GEN	1	1	태초에 하나님이 천지를 창조하시니라	In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.	In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.
GEN	1	2	땅이 혼돈하고 공허하며 흑암이 깊음 위에 있고 하나님의 신은 수면에 운행하시니라	And the earth was without form and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.	Now the earth was formless and void, and darkness was over the surface of the deep. And the Spirit of God was hovering over the surface of the waters.
GEN	1	3	하나님이 가라사대 빛이 있으라 하시매 빛이 있었고	And God said, Let there be light: and there was light.	And God said, “Let there be light,” and there was light.
GEN	1	4	그 빛이 하나님의 보시기에 좋았더라 하나님이 빛과 어두움을 나누사	And God saw the light, that it was good: and God divided the light from the darkness.	And God saw that the light was good, and He separated the light from the darkness.
GEN	1	5	빛을 낮이라 칭하시고 어두움을 밤이라 칭하시니라 저녁이 되며 아침이 되니 이는 첫째 날이니라	And God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night. And the evening and the morning were the first day.	God called the light “day,” and the darkness He called “night.” And there was evening, and there was morning—the first day.
GEN	1	6	하나님이 가라사대 물 가운데 궁창이 있어 물과 물로 나뉘게 하리라 하시고	And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters.	And God said, “Let there be an expanse between the waters, to separate the waters from the waters.”
GEN	1	7	하나님이 궁창을 만드사 궁창 아래의 물과 궁창 위의 물로 나뉘게 하시매 그대로 되니라	And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament: and it was so.	So God made the expanse and separated the waters beneath it from the waters above. And it was so.
GEN	1	8	하나님이 궁창을 하늘이라 칭하시니라 저녁이 되며 아침이 되니 이는 둘째 날이니라	And God called the firmament Heaven. And the evening and the morning were the second day.	God called the expanse “sky.” And there was evening, and there was morning—the second day.
GEN	1	9	하나님이 가라사대 천하의 물이 한 곳으로 모이고 뭍이 드러나라 하시매 그대로 되니라	And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry land appear: and it was so.	And God said, “Let the waters under the sky be gathered into one place, so that the dry land may appear.” And it was so.
GEN	1	10	하나님이 뭍을 땅이라 칭하시고 모인 물을 바다라 칭하시니라 하나님의 보시기에 좋았더라	And God called the dry land Earth; and the gathering together of the waters called he Seas: and God saw that it was good.	God called the dry land “earth,” and the gathering of waters He called “seas.” And God saw that it was good.
GEN	1	11	하나님이 가라사대 땅은 풀과 씨 맺는 채소와 각기 종류대로 씨 가진 열매 맺는 과목을 내라 하시매 그대로 되어	And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in itself, upon the earth: and it was so.	Then God said, “Let the earth bring forth vegetation: seed-bearing plants and fruit trees, each bearing fruit with seed according to its kind.” And it was so.
GEN	1	12	땅이 풀과 각기 종류대로 씨 맺는 채소와 각기 종류대로 씨 가진 열매 맺는 나무를 내니 하나님의 보시기에 좋았더라	And the earth brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in itself, after his kind: and God saw that it was good.	The earth produced vegetation: seed-bearing plants according to their kinds and trees bearing fruit with seed according to their kinds. And God saw that it was good.
GEN	1	13	저녁이 되며 아침이 되니 이는 셋째 날이니라	And the evening and the morning were the third day.	And there was evening, and there was morning—the third day.
GEN	1	14	하나님이 가라사대 하늘의 궁창에 광명이 있어 주야를 나뉘게 하라 또 그 광명으로 하여 징조와 사시와 일자와 연한이 이루라	And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years:	And God said, “Let there be lights in the expanse of the sky to distinguish between the day and the night, and let them be signs to mark the seasons and days and years.
GEN	1	15	또 그 광명이 하늘의 궁창에 있어 땅에 비취라 하시고 (그대로 되니라)	And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth: and it was so.	And let them serve as lights in the expanse of the sky to shine upon the earth.” And it was so.
GEN	1	16	하나님이 두 큰 광명을 만드사 큰 광명으로 낮을 주관하게 하시고 작은 광명으로 밤을 주관하게 하시며 또 별들을 만드시고	And God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the stars also.	God made two great lights: the greater light to rule the day and the lesser light to rule the night. And He made the stars as well.
GEN	1	17	하나님이 그것들을 하늘의 궁창에 두어 땅에 비취게 하시며	And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth,	God set these lights in the expanse of the sky to shine upon the earth,
GEN	1	18	주야를 주관하게 하시며 빛과 어두움을 나뉘게 하시니라 하나님의 보시기에 좋았더라	And to rule over the day and over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness: and God saw that it was good.	to preside over the day and the night, and to separate the light from the darkness. And God saw that it was good.
GEN	1	19	저녁이 되며 아침이 되니 이는 넷째 날이니라	And the evening and the morning were the fourth day.	And there was evening, and there was morning—the fourth day.
GEN	1	20	하나님이 가라사대 물들은 생물로 번성케 하라 땅 위 하늘의 궁창에는 새가 날으라 하시고	And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life, and fowl that may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven.	And God said, “Let the waters teem with living creatures, and let birds fly above the earth in the open expanse of the sky.”
GEN	1	21	하나님이 큰 물고기와 물에서 번성하여 움직이는 모든 생물을 그 종류대로, 날개 있는 모든 새를 그 종류대로 창조하시니 하나님의 보시기에 좋았더라	And God created great whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind: and God saw that it was good.	So God created the great sea creatures and every living thing that moves, with which the waters teemed according to their kinds, and every bird of flight after its kind. And God saw that it was good.
GEN	1	22	하나님이 그들에게 복을 주어 가라사대 생육하고 번성하여 여러 바다 물에 충만하라 새들도 땅에 번성하라 하시니라	And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply in the earth.	Then God blessed them and said, “Be fruitful and multiply and fill the waters of the seas, and let birds multiply on the earth.”
GEN	1	23	저녁이 되며 아침이 되니 이는 다섯째 날이니라	And the evening and the morning were the fifth day.	And there was evening, and there was morning—the fifth day.
GEN	1	24	하나님이 가라사대 땅은 생물을 그 종류대로 내되 육축과 기는 것과 땅의 짐승을 종류대로 내라 하시고 (그대로 되니라)	And God said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of the earth after his kind: and it was so.	And God said, “Let the earth bring forth living creatures according to their kinds: livestock, land crawlers, and beasts of the earth according to their kinds.” And it was so.
GEN	1	25	하나님이 땅의 짐승을 그 종류대로 육축을 그 종류대로 땅에 기는 모든 것을 그 종류대로 만드시니 하나님의 보시기에 좋았더라	And God made the beast of the earth after his kind, and cattle after their kind, and every thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind: and God saw that it was good.	God made the beasts of the earth according to their kinds, the livestock according to their kinds, and everything that crawls upon the earth according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.
GEN	1	26	하나님이 가라사대 우리의 형상을 따라 우리의 모양대로 우리가 사람을 만들고 그로 바다의 고기와 공중의 새와 육축과 온 땅과 땅에 기는 모든 것을 다스리게 하자 하시고	And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.	Then God said, “Let Us make man in Our image, after Our likeness, to rule over the fish of the sea and the birds of the air, over the livestock, and over all the earth itself and every creature that crawls upon it.”
GEN	1	27	하나님이 자기 형상 곧 하나님의 형상대로 사람을 창조하시되 남자와 여자를 창조하시고	So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them.	So God created man in His own image; in the image of God He created him; male and female He created them.
GEN	1	28	하나님이 그들에게 복을 주시며 그들에게 이르시되 생육하고 번성하여 땅에 충만하라, 땅을 정복하라, 바다의 고기와 공중의 새와 땅에 움직이는 모든 생물을 다스리라 하시니라	And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.	God blessed them and said to them, “Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the earth and subdue it; rule over the fish of the sea and the birds of the air and every creature that crawls upon the earth.”
GEN	1	29	하나님이 가라사대 내가 온 지면의 씨 맺는 모든 채소와 씨 가진 열매 맺는 모든 나무를 너희에게 주노니 너희 식물이 되리라	And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree, in the which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat.	Then God said, “Behold, I have given you every seed-bearing plant on the face of all the earth, and every tree whose fruit contains seed. They will be yours for food.
GEN	1	30	또 땅의 모든 짐승과 공중의 모든 새와 생명이 있어 땅에 기는 모든 것에게는 내가 모든 푸른 풀을 식물로 주노라 하시니 그대로 되니라	And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth, wherein there is life, I have given every green herb for meat: and it was so.	And to every beast of the earth and every bird of the air and every creature that crawls upon the earth—everything that has the breath of life in it—I have given every green plant for food.” And it was so.
GEN	1	31	하나님이 그 지으신 모든 것을 보시니 보시기에 심히 좋았더라 저녁이 되며 아침이 되니 이는 여섯째 날이니라	And God saw every thing that he had made, and, behold, it was very good. And the evening and the morning were the sixth day.	And God looked upon all that He had made, and indeed, it was very good. And there was evening, and there was morning—the sixth day.
GEN	2	1	천지와 만물이 다 이루니라	Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them.	Thus the heavens and the earth were completed in all their vast array.
GEN	2	2	하나님의 지으시던 일이 일곱째 날이 이를 때에 마치니 그 지으시던 일이 다하므로 일곱째 날에 안식하시니라	And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made; and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made.	And by the seventh day God had finished the work He had been doing; so on that day He rested from all His work.
GEN	2	3	하나님이 일곱째 날을 복 주사 거룩하게 하셨으니 이는 하나님이 그 창조하시며 만드시던 모든 일을 마치시고 이 날에 안식하셨음이더라	And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that in it he had rested from all his work which God created and made.	Then God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, because on that day He rested from all the work of creation that He had accomplished.
GEN	2	4	여호와 하나님이 천지를 창조하신 때에 천지의 창조된 대략이 이러하니라	These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created, in the day that the Lord God made the earth and the heavens,	This is the account of the heavens and the earth when they were created, in the day that the LORD God made them.
GEN	2	5	여호와 하나님이 땅에 비를 내리지 아니하셨고 경작할 사람도 없었으므로 들에는 초목이 아직 없었고 밭에는 채소가 나지 아니하였으며	And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew: for the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was not a man to till the ground.	Now no shrub of the field had yet appeared on the earth, nor had any plant of the field sprouted; for the LORD God had not yet sent rain upon the earth, and there was no man to cultivate the ground.
GEN	2	6	안개만 땅에서 올라와 온 지면을 적셨더라	But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.	But springs welled up from the earth and watered the whole surface of the ground.
GEN	2	7	여호와 하나님이 흙으로 사람을 지으시고 생기를 그 코에 불어 넣으시니 사람이 생령이 된지라	And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul.	Then the LORD God formed man from the dust of the ground and breathed the breath of life into his nostrils, and the man became a living being.
GEN	2	8	여호와 하나님이 동방의 에덴에 동산을 창설하시고 그 지으신 사람을 거기 두시고	And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put the man whom he had formed.	And the LORD God planted a garden in Eden, in the east, where He placed the man He had formed.
GEN	2	9	여호와 하나님이 그 땅에서 보기에 아름답고 먹기에 좋은 나무가 나게 하시니 동산 가운데에는 생명나무와 선악을 알게 하는 나무도 있더라	And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for food; the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.	Out of the ground the LORD God gave growth to every tree that is pleasing to the eye and good for food. And in the middle of the garden were the tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
GEN	2	10	강이 에덴에서 발원하여 동산을 적시고 거기서부터 갈라져 네 근원이 되었으니	And a river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from thence it was parted, and became into four heads.	Now a river flowed out of Eden to water the garden, and from there it branched into four headwaters:
GEN	2	11	첫째의 이름은 비손이라 금이 있는 하윌라 온 땅에 둘렸으며	The name of the first is Pison: that is it which compasseth the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold;	The name of the first river is Pishon; it winds through the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold.
GEN	2	12	그 땅의 금은 정금이요 그곳에는 베델리엄과 호마노도 있으며	And the gold of that land is good: there is bdellium and the onyx stone.	And the gold of that land is pure, and bdellium and onyx are found there.
GEN	2	13	둘째 강의 이름은 기혼이라 구스 온 땅에 둘렸고	And the name of the second river is Gihon: the same is it that compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia.	The name of the second river is Gihon; it winds through the whole land of Cush.
GEN	2	14	셋째 강의 이름은 힛데겔이라 앗수르 동편으로 흐르며 넷째 강은 유브라데더라	And the name of the third river is Hiddekel: that is it which goeth toward the east of Assyria. And the fourth river is Euphrates.	The name of the third river is Hiddekel; it runs along the east side of Assyria. And the fourth river is the Euphrates.
GEN	2	15	여호와 하나님이 그 사람을 이끌어 에덴 동산에 두사 그것을 다스리며 지키게 하시고	And the Lord God took the man, and put him into the garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it.	Then the LORD God took the man and placed him in the Garden of Eden to cultivate and keep it.
GEN	2	16	여호와 하나님이 그 사람에게 명하여 가라사대 동산 각종 나무의 실과는 네가 임의로 먹되	And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat:	And the LORD God commanded him, “You may eat freely from every tree of the garden,
GEN	2	17	선악을 알게 하는 나무의 실과는 먹지 말라 네가 먹는 날에는 정녕 죽으리라 하시니라	But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.	but you must not eat from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil; for in the day that you eat of it, you will surely die.”
GEN	2	18	여호와 하나님이 가라사대 사람의 독처하는 것이 좋지 못하니 내가 그를 위하여 돕는 배필을 지으리라 하시니라	And the Lord God said, It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him an help meet for him.	The LORD God also said, “It is not good for the man to be alone. I will make for him a suitable helper.”
GEN	2	19	여호와 하나님이 흙으로 각종 들짐승과 공중의 각종 새를 지으시고 아담이 어떻게 이름을 짓나 보시려고 그것들을 그에게로 이끌어 이르시니 아담이 각 생물을 일컫는 바가 곧 그 이름이라	And out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air; and brought them unto Adam to see what he would call them: and whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name thereof.	And out of the ground the LORD God formed every beast of the field and every bird of the air, and He brought them to the man to see what he would name each one. And whatever the man called each living creature, that was its name.
GEN	2	20	아담이 모든 육축과 공중의 새와 들의 모든 짐승에게 이름을 주니라 아담이 돕는 배필이 없으므로	And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast of the field; but for Adam there was not found an help meet for him.	The man gave names to all the livestock, to the birds of the air, and to every beast of the field. But for Adam no suitable helper was found.
GEN	2	21	여호와 하나님이 아담을 깊이 잠들게 하시니 잠들매 그가 그 갈빗대 하나를 취하고 살로 대신 채우시고	And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept: and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof;	So the LORD God caused the man to fall into a deep sleep, and while he slept, He took one of the man’s ribs and closed up the area with flesh.
GEN	2	22	여호와 하나님이 아담에게서 취하신 그 갈빗대로 여자를 만드시고 그를 아담에게로 이끌어 오시니	And the rib, which the Lord God had taken from man, made he a woman, and brought her unto the man.	And from the rib that the LORD God had taken from the man, He made a woman and brought her to him.
GEN	2	23	아담이 가로되 이는 내 뼈 중의 뼈요 살 중의 살이라 이것을 남자에게서 취하였은즉 여자라 칭하리라 하니라	And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man.	And the man said: “This is now bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called ‘woman,’ for out of man she was taken.”
GEN	2	24	이러므로 남자가 부모를 떠나 그 아내와 연합하여 둘이 한 몸을 이룰지로다	Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh.	For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and they will become one flesh.
GEN	2	25	아담과 그 아내 두 사람이 벌거벗었으나 부끄러워 아니하니라	And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.	And the man and his wife were both naked, and they were not ashamed.
GEN	3	1	여호와 하나님의 지으신 들짐승 중에 뱀이 가장 간교하더라 뱀이 여자에게 물어 가로되 하나님이 참으로 너희더러 동산 모든 나무의 실과를 먹지 말라 하시더냐	Now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field which the Lord God had made. And he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?	Now the serpent was more crafty than any beast of the field that the LORD God had made. And he said to the woman, “Did God really say, ‘You must not eat from any tree in the garden?’”
GEN	3	2	여자가 뱀에게 말하되 동산 나무의 실과를 우리가 먹을 수 있으나	And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden:	The woman answered the serpent, “We may eat the fruit of the trees of the garden,
GEN	3	3	동산 중앙에 있는 나무의 실과는 하나님의 말씀에 너희는 먹지도 말고 만지지도 말라 너희가 죽을까 하노라 하셨느니라	But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.	but about the fruit of the tree in the middle of the garden, God has said, ‘You must not eat of it or touch it, or you will die.’”
GEN	3	4	뱀이 여자에게 이르되 너희가 결코 죽지 아니하리라	And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die:	“You will not surely die,” the serpent told her.
GEN	3	5	너희가 그것을 먹는 날에는 너희 눈이 밝아 하나님과 같이 되어 선악을 알 줄을 하나님이 아심이니라	For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.	“For God knows that in the day you eat of it, your eyes will be opened and you will be like God, knowing good and evil.”
GEN	3	6	여자가 그 나무를 본즉 먹음직도 하고 보암직도 하고 지혜롭게 할 만큼 탐스럽기도 한 나무인지라 여자가 그 실과를 따먹고 자기와 함께한 남편에게도 주매 그도 먹은지라	And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her; and he did eat.	When the woman saw that the tree was good for food and pleasing to the eyes, and that it was desirable for obtaining wisdom, she took the fruit and ate it. She also gave some to her husband who was with her, and he ate it.
GEN	3	7	이에 그들의 눈이 밝아 자기들의 몸이 벗은 줄을 알고 무화과 나무 잎을 엮어 치마를 하였더라	And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked; and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons.	And the eyes of both of them were opened, and they knew that they were naked; so they sewed together fig leaves and made coverings for themselves.
GEN	3	8	그들이 날이 서늘할 때에 동산에 거니시는 여호와 하나님의 음성을 듣고 아담과 그 아내가 여호와 하나님의 낯을 피하여 동산 나무 사이에 숨은지라	And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden in the cool of the day: and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God amongst the trees of the garden.	Then the man and his wife heard the voice of the LORD God walking in the garden in the breeze of the day, and they hid themselves from the presence of the LORD God among the trees of the garden.
GEN	3	9	여호와 하나님이 아담을 부르시며 그에게 이르시되 네가 어디 있느냐	And the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou?	But the LORD God called out to the man, “Where are you?”
GEN	3	10	가로되 내가 동산에서 하나님의 소리를 듣고 내가 벗었으므로 두려워하여 숨었나이다	And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked; and I hid myself.	“I heard Your voice in the garden,” he replied, “and I was afraid because I was naked; so I hid myself.”
GEN	3	11	가라사대 누가 너의 벗었음을 네게 고하였느냐 내가 너더러 먹지 말라 명한 그 나무 실과를 네가 먹었느냐	And he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked? Hast thou eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldest not eat?	“Who told you that you were naked?” asked the LORD God. “Have you eaten from the tree of which I commanded you not to eat?”
GEN	3	12	아담이 가로되 하나님이 주셔서 나와 함께 하게 하신 여자 그가 그 나무 실과를 내게 주므로 내가 먹었나이다	And the man said, The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat.	And the man answered, “The woman whom You gave me, she gave me fruit from the tree, and I ate it.”
GEN	3	13	여호와 하나님이 여자에게 이르시되 네가 어찌하여 이렇게 하였느냐 여자가 가로되 뱀이 나를 꾀므로 내가 먹었나이다	And the Lord God said unto the woman, What is this that thou hast done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.	Then the LORD God said to the woman, “What is this you have done?” “The serpent deceived me,” she replied, “and I ate.”
GEN	3	14	여호와 하나님이 뱀에게 이르시되 네가 이렇게 하였으니 네가 모든 육축과 들의 모든 짐승보다 더욱 저주를 받아 배로 다니고 종신토록 흙을 먹을지니라	And the Lord God said unto the serpent, Because thou hast done this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life:	So the LORD God said to the serpent: “Because you have done this, cursed are you above all livestock and every beast of the field! On your belly will you go, and dust you will eat, all the days of your life.
GEN	3	15	내가 너로 여자와 원수가 되게 하고 너의 후손도 여자의 후손과 원수가 되게 하리니 여자의 후손은 네 머리를 상하게 할 것이요 너는 그의 발꿈치를 상하게 할 것이니라 하시고	And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.	And I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your seed and her seed. He will crush your head, and you will strike his heel.”
GEN	3	16	또 여자에게 이르시되 내가 네게 잉태하는 고통을 크게 더하리니 네가 수고하고 자식을 낳을 것이며 너는 남편을 사모하고 남편은 너를 다스릴 것이니라 하시고	Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children; and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.	To the woman He said: “I will sharply increase your pain in childbirth; in pain you will bring forth children. Your desire will be for your husband, and he will rule over you.”
GEN	3	17	아담에게 이르시되 네가 네 아내의 말을 듣고 내가 너더러 먹지 말라 한 나무 실과를 먹었은즉 땅은 너로 인하여 저주를 받고 너는 종신토록 수고하여야 그 소산을 먹으리라	And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life;	And to Adam He said: “Because you have listened to the voice of your wife and have eaten from the tree of which I commanded you not to eat, cursed is the ground because of you; through toil you will eat of it all the days of your life.
GEN	3	18	땅이 네게 가시덤불과 엉겅퀴를 낼 것이라 너의 먹을 것은 밭의 채소인즉	Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field;	Both thorns and thistles it will yield for you, and you will eat the plants of the field.
GEN	3	19	네가 얼굴에 땀이 흘러야 식물을 먹고 필경은 흙으로 돌아 가리니 그 속에서 네가 취함을 입었음이라 너는 흙이니 흙으로 돌아갈 것이니라 하시니라	In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.	By the sweat of your brow you will eat your bread, until you return to the ground— because out of it were you taken. For dust you are, and to dust you shall return.”
GEN	3	20	아담이 그 아내를 하와라 이름하였으니 그는 모든 산 자의 어미가 됨이더라	And Adam called his wife’s name Eve; because she was the mother of all living.	And Adam named his wife Eve, because she would be the mother of all the living.
GEN	3	21	여호와 하나님이 아담과 그 아내를 위하여 가죽옷을 지어 입히시니라	Unto Adam also and to his wife did the Lord God make coats of skins, and clothed them.	And the LORD God made garments of skin for Adam and his wife, and He clothed them.
GEN	3	22	여호와 하나님이 가라사대 보라 이 사람이 선악을 아는 일에 우리 중 하나 같이 되었으니 그가 그 손을 들어 생명나무 실과도 따 먹고 영생할까 하노라 하시고	And the Lord God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever:	Then the LORD God said, “Behold, the man has become like one of Us, knowing good and evil. And now, lest he reach out his hand and take also from the tree of life, and eat, and live forever...”
GEN	3	23	여호와 하나님이 에덴 동산에서 그 사람을 내어 보내어 그의 근본된 토지를 갈게 하시니라	Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till the ground from whence he was taken.	Therefore the LORD God banished him from the Garden of Eden to work the ground from which he had been taken.
GEN	3	24	이같이 하나님이 그 사람을 쫓아 내시고 에덴 동산 동편에 그룹들과 두루 도는 화염검을 두어 생명나무의 길을 지키게 하시니라	So he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the garden of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life.	So He drove out the man and stationed cherubim on the east side of the Garden of Eden, along with a whirling sword of flame to guard the way to the tree of life.
GEN	4	1	아담이 그 아내 하와와 동침하매 하와가 잉태하여 가인을 낳고 이르되 내가 여호와로 말미암아 득남하였다 하니라	And Adam knew Eve his wife; and she conceived, and bare Cain, and said, I have gotten a man from the Lord.	And Adam had relations with his wife Eve, and she conceived and gave birth to Cain. “With the help of the LORD I have brought forth a man,” she said.
GEN	4	2	그가 또 가인의 아우 아벨을 낳았는데 아벨은 양 치는 자이었고 가인은 농사하는 자이었더라	And she again bare his brother Abel. And Abel was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the ground.	Later she gave birth to Cain’s brother Abel. Now Abel was a keeper of sheep, while Cain was a tiller of the soil.
GEN	4	3	세월이 지난 후에 가인은 땅의 소산으로 제물을 삼아 여호와께 드렸고	And in process of time it came to pass, that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the Lord.	So in the course of time, Cain brought some of the fruit of the soil as an offering to the LORD,
GEN	4	4	아벨은 자기도 양의 첫 새끼와 그 기름으로 드렸더니 여호와께서 아벨과 그 제물은 열납하셨으나	And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock and of the fat thereof. And the Lord had respect unto Abel and to his offering:	while Abel brought the best portions of the firstborn of his flock. And the LORD looked with favor on Abel and his offering,
GEN	4	5	가인과 그 제물은 열납하지 아니하신지라 가인이 심히 분하여 안색이 변하니	But unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect. And Cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell.	but He had no regard for Cain and his offering. So Cain became very angry, and his countenance fell.
GEN	4	6	여호와께서 가인에게 이르시되 네가 분하여 함은 어찜이며 안색이 변함은 어찜이뇨	And the Lord said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance fallen?	“Why are you angry,” said the LORD to Cain, “and why has your countenance fallen?
GEN	4	7	네가 선을 행하면 어찌 낯을 들지 못하겠느냐 선을 행치 아니하면 죄가 문에 엎드리느니라 죄의 소원은 네게 있으나 너는 죄를 다스릴지니라	If thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door. And unto thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him.	If you do what is right, will you not be accepted? But if you refuse to do what is right, sin is crouching at your door; it desires you, but you must master it.”
GEN	4	8	가인이 그 아우 아벨에게 고하니라 그후 그들이 들에 있을 때에 가인이 그 아우 아벨을 쳐죽이니라	And Cain talked with Abel his brother: and it came to pass, when they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and slew him.	Then Cain said to his brother Abel, “Let us go out to the field.” And while they were in the field, Cain rose up against his brother Abel and killed him.
GEN	4	9	여호와께서 가인에게 이르시되 네 아우 아벨이 어디 있느냐 그가 가로되 내가 알지 못하나이다 내가 내 아우를 지키는 자이니까	And the Lord said unto Cain, Where is Abel thy brother? And he said, I know not: Am I my brother’s keeper?	And the LORD said to Cain, “Where is your brother Abel?” “I do not know!” he answered. “Am I my brother’s keeper?”
GEN	4	10	가라사대 네가 무엇을 하였느냐 네 아우의 핏소리가 땅에서부터 내게 호소하느니라	And he said, What hast thou done? the voice of thy brother’s blood crieth unto me from the ground.	“What have you done?” replied the LORD. “The voice of your brother’s blood cries out to Me from the ground.
GEN	4	11	땅이 그 입을 벌려 네 손에서부터 네 아우의 피를 받았은즉 네가 땅에서 저주를 받으리니	And now art thou cursed from the earth, which hath opened her mouth to receive thy brother’s blood from thy hand;	Now you are cursed and banished from the ground, which has opened its mouth to receive your brother’s blood from your hand.
GEN	4	12	네가 밭 갈아도 땅이 다시는 그 효력을 네게 주지 아니할 것이요 너는 땅에서 피하며 유리하는 자가 되리라	When thou tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength; a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth.	When you till the ground, it will no longer yield its produce to you. You will be a fugitive and a wanderer on the earth.”
GEN	4	13	가인이 여호와께 고하되 내 죄벌이 너무 중하여 견딜 수 없나이다	And Cain said unto the Lord, My punishment is greater than I can bear.	But Cain said to the LORD, “My punishment is greater than I can bear.
GEN	4	14	주께서 오늘 이 지면에서 나를 쫓아내시온즉 내가 주의 낯을 뵈옵지 못하리니 내가 땅에서 피하며 유리하는 자가 될지라 무릇 나를 만나는 자가 나를 죽이겠나이다	Behold, thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the earth; and from thy face shall I be hid; and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth; and it shall come to pass, that every one that findeth me shall slay me.	Behold, this day You have driven me from the face of the earth, and from Your face I will be hidden; I will be a fugitive and a wanderer on the earth, and whoever finds me will kill me.”
GEN	4	15	여호와께서 그에게 이르시되 그렇지 않다 가인을 죽이는 자는 벌을 칠 배나 받으리라 하시고 가인에게 표를 주사 만나는 누구에게든지 죽임을 면케 하시니라	And the Lord said unto him, Therefore whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold. And the Lord set a mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should kill him.	“Not so!” replied the LORD. “If anyone slays Cain, then Cain will be avenged sevenfold.” And the LORD placed a mark on Cain, so that no one who found him would kill him.
GEN	4	16	가인이 여호와의 앞을 떠나 나가 에덴 동편 놋 땅에 거하였더니	And Cain went out from the presence of the Lord, and dwelt in the land of Nod, on the east of Eden.	So Cain went out from the presence of the LORD and settled in the land of Nod, east of Eden.
GEN	4	17	아내와 동침하니 그가 잉태하여 에녹을 낳은지라 가인이 성을 쌓고 그 아들의 이름으로 성을 이름하여 에녹이라 하였더라	And Cain knew his wife; and she conceived, and bare Enoch: and he builded a city, and called the name of the city, after the name of his son, Enoch.	And Cain had relations with his wife, and she conceived and gave birth to Enoch. Then Cain built a city and named it after his son Enoch.
GEN	4	18	에녹이 이랏을 낳았고 이랏은 므후야엘을 낳았고 므후야엘은 므드사엘을 낳았고 므드사엘은 라멕을 낳았더라	And unto Enoch was born Irad: and Irad begat Mehujael: and Mehujael begat Methusael: and Methusael begat Lamech.	Now to Enoch was born Irad, and Irad was the father of Mehujael, and Mehujael was the father of Methusael, and Methusael was the father of Lamech.
GEN	4	19	라멕이 두 아내를 취하였으니 하나의 이름은 아다요 하나의 이름은 씰라며	And Lamech took unto him two wives: the name of the one was Adah, and the name of the other Zillah.	And Lamech married two women, one named Adah and the other Zillah.
GEN	4	20	아다는 야발을 낳았으니 그는 장막에 거하여 육축 치는 자의 조상이 되었고	And Adah bare Jabal: he was the father of such as dwell in tents, and of such as have cattle.	Adah gave birth to Jabal; he was the father of those who dwell in tents and raise livestock.
GEN	4	21	그 아우의 이름은 유발이니 그는 수금과 퉁소를 잡는 모든 자의 조상이 되었으며	And his brother’s name was Jubal: he was the father of all such as handle the harp and organ.	And his brother’s name was Jubal; he was the father of all who play the harp and flute.
GEN	4	22	씰라는 두발가인을 낳았으니 그는 동철로 각양 날카로운 기계를 만드는 자요 두발가인의 누이는 나아마이었더라	And Zillah, she also bare Tubal–cain, an instructer of every artificer in brass and iron: and the sister of Tubal–cain was Naamah.	And Zillah gave birth to Tubal-cain, a forger of every implement of bronze and iron. And the sister of Tubal-cain was Naamah.
GEN	4	23	라멕이 아내들에게 이르되 아다와 씰라여 내 소리를 들으라 라멕의 아내들이여 내 말을 들으라 나의 창상을 인하여 내가 사람을 죽였고 나의 상함을 인하여 소년을 죽였도다	And Lamech said unto his wives, Adah and Zillah, Hear my voice; ye wives of Lamech, hearken unto my speech: for I have slain a man to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt.	Then Lamech said to his wives: “Adah and Zillah, hear my voice; wives of Lamech, listen to my speech. For I have slain a man for wounding me, a young man for striking me.
GEN	4	24	가인을 위하여는 벌이 칠 배일진대 라멕을 위하여는 벌이 칠십칠 배이리로다 하였더라	If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy and sevenfold.	If Cain is avenged sevenfold, then Lamech seventy-sevenfold.”
GEN	4	25	아담이 다시 아내와 동침하매 그가 아들을 낳아 그 이름을 셋이라 하였으니 이는 하나님이 내게 가인의 죽인 아벨 대신에 다른 씨를 주셨다 함이며	And Adam knew his wife again; and she bare a son, and called his name Seth: For God, said she, hath appointed me another seed instead of Abel, whom Cain slew.	And Adam again had relations with his wife, and she gave birth to a son and named him Seth, saying, “God has granted me another seed in place of Abel, since Cain killed him.”
GEN	4	26	셋도 아들을 낳고 그 이름을 에노스라 하였으며 그 때에 사람들이 비로소 여호와의 이름을 불렀더라	And to Seth, to him also there was born a son; and he called his name Enos: then began men to call upon the name of the Lord.	And to Seth also a son was born, and he called him Enosh. At that time men began to call upon the name of the LORD.
GEN	5	1	아담 자손의 계보가 이러하니라 하나님이 사람을 창조하실 때에 하나님의 형상대로 지으시되	This is the book of the generations of Adam. In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him;	This is the book of the generations of Adam. In the day that God created man, He made him in His own likeness.
GEN	5	2	남자와 여자를 창조하셨고 그들이 창조되던 날에 하나님이 그들에게 복을 주시고 그들의 이름을 사람이라 일컬으셨더라	Male and female created he them; and blessed them, and called their name Adam, in the day when they were created.	Male and female He created them, and He blessed them. And in the day they were created, He called them “man.”
GEN	5	3	아담이 일백삼십 세에 자기 모양 곧 자기 형상과 같은 아들을 낳아 이름을 셋이라 하였고	And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat a son in his own likeness, after his image; and called his name Seth:	When Adam was 130 years old, he had a son in his own likeness, after his own image; and he named him Seth.
GEN	5	4	아담이 셋을 낳은 후 팔백 년을 지내며 자녀를 낳았으며	And the days of Adam after he had begotten Seth were eight hundred years: and he begat sons and daughters:	And after he had become the father of Seth, Adam lived 800 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN	5	5	그가 구백삼십 세를 향수하고 죽었더라	And all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years: and he died.	So Adam lived a total of 930 years, and then he died.
GEN	5	6	셋은 일백오 세에 에노스를 낳았고	And Seth lived an hundred and five years, and begat Enos:	When Seth was 105 years old, he became the father of Enosh.
GEN	5	7	에노스를 낳은 후 팔백칠 년을 지내며 자녀를 낳았으며	And Seth lived after he begat Enos eight hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters:	And after he had become the father of Enosh, Seth lived 807 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN	5	8	그가 구백십이 세를 향수하고 죽었더라	And all the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years: and he died.	So Seth lived a total of 912 years, and then he died.
GEN	5	9	에노스는 구십 세에 게난을 낳았고	And Enos lived ninety years, and begat Cainan:	When Enosh was 90 years old, he became the father of Kenan.
GEN	5	10	게난을 낳은 후 팔백십오 년을 지내며 자녀를 낳았으며	And Enos lived after he begat Cainan eight hundred and fifteen years, and begat sons and daughters:	And after he had become the father of Kenan, Enosh lived 815 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN	5	11	그가 구백오 세를 향수하고 죽었더라	And all the days of Enos were nine hundred and five years: and he died.	So Enosh lived a total of 905 years, and then he died.
GEN	5	12	게난은 칠십 세에 마할랄렐을 낳았고	And Cainan lived seventy years, and begat Mahalaleel:	When Kenan was 70 years old, he became the father of Mahalalel.
GEN	5	13	마할랄렐을 낳은 후 팔백사십 년을 지내며 자녀를 낳았으며	And Cainan lived after he begat Mahalaleel eight hundred and forty years, and begat sons and daughters:	And after he had become the father of Mahalalel, Kenan lived 840 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN	5	14	그가 구백십 세를 향수하고 죽었더라	And all the days of Cainan were nine hundred and ten years: and he died.	So Kenan lived a total of 910 years, and then he died.
GEN	5	15	마할랄렐은 육십오 세에 야렛을 낳았고	And Mahalaleel lived sixty and five years, and begat Jared:	When Mahalalel was 65 years old, he became the father of Jared.
GEN	5	16	야렛을 낳은 후 팔백삼십 년을 지내며 자녀를 낳았으며	And Mahalaleel lived after he begat Jared eight hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters:	And after he had become the father of Jared, Mahalalel lived 830 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN	5	17	그가 팔백구십오 세를 향수하고 죽었더라	And all the days of Mahalaleel were eight hundred ninety and five years: and he died.	So Mahalalel lived a total of 895 years, and then he died.
GEN	5	18	야렛은 일백육십이 세에 에녹을 낳았고	And Jared lived an hundred sixty and two years, and he begat Enoch:	When Jared was 162 years old, he became the father of Enoch.
GEN	5	19	에녹을 낳은 후 팔백 년을 지내며 자녀를 낳았으며	And Jared lived after he begat Enoch eight hundred years, and begat sons and daughters:	And after he had become the father of Enoch, Jared lived 800 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN	5	20	그가 구백육십이 세를 향수하고 죽었더라	And all the days of Jared were nine hundred sixty and two years: and he died.	So Jared lived a total of 962 years, and then he died.
GEN	5	21	에녹은 육십오 세에 므두셀라를 낳았고	And Enoch lived sixty and five years, and begat Methuselah:	When Enoch was 65 years old, he became the father of Methuselah.
GEN	5	22	므두셀라를 낳은 후 삼백 년을 하나님과 동행하며 자녀를 낳았으며	And Enoch walked with God after he begat Methuselah three hundred years, and begat sons and daughters:	And after he had become the father of Methuselah, Enoch walked with God 300 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN	5	23	그가 삼백육십오 세를 향수하였더라	And all the days of Enoch were three hundred sixty and five years:	So Enoch lived a total of 365 years.
GEN	5	24	에녹이 하나님과 동행하더니 하나님이 그를 데려가시므로 세상에 있지 아니하였더라	And Enoch walked with God: and he was not; for God took him.	Enoch walked with God, and then he was no more, because God had taken him away.
GEN	5	25	므두셀라는 일백팔십칠 세에 라멕을 낳았고	And Methuselah lived an hundred eighty and seven years, and begat Lamech:	When Methuselah was 187 years old, he became the father of Lamech.
GEN	5	26	라멕을 낳은 후 칠백팔십이 년을 지내며 자녀를 낳았으며	And Methuselah lived after he begat Lamech seven hundred eighty and two years, and begat sons and daughters:	And after he had become the father of Lamech, Methuselah lived 782 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN	5	27	그는 구백육십구 세를 향수하고 죽었더라	And all the days of Methuselah were nine hundred sixty and nine years: and he died.	So Methuselah lived a total of 969 years, and then he died.
GEN	5	28	라멕은 일백팔십이 세에 아들을 낳고	And Lamech lived an hundred eighty and two years, and begat a son:	When Lamech was 182 years old, he had a son.
GEN	5	29	이름을 노아라 하여 가로되 여호와께서 땅을 저주하시므로 수고로이 일하는 우리를 이 아들이 안위하리라 하였더라	And he called his name Noah, saying, This same shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the Lord hath cursed.	And he named him Noah, saying, “May this one comfort us in the labor and toil of our hands caused by the ground that the LORD has cursed.”
GEN	5	30	라멕이 노아를 낳은 후 오백구십오 년을 지내며 자녀를 낳았으며	And Lamech lived after he begat Noah five hundred ninety and five years, and begat sons and daughters:	And after he had become the father of Noah, Lamech lived 595 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN	5	31	그는 칠백칠십칠 세를 향수하고 죽었더라	And all the days of Lamech were seven hundred seventy and seven years: and he died.	So Lamech lived a total of 777 years, and then he died.
GEN	5	32	노아가 오백 세 된 후에 셈과 함과 야벳을 낳았더라	And Noah was five hundred years old: and Noah begat Shem, Ham, and Japheth.	After Noah was 500 years old, he became the father of Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
GEN	6	1	사람이 땅 위에 번성하기 시작할 때에 그들에게서 딸들이 나니	And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of the earth, and daughters were born unto them,	Now when men began to multiply on the face of the earth and daughters were born to them,
GEN	6	2	하나님의 아들들이 사람의 딸들의 아름다움을 보고 자기들의 좋아하는 모든 자로 아내를 삼는지라	That the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair; and they took them wives of all which they chose.	the sons of God saw that the daughters of men were beautiful, and they took as wives whomever they chose.
GEN	6	3	여호와께서 가라사대 나의 신이 영원히 사람과 함께 하지 아니하리니 이는 그들이 육체가 됨이라 그러나 그들의 날은 일백이십 년이 되리라 하시니라	And the Lord said, My spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he also is flesh: yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years.	So the LORD said, “My Spirit will not contend with man forever, for he is mortal; his days shall be 120 years.”
GEN	6	4	당시에 땅에 네피림이 있었고 그 후에도 하나님의 아들들이 사람의 딸들을 취하여 자식을 낳았으니 그들이 용사라 고대에 유명한 사람이었더라	There were giants in the earth in those days; and also after that, when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare children to them, the same became mighty men which were of old, men of renown.	The Nephilim were on the earth in those days—and afterward as well—when the sons of God had relations with the daughters of men. And they bore them children who became the mighty men of old, men of renown.
GEN	6	5	여호와께서 사람의 죄악이 세상에 관영함과 그 마음의 생각의 모든 계획이 항상 악할 뿐임을 보시고	And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.	Then the LORD saw that the wickedness of man was great upon the earth, and that every inclination of the thoughts of his heart was altogether evil all the time.
GEN	6	6	땅 위에 사람 지으셨음을 한탄하사 마음에 근심하시고	And it repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart.	And the LORD regretted that He had made man on the earth, and He was grieved in His heart.
GEN	6	7	가라사대 나의 창조한 사람을 내가 지면에서 쓸어버리되 사람으로부터 육축과 기는 것과 공중의 새까지 그리하리니 이는 내가 그것을 지었음을 한탄함이니라 하시니라	And the Lord said, I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the earth; both man, and beast, and the creeping thing, and the fowls of the air; for it repenteth me that I have made them.	So the LORD said, “I will blot out man, whom I have created, from the face of the earth—every man and beast and crawling creature and bird of the air—for I am grieved that I have made them.”
GEN	6	8	그러나 노아는 여호와께 은혜를 입었더라	But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord.	Noah, however, found favor in the eyes of the LORD.
GEN	6	9	노아의 사적은 이러하니라 노아는 의인이요 당세에 완전한 자라 그가 하나님과 동행하였으며	These are the generations of Noah: Noah was a just man and perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with God.	This is the account of Noah. Noah was a righteous man, blameless in his generation; Noah walked with God.
GEN	6	10	그가 세 아들을 낳았으니 셈과 함과 야벳이라	And Noah begat three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.	And Noah had three sons: Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
GEN	6	11	때에 온 땅이 하나님 앞에 패괴하여 강포가 땅에 충만한지라	The earth also was corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with violence.	Now the earth was corrupt in the sight of God, and full of violence.
GEN	6	12	하나님이 보신즉 땅이 패괴하였으니 이는 땅에서 모든 혈육 있는자의 행위가 패괴함이었더라	And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth.	And God looked upon the earth and saw that it was corrupt; for all living creatures on the earth had corrupted their ways.
GEN	6	13	하나님이 노아에게 이르시되 모든 혈육 있는 자의 강포가 땅에 가득하므로 그 끝날이 내 앞에 이르렀으니 내가 그들을 땅과 함께 멸하리라	And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled with violence through them; and, behold, I will destroy them with the earth.	Then God said to Noah, “The end of all living creatures has come before Me, because through them the earth is full of violence. Now behold, I will destroy both them and the earth.
GEN	6	14	너는 잣나무로 너를 위하여 방주를 짓되 그 안에 간들을 막고 역청으로 그 안팎에 칠하라	Make thee an ark of gopher wood; rooms shalt thou make in the ark, and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch.	Make for yourself an ark of gopher wood; make rooms in the ark and coat it with pitch inside and out.
GEN	6	15	그 방주의 제도는 이러하니 장이 삼백 규빗, 광이 오십 규빗, 고가 삼십 규빗이며	And this is the fashion which thou shalt make it of: The length of the ark shall be three hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits.	And this is how you are to build it: The ark is to be 300 cubits long, 50 cubits wide, and 30 cubits high.
GEN	6	16	거기 창을 내되 위에서부터 한 규빗에 내고 그 문은 옆으로 내고 상 중 하 삼층으로 할지니라	A window shalt thou make to the ark, and in a cubit shalt thou finish it above; and the door of the ark shalt thou set in the side thereof; with lower, second, and third stories shalt thou make it.	You are to make a roof for the ark, finish its walls a cubit from the top, place a door in the side of the ark, and build lower, middle, and upper decks.
GEN	6	17	내가 홍수를 땅에 일으켜 무릇 생명의 기식 있는 육체를 천하에서 멸절하리니 땅에 있는 자가 다 죽으리라	And, behold, I, even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth, to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of life, from under heaven; and every thing that is in the earth shall die.	And behold, I will bring floodwaters upon the earth to destroy every creature under the heavens that has the breath of life. Everything on the earth will perish.
GEN	6	18	그러나 너와는 내가 내 언약을 세우리니 너는 네 아들들과 네 아내와 네 자부들과 함께 그 방주로 들어가고	But with thee will I establish my covenant; and thou shalt come into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons’ wives with thee.	But I will establish My covenant with you, and you will enter the ark—you and your sons and your wife and your sons’ wives with you.
GEN	6	19	혈육 있는 모든 생물을 너는 각기 암 수 한쌍씩 방주로 이끌어 들여 너와 함께 생명을 보존케 하되	And of every living thing of all flesh, two of every sort shalt thou bring into the ark, to keep them alive with thee; they shall be male and female.	And you are to bring two of every living creature into the ark—male and female—to keep them alive with you.
GEN	6	20	새가 그 종류대로, 육축이 그 종류대로, 땅에 기는 모든 것이 그 종류대로, 각기 둘씩 네게로 나아오리니 그 생명을 보존케하라	Of fowls after their kind, and of cattle after their kind, of every creeping thing of the earth after his kind, two of every sort shall come unto thee, to keep them alive.	Two of every kind of bird and animal and crawling creature will come to you to be kept alive.
GEN	6	21	너는 먹을 모든 식물을 네게로 가져다가 저축하라 이것이 너와 그들의 식물이 되리라	And take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten, and thou shalt gather it to thee; and it shall be for food for thee, and for them.	You are also to take for yourself every kind of food that is eaten and gather it as food for yourselves and for the animals.”
GEN	6	22	노아가 그와 같이 하되 하나님이 자기에게 명하신 대로 다 준행하였더라	Thus did Noah; according to all that God commanded him, so did he.	So Noah did everything precisely as God had commanded him.
GEN	7	1	여호와께서 노아에게 이르시되 너와 네 온 집은 방주로 들어가라 네가 이 세대에 내 앞에서 의로움을 내가 보았음이니라	And the Lord said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy house into the ark; for thee have I seen righteous before me in this generation.	Then the LORD said to Noah, “Go into the ark, you and all your family, because I have found you righteous in this generation.
GEN	7	2	너는 모든 정결한 짐승은 암수 일곱씩 부정한 것은 암수 둘씩을 네게로 취하며	Of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens, the male and his female: and of beasts that are not clean by two, the male and his female.	You are to take with you seven pairs of every kind of clean animal, a male and its mate; a pair of every kind of unclean animal, a male and its mate;
GEN	7	3	공중의 새도 암수 일곱씩을 취하여 그 씨를 온 지면에 유전케 하라	Of fowls also of the air by sevens, the male and the female; to keep seed alive upon the face of all the earth.	and seven pairs of every kind of bird of the air, male and female, to preserve their offspring on the face of all the earth.
GEN	7	4	지금부터 칠 일이면 내가 사십 주야를 땅에 비를 내려 나의 지은 모든 생물을 지면에서 쓸어 버리리라	For yet seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights; and every living substance that I have made will I destroy from off the face of the earth.	For seven days from now I will send rain on the earth for forty days and forty nights, and I will wipe from the face of the earth every living thing I have made.”
GEN	7	5	노아가 여호와께서 자기에게 명하신 대로 다 준행하였더라	And Noah did according unto all that the Lord commanded him.	And Noah did all that the LORD had commanded him.
GEN	7	6	홍수가 땅에 있을 때에 노아가 육백 세라	And Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters was upon the earth.	Now Noah was 600 years old when the floodwaters came upon the earth.
GEN	7	7	노아가 아들들과 아내와 자부들과 함께 홍수를 피하여 방주에 들어갔고	And Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons’ wives with him, into the ark, because of the waters of the flood.	And Noah and his wife, with his sons and their wives, entered the ark to escape the waters of the flood.
GEN	7	8	정결한 짐승과 부정한 짐승과 새와 땅에 기는 모든 것이	Of clean beasts, and of beasts that are not clean, and of fowls, and of every thing that creepeth upon the earth,	The clean and unclean animals, the birds, and everything that crawls along the ground
GEN	7	9	하나님이 노아에게 명하신 대로 암수 둘씩 노아에게 나아와 방주로 들어갔더니	There went in two and two unto Noah into the ark, the male and the female, as God had commanded Noah.	came to Noah to enter the ark, two by two, male and female, as God had commanded Noah.
GEN	7	10	칠 일 후에 홍수가 땅에 덮이니	And it came to pass after seven days, that the waters of the flood were upon the earth.	And after seven days the floodwaters came upon the earth.
GEN	7	11	노아 육백 세 되던 해 이월 곧 그 달 십칠일이라 그 날에 큰 깊음의 샘들이 터지며 하늘의 창들이 열려	In the six hundredth year of Noah’s life, in the second month, the seventeenth day of the month, the same day were all the fountains of the great deep broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened.	In the six hundredth year of Noah’s life, on the seventeenth day of the second month, all the fountains of the great deep burst forth, and the floodgates of the heavens were opened.
GEN	7	12	사십 주야를 비가 땅에 쏟아졌더라	And the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights.	And the rain fell upon the earth for forty days and forty nights.
GEN	7	13	곧 그 날에 노아와 그의 아들 셈, 함, 야벳과 노아의 처와 세 자부가 다 방주로 들어갔고	In the selfsame day entered Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and Japheth, the sons of Noah, and Noah’s wife, and the three wives of his sons with them, into the ark;	On that very day Noah entered the ark, along with his sons Shem, Ham, and Japheth, and his wife, and the three wives of his sons—
GEN	7	14	그들과 모든 들짐승이 그 종류대로, 모든 육축이 그 종류대로, 땅에 기는 모든 것이 그 종류대로, 모든 새 곧 각양의 새가 그 종류대로	They, and every beast after his kind, and all the cattle after their kind, and every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind, and every fowl after his kind, every bird of every sort.	they and every kind of wild animal, livestock, crawling creature, bird, and winged creature.
GEN	7	15	무릇 기식이 있는 육체가 둘씩 노아에게 나아와 방주로 들어갔으니	And they went in unto Noah into the ark, two and two of all flesh, wherein is the breath of life.	They came to Noah to enter the ark, two by two of every creature with the breath of life.
GEN	7	16	들어간 것들은 모든 것의 암수라 하나님이 그에게 명하신 대로 들어가매 여호와께서 그를 닫아 넣으시니라	And they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as God had commanded him: and the Lord shut him in.	And they entered, the male and female of every living thing, as God had commanded Noah. Then the LORD shut him in.
GEN	7	17	홍수가 땅에 사십 일을 있었는지라 물이 많아져 방주가 땅에서 떠 올랐고	And the flood was forty days upon the earth; and the waters increased, and bare up the ark, and it was lift up above the earth.	For forty days the flood kept coming on the earth, and the waters rose and lifted the ark high above the earth.
GEN	7	18	물이 더 많아져 땅에 창일하매 방주가 물 위에 떠 다녔으며	And the waters prevailed, and were increased greatly upon the earth; and the ark went upon the face of the waters.	So the waters continued to surge and rise greatly on the earth, and the ark floated on the surface of the waters.
GEN	7	19	물이 땅에 더욱 창일하매 천하에 높은 산이 다 덮였더니	And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth; and all the high hills, that were under the whole heaven, were covered.	Finally, the waters completely inundated the earth, so that all the high mountains under all the heavens were covered.
GEN	7	20	물이 불어서 십오 규빗이 오르매 산들이 덮인지라	Fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail; and the mountains were covered.	The waters rose and covered the mountaintops to a depth of fifteen cubits.
GEN	7	21	땅위에 움직이는 생물이 다 죽었으니 곧 새와 육축과 들짐승과 땅에 기는 모든 것과 모든 사람이라	And all flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of beast, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, and every man:	And every living thing that moved upon the earth perished—birds, livestock, animals, every creature that swarms upon the earth, and all mankind.
GEN	7	22	육지에 있어 코로 생물의 기식을 호흡하는 것은 다 죽었더라	All in whose nostrils was the breath of life, of all that was in the dry land, died.	Of all that was on dry land, everything that had the breath of life in its nostrils died.
GEN	7	23	지면의 모든 생물을 쓸어버리시니 곧 사람과 짐승과 기는 것과 공중의 새까지라 이들은 땅에서 쓸어버림을 당하였으되 홀로 노아와 그와 함께 방주에 있던 자만 남았더라	And every living substance was destroyed which was upon the face of the ground, both man, and cattle, and the creeping things, and the fowl of the heaven; and they were destroyed from the earth: and Noah only remained alive, and they that were with him in the ark.	And every living thing on the face of the earth was destroyed—man and livestock, crawling creatures and birds of the air; they were blotted out from the earth, and only Noah and those with him in the ark remained.
GEN	7	24	물이 일백오십 일을 땅에 창일하였더라	And the waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty days.	And the waters prevailed upon the earth for 150 days.
GEN	8	1	하나님이 노아와 그와 함께 방주에 있는 모든 들짐승과 육축을 권념하사 바람으로 땅 위에 불게 하시매 물이 감하였고	And God remembered Noah, and every living thing, and all the cattle that was with him in the ark: and God made a wind to pass over the earth, and the waters asswaged;	But God remembered Noah and all the animals and livestock that were with him in the ark. And God sent a wind over the earth, and the waters began to subside.
GEN	8	2	깊음의 샘과 하늘의 창이 막히고 하늘에서 비가 그치매	The fountains also of the deep and the windows of heaven were stopped, and the rain from heaven was restrained;	The springs of the deep and the floodgates of the heavens were closed, and the rain from the sky was restrained.
GEN	8	3	물이 땅에서 물러가고 점점 물러가서 일백오십일 후에 감하고	And the waters returned from off the earth continually: and after the end of the hundred and fifty days the waters were abated.	The waters receded steadily from the earth, and after 150 days the waters had gone down.
GEN	8	4	칠월 곧 그 달 십칠일에 방주가 아라랏 산에 머물렀으며	And the ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the month, upon the mountains of Ararat.	On the seventeenth day of the seventh month, the ark came to rest on the mountains of Ararat.
GEN	8	5	물이 점점 감하여 시월 곧 그 달 일일에 산들의 봉우리가 보였더라	And the waters decreased continually until the tenth month: in the tenth month, on the first day of the month, were the tops of the mountains seen.	And the waters continued to recede until the tenth month, and on the first day of the tenth month the tops of the mountains became visible.
GEN	8	6	사십 일을 지나서 노아가 그 방주에 지은 창을 열고	And it came to pass at the end of forty days, that Noah opened the window of the ark which he had made:	After forty days Noah opened the window he had made in the ark
GEN	8	7	까마귀를 내어 놓으매 까마귀가 물이 땅에서 마르기까지 날아 왕래하였더라	And he sent forth a raven, which went forth to and fro, until the waters were dried up from off the earth.	and sent out a raven. It kept flying back and forth until the waters had dried up from the earth.
GEN	8	8	그가 또 비둘기를 내어 놓아 지면에 물이 감한 여부를 알고자 하매	Also he sent forth a dove from him, to see if the waters were abated from off the face of the ground;	Then Noah sent out a dove to see if the waters had receded from the surface of the ground.
GEN	8	9	온 지면에 물이 있으므로 비둘기가 접족할 곳을 찾지 못하고 방주로 돌아와 그에게로 오는지라 그가 손을 내밀어 방주 속 자기에게로 받아 들이고	But the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot, and she returned unto him into the ark, for the waters were on the face of the whole earth: then he put forth his hand, and took her, and pulled her in unto him into the ark.	But the dove found no place to rest her foot, and she returned to him in the ark, because the waters were still covering the surface of all the earth. So he reached out his hand and brought her back inside the ark.
GEN	8	10	또 칠 일을 기다려 다시 비둘기를 방주에서 내어 놓으매	And he stayed yet other seven days; and again he sent forth the dove out of the ark;	Noah waited seven more days and again sent out the dove from the ark.
GEN	8	11	저녁때에 비둘기가 그에게로 돌아왔는데 그 입에 감람 새 잎사귀가 있는지라 이에 노아가 땅에 물이 감한 줄 알았으며	And the dove came in to him in the evening; and, lo, in her mouth was an olive leaf pluckt off: so Noah knew that the waters were abated from off the earth.	And behold, the dove returned to him in the evening with a freshly plucked olive leaf in her beak. So Noah knew that the waters had receded from the earth.
GEN	8	12	또 칠 일을 기다려 비둘기를 내어 놓으매 다시는 그에게로 돌아오지 아니하였더라	And he stayed yet other seven days; and sent forth the dove; which returned not again unto him any more.	And Noah waited seven more days and sent out the dove again, but this time she did not return to him.
GEN	8	13	육백일년 정월 곧 그 달 일일에 지면에 물이 걷힌지라 노아가 방주 뚜껑을 제치고 본즉 지면에 물이 걷혔더니	And it came to pass in the six hundredth and first year, in the first month, the first day of the month, the waters were dried up from off the earth: and Noah removed the covering of the ark, and looked, and, behold, the face of the ground was dry.	In Noah’s six hundred and first year, on the first day of the first month, the waters had dried up from the earth. So Noah removed the covering from the ark and saw that the surface of the ground was dry.
GEN	8	14	이월 이십칠일에 땅이 말랐더라	And in the second month, on the seven and twentieth day of the month, was the earth dried.	By the twenty-seventh day of the second month, the earth was fully dry.
GEN	8	15	하나님이 노아에게 말씀하여 가라사대	And God spake unto Noah, saying,	Then God said to Noah,
GEN	8	16	너는 네 아내와 네 아들들과 네 자부들로 더불어 방주에서 나오고	Go forth of the ark, thou, and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy sons’ wives with thee.	“Come out of the ark, you and your wife, along with your sons and their wives.
GEN	8	17	너와 함께 한 모든 혈육 있는 생물 곧 새와 육축과 땅에 기는 모든 것을 다 이끌어내라 이것들이 땅에서 생육하고 땅에서 번성하리라 하시매	Bring forth with thee every living thing that is with thee, of all flesh, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth; that they may breed abundantly in the earth, and be fruitful, and multiply upon the earth.	Bring out all the living creatures that are with you—birds, livestock, and everything that crawls upon the ground—so that they can spread out over the earth and be fruitful and multiply upon it.”
GEN	8	18	노아가 그 아들들과 그 아내와 그 자부들과 함께 나왔고	And Noah went forth, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons’ wives with him:	So Noah came out, along with his sons and his wife and his sons’ wives.
GEN	8	19	땅 위의 동물 곧 모든 짐승과 모든 기는 것과 모든 새도 그 종류대로 방주에서 나왔더라	Every beast, every creeping thing, and every fowl, and whatsoever creepeth upon the earth, after their kinds, went forth out of the ark.	Every living creature, every creeping thing, and every bird—everything that moves upon the earth—came out of the ark, kind by kind.
GEN	8	20	노아가 여호와를 위하여 단을 쌓고 모든 정결한 짐승 중에서와 모든 정결한 새 중에서 취하여 번제로 단에 드렸더니	And Noah builded an altar unto the Lord; and took of every clean beast, and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt offerings on the altar.	Then Noah built an altar to the LORD. And taking from every kind of clean animal and clean bird, he offered burnt offerings on the altar.
GEN	8	21	여호와께서 그 향기를 흠향하시고 그 중심에 이르시되 내가 다시는 사람으로 인하여 땅을 저주하지 아니하리니 이는 사람의 마음의 계획하는 바가 어려서부터 악함이라 내가 전에 행한 것 같이 모든 생물을 멸하지 아니하리니	And the Lord smelled a sweet savour; and the Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse the ground any more for man’s sake; for the imagination of man’s heart is evil from his youth; neither will I again smite any more every thing living, as I have done.	When the LORD smelled the pleasing aroma, He said in His heart, “Never again will I curse the ground because of man, even though every inclination of his heart is evil from his youth. And never again will I destroy all living creatures as I have done.
GEN	8	22	땅이 있을 동안에는 심음과 거둠과 추위와 더위와 여름과 겨울과 낮과 밤이 쉬지 아니하리라	While the earth remaineth, seedtime and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease.	As long as the earth endures, seedtime and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter, day and night shall never cease.”
GEN	9	1	하나님이 노아와 그 아들들에게 복을 주시며 그들에게 이르시되 생육하고 번성하여 땅에 충만하라	And God blessed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.	And God blessed Noah and his sons and said to them, “Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth.
GEN	9	2	땅의 모든 짐승과 공중의 모든 새와 땅에 기는 모든 것과 바다의 모든 고기가 너희를 두려워하며 너희를 무서워하리니 이들은 너희 손에 붙이웠음이라	And the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea; into your hand are they delivered.	The fear and dread of you will fall on every living creature on the earth, every bird of the air, every creature that crawls on the ground, and all the fish of the sea. They are delivered into your hand.
GEN	9	3	무릇 산 동물은 너희의 식물이 될지라 채소 같이 내가 이것을 다 너희에게 주노라	Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the green herb have I given you all things.	Everything that lives and moves will be food for you; just as I gave you the green plants, I now give you all things.
GEN	9	4	그러나 고기를 그 생명 되는 피채 먹지 말 것이니라	But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall ye not eat.	But you must not eat meat with its lifeblood still in it.
GEN	9	5	내가 반드시 너희 피 곧 너희 생명의 피를 찾으리니 짐승이면 그 짐승에게서, 사람이나 사람의 형제면 그에게서 그의 생명을 찾으리라	And surely your blood of your lives will I require; at the hand of every beast will I require it, and at the hand of man; at the hand of every man’s brother will I require the life of man.	And surely I will require the life of any man or beast by whose hand your lifeblood is shed. I will demand an accounting from anyone who takes the life of his fellow man:
GEN	9	6	무릇 사람의 피를 흘리면 사람이 그 피를 흘릴 것이니 이는 하나님이 자기 형상대로 사람을 지었음이니라	Whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God made he man.	Whoever sheds the blood of man, by man his blood will be shed; for in His own image God has made mankind.
GEN	9	7	너희는 생육하고 번성하며 땅에 편만하여 그 중에서 번성하라 하셨더라	And you, be ye fruitful, and multiply; bring forth abundantly in the earth, and multiply therein.	But as for you, be fruitful and multiply; spread out across the earth and multiply upon it.”
GEN	9	8	하나님이 노아와 그와 함께 한 아들들에게 일러 가라사대	And God spake unto Noah, and to his sons with him, saying,	Then God said to Noah and his sons with him,
GEN	9	9	내가 내 언약을 너희와 너희 후손과	And I, behold, I establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after you;	“Behold, I now establish My covenant with you and your descendants after you,
GEN	9	10	너희와 함께 한 모든 생물 곧 너희와 함께 한 새와 육축과 땅의 모든 생물에게 세우리니 방주에서 나온 모든 것 곧 땅의 모든 짐승에게니라	And with every living creature that is with you, of the fowl, of the cattle, and of every beast of the earth with you; from all that go out of the ark, to every beast of the earth.	and with every living creature that was with you—the birds, the livestock, and every beast of the earth—every living thing that came out of the ark.
GEN	9	11	내가 너희와 언약을 세우리니 다시는 모든 생물을 홍수로 멸하지 아니할 것이라 땅을 침몰할 홍수가 다시 있지 아니하리라	And I will establish my covenant with you; neither shall all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood; neither shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth.	And I establish My covenant with you: Never again will all life be cut off by the waters of a flood; never again will there be a flood to destroy the earth.”
GEN	9	12	하나님이 가라사대 내가 나와 너희와 및 너희와 함께 하는 모든 생물 사이에 영세까지 세우는 언약의 증거는 이것이라	And God said, This is the token of the covenant which I make between me and you and every living creature that is with you, for perpetual generations:	And God said, “This is the sign of the covenant I am making between Me and you and every living creature with you, a covenant for all generations to come:
GEN	9	13	내가 내 무지개를 구름 속에 두었나니 이것이 나의 세상과의 언약의 증거니라	I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of a covenant between me and the earth.	I have set My rainbow in the clouds, and it will be a sign of the covenant between Me and the earth.
GEN	9	14	내가 구름으로 땅을 덮을 때에 무지개가 구름 속에 나타나면	And it shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be seen in the cloud:	Whenever I form clouds over the earth and the rainbow appears in the clouds,
GEN	9	15	내가 나와 너희와 및 혈기 있는 모든 생물 사이의 내 언약을 기억하리니 다시는 물이 모든 혈기 있는 자를 멸하는 홍수가 되지 아니할지라	And I will remember my covenant, which is between me and you and every living creature of all flesh; and the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.	I will remember My covenant between Me and you and every living creature of every kind. Never again will the waters become a flood to destroy all life.
GEN	9	16	무지개가 구름 사이에 있으리니 내가 보고 나 하나님과 땅의 무릇 혈기 있는 모든 생물 사이에 된 영원한 언약을 기억하리라	And the bow shall be in the cloud; and I will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant between God and every living creature of all flesh that is upon the earth.	And whenever the rainbow appears in the clouds, I will see it and remember the everlasting covenant between God and every living creature of every kind that is on the earth.”
GEN	9	17	하나님이 노아에게 또 이르시되 내가 나와 땅에 있는 모든 생물 사이에 세운 언약의 증거가 이것이라 하셨더라	And God said unto Noah, This is the token of the covenant, which I have established between me and all flesh that is upon the earth.	So God said to Noah, “This is the sign of the covenant that I have established between Me and every creature on the earth.”
GEN	9	18	방주에서 나온 노아의 아들들은 셈과 함과 야벳이며 함은 가나안의 아비라	And the sons of Noah, that went forth of the ark, were Shem, and Ham, and Japheth: and Ham is the father of Canaan.	The sons of Noah who came out of the ark were Shem, Ham, and Japheth. And Ham was the father of Canaan.
GEN	9	19	노아의 이 세 아들로 좇아 백성이 온 땅에 퍼지니라	These are the three sons of Noah: and of them was the whole earth overspread.	These three were the sons of Noah, and from them the whole earth was populated.
GEN	9	20	노아가 농업을 시작하여 포도 나무를 심었더니	And Noah began to be an husbandman, and he planted a vineyard:	Now Noah, a man of the soil, proceeded to plant a vineyard.
GEN	9	21	포도주를 마시고 취하여 그 장막 안에서 벌거벗은지라	And he drank of the wine, and was drunken; and he was uncovered within his tent.	But when he drank some of its wine, he became drunk and uncovered himself inside his tent.
GEN	9	22	가나안의 아비 함이 그 아비의 하체를 보고 밖으로 나가서 두 형제에게 고하매	And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father, and told his two brethren without.	And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw his father’s nakedness and told his two brothers outside.
GEN	9	23	셈과 야벳이 옷을 취하여 자기들의 어깨에 메고 뒷걸음쳐 들어가서 아비의 하체에 덮었으며 그들이 얼굴을 돌이키고 그 아비의 하체를 보지 아니하였더라	And Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid it upon both their shoulders, and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their father; and their faces were backward, and they saw not their father’s nakedness.	Then Shem and Japheth took a garment and placed it across their shoulders, and walking backward, they covered their father’s nakedness. Their faces were turned away so that they did not see their father’s nakedness.
GEN	9	24	노아가 술이 깨어 그 작은 아들이 자기에게 행한 일을 알고	And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son had done unto him.	When Noah awoke from his drunkenness and learned what his youngest son had done to him,
GEN	9	25	이에 가로되 가나안은 저주를 받아 그 형제의 종들의 종이 되기를 원하노라	And he said, Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren.	he said, “Cursed be Canaan! A servant of servants shall he be to his brothers.”
GEN	9	26	또 가로되 셈의 하나님 여호와를 찬송하리로다 가나안은 셈의 종이 되고	And he said, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant.	He also declared: “Blessed be the LORD, the God of Shem! May Canaan be the servant of Shem.
GEN	9	27	하나님이 야벳을 창대케하사 셈의 장막에 거하게 하시고 가나안은 그의 종이 되게 하시기를 원하노라 하였더라	God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant.	May God expand the territory of Japheth; may he dwell in the tents of Shem, and may Canaan be his servant.”
GEN	9	28	홍수 후에 노아가 삼백오십 년을 지내었고	And Noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years.	After the flood, Noah lived 350 years.
GEN	9	29	향년이 구백오십 세에 죽었더라	And all the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years: and he died.	So Noah lived a total of 950 years, and then he died.
GEN	10	1	노아의 아들 셈과 함과 야벳의 후예는 이러하니라 홍수 후에 그들이 아들들을 낳았으니	Now these are the generations of the sons of Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth: and unto them were sons born after the flood.	This is the account of Noah’s sons Shem, Ham, and Japheth, who also had sons after the flood.
GEN	10	2	야벳의 아들은 고멜과 마곡과 마대와 야완과 두발과 메섹과 디라스요	The sons of Japheth; Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras.	The sons of Japheth: Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Meshech, and Tiras.
GEN	10	3	고멜의 아들은 아스그나스와 리밧과 도갈마요	And the sons of Gomer; Ashkenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah.	The sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz, Riphath, and Togarmah.
GEN	10	4	야완의 아들은 엘리사와 달시스와 깃딤과 도다님이라	And the sons of Javan; Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim.	And the sons of Javan: Elishah, Tarshish, the Kittites, and the Rodanites.
GEN	10	5	이들로부터 여러 나라 백성으로 나뉘어서 각기 방언과 종족과 나라대로 바닷가의 땅에 머물렀더라	By these were the isles of the Gentiles divided in their lands; every one after his tongue, after their families, in their nations.	From these, the maritime peoples separated into their territories, according to their languages, by clans within their nations.
GEN	10	6	함의 아들은 구스와 미스라임과 붓과 가나안이요	And the sons of Ham; Cush, and Mizraim, and Phut, and Canaan.	The sons of Ham: Cush, Mizraim, Put, and Canaan.
GEN	10	7	구스의 아들은 스바와 하윌라와 삽다와 라아마와 삽드가요 라아마의 아들은 스바와 드단이며	And the sons of Cush; Seba, and Havilah, and Sabtah, and Raamah, and Sabtecha: and the sons of Raamah; Sheba, and Dedan.	The sons of Cush: Seba, Havilah, Sabtah, Raamah, and Sabteca. And the sons of Raamah: Sheba and Dedan.
GEN	10	8	구스가 또 니므롯을 낳았으니 그는 세상에 처음 영걸이라	And Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be a mighty one in the earth.	Cush was the father of Nimrod, who began to be a mighty one on the earth.
GEN	10	9	그가 여호와 앞에서 특이한 사냥꾼이 되었으므로 속담에 이르기를 아무는 여호와 앞에 니므롯 같은 특이한 사냥꾼이로다 하더라	He was a mighty hunter before the Lord: wherefore it is said, Even as Nimrod the mighty hunter before the Lord.	He was a mighty hunter before the LORD; so it is said, “Like Nimrod, a mighty hunter before the LORD.”
GEN	10	10	그의 나라는 시날 땅의 바벨과 에렉과 악갓과 갈레에서 시작되었으며	And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar.	His kingdom began in Babylon, Erech, Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar.
GEN	10	11	그가 그 땅에서 앗수르로 나아가 니느웨와 르호보딜과 갈라와	Out of that land went forth Asshur, and builded Nineveh, and the city Rehoboth, and Calah,	From that land he went forth into Assyria, where he built Nineveh, Rehoboth-Ir, Calah,
GEN	10	12	및 니느웨와 갈라 사이의 레센(이는 큰 성이라)을 건축하였으며	And Resen between Nineveh and Calah: the same is a great city.	and Resen, which is between Nineveh and the great city of Calah.
GEN	10	13	미스라임은 루딤과 아나밈과 르하빔과 납두힘과	And Mizraim begat Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim,	Mizraim was the father of the Ludites, the Anamites, the Lehabites, the Naphtuhites,
GEN	10	14	바드루심과 가슬루힘과 갑도림을 낳았더라 (블레셋이 가슬루힘에게서 나왔더라)	And Pathrusim, and Casluhim, (out of whom came Philistim,) and Caphtorim.	the Pathrusites, the Casluhites (from whom the Philistines came), and the Caphtorites.
GEN	10	15	가나안은 장자 시돈과 헷을 낳고	And Canaan begat Sidon his firstborn, and Heth,	And Canaan was the father of Sidon his firstborn, and of the Hittites,
GEN	10	16	또 여부스 족속과 아모리 족속과 기르가스 족속과	And the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgasite,	the Jebusites, the Amorites, the Girgashites,
GEN	10	17	히위 족속과 알가 족속과 신 족속과	And the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite,	the Hivites, the Arkites, the Sinites,
GEN	10	18	아르왓 족속과 스말 족속과 하맛 족속의 조상을 낳았더니 이 후로 가나안 자손의 족속이 흩어져 처하였더라	And the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite: and afterward were the families of the Canaanites spread abroad.	the Arvadites, the Zemarites, and the Hamathites. Later the Canaanite clans were scattered,
GEN	10	19	가나안의 지경은 시돈에서부터 그랄을 지나 가사까지와 소돔과 고모라와 아드마와 스보임을 지나 라사까지였더라	And the border of the Canaanites was from Sidon, as thou comest to Gerar, unto Gaza; as thou goest, unto Sodom, and Gomorrah, and Admah, and Zeboim, even unto Lasha.	and the borders of Canaan extended from Sidon toward Gerar as far as Gaza, and then toward Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboiim, as far as Lasha.
GEN	10	20	이들은 함의 자손이라 각기 족속과 방언과 지방과 나라대로이었더라	These are the sons of Ham, after their families, after their tongues, in their countries, and in their nations.	These are the sons of Ham according to their clans, languages, lands, and nations.
GEN	10	21	셈은 에벨 온 자손의 조상이요 야벳의 형이라 그에게도 자녀가 출생하였으니	Unto Shem also, the father of all the children of Eber, the brother of Japheth the elder, even to him were children born.	And sons were also born to Shem, the older brother of Japheth; Shem was the forefather of all the sons of Eber.
GEN	10	22	셈의 아들은 엘람과 앗수르와 아르박삿과 룻과 아람이요	The children of Shem; Elam, and Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram.	The sons of Shem: Elam, Asshur, Arphaxad, Lud, and Aram.
GEN	10	23	아람의 아들은 우스와 훌과 게델과 마스며	And the children of Aram; Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Mash.	The sons of Aram: Uz, Hul, Gether, and Mash.
GEN	10	24	아르박삿은 셀라를 낳고 셀라는 에벨을 낳았으며	And Arphaxad begat Salah; and Salah begat Eber.	Arphaxad was the father of Shelah, and Shelah was the father of Eber.
GEN	10	25	에벨은 두 아들을 낳고 하나의 이름을 벨렉이라 하였으니 그 때에 세상이 나뉘었음이요 벨렉의 아우의 이름은 욕단이며	And unto Eber were born two sons: the name of one was Peleg; for in his days was the earth divided; and his brother’s name was Joktan.	Two sons were born to Eber: One was named Peleg, because in his days the earth was divided, and his brother was named Joktan.
GEN	10	26	욕단은 알모닷과 셀렙과 하살마웹과 예라와	And Joktan begat Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah,	And Joktan was the father of Almodad, Sheleph, Hazarmaveth, Jerah,
GEN	10	27	하도람과 우살과 디글라와	And Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah,	Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah,
GEN	10	28	오발과 아비마엘과 스바와	And Obal, and Abimael, and Sheba,	Obal, Abimael, Sheba,
GEN	10	29	오빌과 하윌라와 요밥을 낳았으니 이들은 다 욕단의 아들이며	And Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab: all these were the sons of Joktan.	Ophir, Havilah, and Jobab. All these were sons of Joktan.
GEN	10	30	그들의 거하는 곳은 메사에서부터 스발로 가는 길의 동편 산이었더라	And their dwelling was from Mesha, as thou goest unto Sephar a mount of the east.	Their territory extended from Mesha to Sephar, in the eastern hill country.
GEN	10	31	이들은 셈의 자손이라 그 족속과 방언과 지방과 나라대로였더라	These are the sons of Shem, after their families, after their tongues, in their lands, after their nations.	These are the sons of Shem, according to their clans, languages, lands, and nations.
GEN	10	32	이들은 노아 자손의 족속들이요 그 세계와 나라대로라 홍수 후에 이들에게서 땅의 열국백성이 나뉘었더라	These are the families of the sons of Noah, after their generations, in their nations: and by these were the nations divided in the earth after the flood.	All these are the clans of Noah’s sons, according to their generations and nations. From these the nations of the earth spread out after the flood.
GEN	11	1	온 땅의 구음이 하나이요 언어가 하나이었더라	And the whole earth was of one language, and of one speech.	Now the whole world had one language and a common form of speech.
GEN	11	2	이에 그들이 동방으로 옮기다가 시날 평지를 만나 거기 거하고	And it came to pass, as they journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the land of Shinar; and they dwelt there.	And as people journeyed eastward, they found a plain in the land of Shinar and settled there.
GEN	11	3	서로 말하되 자, 벽돌을 만들어 견고히 굽자 하고 이에 벽돌로 돌을 대신하며 역청으로 진흙을 대신하고	And they said one to another, Go to, let us make brick, and burn them throughly. And they had brick for stone, and slime had they for morter.	And they said to one another, “Come, let us make bricks and bake them thoroughly.” So they used brick instead of stone, and tar instead of mortar.
GEN	11	4	또 말하되 자, 성과 대를 쌓아 대 꼭대기를 하늘에 닿게 하여 우리 이름을 내고 온 지면에 흩어짐을 면하자 하였더니	And they said, Go to, let us build us a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.	“Come,” they said, “let us build for ourselves a city with a tower that reaches to the heavens, that we may make a name for ourselves and not be scattered over the face of all the earth.”
GEN	11	5	여호와께서 인생들의 쌓는 성과 대를 보시려고 강림하셨더라	And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower, which the children of men builded.	Then the LORD came down to see the city and the tower that the sons of men were building.
GEN	11	6	여호와께서 가라사대 이 무리가 한 족속이요 언어도 하나이므로 이같이 시작하였으니 이후로는 그 경영하는 일을 금지할 수 없으리로다	And the Lord said, Behold, the people is one, and they have all one language; and this they begin to do: and now nothing will be restrained from them, which they have imagined to do.	And the LORD said, “If they have begun to do this as one people speaking the same language, then nothing they devise will be beyond them.
GEN	11	7	자, 우리가 내려가서 거기서 그들의 언어를 혼잡케 하여 그들로 서로 알아듣지 못하게 하자 하시고	Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that they may not understand one another’s speech.	Come, let Us go down and confuse their language, so that they will not understand one another’s speech.”
GEN	11	8	여호와께서 거기서 그들을 온 지면에 흩으신 고로 그들이 성 쌓기를 그쳤더라	So the Lord scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth: and they left off to build the city.	So the LORD scattered them from there over the face of all the earth, and they stopped building the city.
GEN	11	9	그러므로 그 이름을 바벨이라 하니 이는 여호와께서 거기서 온 땅의 언어를 혼잡케 하셨음이라 여호와께서 거기서 그들을 온 지면에 흩으셨더라	Therefore is the name of it called Babel; because the Lord did there confound the language of all the earth: and from thence did the Lord scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth.	That is why it is called Babel, for there the LORD confused the language of the whole world, and from that place the LORD scattered them over the face of all the earth.
GEN	11	10	셈의 후예는 이러하니라 셈은 일백 세 곧 홍수 후 이 년에 아르박삿을 낳았고	These are the generations of Shem: Shem was an hundred years old, and begat Arphaxad two years after the flood:	This is the account of Shem. Two years after the flood, when Shem was 100 years old, he became the father of Arphaxad.
GEN	11	11	아르박삿을 낳은 후에 오백 년을 지내며 자녀를 낳았으며	And Shem lived after he begat Arphaxad five hundred years, and begat sons and daughters.	And after he had become the father of Arphaxad, Shem lived 500 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN	11	12	아르박삿은 삼십오 세에 셀라를 낳았고	And Arphaxad lived five and thirty years, and begat Salah:	When Arphaxad was 35 years old, he became the father of Shelah.
GEN	11	13	셀라를 낳은 후에 사백삼 년을 지내며 자녀를 낳았으며	And Arphaxad lived after he begat Salah four hundred and three years, and begat sons and daughters.	And after he had become the father of Shelah, Arphaxad lived 403 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN	11	14	셀라는 삼십 세에 에벨을 낳았고	And Salah lived thirty years, and begat Eber:	When Shelah was 30 years old, he became the father of Eber.
GEN	11	15	에벨을 낳은 후에 사백삼 년을 지내며 자녀를 낳았으며	And Salah lived after he begat Eber four hundred and three years, and begat sons and daughters.	And after he had become the father of Eber, Shelah lived 403 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN	11	16	에벨은 삼십사 세에 벨렉을 낳았고	And Eber lived four and thirty years, and begat Peleg:	When Eber was 34 years old, he became the father of Peleg.
GEN	11	17	벨렉을 낳은 후에 사백삼십 년을 지내며 자녀를 낳았으며	And Eber lived after he begat Peleg four hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters.	And after he had become the father of Peleg, Eber lived 430 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN	11	18	벨렉은 삼십 세에 르우를 낳았고	And Peleg lived thirty years, and begat Reu:	When Peleg was 30 years old, he became the father of Reu.
GEN	11	19	르우를 낳은 후에 이백구 년을 지내며 자녀를 낳았으며	And Peleg lived after he begat Reu two hundred and nine years, and begat sons and daughters.	And after he had become the father of Reu, Peleg lived 209 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN	11	20	르우는 삼십이 세에 스룩을 낳았고	And Reu lived two and thirty years, and begat Serug:	When Reu was 32 years old, he became the father of Serug.
GEN	11	21	스룩을 낳은 후에 이백칠 년을 지내며 자녀를 낳았으며	And Reu lived after he begat Serug two hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters.	And after he had become the father of Serug, Reu lived 207 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN	11	22	스룩은 삼십 세에 나홀을 낳았고	And Serug lived thirty years, and begat Nahor:	When Serug was 30 years old, he became the father of Nahor.
GEN	11	23	나홀을 낳은 후에 이백 년을 지내며 자녀를 낳았으며	And Serug lived after he begat Nahor two hundred years, and begat sons and daughters.	And after he had become the father of Nahor, Serug lived 200 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN	11	24	나홀은 이십구 세에 데라를 낳았고	And Nahor lived nine and twenty years, and begat Terah:	When Nahor was 29 years old, he became the father of Terah.
GEN	11	25	데라를 낳은 후에 일백십구 년을 지내며 자녀를 낳았으며	And Nahor lived after he begat Terah an hundred and nineteen years, and begat sons and daughters.	And after he had become the father of Terah, Nahor lived 119 years and had other sons and daughters.
GEN	11	26	데라는 칠십 세에 아브람과 나홀과 하란을 낳았더라	And Terah lived seventy years, and begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran.	When Terah was 70 years old, he became the father of Abram, Nahor, and Haran.
GEN	11	27	데라의 후예는 이러하니라 데라는 아브람과 나홀과 하란을 낳았고 하란은 롯을 낳았으며	Now these are the generations of Terah: Terah begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran; and Haran begat Lot.	This is the account of Terah. Terah became the father of Abram, Nahor, and Haran. And Haran became the father of Lot.
GEN	11	28	하란은 그 아비 데라보다 먼저 본토 갈대아 우르에서 죽었더라	And Haran died before his father Terah in the land of his nativity, in Ur of the Chaldees.	During his father Terah’s lifetime, Haran died in his native land, in Ur of the Chaldeans.
GEN	11	29	아브람과 나홀이 장가 들었으니 아브람의 아내 이름은 사래며 나홀의 아내 이름은 밀가니 하란의 딸이요 하란은 밀가의 아비며 또 이스가의 아비더라	And Abram and Nahor took them wives: the name of Abram’s wife was Sarai; and the name of Nahor’s wife, Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milcah, and the father of Iscah.	And Abram and Nahor took wives for themselves. Abram’s wife was named Sarai, and Nahor’s wife was named Milcah; she was the daughter of Haran, who was the father of both Milcah and Iscah.
GEN	11	30	사래는 잉태하지 못하므로 자식이 없었더라	But Sarai was barren; she had no child.	But Sarai was barren; she had no children.
GEN	11	31	데라가 그 아들 아브람과 하란의 아들 그 손자 롯과 그 자부 아브람의 아내 사래를 데리고 갈대아 우르에서 떠나 가나안 땅으로 가고자 하더니 하란에 이르러 거기 거하였으며	And Terah took Abram his son, and Lot the son of Haran his son’s son, and Sarai his daughter in law, his son Abram’s wife; and they went forth with them from Ur of the Chaldees, to go into the land of Canaan; and they came unto Haran, and dwelt there.	And Terah took his son Abram, his grandson Lot son of Haran, and his daughter-in-law Sarai the wife of Abram, and they set out from Ur of the Chaldeans for the land of Canaan. But when they arrived in Haran, they settled there.
GEN	11	32	데라는 이백오 세를 향수하고 하란에서 죽었더라	And the days of Terah were two hundred and five years: and Terah died in Haran.	Terah lived 205 years, and he died in Haran.
GEN	12	1	여호와께서 아브람에게 이르시되 너는 너의 본토 친척 아비 집을 떠나 내가 네게 지시할 땅으로 가라	Now the Lord had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father’s house, unto a land that I will shew thee:	Then the LORD said to Abram, “Leave your country, your kindred, and your father’s household, and go to the land I will show you.
GEN	12	2	내가 너로 큰 민족을 이루고 네게 복을 주어 네 이름을 창대케 하리니 너는 복의 근원이 될지라	And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing:	I will make you into a great nation, and I will bless you; I will make your name great, so that you will be a blessing.
GEN	12	3	너를 축복하는 자에게는 내가 복을 내리고 너를 저주하는 자에게는 내가 저주하리니 땅의 모든 족속이 너를 인하여 복을 얻을 것이니라 하신지라	And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee: and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed.	I will bless those who bless you and curse those who curse you; and all the families of the earth will be blessed through you.”
GEN	12	4	이에 아브람이 여호와의 말씀을 좇아 갔고 롯도 그와 함께 갔으며 아브람이 하란을 떠날 때에 그 나이 칠십오 세였더라	So Abram departed, as the Lord had spoken unto him; and Lot went with him: and Abram was seventy and five years old when he departed out of Haran.	So Abram departed, as the LORD had directed him, and Lot went with him. Abram was seventy-five years old when he left Haran.
GEN	12	5	아브람이 그 아내 사래와 조카 롯과 하란에서 모은 모든 소유와 얻은 사람들을 이끌고 가나안 땅으로 가려고 떠나서 마침내 가나안 땅에 들어갔더라	And Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother’s son, and all their substance that they had gathered, and the souls that they had gotten in Haran; and they went forth to go into the land of Canaan; and into the land of Canaan they came.	And Abram took his wife Sarai, his nephew Lot, and all the possessions and people they had acquired in Haran, and set out for the land of Canaan. When they came to the land of Canaan,
GEN	12	6	아브람이 그 땅을 통과하여 세겜 땅 모레 상수리나무에 이르니 그 때에 가나안 사람이 그 땅에 거하였더라	And Abram passed through the land unto the place of Sichem, unto the plain of Moreh. And the Canaanite was then in the land.	Abram traveled through the land as far as the site of the Oak of Moreh at Shechem. And at that time the Canaanites were in the land.
GEN	12	7	여호와께서 아브람에게 나타나 가라사대 내가 이 땅을 네 자손에게 주리라 하신지라 그가 자기에게 나타나신 여호와를 위하여 그 곳에 단을 쌓고	And the Lord appeared unto Abram, and said, Unto thy seed will I give this land: and there builded he an altar unto the Lord, who appeared unto him.	Then the LORD appeared to Abram and said, “I will give this land to your offspring.” So Abram built an altar there to the LORD, who had appeared to him.
GEN	12	8	거기서 벧엘 동편 산으로 옮겨 장막을 치니 서는 벧엘이요 동은 아이라 그가 그곳에서 여호와를 위하여 단을 쌓고 여호와의 이름을 부르더니	And he removed from thence unto a mountain on the east of Beth–el, and pitched his tent, having Beth–el on the west, and Hai on the east: and there he builded an altar unto the Lord, and called upon the name of the Lord.	From there Abram moved on to the hill country east of Bethel and pitched his tent, with Bethel to the west and Ai to the east. There he built an altar to the LORD, and he called on the name of the LORD.
GEN	12	9	점점 남방으로 옮겨갔더라	And Abram journeyed, going on still toward the south.	And Abram journeyed on toward the Negev.
GEN	12	10	그 땅에 기근이 있으므로 아브람이 애굽에 우거하려 하여 그리로 내려갔으니 이는 그 땅에 기근이 심하였음이라	And there was a famine in the land: and Abram went down into Egypt to sojourn there; for the famine was grievous in the land.	Now there was a famine in the land. So Abram went down to Egypt to live there for a while because the famine was severe.
GEN	12	11	그가 애굽에 가까이 이를 때에 그 아내 사래더러 말하되 나 알기에 그대는 아리따운 여인이라	And it came to pass, when he was come near to enter into Egypt, that he said unto Sarai his wife, Behold now, I know that thou art a fair woman to look upon:	As he was about to enter Egypt, he said to his wife Sarai, “Look, I know that you are a beautiful woman,
GEN	12	12	애굽 사람이 그대를 볼 때에 이르기를 이는 그의 아내라 하고 나는 죽이고 그대는 살리리니	Therefore it shall come to pass, when the Egyptians shall see thee, that they shall say, This is his wife: and they will kill me, but they will save thee alive.	and when the Egyptians see you, they will say, ‘This is his wife.’ Then they will kill me but will let you live.
GEN	12	13	원컨대 그대는 나의 누이라 하라 그리하면 내가 그대로 인하여 안전하고 내 목숨이 그대로 인하여 보존하겠노라 하니라	Say, I pray thee, thou art my sister: that it may be well with me for thy sake; and my soul shall live because of thee.	Please say you are my sister, so that I will be treated well for your sake, and on account of you my life will be spared.”
GEN	12	14	아브람이 애굽에 이르렀을 때에 애굽 사람들이 그 여인의 심히 아리따움을 보았고	And it came to pass, that, when Abram was come into Egypt, the Egyptians beheld the woman that she was very fair.	So when Abram entered Egypt, the Egyptians saw that the woman was very beautiful.
GEN	12	15	바로의 대신들도 그를 보고 바로 앞에 칭찬하므로 그 여인을 바로의 궁으로 취하여 들인지라	The princes also of Pharaoh saw her, and commended her before Pharaoh: and the woman was taken into Pharaoh’s house.	When Pharaoh’s officials saw Sarai, they commended her to him, and she was taken into the palace of Pharaoh.
GEN	12	16	이에 바로가 그를 인하여 아브람을 후대하므로 아브람이 양과 소와 노비와 암수 나귀와 약대를 얻었더라	And he entreated Abram well for her sake: and he had sheep, and oxen, and he asses, and menservants, and maidservants, and she asses, and camels.	He treated Abram well on her account, and Abram acquired sheep and cattle, male and female donkeys, menservants and maidservants, and camels.
GEN	12	17	여호와께서 아브람의 아내 사래의 연고로 바로와 그 집에 큰 재앙을 내리신지라	And the Lord plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues because of Sarai Abram’s wife.	The LORD, however, afflicted Pharaoh and his household with severe plagues because of Abram’s wife Sarai.
GEN	12	18	바로가 아브람을 불러서 이르되 네가 어찌하여 나를 이렇게 대접하였느냐 네가 어찌하여 그를 네 아내라고 내게 고하지 아니하였느냐	And Pharaoh called Abram, and said, What is this that thou hast done unto me? why didst thou not tell me that she was thy wife?	So Pharaoh summoned Abram and asked, “What have you done to me? Why didn’t you tell me she was your wife?
GEN	12	19	네가 어찌 그를 누이라 하여 나로 그를 취하여 아내를 삼게 하였느냐 네 아내가 여기 있으니 이제 데려가라 하고	Why saidst thou, She is my sister? so I might have taken her to me to wife: now therefore behold thy wife, take her, and go thy way.	Why did you say, ‘She is my sister,’ so that I took her as my wife? Now then, here is your wife. Take her and go!”
GEN	12	20	바로가 사람들에게 그의 일을 명하매 그들이 그 아내와 그 모든 소유를 보내었더라	And Pharaoh commanded his men concerning him: and they sent him away, and his wife, and all that he had.	Then Pharaoh gave his men orders concerning Abram, and they sent him away with his wife and all his possessions.
GEN	13	1	아브람이 애굽에서 나올새 그와 그 아내와 모든 소유며 롯도 함께하여 남방으로 올라가니	And Abram went up out of Egypt, he, and his wife, and all that he had, and Lot with him, into the south.	So Abram went up out of Egypt into the Negev—he and his wife and all his possessions—and Lot was with him.
GEN	13	2	아브람에게 육축과 은금이 풍부하였더라	And Abram was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold.	And Abram had become extremely wealthy in livestock and silver and gold.
GEN	13	3	그가 남방에서부터 발행하여 벧엘에 이르며 벧엘과 아이 사이 전에 장막 쳤던 곳에 이르니	And he went on his journeys from the south even to Beth–el, unto the place where his tent had been at the beginning, between Beth–el and Hai;	From the Negev he journeyed from place to place toward Bethel, until he came to the place between Bethel and Ai where his tent had formerly been pitched,
GEN	13	4	그가 처음으로 단을 쌓은 곳이라 그가 거기서 여호와의 이름을 불렀더라	Unto the place of the altar, which he had made there at the first: and there Abram called on the name of the Lord.	to the site where he had built the altar. And there Abram called on the name of the LORD.
GEN	13	5	아브람의 일행 롯도 양과 소와 장막이 있으므로	And Lot also, which went with Abram, had flocks, and herds, and tents.	Now Lot, who was traveling with Abram, also had flocks and herds and tents.
GEN	13	6	그 땅이 그들의 동거함을 용납지 못하였으니 곧 그들의 소유가 많아서 동거할 수 없었음이라	And the land was not able to bear them, that they might dwell together: for their substance was great, so that they could not dwell together.	But the land was unable to support both of them while they stayed together, for they had so many possessions that they were unable to coexist.
GEN	13	7	그러므로 아브람의 가축의 목자와 롯의 가축의 목자가 서로 다투고 또 가나안 사람과 브리스 사람도 그 땅에 거하였는지라	And there was a strife between the herdmen of Abram’s cattle and the herdmen of Lot’s cattle: and the Canaanite and the Perizzite dwelled then in the land.	And there was discord between the herdsmen of Abram and the herdsmen of Lot. At that time the Canaanites and the Perizzites were also living in the land.
GEN	13	8	아브람이 롯에게 이르되 우리는 한 골육이라 나나 너나 내 목자나 네 목자나 서로 다투게 말자	And Abram said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my herdmen and thy herdmen; for we be brethren.	So Abram said to Lot, “Please let there be no contention between you and me, or between your herdsmen and my herdsmen. After all, we are brothers.
GEN	13	9	네 앞에 온 땅이 있지 아니하냐 나를 떠나라 네가 좌하면 나는 우하고 네가 우하면 나는 좌하리라	Is not the whole land before thee? separate thyself, I pray thee, from me: if thou wilt take the left hand, then I will go to the right; or if thou depart to the right hand, then I will go to the left.	Is not the whole land before you? Now separate yourself from me. If you go to the left, I will go to the right; if you go to the right, I will go to the left.”
GEN	13	10	이에 롯이 눈을 들어 요단 들을 바라본즉 소알까지 온 땅에 물이 넉넉하니 여호와께서 소돔과 고모라를 멸하시기 전이었는고로 여호와의 동산 같고 애굽 땅과 같았더라	And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain of Jordan, that it was well watered every where, before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, even as the garden of the Lord, like the land of Egypt, as thou comest unto Zoar.	And Lot looked out and saw that the whole plain of the Jordan, all the way to Zoar, was well watered like the garden of the LORD, like the land of Egypt. (This was before the LORD destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah.)
GEN	13	11	그러므로 롯이 요단 온 들을 택하고 동으로 옮기니 그들이 서로 떠난지라	Then Lot chose him all the plain of Jordan; and Lot journeyed east: and they separated themselves the one from the other.	So Lot chose the whole plain of the Jordan for himself and set out toward the east. And Abram and Lot parted company.
GEN	13	12	아브람은 가나안 땅에 거하였고 롯은 평지 성읍들에 머무르며 그 장막을 옮겨 소돔까지 이르렀더라	Abram dwelled in the land of Canaan, and Lot dwelled in the cities of the plain, and pitched his tent toward Sodom.	Abram lived in the land of Canaan, but Lot settled in the cities of the plain and pitched his tent toward Sodom.
GEN	13	13	소돔 사람은 악하여 여호와 앞에 큰 죄인이었더라	But the men of Sodom were wicked and sinners before the Lord exceedingly.	But the men of Sodom were wicked, sinning greatly against the LORD.
GEN	13	14	롯이 아브람을 떠난 후에 여호와께서 아브람에게 이르시되 너는 눈을 들어 너 있는 곳에서 동서남북을 바라보라	And the Lord said unto Abram, after that Lot was separated from him, Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward:	After Lot had departed, the LORD said to Abram, “Now lift up your eyes from the place where you are, and look to the north and south and east and west,
GEN	13	15	보이는 땅을 내가 너와 네 자손에게 주리니 영원히 이르리라	For all the land which thou seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever.	for all the land that you see, I will give to you and your offspring forever.
GEN	13	16	내가 네 자손으로 땅의 티끌 같게 하리니 사람이 땅의 티끌을 능히 셀 수 있을진대 네 자손도 세리라	And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth: so that if a man can number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also be numbered.	I will make your offspring like the dust of the earth, so that if one could count the dust of the earth, then your offspring could be counted.
GEN	13	17	너는 일어나 그 땅을 종과 횡으로 행하여 보라 내가 그것을 네게 주리라	Arise, walk through the land in the length of it and in the breadth of it; for I will give it unto thee.	Get up and walk around the land, through its length and breadth, for I will give it to you.”
GEN	13	18	이에 아브람이 장막을 옮겨 헤브론에 있는 마므레 상수리 수풀에 이르러 거하며 거기서 여호와를 위하여 단을 쌓았더라	Then Abram removed his tent, and came and dwelt in the plain of Mamre, which is in Hebron, and built there an altar unto the Lord.	So Abram moved his tent and went to live near the Oaks of Mamre at Hebron, where he built an altar to the LORD.
GEN	14	1	당시에 시날 왕 아므라벨과 엘라살 왕 아리옥과 엘람 왕 그돌라오멜과 고임 왕 디달이	And it came to pass in the days of Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of nations;	In those days Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of Goiim
GEN	14	2	소돔 왕 베라와 고모라 왕 비르사와 아드마 왕 시납과 스보임 왕 세메벨과 벨라 곧 소알 왕과 싸우니라	That these made war with Bera king of Sodom, and with Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, and Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela, which is Zoar.	went to war against Bera king of Sodom, Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (that is, Zoar).
GEN	14	3	이들이 다 싯딤 골짜기 곧 지금 염해에 모였더라	All these were joined together in the vale of Siddim, which is the salt sea.	The latter five came as allies to the Valley of Siddim (that is, the Salt Sea).
GEN	14	4	이들이 십이 년 동안 그돌라오멜을 섬기다가 제십삼년에 배반한지라	Twelve years they served Chedorlaomer, and in the thirteenth year they rebelled.	For twelve years they had been subject to Chedorlaomer, but in the thirteenth year they rebelled.
GEN	14	5	제십사년에 그돌라오멜과 그와 동맹한 왕들이 나와서 아스드롯 가르나임에서 르바 족속을, 함에서 수스 족속을, 사웨 기랴다임에서 엠 족속을 치고	And in the fourteenth year came Chedorlaomer, and the kings that were with him, and smote the Rephaims in Ashteroth Karnaim, and the Zuzims in Ham, and the Emims in Shaveh Kiriathaim,	In the fourteenth year, Chedorlaomer and the kings allied with him went out and defeated the Rephaites in Ashteroth-karnaim, the Zuzites in Ham, the Emites in Shaveh-kiriathaim,
GEN	14	6	호리 족속을 그 산 세일에서 쳐서 광야 근방 엘바란까지 이르렀으며	And the Horites in their mount Seir, unto El–paran, which is by the wilderness.	and the Horites in the area of Mount Seir, as far as El-paran, which is near the desert.
GEN	14	7	그들이 돌이켜 엔미스밧 곧 가데스에 이르러 아말렉 족속의 온 땅과 하사손다말에 사는 아모리 족속을 친지라	And they returned, and came to En–mishpat, which is Kadesh, and smote all the country of the Amalekites, and also the Amorites, that dwelt in Hazezon–tamar.	Then they turned back to invade En-mishpat (that is, Kadesh), and they conquered the whole territory of the Amalekites, as well as the Amorites who lived in Hazazon-tamar.
GEN	14	8	소돔 왕과 고모라 왕과 아드마 왕과 스보임 왕과 벨라 곧 소알 왕이 나와서 싯딤 골짜기에서 그들과 접전하였으니	And there went out the king of Sodom, and the king of Gomorrah, and the king of Admah, and the king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (the same is Zoar;) and they joined battle with them in the vale of Siddim;	Then the king of Sodom, the king of Gomorrah, the king of Admah, the king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (that is, Zoar) marched out and arrayed themselves for battle in the Valley of Siddim
GEN	14	9	곧 그 다섯 왕이 엘람 왕 그돌라오멜과 고임 왕 디달과 시날 왕 아므라벨과 엘라살 왕 아리옥 네 왕과 교전하였더라	With Chedorlaomer the king of Elam, and with Tidal king of nations, and Amraphel king of Shinar, and Arioch king of Ellasar; four kings with five.	against Chedorlaomer king of Elam, Tidal king of Goiim, Amraphel king of Shinar, and Arioch king of Ellasar—four kings against five.
GEN	14	10	싯딤 골짜기에는 역청 구덩이가 많은지라 소돔 왕과 고모라 왕이 달아날 때에 군사가 거기 빠지고 그 나머지는 산으로 도망하매	And the vale of Siddim was full of slimepits; and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, and fell there; and they that remained fled to the mountain.	Now the Valley of Siddim was full of tar pits, and as the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, some men fell into the pits, but the survivors fled to the hill country.
GEN	14	11	네 왕이 소돔과 고모라의 모든 재물과 양식을 빼앗아 가고	And they took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah, and all their victuals, and went their way.	The four kings seized all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah and all their food, and they went on their way.
GEN	14	12	소돔에 거하는 아브람의 조카 롯도 사로잡고 그 재물까지 노략하여 갔더라	And they took Lot, Abram’s brother’s son, who dwelt in Sodom, and his goods, and departed.	They also carried off Abram’s nephew Lot and his possessions, since Lot was living in Sodom.
GEN	14	13	도망한 자가 와서 히브리 사람 아브람에게 고하니 때에 아브람이 아모리 족속 마므레의 상수리 수풀 근처에 거하였더라 마므레는 에스골의 형제요 또 아넬의 형제라 이들은 아브람과 동맹한 자더라	And there came one that had escaped, and told Abram the Hebrew; for he dwelt in the plain of Mamre the Amorite, brother of Eshcol, and brother of Aner: and these were confederate with Abram.	Then an escapee came and reported this to Abram the Hebrew. Now Abram was living near the Oaks of Mamre the Amorite, a brother of Eshcol and Aner, all of whom were bound by treaty to Abram.
GEN	14	14	아브람이 그 조카의 사로잡혔음을 듣고 집에서 길리고 연습한 자 삼백십팔 인을 거느리고 단까지 쫓아가서	And when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he armed his trained servants, born in his own house, three hundred and eighteen, and pursued them unto Dan.	And when Abram heard that his relative had been captured, he mobilized the 318 trained men born in his household, and they set out in pursuit as far as Dan.
GEN	14	15	그 가신을 나누어 밤을 타서 그들을 쳐서 파하고 다메섹 좌편 호바까지 쫓아가서	And he divided himself against them, he and his servants, by night, and smote them, and pursued them unto Hobah, which is on the left hand of Damascus.	During the night, Abram divided his forces and routed Chedorlaomer’s army, pursuing them as far as Hobah, north of Damascus.
GEN	14	16	모든 빼앗겼던 재물과 자기 조카 롯과 그 재물과 또 부녀와 인민을 다 찾아왔더라	And he brought back all the goods, and also brought again his brother Lot, and his goods, and the women also, and the people.	He retrieved all the goods, as well as his relative Lot and his possessions, together with the women and the rest of the people.
GEN	14	17	아브람이 그돌라오멜과 그와 함께 한 왕들을 파하고 돌아올 때에 소돔 왕이 사웨 골짜기 곧 왕곡에 나와 그를 영접하였고	And the king of Sodom went out to meet him after his return from the slaughter of Chedorlaomer, and of the kings that were with him, at the valley of Shaveh, which is the king’s dale.	After Abram returned from defeating Chedorlaomer and the kings allied with him, the king of Sodom went out to meet him in the Valley of Shaveh (that is, the King’s Valley).
GEN	14	18	살렘 왕 멜기세덱이 떡과 포도주를 가지고 나왔으니 그는 지극히 높으신 하나님의 제사장이었더라	And Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine: and he was the priest of the most high God.	Then Melchizedek king of Salem brought out bread and wine—since he was priest of God Most High—
GEN	14	19	그가 아브람에게 축복하여 가로되 천지의 주재시요 지극히 높으신 하나님이여 아브람에게 복을 주옵소서	And he blessed him, and said, Blessed be Abram of the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth:	and he blessed Abram and said: “Blessed be Abram by God Most High, Creator of heaven and earth,
GEN	14	20	너희 대적을 네 손에 붙이신 지극히 높으신 하나님을 찬송할지로다 하매 아브람이 그 얻은 것에서 십분 일을 멜기세덱에게 주었더라	And blessed be the most high God, which hath delivered thine enemies into thy hand. And he gave him tithes of all.	and blessed be God Most High, who has delivered your enemies into your hand.” Then Abram gave Melchizedek a tenth of everything.
GEN	14	21	소돔 왕이 아브람에게 이르되 사람은 내게 보내고 물품은 네가 취하라	And the king of Sodom said unto Abram, Give me the persons, and take the goods to thyself.	The king of Sodom said to Abram, “Give me the people, but take the goods for yourself.”
GEN	14	22	아브람이 소돔 왕에게 이르되 천지의 주재시요 지극히 높으신 하나님 여호와께 내가 손을 들어 맹세하노니	And Abram said to the king of Sodom, I have lift up mine hand unto the Lord, the most high God, the possessor of heaven and earth,	But Abram replied to the king of Sodom, “I have raised my hand to the LORD God Most High, Creator of heaven and earth,
GEN	14	23	네 말이 내가 아브람으로 치부케 하였다 할까 하여 네게 속한 것은 무론 한 실이나 신들메라도 내가 취하지 아니하리라	That I will not take from a thread even to a shoelatchet, and that I will not take any thing that is thine, lest thou shouldest say, I have made Abram rich:	that I will not accept even a thread, or a strap of a sandal, or anything that belongs to you, lest you should say, ‘I have made Abram rich.’
GEN	14	24	오직 소년들의 먹은 것과 나와 동행한 아넬과 에스골과 마므레의 분깃을 제할지니 그들이 그 분깃을 취할 것이니라	Save only that which the young men have eaten, and the portion of the men which went with me, Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre; let them take their portion.	I will accept nothing but what my men have eaten and the share for the men who went with me—Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre. They may take their portion.”
GEN	15	1	이 후에 여호와의 말씀이 이상 중에 아브람에게 임하여 가라사대 아브람아 두려워 말라 나는 너의 방패요 너의 지극히 큰 상급이니라	After these things the word of the Lord came unto Abram in a vision, saying, Fear not, Abram: I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward.	After these events, the word of the LORD came to Abram in a vision: “Do not be afraid, Abram. I am your shield, your very great reward.”
GEN	15	2	아브람이 가로되 주 여호와여 무엇을 내게 주시려나이까 나는 무자하오니 나의 상속자는 이 다메섹 엘리에셀이니이다	And Abram said, Lord God, what wilt thou give me, seeing I go childless, and the steward of my house is this Eliezer of Damascus?	But Abram replied, “O Lord GOD, what can You give me, since I remain childless, and the heir of my house is Eliezer of Damascus?”
GEN	15	3	아브람이 또 가로되 주께서 내게 씨를 아니주셨으니 내 집에서 길리운 자가 나의 후사가 될 것이니이다	And Abram said, Behold, to me thou hast given no seed: and, lo, one born in my house is mine heir.	Abram continued, “Behold, You have given me no offspring, so a servant in my household will be my heir.”
GEN	15	4	여호와의 말씀이 그에게 임하여 가라사대 그 사람은 너의 후사가 아니라 네 몸에서 날 자가 네 후사가 되리라 하시고	And, behold, the word of the Lord came unto him, saying, This shall not be thine heir; but he that shall come forth out of thine own bowels shall be thine heir.	Then the word of the LORD came to Abram, saying, “This one will not be your heir, but one who comes from your own body will be your heir.”
GEN	15	5	그를 이끌고 밖으로 나가 가라사대 하늘을 우러러 뭇별을 셀 수 있나 보라 또 그에게 이르시되 네 자손이 이와 같으리라	And he brought him forth abroad, and said, Look now toward heaven, and tell the stars, if thou be able to number them: and he said unto him, So shall thy seed be.	And the LORD took him outside and said, “Now look to the heavens and count the stars, if you are able.” Then He told him, “So shall your offspring be.”
GEN	15	6	아브람이 여호와를 믿으니 여호와께서 이를 그의 의로 여기시고	And he believed in the Lord; and he counted it to him for righteousness.	Abram believed the LORD, and it was credited to him as righteousness.
GEN	15	7	또 그에게 이르시되 나는 이 땅을 네게 주어 업을 삼게 하려고 너를 갈대아 우르에서 이끌어 낸 여호와로라	And he said unto him, I am the Lord that brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees, to give thee this land to inherit it.	The LORD also told him, “I am the LORD, who brought you out of Ur of the Chaldeans to give you this land to possess.”
GEN	15	8	그가 가로되 주 여호와여 내가 이 땅으로 업을 삼을 줄을 무엇으로 알리이까	And he said, Lord God, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it?	But Abram replied, “Lord GOD, how can I know that I will possess it?”
GEN	15	9	여호와께서 그에게 이르시되 나를 위하여 삼 년 된 암소와 삼 년 된 암염소와 삼 년 된 수양과 산비둘기와 집비둘기 새끼를 취할지니라	And he said unto him, Take me an heifer of three years old, and a she goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a turtledove, and a young pigeon.	And the LORD said to him, “Bring Me a heifer, a goat, and a ram, each three years old, along with a turtledove and a young pigeon.”
GEN	15	10	아브람이 그 모든 것을 취하여 그 중간을 쪼개고 그 쪼갠 것을 마주 대하여 놓고 그 새는 쪼개지 아니하였으며	And he took unto him all these, and divided them in the midst, and laid each piece one against another: but the birds divided he not.	So Abram brought all these to Him, split each of them down the middle, and laid the halves opposite each other. The birds, however, he did not cut in half.
GEN	15	11	솔개가 그 사체 위에 내릴 때에는 아브람이 쫓았더라	And when the fowls came down upon the carcases, Abram drove them away.	And the birds of prey descended on the carcasses, but Abram drove them away.
GEN	15	12	해질 때에 아브람이 깊이 잠든 중에 캄캄함이 임하므로 심히 두려워하더니	And when the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram; and, lo, an horror of great darkness fell upon him.	As the sun was setting, Abram fell into a deep sleep, and suddenly great terror and darkness overwhelmed him.
GEN	15	13	여호와께서 아브람에게 이르시되 너는 정녕히 알라 네 자손이 이방에서 객이 되어 그들을 섬기겠고 그들은 사백 년 동안 네 자손을 괴롭게 하리니	And he said unto Abram, Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years;	Then the LORD said to Abram, “Know for certain that your descendants will be strangers in a land that is not their own, and they will be enslaved and mistreated four hundred years.
GEN	15	14	그 섬기는 나라를 내가 징치할지며 그 후에 네 자손이 큰 재물을 이끌고 나오리라	And also that nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge: and afterward shall they come out with great substance.	But I will judge the nation they serve as slaves, and afterward they will depart with many possessions.
GEN	15	15	너는 장수하다가 평안히 조상에게로 돌아가 장사될 것이요	And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace; thou shalt be buried in a good old age.	You, however, will go to your fathers in peace and be buried at a ripe old age.
GEN	15	16	네 자손은 사대 만에 이 땅으로 돌아오리니 이는 아모리 족속의 죄악이 아직 관영치 아니함이니라 하시더니	But in the fourth generation they shall come hither again: for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full.	In the fourth generation your descendants will return here, for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet complete.”
GEN	15	17	해가 져서 어둘 때에 연기 나는 풀무가 보이며 타는 횃불이 쪼갠 고기 사이로 지나더라	And it came to pass, that, when the sun went down, and it was dark, behold a smoking furnace, and a burning lamp that passed between those pieces.	When the sun had set and darkness had fallen, behold, a smoking firepot and a flaming torch appeared and passed between the halves of the carcasses.
GEN	15	18	그 날에 여호와께서 아브람으로 더불어 언약을 세워 가라사대 내가 이 땅을 애굽강에서부터 그 큰 강 유브라데까지 네 자손에게 주노니	In the same day the Lord made a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I given this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates:	On that day the LORD made a covenant with Abram, saying, “To your descendants I have given this land—from the river of Egypt to the great River Euphrates—
GEN	15	19	곧 겐 족속과 그니스 족속과 갓몬 족속과	The Kenites, and the Kenizzites, and the Kadmonites,	the land of the Kenites, Kenizzites, Kadmonites,
GEN	15	20	헷 족속과 브리스 족속과 르바 족속과	And the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Rephaims,	Hittites, Perizzites, Rephaites,
GEN	15	21	아모리 족속과 가나안 족속과 기르가스 족속과 여부스 족속의 땅이니라 하셨더라	And the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Girgashites, and the Jebusites.	Amorites, Canaanites, Girgashites, and Jebusites.”
GEN	16	1	아브람의 아내 사래는 생산치 못하였고 그에게 한 여종이 있으니 애굽 사람이요 이름은 하갈이라	Now Sarai Abram’s wife bare him no children: and she had an handmaid, an Egyptian, whose name was Hagar.	Now Abram’s wife Sarai had borne him no children, but she had an Egyptian maidservant named Hagar.
GEN	16	2	사래가 아브람에게 이르되 여호와께서 나의 생산을 허락지 아니하셨으니 원컨대 나의 여종과 동침하라 내가 혹 그로 말미암아 자녀를 얻을까 하노라 하매 아브람이 사래의 말을 들으니라	And Sarai said unto Abram, Behold now, the Lord hath restrained me from bearing: I pray thee, go in unto my maid; it may be that I may obtain children by her. And Abram hearkened to the voice of Sarai.	So Sarai said to Abram, “Look now, the LORD has prevented me from bearing children. Please go to my maidservant; perhaps I can build a family by her.” And Abram listened to the voice of Sarai.
GEN	16	3	아브람의 아내 사래가 그 여종 애굽 사람 하갈을 가져 그 남편 아브람에게 첩으로 준 때는 아브람이 가나안 땅에 거한지 십 년 후이었더라	And Sarai Abram’s wife took Hagar her maid the Egyptian, after Abram had dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan, and gave her to her husband Abram to be his wife.	So after he had lived in Canaan for ten years, his wife Sarai took her Egyptian maidservant Hagar and gave her to Abram to be his wife.
GEN	16	4	아브람이 하갈과 동침하였더니 하갈이 잉태하매 그가 자기의 잉태함을 깨닫고 그 여주인을 멸시한지라	And he went in unto Hagar, and she conceived: and when she saw that she had conceived, her mistress was despised in her eyes.	And he slept with Hagar, and she conceived. But when Hagar realized that she was pregnant, she began to despise her mistress.
GEN	16	5	사래가 아브람에게 이르되 나의 받는 욕은 당신이 받아야 옳도다 내가 나의 여종을 당신의 품에 두었거늘 그가 자기의 잉태함을 깨닫고 나를 멸시하니 당신과 나 사이에 여호와께서 판단하시기를 원하노라	And Sarai said unto Abram, My wrong be upon thee: I have given my maid into thy bosom; and when she saw that she had conceived, I was despised in her eyes: the Lord judge between me and thee.	Then Sarai said to Abram, “May the wrong done to me be upon you! I delivered my servant into your arms, and ever since she saw that she was pregnant, she has treated me with contempt. May the LORD judge between you and me.”
GEN	16	6	아브람이 사래에게 이르되 그대의 여종은 그대의 수중에 있으니 그대의 눈에 좋은 대로 그에게 행하라 하매 사래가 하갈을 학대하였더니 하갈이 사래의 앞에서 도망하였더라	But Abram said unto Sarai, Behold, thy maid is in thy hand; do to her as it pleaseth thee. And when Sarai dealt hardly with her, she fled from her face.	“Here,” said Abram, “your servant is in your hands. Do whatever you want with her.” Then Sarai treated Hagar so harshly that she fled from her.
GEN	16	7	여호와의 사자가 광야의 샘 곁 곧 술 길 샘물 곁에서 그를 만나	And the angel of the Lord found her by a fountain of water in the wilderness, by the fountain in the way to Shur.	Now the angel of the LORD found Hagar by a spring of water in the desert—the spring along the road to Shur.
GEN	16	8	가로되 사래의 여종 하갈아 네가 어디서 왔으며 어디로 가느냐 그가 가로되 나는 나의 여주인 사래를 피하여 도망하나이다	And he said, Hagar, Sarai’s maid, whence camest thou? and whither wilt thou go? And she said, I flee from the face of my mistress Sarai.	“Hagar, servant of Sarai,” he said, “where have you come from, and where are you going?” “I am running away from my mistress Sarai,” she replied.
GEN	16	9	여호와의 사자가 그에게 이르되 네 여주인에게로 돌아가서 그 수하에 복종하라	And the angel of the Lord said unto her, Return to thy mistress, and submit thyself under her hands.	So the angel of the LORD told her, “Return to your mistress and submit to her authority.”
GEN	16	10	여호와의 사자가 또 그에게 이르되 내가 네 자손으로 크게 번성하여 그 수가 많아 셀 수 없게 하리라	And the angel of the Lord said unto her, I will multiply thy seed exceedingly, that it shall not be numbered for multitude.	Then the angel added, “I will greatly multiply your offspring so that they will be too numerous to count.”
GEN	16	11	여호와의 사자가 또 그에게 이르되 네가 잉태하였은즉 아들을 낳으리니 그 이름을 이스마엘이라 하라 이는 여호와께서 네 고통을 들으셨음이니라	And the angel of the Lord said unto her, Behold, thou art with child, and shalt bear a son, and shalt call his name Ishmael; because the Lord hath heard thy affliction.	The angel of the LORD proceeded: “Behold, you have conceived and will bear a son. And you shall name him Ishmael, for the LORD has heard your cry of affliction.
GEN	16	12	그가 사람 중에 들나귀 같이 되리니 그 손이 모든 사람을 치겠고 모든 사람의 손이 그를 칠지며 그가 모든 형제의 동방에서 살리라 하니라	And he will be a wild man; his hand will be against every man, and every man’s hand against him; and he shall dwell in the presence of all his brethren.	He will be a wild donkey of a man, and his hand will be against everyone, and everyone’s hand against him; he will live in hostility toward all his brothers.”
GEN	16	13	하갈이 자기에게 이르신 여호와의 이름을 감찰하시는 하나님이라 하였으니 이는 내가 어떻게 여기서 나를 감찰하시는 하나님을 뵈었는고 함이라	And she called the name of the Lord that spake unto her, Thou God seest me: for she said, Have I also here looked after him that seeth me?	So Hagar gave this name to the LORD who had spoken to her: “You are the God who sees me,” for she said, “Here I have seen the One who sees me!”
GEN	16	14	이러므로 그 샘을 브엘라해로이라 불렀으며 그것이 가데스와 베렛 사이에 있더라	Wherefore the well was called Beer–lahai–roi; behold, it is between Kadesh and Bered.	Therefore the well was called Beer-lahai-roi. It is located between Kadesh and Bered.
GEN	16	15	하갈이 아브람의 아들을 낳으매 아브람이 하갈의 낳은 그 아들을 이름하여 이스마엘이라 하였더라	And Hagar bare Abram a son: and Abram called his son’s name, which Hagar bare, Ishmael.	And Hagar bore Abram a son, and Abram gave the name Ishmael to the son she had borne.
GEN	16	16	하갈이 아브람에게 이스마엘을 낳을 때에 아브람이 팔십육 세이었더라	And Abram was fourscore and six years old, when Hagar bare Ishmael to Abram.	Abram was eighty-six years old when Hagar bore Ishmael to him.
GEN	17	1	아브람의 구십구 세 때에 여호와께서 아브람에게 나타나서 그에게 이르시되 나는 전능한 하나님이라 너는 내 앞에서 행하여 완전하라	And when Abram was ninety years old and nine, the Lord appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God; walk before me, and be thou perfect.	When Abram was ninety-nine years old, the LORD appeared to him and said, “I am God Almighty. Walk before Me and be blameless.
GEN	17	2	내가 내 언약을 나와 너 사이에 세워 너로 심히 번성케 하리라 하시니	And I will make my covenant between me and thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly.	I will establish My covenant between Me and you, and I will multiply you exceedingly.”
GEN	17	3	아브람이 엎드린대 하나님이 또 그에게 일러 가라사대	And Abram fell on his face: and God talked with him, saying,	Then Abram fell facedown, and God said to him,
GEN	17	4	내가 너와 내 언약을 세우니 너는 열국의 아비가 될지라	As for me, behold, my covenant is with thee, and thou shalt be a father of many nations.	“As for Me, this is My covenant with you: You will be the father of many nations.
GEN	17	5	이제 후로는 네 이름을 아브람이라 하지 아니하고 아브라함이라 하리니 이는 내가 너로 열국의 아비가 되게 함이니라	Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham; for a father of many nations have I made thee.	No longer will you be called Abram, but your name will be Abraham, for I have made you a father of many nations.
GEN	17	6	내가 너로 심히 번성케 하리니 나라들이 네게로 좇아 일어나며 열왕이 네게로 좇아 나리라	And I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and I will make nations of thee, and kings shall come out of thee.	I will make you exceedingly fruitful; I will make nations of you, and kings will descend from you.
GEN	17	7	내가 내 언약을 나와 너와 네 대대 후손의 사이에 세워서 영원한 언약을 삼고 너와 네 후손의 하나님이 되리라	And I will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.	I will establish My covenant as an everlasting covenant between Me and you and your descendants after you, to be your God and the God of your descendants after you.
GEN	17	8	내가 너와 네 후손에게 너의 우거하는 이 땅 곧 가나안 일경으로 주어 영원한 기업이 되게 하고 나는 그들의 하나님이 되리라	And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession; and I will be their God.	And to you and your descendants I will give the land where you are residing—all the land of Canaan—as an eternal possession; and I will be their God.”
GEN	17	9	하나님이 또 아브라함에게 이르시되 그런즉 너는 내 언약을 지키고 네 후손도 대대로 지키라	And God said unto Abraham, Thou shalt keep my covenant therefore, thou, and thy seed after thee in their generations.	God also said to Abraham, “You must keep My covenant—you and your descendants in the generations after you.
GEN	17	10	너희 중 남자는 다 할례를 받으라 이것이 나와 너희와 너희 후손 사이에 지킬 내 언약이니라	This is my covenant, which ye shall keep, between me and you and thy seed after thee; Every man child among you shall be circumcised.	This is My covenant with you and your descendants after you, which you are to keep: Every male among you must be circumcised.
GEN	17	11	너희는 양피를 베어라 이것이 나와 너희 사이의 언약의 표징이니라	And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you.	You are to circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and this will be a sign of the covenant between Me and you.
GEN	17	12	대대로 남자는 집에서 난 자나 혹 너희 자손이 아니요 이방 사람에게서 돈으로 산 자를 무론하고 난 지 팔 일 만에 할례를 받을 것이라	And he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every man child in your generations, he that is born in the house, or bought with money of any stranger, which is not of thy seed.	Generation after generation, every male must be circumcised when he is eight days old, including those born in your household and those purchased from a foreigner—even those who are not your offspring.
GEN	17	13	너희 집에서 난 자든지 너희 돈으로 산 자든지 할례를 받아야 하리니 이에 내 언약이 너희 살에 있어 영원한 언약이 되려니와	He that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy money, must needs be circumcised: and my covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting covenant.	Whether they are born in your household or purchased, they must be circumcised. My covenant in your flesh will be an everlasting covenant.
GEN	17	14	할례를 받지 아니한 남자 곧 그 양피를 베지 아니한 자는 백성 중에서 끊어지리니 그가 내 언약을 배반하였음이니라	And the uncircumcised man child whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people; he hath broken my covenant.	But if any male is not circumcised, he will be cut off from his people; he has broken My covenant.”
GEN	17	15	하나님이 또 아브라함에게 이르시되 네 아내 사래는 이름을 사래라 하지 말고 그 이름을 사라라 하라	And God said unto Abraham, As for Sarai thy wife, thou shalt not call her name Sarai, but Sarah shall her name be.	Then God said to Abraham, “As for Sarai your wife, do not call her Sarai, for her name is to be Sarah.
GEN	17	16	내가 그에게 복을 주어 그로 네게 아들을 낳아 주게 하며 내가 그에게 복을 주어 그로 열국의 어미가 되게 하리니 민족의 열왕이 그에게서 나리라	And I will bless her, and give thee a son also of her: yea, I will bless her, and she shall be a mother of nations; kings of people shall be of her.	And I will bless her and will surely give you a son by her. I will bless her, and she will be the mother of nations; kings of peoples will descend from her.”
GEN	17	17	아브라함이 엎드리어 웃으며 심중에 이르되 백 세 된 사람이 어찌 자식을 낳을까 사라는 구십 세니 어찌 생산하리요 하고	Then Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, and said in his heart, Shall a child be born unto him that is an hundred years old? and shall Sarah, that is ninety years old, bear?	Abraham fell facedown. Then he laughed and said to himself, “Can a child be born to a man who is a hundred years old? Can Sarah give birth at the age of ninety?”
GEN	17	18	아브라함이 이에 하나님께 고하되 이스마엘이나 하나님 앞에 살기를 원하나이다	And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee!	And Abraham said to God, “O that Ishmael might live under Your blessing!”
GEN	17	19	하나님이 가라사대 아니라 네 아내 사라가 정녕 네게 아들을 낳으리니 너는 그 이름을 이삭이라 하라 내가 그와 내 언약을 세우리니 그의 후손에게 영원한 언약이 되리라	And God said, Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou shalt call his name Isaac: and I will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him.	But God replied, “Your wife Sarah will indeed bear you a son, and you are to name him Isaac. I will establish My covenant with him as an everlasting covenant for his descendants after him.
GEN	17	20	이스마엘에게 이르러는 내가 네 말을 들었나니 내가 그에게 복을 주어 생육이 중다하여 그로 크게 번성케 할지라 그가 열두 방백을 낳으리니 내가 그로 큰 나라가 되게 하려니와	And as for Ishmael, I have heard thee: Behold, I have blessed him, and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly; twelve princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great nation.	As for Ishmael, I have heard you, and I will surely bless him; I will make him fruitful and multiply him greatly. He will become the father of twelve rulers, and I will make him into a great nation.
GEN	17	21	내 언약은 내가 명년 이 기한에 사라가 네게 낳을 이삭과 세우리라	But my covenant will I establish with Isaac, which Sarah shall bear unto thee at this set time in the next year.	But I will establish My covenant with Isaac, whom Sarah will bear to you at this time next year.”
GEN	17	22	하나님이 아브라함과 말씀을 마치시고 그를 떠나 올라가셨더라	And he left off talking with him, and God went up from Abraham.	When He had finished speaking with Abraham, God went up from him.
GEN	17	23	이에 아브라함이 하나님이 자기에게 말씀하신 대로 이 날에 그 아들 이스마엘과 집에서 생장한 모든 자와 돈으로 산 모든 자 곧 아브라함의 집 사람 중 모든 남자를 데려다가 그 양피를 베었으니	And Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all that were born in his house, and all that were bought with his money, every male among the men of Abraham’s house; and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in the selfsame day, as God had said unto him.	On that very day Abraham took his son Ishmael and all those born in his household or purchased with his money—every male among the members of Abraham’s household—and he circumcised them, just as God had told him.
GEN	17	24	아브라함이 그 양피를 벤 때는 구십구 세이었고	And Abraham was ninety years old and nine, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.	So Abraham was ninety-nine years old when he was circumcised,
GEN	17	25	그 아들 이스마엘이 그 양피를 벤 때는 십삼 세이었더라	And Ishmael his son was thirteen years old, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.	and his son Ishmael was thirteen;
GEN	17	26	당일에 아브라함과 그 아들 이스마엘이 할례를 받았고	In the selfsame day was Abraham circumcised, and Ishmael his son.	Abraham and his son Ishmael were circumcised on the same day.
GEN	17	27	그 집의 모든 남자 곧 집에서 생장한 자와 돈으로 이방 사람에게서 사온 자가 다 그와 함께 할례를 받았더라	And all the men of his house, born in the house, and bought with money of the stranger, were circumcised with him.	And all the men of Abraham’s household—both servants born in his household and those purchased from foreigners—were circumcised with him.
GEN	18	1	여호와께서 마므레 상수리 수풀 근처에서 아브라함에게 나타나시니라 오정 즈음에 그가 장막 문에 앉았다가	And the Lord appeared unto him in the plains of Mamre: and he sat in the tent door in the heat of the day;	Then the LORD appeared to Abraham by the Oaks of Mamre in the heat of the day, while he was sitting at the entrance of his tent.
GEN	18	2	눈을 들어 본즉 사람 셋이 맞은편에 섰는지라 그가 그들을 보자 곧 장막 문에서 달려나가 영접하며 몸을 땅에 굽혀	And he lift up his eyes and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him: and when he saw them, he ran to meet them from the tent door, and bowed himself toward the ground,	And Abraham looked up and saw three men standing nearby. When he saw them, he ran from the entrance of his tent to meet them and bowed low to the ground.
GEN	18	3	가로되 내 주여 내가 주께 은혜를 입었사오면 원컨대 종을 떠나 지나가지 마옵시고	And said, My Lord, if now I have found favour in thy sight, pass not away, I pray thee, from thy servant:	“My lord,” said Abraham, “if I have found favor in your sight, please do not pass your servant by.
GEN	18	4	물을 조금 가져오게 하사 당신들의 발을 씻으시고 나무 아래서 쉬소서	Let a little water, I pray you, be fetched, and wash your feet, and rest yourselves under the tree:	Let a little water be brought, that you may wash your feet and rest yourselves under the tree.
GEN	18	5	내가 떡을 조금 가져오리니 당신들의 마음을 쾌활케 하신 후에 지나가소서 당신들이 종에게 오셨음이니이다 그들이 가로되 네 말대로 그리하라	And I will fetch a morsel of bread, and comfort ye your hearts; after that ye shall pass on: for therefore are ye come to your servant. And they said, So do, as thou hast said.	And I will bring a bit of bread so that you may refresh yourselves. This is why you have passed your servant’s way. After that, you may continue on your way.” “Yes,” they replied, “you may do as you have said.”
GEN	18	6	아브라함이 급히 장막에 들어가 사라에게 이르러 이르되 속히 고운 가루 세 스아를 가져다가 반죽하여 떡을 만들라 하고	And Abraham hastened into the tent unto Sarah, and said, Make ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes upon the hearth.	So Abraham hurried into the tent and said to Sarah, “Quick! Prepare three seahs of fine flour, knead it, and bake some bread.”
GEN	18	7	아브라함이 또 짐승 떼에 달려가서 기름지고 좋은 송아지를 취하여 하인에게 주니 그가 급히 요리한지라	And Abraham ran unto the herd, and fetcht a calf tender and good, and gave it unto a young man; and he hasted to dress it.	Meanwhile, Abraham ran to the herd, selected a tender and choice calf, and gave it to a servant, who hurried to prepare it.
GEN	18	8	아브라함이 뻐터와 우유와 하인이 요리한 송아지를 가져다가 그들의 앞에 진설하고 나무아래 모셔 서매 그들이 먹으니라	And he took butter, and milk, and the calf which he had dressed, and set it before them; and he stood by them under the tree, and they did eat.	Then Abraham brought curds and milk and the calf that had been prepared, and he set them before the men and stood by them under the tree as they ate.
GEN	18	9	그들이 아브라함에게 이르되 네 아내 사라가 어디 있느냐 대답하되 장막에 있나이다	And they said unto him, Where is Sarah thy wife? And he said, Behold, in the tent.	“Where is your wife Sarah?” they asked. “There, in the tent,” he replied.
GEN	18	10	그가 가라사대 기한이 이를 때에 내가 정녕 네게로 돌아오리니 네 아내 사라에게 아들이 있으리라 하시니 사라가 그 뒤 장막 문에서 들었더라	And he said, I will certainly return unto thee according to the time of life; and, lo, Sarah thy wife shall have a son. And Sarah heard it in the tent door, which was behind him.	Then the LORD said, “I will surely return to you at this time next year, and your wife Sarah will have a son!” Now Sarah was behind him, listening at the entrance to the tent.
GEN	18	11	아브라함과 사라가 나이 많아 늙었고 사라의 경수는 끊어졌는지라	Now Abraham and Sarah were old and well stricken in age; and it ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women.	And Abraham and Sarah were already old and well along in years; Sarah had passed the age of childbearing.
GEN	18	12	사라가 속으로 웃고 이르되 내가 노쇠하였고 내 주인도 늙었으니 내게 어찌 낙이 있으리요	Therefore Sarah laughed within herself, saying, After I am waxed old shall I have pleasure, my lord being old also?	So she laughed to herself, saying, “After I am worn out and my master is old, will I now have this pleasure?”
GEN	18	13	여호와께서 아브라함에게 이르시되 사라가 왜 웃으며 이르기를 내가 늙었거늘 어떻게 아들을 낳으리요 하느냐	And the Lord said unto Abraham, Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying, Shall I of a surety bear a child, which am old?	And the LORD asked Abraham, “Why did Sarah laugh and say, ‘Can I really bear a child when I am old?’
GEN	18	14	여호와께 능치 못한 일이 있겠느냐 기한이 이를 때에 내가 네게로 돌아오리니 사라에게 아들이 있으리라	Is any thing too hard for the Lord? At the time appointed I will return unto thee, according to the time of life, and Sarah shall have a son.	Is anything too difficult for the LORD? At the appointed time I will return to you—in about a year—and Sarah will have a son.”
GEN	18	15	사라가 두려워서 승인치 아니하여 가로되 내가 웃지 아니하였나이다 가라사대 아니라 네가 웃었느니라	Then Sarah denied, saying, I laughed not; for she was afraid. And he said, Nay; but thou didst laugh.	But Sarah was afraid, so she denied it and said, “I did not laugh.” “No,” replied the LORD, “but you did laugh.”
GEN	18	16	그 사람들이 거기서 일어나서 소돔으로 향하고 아브라함은 그들을 전송하러 함께 나가니라	And the men rose up from thence, and looked toward Sodom: and Abraham went with them to bring them on the way.	When the men got up to leave, they looked out over Sodom, and Abraham walked along with them to see them off.
GEN	18	17	여호와께서 가라사대 나의 하려는 것을 아브라함에게 숨기겠느냐	And the Lord said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do;	And the LORD said, “Shall I hide from Abraham what I am about to do?
GEN	18	18	아브라함은 강대한 나라가 되고 천하 만민은 그를 인하여 복을 받게 될 것이 아니냐	Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him?	Abraham will surely become a great and powerful nation, and through him all the nations of the earth will be blessed.
GEN	18	19	내가 그로 그 자식과 권속에게 명하여 여호와의 도를 지켜 의와 공도를 행하게 하려고 그를 택하였나니 이는 나 여호와가 아브라함에게 대하여 말한 일을 이루려 함이니라	For I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment; that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he hath spoken of him.	For I have chosen him, so that he will command his children and his household after him to keep the way of the LORD by doing what is right and just, in order that the LORD may bring upon Abraham what He has promised.”
GEN	18	20	여호와께서 또 가라사대 소돔과 고모라에 대한 부르짖음이 크고 그 죄악이 심히 중하니	And the Lord said, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is very grievous;	Then the LORD said, “The outcry against Sodom and Gomorrah is great. Because their sin is so grievous,
GEN	18	21	내가 이제 내려가서 그 모든 행한 것이 과연 내게 들린 부르짖음과 같은지 그렇지 않은지 내가 보고 알려하노라	I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not, I will know.	I will go down to see if their actions fully justify the outcry that has reached Me. If not, I will find out.”
GEN	18	22	그 사람들이 거기서 떠나 소돔으로 향하여 가고 아브라함은 여호와 앞에 그대로 섰더니	And the men turned their faces from thence, and went toward Sodom: but Abraham stood yet before the Lord.	And the two men turned away and went toward Sodom, but Abraham remained standing before the LORD.
GEN	18	23	가까이 나아가 가로되 주께서 의인을 악인과 함께 멸하시려나이까	And Abraham drew near, and said, Wilt thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked?	Abraham stepped forward and said, “Will You really sweep away the righteous with the wicked?
GEN	18	24	그 성중에 의인 오십이 있을지라도 주께서 그 곳을 멸하시고 그 오십 의인을 위하여 용서치 아니하시리이까	Peradventure there be fifty righteous within the city: wilt thou also destroy and not spare the place for the fifty righteous that are therein?	What if there are fifty righteous ones in the city? Will You really sweep it away and not spare the place for the sake of the fifty righteous ones who are there?
GEN	18	25	주께서 이같이 하사 의인을 악인과 함께 죽이심은 불가하오며 의인과 악인을 균등히 하심도 불가하니이다 세상을 심판하시는 이가 공의를 행하실 것이 아니니이까	That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked: and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far from thee: Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?	Far be it from You to do such a thing—to kill the righteous with the wicked, so that the righteous and the wicked are treated alike. Far be it from You! Will not the Judge of all the earth do what is right?”
GEN	18	26	여호와께서 가라사대 내가 만일 소돔 성중에서 의인 오십을 찾으면 그들을 위하여 온 지경을 용서하리라	And the Lord said, If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within the city, then I will spare all the place for their sakes.	So the LORD replied, “If I find fifty righteous ones within the city of Sodom, on their account I will spare the whole place.”
GEN	18	27	아브라함이 말씀하여 가로되 티끌과 같은 나라도 감히 주께 고하나이다	And Abraham answered and said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, which am but dust and ashes:	Then Abraham answered, “Now that I have ventured to speak to the Lord—though I am but dust and ashes—
GEN	18	28	오십 의인 중에 오인이 부족할 것이면 그 오인 부족함을 인하여 온 성을 멸하시리이까 가라사대 내가 거기서 사십오인을 찾으면 멸하지 아니하리라	Peradventure there shall lack five of the fifty righteous: wilt thou destroy all the city for lack of five? And he said, If I find there forty and five, I will not destroy it.	suppose the fifty righteous ones lack five. Will You destroy the whole city for the lack of five?” He replied, “If I find forty-five there, I will not destroy it.”
GEN	18	29	아브라함이 또 고하여 가로되 거기서 사십인을 찾으시면 어찌 하시려나이까 가라사대 사십인을 인하여 멸하지 아니하리라	And he spake unto him yet again, and said, Peradventure there shall be forty found there. And he said, I will not do it for forty’s sake.	Once again Abraham spoke to the LORD, “Suppose forty are found there?” He answered, “On account of the forty, I will not do it.”
GEN	18	30	아브라함이 가로되 내 주여 노하지 마옵시고 말씀하게 하옵소서 거기서 삼십인을 찾으시면 어찌 하시려나이까 가라사대 내가 거기서 삼십인을 찾으면 멸하지 아니하리라	And he said unto him, Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak: Peradventure there shall thirty be found there. And he said, I will not do it, if I find thirty there.	Then Abraham said, “May the Lord not be angry, but let me speak further. Suppose thirty are found there?” He replied, “If I find thirty there, I will not do it.”
GEN	18	31	아브라함이 또 가로되 내가 감히 내 주께 고하나이다 거기서 이십인을 찾으시면 어찌 하시려나이까 가라사대 내가 이십인을 인하여 멸하지 아니하리라	And he said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord: Peradventure there shall be twenty found there. And he said, I will not destroy it for twenty’s sake.	And Abraham said, “Now that I have ventured to speak to the Lord, suppose twenty are found there?” He answered, “On account of the twenty, I will not destroy it.”
GEN	18	32	아브라함이 또 가로되 주는 노하지 마옵소서 내가 이번만 더 말씀하리이다 거기서 십인을 찾으시면 어찌 하시려나이까 가라사대 내가 십인을 인하여도 멸하지 아니하리라	And he said, Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak yet but this once: Peradventure ten shall be found there. And he said, I will not destroy it for ten’s sake.	Finally, Abraham said, “May the Lord not be angry, but let me speak once more. Suppose ten are found there?” And He answered, “On account of the ten, I will not destroy it.”
GEN	18	33	여호와께서 아브라함과 말씀을 마치시고 즉시 가시니 아브라함도 자기 곳으로 돌아갔더라	And the Lord went his way, as soon as he had left communing with Abraham: and Abraham returned unto his place.	When the LORD had finished speaking with Abraham, He departed, and Abraham returned home.
GEN	19	1	날이 저물 때에 그 두 천사가 소돔에 이르니 마침 롯이 소돔 성문에 앉았다가 그들을 보고 일어나 영접하고 땅에 엎드리어 절하여	And there came two angels to Sodom at even; and Lot sat in the gate of Sodom: and Lot seeing them rose up to meet them; and he bowed himself with his face toward the ground;	Now the two angels arrived at Sodom in the evening, and Lot was sitting in the gateway of the city. When Lot saw them, he got up to meet them, bowed facedown,
GEN	19	2	가로되 내 주여 돌이켜 종의 집으로 들어와 발을 씻고 주무시고 일찍이 일어나 갈 길을 가소서 그들이 가로되 아니라 우리가 거리에서 경야하리라	And he said, Behold now, my lords, turn in, I pray you, into your servant’s house, and tarry all night, and wash your feet, and ye shall rise up early, and go on your ways. And they said, Nay; but we will abide in the street all night.	and said, “My lords, please turn aside into the house of your servant; wash your feet and spend the night. Then you can rise early and go on your way.” “No,” they answered, “we will spend the night in the square.”
GEN	19	3	롯이 간청하매 그제야 돌이켜서 그 집으로 들어 오는지라 롯이 그들을 위하여 식탁을 베풀고 무교병을 구우니 그들이 먹으니라	And he pressed upon them greatly; and they turned in unto him, and entered into his house; and he made them a feast, and did bake unleavened bread, and they did eat.	But Lot insisted so strongly that they followed him into his house. He prepared a feast for them and baked unleavened bread, and they ate.
GEN	19	4	그들의 눕기 전에 그 성 사람 곧 소돔 백성들이 무론 노소하고 사방에서 다 모여 그 집을 에워싸고	But before they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of Sodom, compassed the house round, both old and young, all the people from every quarter:	Before they had gone to bed, all the men of the city of Sodom, both young and old, surrounded the house.
GEN	19	5	롯을 부르고 그에게 이르되 이 저녁에 네게 온 사람이 어디 있느냐 이끌어 내라 우리가 그들을 상관하리라	And they called unto Lot, and said unto him, Where are the men which came in to thee this night? bring them out unto us, that we may know them.	They called out to Lot, saying, “Where are the men who came to you tonight? Send them out to us so we can have relations with them!”
GEN	19	6	롯이 문 밖의 무리에게로 나가서 뒤로 문을 닫고	And Lot went out at the door unto them, and shut the door after him,	Lot went outside to meet them, shutting the door behind him.
GEN	19	7	이르되 청하노니 내 형제들아 이런 악을 행치 말라	And said, I pray you, brethren, do not so wickedly.	“Please, my brothers,” he pleaded, “don’t do such a wicked thing!
GEN	19	8	내게 남자를 가까이 아니한 두 딸이 있노라 청컨대 내가 그들을 너희에게로 이끌어내리니 너희 눈에 좋은 대로 그들에게 행하고 이 사람들은 내 집에 들어왔은즉 이 사람들에게는 아무 짓도 하지 말라	Behold now, I have two daughters which have not known man; let me, I pray you, bring them out unto you, and do ye to them as is good in your eyes: only unto these men do nothing; for therefore came they under the shadow of my roof.	Look, I have two daughters who have never slept with a man. Let me bring them to you, and you can do to them as you please. But do not do anything to these men, for they have come under the protection of my roof.”
GEN	19	9	그들이 가로되 너는 물러나라 또 가로되 이놈이 들어와서 우거하면서 우리의 법관이 되려 하는도다 이제 우리가 그들보다 너를 더 해하리라 하고 롯을 밀치며 가까이 나아와서 그 문을 깨치려 하는지라	And they said, Stand back. And they said again, This one fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge: now will we deal worse with thee, than with them. And they pressed sore upon the man, even Lot, and came near to break the door.	“Get out of the way!” they replied. And they declared, “This one came here as a foreigner, and he is already acting like a judge! Now we will treat you worse than them.” And they pressed in on Lot and moved in to break down the door.
GEN	19	10	그 사람들이 손을 내밀어 롯을 집으로 끌어들이고 문을 닫으며	But the men put forth their hand, and pulled Lot into the house to them, and shut to the door.	But the men inside reached out, pulled Lot into the house with them, and shut the door.
GEN	19	11	문밖의 무리로 무론 대소하고 그 눈을 어둡게 하니 그들이 문을 찾느라고 곤비하였더라	And they smote the men that were at the door of the house with blindness, both small and great: so that they wearied themselves to find the door.	And they struck the men at the entrance, young and old, with blindness, so that they wearied themselves trying to find the door.
GEN	19	12	그 사람들이 롯에게 이르되 이 외에 네게 속한 자가 또 있느냐 네 사위나 자녀나 성중에 네게 속한 자들을 다 성 밖으로 이끌어내라	And the men said unto Lot, Hast thou here any besides? son in law, and thy sons, and thy daughters, and whatsoever thou hast in the city, bring them out of this place:	Then the two men said to Lot, “Do you have anyone else here—a son-in-law, your sons or daughters, or anyone else in the city who belongs to you? Get them out of here,
GEN	19	13	그들에 대하여 부르짖음이 여호와 앞에 크므로 여호와께서 우리로 이곳을 멸하러 보내셨나니 우리가 멸하리라	For we will destroy this place, because the cry of them is waxen great before the face of the Lord; and the Lord hath sent us to destroy it.	because we are about to destroy this place. For the outcry to the LORD against its people is so great that He has sent us to destroy it.”
GEN	19	14	롯이 나가서 그 딸과 정혼한 사위들에게 고하여 이르되 여호와께서 이 성을 멸하실터이니 너희는 일어나 이 곳에서 떠나라 하되 그 사위들이 농담으로 여겼더라	And Lot went out, and spake unto his sons in law, which married his daughters, and said, Up, get you out of this place; for the Lord will destroy this city. But he seemed as one that mocked unto his sons in law.	So Lot went out and spoke to the sons-in-law who were pledged in marriage to his daughters. “Get up,” he said. “Get out of this place, for the LORD is about to destroy the city!” But his sons-in-law thought he was joking.
GEN	19	15	동틀 때에 천사가 롯을 재촉하여 가로되 일어나 여기 있는 네 아내와 두 딸을 이끌라 이 성의 죄악 중에 함께 멸망할까 하노라	And when the morning arose, then the angels hastened Lot, saying, Arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters, which are here; lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city.	At daybreak the angels hurried Lot along, saying, “Get up! Take your wife and your two daughters who are here, or you will be swept away in the punishment of the city.”
GEN	19	16	그러나 롯이 지체하매 그 사람들이 롯의 손과 그 아내의 손과 두 딸의 손을 잡아 인도하여 성밖에 두니 여호와께서 그에게 인자를 더하심이었더라	And while he lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and upon the hand of his wife, and upon the hand of his two daughters; the Lord being merciful unto him: and they brought him forth, and set him without the city.	But when Lot hesitated, the men grabbed his hand and the hands of his wife and his two daughters. And they led them safely out of the city, because of the LORD’s compassion for them.
GEN	19	17	그 사람들이 그들을 밖으로 이끌어 낸 후에 이르되 도망하여 생명을 보존하라 돌아보거나 들에 머무르거나 하지 말고 산으로 도망하여 멸망함을 면하라	And it came to pass, when they had brought them forth abroad, that he said, Escape for thy life; look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the plain; escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed.	As soon as the men had brought them out, one of them said, “Run for your lives! Do not look back, and do not stop anywhere on the plain! Flee to the mountains, or you will be swept away!”
GEN	19	18	롯이 그들에게 이르되 내 주여 그리 마옵소서	And Lot said unto them, Oh, not so, my Lord:	But Lot replied, “No, my lords, please!
GEN	19	19	종이 주께 은혜를 얻었고 주께서 큰 인자를 내게 베푸사 내 생명을 구원하시오나 내가 도망하여 산까지 갈 수 없나이다 두렵건대 재앙을 만나 죽을까 하나이다	Behold now, thy servant hath found grace in thy sight, and thou hast magnified thy mercy, which thou hast shewed unto me in saving my life; and I cannot escape to the mountain, lest some evil take me, and I die:	Your servant has indeed found favor in your sight, and you have shown me great kindness by sparing my life. But I cannot run to the mountains; the disaster will overtake me, and I will die.
GEN	19	20	보소서 저 성은 도망하기 가깝고 작기도 하오니 나로 그곳에 도망하게 하소서 이는 작은 성이 아니니이까 내 생명이 보존되리이다	Behold now, this city is near to flee unto, and it is a little one: Oh, let me escape thither, (is it not a little one?) and my soul shall live.	Look, there is a town nearby where I can flee, and it is a small place. Please let me flee there—is it not a small place? Then my life will be saved.”
GEN	19	21	그가 그에게 이르되 내가 이 일에도 네 소원을 들었은즉 너의 말하는 성을 멸하지 아니하리니	And he said unto him, See, I have accepted thee concerning this thing also, that I will not overthrow this city, for the which thou hast spoken.	“Very well,” he answered, “I will grant this request as well, and will not demolish the town you indicate.
GEN	19	22	그리로 속희 도망하라 네가 거기 이르기까지는 내가 아무 일도 행할 수 없노라 하였더라 그러므로 그 성 이름을 소알이라 불렀더라	Haste thee, escape thither; for I cannot do any thing till thou be come thither. Therefore the name of the city was called Zoar.	Hurry! Run there quickly, for I cannot do anything until you reach it.” That is why the town was called Zoar.
GEN	19	23	롯이 소알에 들어갈 때에 해가 돋았더라	The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered into Zoar.	And by the time the sun had risen over the land, Lot had reached Zoar.
GEN	19	24	여호와께서 하늘 곧 여호와에게로서 유황과 불을 비 같이 소돔과 고모라에 내리사	Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven;	Then the LORD rained down sulfur and fire on Sodom and Gomorrah—from the LORD out of the heavens.
GEN	19	25	그 성들과 온 들과 성에 거하는 모든 백성과 땅에 난 것을 다 엎어 멸하셨더라	And he overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon the ground.	Thus He destroyed these cities and the entire plain, including all the inhabitants of the cities and everything that grew on the ground.
GEN	19	26	롯의 아내는 뒤를 돌아 본고로 소금 기둥이 되었더라	But his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a pillar of salt.	But Lot’s wife looked back, and she became a pillar of salt.
GEN	19	27	아브라함이 그 아침에 일찍이 일어나 여호와의 앞에 섰던 곳에 이르러	And Abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where he stood before the Lord:	Early the next morning, Abraham got up and returned to the place where he had stood before the LORD.
GEN	19	28	소돔과 고모라와 그 온 들을 향하여 눈을 들어 연기가 옹기점 연기 같이 치밀음을 보았더라	And he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the land of the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace.	He looked down toward Sodom and Gomorrah and all the land of the plain, and he saw the smoke rising from the land like smoke from a furnace.
GEN	19	29	하나님이 들의 성들을 멸하실 때 곧 롯의 거하는 성을 엎으실 때에 아브라함을 생각하사 롯을 그 엎으시는 중에서 내어 보내셨더라	And it came to pass, when God destroyed the cities of the plain, that God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in the which Lot dwelt.	So when God destroyed the cities of the plain, He remembered Abraham, and He brought Lot out of the catastrophe that destroyed the cities where he had lived.
GEN	19	30	롯이 소알에 거하기를 두려워하여 두 딸과 함께 소알에서 나와 산에 올라 거하되 그 두 딸과 함께 굴에 거하였더니	And Lot went up out of Zoar, and dwelt in the mountain, and his two daughters with him; for he feared to dwell in Zoar: and he dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters.	Lot and his two daughters left Zoar and settled in the mountains—for he was afraid to stay in Zoar—where they lived in a cave.
GEN	19	31	큰 딸이 작은 딸에게 이르되 우리 아버지는 늙으셨고 이 땅에는 세상의 도리를 좇아 우리의 배필 될 사람이 없으니	And the firstborn said unto the younger, Our father is old, and there is not a man in the earth to come in unto us after the manner of all the earth:	One day the older daughter said to the younger, “Our father is old, and there is no man in the land to sleep with us, as is the custom over all the earth.
GEN	19	32	우리가 우리 아버지에게 술을 마시우고 동침하여 우리 아버지로 말미암아 인종을 전하자 하고	Come, let us make our father drink wine, and we will lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.	Come, let us get our father drunk with wine so we can sleep with him and preserve his line.”
GEN	19	33	그 밤에 그들이 아비에게 술을 마시우고 큰 딸이 들어가서 그 아비와 동침하니라 그러자 그 아비는 그 딸의 눕고 일어나는 것을 깨닫지 못하였더라	And they made their father drink wine that night: and the firstborn went in, and lay with her father; and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose.	So that night they got their father drunk with wine, and the firstborn went in and slept with her father; he was not aware when she lay down or when she got up.
GEN	19	34	이튿날에 큰 딸이 작은 딸에게 이르되 어제 밤에는 내가 우리 아버지와 동침하였으니 오늘 밤에도 우리가 아버지에게 술을 마시우고 네가 들어가 동침하고 우리가 아버지로 말미암아 인종을 전하자 하고	And it came to pass on the morrow, that the firstborn said unto the younger, Behold, I lay yesternight with my father: let us make him drink wine this night also; and go thou in, and lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.	The next day the older daughter said to the younger, “Look, I slept with my father last night. Let us get him drunk with wine again tonight so you can go in and sleep with him and we can preserve our father’s line.”
GEN	19	35	이 밤에도 그들이 아비에게 술을 마시우고 작은 딸이 일어나 아비와 동침하니라 그러나 아비는 그 딸의 눕고 일어나는 것을 깨닫지 못하였더라	And they made their father drink wine that night also: and the younger arose, and lay with him; and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose.	So again that night they got their father drunk with wine, and the younger daughter went in and slept with him; he was not aware when she lay down or when she got up.
GEN	19	36	롯의 두 딸이 아비로 말미암아 잉태하고	Thus were both the daughters of Lot with child by their father.	Thus both of Lot’s daughters became pregnant by their father.
GEN	19	37	큰 딸은 아들을 낳아 이름을 모압이라 하였으니 오늘날 모압 족속의 조상이요	And the firstborn bare a son, and called his name Moab: the same is the father of the Moabites unto this day.	The older daughter gave birth to a son and named him Moab. He is the father of the Moabites of today.
GEN	19	38	작은 딸도 아들을 낳아 이름을 벤암미라 하였으니 오늘날 암몬 족속의 조상이었더라	And the younger, she also bare a son, and called his name Ben–ammi: the same is the father of the children of Ammon unto this day.	The younger daughter also gave birth to a son, and she named him Ben-ammi. He is the father of the Ammonites of today.
GEN	20	1	아브라함이 거기서 남방으로 이사하여 가데스와 술 사이 그랄에 우거하며	And Abraham journeyed from thence toward the south country, and dwelled between Kadesh and Shur, and sojourned in Gerar.	Now Abraham journeyed from there to the region of the Negev and settled between Kadesh and Shur. While he was staying in Gerar,
GEN	20	2	그 아내 사라를 자기 누이라 하였으므로 그랄 왕 아비멜렉이 보내어 사라를 취하였더니	And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, She is my sister: and Abimelech king of Gerar sent, and took Sarah.	Abraham said of his wife Sarah, “She is my sister.” So Abimelech king of Gerar had Sarah brought to him.
GEN	20	3	그 밤에 하나님이 아비멜렉에게 현몽하시고 그에게 이르시되 네가 취한 이 여인을 인하여 네가 죽으리니 그가 남의 아내임이니라	But God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, and said to him, Behold, thou art but a dead man, for the woman which thou hast taken; for she is a man’s wife.	One night, however, God came to Abimelech in a dream and told him, “You are as good as dead because of the woman you have taken, for she is a married woman.”
GEN	20	4	아비멜렉이 그 여인을 가까이 아니한 고로 그가 대답하되 주여 주께서 의로운 백성도 멸하시나이까	But Abimelech had not come near her: and he said, Lord, wilt thou slay also a righteous nation?	Now Abimelech had not gone near her, so he replied, “Lord, would You destroy a nation even though it is innocent?
GEN	20	5	그가 나더러 이는 내 누이라고 하지 아니하였나이까 그 여인도 그는 내 오라비라 하였사오니 나는 온전한 마음과 깨끗한 손으로 이렇게 하였나이다	Said he not unto me, She is my sister? and she, even she herself said, He is my brother: in the integrity of my heart and innocency of my hands have I done this.	Didn’t Abraham tell me, ‘She is my sister’? And she herself said, ‘He is my brother.’ I have done this in the integrity of my heart and the innocence of my hands.”
GEN	20	6	하나님이 꿈에 또 그에게 이르시되 네가 온전한 마음으로 이렇게 한 줄을 나도 알았으므로 너를 막아 내게 범죄하지 않게 하였나니 여인에게 가까이 못하게 함이 이 까닭이니라	And God said unto him in a dream, Yea, I know that thou didst this in the integrity of thy heart; for I also withheld thee from sinning against me: therefore suffered I thee not to touch her.	Then God said to Abimelech in the dream, “Yes, I know that you did this with a clear conscience, and so I have kept you from sinning against Me. That is why I did not let you touch her.
GEN	20	7	이제 그 사람의 아내를 돌려 보내라 그는 선지자라 그가 너를 위하여 기도하리니 네가 살려니와 네가 돌려 보내지 않으면 너와 네게 속한 자가 다 정녕 죽을 줄 알지니라	Now therefore restore the man his wife; for he is a prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live: and if thou restore her not, know thou that thou shalt surely die, thou, and all that are thine.	Now return the man’s wife, for he is a prophet; he will pray for you and you will live. But if you do not restore her, be aware that you will surely die—you and all who belong to you.”
GEN	20	8	아비멜렉이 그 아침에 일찍이 일어나 모든 신복을 불러 그 일을 다 말하여 들리매 그 사람들이 심히 두려워하였더라	Therefore Abimelech rose early in the morning, and called all his servants, and told all these things in their ears: and the men were sore afraid.	Early the next morning Abimelech got up and summoned all his servants; and when he described to them all that had happened, the men were terrified.
GEN	20	9	아비멜렉이 아브라함을 불러서 그에게 이르되 네가 어찌하여 우리에게 이리 하느냐 내가 무슨 죄를 네게 범하였관대 네가 나와 내 나라로 큰 죄에 빠질 뻔하게 하였느냐 네가 합당치 않은 일을 내게 행하였도다 하고	Then Abimelech called Abraham, and said unto him, What hast thou done unto us? and what have I offended thee, that thou hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin? thou hast done deeds unto me that ought not to be done.	Then Abimelech called Abraham and asked, “What have you done to us? How have I sinned against you, that you have brought such tremendous guilt upon me and my kingdom? You have done things to me that should not be done.”
GEN	20	10	아비멜렉이 또 아브라함에게 이르되 네가 무슨 의견으로 이렇게 하였느냐	And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What sawest thou, that thou hast done this thing?	Abimelech also asked Abraham, “What prompted you to do such a thing?”
GEN	20	11	아브라함이 가로되 이곳에서는 하나님을 두려워함이 없으니 내 아내를 인하여 사람이 나를 죽일까 생각하였음이요	And Abraham said, Because I thought, Surely the fear of God is not in this place; and they will slay me for my wife’s sake.	Abraham replied, “I thought to myself, ‘Surely there is no fear of God in this place. They will kill me on account of my wife.’
GEN	20	12	또 그는 실로 나의 이복 누이로서 내 처가 되었음이니라	And yet indeed she is my sister; she is the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife.	Besides, she really is my sister, the daughter of my father—though not the daughter of my mother—and she became my wife.
GEN	20	13	하나님이 나로 내 아비 집을 떠나 두루 다니게 하실 때에 내가 아내에게 말하기를 이후로 우리의 가는 곳마다 그대는 나를 그대의 오라비라 하라 이것이 그대가 내게 베풀 은혜라 하였었노라	And it came to pass, when God caused me to wander from my father’s house, that I said unto her, This is thy kindness which thou shalt shew unto me; at every place whither we shall come, say of me, He is my brother.	So when God had me journey from my father’s house, I said to Sarah, ‘This is how you can show your loyalty to me: Wherever we go, say of me, “He is my brother.”’”
GEN	20	14	아비멜렉이 양과 소와 노비를 취하여 아브라함에게 주고 그 아내 사라도 그에게 돌려보내고	And Abimelech took sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and womenservants, and gave them unto Abraham, and restored him Sarah his wife.	So Abimelech brought sheep and cattle, menservants and maidservants, and he gave them to Abraham and restored his wife Sarah to him.
GEN	20	15	아브라함에게 이르되 내 땅이 네 앞에 있으니 너 보기에 좋은 대로 거하라 하고	And Abimelech said, Behold, my land is before thee: dwell where it pleaseth thee.	And Abimelech said, “Look, my land is before you. Settle wherever you please.”
GEN	20	16	사라에게 이르되 내가 은 천개를 네 오라비에게 주어서 그것으로 너와 함께 한 여러 사람 앞에서 네 수치를 풀게 하였노니 네 일이 다 선히 해결되었느니라	And unto Sarah he said, Behold, I have given thy brother a thousand pieces of silver: behold, he is to thee a covering of the eyes, unto all that are with thee, and with all other: thus she was reproved.	And he said to Sarah, “See, I am giving your brother a thousand pieces of silver. It is your vindication before all who are with you; you are completely cleared.”
GEN	20	17	아브라함이 하나님께 기도하매 하나님이 아비멜렉과 그 아내와 여종을 치료하사 생산케 하셨으니	So Abraham prayed unto God: and God healed Abimelech, and his wife, and his maidservants; and they bare children.	Then Abraham prayed to God, and God healed Abimelech and his wife and his maidservants, so that they could again bear children—
GEN	20	18	여호와께서 이왕에 아브라함의 아내 사라의 연고로 아비멜렉의 집 모든 태를 닫히셨음이더라	For the Lord had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of Abimelech, because of Sarah Abraham’s wife.	for on account of Abraham’s wife Sarah, the LORD had completely closed all the wombs in Abimelech’s household.
GEN	21	1	여호와께서 그 말씀대로 사라를 권고하셨고 여호와께서 그 말씀대로 사라에게 행하셨으므로	And the Lord visited Sarah as he had said, and the Lord did unto Sarah as he had spoken.	Now the LORD attended to Sarah as He had said, and the LORD did for Sarah what He had promised.
GEN	21	2	사라가 잉태하고 하나님의 말씀하신 기한에 미쳐 늙은 아브라함에게 아들을 낳으니	For Sarah conceived, and bare Abraham a son in his old age, at the set time of which God had spoken to him.	So Sarah conceived and bore a son to Abraham in his old age, at the very time God had promised.
GEN	21	3	아브라함이 그 낳은 아들 곧 사라가 자기에게 낳은 아들을 이름하여 이삭이라 하였고	And Abraham called the name of his son that was born unto him, whom Sarah bare to him, Isaac.	And Abraham gave the name Isaac to the son Sarah bore to him.
GEN	21	4	그 아들 이삭이 난지 팔일만에 그가 하나님의 명대로 할례를 행하였더라	And Abraham circumcised his son Isaac being eight days old, as God had commanded him.	When his son Isaac was eight days old, Abraham circumcised him, as God had commanded him.
GEN	21	5	아브라함이 그 아들 이삭을 낳을 때에 백 세라	And Abraham was an hundred years old, when his son Isaac was born unto him.	Abraham was a hundred years old when his son Isaac was born to him.
GEN	21	6	사라가 가로되 하나님이 나로 웃게 하시니 듣는 자가 다 나와 함께 웃으리로다	And Sarah said, God hath made me to laugh, so that all that hear will laugh with me.	Then Sarah said, “God has made me laugh, and everyone who hears of this will laugh with me.”
GEN	21	7	또 가로되 사라가 자식들을 젖 먹이겠다고 누가 아브라함에게 말하였으리요 마는 아브라함 노경에 내가 아들을 낳았도다 하니라	And she said, Who would have said unto Abraham, that Sarah should have given children suck? for I have born him a son in his old age.	She added, “Who would have told Abraham that Sarah would nurse children? Yet I have borne him a son in his old age.”
GEN	21	8	아이가 자라매 젖을 떼고 이삭의 젖을 떼는 날에 아브라함이 대연을 배설하였더라	And the child grew, and was weaned: and Abraham made a great feast the same day that Isaac was weaned.	So the child grew and was weaned, and Abraham held a great feast on the day Isaac was weaned.
GEN	21	9	사라가 본즉 아브라함의 아들 애굽 여인 하갈의 소생이 이삭을 희롱하는지라	And Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, which she had born unto Abraham, mocking.	But Sarah saw that the son whom Hagar the Egyptian had borne to Abraham was mocking her son,
GEN	21	10	그가 아브라함에게 이르되 이 여종과 그 아들을 내어 쫓으라 이 종의 아들은 내 아들 이삭과 함께 기업을 얻지 못하리라 하매	Wherefore she said unto Abraham, Cast out this bondwoman and her son: for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even with Isaac.	and she said to Abraham, “Expel the slave woman and her son, for the slave woman’s son will never share in the inheritance with my son Isaac!”
GEN	21	11	아브라함이 그 아들을 위하여 그 일이 깊이 근심이 되었더니	And the thing was very grievous in Abraham’s sight because of his son.	Now this matter distressed Abraham greatly because it concerned his son Ishmael.
GEN	21	12	하나님이 아브라함에게 이르시되 네 아이나 네 여종을 위하여 근심치 말고 사라가 네게 이른 말을 다 들으라 이삭에게서 나는 자라야 네 씨라 칭할 것임이니라	And God said unto Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy sight because of the lad, and because of thy bondwoman; in all that Sarah hath said unto thee, hearken unto her voice; for in Isaac shall thy seed be called.	But God said to Abraham, “Do not be distressed about the boy and your maidservant. Listen to everything that Sarah tells you, for through Isaac your offspring will be reckoned.
GEN	21	13	그러나 여종의 아들도 네 씨니 내가 그로 한 민족을 이루게 하리라 하신지라	And also of the son of the bondwoman will I make a nation, because he is thy seed.	But I will also make a nation of the slave woman’s son, because he is your offspring.”
GEN	21	14	아브라함이 아침에 일찍이 일어나 떡과 물 한 가죽부대를 취하여 하갈의 어깨에 메워 주고 그 자식을 이끌고 가게 하매 하갈이 나가서 브엘세바 들에서 방황하더니	And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread, and a bottle of water, and gave it unto Hagar, putting it on her shoulder, and the child, and sent her away: and she departed, and wandered in the wilderness of Beer–sheba.	Early in the morning, Abraham got up, took bread and a skin of water, put them on Hagar’s shoulders, and sent her away with the boy. She left and wandered in the Wilderness of Beersheba.
GEN	21	15	가죽부대의 물이 다한지라 그 자식을 떨기나무 아래 두며	And the water was spent in the bottle, and she cast the child under one of the shrubs.	When the water in the skin was gone, she left the boy under one of the bushes.
GEN	21	16	가로되 자식의 죽는 것을 참아 보지 못하겠다 하고 살 한 바탕쯤가서 마주 앉아 바라보며 방성대곡하니	And she went, and sat her down over against him a good way off, as it were a bowshot: for she said, Let me not see the death of the child. And she sat over against him, and lift up her voice, and wept.	Then she went off and sat down nearby, about a bowshot away, for she said, “I cannot bear to watch the boy die!” And as she sat nearby, she lifted up her voice and wept.
GEN	21	17	하나님이 그 아이의 소리를 들으시므로 하나님의 사자가 하늘에서부터 하갈을 불러 가라사대 하갈아 무슨 일이냐 두려워 말라 하나님이 거기 있는 아이의 소리를 들으셨나니	And God heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of God called to Hagar out of heaven, and said unto her, What aileth thee, Hagar? fear not; for God hath heard the voice of the lad where he is.	Then God heard the voice of the boy, and the angel of God called to Hagar from heaven, “What is wrong, Hagar? Do not be afraid, for God has heard the voice of the boy where he lies.
GEN	21	18	일어나 아이를 일으켜 네 손으로 붙들라 그로 큰 민족을 이루게 하리라 하시니라	Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand; for I will make him a great nation.	Get up, lift up the boy, and take him by the hand, for I will make him into a great nation.”
GEN	21	19	하나님이 하갈의 눈을 밝히시매 샘물을 보고 가서 가죽부대에 물을 채워다가 그 아이에게 마시웠더라	And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water; and she went, and filled the bottle with water, and gave the lad drink.	Then God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water. So she went and filled the skin with water and gave the boy a drink.
GEN	21	20	하나님이 그 아이와 함께 계시매 그가 장성하여 광야에 거하며 활 쏘는 자가 되었더니	And God was with the lad; and he grew, and dwelt in the wilderness, and became an archer.	And God was with the boy, and he grew up and settled in the wilderness and became a great archer.
GEN	21	21	그가 바란 광야에 거할 때에 그 어미가 그를 위하여 애굽땅 여인을 취하여 아내를 삼게 하였더라	And he dwelt in the wilderness of Paran: and his mother took him a wife out of the land of Egypt.	And while he was dwelling in the Wilderness of Paran, his mother got a wife for him from the land of Egypt.
GEN	21	22	때에 아비멜렉과 그 군대 장관 비골이 아브라함에게 말하여 가로되 네가 무슨 일을 하든지 하나님이 너와 함께 계시도다	And it came to pass at that time, that Abimelech and Phichol the chief captain of his host spake unto Abraham, saying, God is with thee in all that thou doest:	At that time Abimelech and Phicol the commander of his army said to Abraham, “God is with you in all that you do.
GEN	21	23	그런즉 너는 나와 내 아들과 내 손자에게 거짓되이 행치 않기를 이제 여기서 하나님을 가리켜 내게 맹세하라 내가 네게 후대한 대로 너도 나와 너의 머무는 이 땅에 행할 것이니라	Now therefore swear unto me here by God that thou wilt not deal falsely with me, nor with my son, nor with my son’s son: but according to the kindness that I have done unto thee, thou shalt do unto me, and to the land wherein thou hast sojourned.	Now, therefore, swear to me here before God that you will not deal falsely with me or my children or descendants. Show to me and to the country in which you reside the same kindness that I have shown to you.”
GEN	21	24	아브라함이 가로되 내가 맹세하리라 하고	And Abraham said, I will swear.	And Abraham replied, “I swear it.”
GEN	21	25	아비멜렉의 종들이 아브라함의 우물을 늑탈한 일에 대하여 아브라함이 아비멜렉을 책망하매	And Abraham reproved Abimelech because of a well of water, which Abimelech’s servants had violently taken away.	But when Abraham complained to Abimelech about a well that Abimelech’s servants had seized,
GEN	21	26	아비멜렉이 가로되 누가 그리하였는지 내가 알지 못하노라 너도 내게 고하지 아니하였고 나도 듣지 못하였더니 오늘이야 들었노라	And Abimelech said, I wot not who hath done this thing: neither didst thou tell me, neither yet heard I of it, but to day.	Abimelech replied, “I do not know who has done this. You did not tell me, so I have not heard about it until today.”
GEN	21	27	아브라함이 양과 소를 취하여 아비멜렉에게 주고 두 사람이 서로 언약을 세우니라	And Abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave them unto Abimelech; and both of them made a covenant.	So Abraham brought sheep and cattle and gave them to Abimelech, and the two men made a covenant.
GEN	21	28	아브라함이 일곱 암양 새끼를 따로 놓으니	And Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves.	Abraham separated seven ewe lambs from the flock,
GEN	21	29	아비멜렉이 아브라함에게 이르되 이 일곱 암양 새끼를 따로 놓음은 어찜이뇨	And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What mean these seven ewe lambs which thou hast set by themselves?	and Abimelech asked him, “Why have you set apart these seven ewe lambs?”
GEN	21	30	아브라함이 가로되 너는 내 손에서 이 암양 새끼 일곱을 받아 내가 이 우물 판 증거를 삼으라 하고	And he said, For these seven ewe lambs shalt thou take of my hand, that they may be a witness unto me, that I have digged this well.	He replied, “You are to accept the seven ewe lambs from my hand as my witness that I dug this well.”
GEN	21	31	두 사람이 거기서 서로 맹세하였으므로 그곳을 브엘세바라 이름 하였더라	Wherefore he called that place Beer–sheba; because there they sware both of them.	So that place was called Beersheba, because it was there that the two of them swore an oath.
GEN	21	32	그들이 브엘세바에서 언약을 세우매 아비멜렉과 그 군대 장관 비골은 떠나 블레셋 족속의 땅으로 돌아갔고	Thus they made a covenant at Beer–sheba: then Abimelech rose up, and Phichol the chief captain of his host, and they returned into the land of the Philistines.	After they had made the covenant at Beersheba, Abimelech and Phicol the commander of his army got up and returned to the land of the Philistines.
GEN	21	33	아브라함은 브엘세바에 에셀나무를 심고 거기서 영생하시는 하나님 여호와의 이름을 불렀으며	And Abraham planted a grove in Beer–sheba, and called there on the name of the Lord, the everlasting God.	And Abraham planted a tamarisk tree in Beersheba, and there he called upon the name of the LORD, the Eternal God.
GEN	21	34	그가 블레셋 족속의 땅에서 여러날을 지내었더라	And Abraham sojourned in the Philistines’ land many days.	And Abraham resided in the land of the Philistines for a long time.
GEN	22	1	그 일 후에 하나님이 아브라함을 시험하시려고 그를 부르시되 아브라함아 하시니 그가 가로되 내가 여기 있나이다	And it came to pass after these things, that God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham: and he said, Behold, here I am.	Some time later God tested Abraham and said to him, “Abraham!” “Here I am,” he answered.
GEN	22	2	여호와께서 가라사대 네 아들 네 사랑하는 독자 이삭을 데리고 모리아 땅으로 가서 내가 네게 지시하는 한 산 거기서 그를 번제로 드리라	And he said, Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of.	“Take your son,” God said, “your only son Isaac, whom you love, and go to the land of Moriah. Offer him there as a burnt offering on one of the mountains, which I will show you.”
GEN	22	3	아브라함이 아침에 일찍이 일어나 나귀에 안장을 지우고 두 사환과 그 아들 이삭을 데리고 번제에 쓸 나무를 쪼개어 가지고 떠나 하나님의 자기에게 지시하시는 곳으로 가더니	And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his ass, and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son, and clave the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went unto the place of which God had told him.	So Abraham got up early the next morning, saddled his donkey, and took along two of his servants and his son Isaac. He split the wood for a burnt offering and set out for the place God had designated.
GEN	22	4	제 삼일에 아브라함이 눈을 들어 그곳을 멀리 바라본지라	Then on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the place afar off.	On the third day Abraham looked up and saw the place in the distance.
GEN	22	5	이에 아브라함이 사환에게 이르되 너희는 나귀와 함께 여기서 기다리라 내가 아이와 함께 저기 가서 경배하고 너희에게로 돌아오리라 하고	And Abraham said unto his young men, Abide ye here with the ass; and I and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you.	“Stay here with the donkey,” Abraham told his servants. “The boy and I will go over there to worship, and then we will return to you.”
GEN	22	6	아브라함이 이에 번제 나무를 취하여 그 아들 이삭에게 지우고 자기는 불과 칼을 손에 들고 두 사람이 동행하더니	And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon Isaac his son; and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife; and they went both of them together.	Abraham took the wood for the burnt offering and placed it on his son Isaac. He himself carried the fire and the sacrificial knife, and the two of them walked on together.
GEN	22	7	이삭이 그 아비 아브라함에게 말하여 가로되 내 아버지여 하니 그가 가로되 내 아들아 내가 여기 있노라 이삭이 가로되 불과 나무는 있거니와 번제할 어린 양은 어디 있나이까	And Isaac spake unto Abraham his father, and said, My father: and he said, Here am I, my son. And he said, Behold the fire and the wood: but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?	Then Isaac said to his father Abraham, “My father!” “Here I am, my son,” he replied. “The fire and the wood are here,” said Isaac, “but where is the lamb for the burnt offering?”
GEN	22	8	아브라함이 가로되 아들아 번제할 어린 양은 하나님이 자기를 위하여 친히 준비하시리라 하고 두 사람이 함께 나아가서	And Abraham said, My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering: so they went both of them together.	Abraham answered, “God Himself will provide the lamb for the burnt offering, my son.” And the two walked on together.
GEN	22	9	하나님이 그에게 지시하신 곳에 이른지라 이에 아브라함이 그곳에 단을 쌓고 나무를 벌여놓고 그 아들 이삭을 결박하여 단 나무 위에 놓고	And they came to the place which God had told him of; and Abraham built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the altar upon the wood.	When they arrived at the place God had designated, Abraham built the altar there and arranged the wood. He bound his son Isaac and placed him on the altar, atop the wood.
GEN	22	10	손을 내밀어 칼을 잡고 그 아들을 잡으려 하더니	And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his son.	Then Abraham reached out his hand and took the knife to slaughter his son.
GEN	22	11	여호와의 사자가 하늘에서부터 그를 불러 가라사대 아브라함아 아브라함아 하시는지라 아브라함이 가로되 내가 여기 있나이다 하매	And the angel of the Lord called unto him out of heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here am I.	Just then the angel of the LORD called out to him from heaven, “Abraham, Abraham!” “Here I am,” he replied.
GEN	22	12	사자가 가라사대 그 아이에게 네 손을 대지 말라 아무 일도 그에게 하지 말라 네가 네 아들 네 독자라도 내게 아끼지 아니하였으니 내가 이제야 네가 하나님을 경외하는 줄을 아노라	And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him: for now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son from me.	“Do not lay a hand on the boy or do anything to him,” said the angel, “for now I know that you fear God, since you have not withheld your only son from me.”
GEN	22	13	아브라함이 눈을 들어 살펴본즉 한 수양이 뒤에 있는데 뿔이 수풀에 걸렸는지라 아브라함이 가서 그 수양을 가져다가 아들을 대신하여 번제로 드렸더라	And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold behind him a ram caught in a thicket by his horns: and Abraham went and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt offering in the stead of his son.	Then Abraham looked up and saw behind him a ram in a thicket, caught by its horns. So he went and took the ram and offered it as a burnt offering in place of his son.
GEN	22	14	아브라함이 그 땅 이름을 여호와이레라 하였으므로 오늘까지 사람들이 이르기를 여호와의 산에서 준비되리라 하더라	And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovah–jireh: as it is said to this day, In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen.	And Abraham called that place The LORD Will Provide. So to this day it is said, “On the mountain of the LORD it will be provided.”
GEN	22	15	여호와의 사자가 하늘에서부터 두번째 아브라함을 불러	And the angel of the Lord called unto Abraham out of heaven the second time,	And the angel of the LORD called to Abraham from heaven a second time,
GEN	22	16	가라사대 여호와께서 이르시기를 내가 나를 가리켜 맹세하노니 네가 이같이 행하여 네 아들 네 독자를 아끼지 아니하였은즉	And said, By myself have I sworn, saith the Lord, for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son:	saying, “By Myself I have sworn, declares the LORD, that because you have done this and have not withheld your only son,
GEN	22	17	내가 네게 큰 복을 주고 네 씨로 그게 성하여 하늘의 별과 같고 바닷가의 모래와 같게 하리니 네 씨가 그 대적의 문을 얻으리라	That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies;	I will surely bless you, and I will multiply your descendants like the stars in the sky and the sand on the seashore. Your descendants will possess the gates of their enemies.
GEN	22	18	또 네 씨로 말미암아 천하 만민이 복을 얻으리니 이는 네가 나의 말을 준행하였음이니라 하셨다 하니라	And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice.	And through your offspring all nations of the earth will be blessed, because you have obeyed My voice.”
GEN	22	19	이에 아브라함이 그 사환에게로 돌아와서 함께 떠나 브엘세바에 이르러 거기 거하였더라	So Abraham returned unto his young men, and they rose up and went together to Beer–sheba; and Abraham dwelt at Beer–sheba.	Abraham went back to his servants, and they got up and set out together for Beersheba. And Abraham settled in Beersheba.
GEN	22	20	이일 후에 혹이 아브라함에게 고하여 이르기를 밀가가 그대의 동생 나홀에게 자녀를 낳았다 하였더라	And it came to pass after these things, that it was told Abraham, saying, Behold, Milcah, she hath also born children unto thy brother Nahor;	Some time later, Abraham was told, “Milcah has also borne sons to your brother Nahor:
GEN	22	21	그 맏아들은 우스요 우스의 동생은 부스와 아람의 아비 그므엘과	Huz his firstborn, and Buz his brother, and Kemuel the father of Aram,	Uz the firstborn, his brother Buz, Kemuel (the father of Aram),
GEN	22	22	게셋과 하소와 빌다스와 이들랍과 브두엘이라	And Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash, and Jidlaph, and Bethuel.	Chesed, Hazo, Pildash, Jidlaph, and Bethuel.”
GEN	22	23	이 여덟 사람은 아브라함의 동생 나홀의 처 밀가의 소생이며 브두엘은 리브가를 낳았고	And Bethuel begat Rebekah: these eight Milcah did bear to Nahor, Abraham’s brother.	And Bethuel became the father of Rebekah. Milcah bore these eight sons to Abraham’s brother Nahor.
GEN	22	24	나홀의 첩 르우마라 하는 자도 데바와 가함과 다하스와 마아가를낳았더라	And his concubine, whose name was Reumah, she bare also Tebah, and Gaham, and Thahash, and Maachah.	Moreover, Nahor’s concubine, whose name was Reumah, bore Tebah, Gaham, Tahash, and Maacah.
GEN	23	1	사라가 일백이십칠 세를 살았으니 이것이 곧 사라의 향년이라	And Sarah was an hundred and seven and twenty years old: these were the years of the life of Sarah.	Now Sarah lived to be 127 years old.
GEN	23	2	사라가 가나안 땅 헤브론 곧 기럇아르바에서 죽으매 아브라함이 들어가서 사라를 위하여 슬퍼하며 애통하다가	And Sarah died in Kirjath–arba; the same is Hebron in the land of Canaan: and Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her.	She died in Kiriath-arba (that is, Hebron) in the land of Canaan, and Abraham went out to mourn and to weep for her.
GEN	23	3	그 시체 앞에서 일어나 나가서 헷족속에게 말하여 가로되	And Abraham stood up from before his dead, and spake unto the sons of Heth, saying,	Then Abraham got up from beside his dead wife and said to the Hittites,
GEN	23	4	나는 당신들 중에 나그네요 우거한 자니 청컨대 당신들 중에서 내게 매장지를 주어 소유를 삼아 나로 내 죽은 자를 내어 장사하게 하시오	I am a stranger and a sojourner with you: give me a possession of a buryingplace with you, that I may bury my dead out of my sight.	“I am a foreigner and an outsider among you. Give me a burial site among you so that I can bury my dead.”
GEN	23	5	헷 족속이 아브라함에게 대답하여 가로되	And the children of Heth answered Abraham, saying unto him,	The Hittites replied to Abraham,
GEN	23	6	내 주여 들으소서 당신은 우리 중 하나님의 방백이시니 우리 묘실 중에서 좋은 것을 택하여 당신의 죽은 자를 장사하소서 우리 중에서 자기 묘실에 당신의 죽은 자 장사함을 금할 자가 없으리이다	Hear us, my lord: thou art a mighty prince among us: in the choice of our sepulchres bury thy dead; none of us shall withhold from thee his sepulchre, but that thou mayest bury thy dead.	“Listen to us, sir. You are God’s chosen one among us. Bury your dead in the finest of our tombs. None of us will withhold his tomb for burying your dead.”
GEN	23	7	아브라함이 일어나 그 땅 거민 헷 족속을 향하여 몸을 굽히고	And Abraham stood up, and bowed himself to the people of the land, even to the children of Heth.	Then Abraham rose and bowed down before the people of the land, the Hittites.
GEN	23	8	그들에게 말하여 가로되 나로 나의 죽은 자를 내어 장사하게 하는 일이 당신들의 뜻일진대 내 말을 듣고 나를 위하여 소할의 아들 에브론에게 구하여	And he communed with them, saying, If it be your mind that I should bury my dead out of my sight; hear me, and intreat for me to Ephron the son of Zohar,	“If you are willing for me to bury my dead,” he said to them, “listen to me, and approach Ephron son of Zohar on my behalf
GEN	23	9	그로 그 밭머리에 있는 막벨라 굴을 내게 주게 하되 준가를 받고 그 굴을 내게 주어서 당신들 중에 내 소유 매장지가 되게하기를 원하노라	That he may give me the cave of Machpelah, which he hath, which is in the end of his field; for as much money as it is worth he shall give it me for a possession of a buryingplace amongst you.	to sell me the cave of Machpelah that belongs to him; it is at the end of his field. Let him sell it to me in your presence for full price, so that I may have a burial site.”
GEN	23	10	때에 에브론이 헷 족속 중에 앉았더니 그가 헷 족속 곧 성문에 들어온 모든 자의 듣는데 아브라함에게 대답하여 가로되	And Ephron dwelt among the children of Heth: and Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham in the audience of the children of Heth, even of all that went in at the gate of his city, saying,	Now Ephron was sitting among the sons of Heth. So in the presence of all the Hittites who had come to the gate of his city, Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham,
GEN	23	11	내 주여 그리 마시고 내 말을 들으소서 내가 그 밭을 당신께 드리고 그 속의 굴도 내가 당신께 드리되 내가 내 동족 앞에서 당신께 드리오니 당신의 죽은 자를 장사하소서	Nay, my lord, hear me: the field give I thee, and the cave that is therein, I give it thee; in the presence of the sons of my people give I it thee: bury thy dead.	“No, my lord. Listen to me. I give you the field, and I give you the cave that is in it. I give it to you in the presence of my people. Bury your dead.”
GEN	23	12	아브라함이 이에 그 땅 백성을 대하여 몸을 굽히고	And Abraham bowed down himself before the people of the land.	Again Abraham bowed down before the people of the land
GEN	23	13	그 땅 백성의 듣는데 에브론에게 말하여 가로되 당신이 합당히 여기면 청컨대 내 말을 들으시오 내가 그 밭값을 당신에게 주리니 당신은 내게서 받으시오 내가 나의 죽은 자를 거기 장사하겠노라	And he spake unto Ephron in the audience of the people of the land, saying, But if thou wilt give it, I pray thee, hear me: I will give thee money for the field; take it of me, and I will bury my dead there.	and said to Ephron in their presence, “If you will please listen to me, I will pay you the price of the field. Accept it from me, so that I may bury my dead there.”
GEN	23	14	에브론이 아브라함에게 대답하여 가로되	And Ephron answered Abraham, saying unto him,	Ephron answered Abraham,
GEN	23	15	내 주여 내게 들으소서 땅값은 은 사백 세겔이나 나와 당신 사이에 어찌 교계하리이까 당신의 죽은 자를 장사하소서	My lord, hearken unto me: the land is worth four hundred shekels of silver; what is that betwixt me and thee? bury therefore thy dead.	“Listen to me, my lord. The land is worth four hundred shekels of silver, but what is that between you and me? Bury your dead.”
GEN	23	16	아브라함이 에브론의 말을 좇아 에브론이 헷 족속의 듣는데서 말한 대로 상고의 통용하는 은 사백 세겔을 달아 에브론에게 주었더니	And Abraham hearkened unto Ephron; and Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver, which he had named in the audience of the sons of Heth, four hundred shekels of silver, current money with the merchant.	Abraham agreed to Ephron’s terms and weighed out for him the price he had named in the hearing of the Hittites: four hundred shekels of silver, according to the standard of the merchants.
GEN	23	17	마므레 앞 막벨라에 있는 에브론의 밭을 바꾸어 그 속의 굴과 그 사방에 둘린 수목을 다	And the field of Ephron, which was in Machpelah, which was before Mamre, the field, and the cave which was therein, and all the trees that were in the field, that were in all the borders round about, were made sure	So Ephron’s field at Machpelah near Mamre, the cave that was in it, and all the trees within the boundaries of the field were deeded over
GEN	23	18	성문에 들어온 헷 족속 앞에서 아브라함의 소유로 정한지라	Unto Abraham for a possession in the presence of the children of Heth, before all that went in at the gate of his city.	to Abraham’s possession in the presence of all the Hittites who had come to the gate of his city.
GEN	23	19	그 후에 아브라함이 그 아내 사라를 가나안 땅 마므레 앞 막벨라 밭 굴에 장사하였더라(마므레는 곧 헤브론이라)	And after this, Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of the field of Machpelah before Mamre: the same is Hebron in the land of Canaan.	After this, Abraham buried his wife Sarah in the cave of the field at Machpelah near Mamre (that is, Hebron) in the land of Canaan.
GEN	23	20	이와 같이 그 밭과 그 속의 굴을 헷 족속이 아브라함 소유 매장지로 정하였더라	And the field, and the cave that is therein, were made sure unto Abraham for a possession of a buryingplace by the sons of Heth.	So the field and its cave were deeded by the Hittites to Abraham as a burial site.
GEN	24	1	아브라함이 나이 많아 늙었고 여호와께서 그의 범사에 복을 주셨더라	And Abraham was old, and well stricken in age: and the Lord had blessed Abraham in all things.	By now Abraham was old and well along in years, and the LORD had blessed him in every way.
GEN	24	2	아브라함이 자기 집 모든 소유를 맡은 늙은 종에게 이르되 청컨대 네 손을 내 환도뼈 밑에 넣으라	And Abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that ruled over all that he had, Put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh:	So Abraham instructed the chief servant of his household, who managed all he owned, “Place your hand under my thigh,
GEN	24	3	내가 너로 하늘의 하나님, 땅의 하나님이신 여호와를 가리켜 맹세하게 하노니 너는 나의 거하는 이 지방 가나안 족속의 딸 중에서 내 아들을 위하여 아내를 택하지 말고	And I will make thee swear by the Lord, the God of heaven, and the God of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I dwell:	and I will have you swear by the LORD, the God of heaven and the God of earth, that you will not take a wife for my son from the daughters of the Canaanites among whom I am dwelling,
GEN	24	4	내 고향 내 족속에게로 가서 내 아들 이삭을 위하여 아내를 택하라	But thou shalt go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son Isaac.	but will go to my country and my kindred to take a wife for my son Isaac.”
GEN	24	5	종이 가로되 여자가 나를 좇아 이 땅으로 오고자 아니하거든 내가 주인의 아들을 주인의 나오신 땅으로 인도하여 돌아가리이까	And the servant said unto him, Peradventure the woman will not be willing to follow me unto this land: must I needs bring thy son again unto the land from whence thou camest?	The servant asked him, “What if the woman is unwilling to follow me to this land? Shall I then take your son back to the land from which you came?”
GEN	24	6	아브라함이 그에게 이르되 삼가 내 아들을 그리로 데리고 돌아가지 말라	And Abraham said unto him, Beware thou that thou bring not my son thither again.	Abraham replied, “Make sure that you do not take my son back there.
GEN	24	7	하늘의 하나님 여호와께서 나를 내 아버지의 집과 내 본토에서 떠나게 하시고 내게 말씀하시며 내게 맹세하여 이르시기를 이 땅을 네 씨에게 주리라 하셨으니 그가 그 사자를 네 앞서 보내실지라 네가 거기서 내 아들을 위하여 아내를 택할지니라	The Lord God of heaven, which took me from my father’s house, and from the land of my kindred, and which spake unto me, and that sware unto me, saying, Unto thy seed will I give this land; he shall send his angel before thee, and thou shalt take a wife unto my son from thence.	The LORD, the God of heaven, who brought me from my father’s house and my native land, who spoke to me and promised me on oath, saying, ‘To your offspring I will give this land’—He will send His angel before you so that you can take a wife for my son from there.
GEN	24	8	만일 여자가 너를 좇아 오고자 아니하면 나의 이 맹세가 너와 상관이 없나니 오직 내 아들을 데리고 그리로 가지 말지니라	And if the woman will not be willing to follow thee, then thou shalt be clear from this my oath: only bring not my son thither again.	And if the woman is unwilling to follow you, then you are released from this oath of mine. Only do not take my son back there.”
GEN	24	9	종이 이에 주인 아브라함의 환도뼈 아래 손을 넣고 이 일에 대하여 그에게 맹세하였더라	And the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master, and sware to him concerning that matter.	So the servant placed his hand under the thigh of his master Abraham and swore an oath to him concerning this matter.
GEN	24	10	이에 종이 그 주인의 약대 중 열 필을 취하고 떠났는데 곧 그 주인의 모든 좋은 것을 가지고 떠나 메소보다미아로 가서 나홀의 성에 이르러	And the servant took ten camels of the camels of his master, and departed; for all the goods of his master were in his hand: and he arose, and went to Mesopotamia, unto the city of Nahor.	Then the servant took ten of his master’s camels and departed with all manner of good things from his master in hand. And he set out for Nahor’s hometown in Aram-naharaim.
GEN	24	11	그 약대를 성 밖 우물 곁에 꿇렸으니 저녁때라 여인들이 물을 길러 나올 때이었더라	And he made his camels to kneel down without the city by a well of water at the time of the evening, even the time that women go out to draw water.	As evening approached, he made the camels kneel down near the well outside the town at the time when the women went out to draw water.
GEN	24	12	그가 가로되 우리 주인 아브라함의 하나님 여호와여 원컨대 오늘날 나로 순적히 만나게 하사 나의 주인 아브라함에게 은혜를 베푸시옵소서	And he said, O Lord God of my master Abraham, I pray thee, send me good speed this day, and shew kindness unto my master Abraham.	“O LORD, God of my master Abraham,” he prayed, “please grant me success today, and show kindness to my master Abraham.
GEN	24	13	성 중 사람의 딸들이 물 길러 나오겠사오니 내가 우물 곁에 섰다가	Behold, I stand here by the well of water; and the daughters of the men of the city come out to draw water:	Here I am, standing beside the spring, and the daughters of the townspeople are coming out to draw water.
GEN	24	14	한 소녀에게 이르기를 청컨대 너는 물 항아리를 기울여 나로 마시게 하라 하리니 그의 대답이 마시라 내가 당신의 약대에게도 마시우리라 하면 그는 주께서 주의 종 이삭을 위하여 정하신 자라 이로 인하여 주께서 나의 주인에게 은혜 베푸심을 내가 알겠나이다	And let it come to pass, that the damsel to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink; and she shall say, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also: let the same be she that thou hast appointed for thy servant Isaac; and thereby shall I know that thou hast shewed kindness unto my master.	Now may it happen that the girl to whom I say, ‘Please let down your jar that I may drink,’ and who responds, ‘Drink, and I will water your camels as well’—let her be the one You have appointed for Your servant Isaac. By this I will know that You have shown kindness to my master.”
GEN	24	15	말을 마치지 못하여서 리브가가 물 항아리를 어깨에 메고 나오니 그는 아브라함의 동생 나홀의 아내 밀가의 아들 브두엘의 소생이라	And it came to pass, before he had done speaking, that, behold, Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel, son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham’s brother, with her pitcher upon her shoulder.	Before the servant had finished praying, Rebekah came out with her jar on her shoulder. She was the daughter of Bethuel son of Milcah, the wife of Abraham’s brother Nahor.
GEN	24	16	그 소녀는 보기에 심히 아리땁고 지금까지 남자가 가까이 하지아니한 처녀더라 그가 우물에 내려가서 물을 그 물 항아리에 채워 가지고 올라오는지라	And the damsel was very fair to look upon, a virgin, neither had any man known her: and she went down to the well, and filled her pitcher, and came up.	Now the girl was very beautiful, a virgin who had not had relations with any man. She went down to the spring, filled her jar, and came up again.
GEN	24	17	종이 마주 달려가서 가로되 청컨대 네 물 항아리의 물을 내게 조금 마시우라	And the servant ran to meet her, and said, Let me, I pray thee, drink a little water of thy pitcher.	So the servant ran to meet her and said, “Please let me have a little water from your jar.”
GEN	24	18	그가 가로되 주여 마시소서 하며 급히 그 물 항아리를 손에 내려 마시게 하고	And she said, Drink, my lord: and she hasted, and let down her pitcher upon her hand, and gave him drink.	“Drink, my lord,” she replied, and she quickly lowered her jar to her hands and gave him a drink.
GEN	24	19	마시우기를 다하고 가로되 당신의 약대도 위하여 물을 길어 그것들로 배불리 마시게 하리이다 하고	And when she had done giving him drink, she said, I will draw water for thy camels also, until they have done drinking.	After she had given him a drink, she said, “I will also draw water for your camels, until they have had enough to drink.”
GEN	24	20	급히 물 항아리의 물을 구유에 붓고 다시 길으려고 우물로 달려가서 모든 약대를 위하여 긷는지라	And she hasted, and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran again unto the well to draw water, and drew for all his camels.	And she quickly emptied her jar into the trough and ran back to the well to draw water, until she had drawn water for all his camels.
GEN	24	21	그 사람이 그를 묵묵히 주목하며 여호와께서 과연 평탄한 길을 주신 여부를 알고자 하더니	And the man wondering at her held his peace, to wit whether the Lord had made his journey prosperous or not.	Meanwhile, the man watched her silently to see whether or not the LORD had made his journey a success.
GEN	24	22	약대가 마시기를 다하매 그가 반 세겔중 금고리 한개와 열 세겔 중 금 손목고리 한 쌍을 그에게 주며	And it came to pass, as the camels had done drinking, that the man took a golden earring of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold;	And after the camels had finished drinking, he took out a gold ring weighing a beka, and two gold bracelets for her wrists weighing ten shekels.
GEN	24	23	가로되 네가 뉘 딸이냐 청컨대 내게 고하라 네 부친의 집에 우리 유숙할 곳이 있느냐	And said, Whose daughter art thou? tell me, I pray thee: is there room in thy father’s house for us to lodge in?	“Whose daughter are you?” he asked. “Please tell me, is there room in your father’s house for us to spend the night?”
GEN	24	24	그 여자가 그에게 이르되 나는 밀가가 나홀에게 낳은 아들 브두엘의 딸이니이다	And she said unto him, I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, which she bare unto Nahor.	She replied, “I am the daughter of Bethuel, the son that Milcah bore to Nahor.”
GEN	24	25	또 가로되 우리에게 짚과 보리가 족하며 유숙할 곳도 있나이다	She said moreover unto him, We have both straw and provender enough, and room to lodge in.	Then she added, “We have plenty of straw and feed, as well as a place for you to spend the night.”
GEN	24	26	이에 그 사람이 머리를 숙여 여호와께 경배하고	And the man bowed down his head, and worshipped the Lord.	Then the man bowed down and worshiped the LORD,
GEN	24	27	가로되 나의 주인 아브라함의 하나님 여호와를 찬송하나이다 나의 주인에게 주의 인자와 성실을 끊이지 아니하셨사오며 여호와께서 길에서 나를 인도하사 내 주인의 동생집에 이르게 하셨나이다 하니라	And he said, Blessed be the Lord God of my master Abraham, who hath not left destitute my master of his mercy and his truth: I being in the way, the Lord led me to the house of my master’s brethren.	saying, “Blessed be the LORD, the God of my master Abraham, who has not withheld His kindness and faithfulness from my master. As for me, the LORD has led me on the journey to the house of my master’s relatives.”
GEN	24	28	소녀가 달려가서 이 일을 어미 집에 고하였더니	And the damsel ran, and told them of her mother’s house these things.	The girl ran and told her mother’s household about these things.
GEN	24	29	리브가에게 오라비가 있어 이름은 라반이라 그가 우물로 달려가 그 사람에게 이르니	And Rebekah had a brother, and his name was Laban: and Laban ran out unto the man, unto the well.	Now Rebekah had a brother named Laban, and he rushed out to the man at the spring.
GEN	24	30	그가 그 누이의 고리와 그 손의 손목고리를 보고 또 그 누이 리브가가 그 사람이 자기에게 이같이 말하더라 함을 듣고 그 사람에게로 나아감이라 때에 그가 우물가 약대 곁에 섰더라	And it came to pass, when he saw the earring and bracelets upon his sister’s hands, and when he heard the words of Rebekah his sister, saying, Thus spake the man unto me; that he came unto the man; and, behold, he stood by the camels at the well.	As soon as he saw the ring, and the bracelets on his sister’s wrists, and heard Rebekah’s words, “The man said this to me,” he went and found the man standing by the camels near the spring.
GEN	24	31	라반이 가로되 여호와께 복을 받은 자여 들어오소서 어찌 밖에 섰나이까 내가 방과 약대의 처소를 예비하였나이다	And he said, Come in, thou blessed of the Lord; wherefore standest thou without? for I have prepared the house, and room for the camels.	“Come, you who are blessed by the LORD,” said Laban. “Why are you standing out here? I have prepared the house and a place for the camels.”
GEN	24	32	그 사람이 집으로 들어가매 라반이 약대의 짐을 부리고 짚과 보리를 약대에게 주고 그 사람의 발과 그 종자의 발 씻을 물을 주고	And the man came into the house: and he ungirded his camels, and gave straw and provender for the camels, and water to wash his feet, and the men’s feet that were with him.	So the man came to the house, and the camels were unloaded. Straw and feed were brought to the camels, and water to wash his feet and the feet of his companions.
GEN	24	33	그 앞에 식물을 베푸니 그 사람이 가로되 내가 내 일을 진술하기 전에는 먹지 아니하겠나이다 라반이 가로되 말하소서	And there was set meat before him to eat: but he said, I will not eat, until I have told mine errand. And he said, Speak on.	Then a meal was set before the man, but he said, “I will not eat until I have told you what I came to say.” So Laban said, “Please speak.”
GEN	24	34	그가 가로되 나는 아브라함의 종이니이다	And he said, I am Abraham’s servant.	“I am Abraham’s servant,” he replied.
GEN	24	35	여호와께서 나의 주인에게 크게 복을 주어 창성케 하시되 우양과 은금과 노비와 약대와 나귀를 그에게 주셨고	And the Lord hath blessed my master greatly; and he is become great: and he hath given him flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold, and menservants, and maidservants, and camels, and asses.	“The LORD has greatly blessed my master, and he has become rich. He has given him sheep and cattle, silver and gold, menservants and maidservants, camels and donkeys.
GEN	24	36	나의 주인의 부인 사라가 노년에 나의 주인에게 아들을 낳으매 주인이 그 모든 소유를 그 아들에게 주었나이다	And Sarah my master’s wife bare a son to my master when she was old: and unto him hath he given all that he hath.	My master’s wife Sarah has borne him a son in her old age, and my master has given him everything he owns.
GEN	24	37	나의 주인이 나로 맹세하게 하여 가로되 너는 내 아들을 위하여 나사는 땅 가나안 족속의 딸 중에서 아내를 택하지 말고	And my master made me swear, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife to my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, in whose land I dwell:	My master made me swear an oath and said, ‘You shall not take a wife for my son from the daughters of the Canaanites in whose land I dwell,
GEN	24	38	내 아비 집 내 족속에게로 가서 내 아들을 위하여 아내를 택하라 하시기로	But thou shalt go unto my father’s house, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son.	but you shall go to my father’s house and to my kindred to take a wife for my son.’
GEN	24	39	내가 내 주인에게 말씀하되 혹 여자가 나를 좇지 아니하면 어찌하리이까 한즉	And I said unto my master, Peradventure the woman will not follow me.	Then I asked my master, ‘What if the woman will not come back with me?’
GEN	24	40	주인이 내게 이르되 나의 섬기는 여호와께서 그 사자를 너와 함께 보내어 네게 평탄한 길을 주시리니 너는 내 족속 중 내 아비 집에서 내 아들을 위하여 아내를 택할 것이니라	And he said unto me, The Lord, before whom I walk, will send his angel with thee, and prosper thy way; and thou shalt take a wife for my son of my kindred, and of my father’s house:	And he told me, ‘The LORD, before whom I have walked, will send His angel with you and make your journey a success, so that you may take a wife for my son from my kindred and from my father’s house.
GEN	24	41	네가 내 족속에게 이를 때에는 네가 내 맹세와 상관이 없으리라 설혹 그들이 네게 주지 아니할지라도 네가 내 맹세와 상관이 없으리라 하시기로	Then shalt thou be clear from this my oath, when thou comest to my kindred; and if they give not thee one, thou shalt be clear from my oath.	And when you go to my kindred, if they refuse to give her to you, then you will be released from my oath.’
GEN	24	42	내가 오늘 우물에 이르러 말씀하기를 나의 주인 아브라함의 하나님 여호와여 만일 나의 행하는 길에 형통함을 주실진대	And I came this day unto the well, and said, O Lord God of my master Abraham, if now thou do prosper my way which I go:	So when I came to the spring today, I prayed: O LORD, God of my master Abraham, if only You would make my journey a success!
GEN	24	43	내가 이 우물 곁에 섰다가 청년 여자가 물을 길러 오거든 내가 그에게 청하기를 너는 물 항아리의 물을 내게 조금 마시우라 하여	Behold, I stand by the well of water; and it shall come to pass, that when the virgin cometh forth to draw water, and I say to her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water of thy pitcher to drink;	Here I am, standing beside this spring. Now if a maiden comes out to draw water and I say to her, ‘Please let me drink a little water from your jar,’
GEN	24	44	그의 대답이 당신은 마시라 내가 또 당신의 약대를 위하여도 길으리라 하면 그 여자는 여호와께서 나의 주인의 아들을 위하여 정하여 주신 자가 되리이다 하며	And she say to me, Both drink thou, and I will also draw for thy camels: let the same be the woman whom the Lord hath appointed out for my master’s son.	and she replies, ‘Drink, and I will draw water for your camels as well,’ may she be the woman the LORD has appointed for my master’s son.
GEN	24	45	내가 묵도하기를 마치지 못하여 리브가가 물 항아리를 어깨에 메고 나와서 우물로 내려와 긷기로 내가 그에게 이르기를 청컨대 내게 마시우라 한즉	And before I had done speaking in mine heart, behold, Rebekah came forth with her pitcher on her shoulder; and she went down unto the well, and drew water: and I said unto her, Let me drink, I pray thee.	And before I had finished praying in my heart, there was Rebekah coming out with her jar on her shoulder, and she went down to the spring and drew water. So I said to her, ‘Please give me a drink.’
GEN	24	46	그가 급히 물 항아리를 어깨에서 내리며 가로되 마시라 내가 당신의 약대에게도 마시우리라 하기로 내가 마시매 그가 또 약대에게도 마시운지라	And she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder, and said, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also: so I drank, and she made the camels drink also.	She quickly lowered her jar from her shoulder and said, ‘Drink, and I will water your camels as well.’ So I drank, and she also watered the camels.
GEN	24	47	내가 그에게 묻기를 네가 뉘 딸이뇨 한즉 가로되 밀가가 나홀에게 낳은 브두엘의 딸이라 하기로 내가 고리를 그 코에 꿰고 손목고리를 그 손에 끼우고	And I asked her, and said, Whose daughter art thou? And she said, The daughter of Bethuel, Nahor’s son, whom Milcah bare unto him: and I put the earring upon her face, and the bracelets upon her hands.	Then I asked her, ‘Whose daughter are you?’ She replied, ‘The daughter of Bethuel son of Nahor, whom Milcah bore to him.’ So I put the ring on her nose and the bracelets on her wrists.
GEN	24	48	나의 주인 아브라함의 하나님 여호와께서 나를 바른 길로 인도하사 나의 주인의 동생의 딸을 그 아들을 위하여 택하게 하셨으므로 내가 머리를 숙여 그에게 경배하고 찬송하였나이다	And I bowed down my head, and worshipped the Lord, and blessed the Lord God of my master Abraham, which had led me in the right way to take my master’s brother’s daughter unto his son.	Then I bowed down and worshiped the LORD; and I blessed the LORD, the God of my master Abraham, who led me on the right road to take the granddaughter of my master’s brother for his son.
GEN	24	49	이제 당신들이 인자와 진실로 나의 주인을 대접하려거든 내게 고하시고 그렇지 않을지라도 내게 고하여 나로 좌우간 행하게 하소서	And now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell me: and if not, tell me; that I may turn to the right hand, or to the left.	Now if you will show kindness and faithfulness to my master, tell me; but if not, let me know, so that I may go elsewhere.”
GEN	24	50	라반과 브두엘이 대답하여 가로되 이 일이 여호와께로 말미암았으니 우리는 가부를 말할 수 없노라	Then Laban and Bethuel answered and said, The thing proceedeth from the Lord: we cannot speak unto thee bad or good.	Laban and Bethuel answered, “This is from the LORD; we have no choice in the matter.
GEN	24	51	리브가가 그대 앞에 있으니 데리고 가서 여호와의 명대로 그로 그대의 주인의 아들의 아내가 되게 하라	Behold, Rebekah is before thee, take her, and go, and let her be thy master’s son’s wife, as the Lord hath spoken.	Rebekah is here before you. Take her and go, and let her become the wife of your master’s son, just as the LORD has decreed.”
GEN	24	52	아브라함의 종이 그들의 말을 듣고 땅에 엎드리어 여호와께 절하고	And it came to pass, that, when Abraham’s servant heard their words, he worshipped the Lord, bowing himself to the earth.	When Abraham’s servant heard their words, he bowed down to the ground before the LORD.
GEN	24	53	은금 패물과 의복을 꺼내어 리브가에게 주고 그 오라비와 어미에게도 보물을 주니라	And the servant brought forth jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment, and gave them to Rebekah: he gave also to her brother and to her mother precious things.	Then he brought out jewels of silver and gold, and articles of clothing, and he gave them to Rebekah. He also gave precious gifts to her brother and her mother.
GEN	24	54	이에 그들 곧 종과 종자들이 먹고 마시고 유숙하고 아침에 일어나서 그가 가로되 나를 보내어 내 주인에게로 돌아가게 하소서	And they did eat and drink, he and the men that were with him, and tarried all night; and they rose up in the morning, and he said, Send me away unto my master.	Then he and the men with him ate and drank and spent the night there. When they got up the next morning, he said, “Send me on my way to my master.”
GEN	24	55	리브가의 오라비와 그 어미가 가로되 소녀로 며칠을 적어도 열흘을 우리와 함께 있게 하라 그 후에 그가 갈 것이니라	And her brother and her mother said, Let the damsel abide with us a few days, at the least ten; after that she shall go.	But her brother and mother said, “Let the girl remain with us ten days or so. After that, she may go.”
GEN	24	56	그 사람이 그들에게 이르되 나를 만류치 마소서 여호와께서 내게 형통한 길을 주셨으니 나를 보내어 내 주인에게로 돌아가게 하소서	And he said unto them, Hinder me not, seeing the Lord hath prospered my way; send me away that I may go to my master.	But he replied, “Do not delay me, since the LORD has made my journey a success. Send me on my way so that I may go to my master.”
GEN	24	57	그들이 가로되 우리가 소녀를 불러 그에게 물으리라 하고	And they said, We will call the damsel, and enquire at her mouth.	So they said, “We will call the girl and ask her opinion.”
GEN	24	58	리브가를 불러 그에게 이르되 네가 이 사람과 함께 가려느냐 그가 대답하되 가겠나이다	And they called Rebekah, and said unto her, Wilt thou go with this man? And she said, I will go.	They called Rebekah and asked her, “Will you go with this man?” “I will go,” she replied.
GEN	24	59	그들이 그 누이 리브가와 그의 유모와 아브라함의 종과 종자들을 보내며	And they sent away Rebekah their sister, and her nurse, and Abraham’s servant, and his men.	So they sent their sister Rebekah on her way, along with her nurse and Abraham’s servant and his men.
GEN	24	60	리브가에게 축복하여 가로되 우리 누이여 너는 천만인의 어미가 될지어다 네 씨로 그 원수의 성문을 얻게 할지어다	And they blessed Rebekah, and said unto her, Thou art our sister, be thou the mother of thousands of millions, and let thy seed possess the gate of those which hate them.	And they blessed Rebekah and said to her, “Our sister, may you become the mother of thousands upon thousands. May your offspring possess the gates of their enemies.”
GEN	24	61	리브가가 일어나 비자와 함께 약대를 타고 그 사람을 따라가니 종이 리브가를 데리고 가니라	And Rebekah arose, and her damsels, and they rode upon the camels, and followed the man: and the servant took Rebekah, and went his way.	Then Rebekah and her servant girls got ready, mounted the camels, and followed the man. So the servant took Rebekah and left.
GEN	24	62	때에 이삭이 브엘라해로이에서 왔으니 그가 남방에 거하였었음이라	And Isaac came from the way of the well Lahai–roi; for he dwelt in the south country.	Now Isaac had just returned from Beer-lahai-roi, for he was living in the Negev.
GEN	24	63	이삭이 저물 때에 들에 나가 묵상하다가 눈을 들어 보매 약대들이 오더라	And Isaac went out to meditate in the field at the eventide: and he lifted up his eyes, and saw, and, behold, the camels were coming.	Early in the evening, Isaac went out to the field to meditate, and looking up, he saw the camels approaching.
GEN	24	64	리브가가 눈을 들어 이삭을 바라보고 약대에서 내려	And Rebekah lifted up her eyes, and when she saw Isaac, she lighted off the camel.	And when Rebekah looked up and saw Isaac, she got down from her camel
GEN	24	65	종에게 말하되 들에서 배회하다가 우리에게로 마주 오는 자가 누구뇨 종이 가로되 이는 내 주인이니이다 리브가가 면박을 취하여 스스로 가리우더라	For she had said unto the servant, What man is this that walketh in the field to meet us? And the servant had said, It is my master: therefore she took a vail, and covered herself.	and asked the servant, “Who is that man in the field coming to meet us?” “It is my master,” the servant answered. So she took her veil and covered herself.
GEN	24	66	종이 그 행한 일을 다 이삭에게 고하매	And the servant told Isaac all things that he had done.	Then the servant told Isaac all that he had done.
GEN	24	67	이삭이 리브가를 인도하여 모친 사라의 장막으로 들이고 그를 취하여 아내를 삼고 사랑하였으니 이삭이 모친 상사 후에 위로를 얻었더라	And Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah’s tent, and took Rebekah, and she became his wife; and he loved her: and Isaac was comforted after his mother’s death.	And Isaac brought her into the tent of his mother Sarah and took Rebekah as his wife. And Isaac loved her and was comforted after his mother’s death.
GEN	25	1	아브라함이 후처를 취하였으니 그 이름은 그두라라	Then again Abraham took a wife, and her name was Keturah.	Now Abraham had taken another wife, named Keturah,
GEN	25	2	그가 시므란과 욕산과 므단과 미디안과 이스박과 수아를 낳았고	And she bare him Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah.	and she bore him Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak, and Shuah.
GEN	25	3	욕산과 스바와 드단을 낳았으며 드단의 자손은 앗수르 족속과 르두시 족속과 르움미 족속이며	And Jokshan begat Sheba, and Dedan. And the sons of Dedan were Asshurim, and Letushim, and Leummim.	Jokshan was the father of Sheba and Dedan. And the sons of Dedan were the Asshurites, the Letushites, and the Leummites.
GEN	25	4	미디안의 아들은 에바와 에벨과 하녹과 아비다와 엘다아니 다 그두라의 자손이었더라	And the sons of Midian; Ephah, and Epher, and Hanoch, and Abida, and Eldaah. All these were the children of Keturah.	The sons of Midian were Ephah, Epher, Hanoch, Abida, and Eldaah. All these were descendants of Keturah.
GEN	25	5	아브라함이 이삭에게 자기 모든 소유를 주었고	And Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac.	Abraham left everything he owned to Isaac.
GEN	25	6	자기 서자들에게도 재물을 주어 자기 생전에 그들로 자기 아들 이삭을 떠나 동방 곧 동국으로 가게 하였더라	But unto the sons of the concubines, which Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts, and sent them away from Isaac his son, while he yet lived, eastward, unto the east country.	But while he was still alive, Abraham gave gifts to the sons of his concubines and sent them away from his son Isaac to the land of the east.
GEN	25	7	아브라함의 향년이 일백칠십오 세라	And these are the days of the years of Abraham’s life which he lived, an hundred threescore and fifteen years.	Abraham lived a total of 175 years.
GEN	25	8	그가 수가 높고 나이 많아 기운이 진하여 죽어 자기 열조에게로 돌아가매	Then Abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old age, an old man, and full of years; and was gathered to his people.	And at a ripe old age he breathed his last and died, old and contented, and was gathered to his people.
GEN	25	9	그 아들 이삭과 이스마엘이 그를 마므레 앞 헷 족속 소할의 아들 에브론의 밭에 있는 막벨라 굴에 장사 하였으니	And his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron the son of Zohar the Hittite, which is before Mamre;	His sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah near Mamre, in the field of Ephron son of Zohar the Hittite.
GEN	25	10	이것은 아브라함이 헷 족속에게서 산 밭이라 아브라함과 그 아내 사라가 거기 장사되니라	The field which Abraham purchased of the sons of Heth: there was Abraham buried, and Sarah his wife.	This was the field that Abraham had bought from the Hittites. Abraham was buried there with his wife Sarah.
GEN	25	11	아브라함이 죽은 후에 하나님이 그 아들 이삭에게 복을 주셨고 이삭은 브엘라해로이 근처에 거하였더라	And it came to pass after the death of Abraham, that God blessed his son Isaac; and Isaac dwelt by the well Lahai–roi.	After Abraham’s death, God blessed his son Isaac, who lived near Beer-lahai-roi.
GEN	25	12	사라의 여종 애굽인 하갈이 아브라함에게 낳은 아들 이스마엘의 후예는 이러하고	Now these are the generations of Ishmael, Abraham’s son, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah’s handmaid, bare unto Abraham:	This is the account of Abraham’s son Ishmael, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah’s maidservant, bore to Abraham.
GEN	25	13	이스마엘의 아들들의 이름은 그 이름과 그 세대대로 이와 같으니라 이스마엘의 장자는 느바욧이요 그 다음은 게달과 앗브엘과 밉삼과	And these are the names of the sons of Ishmael, by their names, according to their generations: the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebajoth; and Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam,	These are the names of the sons of Ishmael in the order of their birth: Nebaioth the firstborn of Ishmael, then Kedar, Adbeel, Mibsam,
GEN	25	14	미스마와 두마와 맛사와	And Mishma, and Dumah, and Massa,	Mishma, Dumah, Massa,
GEN	25	15	하닷과 데마와 여둘과 나비스와 게드마니	Hadar, and Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah:	Hadad, Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah.
GEN	25	16	이들은 이스마엘의 아들들이요 그 촌과 부락대로 된 이름이며 그 족속대로는 십이 방백이었더라	These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names, by their towns, and by their castles; twelve princes according to their nations.	These were the sons of Ishmael, and these were their names by their villages and encampments—twelve princes of their tribes.
GEN	25	17	이스마엘은 향년이 일백삼십칠 세에 기운이 진하여 죽어 자기 열조에게로 돌아갔고	And these are the years of the life of Ishmael, an hundred and thirty and seven years: and he gave up the ghost and died; and was gathered unto his people.	Ishmael lived a total of 137 years. Then he breathed his last and died, and was gathered to his people.
GEN	25	18	그 자손들은 하윌라에서부터 앗수르로 통하는 애굽 앞 술까지 이르러 그 모든 형제의 맞은편에 거하였더라	And they dwelt from Havilah unto Shur, that is before Egypt, as thou goest toward Assyria: and he died in the presence of all his brethren.	Ishmael’s descendants settled from Havilah to Shur, which is near the border of Egypt as you go toward Asshur. And they lived in hostility toward all their brothers.
GEN	25	19	아브라함의 아들 이삭의 후예는 이러하니라 아브라함이 이삭을 낳았고	And these are the generations of Isaac, Abraham’s son: Abraham begat Isaac:	This is the account of Abraham’s son Isaac. Abraham became the father of Isaac,
GEN	25	20	이삭은 사십 세에 리브가를 취하여 아내를 삼았으니 리브가는 밧단 아람의 아람 족속 중 브두엘의 딸이요 아람 족속 중 라반의 누이였더라	And Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah to wife, the daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of Padan–aram, the sister to Laban the Syrian.	and Isaac was forty years old when he married Rebekah, the daughter of Bethuel the Aramean from Paddan-aram and the sister of Laban the Aramean.
GEN	25	21	이삭이 그 아내가 잉태하지 못하므로 그를 위하여 여호와께 간구하매 여호와께서 그 간구를 들으셨으므로 그 아내 리브가가 잉태하였더니	And Isaac intreated the Lord for his wife, because she was barren: and the Lord was intreated of him, and Rebekah his wife conceived.	Later, Isaac prayed to the LORD on behalf of his wife, because she was barren. And the LORD heard his prayer, and his wife Rebekah conceived.
GEN	25	22	아이들이 그의 태 속에서 서로 싸우는지라 그가 가로되 이같으면 내가 어찌할꼬 하고 가서 여호와께 묻자온대	And the children struggled together within her; and she said, If it be so, why am I thus? And she went to enquire of the Lord.	But the children inside her struggled with each other, and she said, “Why is this happening to me?” So Rebekah went to inquire of the LORD,
GEN	25	23	여호와께서 그에게 이르시되 두 국민이 네 태중에 있구나 두 민족이 네 복중에서부터 나누이리라 이 족속이 저 족속보다 강하겠고 큰 자는 어린 자를 섬기리라 하셨더라	And the Lord said unto her, Two nations are in thy womb, and two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels; and the one people shall be stronger than the other people; and the elder shall serve the younger.	and He declared to her: “Two nations are in your womb, and two peoples from within you will be separated; one people will be stronger than the other, and the older will serve the younger.”
GEN	25	24	그 해산 기한이 찬즉 태에 쌍동이가 있었는데	And when her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold, there were twins in her womb.	When her time came to give birth, there were indeed twins in her womb.
GEN	25	25	먼저 나온 자는 붉고 전신이 갖옷 같아서 이름을 에서라 하였고	And the first came out red, all over like an hairy garment; and they called his name Esau.	The first one came out red, covered with hair like a fur coat; so they named him Esau.
GEN	25	26	후에 나온 아우는 손으로 에서의 발꿈치를 잡았으므로 그 이름을 야곱이라 하였으며 리브가가 그들을 낳을 때에 이삭이 육십 세이었더라	And after that came his brother out, and his hand took hold on Esau’s heel; and his name was called Jacob: and Isaac was threescore years old when she bare them.	After this, his brother came out grasping Esau’s heel; so he was named Jacob. And Isaac was sixty years old when the twins were born.
GEN	25	27	그 아이들이 장성하매 에서는 익숙한 사냥군인고로 들사람이 되고 야곱은 종용한 사람인고로 장막에 거하니	And the boys grew: and Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the field; and Jacob was a plain man, dwelling in tents.	When the boys grew up, Esau became a skillful hunter, a man of the field, while Jacob was a quiet man who stayed at home.
GEN	25	28	이삭은 에서의 사냥한 고기를 좋아하므로 그를 사랑하고 리브가는 야곱을 사랑하였더라	And Isaac loved Esau, because he did eat of his venison: but Rebekah loved Jacob.	Because Isaac had a taste for wild game, he loved Esau; but Rebekah loved Jacob.
GEN	25	29	야곱이 죽을 쑤었더니 에서가 들에서부터 돌아와서 심히 곤비하여	And Jacob sod pottage: and Esau came from the field, and he was faint:	One day, while Jacob was cooking some stew, Esau came in from the field and was famished.
GEN	25	30	야곱에게 이르되 내가 곤비하니 그 붉은 것을 나로 먹게 하라 한지라 그러므로 에서의 별명은 에돔이더라	And Esau said to Jacob, Feed me, I pray thee, with that same red pottage; for I am faint: therefore was his name called Edom.	He said to Jacob, “Let me eat some of that red stew, for I am famished.” (That is why he was also called Edom.)
GEN	25	31	야곱이 가로되 형의 장자의 명분을 오늘날 내게 팔라	And Jacob said, Sell me this day thy birthright.	“First sell me your birthright,” Jacob replied.
GEN	25	32	에서가 가로되 내가 죽게 되었으니 이 장자의 명분이 내게 무엇이 유익하리요	And Esau said, Behold, I am at the point to die: and what profit shall this birthright do to me?	“Look,” said Esau, “I am about to die, so what good is a birthright to me?”
GEN	25	33	야곱이 가로되 오늘 내게 맹세하라 에서가 맹세하고 장자의 명분을 야곱에게 판지라	And Jacob said, Swear to me this day; and he sware unto him: and he sold his birthright unto Jacob.	“Swear to me first,” Jacob said. So Esau swore to Jacob and sold him the birthright.
GEN	25	34	야곱이 떡과 팥죽을 에서에게 주매 에서가 먹으며 마시고 일어나서 갔으니 에서가 장자의 명분을 경홀히 여김이었더라	Then Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of lentiles; and he did eat and drink, and rose up, and went his way: thus Esau despised his birthright.	Then Jacob gave some bread and lentil stew to Esau, who ate and drank and then got up and went away. Thus Esau despised his birthright.
GEN	26	1	아브라함 때에 첫 흉년이 들었더니 그 땅에 또 흉년이 들매 이삭이 그랄로 가서 블레셋 왕 아비멜렉에게 이르렀더니	And there was a famine in the land, beside the first famine that was in the days of Abraham. And Isaac went unto Abimelech king of the Philistines unto Gerar.	Now there was another famine in the land, subsequent to the one that had occurred in Abraham’s time. And Isaac went to Abimelech king of the Philistines at Gerar.
GEN	26	2	여호와께서 이삭에게 나타나 가라사대 애굽으로 내려가지 말고 내가 네게 지시하는 땅에 거하라	And the Lord appeared unto him, and said, Go not down into Egypt; dwell in the land which I shall tell thee of:	The LORD appeared to Isaac and said, “Do not go down to Egypt. Settle in the land where I tell you.
GEN	26	3	이 땅에 유하면 내가 너와 함께 있어 네게 복을 주고 내가 이 모든 땅을 너와 네 자손에게 주리라 내가 네 아비 아브라함에게 맹세한 것을 이루어	Sojourn in this land, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee; for unto thee, and unto thy seed, I will give all these countries, and I will perform the oath which I sware unto Abraham thy father;	Stay in this land as a foreigner, and I will be with you and bless you. For I will give all these lands to you and your offspring, and I will confirm the oath that I swore to your father Abraham.
GEN	26	4	네 자손을 하늘의 별과 같이 번성케 하며 이 모든 땅을 네 자손에게 주리니 네 자손을 인하여 천하 만민이 복을 받으리라	And I will make thy seed to multiply as the stars of heaven, and will give unto thy seed all these countries; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed;	I will make your descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky, and I will give them all these lands, and through your offspring all nations of the earth will be blessed,
GEN	26	5	이는 아브라함이 내 말을 순종하고 내 명령과 내 계명과 내 율례와 내 법도를 지켰음이니라 하시니라	Because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws.	because Abraham listened to My voice and kept My charge, My commandments, My statutes, and My laws.”
GEN	26	6	이삭이 그랄에 거하였더니	And Isaac dwelt in Gerar:	So Isaac settled in Gerar.
GEN	26	7	그곳 사람들이 그 아내를 물으매 그가 말하기를 그는 나의 누이라 하였으니 리브가는 보기에 아리따우므로 그곳 백성이 리브가로 인하여 자기를 죽일까 하여 그는 나의 아내라 하기를 두려워함이었더라	And the men of the place asked him of his wife; and he said, She is my sister: for he feared to say, She is my wife; lest, said he, the men of the place should kill me for Rebekah; because she was fair to look upon.	But when the men of that place asked about his wife, he said, “She is my sister.” For he was afraid to say, “She is my wife,” since he thought to himself, “The men of this place will kill me on account of Rebekah, because she is so beautiful.”
GEN	26	8	이삭이 거기 오래 거하였더니 이삭이 그 아내 리브가를 껴안은 것을 블레셋 왕 아비멜렉이 창으로 내다본지라	And it came to pass, when he had been there a long time, that Abimelech king of the Philistines looked out at a window, and saw, and, behold, Isaac was sporting with Rebekah his wife.	When Isaac had been there a long time, Abimelech king of the Philistines looked down from the window and was surprised to see Isaac caressing his wife Rebekah.
GEN	26	9	이에 아비멜렉이 이삭을 불러 이르되 그가 정녕 네 아내여늘 어찌 네 누이라 하였느냐 이삭이 그에게 대답하되 내 생각에 그를 인하여 내가 죽게 될까 두려워하였음이로라	And Abimelech called Isaac, and said, Behold, of a surety she is thy wife: and how saidst thou, She is my sister? And Isaac said unto him, Because I said, Lest I die for her.	Abimelech sent for Isaac and said, “So she is really your wife! How could you say, ‘She is my sister’?” Isaac replied, “Because I thought I might die on account of her.”
GEN	26	10	아비멜렉이 가로되 네가 어찌 우리에게 이렇게 행하였느냐 백성중 하나가 네 아내와 동침하기 쉬웠을뻔 하였은즉 네가 죄를 우리에게 입혔으리라	And Abimelech said, What is this thou hast done unto us? one of the people might lightly have lien with thy wife, and thou shouldest have brought guiltiness upon us.	“What is this you have done to us?” asked Abimelech. “One of the people could easily have slept with your wife, and you would have brought guilt upon us.”
GEN	26	11	아비멜렉이 이에 모든 백성에게 명하여 가로되 이 사람이나 그 아내에게 범하는 자는 죽이리라 하였더라	And Abimelech charged all his people, saying, He that toucheth this man or his wife shall surely be put to death.	So Abimelech warned all the people, saying, “Whoever harms this man or his wife will surely be put to death.”
GEN	26	12	이삭이 그 땅에서 농사하여 그 해에 백배나 얻었고 여호와께서 복을 주시므로	Then Isaac sowed in that land, and received in the same year an hundredfold: and the Lord blessed him.	Now Isaac sowed seed in the land, and that very year he reaped a hundredfold. And the LORD blessed him,
GEN	26	13	그 사람이 창대하고 왕성하여 마침내 거부가 되어	And the man waxed great, and went forward, and grew until he became very great:	and he became richer and richer, until he was exceedingly wealthy.
GEN	26	14	양과 소가 떼를 이루고 노복이 심히 많으므로 블레셋 사람이 그를 시기하여	For he had possession of flocks, and possession of herds, and great store of servants: and the Philistines envied him.	He owned so many flocks and herds and servants that the Philistines envied him.
GEN	26	15	그 아비 아브라함 때에 그 아비의 종들이 판 모든 우물을 막고 흙으로 메웠더라	For all the wells which his father’s servants had digged in the days of Abraham his father, the Philistines had stopped them, and filled them with earth.	So the Philistines took dirt and stopped up all the wells that his father’s servants had dug in the days of his father Abraham.
GEN	26	16	아비멜렉이 이삭에게 이르되 네가 우리보다 크게 강성한즉 우리를 떠나가라	And Abimelech said unto Isaac, Go from us; for thou art much mightier than we.	Then Abimelech said to Isaac, “Depart from us, for you are much too powerful for us.”
GEN	26	17	이삭이 그곳을 떠나 그랄 골짜기에 장막을 치고 거기 우거하며	And Isaac departed thence, and pitched his tent in the valley of Gerar, and dwelt there.	So Isaac left that place and encamped in the Valley of Gerar and settled there.
GEN	26	18	그 아비 아브라함 때에 팠던 우물들을 다시 팠으니 이는 아브라함 죽은 후에 블레셋 사람이 그 우물들을 메웠음이라 이삭이 그 우물들의 이름을 그 아비의 부르던 이름으로 불렀더라	And Isaac digged again the wells of water, which they had digged in the days of Abraham his father; for the Philistines had stopped them after the death of Abraham: and he called their names after the names by which his father had called them.	Isaac reopened the wells that had been dug in the days of his father Abraham, which the Philistines had stopped up after Abraham died. And he gave these wells the same names his father had given them.
GEN	26	19	이삭의 종들이 골짜기에 파서 샘 근원을 얻었더니	And Isaac’s servants digged in the valley, and found there a well of springing water.	Then Isaac’s servants dug in the valley and found a well of fresh water there.
GEN	26	20	그랄 목자들이 이삭의 목자와 다투어 가로되 이 물은 우리의 것이라 하매 이삭이 그 다툼을 인하여 그 우물 이름을 에섹이라 하였으며	And the herdmen of Gerar did strive with Isaac’s herdmen, saying, The water is ours: and he called the name of the well Esek; because they strove with him.	But the herdsmen of Gerar quarreled with Isaac’s herdsmen and said, “The water is ours!” So he named the well Esek, because they contended with him.
GEN	26	21	또 다른 우물을 팠더니 그들이 또 다투는고로 그 이름을 싯나라 하였으며	And they digged another well, and strove for that also: and he called the name of it Sitnah.	Then they dug another well and quarreled over that one also; so he named it Sitnah.
GEN	26	22	이삭이 거기서 옮겨 다른 우물을 팠더니 그들이 다투지 아니하였으므로 그 이름을 르호봇이라 하여 가로되 이제는 여호와께서 우리의 장소를 넓게 하셨으니 이 땅에서 우리가 번성하리로다 하였더라	And he removed from thence, and digged another well; and for that they strove not: and he called the name of it Rehoboth; and he said, For now the Lord hath made room for us, and we shall be fruitful in the land.	He moved on from there and dug another well, and they did not quarrel over it. He named it Rehoboth and said, “At last the LORD has made room for us, and we will be fruitful in the land.”
GEN	26	23	이삭이 거기서부터 브엘세바로 올라갔더니	And he went up from thence to Beer–sheba.	From there Isaac went up to Beersheba,
GEN	26	24	그 밤에 여호와께서 그에게 나타나 가라사대 나는 네 아비 아브라함의 하나님이니 두려워 말라 내 종 아브라함을 위하여 내가 너와 함께 있어 네게 복을 주어 네 자손으로 번성케 하리라 하신지라	And the Lord appeared unto him the same night, and said, I am the God of Abraham thy father: fear not, for I am with thee, and will bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant Abraham’s sake.	and that night the LORD appeared to him and said, “I am the God of your father Abraham. Do not be afraid, for I am with you. I will bless you and multiply your descendants for the sake of My servant Abraham.”
GEN	26	25	이삭이 그곳에 단을 쌓아 여호와의 이름을 부르고 거기 장막을 쳤더니 그 종들이 거기서도 우물을 팠더라	And he builded an altar there, and called upon the name of the Lord, and pitched his tent there: and there Isaac’s servants digged a well.	So Isaac built an altar there and called on the name of the LORD, and he pitched his tent there. His servants also dug a well there.
GEN	26	26	아비멜렉이 그 친구 아훗삿과 군대장관 비골로 더불어 그랄에서부터 이삭에게로 온지라	Then Abimelech went to him from Gerar, and Ahuzzath one of his friends, and Phichol the chief captain of his army.	Later, Abimelech came to Isaac from Gerar, with Ahuzzath his adviser and Phicol the commander of his army.
GEN	26	27	이삭이 그들에게 이르되 너희가 나를 미워하여 나로 너희를 떠나가게 하였거늘 어찌하여 내게 왔느냐	And Isaac said unto them, Wherefore come ye to me, seeing ye hate me, and have sent me away from you?	“Why have you come to me?” Isaac asked them. “You hated me and sent me away.”
GEN	26	28	그들이 가로되 여호와께서 너와 함께 계심을 우리가 분명히 보았으므로 우리의 사이 곧 우리와 너의 사이에 맹세를 세워 너와 계약을 맺으리라 말하였노라	And they said, We saw certainly that the Lord was with thee: and we said, Let there be now an oath betwixt us, even betwixt us and thee, and let us make a covenant with thee;	“We can plainly see that the LORD has been with you,” they replied. “We recommend that there should now be an oath between us and you. Let us make a covenant with you
GEN	26	29	너는 우리를 해하지 말라 이는 우리가 너를 범하지 아니하고 선한 일만 네게 행하며 너로 평안히 가게 하였음이니라 이제 너는 여호와께 복을 받은 자니라	That thou wilt do us no hurt, as we have not touched thee, and as we have done unto thee nothing but good, and have sent thee away in peace: thou art now the blessed of the Lord.	that you will not harm us, just as we have not harmed you but have done only good to you, sending you on your way in peace. And now you are blessed by the LORD.”
GEN	26	30	이삭이 그들을 위하여 잔치를 베풀매 그들이 먹고 마시고	And he made them a feast, and they did eat and drink.	So Isaac prepared a feast for them, and they ate and drank.
GEN	26	31	아침에 일찍이 일어나 서로 맹세한 후에 이삭이 그들을 보내매 그들이 평안히 갔더라	And they rose up betimes in the morning, and sware one to another: and Isaac sent them away, and they departed from him in peace.	And they got up early the next morning and swore an oath to each other. Then Isaac sent them on their way, and they left him in peace.
GEN	26	32	그 날에 이삭의 종들이 자기들의 판 우물에 대하여 이삭에게 와서 고하여 가로되 우리가 물을 얻었나이다 하매	And it came to pass the same day, that Isaac’s servants came, and told him concerning the well which they had digged, and said unto him, We have found water.	On that same day, Isaac’s servants came and told him about the well they had dug. “We have found water!” they told him.
GEN	26	33	그가 그 이름을 세바라 한지라 그러므로 그 성읍 이름이 오늘까지 브엘세바더라	And he called it Shebah: therefore the name of the city is Beer–sheba unto this day.	So he called it Shibah, and to this day the name of the city is Beersheba.
GEN	26	34	에서가 사십 세에 헷 족속 브에리의 딸 유딧과 헷 족속 엘론의 딸 바스맛을 아내로 취하였더니	And Esau was forty years old when he took to wife Judith the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Bashemath the daughter of Elon the Hittite:	When Esau was forty years old, he took as his wives Judith daughter of Beeri the Hittite and Basemath daughter of Elon the Hittite.
GEN	26	35	그들이 이삭과 리브가의 마음의 근심이 되었더라	Which were a grief of mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah.	And they brought grief to Isaac and Rebekah.
GEN	27	1	이삭이 나이 많아 눈이 어두워 잘 보지 못하더니 맏아들 에서를 불러 가로되 내 아들아 하매 그가 가로되 내가 여기 있나이다 하니	And it came to pass, that when Isaac was old, and his eyes were dim, so that he could not see, he called Esau his eldest son, and said unto him, My son: and he said unto him, Behold, here am I.	When Isaac was old and his eyes were so weak that he could no longer see, he called his older son Esau and said to him, “My son.” “Here I am,” Esau replied.
GEN	27	2	이삭이 가로되 내가 이제 늙어 어느날 죽을는지 알지 못하노니	And he said, Behold now, I am old, I know not the day of my death:	“Look,” said Isaac, “I am now old, and I do not know the day of my death.
GEN	27	3	그런즉 네 기구 곧 전통과 활을 가지고 들에 가서 나를 위하여 사냥하여	Now therefore take, I pray thee, thy weapons, thy quiver and thy bow, and go out to the field, and take me some venison;	Take your weapons—your quiver and bow—and go out into the field to hunt some game for me.
GEN	27	4	나의 즐기는 별미를 만들어 내게로 가져다가 먹게 하여 나로 죽기 전에 내 마음껏 네게 축복하게 하라	And make me savoury meat, such as I love, and bring it to me, that I may eat; that my soul may bless thee before I die.	Then prepare a tasty dish that I love and bring it to me to eat, so that I may bless you before I die.”
GEN	27	5	이삭이 그 아들 에서에게 말할 때에 리브가가 들었더니 에서가 사냥하여 오려고 들로 나가매	And Rebekah heard when Isaac spake to Esau his son. And Esau went to the field to hunt for venison, and to bring it.	Now Rebekah was listening to what Isaac told his son Esau. So when Esau went into the field to hunt game and bring it back,
GEN	27	6	리브가가 그 아들 야곱에게 일러 가로되 네 부친이 네 형 에서에게 말씀하시는 것을 내가 들으니 이르시기를	And Rebekah spake unto Jacob her son, saying, Behold, I heard thy father speak unto Esau thy brother, saying,	Rebekah said to her son Jacob, “Behold, I overheard your father saying to your brother Esau,
GEN	27	7	나를 위하여 사냥하여 가져다가 별미를 만들어 나로 먹게 하여 죽기 전에 여호와 앞에서 네게 축복하게 하라 하셨으니	Bring me venison, and make me savoury meat, that I may eat, and bless thee before the Lord before my death.	‘Bring me some game and prepare me a tasty dish to eat, so that I may bless you in the presence of the LORD before I die.’
GEN	27	8	그런즉 내 아들아 내 말을 좇아 내가 네게 명하는 대로	Now therefore, my son, obey my voice according to that which I command thee.	Now, my son, listen to my voice and do exactly as I tell you.
GEN	27	9	염소떼에 가서 거기서 염소의 좋은 새끼를 내게로 가져오면 내가 그것으로 네 부친을 위하여 그 즐기시는 별미를 만들리니	Go now to the flock, and fetch me from thence two good kids of the goats; and I will make them savoury meat for thy father, such as he loveth:	Go out to the flock and bring me two choice young goats, so that I can make them into a tasty dish for your father—the kind he loves.
GEN	27	10	네가 그것을 가져 네 부친께 드려서 그로 죽으시기 전에 네게 축복하기 위하여 잡수시게 하라	And thou shalt bring it to thy father, that he may eat, and that he may bless thee before his death.	Then take it to your father to eat, so that he may bless you before he dies.”
GEN	27	11	야곱이 그 모친 리브가에게 이르되 내 형 에서는 털사람이요 나는 매끈매끈한 사람인즉	And Jacob said to Rebekah his mother, Behold, Esau my brother is a hairy man, and I am a smooth man:	Jacob answered his mother Rebekah, “Look, my brother Esau is a hairy man, but I am smooth-skinned.
GEN	27	12	아버지께서 나를 만지실진대 내가 아버지께 속이는 자로 뵈일지라 복은 고사하고 저주를 받을까 하나이다	My father peradventure will feel me, and I shall seem to him as a deceiver; and I shall bring a curse upon me, and not a blessing.	What if my father touches me? Then I would be revealed to him as a deceiver, and I would bring upon myself a curse rather than a blessing.”
GEN	27	13	어미가 그에게 이르되 내 아들아 너의 저주는 내게로 돌리리니 내 말만 좇고 가서 가져오라	And his mother said unto him, Upon me be thy curse, my son: only obey my voice, and go fetch me them.	His mother replied, “Your curse be on me, my son. Just obey my voice and go get them for me.”
GEN	27	14	그가 가서 취하여 어미에게로 가져왔더니 그 어미가 그 아비의 즐기는 별미를 만들었더라	And he went, and fetched, and brought them to his mother: and his mother made savoury meat, such as his father loved.	So Jacob went and got two goats and brought them to his mother, who made the tasty food his father loved.
GEN	27	15	리브가가 집 안 자기 처소에 있는 맏아들 에서의 좋은 의복을 취하여 작은 아들 야곱에게 입히고	And Rebekah took goodly raiment of her eldest son Esau, which were with her in the house, and put them upon Jacob her younger son:	And Rebekah took the finest clothes in the house that belonged to her older son Esau, and she put them on her younger son Jacob.
GEN	27	16	또 염소 새끼의 가죽으로 그 손과 목의 매끈매끈한 곳에 꾸미고	And she put the skins of the kids of the goats upon his hands, and upon the smooth of his neck:	She also put the skins of the young goats on his hands and on the smooth part of his neck.
GEN	27	17	그 만든 별미와 떡을 자기 아들 야곱의 손에 주매	And she gave the savoury meat and the bread, which she had prepared, into the hand of her son Jacob.	Then she handed her son Jacob the tasty food and bread she had made.
GEN	27	18	야곱이 아버지에게 나아가서 내 아버지여 하고 부른대 가로되 내가 여기 있노라 내 아들아 네가 누구냐	And he came unto his father, and said, My father: and he said, Here am I; who art thou, my son?	So Jacob went to his father and said, “My father.” “Here I am!” he answered. “Which one are you, my son?”
GEN	27	19	야곱이 아비에게 대답하되 나는 아버지의 맏아들 에서로소이다 아버지께서 내게 명하신 대로 내가 하였사오니 청컨대 일어나 앉아서 내 사냥한 고기를 잡수시고 아버지의 마음껏 내게 축복하소서	And Jacob said unto his father, I am Esau thy firstborn; I have done according as thou badest me: arise, I pray thee, sit and eat of my venison, that thy soul may bless me.	Jacob said to his father, “I am Esau, your firstborn. I have done as you told me. Please sit up and eat some of my game, so that you may bless me.”
GEN	27	20	이삭이 그 아들에게 이르되 내 아들아 네가 어떻게 이같이 속히 잡았느냐 그가 가로되 아버지의 하나님 여호와께서 나로 순적히 만나게 하셨음이니이다	And Isaac said unto his son, How is it that thou hast found it so quickly, my son? And he said, Because the Lord thy God brought it to me.	But Isaac asked his son, “How did you ever find it so quickly, my son?” “Because the LORD your God brought it to me,” he replied.
GEN	27	21	이삭이 야곱에게 이르되 내 아들아 가까이 오라 네가 과연 내 아들 에서인지 아닌지 내가 너를 만지려 하노라	And Isaac said unto Jacob, Come near, I pray thee, that I may feel thee, my son, whether thou be my very son Esau or not.	Then Isaac said to Jacob, “Please come closer so I can touch you, my son. Are you really my son Esau, or not?”
GEN	27	22	야곱이 그 아비 이삭에게 가까이 가니 이삭이 만지며 가로되 음성은 야곱의 음성이나 손은 에서의 손이로다 하며	And Jacob went near unto Isaac his father; and he felt him, and said, The voice is Jacob’s voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau.	So Jacob came close to his father Isaac, who touched him and said, “The voice is the voice of Jacob, but the hands are the hands of Esau.”
GEN	27	23	그 손이 형 에서의 손과 같이 털이 있으므로 능히 분별치 못하고 축복하였더라	And he discerned him not, because his hands were hairy, as his brother Esau’s hands: so he blessed him.	Isaac did not recognize him, because his hands were hairy like those of his brother Esau; so he blessed him.
GEN	27	24	이삭이 가로되 네가 참 내 아들 에서냐 그가 대답하되 그러하니이다	And he said, Art thou my very son Esau? And he said, I am.	Again he asked, “Are you really my son Esau?” And he replied, “I am.”
GEN	27	25	이삭이 가로되 내게로 가져오라 내 아들의 사냥한 고기를 먹고 내 마음껏 네게 축복하리라 야곱이 그에게로 가져가매 그가 먹고 또 포도주를 가져가매 그가 마시고	And he said, Bring it near to me, and I will eat of my son’s venison, that my soul may bless thee. And he brought it near to him, and he did eat: and he brought him wine, and he drank.	“Serve me,” said Isaac, “and let me eat some of my son’s game, so that I may bless you.” Jacob brought it to him, and he ate; then he brought him wine, and he drank.
GEN	27	26	그 아비 이삭이 그에게 이르되 내 아들아 가까이 와서 내게 입맞추라	And his father Isaac said unto him, Come near now, and kiss me, my son.	Then his father Isaac said to him, “Please come near and kiss me, my son.”
GEN	27	27	그가 가까이 가서 그에게 입맞추니 아비가 그 옷의 향취를 맡고 그에게 축복하여 가로되 내 아들의 향취는 여호와의 복 주신 밭의 향취로다	And he came near, and kissed him: and he smelled the smell of his raiment, and blessed him, and said, See, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the Lord hath blessed:	So he came near and kissed him. When Isaac smelled his clothing, he blessed him and said: “Ah, the smell of my son is like the smell of a field that the LORD has blessed.
GEN	27	28	하나님은 하늘의 이슬과 땅의 기름짐이며 풍성한 곡식과 포도주로 네게 주시기를 원하노라	Therefore God give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and wine:	May God give to you the dew of heaven and the richness of the earth— an abundance of grain and new wine.
GEN	27	29	만민이 너를 섬기고 열국이 네게 굴복하리니 네가 형제들의 주가 되고 네 어미의 아들들이 네게 굴복하며 네게 저주하는 자는 저주를 받고 네게 축복하는 자는 복을 받기를 원하노라	Let people serve thee, and nations bow down to thee: be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother’s sons bow down to thee: cursed be every one that curseth thee, and blessed be he that blesseth thee.	May peoples serve you and nations bow down to you. May you be the master of your brothers, and may the sons of your mother bow down to you. May those who curse you be cursed, and those who bless you be blessed.”
GEN	27	30	이삭이 야곱에게 축복하기를 마치매 야곱이 그 아비 이삭 앞에서 나가자 곧 그 형 에서가 사냥하여 돌아온지라	And it came to pass, as soon as Isaac had made an end of blessing Jacob, and Jacob was yet scarce gone out from the presence of Isaac his father, that Esau his brother came in from his hunting.	As soon as Isaac had finished blessing him and Jacob had left his father’s presence, his brother Esau returned from the hunt.
GEN	27	31	그가 별미를 만들어 아비에게로 가지고 가서 가로되 아버지여 일어나서 아들의 사냥한 고기를 잡수시고 마음껏 내게 축복하소서	And he also had made savoury meat, and brought it unto his father, and said unto his father, Let my father arise, and eat of his son’s venison, that thy soul may bless me.	He too made some tasty food, brought it to his father, and said to him, “My father, sit up and eat of your son’s game, so that you may bless me.”
GEN	27	32	그 아비 이삭이 그에게 이르되 너는 누구냐 그가 대답하되 나는 아버지의 아들 곧 아버지의 맏아들 에서로소이다	And Isaac his father said unto him, Who art thou? And he said, I am thy son, thy firstborn Esau.	But his father Isaac replied, “Who are you?” “I am Esau, your firstborn son,” he answered.
GEN	27	33	이삭이 심히 크게 떨며 가로되 그런즉 사냥한 고기를 내게 가져온 자가 누구냐 너 오기 전에 내가 다 먹고 그를 위하여 축복하였은즉 그가 정녕 복을 받을 것이니라	And Isaac trembled very exceedingly, and said, Who? where is he that hath taken venison, and brought it me, and I have eaten of all before thou camest, and have blessed him? yea, and he shall be blessed.	Isaac began to tremble violently and said, “Who was it, then, who hunted the game and brought it to me? Before you came in, I ate it all and blessed him—and indeed, he will be blessed!”
GEN	27	34	에서가 그 아비의 말을 듣고 방성 대곡하며 아비에게 이르되 내 아버지여 내게 축복하소서 내게도 그리 하소서	And when Esau heard the words of his father, he cried with a great and exceeding bitter cry, and said unto his father, Bless me, even me also, O my father.	When Esau heard his father’s words, he let out a loud and bitter cry and said to his father, “Bless me too, O my father!”
GEN	27	35	이삭이 가로되 네 아우가 간교하게 와서 네 복을 빼앗았도다	And he said, Thy brother came with subtilty, and hath taken away thy blessing.	But Isaac replied, “Your brother came deceitfully and took your blessing.”
GEN	27	36	에서가 가로되 그의 이름을 야곱이라 함이 합당치 아니하니이까 그가 나를 속임이 이것이 두번째니이다 전에는 나의 장자의 명분을 빼앗고 이제는 내 복을 빼앗았나이다 또 가로되 아버지께서 나를 위하여 빌 복을 남기지 아니하셨나이까	And he said, Is not he rightly named Jacob? for he hath supplanted me these two times: he took away my birthright; and, behold, now he hath taken away my blessing. And he said, Hast thou not reserved a blessing for me?	So Esau declared, “Is he not rightly named Jacob? For he has cheated me twice. He took my birthright, and now he has taken my blessing.” Then he asked, “Haven’t you saved a blessing for me?”
GEN	27	37	이삭이 에서에게 대답하여 가로되 내가 그를 너의 주로 세우고 그 모든 형제를 내가 그에게 종으로 주었으며 곡식과 포도주를 그에게 공급하였으니 내 아들아 내가 네게 무엇을 할 수 있으랴	And Isaac answered and said unto Esau, Behold, I have made him thy lord, and all his brethren have I given to him for servants; and with corn and wine have I sustained him: and what shall I do now unto thee, my son?	But Isaac answered Esau: “Look, I have made him your master and given him all his relatives as servants; I have sustained him with grain and new wine. What is left that I can do for you, my son?”
GEN	27	38	에서가 아비에게 이르되 내 아버지여 아버지의 빌 복이 이 하나뿐이리이까 내 아버지여 내게 축복하소서 내게도 그리 하소서 하고 소리를 높여 우니	And Esau said unto his father, Hast thou but one blessing, my father? bless me, even me also, O my father. And Esau lifted up his voice, and wept.	Esau said to his father, “Do you have only one blessing, my father? Bless me too, O my father!” Then Esau wept aloud.
GEN	27	39	그 아비 이삭이 그에게 대답하여 가로되 너의 주소는 땅의 기름짐에서 뜨고 내리는 하늘 이슬에서 뜰 것이며	And Isaac his father answered and said unto him, Behold, thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth, and of the dew of heaven from above;	His father Isaac answered him: “Behold, your dwelling place shall be away from the richness of the land, away from the dew of heaven above.
GEN	27	40	너는 칼을 믿고 생활하겠고 네 아우를 섬길 것이며 네가 매임을 벗을 때에는 그 멍에를 네 목에서 떨쳐버리리라 하였더라	And by thy sword shalt thou live, and shalt serve thy brother; and it shall come to pass when thou shalt have the dominion, that thou shalt break his yoke from off thy neck.	You shall live by the sword and serve your brother. But when you rebel, you will tear his yoke from your neck.”
GEN	27	41	그 아비가 야곱에게 축복한 그 축복을 인하여 에서가 야곱을 미워하여 심중에 이르기를 아버지를 곡할 때가 가까웠은즉 내가 내 아우 야곱을 죽이리라 하였더니	And Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing wherewith his father blessed him: and Esau said in his heart, The days of mourning for my father are at hand; then will I slay my brother Jacob.	Esau held a grudge against Jacob because of the blessing his father had given him. And Esau said in his heart, “The days of mourning for my father are at hand; then I will kill my brother Jacob.”
GEN	27	42	맏아들 에서의 이 말이 리브가에게 들리매 이에 보내어 작은 아들 야곱을 불러 그에게 이르되 네 형 에서가 너를 죽여 그 한을 풀려하나니	And these words of Esau her elder son were told to Rebekah: and she sent and called Jacob her younger son, and said unto him, Behold, thy brother Esau, as touching thee, doth comfort himself, purposing to kill thee.	When the words of her older son Esau were relayed to Rebekah, she sent for her younger son Jacob and told him, “Look, your brother Esau is consoling himself by plotting to kill you.
GEN	27	43	내 아들아 내 말을 좇아 일어나 하란으로 가서 내 오라버니 라반에게 피하여	Now therefore, my son, obey my voice; and arise, flee thou to Laban my brother to Haran;	So now, my son, obey my voice and flee at once to my brother Laban in Haran.
GEN	27	44	네 형의 노가 풀리기까지 몇날 동안 그와 함께 거하라	And tarry with him a few days, until thy brother’s fury turn away;	Stay with him for a while, until your brother’s fury subsides—
GEN	27	45	네 형의 분노가 풀려 네가 자기에게 행한 것을 잊어버리거든 내가 곧 보내어 너를 거기서 불러오리라 어찌 하루에 너희 둘을 잃으랴	Until thy brother’s anger turn away from thee, and he forget that which thou hast done to him: then I will send, and fetch thee from thence: why should I be deprived also of you both in one day?	until your brother’s rage against you wanes and he forgets what you have done to him. Then I will send for you and bring you back from there. Why should I lose both of you in one day?”
GEN	27	46	리브가가 이삭에게 이르되 내가 헷 사람의 딸들을 인하여 나의 생명을 싫어하거늘 야곱이 만일 이 땅의 딸들 곧 그들과 같은 헷사람의 딸들 중에서 아내를 취하면 나의 생명이 내게 무슨 재미가 있으리이까	And Rebekah said to Isaac, I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth: if Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, such as these which are of the daughters of the land, what good shall my life do me?	Then Rebekah said to Isaac, “I am weary of my life because of these Hittite women. If Jacob takes a Hittite wife from among them, what good is my life?”
GEN	28	1	이삭이 야곱을 불러 그에게 축복하고 또 부탁하여 가로되 너는 가나안 사람의 딸들 중에서 아내를 취하지 말고	And Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him, and charged him, and said unto him, Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan.	So Isaac called for Jacob and blessed him. “Do not take a wife from the Canaanite women,” he commanded.
GEN	28	2	일어나 밧단아람으로 가서 너의 외조부 브두엘 집에 이르러 거기서 너의 외삼촌 라반의 딸 중에서 아내를 취하라	Arise, go to Padan–aram, to the house of Bethuel thy mother’s father; and take thee a wife from thence of the daughters of Laban thy mother’s brother.	“Go at once to Paddan-aram, to the house of your mother’s father Bethuel, and take a wife from among the daughters of Laban, your mother’s brother.
GEN	28	3	전능하신 하나님이 네게 복을 주어 너로 생육하고 번성케하사 너로 여러 족속을 이루게 하시고	And God Almighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, that thou mayest be a multitude of people;	May God Almighty bless you and make you fruitful and multiply you, so that you may become a company of peoples.
GEN	28	4	아브라함에게 허락하신 복을 네게 주시되 너와 너와 함께 네 자손에게 주사 너로 하나님이 아브라함에게 주신 땅 곧 너의 우거하는 땅을 유업으로 받게 하시기를 원하노라	And give thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee, and to thy seed with thee; that thou mayest inherit the land wherein thou art a stranger, which God gave unto Abraham.	And may He give the blessing of Abraham to you and your descendants, so that you may possess the land where you dwell as a foreigner, the land God gave to Abraham.”
GEN	28	5	이에 이삭이 야곱을 보내었더니 밧단아람으로 가서 라반에게 이르렀으니 라반은 아람 사람 브두엘의 아들이요 야곱과 에서의 어미 리브가의 오라비더라	And Isaac sent away Jacob: and he went to Padan–aram unto Laban, son of Bethuel the Syrian, the brother of Rebekah, Jacob’s and Esau’s mother.	So Isaac sent Jacob to Paddan-aram, to Laban son of Bethuel the Aramean, the brother of Rebekah, who was the mother of Jacob and Esau.
GEN	28	6	에서가 본즉 이삭이 야곱에게 축복하고 그를 밧단아람으로 보내어 거기서 아내를 취하게 하였고 또 그에게 축복하고 명하기를 너는 가나안 사람의 딸들 중에서 아내를 취하지 말라 하였고	When Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob, and sent him away to Padan–aram, to take him a wife from thence; and that as he blessed him he gave him a charge, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan;	Now Esau learned that Isaac had blessed Jacob and sent him to Paddan-aram to take a wife there, commanding him, “Do not marry a Canaanite woman,”
GEN	28	7	또 야곱이 부모의 명을 좇아 밧단아람으로 갔으며	And that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother, and was gone to Padan–aram;	and that Jacob had obeyed his father and mother and gone to Paddan-aram.
GEN	28	8	에서가 또 본즉 가나안 사람의 딸들이 그 아비 이삭을 기쁘게 못하는지라	And Esau seeing that the daughters of Canaan pleased not Isaac his father;	And seeing that his father Isaac disapproved of the Canaanite women,
GEN	28	9	이에 에서가 이스마엘에게 가서 그 본처들 외에 아브라함의 아들 이스마엘의 딸이요 느바욧의 누이인 마할랏을 아내로 취하였더라	Then went Esau unto Ishmael, and took unto the wives which he had Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael Abraham’s son, the sister of Nebajoth, to be his wife.	Esau went to Ishmael and married Mahalath, the sister of Nebaioth and daughter of Abraham’s son Ishmael, in addition to the wives he already had.
GEN	28	10	야곱이 브엘세바에서 떠나 하란으로 향하여 가더니	And Jacob went out from Beer–sheba, and went toward Haran.	Meanwhile Jacob left Beersheba and set out for Haran.
GEN	28	11	한곳에 이르러는 해가 진지라 거기서 유숙하려고 그곳의 한 돌을 취하여 베개하고 거기 누워 자더니	And he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there all night, because the sun was set; and he took of the stones of that place, and put them for his pillows, and lay down in that place to sleep.	On reaching a certain place, he spent the night there because the sun had set. And taking one of the stones from that place, he put it under his head and lay down to sleep.
GEN	28	12	꿈에 본즉 사닥다리가 땅 위에 섰는데 그 꼭대기가 하늘에 닿았고 또 본즉 하나님의 사자가 그 위에서 오르락 내리락하고	And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it.	And Jacob had a dream about a ladder that rested on the earth with its top reaching up to heaven, and God’s angels were going up and down the ladder.
GEN	28	13	또 본즉 여호와께서 그 위에 서서 가라사대 나는 여호와니 너의 조부 아브라함의 하나님이요 이삭의 하나님이라 너 누운 땅을 내가 너와 네 자손에게 주리니	And, behold, the Lord stood above it, and said, I am the Lord God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac: the land whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed;	And there at the top the LORD was standing and saying, “I am the LORD, the God of your father Abraham and the God of Isaac. I will give you and your descendants the land on which you now lie.
GEN	28	14	네 자손이 땅의 티끌 같이 되어서 동서남북에 편만할지며 땅의 모든 족속이 너와 네 자손을 인하여 복을 얻으리라	And thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south: and in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.	Your descendants will be like the dust of the earth, and you will spread out to the west and east and north and south. All the families of the earth will be blessed through you and your offspring.
GEN	28	15	내가 너와 함께 있어 네가 어디로 가든지 너를 지키며 너를 이끌어 이 땅으로 돌아오게 할지라 내가 네게 허락한 것을 다 이루기까지 너를 떠나지 아니하리라 하신지라	And, behold, I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou goest, and will bring thee again into this land; for I will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to thee of.	Look, I am with you, and I will watch over you wherever you go, and I will bring you back to this land. For I will not leave you until I have done what I have promised you.”
GEN	28	16	야곱이 잠이 깨어 가로되 여호와께서 과연 여기 계시거늘 내가 알지 못하였도다	And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and he said, Surely the Lord is in this place; and I knew it not.	When Jacob woke up, he thought, “Surely the LORD is in this place, and I was unaware of it.”
GEN	28	17	이에 두려워하여 가로되 두렵도다 이 곳이여 다른 것이 아니라 이는 하나님의 전이요 이는 하늘의 문이로다 하고	And he was afraid, and said, How dreadful is this place! this is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.	And he was afraid and said, “How awesome is this place! This is none other than the house of God; this is the gate of heaven!”
GEN	28	18	야곱이 아침에 일찍이 일어나 베개하였던 돌을 가져 기둥으로 세우고 그 위에 기름을 붓고	And Jacob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone that he had put for his pillows, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil upon the top of it.	Early the next morning, Jacob took the stone that he had placed under his head, and he set it up as a pillar. He poured oil on top of it,
GEN	28	19	그곳 이름을 벧엘이라 하였더라 이 성의 본 이름은 루스더라	And he called the name of that place Beth–el: but the name of that city was called Luz at the first.	and he called that place Bethel, though previously the city had been named Luz.
GEN	28	20	야곱이 서원하여 가로되 하나님이 나와 함께 계시사 내가 가는 이 길에서 나를 지키시고 먹을 양식과 입을 옷을 주사	And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on,	Then Jacob made a vow, saying, “If God will be with me and watch over me on this journey, and if He will provide me with food to eat and clothes to wear,
GEN	28	21	나로 평안히 아비 집으로 돌아가게 하시오면 여호와께서 나의 하나님이 되실 것이요	So that I come again to my father’s house in peace; then shall the Lord be my God:	so that I may return safely to my father’s house, then the LORD will be my God.
GEN	28	22	내가 기둥으로 세운 이 돌이 하나님의 전이 될 것이요 하나님께서 내게 주신 모든 것에서 십분 일을 내가 반드시 하나님께 드리겠나이다 하였더라	And this stone, which I have set for a pillar, shall be God’s house: and of all that thou shalt give me I will surely give the tenth unto thee.	And this stone I have set up as a pillar will be God’s house, and of all that You give me I will surely give You a tenth.”
GEN	29	1	야곱이 발행하여 동방 사람의 땅에 이르러	Then Jacob went on his journey, and came into the land of the people of the east.	Jacob resumed his journey and came to the land of the people of the east.
GEN	29	2	본즉 들에 우물이 있고 그 곁에 양 세 떼가 누웠으니 이는 목자들이 그 우물에서 물을 양떼에게 먹임이라 큰 돌로 우물 아구를 덮었다가	And he looked, and behold a well in the field, and, lo, there were three flocks of sheep lying by it; for out of that well they watered the flocks: and a great stone was upon the well’s mouth.	He looked and saw a well in the field, and near it lay three flocks of sheep, because the sheep were watered from this well. And a large stone covered the mouth of the well.
GEN	29	3	모든 떼가 모이면 그들이 우물 아구에서 돌을 옮기고 양에게 물을 먹이고는 여전히 우물 아구 그 자리에 돌을 덮더라	And thither were all the flocks gathered: and they rolled the stone from the well’s mouth, and watered the sheep, and put the stone again upon the well’s mouth in his place.	When all the flocks had been gathered there, the shepherds would roll away the stone from the mouth of the well and water the sheep. Then they would return the stone to its place over the mouth of the well.
GEN	29	4	야곱이 그들에게 이르되 나의 형제여 어디로서뇨 그들이 가로되 하란에서로라	And Jacob said unto them, My brethren, whence be ye? And they said, Of Haran are we.	“My brothers,” Jacob asked the shepherds, “where are you from?” “We are from Haran,” they answered.
GEN	29	5	야곱이 그들에게 이르되 너희가 나홀의 손자 라반을 아느냐 그들이 가로되 아노라	And he said unto them, Know ye Laban the son of Nahor? And they said, We know him.	“Do you know Laban the grandson of Nahor?” Jacob asked. “We know him,” they replied.
GEN	29	6	야곱이 그들에게 이르되 그가 평안하냐 가로되 평안하니라 그 딸 라헬이 지금 양을 몰고 오느니라	And he said unto them, Is he well? And they said, He is well: and, behold, Rachel his daughter cometh with the sheep.	“Is he well?” Jacob inquired. “Yes,” they answered, “and here comes his daughter Rachel with his sheep.”
GEN	29	7	야곱이 가로되 해가 아직 높은즉 짐승 모일 때가 아니니 양에게 물을 먹이고 가서 뜯기라	And he said, Lo, it is yet high day, neither is it time that the cattle should be gathered together: water ye the sheep, and go and feed them.	“Look,” said Jacob, “it is still broad daylight; it is not yet time to gather the livestock. Water the sheep and take them back to pasture.”
GEN	29	8	그들이 가로되 우리가 그리하지 못하겠노라 떼가 다 모이고 목자들이 우물 아구에서 돌을 옮겨야 우리가 양에게 물을 먹이느리라	And they said, We cannot, until all the flocks be gathered together, and till they roll the stone from the well’s mouth; then we water the sheep.	But they replied, “We cannot, until all the flocks have been gathered and the stone has been rolled away from the mouth of the well. Then we will water the sheep.”
GEN	29	9	야곱이 그들과 말하는 중에 라헬이 그 아비의 양과 함께 오니 그가 그의 양들을 침이었더라	And while he yet spake with them, Rachel came with her father’s sheep: for she kept them.	While he was still speaking with them, Rachel arrived with her father’s sheep, for she was a shepherdess.
GEN	29	10	야곱이 그 외삼촌 라반의 딸 라헬과 그 외삼촌의 양을 보고 나아가서 우물 아구에서 돌을 옮기고 외삼촌 라반의 양떼에게 물을 먹이고	And it came to pass, when Jacob saw Rachel the daughter of Laban his mother’s brother, and the sheep of Laban his mother’s brother, that Jacob went near, and rolled the stone from the well’s mouth, and watered the flock of Laban his mother’s brother.	As soon as Jacob saw Rachel, the daughter of his mother’s brother Laban, with Laban’s sheep, he went up and rolled the stone away from the mouth of the well and watered his uncle’s sheep.
GEN	29	11	그가 라헬에게 입맞추고 소리내어 울며	And Jacob kissed Rachel, and lifted up his voice, and wept.	Then Jacob kissed Rachel and wept aloud.
GEN	29	12	그에게 자기가 그의 아비의 생질이요 리브가의 아들됨을 고하였더니 라헬이 달려가서 그 아비에게 고하매	And Jacob told Rachel that he was her father’s brother, and that he was Rebekah’s son: and she ran and told her father.	He told Rachel that he was Rebekah’s son, a relative of her father, and she ran and told her father.
GEN	29	13	라반이 그 생질 야곱의 소식을 듣고 달려와서 그를 영접하여 안고 입맞추고 자기 집으로 인도하여 들이니 야곱이 자기의 모든 일을 라반에게 고하매	And it came to pass, when Laban heard the tidings of Jacob his sister’s son, that he ran to meet him, and embraced him, and kissed him, and brought him to his house. And he told Laban all these things.	When Laban heard the news about his sister’s son Jacob, he ran out to meet him. He embraced him and kissed him and brought him to his home, where Jacob told him all that had happened.
GEN	29	14	라반이 가로되 너는 참으로 나의 골육이로다 하였더라 야곱이 한달을 그와 함께 거하더니	And Laban said to him, Surely thou art my bone and my flesh. And he abode with him the space of a month.	Then Laban declared, “You are indeed my own flesh and blood.” After Jacob had stayed with him a month,
GEN	29	15	라반이 야곱에게 이르되 네가 비록 나의 생질이나 어찌 공으로 내 일만 하겠느냐 무엇이 네 보수겠느냐 내게 고하라	And Laban said unto Jacob, Because thou art my brother, shouldest thou therefore serve me for nought? tell me, what shall thy wages be?	Laban said to him, “Just because you are my relative, should you work for nothing? Tell me what your wages should be.”
GEN	29	16	라반이 두 딸이 있으니 형의 이름은 레아요 아우의 이름은 라헬이라	And Laban had two daughters: the name of the elder was Leah, and the name of the younger was Rachel.	Now Laban had two daughters; the older was named Leah, and the younger was named Rachel.
GEN	29	17	레아는 안력이 부족하고 라헬은 곱고 아리따우니	Leah was tender eyed; but Rachel was beautiful and well favoured.	Leah had weak eyes, but Rachel was shapely and beautiful.
GEN	29	18	야곱이 라헬을 연애하므로 대답하되 내가 외삼춘의 작은 딸 라헬을 위하여 외삼촌에게 칠년을 봉사하리이다	And Jacob loved Rachel; and said, I will serve thee seven years for Rachel thy younger daughter.	Since Jacob loved Rachel, he answered, “I will serve you seven years for your younger daughter Rachel.”
GEN	29	19	라반이 가로되 그를 네게 주는 것이 타인에게 주는 것보다 나으니 나와 함께 있으라	And Laban said, It is better that I give her to thee, than that I should give her to another man: abide with me.	Laban replied, “Better that I give her to you than to another. Stay here with me.”
GEN	29	20	야곱이 라헬을 위하여 칠년 동안 라반을 봉사하였으나 그를 연애하는 까닭에 칠년을 수일 같이 여겼더라	And Jacob served seven years for Rachel; and they seemed unto him but a few days, for the love he had to her.	So Jacob served seven years for Rachel, yet it seemed but a few days because of his love for her.
GEN	29	21	야곱이 라반에게 이르되 내 기한이 찼으니 내 아내를 내게 주소서 내가 그에게 들어가겠나이다	And Jacob said unto Laban, Give me my wife, for my days are fulfilled, that I may go in unto her.	Finally Jacob said to Laban, “Grant me my wife, for my time is complete, and I want to sleep with her.”
GEN	29	22	라반이 그곳 사람을 다 모아 잔치하고	And Laban gathered together all the men of the place, and made a feast.	So Laban invited all the men of that place and prepared a feast.
GEN	29	23	저녁에 그 딸 레아를 야곱에게로 데려가매 야곱이 그에게로 들어가니라	And it came to pass in the evening, that he took Leah his daughter, and brought her to him; and he went in unto her.	But when evening came, Laban took his daughter Leah and gave her to Jacob, and he slept with her.
GEN	29	24	라반이 또 그 여종 실바를 그 딸 레아에게 시녀로 주었더라	And Laban gave unto his daughter Leah Zilpah his maid for an handmaid.	And Laban gave his servant girl Zilpah to his daughter Leah as her maidservant.
GEN	29	25	야곱이 아침에 보니 레아라 라반에게 이르되 외삼촌이 어찌하여 내게 이같이 행하셨나이까 내가 라헬을 위하여 외삼촌께 봉사하지 아니하였나이까 외삼촌이 나를 속이심은 어찜이니이까	And it came to pass, that in the morning, behold, it was Leah: and he said to Laban, What is this thou hast done unto me? did not I serve with thee for Rachel? wherefore then hast thou beguiled me?	When morning came, there was Leah! “What have you done to me?” Jacob said to Laban. “Wasn’t it for Rachel that I served you? Why have you deceived me?”
GEN	29	26	라반이 가로되 형보다 아우를 먼저 주는 것은 우리 지방에서 하지 아니하는 바이라	And Laban said, It must not be so done in our country, to give the younger before the firstborn.	Laban replied, “It is not our custom here to give the younger daughter in marriage before the older.
GEN	29	27	이를 위하여 칠 일을 채우라 우리가 그도 네게 주리니 네가 그를 위하여 또 칠년을 내게 봉사할지니라	Fulfil her week, and we will give thee this also for the service which thou shalt serve with me yet seven other years.	Finish this week’s celebration, and we will give you the younger one in return for another seven years of work.”
GEN	29	28	야곱이 그대로 하여 그 칠 일을 채우매 라반이 딸 라헬도 그에게 아내로 주고	And Jacob did so, and fulfilled her week: and he gave him Rachel his daughter to wife also.	And Jacob did just that. He finished the week’s celebration, and Laban gave him his daughter Rachel as his wife.
GEN	29	29	라반이 또 그 여종 빌하를 그 딸 라헬에게 주어 시녀가 되게하매	And Laban gave to Rachel his daughter Bilhah his handmaid to be her maid.	Laban also gave his servant girl Bilhah to his daughter Rachel as her maidservant.
GEN	29	30	야곱이 또한 라헬에게로 들어갔고 그가 레아보다 라헬을 더 사랑하고 다시 칠년을 라반에게 봉사하였더라	And he went in also unto Rachel, and he loved also Rachel more than Leah, and served with him yet seven other years.	Jacob slept with Rachel as well, and indeed, he loved Rachel more than Leah. So he worked for Laban another seven years.
GEN	29	31	여호와께서 레아에게 총이 없음을 보시고 그의 태를 여셨으나 라헬은 무자하였더라	And when the Lord saw that Leah was hated, he opened her womb: but Rachel was barren.	When the LORD saw that Leah was unloved, He opened her womb; but Rachel was barren.
GEN	29	32	레아가 잉태하여 아들을 낳고 그 이름을 르우벤이라 하여 가로되 여호와께서 나의 괴로움을 권고하셨으니 이제는 내 남편이 나를 사랑하리로다 하였더라	And Leah conceived, and bare a son, and she called his name Reuben: for she said, Surely the Lord hath looked upon my affliction; now therefore my husband will love me.	And Leah conceived and gave birth to a son, and she named him Reuben, for she said, “The LORD has seen my affliction. Surely my husband will love me now.”
GEN	29	33	그가 다시 잉태하여 아들을 낳고 가로되 여호와께서 나의 총이 없음을 들으셨으므로 내게 이도 주셨도다 하고 그 이름을 시므온이라 하였으며	And she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, Because the Lord hath heard that I was hated, he hath therefore given me this son also: and she called his name Simeon.	Again she conceived and gave birth to a son, and she said, “Because the LORD has heard that I am unloved, He has given me this son as well.” So she named him Simeon.
GEN	29	34	그가 또 잉태하여 아들을 낳고 가로되 내가 그에게 세 아들을 낳았으니 내 남편이 지금부터 나와 연합하리로다 하고 그 이름을 레위라 하였으며	And she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, Now this time will my husband be joined unto me, because I have born him three sons: therefore was his name called Levi.	Once again Leah conceived and gave birth to a son, and she said, “Now at last my husband will become attached to me, because I have borne him three sons.” So he was named Levi.
GEN	29	35	그가 또 잉태하여 아들을 낳고 가로되 내가 이제는 여호와를 찬송하리로다 하고 이로 인하여 그가 그 이름을 유다라 하였고 그의 생산이 멈추었더라	And she conceived again, and bare a son: and she said, Now will I praise the Lord: therefore she called his name Judah; and left bearing.	And once more she conceived and gave birth to a son and said, “This time I will praise the LORD.” So she named him Judah. Then Leah stopped having children.
GEN	30	1	라헬이 자기가 야곱에게 아들을 낳지 못함을 보고 그 형을 투기하여 야곱에게 이르되 나로 자식을 낳게 하라 그렇지 아니하면 내가 죽겠노라	And when Rachel saw that she bare Jacob no children, Rachel envied her sister; and said unto Jacob, Give me children, or else I die.	When Rachel saw that she was not bearing any children for Jacob, she envied her sister. “Give me children, or I will die!” she said to Jacob.
GEN	30	2	야곱이 라헬에게 노를 발하여 가로되 그대로 성태치 못하게 하시는 이는 하나님이시니 내가 하나님을 대신하겠느냐	And Jacob’s anger was kindled against Rachel: and he said, Am I in God’s stead, who hath withheld from thee the fruit of the womb?	Jacob became angry with Rachel and said, “Am I in the place of God, who has withheld children from you?”
GEN	30	3	라헬이 가로되 나의 여종 빌하에게로 들어가라 그가 아들을 낳아 내 무릎에 두리니 그러면 나도 그를 인하여 자식을 얻겠노라 하고	And she said, Behold my maid Bilhah, go in unto her; and she shall bear upon my knees, that I may also have children by her.	Then she said, “Here is my maidservant Bilhah. Sleep with her, that she may bear children for me, so that through her I too can build a family.”
GEN	30	4	그 시녀 빌하를 남편에게 첩으로 주매 야곱이 그에게로 들어갔더니	And she gave him Bilhah her handmaid to wife: and Jacob went in unto her.	So Rachel gave Jacob her servant Bilhah as a wife, and he slept with her,
GEN	30	5	빌하가 잉태하여 야곱에게 아들을 낳은지라	And Bilhah conceived, and bare Jacob a son.	and Bilhah conceived and bore him a son.
GEN	30	6	라헬이 가로되 하나님이 내 억울함을 푸시려고 내 소리를 들으사 내게 아들을 주셨다 하고 이로 인하여 그 이름을 단이라 하였으며	And Rachel said, God hath judged me, and hath also heard my voice, and hath given me a son: therefore called she his name Dan.	Then Rachel said, “God has vindicated me; He has heard my plea and given me a son.” So she named him Dan.
GEN	30	7	라헬의 시녀 빌하가 다시 잉태하여 둘째 아들을 야곱에게 낳으매	And Bilhah Rachel’s maid conceived again, and bare Jacob a second son.	And Rachel’s servant Bilhah conceived again and bore Jacob a second son.
GEN	30	8	라헬이 가로되 내가 형과 크게 경쟁하여 이기었다 하고 그 이름을 납달리라 하였더라	And Rachel said, With great wrestlings have I wrestled with my sister, and I have prevailed: and she called his name Naphtali.	Then Rachel said, “In my great struggles, I have wrestled with my sister and won.” So she named him Naphtali.
GEN	30	9	레아가 자기의 생산이 멈춤을 보고 그 시녀 실바를 취하여 야곱에게 주어 첩을 삼게 하였더니	When Leah saw that she had left bearing, she took Zilpah her maid, and gave her Jacob to wife.	When Leah saw that she had stopped having children, she gave her servant Zilpah to Jacob as a wife.
GEN	30	10	레아의 시녀 실바가 야곱에게 아들을 낳으매	And Zilpah Leah’s maid bare Jacob a son.	And Leah’s servant Zilpah bore Jacob a son.
GEN	30	11	레아가 가로되 복되도다 하고 그 이름을 갓이라 하였으며	And Leah said, A troop cometh: and she called his name Gad.	Then Leah said, “How fortunate!” So she named him Gad.
GEN	30	12	레아의 시녀 실바가 둘째 아들을 야곱에게 낳으매	And Zilpah Leah’s maid bare Jacob a second son.	When Leah’s servant Zilpah bore Jacob a second son,
GEN	30	13	레아가 가로되 기쁘도다 모든 딸들이 나를 기쁜 자라 하리로다 하고 그 이름을 아셀이라 하였더라	And Leah said, Happy am I, for the daughters will call me blessed: and she called his name Asher.	Leah said, “How happy I am! For the women call me happy.” So she named him Asher.
GEN	30	14	맥추 때에 르우벤이 나가서 들에서 합환채를 얻어 어미 레아에게 드렸더니 라헬이 레아에게 이르되 형의 아들의 합환채를 청구하노라	And Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest, and found mandrakes in the field, and brought them unto his mother Leah. Then Rachel said to Leah, Give me, I pray thee, of thy son’s mandrakes.	Now during the wheat harvest, Reuben went out and found some mandrakes in the field. When he brought them to his mother, Rachel begged Leah, “Please give me some of your son’s mandrakes.”
GEN	30	15	레아가 그에게 이르되 네가 내 남편을 빼앗은 것이 작은 일이냐 그런데 네가 내 아들의 합환채도 빼앗고자 하느냐 라헬이 가로되 그러면 형의 아들의 합환채 대신에 오늘 밤에 내 남편이 형과 동침하리라 하니라	And she said unto her, Is it a small matter that thou hast taken my husband? and wouldest thou take away my son’s mandrakes also? And Rachel said, Therefore he shall lie with thee to night for thy son’s mandrakes.	But Leah replied, “Is it not enough that you have taken away my husband? Now you want to take my son’s mandrakes as well?” “Very well,” said Rachel, “he may sleep with you tonight in exchange for your son’s mandrakes.”
GEN	30	16	저물 때에 야곱이 들에서 돌아오매 레아가 나와서 그를 영접하며 이르되 내게로 들어오라 내가 내 아들의 합환채로 당신을 샀노라 그 밤에 야곱이 그와 동침하였더라	And Jacob came out of the field in the evening, and Leah went out to meet him, and said, Thou must come in unto me; for surely I have hired thee with my son’s mandrakes. And he lay with her that night.	When Jacob came in from the field that evening, Leah went out to meet him and said, “You must come with me, for I have hired you with my son’s mandrakes.” So he slept with her that night.
GEN	30	17	하나님이 레아를 들으셨으므로 그가 잉태하여 다섯째 아들을 야곱에게 낳은지라	And God hearkened unto Leah, and she conceived, and bare Jacob the fifth son.	And God listened to Leah, and she conceived and bore a fifth son to Jacob.
GEN	30	18	레아가 가로되 내가 내 시녀를 남편에게 주었으므로 하나님이 내게 그 값을 주셨다 하고 그 이름을 잇사갈이라 하였으며	And Leah said, God hath given me my hire, because I have given my maiden to my husband: and she called his name Issachar.	Then Leah said, “God has rewarded me for giving my maidservant to my husband.” So she named him Issachar.
GEN	30	19	레아가 다시 잉태하여 여섯째 아들을 야곱에게 낳은지라	And Leah conceived again, and bare Jacob the sixth son.	Again Leah conceived and bore a sixth son to Jacob.
GEN	30	20	레아가 가로되 하나님이 내게 후한 선물을 주시도다 내가 남편에게 여섯 아들을 낳았으니 이제는 그가 나와 함께 거하리라 하고 그 이름을 스불론이라 하였으며	And Leah said, God hath endued me with a good dowry; now will my husband dwell with me, because I have born him six sons: and she called his name Zebulun.	“God has given me a good gift,” she said. “This time my husband will honor me, because I have borne him six sons.” And she named him Zebulun.
GEN	30	21	그 후에 그가 딸을 낳고 그 이름을 디나라 하였더라	And afterwards she bare a daughter, and called her name Dinah.	After that, Leah gave birth to a daughter and named her Dinah.
GEN	30	22	하나님이 라헬을 생각하신지라 하나님이 그를 들으시고 그 태를 여신 고로	And God remembered Rachel, and God hearkened to her, and opened her womb.	Then God remembered Rachel. He listened to her and opened her womb,
GEN	30	23	그가 잉태하여 아들을 낳고 가로되 하나님이 나의 부끄러움을 씻으셨다 하고	And she conceived, and bare a son; and said, God hath taken away my reproach:	and she conceived and gave birth to a son. “God has taken away my shame,” she said.
GEN	30	24	그 이름을 요셉이라 하니 여호와는 다시 다른 아들을 내게 더하시기를 원하노라 함이었더라	And she called his name Joseph; and said, The Lord shall add to me another son.	She named him Joseph, and said, “May the LORD add to me another son.”
GEN	30	25	라헬이 요셉을 낳은 때에 야곱이 라반에게 이르되 나를 보내어 내 고향 내 본토로 가게 하시되	And it came to pass, when Rachel had born Joseph, that Jacob said unto Laban, Send me away, that I may go unto mine own place, and to my country.	Now after Rachel had given birth to Joseph, Jacob said to Laban, “Send me on my way so I can return to my homeland.
GEN	30	26	내가 외삼촌에게서 일하고 얻은 처자를 내게 주어 나로 가게 하소서 내가 외삼촌께 한 일은 외삼촌이 아시나이다	Give me my wives and my children, for whom I have served thee, and let me go: for thou knowest my service which I have done thee.	Give me my wives and children for whom I have served you, that I may go on my way. You know how hard I have worked for you.”
GEN	30	27	라반이 그에게 이르되 여호와께서 너로 인하여 내게 복 주신줄을 내가 깨달았노니 네가 나를 사랑스럽게 여기거든 유하라	And Laban said unto him, I pray thee, if I have found favour in thine eyes, tarry: for I have learned by experience that the Lord hath blessed me for thy sake.	But Laban replied, “If I have found favor in your eyes, please stay. I have learned by divination that the LORD has blessed me because of you.”
GEN	30	28	또 가로되 네 품삯을 정하라 내가 그것을 주리라	And he said, Appoint me thy wages, and I will give it.	And he added, “Name your wages, and I will pay them.”
GEN	30	29	야곱이 그에게 이르되 내가 어떻게 외삼촌을 섬겼는지 어떻게 외삼촌의 짐승을 쳤는지 외삼촌이 아시나이다	And he said unto him, Thou knowest how I have served thee, and how thy cattle was with me.	Then Jacob answered, “You know how I have served you and how your livestock have thrived under my care.
GEN	30	30	내가 오기 전에는 외삼촌의 소유가 적더니 번성하여 떼를 이루었나이다 나의 공력을 따라 여호와께서 외삼촌에게 복을 주셨나이다 그러나 나는 어느 때에나 내 집을 세우리이까	For it was little which thou hadst before I came, and it is now increased unto a multitude; and the Lord hath blessed thee since my coming: and now when shall I provide for mine own house also?	Indeed, you had very little before my arrival, but now your wealth has increased many times over. The LORD has blessed you wherever I set foot. But now, when may I also provide for my own household?”
GEN	30	31	라반이 가로되 내가 무엇으로 네게 주랴 야곱이 가로되 외삼촌께서 아무 것도 내게 주실 것이 아니라 나를 위하여 이 일을 행하시면 내가 다시 외삼촌의 양떼를 먹이고 지키리이다	And he said, What shall I give thee? And Jacob said, Thou shalt not give me any thing: if thou wilt do this thing for me, I will again feed and keep thy flock:	“What can I give you?” Laban asked. “You do not need to give me anything,” Jacob replied. “If you do this one thing for me, I will keep on shepherding and keeping your flocks.
GEN	30	32	오늘 내가 외삼촌의 양떼로 두루 다니며 그 양 중에 아롱진 자와 점있는 자와 검은 자를 가리어 내며 염소 중에 점 있는 자와 아롱진 자를 가리어 내리니 이같은 것이 나면 나의 삯이 되리이다	I will pass through all thy flock to day, removing from thence all the speckled and spotted cattle, and all the brown cattle among the sheep, and the spotted and speckled among the goats: and of such shall be my hire.	Let me go through all your flocks today and remove from them every speckled or spotted sheep, every dark-colored lamb, and every spotted or speckled goat. These will be my wages.
GEN	30	33	후일에 외삼촌께서 오셔서 내 품삯을 조사하실 때에 나의 의가 나의 표징이 되리이다 내게 혹시 염소 중 아롱지지 아니한 자나 점이 없는 자나 양 중 검지 아니한 자가 있거든 다 도적질한 것으로 인정하소서	So shall my righteousness answer for me in time to come, when it shall come for my hire before thy face: every one that is not speckled and spotted among the goats, and brown among the sheep, that shall be counted stolen with me.	So my honesty will testify for me when you come to check on my wages in the future. If I have any goats that are not speckled or spotted, or any lambs that are not dark-colored, they will be considered stolen.”
GEN	30	34	라반이 가로되 내가 네 말대로 하리라 하고	And Laban said, Behold, I would it might be according to thy word.	“Agreed,” said Laban. “Let it be as you have said.”
GEN	30	35	그 날에 그가 수염소 중 얼룩무늬 있는 자와 점 있는 자를 가리고 암염소 중 흰 바탕에 아롱진 자와 점 있는 자를 가리고 양 중의 검은 자들을 가려 자기 아들들의 손에 붙이고	And he removed that day the he goats that were ringstraked and spotted, and all the she goats that were speckled and spotted, and every one that had some white in it, and all the brown among the sheep, and gave them into the hand of his sons.	That very day Laban removed all the streaked or spotted male goats and every speckled or spotted female goat—every one that had any white on it—and every dark-colored lamb, and he placed them under the care of his sons.
GEN	30	36	자기와 야곱의 사이를 사흘 길이 뜨게 하였고 야곱은 라반의 남은 양떼를 치니라	And he set three days’ journey betwixt himself and Jacob: and Jacob fed the rest of Laban’s flocks.	Then he put a three-day journey between himself and Jacob, while Jacob was shepherding the rest of Laban’s flocks.
GEN	30	37	야곱이 버드나무와 살구나무와 신풍나무의 푸른 가지를 취하여 그것들의 껍질을 벗겨 흰 무늬를 내고	And Jacob took him rods of green poplar, and of the hazel and chesnut tree; and pilled white strakes in them, and made the white appear which was in the rods.	Jacob, however, took fresh branches of poplar, almond, and plane trees, and peeled the bark, exposing the white inner wood of the branches.
GEN	30	38	그 껍질 벗긴 가지를 양떼가 와서 먹는 개천의 물구유에 세워 양떼에 향하게 하매 그 떼가 물을 먹으러 올 때에 새끼를 배니	And he set the rods which he had pilled before the flocks in the gutters in the watering troughs when the flocks came to drink, that they should conceive when they came to drink.	Then he set the peeled branches in the watering troughs in front of the flocks coming in to drink. So when the flocks were in heat and came to drink,
GEN	30	39	가지 앞에서 새끼를 배므로 얼룩얼룩한 것과 점이 있고 아롱진 것을 낳은지라	And the flocks conceived before the rods, and brought forth cattle ringstraked, speckled, and spotted.	they mated in front of the branches. And they bore young that were streaked or speckled or spotted.
GEN	30	40	야곱이 새끼 양을 구분하고 그 얼룩무늬와 검은 빛 있는 것으로 라반의 양과 서로 대하게하며 자기 양을 따로 두어 라반의 양과 섞이지 않게 하며	And Jacob did separate the lambs, and set the faces of the flocks toward the ringstraked, and all the brown in the flock of Laban; and he put his own flocks by themselves, and put them not unto Laban’s cattle.	Jacob set apart the young, but made the rest face the streaked dark-colored sheep in Laban’s flocks. Then he set his own stock apart and did not put them with Laban’s animals.
GEN	30	41	실한 양이 새끼 밸 때에는 야곱이 개천에다가 양떼의 눈앞에 그 가지를 두어 양으로 그 가지 곁에서 새끼를 배게하고	And it came to pass, whensoever the stronger cattle did conceive, that Jacob laid the rods before the eyes of the cattle in the gutters, that they might conceive among the rods.	Whenever the stronger females of the flock were in heat, Jacob would place the branches in the troughs, in full view of the animals, so that they would breed in front of the branches.
GEN	30	42	약한 양이면 그 가지를 두지 아니하니 이러므로 약한 자는 라반의 것이 되고 실한 자는 야곱의 것이 된지라	But when the cattle were feeble, he put them not in: so the feebler were Laban’s, and the stronger Jacob’s.	But if the animals were weak, he did not set out the branches. So the weaker animals went to Laban and the stronger ones to Jacob.
GEN	30	43	이에 그 사람이 심히 풍부하여 양떼와 노비와 약대와 나귀가 많았더라	And the man increased exceedingly, and had much cattle, and maidservants, and menservants, and camels, and asses.	Thus Jacob became exceedingly prosperous. He owned large flocks, maidservants and menservants, and camels and donkeys.
GEN	31	1	야곱이 들은즉 라반의 아들들의 말이 야곱이 우리 아버지의 소유를 다 빼앗고 우리 아버지의 소유로 인하여 이같이 거부가 되었다 하는지라	And he heard the words of Laban’s sons, saying, Jacob hath taken away all that was our father’s; and of that which was our father’s hath he gotten all this glory.	Now Jacob heard that Laban’s sons were saying, “Jacob has taken away all that belonged to our father and built all this wealth at our father’s expense.”
GEN	31	2	야곱이 라반의 안색을 본즉 자기에게 대하여 전과 같지 아니하더라	And Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban, and, behold, it was not toward him as before.	And Jacob saw from the countenance of Laban that his attitude toward him had changed.
GEN	31	3	여호와께서 야곱에게 이르시되 네 조상의 땅, 네 족속에게로 돌아가라 내가 너와 함께 있으리라 하신지라	And the Lord said unto Jacob, Return unto the land of thy fathers, and to thy kindred; and I will be with thee.	Then the LORD said to Jacob, “Go back to the land of your fathers and to your kindred, and I will be with you.”
GEN	31	4	야곱이 보내어 라헬과 레아를 자기 양떼 있는 들로 불러다가	And Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah to the field unto his flock,	So Jacob sent word and called Rachel and Leah to the field where his flocks were,
GEN	31	5	그들에게 이르되 내가 그대들의 아버지의 안색을 본즉 내게 대하여 전과 같지 아니하도다 그러할지라도 내 아버지의 하나님은 나와 함께 계셨느니라	And said unto them, I see your father’s countenance, that it is not toward me as before; but the God of my father hath been with me.	and he told them, “I can see from your father’s countenance that his attitude toward me has changed; but the God of my father has been with me.
GEN	31	6	그대들도 알거니와 내가 힘을 다하여 그대들의 아버지를 섬겼거늘	And ye know that with all my power I have served your father.	You know that I have served your father with all my strength.
GEN	31	7	그대들의 아버지가 나를 속여 품삯을 열번이나 변역하였느니라 그러나 하나님이 그를 금하사 나를 해치 못하게 하셨으며	And your father hath deceived me, and changed my wages ten times; but God suffered him not to hurt me.	And although he has cheated me and changed my wages ten times, God has not allowed him to harm me.
GEN	31	8	그가 이르기를 점 있는 것이 네 삯이 되리라 하면 온 양떼의 낳은 것이 점 있는 것이요 또 얼룩무늬 있는 것이 네 삯이 되리라 하면 온 양떼의 낳은 것이 얼룩무늬 있는 것이니	If he said thus, The speckled shall be thy wages; then all the cattle bare speckled: and if he said thus, The ringstraked shall be thy hire; then bare all the cattle ringstraked.	If he said, ‘The speckled will be your wages,’ then the whole flock bore speckled offspring. If he said, ‘The streaked will be your wages,’ then the whole flock bore streaked offspring.
GEN	31	9	하나님이 이같이 그대들의 아버지의 짐승을 빼앗아 내게 주셨느니라	Thus God hath taken away the cattle of your father, and given them to me.	Thus God has taken away your father’s livestock and given them to me.
GEN	31	10	그 양떼가 새끼 밸 때에 내가 꿈에 눈을 들어 보니 양떼를 탄 수양은 다 얼룩무늬 있는것, 점 있는 것, 아롱진 것이었더라	And it came to pass at the time that the cattle conceived, that I lifted up mine eyes, and saw in a dream, and, behold, the rams which leaped upon the cattle were ringstraked, speckled, and grisled.	When the flocks were breeding, I saw in a dream that the streaked, spotted, and speckled males were mating with the females.
GEN	31	11	꿈에 하나님의 사자가 내게 말씀하시기를 야곱아 하기로 내가 대답하기를 여기 있나이다 하매	And the angel of God spake unto me in a dream, saying, Jacob: And I said, Here am I.	In that dream the angel of God said to me, ‘Jacob!’ And I replied, ‘Here I am.’
GEN	31	12	가라사대 네 눈을 들어 보라 양떼를 탄 수양은 다 얼룩무늬 있는 것, 점 있는것, 아롱진 것이니라 라반이 네게 행한 모든 것을 내가 보았노라	And he said, Lift up now thine eyes, and see, all the rams which leap upon the cattle are ringstraked, speckled, and grisled: for I have seen all that Laban doeth unto thee.	‘Look up,’ he said, ‘and see that all the males that are mating with the flock are streaked, spotted, or speckled; for I have seen all that Laban has done to you.
GEN	31	13	나는 벧엘 하나님이라 네가 거기서 기둥에 기름을 붓고 거기서 내게 서원하였으니 지금 일어나 이곳을 떠나서 네 출생지로 돌아가라 하셨느니라	I am the God of Beth–el, where thou anointedst the pillar, and where thou vowedst a vow unto me: now arise, get thee out from this land, and return unto the land of thy kindred.	I am the God of Bethel, where you anointed the pillar and made a solemn vow to Me. Now get up and leave this land at once, and return to your native land.’”
GEN	31	14	라헬과 레아가 그에게 대답하여 가로되 우리가 우리 아버지 집에서 무슨 분깃이나 유업이나 있으리요	And Rachel and Leah answered and said unto him, Is there yet any portion or inheritance for us in our father’s house?	And Rachel and Leah replied, “Do we have any portion or inheritance left in our father’s house?
GEN	31	15	아버지가 우리를 팔고 우리의 돈을 다 먹었으니 아버지가 우리를 외인으로 여기는 것이 아닌가	Are we not counted of him strangers? for he hath sold us, and hath quite devoured also our money.	Are we not regarded by him as outsiders? Not only has he sold us, but he has certainly squandered what was paid for us.
GEN	31	16	하나님이 우리 아버지에게서 취하신 재물은 우리와 우리 자식의 것이니 이제 하나님이 당신에게 이르신 일을 다 준행하라	For all the riches which God hath taken from our father, that is ours, and our children’s: now then, whatsoever God hath said unto thee, do.	Surely all the wealth that God has taken away from our father belongs to us and to our children. So do whatever God has told you.”
GEN	31	17	야곱이 일어나 자식들과 아내들을 약대들에게 태우고	Then Jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives upon camels;	Then Jacob got up and put his children and his wives on camels,
GEN	31	18	그 얻은 바 모든 짐승과 모든 소유물 곧 그가 밧단아람에서 얻은 짐승을 이끌고 가나안 땅에 있는 그 아비 이삭에게로 가려할새	And he carried away all his cattle, and all his goods which he had gotten, the cattle of his getting, which he had gotten in Padan–aram, for to go to Isaac his father in the land of Canaan.	and he drove all his livestock before him, along with all the possessions he had acquired in Paddan-aram, to go to his father Isaac in the land in Canaan.
GEN	31	19	때에 라반이 양털을 깎으러 갔으므로 라헬은 그 아비의 드라빔을 도적질하고	And Laban went to shear his sheep: and Rachel had stolen the images that were her father’s.	Now while Laban was out shearing his sheep, Rachel stole her father’s household idols.
GEN	31	20	야곱은 그 거취를 아람 사람 라반에게 고하지 않고 가만히 떠났더라	And Jacob stole away unawares to Laban the Syrian, in that he told him not that he fled.	Moreover, Jacob deceived Laban the Aramean by not telling him that he was running away.
GEN	31	21	그가 그 모든 소유를 이끌고 강을 건너 길르앗산을 향하여 도망한지	So he fled with all that he had; and he rose up, and passed over the river, and set his face toward the mount Gilead.	So he fled with all his possessions, crossed the Euphrates, and headed for the hill country of Gilead.
GEN	31	22	삼일만에 야곱의 도망한 것이 라반에게 들린지라	And it was told Laban on the third day that Jacob was fled.	On the third day Laban was informed that Jacob had fled.
GEN	31	23	라반이 그 형제를 거느리고 칠 일 길을 쫓아가 길르앗산에서 그에게 미쳤더니	And he took his brethren with him, and pursued after him seven days’ journey; and they overtook him in the mount Gilead.	So he took his relatives with him, pursued Jacob for seven days, and overtook him in the hill country of Gilead.
GEN	31	24	밤에 하나님이 아람 사람 라반에게 현몽하여 가라사대 너는 삼가 야곱에게 선악간 말하지 말라 하셨더라	And God came to Laban the Syrian in a dream by night, and said unto him, Take heed that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad.	But that night God came to Laban the Aramean in a dream and warned him, “Be careful not to say anything to Jacob, either good or bad.”
GEN	31	25	라반이 야곱을 쫓아 미치니 야곱이 산에 장막을 쳤는지라 라반이 그 형제로 더불어 길르앗산에 장막을 치고	Then Laban overtook Jacob. Now Jacob had pitched his tent in the mount: and Laban with his brethren pitched in the mount of Gilead.	Now Jacob had pitched his tent in the hill country of Gilead when Laban overtook him, and Laban and his relatives camped there as well.
GEN	31	26	라반이 야곱에게 이르되 네가 내게 알리지 아니하고 가만히 내 딸들을 칼로 잡은 자 같이 끌고 갔으니 어찌 이같이 하였느냐	And Laban said to Jacob, What hast thou done, that thou hast stolen away unawares to me, and carried away my daughters, as captives taken with the sword?	Then Laban said to Jacob, “What have you done? You have deceived me and carried off my daughters like captives of war!
GEN	31	27	내가 즐거움과 노래와 북과 수금으로 너를 보내겠거늘 어찌하여 네가 나를 속이고 가만히 도망하고 내게 고하지 아니하였으며	Wherefore didst thou flee away secretly, and steal away from me; and didst not tell me, that I might have sent thee away with mirth, and with songs, with tabret, and with harp?	Why did you run away secretly and deceive me, without even telling me? I would have sent you away with joy and singing, with tambourines and harps.
GEN	31	28	나로 내 손자들과 딸들에게 입맞추지 못하게 하였느냐 네 소위가 실로 어리석도다	And hast not suffered me to kiss my sons and my daughters? thou hast now done foolishly in so doing.	But you did not even let me kiss my grandchildren and my daughters goodbye. Now you have done a foolish thing.
GEN	31	29	너를 해할만한 능력이 내 손에 있으나 너희 아버지의 하나님이 어제밤에 내게 말씀하시기를 너는 삼가 야곱에게 선악간 말하지 말라 하셨느니라	It is in the power of my hand to do you hurt: but the God of your father spake unto me yesternight, saying, Take thou heed that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad.	I have power to do you great harm, but last night the God of your father said to me, ‘Be careful not to say anything to Jacob, either good or bad.’
GEN	31	30	이제 네가 네 아비 집을 사모하여 돌아가려는 것은 가하거니와 어찌 내 신을 도적질하였느냐	And now, though thou wouldest needs be gone, because thou sore longedst after thy father’s house, yet wherefore hast thou stolen my gods?	Now you have gone off because you long for your father’s house. But why have you stolen my gods?”
GEN	31	31	야곱이 라반에게 대답하여 가로되 내가 말하기를 외삼촌이 외삼촌의 딸들을 내게서 억지로 빼앗으리라 하여 두려워 하였음이니이다	And Jacob answered and said to Laban, Because I was afraid: for I said, Peradventure thou wouldest take by force thy daughters from me.	“I was afraid,” Jacob answered, “for I thought you would take your daughters from me by force.
GEN	31	32	외삼촌의 신은 뉘게서 찾든지 그는 살지 못할 것이요 우리 형제들 앞에서 무엇이든지 외삼촌의 것이 발견되거든 외삼촌에게로 취하소서 하니 야곱은 라헬이 그것을 도적질한 줄을 알지 못함이었더라	With whomsoever thou findest thy gods, let him not live: before our brethren discern thou what is thine with me, and take it to thee. For Jacob knew not that Rachel had stolen them.	If you find your gods with anyone here, he shall not live! In the presence of our relatives, see for yourself if anything is yours, and take it back.” For Jacob did not know that Rachel had stolen the idols.
GEN	31	33	라반이 야곱의 장막에 들어가고 레아의 장막에 들어가고 두 여종의 장막에 들어갔으나 찾지 못하고 레아의 장막에서 나와 라헬의 장막에 들어가매	And Laban went into Jacob’s tent, and into Leah’s tent, and into the two maidservants’ tents; but he found them not. Then went he out of Leah’s tent, and entered into Rachel’s tent.	So Laban went into Jacob’s tent, then Leah’s tent, and then the tents of the two maidservants, but he found nothing. Then he left Leah’s tent and entered Rachel’s tent.
GEN	31	34	라헬이 그 드라빔을 가져 약대 안장 아래 넣고 그 위에 앉은지라 라반이 그 장막에서 찾다가 얻지 못하매	Now Rachel had taken the images, and put them in the camel’s furniture, and sat upon them. And Laban searched all the tent, but found them not.	Now Rachel had taken Laban’s household idols, put them in the saddlebag of her camel, and was sitting on them. And Laban searched everything in the tent but found nothing.
GEN	31	35	라헬이 그 아비에게 이르되 마침 경수가 나므로 일어나서 영접할 수 없사오니 내 주는 노하지 마소서 하니라 라반이 그 드라빔을 두루 찾다가 얻지 못한지라	And she said to her father, Let it not displease my lord that I cannot rise up before thee; for the custom of women is upon me. And he searched, but found not the images.	Rachel said to her father, “Sir, do not be angry that I cannot stand up before you; for I am having my period.” So Laban searched, but could not find the household idols.
GEN	31	36	야곱이 노하여 라반을 책망할새 야곱이 라반에게 대척하여 가로되 나의 허물이 무엇이니이까 무슨 죄가 있기에 외삼촌께서 나를 불 같이 급히 쫓나이까	And Jacob was wroth, and chode with Laban: and Jacob answered and said to Laban, What is my trespass? what is my sin, that thou hast so hotly pursued after me?	Then Jacob became incensed and challenged Laban. “What is my crime?” he said. “For what sin of mine have you so hotly pursued me?
GEN	31	37	외삼촌께서 내 물건을 다 뒤져 보셨으니 외삼촌의 가장집물 중에무엇을 찾았나이까 여기 나의 형제와 외삼촌의 형제 앞에 그것을 두고 우리 두 사이에 판단하게 하소서	Whereas thou hast searched all my stuff, what hast thou found of all thy household stuff? set it here before my brethren and thy brethren, that they may judge betwixt us both.	You have searched all my goods! Have you found anything that belongs to you? Put it here before my brothers and yours, that they may judge between the two of us.
GEN	31	38	내가 이 이십년에 외삼촌과 함께 하였거니와 외삼촌의 암양들이나 암염소들이 낙태하지 아니하였고 또 외삼촌의 양떼의 수양을 내가 먹지 아니하였으며	This twenty years have I been with thee; thy ewes and thy she goats have not cast their young, and the rams of thy flock have I not eaten.	I have been with you for twenty years now. Your sheep and goats have not miscarried, nor have I eaten the rams of your flock.
GEN	31	39	물려 찢긴 것은 내가 외삼촌에게로 가져가지 아니하고 스스로 그것을 보충하였으며 낮에 도적을 맞았든지 밤에 도적을 맞았든지 내가 외삼촌에게 물어 내었으며	That which was torn of beasts I brought not unto thee; I bare the loss of it; of my hand didst thou require it, whether stolen by day, or stolen by night.	I did not bring you anything torn by wild beasts; I bore the loss myself. And you demanded payment from me for what was stolen by day or night.
GEN	31	40	내가 이와 같이 낮에는 더위를 무릅쓰고 밤에는 추위를 당하며 눈붙일 겨를도 없이 지내었나이다	Thus I was; in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by night; and my sleep departed from mine eyes.	As it was, the heat consumed me by day and the frost by night, and sleep fled from my eyes.
GEN	31	41	내가 외삼촌의 집에 거한 이 이십년에 외삼촌의 두 딸을 위하여 십 사년, 외삼촌의 양떼를 위하여 육년을 외삼촌을 봉사하였거니와 외삼촌께서 내 품값을 열번이나 변역하셨으니	Thus have I been twenty years in thy house; I served thee fourteen years for thy two daughters, and six years for thy cattle: and thou hast changed my wages ten times.	Thus for twenty years I have served in your household—fourteen years for your two daughters and six years for your flocks—and you have changed my wages ten times!
GEN	31	42	우리 아버지의 하나님, 아브라함의 하나님, 곧 이삭의 경외하는 이가 나와 함께 계시지 아니하셨더면 외삼촌께서 이제 나를 공수로 돌려 보내셨으리이다마는 하나님이 나의 고난과 내 손의 수고를 감찰하시고 어제밤에 외삼촌을 책망하셨나이다	Except the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the fear of Isaac, had been with me, surely thou hadst sent me away now empty. God hath seen mine affliction and the labour of my hands, and rebuked thee yesternight.	If the God of my father, the God of Abraham and the Fear of Isaac, had not been with me, surely by now you would have sent me away empty-handed. But God has seen my affliction and the toil of my hands, and last night He rendered judgment.”
GEN	31	43	라반이 야곱에게 대답하여 가로되 딸들은 내 딸이요 자식들은 내 자식이요 양떼는 나의 양떼요 네가 보는 것은 다 내 것이라 내가 오늘날 내 딸들과 그 낳은 자식들에게 어찌할수 있으랴	And Laban answered and said unto Jacob, These daughters are my daughters, and these children are my children, and these cattle are my cattle, and all that thou seest is mine: and what can I do this day unto these my daughters, or unto their children which they have born?	But Laban answered Jacob, “These daughters are my daughters, these sons are my sons, and these flocks are my flocks! Everything you see is mine! Yet what can I do today about these daughters of mine or the children they have borne?
GEN	31	44	이제 오라 너와 내가 언약을 세워 그것으로 너와 나 사이에 증거를 삼을 것이니라	Now therefore come thou, let us make a covenant, I and thou; and let it be for a witness between me and thee.	Come now, let us make a covenant, you and I, and let it serve as a witness between you and me.”
GEN	31	45	이에 야곱이 돌을 가져 기둥으로 세우고	And Jacob took a stone, and set it up for a pillar.	So Jacob picked out a stone and set it up as a pillar,
GEN	31	46	또 그 형제들에게 돌을 모으라 하니 그들이 돌을 취하여 무더기를 이루매 무리가 거기 무더기 곁에서 먹고	And Jacob said unto his brethren, Gather stones; and they took stones, and made an heap: and they did eat there upon the heap.	and he said to his relatives, “Gather some stones.” So they took stones and made a mound, and there by the mound they ate.
GEN	31	47	라반은 그것을 여갈사하두다라 칭하였고 야곱은 그것을 갈르엣이라 칭하였으니	And Laban called it Jegar–sahadutha: but Jacob called it Galeed.	Laban called it Jegar-sahadutha, and Jacob called it Galeed.
GEN	31	48	라반의 말에 오늘날 이 무더기가 너와 나 사이에 증거가 된다 하였으므로 그 이름을 갈르엣이라 칭하였으며	And Laban said, This heap is a witness between me and thee this day. Therefore was the name of it called Galeed;	Then Laban declared, “This mound is a witness between you and me this day.” Therefore the place was called Galeed.
GEN	31	49	또 미스바라 하였으니 이는 그의 말에 우리 피차 떠나 있을 때에 여호와께서 너와 나 사이에 감찰하옵소서 함이라	And Mizpah; for he said, The Lord watch between me and thee, when we are absent one from another.	It was also called Mizpah, because Laban said, “May the LORD keep watch between you and me when we are absent from each other.
GEN	31	50	네가 내 딸을 박대하거나 내 딸들 외에 다른 아내들을 취하면 사람은 우리와 함께 할 자가 없어도 보라 하나님이 너와 나 사이에 증거하시느니라 하였더라	If thou shalt afflict my daughters, or if thou shalt take other wives beside my daughters, no man is with us; see, God is witness betwixt me and thee.	If you mistreat my daughters or take other wives, although no one is with us, remember that God is a witness between you and me.”
GEN	31	51	라반이 또 야곱에게 이르되 내가 너와 나 사이에 둔 이 무더기를 보라 또 이 기둥을 보라	And Laban said to Jacob, Behold this heap, and behold this pillar, which I have cast betwixt me and thee;	Laban also said to Jacob, “Here is the mound, and here is the pillar I have set up between you and me.
GEN	31	52	이 무더기가 증거가 되고 이 기둥이 증거가 되나니 내가 이 무더기를 넘어 네게로 가서 해하지 않을 것이요 네가 이 무더기, 이 기둥을 넘어 내게로 와서 해하지 않을 것이라	This heap be witness, and this pillar be witness, that I will not pass over this heap to thee, and that thou shalt not pass over this heap and this pillar unto me, for harm.	This mound is a witness, and this pillar is a witness, that I will not go past this mound to harm you, and you will not go past this mound and pillar to harm me.
GEN	31	53	아브라함의 하나님, 나홀의 하나님, 그들의 조상의 하나님은 우리 사이에 판단하옵소서 하매 야곱이 그 아비 이삭의 경외하는 이를 가리켜 맹세하고	The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, the God of their father, judge betwixt us. And Jacob sware by the fear of his father Isaac.	May the God of Abraham and the God of Nahor, the God of their father, judge between us.” So Jacob swore by the Fear of his father Isaac.
GEN	31	54	야곱이 또 산에서 제사를 드리고 형제들을 불러 떡을 먹이니 그들이 떡을 먹고 산에서 경야하고	Then Jacob offered sacrifice upon the mount, and called his brethren to eat bread: and they did eat bread, and tarried all night in the mount.	Then Jacob offered a sacrifice on the mountain and invited his relatives to eat a meal. And after they had eaten, they spent the night on the mountain.
GEN	31	55	라반이 아침에 일찍이 일어나 손자들과 딸들에게 입맞추며 그들에게 축복하고 떠나 고향으로 돌아갔더라	And early in the morning Laban rose up, and kissed his sons and his daughters, and blessed them: and Laban departed, and returned unto his place.	Early the next morning, Laban got up and kissed his grandchildren and daughters and blessed them. Then he left to return home.
GEN	32	1	야곱이 그 길을 진행하더니 하나님의 사자들이 그를 만난지라	And Jacob went on his way, and the angels of God met him.	Jacob also went on his way, and the angels of God met him.
GEN	32	2	야곱이 그들을 볼 때에 이르기를 이는 하나님의 군대라 하고 그 땅 이름을 마하나임이라 하였더라	And when Jacob saw them, he said, This is God’s host: and he called the name of that place Mahanaim.	When Jacob saw them, he said, “This is the camp of God.” So he named that place Mahanaim.
GEN	32	3	야곱이 세일 땅 에돔 들에 있는 형 에서에게로 사자들을 자기보다 앞서 보내며	And Jacob sent messengers before him to Esau his brother unto the land of Seir, the country of Edom.	Jacob sent messengers ahead of him to his brother Esau in the land of Seir, the country of Edom.
GEN	32	4	그들에게 부탁하여 가로되 너희는 이같이 내 주 에서에게 고하라 주의 종 야곱이 말하기를 내가 라반에게 붙여서 지금까지 있었사오며	And he commanded them, saying, Thus shall ye speak unto my lord Esau; Thy servant Jacob saith thus, I have sojourned with Laban, and stayed there until now:	He instructed them, “You are to say to my master Esau, ‘Your servant Jacob says: I have been staying with Laban and have remained there until now.
GEN	32	5	내게 소와 나귀와 양떼와 노비가 있사오므로 사람을 보내어 내 주께 고하고 내 주께 은혜 받기를 원하나이다 하더라 하라 하였더니	And I have oxen, and asses, flocks, and menservants, and womenservants: and I have sent to tell my lord, that I may find grace in thy sight.	I have oxen, donkeys, flocks, menservants, and maidservants. I have sent this message to inform my master, so that I may find favor in your sight.’”
GEN	32	6	사자들이 야곱에게 돌아와 가로되 우리가 주인의 형 에서에게 이른즉 그가 사백인을 거느리고 주인을 만나려고 오더이다	And the messengers returned to Jacob, saying, We came to thy brother Esau, and also he cometh to meet thee, and four hundred men with him.	When the messengers returned to Jacob, they said, “We went to your brother Esau, and now he is coming to meet you—he and four hundred men with him.”
GEN	32	7	야곱이 심히 두렵고 답답하여 자기와 함께 한 종자와 양과 소와 약대를 두 떼로 나누고	Then Jacob was greatly afraid and distressed: and he divided the people that was with him, and the flocks, and herds, and the camels, into two bands;	In great fear and distress, Jacob divided his people into two camps, as well as the flocks and herds and camels.
GEN	32	8	가로되 에서가 와서 한 떼를 치면 남은 한 떼는 피하리라 하고	And said, If Esau come to the one company, and smite it, then the other company which is left shall escape.	He thought, “If Esau comes and attacks one camp, then the other camp can escape.”
GEN	32	9	야곱이 또 가로되 나의 조부 아브라함의 하나님, 나의 아버지 이삭의 하나님, 여호와여 주께서 전에 내게 명하시기를 네 고향 네 족속에게로 돌아가라 내가 네게 은혜를 베풀리라 하셨나이다	And Jacob said, O God of my father Abraham, and God of my father Isaac, the Lord which saidst unto me, Return unto thy country, and to thy kindred, and I will deal well with thee:	Then Jacob declared, “O God of my father Abraham, God of my father Isaac, the LORD who told me, ‘Go back to your country and to your kindred, and I will make you prosper,’
GEN	32	10	나는 주께서 주의 종에게 베푸신 모든 은총과 모든 진리를 조금이라도 감당할 수 없사오나 내가 내 지팡이만 가지고 이 요단을 건넜더니 지금은 두 떼나 이루었나이다	I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth, which thou hast shewed unto thy servant; for with my staff I passed over this Jordan; and now I am become two bands.	I am unworthy of all the kindness and faithfulness You have shown Your servant. Indeed, with only my staff I came across the Jordan, but now I have become two camps.
GEN	32	11	내가 주께 간구하오니 내 형의 손에서 에서의 손에서 나를 건져 내시옵소서 내가 그를 두려워하옴은 그가 와서 나와 내 처자들을 칠까 겁냄이니이다	Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau: for I fear him, lest he will come and smite me, and the mother with the children.	Please deliver me from the hand of my brother Esau, for I am afraid that he may come and attack me and the mothers and children with me.
GEN	32	12	주께서 말씀하시기를 내가 정녕 네게 은혜를 베풀어 네 씨로 바다의 셀 수 없는 모래와 같이 많게 하리라 하셨나이다	And thou saidst, I will surely do thee good, and make thy seed as the sand of the sea, which cannot be numbered for multitude.	But You have said, ‘I will surely make you prosper, and I will make your offspring like the sand of the sea, too numerous to count.’”
GEN	32	13	야곱이 거기서 경야하고 그 소유 중에서 형 에서를 위하여 예물을 택하니	And he lodged there that same night; and took of that which came to his hand a present for Esau his brother;	Jacob spent the night there, and from what he had brought with him, he selected a gift for his brother Esau:
GEN	32	14	암염소가 이백이요 수염소가 이십이요 암양이 이백이요 수양이 이십이요	Two hundred she goats, and twenty he goats, two hundred ewes, and twenty rams,	200 female goats, 20 male goats, 200 ewes, 20 rams,
GEN	32	15	젖나는 약대 삼십과 그 새끼요 암소가 사십이요 황소가 열이요 암나귀가 이십이요 그 새끼나귀가 열이라	Thirty milch camels with their colts, forty kine, and ten bulls, twenty she asses, and ten foals.	30 milk camels with their young, 40 cows, 10 bulls, 20 female donkeys, and 10 male donkeys.
GEN	32	16	그것을 각각 떼로 나눠 종들의 손에 맡기고 그 종들에게 이르되 나보다 앞서 건너가서 각 떼로 상거가 뜨게 하라 하고	And he delivered them into the hand of his servants, every drove by themselves; and said unto his servants, Pass over before me, and put a space betwixt drove and drove.	He entrusted them to his servants in separate herds and told them, “Go on ahead of me, and keep some distance between the herds.”
GEN	32	17	그가 또 앞선 자에게 부탁하여 가로되 내 형 에서가 너를 만나 묻기를 네가 뉘 사람이며 어디로 가느냐 네 앞엣 것은 뉘 것이냐 하거든	And he commanded the foremost, saying, When Esau my brother meeteth thee, and asketh thee, saying, Whose art thou? and whither goest thou? and whose are these before thee?	He instructed the one in the lead, “When my brother Esau meets you and asks, ‘To whom do you belong, where are you going, and whose animals are these before you?’
GEN	32	18	대답하기를 주의 종 야곱의 것이요 자기 주 에서에게로 보내는 예물이오며 야곱도 우리 뒤에 있나이다 하라 하고	Then thou shalt say, They be thy servant Jacob’s; it is a present sent unto my lord Esau: and, behold, also he is behind us.	then you are to say, ‘They belong to your servant Jacob. They are a gift, sent to my lord Esau. And behold, Jacob is behind us.’”
GEN	32	19	그 둘째와 셋째와 각 떼를 따라가는 자에게 부탁하여 가로되 너희도 에서를 만나거든 곧 이같이 그에게 고하고	And so commanded he the second, and the third, and all that followed the droves, saying, On this manner shall ye speak unto Esau, when ye find him.	He also instructed the second, the third, and all those following behind the herds: “When you meet Esau, you are to say the same thing to him.
GEN	32	20	또 너희는 말하기를 주의 종 야곱이 우리 뒤에 있다 하라 하니 이는 야곱의 생각에 내가 내 앞에 보내는 예물로 형의 감정을 푼 후에 대면하면 형이 혹시 나를 받으리라 함이었더라	And say ye moreover, Behold, thy servant Jacob is behind us. For he said, I will appease him with the present that goeth before me, and afterward I will see his face; peradventure he will accept of me.	You are also to say, ‘Look, your servant Jacob is right behind us.’” For he thought, “I will appease Esau with the gift that is going before me. After that I can face him, and perhaps he will accept me.”
GEN	32	21	그 예물은 그의 앞서 행하고 그는 무리 가운데서 경야하다가	So went the present over before him: and himself lodged that night in the company.	So Jacob’s gifts went on before him, while he spent the night in the camp.
GEN	32	22	밤에 일어나 두 아내와 두 여종과 열한 아들을 인도하여 얍복 나루를 건널새	And he rose up that night, and took his two wives, and his two womenservants, and his eleven sons, and passed over the ford Jabbok.	During the night Jacob got up and took his two wives, his two maidservants, and his eleven sons, and crossed the ford of the Jabbok.
GEN	32	23	그들을 인도하여 시내를 건네며 그 소유도 건네고	And he took them, and sent them over the brook, and sent over that he had.	He took them and sent them across the stream, along with all his possessions.
GEN	32	24	야곱은 홀로 남았더니 어떤 사람이 날이 새도록 야곱과 씨름하다가	And Jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a man with him until the breaking of the day.	So Jacob was left all alone, and there a man wrestled with him until daybreak.
GEN	32	25	그 사람이 자기가 야곱을 이기지 못함을 보고 야곱의 환도뼈를 치매 야곱의 환도뼈가 그 사람과 씨름할 때에 위골되었더라	And when he saw that he prevailed not against him, he touched the hollow of his thigh; and the hollow of Jacob’s thigh was out of joint, as he wrestled with him.	When the man saw that he could not overpower Jacob, he struck the socket of Jacob’s hip and dislocated it as they wrestled.
GEN	32	26	그 사람이 가로되 날이 새려 하니 나로 가게 하라 야곱이 가로되 당신이 내게 축복하지 아니하면 가게 하지 아니하겠나이다	And he said, Let me go, for the day breaketh. And he said, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me.	Then the man said, “Let me go, for it is daybreak.” But Jacob replied, “I will not let you go unless you bless me.”
GEN	32	27	그 사람이 그에게 이르되 네 이름이 무엇이냐 그가 가로되 야곱이니이다	And he said unto him, What is thy name? And he said, Jacob.	“What is your name?” the man asked. “Jacob,” he replied.
GEN	32	28	그 사람이 가로되 네 이름을 다시는 야곱이라 부를 것이 아니요 이스라엘이라 부를 것이니 이는 네가 하나님과 사람으로 더불어 겨루어 이기었음이니라	And he said, Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel: for as a prince hast thou power with God and with men, and hast prevailed.	Then the man said, “Your name will no longer be Jacob, but Israel, because you have struggled with God and with men, and you have prevailed.”
GEN	32	29	야곱이 청하여 가로되 당신의 이름을 고하소서 그 사람이 가로되 어찌 내 이름을 묻느냐 하고 거기서 야곱에게 축복한지라	And Jacob asked him, and said, Tell me, I pray thee, thy name. And he said, Wherefore is it that thou dost ask after my name? And he blessed him there.	And Jacob requested, “Please tell me your name.” But he replied, “Why do you ask my name?” Then he blessed Jacob there.
GEN	32	30	그러므로 야곱이 그곳 이름을 브니엘이라 하였으니 그가 이르기를 내가 하나님과 대면하여 보았으나 내 생명이 보전되었다 함이더라	And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel: for I have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved.	So Jacob named the place Peniel, saying, “Indeed, I have seen God face to face, and yet my life was spared.”
GEN	32	31	그가 브니엘을 지날 때에 해가 돋았고 그 환도뼈로 인하여 절었더라	And as he passed over Penuel the sun rose upon him, and he halted upon his thigh.	The sun rose above him as he passed by Penuel, and he was limping because of his hip.
GEN	32	32	그 사람이 야곱의 환도뼈 큰 힘줄을 친고로 이스라엘 사람들이 지금까지 환도뼈 큰 힘줄을 먹지 아니하더라	Therefore the children of Israel eat not of the sinew which shrank, which is upon the hollow of the thigh, unto this day: because he touched the hollow of Jacob’s thigh in the sinew that shrank.	Therefore to this day the Israelites do not eat the tendon which is at the socket of the hip, because the socket of Jacob’s hip was struck near that tendon.
GEN	33	1	야곱이 눈을 들어 보니 에서가 사백인을 거느리고 오는지라 그 자식들을 나누어 레아와 라헬과 두 여종에게 맡기고	And Jacob lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, Esau came, and with him four hundred men. And he divided the children unto Leah, and unto Rachel, and unto the two handmaids.	Now Jacob looked up and saw Esau coming toward him with four hundred men. So he divided the children among Leah, Rachel, and the two maidservants.
GEN	33	2	여종과 그 자식들은 앞에 두고 레아와 그 자식들은 다음에 두고 라헬과 요셉은 뒤에 두고	And he put the handmaids and their children foremost, and Leah and her children after, and Rachel and Joseph hindermost.	He put the maidservants and their children in front, Leah and her children next, and Rachel and Joseph at the rear.
GEN	33	3	자기는 그들 앞에서 나아가되 몸을 일곱번 땅에 굽히며 그 형 에서에게 가까이 하니	And he passed over before them, and bowed himself to the ground seven times, until he came near to his brother.	But Jacob himself went on ahead and bowed to the ground seven times as he approached his brother.
GEN	33	4	에서가 달려와서 그를 맞아서 안고 목을 어긋맞기고 그와 입맞추고 피차 우니라	And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his neck, and kissed him: and they wept.	Esau, however, ran to him and embraced him, threw his arms around his neck, and kissed him. And they both wept.
GEN	33	5	에서가 눈을 들어 여인과 자식들을 보고 묻되 너와 함께한 이들은 누구냐 야곱이 가로되 하나님이 주의 종에게 은혜로 주신 자식이니이다	And he lifted up his eyes, and saw the women and the children; and said, Who are those with thee? And he said, The children which God hath graciously given thy servant.	When Esau looked up and saw the women and children, he asked, “Who are these with you?” Jacob answered, “These are the children God has graciously given your servant.”
GEN	33	6	때에 여종들이 그 자식으로 더불어 나아와 절하고	Then the handmaidens came near, they and their children, and they bowed themselves.	Then the maidservants and their children approached and bowed down.
GEN	33	7	레아도 그 자식으로 더불어 나아와 절하고 그 후에 요셉이 라헬로 더불어 나아와 절하니	And Leah also with her children came near, and bowed themselves: and after came Joseph near and Rachel, and they bowed themselves.	Leah and her children also approached and bowed down, and then Joseph and Rachel approached and bowed down.
GEN	33	8	에서가 또 가로되 나의 만난 바 이 모든 떼는 무슨 까닭이냐 야곱이 가로되 내 주께 은혜를 입으려 함이니이다	And he said, What meanest thou by all this drove which I met? And he said, These are to find grace in the sight of my lord.	“What do you mean by sending this whole company to meet me?” asked Esau. “To find favor in your sight, my lord,” Jacob answered.
GEN	33	9	에서가 가로되 내 동생아 내게 있는 것이 족하니 네 소유는 네게두라	And Esau said, I have enough, my brother; keep that thou hast unto thyself.	“I already have plenty, my brother,” Esau replied. “Keep what belongs to you.”
GEN	33	10	야곱이 가로되 그렇지 아니하니이다 형님께 은혜를 얻었사오면 청컨대 내 손에서 이 예물을 받으소서 내가 형님의 얼굴을 뵈온 즉 하나님의 얼굴을 본 것 같사오며 형님도 나를 기뻐하심이니이다	And Jacob said, Nay, I pray thee, if now I have found grace in thy sight, then receive my present at my hand: for therefore I have seen thy face, as though I had seen the face of God, and thou wast pleased with me.	But Jacob insisted, “No, please! If I have found favor in your sight, then receive this gift from my hand. For indeed, I have seen your face, and it is like seeing the face of God, since you have received me favorably.
GEN	33	11	하나님이 내게 은혜를 베푸셨고 나의 소유도 족하오니 청컨대 내가 형님께 드리는 예물을 받으소서 하고 그에게 강권하매 받으니라	Take, I pray thee, my blessing that is brought to thee; because God hath dealt graciously with me, and because I have enough. And he urged him, and he took it.	Please accept my gift that was brought to you, because God has been gracious to me and I have all I need.” So Jacob pressed him until he accepted.
GEN	33	12	에서가 가로되 우리가 떠나가자 내가 너의 앞잡이가 되리라	And he said, Let us take our journey, and let us go, and I will go before thee.	Then Esau said, “Let us be on our way, and I will go ahead of you.”
GEN	33	13	야곱이 그에게 이르되 내 주도 아시거니와 자식들은 유약하고 내게 있는 양떼와 소가 새끼를 데렸은즉 하루만 과히 몰면 모든 떼가 죽으리니	And he said unto him, My lord knoweth that the children are tender, and the flocks and herds with young are with me: and if men should overdrive them one day, all the flock will die.	But Jacob replied, “My lord knows that the children are frail, and I must care for sheep and cattle that are nursing their young. If they are driven hard for even a day, all the animals will die.
GEN	33	14	청컨대 내 주는 종보다 앞서 가소서 나는 앞에 가는 짐승과 자식의 행보대로 천천히 인도하여 세일로 가서 내 주께 나아가리이다	Let my lord, I pray thee, pass over before his servant: and I will lead on softly, according as the cattle that goeth before me and the children be able to endure, until I come unto my lord unto Seir.	Please let my lord go ahead of his servant. I will continue on slowly, at a comfortable pace for the livestock and children, until I come to my lord at Seir.”
GEN	33	15	에서가 가로되 내가 내 종자 수인을 네게 머물리라 야곱이 가로되 어찌하여 그리하리이까 나로 내 주께 은혜를 얻게 하소서 하매	And Esau said, Let me now leave with thee some of the folk that are with me. And he said, What needeth it? let me find grace in the sight of my lord.	“Let me leave some of my people with you,” Esau said. But Jacob replied, “Why do that? Let me find favor in the sight of my lord.”
GEN	33	16	이 날에 에서는 세일로 회정하고	So Esau returned that day on his way unto Seir.	So that day Esau started on his way back to Seir,
GEN	33	17	야곱은 숙곳에 이르러 자기를 위하여 집을 짓고 짐승을 위하여 우릿간을 지은 고로 그 땅 이름을 숙곳이라 부르더라	And Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and built him an house, and made booths for his cattle: therefore the name of the place is called Succoth.	but Jacob went on to Succoth, where he built a house for himself and shelters for his livestock; that is why the place was called Succoth.
GEN	33	18	야곱이 밧단아람에서부터 평안히 가나안 땅 세겜 성에 이르러 성앞에 그 장막을 치고	And Jacob came to Shalem, a city of Shechem, which is in the land of Canaan, when he came from Padan–aram; and pitched his tent before the city.	After Jacob had come from Paddan-aram, he arrived safely at the city of Shechem in the land of Canaan, and he camped just outside the city.
GEN	33	19	그 장막 친 밭을 세겜의 아비 하몰의 아들들의 손에서 은 일백개로 사고	And he bought a parcel of a field, where he had spread his tent, at the hand of the children of Hamor, Shechem’s father, for an hundred pieces of money.	And the plot of ground where he pitched his tent, he purchased from the sons of Hamor, Shechem’s father, for a hundred pieces of silver.
GEN	33	20	거기 단을 쌓고 그 이름을 엘엘로헤이스라엘이라 하였더라	And he erected there an altar, and called it El–elohe–Israel.	There he set up an altar and called it El-Elohe-Israel.
GEN	34	1	레아가 야곱에게 낳은 딸 디나가 그 땅 여자를 보러 나갔더니	And Dinah the daughter of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob, went out to see the daughters of the land.	Now Dinah, the daughter Leah had borne to Jacob, went out to visit the daughters of the land.
GEN	34	2	히위 족속 중 하몰의 아들 그 땅 추장 세겜이 그를 보고 끌어들여 강간하여 욕되게 하고	And when Shechem the son of Hamor the Hivite, prince of the country, saw her, he took her, and lay with her, and defiled her.	When Shechem son of Hamor the Hivite, the prince of the region, saw her, he took her and lay with her by force.
GEN	34	3	그 마음이 깊이 야곱의 딸 디나에게 연련하며 그 소녀를 사랑하여 그의 마음을 말로 위로하고	And his soul clave unto Dinah the daughter of Jacob, and he loved the damsel, and spake kindly unto the damsel.	And his soul was drawn to Dinah, the daughter of Jacob. He loved the young girl and spoke to her tenderly.
GEN	34	4	그 아비 하몰에게 청하여 가로되 이 소녀를 내 아내로 얻게 하여주소서 하였더라	And Shechem spake unto his father Hamor, saying, Get me this damsel to wife.	So Shechem told his father Hamor, “Get me this girl as a wife.”
GEN	34	5	야곱이 그 딸 디나를 그가 더럽혔다 함을 들었으나 자기 아들들이 들에서 목축하므로 그들의 돌아오기까지 잠잠하였고	And Jacob heard that he had defiled Dinah his daughter: now his sons were with his cattle in the field: and Jacob held his peace until they were come.	Jacob heard that Shechem had defiled his daughter Dinah, but since his sons were with his livestock in the field, he remained silent about it until they returned.
GEN	34	6	세겜의 아비 하몰은 야곱에게 말하러 왔으며	And Hamor the father of Shechem went out unto Jacob to commune with him.	Meanwhile, Shechem’s father Hamor came to speak with Jacob.
GEN	34	7	야곱의 아들들은 들에서 이를 듣고 돌아와서 사람 사람이 근심하고 심히 노하였으니 이는 세겜이 야곱의 딸을 강간하여 이스라엘에게 부끄러운 일 곧 행치 못할 일을 행하였음이더라	And the sons of Jacob came out of the field when they heard it: and the men were grieved, and they were very wroth, because he had wrought folly in Israel in lying with Jacob’s daughter; which thing ought not to be done.	When Jacob’s sons heard what had happened, they returned from the field. They were filled with grief and fury, because Shechem had committed an outrage in Israel by lying with Jacob’s daughter—a thing that should not be done.
GEN	34	8	하몰이 그들에게 이르되 내 아들 세겜이 마음으로 너희 딸을 연련하여 하니 원컨대 그를 세겜에게 주어 아내를 삼게 하라	And Hamor communed with them, saying, The soul of my son Shechem longeth for your daughter: I pray you give her him to wife.	But Hamor said to them, “My son Shechem longs for your daughter. Please give her to him as his wife.
GEN	34	9	너희가 우리와 통혼하여 너희 딸을 우리에게 주며 우리 딸을 너희가 취하고	And make ye marriages with us, and give your daughters unto us, and take our daughters unto you.	Intermarry with us; give us your daughters, and take our daughters for yourselves.
GEN	34	10	너희가 우리와 함께 거하되 땅이 너희 앞에 있으니 여기 머물러 매매하며 여기서 기업을 얻으라 하고	And ye shall dwell with us: and the land shall be before you; dwell and trade ye therein, and get you possessions therein.	You may settle among us, and the land will be open to you. Live here, move about freely, and acquire your own property.”
GEN	34	11	세겜도 디나의 아비와 남형들에게 이르되 나로 너희에게 은혜를 입게 하라 너희가 내게 청구하는 것은 내가 수응하리니	And Shechem said unto her father and unto her brethren, Let me find grace in your eyes, and what ye shall say unto me I will give.	Then Shechem said to Dinah’s father and brothers, “Grant me this favor, and I will give you whatever you ask.
GEN	34	12	이 소녀만 내게 주어 아내가 되게 하라 아무리 큰 빙물과 예물을 청구할지라도 너희가 내게 말한 대로 수응하리라	Ask me never so much dowry and gift, and I will give according as ye shall say unto me: but give me the damsel to wife.	Demand a high dowry and an expensive gift, and I will give you whatever you ask. Only give me the girl as my wife!”
GEN	34	13	야곱의 아들들이 세겜과 그 아비 하몰에게 속여 대답하였으니 이는 세겜이 그 누이 디나를 더럽혔음이라	And the sons of Jacob answered Shechem and Hamor his father deceitfully, and said, because he had defiled Dinah their sister:	But because Shechem had defiled their sister Dinah, Jacob’s sons answered him and his father Hamor deceitfully.
GEN	34	14	야곱의 아들들이 그들에게 말하되 우리는 그리하지 못하겠노라 할례 받지 아니한 사람에게 우리 누이를 줄 수 없노니 이는 우리의 수욕이 됨이니라	And they said unto them, We cannot do this thing, to give our sister to one that is uncircumcised; for that were a reproach unto us:	“We cannot do such a thing,” they said. “To give our sister to an uncircumcised man would be a disgrace to us.
GEN	34	15	그런즉 이같이 하면 너희에게 허락하리라 만일 너희 중 남자가 다 할례를 받고 우리 같이 되면	But in this will we consent unto you: If ye will be as we be, that every male of you be circumcised;	We will consent to this on one condition, that you become circumcised like us—every one of your males.
GEN	34	16	우리 딸을 너희에게 주며 너희 딸을 우리가 취하며 너희가 함께 거하여 한 민족이 되려니와	Then will we give our daughters unto you, and we will take your daughters to us, and we will dwell with you, and we will become one people.	Then we will give you our daughters and take your daughters for ourselves. We will dwell among you and become one people.
GEN	34	17	너희가 만일 우리를 듣지 아니하고 할례를 받지 아니하면 우리는 곧 우리 딸을 데리고 가리라	But if ye will not hearken unto us, to be circumcised; then will we take our daughter, and we will be gone.	But if you will not agree to be circumcised, then we will take our sister and go.”
GEN	34	18	그들의 말을 하몰과 그 아들 세겜이 좋게 여기므로	And their words pleased Hamor, and Shechem Hamor’s son.	Their offer seemed good to Hamor and his son Shechem.
GEN	34	19	이 소년이 그 일 행하기를 지체치 아니하였으니 그가 야곱의 딸을 사랑함이며 그는 그 아비 집에 가장 존귀함일러라	And the young man deferred not to do the thing, because he had delight in Jacob’s daughter: and he was more honourable than all the house of his father.	The young man, who was the most respected of all his father’s household, did not hesitate to fulfill this request, because he was delighted with Jacob’s daughter.
GEN	34	20	하몰과 그 아들 세겜이 성문에 이르러 그 고을 사람에게 말하여 가로되	And Hamor and Shechem his son came unto the gate of their city, and communed with the men of their city, saying,	So Hamor and his son Shechem went to the gate of their city and addressed the men of their city:
GEN	34	21	이 사람들은 우리와 친목하고 이 땅은 넓어 그들을 용납할만하니 그들로 여기서 거주하며 매매하게 하고 우리가 그들의 딸들을 아내로 취하고 우리 딸들도 그들에게 주자	These men are peaceable with us; therefore let them dwell in the land, and trade therein; for the land, behold, it is large enough for them; let us take their daughters to us for wives, and let us give them our daughters.	“These men are at peace with us. Let them live and trade in our land; indeed, it is large enough for them. Let us take their daughters in marriage and give our daughters to them.
GEN	34	22	그러나 우리 중에 모든 남자가 그들의 할례를 받음 같이 할례를 받아야 그 사람들이 우리와 함께 거하여 한 민족 되기를 허락할 것이라	Only herein will the men consent unto us for to dwell with us, to be one people, if every male among us be circumcised, as they are circumcised.	But only on this condition will the men agree to dwell with us and be one people: if all our men are circumcised as they are.
GEN	34	23	그리하면 그들의 생축과 재산과 그 모든 짐승이 우리의 소유가 되지 않겠느냐 다만 그 말대로 하자 그리하면 그들이 우리와 함께 거하리라	Shall not their cattle and their substance and every beast of theirs be ours? only let us consent unto them, and they will dwell with us.	Will not their livestock, their possessions, and all their animals become ours? Only let us consent to them, and they will dwell among us.”
GEN	34	24	성문으로 출입하는 모든 자가 하몰과 그 아들 세겜의 말을 듣고 성문으로 출입하는 그 모든 남자가 할례를 받으니라	And unto Hamor and unto Shechem his son hearkened all that went out of the gate of his city; and every male was circumcised, all that went out of the gate of his city.	All the men who went out of the city gate listened to Hamor and his son Shechem, and every male of the city was circumcised.
GEN	34	25	제삼일에 미쳐 그들이 고통할 때에 야곱의 두 아들 디나의 오라비 시므온과 레위가 각기 칼을 가지고 가서 부지 중에 성을 엄습하여 그 모든 남자를 죽이고	And it came to pass on the third day, when they were sore, that two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinah’s brethren, took each man his sword, and came upon the city boldly, and slew all the males.	Three days later, while they were still in pain, two of Jacob’s sons (Dinah’s brothers Simeon and Levi) took their swords, went into the unsuspecting city, and slaughtered every male.
GEN	34	26	칼로 하몰과 그 아들 세겜을 죽이고 디나를 세겜의 집에서 데려 오고	And they slew Hamor and Shechem his son with the edge of the sword, and took Dinah out of Shechem’s house, and went out.	They killed Hamor and his son Shechem with their swords, took Dinah out of Shechem’s house, and went away.
GEN	34	27	야곱의 여러 아들이 그 시체있는 성으로 가서 노략하였으니 이는 그들이 그 누이를 더럽힌 연고라	The sons of Jacob came upon the slain, and spoiled the city, because they had defiled their sister.	Jacob’s other sons came upon the slaughter and looted the city, because their sister had been defiled.
GEN	34	28	그들이 양과 소와 나귀와 그 성에 있는 것과 들에 있는 것과	They took their sheep, and their oxen, and their asses, and that which was in the city, and that which was in the field,	They took their flocks and herds and donkeys, and everything else in the city or in the field.
GEN	34	29	그 모든 재물을 빼앗으며 그 자녀와 아내들을 사로잡고 집 속의 물건을 다 노략한지라	And all their wealth, and all their little ones, and their wives took they captive, and spoiled even all that was in the house.	They carried off all their possessions and women and children, and they plundered everything in their houses.
GEN	34	30	야곱이 시므온과 레위에게 이르되 너희가 내게 화를 끼쳐 나로 이 땅 사람 곧 가나안 족속과 브리스 족속에게 냄새를 내게 하였도다 나는 수가 적은즉 그들이 모여 나를 치고 나를 죽이리니 그리하면 나와 내 집이 멸망하리라	And Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, Ye have troubled me to make me to stink among the inhabitants of the land, among the Canaanites and the Perizzites: and I being few in number, they shall gather themselves together against me, and slay me; and I shall be destroyed, I and my house.	Then Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, “You have brought trouble upon me by making me a stench to the Canaanites and Perizzites, the people of this land. We are few in number; if they unite against me and attack me, I and my household will be destroyed.”
GEN	34	31	그들이 가로되 그가 우리 누이를 창녀 같이 대우함이 가하니이까	And they said, Should he deal with our sister as with an harlot?	But they replied, “Should he have treated our sister like a prostitute?”
GEN	35	1	하나님이 야곱에게 이르시되 일어나 벧엘로 올라가서 거기 거하며 네가 네 형 에서의 낯을 피하여 도망하던 때에 네게 나타났던 하나님께 거기서 단을 쌓으라 하신지라	And God said unto Jacob, Arise, go up to Beth–el, and dwell there: and make there an altar unto God, that appeared unto thee when thou fleddest from the face of Esau thy brother.	Then God said to Jacob, “Arise, go up to Bethel, and settle there. Build an altar there to the God who appeared to you when you fled from your brother Esau.”
GEN	35	2	야곱이 이에 자기 집 사람과 자기와 함께 한 모든 자에게 이르되 너희 중의 이방 신상을 버리고 자신을 정결케 하고 의복을 바꾸라	Then Jacob said unto his household, and to all that were with him, Put away the strange gods that are among you, and be clean, and change your garments:	So Jacob told his household and all who were with him, “Get rid of the foreign gods that are among you. Purify yourselves and change your garments.
GEN	35	3	우리가 일어나 벧엘로 올라가자 나의 환난날에 내게 응답하시며 나의 가는 길에서 나와 함께 하신 하나님께 내가 거기서 단을 쌓으려 하노라 하매	And let us arise, and go up to Beth–el; and I will make there an altar unto God, who answered me in the day of my distress, and was with me in the way which I went.	Then let us arise and go to Bethel. I will build an altar there to God, who answered me in my day of distress. He has been with me wherever I have gone.”
GEN	35	4	그들이 자기 손에 있는 모든 이방 신상과 자기 귀에 있는 고리를 야곱에게 주는지라 야곱이 그것들을 세겜 근처 상수리나무 아래 묻고	And they gave unto Jacob all the strange gods which were in their hand, and all their earrings which were in their ears; and Jacob hid them under the oak which was by Shechem.	So they gave Jacob all their foreign gods and all their earrings, and Jacob buried them under the oak near Shechem.
GEN	35	5	그들이 발행하였으나 하나님이 그 사면 고을들로 크게 두려워하게 하신고로 야곱의 아들들을 추격하는 자가 없었더라	And they journeyed: and the terror of God was upon the cities that were round about them, and they did not pursue after the sons of Jacob.	As they set out, a terror from God fell over the surrounding cities, so that they did not pursue Jacob’s sons.
GEN	35	6	야곱과 그와 함께한 모든 사람이 가나안 땅 루스 곧 벧엘에 이르고	So Jacob came to Luz, which is in the land of Canaan, that is, Beth–el, he and all the people that were with him.	So Jacob and everyone with him arrived in Luz (that is, Bethel) in the land of Canaan.
GEN	35	7	그가 거기서 단을 쌓고 그곳을 엘벧엘이라 불렀으니 이는 그 형의 낯을 피할 때에 하나님이 그에게 거기서 나타나셨음이더라	And he built there an altar, and called the place El–beth–el: because there God appeared unto him, when he fled from the face of his brother.	There Jacob built an altar, and he called that place El-bethel, because it was there that God had revealed Himself to Jacob as he fled from his brother.
GEN	35	8	리브가의 유모 드보라가 죽으매 그를 벧엘 아래 상수리나무 밑에 장사하고 그 나무 이름을 알론바굿이라 불렀더라	But Deborah Rebekah’s nurse died, and she was buried beneath Beth–el under an oak: and the name of it was called Allon–bachuth.	Now Deborah, Rebekah’s nurse, died and was buried under the oak below Bethel. So Jacob named it Allon-bachuth.
GEN	35	9	야곱이 밧단아람에서 돌아오매 하나님이 다시 야곱에게 나타나사 그에게 복을 주시고	And God appeared unto Jacob again, when he came out of Padan–aram, and blessed him.	After Jacob had returned from Paddan-aram, God appeared to him again and blessed him.
GEN	35	10	그에게 이르시되 네 이름이 야곱이다마는 네 이름을 다시는 야곱이라 부르지 않겠고 이스라엘이 네 이름이 되리라 하시고 그가 그의 이름을 이스라엘이라 부르시고	And God said unto him, Thy name is Jacob: thy name shall not be called any more Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name: and he called his name Israel.	And God said to him, “Though your name is Jacob, you will no longer be called Jacob. Instead, your name will be Israel.” So God named him Israel.
GEN	35	11	그에게 이르시되 나는 전능한 하나님이니라 생육하며 번성하라 국민과 많은 국민이 네게서 나고 왕들이 네 허리에서 나오리라	And God said unto him, I am God Almighty: be fruitful and multiply; a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee, and kings shall come out of thy loins;	And God told him, “I am God Almighty. Be fruitful and multiply. A nation—even a company of nations—shall come from you, and kings shall descend from you.
GEN	35	12	내가 아브라함과 이삭에게 준 땅을 네게 주고 내가 네 후손에게도 그 땅을 주리라 하시고	And the land which I gave Abraham and Isaac, to thee I will give it, and to thy seed after thee will I give the land.	The land that I gave to Abraham and Isaac I will give to you, and I will give this land to your descendants after you.”
GEN	35	13	하나님이 그와 말씀하시던 곳에서 그를 떠나 올라 가시는지라	And God went up from him in the place where he talked with him.	Then God went up from the place where He had spoken with him.
GEN	35	14	야곱이 하나님의 자기와 말씀하시던 곳에 기둥 곧 돌 기둥을 세우고 그 위에 전제물을 붓고 또 그 위에 기름을 붓고	And Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with him, even a pillar of stone: and he poured a drink offering thereon, and he poured oil thereon.	So Jacob set up a pillar in the place where God had spoken with him—a stone marker—and he poured out a drink offering on it and anointed it with oil.
GEN	35	15	하나님이 자기와 말씀하시던 곳의 이름을 벧엘이라 불렀더라	And Jacob called the name of the place where God spake with him, Beth–el.	Jacob called the place where God had spoken with him Bethel.
GEN	35	16	그들이 벧엘에서 발행하여 에브랏에 이르기까지 얼마 길을 격한 곳에서 라헬이 임신하여 심히 신고하더니	And they journeyed from Beth–el; and there was but a little way to come to Ephrath: and Rachel travailed, and she had hard labour.	Later, they set out from Bethel, and while they were still some distance from Ephrath, Rachel began to give birth, and her labor was difficult.
GEN	35	17	그가 난산할 즈음에 산파가 그에게 이르되 두려워말라 지금 그대가 또 득남하느니라 하매	And it came to pass, when she was in hard labour, that the midwife said unto her, Fear not; thou shalt have this son also.	During her severe labor, the midwife said to her, “Do not be afraid, for you are having another son.”
GEN	35	18	그가 죽기에 임하여 그 혼이 떠나려할 때에 아들의 이름은 베노니라 불렀으나 그 아비가 그를 베냐민이라 불렀더라	And it came to pass, as her soul was in departing, (for she died) that she called his name Ben–oni: but his father called him Benjamin.	And with her last breath—for she was dying—she named him Ben-oni. But his father called him Benjamin.
GEN	35	19	라헬이 죽으매 에브랏 곧 베들레헴 길에 장사되었고	And Rachel died, and was buried in the way to Ephrath, which is Beth–lehem.	So Rachel died and was buried on the way to Ephrath (that is, Bethlehem).
GEN	35	20	야곱이 라헬의 묘에 비를 세웠더니 지금까지 라헬의 묘비라 일컫더라	And Jacob set a pillar upon her grave: that is the pillar of Rachel’s grave unto this day.	Jacob set up a pillar on her grave; it marks Rachel’s tomb to this day.
GEN	35	21	이스라엘이 다시 발행하여 에델 망대를 지나 장막을 쳤더라	And Israel journeyed, and spread his tent beyond the tower of Edar.	Israel again set out and pitched his tent beyond the Tower of Eder.
GEN	35	22	이스라엘이 그 땅에 유할 때에 르우벤이 가서 그 서모 빌하와 통간하매 이스라엘이 이를 들었더라 야곱의 아들은 열둘이라	And it came to pass, when Israel dwelt in that land, that Reuben went and lay with Bilhah his father’s concubine: and Israel heard it. Now the sons of Jacob were twelve:	While Israel was living in that region, Reuben went in and slept with his father’s concubine Bilhah, and Israel heard about it. Jacob had twelve sons:
GEN	35	23	레아의 소생은 야곱의 장자 르우벤과 그 다음 시므온과 레위와 유다와 잇사갈과 스불론이요	The sons of Leah; Reuben, Jacob’s firstborn, and Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Zebulun:	The sons of Leah were Reuben the firstborn of Jacob, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun.
GEN	35	24	라헬의 소생은 요셉과 베냐민이며	The sons of Rachel; Joseph, and Benjamin:	The sons of Rachel were Joseph and Benjamin.
GEN	35	25	라헬의 여종 빌하의 소생은 단과 납달리요	And the sons of Bilhah, Rachel’s handmaid; Dan, and Naphtali:	The sons of Rachel’s maidservant Bilhah were Dan and Naphtali.
GEN	35	26	레아의 여종 실바의 소생은 갓과 아셀이니 이들은 야곱의 아들들이요 밧단아람에서 그에게 낳은 자더라	And the sons of Zilpah, Leah’s handmaid; Gad, and Asher: these are the sons of Jacob, which were born to him in Padan–aram.	And the sons of Leah’s maidservant Zilpah were Gad and Asher. These are the sons of Jacob, who were born to him in Paddan-aram.
GEN	35	27	야곱이 기럇아르바의 마므레로 가서 그 아비 이삭에게 이르렀으니 기럇아르바는 곧 아브라함과 이삭의 우거하던 헤브론이더라	And Jacob came unto Isaac his father unto Mamre, unto the city of Arbah, which is Hebron, where Abraham and Isaac sojourned.	Jacob returned to his father Isaac at Mamre, near Kiriath-arba (that is, Hebron), where Abraham and Isaac had stayed.
GEN	35	28	이삭의 나이 일백팔십 세라	And the days of Isaac were an hundred and fourscore years.	And Isaac lived 180 years.
GEN	35	29	이삭이 나이 많고 늙어 기운이 진하매 죽어 자기 열조에게로 돌아가니 그 아들 에서와 야곱이 그를 장사하였더라	And Isaac gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered unto his people, being old and full of days: and his sons Esau and Jacob buried him.	Then he breathed his last and died and was gathered to his people, old and full of years. And his sons Esau and Jacob buried him.
GEN	36	1	에서 곧 에돔의 대략이 이러하니라	Now these are the generations of Esau, who is Edom.	This is the account of Esau (that is, Edom).
GEN	36	2	에서가 가나안 여인 중 헷 족속 중 엘론의 딸 아다와 히위 족속 중 시브온의 딸 아나의 소생 오홀리바마를 자기 아내로 취하고	Esau took his wives of the daughters of Canaan; Adah the daughter of Elon the Hittite, and Aholibamah the daughter of Anah the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite;	Esau took his wives from the daughters of Canaan: Adah daughter of Elon the Hittite, Oholibamah daughter of Anah and granddaughter of Zibeon the Hivite,
GEN	36	3	또 이스마엘의 딸 느바욧의 누이 바스맛을 취하였더니	And Bashemath Ishmael’s daughter, sister of Nebajoth.	and Basemath daughter of Ishmael and sister of Nebaioth.
GEN	36	4	아다는 엘리바스를 에서에게 낳았고 바스맛은 르우엘을 낳았고	And Adah bare to Esau Eliphaz; and Bashemath bare Reuel;	And Adah bore Eliphaz to Esau, Basemath gave birth to Reuel,
GEN	36	5	오홀리바마는 여우스와 얄람과 고라를 낳았으니 이들은 에서의 아들이요 가나안 땅에서 그에게 낳은 자더라	And Aholibamah bare Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah: these are the sons of Esau, which were born unto him in the land of Canaan.	and Oholibamah gave birth to Jeush, Jalam, and Korah. These were the sons of Esau, who were born to him in the land of Canaan.
GEN	36	6	에서가 자기 아내들과 자기 자녀들과 자기 집의 모든 사람과 자기의 가축과 자기 모든 짐승과 자기가 가나안 땅에서 얻은 모든 재물을 이끌고 그 동생 야곱을 떠나 타처로 갔으니	And Esau took his wives, and his sons, and his daughters, and all the persons of his house, and his cattle, and all his beasts, and all his substance, which he had got in the land of Canaan; and went into the country from the face of his brother Jacob.	Later, Esau took his wives and sons and daughters and all the people of his household, along with his livestock, all his other animals, and all the property he had acquired in Canaan, and he moved to a land far away from his brother Jacob.
GEN	36	7	두 사람의 소유가 풍부하여 함께 거할 수 없음이러라 그들의 우거한 땅이 그들의 가축으로 인하여 그들을 용납할 수 없었더라	For their riches were more than that they might dwell together; and the land wherein they were strangers could not bear them because of their cattle.	For their possessions were too great for them to dwell together; the land where they stayed could not support them because of their livestock.
GEN	36	8	이에 에서 곧 에돔이 세일 산에 거하니라	Thus dwelt Esau in mount Seir: Esau is Edom.	So Esau (that is, Edom) settled in the area of Mount Seir.
GEN	36	9	세일 산에 거한 에돔 족속의 조상 에서의 대략이 이러하고	And these are the generations of Esau the father of the Edomites in mount Seir:	This is the account of Esau, the father of the Edomites, in the area of Mount Seir.
GEN	36	10	그 자손의 이름은 이러하니라 에서의 아내 아다의 아들은 엘리바스요 에서의 아내 바스맛의 아들은 르우엘이며	These are the names of Esau’s sons; Eliphaz the son of Adah the wife of Esau, Reuel the son of Bashemath the wife of Esau.	These are the names of Esau’s sons: Eliphaz son of Esau’s wife Adah, and Reuel son of Esau’s wife Basemath.
GEN	36	11	엘리바스의 아들들은 데만과 오말과 스보와 가담과 그나스요	And the sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, and Kenaz.	The sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, Gatam, and Kenaz.
GEN	36	12	에서의 아들 엘리바스의 첩 딤나는 아말렉을 엘리바스에게 낳았으니 이들은 에서의 아내 아다의 자손이며	And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz Esau’s son; and she bare to Eliphaz Amalek: these were the sons of Adah Esau’s wife.	Additionally, Timna, a concubine of Esau’s son Eliphaz, gave birth to Amalek. These are the grandsons of Esau’s wife Adah.
GEN	36	13	르우엘의 아들들은 나핫과 세라와 삼마와 미사니 이들은 에서의 아내 바스맛의 자손이며	And these are the sons of Reuel; Nahath, and Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah: these were the sons of Bashemath Esau’s wife.	These are the sons of Reuel: Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah. They are the grandsons of Esau’s wife Basemath.
GEN	36	14	시브온의 손녀 아나의 딸 에서의 아내 오홀리바마의 아들들은 이러하니 그가 여우스와 얄람과 고라를 에서에게 낳았더라	And these were the sons of Aholibamah, the daughter of Anah the daughter of Zibeon, Esau’s wife: and she bare to Esau Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah.	These are the sons of Esau’s wife Oholibamah (daughter of Anah and granddaughter of Zibeon) whom she bore to Esau: Jeush, Jalam, and Korah.
GEN	36	15	에서 자손 중 족장은 이러하니라 에서의 장자 엘리바스의 자손에는 데만 족장, 오말 족장, 스보 족장, 그나스 족장과	These were dukes of the sons of Esau: the sons of Eliphaz the firstborn son of Esau; duke Teman, duke Omar, duke Zepho, duke Kenaz,	These are the chiefs among the sons of Esau. The sons of Eliphaz the firstborn of Esau: Chiefs Teman, Omar, Zepho, Kenaz,
GEN	36	16	고라 족장, 가담 족장, 아말렉 족장이니 이들은 에돔 땅에 있는 엘리바스로 말미암아 나온 족장들이요 이들은 아다의 자손이며	Duke Korah, duke Gatam, and duke Amalek: these are the dukes that came of Eliphaz in the land of Edom; these were the sons of Adah.	Korah, Gatam, and Amalek. They are the chiefs of Eliphaz in the land of Edom, and they are the grandsons of Adah.
GEN	36	17	에서의 아들 르우엘의 자손에는 나핫 족장, 세라 족장, 삼마 족장, 미사 족장이니 이들은 에돔 땅에 있는 르우엘로 말미암아 나온 족장들이요 이들은 에서의 아내 바스맛의 자손이며	And these are the sons of Reuel Esau’s son; duke Nahath, duke Zerah, duke Shammah, duke Mizzah: these are the dukes that came of Reuel in the land of Edom; these are the sons of Bashemath Esau’s wife.	These are the sons of Esau’s son Reuel: Chiefs Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah. They are the chiefs descended from Reuel in the land of Edom, and they are the grandsons of Esau’s wife Basemath.
GEN	36	18	에서의 아내 오홀리바마의 아들들은 여우스 족장, 얄람 족장, 고라 족장이니 이들은 아나의 딸이요 에서의 아내인 오홀리바마로 말미암아 나온 족장들이라	And these are the sons of Aholibamah Esau’s wife; duke Jeush, duke Jaalam, duke Korah: these were the dukes that came of Aholibamah the daughter of Anah, Esau’s wife.	These are the sons of Esau’s wife Oholibamah: Chiefs Jeush, Jalam, and Korah. They are the chiefs descended from Esau’s wife Oholibamah, the daughter of Anah.
GEN	36	19	에서 곧 에돔의 자손으로서 족장 된 자들이 이러하였더라	These are the sons of Esau, who is Edom, and these are their dukes.	All these are the sons of Esau (that is, Edom), and they were their chiefs.
GEN	36	20	그 땅의 원거인 호리 족속 세일의 자손은 로단과 소발과 시브온과 아나와	These are the sons of Seir the Horite, who inhabited the land; Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah,	These are the sons of Seir the Horite, who were living in the land: Lotan, Shobal, Zibeon, Anah,
GEN	36	21	디손과 에셀과 디산이니 이들은 에돔 땅에 있는 세일의 자손 중 호리 족속으로 말미암아 나온 족장들이요	And Dishon, and Ezer, and Dishan: these are the dukes of the Horites, the children of Seir in the land of Edom.	Dishon, Ezer, and Dishan. They are the chiefs of the Horites, the descendants of Seir in the land of Edom.
GEN	36	22	로단의 자녀는 호리와 헤맘과 로단의 누이 딤나요	And the children of Lotan were Hori and Hemam; and Lotan’s sister was Timna.	The sons of Lotan were Hori and Hemam. Timna was Lotan’s sister.
GEN	36	23	소발의 자녀는 알완과 마나핫과 에발과 스보와 오남이요	And the children of Shobal were these; Alvan, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shepho, and Onam.	These are the sons of Shobal: Alvan, Manahath, Ebal, Shepho, and Onam.
GEN	36	24	시브온의 자녀는 아야와 아나며 이 아나는 그 아비 시브온의 나귀를 칠 때에 광야에서 온천을 발견하였고	And these are the children of Zibeon; both Ajah, and Anah: this was that Anah that found the mules in the wilderness, as he fed the asses of Zibeon his father.	These are the sons of Zibeon: Aiah and Anah. (This is the Anah who found the hot springs in the wilderness as he was pasturing the donkeys of his father Zibeon.)
GEN	36	25	아나의 자녀는 디손과 오홀리바마니 오홀리바마는 아나의 딸이며	And the children of Anah were these; Dishon, and Aholibamah the daughter of Anah.	These are the children of Anah: Dishon and Oholibamah daughter of Anah.
GEN	36	26	디손의 자녀는 헴단과 에스반과 이드란과 그란이요	And these are the children of Dishon; Hemdan, and Eshban, and Ithran, and Cheran.	These are the sons of Dishon: Hemdan, Eshban, Ithran, and Cheran.
GEN	36	27	에셀의 자녀는 빌한과 사아완과 아간이요	The children of Ezer are these; Bilhan, and Zaavan, and Akan.	These are the sons of Ezer: Bilhan, Zaavan, and Akan.
GEN	36	28	디산의 자녀는 우스와 아란이니	The children of Dishan are these; Uz, and Aran.	These are the sons of Dishan: Uz and Aran.
GEN	36	29	호리 족속의 족장들은 곧 로단 족장, 소발 족장, 시브온 족장, 아나 족장,	These are the dukes that came of the Horites; duke Lotan, duke Shobal, duke Zibeon, duke Anah,	These are the chiefs of the Horites: Chiefs Lotan, Shobal, Zibeon, Anah,
GEN	36	30	디손 족장, 에셀 족장, 디산 족장이라 이들은 그 구역을 따라 세일 땅에 있는 호리 족속으로 말미암아 나온 족장들이었더라	Duke Dishon, duke Ezer, duke Dishan: these are the dukes that came of Hori, among their dukes in the land of Seir.	Dishon, Ezer, and Dishan. They are the chiefs of the Horites, according to their divisions in the land of Seir.
GEN	36	31	이스라엘 자손을 다스리는 왕이 있기 전에 에돔 땅을 다스리는 왕이 이러하니라	And these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom, before there reigned any king over the children of Israel.	These are the kings who reigned in the land of Edom before any king reigned over the Israelites:
GEN	36	32	브올의 아들 벨라가 에돔의 왕이 되었으니 그 도성의 이름은 딘하바며	And Bela the son of Beor reigned in Edom: and the name of his city was Dinhabah.	Bela son of Beor reigned in Edom; the name of his city was Dinhabah.
GEN	36	33	벨라가 죽고 보스라 사람 세라의 아들 요밥이 그를 대신하여 왕이 되고	And Bela died, and Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his stead.	When Bela died, Jobab son of Zerah from Bozrah reigned in his place.
GEN	36	34	요밥이 죽고 데만 족속의 땅의 후삼이 그를 대신하여 왕이 되고	And Jobab died, and Husham of the land of Temani reigned in his stead.	When Jobab died, Husham from the land of the Temanites reigned in his place.
GEN	36	35	후삼이 죽고 브닷의 아들 곧 모압 들에서 미디안 족속을 친 하닷이 그를 대신하여 왕이 되니 그 도성 이름은 아윗이며	And Husham died, and Hadad the son of Bedad, who smote Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was Avith.	When Husham died, Hadad son of Bedad, who defeated Midian in the country of Moab, reigned in his place. And the name of his city was Avith.
GEN	36	36	하닷이 죽고 마스레가의 삼라가 그를 대신하여 왕이 되고	And Hadad died, and Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead.	When Hadad died, Samlah from Masrekah reigned in his place.
GEN	36	37	삼라가 죽고 유브라데 하숫가 르호봇의 사울이 그를 대신하여 왕이 되고	And Samlah died, and Saul of Rehoboth by the river reigned in his stead.	When Samlah died, Shaul from Rehoboth on the Euphrates reigned in his place.
GEN	36	38	사울이 죽고 악볼의 아들 바알하난이 그를 대신하여 왕이 되고	And Saul died, and Baal–hanan the son of Achbor reigned in his stead.	When Shaul died, Baal-hanan son of Achbor reigned in his place.
GEN	36	39	악볼의 아들 바알하난이 죽고 하달이 그를 대신하여 왕이 되니 그 도성 이름은 바우며 그 처의 이름은 므헤다벨이니 마드렛의 딸이요 메사합의 손녀더라	And Baal–hanan the son of Achbor died, and Hadar reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was Pau; and his wife’s name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab.	When Baal-hanan son of Achbor died, Hadad reigned in his place. His city was named Pau, and his wife’s name was Mehetabel daughter of Matred, the daughter of Me-zahab.
GEN	36	40	에서에게서 나온 족장들의 이름은 그 종족과 거처와 이름대로 이러하니 딤나 족장, 알와 족장, 여뎃 족장,	And these are the names of the dukes that came of Esau, according to their families, after their places, by their names; duke Timnah, duke Alvah, duke Jetheth,	These are the names of Esau’s chiefs, according to their families and regions, by their names: Chiefs Timna, Alvah, Jetheth,
GEN	36	41	오홀리바마 족장, 엘라 족장, 비논 족장,	Duke Aholibamah, duke Elah, duke Pinon,	Oholibamah, Elah, Pinon,
GEN	36	42	그나스 족장, 데만 족장, 밉살 족장,	Duke Kenaz, duke Teman, duke Mibzar,	Kenaz, Teman, Mibzar,
GEN	36	43	막디엘 족장, 이람 족장이라 이들은 그 구역과 거처를 따른 에돔 족장들이며 에돔 족속의 조상은 에서더라	Duke Magdiel, duke Iram: these be the dukes of Edom, according to their habitations in the land of their possession: he is Esau the father of the Edomites.	Magdiel, and Iram. These were the chiefs of Edom, according to their settlements in the land they possessed. Esau was the father of the Edomites.
GEN	37	1	야곱이 가나안 땅 곧 그 아비의 우거하던 땅에 거하였으니	And Jacob dwelt in the land wherein his father was a stranger, in the land of Canaan.	Now Jacob lived in the land where his father had resided, the land of Canaan.
GEN	37	2	야곱의 약전이 이러하니라 요셉이 십칠 세의 소년으로서 그 형제와 함께 양을 칠 때에 그 아비의 첩 빌하와 실바의 아들들로 더불어 함께 하였더니 그가 그들의 과실을 아비에게 고하더라	These are the generations of Jacob. Joseph, being seventeen years old, was feeding the flock with his brethren; and the lad was with the sons of Bilhah, and with the sons of Zilpah, his father’s wives: and Joseph brought unto his father their evil report.	This is the account of Jacob. When Joseph was seventeen years old, he was tending the flock with his brothers, the sons of his father’s wives Bilhah and Zilpah, and he brought their father a bad report about them.
GEN	37	3	요셉은 노년에 얻은 아들이므로 이스라엘이 여러 아들보다 그를 깊이 사랑하여 위하여 채색옷을 지었더니	Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his children, because he was the son of his old age: and he made him a coat of many colours.	Now Israel loved Joseph more than his other sons, because Joseph had been born to him in his old age; so he made him a robe of many colors.
GEN	37	4	그 형들이 아비가 형제들보다 그를 사랑함을 보고 그를 미워하여 그에게 언사가 불평하였더라	And when his brethren saw that their father loved him more than all his brethren, they hated him, and could not speak peaceably unto him.	When Joseph’s brothers saw that their father loved him more than any of them, they hated him and could not speak a kind word to him.
GEN	37	5	요셉이 꿈을 꾸고 자기 형들에게 고하매 그들이 그를 더욱 미워하였더라	And Joseph dreamed a dream, and he told it his brethren: and they hated him yet the more.	Then Joseph had a dream, and when he told it to his brothers, they hated him even more.
GEN	37	6	요셉이 그들에게 이르되 청컨대 나의 꾼 꿈을 들으시오	And he said unto them, Hear, I pray you, this dream which I have dreamed:	He said to them, “Listen to this dream I had:
GEN	37	7	우리가 밭에서 곡식을 묶더니 내 단은 일어서고 당신들의 단은 내 단을 둘러서서 절하더이다	For, behold, we were binding sheaves in the field, and, lo, my sheaf arose, and also stood upright; and, behold, your sheaves stood round about, and made obeisance to my sheaf.	We were binding sheaves of grain in the field, and suddenly my sheaf rose and stood upright, while your sheaves gathered around and bowed down to mine.”
GEN	37	8	그 형들이 그에게 이르되 네가 참으로 우리의 왕이 되겠느냐 참으로 우리를 다스리게 되겠느냐 하고 그 꿈과 그 말을 인하여 그를 더욱 미워하더니	And his brethren said to him, Shalt thou indeed reign over us? or shalt thou indeed have dominion over us? And they hated him yet the more for his dreams, and for his words.	“Do you intend to reign over us?” his brothers asked. “Will you actually rule us?” So they hated him even more because of his dream and his statements.
GEN	37	9	요셉이 다시 꿈을 꾸고 그 형들에게 고하여 가로되 내가 또 꿈을 꾼즉 해와 달과 열한 별이 내게 절하더이다 하니라	And he dreamed yet another dream, and told it his brethren, and said, Behold, I have dreamed a dream more; and, behold, the sun and the moon and the eleven stars made obeisance to me.	Then Joseph had another dream and told it to his brothers. “Look,” he said, “I had another dream, and this time the sun and moon and eleven stars were bowing down to me.”
GEN	37	10	그가 그 꿈으로 부형에게 고하매 아비가 그를 꾸짖고 그에게 이르되 너의 꾼 꿈이 무엇이냐 나와 네 모와 네 형제들이 참으로 가서 땅에 엎드려 네게 절하겠느냐	And he told it to his father, and to his brethren: and his father rebuked him, and said unto him, What is this dream that thou hast dreamed? Shall I and thy mother and thy brethren indeed come to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth?	He told his father and brothers, but his father rebuked him and said, “What is this dream that you have had? Will your mother and brothers and I actually come and bow down to the ground before you?”
GEN	37	11	그 형들은 시기하되 그 아비는 그 말을 마음에 두었더라	And his brethren envied him; but his father observed the saying.	And his brothers were jealous of him, but his father kept in mind what he had said.
GEN	37	12	그 형들이 세겜에 가서 아비의 양떼를 칠 때에	And his brethren went to feed their father’s flock in Shechem.	Some time later, Joseph’s brothers had gone to pasture their father’s flocks near Shechem.
GEN	37	13	이스라엘이 요셉에게 이르되 네 형들이 세겜에서 양을 치지 아니하느냐 너를 그들에게로 보내리라 요셉이 아비에게 대답하되 내가 그리하겠나이다	And Israel said unto Joseph, Do not thy brethren feed the flock in Shechem? come, and I will send thee unto them. And he said to him, Here am I.	Israel said to him, “Are not your brothers pasturing the flocks at Shechem? Get ready; I am sending you to them.” “I am ready,” Joseph replied.
GEN	37	14	이스라엘이 그에게 이르되 가서 네 형들과 양떼가 다 잘 있는 여부를 보고 돌아와 내게 고하라 하고 그를 헤브론 골짜기에서 보내매 이에 세겜으로 가니라	And he said to him, Go, I pray thee, see whether it be well with thy brethren, and well with the flocks; and bring me word again. So he sent him out of the vale of Hebron, and he came to Shechem.	Then Israel told him, “Go now and see how your brothers and the flocks are faring, and bring word back to me.” So he sent him off from the Valley of Hebron. And when Joseph arrived in Shechem,
GEN	37	15	어떤 사람이 그를 만난즉 그가 들에서 방황하는지라 그 사람이 그에게 물어 가로되 네가 무엇을 찾느냐	And a certain man found him, and, behold, he was wandering in the field: and the man asked him, saying, What seekest thou?	a man found him wandering in the field and asked, “What are you looking for?”
GEN	37	16	그가 가로되 내가 나의 형들을 찾으오니 청컨대 그들의 양치는 곳을 내게 가르치소서	And he said, I seek my brethren: tell me, I pray thee, where they feed their flocks.	“I am looking for my brothers,” Joseph replied. “Can you please tell me where they are pasturing their flocks?”
GEN	37	17	그 사람이 가로되 그들이 여기서 떠났느니라 내가 그들의 말을 들으니 도단으로 가자 하더라 요셉이 그 형들의 뒤를 따라 가서 도단에서 그들을 만나니라	And the man said, They are departed hence; for I heard them say, Let us go to Dothan. And Joseph went after his brethren, and found them in Dothan.	“They have moved on from here,” the man answered. “I heard them say, ‘Let us go to Dothan.’” So Joseph set out after his brothers and found them at Dothan.
GEN	37	18	요셉이 그들에게 가까이 오기 전에 그들이 요셉을 멀리서 보고 죽이기를 꾀하여	And when they saw him afar off, even before he came near unto them, they conspired against him to slay him.	Now Joseph’s brothers saw him in the distance, and before he arrived, they plotted to kill him.
GEN	37	19	서로 이르되 꿈 꾸는 자가 오는도다	And they said one to another, Behold, this dreamer cometh.	“Here comes that dreamer!” they said to one another.
GEN	37	20	자, 그를 죽여 한 구덩이에 던지고 우리가 말하기를 악한 짐승이 그를 잡아먹었다 하자 그 꿈이 어떻게 되는 것을 우리가 볼 것이니라 하는지라	Come now therefore, and let us slay him, and cast him into some pit, and we will say, Some evil beast hath devoured him: and we shall see what will become of his dreams.	“Come now, let us kill him and throw him into one of the pits. We can say that a vicious animal has devoured him. Then we shall see what becomes of his dreams!”
GEN	37	21	르우벤이 듣고 요셉을 그들의 손에서 구원하려하여 가로되 우리가 그 생명은 상하지 말자	And Reuben heard it, and he delivered him out of their hands; and said, Let us not kill him.	When Reuben heard this, he tried to rescue Joseph from their hands. “Let us not take his life,” he said.
GEN	37	22	르우벤이 또 그들에게 이르되 피를 흘리지 말라 그를 광야 그 구덩이에 던지고 손을 그에게 대지 말라 하니 이는 그가 요셉을 그들의 손에서 구원하여 그 아비에게로 돌리려 함이었더라	And Reuben said unto them, Shed no blood, but cast him into this pit that is in the wilderness, and lay no hand upon him; that he might rid him out of their hands, to deliver him to his father again.	“Do not shed his blood. Throw him into this pit in the wilderness, but do not lay a hand on him.” Reuben said this so that he could rescue Joseph from their hands and return him to his father.
GEN	37	23	요셉이 형들에게 이르매 그 형들이 요셉의 옷 곧 그 입은 채색옷을 벗기고	And it came to pass, when Joseph was come unto his brethren, that they stript Joseph out of his coat, his coat of many colours that was on him;	So when Joseph came to his brothers, they stripped him of his robe—the robe of many colors he was wearing—
GEN	37	24	그를 잡아 구덩이에 던지니 그 구덩이는 빈 것이라 그 속에 물이 없었더라	And they took him, and cast him into a pit: and the pit was empty, there was no water in it.	and they took him and threw him into the pit. Now the pit was empty, with no water in it.
GEN	37	25	그들이 앉아 음식을 먹다가 눈을 들어 본즉 한 떼 이스마엘 족속이 길르앗에서 오는데 그 약대들에 향품과 유향과 몰약을 싣고 애굽으로 내려가는지라	And they sat down to eat bread: and they lifted up their eyes and looked, and, behold, a company of Ishmeelites came from Gilead with their camels bearing spicery and balm and myrrh, going to carry it down to Egypt.	And as they sat down to eat a meal, they looked up and saw a caravan of Ishmaelites coming from Gilead. Their camels were carrying spices, balm, and myrrh on their way down to Egypt.
GEN	37	26	유다가 자기 형제에게 이르되 우리가 우리 동생을 죽이고 그의 피를 은익한들 무엇이 유익할까	And Judah said unto his brethren, What profit is it if we slay our brother, and conceal his blood?	Then Judah said to his brothers, “What profit will we gain if we kill our brother and cover up his blood?
GEN	37	27	자, 그를 이스마엘 사람에게 팔고 우리 손을 그에게 대지 말자 그는 우리의 동생이요 우리의 골육이니라 하매 형제들이 청종하였더라	Come, and let us sell him to the Ishmeelites, and let not our hand be upon him; for he is our brother and our flesh. And his brethren were content.	Come, let us sell him to the Ishmaelites and not lay a hand on him; for he is our brother, our own flesh.” And they agreed.
GEN	37	28	때에 미디안 사람 상고들이 지나는지라 그들이 요셉을 구덩이에서 끌어 올리고 은 이십 개에 그를 이스마엘 사람들에게 팔매 그 상고들이 요셉을 데리고 애굽으로 갔더라	Then there passed by Midianites merchantmen; and they drew and lifted up Joseph out of the pit, and sold Joseph to the Ishmeelites for twenty pieces of silver: and they brought Joseph into Egypt.	So when the Midianite traders passed by, his brothers pulled Joseph out of the pit and sold him for twenty shekels of silver to the Ishmaelites, who took him to Egypt.
GEN	37	29	르우벤이 돌아와서 구덩이에 이르러 본즉 거기 요셉이 없는지라 옷을 찢고	And Reuben returned unto the pit; and, behold, Joseph was not in the pit; and he rent his clothes.	When Reuben returned to the pit and saw that Joseph was not there, he tore his clothes,
GEN	37	30	아우들에게로 와서 가로되 아이가 없도다 나는 나는 어디로 갈까	And he returned unto his brethren, and said, The child is not; and I, whither shall I go?	returned to his brothers, and said, “The boy is gone! What am I going to do?”
GEN	37	31	그들이 요셉의 옷을 취하고 수염소를 죽여 그 옷을 피에 적시고	And they took Joseph’s coat, and killed a kid of the goats, and dipped the coat in the blood;	Then they took Joseph’s robe, slaughtered a young goat, and dipped the robe in its blood.
GEN	37	32	그 채색옷을 보내어 그 아비에게로 가져다가 이르기를 우리가 이것을 얻었으니 아버지의 아들의 옷인가 아닌가 보소서 하매	And they sent the coat of many colours, and they brought it to their father; and said, This have we found: know now whether it be thy son’s coat or no.	They sent the robe of many colors to their father and said, “We found this. Examine it to see whether it is your son’s robe or not.”
GEN	37	33	아비가 그것을 알아보고 가로되 내 아들의 옷이라 악한 짐승이 그를 먹었도다 요셉이 정녕 찢겼도다 하고	And he knew it, and said, It is my son’s coat; an evil beast hath devoured him; Joseph is without doubt rent in pieces.	His father recognized it and said, “It is my son’s robe! A vicious animal has devoured him. Joseph has surely been torn to pieces!”
GEN	37	34	자기 옷을 찢고 굵은 베로 허리를 묶고 오래도록 그 아들을 위하여 애통하니	And Jacob rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his son many days.	Then Jacob tore his clothes, put sackcloth around his waist, and mourned for his son many days.
GEN	37	35	그 모든 자녀가 위로하되 그가 그 위로를 받지 아니하여 가로되 내가 슬퍼하며 음부에 내려 아들에게로 가리라 하고 그 아비가 그를 위하여 울었더라	And all his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him; but he refused to be comforted; and he said, For I will go down into the grave unto my son mourning. Thus his father wept for him.	All his sons and daughters tried to comfort him, but he refused to be comforted. “No,” he said. “I will go down to Sheol mourning for my son.” So his father wept for him.
GEN	37	36	미디안 사람이 애굽에서 바로의 신하 시위대장 보디발에게 요셉을 팔았더라	And the Midianites sold him into Egypt unto Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh’s, and captain of the guard.	Meanwhile, the Midianites sold Joseph in Egypt to Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh and captain of the guard.
GEN	38	1	그 후에 유다가 자기 형제에게서 내려가서 아둘람 사람 히라에게로 나아가니라	And it came to pass at that time, that Judah went down from his brethren, and turned in to a certain Adullamite, whose name was Hirah.	About that time, Judah left his brothers and settled near a man named Hirah, an Adullamite.
GEN	38	2	유다가 거기서 가나안 사람 수아라 하는 자의 딸을 보고 그를 취하여 동침하니	And Judah saw there a daughter of a certain Canaanite, whose name was Shuah; and he took her, and went in unto her.	There Judah saw the daughter of a Canaanite man named Shua, and he took her as a wife and slept with her.
GEN	38	3	그가 잉태하여 아들을 낳으매 유다가 그 이름을 엘이라 하니라	And she conceived, and bare a son; and he called his name Er.	So she conceived and gave birth to a son, and Judah named him Er.
GEN	38	4	그가 다시 잉태하여 아들을 낳고 그 이름을 오난이라 하고	And she conceived again, and bare a son; and she called his name Onan.	Again she conceived and gave birth to a son, and she named him Onan.
GEN	38	5	그가 또 다시 아들을 낳고 그 이름을 셀라라 하니라 그가 셀라를 낳을 때에 유다는 거십에 있었더라	And she yet again conceived, and bare a son; and called his name Shelah: and he was at Chezib, when she bare him.	Then she gave birth to another son and named him Shelah; it was at Chezib that she gave birth to him.
GEN	38	6	유다가 장자 엘을 위하여 아내를 취하니 그 이름은 다말이더라	And Judah took a wife for Er his firstborn, whose name was Tamar.	Now Judah acquired a wife for Er, his firstborn, and her name was Tamar.
GEN	38	7	유다의 장자 엘이 여호와 목전에 악하므로 여호와께서 그를 죽이신지라	And Er, Judah’s firstborn, was wicked in the sight of the Lord; and the Lord slew him.	But Er, Judah’s firstborn, was wicked in the sight of the LORD; so the LORD put him to death.
GEN	38	8	유다가 오난에게 이르되 네 형수에게로 들어가서 남편의 아우의 본분을 행하여 네 형을 위하여 씨가 있게 하라	And Judah said unto Onan, Go in unto thy brother’s wife, and marry her, and raise up seed to thy brother.	Then Judah said to Onan, “Sleep with your brother’s wife. Perform your duty as her brother-in-law and raise up offspring for your brother.”
GEN	38	9	오난이 그 씨가 자기 것이 되지 않을 줄 알므로 형수에게 들어갔을 때에 형에게 아들을 얻게 아니하려고 땅에 설정하매	And Onan knew that the seed should not be his; and it came to pass, when he went in unto his brother’s wife, that he spilled it on the ground, lest that he should give seed to his brother.	But Onan knew that the offspring would not belong to him; so whenever he would sleep with his brother’s wife, he would spill his seed on the ground so that he would not produce offspring for his brother.
GEN	38	10	그 일이 여호와 목전에 악하므로 여호와께서 그도 죽이시니	And the thing which he did displeased the Lord: wherefore he slew him also.	What he did was wicked in the sight of the LORD, so He put Onan to death as well.
GEN	38	11	유다가 그 며느리 다말에게 이르되 수절하고 네 아비 집에 있어서 내 아들 셀라가 장성하기를 기다리라 하니 셀라도 그 형들 같이 죽을까 염려함이라 다말이 가서 그 아비 집에 있으니라	Then said Judah to Tamar his daughter in law, Remain a widow at thy father’s house, till Shelah my son be grown: for he said, Lest peradventure he die also, as his brethren did. And Tamar went and dwelt in her father’s house.	Then Judah said to his daughter-in-law Tamar, “Live as a widow in your father’s house until my son Shelah grows up.” For he thought, “He may die too, like his brothers.” So Tamar went to live in her father’s house.
GEN	38	12	얼마 후에 유다의 아내 수아의 딸이 죽은지라 유다가 위로를 받은 후에 그 친구 아둘람 사람 히라와 함께 딤나로 올라가서 자기 양털 깍는 자에게 이르렀더니	And in process of time the daughter of Shuah Judah’s wife died; and Judah was comforted, and went up unto his sheepshearers to Timnath, he and his friend Hirah the Adullamite.	After a long time Judah’s wife, the daughter of Shua, died. When Judah had finished mourning, he and his friend Hirah the Adullamite went up to his sheepshearers at Timnah.
GEN	38	13	혹이 다말에게 고하되 네 시부가 자기 양털을 깎으려고 딤나에 올라왔다 한지라	And it was told Tamar, saying, Behold thy father in law goeth up to Timnath to shear his sheep.	When Tamar was told, “Your father-in-law is going up to Timnah to shear his sheep,”
GEN	38	14	그가 그 과부의 의복을 벗고 면박으로 얼굴을 가리고 몸을 휩싸고 딤나 길 곁 에나임 문에 앉으니 이는 셀라가 장성함을 보았어도 자기를 그의 아내로 주지 않음을 인함이라	And she put her widow’s garments off from her, and covered her with a vail, and wrapped herself, and sat in an open place, which is by the way to Timnath; for she saw that Shelah was grown, and she was not given unto him to wife.	she removed her widow’s garments, covered her face with a veil to disguise herself, and sat at the entrance to Enaim, which is on the way to Timnah. For she saw that although Shelah had grown up, she had not been given to him as a wife.
GEN	38	15	그가 얼굴을 가리웠으므로 유다가 그를 보고 창녀로 여겨	When Judah saw her, he thought her to be an harlot; because she had covered her face.	When Judah saw her, he thought she was a prostitute because she had covered her face.
GEN	38	16	길 곁으로 그에게 나아가 가로되 청컨대 나로 네게 들어가게 하라 하니 그 자부인줄 알지 못하였음이라 그가 가로되 당신이 무엇을 주고 내게 들어 오려느냐	And he turned unto her by the way, and said, Go to, I pray thee, let me come in unto thee; (for he knew not that she was his daughter in law.) And she said, What wilt thou give me, that thou mayest come in unto me?	Not realizing that she was his daughter-in-law, he went over to her and said, “Come now, let me sleep with you.” “What will you give me for sleeping with you?” she inquired.
GEN	38	17	유다가 가로되 내가 내 떼에서 염소 새끼를 주리라 그가 가로되 당신이 그것을 줄 때까지 약조물을 주겠느냐	And he said, I will send thee a kid from the flock. And she said, Wilt thou give me a pledge, till thou send it?	“I will send you a young goat from my flock,” Judah answered. But she replied, “Only if you leave me something as a pledge until you send it.”
GEN	38	18	유다가 가로되 무슨 약조물을 네게 주랴 그가 가로되 당신의 도장과 그 끈과 당신의 손에 있는 지팡이로 하라 유다가 그것들을 그에게 주고 그에게로 들어갔더니 그가 유다로 말미암아 잉태하였더라	And he said, What pledge shall I give thee? And she said, Thy signet, and thy bracelets, and thy staff that is in thine hand. And he gave it her, and came in unto her, and she conceived by him.	“What pledge should I give you?” he asked. She answered, “Your seal and your cord, and the staff in your hand.” So he gave them to her and slept with her, and she became pregnant by him.
GEN	38	19	그가 일어나 떠나가서 그 면박을 벗고 과부의 의복을 도로 입으니라	And she arose, and went away, and laid by her vail from her, and put on the garments of her widowhood.	Then Tamar got up and departed. And she removed her veil and put on her widow’s garments again.
GEN	38	20	유다가 그 친구 아둘람 사람의 손에 부탁하여 염소 새끼를 보내고 그 여인의 손에서 약조물을 찾으려 하였으나 그가 그 여인을 찾지 못한지라	And Judah sent the kid by the hand of his friend the Adullamite, to receive his pledge from the woman’s hand: but he found her not.	Now when Judah sent his friend Hirah the Adullamite with the young goat to collect the items he had left with the woman, he could not find her.
GEN	38	21	그가 그곳 사람에게 물어 가로되 길 곁 에나임에 있던 창녀가 어디 있느냐 그들이 가로되 여기는 창녀가 없느니라	Then he asked the men of that place, saying, Where is the harlot, that was openly by the way side? And they said, There was no harlot in this place.	He asked the men of that place, “Where is the shrine prostitute who was beside the road at Enaim?” “No shrine prostitute has been here,” they answered.
GEN	38	22	그가 유다에게로 돌아와 가로되 내가 그를 찾지 못하고 그곳 사람도 이르기를 여기는 창녀가 없다 하더라	And he returned to Judah, and said, I cannot find her; and also the men of the place said, that there was no harlot in this place.	So Hirah returned to Judah and said, “I could not find her, and furthermore, the men of that place said, ‘No shrine prostitute has been here.’”
GEN	38	23	유다가 가로되 그로 그것을 가지게 두라 우리가 부끄러움을 당할까 하노라 내가 이 염소 새끼를 보내었으나 그대가 그를 찾지 못하였느니라	And Judah said, Let her take it to her, lest we be shamed: behold, I sent this kid, and thou hast not found her.	“Let her keep the items,” Judah replied. “Otherwise we will become a laughingstock. After all, I did send her this young goat, but you could not find her.”
GEN	38	24	석 달쯤 후에 혹이 유다에게 고하여 가로되 네 며느리 다말이 행음하였고 그 행음함을 인하여 잉태하였느니라 유다가 가로되 그를 끌어 내어 불사르라	And it came to pass about three months after, that it was told Judah, saying, Tamar thy daughter in law hath played the harlot; and also, behold, she is with child by whoredom. And Judah said, Bring her forth, and let her be burnt.	About three months later, Judah was told, “Your daughter-in-law Tamar has prostituted herself, and now she is pregnant.” “Bring her out!” Judah replied. “Let her be burned to death!”
GEN	38	25	여인이 끌려 나갈 때에 보내어 시부에게 이르되 이 물건 임자로 말미암아 잉태하였나이다 청컨대 보소서 이 도장과 그 끈과 지팡이가 뉘 것이니이까 한지라	When she was brought forth, she sent to her father in law, saying, By the man, whose these are, am I with child: and she said, Discern, I pray thee, whose are these, the signet, and bracelets, and staff.	As she was being brought out, Tamar sent a message to her father-in-law: “I am pregnant by the man to whom these items belong.” And she added, “Please examine them. Whose seal and cord and staff are these?”
GEN	38	26	유다가 그것들을 알아보고 가로되 그는 나보다 옳도다 내가 그를 내 아들 셀라에게 주지 아니하였음이로다 하고 다시는 그를 가까이 하지 아니하였더라	And Judah acknowledged them, and said, She hath been more righteous than I; because that I gave her not to Shelah my son. And he knew her again no more.	Judah recognized the items and said, “She is more righteous than I, since I did not give her to my son Shelah.” And he did not have relations with her again.
GEN	38	27	임산하여 보니 쌍태라	And it came to pass in the time of her travail, that, behold, twins were in her womb.	When the time came for Tamar to give birth, there were twins in her womb.
GEN	38	28	해산할 때에 손이 나오는지라 산파가 가로되 이는 먼저 나온 자라 하고 홍사를 가져 그 손에 매었더니	And it came to pass, when she travailed, that the one put out his hand: and the midwife took and bound upon his hand a scarlet thread, saying, This came out first.	And as she was giving birth, one of them put out his hand; so the midwife took a scarlet thread and tied it around his wrist. “This one came out first,” she announced.
GEN	38	29	그 손을 도로 들이며 그 형제가 나오는지라 산파가 가로되 네가 어찌하여 터치고 나오느냐 한고로 그 이름을 베레스라 불렀고	And it came to pass, as he drew back his hand, that, behold, his brother came out: and she said, How hast thou broken forth? this breach be upon thee: therefore his name was called Pharez.	But when he pulled his hand back and his brother came out, she said, “You have broken out first!” So he was named Perez.
GEN	38	30	그 형제 곧 손에 홍사 있는 자가 뒤에 나오니 그 이름을 세라라 불렀더라	And afterward came out his brother, that had the scarlet thread upon his hand: and his name was called Zarah.	Then his brother came out with the scarlet thread around his wrist, and he was named Zerah.
GEN	39	1	요셉이 이끌려 애굽에 내려가매 바로의 신하 시위대장 애굽사람 보디발이 그를 그리로 데려간 이스마엘 사람의 손에서 그를 사니라	And Joseph was brought down to Egypt; and Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh, captain of the guard, an Egyptian, bought him of the hands of the Ishmeelites, which had brought him down thither.	Meanwhile, Joseph had been taken down to Egypt, where an Egyptian named Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh and captain of the guard, bought him from the Ishmaelites who had taken him there.
GEN	39	2	여호와께서 요셉과 함께 하시므로 그가 형통한 자가 되어 그 주인 애굽 사람의 집에 있으니	And the Lord was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man; and he was in the house of his master the Egyptian.	And the LORD was with Joseph, and he became a successful man, serving in the household of his Egyptian master.
GEN	39	3	그 주인이 여호와께서 그와 함께하심을 보며 또 여호와께서 그의 범사에 형통케 하심을 보았더라	And his master saw that the Lord was with him, and that the Lord made all that he did to prosper in his hand.	When his master saw that the LORD was with him and made him prosper in all he did,
GEN	39	4	요셉이 그 주인에게 은혜를 입어 섬기매 그가 요셉으로 가정 총무를 삼고 자기 소유를 다 그 손에 위임하니	And Joseph found grace in his sight, and he served him: and he made him overseer over his house, and all that he had he put into his hand.	Joseph found favor in his sight and became his personal attendant. Potiphar put him in charge of his household and entrusted him with everything he owned.
GEN	39	5	그가 요셉에게 자기 집과 그 모든 소유물을 주관하게 한 때부터 여호와께서 요셉을 위하여 그 애굽 사람의 집에 복을 내리시므로 여호와의 복이 그의 집과 밭에 있는 모든 소유에 미친지라	And it came to pass from the time that he had made him overseer in his house, and over all that he had, that the Lord blessed the Egyptian’s house for Joseph’s sake; and the blessing of the Lord was upon all that he had in the house, and in the field.	From the time that he put Joseph in charge of his household and all he owned, the LORD blessed the Egyptian’s household on account of him. The LORD’s blessing was on everything he owned, both in his house and in his field.
GEN	39	6	주인이 그 소유를 다 요셉의 손에 위임하고 자기 식료 외에는 간섭하지 아니하였더라 요셉은 용모가 준수하고 아담하였더라	And he left all that he had in Joseph’s hand; and he knew not ought he had, save the bread which he did eat. And Joseph was a goodly person, and well favoured.	So Potiphar left all that he owned in Joseph’s care; he did not concern himself with anything except the food he ate. Now Joseph was well-built and handsome,
GEN	39	7	그 후에 그 주인의 처가 요셉에게 눈짓하다가 동침하기를 청하니	And it came to pass after these things, that his master’s wife cast her eyes upon Joseph; and she said, Lie with me.	and after some time his master’s wife cast her eyes upon Joseph and said, “Sleep with me.”
GEN	39	8	요셉이 거절하며 자기 주인의 처에게 이르되 나의 주인이 가중 제반 소유를 간섭지 아니하고 다 내 손에 위임하였으니	But he refused, and said unto his master’s wife, Behold, my master wotteth not what is with me in the house, and he hath committed all that he hath to my hand;	But he refused. “Look,” he said to his master’s wife, “with me here, my master does not concern himself with anything in his house, and he has entrusted everything he owns to my care.
GEN	39	9	이 집에는 나보다 큰 이가 없으며 주인이 아무 것도 내게 금하지 아니하였어도 금한 것은 당신뿐이니 당신은 자기 아내임이라 그런즉 내가 어찌 이 큰 악을 행하여 하나님께 득죄하리이까	There is none greater in this house than I; neither hath he kept back any thing from me but thee, because thou art his wife: how then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?	No one in this house is greater than I am. He has withheld nothing from me except you, because you are his wife. So how could I do such a great evil and sin against God?”
GEN	39	10	여인이 날마다 요셉에게 청하였으나 요셉이 듣지 아니하여 동침하지 아니할 뿐더러 함께 있지도 아니하니라	And it came to pass, as she spake to Joseph day by day, that he hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, or to be with her.	Although Potiphar’s wife spoke to Joseph day after day, he refused to go to bed with her or even be near her.
GEN	39	11	그러할 때에 요셉이 시무하러 그 집에 들어갔더니 그 집 사람은 하나도 거기 없었더라	And it came to pass about this time, that Joseph went into the house to do his business; and there was none of the men of the house there within.	One day, however, Joseph went into the house to attend to his work, and not a single household servant was inside.
GEN	39	12	그 여인이 그 옷을 잡고 가로되 나와 동침하자 요셉이 자기 옷을 그 손에 버리고 도망하여 나가매	And she caught him by his garment, saying, Lie with me: and he left his garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out.	She grabbed Joseph by his cloak and said, “Sleep with me!” But leaving his cloak in her hand, he escaped and ran outside.
GEN	39	13	그가 요셉이 그 옷을 자기 손에 버려두고 도망하여 나감을 보고	And it came to pass, when she saw that he had left his garment in her hand, and was fled forth,	When she saw that he had left his cloak in her hand and had run out of the house,
GEN	39	14	집 사람들을 불러서 그들에게 이르되 보라 주인이 히브리 사람을 우리에게 데려다가 우리를 희롱하게 하도다 그가 나를 겁간코자 내게로 들어오기로 내가 크게 소리 질렀더니	That she called unto the men of her house, and spake unto them, saying, See, he hath brought in an Hebrew unto us to mock us; he came in unto me to lie with me, and I cried with a loud voice:	she called her household servants. “Look,” she said, “this Hebrew has been brought to us to make sport of us. He came to me so he could sleep with me, but I screamed as loud as I could.
GEN	39	15	그가 나의 소리질러 부름을 듣고 그 옷을 내게 버려두고 도망하여 나갔느니라 하고	And it came to pass, when he heard that I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment with me, and fled, and got him out.	When he heard me scream for help, he left his cloak beside me and ran out of the house.”
GEN	39	16	그 옷을 곁에 두고 자기 주인이 집으로 돌아 오기를 기다려	And she laid up his garment by her, until his lord came home.	So Potiphar’s wife kept Joseph’s cloak beside her until his master came home.
GEN	39	17	이 말로 그에게 고하여 가로되 당신이 우리에게 데려온 히브리 종이 나를 희롱코자 내게로 들어왔기로	And she spake unto him according to these words, saying, The Hebrew servant, which thou hast brought unto us, came in unto me to mock me:	Then she told him the same story: “The Hebrew slave you brought us came to me to make sport of me,
GEN	39	18	내가 소리질러 불렀더니 그가 그 옷을 내게 버려두고 도망하여 나갔나이다	And it came to pass, as I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment with me, and fled out.	but when I screamed for help, he left his cloak beside me and ran out of the house.”
GEN	39	19	주인이 그 아내가 자기에게 고하기를 당신의 종이 내게 이같이 행하였다 하는 말을 듣고 심히 노한지라	And it came to pass, when his master heard the words of his wife, which she spake unto him, saying, After this manner did thy servant to me; that his wrath was kindled.	When his master heard the story his wife told him, saying, “This is what your slave did to me,” he burned with anger.
GEN	39	20	이에 요셉의 주인이 그를 잡아 옥에 넣으니 그 옥은 왕의 죄수를 가두는 곳이었더라 요셉이 옥에 갇혔으나	And Joseph’s master took him, and put him into the prison, a place where the king’s prisoners were bound: and he was there in the prison.	So Joseph’s master took him and had him thrown into the prison where the king’s prisoners were confined. While Joseph was there in the prison,
GEN	39	21	여호와께서 요셉과 함께 하시고 그에게 인자를 더하사 전옥에게 은혜를 받게 하시매	But the Lord was with Joseph, and shewed him mercy, and gave him favour in the sight of the keeper of the prison.	the LORD was with him and extended kindness to him, granting him favor in the eyes of the prison warden.
GEN	39	22	전옥이 옥중 죄수를 다 요셉의 손에 맡기므로 그 제반 사무를 요셉이 처리하고	And the keeper of the prison committed to Joseph’s hand all the prisoners that were in the prison; and whatsoever they did there, he was the doer of it.	And the warden put all the prisoners under Joseph’s care, so that he was responsible for all that was done in the prison.
GEN	39	23	전옥은 그의 손에 맡긴 것을 무엇이든지 돌아보지 아니하였으니 이는 여호와께서 요셉과 함께 하심이라 여호와께서 그의 범사에 형통케 하셨더라	The keeper of the prison looked not to any thing that was under his hand; because the Lord was with him, and that which he did, the Lord made it to prosper.	The warden did not concern himself with anything under Joseph’s care, because the LORD was with Joseph and gave him success in whatever he did.
GEN	40	1	그 후에 애굽 왕의 술 맡은 자와 떡 굽는 자가 그 주 애굽 왕에게 범죄한지라	And it came to pass after these things, that the butler of the king of Egypt and his baker had offended their lord the king of Egypt.	Some time later, the king’s cupbearer and baker offended their master, the king of Egypt.
GEN	40	2	바로가 그 두 관원장 곧 술 맡은 관원장과 떡 굽는 관원장에게 노하여	And Pharaoh was wroth against two of his officers, against the chief of the butlers, and against the chief of the bakers.	Pharaoh was angry with his two officers, the chief cupbearer and the chief baker,
GEN	40	3	그들을 시위대장의 집 안에 있는 옥에 가두니 곧 요셉의 갇힌 곳이라	And he put them in ward in the house of the captain of the guard, into the prison, the place where Joseph was bound.	and imprisoned them in the house of the captain of the guard, the same prison where Joseph was confined.
GEN	40	4	시위대장이 요셉으로 그들에게 수종하게 하매 요셉이 그들을 섬겼더라 그들이 갇힌 지 수 일이라	And the captain of the guard charged Joseph with them, and he served them: and they continued a season in ward.	The captain of the guard assigned them to Joseph, and he became their personal attendant. After they had been in custody for some time,
GEN	40	5	옥에 갇힌 애굽 왕의 술 맡은 자와 떡 굽는 자 두 사람이 하룻밤에 꿈을 꾸니 각기 몽조가 다르더라	And they dreamed a dream both of them, each man his dream in one night, each man according to the interpretation of his dream, the butler and the baker of the king of Egypt, which were bound in the prison.	both of these men—the Egyptian king’s cupbearer and baker, who were being held in the prison—had a dream on the same night, and each dream had its own meaning.
GEN	40	6	아침에 요셉이 들어가 보니 그들에게 근심 빛이 있는지라	And Joseph came in unto them in the morning, and looked upon them, and, behold, they were sad.	When Joseph came to them in the morning, he saw that they were distraught.
GEN	40	7	요셉이 그 주인의 집에 자기와 함께 갇힌 바로의 관원장에게 묻되 당신들이 오늘 어찌하여 근심 빛이 있나이까	And he asked Pharaoh’s officers that were with him in the ward of his lord’s house, saying, Wherefore look ye so sadly to day?	So he asked the officials of Pharaoh who were in custody with him in his master’s house, “Why are your faces so downcast today?”
GEN	40	8	그들이 그에게 이르되 우리가 꿈을 꾸었으나 이를 해석할 자가 없도다 요셉이 그들에게 이르되 해석은 하나님께 있지 아니하니이까 청컨대 내게 고하소서	And they said unto him, We have dreamed a dream, and there is no interpreter of it. And Joseph said unto them, Do not interpretations belong to God? tell me them, I pray you.	“We both had dreams,” they replied, “but there is no one to interpret them.” Then Joseph said to them, “Don’t interpretations belong to God? Tell me your dreams.”
GEN	40	9	술 맡은 관원장이 그 꿈을 요셉에게 말하여 가로되 내가 꿈에 보니 내 앞에 포도나무가 있는데	And the chief butler told his dream to Joseph, and said to him, In my dream, behold, a vine was before me;	So the chief cupbearer told Joseph his dream: “In my dream there was a vine before me,
GEN	40	10	그 나무에 세 가지가 있고 싹이 나서 꽃이 피고 포도송이가 익었고	And in the vine were three branches: and it was as though it budded, and her blossoms shot forth; and the clusters thereof brought forth ripe grapes:	and on the vine were three branches. As it budded, its blossoms opened and its clusters ripened into grapes.
GEN	40	11	내 손에 바로의 잔이 있기로 내가 포도를 따서 그 즙을 바로의 잔에 짜서 그 잔을 바로의 손에 드렸노라	And Pharaoh’s cup was in my hand: and I took the grapes, and pressed them into Pharaoh’s cup, and I gave the cup into Pharaoh’s hand.	Pharaoh’s cup was in my hand, and I took the grapes, squeezed them into his cup, and placed the cup in his hand.”
GEN	40	12	요셉이 그에게 이르되 그 해석이 이러하니 세 가지는 사흘이라	And Joseph said unto him, This is the interpretation of it: The three branches are three days:	Joseph replied, “This is the interpretation: The three branches are three days.
GEN	40	13	지금부터 사흘 안에 바로가 당신의 머리를 들고 당신의 전직을 회복하리니 당신이 이왕에 술 맡은 자가 되었을 때에 하던 것 같이 바로의 잔을 그 손에 받들게 되리이다	Yet within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thine head, and restore thee unto thy place: and thou shalt deliver Pharaoh’s cup into his hand, after the former manner when thou wast his butler.	Within three days Pharaoh will lift up your head and restore your position. You will put Pharaoh’s cup in his hand, just as you did when you were his cupbearer.
GEN	40	14	당신이 득의하거든 나를 생각하고 내게 은혜를 베풀어서 내 사정을 바로에게 고하여 이 집에서 나를 건져내소서	But think on me when it shall be well with thee, and shew kindness, I pray thee, unto me, and make mention of me unto Pharaoh, and bring me out of this house:	But when it goes well for you, please remember me and show me kindness by mentioning me to Pharaoh, that he might bring me out of this prison.
GEN	40	15	나는 히브리 땅에서 끌려온 자요 여기서도 옥에 갇힐 일은 행치 아니하였나이다	For indeed I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews: and here also have I done nothing that they should put me into the dungeon.	For I was kidnapped from the land of the Hebrews, and even here I have done nothing for which they should have put me in this dungeon.”
GEN	40	16	떡 굽는 관원장이 그 해석이 길함을 보고 요셉에게 이르되 나도 꿈에 보니 흰 떡 세 광주리가 내 머리에 있고	When the chief baker saw that the interpretation was good, he said unto Joseph, I also was in my dream, and, behold, I had three white baskets on my head:	When the chief baker saw that the interpretation was favorable, he said to Joseph, “I too had a dream: There were three baskets of white bread on my head.
GEN	40	17	그 윗광주리에 바로를 위하여 만든 각종 구운 식물이 있는데 새들이 내 머리의 광주리에서 그것을 먹더라	And in the uppermost basket there was of all manner of bakemeats for Pharaoh; and the birds did eat them out of the basket upon my head.	In the top basket were all sorts of baked goods for Pharaoh, but the birds were eating them out of the basket on my head.”
GEN	40	18	요셉이 대답하여 가로되 그 해석은 이러하니 세 광주리는 사흘이라	And Joseph answered and said, This is the interpretation thereof: The three baskets are three days:	Joseph replied, “This is the interpretation: The three baskets are three days.
GEN	40	19	지금부터 사흘 안에 바로가 당신의 머리를 끊고 당신을 나무에 달리니 새들이 당신의 고기를 뜯어 먹으리이다 하더니	Yet within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thy head from off thee, and shall hang thee on a tree; and the birds shall eat thy flesh from off thee.	Within three days Pharaoh will lift off your head and hang you on a tree. Then the birds will eat the flesh of your body.”
GEN	40	20	제삼일은 바로의 탄일이라 바로가 모든 신하를 위하여 잔치할 때에 술 맡은 관원장과 떡 굽는 관원장으로 머리를 그 신하 중에 들게 하니라	And it came to pass the third day, which was Pharaoh’s birthday, that he made a feast unto all his servants: and he lifted up the head of the chief butler and of the chief baker among his servants.	On the third day, which was Pharaoh’s birthday, he held a feast for all his officials, and in their presence he lifted up the heads of the chief cupbearer and the chief baker.
GEN	40	21	바로의 술 맡은 관원장은 전직을 회복하매 그가 잔을 바로의 손에 받들어 드렸고	And he restored the chief butler unto his butlership again; and he gave the cup into Pharaoh’s hand:	Pharaoh restored the chief cupbearer to his position, so that he once again placed the cup in Pharaoh’s hand.
GEN	40	22	떡 굽는 관원장은 매여 달리니 요셉이 그들에게 해석함과 같이 되었으나	But he hanged the chief baker: as Joseph had interpreted to them.	But Pharaoh hanged the chief baker, just as Joseph had described to them in his interpretation.
GEN	40	23	술 맡은 관원장이 요셉을 기억지 않고 잊었더라	Yet did not the chief butler remember Joseph, but forgat him.	The chief cupbearer, however, did not remember Joseph; he forgot all about him.
GEN	41	1	만 이년 후에 바로가 꿈을 꾼즉 자기가 하숫가에 섰는데	And it came to pass at the end of two full years, that Pharaoh dreamed: and, behold, he stood by the river.	After two full years had passed, Pharaoh had a dream: He was standing beside the Nile,
GEN	41	2	보니 아름답고 살찐 일곱 암소가 하수에서 올라와 갈밭에서 뜯어먹고	And, behold, there came up out of the river seven well favoured kine and fatfleshed; and they fed in a meadow.	when seven cows, sleek and well-fed, came up from the river and began to graze among the reeds.
GEN	41	3	그 뒤에 또 흉악하고 파리한 다른 일곱 암소가 하수에서 올라와 그 소와 함께 하숫가에 섰더니	And, behold, seven other kine came up after them out of the river, ill favoured and leanfleshed; and stood by the other kine upon the brink of the river.	After them, seven other cows, sickly and thin, came up from the Nile and stood beside the well-fed cows on the bank of the river.
GEN	41	4	그 흉악하고 파리한 소가 그 아름답고 살찐 일곱 소를 먹은지라 바로가 곧 깨었다가	And the ill favoured and leanfleshed kine did eat up the seven well favoured and fat kine. So Pharaoh awoke.	And the cows that were sickly and thin devoured the seven sleek, well-fed cows. Then Pharaoh woke up,
GEN	41	5	다시 잠이 들어 꿈을 꾸니 한 줄기에 무성하고 충실한 일곱 이삭이 나오고	And he slept and dreamed the second time: and, behold, seven ears of corn came up upon one stalk, rank and good.	but he fell back asleep and dreamed a second time: Seven heads of grain, plump and ripe, came up on one stalk.
GEN	41	6	그 후에 또 세약하고 동풍에 마른 일곱 이삭이 나오더니	And, behold, seven thin ears and blasted with the east wind sprung up after them.	After them, seven other heads of grain sprouted, thin and scorched by the east wind.
GEN	41	7	그 세약한 일곱 이삭이 무성하고 충실한 일곱 이삭을 삼킨지라 바로가 깬즉 꿈이라	And the seven thin ears devoured the seven rank and full ears. And Pharaoh awoke, and, behold, it was a dream.	And the thin heads of grain swallowed up the seven plump, ripe ones. Then Pharaoh awoke and realized it was a dream.
GEN	41	8	아침에 그 마음이 번민하여 보내어 애굽의 술객과 박사를 모두 불러 그들에게 그 꿈을 고하였으나 그것을 바로에게 해석하는 자가 없었더라	And it came to pass in the morning that his spirit was troubled; and he sent and called for all the magicians of Egypt, and all the wise men thereof: and Pharaoh told them his dream; but there was none that could interpret them unto Pharaoh.	In the morning his spirit was troubled, so he summoned all the magicians and wise men of Egypt. Pharaoh told them his dreams, but no one could interpret them for him.
GEN	41	9	술 맡은 관원장이 바로에게 고하여 가로되 내가 오늘날 나의 허물을 추억하나이다	Then spake the chief butler unto Pharaoh, saying, I do remember my faults this day:	Then the chief cupbearer said to Pharaoh, “Today I recall my failures.
GEN	41	10	바로께서 종들에게 노하사 나와 떡 굽는 관원장을 시위대장의 집에 가두셨을 때에	Pharaoh was wroth with his servants, and put me in ward in the captain of the guard’s house, both me and the chief baker:	Pharaoh was once angry with his servants, and he put me and the chief baker in the custody of the captain of the guard.
GEN	41	11	나와 그가 하룻밤에 꿈을 꾼즉 각기 징조가 있는 꿈이라	And we dreamed a dream in one night, I and he; we dreamed each man according to the interpretation of his dream.	One night both the chief baker and I had dreams, and each dream had its own meaning.
GEN	41	12	그곳에 시위대장의 종된 히브리 소년이 우리와 함께 있기로 우리가 그에게 고하매 그가 우리의 꿈을 풀되 그 꿈대로 각인에게 해석하더니	And there was there with us a young man, an Hebrew, servant to the captain of the guard; and we told him, and he interpreted to us our dreams; to each man according to his dream he did interpret.	Now a young Hebrew was there with us, a servant of the captain of the guard. We told him our dreams and he interpreted them for us individually.
GEN	41	13	그 해석한 대로 되어 나는 복직하고 그는 매여 달렸나이다	And it came to pass, as he interpreted to us, so it was; me he restored unto mine office, and him he hanged.	And it happened to us just as he had interpreted: I was restored to my position, and the other man was hanged.”
GEN	41	14	이에 바로가 보내어 요셉을 부르매 그들이 급히 그를 옥에서 낸지라 요셉이 곧 수염을 깎고 그 옷을 갈아 입고 바로에게 들어오니	Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph, and they brought him hastily out of the dungeon: and he shaved himself, and changed his raiment, and came in unto Pharaoh.	So Pharaoh sent for Joseph, who was quickly brought out of the dungeon. After he had shaved and changed his clothes, he went in before Pharaoh.
GEN	41	15	바로가 요셉에게 이르되 내가 한 꿈을 꾸었으나 그것을 해석하는 자가 없더니 들은즉 너는 꿈을 들으면 능히 푼다더라	And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I have dreamed a dream, and there is none that can interpret it: and I have heard say of thee, that thou canst understand a dream to interpret it.	Pharaoh said to Joseph, “I had a dream, and no one can interpret it. But I have heard it said of you that when you hear a dream you can interpret it.”
GEN	41	16	요셉이 바로에게 대답하여 가로되 이는 내게 있는 것이 아니라 하나님이 바로에게 평안한 대답을 하시리이다	And Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, It is not in me: God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace.	“I myself cannot do it,” Joseph replied, “but God will give Pharaoh a sound answer.”
GEN	41	17	바로가 요셉에게 이르되 내가 꿈에 하숫가에 서서	And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, In my dream, behold, I stood upon the bank of the river:	Then Pharaoh said to Joseph: “In my dream I was standing on the bank of the Nile,
GEN	41	18	보니 살지고 아름다운 일곱 암소가 하숫가에 올라와 갈밭에서 뜯어 먹고	And, behold, there came up out of the river seven kine, fatfleshed and well favoured; and they fed in a meadow:	when seven cows, well-fed and sleek, came up from the river and began to graze among the reeds.
GEN	41	19	그 뒤에 또 약하고 심히 흉악하고 파리한 일곱 암소가 올라오니 그같이 흉악한 것들은 애굽 땅에서 내가 아직 보지 못한 것이라	And, behold, seven other kine came up after them, poor and very ill favoured and leanfleshed, such as I never saw in all the land of Egypt for badness:	After them, seven other cows—sickly, ugly, and thin—came up. I have never seen such ugly cows in all the land of Egypt!
GEN	41	20	그 파리하고 흉악한 소가 처음의 일곱 살찐 소를 먹었으며	And the lean and the ill favoured kine did eat up the first seven fat kine:	Then the thin, ugly cows devoured the seven well-fed cows that were there first.
GEN	41	21	먹었으나 먹은듯하지 아니하여 여전히 흉악하더라 내가 곧 깨었다가	And when they had eaten them up, it could not be known that they had eaten them; but they were still ill favoured, as at the beginning. So I awoke.	When they had devoured them, however, no one could tell that they had done so; their appearance was as ugly as it had been before. Then I awoke.
GEN	41	22	다시 꿈에 보니 한 줄기에 무성하고 충실한 일곱 이삭이 나오고	And I saw in my dream, and, behold, seven ears came up in one stalk, full and good:	In my dream I also saw seven heads of grain, plump and ripe, growing on a single stalk.
GEN	41	23	그 후에 또 세약하고 동풍에 마른 일곱 이삭이 나더니	And, behold, seven ears, withered, thin, and blasted with the east wind, sprung up after them:	After them, seven other heads of grain sprouted—withered, thin, and scorched by the east wind.
GEN	41	24	그 세약한 이삭이 좋은 일곱 이삭을 삼키더라 내가 그 꿈을 술객에게 말하였으나 그것을 내게 보이는 자가 없느니라	And the thin ears devoured the seven good ears: and I told this unto the magicians; but there was none that could declare it to me.	And the thin heads of grain swallowed the seven plump ones. I told this dream to the magicians, but no one could explain it to me.”
GEN	41	25	요셉이 바로에게 고하되 바로의 꿈은 하나이라 하나님이 그 하실 일을 바로에게 보이심이니이다	And Joseph said unto Pharaoh, The dream of Pharaoh is one: God hath shewed Pharaoh what he is about to do.	At this, Joseph said to Pharaoh, “The dreams of Pharaoh are one and the same. God has revealed to Pharaoh what He is about to do.
GEN	41	26	일곱 좋은 암소는 일곱 해요 일곱 좋은 이삭도 일곱 해니 그 꿈은 하나이라	The seven good kine are seven years; and the seven good ears are seven years: the dream is one.	The seven good cows are seven years, and the seven ripe heads of grain are seven years. The dreams have the same meaning.
GEN	41	27	그 후에 올라온 파리하고 흉악한 일곱 소는 칠년이요 동풍에 말라 속이 빈 일곱 이삭도 일곱 해 흉년이니	And the seven thin and ill favoured kine that came up after them are seven years; and the seven empty ears blasted with the east wind shall be seven years of famine.	Moreover, the seven thin, ugly cows that came up after them are seven years, and so are the seven worthless heads of grain scorched by the east wind—they are seven years of famine.
GEN	41	28	내가 바로에게 고하기를 하나님이 그 하실 일로 바로에게 보이신다 함이 이것이라	This is the thing which I have spoken unto Pharaoh: What God is about to do he sheweth unto Pharaoh.	It is just as I said to Pharaoh: God has shown Pharaoh what He is about to do.
GEN	41	29	온 애굽 땅에 일곱 해 큰 풍년이 있겠고	Behold, there come seven years of great plenty throughout all the land of Egypt:	Behold, seven years of great abundance are coming throughout the land of Egypt,
GEN	41	30	후에 일곱 해 흉년이 들므로 애굽 땅에 있던 풍년을 다 잊어버리게 되고 이 땅이 기근으로 멸망되리니	And there shall arise after them seven years of famine; and all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land of Egypt; and the famine shall consume the land;	but seven years of famine will follow them. Then all the abundance in the land of Egypt will be forgotten, and the famine will devastate the land.
GEN	41	31	후에 든 그 흉년이 너무 심하므로 이전 풍년을 이 땅에서 기억하지 못하게 되리이다	And the plenty shall not be known in the land by reason of that famine following; for it shall be very grievous.	The abundance in the land will not be remembered, since the famine that follows it will be so severe.
GEN	41	32	바로께서 꿈을 두 번 겹쳐 꾸신 것은 하나님이 이 일을 정하셨음이라 속히 행하시리니	And for that the dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice; it is because the thing is established by God, and God will shortly bring it to pass.	Moreover, because the dream was given to Pharaoh in two versions, the matter has been decreed by God, and He will carry it out shortly.
GEN	41	33	이제 바로께서는 명철하고 지혜있는 사람을 택하여 애굽 땅을 치리하게 하시고	Now therefore let Pharaoh look out a man discreet and wise, and set him over the land of Egypt.	Now, therefore, Pharaoh should look for a discerning and wise man and set him over the land of Egypt.
GEN	41	34	바로께서는 또 이같이 행하사 국중에 여러 관리를 두어 그 일곱 해 풍년에 애굽 땅의 오분의 일을 거두되	Let Pharaoh do this, and let him appoint officers over the land, and take up the fifth part of the land of Egypt in the seven plenteous years.	Let Pharaoh take action and appoint commissioners over the land to take a fifth of the harvest of Egypt during the seven years of abundance.
GEN	41	35	그 관리로 장차 올 풍년의 모든 곡물을 거두고 그 곡물을 바로의 손에 돌려 양식을 위하여 각 성에 적치하게 하소서	And let them gather all the food of those good years that come, and lay up corn under the hand of Pharaoh, and let them keep food in the cities.	Under the authority of Pharaoh, let them collect all the excess food from these good years, that they may come and lay up the grain to be preserved as food in the cities.
GEN	41	36	이와 같이 그 곡물을 이 땅에 저장하여 애굽 땅에 임할 일곱 해 흉년을 예비하시면 땅이 이 흉년을 인하여 멸망치 아니하리이다	And that food shall be for store to the land against the seven years of famine, which shall be in the land of Egypt; that the land perish not through the famine.	This food will be a reserve for the land during the seven years of famine to come upon the land of Egypt. Then the country will not perish in the famine.”
GEN	41	37	바로와 그 모든 신하가 이 일을 좋게 여긴지라	And the thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of all his servants.	This proposal pleased Pharaoh and all his officials.
GEN	41	38	바로가 그 신하들에게 이르되 이와 같이 하나님의 신에 감동한 사람을 우리가 어찌 얻을 수 있으리요 하고	And Pharaoh said unto his servants, Can we find such a one as this is, a man in whom the Spirit of God is?	So Pharaoh asked them, “Can we find anyone like this man, in whom the Spirit of God abides?”
GEN	41	39	요셉에게 이르되 하나님이 이 모든 것을 네게 보이셨으니 너와 같이 명철하고 지혜있는 자가 없도다	And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Forasmuch as God hath shewed thee all this, there is none so discreet and wise as thou art:	Then Pharaoh said to Joseph, “Since God has made all this known to you, there is no one as discerning and wise as you.
GEN	41	40	너는 내 집을 치리하라 내 백성이 다 네 명을 복종하리니 나는 너보다 높음이 보좌뿐이니라	Thou shalt be over my house, and according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled: only in the throne will I be greater than thou.	You shall be in charge of my house, and all my people are to obey your commands. Only with regard to the throne will I be greater than you.”
GEN	41	41	바로가 또 요셉에게 이르되 내가 너로 애굽 온 땅을 총리하게 하노라 하고	And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, See, I have set thee over all the land of Egypt.	Pharaoh also told Joseph, “I hereby place you over all the land of Egypt.”
GEN	41	42	자기의 인장 반지를 빼어 요셉의 손에 끼우고 그에게 세마포 옷을 입히고 금사슬을 목에 걸고	And Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon Joseph’s hand, and arrayed him in vestures of fine linen, and put a gold chain about his neck;	Then Pharaoh removed the signet ring from his finger, put it on Joseph’s finger, clothed him in garments of fine linen, and placed a gold chain around his neck.
GEN	41	43	자기에게 있는 버금 수레에 그를 태우매 무리가 그 앞에서 소리 지르기를 엎드리라 하더라 바로가 그로 애굽 전국을 총리하게 하였더라	And he made him to ride in the second chariot which he had; and they cried before him, Bow the knee: and he made him ruler over all the land of Egypt.	He had Joseph ride in his second chariot, with men calling out before him, “Bow the knee!” So he placed him over all the land of Egypt.
GEN	41	44	바로가 요셉에게 이르되 나는 바로라 애굽 온 땅에서 네 허락 없이는 수족을 놀릴 자가 없으리라 하고	And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I am Pharaoh, and without thee shall no man lift up his hand or foot in all the land of Egypt.	And Pharaoh declared to Joseph, “I am Pharaoh, but without your permission, no one in all the land of Egypt shall lift his hand or foot.”
GEN	41	45	그가 요셉의 이름을 사브낫바네아라 하고 또 온 제사장 보디베라의 딸 아스낫을 그에게 주어 아내를 삼게 하니라 요셉이 나가 애굽 온 땅을 순찰하니라	And Pharaoh called Joseph’s name Zaphnath–paaneah; and he gave him to wife Asenath the daughter of Poti–pherah priest of On. And Joseph went out over all the land of Egypt.	Pharaoh gave Joseph the name Zaphenath-paneah, and he gave him Asenath daughter of Potiphera, priest of On, to be his wife. And Joseph took charge of all the land of Egypt.
GEN	41	46	요셉이 애굽왕 바로 앞에 설 때에 삼십 세라 그가 바로 앞을 떠나 애굽 온 땅을 순찰하니	And Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh king of Egypt. And Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh, and went throughout all the land of Egypt.	Now Joseph was thirty years old when he entered the service of Pharaoh king of Egypt. And Joseph left Pharaoh’s presence and traveled throughout the land of Egypt.
GEN	41	47	일곱 해 풍년에 토지 소출이 심히 많은지라	And in the seven plenteous years the earth brought forth by handfuls.	During the seven years of abundance, the land brought forth bountifully.
GEN	41	48	요셉이 애굽 땅에 있는 그 칠년 곡물을 거두어 각성에 저축하되 각성 주위의 밭의 곡물을 그 성중에 저장하매	And he gathered up all the food of the seven years, which were in the land of Egypt, and laid up the food in the cities: the food of the field, which was round about every city, laid he up in the same.	During those seven years, Joseph collected all the excess food in the land of Egypt and stored it in the cities. In every city he laid up the food from the fields around it.
GEN	41	49	저장한 곡식이 바다 모래 같이 심히 많아 세기를 그쳤으니 그 수가 한이 없음이었더라	And Joseph gathered corn as the sand of the sea, very much, until he left numbering; for it was without number.	So Joseph stored up grain in such abundance, like the sand of the sea, that he stopped keeping track of it; for it was beyond measure.
GEN	41	50	흉년이 들기 전에 요셉에게 두 아들을 낳되 곧 온 제사장 보디베라의 딸 아스낫이 그에게 낳은지라	And unto Joseph were born two sons before the years of famine came, which Asenath the daughter of Poti–pherah priest of On bare unto him.	Before the years of famine arrived, two sons were born to Joseph by Asenath daughter of Potiphera, priest of On.
GEN	41	51	요셉이 그 장자의 이름을 므낫세라 하였으니 하나님이 나로 나의 모든 고난과 나의 아비의 온 집 일을 잊어버리게 하셨다 함이요	And Joseph called the name of the firstborn Manasseh: For God, said he, hath made me forget all my toil, and all my father’s house.	Joseph named the firstborn Manasseh, saying, “God has made me forget all my hardship and all my father’s household.”
GEN	41	52	차자의 이름을 에브라임이라 하였으니 하나님이 나로 나의 수고 한 땅에서 창성하게 하셨다 함이었더라	And the name of the second called he Ephraim: For God hath caused me to be fruitful in the land of my affliction.	And the second son he named Ephraim, saying, “God has made me fruitful in the land of my affliction.”
GEN	41	53	애굽 땅에 일곱 해 풍년이 그치고	And the seven years of plenteousness, that was in the land of Egypt, were ended.	When the seven years of abundance in the land of Egypt came to an end,
GEN	41	54	요셉의 말과 같이 일곱 해 흉년이 들기 시작하매 각국에는 기근이 있으나 애굽 온 땅에는 식물이 있더니	And the seven years of dearth began to come, according as Joseph had said: and the dearth was in all lands; but in all the land of Egypt there was bread.	the seven years of famine began, just as Joseph had said. And although there was famine in every country, there was food throughout the land of Egypt.
GEN	41	55	애굽 온 땅이 주리매 백성이 바로에게 부르짖어 양식을 구하는지라 바로가 애굽 모든 백성에게 이르되 요셉에게 가서 그가 너희에게 이르는 대로 하라 하니라	And when all the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread: and Pharaoh said unto all the Egyptians, Go unto Joseph; what he saith to you, do.	When extreme hunger came to all the land of Egypt and the people cried out to Pharaoh for food, he told all the Egyptians, “Go to Joseph and do whatever he tells you.”
GEN	41	56	온 지면에 기근이 있으매 요셉이 모든 창고를 열고 애굽 백성에게 팔새 애굽 땅에 기근이 심하며	And the famine was over all the face of the earth: And Joseph opened all the storehouses, and sold unto the Egyptians; and the famine waxed sore in the land of Egypt.	When the famine had spread over all the land, Joseph opened up all the storehouses and sold grain to the Egyptians; for the famine was severe in the land of Egypt.
GEN	41	57	각국 백성도 양식을 사려고 애굽으로 들어와 요셉에게 이르렀으니 기근이 온 세상에 심함이었더라	And all countries came into Egypt to Joseph for to buy corn; because that the famine was so sore in all lands.	And every nation came to Joseph in Egypt to buy grain, because the famine was severe over all the earth.
GEN	42	1	때에 야곱이 애굽에 곡식이 있음을 보고 아들들에게 이르되 너희는 어찌하여 서로 관망 만하느냐	Now when Jacob saw that there was corn in Egypt, Jacob said unto his sons, Why do ye look one upon another?	When Jacob learned that there was grain in Egypt, he said to his sons, “Why are you staring at one another?”
GEN	42	2	야곱이 또 이르되 내가 들은즉 저 애굽에 곡식이 있다 하니 너희는 그리로 가서 거기서 우리를 위하여 사오라 그리하면 우리가 살고 죽지 아니하리라 하매	And he said, Behold, I have heard that there is corn in Egypt: get you down thither, and buy for us from thence; that we may live, and not die.	“Look,” he added, “I have heard that there is grain in Egypt. Go down there and buy some for us, so that we may live and not die.”
GEN	42	3	요셉의 형 십 인이 애굽에서 곡식을 사려고 내려 갔으나	And Joseph’s ten brethren went down to buy corn in Egypt.	So ten of Joseph’s brothers went down to buy grain from Egypt.
GEN	42	4	야곱이 요셉의 아우 베냐민을 그 형들과 함께 보내지 아니하였으니 이는 그의 말이 재난이 그에게 미칠까 두렵다 함이었더라	But Benjamin, Joseph’s brother, Jacob sent not with his brethren; for he said, Lest peradventure mischief befall him.	But Jacob did not send Joseph’s brother Benjamin with his brothers, for he said, “I am afraid that harm might befall him.”
GEN	42	5	이스라엘의 아들들이 양식 사러간 자 중에 있으니 가나안 땅에 기근이 있음이라	And the sons of Israel came to buy corn among those that came: for the famine was in the land of Canaan.	So the sons of Israel were among those who came to buy grain, since the famine had also spread to the land of Canaan.
GEN	42	6	때에 요셉이 나라의 총리로서 그 땅 모든 백성에게 팔더니 요셉의 형들이 와서 그 앞에서 땅에 엎드려 절하매	And Joseph was the governor over the land, and he it was that sold to all the people of the land: and Joseph’s brethren came, and bowed down themselves before him with their faces to the earth.	Now Joseph was the ruler of the land; he was the one who sold grain to all its people. So when his brothers arrived, they bowed down before him with their faces to the ground.
GEN	42	7	요셉이 보고 형들인줄 아나 모르는체 하고 엄한 소리로 그들에게 말하여 가로되 너희가 어디서 왔느냐 그들이 가로되 곡물을 사려고 가나안에서 왔나이다	And Joseph saw his brethren, and he knew them, but made himself strange unto them, and spake roughly unto them; and he said unto them, Whence come ye? And they said, From the land of Canaan to buy food.	And when Joseph saw his brothers, he recognized them, but he treated them as strangers and spoke harshly to them. “Where have you come from?” he asked. “From the land of Canaan,” they replied. “We are here to buy food.”
GEN	42	8	요셉은 그 형들을 아나 그들은 요셉을 알지 못하더라	And Joseph knew his brethren, but they knew not him.	Although Joseph recognized his brothers, they did not recognize him.
GEN	42	9	요셉이 그들에게 대하여 꾼 꿈을 생각하고 그들에게 이르되 너희는 정탐들이라 이 나라의 틈을 엿보려고 왔느니라	And Joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed of them, and said unto them, Ye are spies; to see the nakedness of the land ye are come.	Joseph remembered his dreams about them and said, “You are spies! You have come to see if our land is vulnerable.”
GEN	42	10	그들이 그에게 이르되 내 주여 아니니이다 종들은 곡물을 사러 왔나이다	And they said unto him, Nay, my lord, but to buy food are thy servants come.	“Not so, my lord,” they replied. “Your servants have come to buy food.
GEN	42	11	우리는 다 한 사람의 아들로서 독실한 자니 종들은 정탐이 아니니이다	We are all one man’s sons; we are true men, thy servants are no spies.	We are all sons of one man. Your servants are honest men, not spies.”
GEN	42	12	요셉이 그들에게 이르되 아니라 너희가 이 나라의 틈을 엿보러 왔느니라	And he said unto them, Nay, but to see the nakedness of the land ye are come.	“No,” he told them. “You have come to see if our land is vulnerable.”
GEN	42	13	그들이 가로되 주의 종 우리들은 십이 형제로서 가나안 땅 한 사람의 아들들이라 말째 아들은 오늘 아버지와 함께 있고 또 하나는 없어졌나이다	And they said, Thy servants are twelve brethren, the sons of one man in the land of Canaan; and, behold, the youngest is this day with our father, and one is not.	But they answered, “Your servants are twelve brothers, the sons of one man in the land of Canaan. The youngest is now with our father, and one is no more.”
GEN	42	14	요셉이 그들에게 이르되 내가 너희에게 이르기를 너희는 정탐들이라 한 말이 이것이니라	And Joseph said unto them, That is it that I spake unto you, saying, Ye are spies:	Then Joseph declared, “Just as I said, you are spies!
GEN	42	15	너희는 이같이 하여 너희 진실함을 증명할 것이라 바로의 생명으로 맹세하노니 너희 말째 아우가 여기 오지 아니하면 너희가 여기서 나가지 못하리라	Hereby ye shall be proved: By the life of Pharaoh ye shall not go forth hence, except your youngest brother come hither.	And this is how you will be tested: As surely as Pharaoh lives, you shall not leave this place unless your youngest brother comes here.
GEN	42	16	너희 중 하나를 보내어 너희 아우를 데려오게 하고 너희는 갇히어 있으라 내가 너희의 말을 시험하여 너희 중에 진실이 있는지 보리라 바로의 생명으로 맹세하노니 그리하지 아니하면 너희는 과연 정탐이니라 하고	Send one of you, and let him fetch your brother, and ye shall be kept in prison, that your words may be proved, whether there be any truth in you: or else by the life of Pharaoh surely ye are spies.	Send one of your number to get your brother; the rest of you will be confined so that the truth of your words may be tested. If they are untrue, then as surely as Pharaoh lives, you are spies!”
GEN	42	17	그들을 다 함께 삼일을 가두었더라	And he put them all together into ward three days.	So Joseph imprisoned them for three days,
GEN	42	18	삼일만에 요셉이 그들에게 이르되 나는 하나님을 경외하노니 너희는 이같이 하여 생명을 보전하라	And Joseph said unto them the third day, This do, and live; for I fear God:	and on the third day he said to them, “I fear God. So do this and you will live:
GEN	42	19	너희가 독실한 자이면 너희 형제 중 한 사람만 그 옥에 갇히게 하고 너희는 곡식을 가지고 가서 너희 집들의 주림을 구하고	If ye be true men, let one of your brethren be bound in the house of your prison: go ye, carry corn for the famine of your houses:	If you are honest, leave one of your brothers in custody while the rest of you go and take back grain to relieve the hunger of your households.
GEN	42	20	너희 말째 아우를 내게로 데리고 오라 그리하면 너희 말이 진실함이 되고 너희가 죽지 아니하리라 그들이 그대로 하니라	But bring your youngest brother unto me; so shall your words be verified, and ye shall not die. And they did so.	Then bring your youngest brother to me so that your words can be verified, that you may not die.” And to this they consented.
GEN	42	21	그들이 서로 말하되 우리가 아우의 일로 인하여 범죄하였도다 그가 우리에게 애걸할 때에 그 마음의 괴로움을 보고도 듣지 아니하였으므로 이 괴로움이 우리에게 임하도다	And they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is this distress come upon us.	Then they said to one another, “Surely we are being punished because of our brother. We saw his anguish when he pleaded with us, but we would not listen. That is why this distress has come upon us.”
GEN	42	22	르우벤이 그들에게 대답하여 가로되 내가 너희더러 그 아이에게 득죄하지 말라고 하지 아니하였느냐 그래도 너희가 듣지 아니하였느니라 그러므로 그의 피 값을 내게 되었도다 하니	And Reuben answered them, saying, Spake I not unto you, saying, Do not sin against the child; and ye would not hear? therefore, behold, also his blood is required.	And Reuben responded, “Didn’t I tell you not to sin against the boy? But you would not listen. Now we must account for his blood!”
GEN	42	23	피차간에 통변을 세웠으므로 그들은 요셉이 그 말을 알아 들은 줄을 알지 못하였더라	And they knew not that Joseph understood them; for he spake unto them by an interpreter.	They did not realize that Joseph understood them, since there was an interpreter between them.
GEN	42	24	요셉이 그들을 떠나 가서 울고 다시 돌아와서 그들과 말하다가 그들 중에서 시므온을 취하여 그들의 목전에서 결박하고	And he turned himself about from them, and wept; and returned to them again, and communed with them, and took from them Simeon, and bound him before their eyes.	And he turned away from them and wept. When he turned back and spoke to them, he took Simeon from them and had him bound before their eyes.
GEN	42	25	명하여 곡물을 그 그릇에 채우게 하고 각인의 돈은 그 자루에 도로 넣게 하고 또 길 양식을 그들에게 주게 하니 그대로 행하였더라	Then Joseph commanded to fill their sacks with corn, and to restore every man’s money into his sack, and to give them provision for the way: and thus did he unto them.	Then Joseph gave orders to fill their bags with grain, to return each man’s silver to his sack, and to give them provisions for their journey. This order was carried out,
GEN	42	26	그들이 곡식을 나귀에 싣고 그 곳을 떠났더니	And they laded their asses with the corn, and departed thence.	and they loaded the grain on their donkeys and departed.
GEN	42	27	한 사람이 객점에서 나귀에게 먹이를 주려고 자루를 풀고 본즉 그 돈이 자루 아구에 있는지라	And as one of them opened his sack to give his ass provender in the inn, he espied his money; for, behold, it was in his sack’s mouth.	At the place where they lodged for the night, one of them opened his sack to get feed for his donkey, and he saw his silver in the mouth of the sack.
GEN	42	28	그가 그 형제에게 고하되 내 돈을 도로 넣었도다 보라 자루 속에 있도다 이에 그들이 혼이 나서 떨며 서로 돌아보며 말하되 하나님이 어찌하여 우리에게 이 일을 행하셨는고 하고	And he said unto his brethren, My money is restored; and, lo, it is even in my sack: and their heart failed them, and they were afraid, saying one to another, What is this that God hath done unto us?	“My silver has been returned!” he said to his brothers. “It is here in my sack.” Their hearts sank, and trembling, they turned to one another and said, “What is this that God has done to us?”
GEN	42	29	그들이 가나안 땅에 돌아와 그 아비 야곱에게 이르러 그 만난 일을 자세히 고하여 가로되	And they came unto Jacob their father unto the land of Canaan, and told him all that befell unto them; saying,	When they reached their father Jacob in the land of Canaan, they described to him all that had happened to them:
GEN	42	30	그 땅의 주 그 사람이 엄히 우리에게 말씀하고 우리를 그 나라 정탐자로 여기기로	The man, who is the lord of the land, spake roughly to us, and took us for spies of the country.	“The man who is lord of the land spoke harshly to us and accused us of spying on the country.
GEN	42	31	우리가 그에게 이르되 우리는 독실한 자요 정탐이 아니니이다	And we said unto him, We are true men; we are no spies:	But we told him, ‘We are honest men, not spies.
GEN	42	32	우리는 한 아비의 아들 십이 형제로서 하나는 없어지고 말째는 오늘 우리 아버지와 함께 가나안 땅에 있나이다 하였더니	We be twelve brethren, sons of our father; one is not, and the youngest is this day with our father in the land of Canaan.	We are twelve brothers, sons of one father. One is no more, and the youngest is now with our father in the land of Canaan.’
GEN	42	33	그 땅의 주 그 사람이 우리에게 이르되 내가 이같이 하여 너희가 독실한 자임을 알리니 너희 형제 중 하나를 내게 두고 양식을 가지고 가서 너희 집들의 주림을 구하고	And the man, the lord of the country, said unto us, Hereby shall I know that ye are true men; leave one of your brethren here with me, and take food for the famine of your households, and be gone:	Then the man who is lord of the land said to us, ‘This is how I will know whether you are honest: Leave one brother with me, take food to relieve the hunger of your households, and go.
GEN	42	34	너희 말째 아우를 내게로 데려오라 그리하면 너희가 정탐이 아니요 독실한 자임을 내가 알고 너희 형제를 너희에게 돌리리니 너희가 이 나라에서 무역하리라 하더이다 하고	And bring your youngest brother unto me: then shall I know that ye are no spies, but that ye are true men: so will I deliver you your brother, and ye shall traffick in the land.	But bring your youngest brother back to me so I will know that you are not spies but honest men. Then I will give your brother back to you, and you can trade in the land.’”
GEN	42	35	각기 자루를 쏟고 본즉 각인의 돈뭉치가 그 자루 속에 있는지라 그들과 그 아비가 돈 뭉치를 보고 다 두려워하더니	And it came to pass as they emptied their sacks, that, behold, every man’s bundle of money was in his sack: and when both they and their father saw the bundles of money, they were afraid.	As they began emptying their sacks, there in each man’s sack was his bag of silver! And when they and their father saw the bags of silver, they were dismayed.
GEN	42	36	그 아비 야곱이 그들에게 이르되 너희가 나로 나의 자식들을 잃게 하도다 요셉도 없어졌고 시므온도 없어졌거늘 베냐민을 또 빼앗아 가고자 하니 이는 다 나를 해롭게 함이로다	And Jacob their father said unto them, Me have ye bereaved of my children: Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take Benjamin away: all these things are against me.	Their father Jacob said to them, “You have deprived me of my sons. Joseph is gone and Simeon is no more. Now you want to take Benjamin. Everything is going against me!”
GEN	42	37	르우벤이 아비에게 고하여 가로되 내가 그를 아버지께로 데리고 오지 아니하거든 나의 두 아들을 죽이소서 그를 내 손에 맡기소서 내가 그를 아버지께로 데리고 돌아오리이다	And Reuben spake unto his father, saying, Slay my two sons, if I bring him not to thee: deliver him into my hand, and I will bring him to thee again.	Then Reuben said to his father, “You may kill my two sons if I fail to bring him back to you. Put him in my care, and I will return him.”
GEN	42	38	야곱이 가로되 내 아들은 너희와 함께 내려가지 못하리니 그의 형은 죽고 그만 남았음이라 만일 너희 행하는 길에서 재난이 그 몸에 미치면 너희가 나의 흰 머리로 슬피 음부로 내려가게 함이 되리라	And he said, My son shall not go down with you; for his brother is dead, and he is left alone: if mischief befall him by the way in the which ye go, then shall ye bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.	But Jacob replied, “My son will not go down there with you, for his brother is dead, and he alone is left. If any harm comes to him on your journey, you will bring my gray hair down to Sheol in sorrow.”
GEN	43	1	그 땅에 기근이 심하고	And the famine was sore in the land.	Now the famine was still severe in the land.
GEN	43	2	그들이 애굽에서 가져온 곡식을 다 먹으매 그 아비가 그들에게 이르되 다시 가서 우리를 위하여 양식을 조금 사라	And it came to pass, when they had eaten up the corn which they had brought out of Egypt, their father said unto them, Go again, buy us a little food.	So when Jacob’s sons had eaten all the grain they had brought from Egypt, their father said to them, “Go back and buy us a little more food.”
GEN	43	3	유다가 아비에게 말하여 가로되 그 사람이 엄히 우리에게 경계하여 가로되 너희 아우가 너희와 함께 하지 아니하면 너희가 내 얼굴을 보지 못하리라 하였으니	And Judah spake unto him, saying, The man did solemnly protest unto us, saying, Ye shall not see my face, except your brother be with you.	But Judah replied, “The man solemnly warned us, ‘You will not see my face again unless your brother is with you.’
GEN	43	4	아버지께서 우리 아우를 우리와 함께 보내시면 우리가 내려가서 아버지를 위하여 양식을 사려니와	If thou wilt send our brother with us, we will go down and buy thee food:	If you will send our brother with us, we will go down and buy food for you.
GEN	43	5	아버지께서 만일 그를 보내지 않으시면 우리는 내려가지 아니하리니 그 사람이 우리에게 말하기를 너희 아우가 너희와 함께하지 아니하면 너희가 내 얼굴을 보지 못하리라 하였음이니이다	But if thou wilt not send him, we will not go down: for the man said unto us, Ye shall not see my face, except your brother be with you.	But if you will not send him, we will not go; for the man told us, ‘You will not see my face again unless your brother is with you.’”
GEN	43	6	이스라엘이 가로되 너희가 어찌하여 너희에게 오히려 아우가 있다고 그 사람에게 고하여 나를 해롭게 하였느냐	And Israel said, Wherefore dealt ye so ill with me, as to tell the man whether ye had yet a brother?	“Why did you bring this trouble upon me?” Israel asked. “Why did you tell the man you had another brother?”
GEN	43	7	그들이 가로되 그 사람이 우리와 우리의 친족에 대하여 자세히 힐문하여 이르기를 너희 아버지가 그저 살았느냐 너희에게 아우가 있느냐 하기로 그 말을 조조이 그에게 대답한 것이라 그가 너희 아우를 데리고 내려오라 할 줄을 우리가 어찌 알았으리이까	And they said, The man asked us straitly of our state, and of our kindred, saying, Is your father yet alive? have ye another brother? and we told him according to the tenor of these words: could we certainly know that he would say, Bring your brother down?	They replied, “The man questioned us in detail about ourselves and our family: ‘Is your father still alive? Do you have another brother?’ And we answered him accordingly. How could we possibly know that he would say, ‘Bring your brother here’?”
GEN	43	8	유다가 아비 이스라엘에게 이르되 저 아이를 나와 함께 보내시면 우리가 곧 가리니 그러면 우리와 아버지와 우리 어린 것들이 다 살고 죽지 아니하리이다	And Judah said unto Israel his father, Send the lad with me, and we will arise and go; that we may live, and not die, both we, and thou, and also our little ones.	And Judah said to his father Israel, “Send the boy with me, and we will go at once, so that we may live and not die—neither we, nor you, nor our children.
GEN	43	9	내가 그의 몸을 담보하오리니 아버지께서 내 손에 그를 물으소서 내가 만일 그를 아버지께 데려다가 아버지 앞에 두지 아니하면 내가 영원히 죄를 지리이다	I will be surety for him; of my hand shalt thou require him: if I bring him not unto thee, and set him before thee, then let me bear the blame for ever:	I will guarantee his safety. You may hold me personally responsible. If I do not bring him back and set him before you, then may I bear the guilt before you all my life.
GEN	43	10	우리가 지체하지 아니하였더면 벌써 두 번 갔다 왔으리이다.	For except we had lingered, surely now we had returned this second time.	If we had not delayed, we could have come and gone twice by now.”
GEN	43	11	그들의 아비 이스라엘이 그들에게 이르되 그러할진대 이렇게 하라 너희는 이 땅의 아름다운 소산을 그릇에 담아가지고 내려가서그 사람에게 예물을 삼을지니 곧 유향 조금과 꿀 조금과 향품과 몰약과 비자와 파단행이니라	And their father Israel said unto them, If it must be so now, do this; take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels, and carry down the man a present, a little balm, and a little honey, spices, and myrrh, nuts, and almonds:	Then their father Israel said to them, “If it must be so, then do this: Put some of the best products of the land in your packs and carry them down as a gift for the man—a little balm and a little honey, spices and myrrh, pistachios and almonds.
GEN	43	12	너희 손에 돈을 배나 가지고 너희 자루 아구에 도로 넣여 온 그 돈을 다시 가지고 가라 혹 차착이 있었을까 두렵도다	And take double money in your hand; and the money that was brought again in the mouth of your sacks, carry it again in your hand; peradventure it was an oversight:	Take double the silver with you so that you may return the silver that was put back into the mouths of your sacks. Perhaps it was a mistake.
GEN	43	13	네 아우도 데리고 떠나 다시 그 사람에게로 가라	Take also your brother, and arise, go again unto the man:	Take your brother as well, and return to the man at once.
GEN	43	14	전능하신 하나님께서 그 사람 앞에서 너희에게 은혜를 베푸사 그사람으로 너희 다른 형제와 베냐민을 돌려보내게 하시기를 원하노라 내가 자식을 잃게 되면 잃으리로다	And God Almighty give you mercy before the man, that he may send away your other brother, and Benjamin. If I be bereaved of my children, I am bereaved.	May God Almighty grant you mercy before the man, that he may release your other brother along with Benjamin. As for me, if I am bereaved, I am bereaved.”
GEN	43	15	그 사람들이 그 예물을 취하고 갑절 돈을 자기들의 손에 가지고 베냐민을 데리고 애굽에 내려가서 요셉의 앞에 서니라	And the men took that present, and they took double money in their hand, and Benjamin; and rose up, and went down to Egypt, and stood before Joseph.	So the men took these gifts, along with double the amount of silver, and Benjamin as well. Then they hurried down to Egypt and stood before Joseph.
GEN	43	16	요셉이 베냐민이 그들과 함께 있음을 보고 청지기에게 이르되 이사람들을 집으로 인도해 들이고 짐승을 잡고 준비하라 이 사람들이 오정에 나와 함께 먹을 것이니라	And when Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the ruler of his house, Bring these men home, and slay, and make ready; for these men shall dine with me at noon.	When Joseph saw Benjamin with his brothers, he said to the steward of his house, “Take these men to my house. Slaughter an animal and prepare it, for they shall dine with me at noon.”
GEN	43	17	그 사람이 요셉의 명대로 하여 그 사람들을 요셉의 집으로 인도 하니	And the man did as Joseph bade; and the man brought the men into Joseph’s house.	The man did as Joseph had commanded and took the brothers to Joseph’s house.
GEN	43	18	그 사람들이 요셉의 집으로 인도되매 두려워하여 이르되 전일 우리 자루에 넣여 있던 돈의 일로 우리가 끌려드도다 이는 우리를 억류하고 달려들어 우리를 잡아 노예를 삼고 우리의 나귀를 빼앗으려 함이로다 하고	And the men were afraid, because they were brought into Joseph’s house; and they said, Because of the money that was returned in our sacks at the first time are we brought in; that he may seek occasion against us, and fall upon us, and take us for bondmen, and our asses.	But the brothers were frightened that they had been taken to Joseph’s house. “We have been brought here because of the silver that was returned in our bags the first time,” they said. “They intend to overpower us and take us as slaves, along with our donkeys.”
GEN	43	19	그들이 요셉의 청지기에게 가까이 나아가 그 집 문 앞에서 그에게 고하여	And they came near to the steward of Joseph’s house, and they communed with him at the door of the house,	So they approached Joseph’s steward and spoke to him at the entrance to the house.
GEN	43	20	가로되 내 주여 우리가 전일에 내려와서 양식을 사가지고	And said, O sir, we came indeed down at the first time to buy food:	“Please, sir,” they said, “we really did come down here the first time to buy food.
GEN	43	21	객점에 이르러 자루를 풀어본즉 각인의 돈이 본수대로 자루 아구에 있기로 우리가 도로 가져왔고	And it came to pass, when we came to the inn, that we opened our sacks, and, behold, every man’s money was in the mouth of his sack, our money in full weight: and we have brought it again in our hand.	But when we came to the place we lodged for the night, we opened our sacks and, behold, each of us found his silver in the mouth of his sack! It was the full amount of our silver, and we have brought it back with us.
GEN	43	22	양식 살 다른 돈도 우리가 가지고 내려왔나이다 우리의 돈을 우리 자루에 넣은 자는 누구인지 우리가 알지 못하나이다	And other money have we brought down in our hands to buy food: we cannot tell who put our money in our sacks.	We have brought additional silver with us to buy food. We do not know who put our silver in our sacks.”
GEN	43	23	그가 이르되 너희는 안심하라 두려워 말라 너희 하나님 너희 아버지의 하나님이 재물을 너희 자루에 넣어 너희에게 주신 것이니라 너희 돈은 내가 이미 받았느니라 하고 시므온을 그들에게로 이끌어 내고	And he said, Peace be to you, fear not: your God, and the God of your father, hath given you treasure in your sacks: I had your money. And he brought Simeon out unto them.	“It is fine,” said the steward. “Do not be afraid. Your God, the God of your father, gave you the treasure that was in your sacks. I received your silver.” Then he brought Simeon out to them.
GEN	43	24	그들을 요셉의 집으로 인도하고 물을 주어 발을 씻게 하며 그 나귀에게 먹이를 주더라	And the man brought the men into Joseph’s house, and gave them water, and they washed their feet; and he gave their asses provender.	And the steward took the men into Joseph’s house, gave them water to wash their feet, and provided food for their donkeys.
GEN	43	25	그들이 여기서 먹겠다 함을 들으므로 예물을 정돈하고 요셉이 오정에 오기를 기다리더니	And they made ready the present against Joseph came at noon: for they heard that they should eat bread there.	Since the brothers had been told that they were going to eat a meal there, they prepared their gift for Joseph’s arrival at noon.
GEN	43	26	요셉이 집으로 오매 그들이 그 집으로 들어가서 그 예물을 그에게 드리고 땅에 엎드리어 절하니	And when Joseph came home, they brought him the present which was in their hand into the house, and bowed themselves to him to the earth.	When Joseph came home, they presented him with the gifts they had brought, and they bowed to the ground before him.
GEN	43	27	요셉이 그들의 안부를 물으며 가로되 너희 아버지 너희가 말하던 그 노인이 안녕하시냐 지금까지 생존하셨느냐	And he asked them of their welfare, and said, Is your father well, the old man of whom ye spake? Is he yet alive?	He asked if they were well, and then he asked, “How is your elderly father you told me about? Is he still alive?”
GEN	43	28	그들이 대답하되 주의 종 우리 아비가 평안하고 지금까지 생존하였나이다 하고 머리 숙여 절하더라	And they answered, Thy servant our father is in good health, he is yet alive. And they bowed down their heads, and made obeisance.	“Your servant our father is well,” they answered. “He is still alive.” And they bowed down to honor him.
GEN	43	29	요셉이 눈을 들어 자기 어머니의 아들 자기 동생 베냐민을 보고 가로되 너희가 내게 말하던 너희 작은 동생이 이냐 그가 또 가로되 소자여 하나님이 네게 은혜 베푸시기를 원하노라	And he lifted up his eyes, and saw his brother Benjamin, his mother’s son, and said, Is this your younger brother, of whom ye spake unto me? And he said, God be gracious unto thee, my son.	When Joseph looked up and saw his brother Benjamin, his own mother’s son, he asked, “Is this your youngest brother, the one you told me about?” Then he declared, “May God be gracious to you, my son.”
GEN	43	30	요셉이 아우를 인하여 마음이 타는듯 하므로 급히 울 곳을 찾아 안방으로 들어가서 울고	And Joseph made haste; for his bowels did yearn upon his brother: and he sought where to weep; and he entered into his chamber, and wept there.	Joseph hurried out because he was moved to tears for his brother, and he went to a private room to weep.
GEN	43	31	얼굴을 씻고 나와서 그 정을 억제하고 음식을 차리라 하매	And he washed his face, and went out, and refrained himself, and said, Set on bread.	Then he washed his face and came back out. Regaining his composure, he said, “Serve the meal.”
GEN	43	32	그들이 요셉에게 따로 하고 그 형제들에게 따로 하고 배식하는 애굽 사람에게도 따로 하니 애굽 사람은 히브리 사람과 같이 먹으면 부정을 입음이었더라	And they set on for him by himself, and for them by themselves, and for the Egyptians, which did eat with him, by themselves: because the Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews; for that is an abomination unto the Egyptians.	They separately served Joseph, his brothers, and the Egyptians. They ate separately because the Egyptians would not eat with the Hebrews, since that was detestable to them.
GEN	43	33	그들이 요셉의 앞에 앉되 그 장유의 차서대로 앉히운바 되니 그들이 서로 이상히 여겼더라	And they sat before him, the firstborn according to his birthright, and the youngest according to his youth: and the men marvelled one at another.	They were seated before Joseph in order by age, from the firstborn to the youngest, and the men looked at one another in astonishment.
GEN	43	34	요셉이 자기 식물로 그들에게 주되 베냐민에게는 다른 사람보다 오배나 주매 그들이 마시며 요셉과 함께 즐거워하였더라	And he took and sent messes unto them from before him: but Benjamin’s mess was five times so much as any of theirs. And they drank, and were merry with him.	When the portions were served to them from Joseph’s table, Benjamin’s portion was five times larger than any of the others. So they feasted and drank freely with Joseph.
GEN	44	1	요셉이 그 청지기에 명하여 가로되 양식을 각인의 자루에 실을 수 있을 만큼 채우고 각인의 돈을 그 자루에 넣고	And he commanded the steward of his house, saying, Fill the men’s sacks with food, as much as they can carry, and put every man’s money in his sack’s mouth.	Then Joseph instructed his steward: “Fill the men’s sacks with as much food as they can carry, and put each one’s silver in the mouth of his sack.
GEN	44	2	또 잔 내 곧 은잔을 그 소년의 자루 아구에 넣고 그 양식 값 돈도 함께 넣으라 하매 그가 요셉의 명령대로 하고	And put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack’s mouth of the youngest, and his corn money. And he did according to the word that Joseph had spoken.	Put my cup, the silver one, in the mouth of the youngest one’s sack, along with the silver for his grain.” So the steward did as Joseph had instructed.
GEN	44	3	개동시에 사람들과 그 나귀를 보내니라	As soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away, they and their asses.	At daybreak, the men were sent on their way with their donkeys.
GEN	44	4	그들이 성에서 나가 멀리 가기 전에 요셉이 청지기에게 이르되 일어나 그 사람들의 뒤를 따라 미칠 때에 그들에게 이르기를 너 희가 어찌하여 악으로 선을 갚느냐	And when they were gone out of the city, and not yet far off, Joseph said unto his steward, Up, follow after the men; and when thou dost overtake them, say unto them, Wherefore have ye rewarded evil for good?	They had not gone far from the city when Joseph told his steward, “Pursue the men at once, and when you overtake them, ask, ‘Why have you repaid good with evil?
GEN	44	5	이것은 내 주인이 가지고 마시며 늘 점치는데 쓰는 것이 아니냐 너희가 이같이 하니 악하도다 하라	Is not this it in which my lord drinketh, and whereby indeed he divineth? ye have done evil in so doing.	Is this not the cup my master drinks from and uses for divination? What you have done is wicked!’”
GEN	44	6	청지기가 그들에게 따라 미쳐 그대로 말하니	And he overtook them, and he spake unto them these same words.	When the steward overtook them, he relayed these words to them.
GEN	44	7	그들이 그에게 대답하되 우리 주여 어찌 이렇게 말씀하시나이까 이런 일은 종들이 결단코 아니하나이다	And they said unto him, Wherefore saith my lord these words? God forbid that thy servants should do according to this thing:	“Why does my lord say these things?” they asked. “Your servants could not possibly do such a thing.
GEN	44	8	우리 자루에 있던 돈도 우리가 가나안 땅에서부터 당신에게로 가져왔거늘 우리가 어찌 당신 주인의 집에서 은, 금을 도적질 하리이까	Behold, the money, which we found in our sacks’ mouths, we brought again unto thee out of the land of Canaan: how then should we steal out of thy lord’s house silver or gold?	We even brought back to you from the land of Canaan the silver we found in the mouths of our sacks. Why would we steal silver or gold from your master’s house?
GEN	44	9	종들 중 뉘게서 발견되든지 그는 죽을 것이요 우리는 우리 주의 종이 되리이다	With whomsoever of thy servants it be found, both let him die, and we also will be my lord’s bondmen.	If any of your servants is found to have it, he must die, and the rest will become slaves of my lord.”
GEN	44	10	그가 가로되 그러면 너희 말과 같이 하리라 그것이 뉘게서든지 발견되면 그는 우리 종이 될 것이요 너희에게는 책망이 없으리라	And he said, Now also let it be according unto your words: he with whom it is found shall be my servant; and ye shall be blameless.	“As you say,” replied the steward. “But only the one who is found with the cup will be my slave, and the rest of you shall be free of blame.”
GEN	44	11	그들이 각각 급히 자루를 땅에 내려 놓고 각기 푸니	Then they speedily took down every man his sack to the ground, and opened every man his sack.	So each one quickly lowered his sack to the ground and opened it.
GEN	44	12	그가 나이 많은 자에게서부터 시작하여 나이 적은 자에게까지 수탐하매 잔이 베냐민의 자루에서 발견된지라	And he searched, and began at the eldest, and left at the youngest: and the cup was found in Benjamin’s sack.	The steward searched, beginning with the oldest and ending with the youngest—and the cup was found in Benjamin’s sack.
GEN	44	13	그들이 옷을 찢고 각기 짐을 나귀에 싣고 성으로 돌아오니라	Then they rent their clothes, and laded every man his ass, and returned to the city.	Then they all tore their clothes, loaded their donkeys, and returned to the city.
GEN	44	14	유다와 그 형제들이 요셉의 집에 이르니 요셉이 오히려 그곳에 있는지라 그 앞 땅에 엎드리니	And Judah and his brethren came to Joseph’s house; for he was yet there: and they fell before him on the ground.	When Judah and his brothers arrived at Joseph’s house, he was still there, and they fell to the ground before him.
GEN	44	15	요셉이 그들에게 이르되 너희가 어찌하여 이런 일을 행하였느냐 나 같은 사람이 점 잘 칠 줄을 너희가 알지 못하느냐	And Joseph said unto them, What deed is this that ye have done? wot ye not that such a man as I can certainly divine?	“What is this deed you have done?” Joseph declared. “Do you not know that a man like me can surely divine the truth?”
GEN	44	16	유다가 가로되 우리가 내 주께 무슨 말을 하오리이까 무슨 설명을 하오리이까 어떻게 우리의 정직을 나타내리이까 하나님이 종들의 죄악을 적발하셨으니 우리와 이 잔이 발견된 자가 다 내 주의 종이 되겠나이다	And Judah said, What shall we say unto my lord? what shall we speak? or how shall we clear ourselves? God hath found out the iniquity of thy servants: behold, we are my lord’s servants, both we, and he also with whom the cup is found.	“What can we say to my lord?” Judah replied. “How can we plead? How can we justify ourselves? God has exposed the iniquity of your servants. We are now my lord’s slaves—both we and the one who was found with the cup.”
GEN	44	17	요셉이 가로되 내가 결코 그리하지 아니하리라 잔이 그 손에서 발견된 자만 나의 종이 되고 너희는 평안히 너희 아버지께로 도로 올라갈 것이니라	And he said, God forbid that I should do so: but the man in whose hand the cup is found, he shall be my servant; and as for you, get you up in peace unto your father.	But Joseph replied, “Far be it from me to do this. The man who was found with the cup will be my slave. The rest of you may return to your father in peace.”
GEN	44	18	유다가 그에게 가까이 가서 가로되 내 주여 청컨대 종으로 내 주의 귀에 한 말씀을 고하게 하소서 주의 종에게 노하지 마옵소서 주는 바로와 같으심이니이다	Then Judah came near unto him, and said, Oh my lord, let thy servant, I pray thee, speak a word in my lord’s ears, and let not thine anger burn against thy servant: for thou art even as Pharaoh.	Then Judah approached Joseph and said, “Sir, please let your servant speak personally to my lord. Do not be angry with your servant, for you are equal to Pharaoh himself.
GEN	44	19	이전에 내 주께서 종들에게 물으시되 너희는 아비가 있느냐 아우가 있느냐 하시기에	My lord asked his servants, saying, Have ye a father, or a brother?	My lord asked his servants, ‘Do you have a father or a brother?’
GEN	44	20	우리가 내 주께 고하되 우리에게 아비가 있으니 노인이요 또 그 노년에 얻은 아들 소년이 있으니 그의 형은 죽고 그 어미의 끼친 것은 그뿐이므로 그 아비가 그를 사랑하나이다 하였더니	And we said unto my lord, We have a father, an old man, and a child of his old age, a little one; and his brother is dead, and he alone is left of his mother, and his father loveth him.	And we answered, ‘We have an elderly father and a younger brother, the child of his old age. The boy’s brother is dead. He is the only one of his mother’s sons left, and his father loves him.’
GEN	44	21	주께서 또 종들에게 이르시되 그를 내게로 데리고 내려와서 나로 그를 목도하게 하라 하시기로	And thou saidst unto thy servants, Bring him down unto me, that I may set mine eyes upon him.	Then you told your servants, ‘Bring him down to me so that I can see him for myself.’
GEN	44	22	우리가 내 주께 말씀하기를 그 아이는 아비를 떠나지 못할지니 떠나면 아비가 죽겠나이다	And we said unto my lord, The lad cannot leave his father: for if he should leave his father, his father would die.	So we said to my lord, ‘The boy cannot leave his father. If he were to leave, his father would die.’
GEN	44	23	주께서 또 주의 종들에게 말씀하시되 너희 말째 아우가 너희와 함께 내려오지 아니하면 너희가 다시 내 얼굴을 보지 못하리라 하시기로	And thou saidst unto thy servants, Except your youngest brother come down with you, ye shall see my face no more.	But you said to your servants, ‘Unless your younger brother comes down with you, you will not see my face again.’
GEN	44	24	우리가 주의 종 우리 아비에게로 도로 올라가서 내 주의 말씀을 그에게 고하였나이다	And it came to pass when we came up unto thy servant my father, we told him the words of my lord.	Now when we returned to your servant my father, we relayed your words to him.
GEN	44	25	그 후에 우리 아비가 다시 가서 곡물을 조금 사오라 하시기로	And our father said, Go again, and buy us a little food.	Then our father said, ‘Go back and buy us some food.’
GEN	44	26	우리가 이르되 우리가 내려갈 수 없나이다 우리 말째 아우가 함께 하면 내려 가려니와 말째 아우가 우리와 함께함이 아니면 사람의 얼굴을 볼 수 없음이니이다	And we said, We cannot go down: if our youngest brother be with us, then will we go down: for we may not see the man’s face, except our youngest brother be with us.	But we answered, ‘We cannot go down there unless our younger brother goes with us. So if our younger brother is not with us, we cannot see the man.’
GEN	44	27	주의 종 우리 아비가 우리에게 이르되 너희도 알거니와 내 아내가 내게 두 아들을 낳았으나	And thy servant my father said unto us, Ye know that my wife bare me two sons:	And your servant my father said to us, ‘You know that my wife bore me two sons.
GEN	44	28	하나는 내게서 나간 고로 내가 말하기를 정녕 찢겨 죽었다하고 내가 지금까지 그를 보지 못하거늘	And the one went out from me, and I said, Surely he is torn in pieces; and I saw him not since:	When one of them was gone, I said: “Surely he has been torn to pieces.” And I have not seen him since.
GEN	44	29	너희가 이도 내게서 취하여 가려한즉 만일 재해가 그 몸에 미치면 나의 흰머리로 슬피 음부로 내려가게 하리라 하니	And if ye take this also from me, and mischief befall him, ye shall bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.	Now if you also take this one from me and harm comes to him, you will bring my gray hair down to Sheol in sorrow.’
GEN	44	30	아비의 생명과 아이의 생명이 서로 결탁되었거늘 이제 내가 주의 종 우리 아비에게 돌아갈 때에 아이가 우리와 함께 하지 아니하면	Now therefore when I come to thy servant my father, and the lad be not with us; seeing that his life is bound up in the lad’s life;	So if the boy is not with us when I return to your servant, and if my father, whose life is wrapped up in the boy’s life,
GEN	44	31	아비가 아이의 없음을 보고 죽으리니 이같이 되면 종들이 주의 종 우리 아비의 흰 머리로 슬피 음부로 내려가게 함이니이다	It shall come to pass, when he seeth that the lad is not with us, that he will die: and thy servants shall bring down the gray hairs of thy servant our father with sorrow to the grave.	sees that the boy is not with us, he will die. Then your servants will have brought the gray hair of your servant our father down to Sheol in sorrow.
GEN	44	32	주의 종이 내 아비에게 아이를 담보하기를 내가 이를 아버지께로 데리고 돌아오지 아니하면 영영히 아버지께 죄를 지리이다 하였사오니	For thy servant became surety for the lad unto my father, saying, If I bring him not unto thee, then I shall bear the blame to my father for ever.	Indeed, your servant guaranteed the boy’s safety to my father, saying, ‘If I do not return him to you, I will bear the guilt before you, my father, all my life.’
GEN	44	33	청컨대 주의 종으로 아이를 대신하여 있어서 주의 종이 되게 하시고 아이는 형제와 함께 도로 올려 보내소서	Now therefore, I pray thee, let thy servant abide instead of the lad a bondman to my lord; and let the lad go up with his brethren.	Now please let your servant stay here as my lord’s slave in place of the boy. Let him return with his brothers.
GEN	44	34	내가 어찌 아이와 함께 하지 아니하고 내 아비에게로 올라 갈 수 있으리이까 두렵건대 재해가 내 아비에게 미침을 보리이다	For how shall I go up to my father, and the lad be not with me? lest peradventure I see the evil that shall come on my father.	For how can I go back to my father without the boy? I could not bear to see the misery that would overwhelm him.”
GEN	45	1	요셉이 시종하는 자들 앞에서 그 정을 억제하지 못하여 소리질러 모든 사람을 자기에게서 물러가라 하고 그 형제에게 자기를 알리니 때에 그와 함께 한 자가 없었더라	Then Joseph could not refrain himself before all them that stood by him; and he cried, Cause every man to go out from me. And there stood no man with him, while Joseph made himself known unto his brethren.	Then Joseph could no longer control himself before all his attendants, and he cried out, “Send everyone away from me!” So none of them were with Joseph when he made himself known to his brothers.
GEN	45	2	요셉이 방성대곡하니 애굽 사람에게 들리며 바로의 궁중에 들리더라	And he wept aloud: and the Egyptians and the house of Pharaoh heard.	But he wept so loudly that the Egyptians heard him, and Pharaoh’s household soon heard of it.
GEN	45	3	요셉이 그 형들에게 이르되 나는 요셉이라 내 아버지께서 아직 살아 계시니이까 형들이 그 앞에서 놀라서 능히 대답하지 못하는지라	And Joseph said unto his brethren, I am Joseph; doth my father yet live? And his brethren could not answer him; for they were troubled at his presence.	Joseph said to his brothers, “I am Joseph! Is my father still alive?” But they were unable to answer him, because they were terrified in his presence.
GEN	45	4	요셉이 형들에게 이르되 내게로 가까이 오소서 그들이 가까이 가니 가로되 나는 당신들의 아우 요셉이니 당신들이 애굽에 판 자라	And Joseph said unto his brethren, Come near to me, I pray you. And they came near. And he said, I am Joseph your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt.	Then Joseph said to his brothers, “Please come near me.” And they did so. “I am Joseph, your brother,” he said, “the one you sold into Egypt!
GEN	45	5	당신들이 나를 이곳에 팔았으므로 근심하지 마소서 한탄하지 마소서 하나님이 생명을 구원하시려고 나를 당신들 앞서 보내셨나이다	Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye sold me hither: for God did send me before you to preserve life.	And now, do not be distressed or angry with yourselves that you sold me into this place, because it was to save lives that God sent me before you.
GEN	45	6	이 땅에 이년 동안 흉년이 들었으나 아직 오년은 기경도 못하고 추수도 못할지라	For these two years hath the famine been in the land: and yet there are five years, in the which there shall neither be earing nor harvest.	For the famine has covered the land these two years, and there will be five more years without plowing or harvesting.
GEN	45	7	하나님이 큰 구원으로 당신들의 생명을 보존하고 당신들의 후손을 세상에 두시려고 나를 당신들 앞서 보내셨나니	And God sent me before you to preserve you a posterity in the earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance.	God sent me before you to preserve you as a remnant on the earth and to save your lives by a great deliverance.
GEN	45	8	그런즉 나를 이리로 보낸 자는 당신들이 아니요 하나님이시라 하나님이 나로 바로의 아비를 삼으시며 그 온 집의 주를 삼으시며 애굽 온 땅의 치리자를 삼으셨나이다	So now it was not you that sent me hither, but God: and he hath made me a father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and a ruler throughout all the land of Egypt.	Therefore it was not you who sent me here, but God, who has made me a father to Pharaoh—lord of all his household and ruler over all the land of Egypt.
GEN	45	9	당신들은 속히 아버지께로 올라가서 고하기를 아버지의 아들 요셉의 말에 하나님이 나를 애굽 전국의 주로 세우셨으니 내게로 지체말고 내려오사	Haste ye, and go up to my father, and say unto him, Thus saith thy son Joseph, God hath made me lord of all Egypt: come down unto me, tarry not:	Now return quickly to my father and tell him, ‘This is what your son Joseph says: God has made me lord of all Egypt. Come down to me without delay.
GEN	45	10	아버지의 아들들과 아버지의 손자들과 아버지의 양과 소와 모든 소유가 고센 땅에 있어서 나와 가깝게 하소서	And thou shalt dwell in the land of Goshen, and thou shalt be near unto me, thou, and thy children, and thy children’s children, and thy flocks, and thy herds, and all that thou hast:	You shall settle in the land of Goshen and be near me—you and your children and grandchildren, your flocks and herds, and everything you own.
GEN	45	11	흉년이 아직 다섯 해가 있으니 내가 거기서 아버지를 봉양하리이다 아버지와 아버지의 가속과 아버지의 모든 소속이 결핍할까 하나이다 하더라 하소서	And there will I nourish thee; for yet there are five years of famine; lest thou, and thy household, and all that thou hast, come to poverty.	And there I will provide for you, because there will be five more years of famine. Otherwise, you and your household and everything you own will come to destitution.’
GEN	45	12	당신들은 눈과 내 아우 베냐민의 눈이 보는 바 당신들에게 이 말을 하는 것은 내 입이라	And, behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin, that it is my mouth that speaketh unto you.	Behold! You and my brother Benjamin can see that I, Joseph, am the one speaking with you.
GEN	45	13	당신들은 나의 애굽에서의 영화와 당신들의 본 모든 것을 다 내 아버지께 고하고 속히 모시고 내려오소서 하며	And ye shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt, and of all that ye have seen; and ye shall haste and bring down my father hither.	Tell my father about all my splendor in Egypt and everything you have seen. And bring my father down here quickly.”
GEN	45	14	자기 아우 베냐민의 목을 안고 우니 베냐민도 요셉의 목을 안고 우니라	And he fell upon his brother Benjamin’s neck, and wept; and Benjamin wept upon his neck.	Then Joseph threw his arms around his brother Benjamin and wept, and Benjamin wept as they embraced.
GEN	45	15	요셉이 또 형들과 입맞추며 안고 우니 형들이 그제야 요셉과 말하니라	Moreover he kissed all his brethren, and wept upon them: and after that his brethren talked with him.	Joseph kissed each of his brothers as he wept over them. And afterward his brothers talked with him.
GEN	45	16	요셉의 형들이 왔다는 소문이 바로의 궁에 들리매 바로와 그 신복이 기뻐하고	And the fame thereof was heard in Pharaoh’s house, saying, Joseph’s brethren are come: and it pleased Pharaoh well, and his servants.	When the news reached Pharaoh’s house that Joseph’s brothers had come, Pharaoh and his servants were pleased.
GEN	45	17	바로는 요셉에게 이르되 네 형들에게 명하기를 너희는 이렇게 하여 너희 양식을 싣고 가서 가나안 땅에 이르거든	And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Say unto thy brethren, This do ye; lade your beasts, and go, get you unto the land of Canaan;	Pharaoh said to Joseph, “Tell your brothers, ‘Do as follows: Load your animals and return to the land of Canaan.
GEN	45	18	너희 아비와 너희 가속을 이끌고 내게로 오라 내가 너희에게 애굽 땅 아름다운 것을 주리니 너희가 나라의 기름진 것을 먹으리라	And take your father and your households, and come unto me: and I will give you the good of the land of Egypt, and ye shall eat the fat of the land.	Then bring your father and your families and return to me. I will give you the best of the land of Egypt, and you shall eat from the fat of the land.’
GEN	45	19	이제 명을 받았으니 이렇게 하라 너희는 애굽 땅에서 수레를 가져다가 너희 자녀와 아내를 태우고 너희 아비를 데려오라	Now thou art commanded, this do ye; take you wagons out of the land of Egypt for your little ones, and for your wives, and bring your father, and come.	You are also directed to tell them: ‘Take wagons from the land of Egypt for your young children and your wives, and bring your father and come back.
GEN	45	20	또 너희의 기구를 아끼지 말라 온 애굽 땅의 좋은 것이 너희 것임이니라 하라	Also regard not your stuff; for the good of all the land of Egypt is yours.	But pay no regard to your belongings, for the best of all the land of Egypt is yours.’”
GEN	45	21	이스라엘의 아들들이 그대로 할새 요셉이 바로의 명대로 그들에게로 수레를 주고 길 양식을 주며	And the children of Israel did so: and Joseph gave them wagons, according to the commandment of Pharaoh, and gave them provision for the way.	So the sons of Israel did as they were told. Joseph gave them wagons as Pharaoh had instructed, and he also gave them provisions for their journey.
GEN	45	22	또 그들에게 다 각기 옷 한 벌씩 주되 베냐민에게는 은 삼백과 옷 다섯 벌을 주고	To all of them he gave each man changes of raiment; but to Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver, and five changes of raiment.	He gave new garments to each of them, but to Benjamin he gave three hundred shekels of silver and five sets of clothes.
GEN	45	23	그가 또 이와 같이 그 아비에게 보내되 수나귀 열 필에 애굽의 아름다운 물품을 실리고 암나귀 열 필에는 아비에게 길에서 공궤할 곡식과 떡과 양식을 실리고	And to his father he sent after this manner; ten asses laden with the good things of Egypt, and ten she asses laden with corn and bread and meat for his father by the way.	And he sent to his father the following: ten donkeys loaded with the best of Egypt, and ten female donkeys loaded with grain and bread and provisions for his father’s journey.
GEN	45	24	이에 형들을 돌려 보내며 그들에게 이르되 당신들은 노중에서 다투지 말라 하였더라	So he sent his brethren away, and they departed: and he said unto them, See that ye fall not out by the way.	Then Joseph sent his brothers on their way, and as they were leaving, he said to them, “Do not quarrel on the way!”
GEN	45	25	그들이 애굽에서 올라와 가나안 땅으로 들어가서 아비 야곱에게 이르러	And they went up out of Egypt, and came into the land of Canaan unto Jacob their father,	So the brothers went up out of Egypt and came to their father Jacob in the land of Canaan.
GEN	45	26	고하여 가로되 요셉이 지금까지 살아 있어 애굽 땅 총리가 되었더이다 야곱이 그들을 믿지 아니하므로 기색하더니	And told him, saying, Joseph is yet alive, and he is governor over all the land of Egypt. And Jacob’s heart fainted, for he believed them not.	“Joseph is still alive,” they said, “and he is ruler over all the land of Egypt!” But Jacob was stunned, for he did not believe them.
GEN	45	27	그들이 또 요셉이 자기들에게 부탁한 모든 말로 그 아비에게 고하매 그 아비 야곱이 요셉의 자기를 태우려고 보낸 수레를 보고야 기운이 소생한지라	And they told him all the words of Joseph, which he had said unto them: and when he saw the wagons which Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob their father revived:	However, when they relayed all that Joseph had told them, and when he saw the wagons that Joseph had sent to carry him back, the spirit of their father Jacob was revived.
GEN	45	28	이스라엘이 가로되 족하도다 내 아들 요셉이 지금까지 살았으니 내가 죽기 전에 가서 그를 보리라	And Israel said, It is enough; Joseph my son is yet alive: I will go and see him before I die.	“Enough!” declared Israel. “My son Joseph is still alive! I will go to see him before I die.”
GEN	46	1	이스라엘이 모든 소유를 이끌고 발행하여 브엘세바에 이르러 그 아비 이삭의 하나님께 희생을 드리니	And Israel took his journey with all that he had, and came to Beer–sheba, and offered sacrifices unto the God of his father Isaac.	So Israel set out with all that he had, and when he came to Beersheba, he offered sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac.
GEN	46	2	밤에 하나님이 이상 중에 이스라엘에게 나타나시고 불러 가라사대 야곱아 야곱아 하시는지라 야곱이 가로되 내가 여기 있나이다 하매	And God spake unto Israel in the visions of the night, and said, Jacob, Jacob. And he said, Here am I.	And that night God spoke to Israel in a vision: “Jacob, Jacob!” He said. “Here I am,” replied Jacob.
GEN	46	3	하나님이 가라사대 나는 하나님이라 네 아비의 하나님이니 애굽으로 내려가기를 두려워 말라 내가 거기서 너로 큰 민족을 이루게 하리라	And he said, I am God, the God of thy father: fear not to go down into Egypt; for I will there make of thee a great nation:	“I am God,” He said, “the God of your father. Do not be afraid to go down to Egypt, for I will make you into a great nation there.
GEN	46	4	내가 너와 함께 애굽으로 내려가겠고 정녕 너를 인도하여 다시 올라올 것이며 요셉이 그 손으로 네 눈을 감기리라 하셨더라	I will go down with thee into Egypt; and I will also surely bring thee up again: and Joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes.	I will go down with you to Egypt, and I will surely bring you back. And Joseph’s own hands will close your eyes.”
GEN	46	5	야곱이 브엘세바에서 발행할새 이스라엘의 아들들이 바로의 태우려고 보낸 수레에 자기들의 아비 야곱과 자기들의 처자들을 태웠고	And Jacob rose up from Beer–sheba: and the sons of Israel carried Jacob their father, and their little ones, and their wives, in the wagons which Pharaoh had sent to carry him.	Then Jacob departed from Beersheba, and the sons of Israel took their father Jacob in the wagons Pharaoh had sent to carry him, along with their children and wives.
GEN	46	6	그 생축과 가나안 땅에서 얻은 재물을 이끌었으며 야곱과 그 자손들이 다 함께 애굽으로 갔더라	And they took their cattle, and their goods, which they had gotten in the land of Canaan, and came into Egypt, Jacob, and all his seed with him:	They also took the livestock and possessions they had acquired in the land of Canaan, and Jacob and all his offspring went to Egypt.
GEN	46	7	이와 같이 야곱이 그 아들들과 손자들과 딸들과 손녀들 곧 그 모든 자손을 데리고 애굽으로 갔더라	His sons, and his sons’ sons with him, his daughters, and his sons’ daughters, and all his seed brought he with him into Egypt.	Jacob took with him to Egypt his sons and grandsons, and his daughters and granddaughters—all his offspring.
GEN	46	8	애굽으로 내려간 이스라엘 가족의 이름이 이러하니 야곱과 그 아들들 곧 야곱의 맏아들 르우벤과	And these are the names of the children of Israel, which came into Egypt, Jacob and his sons: Reuben, Jacob’s firstborn.	Now these are the names of the sons of Israel (Jacob and his descendants) who went to Egypt: Reuben, Jacob’s firstborn.
GEN	46	9	르우벤의 아들 하녹과 발루와 헤스론과 갈미요	And the sons of Reuben; Hanoch, and Phallu, and Hezron, and Carmi.	The sons of Reuben: Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi.
GEN	46	10	시므온의 아들 곧 여무엘과 야민과 오핫과 야긴과 스할과 가나안 여인의 소생 사울이요	And the sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman.	The sons of Simeon: Jemuel, Jamin, Ohad, Jachin, Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanite woman.
GEN	46	11	레위의 아들 곧 게르손과 그핫과 므라리요	And the sons of Levi; Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.	The sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
GEN	46	12	유다의 아들 곧 엘과 오난과 셀라와 베레스와 세라니 엘과 오난은 가나안 땅에서 죽었고 또 베레스의 아들 곧 헤스론과 하물이요	And the sons of Judah; Er, and Onan, and Shelah, and Pharez, and Zerah: but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan. And the sons of Pharez were Hezron and Hamul.	The sons of Judah: Er, Onan, Shelah, Perez, and Zerah; but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan. The sons of Perez: Hezron and Hamul.
GEN	46	13	잇사갈의 아들 곧 돌라와 부와와 욥과 시므론이요	And the sons of Issachar; Tola, and Phuvah, and Job, and Shimron.	The sons of Issachar: Tola, Puvah, Job, and Shimron.
GEN	46	14	스불론의 아들 곧 세렛과 엘론과 얄르엘이니	And the sons of Zebulun; Sered, and Elon, and Jahleel.	The sons of Zebulun: Sered, Elon, and Jahleel.
GEN	46	15	이들은 레아가 밧단아람에서 야곱에게 낳은 자손들이라 그 딸 디나를 합하여 남자와 여자가 삼십삼 명이며	These be the sons of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob in Padan–aram, with his daughter Dinah: all the souls of his sons and his daughters were thirty and three.	These are the sons of Leah born to Jacob in Paddan-aram, in addition to his daughter Dinah. The total number of sons and daughters was thirty-three.
GEN	46	16	갓의 아들 곧 시뵨과 학기와 수니와 에스본과 에리와 아로디와 아렐리요	And the sons of Gad; Ziphion, and Haggi, Shuni, and Ezbon, Eri, and Arodi, and Areli.	The sons of Gad: Ziphion, Haggi, Shuni, Ezbon, Eri, Arodi, and Areli.
GEN	46	17	아셀의 아들 곧 임나와 이스와와 이스위와 브리아와 그들의 누이 세라며 또 브리아의 아들 곧 헤벨과 말기엘이니	And the sons of Asher; Jimnah, and Ishuah, and Isui, and Beriah, and Serah their sister: and the sons of Beriah; Heber, and Malchiel.	The children of Asher: Imnah, Ishvah, Ishvi, Beriah, and their sister Serah. The sons of Beriah: Heber and Malchiel.
GEN	46	18	이들은 라반이 그 딸 레아에게 준 실바가 야곱에게 낳은 자손들이라 합 십육 명이요	These are the sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to Leah his daughter, and these she bare unto Jacob, even sixteen souls.	These are the sons of Jacob born to Zilpah—whom Laban gave to his daughter Leah—sixteen in all.
GEN	46	19	야곱의 아내 라헬의 아들 곧 요셉과 베냐민이요	The sons of Rachel Jacob’s wife; Joseph, and Benjamin.	The sons of Jacob’s wife Rachel: Joseph and Benjamin.
GEN	46	20	애굽 땅에서 온 제사장 보디베라의 딸 아스낫이 요셉에게 낳은 므낫세와 에브라임이요	And unto Joseph in the land of Egypt were born Manasseh and Ephraim, which Asenath the daughter of Poti–pherah priest of On bare unto him.	Manasseh and Ephraim were born to Joseph in the land of Egypt by Asenath daughter of Potiphera, priest of On.
GEN	46	21	베냐민의 아들 곧 벨라와 베겔과 아스벨과 게라와 나아만과 에히와 로스와 뭅빔과 훕빔과 아릇이니	And the sons of Benjamin were Belah, and Becher, and Ashbel, Gera, and Naaman, Ehi, and Rosh, Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard.	The sons of Benjamin: Bela, Becher, Ashbel, Gera, Naaman, Ehi, Rosh, Muppim, Huppim, and Ard.
GEN	46	22	이들은 라헬이 야곱에게 낳은 자손이라 합 십사 명이요	These are the sons of Rachel, which were born to Jacob: all the souls were fourteen.	These are the sons of Rachel born to Jacob—fourteen in all.
GEN	46	23	단의 아들 후심이요	And the sons of Dan; Hushim.	The son of Dan: Hushim.
GEN	46	24	납달리의 아들 곧 야스엘과 구니와 예셀과 실렘이라	And the sons of Naphtali; Jahzeel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shillem.	The sons of Naphtali: Jahzeel, Guni, Jezer, and Shillem.
GEN	46	25	이들은 라반이 그 딸 라헬에게 준 빌하가 야곱에게 낳은 자손이니 합이 칠 명이라	These are the sons of Bilhah, which Laban gave unto Rachel his daughter, and she bare these unto Jacob: all the souls were seven.	These are the sons of Jacob born to Bilhah, whom Laban gave to his daughter Rachel—seven in all.
GEN	46	26	야곱과 함께 애굽에 이른 자는 야곱의 자부 외에 육십륙 명이니 이는 다 야곱의 몸에서 나온 자며	All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, which came out of his loins, besides Jacob’s sons’ wives, all the souls were threescore and six;	All those belonging to Jacob who came to Egypt—his direct descendants, besides the wives of Jacob’s sons—numbered sixty-six persons.
GEN	46	27	애굽에서 요셉에게 낳은 아들이 두 명이니 야곱의 집 사람으로 애굽에 이른 자의 도합이 칠십 명이었더라	And the sons of Joseph, which were born him in Egypt, were two souls: all the souls of the house of Jacob, which came into Egypt, were threescore and ten.	And with the two sons who had been born to Joseph in Egypt, the members of Jacob’s family who went to Egypt were seventy in all.
GEN	46	28	야곱이 유다를 요셉에게 미리 보내어 자기를 고센으로 인도하게 하고 다 고센 땅에 이르니	And he sent Judah before him unto Joseph, to direct his face unto Goshen; and they came into the land of Goshen.	Now Jacob had sent Judah ahead of him to Joseph to get directions to Goshen. When Jacob’s family arrived in the land of Goshen,
GEN	46	29	요셉이 수레를 갖추고 고센으로 올라가서 아비 이스라엘을 맞으며 그에게 보이고 그 목을 어긋맞겨 안고 얼마동안 울매	And Joseph made ready his chariot, and went up to meet Israel his father, to Goshen, and presented himself unto him; and he fell on his neck, and wept on his neck a good while.	Joseph prepared his chariot and went there to meet his father Israel. Joseph presented himself to him, embraced him, and wept profusely.
GEN	46	30	이스라엘이 요셉에게 이르되 네가 지금까지 살아 있고 내가 네 얼굴을 보았으니 지금 죽어도 가하도다	And Israel said unto Joseph, Now let me die, since I have seen thy face, because thou art yet alive.	Then Israel said to Joseph, “Finally I can die, now that I have seen your face and know that you are still alive!”
GEN	46	31	요셉이 그 형들과 아비의 권속에게 이르되 내가 올라가서 바로에게 고하여 이르기를 가나안 땅에 있던 내 형들과 내 아비의 권속이 내게로 왔는데	And Joseph said unto his brethren, and unto his father’s house, I will go up, and shew Pharaoh, and say unto him, My brethren, and my father’s house, which were in the land of Canaan, are come unto me;	Joseph said to his brothers and to his father’s household, “I will go up and inform Pharaoh: ‘My brothers and my father’s household from the land of Canaan have come to me.
GEN	46	32	그들은 목자라 목축으로 업을 삼으므로 그 양과 소와 모든 소유를 이끌고 왔나이다 하리니	And the men are shepherds, for their trade hath been to feed cattle; and they have brought their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have.	The men are shepherds; they raise livestock, and they have brought their flocks and herds and all that they own.’
GEN	46	33	바로가 당신들을 불러서 너희의 업이 무엇이냐 묻거든	And it shall come to pass, when Pharaoh shall call you, and shall say, What is your occupation?	When Pharaoh summons you and asks, ‘What is your occupation?’
GEN	46	34	당신들은 고하기를 주의 종들은 어렸을 때부터 지금까지 목축하는 자이온데 우리와 우리 선조가 다 그러하니이다 하소서 애굽 사람은 다 목축을 가증히 여기나니 당신들이 고센 땅에 거하게 되리이다	That ye shall say, Thy servants’ trade hath been about cattle from our youth even until now, both we, and also our fathers: that ye may dwell in the land of Goshen; for every shepherd is an abomination unto the Egyptians.	you are to say, ‘Your servants have raised livestock ever since our youth—both we and our fathers.’ Then you will be allowed to settle in the land of Goshen, since all shepherds are detestable to the Egyptians.”
GEN	47	1	요셉이 바로에게 가서 고하여 가로되 나의 아비와 형들과 그들의 양과 소와 모든 소유가 가나안 땅에서 와서 고센 땅에 있나이다 하고	Then Joseph came and told Pharaoh, and said, My father and my brethren, and their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have, are come out of the land of Canaan; and, behold, they are in the land of Goshen.	So Joseph went and told Pharaoh: “My father and my brothers, with their flocks and herds and all they own, have come from the land of Canaan and are now in Goshen.”
GEN	47	2	형들 중 오인을 택하여 바로에게 보이니	And he took some of his brethren, even five men, and presented them unto Pharaoh.	And he chose five of his brothers and presented them before Pharaoh.
GEN	47	3	바로가 요셉의 형들에게 묻되 너희 생업이 무엇이냐 그들이 바로에게 대답하되 종들은 목자이온데 우리와 선조가 다 그러하니이다 하고	And Pharaoh said unto his brethren, What is your occupation? And they said unto Pharaoh, Thy servants are shepherds, both we, and also our fathers.	“What is your occupation?” Pharaoh asked Joseph’s brothers. “Your servants are shepherds,” they replied, “both we and our fathers.”
GEN	47	4	그들이 또 바로에게 고하되 가나안 땅에 기근이 심하여 종들의 떼를 칠 곳이 없기로 종들이 이곳에 우거하러 왔사오니 청컨대 종들로 고센 땅에 거하게 하소서	They said moreover unto Pharaoh, For to sojourn in the land are we come; for thy servants have no pasture for their flocks; for the famine is sore in the land of Canaan: now therefore, we pray thee, let thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen.	Then they said to Pharaoh, “We have come to live in the land for a time, because there is no pasture for the flocks of your servants, since the famine in the land of Canaan has been severe. So now, please allow your servants to settle in the land of Goshen.”
GEN	47	5	바로가 요셉에게 일러 가로되 네 아비와 형들이 네게 왔은즉	And Pharaoh spake unto Joseph, saying, Thy father and thy brethren are come unto thee:	Pharaoh said to Joseph, “Now that your father and brothers have come to you,
GEN	47	6	애굽 땅이 네 앞에 있으니 땅의 좋은 곳에 네 아비와 형들로 거하게 하되 고센 땅에 그들로 거하게 하고 그들 중에 능한 자가 있는줄 알거든 그들로 나의 짐승을 주관하게 하라	The land of Egypt is before thee; in the best of the land make thy father and brethren to dwell; in the land of Goshen let them dwell: and if thou knowest any men of activity among them, then make them rulers over my cattle.	the land of Egypt is before you; settle your father and brothers in the best part of the land. They may dwell in the land of Goshen. And if you know of any talented men among them, put them in charge of my own livestock.”
GEN	47	7	요셉이 자기 아비 야곱을 인도하여 바로 앞에 서게 하니 야곱이 바로에게 축복하매	And Joseph brought in Jacob his father, and set him before Pharaoh: and Jacob blessed Pharaoh.	Then Joseph brought in his father Jacob and presented him before Pharaoh, and Jacob blessed Pharaoh.
GEN	47	8	바로가 야곱에게 묻되 네 연세가 얼마뇨	And Pharaoh said unto Jacob, How old art thou?	“How many years have you lived?” Pharaoh asked.
GEN	47	9	야곱이 바로에게 고하되 내 나그네 길의 세월이 일백삼십 년이니이다 나의 연세가 얼마 못되니 우리 조상의 나그네 길의 세월에 미치지 못하나 험악한 세월을 보내었나이다 하고	And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, The days of the years of my pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty years: few and evil have the days of the years of my life been, and have not attained unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage.	“My travels have lasted 130 years,” Jacob replied. “My years have been few and hard, and they have not matched the years of the travels of my fathers.”
GEN	47	10	야곱이 바로에게 축복하고 그 앞에서 나오니라	And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went out from before Pharaoh.	Then Jacob blessed Pharaoh and departed from his presence.
GEN	47	11	요셉이 바로의 명대로 그 아비와 형들에게 거할 곳을 주되 애굽의 좋은 땅 라암세스를 그들에게 주어 기업을 삼게 하고	And Joseph placed his father and his brethren, and gave them a possession in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land, in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded.	So Joseph settled his father and brothers in the land of Egypt and gave them property in the best part of the land, the district of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded.
GEN	47	12	또 그 아비와 형들과 아비의 온 집에 그 식구를 따라 식물을 주어 공궤하였더라	And Joseph nourished his father, and his brethren, and all his father’s household, with bread, according to their families.	Joseph also provided his father and brothers and all his father’s household with food for their families.
GEN	47	13	기근이 더욱 심하여 사방에 식물이 없고 애굽 땅과 가나안 땅이 기근으로 쇠약하니	And there was no bread in all the land; for the famine was very sore, so that the land of Egypt and all the land of Canaan fainted by reason of the famine.	There was no food, however, in all that region, because the famine was so severe; the lands of Egypt and Canaan had been exhausted by the famine.
GEN	47	14	요셉이 곡식을 팔아 애굽 땅과 가나안 땅에 있는 돈을 몰수이 거두고 그 돈을 바로의 궁으로 가져오니	And Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, for the corn which they bought: and Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh’s house.	Joseph collected all the money to be found in the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan in exchange for the grain they were buying, and he brought it into Pharaoh’s palace.
GEN	47	15	애굽 땅과 가나안 땅에 돈이 진한지라 애굽 백성이 다 요셉에게 와서 가로되 돈이 진하였사오니 우리에게 식물을 주소서 어찌 주 앞에서 죽으리이까	And when money failed in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, all the Egyptians came unto Joseph, and said, Give us bread: for why should we die in thy presence? for the money faileth.	When the money from the lands of Egypt and Canaan was gone, all the Egyptians came to Joseph and said, “Give us food. Why should we die before your eyes? For our funds have run out!”
GEN	47	16	요셉이 가로되 너희의 짐승을 내라 돈이 진하였은즉 내가 너희의 짐승과 바꾸어 주리라	And Joseph said, Give your cattle; and I will give you for your cattle, if money fail.	“Then bring me your livestock,” said Joseph. “Since the money is gone, I will sell you food in exchange for your livestock.”
GEN	47	17	그들이 그 짐승을 요셉에게 끌어 오는지라 요셉이 그 말과 양떼와 소떼와 나귀를 받고 그들에게 식물을 주되 곧 그 모든 짐승과 바꾸어서 그 해 동안에 식물로 그들을 기르니라	And they brought their cattle unto Joseph: and Joseph gave them bread in exchange for horses, and for the flocks, and for the cattle of the herds, and for the asses: and he fed them with bread for all their cattle for that year.	So they brought their livestock to Joseph, and he gave them food in exchange for their horses, their flocks and herds, and their donkeys. Throughout that year he provided them with food in exchange for all their livestock.
GEN	47	18	그 해가 다하고 새 해가 되매 무리가 요셉에게 와서 그에게 고하되 우리가 주께 숨기지 아니하나이다 우리의 돈이 다하였고 우리의 짐승 떼가 주께로 돌아갔사오니 주께 낼 것이 아무 것도 남지 아니하고 우리의 몸과 전지뿐이라	When that year was ended, they came unto him the second year, and said unto him, We will not hide it from my lord, how that our money is spent; my lord also hath our herds of cattle; there is not ought left in the sight of my lord, but our bodies, and our lands:	When that year was over, they came to him the second year and said, “We cannot hide from our lord that our money is gone and all our livestock belongs to you. There is nothing left for our lord except our bodies and our land.
GEN	47	19	우리가 어찌 우리의 전지와 함께 주의 목전에 죽으리이까 우리 몸과 우리 토지를 식물로 사소서 우리가 토지와 함께 바로의 종이 되리니 우리에게 종자를 주시면 우리가 살고 죽지 아니하고 전지도 황폐치 아니하리이다	Wherefore shall we die before thine eyes, both we and our land? buy us and our land for bread, and we and our land will be servants unto Pharaoh: and give us seed, that we may live, and not die, that the land be not desolate.	Why should we perish before your eyes—we and our land as well? Purchase us and our land in exchange for food. Then we, along with our land, will be slaves to Pharaoh. Give us seed that we may live and not die, and that the land may not become desolate.”
GEN	47	20	그러므로 요셉이 애굽 전지를 다 사서 바로에게 드리니 애굽 사람이 기근에 몰려서 각기 전지를 팖이라 땅이 바로의 소유가 되니라	And Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh; for the Egyptians sold every man his field, because the famine prevailed over them: so the land became Pharaoh’s.	So Joseph acquired for Pharaoh all the land in Egypt; the Egyptians, one and all, sold their fields because the famine was so severe upon them. The land became Pharaoh’s,
GEN	47	21	요셉이 애굽 이 끝에서 저 끝까지의 백성을 성읍들에 옮겼으나	And as for the people, he removed them to cities from one end of the borders of Egypt even to the other end thereof.	and Joseph reduced the people to servitude from one end of Egypt to the other.
GEN	47	22	제사장의 전지는 사지 아니하였으니 제사장은 바로에게서 녹을 받음이라 바로의 주는 녹을 먹으므로 그 전지를 팔지 않음이었더라	Only the land of the priests bought he not; for the priests had a portion assigned them of Pharaoh, and did eat their portion which Pharaoh gave them: wherefore they sold not their lands.	However, he did not acquire the priests’ portion of the land, for it had been given to them by Pharaoh. They ate the rations that Pharaoh supplied; so they did not sell their land.
GEN	47	23	요셉이 백성에게 이르되 오늘날 내가 바로를 위하여 너희 몸과 너희 전지를 샀노라 여기 종자가 있으니 너희는 그 땅에 뿌리라	Then Joseph said unto the people, Behold, I have bought you this day and your land for Pharaoh: lo, here is seed for you, and ye shall sow the land.	Then Joseph said to the people, “Now that I have acquired you and your land for Pharaoh this day, here is seed for you to sow in the land.
GEN	47	24	추수의 오분 일을 바로에게 상납하고 사분은 너희가 취하여 전지의 종자도 삼고 너희의 양식도 삼고 너희 집 사람과 어린 아이의 양식도 삼으라	And it shall come to pass in the increase, that ye shall give the fifth part unto Pharaoh, and four parts shall be your own, for seed of the field, and for your food, and for them of your households, and for food for your little ones.	At harvest time, you are to give a fifth of it to Pharaoh, and four-fifths will be yours as seed for the field and food for yourselves and your households and children.”
GEN	47	25	그들이 가로되 주께서 우리를 살리셨사오니 우리가 주께 은혜를 입고 바로의 종이 되겠나이다	And they said, Thou hast saved our lives: let us find grace in the sight of my lord, and we will be Pharaoh’s servants.	“You have saved our lives,” they said. “We have found favor in our lord’s eyes, and we will be Pharaoh’s servants.”
GEN	47	26	요셉이 애굽 토지법을 세우매 그 오분 일이 바로에게 상납되나 제사장의 토지는 바로의 소유가 되지 아니하여 오늘까지 이르니라	And Joseph made it a law over the land of Egypt unto this day, that Pharaoh should have the fifth part; except the land of the priests only, which became not Pharaoh’s.	So Joseph established a law that a fifth of the produce belongs to Pharaoh, and it is in effect in the land of Egypt to this day. Only the priests’ land does not belong to Pharaoh.
GEN	47	27	이스라엘 족속이 애굽 고센 땅에 거하며 거기서 산업을 얻고 생육하며 번성하였더라	And Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt, in the country of Goshen; and they had possessions therein, and grew, and multiplied exceedingly.	Now the Israelites settled in the land of Egypt, in the region of Goshen. They acquired property there and became fruitful and increased greatly in number.
GEN	47	28	야곱이 애굽 땅에 십칠 년을 거하였으니 그의 수가 일백사십칠 세라	And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years: so the whole age of Jacob was an hundred forty and seven years.	And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years, and the length of his life was 147 years.
GEN	47	29	이스라엘의 죽을 기한이 가까우매 그가 그 아들 요셉을 불러 그에게 이르되 이제 내가 네게 은혜를 입었거든 청하노니 네 손을 내 환도뼈 아래 넣어서 나를 인애와 성심으로 대접하여 애굽에 장사하지 않기를 맹세하고	And the time drew nigh that Israel must die: and he called his son Joseph, and said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy sight, put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh, and deal kindly and truly with me; bury me not, I pray thee, in Egypt:	When the time drew near for Israel to die, he called his son Joseph and said to him, “If I have found favor in your eyes, put your hand under my thigh and promise to show me kindness and faithfulness. Do not bury me in Egypt,
GEN	47	30	내가 조상들과 함께 눕거든 너는 나를 애굽에서 메어다가 선영에 장사하라 요셉이 가로되 내가 아버지의 말씀대로 행하리이다	But I will lie with my fathers, and thou shalt carry me out of Egypt, and bury me in their buryingplace. And he said, I will do as thou hast said.	but when I lie down with my fathers, carry me out of Egypt and bury me with them.” Joseph answered, “I will do as you have requested.”
GEN	47	31	야곱이 또 가로되 내게 맹세하라 맹세하니 이스라엘이 침상 머리에서 경배하니라	And he said, Swear unto me. And he sware unto him. And Israel bowed himself upon the bed’s head.	“Swear to me,” Jacob said. So Joseph swore to him, and Israel bowed in worship at the head of his bed.
GEN	48	1	이 일 후에 혹이 요셉에게 고하기를 네 부친이 병들었다 하므로 그가 곧 두 아들 므낫세와 에브라임과 함께 이르니	And it came to pass after these things, that one told Joseph, Behold, thy father is sick: and he took with him his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim.	Some time later Joseph was told, “Your father is ill.” So he set out with his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim.
GEN	48	2	혹이 야곱에게 고하되 네 아들 요셉이 네게 왔다 하매 이스라엘이 힘을 내어 침상에 앉아	And one told Jacob, and said, Behold, thy son Joseph cometh unto thee: and Israel strengthened himself, and sat upon the bed.	When Jacob was told, “Your son Joseph has come to you,” Israel rallied his strength and sat up in bed.
GEN	48	3	요셉에게 이르되 이전에 가나안 땅 루스에서 전능한 하나님이 내게 나타나 복을 허락하여	And Jacob said unto Joseph, God Almighty appeared unto me at Luz in the land of Canaan, and blessed me,	Jacob said to Joseph, “God Almighty appeared to me at Luz in the land of Canaan, and there He blessed me
GEN	48	4	내게 이르시되 내가 너로 생육하게 하며 번성하게 하여 네게서 많은 백성이 나게 하고 내가 이 땅을 네 후손에게 주어 영원한 기업이 되게 하리라 하셨느니라	And said unto me, Behold, I will make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, and I will make of thee a multitude of people; and will give this land to thy seed after thee for an everlasting possession.	and told me, ‘Behold, I will make you fruitful and multiply you; I will make you a multitude of peoples, and will give this land to your descendants after you as an everlasting possession.’
GEN	48	5	내가 애굽으로 와서 네게 이르기 전에 애굽에서 네게 낳은 두 아들 에브라임과 므낫세는 내 것이라 르우벤과 시므온처럼 내 것이 될 것이요	And now thy two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, which were born unto thee in the land of Egypt before I came unto thee into Egypt, are mine; as Reuben and Simeon, they shall be mine.	And now your two sons born to you in Egypt before I came to you here shall be reckoned as mine; Ephraim and Manasseh shall be mine, just as Reuben and Simeon are mine.
GEN	48	6	이들 후의 네 소생이 네 것이 될 것이며 그 산업은 그 형의 명의하에서 함께 하리라	And thy issue, which thou begettest after them, shall be thine, and shall be called after the name of their brethren in their inheritance.	Any children born to you after them shall be yours, and they shall be called by the names of their brothers in the territory they inherit.
GEN	48	7	내게 관하여는 내가 이전에 내가 밧단에서 올 때에 라헬이 나를 따르는 노중 가나안 땅에서 죽었는데 그곳은 에브랏까지 길이 오히려 격한 곳이라 내가 거기서 그를 에브랏 길에 장사 하였느니라(에브랏은 곧 베들레헴이라)	And as for me, when I came from Padan, Rachel died by me in the land of Canaan in the way, when yet there was but a little way to come unto Ephrath: and I buried her there in the way of Ephrath; the same is Beth–lehem.	Now as for me, when I was returning from Paddan, to my sorrow Rachel died along the way in the land of Canaan, some distance from Ephrath. So I buried her there beside the road to Ephrath” (that is, Bethlehem).
GEN	48	8	이스라엘이 요셉의 아들들을 보고 가로되 이들은 누구냐	And Israel beheld Joseph’s sons, and said, Who are these?	When Israel saw the sons of Joseph, he asked, “Who are these?”
GEN	48	9	요셉이 그 아비에게 고하되 이는 하나님이 여기서 내게 주신 아들들이니이다 아비가 가로되 그들을 이끌어 내 앞으로 나아오라 내가 그들에게 축복하리라	And Joseph said unto his father, They are my sons, whom God hath given me in this place. And he said, Bring them, I pray thee, unto me, and I will bless them.	Joseph said to his father, “They are the sons God has given me in this place.” So Jacob said, “Please bring them to me, that I may bless them.”
GEN	48	10	이스라엘의 눈이 나이로 인하여 어두워서 보지 못하더라 요셉이 두 아들을 이끌어 아비 앞으로 나아가니 이스라엘이 그들에게 입맞추고 그들을 안고	Now the eyes of Israel were dim for age, so that he could not see. And he brought them near unto him; and he kissed them, and embraced them.	Now Israel’s eyesight was poor because of old age; he could hardly see. Joseph brought his sons to him, and his father kissed them and embraced them.
GEN	48	11	요셉에게 이르되 내가 네 얼굴을 보리라고는 뜻하지 못하였더니 하나님이 내게 네 소생까지 보이셨도다	And Israel said unto Joseph, I had not thought to see thy face: and, lo, God hath shewed me also thy seed.	“I never expected to see your face again,” Israel said to Joseph, “but now God has let me see your children as well.”
GEN	48	12	요셉이 아비 무릎 사이에서 두 아들을 물리고 땅에 엎드려 절하고	And Joseph brought them out from between his knees, and he bowed himself with his face to the earth.	Then Joseph removed his sons from his father’s knees and bowed facedown.
GEN	48	13	우수로는 에브라임을 이스라엘의 좌수를 향하게 하고 좌수로는 므낫세를 이스라엘의 우수를 향하게 하고 이끌어 그에게 가까이 나아가매	And Joseph took them both, Ephraim in his right hand toward Israel’s left hand, and Manasseh in his left hand toward Israel’s right hand, and brought them near unto him.	And Joseph took both of them—with Ephraim in his right hand toward Israel’s left hand, and Manasseh in his left hand toward Israel’s right hand—and brought them close to him.
GEN	48	14	이스라엘이 우수를 펴서 차자 에브라임의 머리에 얹고 좌수를 펴서 므낫세의 머리에 얹으니 므낫세는 장자라도 팔을 어긋맞겨 얹었더라	And Israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon Ephraim’s head, who was the younger, and his left hand upon Manasseh’s head, guiding his hands wittingly; for Manasseh was the firstborn.	But Israel stretched out his right hand and put it on the head of Ephraim, the younger; and crossing his hands, he put his left on Manasseh’s head, although Manasseh was the firstborn.
GEN	48	15	그가 요셉을 위하여 축복하여 가로되 내 조부 아브라함과 아버지 이삭의 섬기던 하나님, 나의 남으로부터 지금까지 나를 기르신 하나님,	And he blessed Joseph, and said, God, before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God which fed me all my life long unto this day,	Then he blessed Joseph and said: “May the God before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac walked, the God who has been my shepherd all my life to this day,
GEN	48	16	나를 모든 환난에서 건지신 사자께서 이 아이에게 복을 주시오며 이들로 내 이름과 내 조부 아브라함과 아버지 이삭의 이름으로 칭하게 하시오며 이들로 세상에서 번식되게 하시기를 원하나이다	The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads; and let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth.	the angel who has redeemed me from all harm— may He bless these boys. And may they be called by my name and the names of my fathers Abraham and Isaac, and may they grow into a multitude upon the earth.”
GEN	48	17	요셉이 그 아비가 우수를 에브라임의 머리에 얹은 것을 보고 기뻐 아니하여 아비의 손을 들어 에브라임의 머리에서 므낫세의 머리로 옮기고자 하여	And when Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, it displeased him: and he held up his father’s hand, to remove it from Ephraim’s head unto Manasseh’s head.	When Joseph saw that his father had placed his right hand on Ephraim’s head, he was displeased and took his father’s hand to move it from Ephraim’s head to Manasseh’s.
GEN	48	18	그 아비에게 이르되 아버지여 그리 마옵소서 이는 장자니 우수를 그 머리에 얹으소서	And Joseph said unto his father, Not so, my father: for this is the firstborn; put thy right hand upon his head.	“Not so, my father!” Joseph said. “This one is the firstborn; put your right hand on his head.”
GEN	48	19	아비가 허락지 아니하여 가로되 나도 안다 내 아들아 나도 안다 그도 한 족속이 되며 그도 크게 되려니와 그 아우가 그보다 큰 자가 되고 그 자손이 여러 민족을 이루리라 하고	And his father refused, and said, I know it, my son, I know it: he also shall become a people, and he also shall be great: but truly his younger brother shall be greater than he, and his seed shall become a multitude of nations.	But his father refused. “I know, my son, I know!” he said. “He too shall become a people, and he too shall be great; nevertheless, his younger brother shall be greater than he, and his offspring shall become a multitude of nations.”
GEN	48	20	그 날에 그들에게 축복하여 가로되 이스라엘 족속이 너로 축복하기를 하나님이 너로 에브라임 같고 므낫세 같게 하시리라 하리라 하여 에브라임을 므낫세보다 앞세웠더라	And he blessed them that day, saying, In thee shall Israel bless, saying, God make thee as Ephraim and as Manasseh: and he set Ephraim before Manasseh.	So that day Jacob blessed them and said: “By you shall Israel pronounce this blessing: ‘May God make you like Ephraim and Manasseh.’” So he put Ephraim before Manasseh.
GEN	48	21	이스라엘이 요셉에게 또 이르되 나는 죽으나 하나님이 너희와 함께 계시사 너희를 인도하여 너희 조상의 땅으로 돌아가게 하시려니와	And Israel said unto Joseph, Behold, I die: but God shall be with you, and bring you again unto the land of your fathers.	Then Israel said to Joseph, “Look, I am about to die, but God will be with you and bring you back to the land of your fathers.
GEN	48	22	내가 네게 네 형제보다 일부분을 더 주었나니 이는 내가 내 칼과 활로 아모리 족속의 손에서 빼앗은 것이니라	Moreover I have given to thee one portion above thy brethren, which I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my sword and with my bow.	And to you, as one who is above your brothers, I give the ridge of land that I took from the Amorites with my sword and bow.”
GEN	49	1	야곱이 그 아들들을 불러 이르되 너희는 모이라 너희의 후일에 당할 일을 내가 너희에게 이르리라	And Jacob called unto his sons, and said, Gather yourselves together, that I may tell you that which shall befall you in the last days.	Then Jacob called for his sons and said, “Gather around so that I can tell you what will happen to you in the days to come:
GEN	49	2	너희는 모여 들으라 야곱의 아들들아 너희 아비 이스라엘에게 들을지어다	Gather yourselves together, and hear, ye sons of Jacob; and hearken unto Israel your father.	Come together and listen, O sons of Jacob; listen to your father Israel.
GEN	49	3	르우벤아 너는 내 장자요 나의 능력이요 나의 기력의 시작이라 위광이 초등하고 권능이 탁월하도다마는	Reuben, thou art my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power:	Reuben, you are my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my strength, excelling in honor, excelling in power.
GEN	49	4	물의 끓음 같았은즉 너는 탁월치 못하리니 네가 아비의 침상에 올라 더럽혔음이로다 그가 내 침상에 올랐었도다	Unstable as water, thou shalt not excel; because thou wentest up to thy father’s bed; then defiledst thou it: he went up to my couch.	Uncontrolled as the waters, you will no longer excel, because you went up to your father’s bed, onto my couch, and defiled it.
GEN	49	5	시므온과 레위는 형제요 그들의 칼은 잔해하는 기계로다	Simeon and Levi are brethren; instruments of cruelty are in their habitations.	Simeon and Levi are brothers; their swords are weapons of violence.
GEN	49	6	내 혼아 그들의 모의에 상관하지 말지어다 내 영광아 그들의 집회에 참여하지 말지어다 그들이 그 분노대로 사람을 죽이고 그 혈기대로 소의 발목 힘줄을 끊었음이로다	O my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine honour, be not thou united: for in their anger they slew a man, and in their selfwill they digged down a wall.	May I never enter their council; may I never join their assembly. For they kill men in their anger, and hamstring oxen on a whim.
GEN	49	7	그 노염이 혹독하니 저주를 받을 것이요 분기가 맹렬하니 저주를 받을 것이라 내가 그들을 야곱 중에서 나누며 이스라엘 중에서 흩으리로다	Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel: I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.	Cursed be their anger, for it is strong, and their wrath, for it is cruel! I will disperse them in Jacob and scatter them in Israel.
GEN	49	8	유다야 너는 네 형제의 찬송이 될지라 네 손이 네 원수의 목을 잡을 것이요 네 아비의 아들들이 네 앞에 절하리로다	Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise: thy hand shall be in the neck of thine enemies; thy father’s children shall bow down before thee.	Judah, your brothers shall praise you. Your hand shall be on the necks of your enemies; your father’s sons shall bow down to you.
GEN	49	9	유다는 사자 새끼로다 내 아들아 너는 움킨 것을 찢고 올라 갔도다 그의 엎드리고 웅크림이 수사자 같고 암사자 같으니 누가 그를 범할 수 있으랴	Judah is a lion’s whelp: from the prey, my son, thou art gone up: he stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as an old lion; who shall rouse him up?	Judah is a young lion— my son, you return from the prey. Like a lion he crouches and lies down; like a lioness, who dares to rouse him?
GEN	49	10	홀이 유다를 떠나지 아니하며 치리자의 지팡이가 그 발 사이에서 떠나지 아니하시기를 실로가 오시기까지 미치리니 그에게 모든 백성이 복종하리로다	The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto him shall the gathering of the people be.	The scepter will not depart from Judah, nor the staff from between his feet, until Shiloh comes and the allegiance of the nations is his.
GEN	49	11	그의 나귀를 포도나무에 매며 그 암나귀 새끼를 아름다운 포도나무에 맬 것이며 또 그 옷을 포도주에 빨며 그 복장을 포도즙에 빨리로다	Binding his foal unto the vine, and his ass’s colt unto the choice vine; he washed his garments in wine, and his clothes in the blood of grapes:	He ties his donkey to the vine, his colt to the choicest branch. He washes his garments in wine, his robes in the blood of grapes.
GEN	49	12	그 눈은 포도주로 인하여 붉겠고 그 이는 우유로 인하여 희리로다	His eyes shall be red with wine, and his teeth white with milk.	His eyes are darker than wine, and his teeth are whiter than milk.
GEN	49	13	스불론은 해변에 거하리니 그곳은 배 매는 해변이라 그 지경이 시돈까지리로다	Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea; and he shall be for an haven of ships; and his border shall be unto Zidon.	Zebulun shall dwell by the seashore and become a harbor for ships; his border shall extend to Sidon.
GEN	49	14	잇사갈은 양의 우리 사이에 꿇어 앉은 건장한 나귀로다	Issachar is a strong ass couching down between two burdens:	Issachar is a strong donkey, lying down between the sheepfolds.
GEN	49	15	그는 쉴 곳을 보고 좋게 여기며 토지를 보고 아름답게 여기고 어깨를 내려 짐을 메고 압제 아래서 섬기리로다	And he saw that rest was good, and the land that it was pleasant; and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant unto tribute.	He saw that his resting place was good and that his land was pleasant, so he bent his shoulder to the burden and submitted to labor as a servant.
GEN	49	16	단은 이스라엘의 한 지파 같이 그 백성을 심판하리로다	Dan shall judge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel.	Dan shall provide justice for his people as one of the tribes of Israel.
GEN	49	17	단은 길의 뱀이요 첩경의 독사리로다 말굽을 물어서 그 탄 자로 뒤로 떨어지게 하리로다	Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path, that biteth the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward.	He will be a snake by the road, a viper in the path that bites the horse’s heels so that its rider tumbles backward.
GEN	49	18	여호와여 나는 주의 구원을 기다리나이다	I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord.	I await Your salvation, O LORD.
GEN	49	19	갓은 군대의 박격을 받으나 도리어 그 뒤를 추격하리로다	Gad, a troop shall overcome him: but he shall overcome at the last.	Gad will be attacked by raiders, but he will attack their heels.
GEN	49	20	아셀에게서 나는 식물은 기름진 것이라 그가 왕의 진수를 공궤하리로다	Out of Asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal dainties.	Asher’s food will be rich; he shall provide royal delicacies.
GEN	49	21	납달리는 놓인 암사슴이라 아름다운 소리를 발하는도다	Naphtali is a hind let loose: he giveth goodly words.	Naphtali is a doe set free that bears beautiful fawns.
GEN	49	22	요셉은 무성한 가지 곧 샘 곁의 무성한 가지라 그 가지가 담을 넘었도다	Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well; whose branches run over the wall:	Joseph is a fruitful vine— a fruitful vine by a spring, whose branches scale the wall.
GEN	49	23	활쏘는 자가 그를 학대하며 그를 쏘며 그를 군박하였으나	The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him:	The archers attacked him with bitterness; they aimed at him in hostility.
GEN	49	24	요셉의 활이 도리어 견강하며 그의 팔이 힘이 있으니 야곱의 전능자의 손을 힘입음이라 그로부터 이스라엘의 반석인 목자가 나도다	But his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob; (from thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel:)	Yet he steadied his bow, and his strong arms were tempered by the hands of the Mighty One of Jacob, in the name of the Shepherd, the Rock of Israel,
GEN	49	25	네 아비의 하나님께로 말미암나니 그가 너를 도우실 것이요 전능자로 말미암나니 그가 네게 복을 주실 것이라 위로 하늘의 복과 아래로 원천의 복과 젖먹이는 복과 태의 복이리로다	Even by the God of thy father, who shall help thee; and by the Almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lieth under, blessings of the breasts, and of the womb:	by the God of your father who helps you, and by the Almighty who blesses you, with blessings of the heavens above, with blessings of the depths below, with blessings of the breasts and womb.
GEN	49	26	네 아비의 축복이 내 부여조의 축복보다 나아서 영원한 산이 한 없음 같이 이 축복이 요셉의 머리로 돌아오며 그 형제 중 뛰어난 자의 정수리로 돌아오리로다	The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren.	The blessings of your father have surpassed the blessings of the ancient mountains and the bounty of the everlasting hills. May they rest on the head of Joseph, on the brow of the prince of his brothers.
GEN	49	27	베냐민은 물어 뜯는 이리라 아침에는 빼앗은 것을 먹고 저녁에는 움킨 것을 나누리로다	Benjamin shall ravin as a wolf: in the morning he shall devour the prey, and at night he shall divide the spoil.	Benjamin is a ravenous wolf; in the morning he devours the prey, in the evening he divides the plunder.”
GEN	49	28	이들은 이스라엘의 십이 지파라 이와 같이 그 아비가 그들에게 말하고 그들에게 축복하였으되 곧 그들 각인의 분량대로 축복하였더라	All these are the twelve tribes of Israel: and this is it that their father spake unto them, and blessed them; every one according to his blessing he blessed them.	These are the tribes of Israel, twelve in all, and this was what their father said to them. He blessed them, and he blessed each one with a suitable blessing.
GEN	49	29	그가 그들에게 명하여 가로되 내가 내 열조에게로 돌아가리니 나를 헷 사람 에브론의 밭에 있는 굴에 우리 부여조와 함께 장사하라	And he charged them, and said unto them, I am to be gathered unto my people: bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the field of Ephron the Hittite,	Then Jacob instructed them, “I am about to be gathered to my people. Bury me with my fathers in the cave in the field of Ephron the Hittite.
GEN	49	30	이 굴은 가나안 땅 마므레 앞 막벨라 밭에 있는 것이라 아브라함이 헷 사람 에브론에게서 밭과 함께 사서 그 소유 매장지를 삼았으므로	In the cave that is in the field of Machpelah, which is before Mamre, in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought with the field of Ephron the Hittite for a possession of a buryingplace.	The cave is in the field of Machpelah near Mamre, in the land of Canaan. This is the field Abraham purchased from Ephron the Hittite as a burial site.
GEN	49	31	아브라함과 그 아내 사라가 거기 장사되었고 이삭과 그 아내 리브가도 거기 장사되었으며 나도 레아를 그곳에 장사하였노라	There they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife; there they buried Isaac and Rebekah his wife; and there I buried Leah.	There Abraham and his wife Sarah are buried, there Isaac and his wife Rebekah are buried, and there I buried Leah.
GEN	49	32	이 밭과 거기 있는 굴은 헷 사람에게서 산 것이니라	The purchase of the field and of the cave that is therein was from the children of Heth.	The field and the cave that is in it were purchased from the Hittites.”
GEN	49	33	야곱이 아들에게 명하기를 마치고 그 발을 침상에 거두고 기운이 진하여 그 열조에게로 돌아갔더라	And when Jacob had made an end of commanding his sons, he gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was gathered unto his people.	When Jacob had finished instructing his sons, he pulled his feet into the bed and breathed his last, and he was gathered to his people.
GEN	50	1	요셉이 아비 얼굴에 구푸려 울며 입맞추고	And Joseph fell upon his father’s face, and wept upon him, and kissed him.	Then Joseph fell upon his father’s face, wept over him, and kissed him.
GEN	50	2	그 수종 의사에게 명하여 향 재료로 아비의 몸에 넣게 하매 의사가 이스라엘에게 그대로 하되	And Joseph commanded his servants the physicians to embalm his father: and the physicians embalmed Israel.	And Joseph directed the physicians in his service to embalm his father Israel. So they embalmed him,
GEN	50	3	사십 일이 걸렸으니 향 재료를 넣는 데는 이 날수가 걸림이며 애굽 사람들은 칠십 일 동안 그를 위하여 곡하였더라	And forty days were fulfilled for him; for so are fulfilled the days of those which are embalmed: and the Egyptians mourned for him threescore and ten days.	taking the forty days required to complete the embalming. And the Egyptians mourned for him seventy days.
GEN	50	4	곡하는 기한이 지나매 요셉이 바로의 궁에 말하여 가로되 내가 너희에게 은혜를 입었으면 청컨대 바로의 귀에 고하기를	And when the days of his mourning were past, Joseph spake unto the house of Pharaoh, saying, If now I have found grace in your eyes, speak, I pray you, in the ears of Pharaoh, saying,	When the days of mourning had passed, Joseph said to Pharaoh’s court, “If I have found favor in your eyes, please tell Pharaoh that
GEN	50	5	우리 아버지가 나로 맹세하게 하여 이르되 내가 죽거든 가나안 땅에 내가 파서 둔 묘실에 나를 장사하라 하였나니 나로 올라가서 아버지를 장사하게 하소서 내가 다시 오리이다 하라 하였더니	My father made me swear, saying, Lo, I die: in my grave which I have digged for me in the land of Canaan, there shalt thou bury me. Now therefore let me go up, I pray thee, and bury my father, and I will come again.	my father made me swear an oath when he said, ‘I am about to die. You must bury me in the tomb that I dug for myself in the land of Canaan.’ Now let me go and bury my father, and then return.”
GEN	50	6	바로가 가로되 그가 네게 시킨 맹세대로 올라가서 네 아비를 장사하라	And Pharaoh said, Go up, and bury thy father, according as he made thee swear.	Pharaoh replied, “Go up and bury your father, as he made you swear to do.”
GEN	50	7	요셉이 자기 아비를 장사하러 올라가니 바로의 모든 신하와 바로 궁의 장로들과 애굽 땅의 모든 장로와	And Joseph went up to bury his father: and with him went up all the servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his house, and all the elders of the land of Egypt,	Then Joseph went to bury his father, and all the servants of Pharaoh accompanied him—the elders of Pharaoh’s household and all the elders of the land of Egypt—
GEN	50	8	요셉의 온 집과 그 형제들과 그 아비의 집이 그와 함께 올라가고 그들의 어린 아이들과 양떼와 소떼만 고센 땅에 남겼으며	And all the house of Joseph, and his brethren, and his father’s house: only their little ones, and their flocks, and their herds, they left in the land of Goshen.	along with all of Joseph’s household, and his brothers, and his father’s household. Only their children and flocks and herds were left in Goshen.
GEN	50	9	병거와 기병이 요셉을 따라 올라가니 그 떼가 심히 컸더라	And there went up with him both chariots and horsemen: and it was a very great company.	Chariots and horsemen alike went up with him, and it was an exceedingly large procession.
GEN	50	10	그들이 요단 강 건너편 아닷 타작마당에 이르러 거기서 크게 호곡하고 애통하며 요셉이 아비를 위하여 칠 일 동안 애곡하였더니	And they came to the threshingfloor of Atad, which is beyond Jordan, and there they mourned with a great and very sore lamentation: and he made a mourning for his father seven days.	When they reached the threshing floor of Atad, which is across the Jordan, they lamented and wailed loudly, and Joseph mourned for his father seven days.
GEN	50	11	그 땅 거민 가나안 백성들이 아닷 마당의 애통을 보고 가로되 이는 애굽 사람의 큰 애통이라 하였으므로 그 땅 이름을 아벨미스라임이라 하였으니 곧 요단 강 건너편이더라	And when the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, saw the mourning in the floor of Atad, they said, This is a grievous mourning to the Egyptians: wherefore the name of it was called Abel–mizraim, which is beyond Jordan.	When the Canaanites of the land saw the mourning at the threshing floor of Atad, they said, “This is a solemn ceremony of mourning by the Egyptians.” Thus the place across the Jordan is called Abel-mizraim.
GEN	50	12	야곱의 아들들이 부명을 좇아 행하여	And his sons did unto him according as he commanded them:	So Jacob’s sons did as he had charged them.
GEN	50	13	그를 가나안 땅으로 메어다가 마므레 앞 막벨라 밭 굴에 장사하였으니 이는 아브라함이 헷 족속 에브론에게 밭과 함께 사서 소유 매장지를 삼은 곳이더라	For his sons carried him into the land of Canaan, and buried him in the cave of the field of Machpelah, which Abraham bought with the field for a possession of a buryingplace of Ephron the Hittite, before Mamre.	They carried him to the land of Canaan and buried him in the cave at Machpelah in the field near Mamre, which Abraham had purchased from Ephron the Hittite as a burial site.
GEN	50	14	요셉이 아비를 장사한 후에 자기 형제와 호상군과 함께 애굽으로 돌아왔더라	And Joseph returned into Egypt, he, and his brethren, and all that went up with him to bury his father, after he had buried his father.	After Joseph had buried his father, he returned to Egypt with his brothers and all who had gone with him to bury his father.
GEN	50	15	요셉의 형제들이 그 아비가 죽었음을 보고 말하되 요셉이 혹시 우리를 미워하여 우리가 그에게 행한 모든 악을 다 갚지나 아니할까 하고	And when Joseph’s brethren saw that their father was dead, they said, Joseph will peradventure hate us, and will certainly requite us all the evil which we did unto him.	When Joseph’s brothers saw that their father was dead, they said, “What if Joseph bears a grudge? Then he will surely repay us for all the evil that we did to him.”
GEN	50	16	요셉에게 말을 전하여 가로되 당신의 아버지가 돌아가시기 전에 명하여 이르시기를	And they sent a messenger unto Joseph, saying, Thy father did command before he died, saying,	So they sent word to Joseph, saying, “Before he died, your father commanded,
GEN	50	17	너희는 이같이 요셉에게 이르라 네 형들이 네게 악을 행하였을지라도 이제 바라건대 그 허물과 죄를 용서하라 하셨다 하라 하셨나니 당신의 아버지의 하나님의 종들의 죄를 이제 용서하소서 하매 요셉이 그 말을 들을 때에 울었더라	So shall ye say unto Joseph, Forgive, I pray thee now, the trespass of thy brethren, and their sin; for they did unto thee evil: and now, we pray thee, forgive the trespass of the servants of the God of thy father. And Joseph wept when they spake unto him.	‘This is what you are to say to Joseph: I beg you, please forgive the transgression and sin of your brothers, for they did you wrong.’ So now, Joseph, please forgive the transgression of the servants of the God of your father.” When their message came to him, Joseph wept.
GEN	50	18	그 형들이 또 친히 와서 요셉의 앞에 엎드려 가로되 우리는 당신의 종이니이다	And his brethren also went and fell down before his face; and they said, Behold, we be thy servants.	His brothers also came to him, bowed down before him, and said, “We are your slaves!”
GEN	50	19	요셉이 그들에게 이르되 두려워 마소서 내가 하나님을 대신하리이까	And Joseph said unto them, Fear not: for am I in the place of God?	But Joseph replied, “Do not be afraid. Am I in the place of God?
GEN	50	20	당신들은 나를 해하려 하였으나 하나님은 그것을 선으로 바꾸사 오늘과 같이 만민의 생명을 구원하게 하시려 하셨나니	But as for you, ye thought evil against me; but God meant it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people alive.	As for you, what you intended against me for evil, God intended for good, in order to accomplish a day like this—to preserve the lives of many people.
GEN	50	21	당신들은 두려워 마소서 내가 당신들과 당신들의 자녀를 기르리이다 하고 그들을 간곡한 말로 위로하였더라	Now therefore fear ye not: I will nourish you, and your little ones. And he comforted them, and spake kindly unto them.	Therefore do not be afraid. I will provide for you and your little ones.” So Joseph reassured his brothers and spoke kindly to them.
GEN	50	22	요셉이 그 아비의 가족과 함께 애굽에 거하여 일백십 세를 살며	And Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he, and his father’s house: and Joseph lived an hundred and ten years.	Now Joseph and his father’s household remained in Egypt, and Joseph lived to the age of 110.
GEN	50	23	에브라임의 자손 삼대를 보았으며 므낫세의 아들 마길의 아들들도 요셉의 슬하에서 양육되었더라	And Joseph saw Ephraim’s children of the third generation: the children also of Machir the son of Manasseh were brought up upon Joseph’s knees.	He saw Ephraim’s sons to the third generation, and indeed the sons of Machir son of Manasseh were brought up on Joseph’s knees.
GEN	50	24	요셉이 그 형제에게 이르되 나는 죽으나 하나님이 너희를 권고하시고 너희를 이 땅에서 인도하여 내사 아브라함과 이삭과 야곱에게 맹세하신 땅에 이르게 하시리라 하고	And Joseph said unto his brethren, I die: and God will surely visit you, and bring you out of this land unto the land which he sware to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.	Then Joseph said to his brothers, “I am about to die, but God will surely visit you and bring you up from this land to the land He promised on oath to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.”
GEN	50	25	요셉이 또 이스라엘 자손에게 맹세시켜 이르기를 하나님이 정녕 너희를 권고하시리니 너희는 여기서 내 해골을 메고 올라가겠다 하라 하였더라	And Joseph took an oath of the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from hence.	And Joseph made the sons of Israel take an oath and said, “God will surely attend to you, and then you must carry my bones up from this place.”
GEN	50	26	요셉이 일백십 세에 죽으매 그들이 그의 몸에 향 재료를 넣고 애굽에서 입관하였더라	So Joseph died, being an hundred and ten years old: and they embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.	So Joseph died at the age of 110. And they embalmed his body and placed it in a coffin in Egypt.
EXO	1	1	야곱과 함께 각기 권속을 데리고 애굽에 이른 이스라엘 아들들의 이름은 이러하니	Now these are the names of the children of Israel, which came into Egypt; every man and his household came with Jacob.	These are the names of the sons of Israel who went to Egypt with Jacob, each with his family:
EXO	1	2	르우벤과 시므온과 레위와 유다와	Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah,	Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah;
EXO	1	3	잇사갈과 스불론과 베냐민과	Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin,	Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin;
EXO	1	4	단과 납달리와 갓과 아셀이요	Dan, and Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.	Dan and Naphtali; Gad and Asher.
EXO	1	5	이미 애굽에 있는 요셉까지 야곱의 혈속이 모두 칠십 인이었더라	And all the souls that came out of the loins of Jacob were seventy souls: for Joseph was in Egypt already.	The descendants of Jacob numbered seventy in all, including Joseph, who was already in Egypt.
EXO	1	6	요셉과 그의 모든 형제와 그 시대 사람은 다 죽었고	And Joseph died, and all his brethren, and all that generation.	Now Joseph and all his brothers and all that generation died,
EXO	1	7	이스라엘 자손은 생육이 중다하고 번식하고 창성하고 심히 강대하여 온 땅에 가득하게 되었더라	And the children of Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty; and the land was filled with them.	but the Israelites were fruitful and increased rapidly; they multiplied and became exceedingly numerous, so that the land was filled with them.
EXO	1	8	요셉을 알지 못하는 새 왕이 일어나서 애굽을 다스리더니	Now there arose up a new king over Egypt, which knew not Joseph.	Then a new king, who did not know Joseph, came to power in Egypt.
EXO	1	9	그가 그 신민에게 이르되 이 백성 이스라엘 자손이 우리보다 많고 강하도다	And he said unto his people, Behold, the people of the children of Israel are more and mightier than we:	“Look,” he said to his people, “the Israelites have become too numerous and too powerful for us.
EXO	1	10	자 우리가 그들에게 대하여 지혜롭게 하자 두렵건대 그들이 더 많게 되면 전쟁이 일어날 때에 우리 대적과 합하여 우리와 싸우고 이 땅에서 갈까 하노라 하고	Come on, let us deal wisely with them; lest they multiply, and it come to pass, that, when there falleth out any war, they join also unto our enemies, and fight against us, and so get them up out of the land.	Come, let us deal shrewdly with them, or they will increase even more; and if a war breaks out, they may join our enemies, fight against us, and leave the country.”
EXO	1	11	감독들을 그들 위에 세우고 그들에게 무거운 짐을 지워 괴롭게 하여 그들로 바로를 위하여 국고성 비돔과 라암셋을 건축하게 하니라	Therefore they did set over them taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens. And they built for Pharaoh treasure cities, Pithom and Raamses.	So the Egyptians appointed taskmasters over the Israelites to oppress them with forced labor. As a result, they built Pithom and Rameses as store cities for Pharaoh.
EXO	1	12	그러나 학대를 받을수록 더욱 번식하고 창성하니 애굽 사람이 이스라엘 자손을 인하여 근심하여	But the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and grew. And they were grieved because of the children of Israel.	But the more they were oppressed, the more they multiplied and flourished; so the Egyptians came to dread the Israelites.
EXO	1	13	이스라엘 자손의 역사를 엄하게 하여	And the Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve with rigour:	They worked the Israelites ruthlessly
EXO	1	14	고역으로 그들의 생활을 괴롭게 하니 곧 흙 이기기와 벽돌 굽기와 농사의 여러가지 일이라 그 시키는 역사가 다 엄하였더라	And they made their lives bitter with hard bondage, in morter, and in brick, and in all manner of service in the field: all their service, wherein they made them serve, was with rigour.	and made their lives bitter with hard labor in brick and mortar, and with all kinds of work in the fields. Every service they imposed was harsh.
EXO	1	15	애굽 왕이 히브리 산파 십브라라 하는 자와 부아라 하는 자에게 일러	And the king of Egypt spake to the Hebrew midwives, of which the name of the one was Shiphrah, and the name of the other Puah:	Then the king of Egypt said to the Hebrew midwives, whose names were Shiphrah and Puah,
EXO	1	16	가로되 너희는 히브리 여인을 위하여 조산할 때에 살펴서 남자여든 죽이고 여자여든 그는 살게 두라	And he said, When ye do the office of a midwife to the Hebrew women, and see them upon the stools; if it be a son, then ye shall kill him: but if it be a daughter, then she shall live.	“When you help the Hebrew women give birth, observe them on the birthstools. If the child is a son, kill him; but if it is a daughter, let her live.”
EXO	1	17	그러나 산파들이 하나님을 두려워하여 애굽 왕의 명을 어기고 남자를 살린지라	But the midwives feared God, and did not as the king of Egypt commanded them, but saved the men children alive.	The midwives, however, feared God and did not do as the king of Egypt had instructed; they let the boys live.
EXO	1	18	애굽 왕이 산파를 불러서 그들에게 이르되 너희가 어찌 이같이 하여 남자를 살렸느냐	And the king of Egypt called for the midwives, and said unto them, Why have ye done this thing, and have saved the men children alive?	So the king of Egypt summoned the midwives and asked them, “Why have you done this? Why have you let the boys live?”
EXO	1	19	산파가 바로에게 대답하되 히브리 여인은 애굽 여인과 같지 아니하고 건장하여 산파가 그들에게 이르기 전에 해산하였더이다 하매	And the midwives said unto Pharaoh, Because the Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian women; for they are lively, and are delivered ere the midwives come in unto them.	The midwives answered Pharaoh, “The Hebrew women are not like the Egyptian women, for they are vigorous and give birth before a midwife arrives.”
EXO	1	20	하나님이 그 산파들에게 은혜를 베푸시니라 백성은 생육이 번성하고 심히 강대하며	Therefore God dealt well with the midwives: and the people multiplied, and waxed very mighty.	So God was good to the midwives, and the people multiplied and became even more numerous.
EXO	1	21	산파는 하나님을 경외하였으므로 하나님이 그들의 집을 왕성케 하신지라	And it came to pass, because the midwives feared God, that he made them houses.	And because the midwives feared God, He gave them families of their own.
EXO	1	22	그러므로 바로가 그 모든 신민에게 명하여 가로되 남자가 나거든 너희는 그를 하수에 던지고 여자여든 살리라 하였더라	And Pharaoh charged all his people, saying, Every son that is born ye shall cast into the river, and every daughter ye shall save alive.	Then Pharaoh commanded all his people: “Every son born to the Hebrews you must throw into the Nile, but every daughter you may allow to live.”
EXO	2	1	레위 족속 중 한 사람이 가서 레위 여자에게 장가 들었더니	And there went a man of the house of Levi, and took to wife a daughter of Levi.	Now a man of the house of Levi married a daughter of Levi,
EXO	2	2	그 여자가 잉태하여 아들을 낳아 그 준수함을 보고 그를 석달을 숨겼더니	And the woman conceived, and bare a son: and when she saw him that he was a goodly child, she hid him three months.	and she conceived and gave birth to a son. When she saw that he was a beautiful child, she hid him for three months.
EXO	2	3	더 숨길 수 없이 되매 그를 위하여 갈 상자를 가져다가 역청과 나무 진을 칠하고 아이를 거기 담아 하숫가 갈대 사이에 두고	And when she could not longer hide him, she took for him an ark of bulrushes, and daubed it with slime and with pitch, and put the child therein; and she laid it in the flags by the river’s brink.	But when she could no longer hide him, she got him a papyrus basket and coated it with tar and pitch. Then she placed the child in the basket and set it among the reeds along the bank of the Nile.
EXO	2	4	그 누이가 어떻게 되는 것을 알려고 멀리 섰더니	And his sister stood afar off, to wit what would be done to him.	And his sister stood at a distance to see what would happen to him.
EXO	2	5	바로의 딸이 목욕하러 하수로 내려오고 시녀들은 하숫가에 거닐 때에 그가 갈대 사이에 상자를 보고 시녀를 보내어 가져다가	And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash herself at the river; and her maidens walked along by the river’s side; and when she saw the ark among the flags, she sent her maid to fetch it.	Soon the daughter of Pharaoh went down to bathe in the Nile, and her attendants were walking along the riverbank. And when she saw the basket among the reeds, she sent her maidservant to retrieve it.
EXO	2	6	열고 그 아이를 보니 아이가 우는지라 그가 불쌍히 여겨 가로되 이는 히브리 사람의 아이로다	And when she had opened it, she saw the child: and, behold, the babe wept. And she had compassion on him, and said, This is one of the Hebrews’ children.	When she opened it, she saw the child, and behold, the little boy was crying. So she had compassion on him and said, “This is one of the Hebrew children.”
EXO	2	7	그 누이가 바로의 딸에게 이르되 내가 가서 히브리 여인 중에서 유모를 불러다가 당신을 위하여 이 아이를 젖 먹이게 하리이까	Then said his sister to Pharaoh’s daughter, Shall I go and call to thee a nurse of the Hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for thee?	Then his sister said to Pharaoh’s daughter, “Shall I go and call one of the Hebrew women to nurse the child for you?”
EXO	2	8	바로의 딸이 그에게 이르되 가라 그 소녀가 가서 아이의 어미를 불러오니	And Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, Go. And the maid went and called the child’s mother.	“Go ahead,” Pharaoh’s daughter told her. And the girl went and called the boy’s mother.
EXO	2	9	바로의 딸이 그에게 이르되 이 아이를 데려다가 나를 위하여 젖을 먹이라 내가 그 삯을 주리라 여인이 아이를 데려다가 젖을 먹이더니	And Pharaoh’s daughter said unto her, Take this child away, and nurse it for me, and I will give thee thy wages. And the woman took the child, and nursed it.	Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, “Take this child and nurse him for me, and I will pay your wages.” So the woman took the boy and nursed him.
EXO	2	10	그 아이가 자라매 바로의 딸에게로 데려가니 그의 아들이 되니라 그가 그 이름을 모세라 하여 가로되 이는 내가 그를 물에서 건져내었음이라 하였더라	And the child grew, and she brought him unto Pharaoh’s daughter, and he became her son. And she called his name Moses: and she said, Because I drew him out of the water.	When the child had grown older, she brought him to Pharaoh’s daughter, and he became her son. She named him Moses and explained, “I drew him out of the water.”
EXO	2	11	모세가 장성한 후에 한번은 자기 형제들에게 나가서 그 고역함을 보더니 어떤 애굽 사람이 어떤 히브리 사람 곧 자기 형제를 치는 것을 본지라	And it came to pass in those days, when Moses was grown, that he went out unto his brethren, and looked on their burdens: and he spied an Egyptian smiting an Hebrew, one of his brethren.	One day, after Moses had grown up, he went out to his own people and observed their hard labor. He saw an Egyptian beating a Hebrew, one of his own people.
EXO	2	12	좌우로 살펴 사람이 없음을 보고 그 애굽 사람을 쳐죽여 모래에 감추니라	And he looked this way and that way, and when he saw that there was no man, he slew the Egyptian, and hid him in the sand.	After looking this way and that and seeing no one, he struck down the Egyptian and hid his body in the sand.
EXO	2	13	이튿날 다시 나가니 두 히브리 사람이 서로 싸우는지라 그 그른 자에게 이르되 네가 어찌하여 동포를 치느냐 하매	And when he went out the second day, behold, two men of the Hebrews strove together: and he said to him that did the wrong, Wherefore smitest thou thy fellow?	The next day Moses went out and saw two Hebrews fighting. He asked the one in the wrong, “Why are you attacking your companion?”
EXO	2	14	그가 가로되 누가 너로 우리의 주재와 법관을 삼았느냐 네가 애굽 사람을 죽임 같이 나도 죽이려느냐 모세가 두려워하여 가로되 일이 탄로되었도다	And he said, Who made thee a prince and a judge over us? intendest thou to kill me, as thou killedst the Egyptian? And Moses feared, and said, Surely this thing is known.	But the man replied, “Who made you ruler and judge over us? Are you planning to kill me as you killed the Egyptian?” Then Moses was afraid and thought, “This thing I have done has surely become known.”
EXO	2	15	바로가 이 일을 듣고 모세를 죽이고자 하여 찾은지라 모세가 바로의 낯을 피하여 미디안 땅에 머물며 하루는 우물 곁에 앉았더라	Now when Pharaoh heard this thing, he sought to slay Moses. But Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh, and dwelt in the land of Midian: and he sat down by a well.	When Pharaoh heard about this matter, he sought to kill Moses. But Moses fled from Pharaoh and settled in the land of Midian, where he sat down beside a well.
EXO	2	16	미디안 제사장에게 일곱 딸이 있더니 그들이 와서 물을 길어 구유에 채우고 그 아비의 양무리에게 먹이려 하는데	Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters: and they came and drew water, and filled the troughs to water their father’s flock.	Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters, and they came to draw water and fill the troughs to water their father’s flock.
EXO	2	17	목자들이 와서 그들을 쫓는지라 모세가 일어나 그들을 도와 그 양무리에게 먹이니라	And the shepherds came and drove them away: but Moses stood up and helped them, and watered their flock.	And when some shepherds came along and drove them away, Moses rose up to help them and watered their flock.
EXO	2	18	그들이 그 아비 르우엘에게 이를 때에 아비가 가로되 너희가 오늘은 어찌하여 이같이 속히 돌아오느냐	And when they came to Reuel their father, he said, How is it that ye are come so soon to day?	When the daughters returned to their father Reuel, he asked them, “Why have you returned so early today?”
EXO	2	19	그들이 가로되 한 애굽 사람이 우리를 목자들의 손에서 건져내고 우리를 위하여 물을 길어 양무리에게 먹였나이다	And they said, An Egyptian delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds, and also drew water enough for us, and watered the flock.	“An Egyptian rescued us from the shepherds,” they replied. “He even drew water for us and watered the flock.”
EXO	2	20	아비가 딸들에게 이르되 그 사람이 어디 있느냐 너희가 어찌하여 그 사람을 버리고 왔느냐 그를 청하여 음식으로 대접하라 하였더라	And he said unto his daughters, And where is he? why is it that ye have left the man? call him, that he may eat bread.	“So where is he?” their father asked. “Why did you leave the man behind? Invite him to have something to eat.”
EXO	2	21	모세가 그와 동거하기를 기뻐하매 그가 그 딸 십보라를 모세에게 주었더니	And Moses was content to dwell with the man: and he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter.	Moses agreed to stay with the man, and he gave his daughter Zipporah to Moses in marriage.
EXO	2	22	그가 아들을 낳으매 모세가 그 이름을 게르솜이라 하여 가로되 내가 타국에서 객이 되었음이라 하였더라	And she bare him a son, and he called his name Gershom: for he said, I have been a stranger in a strange land.	And she gave birth to a son, and Moses named him Gershom, saying, “I have become a foreigner in a foreign land.”
EXO	2	23	여러 해 후에 애굽 왕은 죽었고 이스라엘 자손은 고역으로 인하여 탄식하며 부르짖으니 그 고역으로 인하여 부르짖는 소리가 하나님께 상달한지라	And it came to pass in process of time, that the king of Egypt died: and the children of Israel sighed by reason of the bondage, and they cried, and their cry came up unto God by reason of the bondage.	After a long time, the king of Egypt died. The Israelites groaned and cried out under their burden of slavery, and their cry for deliverance from bondage ascended to God.
EXO	2	24	하나님이 그 고통 소리를 들으시고 아브라함과 이삭과 야곱에게 세운 그 언약을 기억하사	And God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob.	So God heard their groaning, and He remembered His covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
EXO	2	25	이스라엘 자손을 권념하셨더라	And God looked upon the children of Israel, and God had respect unto them.	God saw the Israelites and took notice.
EXO	3	1	모세가 그 장인 미디안 제사장 이드로의 양무리를 치더니 그 무리를 광야 서편으로 인도하여 하나님의 산 호렙에 이르매	Now Moses kept the flock of Jethro his father in law, the priest of Midian: and he led the flock to the backside of the desert, and came to the mountain of God, even to Horeb.	Meanwhile, Moses was shepherding the flock of his father-in-law Jethro, the priest of Midian. He led the flock to the far side of the wilderness and came to Horeb, the mountain of God.
EXO	3	2	여호와의 사자가 떨기나무 불꽃 가운데서 그에게 나타나시니라 그가 보니 떨기나무에 불이 붙었으나 사라지지 아니하는지라	And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed.	There the angel of the LORD appeared to him in a blazing fire from within a bush. Moses saw the bush ablaze with fire, but it was not consumed.
EXO	3	3	이에 가로되 내가 돌이켜 가서 이 큰 광경을 보리라 떨기나무가 어찌하여 타지 아니하는고 하는 동시에	And Moses said, I will now turn aside, and see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt.	So Moses thought, “I must go over and see this marvelous sight. Why is the bush not burning up?”
EXO	3	4	여호와께서 그가 보려고 돌이켜 오는 것을 보신지라 하나님이 떨기나무 가운데서 그를 불러 가라사대 모세야 모세야 하시매 그가 가로되 내가 여기 있나이다	And when the Lord saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto him out of the midst of the bush, and said, Moses, Moses. And he said, Here am I.	When the LORD saw that he had gone over to look, God called out to him from within the bush, “Moses, Moses!” “Here I am,” he answered.
EXO	3	5	하나님이 가라사대 이리로 가까이 하지 말라 너의 선 곳은 거룩한 땅이니 네 발에서 신을 벗으라	And he said, Draw not nigh hither: put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground.	“Do not come any closer,” God said. “Take off your sandals, for the place where you are standing is holy ground.”
EXO	3	6	또 이르시되 나는 네 조상의 하나님이니 아브라함의 하나님, 이삭의 하나님, 야곱의 하나님이니라 모세가 하나님 뵈옵기를 두려워하여 얼굴을 가리우매	Moreover he said, I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And Moses hid his face; for he was afraid to look upon God.	Then He said, “I am the God of your father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.” At this, Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to look at God.
EXO	3	7	여호와께서 가라사대 내가 애굽에 있는 내 백성의 고통을 정녕히 보고 그들이 그 간역자로 인하여 부르짖음을 듣고 그 우고를 알고	And the Lord said, I have surely seen the affliction of my people which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their taskmasters; for I know their sorrows;	The LORD said, “I have indeed seen the affliction of My people in Egypt. I have heard them crying out because of their oppressors, and I am aware of their sufferings.
EXO	3	8	내가 내려와서 그들을 애굽인의 손에서 건져내고 그들을 그 땅에서 인도하여 아름답고 광대한 땅 젖과 꿀이 흐르는 땅 곧 가나안 족속, 헷 족속, 아모리 족속, 브리스 족속, 히위 족속, 여부스 족속의 지방에 이르려 하노라	And I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up out of that land unto a good land and a large, unto a land flowing with milk and honey; unto the place of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites.	I have come down to rescue them from the hand of the Egyptians and to bring them up out of that land to a good and spacious land, a land flowing with milk and honey—the home of the Canaanites, Hittites, Amorites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites.
EXO	3	9	이제 이스라엘 자손의 부르짖음이 내게 달하고 애굽 사람이 그들을 괴롭게 하는 학대도 내가 보았으니	Now therefore, behold, the cry of the children of Israel is come unto me: and I have also seen the oppression wherewith the Egyptians oppress them.	And now the cry of the Israelites has reached Me, and I have seen how severely the Egyptians are oppressing them.
EXO	3	10	이제 내가 너를 바로에게 보내어 너로 내 백성 이스라엘 자손을 애굽에서 인도하여 내게 하리라	Come now therefore, and I will send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth my people the children of Israel out of Egypt.	Therefore, go! I am sending you to Pharaoh to bring My people the Israelites out of Egypt.”
EXO	3	11	모세가 하나님께 고하되 내가 누구관대 바로에게 가며 이스라엘 자손을 애굽에서 인도하여 내리이까	And Moses said unto God, Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?	But Moses asked God, “Who am I, that I should go to Pharaoh and bring the Israelites out of Egypt?”
EXO	3	12	하나님이 가라사대 내가 정녕 너와 함께 있으리라 네가 백성을 애굽에서 인도하여 낸 후에 너희가 이 산에서 하나님을 섬기리니 이것이 내가 너를 보낸 증거니라	And he said, Certainly I will be with thee; and this shall be a token unto thee, that I have sent thee: When thou hast brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this mountain.	“I will surely be with you,” God said, “and this will be the sign to you that I have sent you: When you have brought the people out of Egypt, all of you will worship God on this mountain.”
EXO	3	13	모세가 하나님께 고하되 내가 이스라엘 자손에게 가서 이르기를 너희 조상의 하나님이 나를 너희에게 보내셨다 하면 그들이 내게 묻기를 그의 이름이 무엇이냐 하리니 내가 무엇이라고 그들에게 말하리이까	And Moses said unto God, Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, What is his name? what shall I say unto them?	Then Moses asked God, “Suppose I go to the Israelites and say to them, ‘The God of your fathers has sent me to you,’ and they ask me, ‘What is His name?’ What should I tell them?”
EXO	3	14	하나님이 모세에게 이르시되 나는 스스로 있는 자니라 또 이르시되 너는 이스라엘 자손에게 이같이 이르기를 스스로 있는 자가 나를 너희에게 보내셨다 하라	And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you.	God said to Moses, “I AM WHO I AM. This is what you are to say to the Israelites: ‘I AM has sent me to you.’”
EXO	3	15	하나님이 또 모세에게 이르시되 너는 이스라엘 자손에게 이같이 이르기를 나를 너희에게 보내신 이는 너희 조상의 하나님 곧 아브라함의 하나님, 이삭의 하나님, 야곱의 하나님 여호와라 하라 이는 나의 영원한 이름이요 대대로 기억할 나의 표호니라	And God said moreover unto Moses, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, The Lord God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you: this is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations.	God also told Moses, “Say to the Israelites, ‘The LORD, the God of your fathers—the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob—has sent me to you.’ This is My name forever, and this is how I am to be remembered in every generation.
EXO	3	16	너는 가서 이스라엘 장로들을 모으고 그들에게 이르기를 여호와 너희 조상의 하나님 곧 아브라함과 이삭과 야곱의 하나님이 내게 나타나 이르시되 내가 실로 너희를 권고하여 너희가 애굽에서 당한 일을 보았노라	Go, and gather the elders of Israel together, and say unto them, The Lord God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, appeared unto me, saying, I have surely visited you, and seen that which is done to you in Egypt:	Go, assemble the elders of Israel and say to them, ‘The LORD, the God of your fathers—the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob—has appeared to me and said: I have surely attended to you and have seen what has been done to you in Egypt.
EXO	3	17	내가 말하였거니와 내가 너희를 애굽의 고난 중에서 인도하여 내어 젖과 꿀이 흐르는 땅 곧 가나안 족속, 헷 족속, 아모리 족속, 브리스 족속, 히위 족속, 여부스 족속의 땅으로 올라가게 하리라 하셨다 하면	And I have said, I will bring you up out of the affliction of Egypt unto the land of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, unto a land flowing with milk and honey.	And I have promised to bring you up out of your affliction in Egypt, into the land of the Canaanites, Hittites, Amorites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites—a land flowing with milk and honey.’
EXO	3	18	그들이 네 말을 들으리니 너는 그들의 장로들과 함께 애굽 왕에게 이르기를 히브리 사람의 하나님 여호와께서 우리에게 임하셨은즉 우리가 우리 하나님 여호와께 희생을 드리려 하오니 사흘 길쯤 광야로 가기를 허락하소서 하라	And they shall hearken to thy voice: and thou shalt come, thou and the elders of Israel, unto the king of Egypt, and ye shall say unto him, The Lord God of the Hebrews hath met with us: and now let us go, we beseech thee, three days’ journey into the wilderness, that we may sacrifice to the Lord our God.	The elders of Israel will listen to what you say, and you must go with them to the king of Egypt and tell him, ‘The LORD, the God of the Hebrews, has met with us. Now please let us take a three-day journey into the wilderness, so that we may sacrifice to the LORD our God.’
EXO	3	19	내가 아노니 강한 손으로 치기 전에는 애굽 왕이 너희의 가기를 허락지 아니하다가	And I am sure that the king of Egypt will not let you go, no, not by a mighty hand.	But I know that the king of Egypt will not allow you to go unless a mighty hand compels him.
EXO	3	20	내가 내 손을 들어 애굽 중에 여러가지 이적으로 그 나라를 친 후에야 그가 너희를 보내리라	And I will stretch out my hand, and smite Egypt with all my wonders which I will do in the midst thereof: and after that he will let you go.	So I will stretch out My hand and strike the Egyptians with all the wonders I will perform among them. And after that, he will release you.
EXO	3	21	내가 애굽 사람으로 이 백성에게 은혜를 입히게 할지라 너희가 갈 때에 빈 손으로 가지 아니하리니	And I will give this people favour in the sight of the Egyptians: and it shall come to pass, that, when ye go, ye shall not go empty:	And I will grant this people such favor in the sight of the Egyptians that when you leave, you will not go away empty-handed.
EXO	3	22	여인마다 그 이웃 사람과 및 자기 집에 우거하는 자에게 은 패물과 금 패물과 의복을 구하여 너희 자녀를 꾸미라 너희가 애굽 사람의 물품을 취하리라	But every woman shall borrow of her neighbour, and of her that sojourneth in her house, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment: and ye shall put them upon your sons, and upon your daughters; and ye shall spoil the Egyptians.	Every woman shall ask her neighbor and any woman staying in her house for silver and gold jewelry and clothing, and you will put them on your sons and daughters. So you will plunder the Egyptians.”
EXO	4	1	모세가 대답하여 가로되 그러나 그들이 나를 믿지 아니하며 내 말을 듣지 아니하고 이르기를 여호와께서 네게 나타나지 아니하셨다 하리이다	And Moses answered and said, But, behold, they will not believe me, nor hearken unto my voice: for they will say, The Lord hath not appeared unto thee.	Then Moses answered, “What if they do not believe me or listen to my voice? For they may say, ‘The LORD has not appeared to you.’”
EXO	4	2	여호와께서 그에게 이르시되 네 손에 있는 것이 무엇이냐 그가 가로되 지팡이니이다	And the Lord said unto him, What is that in thine hand? And he said, A rod.	And the LORD asked him, “What is that in your hand?” “A staff,” he replied.
EXO	4	3	여호와께서 가라사대 그것을 땅에 던지라 곧 땅에 던지니 그것이 뱀이 된지라 모세가 뱀 앞에서 피하매	And he said, Cast it on the ground. And he cast it on the ground, and it became a serpent; and Moses fled from before it.	“Throw it on the ground,” said the LORD. So Moses threw it on the ground, and it became a snake, and he ran from it.
EXO	4	4	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 네 손을 내밀어 그 꼬리를 잡으라 그가 손을 내밀어 잡으니 그 손에서 지팡이가 된지라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Put forth thine hand, and take it by the tail. And he put forth his hand, and caught it, and it became a rod in his hand:	“Stretch out your hand and grab it by the tail,” the LORD said to Moses, who reached out his hand and caught the snake, and it turned back into a staff in his hand.
EXO	4	5	또 가라사대 이는 그들로 그 조상의 하나님 곧 아브라함의 하나님, 이삭의 하나님, 야곱의 하나님 여호와가 네게 나타난 줄을 믿게 함이니라 하시고	That they may believe that the Lord God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath appeared unto thee.	“This is so that they may believe that the LORD, the God of their fathers—the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob—has appeared to you.”
EXO	4	6	여호와께서 또 가라사대 네 손을 품에 넣으라 하시매 손을 품에 넣었다가 내어보니 그 손에 문둥병이 발하여 눈 같이 흰지라	And the Lord said furthermore unto him, Put now thine hand into thy bosom. And he put his hand into his bosom: and when he took it out, behold, his hand was leprous as snow.	Furthermore, the LORD said to Moses, “Put your hand inside your cloak.” So he put his hand inside his cloak, and when he took it out, his hand was leprous, white as snow.
EXO	4	7	가라사대 네 손을 다시 품에 넣으라 하시매 그가 다시 손을 품에 넣었다가 내어보니 손이 여상하더라	And he said, Put thine hand into thy bosom again. And he put his hand into his bosom again; and plucked it out of his bosom, and, behold, it was turned again as his other flesh.	“Put your hand back inside your cloak,” said the LORD. So Moses put his hand back inside his cloak, and when he took it out, it was restored, like the rest of his skin.
EXO	4	8	여호와께서 가라사대 그들이 너를 믿지 아니하며 그 처음 이적의 표징을 받지 아니하여도 둘째 이적의 표징은 믿으리라	And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, neither hearken to the voice of the first sign, that they will believe the voice of the latter sign.	And the LORD said, “If they refuse to believe you or heed the witness of the first sign, they may believe that of the second.
EXO	4	9	그들이 이 두 이적을 믿지 아니하며 네 말을 듣지 아니하거든 너는 하수를 조금 취하여다가 육지에 부으라 네가 취한 하수가 육지에서 피가 되리라	And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe also these two signs, neither hearken unto thy voice, that thou shalt take of the water of the river, and pour it upon the dry land: and the water which thou takest out of the river shall become blood upon the dry land.	But if they do not believe even these two signs or listen to your voice, take some water from the Nile and pour it on the dry ground. Then the water you take from the Nile will become blood on the ground.”
EXO	4	10	모세가 여호와께 고하되 주여 나는 본래 말에 능치 못한 자라 주께서 주의 종에게 명하신 후에도 그러하니 나는 입이 뻣뻣하고 혀가 둔한 자니이다	And Moses said unto the Lord, O my Lord, I am not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou hast spoken unto thy servant: but I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.	“Please, Lord,” Moses replied, “I have never been eloquent, neither in the past nor since You have spoken to Your servant, for I am slow of speech and tongue.”
EXO	4	11	여호와께서 그에게 이르시되 누가 사람의 입을 지었느뇨 누가 벙어리나 귀머거리나 눈 밝은 자나 소경이 되게 하였느뇨 나 여호와가 아니뇨	And the Lord said unto him, Who hath made man’s mouth? or who maketh the dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or the blind? have not I the Lord?	And the LORD said to him, “Who gave man his mouth? Or who makes the mute or the deaf, the sighted or the blind? Is it not I, the LORD?
EXO	4	12	이제 가라 내가 네 입과 함께 있어서 할 말을 가르치리라	Now therefore go, and I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shalt say.	Now go! I will help you as you speak, and I will teach you what to say.”
EXO	4	13	모세가 가로되 주여 보낼만한 자를 보내소서	And he said, O my Lord, send, I pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou wilt send.	But Moses replied, “Please, Lord, send someone else.”
EXO	4	14	여호와께서 모세를 향하여 노를 발하시고 가라사대 레위 사람 네 형 아론이 있지 아니하뇨 그의 말 잘함을 내가 아노라 그가 너를 만나러 나오나니 그가 너를 볼 때에 마음에 기뻐할 것이라	And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Moses, and he said, Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak well. And also, behold, he cometh forth to meet thee: and when he seeth thee, he will be glad in his heart.	Then the anger of the LORD burned against Moses, and He said, “Is not Aaron the Levite your brother? I know that he can speak well, and he is now on his way to meet you. When he sees you, he will be glad in his heart.
EXO	4	15	너는 그에게 말하고 그 입에 말을 주라 내가 네 입과 그의 입에 함께 있어서 너의 행할 일을 가르치리라	And thou shalt speak unto him, and put words in his mouth: and I will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye shall do.	You are to speak to him and put the words in his mouth. I will help both of you to speak, and I will teach you what to do.
EXO	4	16	그가 너를 대신하여 백성에게 말할 것이니 그는 네 입을 대신할 것이요 너는 그에게 하나님 같이 되리라	And he shall be thy spokesman unto the people: and he shall be, even he shall be to thee instead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him instead of God.	He will speak to the people for you. He will be your spokesman, and it will be as if you were God to him.
EXO	4	17	너는 이 지팡이를 손에 잡고 이것으로 이적을 행할지니라	And thou shalt take this rod in thine hand, wherewith thou shalt do signs.	But take this staff in your hand so you can perform signs with it.”
EXO	4	18	모세가 장인 이드로에게로 돌아가서 그에게 이르되 내가 애굽에 있는 내 형제들에게로 돌아가서 그들이 생존하였는지 보려하오니 나로 가게 하소서 이드로가 그에게 평안히 가라 하니라	And Moses went and returned to Jethro his father in law, and said unto him, Let me go, I pray thee, and return unto my brethren which are in Egypt, and see whether they be yet alive. And Jethro said to Moses, Go in peace.	Then Moses went back to his father-in-law Jethro and said to him, “Please let me return to my brothers in Egypt to see if they are still alive.” “Go in peace,” Jethro replied.
EXO	4	19	여호와께서 미디안에서 모세에게 이르시되 애굽으로 돌아가라 네 생명을 찾던 자가 다 죽었느니라	And the Lord said unto Moses in Midian, Go, return into Egypt: for all the men are dead which sought thy life.	Now the LORD had said to Moses in Midian, “Go back to Egypt, for all the men who sought to kill you are dead.”
EXO	4	20	모세가 그 아내와 아들들을 나귀에 태우고 애굽으로 돌아가는데 하나님의 지팡이를 손에 잡았더라	And Moses took his wife and his sons, and set them upon an ass, and he returned to the land of Egypt: and Moses took the rod of God in his hand.	So Moses took his wife and sons, put them on a donkey, and headed back to Egypt. And he took the staff of God in his hand.
EXO	4	21	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 네가 애굽으로 돌아가거든 내가 네 손에 준 이적을 바로 앞에서 다 행하라 그러나 내가 그의 마음을 강퍅케 한즉 그가 백성을 놓지 아니하리니	And the Lord said unto Moses, When thou goest to return into Egypt, see that thou do all those wonders before Pharaoh, which I have put in thine hand: but I will harden his heart, that he shall not let the people go.	The LORD instructed Moses, “When you go back to Egypt, see that you perform before Pharaoh all the wonders that I have put within your power. But I will harden his heart so that he will not let the people go.
EXO	4	22	너는 바로에게 이르기를 여호와의 말씀에 이스라엘은 내 아들 내 장자라	And thou shalt say unto Pharaoh, Thus saith the Lord, Israel is my son, even my firstborn:	Then tell Pharaoh that this is what the LORD says: ‘Israel is My firstborn son,
EXO	4	23	내가 네게 이르기를 내 아들을 놓아서 나를 섬기게 하라 하여도 네가 놓기를 거절하니 내가 네 아들 네 장자를 죽이리라 하셨다 하라 하시니라	And I say unto thee, Let my son go, that he may serve me: and if thou refuse to let him go, behold, I will slay thy son, even thy firstborn.	and I told you to let My son go so that he may worship Me. But since you have refused to let him go, behold, I will kill your firstborn son!’”
EXO	4	24	여호와께서 길의 숙소에서 모세를 만나사 그를 죽이려 하시는지라	And it came to pass by the way in the inn, that the Lord met him, and sought to kill him.	Now at a lodging place along the way, the LORD met Moses and was about to kill him.
EXO	4	25	십보라가 차돌을 취하여 그 아들의 양피를 베어 모세의 발 앞에 던지며 가로되 당신은 참으로 내게 피 남편이로다 하니	Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her son, and cast it at his feet, and said, Surely a bloody husband art thou to me.	But Zipporah took a flint knife, cut off her son’s foreskin, and touched it to Moses’ feet. “Surely you are a bridegroom of blood to me,” she said.
EXO	4	26	여호와께서 모세를 놓으시니라 그 때에 십보라가 피 남편이라 함은 할례를 인함이었더라	So he let him go: then she said, A bloody husband thou art, because of the circumcision.	So the LORD let him alone. (When she said, “bridegroom of blood,” she was referring to the circumcision.)
EXO	4	27	여호와께서 아론에게 이르시되 광야에 가서 모세를 맞으라 하시매 그가 가서 하나님의 산에서 모세를 만나 그에게 입맞추니	And the Lord said to Aaron, Go into the wilderness to meet Moses. And he went, and met him in the mount of God, and kissed him.	Meanwhile, the LORD had said to Aaron, “Go and meet Moses in the wilderness.” So he went and met Moses at the mountain of God and kissed him.
EXO	4	28	모세가 여호와께서 자기에게 부탁하여 보내신 모든 말씀과 여호와께서 자기에게 명하신 모든 이적을 아론에게 고하니라	And Moses told Aaron all the words of the Lord who had sent him, and all the signs which he had commanded him.	And Moses told Aaron everything the LORD had sent him to say, and all the signs He had commanded him to perform.
EXO	4	29	모세와 아론이 가서 이스라엘 자손의 모든 장로를 모으고	And Moses and Aaron went and gathered together all the elders of the children of Israel:	Then Moses and Aaron went and assembled all the elders of the Israelites,
EXO	4	30	아론이 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 모든 말씀을 전하고 백성 앞에서 이적을 행하니	And Aaron spake all the words which the Lord had spoken unto Moses, and did the signs in the sight of the people.	and Aaron relayed everything the LORD had said to Moses. And Moses performed the signs before the people,
EXO	4	31	백성이 믿으며 여호와께서 이스라엘 자손을 돌아보시고 그 고난을 감찰하셨다 함을 듣고 머리 숙여 경배하였더라	And the people believed: and when they heard that the Lord had visited the children of Israel, and that he had looked upon their affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped.	and they believed. And when they heard that the LORD had attended to the Israelites and had seen their affliction, they bowed down and worshiped.
EXO	5	1	그 후에 모세와 아론이 가서 바로에게 이르되 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 말씀에 내 백성을 보내라 그들이 광야에서 내 앞에 절기를 지킬 것이니라 하셨나이다	And afterward Moses and Aaron went in, and told Pharaoh, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Let my people go, that they may hold a feast unto me in the wilderness.	After that, Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh and said, “This is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: ‘Let My people go, so that they may hold a feast to Me in the wilderness.’”
EXO	5	2	바로가 가로되 여호와가 누구관대 내가 그 말을 듣고 이스라엘을 보내겠느냐 나는 여호와를 알지 못하니 이스라엘도 보내지 아니하리라	And Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go.	But Pharaoh replied, “Who is the LORD that I should obey His voice and let Israel go? I do not know the LORD, and I will not let Israel go.”
EXO	5	3	그들이 가로되 히브리인의 하나님이 우리에게 나타나셨은즉 우리가 사흘길쯤 광야에 가서 우리 하나님 여호와께 희생을 드리려하오니 가기를 허락하소서 여호와께서 온역이나 칼로 우리를 치실까 두려워하나이다	And they said, The God of the Hebrews hath met with us: let us go, we pray thee, three days’ journey into the desert, and sacrifice unto the Lord our God; lest he fall upon us with pestilence, or with the sword.	“The God of the Hebrews has met with us,” they answered. “Please let us go on a three-day journey into the wilderness to sacrifice to the LORD our God, or He may strike us with plagues or with the sword.”
EXO	5	4	애굽 왕이 그들에게 이르되 모세와 아론아 너희가 어찌하여 백성으로 역사를 쉬게 하느냐 가서 너희의 역사나 하라	And the king of Egypt said unto them, Wherefore do ye, Moses and Aaron, let the people from their works? get you unto your burdens.	But the king of Egypt said to them, “Moses and Aaron, why do you draw the people away from their work? Get back to your labor!”
EXO	5	5	또 가로되 이제 나라에 이 백성이 많거늘 너희가 그들로 역사를 쉬게 하는도다 하고	And Pharaoh said, Behold, the people of the land now are many, and ye make them rest from their burdens.	Pharaoh also said, “Look, the people of the land are now numerous, and you would be stopping them from their labor.”
EXO	5	6	바로가 당일에 백성의 간역자들과 패장들에게 명하여 가로되	And Pharaoh commanded the same day the taskmasters of the people, and their officers, saying,	That same day Pharaoh commanded the taskmasters of the people and their foremen:
EXO	5	7	너희는 백성에게 다시는 벽돌 소용의 짚을 전과 같이 주지 말고 그들로 가서 스스로 줍게 하라	Ye shall no more give the people straw to make brick, as heretofore: let them go and gather straw for themselves.	“You shall no longer supply the people with straw for making bricks. They must go and gather their own straw.
EXO	5	8	또 그들의 전에 만든 벽돌 수효대로 그들로 만들게 하고 감하지 말라 그들이 게으르므로 소리질러 이르기를 우리가 가서 우리 하나님께 희생을 드리자 하나니	And the tale of the bricks, which they did make heretofore, ye shall lay upon them; ye shall not diminish ought thereof: for they be idle; therefore they cry, saying, Let us go and sacrifice to our God.	But require of them the same quota of bricks as before; do not reduce it. For they are lazy; that is why they are crying out, ‘Let us go and sacrifice to our God.’
EXO	5	9	그 사람들의 고역을 무겁게 함으로 수고롭게 하여 그들로 거짓말을 듣지 않게 하라	Let there more work be laid upon the men, that they may labour therein; and let them not regard vain words.	Make the work harder on the men so they will be occupied and pay no attention to these lies.”
EXO	5	10	간역자들과 패장들이 나아가 백성에게 일러 가로되 바로의 말씀에 내가 너희에게 짚을 주지 아니하리니	And the taskmasters of the people went out, and their officers, and they spake to the people, saying, Thus saith Pharaoh, I will not give you straw.	So the taskmasters and foremen of the people went out and said to them, “This is what Pharaoh says: ‘I am no longer giving you straw.
EXO	5	11	너희는 짚을 얻을 곳으로 가서 주우라 너희 일은 조금도 감하지 아니하리라 하셨느니라	Go ye, get you straw where ye can find it: yet not ought of your work shall be diminished.	Go and get your own straw wherever you can find it; but your workload will in no way be reduced.’”
EXO	5	12	백성이 애굽 온 땅에 흩어져 곡초 그루터기를 거두어다가 짚을 대신하니	So the people were scattered abroad throughout all the land of Egypt to gather stubble instead of straw.	So the people scattered all over the land of Egypt to gather stubble for straw.
EXO	5	13	간역자들이 그들을 독촉하여 가로되 너희는 짚이 있을 때와 같이 당일 일을 당일에 마치라 하며	And the taskmasters hasted them, saying, Fulfil your works, your daily tasks, as when there was straw.	The taskmasters kept pressing them, saying, “Fulfill your quota each day, just as you did when straw was provided.”
EXO	5	14	바로의 간역자들이 자기들의 세운바 이스라엘 자손의 패장들을 때리며 가로되 너희가 어찌하여 어제와 오늘에 만드는 벽돌의 수효를 전과 같이 채우지 아니하였느냐 하니라	And the officers of the children of Israel, which Pharaoh’s taskmasters had set over them, were beaten, and demanded, Wherefore have ye not fulfilled your task in making brick both yesterday and to day, as heretofore?	Then the Israelite foremen, whom Pharaoh’s taskmasters had set over the people, were beaten and asked, “Why have you not fulfilled your quota of bricks yesterday or today, as you did before?”
EXO	5	15	이스라엘 자손의 패장들이 가서 바로에게 호소하여 가로되 왕은 어찌하여 종들에게 이같이 하시나이까	Then the officers of the children of Israel came and cried unto Pharaoh, saying, Wherefore dealest thou thus with thy servants?	So the Israelite foremen went and appealed to Pharaoh: “Why are you treating your servants this way?
EXO	5	16	종들에게 짚을 주지 아니하고 그들이 우리더러 벽돌을 만들라 하나이다 종들이 매를 맞으오니 이는 왕의 백성의 허물이니이다	There is no straw given unto thy servants, and they say to us, Make brick: and, behold, thy servants are beaten; but the fault is in thine own people.	No straw has been given to your servants, yet we are told, ‘Make bricks!’ Look, your servants are being beaten, but the fault is with your own people.”
EXO	5	17	바로가 가로되 너희가 게으르다 게으르다 그러므로 너희가 이르기를 우리가 가서 여호와께 희생을 드리자 하는도다	But he said, Ye are idle, ye are idle: therefore ye say, Let us go and do sacrifice to the Lord.	“You are slackers!” Pharaoh replied. “Slackers! That is why you keep saying, ‘Let us go and sacrifice to the LORD.’
EXO	5	18	이제 가서 일하라 짚은 너희에게 주지 않을지라도 너희가 벽돌을 여수히 바칠지니라	Go therefore now, and work; for there shall no straw be given you, yet shall ye deliver the tale of bricks.	Now get to work. You will be given no straw, yet you must deliver the full quota of bricks.”
EXO	5	19	이스라엘 자손의 패장들이 너희의 매일 만드는 벽돌을 조금도 감하지 못하리라 함을 듣고 화가 몸에 미친 줄 알고	And the officers of the children of Israel did see that they were in evil case, after it was said, Ye shall not minish ought from your bricks of your daily task.	The Israelite foremen realized they were in trouble when they were told, “You must not reduce your daily quota of bricks.”
EXO	5	20	그들이 바로를 떠나 나올 때에 모세와 아론이 길에 선 것을 만나	And they met Moses and Aaron, who stood in the way, as they came forth from Pharaoh:	When they left Pharaoh, they confronted Moses and Aaron, who stood waiting to meet them.
EXO	5	21	그들에게 이르되 너희가 우리로 바로의 눈과 그 신하의 눈에 미운 물건이 되게 하고 그들의 손에 칼을 주어 우리를 죽이게 하는도다 여호와는 너희를 감찰하시고 판단하시기를 원하노라	And they said unto them, The Lord look upon you, and judge; because ye have made our savour to be abhorred in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword in their hand to slay us.	“May the LORD look upon you and judge you,” the foremen said, “for you have made us a stench before Pharaoh and his officials; you have placed in their hand a sword to kill us!”
EXO	5	22	모세가 여호와께 돌아와서 고하되 주여 어찌하여 이 백성으로 학대를 당케 하셨나이까 어찌하여 나를 보내셨나이까	And Moses returned unto the Lord, and said, Lord, wherefore hast thou so evil entreated this people? why is it that thou hast sent me?	So Moses returned to the LORD and asked, “Lord, why have You brought trouble upon this people? Is this why You sent me?
EXO	5	23	내가 바로에게 와서 주의 이름으로 말함으로부터 그가 이 백성을 더 학대하며 주께서도 주의 백성을 구원치 아니하시나이다	For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in thy name, he hath done evil to this people; neither hast thou delivered thy people at all.	Ever since I went to Pharaoh to speak in Your name, he has brought trouble on this people, and You have not delivered Your people in any way.”
EXO	6	1	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 이제 내가 바로에게 하는 일을 네가 보리라 강한 손을 더하므로 바로가 그들을 보내리라 강한 손을 더하므로 바로가 그들을 그 땅에서 쫓아 내리라	Then the Lord said unto Moses, Now shalt thou see what I will do to Pharaoh: for with a strong hand shall he let them go, and with a strong hand shall he drive them out of his land.	But the LORD said to Moses, “Now you will see what I will do to Pharaoh, for because of My mighty hand he will let the people go; because of My strong hand he will drive them out of his land.”
EXO	6	2	하나님이 모세에게 말씀하여 가라사대 나는 여호와로라	And God spake unto Moses, and said unto him, I am the Lord:	God also told Moses, “I am the LORD.
EXO	6	3	내가 아브라함과 이삭과 야곱에게 전능의 하나님으로 나타났으나 나의 이름을 여호와로는 그들에게 알리지 아니하였고	And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name of God Almighty, but by my name Jehovah was I not known to them.	I appeared to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob as God Almighty, but by My name the LORD I did not make Myself known to them.
EXO	6	4	가나안 땅 곧 그들의 우거하는 땅을 주기로 그들과 언약하였더니	And I have also established my covenant with them, to give them the land of Canaan, the land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were strangers.	I also established My covenant with them to give them the land of Canaan, the land where they lived as foreigners.
EXO	6	5	이제 애굽 사람이 종을 삼은 이스라엘 자손의 신음을 듣고 나의 언약을 기억하노라	And I have also heard the groaning of the children of Israel, whom the Egyptians keep in bondage; and I have remembered my covenant.	Furthermore, I have heard the groaning of the Israelites, whom the Egyptians are enslaving, and I have remembered My covenant.
EXO	6	6	그러므로 이스라엘 자손에게 말하기를 나는 여호와라 내가 애굽 사람의 무거운 짐 밑에서 너희를 빼어 내며 그 고역에서 너희를 건지며 편 팔과 큰 재앙으로 너희를 구속하여	Wherefore say unto the children of Israel, I am the Lord, and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will rid you out of their bondage, and I will redeem you with a stretched out arm, and with great judgments:	Therefore tell the Israelites: ‘I am the LORD, and I will bring you out from under the yoke of the Egyptians and deliver you from their bondage. I will redeem you with an outstretched arm and with mighty acts of judgment.
EXO	6	7	너희로 내 백성을 삼고 나는 너희 하나님이 되리니 나는 애굽 사람의 무거운 짐 밑에서 너희를 빼어낸 너희 하나님 여호와인줄 너희가 알지라	And I will take you to me for a people, and I will be to you a God: and ye shall know that I am the Lord your God, which bringeth you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians.	I will take you as My own people, and I will be your God. Then you will know that I am the LORD your God, who brought you out from under the yoke of the Egyptians.
EXO	6	8	내가 아브라함과 이삭과 야곱에게 주기로 맹세한 땅으로 너희를 인도하고 그 땅을 너희에게 주어 기업을 삼게 하리라 나는 여호와로라 하셨다 하라	And I will bring you in unto the land, concerning the which I did swear to give it to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; and I will give it you for an heritage: I am the Lord.	And I will bring you into the land that I swore to give to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. I will give it to you as a possession. I am the LORD!’”
EXO	6	9	모세가 이와 같이 이스라엘 자손에게 전하나 그들이 마음의 상함과 역사의 혹독함을 인하여 모세를 듣지 아니하였더라	And Moses spake so unto the children of Israel: but they hearkened not unto Moses for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage.	Moses relayed this message to the Israelites, but on account of their broken spirit and cruel bondage, they did not listen to him.
EXO	6	10	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	So the LORD said to Moses,
EXO	6	11	들어가서 애굽 왕 바로에게 말하여 이스라엘 자손을 그 땅에서 내어 보내게 하라	Go in, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, that he let the children of Israel go out of his land.	“Go and tell Pharaoh king of Egypt to let the Israelites go out of his land.”
EXO	6	12	모세가 여호와 앞에 고하여 가로되 이스라엘 자손도 나를 듣지 아니하였거든 바로가 어찌 들으리이까 나는 입이 둔한 자니이다	And Moses spake before the Lord, saying, Behold, the children of Israel have not hearkened unto me; how then shall Pharaoh hear me, who am of uncircumcised lips?	But in the LORD’s presence Moses replied, “If the Israelites will not listen to me, then why would Pharaoh listen to me, since I am unskilled in speech?”
EXO	6	13	여호와께서 모세와 아론에게 말씀하사 그들로 이스라엘 자손과 애굽 왕 바로에게 명을 전하고 이스라엘 자손을 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내게 하시니라	And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, and gave them a charge unto the children of Israel, and unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt.	Then the LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron and gave them a charge concerning both the Israelites and Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring the Israelites out of the land of Egypt.
EXO	6	14	그 조상을 따라 집의 어른은 이러하니라 이스라엘의 장자 르우벤의 아들 하녹과 발루와 헤스론과 갈미니 이들은 르우벤의 족장이요	These be the heads of their fathers’ houses: The sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel; Hanoch, and Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi: these be the families of Reuben.	These were the heads of their fathers’ houses: The sons of Reuben, the firstborn of Israel, were Hanoch and Pallu, Hezron and Carmi. These were the clans of Reuben.
EXO	6	15	시므온의 아들 여무엘과 야민과 오핫과 야긴과 소할과 가나안 여인의 소생 사울이니 이들은 시므온의 족장이요	And the sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman: these are the families of Simeon.	The sons of Simeon were Jemuel, Jamin, Ohad, Jachin, Zohar, and Shaul, the son of a Canaanite woman. These were the clans of Simeon.
EXO	6	16	레위의 아들들의 이름은 그 연치대로 이러하니 게르손과 고핫과 므라리요 레위의 수는 일백삼십칠 세이었으며	And these are the names of the sons of Levi according to their generations; Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari: and the years of the life of Levi were an hundred thirty and seven years.	These were the names of the sons of Levi according to their records: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. Levi lived 137 years.
EXO	6	17	게르손의 아들들은 그 가족대로 립니와 시므이요	The sons of Gershon; Libni, and Shimi, according to their families.	The sons of Gershon were Libni and Shimei, by their clans.
EXO	6	18	고핫의 아들들은 아므람과 이스할과 헤브론과 웃시엘이요 고핫의 수는 일백삼십삼 세이었으며	And the sons of Kohath; Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel: and the years of the life of Kohath were an hundred thirty and three years.	The sons of Kohath were Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel. Kohath lived 133 years.
EXO	6	19	므라리의 아들은 마흘리와 무시니 이들은 그 연치대로 레위의 족장이요	And the sons of Merari; Mahali and Mushi: these are the families of Levi according to their generations.	The sons of Merari were Mahli and Mushi. These were the clans of the Levites according to their records.
EXO	6	20	아므람이 그 아비의 누이 요게벳을 아내로 취하였고 그가 아론과 모세를 낳았으며 아므람의 수는 일백삼십칠 세이었으며	And Amram took him Jochebed his father’s sister to wife; and she bare him Aaron and Moses: and the years of the life of Amram were an hundred and thirty and seven years.	And Amram married his father’s sister Jochebed, and she bore him Aaron and Moses. Amram lived 137 years.
EXO	6	21	이스할의 아들은 고라와 네벡과 시그리요	And the sons of Izhar; Korah, and Nepheg, and Zichri.	The sons of Izhar were Korah, Nepheg, and Zichri.
EXO	6	22	웃시엘의 아들은 미사엘과 엘사반과 시드리요	And the sons of Uzziel; Mishael, and Elzaphan, and Zithri.	The sons of Uzziel were Mishael, Elzaphan, and Sithri.
EXO	6	23	아론이 암미나답의 딸 나손의 누이 엘리세바를 아내로 취하였고 그가 나답과 아비후와 엘르아살과 이다말을 낳았으며	And Aaron took him Elisheba, daughter of Amminadab, sister of Naashon, to wife; and she bare him Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.	And Aaron married Elisheba, the daughter of Amminadab and sister of Nahshon, and she bore him Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
EXO	6	24	고라의 아들은 앗실과 엘가나와 아비아삽이니 이들은 고라 사람의 족장이요	And the sons of Korah; Assir, and Elkanah, and Abiasaph: these are the families of the Korhites.	The sons of Korah were Assir, Elkanah, and Abiasaph. These were the clans of the Korahites.
EXO	6	25	아론의 아들 엘르아살이 부디엘의 딸 중에서 아내를 취하였고 그가 비느하스를 낳았으니 이들은 레위 사람의 조상을 따라 가족의 어른들이라	And Eleazar Aaron’s son took him one of the daughters of Putiel to wife; and she bare him Phinehas: these are the heads of the fathers of the Levites according to their families.	Aaron’s son Eleazar married one of the daughters of Putiel, and she bore him Phinehas. These were the heads of the Levite families by their clans.
EXO	6	26	이스라엘 자손을 그 군대대로 애굽 땅에서 인도하라 하신 여호와의 명을 받은 자는 이 아론과 모세요	These are that Aaron and Moses, to whom the Lord said, Bring out the children of Israel from the land of Egypt according to their armies.	It was this Aaron and Moses to whom the LORD said, “Bring the Israelites out of the land of Egypt by their divisions.”
EXO	6	27	애굽 왕 바로에게 이스라엘 자손을 애굽에서 내어 보내라 말한 자도 이 모세와 아론이었더라	These are they which spake to Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring out the children of Israel from Egypt: these are that Moses and Aaron.	Moses and Aaron were the ones who spoke to Pharaoh king of Egypt in order to bring the Israelites out of Egypt.
EXO	6	28	여호와께서 애굽 땅에서 모세에게 말씀하시던 날에	And it came to pass on the day when the Lord spake unto Moses in the land of Egypt,	Now on the day that the LORD spoke to Moses in Egypt,
EXO	6	29	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대 나는 여호와라 내가 네게 이르는 바를 너는 애굽 왕 바로에게 다 고하라	That the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, I am the Lord: speak thou unto Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I say unto thee.	He said to him, “I am the LORD; tell Pharaoh king of Egypt everything I say to you.”
EXO	6	30	모세가 여호와 앞에서 고하되 나는 입이 둔한 자이오니 바로가 어찌 나를 들으리이까	And Moses said before the Lord, Behold, I am of uncircumcised lips, and how shall Pharaoh hearken unto me?	But in the LORD’s presence Moses replied, “Since I am unskilled in speech, why would Pharaoh listen to me?”
EXO	7	1	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 볼지어다 내가 너로 바로에게 신이 되게 하였은즉 네 형 아론은 네 대언자가 되리니	And the Lord said unto Moses, See, I have made thee a god to Pharaoh: and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet.	The LORD answered Moses, “See, I have made you like God to Pharaoh, and your brother Aaron will be your prophet.
EXO	7	2	내가 네게 명한 바를 너는 네 형 아론에게 말하고 그는 바로에게 말하여 그로 이스라엘 자손을 그 땅에서 보내게 할지니라	Thou shalt speak all that I command thee: and Aaron thy brother shall speak unto Pharaoh, that he send the children of Israel out of his land.	You are to speak all that I command you, and your brother Aaron is to tell Pharaoh to let the Israelites go out of his land.
EXO	7	3	내가 바로의 마음을 강퍅케 하고 나의 표징과 나의 이적을 애굽 땅에 많이 행하리라마는	And I will harden Pharaoh’s heart, and multiply my signs and my wonders in the land of Egypt.	But I will harden Pharaoh’s heart, and though I will multiply My signs and wonders in the land of Egypt,
EXO	7	4	바로가 너희를 듣지 아니할터인즉 내가 내 손을 애굽에 더하여 여러 큰 재앙을 내리고 내 군대 내 백성 이스라엘 자손을 그 땅에서 인도하여 낼지라	But Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, that I may lay my hand upon Egypt, and bring forth mine armies, and my people the children of Israel, out of the land of Egypt by great judgments.	Pharaoh will not listen to you. Then I will lay My hand on Egypt, and by mighty acts of judgment I will bring the divisions of My people the Israelites out of the land of Egypt.
EXO	7	5	내가 내 손을 애굽 위에 펴서 이스라엘 자손을 그 땅에서 인도하여 낼 때에야 애굽 사람이 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라 하시매	And the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord, when I stretch forth mine hand upon Egypt, and bring out the children of Israel from among them.	And the Egyptians will know that I am the LORD, when I stretch out My hand against Egypt and bring the Israelites out from among them.”
EXO	7	6	모세와 아론이 여호와께서 자기들에게 명하신 대로 곧 그대로 행하였더라	And Moses and Aaron did as the Lord commanded them, so did they.	So Moses and Aaron did just as the LORD had commanded them.
EXO	7	7	그들이 바로에게 말할 때에 모세는 팔십 세이었고 아론은 팔십삼 세이었더라	And Moses was fourscore years old, and Aaron fourscore and three years old, when they spake unto Pharaoh.	Moses was eighty years old and Aaron was eighty-three when they spoke to Pharaoh.
EXO	7	8	여호와께서 모세와 아론에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,	The LORD said to Moses and Aaron,
EXO	7	9	바로가 너희에게 이르기를 너희는 이적을 보이라 하거든 너는 아론에게 명하기를 너의 지팡이를 가져 바로 앞에 던지라 하라 그것이 뱀이 되리라	When Pharaoh shall speak unto you, saying, Shew a miracle for you: then thou shalt say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and cast it before Pharaoh, and it shall become a serpent.	“When Pharaoh tells you, ‘Perform a miracle,’ you are to say to Aaron, ‘Take your staff and throw it down before Pharaoh,’ and it will become a serpent.”
EXO	7	10	모세와 아론이 바로에게 가서 여호와의 명하신 대로 행하여 아론이 바로와 그 신하 앞에 지팡이를 던졌더니 뱀이 된지라	And Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharaoh, and they did so as the Lord had commanded: and Aaron cast down his rod before Pharaoh, and before his servants, and it became a serpent.	So Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh and did just as the LORD had commanded. Aaron threw his staff down before Pharaoh and his officials, and it became a serpent.
EXO	7	11	바로도 박사와 박수를 부르매 그 애굽 술객들도 그 술법으로 그와 같이 행하되	Then Pharaoh also called the wise men and the sorcerers: now the magicians of Egypt, they also did in like manner with their enchantments.	But Pharaoh called the wise men and sorcerers and magicians of Egypt, and they also did the same things by their magic arts.
EXO	7	12	각 사람이 지팡이를 던지매 뱀이 되었으나 아론의 지팡이가 그들의 지팡이를 삼키니라	For they cast down every man his rod, and they became serpents: but Aaron’s rod swallowed up their rods.	Each one threw down his staff, and it became a serpent. But Aaron’s staff swallowed up the other staffs.
EXO	7	13	그러나 바로의 마음이 강퍅하여 그들을 듣지 아니하니 여호와의 말씀과 같더라	And he hardened Pharaoh’s heart, that he hearkened not unto them; as the Lord had said.	Still, Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he would not listen to them, just as the LORD had said.
EXO	7	14	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 바로의 마음이 완강하여 백성 보내기를 거절하는도다	And the Lord said unto Moses, Pharaoh’s heart is hardened, he refuseth to let the people go.	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Pharaoh’s heart is unyielding; he refuses to let the people go.
EXO	7	15	아침에 너는 바로에게로 가라 그가 물로 나오리니 너는 하숫가에 서서 그를 맞으며 그 뱀 되었던 지팡이를 손에 잡고	Get thee unto Pharaoh in the morning; lo, he goeth out unto the water; and thou shalt stand by the river’s brink against he come; and the rod which was turned to a serpent shalt thou take in thine hand.	Go to Pharaoh in the morning as you see him walking out to the water. Wait on the bank of the Nile to meet him, and take in your hand the staff that was changed into a snake.
EXO	7	16	그에게 이르기를 히브리 사람의 하나님 여호와께서 나를 왕에게 보내어 이르시되 내 백성을 보내라 그들이 광야에서 나를 섬길 것이니라 하였으나 이제까지 네가 듣지 아니하도다	And thou shalt say unto him, The Lord God of the Hebrews hath sent me unto thee, saying, Let my people go, that they may serve me in the wilderness: and, behold, hitherto thou wouldest not hear.	Then say to him, ‘The LORD, the God of the Hebrews, has sent me to tell you: Let My people go, so that they may worship Me in the wilderness. But you have not listened until now.
EXO	7	17	여호와가 이같이 이르노니 네가 이로 인하여 나를 여호와인줄 알리라 하셨느니라 볼지어다 내가 내 손의 지팡이로 하수를 치면 그것이 피로 변하고	Thus saith the Lord, In this thou shalt know that I am the Lord: behold, I will smite with the rod that is in mine hand upon the waters which are in the river, and they shall be turned to blood.	This is what the LORD says: By this you will know that I am the LORD. Behold, with the staff in my hand I will strike the water of the Nile, and it will turn to blood.
EXO	7	18	하수의 고기가 죽고 그 물에서는 악취가 나리니 애굽 사람들이 그 물 마시기를 싫어하리라 하라	And the fish that is in the river shall die, and the river shall stink; and the Egyptians shall lothe to drink of the water of the river.	The fish in the Nile will die, the river will stink, and the Egyptians will be unable to drink its water.’”
EXO	7	19	여호와께서 또 모세에게 이르시되 아론에게 명하기를 네 지팡이를 잡고 네 팔을 애굽의 물들과 하수들과 운하와 못과 모든 호수 위에 펴라 하라 그것들이 피가 되리니 애굽 온 땅에와 나무 그릇에와 돌 그릇에 모두 피가 있으리라	And the Lord spake unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and stretch out thine hand upon the waters of Egypt, upon their streams, upon their rivers, and upon their ponds, and upon all their pools of water, that they may become blood; and that there may be blood throughout all the land of Egypt, both in vessels of wood, and in vessels of stone.	And the LORD said to Moses, “Tell Aaron, ‘Take your staff and stretch out your hand over the waters of Egypt—over their rivers and canals and ponds and reservoirs—that they may become blood.’ There will be blood throughout the land of Egypt, even in the vessels of wood and stone.”
EXO	7	20	모세와 아론이 여호와의 명하신 대로 행하여 바로와 그 신하의 목전에서 지팡이를 들어 하수를 치니 그 물이 다 피로 변하고	And Moses and Aaron did so, as the Lord commanded; and he lifted up the rod, and smote the waters that were in the river, in the sight of Pharaoh, and in the sight of his servants; and all the waters that were in the river were turned to blood.	Moses and Aaron did just as the LORD had commanded; in the presence of Pharaoh and his officials, Aaron raised the staff and struck the water of the Nile, and all the water was turned to blood.
EXO	7	21	하수의 고기가 죽고 그 물에서는 악취가 나니 애굽 사람들이 하수물을 마시지 못하며 애굽 온 땅에는 피가 있으나	And the fish that was in the river died; and the river stank, and the Egyptians could not drink of the water of the river; and there was blood throughout all the land of Egypt.	The fish in the Nile died, and the river smelled so bad that the Egyptians could not drink its water. And there was blood throughout the land of Egypt.
EXO	7	22	애굽 술객들도 자기 술법으로 그와 같이 행하므로 바로의 마음이 강퍅하여 그들을 듣지 아니하니 여호와의 말씀과 같더라	And the magicians of Egypt did so with their enchantments: and Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, neither did he hearken unto them; as the Lord had said.	But the magicians of Egypt did the same things by their magic arts. So Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he would not listen to Moses and Aaron, just as the LORD had said.
EXO	7	23	바로가 돌이켜 궁으로 들어가고 그 일에도 관념하지 아니하였고	And Pharaoh turned and went into his house, neither did he set his heart to this also.	Instead, Pharaoh turned around, went into his palace, and did not take any of this to heart.
EXO	7	24	애굽 사람들은 하수 물을 마실 수 없으므로 하숫가를 두루 파서 마실 물을 구하였더라	And all the Egyptians digged round about the river for water to drink; for they could not drink of the water of the river.	So all the Egyptians dug around the Nile for water to drink, because they could not drink the water from the river.
EXO	7	25	여호와께서 하수를 치신 후 칠 일이 지나니라	And seven days were fulfilled, after that the Lord had smitten the river.	And seven full days passed after the LORD had struck the Nile.
EXO	8	1	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 너는 바로에게 가서 그에게 이르기를 여호와의 말씀에 내 백성을 보내라 그들이 나를 섬길 것이니라	And the Lord spake unto Moses, Go unto Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord, Let my people go, that they may serve me.	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Go to Pharaoh and tell him that this is what the LORD says: ‘Let My people go, so that they may worship Me.
EXO	8	2	네가 만일 보내기를 거절하면 내가 개구리로 너의 온 지경을 칠지라	And if thou refuse to let them go, behold, I will smite all thy borders with frogs:	But if you refuse to let them go, I will plague your whole country with frogs.
EXO	8	3	개구리가 하수에서 무수히 생기고 올라와서 네 궁에와 네 침실에와 네 침상 위에와 네 신하의 집에와 네 백성에게와 네 화덕에와 네 떡반죽 그릇에 들어갈지며	And the river shall bring forth frogs abundantly, which shall go up and come into thine house, and into thy bedchamber, and upon thy bed, and into the house of thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thine ovens, and into thy kneadingtroughs:	The Nile will teem with frogs, and they will come into your palace and up to your bedroom and onto your bed, into the houses of your officials and your people, and into your ovens and kneading bowls.
EXO	8	4	개구리가 네게와 네 백성에게와 네 모든 신하에게 오르리라 하셨다 하라	And the frogs shall come up both on thee, and upon thy people, and upon all thy servants.	The frogs will come up on you and your people and all your officials.’”
EXO	8	5	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 아론에게 명하기를 네 지팡이를 잡고 네 팔을 강들과 운하들과 못 위에 펴서 개구리로 애굽 땅에 올라오게 하라 할지니라	And the Lord spake unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch forth thine hand with thy rod over the streams, over the rivers, and over the ponds, and cause frogs to come up upon the land of Egypt.	And the LORD said to Moses, “Tell Aaron, ‘Stretch out your hand with your staff over the rivers and canals and ponds, and cause the frogs to come up onto the land of Egypt.’”
EXO	8	6	아론이 팔을 애굽 물들 위에 펴매 개구리가 올라와서 애굽 땅에 덮이니	And Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt; and the frogs came up, and covered the land of Egypt.	So Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt, and the frogs came up and covered the land of Egypt.
EXO	8	7	술객들도 자기 술법대로 이와 같이 하여 개구리로 애굽 땅에 올라오게 하였더라	And the magicians did so with their enchantments, and brought up frogs upon the land of Egypt.	But the magicians did the same thing by their magic arts, and they also brought frogs up onto the land of Egypt.
EXO	8	8	바로가 모세와 아론을 불러 이르되 여호와께 구하여 개구리를 나와 내 백성에게서 떠나게 하라 내가 이 백성을 보내리니 그들이 여호와께 희생을 드릴 것이니라	Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said, Intreat the Lord, that he may take away the frogs from me, and from my people; and I will let the people go, that they may do sacrifice unto the Lord.	Pharaoh summoned Moses and Aaron and said, “Pray to the LORD to take the frogs away from me and my people. Then I will let your people go, that they may sacrifice to the LORD.”
EXO	8	9	모세가 바로에게 이르되 내가 왕과 왕의 신하와 왕의 백성을 위하여 어느 때에 구하여 이 개구리를 왕과 왕궁에서 끊어서 하수에만 있게 하오리이까 내게 보이소서	And Moses said unto Pharaoh, Glory over me: when shall I intreat for thee, and for thy servants, and for thy people, to destroy the frogs from thee and thy houses, that they may remain in the river only?	Moses said to Pharaoh, “You may have the honor over me. When shall I pray for you and your officials and your people that the frogs (except for those in the Nile) may be taken away from you and your houses?”
EXO	8	10	그가 가로되 내일이니라 모세가 가로되 왕의 말씀대로 하여 왕으로 우리 하나님 여호와와 같은 이가 없는 줄을 알게 하리니	And he said, To morrow. And he said, Be it according to thy word: that thou mayest know that there is none like unto the Lord our God.	“Tomorrow,” Pharaoh answered. “May it be as you say,” Moses replied, “so that you may know that there is no one like the LORD our God.
EXO	8	11	개구리가 왕과 왕궁과 왕의 신하와 왕의 백성을 떠나서 하수에만 있으리이다 하고	And the frogs shall depart from thee, and from thy houses, and from thy servants, and from thy people; they shall remain in the river only.	The frogs will depart from you and your houses and your officials and your people; they will remain only in the Nile.”
EXO	8	12	모세와 아론이 바로를 떠나 나가서 바로에게 내리신 개구리에 대하여 모세가 여호와께 간구하매	And Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh: and Moses cried unto the Lord because of the frogs which he had brought against Pharaoh.	After Moses and Aaron had left Pharaoh, Moses cried out to the LORD for help with the frogs that He had brought against Pharaoh.
EXO	8	13	여호와께서 모세의 말대로 하시니 개구리가 집에서, 마당에서, 밭에서 나와서 죽은지라	And the Lord did according to the word of Moses; and the frogs died out of the houses, out of the villages, and out of the fields.	And the LORD did as Moses requested, and the frogs in the houses, the courtyards, and the fields died.
EXO	8	14	사람들이 모아 무더기로 쌓으니 땅에서 악취가 나더라	And they gathered them together upon heaps: and the land stank.	They were piled into countless heaps, and there was a terrible stench in the land.
EXO	8	15	그러나 바로가 숨을 통할 수 있음을 볼 때에 그 마음을 완강케 하여 그들을 듣지 아니하였으니 여호와의 말씀과 같더라	But when Pharaoh saw that there was respite, he hardened his heart, and hearkened not unto them; as the Lord had said.	When Pharaoh saw that there was relief, however, he hardened his heart and would not listen to Moses and Aaron, just as the LORD had said.
EXO	8	16	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 아론에게 명하기를 네 지팡이를 들어 땅의 티끌을 치라 하라 그것이 애굽 온 땅에서 이가 되리라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch out thy rod, and smite the dust of the land, that it may become lice throughout all the land of Egypt.	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Tell Aaron, ‘Stretch out your staff and strike the dust of the earth, that it may turn into swarms of gnats throughout the land of Egypt.’”
EXO	8	17	그들이 그대로 행할새 아론이 지팡이를 잡고 손을 들어 땅의 티끌을 치매 애굽 온 땅의 티끌이 다 이가 되어 사람과 생축에게 오르니	And they did so; for Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod, and smote the dust of the earth, and it became lice in man, and in beast; all the dust of the land became lice throughout all the land of Egypt.	This they did, and when Aaron stretched out his hand with his staff and struck the dust of the earth, gnats came upon man and beast. All the dust of the earth turned into gnats throughout the land of Egypt.
EXO	8	18	술객들이 자기 술법으로 이같이 행하여 이를 내려 하였으나 못 하였고 이는 사람과 생축에게 있은지라	And the magicians did so with their enchantments to bring forth lice, but they could not: so there were lice upon man, and upon beast.	The magicians tried to produce gnats using their magic arts, but they could not. And the gnats remained on man and beast.
EXO	8	19	술객이 바로에게 고하되 이는 하나님의 권능이니이다 하나 바로의 마음이 강퍅케 되어 그들을 듣지 아니하였으니 여호와의 말씀과 같더라	Then the magicians said unto Pharaoh, This is the finger of God: and Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them; as the Lord had said.	“This is the finger of God,” the magicians said to Pharaoh. But Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he would not listen to them, just as the LORD had said.
EXO	8	20	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 아침에 일찍이 일어나 바로 앞에 서라 그가 물로 나오리니 그에게 이르기를 여호와의 말씀에 내 백성을 보내라 그들이 나를 섬길 것이니라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh; lo, he cometh forth to the water; and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord, Let my people go, that they may serve me.	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Get up early in the morning, and when Pharaoh goes out to the water, stand before him and tell him that this is what the LORD says: ‘Let My people go, so that they may worship Me.
EXO	8	21	네가 만일 내 백성을 보내지 아니하면 내가 너와 네 신하와 네 백성을 보내지 아니하면 내가 너와 네 신하와 네 백성과 네 집들에 파리 떼를 보내리니 애굽 사람의 집집에 파리 떼가 가득할 것이며 그들의 거하는 땅에도 그러하리라	Else, if thou wilt not let my people go, behold, I will send swarms of flies upon thee, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thy houses: and the houses of the Egyptians shall be full of swarms of flies, and also the ground whereon they are.	But if you will not let My people go, I will send swarms of flies upon you and your officials and your people and your houses. The houses of the Egyptians and even the ground where they stand will be full of flies.
EXO	8	22	그 날에 내가 내 백성의 거하는 고센 땅을 구별하여 그곳에는 파리 떼가 없게 하리니 이로 말미암아 나는 세상 중의 여호와인 줄을 네가 알게 될 것이라	And I will sever in that day the land of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there; to the end thou mayest know that I am the Lord in the midst of the earth.	But on that day I will give special treatment to the land of Goshen, where My people live; no swarms of flies will be found there. In this way you will know that I, the LORD, am in the land.
EXO	8	23	내가 내 백성과 네 백성 사이에 구별을 두리니 내일 이 표징이 있으리라 하셨다 하라 하시고	And I will put a division between my people and thy people: to morrow shall this sign be.	I will make a distinction between My people and your people. This sign will take place tomorrow.’”
EXO	8	24	여호와께서 그와 같이 하시니 무수한 파리 떼가 바로의 궁에와 그 신하의 집에와 애굽 전국에 이르니 파리 떼로 인하여 땅이 해를 받더라	And the Lord did so; and there came a grievous swarm of flies into the house of Pharaoh, and into his servants’ houses, and into all the land of Egypt: the land was corrupted by reason of the swarm of flies.	And the LORD did so. Thick swarms of flies poured into Pharaoh’s palace and into the houses of his officials. Throughout Egypt the land was ruined by swarms of flies.
EXO	8	25	바로가 모세와 아론을 불러 이르되 너희는 가서 이 땅에서 너희 하나님께 희생을 드리라	And Pharaoh called for Moses and for Aaron, and said, Go ye, sacrifice to your God in the land.	Then Pharaoh summoned Moses and Aaron and said, “Go, sacrifice to your God within this land.”
EXO	8	26	모세가 가로되 그리함은 불가하니이다 우리가 우리 하나님 여호와께 희생을 드리는 것은 애굽 사람의 미워하는 바이온즉 우리가 만일 애굽 사람의 목전에서 희생을 드리면 그들이 그것을 미워하여 우리를 돌로 치지 아니하리이까	And Moses said, It is not meet so to do; for we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to the Lord our God: lo, shall we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and will they not stone us?	But Moses replied, “It would not be right to do that, because the sacrifices we offer to the LORD our God would be detestable to the Egyptians. If we offer sacrifices that are detestable before the Egyptians, will they not stone us?
EXO	8	27	우리가 사흘길쯤 광야로 들어가서 우리 하나님 여호와께 희생을 드리되 우리에게 명하시는 대로 하려하나이다	We will go three days’ journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice to the Lord our God, as he shall command us.	We must make a three-day journey into the wilderness and sacrifice to the LORD our God as He commands us.”
EXO	8	28	바로가 가로되 내가 너희를 보내리니 너희가 너희 하나님 여호와께 광야에서 희생을 드릴 것이나 너무 멀리는 가지 말라 그런즉 너희는 나를 위하여 기도하라	And Pharaoh said, I will let you go, that ye may sacrifice to the Lord your God in the wilderness; only ye shall not go very far away: intreat for me.	Pharaoh answered, “I will let you go and sacrifice to the LORD your God in the wilderness, but you must not go very far. Now pray for me.”
EXO	8	29	모세가 가로되 내가 왕을 떠나 가서 여호와께 기도하리니 내일이면 파리 떼가 바로와 바로의 신하와 바로의 백성을 떠나려니와 바로는 이 백성을 보내어 여호와께 희생을 드리는 일에 다시 거짓을 행치 마소서 하고	And Moses said, Behold, I go out from thee, and I will intreat the Lord that the swarms of flies may depart from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people, to morrow: but let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more in not letting the people go to sacrifice to the Lord.	“As soon as I leave you,” Moses said, “I will pray to the LORD, so that tomorrow the swarms of flies will depart from Pharaoh and his officials and his people. But Pharaoh must not act deceitfully again by refusing to let the people go and sacrifice to the LORD.”
EXO	8	30	모세가 바로를 떠나 나와서 여호와께 기도하니	And Moses went out from Pharaoh, and intreated the Lord.	Then Moses left Pharaoh and prayed to the LORD,
EXO	8	31	여호와께서 모세의 말대로 하사 파리를 바로와 그 신하와 그 백성에게 몰수히 떠나게 하시니라	And the Lord did according to the word of Moses; and he removed the swarms of flies from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people; there remained not one.	and the LORD did as Moses requested. He removed the swarms of flies from Pharaoh and his officials and his people; not one fly remained.
EXO	8	32	그러나 바로가 이 때에도 마음을 완강케 하여 백성을 보내지 아니하였더라	And Pharaoh hardened his heart at this time also, neither would he let the people go.	But Pharaoh hardened his heart this time as well, and he would not let the people go.
EXO	9	1	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 바로에게 들어가서 그에게 이르라 히브리 사람의 하나님 여호와께서 말씀하시기를 내 백성을 보내라 그들이 나를 섬길 것이니라	Then the Lord said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh, and tell him, Thus saith the Lord God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve me.	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Go to Pharaoh and tell him that this is what the LORD, the God of the Hebrews, says: ‘Let My people go, so that they may worship Me.
EXO	9	2	네가 만일 그들 보내기를 거절하고 억지로 잡아 두면	For if thou refuse to let them go, and wilt hold them still,	But if you continue to restrain them and refuse to let them go,
EXO	9	3	여호와의 손이 들에 있는 네 생축 곧 말과 나귀와 약대와 우양에게 더하리니 심한 악질이 있을 것이며	Behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thy cattle which is in the field, upon the horses, upon the asses, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and upon the sheep: there shall be a very grievous murrain.	then the hand of the LORD will bring a severe plague on your livestock in the field—on your horses, donkeys, camels, herds, and flocks.
EXO	9	4	여호와가 이스라엘의 생축과 애굽의 생축을 구별하리니 이스라엘 자손에 속한 것은 하나도 죽지 아니하리라 하셨다 하라 하시고	And the Lord shall sever between the cattle of Israel and the cattle of Egypt: and there shall nothing die of all that is the children’s of Israel.	But the LORD will make a distinction between the livestock of Israel and the livestock of Egypt, so that no animal belonging to the Israelites will die.’”
EXO	9	5	여호와께서 기한을 정하여 가라사대 여호와가 내일 이 땅에서 이 일을 행하리라 하시더니	And the Lord appointed a set time, saying, To morrow the Lord shall do this thing in the land.	The LORD set a time, saying, “Tomorrow the LORD will do this in the land.”
EXO	9	6	이튿날에 여호와께서 이 일을 행하시니 애굽의 모든 생축은 죽었으나 이스라엘 자손의 생축은 하나도 죽지 아니한지라	And the Lord did that thing on the morrow, and all the cattle of Egypt died: but of the cattle of the children of Israel died not one.	And the next day the LORD did just that. All the livestock of the Egyptians died, but not one animal belonging to the Israelites died.
EXO	9	7	바로가 보내어 본즉 이스라엘의 생축은 하나도 죽지 아니하였더라 그러나 바로의 마음이 완강하여 백성을 보내지 아니하니라	And Pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was not one of the cattle of the Israelites dead. And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he did not let the people go.	Pharaoh sent officials and found that none of the livestock of the Israelites had died. But Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he would not let the people go.
EXO	9	8	여호와께서 모세와 아론에게 이르시되 너희는 풀무의 재 두 움큼을 가지고 모세가 바로의 목전에서 하늘을 향하여 날리라	And the Lord said unto Moses and unto Aaron, Take to you handfuls of ashes of the furnace, and let Moses sprinkle it toward the heaven in the sight of Pharaoh.	Then the LORD said to Moses and Aaron, “Take handfuls of soot from the furnace; in the sight of Pharaoh, Moses is to toss it into the air.
EXO	9	9	그 재가 애굽 온 땅의 티끌이 되어 애굽 온 땅의 사람과 짐승에게 붙어서 독종이 발하리라	And it shall become small dust in all the land of Egypt, and shall be a boil breaking forth with blains upon man, and upon beast, throughout all the land of Egypt.	It will become fine dust over all the land of Egypt, and festering boils will break out on man and beast throughout the land.”
EXO	9	10	그들이 풀무의 재를 가지고 바로 앞에 서서 모세가 하늘을 향하여 날리니 사람과 짐승에게 붙어 독종이 발하고	And they took ashes of the furnace, and stood before Pharaoh; and Moses sprinkled it up toward heaven; and it became a boil breaking forth with blains upon man, and upon beast.	So they took soot from the furnace and stood before Pharaoh. Moses tossed it into the air, and festering boils broke out on man and beast.
EXO	9	11	술객도 독종으로 인하여 모세 앞에 서지 못하니 독종이 술객들로부터 애굽 모든 사람에게 발하였음이라	And the magicians could not stand before Moses because of the boils; for the boil was upon the magicians, and upon all the Egyptians.	The magicians could not stand before Moses, because the boils had broken out on them and on all the Egyptians.
EXO	9	12	그러나 여호와께서 바로의 마음을 강퍅케 하셨으므로 그들을 듣지 아니하였으니 여호와께서 모세에게 말씀하심과 같더라	And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he hearkened not unto them; as the Lord had spoken unto Moses.	But the LORD hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he would not listen to them, just as the LORD had said to Moses.
EXO	9	13	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 아침에 일찍이 일어나 바로 앞에 서서 그에게 이르기를 히브리 사람의 하나님 여호와의 말씀에 내 백성을 보내라 그들이 나를 섬길 것이니라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve me.	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Get up early in the morning, stand before Pharaoh, and tell him that this is what the LORD, the God of the Hebrews, says: ‘Let My people go, so that they may worship Me.
EXO	9	14	내가 이번에는 모든 재앙을 네 마음과 네 신하와 네 백성에게 내려 너로 온 천하에 나와 같은 자가 없음을 알게 하리라	For I will at this time send all my plagues upon thine heart, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people; that thou mayest know that there is none like me in all the earth.	Otherwise, I will send all My plagues against you and your officials and your people, so you may know that there is no one like Me in all the earth.
EXO	9	15	내가 손을 펴서 온역으로 너와 네 백성을 쳤더면 네가 세상에서 끊어졌을 것이나	For now I will stretch out my hand, that I may smite thee and thy people with pestilence; and thou shalt be cut off from the earth.	For by this time I could have stretched out My hand and struck you and your people with a plague to wipe you off the earth.
EXO	9	16	네가 너를 세웠음은 나의 능력을 네게 보이고 내 이름이 온 천하에 전파되게 하려 하였음이니라	And in very deed for this cause have I raised thee up, for to shew in thee my power; and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth.	But I have raised you up for this very purpose, that I might display My power to you, and that My name might be proclaimed in all the earth.
EXO	9	17	네가 여전히 내 백성 앞에 자고하고 그들을 보내지 아니하느냐	As yet exaltest thou thyself against my people, that thou wilt not let them go?	Still, you lord it over My people and do not allow them to go.
EXO	9	18	내일 이맘때면 내가 중한 우박을 내리리니 애굽 개국 이래로 그 같은 것이 있지 않던 것이리라	Behold, to morrow about this time I will cause it to rain a very grievous hail, such as hath not been in Egypt since the foundation thereof even until now.	Behold, at this time tomorrow I will rain down the worst hail that has ever fallen on Egypt, from the day it was founded until now.
EXO	9	19	이제 보내어 네 생축과 네 들에 있는 것을 다 모으라 사람이나 짐승이나 무릇 들에 있어서 집에 돌아오지 않은 자에게는 우박이 그 위에 내리리니 그것들이 죽으리라 하셨다 하라 하시니라	Send therefore now, and gather thy cattle, and all that thou hast in the field; for upon every man and beast which shall be found in the field, and shall not be brought home, the hail shall come down upon them, and they shall die.	So give orders now to shelter your livestock and everything you have in the field. Every man or beast that remains in the field and is not brought inside will die when the hail comes down upon them.’”
EXO	9	20	바로의 신하 중에 여호와의 말씀을 두려워하는 자들은 그 종들과 생축을 집으로 피하여 들였으나	He that feared the word of the Lord among the servants of Pharaoh made his servants and his cattle flee into the houses:	Those among Pharaoh’s officials who feared the word of the LORD hurried to bring their servants and livestock to shelter,
EXO	9	21	여호와의 말씀을 마음에 두지 아니하는 자는 그 종들과 생축을 들에 그대로 두었더라	And he that regarded not the word of the Lord left his servants and his cattle in the field.	but those who disregarded the word of the LORD left their servants and livestock in the field.
EXO	9	22	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 너는 하늘을 향하여 손을 들어 애굽 전국에 우박이 애굽 땅의 사람과 짐승과 밭의 모든 채소에 내리게 하라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Stretch forth thine hand toward heaven, that there may be hail in all the land of Egypt, upon man, and upon beast, and upon every herb of the field, throughout the land of Egypt.	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand toward heaven, so that hail may fall on all the land of Egypt—on man and beast and every plant of the field throughout the land of Egypt.”
EXO	9	23	모세가 하늘을 향하여 지팡이를 들매 여호와께서 뇌성과 우박을 보내시고 불을 내려 땅에 달리게 하시니라 여호와께서 우박을 애굽 땅에 내리시매	And Moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven: and the Lord sent thunder and hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground; and the Lord rained hail upon the land of Egypt.	So Moses stretched out his staff toward heaven, and the LORD sent thunder and hail, and lightning struck the earth. So the LORD rained down hail upon the land of Egypt.
EXO	9	24	우박의 내림과 불덩이가 우박에 섞여 내림이 심히 맹렬하니 애굽 전국에 그 개국 이래로 그같은 것이 없던 것이라	So there was hail, and fire mingled with the hail, very grievous, such as there was none like it in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation.	The hail fell and the lightning continued flashing through it. The hail was so severe that nothing like it had ever been seen in all the land of Egypt from the time it became a nation.
EXO	9	25	우박이 애굽 온 땅에서 사람과 짐승을 무론하고 무릇 밭에 있는 것을 쳤으며 우박이 또 밭의 모든 채소를 치고 들의 모든 나무를 꺽었으되	And the hail smote throughout all the land of Egypt all that was in the field, both man and beast; and the hail smote every herb of the field, and brake every tree of the field.	Throughout the land of Egypt, the hail struck down everything in the field, both man and beast; it beat down every plant of the field and stripped every tree.
EXO	9	26	이스라엘 자손의 거한 고센 땅에는 우박이 없었더라	Only in the land of Goshen, where the children of Israel were, was there no hail.	The only place where it did not hail was in the land of Goshen, where the Israelites lived.
EXO	9	27	바로가 사람을 보내어 모세와 아론을 불러 그들에게 이르되 이번은 내가 범죄하였노라 여호와는 의로우시고 나와 나의 백성은 악하도다	And Pharaoh sent, and called for Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, I have sinned this time: the Lord is righteous, and I and my people are wicked.	Then Pharaoh summoned Moses and Aaron. “This time I have sinned,” he said. “The LORD is righteous, and I and my people are wicked.
EXO	9	28	여호와께 구하여 이 뇌성과 우박을 그만 그치게 하라 내가 너희를 보내리니 너희가 다시는 머물지 아니하리라	Intreat the Lord (for it is enough) that there be no more mighty thunderings and hail; and I will let you go, and ye shall stay no longer.	Pray to the LORD, for there has been enough of God’s thunder and hail. I will let you go; you do not need to stay any longer.”
EXO	9	29	모세가 그에게 이르되 내가 성에서 나가자 곧 내 손을 여호와를 향하여 펴리니 그리하면 뇌성이 그치고 우박이 다시 있지 않을지라 세상이 여호와께 속한 줄을 왕이 알리이다	And Moses said unto him, As soon as I am gone out of the city, I will spread abroad my hands unto the Lord; and the thunder shall cease, neither shall there be any more hail; that thou mayest know how that the earth is the Lord’s.	Moses said to him, “When I have left the city, I will spread out my hands to the LORD. The thunder will cease, and there will be no more hail, so that you may know that the earth is the LORD’s.
EXO	9	30	그러나 왕과 왕의 신하들이 여호와 하나님을 아직도 두려워 아니할 줄을 내가 아나이다	But as for thee and thy servants, I know that ye will not yet fear the Lord God.	But as for you and your officials, I know that you still do not fear the LORD our God.”
EXO	9	31	때에 보리는 이삭이 나왔고 삼은 꽃이 피었으므로 삼과 보리가 상하였으나	And the flax and the barley was smitten: for the barley was in the ear, and the flax was bolled.	(Now the flax and barley were destroyed, since the barley was ripe and the flax was in bloom;
EXO	9	32	그러나 밀과 나맥은 자라지 아니한고로 상하지 아니하였더라	But the wheat and the rie were not smitten: for they were not grown up.	but the wheat and spelt were not destroyed, because they are late crops.)
EXO	9	33	모세가 바로를 떠나 성에서 나가서 여호와를 향하여 손을 펴매 뇌성과 우박이 그치고 비가 땅에 내리지 아니하니라	And Moses went out of the city from Pharaoh, and spread abroad his hands unto the Lord: and the thunders and hail ceased, and the rain was not poured upon the earth.	Then Moses departed from Pharaoh, went out of the city, and spread out his hands to the LORD. The thunder and hail ceased, and the rain no longer poured down on the land.
EXO	9	34	바로가 비와 우박과 뇌성의 그친 것을 볼 때에 다시 범죄하여 마음을 완강케 하니 그와 그 신하가 일반이라	And when Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunders were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his servants.	When Pharaoh saw that the rain and hail and thunder had ceased, he sinned again and hardened his heart—he and his officials.
EXO	9	35	바로의 마음이 강퍅하여 이스라엘 자손을 보내지 아니하였으니 여호와께서 모세에게 말씀하심과 같더라	And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, neither would he let the children of Israel go; as the Lord had spoken by Moses.	So Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he would not let the Israelites go, just as the LORD had said through Moses.
EXO	10	1	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 바로에게로 들어가라 내가 그의 마음과 그 신하들의 마음을 완강케 함은 나의 표징을 그들 중에 보이기 위함이며	And the Lord said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh: for I have hardened his heart, and the heart of his servants, that I might shew these my signs before him:	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Go to Pharaoh, for I have hardened his heart and the hearts of his officials, that I may perform these miraculous signs of Mine among them,
EXO	10	2	너로 내가 애굽에서 행한 일들 곧 내가 그 가운데서 행한 표징을 네 아들과 네 자손의 귀에 전하게 하려 함이라 너희가 나를 여호와인줄 알리라	And that thou mayest tell in the ears of thy son, and of thy son’s son, what things I have wrought in Egypt, and my signs which I have done among them; that ye may know how that I am the Lord.	and that you may tell your children and grandchildren how severely I dealt with the Egyptians when I performed miraculous signs among them, so that all of you may know that I am the LORD.”
EXO	10	3	모세와 아론이 바로에게 들어가서 그에게 이르되 히브리 사람의 하나님 여호와께서 말씀하시기를 네가 어느 때까지 내 앞에 겸비치 아니하겠느냐 내 백성을 보내라 그들이 나를 섬길 것이라	And Moses and Aaron came in unto Pharaoh, and said unto him, Thus saith the Lord God of the Hebrews, How long wilt thou refuse to humble thyself before me? let my people go, that they may serve me.	So Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh and told him, “This is what the LORD, the God of the Hebrews, says: ‘How long will you refuse to humble yourself before Me? Let My people go, so that they may worship Me.
EXO	10	4	네가 만일 내 백성 보내기를 거절하면 내일 내가 메뚜기로 네 경내에 들어가게 하리니	Else, if thou refuse to let my people go, behold, to morrow will I bring the locusts into thy coast:	But if you refuse to let My people go, I will bring locusts into your territory tomorrow.
EXO	10	5	메뚜기가 지면을 덮어서 사람이 땅을 볼 수 없을 것이라 메뚜기가 네게 남은 그것 곧 우박을 면하고 남은 것을 먹으며 들에 너희를 위하여 자라는 모든 나무를 먹을 것이며	And they shall cover the face of the earth, that one cannot be able to see the earth: and they shall eat the residue of that which is escaped, which remaineth unto you from the hail, and shall eat every tree which groweth for you out of the field:	They will cover the face of the land so that no one can see it. They will devour whatever is left after the hail and eat every tree that grows in your fields.
EXO	10	6	또 네 집들과 네 모든 신하의 집들과 모든 애굽 사람의 집들에 가득하리니 이는 네 아비와 네 조상이 세상에 있어 옴으로 오늘 까지 보지 못하였던 것이리라 하셨다 하고 돌이켜 바로에게서 나오니	And they shall fill thy houses, and the houses of all thy servants, and the houses of all the Egyptians; which neither thy fathers, nor thy fathers’ fathers have seen, since the day that they were upon the earth unto this day. And he turned himself, and went out from Pharaoh.	They will fill your houses and the houses of all your officials and every Egyptian—something neither your fathers nor your grandfathers have seen since the day they came into this land.’” Then Moses turned and left Pharaoh’s presence.
EXO	10	7	바로의 신하들이 그에게 고하되 어느 때까지 이 사람이 우리의 함정이 되리이까 그 사람들을 보내어 그 하나님 여호와를 섬기게 하소서 왕은 아직도 애굽이 망한 줄을 알지 못하시나이까 하고	And Pharaoh’s servants said unto him, How long shall this man be a snare unto us? let the men go, that they may serve the Lord their God: knowest thou not yet that Egypt is destroyed?	Pharaoh’s officials asked him, “How long will this man be a snare to us? Let the people go, so that they may worship the LORD their God. Do you not yet realize that Egypt is in ruins?”
EXO	10	8	모세와 아론을 바로에게로 다시 데려오니 바로가 그들에게 이르되 가서 너희 하나님 여호와를 섬기라 갈 자는 누구 누구뇨	And Moses and Aaron were brought again unto Pharaoh: and he said unto them, Go, serve the Lord your God: but who are they that shall go?	So Moses and Aaron were brought back to Pharaoh. “Go, worship the LORD your God,” he said. “But who exactly will be going?”
EXO	10	9	모세가 가로되 우리가 여호와 앞에 절기를 지킬 것인즉 우리가 남녀 노소와 우양을 데리고 가겠나이다	And Moses said, We will go with our young and with our old, with our sons and with our daughters, with our flocks and with our herds will we go; for we must hold a feast unto the Lord.	“We will go with our young and old,” Moses replied. “We will go with our sons and daughters, and with our flocks and herds, for we must hold a feast to the LORD.”
EXO	10	10	바로가 그들에게 이르되 내가 너희와 너희 어린 것들을 보내면 여호와를 너희와 함께하게 함과 일반이니라 삼갈지어다 너희 경영이 악하니라	And he said unto them, Let the Lord be so with you, as I will let you go, and your little ones: look to it; for evil is before you.	Then Pharaoh told them, “May the LORD be with you if I ever let you go with your little ones. Clearly you are bent on evil.
EXO	10	11	그는 불가하니 너희 남정만 가서 여호와를 섬기라 이것이 너희의 구하는 바니라 이에 그들이 바로 앞에서 쫓겨나니라	Not so: go now ye that are men, and serve the Lord; for that ye did desire. And they were driven out from Pharaoh’s presence.	No, only the men may go and worship the LORD, since that is what you have been requesting.” And Moses and Aaron were driven from Pharaoh’s presence.
EXO	10	12	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 네 손을 애굽 땅 위에 들어 메뚜기로 애굽 땅에 올라와서 우박에 상하지 아니한 밭의 모든 채소를 먹게 하라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the land of Egypt for the locusts, that they may come up upon the land of Egypt, and eat every herb of the land, even all that the hail hath left.	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand over the land of Egypt, so that the locusts may swarm over it and devour every plant in the land—everything that the hail has left behind.”
EXO	10	13	모세가 애굽 땅 위에 그 지팡이를 들매 여호와께서 동풍을 일으켜 온 낮과 온 밤에 불게 하시니 아침에 미쳐 동풍이 메뚜기를 불어 들인지라	And Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt, and the Lord brought an east wind upon the land all that day, and all that night; and when it was morning, the east wind brought the locusts.	So Moses stretched out his staff over the land of Egypt, and throughout that day and night the LORD sent an east wind across the land. By morning the east wind had brought the locusts.
EXO	10	14	메뚜기가 애굽 온 땅에 이르러 그 사방에 내리매 그 해가 심하니 이런 메뚜기는 전에도 없었고 후에도 없을러라	And the locusts went up over all the land of Egypt, and rested in all the coasts of Egypt: very grievous were they; before them there were no such locusts as they, neither after them shall be such.	The locusts swarmed across the land and settled over the entire territory of Egypt. Never before had there been so many locusts, and never again will there be.
EXO	10	15	메뚜기가 온 지면에 덮여 날으매 땅이 어둡게 되었고 메뚜기가 우박에 상하지 아니한 밭의 채소와 나무 열매를 다 먹었으므로 애굽 전경에 나무나 밭의 채소나 푸른 것은 남지 아니하였더라	For they covered the face of the whole earth, so that the land was darkened; and they did eat every herb of the land, and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had left: and there remained not any green thing in the trees, or in the herbs of the field, through all the land of Egypt.	They covered the face of all the land until it was black, and they consumed all the plants on the ground and all the fruit on the trees that the hail had left behind. Nothing green was left on any tree or plant in all the land of Egypt.
EXO	10	16	바로가 모세와 아론을 급히 불러서 이르되 내가 너희 하나님 여호와와 너희에게 득죄하였으니	Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron in haste; and he said, I have sinned against the Lord your God, and against you.	Pharaoh quickly summoned Moses and Aaron and said, “I have sinned against the LORD your God and against you.
EXO	10	17	청컨대 나의 죄를 이번만 용서하고 너희 하나님 여호와께 구하여 이 죽음만을 내게서 떠나게 하라	Now therefore forgive, I pray thee, my sin only this once, and intreat the Lord your God, that he may take away from me this death only.	Now please forgive my sin once more and appeal to the LORD your God, that He may remove this death from me.”
EXO	10	18	그가 바로에게서 나가서 여호와께 구하매	And he went out from Pharaoh, and intreated the Lord.	So Moses left Pharaoh’s presence and appealed to the LORD.
EXO	10	19	여호와께서 돌이켜 강렬한 서풍이 불게 하사 메뚜기를 홍해에 몰아 넣으시니 애굽 온 지경에 메뚜기가 하나도 남지 아니하니라	And the Lord turned a mighty strong west wind, which took away the locusts, and cast them into the Red sea; there remained not one locust in all the coasts of Egypt.	And the LORD changed the wind to a very strong west wind that carried off the locusts and blew them into the Red Sea. Not a single locust remained anywhere in Egypt.
EXO	10	20	그러나 여호와께서 바로의 마음을 강퍅케 하셨으므로 이스라엘 자손을 보내지 아니하였더라	But the Lord hardened Pharaoh’s heart, so that he would not let the children of Israel go.	But the LORD hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he would not let the Israelites go.
EXO	10	21	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 하늘을 향하여 네 손을 들어서 애굽 땅위에 흑암이 있게 하라 곧 더듬을만한 흑암이리라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand toward heaven, that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, even darkness which may be felt.	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand toward heaven, so that darkness may spread over the land of Egypt—a palpable darkness.”
EXO	10	22	모세가 하늘을 향하여 손을 들매 캄캄한 흑암이 삼일 동안 애굽 온 땅에 있어서	And Moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven; and there was a thick darkness in all the land of Egypt three days:	So Moses stretched out his hand toward heaven, and total darkness covered all the land of Egypt for three days.
EXO	10	23	그 동안은 사람 사람이 서로 볼 수 없으며 자기 처소에서 일어나는 자가 없으되 이스라엘 자손의 거하는 곳에는 광명이 있었더라	They saw not one another, neither rose any from his place for three days: but all the children of Israel had light in their dwellings.	No one could see anyone else, and for three days no one left his place. Yet all the Israelites had light in their dwellings.
EXO	10	24	바로가 모세를 불러서 이르되 너희는 가서 여호와를 섬기되 너희 양과 소는 머물러두고 너희 어린 것은 너희와 함께 갈지니라	And Pharaoh called unto Moses, and said, Go ye, serve the Lord; only let your flocks and your herds be stayed: let your little ones also go with you.	Then Pharaoh summoned Moses and said, “Go, worship the LORD. Even your little ones may go with you; only your flocks and herds must stay behind.”
EXO	10	25	모세가 가로되 왕이라도 우리 하나님 여호와께 드릴 희생과 번제물을 우리에게 주어야 하겠고	And Moses said, Thou must give us also sacrifices and burnt offerings, that we may sacrifice unto the Lord our God.	But Moses replied, “You must also provide us with sacrifices and burnt offerings to present to the LORD our God.
EXO	10	26	우리의 생축도 우리와 함께 가고 한 마리도 남길 수 없으니 이는 우리가 그 중에서 취하여 우리 하나님 여호와를 섬길 것임이며 또 우리가 거기 이르기까지는 어떤 것으로 여호와를 섬기는지 알지 못함이니이다 하나	Our cattle also shall go with us; there shall not an hoof be left behind; for thereof must we take to serve the Lord our God; and we know not with what we must serve the Lord, until we come thither.	Even our livestock must go with us; not a hoof will be left behind, for we will need some of them to worship the LORD our God, and we will not know how we are to worship the LORD until we arrive.”
EXO	10	27	여호와께서 바로의 마음을 강퍅케 하셨으므로 그들을 보내기를 즐겨 아니하고	But the Lord hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he would not let them go.	But the LORD hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he was unwilling to let them go.
EXO	10	28	모세에게 이르되 너는 나를 떠나가고 스스로 삼가 다시 내 얼굴을 보지 말라 내 얼굴을 보는 날에는 죽으리라	And Pharaoh said unto him, Get thee from me, take heed to thyself, see my face no more; for in that day thou seest my face thou shalt die.	“Depart from me!” Pharaoh said to Moses. “Make sure you never see my face again, for on the day you see my face, you will die.”
EXO	10	29	모세가 가로되 왕의 말씀이 옳으니이다 내가 다시는 왕의 얼굴을 보지 아니하리이다	And Moses said, Thou hast spoken well, I will see thy face again no more.	“As you say,” Moses replied, “I will never see your face again.”
EXO	11	1	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시기를 내가 이제 한 가지 재앙을 바로와 애굽에 내린 후에야 그가 너희를 여기서 보낼지라 그가 너희를 보낼 때에는 여기서 정녕 다 쫓아 내리니	And the Lord said unto Moses, Yet will I bring one plague more upon Pharaoh, and upon Egypt; afterwards he will let you go hence: when he shall let you go, he shall surely thrust you out hence altogether.	Then the LORD said to Moses, “I will bring upon Pharaoh and Egypt one more plague. After that, he will allow you to leave this place. And when he lets you go, he will drive you out completely.
EXO	11	2	백성에게 말하여 남녀로 각기 이웃들에게 은금 패물을 구하게 하라 하시더니	Speak now in the ears of the people, and let every man borrow of his neighbour, and every woman of her neighbour, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold.	Now announce to the people that men and women alike should ask their neighbors for articles of silver and gold.”
EXO	11	3	여호와께서 그 백성으로 애굽 사람의 은혜를 받게 하셨고 또 그 사람 모세는 애굽국에서 바로의 신하와 백성에게 심히 크게 뵈었더라	And the Lord gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians. Moreover the man Moses was very great in the land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharaoh’s servants, and in the sight of the people.	And the LORD gave the people favor in the sight of the Egyptians. Moreover, Moses himself was highly regarded in Egypt by Pharaoh’s officials and by the people.
EXO	11	4	모세가 바로에게 이르되 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시기를 밤중에 내가 애굽 가운데로 들어가리니	And Moses said, Thus saith the Lord, About midnight will I go out into the midst of Egypt:	So Moses declared, “This is what the LORD says: ‘About midnight I will go throughout Egypt,
EXO	11	5	애굽 가운데 처음 난 것은 위에 앉은 바로의 장자로부터 맷돌 뒤에 있는 여종의 장자까지와 모든 생축의 처음 난 것이 죽을지라	And all the firstborn in the land of Egypt shall die, from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sitteth upon his throne, even unto the firstborn of the maidservant that is behind the mill; and all the firstborn of beasts.	and every firstborn son in the land of Egypt will die, from the firstborn of Pharaoh who sits on his throne, to the firstborn of the servant girl behind the hand mill, as well as the firstborn of all the cattle.
EXO	11	6	애굽 전국에 전무후무한 큰 곡성이 있으리라	And there shall be a great cry throughout all the land of Egypt, such as there was none like it, nor shall be like it any more.	Then a great cry will go out over all the land of Egypt. Such an outcry has never been heard before and will never be heard again.
EXO	11	7	그러나 이스라엘 자손에게는 사람에게나 짐승에게나 개도 그 혀를 움직이지 않으리니 여호와가 애굽 사람과 이스라엘 사이에 구별하는 줄을 너희가 알리라 하셨나니	But against any of the children of Israel shall not a dog move his tongue, against man or beast: that ye may know how that the Lord doth put a difference between the Egyptians and Israel.	But among all the Israelites, not even a dog will snarl at man or beast.’ Then you will know that the LORD makes a distinction between Egypt and Israel.
EXO	11	8	왕이 이 모든 신하가 내게 내려와서 내게 절하며 이르기를 너와 너를 좇는 온 백성은 나가라 한 후에야 내가 나가리라 하고 심히 노하여 바로에게서 나오니라	And all these thy servants shall come down unto me, and bow down themselves unto me, saying, Get thee out, and all the people that follow thee: and after that I will go out. And he went out from Pharaoh in a great anger.	And all these officials of yours will come and bow before me, saying, ‘Go, you and all the people who follow you!’ After that, I will depart.” And hot with anger, Moses left Pharaoh’s presence.
EXO	11	9	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시기를 바로가 너희를 듣지 아니할지라 그러므로 내가 애굽 땅에서 나의 기사를 더하리라 하셨고	And the Lord said unto Moses, Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you; that my wonders may be multiplied in the land of Egypt.	The LORD said to Moses, “Pharaoh will not listen to you, so that My wonders may be multiplied in the land of Egypt.”
EXO	11	10	모세와 아론이 이 모든 기사를 바로 앞에서 행하였으나 여호와께서 바로의 마음을 강퍅케 하셨으므로 그가 이스라엘 자손을 그 나라에서 보내지 아니하였더라	And Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharaoh: and the Lord hardened Pharaoh’s heart, so that he would not let the children of Israel go out of his land.	Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharaoh, but the LORD hardened Pharaoh’s heart so that he would not let the Israelites go out of his land.
EXO	12	1	여호와께서 애굽 땅에서 모세와 아론에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt, saying,	Now the LORD said to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt,
EXO	12	2	이 달로 너희에게 달의 시작 곧 해의 첫 달이 되게 하고	This month shall be unto you the beginning of months: it shall be the first month of the year to you.	“This month is the beginning of months for you; it shall be the first month of your year.
EXO	12	3	너희는 이스라엘 회중에게 고하여 이르라 이 달 열흘에 너희 매인이 어린 양을 취할지니 각 가족대로 그 식구를 위하여 어린 양을 취하되	Speak ye unto all the congregation of Israel, saying, In the tenth day of this month they shall take to them every man a lamb, according to the house of their fathers, a lamb for an house:	Tell the whole congregation of Israel that on the tenth day of this month each man must select a lamb for his family, one per household.
EXO	12	4	그 어린 양에 대하여 식구가 너무 적으면 그 집의 이웃과 함께 수를 따라서 하나를 취하며 각 사람의 식량을 따라서 너희 어린 양을 계산할 것이며	And if the household be too little for the lamb, let him and his neighbour next unto his house take it according to the number of the souls; every man according to his eating shall make your count for the lamb.	If the household is too small for a whole lamb, they are to share with the nearest neighbor based on the number of people, and apportion the lamb accordingly.
EXO	12	5	너희 어린 양은 흠 없고 일년 된 수컷으로 하되 양이나 염소 중에서 취하고	Your lamb shall be without blemish, a male of the first year: ye shall take it out from the sheep, or from the goats:	Your lamb must be an unblemished year-old male, and you may take it from the sheep or the goats.
EXO	12	6	이달 십사 일까지 간직하였다가 해질 때에 이스라엘 회중이 그 양을 잡고	And ye shall keep it up until the fourteenth day of the same month: and the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall kill it in the evening.	You must keep it until the fourteenth day of the month, when the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel will slaughter the animals at twilight.
EXO	12	7	양을 먹을 집 문 좌우 설주와 인방에 바르고	And they shall take of the blood, and strike it on the two side posts and on the upper door post of the houses, wherein they shall eat it.	They are to take some of the blood and put it on the sides and tops of the doorframes of the houses where they eat the lambs.
EXO	12	8	그 밤에 그 고기를 불에 구워 무교병과 쓴 나물과 아울러 먹되	And they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and unleavened bread; and with bitter herbs they shall eat it.	They are to eat the meat that night, roasted over the fire, along with unleavened bread and bitter herbs.
EXO	12	9	날로나 물에 삶아서나 먹지 말고 그 머리와 정강이와 내장을 다 불에 구워 먹고	Eat not of it raw, nor sodden at all with water, but roast with fire; his head with his legs, and with the purtenance thereof.	Do not eat any of the meat raw or cooked in boiling water, but only roasted over the fire—its head and legs and inner parts.
EXO	12	10	아침까지 남겨 두지 말며 아침까지 남은 것은 곧 소화하라	And ye shall let nothing of it remain until the morning; and that which remaineth of it until the morning ye shall burn with fire.	Do not leave any of it until morning; before the morning you must burn up any part that is left over.
EXO	12	11	너희는 그것을 이렇게 먹을지니 허리에 띠를 띠고 발에 신을 신고 손에 지팡이를 잡고 급히 먹으라 이것이 여호와의 유월절이니라	And thus shall ye eat it; with your loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and your staff in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste: it is the Lord’s passover.	This is how you are to eat it: You must be fully dressed for travel, with your sandals on your feet and your staff in your hand. You are to eat in haste; it is the LORD’s Passover.
EXO	12	12	내가 그 밤에 애굽 땅에 두루 다니며 사람과 짐승을 무론하고 애굽 나라 가운데 처음 난 것을 다 치고 애굽의 모든 신에게 벌을 내리리라 나는 여호와로라	For I will pass through the land of Egypt this night, and will smite all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast; and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment: I am the Lord.	On that night I will pass through the land of Egypt and strike down every firstborn male, both man and beast, and I will execute judgment against all the gods of Egypt. I am the LORD.
EXO	12	13	내가 애굽 땅을 칠 때에 그 피가 너희의 거하는 집에 있어서 너희를 위하여 표적이 될지라 내가 피를 볼 때에 너희를 넘어가리니 재앙이 너희에게 내려 멸하지 아니하리라	And the blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where ye are: and when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt.	The blood on the houses where you are staying will distinguish them; when I see the blood, I will pass over you. No plague will fall on you to destroy you when I strike the land of Egypt.
EXO	12	14	너희는 이 날을 기념하여 여호와의 절기를 삼아 영원한 규례로 대대에 지킬지니라	And this day shall be unto you for a memorial; and ye shall keep it a feast to the Lord throughout your generations; ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for ever.	And this day will be a memorial for you, and you are to celebrate it as a feast to the LORD, as a permanent statute for the generations to come.
EXO	12	15	너희는 칠 일 동안 무교병을 먹을지니 그 첫날에 누룩을 너희 집에서 제하라 무릇 첫날부터 칠일까지 유교병을 먹는 자는 이스라엘에서 끊쳐지리라	Seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread; even the first day ye shall put away leaven out of your houses: for whosoever eateth leavened bread from the first day until the seventh day, that soul shall be cut off from Israel.	For seven days you must eat unleavened bread. On the first day you are to remove the leaven from your houses. Whoever eats anything leavened from the first day through the seventh must be cut off from Israel.
EXO	12	16	너희에게 첫날에도 성회요 제칠일에도 성회가 되리니 이 두 날에는 아무 일도 하지 말고 각인의 식물만 너희가 갖출 것이니라	And in the first day there shall be an holy convocation, and in the seventh day there shall be an holy convocation to you; no manner of work shall be done in them, save that which every man must eat, that only may be done of you.	On the first day you are to hold a sacred assembly, and another on the seventh day. You must not do any work on those days, except to prepare the meals—that is all you may do.
EXO	12	17	너희는 무교절을 지키라 이 날에 내가 너희 군대를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내었음이니라 그러므로 너희가 영원한 규례를 삼아 이 날을 대대로 지킬지라	And ye shall observe the feast of unleavened bread; for in this selfsame day have I brought your armies out of the land of Egypt: therefore shall ye observe this day in your generations by an ordinance for ever.	So you are to keep the Feast of Unleavened Bread, for on this very day I brought your divisions out of the land of Egypt. You must keep this day as a permanent statute for the generations to come.
EXO	12	18	정월에 그 달 십사일 저녁부터 이십일일 저녁까지 너희는 무교병을 먹을 것이요	In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at even, ye shall eat unleavened bread, until the one and twentieth day of the month at even.	In the first month you are to eat unleavened bread, from the evening of the fourteenth day until the evening of the twenty-first day.
EXO	12	19	칠 일 동안은 누룩을 너희 집에 있지 않게 하라 무릇 유교물을 먹는 타국인이든지 본국에서 난 자든지 무론하고 이스라엘 회중에서 끊쳐지리니	Seven days shall there be no leaven found in your houses: for whosoever eateth that which is leavened, even that soul shall be cut off from the congregation of Israel, whether he be a stranger, or born in the land.	For seven days there must be no leaven found in your houses. If anyone eats something leavened, that person, whether a foreigner or native of the land, must be cut off from the congregation of Israel.
EXO	12	20	너희는 아무 유교물이든지 먹지 말고 너희 모든 유하는 곳에서 무교병을 먹을지니라	Ye shall eat nothing leavened; in all your habitations shall ye eat unleavened bread.	You are not to eat anything leavened; eat unleavened bread in all your homes.”
EXO	12	21	모세가 이스라엘 모든 장로를 불러서 그들에게 이르되 너희는 나가서 너희 가족대로 어린 양을 택하여 유월절 양으로 잡고	Then Moses called for all the elders of Israel, and said unto them, Draw out and take you a lamb according to your families, and kill the passover.	Then Moses summoned all the elders of Israel and told them, “Go at once and select for yourselves a lamb for each family, and slaughter the Passover lamb.
EXO	12	22	너희는 우슬초 묶음을 취하여 그릇에 담은 피에 적시어서 그 피를 문 인방과 좌우 설주에 뿌리고 아침까지 한 사람도 자기 집 문밖에 나가지 말라	And ye shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood that is in the bason, and strike the lintel and the two side posts with the blood that is in the bason; and none of you shall go out at the door of his house until the morning.	Take a cluster of hyssop, dip it into the blood in the basin, and brush the blood on the top and sides of the doorframe. None of you shall go out the door of his house until morning.
EXO	12	23	여호와께서 애굽 사람을 치러 두루 다니실 때에 문 인방과 좌우 설주의 피를 보시면 그 문을 넘으시고 멸하는 자로 너희 집에 들어가서 너희를 치지 못하게 하실 것임이니라	For the Lord will pass through to smite the Egyptians; and when he seeth the blood upon the lintel, and on the two side posts, the Lord will pass over the door, and will not suffer the destroyer to come in unto your houses to smite you.	When the LORD passes through to strike down the Egyptians, He will see the blood on the top and sides of the doorframe and will pass over that doorway; so He will not allow the destroyer to enter your houses and strike you down.
EXO	12	24	너희는 이 일을 규례로 삼아 너희와 너희 자손이 영원히 지킬 것이니	And ye shall observe this thing for an ordinance to thee and to thy sons for ever.	And you are to keep this command as a permanent statute for you and your descendants.
EXO	12	25	너희는 여호와께서 허락하신 대로 너희에게 주시는 땅에 이를 때에 이 예식을 지킬 것이라	And it shall come to pass, when ye be come to the land which the Lord will give you, according as he hath promised, that ye shall keep this service.	When you enter the land that the LORD will give you as He promised, you are to keep this service.
EXO	12	26	이 후에 너희 자녀가 묻기를 이 예식이 무슨 뜻이냐 하거든	And it shall come to pass, when your children shall say unto you, What mean ye by this service?	When your children ask you, ‘What does this service mean to you?’
EXO	12	27	너희는 이르기를 이는 여호와의 유월절 제사라 여호와께서 애굽 사람을 치실 때에 애굽에 있는 이스라엘 자손의 집을 넘으사 우리의 집을 구원하셨느니라 하라 하매 백성이 머리 숙여 경배하니라	That ye shall say, It is the sacrifice of the Lord’s passover, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses. And the people bowed the head and worshipped.	you are to reply, ‘It is the Passover sacrifice to the LORD, who passed over the houses of the Israelites in Egypt when He struck down the Egyptians and spared our homes.’” Then the people bowed down and worshiped.
EXO	12	28	이스라엘 자손이 물러가서 그대로 행하되 여호와께서 모세와 아론에게 명하신 대로 행하니라	And the children of Israel went away, and did as the Lord had commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.	And the Israelites went and did just what the LORD had commanded Moses and Aaron.
EXO	12	29	밤중에 여호와께서 애굽 땅에서 모든 처음 난 것 곧 위에 앉은 바로의 장자로부터 옥에 갇힌 사람의 장자까지와 생축의 처음 난것을 다 치시매	And it came to pass, that at midnight the Lord smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on his throne unto the firstborn of the captive that was in the dungeon; and all the firstborn of cattle.	Now at midnight the LORD struck down every firstborn male in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh, who sat on his throne, to the firstborn of the prisoner in the dungeon, as well as all the firstborn among the livestock.
EXO	12	30	그 밤에 바로와 그 모든 신하와 모든 애굽 사람이 일어나고 애굽에 큰 호곡이 있었으니 이는 그 나라에 사망치 아니한 집이 하나도 없었음이었더라	And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all his servants, and all the Egyptians; and there was a great cry in Egypt; for there was not a house where there was not one dead.	During the night Pharaoh got up—he and all his officials and all the Egyptians—and there was loud wailing in Egypt; for there was no house without someone dead.
EXO	12	31	밤에 바로가 모세와 아론을 불러서 이르되 너희와 이스라엘 자손은 일어나 내 백성 가운데서 떠나서 너희의 말대로 가서 여호와를 섬기며	And he called for Moses and Aaron by night, and said, Rise up, and get you forth from among my people, both ye and the children of Israel; and go, serve the Lord, as ye have said.	Then Pharaoh summoned Moses and Aaron by night and said, “Get up, leave my people, both you and the Israelites! Go, worship the LORD as you have requested.
EXO	12	32	너희의 말대로 너희의 양도 소도 몰아가고 나를 위하여 축복하라 하며	Also take your flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and be gone; and bless me also.	Take your flocks and herds as well, just as you have said, and depart! And bless me also.”
EXO	12	33	애굽 사람들은 말하기를 우리가 다 죽은 자가 되도다 하고 백성을 재촉하여 그 지경에서 속히 보내려 하므로	And the Egyptians were urgent upon the people, that they might send them out of the land in haste; for they said, We be all dead men.	And in order to send them out of the land quickly, the Egyptians urged the people on. “For otherwise,” they said, “we are all going to die!”
EXO	12	34	백성이 발교되지 못한 반죽 담은 그릇을 옷에 싸서 어깨에 메니라	And the people took their dough before it was leavened, their kneadingtroughs being bound up in their clothes upon their shoulders.	So the people took their dough before it was leavened, carrying it on their shoulders in kneading bowls wrapped in clothing.
EXO	12	35	이스라엘 자손이 모세의 말대로 하여 애굽 사람에게 은금 패물과 의복을 구하매	And the children of Israel did according to the word of Moses; and they borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment:	Furthermore, the Israelites acted on Moses’ word and asked the Egyptians for articles of silver and gold, and for clothing.
EXO	12	36	여호와께서 애굽 사람으로 백성에게 은혜를 입히게 하사 그들의 구하는 대로 주게 하시므로 그들이 애굽 사람의 물품을 취하였더라	And the Lord gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they lent unto them such things as they required. And they spoiled the Egyptians.	And the LORD gave the people such favor in the sight of the Egyptians that they granted their request. In this way they plundered the Egyptians.
EXO	12	37	이스라엘 자손이 라암셋에서 발행하여 숙곳에 이르니 유아 외에 보행하는 장정이 육십만 가량이요	And the children of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth, about six hundred thousand on foot that were men, beside children.	The Israelites journeyed from Rameses to Succoth with about 600,000 men on foot, besides women and children.
EXO	12	38	중다한 잡족과 양과 소와 심히 많은 생축이 그들과 함께하였으며	And a mixed multitude went up also with them; and flocks, and herds, even very much cattle.	And a mixed multitude also went up with them, along with great droves of livestock, both flocks and herds.
EXO	12	39	그들이 가지고 나온 발교되지 못한 반죽으로 무교병을 구웠으니 이는 그들이 애굽에서 쫓겨 남으로 지체할 수 없었음이며 아무 양식도 준비하지 못하였음이었더라	And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they brought forth out of Egypt, for it was not leavened; because they were thrust out of Egypt, and could not tarry, neither had they prepared for themselves any victual.	Since their dough had no leaven, the people baked what they had brought out of Egypt into unleavened loaves. For when they had been driven out of Egypt, they could not delay and had not prepared any provisions for themselves.
EXO	12	40	이스라엘 자손이 애굽에 거주한지 사백삼십 년이라	Now the sojourning of the children of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, was four hundred and thirty years.	Now the duration of the Israelites’ stay in Egypt was 430 years.
EXO	12	41	사백삼십 년이 마치는 그 날에 여호와의 군대가 다 애굽 땅에서 나왔은즉	And it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty years, even the selfsame day it came to pass, that all the hosts of the Lord went out from the land of Egypt.	At the end of the 430 years, to the very day, all the LORD’s divisions went out of the land of Egypt.
EXO	12	42	이 밤은 그들을 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내심을 인하여 여호와 앞에 지킬 것이니 이는 여호와의 밤이라 이스라엘 자손이 다 대대로 지킬 것이니라	It is a night to be much observed unto the Lord for bringing them out from the land of Egypt: this is that night of the Lord to be observed of all the children of Israel in their generations.	Because the LORD kept a vigil that night to bring them out of the land of Egypt, this same night is to be a vigil to the LORD, to be observed by all the Israelites for the generations to come.
EXO	12	43	여호와께서 모세와 아론에게 이르시되 유월절 규례가 이러하니라 이방 사람은 먹지 못할 것이나	And the Lord said unto Moses and Aaron, This is the ordinance of the passover: There shall no stranger eat thereof:	And the LORD said to Moses and Aaron, “This is the statute of the Passover: No foreigner is to eat of it.
EXO	12	44	각 사람이 돈으로 산 종은 할례를 받은 후에 먹을 것이며	But every man’s servant that is bought for money, when thou hast circumcised him, then shall he eat thereof.	But any slave who has been purchased may eat of it, after you have circumcised him.
EXO	12	45	거류인과 타국 품꾼은 먹지 못하리라	A foreigner and an hired servant shall not eat thereof.	A temporary resident or hired hand shall not eat the Passover.
EXO	12	46	한 집에서 먹되 그 고기를 조금도 집 밖으로 내지 말고 뼈도 꺾지 말지며	In one house shall it be eaten; thou shalt not carry forth ought of the flesh abroad out of the house; neither shall ye break a bone thereof.	It must be eaten inside one house. You are not to take any of the meat outside the house, and you may not break any of the bones.
EXO	12	47	이스라엘 회중이 다 이것을 지킬지니라	All the congregation of Israel shall keep it.	The whole congregation of Israel must celebrate it.
EXO	12	48	너희와 함께 거하는 타국인이 여호와의 유월절을 지키고자 하거든 그 모든 남자는 할례를 받은 후에야 가까이하여 지킬지니 곧 그는 본토인과 같이 될 것이나 할례받지 못한 자는 먹지 못할 것이니라	And when a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the passover to the Lord, let all his males be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it; and he shall be as one that is born in the land: for no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof.	If a foreigner resides with you and wants to celebrate the LORD’s Passover, all the males in the household must be circumcised; then he may come near to celebrate it, and he shall be like a native of the land. But no uncircumcised man may eat of it.
EXO	12	49	본토인에게나 너희 중에 우거한 이방인에게나 이 법이 동일하니라 하셨으므로	One law shall be to him that is homeborn, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among you.	The same law shall apply to both the native and the foreigner who resides among you.”
EXO	12	50	온 이스라엘 자손이 이와 같이 행하되 여호와께서 모세와 아론에게 명하신 대로 행하였으며	Thus did all the children of Israel; as the Lord commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.	Then all the Israelites did this—they did just as the LORD had commanded Moses and Aaron.
EXO	12	51	그 같은 날에 여호와께서 이스라엘 자손을 그 군대대로 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내셨더라	And it came to pass the selfsame day, that the Lord did bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt by their armies.	And on that very day the LORD brought the Israelites out of the land of Egypt by their divisions.
EXO	13	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
EXO	13	2	이스라엘 자손 중에 사람이나 짐승이나 무론하고 초태생은 다 거룩히 구별하여 내게 돌리라 이는 내 것이니라 하시니라	Sanctify unto me all the firstborn, whatsoever openeth the womb among the children of Israel, both of man and of beast: it is mine.	“Consecrate to Me every firstborn male. The firstborn from every womb among the Israelites belongs to Me, both of man and beast.”
EXO	13	3	모세가 백성에게 이르되 너희는 애굽에서 곧 종 되었던 집에서 나온 그 날을 기념하여 유교병을 먹지 말라 여호와께서 그 손의 권능으로 너희를 그곳에서 인도하여 내셨음이니라	And Moses said unto the people, Remember this day, in which ye came out from Egypt, out of the house of bondage; for by strength of hand the Lord brought you out from this place: there shall no leavened bread be eaten.	So Moses told the people, “Remember this day, the day you came out of Egypt, out of the house of slavery; for the LORD brought you out of it by the strength of His hand. And nothing leavened shall be eaten.
EXO	13	4	아빕월 이 날에 너희가 나왔으니	This day came ye out in the month Abib.	Today, in the month of Abib, you are leaving.
EXO	13	5	여호와께서 너를 인도하여 가나안 사람과 헷 사람과 아모리 사람과 히위 사람과 여부스 사람의 땅 곧 네게 주시려고 네 조상들에게 맹세하신바 젖과 꿀이 흐르는 땅에 이르게 하시거든 너는 이 달에 이 예식을 지켜	And it shall be when the Lord shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, which he sware unto thy fathers to give thee, a land flowing with milk and honey, that thou shalt keep this service in this month.	And when the LORD brings you into the land of the Canaanites, Hittites, Amorites, Hivites, and Jebusites—the land He swore to your fathers that He would give you, a land flowing with milk and honey—you shall keep this service in this month.
EXO	13	6	칠 일 동안 무교병을 먹고 제칠일에는 여호와께 절기를 지키라	Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, and in the seventh day shall be a feast to the Lord.	For seven days you are to eat unleavened bread, and on the seventh day there shall be a feast to the LORD.
EXO	13	7	칠 일 동안에는 무교병을 먹고 유교병을 너희 곳에 있게 하지 말며 네 지경 안에서 누룩을 네게 보이지도 말게 하며	Unleavened bread shall be eaten seven days; and there shall no leavened bread be seen with thee, neither shall there be leaven seen with thee in all thy quarters.	Unleavened bread shall be eaten during those seven days. Nothing leavened may be found among you, nor shall leaven be found anywhere within your borders.
EXO	13	8	너는 그 날에 네 아들에게 뵈어 이르기를 이 예식은 내가 애굽에서 나올 때에 여호와께서 나를 위하여 행하신 일을 인함이라 하고	And thou shalt shew thy son in that day, saying, This is done because of that which the Lord did unto me when I came forth out of Egypt.	And on that day you are to explain to your son, ‘This is because of what the LORD did for me when I came out of Egypt.’
EXO	13	9	이것으로 네 손의 기호와 네 미간의 표를 삼고 여호와의 율법으로 네 입에 있게 하라 이는 여호와께서 능하신 손으로 너를 애굽에서 인도하여 내셨음이니	And it shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes, that the Lord’s law may be in thy mouth: for with a strong hand hath the Lord brought thee out of Egypt.	It shall be a sign for you on your hand and a reminder on your forehead that the Law of the LORD is to be on your lips. For with a mighty hand the LORD brought you out of Egypt.
EXO	13	10	연년이 기한에 이르러 이 규례를 지킬지니라	Thou shalt therefore keep this ordinance in his season from year to year.	Therefore you shall keep this statute at the appointed time year after year.
EXO	13	11	여호와께서 너와 네 조상에게 맹세하신 대로 너를 가나안 사람의 땅에 인도하시고 그 땅을 네게 주시거든	And it shall be when the Lord shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanites, as he sware unto thee and to thy fathers, and shall give it thee,	And after the LORD brings you into the land of the Canaanites and gives it to you, as He swore to you and your fathers,
EXO	13	12	너는 무릇 초태생과 네게 있는 생축의 초태생을 다 구별하여 여호와께 돌리라 수컷은 여호와의 것이니라	That thou shalt set apart unto the Lord all that openeth the matrix, and every firstling that cometh of a beast which thou hast; the males shall be the Lord’s.	you are to present to the LORD the firstborn male of every womb. All the firstborn males of your livestock belong to the LORD.
EXO	13	13	나귀의 첫새끼는 다 어린 양으로 대속할 것이요 그렇게 아니하려면 그 목을 꺽을 것이며 너의 아들중 모든 장자된 자는 다 대속할지니라	And every firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb; and if thou wilt not redeem it, then thou shalt break his neck: and all the firstborn of man among thy children shalt thou redeem.	You must redeem every firstborn donkey with a lamb, and if you do not redeem it, you are to break its neck. And every firstborn of your sons you must redeem.
EXO	13	14	장래에 네 아들이 네게 묻기를 이것이 어찜이냐 하거든 너는 그에게 이르기를 여호와께서 그 손의 권능으로 우리를 애굽에서 곧 종이 되었던 집에서 인도하여 내실새	And it shall be when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, What is this? that thou shalt say unto him, By strength of hand the Lord brought us out from Egypt, from the house of bondage:	In the future, when your son asks you, ‘What does this mean?’ you are to tell him, ‘With a mighty hand the LORD brought us out of Egypt, out of the house of slavery.
EXO	13	15	그 때에 바로가 강퍅하여 우리를 보내지 아니하매 여호와께서 애굽 나라 가운데 처음 낳은 것까지 다 죽이신고로 초태생의 수컷은 다 여호와께 희생으로 드리고 우리 장자는 다 대속하나니	And it came to pass, when Pharaoh would hardly let us go, that the Lord slew all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn of man, and the firstborn of beast: therefore I sacrifice to the Lord all that openeth the matrix, being males; but all the firstborn of my children I redeem.	And when Pharaoh stubbornly refused to let us go, the LORD killed every firstborn in the land of Egypt, both of man and beast. This is why I sacrifice to the LORD the firstborn male of every womb, but I redeem all the firstborn of my sons.’
EXO	13	16	이것으로 네 손의 기호와 네 미간의 표를 삼으라 여호와께서 그 손의 권능으로 우리를 애굽에서 인도하여 내셨음이니라 할지니라	And it shall be for a token upon thine hand, and for frontlets between thine eyes: for by strength of hand the Lord brought us forth out of Egypt.	So it shall serve as a sign on your hand and a symbol on your forehead, for with a mighty hand the LORD brought us out of Egypt.”
EXO	13	17	바로가 백성을 보낸 후에 블레셋 사람의 땅의 길은 가까울지라도 하나님이 그들을 그 길로 인도하지 아니하셨으니 이는 하나님이 말씀하시기를 이 백성이 전쟁을 보면 뉘우쳐 애굽으로 돌아갈까 하셨음이라	And it came to pass, when Pharaoh had let the people go, that God led them not through the way of the land of the Philistines, although that was near; for God said, Lest peradventure the people repent when they see war, and they return to Egypt:	When Pharaoh let the people go, God did not lead them along the road through the land of the Philistines, though it was shorter. For God said, “If the people face war, they might change their minds and return to Egypt.”
EXO	13	18	그러므로 하나님이 홍해의 광야 길로 돌려 백성을 인도하시매 이스라엘 자손이 애굽 땅에서 항오를 지어 나올 때에	But God led the people about, through the way of the wilderness of the Red sea: and the children of Israel went up harnessed out of the land of Egypt.	So God led the people around by the way of the wilderness toward the Red Sea. And the Israelites left the land of Egypt arrayed for battle.
EXO	13	19	모세가 요셉의 해골을 취하였으니 이는 요셉이 이스라엘 자손으로 단단히 맹세케 하여 이르기를 하나님이 필연 너희를 권고하시리니 너희는 나의 해골을 여기서 가지고 나가라 하였음이었더라	And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him: for he had straitly sworn the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you; and ye shall carry up my bones away hence with you.	Moses took the bones of Joseph with him because Joseph had made the sons of Israel swear a solemn oath when he said, “God will surely attend to you, and then you must carry my bones with you from this place.”
EXO	13	20	그들이 숙곳에서 발행하여 광야 끝 에담에 장막을 치니	And they took their journey from Succoth, and encamped in Etham, in the edge of the wilderness.	They set out from Succoth and camped at Etham on the edge of the wilderness.
EXO	13	21	여호와께서 그들 앞에 행하사 낮에는 구름 기둥으로 그들의 길을 인도하시고 밤에는 불기둥으로 그들에게 비취사 주야로 진행하게 하시니	And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light; to go by day and night:	And the LORD went before them in a pillar of cloud to guide their way by day, and in a pillar of fire to give them light by night, so that they could travel by day or night.
EXO	13	22	낮에는 구름 기둥, 밤에는 불 기둥이 백성 앞에서 떠나지 아니하니라	He took not away the pillar of the cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by night, from before the people.	Neither the pillar of cloud by day nor the pillar of fire by night left its place before the people.
EXO	14	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
EXO	14	2	이스라엘 자손을 명하여 돌쳐서 바다와 믹돌 사이의 비하히롯 앞 곧 바알스본 맞은편 바닷가에 장막을 치게 하라	Speak unto the children of Israel, that they turn and encamp before Pi–hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, over against Baal–zephon: before it shall ye encamp by the sea.	“Tell the Israelites to turn back and encamp before Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea. You are to encamp by the sea, directly opposite Baal-zephon.
EXO	14	3	바로가 이스라엘 자손에 대하여 말하기를 그들이 그 땅에서 아득하여 광야에 갇힌바 되었다 할지라	For Pharaoh will say of the children of Israel, They are entangled in the land, the wilderness hath shut them in.	For Pharaoh will say of the Israelites, ‘They are wandering the land in confusion; the wilderness has boxed them in.’
EXO	14	4	내가 바로의 마음을 강퍅케 한즉 바로가 그들의 뒤를 따르리니 내가 그와 그 온 군대를 인하여 영광을 얻어 애굽 사람으로 나를 여호와인 줄 알게 하리라 하시매 무리가 그대로 행하니라	And I will harden Pharaoh’s heart, that he shall follow after them; and I will be honoured upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host; that the Egyptians may know that I am the Lord. And they did so.	And I will harden Pharaoh’s heart so that he will pursue them. But I will gain honor by means of Pharaoh and all his army, and the Egyptians will know that I am the LORD.” So this is what the Israelites did.
EXO	14	5	혹이 백성의 도망한 것을 애굽 왕에게 고하매 바로와 그 신하들이 백성에 대하여 마음이 변하여 가로되 우리가 어찌 이같이 하여 이스라엘을 우리를 섬김에서 놓아 보내었는고 하고	And it was told the king of Egypt that the people fled: and the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was turned against the people, and they said, Why have we done this, that we have let Israel go from serving us?	When the king of Egypt was told that the people had fled, Pharaoh and his officials changed their minds about them and said, “What have we done? We have released Israel from serving us.”
EXO	14	6	바로가 곧 그 병거를 갖추고 그 백성을 데리고 갈새	And he made ready his chariot, and took his people with him:	So Pharaoh prepared his chariot and took his army with him.
EXO	14	7	특별 병거 육백 승과 애굽의 모든 병거를 발하니 장관들이 다 거느렸더라	And he took six hundred chosen chariots, and all the chariots of Egypt, and captains over every one of them.	He took 600 of the best chariots, and all the other chariots of Egypt, with officers over all of them.
EXO	14	8	여호와께서 애굽 왕 바로의 마음을 강퍅케 하셨으므로 그가 이스라엘 자손의 뒤를 따르니 이스라엘 자손이 담대히 나갔음이라	And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he pursued after the children of Israel: and the children of Israel went out with an high hand.	And the LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt so that he pursued the Israelites, who were marching out defiantly.
EXO	14	9	애굽 사람들과 바로의 말들, 병거들과 그 마병과 그 군대가 그들의 뒤를 따라 바알스본 맞은편 비하히롯 곁 해변 그 장막 친데 미치니라	But the Egyptians pursued after them, all the horses and chariots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army, and overtook them encamping by the sea, beside Pi–hahiroth, before Baal–zephon.	The Egyptians—all Pharaoh’s horses and chariots, horsemen and troops—pursued the Israelites and overtook them as they camped by the sea near Pi-hahiroth, opposite Baal-zephon.
EXO	14	10	바로가 가까워 올 때에 이스라엘 자손이 눈을 들어 본즉 애굽 사람들이 자기 뒤에 미친지라 이스라엘 자손이 심히 두려워하여 여호와께 부르짖고	And when Pharaoh drew nigh, the children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and, behold, the Egyptians marched after them; and they were sore afraid: and the children of Israel cried out unto the Lord.	As Pharaoh approached, the Israelites looked up and saw the Egyptians marching after them, and they were terrified and cried out to the LORD.
EXO	14	11	그들이 또 모세에게 이르되 애굽에 매장지가 없으므로 당신이 우리를 이끌어 내어 이 광야에서 죽게 하느뇨 어찌하여 당신이 우리를 애굽에서 이끌어 내어 이같이 우리에게 하느뇨	And they said unto Moses, Because there were no graves in Egypt, hast thou taken us away to die in the wilderness? wherefore hast thou dealt thus with us, to carry us forth out of Egypt?	They said to Moses, “Was it because there were no graves in Egypt that you brought us into the wilderness to die? What have you done to us by bringing us out of Egypt?
EXO	14	12	우리가 애굽에서 당신에게 고한 말이 이것이 아니뇨 이르기를 우리를 버려 두라 우리가 애굽 사람을 섬길 것이라 하지 아니하더뇨 애굽 사람을 섬기는 것이 광야에서 죽는 것보다 낫겠노라	Is not this the word that we did tell thee in Egypt, saying, Let us alone, that we may serve the Egyptians? For it had been better for us to serve the Egyptians, than that we should die in the wilderness.	Did we not say to you in Egypt, ‘Leave us alone so that we may serve the Egyptians’? For it would have been better for us to serve the Egyptians than to die in the wilderness.”
EXO	14	13	모세가 백성에게 이르되 너희는 두려워 말고 가만히 서서 여호와께서 오늘날 너희를 위하여 행하시는 구원을 보라 너희가 오늘 본 애굽 사람을 또 다시는 영원히 보지 못하리라	And Moses said unto the people, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord, which he will shew to you to day: for the Egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see them again no more for ever.	But Moses told the people, “Do not be afraid. Stand firm and you will see the LORD’s salvation, which He will accomplish for you today; for the Egyptians you see today, you will never see again.
EXO	14	14	여호와께서 너희를 위하여 싸우시리니 너희는 가만히 있을지니라	The Lord shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace.	The LORD will fight for you; you need only to be still.”
EXO	14	15	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 너는 어찌하여 내게 부르짖느뇨 이스라엘 자손을 명하여 앞으로 나가게 하고	And the Lord said unto Moses, Wherefore criest thou unto me? speak unto the children of Israel, that they go forward:	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Why are you crying out to Me? Tell the Israelites to go forward.
EXO	14	16	지팡이를 들고 손을 바다 위로 내밀어 그것으로 갈라지게 하라 이스라엘 자손이 바다 가운데 육지로 행하리라	But lift thou up thy rod, and stretch out thine hand over the sea, and divide it: and the children of Israel shall go on dry ground through the midst of the sea.	And as for you, lift up your staff and stretch out your hand over the sea and divide it, so that the Israelites can go through the sea on dry ground.
EXO	14	17	내가 애굽 사람들의 마음을 강퍅케 할 것인즉 그들이 그 뒤를 따라 들어갈 것이라 내가 바로와 그 모든 군대와 그 병거와 마병을 인하여 영광을 얻으리니	And I, behold, I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians, and they shall follow them: and I will get me honour upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen.	And I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians so that they will go in after them. Then I will gain honor by means of Pharaoh and all his army and chariots and horsemen.
EXO	14	18	내가 바로와 그 병거와 마병으로 인하여 영광을 얻을 때에야 애굽 사람들이 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라 하시더니	And the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord, when I have gotten me honour upon Pharaoh, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen.	The Egyptians will know that I am the LORD when I am honored through Pharaoh, his chariots, and his horsemen.”
EXO	14	19	이스라엘 진 앞에 행하던 하나님의 사자가 옮겨 그 뒤로 행하매 구름 기둥도 앞에서 그 뒤로 옮겨	And the angel of God, which went before the camp of Israel, removed and went behind them; and the pillar of the cloud went from before their face, and stood behind them:	And the angel of God, who had gone before the camp of Israel, withdrew and went behind them. The pillar of cloud also moved from before them and stood behind them,
EXO	14	20	애굽 진과 이스라엘 진 사이에 이르러 서니 저 편은 구름과 흑암이 있고 이 편은 밤이 광명하므로 밤새도록 저 편이 이 편에 가까이 못하였더라	And it came between the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of Israel; and it was a cloud and darkness to them, but it gave light by night to these: so that the one came not near the other all the night.	so that it came between the camps of Egypt and Israel. The cloud was there in the darkness, but it lit up the night. So all night long neither camp went near the other.
EXO	14	21	모세가 바다 위로 손을 내어민대 여호와께서 큰 동풍으로 밤새도록 바닷물을 물러가게 하시니 물이 갈라져 바다가 마른 땅이 된지라	And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea; and the Lord caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind all that night, and made the sea dry land, and the waters were divided.	Then Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and all that night the LORD drove back the sea with a strong east wind that turned it into dry land. So the waters were divided,
EXO	14	22	이스라엘 자손이 바다 가운데 육지로 행하고 물은 그들의 좌우에 벽이 되니	And the children of Israel went into the midst of the sea upon the dry ground: and the waters were a wall unto them on their right hand, and on their left.	and the Israelites went through the sea on dry ground, with walls of water on their right and on their left.
EXO	14	23	애굽 사람들과 바로의 말들, 병거들과 그 마병들이 다 그 뒤를 쫓아 바다 가운데로 들어 오는지라	And the Egyptians pursued, and went in after them to the midst of the sea, even all Pharaoh’s horses, his chariots, and his horsemen.	And the Egyptians chased after them—all Pharaoh’s horses, chariots, and horsemen—and followed them into the sea.
EXO	14	24	새벽에 여호와께서 불 구름기둥 가운데서 애굽 군대를 보시고 그 군대를 어지럽게 하시며	And it came to pass, that in the morning watch the Lord looked unto the host of the Egyptians through the pillar of fire and of the cloud, and troubled the host of the Egyptians,	At morning watch, however, the LORD looked down on the army of the Egyptians from the pillar of fire and cloud, and He threw their camp into confusion.
EXO	14	25	그 병거 바퀴를 벗겨서 달리기에 극난하게 하시니 애굽 사람들이 가로되 이스라엘 앞에서 우리가 도망하자 여호와가 그들을 위하여 싸워 애굽 사람들을 치는도다	And took off their chariot wheels, that they drave them heavily: so that the Egyptians said, Let us flee from the face of Israel; for the Lord fighteth for them against the Egyptians.	He caused their chariot wheels to wobble, so that they had difficulty driving. “Let us flee from the Israelites,” said the Egyptians, “for the LORD is fighting for them against Egypt!”
EXO	14	26	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 네 손을 바다 위로 내어밀어 물이 애굽 사람들과 그 병거들과 마병들 위에 다시 흐르게 하라 하시니	And the Lord said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the sea, that the waters may come again upon the Egyptians, upon their chariots, and upon their horsemen.	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand over the sea, so that the waters may flow back over the Egyptians and their chariots and horsemen.”
EXO	14	27	모세가 곧 손을 바다 위로 내어밀매 새벽에 미쳐 바다의 그 세력이 회복된지라 애굽 사람들이 물을 거스려 도망하나 여호와께서 애굽 사람들을 바다 가운데 엎으시니	And Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and the sea returned to his strength when the morning appeared; and the Egyptians fled against it; and the Lord overthrew the Egyptians in the midst of the sea.	So Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and at daybreak the sea returned to its normal state. As the Egyptians were retreating, the LORD swept them into the sea.
EXO	14	28	물이 다시 흘러 병거들과 기병들을 덮되 그들의 뒤를 쫓아 바다에 들어간 바로의 군대를 다 덮고 하나도 남기지 아니하였더라	And the waters returned, and covered the chariots, and the horsemen, and all the host of Pharaoh that came into the sea after them; there remained not so much as one of them.	The waters flowed back and covered the chariots and horsemen—the entire army of Pharaoh that had chased the Israelites into the sea. Not one of them survived.
EXO	14	29	그러나 이스라엘 자손은 바다 가운데 육지로 행하였고 물이 좌우에 벽이 되었었더라	But the children of Israel walked upon dry land in the midst of the sea; and the waters were a wall unto them on their right hand, and on their left.	But the Israelites had walked through the sea on dry ground, with walls of water on their right and on their left.
EXO	14	30	그 날에 여호와께서 이같이 이스라엘을 애굽 사람의 손에서 구원하시매 이스라엘이 바닷가의 애굽 사람의 시체를 보았더라	Thus the Lord saved Israel that day out of the hand of the Egyptians; and Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea shore.	That day the LORD saved Israel from the hand of the Egyptians, and Israel saw the Egyptians dead on the shore.
EXO	14	31	이스라엘이 여호와께서 애굽 사람들에게 베푸신 큰 일을 보았으므로 백성이 여호와를 경외하며 여호와와 그 종 모세를 믿었더라	And Israel saw that great work which the Lord did upon the Egyptians: and the people feared the Lord, and believed the Lord, and his servant Moses.	When Israel saw the great power that the LORD had exercised over the Egyptians, the people feared the LORD and believed in Him and in His servant Moses.
EXO	15	1	이 때에 모세와 이스라엘 자손이 이 노래로 여호와께 노래하니 일렀으되 내가 여호와를 찬송하리니 그는 높고 영화로우심이요 말과 그 탄 자를 바다에 던지셨음이로다	Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the Lord, and spake, saying, I will sing unto the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously: the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea.	Then Moses and the Israelites sang this song to the LORD: “I will sing to the LORD, for He is highly exalted. The horse and rider He has thrown into the sea.
EXO	15	2	여호와는 나의 힘이요 노래시며 나의 구원이시로다 그는 나의 하나님이시니 내가 그를 찬송할 것이요 내 아비의 하나님이시니 내가 그를 높이리로다	The Lord is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation: he is my God, and I will prepare him an habitation; my father’s God, and I will exalt him.	The LORD is my strength and my song, and He has become my salvation. He is my God, and I will praise Him, my father’s God, and I will exalt Him.
EXO	15	3	여호와는 용사시니 여호와는 그의 이름이시로다	The Lord is a man of war: the Lord is his name.	The LORD is a warrior, the LORD is His name.
EXO	15	4	그가 바로의 병거와 그 군대를 바다에 던지시니 그 택한 장관이 홍해에 잠겼고	Pharaoh’s chariots and his host hath he cast into the sea: his chosen captains also are drowned in the Red sea.	Pharaoh’s chariots and army He has cast into the sea; the finest of his officers are drowned in the Red Sea.
EXO	15	5	큰 물이 그들을 덮으니 그들이 돌처럼 깊음에 내렸도다	The depths have covered them: they sank into the bottom as a stone.	The depths have covered them; they sank there like a stone.
EXO	15	6	여호와여 주의 오른손이 권능으로 영광을 나타내시니이다 여호와여 주의 오른 손이 원수를 부수시니이다	Thy right hand, O Lord, is become glorious in power: thy right hand, O Lord, hath dashed in pieces the enemy.	Your right hand, O LORD, is majestic in power; Your right hand, O LORD, has shattered the enemy.
EXO	15	7	주께서 주의 큰 위엄으로 주를 거스리는 자를 엎으시나이다 주께서 진노를 발하시니 그 진노가 그들을 초개 같이 사르니이다	And in the greatness of thine excellency thou hast overthrown them that rose up against thee: thou sentest forth thy wrath, which consumed them as stubble.	You overthrew Your adversaries by Your great majesty. You unleashed Your burning wrath; it consumed them like stubble.
EXO	15	8	주의 콧김에 물이 쌓이되 파도가 언덕 같이 일어서고 큰 물이 바다 가운데 엉기니이다	And with the blast of thy nostrils the waters were gathered together, the floods stood upright as an heap, and the depths were congealed in the heart of the sea.	At the blast of Your nostrils the waters piled up; like a wall the currents stood firm; the depths congealed in the heart of the sea.
EXO	15	9	대적의 말이 내가 쫓아 미쳐 탈취물을 나누리라 내가 그들로 인하여 내 마음을 채우리라 내가 내 칼을 빼리니 내 손이 그들을 멸하리라 하였으나	The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil; my lust shall be satisfied upon them; I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them.	The enemy declared, ‘I will pursue, I will overtake. I will divide the spoils; I will gorge myself on them. I will draw my sword; my hand will destroy them.’
EXO	15	10	주께서 주의 바람을 일으키시매 바다가 그들을 덮으니 그들이 흉용한 물에 납 같이 잠겼나이다	Thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them: they sank as lead in the mighty waters.	But You blew with Your breath, and the sea covered them. They sank like lead in the mighty waters.
EXO	15	11	여호와여 신 중에 주와 같은 자 누구니이까 주와 같이 거룩함에 영광스러우며 찬송할만한 위엄이 있으며 기이한 일을 행하는 자 누구니이까	Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the gods? who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?	Who among the gods is like You, O LORD? Who is like You—majestic in holiness, revered with praises, performing wonders?
EXO	15	12	주께서 오른손을 드신즉 땅이 그들을 삼켰나이다	Thou stretchedst out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them.	You stretched out Your right hand, and the earth swallowed them up.
EXO	15	13	주께서 그 구속하신 백성을 은혜로 인도하시되 주의 힘으로 그들을 주의 성결한 처소에 들어가게 하시나이다	Thou in thy mercy hast led forth the people which thou hast redeemed: thou hast guided them in thy strength unto thy holy habitation.	With loving devotion You will lead the people You have redeemed; with Your strength You will guide them to Your holy dwelling.
EXO	15	14	열방이 듣고 떨며 블레셋 거민이 두려움에 잡히며	The people shall hear, and be afraid: sorrow shall take hold on the inhabitants of Palestina.	The nations will hear and tremble; anguish will grip the dwellers of Philistia.
EXO	15	15	에돔 방백이 놀라고 모압 영웅이 떨림에 잡히며 가나안 거민이 다 낙담하나이다	Then the dukes of Edom shall be amazed; the mighty men of Moab, trembling shall take hold upon them; all the inhabitants of Canaan shall melt away.	Then the chiefs of Edom will be dismayed; trembling will seize the leaders of Moab; those who dwell in Canaan will melt away,
EXO	15	16	놀람과 두려움이 그들에게 미치매 주의 팔이 큼을 인하여 그들이 돌 같이 고요하였사오되 여호와여 주의 백성이 통과하기까지 곧 주의 사신 백성이 통과하기까지였나이다	Fear and dread shall fall upon them; by the greatness of thine arm they shall be as still as a stone; till thy people pass over, O Lord, till the people pass over, which thou hast purchased.	and terror and dread will fall on them. By the power of Your arm they will be as still as a stone until Your people pass by, O LORD, until the people You have bought pass by.
EXO	15	17	주께서 백성을 인도하사 그들을 주의 기업의 산에 심으시리이다 여호와여 이는 주의 처소를 삼으시려고 예비하신 것이라 주여 이것이 주의 손으로 세우신 성소로소이다	Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, in the place, O Lord, which thou hast made for thee to dwell in, in the Sanctuary, O Lord, which thy hands have established.	You will bring them in and plant them on the mountain of Your inheritance— the place, O LORD, You have prepared for Your dwelling, the sanctuary, O Lord, Your hands have established.
EXO	15	18	여호와의 다스리심이 영원무궁하시도다 하였더라	The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.	The LORD will reign forever and ever!”
EXO	15	19	바로의 말과 병거와 마병이 함께 바다에 들어가매 여호와께서 바닷물로 그들 위에 돌이켜 흐르게 하셨으나 이스라엘 자손은 바다 가운데서 육지로 행한지라	For the horse of Pharaoh went in with his chariots and with his horsemen into the sea, and the Lord brought again the waters of the sea upon them; but the children of Israel went on dry land in the midst of the sea.	For when Pharaoh’s horses, chariots, and horsemen went into the sea, the LORD brought the waters of the sea back over them. But the Israelites walked through the sea on dry ground.
EXO	15	20	아론의 누이 선지자 미리암이 손에 소고를 잡으매 모든 여인도 그를 따라 나오며 소고를 잡고 춤추니	And Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in her hand; and all the women went out after her with timbrels and with dances.	Then Miriam the prophetess, Aaron’s sister, took a tambourine in her hand, and all the women followed her with tambourines and dancing.
EXO	15	21	미리암이 그들에게 화답하여 가로되 너희는 여호와를 찬송하라 그는 높고 영화로우심이요 말과 그 탄 자를 바다에 던지셨음이로다 하였더라	And Miriam answered them, Sing ye to the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea.	And Miriam sang back to them: “Sing to the LORD, for He is highly exalted; the horse and rider He has thrown into the sea.”
EXO	15	22	모세가 홍해에서 이스라엘을 인도하매 그들이 나와서 수르 광야로 들어가서 거기서 사흘길을 행하였으나 물을 얻지 못하고	So Moses brought Israel from the Red sea, and they went out into the wilderness of Shur; and they went three days in the wilderness, and found no water.	Then Moses led Israel from the Red Sea, and they went out into the Desert of Shur. For three days they walked in the desert without finding water.
EXO	15	23	마라에 이르렀더니 그 곳 물이 써서 마시지 못하겠으므로 그 이름을 마라라 하였더라	And when they came to Marah, they could not drink of the waters of Marah, for they were bitter: therefore the name of it was called Marah.	And when they came to Marah, they could not drink the water there because it was bitter. (That is why it was named Marah.)
EXO	15	24	백성이 모세를 대하여 원망하여 가로되 우리가 무엇을 마실까 하매	And the people murmured against Moses, saying, What shall we drink?	So the people grumbled against Moses, saying, “What are we to drink?”
EXO	15	25	모세가 여호와께 부르짖었더니 여호와께서 그에게 한 나무를 지시하시니 그가 물에 던지매 물이 달아졌더라 거기서 여호와께서 그들을 위하여 법도와 율례를 정하시고 그들을 시험하실새	And he cried unto the Lord; and the Lord shewed him a tree, which when he had cast into the waters, the waters were made sweet: there he made for them a statute and an ordinance, and there he proved them,	And Moses cried out to the LORD, and the LORD showed him a log. And when he cast it into the waters, they were sweetened. There the LORD made for them a statute and an ordinance, and there He tested them,
EXO	15	26	가라사대 너희가 너희 하나님 나 여호와의 말을 청종하고 나의 보기에 의를 행하며 내 계명에 귀를 기울이며 내 모든 규례를 지키면 내가 애굽 사람에게 내린 모든 질병의 하나도 너희에게 내리지 아니하리니 나는 너희를 치료하는 여호와임이니라	And said, If thou wilt diligently hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, and wilt do that which is right in his sight, and wilt give ear to his commandments, and keep all his statutes, I will put none of these diseases upon thee, which I have brought upon the Egyptians: for I am the Lord that healeth thee.	saying, “If you will listen carefully to the voice of the LORD your God, and do what is right in His eyes, and pay attention to His commands, and keep all His statutes, then I will not bring on you any of the diseases I inflicted on the Egyptians. For I am the LORD who heals you.”
EXO	15	27	그들이 엘림에 이르니 거기 물샘 열둘과 종려 칠십 주가 있는지라 거기서 그들이 그 물 곁에 장막을 치니라	And they came to Elim, where were twelve wells of water, and threescore and ten palm trees: and they encamped there by the waters.	Then they came to Elim, where there were twelve springs of water and seventy palm trees, and they camped there by the waters.
EXO	16	1	이스라엘 자손의 온 회중이 엘림에서 떠나 엘림과 시내산 사이 신 광야에 이르니 애굽에서 나온 후 제이월 십오일이라	And they took their journey from Elim, and all the congregation of the children of Israel came unto the wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after their departing out of the land of Egypt.	On the fifteenth day of the second month after they had left the land of Egypt, the whole congregation of Israel set out from Elim and came to the Desert of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai.
EXO	16	2	이스라엘 온 회중이 그 광야에서 모세와 아론을 원망하여	And the whole congregation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron in the wilderness:	And there in the desert they all grumbled against Moses and Aaron.
EXO	16	3	그들에게 이르되 우리가 애굽 땅에서 고기 가마 곁에 앉았던 때와 떡을 배불리 먹던 때에 여호와의 손에 죽었더면 좋았을 것을 너희가 이 광야로 우리를 인도하여 내어 이 온 회중으로 주려 죽게 하는도다	And the children of Israel said unto them, Would to God we had died by the hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh pots, and when we did eat bread to the full; for ye have brought us forth into this wilderness, to kill this whole assembly with hunger.	“If only we had died by the LORD’s hand in the land of Egypt!” they said. “There we sat by pots of meat and ate our fill of bread, but you have brought us into this desert to starve this whole assembly to death!”
EXO	16	4	때에 여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 보라 내가 너희를 위하여 하늘에서 양식을 비 같이 내리리니 백성이 나가서 일용할 것을 날 마다 거둘 것이라 이같이 하여 그들이 나의 율법을 준행하나 아니하나 내가 시험하리라	Then said the Lord unto Moses, Behold, I will rain bread from heaven for you; and the people shall go out and gather a certain rate every day, that I may prove them, whether they will walk in my law, or no.	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Behold, I will rain down bread from heaven for you. Each day the people are to go out and gather enough for that day. In this way I will test whether or not they will follow My instructions.
EXO	16	5	제육일에는 그들이 그 거둔 것을 예비할지니 날마다 거두던 것의 갑절이 되리라	And it shall come to pass, that on the sixth day they shall prepare that which they bring in; and it shall be twice as much as they gather daily.	Then on the sixth day, when they prepare what they bring in, it will be twice as much as they gather on the other days.”
EXO	16	6	모세와 아론이 온 이스라엘 자손에게 이르되 저녁이 되면 너희가 여호와께서 너희를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내셨음을 알 것이요	And Moses and Aaron said unto all the children of Israel, At even, then ye shall know that the Lord hath brought you out from the land of Egypt:	So Moses and Aaron said to all the Israelites, “This evening you will know that it was the LORD who brought you out of the land of Egypt,
EXO	16	7	아침에는 너희가 여호와의 영광을 보리니 이는 여호와께서 너희가 자기를 향하여 원망함을 들으셨음이라 우리가 누구관대 너희가 우리를 대하여 원망하느냐	And in the morning, then ye shall see the glory of the Lord; for that he heareth your murmurings against the Lord: and what are we, that ye murmur against us?	and in the morning you will see the LORD’s glory, because He has heard your grumbling against Him. For who are we that you should grumble against us?”
EXO	16	8	모세가 또 가로되 여호와께서 저녁에는 너희에게 고기를 주어 먹이시고 아침에는 떡으로 배불리시리니 이는 여호와께서 자기를 향하여 너희의 원망하는 그 말을 들으셨음이니라 우리가 누구냐 너희의 원망은 우리를 향하여 함이 아니요 여호와를 향하여 함이로다	And Moses said, This shall be, when the Lord shall give you in the evening flesh to eat, and in the morning bread to the full; for that the Lord heareth your murmurings which ye murmur against him: and what are we? your murmurings are not against us, but against the Lord.	And Moses added, “The LORD will give you meat to eat this evening and bread to fill you in the morning, for He has heard your grumbling against Him. Who are we? Your grumblings are not against us but against the LORD.”
EXO	16	9	모세가 또 아론에게 이르되 이스라엘 자손의 온 회중에게 명하기를 여호와께 가까이 나아오라 여호와께서 너희의 원망함을 들으셨느니라 하라	And Moses spake unto Aaron, Say unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, Come near before the Lord: for he hath heard your murmurings.	Then Moses said to Aaron, “Tell the whole congregation of Israel, ‘Come before the LORD, for He has heard your grumbling.’”
EXO	16	10	아론이 이스라엘 자손의 온 회중에게 말하매 그들이 광야를 바라보니 여호와의 영광이 구름 속에 나타나더라	And it came to pass, as Aaron spake unto the whole congregation of the children of Israel, that they looked toward the wilderness, and, behold, the glory of the Lord appeared in the cloud.	And as Aaron was speaking to the whole congregation of Israel, they looked toward the desert, and there in a cloud the glory of the LORD appeared.
EXO	16	11	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
EXO	16	12	내가 이스라엘 자손의 원망함을 들었노라 그들에게 고하여 이르기를 너희가 해 질 때에는 고기를 먹고 아침에는 떡으로 배부르리니 나는 여호와 너희의 하나님인 줄 알리라 하라 하시니라	I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel: speak unto them, saying, At even ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye shall be filled with bread; and ye shall know that I am the Lord your God.	“I have heard the grumbling of the Israelites. Tell them, ‘At twilight you will eat meat, and in the morning you will be filled with bread. Then you will know that I am the LORD your God.’”
EXO	16	13	저녁에는 메추라기가 와서 진에 덮이고 아침에는 이슬이 진 사면에 있더니	And it came to pass, that at even the quails came up, and covered the camp: and in the morning the dew lay round about the host.	That evening quail came and covered the camp, and in the morning there was a layer of dew around the camp.
EXO	16	14	그 이슬이 마른 후에 광야 지면에 작고 둥글며 서리 같이 세미한 것이 있는지라	And when the dew that lay was gone up, behold, upon the face of the wilderness there lay a small round thing, as small as the hoar frost on the ground.	When the layer of dew had evaporated, there were thin flakes on the desert floor, as fine as frost on the ground.
EXO	16	15	이스라엘 자손이 보고 그것이 무엇인지 알지 못하여 서로 이르되 이것이 무엇이냐 하니 모세가 그들에게 이르되 이는 여호와께서 너희에게 주어 먹게 하신 양식이라	And when the children of Israel saw it, they said one to another, It is manna: for they wist not what it was. And Moses said unto them, This is the bread which the Lord hath given you to eat.	When the Israelites saw it, they asked one another, “What is it?” For they did not know what it was. So Moses told them, “It is the bread that the LORD has given you to eat.
EXO	16	16	여호와께서 이같이 명하시기를 너희 각 사람의 식량대로 이것을 거둘지니 곧 너희 인수대로 매명에 한 오멜씩 취하되 각 사람이 그 장막에 있는 자들을 위하여 취할지니라 하셨느니라	This is the thing which the Lord hath commanded, Gather of it every man according to his eating, an omer for every man, according to the number of your persons; take ye every man for them which are in his tents.	This is what the LORD has commanded: ‘Each one is to gather as much as he needs. You may take an omer for each person in your tent.’”
EXO	16	17	이스라엘 자손이 그같이 하였더니 그 거둔 것이 많기도 하고 적기도 하나	And the children of Israel did so, and gathered, some more, some less.	So the Israelites did this. Some gathered more, and some less.
EXO	16	18	오멜로 되어 본즉 많이 거둔 자도 남음이 없고 적게 거둔 자도 부족함이 없이 각기 식량대로 거두었더라	And when they did mete it with an omer, he that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little had no lack; they gathered every man according to his eating.	When they measured it by the omer, he who gathered much had no excess, and he who gathered little had no shortfall. Each one gathered as much as he needed to eat.
EXO	16	19	모세가 그들에게 이르기를 아무든지 아침까지 그것을 남겨 두지 말라 하였으나	And Moses said, Let no man leave of it till the morning.	Then Moses said to them, “No one may keep any of it until morning.”
EXO	16	20	그들이 모세의 말을 청종치 아니하고 더러는 아침까지 두었더니 벌레가 생기고 냄새가 난지라 모세가 그들에게 노하니라	Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto Moses; but some of them left of it until the morning, and it bred worms, and stank: and Moses was wroth with them.	But they did not listen to Moses; some people left part of it until morning, and it became infested with maggots and began to smell. So Moses was angry with them.
EXO	16	21	무리가 아침마다 각기 식량대로 거두었고 해가 뜨겁게 쪼이면 그것이 스러졌더라	And they gathered it every morning, every man according to his eating: and when the sun waxed hot, it melted.	Every morning each one gathered as much as was needed, and when the sun grew hot, it melted away.
EXO	16	22	제육일에는 각 사람이 갑절의 식물 곧 하나에 두 오멜씩 거둔지라 회중의 모든 두목이 와서 모세에게 고하매	And it came to pass, that on the sixth day they gathered twice as much bread, two omers for one man: and all the rulers of the congregation came and told Moses.	On the sixth day, they gathered twice as much food—two omers per person—and all the leaders of the congregation came and reported this to Moses.
EXO	16	23	모세가 그들에게 이르되 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하셨느니라 내일은 휴식이니 여호와께 거룩한 안식일이라 너희가 구울 것은 굽고 삶을 것은 삶고 그 나머지는 다 너희를 위하여 아침까지 간수하라	And he said unto them, This is that which the Lord hath said, To morrow is the rest of the holy sabbath unto the Lord: bake that which ye will bake to day, and seethe that ye will seethe; and that which remaineth over lay up for you to be kept until the morning.	He told them, “This is what the LORD has said: ‘Tomorrow is to be a day of complete rest, a holy Sabbath to the LORD. So bake what you want to bake, and boil what you want to boil. Then set aside whatever remains and keep it until morning.’”
EXO	16	24	그들이 모세의 명대로 아침까지 간수하였으나 냄새도 나지 아니하고 벌레도 생기지 아니한지라	And they laid it up till the morning, as Moses bade: and it did not stink, neither was there any worm therein.	So they set it aside until morning as Moses had commanded, and it did not smell or contain any maggots.
EXO	16	25	모세가 가로되 오늘은 그것을 먹으라 오늘은 여호와께 안식일인즉 오늘은 너희가 그것을 들에서 얻지 못하리라	And Moses said, Eat that to day; for to day is a sabbath unto the Lord: to day ye shall not find it in the field.	“Eat it today,” Moses said, “because today is a Sabbath to the LORD. Today you will not find anything in the field.
EXO	16	26	육일 동안은 너희가 그것을 거두되 제칠일은 안식일인즉 그날에는 없으리라 하였으나	Six days ye shall gather it; but on the seventh day, which is the sabbath, in it there shall be none.	For six days you may gather, but on the seventh day, the Sabbath, it will not be there.”
EXO	16	27	제칠일에 백성 중 더러가 거두러 나갔다가 얻지 못하니라	And it came to pass, that there went out some of the people on the seventh day for to gather, and they found none.	Yet on the seventh day some of the people went out to gather, but they did not find anything.
EXO	16	28	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 어느 때까지 너희가 내 계명과 내 율법을 지키지 아니하려느냐	And the Lord said unto Moses, How long refuse ye to keep my commandments and my laws?	Then the LORD said to Moses, “How long will you refuse to keep My commandments and instructions?
EXO	16	29	볼지어다 여호와가 너희에게 안식일을 줌으로 제육일에는 이들 양식을 너희에게 주는 것이니 너희는 각기 처소에 있고 제칠일에는 아무도 그 처소에서 나오지 말지니라	See, for that the Lord hath given you the sabbath, therefore he giveth you on the sixth day the bread of two days; abide ye every man in his place, let no man go out of his place on the seventh day.	Understand that the LORD has given you the Sabbath; that is why on the sixth day He will give you bread for two days. On the seventh day, everyone must stay where he is; no one may leave his place.”
EXO	16	30	그러므로 백성이 제칠일에 안식하니라	So the people rested on the seventh day.	So the people rested on the seventh day.
EXO	16	31	이스라엘 족속이 그 이름을 만나라 하였으며 깟씨 같고도 희고 맛은 꿀 섞은 과자 같았더라	And the house of Israel called the name thereof Manna: and it was like coriander seed, white; and the taste of it was like wafers made with honey.	Now the house of Israel called the bread manna. It was white like coriander seed and tasted like wafers made with honey.
EXO	16	32	모세가 가로되 여호와께서 이같이 명하시기를 이것을 오멜에 채워서 너의 대대 후손을 위하여 간수하라 이는 내가 너희를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 낼 때에 광야에서 너희에게 먹인 양식을 그들에게 보이기 위함이니라 하셨다 하고	And Moses said, This is the thing which the Lord commandeth, Fill an omer of it to be kept for your generations; that they may see the bread wherewith I have fed you in the wilderness, when I brought you forth from the land of Egypt.	Moses said, “This is what the LORD has commanded: ‘Keep an omer of manna for the generations to come, so that they may see the bread I fed you in the wilderness when I brought you out of the land of Egypt.’”
EXO	16	33	또 아론에게 이르되 항아리를 가져다가 그 속에 만나 한 오멜을 담아 여호와 앞에 두어 너희 대대로 간수하라	And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a pot, and put an omer full of manna therein, and lay it up before the Lord, to be kept for your generations.	So Moses told Aaron, “Take a jar and fill it with an omer of manna. Then place it before the LORD to be preserved for the generations to come.”
EXO	16	34	아론이 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 그것을 증거판 앞에 두어 간수하게 하였고	As the Lord commanded Moses, so Aaron laid it up before the Testimony, to be kept.	And Aaron placed it in front of the Testimony, to be preserved just as the LORD had commanded Moses.
EXO	16	35	이스라엘 자손이 사람 사는 땅에 이르기까지 사십 년 동안 만나를 먹되 곧 가나안 지경에 이르기까지 그들이 만나를 먹었더라	And the children of Israel did eat manna forty years, until they came to a land inhabited; they did eat manna, until they came unto the borders of the land of Canaan.	The Israelites ate manna forty years, until they came to a land where they could settle; they ate manna until they reached the border of Canaan.
EXO	16	36	오멜은 에바 십분의 일이더라	Now an omer is the tenth part of an ephah.	(Now an omer is a tenth of an ephah.)
EXO	17	1	이스라엘 자손의 온 회중이 여호와의 명령대로 신 광야에서 떠나 그 노정대로 행하여 르비딤에 장막을 쳤으나 백성이 마실 물이 없는지라	And all the congregation of the children of Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin, after their journeys, according to the commandment of the Lord, and pitched in Rephidim: and there was no water for the people to drink.	Then the whole congregation of Israel left the Desert of Sin, moving from place to place as the LORD commanded. They camped at Rephidim, but there was no water for the people to drink.
EXO	17	2	백성이 모세와 다투어 가로되 우리에게 물을 주어 마시게 하라 모세가 그들에게 이르되 너희가 어찌하여 나와 다투느냐 너희가 어찌하여 여호와를 시험하느냐	Wherefore the people did chide with Moses, and said, Give us water that we may drink. And Moses said unto them, Why chide ye with me? wherefore do ye tempt the Lord?	So the people contended with Moses, “Give us water to drink.” “Why do you contend with me?” Moses replied. “Why do you test the LORD?”
EXO	17	3	거기서 백성이 물에 갈하매 그들이 모세를 대하여 원망하여 가로되 당신이 어찌하여 우리를 애굽에서 인도하여 내어서 우리와 우리 자녀와 우리 생축으로 목말라 죽게 하느냐	And the people thirsted there for water; and the people murmured against Moses, and said, Wherefore is this that thou hast brought us up out of Egypt, to kill us and our children and our cattle with thirst?	But the people thirsted for water there, and they grumbled against Moses: “Why have you brought us out of Egypt—to make us and our children and livestock die of thirst?”
EXO	17	4	모세가 여호와께 부르짖어 가로되 내가 이 백성에게 어떻게 하리이까 그들이 얼마 아니면 내게 돌질 하겠나이다	And Moses cried unto the Lord, saying, What shall I do unto this people? they be almost ready to stone me.	Then Moses cried out to the LORD, “What should I do with these people? A little more and they will stone me!”
EXO	17	5	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 백성 앞을 지나가서 이스라엘 장로들을 데리고 하수를 치던 네 지팡이를 손에 잡고 가라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Go on before the people, and take with thee of the elders of Israel; and thy rod, wherewith thou smotest the river, take in thine hand, and go.	And the LORD said to Moses, “Walk on ahead of the people and take some of the elders of Israel with you. Take along in your hand the staff with which you struck the Nile, and go.
EXO	17	6	내가 거기서 호렙 산 반석 위에 너를 대하여 서리니 너는 반석을 치라 그것에서 물이 나리니 백성이 마시리라 모세가 이스라엘 장로들의 목전에서 그대로 행하니라	Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock in Horeb; and thou shalt smite the rock, and there shall come water out of it, that the people may drink. And Moses did so in the sight of the elders of Israel.	Behold, I will stand there before you by the rock at Horeb. And when you strike the rock, water will come out of it for the people to drink.” So Moses did this in the sight of the elders of Israel.
EXO	17	7	그가 그곳 이름을 맛사라 또는 므리바라 불렀으니 이는 이스라엘 자손이 다투었음이요 또는 그들이 여호와를 시험하여 이르기를 여호와께서 우리 중에 계신가 아닌가 하였음이더라	And he called the name of the place Massah, and Meribah, because of the chiding of the children of Israel, and because they tempted the Lord, saying, Is the Lord among us, or not?	He named the place Massah and Meribah because the Israelites quarreled, and because they tested the LORD, saying, “Is the LORD among us or not?”
EXO	17	8	때에 아말렉이 이르러 이스라엘과 르비딤에서 싸우니라	Then came Amalek, and fought with Israel in Rephidim.	After this, the Amalekites came and attacked the Israelites at Rephidim.
EXO	17	9	모세가 여호수아에게 이르되 우리를 위하여 사람들을 택하여 나가서 아말렉과 싸우라 내일 내가 하나님의 지팡이를 손에 잡고 산꼭대기에 서리라	And Moses said unto Joshua, Choose us out men, and go out, fight with Amalek: to morrow I will stand on the top of the hill with the rod of God in mine hand.	So Moses said to Joshua, “Choose some of our men and go out to fight the Amalekites. Tomorrow I will stand on the hilltop with the staff of God in my hand.”
EXO	17	10	여호수아가 모세의 말대로 행하여 아말렉과 싸우고 모세와 아론과 훌은 산꼭대기에 올라가서	So Joshua did as Moses had said to him, and fought with Amalek: and Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the hill.	Joshua did as Moses had instructed him and fought against the Amalekites, while Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the hill.
EXO	17	11	모세가 손을 들면 이스라엘이 이기고 손을 내리면 아말렉이 이기더니	And it came to pass, when Moses held up his hand, that Israel prevailed: and when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed.	As long as Moses held up his hands, Israel prevailed; but when he lowered them, Amalek prevailed.
EXO	17	12	모세의 팔이 피곤하매 그들이 돌을 가져다가 모세의 아래에 놓아 그로 그 위에 앉게 하고 아론과 훌이 하나는 이편에서 하나는 저편에서 모세의 손을 붙들어 올렸더니 그 손이 해가 지도록 내려오지 아니한지라	But Moses’ hands were heavy; and they took a stone, and put it under him, and he sat thereon; and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, the one on the one side, and the other on the other side; and his hands were steady until the going down of the sun.	When Moses’ hands grew heavy, they took a stone and put it under him, and he sat on it. Then Aaron and Hur held his hands up, one on each side, so that his hands remained steady until the sun went down.
EXO	17	13	여호수아가 칼날로 아말렉과 그 백성을 쳐서 파하니라	And Joshua discomfited Amalek and his people with the edge of the sword.	So Joshua overwhelmed Amalek and his army with the sword.
EXO	17	14	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 이것을 책에 기록하여 기념하게 하고 여호수아의 귀에 외워 들리라 내가 아말렉을 도말하여 천하에서 기억함이 없게 하리라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Write this for a memorial in a book, and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua: for I will utterly put out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven.	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Write this on a scroll as a reminder and recite it to Joshua, because I will utterly blot out the memory of Amalek from under heaven.”
EXO	17	15	모세가 단을 쌓고 그 이름을 여호와 닛시라 하고	And Moses built an altar, and called the name of it JEHOVAH–nissi:	And Moses built an altar and named it The LORD Is My Banner.
EXO	17	16	가로되 여호와께서 맹세하시기를 여호와가 아말렉으로 더불어 대대로 싸우리라 하셨다 하였더라	For he said, Because the Lord hath sworn that the Lord will have war with Amalek from generation to generation.	“Indeed,” he said, “a hand was lifted up toward the throne of the LORD. The LORD will war against Amalek from generation to generation.”
EXO	18	1	모세의 장인 미디안 제사장 이드로가 하나님이 모세에게와 자기 백성 이스라엘에게 하신 일 곧 여호와께서 이스라엘을 애굽에서 인도하여 내신 모든 일을 들으니라	When Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses’ father in law, heard of all that God had done for Moses, and for Israel his people, and that the Lord had brought Israel out of Egypt;	Now Moses’ father-in-law Jethro, the priest of Midian, heard about all that God had done for Moses and His people Israel, and how the LORD had brought Israel out of Egypt.
EXO	18	2	모세의 장인 이드로가 모세가 돌려 보내었던 그의 아내 십보라와	Then Jethro, Moses’ father in law, took Zipporah, Moses’ wife, after he had sent her back,	After Moses had sent back his wife Zipporah, his father-in-law Jethro had received her,
EXO	18	3	그 두 아들을 데렸으니 그 하나의 이름은 게르솜이라 이는 모세가 이르기를 내가 이방에서 객이 되었다 함이요	And her two sons; of which the name of the one was Gershom; for he said, I have been an alien in a strange land:	along with her two sons. One son was named Gershom, for Moses had said, “I have been a foreigner in a foreign land.”
EXO	18	4	하나의 이름은 엘리에셀이라 이는 내 아버지의 하나님이 나를 도우사 바로의 칼에서 구원하셨다 함이더라	And the name of the other was Eliezer; for the God of my father, said he, was mine help, and delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh:	The other son was named Eliezer, for Moses had said, “The God of my father was my helper and delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh.”
EXO	18	5	모세의 장인 이드로가 모세의 아들들과 그 아내로 더불어 광야에 들어와 모세에게 이르니 곧 모세가 하나님의 산에 진 친 곳이라	And Jethro, Moses’ father in law, came with his sons and his wife unto Moses into the wilderness, where he encamped at the mount of God:	Moses’ father-in-law Jethro, along with Moses’ wife and sons, came to him in the desert, where he was encamped at the mountain of God.
EXO	18	6	그가 모세에게 전언하되 그대의 장인 나 이드로가 그대의 아내와 그와 함께한 그 두 아들로 더불어 그대에게 왔노라	And he said unto Moses, I thy father in law Jethro am come unto thee, and thy wife, and her two sons with her.	He sent word to Moses, “I, your father-in-law Jethro, am coming to you with your wife and her two sons.”
EXO	18	7	모세가 나가서 그 장인을 맞아 절하고 그에게 입맞추고 그들이 서로 문안하고 함께 장막에 들어가서	And Moses went out to meet his father in law, and did obeisance, and kissed him; and they asked each other of their welfare; and they came into the tent.	So Moses went out to meet his father-in-law and bowed down and kissed him. They greeted each other and went into the tent.
EXO	18	8	모세가 여호와께서 이스라엘을 위하여 바로와 애굽 사람에게 행하신 모든 일과 길에서 그들의 당한 모든 고난과 여호와께서 그들을 구원하신 일을 다 그 장인에게 고하매	And Moses told his father in law all that the Lord had done unto Pharaoh and to the Egyptians for Israel’s sake, and all the travail that had come upon them by the way, and how the Lord delivered them.	Then Moses recounted to his father-in-law all that the LORD had done to Pharaoh and the Egyptians for Israel’s sake, all the hardships they had encountered along the way, and how the LORD had delivered them.
EXO	18	9	이드로가 여호와께서 이스라엘에게 모든 은혜를 베푸사 애굽 사람의 손에서 구원하심을 기뻐하여	And Jethro rejoiced for all the goodness which the Lord had done to Israel, whom he had delivered out of the hand of the Egyptians.	And Jethro rejoiced over all the good things the LORD had done for Israel, whom He had rescued from the hand of the Egyptians.
EXO	18	10	가로되 여호와를 찬송하리로다 너희를 애굽 사람의 손에서와 바로의 손에서 건져내시고 백성을 애굽 사람의 손 밑에서 건지셨도다	And Jethro said, Blessed be the Lord, who hath delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of Pharaoh, who hath delivered the people from under the hand of the Egyptians.	Jethro declared, “Blessed be the LORD, who has delivered you from the hand of the Egyptians and of Pharaoh, and who has delivered the people from the hand of the Egyptians.
EXO	18	11	이제 내가 알았도다 여호와는 모든 신보다 크시므로 이스라엘에게 교만히 행하는 그들을 이기셨도다 하고	Now I know that the Lord is greater than all gods: for in the thing wherein they dealt proudly he was above them.	Now I know that the LORD is greater than all other gods, for He did this when they treated Israel with arrogance.”
EXO	18	12	모세의 장인 이드로가 번제물과 희생을 하나님께 가져오매 아론과 이스라엘 모든 장로가 와서 모세의 장인과 함께 하나님 앞에서 떡을 먹으니라	And Jethro, Moses’ father in law, took a burnt offering and sacrifices for God: and Aaron came, and all the elders of Israel, to eat bread with Moses’ father in law before God.	Then Moses’ father-in-law Jethro brought a burnt offering and sacrifices to God, and Aaron came with all the elders of Israel to eat bread with Moses’ father-in-law in the presence of God.
EXO	18	13	이튿날에 모세가 백성을 재판하느라고 앉았고 백성은 아침부터 저녁까지 모세의 곁에 섰는지라	And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses sat to judge the people: and the people stood by Moses from the morning unto the evening.	The next day Moses took his seat to judge the people, and they stood around him from morning until evening.
EXO	18	14	모세의 장인이 모세가 백성에게 행하는 모든 일을 보고 가로되 그대가 이 백성에게 행하는 이 일이 어찜이뇨 어찌하여 그대는 홀로 앉았고 백성은 아침부터 저녁까지 그대의 곁에 섰느뇨	And when Moses’ father in law saw all that he did to the people, he said, What is this thing that thou doest to the people? why sittest thou thyself alone, and all the people stand by thee from morning unto even?	When his father-in-law saw all that Moses was doing for the people, he asked, “What is this that you are doing for the people? Why do you sit alone as judge, with all the people standing around you from morning till evening?”
EXO	18	15	모세가 그 장인에게 대답하되 백성이 하나님께 물으려고 내게로 옴이라	And Moses said unto his father in law, Because the people come unto me to enquire of God:	“Because the people come to me to inquire of God,” Moses replied.
EXO	18	16	그들이 일이 있으면 내게로 오나니 내가 그 양편을 판단하여 하나님의 율례와 법도를 알게 하나이다	When they have a matter, they come unto me; and I judge between one and another, and I do make them know the statutes of God, and his laws.	“Whenever they have a dispute, it is brought to me to judge between one man and another, and I make known to them the statutes and laws of God.”
EXO	18	17	모세의 장인이 그에게 이르되 그대의 하는 것이 선하지 못하도다	And Moses’ father in law said unto him, The thing that thou doest is not good.	But Moses’ father-in-law said to him, “What you are doing is not good.
EXO	18	18	그대와 그대와 함께한 이 백성이 필연 기력이 쇠하리니 이 일이 그대에게 너무 중함이라 그대가 혼자 할 수 없으리라	Thou wilt surely wear away, both thou, and this people that is with thee: for this thing is too heavy for thee; thou art not able to perform it thyself alone.	Surely you and these people with you will wear yourselves out, because the task is too heavy for you. You cannot handle it alone.
EXO	18	19	이제 내 말을 들으라 내가 그대에게 방침을 가르치리니 하나님이 그대와 함께 계실지로다 그대는 백성을 위하여 하나님 앞에 있어서 소송을 하나님께 베풀며	Hearken now unto my voice, I will give thee counsel, and God shall be with thee: Be thou for the people to God-ward, that thou mayest bring the causes unto God:	Now listen to me; I will give you some advice, and may God be with you. You must be the people’s representative before God and bring their causes to Him.
EXO	18	20	그들에게 율례와 법도를 가르쳐서 마땅히 갈 길과 할 일을 그들에게 보이고	And thou shalt teach them ordinances and laws, and shalt shew them the way wherein they must walk, and the work that they must do.	Teach them the statutes and laws, and show them the way to live and the work they must do.
EXO	18	21	그대는 또 온 백성 가운데서 재덕이 겸전한 자 곧 하나님을 두려워하며 진실무망하며 불의한 이를 미워하는 자를 빼서 백성 위에 세워 천부장과 백부장과 오십부장과 십부장을 삼아	Moreover thou shalt provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness; and place such over them, to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens:	Furthermore, select capable men from among the people—God-fearing, trustworthy men who are averse to dishonest gain. Appoint them over the people as leaders of thousands, of hundreds, of fifties, and of tens.
EXO	18	22	그들로 때를 따라 백성을 재판하게 하라 무릇 큰 일이면 그대에게 베풀 것이고 무릇 작은 일이면 그들이 스스로 재판할 것이니 그리하면 그들이 그대와 함께 담당할 것인즉 일이 그대에게 쉬우리라	And let them judge the people at all seasons: and it shall be, that every great matter they shall bring unto thee, but every small matter they shall judge: so shall it be easier for thyself, and they shall bear the burden with thee.	Have these men judge the people at all times. Then they can bring you any major issue, but all minor cases they can judge on their own, so that your load may be lightened as they share it with you.
EXO	18	23	그대가 만일 이 일을 하고 하나님께서도 그대에게 인가하시면 그대가 이 일을 감당하고 이 모든 백성도 자기 곳으로 평안히 가리라	If thou shalt do this thing, and God command thee so, then thou shalt be able to endure, and all this people shall also go to their place in peace.	If you follow this advice and God so directs you, then you will be able to endure, and all these people can go home in peace.”
EXO	18	24	이에 모세가 자기 장인의 말을 듣고 그 모든 말대로 하여	So Moses hearkened to the voice of his father in law, and did all that he had said.	Moses listened to his father-in-law and did everything he said.
EXO	18	25	이스라엘 무리 중에서 재덕이 겸전한 자를 빼서 그들로 백성의 두목 곧 천부장과 백부장과 오십부장과 십부장을 삼으매	And Moses chose able men out of all Israel, and made them heads over the people, rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens.	So Moses chose capable men from all Israel and made them heads over the people as leaders of thousands, of hundreds, of fifties, and of tens.
EXO	18	26	그들이 때를 따라 백성을 재판하되 어려운 일은 모세에게 베풀고 쉬운 일은 자단하더라	And they judged the people at all seasons: the hard causes they brought unto Moses, but every small matter they judged themselves.	And they judged the people at all times; they would bring the difficult cases to Moses, but any minor issue they would judge themselves.
EXO	18	27	모세가 그 장인을 보내니 그가 자기 고향으로 돌아가니라	And Moses let his father in law depart; and he went his way into his own land.	Then Moses sent his father-in-law on his way, and Jethro returned to his own land.
EXO	19	1	이스라엘 자손이 애굽 땅에서 나올 때부터 제삼월 곧 그 때에 그들이 시내 광야에 이르니라	In the third month, when the children of Israel were gone forth out of the land of Egypt, the same day came they into the wilderness of Sinai.	In the third month, on the same day of the month that the Israelites had left the land of Egypt, they came to the Wilderness of Sinai.
EXO	19	2	그들이 르비딤을 떠나 시내 광야에 이르러 그 광야에 장막을 치되 산 앞에 장막을 치니라	For they were departed from Rephidim, and were come to the desert of Sinai, and had pitched in the wilderness; and there Israel camped before the mount.	After they had set out from Rephidim, they entered the Wilderness of Sinai, and Israel camped there in front of the mountain.
EXO	19	3	모세가 하나님 앞에 올라가니 여호와께서 산에서 그를 불러 가라사대 너는 이같이 야곱 족속에게 이르고 이스라엘 자손에게 고하라	And Moses went up unto God, and the Lord called unto him out of the mountain, saying, Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel;	Then Moses went up to God, and the LORD called to him from the mountain, “This is what you are to tell the house of Jacob and explain to the sons of Israel:
EXO	19	4	나의 애굽 사람에게 어떻게 행하였음과 내가 어떻게 독수리 날개로 너희를 업어 내게로 인도하였음을 너희가 보았느니라	Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you on eagles’ wings, and brought you unto myself.	‘You have seen for yourselves what I did to Egypt, and how I carried you on eagles’ wings and brought you to Myself.
EXO	19	5	세계가 다 내게 속하였나니 너희가 내 말을 잘 듣고 내 언약을 지키면 너희는 열국 중에서 내 소유가 되겠고	Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine:	Now if you will indeed obey My voice and keep My covenant, you will be My treasured possession out of all the nations—for the whole earth is Mine.
EXO	19	6	너희가 내게 대하여 제사장 나라가 되며 거룩한 백성이 되리라 너는 이 말을 이스라엘 자손에게 고할지니라	And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation. These are the words which thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel.	And unto Me you shall be a kingdom of priests and a holy nation.’ These are the words that you are to speak to the Israelites.”
EXO	19	7	모세가 와서 백성의 장로들을 불러 여호와께서 자기에게 명하신 그 모든 말씀을 그 앞에 진술하니	And Moses came and called for the elders of the people, and laid before their faces all these words which the Lord commanded him.	So Moses went back and summoned the elders of the people and set before them all these words that the LORD had commanded him.
EXO	19	8	백성이 일제히 응답하여 가로되 여호와의 명하신 대로 우리가 다 행하리이다 모세가 백성의 말로 여호와께 회보하매	And all the people answered together, and said, All that the Lord hath spoken we will do. And Moses returned the words of the people unto the Lord.	And all the people answered together, “We will do everything that the LORD has spoken.” So Moses brought their words back to the LORD.
EXO	19	9	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 내가 빽빽한 구름 가운데서 네게 일함은 내가 너와 말하는 것을 백성으로 듣게 하며 또한 너를 영영히 믿게 하려함이니라 모세가 백성의 말로 여호와께 고하였으므로	And the Lord said unto Moses, Lo, I come unto thee in a thick cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and believe thee for ever. And Moses told the words of the people unto the Lord.	The LORD said to Moses, “Behold, I will come to you in a dense cloud, so that the people will hear when I speak with you, and they will always put their trust in you.” And Moses relayed to the LORD what the people had said.
EXO	19	10	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 너는 백성에게로 가서 오늘과 내일 그들을 성결케 하며 그들로 옷을 빨고	And the Lord said unto Moses, Go unto the people, and sanctify them to day and to morrow, and let them wash their clothes,	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Go to the people and consecrate them today and tomorrow. They must wash their clothes
EXO	19	11	예비하여 제삼일을 기다리게 하라 이는 제삼일에 나 여호와가 온 백성의 목전에 시내 산에 강림할 것임이니	And be ready against the third day: for the third day the Lord will come down in the sight of all the people upon mount Sinai.	and be prepared by the third day, for on the third day the LORD will come down on Mount Sinai in the sight of all the people.
EXO	19	12	너는 백성을 위하여 사면으로 지경을 정하고 이르기를 너희는 삼가 산에 오르거나 그 지경을 범하지 말지니 산을 범하는 자는 정녕 죽임을 당할 것이라	And thou shalt set bounds unto the people round about, saying, Take heed to yourselves, that ye go not up into the mount, or touch the border of it: whosoever toucheth the mount shall be surely put to death:	And you are to set up a boundary for the people around the mountain and tell them, ‘Be careful not to go up on the mountain or touch its base. Whoever touches the mountain shall surely be put to death.
EXO	19	13	손을 그에게 댐이 없이 그런 자는 돌에 맞아 죽임을 당하거나 살에 쐬어 죽임을 당하리니 짐승이나 사람을 무론하고 살지 못하리라 나팔을 길게 불거든 산 앞에 이를 것이니라 하라	There shall not an hand touch it, but he shall surely be stoned, or shot through; whether it be beast or man, it shall not live: when the trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up to the mount.	No hand shall touch him, but he shall surely be stoned or shot with arrows—whether man or beast, he must not live.’ Only when the ram’s horn sounds a long blast may they approach the mountain.”
EXO	19	14	모세가 산에서 내려 백성에게 이르러 백성으로 성결케 하니 그들이 자기 옷을 빨더라	And Moses went down from the mount unto the people, and sanctified the people; and they washed their clothes.	When Moses came down from the mountain to the people, he consecrated them, and they washed their clothes.
EXO	19	15	모세가 백성에게 이르되 예비하여 제삼일을 기다리고 여인을 가까이 말라 하니라	And he said unto the people, Be ready against the third day: come not at your wives.	“Be prepared for the third day,” he said to the people. “Do not draw near to a woman.”
EXO	19	16	제삼일 아침에 우뢰와 번개와 빽빽한 구름이 산 위에 있고 나팔소리가 심히 크니 진중 모든 백성이 다 떨더라	And it came to pass on the third day in the morning, that there were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud; so that all the people that was in the camp trembled.	On the third day, when morning came, there was thunder and lightning. A thick cloud was upon the mountain, and a very loud blast of the ram’s horn went out, so that all the people in the camp trembled.
EXO	19	17	모세가 하나님을 맞으려고 백성을 거느리고 진에서 나오매 그들이 산 기슭에 섰더니	And Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet with God; and they stood at the nether part of the mount.	Then Moses brought the people out of the camp to meet with God, and they stood at the foot of the mountain.
EXO	19	18	시내 산에 연기가 자욱하니 여호와께서 불 가운데서 거기 강림하심이라 그 연기가 옹기점 연기 같이 떠오르고 온 산이 크게 진동하며	And mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord descended upon it in fire: and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly.	Mount Sinai was completely enveloped in smoke, because the LORD had descended on it in fire. And the smoke rose like the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mountain quaked violently.
EXO	19	19	나팔 소리가 점점 커질 때에 모세가 말한즉 하나님이 음성으로 대답하시더라	And when the voice of the trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder and louder, Moses spake, and God answered him by a voice.	And as the sound of the ram’s horn grew louder and louder, Moses spoke and God answered him in the thunder.
EXO	19	20	여호와께서 시내 산 곧 그 산꼭대기에 강림하시고 그리로 모세를 부르시니 모세가 올라 가매	And the Lord came down upon mount Sinai, on the top of the mount: and the Lord called Moses up to the top of the mount; and Moses went up.	The LORD descended to the top of Mount Sinai and called Moses to the summit. So Moses went up,
EXO	19	21	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 내려가서 백성을 신칙하라 백성이 돌파하고 나 여호와께로 와서 보려고 하다가 많이 죽을까 하노라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Go down, charge the people, lest they break through unto the Lord to gaze, and many of them perish.	and the LORD said to him, “Go down and warn the people not to break through to see the LORD, lest many of them perish.
EXO	19	22	또 여호와께 가까이 하는 제사장들로 그 몸을 성결히 하게 하라 나 여호와가 그들을 돌격할까 하노라	And let the priests also, which come near to the Lord, sanctify themselves, lest the Lord break forth upon them.	Even the priests who approach the LORD must consecrate themselves, or the LORD will break out against them.”
EXO	19	23	모세가 여호와께 고하되 주께서 우리에게 명하여 이르시기를 산 사면에 지경을 세워 산을 거룩하게 하라 하셨사온즉 백성이 시내 산에 오르지 못하리이다	And Moses said unto the Lord, The people cannot come up to mount Sinai: for thou chargedst us, saying, Set bounds about the mount, and sanctify it.	But Moses said to the LORD, “The people cannot come up Mount Sinai, for You solemnly warned us, ‘Put a boundary around the mountain and set it apart as holy.’”
EXO	19	24	여호와께서 그에게 이르시되 가라 너는 내려가서 아론과 함께 올라오고 제사장들과 백성에게는 돌파하고 나 여호와에게로 올라오지 못하게 하라 내가 그들을 돌격할까 하노라	And the Lord said unto him, Away, get thee down, and thou shalt come up, thou, and Aaron with thee: but let not the priests and the people break through to come up unto the Lord, lest he break forth upon them.	And the LORD replied, “Go down and bring Aaron with you. But the priests and the people must not break through to come up to the LORD, or He will break out against them.”
EXO	19	25	모세가 백성에게 내려가서 그들에게 고하니라	So Moses went down unto the people, and spake unto them.	So Moses went down to the people and spoke to them.
EXO	20	1	하나님이 이 모든 말씀으로 일러 가라사대	And God spake all these words, saying,	And God spoke all these words:
EXO	20	2	나는 너를 애굽 땅 종 되었던 집에서 인도하여 낸 너의 하나님 여호와로라	I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.	“I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery.
EXO	20	3	너는 나 외에는 다른 신들을 네게 있게 말지니라	Thou shalt have no other gods before me.	You shall have no other gods before Me.
EXO	20	4	너를 위하여 새긴 우상을 만들지 말고 또 위로 하늘에 있는 것이나 아래로 땅에 있는 것이나 땅 아래 물 속에 있는 것의 아무 형상이든지 만들지 말며	Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth:	You shall not make for yourself an idol in the form of anything in the heavens above, on the earth below, or in the waters beneath.
EXO	20	5	그것들에게 절하지 말며 그것들을 섬기지 말라 나 여호와 너의 하나님은 질투하는 하나님인즉 나를 미워하는 자의 죄를 갚되 아비로부터 아들에게로 삼사 대까지 이르게 하거니와	Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me;	You shall not bow down to them or worship them; for I, the LORD your God, am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers on their children to the third and fourth generations of those who hate Me,
EXO	20	6	나를 사랑하고 내 계명을 지키는 자에게는 천대까지 은혜를 베푸느니라	And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments.	but showing loving devotion to a thousand generations of those who love Me and keep My commandments.
EXO	20	7	너는 너의 하나님 여호와의 이름을 망령되이 일컫지 말라 나 여호와의 이름을 망령되이 일컫는 자를 죄없다 하지 아니하리라	Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.	You shall not take the name of the LORD your God in vain, for the LORD will not leave anyone unpunished who takes His name in vain.
EXO	20	8	안식일을 기억하여 거룩히 지키라	Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.	Remember the Sabbath day by keeping it holy.
EXO	20	9	엿새 동안은 힘써 네 모든 일을 행할 것이나	Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work:	Six days you shall labor and do all your work,
EXO	20	10	제칠일은 너의 하나님 여호와의 안식일인즉 너나 네 아들이나 네 딸이나 네 남종이나 네 여종이나 네 육축이나 네 문안에 유하는 객이라도 아무 일도 하지 말라	But the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates:	but the seventh day is a Sabbath to the LORD your God, on which you must not do any work—neither you, nor your son or daughter, nor your manservant or maidservant or livestock, nor the foreigner within your gates.
EXO	20	11	이는 엿새 동안에 나 여호와가 하늘과 땅과 바다와 그 가운데 모든 것을 만들고 제칠일에 쉬었음이라 그러므로 나 여호와가 안식일을 복되게 하여 그 날을 거룩하게 하였느니라	For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it.	For in six days the LORD made the heavens and the earth and the sea and all that is in them, but on the seventh day He rested. Therefore the LORD blessed the Sabbath day and set it apart as holy.
EXO	20	12	네 부모를 공경하라 그리하면 너의 하나님 나 여호와가 네게 준 땅에서 네 생명이 길리라	Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.	Honor your father and mother, so that your days may be long in the land that the LORD your God is giving you.
EXO	20	13	살인하지 말지니라	Thou shalt not kill.	You shall not murder.
EXO	20	14	간음하지 말지니라	Thou shalt not commit adultery.	You shall not commit adultery.
EXO	20	15	도적질하지말지니라	Thou shalt not steal.	You shall not steal.
EXO	20	16	네 이웃에 대하여 거짓 증거하지 말지니라	Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.	You shall not bear false witness against your neighbor.
EXO	20	17	네 이웃의 집을 탐내지 말지니라 네 이웃의 아내나 그의 남종이나 그의 여종이나 그의 소나 그의 나귀나 무릇 네 이웃의 소유를 탐내지 말지니라	Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbour’s.	You shall not covet your neighbor’s house. You shall not covet your neighbor’s wife, or his manservant or maidservant, or his ox or donkey, or anything that belongs to your neighbor.”
EXO	20	18	뭇 백성이 우뢰와 번개와 나팔소리와 산의 연기를 본지라 그들이 볼 때에 떨며 멀리 서서	And all the people saw the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the noise of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking: and when the people saw it, they removed, and stood afar off.	When all the people witnessed the thunder and lightning, the sounding of the ram’s horn, and the mountain enveloped in smoke, they trembled and stood at a distance.
EXO	20	19	모세에게 이르되 당신이 우리에게 말씀하소서 우리가 들으리이다 하나님이 우리에게 말씀하시지 말게 하소서 우기가 죽을까 하나이다	And they said unto Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear: but let not God speak with us, lest we die.	“Speak to us yourself and we will listen,” they said to Moses. “But do not let God speak to us, or we will die.”
EXO	20	20	모세가 백성에게 이르되 두려워 말라 하나님이 강림하심은 너희를 시험하고 너희로 경외하여 범죄치 않게 하려 하심이니라	And Moses said unto the people, Fear not: for God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before your faces, that ye sin not.	“Do not be afraid,” Moses replied. “For God has come to test you, so that the fear of Him may be before you, to keep you from sinning.”
EXO	20	21	백성은 멀리 섰고 모세는 하나님의 계신 암흑으로 가까이 가니라	And the people stood afar off, and Moses drew near unto the thick darkness where God was.	And the people stood at a distance as Moses approached the thick darkness where God was.
EXO	20	22	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 너는 이스라엘 자손에게 이같이 이르라 내가 하늘에서부터 너희에게 말하는 것을 너희가 친히 보았으니	And the Lord said unto Moses, Thus thou shalt say unto the children of Israel, Ye have seen that I have talked with you from heaven.	Then the LORD said to Moses, “This is what you are to tell the Israelites: ‘You have seen for yourselves that I have spoken to you from heaven.
EXO	20	23	너희는 나를 비겨서 은으로 신상이나 금으로 신상을 너희를 위하여 만들지 말고	Ye shall not make with me gods of silver, neither shall ye make unto you gods of gold.	You are not to make any gods alongside Me; you are not to make for yourselves gods of silver or gold.
EXO	20	24	내게 토단을 쌓고 그 위에 너의 양과 소로 너의 번제와 화목제를 드리라 내가 무릇 내 이름을 기념하게 하는 곳에서 네게 강림하여 복을 주리라	An altar of earth thou shalt make unto me, and shalt sacrifice thereon thy burnt offerings, and thy peace offerings, thy sheep, and thine oxen: in all places where I record my name I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee.	You are to make for Me an altar of earth, and sacrifice on it your burnt offerings and peace offerings, your sheep and goats and cattle. In every place where I cause My name to be remembered, I will come to you and bless you.
EXO	20	25	네가 내게 돌로 단을 쌓거든 다듬은 돌로 쌓지 말라 네가 정으로 그것을 쪼면 부정하게 함이니라	And if thou wilt make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stone: for if thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou hast polluted it.	Now if you make an altar of stones for Me, you must not build it with stones shaped by tools; for if you use a chisel on it, you will defile it.
EXO	20	26	너는 층계로 내 단에 오르지 말라 네 하체가 그 위에서 드러날까 함이니라	Neither shalt thou go up by steps unto mine altar, that thy nakedness be not discovered thereon.	And you must not go up to My altar on steps, lest your nakedness be exposed on it.’
EXO	21	1	네가 백성 앞에 세울 율례는 이러하니라	Now these are the judgments which thou shalt set before them.	“These are the ordinances that you are to set before them:
EXO	21	2	네가 히브리 종을 사면 그가 육년 동안 섬길 것이요 제칠년에는 값 없이 나가 자유할 것이요	If thou buy an Hebrew servant, six years he shall serve: and in the seventh he shall go out free for nothing.	If you buy a Hebrew servant, he is to serve you for six years. But in the seventh year, he shall go free without paying anything.
EXO	21	3	그가 단신으로 왔으면 단신으로 나갈 것이요 장가 들었으면 그 아내도 그와 함께 나가려니와	If he came in by himself, he shall go out by himself: if he were married, then his wife shall go out with him.	If he arrived alone, he is to leave alone; if he arrived with a wife, she is to leave with him.
EXO	21	4	상전이 그에게 아내를 줌으로 그 아내가 자녀간 낳았으면 그 아내와 그 자식들은 상전에게 속할 것이요 그는 단신으로 나갈 것이로되	If his master have given him a wife, and she have born him sons or daughters; the wife and her children shall be her master’s, and he shall go out by himself.	If his master gives him a wife and she bears him sons or daughters, the woman and her children shall belong to her master, and only the man shall go free.
EXO	21	5	종이 진정으로 말하기를 내가 상전과 내 처자를 사랑하니 나가서 자유하지 않겠노라 하면	And if the servant shall plainly say, I love my master, my wife, and my children; I will not go out free:	But if the servant declares, ‘I love my master and my wife and children; I do not want to go free,’
EXO	21	6	상전이 그를 데리고 재판장에게로 갈 것이요 또 그를 문이나 문설주 앞으로 데리고 가서 그것에다가 송곳으로 그 귀를 뚫을 것이라 그가 영영히 그 상전을 섬기리라	Then his master shall bring him unto the judges; he shall also bring him to the door, or unto the door post; and his master shall bore his ear through with an aul; and he shall serve him for ever.	then his master is to bring him before the judges. And he shall take him to the door or doorpost and pierce his ear with an awl. Then he shall serve his master for life.
EXO	21	7	사람이 그 딸을 여종으로 팔았으면 그는 남종 같이 나오지 못할지며	And if a man sell his daughter to be a maidservant, she shall not go out as the menservants do.	And if a man sells his daughter as a servant, she is not to go free as the menservants do.
EXO	21	8	만일 상전이 그를 기뻐 아니하여 상관치 아니하면 그를 속신케 할 것이나 그 여자를 속임이 되었으니 타국인에게 팔지 못할 것이	If she please not her master, who hath betrothed her to himself, then shall he let her be redeemed: to sell her unto a strange nation he shall have no power, seeing he hath dealt deceitfully with her.	If she is displeasing in the eyes of her master who had designated her for himself, he must allow her to be redeemed. He has no right to sell her to foreigners, since he has broken faith with her.
EXO	21	9	만일 그를 자기 아들에게 주기로 하였으면 그를 딸 같이 대접할 것이요	And if he have betrothed her unto his son, he shall deal with her after the manner of daughters.	And if he chooses her for his son, he must deal with her as with a daughter.
EXO	21	10	만일 상전이 달리 장가를 들지라도 그의 의복과 음식과 동침하는 것은 끊지 못할 것이요	If he take him another wife; her food, her raiment, and her duty of marriage, shall he not diminish.	If he takes another wife, he must not reduce the food, clothing, or marital rights of his first wife.
EXO	21	11	이 세가지를 시행하지 아니하면 그는 속전을 내지 않고 거저 나가게 할 것이니라	And if he do not these three unto her, then shall she go out free without money.	If, however, he does not provide her with these three things, she is free to go without monetary payment.
EXO	21	12	사람을 쳐 죽인 자는 반드시 죽일 것이나	He that smiteth a man, so that he die, shall be surely put to death.	Whoever strikes and kills a man must surely be put to death.
EXO	21	13	만일 사람이 계획한 일이 아니라 나 하나님이 사람을 그 손에 붙임이면 내가 위하여 한 곳을 정하리니 그 사람이 그리로 도망할 것이며	And if a man lie not in wait, but God deliver him into his hand; then I will appoint thee a place whither he shall flee.	If, however, he did not lie in wait, but God allowed it to happen, then I will appoint for you a place where he may flee.
EXO	21	14	사람이 그 이웃을 짐짓 모살하였으면 너는 그를 내 단에서라도 잡아내려 죽일지니라	But if a man come presumptuously upon his neighbour, to slay him with guile; thou shalt take him from mine altar, that he may die.	But if a man schemes and acts willfully against his neighbor to kill him, you must take him away from My altar to be put to death.
EXO	21	15	자기 아비나 어미를 치는 자는 반드시 죽일지니라	And he that smiteth his father, or his mother, shall be surely put to death.	Whoever strikes his father or mother must surely be put to death.
EXO	21	16	사람을 후린 자가 그 사람을 팔았든지 자기 수하에 두었든지 그를 반드시 죽일 지니라	And he that stealeth a man, and selleth him, or if he be found in his hand, he shall surely be put to death.	Whoever kidnaps another man must be put to death, whether he sells him or the man is found in his possession.
EXO	21	17	그 아비나 어미를 저주하는 자는 반드시 죽일 지니라	And he that curseth his father, or his mother, shall surely be put to death.	Anyone who curses his father or mother must surely be put to death.
EXO	21	18	사람이 서로 싸우다가 하나가 돌이나 주먹으로 그 적수를 쳤으나 그가 죽지 않고 자리에 누었다가	And if men strive together, and one smite another with a stone, or with his fist, and he die not, but keepeth his bed:	If men are quarreling and one strikes the other with a stone or a fist, and he does not die but is confined to bed,
EXO	21	19	지팡이를 짚고 기동하면 그를 친 자가 형벌은 면하되 기간 손해를 배상하고 그로 전치되게 할지니라	If he rise again, and walk abroad upon his staff, then shall he that smote him be quit: only he shall pay for the loss of his time, and shall cause him to be thoroughly healed.	then the one who struck him shall go unpunished, as long as the other can get up and walk around outside with his staff. Nevertheless, he must compensate the man for his lost work and see that he is completely healed.
EXO	21	20	사람이 매로 그 남종이나 여종을 쳐서 당장에 죽으면 반드시 형벌을 받으려니와	And if a man smite his servant, or his maid, with a rod, and he die under his hand; he shall be surely punished.	If a man strikes his manservant or maidservant with a rod, and the servant dies by his hand, he shall surely be punished.
EXO	21	21	그가 일일이나 이일을 연명하면 형벌을 면하리니 그는 상전의 금전임이니라	Notwithstanding, if he continue a day or two, he shall not be punished: for he is his money.	However, if the servant gets up after a day or two, the owner shall not be punished, since the servant is his property.
EXO	21	22	사람이 서로 싸우다가 아이 밴 여인을 다쳐 낙태케 하였으나 다른 해가 없으면 그 남편의 청구대로 반드시 벌금을 내되 재판장의 판결을 좇아 낼 것이니라	If men strive, and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit depart from her, and yet no mischief follow: he shall be surely punished, according as the woman’s husband will lay upon him; and he shall pay as the judges determine.	If men who are fighting strike a pregnant woman and her child is born prematurely, but there is no further injury, he shall surely be fined as the woman’s husband demands and as the court allows.
EXO	21	23	그러나 다른 해가 있으면 갚되 생명은 생명으로,	And if any mischief follow, then thou shalt give life for life,	But if a serious injury results, then you must require a life for a life—
EXO	21	24	눈은 눈으로, 이는 이로, 손은 손으로, 발은 발로,	Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,	eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
EXO	21	25	데운 것은 데움으로, 상하게 한 것은 상함으로, 때린 것은 때림으로 갚을지니라	Burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe.	burn for burn, wound for wound, and stripe for stripe.
EXO	21	26	사람이 그 남종의 한 눈이나 여종의 한 눈을 쳐서 상하게 하면 그 눈 대신에 그를 놓을 것이며	And if a man smite the eye of his servant, or the eye of his maid, that it perish; he shall let him go free for his eye’s sake.	If a man strikes and blinds the eye of his manservant or maidservant, he must let the servant go free as compensation for the eye.
EXO	21	27	그 남종의 한 이나 여종의 한 이를 쳐서 빠뜨리면 그 이 대신에 그를 놓을지니라	And if he smite out his manservant’s tooth, or his maidservant’s tooth; he shall let him go free for his tooth’s sake.	And if he knocks out the tooth of his manservant or maidservant, he must let the servant go free as compensation for the tooth.
EXO	21	28	소가 남자나 여자를 받아서 죽이면 그 소는 반드시 돌에 맞아 죽을 것이요 그 고기는 먹지 말 것이며 임자는 형벌을 면하려니와	If an ox gore a man or a woman, that they die: then the ox shall be surely stoned, and his flesh shall not be eaten; but the owner of the ox shall be quit.	If an ox gores a man or woman to death, the ox must surely be stoned, and its meat must not be eaten. But the owner of the ox shall not be held responsible.
EXO	21	29	소는 본래 받는 버릇이 있고 그 임자는 그로 인하여 경고를 받았으되 단속하지 아니하므로 남녀 간에 받아 죽이면 그 소는 돌로 쳐 죽일 것이고 임자도 죽일 것이며	But if the ox were wont to push with his horn in time past, and it hath been testified to his owner, and he hath not kept him in, but that he hath killed a man or a woman; the ox shall be stoned, and his owner also shall be put to death.	But if the ox has a habit of goring, and its owner has been warned yet does not restrain it, and it kills a man or woman, then the ox must be stoned and its owner must also be put to death.
EXO	21	30	만일 그에게 속죄금을 명하면 무릇 그 명한 것을 생명의 속으로 낼 것이요	If there be laid on him a sum of money, then he shall give for the ransom of his life whatsoever is laid upon him.	If payment is demanded of him instead, he may redeem his life by paying the full amount demanded of him.
EXO	21	31	아들을 받든지 딸을 받든지 이 율례대로 그 임자에게 행할 것이며	Whether he have gored a son, or have gored a daughter, according to this judgment shall it be done unto him.	If the ox gores a son or a daughter, it shall be done to him according to the same rule.
EXO	21	32	소가 만일 남종이나 여종을 받으면 소 임자가 은 삼십 세겔을 그 상전에게 줄 것이요 소는 돌에 맞아 죽을지니라	If the ox shall push a manservant or a maidservant; he shall give unto their master thirty shekels of silver, and the ox shall be stoned.	If the ox gores a manservant or maidservant, the owner must pay thirty shekels of silver to the master of that servant, and the ox must be stoned.
EXO	21	33	사람이 구덩이를 열어 두거나 구덩이를 파고 덮지 아니함으로 소나 나귀가 거기에 빠지면	And if a man shall open a pit, or if a man shall dig a pit, and not cover it, and an ox or an ass fall therein;	If a man opens or digs a pit and fails to cover it, and an ox or a donkey falls into it,
EXO	21	34	그 구덩이 주인이 잘 조처하여 짐승의 임자에게 돈을 줄 것이요 죽은 것은 그의 차지가 될지니라	The owner of the pit shall make it good, and give money unto the owner of them; and the dead beast shall be his.	the owner of the pit shall make restitution; he must pay its owner, and the dead animal will be his.
EXO	21	35	이 사람의 소가 저 사람의 소를 받아 죽이면 산 소를 팔아 그 값을 반분하고 죽은 것도 반분하려니와	And if one man’s ox hurt another’s, that he die; then they shall sell the live ox, and divide the money of it; and the dead ox also they shall divide.	If a man’s ox injures his neighbor’s ox and it dies, they must sell the live one and divide the proceeds; they also must divide the dead animal.
EXO	21	36	그 소가 본래 받는 버릇이 있는 줄을 알고도 그 임자가 단속하지 아니하였으면 그는 소로 소를 갚을 것이요 죽은 것은 그의 차지가 될지니라	Or if it be known that the ox hath used to push in time past, and his owner hath not kept him in; he shall surely pay ox for ox; and the dead shall be his own.	But if it was known that the ox had a habit of goring, yet its owner failed to restrain it, he shall pay full compensation, ox for ox, and the dead animal will be his.
EXO	22	1	사람이 소나 양을 도적질하여 잡거나 팔면 그는 소 하나에 소 다섯으로 갚고 양 하나에 양 넷으로 갚을지니라	If a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it; he shall restore five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep.	“If a man steals an ox or a sheep and slaughters or sells it, he must repay five oxen for an ox and four sheep for a sheep.
EXO	22	2	도적이 뚫고 들어옴을 보고 그를 쳐 죽이면 피 흘린 죄가 없으나	If a thief be found breaking up, and be smitten that he die, there shall no blood be shed for him.	If a thief is caught breaking in and is beaten to death, no one shall be guilty of bloodshed.
EXO	22	3	해 돋은 후이면 피 흘린 죄가 있으리라 도적은 반드시 배상할 것이나 배상할 것이 없으면 그 몸을 팔아 그 도적질한 것을 배상할 것이요	If the sun be risen upon him, there shall be blood shed for him; for he should make full restitution; if he have nothing, then he shall be sold for his theft.	But if it happens after sunrise, there is guilt for his bloodshed. A thief must make full restitution; if he has nothing, he himself shall be sold for his theft.
EXO	22	4	도적질한 것이 살아 그 손에 있으면 소나 나귀나 양을 무론하고 갑절을 배상할지니라	If the theft be certainly found in his hand alive, whether it be ox, or ass, or sheep; he shall restore double.	If what was stolen is actually found alive in his possession—whether ox or donkey or sheep—he must pay back double.
EXO	22	5	사람이 밭에서나 포도원에서 먹이다가 그 짐승을 놓아서 남의 밭에서 먹게 하면 자기 밭의 제일 좋은 것과 자기 포도원의 제일 좋은 것으로 배상할지니라	If a man shall cause a field or vineyard to be eaten, and shall put in his beast, and shall feed in another man’s field; of the best of his own field, and of the best of his own vineyard, shall he make restitution.	If a man grazes his livestock in a field or vineyard and allows them to stray so that they graze in someone else’s field, he must make restitution from the best of his own field or vineyard.
EXO	22	6	불이 나서 가시나무에 미쳐 낟가리나 거두지 못한 곡식이나 전원을 태우면 불 놓은 자가 반드시 배상할지니라	If fire break out, and catch in thorns, so that the stacks of corn, or the standing corn, or the field, be consumed therewith; he that kindled the fire shall surely make restitution.	If a fire breaks out and spreads to thornbushes so that it consumes stacked or standing grain, or the whole field, the one who started the fire must make full restitution.
EXO	22	7	사람이 돈이나 물품을 이웃에게 맡겨 지키게 하였다가 그 이웃의 집에서 봉적하였는데 그 도적이 잡히면 갑절을 배상할 것이요	If a man shall deliver unto his neighbour money or stuff to keep, and it be stolen out of the man’s house; if the thief be found, let him pay double.	If a man gives his neighbor money or goods for safekeeping and they are stolen from the neighbor’s house, the thief, if caught, must pay back double.
EXO	22	8	도적이 잡히지 아니하면 그 집 주인이 재판장 앞에 가서 자기가 그 이웃의 물품에 손 댄 여부의 조사를 받을 것이며	If the thief be not found, then the master of the house shall be brought unto the judges, to see whether he have put his hand unto his neighbour’s goods.	If the thief is not found, the owner of the house must appear before the judges to determine whether he has taken his neighbor’s property.
EXO	22	9	어떠한 과실에든지 소에든지 나귀에든지 양에든지 의복에든지 또는 아무 잃은 물건에든지 그것에 대하여 혹이 이르기를 이것이 그것이라 하면 두 편이 재판장 앞에 나아갈 것이요 재판장이 죄 있다고 하는 자가 그 상대편에게 갑절을 배상할지니라	For all manner of trespass, whether it be for ox, for ass, for sheep, for raiment, or for any manner of lost thing, which another challengeth to be his, the cause of both parties shall come before the judges; and whom the judges shall condemn, he shall pay double unto his neighbour.	In all cases of illegal possession of an ox, a donkey, a sheep, a garment, or any lost item that someone claims, ‘This is mine,’ both parties shall bring their cases before the judges. The one whom the judges find guilty must pay back double to his neighbor.
EXO	22	10	사람이 나귀나 소나 양이나 다른 짐승을 이웃에게 맡겨 지키게 하였다가 죽거나 상하거나 몰려가도 본 사람이 없으면	If a man deliver unto his neighbour an ass, or an ox, or a sheep, or any beast, to keep; and it die, or be hurt, or driven away, no man seeing it:	If a man gives a donkey, an ox, a sheep, or any other animal to be cared for by his neighbor, but it dies or is injured or stolen while no one is watching,
EXO	22	11	두 사람 사이에 맡은 자가 이웃의 것에 손을 대지 아니하였다고 여호와로 맹세할 것이요 그 임자는 그대로 믿을 것이며 그 사람은 배상하지 아니하려니와	Then shall an oath of the Lord be between them both, that he hath not put his hand unto his neighbour’s goods; and the owner of it shall accept thereof, and he shall not make it good.	an oath before the LORD shall be made between the parties to determine whether or not the man has taken his neighbor’s property. The owner must accept the oath and require no restitution.
EXO	22	12	만일 자기에게서 봉적하였으면 그 임자에게 배상할 것이며	And if it be stolen from him, he shall make restitution unto the owner thereof.	But if the animal was actually stolen from the neighbor, he must make restitution to the owner.
EXO	22	13	만일 찢겼으면 그것을 가져다가 증거할 것이요 그 찢긴 것에 대하여 배상하지 않을지니라	If it be torn in pieces, then let him bring it for witness, and he shall not make good that which was torn.	If the animal was torn to pieces, he shall bring it as evidence; he need not make restitution for the torn carcass.
EXO	22	14	만일 이웃에게 빌어온 것이 그 임자가 함께 있지 아니할 때에 상하거나 죽으면 반드시 배상하려니와	And if a man borrow ought of his neighbour, and it be hurt, or die, the owner thereof being not with it, he shall surely make it good.	If a man borrows an animal from his neighbor and it is injured or dies while its owner is not present, he must make full restitution.
EXO	22	15	그 임자가 그것과 함께 하였으면 배상하지 않을지며 세 낸 것도 세를 위하여 왔은즉 배상하지 않을지니라	But if the owner thereof be with it, he shall not make it good: if it be an hired thing, it came for his hire.	If the owner was present, no restitution is required. If the animal was rented, the fee covers the loss.
EXO	22	16	사람이 정혼하지 아니한 처녀를 꾀어 동침하였으면 빙폐를 드려 아내로 삼을 것이요	And if a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with her, he shall surely endow her to be his wife.	If a man seduces a virgin who is not pledged in marriage and sleeps with her, he must pay the full dowry for her to be his wife.
EXO	22	17	만일 그 아비가 그로 그에게 주기를 거절하면 그는 처녀에게 빙폐하는 일례로 돈을 낼지니라	If her father utterly refuse to give her unto him, he shall pay money according to the dowry of virgins.	If her father absolutely refuses to give her to him, the man still must pay an amount comparable to the bridal price of a virgin.
EXO	22	18	너는 무당을 살려 두지 말지니라	Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live.	You must not allow a sorceress to live.
EXO	22	19	짐승과 행음하는 자는 반드시 죽일지니라	Whosoever lieth with a beast shall surely be put to death.	Whoever lies with an animal must surely be put to death.
EXO	22	20	여호와 외에 다른 신에게 희생을 드리는 자는 멸할지니라	He that sacrificeth unto any god, save unto the Lord only, he shall be utterly destroyed.	If anyone sacrifices to any god other than the LORD alone, he must be set apart for destruction.
EXO	22	21	너는 이방 나그네를 압제하지 말며 그들을 학대하지 말라 너희도 애굽 땅에서 나그네이었었음이니라	Thou shalt neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him: for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.	You must not exploit or oppress a foreign resident, for you yourselves were foreigners in the land of Egypt.
EXO	22	22	너는 과부나 고아를 해롭게 하지 말라	Ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child.	You must not mistreat any widow or orphan.
EXO	22	23	네가 만일 그들을 해롭게 하므로 그들이 내게 부르짖으면 내가 반드시 그 부르짖음을 들을지라	If thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry;	If you do mistreat them, and they cry out to Me in distress, I will surely hear their cry.
EXO	22	24	나의 노가 맹렬하므로 내가 칼로 너희를 죽이리니 너희 아내는 과부가 되고 너희 자녀는 고아가 되리라	And my wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword; and your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless.	My anger will be kindled, and I will kill you with the sword; then your wives will become widows and your children will be fatherless.
EXO	22	25	네가 만일 너와 함께한 나의 백성 중 가난한 자에게 돈을 꾸이거든 너는 그에게 채주 같이 하지 말며 변리를 받지 말 것이며	If thou lend money to any of my people that is poor by thee, thou shalt not be to him as an usurer, neither shalt thou lay upon him usury.	If you lend money to one of My people among you who is poor, you must not act as a creditor to him; you are not to charge him interest.
EXO	22	26	네가 만일 이웃의 옷을 전당잡거든 해가 지기 전에 그에게 돌려보내라	If thou at all take thy neighbour’s raiment to pledge, thou shalt deliver it unto him by that the sun goeth down:	If you take your neighbor’s cloak as collateral, return it to him by sunset,
EXO	22	27	그 몸을 가릴 것이 이뿐이라 이는 그 살의 옷인즉 그가 무엇을 입고 자겠느냐 그가 내게 부르짖으면 내가 들으리니 나는 자비한 자임이니라	For that is his covering only, it is his raiment for his skin: wherein shall he sleep? and it shall come to pass, when he crieth unto me, that I will hear; for I am gracious.	because his cloak is the only covering he has for his body. What else will he sleep in? And if he cries out to Me, I will hear, for I am compassionate.
EXO	22	28	너는 재판장을 욕하지 말며 백성의 유사를 저주하지 말지니라	Thou shalt not revile the gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people.	You must not blaspheme God or curse the ruler of your people.
EXO	22	29	너는 너의 추수한 것과 너의 짜낸 즙을 드리기에 더디게 말지며 너의 처음 난 아들들을 내게 줄지며	Thou shalt not delay to offer the first of thy ripe fruits, and of thy liquors: the firstborn of thy sons shalt thou give unto me.	You must not hold back offerings from your granaries or vats. You are to give Me the firstborn of your sons.
EXO	22	30	너의 소와 양도 그 일례로 하되 칠 일 동안 어미와 함께 있게 하다가 팔일만에 내게 줄지니라	Likewise shalt thou do with thine oxen, and with thy sheep: seven days it shall be with his dam; on the eighth day thou shalt give it me.	You shall do likewise with your cattle and your sheep. Let them stay with their mothers for seven days, but on the eighth day you are to give them to Me.
EXO	22	31	너희는 내게 거룩한 사람이 될지니 들에서 짐승에게 찢긴 것의 고기를 먹지 말고 개에게 던질지니라	And ye shall be holy men unto me: neither shall ye eat any flesh that is torn of beasts in the field; ye shall cast it to the dogs.	You are to be My holy people. You must not eat the meat of a mauled animal found in the field; you are to throw it to the dogs.
EXO	23	1	너는 허망한 풍설을 전파하지 말며 악인과 연합하여 무함하는 증인이 되지 말며	Thou shalt not raise a false report: put not thine hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness.	“You shall not spread a false report. Do not join the wicked by being a malicious witness.
EXO	23	2	다수를 따라 악을 행하지 말며 송사에 다수를 따라 부정당한 증거를 하지 말며	Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil; neither shalt thou speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest judgment:	You shall not follow the crowd in wrongdoing. When you testify in a lawsuit, do not pervert justice by siding with the crowd.
EXO	23	3	가난한 자의 송사라고 편벽되이 두호하지 말지니라	Neither shalt thou countenance a poor man in his cause.	And do not show favoritism to a poor man in his lawsuit.
EXO	23	4	네가 만일 네 원수의 길 잃은 소나 나귀를 만나거든 반드시 그 사람에게로 돌릴지며	If thou meet thine enemy’s ox or his ass going astray, thou shalt surely bring it back to him again.	If you encounter your enemy’s stray ox or donkey, you must return it to him.
EXO	23	5	네가 만일 너를 미워하는 자의 나귀가 짐을 싣고 엎드러짐을 보거든 삼가 버려두지 말고 그를 도와 그 짐을 부리울지니라	If thou see the ass of him that hateth thee lying under his burden, and wouldest forbear to help him, thou shalt surely help with him.	If you see the donkey of one who hates you fallen under its load, do not leave it there; you must help him with it.
EXO	23	6	너는 가난한 자의 송사라고 공평치 않게 하지 말며	Thou shalt not wrest the judgment of thy poor in his cause.	You shall not deny justice to the poor in their lawsuits.
EXO	23	7	거짓 일을 멀리하며 무죄한 자와 의로운 자를 죽이지 말라 나는 악인을 의롭다 하지 아니하겠노라	Keep thee far from a false matter; and the innocent and righteous slay thou not: for I will not justify the wicked.	Stay far away from a false accusation. Do not kill the innocent or the just, for I will not acquit the guilty.
EXO	23	8	너는 뇌물을 받지 말라 뇌물은 밝은 자의 눈을 어둡게 하고 의로운 자의 말을 굽게 하느니라	And thou shalt take no gift: for the gift blindeth the wise, and perverteth the words of the righteous.	Do not accept a bribe, for a bribe blinds those who see and twists the words of the righteous.
EXO	23	9	너는 이방 나그네를 압제하지 말라 너희가 애굽 땅에서 나그네 되었었은즉 나그네의 정경을 아느니라	Also thou shalt not oppress a stranger: for ye know the heart of a stranger, seeing ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.	Do not oppress a foreign resident, since you yourselves know how it feels to be foreigners; for you were foreigners in the land of Egypt.
EXO	23	10	너는 육년 동안은 너의 땅에 파종하여 그 소산을 거두고	And six years thou shalt sow thy land, and shalt gather in the fruits thereof:	For six years you are to sow your land and gather its produce,
EXO	23	11	제칠년에는 갈지 말고 묵여 두어서 네 백성의 가난한 자로 먹게 하라 그 남은 것은 들짐승이 먹으리라 너의 포도원과 감람원도 그리할지니라	But the seventh year thou shalt let it rest and lie still; that the poor of thy people may eat: and what they leave the beasts of the field shall eat. In like manner thou shalt deal with thy vineyard, and with thy oliveyard.	but in the seventh year you must let it rest and lie fallow, so that the poor among your people may eat from the field and the wild animals may consume what they leave. Do the same with your vineyard and olive grove.
EXO	23	12	너는 육일 동안에 네 일을 하고 제칠일에는 쉬라 네 소와 나귀가 쉴 것이며 네 계집 종의 자식과 나그네가 숨을 돌리리라	Six days thou shalt do thy work, and on the seventh day thou shalt rest: that thine ox and thine ass may rest, and the son of thy handmaid, and the stranger, may be refreshed.	For six days you are to do your work, but on the seventh day you must cease, so that your ox and your donkey may rest and the son of your maidservant may be refreshed, as well as the foreign resident.
EXO	23	13	내가 네게 이른 모든 일을 삼가 지키고 다른 신들의 이름은 부르지도 말며 네 입에서 들리게도 말지니라	And in all things that I have said unto you be circumspect: and make no mention of the name of other gods, neither let it be heard out of thy mouth.	Pay close attention to everything I have said to you. You must not invoke the names of other gods; they must not be heard on your lips.
EXO	23	14	너는 매년 삼차 내게 절기를 지킬지니라	Three times thou shalt keep a feast unto me in the year.	Three times a year you are to celebrate a feast to Me.
EXO	23	15	너는 무교병의 절기를 지키라 내가 네게 명한 대로 아빕월의 정한 때에 칠 일동안 무교병을 먹을지니 이는 그 달에 네가 애굽에서 나왔음이라 빈 손으로 내게 보이지 말지니라	Thou shalt keep the feast of unleavened bread: (thou shalt eat unleavened bread seven days, as I commanded thee, in the time appointed of the month Abib; for in it thou camest out from Egypt: and none shall appear before me empty:)	You are to keep the Feast of Unleavened Bread as I commanded you: At the appointed time in the month of Abib you are to eat unleavened bread for seven days, because that was the month you came out of Egypt. No one may appear before Me empty-handed.
EXO	23	16	맥추절을 지키라 이는 네가 수고하여 밭에 뿌린 것의 첫 열매를 거둠이니라 수장절을 지키라 이는 네가 수고하여 이룬 것을 연종에 밭에서부터 거두어 저장함이니라	And the feast of harvest, the firstfruits of thy labours, which thou hast sown in the field: and the feast of ingathering, which is in the end of the year, when thou hast gathered in thy labours out of the field.	You are also to keep the Feast of Harvest with the firstfruits of the produce from what you sow in the field. And keep the Feast of Ingathering at the end of the year, when you gather your produce from the field.
EXO	23	17	너의 모든 남자는 매년 세번씩 주 여호와께 보일지니라	Three times in the year all thy males shall appear before the Lord God.	Three times a year all your males are to appear before the Lord GOD.
EXO	23	18	너는 내 희생의 피를 유교병과 함께 드리지 말며 내 절기 희생의 기름을 아침까지 남겨 두지 말지니라	Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leavened bread; neither shall the fat of my sacrifice remain until the morning.	You must not offer the blood of My sacrifices with anything leavened, nor may the fat of My feast remain until morning.
EXO	23	19	너의 토지에서 처음 익은 열매의 첫것을 가져다가 너의 하나님 여호와의 전에 드릴지니라 너는 염소 새끼를 그 어미의 젖으로 삶지 말지니라	The first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring into the house of the Lord thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother’s milk.	Bring the best of the firstfruits of your soil to the house of the LORD your God. You must not cook a young goat in its mother’s milk.
EXO	23	20	내가 사자를 네 앞서 보내어 길에서 너를 보호하여 너로 내가 예비한 곳에 이르게 하리니	Behold, I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared.	Behold, I am sending an angel before you to protect you along the way and to bring you to the place I have prepared.
EXO	23	21	너희는 삼가 그 목소리를 청종하고 그를 노엽게 하지 말라 그가 너희 허물을 사하지 아니할 것은 내 이름이 그에게 있음이니라	Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not; for he will not pardon your transgressions: for my name is in him.	Pay attention to him and listen to his voice; do not defy him, for he will not forgive rebellion, since My Name is in him.
EXO	23	22	네가 그 목소리를 잘 청종하고 나의 모든 말대로 행하면 내가 네 원수에게 원수가 되고 네 대적에게 대적이 될지라	But if thou shalt indeed obey his voice, and do all that I speak; then I will be an enemy unto thine enemies, and an adversary unto thine adversaries.	But if you will listen carefully to his voice and do everything I say, I will be an enemy to your enemies and a foe to your foes.
EXO	23	23	나의 사자가 네 앞서 가서 너를 아모리 사람과 헷 사람과 브리스 사람과 가나안 사람과 히위 사람과 여부스 사람에게로 인도하고 나는 그들을 끊으리니	For mine Angel shall go before thee, and bring thee in unto the Amorites, and the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Canaanites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites: and I will cut them off.	For My angel will go before you and bring you into the land of the Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, Canaanites, Hivites, and Jebusites, and I will annihilate them.
EXO	23	24	너는 그들의 신을 숭배하지 말며 섬기지 말며 그들의 소위를 본받지 말며 그것들을 다 훼파하며 그 주상을 타파하고	Thou shalt not bow down to their gods, nor serve them, nor do after their works: but thou shalt utterly overthrow them, and quite break down their images.	You must not bow down to their gods or serve them or follow their practices. Instead, you are to demolish them and smash their sacred stones to pieces.
EXO	23	25	너의 하나님 여호와를 섬기라 그리하면 여호와가 너희의 양식과 물에 복을 내리고 너희 중에 병을 제하리니	And ye shall serve the Lord your God, and he shall bless thy bread, and thy water; and I will take sickness away from the midst of thee.	So you shall serve the LORD your God, and He will bless your bread and your water. And I will take away sickness from among you.
EXO	23	26	네 나라에 낙태하는 자가 없고 잉태치 못하는 자가 없을 것이라 내가 너의 날 수를 채우리라	There shall nothing cast their young, nor be barren, in thy land: the number of thy days I will fulfil.	No woman in your land will miscarry or be barren; I will fulfill the number of your days.
EXO	23	27	내가 내 위엄을 네 앞서 보내어 너의 이를 곳의 모든 백성을 파하고 너의 모든 원수로 너를 등지게 할 것이며	I will send my fear before thee, and will destroy all the people to whom thou shalt come, and I will make all thine enemies turn their backs unto thee.	I will send My terror ahead of you and throw into confusion every nation you encounter. I will make all your enemies turn and run.
EXO	23	28	내가 왕벌을 네 앞에 보내리니 그 벌이 히위 족속과 가나안 족속과 헷 족속을 네 앞에서 쫓아내리라	And I will send hornets before thee, which shall drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite, from before thee.	I will send the hornet before you to drive the Hivites and Canaanites and Hittites out of your way.
EXO	23	29	그러나 그 땅이 황무하게 되어 들짐승이 번성하여 너희를 해할까 하여 일년 안에는 그들을 네 앞에서 쫓아내지 아니하고	I will not drive them out from before thee in one year; lest the land become desolate, and the beast of the field multiply against thee.	I will not drive them out before you in a single year; otherwise the land would become desolate and wild animals would multiply against you.
EXO	23	30	네가 번성하여 그 땅을 기업으로 얻을 때까지 내가 그들을 네 앞에서 조금씩 쫓아내리라	By little and little I will drive them out from before thee, until thou be increased, and inherit the land.	Little by little I will drive them out ahead of you, until you become fruitful and possess the land.
EXO	23	31	너의 지경을 홍해에서부터 블레셋 바다까지 광야에서부터 하수까지 정하고 그 땅의 거민을 네 앞에서 쫓아낼지라	And I will set thy bounds from the Red sea even unto the sea of the Philistines, and from the desert unto the river: for I will deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hand; and thou shalt drive them out before thee.	And I will establish your borders from the Red Sea to the Sea of the Philistines, and from the desert to the Euphrates. For I will deliver the inhabitants into your hand, and you will drive them out before you.
EXO	23	32	너는 그들과 그들의 신과 언약하지 말라	Thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor with their gods.	You shall make no covenant with them or with their gods.
EXO	23	33	그들이 네 땅에 머무르지 못할 것은 그들이 너로 내게 범죄케 할까 두려움이라 네가 그 신을 섬기면 그것이 너의 올무가 되리라	They shall not dwell in thy land, lest they make thee sin against me: for if thou serve their gods, it will surely be a snare unto thee.	They must not remain in your land, lest they cause you to sin against Me. For if you serve their gods, it will surely be a snare to you.”
EXO	24	1	또 모세에게 이르시되 너는 아론과 나답과 아비후와 이스라엘 장로 칠십 인과 함께 여호와에게로 올라와 멀리서 경배하고	And he said unto Moses, Come up unto the Lord, thou, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel; and worship ye afar off.	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Come up to the LORD—you and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of Israel’s elders—and you are to worship at a distance.
EXO	24	2	너 모세만 여호와에게 가까이 나아오고 그들은 가까이 나아오지 말며 백성은 너와 함께 올라오지 말지니라	And Moses alone shall come near the Lord: but they shall not come nigh; neither shall the people go up with him.	Moses alone shall approach the LORD, but the others must not come near. And the people may not go up with him.”
EXO	24	3	모세가 와서 여호와의 모든 말씀과 그 모든 율례를 백성에게 고하매 그들이 한 소리로 응답하여 가로되 여호와의 명하신 모든 말씀을 우리가 준행하리이다	And Moses came and told the people all the words of the Lord, and all the judgments: and all the people answered with one voice, and said, All the words which the Lord hath said will we do.	When Moses came and told the people all the words and ordinances of the LORD, they all responded with one voice: “All the words that the LORD has spoken, we will do.”
EXO	24	4	모세가 여호와의 모든 말씀을 기록하고 이른 아침에 일어나 산 아래 단을 쌓고 이스라엘 십이 지파대로 열두 기둥을 세우고	And Moses wrote all the words of the Lord, and rose up early in the morning, and builded an altar under the hill, and twelve pillars, according to the twelve tribes of Israel.	And Moses wrote down all the words of the LORD. Early the next morning he got up and built an altar at the base of the mountain, along with twelve pillars for the twelve tribes of Israel.
EXO	24	5	이스라엘 자손의 청년들을 보내어 번제와 소로 화목제를 여호와께 드리게 하고	And he sent young men of the children of Israel, which offered burnt offerings, and sacrificed peace offerings of oxen unto the Lord.	Then he sent out some young men of Israel, and they offered burnt offerings and sacrificed young bulls as peace offerings to the LORD.
EXO	24	6	모세가 피를 취하여 반은 양푼에 담고 반은 단에 뿌리고	And Moses took half of the blood, and put it in basons; and half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar.	Moses took half of the blood and put it in bowls, and the other half he sprinkled on the altar.
EXO	24	7	언약서를 가져 백성에게 낭독하여 들리매 그들이 가로되 여호와의 모든 말씀을 우리가 준행하리이다	And he took the book of the covenant, and read in the audience of the people: and they said, All that the Lord hath said will we do, and be obedient.	Then he took the Book of the Covenant and read it to the people, who replied, “All that the LORD has spoken we will do, and we will be obedient.”
EXO	24	8	모세가 그 피를 취하여 백성에게 뿌려 가로되 이는 여호와께서 이 모든 말씀에 대하여 너희와 세우신 언약의 피니라	And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the blood of the covenant, which the Lord hath made with you concerning all these words.	So Moses took the blood, sprinkled it on the people, and said, “This is the blood of the covenant that the LORD has made with you in accordance with all these words.”
EXO	24	9	모세와 아론과 나답과 아비후와 이스라엘 장로 칠십 인이 올라가서	Then went up Moses, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel:	Then Moses went up with Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel,
EXO	24	10	이스라엘 하나님을 보니 그 발 아래에는 청옥을 편듯하고 하늘 같이 청명하더라	And they saw the God of Israel: and there was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness.	and they saw the God of Israel. Under His feet was a work like a pavement made of sapphire, as clear as the sky itself.
EXO	24	11	하나님이 이스라엘의 존귀한 자들에게 손을 대지 아니하셨고 그들은 하나님을 보고 먹고 마셨더라	And upon the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: also they saw God, and did eat and drink.	But God did not lay His hand on the nobles of Israel; they saw Him, and they ate and drank.
EXO	24	12	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 너는 산에 올라 내게로 와서 거기 있으라 너로 그들을 가르치려고 내가 율법과 계명을 친히 기록한 돌판을 네게 주리라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Come up to me into the mount, and be there: and I will give thee tables of stone, and a law, and commandments which I have written; that thou mayest teach them.	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Come up to Me on the mountain and stay here, so that I may give you the tablets of stone, with the law and commandments I have written for their instruction.”
EXO	24	13	모세가 그 종자 여호수아와 함께 일어나 하나님의 산으로 올라가며	And Moses rose up, and his minister Joshua: and Moses went up into the mount of God.	So Moses set out with Joshua his attendant and went up on the mountain of God.
EXO	24	14	장로들에게 이르되 너희는 여기서 우리가 너희에게로 돌아오기까지 기다리라 아론과 훌이 너희와 함께하리니 무릇 일이 있는 자는 그들에게로 나아갈지니라 하고	And he said unto the elders, Tarry ye here for us, until we come again unto you: and, behold, Aaron and Hur are with you: if any man have any matters to do, let him come unto them.	And he said to the elders, “Wait here for us until we return to you. Aaron and Hur are here with you. Whoever has a dispute can go to them.”
EXO	24	15	모세가 산에 오르매 구름이 산을 가리며	And Moses went up into the mount, and a cloud covered the mount.	When Moses went up on the mountain, the cloud covered it,
EXO	24	16	여호와의 영광이 시내 산 위에 머무르고 구름이 육일 동안 산을 가리더니 제칠일에 여호와께서 구름 가운데 모세를 부르시니라	And the glory of the Lord abode upon mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days: and the seventh day he called unto Moses out of the midst of the cloud.	and the glory of the LORD settled on Mount Sinai. For six days the cloud covered it, and on the seventh day the LORD called to Moses from within the cloud.
EXO	24	17	산 위의 여호와의 영광이 이스라엘 자손의 눈에 맹렬한 불 같이 보였고	And the sight of the glory of the Lord was like devouring fire on the top of the mount in the eyes of the children of Israel.	And the sight of the glory of the LORD was like a consuming fire on the mountaintop in the eyes of the Israelites.
EXO	24	18	모세는 구름 속으로 들어가서 산 위에 올랐으며 사십 일 사십 야를 산에 있으니라	And Moses went into the midst of the cloud, and gat him up into the mount: and Moses was in the mount forty days and forty nights.	Moses entered the cloud as he went up on the mountain, and he remained on the mountain forty days and forty nights.
EXO	25	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
EXO	25	2	이스라엘 자손에게 명하여 내게 예물을 가져오라 하고 무릇 즐거운 마음으로 내는 자에게서 내게 드리는 것을 너희는 받을지니라	Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring me an offering: of every man that giveth it willingly with his heart ye shall take my offering.	“Tell the Israelites to bring Me an offering. You are to receive My offering from every man whose heart compels him.
EXO	25	3	너희가 그들에게서 받을 예물은 이러하니 금과 은과 놋과	And this is the offering which ye shall take of them; gold, and silver, and brass,	This is the offering you are to accept from them: gold, silver, and bronze;
EXO	25	4	청색 자색 홍색실과 가는 베실과 염소털과	And blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats’ hair,	blue, purple, and scarlet yarn; fine linen and goat hair;
EXO	25	5	붉은 물 들인 수양의 가죽과 해달의 가죽과 조각목과	And rams’ skins dyed red, and badgers’ skins, and shittim wood,	ram skins dyed red and fine leather; acacia wood;
EXO	25	6	등유와 관유에 드는 향품과 분향할 향을 만들 향품과	Oil for the light, spices for anointing oil, and for sweet incense,	olive oil for the light; spices for the anointing oil and for the fragrant incense;
EXO	25	7	호마노며 에봇과 흉패에 물릴 보석이니라	Onyx stones, and stones to be set in the ephod, and in the breastplate.	and onyx stones and gemstones to be mounted on the ephod and breastpiece.
EXO	25	8	내가 그들 중에 거할 성소를 그들을 시켜 나를 위하여 짓되	And let them make me a sanctuary; that I may dwell among them.	And they are to make a sanctuary for Me, so that I may dwell among them.
EXO	25	9	무릇 내가 네게 보이는 대로 장막의 식양과 그 기구의 식양을 따라 지을지니라	According to all that I shew thee, after the pattern of the tabernacle, and the pattern of all the instruments thereof, even so shall ye make it.	You must make the tabernacle and design all its furnishings according to the pattern I show you.
EXO	25	10	그들은 조각목으로 궤를 짓되 장이 이 규빗 반, 광이 일 규빗 반, 고가 일 규빗 반이 되게 하고	And they shall make an ark of shittim wood: two cubits and a half shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.	And they are to construct an ark of acacia wood, two and a half cubits long, a cubit and a half wide, and a cubit and a half high.
EXO	25	11	너는 정금으로 그것을 싸되 그 안팎을 싸고 윗가로 돌아가며 금테를 두르고	And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, within and without shalt thou overlay it, and shalt make upon it a crown of gold round about.	Overlay it with pure gold both inside and out, and make a gold molding around it.
EXO	25	12	금고리 넷을 부어 만들어 그 네 발에 달되 이편에 두 고리요 저편에 두 고리며	And thou shalt cast four rings of gold for it, and put them in the four corners thereof; and two rings shall be in the one side of it, and two rings in the other side of it.	Cast four gold rings for it and fasten them to its four feet, two rings on one side and two on the other.
EXO	25	13	조각목으로 채를 만들고 금으로 싸고	And thou shalt make staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold.	And make poles of acacia wood and overlay them with gold.
EXO	25	14	그 채를 궤 양편 고리에 꿰어서 궤를 메게 하며	And thou shalt put the staves into the rings by the sides of the ark, that the ark may be borne with them.	Insert the poles into the rings on the sides of the ark, in order to carry it.
EXO	25	15	채를 궤의 고리에 꿴 대로 두고 빼어내지 말지며	The staves shall be in the rings of the ark: they shall not be taken from it.	The poles are to remain in the rings of the ark; they must not be removed.
EXO	25	16	내가 네게 줄 증거판을 궤 속에 둘지며	And thou shalt put into the ark the testimony which I shall give thee.	And place inside the ark the Testimony, which I will give you.
EXO	25	17	정금으로 속죄소를 만들되 장이 이 규빗 반, 광이 일 규빗 반이 되게 하고	And thou shalt make a mercy seat of pure gold: two cubits and a half shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof.	And you are to construct a mercy seat of pure gold, two and a half cubits long and a cubit and a half wide.
EXO	25	18	금으로 그룹 둘을 속죄소 두 끝에 쳐서 만들되	And thou shalt make two cherubims of gold, of beaten work shalt thou make them, in the two ends of the mercy seat.	Make two cherubim of hammered gold at the ends of the mercy seat,
EXO	25	19	한 그룹은 이 끝에, 한 그룹은 저 끝에 곧 속죄소 두 끝에 속죄소와 한 덩이로 연하게 할지며	And make one cherub on the one end, and the other cherub on the other end: even of the mercy seat shall ye make the cherubims on the two ends thereof.	one cherub on one end and one on the other, all made from one piece of gold.
EXO	25	20	그룹들은 그 날개를 높이 펴서 그 날개로 속죄소를 덮으며 그 얼굴을 서로 대하여 속죄소를 향하게 하고	And the cherubims shall stretch forth their wings on high, covering the mercy seat with their wings, and their faces shall look one to another; toward the mercy seat shall the faces of the cherubims be.	And the cherubim are to have wings that spread upward, overshadowing the mercy seat. The cherubim are to face each other, looking toward the mercy seat.
EXO	25	21	속죄소를 궤 위에 얹고 내가 네게 줄 증거판을 궤 속에 넣으라	And thou shalt put the mercy seat above upon the ark; and in the ark thou shalt put the testimony that I shall give thee.	Set the mercy seat atop the ark, and put the Testimony that I will give you into the ark.
EXO	25	22	거기서 내가 너와 만나고 속죄소 위 곧 증거궤 위에 있는 두 그룹 사이에서 내가 이스라엘 자손을 위하여 네게 명할 모든 일을 네게 이르리라	And there I will meet with thee, and I will commune with thee from above the mercy seat, from between the two cherubims which are upon the ark of the testimony, of all things which I will give thee in commandment unto the children of Israel.	And I will meet with you there above the mercy seat, between the two cherubim that are over the ark of the Testimony; I will speak with you about all that I command you regarding the Israelites.
EXO	25	23	너는 조각목으로 상을 만들되 장이 이 규빗, 광이 일 규빗, 고가 일 규빗 반이 되게 하고	Thou shalt also make a table of shittim wood: two cubits shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.	You are also to make a table of acacia wood two cubits long, a cubit wide, and a cubit and a half high.
EXO	25	24	정금으로 싸고 주위에 금테를 두르고	And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, and make thereto a crown of gold round about.	Overlay it with pure gold and make a gold molding around it.
EXO	25	25	그 사면에 손바닥 넓이만한 턱을 만들고 그 턱 주위에 금으로 테를 만들고	And thou shalt make unto it a border of an hand breadth round about, and thou shalt make a golden crown to the border thereof round about.	And make a rim around it a handbreadth wide and put a gold molding on the rim.
EXO	25	26	그것을 위하여 금고리 넷을 만들어 네 발위 네 모퉁이에 달되	And thou shalt make for it four rings of gold, and put the rings in the four corners that are on the four feet thereof.	Make four gold rings for the table and fasten them to the four corners at its four legs.
EXO	25	27	턱 곁에 달라 이는 상 멜 채를 꿸 곳이며	Over against the border shall the rings be for places of the staves to bear the table.	The rings are to be close to the rim, to serve as holders for the poles used to carry the table.
EXO	25	28	또 조각목으로 그 채를 만들고 금으로 싸라 상을 이것으로 멜 것이니라	And thou shalt make the staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold, that the table may be borne with them.	Make the poles of acacia wood and overlay them with gold, so that the table may be carried with them.
EXO	25	29	너는 대접과 숟가락과 병과 붓는 잔을 만들되 정금으로 만들지며	And thou shalt make the dishes thereof, and spoons thereof, and covers thereof, and bowls thereof, to cover withal: of pure gold shalt thou make them.	You are also to make the plates and dishes, as well as the pitchers and bowls for pouring drink offerings. Make them out of pure gold.
EXO	25	30	상 위에 진설병을 두어 항상 내 앞에 있게 할지니라	And thou shalt set upon the table shewbread before me alway.	And place the Bread of the Presence on the table before Me at all times.
EXO	25	31	너는 정금으로 등대를 쳐서 만들되 그 밑판과 줄기와 잔과 꽃받침과 꽃을 한 덩이로 연하게 하고	And thou shalt make a candlestick of pure gold: of beaten work shall the candlestick be made: his shaft, and his branches, his bowls, his knops, and his flowers, shall be of the same.	Then you are to make a lampstand of pure, hammered gold. It shall be made of one piece, including its base and shaft, its cups, and its buds and petals.
EXO	25	32	가지 여섯을 등대 곁에서 나오게 하되 그 세 가지는 이편으로 나오고 그 세 가지는 저편으로 나오게 하며	And six branches shall come out of the sides of it; three branches of the candlestick out of the one side, and three branches of the candlestick out of the other side:	Six branches are to extend from the sides of the lampstand—three on one side and three on the other.
EXO	25	33	이편 가지에 살구 꽃 형상의 잔 셋과 꽃받침과 꽃이 있게 하고 저편 가지에도 살구꽃 형상의 잔 셋과 꽃받침과 꽃이 있게 하여 등대에서 나온 여섯 가지를 같게 할지며	Three bowls made like unto almonds, with a knop and a flower in one branch; and three bowls made like almonds in the other branch, with a knop and a flower: so in the six branches that come out of the candlestick.	There are to be three cups shaped like almond blossoms on the first branch, each with buds and petals, three on the next branch, and the same for all six branches that extend from the lampstand.
EXO	25	34	등대 줄기에는 살구꽃 형상의 잔 넷과 꽃받침과 꽃이 있게 하고	And in the candlestick shall be four bowls made like unto almonds, with their knops and their flowers.	And on the lampstand there shall be four cups shaped like almond blossoms with buds and petals.
EXO	25	35	등대에서 나온 여섯 가지를 위하여 꽃받침이 있게 하되 두 가지 아래 한 꽃받침이 있어 줄기와 연하게 하며 또 두 가지 아래 한 꽃받침이 있어 줄기와 연하게 하고	And there shall be a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, according to the six branches that proceed out of the candlestick.	For the six branches that extend from the lampstand, a bud must be under the first pair of branches, a bud under the second pair, and a bud under the third pair.
EXO	25	36	그 꽃받침과 가지를 줄기와 연하게 하여 전부를 정금으로 쳐 만들고	Their knops and their branches shall be of the same: all it shall be one beaten work of pure gold.	The buds and branches are to be all of one piece with the lampstand, hammered out of pure gold.
EXO	25	37	등잔 일곱을 만들어 그 위에 두어 앞을 비추게 하며	And thou shalt make the seven lamps thereof: and they shall light the lamps thereof, that they may give light over against it.	Make seven lamps and set them up on the lampstand so that they illuminate the area in front of it.
EXO	25	38	그 불집게와 불똥 그릇도 정금으로 만들지니	And the tongs thereof, and the snuffdishes thereof, shall be of pure gold.	The wick trimmers and their trays must be of pure gold.
EXO	25	39	등대와 이 모든 기구를 정금 한 달란트로 만들되	Of a talent of pure gold shall he make it, with all these vessels.	The lampstand and all these utensils shall be made from a talent of pure gold.
EXO	25	40	너는 삼가 이 산에서 네게 보인 식양대로 할지니라	And look that thou make them after their pattern, which was shewed thee in the mount.	See to it that you make everything according to the pattern shown you on the mountain.
EXO	26	1	너는 성막을 만들되 앙장 열 폭을 가늘게 꼰 베실과 청색 자색 홍색실로 그룹을 공교히 수 놓아 만들지니	Moreover thou shalt make the tabernacle with ten curtains of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet: with cherubims of cunning work shalt thou make them.	“You are to construct the tabernacle itself with ten curtains of finely spun linen, each with blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and cherubim skillfully worked into them.
EXO	26	2	매 폭의 장은 이십팔 규빗, 광은 사 규빗으로 각 폭의 장단을 같게하고	The length of one curtain shall be eight and twenty cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: and every one of the curtains shall have one measure.	Each curtain shall be twenty-eight cubits long and four cubits wide—all curtains the same size.
EXO	26	3	그 앙장 다섯 폭을 서로 연하며 다른 다섯 폭도 서로 연하고	The five curtains shall be coupled together one to another; and other five curtains shall be coupled one to another.	Five of the curtains are to be joined together, and the other five joined as well.
EXO	26	4	그 앙장의 연락할 말폭 가에 청색 고를 만들며 다른 연락할 말폭 가에도 그와 같이 하고	And thou shalt make loops of blue upon the edge of the one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling; and likewise shalt thou make in the uttermost edge of another curtain, in the coupling of the second.	Make loops of blue material on the edge of the end curtain in the first set, and do the same for the end curtain in the second set.
EXO	26	5	앙장 말폭 가에 고 오십을 달며 다른 앙장 말폭 가에도 고 오십을 달고 그 고들을 서로 대하게 하고	Fifty loops shalt thou make in the one curtain, and fifty loops shalt thou make in the edge of the curtain that is in the coupling of the second; that the loops may take hold one of another.	Make fifty loops on one curtain and fifty loops on the end curtain of the second set, so that the loops line up opposite one another.
EXO	26	6	금 갈고리 오십을 만들고 그 갈고리로 앙장을 연합하여 한 성막을 이룰지며	And thou shalt make fifty taches of gold, and couple the curtains together with the taches: and it shall be one tabernacle.	Make fifty gold clasps as well, and join the curtains together with the clasps, so that the tabernacle will be a unit.
EXO	26	7	그 성막을 덮는 막 곧 앙장을 염소털로 만들되 열한 폭을 만들지며	And thou shalt make curtains of goats’ hair to be a covering upon the tabernacle: eleven curtains shalt thou make.	You are to make curtains of goat hair for the tent over the tabernacle—eleven curtains in all.
EXO	26	8	각 폭의 장은 삼십 규빗, 광은 사 규빗으로 열한 폭의 장단을 같게 하고	The length of one curtain shall be thirty cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: and the eleven curtains shall be all of one measure.	Each of the eleven curtains is to be the same size—thirty cubits long and four cubits wide.
EXO	26	9	그 앙장 다섯 폭을 서로 연하며 또 여섯 폭을 서로 연하고 그 여섯째 폭 절반은 성막 전면에 접어 드리우고	And thou shalt couple five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves, and shalt double the sixth curtain in the forefront of the tabernacle.	Join five of the curtains into one set and the other six into another. Then fold the sixth curtain over double at the front of the tent.
EXO	26	10	앙장을 연락할 말폭 가에 고 오십을 달며 다른 연락할 말폭 가에도 고 오십을 달고	And thou shalt make fifty loops on the edge of the one curtain that is outmost in the coupling, and fifty loops in the edge of the curtain which coupleth the second.	Make fifty loops along the edge of the end curtain in the first set, and fifty loops along the edge of the corresponding curtain in the second set.
EXO	26	11	놋 갈고리 오십을 만들고 그 갈고리로 그 고를 꿰어 연합하여 한막이 되게 하고	And thou shalt make fifty taches of brass, and put the taches into the loops, and couple the tent together, that it may be one.	Make fifty bronze clasps and put them through the loops to join the tent together as a unit.
EXO	26	12	그 막 곧 앙장의 나머지 그 반폭은 성막 뒤에 드리우고	And the remnant that remaineth of the curtains of the tent, the half curtain that remaineth, shall hang over the backside of the tabernacle.	As for the overlap that remains of the tent curtains, the half curtain that is left over shall hang down over the back of the tabernacle.
EXO	26	13	막 곧 앙장의 길이의 남은 것은 이편에 한 규빗, 저편에 한 규빗씩 성막 좌우 양편에 덮어 드리우고	And a cubit on the one side, and a cubit on the other side of that which remaineth in the length of the curtains of the tent, it shall hang over the sides of the tabernacle on this side and on that side, to cover it.	And the tent curtains will be a cubit longer on either side, and the excess will hang over the sides of the tabernacle to cover it.
EXO	26	14	붉은 물 들인 수양의 가죽으로 막의 덮개를 만들고 해달의 가죽으로 그 웃덮개를 만들지니라	And thou shalt make a covering for the tent of rams’ skins dyed red, and a covering above of badgers’ skins.	Also make a covering for the tent out of ram skins dyed red, and over that a covering of fine leather.
EXO	26	15	너는 조각목으로 성막을 위하여 널판을 만들어 세우되	And thou shalt make boards for the tabernacle of shittim wood standing up.	You are to construct upright frames of acacia wood for the tabernacle.
EXO	26	16	각 판의 장은 십 규빗, 광은 일 규빗 반으로 하고	Ten cubits shall be the length of a board, and a cubit and a half shall be the breadth of one board.	Each frame is to be ten cubits long and a cubit and a half wide.
EXO	26	17	각 판에 두 촉씩 내어 서로 연하게 하되 너는 성막 널판을 다 그와 같이 하라	Two tenons shall there be in one board, set in order one against another: thus shalt thou make for all the boards of the tabernacle.	Two tenons must be connected to each other for each frame. Make all the frames of the tabernacle in this way.
EXO	26	18	너는 성막을 위하여 널판을 만들되 남편을 위하여 널판 스물을 만들고	And thou shalt make the boards for the tabernacle, twenty boards on the south side southward.	Construct twenty frames for the south side of the tabernacle,
EXO	26	19	스무 널판 아래 은받침 마흔을 만들지니 이 널판 아래에도 그 두 촉을 위하여 두 받침을 만들고 저 널판 아래에도 그 두 촉을 위하여 두 받침을 만들찌라	And thou shalt make forty sockets of silver under the twenty boards; two sockets under one board for his two tenons, and two sockets under another board for his two tenons.	with forty silver bases under the twenty frames—two bases for each frame, one under each tenon.
EXO	26	20	성막 다른 편 곧 그 북편을 위하여도 널판 스물로 하고	And for the second side of the tabernacle on the north side there shall be twenty boards:	For the second side of the tabernacle, the north side, make twenty frames
EXO	26	21	은받침 마흔을 이 널판 아래에도 두 받침, 저 널판 아래에도 두 받침으로 하며	And their forty sockets of silver; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.	and forty silver bases—two bases under each frame.
EXO	26	22	성막 뒤 곧 그 서편을 위하여는 널판 여섯을 만들고	And for the sides of the tabernacle westward thou shalt make six boards.	Make six frames for the rear of the tabernacle, the west side,
EXO	26	23	성막 뒤 두 모퉁이 편을 위하여는 널판 둘을 만들되	And two boards shalt thou make for the corners of the tabernacle in the two sides.	and two frames for the two back corners of the tabernacle,
EXO	26	24	아래에서부터 위까지 각기 두겹 두께로 하여 윗고리에 이르게 하고 두 모퉁이 편을 다 그리하며	And they shall be coupled together beneath, and they shall be coupled together above the head of it unto one ring: thus shall it be for them both; they shall be for the two corners.	coupled together from bottom to top and fitted into a single ring. These will serve as the two corners.
EXO	26	25	그 여덞 널판에는 은받침이 열여섯이니 이 판 아래에도 두 받침이요 저 판 아래에도 두 받침이니라	And they shall be eight boards, and their sockets of silver, sixteen sockets; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.	So there are to be eight frames and sixteen silver bases—two under each frame.
EXO	26	26	너는 조각목으로 띠를 만들지니 성막 이편 널판을 위하여 다섯이요	And thou shalt make bars of shittim wood; five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,	You are also to make five crossbars of acacia wood for the frames on one side of the tabernacle,
EXO	26	27	성막 저편 널판을 위하여 다섯이요 성막 뒤 곧 서편 널판을 위하여 다섯이요	And five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the side of the tabernacle, for the two sides westward.	five for those on the other side, and five for those on the rear side of the tabernacle, to the west.
EXO	26	28	널판 가운데 있는 중간 띠는 이 끝에서 저 끝에 미치게 하고	And the middle bar in the midst of the boards shall reach from end to end.	The central crossbar in the middle of the frames shall extend from one end to the other.
EXO	26	29	그 널판들을 금으로 싸고 그 널판들의 띠를 꿸 금고리를 만들고 그 띠를 금으로 싸라	And thou shalt overlay the boards with gold, and make their rings of gold for places for the bars: and thou shalt overlay the bars with gold.	Overlay the frames with gold and make gold rings to hold the crossbars. Also overlay the crossbars with gold.
EXO	26	30	너는 산에서 보인 식양대로 성막을 세울지니라	And thou shalt rear up the tabernacle according to the fashion thereof which was shewed thee in the mount.	So you are to set up the tabernacle according to the pattern shown you on the mountain.
EXO	26	31	너는 청색 자색 홍색실과 가늘게 꼰 베실로 짜서 장을 만들고 그 위에 그룹들을 공교히 수 놓아서	And thou shalt make a vail of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen of cunning work: with cherubims shall it be made:	Make a veil of blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and finely spun linen, with cherubim skillfully worked into it.
EXO	26	32	금 갈고리로 네 기둥 위에 드리우되 그 네 기둥을 조각목으로 만들고 금으로 싸서 네 은받침 위에 둘지며	And thou shalt hang it upon four pillars of shittim wood overlaid with gold: their hooks shall be of gold, upon the four sockets of silver.	Hang it with gold hooks on four posts of acacia wood, overlaid with gold and standing on four silver bases.
EXO	26	33	그 장을 갈고리 아래 드리운 후에 증거궤를 그 장안에 들여 놓으라 그장이 너희를 위하여 성소와 지성소를 구별하리라	And thou shalt hang up the vail under the taches, that thou mayest bring in thither within the vail the ark of the testimony: and the vail shall divide unto you between the holy place and the most holy.	And hang the veil from the clasps and place the ark of the Testimony behind the veil. So the veil will separate the Holy Place from the Most Holy Place.
EXO	26	34	너는 지성소에 있는 증거궤 위에 속죄소를 두고	And thou shalt put the mercy seat upon the ark of the testimony in the most holy place.	Put the mercy seat on the ark of the Testimony in the Most Holy Place.
EXO	26	35	그 장 바깥 북편에 상을 놓고 남편에 등대를 놓아 상과 대하게 할지며	And thou shalt set the table without the vail, and the candlestick over against the table on the side of the tabernacle toward the south: and thou shalt put the table on the north side.	And place the table outside the veil on the north side of the tabernacle, and put the lampstand opposite the table, on the south side.
EXO	26	36	청색 자색 홍색실과 가늘게 꼰 베실로 수 놓아 짜서 성막 문을 위하여 장을 만들고	And thou shalt make an hanging for the door of the tent, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, wrought with needlework.	For the entrance to the tent, you are to make a curtain embroidered with blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and finely spun linen.
EXO	26	37	그 문장을 위하여 기둥 다섯을 조각목으로 만들어 금으로 싸고 그 갈고리도 금으로 만들찌며 또 그 기둥을 위하여 받침 다섯을 놋으로 부어 만들지니라	And thou shalt make for the hanging five pillars of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold, and their hooks shall be of gold: and thou shalt cast five sockets of brass for them.	Make five posts of acacia wood for the curtain, overlay them with gold hooks, and cast five bronze bases for them.
EXO	27	1	너는 조각목으로 장이 오 규빗, 광이 오 규빗의 단을 만들되 네모 반듯하게하며 고는 삼 규빗으로 하고	And thou shalt make an altar of shittim wood, five cubits long, and five cubits broad; the altar shall be foursquare: and the height thereof shall be three cubits.	“You are to build an altar of acacia wood. The altar must be square, five cubits long, five cubits wide, and three cubits high.
EXO	27	2	그 네 모퉁이 위에 뿔을 만들되 그 뿔이 그것에 연하게 하고 그 단을 놋으로 쌀지며	And thou shalt make the horns of it upon the four corners thereof: his horns shall be of the same: and thou shalt overlay it with brass.	Make a horn on each of its four corners, so that the horns are of one piece, and overlay it with bronze.
EXO	27	3	재를 담는 통과 부삽과 대야와 고기 갈고리와 불 옮기는 그릇을 만들되 단의 그릇을 다 놋으로 만들지며	And thou shalt make his pans to receive his ashes, and his shovels, and his basons, and his fleshhooks, and his firepans: all the vessels thereof thou shalt make of brass.	Make all its utensils of bronze—its pots for removing ashes, its shovels, its sprinkling bowls, its meat forks, and its firepans.
EXO	27	4	단을 위하여 놋으로 그물을 만들고 그 위 네 모퉁이에 놋고리 넷을 만들고	And thou shalt make for it a grate of network of brass; and upon the net shalt thou make four brasen rings in the four corners thereof.	Construct for it a grate of bronze mesh, and make a bronze ring at each of the four corners of the mesh.
EXO	27	5	그물은 단 사면 가장자리 아래 곧 단 절반에 오르게 할지며	And thou shalt put it under the compass of the altar beneath, that the net may be even to the midst of the altar.	Set the grate beneath the ledge of the altar, so that the mesh comes halfway up the altar.
EXO	27	6	또 그 단을 위하여 채를 만들되 조각목으로 만들고 놋으로 쌀지며	And thou shalt make staves for the altar, staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with brass.	Additionally, make poles of acacia wood for the altar and overlay them with bronze.
EXO	27	7	단 양편 고리에 그 채를 꿰어 단을 메게 할지며	And the staves shall be put into the rings, and the staves shall be upon the two sides of the altar, to bear it.	The poles are to be inserted into the rings so that the poles are on two sides of the altar when it is carried.
EXO	27	8	단은 널판으로 비게 만들되 산에서 네게 보인 대로 그들이 만들지니라	Hollow with boards shalt thou make it: as it was shewed thee in the mount, so shall they make it.	Construct the altar with boards so that it is hollow. It is to be made just as you were shown on the mountain.
EXO	27	9	너는 성막의 뜰을 만들찌니 남을 향하여 뜰 남편에 광이 백 규빗의 세마포장을 쳐서 그 한 편을 당하게 할지니	And thou shalt make the court of the tabernacle: for the south side southward there shall be hangings for the court of fine twined linen of an hundred cubits long for one side:	You are also to make a courtyard for the tabernacle. On the south side of the courtyard make curtains of finely spun linen, a hundred cubits long on one side,
EXO	27	10	그 기둥이 스물이며 그 받침 스물은 놋으로 하고 그 기둥의 갈고리와 가름대는 은으로 할찌며	And the twenty pillars thereof and their twenty sockets shall be of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets shall be of silver.	with twenty posts and twenty bronze bases, and silver hooks and bands on the posts.
EXO	27	11	그 북편에도 광이 백 규빗의 포장을 치되 그 기둥이 스물이며 그 기둥의 받침 스물은 놋으로 하고 그 기둥의 갈고리와 가름대는 은으로 할지며	And likewise for the north side in length there shall be hangings of an hundred cubits long, and his twenty pillars and their twenty sockets of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver.	Likewise there are to be curtains on the north side, a hundred cubits long, with twenty posts and twenty bronze bases, and with silver hooks and bands on the posts.
EXO	27	12	뜰의 옆 곧 서편에 광 오십 규빗의 포장을 치되 그 기둥이 열이요 받침이 열이며	And for the breadth of the court on the west side shall be hangings of fifty cubits: their pillars ten, and their sockets ten.	The curtains on the west side of the courtyard shall be fifty cubits wide, with ten posts and ten bases.
EXO	27	13	동을 향하여 뜰 동편의 광도 오십 규빗이 될지며	And the breadth of the court on the east side eastward shall be fifty cubits.	The east side of the courtyard, toward the sunrise, is to be fifty cubits wide.
EXO	27	14	문 이편을 위하여 포장이 십 오 규빗이며 그 기둥이 셋이요 받침이 셋이요	The hangings of one side of the gate shall be fifteen cubits: their pillars three, and their sockets three.	Make the curtains on one side fifteen cubits long, with three posts and three bases,
EXO	27	15	문 저편을 위하여도 포장이 십오 규빗이며 그 기둥이 셋이요 받침이 셋이며	And on the other side shall be hangings fifteen cubits: their pillars three, and their sockets three.	and the curtains on the other side fifteen cubits long, with three posts and three bases.
EXO	27	16	뜰 문을 위하여는 청색 자색 홍색실과 가늘게 꼰 베실로 수 놓아 짠 이십 규빗의 장이 있게 할찌니 그 기둥이 넷이요 받침이 넷이며	And for the gate of the court shall be an hanging of twenty cubits, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, wrought with needlework: and their pillars shall be four, and their sockets four.	The gate of the courtyard shall be twenty cubits long, with a curtain embroidered with blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and finely spun linen. It shall have four posts and four bases.
EXO	27	17	뜰 사면 모든 기둥의 가름대와 갈고리는 은이요 그 받침은 놋이며	All the pillars round about the court shall be filleted with silver; their hooks shall be of silver, and their sockets of brass.	All the posts around the courtyard shall have silver bands, silver hooks, and bronze bases.
EXO	27	18	뜰의 장은 백 규빗이요 광은 오십 규빗이요 세마포장의 고는 오 규빗이요 그 받침은 놋이며	The length of the court shall be an hundred cubits, and the breadth fifty every where, and the height five cubits of fine twined linen, and their sockets of brass.	The entire courtyard shall be a hundred cubits long and fifty cubits wide, with curtains of finely spun linen five cubits high, and with bronze bases.
EXO	27	19	성막에서 쓰는 모든 기구와 그 말뚝과 뜰의 포장 말뚝을 다 놋으로 할지니라	All the vessels of the tabernacle in all the service thereof, and all the pins thereof, and all the pins of the court, shall be of brass.	All the utensils of the tabernacle for every use, including all its tent pegs and the tent pegs of the courtyard, shall be made of bronze.
EXO	27	20	너는 또 이스라엘 자손에게 명하여 감람으로 찧어낸 순결한 기름을 등불을 위하여 네게로 가져오게 하고 끊이지 말고 등불을 켜되	And thou shalt command the children of Israel, that they bring thee pure oil olive beaten for the light, to cause the lamp to burn always.	And you are to command the Israelites to bring you pure oil of pressed olives for the light, to keep the lamps burning continually.
EXO	27	21	아론과 그 아들들로 회막안 증거 궤 앞 휘장 밖에서 저녁부터 아침까지 항상 여호와 앞에 그 등불을 간검하게 하라 이는 이스라엘 자손의 대대로 영원한 규례니라	In the tabernacle of the congregation without the vail, which is before the testimony, Aaron and his sons shall order it from evening to morning before the Lord: it shall be a statute for ever unto their generations on the behalf of the children of Israel.	In the Tent of Meeting, outside the veil that is in front of the Testimony, Aaron and his sons are to tend the lamps before the LORD from evening until morning. This is to be a permanent statute for the Israelites for the generations to come.
EXO	28	1	너는 이스라엘 자손 중 네 형 아론과 그 아들들 곧 나답과 아비후와 엘르아살과 이다말을 그와 함께 네게로 나아오게 하여 나를 섬기는 제사장 직분을 행하게 하되	And take thou unto thee Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, from among the children of Israel, that he may minister unto me in the priest’s office, even Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron’s sons.	“Next, have your brother Aaron brought to you from among the Israelites, along with his sons Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar, to serve Me as priests.
EXO	28	2	네 형 아론을 위하여 거룩한 옷을 지어서 영화롭고 아름답게 할지니	And thou shalt make holy garments for Aaron thy brother for glory and for beauty.	Make holy garments for your brother Aaron, to give him glory and splendor.
EXO	28	3	너는 무릇 마음에 지혜 있는자 곧 내가 지혜로운 영으로 채운 자들에게 말하여 아론의 옷을 지어 그를 거룩하게하여 내게 제사장 직분을 행하게 하라	And thou shalt speak unto all that are wise hearted, whom I have filled with the spirit of wisdom, that they may make Aaron’s garments to consecrate him, that he may minister unto me in the priest’s office.	You are to instruct all the skilled craftsmen, whom I have filled with a spirit of wisdom, to make garments for Aaron’s consecration, so that he may serve Me as priest.
EXO	28	4	그들의 지을 옷은 이러하니 곧 흉패와 에봇과 겉옷과 반포 속옷과 관과 띠라 그들이 네 형 아론과 그 아들들을 위하여 거룩한 옷을 지어 아론으로 내게 제사장 직분을 행하게 할지며	And these are the garments which they shall make; a breastplate, and an ephod, and a robe, and a broidered coat, a mitre, and a girdle: and they shall make holy garments for Aaron thy brother, and his sons, that he may minister unto me in the priest’s office.	These are the garments that they shall make: a breastpiece, an ephod, a robe, a woven tunic, a turban, and a sash. They are to make these holy garments for your brother Aaron and his sons, so that they may serve Me as priests.
EXO	28	5	그들의 쓸 것은 금실과 청색 자색 홍색실과 가늘게 꼰 베실이니라	And they shall take gold, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen.	They shall use gold, along with blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and fine linen.
EXO	28	6	그들이 금실과 청색 자색 홍색실과 가늘게 꼰 베실로 공교히 짜서 에봇을 짓되	And they shall make the ephod of gold, of blue, and of purple, of scarlet, and fine twined linen, with cunning work.	They are to make the ephod of finely spun linen embroidered with gold, and with blue, purple, and scarlet yarn.
EXO	28	7	그것에 견대 둘을 달아 그 두 끝을 연하게 하고	It shall have the two shoulderpieces thereof joined at the two edges thereof; and so it shall be joined together.	It shall have two shoulder pieces attached at two of its corners, so it can be fastened.
EXO	28	8	에봇 위에 매는 띠는 에봇 짜는 법으로 금실과 청색 자색 홍색실과 가늘게 꼰 베실로 에봇에 공교히 붙여 짤지며	And the curious girdle of the ephod, which is upon it, shall be of the same, according to the work thereof; even of gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.	And the skillfully woven waistband of the ephod must be of one piece, of the same workmanship—with gold, with blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and with finely spun linen.
EXO	28	9	호마노 두개를 취하여 그 위에 이스라엘 아들들의 이름을 새기되	And thou shalt take two onyx stones, and grave on them the names of the children of Israel:	Take two onyx stones and engrave on them the names of the sons of Israel:
EXO	28	10	그들의 연치대로 여섯 이름을 한 보석에 나머지 여섯 이름은 다른 보석에	Six of their names on one stone, and the other six names of the rest on the other stone, according to their birth.	six of their names on one stone and the remaining six on the other, in the order of their birth.
EXO	28	11	보석을 새기는 자가 인에 새김 같이 너는 이스라엘 아들들의 이름을 그 두 보석에 새겨 금테에 물리고	With the work of an engraver in stone, like the engravings of a signet, shalt thou engrave the two stones with the names of the children of Israel: thou shalt make them to be set in ouches of gold.	Engrave the names of the sons of Israel on the two stones the way a gem cutter engraves a seal. Then mount the stones in gold filigree settings.
EXO	28	12	그 두 보석을 에봇 두 견대에 붙여 이스라엘 아들들의 기념 보석을 삼되 아론이 여호와 앞에서 그들의 이름을 그 두 어께에 메어서 기념이 되게 할지며	And thou shalt put the two stones upon the shoulders of the ephod for stones of memorial unto the children of Israel: and Aaron shall bear their names before the Lord upon his two shoulders for a memorial.	Fasten both stones on the shoulder pieces of the ephod as memorial stones for the sons of Israel. Aaron is to bear their names on his two shoulders as a memorial before the LORD.
EXO	28	13	너는 금으로 테를 만들고	And thou shalt make ouches of gold;	Fashion gold filigree settings
EXO	28	14	정금으로 노끈처럼 두 사슬을 땋고 그 땋은 사슬을 그 테에 달지니라	And two chains of pure gold at the ends; of wreathen work shalt thou make them, and fasten the wreathen chains to the ouches.	and two chains of pure gold, made of braided cord work; and attach these chains to the settings.
EXO	28	15	너는 판결 흉패를 에봇 짜는 법으로 금실과 청색 자색 홍색실과 가늘게 꼰 베실로 공교히 짜서 만들되	And thou shalt make the breastplate of judgment with cunning work; after the work of the ephod thou shalt make it; of gold, of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, and of fine twined linen, shalt thou make it.	You are also to make a breastpiece of judgment with the same workmanship as the ephod. Construct it with gold, with blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and with finely spun linen.
EXO	28	16	장광이 한뼘씩 두 겹으로 네모 반듯하게 하고	Foursquare it shall be being doubled; a span shall be the length thereof, and a span shall be the breadth thereof.	It must be square when folded over double, a span long and a span wide.
EXO	28	17	그것에 네 줄로 보석을 물리되 첫 줄은 홍보석 황옥 녹주옥이요	And thou shalt set in it settings of stones, even four rows of stones: the first row shall be a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: this shall be the first row.	And mount on it a setting of gemstones, four rows of stones: In the first row there shall be a ruby, a topaz, and an emerald;
EXO	28	18	둘째 줄은 석류석 남보석 홍마노요	And the second row shall be an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond.	in the second row a turquoise, a sapphire, and a diamond;
EXO	28	19	셋째 줄은 호박 백마노 자수정이요	And the third row a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst.	in the third row a jacinth, an agate, and an amethyst;
EXO	28	20	넷째 줄은 녹보석 호마노 벽옥으로 다 금테에 물릴지니	And the fourth row a beryl, and an onyx, and a jasper: they shall be set in gold in their inclosings.	and in the fourth row a beryl, an onyx, and a jasper. Mount these stones in gold filigree settings.
EXO	28	21	이 보석들은 이스라엘 아들들의 이름대로 열둘이라 매 보석에 열두 지파의 한 이름씩 인을 새기는 법으로 새기고	And the stones shall be with the names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names, like the engravings of a signet; every one with his name shall they be according to the twelve tribes.	The twelve stones are to correspond to the names of the sons of Israel, each engraved like a seal with the name of one of the twelve tribes.
EXO	28	22	정금으로 노끈처럼 땋은 사슬을 흉패 위에 붙이고	And thou shalt make upon the breastplate chains at the ends of wreathen work of pure gold.	For the breastpiece, make braided chains like cords of pure gold.
EXO	28	23	또 금고리 둘을 만들어 흉패 위 곧 흉패 두 끝에 그 두 고리를 달고	And thou shalt make upon the breastplate two rings of gold, and shalt put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate.	You are also to make two gold rings and fasten them to the two corners of the breastpiece.
EXO	28	24	땋은 두 금사슬로 흉패 두 끝 두 고리에 꿰어 매고	And thou shalt put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings which are on the ends of the breastplate.	Then fasten the two gold chains to the two gold rings at the corners of the breastpiece,
EXO	28	25	두 땋은 사슬의 다른 두 끝을 에봇 앞 두 견대의 금테에 매고	And the other two ends of the two wreathen chains thou shalt fasten in the two ouches, and put them on the shoulderpieces of the ephod before it.	and fasten the other ends of the two chains to the two filigree settings, attaching them to the shoulder pieces of the ephod at the front.
EXO	28	26	또 금고리 둘을 만들어 흉패 아래 양편 가 안쪽 곧 에봇에 닿은 곳에 달고	And thou shalt make two rings of gold, and thou shalt put them upon the two ends of the breastplate in the border thereof, which is in the side of the ephod inward.	Make two more gold rings and attach them to the other two corners of the breastpiece, on the inside edge next to the ephod.
EXO	28	27	또 금고리 둘을 만들어 에봇 앞 두 견대 아래 매는 자리 가까운 편 곧 공교히 짠 띠 윗편에 달고	And two other rings of gold thou shalt make, and shalt put them on the two sides of the ephod underneath, toward the forepart thereof, over against the other coupling thereof, above the curious girdle of the ephod.	Make two additional gold rings and attach them to the bottom of the two shoulder pieces of the ephod, on its front, near its seam just above its woven waistband.
EXO	28	28	청색 끈으로 흉패 고리와 에봇 고리에 꿰어 흉패로 공교히 짠 에봇 띠 위에 붙여 떠나지 않게 하라	And they shall bind the breastplate by the rings thereof unto the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it may be above the curious girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate be not loosed from the ephod.	The rings of the breastpiece shall be tied to the rings of the ephod with a cord of blue yarn, so that the breastpiece is above the waistband of the ephod and does not swing out from the ephod.
EXO	28	29	아론이 성소에 들어갈 때에는 이스라엘 아들들의 이름을 기록한 이 판결 흉패를 가슴에 붙여 여호와 앞에 영원한 기념을 삼을 것이니라	And Aaron shall bear the names of the children of Israel in the breastplate of judgment upon his heart, when he goeth in unto the holy place, for a memorial before the Lord continually.	Whenever Aaron enters the Holy Place, he shall bear the names of the sons of Israel over his heart on the breastpiece of judgment, as a continual reminder before the LORD.
EXO	28	30	너는 우림과 둠밈을 판결 흉패 안에 넣어 아론으로 여호와 앞에 들어 갈 때에 그 가슴 위에 있게 하라 아론이 여호와 앞에서 이스라엘 자손의 판결을 항상 그 가슴 위에 둘지니라	And thou shalt put in the breastplate of judgment the Urim and the Thummim; and they shall be upon Aaron’s heart, when he goeth in before the Lord: and Aaron shall bear the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart before the Lord continually.	And place the Urim and Thummim in the breastpiece of judgment, so that they will also be over Aaron’s heart whenever he comes before the LORD. Aaron will continually carry the judgment of the sons of Israel over his heart before the LORD.
EXO	28	31	너는 에봇 받침 겉옷을 전부 청색으로 하되	And thou shalt make the robe of the ephod all of blue.	You are to make the robe of the ephod entirely of blue cloth,
EXO	28	32	두 어깨 사이에 머리 들어갈 구멍을 내고 그 주위에 갑옷 깃 같이 깃을 짜서 찢어지지 않게하고	And there shall be an hole in the top of it, in the midst thereof: it shall have a binding of woven work round about the hole of it, as it were the hole of an habergeon, that it be not rent.	with an opening at its top in the center. Around the opening shall be a woven collar with an opening like that of a garment, so that it will not tear.
EXO	28	33	그 옷 가장자리로 돌아가며 청색 자색 홍색실로 석류를 수놓고 금방울을 간격하여 달되	And beneath upon the hem of it thou shalt make pomegranates of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, round about the hem thereof; and bells of gold between them round about:	Make pomegranates of blue, purple, and scarlet yarn all the way around the lower hem, with gold bells between them,
EXO	28	34	그 옷 가장자리로 돌아가며 한 금방울, 한 석류, 한 금방울, 한 석류가 있게 하라	A golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, upon the hem of the robe round about.	alternating the gold bells and pomegranates around the lower hem of the robe.
EXO	28	35	아론이 입고 여호와를 섬기러 성소에 들어갈 때와 성소에서 나갈 때에 그 소리가 들릴 것이라 그리하면 그가 죽지 아니하리라	And it shall be upon Aaron to minister: and his sound shall be heard when he goeth in unto the holy place before the Lord, and when he cometh out, that he die not.	Aaron must wear the robe whenever he ministers, and its sound will be heard when he enters or exits the sanctuary before the LORD, so that he will not die.
EXO	28	36	너는 또 정금으로 패를 만들어 인을 새기는 법으로 그 위에 새기되 여호와께 성결이라 하고	And thou shalt make a plate of pure gold, and grave upon it, like the engravings of a signet, HOLINESS TO THE LORD.	You are to make a plate of pure gold and engrave on it as on a seal: HOLY TO THE LORD.
EXO	28	37	그 패를 청색 끈으로 관 위에 매되 곧 전면에 있게 하라	And thou shalt put it on a blue lace, that it may be upon the mitre; upon the forefront of the mitre it shall be.	Fasten to it a blue cord to mount it on the turban; it shall be on the front of the turban.
EXO	28	38	이 패가 아론의 이마에 있어서 그로 이스라엘 자손의 거룩하게 드리는 성물의 죄건을 담당하게 하라 그 패가 아론의 이마에 늘 있으므로 그 성물을 여호와께서 받으시게 되리라	And it shall be upon Aaron’s forehead, that Aaron may bear the iniquity of the holy things, which the children of Israel shall hallow in all their holy gifts; and it shall be always upon his forehead, that they may be accepted before the Lord.	And it will be worn on Aaron’s forehead, so that he may bear the iniquity of the holy things that the sons of Israel consecrate with regard to all their holy gifts. It shall always be on his forehead, so that they may be acceptable before the LORD.
EXO	28	39	너는 가는 베실로 반포 속옷을 짜고 가는 베실로 관을 만드고 띠를 수 놓아 만들지니라	And thou shalt embroider the coat of fine linen, and thou shalt make the mitre of fine linen, and thou shalt make the girdle of needlework.	You are to weave the tunic with fine linen, make the turban of fine linen, and fashion an embroidered sash.
EXO	28	40	너는 아론의 아들들을 위하여 속옷을 만들며 그들을 위하여 띠를 만들며 그들을 위하여 관을 만들어서 영화롭고 아름답게 하되	And for Aaron’s sons thou shalt make coats, and thou shalt make for them girdles, and bonnets shalt thou make for them, for glory and for beauty.	Make tunics, sashes, and headbands for Aaron’s sons, to give them glory and splendor.
EXO	28	41	너는 그것들로 네 형 아론과 그와 함께한 그 아들들에게 입히고 그들에게 기름을 부어 위임하고 거룩하게 하여 그들로 제사장 직분을 내게 행하게 할지며	And thou shalt put them upon Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him; and shalt anoint them, and consecrate them, and sanctify them, that they may minister unto me in the priest’s office.	After you put these garments on your brother Aaron and his sons, anoint them, ordain them, and consecrate them so that they may serve Me as priests.
EXO	28	42	또 그들을 위하여 베로 고의를 만들어 허리에서부터 넓적다리까지 이르게 하여 하체를 가리게 하라	And thou shalt make them linen breeches to cover their nakedness; from the loins even unto the thighs they shall reach:	Make linen undergarments to cover their bare flesh, extending from waist to thigh.
EXO	28	43	아론과 그 아들들이 회막에 들어갈 때에나 제단에 가까이 하여 거룩한 곳에서 섬길 때에 그것들을 입어야 죄를 지어서 죽지 아니하리니 그와 후손의 영원히 지킬 규례니라	And they shall be upon Aaron, and upon his sons, when they come in unto the tabernacle of the congregation, or when they come near unto the altar to minister in the holy place; that they bear not iniquity, and die: it shall be a statute for ever unto him and his seed after him.	Aaron and his sons must wear them whenever they enter the Tent of Meeting or approach the altar to minister in the Holy Place, so that they will not incur guilt and die. This is to be a permanent statute for Aaron and his descendants.
EXO	29	1	너는 그들에게 나를 섬길 제사장 직분을 위임하여 그들로 거룩하게 할 일이 이러하니 곧 젊은 수소 하나와 흠 없는 수양 둘을 취하고	And this is the thing that thou shalt do unto them to hallow them, to minister unto me in the priest’s office: Take one young bullock, and two rams without blemish,	“Now this is what you are to do to consecrate Aaron and his sons to serve Me as priests: Take a young bull and two rams without blemish,
EXO	29	2	무교병과 기름 섞인 무교 과자와 기름 바른 무교 전병을 모두 고운 밀가루로 만들고	And unleavened bread, and cakes unleavened tempered with oil, and wafers unleavened anointed with oil: of wheaten flour shalt thou make them.	along with unleavened bread, unleavened cakes mixed with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil. Make them out of fine wheat flour,
EXO	29	3	그것들을 한 광주리에 담고 그것을 광주리에 담은 채 그 송아지와 두 양과 함께 가져 오고	And thou shalt put them into one basket, and bring them in the basket, with the bullock and the two rams.	put them in a basket, and present them in the basket, along with the bull and the two rams.
EXO	29	4	너는 아론과 그 아들들을 회막문으로 데려다가 물로 씻기고	And Aaron and his sons thou shalt bring unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and shalt wash them with water.	Then present Aaron and his sons at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting and wash them with water.
EXO	29	5	의복을 가져다가 아론에게 속옷과 에봇 받침 겉옷과 에봇을 입히고 흉패를 달고 에봇에 공교히 짠 띠를 띠우고	And thou shalt take the garments, and put upon Aaron the coat, and the robe of the ephod, and the ephod, and the breastplate, and gird him with the curious girdle of the ephod:	Take the garments and clothe Aaron with the tunic, the robe of the ephod, the ephod itself, and the breastplate. Fasten the ephod on him with its woven waistband.
EXO	29	6	그 머리에 관을 씌우고 그 위에 성패를 더하고	And thou shalt put the mitre upon his head, and put the holy crown upon the mitre.	Put the turban on his head and attach the holy diadem to the turban.
EXO	29	7	관유를 가져다가 그 머리에 부어 바르고	Then shalt thou take the anointing oil, and pour it upon his head, and anoint him.	Then take the anointing oil and anoint him by pouring it on his head.
EXO	29	8	그 아들들을 데려다가 그들에게 속옷을 입히고	And thou shalt bring his sons, and put coats upon them.	Present his sons as well and clothe them with tunics.
EXO	29	9	아론과 그 아들들에게 띠를 띠우며 관을 씌워서 제사장의 직분을 그들에게 맡겨 영원한 규례가 되게 하라 너는 이같이 아론과 그 아들들에게 위임하여 거룩하게 할지니라	And thou shalt gird them with girdles, Aaron and his sons, and put the bonnets on them: and the priest’s office shall be theirs for a perpetual statute: and thou shalt consecrate Aaron and his sons.	Wrap the sashes around Aaron and his sons and tie headbands on them. The priesthood shall be theirs by a permanent statute. In this way you are to ordain Aaron and his sons.
EXO	29	10	너는 수송아지를 회막 앞으로 끌어 오고 아론과 그 아들들은 그 송아지 머리에 안수할지며	And thou shalt cause a bullock to be brought before the tabernacle of the congregation: and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the bullock.	You are to present the bull at the front of the Tent of Meeting, and Aaron and his sons are to lay their hands on its head.
EXO	29	11	너는 회막문 여호와 앞에서 그 송아지를 잡고	And thou shalt kill the bullock before the Lord, by the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.	And you shall slaughter the bull before the LORD at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting.
EXO	29	12	그 피를 네 손가락으로 단 뿔들에 바르고 그 피 전부를 단 밑에 쏟을지며	And thou shalt take of the blood of the bullock, and put it upon the horns of the altar with thy finger, and pour all the blood beside the bottom of the altar.	Take some of the blood of the bull and put it on the horns of the altar with your finger; then pour out the rest of the blood at the base of the altar.
EXO	29	13	내장에 덮인 모든 기름과 간 위에 있는 꺼풀과 두 콩팥과 그 위의 기름을 취하여 단 위에 불사르고	And thou shalt take all the fat that covereth the inwards, and the caul that is above the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and burn them upon the altar.	Take all the fat that covers the entrails and the lobe of the liver, and both kidneys with the fat on them, and burn them on the altar.
EXO	29	14	그 수소의 고기와 가죽과 똥은 진 밖에서 불사르라 이는 속죄제니라	But the flesh of the bullock, and his skin, and his dung, shalt thou burn with fire without the camp: it is a sin offering.	But burn the flesh of the bull and its hide and dung outside the camp; it is a sin offering.
EXO	29	15	너는 또 수양 하나를 취하고 아론과 그 아들들은 그 수양의 머리 위에 안수할지며	Thou shalt also take one ram; and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the ram.	Take one of the rams, and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands on its head.
EXO	29	16	너는 그 수양을 잡고 그 피를 취하여 단 위의 주위에 뿌리고	And thou shalt slay the ram, and thou shalt take his blood, and sprinkle it round about upon the altar.	You are to slaughter the ram, take its blood, and sprinkle it on all sides of the altar.
EXO	29	17	그 수양의 각을 뜨고 그 장부와 다리는 씻어 각 뜬 고기와 그 머리와 함께 두고	And thou shalt cut the ram in pieces, and wash the inwards of him, and his legs, and put them unto his pieces, and unto his head.	Cut the ram into pieces, wash the entrails and legs, and place them with its head and other pieces.
EXO	29	18	그 수양의 전부를 단 위에 불사르라 이는 여호와께 드리는 번제요 이는 향기로운 냄새니 여호와께 드리는 화제니라	And thou shalt burn the whole ram upon the altar: it is a burnt offering unto the Lord: it is a sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the Lord.	Then burn the entire ram on the altar; it is a burnt offering to the LORD, a pleasing aroma, an offering made by fire to the LORD.
EXO	29	19	너는 다른 수양을 취하고 아론과 그 아들들은 그 수양의 머리 위에 안수할지며	And thou shalt take the other ram; and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the ram.	Take the second ram, and Aaron and his sons are to lay their hands on its head.
EXO	29	20	너는 그 수양을 잡고 그 피를 취하여 아론의 오른 귓부리와 그 아들들의 오른 귓부리에 바르고 그 오른손 엄지와 오른발 엄지에 바르고 그 피를 단 주위에 뿌리고	Then shalt thou kill the ram, and take of his blood, and put it upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron, and upon the tip of the right ear of his sons, and upon the thumb of their right hand, and upon the great toe of their right foot, and sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about.	Slaughter the ram, take some of its blood, and put it on the right earlobes of Aaron and his sons, on the thumbs of their right hands, and on the big toes of their right feet. Sprinkle the remaining blood on all sides of the altar.
EXO	29	21	단 위의 피와 관유를 취하여 아론과 그 옷과 그 아들들과 그 아들들의 옷에 뿌리라 그와 그 옷과 그 아들들과 그 아들들의 옷이 거룩하리라	And thou shalt take of the blood that is upon the altar, and of the anointing oil, and sprinkle it upon Aaron, and upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon the garments of his sons with him: and he shall be hallowed, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons’ garments with him.	And take some of the blood on the altar and some of the anointing oil and sprinkle it on Aaron and his garments, as well as on his sons and their garments. Then he and his garments will be consecrated, as well as his sons and their garments.
EXO	29	22	또 너는 그 수양의 기름과 기름진 꼬리와 그 내장에 덮인 기름과 간 위의 꺼풀과 두 콩팥과 그것들 위의 기름과 우편 넓적다리를 취하라 이는 위임식의 수양이며	Also thou shalt take of the ram the fat and the rump, and the fat that covereth the inwards, and the caul above the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and the right shoulder; for it is a ram of consecration:	Take the fat from the ram, the fat tail, the fat covering the entrails, the lobe of the liver, both kidneys with the fat on them, and the right thigh (since this is a ram for ordination),
EXO	29	23	또 여호와 앞에 있는 무교병 광주리에서 떡 한 덩이와 기름 바른 과자 하나와 전병 하나를 취하고	And one loaf of bread, and one cake of oiled bread, and one wafer out of the basket of the unleavened bread that is before the Lord:	along with one loaf of bread, one cake of bread made with oil, and one wafer from the basket of unleavened bread that is before the LORD.
EXO	29	24	그 전부를 아론의 손과 그 아들들의 손에 주고 그것을 흔들어 여호와 앞에 요제를 삼을지며	And thou shalt put all in the hands of Aaron, and in the hands of his sons; and shalt wave them for a wave offering before the Lord.	Put all these in the hands of Aaron and his sons and wave them before the LORD as a wave offering.
EXO	29	25	너는 그것을 그들의 손에서 취하여 단 위에서 번제물을 더하여 불사르라 이는 여호와 앞에 향기로운 냄새니 곧 여호와께 드리는 화제니라	And thou shalt receive them of their hands, and burn them upon the altar for a burnt offering, for a sweet savour before the Lord: it is an offering made by fire unto the Lord.	Then take them from their hands and burn them on the altar atop the burnt offering as a pleasing aroma before the LORD; it is an offering made by fire to the LORD.
EXO	29	26	너는 위임식 수양의 가슴을 취하여 여호와 앞에 흔들어 요제를 삼으라 이는 너의 분깃이니라	And thou shalt take the breast of the ram of Aaron’s consecration, and wave it for a wave offering before the Lord: and it shall be thy part.	Take the breast of the ram of Aaron’s ordination and wave it before the LORD as a wave offering, and it will be your portion.
EXO	29	27	너는 그 흔든 요제물 곧 아론과 그 아들들의 위임식 수양의 가슴과 넓적다리를 거룩하게 하라	And thou shalt sanctify the breast of the wave offering, and the shoulder of the heave offering, which is waved, and which is heaved up, of the ram of the consecration, even of that which is for Aaron, and of that which is for his sons:	Consecrate for Aaron and his sons the breast of the wave offering that is waved and the thigh of the heave offering that is lifted up from the ram of ordination.
EXO	29	28	이는 이스라엘 자손이 아론과 그 자손에게 돌릴 영원한 분깃이요 거제물이니 곧 이스라엘 자손이 화목제의 희생 중에서 취한 거제물로서 여호와께 드리는 거제물이니라	And it shall be Aaron’s and his sons’ by a statute for ever from the children of Israel: for it is an heave offering: and it shall be an heave offering from the children of Israel of the sacrifice of their peace offerings, even their heave offering unto the Lord.	This will belong to Aaron and his sons as a regular portion from the Israelites, for it is the heave offering the Israelites will make to the LORD from their peace offerings.
EXO	29	29	아론의 성의는 아론의 후에 그 아들들에게 돌릴지니 그들이 그것을 입고 기름 부음으로 위임을 받을 것이며	And the holy garments of Aaron shall be his sons’ after him, to be anointed therein, and to be consecrated in them.	The holy garments that belong to Aaron will belong to his sons after him, so they can be anointed and ordained in them.
EXO	29	30	그를 이어 제사장이 되는 아들이 회막에 들어가서 성소에서 섬길 때에는 칠 일 동안 그것을 입을지니라	And that son that is priest in his stead shall put them on seven days, when he cometh into the tabernacle of the congregation to minister in the holy place.	The son who succeeds him as priest and enters the Tent of Meeting to minister in the Holy Place must wear them for seven days.
EXO	29	31	너는 위임식 수양을 취하여 거룩한 곳에서 그 고기를 삶고	And thou shalt take the ram of the consecration, and seethe his flesh in the holy place.	You are to take the ram of ordination and boil its flesh in a holy place.
EXO	29	32	아론과 그 아들들이 회막문에서 그 수양의 고기와 광주리에 있는 떡을 먹을지라	And Aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram, and the bread that is in the basket, by the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.	At the entrance to the Tent of Meeting, Aaron and his sons are to eat the meat of the ram and the bread that is in the basket.
EXO	29	33	속죄물 곧 그들을 위임하며 그들은 거룩하게 하는데 쓰는 것은 그들은 먹되 타인은 먹지 못할지니 이는 성물이 됨이며	And they shall eat those things wherewith the atonement was made, to consecrate and to sanctify them: but a stranger shall not eat thereof, because they are holy.	They must eat those things by which atonement was made for their ordination and consecration. But no outsider may eat them, because these things are sacred.
EXO	29	34	위임식 고기나 떡이 아침까지 남았으면 그것을 불에 사를지니 이는 거룩한즉 먹지 못할지니라	And if ought of the flesh of the consecrations, or of the bread, remain unto the morning, then thou shalt burn the remainder with fire: it shall not be eaten, because it is holy.	And if any of the meat of ordination or any bread is left until the morning, you are to burn up the remainder. It must not be eaten, because it is sacred.
EXO	29	35	너는 내가 무릇 네게 명한 대로 아론과 그 아들들에게 그같이 하여 칠 일동안 위임식을 행하되	And thus shalt thou do unto Aaron, and to his sons, according to all things which I have commanded thee: seven days shalt thou consecrate them.	This is what you are to do for Aaron and his sons based on all that I have commanded you, taking seven days to ordain them.
EXO	29	36	매일 수송아지 하나로 속죄하기 위하여 속죄제를 드리며 또 단을 위하여 깨끗케 하고 그것에 기름을 부어 거룩하게 하라	And thou shalt offer every day a bullock for a sin offering for atonement: and thou shalt cleanse the altar, when thou hast made an atonement for it, and thou shalt anoint it, to sanctify it.	Sacrifice a bull as a sin offering each day for atonement. Purify the altar by making atonement for it, and anoint it to consecrate it.
EXO	29	37	네가 칠 일 동안 단을 위하여 속죄하여 거룩하게 하라 그리하면 지극히 거룩한 단이 되리니 무릇 단에 접촉하는 것이 거룩하리라	Seven days thou shalt make an atonement for the altar, and sanctify it; and it shall be an altar most holy: whatsoever toucheth the altar shall be holy.	For seven days you shall make atonement for the altar and consecrate it. Then the altar will become most holy; whatever touches the altar will be holy.
EXO	29	38	네가 단 위에 드릴 것은 이러하니라 매일 일년 된 어린 양 두 마리니	Now this is that which thou shalt offer upon the altar; two lambs of the first year day by day continually.	This is what you are to offer regularly on the altar, each day: two lambs that are a year old.
EXO	29	39	한 어린 양은 아침에 드리고 한 어린 양은 저녁 때에 드릴지며	The one lamb thou shalt offer in the morning; and the other lamb thou shalt offer at even:	Offer one lamb in the morning and the other at twilight.
EXO	29	40	한 어린 양에 고운 밀가루 에바 십분 일과 찧은 기름 힌의 사분 일을 더하고 또 전제로 포도주 힌의 사분 일을 더할지며	And with the one lamb a tenth deal of flour mingled with the fourth part of an hin of beaten oil; and the fourth part of an hin of wine for a drink offering.	With the first lamb offer a tenth of an ephah of fine flour, mixed with a quarter hin of oil from pressed olives, and a drink offering of a quarter hin of wine.
EXO	29	41	한 어린 양은 저녁 때에 드리되 아침과 일반으로 소제와 전제를 그것과 함께 드려 향기로운 냄새가 되게 하여 여호와께 화제를 삼을지니	And the other lamb thou shalt offer at even, and shalt do thereto according to the meat offering of the morning, and according to the drink offering thereof, for a sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the Lord.	And offer the second lamb at twilight with the same grain offering and drink offering as in the morning, as a pleasing aroma, an offering made by fire to the LORD.
EXO	29	42	이는 너희가 대대로 여호와 앞 회막문에서 늘 드릴 번제라 내가 거기서 너희와 만나고 네게 말하리라	This shall be a continual burnt offering throughout your generations at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before the Lord: where I will meet you, to speak there unto thee.	For the generations to come, this burnt offering shall be made regularly at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting before the LORD, where I will meet you to speak with you.
EXO	29	43	내가 거기서 이스라엘 자손을 만나리니 내 영광을 인하여 회막이 거룩하게 될지라	And there I will meet with the children of Israel, and the tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory.	I will also meet with the Israelites there, and that place will be consecrated by My glory.
EXO	29	44	내가 그 회막과 단을 거룩하게 하며 아론과 그 아들들도 거룩하게 하여 내게 제사장 직분을 행하게 하며	And I will sanctify the tabernacle of the congregation, and the altar: I will sanctify also both Aaron and his sons, to minister to me in the priest’s office.	So I will consecrate the Tent of Meeting and the altar, and I will consecrate Aaron and his sons to serve Me as priests.
EXO	29	45	내가 이스라엘 자손 중에 거하여 그들의 하나님이 되리니	And I will dwell among the children of Israel, and will be their God.	Then I will dwell among the Israelites and be their God.
EXO	29	46	그들은 내가 그들의 하나님 여호와로서 그들 중에 거하려고 그들을 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 낸 줄을 알리라 나는 그들의 하나님 여호와니라	And they shall know that I am the Lord their God, that brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, that I may dwell among them: I am the Lord their God.	And they will know that I am the LORD their God, who brought them out of the land of Egypt so that I might dwell among them. I am the LORD their God.
EXO	30	1	너는 분향할 단을 만들지니 곧 조각목으로 만들되	And thou shalt make an altar to burn incense upon: of shittim wood shalt thou make it.	“You are also to make an altar of acacia wood for the burning of incense.
EXO	30	2	장이 일 규빗, 광이 일 규빗으로 네모 반듯하게 하고 고는 이 규빗으로 하며 그 뿔을 그것과 연하게 하고	A cubit shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof; foursquare shall it be: and two cubits shall be the height thereof: the horns thereof shall be of the same.	It is to be square, a cubit long, a cubit wide, and two cubits high. Its horns must be of one piece.
EXO	30	3	단 상면과 전후 좌우면과 뿔을 정금으로 싸고 주위에 금테를 두를지며	And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, the top thereof, and the sides thereof round about, and the horns thereof; and thou shalt make unto it a crown of gold round about.	Overlay with pure gold the top and all the sides and horns, and make a molding of gold around it.
EXO	30	4	금테 아래 양편에 금고리 둘을 만들되 곧 그 양편에 만들지니 이는 단을 메는 채를 꿸 곳이며	And two golden rings shalt thou make to it under the crown of it, by the two corners thereof, upon the two sides of it shalt thou make it; and they shall be for places for the staves to bear it withal.	And make two gold rings below the molding on opposite sides to hold the poles used to carry it.
EXO	30	5	그 채를 조각목으로 만들고 금으로 싸고	And thou shalt make the staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold.	Make the poles of acacia wood and overlay them with gold.
EXO	30	6	그 단을 증거궤 위 속죄소 맞은편 곧 증거궤 앞에 있는 장 밖에 두라 그 속죄소는 내가 너와 만날 곳이며	And thou shalt put it before the vail that is by the ark of the testimony, before the mercy seat that is over the testimony, where I will meet with thee.	Place the altar in front of the veil that is before the ark of the Testimony—before the mercy seat that is over the Testimony—where I will meet with you.
EXO	30	7	아론이 아침마다 그 위에 향기로운 향을 사르되 등불을 정리할 때에 사를지며	And Aaron shall burn thereon sweet incense every morning: when he dresseth the lamps, he shall burn incense upon it.	And Aaron is to burn fragrant incense on it every morning when he tends the lamps.
EXO	30	8	또 저녁때 등불을 켤 때에 사를지니 이 향은 너희가 대대로 여호와앞에 끊지 못할지며	And when Aaron lighteth the lamps at even, he shall burn incense upon it, a perpetual incense before the Lord throughout your generations.	When Aaron sets up the lamps at twilight, he must burn the incense perpetually before the LORD for the generations to come.
EXO	30	9	너희는 그 위에 다른 향을 사르지 말며 번제나 소제를 드리지 말며 전제의 술을 붓지 말며	Ye shall offer no strange incense thereon, nor burnt sacrifice, nor meat offering; neither shall ye pour drink offering thereon.	On this altar you must not offer unauthorized incense or a burnt offering or grain offering; nor are you to pour a drink offering on it.
EXO	30	10	아론이 일년 일차씩 이 향단 뿔을 위하여 속죄하되 속죄제의 피로 일년 일차씩 대대로 속죄할지니라 이 단은 여호와께 지극히 거룩하니라	And Aaron shall make an atonement upon the horns of it once in a year with the blood of the sin offering of atonements: once in the year shall he make atonement upon it throughout your generations: it is most holy unto the Lord.	Once a year Aaron shall make atonement on the horns of the altar. Throughout your generations he shall make atonement on it annually with the blood of the sin offering of atonement. The altar is most holy to the LORD.”
EXO	30	11	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
EXO	30	12	네가 이스라엘 자손의 수효를 따라 조사할 때에 조사 받은 각 사람은 그 생명의 속전을 여호와께 드릴지니 이는 그 계수할 때에 그들 중에 온역이 없게 하려 함이라	When thou takest the sum of the children of Israel after their number, then shall they give every man a ransom for his soul unto the Lord, when thou numberest them; that there be no plague among them, when thou numberest them.	“When you take a census of the Israelites to number them, each man must pay the LORD a ransom for his life when he is counted. Then no plague will come upon them when they are numbered.
EXO	30	13	무릇 계수 중에 드는 자마다 성소에 세겔대로 반 세겔을 낼지니 한 세겔은 이십 게라라 그 반 세겔을 여호와께 드릴지며	This they shall give, every one that passeth among them that are numbered, half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary: (a shekel is twenty gerahs:) an half shekel shall be the offering of the Lord.	Everyone who crosses over to those counted must pay a half shekel, according to the sanctuary shekel, which weighs twenty gerahs. This half shekel is an offering to the LORD.
EXO	30	14	무릇 계수 중에 드는 자 곧 이십세 이상 된 자가 여호와께 드리되	Every one that passeth among them that are numbered, from twenty years old and above, shall give an offering unto the Lord.	Everyone twenty years of age or older who crosses over must give this offering to the LORD.
EXO	30	15	너희의 생명을 속하기 위하여 여호와께 드릴 때에 부자라고 반 세겔에서 더 내지 말고 가난한 자라고 덜 내지 말지며	The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less than half a shekel, when they give an offering unto the Lord, to make an atonement for your souls.	In making the offering to the LORD to atone for your lives, the rich shall not give more than a half shekel, nor shall the poor give less.
EXO	30	16	너는 이스라엘 자손에게서 속전을 취하여 회막의 봉사에 쓰라 이것이 여호와 앞에서 이스라엘 자손의 기념이 되어서 너희의 생명을 속하리라	And thou shalt take the atonement money of the children of Israel, and shalt appoint it for the service of the tabernacle of the congregation; that it may be a memorial unto the children of Israel before the Lord, to make an atonement for your souls.	Take the atonement money from the Israelites and use it for the service of the Tent of Meeting. It will serve as a memorial for the Israelites before the LORD to make atonement for your lives.”
EXO	30	17	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	And the LORD said to Moses,
EXO	30	18	너는 물두멍을 놋으로 만들어 씻게 하되 그것을 회막과 단 사이에 두고 그 속에 물을 담으라	Thou shalt also make a laver of brass, and his foot also of brass, to wash withal: and thou shalt put it between the tabernacle of the congregation and the altar, and thou shalt put water therein.	“You are to make a bronze basin with a bronze stand for washing. Set it between the Tent of Meeting and the altar, and put water in it,
EXO	30	19	아론과 그 아들들이 그 두멍에서 수족을 씻되	For Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet thereat:	with which Aaron and his sons are to wash their hands and feet.
EXO	30	20	그들이 회막에 들어갈 때에 물로 씻어 죽기를 면할 것이요 단에 가까이 가서 그 직분을 행하여 화제를 여호와 앞에 사를 때에도 그리 할지니라	When they go into the tabernacle of the congregation, they shall wash with water, that they die not; or when they come near to the altar to minister, to burn offering made by fire unto the Lord:	Whenever they enter the Tent of Meeting or approach the altar to minister by presenting an offering made by fire to the LORD, they must wash with water so that they will not die.
EXO	30	21	이와 같이 그들이 그 수족을 씻어 죽기를 면할지니 이는 그와 그 자손이 대대로 영원히 지킬 규례니라	So they shall wash their hands and their feet, that they die not: and it shall be a statute for ever to them, even to him and to his seed throughout their generations.	Thus they are to wash their hands and feet so that they will not die; this shall be a permanent statute for Aaron and his descendants for the generations to come.”
EXO	30	22	여호와께서 모세에게 또 일러 가라사대	Moreover the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
EXO	30	23	너는 상등 향품을 취하되 액체 몰약 오백 세겔과 그 반수의 향기로운 육계 이백오십 세겔과 향기로운 창포 이백오십 세겔과	Take thou also unto thee principal spices, of pure myrrh five hundred shekels, and of sweet cinnamon half so much, even two hundred and fifty shekels, and of sweet calamus two hundred and fifty shekels,	“Take the finest spices: 500 shekels of liquid myrrh, half that amount (250 shekels) of fragrant cinnamon, 250 shekels of fragrant cane,
EXO	30	24	계피 오백 세겔을 성소의 세겔대로 하고 감람 기름 한 힌을 취하여	And of cassia five hundred shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, and of oil olive an hin:	500 shekels of cassia—all according to the sanctuary shekel—and a hin of olive oil.
EXO	30	25	그것으로 거룩한 관유를 만들되 향을 제조하는 법대로 향기름을 만들지니 그것이 거룩한 관유가 될지라	And thou shalt make it an oil of holy ointment, an ointment compound after the art of the apothecary: it shall be an holy anointing oil.	Prepare from these a sacred anointing oil, a fragrant blend, the work of a perfumer; it will be a sacred anointing oil.
EXO	30	26	너는 그것으로 회막과 증거궤에 바르고	And thou shalt anoint the tabernacle of the congregation therewith, and the ark of the testimony,	Use this oil to anoint the Tent of Meeting, the ark of the Testimony,
EXO	30	27	상과 그 모든 기구며 등대와 그 기구며 분향단과	And the table and all his vessels, and the candlestick and his vessels, and the altar of incense,	the table and all its utensils, the lampstand and its utensils, the altar of incense,
EXO	30	28	및 번제단과 그 모든 기구와 물두멍과 그 받침에 발라	And the altar of burnt offering with all his vessels, and the laver and his foot.	the altar of burnt offering and all its utensils, and the basin with its stand.
EXO	30	29	그것들을 지성물로 구별하라 무릇 이것에 접촉하는 것이 거룩하리라	And thou shalt sanctify them, that they may be most holy: whatsoever toucheth them shall be holy.	You are to consecrate them so that they will be most holy. Whatever touches them shall be holy.
EXO	30	30	너는 아론과 그 아들들에게 기름을 발라 그들을 거룩하게 하고 그들로 내게 제사장 직분을 행하게 하고	And thou shalt anoint Aaron and his sons, and consecrate them, that they may minister unto me in the priest’s office.	Anoint Aaron and his sons and consecrate them to serve Me as priests.
EXO	30	31	이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 이르기를 이것은 너희 대대로 내게 거룩한 관유니	And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, This shall be an holy anointing oil unto me throughout your generations.	And you are to tell the Israelites, ‘This will be My sacred anointing oil for the generations to come.
EXO	30	32	사람의 몸에 붓지 말며 이 방법대로 이와 같은 것을 만들지 말라 이는 거룩하니 너희는 거룩히 여기라	Upon man’s flesh shall it not be poured, neither shall ye make any other like it, after the composition of it: it is holy, and it shall be holy unto you.	It must not be used to anoint an ordinary man, and you must not make anything like it with the same formula. It is holy, and it must be holy to you.
EXO	30	33	무릇 이와 같은 것을 만드는 자나 무릇 이것을 타인에게 붓는 자는 그 백성 중에서 끊쳐지리라 하라	Whosoever compoundeth any like it, or whosoever putteth any of it upon a stranger, shall even be cut off from his people.	Anyone who mixes perfume like it or puts it on an outsider shall be cut off from his people.’”
EXO	30	34	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 너는 소합향과 나감향과 풍자향의 향품을 취하고 그 향품을 유향에 섞되 각기 동일한 중수로 하고	And the Lord said unto Moses, Take unto thee sweet spices, stacte, and onycha, and galbanum; these sweet spices with pure frankincense: of each shall there be a like weight:	The LORD also said to Moses, “Take fragrant spices—gum resin, onycha, galbanum, and pure frankincense—in equal measures,
EXO	30	35	그것으로 향을 만들되 향 만드는 법대로 만들고 그것에 소금을 쳐서 성결하게 하고	And thou shalt make it a perfume, a confection after the art of the apothecary, tempered together, pure and holy:	and make a fragrant blend of incense, the work of a perfumer, seasoned with salt, pure and holy.
EXO	30	36	그 향 얼마를 곱게 찧어 내가 너와 만날 회막 안 증거궤 앞에 두라 이 향은 너희에게 지극히 거룩하니라	And thou shalt beat some of it very small, and put of it before the testimony in the tabernacle of the congregation, where I will meet with thee: it shall be unto you most holy.	Grind some of it into fine powder and place it in front of the Testimony in the Tent of Meeting, where I will meet with you. It shall be most holy to you.
EXO	30	37	네가 만들 향은 여호와를 위하여 거룩한 것이니 그 방법대로 너희를 위하여 만들지 말라	And as for the perfume which thou shalt make, ye shall not make to yourselves according to the composition thereof: it shall be unto thee holy for the Lord.	You are never to use this formula to make incense for yourselves; you shall regard it as holy to the LORD.
EXO	30	38	무릇 맡으려고 이같은 것을 만드는 자는 그 백성 중에서 끊쳐지리라	Whosoever shall make like unto that, to smell thereto, shall even be cut off from his people.	Anyone who makes something like it to enjoy its fragrance shall be cut off from his people.”
EXO	31	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
EXO	31	2	내가 유다 지파 훌의 손자요 우리의 아들인 브사렐을 지명하여 부르고	See, I have called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah:	“See, I have called by name Bezalel son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah.
EXO	31	3	하나님의 신을 그에게 충만하게 하여 지혜와 총명과 지식과 여러가지 재주로	And I have filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship,	And I have filled him with the Spirit of God, with skill, ability, and knowledge in all kinds of craftsmanship,
EXO	31	4	공교한 일을 연구하여 금과 은과 놋으로 만들게 하며	To devise cunning works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass,	to design artistic works in gold, silver, and bronze,
EXO	31	5	보석을 깍아 물리며 나무를 새겨서 여러가지 일을 하게 하고	And in cutting of stones, to set them, and in carving of timber, to work in all manner of workmanship.	to cut gemstones for settings, and to carve wood, so that he may be a master of every craft.
EXO	31	6	내가 또 단 지파 아히사막의 아들 오홀리압을 세워 그와 함께 하게 하며 무릇 지혜로운 마음이 있는 자에게 내가 지혜를 주어 그들로 내가 네게 명한 것을 다 만들게 할지니	And I, behold, I have given with him Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan: and in the hearts of all that are wise hearted I have put wisdom, that they may make all that I have commanded thee;	Moreover, I have selected Oholiab son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, as his assistant. I have also given skill to all the craftsmen, that they may fashion all that I have commanded you:
EXO	31	7	곧 회막과 증거궤와 그 위의 속죄소와 회막의 모든 기구와	The tabernacle of the congregation, and the ark of the testimony, and the mercy seat that is thereupon, and all the furniture of the tabernacle,	the Tent of Meeting, the ark of the Testimony and the mercy seat upon it, and all the other furnishings of the tent—
EXO	31	8	상과 그 기구와 정금 등대와 그 모든 기구와 분향단과	And the table and his furniture, and the pure candlestick with all his furniture, and the altar of incense,	the table with its utensils, the pure gold lampstand with all its utensils, the altar of incense,
EXO	31	9	번제단과 그 모든 기구와 물두멍과 그 받침과	And the altar of burnt offering with all his furniture, and the laver and his foot,	the altar of burnt offering with all its utensils, and the basin with its stand—
EXO	31	10	제사직을 행할 때에 입는 공교히 짠 의복 곧 제사장 아론의 성의와 그 아들들의 옷과	And the cloths of service, and the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest’s office,	as well as the woven garments, both the holy garments for Aaron the priest and the garments for his sons to serve as priests,
EXO	31	11	관유와 성소의 향기로운 향이라 무릇 내가 네게 명한 대로 그들이 만들지니라	And the anointing oil, and sweet incense for the holy place: according to all that I have commanded thee shall they do.	in addition to the anointing oil and fragrant incense for the Holy Place. They are to make them according to all that I have commanded you.”
EXO	31	12	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	And the LORD said to Moses,
EXO	31	13	너는 이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 이르기를 너희는 나의 안식일을 지키라 이는 나와 너희 사이에 너희 대대의 표징이니 나는 너희를 거룩하게 하는 여호와인 줄 너희로 알게 함이라	Speak thou also unto the children of Israel, saying, Verily my sabbaths ye shall keep: for it is a sign between me and you throughout your generations; that ye may know that I am the Lord that doth sanctify you.	“Tell the Israelites, ‘Surely you must keep My Sabbaths, for this will be a sign between Me and you for the generations to come, so that you may know that I am the LORD who sanctifies you.
EXO	31	14	너희는 안식일을 지킬지니 이는 너희에게 성일이 됨이라 무릇 그날에 일하는 자는 그 백성 중에서 그 생명이 끊쳐지리라	Ye shall keep the sabbath therefore; for it is holy unto you: every one that defileth it shall surely be put to death: for whosoever doeth any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from among his people.	Keep the Sabbath, for it is holy to you. Anyone who profanes it must surely be put to death. Whoever does any work on that day must be cut off from among his people.
EXO	31	15	엿새 동안은 일할 것이나 제칠일은 큰 안식일이니 여호와께 거룩한 것이라 무릇 안식일에 일하는 자를 반드시 죽일지니라	Six days may work be done; but in the seventh is the sabbath of rest, holy to the Lord: whosoever doeth any work in the sabbath day, he shall surely be put to death.	For six days work may be done, but the seventh day is a Sabbath of complete rest, holy to the LORD. Whoever does any work on the Sabbath day must surely be put to death.
EXO	31	16	이같이 이스라엘 자손이 안식일을 지켜서 그것으로 대대로 영원한 언약을 삼을 것이니	Wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the sabbath, to observe the sabbath throughout their generations, for a perpetual covenant.	The Israelites must keep the Sabbath, celebrating it as a permanent covenant for the generations to come.
EXO	31	17	이는 나와 이스라엘 자손 사이에 영원한 표징이며 나 여호와가 엿새 동안에 천지를 창조하고 제칠일에 쉬어 평안하였음이니라 하라	It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever: for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed.	It is a sign between Me and the Israelites forever; for in six days the LORD made the heavens and the earth, but on the seventh day He rested and was refreshed.’”
EXO	31	18	여호와께서 시내산 위에서 모세에게 이르시기를 마치신 때에 증거판 둘을 모세에게 주시니 이는 돌판이요 하나님이 친히 쓰신 것이더라	And he gave unto Moses, when he had made an end of communing with him upon mount Sinai, two tables of testimony, tables of stone, written with the finger of God.	When the LORD had finished speaking with Moses on Mount Sinai, He gave him the two tablets of the Testimony, tablets of stone inscribed by the finger of God.
EXO	32	1	백성이 모세가 산에서 내려옴이 더딤을 보고 모여 아론에게 이르러 가로되 일어나라 우리를 인도할 신을 우리를 위하여 만들라 이 모세 곧 우리를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 낸 사람은 어찌 되었는지 알지 못함이라	And when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down out of the mount, the people gathered themselves together unto Aaron, and said unto him, Up, make us gods, which shall go before us; for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him.	Now when the people saw that Moses was delayed in coming down from the mountain, they gathered around Aaron and said, “Come, make us gods who will go before us. As for this Moses who brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we do not know what has happened to him!”
EXO	32	2	아론이 그들에게 이르되 너희 아내와 자녀의 귀의 금고리를 빼어 내게로 가져 오라	And Aaron said unto them, Break off the golden earrings, which are in the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of your daughters, and bring them unto me.	So Aaron told them, “Take off the gold earrings that are on your wives and sons and daughters, and bring them to me.”
EXO	32	3	모든 백성이 그 귀에서 금고리를 빼어 아론에게로 가져 오매	And all the people brake off the golden earrings which were in their ears, and brought them unto Aaron.	Then all the people took off their gold earrings and brought them to Aaron.
EXO	32	4	아론이 그들의 손에서 그 고리를 받아 부어서 각도로 새겨 송아지 형상을 만드니 그들이 말하되 이스라엘아 이는 너희를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 낸 너희 신이로다 하는지라	And he received them at their hand, and fashioned it with a graving tool, after he had made it a molten calf: and they said, These be thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.	He took the gold from their hands, and with an engraving tool he fashioned it into a molten calf. And they said, “These, O Israel, are your gods, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt!”
EXO	32	5	아론이 보고 그 앞에 단을 쌓고 이에 공포하여 가로되 내일은 여호와의 절일이니라 하니	And when Aaron saw it, he built an altar before it; and Aaron made proclamation, and said, To morrow is a feast to the Lord.	When Aaron saw this, he built an altar before the calf and proclaimed: “Tomorrow shall be a feast to the LORD.”
EXO	32	6	이튿날에 그들이 일찍이 일어나 번제를 드리며 화목제를 드리고 앉아서 먹고 마시며 일어나서 뛰놀더라	And they rose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt offerings, and brought peace offerings; and the people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play.	So the next day they arose, offered burnt offerings, and presented peace offerings. And the people sat down to eat and drink, and got up to indulge in revelry.
EXO	32	7	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 너는 내려가라 네가 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 낸 네 백성이 부패하였도다	And the Lord said unto Moses, Go, get thee down; for thy people, which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt, have corrupted themselves:	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Go down at once, for your people, whom you brought up out of the land of Egypt, have corrupted themselves.
EXO	32	8	그들이 내가 그들에게 명한 길을 속히 떠나 자기를 위하여 송아지를 부어 만들고 그것을 숭배하며 그것에게 희생을 드리며 말하기를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 낸 너희 신이라 하였도다	They have turned aside quickly out of the way which I commanded them: they have made them a molten calf, and have worshipped it, and have sacrificed thereunto, and said, These be thy gods, O Israel, which have brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.	How quickly they have turned aside from the way that I commanded them! They have made for themselves a molten calf and have bowed down to it. They have sacrificed to it and said, ‘These, O Israel, are your gods, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt.’”
EXO	32	9	여호와께서 또 모세에게 이르시되 내가 이 백성을 보니 목이 곧은 백성이로다	And the Lord said unto Moses, I have seen this people, and, behold, it is a stiffnecked people:	The LORD also said to Moses, “I have seen this people, and they are indeed a stiff-necked people.
EXO	32	10	그런즉 나대로 하게 하라 내가 그들에게 진노하여 그들을 진멸하고 너로 큰 나라가 되게 하리라	Now therefore let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them: and I will make of thee a great nation.	Now leave Me alone, so that My anger may burn against them and consume them. Then I will make you into a great nation.”
EXO	32	11	모세가 그 하나님 여호와께 구하여 가로되 여호와여 어찌하여 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내신 주의 백성에게 진노하시나이까	And Moses besought the Lord his God, and said, Lord, why doth thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou hast brought forth out of the land of Egypt with great power, and with a mighty hand?	But Moses sought the favor of the LORD his God, saying, “O LORD, why does Your anger burn against Your people, whom You brought out of the land of Egypt with great power and a mighty hand?
EXO	32	12	어찌하여 애굽 사람으로 이르기를 여호와가 화를 내려 그 백성을 산에서 죽이고 지면에서 진멸하려고 인도하여 내었다 하게 하려 하시나이까 주의 맹렬한 노를 그치시고 뜻을 돌이키사 주의 백성에게 이 화를 내리지 마옵소서	Wherefore should the Egyptians speak, and say, For mischief did he bring them out, to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth? Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against thy people.	Why should the Egyptians declare, ‘He brought them out with evil intent, to kill them in the mountains and wipe them from the face of the earth’? Turn from Your fierce anger and relent from doing harm to Your people.
EXO	32	13	주의 종 아브라함과 이삭과 이스라엘을 기억하소서 주께서 주를 가리켜 그들에게 맹세하여 이르시기를 내가 너희 자손을 하늘의 별처럼 많게 하고 나의 허락한 이 온 땅을 너희의 자손에게 주어 영원한 기업이 되게 하리라 하셨나이다	Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, thy servants, to whom thou swarest by thine own self, and saidst unto them, I will multiply your seed as the stars of heaven, and all this land that I have spoken of will I give unto your seed, and they shall inherit it for ever.	Remember Your servants Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, to whom You swore by Your very self when You declared, ‘I will make your descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky, and I will give your descendants all this land that I have promised, and it shall be their inheritance forever.’”
EXO	32	14	여호와께서 뜻을 돌이키사 말씀하신 화를 그 백성에게 내리지 아니하시니라	And the Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people.	So the LORD relented from the calamity He had threatened to bring on His people.
EXO	32	15	모세가 돌이켜 산에서 내려 오는데 증거의 두 판이 그 손에 있고 그 판의 양면 이편 저편에 글자가 있으니	And Moses turned, and went down from the mount, and the two tables of the testimony were in his hand: the tables were written on both their sides; on the one side and on the other were they written.	Then Moses turned and went down the mountain with the two tablets of the Testimony in his hands. They were inscribed on both sides, front and back.
EXO	32	16	그 판은 하나님이 만드신 것이요 글자는 하나님이 쓰셔서 판에 새기신 것이더라	And the tables were the work of God, and the writing was the writing of God, graven upon the tables.	The tablets were the work of God, and the writing was the writing of God, engraved on the tablets.
EXO	32	17	여호수아가 백성의 떠듦을 듣고 모세에게 말하되 진 중에서 싸우는 소리가 나나이다	And when Joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted, he said unto Moses, There is a noise of war in the camp.	When Joshua heard the sound of the people shouting, he said to Moses, “The sound of war is in the camp.”
EXO	32	18	모세가 가로되 이는 승전가도 아니요 패하여 부르짖는 소리도 아니라 나의 듣기에는 노래하는 소리로다 하고	And he said, It is not the voice of them that shout for mastery, neither is it the voice of them that cry for being overcome: but the noise of them that sing do I hear.	But Moses replied: “It is neither the cry of victory nor the cry of defeat; I hear the sound of singing!”
EXO	32	19	진에 가까이 이르러 송아지와 그 춤 추는 것을 보고 대노하여 손에서 그 판들을 산 아래로 던져 깨뜨리니라	And it came to pass, as soon as he came nigh unto the camp, that he saw the calf, and the dancing: and Moses’ anger waxed hot, and he cast the tables out of his hands, and brake them beneath the mount.	As Moses approached the camp and saw the calf and the dancing, he burned with anger and threw the tablets out of his hands, shattering them at the base of the mountain.
EXO	32	20	모세가 그들의 만든 송아지를 가져 불살라 부수어 가루를 만들어 물에 뿌려 이스라엘 자손에게 마시우니라	And he took the calf which they had made, and burnt it in the fire, and ground it to powder, and strawed it upon the water, and made the children of Israel drink of it.	Then he took the calf they had made, burned it in the fire, ground it to powder, and scattered the powder over the face of the water. Then he forced the Israelites to drink it.
EXO	32	21	모세가 아론에게 이르되 이 백성이 네게 어떻게 하였기에 네가 그들로 중죄에 빠지게 하였느뇨	And Moses said unto Aaron, What did this people unto thee, that thou hast brought so great a sin upon them?	“What did this people do to you,” Moses asked Aaron, “that you have led them into so great a sin?”
EXO	32	22	아론이 가로되 내 주여 노하지 마소서 이 백성의 악함을 당신이 아나이다	And Aaron said, Let not the anger of my lord wax hot: thou knowest the people, that they are set on mischief.	“Do not be enraged, my lord,” Aaron replied. “You yourself know that the people are intent on evil.
EXO	32	23	그들이 내게 말하기를 우리를 위하여 우리를 인도할 신을 만들라 이 모세 곧 우리를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 낸 사람은 어찌 되었는지 알 수 없노라 하기에	For they said unto me, Make us gods, which shall go before us: for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him.	They told me, ‘Make us gods who will go before us. As for this Moses who brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we do not know what has happened to him!’
EXO	32	24	내가 그들에게 이르기를 금이 있는 자는 빼어내라 한즉 그들이 그것을 내게로 가져왔기로 내가 불에 던졌더니 이 송아지가 나왔나이다	And I said unto them, Whosoever hath any gold, let them break it off. So they gave it me: then I cast it into the fire, and there came out this calf.	So I said to them, ‘Whoever has gold, let him take it off,’ and they gave it to me. And when I threw it into the fire, out came this calf!”
EXO	32	25	모세가 본즉 백성이 방자하니 이는 아론이 그들로 방자하게 하여 원수에게 조롱거리가 되게 하였음이라	And when Moses saw that the people were naked; (for Aaron had made them naked unto their shame among their enemies:)	Moses saw that the people were out of control, for Aaron had let them run wild and become a laughingstock to their enemies.
EXO	32	26	이에 모세가 진문에 서서 가로되 누구든지 여호와의 편에 있는 자는 내게로 나아오라 하매 레위 자손이 다 모여 그에게로 오는지라	Then Moses stood in the gate of the camp, and said, Who is on the Lord’s side? let him come unto me. And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto him.	So Moses stood at the entrance to the camp and said, “Whoever is for the LORD, come to me.” And all the Levites gathered around him.
EXO	32	27	모세가 그들에게 이르되 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시기를 너희는 각각 허리에 칼을 차고 진 이 문에서 저 문까지 왕래하며 각 사람이 그 형제를, 각 사람이 그 친구를, 각 사람이 그 이웃을 도륙하라 하셨느니라	And he said unto them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Put every man his sword by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate throughout the camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his companion, and every man his neighbour.	He told them, “This is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: ‘Each of you men is to fasten his sword to his side, go back and forth through the camp from gate to gate, and slay his brother, his friend, and his neighbor.’”
EXO	32	28	레위 자손이 모세의 말대로 행하매 이 날에 백성 중에 삼천 명 가량이 죽인 바 된지라	And the children of Levi did according to the word of Moses: and there fell of the people that day about three thousand men.	The Levites did as Moses commanded, and that day about three thousand of the people fell dead.
EXO	32	29	모세가 이르되 각 사람이 그 아들과 그 형제를 쳤으니 오늘날 여호와께 헌신하게 되었느니라 그가 오늘날 너희에게 복을 내리시리라	For Moses had said, Consecrate yourselves to day to the Lord, even every man upon his son, and upon his brother; that he may bestow upon you a blessing this day.	Afterward, Moses said, “Today you have been ordained for service to the LORD, since each man went against his son and his brother; so the LORD has bestowed a blessing on you this day.”
EXO	32	30	이튿날 모세가 백성에게 이르되 너희가 큰 죄를 범하였도다 내가 이제 여호와께로 올라가노니 혹 너희의 죄를 속할까 하노라 하고	And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses said unto the people, Ye have sinned a great sin: and now I will go up unto the Lord; peradventure I shall make an atonement for your sin.	The next day Moses said to the people, “You have committed a great sin. Now I will go up to the LORD; perhaps I can make atonement for your sin.”
EXO	32	31	여호와께로 다시 나아가 여짜오되 슬프도소이다 이 백성이 자기들을 위하여 금신을 만들었사오니 큰 죄를 범하였나이다	And Moses returned unto the Lord, and said, Oh, this people have sinned a great sin, and have made them gods of gold.	So Moses returned to the LORD and said, “Oh, what a great sin these people have committed! They have made gods of gold for themselves.
EXO	32	32	그러나 합의하시면 이제 그들의 죄를 사하시옵소서 그렇지 않사오면 원컨대 주의 기록하신 책에서 내 이름을 지워버려주옵소서	Yet now, if thou wilt forgive their sin—; and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book which thou hast written.	Yet now, if You would only forgive their sin.... But if not, please blot me out of the book that You have written.”
EXO	32	33	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 누구든지 내게 범죄하면 그는 내가 내 책에서 지워버리리라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Whosoever hath sinned against me, him will I blot out of my book.	The LORD replied to Moses, “Whoever has sinned against Me, I will blot out of My book.
EXO	32	34	이제 가서 내가 네게 말한 곳으로 백성을 인도하라 내 사자가 네 앞서 가리라 그러나 내가 보응할 날에는 그들의 죄를 보응하리라	Therefore now go, lead the people unto the place of which I have spoken unto thee: behold, mine Angel shall go before thee: nevertheless in the day when I visit I will visit their sin upon them.	Now go, lead the people to the place I described. Behold, My angel shall go before you. But on the day I settle accounts, I will punish them for their sin.”
EXO	32	35	여호와께서 백성을 치시니 이는 그들이 아론의 만든 바 그 송아지를 만들었음이더라	And the Lord plagued the people, because they made the calf, which Aaron made.	And the LORD sent a plague on the people because of what they had done with the calf that Aaron had made.
EXO	33	1	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 너는 네가 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 낸 백성과 함꼐 여기서 떠나서 내가 아브라함과 이삭과 야곱에게 맹세하기를 네 자손에게 주마 한 그 땅으로 올라가라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Depart, and go up hence, thou and the people which thou hast brought up out of the land of Egypt, unto the land which I sware unto Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, Unto thy seed will I give it:	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Leave this place, you and the people you brought up out of the land of Egypt, and go to the land that I promised to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob when I said, ‘I will give it to your descendants.’
EXO	33	2	내가 사자를 네 앞서 보내어 가나안 사람과 아모리 사람과 헷 사람과 브리스 사람과 히위 사람과 여부스 사람을 쫓아내고	And I will send an angel before thee; and I will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite:	And I will send an angel before you, and I will drive out the Canaanites, Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites.
EXO	33	3	너희로 젖과 꿀이 흐르는 땅에 이르게 하려니와 나는 너희와 함께 올라가지 아니하리니 너희는 목이 곧은 백성인즉 내가 중로에서 너희를 진멸할까 염려함이니라 하시니	Unto a land flowing with milk and honey: for I will not go up in the midst of thee; for thou art a stiffnecked people: lest I consume thee in the way.	Go up to a land flowing with milk and honey. But I will not go with you, because you are a stiff-necked people; otherwise, I might destroy you on the way.”
EXO	33	4	백성이 이 황송한 말씀을 듣고 슬퍼하여 한 사람도 그 몸을 단장하지 아니하니	And when the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned: and no man did put on him his ornaments.	When the people heard these bad tidings, they went into mourning, and no one put on any of his jewelry.
EXO	33	5	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시기를 이스라엘 자손에게 이르라 너희는 목이 곧은 백성인즉 내가 순식간이라도 너희 중에 행하면 너희를 진멸하리니 너희 단장품을 제하라 그리하면 내가 너희에게 어떻게 할 일을 알겠노라 하셨음이라	For the Lord had said unto Moses, Say unto the children of Israel, Ye are a stiffnecked people: I will come up into the midst of thee in a moment, and consume thee: therefore now put off thy ornaments from thee, that I may know what to do unto thee.	For the LORD had said to Moses, “Tell the Israelites, ‘You are a stiff-necked people. If I should go with you for a single moment, I would destroy you. Now take off your jewelry, and I will decide what to do with you.’”
EXO	33	6	이스라엘 자손이 호렙 산에서부터 그 단장품을 제하니라	And the children of Israel stripped themselves of their ornaments by the mount Horeb.	So the Israelites stripped themselves of their jewelry from Mount Horeb onward.
EXO	33	7	모세가 항상 장막을 취하여 진 밖에 쳐서 진과 멀리 떠나게 하고 회막이라 이름하니 여호와를 앙모하는 자는 다 진 바깥 회막으로 나아가며	And Moses took the tabernacle, and pitched it without the camp, afar off from the camp, and called it the Tabernacle of the congregation. And it came to pass, that every one which sought the Lord went out unto the tabernacle of the congregation, which was without the camp.	Now Moses used to take the tent and pitch it at a distance outside the camp. He called it the Tent of Meeting, and anyone inquiring of the LORD would go to the Tent of Meeting outside the camp.
EXO	33	8	모세가 회막으로 나아갈 때에는 백성이 다 일어나 자기 장막문에 서서 모세가 회막에 들어가기까지 바라보며	And it came to pass, when Moses went out unto the tabernacle, that all the people rose up, and stood every man at his tent door, and looked after Moses, until he was gone into the tabernacle.	Then, whenever Moses went out to the tent, all the people would stand at the entrances to their own tents and watch Moses until he entered the tent.
EXO	33	9	모세가 회막에 들어갈 때에 구름 기둥이 내려 회막문에 서며 여호와께서 모세와 말씀하시니	And it came to pass, as Moses entered into the tabernacle, the cloudy pillar descended, and stood at the door of the tabernacle, and the Lord talked with Moses.	As Moses entered the tent, the pillar of cloud would come down and remain at the entrance, and the LORD would speak with Moses.
EXO	33	10	모든 백성이 회막문에 구름 기둥이 섰음을 보고 다 일어나 각기 장막문에 서서 경배하며	And all the people saw the cloudy pillar stand at the tabernacle door: and all the people rose up and worshipped, every man in his tent door.	When all the people saw the pillar of cloud standing at the entrance to the tent, they would stand up and worship, each one at the entrance to his own tent.
EXO	33	11	사람이 그 친구와 이야기함 같이 여호와께서는 모세와 대면하여 말씀하시며 모세는 진으로 돌아오나 그 수종자 눈의 아들 청년 여호수아는 회막을 떠나지 아니하니라	And the Lord spake unto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend. And he turned again into the camp: but his servant Joshua, the son of Nun, a young man, departed not out of the tabernacle.	Thus the LORD would speak to Moses face to face, as a man speaks to his friend. Then Moses would return to the camp, but his young assistant Joshua son of Nun would not leave the tent.
EXO	33	12	모세가 여호와께 고하되 보시옵소서 주께서 나더러 이 백성을 인도하여 올라가라 하시면서 나와 함께 보낼 자를 내게 지시하지 아니하시나이다 주께서 전에 말씀하시기를 나는 이름으로도 너를 알고 너도 내 앞에 은총을 입었다 하셨사온즉	And Moses said unto the Lord, See, thou sayest unto me, Bring up this people: and thou hast not let me know whom thou wilt send with me. Yet thou hast said, I know thee by name, and thou hast also found grace in my sight.	Then Moses said to the LORD, “Look, You have been telling me, ‘Lead this people up,’ but You have not let me know whom You will send with me. Yet You have said, ‘I know you by name, and you have found favor in My sight.’
EXO	33	13	내가 참으로 주의 목전에 은총을 입게 하시며 이 족속을 주의 백성으로 여기소서	Now therefore, I pray thee, if I have found grace in thy sight, shew me now thy way, that I may know thee, that I may find grace in thy sight: and consider that this nation is thy people.	Now if indeed I have found favor in Your sight, please let me know Your ways, that I may know You and find favor in Your sight. Remember that this nation is Your people.”
EXO	33	14	여호와께서 가라사대 내가 친히 가리라 내가 너로 편케 하리라	And he said, My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest.	And the LORD answered, “My Presence will go with you, and I will give you rest.”
EXO	33	15	모세가 여호와께 고하되 주께서 친히 가지 아니하시려거든 우리를 이곳에서 올려 보내지 마옵소서	And he said unto him, If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence.	“If Your Presence does not go with us,” Moses replied, “do not lead us up from here.
EXO	33	16	나와 주의 백성이 주의 목전에 은총 입은 줄을 무엇으로 알리이까 주께서 우리와 함께 행하심으로 나와 주의 백성을 천하 만민 중에 구별하심이 아니니이까	For wherein shall it be known here that I and thy people have found grace in thy sight? is it not in that thou goest with us? so shall we be separated, I and thy people, from all the people that are upon the face of the earth.	For how then can it be known that Your people and I have found favor in Your sight, unless You go with us? How else will we be distinguished from all the other people on the face of the earth?”
EXO	33	17	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 너의 말하는 이 일도 내가 하리니 너는 내 목전에 은총을 입었고 내가 이름으로도 너를 앎이니라	And the Lord said unto Moses, I will do this thing also that thou hast spoken: for thou hast found grace in my sight, and I know thee by name.	So the LORD said to Moses, “I will do this very thing you have asked, for you have found favor in My sight, and I know you by name.”
EXO	33	18	모세가 가로되 원컨대 주의 영광을 내게 보이소서	And he said, I beseech thee, shew me thy glory.	Then Moses said, “Please show me Your glory.”
EXO	33	19	여호와께서 가라사대 내가 나의 모든 선한 형상을 네 앞으로 지나게 하고 여호와의 이름을 네 앞에 반포하리라 나는 은혜 줄 자에게 은혜를 주고 긍휼히 여길 자에게 긍휼을 베푸느니라	And he said, I will make all my goodness pass before thee, and I will proclaim the name of the Lord before thee; and will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will shew mercy on whom I will shew mercy.	“I will cause all My goodness to pass before you,” the LORD replied, “and I will proclaim My name—the LORD—in your presence. I will have mercy on whom I have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion.”
EXO	33	20	또 가라사대 네가 내 얼굴을 보지 못하리니 나를 보고 살 자가 없음이니라	And he said, Thou canst not see my face: for there shall no man see me, and live.	But He added, “You cannot see My face, for no one can see Me and live.”
EXO	33	21	여호와께서 가라사대 보라 내 곁에 한 곳이 있으니 너는 그 반석 위에 섰으라	And the Lord said, Behold, there is a place by me, and thou shalt stand upon a rock:	The LORD continued, “There is a place near Me where you are to stand upon a rock,
EXO	33	22	내 영광이 지날 때에 내가 너를 반석 틈에 두고 내가 지나도록 내 손으로 너를 덮었다가	And it shall come to pass, while my glory passeth by, that I will put thee in a clift of the rock, and will cover thee with my hand while I pass by:	and when My glory passes by, I will put you in a cleft of the rock and cover you with My hand until I have passed by.
EXO	33	23	손을 거두리니 네가 내 등을 볼 것이요 얼굴은 보지 못하리라	And I will take away mine hand, and thou shalt see my back parts: but my face shall not be seen.	Then I will take My hand away, and you will see My back; but My face must not be seen.”
EXO	34	1	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 너는 돌판 둘을 처음 것과 같이 깍아 만들라 네가 깨뜨린 바 처음 것과 같이 깎아 만들라 네가 깨뜨린 바 처음 판에 있던 말을 내가 그 판에 쓰리니	And the Lord said unto Moses, Hew thee two tables of stone like unto the first: and I will write upon these tables the words that were in the first tables, which thou brakest.	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Chisel out two stone tablets like the originals, and I will write on them the words that were on the first tablets, which you broke.
EXO	34	2	아침 전에 예비하고 아침에 시내 산에 올라와 산꼭대기에서 내게 보이되	And be ready in the morning, and come up in the morning unto mount Sinai, and present thyself there to me in the top of the mount.	Be ready in the morning, and come up on Mount Sinai to present yourself before Me on the mountaintop.
EXO	34	3	아무도 너와 함께 오르지 말며 온 산에 인적을 금하고 양과 소도 산 앞에서 먹지 못하게 하라	And no man shall come up with thee, neither let any man be seen throughout all the mount; neither let the flocks nor herds feed before that mount.	No one may go up with you; in fact, no one may be seen anywhere on the mountain—not even the flocks or herds may graze in front of the mountain.”
EXO	34	4	모세가 돌판 둘을 처음 것과 같이 깎아 만들고 아침에 일찍이 일어나 그 두 돌판을 손에 들고 여호와의 명대로 시내 산에 올라가니	And he hewed two tables of stone like unto the first; and Moses rose up early in the morning, and went up unto mount Sinai, as the Lord had commanded him, and took in his hand the two tables of stone.	So Moses chiseled out two stone tablets like the originals. He rose early in the morning, and taking the two stone tablets in his hands, he went up Mount Sinai as the LORD had commanded him.
EXO	34	5	여호와께서 구름 가운데 강림하사 그와 함께 거기 서서 여호와의 이름을 반포하실새	And the Lord descended in the cloud, and stood with him there, and proclaimed the name of the Lord.	And the LORD descended in a cloud, stood with him there, and proclaimed His name, the LORD.
EXO	34	6	여호와께서 그의 앞으로 지나시며 반포하시되 여호와로라 여호와로라 자비롭고 은혜롭고 노하기를 더디하고 인자와 진실이 많은 하나님이로라	And the Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, The Lord, The Lord God, merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth,	Then the LORD passed in front of Moses and called out: “The LORD, the LORD God, is compassionate and gracious, slow to anger, abounding in loving devotion and faithfulness,
EXO	34	7	인자를 천대까지 베풀며 악과 과실과 죄를 용서하나 형벌 받을 자는 결단코 면죄하지 않고 아비의 악을 자녀손 삼사 대까지 보응하리라	Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon the children’s children, unto the third and to the fourth generation.	maintaining loving devotion to a thousand generations, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin. Yet He will by no means leave the guilty unpunished; He will visit the iniquity of the fathers on their children and grandchildren to the third and fourth generations.”
EXO	34	8	모세가 급히 땅에 엎드리어 경배하며	And Moses made haste, and bowed his head toward the earth, and worshipped.	Moses immediately bowed down to the ground and worshiped.
EXO	34	9	가로되 주여 내가 주께 은총을 입었거든 원컨대 주는 우리 중에서 행하옵소서 이는 목이 곧은 백성이니이다 우리의 악과 죄를 사하시고 우리로 주의 기업을 삼으소서	And he said, If now I have found grace in thy sight, O Lord, let my Lord, I pray thee, go among us; for it is a stiffnecked people; and pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for thine inheritance.	“O Lord,” he said, “if I have indeed found favor in Your sight, my Lord, please go with us. Although this is a stiff-necked people, forgive our iniquity and sin, and take us as Your inheritance.”
EXO	34	10	여호와께서 가라사대 보라 내가 언약을 세우나니 곧 내가 아직 온 땅 아무 국민에게도 행치 아니한 이적을 너희 전체 백성 앞에 행할 것이라 너의 머무는 나라 백성이 다 여호와의 소위를 보리니 내가 너를 위하여 행할 일이 두려운 것임이니라	And he said, Behold, I make a covenant: before all thy people I will do marvels, such as have not been done in all the earth, nor in any nation: and all the people among which thou art shall see the work of the Lord: for it is a terrible thing that I will do with thee.	And the LORD said, “Behold, I am making a covenant. Before all your people I will perform wonders that have never been done in any nation in all the world. All the people among whom you live will see the LORD’s work, for it is an awesome thing that I am doing with you.
EXO	34	11	너는 내가 오늘 네게 명하는 것을 삼가 지키라 보라 내가 네 앞에서 아모리 사람과 가나안 사람과 헷 사람과 브리스 사람과 히위 사람과 여부스 사람을 쫓아내리니	Observe thou that which I command thee this day: behold, I drive out before thee the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite.	Observe what I command you this day. I will drive out before you the Amorites, Canaanites, Hittites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites.
EXO	34	12	너는 스스로 삼가 네가 들어가는 땅의 거민과 언약을 세우지 말라 그들이 너희 중에 올무가 될까 하노라	Take heed to thyself, lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land whither thou goest, lest it be for a snare in the midst of thee:	Be careful not to make a treaty with the inhabitants of the land you are entering, lest they become a snare in your midst.
EXO	34	13	너희는 도리어 그들의 단들을 헐고 그들의 주상을 깨뜨리고 그들의 아세라 상을 찍을지어다	But ye shall destroy their altars, break their images, and cut down their groves:	Rather, you must tear down their altars, smash their sacred stones, and chop down their Asherah poles.
EXO	34	14	너는 다른 신에게 절하지 말라 여호와는 질투라 이름하는 질투의 하나님임이니라	For thou shalt worship no other god: for the Lord, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God:	For you must not worship any other god, for the LORD, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God.
EXO	34	15	너는 삼가 그 땅의 거민과 언약을 세우지 말지니 이는 그들이 모든 신을 음란히 섬기며 그 신들에게 희생을 드리고 너를 청하면 네가 그 희생을 먹을까 함이며	Lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, and they go a whoring after their gods, and do sacrifice unto their gods, and one call thee, and thou eat of his sacrifice;	Do not make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, for when they prostitute themselves to their gods and sacrifice to them, they will invite you, and you will eat their sacrifices.
EXO	34	16	또 네가 그들의 딸들로 네 아들들의 아내를 삼음으로 그들의 딸들이 그 신들을 음란히 섬기며 네 아들로 그들의 신들을 음란히 섬기게 할까 함이니라	And thou take of their daughters unto thy sons, and their daughters go a whoring after their gods, and make thy sons go a whoring after their gods.	And when you take some of their daughters as brides for your sons, their daughters will prostitute themselves to their gods and cause your sons to do the same.
EXO	34	17	너는 신상들을 부어 만들지 말지니라	Thou shalt make thee no molten gods.	You shall make no molten gods for yourselves.
EXO	34	18	너는 무교절을 지키되 내가 네게 명한 대로 아빕월 그 기한에 칠 일 동안 무교병을 먹으라 이는 네가 아빕월에 애굽에서 나왔음이니라	The feast of unleavened bread shalt thou keep. Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, as I commanded thee, in the time of the month Abib: for in the month Abib thou camest out from Egypt.	You are to keep the Feast of Unleavened Bread. For seven days at the appointed time in the month of Abib, you are to eat unleavened bread as I commanded you. For in the month of Abib you came out of Egypt.
EXO	34	19	무릇 초태생은 다 내 것이며 무릇 네 가축의 수컷 처음 난 우양도 다 그러하며	All that openeth the matrix is mine; and every firstling among thy cattle, whether ox or sheep, that is male.	The first offspring of every womb belongs to Me, including all the firstborn males among your livestock, whether cattle or sheep.
EXO	34	20	나귀의 첫 새끼는 어린 양으로 대속할 것이요 그렇게 아니하려면 그 목을 꺾을 것이며 네 아들 중 장자는 다 대속할지며 빈 손으로 내 얼굴을 보지 말지니라	But the firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb: and if thou redeem him not, then shalt thou break his neck. All the firstborn of thy sons thou shalt redeem. And none shall appear before me empty.	You must redeem the firstborn of a donkey with a lamb; but if you do not redeem it, you are to break its neck. You must redeem all the firstborn of your sons. No one shall appear before Me empty-handed.
EXO	34	21	너는 엿새 동안 일하고 제칠일에는 쉴지니 밭 갈 때에나 거둘 때에도 쉴지며	Six days thou shalt work, but on the seventh day thou shalt rest: in earing time and in harvest thou shalt rest.	Six days you shall labor, but on the seventh day you shall rest; even in the seasons of plowing and harvesting, you must rest.
EXO	34	22	칠칠절 곧 맥추의 초실절을 지키고 가을에는 수장절을 지키라	And thou shalt observe the feast of weeks, of the firstfruits of wheat harvest, and the feast of ingathering at the year’s end.	And you are to celebrate the Feast of Weeks with the firstfruits of the wheat harvest, and the Feast of Ingathering at the turn of the year.
EXO	34	23	너희 모든 남자는 매년 세번씩 주 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님 앞에 보일지라	Thrice in the year shall all your men children appear before the Lord God, the God of Israel.	Three times a year all your males are to appear before the Lord GOD, the God of Israel.
EXO	34	24	내가 열방을 네 앞에서 쫓아내고 네 지경을 넓히리니 네가 매년 세번씩 여호와 너희 하나님께 보이러 올 때에 아무 사람도 네 땅을 탐내어 엿보지 못하리라	For I will cast out the nations before thee, and enlarge thy borders: neither shall any man desire thy land, when thou shalt go up to appear before the Lord thy God thrice in the year.	For I will drive out the nations before you and enlarge your borders, and no one will covet your land when you go up three times a year to appear before the LORD your God.
EXO	34	25	너는 내 희생의 피를 유교병과 함께 드리지 말며 유월절 희생을 아침까지 두지 말지며	Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leaven; neither shall the sacrifice of the feast of the passover be left unto the morning.	Do not offer the blood of a sacrifice to Me along with anything leavened, and do not let any of the sacrifice from the Passover Feast remain until morning.
EXO	34	26	너의 토지소산의 처음 익은 것을 가져다가 너의 하나님 여호와의 전에 드릴지며 너는 염소 새끼를 그 어미의 젖으로 삶지 말지니라	The first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring unto the house of the Lord thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother’s milk.	Bring the best of the firstfruits of your soil to the house of the LORD your God. You must not cook a young goat in its mother’s milk.”
EXO	34	27	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 너는 이 말들을 기록하라 내가 이 말들의 뜻대로 너와 이스라엘과 언약을 세웠음이니라 하시니라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Write thou these words: for after the tenor of these words I have made a covenant with thee and with Israel.	The LORD also said to Moses, “Write down these words, for in accordance with these words I have made a covenant with you and with Israel.”
EXO	34	28	모세가 여호와와 함께 사십 일 사십 야를 거기 있으면서 떡도 먹지 아니하였고 물도 마시지 아니하였으며 여호와께서는 언약의 말씀 곧 십계를 그 판들에 기록하셨더라	And he was there with the Lord forty days and forty nights; he did neither eat bread, nor drink water. And he wrote upon the tables the words of the covenant, the ten commandments.	So Moses was there with the LORD forty days and forty nights without eating bread or drinking water. He wrote on the tablets the words of the covenant—the Ten Commandments.
EXO	34	29	모세가 그 증거의 두 판을 자기 손에 들고 시내산에서 내려오니 그 산에서 내려올 때에 모세는 자기가 여호와와 말씀하였음을 인하여 얼굴 꺼풀에 광채가 나나 깨닫지 못하였더라	And it came to pass, when Moses came down from mount Sinai with the two tables of testimony in Moses’ hand, when he came down from the mount, that Moses wist not that the skin of his face shone while he talked with him.	And when Moses came down from Mount Sinai with the two tablets of the Testimony in his hands, he was unaware that his face had become radiant from speaking with the LORD.
EXO	34	30	아론과 온 이스라엘 자손이 모세를 볼 때에 모세의 얼굴 꺼풀에 광채 남을 보고 그에게 가까이 하기를 두려워하더니	And when Aaron and all the children of Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin of his face shone; and they were afraid to come nigh him.	Aaron and all the Israelites looked at Moses, and behold, his face was radiant. And they were afraid to approach him.
EXO	34	31	모세가 그들을 부르니 아론과 회중의 모든 어른이 모세에게로 오고 모세가 그들과 말하니	And Moses called unto them; and Aaron and all the rulers of the congregation returned unto him: and Moses talked with them.	But Moses called out to them; so Aaron and all the leaders of the congregation returned to him, and Moses spoke to them.
EXO	34	32	그 후에야 온 이스라엘 자손이 가까이 오는지라 모세가 여호와께서 시내 산에서 자기에게 이르신 말씀을 다 그들에게 명하고	And afterward all the children of Israel came nigh: and he gave them in commandment all that the Lord had spoken with him in mount Sinai.	And after this all the Israelites came near, and Moses commanded them to do everything that the LORD had told him on Mount Sinai.
EXO	34	33	그들에게 말하기를 마치고 수건으로 자기 얼굴을 가리웠더라	And till Moses had done speaking with them, he put a vail on his face.	When Moses had finished speaking with them, he put a veil over his face.
EXO	34	34	그러나 모세가 여호와 앞에 들어가서 함께 말씀할 때에는 나오기까지 수건을 벗고 있다가 나와서는 그 명하신 일을 이스라엘 자손에게 고하며	But when Moses went in before the Lord to speak with him, he took the vail off, until he came out. And he came out, and spake unto the children of Israel that which he was commanded.	But whenever Moses went in before the LORD to speak with Him, he would remove the veil until he came out. And when he came out, he would tell the Israelites what he had been commanded,
EXO	34	35	이스라엘 자손이 모세의 얼굴의 광채를 보는 고로 모세가 여호와께 말씀하러 들어가기까지 다시 수건으로 자기 얼굴을 가리웠더라	And the children of Israel saw the face of Moses, that the skin of Moses’ face shone: and Moses put the vail upon his face again, until he went in to speak with him.	and the Israelites would see that the face of Moses was radiant. So Moses would put the veil back over his face until he went in to speak with the LORD.
EXO	35	1	모세가 이스라엘의 온 회중을 모으고 그들에게 이르되 여호와께서 너희에게 명하사 행하게 하신 말씀이 이러하니라	And Moses gathered all the congregation of the children of Israel together, and said unto them, These are the words which the Lord hath commanded, that ye should do them.	Then Moses assembled the whole congregation of Israel and said to them, “These are the things that the LORD has commanded you to do:
EXO	35	2	엿새 동안은 일하고 제칠일은 너희에게 성일이니 여호와께 특별한 안식일이라 무릇 이날에 일하는 자를 죽일지니	Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day there shall be to you an holy day, a sabbath of rest to the Lord: whosoever doeth work therein shall be put to death.	For six days work may be done, but the seventh day shall be your holy day, a Sabbath of complete rest to the LORD. Whoever does any work on that day must be put to death.
EXO	35	3	안식일에는 너희의 모든 처소에서 불도 피우지 말지니라	Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon the sabbath day.	Do not light a fire in any of your dwellings on the Sabbath day.”
EXO	35	4	모세가 이스라엘 자손의 온 회중에게 고하여 가로되 여호와의 명하신 일이 이러하니라 이르시기를	And Moses spake unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, saying, This is the thing which the Lord commanded, saying,	Moses also told the whole congregation of Israel, “This is what the LORD has commanded:
EXO	35	5	너희의 소유 중에서 너희는 여호와께 드릴 것을 취하되 무릇 마음에 원하는 자는 그것을 가져다가 여호와께 드릴지니 곧 금과 은과 놋과	Take ye from among you an offering unto the Lord: whosoever is of a willing heart, let him bring it, an offering of the Lord; gold, and silver, and brass,	Take from among you an offering to the LORD. Let everyone whose heart is willing bring an offering to the LORD: gold, silver, and bronze;
EXO	35	6	청색 자색 홍색실과 가는 베실과 염소털과	And blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats’ hair,	blue, purple, and scarlet yarn; fine linen and goat hair;
EXO	35	7	붉은 물 들인 수양의 가죽과 해달의 가죽과 조각목과	And rams’ skins dyed red, and badgers’ skins, and shittim wood,	ram skins dyed red and fine leather; acacia wood;
EXO	35	8	등유와 및 관유에 드는 향품과 분향할 향을 만드는 향품과	And oil for the light, and spices for anointing oil, and for the sweet incense,	olive oil for the light; spices for the anointing oil and for the fragrant incense;
EXO	35	9	호마노며 에봇과 흉패에 물릴 보석이니라	And onyx stones, and stones to be set for the ephod, and for the breastplate.	and onyx stones and gemstones to be mounted on the ephod and breastpiece.
EXO	35	10	무릇 너희 중 마음이 지혜로운 자는 와서 여호와의 명하신 것을 다 만들지니	And every wise hearted among you shall come, and make all that the Lord hath commanded;	Let every skilled craftsman among you come and make everything that the LORD has commanded:
EXO	35	11	곧 성막과 그 막과 그 덮개와 그 갈고리와 그 널판과 그 띠와 그 기둥과 그 받침과	The tabernacle, his tent, and his covering, his taches, and his boards, his bars, his pillars, and his sockets,	the tabernacle with its tent and covering, its clasps and frames, its crossbars, posts, and bases;
EXO	35	12	증거궤와 그 채와 속죄소와 그 가리는 장과	The ark, and the staves thereof, with the mercy seat, and the vail of the covering,	the ark with its poles and mercy seat, and the veil to shield it;
EXO	35	13	상과 그 채와 그 모든 기구와 진설병과	The table, and his staves, and all his vessels, and the shewbread,	the table with its poles, all its utensils, and the Bread of the Presence;
EXO	35	14	불 켜는 등대와 그 기구와 그 등잔과 등유와	The candlestick also for the light, and his furniture, and his lamps, with the oil for the light,	the lampstand for light with its accessories and lamps and oil for the light;
EXO	35	15	분향단과 그 채와 관유와 분향할 향품과 성막문의 장과	And the incense altar, and his staves, and the anointing oil, and the sweet incense, and the hanging for the door at the entering in of the tabernacle,	the altar of incense with its poles; the anointing oil and fragrant incense; the curtain for the doorway at the entrance to the tabernacle;
EXO	35	16	번제단과 그 놋 그물과 그 채와 그 모든 기구와 물두멍과 그 받침과	The altar of burnt offering, with his brasen grate, his staves, and all his vessels, the laver and his foot,	the altar of burnt offering with its bronze grate, its poles, and all its utensils; the basin with its stand;
EXO	35	17	뜰의 포장과 그 기둥과 그 받침과 뜰문의 장과	The hangings of the court, his pillars, and their sockets, and the hanging for the door of the court,	the curtains of the courtyard with its posts and bases, and the curtain for the gate of the courtyard;
EXO	35	18	장막 말뚝과 뜰의 포장 말뚝과 그 줄과	The pins of the tabernacle, and the pins of the court, and their cords,	the tent pegs for the tabernacle and for the courtyard, along with their ropes;
EXO	35	19	성소에서 섬기기 위하여 공교히 만든 옷 곧 제사 직분을 행할 때에 입는 제사장 아론의 거룩한 옷과 그 아들들의 옷이니라	The cloths of service, to do service in the holy place, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest’s office.	and the woven garments for ministering in the holy place—both the holy garments for Aaron the priest and the garments for his sons to serve as priests.”
EXO	35	20	이스라엘 자손의 온 회중이 모세 앞에서 물러갔더니	And all the congregation of the children of Israel departed from the presence of Moses.	Then the whole congregation of Israel withdrew from the presence of Moses.
EXO	35	21	무릇 마음이 감동된 자와 무릇 자원하는 자가 와서 성막을 짓기 위하여 그 속에서 쓸 모든 것을 위하여, 거룩한 옷을 위하여 예물을 가져 여호와께 드렸으니	And they came, every one whose heart stirred him up, and every one whom his spirit made willing, and they brought the Lord’s offering to the work of the tabernacle of the congregation, and for all his service, and for the holy garments.	And everyone whose heart stirred him and whose spirit prompted him came and brought an offering to the LORD for the work on the Tent of Meeting, for all its services, and for the holy garments.
EXO	35	22	곧 마음에 원하는 남녀가 와서 가슴 핀과 귀고리와 가락지와 목거리와 여러가지 금품을 가져왔으되 사람마다 여호와께 금 예물을 드렸으며	And they came, both men and women, as many as were willing hearted, and brought bracelets, and earrings, and rings, and tablets, all jewels of gold: and every man that offered offered an offering of gold unto the Lord.	So all who had willing hearts, both men and women, came and brought brooches and earrings, rings and necklaces, and all kinds of gold jewelry. And they all presented their gold as a wave offering to the LORD.
EXO	35	23	무릇 청색 자색 홍색실과 가는 베실과 염소털과 붉은 물 들인 수양의 가죽과 해달의 가죽이 있는 자도 가져왔으며	And every man, with whom was found blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats’ hair, and red skins of rams, and badgers’ skins, brought them.	Everyone who had blue, purple, or scarlet yarn, or fine linen, goat hair, ram skins dyed red, or articles of fine leather, brought them.
EXO	35	24	무릇 은과 놋으로 예물을 삼는 자는 가져다가 여호와께 드렸으며 무릇 섬기는 일에 소용되는 조각목이 있는 자는 가져왔으며	Every one that did offer an offering of silver and brass brought the Lord’s offering: and every man, with whom was found shittim wood for any work of the service, brought it.	And all who could present an offering of silver or bronze brought it as a contribution to the LORD. Also, everyone who had acacia wood for any part of the service brought it.
EXO	35	25	마음이 슬기로운 모든 여인은 손수 실을 낳고 그 낳은 청색 자색 홍색실과 가는 베실을 가져왔으며	And all the women that were wise hearted did spin with their hands, and brought that which they had spun, both of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, and of fine linen.	Every skilled woman spun with her hands and brought what she had spun: blue, purple, or scarlet yarn, or fine linen.
EXO	35	26	마음에 감동을 받아 슬기로운 모든 여인은 염소털로 실을 낳았으며	And all the women whose heart stirred them up in wisdom spun goats’ hair.	And all the skilled women whose hearts were stirred spun the goat hair.
EXO	35	27	모든 족장은 호마노와 및 에봇과 흉패에 물릴 보석을 가져왔으며	And the rulers brought onyx stones, and stones to be set, for the ephod, and for the breastplate;	The leaders brought onyx stones and gemstones to mount on the ephod and breastpiece,
EXO	35	28	등불과 관유와 분향할 향에 소용되는 기름과 향품을 가져왔으니	And spice, and oil for the light, and for the anointing oil, and for the sweet incense.	as well as spices and olive oil for the light, for the anointing oil, and for the fragrant incense.
EXO	35	29	마음에 원하는 이스라엘 자손의 남녀마다 여호와께서 모세의 손을 빙자하여 명하신 모든 것을 만들기 위하여 물품을 가져다가 여호와께 즐거이 드림이 이러하였더라	The children of Israel brought a willing offering unto the Lord, every man and woman, whose heart made them willing to bring for all manner of work, which the Lord had commanded to be made by the hand of Moses.	So all the men and women of the Israelites whose hearts prompted them brought a freewill offering to the LORD for all the work that the LORD through Moses had commanded them to do.
EXO	35	30	모세가 이스라엘 자손에게 이르되 볼지어다 여호와께서 유다 지파 훌의 손자요 우리의 아들인 브사렐을 지명하여 부르시고	And Moses said unto the children of Israel, See, the Lord hath called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah;	Then Moses said to the Israelites, “See, the LORD has called by name Bezalel son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah.
EXO	35	31	하나님의 신을 그에게 충만케 하여 지혜와 총명과 지식으로 여러가지 일을 하게 하시되	And he hath filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship;	And He has filled him with the Spirit of God, with skill, ability, and knowledge in all kinds of craftsmanship,
EXO	35	32	공교한 일을 연구하여 금과 은과 놋으로 일하게 하시며	And to devise curious works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass,	to design artistic works in gold, silver, and bronze,
EXO	35	33	보석을 깎아 물리며 나무를 새기는 여러가지 공교한 일을 하게 하셨고	And in the cutting of stones, to set them, and in carving of wood, to make any manner of cunning work.	to cut gemstones for settings, and to carve wood, so that he may be a master of every artistic craft.
EXO	35	34	또 그와 단 지파 아히사막의 아들 오홀리압을 감동시키사 가르치게 하시며	And he hath put in his heart that he may teach, both he, and Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan.	And the LORD has given both him and Oholiab son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, the ability to teach others.
EXO	35	35	지혜로운 마음을 그들에게 충만하게 하사 여러가지 일을 하게 하시되 조각하는 일과 공교로운 일과 청색 자색 홍색실과 가는 베실로 수 놓은 일과 짜는 일과 그 외에 여러가지 일을 하게 하시고 공교로운 일을 연구하게 하셨나니	Them hath he filled with wisdom of heart, to work all manner of work, of the engraver, and of the cunning workman, and of the embroiderer, in blue, and in purple, in scarlet, and in fine linen, and of the weaver, even of them that do any work, and of those that devise cunning work.	He has filled them with skill to do all kinds of work as engravers, designers, embroiderers in blue, purple, and scarlet yarn and fine linen, and as weavers—as artistic designers of every kind of craft.
EXO	36	1	브사렐과 오홀리압과 및 마음이 지혜로운 사람 곧 여호와께서 지혜와 총명을 부으사 성소에 쓸 모든 일을 할 줄 알게 하심을 입은 자들은 여호와의 무릇 명하신 대로 할 것이니라	Then wrought Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every wise hearted man, in whom the Lord put wisdom and understanding to know how to work all manner of work for the service of the sanctuary, according to all that the Lord had commanded.	“So Bezalel, Oholiab, and every skilled person are to carry out everything commanded by the LORD, who has given them skill and ability to know how to perform all the work of constructing the sanctuary.”
EXO	36	2	모세가 브살렐과 오홀리압과 및 마음이 지혜로운 사람 곧 그 마음에 여호와께로 지혜를 얻고 와서 그 일을 하려고 마음에 원하는 모든 자를 부르매	And Moses called Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every wise hearted man, in whose heart the Lord had put wisdom, even every one whose heart stirred him up to come unto the work to do it:	Then Moses summoned Bezalel, Oholiab, and every skilled person whom the LORD had gifted—everyone whose heart stirred him to come and do the work.
EXO	36	3	그들이 이스라엘 자손의 성소의 모든 것을 만들기 위하여 가져 온 예물을 모세에게서 받으니라 그러나 백성이 아침마다 자원하는 예물을 연하여 가져 오는 고로	And they received of Moses all the offering, which the children of Israel had brought for the work of the service of the sanctuary, to make it withal. And they brought yet unto him free offerings every morning.	They received from Moses all the contributions that the Israelites had brought to carry out the service of constructing the sanctuary. Meanwhile, the people continued to bring freewill offerings morning after morning,
EXO	36	4	성소의 모든 일을 하는 지혜로운 자들이 각기 하는 일을 정지하고 와서	And all the wise men, that wrought all the work of the sanctuary, came every man from his work which they made;	so that all the skilled craftsmen who were doing all the work on the sanctuary left their work
EXO	36	5	모세에게 고하여 가로되 백성이 너무 많이 가져오므로 여호와의 명하신 일에 쓰기에 남음이 있나이다	And they spake unto Moses, saying, The people bring much more than enough for the service of the work, which the Lord commanded to make.	and said to Moses, “The people are bringing more than enough for doing the work the LORD has commanded us to do.”
EXO	36	6	모세가 명을 내리매 그들이 진중에 공포하여 가로되 무론 남녀하고 성소에 드릴 예물을 다시 만들지 말라 하매 백성이 가져오기를 정지하니	And Moses gave commandment, and they caused it to be proclaimed throughout the camp, saying, Let neither man nor woman make any more work for the offering of the sanctuary. So the people were restrained from bringing.	After Moses had given an order, they sent a proclamation throughout the camp: “No man or woman should make anything else as an offering for the sanctuary.” So the people were restrained from bringing more,
EXO	36	7	있는 재료가 모든 일을 하기에 넉넉하여 남음이 있었더라	For the stuff they had was sufficient for all the work to make it, and too much.	since what they already had was more than enough to perform all the work.
EXO	36	8	일하는 사람 중에 마음이 지혜로운 모든 사람이 열 폭 앙장으로 성막을 지었으니 곧 가늘게 꼰 베실과 청색 자색 홍색실로 그룹들을 무늬 놓아 짜서 지은 것이라	And every wise hearted man among them that wrought the work of the tabernacle made ten curtains of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet: with cherubims of cunning work made he them.	All the skilled craftsmen among the workmen made the ten curtains for the tabernacle. They were made of finely spun linen, as well as blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, with cherubim skillfully worked into them.
EXO	36	9	매폭의 장은 이십팔 규빗, 광은 사 규빗으로 각 폭의 장단을 같게 하여	The length of one curtain was twenty and eight cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: the curtains were all of one size.	Each curtain was twenty-eight cubits long and four cubits wide; all the curtains were the same size.
EXO	36	10	그 다섯 폭을 서로 연하며 또 그 다섯 폭을 서로 연하고	And he coupled the five curtains one unto another: and the other five curtains he coupled one unto another.	And he joined five of the curtains together, and the other five he joined as well.
EXO	36	11	연락할 말폭 가에 청색 고를 만들며 다른 연락할 말폭 가에도 고를 만들되	And he made loops of blue on the edge of one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling: likewise he made in the uttermost side of another curtain, in the coupling of the second.	He made loops of blue material on the edge of the end curtain in the first set, and also on the end curtain in the second set.
EXO	36	12	그 연락할 한 폭에 고 오십을 달고 다른 연락할 한 폭의 가에도 고 오십을 달아 그 고들이 서로 대하게 하고	Fifty loops made he in one curtain, and fifty loops made he in the edge of the curtain which was in the coupling of the second: the loops held one curtain to another.	He made fifty loops on one curtain and fifty loops on the end curtain of the second set, so that the loops lined up opposite one another.
EXO	36	13	금 갈고리 오십을 만들어 그 갈고리로 두 앙장을 연하여 한 막을 이루었더라	And he made fifty taches of gold, and coupled the curtains one unto another with the taches: so it became one tabernacle.	He also made fifty gold clasps to join the curtains together, so that the tabernacle was a unit.
EXO	36	14	그 성막을 덮는 막 곧 앙장을 염소털로 만들되 십일 폭을 만들었으니	And he made curtains of goats’ hair for the tent over the tabernacle: eleven curtains he made them.	He then made curtains of goat hair for the tent over the tabernacle—eleven curtains in all.
EXO	36	15	각 폭의 장은 삼십 규빗, 광은 사 규빗으로 십일 폭의 장단을 같게 하여	The length of one curtain was thirty cubits, and four cubits was the breadth of one curtain: the eleven curtains were of one size.	Each of the eleven curtains was the same size—thirty cubits long and four cubits wide.
EXO	36	16	그 앙장 다섯 폭을 서로 연하며 또 여섯 폭을 서로 연하고	And he coupled five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves.	He joined five of the curtains into one set and the other six into another.
EXO	36	17	앙장을 연락할 말폭 가에도 고 오십을 달며 다른 연락할 말폭 가에도 고 오십을 달고	And he made fifty loops upon the uttermost edge of the curtain in the coupling, and fifty loops made he upon the edge of the curtain which coupleth the second.	He made fifty loops along the edge of the end curtain in the first set, and fifty loops along the edge of the corresponding curtain in the second set.
EXO	36	18	놋 갈고리 오십을 만들어 그 앙장을 연합하여 한 막이 되게 하고	And he made fifty taches of brass to couple the tent together, that it might be one.	He also made fifty bronze clasps to join the tent together as a unit.
EXO	36	19	붉은 물 들인 수양의 가죽으로 막의 덮개를 만들고 해달의 가죽으로 그 웃덮개를 만들었더라	And he made a covering for the tent of rams’ skins dyed red, and a covering of badgers’ skins above that.	Additionally, he made for the tent a covering of ram skins dyed red, and over that a covering of fine leather.
EXO	36	20	그가 또 조각목으로 성막에 세울 널판들을 만들었으니	And he made boards for the tabernacle of shittim wood, standing up.	Next, he constructed upright frames of acacia wood for the tabernacle.
EXO	36	21	각 판의 장은 십 규빗, 광은 일 규빗 반이며	The length of a board was ten cubits, and the breadth of a board one cubit and a half.	Each frame was ten cubits long and a cubit and a half wide.
EXO	36	22	각 판에 두 촉이 있어 서로 연하게 하였으니 성막의 모든 판이 그러하며	One board had two tenons, equally distant one from another: thus did he make for all the boards of the tabernacle.	Two tenons were connected to each other for each frame. He made all the frames of the tabernacle in this way.
EXO	36	23	성막을 위하여 널판을 만들었으되 남으로는 남편에 널판이 이십이라	And he made boards for the tabernacle; twenty boards for the south side southward:	He constructed twenty frames for the south side of the tabernacle,
EXO	36	24	그 이십 널판 밑에 은받침 사십을 만들었으되 곧 이 널판 밑에도 두 받침이 그 두 촉을 받게 하였으며	And forty sockets of silver he made under the twenty boards; two sockets under one board for his two tenons, and two sockets under another board for his two tenons.	with forty silver bases to put under the twenty frames—two bases for each frame, one under each tenon.
EXO	36	25	성막 다른 편 곧 북편을 위하여도 널판 이십을 만들고	And for the other side of the tabernacle, which is toward the north corner, he made twenty boards,	For the second side of the tabernacle, the north side, he made twenty frames
EXO	36	26	또 은받침 사십을 만들었으니 곧 이 판 밑에도 두 받침이요 저 판 밑에도 두 받침이며	And their forty sockets of silver; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.	and forty silver bases—two bases under each frame.
EXO	36	27	장막 뒤 곧 서편을 위하여는 널판 여섯을 만들었고	And for the sides of the tabernacle westward he made six boards.	He made six frames for the rear of the tabernacle, the west side,
EXO	36	28	장막 뒤 두 모퉁이 편을 위하여는 널판 둘을 만들되	And two boards made he for the corners of the tabernacle in the two sides.	and two frames for the two back corners of the tabernacle,
EXO	36	29	아래서부터 위까지 각기 두 겹 두께로 하여 윗고리에 이르게 하고 두 모퉁이 편을 다 그리하며	And they were coupled beneath, and coupled together at the head thereof, to one ring: thus he did to both of them in both the corners.	coupled together from bottom to top and fitted into a single ring. He made both corners in this way.
EXO	36	30	그 널판은 여덟이요 그 받침은 은받침 열 여섯이라 각 널판 밑에 둘씩이었더라	And there were eight boards; and their sockets were sixteen sockets of silver, under every board two sockets.	So there were eight frames and sixteen silver bases—two under each frame.
EXO	36	31	그가 또 조각목으로 띠를 만들었으니 곧 성막 이편 널판을 위하여 다섯이요	And he made bars of shittim wood; five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,	He also made five crossbars of acacia wood for the frames on one side of the tabernacle,
EXO	36	32	성막 저편 널판을 위하여 다섯이요 성막 뒤 곧 서편 널판을 위하여 다섯이며	And five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the tabernacle for the sides westward.	five for those on the other side, and five for those on the rear side of the tabernacle, to the west.
EXO	36	33	그 중간 띠를 만들되 널판 중간 이 끝에서 저 끝에 미치게 하였으며	And he made the middle bar to shoot through the boards from the one end to the other.	He made the central crossbar to run through the center of the frames, from one end to the other.
EXO	36	34	그 널판들을 금으로 싸고 그 널판에 띠를 꿸 금고리를 만들고 그 띠도 금으로 쌌더라	And he overlaid the boards with gold, and made their rings of gold to be places for the bars, and overlaid the bars with gold.	And he overlaid the frames with gold and made gold rings to hold the crossbars. He also overlaid the crossbars with gold.
EXO	36	35	그가 또 청색 자색 홍색실과 가늘게 꼰 베실로 장을 짜고 그 위에 그룹들을 공교히 수 놓고	And he made a vail of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen: with cherubims made he it of cunning work.	Next, he made the veil of blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and finely spun linen, with cherubim skillfully worked into it.
EXO	36	36	조각목으로 네 기둥을 만들어 금으로 쌌으며 그 갈고리는 금이며 기둥의 네 받침은 은으로 부어 만들었으며	And he made thereunto four pillars of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold: their hooks were of gold; and he cast for them four sockets of silver.	He also made four posts of acacia wood for it and overlaid them with gold, along with gold hooks; and he cast four silver bases for the posts.
EXO	36	37	청색 자색 홍색실과 가늘게 꼰 베실로 수 놓아 장막 문을 위하여 장을 만들고	And he made an hanging for the tabernacle door of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, of needlework;	For the entrance to the tent, he made a curtain embroidered with blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and finely spun linen,
EXO	36	38	문장의 기둥 다섯과 그 갈고리를 만들고 기둥머리와 그 가름대를 금으로 쌌으며 그 다섯 받침은 놋이었더라	And the five pillars of it with their hooks: and he overlaid their chapiters and their fillets with gold: but their five sockets were of brass.	together with five posts and their hooks. He overlaid the tops of the posts and their bands with gold, and their five bases were bronze.
EXO	37	1	브사렐이 조각목으로 궤를 만들었으니 장이 이 규빗 반, 광이 일 규빗 반, 고가 일 규빗 반이며	And Bezaleel made the ark of shittim wood: two cubits and a half was the length of it, and a cubit and a half the breadth of it, and a cubit and a half the height of it:	Bezalel went on to construct the ark of acacia wood, two and a half cubits long, a cubit and a half wide, and a cubit and a half high.
EXO	37	2	정금으로 안팎을 싸고 윗가로 돌아가며 금테를 만들었으며	And he overlaid it with pure gold within and without, and made a crown of gold to it round about.	He overlaid it with pure gold, both inside and out, and made a gold molding around it.
EXO	37	3	금고리 넷을 부어 만들어 네 발에 달았으니 곧 이편에 두 고리요 저편에 두 고리며	And he cast for it four rings of gold, to be set by the four corners of it; even two rings upon the one side of it, and two rings upon the other side of it.	And he cast four gold rings for its four feet, two rings on one side and two on the other.
EXO	37	4	조각목으로 채를 만들어 금으로 싸고	And he made staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold.	Then he made poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold.
EXO	37	5	그 채를 궤 양편 고리에 꿰어 궤를 메게 하였으며	And he put the staves into the rings by the sides of the ark, to bear the ark.	He inserted the poles into the rings on the sides of the ark in order to carry it.
EXO	37	6	정금으로 속죄소를 만들었으니 장이 이 규빗 반, 광이 일 규빗 반이며	And he made the mercy seat of pure gold: two cubits and a half was the length thereof, and one cubit and a half the breadth thereof.	He constructed a mercy seat of pure gold, two and a half cubits long and a cubit and a half wide.
EXO	37	7	금으로 그룹 둘을 속죄소 양편에 쳐서 만들었으되	And he made two cherubims of gold, beaten out of one piece made he them, on the two ends of the mercy seat;	He made two cherubim of hammered gold at the ends of the mercy seat,
EXO	37	8	한 그룹은 이편 끝에, 한 그룹은 저편 끝에 곧 속죄소와 한 덩이로 그 양편에 만들었으니	One cherub on the end on this side, and another cherub on the other end on that side: out of the mercy seat made he the cherubims on the two ends thereof.	one cherub on one end and one on the other, all made from one piece of gold.
EXO	37	9	그룹들이 그 날개를 높이 펴서 그 날개로 속죄소를 덮으며 그 얼굴을 서로 대하여 속죄소를 향하였더라	And the cherubims spread out their wings on high, and covered with their wings over the mercy seat, with their faces one to another; even to the mercy seatward were the faces of the cherubims.	And the cherubim had wings that spread upward, overshadowing the mercy seat. The cherubim faced each other, looking toward the mercy seat.
EXO	37	10	그가 또 조각목으로 상을 만들었으니 장이 이 규빗, 광이 일 규빗, 고가 일 규빗 반이며	And he made the table of shittim wood: two cubits was the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof:	He also made the table of acacia wood two cubits long, a cubit wide, and a cubit and a half high.
EXO	37	11	정금으로 싸고 윗가로 돌아가며 금테를 둘렀으며	And he overlaid it with pure gold, and made thereunto a crown of gold round about.	He overlaid it with pure gold and made a gold molding around it.
EXO	37	12	그 사면에 손바닥 넓이만한 턱을 만들고 그 턱 주위에 금으로 테를 만들었고	Also he made thereunto a border of an handbreadth round about; and made a crown of gold for the border thereof round about.	And he made a rim around it a handbreadth wide and put a gold molding on the rim.
EXO	37	13	상을 위하여 금고리 넷을 부어 만들어 네 발 위 네 모퉁이에 달았으니	And he cast for it four rings of gold, and put the rings upon the four corners that were in the four feet thereof.	He cast four gold rings for the table and fastened them to the four corners at its four legs.
EXO	37	14	그 고리가 턱 곁에 있어서 상을 메는 채를 꿰게 하였으며	Over against the border were the rings, the places for the staves to bear the table.	The rings were placed close to the rim, to serve as holders for the poles used to carry the table.
EXO	37	15	또 조각목으로 상 멜 채를 만들어 금으로 쌌으며	And he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold, to bear the table.	He made the poles of acacia wood for carrying the table and overlaid them with gold.
EXO	37	16	상 위의 기구 곧 대접과 숟가락과 잔과 붓는 병을 정금으로 만들었더라	And he made the vessels which were upon the table, his dishes, and his spoons, and his bowls, and his covers to cover withal, of pure gold.	He also made the utensils for the table out of pure gold: its plates and dishes, as well as its bowls and pitchers for pouring drink offerings.
EXO	37	17	그가 또 정금으로 등대를 만들되 그것을 쳐서 만들었으니 그 밑판과 줄기와 잔과 꽃받침과 꽃이 그것과 한 덩이로 되었고	And he made the candlestick of pure gold: of beaten work made he the candlestick; his shaft, and his branch, his bowls, his knops, and his flowers, were of the same:	Then he made the lampstand out of pure hammered gold, all of one piece: its base and shaft, its cups, and its buds and petals.
EXO	37	18	여섯 가지가 그 곁에서 나왔으니 곧 등대의 세 가지는 저편으로 나왔고 등대의 세 가지는 이 편으로 나왔으며	And six branches going out of the sides thereof; three branches of the candlestick out of the one side thereof, and three branches of the candlestick out of the other side thereof:	Six branches extended from the sides, three on one side and three on the other.
EXO	37	19	이 편 가지에 살구꽃 형상의 잔 셋과 꽃받침과 꽃이 있고 저편 가지에 살구꽃 형상의 잔 셋과 꽃받침과 꽃이 있어 등대에서 나온 여섯 가지가 그러하며	Three bowls made after the fashion of almonds in one branch, a knop and a flower; and three bowls made like almonds in another branch, a knop and a flower: so throughout the six branches going out of the candlestick.	There were three cups shaped like almond blossoms on the first branch, each with buds and petals, three on the next branch, and the same for all six branches that extended from the lampstand.
EXO	37	20	등대 줄기에는 살구꽃 형상의 잔 넷과 꽃받침과 꽃이 있고	And in the candlestick were four bowls made like almonds, his knops, and his flowers:	And on the lampstand were four cups shaped like almond blossoms with buds and petals.
EXO	37	21	등대에서 나온 여섯 가지를 위하여는 꽃받침이 있게 하였으되 두가지 아래 한 꽃받침이 있어 줄기와 연하였고 또 두 가지 아래 한 꽃받침이 있어 줄기와 연하게 하였으니	And a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, according to the six branches going out of it.	A bud was under the first pair of branches that extended from the lampstand, a bud under the second pair, and a bud under the third pair.
EXO	37	22	이 꽃받침과 가지들을 줄기와 연하여 전부를 정금으로 쳐서 만들었으며	Their knops and their branches were of the same: all of it was one beaten work of pure gold.	The buds and branches were all of one piece with the lampstand, hammered out of pure gold.
EXO	37	23	등잔 일곱과 그 불집게와 불똥 그릇을 정금으로 만들었으니	And he made his seven lamps, and his snuffers, and his snuffdishes, of pure gold.	He also made its seven lamps, its wick trimmers, and trays of pure gold.
EXO	37	24	등대와 그 모든 기구는 정금 한 달란트로 만들었더라	Of a talent of pure gold made he it, and all the vessels thereof.	He made the lampstand and all its utensils from a talent of pure gold.
EXO	37	25	그가 또 조각목으로 분향할 단을 만들었으니 장이 일 규빗이요 광이 일 규빗이라 네모 반듯하고 고는 이 규빗이며 그 뿔들이 단과 연하였으며	And he made the incense altar of shittim wood: the length of it was a cubit, and the breadth of it a cubit; it was foursquare; and two cubits was the height of it; the horns thereof were of the same.	He made the altar of incense out of acacia wood. It was square, a cubit long, a cubit wide, and two cubits high. Its horns were of one piece.
EXO	37	26	단 상면과 전후 좌우면과 그 뿔을 정금으로 싸고 주위에 금테를 둘렀고	And he overlaid it with pure gold, both the top of it, and the sides thereof round about, and the horns of it: also he made unto it a crown of gold round about.	And he overlaid with pure gold the top and all the sides and horns. Then he made a molding of gold around it.
EXO	37	27	그 테 아래 양 편에 금고리 둘을 만들었으되 곧 그 양 편에 만들어 단을 메는 채를 꿰게 하였으며	And he made two rings of gold for it under the crown thereof, by the two corners of it, upon the two sides thereof, to be places for the staves to bear it withal.	He made two gold rings below the molding on opposite sides to hold the poles used to carry it.
EXO	37	28	조각목으로 그 채를 만들어 금으로 쌌으며	And he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold.	And he made the poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold.
EXO	37	29	거룩한 관유와 향품으로 정결한 향을 만들었으되 향을 만드는 법대로 하였더라	And he made the holy anointing oil, and the pure incense of sweet spices, according to the work of the apothecary.	He also made the sacred anointing oil and the pure, fragrant incense, the work of a perfumer.
EXO	38	1	그가 또 조각목으로 번제단을 만들었으니 장이 오 규빗이요 광이 오 규빗이라 네모 반듯하고 고는 삼 규빗이며	And he made the altar of burnt offering of shittim wood: five cubits was the length thereof, and five cubits the breadth thereof; it was foursquare; and three cubits the height thereof.	Bezalel constructed the altar of burnt offering from acacia wood. It was square, five cubits long, five cubits wide, and three cubits high.
EXO	38	2	그 네 모퉁이 위에 그 뿔을 만들되 그 뿔을 단과 연하게 하고 단을 놋으로 쌌으며	And he made the horns thereof on the four corners of it; the horns thereof were of the same: and he overlaid it with brass.	He made a horn at each of its four corners, so that the horns and altar were of one piece, and he overlaid the altar with bronze.
EXO	38	3	단의 모든 기구 곧 통과 부삽과 대야와 고기 갈고리와 불 옮기는 그릇을 다 놋으로 만들고	And he made all the vessels of the altar, the pots, and the shovels, and the basons, and the fleshhooks, and the firepans: all the vessels thereof made he of brass.	He made all the altar’s utensils of bronze—its pots, shovels, sprinkling bowls, meat forks, and firepans.
EXO	38	4	단을 위하여 놋 그물을 만들어 단 사면 가장자리 아래 두되 단 절반에 오르게 하고	And he made for the altar a brasen grate of network under the compass thereof beneath unto the midst of it.	He made a grate of bronze mesh for the altar under its ledge, halfway up from the bottom.
EXO	38	5	그 놋 그물 네 모퉁이에 채를 꿸 고리 넷을 부어 만들었으며	And he cast four rings for the four ends of the grate of brass, to be places for the staves.	At the four corners of the bronze grate he cast four rings as holders for the poles.
EXO	38	6	채를 조각목으로 만들어 놋으로 싸고	And he made the staves of shittim wood, and overlaid them with brass.	And he made the poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with bronze.
EXO	38	7	단 양편 고리에 그 채를 꿰어 메게 하였으며 단은 널판으로 비게 만들었더라	And he put the staves into the rings on the sides of the altar, to bear it withal; he made the altar hollow with boards.	Then he inserted the poles into the rings on the sides of the altar for carrying it. He made the altar with boards so that it was hollow.
EXO	38	8	그가 놋으로 물두멍을 만들고 그 받침도 놋으로 하였으니 곧 회막문에서 수종드는 여인들의 거울로 만들었더라	And he made the laver of brass, and the foot of it of brass, of the lookingglasses of the women assembling, which assembled at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.	Next he made the bronze basin and its stand from the mirrors of the women who served at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting.
EXO	38	9	그가 또 뜰을 만들었으니 남으로 뜰의 남편에는 세마포 포장이 백 규빗이라	And he made the court: on the south side southward the hangings of the court were of fine twined linen, an hundred cubits:	Then he constructed the courtyard. The south side of the courtyard was a hundred cubits long and had curtains of finely spun linen,
EXO	38	10	그 기둥이 스물이며 그 받침이 스물이니 놋이요 기둥의 갈고리와 가름대는 은이며	Their pillars were twenty, and their brasen sockets twenty; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets were of silver.	with twenty posts and twenty bronze bases, and with silver hooks and bands on the posts.
EXO	38	11	그 북편에도 백 규빗이라 그 기둥이 스물이며 그 받침이 스물이니 놋이요 기둥의 갈고리와 가름대는 은이며	And for the north side the hangings were an hundred cubits, their pillars were twenty, and their sockets of brass twenty; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver.	The north side was also a hundred cubits long, with twenty posts and twenty bronze bases. The hooks and bands of the posts were silver.
EXO	38	12	서편에 포장은 오십 규빗이라 그 기둥이 열이요 받침이 열이며 기둥의 갈고리와 가름대는 은이며	And for the west side were hangings of fifty cubits, their pillars ten, and their sockets ten; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver.	The west side was fifty cubits long and had curtains, with ten posts and ten bases. The hooks and bands of the posts were silver.
EXO	38	13	동으로 동편에도 오십 규빗이라	And for the east side eastward fifty cubits.	And the east side, toward the sunrise, was also fifty cubits long.
EXO	38	14	문 이편의 포장이 십오 규빗이요 그 기둥이 셋이요 받침이 셋이며	The hangings of the one side of the gate were fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their sockets three.	The curtains on one side of the entrance were fifteen cubits long, with three posts and three bases.
EXO	38	15	문 저편도 그와 같으니 뜰문 이편, 저편의 포장이 십오 규빗씩이요 그 기둥이 셋씩, 받침이 셋씩이라	And for the other side of the court gate, on this hand and that hand, were hangings of fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their sockets three.	And the curtains on the other side were also fifteen cubits long, with three posts and three bases as well.
EXO	38	16	뜰 사면의 포장은 세마포요	All the hangings of the court round about were of fine twined linen.	All the curtains around the courtyard were made of finely spun linen.
EXO	38	17	기둥 받침은 놋이요 기둥의 갈고리와 가름대는 은이요 기둥머리 싸개는 은이며 뜰의 모든 기둥에 은 가름대를 꿰었으며	And the sockets for the pillars were of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of silver; and the overlaying of their chapiters of silver; and all the pillars of the court were filleted with silver.	The bases for the posts were bronze, the hooks and bands were silver, and the plating for the tops of the posts was silver. So all the posts of the courtyard were banded with silver.
EXO	38	18	뜰의 문장을 청색 자색 홍색실과 가늘게 꼰 베실로 수 놓아 짰으니 장은 이십 규빗이요 광 곧 고는 뜰의 포장과 같이 오 규빗이며	And the hanging for the gate of the court was needlework, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen: and twenty cubits was the length, and the height in the breadth was five cubits, answerable to the hangings of the court.	The curtain for the entrance to the courtyard was embroidered with blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and finely spun linen. It was twenty cubits long and, like the curtains of the courtyard, five cubits high,
EXO	38	19	그 기둥은 넷인데 그 받침 넷은 놋이요 그 갈고리는 은이요 그 머리 싸개와 가름대도 은이며	And their pillars were four, and their sockets of brass four; their hooks of silver, and the overlaying of their chapiters and their fillets of silver.	with four posts and four bronze bases. Their hooks were silver, as well as the bands and the plating of their tops.
EXO	38	20	성막 말뚝과 뜰의 사면 포장 말뚝은 다 놋이더라	And all the pins of the tabernacle, and of the court round about, were of brass.	All the tent pegs for the tabernacle and for the surrounding courtyard were bronze.
EXO	38	21	성막 곧 증거막을 위하여 레위 사람의 쓴 재료의 물목은 제사장 아론의 아들 이다말이 모세의 명대로 계산하였으며	This is the sum of the tabernacle, even of the tabernacle of testimony, as it was counted, according to the commandment of Moses, for the service of the Levites, by the hand of Ithamar, son to Aaron the priest.	This is the inventory for the tabernacle, the tabernacle of the Testimony, as recorded at Moses’ command by the Levites under the direction of Ithamar son of Aaron the priest.
EXO	38	22	유다 지파 훌의 손자요 우리의 아들인 브사렐은 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 모든 것을 만들었고	And Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, made all that the Lord commanded Moses.	Bezalel son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, made everything that the LORD had commanded Moses.
EXO	38	23	단 지파 아히사막의 아들 오홀리압은 그와 함께 하였으니 오홀리압은 재능이 있어서 조각하며 또 청색 자색 홍색실과 가는 베실로 수 놓은 자더라	And with him was Aholiab, son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, an engraver, and a cunning workman, and an embroiderer in blue, and in purple, and in scarlet, and fine linen.	With him was Oholiab son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, an engraver, designer, and embroiderer in blue, purple, and scarlet yarn and fine linen.
EXO	38	24	성소 건축 비용으로 드린 금은 성소의 세겔대로 이십구 달란트와 칠백삼십 세겔이며	All the gold that was occupied for the work in all the work of the holy place, even the gold of the offering, was twenty and nine talents, and seven hundred and thirty shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary.	All the gold from the wave offering used for the work on the sanctuary totaled 29 talents and 730 shekels, according to the sanctuary shekel.
EXO	38	25	조사를 받은 회중의 드린 은은 성소의 세겔대로 일백 달란트와 일천칠백칠십오 세겔이니	And the silver of them that were numbered of the congregation was an hundred talents, and a thousand seven hundred and threescore and fifteen shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary:	The silver from those numbered among the congregation totaled 100 talents and 1,775 shekels, according to the sanctuary shekel—
EXO	38	26	조사를 받은 자가 이십 세 이상으로 육십만 삼천오백오십 명인즉 성소의 세겔대로 매인에게 은 한 베가 곧 반 세겔씩이라	A bekah for every man, that is, half a shekel, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for every one that went to be numbered, from twenty years old and upward, for six hundred thousand and three thousand and five hundred and fifty men.	a beka per person, that is, half a shekel, according to the sanctuary shekel, from everyone twenty years of age or older who had crossed over to be numbered, a total of 603,550 men.
EXO	38	27	은 일백 달란트로 성소의 판장 받침과 문장 기둥 받침 합 일백을 부어 만들었으니 매 받침에 한 달란트씩 합 일백 달란트요	And of the hundred talents of silver were cast the sockets of the sanctuary, and the sockets of the vail; an hundred sockets of the hundred talents, a talent for a socket.	The hundred talents of silver were used to cast the bases of the sanctuary and the bases of the veil—100 bases from the 100 talents, one talent per base.
EXO	38	28	일천칠백칠십오 세겔로 기둥 갈고리를 만들고 기둥머리를 싸고 기둥 가름대를 만들었으며	And of the thousand seven hundred seventy and five shekels he made hooks for the pillars, and overlaid their chapiters, and filleted them.	With the 1,775 shekels of silver he made the hooks for the posts, overlaid their tops, and supplied bands for them.
EXO	38	29	드린 놋은 칠십 달란트와 이천사백 세겔이라	And the brass of the offering was seventy talents, and two thousand and four hundred shekels.	The bronze from the wave offering totaled 70 talents and 2,400 shekels.
EXO	38	30	이것으로 회막문 기둥 받침과 놋 단과 놋 그물과 단의 모든 기구를 만들었으며	And therewith he made the sockets to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and the brasen altar, and the brasen grate for it, and all the vessels of the altar,	He used it to make the bases for the entrance to the Tent of Meeting, the bronze altar and its bronze grating, all the utensils for the altar,
EXO	38	31	뜰 사면의 기둥 받침과 그 문장 기둥 받침이며 성막의 모든 말뚝과 뜰 사면의 모든 말뚝을 만들었더라	And the sockets of the court round about, and the sockets of the court gate, and all the pins of the tabernacle, and all the pins of the court round about.	the bases for the surrounding courtyard and its gate, and all the tent pegs for the tabernacle and its surrounding courtyard.
EXO	39	1	그들이 여호와꼐서 모세에게 명하신 대로 청색 자색 홍색실로 성소에서 섬기기 위한 정교한 옷을 만들고 또 아론을 위한 거룩한 옷을 만들었더라	And of the blue, and purple, and scarlet, they made cloths of service, to do service in the holy place, and made the holy garments for Aaron; as the Lord commanded Moses.	From the blue, purple, and scarlet yarn they made specially woven garments for ministry in the sanctuary, as well as the holy garments for Aaron, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.
EXO	39	2	그가 또 금실과 청색 자색 홍색실과 가늘게 꼰 베실로 에봇을 만들었으되	And he made the ephod of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.	Bezalel made the ephod of finely spun linen embroidered with gold, and with blue, purple, and scarlet yarn.
EXO	39	3	금실을 얇게 쳐서 오려서 실을 만들어 청색 자색 홍색실과 가는 베실에 섞어 공교히 짜고	And they did beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it into wires, to work it in the blue, and in the purple, and in the scarlet, and in the fine linen, with cunning work.	They hammered out thin sheets of gold and cut threads from them to interweave with the blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and fine linen—the work of a skilled craftsman.
EXO	39	4	에봇을 위하여 견대를 만들어 그 두 끝에 달아 서로 연하게 하고	They made shoulderpieces for it, to couple it together: by the two edges was it coupled together.	They made shoulder pieces for the ephod, which were attached at two of its corners, so it could be fastened.
EXO	39	5	에봇 위에 에봇을 매는 띠를 에봇과 같은 모양으로 금실과 청색 자색 홍색실과 가늘게 꼰 베실로 에봇에 붙여 짰으니 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 하였더라	And the curious girdle of his ephod, that was upon it, was of the same, according to the work thereof; of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen; as the Lord commanded Moses.	And the skillfully woven waistband of the ephod was of one piece with the ephod, of the same workmanship—with gold, with blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and with finely spun linen, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.
EXO	39	6	그들이 또 호마노를 깎아 금테에 물려 인을 새김 같이 이스라엘의 아들들의 이름을 그것에 새겨	And they wrought onyx stones inclosed in ouches of gold, graven, as signets are graven, with the names of the children of Israel.	They mounted the onyx stones in gold filigree settings, engraved like a seal with the names of the sons of Israel.
EXO	39	7	에봇 견대에 달아 이스라엘 자손의 기념 보석을 삼았으니 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 하였더라	And he put them on the shoulders of the ephod, that they should be stones for a memorial to the children of Israel; as the Lord commanded Moses.	Then they fastened them on the shoulder pieces of the ephod as memorial stones for the sons of Israel, as the LORD had commanded Moses.
EXO	39	8	그가 또 흉패를 공교히 짜되 에봇과 같은 모양으로 금실과 청색 자색 홍색실과 가늘게 꼰 베실로 하였으니	And he made the breastplate of cunning work, like the work of the ephod; of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.	He made the breastpiece with the same workmanship as the ephod, with gold, with blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and with finely spun linen.
EXO	39	9	그것의 장이 한 뼘, 광이 한 뼘으로 네모 반듯하고 두 겹이며	It was foursquare; they made the breastplate double: a span was the length thereof, and a span the breadth thereof, being doubled.	It was square when folded over double, a span long and a span wide.
EXO	39	10	그것에 네 줄 보석을 물렸으니 곧 홍보석 황옥 녹주옥이 첫 줄이요	And they set in it four rows of stones: the first row was a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: this was the first row.	And they mounted on it four rows of gemstones: The first row had a ruby, a topaz, and an emerald;
EXO	39	11	둘째 줄은 석류석 남보석 홍마노요	And the second row, an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond.	the second row had a turquoise, a sapphire, and a diamond;
EXO	39	12	셋째 줄은 호박 백마노 자수정이요	And the third row, a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst.	the third row had a jacinth, an agate, and an amethyst;
EXO	39	13	넷째 줄은 녹보석 호마노 벽옥이라 다 금테에 물렸으니	And the fourth row, a beryl, an onyx, and a jasper: they were inclosed in ouches of gold in their inclosings.	and the fourth row had a beryl, an onyx, and a jasper. These stones were mounted in gold filigree settings.
EXO	39	14	이 보석들은 이스라엘 아들들의 이름 곧 그들의 이름대로 열둘이라 인을 새김 같이 그 열두 지파의 각 이름을 새겼으며	And the stones were according to the names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names, like the engravings of a signet, every one with his name, according to the twelve tribes.	The twelve stones corresponded to the names of the sons of Israel. Each stone was engraved like a seal with the name of one of the twelve tribes.
EXO	39	15	그들이 또 정금으로 사슬을 노끈처럼 땋아 흉패에 붙이고	And they made upon the breastplate chains at the ends, of wreathen work of pure gold.	For the breastpiece they made braided chains like cords of pure gold.
EXO	39	16	또 금테 둘과 금고리 둘을 만들어 그 두 고리를 흉패 두 끝에 달고	And they made two ouches of gold, and two gold rings; and put the two rings in the two ends of the breastplate.	They also made two gold filigree settings and two gold rings, and fastened the two rings to the two corners of the breastpiece.
EXO	39	17	그 두 땋은 금사슬을 흉패 끝 두 고리에 꿰어 매었으며	And they put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings on the ends of the breastplate.	Then they fastened the two gold chains to the two gold rings at the corners of the breastpiece,
EXO	39	18	그 땋은 두 사슬의 다른 두 끝을 에봇 앞 두 견대의 금테에 매고	And the two ends of the two wreathen chains they fastened in the two ouches, and put them on the shoulderpieces of the ephod, before it.	and they fastened the other ends of the two chains to the two filigree settings, attaching them to the shoulder pieces of the ephod at the front.
EXO	39	19	또 금고리 둘을 만들어 흉패 두 끝에 달았으니 곧 그 에봇에 대한 안쪽 가에 달았으며	And they made two rings of gold, and put them on the two ends of the breastplate, upon the border of it, which was on the side of the ephod inward.	They made two more gold rings and attached them to the other two corners of the breastpiece, on the inside edge next to the ephod.
EXO	39	20	또 금고리 둘을 만들어 에봇 앞 두 견대 아래 매는 자리 가까운 편 곧 공교히 짠 에봇 띠 윗편에 달고	And they made two other golden rings, and put them on the two sides of the ephod underneath, toward the forepart of it, over against the other coupling thereof, above the curious girdle of the ephod.	They made two additional gold rings and attached them to the bottom of the two shoulder pieces of the ephod, on its front, near the seam just above its woven waistband.
EXO	39	21	청색 끈으로 흉패 고리와 에봇 고리에 꿰어 흉패로 공교히 짠 에봇 띠 위에 붙여서 에봇을 떠나지 않게 하였으니 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 하였더라	And they did bind the breastplate by his rings unto the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it might be above the curious girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate might not be loosed from the ephod; as the Lord commanded Moses.	Then they tied the rings of the breastpiece to the rings of the ephod with a cord of blue yarn, so that the breastpiece was above the waistband of the ephod and would not swing out from the ephod, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.
EXO	39	22	그가 에봇 받침 긴 옷을 전부 청색으로 짜서 만들되	And he made the robe of the ephod of woven work, all of blue.	They made the robe of the ephod entirely of blue cloth, the work of a weaver,
EXO	39	23	그 옷의 두 어깨 사이에 구멍을 내고 갑옷 깃 같이 그 구멍 주위에 깃을 짜서 찢어지지 않게 하고	And there was an hole in the midst of the robe, as the hole of an habergeon, with a band round about the hole, that it should not rend.	with an opening in the center of the robe like that of a garment, with a collar around the opening so that it would not tear.
EXO	39	24	청색 자색 홍색실과 가는 베실로 그 옷 가장자리에 석류를 수 놓고	And they made upon the hems of the robe pomegranates of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen.	They made pomegranates of blue, purple, and scarlet yarn and finely spun linen on the lower hem of the robe.
EXO	39	25	정금으로 방울을 만들어 그 옷 가장자리로 돌아가며 석류 사이 사이에 달되	And they made bells of pure gold, and put the bells between the pomegranates upon the hem of the robe, round about between the pomegranates;	They also made bells of pure gold and attached them around the hem between the pomegranates,
EXO	39	26	방울과 석류를 서로 간격하여 공직하는 그 옷 가장자리로 돌아가며 달았으니 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 하였더라	A bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate, round about the hem of the robe to minister in; as the Lord commanded Moses.	alternating the bells and pomegranates around the lower hem of the robe to be worn for ministry, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.
EXO	39	27	그들이 또 직조한 가는 베로 아론과 그 아들들을 위하여 속옷을 짓고	And they made coats of fine linen of woven work for Aaron, and for his sons,	For Aaron and his sons they made tunics of fine linen, the work of a weaver,
EXO	39	28	세마포로 두건을 짓고 세마포로 빛난 관을 만들고 가는 베실로 짜서 세마포 고의들을 만들고	And a mitre of fine linen, and goodly bonnets of fine linen, and linen breeches of fine twined linen,	as well as the turban of fine linen, the ornate headbands and undergarments of finely spun linen,
EXO	39	29	가는 베실과 청색 자색 홍색실로 수 놓아 띠를 만들었으니 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 하였더라	And a girdle of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, of needlework; as the Lord commanded Moses.	and the sash of finely spun linen, embroidered with blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.
EXO	39	30	그들이 또 정금으로 거룩한 패를 만들고 인을 새김 같이 그 위에 여호와께 성결이라 새기고	And they made the plate of the holy crown of pure gold, and wrote upon it a writing, like to the engravings of a signet, HOLINESS TO THE LORD.	They also made the plate of the holy crown of pure gold, and they engraved on it, like an inscription on a seal: HOLY TO THE LORD.
EXO	39	31	그 패를 청색 끈으로 관 전면에 달았으니 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 하였더라	And they tied unto it a lace of blue, to fasten it on high upon the mitre; as the Lord commanded Moses.	Then they fastened to it a blue cord to mount it on the turban, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.
EXO	39	32	이스라엘 자손이 이와 같이 성막 곧 회막의 모든 역사를 준공하여 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 다 행하고	Thus was all the work of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation finished: and the children of Israel did according to all that the Lord commanded Moses, so did they.	So all the work for the tabernacle, the Tent of Meeting, was completed. The Israelites did everything just as the LORD had commanded Moses.
EXO	39	33	그들이 성막을 모세에게로 가져왔으니 곧 막과 그 모든 기구와 그 갈고리들과 그 널판들과 그 띠들과 그 기둥들과 그 받침들과	And they brought the tabernacle unto Moses, the tent, and all his furniture, his taches, his boards, his bars, and his pillars, and his sockets,	Then they brought the tabernacle to Moses: the tent with all its furnishings, its clasps, its frames, its crossbars, and its posts and bases;
EXO	39	34	붉은 물 들인 수양의 가죽 덮개와 해달의 가죽 덮개와 가리우는 장과	And the covering of rams’ skins dyed red, and the covering of badgers’ skins, and the vail of the covering,	the covering of ram skins dyed red, the covering of fine leather, and the veil of the covering;
EXO	39	35	증거궤와 그 채들과 속죄소와	The ark of the testimony, and the staves thereof, and the mercy seat,	the ark of the Testimony with its poles and the mercy seat;
EXO	39	36	상과 그 모든 기구와 진설병과	The table, and all the vessels thereof, and the shewbread,	the table with all its utensils and the Bread of the Presence;
EXO	39	37	정금 등대와 그 잔 곧 벌여놓은 등잔과 그 모든 기구와 등유와	The pure candlestick, with the lamps thereof, even with the lamps to be set in order, and all the vessels thereof, and the oil for light,	the pure gold lampstand with its row of lamps and all its utensils, as well as the oil for the light;
EXO	39	38	금단과 관유와 향기로운 향과 장막 문장과	And the golden altar, and the anointing oil, and the sweet incense, and the hanging for the tabernacle door,	the gold altar, the anointing oil, the fragrant incense, and the curtain for the entrance to the tent;
EXO	39	39	놋단과 그 놋 그물과 그 채들과 그 모든 기구와 물두멍과 그 받침과	The brasen altar, and his grate of brass, his staves, and all his vessels, the laver and his foot,	the bronze altar with its bronze grating, its poles, and all its utensils; the basin with its stand;
EXO	39	40	뜰의 포장들과 그 기둥들과 그 받침들과 뜰문의 장과 그 줄들과 그 말뚝들과 회막의 소용 곧 성막의 모든 기구와	The hangings of the court, his pillars, and his sockets, and the hanging for the court gate, his cords, and his pins, and all the vessels of the service of the tabernacle, for the tent of the congregation,	the curtains of the courtyard with its posts and bases; the curtain for the gate of the courtyard, its ropes and tent pegs, and all the equipment for the service of the tabernacle, the Tent of Meeting;
EXO	39	41	성소에서 섬기기 위한 정교한 옷 곧 제사 직분을 행할 때에 입는 제사장 아론의 거룩한 옷과 그 아들들의 옷이라	The cloths of service to do service in the holy place, and the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and his sons’ garments, to minister in the priest’s office.	and the woven garments for ministering in the sanctuary, both the holy garments for Aaron the priest and the garments for his sons to serve as priests.
EXO	39	42	여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 이스라엘 자손이 모든 역사를 필하매	According to all that the Lord commanded Moses, so the children of Israel made all the work.	The Israelites had done all the work just as the LORD had commanded Moses.
EXO	39	43	모세가 그 필한 모든 것을 본즉 여호와께서 명하신 대로 되었으므로 그들에게 축복하였더라	And Moses did look upon all the work, and, behold, they had done it as the Lord had commanded, even so had they done it: and Moses blessed them.	And Moses inspected all the work and saw that they had accomplished it just as the LORD had commanded. So Moses blessed them.
EXO	40	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
EXO	40	2	너는 정월 초일일에 성막 곧 회막을 세우고	On the first day of the first month shalt thou set up the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation.	“On the first day of the first month you are to set up the tabernacle, the Tent of Meeting.
EXO	40	3	또 증거궤를 들여 놓고 또 장으로 그 궤를 가리우고	And thou shalt put therein the ark of the testimony, and cover the ark with the vail.	Put the ark of the Testimony in it and screen off the ark with the veil.
EXO	40	4	또 상을 들여 놓고 그 위에 물품을 진설하고 등대를 들여 놓고 불을 켜고	And thou shalt bring in the table, and set in order the things that are to be set in order upon it; and thou shalt bring in the candlestick, and light the lamps thereof.	Then bring in the table and set out its arrangement; bring in the lampstand as well, and set up its lamps.
EXO	40	5	또 금 향단을 증거궤 앞에 두고 성막 문에 장을 달고	And thou shalt set the altar of gold for the incense before the ark of the testimony, and put the hanging of the door to the tabernacle.	Place the gold altar of incense in front of the ark of the Testimony, and hang the curtain at the entrance to the tabernacle.
EXO	40	6	또 번제단을 회막의 성막 문 앞에 놓고	And thou shalt set the altar of the burnt offering before the door of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation.	Place the altar of burnt offering in front of the entrance to the tabernacle, the Tent of Meeting.
EXO	40	7	또 물두멍을 회막과 단 사이에 놓고 그 속에 물을 담고	And thou shalt set the laver between the tent of the congregation and the altar, and shalt put water therein.	And place the basin between the Tent of Meeting and the altar, and put water in it.
EXO	40	8	또 뜰 주위에 포장을 치고 뜰 문에 장을 달고	And thou shalt set up the court round about, and hang up the hanging at the court gate.	Set up the surrounding courtyard and hang the curtain for the entrance to the courtyard.
EXO	40	9	또 관유를 취하여 성막과 그 안에 있는 모든 것에 발라 그것과 그 모든 기구를 거룩하게 하라 그것이 거룩하리라	And thou shalt take the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle, and all that is therein, and shalt hallow it, and all the vessels thereof: and it shall be holy.	Take the anointing oil and anoint the tabernacle and everything in it; consecrate it along with all its furnishings, and it shall be holy.
EXO	40	10	너는 또 번제단과 그 모든 기구에 발라 그 안을 거룩하게 하라 그 단이 지극히 거룩하리라	And thou shalt anoint the altar of the burnt offering, and all his vessels, and sanctify the altar: and it shall be an altar most holy.	Anoint the altar of burnt offering and all its utensils; consecrate the altar, and it shall be most holy.
EXO	40	11	너는 또 물두멍과 그 받침에 발라 거룩하게 하고	And thou shalt anoint the laver and his foot, and sanctify it.	Anoint the basin and its stand and consecrate them.
EXO	40	12	또 아론과 그 아들들을 회막문으로 데려다가 물로 씻기고	And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and wash them with water.	Then bring Aaron and his sons to the entrance to the Tent of Meeting and wash them with water.
EXO	40	13	아론에게 거룩한 옷을 입히고 그에게 기름을 부어 거룩하게 하여 그로 내게 제사장의 직분을 행하게 하라	And thou shalt put upon Aaron the holy garments, and anoint him, and sanctify him; that he may minister unto me in the priest’s office.	And you are to clothe Aaron with the holy garments, anoint him, and consecrate him, so that he may serve Me as a priest.
EXO	40	14	너는 또 그 아들들을 데려다가 그들에게 겉옷을 입히고	And thou shalt bring his sons, and clothe them with coats:	Bring his sons forward and clothe them with tunics.
EXO	40	15	그 아비에게 기름을 부음 같이 그들에게도 부어서 그들로 내게 제사장 직분을 행하게 하라 그들이 기름 부음을 받았은즉 대대로 영영히 제사장이 되리라 하시매	And thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that they may minister unto me in the priest’s office: for their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations.	Anoint them just as you anointed their father, so that they may also serve Me as priests. Their anointing will qualify them for a permanent priesthood throughout their generations.”
EXO	40	16	모세가 그같이 행하되 곧 여호와께서 자기에게 명하신 대로 다 행하였더라	Thus did Moses: according to all that the Lord commanded him, so did he.	Moses did everything just as the LORD had commanded him.
EXO	40	17	제 이년 정월 곧 그 달 초일일에 성막을 세우니라	And it came to pass in the first month in the second year, on the first day of the month, that the tabernacle was reared up.	So the tabernacle was set up on the first day of the first month of the second year.
EXO	40	18	모세가 성막을 세우되 그 받침들을 놓고 그 널판들을 세우고 그 띠를 띠우고 그 기둥들을 세우고	And Moses reared up the tabernacle, and fastened his sockets, and set up the boards thereof, and put in the bars thereof, and reared up his pillars.	When Moses set up the tabernacle, he laid its bases, positioned its frames, inserted its crossbars, and set up its posts.
EXO	40	19	또 성막 위에 막을 펴고 그 위에 덮개를 덮으니 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 되니라	And he spread abroad the tent over the tabernacle, and put the covering of the tent above upon it; as the Lord commanded Moses.	Then he spread the tent over the tabernacle and put the covering over the tent, just as the LORD had commanded him.
EXO	40	20	그가 또 증거판을 궤 속에 넣고 채를 궤에 꿰고 속죄소를 궤 위에 두고	And he took and put the testimony into the ark, and set the staves on the ark, and put the mercy seat above upon the ark:	Moses took the Testimony and placed it in the ark, attaching the poles to the ark; and he set the mercy seat atop the ark.
EXO	40	21	또 그 궤를 성막에 들여 놓고 장을 드리워서 그 증거궤를 가리우니 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 되니라	And he brought the ark into the tabernacle, and set up the vail of the covering, and covered the ark of the testimony; as the Lord commanded Moses.	Then he brought the ark into the tabernacle, put up the veil for the screen, and shielded off the ark of the Testimony, just as the LORD had commanded him.
EXO	40	22	그가 또 회막 안 곧 성막 북편으로 장 밖에 상을 놓고	And he put the table in the tent of the congregation, upon the side of the tabernacle northward, without the vail.	Moses placed the table in the Tent of Meeting on the north side of the tabernacle, outside the veil.
EXO	40	23	또 여호와 앞 그 상 위에 떡을 진설하니 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 되니라	And he set the bread in order upon it before the Lord; as the Lord had commanded Moses.	He arranged the bread on it before the LORD, just as the LORD had commanded him.
EXO	40	24	그가 또 회막 안 곧 성막 남편에 등대를 놓아 상과 대하게 하고	And he put the candlestick in the tent of the congregation, over against the table, on the side of the tabernacle southward.	He also placed the lampstand in the Tent of Meeting opposite the table on the south side of the tabernacle
EXO	40	25	또 여호와 앞에 등잔에 불을 켜니 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 되니라	And he lighted the lamps before the Lord; as the Lord commanded Moses.	and set up the lamps before the LORD, just as the LORD had commanded him.
EXO	40	26	그가 또 금 향단을 회막 안 장 앞에 두고	And he put the golden altar in the tent of the congregation before the vail:	Moses placed the gold altar in the Tent of Meeting, in front of the veil,
EXO	40	27	그 위에 향기로운 향을 사르니 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 되니라	And he burnt sweet incense thereon; as the Lord commanded Moses.	and he burned fragrant incense on it, just as the LORD had commanded him.
EXO	40	28	그가 또 성막 문에 장을 달고	And he set up the hanging at the door of the tabernacle.	Then he put up the curtain at the entrance to the tabernacle.
EXO	40	29	또 회막의 성막 문 앞에 번제단을 두고 번제와 소제를 그 위에 드리니 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 되니라	And he put the altar of burnt offering by the door of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation, and offered upon it the burnt offering and the meat offering; as the Lord commanded Moses.	He placed the altar of burnt offering near the entrance to the tabernacle, the Tent of Meeting, and offered on it the burnt offering and the grain offering, just as the LORD had commanded him.
EXO	40	30	그가 또 물두멍을 회막과 단 사이에 두고 거기 씻을 물을 담고	And he set the laver between the tent of the congregation and the altar, and put water there, to wash withal.	He placed the basin between the Tent of Meeting and the altar and put water in it for washing;
EXO	40	31	자기와 아론과 그 아들들이 거기서 수족을 씻되	And Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their feet thereat:	and from it Moses, Aaron, and his sons washed their hands and feet.
EXO	40	32	그들이 회막에 들어갈 때와 단에 가까이 갈 때에 씻었으니 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 되니라	When they went into the tent of the congregation, and when they came near unto the altar, they washed; as the Lord commanded Moses.	They washed whenever they entered the Tent of Meeting or approached the altar, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.
EXO	40	33	그가 또 성막과 단 사면 뜰에 포장을 치고 뜰문의 장을 다니라 모세가 이같이 역사를 필하였더라	And he reared up the court round about the tabernacle and the altar, and set up the hanging of the court gate. So Moses finished the work.	And Moses set up the courtyard around the tabernacle and the altar, and he hung the curtain for the entrance to the courtyard. So Moses finished the work.
EXO	40	34	그 후에 구름이 회막에 덮이고 여호와의 영광이 성막에 충만하매	Then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle.	Then the cloud covered the Tent of Meeting, and the glory of the LORD filled the tabernacle.
EXO	40	35	모세가 회막에 들어갈 수 없었으니 이는 구름이 회막 위에 덮이고 여호와의 영광이 성막에 충만함이었으며	And Moses was not able to enter into the tent of the congregation, because the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle.	Moses was unable to enter the Tent of Meeting because the cloud had settled on it, and the glory of the LORD filled the tabernacle.
EXO	40	36	구름이 성막 위에서 떠오를 때에는 이스라엘 자손이 그 모든 행하는 길에 앞으로 발행하였고	And when the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the children of Israel went onward in all their journeys:	Whenever the cloud was lifted from above the tabernacle, the Israelites would set out through all the stages of their journey.
EXO	40	37	구름이 떠오르지 않을 때에는 떠오르는 날까지 발행하지 아니하였으며	But if the cloud were not taken up, then they journeyed not till the day that it was taken up.	If the cloud was not lifted, they would not set out until the day it was taken up.
EXO	40	38	낮에는 여호와의 구름이 성막 위에 있고 밤에는 불이 그 구름 가운데 있음을 이스라엘의 온 족속이 그 모든 행하는 길에서 친히 보았더라	For the cloud of the Lord was upon the tabernacle by day, and fire was on it by night, in the sight of all the house of Israel, throughout all their journeys.	For the cloud of the LORD was over the tabernacle by day, and fire was in the cloud by night, in the sight of all the house of Israel through all their journeys.
LEV	1	1	여호와께서 회막에서 모세를 부르시고 그에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord called unto Moses, and spake unto him out of the tabernacle of the congregation, saying,	Then the LORD called to Moses and spoke to him from the Tent of Meeting, saying,
LEV	1	2	이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 이르라 너희 중에 누구든지 여호와께 예물을 드리려거든 생축 중에서 소나 양으로 예물을 드릴지니라	Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, If any man of you bring an offering unto the Lord, ye shall bring your offering of the cattle, even of the herd, and of the flock.	“Speak to the Israelites and tell them: When any of you brings an offering to the LORD, you may bring as your offering an animal from the herd or the flock.
LEV	1	3	그 예물이 소의 번제이면 흠 없는 수컷으로 회막문에서 여호와 앞에 열납하시도록 드릴지니라	If his offering be a burnt sacrifice of the herd, let him offer a male without blemish: he shall offer it of his own voluntary will at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before the Lord.	If one’s offering is a burnt offering from the herd, he is to present an unblemished male. He must bring it to the entrance to the Tent of Meeting for its acceptance before the LORD.
LEV	1	4	그가 번제물의 머리에 안수할지니 그리하면 열납되어 그를 위하여 속죄가 될 것이라	And he shall put his hand upon the head of the burnt offering; and it shall be accepted for him to make atonement for him.	He is to lay his hand on the head of the burnt offering, so it can be accepted on his behalf to make atonement for him.
LEV	1	5	그는 여호와 앞에서 그 수송아지를 잡을 것이요 아론의 자손 제사장들은 그 피를 가져다가 회막문 앞 단 사면에 뿌릴 것이며	And he shall kill the bullock before the Lord: and the priests, Aaron’s sons, shall bring the blood, and sprinkle the blood round about upon the altar that is by the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.	And he shall slaughter the young bull before the LORD, and Aaron’s sons the priests are to present the blood and sprinkle it on all sides of the altar at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting.
LEV	1	6	그는 또 그 번제 희생의 가죽을 벗기고 각을 뜰 것이요	And he shall flay the burnt offering, and cut it into his pieces.	Next, he is to skin the burnt offering and cut it into pieces.
LEV	1	7	제사장 아론의 자손들은 단 위에 불을 두고 불 위에 나무를 벌여 놓고	And the sons of Aaron the priest shall put fire upon the altar, and lay the wood in order upon the fire:	The sons of Aaron the priest shall put a fire on the altar and arrange wood on the fire.
LEV	1	8	아론의 자손 제사장들은 그 뜬 각과 머리와 기름을 단 윗불 위에 있는 나무에 벌여 놓을 것이며	And the priests, Aaron’s sons, shall lay the parts, the head, and the fat, in order upon the wood that is on the fire which is upon the altar:	Then Aaron’s sons the priests are to arrange the pieces, including the head and the fat, atop the burning wood on the altar.
LEV	1	9	그 내장과 정갱이를 물로 씻을 것이요 제사장은 그 전부를 단 위에 불살라 번제를 삼을지니 이는 화제라 여호와께 향기로운 냄새니라	But his inwards and his legs shall he wash in water: and the priest shall burn all on the altar, to be a burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord.	The entrails and legs must be washed with water, and the priest shall burn all of it on the altar as a burnt offering, an offering made by fire, a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
LEV	1	10	만일 그 예물이 떼의 양이나 염소의 번제이면 흠 없은 수컷으로 드릴지니	And if his offering be of the flocks, namely, of the sheep, or of the goats, for a burnt sacrifice; he shall bring it a male without blemish.	If, however, one’s offering is a burnt offering from the flock—from the sheep or goats—he is to present an unblemished male.
LEV	1	11	그가 단 북편에서 여호와 앞에서 잡을 것이요 아론의 자손 제사장들은 그 피를 단 사면에 뿌릴 것이며	And he shall kill it on the side of the altar northward before the Lord: and the priests, Aaron’s sons, shall sprinkle his blood round about upon the altar.	He shall slaughter it on the north side of the altar before the LORD, and Aaron’s sons the priests are to sprinkle its blood against the altar on all sides.
LEV	1	12	그는 그것의 각을 뜨고 그 머리와 그 기름을 베어 낼 것이요 제사장은 그것을 다 단 윗불 위에 있는 나무에 벌여 놓을 것이며	And he shall cut it into his pieces, with his head and his fat: and the priest shall lay them in order on the wood that is on the fire which is upon the altar:	He is to cut the animal into pieces, and the priest shall arrange them, including the head and fat, atop the burning wood that is on the altar.
LEV	1	13	그 내장과 정갱이를 물로 씻을 것이요 제사장은 그 전부를 가져다가 단 위에 불살라 번제를 삼을지니 이는 화제라 여호와께 향기로운 냄새니라	But he shall wash the inwards and the legs with water: and the priest shall bring it all, and burn it upon the altar: it is a burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord.	The entrails and legs must be washed with water, and the priest shall bring all of it and burn it on the altar; it is a burnt offering, an offering made by fire, a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
LEV	1	14	만일 여호와께 드리는 예물이 새의 번제이면 산비둘기나 집비둘기 새끼로 예물을 삼을 것이요	And if the burnt sacrifice for his offering to the Lord be of fowls, then he shall bring his offering of turtledoves, or of young pigeons.	If, instead, one’s offering to the LORD is a burnt offering of birds, he is to present a turtledove or a young pigeon.
LEV	1	15	제사장은 그것을 단으로 가져다가 그 머리를 비틀어 끊고 단 위에 불사르고 피는 단 곁에 흘릴 것이며	And the priest shall bring it unto the altar, and wring off his head, and burn it on the altar; and the blood thereof shall be wrung out at the side of the altar:	Then the priest shall bring it to the altar, twist off its head, and burn it on the altar; its blood should be drained out on the side of the altar.
LEV	1	16	멱통과 그 더러운 것은 제하여 단 동편 재 버리는 곳에 던지고	And he shall pluck away his crop with his feathers, and cast it beside the altar on the east part, by the place of the ashes:	And he is to remove the crop with its contents and throw it to the east side of the altar, in the place for ashes.
LEV	1	17	또 그 날개 자리에서 그 몸을 찢되 아주 찢지 말고 제사장이 그것을 단 윗불 위의 나무 위에 살라 번제를 삼을지니 이는 화제라 여호와께 향기로운 냄새니라	And he shall cleave it with the wings thereof, but shall not divide it asunder: and the priest shall burn it upon the altar, upon the wood that is upon the fire: it is a burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord.	He shall tear it open by its wings, without dividing the bird completely. And the priest is to burn it on the altar atop the burning wood. It is a burnt offering, an offering made by fire, a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
LEV	2	1	누구든지 소제의 예물을 여호와께 드리려거든 고운 가루로 예물을 삼아 그 위에 기름을 붓고 또 그 위에 유향을 놓아	And when any will offer a meat offering unto the Lord, his offering shall be of fine flour; and he shall pour oil upon it, and put frankincense thereon:	“When anyone brings a grain offering to the LORD, his offering must consist of fine flour. He is to pour olive oil on it, put frankincense on it,
LEV	2	2	아론의 자손 제사장들에게로 가져 올 것이요 제사장은 그 고운 기름 가루 한 줌과 그 모든 유향을 취하여 기념물로 단 위에 불사를지니 이는 화제라 여호와께 향기로운 냄새니라	And he shall bring it to Aaron’s sons the priests: and he shall take thereout his handful of the flour thereof, and of the oil thereof, with all the frankincense thereof; and the priest shall burn the memorial of it upon the altar, to be an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord:	and bring it to Aaron’s sons the priests. The priest shall take a handful of the flour and oil, together with all the frankincense, and burn this as a memorial portion on the altar, an offering made by fire, a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
LEV	2	3	그 소제물의 남은 것은 아론과 그 자손에게 돌릴지니 이는 여호와의 화제 중에 지극히 거룩한 것이니라	And the remnant of the meat offering shall be Aaron’s and his sons’: it is a thing most holy of the offerings of the Lord made by fire.	The remainder of the grain offering shall belong to Aaron and his sons; it is a most holy part of the offerings made by fire to the LORD.
LEV	2	4	네가 화덕에 구운 것으로 소제의 예물을 드리려거든 고운 가루에 기름을 섞어 만든 무교병이나 기름을 바른 무교병을 드릴 것이요	And if thou bring an oblation of a meat offering baken in the oven, it shall be unleavened cakes of fine flour mingled with oil, or unleavened wafers anointed with oil.	Now if you bring an offering of grain baked in an oven, it must consist of fine flour, either unleavened cakes mixed with oil or unleavened wafers coated with oil.
LEV	2	5	번철에 부친 것으로 소제의 예물을 드리려거든 고운 가루에 누룩을 넣지 말고 기름을 섞어	And if thy oblation be a meat offering baken in a pan, it shall be of fine flour unleavened, mingled with oil.	If your offering is a grain offering prepared on a griddle, it must be unleavened bread made of fine flour mixed with oil.
LEV	2	6	조각으로 나누고 그 위에 기름을 부을지니 이는 소제니라	Thou shalt part it in pieces, and pour oil thereon: it is a meat offering.	Crumble it and pour oil on it; it is a grain offering.
LEV	2	7	네가 솥에 삶은 것으로 소제를 드리려거든 고운 가루와 기름을 섞어 만들지니라	And if thy oblation be a meat offering baken in the fryingpan, it shall be made of fine flour with oil.	If your offering is a grain offering cooked in a pan, it must consist of fine flour with oil.
LEV	2	8	너는 이것들로 만든 소제물을 여호와께로 가져다가 제사장에게 줄 것이요 제사장은 그것을 단으로 가져다가	And thou shalt bring the meat offering that is made of these things unto the Lord: and when it is presented unto the priest, he shall bring it unto the altar.	When you bring to the LORD the grain offering made in any of these ways, it is to be presented to the priest, and he shall take it to the altar.
LEV	2	9	그 소제물 중에서 기념할 것을 취하여 단 위에 불사를지니 이는 화제라 여호와께 향기로운 냄새니라	And the priest shall take from the meat offering a memorial thereof, and shall burn it upon the altar: it is an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord.	The priest is to remove the memorial portion from the grain offering and burn it on the altar as an offering made by fire, a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
LEV	2	10	소제물의 남은 것은 아론과 그 자손에게 돌릴찌니 이는 여호와의 화제 중에 지극히 거룩한 것이니라	And that which is left of the meat offering shall be Aaron’s and his sons’: it is a thing most holy of the offerings of the Lord made by fire.	But the remainder of the grain offering shall belong to Aaron and his sons; it is a most holy part of the offerings made by fire to the LORD.
LEV	2	11	무릇 너희가 여호와께 드리는 소제물에는 모두 누룩을 넣지 말지니 너희가 누룩이나 꿀을 여호와께 화제로 드려 사르지 못할지니라	No meat offering, which ye shall bring unto the Lord, shall be made with leaven: for ye shall burn no leaven, nor any honey, in any offering of the Lord made by fire.	No grain offering that you present to the LORD may be made with leaven, for you are not to burn any leaven or honey as an offering made by fire to the LORD.
LEV	2	12	처음 익은 것으로는 그것을 여호와께 드릴지나 향기로운 냄새를 위하여는 단에 올리지 말지며	As for the oblation of the firstfruits, ye shall offer them unto the Lord: but they shall not be burnt on the altar for a sweet savour.	You may bring them to the LORD as an offering of firstfruits, but they are not to be offered on the altar as a pleasing aroma.
LEV	2	13	네 모든 소제물에 소금을 치라 네 하나님의 언약의 소금을 네 소제에 빼지 못할지니 네 모든 예물에 소금을 드릴지니라	And every oblation of thy meat offering shalt thou season with salt; neither shalt thou suffer the salt of the covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy meat offering: with all thine offerings thou shalt offer salt.	And you shall season each of your grain offerings with salt. You must not leave the salt of the covenant of your God out of your grain offering; you are to add salt to each of your offerings.
LEV	2	14	너는 첫 이삭의 소제를 여호와께 드리거든 첫 이삭을 볶아 찧은 것으로 너의 소제를 삼되	And if thou offer a meat offering of thy firstfruits unto the Lord, thou shalt offer for the meat offering of thy firstfruits green ears of corn dried by the fire, even corn beaten out of full ears.	If you bring a grain offering of firstfruits to the LORD, you shall offer crushed heads of new grain roasted on the fire.
LEV	2	15	그 위에 기름을 붓고 그 위에 유향을 더할지니 이는 소제니라	And thou shalt put oil upon it, and lay frankincense thereon: it is a meat offering.	And you are to put oil and frankincense on it; it is a grain offering.
LEV	2	16	제사장은 찧은 곡식 얼마와 기름의 얼마와 모든 유향을 기념물로 불사를지니 이는 여호와께 드리는 화제니라	And the priest shall burn the memorial of it, part of the beaten corn thereof, and part of the oil thereof, with all the frankincense thereof: it is an offering made by fire unto the Lord.	The priest shall then burn the memorial portion of the crushed grain and the oil, together with all its frankincense, as an offering made by fire to the LORD.
LEV	3	1	사람이 만일 화목제의 희생을 예물로 드리되 소로 드리려거든 수컷이나 암컷이나 흠 없는 것으로 여호와 앞에 드릴지니	And if his oblation be a sacrifice of peace offering, if he offer it of the herd; whether it be a male or female, he shall offer it without blemish before the Lord.	“If one’s offering is a peace offering and he offers an animal from the herd, whether male or female, he must present it without blemish before the LORD.
LEV	3	2	그 예물의 머리에 안수하고 회막문에서 잡을 것이요 아론의 자손 제사장들은 그 피를 제단 사면에 뿌릴 것이며	And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering, and kill it at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and Aaron’s sons the priests shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about.	He is to lay his hand on the head of the offering and slaughter it at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting. Then Aaron’s sons the priests shall sprinkle the blood on all sides of the altar.
LEV	3	3	그는 또 그 화목제의 희생 중에서 여호와께 화제를 드릴지니 곧 내장에 덮인 기름과 내장에 붙은 모든 기름과	And he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering an offering made by fire unto the Lord; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards,	From the peace offering he is to bring an offering made by fire to the LORD: the fat that covers the entrails, all the fat that is on them,
LEV	3	4	두 콩팥과 그 위의 기름 곧 허리 근방에 있는 것과 간에 덮인 꺼풀을 콩팥과 함께 취할 것이요	And the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away.	both kidneys with the fat on them near the loins, and the lobe of the liver, which he is to remove with the kidneys.
LEV	3	5	아론의 자손은 그것을 단 윗불 위에 있는 나무 위 번제물 위에 사를지니 이는 화제라 여호와께 향기로운 냄새니라	And Aaron’s sons shall burn it on the altar upon the burnt sacrifice, which is upon the wood that is on the fire: it is an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord.	Then Aaron’s sons are to burn it on the altar atop the burnt offering that is on the burning wood, as an offering made by fire, a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
LEV	3	6	만일 여호와께 예물로 드리는 화목제의 희생이 양이면 수컷이나 암컷이나 흠 없는 것으로 드릴지며	And if his offering for a sacrifice of peace offering unto the Lord be of the flock; male or female, he shall offer it without blemish.	If, however, one’s peace offering to the LORD is from the flock, he must present a male or female without blemish.
LEV	3	7	만일 예물로 드리는 것이 어린 양이면 그것을 여호와 앞으로 끌어다가	If he offer a lamb for his offering, then shall he offer it before the Lord.	If he is presenting a lamb for his offering, he must present it before the LORD.
LEV	3	8	그 예물의 머리에 안수하고 회막 앞에서 잡을 것이요 아론의 자손은 그 피를 단 사면에 뿌릴 것이며	And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering, and kill it before the tabernacle of the congregation: and Aaron’s sons shall sprinkle the blood thereof round about upon the altar.	He is to lay his hand on the head of his offering and slaughter it in front of the Tent of Meeting. Then Aaron’s sons shall sprinkle its blood on all sides of the altar.
LEV	3	9	그는 그 화목제의 희생 중에서 여호와께 화제를 드릴지니 그 기름 곧 미려골에서 벤바 기름진 꼬리와 내장에 덮힌 기름과 내장에 붙은 모든 기름과	And he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering an offering made by fire unto the Lord; the fat thereof, and the whole rump, it shall he take off hard by the backbone; and the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards,	And from the peace offering he shall bring an offering made by fire to the LORD consisting of its fat: the entire fat tail cut off close to the backbone, the fat that covers the entrails, all the fat that is on them,
LEV	3	10	두 콩팥과 그 위의 기름 곧 허리 근방에 있는 것과 간에 덮인 꺼풀을 콩팥과 함께 취할 것이요	And the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away.	both kidneys with the fat on them near the loins, and the lobe of the liver, which he is to remove with the kidneys.
LEV	3	11	제사장은 그것을 단 위에 불사를지니 이는 화제로 여호와께 드리는 식물이니라	And the priest shall burn it upon the altar: it is the food of the offering made by fire unto the Lord.	Then the priest is to burn them on the altar as food, an offering made by fire to the LORD.
LEV	3	12	만일 예물이 염소면 그것을 여호와 앞으로 끌어다가	And if his offering be a goat, then he shall offer it before the Lord.	If one’s offering is a goat, he is to present it before the LORD.
LEV	3	13	그 머리에 안수하고 회막 앞에서 잡을 것이요 아론의 자손은 그 피를 단 사면에 뿌릴 것이며	And he shall lay his hand upon the head of it, and kill it before the tabernacle of the congregation: and the sons of Aaron shall sprinkle the blood thereof upon the altar round about.	He must lay his hand on its head and slaughter it in front of the Tent of Meeting. Then Aaron’s sons shall sprinkle its blood on all sides of the altar.
LEV	3	14	그는 그 중에서 예물을 취하여 여호와께 화제를 드릴지니 곧 내장에 덮인 기름과 내장에 붙은 모든 기름과	And he shall offer thereof his offering, even an offering made by fire unto the Lord; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards,	And from his offering he shall present an offering made by fire to the LORD: the fat that covers the entrails, all the fat that is on them,
LEV	3	15	두 콩팥과 그 위의 기름 곧 허리 근방에 있는 것과 간에 덮인 꺼풀을 콩팥과 함께 취할 것이요	And the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away.	both kidneys with the fat on them near the loins, and the lobe of the liver, which he is to remove with the kidneys.
LEV	3	16	제사장은 그것을 단 위에 불사를지니 이는 화제로 드리는 식물이요 향기로운 냄새라 모든 기름은 여호와의 것이니라	And the priest shall burn them upon the altar: it is the food of the offering made by fire for a sweet savour: all the fat is the Lord’s.	Then the priest is to burn the food on the altar as an offering made by fire, a pleasing aroma. All the fat is the LORD’s.
LEV	3	17	너희는 기름과 피를 먹지 말라 이는 너희 모든 처소에서 대대로 영원한 규례니라	It shall be a perpetual statute for your generations throughout all your dwellings, that ye eat neither fat nor blood.	This is a permanent statute for the generations to come, wherever you live: You must not eat any fat or any blood.”
LEV	4	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	4	2	이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 이르라 누구든지 여호와의 금령 중 하나라도 그릇 범하였으되	Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If a soul shall sin through ignorance against any of the commandments of the Lord concerning things which ought not to be done, and shall do against any of them:	“Tell the Israelites to do as follows with one who sins unintentionally against any of the LORD’s commandments and does what is forbidden by them:
LEV	4	3	만일 기름 부음을 받은 제사장이 범죄하여 백성으로 죄얼을 입게 하였으면 그 범한 죄를 인하여 흠 없는 수송아지로 속죄 제물을 삼아 여호와께 드릴지니	If the priest that is anointed do sin according to the sin of the people; then let him bring for his sin, which he hath sinned, a young bullock without blemish unto the Lord for a sin offering.	If the anointed priest sins, bringing guilt on the people, he must bring to the LORD a young bull without blemish as a sin offering for the sin he has committed.
LEV	4	4	곧 그 수송아지를 회막문 여호와 앞으로 끌어다가 그 수송아지 머리에 안수하고 그것을 여호와 앞에서 잡을 것이요	And he shall bring the bullock unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before the Lord; and shall lay his hand upon the bullock’s head, and kill the bullock before the Lord.	He must bring the bull to the entrance to the Tent of Meeting before the LORD, lay his hand on the bull’s head, and slaughter it before the LORD.
LEV	4	5	기름 부음을 받은 제사장은 그 수송아지의 피를 가지고 회막에 들어가서	And the priest that is anointed shall take of the bullock’s blood, and bring it to the tabernacle of the congregation:	Then the anointed priest shall take some of the bull’s blood and bring it into the Tent of Meeting.
LEV	4	6	그 제사장이 손가락에 그 피를 찍어 여호와 앞 곧 성소 장 앞에 일곱 번 뿌릴 것이며	And the priest shall dip his finger in the blood, and sprinkle of the blood seven times before the Lord, before the vail of the sanctuary.	The priest is to dip his finger in the blood and sprinkle some of it seven times before the LORD, in front of the veil of the sanctuary.
LEV	4	7	제사장은 또 그 피를 여호와 앞 곧 회막 안 향단 뿔에 바르고 그 송아지의 피 전부를 회막문 앞 번제단 밑에 쏟을 것이며	And the priest shall put some of the blood upon the horns of the altar of sweet incense before the Lord, which is in the tabernacle of the congregation; and shall pour all the blood of the bullock at the bottom of the altar of the burnt offering, which is at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.	The priest must then put some of the blood on the horns of the altar of fragrant incense that is before the LORD in the Tent of Meeting. And he is to pour out the rest of the bull’s blood at the base of the altar of burnt offering at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting.
LEV	4	8	또 그 속죄 제물 된 수송아지의 모든 기름을 취할지니 곧 내장에 덮인 기름과 내장에 붙은 모든 기름과	And he shall take off from it all the fat of the bullock for the sin offering; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards,	Then he shall remove all the fat from the bull of the sin offering—the fat that covers the entrails, all the fat that is on them,
LEV	4	9	두 콩팥과 그 위의 기름 곧 허리 근방에 있는 것과 간에 덮인 꺼풀을 콩팥과 함께 취하되	And the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away,	both kidneys with the fat on them near the loins, and the lobe of the liver, which he is to remove with the kidneys—
LEV	4	10	화목제 희생의 소에게서 취함 같이 할 것이요 제사장은 그것을 번제단 위에 불사를 것이며	As it was taken off from the bullock of the sacrifice of peace offerings: and the priest shall burn them upon the altar of the burnt offering.	just as the fat is removed from the ox of the peace offering. Then the priest shall burn them on the altar of burnt offering.
LEV	4	11	그 수송아지의 가죽과 그 모든 고기와 그 머리와 다리와 내장과	And the skin of the bullock, and all his flesh, with his head, and with his legs, and his inwards, and his dung,	But the hide of the bull and all its flesh, with its head and legs and its entrails and dung—
LEV	4	12	곧 그 송아지의 전체를 진 바깥 재 버리는 곳인 청결한 곳으로 가져다가 불로 나무 위에 사르되 곧 재 버리는 곳에서 사를지니라	Even the whole bullock shall he carry forth without the camp unto a clean place, where the ashes are poured out, and burn him on the wood with fire: where the ashes are poured out shall he be burnt.	all the rest of the bull—he must take outside the camp to a ceremonially clean place where the ashes are poured out, and there he must burn it on a wood fire on the ash heap.
LEV	4	13	만일 이스라엘 온 회중이 여호와의 금령 중 하나라도 그릇 범하여 허물이 있으나 스스로 깨닫지 못하다가	And if the whole congregation of Israel sin through ignorance, and the thing be hid from the eyes of the assembly, and they have done somewhat against any of the commandments of the Lord concerning things which should not be done, and are guilty;	Now if the whole congregation of Israel strays unintentionally and the matter escapes the notice of the assembly so that they violate any of the LORD’s commandments and incur guilt by doing what is forbidden,
LEV	4	14	그 범한 죄를 깨달으면 회중은 수송아지를 속죄제로 드릴지니 그것을 회막 앞으로 끌어다가	When the sin, which they have sinned against it, is known, then the congregation shall offer a young bullock for the sin, and bring him before the tabernacle of the congregation.	when they become aware of the sin they have committed, then the assembly must bring a young bull as a sin offering and present it before the Tent of Meeting.
LEV	4	15	회중의 장로들이 여호와 앞에서 그 수송아지 머리에 안수하고 그것을 여호와 앞에서 잡을 것이요	And the elders of the congregation shall lay their hands upon the head of the bullock before the Lord: and the bullock shall be killed before the Lord.	The elders of the congregation are to lay their hands on the bull’s head before the LORD, and it shall be slaughtered before the LORD.
LEV	4	16	기름 부음을 받은 제사장은 그 수송아지의 피를 가지고 회막에 들어가서	And the priest that is anointed shall bring of the bullock’s blood to the tabernacle of the congregation:	Then the anointed priest is to bring some of the bull’s blood into the Tent of Meeting,
LEV	4	17	그 제사장이 손가락으로 그 피를 찍어 여호와 앞 장 앞에 일곱 번 뿌릴 것이며	And the priest shall dip his finger in some of the blood, and sprinkle it seven times before the Lord, even before the vail.	and he is to dip his finger in the blood and sprinkle it seven times before the LORD in front of the veil.
LEV	4	18	또 그 피로 회막 안 여호와 앞에 있는 단 뿔에 바르고 그 피 전부는 회막문 앞 번제단 밑에 쏟을 것이며	And he shall put some of the blood upon the horns of the altar which is before the Lord, that is in the tabernacle of the congregation, and shall pour out all the blood at the bottom of the altar of the burnt offering, which is at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.	He is also to put some of the blood on the horns of the altar that is before the LORD in the Tent of Meeting, and he must pour out the rest of the blood at the base of the altar of burnt offering at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting.
LEV	4	19	그 기름은 다 취하여 단 위에 불사르되	And he shall take all his fat from him, and burn it upon the altar.	And he is to remove all the fat from it and burn it on the altar.
LEV	4	20	그 송아지를 속제죄의 수송아지에게 한 것 같이 할지며 제사장이 그것으로 회중을 위하여 속죄한즉 그들이 사함을 얻으리라	And he shall do with the bullock as he did with the bullock for a sin offering, so shall he do with this: and the priest shall make an atonement for them, and it shall be forgiven them.	He shall offer this bull just as he did the bull for the sin offering; in this way the priest will make atonement on their behalf, and they will be forgiven.
LEV	4	21	그는 그 수송아지를 진 밖으로 가져다가 첫번 수송아지를 사름 같이 사를지니 이는 회중의 속죄제니라	And he shall carry forth the bullock without the camp, and burn him as he burned the first bullock: it is a sin offering for the congregation.	Then he is to take the bull outside the camp and burn it, just as he burned the first bull. It is the sin offering for the assembly.
LEV	4	22	만일 족장이 그 하나님 여호와의 금령 중 하나라도 부지중에 범하여 허물이 있었다가	When a ruler hath sinned, and done somewhat through ignorance against any of the commandments of the Lord his God concerning things which should not be done, and is guilty;	When a leader sins unintentionally and does what is prohibited by any of the commandments of the LORD his God, he incurs guilt.
LEV	4	23	그 범한 죄에 깨우침을 받거든 그는 흠 없는 수염소를 예물로 가져다가	Or if his sin, wherein he hath sinned, come to his knowledge; he shall bring his offering, a kid of the goats, a male without blemish:	When he becomes aware of the sin he has committed, he must bring an unblemished male goat as his offering.
LEV	4	24	그 수염소의 머리에 안수하고 여호와 앞 번제 희생을 잡는 곳에서 잡을지니 이는 속죄제라	And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the goat, and kill it in the place where they kill the burnt offering before the Lord: it is a sin offering.	He is to lay his hand on the head of the goat and slaughter it at the place where the burnt offering is slaughtered before the LORD. It is a sin offering.
LEV	4	25	제사장은 그 속죄 희생의 피를 손가락으로 찍어 번제단 뿔에 바르고 그 피는 번제단 밑에 쏟고	And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and shall pour out his blood at the bottom of the altar of burnt offering.	Then the priest is to take some of the blood of the sin offering with his finger, put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and pour out the rest of the blood at the base of the altar.
LEV	4	26	그 모든 기름은 화목제 희생의 기름 같이 단 위에 불사를지니 이같이 제사장이 그 범한 죄에 대하여 그를 위하여 속죄한즉 그가 사함을 얻으리라	And he shall burn all his fat upon the altar, as the fat of the sacrifice of peace offerings: and the priest shall make an atonement for him as concerning his sin, and it shall be forgiven him.	He must burn all its fat on the altar, like the fat of the peace offerings; thus the priest will make atonement for that man’s sin, and he will be forgiven.
LEV	4	27	만일 평민의 하나가 여호와의 금령 중 하나라도 부지중에 범하여 허물이 있었다가	And if any one of the common people sin through ignorance, while he doeth somewhat against any of the commandments of the Lord concerning things which ought not to be done, and be guilty;	And if one of the common people sins unintentionally and does what is prohibited by any of the LORD’s commandments, he incurs guilt.
LEV	4	28	그 범한 죄에 깨우침을 받거든 그는 흠 없는 암염소를 끌고와서 그 범한 죄를 인하여 그것을 예물로 삼아	Or if his sin, which he hath sinned, come to his knowledge: then he shall bring his offering, a kid of the goats, a female without blemish, for his sin which he hath sinned.	When he becomes aware of the sin he has committed, he must bring an unblemished female goat as his offering for that sin.
LEV	4	29	그 속죄제 희생의 머리에 안수하고 그 희생을 번제소에서 잡을 것이요	And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin offering, and slay the sin offering in the place of the burnt offering.	He is to lay his hand on the head of the sin offering and slaughter it at the place of the burnt offering.
LEV	4	30	제사장은 손가락으로 그 피를 찍어 번제단 뿔에 바르고 그 피 전부를 단 밑에 쏟고	And the priest shall take of the blood thereof with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and shall pour out all the blood thereof at the bottom of the altar.	Then the priest is to take some of its blood with his finger, put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and pour out the rest of the blood at the base of the altar.
LEV	4	31	그 모든 기름을 화목제 희생의 기름을 취한 것 같이 취하여 단 위에 불살라 여호와께 향기롭게 할지니 제사장이 그를 위하여 속죄한즉 그가 사함을 얻으리라	And he shall take away all the fat thereof, as the fat is taken away from off the sacrifice of peace offerings; and the priest shall burn it upon the altar for a sweet savour unto the Lord; and the priest shall make an atonement for him, and it shall be forgiven him.	Then he is to remove all the fat, just as it is removed from the peace offering, and the priest is to burn it on the altar as a pleasing aroma to the LORD. In this way the priest will make atonement for him, and he will be forgiven.
LEV	4	32	그가 만일 어린 양을 속죄 제물로 가져 오려거든 흠 없는 암컷을 끌어다가	And if he bring a lamb for a sin offering, he shall bring it a female without blemish.	If, however, he brings a lamb as a sin offering, he must bring an unblemished female.
LEV	4	33	그 속죄제 희생의 머리에 안수하고 번제 희생을 잡는 곳에서 잡아 속죄제를 삼을 것이요	And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin offering, and slay it for a sin offering in the place where they kill the burnt offering.	And he is to lay his hand on the head of the sin offering and slaughter it as a sin offering at the place where the burnt offering is slaughtered.
LEV	4	34	제사장은 그 속죄제 희생의 피를 손가락으로 찍어 번제단 뿔에 바르고 그 피는 전부를 단 밑에 쏟고	And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and shall pour out all the blood thereof at the bottom of the altar:	Then the priest is to take some of the blood of the sin offering with his finger, put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and pour out the rest of its blood at the base of the altar.
LEV	4	35	그 모든 기름을 화목제 어린 양의 기름을 취한 것 같이 취하여 단 위 여호와의 화제물 위에 불사를지니 이같이 제사장이 그의 범한 죄에 대하여 그를 위하여 속죄한즉 그가 사함을 얻으리라	And he shall take away all the fat thereof, as the fat of the lamb is taken away from the sacrifice of the peace offerings; and the priest shall burn them upon the altar, according to the offerings made by fire unto the Lord: and the priest shall make an atonement for his sin that he hath committed, and it shall be forgiven him.	And he shall remove all the fat, just as the fat of the lamb is removed from the peace offerings, and he shall burn it on the altar along with the offerings made by fire to the LORD. In this way the priest will make atonement for him for the sin he has committed, and he will be forgiven.
LEV	5	1	누구든지 증인이 되어 맹세시키는 소리를 듣고도 그 본 일이나 아는 일을 진술치 아니하면 죄가 있나니 그 허물이 그에게로 돌아갈 것이요	And if a soul sin, and hear the voice of swearing, and is a witness, whether he hath seen or known of it; if he do not utter it, then he shall bear his iniquity.	“If someone sins by failing to testify when he hears a public charge about something he has witnessed, whether he has seen it or learned of it, he shall bear the iniquity.
LEV	5	2	누구든지 부정한 들짐승의 사체나 부정한 가축의 사체나 부정한 곤충의 사체들 무릇 부정한 것을 만졌으면 부지 중에라 할지라도 그 몸이 더러워져서 허물이 있을 것이요	Or if a soul touch any unclean thing, whether it be a carcase of an unclean beast, or a carcase of unclean cattle, or the carcase of unclean creeping things, and if it be hidden from him; he also shall be unclean, and guilty.	Or if a person touches anything unclean—whether the carcass of any unclean wild animal or livestock or crawling creature—even if he is unaware of it, he is unclean and guilty.
LEV	5	3	혹시 부지 중에 사람의 부정에 다닥쳤는데 그 사람의 부정이 어떠한 부정이든지 그것을 깨달을 때에는 허물이 있을 것이요	Or if he touch the uncleanness of man, whatsoever uncleanness it be that a man shall be defiled withal, and it be hid from him; when he knoweth of it, then he shall be guilty.	Or if he touches human uncleanness—anything by which one becomes unclean—even if he is unaware of it, when he realizes it, he is guilty.
LEV	5	4	혹 누구든지 무심 중에 입으로 맹세를 발하여 악을 하리라 하든지 선을 하리라 하면 그 사람의 무심 중에 맹세를 발하여 말한 것이 어떠한 일이든지 깨닫지 못하다가 그것을 깨달을 때에는 그 중 하나에 허물이 있을 것이니	Or if a soul swear, pronouncing with his lips to do evil, or to do good, whatsoever it be that a man shall pronounce with an oath, and it be hid from him; when he knoweth of it, then he shall be guilty in one of these.	Or if someone swears thoughtlessly with his lips to do anything good or evil—in whatever matter a man may rashly pronounce an oath—even if he is unaware of it, when he realizes it, he is guilty in the matter.
LEV	5	5	이 중 하나에 허물이 있을 때에는 아무 일에 범과하였노라 자복하고	And it shall be, when he shall be guilty in one of these things, that he shall confess that he hath sinned in that thing:	If someone incurs guilt in one of these ways, he must confess the sin he has committed,
LEV	5	6	그 범과를 인하여 여호와께 속건제를 드리되 양떼의 암컷 어린 양이나 염소를 끌어다가 속죄제를 드릴 것이요 제사장은 그의 허물을 위하여 속죄할지니라	And he shall bring his trespass offering unto the Lord for his sin which he hath sinned, a female from the flock, a lamb or a kid of the goats, for a sin offering; and the priest shall make an atonement for him concerning his sin.	and he must bring his guilt offering to the LORD for the sin he has committed: a female lamb or goat from the flock as a sin offering. And the priest will make atonement for him concerning his sin.
LEV	5	7	만일 힘이 어린 양에 미치지 못하거든 그 범과를 속하기 위하여 산비둘기 둘이나 집비둘기 새끼 둘을 여호와께로 가져 가되 하나는 속죄제물을 삼고 하나는 번제물을 삼아	And if he be not able to bring a lamb, then he shall bring for his trespass, which he hath committed, two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, unto the Lord; one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering.	If, however, he cannot afford a lamb, he may bring to the LORD as restitution for his sin two turtledoves or two young pigeons—one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering.
LEV	5	8	제사장에게로 가져 갈 것이요 제사장은 그 속죄제물을 먼저 드리되 그 머리를 목에서 비틀어 끊고 몸은 아주 쪼개지 말며	And he shall bring them unto the priest, who shall offer that which is for the sin offering first, and wring off his head from his neck, but shall not divide it asunder:	He is to bring them to the priest, who shall first present the one for the sin offering. He is to twist its head at the front of its neck without severing it;
LEV	5	9	그 속죄제물의 피를 단 곁에 뿌리고 그 남은 피는 단 밑에 흘릴지니 이는 속죄제요	And he shall sprinkle of the blood of the sin offering upon the side of the altar; and the rest of the blood shall be wrung out at the bottom of the altar: it is a sin offering.	then he is to sprinkle some of the blood of the sin offering on the side of the altar, while the rest of the blood is drained out at the base of the altar. It is a sin offering.
LEV	5	10	그 다음 것은 규례대로 번제를 드릴지니 제사장이 그의 범과를 위하여 속한즉 그가 사함을 얻으리라	And he shall offer the second for a burnt offering, according to the manner: and the priest shall make an atonement for him for his sin which he hath sinned, and it shall be forgiven him.	And the priest must prepare the second bird as a burnt offering according to the ordinance. In this way the priest will make atonement for him for the sin he has committed, and he will be forgiven.
LEV	5	11	만일 힘이 산비둘기 둘이나 집비둘기 둘에도 미치지 못하거든 그 범과를 인하여 고운 가루 에바 십분 일을 예물로 가져다가 속죄제물로 드리되 이는 속죄제인즉 그 위에 기름을 붓지 말며 유향을 놓지 말고	But if he be not able to bring two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, then he that sinned shall bring for his offering the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a sin offering; he shall put no oil upon it, neither shall he put any frankincense thereon: for it is a sin offering.	But if he cannot afford two turtledoves or two young pigeons, he may bring a tenth of an ephah of fine flour as a sin offering. He must not put olive oil or frankincense on it, because it is a sin offering.
LEV	5	12	그것을 제사장에게로 가져갈 것이요 제사장은 그것을 기념물로 한 움큼을 취하여 단 위 여호와의 화제물 위에 불사를지니 이는 속죄제라	Then shall he bring it to the priest, and the priest shall take his handful of it, even a memorial thereof, and burn it on the altar, according to the offerings made by fire unto the Lord: it is a sin offering.	He is to bring it to the priest, who shall take a handful from it as a memorial portion and burn it on the altar atop the offerings made by fire to the LORD; it is a sin offering.
LEV	5	13	제사장이 그가 이 중에 하나를 범하여 얻은 허물을 위하여 속한즉 그가 사함을 얻으리라 그 나머지는 소제물 같이 제사장에게 돌릴지니라	And the priest shall make an atonement for him as touching his sin that he hath sinned in one of these, and it shall be forgiven him: and the remnant shall be the priest’s, as a meat offering.	In this way the priest will make atonement for him for any of these sins he has committed, and he will be forgiven. The remainder will belong to the priest, like the grain offering.”
LEV	5	14	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	5	15	누구든지 여호와의 성물에 대하여 그릇 범과하였거든 여호와께 속건제를 드리되 너의 지정한 가치를 따라 성소의 세겔로 몇 세겔 은에 상당한 흠 없는 수양을 떼 중에서 끌어다가 속건제로 드려서	If a soul commit a trespass, and sin through ignorance, in the holy things of the Lord; then he shall bring for his trespass unto the Lord a ram without blemish out of the flocks, with thy estimation by shekels of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for a trespass offering:	“If someone acts unfaithfully and sins unintentionally against any of the LORD’s holy things, he must bring his guilt offering to the LORD: an unblemished ram from the flock, of proper value in silver shekels according to the sanctuary shekel; it is a guilt offering.
LEV	5	16	성물에 대한 범과를 갚되 그것에 오분 일을 더하여 제사장에게 줄 것이요 제사장은 그 속건제의 수양으로 그를 위하여 속한즉 그가 사함을 얻으리라	And he shall make amends for the harm that he hath done in the holy thing, and shall add the fifth part thereto, and give it unto the priest: and the priest shall make an atonement for him with the ram of the trespass offering, and it shall be forgiven him.	Regarding any holy thing he has harmed, he must make restitution by adding a fifth of its value to it and giving it to the priest, who will make atonement on his behalf with the ram as a guilt offering, and he will be forgiven.
LEV	5	17	만일 누구든지 여호와의 금령 중 하나를 부지 중에 범하여도 허물이라 벌을 당할 것이니	And if a soul sin, and commit any of these things which are forbidden to be done by the commandments of the Lord; though he wist it not, yet is he guilty, and shall bear his iniquity.	If someone sins and violates any of the LORD’s commandments even though he was unaware, he is guilty and shall bear his punishment.
LEV	5	18	그는 너의 지정한 가치대로 떼 중 흠 없는 수양을 속건제물로 제사장에게로 가져올 것이요 제사장은 그의 부지 중에 그릇 범한 허물을 위하여 속한즉 그가 사함을 얻으리라	And he shall bring a ram without blemish out of the flock, with thy estimation, for a trespass offering, unto the priest: and the priest shall make an atonement for him concerning his ignorance wherein he erred and wist it not, and it shall be forgiven him.	He is to bring to the priest an unblemished ram of proper value from the flock as a guilt offering. Then the priest will make atonement on his behalf for the wrong he has committed in ignorance, and he will be forgiven.
LEV	5	19	이는 속건제니 그가 실로 여호와 앞에 범과함이니라	It is a trespass offering: he hath certainly trespassed against the Lord.	It is a guilt offering; he was certainly guilty before the LORD.”
LEV	6	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	And the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	6	2	누구든지 여호와께 신실치 못하여 범죄하되 곧 남의 물건을 맡거나 전당 잡거나 강도질 하거나 늑봉하고도 사실을 부인하거나	If a soul sin, and commit a trespass against the Lord, and lie unto his neighbour in that which was delivered him to keep, or in fellowship, or in a thing taken away by violence, or hath deceived his neighbour;	“If someone sins and acts unfaithfully against the LORD by deceiving his neighbor in regard to a deposit or security entrusted to him or stolen, or if he extorts his neighbor
LEV	6	3	남의 잃은 물건을 얻고도 사실을 부인하여 거짓 맹세하는 등 사람이 이 모든 일 중에 하나라도 행하여 범죄하면	Or have found that which was lost, and lieth concerning it, and sweareth falsely; in any of all these that a man doeth, sinning therein:	or finds lost property and lies about it and swears falsely, or if he commits any such sin that a man might commit—
LEV	6	4	이는 죄를 범하였고 죄가 있는 자니 그 빼앗은 것이나 늑봉한 것이나 맡은 것이나 얻은 유실물이나	Then it shall be, because he hath sinned, and is guilty, that he shall restore that which he took violently away, or the thing which he hath deceitfully gotten, or that which was delivered him to keep, or the lost thing which he found,	once he has sinned and becomes guilty, he must return what he has stolen or taken by extortion, or the deposit entrusted to him, or the lost property he found,
LEV	6	5	무릇 그 거짓 맹세한 물건을 돌려 보내되 곧 그 본물에 오분 일을 더하여 돌려 보낼 것이니 그 죄가 드러나는 날에 그 임자에게 줄 것이요	Or all that about which he hath sworn falsely; he shall even restore it in the principal, and shall add the fifth part more thereto, and give it unto him to whom it appertaineth, in the day of his trespass offering.	or anything else about which he has sworn falsely. He must make restitution in full, add a fifth of the value, and pay it to the owner on the day he acknowledges his guilt.
LEV	6	6	그는 또 그 속건제를 여호와께 가져 올지니 곧 너의 지정한 가치대로 떼 중 흠 없는 수양을 속건제물을 위하여 제사장에게로 끌어 올 것이요	And he shall bring his trespass offering unto the Lord, a ram without blemish out of the flock, with thy estimation, for a trespass offering, unto the priest:	Then he must bring to the priest his guilt offering to the LORD: an unblemished ram of proper value from the flock.
LEV	6	7	제사장은 여호와 앞에서 그를 위하여 속죄한즉 그는 무슨 허물이든지 사함을 얻으리라	And the priest shall make an atonement for him before the Lord: and it shall be forgiven him for any thing of all that he hath done in trespassing therein.	In this way the priest will make atonement for him before the LORD, and he will be forgiven for anything he may have done to incur guilt.”
LEV	6	8	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	6	9	아론과 그 자손에게 명하여 이르라 번제의 규례는 이러하니라 번제물은 단 위 석쇠 위에 아침까지 두고 단의 불로 그 위에서 꺼지지 않게 할 것이요	Command Aaron and his sons, saying, This is the law of the burnt offering: It is the burnt offering, because of the burning upon the altar all night unto the morning, and the fire of the altar shall be burning in it.	“Command Aaron and his sons that this is the law of the burnt offering: The burnt offering is to remain on the hearth of the altar all night, until morning, and the fire must be kept burning on the altar.
LEV	6	10	제사장은 세마포 긴 옷을 입고 세마포 고의로 하체를 가리우고 단 위에서 탄 번제의 재를 가져다가 단 곁에 두고	And the priest shall put on his linen garment, and his linen breeches shall he put upon his flesh, and take up the ashes which the fire hath consumed with the burnt offering on the altar, and he shall put them beside the altar.	And the priest shall put on his linen robe and linen undergarments, and he shall remove from the altar the ashes of the burnt offering that the fire has consumed and place them beside it.
LEV	6	11	그 옷을 벗고 다른 옷을 입고 그 재를 진 바깥 정결한 곳으로 가져 갈 것이요	And he shall put off his garments, and put on other garments, and carry forth the ashes without the camp unto a clean place.	Then he must take off his garments, put on other clothes, and carry the ashes outside the camp to a ceremonially clean place.
LEV	6	12	단 위에 불은 항상 피워 꺼지지 않게 할지니 제사장은 아침마다 나무를 그 위에 태우고 번제물을 그 위에 벌여놓고 화목제의 기름을 그 위에 사를지며	And the fire upon the altar shall be burning in it; it shall not be put out: and the priest shall burn wood on it every morning, and lay the burnt offering in order upon it; and he shall burn thereon the fat of the peace offerings.	The fire on the altar shall be kept burning; it must not be extinguished. Every morning the priest is to add wood to the fire, arrange the burnt offering on it, and burn the fat portions of the peace offerings on it.
LEV	6	13	불은 끊이지 않고 단 위에 피워 꺼지지 않게 할지니라	The fire shall ever be burning upon the altar; it shall never go out.	The fire shall be kept burning on the altar continually; it must not be extinguished.
LEV	6	14	소제의 규례는 이러하니라 아론의 자손은 그것을 단 앞 여호와 앞에 드리되	And this is the law of the meat offering: the sons of Aaron shall offer it before the Lord, before the altar.	Now this is the law of the grain offering: Aaron’s sons shall present it before the LORD in front of the altar.
LEV	6	15	그 소제의 고운 기름 가루 한 움큼과 소제물 위의 유향을 다 취하여 기념물로 단 위에 불살라 여호와 앞에 향기로운 냄새가 되게 하고	And he shall take of it his handful, of the flour of the meat offering, and of the oil thereof, and all the frankincense which is upon the meat offering, and shall burn it upon the altar for a sweet savour, even the memorial of it, unto the Lord.	The priest is to remove a handful of fine flour and olive oil, together with all the frankincense from the grain offering, and burn the memorial portion on the altar as a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
LEV	6	16	그 나머지는 아론과 그 자손이 먹되 누룩을 넣지 말고 거룩한 곳 회막 뜰에서 먹을지니라	And the remainder thereof shall Aaron and his sons eat: with unleavened bread shall it be eaten in the holy place; in the court of the tabernacle of the congregation they shall eat it.	Aaron and his sons are to eat the remainder. It must be eaten without leaven in a holy place; they are to eat it in the courtyard of the Tent of Meeting.
LEV	6	17	그것에 누룩을 넣어 굽지 말라 이는 나의 화제 중에서 내가 그들에게 주어 그 소득이 되게 하는 것이라 속죄제와 속건제 같이 지극히 거룩한즉	It shall not be baken with leaven. I have given it unto them for their portion of my offerings made by fire; it is most holy, as is the sin offering, and as the trespass offering.	It must not be baked with leaven; I have assigned it as their portion of My offerings made by fire. It is most holy, like the sin offering and the guilt offering.
LEV	6	18	무릇 아론 자손의 남자는 이를 먹을지니 이는 여호와의 화제 중에서 그들의 대대로 영원한 소득이 됨이라 이를 만지는 자마다 거룩하니라	All the males among the children of Aaron shall eat of it. It shall be a statute for ever in your generations concerning the offerings of the Lord made by fire: every one that toucheth them shall be holy.	Any male among the sons of Aaron may eat it. This is a permanent portion from the offerings made by fire to the LORD for the generations to come. Anything that touches them will become holy.”
LEV	6	19	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	6	20	아론과 그 자손이 기름 부음을 받는 날에 여호와께 드릴 예물은 이러하니라 고운 가루 에바 십분 일을 항상 드리는 소제물로 삼아 그 절반은 아침에, 절반은 저녁에 드리되	This is the offering of Aaron and of his sons, which they shall offer unto the Lord in the day when he is anointed; the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a meat offering perpetual, half of it in the morning, and half thereof at night.	“This is the offering that Aaron and his sons must present to the LORD on the day he is anointed: a tenth of an ephah of fine flour as a regular grain offering, half of it in the morning and half in the evening.
LEV	6	21	그것을 기름으로 반죽하여 번철에 굽고 기름에 적시어다가 썰어 소제로 여호와께 드려 향기로운 냄새가 되게 하라	In a pan it shall be made with oil; and when it is baken, thou shalt bring it in: and the baken pieces of the meat offering shalt thou offer for a sweet savour unto the Lord.	It shall be prepared with oil on a griddle; you are to bring it well-kneaded and present it as a grain offering broken in pieces, a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
LEV	6	22	이 소제는 아론의 자손 중 기름 부음을 받고 그를 이어 제사장 된 자가 드릴 것이요 영원한 규례로 여호와께 온전히 불사를 것이니	And the priest of his sons that is anointed in his stead shall offer it: it is a statute for ever unto the Lord; it shall be wholly burnt.	The priest, who is one of Aaron’s sons and will be anointed to take his place, is to prepare it. As a permanent portion for the LORD, it must be burned completely.
LEV	6	23	무릇 제사장의 소제물은 온전히 불사르고 먹지 말지니라	For every meat offering for the priest shall be wholly burnt: it shall not be eaten.	Every grain offering for a priest shall be burned completely; it is not to be eaten.”
LEV	6	24	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	And the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	6	25	아론과 그 아들들에게 고하여 이르라 속죄제의 규례는 이러하니라 속죄제 희생은 지극히 거룩하니 여호와 앞 번제 희생을 잡는 곳에서 그 속죄제 희생을 잡을 것이요	Speak unto Aaron and to his sons, saying, This is the law of the sin offering: In the place where the burnt offering is killed shall the sin offering be killed before the Lord: it is most holy.	“Tell Aaron and his sons that this is the law of the sin offering: In the place where the burnt offering is slaughtered, the sin offering shall be slaughtered before the LORD; it is most holy.
LEV	6	26	죄를 위하여 제사드리는 제사장이 그것을 먹되 곧 회막 뜰 거룩한 곳에서 먹을 것이며	The priest that offereth it for sin shall eat it: in the holy place shall it be eaten, in the court of the tabernacle of the congregation.	The priest who offers it shall eat it; it must be eaten in a holy place, in the courtyard of the Tent of Meeting.
LEV	6	27	무릇 그 고기에 접촉하는 자는 거룩할 것이며 그 피가 어떤 옷에든지 묻었으면 묻은 그것을 거룩한 곳에서 빨 것이요	Whatsoever shall touch the flesh thereof shall be holy: and when there is sprinkled of the blood thereof upon any garment, thou shalt wash that whereon it was sprinkled in the holy place.	Anything that touches its flesh will become holy, and if any of the blood is spattered on a garment, you must wash it in a holy place.
LEV	6	28	그 고기를 토기에 삶았으면 그 그릇을 깨뜨릴 것이요 유기에 삶았으면 그 그릇을 닦고 물에 씻을 것이며	But the earthen vessel wherein it is sodden shall be broken: and if it be sodden in a brasen pot, it shall be both scoured, and rinsed in water.	The clay pot in which the sin offering is boiled must be broken; if it is boiled in a bronze pot, the pot must be scoured and rinsed with water.
LEV	6	29	그 고기는 지극히 거룩하니 제사장의 남자마다 먹을 것이니라	All the males among the priests shall eat thereof: it is most holy.	Any male among the priests may eat it; it is most holy.
LEV	6	30	그러나 피를 가지고 회막에 들어가 성소에서 속하게 한 속죄제 희생의 고기는 먹지 못할지니 불사를지니라	And no sin offering, whereof any of the blood is brought into the tabernacle of the congregation to reconcile withal in the holy place, shall be eaten: it shall be burnt in the fire.	But no sin offering may be eaten if its blood has been brought into the Tent of Meeting to make atonement in the Holy Place; it must be burned.
LEV	7	1	속건제의 규례는 이러하니라 이는 지극히 거룩하니	Likewise this is the law of the trespass offering: it is most holy.	“Now this is the law of the guilt offering, which is most holy:
LEV	7	2	번제 희생을 잡는 곳에서 속건제의 희생을 잡을 것이요 제사장은 그 피를 단 사면에 뿌릴 것이며	In the place where they kill the burnt offering shall they kill the trespass offering: and the blood thereof shall he sprinkle round about upon the altar.	The guilt offering must be slaughtered in the place where the burnt offering is slaughtered, and the priest shall sprinkle its blood on all sides of the altar.
LEV	7	3	그 모든 기름을 드리되 곧 그 기름진 꼬리와 내장에 덮인 기름과	And he shall offer of it all the fat thereof; the rump, and the fat that covereth the inwards,	And all the fat from it shall be offered: the fat tail, the fat that covers the entrails,
LEV	7	4	두 콩팥과 그 위의 기름 곧 허리 근방에 있는 것과 간에 덮인 꺼풀을 콩팥과 함께 취하고	And the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the flanks, and the caul that is above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away:	both kidneys with the fat on them near the loins, and the lobe of the liver, which is to be removed with the kidneys.
LEV	7	5	제사장은 그것을 다 단 위에 불살라 여호와께 화제로 드릴 것이니라 이는 속건제요	And the priest shall burn them upon the altar for an offering made by fire unto the Lord: it is a trespass offering.	The priest shall burn them on the altar as an offering made by fire to the LORD; it is a guilt offering.
LEV	7	6	지극히 거룩하니 이것을 제사장의 남자마다 먹되 거룩한 곳에서 먹을지며	Every male among the priests shall eat thereof: it shall be eaten in the holy place: it is most holy.	Every male among the priests may eat of it. It must be eaten in a holy place; it is most holy.
LEV	7	7	속건제나 속죄제는 일례니 그 제육은 속하는 제사장에게로 돌아갈 것이요	As the sin offering is, so is the trespass offering: there is one law for them: the priest that maketh atonement therewith shall have it.	The guilt offering is like the sin offering; the same law applies to both. It belongs to the priest who makes atonement with it.
LEV	7	8	사람의 번제를 드리는 제사장 곧 그 제사장은 그 드린 번제물의 가죽을 자기가 얻을 것이며	And the priest that offereth any man’s burnt offering, even the priest shall have to himself the skin of the burnt offering which he hath offered.	As for the priest who presents a burnt offering for anyone, the hide of that offering belongs to him.
LEV	7	9	무릇 화덕에 구운 소제물과 솥에나 번철에 만든 소제물은 그 드린 제사장에게로 돌아갈 것이니	And all the meat offering that is baken in the oven, and all that is dressed in the fryingpan, and in the pan, shall be the priest’s that offereth it.	Likewise, every grain offering that is baked in an oven or cooked in a pan or on a griddle belongs to the priest who presents it,
LEV	7	10	무릇 소제물은 기름 섞은 것이나 마른 것이나 아론의 모든 자손이 평균히 분배할 것이니라	And every meat offering, mingled with oil, and dry, shall all the sons of Aaron have, one as much as another.	and every grain offering, whether dry or mixed with oil, belongs equally to all the sons of Aaron.
LEV	7	11	여호와께 드릴 화목제 희생의 규례는 이러하니라	And this is the law of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which he shall offer unto the Lord.	Now this is the law of the peace offering that one may present to the LORD:
LEV	7	12	만일 그것을 감사하므로 드리거든 기름 섞은 무교병과 기름 바른 무교병과 고운 가루에 기름 섞어 구운 과자를 그 감사 희생과 함께 드리고	If he offer it for a thanksgiving, then he shall offer with the sacrifice of thanksgiving unleavened cakes mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil, and cakes mingled with oil, of fine flour, fried.	If he offers it in thanksgiving, then along with the sacrifice of thanksgiving he shall offer unleavened cakes mixed with olive oil, unleavened wafers coated with oil, and well-kneaded cakes of fine flour mixed with oil.
LEV	7	13	또 유교병을 화목제의 감사 희생과 함께 그 예물에 드리되	Besides the cakes, he shall offer for his offering leavened bread with the sacrifice of thanksgiving of his peace offerings.	Along with his peace offering of thanksgiving he is to present an offering with cakes of leavened bread.
LEV	7	14	그 전체의 예물 중에서 하나씩 여호와께 거제로 드리고 그것을 화목제의 피를 뿌린 제사장들에게로 돌릴지니라	And of it he shall offer one out of the whole oblation for an heave offering unto the Lord, and it shall be the priest’s that sprinkleth the blood of the peace offerings.	From the cakes he must present one portion of each offering as a contribution to the LORD. It belongs to the priest who sprinkles the blood of the peace offering.
LEV	7	15	감사함으로 드리는 화목제 희생의 고기는 드리는 그 날에 먹을 것이요 조금이라도 이튿날 아침까지 두지 말 것이니라	And the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings for thanksgiving shall be eaten the same day that it is offered; he shall not leave any of it until the morning.	The meat of the sacrifice of his peace offering of thanksgiving must be eaten on the day he offers it; none of it may be left until morning.
LEV	7	16	그러나 그 희생의 예물이 서원이나 자원의 예물이면 그 희생을 드린 날에 먹을 것이요 그 남은 것은 이튿날에도 먹되	But if the sacrifice of his offering be a vow, or a voluntary offering, it shall be eaten the same day that he offereth his sacrifice: and on the morrow also the remainder of it shall be eaten:	If, however, the sacrifice he offers is a vow or a freewill offering, it shall be eaten on the day he presents his sacrifice, but the remainder may be eaten on the next day.
LEV	7	17	그 희생의 고기가 제삼일까지 남았으면 불사를지니	But the remainder of the flesh of the sacrifice on the third day shall be burnt with fire.	But any meat of the sacrifice remaining until the third day must be burned up.
LEV	7	18	만일 그 화목제 희생의 고기를 제삼일에 조금이라도 먹으면 그 제사는 열납되지 않을 것이라 드린 자에게도 예물답게 못되고 도리어 가증한 것이 될 것이며 그것을 먹는 자는 죄를 당하리라	And if any of the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings be eaten at all on the third day, it shall not be accepted, neither shall it be imputed unto him that offereth it: it shall be an abomination, and the soul that eateth of it shall bear his iniquity.	If any of the meat from his peace offering is eaten on the third day, it will not be accepted. It will not be credited to the one who presented it; it shall be an abomination, and the one who eats of it shall bear his iniquity.
LEV	7	19	그 고기가 부정한 물건에 접촉되었으면 먹지 말고 불사를 것이라 그 고기는 깨끗한 자만 먹을 것이니	And the flesh that toucheth any unclean thing shall not be eaten; it shall be burnt with fire: and as for the flesh, all that be clean shall eat thereof.	Meat that touches anything unclean must not be eaten; it is to be burned up. As for any other meat, anyone who is ceremonially clean may eat it.
LEV	7	20	만일 몸이 부정한 자가 여호와께 속한 화목제 희생의 고기를 먹으면 그 사람은 자기 백성 중에서 끊쳐질 것이요	But the soul that eateth of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace offerings, that pertain unto the Lord, having his uncleanness upon him, even that soul shall be cut off from his people.	But if anyone who is unclean eats meat from the peace offering that belongs to the LORD, that person must be cut off from his people.
LEV	7	21	만일 누구든지 부정한 것 곧 사람의 부정이나 부정한 짐승이나 부정하고 가증한 아무 물건이든지 만지고 여호와께 속한 화목제 희생의 고기를 먹으면 그 사람도 자기 백성 중에서 끊쳐지리라	Moreover the soul that shall touch any unclean thing, as the uncleanness of man, or any unclean beast, or any abominable unclean thing, and eat of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which pertain unto the Lord, even that soul shall be cut off from his people.	If one touches anything unclean, whether human uncleanness, an unclean animal, or any unclean, detestable thing, and then eats any of the meat of the peace offering that belongs to the LORD, that person must be cut off from his people.”
LEV	7	22	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	7	23	이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 이르라 너희는 소나 양이나 염소의 기름을 먹지 말 것이요	Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, Ye shall eat no manner of fat, of ox, or of sheep, or of goat.	“Speak to the Israelites and say, ‘You are not to eat any of the fat of an ox, a sheep, or a goat.
LEV	7	24	스스로 죽은 것의 기름이나 짐승에게 찢긴 것의 기름은 달리는 쓰려니와 결단코 먹지 말지니라	And the fat of the beast that dieth of itself, and the fat of that which is torn with beasts, may be used in any other use: but ye shall in no wise eat of it.	The fat of an animal found dead or mauled by wild beasts may be used for any other purpose, but you must not eat it.
LEV	7	25	사람이 여호와께 화제로 드리는 희생의 기름을 먹으면 그 먹는 자는 자기 백성 중에서 끊쳐지리라	For whosoever eateth the fat of the beast, of which men offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord, even the soul that eateth it shall be cut off from his people.	If anyone eats the fat of an animal from which an offering made by fire may be presented to the LORD, the one who eats it must be cut off from his people.
LEV	7	26	너희의 사는 모든 곳에서 무슨 피든지 새나 짐승의 피를 먹지말라	Moreover ye shall eat no manner of blood, whether it be of fowl or of beast, in any of your dwellings.	You must not eat the blood of any bird or animal in any of your dwellings.
LEV	7	27	무슨 피든지 먹는 사람이 있으면 그 사람은 다 자기 벡성 중에서 끊쳐지리라	Whatsoever soul it be that eateth any manner of blood, even that soul shall be cut off from his people.	If anyone eats blood, that person must be cut off from his people.’”
LEV	7	28	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	7	29	이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 이르라 화목제의 희생을 여호와께 드리려는 자는 그 화목제 희생 중에서 그 예물을 취하여 여호와께 가져오되	Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, He that offereth the sacrifice of his peace offerings unto the Lord shall bring his oblation unto the Lord of the sacrifice of his peace offerings.	“Speak to the Israelites and say, ‘Anyone who presents a peace offering to the LORD must bring it as his sacrifice to the LORD.
LEV	7	30	여호와의 화제는 그 사람이 자기 손으로 가져올지니 곧 그 제물의 기름과 가슴을 가져올 것이요 제사장은 그 가슴을 여호와 앞에 흔들어 요제를 삼고	His own hands shall bring the offerings of the Lord made by fire, the fat with the breast, it shall he bring, that the breast may be waved for a wave offering before the Lord.	With his own hands he is to bring the offerings made by fire to the LORD; he shall bring the fat, together with the breast, and wave the breast as a wave offering before the LORD.
LEV	7	31	그 기름은 단 위에 불사를 것이며 가슴은 아론과 그 자손들에게 돌릴 것이며	And the priest shall burn the fat upon the altar: but the breast shall be Aaron’s and his sons’.	The priest is to burn the fat on the altar, but the breast belongs to Aaron and his sons.
LEV	7	32	또 너희는 그 화목제 희생의 우편 뒷다리를 제사장에게 주어 거제를 삼을지니	And the right shoulder shall ye give unto the priest for an heave offering of the sacrifices of your peace offerings.	And you are to give the right thigh to the priest as a contribution from your peace offering.
LEV	7	33	아론의 자손 중 화목제 희생의 피와 기름을 드리는 자가 그 우편 뒷다리를 자기의 소득으로 삼을 것이라	He among the sons of Aaron, that offereth the blood of the peace offerings, and the fat, shall have the right shoulder for his part.	The son of Aaron who presents the blood and fat of the peace offering shall have the right thigh as a portion.
LEV	7	34	내가 이스라엘 자손의 화목제 중에서 그 흔든 가슴과 든 뒷다리를 취하여 제사장 아론과 그 자손에게 주었나니 이는 이스라엘 자손에게 받을 영원한 소득이니라	For the wave breast and the heave shoulder have I taken of the children of Israel from off the sacrifices of their peace offerings, and have given them unto Aaron the priest and unto his sons by a statute for ever from among the children of Israel.	I have taken from the sons of Israel the breast of the wave offering and the thigh of the contribution of their peace offerings, and I have given them to Aaron the priest and his sons as a permanent portion from the sons of Israel.’”
LEV	7	35	이는 여호와의 화제 중에서 아론에게 돌릴 것과 그 자손에게 돌릴 것이니 그들을 세워 여호와의 제사장의 직분을 행하게 한 날	This is the portion of the anointing of Aaron, and of the anointing of his sons, out of the offerings of the Lord made by fire, in the day when he presented them to minister unto the Lord in the priest’s office;	This is the portion of the offerings made by fire to the LORD for Aaron and his sons since the day they were presented to serve the LORD as priests.
LEV	7	36	곧 그들에게 기름 부은 날에 여호와께서 명하사 이스라엘 자손 중에서 그들에게 돌리게 하신 것이라 대대로 영원히 받을 소득이니라	Which the Lord commanded to be given them of the children of Israel, in the day that he anointed them, by a statute for ever throughout their generations.	On the day they were anointed, the LORD commanded that this be given them by the sons of Israel. It is a permanent portion for the generations to come.
LEV	7	37	이는 번제와 소제와 속죄제와 속건제와 위임제와 화목제의 규례라	This is the law of the burnt offering, of the meat offering, and of the sin offering, and of the trespass offering, and of the consecrations, and of the sacrifice of the peace offerings;	This is the law of the burnt offering, the grain offering, the sin offering, the guilt offering, the ordination offering, and the peace offering,
LEV	7	38	여호와께서 시내 광야에서 이스라엘 자손에게 그 예물을 여호와꼐 드리라 명하신 날에 시내 산에서 이같이 모세에게 명하셨더라	Which the Lord commanded Moses in mount Sinai, in the day that he commanded the children of Israel to offer their oblations unto the Lord, in the wilderness of Sinai.	which the LORD gave Moses on Mount Sinai on the day He commanded the Israelites to present their offerings to the LORD in the Wilderness of Sinai.
LEV	8	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	8	2	너는 아론과 그 아들들과 그 의복과 관유와 속죄제의 수송아지와 수양 둘과 무교병 한 광주리를 이끌고	Take Aaron and his sons with him, and the garments, and the anointing oil, and a bullock for the sin offering, and two rams, and a basket of unleavened bread;	“Take Aaron and his sons, their garments, the anointing oil, the bull of the sin offering, the two rams, and the basket of unleavened bread,
LEV	8	3	온 회중을 회막문에 모으라	And gather thou all the congregation together unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.	and assemble the whole congregation at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting.”
LEV	8	4	모세가 여호와꼐서 자기에게 명하신 대로 하매 회중이 회막문에 모인지라	And Moses did as the Lord commanded him; and the assembly was gathered together unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.	So Moses did as the LORD had commanded him, and the assembly gathered at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting.
LEV	8	5	모세가 회중에게 이르되 여호와께서 행하라고 명하신 것이 이러하니라 하고	And Moses said unto the congregation, This is the thing which the Lord commanded to be done.	And Moses said to them, “This is what the LORD has commanded to be done.”
LEV	8	6	아론과 그 아들들을 데려다가 물로 그들을 씻기고	And Moses brought Aaron and his sons, and washed them with water.	Then Moses presented Aaron and his sons and washed them with water.
LEV	8	7	아론에게 속옷을 입히며 띠를 띠우고 겉옷을 입히며 에봇을 더하고 에봇의 기묘하게 짠 띠를 띠워서 에봇을 몸에 매고	And he put upon him the coat, and girded him with the girdle, and clothed him with the robe, and put the ephod upon him, and he girded him with the curious girdle of the ephod, and bound it unto him therewith.	He put the tunic on Aaron, tied the sash around him, clothed him with the robe, and put the ephod on him. He tied the woven band of the ephod around him and fastened it to him.
LEV	8	8	흉패를 붙이고 흉패에 우림과 둠밈을 넣고	And he put the breastplate upon him: also he put in the breastplate the Urim and the Thummim.	Then he put the breastpiece on him and placed the Urim and Thummim in the breastpiece.
LEV	8	9	그 머리에 관을 씌우고 그 관 위 전면에 금패를 붙이니 곧 거룩한 관이라 여호와께서 모세에게 명하심과 같았더라	And he put the mitre upon his head; also upon the mitre, even upon his forefront, did he put the golden plate, the holy crown; as the Lord commanded Moses.	Moses also put the turban on Aaron’s head and set the gold plate, the holy diadem, on the front of the turban, as the LORD had commanded him.
LEV	8	10	모세가 관유를 취하여 장막과 그 안에 있는 모든 것에 발라 거룩하게 하고	And Moses took the anointing oil, and anointed the tabernacle and all that was therein, and sanctified them.	Next, Moses took the anointing oil and anointed the tabernacle and everything in it; and so he consecrated them.
LEV	8	11	또 단에 일곱 번 뿌리고 또 그 단과 그 모든 기구와 물두멍과 그 받침에 발라 거룩하게 하고	And he sprinkled thereof upon the altar seven times, and anointed the altar and all his vessels, both the laver and his foot, to sanctify them.	He sprinkled some of the oil on the altar seven times, anointing the altar and all its utensils, and the basin with its stand, to consecrate them.
LEV	8	12	또 관유로 아론의 머리에 부어 발라 거룩하게 하고	And he poured of the anointing oil upon Aaron’s head, and anointed him, to sanctify him.	He also poured some of the anointing oil on Aaron’s head and anointed him to consecrate him.
LEV	8	13	모세가 또 아론의 아들들을 데려다가 그들에게 속옷을 입히고 띠를 띠우며 관을 씌웠으니 여호와께서 모세에게 명하심과 같았더라	And Moses brought Aaron’s sons, and put coats upon them, and girded them with girdles, and put bonnets upon them; as the Lord commanded Moses.	Then Moses presented Aaron’s sons, put tunics on them, wrapped sashes around them, and tied headbands on them, just as the LORD had commanded him.
LEV	8	14	모세가 또 속죄제의 수송아지를 끌어오니 아론과 그 아들들이 그 속죄제 수송아지 머리에 안수하매	And he brought the bullock for the sin offering: and Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the bullock for the sin offering.	Moses then brought the bull near for the sin offering, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on its head.
LEV	8	15	모세가 잡고 그 피를 취하여 손가락으로 그 피를 단의 네 귀퉁이 뿔에 발라 단을 깨끗하게 하고 그 피는 단 밑에 쏟아 단을 속하여 거룩하게 하고	And he slew it; and Moses took the blood, and put it upon the horns of the altar round about with his finger, and purified the altar, and poured the blood at the bottom of the altar, and sanctified it, to make reconciliation upon it.	Moses slaughtered the bull, took some of the blood, and applied it with his finger to all four horns of the altar, purifying the altar. He poured out the rest of the blood at the base of the altar and consecrated it so that atonement could be made on it.
LEV	8	16	또 내장에 덮인 모든 기름과 간 꺼풀과 두 콩팥과 그 기름을 취하여 단 위에 불사르고	And he took all the fat that was upon the inwards, and the caul above the liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat, and Moses burned it upon the altar.	Moses also took all the fat that was on the entrails, the lobe of the liver, and both kidneys and their fat, and burned it all on the altar.
LEV	8	17	그 수송아지 곧 그 가죽과 고기와 똥은 진 밖에 불살랐으니 여호와께서 모세에게 명하심과 같았더라	But the bullock, and his hide, his flesh, and his dung, he burnt with fire without the camp; as the Lord commanded Moses.	But the bull with its hide, flesh, and dung he burned outside the camp, as the LORD had commanded him.
LEV	8	18	또 번제의 수양을 드릴새 아론과 그 아들들이 그 수양의 머리에 안수하매	And he brought the ram for the burnt offering: and Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram.	Then Moses presented the ram for the burnt offering, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on its head.
LEV	8	19	모세가 잡아 그 피를 단 주위에 뿌리고	And he killed it; and Moses sprinkled the blood upon the altar round about.	Moses slaughtered the ram and sprinkled the blood on all sides of the altar.
LEV	8	20	그 수양의 각을 뜨고 그 머리와 각뜬 것과 기름을 불사르고	And he cut the ram into pieces; and Moses burnt the head, and the pieces, and the fat.	He cut the ram into pieces and burned the head, the pieces, and the fat.
LEV	8	21	물로 내장과 정갱이들을 씻고 그 수양의 전부를 단 위에 불사르니 이는 향기로운 냄새를 위하여 드리는 번제로 여호와께 드리는 화제라 여호와께서 모세에게 명하심과 같았더라	And he washed the inwards and the legs in water; and Moses burnt the whole ram upon the altar: it was a burnt sacrifice for a sweet savour, and an offering made by fire unto the Lord; as the Lord commanded Moses.	He washed the entrails and legs with water and burned the entire ram on the altar as a burnt offering, a pleasing aroma, an offering made by fire to the LORD, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.
LEV	8	22	또 다른 수양 곧 위임식의 수양을 드릴새 아론과 그 아들들이 그 수양의 머리에 안수하매	And he brought the other ram, the ram of consecration: and Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram.	After that, Moses presented the other ram, the ram of ordination, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on its head.
LEV	8	23	모세가 잡고 그 피를 취하여 아론의 오른 귓부리와 오른손 엄지가락과 오른발 엄지가락에 바르고	And he slew it; and Moses took of the blood of it, and put it upon the tip of Aaron’s right ear, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot.	Moses slaughtered the ram and took some of its blood and put it on Aaron’s right earlobe, on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot.
LEV	8	24	아론의 아들들을 데려다가 그 오른 귓부리와 오른손 엄지가락과 오른발 엄지가락에 그 피를 바르고 또 그 피를 단 주위에 뿌리고	And he brought Aaron’s sons, and Moses put of the blood upon the tip of their right ear, and upon the thumbs of their right hands, and upon the great toes of their right feet: and Moses sprinkled the blood upon the altar round about.	Moses also presented Aaron’s sons and put some of the blood on their right earlobes, on the thumbs of their right hands, and on the big toes of their right feet. Then he sprinkled the blood on all sides of the altar.
LEV	8	25	그가 또 그 기름과 기름진 꼬리와 내장에 덮인 모든 기름과 간 꺼풀과 두 콩팥과 기름과 우편 뒷다리를 취하고	And he took the fat, and the rump, and all the fat that was upon the inwards, and the caul above the liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat, and the right shoulder:	And Moses took the fat—the fat tail, all the fat that was on the entrails, the lobe of the liver, and both kidneys with their fat—as well as the right thigh.
LEV	8	26	여호와 앞 무교병 광주리에서 무교병 한개와 기름 섞은 떡 한개와 전병 한개를 취하여 그 기름 위에와 우편 뒷다리 위에 놓아	And out of the basket of unleavened bread, that was before the Lord, he took one unleavened cake, and a cake of oiled bread, and one wafer, and put them on the fat, and upon the right shoulder:	And from the basket of unleavened bread that was before the LORD, he took one cake of unleavened bread, one cake of bread made with oil, and one wafer, and he placed them on the fat portions and on the right thigh.
LEV	8	27	그 전부를 아론의 손과 그 아들들의 손에 두어 여호와 앞에 흔들어 요제를 삼게 하고	And he put all upon Aaron’s hands, and upon his sons’ hands, and waved them for a wave offering before the Lord.	He put all these in the hands of Aaron and his sons and waved them before the LORD as a wave offering.
LEV	8	28	모세가 그것을 그들의 손에서 취하여 단 윗 번제물 위에 불사르니 이는 향기로운 냄새를 위하여 드리는 위임식 제사로 여호와께 드리는 화제라	And Moses took them from off their hands, and burnt them on the altar upon the burnt offering: they were consecrations for a sweet savour: it is an offering made by fire unto the Lord.	Then Moses took these from their hands and burned them on the altar with the burnt offering. This was an ordination offering, a pleasing aroma, an offering made by fire to the LORD.
LEV	8	29	이에 모세가 그 가슴을 취하여 여호와 앞에 흔들어 요제를 삼았으니 이는 위임식 수양의 모세의 응식이라 여호와께서 모세에게 명하심과 같았더라	And Moses took the breast, and waved it for a wave offering before the Lord: for of the ram of consecration it was Moses’ part; as the Lord commanded Moses.	He also took the breast—Moses’ portion of the ram of ordination—and waved it before the LORD as a wave offering, as the LORD had commanded him.
LEV	8	30	모세가 관유와 단 위의 피를 취하여 아론과 그 옷과 그 아들들과 그 아들들의 옷에 뿌려서 아론과 그 옷과 그 아들들과 그 아들들의 옷을 거룩하게 하고	And Moses took of the anointing oil, and of the blood which was upon the altar, and sprinkled it upon Aaron, and upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon his sons’ garments with him; and sanctified Aaron, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons’ garments with him.	Next, Moses took some of the anointing oil and some of the blood that was on the altar and sprinkled them on Aaron and his garments, and on his sons and their garments. So he consecrated Aaron and his garments, as well as Aaron’s sons and their garments.
LEV	8	31	아론과 그 아들들에게 이르되 내게 이미 명하시기를 아론과 그 아들들은 먹으라 하셨은즉 너희는 회막문에서 그 고기를 삶아 위임식 광주리 안의 떡과 아울러 그곳에서 먹고	And Moses said unto Aaron and to his sons, Boil the flesh at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and there eat it with the bread that is in the basket of consecrations, as I commanded, saying, Aaron and his sons shall eat it.	And Moses said to Aaron and his sons, “Boil the meat at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting and eat it there with the bread that is in the basket of ordination offerings, as I commanded, saying, ‘Aaron and his sons are to eat it.’
LEV	8	32	고기와 떡의 나머지는 불사를지며	And that which remaineth of the flesh and of the bread shall ye burn with fire.	Then you must burn up the remainder of the meat and bread.
LEV	8	33	위임식은 칠 일 동안 행하나니 위임식이 마치는 날까지 칠 일 동안은 회막문에 나가지 말라	And ye shall not go out of the door of the tabernacle of the congregation in seven days, until the days of your consecration be at an end: for seven days shall he consecrate you.	You must not go outside the entrance to the Tent of Meeting for seven days, until the days of your ordination are complete; for it will take seven days to ordain you.
LEV	8	34	오늘날 행한 것은 여호와께서 너희를 위하여 속하게 하시려고 명하신 것이니	As he hath done this day, so the Lord hath commanded to do, to make an atonement for you.	What has been done today has been commanded by the LORD in order to make atonement on your behalf.
LEV	8	35	너희는 칠 주야를 회막문에 거하여 여호와의 부탁을 지키라 그리하면 사망을 면하리라 내가 이같이 명령을 받았느니라	Therefore shall ye abide at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation day and night seven days, and keep the charge of the Lord, that ye die not: for so I am commanded.	You must remain at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting day and night for seven days and keep the LORD’s charge so that you will not die, for this is what I have been commanded.”
LEV	8	36	아론과 그 아들들이 여호와께서 모세로 명하신 모든 일을 준행하니라	So Aaron and his sons did all things which the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses.	So Aaron and his sons did everything the LORD had commanded through Moses.
LEV	9	1	제팔일에 모세가 아론과 그 아들들과 이스라엘 장로들을 불러다가	And it came to pass on the eighth day, that Moses called Aaron and his sons, and the elders of Israel;	On the eighth day Moses summoned Aaron and his sons and the elders of Israel.
LEV	9	2	아론에게 이르되 흠 없는 송아지를 속죄제를 위하여 취하고 흠 없는 수양을 번제를 위하여 취하여 여호와 앞에 드리고	And he said unto Aaron, Take thee a young calf for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering, without blemish, and offer them before the Lord.	He said to Aaron, “Take for yourself a young bull for a sin offering and a ram for a burnt offering, both without blemish, and present them before the LORD.
LEV	9	3	이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 이르기를 너희는 수염소를 속죄제를 위하여 취하고 또 송아지와 어린 양의 일년 되고 흠 없는 것을 번제를 위하여 취하고	And unto the children of Israel thou shalt speak, saying, Take ye a kid of the goats for a sin offering; and a calf and a lamb, both of the first year, without blemish, for a burnt offering;	Then speak to the Israelites and say, ‘Take a male goat for a sin offering, a calf and a lamb—both a year old and without blemish—for a burnt offering,
LEV	9	4	또 화목제를 위하여 여호와 앞에 드릴 수소와 수양을 취하고 또 기름 섞은 소제물을 가져오라 하라 오늘 여호와께서 너희에게 나타나실 것임이니라 하매	Also a bullock and a ram for peace offerings, to sacrifice before the Lord; and a meat offering mingled with oil: for to day the Lord will appear unto you.	an ox and a ram for a peace offering to sacrifice before the LORD, and a grain offering mixed with oil. For today the LORD will appear to you.’”
LEV	9	5	그들이 모세의 명한 모든 것을 회막 앞으로 가져 오고 온 회중이 나아와 여호와 앞에 선지라	And they brought that which Moses commanded before the tabernacle of the congregation: and all the congregation drew near and stood before the Lord.	So they took what Moses had commanded to the front of the Tent of Meeting, and the whole congregation drew near and stood before the LORD.
LEV	9	6	모세가 가로되 이는 여호와께서 너희에게 하라고 명하신 것이니 여호와의 영광이 너희에게 나타나리라	And Moses said, This is the thing which the Lord commanded that ye should do: and the glory of the Lord shall appear unto you.	And Moses said, “This is what the LORD has commanded you to do, so that the glory of the LORD may appear to you.”
LEV	9	7	그가 또 아론에게 이르되 너는 단에 나아가 네 속죄제와 네 번제를 드려서 너를 위하여, 백성을 위하여 속하고 또 백성의 예물을 드려서 그들을 위하여 속하되 무릇 여호와의 명대로 하라	And Moses said unto Aaron, Go unto the altar, and offer thy sin offering, and thy burnt offering, and make an atonement for thyself, and for the people: and offer the offering of the people, and make an atonement for them; as the Lord commanded.	Then Moses said to Aaron, “Approach the altar and sacrifice your sin offering and your burnt offering to make atonement for yourself and for the people. And sacrifice the people’s offering to make atonement for them, as the LORD has commanded.”
LEV	9	8	이에 아론이 단에 나아가 자기를 위한 속죄제 송아지를 잡으매	Aaron therefore went unto the altar, and slew the calf of the sin offering, which was for himself.	So Aaron approached the altar and slaughtered the calf as a sin offering for himself.
LEV	9	9	아론의 아들들이 그 피를 아론에게 받들어 주니 아론이 손가락으로 그 피를 찍어 단 뿔들에 바르고 그 피는 단 밑에 쏟고	And the sons of Aaron brought the blood unto him: and he dipped his finger in the blood, and put it upon the horns of the altar, and poured out the blood at the bottom of the altar:	The sons of Aaron brought the blood to him, and he dipped his finger in the blood and applied it to the horns of the altar. And he poured out the rest of the blood at the base of the altar.
LEV	9	10	그 속죄제 희생의 기름과 콩팥과 간 꺼풀을 단 위에 불사르니 여호와께서 모세에게 명하심과 같았고	But the fat, and the kidneys, and the caul above the liver of the sin offering, he burnt upon the altar; as the Lord commanded Moses.	On the altar he burned the fat, the kidneys, and the lobe of the liver from the sin offering, as the LORD had commanded Moses.
LEV	9	11	그 고기와 가죽은 진 밖에서 불사르니라	And the flesh and the hide he burnt with fire without the camp.	But he burned up the flesh and the hide outside the camp.
LEV	9	12	아론이 또 번제 희생을 잡으매 아론의 아들들이 그 피를 그에게로 가져오니 그가 그 피를 단 주위에 뿌리고	And he slew the burnt offering; and Aaron’s sons presented unto him the blood, which he sprinkled round about upon the altar.	Then Aaron slaughtered the burnt offering. His sons brought him the blood, and he sprinkled it on all sides of the altar.
LEV	9	13	그들이 또 번제의 희생 곧 그 각과 머리를 그에게로 가져오매 그가 단 위에 불사르고	And they presented the burnt offering unto him, with the pieces thereof, and the head: and he burnt them upon the altar.	They brought him the burnt offering piece by piece, including the head, and he burned them on the altar.
LEV	9	14	또 내장과 정갱이는 씻어서 단 윗 번제물 위에 불사르니라	And he did wash the inwards and the legs, and burnt them upon the burnt offering on the altar.	He washed the entrails and the legs and burned them atop the burnt offering on the altar.
LEV	9	15	그가 또 백성의 예물을 드리되 곧 백성을 위한 속죄제의 염소를 취하여 잡아 전과 같이 죄를 위하여 드리고	And he brought the people’s offering, and took the goat, which was the sin offering for the people, and slew it, and offered it for sin, as the first.	Aaron then presented the people’s offering. He took the male goat for the people’s sin offering, slaughtered it, and offered it for sin like the first one.
LEV	9	16	또 번제 희생을 드리되 규례대로 드리고	And he brought the burnt offering, and offered it according to the manner.	He presented the burnt offering and offered it according to the ordinance.
LEV	9	17	또 소제를 드리되 그 중에서 한 움큼을 취하여 아침 번제물에 더하여 단 위에 불사르고	And he brought the meat offering, and took an handful thereof, and burnt it upon the altar, beside the burnt sacrifice of the morning.	Next he presented the grain offering, took a handful of it, and burned it on the altar in addition to the morning’s burnt offering.
LEV	9	18	또 백성을 위하는 화목제 희생의 수소와 수양을 잡으매 아론의 아들들이 그 피를 그에게로 가져오니 그가 단 주위에 뿌리고	He slew also the bullock and the ram for a sacrifice of peace offerings, which was for the people: and Aaron’s sons presented unto him the blood, which he sprinkled upon the altar round about,	Then he slaughtered the ox and the ram as the people’s peace offering. His sons brought him the blood, and he sprinkled it on all sides of the altar.
LEV	9	19	그들이 또 수소와 수양의 기름과 기름진 꼬리와 내장에 덮인 것과 콩팥과 간 꺼풀을 아론에게로 가져다가	And the fat of the bullock and of the ram, the rump, and that which covereth the inwards, and the kidneys, and the caul above the liver:	They also brought the fat portions from the ox and the ram—the fat tail, the fat covering the entrails, the kidneys, and the lobe of the liver—
LEV	9	20	그 기름을 가슴들 위에 놓으매 아론이 그 기름을 단 위에 불사르고	And they put the fat upon the breasts, and he burnt the fat upon the altar:	and placed these on the breasts. Aaron burned the fat portions on the altar,
LEV	9	21	가슴들과 우편 뒷다리를 그가 여호와 앞에 요제로 흔드니 모세의 명한 것과 같았더라	And the breasts and the right shoulder Aaron waved for a wave offering before the Lord; as Moses commanded.	but he waved the breasts and the right thigh as a wave offering before the LORD, as Moses had commanded.
LEV	9	22	아론이 백성을 향하여 손을 들어 축복함으로 속죄제와 번제와 화목제를 필하고 내려오니라	And Aaron lifted up his hand toward the people, and blessed them, and came down from offering of the sin offering, and the burnt offering, and peace offerings.	Aaron lifted up his hands toward the people and blessed them. And having made the sin offering, the burnt offering, and the peace offering, he stepped down.
LEV	9	23	모세와 아론이 회막에 들어 갔다가 나와서 백성에게 축복하매 여호와의 영광이 온 백성에게 나타나며	And Moses and Aaron went into the tabernacle of the congregation, and came out, and blessed the people: and the glory of the Lord appeared unto all the people.	Moses and Aaron then entered the Tent of Meeting. When they came out, they blessed the people, and the glory of the LORD appeared to all the people.
LEV	9	24	불이 여호와 앞에서 나와 단 위의 번제물과 기름을 사른지라 온 백성이 이를 보고 소리지르며 엎드렸더라	And there came a fire out from before the Lord, and consumed upon the altar the burnt offering and the fat: which when all the people saw, they shouted, and fell on their faces.	Fire came out from the presence of the LORD and consumed the burnt offering and the fat portions on the altar. And when all the people saw it, they shouted for joy and fell facedown.
LEV	10	1	아론의 아들 나답과 아비후가 각기 향로를 가져다가 여호와의 명하시지 않은 다른 불을 담아 여호와 앞에 분향하였더니	And Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, took either of them his censer, and put fire therein, and put incense thereon, and offered strange fire before the Lord, which he commanded them not.	Now Aaron’s sons Nadab and Abihu took their censers, put fire in them and added incense, and offered unauthorized fire before the LORD, contrary to His command.
LEV	10	2	불이 여호와 앞에서 나와 그들을 삼키매 그들이 여호와 앞에서 죽은지라	And there went out fire from the Lord, and devoured them, and they died before the Lord.	So fire came out from the presence of the LORD and consumed them, and they died in the presence of the LORD.
LEV	10	3	모세가 아론에게 이르되 이는 여호와의 말씀이라 이르시기를 나는 나를 가까이 하는 자 중에 내가 거룩하다함을 얻겠고 온 백성 앞에 내가 영광을 얻으리라 하셨느니라 아론이 잠잠하니	Then Moses said unto Aaron, This is it that the Lord spake, saying, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all the people I will be glorified. And Aaron held his peace.	Then Moses said to Aaron, “This is what the LORD meant when He said: ‘To those who come near Me I will show My holiness, and in the sight of all the people I will reveal My glory.’” But Aaron remained silent.
LEV	10	4	모세가 아론의 아자비 웃시엘의 아들 미사엘과 엘사반을 불러 그들에게 이르되 나아와 너희 형제들을 성소 앞에서 진 밖으로 메어 가라 하매	And Moses called Mishael and Elzaphan, the sons of Uzziel the uncle of Aaron, and said unto them, Come near, carry your brethren from before the sanctuary out of the camp.	Moses summoned Mishael and Elzaphan, sons of Aaron’s uncle Uzziel, and said to them, “Come here; carry the bodies of your cousins outside the camp, away from the front of the sanctuary.”
LEV	10	5	그들이 나아와 모세의 명대로 그들을 옷 입은 채 진 밖으로 메어 내니	So they went near, and carried them in their coats out of the camp; as Moses had said.	So they came forward and carried them, still in their tunics, outside the camp, as Moses had directed.
LEV	10	6	모세가 아론과 그 아들 엘르아살과 이다말에게 이르되 너희는 머리를 풀거나 옷을 찢지 말아서 너희 죽음을 면하고 여호와의 진노가 온 회중에게 미침을 면케 하라 오직 너희 형제 이스라엘 온 족속이 여호와의 치신 불로 인하여 슬퍼할 것이니라	And Moses said unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar and unto Ithamar, his sons, Uncover not your heads, neither rend your clothes; lest ye die, and lest wrath come upon all the people: but let your brethren, the whole house of Israel, bewail the burning which the Lord hath kindled.	Then Moses said to Aaron and his sons Eleazar and Ithamar, “Do not let your hair become disheveled and do not tear your garments, or else you will die, and the LORD will be angry with the whole congregation. But your brothers, the whole house of Israel, may mourn on account of the fire that the LORD has ignited.
LEV	10	7	여호와의 관유가 너희에게 있은즉 너희는 회막문에 나가지 말아서 죽음을 면할지니라 그들이 모세의 명대로 하니라	And ye shall not go out from the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye die: for the anointing oil of the Lord is upon you. And they did according to the word of Moses.	You shall not go outside the entrance to the Tent of Meeting, or you will die, for the LORD’s anointing oil is on you.” So they did as Moses instructed.
LEV	10	8	여호와께서 아론에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Aaron, saying,	Then the LORD said to Aaron,
LEV	10	9	너나 네 자손들이 회막에 들어갈 때에는 포도주나 독주를 마시지 말아서 너희 사망을 면하라 이는 너희 대대로 영영한 규례라	Do not drink wine nor strong drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee, when ye go into the tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye die: it shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations:	“You and your sons are not to drink wine or strong drink when you enter the Tent of Meeting, or else you will die; this is a permanent statute for the generations to come.
LEV	10	10	그리하여야 너희가 거룩하고 속된 것을 분별하며 부정하고 정한 것을 분별하고	And that ye may put difference between holy and unholy, and between unclean and clean;	You must distinguish between the holy and the common, between the clean and the unclean,
LEV	10	11	또 여호와가 모세로 명한 모든 규례를 이스라엘 자손에게 가르치리라	And that ye may teach the children of Israel all the statutes which the Lord hath spoken unto them by the hand of Moses.	so that you may teach the Israelites all the statutes that the LORD has given them through Moses.”
LEV	10	12	모세가 아론과 그 남은 아들 엘르아살에게와 이다말에게 이르되 여호와께 드린 화제 중 소제의 남은 것은 지극히 거룩하니 너희는 그것을 취하여 누룩을 넣지 말고 단 곁에서 먹되	And Moses spake unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar and unto Ithamar, his sons that were left, Take the meat offering that remaineth of the offerings of the Lord made by fire, and eat it without leaven beside the altar: for it is most holy:	And Moses said to Aaron and his remaining sons, Eleazar and Ithamar, “Take the grain offering that remains from the offerings made by fire to the LORD and eat it without leaven beside the altar, because it is most holy.
LEV	10	13	이는 여호와의 화제 중 네 응식과 네 아들의 응식인즉 너희는 그것을 거룩한 곳에서 먹으라 내가 명령을 받았느니라	And ye shall eat it in the holy place, because it is thy due, and thy sons’ due, of the sacrifices of the Lord made by fire: for so I am commanded.	You shall eat it in a holy place, because it is your share and your sons’ share of the offerings made by fire to the LORD; for this is what I have been commanded.
LEV	10	14	흔든 가슴과 든 뒷다리는 너와 네 자녀가 너와 함께 정결한 곳에서 먹을지니 이는 이스라엘 자손의 화목제 희생 중에서 네 응식과 네 자손의 응식으로 주신 것임이니라	And the wave breast and heave shoulder shall ye eat in a clean place; thou, and thy sons, and thy daughters with thee: for they be thy due, and thy sons’ due, which are given out of the sacrifices of peace offerings of the children of Israel.	And you and your sons and daughters may eat the breast of the wave offering and the thigh of the contribution in a ceremonially clean place, because these portions have been assigned to you and your children from the peace offerings of the sons of Israel.
LEV	10	15	그 든 뒷다리와 흔든 가슴으로 화제의 기름과 함께 가져다가 여호와 앞에 흔들어 요제를 삼을지니 이는 여호와의 명령대로 너와 네 자손의 영원한 응식이니라	The heave shoulder and the wave breast shall they bring with the offerings made by fire of the fat, to wave it for a wave offering before the Lord; and it shall be thine, and thy sons’ with thee, by a statute for ever; as the Lord hath commanded.	They are to bring the thigh of the contribution and the breast of the wave offering, together with the fat portions of the offerings made by fire, to wave as a wave offering before the LORD. It will belong permanently to you and your children, as the LORD has commanded.”
LEV	10	16	모세가 속죄제 드린 염소를 찾은즉 이미 불살랐는지라 그가 아론의 남은 아들 엘르아살과 이다말에게 노하여 가로되	And Moses diligently sought the goat of the sin offering, and, behold, it was burnt: and he was angry with Eleazar and Ithamar, the sons of Aaron which were left alive, saying,	Later, Moses searched carefully for the goat of the sin offering, and behold, it had been burned up. He was angry with Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron’s remaining sons, and asked,
LEV	10	17	이 속죄제 희생은 지극히 거룩하거늘 너희가 어찌하여 거룩한 곳에서 먹지 아니하였느뇨 이는 너희로 회중의 죄를 담당하여 그들을 위하여 여호와 앞에 속하게 하려고 너희에게 주신 것이니라	Wherefore have ye not eaten the sin offering in the holy place, seeing it is most holy, and God hath given it you to bear the iniquity of the congregation, to make atonement for them before the Lord?	“Why didn’t you eat the sin offering in the holy place? For it is most holy; it was given to you to take away the guilt of the congregation by making atonement for them before the LORD.
LEV	10	18	그 피를 성소에 들여오지 아니하였으니 그 제육은 너희가 나의 명한 대로 거룩한 곳에서 먹었어야 할 것이니라	Behold, the blood of it was not brought in within the holy place: ye should indeed have eaten it in the holy place, as I commanded.	Since its blood was not brought inside the holy place, you should have eaten it in the sanctuary area, as I commanded.”
LEV	10	19	아론이 모세에게 이르되 오늘 그들이 그 속죄제와 번제를 여호와께 드렸어도 이런 일이 내게 임하였거늘 오늘 내가 속죄 제육을 먹었더면 여호와께서 어찌 선히 여기셨으리요	And Aaron said unto Moses, Behold, this day have they offered their sin offering and their burnt offering before the Lord; and such things have befallen me: and if I had eaten the sin offering to day, should it have been accepted in the sight of the Lord?	But Aaron replied to Moses, “Behold, this very day they presented their sin offering and their burnt offering before the LORD. Since these things have happened to me, if I had eaten the sin offering today, would it have been acceptable in the sight of the LORD?”
LEV	10	20	모세가 그 말을 듣고 좋게 여겼더라	And when Moses heard that, he was content.	And when Moses heard this explanation, he was satisfied.
LEV	11	1	여호와께서 모세와 아론에게 고하여 그들에게 이르시되	And the Lord spake unto Moses and to Aaron, saying unto them,	The LORD spoke again to Moses and Aaron, telling them,
LEV	11	2	이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 이르라 육지 모든 짐승 중 너희의 먹을만한 생물은 이러하니	Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, These are the beasts which ye shall eat among all the beasts that are on the earth.	“Say to the Israelites, ‘Of all the beasts of the earth, these ones you may eat:
LEV	11	3	짐승 중 무릇 굽이 갈라져 쪽발이 되고 새김질하는 것은 너희가 먹되	Whatsoever parteth the hoof, and is clovenfooted, and cheweth the cud, among the beasts, that shall ye eat.	You may eat any animal that has a split hoof completely divided and that chews the cud.
LEV	11	4	새김질하는 것이나 굽이 갈라진 짐승 중에도 너희가 먹지 못할 것은 이러하니 약대는 새김질은 하되 굽이 갈라지지 아니하였으므로 너희에게 부정하고	Nevertheless these shall ye not eat of them that chew the cud, or of them that divide the hoof: as the camel, because he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the hoof; he is unclean unto you.	But of those that only chew the cud or only have a divided hoof, you are not to eat the following: The camel, though it chews the cud, does not have a divided hoof; it is unclean for you.
LEV	11	5	사반도 새김질은 하되 굽이 갈라지지 아니하였으므로 너희에게 부정하고	And the coney, because he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the hoof; he is unclean unto you.	The rock badger, though it chews the cud, does not have a divided hoof; it is unclean for you.
LEV	11	6	토끼도 새김질은 하되 굽이 갈라지지 아니하였으므로 너희에게 부정하고	And the hare, because he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the hoof; he is unclean unto you.	The rabbit, though it chews the cud, does not have a divided hoof; it is unclean for you.
LEV	11	7	돼지는 굽이 갈라져 쪽발이로되 새김질을 못하므로 너희에게 부정하니	And the swine, though he divide the hoof, and be clovenfooted, yet he cheweth not the cud; he is unclean to you.	And the pig, though it has a split hoof completely divided, does not chew the cud; it is unclean for you.
LEV	11	8	너희는 이 고기를 먹지 말고 그 주검도 만지지 말라 이것들은 너희에게 부정하니라	Of their flesh shall ye not eat, and their carcase shall ye not touch; they are unclean to you.	You must not eat their meat or touch their carcasses; they are unclean for you.
LEV	11	9	물에 있는 모든 것 중 너희의 먹을 만한 것은 이것이니 무릇 강과 바다와 다른 물에 있는 것 중에 지느러미와 비늘 있는 것은 너희가 먹되	These shall ye eat of all that are in the waters: whatsoever hath fins and scales in the waters, in the seas, and in the rivers, them shall ye eat.	Of all the creatures that live in the water, whether in the seas or in the streams, you may eat anything with fins and scales.
LEV	11	10	무릇 물에서 동하는 것과 무릇 물에서 사는 것 곧 무릇 강과 바다에 있는 것으로서 지느러미와 비늘 없는 것은 너희에게 가증한 것이라	And all that have not fins and scales in the seas, and in the rivers, of all that move in the waters, and of any living thing which is in the waters, they shall be an abomination unto you:	But the following among all the teeming life and creatures in the water are detestable to you: everything in the seas or streams that does not have fins and scales.
LEV	11	11	이들은 너희에게 가증한 것이니 너희는 그 고기를 먹지 말고 그 주검을 가증히 여기라	They shall be even an abomination unto you; ye shall not eat of their flesh, but ye shall have their carcases in abomination.	They shall be an abomination to you; you must not eat their meat, and you must detest their carcasses.
LEV	11	12	수중 생물에 지느러미와 비늘 없는 것은 너희에게 가증하니라	Whatsoever hath no fins nor scales in the waters, that shall be an abomination unto you.	Everything in the water that does not have fins and scales shall be detestable to you.
LEV	11	13	새 중에 너희가 가증히 여길 것은 이것이라 이것들이 가증한즉 먹지 말지니 곧 독수리와 솔개와 어응과	And these are they which ye shall have in abomination among the fowls; they shall not be eaten, they are an abomination: the eagle, and the ossifrage, and the ospray,	Additionally, you are to detest the following birds, and they must not be eaten because they are detestable: the eagle, the bearded vulture, the black vulture,
LEV	11	14	매와 매 종류와	And the vulture, and the kite after his kind;	the kite, any kind of falcon,
LEV	11	15	까마귀 종류와	Every raven after his kind;	any kind of raven,
LEV	11	16	타조와 다호마스와 갈매기와 새매 종류와	And the owl, and the night hawk, and the cuckow, and the hawk after his kind,	the ostrich, the screech owl, the gull, any kind of hawk,
LEV	11	17	올빼미와 노자와 부엉이와	And the little owl, and the cormorant, and the great owl,	the little owl, the cormorant, the great owl,
LEV	11	18	따오기와 당아와 올응과	And the swan, and the pelican, and the gier eagle,	the white owl, the desert owl, the osprey,
LEV	11	19	학과 황새 종류와 대승과 박쥐니라	And the stork, the heron after her kind, and the lapwing, and the bat.	the stork, any kind of heron, the hoopoe, and the bat.
LEV	11	20	날개가 있고 네 발로 기어 다니는 곤충은 너희에게 가증하되	All fowls that creep, going upon all four, shall be an abomination unto you.	All flying insects that walk on all fours are detestable to you.
LEV	11	21	오직 날개가 있고 네 발로 기어다니는 모든 곤충 중에 그 발에 뛰는 다리가 있어서 땅에서 뛰는 것은 너희가 먹을지니	Yet these may ye eat of every flying creeping thing that goeth upon all four, which have legs above their feet, to leap withal upon the earth;	However, you may eat the following kinds of flying insects that walk on all fours: those having jointed legs above their feet for hopping on the ground.
LEV	11	22	곧 그 중에 메뚜기 종류와 베짱이 종류와 귀뚜라미 종류와 팟종이 종류는 너희가 먹으려니와	Even these of them ye may eat; the locust after his kind, and the bald locust after his kind, and the beetle after his kind, and the grasshopper after his kind.	Of these you may eat any kind of locust, katydid, cricket, or grasshopper.
LEV	11	23	오직 날개가 있고 기어다니는 곤충은 다 너희에게 가증하니라	But all other flying creeping things, which have four feet, shall be an abomination unto you.	All other flying insects that have four legs are detestable to you.
LEV	11	24	이런 유는 너희를 부정케 하나니 누구든지 이것들의 주검을 만지면 저녁까지 부정할 것이며	And for these ye shall be unclean: whosoever toucheth the carcase of them shall be unclean until the even.	These creatures will make you unclean. Whoever touches their carcasses will be unclean until evening,
LEV	11	25	무릇 그 주검을 옮기는 자는 그 옷을 빨지니 저녁까지 부정하리라	And whosoever beareth ought of the carcase of them shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even.	and whoever picks up one of their carcasses must wash his clothes, and he will be unclean until evening.
LEV	11	26	무릇 굽이 갈라진 짐승 중에 쪽발이 아닌 것이나 새김질 아니하는 것의 주검은 다 네게 부정하니 만지는 자는 부정할 것이요	The carcases of every beast which divideth the hoof, and is not clovenfooted, nor cheweth the cud, are unclean unto you: every one that toucheth them shall be unclean.	Every animal with hooves not completely divided or that does not chew the cud is unclean for you. Whoever touches any of them will be unclean.
LEV	11	27	네 발로 다니는 모든 짐승 중 발바닥으로 다니는 것은 다 네게 부정하니 그 주검을 만지는 자는 저녁까지 부정할 것이며	And whatsoever goeth upon his paws, among all manner of beasts that go on all four, those are unclean unto you: whoso toucheth their carcase shall be unclean until the even.	All the four-footed animals that walk on their paws are unclean for you; whoever touches their carcasses will be unclean until evening,
LEV	11	28	그 주검을 옮기는 자는 그 옷을 빨지니 저녁까지 부정하리라 그것들이 네게 부정하니라	And he that beareth the carcase of them shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even: they are unclean unto you.	and anyone who picks up a carcass must wash his clothes, and he will be unclean until evening. They are unclean for you.
LEV	11	29	땅에 기는 바 기는 것 중에 네게 부정한 것은 이러하니 곧 쪽제비와 쥐와 도마뱀 종류와	These also shall be unclean unto you among the creeping things that creep upon the earth; the weasel, and the mouse, and the tortoise after his kind,	The following creatures that move along the ground are unclean for you: the mole, the mouse, any kind of great lizard,
LEV	11	30	합개와 육지 악어와 수궁과 사막 도마뱀과 칠면석척이라	And the ferret, and the chameleon, and the lizard, and the snail, and the mole.	the gecko, the monitor lizard, the common lizard, the skink, and the chameleon.
LEV	11	31	모든 기는 것 중 이것들은 네게 부정하니 무릇 그 주검을 만지는 자는 저녁까지 부정할 것이며	These are unclean to you among all that creep: whosoever doth touch them, when they be dead, shall be unclean until the even.	These animals are unclean for you among all the crawling creatures. Whoever touches them when they are dead shall be unclean until evening.
LEV	11	32	이런 것 중 어떤 것의 주검이 목기에든지 의복에든지 가죽에든지 부대에든지 무론 무엇에 쓰는 그릇에든지 떨어지면 부정하여지리니 물에 담그라 저녁까지 부정하다가 정할 것이며	And upon whatsoever any of them, when they are dead, doth fall, it shall be unclean; whether it be any vessel of wood, or raiment, or skin, or sack, whatsoever vessel it be, wherein any work is done, it must be put into water, and it shall be unclean until the even; so it shall be cleansed.	When one of them dies and falls on something, that article becomes unclean; any article of wood, clothing, leather, sackcloth, or any implement used for work must be rinsed with water and will remain unclean until evening; then it will be clean.
LEV	11	33	그것 중 어떤 것이 어느 질그릇에 떨어지면 그 속에 있는 것이 다 부정하여지나니 너는 그 그릇을 깨뜨리라	And every earthen vessel, whereinto any of them falleth, whatsoever is in it shall be unclean; and ye shall break it.	If any of them falls into a clay pot, everything in it will be unclean; you must break the pot.
LEV	11	34	먹을 만한 축축한 식물이 거기 담겼으면 부정하여질 것이요 그 같은 그릇의 마실 만한 마실 것도 부정할 것이며	Of all meat which may be eaten, that on which such water cometh shall be unclean: and all drink that may be drunk in every such vessel shall be unclean.	Any food coming into contact with water from that pot will be unclean, and any drink in such a container will be unclean.
LEV	11	35	이런 것의 주검이 물건 위에 떨어지면 그것이 모두 부정하여지리니 화덕이든지 질탕관이든지 깨뜨려버리라 이것이 부정하여져서 너희에게 부정한 것이 되리라	And every thing whereupon any part of their carcase falleth shall be unclean; whether it be oven, or ranges for pots, they shall be broken down: for they are unclean, and shall be unclean unto you.	Anything upon which one of their carcasses falls will be unclean. If it is an oven or cooking pot, it must be smashed; it is unclean and will remain unclean for you.
LEV	11	36	샘물이나 방축물 웅덩이는 부정하여지지 아니하되 그 주검에 다닥치는 것만 부정하여질 것이요	Nevertheless a fountain or pit, wherein there is plenty of water, shall be clean: but that which toucheth their carcase shall be unclean.	Nevertheless, a spring or cistern containing water will remain clean, but one who touches a carcass in it will be unclean.
LEV	11	37	이것들의 주검이 심을 종자에 떨어질지라도 그것이 정하거니와	And if any part of their carcase fall upon any sowing seed which is to be sown, it shall be clean.	If a carcass falls on any seed for sowing, the seed is clean;
LEV	11	38	종자에 물을 더할 때에 그것이 그 위에 떨어지면 너희에게 부정하리라	But if any water be put upon the seed, and any part of their carcase fall thereon, it shall be unclean unto you.	but if water has been put on the seed and a carcass falls on it, it is unclean for you.
LEV	11	39	너희의 먹을 만한 짐승이 죽은 때에 그 사체를 만지는 자는 저녁까지 부정할 것이며	And if any beast, of which ye may eat, die; he that toucheth the carcase thereof shall be unclean until the even.	If an animal that you may eat dies, anyone who touches the carcass will be unclean until evening.
LEV	11	40	그것을 먹는 자는 그 옷을 빨 것이요 저녁까지 부정할 것이며 그 주검을 옮기는 자도 그 옷을 빨 것이요 저녁까지 부정하리라	And he that eateth of the carcase of it shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even: he also that beareth the carcase of it shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even.	Whoever eats from the carcass must wash his clothes and will be unclean until evening, and anyone who picks up the carcass must wash his clothes and will be unclean until evening.
LEV	11	41	땅에 기어 다니는 모든 기는 것은 가증한즉 먹지 못할지니	And every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth shall be an abomination; it shall not be eaten.	Every creature that moves along the ground is detestable; it must not be eaten.
LEV	11	42	곧 땅에 기어다니는 모든 기는 것 중에 배로 밀어 다니는 것이나 네 발로 걷는 것이나 여러 발을 가진 것이라 너희가 먹지 말지니 이는 가증함이니라	Whatsoever goeth upon the belly, and whatsoever goeth upon all four, or whatsoever hath more feet among all creeping things that creep upon the earth, them ye shall not eat; for they are an abomination.	Do not eat any creature that moves along the ground, whether it crawls on its belly or walks on four or more feet; for such creatures are detestable.
LEV	11	43	너희는 기는바 기어다니는 것을 인하여 자기로 가증하게 되게 말며 또한 그것을 인하여 스스로 더럽혀 부정하게 되게 말라	Ye shall not make yourselves abominable with any creeping thing that creepeth, neither shall ye make yourselves unclean with them, that ye should be defiled thereby.	Do not defile yourselves by any crawling creature; do not become unclean or defiled by them.
LEV	11	44	나는 여호와 너희 하나님이라 내가 거룩하니 너희도 몸을 구별하여 거룩하게 하고 땅에 기는바 기어다니는 것으로 인하여 스스로 더럽히지 말라	For I am the Lord your God: ye shall therefore sanctify yourselves, and ye shall be holy; for I am holy: neither shall ye defile yourselves with any manner of creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.	For I am the LORD your God; consecrate yourselves, therefore, and be holy, because I am holy. You must not defile yourselves by any creature that crawls along the ground.
LEV	11	45	나는 너희의 하나님이 되려고 너희를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 낸 여호와라 내가 거룩하니 너희도 거룩할지어다	For I am the Lord that bringeth you up out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: ye shall therefore be holy, for I am holy.	For I am the LORD, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt so that I would be your God; therefore be holy, because I am holy.
LEV	11	46	이는 짐승과 새와 물에서 움직이는 모든 생물과 땅에 기는 모든 기어다니는 것에 대한 규례니	This is the law of the beasts, and of the fowl, and of every living creature that moveth in the waters, and of every creature that creepeth upon the earth:	This is the law regarding animals, birds, all living creatures that move in the water, and all creatures that crawl along the ground.
LEV	11	47	부정하고 정한 것과 먹을 생물과 먹지 못할 생물을 분별한 것이니라	To make a difference between the unclean and the clean, and between the beast that may be eaten and the beast that may not be eaten.	You must distinguish between the unclean and the clean, between animals that may be eaten and those that may not.’”
LEV	12	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	12	2	이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 이르라 여인이 잉태하여 남자를 낳으면 그는 칠 일 동안 부정하리니 곧 경도할 때와 같이 부정할 것이며	Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If a woman have conceived seed, and born a man child: then she shall be unclean seven days; according to the days of the separation for her infirmity shall she be unclean.	“Say to the Israelites, ‘A woman who becomes pregnant and gives birth to a son will be unclean for seven days, as she is during the days of her menstruation.
LEV	12	3	제팔일에는 그 아이의 양피를 벨 것이요	And in the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised.	And on the eighth day the flesh of the boy’s foreskin is to be circumcised.
LEV	12	4	그 여인은 오히려 삼십삼 일을 지나야 산혈이 깨끗하리니 정결케 되는 기한이 차기 전에는 성물을 만지지도 말며 성소에 들어가지도 말 것이며	And she shall then continue in the blood of her purifying three and thirty days; she shall touch no hallowed thing, nor come into the sanctuary, until the days of her purifying be fulfilled.	The woman shall continue in purification from her bleeding for thirty-three days. She must not touch anything sacred or go into the sanctuary until the days of her purification are complete.
LEV	12	5	여자를 낳으면 그는 이 칠 일 동안 부정하리니 경도할 때와 같을 것이며 산혈이 깨끗하게 됨은 육십륙 일을 지나야 하리라	But if she bear a maid child, then she shall be unclean two weeks, as in her separation: and she shall continue in the blood of her purifying threescore and six days.	If, however, she gives birth to a daughter, the woman will be unclean for two weeks as she is during her menstruation. Then she must continue in purification from her bleeding for sixty-six days.
LEV	12	6	자녀간 정결케 되는 기한이 차거든 그 여인은 번제를 위하여 일년 된 어린 양을 취하고 속죄제를 위하여 집비둘기 새끼나 산비둘기를 취하여 회막문 제사장에게로 가져갈 것이요	And when the days of her purifying are fulfilled, for a son, or for a daughter, she shall bring a lamb of the first year for a burnt offering, and a young pigeon, or a turtledove, for a sin offering, unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, unto the priest:	When the days of her purification are complete, whether for a son or for a daughter, she is to bring to the priest at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting a year-old lamb for a burnt offering and a young pigeon or a turtledove for a sin offering.
LEV	12	7	제사장은 그것을 여호와 앞에 드려서 여인을 위하여 속죄할지니 그리하면 산혈이 깨끗하리라 이는 자녀간 생산한 여인에게 대한 규례니라	Who shall offer it before the Lord, and make an atonement for her; and she shall be cleansed from the issue of her blood. This is the law for her that hath born a male or a female.	And the priest will present them before the LORD and make atonement for her; and she shall be ceremonially cleansed from her flow of blood. This is the law for a woman giving birth, whether to a male or to a female.
LEV	12	8	그 여인의 힘이 어린 양에 미치지 못하거든 산비둘기 둘이나 집비둘기 새끼 둘을 가져다가 하나는 번제물로, 하나는 속죄제물로 삼을 것이요 제사장은 그를 위하여 속할지니 그가 정결하리라	And if she be not able to bring a lamb, then she shall bring two turtles, or two young pigeons; the one for the burnt offering, and the other for a sin offering: and the priest shall make an atonement for her, and she shall be clean.	But if she cannot afford a lamb, she shall bring two turtledoves or two young pigeons, one for a burnt offering and the other for a sin offering. Then the priest will make atonement for her, and she will be clean.’”
LEV	13	1	여호와께서 모세와 아론에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses and Aaron,
LEV	13	2	사람의 피부에 무엇이 돋거나 딱지가 앉거나 색점이 생겨서 그 피부에 문둥병 같이 되거든 곧 제사장 아론에게나 그 자손 중 한 제사장에게로 데리고 갈 것이요	When a man shall have in the skin of his flesh a rising, a scab, or bright spot, and it be in the skin of his flesh like the plague of leprosy; then he shall be brought unto Aaron the priest, or unto one of his sons the priests:	“When someone has a swelling or rash or bright spot on his skin that could become an infectious skin disease, he must be brought to Aaron the priest or to one of his sons who is a priest.
LEV	13	3	제사장은 그 피부의 병을 진찰할지니 환처의 털이 희어졌고 환처가 피부보다 우묵하여졌으면 이는 문둥병의 환처라 제사장이 진단하여 그를 부정하다 할 것이요	And the priest shall look on the plague in the skin of the flesh: and when the hair in the plague is turned white, and the plague in sight be deeper than the skin of his flesh, it is a plague of leprosy: and the priest shall look on him, and pronounce him unclean.	The priest is to examine the infection on his skin, and if the hair in the infection has turned white and the sore appears to be deeper than the skin, it is a skin disease. After the priest examines him, he must pronounce him unclean.
LEV	13	4	피부에 색점이 희나 우묵하지 아니하고 그 털이 희지 아니하면 제사장은 그 환자를 칠 일동안 금고할 것이며	If the bright spot be white in the skin of his flesh, and in sight be not deeper than the skin, and the hair thereof be not turned white; then the priest shall shut up him that hath the plague seven days:	If, however, the spot on his skin is white and does not appear to be deeper than the skin, and the hair in it has not turned white, the priest shall isolate the infected person for seven days.
LEV	13	5	칠 일만에 제사장이 그를 진찰할지니 그의 보기에 그 환처가 변하지 아니하고 병색이 피부에 퍼지지 아니하였으면 제사장이 그를 또 칠 일 동안을 금고할 것이며	And the priest shall look on him the seventh day: and, behold, if the plague in his sight be at a stay, and the plague spread not in the skin; then the priest shall shut him up seven days more:	On the seventh day the priest is to reexamine him, and if he sees that the infection is unchanged and has not spread on the skin, the priest must isolate him for another seven days.
LEV	13	6	칠 일만에 제사장이 또 진찰할지니 그 환처가 엷어졌고 병색이 피부에 퍼지지 아니하였으면 피부병이라 제사장이 그를 정하다 할 것이요 그는 옷을 빨 것이라 그리하면 정하리라	And the priest shall look on him again the seventh day: and, behold, if the plague be somewhat dark, and the plague spread not in the skin, the priest shall pronounce him clean: it is but a scab: and he shall wash his clothes, and be clean.	The priest will examine him again on the seventh day, and if the sore has faded and has not spread on the skin, the priest shall pronounce him clean; it is a rash. The person must wash his clothes and be clean.
LEV	13	7	그러나 정결한 여부를 위하여 제사장에게 보인 후에 병이 피부에 퍼지면 제사장에게 다시 보일 것이요	But if the scab spread much abroad in the skin, after that he hath been seen of the priest for his cleansing, he shall be seen of the priest again:	But if the rash spreads further on his skin after he has shown himself to the priest for his cleansing, he must present himself again to the priest.
LEV	13	8	제사장은 진찰할지니 그 병이 피부에 퍼졌으면 그를 부정하다 진단할 것이라 이는 문둥병임이니라	And if the priest see that, behold, the scab spreadeth in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a leprosy.	The priest will reexamine him, and if the rash has spread on the skin, the priest must pronounce him unclean; he has a skin disease.
LEV	13	9	사람에게 문둥병이 들었거든 그를 제사장에게로 데려갈 것이요	When the plague of leprosy is in a man, then he shall be brought unto the priest;	When anyone develops a skin disease, he must be brought to the priest.
LEV	13	10	제사장은 진찰할지니 피부에 흰 점이 돋고 털이 희어지고 거기 난육이 생겼으면	And the priest shall see him: and, behold, if the rising be white in the skin, and it have turned the hair white, and there be quick raw flesh in the rising;	The priest will examine him, and if there is a white swelling on the skin that has turned the hair white, and there is raw flesh in the swelling,
LEV	13	11	이는 그의 피부의 오랜 문둥병이라 제사장이 부정하다 진단할 것이요 그가 이미 부정하였은즉 금고하지는 않을 것이며	It is an old leprosy in the skin of his flesh, and the priest shall pronounce him unclean, and shall not shut him up: for he is unclean.	it is a chronic skin disease and the priest must pronounce him unclean. He need not isolate him, for he is unclean.
LEV	13	12	제사장의 보기에 문둥병이 그 피부에 크게 발하였으되 그 환자의 머리부터 발까지 퍼졌거든	And if a leprosy break out abroad in the skin, and the leprosy cover all the skin of him that hath the plague from his head even to his foot, wheresoever the priest looketh;	But if the skin disease breaks out all over his skin so that it covers all the skin of the infected person from head to foot, as far as the priest can see,
LEV	13	13	그가 진찰할 것이요 문둥병이 과연 그 전신에 퍼졌으면 그 환자를 정하다 할지니 다 희어진 자인즉 정하거니와	Then the priest shall consider: and, behold, if the leprosy have covered all his flesh, he shall pronounce him clean that hath the plague: it is all turned white: he is clean.	the priest shall examine him, and if the disease has covered his entire body, he is to pronounce the infected person clean. Since it has all turned white, he is clean.
LEV	13	14	아무 때든지 그에게 난육이 발생하면 그는 부정한즉	But when raw flesh appeareth in him, he shall be unclean.	But whenever raw flesh appears on someone, he will be unclean.
LEV	13	15	제사장이 난육을 보고 그를 부정하다 진단할지니 그 난육은 부정한 것인즉 이는 문둥병이며	And the priest shall see the raw flesh, and pronounce him to be unclean: for the raw flesh is unclean: it is a leprosy.	When the priest sees the raw flesh, he must pronounce him unclean. The raw flesh is unclean; it is a skin disease.
LEV	13	16	그 난육이 변하여 다시 희어지면 제사장에게로 갈 것이요	Or if the raw flesh turn again, and be changed unto white, he shall come unto the priest;	But if the raw flesh changes and turns white, he must go to the priest.
LEV	13	17	제사장은 그를 진찰하여서 그 환처가 희어졌으면 환자를 정하다 할지니 그는 정하니라	And the priest shall see him: and, behold, if the plague be turned into white; then the priest shall pronounce him clean that hath the plague: he is clean.	The priest will reexamine him, and if the infection has turned white, the priest is to pronounce the infected person clean; then he is clean.
LEV	13	18	피부에 종기가 생겼다가 나았고	The flesh also, in which, even in the skin thereof, was a boil, and is healed,	When a boil appears on someone’s skin and it heals,
LEV	13	19	그 종처에 흰 점이 돋거나 희고 불그스름한 색점이 생겼으면 제사장에게 보일 것이요	And in the place of the boil there be a white rising, or a bright spot, white, and somewhat reddish, and it be shewed to the priest;	and a white swelling or a reddish-white spot develops where the boil was, he must present himself to the priest.
LEV	13	20	그는 진찰하여 피부보다 얕고 그 털이 희면 그를 부정하다 진단할지니 이는 종기로 된 문둥병의 환처임이니라	And if, when the priest seeth it, behold, it be in sight lower than the skin, and the hair thereof be turned white; the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a plague of leprosy broken out of the boil.	The priest shall examine it, and if it appears to be beneath the skin and the hair in it has turned white, the priest shall pronounce him unclean; it is a diseased infection that has broken out in the boil.
LEV	13	21	그러나 제사장의 보기에 거기 흰 털이 없고 피부보다 얕지 아니하고 빛이 엷으면 제사장은 그를 칠 일 동안 금고할 것이며	But if the priest look on it, and, behold, there be no white hairs therein, and if it be not lower than the skin, but be somewhat dark; then the priest shall shut him up seven days:	But when the priest examines it, if there is no white hair in it, and it is not beneath the skin and has faded, the priest shall isolate him for seven days.
LEV	13	22	그 병이 크게 피부에 퍼졌으면 제사장은 그를 부정하다 진단할지니 이는 그 환처임이니라	And if it spread much abroad in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a plague.	If it spreads any further on the skin, the priest must pronounce him unclean; it is an infection.
LEV	13	23	그러나 그 색점이 여전하고 퍼지지 아니하였으면 이는 종기 흔적이니 제사장은 그를 정하다 진단할지니라	But if the bright spot stay in his place, and spread not, it is a burning boil; and the priest shall pronounce him clean.	But if the spot remains unchanged and does not spread, it is only the scar from the boil, and the priest shall pronounce him clean.
LEV	13	24	피부를 불에 데었는데 그 덴 곳에 불그스름하고 희거나 순전히 흰 색점이 생기면	Or if there be any flesh, in the skin whereof there is a hot burning, and the quick flesh that burneth have a white bright spot, somewhat reddish, or white;	When there is a burn on someone’s skin and the raw area of the burn becomes reddish-white or white,
LEV	13	25	제사장은 진찰할지니 그 색점의 털이 희고 그 자리가 피부보다 우묵하면 이는 화상에서 발한 문둥병인즉 제사장은 그를 부정하다 할 것은 문둥병의 환처가 됨이니라	Then the priest shall look upon it: and, behold, if the hair in the bright spot be turned white, and it be in sight deeper than the skin; it is a leprosy broken out of the burning: wherefore the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is the plague of leprosy.	the priest must examine it. If the hair in the spot has turned white and the spot appears to be deeper than the skin, it is a disease that has broken out in the burn. The priest must pronounce him unclean; it is a diseased infection.
LEV	13	26	그러나 제사장의 보기에 그 색점에 흰 털이 없으며 그 자리가 피부보다 얕지 아니하고 빛이 엷으면 그는 그를 칠 일동안 금고할 것이며	But if the priest look on it, and, behold, there be no white hair in the bright spot, and it be no lower than the other skin, but be somewhat dark; then the priest shall shut him up seven days:	But if the priest examines it and there is no white hair in the spot, and it is not beneath the skin but has faded, the priest shall isolate him for seven days.
LEV	13	27	칠 일만에 제사장이 그를 진찰할지니 만일 병이 크게 피부에 퍼졌으면 그는 그를 부정하다 진단할 것은 문둥병의 환처임이니라	And the priest shall look upon him the seventh day: and if it be spread much abroad in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is the plague of leprosy.	On the seventh day the priest is to reexamine him, and if it has spread further on the skin, the priest must pronounce him unclean; it is a diseased infection.
LEV	13	28	만일 색점이 여전하여 피부에 퍼지지 아니하고 빛이 엷으면 화상으로 부은 것이니 제사장은 그를 정하다 할 것은 이는 화상의 흔적임이니라	And if the bright spot stay in his place, and spread not in the skin, but it be somewhat dark; it is a rising of the burning, and the priest shall pronounce him clean: for it is an inflammation of the burning.	But if the spot is unchanged and has not spread on the skin but has faded, it is a swelling from the burn, and the priest is to pronounce him clean; for it is only the scar from the burn.
LEV	13	29	남자나 여자의 머리에나 수염에 환처가 있으면	If a man or woman have a plague upon the head or the beard;	If a man or woman has an infection on the head or chin,
LEV	13	30	제사장은 진찰할지니 환처가 피부보다 우묵하고 그 자리에 누르고 가는 털이 있으면 그는 그를 부정하다 할 것은 이는 옴이라 머리에나 수염에 발한 문둥병임이니라	Then the priest shall see the plague: and, behold, if it be in sight deeper than the skin; and there be in it a yellow thin hair; then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a dry scall, even a leprosy upon the head or beard.	the priest shall examine the infection, and if it appears to be deeper than the skin and the hair in it is yellow and thin, the priest must pronounce him unclean; it is a scaly outbreak, an infectious disease of the head or chin.
LEV	13	31	만일 제사장의 보기에 그 옴의 환처가 피부보다 우묵하지 아니하고 그 자리에 검은 털이 없으면 제사장은 그 옴 환자를 칠 일 동안 금고할 것이며	And if the priest look on the plague of the scall, and, behold, it be not in sight deeper than the skin, and that there is no black hair in it; then the priest shall shut up him that hath the plague of the scall seven days:	But if the priest examines the scaly infection and it does not appear to be deeper than the skin, and there is no black hair in it, the priest shall isolate the infected person for seven days.
LEV	13	32	칠 일만에 제사장은 그 환처를 진찰할지니 그 옴이 퍼지지 아니하고 그 자리에 누른 털이 없고 피부보다 우묵하지 아니하거든	And in the seventh day the priest shall look on the plague: and, behold, if the scall spread not, and there be in it no yellow hair, and the scall be not in sight deeper than the skin;	On the seventh day the priest is to reexamine the infection, and if the scaly outbreak has not spread and there is no yellow hair in it, and it does not appear to be deeper than the skin,
LEV	13	33	그는 모발을 밀되 환처는 밀지 말 것이요 제사장은 옴 환자를 또 칠 일 동안 금고할 것이며	He shall be shaven, but the scall shall he not shave; and the priest shall shut up him that hath the scall seven days more:	then the person must shave himself except for the scaly area. Then the priest shall isolate him for another seven days.
LEV	13	34	칠 일만에 제사장은 그 옴을 또 진찰할지니 그 옴이 피부에 퍼지지 아니하고 피부보다 우묵하지 아니하면 그는 그를 정하다 진단할 것이요 그는 그 옷을 빨지니 정하려니와	And in the seventh day the priest shall look on the scall: and, behold, if the scall be not spread in the skin, nor be in sight deeper than the skin; then the priest shall pronounce him clean: and he shall wash his clothes, and be clean.	On the seventh day the priest shall examine the scaly outbreak, and if it has not spread on the skin and does not appear to be deeper than the skin, the priest is to pronounce him clean. He must wash his clothes, and he will be clean.
LEV	13	35	깨끗한 후에라도 옴이 크게 피부에 퍼지면	But if the scall spread much in the skin after his cleansing;	If, however, the scaly outbreak spreads further on the skin after his cleansing,
LEV	13	36	제사장은 그를 진찰할지니 과연 옴이 피부에 퍼졌으면 누른 털을 찾을 것 없이 그는 부정하니라	Then the priest shall look on him: and, behold, if the scall be spread in the skin, the priest shall not seek for yellow hair; he is unclean.	the priest is to examine him, and if the scaly outbreak has spread on the skin, the priest need not look for yellow hair; the person is unclean.
LEV	13	37	그러나 제사장의 보기에 옴이 여전하고 그 자리에 검은 털이 났으면 그 옴은 나았고 그 사람은 정하니 제사장은 그를 정하다 진단할지니라	But if the scall be in his sight at a stay, and that there is black hair grown up therein; the scall is healed, he is clean: and the priest shall pronounce him clean.	If, however, in his sight the scaly outbreak is unchanged and black hair has grown in it, then it has healed. He is clean, and the priest is to pronounce him clean.
LEV	13	38	남자나 여자의 피부에 색점 곧 흰 색점이 있으면	If a man also or a woman have in the skin of their flesh bright spots, even white bright spots;	When a man or a woman has white spots on the skin,
LEV	13	39	제사장은 진찰할지니 그 피부의 색점이 부유스름하면 이는 피부에 발한 어루러기라 그는 정하니라	Then the priest shall look: and, behold, if the bright spots in the skin of their flesh be darkish white; it is a freckled spot that groweth in the skin; he is clean.	the priest shall examine them, and if the spots are dull white, it is a harmless rash that has broken out on the skin; the person is clean.
LEV	13	40	누구든지 그 머리털이 빠지면 그는 대머리니 정하고	And the man whose hair is fallen off his head, he is bald; yet is he clean.	Now if a man loses his hair and is bald, he is still clean.
LEV	13	41	앞머리가 빠져도 그는 이마 대머리니 정하니라	And he that hath his hair fallen off from the part of his head toward his face, he is forehead bald: yet is he clean.	Or if his hairline recedes and he is bald on his forehead, he is still clean.
LEV	13	42	그러나 대머리나 이마 대머리에 희고 불그스름한 색점이 있으면 이는 문둥병이 대머리에나 이마 대머리에 발함이라	And if there be in the bald head, or bald forehead, a white reddish sore; it is a leprosy sprung up in his bald head, or his bald forehead.	But if there is a reddish-white sore on the bald head or forehead, it is an infectious disease breaking out on it.
LEV	13	43	제사장은 그를 진찰할지니 그 대머리에나 이마 대머리에 돋은 색점이 희고 불그스름하여 피부에 발한 문둥병과 같으면	Then the priest shall look upon it: and, behold, if the rising of the sore be white reddish in his bald head, or in his bald forehead, as the leprosy appeareth in the skin of the flesh;	The priest is to examine him, and if the swelling of the infection on his bald head or forehead is reddish-white like a skin disease,
LEV	13	44	이는 문둥 환자라 부정하니 제사장은 그를 부정하다 확실히 진단할 것은 그 환처가 그 머리에 있음이니라	He is a leprous man, he is unclean: the priest shall pronounce him utterly unclean; his plague is in his head.	the man is diseased; he is unclean. The priest must pronounce him unclean because of the infection on his head.
LEV	13	45	문둥 환자는 옷을 찢고 머리를 풀며 윗 입술을 가리우고 외치기를 부정하다 부정하다 할 것이요	And the leper in whom the plague is, his clothes shall be rent, and his head bare, and he shall put a covering upon his upper lip, and shall cry, Unclean, unclean.	A diseased person must wear torn clothes and let his hair hang loose, and he must cover his mouth and cry out, ‘Unclean, unclean!’
LEV	13	46	병 있는 날 동안은 늘 부정할 것이라 그가 부정한즉 혼자 살되 진 밖에 살지니라	All the days wherein the plague shall be in him he shall be defiled; he is unclean: he shall dwell alone; without the camp shall his habitation be.	As long as he has the infection, he remains unclean. He must live alone in a place outside the camp.
LEV	13	47	만일 의복에 문둥병 색점이 발하여 털옷에나 베옷에나	The garment also that the plague of leprosy is in, whether it be a woollen garment, or a linen garment;	If any fabric is contaminated with mildew—any wool or linen garment,
LEV	13	48	베나 털의 날에나 씨에나 혹 가죽에나 무릇 가죽으로 만든 것에 있되	Whether it be in the warp, or woof; of linen, or of woollen; whether in a skin, or in any thing made of skin;	any weave or knit of linen or wool, or any article of leather—
LEV	13	49	그 의복에나 가죽에나 그 날에나 씨에나 무릇 가죽으로 만든 것에 병색이 푸르거나 붉으면 이는 문둥병의 색점이라 제사장에게 보일 것이요	And if the plague be greenish or reddish in the garment, or in the skin, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in any thing of skin; it is a plague of leprosy, and shall be shewed unto the priest:	and if the mark in the fabric, leather, weave, knit, or leather article is green or red, then it is contaminated with mildew and must be shown to the priest.
LEV	13	50	제사장은 그 색점을 살피고 그것을 칠 일 동안 간직하였다가	And the priest shall look upon the plague, and shut up it that hath the plague seven days:	And the priest is to examine the mildew and isolate the contaminated fabric for seven days.
LEV	13	51	칠 일만에 그 색점을 살필지니 그 색점이 그 의복의 날에나 씨에나 가죽에나 가죽으로 만든 것에 퍼졌으면 이는 악성 문둥병이라 그것이 부정하니	And he shall look on the plague on the seventh day: if the plague be spread in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in a skin, or in any work that is made of skin; the plague is a fretting leprosy; it is unclean.	On the seventh day the priest shall reexamine it, and if the mildew has spread in the fabric, weave, knit, or leather, then regardless of how it is used, it is a harmful mildew; the article is unclean.
LEV	13	52	그는 그 색점 있는 의복이나 털이나 베의 날이나 씨나 무릇 가죽으로 만든 것을 불사를지니 이는 악성 문둥병인즉 그것을 불사를지니라	He shall therefore burn that garment, whether warp or woof, in woollen or in linen, or any thing of skin, wherein the plague is: for it is a fretting leprosy; it shall be burnt in the fire.	He is to burn the fabric, weave, or knit, whether the contaminated item is wool or linen or leather. Since the mildew is harmful, the article must be burned up.
LEV	13	53	그러나 제사장의 보기에 그 색점이 그 의복의 날에나 씨에나 무릇 가죽으로 만든 것에 퍼지지 아니하였으면	And if the priest shall look, and, behold, the plague be not spread in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in any thing of skin;	But when the priest reexamines it, if the mildew has not spread in the fabric, weave, knit, or leather article,
LEV	13	54	제사장은 명하여 그 색점 있는 것을 빨게하고 또 칠 일 동안 간직하였다가	Then the priest shall command that they wash the thing wherein the plague is, and he shall shut it up seven days more:	the priest is to order the contaminated article to be washed and isolated for another seven days.
LEV	13	55	그 빤 곳을 볼지니 그 색점의 빛이 변치 아니하고 그 색점이 퍼지지 아니하였으면 부정하니 너는 그것을 불사르라 이는 거죽에 있든지 속에 있든지 악성 문둥병이니라	And the priest shall look on the plague, after that it is washed: and, behold, if the plague have not changed his colour, and the plague be not spread; it is unclean; thou shalt burn it in the fire; it is fret inward, whether it be bare within or without.	After it has been washed, the priest is to reexamine it, and if the mildewed article has not changed in appearance, it is unclean. Even though the mildew has not spread, you must burn it, whether the rot is on the front or back.
LEV	13	56	빤 후에 제사장의 보기에 그 색점이 엷으면 그 의복에서나 가죽에서나 그 날에서나 씨에서나 그 색점을 찢어 버릴 것이요	And if the priest look, and, behold, the plague be somewhat dark after the washing of it; then he shall rend it out of the garment, or out of the skin, or out of the warp, or out of the woof:	If the priest examines it and the mildew has faded after it has been washed, he must cut the contaminated section out of the fabric, leather, weave, or knit.
LEV	13	57	그 의복의 날에나 씨에나 무릇 가죽으로 만든 것에 색점이 여전히 보이면 복발하는 것이니 너는 그 색점있는 것을 불사를지니라	And if it appear still in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in any thing of skin; it is a spreading plague: thou shalt burn that wherein the plague is with fire.	But if it reappears in the fabric, weave, or knit, or on any leather article, it is spreading. You must burn the contaminated article.
LEV	13	58	네가 빤 의복의 날에나 씨에나 무릇 가죽으로 만든 것에 그 색점이 벗어졌으면 그것을 다시 빨아야 정하리라	And the garment, either warp, or woof, or whatsoever thing of skin it be, which thou shalt wash, if the plague be departed from them, then it shall be washed the second time, and shall be clean.	If the mildew disappears from the fabric, weave, or knit, or any leather article after washing, then it is to be washed again, and it will be clean.
LEV	13	59	이는 털옷에나 베옷에나 그 날에나 씨에나 무릇 가죽으로 만든 것에 발한 문둥병 색점의 정하고 부정한 것을 단정하는 규례니라	This is the law of the plague of leprosy in a garment of woollen or linen, either in the warp, or woof, or any thing of skins, to pronounce it clean, or to pronounce it unclean.	This is the law concerning a mildew contamination in wool or linen fabric, weave, or knit, or any leather article, for pronouncing it clean or unclean.”
LEV	14	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	14	2	문둥 환자의 정결케 되는 날의 규례는 이러하니 곧 그 사람을 제사장에게로 데려갈 것이요	This shall be the law of the leper in the day of his cleansing: He shall be brought unto the priest:	“This is the law for the one afflicted with a skin disease on the day of his cleansing, when he is brought to the priest.
LEV	14	3	제사장은 진에서 나가서 진찰할지니 그 환자에게 있던 문둥병 환처가 나았으면	And the priest shall go forth out of the camp; and the priest shall look, and, behold, if the plague of leprosy be healed in the leper;	The priest is to go outside the camp to examine him, and if the skin disease of the afflicted person has healed,
LEV	14	4	제사장은 그를 위하여 명하여 정한 산 새 두 마리와 백향목과 홍색실과 우슬초를 가져오게 하고	Then shall the priest command to take for him that is to be cleansed two birds alive and clean, and cedar wood, and scarlet, and hyssop:	the priest shall order that two live clean birds, cedar wood, scarlet yarn, and hyssop be brought for the one to be cleansed.
LEV	14	5	제사장은 또 명하여 그 새 하나는 흐르는 물 위 질그릇 안에서 잡게 하고	And the priest shall command that one of the birds be killed in an earthen vessel over running water:	Then the priest shall command that one of the birds be slaughtered over fresh water in a clay pot.
LEV	14	6	다른 새는 산 대로 취하여 백향목과 홍색실과 우슬초와 함께 가져다가 흐르는 물 위에서 잡은 새 피를 찍어	As for the living bird, he shall take it, and the cedar wood, and the scarlet, and the hyssop, and shall dip them and the living bird in the blood of the bird that was killed over the running water:	And he is to take the live bird together with the cedar wood, scarlet yarn, and hyssop, and dip them into the blood of the bird that was slaughtered over the fresh water.
LEV	14	7	문둥병에서 정결함을 받을 자에게 일곱 번 뿌려 정하다 하고 그 산 새는 들에 놓을지며	And he shall sprinkle upon him that is to be cleansed from the leprosy seven times, and shall pronounce him clean, and shall let the living bird loose into the open field.	Seven times he shall sprinkle the one to be cleansed of the skin disease. Then he shall pronounce him clean and release the live bird into the open field.
LEV	14	8	정결함을 받는 자는 그 옷을 빨고 모든 털을 밀고 물로 몸을 씻을 것이라 그리하면 정하리니 그 후에 진에 들어올 것이나 자기 장막 밖에 칠 일을 거할 것이요	And he that is to be cleansed shall wash his clothes, and shave off all his hair, and wash himself in water, that he may be clean: and after that he shall come into the camp, and shall tarry abroad out of his tent seven days.	The one being cleansed must wash his clothes, shave off all his hair, and bathe with water; then he will be ceremonially clean. Afterward, he may enter the camp, but he must remain outside his tent for seven days.
LEV	14	9	칠 일만에 그 모든 털을 밀되 머리털과 수염과 눈썹을 다 밀고 그 옷을 빨고 몸을 물에 씻을 것이라 그리하면 정하리라	But it shall be on the seventh day, that he shall shave all his hair off his head and his beard and his eyebrows, even all his hair he shall shave off: and he shall wash his clothes, also he shall wash his flesh in water, and he shall be clean.	On the seventh day he must shave off all his hair—his head, his beard, his eyebrows, and the rest of his hair. He must wash his clothes and bathe himself with water, and he will be clean.
LEV	14	10	제팔일에 그는 흠 없는 어린 수양 둘과 일년 된 흠 없는 어린 암양 하나와 또 고운 가루 에바 십분 삼에 기름 섞은 소제물과 기름 한 록을 취할 것이요	And on the eighth day he shall take two he lambs without blemish, and one ewe lamb of the first year without blemish, and three tenth deals of fine flour for a meat offering, mingled with oil, and one log of oil.	On the eighth day he is to bring two unblemished male lambs, an unblemished ewe lamb a year old, a grain offering of three-tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with olive oil, and one log of olive oil.
LEV	14	11	정결케 하는 제사장은 정결함을 받을 자와 그 물건들을 회막문 여호와 앞에 두고	And the priest that maketh him clean shall present the man that is to be made clean, and those things, before the Lord, at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation:	The priest who performs the cleansing shall present the one to be cleansed, together with these offerings, before the LORD at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting.
LEV	14	12	어린 수양 하나를 취하여 기름 한 록과 아울러 속건제로 드리되 여호와 앞에 흔들어 요제를 삼고	And the priest shall take one he lamb, and offer him for a trespass offering, and the log of oil, and wave them for a wave offering before the Lord:	Then the priest is to take one of the male lambs and present it as a guilt offering, along with the log of olive oil; and he must wave them as a wave offering before the LORD.
LEV	14	13	그 어린 수양은 거룩한 장소 곧 속죄제와 번제 희생 잡는 곳에서 잡을 것이며 속건 제물은 속죄 제물과 일례로 제사장에게 돌릴지니 이는 지극히 거룩한 것이니라	And he shall slay the lamb in the place where he shall kill the sin offering and the burnt offering, in the holy place: for as the sin offering is the priest’s, so is the trespass offering: it is most holy:	Then he is to slaughter the lamb in the sanctuary area where the sin offering and burnt offering are slaughtered. Like the sin offering, the guilt offering belongs to the priest; it is most holy.
LEV	14	14	제사장은 그 속건제 희생의 피를 취하여 정결함을 받을 자의 우편 귓부리와 우편 손 엄지가락과 우편 발 엄지가락에 바를 것이요	And the priest shall take some of the blood of the trespass offering, and the priest shall put it upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot:	The priest is to take some of the blood from the guilt offering and put it on the right earlobe of the one to be cleansed, on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot.
LEV	14	15	제사장은 또 그 한 록의 기름을 취하여 자기 좌편 손바닥에 따르고	And the priest shall take some of the log of oil, and pour it into the palm of his own left hand:	Then the priest shall take some of the log of olive oil, pour it into his left palm,
LEV	14	16	우편 손가락으로 좌편 손의 기름을 찍어 그 손가락으로 그것을 여호와 앞에 일곱번 뿌릴 것이요	And the priest shall dip his right finger in the oil that is in his left hand, and shall sprinkle of the oil with his finger seven times before the Lord:	dip his right forefinger into the oil in his left palm, and sprinkle some of the oil with his finger seven times before the LORD.
LEV	14	17	손에 남은 기름은 제사장이 정결함을 받는 자의 우편 귓부리와 우편 손 엄지가락과 우편 발 엄지가락 곧 속건제 희생의 피 위에 바를 것이며	And of the rest of the oil that is in his hand shall the priest put upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot, upon the blood of the trespass offering:	And the priest is to put some of the oil remaining in his palm on the right earlobe of the one to be cleansed, on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot, on top of the blood of the guilt offering.
LEV	14	18	오히려 그 손에 남은 기름은 제사장이 그 정결함을 받는 자의 머리에 바르고 여호와 앞에서 제사장은 그를 위하여 속죄하고	And the remnant of the oil that is in the priest’s hand he shall pour upon the head of him that is to be cleansed: and the priest shall make an atonement for him before the Lord.	The rest of the oil in his palm, the priest is to put on the head of the one to be cleansed, to make atonement for him before the LORD.
LEV	14	19	또 제사장은 속죄제를 드려 그 부정함을 인하여 정결함을 받으려는 자를 위하여 속죄하고 그 후에 번제 희생을 잡을 것이요	And the priest shall offer the sin offering, and make an atonement for him that is to be cleansed from his uncleanness; and afterward he shall kill the burnt offering:	Then the priest is to sacrifice the sin offering and make atonement for the one to be cleansed from his uncleanness. After that, the priest shall slaughter the burnt offering
LEV	14	20	제사장은 그 번제와 소제를 단에 드려 그를 위하여 속죄할 것이라 그리하면 그가 정결하리라	And the priest shall offer the burnt offering and the meat offering upon the altar: and the priest shall make an atonement for him, and he shall be clean.	and offer it on the altar, with the grain offering, to make atonement for him, and he will be clean.
LEV	14	21	그가 가난하여 이에 힘이 미치지 못하면 그는 흔들어 자기를 속할 속건제를 위하여 어린 수양 하나와 소제를 위하여 고운 가루 에바 십분 일에 기름 섞은 것과 기름 한 록을 취하고	And if he be poor, and cannot get so much; then he shall take one lamb for a trespass offering to be waved, to make an atonement for him, and one tenth deal of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering, and a log of oil;	If, however, the person is poor and cannot afford these offerings, he is to take one male lamb as a guilt offering to be waved to make atonement for him, along with a tenth of an ephah of fine flour mixed with olive oil for a grain offering, a log of olive oil,
LEV	14	22	그 힘이 미치는 대로 산비둘기 둘이나 집비둘기 새끼 둘을 취하되 하나는 속죄 제물로, 하나는 번제물로 삼아	And two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, such as he is able to get; and the one shall be a sin offering, and the other a burnt offering.	and two turtledoves or two young pigeons, whichever he can afford, one to be a sin offering and the other a burnt offering.
LEV	14	23	제팔일에 그 결례를 위하여 그것들을 회막문 여호와 앞 제사장에게로 가져갈 것이요	And he shall bring them on the eighth day for his cleansing unto the priest, unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, before the Lord.	On the eighth day he is to bring them for his cleansing to the priest at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting before the LORD.
LEV	14	24	제사장은 속건제 어린 양과 기름 한 록을 취하여 여호와 앞에 흔들어 요제를 삼고	And the priest shall take the lamb of the trespass offering, and the log of oil, and the priest shall wave them for a wave offering before the Lord:	The priest shall take the lamb for the guilt offering, along with the log of olive oil, and wave them as a wave offering before the LORD.
LEV	14	25	속건제의 어린 양을 잡아서 제사장은 그 속건제 희생의 피를 취하여 정결함을 받을 자의 우편 손 엄지가락과 우편 발 엄지가락에 바를 것이요	And he shall kill the lamb of the trespass offering, and the priest shall take some of the blood of the trespass offering, and put it upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot:	And after he slaughters the lamb for the guilt offering, the priest is to take some of the blood of the guilt offering and put it on the right earlobe of the one to be cleansed, on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot.
LEV	14	26	제사장은 그 기름을 자기 좌편 손바닥에 따르고	And the priest shall pour of the oil into the palm of his own left hand:	Then the priest is to pour some of the oil into his left palm
LEV	14	27	우편 손가락으로 좌편 손의 기름을 조금 찍어 여호와 앞에 일곱번 뿌릴 것이요	And the priest shall sprinkle with his right finger some of the oil that is in his left hand seven times before the Lord:	and sprinkle with his right forefinger some of the oil in his left palm seven times before the LORD.
LEV	14	28	그 손의 기름은 제사장이 정결함을 받을 자의 우편 귓부리와 우편 손 엄지가락과 우편 발 엄지가락 곧 속건제 희생의 피를 바른 곳에 바를 것이며	And the priest shall put of the oil that is in his hand upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot, upon the place of the blood of the trespass offering:	The priest shall also put some of the oil in his palm on the right earlobe of the one to be cleansed, on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot—on the same places as the blood of the guilt offering.
LEV	14	29	또 그 손에 남은 기름은 제사장이 그 정결함을 받는 자의 머리에 발라 여호와 앞에서 그를 위하여 속죄할 것이며	And the rest of the oil that is in the priest’s hand he shall put upon the head of him that is to be cleansed, to make an atonement for him before the Lord.	The rest of the oil in his palm, the priest is to put on the head of the one to be cleansed, to make atonement for him before the LORD.
LEV	14	30	그는 힘이 미치는 대로 산비둘기 하나나 집비둘기 새끼 하나를 드리되	And he shall offer the one of the turtledoves, or of the young pigeons, such as he can get;	Then he must sacrifice the turtledoves or young pigeons, whichever he can afford,
LEV	14	31	곧 그 힘이 미치는 것의 하나는 속죄제로, 하나는 소제와 함께 번제로 드릴 것이요 제사장은 정결함을 받을 자를 위하여 여호와 앞에 속죄할지니	Even such as he is able to get, the one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering, with the meat offering: and the priest shall make an atonement for him that is to be cleansed before the Lord.	one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering, together with the grain offering. In this way the priest will make atonement before the LORD for the one to be cleansed.
LEV	14	32	문둥병 환자로서 그 결례에 힘이 부족한 자의 규례가 이러하니라	This is the law of him in whom is the plague of leprosy, whose hand is not able to get that which pertaineth to his cleansing.	This is the law for someone who has a skin disease and cannot afford the cost of his cleansing.”
LEV	14	33	여호와께서 모세와 아론에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses and Aaron,
LEV	14	34	내가 네게 기업으로 주는 가나안 땅에 너희가 이른 때에 내가 너희 기업의 땅에서 어느 집에 문둥병 색점을 발하게 하거든	When ye be come into the land of Canaan, which I give to you for a possession, and I put the plague of leprosy in a house of the land of your possession;	“When you enter the land of Canaan, which I am giving you as your possession, and I put a contamination of mildew into a house in that land,
LEV	14	35	그 집 주인은 제사장에게 와서 고하기를 무슨 색점이 집에 생겼다 할 것이요	And he that owneth the house shall come and tell the priest, saying, It seemeth to me there is as it were a plague in the house:	the owner of the house shall come and tell the priest, ‘Something like mildew has appeared in my house.’
LEV	14	36	제사장은 그 색점을 보러 가기 전에 그 가장 집물에 부정을 면케하기 위하여 명하여 그 집을 비게 한 후에 들어가서 그 집을 볼지니	Then the priest shall command that they empty the house, before the priest go into it to see the plague, that all that is in the house be not made unclean: and afterward the priest shall go in to see the house:	The priest must order that the house be cleared before he enters it to examine the mildew, so that nothing in the house will become unclean. After this, the priest shall go in to inspect the house.
LEV	14	37	그 색점을 볼 때에 그 집 벽에 푸르거나 붉은 무늬의 색점이 있어 벽보다 우묵하면	And he shall look on the plague, and, behold, if the plague be in the walls of the house with hollow strakes, greenish or reddish, which in sight are lower than the wall;	He is to examine the house, and if the mildew on the walls consists of green or red depressions that appear to be beneath the surface of the wall,
LEV	14	38	제사장은 그 집 문으로 나와 그 집을 칠 일 동안 폐쇄하였다가	Then the priest shall go out of the house to the door of the house, and shut up the house seven days:	the priest shall go outside the doorway of the house and close it up for seven days.
LEV	14	39	칠 일만에 또 와서 살펴볼 것이요 그 색점이 벽에 퍼졌으면	And the priest shall come again the seventh day, and shall look: and, behold, if the plague be spread in the walls of the house;	On the seventh day the priest is to return and inspect the house. If the mildew has spread on the walls,
LEV	14	40	그는 명하여 색점 있는 돌을 빼어 성 밖 부정한 곳에 버리게 하고	Then the priest shall command that they take away the stones in which the plague is, and they shall cast them into an unclean place without the city:	he must order that the contaminated stones be pulled out and thrown into an unclean place outside the city.
LEV	14	41	또 집안 사면을 긁게 하고 그 긁은 흙을 성 밖 부정한 곳에 쏟아버리게 할 것이요	And he shall cause the house to be scraped within round about, and they shall pour out the dust that they scrape off without the city into an unclean place:	And he shall have the inside of the house scraped completely and the plaster that is scraped off dumped into an unclean place outside the city.
LEV	14	42	그들은 다른 돌로 그 돌을 대신하며 다른 흙으로 집에 바를지니라	And they shall take other stones, and put them in the place of those stones; and he shall take other morter, and shall plaister the house.	So different stones must be obtained to replace the contaminated ones, as well as additional mortar to replaster the house.
LEV	14	43	돌을 빼며 집을 긁고 고쳐 바른 후에 색점이 집에 복발하거든	And if the plague come again, and break out in the house, after that he hath taken away the stones, and after he hath scraped the house, and after it is plaistered;	If the mildew reappears in the house after the stones have been torn out and the house has been scraped and replastered,
LEV	14	44	제사장은 또 와서 살펴볼 것이요 그 색점이 만일 집에 펴졌으면 악성 문둥병인즉 이는 부정하니	Then the priest shall come and look, and, behold, if the plague be spread in the house, it is a fretting leprosy in the house: it is unclean.	the priest must come and inspect it. If the mildew has spread in the house, it is a destructive mildew; the house is unclean.
LEV	14	45	그는 그 집을 헐고 돌과 그 재목과 그 집의 모든 흙을 성 밖 부정한 곳으로 내어갈 것이며	And he shall break down the house, the stones of it, and the timber thereof, and all the morter of the house; and he shall carry them forth out of the city into an unclean place.	It must be torn down with its stones, its timbers, and all its plaster, and taken outside the city to an unclean place.
LEV	14	46	그 집을 폐쇄한 날 동안에 들어가는 자는 저녁까지 부정할 것이요	Moreover he that goeth into the house all the while that it is shut up shall be unclean until the even.	Anyone who enters the house during any of the days that it is closed up will be unclean until evening.
LEV	14	47	그 집에서 자는 자는 그 옷을 빨 것이요 그 집에서 먹는 자도 그 옷을 빨 것이니라	And he that lieth in the house shall wash his clothes; and he that eateth in the house shall wash his clothes.	And anyone who sleeps in the house or eats in it must wash his clothes.
LEV	14	48	그 집을 고쳐 바른 후에 제사장이 들어가 살펴 보아서 색점이 집에 퍼지지 아니하였으면 이는 색점이 나은 것이니 제사장은 그 집을 정하다 하고	And if the priest shall come in, and look upon it, and, behold, the plague hath not spread in the house, after the house was plaistered: then the priest shall pronounce the house clean, because the plague is healed.	If, however, the priest comes and inspects it, and the mildew has not spread after the house has been replastered, he shall pronounce the house clean, because the mildew is gone.
LEV	14	49	그는 그 집을 정결케 하기 위하여 새 두마리와 백향목과 홍색실과 우슬초를 취하고	And he shall take to cleanse the house two birds, and cedar wood, and scarlet, and hyssop:	He is to take two birds, cedar wood, scarlet yarn, and hyssop to purify the house;
LEV	14	50	그 새 하나를 흐르는 물 위 질그릇 안에서 잡고	And he shall kill the one of the birds in an earthen vessel over running water:	and he shall slaughter one of the birds over fresh water in a clay pot.
LEV	14	51	백향목과 우슬초와 홍색실과 산새를 가져다가 잡은 새의 피와 흐르는 물을 찍어 그 집에 일곱번 뿌릴 것이요	And he shall take the cedar wood, and the hyssop, and the scarlet, and the living bird, and dip them in the blood of the slain bird, and in the running water, and sprinkle the house seven times:	Then he shall take the cedar wood, the hyssop, the scarlet yarn, and the live bird, dip them in the blood of the slaughtered bird and the fresh water, and sprinkle the house seven times.
LEV	14	52	그는 새의 피와 흐르는 물과 산새와 백향목과 우슬초와 홍색실로 집을 정결케 하고	And he shall cleanse the house with the blood of the bird, and with the running water, and with the living bird, and with the cedar wood, and with the hyssop, and with the scarlet:	And he shall cleanse the house with the bird’s blood, the fresh water, the live bird, the cedar wood, the hyssop, and the scarlet yarn.
LEV	14	53	그 산새는 성 밖 들에 놓아 그 집을 위하여 속할 것이라 그리하면 정결하리라	But he shall let go the living bird out of the city into the open fields, and make an atonement for the house: and it shall be clean.	Finally, he is to release the live bird into the open fields outside the city. In this way he will make atonement for the house, and it will be clean.
LEV	14	54	이는 각종 문둥병 환처에 대한 규례니 곧 옴과	This is the law for all manner of plague of leprosy, and scall,	This is the law for any infectious skin disease, for a scaly outbreak,
LEV	14	55	의복과 가옥의 문둥병과	And for the leprosy of a garment, and of a house,	for mildew in clothing or in a house,
LEV	14	56	붓는 것과 피부병과 색점의	And for a rising, and for a scab, and for a bright spot:	and for a swelling, rash, or spot,
LEV	14	57	언제는 부정하고 언제는 정함을 가르치는 것이니 문둥병의 규례가 이러하니라	To teach when it is unclean, and when it is clean: this is the law of leprosy.	to determine when something is clean or unclean. This is the law regarding skin diseases and mildew.”
LEV	15	1	여호와께서 모세와 아론에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses and to Aaron, saying,	And the LORD said to Moses and Aaron,
LEV	15	2	이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 이르라 누구든지 몸에 유출병이 있으면 그 유출병을 인하여 부정한 자라	Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When any man hath a running issue out of his flesh, because of his issue he is unclean.	“Say to the Israelites, ‘When any man has a bodily discharge, the discharge is unclean.
LEV	15	3	그 유출병으로 말미암아 부정함이 이러하니 곧 몸에서 흘러 나오든지 그것이 엉겼든지 부정한즉	And this shall be his uncleanness in his issue: whether his flesh run with his issue, or his flesh be stopped from his issue, it is his uncleanness.	This uncleanness is from his discharge, whether his body allows the discharge to flow or blocks it. So his discharge will bring about uncleanness.
LEV	15	4	유출병 있는 자의 눕는 상은 다 부정하고 그의 앉았던 자리도 다 부정하니	Every bed, whereon he lieth that hath the issue, is unclean: and every thing, whereon he sitteth, shall be unclean.	Any bed on which the man with the discharge lies will be unclean, and any furniture on which he sits will be unclean.
LEV	15	5	그 침상에 접촉하는 자는 옷을 빨고 물로 몸을 씻을 것이며 저녁까지 부정하리라	And whosoever toucheth his bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.	Anyone who touches his bed must wash his clothes and bathe with water, and he will be unclean until evening.
LEV	15	6	유출병 있는 자의 앉았던 자리에 앉는 자는 옷을 빨고 물로 몸을 씻을 것이며 저녁까지 부정하리라	And he that sitteth on any thing whereon he sat that hath the issue shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.	Whoever sits on furniture on which the man with the discharge was sitting must wash his clothes and bathe with water, and he will be unclean until evening.
LEV	15	7	유출병 있는 자의 몸에 접촉하는 자는 옷을 빨고 물로 몸을 씻을 것이며 저녁까지 부정하리라	And he that toucheth the flesh of him that hath the issue shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.	Whoever touches the body of the man with a discharge must wash his clothes and bathe with water, and he will be unclean until evening.
LEV	15	8	유출병 있는 자가 정한 자에게 침을 뱉으면 정한 자는 옷을 빨고 물로 몸을 씻을 것이며 저녁까지 부정하리라	And if he that hath the issue spit upon him that is clean; then he shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.	If the man with the discharge spits on one who is clean, that person must wash his clothes and bathe with water, and he will be unclean until evening.
LEV	15	9	유출병 있는 자의 탔던 안장은 다 부정하며	And what saddle soever he rideth upon that hath the issue shall be unclean.	Any saddle on which the man with the discharge rides will be unclean.
LEV	15	10	그 몸 아래 닿았던 것에 접촉한 자는 다 저녁까지 부정하며 그런 것을 옮기는 자는 옷을 빨고 물로 몸을 씻을 것이며 저녁까지 부정하리라	And whosoever toucheth any thing that was under him shall be unclean until the even: and he that beareth any of those things shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.	Whoever touches anything that was under him will be unclean until evening, and whoever carries such things must wash his clothes and bathe with water, and he will be unclean until evening.
LEV	15	11	유출병 있는 자가 물로 손을 씻지 아니하고 아무든지 만지면 그 자는 옷을 빨고 물로 몸을 씻을 것이며 저녁까지 부정하리라	And whomsoever he toucheth that hath the issue, and hath not rinsed his hands in water, he shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.	If the man with the discharge touches anyone without first rinsing his hands with water, the one who was touched must wash his clothes and bathe with water, and he will be unclean until evening.
LEV	15	12	유출병 있는 자의 만진 질그릇은 깨뜨리고 목기는 다 물로 씻을지니라	And the vessel of earth, that he toucheth which hath the issue, shall be broken: and every vessel of wood shall be rinsed in water.	Any clay pot that the man with the discharge touches must be broken, and any wooden utensil must be rinsed with water.
LEV	15	13	유출병 있는 자는 그 유출이 깨끗하여지거든 그 몸이 정결하기 위하여 칠 일을 계산하여 옷을 빨고 흐르는 물에 몸을 씻을 것이요 그리하면 정하리니	And when he that hath an issue is cleansed of his issue; then he shall number to himself seven days for his cleansing, and wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in running water, and shall be clean.	When the man has been cleansed from his discharge, he must count off seven days for his cleansing, wash his clothes, and bathe himself in fresh water, and he shall be clean.
LEV	15	14	제팔일에 산비둘기 둘이나 집비둘기 새끼 둘을 자기를 위하여 취하고 회막문 여호와 앞으로 가서 제사장에게 줄 것이요	And on the eighth day he shall take to him two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, and come before the Lord unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and give them unto the priest:	On the eighth day he is to take two turtledoves or two young pigeons, come before the LORD at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting, and give them to the priest.
LEV	15	15	제사장은 그 하나는 속죄제로, 하나는 번제로 드려 그의 유출병을 인하여 여호와 앞에 속죄할지니라	And the priest shall offer them, the one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering; and the priest shall make an atonement for him before the Lord for his issue.	The priest is to sacrifice them, one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering. In this way the priest will make atonement for the man before the LORD because of his discharge.
LEV	15	16	설정한 자는 전신을 물로 씻을 것이며 저녁까지 부정하리라	And if any man’s seed of copulation go out from him, then he shall wash all his flesh in water, and be unclean until the even.	When a man has an emission of semen, he must bathe his whole body with water, and he will be unclean until evening.
LEV	15	17	무릇 정수가 묻은 옷이나 가죽은 물에 빨 것이며 저녁까지 부정하리라	And every garment, and every skin, whereon is the seed of copulation, shall be washed with water, and be unclean until the even.	Any clothing or leather on which there is an emission of semen must be washed with water, and it will remain unclean until evening.
LEV	15	18	남녀가 동침하여 설정하였거든 둘 다 물로 몸을 씻을 것이며 저녁까지 부정하리라	The woman also with whom man shall lie with seed of copulation, they shall both bathe themselves in water, and be unclean until the even.	If a man lies with a woman and there is an emission of semen, both must bathe with water, and they will remain unclean until evening.
LEV	15	19	어떤 여인이 유출을 하되 그 유출이 피면 칠 일 동안 불결하니 무릇 그를 만지는 자는 저녁까지 부정할 것이요	And if a woman have an issue, and her issue in her flesh be blood, she shall be put apart seven days: and whosoever toucheth her shall be unclean until the even.	When a woman has a discharge consisting of blood from her body, she will be unclean due to her menstruation for seven days, and anyone who touches her will be unclean until evening.
LEV	15	20	그 불결할 동안에 그의 누웠던 자리는 다 부정하며 그의 앉았던 자리도 다 부정한즉	And every thing that she lieth upon in her separation shall be unclean: every thing also that she sitteth upon shall be unclean.	Anything on which she lies or sits during her menstruation will be unclean,
LEV	15	21	그 침상을 만지는 자는 다 옷을 빨고 물로 몸을 씻을 것이요 저녁까지 부정할 것이며	And whosoever toucheth her bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.	and anyone who touches her bed must wash his clothes and bathe with water, and he will be unclean until evening.
LEV	15	22	그 좌석을 만지는 자도 다 옷을 빨고 물로 몸을 씻을 것이요 저녁까지 부정할 것이며	And whosoever toucheth any thing that she sat upon shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.	Whoever touches any furniture on which she was sitting must wash his clothes and bathe with water, and he will be unclean until evening.
LEV	15	23	그의 침상과 무릇 그 좌석에 있는 것을 만지는 자도 저녁까지 부정할 것이며	And if it be on her bed, or on any thing whereon she sitteth, when he toucheth it, he shall be unclean until the even.	And whether it is a bed or furniture on which she was sitting, whoever touches it will be unclean until evening.
LEV	15	24	누구든지 이 여인과 동침하여 그 불결에 전염되면 칠 일 동안 부정할 것이라 그의 눕는 상은 무릇 부정하니라	And if any man lie with her at all, and her flowers be upon him, he shall be unclean seven days; and all the bed whereon he lieth shall be unclean.	If a man lies with her and her menstrual flow touches him, he will be unclean for seven days, and any bed on which he lies will become unclean.
LEV	15	25	여인의 피의 유출이 그 불결기 외에 있어서 여러 날이 간다든지 그 유출이 불결기를 지나든지 하면 그 부정을 유출하는 날 동안은 무릇 그 불결한 때와 같이 부정한즉	And if a woman have an issue of her blood many days out of the time of her separation, or if it run beyond the time of her separation; all the days of the issue of her uncleanness shall be as the days of her separation: she shall be unclean.	When a woman has a discharge of her blood for many days at a time other than her menstrual period, or if it continues beyond her period, she will be unclean all the days of her unclean discharge, just as she is during the days of her menstruation.
LEV	15	26	무릇 그 유출이 있는 날 동안에 그의 눕는 침상은 그에게 불결한 때의 침상과 같고 무릇 그의 앉는 자리도 부정함이 불결의 부정과 같으니	Every bed whereon she lieth all the days of her issue shall be unto her as the bed of her separation: and whatsoever she sitteth upon shall be unclean, as the uncleanness of her separation.	Any bed on which she lies or any furniture on which she sits during the days of her discharge will be unclean, like her bed during her menstrual period.
LEV	15	27	이런 것을 만지는 자는 무릇 부정한즉 옷을 빨고 물로 몸을 씻을 것이며 저녁까지 부정할 것이요	And whosoever toucheth those things shall be unclean, and shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even.	Anyone who touches these things will be unclean; he must wash his clothes and bathe with water, and he will be unclean until evening.
LEV	15	28	그의 유출이 그치면 칠 일을 센 후에야 정하리니	But if she be cleansed of her issue, then she shall number to herself seven days, and after that she shall be clean.	When a woman is cleansed of her discharge, she must count off seven days, and after that she will be ceremonially clean.
LEV	15	29	그는 제팔일에 산비둘기 둘이나 집비둘기 새끼 둘을 자기를 위하여 취하여 회막문 앞 제사장에게로 가져올 것이요	And on the eighth day she shall take unto her two turtles, or two young pigeons, and bring them unto the priest, to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.	On the eighth day she is to take two turtledoves or two young pigeons and bring them to the priest at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting.
LEV	15	30	제사장은 그 하나는 속죄제로, 하나는 번제로 드려 유출로 부정한 여인을 위하여 여호와 앞에 속할지니라	And the priest shall offer the one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering; and the priest shall make an atonement for her before the Lord for the issue of her uncleanness.	The priest is to sacrifice one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering. In this way the priest will make atonement for her before the LORD for her unclean discharge.
LEV	15	31	너희는 이와 같이 이스라엘 자손으로 그 부정에서 떠나게하여 그들로 그 가운데 있는 내 장막을 더럽히고 그 부정한 중에서 죽음을 면케 할지니라	Thus shall ye separate the children of Israel from their uncleanness; that they die not in their uncleanness, when they defile my tabernacle that is among them.	You must keep the children of Israel separate from their uncleanness, so that they do not die by defiling My tabernacle, which is among them.
LEV	15	32	이 규례는 유출병이 있는 자와 설정함으로 부정을 입은 자와	This is the law of him that hath an issue, and of him whose seed goeth from him, and is defiled therewith;	This is the law of him who has a discharge, of the man who has an emission of semen whereby he is unclean,
LEV	15	33	불결을 앓는 여인과 유출병이 있는 남녀와 불결한 여인과 동침한 자에게 관한 것이니라	And of her that is sick of her flowers, and of him that hath an issue, of the man, and of the woman, and of him that lieth with her that is unclean.	of a woman in her menstrual period, of any male or female who has a discharge, and of a man who lies with an unclean woman.’”
LEV	16	1	아론의 두 아들이 여호와 앞에 나아가다가 죽은 후에 여호와께서 모세에게 말씀하시니라	And the Lord spake unto Moses after the death of the two sons of Aaron, when they offered before the Lord, and died;	Now the LORD spoke to Moses after the death of two of Aaron’s sons when they approached the presence of the LORD.
LEV	16	2	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 네 형 아론에게 이르라 성소의 장안 법궤 위 속죄소 앞에 무시로 들어오지 말아서 사망을 면하라 내가 구름 가운데서 속죄소 위에 나타남이니라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Speak unto Aaron thy brother, that he come not at all times into the holy place within the vail before the mercy seat, which is upon the ark; that he die not: for I will appear in the cloud upon the mercy seat.	And the LORD said to Moses: “Tell your brother Aaron not to enter freely into the Most Holy Place behind the veil in front of the mercy seat on the ark, or else he will die, because I appear in the cloud above the mercy seat.
LEV	16	3	아론이 성소에 들어오려면 수송아지로 속죄 제물을 삼고 수양으로 번제물을 삼고	Thus shall Aaron come into the holy place: with a young bullock for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering.	This is how Aaron is to enter the Holy Place: with a young bull for a sin offering and a ram for a burnt offering.
LEV	16	4	거룩한 세마포 속옷을 입으며 세마포 고의를 살에 입고 세마포 띠를 띠며 세마포 관을 쓸지니 이것들은 거룩한 옷이라 물로 몸을 씻고 입을 것이며	He shall put on the holy linen coat, and he shall have the linen breeches upon his flesh, and shall be girded with a linen girdle, and with the linen mitre shall he be attired: these are holy garments; therefore shall he wash his flesh in water, and so put them on.	He is to wear the sacred linen tunic, with linen undergarments. He must tie a linen sash around him and put on the linen turban. These are holy garments, and he must bathe himself with water before he wears them.
LEV	16	5	이스라엘 자손의 회중에게서 속죄 제물을 위하여 수염소 둘과 번제물을 위하여 수양 하나를 취할지니라	And he shall take of the congregation of the children of Israel two kids of the goats for a sin offering, and one ram for a burnt offering.	And he shall take from the congregation of Israel two male goats for a sin offering and one ram for a burnt offering.
LEV	16	6	아론은 자기를 위한 속죄제의 수송아지를 드리되 자기와 권속을 위하여 속죄하고	And Aaron shall offer his bullock of the sin offering, which is for himself, and make an atonement for himself, and for his house.	Aaron is to present the bull for his sin offering and make atonement for himself and his household.
LEV	16	7	또 그 두 염소를 취하여 회막문 여호와 앞에 두고	And he shall take the two goats, and present them before the Lord at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.	Then he shall take the two goats and present them before the LORD at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting.
LEV	16	8	두 염소를 위하여 제비 뽑되 한 제비는 여호와를 위하고 한 제비는 아사셀을 위하여 할지며	And Aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats; one lot for the Lord, and the other lot for the scapegoat.	After Aaron casts lots for the two goats, one for the LORD and the other for the scapegoat,
LEV	16	9	아론은 여호와를 위하여 제비 뽑은 염소를 속죄제로 드리고	And Aaron shall bring the goat upon which the Lord’s lot fell, and offer him for a sin offering.	he shall present the goat chosen by lot for the LORD and sacrifice it as a sin offering.
LEV	16	10	아사셀을 위하여 제비 뽑은 염소는 산 대로 여호와 앞에 두었다가 그것으로 속죄하고 아사셀을 위하여 광야로 보낼지니라	But the goat, on which the lot fell to be the scapegoat, shall be presented alive before the Lord, to make an atonement with him, and to let him go for a scapegoat into the wilderness.	But the goat chosen by lot as the scapegoat shall be presented alive before the LORD to make atonement by sending it into the wilderness as the scapegoat.
LEV	16	11	아론은 자기를 위한 속죄제의 수송아지를 드리되 자기와 권속을 위하여 속죄하고 자기를 위한 그 속죄제 수송아지를 잡고	And Aaron shall bring the bullock of the sin offering, which is for himself, and shall make an atonement for himself, and for his house, and shall kill the bullock of the sin offering which is for himself:	When Aaron presents the bull for his sin offering and makes atonement for himself and his household, he is to slaughter the bull for his own sin offering.
LEV	16	12	향로를 취하여 여호와 앞 단 위에서 피운 불을 그것에 채우고 또 두 손에 곱게 간 향기로운 향을 채워 가지고 장 안에 들어가서	And he shall take a censer full of burning coals of fire from off the altar before the Lord, and his hands full of sweet incense beaten small, and bring it within the vail:	Then he must take a censer full of burning coals from the altar before the LORD, and two handfuls of finely ground fragrant incense, and take them inside the veil.
LEV	16	13	여호와 앞에서 분향하여 향연으로 증거궤 위 속죄소를 가리우게 할지니 그리하면 그가 죽음을 면할 것이며	And he shall put the incense upon the fire before the Lord, that the cloud of the incense may cover the mercy seat that is upon the testimony, that he die not:	He is to put the incense on the fire before the LORD, and the cloud of incense will cover the mercy seat above the Testimony, so that he will not die.
LEV	16	14	그는 또 수송아지의 피를 취하여 손가락으로 속죄소 동편에 뿌리고 또 손가락으로 그 피를 속죄소 앞에 일곱 번 뿌릴 것이며	And he shall take of the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it with his finger upon the mercy seat eastward; and before the mercy seat shall he sprinkle of the blood with his finger seven times.	And he is to take some of the bull’s blood and sprinkle it with his finger on the east side of the mercy seat; then he shall sprinkle some of it with his finger seven times before the mercy seat.
LEV	16	15	또 백성을 위한 속죄제 염소를 잡아 그 피를 가지고 장 안에 들어가서 그 수송아지 피로 행함 같이 그 피로 행하여 속죄소 위와 속죄소 앞에 뿌릴지니	Then shall he kill the goat of the sin offering, that is for the people, and bring his blood within the vail, and do with that blood as he did with the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it upon the mercy seat, and before the mercy seat:	Aaron shall then slaughter the goat for the sin offering for the people and bring its blood behind the veil, and with its blood he must do as he did with the bull’s blood: He is to sprinkle it against the mercy seat and in front of it.
LEV	16	16	곧 이스라엘 자손의 부정과 그 범한 모든 죄를 인하여 지성소를 위하여 속죄하고 또 그들의 부정한 중에 있는 회막을 위하여 그 같이 할 것이요	And he shall make an atonement for the holy place, because of the uncleanness of the children of Israel, and because of their transgressions in all their sins: and so shall he do for the tabernacle of the congregation, that remaineth among them in the midst of their uncleanness.	So he shall make atonement for the Most Holy Place because of the impurities and rebellious acts of the Israelites in regard to all their sins. He is to do the same for the Tent of Meeting which abides among them, because it is surrounded by their impurities.
LEV	16	17	그가 지성소에 속죄하러 들어가서 자기와 그 권속과 이스라엘 온 회중을 위하여 속죄하고 나오기까지는 누구든지 회막에 있지 못할 것이며	And there shall be no man in the tabernacle of the congregation when he goeth in to make an atonement in the holy place, until he come out, and have made an atonement for himself, and for his household, and for all the congregation of Israel.	No one may be in the Tent of Meeting from the time Aaron goes in to make atonement in the Most Holy Place until he leaves, after he has made atonement for himself, his household, and the whole assembly of Israel.
LEV	16	18	그는 여호와 앞 단으로 나와서 그것을 위하여 속죄할지니 곧 그 수송아지의 피와 염소의 피를 취하여 단 귀퉁이 뿔들에 바르고	And he shall go out unto the altar that is before the Lord, and make an atonement for it; and shall take of the blood of the bullock, and of the blood of the goat, and put it upon the horns of the altar round about.	Then he shall go out to the altar that is before the LORD and make atonement for it. He is to take some of the bull’s blood and some of the goat’s blood and put it on all the horns of the altar.
LEV	16	19	또 손가락으로 그 피를 그 위에 일곱 번 뿌려 이스라엘 자손의 부정에서 단을 성결케 할 것이요	And he shall sprinkle of the blood upon it with his finger seven times, and cleanse it, and hallow it from the uncleanness of the children of Israel.	He is to sprinkle some of the blood on it with his finger seven times to cleanse it and consecrate it from the uncleanness of the Israelites.
LEV	16	20	그 지성소와 회막과 단을 위하여 속죄하기를 마친 후에 산 염소를 드리되	And when he hath made an end of reconciling the holy place, and the tabernacle of the congregation, and the altar, he shall bring the live goat:	When Aaron has finished purifying the Most Holy Place, the Tent of Meeting, and the altar, he is to bring forward the live goat.
LEV	16	21	아론은 두 손으로 산 염소의 머리에 안수하여 이스라엘 자손의 모든 불의와 그 범한 모든 죄를 고하고 그 죄를 염소의 머리에 두어 미리 정한 사람에게 맡겨 광야로 보낼지니	And Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions in all their sins, putting them upon the head of the goat, and shall send him away by the hand of a fit man into the wilderness:	Then he is to lay both hands on the head of the live goat and confess over it all the iniquities and rebellious acts of the Israelites in regard to all their sins. He is to put them on the goat’s head and send it away into the wilderness by the hand of a man appointed for the task.
LEV	16	22	염소가 그들의 모든 불의를 지고 무인지경에 이르거든 그는 그 염소를 광야에 놓을지니라	And the goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities unto a land not inhabited: and he shall let go the goat in the wilderness.	The goat will carry on itself all their iniquities into a solitary place, and the man will release it into the wilderness.
LEV	16	23	아론은 회막에 들어가서 지성소에 들어갈 때에 입었던 세마포 옷을 벗어 거기 두고	And Aaron shall come into the tabernacle of the congregation, and shall put off the linen garments, which he put on when he went into the holy place, and shall leave them there:	Then Aaron is to enter the Tent of Meeting, take off the linen garments he put on before entering the Most Holy Place, and leave them there.
LEV	16	24	거룩한 곳에서 물로 몸을 씻고 자기 옷을 입고 나와서 자기의 번제와 백성의 번제를 드려 자기와 백성을 위하여 속죄하고	And he shall wash his flesh with water in the holy place, and put on his garments, and come forth, and offer his burnt offering, and the burnt offering of the people, and make an atonement for himself, and for the people.	He is to bathe himself with water in a holy place and put on his own clothes. Then he must go out and sacrifice his burnt offering and the people’s burnt offering to make atonement for himself and for the people.
LEV	16	25	속죄제 희생의 기름을 단에 불사를 것이요	And the fat of the sin offering shall he burn upon the altar.	He is also to burn the fat of the sin offering on the altar.
LEV	16	26	염소를 아사셀에게 보낸 자는 옷을 빨고 물로 몸을 씻은 후에 진에 들어올 것이며	And he that let go the goat for the scapegoat shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward come into the camp.	The man who released the goat as the scapegoat must wash his clothes and bathe himself with water; afterward he may reenter the camp.
LEV	16	27	속죄제 수송아지와 속죄제 염소의 피를 성소로 들여다가 속죄하였은즉 그 가죽과 고기와 똥을 밖으로 내어다가 불사를 것이요	And the bullock for the sin offering, and the goat for the sin offering, whose blood was brought in to make atonement in the holy place, shall one carry forth without the camp; and they shall burn in the fire their skins, and their flesh, and their dung.	The bull for the sin offering and the goat for the sin offering, whose blood was brought into the Most Holy Place to make atonement, must be taken outside the camp; and their hides, flesh, and dung must be burned up.
LEV	16	28	불사른 자는 옷을 빨고 물로 몸을 씻은 후에 진에 들어올지니라	And he that burneth them shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he shall come into the camp.	The one who burns them must wash his clothes and bathe himself with water, and afterward he may reenter the camp.
LEV	16	29	너희는 영원히 이 규례를 지킬지니라 칠월 곧 그 달 십일에 너희는 스스로 괴롭게 하고 아무 일도 하지 말되 본토인이든지 너희 중에 우거하는 객이든지 그리하라	And this shall be a statute for ever unto you: that in the seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, ye shall afflict your souls, and do no work at all, whether it be one of your own country, or a stranger that sojourneth among you:	This is to be a permanent statute for you: On the tenth day of the seventh month, you shall humble yourselves and not do any work—whether the native or the foreigner who resides among you—
LEV	16	30	이 날에 너희를 위하여 속죄하여 너희로 정결케 하리니 너희 모든 죄에서 너희가 여호와 앞에 정결하리라	For on that day shall the priest make an atonement for you, to cleanse you, that ye may be clean from all your sins before the Lord.	because on this day atonement will be made for you to cleanse you, and you will be clean from all your sins before the LORD.
LEV	16	31	이는 너희에게 큰 안식일인즉 너희는 스스로 괴롭게 할지니 영원히 지킬 규례라	It shall be a sabbath of rest unto you, and ye shall afflict your souls, by a statute for ever.	It is a Sabbath of complete rest for you, that you may humble yourselves; it is a permanent statute.
LEV	16	32	그 기름 부음을 받고 위임되어 그 아비를 대신하여 제사장의 직분을 행하는 제사장은 속죄하되 세마포 옷 곧 성의를 입고	And the priest, whom he shall anoint, and whom he shall consecrate to minister in the priest’s office in his father’s stead, shall make the atonement, and shall put on the linen clothes, even the holy garments:	The priest who is anointed and ordained to succeed his father as high priest shall make atonement. He will put on the sacred linen garments
LEV	16	33	지성소를 위하여 속죄하며 회막과 단을 위하여 속죄하고 또 제사장들과 백성의 회중을 위하여 속죄할지니	And he shall make an atonement for the holy sanctuary, and he shall make an atonement for the tabernacle of the congregation, and for the altar, and he shall make an atonement for the priests, and for all the people of the congregation.	and make atonement for the Most Holy Place, the Tent of Meeting, and the altar, and for the priests and all the people of the assembly.
LEV	16	34	이는 너희의 영원히 지킬 규례라 이스라엘 자손의 모든 죄를 위하여 일 년 일 차 속죄할 것이니라 아론이 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 행하니라	And this shall be an everlasting statute unto you, to make an atonement for the children of Israel for all their sins once a year. And he did as the Lord commanded Moses.	This is to be a permanent statute for you, to make atonement once a year for the Israelites because of all their sins.” And all this was done as the LORD had commanded Moses.
LEV	17	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	17	2	아론과 그 아들들과 이스라엘 모든 자손에게 고하여 그들에게 이르기를 여호와의 명령이 이러하시다 하라	Speak unto Aaron, and unto his sons, and unto all the children of Israel, and say unto them; This is the thing which the Lord hath commanded, saying,	“Speak to Aaron, his sons, and all the Israelites and tell them this is what the LORD has commanded:
LEV	17	3	무릇 이스라엘 집의 누구든지 소나 어린 양이나 염소를 진 안에서 잡든지 진 밖에서 잡든지	What man soever there be of the house of Israel, that killeth an ox, or lamb, or goat, in the camp, or that killeth it out of the camp,	‘Anyone from the house of Israel who slaughters an ox, a lamb, or a goat in the camp or outside of it
LEV	17	4	먼저 희막문으로 끌어다가 여호와의 장막 앞에서 여호와께 예물로 드리지 아니하는 자는 피흘린 자로 여길 것이라 그가 피를 흘렸은즉 자기 백성 중에서 끊쳐지리라	And bringeth it not unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, to offer an offering unto the Lord before the tabernacle of the Lord; blood shall be imputed unto that man; he hath shed blood; and that man shall be cut off from among his people:	instead of bringing it to the entrance to the Tent of Meeting to present it as an offering to the LORD before His tabernacle—that man shall incur bloodguilt. He has shed blood and must be cut off from among his people.
LEV	17	5	그런즉 이스라엘 자손이 들에서 잡던 희생을 회막문 여호와께로 끌어다가 제사장에게 주어 화목제로 여호와께 드려야 할 것이요	To the end that the children of Israel may bring their sacrifices, which they offer in the open field, even that they may bring them unto the Lord, unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, unto the priest, and offer them for peace offerings unto the Lord.	For this reason the Israelites will bring to the LORD the sacrifices they have been offering in the open fields. They are to bring them to the priest at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting and offer them as sacrifices of peace to the LORD.
LEV	17	6	제사장은 그 피를 회막문 여호와의 단에 뿌리고 그 기름을 불살라 여호와께 향기로운 냄새가 되게 할 것이라	And the priest shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar of the Lord at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and burn the fat for a sweet savour unto the Lord.	The priest will then sprinkle the blood on the altar of the LORD at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting and burn the fat as a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
LEV	17	7	그들은 전에 음란히 섬기던 수염소에게 다시 제사하지 말 것이니라 이는 그들이 대대로 지킬 영원한 규례니라	And they shall no more offer their sacrifices unto devils, after whom they have gone a whoring. This shall be a statute for ever unto them throughout their generations.	They must no longer offer their sacrifices to the goat demons to which they have prostituted themselves. This will be a permanent statute for them for the generations to come.’
LEV	17	8	너는 또 그들에게 이르라 무릇 이스라엘 집 사람이나 혹시 그들 중에 우거하는 타국인이 번제나 희생을 드리되	And thou shalt say unto them, Whatsoever man there be of the house of Israel, or of the strangers which sojourn among you, that offereth a burnt offering or sacrifice,	Tell them that if anyone from the house of Israel or any foreigner living among them offers a burnt offering or a sacrifice
LEV	17	9	회막문으로 가져다가 여호와께 드리지 아니하면 그는 백성 중에서 끊쳐지리라	And bringeth it not unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, to offer it unto the Lord; even that man shall be cut off from among his people.	but does not bring it to the entrance to the Tent of Meeting to sacrifice it to the LORD, that man must be cut off from his people.
LEV	17	10	무릇 이스라엘 집 사람이나 그들 중에 우거하는 타국인 중에 어떤 피든지 먹는 자가 있으면 내가 그 피 먹는 사람에게 진노하여그를 백성 중에서 끊으리니	And whatsoever man there be of the house of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among you, that eateth any manner of blood; I will even set my face against that soul that eateth blood, and will cut him off from among his people.	If anyone from the house of Israel or a foreigner living among them eats any blood, I will set My face against that person and cut him off from among his people.
LEV	17	11	육체의 생명은 피에 있음이라 내가 이 피를 너희에게 주어 단에 뿌려 너희의 생명을 위하여 속하게 하였나니 생명이 피에 있으므로 피가 죄를 속하느니라	For the life of the flesh is in the blood: and I have given it to you upon the altar to make an atonement for your souls: for it is the blood that maketh an atonement for the soul.	For the life of the flesh is in the blood, and I have given it to you to make atonement for your souls upon the altar; for it is the blood that makes atonement for the soul.
LEV	17	12	그러므로 내가 이스라엘 자손에게 말하기를 너희 중에 아무도 피를 먹지 말며 너희 중에 우거하는 타국인이라도 피를 먹지 말라 하였나니	Therefore I said unto the children of Israel, No soul of you shall eat blood, neither shall any stranger that sojourneth among you eat blood.	Therefore I say to the Israelites, ‘None of you may eat blood, nor may any foreigner living among you eat blood.’
LEV	17	13	무릇 이스라엘 자손이나 그들 중에 우거하는 타국인이 먹을 만한 짐승이나 새를 사냥하여 잡거든 그 피를 흘리고 흙으로 덮을지니라	And whatsoever man there be of the children of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among you, which hunteth and catcheth any beast or fowl that may be eaten; he shall even pour out the blood thereof, and cover it with dust.	And if any Israelite or foreigner living among them hunts down a wild animal or bird that may be eaten, he must drain its blood and cover it with dirt.
LEV	17	14	모든 생물은 그 피가 생명과 일체라 그러므로 내가 이스라엘 자손에게 이르기를 너희는 어느 육체의 피든지 먹지 말라 하였나니 모든 육체의 생명은 그 피인즉 무릇 피를 먹는 자는 끊쳐지리라	For it is the life of all flesh; the blood of it is for the life thereof: therefore I said unto the children of Israel, Ye shall eat the blood of no manner of flesh: for the life of all flesh is the blood thereof: whosoever eateth it shall be cut off.	For the life of all flesh is its blood. Therefore I have told the Israelites, ‘You must not eat the blood of any living thing, because the life of all flesh is its blood; whoever eats it must be cut off.’
LEV	17	15	무릇 스스로 죽은 것이나 들짐승에게 찢겨 죽은 것을 먹은 자는 본토인이나 타국인이나 물론하고 그 옷을 빨고 물로 몸을 씻을 것이며 저녁까지 부정하고 그 후에 정하려니와	And every soul that eateth that which died of itself, or that which was torn with beasts, whether it be one of your own country, or a stranger, he shall both wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even: then shall he be clean.	And any person, whether native or foreigner, who eats anything found dead or mauled by wild beasts must wash his clothes and bathe with water, and he will be unclean until evening; then he will be clean.
LEV	17	16	그가 빨지 아니하거나 몸을 물로 씻지 아니하면 죄를 당하리라	But if he wash them not, nor bathe his flesh; then he shall bear his iniquity.	But if he does not wash his clothes and bathe himself, then he shall bear his iniquity.”
LEV	18	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	18	2	너는 이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 이르라 나는 여호와 너희 하나님이라	Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, I am the Lord your God.	“Speak to the Israelites and tell them: I am the LORD your God.
LEV	18	3	너희는 그 거하던 애굽 땅의 풍속을 좇지 말며 내가 너희를 인도할 가나안 땅의 풍속과 규례도 행하지 말고	After the doings of the land of Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shall ye not do: and after the doings of the land of Canaan, whither I bring you, shall ye not do: neither shall ye walk in their ordinances.	You must not follow the practices of the land of Egypt, where you used to live, and you must not follow the practices of the land of Canaan, into which I am bringing you. You must not walk in their customs.
LEV	18	4	너희는 나의 법도를 좇으며 나의 규례를 지켜 그대로 행하라 나는 너희의 하나님 여호와니라	Ye shall do my judgments, and keep mine ordinances, to walk therein: I am the Lord your God.	You are to practice My judgments and keep My statutes by walking in them. I am the LORD your God.
LEV	18	5	너희는 나의 규례와 법도를 지키라 사람이 이를 행하면 그로 인하여 살리라 나는 여호와니라	Ye shall therefore keep my statutes, and my judgments: which if a man do, he shall live in them: I am the Lord.	Keep My statutes and My judgments, for the man who does these things will live by them. I am the LORD.
LEV	18	6	너희는 골육지친을 가까이하여 그 하체를 범치 말라 나는 여호와니라	None of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to him, to uncover their nakedness: I am the Lord.	None of you are to approach any close relative to have sexual relations. I am the LORD.
LEV	18	7	네 어미의 하체는 곧 네 아비의 하체니 너는 범치 말라 그는 네 어미인즉 너는 그의 하체를 너는 범치 말지니라	The nakedness of thy father, or the nakedness of thy mother, shalt thou not uncover: she is thy mother; thou shalt not uncover her nakedness.	You must not expose the nakedness of your father by having sexual relations with your mother. She is your mother; you must not have sexual relations with her.
LEV	18	8	너는 계모의 하체를 범치 말라 이는 네 아비의 하체니라	The nakedness of thy father’s wife shalt thou not uncover: it is thy father’s nakedness.	You must not have sexual relations with your father’s wife; it would dishonor your father.
LEV	18	9	너는 네 자매 곧 네 아비의 딸이나 네 어미의 딸이나 집에서나 타처에서 출생하였음을 물론하고 그들의 하체를 범치 말지니라	The nakedness of thy sister, the daughter of thy father, or daughter of thy mother, whether she be born at home, or born abroad, even their nakedness thou shalt not uncover.	You must not have sexual relations with your sister, either your father’s daughter or your mother’s daughter, whether she was born in the same home or elsewhere.
LEV	18	10	너는 손녀나 외손녀의 하체를 범치 말라 이는 너의 하체니라	The nakedness of thy son’s daughter, or of thy daughter’s daughter, even their nakedness thou shalt not uncover: for theirs is thine own nakedness.	You must not have sexual relations with your son’s daughter or your daughter’s daughter, for that would shame your family.
LEV	18	11	네 계모가 네 아비에게 낳은 딸은 네 누이니 너는 그 하체를 범치 말지니라	The nakedness of thy father’s wife’s daughter, begotten of thy father, she is thy sister, thou shalt not uncover her nakedness.	You must not have sexual relations with the daughter of your father’s wife, born to your father; she is your sister.
LEV	18	12	너는 고모의 하체를 범치 말라 그는 네 아비의 골육지친이니라	Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father’s sister: she is thy father’s near kinswoman.	You must not have sexual relations with your father’s sister; she is your father’s close relative.
LEV	18	13	너는 이모의 하체를 범치 말라 그는 네 어미의 골육지친이니라	Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother’s sister: for she is thy mother’s near kinswoman.	You must not have sexual relations with your mother’s sister, for she is your mother’s close relative.
LEV	18	14	너는 네 아비 형제의 아내를 가까이하여 그 하체를 범치 말라 그는 네 백숙모니라	Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father’s brother, thou shalt not approach to his wife: she is thine aunt.	You must not dishonor your father’s brother by approaching his wife to have sexual relations with her; she is your aunt.
LEV	18	15	너는 자부의 하체를 범치 말라 그는 네 아들의 아내니 그 하체를 범치 말지니라	Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy daughter in law: she is thy son’s wife; thou shalt not uncover her nakedness.	You must not have sexual relations with your daughter-in-law. She is your son’s wife; you are not to have sexual relations with her.
LEV	18	16	너는 형제의 아내의 하체를 범치 말라 이는 네 형제의 하체니라	Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy brother’s wife: it is thy brother’s nakedness.	You must not have sexual relations with your brother’s wife; that would shame your brother.
LEV	18	17	너는 여인과 그 여인의 딸의 하체를 아울러 범치 말며 또 그 여인의 손녀나 외손녀를 아울러 취하여 그 하체를 범치 말라 그들은 그의 골육지친이니 이는 악행이니라	Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of a woman and her daughter, neither shalt thou take her son’s daughter, or her daughter’s daughter, to uncover her nakedness; for they are her near kinswomen: it is wickedness.	You must not have sexual relations with both a woman and her daughter. You are not to marry her son’s daughter or her daughter’s daughter and have sexual relations with her. They are close relatives; it is depraved.
LEV	18	18	너는 아내가 생존할 동안에 그 형제를 취하여 하체를 범하여 그로 투기케 하지 말지니라	Neither shalt thou take a wife to her sister, to vex her, to uncover her nakedness, beside the other in her life time.	You must not take your wife’s sister as a rival wife and have sexual relations with her while your wife is still alive.
LEV	18	19	너는 여인이 경도로 불결할 동안에 그에게 가까이하여 그 하체를 범치 말지니라	Also thou shalt not approach unto a woman to uncover her nakedness, as long as she is put apart for her uncleanness.	You must not approach a woman to have sexual relations with her during her menstrual period.
LEV	18	20	너는 타인의 아내와 통간하여 그로 자기를 더럽히지 말지니라	Moreover thou shalt not lie carnally with thy neighbour’s wife, to defile thyself with her.	You must not lie carnally with your neighbor’s wife and thus defile yourself with her.
LEV	18	21	너는 결단코 자녀를 몰렉에게 주어 불로 통과케 말아서 네 하나님의 이름을 욕되게 하지 말라 나는 여호와니라	And thou shalt not let any of thy seed pass through the fire to Molech, neither shalt thou profane the name of thy God: I am the Lord.	You must not give any of your children to be sacrificed to Molech, for you must not profane the name of your God. I am the LORD.
LEV	18	22	너는 여자와 교합함 같이 남자와 교합하지 말라 이는 가증한 일이니라	Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind: it is abomination.	You must not lie with a man as with a woman; that is an abomination.
LEV	18	23	너는 짐승과 교합하여 자기를 더럽히지 말며 여자가 된 자는 짐승 앞에 서서 그것과 교접하지 말라 이는 문란한 일이니라	Neither shalt thou lie with any beast to defile thyself therewith: neither shall any woman stand before a beast to lie down thereto: it is confusion.	You must not lie carnally with any animal, thus defiling yourself with it; a woman must not stand before an animal to mate with it; that is a perversion.
LEV	18	24	너희는 이 모든 일로 스스로 더럽히지 말라 내가 너희의 앞에서 쫓아내는 족속들이 이 모든 일로 인하여 더러워졌고	Defile not ye yourselves in any of these things: for in all these the nations are defiled which I cast out before you:	Do not defile yourselves by any of these practices, for by all these things the nations I am driving out before you have defiled themselves.
LEV	18	25	그 땅도 더러워졌으므로 내가 그 악을 인하여 벌하고 그 땅도 스스로 그 거민을 토하여 내느니라	And the land is defiled: therefore I do visit the iniquity thereof upon it, and the land itself vomiteth out her inhabitants.	Even the land has become defiled, so I am punishing it for its sin, and the land will vomit out its inhabitants.
LEV	18	26	그러므로 너희 곧 너희의 동족이나 혹시 너희 중에 우거하는 타국인이나 나의 규례와 법도를 지키고 이런 가증한 일의 하나도 행하지 말라	Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my judgments, and shall not commit any of these abominations; neither any of your own nation, nor any stranger that sojourneth among you:	But you are to keep My statutes and ordinances, and you must not commit any of these abominations—neither your native-born nor the foreigner who lives among you.
LEV	18	27	너희의 전에 있던 그 땅 거민이 이 모든 가증한 일을 행하였고 그 땅도 더러워졌느니라	(For all these abominations have the men of the land done, which were before you, and the land is defiled;)	For the men who were in the land before you committed all these abominations, and the land has become defiled.
LEV	18	28	너희도 더럽히면 그 땅이 너희 있기 전 거민을 토함 같이 너희를 토할까 하노라	That the land spue not you out also, when ye defile it, as it spued out the nations that were before you.	So if you defile the land, it will vomit you out as it spewed out the nations before you.
LEV	18	29	무릇 이 가증한 일을 하나라도 행하는 자는 그 백성 중에서 끊쳐지리라	For whosoever shall commit any of these abominations, even the souls that commit them shall be cut off from among their people.	Therefore anyone who commits any of these abominations must be cut off from among his people.
LEV	18	30	그러므로 너희는 내 명령을 지키고 너희 있기 전에 행하던 가증한 풍속을 하나라도 좇음으로 스스로 더럽히지 말라 나는 너희 하나님 여호와니라	Therefore shall ye keep mine ordinance, that ye commit not any one of these abominable customs, which were committed before you, and that ye defile not yourselves therein: I am the Lord your God.	You must keep My charge not to practice any of the abominable customs that were practiced before you, so that you do not defile yourselves by them. I am the LORD your God.”
LEV	19	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	19	2	너는 이스라엘 자손의 온 회중에게 고하여 이르라 너희는 거룩하라 나 여호와 너희 하나님이 거룩함이니라	Speak unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, and say unto them, Ye shall be holy: for I the Lord your God am holy.	“Speak to the whole congregation of Israel and tell them: Be holy because I, the LORD your God, am holy.
LEV	19	3	너희 각 사람은 부모를 경외하고 나의 안식일을 지키라 나는 너희 하나님 여호와니라	Ye shall fear every man his mother, and his father, and keep my sabbaths: I am the Lord your God.	Each of you must respect his mother and father, and you must keep My Sabbaths. I am the LORD your God.
LEV	19	4	너희는 헛것을 위하지 말며 너희를 위하여 신상들을 부어 만들지 말라 나는 너희 하나님 여호와니라	Turn ye not unto idols, nor make to yourselves molten gods: I am the Lord your God.	Do not turn to idols or make for yourselves molten gods. I am the LORD your God.
LEV	19	5	너희는 화목제 희생을 여호와께 드릴 때에 열납되도록 드리고	And if ye offer a sacrifice of peace offerings unto the Lord, ye shall offer it at your own will.	When you sacrifice a peace offering to the LORD, you shall offer it for your acceptance.
LEV	19	6	그 제물은 드리는 날과 이튿날에 먹고 제삼일까지 남았거든 불사르라	It shall be eaten the same day ye offer it, and on the morrow: and if ought remain until the third day, it shall be burnt in the fire.	It shall be eaten on the day you sacrifice it, or on the next day; but what remains on the third day must be burned up.
LEV	19	7	제삼일에 조금이라도 먹으면 가증한 것이 되어 열납되지 못하고	And if it be eaten at all on the third day, it is abominable; it shall not be accepted.	If any of it is eaten on the third day, it is tainted and will not be accepted.
LEV	19	8	그것을 먹는 자는 여호와의 성물 더럽힘을 인하여 죄를 당하리니 그가 그 백성 중에서 끊쳐지리라	Therefore every one that eateth it shall bear his iniquity, because he hath profaned the hallowed thing of the Lord: and that soul shall be cut off from among his people.	Whoever eats it will bear his iniquity, for he has profaned what is holy to the LORD. That person must be cut off from his people.
LEV	19	9	너희 땅의 곡물을 벨 때에 너는 밭 모퉁이까지 다 거두지 말고 너의 떨어진 이삭도 줍지 말며	And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not wholly reap the corners of thy field, neither shalt thou gather the gleanings of thy harvest.	When you reap the harvest of your land, you are not to reap to the very edges of your field or gather the gleanings of your harvest.
LEV	19	10	너의 포도원의 열매를 다 따지 말며 너의 포도원에 떨어진 열매도 줍지 말고 가난한 사람과 타국인을 위하여 버려 두라 나는 너희 하나님 여호와니라	And thou shalt not glean thy vineyard, neither shalt thou gather every grape of thy vineyard; thou shalt leave them for the poor and stranger: I am the Lord your God.	You must not strip your vineyard bare or gather its fallen grapes. Leave them for the poor and the foreigner. I am the LORD your God.
LEV	19	11	너희는 도적질하지 말며 속이지 말며 서로 거짓말하지 말며	Ye shall not steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie one to another.	You must not steal. You must not lie or deceive one another.
LEV	19	12	너희는 내 이름으로 거짓 맹세함으로 네 하나님의 이름을 욕되게 하지 말라 나는 여호와니라	And ye shall not swear by my name falsely, neither shalt thou profane the name of thy God: I am the Lord.	You must not swear falsely by My name and so profane the name of your God. I am the LORD.
LEV	19	13	너는 네 이웃을 압제하지 말며 늑탈하지 말며 품꾼의 삯을 아침까지 밤새도록 네게 두지 말며	Thou shalt not defraud thy neighbour, neither rob him: the wages of him that is hired shall not abide with thee all night until the morning.	You must not defraud your neighbor or rob him. You must not withhold until morning the wages due a hired hand.
LEV	19	14	너는 귀먹은 자를 저주하지 말며 소경 앞에 장애물을 놓지 말고 네 하나님을 경외하라 나는 여호와니라	Thou shalt not curse the deaf, nor put a stumblingblock before the blind, but shalt fear thy God: I am the Lord.	You must not curse the deaf or place a stumbling block before the blind, but you shall fear your God. I am the LORD.
LEV	19	15	너희는 재판할 때에 불의를 행치 말며 가난한 자의 편을 들지 말며 세력있는 자라고 두호하지 말고 공의로 사람을 재판할지며	Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment: thou shalt not respect the person of the poor, nor honour the person of the mighty: but in righteousness shalt thou judge thy neighbour.	You must not pervert justice; you must not show partiality to the poor or favoritism to the rich; you are to judge your neighbor fairly.
LEV	19	16	너는 네 백성 중으로 돌아다니며 사람을 논단하지 말며 네 이웃을 대적하여 죽을 지경에 이르게 하지 말라 나는 여호와니라	Thou shalt not go up and down as a talebearer among thy people: neither shalt thou stand against the blood of thy neighbour: I am the Lord.	You must not go about spreading slander among your people. You must not endanger the life of your neighbor. I am the LORD.
LEV	19	17	너는 네 형제를 마음으로 미워하지 말며 이웃을 인하여 죄를 당치 않도록 그를 반드시 책선하라	Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart: thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbour, and not suffer sin upon him.	You must not harbor hatred against your brother in your heart. Directly rebuke your neighbor, so that you will not incur guilt on account of him.
LEV	19	18	원수를 갚지 말며 동포를 원망하지 말며 이웃 사랑하기를 네 몸과 같이 하라 나는 여호와니라	Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself: I am the Lord.	Do not seek revenge or bear a grudge against any of your people, but love your neighbor as yourself. I am the LORD.
LEV	19	19	너희는 내 규례를 지킬지어다 네 육축을 다른 종류와 교합시키지 말며 네 밭에 두 종자를 섞어 뿌리지 말며 두 재료로 직조한 옷을 입지 말지며	Ye shall keep my statutes. Thou shalt not let thy cattle gender with a diverse kind: thou shalt not sow thy field with mingled seed: neither shall a garment mingled of linen and woollen come upon thee.	You are to keep My statutes. You shall not crossbreed two different kinds of livestock; you shall not sow your fields with two kinds of seed; and you shall not wear clothing made of two kinds of material.
LEV	19	20	무릇 아직 속량도 되지 못하고 해방도 되지 못하고 정혼한 씨종과 사람이 행음하면 두 사람이 형벌은 받으려니와 그들이 죽임을 당치 아니할 것은 그 여인은 아직 해방되지 못하였음이라	And whosoever lieth carnally with a woman, that is a bondmaid, betrothed to an husband, and not at all redeemed, nor freedom given her; she shall be scourged; they shall not be put to death, because she was not free.	If a man lies carnally with a slave girl promised to another man but who has not been redeemed or given her freedom, there must be due punishment. But they are not to be put to death, because she had not been freed.
LEV	19	21	그 남자는 그 속건 제물 곧 속건제 수양을 회막문 여호와께로 끌어올 것이요	And he shall bring his trespass offering unto the Lord, unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, even a ram for a trespass offering.	The man, however, must bring a ram to the entrance to the Tent of Meeting as his guilt offering to the LORD.
LEV	19	22	제사장은 그의 범한 죄를 위하여 그 속건제의 수양으로 여호와 앞에 속죄할 것이요 그리하면 그의 범한 죄의 사함을 받으리라	And the priest shall make an atonement for him with the ram of the trespass offering before the Lord for his sin which he hath done: and the sin which he hath done shall be forgiven him.	The priest shall make atonement on his behalf before the LORD with the ram of the guilt offering for the sin he has committed, and he will be forgiven the sin he has committed.
LEV	19	23	너희가 그 땅에 들어가 각종 과목을 심거든 그 열매는 아직 할례받지 못한 것으로 여기되 곧 삼 년 동안 너희는 그것을 할례 받지 못한 것으로 여겨 먹지 말 것이요	And when ye shall come into the land, and shall have planted all manner of trees for food, then ye shall count the fruit thereof as uncircumcised: three years shall it be as uncircumcised unto you: it shall not be eaten of.	When you enter the land and plant any kind of tree for food, you shall regard the fruit as forbidden. For three years it will be forbidden to you and must not be eaten.
LEV	19	24	제사년에는 그 모든 과실이 거룩하니 여호와께 드려 찬송할 것이며	But in the fourth year all the fruit thereof shall be holy to praise the Lord withal.	In the fourth year all its fruit must be consecrated as a praise offering to the LORD.
LEV	19	25	제오년에는 그 열매를 먹을지니 그리하면 너희에게 그 소산이 풍성하리라 나는 너희 하나님 여호와니라	And in the fifth year shall ye eat of the fruit thereof, that it may yield unto you the increase thereof: I am the Lord your God.	But in the fifth year you may eat its fruit; thus your harvest will be increased. I am the LORD your God.
LEV	19	26	너희는 무엇이든지 피채 먹지 말며 복술을 하지 말며 술수를 행치 말며	Ye shall not eat any thing with the blood: neither shall ye use enchantment, nor observe times.	You must not eat anything with blood still in it. You must not practice divination or sorcery.
LEV	19	27	머리 가를 둥글게 깎지 말며 수염 끝을 손상치 말며	Ye shall not round the corners of your heads, neither shalt thou mar the corners of thy beard.	You must not cut off the hair at the sides of your head or clip off the edges of your beard.
LEV	19	28	죽은 자를 위하여 너희는 살을 베지 말며 몸에 무늬를 놓지 말라 나는 여호와니라	Ye shall not make any cuttings in your flesh for the dead, nor print any marks upon you: I am the Lord.	You must not make any cuts in your bodies for the dead or put tattoo marks on yourselves. I am the LORD.
LEV	19	29	네 딸을 더럽혀 기생이 되게 말라 음풍이 전국에 퍼져 죄악이 가득할까 하노라	Do not prostitute thy daughter, to cause her to be a whore; lest the land fall to whoredom, and the land become full of wickedness.	You must not defile your daughter by making her a prostitute, or the land will be prostituted and filled with depravity.
LEV	19	30	내 안식일을 지키고 내 성소를 공경하라 나는 여호와니라	Ye shall keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary: I am the Lord.	You must keep My Sabbaths and have reverence for My sanctuary. I am the LORD.
LEV	19	31	너희는 신접한 자와 박수를 믿지 말며 그들을 추종하여 스스로 더럽히지 말라 나는 너희 하나님 여호와니라	Regard not them that have familiar spirits, neither seek after wizards, to be defiled by them: I am the Lord your God.	You must not turn to mediums or spiritists; do not seek them out, or you will be defiled by them. I am the LORD your God.
LEV	19	32	너는 센 머리 앞에 일어서고 노인의 얼굴을 공경하며 네 하나님을 경외하라 나는 여호와니라	Thou shalt rise up before the hoary head, and honour the face of the old man, and fear thy God: I am the Lord.	You are to rise in the presence of the elderly, honor the aged, and fear your God. I am the LORD.
LEV	19	33	타국인이 너희 땅에 우거하여 함께 있거든 너희는 그를 학대하지 말고	And if a stranger sojourn with thee in your land, ye shall not vex him.	When a foreigner resides with you in your land, you must not oppress him.
LEV	19	34	너희와 함께 있는 타국인을 너희 중에서 낳은 자 같이 여기며 자기 같이 사랑하라 너희도 애굽 땅에서 객이 되었더니라 나는 너희 하나님 여호와니라	But the stranger that dwelleth with you shall be unto you as one born among you, and thou shalt love him as thyself; for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt: I am the Lord your God.	You must treat the foreigner living among you as native-born and love him as yourself, for you were foreigners in the land of Egypt. I am the LORD your God.
LEV	19	35	너희는 재판에든지 도량형에든지 불의를 행치 말고	Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in meteyard, in weight, or in measure.	You must not use dishonest measures of length, weight, or volume.
LEV	19	36	공평한 저울과 공평한 추와 공평한 에바와 공평한 힌을 사용하라 나는 너희를 인도하여 애굽 땅에서 나오게 한 너희 하나님 여호와니라	Just balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hin, shall ye have: I am the Lord your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt.	You shall maintain honest scales and weights, an honest ephah, and an honest hin. I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt.
LEV	19	37	너희는 나의 모든 규례와 나의 모든 법도를 지켜 행하라 나는 여호와니라	Therefore shall ye observe all my statutes, and all my judgments, and do them: I am the Lord.	You must keep all My statutes and all My ordinances and follow them. I am the LORD.”
LEV	20	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	20	2	너는 이스라엘 자손에게 또 이르라 무릇 그가 이스라엘 자손이든지 이스라엘에 우거한 타국인이든지 그 자식을 몰렉에게 주거든 반드시 죽이되 그 지방 사람이 돌로 칠 것이요	Again, thou shalt say to the children of Israel, Whosoever he be of the children of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn in Israel, that giveth any of his seed unto Molech; he shall surely be put to death: the people of the land shall stone him with stones.	“Tell the Israelites, ‘Any Israelite or foreigner living in Israel who gives any of his children to Molech must be put to death. The people of the land are to stone him.
LEV	20	3	나도 그 사람에게 진노하여 그를 그 백성 중에서 끊으리니 이는 그가 그 자식을 몰렉에게 주어서 내 성소를 더럽히고 내 성호를 욕되게 하였음이라	And I will set my face against that man, and will cut him off from among his people; because he hath given of his seed unto Molech, to defile my sanctuary, and to profane my holy name.	And I will set My face against that man and cut him off from his people, because by giving his offspring to Molech, he has defiled My sanctuary and profaned My holy name.
LEV	20	4	그가 그 자식을 몰렉에게 주는 것을 그 지방 사람이 못본체하고 그를 죽이지 아니하면	And if the people of the land do any ways hide their eyes from the man, when he giveth of his seed unto Molech, and kill him not:	And if the people of the land ever hide their eyes and fail to put to death the man who gives one of his children to Molech,
LEV	20	5	내가 그 사람과 그 권속에게 진노하여 그와 무릇 그를 본받아 몰렉을 음란히 섬기는 모든 사람을 그 백성 중에서 끊으리라	Then I will set my face against that man, and against his family, and will cut him off, and all that go a whoring after him, to commit whoredom with Molech, from among their people.	then I will set My face against that man and his family and cut off from among their people both him and all who follow him in prostituting themselves with Molech.
LEV	20	6	음란하듯 신접한 자와 박수를 추종하는 자에게는 내가 진노하여 그를 그 백성 중에서 끊으리니	And the soul that turneth after such as have familiar spirits, and after wizards, to go a whoring after them, I will even set my face against that soul, and will cut him off from among his people.	Whoever turns to mediums or spiritists to prostitute himself with them, I will also set My face against that person and cut him off from his people.
LEV	20	7	너희는 스스로 깨끗케 하여 거룩할지어다 나는 너희 하나님 여호와니라	Sanctify yourselves therefore, and be ye holy: for I am the Lord your God.	Consecrate yourselves, therefore, and be holy, because I am the LORD your God.
LEV	20	8	너희는 내 규례를 지켜 행하라 나는 너희를 거룩케 하는 여호와니라	And ye shall keep my statutes, and do them: I am the Lord which sanctify you.	And you shall keep My statutes and practice them. I am the LORD who sanctifies you.
LEV	20	9	무릇 그 아비나 어미를 저주하는 자는 반드시 죽일지니 그가 그 아비나 어미를 저주하였은즉 그 피가 자기에게로 돌아가리라	For every one that curseth his father or his mother shall be surely put to death: he hath cursed his father or his mother; his blood shall be upon him.	If anyone curses his father or mother, he must be put to death. He has cursed his father or mother; his blood shall be upon him.
LEV	20	10	누구든지 남의 아내와 간음하는 자 곧 그 이웃의 아내와 간음하는 자는 그 간부와 음부를 반드시 죽일지니라	And the man that committeth adultery with another man’s wife, even he that committeth adultery with his neighbour’s wife, the adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be put to death.	If a man commits adultery with another man’s wife—with the wife of his neighbor—both the adulterer and the adulteress must surely be put to death.
LEV	20	11	누구든지 그 계모와 동침하는 자는 그 아비의 하체를 범하였은즉 둘 다 반드시 죽일지니 그 피가 자기에게로 돌아가리라	And the man that lieth with his father’s wife hath uncovered his father’s nakedness: both of them shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.	If a man lies with his father’s wife, he has uncovered his father’s nakedness. Both must surely be put to death; their blood is upon them.
LEV	20	12	누구든지 그 자부와 동침하거든 둘 다 반드시 죽일지니 그들이 가증한 일을 행하였음이라 그 피가 자기에게로 돌아가리라	And if a man lie with his daughter in law, both of them shall surely be put to death: they have wrought confusion; their blood shall be upon them.	If a man lies with his daughter-in-law, both must surely be put to death. They have acted perversely; their blood is upon them.
LEV	20	13	누구든지 여인과 교합하둣 남자와 교합하면 둘 다 가증한 일을 행함인즉 반드시 죽일지니 그 피가 자기에게로 돌아가리라	If a man also lie with mankind, as he lieth with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination: they shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.	If a man lies with a man as with a woman, they have both committed an abomination. They must surely be put to death; their blood is upon them.
LEV	20	14	누구든지 아내와 그 장모를 아울러 취하면 악행인즉 그와 그들을 함께 불사를지니 이는 너희 중에 악행이 없게 하려 함이니라	And if a man take a wife and her mother, it is wickedness: they shall be burnt with fire, both he and they; that there be no wickedness among you.	If a man marries both a woman and her mother, it is depraved. Both he and they must be burned in the fire, so that there will be no depravity among you.
LEV	20	15	남자가 짐승과 교합하면 반드시 죽이고 너희는 그 짐승도 죽일 것이며	And if a man lie with a beast, he shall surely be put to death: and ye shall slay the beast.	If a man lies carnally with an animal, he must be put to death. And you are also to kill the animal.
LEV	20	16	여자가 짐승에게 가까이하여 교합하거든 너는 여자와 짐승을 죽이되 이들을 반드시 죽일지니 그 피가 자기에게로 돌아가리라	And if a woman approach unto any beast, and lie down thereto, thou shalt kill the woman, and the beast: they shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.	If a woman approaches any animal to mate with it, you must kill both the woman and the animal. They must surely be put to death; their blood is upon them.
LEV	20	17	누구든지 그 자매 곧 아비의 딸이나 어미의 딸을 취하여 그 여자의 하체를 보고 여자는 그 남자의 하체를 보면 부끄러운 일이라 그 민족 앞에서 그들이 끊어질지니 그가 그 자매의 하체를 범하였은즉 그 죄를 당하리라	And if a man shall take his sister, his father’s daughter, or his mother’s daughter, and see her nakedness, and she see his nakedness; it is a wicked thing; and they shall be cut off in the sight of their people: he hath uncovered his sister’s nakedness; he shall bear his iniquity.	If a man marries his sister, whether the daughter of his father or of his mother, and they have sexual relations, it is a disgrace. They must be cut off in the sight of their people. He has uncovered the nakedness of his sister; he shall bear his iniquity.
LEV	20	18	누구든지 경도하는 여인과 동침하여 그의 하체를 범하면 남자는 그 여인의 근원을 드러내었고 여인은 자기의 피 근원을 드러내었음인즉 둘 다 백성 중에서 끊어지리라	And if a man shall lie with a woman having her sickness, and shall uncover her nakedness; he hath discovered her fountain, and she hath uncovered the fountain of her blood: and both of them shall be cut off from among their people.	If a man lies with a menstruating woman and has sexual relations with her, he has exposed the source of her flow, and she has uncovered the source of her blood. Both of them must be cut off from among their people.
LEV	20	19	너의 이모나 고모의 하체를 범하지 말지니 이는 골육지친의 하체인즉 그들이 그 죄를 당하리라	And thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother’s sister, nor of thy father’s sister: for he uncovereth his near kin: they shall bear their iniquity.	You must not have sexual relations with the sister of your mother or your father, for it is exposing one’s own kin; both shall bear their iniquity.
LEV	20	20	누구든지 백숙모와 동침하면 그 백숙부의 하체를 범함이니 그들이 그 죄를 당하여 무자히 죽으리라	And if a man shall lie with his uncle’s wife, he hath uncovered his uncle’s nakedness: they shall bear their sin; they shall die childless.	If a man lies with his uncle’s wife, he has uncovered the nakedness of his uncle. They will bear their sin; they shall die childless.
LEV	20	21	누구든지 그 형제의 아내를 취하면 더러운 일이라 그가 그 형제의 하체를 범함이니 그들이 무자하리라	And if a man shall take his brother’s wife, it is an unclean thing: he hath uncovered his brother’s nakedness; they shall be childless.	If a man marries his brother’s wife, it is an act of impurity. He has uncovered the nakedness of his brother; they shall be childless.
LEV	20	22	너희는 나의 모든 규례와 법도를 지켜 행하라 그리하여야 내가 너희를 인도하여 거하게 하는 땅이 너희를 토하지 아니하리라	Ye shall therefore keep all my statutes, and all my judgments, and do them: that the land, whither I bring you to dwell therein, spue you not out.	You are therefore to keep all My statutes and ordinances, so that the land where I am bringing you to live will not vomit you out.
LEV	20	23	너희는 내가 너희 앞에서 쫓아내는 족속의 풍속을 좇지 말라 그들이 이 모든 일을 행하므로 내가 그들을 가증히 여기노라	And ye shall not walk in the manners of the nation, which I cast out before you: for they committed all these things, and therefore I abhorred them.	You must not follow the statutes of the nations I am driving out before you. Because they did all these things, I abhorred them.
LEV	20	24	내가 전에 너희에게 이르기를 너희가 그들의 땅을 기업으로 얻을 것이라 내가 그 땅 곧 젖과 꿀이 흐르는 땅으로 너희에게 주어 유업을 삼게 하리라 하였노라 나는 너희를 만민 중에서 구별한 너희 하나님 여호와라	But I have said unto you, Ye shall inherit their land, and I will give it unto you to possess it, a land that floweth with milk and honey: I am the Lord your God, which have separated you from other people.	But I have told you that you will inherit their land, since I will give it to you as an inheritance—a land flowing with milk and honey. I am the LORD your God, who has set you apart from the peoples.
LEV	20	25	너희는 짐승의 정하고 부정함과 새의 정하고 부정함을 구별하고 내가 너희를 위하여 부정한 것으로 구별한 짐승이나 새나 땅에 기는 곤충으로 인하여 너희 몸을 더럽히지 말라	Ye shall therefore put difference between clean beasts and unclean, and between unclean fowls and clean: and ye shall not make your souls abominable by beast, or by fowl, or by any manner of living thing that creepeth on the ground, which I have separated from you as unclean.	You are therefore to distinguish between clean and unclean animals and birds. Do not become contaminated by any animal or bird, or by anything that crawls on the ground; I have set these apart as unclean for you.
LEV	20	26	너희는 내게 거룩할지어다 이는 나 여호와가 거룩하고 내가 또 너희로 나의 소유를 삼으려고 너희를 만민 중에서 구별하였음이니라	And ye shall be holy unto me: for I the Lord am holy, and have severed you from other people, that ye should be mine.	You are to be holy to Me because I, the LORD, am holy, and I have set you apart from the nations to be My own.
LEV	20	27	남자나 여자가 신접하거나 박수가 되거든 반드시 죽일지니 곧 돌로 그를 치라 그 피가 자기에게로 돌아가리라	A man also or woman that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to death: they shall stone them with stones: their blood shall be upon them.	A man or a woman who is a medium or spiritist must surely be put to death. They shall be stoned; their blood is upon them.’”
LEV	21	1	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 아론의 자손 제사장들에게 고하여 이르라 백성 중의 죽은 자로 인하여 스스로 더럽히지 말려니와	And the Lord said unto Moses, Speak unto the priests the sons of Aaron, and say unto them, There shall none be defiled for the dead among his people:	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Speak to Aaron’s sons, the priests, and tell them that a priest is not to defile himself for a dead person among his people,
LEV	21	2	골육지친인 부모나 자녀나 형제나	But for his kin, that is near unto him, that is, for his mother, and for his father, and for his son, and for his daughter, and for his brother,	except for his immediate family—his mother, father, son, daughter, or brother,
LEV	21	3	출가하지 아니한 처녀인 친 자매로 인하여는 몸을 더럽힐 수 있느니라	And for his sister a virgin, that is nigh unto him, which hath had no husband; for her may he be defiled.	or his unmarried sister who is near to him, since she has no husband.
LEV	21	4	제사장은 백성의 어른인즉 스스로 더럽혀 욕되게 하지 말지니라	But he shall not defile himself, being a chief man among his people, to profane himself.	He is not to defile himself for those related to him by marriage, and so profane himself.
LEV	21	5	제사장은 머리털을 깎아 대머리 같게 하지 말며 그 수염 양편을 깎지 말며 살을 베지 말고	They shall not make baldness upon their head, neither shall they shave off the corner of their beard, nor make any cuttings in their flesh.	Priests must not make bald spots on their heads, shave off the edges of their beards, or make cuts in their bodies.
LEV	21	6	그 하나님께 대하여 거룩하고 그 하나님의 이름을 욕되게 하지 말 것이며 그들은 여호와의 화제 곧 그 하나님의 식물을 드리는 자인즉 거룩할 것이라	They shall be holy unto their God, and not profane the name of their God: for the offerings of the Lord made by fire, and the bread of their God, they do offer: therefore they shall be holy.	They must be holy to their God and not profane the name of their God. Because they present to the LORD the offerings made by fire, the food of their God, they must be holy.
LEV	21	7	그들은 기생이나 부정한 여인을 취하지 말 것이며 이혼 당한 여인을 취하지 말지니 이는 그가 여호와께 거룩함이니라	They shall not take a wife that is a whore, or profane; neither shall they take a woman put away from her husband: for he is holy unto his God.	A priest must not marry a woman defiled by prostitution or divorced by her husband, for the priest is holy to his God.
LEV	21	8	너는 그를 거룩하게 하라 그는 네 하나님의 식물을 드림이니라 너는 그를 거룩히 여기라 나 여호와 너희를 거룩하게 하는 자는 거룩함이니라	Thou shalt sanctify him therefore; for he offereth the bread of thy God: he shall be holy unto thee: for I the Lord, which sanctify you, am holy.	You are to regard him as holy, since he presents the food of your God. He shall be holy to you, because I the LORD am holy—I who set you apart.
LEV	21	9	아무 제사장의 딸이든지 행음하여 스스로 더럽히면 그 아비를 욕되게 함이니 그를 불사를지니라	And the daughter of any priest, if she profane herself by playing the whore, she profaneth her father: she shall be burnt with fire.	If a priest’s daughter defiles herself by prostituting herself, she profanes her father; she must be burned in the fire.
LEV	21	10	자기 형제 중 관유로 부음을 받고 위임되어 예복을 입은 대제사장은 그 머리를 풀지 말며 그 옷을 찢지 말며	And he that is the high priest among his brethren, upon whose head the anointing oil was poured, and that is consecrated to put on the garments, shall not uncover his head, nor rend his clothes;	The priest who is highest among his brothers, who has had the anointing oil poured on his head and has been ordained to wear the priestly garments, must not let his hair hang loose or tear his garments.
LEV	21	11	어떤 시체에든지 가까이 말지니 부모로 인하여도 더러워지게 말며	Neither shall he go in to any dead body, nor defile himself for his father, or for his mother;	He must not go near any dead body; he must not defile himself, even for his father or mother.
LEV	21	12	성소에서 나오지 말며 그 하나님의 성소를 더럽히지 말라 이는 하나님의 위임한 관유가 그 위에 있음이니라 나는 여호와니라	Neither shall he go out of the sanctuary, nor profane the sanctuary of his God; for the crown of the anointing oil of his God is upon him: I am the Lord.	He must not leave or desecrate the sanctuary of his God, for the consecration of the anointing oil of his God is on him. I am the LORD.
LEV	21	13	그는 처녀를 취하여 아내를 삼을지니	And he shall take a wife in her virginity.	The woman he marries must be a virgin.
LEV	21	14	과부나 이혼된 여인이나 더러운 여인이나 기생을 취하지 말고 자기 백성 중 처녀를 취하여 아내를 삼아	A widow, or a divorced woman, or profane, or an harlot, these shall he not take: but he shall take a virgin of his own people to wife.	He is not to marry a widow, a divorced woman, or one defiled by prostitution. He is to marry a virgin from his own people,
LEV	21	15	그 자손으로 백성 중에서 더럽히지 말지니 나는 그를 거룩하게 하는 여호와임이니라	Neither shall he profane his seed among his people: for I the Lord do sanctify him.	so that he does not defile his offspring among his people, for I am the LORD who sanctifies him.”
LEV	21	16	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	21	17	아론에게 고하여 이르라 무릇 너의 대대 자손 중 육체에 흠이 있는 자는 그 하나님의 식물을 드리려고 가까이 오지 못할 것이라	Speak unto Aaron, saying, Whosoever he be of thy seed in their generations that hath any blemish, let him not approach to offer the bread of his God.	“Say to Aaron, ‘For the generations to come, none of your descendants who has a physical defect may approach to offer the food of his God.
LEV	21	18	무릇 흠이 있는 자는 가까이 못할지니 곧 소경이나 절뚝발이나 코가 불완전한 자나 지체가 더한 자나	For whatsoever man he be that hath a blemish, he shall not approach: a blind man, or a lame, or he that hath a flat nose, or any thing superfluous,	No man who has any defect may approach—no man who is blind, lame, disfigured, or deformed;
LEV	21	19	발 부러진 자나 손 부러진 자나	Or a man that is brokenfooted, or brokenhanded,	no man who has a broken foot or hand,
LEV	21	20	곱사등이나 난장이나 눈에 백막이 있는 자나 괴혈병이나 버짐이 있는 자나 불알 상한 자나	Or crookbackt, or a dwarf, or that hath a blemish in his eye, or be scurvy, or scabbed, or hath his stones broken;	or who is a hunchback or dwarf, or who has an eye defect, a festering rash, scabs, or a crushed testicle.
LEV	21	21	제사장 아론의 자손 중에 흠이 있는 자는 나아와 여호와의 화제를 드리지 못할지니 그는 흠이 있은즉 나아와 하나님의 식물을 드리지 못하느니라	No man that hath a blemish of the seed of Aaron the priest shall come nigh to offer the offerings of the Lord made by fire: he hath a blemish; he shall not come nigh to offer the bread of his God.	No descendant of Aaron the priest who has a defect shall approach to present the offerings made by fire to the LORD. Since he has a defect, he is not to come near to offer the food of his God.
LEV	21	22	그는 하나님의 식물의 지성물이든지 성물이든지 먹을 것이나	He shall eat the bread of his God, both of the most holy, and of the holy.	He may eat the most holy food of his God as well as the holy food,
LEV	21	23	장 안에 들어가지 못할 것이요 단에 가까이 못할지니 이는 그가 흠이 있음이라 이와 같이 그가 나의 성소를 더럽히지 못할 것은 나는 그들을 거룩하게 하는 여호와임이니라	Only he shall not go in unto the vail, nor come nigh unto the altar, because he hath a blemish; that he profane not my sanctuaries: for I the Lord do sanctify them.	but because he has a defect, he must not go near the veil or approach the altar, so as not to desecrate My sanctuaries. For I am the LORD who sanctifies them.’”
LEV	21	24	모세가 이대로 아론과 그 아들들과 온 이스라엘 자손에게 고하였더라	And Moses told it unto Aaron, and to his sons, and unto all the children of Israel.	Moses told this to Aaron and his sons and to all the Israelites.
LEV	22	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	22	2	아론과 그 아들들에게 고하여 그들로 이스라엘 자손이 내게 드리는 성물에 대하여 스스로 구별하여 내 성호를 욕되게 함이 없게 하라 나는 여호와니라	Speak unto Aaron and to his sons, that they separate themselves from the holy things of the children of Israel, and that they profane not my holy name in those things which they hallow unto me: I am the Lord.	“Tell Aaron and his sons to treat with respect the sacred offerings that the Israelites have consecrated to Me, so that they do not profane My holy name. I am the LORD.
LEV	22	3	그들에게 이르라 무릇 너의 대대 자손 중에 그 몸이 부정하고도 이스라엘 자손이 구별하여 여호와께 드리는 성물에 가까이하는 자는 내 앞에서 끊어지리라 나는 여호와니라	Say unto them, Whosoever he be of all your seed among your generations, that goeth unto the holy things, which the children of Israel hallow unto the Lord, having his uncleanness upon him, that soul shall be cut off from my presence: I am the Lord.	Tell them that for the generations to come, if any of their descendants in a state of uncleanness approaches the sacred offerings that the Israelites consecrate to the LORD, that person must be cut off from My presence. I am the LORD.
LEV	22	4	아론의 자손 중 문둥 환자나 유출병이 있는 자는 정하기 전에는 성물을 먹지 말 것이요 시체로 부정하게 된 자나 설정한 자나	What man soever of the seed of Aaron is a leper, or hath a running issue; he shall not eat of the holy things, until he be clean. And whoso toucheth any thing that is unclean by the dead, or a man whose seed goeth from him;	If a descendant of Aaron has a skin disease or a discharge, he may not eat the sacred offerings until he is clean. Whoever touches anything defiled by a corpse or by a man who has an emission of semen,
LEV	22	5	무릇 사람을 부정하게 하는 벌레에 접촉된 자나 무슨 부정이든지 사람을 더럽힐 만한 자에게 접촉된 자	Or whosoever toucheth any creeping thing, whereby he may be made unclean, or a man of whom he may take uncleanness, whatsoever uncleanness he hath;	or whoever touches a crawling creature or a person that makes him unclean, whatever the uncleanness may be—
LEV	22	6	곧 이런 것에 접촉된 자는 저녁까지 부정하니 몸을 물로 씻지 아니하면 성물을 먹지 못할지며	The soul which hath touched any such shall be unclean until even, and shall not eat of the holy things, unless he wash his flesh with water.	the man who touches any of these will remain unclean until evening. He must not eat from the sacred offerings unless he has bathed himself with water.
LEV	22	7	해 질 때에야 정하리니 그 후에 성물을 먹을 것이라 이는 자기의 응식이 됨이니라	And when the sun is down, he shall be clean, and shall afterward eat of the holy things; because it is his food.	When the sun has set, he will become clean, and then he may eat from the sacred offerings, for they are his food.
LEV	22	8	절로 죽은 것이나 들짐승에게 찢긴 것을 먹음으로 자기를 더럽히지 말라 나는 여호와니라	That which dieth of itself, or is torn with beasts, he shall not eat to defile himself therewith: I am the Lord.	He must not eat anything found dead or torn by wild animals, which would make him unclean. I am the LORD.
LEV	22	9	그들은 나의 명을 지킬 것이라 그것을 욕되게 하면 그로 인하여 죄를 짓고 그 가운데서 죽을까 하노라 나는 그들을 거룩하게 하는 여호와니라	They shall therefore keep mine ordinance, lest they bear sin for it, and die therefore, if they profane it: I the Lord do sanctify them.	The priests must keep My charge, lest they bear the guilt and die because they profane it. I am the LORD who sanctifies them.
LEV	22	10	외국인은 성물을 먹지 못할 것이며 제사장의 객이나 품꾼은 다 성물을 먹지 못할 것이니라	There shall no stranger eat of the holy thing: a sojourner of the priest, or an hired servant, shall not eat of the holy thing.	No one outside a priest’s family may eat the sacred offering, nor may the guest of a priest or his hired hand eat it.
LEV	22	11	그러나 제사장이 돈으로 사람을 샀으면 그 자는 그것을 먹을 것이고 그 집에서 출생한 자도 그러하여 그들이 제사장의 식물을 먹을 것이며	But if the priest buy any soul with his money, he shall eat of it, and he that is born in his house: they shall eat of his meat.	But if a priest buys a slave with his own money, or if a slave is born in his household, that slave may eat his food.
LEV	22	12	제사장의 딸은 외국인에게 출가하였으면 거제의 성물을 먹지 못하되	If the priest’s daughter also be married unto a stranger, she may not eat of an offering of the holy things.	If the priest’s daughter is married to a man other than a priest, she is not to eat of the sacred contributions.
LEV	22	13	그가 과부가 되든지 이혼을 당하든지 자식이 없이 친정에 돌아와서 어릴 때와 같으면 그는 그 아비의 응식을 먹을 것이나 외국인은 먹지 못할 것이니라	But if the priest’s daughter be a widow, or divorced, and have no child, and is returned unto her father’s house, as in her youth, she shall eat of her father’s meat: but there shall no stranger eat thereof.	But if a priest’s daughter with no children becomes widowed or divorced and returns to her father’s house, she may share her father’s food as in her youth. But no outsider may share it.
LEV	22	14	사람이 부지 중 성물을 먹으면 그 성물에 그 오분 일을 더하여 제사장에게 줄지니라	And if a man eat of the holy thing unwittingly, then he shall put the fifth part thereof unto it, and shall give it unto the priest with the holy thing.	If anyone eats a sacred offering in error, he must add a fifth to its value and give the sacred offering to the priest.
LEV	22	15	이스라엘 자손이 여호와께 드리는 성물을 그들은 더럽히지 말지니	And they shall not profane the holy things of the children of Israel, which they offer unto the Lord;	The priests must not profane the sacred offerings that the Israelites present to the LORD
LEV	22	16	그들이 성물을 먹으면 그 죄로 인하여 형벌을 받게 할 것이니라 나는 그들을 거룩하게 하는 여호와니라	Or suffer them to bear the iniquity of trespass, when they eat their holy things: for I the Lord do sanctify them.	by allowing the people to eat the sacred offerings and thus to bear the punishment for guilt. For I am the LORD who sanctifies them.”
LEV	22	17	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	22	18	아론과 그 아들들과 이스라엘 온 족속에게 고하여 이르라 이스라엘 자손이나 그 중에 우거하는 자가 서원제나 낙헌제로 번제를 여호와께 예물로 드리려거든	Speak unto Aaron, and to his sons, and unto all the children of Israel, and say unto them, Whatsoever he be of the house of Israel, or of the strangers in Israel, that will offer his oblation for all his vows, and for all his freewill offerings, which they will offer unto the Lord for a burnt offering;	“Speak to Aaron and his sons and all the Israelites and tell them, ‘Any man of the house of Israel or any foreign resident who presents a gift for a burnt offering to the LORD, whether to fulfill a vow or as a freewill offering,
LEV	22	19	열납되도록 소나 양이나 염소의 흠 없는 수컷으로 드릴지니	Ye shall offer at your own will a male without blemish, of the beeves, of the sheep, or of the goats.	must offer an unblemished male from the cattle, sheep, or goats in order for it to be accepted on your behalf.
LEV	22	20	무릇 흠 있는 것을 너희는 드리지 말 것은 그것이 열납되지 못할 것임이니라	But whatsoever hath a blemish, that shall ye not offer: for it shall not be acceptable for you.	You must not present anything with a defect, because it will not be accepted on your behalf.
LEV	22	21	무릇 서원한 것을 갚으려든지 자의로 예물을 드리려든지 하여 소나 양으로 화목제 희생을 여호와께 드리는 자는 열납되도록 아무 흠이 없는 온전한 것으로 할지니	And whosoever offereth a sacrifice of peace offerings unto the Lord to accomplish his vow, or a freewill offering in beeves or sheep, it shall be perfect to be accepted; there shall be no blemish therein.	When a man presents a peace offering to the LORD from the herd or flock to fulfill a vow or as a freewill offering, it must be without blemish or defect to be acceptable.
LEV	22	22	눈먼 것이나 상한 것이나 지체에 베임을 당한 것이나 종기 있는 것이나 괴혈병 있는 것이나 비루먹은 것을 너희는 여호와께 드리지 말며 단 위에 화제로 여호와께 드리지 말라	Blind, or broken, or maimed, or having a wen, or scurvy, or scabbed, ye shall not offer these unto the Lord, nor make an offering by fire of them upon the altar unto the Lord.	You are not to present to the LORD any animal that is blind, injured, or maimed, or anything with a running sore, a festering rash, or a scab; you must not put any of these on the altar as an offering made by fire to the LORD.
LEV	22	23	우양의 지체가 더하거나 덜하거나 한 것은 너희가 낙헌 예물로는 쓰려니와 서원한 것을 갚음으로 드리면 열납되지 못하리라	Either a bullock or a lamb that hath any thing superfluous or lacking in his parts, that mayest thou offer for a freewill offering; but for a vow it shall not be accepted.	You may present as a freewill offering an ox or sheep that has a deformed or stunted limb, but it is not acceptable in fulfillment of a vow.
LEV	22	24	너희는 불알이 상하였거나 치었거나 터졌거나 베임을 당한 것은 여호와께 드리지 말며 너희 땅에서는 이런 일을 행치도 말지며	Ye shall not offer unto the Lord that which is bruised, or crushed, or broken, or cut; neither shall ye make any offering thereof in your land.	You are not to present to the LORD an animal whose testicles are bruised, crushed, torn, or cut; you are not to sacrifice them in your land.
LEV	22	25	너희는 외방인에게서도 이런 것을 받아 너희의 하나님의 식물로 드리지 말라 이는 결점이 있고 흠이 있는 것인즉 너희를 위하여 열납되지 못할 것임이니라	Neither from a stranger’s hand shall ye offer the bread of your God of any of these; because their corruption is in them, and blemishes be in them: they shall not be accepted for you.	Neither you nor a foreigner shall present food to your God from any such animal. They will not be accepted on your behalf, because they are deformed and flawed.’”
LEV	22	26	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	22	27	수소나 양이나 염소가 나거든 칠 일동안 그 어미와 같이 있게 하라 제팔일 이후로는 여호와께 화제로 예물을 드리면 열납되리라	When a bullock, or a sheep, or a goat, is brought forth, then it shall be seven days under the dam; and from the eighth day and thenceforth it shall be accepted for an offering made by fire unto the Lord.	“When an ox, a sheep, or a goat is born, it must remain with its mother for seven days. From the eighth day on, it will be acceptable as an offering made by fire to the LORD.
LEV	22	28	암소나 암양을 무론하고 어미와 새끼를 동일에 잡지 말지니라	And whether it be cow or ewe, ye shall not kill it and her young both in one day.	But you must not slaughter an ox or a sheep on the same day as its young.
LEV	22	29	너희가 여호와께 감사 희생을 드리거든 너희가 열납되도록 드릴지며	And when ye will offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving unto the Lord, offer it at your own will.	When you sacrifice a thank offering to the LORD, offer it so that it may be acceptable on your behalf.
LEV	22	30	그 제물은 당일에 먹고 이튿날까지 두지 말라 나는 여호와니라	On the same day it shall be eaten up; ye shall leave none of it until the morrow: I am the Lord.	It must be eaten that same day. Do not leave any of it until morning. I am the LORD.
LEV	22	31	너희는 나의 계명을 지키며 행하라 나는 여호와니라	Therefore shall ye keep my commandments, and do them: I am the Lord.	You are to keep My commandments and practice them. I am the LORD.
LEV	22	32	너희는 나의 성호를 욕되게 말라 나는 이스라엘 자손 중에서 거룩하게 함을 받을 것이니라 나는 너희를 거룩하게 하는 여호와요	Neither shall ye profane my holy name; but I will be hallowed among the children of Israel: I am the Lord which hallow you,	You must not profane My holy name. I must be acknowledged as holy among the Israelites. I am the LORD who sanctifies you,
LEV	22	33	너희 하나님이 되려고 너희를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 낸 자니 나는 여호와니라	That brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I am the Lord.	who brought you out of the land of Egypt to be your God. I am the LORD.”
LEV	23	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	23	2	이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 이르라 너희가 공포하여 성회를 삼을 여호와의 절기는 이러하니라	Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, Concerning the feasts of the Lord, which ye shall proclaim to be holy convocations, even these are my feasts.	“Speak to the Israelites and say to them, ‘These are My appointed feasts, the feasts of the LORD that you are to proclaim as sacred assemblies.
LEV	23	3	엿새 동안은 일할 것이요 일곱째 날은 쉴 안식일이니 성회라 너희는 무슨 일이든지 하지 말라 이는 너희 거하는 각처에서 지킬 여호와의 안식일이니라	Six days shall work be done: but the seventh day is the sabbath of rest, an holy convocation; ye shall do no work therein: it is the sabbath of the Lord in all your dwellings.	For six days work may be done, but the seventh day is a Sabbath of complete rest, a day of sacred assembly. You must not do any work; wherever you live, it is a Sabbath to the LORD.
LEV	23	4	기한에 미쳐 너희가 공포하여 성회로 삼을 여호와의 절기는 이러하니라	These are the feasts of the Lord, even holy convocations, which ye shall proclaim in their seasons.	These are the LORD’s appointed feasts, the sacred assemblies you are to proclaim at their appointed times.
LEV	23	5	정월 십사일 저녁은 여호와의 유월절이요	In the fourteenth day of the first month at even is the Lord’s passover.	The Passover to the LORD begins at twilight on the fourteenth day of the first month.
LEV	23	6	이 달 십오일은 여호와의 무교절이니 칠 일 동안 너희는 무교병을 먹을 것이요	And on the fifteenth day of the same month is the feast of unleavened bread unto the Lord: seven days ye must eat unleavened bread.	On the fifteenth day of the same month begins the Feast of Unleavened Bread to the LORD. For seven days you must eat unleavened bread.
LEV	23	7	그 첫날에는 너희가 성회로 모이고 아무 노동도 하지 말지며	In the first day ye shall have an holy convocation: ye shall do no servile work therein.	On the first day you are to hold a sacred assembly; you are not to do any regular work.
LEV	23	8	너희는 칠 일 동안 여호와께 화제를 드릴 것이요 제칠일에도 성회로 모이고 아무 노동도 하지 말지니라	But ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord seven days: in the seventh day is an holy convocation: ye shall do no servile work therein.	For seven days you are to present an offering made by fire to the LORD. On the seventh day there shall be a sacred assembly; you must not do any regular work.’”
LEV	23	9	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	And the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	23	10	이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 이르라 너희는 내가 너희에게 주는 땅에 들어가서 너희의 곡물을 거둘 때에 위선 너희의 곡물의 첫 이삭 한 단을 제사장에게로 가져갈 것이요	Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be come into the land which I give unto you, and shall reap the harvest thereof, then ye shall bring a sheaf of the firstfruits of your harvest unto the priest:	“Speak to the Israelites and say, ‘When you enter the land that I am giving you and you reap its harvest, you are to bring to the priest a sheaf of the firstfruits of your harvest.
LEV	23	11	제사장은 너희를 위하여 그 단을 여호와 앞에 열납되도록 흔들되 안식일 이튿날에 흔들 것이며	And he shall wave the sheaf before the Lord, to be accepted for you: on the morrow after the sabbath the priest shall wave it.	And he shall wave the sheaf before the LORD so that it may be accepted on your behalf; the priest is to wave it on the day after the Sabbath.
LEV	23	12	너희가 그 단을 흔드는 날에 일년 되고 흠 없는 수양을 번제로 여호와께 드리고	And ye shall offer that day when ye wave the sheaf an he lamb without blemish of the first year for a burnt offering unto the Lord.	On the day you wave the sheaf, you shall offer a year-old lamb without blemish as a burnt offering to the LORD,
LEV	23	13	그 소제로는 기름 섞은 고운 가루 에바 십분 이를 여호와께 드려 화제를 삼아 향기로운 냄새가 되게 하고 전제로는 포도주 힌 사분 일을 쓸 것이며	And the meat offering thereof shall be two tenth deals of fine flour mingled with oil, an offering made by fire unto the Lord for a sweet savour: and the drink offering thereof shall be of wine, the fourth part of an hin.	along with its grain offering of two-tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil—an offering made by fire to the LORD, a pleasing aroma—and its drink offering of a quarter hin of wine.
LEV	23	14	너희는 너희 하나님께 예물을 가져오는 그 날까지 떡이든지 볶은 곡식이든지 생 이삭이든지 먹지 말지니 이는 너희가 그 거하는 각처에서 대대로 지킬 영원한 규례니라	And ye shall eat neither bread, nor parched corn, nor green ears, until the selfsame day that ye have brought an offering unto your God: it shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations in all your dwellings.	You must not eat any bread or roasted or new grain until the very day you have brought this offering to your God. This is to be a permanent statute for the generations to come, wherever you live.
LEV	23	15	안식일 이튿날 곧 너희가 요제로 단을 가져온 날부터 세어서 칠 안식일의 수효를 채우고	And ye shall count unto you from the morrow after the sabbath, from the day that ye brought the sheaf of the wave offering; seven sabbaths shall be complete:	From the day after the Sabbath, the day you brought the sheaf of the wave offering, you are to count off seven full weeks.
LEV	23	16	제칠 안식일 이튿날까지 합 오십 일을 계수하여 새 소제를 여호와께 드리되	Even unto the morrow after the seventh sabbath shall ye number fifty days; and ye shall offer a new meat offering unto the Lord.	You shall count off fifty days until the day after the seventh Sabbath, and then present an offering of new grain to the LORD.
LEV	23	17	너희 처소에서 에바 십분 이로 만든 떡 두개를 가져다가 흔들지니 이는 고운 가루에 누룩을 넣어서 구운 것이요 이는 첫 요제로 여호와께 드리는 것이며	Ye shall bring out of your habitations two wave loaves of two tenth deals: they shall be of fine flour; they shall be baken with leaven; they are the firstfruits unto the Lord.	Bring two loaves of bread from your dwellings as a wave offering, each made from two-tenths of an ephah of fine flour, baked with leaven, as the firstfruits to the LORD.
LEV	23	18	너희는 또 이 떡과 함께 일년 되고 흠 없는 어린 양 일곱과 젊은 수소 하나와 수양 둘을 드리되 이들을 그 소제와 그 전제와 함께 여호와께 드려서 번제를 삼을지니 이는 화제라 여호와께 향기로운 냄새며	And ye shall offer with the bread seven lambs without blemish of the first year, and one young bullock, and two rams: they shall be for a burnt offering unto the Lord, with their meat offering, and their drink offerings, even an offering made by fire, of sweet savour unto the Lord.	Along with the bread you are to present seven unblemished male lambs a year old, one young bull, and two rams. They will be a burnt offering to the LORD, together with their grain offerings and drink offerings—an offering made by fire, a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
LEV	23	19	또 수염소 하나로 속죄제를 드리며 일년된 어린 수양 둘을 화목제 희생으로 드릴 것이요	Then ye shall sacrifice one kid of the goats for a sin offering, and two lambs of the first year for a sacrifice of peace offerings.	You shall also prepare one male goat as a sin offering and two male lambs a year old as a peace offering.
LEV	23	20	제사장은 그 첫 이삭의 떡과 함께 그 두 어린 양을 여호와 앞에 흔들어 요제를 삼을 것이요 이것들은 여호와께 드리는 성물인즉 제사장에게 돌릴 것이며	And the priest shall wave them with the bread of the firstfruits for a wave offering before the Lord, with the two lambs: they shall be holy to the Lord for the priest.	The priest is to wave the lambs as a wave offering before the LORD, together with the bread of the firstfruits. The bread and the two lambs shall be holy to the LORD for the priest.
LEV	23	21	이 날에 너희는 너희 중에 성회를 공포하고 아무 노동도 하지 말지니 이는 너희가 그 거하는 각처에서 대대로 지킬 영원한 규례니라	And ye shall proclaim on the selfsame day, that it may be an holy convocation unto you: ye shall do no servile work therein: it shall be a statute for ever in all your dwellings throughout your generations.	On that same day you are to proclaim a sacred assembly, and you must not do any regular work. This is to be a permanent statute wherever you live for the generations to come.
LEV	23	22	너희 땅의 곡물을 벨 때에 밭 모퉁이까지 다 베지 말며 떨어진 진을 줍지 말고 너는 그것을 가난한 자와 객을 위하여 버려 두라 나는 너희 하나님 여호와니라	And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not make clean riddance of the corners of thy field when thou reapest, neither shalt thou gather any gleaning of thy harvest: thou shalt leave them unto the poor, and to the stranger: I am the Lord your God.	When you reap the harvest of your land, do not reap all the way to the edges of your field or gather the gleanings of your harvest. Leave them for the poor and the foreign resident. I am the LORD your God.’”
LEV	23	23	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	The LORD also said to Moses,
LEV	23	24	이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 이르라 칠월 곧 그 달 일일로 안식일을 삼을지니 이는 나팔을 불어 기념할 날이요 성회라	Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, In the seventh month, in the first day of the month, shall ye have a sabbath, a memorial of blowing of trumpets, an holy convocation.	“Speak to the Israelites and say, ‘On the first day of the seventh month you are to have a day of rest, a sacred assembly announced by trumpet blasts.
LEV	23	25	아무 노동도 하지 말고 여호와께 화제를 드릴지니라	Ye shall do no servile work therein: but ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord.	You must not do any regular work, but you are to present an offering made by fire to the LORD.’”
LEV	23	26	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Again the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	23	27	칠월 십일은 속죄일이니 너희에게 성회라 너희는 스스로 괴롭게하며 여호와께 화제를 드리고	Also on the tenth day of this seventh month there shall be a day of atonement: it shall be an holy convocation unto you; and ye shall afflict your souls, and offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord.	“The tenth day of this seventh month is the Day of Atonement. You shall hold a sacred assembly and humble yourselves, and present an offering made by fire to the LORD.
LEV	23	28	이 날에는 아무 일도 하지 말 것은 너희를 위하여 너희 하나님 여호와 앞에 속죄할 속죄일이 됨이니라	And ye shall do no work in that same day: for it is a day of atonement, to make an atonement for you before the Lord your God.	On this day you are not to do any work, for it is the Day of Atonement, when atonement is made for you before the LORD your God.
LEV	23	29	이 날에 스스로 괴롭게 하지 아니하는 자는 그 백성 중에서 끊쳐질 것이라	For whatsoever soul it be that shall not be afflicted in that same day, he shall be cut off from among his people.	If anyone does not humble himself on this day, he must be cut off from his people.
LEV	23	30	이 날에 누구든지 아무 일이나 하는 자는 내가 백성 중에서 멸절시키리니	And whatsoever soul it be that doeth any work in that same day, the same soul will I destroy from among his people.	I will destroy from among his people anyone who does any work on this day.
LEV	23	31	너희는 아무 일이든지 하지 말라 이는 너희가 그 거하는 각처에서 대대로 지킬 영원한 규례니라	Ye shall do no manner of work: it shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations in all your dwellings.	You are not to do any work at all. This is a permanent statute for the generations to come, wherever you live.
LEV	23	32	이는 너희의 쉴 안식일이라 너희는 스스로 괴롭게 하고 이 달 구일 저녁 곧 그 저녁부터 이튿날 저녁까지 안식을 지킬지니라	It shall be unto you a sabbath of rest, and ye shall afflict your souls: in the ninth day of the month at even, from even unto even, shall ye celebrate your sabbath.	It will be a Sabbath of complete rest for you, and you shall humble yourselves. From the evening of the ninth day of the month until the following evening you are to keep your Sabbath.”
LEV	23	33	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	And the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	23	34	이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 이르라 칠월 십오일은 초막절이니 여호와를 위하여 칠 일동안 지킬 것이라	Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, The fifteenth day of this seventh month shall be the feast of tabernacles for seven days unto the Lord.	“Speak to the Israelites and say, ‘On the fifteenth day of the seventh month the Feast of Tabernacles to the LORD begins, and it continues for seven days.
LEV	23	35	첫날에는 성회가 있을지니 너희는 아무 노동도 하지 말지며	On the first day shall be an holy convocation: ye shall do no servile work therein.	On the first day there shall be a sacred assembly. You must not do any regular work.
LEV	23	36	칠 일 동안에 너희는 화제를 여호와께 드릴 것이요 제팔일에도 너희에게 성회가 될 것이며 화제를 여호와께 드릴지니 이는 거룩한 대회라 너희는 아무 노동도 하지 말지니라	Seven days ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord: on the eighth day shall be an holy convocation unto you; and ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord: it is a solemn assembly; and ye shall do no servile work therein.	For seven days you are to present an offering made by fire to the LORD. On the eighth day you are to hold a sacred assembly and present an offering made by fire to the LORD. It is a solemn assembly; you must not do any regular work.
LEV	23	37	이것들은 여호와의 절기라 너희는 공포하여 성회를 삼고 번제와 소제와 희생과 전제를 각각 그 날에 여호와께 화제로 드릴지니	These are the feasts of the Lord, which ye shall proclaim to be holy convocations, to offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord, a burnt offering, and a meat offering, a sacrifice, and drink offerings, every thing upon his day:	These are the LORD’s appointed feasts, which you are to proclaim as sacred assemblies for presenting offerings by fire to the LORD—burnt offerings and grain offerings, sacrifices and drink offerings, each on its designated day.
LEV	23	38	이는 여호와의 안식일 외에, 너희의 헌물 외에, 너희의 모든 서원 예물외에, 너희의 모든 낙헌 예물 외에 너희가 여호와께 드리는 것이니라	Beside the sabbaths of the Lord, and beside your gifts, and beside all your vows, and beside all your freewill offerings, which ye give unto the Lord.	These offerings are in addition to the offerings for the LORD’s Sabbaths, and in addition to your gifts, to all your vow offerings, and to all the freewill offerings you give to the LORD.
LEV	23	39	너희가 토지 소산 거두기를 마치거든 칠월 십오일부터 칠 일 동안 여호와의 절기를 지키되 첫날에도 안식하고 제팔일에도 안식할 것이요	Also in the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when ye have gathered in the fruit of the land, ye shall keep a feast unto the Lord seven days: on the first day shall be a sabbath, and on the eighth day shall be a sabbath.	On the fifteenth day of the seventh month, after you have gathered the produce of the land, you are to celebrate a feast to the LORD for seven days. There shall be complete rest on the first day and also on the eighth day.
LEV	23	40	첫날에는 너희가 아름다운 나무 실과와 종려 가지와 무성한 가지와 시내 버들을 취하여 너희 하나님 여호와 앞에서 칠 일 동안 즐거워할 것이라	And ye shall take you on the first day the boughs of goodly trees, branches of palm trees, and the boughs of thick trees, and willows of the brook; and ye shall rejoice before the Lord your God seven days.	On the first day you are to gather the fruit of majestic trees, the branches of palm trees, and the boughs of leafy trees and of willows of the brook. And you are to rejoice before the LORD your God for seven days.
LEV	23	41	너희는 매년에 칠 일 동안 여호와께 이 절기를 지킬지니 너희 대대로의 영원한 규례라 너희는 칠월에 이를 지킬지니라	And ye shall keep it a feast unto the Lord seven days in the year. It shall be a statute for ever in your generations: ye shall celebrate it in the seventh month.	You are to celebrate this as a feast to the LORD for seven days each year. This is a permanent statute for the generations to come; you are to celebrate it in the seventh month.
LEV	23	42	너희는 칠 일 동안 초막에 거하되 이스라엘에서 난 자는 다 초막에 거할지니	Ye shall dwell in booths seven days; all that are Israelites born shall dwell in booths:	You are to dwell in booths for seven days. All the native-born of Israel must dwell in booths,
LEV	23	43	이는 내가 이스라엘 자손을 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내던 때에 초막에 거하게 한 줄을 너희 대대로 알게 함이니라 나는 너희 하나님 여호와니라	That your generations may know that I made the children of Israel to dwell in booths, when I brought them out of the land of Egypt: I am the Lord your God.	so that your descendants may know that I made the Israelites dwell in booths when I brought them out of the land of Egypt. I am the LORD your God.’”
LEV	23	44	모세가 여호와의 절기를 이스라엘 자손에게 공포하였더라	And Moses declared unto the children of Israel the feasts of the Lord.	So Moses announced to the Israelites the appointed feasts of the LORD.
LEV	24	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	24	2	이스라엘 자손에게 명하여 감람을 찧어 낸 순결한 기름을 켜기 위하여 네게로 가져오게 하고 끊이지 말고 등잔불을 켤지며	Command the children of Israel, that they bring unto thee pure oil olive beaten for the light, to cause the lamps to burn continually.	“Command the Israelites to bring you pure oil of pressed olives for the light, to keep the lamps burning continually.
LEV	24	3	아론은 회막 안 증거궤 장 밖에서 저녁부터 아침까지 여호와 앞에 항상 등잔불을 정리할지니 너희 대대로 지킬 영원한 규례라	Without the vail of the testimony, in the tabernacle of the congregation, shall Aaron order it from the evening unto the morning before the Lord continually: it shall be a statute for ever in your generations.	Outside the veil of the Testimony in the Tent of Meeting, Aaron is to tend the lamps continually before the LORD from evening until morning. This is to be a permanent statute for the generations to come.
LEV	24	4	그가 여호와 앞에서 순결한 등대 위의 등잔들을 끊이지 않고 정리할지니라	He shall order the lamps upon the pure candlestick before the Lord continually.	He shall tend the lamps on the pure gold lampstand before the LORD continually.
LEV	24	5	너는 고운 가루를 취하여 떡 열둘을 굽되 매 덩이를 에바 십분 이로 하여	And thou shalt take fine flour, and bake twelve cakes thereof: two tenth deals shall be in one cake.	You are also to take fine flour and bake twelve loaves, using two-tenths of an ephah for each loaf,
LEV	24	6	여호와 앞 순결한 상 위에 두 줄로 한 줄에 여섯씩 진설하고	And thou shalt set them in two rows, six on a row, upon the pure table before the Lord.	and set them in two rows—six per row—on the table of pure gold before the LORD.
LEV	24	7	너는 또 정결한 유향을 그 매 줄 위에 두어 기념물로 여호와께 화제를 삼을 것이며	And thou shalt put pure frankincense upon each row, that it may be on the bread for a memorial, even an offering made by fire unto the Lord.	And you are to place pure frankincense near each row, so that it may serve as a memorial portion for the bread, an offering made by fire to the LORD.
LEV	24	8	항상 매 안식일에 이 떡을 여호와 앞에 진설할지니 이는 이스라엘 자손을 위한 것이요 영원한 언약이니라	Every sabbath he shall set it in order before the Lord continually, being taken from the children of Israel by an everlasting covenant.	Every Sabbath day the bread is to be set out before the LORD on behalf of the Israelites as a permanent covenant.
LEV	24	9	이 떡은 아론과 그 자손에게 돌리고 그들은 그것을 거룩한 곳에서 먹을지니 이는 여호와의 화제 중 그에게 돌리는 것으로서 지극히 거룩함이니라 이는 영원한 규례니라	And it shall be Aaron’s and his sons’; and they shall eat it in the holy place: for it is most holy unto him of the offerings of the Lord made by fire by a perpetual statute.	It belongs to Aaron and his sons, who are to eat it in a holy place; for it is to him a most holy part of the offerings made by fire to the LORD—his portion forever.”
LEV	24	10	이스라엘 여인의 아들이요 그 아비는 애굽 사람된 자가 이스라엘 자손 중에 나가서 한 이스라엘 사람과 진 중에서 싸우다가	And the son of an Israelitish woman, whose father was an Egyptian, went out among the children of Israel: and this son of the Israelitish woman and a man of Israel strove together in the camp;	Now the son of an Israelite mother and an Egyptian father went out among the Israelites, and a fight broke out in the camp between him and an Israelite.
LEV	24	11	그 이스라엘 여인의 아들이 여호와의 이름을 훼방하며 저주하므로 무리가 끌고 모세에게로 가니라 그 어미의 이름은 슬로밋이요 단 지파 디브리의 딸이었더라	And the Israelitish woman’s son blasphemed the name of the Lord, and cursed. And they brought him unto Moses: (and his mother’s name was Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan:)	The son of the Israelite woman blasphemed the Name with a curse. So they brought him to Moses. (His mother’s name was Shelomith daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan.)
LEV	24	12	그들이 그를 가두고 여호와의 명령을 기다리더니	And they put him in ward, that the mind of the Lord might be shewed them.	They placed him in custody until the will of the LORD should be made clear to them.
LEV	24	13	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	24	14	저주한 사람을 진 밖에 끌어 내어 그 말을 들은 모든 자로 그 머리에 안수하게 하고 온 회중이 돌로 그를 칠지니라	Bring forth him that hath cursed without the camp; and let all that heard him lay their hands upon his head, and let all the congregation stone him.	“Take the blasphemer outside the camp, and have all who heard him lay their hands on his head; then have the whole assembly stone him.
LEV	24	15	너는 이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 이르라 누구든지 자기 하나님을 저주하면 죄를 당할 것이요	And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, Whosoever curseth his God shall bear his sin.	And you are to tell the Israelites, ‘If anyone curses his God, he shall bear the consequences of his sin.
LEV	24	16	여호와의 이름을 훼방하면 그를 반드시 죽일지니 온 회중이 돌로 그를 칠 것이라 외국인이든지 본토인이든지 여호와의 이름을 훼방하면 그를 죽일지니라	And he that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, he shall surely be put to death, and all the congregation shall certainly stone him: as well the stranger, as he that is born in the land, when he blasphemeth the name of the Lord, shall be put to death.	Whoever blasphemes the name of the LORD must surely be put to death; the whole assembly must surely stone him, whether he is a foreign resident or native; if he blasphemes the Name, he must be put to death.
LEV	24	17	사람을 쳐 죽인 자는 반드시 죽일 것이요	And he that killeth any man shall surely be put to death.	And if a man takes the life of anyone else, he must surely be put to death.
LEV	24	18	짐승을 쳐 죽인 자는 짐승으로 짐승을 갚을 것이며	And he that killeth a beast shall make it good; beast for beast.	Whoever kills an animal must make restitution—life for life.
LEV	24	19	사람이 만일 그 이웃을 상하였으면 그 행한 대로 그에게 행할 것이니	And if a man cause a blemish in his neighbour; as he hath done, so shall it be done to him;	If anyone injures his neighbor, whatever he has done must be done to him:
LEV	24	20	파상은 파상으로, 눈은 눈으로, 이는 이로 갚을지라 남에게 손상을 입힌 대로 그에게 그렇게 할 것이며	Breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth: as he hath caused a blemish in a man, so shall it be done to him again.	fracture for fracture, eye for eye, tooth for tooth. Just as he injured the other person, the same must be inflicted on him.
LEV	24	21	짐승을 죽인 자는 그것을 물어 줄 것이요 사람을 죽인 자는 죽일지니	And he that killeth a beast, he shall restore it: and he that killeth a man, he shall be put to death.	Whoever kills an animal must make restitution, but whoever kills a man must be put to death.
LEV	24	22	외국인에게든지 본토인에게든지 그 법을 동일히 할 것은 나는 너희 하나님 여호와임이니라	Ye shall have one manner of law, as well for the stranger, as for one of your own country: for I am the Lord your God.	You are to have the same standard of law for the foreign resident and the native; for I am the LORD your God.’”
LEV	24	23	모세가 이스라엘 자손에게 고하니 그들이 저주한 자를 진 밖에 끌어 내어 돌로 쳤더라 이스라엘 자손이 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 행하였더라	And Moses spake to the children of Israel, that they should bring forth him that had cursed out of the camp, and stone him with stones. And the children of Israel did as the Lord commanded Moses.	Then Moses spoke to the Israelites, and they took the blasphemer outside the camp and stoned him. So the Israelites did as the LORD had commanded Moses.
LEV	25	1	여호와께서 시내산에서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses in mount Sinai, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses on Mount Sinai,
LEV	25	2	이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 이르라 너희는 내가 너희에게 주는 땅에 들어간 후에 그 땅으로 여호와 앞에 안식하게 하라	Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come into the land which I give you, then shall the land keep a sabbath unto the Lord.	“Speak to the Israelites and say to them: When you enter the land that I am giving you, the land itself must observe a Sabbath to the LORD.
LEV	25	3	너는 육 년 동안 그 밭에 파종하며 육 년 동안 그 포도원을 다스려 그 열매를 거둘 것이나	Six years thou shalt sow thy field, and six years thou shalt prune thy vineyard, and gather in the fruit thereof;	For six years you may sow your field and prune your vineyard and gather its crops.
LEV	25	4	제칠년에는 땅으로 쉬어 안식하게 할지니 여호와께 대한 안식이라 너는 그 밭에 파종하거나 포도원을 다스리지 말며	But in the seventh year shall be a sabbath of rest unto the land, a sabbath for the Lord: thou shalt neither sow thy field, nor prune thy vineyard.	But in the seventh year there shall be a Sabbath of complete rest for the land—a Sabbath to the LORD. You are not to sow your field or prune your vineyard.
LEV	25	5	너의 곡물의 스스로 난 것을 거두지 말고 다스리지 아니한 포도나무의 맺은 열매를 거두지 말라 이는 땅의 안식년임이니라	That which groweth of its own accord of thy harvest thou shalt not reap, neither gather the grapes of thy vine undressed: for it is a year of rest unto the land.	You are not to reap the aftergrowth of your harvest or gather the grapes of your untended vines. The land must have a year of complete rest.
LEV	25	6	안식년의 소출은 너희의 먹을 것이니 너와 네 남종과 네 여종과 네 품꾼과 너와 함께 거하는 객과	And the sabbath of the land shall be meat for you; for thee, and for thy servant, and for thy maid, and for thy hired servant, and for thy stranger that sojourneth with thee,	Whatever the land yields during the Sabbath year shall be food for you—for yourself, your manservant and maidservant, the hired hand or foreigner who stays with you,
LEV	25	7	네 육축과 네 땅에 있는 들짐승들이 다 그 소산으로 식물을 삼을지니라	And for thy cattle, and for the beast that are in thy land, shall all the increase thereof be meat.	and for your livestock and the wild animals in your land. All its growth may serve as food.
LEV	25	8	너는 일곱 안식년을 계수할지니 이는 칠 년이 일곱 번인즉 안식년 일곱 번 동안 곧 사십구 년이라	And thou shalt number seven sabbaths of years unto thee, seven times seven years; and the space of the seven sabbaths of years shall be unto thee forty and nine years.	And you shall count off seven Sabbaths of years—seven times seven years—so that the seven Sabbaths of years amount to forty-nine years.
LEV	25	9	칠월 십일은 속죄일이니 너는 나팔 소리를 내되 전국에서 나팔을 크게 불지며	Then shalt thou cause the trumpet of the jubile to sound on the tenth day of the seventh month, in the day of atonement shall ye make the trumpet sound throughout all your land.	Then you are to sound the horn far and wide on the tenth day of the seventh month, the Day of Atonement. You shall sound it throughout your land.
LEV	25	10	제오십년을 거룩하게 하여 전국 거민에게 자유를 공포하라 이 해는 너희에게 희년이니 너희는 각각 그 기업으로 돌아가며 각각 그 가족에게로 돌아갈지며	And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty throughout all the land unto all the inhabitants thereof: it shall be a jubile unto you; and ye shall return every man unto his possession, and ye shall return every man unto his family.	So you are to consecrate the fiftieth year and proclaim liberty in the land for all its inhabitants. It shall be your Jubilee, when each of you is to return to his property and to his clan.
LEV	25	11	그 오십년은 너희의 희년이니 너희는 파종하지 말며 스스로 난 것을 거두지 말며 다스리지 아니한 포도를 거두지 말라	A jubile shall that fiftieth year be unto you: ye shall not sow, neither reap that which groweth of itself in it, nor gather the grapes in it of thy vine undressed.	The fiftieth year will be a Jubilee for you; you are not to sow the land or reap its aftergrowth or harvest the untended vines.
LEV	25	12	이는 희년이니 너희에게 거룩함이니라 너희가 밭의 소산을 먹으리라	For it is the jubile; it shall be holy unto you: ye shall eat the increase thereof out of the field.	For it is a Jubilee; it shall be holy to you. You may eat only the crops taken directly from the field.
LEV	25	13	이 희년에는 너희가 각기 기업으로 돌아갈지라	In the year of this jubile ye shall return every man unto his possession.	In this Year of Jubilee, each of you shall return to his own property.
LEV	25	14	네 이웃에게 팔든지 네 이웃의 손에서 사거든 너희는 서로 속이지 말라	And if thou sell ought unto thy neighbour, or buyest ought of thy neighbour’s hand, ye shall not oppress one another:	If you make a sale to your neighbor or a purchase from him, you must not take advantage of each other.
LEV	25	15	희년 후의 연수를 따라서 너는 이웃에게 살 것이요 그도 그 열매를 얻을 연수를 따라서 네게 팔 것인즉	According to the number of years after the jubile thou shalt buy of thy neighbour, and according unto the number of years of the fruits he shall sell unto thee:	You are to buy from your neighbor according to the number of years since the last Jubilee; he is to sell to you according to the number of harvest years remaining.
LEV	25	16	연수가 많으면 너는 그 값을 많게 하고 연수가 적으면 너는 그 값을 적게 할지니 곧 그가 그 열매의 다소를 따라서 네게 팔 것이라	According to the multitude of years thou shalt increase the price thereof, and according to the fewness of years thou shalt diminish the price of it: for according to the number of the years of the fruits doth he sell unto thee.	You shall increase the price in proportion to a greater number of years, or decrease it in proportion to a lesser number of years; for he is selling you a given number of harvests.
LEV	25	17	너희는 서로 속이지 말고 너희의 하나님을 경외하라 나는 너희 하나님 여호와니라	Ye shall not therefore oppress one another; but thou shalt fear thy God: for I am the Lord your God.	Do not take advantage of each other, but fear your God; for I am the LORD your God.
LEV	25	18	너희는 내 법도를 행하며 내 규례를 지켜 행하라 그리하면 너희가 그 땅에 안전히 거할 것이라	Wherefore ye shall do my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do them; and ye shall dwell in the land in safety.	You are to keep My statutes and carefully observe My judgments, so that you may dwell securely in the land.
LEV	25	19	땅은 그 산물을 내리니 너희가 배불리 먹고 거기 안전히 거하리라	And the land shall yield her fruit, and ye shall eat your fill, and dwell therein in safety.	Then the land will yield its fruit, so that you can eat your fill and dwell in safety in the land.
LEV	25	20	혹 너희 말이 우리가 만일 제칠년에 심지도 못하고 그 산물을 거두지도 못하면 무엇을 먹으리요 하겠으나	And if ye shall say, What shall we eat the seventh year? behold, we shall not sow, nor gather in our increase:	Now you may wonder, ‘What will we eat in the seventh year if we do not sow or gather our produce?’
LEV	25	21	내가 명하여 제육년에 내 복을 너희에게 내려 그 소출이 삼 년 쓰기에 족하게 할지라	Then I will command my blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it shall bring forth fruit for three years.	But I will send My blessing upon you in the sixth year, so that the land will yield a crop sufficient for three years.
LEV	25	22	너희가 제팔년에는 파종하려니와 묵은 곡식을 먹을 것이며 제구년 곧 추수하기까지 묵은 곡식을 먹으리라	And ye shall sow the eighth year, and eat yet of old fruit until the ninth year; until her fruits come in ye shall eat of the old store.	While you are sowing in the eighth year, you will be eating from the previous harvest, until the ninth year’s harvest comes in.
LEV	25	23	토지를 영영히 팔지 말 것은 토지는 다 내 것임이라 너희는 나그네요 우거하는 자로서 나와 함께 있느니라	The land shall not be sold for ever: for the land is mine; for ye are strangers and sojourners with me.	The land must not be sold permanently, because it is Mine, and you are but foreigners and residents with Me.
LEV	25	24	너희 기업의 온 땅에서 그 토지 무르기를 허락할지니	And in all the land of your possession ye shall grant a redemption for the land.	Thus for every piece of property you possess, you must provide for the redemption of the land.
LEV	25	25	만일 너희 형제가 가난하여 그 기업 얼마를 팔았으면 그 근족이 와서 동족의 판 것을 무를 것이요	If thy brother be waxen poor, and hath sold away some of his possession, and if any of his kin come to redeem it, then shall he redeem that which his brother sold.	If your brother becomes impoverished and sells some of his property, his nearest of kin may come and redeem what his brother has sold.
LEV	25	26	만일 그것을 무를 사람이 없고 자기가 부요하게 되어 무를 힘이 있거든	And if the man have none to redeem it, and himself be able to redeem it;	Or if a man has no one to redeem it for him, but he prospers and acquires enough to redeem his land,
LEV	25	27	그 판 해를 계수하여 그 남은 값을 산 자에게 주고 그 기업으로 돌아갈 것이니라	Then let him count the years of the sale thereof, and restore the overplus unto the man to whom he sold it; that he may return unto his possession.	he shall calculate the years since its sale, repay the balance to the man to whom he sold it, and return to his property.
LEV	25	28	그러나 자기가 무를 힘이 없으면 그 판 것이 희년이 이르기까지 산자의 손에 있다가 희년에 미쳐 돌아올지니 그가 곧 그 기업으로 돌아갈 것이니라	But if he be not able to restore it to him, then that which is sold shall remain in the hand of him that hath bought it until the year of jubile: and in the jubile it shall go out, and he shall return unto his possession.	But if he cannot obtain enough to repay him, what he sold will remain in possession of the buyer until the Year of Jubilee. In the Jubilee, however, it is to be released, so that he may return to his property.
LEV	25	29	성벽 있는 성내의 가옥을 팔았으면 판 지 만 일 년 안에는 무를 수 있나니 곧 그 기한 안에 무르려니와	And if a man sell a dwelling house in a walled city, then he may redeem it within a whole year after it is sold; within a full year may he redeem it.	If a man sells a house in a walled city, he retains his right of redemption until a full year after its sale; during that year it may be redeemed.
LEV	25	30	주년 내에 무르지 못하면 그 성내 가옥은 산 자의 소유로 확정되어 대대로 영영히 그에게 속하고 희년에라도 돌려 보내지 아니할 것이니라	And if it be not redeemed within the space of a full year, then the house that is in the walled city shall be established for ever to him that bought it throughout his generations: it shall not go out in the jubile.	If it is not redeemed by the end of a full year, then the house in the walled city is permanently transferred to its buyer and his descendants. It is not to be released in the Jubilee.
LEV	25	31	그러나 성벽이 둘리지 아니한 촌락의 가옥은 나라의 전토 일례로 물러주기도 할 것이요 희년에 돌려 보내기도 할 것이니라	But the houses of the villages which have no wall round about them shall be counted as the fields of the country: they may be redeemed, and they shall go out in the jubile.	But houses in villages with no walls around them are to be considered as open fields. They may be redeemed, and they shall be released in the Jubilee.
LEV	25	32	레위 족속의 성읍 곧 그 기업의 성읍의 가옥은 레위 사람이 언제든지 무를 수 있으나	Notwithstanding the cities of the Levites, and the houses of the cities of their possession, may the Levites redeem at any time.	As for the cities of the Levites, the Levites always have the right to redeem their houses in the cities they possess.
LEV	25	33	레위 사람이 만일 무르지 아니하면 그 기업된 성읍의 판 가옥은 희년에 돌려 보낼지니 대저 레위 사람의 성읍의 가옥은 이스라엘 자손 중에서 얻을 기업이 됨이니라	And if a man purchase of the Levites, then the house that was sold, and the city of his possession, shall go out in the year of jubile: for the houses of the cities of the Levites are their possession among the children of Israel.	So whatever belongs to the Levites may be redeemed—a house sold in a city they possess—and must be released in the Jubilee, because the houses in the cities of the Levites are their possession among the Israelites.
LEV	25	34	그러나 그 성읍의 들의 사면 밭은 그의 영원한 기업이니 팔지 못할지니라	But the field of the suburbs of their cities may not be sold; for it is their perpetual possession.	But the open pastureland around their cities may not be sold, for this is their permanent possession.
LEV	25	35	네 동족이 빈한하게 되어 빈 손으로 네 곁에 있거든 너는 그를 도와 객이나 우거하는 자처럼 너와 함께 생활하게 하되	And if thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee; then thou shalt relieve him: yea, though he be a stranger, or a sojourner; that he may live with thee.	Now if your countryman becomes destitute and cannot support himself among you, then you are to help him as you would a foreigner or stranger, so that he can continue to live among you.
LEV	25	36	너는 그에게 이식을 취하지 말고 네 하나님을 경외하여 네 형제로 너와 함께 생활하게 할 것인즉	Take thou no usury of him, or increase: but fear thy God; that thy brother may live with thee.	Do not take any interest or profit from him, but fear your God, that your countryman may live among you.
LEV	25	37	너는 그에게 이식을 위하여 돈을 꾸이지 말고 이익을 위하여 식물을 꾸이지 말라	Thou shalt not give him thy money upon usury, nor lend him thy victuals for increase.	You must not lend him your silver at interest or sell him your food for profit.
LEV	25	38	나는 너희 하나님이 되려고 또는 가나안 땅으로 너희에게 주려고 애굽 땅에서 너희를 인도하여 낸 너희 하나님 여호와니라	I am the Lord your God, which brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, to give you the land of Canaan, and to be your God.	I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt to give you the land of Canaan and to be your God.
LEV	25	39	네 동족이 반한하게 되어 네게 몸이 팔리거든 너는 그를 종으로 부리지 말고	And if thy brother that dwelleth by thee be waxen poor, and be sold unto thee; thou shalt not compel him to serve as a bondservant:	If a countryman among you becomes destitute and sells himself to you, then you must not force him into slave labor.
LEV	25	40	품꾼이나 우거하는 자 같이 너와 함께 있게 하여 희년까지 너를 섬기게 하라	But as an hired servant, and as a sojourner, he shall be with thee, and shall serve thee unto the year of jubile:	Let him stay with you as a hired worker or temporary resident; he is to work for you until the Year of Jubilee.
LEV	25	41	그 때에는 그와 그 자녀가 함께 네게서 떠나 그 본족에게로 돌아가서 조상의 기업을 회복하리라	And then shall he depart from thee, both he and his children with him, and shall return unto his own family, and unto the possession of his fathers shall he return.	Then he and his children are to be released, and he may return to his clan and to the property of his fathers.
LEV	25	42	그들은 내가 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 낸바 나의 품꾼인즉 종으로 팔리지 말 것이라	For they are my servants, which I brought forth out of the land of Egypt: they shall not be sold as bondmen.	Because the Israelites are My servants, whom I brought out of the land of Egypt, they are not to be sold as slaves.
LEV	25	43	너는 그를 엄하게 부리지 말고 너의 하나님을 경외하라	Thou shalt not rule over him with rigour; but shalt fear thy God.	You are not to rule over them harshly, but you shall fear your God.
LEV	25	44	너의 종은 남녀를 무론하고 너의 사면 이방인 중에서 취할지니 남녀 종은 이런 자 중에서 살 것이며	Both thy bondmen, and thy bondmaids, which thou shalt have, shall be of the heathen that are round about you; of them shall ye buy bondmen and bondmaids.	Your menservants and maidservants shall come from the nations around you, from whom you may purchase them.
LEV	25	45	또 너희 중에 우거한 이방인의 자녀 중에서도 너희가 살 수 있고 또 그들이 너희 중에서 살아서 너희 땅에서 가정을 이룬 그 중에서도 그리 할 수 있은즉 그들이 너희 소유가 될지니	Moreover of the children of the strangers that do sojourn among you, of them shall ye buy, and of their families that are with you, which they begat in your land: and they shall be your possession.	You may also purchase them from the foreigners residing among you or their clans living among you who are born in your land. These may become your property.
LEV	25	46	너희는 그들을 너희 후손에게 기업으로 주어 소유가 되게 할 것이라 이방인 중에서는 너희가 영원한 종을 삼으려니와 너희 동족 이스라엘 자손은 너희 피차 엄하게 부리지 말지니라	And ye shall take them as an inheritance for your children after you, to inherit them for a possession; they shall be your bondmen for ever: but over your brethren the children of Israel, ye shall not rule one over another with rigour.	You may leave them to your sons after you to inherit as property; you can make them slaves for life. But as for your brothers, the Israelites, no man may rule harshly over his brother.
LEV	25	47	너희 중에 우거하는 이방인은 부요하게 되고 그 곁에 사는 너희 동족은 빈한하게 됨으로 너희 중에 우거하는 그 이방인에게나 그 족속에게 몸이 팔렸으면	And if a sojourner or stranger wax rich by thee, and thy brother that dwelleth by him wax poor, and sell himself unto the stranger or sojourner by thee, or to the stock of the stranger’s family:	If a foreigner residing among you prospers, but your countryman dwelling near him becomes destitute and sells himself to the foreigner or to a member of his clan,
LEV	25	48	팔린 후에 그를 속량할 수 있나니 그 형제 중 하나가 속하거나	After that he is sold he may be redeemed again; one of his brethren may redeem him:	he retains the right of redemption after he has sold himself. One of his brothers may redeem him:
LEV	25	49	삼촌이나 사촌이 속하거나 그 근족 중 누구든지 속할 것이요 그가 부요하게 되면 스스로 속하되	Either his uncle, or his uncle’s son, may redeem him, or any that is nigh of kin unto him of his family may redeem him; or if he be able, he may redeem himself.	either his uncle or cousin or any close relative from his clan may redeem him. Or if he prospers, he may redeem himself.
LEV	25	50	자기 몸이 팔린 해로부터 희년까지를 그 산 자와 계산하여 그 년수를 따라서 그 몸의 값을 정할 때에 그 사람을 섬긴 날을 그 사람에게 고용된 날로 여길 것이라	And he shall reckon with him that bought him from the year that he was sold to him unto the year of jubile: and the price of his sale shall be according unto the number of years, according to the time of an hired servant shall it be with him.	He and his purchaser will then count the time from the year he sold himself up to the Year of Jubilee. The price of his sale will be determined by the number of years, based on the daily wages of a hired hand.
LEV	25	51	만일 남은 해가 많으면 그 연수대로 팔린 값에서 속하는 값을 그 사람에게 도로 주고	If there be yet many years behind, according unto them he shall give again the price of his redemption out of the money that he was bought for.	If many years remain, he must pay for his redemption in proportion to his purchase price.
LEV	25	52	만일 희년까지 남은 해가 적으면 그 사람과 계산하여 그 연수대로 속하는 그 값을 그에게 도로 줄지며	And if there remain but few years unto the year of jubile, then he shall count with him, and according unto his years shall he give him again the price of his redemption.	If only a few years remain until the Year of Jubilee, he is to calculate and pay his redemption according to his remaining years.
LEV	25	53	주인은 그를 매년의 삯군과 같이 여기고 너의 목전에서 엄하게 부리지 못하리라	And as a yearly hired servant shall he be with him: and the other shall not rule with rigour over him in thy sight.	He shall be treated like a man hired from year to year, but a foreign owner must not rule over him harshly in your sight.
LEV	25	54	그가 이같이 속하지 못하면 희년에 이르러 그와 그 자녀가 자유하리니	And if he be not redeemed in these years, then he shall go out in the year of jubile, both he, and his children with him.	Even if he is not redeemed in any of these ways, he and his children shall be released in the Year of Jubilee.
LEV	25	55	이스라엘 자손은 나의 품꾼이 됨이라 그들은 내가 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 낸 나의 품꾼이요 나는 너희 하나님 여호와니라	For unto me the children of Israel are servants; they are my servants whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt: I am the Lord your God.	For the Israelites are My servants. They are My servants, whom I brought out of the land of Egypt. I am the LORD your God.
LEV	26	1	너희는 자기를 위하여 우상을 만들지 말지니 목상이나 주상을 세우지 말며 너희 땅에 조각한 석상을 세우고 그에게 경배하지 말라 나는 너희 하나님 여호와임이니라	Ye shall make you no idols nor graven image, neither rear you up a standing image, neither shall ye set up any image of stone in your land, to bow down unto it: for I am the Lord your God.	“You must not make idols for yourselves or set up a carved image or sacred pillar; you must not place a sculpted stone in your land to bow down to it. For I am the LORD your God.
LEV	26	2	너희는 나의 안식일을 지키며 나의 성소를 공경하라 나는 여호와니라	Ye shall keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary: I am the Lord.	You must keep My Sabbaths and have reverence for My sanctuary. I am the LORD.
LEV	26	3	너희가 나의 규례와 계명을 준행하면	If ye walk in my statutes, and keep my commandments, and do them;	If you follow My statutes and carefully keep My commandments,
LEV	26	4	내가 너희 비를 그 시후에 주리니 땅은 그 산물을 내고 밭의 수목은 열매를 맺을지라	Then I will give you rain in due season, and the land shall yield her increase, and the trees of the field shall yield their fruit.	I will give you rains in their season, and the land will yield its produce, and the trees of the field will bear their fruit.
LEV	26	5	너희의 타작은 포도 딸 때까지 미치며 너희의 포도 따는 것은 파종할 때까지 미치리니 너희가 음식을 배불리 먹고 너희 땅에 안전히 거하리라	And your threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto the sowing time: and ye shall eat your bread to the full, and dwell in your land safely.	Your threshing will continue until the grape harvest, and the grape harvest will continue until sowing time; you will have your fill of food to eat and will dwell securely in your land.
LEV	26	6	내가 그 땅에 평화를 줄 것인즉 너희가 누우나 너희를 두렵게 할 자가 없을 것이며 내가 사나운 짐승을 그 땅에서 제할 것이요 칼이 너희 땅에 두루 행하지 아니할 것이며	And I will give peace in the land, and ye shall lie down, and none shall make you afraid: and I will rid evil beasts out of the land, neither shall the sword go through your land.	And I will give peace to the land, and you will lie down with nothing to fear. I will rid the land of dangerous animals, and no sword will pass through your land.
LEV	26	7	너희가 대적을 쫓으리니 그들이 너희 앞에서 칼에 엎드러질 것이라	And ye shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall before you by the sword.	You will pursue your enemies, and they will fall by the sword before you.
LEV	26	8	너희 다섯이 백을 쫓고 너희 백이 만을 쫓으리니 너희 대적들이 너희 앞에서 칼에 엎드러질 것이며	And five of you shall chase an hundred, and an hundred of you shall put ten thousand to flight: and your enemies shall fall before you by the sword.	Five of you will pursue a hundred, and a hundred of you will pursue ten thousand, and your enemies will fall by the sword before you.
LEV	26	9	내가 너희를 권고하여 나의 너희와 세운 언약을 이행하여 너희로 번성케 하고 너희로 창대케 할 것이며	For I will have respect unto you, and make you fruitful, and multiply you, and establish my covenant with you.	I will turn toward you and make you fruitful and multiply you, and I will establish My covenant with you.
LEV	26	10	너희는 오래 두었던 묵은 곡식을 먹다가 새 곡식을 인하여 묵은 곡식을 치우게 될 것이며	And ye shall eat old store, and bring forth the old because of the new.	You will still be eating the old supply of grain when you need to clear it out to make room for the new.
LEV	26	11	내가 내 장막을 너희 중에 세우리니 내 마음이 너희를 싫어하지 아니할 것이며	And I will set my tabernacle among you: and my soul shall not abhor you.	And I will make My dwelling place among you, and My soul will not despise you.
LEV	26	12	나는 너희 중에 행하여 너희 하나님이 되고 너희는 나의 백성이 될 것이니라	And I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my people.	I will walk among you and be your God, and you will be My people.
LEV	26	13	나는 너희를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내어 그 종된 것을 면케 한 너희 하나님 여호와라 내가 너희 멍에 빗장목을 깨뜨리고 너희로 바로 서서 걷게 하였느니라	I am the Lord your God, which brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, that ye should not be their bondmen; and I have broken the bands of your yoke, and made you go upright.	I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt so that you would no longer be slaves to the Egyptians. I broke the bars of your yoke and enabled you to walk in uprightness.
LEV	26	14	그러나 너희가 내게 청종치 아니하여 이 모든 명령을 준행치 아니하며	But if ye will not hearken unto me, and will not do all these commandments;	If, however, you fail to obey Me and to carry out all these commandments,
LEV	26	15	나의 규례를 멸시하며 마음에 나의 법도를 싫어하여 나의 모든 계명을 준행치 아니하며 나의 언약을 배반할진대	And if ye shall despise my statutes, or if your soul abhor my judgments, so that ye will not do all my commandments, but that ye break my covenant:	and if you reject My statutes, despise My ordinances, and neglect to carry out all My commandments, and so break My covenant,
LEV	26	16	내가 이같이 너희에게 행하리니 곧 내가 너희에게 놀라운 재앙을 내려 폐병과 열병으로 눈이 어둡고 생명이 쇠약하게 할 것이요 너희의 파종은 헛되리니 너희의 대적이 그것을 먹을 것임이며	I also will do this unto you; I will even appoint over you terror, consumption, and the burning ague, that shall consume the eyes, and cause sorrow of heart: and ye shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it.	then this is what I will do to you: I will bring upon you sudden terror, wasting disease, and fever that will destroy your sight and drain your life. You will sow your seed in vain, because your enemies will eat it.
LEV	26	17	내가 너희를 치리니 너희가 너희 대적에게 패할 것이요 너희를 미워하는 자가 너희를 다스릴 것이며 너희는 쫓는 자가 없어도 도망하리라	And I will set my face against you, and ye shall be slain before your enemies: they that hate you shall reign over you; and ye shall flee when none pursueth you.	And I will set My face against you, so that you will be defeated by your enemies. Those who hate you will rule over you, and you will flee when no one pursues you.
LEV	26	18	너희가 그렇게 되어도 내게 청종치 아니하면 너희 죄를 인하여 내가 너희를 칠 배나 더 징치할지라	And if ye will not yet for all this hearken unto me, then I will punish you seven times more for your sins.	And if after all this you will not obey Me, I will proceed to punish you sevenfold for your sins.
LEV	26	19	내가 너희의 세력을 인한 교만을 꺾고 너희 하늘로 철과 같게 하며 너희 땅으로 놋과 같게 하리니	And I will break the pride of your power; and I will make your heaven as iron, and your earth as brass:	I will break down your stubborn pride and make your sky like iron and your land like bronze,
LEV	26	20	너희 수고가 헛될지라 땅은 그 산물을 내지 아니하고 땅의 나무는 그 열매를 맺지 아니하리라	And your strength shall be spent in vain: for your land shall not yield her increase, neither shall the trees of the land yield their fruits.	and your strength will be spent in vain. For your land will not yield its produce, and the trees of the land will not bear their fruit.
LEV	26	21	너희가 나를 거스려 내게 청종치 않을진대 내가 너희 죄대로 너희에게 칠 배나 더 재앙을 내릴 것이라	And if ye walk contrary unto me, and will not hearken unto me; I will bring seven times more plagues upon you according to your sins.	If you walk in hostility toward Me and refuse to obey Me, I will multiply your plagues seven times, according to your sins.
LEV	26	22	내가 들짐승을 너희 중에 보내리니 그것들이 너희 자녀를 움키고 너희 육축을 멸하며 너희 수효를 감소케 할지라 너희 도로가 황폐하리라	I will also send wild beasts among you, which shall rob you of your children, and destroy your cattle, and make you few in number; and your high ways shall be desolate.	I will send wild animals against you to rob you of your children, destroy your livestock, and reduce your numbers, until your roads lie desolate.
LEV	26	23	이런 일을 당하여도 너희가 내게로 돌아오지 아니하고 나를 대항할진대	And if ye will not be reformed by me by these things, but will walk contrary unto me;	And if in spite of these things you do not accept My discipline, but continue to walk in hostility toward Me,
LEV	26	24	나 곧 나도 너희에게 대항하여 너희 죄를 인하여 너희를 칠 배나 더 칠지라	Then will I also walk contrary unto you, and will punish you yet seven times for your sins.	then I will act with hostility toward you, and I will strike you sevenfold for your sins.
LEV	26	25	내가 칼을 너희에게로 가져다가 너희의 배약한 원수를 갚을 것이며 너희가 성읍에 모일지라도 너희 중에 염병을 보내고 너희를 대적의 손에 붙일 것이며	And I will bring a sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel of my covenant: and when ye are gathered together within your cities, I will send the pestilence among you; and ye shall be delivered into the hand of the enemy.	And I will bring a sword against you to execute the vengeance of the covenant. Though you withdraw into your cities, I will send a plague among you, and you will be delivered into the hand of the enemy.
LEV	26	26	내가 너희 의뢰하는 양식을 끊을 때에 열 여인이 한 화덕에서 너희 떡을 구워 저울에 달아 주리니 너희가 먹어도 배부르지 아니하리라	And when I have broken the staff of your bread, ten women shall bake your bread in one oven, and they shall deliver you your bread again by weight: and ye shall eat, and not be satisfied.	When I cut off your supply of bread, ten women will bake your bread in a single oven and dole out your bread by weight, so that you will eat but not be satisfied.
LEV	26	27	너희가 이같이 될지라도 내게 청종치 아니하고 내게 대항할진대	And if ye will not for all this hearken unto me, but walk contrary unto me;	But if in spite of all this you do not obey Me, but continue to walk in hostility toward Me,
LEV	26	28	내가 진노로 너희에게 대항하되 너희 죄를 인하여 칠 배나 더 징책하리니	Then I will walk contrary unto you also in fury; and I, even I, will chastise you seven times for your sins.	then I will walk in fury against you, and I, even I, will punish you sevenfold for your sins.
LEV	26	29	너희가 아들의 고기를 먹을 것이요 딸의 고기를 먹을 것이며	And ye shall eat the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your daughters shall ye eat.	You will eat the flesh of your own sons and daughters.
LEV	26	30	내가 너희의 산당을 헐며 너희의 태양 주상을 찍어 넘기며 너희 시체를 파상한 우상 위에 던지고 내 마음이 너희를 싫어할 것이며	And I will destroy your high places, and cut down your images, and cast your carcases upon the carcases of your idols, and my soul shall abhor you.	I will destroy your high places, cut down your incense altars, and heap your lifeless bodies on the lifeless remains of your idols; and My soul will despise you.
LEV	26	31	내가 너희 성읍으로 황폐케 하고 너희 성소들로 황량케 할 것이요 너희의 향기로운 향을 흠향치 아니하고	And I will make your cities waste, and bring your sanctuaries unto desolation, and I will not smell the savour of your sweet odours.	I will reduce your cities to rubble and lay waste your sanctuaries, and I will refuse to smell the pleasing aroma of your sacrifices.
LEV	26	32	그 땅을 황무케 하리니 거기 거하는 너희 대적들이 그것을 인하여 놀랄 것이며	And I will bring the land into desolation: and your enemies which dwell therein shall be astonished at it.	And I will lay waste the land, so that your enemies who dwell in it will be appalled.
LEV	26	33	내가 너희를 열방 중에 흩을 것이요 내가 칼을 빼어 너희를 따르게 하리니 너희의 땅이 황무하며 너희의 성읍이 황폐하리라	And I will scatter you among the heathen, and will draw out a sword after you: and your land shall be desolate, and your cities waste.	But I will scatter you among the nations and will draw out a sword after you as your land becomes desolate and your cities are laid waste.
LEV	26	34	너희가 대적의 땅에 거할 동안에 너희 본토가 황무할 것이므로 땅이 안식을 누릴 것이라 그 때에 땅이 쉬어 안식을 누리리니	Then shall the land enjoy her sabbaths, as long as it lieth desolate, and ye be in your enemies’ land; even then shall the land rest, and enjoy her sabbaths.	Then the land shall enjoy its Sabbaths all the days it lies desolate, while you are in the land of your enemies. At that time the land will rest and enjoy its Sabbaths.
LEV	26	35	너희가 그 땅에 거한 동안 너희 안식시에 쉼을 얻지 못하던 땅이 그 황무할 동안에는 쉬리라	As long as it lieth desolate it shall rest; because it did not rest in your sabbaths, when ye dwelt upon it.	As long as it lies desolate, the land will have the rest it did not receive during the Sabbaths when you lived in it.
LEV	26	36	너희 남은 자에게는 그 대적의 땅에서 내가 그들의 마음으로 약하게 하리니 그들은 바람에 불린 잎사귀 소리에도 놀라 도망하기를 칼을 피하여 도망하듯 할 것이요 쫓는 자가 없어도 엎드러질 것이라	And upon them that are left alive of you I will send a faintness into their hearts in the lands of their enemies; and the sound of a shaken leaf shall chase them; and they shall flee, as fleeing from a sword; and they shall fall when none pursueth.	As for those of you who survive, I will send a faintness into their hearts in the lands of their enemies, so that even the sound of a windblown leaf will put them to flight. And they will flee as one flees the sword, and fall when no one pursues them.
LEV	26	37	그들은 쫓는 자가 없어도 칼 앞에 있음 같이 서로 천답하여 넘어지리니 너희가 대적을 당할 힘이 없을 것이요	And they shall fall one upon another, as it were before a sword, when none pursueth: and ye shall have no power to stand before your enemies.	They will stumble over one another as before the sword, though no one is behind them. So you will not be able to stand against your enemies.
LEV	26	38	너희가 열방 중에서 망하리니 너희 대적의 땅이 너희를 삼킬 것이라	And ye shall perish among the heathen, and the land of your enemies shall eat you up.	You will perish among the nations, and the land of your enemies will consume you.
LEV	26	39	너희 남은 자가 너희 대적의 땅에서 자기의 죄로 인하여 쇠잔하며 그 열조의 죄로 인하여 그 열조 같이 쇠잔하리라	And they that are left of you shall pine away in their iniquity in your enemies’ lands; and also in the iniquities of their fathers shall they pine away with them.	Those of you who survive in the lands of your enemies will waste away in their iniquity and will decay in the sins of their fathers.
LEV	26	40	그들이 자기 죄와 그 열조의 죄와 및 그들이 나를 거스린 허물을 자복하고 또 자기들이 나를 대항하였으므로	If they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their fathers, with their trespass which they trespassed against me, and that also they have walked contrary unto me;	But if they will confess their iniquity and that of their fathers in the unfaithfulness that they practiced against Me, by which they have also walked in hostility toward Me—
LEV	26	41	나도 그들을 대항하여 그 대적의 땅으로 끌어 갔음을 깨닫고 그 할례받지 아니한 마음이 낮아져서 그 죄악의 형벌을 순히 받으면	And that I also have walked contrary unto them, and have brought them into the land of their enemies; if then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they then accept of the punishment of their iniquity:	and I acted with hostility toward them and brought them into the land of their enemies—and if their uncircumcised hearts will be humbled and they will make amends for their iniquity,
LEV	26	42	내가 야곱과 맺은 내 언약과 이삭과 맺은 내 언약을 생각하며 아브라함과 맺은 내 언약을 생각하고 그 땅을 권고하리라	Then will I remember my covenant with Jacob, and also my covenant with Isaac, and also my covenant with Abraham will I remember; and I will remember the land.	then I will remember My covenant with Jacob and My covenant with Isaac and My covenant with Abraham, and I will remember the land.
LEV	26	43	그들이 나의 법도를 싫어하며 나의 규례를 멸시하였으므로 그 땅을 떠나서 사람이 없을 때에 땅이 황폐하여 안식을 누릴 것이요 그들은 자기 죄악으로 형벌을 순히 받으리라	The land also shall be left of them, and shall enjoy her sabbaths, while she lieth desolate without them: and they shall accept of the punishment of their iniquity: because, even because they despised my judgments, and because their soul abhorred my statutes.	For the land will be abandoned by them, and it will enjoy its Sabbaths by lying desolate without them. And they will pay the penalty for their iniquity, because they rejected My ordinances and abhorred My statutes.
LEV	26	44	그런즉 그들이 대적의 땅에 거할 때에 내가 싫어 버리지 아니하며 미워하지 아니하며 아주 멸하지 아니하여 나의 그들과 세운 언약을 폐하지 아니하리니 나는 여호와 그들의 하나님이 됨이라	And yet for all that, when they be in the land of their enemies, I will not cast them away, neither will I abhor them, to destroy them utterly, and to break my covenant with them: for I am the Lord their God.	Yet in spite of this, when they are in the land of their enemies, I will not reject or despise them so as to destroy them and break My covenant with them; for I am the LORD their God.
LEV	26	45	내가 그들의 하나님이 되기 위하여 열방의 목전에 애굽에서 인도하여 낸 그들의 열조와 맺은 언약을 그들을 위하여 기억하리라 나는 여호와니라	But I will for their sakes remember the covenant of their ancestors, whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt in the sight of the heathen, that I might be their God: I am the Lord.	But for their sake I will remember the covenant with their fathers, whom I brought out of the land of Egypt in the sight of the nations, that I might be their God. I am the LORD.”
LEV	26	46	이상은 여호와께서 시내 산에서 자기와 이스라엘 자손 사이에 모세로 세우신 규례와 법도와 율법이니라	These are the statutes and judgments and laws, which the Lord made between him and the children of Israel in mount Sinai by the hand of Moses.	These are the statutes, ordinances, and laws that the LORD established between Himself and the Israelites through Moses on Mount Sinai.
LEV	27	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
LEV	27	2	이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 이르라 사람을 여호와께 드리기로 서원하였으면 너는 그 값을 정할지니	Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When a man shall make a singular vow, the persons shall be for the Lord by thy estimation.	“Speak to the Israelites and say to them, ‘When someone makes a special vow to the LORD involving the value of persons,
LEV	27	3	너의 정한 값은 이십 세로 육십 세까지는 남자이면 성소의 세겔대로 은 오십 세겔로 하고	And thy estimation shall be of the male from twenty years old even unto sixty years old, even thy estimation shall be fifty shekels of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary.	if the valuation concerns a male from twenty to sixty years of age, then your valuation shall be fifty shekels of silver, according to the sanctuary shekel.
LEV	27	4	여자이면 그 값을 삼십 세겔로 하며	And if it be a female, then thy estimation shall be thirty shekels.	Or if it is a female, then your valuation shall be thirty shekels.
LEV	27	5	오 세로 이십 세까지는 남자이면 그 값을 이십 세겔로 하고 여자이면 십 세겔로 하며	And if it be from five years old even unto twenty years old, then thy estimation shall be of the male twenty shekels, and for the female ten shekels.	And if the person is from five to twenty years of age, then your valuation for the male shall be twenty shekels, and for the female ten shekels.
LEV	27	6	일 개월로 오 세까지는 남자이면 그 값을 은 오 세겔로 하고 여자이면 그 값을 은 삼 세겔로 하며	And if it be from a month old even unto five years old, then thy estimation shall be of the male five shekels of silver, and for the female thy estimation shall be three shekels of silver.	Now if the person is from one month to five years of age, then your valuation for the male shall be five shekels of silver, and for the female three shekels of silver.
LEV	27	7	육십 세 이상은 남자이면 그 값을 십오 세겔로 하고 여자는 십 세겔로 하라	And if it be from sixty years old and above; if it be a male, then thy estimation shall be fifteen shekels, and for the female ten shekels.	And if the person is sixty years of age or older, then your valuation shall be fifteen shekels for the male and ten shekels for the female.
LEV	27	8	그러나 서원자가 가난하여 너의 정가를 감당치 못하겠으면 그를 제사장의 앞으로 데리고 갈 것이요 제사장은 그 값을 정하되 그 서원자의 형세대로 값을 정할지니라	But if he be poorer than thy estimation, then he shall present himself before the priest, and the priest shall value him; according to his ability that vowed shall the priest value him.	But if the one making the vow is too poor to pay the valuation, he is to present the person before the priest, who shall set the value according to what the one making the vow can afford.
LEV	27	9	사람이 예물로 여호와께 드리는 것이 생축이면 서원물로 여호와께 드릴 때는 다 거룩하니	And if it be a beast, whereof men bring an offering unto the Lord, all that any man giveth of such unto the Lord shall be holy.	If he vows an animal that may be brought as an offering to the LORD, any such animal given to the LORD shall be holy.
LEV	27	10	그것을 변개하여 우열간 바꾸지 못할 것이요 혹 생축으로 생축을 바꾸면 둘 다 거룩할 것이며	He shall not alter it, nor change it, a good for a bad, or a bad for a good: and if he shall at all change beast for beast, then it and the exchange thereof shall be holy.	He must not replace it or exchange it, either good for bad or bad for good. But if he does substitute one animal for another, both that animal and its substitute will be holy.
LEV	27	11	부정하여 여호와께 예물로 드리지 못할 생축이면 그 생축을 제사장 앞으로 끌어 갈 것이요	And if it be any unclean beast, of which they do not offer a sacrifice unto the Lord, then he shall present the beast before the priest:	But if the vow involves any of the unclean animals that may not be brought as an offering to the LORD, the animal must be presented before the priest.
LEV	27	12	제사장은 그 우열간에 정가할지니 그 값이 제사장의 정한 대로 될 것이며	And the priest shall value it, whether it be good or bad: as thou valuest it, who art the priest, so shall it be.	The priest shall set its value, whether high or low; as the priest values it, the price will be set.
LEV	27	13	그가 그것을 무르려면 정가에 그 오분 일을 더할지니라	But if he will at all redeem it, then he shall add a fifth part thereof unto thy estimation.	If, however, the owner decides to redeem the animal, he must add a fifth to its value.
LEV	27	14	사람이 자기 집을 구별하여 여호와께 드리려면 제사장이 그 우열간에 정가할지니 그 값이 제사장의 정한 대로 될 것이며	And when a man shall sanctify his house to be holy unto the Lord, then the priest shall estimate it, whether it be good or bad: as the priest shall estimate it, so shall it stand.	Now if a man consecrates his house as holy to the LORD, then the priest shall value it either as good or bad. The price will stand just as the priest values it.
LEV	27	15	그 사람이 자기 집을 무르려면 정가한 돈에 그 오분 일을 더할지니 그리하면 자기 소유가 되리라	And if he that sanctified it will redeem his house, then he shall add the fifth part of the money of thy estimation unto it, and it shall be his.	But if he who consecrated his house redeems it, he must add a fifth to the assessed value, and it will belong to him.
LEV	27	16	사람이 자기 기업된 밭 얼마를 구별하여 여호와께 드리려면 두락수대로 정가하되 보리 한 호멜지기에는 은 오십 세겔로 계산할지며	And if a man shall sanctify unto the Lord some part of a field of his possession, then thy estimation shall be according to the seed thereof: an homer of barley seed shall be valued at fifty shekels of silver.	If a man consecrates to the LORD a parcel of his land, then your valuation shall be proportional to the seed required for it—fifty shekels of silver for every homer of barley seed.
LEV	27	17	그가 그 밭을 희년부터 구별하여 드렸으면 그 값을 네가 정한 대로 할 것이요	If he sanctify his field from the year of jubile, according to thy estimation it shall stand.	If he consecrates his field during the Year of Jubilee, the price will stand according to your valuation.
LEV	27	18	그 밭을 희년 후에 구별하여 드렸으면 제사장이 다음 희년까지 남은 연수를 따라 그 값을 계산하고 정가에서 그 값에 상당하게 감할 것이며	But if he sanctify his field after the jubile, then the priest shall reckon unto him the money according to the years that remain, even unto the year of the jubile, and it shall be abated from thy estimation.	But if he consecrates his field after the Jubilee, the priest is to calculate the price in proportion to the years left until the next Year of Jubilee, so that your valuation will be reduced.
LEV	27	19	밭을 구별하여 드린 자가 그것을 무르려면 정가한 돈에 그 오분 일을 더할지니 그리하면 그것이 자기 소유가 될 것이요	And if he that sanctified the field will in any wise redeem it, then he shall add the fifth part of the money of thy estimation unto it, and it shall be assured to him.	And if the one who consecrated the field decides to redeem it, he must add a fifth to the assessed value, and it shall belong to him.
LEV	27	20	그가 그 밭을 무르지 아니하려거나 타인에게 팔았으면 다시는 무르지 못하고	And if he will not redeem the field, or if he have sold the field to another man, it shall not be redeemed any more.	If, however, he does not redeem the field, or if he has sold it to another man, it may no longer be redeemed.
LEV	27	21	희년이 되어서 그 밭이 돌아오게 될 때에는 여호와께 바친 성물이 되어 영영히 드린 땅과 같이 제사장의 기업이 될 것이며	But the field, when it goeth out in the jubile, shall be holy unto the Lord, as a field devoted; the possession thereof shall be the priest’s.	When the field is released in the Jubilee, it will become holy, like a field devoted to the LORD; it becomes the property of the priests.
LEV	27	22	사람에게 샀고 자기 기업이 아닌 밭을 여호와께 구별하여 드렸으면	And if a man sanctify unto the Lord a field which he hath bought, which is not of the fields of his possession;	Now if a man consecrates to the LORD a field he has purchased, which is not a part of his own property,
LEV	27	23	너는 정가하고 제사장은 그를 위하여 희년까지 계산하고 그는 너의 정가한 돈을 그 날에 여호와께 드려 성물을 삼을지며	Then the priest shall reckon unto him the worth of thy estimation, even unto the year of the jubile: and he shall give thine estimation in that day, as a holy thing unto the Lord.	then the priest shall calculate for him the value up to the Year of Jubilee, and the man shall pay the assessed value on that day as a sacred offering to the LORD.
LEV	27	24	그 밭은 희년에 판 사람 곧 그 기업의 본주에게로 돌아 갈지니라	In the year of the jubile the field shall return unto him of whom it was bought, even to him to whom the possession of the land did belong.	In the Year of Jubilee the field shall return to the one from whom it was bought—the original owner of the land.
LEV	27	25	너의 모든 정가를 성소의 세겔대로 하되 이십 게라를 한 세겔로 할지니라	And all thy estimations shall be according to the shekel of the sanctuary: twenty gerahs shall be the shekel.	Every valuation will be according to the sanctuary shekel, twenty gerahs to the shekel.
LEV	27	26	오직 생축의 첫새끼는 여호와께 돌릴 첫새끼라 우양을 물론하고 여호와의 것이니 누구든지 그것으로는 구별하여 드리지 못할 것이며	Only the firstling of the beasts, which should be the Lord’s firstling, no man shall sanctify it; whether it be ox, or sheep: it is the Lord’s.	But no one may consecrate a firstborn of the livestock, because a firstborn belongs to the LORD. Whether it is an ox or a sheep, it is the LORD’s.
LEV	27	27	부정한 짐승이면 너의 정가에 그 오분 일을 더하여 속할 것이요 만일 속하지 아니하거든 너의 정가대로 팔지니라	And if it be of an unclean beast, then he shall redeem it according to thine estimation, and shall add a fifth part of it thereto: or if it be not redeemed, then it shall be sold according to thy estimation.	But if it is among the unclean animals, then he may redeem it according to your valuation and add a fifth of its value. If it is not redeemed, then it shall be sold according to your valuation.
LEV	27	28	오직 여호와께 아주 바친 그 물건은 사람이든지 생축이든지 기업의 밭이든지 팔지도 못하고 속하지도 못하나니 바친 것은 다 여호와께 지극히 거룩함이며	Notwithstanding no devoted thing, that a man shall devote unto the Lord of all that he hath, both of man and beast, and of the field of his possession, shall be sold or redeemed: every devoted thing is most holy unto the Lord.	Nothing that a man sets apart to the LORD from all he owns—whether a man, an animal, or his inherited land—can be sold or redeemed; everything so devoted is most holy to the LORD.
LEV	27	29	아주 바친 그 사람은 다시 속하지 못하나니 반드시 죽일지니라	None devoted, which shall be devoted of men, shall be redeemed; but shall surely be put to death.	No person set apart for destruction may be ransomed; he must surely be put to death.
LEV	27	30	땅의 십분 일 곧 땅의 곡식이나 나무의 과실이나 그 십분 일은 여호와의 것이니 여호와께 성물이라	And all the tithe of the land, whether of the seed of the land, or of the fruit of the tree, is the Lord’s: it is holy unto the Lord.	Thus any tithe from the land, whether from the seed of the land or the fruit of the trees, belongs to the LORD; it is holy to the LORD.
LEV	27	31	사람이 그 십분 일을 속하려면 그것에 그 오분 일을 더할 것이요	And if a man will at all redeem ought of his tithes, he shall add thereto the fifth part thereof.	If a man wishes to redeem part of his tithe, he must add a fifth to its value.
LEV	27	32	소나 양의 십분 일은 막대기 아래로 통과하는 것의 열째마다 여호와의 거룩한 것이 되리니	And concerning the tithe of the herd, or of the flock, even of whatsoever passeth under the rod, the tenth shall be holy unto the Lord.	Every tenth animal from the herd or flock that passes under the shepherd’s rod will be holy to the LORD.
LEV	27	33	그 우열을 교계하거나 바꾸거나 하지 말라 바꾸면 둘 다 거룩하리니 속하지 못하리라	He shall not search whether it be good or bad, neither shall he change it: and if he change it at all, then both it and the change thereof shall be holy; it shall not be redeemed.	He must not inspect whether it is good or bad, and he shall not make any substitution. But if he does make a substitution, both the animal and its substitute shall become holy; they cannot be redeemed.’”
LEV	27	34	이상은 여호와께서 시내 산에서 이스라엘 자손을 위하여 모세에게 명하신 계명이니라	These are the commandments, which the Lord commanded Moses for the children of Israel in mount Sinai.	These are the commandments that the LORD gave to Moses for the Israelites on Mount Sinai.
NUM	1	1	이스라엘 자손이 애굽 땅에서 나온 후 제이년 이월 일일에 여호와께서 시내 광야 회막에서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the tabernacle of the congregation, on the first day of the second month, in the second year after they were come out of the land of Egypt, saying,	On the first day of the second month of the second year after the Israelites had come out of the land of Egypt, the LORD spoke to Moses in the Tent of Meeting in the Wilderness of Sinai. He said:
NUM	1	2	너희는 이스라엘 자손의 모든 회중 각 남자의 수를 그들의 가족과 종족을 따라 그 명수대로 계수할지니	Take ye the sum of all the congregation of the children of Israel, after their families, by the house of their fathers, with the number of their names, every male by their polls;	“Take a census of the whole congregation of Israel by their clans and families, listing every man by name, one by one.
NUM	1	3	이스라엘 중 이십 세 이상으로 싸움에 나갈만한 모든 자를 너와 아론은 그 군대대로 계수하되	From twenty years old and upward, all that are able to go forth to war in Israel: thou and Aaron shall number them by their armies.	You and Aaron are to number those who are twenty years of age or older by their divisions—everyone who can serve in Israel’s army.
NUM	1	4	매 지파의 각기 종족의 두령 한 사람씩 너희와 함께 하라	And with you there shall be a man of every tribe; every one head of the house of his fathers.	And one man from each tribe, the head of each family, must be there with you.
NUM	1	5	너희와 함께 설 사람들의 이름은 이러하니 르우벤에게서는 스데울의 아들 엘리술이요	And these are the names of the men that shall stand with you: of the tribe of Reuben; Elizur the son of Shedeur.	These are the names of the men who are to assist you: From the tribe of Reuben, Elizur son of Shedeur;
NUM	1	6	시므온에게서는 수리삿대의 아들 슬루미엘이요	Of Simeon; Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.	from Simeon, Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai;
NUM	1	7	유다에게서는 암미나답의 아들 나손이요	Of Judah; Nahshon the son of Amminadab.	from Judah, Nahshon son of Amminadab;
NUM	1	8	잇사갈에게서는 수리알의 아들 느다넬이요	Of Issachar; Nethaneel the son of Zuar.	from Issachar, Nethanel son of Zuar;
NUM	1	9	스불론에게서는 헬론의 아들 엘리압이요	Of Zebulun; Eliab the son of Helon.	from Zebulun, Eliab son of Helon;
NUM	1	10	요셉 자손에게서는 에브라임에 암미훗의 아들 엘리사마와 므낫세에 브다술의 아들 가말리엘이요	Of the children of Joseph: of Ephraim; Elishama the son of Ammihud: of Manasseh; Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.	from the sons of Joseph: from Ephraim, Elishama son of Ammihud, and from Manasseh, Gamaliel son of Pedahzur;
NUM	1	11	베냐민에게서는 기드오니의 아들 아비단이요	Of Benjamin; Abidan the son of Gideoni.	from Benjamin, Abidan son of Gideoni;
NUM	1	12	단에게서는 암미삿대의 아들 아히에셀이요	Of Dan; Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.	from Dan, Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai;
NUM	1	13	아셀에게서는 오그란의 아들 바기엘이요	Of Asher; Pagiel the son of Ocran.	from Asher, Pagiel son of Ocran;
NUM	1	14	갓에게서는 드우엘의 아들 엘리아삽이요	Of Gad; Eliasaph the son of Deuel.	from Gad, Eliasaph son of Deuel;
NUM	1	15	납달리에게서는 에난의 아들 아히라니라 하시니	Of Naphtali; Ahira the son of Enan.	and from Naphtali, Ahira son of Enan.”
NUM	1	16	그들은 회중에서 부름을 받은 자요 그 조상 지파의 족장으로서 이스라엘 천만 인의 두령이라	These were the renowned of the congregation, princes of the tribes of their fathers, heads of thousands in Israel.	These men were appointed from the congregation; they were the leaders of the tribes of their fathers, the heads of the clans of Israel.
NUM	1	17	모세와 아론이 지명된 이 사람들을 데리고	And Moses and Aaron took these men which are expressed by their names:	So Moses and Aaron took these men who had been designated by name,
NUM	1	18	이월 일일에 온 회중을 모으니 그들이 각기 가족과 종족을 따라 이십 세 이상으로 그 명수를 의지하여 자기 계통을 말하매	And they assembled all the congregation together on the first day of the second month, and they declared their pedigrees after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, by their polls.	and on the first day of the second month they assembled the whole congregation and recorded their ancestry by clans and families, counting one by one the names of those twenty years of age or older,
NUM	1	19	여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 그가 시내 광야에서 그들을 계수하였더라	As the Lord commanded Moses, so he numbered them in the wilderness of Sinai.	just as the LORD had commanded Moses. So Moses numbered them in the Wilderness of Sinai:
NUM	1	20	이스라엘의 장자 르우벤의 아들들에게서 난 자를 그들의 가족과 종족을 따라 이십 세 이상으로 싸움에 나갈만한 각 남자를 그 명수대로 다 계수하니	And the children of Reuben, Israel’s eldest son, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, by their polls, every male from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;	From the sons of Reuben, the firstborn of Israel, according to the records of their clans and families, counting one by one the names of every male twenty years of age or older who could serve in the army,
NUM	1	21	르우벤 지파의 계수함을 입은 자가 사만 육천오백 명이었더라	Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Reuben, were forty and six thousand and five hundred.	those registered to the tribe of Reuben numbered 46,500.
NUM	1	22	시므온의 아들들에게서 난 자를 그들의 가족과 종족을 따라 이십 세 이상으로 싸움에 나갈만한 각 남자를 그 명수대로 다 계수하니	Of the children of Simeon, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, those that were numbered of them, according to the number of the names, by their polls, every male from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;	From the sons of Simeon, according to the records of their clans and families, counting one by one the names of every male twenty years of age or older who could serve in the army,
NUM	1	23	시므온 지파의 계수함을 입은 자가 오만 구천삼백 명이었더라	Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Simeon, were fifty and nine thousand and three hundred.	those registered to the tribe of Simeon numbered 59,300.
NUM	1	24	갓의 아들에게서 난 자를 그들의 가족과 종족을 따라 이십 세 이상으로 싸움에 나갈만한 자를 그 명수대로 다 계수하니	Of the children of Gad, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;	From the sons of Gad, according to the records of their clans and families, counting the names of all those twenty years of age or older who could serve in the army,
NUM	1	25	갓 지파의 계수함을 입은 자가 사만 오천육백오십 명이었더라	Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Gad, were forty and five thousand six hundred and fifty.	those registered to the tribe of Gad numbered 45,650.
NUM	1	26	유다의 아들들에게서 난 자를 그들의 가족과 종족을 따라 이십 세 이상으로 싸움에 나갈만한 자를 그 명수대로 다 계수하니	Of the children of Judah, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;	From the sons of Judah, according to the records of their clans and families, counting the names of all those twenty years of age or older who could serve in the army,
NUM	1	27	유다 지파의 계수함을 입은자가 칠만 사천육백 명이었더라	Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Judah, were threescore and fourteen thousand and six hundred.	those registered to the tribe of Judah numbered 74,600.
NUM	1	28	잇사갈의 아들들에게서 난 자를 그들의 가족과 종족을 따라 이십 세 이상으로 싸움에 나갈만한 자를 그 명수대로 다 계수하니	Of the children of Issachar, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;	From the sons of Issachar, according to the records of their clans and families, counting the names of all those twenty years of age or older who could serve in the army,
NUM	1	29	잇사갈 지파의 계수함을 입은자가 오만 사천사백 명이었더라	Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Issachar, were fifty and four thousand and four hundred.	those registered to the tribe of Issachar numbered 54,400.
NUM	1	30	스불론의 아들들에게서 난 자를 그들의 가족과 종족을 따라 이십 세 이상으로 싸움에 나갈만한 자를 그 명수대로 다 계수하니	Of the children of Zebulun, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;	From the sons of Zebulun, according to the records of their clans and families, counting the names of all those twenty years of age or older who could serve in the army,
NUM	1	31	스불론 지파의 계수함을 입은 자가 오만 칠천사백 명이었더라	Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Zebulun, were fifty and seven thousand and four hundred.	those registered to the tribe of Zebulun numbered 57,400.
NUM	1	32	요셉의 아들 에브라임의 아들들에게서 난 자를 그들의 가족과 종족을 따라 이십 세 이상으로 싸움에 나갈만한 자를 그 명수대로 다 계수하니	Of the children of Joseph, namely, of the children of Ephraim, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;	From the sons of Joseph:
NUM	1	33	에브라임 지파의 계수함을 입은 자가 사만 오백 명이었더라	Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Ephraim, were forty thousand and five hundred.	From the sons of Ephraim, according to the records of their clans and families, counting the names of all those twenty years of age or older who could serve in the army, those registered to the tribe of Ephraim numbered 40,500.
NUM	1	34	므낫세의 아들들에게서 난 자를 그들의 가족과 종족을 따라 이십 세 이상으로 싸움에 나갈만한 자를 그 명수대로 다 계수하니	Of the children of Manasseh, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;	And from the sons of Manasseh, according to the records of their clans and families, counting the names of all those twenty years of age or older who could serve in the army,
NUM	1	35	므낫세 지파의 계수함을 입은 자가 삼만 이천이백 명이었더라	Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Manasseh, were thirty and two thousand and two hundred.	those registered to the tribe of Manasseh numbered 32,200.
NUM	1	36	베냐민의 아들들에게서 난 자를 그들의 가족과 종족을 따라 이십 세 이상으로 싸움에 나갈만한 자를 그 명수대로 다 계수하니	Of the children of Benjamin, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;	From the sons of Benjamin, according to the records of their clans and families, counting the names of all those twenty years of age or older who could serve in the army,
NUM	1	37	베냐민 지파의 계수함을 입은 자가 삼만 오천사백 명이었더라	Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Benjamin, were thirty and five thousand and four hundred.	those registered to the tribe of Benjamin numbered 35,400.
NUM	1	38	단의 아들들에게서 난 자를 그들의 가족과 종족을 따라 이십 세 이상으로 싸움에 나갈만한 자를 그 명수대로 다 계수하니	Of the children of Dan, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;	From the sons of Dan, according to the records of their clans and families, counting the names of all those twenty years of age or older who could serve in the army,
NUM	1	39	단 지파의 계수함을 입은 자가 육만 이천칠백 명이었더라	Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Dan, were threescore and two thousand and seven hundred.	those registered to the tribe of Dan numbered 62,700.
NUM	1	40	아셀의 아들들에게서 난 자를 그들의 가족과 종족을 따라 이십 세 이상으로 싸움에 나갈만한 자를 그 명수대로 다 계수하니	Of the children of Asher, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;	From the sons of Asher, according to the records of their clans and families, counting the names of all those twenty years of age or older who could serve in the army,
NUM	1	41	아셀 지파의 계수함을 입은 자가 사만 일천오백 명이었더라	Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Asher, were forty and one thousand and five hundred.	those registered to the tribe of Asher numbered 41,500.
NUM	1	42	납달리의 아들들에게서 난 자를 그들의 가족과 종족을 따라 이십 세 이상으로 싸움에 나갈만한 자를 그 명수대로 다 계수하니	Of the children of Naphtali, throughout their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;	From the sons of Naphtali, according to the records of their clans and families, counting the names of all those twenty years of age or older who could serve in the army,
NUM	1	43	납달리 지파의 계수함을 입은 자가 오만 삼천사백 명이었더라	Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Naphtali, were fifty and three thousand and four hundred.	those registered to the tribe of Naphtali numbered 53,400.
NUM	1	44	이 계수함을 입은 자는 모세와 아론과 각기 이스라엘 종족을 대표한 족장 십이 인이 계수한 자라	These are those that were numbered, which Moses and Aaron numbered, and the princes of Israel, being twelve men: each one was for the house of his fathers.	These were the men numbered by Moses and Aaron, with the assistance of the twelve leaders of Israel, each one representing his family.
NUM	1	45	이같이 이스라엘 자손의 그 종족을 따라 이십 세 이상으로 싸움에 나갈 한 자가 이스라엘 중에서 다 계수함을 입었으니	So were all those that were numbered of the children of Israel, by the house of their fathers, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war in Israel;	So all the Israelites twenty years of age or older who could serve in Israel’s army were counted according to their families.
NUM	1	46	계수함을 입은 자의 총계가 육십만 삼천오백오십 명이었더라	Even all they that were numbered were six hundred thousand and three thousand and five hundred and fifty.	And all those counted totaled 603,550.
NUM	1	47	오직 레위인은 그 조상의 지파대로 그 계수에 들지 아니하였으니	But the Levites after the tribe of their fathers were not numbered among them.	The Levites, however, were not numbered along with them by the tribe of their fathers.
NUM	1	48	이는 여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	For the Lord had spoken unto Moses, saying,	For the LORD had said to Moses:
NUM	1	49	레위 지파만은 너는 계수치 말며 그들을 이스라엘 자손 계수 중에 넣지 말고	Only thou shalt not number the tribe of Levi, neither take the sum of them among the children of Israel:	“Do not number the tribe of Levi in the census with the other Israelites.
NUM	1	50	그들을 증거막과 그 모든 기구와 그 모든 부속품을 관리하게 하라	But thou shalt appoint the Levites over the tabernacle of testimony, and over all the vessels thereof, and over all things that belong to it: they shall bear the tabernacle, and all the vessels thereof; and they shall minister unto it, and shall encamp round about the tabernacle.	Instead, you are to appoint the Levites over the tabernacle of the Testimony, all its furnishings, and everything in it. They shall carry the tabernacle and all its articles, care for it, and camp around it.
NUM	1	51	그들은 그 장막과 그 모든 기구를 운반하며 거기서 봉사하며 장막 사면에 진을 칠지며	And when the tabernacle setteth forward, the Levites shall take it down: and when the tabernacle is to be pitched, the Levites shall set it up: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.	Whenever the tabernacle is to move, the Levites are to take it down, and whenever it is to be pitched, the Levites are to set it up. Any outsider who goes near it must be put to death.
NUM	1	52	장막을 운반할 때에는 레위인이 그것을 걷고 장막을 세울 때에는 레위인이 그것을 세울 것이요 외인이 가까이 오면 죽일지며	And the children of Israel shall pitch their tents, every man by his own camp, and every man by his own standard, throughout their hosts.	The Israelites are to camp by their divisions, each man in his own camp and under his own standard.
NUM	1	53	레위인은 증거막 사면에 진을 쳐서 이스라엘 자손의 회중에게 진노가 임하지 않게 할 것이라 레위인은 증거막에 대한 책임을 지킬지니라 하셨음이라	But the Levites shall pitch round about the tabernacle of testimony, that there be no wrath upon the congregation of the children of Israel: and the Levites shall keep the charge of the tabernacle of testimony.	But the Levites are to camp around the tabernacle of the Testimony and watch over it, so that no wrath will fall on the congregation of Israel. So the Levites are responsible for the tabernacle of the Testimony.”
NUM	1	54	이스라엘 자손이 그대로 행하되 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 행하였더라	And the children of Israel did according to all that the Lord commanded Moses, so did they.	Thus the Israelites did everything just as the LORD had commanded Moses.
NUM	2	1	여호와께서 모세와 아론에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses and Aaron:
NUM	2	2	이스라엘 자손은 각각 그 기와 그 종족의 기호 곁에 진을 치되 회막을 사면으로 대하여 치라	Every man of the children of Israel shall pitch by his own standard, with the ensign of their father’s house: far off about the tabernacle of the congregation shall they pitch.	“The Israelites are to camp around the Tent of Meeting at a distance from it, each man under his standard, with the banners of his family.
NUM	2	3	동방 해 돋는 편에 진 칠 자는 그 군대대로 유다의 진 기에 속한 자라 유다 자손의 족장은 암미나답의 아들 나손이요	And on the east side toward the rising of the sun shall they of the standard of the camp of Judah pitch throughout their armies: and Nahshon the son of Amminadab shall be captain of the children of Judah.	On the east side, toward the sunrise, the divisions of Judah are to camp under their standard:
NUM	2	4	그 군대는 계수함을 입은 자가 칠만 사천육백 명이며	And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were threescore and fourteen thousand and six hundred.	The leader of the descendants of Judah is Nahshon son of Amminadab, and his division numbers 74,600.
NUM	2	5	그 곁에 진 칠 자는 잇사갈 지파라 잇사갈 자손의 족장은 수알의 아들 느다넬이요	And those that do pitch next unto him shall be the tribe of Issachar: and Nethaneel the son of Zuar shall be captain of the children of Issachar.	The tribe of Issachar will camp next to it. The leader of the Issacharites is Nethanel son of Zuar,
NUM	2	6	그 군대는 계수함을 입은 자 오만 사천사백 명이며	And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were fifty and four thousand and four hundred.	and his division numbers 54,400.
NUM	2	7	또 스불론 지파라 스불론 자손의 족장은 헬론의 아들 엘리압이요	Then the tribe of Zebulun: and Eliab the son of Helon shall be captain of the children of Zebulun.	Next will be the tribe of Zebulun. The leader of the Zebulunites is Eliab son of Helon,
NUM	2	8	그 군대는 계수함을 입은 자 오만 칠천사백 명이니	And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were fifty and seven thousand and four hundred.	and his division numbers 57,400.
NUM	2	9	유다 진에 속한 군대의 계수함을 입은 군대의 총계가 십팔만 육천사백 명이라 그들은 제일대로 진행할지니라	All that were numbered in the camp of Judah were an hundred thousand and fourscore thousand and six thousand and four hundred, throughout their armies. These shall first set forth.	The total number of men in the divisions of the camp of Judah is 186,400; they shall set out first.
NUM	2	10	남편에는 르우벤 군대의 진 기가 있을 것이라 르우벤 자손의 족장은 스데울의 아들 엘리술이요	On the south side shall be the standard of the camp of Reuben according to their armies: and the captain of the children of Reuben shall be Elizur the son of Shedeur.	On the south side, the divisions of Reuben are to camp under their standard:
NUM	2	11	그 군대는 계수함을 입은 자 사만 육천오백 명이며	And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were forty and six thousand and five hundred.	The leader of the Reubenites is Elizur son of Shedeur, and his division numbers 46,500.
NUM	2	12	그 곁에 진 칠 자는 시므온 지파라 시므온 자손의 족장은 수리삿대의 아들 슬루미엘이요	And those which pitch by him shall be the tribe of Simeon: and the captain of the children of Simeon shall be Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.	The tribe of Simeon will camp next to it. The leader of the Simeonites is Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai,
NUM	2	13	그 군대는 계수함을 입은 자 오만 구천삼백 명이며	And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were fifty and nine thousand and three hundred.	and his division numbers 59,300.
NUM	2	14	또 갓 지파라 갓 자손의 족장은 르우엘의 아들 엘리아삽이요	Then the tribe of Gad: and the captain of the sons of Gad shall be Eliasaph the son of Reuel.	Next will be the tribe of Gad. The leader of the Gadites is Eliasaph son of Deuel,
NUM	2	15	그 군대는 계수함을 입은 자 사만 오천육백오십 명이니	And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty and five thousand and six hundred and fifty.	and his division numbers 45,650.
NUM	2	16	르우벤 진에 속한 계수함을 입은 군대의 총계가 십오만 일천사백오십 명이라 그들은 제이대로 진행할지니라	All that were numbered in the camp of Reuben were an hundred thousand and fifty and one thousand and four hundred and fifty, throughout their armies. And they shall set forth in the second rank.	The total number of men in the divisions of the camp of Reuben is 151,450; they shall set out second.
NUM	2	17	그 다음에 회막이 레위인의 진과 함께 모든 진의 중앙에 있어 진행하되 그들의 진 친 순서대로 각 사람은 그 위치에서 그 기를 따라 앞으로 행할지니라	Then the tabernacle of the congregation shall set forward with the camp of the Levites in the midst of the camp: as they encamp, so shall they set forward, every man in his place by their standards.	In the middle of the camps, the Tent of Meeting is to travel with the camp of the Levites. They are to set out in the order they encamped, each in his own place under his standard.
NUM	2	18	서편에는 에브라임의 군대의 진 기가 있을 것이라 에브라임 자손의 족장은 암미훗의 아들 엘리사마요	On the west side shall be the standard of the camp of Ephraim according to their armies: and the captain of the sons of Ephraim shall be Elishama the son of Ammihud.	On the west side, the divisions of Ephraim are to camp under their standard:
NUM	2	19	그 군대는 계수함을 입은 자 사만 오백명이며	And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty thousand and five hundred.	The leader of the Ephraimites is Elishama son of Ammihud, and his division numbers 40,500.
NUM	2	20	그 곁에는 므낫세 지파가 있을 것이라 므낫세 자손의 족장은 브다술의 아들 가말리엘이요	And by him shall be the tribe of Manasseh: and the captain of the children of Manasseh shall be Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.	The tribe of Manasseh will be next to it. The leader of the Manassites is Gamaliel son of Pedahzur,
NUM	2	21	그 군대는 계수함을 입은 자 삼만 이천이백 명이며	And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thirty and two thousand and two hundred.	and his division numbers 32,200.
NUM	2	22	또 베냐민 지파라 베냐민 자손의 족장은 기드오니의 아들 아비단이요	Then the tribe of Benjamin: and the captain of the sons of Benjamin shall be Abidan the son of Gideoni.	Next will be the tribe of Benjamin. The leader of the Benjamites is Abidan son of Gideoni,
NUM	2	23	그 군대는 계수함을 입은 자 삼만 오천사백 명이니	And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thirty and five thousand and four hundred.	and his division numbers 35,400.
NUM	2	24	에브라임 진에 속한 계수함을 입은 군대의 총계가 십만 팔천일백 명이라 그들은 제삼대로 진행할지니라	All that were numbered of the camp of Ephraim were an hundred thousand and eight thousand and an hundred, throughout their armies. And they shall go forward in the third rank.	The total number of men in the divisions of the camp of Ephraim is 108,100; they shall set out third.
NUM	2	25	북편에는 단 군대의 진 기가 있을 것이라 단 자손의 족장은 암미삿대의 아들 아히에셀이요	The standard of the camp of Dan shall be on the north side by their armies: and the captain of the children of Dan shall be Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.	On the north side, the divisions of Dan are to camp under their standard:
NUM	2	26	그 군대는 계수함을 입은 자 육만 이천칠백 명이며	And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were threescore and two thousand and seven hundred.	The leader of the Danites is Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai, and his division numbers 62,700.
NUM	2	27	그 곁에 진 칠 자는 아셀 지파라 아셀 자손의 족장은 오그란의 아들 바기엘이요	And those that encamp by him shall be the tribe of Asher: and the captain of the children of Asher shall be Pagiel the son of Ocran.	The tribe of Asher will camp next to it. The leader of the Asherites is Pagiel son of Ocran,
NUM	2	28	그 군대는 계수함을 입은 자 사만 일천오백 명이며	And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty and one thousand and five hundred.	and his division numbers 41,500.
NUM	2	29	또 납달리 지파라 납달리 자손의 족장은 에난의 아들 아히라요	Then the tribe of Naphtali: and the captain of the children of Naphtali shall be Ahira the son of Enan.	Next will be the tribe of Naphtali. The leader of the Naphtalites is Ahira son of Enan,
NUM	2	30	그 군대는 계수함을 입은 자 오만 삼천사백 명이니	And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were fifty and three thousand and four hundred.	and his division numbers 53,400.
NUM	2	31	단의 진에 속한 계수함을 입은 군대의 총계가 십오만 칠천육백 명이라 그들은 기를 따라 후대로 진행할지니라 하시니라	All they that were numbered in the camp of Dan were an hundred thousand and fifty and seven thousand and six hundred. They shall go hindmost with their standards.	The total number of men in the camp of Dan is 157,600; they shall set out last, under their standards.”
NUM	2	32	이상은 이스라엘 자손이 그 종족을 따라 계수함을 입은 자니 모든 진의 군대 곧 계수함을 입은 총계가 육십만 삼천오백오십 명이었으며	These are those which were numbered of the children of Israel by the house of their fathers: all those that were numbered of the camps throughout their hosts were six hundred thousand and three thousand and five hundred and fifty.	These are the Israelites, numbered according to their families. The total of those counted in the camps, by their divisions, was 603,550.
NUM	2	33	레위인은 이스라엘 자손과 함께 계수되지 아니하였으니 여호와께서 모세에게 명하심과 같았느니라	But the Levites were not numbered among the children of Israel; as the Lord commanded Moses.	But the Levites were not counted among the other Israelites, as the LORD had commanded Moses.
NUM	2	34	이스라엘 자손이 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 다 준행하여 각기 가족과 종족을 따르며 그 기를 따라 진 치기도 하며 진행하기도 하였더라	And the children of Israel did according to all that the Lord commanded Moses: so they pitched by their standards, and so they set forward, every one after their families, according to the house of their fathers.	So the Israelites did everything the LORD commanded Moses; they camped under their standards in this way and set out in the same way, each man with his clan and his family.
NUM	3	1	여호와께서 시내 산에서 모세와 말씀하실 때에 아론과 모세의 낳은 자가 이러하니라	These also are the generations of Aaron and Moses in the day that the Lord spake with Moses in mount Sinai.	This is the account of Aaron and Moses at the time the LORD spoke with Moses on Mount Sinai.
NUM	3	2	아론의 아들들의 이름은 장자는 나답이요 다음은 아비후와 엘르아살과 이다말이니	And these are the names of the sons of Aaron; Nadab the firstborn, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.	These are the names of the sons of Aaron: Nadab the firstborn, then Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
NUM	3	3	이는 아론의 아들들의 이름이며 그들은 기름을 발리우고 거룩히 구별되어 제사장 직분을 위임받은 제사장들이라	These are the names of the sons of Aaron, the priests which were anointed, whom he consecrated to minister in the priest’s office.	These were Aaron’s sons, the anointed priests, who were ordained to serve as priests.
NUM	3	4	나답과 아비후는 시내 광야에서 다른 불을 여호와 앞에 드리다가 여호와 앞에서 죽었고 무자하였고 엘리아살과 이다말이 그 아비 아론 앞에서 제사장의 직분을 행하였더라	And Nadab and Abihu died before the Lord, when they offered strange fire before the Lord, in the wilderness of Sinai, and they had no children: and Eleazar and Ithamar ministered in the priest’s office in the sight of Aaron their father.	Nadab and Abihu, however, died in the presence of the LORD when they offered unauthorized fire before the LORD in the Wilderness of Sinai. And since they had no sons, only Eleazar and Ithamar served as priests during the lifetime of their father Aaron.
NUM	3	5	여호와께서 또 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	3	6	레위 지파로 나아와 제사장 아론 앞에 서서 그에게 시종하게 하라	Bring the tribe of Levi near, and present them before Aaron the priest, that they may minister unto him.	“Bring the tribe of Levi and present them to Aaron the priest to assist him.
NUM	3	7	그들이 회막 앞에서 아론의 직무와 온 회중의 직무를 위하여 회막에서 시무하되	And they shall keep his charge, and the charge of the whole congregation before the tabernacle of the congregation, to do the service of the tabernacle.	They are to perform duties for him and for the whole congregation before the Tent of Meeting, attending to the service of the tabernacle.
NUM	3	8	곧 회막의 모든 기구를 수직하며 이스라엘 자손의 직무를 위하여 장막에서 시무할지니	And they shall keep all the instruments of the tabernacle of the congregation, and the charge of the children of Israel, to do the service of the tabernacle.	They shall take care of all the furnishings of the Tent of Meeting and fulfill obligations for the Israelites by attending to the service of the tabernacle.
NUM	3	9	너는 레위인을 아론과 그 아들들에게 주라 그들은 이스라엘 자손 중에서 아론에게 온전히 돌리운 자니라	And thou shalt give the Levites unto Aaron and to his sons: they are wholly given unto him out of the children of Israel.	Assign the Levites to Aaron and his sons; they have been given exclusively to him from among the Israelites.
NUM	3	10	너는 아론과 그 아들들을 세워 제사장 직분을 행하게 하라 외인이 가까이 하면 죽임을 당할 것이니라	And thou shalt appoint Aaron and his sons, and they shall wait on their priest’s office: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.	So you shall appoint Aaron and his sons to carry out the duties of the priesthood; but any outsider who approaches the tabernacle must be put to death.”
NUM	3	11	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Again the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,
NUM	3	12	보라 내가 이스라엘 자손 중에서 레위인을 택하여 이스라엘 자손 중 모든 첫 태에 처음 난 자를 대신케 하였은즉 레위인은 내 것이라	And I, behold, I have taken the Levites from among the children of Israel instead of all the firstborn that openeth the matrix among the children of Israel: therefore the Levites shall be mine;	“Behold, I have taken the Levites from among the children of Israel in place of every firstborn Israelite from the womb. The Levites belong to Me,
NUM	3	13	처음 난 자는 다 내 것임은 내가 애굽 땅에서 그 처음 난 자를 다 죽이던 날에 이스라엘의 처음 난 자는 사람이나 짐승을 다 거룩히 구별하였음이니 그들은 내 것이 될 것임이니라	Because all the firstborn are mine; for on the day that I smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt I hallowed unto me all the firstborn in Israel, both man and beast: mine shall they be: I am the Lord.	for all the firstborn are Mine. On the day I struck down every firstborn in the land of Egypt, I consecrated to Myself all the firstborn in Israel, both man and beast. They are Mine; I am the LORD.”
NUM	3	14	여호와께서 시내 광야에서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, saying,	Then the LORD spoke to Moses in the Wilderness of Sinai, saying,
NUM	3	15	레위 자손을 그들의 종족과 가족을 따라 계수하되 일 개월 이상의 남자를 다 계수하라	Number the children of Levi after the house of their fathers, by their families: every male from a month old and upward shalt thou number them.	“Number the Levites by their families and clans. You are to count every male a month old or more.”
NUM	3	16	모세가 여호와의 말씀을 좇아 그 명하신 대로 계수하니라	And Moses numbered them according to the word of the Lord, as he was commanded.	So Moses numbered them according to the word of the LORD, as he had been commanded.
NUM	3	17	레위의 아들들의 이름은 이러하니 게르손과 고핫과 므라리요	And these were the sons of Levi by their names; Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari.	These were the sons of Levi by name: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
NUM	3	18	게르손의 아들들의 이름은 그 가족대로 이러하니 립니와 시므이요	And these are the names of the sons of Gershon by their families; Libni, and Shimei.	These were the names of the sons of Gershon by their clans: Libni and Shimei.
NUM	3	19	고핫의 아들들은 그 가족대로 이러하니 아므람과 이스할과 헤브론과 웃시엘이요	And the sons of Kohath by their families; Amram, and Izehar, Hebron, and Uzziel.	The sons of Kohath by their clans were Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel.
NUM	3	20	므라리의 아들들은 그 가족대로 말리와 무시니 이는 그 종족대로 된 레위인의 가족들이니라	And the sons of Merari by their families; Mahli, and Mushi. These are the families of the Levites according to the house of their fathers.	And the sons of Merari by their clans were Mahli and Mushi. These were the clans of the Levites, according to their families.
NUM	3	21	게르손에게서는 립니 가족과 시므이 가족이 났으니 이들이 곧 게르손의 가족들이라	Of Gershon was the family of the Libnites, and the family of the Shimites: these are the families of the Gershonites.	From Gershon came the Libnite clan and the Shimeite clan; these were the Gershonite clans.
NUM	3	22	계수함을 입은 자의 수효 곧 일 개월 이상 남자의 수효 합계가 칠천오백 명이며	Those that were numbered of them, according to the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, even those that were numbered of them were seven thousand and five hundred.	The number of all the males a month old or more was 7,500.
NUM	3	23	게르손 가족들은 장막 뒤 곧 서편에 진을 칠 것이요	The families of the Gershonites shall pitch behind the tabernacle westward.	The Gershonite clans were to camp on the west, behind the tabernacle,
NUM	3	24	라엘의 아들 엘리아삽은 게르손 사람의 종족의 족장이 될 것이며	And the chief of the house of the father of the Gershonites shall be Eliasaph the son of Lael.	and the leader of the families of the Gershonites was Eliasaph son of Lael.
NUM	3	25	게르손 자손의 회막에 대하여 맡을 것은 성막과 장막과 그 덮개와 회막 문장과	And the charge of the sons of Gershon in the tabernacle of the congregation shall be the tabernacle, and the tent, the covering thereof, and the hanging for the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,	The duties of the Gershonites at the Tent of Meeting were the tabernacle and tent, its covering, the curtain for the entrance to the Tent of Meeting,
NUM	3	26	뜰의 휘장과 및 성막과 단 사면에 있는 뜰의 문장과 그 모든 것에 쓰는 줄들이니라	And the hangings of the court, and the curtain for the door of the court, which is by the tabernacle, and by the altar round about, and the cords of it for all the service thereof.	the curtains of the courtyard, the curtain for the entrance to the courtyard that surrounds the tabernacle and altar, and the cords—all the service for these items.
NUM	3	27	고핫에게서는 아므람 가족과 이스할 가족과 헤브론 가족과 웃시엘 가족이 났으니 이들이 곧 고핫 가족들이라	And of Kohath was the family of the Amramites, and the family of the Izeharites, and the family of the Hebronites, and the family of the Uzzielites: these are the families of the Kohathites.	From Kohath came the clans of the Amramites, the Izharites, the Hebronites, and the Uzzielites; these were the clans of the Kohathites.
NUM	3	28	계수함을 입은 일 개월 이상 모든 남자의 수효가 팔천육백 명인데 성소를 맡을 것이며	In the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, were eight thousand and six hundred, keeping the charge of the sanctuary.	The number of all the males a month old or more was 8,600. They were responsible for the duties of the sanctuary.
NUM	3	29	고핫 자손의 가족들은 성막 남편에 진을 칠 것이요	The families of the sons of Kohath shall pitch on the side of the tabernacle southward.	The clans of the Kohathites were to camp on the south side of the tabernacle,
NUM	3	30	웃시엘의 아들 엘리사반은 고핫 사람의 가족과 종족의 족장이 될 것이며	And the chief of the house of the father of the families of the Kohathites shall be Elizaphan the son of Uzziel.	and the leader of the families of the Kohathites was Elizaphan son of Uzziel.
NUM	3	31	그들의 맡을 것은 증거궤와 상과 등대와 단들과 성소에서 봉사하는데 쓰는 기구들과 휘장과 그것에 쓰는 모든 것이며	And their charge shall be the ark, and the table, and the candlestick, and the altars, and the vessels of the sanctuary wherewith they minister, and the hanging, and all the service thereof.	Their duties were the ark, the table, the lampstand, the altars, the articles of the sanctuary used with them, and the curtain—all the service for these items.
NUM	3	32	제사장 아론의 아들 엘리아살은 레위인의 족장들의 어른이 되고 또 성소를 맡을 자를 통할할 것이니라	And Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest shall be chief over the chief of the Levites, and have the oversight of them that keep the charge of the sanctuary.	The chief of the leaders of the Levites was Eleazar son of Aaron the priest; he oversaw those responsible for the duties of the sanctuary.
NUM	3	33	므라리에게서는 말리 가족과 무시 가족이 났으니 이들이 곧 므라리 가족들이라	Of Merari was the family of the Mahlites, and the family of the Mushites: these are the families of Merari.	From Merari came the clans of the Mahlites and Mushites; these were the Merarite clans.
NUM	3	34	그 계수함을 입은 자 곧 일 개월 이상 남자의 수효 총계가 육천이백 명이며	And those that were numbered of them, according to the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, were six thousand and two hundred.	The number of all the males a month old or more was 6,200.
NUM	3	35	아비하일의 아들 수리엘이 므라리 가족과 종족의 족장이 될 것이요 이 가족은 장막 북편에 진을 칠 것이며	And the chief of the house of the father of the families of Merari was Zuriel the son of Abihail: these shall pitch on the side of the tabernacle northward.	The leader of the families of the Merarites was Zuriel son of Abihail; they were to camp on the north side of the tabernacle.
NUM	3	36	므라리 자손의 맡을 것은 성막의 널판과 그 띠와 그 기둥과 그 받침과 그 모든 기구와 그것에 쓰는 모든 것이며	And under the custody and charge of the sons of Merari shall be the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars thereof, and the sockets thereof, and all the vessels thereof, and all that serveth thereto,	The duties assigned to the sons of Merari were the tabernacle’s frames, crossbars, posts, bases, and all its equipment—all the service for these items,
NUM	3	37	뜰 사면 기둥과 그 받침과 그 말뚝과 그 줄들이니라	And the pillars of the court round about, and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords.	as well as the posts of the surrounding courtyard with their bases, tent pegs, and ropes.
NUM	3	38	장막 앞 동편 곧 회막 앞 해 돋는 편에는 모세와 아론과 아론의 아들들이 진을 치고 이스라엘 자손의 직무를 대신하여 성소의 직무를 지킬 것이며 외인이 가까이 하면 죽일지니라	But those that encamp before the tabernacle toward the east, even before the tabernacle of the congregation eastward, shall be Moses, and Aaron and his sons, keeping the charge of the sanctuary for the charge of the children of Israel; and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.	Moses, Aaron, and Aaron’s sons were to camp to the east of the tabernacle, toward the sunrise, before the Tent of Meeting. They were to perform the duties of the sanctuary as a service on behalf of the Israelites; but any outsider who approached the sanctuary was to be put to death.
NUM	3	39	모세와 아론이 여호와의 명을 좇아 레위인을 각 가족대로 계수한즉 일 개월 이상 남자의 수효가 이만 이천 명이었더라	All that were numbered of the Levites, which Moses and Aaron numbered at the commandment of the Lord, throughout their families, all the males from a month old and upward, were twenty and two thousand.	The total number of Levites that Moses and Aaron counted by their clans at the LORD’s command, including all the males a month old or more, was 22,000.
NUM	3	40	여호와께서 또 모세에게 이르시되 이스라엘 자손의 처음 난 남자를 일 개월 이상으로 다 계수하여 그 명수를 기록하라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Number all the firstborn of the males of the children of Israel from a month old and upward, and take the number of their names.	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Number every firstborn male of the Israelites a month old or more, and list their names.
NUM	3	41	나는 여호와라 이스라엘 자손 중 모든 처음 난 자의 대신에 레위인을 내게 돌리고 또 이스라엘 자손의 가축 중 모든 처음 난 것의 대신에 레위인의 가축을 내게 돌리라	And thou shalt take the Levites for me (I am the Lord) instead of all the firstborn among the children of Israel; and the cattle of the Levites instead of all the firstlings among the cattle of the children of Israel.	You are to take the Levites for Me—I am the LORD—in place of all the firstborn of Israel, and the livestock of the Levites in place of all the firstborn of the livestock of the Israelites.”
NUM	3	42	모세가 여호와께서 자기에게 명하신 대로 이스라엘 자손 중 모든 처음 난 자를 계수하니	And Moses numbered, as the Lord commanded him, all the firstborn among the children of Israel.	So Moses numbered all the firstborn of the Israelites, as the LORD had commanded him.
NUM	3	43	일 개월 이상으로 계수함을 입은 처음 난 남자의 명수의 총계가 이만 이천이백칠십삼 명이었더라	And all the firstborn males by the number of names, from a month old and upward, of those that were numbered of them, were twenty and two thousand two hundred and threescore and thirteen.	The total number of the firstborn males a month old or more, listed by name, was 22,273.
NUM	3	44	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Again the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,
NUM	3	45	이스라엘 자손 중 모든 처음 난 자의 대신에 레위인을 취하고 또 그들의 가축 대신에 레위인의 가축을 취하라 레위인은 내 것이라 나는 여호와니라	Take the Levites instead of all the firstborn among the children of Israel, and the cattle of the Levites instead of their cattle; and the Levites shall be mine: I am the Lord.	“Take the Levites in place of all the firstborn of Israel, and the livestock of the Levites in place of their livestock. The Levites belong to Me; I am the LORD.
NUM	3	46	이스라엘 자손의 처음 난 자가 레위인보다 이백칠십삼 인이 더한즉 속하기 위하여	And for those that are to be redeemed of the two hundred and threescore and thirteen of the firstborn of the children of Israel, which are more than the Levites;	To redeem the 273 firstborn Israelites who outnumber the Levites,
NUM	3	47	매명에 오 세겔씩 취하되 성소의 세겔대로 취하라 한 세겔은 이십 게라니라	Thou shalt even take five shekels apiece by the poll, after the shekel of the sanctuary shalt thou take them: (the shekel is twenty gerahs:)	you are to collect five shekels for each one, according to the sanctuary shekel of twenty gerahs.
NUM	3	48	그 더한 자의 속전을 아론과 그 아들들에게 줄 것이니라	And thou shalt give the money, wherewith the odd number of them is to be redeemed, unto Aaron and to his sons.	Give the money to Aaron and his sons as the redemption price for the excess among the Israelites.”
NUM	3	49	모세가 레위인으로 대속한 이외의 사람들에게서 속전을 받았으니	And Moses took the redemption money of them that were over and above them that were redeemed by the Levites:	So Moses collected the redemption money from those in excess of the number redeemed by the Levites.
NUM	3	50	곧 이스라엘 자손의 처음 난 자에게서 받은 돈이 성소의 세겔대로 일천삼백육십오 세겔이라	Of the firstborn of the children of Israel took he the money; a thousand three hundred and threescore and five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary:	He collected the money from the firstborn of the Israelites: 1,365 shekels, according to the sanctuary shekel.
NUM	3	51	이 속전을 여호와의 말씀대로 아론과 그 아들들에게 주었으니 여호와께서 모세에게 명하심과 같았느니라	And Moses gave the money of them that were redeemed unto Aaron and to his sons, according to the word of the Lord, as the Lord commanded Moses.	And Moses gave the redemption money to Aaron and his sons in obedience to the word of the LORD, just as the LORD had commanded him.
NUM	4	1	여호와께서 또 모세와 아론에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses and Aaron,
NUM	4	2	레위 자손 중에서 고핫 자손을 그들의 가족과 종족을 따라 총계할지니	Take the sum of the sons of Kohath from among the sons of Levi, after their families, by the house of their fathers,	“Take a census of the Kohathites among the Levites by their clans and families,
NUM	4	3	곧 삼십 세 이상으로 오십 세까지 회막의 일을 하기 위하여 그 역사에 참가할 만한 모든 자를 계수하라	From thirty years old and upward even until fifty years old, all that enter into the host, to do the work in the tabernacle of the congregation.	men from thirty to fifty years old—everyone who is qualified to serve in the work at the Tent of Meeting.
NUM	4	4	고핫 자손의 회막 안 지성물에 대하여 할 일은 이러하니라	This shall be the service of the sons of Kohath in the tabernacle of the congregation, about the most holy things:	This service of the Kohathites at the Tent of Meeting regards the most holy things.
NUM	4	5	행진할 때에 아론과 그 아들들이 들어가서 간 막는 장을 걷어 증거궤를 덮고	And when the camp setteth forward, Aaron shall come, and his sons, and they shall take down the covering vail, and cover the ark of testimony with it:	Whenever the camp sets out, Aaron and his sons are to go in, take down the veil of the curtain, and cover the ark of the Testimony with it.
NUM	4	6	그 위에 해달의 가죽으로 덮고 그 위에 순청색 보자기를 덮은 후에 그 채를 꿰고	And shall put thereon the covering of badgers’ skins, and shall spread over it a cloth wholly of blue, and shall put in the staves thereof.	They are to place over this a covering of fine leather, spread a solid blue cloth over it, and insert its poles.
NUM	4	7	또 진설병의 상에 청색 보자기를 펴고 대접들과 숟가락들과 주발들과 붓는 잔들을 그 위에 두고 또 항상 진설하는 떡을 그 위에 두고	And upon the table of shewbread they shall spread a cloth of blue, and put thereon the dishes, and the spoons, and the bowls, and covers to cover withal: and the continual bread shall be thereon:	Over the table of the Presence they are to spread a blue cloth and place the plates and cups on it, along with the bowls and pitchers for the drink offering. The regular bread offering is to remain on it.
NUM	4	8	홍색 보자기를 그 위에 펴고 그것을 해달의 가죽 덮개로 덮은후에 그 채를 꿰고	And they shall spread upon them a cloth of scarlet, and cover the same with a covering of badgers’ skins, and shall put in the staves thereof.	And they shall spread a scarlet cloth over them, cover them with fine leather, and insert the poles.
NUM	4	9	또 청색 보자기를 취하여 등대와 그 등잔들과 그 불집게들과 불똥 그릇들과 그 쓰는바 모든 기름 그릇을 덮고	And they shall take a cloth of blue, and cover the candlestick of the light, and his lamps, and his tongs, and his snuffdishes, and all the oil vessels thereof, wherewith they minister unto it:	They are to take a blue cloth and cover the lampstand used for light, together with its lamps, wick trimmers, and trays, as well as the jars of oil with which to supply it.
NUM	4	10	등대와 그 모든 기구를 해달의 가죽 덮개 안에 넣어 메는 틀위에 두고	And they shall put it and all the vessels thereof within a covering of badgers’ skins, and shall put it upon a bar.	Then they shall wrap it and all its utensils inside a covering of fine leather and put it on the carrying frame.
NUM	4	11	또 금단 위에 청색 보자기를 펴고 해달의 가죽 덮개로 덮고 그 채를 꿰고	And upon the golden altar they shall spread a cloth of blue, and cover it with a covering of badgers’ skins, and shall put to the staves thereof:	Over the gold altar they are to spread a blue cloth, cover it with fine leather, and insert the poles.
NUM	4	12	또 성소에서 봉사하는데 쓰는 모든 기명을 취하여 청색 보자기에 싸서 해달의 가죽 덮개로 덮어 메는 틀 위에 두고	And they shall take all the instruments of ministry, wherewith they minister in the sanctuary, and put them in a cloth of blue, and cover them with a covering of badgers’ skins, and shall put them on a bar:	They are to take all the utensils for serving in the sanctuary, place them in a blue cloth, cover them with fine leather, and put them on the carrying frame.
NUM	4	13	또 단의 재를 버리고 그 단 위에 자색 보자기를 펴고	And they shall take away the ashes from the altar, and spread a purple cloth thereon:	Then they shall remove the ashes from the bronze altar, spread a purple cloth over it,
NUM	4	14	봉사하는 데 쓰는 모든 기구 곧 불 옮기는 그릇들과 고기 갈고리들과 부삽들과 대야들과 단의 모든 기구를 두고 해달의 가죽 덮개를 그 위에 덮고 그 채를 꿸 것이며	And they shall put upon it all the vessels thereof, wherewith they minister about it, even the censers, the fleshhooks, and the shovels, and the basons, all the vessels of the altar; and they shall spread upon it a covering of badgers’ skins, and put to the staves of it.	and place on it all the vessels used to serve there: the firepans, meat forks, shovels, and sprinkling bowls—all the equipment of the altar. They are to spread over it a covering of fine leather and insert the poles.
NUM	4	15	행진할 때에 아론과 그 아들들이 성소와 성소의 모든 기구 덮기를 필하거든 고핫 자손이 와서 멜 것이니라 그러나 성물은 만지지 말지니 죽을까 하노라 회막 물건 중에서 이것들은 고핫 자손이 멜 것이며	And when Aaron and his sons have made an end of covering the sanctuary, and all the vessels of the sanctuary, as the camp is to set forward; after that, the sons of Kohath shall come to bear it: but they shall not touch any holy thing, lest they die. These things are the burden of the sons of Kohath in the tabernacle of the congregation.	When Aaron and his sons have finished covering the holy objects and all their equipment, as soon as the camp is ready to move, the Kohathites shall come and do the carrying. But they must not touch the holy objects, or they will die. These are the transportation duties of the Kohathites regarding the Tent of Meeting.
NUM	4	16	제사장 아론의 아들 엘르아살의 맡을 것은 등유와 분향할 향품과 항상 드리는 소제물과 관유며 또 장막의 전체와 그 중에 있는 모든 것과 성소와 그 모든 기구니라	And to the office of Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest pertaineth the oil for the light, and the sweet incense, and the daily meat offering, and the anointing oil, and the oversight of all the tabernacle, and of all that therein is, in the sanctuary, and in the vessels thereof.	Eleazar son of Aaron the priest shall oversee the oil for the light, the fragrant incense, the daily grain offering, and the anointing oil. He has oversight of the entire tabernacle and everything in it, including the holy objects and their utensils.”
NUM	4	17	여호와께서 또 모세와 아론에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses and Aaron,
NUM	4	18	너희는 고핫 족속의 지파를 레위인 중에서 끊어지게 말지니	Cut ye not off the tribe of the families of the Kohathites from among the Levites:	“Do not allow the Kohathite tribal clans to be cut off from among the Levites.
NUM	4	19	그들이 지성물에 접근할 때에 그 생명을 보존하고 죽지 않게 하기 위하여 너희는 이같이 하여 아론과 그 아들들이 들어가서 각 사람에게 그 할 일과 그 멜 것을 지휘할지니라	But thus do unto them, that they may live, and not die, when they approach unto the most holy things: Aaron and his sons shall go in, and appoint them every one to his service and to his burden:	In order that they may live and not die when they come near the most holy things, do this for them: Aaron and his sons are to go in and assign each man his task and what he is to carry.
NUM	4	20	그들은 잠시라도 들어가서 성소를 보지 말 것은 죽을까 함이니라	But they shall not go in to see when the holy things are covered, lest they die.	But the Kohathites are not to go in and look at the holy objects, even for a moment, or they will die.”
NUM	4	21	여호와께서 또 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	And the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	4	22	게르손 자손도 그 종족과 가족을 따라 총계하되	Take also the sum of the sons of Gershon, throughout the houses of their fathers, by their families;	“Take a census of the Gershonites as well, by their families and clans,
NUM	4	23	삼십 세 이상으로 오십 세까지 회막 봉사에 입참하여 일할만한 모든 자를 계수하라	From thirty years old and upward until fifty years old shalt thou number them; all that enter in to perform the service, to do the work in the tabernacle of the congregation.	from thirty to fifty years old, counting everyone who comes to serve in the work at the Tent of Meeting.
NUM	4	24	게르손 가족의 할 일과 멜 것은 이러하니	This is the service of the families of the Gershonites, to serve, and for burdens:	This is the service of the Gershonite clans regarding work and transport:
NUM	4	25	곧 그들은 성막의 앙장들과 회막과 그 덮개와 그 위의 해달의 가죽 덮개와 회막 문장을 메이며	And they shall bear the curtains of the tabernacle, and the tabernacle of the congregation, his covering, and the covering of the badgers’ skins that is above upon it, and the hanging for the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,	They are to carry the curtains of the tabernacle, the Tent of Meeting with the covering of fine leather over it, the curtains for the entrance to the Tent of Meeting,
NUM	4	26	뜰의 휘장과 및 성막과 단 사면에 있는 뜰의 문장과 그 줄들과 그것에 사용하는 모든 기구를 메이며 이 모든 것을 어떻게 맡아 처리할 것이라	And the hangings of the court, and the hanging for the door of the gate of the court, which is by the tabernacle and by the altar round about, and their cords, and all the instruments of their service, and all that is made for them: so shall they serve.	the curtains of the courtyard, and the curtains for the entrance at the gate of the courtyard that surrounds the tabernacle and altar, along with their ropes and all the equipment for their service. The Gershonites will do all that needs to be done with these items.
NUM	4	27	게르손 자손은 그 모든 일 곧 멜 것과 처리할 것에 아론과 그 아들들의 명대로 할 것이니 너희는 그들의 멜 짐을 그들에게 맡길 것이니라	At the appointment of Aaron and his sons shall be all the service of the sons of the Gershonites, in all their burdens, and in all their service: and ye shall appoint unto them in charge all their burdens.	All the service of the Gershonites—all their transport duties and other work—is to be done at the direction of Aaron and his sons; you are to assign to them all that they are responsible to carry.
NUM	4	28	게르손 자손의 가족들이 회막에서 할 일이 이러하며 그들의 직무는 제사장 아론의 아들 이다말이 감독할지니라	This is the service of the families of the sons of Gershon in the tabernacle of the congregation: and their charge shall be under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.	This is the service of the Gershonite clans at the Tent of Meeting, and their duties shall be under the direction of Ithamar son of Aaron the priest.
NUM	4	29	너는 므라리 자손도 그 가족과 종족을 따라 계수하되	As for the sons of Merari, thou shalt number them after their families, by the house of their fathers;	As for the sons of Merari, you are to number them by their clans and families,
NUM	4	30	삼십 세 이상으로 오십 세까지 회막 봉사에 입참하여 일할 만한 모든 자를 계수하라	From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old shalt thou number them, every one that entereth into the service, to do the work of the tabernacle of the congregation.	from thirty to fifty years old, counting everyone who comes to serve in the work of the Tent of Meeting.
NUM	4	31	그들이 직무를 따라 회막에서 할 모든 일 곧 그 멜 것이 이러하니 곧 장막의 널판들과 그 띠들과 그 기둥들과 그 받침들과	And this is the charge of their burden, according to all their service in the tabernacle of the congregation; the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars thereof, and sockets thereof,	This is the duty for all their service at the Tent of Meeting: to carry the frames of the tabernacle with its crossbars, posts, and bases,
NUM	4	32	뜰 사면 기둥들과 그 받침들과 그 말뚝들과 그 줄들과 그 모든 기구들과 무릇 그것에 쓰는 것이라 너희는 그들의 맡아 멜 모든 기구의 명목을 지정하라	And the pillars of the court round about, and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords, with all their instruments, and with all their service: and by name ye shall reckon the instruments of the charge of their burden.	and the posts of the surrounding courtyard with their bases, tent pegs, and ropes, including all their equipment and everything related to their use. You shall assign by name the items that they are responsible to carry.
NUM	4	33	이는 제사장 아론의 아들 이다말의 수하에 있을 므라리 자손의 가족들이 그 모든 사무대로 회막에서 행할 일이니라	This is the service of the families of the sons of Merari, according to all their service, in the tabernacle of the congregation, under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.	This is the service of the Merarite clans according to all their work at the Tent of Meeting, under the direction of Ithamar son of Aaron the priest.”
NUM	4	34	모세와 아론과 회중의 족장들이 고핫 자손들을 그 가족과 종족대로 계수하니	And Moses and Aaron and the chief of the congregation numbered the sons of the Kohathites after their families, and after the house of their fathers,	So Moses, Aaron, and the leaders of the congregation numbered the Kohathites by their clans and families,
NUM	4	35	삼십 세 이상으로 오십 세까지 회막 봉사에 입참하여 일할 만한 모든 자	From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacle of the congregation:	everyone from thirty to fifty years old who came to serve in the work at the Tent of Meeting.
NUM	4	36	곧 그 가족대로 계수함을 입은 자가 이천칠백오십이니	And those that were numbered of them by their families were two thousand seven hundred and fifty.	And those numbered by their clans totaled 2,750.
NUM	4	37	이는 모세와 아론이 여호와께서 모세로 명하신 대로 회막에서 종사하는 고핫인의 모든 가족 중 계수한 자니라	These were they that were numbered of the families of the Kohathites, all that might do service in the tabernacle of the congregation, which Moses and Aaron did number according to the commandment of the Lord by the hand of Moses.	These were counted from the Kohathite clans, everyone who could serve at the Tent of Meeting. Moses and Aaron numbered them according to the command of the LORD through Moses.
NUM	4	38	게르손 자손의 그 가족과 종족을 따라 계수함을 입은 자는	And those that were numbered of the sons of Gershon, throughout their families, and by the house of their fathers,	Then the Gershonites were numbered by their clans and families,
NUM	4	39	삼십 세 이상으로 오십 세까지 회막 봉사에 입참하여 일할 만한 모든 자라	From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacle of the congregation,	everyone from thirty to fifty years old who came to serve in the work at the Tent of Meeting.
NUM	4	40	그 가족과 종족을 따라 계수함을 입은 자가 이천육백삼십 명이니	Even those that were numbered of them, throughout their families, by the house of their fathers, were two thousand and six hundred and thirty.	And those numbered by their clans and families totaled 2,630.
NUM	4	41	이는 모세와 아론이 여호와의 명대로 회막에서 종사하는 게르손 자손의 모든 가족 중 계수한 자니라	These are they that were numbered of the families of the sons of Gershon, of all that might do service in the tabernacle of the congregation, whom Moses and Aaron did number according to the commandment of the Lord.	These were counted from the Gershonite clans who served at the Tent of Meeting, whom Moses and Aaron counted at the LORD’s command.
NUM	4	42	므라리 자손의 가족 중 그 가족과 종족을 따라 계수함을 입은 자는	And those that were numbered of the families of the sons of Merari, throughout their families, by the house of their fathers,	And the Merarites were numbered by their clans and families,
NUM	4	43	삼십 세 이상으로 오십 세까지 회막 봉사에 입참하여 일할만한 모든 자라	From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacle of the congregation,	everyone from thirty to fifty years old who came to serve in the work at the Tent of Meeting.
NUM	4	44	그 가족을 따라 계수함을 입은 자가 삼천이백 명이니	Even those that were numbered of them after their families, were three thousand and two hundred.	The men registered by their clans numbered 3,200.
NUM	4	45	이는 모세와 아론이 여호와께서 모세로 명하신 대로 므라리 자손들의 가족 중 계수한 자니라	These be those that were numbered of the families of the sons of Merari, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the word of the Lord by the hand of Moses.	These were counted from the Merarite clans, whom Moses and Aaron numbered at the LORD’s command through Moses.
NUM	4	46	모세와 아론과 이스라엘 족장들이 레위인을 그 가족과 종족대로 다 계수하니	All those that were numbered of the Levites, whom Moses and Aaron and the chief of Israel numbered, after their families, and after the house of their fathers,	So Moses, Aaron, and the leaders of Israel numbered by their clans and families all the Levites
NUM	4	47	삼십 세 이상으로 오십 세까지 회막 봉사와 메는 일에 입참하여 일할만한 모든 자	From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that came to do the service of the ministry, and the service of the burden in the tabernacle of the congregation,	from thirty to fifty years old who came to do the work of serving and carrying the Tent of Meeting.
NUM	4	48	곧 그 계수함을 입은 자가 팔천오백팔십 명이라	Even those that were numbered of them, were eight thousand and five hundred and fourscore.	And the number of men was 8,580.
NUM	4	49	그들이 그 할 일과 멜 일을 따라 모세에게 계수함을 입었으되 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 그들이 계수함을 입었더라	According to the commandment of the Lord they were numbered by the hand of Moses, every one according to his service, and according to his burden: thus were they numbered of him, as the Lord commanded Moses.	At the LORD’s command they were numbered through Moses and each one was assigned his work and burden, as the LORD had commanded Moses.
NUM	5	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	5	2	이스라엘 자손에게 명하여 모든 문둥병 환자와 유출병이 있는 자와 주검으로 부정케 된 자를 다 진 밖으로 내어 보내되	Command the children of Israel, that they put out of the camp every leper, and every one that hath an issue, and whosoever is defiled by the dead:	“Command the Israelites to send away from the camp anyone with a skin disease, anyone who has a bodily discharge, and anyone who is defiled by a dead body.
NUM	5	3	무론 남녀하고 다 진 밖으로 내어 보내어 그들로 진을 더럽히게 말라 내가 그 진 가운데 거하느니라 하시매	Both male and female shall ye put out, without the camp shall ye put them; that they defile not their camps, in the midst whereof I dwell.	You must send away male and female alike; send them outside the camp so they will not defile their camp, where I dwell among them.”
NUM	5	4	이스라엘 자손이 그같이 행하여 그들을 진 밖으로 내어 보내었으니 곧 여호와께서 모세에게 이르신 대로 이스라엘 자손이 행하였더라	And the children of Israel did so, and put them out without the camp: as the Lord spake unto Moses, so did the children of Israel.	So the Israelites did this, sending such people outside the camp. They did just as the LORD had instructed Moses.
NUM	5	5	여호와께서 또 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	And the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	5	6	이스라엘 자손에게 이르라 남자나 여자나 사람들이 범하는 죄를 범하여 여호와께 패역하여 그 몸에 죄를 얻거든	Speak unto the children of Israel, When a man or woman shall commit any sin that men commit, to do a trespass against the Lord, and that person be guilty;	“Tell the Israelites that when a man or woman acts unfaithfully against the LORD by committing any sin against another, that person is guilty
NUM	5	7	그 지은 죄를 자복하고 그 죄 값을 온전히 갚되 오분지 일을 더하여 그가 죄를 얻었던 그 본주에게 돌려 줄 것이요	Then they shall confess their sin which they have done: and he shall recompense his trespass with the principal thereof, and add unto it the fifth part thereof, and give it unto him against whom he hath trespassed.	and must confess the sin he has committed. He must make full restitution, add a fifth to its value, and give all this to the one he has wronged.
NUM	5	8	만일 죄 값을 받을 만한 친족이 없거든 그 죄 값을 여호와께 드려 제사장에게로 돌릴 것이니 이는 그를 위하여 속죄할 수양 외에 돌릴 것이니라	But if the man have no kinsman to recompense the trespass unto, let the trespass be recompensed unto the Lord, even to the priest; beside the ram of the atonement, whereby an atonement shall be made for him.	But if the man has no relative to whom restitution can be made for the wrong, the restitution belongs to the LORD and must be given to the priest along with the ram of atonement, by which the atonement is made for him.
NUM	5	9	이스라엘 자손의 거제로 제사장에게 가져 오는 모든 성물은 그의 것이 될 것이라	And every offering of all the holy things of the children of Israel, which they bring unto the priest, shall be his.	Every sacred contribution the Israelites bring to the priest shall belong to him.
NUM	5	10	각 사람의 구별한 물건은 그의 것이 되나니 누구든지 제사장에게 주는 것은 그의 것이 되느니라	And every man’s hallowed things shall be his: whatsoever any man giveth the priest, it shall be his.	Each man’s sacred gifts are his own, but whatever he gives to the priest will belong to the priest.”
NUM	5	11	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	5	12	이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 그들에게 이르라 만일 어떤 사람의 아내가 실행하여 남편에게 범죄하여	Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, If any man’s wife go aside, and commit a trespass against him,	“Speak to the Israelites and tell them that if any man’s wife goes astray and is unfaithful to him
NUM	5	13	타인과 정교를 하였으나 그 남편의 눈에 숨겨 드러나지 아니하였고 그 여자의 더러워진 일에 증인도 없고 그가 잡히지 아니하였어도	And a man lie with her carnally, and it be hid from the eyes of her husband, and be kept close, and she be defiled, and there be no witness against her, neither she be taken with the manner;	by sleeping with another man, and it is concealed from her husband and her impurity is undetected (since there is no witness against her and she was not caught in the act),
NUM	5	14	그 더러워짐을 인하여 남편이 의심이 생겨서 그 아내를 의심하든지 또는 아내가 더럽히지 아니하였어도 그 남편이 의심이 생겨서 그 아내를 의심하거든	And the spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of his wife, and she be defiled: or if the spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of his wife, and she be not defiled:	and if a feeling of jealousy comes over her husband and he suspects his wife who has defiled herself—or if a feeling of jealousy comes over him and he suspects her even though she has not defiled herself—
NUM	5	15	그 아내를 데리고 제사장에게로 가서 그를 위하여 보리 가루 에바 십분지 일을 예물로 드리되 그것에 기름도 붓지 말고 유향도 두지 말라 이는 의심의 소제요 생각하게 하는 소제니 곧 죄악을 생각하게 하는 것이니라	Then shall the man bring his wife unto the priest, and he shall bring her offering for her, the tenth part of an ephah of barley meal; he shall pour no oil upon it, nor put frankincense thereon; for it is an offering of jealousy, an offering of memorial, bringing iniquity to remembrance.	then he is to bring his wife to the priest. He must also bring for her an offering of a tenth of an ephah of barley flour. He is not to pour oil over it or put frankincense on it, because it is a grain offering for jealousy, an offering of memorial as a reminder of iniquity.
NUM	5	16	제사장은 그 여인으로 가까이 오게 하여 여호와 앞에 세우고	And the priest shall bring her near, and set her before the Lord:	The priest is to bring the wife forward and have her stand before the LORD.
NUM	5	17	토기에 거룩한 물을 담고 성막 바닥의 티끌을 취하여 물에 넣고	And the priest shall take holy water in an earthen vessel; and of the dust that is in the floor of the tabernacle the priest shall take, and put it into the water:	Then he is to take some holy water in a clay jar and put some of the dust from the tabernacle floor into the water.
NUM	5	18	여인을 여호와 앞에 세우고 그 머리를 풀게 하고 생각하게 하는 소제물 곧 의심의 소제물을 그 두 손에 두고 제사장은 저주가 되게 할 쓴 물을 자기 손에 들고	And the priest shall set the woman before the Lord, and uncover the woman’s head, and put the offering of memorial in her hands, which is the jealousy offering: and the priest shall have in his hand the bitter water that causeth the curse:	After the priest has the woman stand before the LORD, he is to let down her hair and place in her hands the grain offering of memorial, which is the grain offering for jealousy. The priest is to hold the bitter water that brings a curse.
NUM	5	19	여인에게 맹세시켜 그에게 이르기를 네가 네 남편을 두고 실행하여 사람과 동침하여 더럽힌 일이 없으면 저주가 되게 하는 이 쓴 물의 해독을 면하리라	And the priest shall charge her by an oath, and say unto the woman, If no man have lain with thee, and if thou hast not gone aside to uncleanness with another instead of thy husband, be thou free from this bitter water that causeth the curse:	And he is to put the woman under oath and say to her, ‘If no other man has slept with you and you have not gone astray and become defiled while under your husband’s authority, may you be immune to this bitter water that brings a curse.
NUM	5	20	그러나 네가 네 남편을 두고 실행하여 더럽혀서 네 남편 아닌 사람과 동침하였으면	But if thou hast gone aside to another instead of thy husband, and if thou be defiled, and some man have lain with thee beside thine husband:	But if you have gone astray while under your husband’s authority and have defiled yourself and lain carnally with a man other than your husband’—
NUM	5	21	제사장이 그 여인으로 저주의 맹세를 하게 하고 그 여인에게 말할지니라 여호와께서 네 넓적다리로 떨어지고 네 배로 부어서 너로 네 백성 중에 저줏거리, 맹셋거리가 되게 하실지라	Then the priest shall charge the woman with an oath of cursing, and the priest shall say unto the woman, The Lord make thee a curse and an oath among thy people, when the Lord doth make thy thigh to rot, and thy belly to swell;	and the priest shall have the woman swear under the oath of the curse—‘then may the LORD make you an attested curse among your people by making your thigh shrivel and your belly swell.
NUM	5	22	이 저주가 되게 하는 이 물이 네 창자에 들어가서 네 배로 붓게 하고 네 넓적다리로 떨어지게 하리라 할 것이요 여인은 아멘 아멘 할지니라	And this water that causeth the curse shall go into thy bowels, to make thy belly to swell, and thy thigh to rot: And the woman shall say, Amen, amen.	May this water that brings a curse enter your stomach and cause your belly to swell and your thigh to shrivel.’ Then the woman is to say, ‘Amen, Amen.’
NUM	5	23	제사장이 저주의 말을 두루마리에 써서 그 글자를 그 쓴 물에 빨아 넣고	And the priest shall write these curses in a book, and he shall blot them out with the bitter water:	And the priest shall write these curses on a scroll and wash them off into the bitter water.
NUM	5	24	여인으로 그 저주가 되게 하는 쓴 물을 마시게 할지니 그 저주가 되게 하는 물이 그 속에 들어가서 쓰리라	And he shall cause the woman to drink the bitter water that causeth the curse: and the water that causeth the curse shall enter into her, and become bitter.	He is to have the woman drink the bitter water that brings a curse, and it will enter her and cause her bitter suffering.
NUM	5	25	제사장이 먼저 그 여인의 손에서 의심의 소제물을 취하여 그 소제물을 여호와 앞에 흔들고 가지고 단으로 가서	Then the priest shall take the jealousy offering out of the woman’s hand, and shall wave the offering before the Lord, and offer it upon the altar:	The priest shall take from her hand the grain offering for jealousy, wave it before the LORD, and bring it to the altar.
NUM	5	26	그 소제물 중에서 기념으로 한 움큼을 취하여 단 위에 소화하고 그 후에 여인에게 그 물을 마시울지라	And the priest shall take an handful of the offering, even the memorial thereof, and burn it upon the altar, and afterward shall cause the woman to drink the water.	Then the priest is to take a handful of the grain offering as a memorial portion and burn it on the altar; after that he is to have the woman drink the water.
NUM	5	27	그 물을 마시운 후에 만일 여인이 몸을 더럽혀서 그 남편에게 범죄하였으면 그 저주가 되게 하는 물이 그의 속에 들어가서 쓰게 되어 그 배가 부으며 그 넓적다리가 떨어지리니 그 여인이 백성 중에서 저줏거리가 될 것이니라	And when he hath made her to drink the water, then it shall come to pass, that, if she be defiled, and have done trespass against her husband, that the water that causeth the curse shall enter into her, and become bitter, and her belly shall swell, and her thigh shall rot: and the woman shall be a curse among her people.	When he has made her drink the water, if she has defiled herself and been unfaithful to her husband, then the water that brings a curse will enter her and cause bitter suffering; her belly will swell, her thigh will shrivel, and she will become accursed among her people.
NUM	5	28	그러나 여인이 더럽힌 일이 없고 정결하면 해를 받지 않고 잉태하리라	And if the woman be not defiled, but be clean; then she shall be free, and shall conceive seed.	But if the woman has not defiled herself and is clean, she will be unaffected and able to conceive children.
NUM	5	29	이는 의심의 법이니 아내가 그 남편을 두고 실행하여 더럽힌 때나	This is the law of jealousies, when a wife goeth aside to another instead of her husband, and is defiled;	This is the law of jealousy when a wife goes astray and defiles herself while under her husband’s authority,
NUM	5	30	또는 그 남편이 의심이 생겨서 그 아내를 의심할 때에 그 여인을 여호와 앞에 두고 제사장이 이 법대로 행할 것이라	Or when the spirit of jealousy cometh upon him, and he be jealous over his wife, and shall set the woman before the Lord, and the priest shall execute upon her all this law.	or when a feeling of jealousy comes over a husband and he suspects his wife. He is to have the woman stand before the LORD, and the priest is to apply to her this entire law.
NUM	5	31	남편은 무죄할 것이요 여인은 죄가 있으면 당하리라	Then shall the man be guiltless from iniquity, and this woman shall bear her iniquity.	The husband will be free from guilt, but the woman shall bear her iniquity.”
NUM	6	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	And the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	6	2	이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 그들에게 이르라 남자나 여자가 특별한 서원 곧 나실인의 서원을 하고 자기 몸을 구별하여 여호와께 드리거든	Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When either man or woman shall separate themselves to vow a vow of a Nazarite, to separate themselves unto the Lord:	“Speak to the Israelites and tell them that if a man or woman makes a special vow, the vow of a Nazirite, to separate himself to the LORD,
NUM	6	3	포도주와 독주를 멀리하며 포도주의 초나 독주의 초를 마시지 말며 포도즙도 마시지 말며 생포도나 건포도도 먹지 말지니	He shall separate himself from wine and strong drink, and shall drink no vinegar of wine, or vinegar of strong drink, neither shall he drink any liquor of grapes, nor eat moist grapes, or dried.	he is to abstain from wine and strong drink. He must not drink vinegar made from wine or strong drink, and he must not drink any grape juice or eat fresh grapes or raisins.
NUM	6	4	자기 몸을 구별하는 모든 날 동안에는 포도나무 소산은 씨나 껍질이라도 먹지 말지며	All the days of his separation shall he eat nothing that is made of the vine tree, from the kernels even to the husk.	All the days of his separation, he is not to eat anything that comes from the grapevine, not even the seeds or skins.
NUM	6	5	그 서원을 하고 구별하는 모든 날 동안은 삭도를 도무지 그 머리에 대지 말 것이라 자기 몸을 구별하여 여호와께 드리는 날이 차기까지 그는 거룩한즉 그 머리털을 길게 자라게 할 것이며	All the days of the vow of his separation there shall no razor come upon his head: until the days be fulfilled, in the which he separateth himself unto the Lord, he shall be holy, and shall let the locks of the hair of his head grow.	For the entire period of his vow of separation, no razor shall pass over his head. He must be holy until the time of his separation to the LORD is complete; he must let the hair of his head grow long.
NUM	6	6	자기 몸을 구별하여 여호와께 드리는 모든 날 동안은 시체를 가까이 하지 말 것이요	All the days that he separateth himself unto the Lord he shall come at no dead body.	Throughout the days of his separation to the LORD, he must not go near a dead body.
NUM	6	7	그 부모 형제 자매가 죽은 때에라도 그로 인하여 더럽히지 말 것이니 이는 자기 몸을 구별하여 하나님께 드리는 표가 그 머리에 있음이라	He shall not make himself unclean for his father, or for his mother, for his brother, or for his sister, when they die: because the consecration of his God is upon his head.	Even if his father or mother or brother or sister should die, he is not to defile himself, because the crown of consecration to his God is upon his head.
NUM	6	8	자기 몸을 구별하는 모든 날 동안 그는 여호와께 거룩한 자니라	All the days of his separation he is holy unto the Lord.	Throughout the time of his separation, he is holy to the LORD.
NUM	6	9	누가 홀연히 그 곁에서 죽어서 스스로 구별한 자의 머리를 더럽히거든 그 몸을 정결케 하는 날에 머리를 밀 것이니 곧 제칠일에 밀 것이며	And if any man die very suddenly by him, and he hath defiled the head of his consecration; then he shall shave his head in the day of his cleansing, on the seventh day shall he shave it.	If someone suddenly dies in his presence and defiles his consecrated head of hair, he must shave his head on the day of his cleansing—the seventh day.
NUM	6	10	제팔일에 산비둘기 두 마리나 집비둘기 새끼 두 마리를 가지고 회막문에 와서 제사장에게 줄 것이요	And on the eighth day he shall bring two turtles, or two young pigeons, to the priest, to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation:	On the eighth day he must bring two turtledoves or two young pigeons to the priest at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting.
NUM	6	11	제사장은 그 하나를 속죄 제물로, 하나를 번제물로 드려서 그의 시체로 인하여 얻은 죄를 속하고 또 그는 당일에 그의 머리를 성결케 할 것이며	And the priest shall offer the one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering, and make an atonement for him, for that he sinned by the dead, and shall hallow his head that same day.	And the priest is to offer one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering to make atonement for him, because he has sinned by being in the presence of the dead body. On that day he must consecrate his head again.
NUM	6	12	자기 몸을 구별하여 여호와께 드릴 날을 새로 정하고 일 년 된 수양을 가져다가 속건제로 드릴지니라 자기 몸을 구별한 때에 그 몸을 더렵혔은즉 지나간 날은 무효니라	And he shall consecrate unto the Lord the days of his separation, and shall bring a lamb of the first year for a trespass offering: but the days that were before shall be lost, because his separation was defiled.	He must rededicate his time of separation to the LORD and bring a year-old male lamb as a guilt offering. But the preceding days shall not be counted, because his separation was defiled.
NUM	6	13	나실인의 법은 이러하니라 자기 몸을 구별한 날이 차면 그 사람을 회막문으로 데리고 갈 것이요	And this is the law of the Nazarite, when the days of his separation are fulfilled: he shall be brought unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation:	Now this is the law of the Nazirite when his time of separation is complete: He must be brought to the entrance to the Tent of Meeting,
NUM	6	14	그는 여호와께 예물을 드리되 번제물로 일 년 된 흠 없는 수양 하나와 속죄 제물로 일 년 된 흠 없는 어린 암양 하나와 화목 제물로 흠 없는 수양 하나와	And he shall offer his offering unto the Lord, one he lamb of the first year without blemish for a burnt offering, and one ewe lamb of the first year without blemish for a sin offering, and one ram without blemish for peace offerings,	and he is to present an offering to the LORD of an unblemished year-old male lamb as a burnt offering, an unblemished year-old female lamb as a sin offering, and an unblemished ram as a peace offering—
NUM	6	15	무교병 한 광주리와 고운 가루에 기름 섞은 과자들과 기름 바른 무교전병들과 그 소제물과 전제물을 드릴 것이요	And a basket of unleavened bread, cakes of fine flour mingled with oil, and wafers of unleavened bread anointed with oil, and their meat offering, and their drink offerings.	together with their grain offerings and drink offerings—and a basket of unleavened cakes made from fine flour mixed with oil and unleavened wafers coated with oil.
NUM	6	16	제사장은 그것들을 여호와 앞에 가져다가 속죄제와 번제를 드리고	And the priest shall bring them before the Lord, and shall offer his sin offering, and his burnt offering:	The priest is to present all these before the LORD and make the sin offering and the burnt offering.
NUM	6	17	화목 제물로 수양에 무교병 한 광주리를 아울러 여호와께 드리고 그 소제와 전제를 드릴 것이요	And he shall offer the ram for a sacrifice of peace offerings unto the Lord, with the basket of unleavened bread: the priest shall offer also his meat offering, and his drink offering.	He shall also offer the ram as a peace offering to the LORD, along with the basket of unleavened bread. And the priest is to offer the accompanying grain offering and drink offering.
NUM	6	18	자기 몸을 구별한 나실인은 회막문에서 그 머리털을 밀고 그것을 화목 제물 밑에 있는 불에 둘지며	And the Nazarite shall shave the head of his separation at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and shall take the hair of the head of his separation, and put it in the fire which is under the sacrifice of the peace offerings.	Then at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting, the Nazirite is to shave his consecrated head, take the hair, and put it on the fire under the peace offering.
NUM	6	19	자기 몸을 구별한 나실인이 그 머리털을 민 후에 제사장이 삶은 수양의 어깨와 광주리 가운데 무교병 하나와 무교전병 하나를 취하여 나실인의 두 손에 두고	And the priest shall take the sodden shoulder of the ram, and one unleavened cake out of the basket, and one unleavened wafer, and shall put them upon the hands of the Nazarite, after the hair of his separation is shaven:	And the priest is to take the boiled shoulder from the ram, one unleavened cake from the basket, and one unleavened wafer, and put them into the hands of the Nazirite who has just shaved the hair of his consecration.
NUM	6	20	여호와 앞에 요제로 흔들 것이며 그것과 흔든 가슴과 든 넓적다리는 성물이라 다 제사장에게 돌릴 것이니라 그 후에는 나실인이 포도주를 마실 수 있느니라	And the priest shall wave them for a wave offering before the Lord: this is holy for the priest, with the wave breast and heave shoulder: and after that the Nazarite may drink wine.	The priest shall then wave them as a wave offering before the LORD. This is a holy portion for the priest, in addition to the breast of the wave offering and the thigh that was presented. After that, the Nazirite may drink wine.
NUM	6	21	이는 곧 서원한 나실인이 자기 몸을 구별한 일로 인하여 여호와께 예물을 드림과 행할 법이며 이 외에도 힘이 미치는 대로 하려니와 그 서원한 대로 자기 몸을 구별하는 법을 따라 할 것이니라	This is the law of the Nazarite who hath vowed, and of his offering unto the Lord for his separation, beside that that his hand shall get: according to the vow which he vowed, so he must do after the law of his separation.	This is the law of the Nazirite who vows his offering to the LORD for his separation, in addition to whatever else he can afford; he must fulfill whatever vow he makes, according to the law of his separation.”
NUM	6	22	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	6	23	아론과 그 아들들에게 고하여 이르기를 너희는 이스라엘 자손을 위하여 이렇게 축복하여 이르되	Speak unto Aaron and unto his sons, saying, On this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel, saying unto them,	“Tell Aaron and his sons: This is how you are to bless the Israelites. Say to them:
NUM	6	24	여호와는 네게 복을 주시고 너를 지키시기를 원하며	The Lord bless thee, and keep thee:	‘May the LORD bless you and keep you;
NUM	6	25	여호와는 그 얼굴로 네게 비취사 은혜 베푸시기를 원하며	The Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee:	may the LORD cause His face to shine upon you and be gracious to you;
NUM	6	26	여호와는 그 얼굴을 네게로 향하여 드사 평강주시기를 원하노라 할지니라 하라	The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace.	may the LORD lift up His countenance toward you and give you peace.’
NUM	6	27	그들은 이같이 내 이름으로 이스라엘 자손에게 축복할지니 내가 그들에게 복을 주리라	And they shall put my name upon the children of Israel; and I will bless them.	So they shall put My name on the Israelites, and I will bless them.”
NUM	7	1	모세가 장막 세우기를 필하고 그것에 기름을 발라 거룩히 구별하고 또 그 모든 기구와 단과 그 모든 기구에 기름을 발라 거룩히 구별한 날에	And it came to pass on the day that Moses had fully set up the tabernacle, and had anointed it, and sanctified it, and all the instruments thereof, both the altar and all the vessels thereof, and had anointed them, and sanctified them;	On the day Moses finished setting up the tabernacle, he anointed and consecrated it and all its furnishings, along with the altar and all its utensils.
NUM	7	2	이스라엘 족장들 곧 그들의 종족의 두령들이요 그 지파의 족장으로서 그 계수함을 입은 자의 감독된 자들이 예물을 드렸으니	That the princes of Israel, heads of the house of their fathers, who were the princes of the tribes, and were over them that were numbered, offered:	And the leaders of Israel, the heads of their families, presented an offering. These men were the tribal leaders who had supervised the registration.
NUM	7	3	그들의 여호와께 드린 예물은 덮개 있는 수레 여섯과 소 열둘이니 족장 둘에 수레가 하나씩이요 하나에 소가 하나씩이라 그것들을 장막 앞에 드린지라	And they brought their offering before the Lord, six covered wagons, and twelve oxen; a wagon for two of the princes, and for each one an ox: and they brought them before the tabernacle.	They brought as their offering before the LORD six covered carts and twelve oxen—an ox from each leader and a cart from every two leaders—and presented them before the tabernacle.
NUM	7	4	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	And the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	7	5	그것을 그들에게서 받아 레위인에게 주어 각기 직임대로 회막 봉사에 쓰게 할지니라	Take it of them, that they may be to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation; and thou shalt give them unto the Levites, to every man according to his service.	“Accept these gifts from them, that they may be used in the work of the Tent of Meeting. And give them to the Levites, to each man according to his service.”
NUM	7	6	모세가 수레와 소를 받아 레위인에게 주었으니	And Moses took the wagons and the oxen, and gave them unto the Levites.	So Moses took the carts and oxen and gave them to the Levites.
NUM	7	7	곧 게르손 자손들에게는 그 직임대로 수레 둘과 소 넷을 주었고	Two wagons and four oxen he gave unto the sons of Gershon, according to their service:	He gave the Gershonites two carts and four oxen, as their service required,
NUM	7	8	므라리 자손들에게는 그 직임대로 수레 넷과 소 여덟을 주고 제사장 아론의 아들 이다말로 감독케 하였으나	And four wagons and eight oxen he gave unto the sons of Merari, according unto their service, under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.	and he gave the Merarites four carts and eight oxen, as their service required, all under the direction of Ithamar son of Aaron the priest.
NUM	7	9	고핫 자손에게는 주지 아니하였으니 그들의 성소의 직임은 그 어깨로 메는 일을 하는 까닭이었더라	But unto the sons of Kohath he gave none: because the service of the sanctuary belonging unto them was that they should bear upon their shoulders.	But he did not give any to the Kohathites, since they were to carry on their shoulders the holy objects for which they were responsible.
NUM	7	10	단에 기름을 바르던 날에 족장들이 단의 봉헌을 위하여 예물을 가져다가 그 예물을 단 앞에 드리니라	And the princes offered for dedicating of the altar in the day that it was anointed, even the princes offered their offering before the altar.	When the altar was anointed, the leaders approached with their offerings for its dedication and presented them before the altar.
NUM	7	11	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시기를 족장들은 하루 한 사람씩 단의 봉헌 예물을 드릴지니라 하셨더라	And the Lord said unto Moses, They shall offer their offering, each prince on his day, for the dedicating of the altar.	And the LORD said to Moses, “Each day one leader is to present his offering for the dedication of the altar.”
NUM	7	12	제일일에 예물을 드린 자는 유다 지파 암미나답의 아들 나손이라	And he that offered his offering the first day was Nahshon the son of Amminadab, of the tribe of Judah:	On the first day Nahshon son of Amminadab from the tribe of Judah drew near with his offering.
NUM	7	13	그 예물은 성소의 세겔대로 일백삼십 세겔중 은반 하나와 칠십 세겔중 은바리 하나라 이 두 그릇에는 소제물로 기름 섞은 고운 가루를 채웠고	And his offering was one silver charger, the weight thereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them were full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:	His offering was one silver platter weighing a hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl weighing seventy shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel and filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
NUM	7	14	또 십 세겔중 금숟가락 하나라 그것에는 향을 채웠고	One spoon of ten shekels of gold, full of incense:	one gold dish weighing ten shekels, filled with incense;
NUM	7	15	또 번제물로 수송아지 하나와 수양 하나와 일 년 된 어린 수양 하나이며	One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:	one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old for a burnt offering;
NUM	7	16	속죄 제물로 수염소 하나이며	One kid of the goats for a sin offering:	one male goat for a sin offering;
NUM	7	17	화목 제물로 소 둘과 수양 다섯과 수염소 다섯과 일 년 된 어린 수양 다섯이라 이는 암미나답의 아들 나손의 예물이었더라	And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Nahshon the son of Amminadab.	and a peace offering of two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Nahshon son of Amminadab.
NUM	7	18	제이일에는 잇사갈의 족장 수알의 아들 느다넬이 드렸으니	On the second day Nethaneel the son of Zuar, prince of Issachar, did offer:	On the second day Nethanel son of Zuar, the leader of Issachar, drew near.
NUM	7	19	그 드린 예물도 성소의 세겔대로 일백삼십 세겔중 은반 하나와 칠십 세겔중 은바리 하나라 이 두 그릇에는 소제물로 기름 섞은 고운 가루를 채웠고	He offered for his offering one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:	The offering he presented was one silver platter weighing a hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl weighing seventy shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel and filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
NUM	7	20	또 십 세겔중 금숟가락 하나라 그것에는 향을 채웠고	One spoon of gold of ten shekels, full of incense:	one gold dish weighing ten shekels, filled with incense;
NUM	7	21	또 번제물로 수송아지 하나와 수양 하나와 일 년 된 어린 수양 하나이며	One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:	one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old for a burnt offering;
NUM	7	22	속죄 제물로 수염소 하나이며	One kid of the goats for a sin offering:	one male goat for a sin offering;
NUM	7	23	화목 제물로 소 둘과 수양 다섯과 수염소 다섯과 일 년 된 어린 수양 다섯이라 이는 수알의 아들 느다넬의 예물이었더라	And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Nethaneel the son of Zuar.	and a peace offering of two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Nethanel son of Zuar.
NUM	7	24	제삼일에는 스불론 자손의 족장 헬론의 아들 엘리압이 드렸으니	On the third day Eliab the son of Helon, prince of the children of Zebulun, did offer:	On the third day Eliab son of Helon, the leader of the Zebulunites, drew near.
NUM	7	25	그 예물도 성소의 세겔대로 일백삼십 세겔중 은반 하나와 칠십 세겔중 은바리 하나라 이 두 그릇에는 소제물로 기름 섞은 고운 가루를 채웠고	His offering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:	His offering was one silver platter weighing a hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl weighing seventy shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel and filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
NUM	7	26	또 십 세겔중 금숟가락 하나라 이것에는 향을 채웠고	One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:	one gold dish weighing ten shekels, filled with incense;
NUM	7	27	또 번제물로 수송아지 하나와 수양 하나와 일 년 된 어린 수양 하나이며	One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:	one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old for a burnt offering;
NUM	7	28	속죄 제물로 수염소 하나이며	One kid of the goats for a sin offering:	one male goat for a sin offering;
NUM	7	29	화목 제물로 소 둘과 수양 다섯과 수염소 다섯과 일 년 된 어린 수양 다섯이라 이는 헬론의 아들 엘리압의 예물이었더라	And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Eliab the son of Helon.	and a peace offering of two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Eliab son of Helon.
NUM	7	30	제사일에는 르우벤 자손의 족장 스데울의 아들 엘리술이 드렸으니	On the fourth day Elizur the son of Shedeur, prince of the children of Reuben, did offer:	On the fourth day Elizur son of Shedeur, the leader of the Reubenites, drew near.
NUM	7	31	그 예물도 성소의 세겔대로 일백삼십 세겔중 은반 하나와 칠십 세겔중 은바리 하나라 이 두 그릇에는 소제물로 기름 섞은 고운 가루를 채웠고	His offering was one silver charger of the weight of an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:	His offering was one silver platter weighing a hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl weighing seventy shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel and filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
NUM	7	32	또 십 세겔중 금숟가락 하나라 이것에는 향을 채웠고	One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:	one gold dish weighing ten shekels, filled with incense;
NUM	7	33	또 번죄물로 수송아지 하나와 수양 하나와 일 년 된 어린 수양 하나이며	One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:	one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old for a burnt offering;
NUM	7	34	속죄 제물로 수염소 하나이며	One kid of the goats for a sin offering:	one male goat for a sin offering;
NUM	7	35	화목 제물로 소 둘과 수양 다섯과 수염소 다섯과 일 년 된 어린 수양 다섯이라 이는 스데울의 아들 엘리술의 예물이었더라	And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Elizur the son of Shedeur.	and a peace offering of two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Elizur son of Shedeur.
NUM	7	36	제오일에는 시므온 자손의 족장 수리삿대의 아들 슬루미엘이 드렸으니	On the fifth day Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai, prince of the children of Simeon, did offer:	On the fifth day Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai, the leader of the Simeonites, drew near.
NUM	7	37	그 예물도 성소의 세겔대로 일백삼십 세겔중 은반 하나와 칠십 세겔중 은바리 하나라 이 두 그릇에는 소제물로 기름 섞은 고운 가루를 채웠고	His offering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:	His offering was one silver platter weighing a hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl weighing seventy shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel and filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
NUM	7	38	또 십 세겔중 금숟가락 하나라 이것에는 향을 채웠고	One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:	one gold dish weighing ten shekels, filled with incense;
NUM	7	39	또 번제물로 수송아지 하나와 수양 하나와 일 년 된 어린 수양 하나이며	One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:	one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old for a burnt offering;
NUM	7	40	속죄제물로 수염소 하나이며	One kid of the goats for a sin offering:	one male goat for a sin offering;
NUM	7	41	화목제물로 소 둘과 수양 다섯과 수염소 다섯과 일 년 된 어린 수양 다섯이라 이는 수리삿대의 아들 슬루미엘의 예물이었더라	And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.	and a peace offering of two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai.
NUM	7	42	제육일에는 갓 자손의 족장 드우엘의 아들 엘리아삽이 드렸으니	On the sixth day Eliasaph the son of Deuel, prince of the children of Gad, offered:	On the sixth day Eliasaph son of Deuel, the leader of the Gadites, drew near.
NUM	7	43	그 예물도 성소의 세겔대로 일백삼십 세겔중 은반 하나와 칠십 세겔중 은바리 하나라 이 두 그릇에는 소제물로 기름 섞은 고운 가루를 채웠고	His offering was one silver charger of the weight of an hundred and thirty shekels, a silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:	His offering was one silver platter weighing a hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl weighing seventy shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel and filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
NUM	7	44	또 십 세겔중 금숟가락 하나라 이것에는 향을 채웠고	One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:	one gold dish weighing ten shekels, filled with incense;
NUM	7	45	또 번제물로 수송아지 하나와 수양 하나와 일 년 된 어린 수양 하나이며	One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:	one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old for a burnt offering;
NUM	7	46	속죄 제물로 수염소 하나이며	One kid of the goats for a sin offering:	one male goat for a sin offering;
NUM	7	47	화목 제물로 소 둘과 수양 다섯과 수염소 다섯과 일 년 된 어린 수양 다섯이라 이는 드우엘의 아들 엘리아삽의 예물이었더라	And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Eliasaph the son of Deuel.	and a peace offering of two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Eliasaph son of Deuel.
NUM	7	48	제칠일에는 에브라임 자손의 족장 암미훗의 아들 엘리사마가 드렸으니	On the seventh day Elishama the son of Ammihud, prince of the children of Ephraim, offered:	On the seventh day Elishama son of Ammihud, the leader of the Ephraimites, drew near.
NUM	7	49	그 예물도 성소의 세겔대로 일백삼십 세겔중 은반 하나와 칠십 세겔중 은바리 하나라 이 두 그릇에는 소제물로 기름 섞은 고운 가루를 채웠고	His offering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:	His offering was one silver platter weighing a hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl weighing seventy shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel and filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
NUM	7	50	또 십 세겔중 금숟가락 하나라 이것에는 향을 채웠고	One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:	one gold dish weighing ten shekels, filled with incense;
NUM	7	51	또 번제물로 수송아지 하나와 수양 하나와 일 년 된 어린 수양 하나이며	One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:	one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old for a burnt offering;
NUM	7	52	속죄제물로 수염소 하나이며	One kid of the goats for a sin offering:	one male goat for a sin offering;
NUM	7	53	화목제물로 소 둘과 수양 다섯과 수염소 다섯과 일 년 된 어린 수양 다섯이라 이는 암미훗의 아들 엘리사마의 예물이었더라	And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Elishama the son of Ammihud.	and a peace offering of two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Elishama son of Ammihud.
NUM	7	54	제팔일에는 므낫세 자손의 족장 브다술의 아들 가말리엘이 드렸으니	On the eighth day offered Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur, prince of the children of Manasseh:	On the eighth day Gamaliel son of Pedahzur, the leader of the Manassites, drew near.
NUM	7	55	그 예물도 성소의 세겔대로 일백삼십 세겔중 은반 하나와 칠십 세겔중 은바리 하나라 이 두 그릇에는 소제물로 기름 섞은 고운 가루를 채웠고	His offering was one silver charger of the weight of an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:	His offering was one silver platter weighing a hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl weighing seventy shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel and filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
NUM	7	56	또 십 세겔중 금숟가락 하나라 이것에는 향을 채웠고	One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:	one gold dish weighing ten shekels, filled with incense;
NUM	7	57	또 번제물로 수송아지 하나와 수양 하나와 일년 된 어린 수양 하나이며	One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:	one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old for a burnt offering;
NUM	7	58	속죄제물로 수염소 하나이며	One kid of the goats for a sin offering:	one male goat for a sin offering;
NUM	7	59	화목제물로 소 둘과 수양 다섯과 수염소 다섯과 일 년 된 어린 수양 다섯이라 이는 브다술의 아들 가말리엘의 예물이었더라	And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.	and a peace offering of two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Gamaliel son of Pedahzur.
NUM	7	60	제구일에는 베냐민 자손의 족장 기드오니의 아들 아비단이 드렸으니	On the ninth day Abidan the son of Gideoni, prince of the children of Benjamin, offered:	On the ninth day Abidan son of Gideoni, the leader of the Benjamites, drew near.
NUM	7	61	그 예물도 성소의 세겔대로 일백삼십 세겔중 은반 하나와 칠십 세겔중 은바리 하나라 이 두 그릇에는 소제물로 기름 섞은 고운 가루를 채웠고	His offering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:	His offering was one silver platter weighing a hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl weighing seventy shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel and filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
NUM	7	62	또 십 세겔중 금숟가락 하나라 이것에는 향을 채웠고	One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:	one gold dish weighing ten shekels, filled with incense;
NUM	7	63	또 번제물로 수송아지 하나와 수양 하나와 일 년 된 어린 수양 하나이며	One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:	one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old for a burnt offering;
NUM	7	64	속죄제물로 수염소 하나이며	One kid of the goats for a sin offering:	one male goat for a sin offering;
NUM	7	65	화목제물로 소 둘과 수양 다섯과 수염소 다섯과 일 년 된 어린 수양 다섯이라 이는 기드오니의 아들 아비단의 예물이었더라	And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Abidan the son of Gideoni.	and a peace offering of two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Abidan son of Gideoni.
NUM	7	66	제십일에는 단 자손의 족장 암미삿대의 아들 아히에셀이 드렸으니	On the tenth day Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai, prince of the children of Dan, offered:	On the tenth day Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai, the leader of the Danites, drew near.
NUM	7	67	그 예물도 성소의 세겔대로 일백삼십 세겔중 은반 하나와 칠십 세겔중 은바리 하나라 이 두 그릇에는 소제물로 기름 섞은 고운 가루를 채웠고	His offering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:	His offering was one silver platter weighing a hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl weighing seventy shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel and filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
NUM	7	68	또 십 세겔중 금숟가락 하나라 이것에는 향을 채웠고	One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:	one gold dish weighing ten shekels, filled with incense;
NUM	7	69	또 번제물로 수송아지 하나와 수양 하나와 일 년 된 어린 수양 하나이며	One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:	one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old for a burnt offering;
NUM	7	70	속죄제물로 수염소 하나이며	One kid of the goats for a sin offering:	one male goat for a sin offering;
NUM	7	71	화목제물로 소 둘과 수양 다섯과 수염소 다섯과 일 년 된 어린 수양 다섯이라 이는 암미삿대의 아들 아히에셀의 예물이었더라	And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.	and a peace offering of two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai.
NUM	7	72	제십일일에는 아셀 자손의 족장 오그란의 아들 바기엘이 드렸으니	On the eleventh day Pagiel the son of Ocran, prince of the children of Asher, offered:	On the eleventh day Pagiel son of Ocran, the leader of the Asherites, drew near.
NUM	7	73	그 예물도 성소의 세겔대로 일백삼십 세겔중 은반 하나와 칠십 세겔중 은바리 하나라 이 두 그릇에는 소제물로 기름 섞은 고운 가루를 채웠고	His offering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:	His offering was one silver platter weighing a hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl weighing seventy shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel and filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
NUM	7	74	또 십 세겔중 금숟가락 하나라 이것에는 향을 채웝고	One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:	one gold dish weighing ten shekels, filled with incense;
NUM	7	75	또 번제물로 수송아지 하나와 수양 하나와 일 년 된 어린 수양 하나이며	One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:	one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old for a burnt offering;
NUM	7	76	속죄제물로 수염소 하나이며	One kid of the goats for a sin offering:	one male goat for a sin offering;
NUM	7	77	화목제물로 소 둘과 수양 다섯과 수염소 다섯과 일 년 된 어린 수양 다섯이라 이는 오그란의 아들 바기엘의 예물이었더라	And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Pagiel the son of Ocran.	and a peace offering of two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Pagiel son of Ocran.
NUM	7	78	제십이일에는 납달리 자손의 족장 에난의 아들 아히라가 드렸으니	On the twelfth day Ahira the son of Enan, prince of the children of Naphtali, offered:	On the twelfth day Ahira son of Enan, the leader of the Naphtalites, drew near.
NUM	7	79	그 예물도 성소의 세겔대로 일백삼십 세겔중 은반 하나와 칠십 세겔중 은바리 하나라 이 두 그릇에는 소제물로 기름 섞은 고운 가루를 채웠고	His offering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:	His offering was one silver platter weighing a hundred and thirty shekels, and one silver bowl weighing seventy shekels, both according to the sanctuary shekel and filled with fine flour mixed with oil for a grain offering;
NUM	7	80	또 십 세겔중 금숟가락 하나라 이것에는 향을 채웠고	One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense:	one gold dish weighing ten shekels, filled with incense;
NUM	7	81	또 번제물로 수송아지 하나와 수양 하나와 일 년 된 어린 수양 하나이며	One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:	one young bull, one ram, and one male lamb a year old for a burnt offering;
NUM	7	82	속죄제물로 수염소 하나이며	One kid of the goats for a sin offering:	one male goat for a sin offering;
NUM	7	83	화목제물로 소 둘과 수양 다섯과 수염소 다섯과 일 년 된 어린 수양 다섯이라 이는 에난의 아들 아히라의 예물이었더라	And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Ahira the son of Enan.	and a peace offering of two oxen, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a year old. This was the offering of Ahira son of Enan.
NUM	7	84	이는 곧 단에 기름 바르던 날에 이스라엘 족장들이 드린 바 단의 봉헌 예물이라 은반이 열둘이요 은바리가 열둘이요 금숟가락이 열둘이니	This was the dedication of the altar, in the day when it was anointed, by the princes of Israel: twelve chargers of silver, twelve silver bowls, twelve spoons of gold:	So these were the offerings from the leaders of Israel for the dedication of the altar when it was anointed: twelve silver platters, twelve silver bowls, and twelve gold dishes.
NUM	7	85	은반은 각각 일백삼십 세겔중이요 은바리는 각각 칠십 세겔중이라 성소의 세겔대로 모든 기명의 은이 도합이 이천사백 세겔이요	Each charger of silver weighing an hundred and thirty shekels, each bowl seventy: all the silver vessels weighed two thousand and four hundred shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary:	Each silver platter weighed a hundred and thirty shekels, and each silver bowl seventy shekels. The total weight of the silver articles was two thousand four hundred shekels, according to the sanctuary shekel.
NUM	7	86	또 향을 채운 금숟가락이 열둘이니 성소의 세겔대로 각각 십 세겔중이라 그 숟가락의 금이 도합이 일백이십 세겔이요	The golden spoons were twelve, full of incense, weighing ten shekels apiece, after the shekel of the sanctuary: all the gold of the spoons was an hundred and twenty shekels.	The twelve gold dishes filled with incense weighed ten shekels each, according to the sanctuary shekel. The total weight of the gold dishes was a hundred and twenty shekels.
NUM	7	87	또 번제물로 수송아지가 열둘이요 수양이 열둘이요 일 년 된 어린 수양이 열둘이요 그 소제물이며 속죄제물로 수염소가 열둘이며	All the oxen for the burnt offering were twelve bullocks, the rams twelve, the lambs of the first year twelve, with their meat offering: and the kids of the goats for sin offering twelve.	All the livestock for the burnt offering totaled twelve bulls, twelve rams, and twelve male lambs a year old—together with their grain offerings—and twelve male goats for the sin offering.
NUM	7	88	화목제물로 수소가 이십사요 수양이 육십이요 수염소가 육십이요 일 년 된 어린 수양이 육십이라 이는 단에 기름 바른 후에 드린바 단의 봉헌 예물이었더라	And all the oxen for the sacrifice of the peace offerings were twenty and four bullocks, the rams sixty, the he goats sixty, the lambs of the first year sixty. This was the dedication of the altar, after that it was anointed.	All the livestock sacrificed for the peace offering totaled twenty-four bulls, sixty rams, sixty male goats, and sixty male lambs a year old. This was the dedication offering for the altar after it was anointed.
NUM	7	89	모세가 회막에 들어가서 여호와께 말씀하려 할 때에 증거궤 위 속죄소 위의 두 그룹 사이에서 자기에게 말씀하시는 목소리를 들었으니 여호와께서 그에게 말씀하심이었더라	And when Moses was gone into the tabernacle of the congregation to speak with him, then he heard the voice of one speaking unto him from off the mercy seat that was upon the ark of testimony, from between the two cherubims: and he spake unto him.	When Moses entered the Tent of Meeting to speak with the LORD, he heard the voice speaking to him from between the two cherubim above the mercy seat on the ark of the Testimony. Thus the LORD spoke to him.
NUM	8	1	여호와께서 또 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	8	2	아론에게 고하여 이르라 등을 켤 때에는 일곱 등잔을 등대 앞으로 비취게 할지니라 하시매	Speak unto Aaron, and say unto him, When thou lightest the lamps, the seven lamps shall give light over against the candlestick.	“Speak to Aaron and tell him: ‘When you set up the seven lamps, they are to light the area in front of the lampstand.’”
NUM	8	3	아론이 그리하여 등불을 등대 앞으로 비취도록 켰으니 여호와께서 모세에게 명하심과 같았더라	And Aaron did so; he lighted the lamps thereof over against the candlestick, as the Lord commanded Moses.	And Aaron did so; he set up the lamps facing toward the front of the lampstand, just as the LORD had commanded Moses.
NUM	8	4	이 등대의 제도는 이러하니 곧 금을 쳐서 만든 것인데 밑판에서 그 꽃까지 쳐서 만든 것이라 모세가 여호와께서 자기에게 보이신 식양을 따라 이 등대를 만들었더라	And this work of the candlestick was of beaten gold, unto the shaft thereof, unto the flowers thereof, was beaten work: according unto the pattern which the Lord had shewed Moses, so he made the candlestick.	This is how the lampstand was constructed: it was made of hammered gold from its base to its blossoms, fashioned according to the pattern the LORD had shown Moses.
NUM	8	5	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Again the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,
NUM	8	6	이스라엘 자손 중에서 레위인을 취하여 정결케 하라	Take the Levites from among the children of Israel, and cleanse them.	“Take the Levites from among the Israelites and make them ceremonially clean.
NUM	8	7	너는 이같이 하여 그들을 정결케 하되 곧 속죄의 물로 그들에게 뿌리고 그들로 그 전신을 삭도로 밀게 하고 그 의복을 빨게 하여 몸을 정결케 하고	And thus shalt thou do unto them, to cleanse them: Sprinkle water of purifying upon them, and let them shave all their flesh, and let them wash their clothes, and so make themselves clean.	This is what you must do to cleanse them: Sprinkle them with the water of purification. Have them shave their whole bodies and wash their clothes, and so purify themselves.
NUM	8	8	또 그들로 수송아지 하나를 번제물로, 기름 섞은 고운 가루를 그 소제물로 취하게 하고 그 외에 너는 또 수송아지 하나를 속죄물로 취하고	Then let them take a young bullock with his meat offering, even fine flour mingled with oil, and another young bullock shalt thou take for a sin offering.	Then have them take a young bull with its grain offering of fine flour mixed with oil, and you are to take a second young bull for a sin offering.
NUM	8	9	레위인을 회막 앞에 나오게 하고 이스라엘 자손의 온 회중을 모으고	And thou shalt bring the Levites before the tabernacle of the congregation: and thou shalt gather the whole assembly of the children of Israel together:	Bring the Levites before the Tent of Meeting and assemble the whole congregation of Israel.
NUM	8	10	레위인을 여호와 앞에 나오게 하고 이스라엘 자손으로 그들에게 안수케 한 후에	And thou shalt bring the Levites before the Lord: and the children of Israel shall put their hands upon the Levites:	You are to present the Levites before the LORD and have the Israelites lay their hands upon them.
NUM	8	11	아론이 이스라엘 자손을 위하여 레위인을 요제로 여호와 앞에 드릴지니 이는 그들로 여호와를 봉사케 하기 위함이라	And Aaron shall offer the Levites before the Lord for an offering of the children of Israel, that they may execute the service of the Lord.	Aaron is to present the Levites before the LORD as a wave offering from the sons of Israel, so that they may perform the service of the LORD.
NUM	8	12	레위인으로 수송아지들의 머리를 안수케 하고 네가 그 하나는 속죄제물로 하나는 번제물로 여호와께 드려 레위인을 속죄하고	And the Levites shall lay their hands upon the heads of the bullocks: and thou shalt offer the one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering, unto the Lord, to make an atonement for the Levites.	And the Levites are to lay their hands on the heads of the bulls, and offer to the LORD one as a sin offering and the other as a burnt offering, to make atonement for the Levites.
NUM	8	13	레위인을 아론과 그 아들들 앞에 세워 여호와께 요제로 드릴지니라	And thou shalt set the Levites before Aaron, and before his sons, and offer them for an offering unto the Lord.	You are to have the Levites stand before Aaron and his sons and then present them before the LORD as a wave offering.
NUM	8	14	너는 이같이 이스라엘 자손 중에서 레위인을 구별하라 그리하면 그들이 내게 속할 것이라	Thus shalt thou separate the Levites from among the children of Israel: and the Levites shall be mine.	In this way you shall separate the Levites from the rest of the Israelites, and the Levites will belong to Me.
NUM	8	15	네가 그들을 정결케 하여 요제로 드린 후에 그들이 회막에 들어가서 봉사할 것이니라	And after that shall the Levites go in to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation: and thou shalt cleanse them, and offer them for an offering.	After you have cleansed them and presented them as a wave offering, they may come to serve at the Tent of Meeting.
NUM	8	16	그들은 이스라엘 자손 중에서 내게 온전히 드린바 된 자라 이스라엘 자손 중 일절 초태생 곧 모든 처음 난 자의 대신으로 내가 그들을 취하였나니	For they are wholly given unto me from among the children of Israel; instead of such as open every womb, even instead of the firstborn of all the children of Israel, have I taken them unto me.	For the Levites have been wholly given to Me from among the sons of Israel. I have taken them for Myself in place of all who come first from the womb, the firstborn of all the sons of Israel.
NUM	8	17	이스라엘 자손 중에 처음 난 것은 사람이든지 짐승이든지 다 내게 속하였음은 내가 애굽 땅에서 그 모든 처음 난 자를 치던 날에 내가 그들을 내게 구별하였음이라	For all the firstborn of the children of Israel are mine, both man and beast: on the day that I smote every firstborn in the land of Egypt I sanctified them for myself.	For every firstborn male in Israel is Mine, both man and beast. I set them apart for Myself on the day I struck down all the firstborn in the land of Egypt.
NUM	8	18	이러므로 내가 이스라엘 자손 중 모든 처음 난 자의 대신으로 레위인을 취하였느니라	And I have taken the Levites for all the firstborn of the children of Israel.	But I have taken the Levites in place of all the firstborn among the sons of Israel.
NUM	8	19	내가 이스라엘 자손 중에서 레위인을 취하여 그들을 아론과 그 아들들에게 선물로 주어서 그들로 회막에서 이스라엘 자손을 대신하여 봉사하게 하며 또 이스라엘 자손을 위하여 속죄하게 하였나니 이는 이스라엘 자손이 성소에 가까이 할 때에 그들 중에 재앙이 없게 하려 하였음이니라	And I have given the Levites as a gift to Aaron and to his sons from among the children of Israel, to do the service of the children of Israel in the tabernacle of the congregation, and to make an atonement for the children of Israel: that there be no plague among the children of Israel, when the children of Israel come nigh unto the sanctuary.	And I have given the Levites as a gift to Aaron and his sons from among the Israelites, to perform the service for the Israelites at the Tent of Meeting and to make atonement on their behalf, so that no plague will come against the Israelites when they approach the sanctuary.”
NUM	8	20	모세와 아론과 이스라엘 자손의 온 회중이 여호와께서 레위인에게 대하여 모세에게 명하신 것을 다 좇아 레위인에게 행하였으되 곧 이스라엘 자손이 그와 같이 그들에게 행하였더라	And Moses, and Aaron, and all the congregation of the children of Israel, did to the Levites according unto all that the Lord commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so did the children of Israel unto them.	So Moses, Aaron, and the whole congregation of Israel did with the Levites everything that the LORD had commanded Moses they should do.
NUM	8	21	레위인이 이에 죄에서 스스로 깨끗케 하고 그 옷을 빨매 아론이 그들을 여호와 앞에 요제로 드리고 그가 또 그들을 위하여 속죄하여 정결케 한	And the Levites were purified, and they washed their clothes; and Aaron offered them as an offering before the Lord; and Aaron made an atonement for them to cleanse them.	The Levites purified themselves and washed their clothes, and Aaron presented them as a wave offering before the LORD. Aaron also made atonement for them to cleanse them.
NUM	8	22	후에 레위인이 회막에 들어가서 아론과 그 아들들의 앞에서 봉사하니라 여호와께서 레위인의 일에 대하여 모세에게 명하신 것을 좇아 그와 같이 그들에게 행하였더라	And after that went the Levites in to do their service in the tabernacle of the congregation before Aaron, and before his sons: as the Lord had commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so did they unto them.	After that, the Levites came to perform their service at the Tent of Meeting in the presence of Aaron and his sons. Thus they did with the Levites just as the LORD had commanded Moses.
NUM	8	23	여호와께서 또 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	And the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	8	24	레위인은 이같이 할지니 곧 이십오 세 이상으로는 회막에 들어와서 봉사하여 일할 것이요	This is it that belongeth unto the Levites: from twenty and five years old and upward they shall go in to wait upon the service of the tabernacle of the congregation:	“This applies to the Levites: Men twenty-five years of age or older shall enter to perform the service in the work at the Tent of Meeting.
NUM	8	25	오십 세부터는 그 일을 쉬어 봉사하지 아니할 것이나	And from the age of fifty years they shall cease waiting upon the service thereof, and shall serve no more:	But at the age of fifty, they must retire from performing the work and no longer serve.
NUM	8	26	그 형제와 함께 회막에서 모시는 직무를 지킬 것이요 일하지 아니할 것이라 너는 레위인의 직무에 대하여 이같이 할지니라	But shall minister with their brethren in the tabernacle of the congregation, to keep the charge, and shall do no service. Thus shalt thou do unto the Levites touching their charge.	After that, they may assist their brothers in fulfilling their duties at the Tent of Meeting, but they themselves are not to do the work. This is how you are to assign responsibilities to the Levites.”
NUM	9	1	애굽 땅에서 나온 다음 해 정월에 여호와께서 시내 광야에서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the first month of the second year after they were come out of the land of Egypt, saying,	In the first month of the second year after Israel had come out of the land of Egypt, the LORD spoke to Moses in the Wilderness of Sinai:
NUM	9	2	이스라엘 자손으로 유월절을 그 정기에 지키게 하라	Let the children of Israel also keep the passover at his appointed season.	“The Israelites are to observe the Passover at its appointed time.
NUM	9	3	그 정기 곧 이달 십사일 해 질 때에 너희는 그것을 지키되 그 모든 율례와 그 모든 규례대로 지킬지니라	In the fourteenth day of this month, at even, ye shall keep it in his appointed season: according to all the rites of it, and according to all the ceremonies thereof, shall ye keep it.	You are to observe it at the appointed time, at twilight on the fourteenth day of this month, in accordance with its statutes and ordinances.”
NUM	9	4	모세가 이스라엘 자손에게 명하여 유월절을 지키라 하매	And Moses spake unto the children of Israel, that they should keep the passover.	So Moses told the Israelites to observe the Passover,
NUM	9	5	그들이 정월 십사일 해 질 때에 시내 광야에서 유월절을 지켰으되 이스라엘 자손이 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 것을 다 좇아 행하였더라	And they kept the passover on the fourteenth day of the first month at even in the wilderness of Sinai: according to all that the Lord commanded Moses, so did the children of Israel.	and they did so in the Wilderness of Sinai, at twilight on the fourteenth day of the first month. The Israelites did everything just as the LORD had commanded Moses.
NUM	9	6	때에 사람의 시체로 인하여 부정케 되어서 유월절을 지킬 수 없는 사람들이 있었는데 그들이 당일에 모세와 아론 앞에 이르러	And there were certain men, who were defiled by the dead body of a man, that they could not keep the passover on that day: and they came before Moses and before Aaron on that day:	But there were some men who were unclean due to a dead body, so they could not observe the Passover on that day. And they came before Moses and Aaron that same day
NUM	9	7	그에게 이르되 우리가 사람의 시체로 인하여 부정케 되었거니와 우리를 금지하여 이스라엘 자손과 함께 정기에 여호와께 예물을 드리지 못하게 하심은 어찜이니이까	And those men said unto him, We are defiled by the dead body of a man: wherefore are we kept back, that we may not offer an offering of the Lord in his appointed season among the children of Israel?	and said to Moses, “We are unclean because of a dead body, but why should we be excluded from presenting the LORD’s offering with the other Israelites at the appointed time?”
NUM	9	8	모세가 그들에게 이르되 기다리라 여호와께서 너희에게 대하여 어떻게 명하시는지 내가 들으리라	And Moses said unto them, Stand still, and I will hear what the Lord will command concerning you.	“Wait here until I find out what the LORD commands concerning you,” Moses replied.
NUM	9	9	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	9	10	이스라엘 자손에게 일러 고하여 이르라 너희나 너희 후손 중에 시체로 인하여 부정케 되든지 먼 여행 중에 있든지 할지라도 다 여호와 앞에 마땅히 유월절을 지키되	Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If any man of you or of your posterity shall be unclean by reason of a dead body, or be in a journey afar off, yet he shall keep the passover unto the Lord.	“Tell the Israelites: ‘When any one of you or your descendants is unclean because of a dead body, or is away on a journey, he may still observe the Passover to the LORD.
NUM	9	11	이월 십사일 해 질 때에 그것을 지켜서 어린 양에 무교병과 쓴 나물을 아울러 먹을 것이요	The fourteenth day of the second month at even they shall keep it, and eat it with unleavened bread and bitter herbs.	Such people are to observe it at twilight on the fourteenth day of the second month. They are to eat the lamb, together with unleavened bread and bitter herbs;
NUM	9	12	아침까지 그것을 조금도 남겨 두지 말며 그 뼈를 하나도 꺽지 말아서 유월절 모든 율례대로 지킬 것이니라	They shall leave none of it unto the morning, nor break any bone of it: according to all the ordinances of the passover they shall keep it.	they may not leave any of it until morning or break any of its bones. They must observe the Passover according to all its statutes.
NUM	9	13	그러나 사람이 정결도 하고 여행 중에도 있지 아니하면서 유월절을 지키지 아니하는 자는 그 백성 중에서 끊쳐지리니 이런 사람은 그 정기에 여호와께 예물을 드리지 아니하였은즉 그 죄를 당할지며	But the man that is clean, and is not in a journey, and forbeareth to keep the passover, even the same soul shall be cut off from among his people: because he brought not the offering of the Lord in his appointed season, that man shall bear his sin.	But if a man who is ceremonially clean and is not on a journey still fails to observe the Passover, he must be cut off from his people, because he did not present the LORD’s offering at its appointed time. That man will bear the consequences of his sin.
NUM	9	14	만일 타국인이 너희 중에 우거하여 여호와 앞에 유월절을 지키고자 하면 유월절 율례대로 그 규례를 따라서 행할지니 우거한 자에게나 본토인에게나 그 율례는 동일할 것이니라	And if a stranger shall sojourn among you, and will keep the passover unto the Lord; according to the ordinance of the passover, and according to the manner thereof, so shall he do: ye shall have one ordinance, both for the stranger, and for him that was born in the land.	If a foreigner dwelling among you wants to observe the Passover to the LORD, he is to do so according to the Passover statute and its ordinances. You are to apply the same statute to both the foreigner and the native of the land.’”
NUM	9	15	성막을 세운 날에 구름이 성막 곧 증거막을 덮었고 저녁이 되면 성막 위에 불 모양 같은 것이 나타나서 아침까지 이르렀으되	And on the day that the tabernacle was reared up the cloud covered the tabernacle, namely, the tent of the testimony: and at even there was upon the tabernacle as it were the appearance of fire, until the morning.	On the day that the tabernacle, the Tent of the Testimony, was set up, the cloud covered it and appeared like fire above the tabernacle from evening until morning.
NUM	9	16	항상 그러하여 낮에는 구름이 그것을 덮었고 밤에는 불 모양이 있었는데	So it was alway: the cloud covered it by day, and the appearance of fire by night.	It remained that way continually; the cloud would cover the tabernacle by day, and at night it would appear like fire.
NUM	9	17	구름이 성막에서 떠오르는 때에는 이스라엘 자손이 곧 진행하였고 구름이 머무는 곳에 이스라엘 자손이 진을 쳤으니	And when the cloud was taken up from the tabernacle, then after that the children of Israel journeyed: and in the place where the cloud abode, there the children of Israel pitched their tents.	Whenever the cloud was lifted from above the Tent, the Israelites would set out, and wherever the cloud settled, there the Israelites would camp.
NUM	9	18	이스라엘 자손이 여호와의 명을 좇아 진행하였고 여호와의 명을 좇아 진을 쳤으며 구름이 성막 위에 머무는 동안에는 그들이 유진하였고	At the commandment of the Lord the children of Israel journeyed, and at the commandment of the Lord they pitched: as long as the cloud abode upon the tabernacle they rested in their tents.	At the LORD’s command the Israelites set out, and at the LORD’s command they camped. As long as the cloud remained over the tabernacle, they remained encamped.
NUM	9	19	구름이 장막 위에 머무는 날이 오랠 때에는 이스라엘 자손이 여호와의 명을 지켜 진행치 아니하였으며	And when the cloud tarried long upon the tabernacle many days, then the children of Israel kept the charge of the Lord, and journeyed not.	Even when the cloud lingered over the tabernacle for many days, the Israelites kept the LORD’s charge and did not set out.
NUM	9	20	혹시 구름이 장막 위에 머무는 날이 적을 때에도 그들이 다만 여호와의 명을 좇아 유진하고 여호와의 명을 좇아 진행하였으며	And so it was, when the cloud was a few days upon the tabernacle; according to the commandment of the Lord they abode in their tents, and according to the commandment of the Lord they journeyed.	Sometimes the cloud remained over the tabernacle for only a few days, and they would camp at the LORD’s command and set out at the LORD’s command.
NUM	9	21	혹시 구름이 저녁부터 아침까지 있다가 아침에 그 구름이 떠오를 때에는 그들이 진행하였고 구름이 밤낮 있다가 떠 오르면 곧 진행하였으며	And so it was, when the cloud abode from even unto the morning, and that the cloud was taken up in the morning, then they journeyed: whether it was by day or by night that the cloud was taken up, they journeyed.	Sometimes the cloud remained only from evening until morning, and when it lifted in the morning, they would set out. Whether it was by day or by night, when the cloud was taken up, they would set out.
NUM	9	22	이틀이든지 한 달이든지 일 년이든지 구름이 성막 위에 머물러 있을 동안에는 이스라엘 자손이 유진하고 진행치 아니하다가 떠 오르면 진행하였으니	Or whether it were two days, or a month, or a year, that the cloud tarried upon the tabernacle, remaining thereon, the children of Israel abode in their tents, and journeyed not: but when it was taken up, they journeyed.	Whether the cloud lingered for two days, a month, or longer, the Israelites camped and did not set out as long as the cloud remained over the tabernacle; but when it was lifted, they would set out.
NUM	9	23	곧 그들이 여호와의 명을 좇아 진을 치며 여호와의 명을 좇아 진행하고 또 모세로 전하신 여호와의 명을 따라 여호와의 직임을 지켰더라	At the commandment of the Lord they rested in the tents, and at the commandment of the Lord they journeyed: they kept the charge of the Lord, at the commandment of the Lord by the hand of Moses.	They camped at the LORD’s command, and they set out at the LORD’s command; they carried out the LORD’s charge according to His command through Moses.
NUM	10	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	10	2	은나팔 둘을 만들되 쳐서 만들어서 그것으로 회중을 소집하며 진을 진행케 할 것이라	Make thee two trumpets of silver; of a whole piece shalt thou make them: that thou mayest use them for the calling of the assembly, and for the journeying of the camps.	“Make two trumpets of hammered silver to be used for calling the congregation and for having the camps set out.
NUM	10	3	두 나팔을 불 때에는 온 회중이 회막문 앞에 모여서 네게로 나아올 것이요	And when they shall blow with them, all the assembly shall assemble themselves to thee at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.	When both are sounded, the whole congregation is to assemble before you at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting.
NUM	10	4	하나만 불 때에는 이스라엘 천부장된 족장들이 모여서 네게로 나아올 것이며	And if they blow but with one trumpet, then the princes, which are heads of the thousands of Israel, shall gather themselves unto thee.	But if only one is sounded, then the leaders, the heads of the clans of Israel, are to gather before you.
NUM	10	5	너희가 그것을 울려 불 때에는 동편 진들이 진행할 것이고	When ye blow an alarm, then the camps that lie on the east parts shall go forward.	When you sound short blasts, the camps that lie on the east side are to set out.
NUM	10	6	제이차로 울려 불 때에는 남편 진들이 진행할 것이라 무릇 진행하려 할 때에는 나팔 소리를 울려 불 것이며	When ye blow an alarm the second time, then the camps that lie on the south side shall take their journey: they shall blow an alarm for their journeys.	When you sound the short blasts a second time, the camps that lie on the south side are to set out. The blasts are to signal them to set out.
NUM	10	7	또 회중을 모을 때에도 나팔을 불 것이나 소리를 울려 불지 말 것이며	But when the congregation is to be gathered together, ye shall blow, but ye shall not sound an alarm.	To convene the assembly, you are to sound long blasts, not short ones.
NUM	10	8	그 나팔은 아론의 자손인 제사장들이 불지니 이는 너희 대대에 영원한 율례니라	And the sons of Aaron, the priests, shall blow with the trumpets; and they shall be to you for an ordinance for ever throughout your generations.	The sons of Aaron, the priests, are to sound the trumpets. This shall be a permanent statute for you and the generations to come.
NUM	10	9	또 너희 땅에서 너희가 자기를 압박하는 대적을 치러 나갈 때에는 나팔을 울려 불지니 그리하면 너희 하나님 여호와가 너희를 기억하고 너희를 너희 대적에게서 구원하리라	And if ye go to war in your land against the enemy that oppresseth you, then ye shall blow an alarm with the trumpets; and ye shall be remembered before the Lord your God, and ye shall be saved from your enemies.	When you enter into battle in your land against an adversary who attacks you, sound short blasts on the trumpets, and you will be remembered before the LORD your God and saved from your enemies.
NUM	10	10	또 너희 희락의 날과 너희 정한 절기와 월삭에는 번제물의 위에와 화목제물의 위에 나팔을 불라 그로 말미암아 너희 하나님이 너희를 기억하리라 나는 너희 하나님 여호와니라	Also in the day of your gladness, and in your solemn days, and in the beginnings of your months, ye shall blow with the trumpets over your burnt offerings, and over the sacrifices of your peace offerings; that they may be to you for a memorial before your God: I am the Lord your God.	And on your joyous occasions, your appointed feasts, and the beginning of each month, you are to blow the trumpets over your burnt offerings and fellowship offerings to serve as a reminder for you before your God. I am the LORD your God.”
NUM	10	11	제이년 이월 이십일에 구름이 증거막에서 떠오르매	And it came to pass on the twentieth day of the second month, in the second year, that the cloud was taken up from off the tabernacle of the testimony.	On the twentieth day of the second month of the second year, the cloud was lifted from above the tabernacle of the Testimony,
NUM	10	12	이스라엘 자손이 시내 광야에서 출발하여 자기 길을 행하더니 바란 광야에 구름이 머무니라	And the children of Israel took their journeys out of the wilderness of Sinai; and the cloud rested in the wilderness of Paran.	and the Israelites set out from the Wilderness of Sinai, traveling from place to place until the cloud settled in the Wilderness of Paran.
NUM	10	13	이와 같이 그들이 여호와께서 모세로 명하신 것을 좇아 진행하기를 시작하였는데	And they first took their journey according to the commandment of the Lord by the hand of Moses.	They set out this first time according to the LORD’s command through Moses.
NUM	10	14	수두로 유다 자손 진 기에 속한 자들이 그 군대대로 진행하였으니 유다 군대는 암미나답의 아들 나손이 영솔하였고	In the first place went the standard of the camp of the children of Judah according to their armies: and over his host was Nahshon the son of Amminadab.	First, the divisions of the camp of Judah set out under their standard, with Nahshon son of Amminadab in command.
NUM	10	15	잇사갈 자손 지파의 군대는 수알의 아들 느다넬이 영솔하였고	And over the host of the tribe of the children of Issachar was Nethaneel the son of Zuar.	Nethanel son of Zuar was over the division of the tribe of Issachar,
NUM	10	16	스불론 자손 지파의 군대는 헬론의 아들 엘리압이 영솔하였더라	And over the host of the tribe of the children of Zebulun was Eliab the son of Helon.	and Eliab son of Helon was over the division of the tribe of Zebulun.
NUM	10	17	이에 성막을 걷으매 게르손 자손과 므라리 자손이 성막을 메고 발행하였으며	And the tabernacle was taken down; and the sons of Gershon and the sons of Merari set forward, bearing the tabernacle.	Then the tabernacle was taken down, and the Gershonites and the Merarites set out, transporting it.
NUM	10	18	다음으로 르우벤 진 기에 속한 자들이 그 군대대로 발행하였으니 르우벤의 군대는 스데울의 아들 엘리술이 영솔하였고	And the standard of the camp of Reuben set forward according to their armies: and over his host was Elizur the son of Shedeur.	Then the divisions of the camp of Reuben set out under their standard, with Elizur son of Shedeur in command.
NUM	10	19	시므온 자손 지파의 군대는 수리삿대의 아들 슬루미엘이 영솔하였고	And over the host of the tribe of the children of Simeon was Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.	Shelumiel son of Zurishaddai was over the division of the tribe of Simeon,
NUM	10	20	갓 자손 지파의 군대는 드우엘의 아들 엘리아삽이 영솔하였더라	And over the host of the tribe of the children of Gad was Eliasaph the son of Deuel.	and Eliasaph son of Deuel was over the division of the tribe of Gad.
NUM	10	21	고핫인은 성물을 메고 진행하였고 그들이 이르기 전에 성막을 세웠으며	And the Kohathites set forward, bearing the sanctuary: and the other did set up the tabernacle against they came.	Then the Kohathites set out, transporting the holy objects; the tabernacle was to be set up before their arrival.
NUM	10	22	다음으로 에브라임 자손 진 기에 속한 자들이 그 군대대로 진행하였으니 에브라임 군대는 암미훗의 아들 엘리사마가 영솔하였고	And the standard of the camp of the children of Ephraim set forward according to their armies: and over his host was Elishama the son of Ammihud.	Next, the divisions of the camp of Ephraim set out under their standard, with Elishama son of Ammihud in command.
NUM	10	23	므낫세 자손 지파의 군대는 브다술의 아들 가말리엘이 영솔하였고	And over the host of the tribe of the children of Manasseh was Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.	Gamaliel son of Pedahzur was over the division of the tribe of Manasseh,
NUM	10	24	베냐민 자손 지파의 군대는 기드오니의 아들 아비단이 영솔하였더라	And over the host of the tribe of the children of Benjamin was Abidan the son of Gideoni.	and Abidan son of Gideoni was over the division of the tribe of Benjamin.
NUM	10	25	다음으로 단 자손 진 기에 속한 자들이 그 군대대로 진행하였으니 이 군대는 모든 진의 후진이었더라 단 군대는 암미삿대의 아들 아히에셀이 영솔하였고	And the standard of the camp of the children of Dan set forward, which was the rereward of all the camps throughout their hosts: and over his host was Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.	Finally, the divisions of the camp of Dan set out under their standard, serving as the rear guard for all units, with Ahiezer son of Ammishaddai in command.
NUM	10	26	아셀 자손 지파의 군대는 오그란의 아들 바기엘이 영솔하였고	And over the host of the tribe of the children of Asher was Pagiel the son of Ocran.	Pagiel son of Ocran was over the division of the tribe of Asher,
NUM	10	27	납달리 자손 지파의 군대는 에난의 아들 아히라가 영솔하였더라	And over the host of the tribe of the children of Naphtali was Ahira the son of Enan.	and Ahira son of Enan was over the division of the tribe of Naphtali.
NUM	10	28	이스라엘 자손이 진행할 때에 이와 같이 그 군대를 따라 나아갔더라	Thus were the journeyings of the children of Israel according to their armies, when they set forward.	This was the order of march for the Israelite divisions as they set out.
NUM	10	29	모세가 그 장인 미디안 사람 르우엘의 아들 호밥에게 이르되 여호와께서 주마 하신 곳으로 우리가 진행하나니 우리와 동행하자 그리하면 선대하리라 여호와께서 이스라엘에게 복을 내리리라 하셨느니라	And Moses said unto Hobab, the son of Raguel the Midianite, Moses’ father in law, We are journeying unto the place of which the Lord said, I will give it you: come thou with us, and we will do thee good: for the Lord hath spoken good concerning Israel.	Then Moses said to Hobab, the son of Moses’ father-in-law Reuel the Midianite, “We are setting out for the place of which the LORD said: ‘I will give it to you.’ Come with us, and we will treat you well, for the LORD has promised good things to Israel.”
NUM	10	30	호밥이 그에게 이르되 나는 가지 아니하고 내 고향 친족에게로 가리라	And he said unto him, I will not go; but I will depart to mine own land, and to my kindred.	“I will not go,” Hobab replied. “Instead, I am going back to my own land and my own people.”
NUM	10	31	모세가 가로되 청컨대 우리를 떠나지 마소서 당신은 우리가 광야에서 어떻게 진 칠 것을 아나니 우리의 눈이 되리이다	And he said, Leave us not, I pray thee; forasmuch as thou knowest how we are to encamp in the wilderness, and thou mayest be to us instead of eyes.	“Please do not leave us,” Moses said, “since you know where we should camp in the wilderness, and you can serve as our eyes.
NUM	10	32	우리와 동행하면 여호와께서 우리에게 복을 내리시는 대로 우리도 당신에게 행하리이다	And it shall be, if thou go with us, yea, it shall be, that what goodness the Lord shall do unto us, the same will we do unto thee.	If you come with us, we will share with you whatever good things the LORD gives us.”
NUM	10	33	그들이 여호와의 산에서 떠나 삼 일 길을 행할 때에 여호와의 언약궤가 그 삼 일 길에 앞서 행하며 그들의 쉴 곳을 찾았고	And they departed from the mount of the Lord three days’ journey: and the ark of the covenant of the Lord went before them in the three days’ journey, to search out a resting place for them.	So they set out on a three-day journey from the mountain of the LORD, with the ark of the covenant of the LORD traveling ahead of them for those three days to seek a resting place for them.
NUM	10	34	그들이 행진할 때에 낮에는 여호와의 구름이 그 위에 덮였었더라	And the cloud of the Lord was upon them by day, when they went out of the camp.	And the cloud of the LORD was over them by day when they set out from the camp.
NUM	10	35	궤가 떠날 때에는 모세가 가로되 여호와여 일어나사 주의 대적들을 흩으시고 주를 미워하는 자로 주의 앞에서 도망하게 하소서 하였고	And it came to pass, when the ark set forward, that Moses said, Rise up, Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered; and let them that hate thee flee before thee.	Whenever the ark set out, Moses would say, “Rise up, O LORD! May Your enemies be scattered; may those who hate You flee before You.”
NUM	10	36	궤가 쉴 때에는 가로되 여호와여 이스라엘 천만 인에게로 돌아오소서 하였더라	And when it rested, he said, Return, O Lord, unto the many thousands of Israel.	And when it came to rest, he would say: “Return, O LORD, to the countless thousands of Israel.”
NUM	11	1	백성이 여호와의 들으시기에 악한 말로 원망하매 여호와께서 들으시고 진노하사 여호와의 불로 그들 중에 붙어서 진 끝을 사르게 하시매	And when the people complained, it displeased the Lord: and the Lord heard it; and his anger was kindled; and the fire of the Lord burnt among them, and consumed them that were in the uttermost parts of the camp.	Soon the people began to complain about their hardship in the hearing of the LORD, and when He heard them, His anger was kindled, and fire from the LORD blazed among them and consumed the outskirts of the camp.
NUM	11	2	백성이 모세에게 부르짖으므로 모세가 여호와께 기도하니 불이 꺼졌더라	And the people cried unto Moses; and when Moses prayed unto the Lord, the fire was quenched.	And the people cried out to Moses, and he prayed to the LORD, and the fire died down.
NUM	11	3	그곳 이름을 다베라라 칭하였으니 이는 여호와의 불이 그들 중에 붙은 연고였더라	And he called the name of the place Taberah: because the fire of the Lord burnt among them.	So that place was called Taberah, because the fire of the LORD had burned among them.
NUM	11	4	이스라엘 중에 섞어 사는 무리가 탐욕을 품으매 이스라엘 자손도 다시 울며 가로되 누가 우리에게 고기를 주어 먹게 할꼬	And the mixt multitude that was among them fell a lusting: and the children of Israel also wept again, and said, Who shall give us flesh to eat?	Meanwhile, the rabble among them had a strong craving for other food, and again the Israelites wept and said, “Who will feed us meat?
NUM	11	5	우리가 애굽에 있을 때에는 값 없이 생선과 외와 수박과 부추와 파와 마늘들을 먹은 것이 생각나거늘	We remember the fish, which we did eat in Egypt freely; the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks, and the onions, and the garlick:	We remember the fish we ate freely in Egypt, along with the cucumbers, melons, leeks, onions, and garlic.
NUM	11	6	이제는 우리 정력이 쇠약하되 이 만나 외에는 보이는 것이 아무 것도 없도다 하니	But now our soul is dried away: there is nothing at all, beside this manna, before our eyes.	But now our appetite is gone; there is nothing to see but this manna!”
NUM	11	7	만나는 깟씨와 같고 모양은 진주와 같은 것이라	And the manna was as coriander seed, and the colour thereof as the colour of bdellium.	Now the manna resembled coriander seed, and its appearance was like that of gum resin.
NUM	11	8	백성이 두루 다니며 그것을 거두어 맷돌에 갈기도 하며 절구에 찧기도 하고 가마에 삶기도 하여 과자를 만들었으니 그 맛이 기름 섞은 과자맛 같았더라	And the people went about, and gathered it, and ground it in mills, or beat it in a mortar, and baked it in pans, and made cakes of it: and the taste of it was as the taste of fresh oil.	The people walked around and gathered it, ground it on a handmill or crushed it in a mortar, then boiled it in a cooking pot or shaped it into cakes. It tasted like pastry baked with fine oil.
NUM	11	9	밤에 이슬이 진에 내릴 때에 만나도 같이 내렸더라	And when the dew fell upon the camp in the night, the manna fell upon it.	When the dew fell on the camp at night, the manna would fall with it.
NUM	11	10	백성의 온 가족들이 각기 장막 문에서 우는 것을 모세가 들으니라 이러므로 여호와의 진노가 심히 크고 모세도 기뻐하지 아니하여	Then Moses heard the people weep throughout their families, every man in the door of his tent: and the anger of the Lord was kindled greatly; Moses also was displeased.	Then Moses heard the people of family after family weeping at the entrances to their tents, and the anger of the LORD was kindled greatly, and Moses was also displeased.
NUM	11	11	여호와께 여짜오되 주께서 어찌하여 종을 괴롭게 하시나이까 어찌하여 나로 주의 목전에 은혜를 입게 아니하시고 이 모든 백성을 내게 맡기사 나로 그 짐을 지게 하시나이까	And Moses said unto the Lord, Wherefore hast thou afflicted thy servant? and wherefore have I not found favour in thy sight, that thou layest the burden of all this people upon me?	So Moses asked the LORD, “Why have You brought this trouble on Your servant? Why have I not found favor in Your sight, that You have laid upon me the burden of all these people?
NUM	11	12	이 모든 백성을 내가 잉태하였나이까 내가 어찌 그들을 생산하였기에 주께서 나더러 양육하는 아비가 젖 먹는 아이를 품듯 그들을 품에 품고 주께서 그들의 열조에게 맹세하신 땅으로 가라 하시나이까	Have I conceived all this people? have I begotten them, that thou shouldest say unto me, Carry them in thy bosom, as a nursing father beareth the sucking child, unto the land which thou swarest unto their fathers?	Did I conceive all these people? Did I give them birth, so that You should tell me, ‘Carry them in your bosom, as a nurse carries an infant,’ to the land that You swore to give their fathers?
NUM	11	13	이 모든 백성에게 줄 고기를 내가 어디서 얻으리이까 그들이 나를 향하여 울며 가로되 우리에게 고기를 주어 먹게 하라 하온즉	Whence should I have flesh to give unto all this people? for they weep unto me, saying, Give us flesh, that we may eat.	Where can I get meat for all these people? For they keep crying out to me, ‘Give us meat to eat!’
NUM	11	14	책임이 심히 중하여 나 혼자는 이 모든 백성을 질 수 없나이다	I am not able to bear all this people alone, because it is too heavy for me.	I cannot carry all these people by myself; it is too burdensome for me.
NUM	11	15	주께서 내게 이같이 행하실진대 구하옵나니 내게 은혜를 베푸사 즉시 나를 죽여 나로 나의 곤고함을 보지 않게 하옵소서	And if thou deal thus with me, kill me, I pray thee, out of hand, if I have found favour in thy sight; and let me not see my wretchedness.	If this is how You are going to treat me, please kill me right now—if I have found favor in Your eyes—and let me not see my own wretchedness.”
NUM	11	16	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 이스라엘 노인 중 백성의 장로와 유사되는 줄을 네가 아는 자 칠십 인을 모아 데리고 회막 내 앞에 이르러 거기서 너와 함께 서게 하라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Gather unto me seventy men of the elders of Israel, whom thou knowest to be the elders of the people, and officers over them; and bring them unto the tabernacle of the congregation, that they may stand there with thee.	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Bring Me seventy of the elders of Israel known to you as leaders and officers of the people. Bring them to the Tent of Meeting and have them stand there with you.
NUM	11	17	내가 강림하여 거기서 너와 말하고 네게 임한 신을 그들에게도 임하게 하리니 그들이 너와 함께 백성의 짐을 담당하고 너 혼자 지지 아니하리라	And I will come down and talk with thee there: and I will take of the spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them; and they shall bear the burden of the people with thee, that thou bear it not thyself alone.	And I will come down and speak with you there, and I will take some of the Spirit that is on you and put that Spirit on them. They will help you bear the burden of the people, so that you do not have to bear it by yourself.
NUM	11	18	또 백성에게 이르기를 너희 몸을 거룩히 하여 내일 고기 먹기를 기다리라 너희가 울며 이르기를 누가 우리에게 고기를 주어 먹게 할꼬 애굽에 있을 때가 우리에게 재미 있었다 하는 말이 여호와께 들렸으므로 여호와께서 너희에게 고기를 주어 먹게 하실 것이라	And say thou unto the people, Sanctify yourselves against to morrow, and ye shall eat flesh: for ye have wept in the ears of the Lord, saying, Who shall give us flesh to eat? for it was well with us in Egypt: therefore the Lord will give you flesh, and ye shall eat.	And say to the people: Consecrate yourselves for tomorrow, and you will eat meat, because you have cried out in the hearing of the LORD, saying: ‘Who will feed us meat? For we were better off in Egypt!’ Therefore the LORD will give you meat, and you will eat.
NUM	11	19	하루나 이틀이나 닷새나 열흘이나 이십 일만 먹을 뿐 아니라	Ye shall not eat one day, nor two days, nor five days, neither ten days, nor twenty days;	You will eat it not for one or two days, nor for five or ten or twenty days,
NUM	11	20	코에서 넘쳐서 싫어하기까지 일 개월 간을 먹게 하시리니 이는 너희가 너희 중에 거하시는 여호와를 멸시하고 그 앞에서 울며 이르기를 우리가 어찌하여 애굽에서 나왔던고 함이라 하라	But even a whole month, until it come out at your nostrils, and it be loathsome unto you: because that ye have despised the Lord which is among you, and have wept before him, saying, Why came we forth out of Egypt?	but for a whole month—until it comes out of your nostrils and makes you nauseous—because you have rejected the LORD, who is among you, and have cried out before Him, saying, ‘Why did we ever leave Egypt?’”
NUM	11	21	모세가 가로되 나와 함께 있는 이 백성의 보행자가 육십만 명이온데 주의 말씀이 일 개월간 고기를 주어 먹게 하겠다 하시오니	And Moses said, The people, among whom I am, are six hundred thousand footmen; and thou hast said, I will give them flesh, that they may eat a whole month.	But Moses replied, “Here I am among 600,000 men on foot, yet You say, ‘I will give them meat, and they will eat for a month.’
NUM	11	22	그들을 위하여 양떼와 소떼를 잡은들 족하오며 바다의 모든 고기를 모은들 족하오리이까	Shall the flocks and the herds be slain for them, to suffice them? or shall all the fish of the sea be gathered together for them, to suffice them?	If all our flocks and herds were slaughtered for them, would they have enough? Or if all the fish in the sea were caught for them, would they have enough?”
NUM	11	23	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 여호와의 손이 짧아졌느냐 네가 이제 내 말이 네게 응하는 여부를 보리라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Is the Lord’s hand waxed short? thou shalt see now whether my word shall come to pass unto thee or not.	The LORD answered Moses, “Is the LORD’s arm too short? Now you will see whether or not My word will come to pass.”
NUM	11	24	모세가 나가서 여호와의 말씀을 백성에게 고하고 백성의 장로 칠십 인을 모아 장막에 둘러 세우매	And Moses went out, and told the people the words of the Lord, and gathered the seventy men of the elders of the people, and set them round about the tabernacle.	So Moses went out and relayed to the people the words of the LORD, and he gathered seventy of the elders of the people and had them stand around the tent.
NUM	11	25	여호와께서 구름 가운데 강림하사 모세에게 말씀하시고 그에게 임한 신을 칠십 장로에게도 임하게 하시니 신이 임하신 때에 그들이 예언을 하다가 다시는 아니하였더라	And the Lord came down in a cloud, and spake unto him, and took of the spirit that was upon him, and gave it unto the seventy elders: and it came to pass, that, when the spirit rested upon them, they prophesied, and did not cease.	Then the LORD came down in the cloud and spoke to him, and He took some of the Spirit that was on Moses and placed that Spirit on the seventy elders. As the Spirit rested on them, they prophesied—but they never did so again.
NUM	11	26	그 녹명된 자 중 엘닷이라 하는 자와 메닷이라 하는 자 두 사람이 진에 머물고 회막에 나아가지 아니하였으나 그들에게도 신이 임하였으므로 진에서 예언한지라	But there remained two of the men in the camp, the name of the one was Eldad, and the name of the other Medad: and the spirit rested upon them; and they were of them that were written, but went not out unto the tabernacle: and they prophesied in the camp.	Two men, however, had remained in the camp—one named Eldad and the other Medad—and the Spirit rested on them. They were among those listed, but they had not gone out to the tent, and they prophesied in the camp.
NUM	11	27	한 소년이 달려와서 모세에게 고하여 가로되 엘닷과 메닷이 진 중에서 예언하더이다 하매	And there ran a young man, and told Moses, and said, Eldad and Medad do prophesy in the camp.	A young man ran and reported to Moses, “Eldad and Medad are prophesying in the camp.”
NUM	11	28	택한 자 중 한 사람 곧 모세를 섬기는 눈의 아들 여호수아가 말하여 가로되 내 주 모세여 금하소서	And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of Moses, one of his young men, answered and said, My lord Moses, forbid them.	Joshua son of Nun, the attendant to Moses since youth, spoke up and said, “Moses, my lord, stop them!”
NUM	11	29	모세가 그에게 이르되 네가 나를 위하여 시기하느냐 여호와께서 그 신을 그 모든 백성에게 주사 다 선지자 되게 하시기를 원하노라	And Moses said unto him, Enviest thou for my sake? would God that all the Lord’s people were prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them!	But Moses replied, “Are you jealous on my account? I wish that all the LORD’s people were prophets and that the LORD would place His Spirit on them!”
NUM	11	30	모세와 이스라엘 장로들이 진중으로 돌아왔더라	And Moses gat him into the camp, he and the elders of Israel.	Then Moses returned to the camp, along with the elders of Israel.
NUM	11	31	바람이 여호와에게로서 나와 바다에서부터 메추라기를 몰아 진곁 이편 저편 곧 진 사방으로 각기 하룻길 되는 지면 위 두 규빗쯤에 내리게 한지라	And there went forth a wind from the Lord, and brought quails from the sea, and let them fall by the camp, as it were a day’s journey on this side, and as it were a day’s journey on the other side, round about the camp, and as it were two cubits high upon the face of the earth.	Now a wind sent by the LORD came up, drove in quail from the sea, and brought them near the camp, about two cubits above the surface of the ground, for a day’s journey in every direction around the camp.
NUM	11	32	백성이 일어나 종일 종야와 그 이튿날 종일토록 메추라기를 모으니 적게 모은 자도 십 호멜이라 그들이 자기를 위하여 진 사면에 펴 두었더라	And the people stood up all that day, and all that night, and all the next day, and they gathered the quails: he that gathered least gathered ten homers: and they spread them all abroad for themselves round about the camp.	All that day and night, and all the next day, the people stayed up gathering the quail. No one gathered less than ten homers, and they spread them out all around the camp.
NUM	11	33	고기가 아직 잇사이에 있어 씹히기 전에 여호와께서 백성에게 대하여 진노하사 심히 큰 재앙으로 치셨으므로	And while the flesh was yet between their teeth, ere it was chewed, the wrath of the Lord was kindled against the people, and the Lord smote the people with a very great plague.	But while the meat was still between their teeth, before it was chewed, the anger of the LORD burned against the people, and the LORD struck them with a severe plague.
NUM	11	34	그곳 이름을 기브롯 핫다아와라 칭하였으니 탐욕을 낸 백성을 거기 장사함이었더라	And he called the name of that place Kibroth–hattaavah: because there they buried the people that lusted.	So they called that place Kibroth-hattaavah, because there they buried the people who had craved other food.
NUM	11	35	백성이 기브롯 핫다아와에서 진행하여 하세롯에 이르러 거기 거하니라	And the people journeyed from Kibroth–hattaavah unto Hazeroth; and abode at Hazeroth.	From Kibroth-hattaavah the people moved on to Hazeroth, where they remained for some time.
NUM	12	1	모세가 구스 여자를 취하였더니 그 구스 여자를 취하였으므로 미리암과 아론이 모세를 비방하니라	And Miriam and Aaron spake against Moses because of the Ethiopian woman whom he had married: for he had married an Ethiopian woman.	Then Miriam and Aaron criticized Moses because of the Cushite woman he had married, for he had taken a Cushite wife.
NUM	12	2	그들이 이르되 여호와께서 모세와만 말씀하셨느냐 우리와도 말씀하지 아니하셨느냐 하매 여호와께서 이 말을 들으셨더라	And they said, Hath the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses? hath he not spoken also by us? And the Lord heard it.	“Does the LORD speak only through Moses?” they said. “Does He not also speak through us?” And the LORD heard this.
NUM	12	3	이 사람 모세는 온유함이 지면의 모든 사람보다 승하더라	(Now the man Moses was very meek, above all the men which were upon the face of the earth.)	Now Moses was a very humble man, more so than any man on the face of the earth.
NUM	12	4	여호와께서 갑자기 모세와 아론과 미리암에게 이르시되 너희 삼인은 회막으로 나아오라 하시니 그 삼인이 나아가매	And the Lord spake suddenly unto Moses, and unto Aaron, and unto Miriam, Come out ye three unto the tabernacle of the congregation. And they three came out.	And suddenly the LORD said to Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, “You three, come out to the Tent of Meeting.” So the three went out,
NUM	12	5	여호와께서 구름 기둥 가운데로서 강림하사 장막 문에 서시고 아론과 미리암을 부르시는지라 그 두 사람이 나아가매	And the Lord came down in the pillar of the cloud, and stood in the door of the tabernacle, and called Aaron and Miriam: and they both came forth.	and the LORD came down in a pillar of cloud, stood at the entrance to the Tent, and summoned Aaron and Miriam. When both of them had stepped forward,
NUM	12	6	이르시되 내 말을 들으라 너희 중에 선지자가 있으면 나 여호와가 이상으로 나를 그에게 알리기도 하고 꿈으로 그와 말하기도 하거니와	And he said, Hear now my words: If there be a prophet among you, I the Lord will make myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream.	He said, “Hear now My words: If there is a prophet among you, I, the LORD, will reveal Myself to him in a vision; I will speak to him in a dream.
NUM	12	7	내 종 모세와는 그렇지 아니하니 그는 나의 온 집에 충성됨이라	My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all mine house.	But this is not so with My servant Moses; he is faithful in all My house.
NUM	12	8	그와는 내가 대면하여 명백히 말하고 은밀한 말로 아니하며 그는 또 여호와의 형상을 보겠거늘 너희가 어찌하여 내 종 모세 비방하기를 두려워 아니하느냐	With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches; and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold: wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?	I speak with him face to face, clearly and not in riddles; he sees the form of the LORD. Why then were you unafraid to speak against My servant Moses?”
NUM	12	9	여호와께서 그들을 향하여 진노하시고 떠나시매	And the anger of the Lord was kindled against them; and he departed.	So the anger of the LORD burned against them, and He departed.
NUM	12	10	구름이 장막 위에서 떠나갔고 미리암은 문둥병이 들려 눈과 같더라 아론이 미리암을 본즉 문둥병이 들었는지라	And the cloud departed from off the tabernacle; and, behold, Miriam became leprous, white as snow: and Aaron looked upon Miriam, and, behold, she was leprous.	As the cloud lifted from above the Tent, suddenly Miriam became leprous, white as snow. Aaron turned toward her, saw that she was leprous,
NUM	12	11	아론이 이에 모세에게 이르되 슬프다 내 주여 우리가 우매한 일을 하여 죄를 얻었으나 청컨대 그 허물을 우리에게 돌리지 마소서	And Aaron said unto Moses, Alas, my lord, I beseech thee, lay not the sin upon us, wherein we have done foolishly, and wherein we have sinned.	and said to Moses, “My lord, please do not hold against us this sin we have so foolishly committed.
NUM	12	12	그로 살이 반이나 썩고 죽어서 모태에서 나온 자 같이 되게 마옵소서	Let her not be as one dead, of whom the flesh is half consumed when he cometh out of his mother’s womb.	Please do not let her be like a stillborn infant whose flesh is half consumed when he comes out of his mother’s womb.”
NUM	12	13	모세가 여호와께 부르짖어 가로되 하나님이여 원컨대 그를 고쳐 주옵소서	And Moses cried unto the Lord, saying, Heal her now, O God, I beseech thee.	So Moses cried out to the LORD, “O God, please heal her!”
NUM	12	14	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 그의 아비가 그의 얼굴에 침을 뱉았을지라도 그가 칠 일간 부끄러워 하지 않겠느냐 그런즉 그를 진 밖에 칠 일을 가두고 그 후에 들어오게 할지니라 하시니	And the Lord said unto Moses, If her father had but spit in her face, should she not be ashamed seven days? let her be shut out from the camp seven days, and after that let her be received in again.	But the LORD answered Moses, “If her father had but spit in her face, would she not have been in disgrace for seven days? Let her be confined outside the camp for seven days; after that she may be brought back in.”
NUM	12	15	이에 미리암이 진 밖에 칠 일 동안 갇혔고 백성은 그를 다시 들어 오게 하기까지 진행치 아니하다가	And Miriam was shut out from the camp seven days: and the people journeyed not till Miriam was brought in again.	So Miriam was confined outside the camp for seven days, and the people did not move on until she was brought in again.
NUM	12	16	그 후에 백성이 하세롯에서 진행하여 바란 광야에 진을 치니라	And afterward the people removed from Hazeroth, and pitched in the wilderness of Paran.	After that, the people set out from Hazeroth and camped in the Wilderness of Paran.
NUM	13	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	And the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	13	2	사람을 보내어 내가 이스라엘 자손에게 주는 가나안 땅을 탐지하게 하되 그 종족의 각 지파 중에서 족장 된 자 한 사람씩 보내라	Send thou men, that they may search the land of Canaan, which I give unto the children of Israel: of every tribe of their fathers shall ye send a man, every one a ruler among them.	“Send out for yourself men to spy out the land of Canaan, which I am giving to the Israelites. From each of their fathers’ tribes send one man who is a leader among them.”
NUM	13	3	모세가 여호와의 명을 좇아 바란 광야에서 그들을 보내었으니 그들은 다 이스라엘 자손의 두령된 사람이라	And Moses by the commandment of the Lord sent them from the wilderness of Paran: all those men were heads of the children of Israel.	So at the consent of the LORD, Moses sent them out from the Wilderness of Paran. All the men were leaders of the Israelites,
NUM	13	4	그들의 이름은 이러하니라 르우벤 지파에서는 삭굴의 아들 삼무아요	And these were their names: of the tribe of Reuben, Shammua the son of Zaccur.	and these were their names: From the tribe of Reuben, Shammua son of Zaccur;
NUM	13	5	시므온 지파에서는 호리의 아들 사밧이요	Of the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat the son of Hori.	from the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat son of Hori;
NUM	13	6	유다 지파에서는 여분네의 아들 갈렙이요	Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh.	from the tribe of Judah, Caleb son of Jephunneh;
NUM	13	7	잇사갈 지파에서는 요셉의 아들 이갈이요	Of the tribe of Issachar, Igal the son of Joseph.	from the tribe of Issachar, Igal son of Joseph;
NUM	13	8	에브라임 지파에서는 눈의 아들 호세아요	Of the tribe of Ephraim, Oshea the son of Nun.	from the tribe of Ephraim, Hoshea son of Nun;
NUM	13	9	베냐민 지파에서는 라부의 아들 발디요	Of the tribe of Benjamin, Palti the son of Raphu.	from the tribe of Benjamin, Palti son of Raphu;
NUM	13	10	스불론 지파에서는 소디의 아들 갓디엘이요	Of the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel the son of Sodi.	from the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel son of Sodi;
NUM	13	11	요셉 지파 곧 므낫세 지파에서는 수시의 아들 갓디요	Of the tribe of Joseph, namely, of the tribe of Manasseh, Gaddi the son of Susi.	from the tribe of Manasseh (a tribe of Joseph), Gaddi son of Susi;
NUM	13	12	단 지파에서는 그말리의 아들 암미엘이요	Of the tribe of Dan, Ammiel the son of Gemalli.	from the tribe of Dan, Ammiel son of Gemalli;
NUM	13	13	아셀 지파에서는 미가엘의 아들 스둘이요	Of the tribe of Asher, Sethur the son of Michael.	from the tribe of Asher, Sethur son of Michael;
NUM	13	14	납달리 지파에서는 웝시의 아들 나비요	Of the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi the son of Vophsi.	from the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi son of Vophsi;
NUM	13	15	갓 지파에서는 마기의 아들 그우엘이니	Of the tribe of Gad, Geuel the son of Machi.	and from the tribe of Gad, Geuel son of Machi.
NUM	13	16	이는 모세가 땅을 탐지하러 보낸 자들의 이름이라 모세가 눈의 아들 호세아를 여호수아라 칭하였더라	These are the names of the men which Moses sent to spy out the land. And Moses called Oshea the son of Nun Jehoshua.	These were the names of the men Moses sent to spy out the land; and Moses gave to Hoshea son of Nun the name Joshua.
NUM	13	17	모세가 가나안 땅을 탐지하러 그들을 보내며 이르되 너희는 남방길로 행하여 산지로 올라가서	And Moses sent them to spy out the land of Canaan, and said unto them, Get you up this way southward, and go up into the mountain:	When Moses sent them to spy out the land of Canaan, he told them, “Go up through the Negev and into the hill country.
NUM	13	18	그 땅의 어떠함을 탐지하라 곧 그 땅 거민의 강약과 다소와	And see the land, what it is; and the people that dwelleth therein, whether they be strong or weak, few or many;	See what the land is like and whether its people are strong or weak, few or many.
NUM	13	19	그들의 거하는 땅의 호 불호와 거하는 성읍이 진영인지 산성인지와	And what the land is that they dwell in, whether it be good or bad; and what cities they be that they dwell in, whether in tents, or in strong holds;	Is the land where they live good or bad? Are the cities where they dwell open camps or fortifications?
NUM	13	20	토지의 후박과 수목의 유무니라 담대하라 또 그 땅 실과를 가져오라 하니 그 때는 포도가 처음 익을 즈음이었더라	And what the land is, whether it be fat or lean, whether there be wood therein, or not. And be ye of good courage, and bring of the fruit of the land. Now the time was the time of the firstripe grapes.	Is the soil fertile or unproductive? Are there trees in it or not? Be courageous, and bring back some of the fruit of the land.” (It was the season for the first ripe grapes.)
NUM	13	21	이에 그들이 올라 가서 땅을 탐지하되 신 광야에서부터 하맛 어귀 르홉에 이르렀고	So they went up, and searched the land from the wilderness of Zin unto Rehob, as men come to Hamath.	So they went up and spied out the land from the Wilderness of Zin as far as Rehob, toward Lebo-hamath.
NUM	13	22	또 남방으로 올라가서 헤브론에 이르렀으니 헤브론은 애굽 소안보다 칠 년 전에 세운 곳이라 그 곳에 아낙 자손 아히만과 세새와 달매가 있었더라	And they ascended by the south, and came unto Hebron; where Ahiman, Sheshai, and Talmai, the children of Anak, were. (Now Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.)	They went up through the Negev and came to Hebron, where Ahiman, Sheshai, and Talmai, the descendants of Anak, dwelled. It had been built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.
NUM	13	23	또 에스골 골짜기에 이르러 거기서 포도 한 송이 달린 가지를 베어 둘이 막대기에 꿰어 메고 또 석류와 무화과를 취하니라	And they came unto the brook of Eshcol, and cut down from thence a branch with one cluster of grapes, and they bare it between two upon a staff; and they brought of the pomegranates, and of the figs.	When they came to the Valley of Eshcol, they cut down a branch with a single cluster of grapes, which they carried on a pole between two men. They also took some pomegranates and figs.
NUM	13	24	이스라엘 자손이 거기서 포도송이를 벤 고로 그 곳을 에스골 골짜기라 칭하였더라	The place was called the brook Eshcol, because of the cluster of grapes which the children of Israel cut down from thence.	Because of the cluster of grapes the Israelites cut there, that place was called the Valley of Eshcol.
NUM	13	25	사십 일 동안에 땅을 탐지하기를 마치고 돌아와	And they returned from searching of the land after forty days.	After forty days the men returned from spying out the land,
NUM	13	26	바란 광야 가데스에 이르러 모세와 아론과 이스라엘 자손의 온 회중에게 나아와 그들에게 회보하고 그 땅 실과를 보이고	And they went and came to Moses, and to Aaron, and to all the congregation of the children of Israel, unto the wilderness of Paran, to Kadesh; and brought back word unto them, and unto all the congregation, and shewed them the fruit of the land.	and they went back to Moses, Aaron, and the whole congregation of Israel in the Wilderness of Paran at Kadesh. They brought back a report for the whole congregation and showed them the fruit of the land.
NUM	13	27	모세에게 보고하여 가로되 당신이 우리를 보낸 땅에 간즉 과연 젓과 꿀이 그 땅에 흐르고 이것은 그 땅의 실과니이다	And they told him, and said, We came unto the land whither thou sentest us, and surely it floweth with milk and honey; and this is the fruit of it.	And they gave this account to Moses: “We went into the land to which you sent us, and indeed, it is flowing with milk and honey. Here is some of its fruit!
NUM	13	28	그러나 그 땅 거민은 강하고 성읍은 견고하고 심히 클 뿐 아니라 거기서 아낙 자손을 보았으며	Nevertheless the people be strong that dwell in the land, and the cities are walled, and very great: and moreover we saw the children of Anak there.	Nevertheless, the people living in the land are strong, and the cities are large and fortified. We even saw the descendants of Anak there.
NUM	13	29	아말렉인은 남방 땅에 거하고 헷인과 여부스인과 아모리인은 산지에 거하고 가나안인은 해변과 요단 가에 거하더이다	The Amalekites dwell in the land of the south: and the Hittites, and the Jebusites, and the Amorites, dwell in the mountains: and the Canaanites dwell by the sea, and by the coast of Jordan.	The Amalekites live in the land of the Negev; the Hittites, Jebusites, and Amorites live in the hill country; and the Canaanites live by the sea and along the Jordan.”
NUM	13	30	갈렙이 모세 앞에서 백성을 안돈시켜 가로되 우리가 곧 올라가서 그 땅을 취하자 능히 이기리라 하나	And Caleb stilled the people before Moses, and said, Let us go up at once, and possess it; for we are well able to overcome it.	Then Caleb quieted the people before Moses and said, “We must go up and take possession of the land, for we can certainly conquer it!”
NUM	13	31	그와 함께 올라갔던 사람들은 가로되 우리는 능히 올라가서 그 백성을 치지 못하리라 그들은 우리보다 강하니라 하고	But the men that went up with him said, We be not able to go up against the people; for they are stronger than we.	But the men who had gone up with him replied, “We cannot go up against the people, for they are stronger than we are!”
NUM	13	32	이스라엘 자손 앞에서 그 탐지한 땅을 악평하여 가로되 우리가 두루 다니며 탐지한 땅은 그 거민을 삼키는 땅이요 거기서 본 모든 백성은 신장이 장대한 자들이며	And they brought up an evil report of the land which they had searched unto the children of Israel, saying, The land, through which we have gone to search it, is a land that eateth up the inhabitants thereof; and all the people that we saw in it are men of a great stature.	So they gave the Israelites a bad report about the land that they had spied out: “The land we explored devours its inhabitants, and all the people we saw there are great in stature.
NUM	13	33	거기서 또 네피림 후손 아낙 자손 대장부들을 보았나니 우리는 스스로 보기에도 메뚜기 같으니 그들의 보기에도 그와 같았을 것이니라	And there we saw the giants, the sons of Anak, which come of the giants: and we were in our own sight as grasshoppers, and so we were in their sight.	We even saw the Nephilim there—the descendants of Anak that come from the Nephilim! We seemed like grasshoppers in our own sight, and we must have seemed the same to them!”
NUM	14	1	온 회중이 소리를 높여 부르짖으며 밤새도록 백성이 곡하였더라	And all the congregation lifted up their voice, and cried; and the people wept that night.	Then the whole congregation lifted up their voices and cried out, and that night the people wept.
NUM	14	2	이스라엘 자손이 다 모세와 아론을 원망하며 온 회중이 그들에게 이르되 우리가 애굽 땅에서 죽었거나 이 광야에서 죽었더면 좋았을 것을	And all the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron: and the whole congregation said unto them, Would God that we had died in the land of Egypt! or would God we had died in this wilderness!	All the Israelites grumbled against Moses and Aaron, and the whole congregation said to them, “If only we had died in the land of Egypt, or if only we had died in this wilderness!
NUM	14	3	어찌하여 여호와가 우리를 그 땅으로 인도하여 칼에 망하게 하려 하는고 우리 처자가 사로잡히리니 애굽으로 돌아가는 것이 낫지 아니하랴	And wherefore hath the Lord brought us unto this land, to fall by the sword, that our wives and our children should be a prey? were it not better for us to return into Egypt?	Why is the LORD bringing us into this land to fall by the sword? Our wives and children will become plunder. Would it not be better for us to go back to Egypt?”
NUM	14	4	이에 서로 말하되 우리가 한 장관을 세우고 애굽으로 돌아가자 하매	And they said one to another, Let us make a captain, and let us return into Egypt.	So they said to one another, “Let us appoint a leader and return to Egypt.”
NUM	14	5	모세와 아론이 이스라엘 자손의 온 회중 앞에서 엎드린지라	Then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before all the assembly of the congregation of the children of Israel.	Then Moses and Aaron fell facedown before the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel.
NUM	14	6	그 땅을 탐지한 자 중 눈의 아들 여호수아와 여분네의 아들 갈렙이 그 옷을 찢고	And Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, which were of them that searched the land, rent their clothes:	Joshua son of Nun and Caleb son of Jephunneh, who were among those who had spied out the land, tore their clothes
NUM	14	7	이스라엘 자손의 온 회중에 일러 가로되 우리가 두루 다니며 탐지한 땅은 심히 아름다운 땅이라	And they spake unto all the company of the children of Israel, saying, The land, which we passed through to search it, is an exceeding good land.	and said to the whole congregation of Israel, “The land we passed through and explored is an exceedingly good land.
NUM	14	8	여호와께서 우리를 기뻐하시면 우리를 그 땅으로 인도하여 들이시고 그 땅을 우리에게 주시리라 이는 과연 젖과 꿀이 흐르는 땅이니라	If the Lord delight in us, then he will bring us into this land, and give it us; a land which floweth with milk and honey.	If the LORD delights in us, He will bring us into this land, a land flowing with milk and honey, and He will give it to us.
NUM	14	9	오직 여호와를 거역하지 말라 또 그 땅 백성을 두려워하지 말라 그들은 우리 밥이라 그들의 보호자는 그들에게서 떠났고 여호와는 우리와 함께 하시느니라 그들을 두려워 말라 하나	Only rebel not ye against the Lord, neither fear ye the people of the land; for they are bread for us: their defence is departed from them, and the Lord is with us: fear them not.	Only do not rebel against the LORD, and do not be afraid of the people of the land, for they will be like bread for us. Their protection has been removed, and the LORD is with us. Do not be afraid of them!”
NUM	14	10	온 회중이 그들을 돌로 치려하는 동시에 여호와의 영광이 회막에서 이스라엘 모든 자손에게 나타나시니라	But all the congregation bade stone them with stones. And the glory of the Lord appeared in the tabernacle of the congregation before all the children of Israel.	But the whole congregation threatened to stone Joshua and Caleb. Then the glory of the LORD appeared to all the Israelites at the Tent of Meeting.
NUM	14	11	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 이 백성이 어느 때까지 나를 멸시하겠느냐 내가 그들 중에 모든 이적을 행한 것도 생각하지 아니하고 어느 때까지 나를 믿지 않겠느냐	And the Lord said unto Moses, How long will this people provoke me? and how long will it be ere they believe me, for all the signs which I have shewed among them?	And the LORD said to Moses, “How long will this people treat Me with contempt? How long will they refuse to believe in Me, despite all the signs I have performed among them?
NUM	14	12	내가 전염병으로 그들을 쳐서 멸하고 너로 그들보다 크고 강한 나라를 이루게 하리라	I will smite them with the pestilence, and disinherit them, and will make of thee a greater nation and mightier than they.	I will strike them with a plague and destroy them—and I will make you into a nation greater and mightier than they are.”
NUM	14	13	모세가 여호와께 여짜오되 애굽인 중에서 주의 능력으로 이 백성을 인도하여 내셨거늘 그리하시면 그들이 듣고	And Moses said unto the Lord, Then the Egyptians shall hear it, (for thou broughtest up this people in thy might from among them;)	But Moses said to the LORD, “The Egyptians will hear of it, for by Your strength You brought this people from among them.
NUM	14	14	이 땅 거민에게 고하리이다 주 여호와께서 이 백성 중에 계심을 그들도 들었으니 곧 주 여호와께서 대면하여 보이시며 주의 구름이 그들 위에 섰으며 주께서 낮에는 구름기둥 가운데서 밤에는 불기둥 가운데서 그들 앞에서 행하시는 것이니이다	And they will tell it to the inhabitants of this land: for they have heard that thou Lord art among this people, that thou Lord art seen face to face, and that thy cloud standeth over them, and that thou goest before them, by day time in a pillar of a cloud, and in a pillar of fire by night.	And they will tell it to the inhabitants of this land. They have already heard that You, O LORD, are in the midst of this people, that You, O LORD, have been seen face to face, that Your cloud stands over them, and that You go before them in a pillar of cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night.
NUM	14	15	이제 주께서 이 백성을 한 사람 같이 죽이시면 주의 명성을 들은 열국이 말하여 이르기를	Now if thou shalt kill all this people as one man, then the nations which have heard the fame of thee will speak, saying,	If You kill this people as one man, the nations who have heard of Your fame will say,
NUM	14	16	여호와가 이 백성에게 주기로 맹세한 땅에 인도할 능이 없는 고로 광야에서 죽였다 하리이다	Because the Lord was not able to bring this people into the land which he sware unto them, therefore he hath slain them in the wilderness.	‘Because the LORD was unable to bring this people into the land He swore to give them, He has slaughtered them in the wilderness.’
NUM	14	17	이제 구하옵나니 이미 말씀하신 대로 주의 큰 권능을 나타내옵소서 이르시기를	And now, I beseech thee, let the power of my Lord be great, according as thou hast spoken, saying,	So now I pray, may the power of my Lord be magnified, just as You have declared:
NUM	14	18	여호와는 노하기를 더디하고 인자가 많아 죄악과 과실을 사하나 형벌 받을 자는 결단코 사하지 아니하고 아비의 죄악을 자식에게 갚아 삼사대까지 이르게 하리라 하셨나이다	The Lord is longsuffering, and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity and transgression, and by no means clearing the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation.	‘The LORD is slow to anger and abounding in loving devotion, forgiving iniquity and transgression. Yet He will by no means leave the guilty unpunished; He will visit the iniquity of the fathers upon their children to the third and fourth generation.’
NUM	14	19	구하옵나니 주의 인자의 광대하심을 따라 이 백성의 죄악을 사하시되 애굽에서부터 지금까지 이 백성을 사하신 것 같이 사하옵소서	Pardon, I beseech thee, the iniquity of this people according unto the greatness of thy mercy, and as thou hast forgiven this people, from Egypt even until now.	Pardon, I pray, the iniquity of this people, in keeping with the greatness of Your loving devotion, just as You have forgiven them ever since they left Egypt.”
NUM	14	20	여호와께서 가라사대 내가 네 말대로 사하노라	And the Lord said, I have pardoned according to thy word:	“I have pardoned them as you requested,” the LORD replied.
NUM	14	21	그러나 진실로 나의 사는 것과 여호와의 영광이 온 세계에 충만할 것으로 맹세하노니	But as truly as I live, all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord.	“Yet as surely as I live and as surely as the whole earth is filled with the glory of the LORD,
NUM	14	22	나의 영광과 애굽과 광야에서 행한 나의 이적을 보고도 이같이 열 번이나 나를 시험하고 내 목소리를 청종치 아니한 그 사람들은	Because all those men which have seen my glory, and my miracles, which I did in Egypt and in the wilderness, and have tempted me now these ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice;	not one of the men who have seen My glory and the signs I performed in Egypt and in the wilderness—yet have tested Me and disobeyed Me these ten times—
NUM	14	23	내가 그 조상들에게 맹세한 땅을 결단코 보지 못할 것이요 또 나를 멸시하는 사람은 하나라도 그것을 보지 못하리라	Surely they shall not see the land which I sware unto their fathers, neither shall any of them that provoked me see it:	not one will ever see the land that I swore to give their fathers. None of those who have treated Me with contempt will see it.
NUM	14	24	오직 내 종 갈렙은 그 마음이 그들과 달라서 나를 온전히 좇았은즉 그의 갔던 땅으로 내가 그를 인도하여 들이리니 그 자손이 그 땅을 차지하리라	But my servant Caleb, because he had another spirit with him, and hath followed me fully, him will I bring into the land whereinto he went; and his seed shall possess it.	But because My servant Caleb has a different spirit and has followed Me wholeheartedly, I will bring him into the land he has entered, and his descendants will inherit it.
NUM	14	25	아말렉인과 가나안인이 골짜기에 거하나니 너희는 내일 돌이켜 홍해 길로 하여 광야로 들어갈지니라	(Now the Amalekites and the Canaanites dwelt in the valley.) To morrow turn you, and get you into the wilderness by the way of the Red sea.	Now since the Amalekites and Canaanites are living in the valleys, turn back tomorrow and head for the wilderness along the route to the Red Sea.”
NUM	14	26	여호와께서 모세와 아론에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses and Aaron,
NUM	14	27	나를 원망하는 이 악한 회중을 내가 어느 때까지 참으랴 이스라엘 자손이 나를 향하여 원망하는바 그 원망하는 말을 내가 들었노라	How long shall I bear with this evil congregation, which murmur against me? I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel, which they murmur against me.	“How long will this wicked congregation grumble against Me? I have heard the complaints that the Israelites are making against Me.
NUM	14	28	그들에게 이르기를 여호와의 말씀에 나의 삶을 가리켜 맹세하노라 너희 말이 내 귀에 들린 대로 내가 너희에게 행하리니	Say unto them, As truly as I live, saith the Lord, as ye have spoken in mine ears, so will I do to you:	So tell them: As surely as I live, declares the LORD, I will do to you exactly as I heard you say.
NUM	14	29	너희 시체가 이 광야에 엎드러질 것이라 너희 이십 세 이상으로 게수함을 받은 자 곧 나를 원망한 자의 전부가	Your carcases shall fall in this wilderness; and all that were numbered of you, according to your whole number, from twenty years old and upward, which have murmured against me,	Your bodies will fall in this wilderness—all who were numbered in the census, everyone twenty years of age or older—because you have grumbled against Me.
NUM	14	30	여분네의 아들 갈렙과 눈의 아들 여호수아 외에는 내가 맹세하여 너희로 거하게 하리라 한 땅에 결단코 들어가지 못하리라	Doubtless ye shall not come into the land, concerning which I sware to make you dwell therein, save Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun.	Surely none of you will enter the land in which I swore to settle you, except Caleb son of Jephunneh and Joshua son of Nun.
NUM	14	31	너희가 사로잡히겠다고 말하던 너희의 유아들은 내가 인도하여 들이리니 그들은 너희가 싫어하던 땅을 보려니와	But your little ones, which ye said should be a prey, them will I bring in, and they shall know the land which ye have despised.	But I will bring your children, whom you said would become plunder, into the land you have rejected—and they will enjoy it.
NUM	14	32	너희 시체는 이 광야에 엎드러질 것이요	But as for you, your carcases, they shall fall in this wilderness.	As for you, however, your bodies will fall in this wilderness.
NUM	14	33	너희 자녀들은 너희의 패역한 죄를 지고 너희의 시체가 광야에서 소멸되기까지 사십 년을 광야에서 유리하는 자가 되리라	And your children shall wander in the wilderness forty years, and bear your whoredoms, until your carcases be wasted in the wilderness.	Your children will be shepherds in the wilderness for forty years, and they will suffer for your unfaithfulness until the last of your bodies lies in the wilderness.
NUM	14	34	너희가 그 땅을 탐지한 날 수 사십 일의 하루를 일년으로 환산하여 그 사십 년간 너희가 너희의 죄악을 질지니 너희가 나의 싫어 버림을 알리라 하셨다 하라	After the number of the days in which ye searched the land, even forty days, each day for a year, shall ye bear your iniquities, even forty years, and ye shall know my breach of promise.	In keeping with the forty days you spied out the land, you shall bear your guilt forty years—a year for each day—and you will experience My alienation.
NUM	14	35	나 여호와가 말하였거니와 모여 나를 거역하는 이 악한 온 회중에게 내가 단정코 이같이 행하리니 그들이 이 광야에서 소멸되어 거기서 죽으리라	I the Lord have said, I will surely do it unto all this evil congregation, that are gathered together against me: in this wilderness they shall be consumed, and there they shall die.	I, the LORD, have spoken, and I will surely do these things to this entire wicked congregation, which has conspired against Me. They will meet their end in the wilderness, and there they will die.”
NUM	14	36	모세의 보냄을 받고 땅을 탐지하고 돌아와서 그 땅을 악평하여 온 회중으로 모세를 원망케 한 사람	And the men, which Moses sent to search the land, who returned, and made all the congregation to murmur against him, by bringing up a slander upon the land,	So the men Moses had sent to spy out the land, who had returned and made the whole congregation grumble against him by bringing out a bad report about the land—
NUM	14	37	곧 그 땅에 대하여 악평한 자들은 여호와 앞에서 재앙으로 죽었고	Even those men that did bring up the evil report upon the land, died by the plague before the Lord.	those men who had brought out the bad report about the land—were struck down by a plague before the LORD.
NUM	14	38	그 땅을 탐지하러 갔던 사람들 중에 오직 눈의 아들 여호수아와 여분네의 아들 갈렙은 생존하니라	But Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, which were of the men that went to search the land, lived still.	Of those men who had gone to spy out the land, only Joshua son of Nun and Caleb son of Jephunneh remained alive.
NUM	14	39	모세가 이 말로 이스라엘 모든 자손에게 고하매 백성이 크게 슬퍼하여	And Moses told these sayings unto all the children of Israel: and the people mourned greatly.	And when Moses relayed these words to all the Israelites, the people mourned bitterly.
NUM	14	40	아침에 일찍이 일어나 산꼭대기로 올라가며 가로되 보소서 우리가 여기 있나이다 우리가 여호와의 허락하신 곳으로 올라 가리니 우리가 범죄하였음이니이다	And they rose up early in the morning, and gat them up into the top of the mountain, saying, Lo, we be here, and will go up unto the place which the Lord hath promised: for we have sinned.	Early the next morning they got up and went up toward the ridge of the hill country. “We have indeed sinned,” they said, “but we will go to the place the LORD has promised.”
NUM	14	41	모세가 가로되 너희가 어찌하여 이제 여호와의 명령을 범하느냐 이 일이 형통치 못하리라	And Moses said, Wherefore now do ye transgress the commandment of the Lord? but it shall not prosper.	But Moses said, “Why are you transgressing the commandment of the LORD? This will not succeed!
NUM	14	42	여호와께서 너희 중에 계시지 아니하니 올라가지 말라 너희 대적 앞에서 패할까 하노라	Go not up, for the Lord is not among you; that ye be not smitten before your enemies.	Do not go up, lest you be struck down by your enemies, because the LORD is not among you.
NUM	14	43	아말렉인과 가나안인이 너희 앞에 있으니 너희가 그 칼에 망하리라 너희가 여호와를 배반하였으니 여호와께서 너희와 함께 하지 아니하시리라 하나	For the Amalekites and the Canaanites are there before you, and ye shall fall by the sword: because ye are turned away from the Lord, therefore the Lord will not be with you.	For there the Amalekites and Canaanites will face you, and you will fall by the sword. Because you have turned away from the LORD, He will not be with you.”
NUM	14	44	그들이 그래도 산꼭대기로 올라갔고 여호와의 언약궤와 모세는 진을 떠나지 아니하였더라	But they presumed to go up unto the hill top: nevertheless the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and Moses, departed not out of the camp.	But they dared to go up to the ridge of the hill country, though neither Moses nor the ark of the covenant of the LORD moved from the camp.
NUM	14	45	아말렉인과 산지에 거하는 가나안인이 내려와 쳐서 파하고 호르마까지 이르렀더라	Then the Amalekites came down, and the Canaanites which dwelt in that hill, and smote them, and discomfited them, even unto Hormah.	Then the Amalekites and Canaanites who lived in that part of the hill country came down, attacked them, and routed them all the way to Hormah.
NUM	15	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	15	2	이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 그들에게 이르라 너희가 내게 주어 거하게 할 땅에 들어가서	Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be come into the land of your habitations, which I give unto you,	“Speak to the Israelites and tell them: After you enter the land that I am giving you as a home
NUM	15	3	여호와께 화제나 번제나 서원을 갚는 제나 낙헌제나 정한 절기제에 소나 양으로 여호와께 향기롭게 드릴 때에는	And will make an offering by fire unto the Lord, a burnt offering, or a sacrifice in performing a vow, or in a freewill offering, or in your solemn feasts, to make a sweet savour unto the Lord, of the herd, or of the flock:	and you present an offering made by fire to the LORD from the herd or flock to produce a pleasing aroma to the LORD—either a burnt offering or a sacrifice, for a special vow or freewill offering or appointed feast—
NUM	15	4	그 예물을 드리는 자는 고운 가루 에바 십분지 일에 기름 한 힌의 사분지 일을 섞어 여호와께 소제로 드릴 것이며	Then shall he that offereth his offering unto the Lord bring a meat offering of a tenth deal of flour mingled with the fourth part of an hin of oil.	then the one presenting his offering to the LORD shall also present a grain offering of a tenth of an ephah of fine flour mixed with a quarter hin of olive oil.
NUM	15	5	번제나 다른 제사로 드리는 제물이 어린 양이면 전제로 포도주 한 힌의 사분 일을 예비할 것이요	And the fourth part of an hin of wine for a drink offering shalt thou prepare with the burnt offering or sacrifice, for one lamb.	With the burnt offering or sacrifice of each lamb, you are to prepare a quarter hin of wine as a drink offering.
NUM	15	6	수양이면 소제로 고운 가루 한 에바 십분지 이에 기름 한 힌의 삼분지 일을 섞어 예비하고	Or for a ram, thou shalt prepare for a meat offering two tenth deals of flour mingled with the third part of an hin of oil.	With a ram you are to prepare a grain offering of two-tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with a third of a hin of olive oil,
NUM	15	7	전제로 포도주 한 힌의 삼분지 일을 드려 여호와 앞에 향기롭게 할 것이요	And for a drink offering thou shalt offer the third part of an hin of wine, for a sweet savour unto the Lord.	and a third of a hin of wine as a drink offering, a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
NUM	15	8	번제로나 서원을 갚는 제로나 화목제로 수송아지를 예비하여 여호와께 드릴 때에는	And when thou preparest a bullock for a burnt offering, or for a sacrifice in performing a vow, or peace offerings unto the Lord:	When you prepare a young bull as a burnt offering or sacrifice to fulfill a vow or as a peace offering to the LORD,
NUM	15	9	소제로 고운 가루 한 에바 십분지 삼에 기름 반 힌을 섞어 그 수송아지와 함께 드리고	Then shall he bring with a bullock a meat offering of three tenth deals of flour mingled with half an hin of oil.	present with the bull a grain offering of three-tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with half a hin of olive oil.
NUM	15	10	전제로 포도주 반 힌을 드려 여호와 앞에 향기로운 화제를 삼을 지니라	And thou shalt bring for a drink offering half an hin of wine, for an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord.	Also present half a hin of wine as a drink offering. It is an offering made by fire, a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
NUM	15	11	수송아지나 수양이나 어린 수양이나 어린 염소에는 그 마리 수마다 이 위와 같이 행하되	Thus shall it be done for one bullock, or for one ram, or for a lamb, or a kid.	This is to be done for each bull, ram, lamb, or goat.
NUM	15	12	너희 예비하는 수효를 따라 각기 수효에 맞게 하라	According to the number that ye shall prepare, so shall ye do to every one according to their number.	This is how you must prepare each one, no matter how many.
NUM	15	13	무릇 본토 소생이 여호와께 향기로운 화제를 드릴 때에는 이 법대로 할 것이요	All that are born of the country shall do these things after this manner, in offering an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord.	Everyone who is native-born shall prepare these things in this way when he presents an offering made by fire as a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
NUM	15	14	너희 중에 우거하는 타국인이나 너희 중에 대대로 있는 자가 누구든지 여호와께 향기로운 화제를 드릴 때에는 너희 하는 대로 그도 그리할 것이라	And if a stranger sojourn with you, or whosoever be among you in your generations, and will offer an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord; as ye do, so he shall do.	And for the generations to come, if a foreigner residing with you or someone else among you wants to prepare an offering made by fire as a pleasing aroma to the LORD, he is to do exactly as you do.
NUM	15	15	회중 곧 너희나 우거하는 타국인이나 한 율례니 너희의 대대로 영원한 율례라 너희의 어떠한 대로 타국인도 여호와 앞에 그러하리라	One ordinance shall be both for you of the congregation, and also for the stranger that sojourneth with you, an ordinance for ever in your generations: as ye are, so shall the stranger be before the Lord.	The assembly is to have the same statute both for you and for the foreign resident; it is a permanent statute for the generations to come. You and the foreigner shall be the same before the LORD.
NUM	15	16	너희나 너희 중에 우거하는 타국인이나 한 법도, 한 규례니라	One law and one manner shall be for you, and for the stranger that sojourneth with you.	The same law and the same ordinance will apply both to you and to the foreigner residing with you.”
NUM	15	17	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	15	18	이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 이르라 너희가 나의 인도하는 땅에 들어가거든	Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come into the land whither I bring you,	“Speak to the Israelites and tell them: When you enter the land to which I am bringing you
NUM	15	19	그 땅의 양식을 먹을 때에 여호와께 거제를 드리되	Then it shall be, that, when ye eat of the bread of the land, ye shall offer up an heave offering unto the Lord.	and you eat the food of the land, you shall lift up an offering to the LORD.
NUM	15	20	너희의 처음 익은 곡식 가루 떡을 거제로 타작 마당의 거제 같이 들어 드리라	Ye shall offer up a cake of the first of your dough for an heave offering: as ye do the heave offering of the threshingfloor, so shall ye heave it.	From the first of your dough, you are to lift up a cake as a contribution; offer it just like an offering from the threshing floor.
NUM	15	21	너희의 처음 익은 곡식 가루 떡을 대대에 여호와께 거제로 드릴지니라	Of the first of your dough ye shall give unto the Lord an heave offering in your generations.	Throughout your generations, you are to give the LORD an offering from the first of your dough.
NUM	15	22	너희가 그릇 범죄하여 여호와가 모세에게 말한 이 모든 명령을 지키지 못하되	And if ye have erred, and not observed all these commandments, which the Lord hath spoken unto Moses,	Now if you stray unintentionally and do not obey all these commandments that the LORD has spoken to Moses—
NUM	15	23	곧 여호와가 모세로 너희에게 명한 모든 것을 여호와가 명한 날부터 이후 너희의 대대에 지키지 못하여	Even all that the Lord hath commanded you by the hand of Moses, from the day that the Lord commanded Moses, and henceforward among your generations;	all that the LORD has commanded you through Moses from the day the LORD gave them and continuing through the generations to come—
NUM	15	24	회중이 부지 중에 그릇 범죄하였거든 온 회중은 수송아지 하나를 여호와께 향기로운 화제로 드리고 규례대로 그 소제와 전제를 드리고 수염소 하나를 속죄제로 드릴 것이라	Then it shall be, if ought be committed by ignorance without the knowledge of the congregation, that all the congregation shall offer one young bullock for a burnt offering, for a sweet savour unto the Lord, with his meat offering, and his drink offering, according to the manner, and one kid of the goats for a sin offering.	and if it was done unintentionally without the knowledge of the congregation, then the whole congregation is to prepare one young bull as a burnt offering, a pleasing aroma to the LORD, with its grain offering and drink offering according to the regulation, and one male goat as a sin offering.
NUM	15	25	제사장이 이스라엘 자손의 온 회중을 위하여 속죄하면 그들이 사함을 얻으리니 이는 그릇 범죄함이며 또 그 그릇 범죄함을 인하여 예물 곧 화제와 속죄제를 여호와께 드렸음이라	And the priest shall make an atonement for all the congregation of the children of Israel, and it shall be forgiven them; for it is ignorance: and they shall bring their offering, a sacrifice made by fire unto the Lord, and their sin offering before the Lord, for their ignorance:	The priest is to make atonement for the whole congregation of Israel, so that they may be forgiven; for the sin was unintentional and they have brought to the LORD an offering made by fire and a sin offering, presented before the LORD for their unintentional sin.
NUM	15	26	이스라엘 자손의 온 회중과 그들 중에 우거하는 타국인도 사함을 얻을 것은 온 백성이 그릇 범죄하였음이니라	And it shall be forgiven all the congregation of the children of Israel, and the stranger that sojourneth among them; seeing all the people were in ignorance.	Then the whole congregation of Israel and the foreigners residing among them will be forgiven, since it happened to all the people unintentionally.
NUM	15	27	만일 한 사람이 그릇 범죄하거든 일 년 된 암염소로 속죄제를 드릴 것이요	And if any soul sin through ignorance, then he shall bring a she goat of the first year for a sin offering.	Also, if one person sins unintentionally, he is to present a year-old female goat as a sin offering.
NUM	15	28	제사장은 그 그릇 범죄한 사람이 그릇하여 여호와 앞에 얻은 죄를 위하여 속죄하여 그 죄를 속할지니 그리하면 사함을 얻으리라	And the priest shall make an atonement for the soul that sinneth ignorantly, when he sinneth by ignorance before the Lord, to make an atonement for him; and it shall be forgiven him.	And the priest shall make atonement before the LORD on behalf of the person who erred by sinning unintentionally; and when atonement has been made for him, he will be forgiven.
NUM	15	29	이스라엘 자손 중 본토 소생이든지 그들 중에 우거하는 타국인이든지 무릇 그릇 범죄한 자에게 대한 법이 동일하거니와	Ye shall have one law for him that sinneth through ignorance, both for him that is born among the children of Israel, and for the stranger that sojourneth among them.	You shall have the same law for the one who acts in error, whether he is a native-born Israelite or a foreigner residing among you.
NUM	15	30	본토 소생이든지 타국인이든지 무릇 짐짓 무엇을 행하면 여호와를 훼방하는 자니 그 백성 중에서 끊쳐질 것이라	But the soul that doeth ought presumptuously, whether he be born in the land, or a stranger, the same reproacheth the Lord; and that soul shall be cut off from among his people.	But the person who sins defiantly, whether a native or foreigner, blasphemes the LORD. That person shall be cut off from among his people.
NUM	15	31	그런 사람은 여호와의 말씀을 멸시하고 그 명령을 파괴하였은즉 그 죄악이 자기에게로 돌아가서 온전히 끊쳐지리라	Because he hath despised the word of the Lord, and hath broken his commandment, that soul shall utterly be cut off; his iniquity shall be upon him.	He shall certainly be cut off, because he has despised the word of the LORD and broken His commandment; his guilt remains on him.”
NUM	15	32	이스라엘 자손이 광야에 거할 때에 안식일에 어떤 사람이 나무하는 것을 발견한지라	And while the children of Israel were in the wilderness, they found a man that gathered sticks upon the sabbath day.	While the Israelites were in the wilderness, a man was found gathering wood on the Sabbath day.
NUM	15	33	그 나무하는 자를 발견한 자들이 그를 모세와 아론과 온 회중의 앞으로 끌어왔으나	And they that found him gathering sticks brought him unto Moses and Aaron, and unto all the congregation.	Those who found the man gathering wood brought him to Moses, Aaron, and the whole congregation,
NUM	15	34	어떻게 처치할는지 지시하심을 받지 못한 고로 가두었더니	And they put him in ward, because it was not declared what should be done to him.	and because it had not been declared what should be done to him, they placed him in custody.
NUM	15	35	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 그 사람을 반드시 죽일지니 온 회중이 진 밖에서 돌로 그를 칠지니라	And the Lord said unto Moses, The man shall be surely put to death: all the congregation shall stone him with stones without the camp.	And the LORD said to Moses, “The man must surely be put to death. The whole congregation is to stone him outside the camp.”
NUM	15	36	온 회중이 곧 그를 진 밖으로 끌어내어 돌로 그를 쳐 죽여서 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 하니라	And all the congregation brought him without the camp, and stoned him with stones, and he died; as the Lord commanded Moses.	So the whole congregation took the man outside the camp and stoned him to death, as the LORD had commanded Moses.
NUM	15	37	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Later, the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	15	38	이스라엘 자손에게 명하여 그들의 대대로 그 옷단 귀에 술을 만들고 청색 끈을 그 귀의 술에 더하라	Speak unto the children of Israel, and bid them that they make them fringes in the borders of their garments throughout their generations, and that they put upon the fringe of the borders a ribband of blue:	“Speak to the Israelites and tell them that throughout the generations to come they are to make for themselves tassels for the corners of their garments, with a blue cord on each tassel.
NUM	15	39	이 술은 너희로 보고 여호와의 모든 계명을 기억하여 준행하고 너희로 방종케 하는 자기의 마음과 눈의 욕심을 좇지 않게 하기 위함이라	And it shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember all the commandments of the Lord, and do them; and that ye seek not after your own heart and your own eyes, after which ye use to go a whoring:	These will serve as tassels for you to look at, so that you may remember all the commandments of the LORD, that you may obey them and not prostitute yourselves by following your own heart and your own eyes.
NUM	15	40	그리하면 너희가 나의 모든 계명을 기억하고 준행하여 너희의 하나님 앞에 거룩하리라	That ye may remember, and do all my commandments, and be holy unto your God.	Then you will remember and obey all My commandments, and you will be holy to your God.
NUM	15	41	나는 너희의 하나님이 되려 하여 너희를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 낸 여호와 너희 하나님이니라 나는 여호와 너희 하나님이니라	I am the Lord your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I am the Lord your God.	I am the LORD your God who brought you out of the land of Egypt to be your God. I am the LORD your God.”
NUM	16	1	레위의 증손 고핫의 손자 이스할의 아들 고라와 르우벤 자손 엘리압의 아들 다단과 아비람과 벨렛의 아들 온이 당을 짓고	Now Korah, the son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, and Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, and On, the son of Peleth, sons of Reuben, took men:	Now Korah son of Izhar, the son of Kohath son of Levi, along with some Reubenites—Dathan and Abiram, sons of Eliab, and On son of Peleth—conducted
NUM	16	2	이스라엘 자손 총회에 택함을 받은 자 곧 회중에 유명한 어떤 족장 이백오십 인과 함께 일어나서 모세를 거스리니라	And they rose up before Moses, with certain of the children of Israel, two hundred and fifty princes of the assembly, famous in the congregation, men of renown:	a rebellion against Moses, along with 250 men of Israel renowned as leaders of the congregation and representatives in the assembly.
NUM	16	3	그들이 모여서 모세와 아론을 거스려 그들에게 이르되 너희가 분수에 지나도다 회중이 다 각각 거룩하고 여호와께서도 그들 중에 계시거늘 너희가 어찌하여 여호와의 총회 위에 스스로 높이느뇨	And they gathered themselves together against Moses and against Aaron, and said unto them, Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them: wherefore then lift ye up yourselves above the congregation of the Lord?	They came together against Moses and Aaron and told them, “You have taken too much upon yourselves! For everyone in the entire congregation is holy, and the LORD is in their midst. Why then do you exalt yourselves above the assembly of the LORD?”
NUM	16	4	모세가 듣고 엎드렸다가	And when Moses heard it, he fell upon his face:	When Moses heard this, he fell facedown.
NUM	16	5	고라와 그 모든 무리에게 말하여 가로되 아침에 여호와께서 자기에게 속한 자가 누구인지 거룩한 자가 누구인지 보이시고 그 자를 자기에게 가까이 나아오게 하시되 곧 그가 택하신 자를 자기에게 가까이 나아오게 하시리니	And he spake unto Korah and unto all his company, saying, Even to morrow the Lord will shew who are his, and who is holy; and will cause him to come near unto him: even him whom he hath chosen will he cause to come near unto him.	Then he said to Korah and all his followers, “Tomorrow morning the LORD will reveal who belongs to Him and who is holy, and He will bring that person near to Himself. The one He chooses, He will bring near to Himself.
NUM	16	6	이렇게 하라 너 고라와 너의 모든 무리는 향로를 취하고	This do; Take you censers, Korah, and all his company;	You, Korah, and all your followers are to do as follows: Take censers,
NUM	16	7	내일 여호와 앞에서 그 향로에 불을 담고 그 위에 향을 두라 그 때에 여호와의 택하신 자는 거룩하게 되리라 레위 자손들아 너희가 너무 분수에 지나치느니라	And put fire therein, and put incense in them before the Lord to morrow: and it shall be that the man whom the Lord doth choose, he shall be holy: ye take too much upon you, ye sons of Levi.	and tomorrow you are to place fire and incense in them in the presence of the LORD. Then the man the LORD chooses will be the one who is holy. It is you sons of Levi who have taken too much upon yourselves!”
NUM	16	8	모세가 또 고라에게 이르되 너희 레위 자손들아 들으라	And Moses said unto Korah, Hear, I pray you, ye sons of Levi:	Moses also said to Korah, “Now listen, you sons of Levi!
NUM	16	9	이스라엘의 하나님이 이스라엘 회중에서 너희를 구별하여 자기에게 가까이 하게 하사 여호와의 성막에서 봉사하게 하시며 회중 앞에 서서 그들을 대신하여 섬기게 하심이 너희에게 작은 일이겠느냐	Seemeth it but a small thing unto you, that the God of Israel hath separated you from the congregation of Israel, to bring you near to himself to do the service of the tabernacle of the Lord, and to stand before the congregation to minister unto them?	Is it not enough for you that the God of Israel has separated you from the congregation of Israel and brought you near to Himself to perform the work at the LORD’s tabernacle, and to stand before the congregation to minister to them?
NUM	16	10	하나님이 너와 네 모든 형제 레위 자손으로 너와 함께 가까이 오게 하신 것이 작은 일이 아니어늘 너희가 오히려 제사장의 직분을 구하느냐	And he hath brought thee near to him, and all thy brethren the sons of Levi with thee: and seek ye the priesthood also?	He has brought you near, you and all your fellow Levites, but you are seeking the priesthood as well.
NUM	16	11	이를 위하여 너와 너의 무리가 다 모여서 여호와를 거스리는도다 아론은 어떠한 사람이관대 너희가 그를 원망하느냐	For which cause both thou and all thy company are gathered together against the Lord: and what is Aaron, that ye murmur against him?	Therefore, it is you and all your followers who have conspired against the LORD! As for Aaron, who is he that you should grumble against him?”
NUM	16	12	모세가 엘리압의 아들 다단과 아비람을 부르러 보내었더니 그들이 가로되 우리는 올라가지 않겠노라	And Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab: which said, We will not come up:	Then Moses summoned Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, but they said, “We will not come!
NUM	16	13	네가 우리를 젖과 꿀이 흐르는 땅에서 이끌어 내어 광야에서 죽이려 함이 어찌 작은 일이기에 오히려 스스로 우리 위에 왕이 되려 하느냐	Is it a small thing that thou hast brought us up out of a land that floweth with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness, except thou make thyself altogether a prince over us?	Is it not enough that you have brought us up out of a land flowing with milk and honey to kill us in the wilderness? Must you also appoint yourself as ruler over us?
NUM	16	14	이뿐 아니라 네가 우리를 젖과 꿀이 흐르는 땅으로 인도하여 들이지도 아니하고 밭과 포도원도 우리에게 기업으로 주지 아니하니 네가 이 사람들의 눈을 빼려느냐 우리는 올라가지 아니하겠노라	Moreover thou hast not brought us into a land that floweth with milk and honey, or given us inheritance of fields and vineyards: wilt thou put out the eyes of these men? we will not come up.	Moreover, you have not brought us into a land flowing with milk and honey or given us an inheritance of fields and vineyards. Will you gouge out the eyes of these men? No, we will not come!”
NUM	16	15	모세가 심히 노하여 여호와께 여짜오되 주는 그들의 예물을 돌아보지 마옵소서 나는 그들의 한 나귀도 취하지 아니하였고 그들의 한 사람도 해하지 아니하였나이다 하고	And Moses was very wroth, and said unto the Lord, Respect not thou their offering: I have not taken one ass from them, neither have I hurt one of them.	Then Moses became very angry and said to the LORD, “Do not regard their offering. I have not taken one donkey from them or mistreated a single one of them.”
NUM	16	16	이에 고라에게 이르되 너와 너의 온 무리는 아론과 함께 내일 여호와 앞으로 나아오되	And Moses said unto Korah, Be thou and all thy company before the Lord, thou, and they, and Aaron, to morrow:	And Moses said to Korah, “You and all your followers are to appear before the LORD tomorrow—you and they and Aaron.
NUM	16	17	너희는 각기 향로를 잡고 그 위에 향을 두고 각 사람이 그 향로를 여호와 앞으로 가져오라 향로는 모두 이백오십 이라 너와 아론도 각각 향로를 가지고 올지니라	And take every man his censer, and put incense in them, and bring ye before the Lord every man his censer, two hundred and fifty censers; thou also, and Aaron, each of you his censer.	Each man is to take his censer, place incense in it, and present it before the LORD—250 censers. You and Aaron are to present your censers as well.”
NUM	16	18	그들이 각기 향로를 취하여 불을 담고 향을 그 위에 두고 모세와 아론으로 더불어 회막문에 서니라	And they took every man his censer, and put fire in them, and laid incense thereon, and stood in the door of the tabernacle of the congregation with Moses and Aaron.	So each man took his censer, put fire and incense in it, and stood with Moses and Aaron at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting.
NUM	16	19	고라가 온 회중을 회막문에 모아 놓고 그 두 사람을 대적하려 하매 여호와의 영광이 온 회중에게 나타나시니라	And Korah gathered all the congregation against them unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and the glory of the Lord appeared unto all the congregation.	When Korah had gathered his whole assembly against them at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting, the glory of the LORD appeared to the whole congregation.
NUM	16	20	여호와께서 모세와 아론에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,	And the LORD said to Moses and Aaron,
NUM	16	21	너희는 이 회중에게서 떠나라 내가 순식간에 그들을 멸하려 하노라	Separate yourselves from among this congregation, that I may consume them in a moment.	“Separate yourselves from this congregation so that I may consume them in an instant.”
NUM	16	22	그 두 사람이 엎드려 가로되 하나님이여 모든 육체의 생명의 하나님이여 한 사람이 범죄하였거늘 온 회중에게 진노하시나이까	And they fell upon their faces, and said, O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and wilt thou be wroth with all the congregation?	But Moses and Aaron fell facedown and said, “O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, when one man sins, will You be angry with the whole congregation?”
NUM	16	23	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	16	24	회중에게 명하여 이르기를 너희는 고라와 다단과 아비람의 장막 사면에서 떠나라 하라	Speak unto the congregation, saying, Get you up from about the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.	“Tell the congregation to move away from the dwellings of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.”
NUM	16	25	모세가 일어나 다단과 아비람에게로 가니 이스라엘 장로들이 좇았더라	And Moses rose up and went unto Dathan and Abiram; and the elders of Israel followed him.	So Moses got up and went to Dathan and Abiram, and the elders of Israel followed him.
NUM	16	26	모세가 회중에게 일러 가로되 이 악인들의 장막에서 떠나고 그들의 물건은 아무 것도 만지지 말라 그들의 모든 죄 중에서 너희도 멸망할까 두려워 하노라 하매	And he spake unto the congregation, saying, Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in all their sins.	And he warned the congregation, “Move away now from the tents of these wicked men. Do not touch anything that belongs to them, or you will be swept away because of all their sins.”
NUM	16	27	무리가 고라와 다단과 아비람의 장막 사면을 떠나고 다단과 아비람은 그 처자와 유아들과 함께 나와서 자기 장막문에 선지라	So they gat up from the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, on every side: and Dathan and Abiram came out, and stood in the door of their tents, and their wives, and their sons, and their little children.	So they moved away from the dwellings of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram. Meanwhile, Dathan and Abiram had come out and stood at the entrances to their tents with their wives and children and infants.
NUM	16	28	모세가 가로되 여호와께서 나를 보내사 이 모든 일을 행케 하신 것이요 나의 임의로 함이 아닌 줄을 이 일로 인하여 알리라	And Moses said, Hereby ye shall know that the Lord hath sent me to do all these works; for I have not done them of mine own mind.	Then Moses said, “This is how you will know that the LORD has sent me to do all these things, for it was not my own doing:
NUM	16	29	곧 이 사람들의 죽음이 모든 사람과 일반이요 그들의 당하는 벌이 모든 사람의 당하는 벌과 일반이면 여호와께서 나를 보내심이 아니어니와	If these men die the common death of all men, or if they be visited after the visitation of all men; then the Lord hath not sent me.	If these men die a natural death, or if they suffer the fate of all men, then the LORD has not sent me.
NUM	16	30	만일 여호와께서 새 일을 행하사 땅으로 입을 열어 이 사람들과 그들의 모든 소속을 삼켜 산채로 음부에 빠지게 하시면 이 사람들이 과연 여호와를 멸시한 것인 줄을 너희가 알리라	But if the Lord make a new thing, and the earth open her mouth, and swallow them up, with all that appertain unto them, and they go down quick into the pit; then ye shall understand that these men have provoked the Lord.	But if the LORD brings about something unprecedented, and the earth opens its mouth and swallows them and all that belongs to them so that they go down alive into Sheol, then you will know that these men have treated the LORD with contempt.”
NUM	16	31	이 모든 말을 마치는 동시에 그들의 밑의 땅이 갈라지니라	And it came to pass, as he had made an end of speaking all these words, that the ground clave asunder that was under them:	As soon as Moses had finished saying all this, the ground beneath them split open,
NUM	16	32	땅이 그 입을 열어 그들과 그 가속과 고라에게 속한 모든 사람과 그 물건을 삼키매	And the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their houses, and all the men that appertained unto Korah, and all their goods.	and the earth opened its mouth and swallowed them and their households—all Korah’s men and all their possessions.
NUM	16	33	그들과 그 모든 소속이 산채로 음부에 빠지며 땅이 그 위에 합하니 그들이 총회 중에서 망하니라	They, and all that appertained to them, went down alive into the pit, and the earth closed upon them: and they perished from among the congregation.	They went down alive into Sheol with all they owned. The earth closed over them, and they vanished from the assembly.
NUM	16	34	그 주위에 있는 온 이스라엘이 그들의 부르짖음을 듣고 도망하며 가로되 땅이 우리도 삼킬까 두렵다 하였고	And all Israel that were round about them fled at the cry of them: for they said, Lest the earth swallow us up also.	At their cries, all the people of Israel who were around them fled, saying, “The earth may swallow us too!”
NUM	16	35	여호와께로서 불이 나와서 분향하는 이백오십 인을 소멸하였더라	And there came out a fire from the Lord, and consumed the two hundred and fifty men that offered incense.	And fire came forth from the LORD and consumed the 250 men who were offering the incense.
NUM	16	36	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	16	37	너는 제사장 아론의 아들 엘르아살을 명하여 붙는 불 가운데서 향로를 취하여다가 그 불을 타처에 쏟으라 그 향로는 거룩함이니라	Speak unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, that he take up the censers out of the burning, and scatter thou the fire yonder; for they are hallowed.	“Tell Eleazar son of Aaron the priest to remove the censers from the flames and to scatter the coals far away, because the censers are holy.
NUM	16	38	사람들은 범죄하여 그 생명을 스스로 해하였거니와 그들이 향로를 여호와 앞에 드렸으므로 그 향기가 거룩하게 되었나니 그 향로를 쳐서 제단을 싸는 편철을 만들라 이스라엘 자손에게 표가 되리라 하신지라	The censers of these sinners against their own souls, let them make them broad plates for a covering of the altar: for they offered them before the Lord, therefore they are hallowed: and they shall be a sign unto the children of Israel.	As for the censers of those who sinned at the cost of their own lives, hammer them into sheets to overlay the altar, for these were presented before the LORD, and so have become holy. They will serve as a sign to the Israelites.”
NUM	16	39	제사장 엘르아살이 불탄 자들의 드렸던 놋 향로를 취하여 쳐서 제단을 싸서	And Eleazar the priest took the brasen censers, wherewith they that were burnt had offered; and they were made broad plates for a covering of the altar:	So Eleazar the priest took the bronze censers brought by those who had been burned up, and he had them hammered out to overlay the altar,
NUM	16	40	이스라엘 자손의 기념물이 되게 하였으니 이는 아론 자손이 아닌 외인은 여호와 앞에 분향하러 가까이 오지 못하게 함이며 또 고라와 그 무리 같이 되지 않게 하기 위함이라 여호와께서 모세로 그에게 명하신 대로 하였더라	To be a memorial unto the children of Israel, that no stranger, which is not of the seed of Aaron, come near to offer incense before the Lord; that he be not as Korah, and as his company: as the Lord said to him by the hand of Moses.	just as the LORD commanded him through Moses. This was to be a reminder to the Israelites that no outsider who is not a descendant of Aaron should approach to offer incense before the LORD, lest he become like Korah and his followers.
NUM	16	41	이튿날 이스라엘 자손의 온 회중이 모세와 아론에게 원망하여 가로되 너희가 여호와의 백성을 죽였도다 하고	But on the morrow all the congregation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the people of the Lord.	The next day the whole congregation of Israel grumbled against Moses and Aaron, saying, “You have killed the LORD’s people!”
NUM	16	42	회중이 모여 모세와 아론을 칠 때에 회막을 바라본즉 구름이 회막을 덮었고 여호와의 영광이 나타났더라	And it came to pass, when the congregation was gathered against Moses and against Aaron, that they looked toward the tabernacle of the congregation: and, behold, the cloud covered it, and the glory of the Lord appeared.	But when the congregation gathered against them, Moses and Aaron turned toward the Tent of Meeting, and suddenly the cloud covered it and the glory of the LORD appeared.
NUM	16	43	모세와 아론이 회막 앞에 이르매	And Moses and Aaron came before the tabernacle of the congregation.	Then Moses and Aaron went to the front of the Tent of Meeting,
NUM	16	44	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	and the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	16	45	너희는 이 회중에게서 떠나라 내가 순식간에 그들을 멸하려 하노라 하시매 그 두 사람이 엎드리니라	Get you up from among this congregation, that I may consume them as in a moment. And they fell upon their faces.	“Get away from this congregation so that I may consume them in an instant.” And Moses and Aaron fell facedown.
NUM	16	46	이에 모세가 아론에게 이르되 너는 향로를 취하고 단의 불을 그것에 담고 그 위에 향을 두어 가지고 급히 회중에게로 가서 그들을 위하여 속죄하라 여호와께서 진노하셨으므로 염병이 시작되었음이니라	And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a censer, and put fire therein from off the altar, and put on incense, and go quickly unto the congregation, and make an atonement for them: for there is wrath gone out from the Lord; the plague is begun.	Moses said to Aaron, “Take your censer, place fire from the altar in it, and add incense. Go quickly to the congregation and make atonement for them, because wrath has come out from the LORD; the plague has begun.”
NUM	16	47	아론이 모세의 명을 좇아 향로를 가지고 회중에게로 달려간즉 백성 중에 염병이 시작되었는지라 이에 백성을 위하여 속죄하고	And Aaron took as Moses commanded, and ran into the midst of the congregation; and, behold, the plague was begun among the people: and he put on incense, and made an atonement for the people.	So Aaron took the censer as Moses had ordered and ran into the midst of the assembly. And seeing that the plague had begun among the people, he offered the incense and made atonement for the people.
NUM	16	48	죽은 자와 산 자 사이에 섰을 때에 염병이 그치니라	And he stood between the dead and the living; and the plague was stayed.	He stood between the living and the dead, and the plague was halted.
NUM	16	49	고라의 일로 죽은 자 외에 염병에 죽은 자가 일만 사천칠백 명이었더라	Now they that died in the plague were fourteen thousand and seven hundred, beside them that died about the matter of Korah.	But those who died from the plague numbered 14,700, in addition to those who had died on account of Korah.
NUM	16	50	염병이 그치매 아론이 회막문 모세에게로 돌아오니라	And Aaron returned unto Moses unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and the plague was stayed.	Then Aaron returned to Moses at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting, since the plague had been halted.
NUM	17	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	And the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	17	2	너는 이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 그들 중에서 각 종족을 따라 지팡이 하나씩 취하되 곧 그들의 종족대로 그 모든 족장에게서 지팡이 열둘을 취하고 그 사람들의 이름을 각각 그 지팡이에 쓰되	Speak unto the children of Israel, and take of every one of them a rod according to the house of their fathers, of all their princes according to the house of their fathers twelve rods: write thou every man’s name upon his rod.	“Speak to the Israelites and take from them twelve staffs, one from the leader of each tribe. Write each man’s name on his staff,
NUM	17	3	레위의 지팡이에는 아론의 이름을 쓰라 이는 그들의 종족의 각 두령이 지팡이 하나씩 있어야 할 것임이니라	And thou shalt write Aaron’s name upon the rod of Levi: for one rod shall be for the head of the house of their fathers.	and write Aaron’s name on the staff of Levi, because there must be one staff for the head of each tribe.
NUM	17	4	그 지팡이를 회막 안에서 내가 너희와 만나는 곳인 증거궤 앞에 두라	And thou shalt lay them up in the tabernacle of the congregation before the testimony, where I will meet with you.	Place the staffs in the Tent of Meeting in front of the Testimony, where I meet with you.
NUM	17	5	내가 택한 자의 지팡이에는 싹이 나리니 이것으로 이스라엘 자손이 너희를 대하여 원망하는 말을 내 앞에서 그치게 하리라	And it shall come to pass, that the man’s rod, whom I shall choose, shall blossom: and I will make to cease from me the murmurings of the children of Israel, whereby they murmur against you.	The staff belonging to the man I choose will sprout, and I will rid Myself of the constant grumbling of the Israelites against you.”
NUM	17	6	모세가 이스라엘 자손에게 고하매 그 족장들이 각기 종족대로 지팡이 하나씩 그에게 주었으니 그 지팡이 합이 열둘이라 그 중에 아론의 지팡이가 있었더라	And Moses spake unto the children of Israel, and every one of their princes gave him a rod apiece, for each prince one, according to their fathers’ houses, even twelve rods: and the rod of Aaron was among their rods.	So Moses spoke to the Israelites, and each of their leaders gave him a staff—one for each of the leaders of their tribes, twelve staffs in all. And Aaron’s staff was among them.
NUM	17	7	모세가 그 지팡이들을 증거의 장막 안 여호와 앞에 두었더라	And Moses laid up the rods before the Lord in the tabernacle of witness.	Then Moses placed the staffs before the LORD in the Tent of the Testimony.
NUM	17	8	이튿날 모세가 증거의 장막 안에 들어가 본즉 레위 집을 위하여 낸 아론의 지팡이에 움이 돋고 순이 나고 꽃이 피어서 살구 열매가 열렸더라	And it came to pass, that on the morrow Moses went into the tabernacle of witness; and, behold, the rod of Aaron for the house of Levi was budded, and brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms, and yielded almonds.	The next day Moses entered the Tent of the Testimony and saw that Aaron’s staff, representing the house of Levi, had sprouted, put forth buds, blossomed, and produced almonds.
NUM	17	9	모세가 그 지팡이 전부를 여호와 앞에서 이스라엘 모든 자손에게로 취하여 내매 그들이 보고 각각 자기 지팡이를 취하였더라	And Moses brought out all the rods from before the Lord unto all the children of Israel: and they looked, and took every man his rod.	Then Moses brought out all the staffs from the LORD’s presence to all the Israelites. They saw them, and each man took his own staff.
NUM	17	10	여호와께서 또 모세에게 이르시되 아론의 지팡이는 증거궤 앞으로 도로 가져다가 거기 간직하여 패역한 자에 대한 표징이 되게 하여 그들로 내게 대한 원망을 그치고 죽지 않게 할지니라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Bring Aaron’s rod again before the testimony, to be kept for a token against the rebels; and thou shalt quite take away their murmurings from me, that they die not.	The LORD said to Moses, “Put Aaron’s staff back in front of the Testimony, to be kept as a sign for the rebellious, so that you may put an end to their grumbling against Me, lest they die.”
NUM	17	11	모세가 곧 그같이 하되 여호와께서 자기에게 명하신 대로 하였더라	And Moses did so: as the Lord commanded him, so did he.	So Moses did as the LORD had commanded him.
NUM	17	12	이스라엘 자손이 모세에게 말하여 가로되 보소서 우리는 죽게 되었나이다 망하게 되었나이다 다 망하게 되었나이다	And the children of Israel spake unto Moses, saying, Behold, we die, we perish, we all perish.	Then the Israelites declared to Moses, “Look, we are perishing! We are lost; we are all lost!
NUM	17	13	가까이 나아가는 자 곧 여호와의 성막에 가까이 나아가는 자마다 죽사오니 우리가 다 망하여야 하리이까	Whosoever cometh any thing near unto the tabernacle of the Lord shall die: shall we be consumed with dying?	Anyone who comes near the tabernacle of the LORD will die. Are we all going to perish?”
NUM	18	1	여호와께서 아론에게 이르시되 너와 네 아들들과 네 종족은 성소에 대한 죄를 함께 담당할 것이요 너와 네 아들들은 너희가 그 제사장 직분에 대한 죄를 함께 담당할 것이니라	And the Lord said unto Aaron, Thou and thy sons and thy father’s house with thee shall bear the iniquity of the sanctuary: and thou and thy sons with thee shall bear the iniquity of your priesthood.	So the LORD said to Aaron, “You and your sons and your father’s house must bear the iniquity involving the sanctuary. And you and your sons alone must bear the iniquity involving your priesthood.
NUM	18	2	너는 네 형제 레위 지파 곧 네 조상의 지파를 데려다가 너와 합동시켜 너를 섬기게 하고 너와 네 아들들은 증거의 장막 앞에 있을 것이니라	And thy brethren also of the tribe of Levi, the tribe of thy father, bring thou with thee, that they may be joined unto thee, and minister unto thee: but thou and thy sons with thee shall minister before the tabernacle of witness.	But bring with you also your brothers from the tribe of Levi, the tribe of your father, that they may join you and assist you and your sons before the Tent of the Testimony.
NUM	18	3	레위인은 네 직무와 장막의 모든 직무를 지키려니와 성소의 기구와 단에는 가까이 못하리니 두렵건대 그들과 너희가 죽을까 하노라	And they shall keep thy charge, and the charge of all the tabernacle: only they shall not come nigh the vessels of the sanctuary and the altar, that neither they, nor ye also, die.	And they shall attend to your duties and to all the duties of the Tent; but they must not come near to the furnishings of the sanctuary or the altar, or both they and you will die.
NUM	18	4	레위인은 너와 합동하여 장막의 모든 일과 회막의 직무를 지킬 것이요 외인은 너희에게 가까이 못할 것이니라	And they shall be joined unto thee, and keep the charge of the tabernacle of the congregation, for all the service of the tabernacle: and a stranger shall not come nigh unto you.	They are to join you and attend to the duties of the Tent of Meeting, doing all the work at the Tent; but no outsider may come near you.
NUM	18	5	이와 같이 너희는 성소의 직무와 단의 직무를 지키라 그리하면 여호와의 진노가 다시는 이스라엘 자손에게 미치지 아니하리라	And ye shall keep the charge of the sanctuary, and the charge of the altar: that there be no wrath any more upon the children of Israel.	And you shall attend to the duties of the sanctuary and of the altar, so that wrath may not fall on the Israelites again.
NUM	18	6	보라 내가 이스라엘 자손 중에서 너희 형제 레위인을 취하여 내게 돌리고 너희에게 선물로 주어 회막의 일을 하게 하였나니	And I, behold, I have taken your brethren the Levites from among the children of Israel: to you they are given as a gift for the Lord, to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation.	Behold, I Myself have selected your fellow Levites from the Israelites as a gift to you, dedicated to the LORD to perform the service for the Tent of Meeting.
NUM	18	7	너와 네 아들들은 단과 장 안의 모든 일에 대하여 제사장의 직분을 지켜 섬기라 내가 제사장의 직분을 너희에게 선물로 주었은즉 거기 가까이 하는 외인은 죽이울지니라	Therefore thou and thy sons with thee shall keep your priest’s office for every thing of the altar, and within the vail; and ye shall serve: I have given your priest’s office unto you as a service of gift: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.	But only you and your sons shall attend to your priesthood for everything concerning the altar and what is inside the veil, and you are to perform that service. I am giving you the work of the priesthood as a gift, but any outsider who comes near the sanctuary must be put to death.”
NUM	18	8	여호와께서 또 아론에게 이르시되 보라 내가 내 거제물 곧 이스라엘 자손의 거룩하게 한 모든 예물을 너로 주관하게 하고 네가 기름 부음을 받았음을 인하여 그것을 너와 네 아들들에게 영영한 응식으로 주노라	And the Lord spake unto Aaron, Behold, I also have given thee the charge of mine heave offerings of all the hallowed things of the children of Israel; unto thee have I given them by reason of the anointing, and to thy sons, by an ordinance for ever.	Then the LORD said to Aaron, “Behold, I have put you in charge of My offerings. As for all the sacred offerings of the Israelites, I have given them to you and your sons as a portion and a permanent statute.
NUM	18	9	지성물 중에 불사르지 않은 것은 네 것이라 그들이 내게 드리는 모든 예물의 모든 소제와 속죄제와 속건 제물은 다 지극히 거룩한즉 너와 네 아들들에게 돌리리니	This shall be thine of the most holy things, reserved from the fire: every oblation of theirs, every meat offering of theirs, and every sin offering of theirs, and every trespass offering of theirs, which they shall render unto me, shall be most holy for thee and for thy sons.	A portion of the most holy offerings reserved from the fire will be yours. From all the offerings they render to Me as most holy offerings, whether grain offerings or sin offerings or guilt offerings, that part belongs to you and your sons.
NUM	18	10	지극히 거룩하게 여김으로 먹으라 이는 네게 성물인즉 남자들이 다 먹을지니라	In the most holy place shalt thou eat it; every male shall eat it: it shall be holy unto thee.	You are to eat it as a most holy offering, and every male may eat it. You shall regard it as holy.
NUM	18	11	내게 돌릴 것이 이것이니 곧 이스라엘 자손의 드리는 거제물과 모든 요제물이라 내가 그것을 너와 네 자손에게 영영한 응식으로 주었은즉 네 집의 정결한 자마다 먹을 것이니라	And this is thine; the heave offering of their gift, with all the wave offerings of the children of Israel: I have given them unto thee, and to thy sons and to thy daughters with thee, by a statute for ever: every one that is clean in thy house shall eat of it.	And this is yours as well: the offering of their gifts, along with all the wave offerings of the Israelites. I have given this to you and your sons and daughters as a permanent statute. Every ceremonially clean person in your household may eat it.
NUM	18	12	그들이 여호와께 드리는 첫 소산 곧 제일 좋은 기름과 제일 좋은 포도주와 곡식을 네게 주었은즉	All the best of the oil, and all the best of the wine, and of the wheat, the firstfruits of them which they shall offer unto the Lord, them have I given thee.	I give you all the freshest olive oil and all the finest new wine and grain that the Israelites give to the LORD as their firstfruits.
NUM	18	13	그들이 여호와께 드리는 그 땅 처음 익은 모든 열매는 네 것이니 네 집에 정결한 자마다 먹을 것이라	And whatsoever is first ripe in the land, which they shall bring unto the Lord, shall be thine; every one that is clean in thine house shall eat of it.	The firstfruits of everything in their land that they bring to the LORD will belong to you. Every ceremonially clean person in your household may eat them.
NUM	18	14	이스라엘 중에서 특별히 드린 모든 것은 네 것이 되리라	Every thing devoted in Israel shall be thine.	Every devoted thing in Israel belongs to you.
NUM	18	15	여호와께 드리는 모든 생물의 처음 나는 것은 사람이나 짐승이나 다 네 것이로되 사람의 처음 난 것은 반드시 대속할 것이요 부정한 짐승의 처음 난 것도 대속할 것이며	Every thing that openeth the matrix in all flesh, which they bring unto the Lord, whether it be of men or beasts, shall be thine: nevertheless the firstborn of man shalt thou surely redeem, and the firstling of unclean beasts shalt thou redeem.	The firstborn of every womb, whether man or beast, that is offered to the LORD belongs to you. But you must surely redeem every firstborn son and every firstborn male of unclean animals.
NUM	18	16	그 사람을 속할 때에는 난지 일 개월 이후에 네가 정한 대로 성소의 세겔을 따라 은 다섯 세겔로 속하라 한 세겔은 이십 게라니라	And those that are to be redeemed from a month old shalt thou redeem, according to thine estimation, for the money of five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, which is twenty gerahs.	You are to pay the redemption price for a month-old male according to your valuation: five shekels of silver, according to the sanctuary shekel, which is twenty gerahs.
NUM	18	17	오직 소의 처음 난 것이나 양의 처음 난 것이나 염소의 처음 난 것은 속하지 말지니 그것들은 거룩한즉 그 피는 단에 뿌리고 그 기름은 불살라 여호와께 향기로운 화제로 드릴 것이며	But the firstling of a cow, or the firstling of a sheep, or the firstling of a goat, thou shalt not redeem; they are holy: thou shalt sprinkle their blood upon the altar, and shalt burn their fat for an offering made by fire, for a sweet savour unto the Lord.	But you must not redeem the firstborn of an ox, a sheep, or a goat; they are holy. You are to sprinkle their blood on the altar and burn their fat as an offering made by fire, a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
NUM	18	18	그 고기는 네게 돌릴지니 흔든 가슴과 우편 넓적다리 같이 네게 돌릴 것이니라	And the flesh of them shall be thine, as the wave breast and as the right shoulder are thine.	And their meat belongs to you, just as the breast and right thigh of the wave offering belong to you.
NUM	18	19	이스라엘 자손이 여호와께 거제로 드리는 모든 성물은 내가 영영한 응식으로 너와 네 자녀에게 주노니 이는 여호와 앞에 너와 네 후손에게 변하지 않는 소금 언약이니라	All the heave offerings of the holy things, which the children of Israel offer unto the Lord, have I given thee, and thy sons and thy daughters with thee, by a statute for ever: it is a covenant of salt for ever before the Lord unto thee and to thy seed with thee.	All the holy offerings that the Israelites present to the LORD I give to you and to your sons and daughters as a permanent statute. It is a permanent covenant of salt before the LORD for you and your offspring.”
NUM	18	20	여호와께서 또 아론에게 이르시되 너는 이스라엘 자손의 땅의 기업도 없겠고 그들 중에 아무 분깃도 없을 것이나 나는 이스라엘 자손 중에 네 분깃이요 네 기업이니라	And the Lord spake unto Aaron, Thou shalt have no inheritance in their land, neither shalt thou have any part among them: I am thy part and thine inheritance among the children of Israel.	Then the LORD said to Aaron, “You will have no inheritance in their land, nor will you have any portion among them. I am your portion and your inheritance among the Israelites.
NUM	18	21	내가 이스라엘의 십일조를 레위 자손에게 기업으로 다 주어서 그들의 하는 일 곧 회막에서 하는 일을 갚나니	And, behold, I have given the children of Levi all the tenth in Israel for an inheritance, for their service which they serve, even the service of the tabernacle of the congregation.	Behold, I have given to the Levites all the tithes in Israel as an inheritance in return for the work they do, the service of the Tent of Meeting.
NUM	18	22	이후로는 이스라엘 자손이 회막에 가까이 말 것이라 죄를 당하여 죽을까 하노라	Neither must the children of Israel henceforth come nigh the tabernacle of the congregation, lest they bear sin, and die.	No longer may the Israelites come near to the Tent of Meeting, or they will incur guilt and die.
NUM	18	23	오직 레위인은 회막에서 봉사하며 자기들의 죄를 담당할 것이요 이스라엘 자손 중에는 기업이 없을 것이니 이는 너희의 대대에 영원한 율례라	But the Levites shall do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation, and they shall bear their iniquity: it shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations, that among the children of Israel they have no inheritance.	The Levites are to perform the work of the Tent of Meeting, and they must bear their iniquity. This is a permanent statute for the generations to come. The Levites will not receive an inheritance among the Israelites.
NUM	18	24	이스라엘 자손이 여호와께 거제로 드리는 십일조를 레위인에게 기업으로 준 고로 내가 그들에 대하여 말하기를 이스라엘 자손 중에 기업이 없을 것이라 하였노라	But the tithes of the children of Israel, which they offer as an heave offering unto the Lord, I have given to the Levites to inherit: therefore I have said unto them, Among the children of Israel they shall have no inheritance.	For I have given to the Levites as their inheritance the tithe that the Israelites present to the LORD as a contribution. That is why I told them that they would not receive an inheritance among the Israelites.”
NUM	18	25	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	And the LORD instructed Moses,
NUM	18	26	너는 레위인에게 고하여 그에게 이르라 내가 이스라엘 자손에게 취하여 너희에게 기업으로 준 십일조를 너희가 그들에게서 취할 때에 그 십일조의 십일조를 거제로 여호와께 드릴 것이라	Thus speak unto the Levites, and say unto them, When ye take of the children of Israel the tithes which I have given you from them for your inheritance, then ye shall offer up an heave offering of it for the Lord, even a tenth part of the tithe.	“Speak to the Levites and tell them: ‘When you receive from the Israelites the tithe that I have given you as your inheritance, you must present part of it as an offering to the LORD—a tithe of the tithe.
NUM	18	27	내가 너희의 거제물을 타작 마당에서 받드는 곡물과 포도즙 틀에서 받드는 즙 같이 여기리니	And this your heave offering shall be reckoned unto you, as though it were the corn of the threshingfloor, and as the fulness of the winepress.	Your offering will be reckoned to you as grain from the threshing floor or juice from the winepress.
NUM	18	28	너희는 이스라엘 자손에게서 받는 모든 것의 십일조 중에서 여호와께 거제로 드리고 여호와께 드린 그 거제물은 제사장 아론에게 돌리되	Thus ye also shall offer an heave offering unto the Lord of all your tithes, which ye receive of the children of Israel; and ye shall give thereof the Lord’s heave offering to Aaron the priest.	So you are to present an offering to the LORD from all the tithes you receive from the Israelites, and from these you are to give the LORD’s offering to Aaron the priest.
NUM	18	29	너희의 받은 모든 예물 중에서 너희는 그 아름다운 것 곧 거룩하게 한 부분을 취하여 여호와께 거제로 드릴지니라	Out of all your gifts ye shall offer every heave offering of the Lord, of all the best thereof, even the hallowed part thereof out of it.	You must present the offering due the LORD from all the best of every gift, the holiest part of it.’
NUM	18	30	이러므로 너는 그들에게 이르라 너희가 그 중에서 아름다운 것을 취하여 드리고 남은 것은 너희 레위인에게는 타작 마당의 소출과 포도즙 틀의 소출 같이 되리니	Therefore thou shalt say unto them, When ye have heaved the best thereof from it, then it shall be counted unto the Levites as the increase of the threshingfloor, and as the increase of the winepress.	Therefore say to the Levites, ‘When you have presented the best part, it will be reckoned to you as the produce of the threshing floor or winepress.
NUM	18	31	너희와 너희 권속이 어디서든지 이것을 먹을 수 있음은 이는 회막에서 일한 너희의 보수임이니라	And ye shall eat it in every place, ye and your households: for it is your reward for your service in the tabernacle of the congregation.	And you and your households may eat the rest of it anywhere; it is the compensation for your work at the Tent of Meeting.
NUM	18	32	너희가 그 중 아름다운 것을 받들어 드린즉 이로 인하여 죄를 지지 아니할 것이라 너희는 이스라엘 자손의 성물을 더럽히지 말라 그리하면 죽지 아니하리라	And ye shall bear no sin by reason of it, when ye have heaved from it the best of it: neither shall ye pollute the holy things of the children of Israel, lest ye die.	Once you have presented the best part of it, you will not incur guilt because of it. But you must not defile the sacred offerings of the Israelites, or else you will die.’”
NUM	19	1	여호와께서 모세와 아론에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses and Aaron,
NUM	19	2	여호와의 명하는 법의 율례를 이제 이르노니 이스라엘 자손에게 일러서 온전하여 흠이 없고 아직 멍에 메지 아니한 붉은 암송아지를 네게로 끌어 오게 하고	This is the ordinance of the law which the Lord hath commanded, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring thee a red heifer without spot, wherein is no blemish, and upon which never came yoke:	“This is the statute of the law that the LORD has commanded: Instruct the Israelites to bring you an unblemished red heifer that has no defect and has never been placed under a yoke.
NUM	19	3	너는 그것을 제사장 엘르아살에게 줄 것이요 그는 그것을 진 밖으로 끌어 내어서 자기 목전에서 잡게 할 것이며	And ye shall give her unto Eleazar the priest, that he may bring her forth without the camp, and one shall slay her before his face:	Give it to Eleazar the priest, and he will have it brought outside the camp and slaughtered in his presence.
NUM	19	4	제사장 엘르아살은 손가락에 그 피를 찍고 그 피를 회막 앞을 향하여 일곱 번 뿌리고	And Eleazar the priest shall take of her blood with his finger, and sprinkle of her blood directly before the tabernacle of the congregation seven times:	Eleazar the priest is to take some of its blood on his finger and sprinkle it seven times toward the front of the Tent of Meeting.
NUM	19	5	그 암소를 자기 목전에서 불사르게 하되 그 가죽과 고기와 피와 똥을 불사르게 하고	And one shall burn the heifer in his sight; her skin, and her flesh, and her blood, with her dung, shall he burn:	Then the heifer must be burned in his sight. Its hide, its flesh, and its blood are to be burned, along with its dung.
NUM	19	6	동시에 제사장은 백향목과 우슬초와 홍색실을 취하여 암송아지를 사르는 불 가운데 던질 것이며	And the priest shall take cedar wood, and hyssop, and scarlet, and cast it into the midst of the burning of the heifer.	The priest is to take cedar wood, hyssop, and scarlet wool and throw them onto the burning heifer.
NUM	19	7	제사장은 그 옷을 빨고 물로 몸을 씻은 후에 진에 들어갈 것이라 그는 저녁까지 부정하리라	Then the priest shall wash his clothes, and he shall bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he shall come into the camp, and the priest shall be unclean until the even.	Then the priest must wash his clothes and bathe his body in water; after that he may enter the camp, but he will be ceremonially unclean until evening.
NUM	19	8	송아지를 불사른 자도 그 옷을 물로 빨고 물로 그 몸을 씻을 것이라 그도 저녁까지 부정하리라	And he that burneth her shall wash his clothes in water, and bathe his flesh in water, and shall be unclean until the even.	The one who burned the heifer must also wash his clothes and bathe his body in water, and he too will be ceremonially unclean until evening.
NUM	19	9	이에 정한 자가 암송아지의 재를 거두어 진 밖 정한 곳에 둘지니 이것은 이스라엘 자손 회중을 위하여 간직하였다가 부정을 깨끗케 하는 물을 만드는데 쓸 것이니 곧 속죄제니라	And a man that is clean shall gather up the ashes of the heifer, and lay them up without the camp in a clean place, and it shall be kept for the congregation of the children of Israel for a water of separation: it is a purification for sin.	Then a man who is ceremonially clean is to gather up the ashes of the heifer and store them in a ceremonially clean place outside the camp. They must be kept by the congregation of Israel for preparing the water of purification; this is for purification from sin.
NUM	19	10	암송아지의 재를 거둔 자도 그 옷을 빨 것이며 저녁까지 부정하리라 이는 이스라엘 자손과 그 중에 우거하는 외인에게 영원한 율례니라	And he that gathereth the ashes of the heifer shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even: and it shall be unto the children of Israel, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among them, for a statute for ever.	The man who has gathered up the ashes of the heifer must also wash his clothes, and he will be ceremonially unclean until evening. This is a permanent statute for the Israelites and for the foreigner residing among them.
NUM	19	11	사람의 시체를 만진 자는 칠 일을 부정하리니	He that toucheth the dead body of any man shall be unclean seven days.	Whoever touches any dead body will be unclean for seven days.
NUM	19	12	그는 제삼일과 제칠일에 이 잿물로 스스로 정결케 할 것이라 그리하면 정하려니와 제삼일과 제칠일에 스스로 정결케 아니하면 그냥 부정하니	He shall purify himself with it on the third day, and on the seventh day he shall be clean: but if he purify not himself the third day, then the seventh day he shall not be clean.	He must purify himself with the water on the third day and on the seventh day; then he will be clean. But if he does not purify himself on the third and seventh days, he will not be clean.
NUM	19	13	누구든지 죽은 사람의 시체를 만지고 스스로 정결케 아니하는 자는 여호와의 성막을 더럽힘이라 그가 이스라엘에서 끊쳐질 것은 정결케 하는 물을 그에게 뿌리지 아니하므로 깨끗케 되지 못하고 그 부정함이 있음이니라	Whosoever toucheth the dead body of any man that is dead, and purifieth not himself, defileth the tabernacle of the Lord; and that soul shall be cut off from Israel: because the water of separation was not sprinkled upon him, he shall be unclean; his uncleanness is yet upon him.	Anyone who touches a human corpse and fails to purify himself defiles the tabernacle of the LORD. That person must be cut off from Israel. He remains unclean, because the water of purification has not been sprinkled on him, and his uncleanness is still on him.
NUM	19	14	장막에서 사람이 죽을 때의 법은 이러하니 무릇 그 장막에 들어가는 자와 무릇 그 장막에 있는 자가 칠 일 동안 부정할 것이며	This is the law, when a man dieth in a tent: all that come into the tent, and all that is in the tent, shall be unclean seven days.	This is the law when a person dies in a tent: Everyone who enters the tent and everyone already in the tent will be unclean for seven days,
NUM	19	15	무릇 뚜껑을 열어 놓고 덮지 아니한 그릇도 부정하니라	And every open vessel, which hath no covering bound upon it, is unclean.	and any open container without a lid fastened on it is unclean.
NUM	19	16	누구든지 들에서 칼에 죽이운 자나 시체나 사람의 뼈나 무덤을 만졌으면 칠 일 동안 부정하리니	And whosoever toucheth one that is slain with a sword in the open fields, or a dead body, or a bone of a man, or a grave, shall be unclean seven days.	Anyone in the open field who touches someone who has been killed by the sword or has died of natural causes, or anyone who touches a human bone or a grave, will be unclean for seven days.
NUM	19	17	그 부정한 자를 위하여 죄를 깨끗하게 하려고 불사른 재를 취하여 흐르는 물과 함께 그릇에 담고	And for an unclean person they shall take of the ashes of the burnt heifer of purification for sin, and running water shall be put thereto in a vessel:	For the purification of the unclean person, take some of the ashes of the burnt sin offering, put them in a jar, and pour fresh water over them.
NUM	19	18	정한 자가 우슬초를 취하여 그 물을 찍어서 장막과 그 모든 기구와 거기 있는 사람들에게 뿌리고 또 뼈나 죽임을 당한 자나 시체나 무덤을 만진 자에게 뿌리되	And a clean person shall take hyssop, and dip it in the water, and sprinkle it upon the tent, and upon all the vessels, and upon the persons that were there, and upon him that touched a bone, or one slain, or one dead, or a grave:	Then a man who is ceremonially clean is to take some hyssop, dip it in the water, and sprinkle the tent, all the furnishings, and the people who were there. He is also to sprinkle the one who touched a bone, a grave, or a person who has died or been slain.
NUM	19	19	그 정한 자가 제삼일과 제칠일에 그 부정한 자에게 뿌려서 제칠일에 그를 정결케 할 것이며 그는 자기 옷을 빨고 물로 몸을 씻을 것이라 저녁이면 정하리라	And the clean person shall sprinkle upon the unclean on the third day, and on the seventh day: and on the seventh day he shall purify himself, and wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and shall be clean at even.	The man who is ceremonially clean is to sprinkle the unclean person on the third day and on the seventh day. After he purifies the unclean person on the seventh day, the one being cleansed must wash his clothes and bathe in water, and that evening he will be clean.
NUM	19	20	사람이 부정하고도 스스로 정결케 아니하면 여호와의 성소를 더럽힘이니 그러므로 총회 중에서 끊쳐질 것이니라 그는 정결케 하는 물로 뿌리움을 받지 아니하였은즉 부정하니라	But the man that shall be unclean, and shall not purify himself, that soul shall be cut off from among the congregation, because he hath defiled the sanctuary of the Lord: the water of separation hath not been sprinkled upon him; he is unclean.	But if a person who is unclean does not purify himself, he will be cut off from the assembly, because he has defiled the sanctuary of the LORD. The water of purification has not been sprinkled on him; he is unclean.
NUM	19	21	이는 그들의 영영한 율례니라 정결케 하는 물을 뿌린 자는 그 옷을 빨 것이며 정결케 하는 물을 만지는 자는 저녁까지 부정할 것이며	And it shall be a perpetual statute unto them, that he that sprinkleth the water of separation shall wash his clothes; and he that toucheth the water of separation shall be unclean until even.	This is a permanent statute for the people: The one who sprinkles the water of purification must wash his clothes, and whoever touches the water of purification will be unclean until evening.
NUM	19	22	부정한 자가 만진 것은 무엇이든지 부정할 것이며 그것을 만지는 자도 저녁까지 부정하리라	And whatsoever the unclean person toucheth shall be unclean; and the soul that toucheth it shall be unclean until even.	Anything the unclean person touches will become unclean, and anyone who touches it will be unclean until evening.”
NUM	20	1	정월에 이스라엘 자손 곧 온 회중이 신 광야에 이르러서 백성이 가데스에 거하더니 미리암이 거기서 죽으매 거기 장사하니라	Then came the children of Israel, even the whole congregation, into the desert of Zin in the first month: and the people abode in Kadesh; and Miriam died there, and was buried there.	In the first month, the whole congregation of Israel entered the Wilderness of Zin and stayed in Kadesh. There Miriam died and was buried.
NUM	20	2	회중이 물이 없으므로 모여서 모세와 아론을 공박하니라	And there was no water for the congregation: and they gathered themselves together against Moses and against Aaron.	Now there was no water for the congregation, so they gathered against Moses and Aaron.
NUM	20	3	백성이 모세와 다투어 말하여 가로되 우리 형제들이 여호와 앞에서 죽을 때에 우리도 죽었더면 좋을 뻔 하였도다	And the people chode with Moses, and spake, saying, Would God that we had died when our brethren died before the Lord!	The people quarreled with Moses and said, “If only we had perished with our brothers before the LORD!
NUM	20	4	너희가 어찌하여 여호와의 총회를 이 광야로 인도하여 올려서 우리와 우리 짐승으로 다 여기서 죽게 하느냐	And why have ye brought up the congregation of the Lord into this wilderness, that we and our cattle should die there?	Why have you brought the LORD’s assembly into this wilderness for us and our livestock to die here?
NUM	20	5	너희가 어찌하여 우리를 애굽에서 나오게 하여 이 악한 곳으로 인도하였느냐 이곳에는 파종할 곳이 없고 무화과도 없고 포도도 없고 석류도 없고 마실 물도 없도다	And wherefore have ye made us to come up out of Egypt, to bring us in unto this evil place? it is no place of seed, or of figs, or of vines, or of pomegranates; neither is there any water to drink.	Why have you led us up out of Egypt to bring us to this wretched place? It is not a place of grain, figs, vines, or pomegranates—and there is no water to drink!”
NUM	20	6	모세와 아론이 총회 앞을 떠나 회막문에 이르러 엎드리매 여호와의 영광이 그들에게 나타나며	And Moses and Aaron went from the presence of the assembly unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and they fell upon their faces: and the glory of the Lord appeared unto them.	Then Moses and Aaron went from the presence of the assembly to the entrance to the Tent of Meeting. They fell facedown, and the glory of the LORD appeared to them.
NUM	20	7	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	And the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	20	8	지팡이를 가지고 네 형 아론과 함께 회중을 모으고 그들의 목전에서 너희는 반석에게 명하여 물을 내라 하라 네가 그 반석으로 물을 내게 하여 회중과 그들의 짐승에게 마시울지니라	Take the rod, and gather thou the assembly together, thou, and Aaron thy brother, and speak ye unto the rock before their eyes; and it shall give forth his water, and thou shalt bring forth to them water out of the rock: so thou shalt give the congregation and their beasts drink.	“Take the staff and assemble the congregation. You and your brother Aaron are to speak to the rock while they watch, and it will pour out its water. You will bring out water from the rock and provide drink for the congregation and their livestock.”
NUM	20	9	모세가 그 명대로 여호와의 앞에서 지팡이를 취하니라	And Moses took the rod from before the Lord, as he commanded him.	So Moses took the staff from the LORD’s presence, just as he had been commanded.
NUM	20	10	모세와 아론이 총회를 그 반석 앞에 모으고 모세가 그들에게 이르되 패역한 너희여 들으라 우리가 너희를 위하여 이 반석에서 물을 내랴 하고	And Moses and Aaron gathered the congregation together before the rock, and he said unto them, Hear now, ye rebels; must we fetch you water out of this rock?	Then Moses and Aaron gathered the assembly in front of the rock, and Moses said to them, “Listen now, you rebels, must we bring you water out of this rock?”
NUM	20	11	그 손을 들어 그 지팡이로 반석을 두 번 치매 물이 많이 솟아 나오므로 회중과 그들의 짐승이 마시니라	And Moses lifted up his hand, and with his rod he smote the rock twice: and the water came out abundantly, and the congregation drank, and their beasts also.	Then Moses raised his hand and struck the rock twice with his staff, so that a great amount of water gushed out, and the congregation and their livestock were able to drink.
NUM	20	12	여호와께서 모세와 아론에게 이르시되 너희가 나를 믿지 아니하고 이스라엘 자손의 목전에 나의 거룩함을 나타내지 아니한고로 너희는 이 총회를 내가 그들에게 준 땅으로 인도하여 들이지 못하리라 하시니라	And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron, Because ye believed me not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the land which I have given them.	But the LORD said to Moses and Aaron, “Because you did not trust Me to show My holiness in the sight of the Israelites, you will not bring this assembly into the land that I have given them.”
NUM	20	13	이스라엘 자손이 여호와와 다투었으므로 이를 므리바 물이라 하니라 여호와께서 그들 중에서 그 거룩함을 나타내셨더라	This is the water of Meribah; because the children of Israel strove with the Lord, and he was sanctified in them.	These were the waters of Meribah, where the Israelites quarreled with the LORD, and He showed His holiness among them.
NUM	20	14	모세가 가데스에서 에돔 왕에게 사자를 보내며 이르되 당신의 형제 이스라엘의 말에 우리의 당한 모든 고난을 당신도 아시거니와	And Moses sent messengers from Kadesh unto the king of Edom, Thus saith thy brother Israel, Thou knowest all the travail that hath befallen us:	From Kadesh, Moses sent messengers to tell the king of Edom, “This is what your brother Israel says: You know all the hardship that has befallen us,
NUM	20	15	우리 열조가 애굽으로 내려갔으므로 우리가 애굽에 오래 거하였더니 애굽인이 우리 열조와 우리를 학대하였으므로	How our fathers went down into Egypt, and we have dwelt in Egypt a long time; and the Egyptians vexed us, and our fathers:	how our fathers went down to Egypt, where we lived many years. The Egyptians mistreated us and our fathers,
NUM	20	16	우리가 여호와께 부르짖었더니 우리 소리를 들으시고 천사를 보내사 우리를 애굽에서 인도하여 내셨나이다 이제 우리가 당신의 변방 모퉁이 한 성읍 가데스에 있사오니	And when we cried unto the Lord, he heard our voice, and sent an angel, and hath brought us forth out of Egypt: and, behold, we are in Kadesh, a city in the uttermost of thy border:	and when we cried out to the LORD, He heard our voice, sent an angel, and brought us out of Egypt. Now look, we are in Kadesh, a city on the edge of your territory.
NUM	20	17	청컨대 우리로 당신의 땅을 통과하게 하소서 우리가 밭으로나 포도원으로나 통과하지 아니하고 우물물도 공히 마시지 아니하고 우리가 왕의 대로로만 통과하고 당신의 지경에서 나가기까지 좌편으로나 우편으로 치우치지 아니하리이다 한다 하라 하였더니	Let us pass, I pray thee, through thy country: we will not pass through the fields, or through the vineyards, neither will we drink of the water of the wells: we will go by the king’s high way, we will not turn to the right hand nor to the left, until we have passed thy borders.	Please let us pass through your land. We will not cut through any field or vineyard, or drink water from any well. We will stay on the King’s Highway; we will not turn to the right or to the left until we have passed through your territory.”
NUM	20	18	에돔 왕이 대답하되 너는 우리 가운데로 통과하지 못하리라 내가 나가서 칼로 너를 맞을까 염려하라	And Edom said unto him, Thou shalt not pass by me, lest I come out against thee with the sword.	But Edom answered, “You may not travel through our land, or we will come out and confront you with the sword.”
NUM	20	19	이스라엘 자손이 이르되 우리가 대로로 통과하겠고 우리나 우리 짐승이 당신의 물을 마시면 그 값을 줄 것이라 우리가 도보로 통과할뿐인즉 아무 일도 없으리이다 하나	And the children of Israel said unto him, We will go by the high way: and if I and my cattle drink of thy water, then I will pay for it: I will only, without doing any thing else, go through on my feet.	“We will stay on the main road,” the Israelites replied, “and if we or our herds drink your water, we will pay for it. There will be no problem; only let us pass through on foot.”
NUM	20	20	그는 가로되 너는 지나가지 못하리라 하고 에돔 왕이 많은 백성을 거느리고 나와서 강한 손으로 막으니	And he said, Thou shalt not go through. And Edom came out against him with much people, and with a strong hand.	But Edom insisted, “You may not pass through.” And they came out to confront the Israelites with a large army and a strong hand.
NUM	20	21	에돔 왕이 이같이 이스라엘의 그 경내로 통과함을 용납지 아니하므로 이스라엘이 그들에게서 돌이키니라	Thus Edom refused to give Israel passage through his border: wherefore Israel turned away from him.	So Edom refused to allow Israel to pass through their territory, and Israel turned away from them.
NUM	20	22	이스라엘 자손 곧 온 회중이 가데스에서 진행하여 호르 산에 이르렀더니	And the children of Israel, even the whole congregation, journeyed from Kadesh, and came unto mount Hor.	After they had set out from Kadesh, the whole congregation of Israel came to Mount Hor.
NUM	20	23	여호와께서 에돔 땅 변경 호르 산에서 모세와 아론에게 말씀하시니라 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron in mount Hor, by the coast of the land of Edom, saying,	And at Mount Hor, near the border of the land of Edom, the LORD said to Moses and Aaron,
NUM	20	24	아론은 그 열조에게로 돌아가고 내가 이스라엘 자손에게 준 땅에는 들어가지 못하리니 이는 너희가 므리바 물에서 내 말을 거역한 연고니라	Aaron shall be gathered unto his people: for he shall not enter into the land which I have given unto the children of Israel, because ye rebelled against my word at the water of Meribah.	“Aaron will be gathered to his people; he will not enter the land that I have given the Israelites, because both of you rebelled against My command at the waters of Meribah.
NUM	20	25	너는 아론과 그 아들 엘르아살을 데리고 호르 산에 올라	Take Aaron and Eleazar his son, and bring them up unto mount Hor:	Take Aaron and his son Eleazar and bring them up Mount Hor.
NUM	20	26	아론의 옷을 벗겨 그 아들 엘르아살에게 입히라 아론은 거기서 죽어 그 열조에게로 돌아가리라	And strip Aaron of his garments, and put them upon Eleazar his son: and Aaron shall be gathered unto his people, and shall die there.	Remove Aaron’s priestly garments and put them on his son Eleazar. Aaron will be gathered to his people and will die there.”
NUM	20	27	모세가 여호와의 명을 좇아 그들과 함께 회중의 목전에서 호르 산에 오르니라	And Moses did as the Lord commanded: and they went up into mount Hor in the sight of all the congregation.	So Moses did as the LORD had commanded, and they climbed Mount Hor in the sight of the whole congregation.
NUM	20	28	모세가 아론의 옷을 벗겨 그 아들 엘르아살에게 입히매 아론이 그 산꼭대기에서 죽으니라 모세와 엘르아살이 산에서 내려오니	And Moses stripped Aaron of his garments, and put them upon Eleazar his son; and Aaron died there in the top of the mount: and Moses and Eleazar came down from the mount.	After Moses had removed Aaron’s garments and put them on his son Eleazar, Aaron died there on top of the mountain. Then Moses and Eleazar came down from the mountain.
NUM	20	29	온 회중 곧 이스라엘 온 족속이 아론의 죽은 것을 보고 위하여 삼십 일을 애곡하였더라	And when all the congregation saw that Aaron was dead, they mourned for Aaron thirty days, even all the house of Israel.	When the whole congregation saw that Aaron had died, the entire house of Israel mourned for him thirty days.
NUM	21	1	남방에 거하는 가나안 사람 곧 아랏의 왕이 이스라엘이 아다림 길로 온다 함을 듣고 이스라엘을 쳐서 그 중 몇 사람을 사로잡은지라	And when king Arad the Canaanite, which dwelt in the south, heard tell that Israel came by the way of the spies; then he fought against Israel, and took some of them prisoners.	When the Canaanite king of Arad, who lived in the Negev, heard that Israel was coming along the road to Atharim, he attacked Israel and captured some prisoners.
NUM	21	2	이스라엘이 여호와께 서원하여 가로되 주께서 만일 이 백성을 내 손에 붙이시면 내가 그들의 성읍을 다 멸하리이다	And Israel vowed a vow unto the Lord, and said, If thou wilt indeed deliver this people into my hand, then I will utterly destroy their cities.	So Israel made a vow to the LORD: “If You will deliver this people into our hands, we will devote their cities to destruction.”
NUM	21	3	여호와께서 이스라엘의 소리를 들으시고 가나안 사람을 붙이시매 그들과 그 성읍을 다 멸하니라 그러므로 그곳 이름을 호르마라 하였더라	And the Lord hearkened to the voice of Israel, and delivered up the Canaanites; and they utterly destroyed them and their cities: and he called the name of the place Hormah.	And the LORD heard Israel’s plea and delivered up the Canaanites. Israel devoted them and their cities to destruction; so they named the place Hormah.
NUM	21	4	백성이 호르 산에서 진행하여 홍해 길로 좇아 에돔 땅을 둘러 행하려 하였다가 길로 인하여 백성의 마음이 상하니라	And they journeyed from mount Hor by the way of the Red sea, to compass the land of Edom: and the soul of the people was much discouraged because of the way.	Then they set out from Mount Hor along the route to the Red Sea, in order to bypass the land of Edom. But the people grew impatient on the journey
NUM	21	5	백성이 하나님과 모세를 향하여 원망하되 어찌하여 우리를 애굽에서 인도하여 올려서 이 광야에서 죽게 하는고 이곳에는 식물도 없고 물도 없도다 우리 마음이 이 박한 식물을 싫어하노라 하매	And the people spake against God, and against Moses, Wherefore have ye brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness? for there is no bread, neither is there any water; and our soul loatheth this light bread.	and spoke against God and against Moses: “Why have you led us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness? There is no bread or water, and we detest this wretched food!”
NUM	21	6	여호와께서 불뱀들을 백성 중에 보내어 백성을 물게 하시므로 이스라엘 백성 중에 죽은 자가 많은지라	And the Lord sent fiery serpents among the people, and they bit the people; and much people of Israel died.	So the LORD sent venomous snakes among the people, and many of the Israelites were bitten and died.
NUM	21	7	백성이 모세에게 이르러 가로되 우리가 여호와와 당신을 향하여 원망하므로 범죄하였사오니 여호와께 기도하여 이 뱀들을 우리에게서 떠나게 하소서 모세가 백성을 위하여 기도하매	Therefore the people came to Moses, and said, We have sinned, for we have spoken against the Lord, and against thee; pray unto the Lord, that he take away the serpents from us. And Moses prayed for the people.	Then the people came to Moses and said, “We have sinned by speaking against the LORD and against you. Intercede with the LORD so He will take the snakes away from us.” So Moses interceded for the people.
NUM	21	8	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 불뱀을 만들어 장대 위에 달라 물린 자마다 그것을 보면 살리라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Make thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a pole: and it shall come to pass, that every one that is bitten, when he looketh upon it, shall live.	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Make a fiery serpent and mount it on a pole. When anyone who is bitten looks at it, he will live.”
NUM	21	9	모세가 놋뱀을 만들어 장대 위에 다니 뱀에게 물린 자마다 놋뱀을 쳐다본즉 살더라	And Moses made a serpent of brass, and put it upon a pole, and it came to pass, that if a serpent had bitten any man, when he beheld the serpent of brass, he lived.	So Moses made a bronze snake and mounted it on a pole. If anyone who was bitten looked at the bronze snake, he would live.
NUM	21	10	이스라엘 자손이 진행하여 오봇에 진 쳤고	And the children of Israel set forward, and pitched in Oboth.	Then the Israelites set out and camped at Oboth.
NUM	21	11	오봇에서 진행하여 모압 앞 해 돋는 편 광야 이예아바림에 진 쳤고	And they journeyed from Oboth, and pitched at Ije–abarim, in the wilderness which is before Moab, toward the sunrising.	They journeyed from Oboth and camped at Iye-abarim in the wilderness opposite Moab to the east.
NUM	21	12	거기서 진행하여 세렛 골짜기에 진 쳤고	From thence they removed, and pitched in the valley of Zared.	From there they set out and camped in the Valley of Zered.
NUM	21	13	거기서 진행하여 아모리인의 지경에서 흘러 나와서 광야에 이른 아르논 건너편에 진 쳤으니 아르논은 모압과 아모리 사이에서 모압의 경계가 된 것이라	From thence they removed, and pitched on the other side of Arnon, which is in the wilderness that cometh out of the coasts of the Amorites: for Arnon is the border of Moab, between Moab and the Amorites.	From there they moved on and camped on the other side of the Arnon, in the wilderness that extends into the Amorite territory. Now the Arnon is the border between the Moabites and the Amorites.
NUM	21	14	이러므로 여호와의 전쟁기에 일렀으되 수바의 와헙과 아르논 골짜기와	Wherefore it is said in the book of the wars of the Lord, What he did in the Red sea, and in the brooks of Arnon,	Therefore it is stated in the Book of the Wars of the LORD: “Waheb in Suphah and the wadis of the Arnon,
NUM	21	15	모든 골짜기의 비탈은 아르 고을을 향하여 기울어지고 모압의 경계에 닿았도다 하였더라	And at the stream of the brooks that goeth down to the dwelling of Ar, and lieth upon the border of Moab.	even the slopes of the wadis that extend to the site of Ar and lie along the border of Moab.”
NUM	21	16	거기서 브엘에 이르니 브엘은 여호와께서 모세에게 명하시기를 백성을 모으라 내가 그들에게 물을 주리라 하시던 우물이라	And from thence they went to Beer: that is the well whereof the Lord spake unto Moses, Gather the people together, and I will give them water.	From there they went on to Beer, the well where the LORD said to Moses, “Gather the people so that I may give them water.”
NUM	21	17	그 때에 이스라엘이 노래하여 가로되 우물물아 솟아나라 너희는 그것을 노래하라	Then Israel sang this song, Spring up, O well; sing ye unto it:	Then Israel sang this song: “Spring up, O well, all of you sing to it!
NUM	21	18	이 우물은 족장들이 팠고 백성의 귀인들이 홀과 지팡이로 판 것이로다 하였더라 광야에서 맛다나에 이르렀고	The princes digged the well, the nobles of the people digged it, by the direction of the lawgiver, with their staves. And from the wilderness they went to Mattanah:	The princes dug the well; the nobles of the people hollowed it out with their scepters and with their staffs.” From the wilderness the Israelites went on to Mattanah,
NUM	21	19	맛다나에서 나할리엘에 이르렀고 나할리엘에서 바못에 이르렀고	And from Mattanah to Nahaliel: and from Nahaliel to Bamoth:	and from Mattanah to Nahaliel, and from Nahaliel to Bamoth,
NUM	21	20	바못에서 모압 들에 있는 골짜기에 이르러 광야가 내려다 보이는 비스가 산 꼭대기에 이르렀더라	And from Bamoth in the valley, that is in the country of Moab, to the top of Pisgah, which looketh toward Jeshimon.	and from Bamoth to the valley in Moab where the top of Pisgah overlooks the wasteland.
NUM	21	21	이스라엘이 아모리 왕 시혼에게 사자를 보내어 가로되	And Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites, saying,	Then Israel sent messengers to Sihon king of the Amorites, saying,
NUM	21	22	우리로 당신의 땅을 통과하게 하소서 우리가 밭에든지 포도원에든지 들어가지 아니하며 우물물도 공히 마시지 아니하고 우리가 당신의 지경에서 다 나가기까지 왕의 대로로만 통행하리이다 하나	Let me pass through thy land: we will not turn into the fields, or into the vineyards; we will not drink of the waters of the well: but we will go along by the king’s high way, until we be past thy borders.	“Let us pass through your land. We will not cut through any field or vineyard, or drink water from any well. We will stay on the King’s Highway until we have passed through your territory.”
NUM	21	23	시혼이 자기 지경으로 이스라엘의 통과함을 용납하지 아니하고 그 백성을 다 모아 이스라엘을 치러 광야로 나와서 야하스에 이르러 이스라엘을 치므로	And Sihon would not suffer Israel to pass through his border: but Sihon gathered all his people together, and went out against Israel into the wilderness: and he came to Jahaz, and fought against Israel.	But Sihon would not let Israel pass through his territory. Instead, he gathered his whole army and went out to confront Israel in the wilderness. When he came to Jahaz, he fought against Israel.
NUM	21	24	이스라엘이 칼날로 그들을 쳐서 파하고 그 땅을 아르논부터 얍복까지 점령하여 암몬 자손에게까지 미치니 암몬 자손의 경계는 견고하더라	And Israel smote him with the edge of the sword, and possessed his land from Arnon unto Jabbok, even unto the children of Ammon: for the border of the children of Ammon was strong.	And Israel put him to the sword and took possession of his land, from the Arnon to the Jabbok—but only up to the border of the Ammonites, because it was fortified.
NUM	21	25	이스라엘이 이같이 그 모든 성읍을 취하고 그 아모리인의 모든 성읍 헤스본과 그 모든 촌락에 거하였으니	And Israel took all these cities: and Israel dwelt in all the cities of the Amorites, in Heshbon, and in all the villages thereof.	Israel captured all the cities of the Amorites and occupied them, including Heshbon and all its villages.
NUM	21	26	헤스본은 아모리인의 왕 시혼의 도성이라 시혼이 모압 전왕을 치고 그 모든 땅을 아르논까지 그 손에서 탈취하였더라	For Heshbon was the city of Sihon the king of the Amorites, who had fought against the former king of Moab, and taken all his land out of his hand, even unto Arnon.	Heshbon was the city of Sihon king of the Amorites, who had fought against the former king of Moab and taken all his land as far as the Arnon.
NUM	21	27	그러므로 시인이 읊어 가로되 너희는 헤스본으로 올지어다 시혼의 성을 세워 견고히 할지어다	Wherefore they that speak in proverbs say, Come into Heshbon, let the city of Sihon be built and prepared:	That is why the poets say: “Come to Heshbon, let it be rebuilt; let the city of Sihon be restored.
NUM	21	28	헤스본의 불이 나오며 시혼의 성에서 화염이 나와서 모압의 아르를 삼키며 아르논 높은 곳의 주인을 멸하였도다	For there is a fire gone out of Heshbon, a flame from the city of Sihon: it hath consumed Ar of Moab, and the lords of the high places of Arnon.	For a fire went out from Heshbon, a blaze from the city of Sihon. It consumed Ar of Moab, the rulers of Arnon’s heights.
NUM	21	29	모압아 네가 화를 당하였도다 그모스의 백성아 네가 멸망하였도다 그가 그 아들들로 도망케 하였고 그 딸들로 아모리인의 왕 시혼의 포로가 되게 하였도다	Woe to thee, Moab! thou art undone, O people of Chemosh: he hath given his sons that escaped, and his daughters, into captivity unto Sihon king of the Amorites.	Woe to you, O Moab! You are destroyed, O people of Chemosh! He gave up his sons as refugees, and his daughters into captivity to Sihon king of the Amorites.
NUM	21	30	우리가 그들을 쏘아서 헤스본을 디본까지 멸하였고 메드바에 가까운 노바까지 황폐케 하였도다 하였더라	We have shot at them; Heshbon is perished even unto Dibon, and we have laid them waste even unto Nophah, which reacheth unto Medeba.	But we have overthrown them; Heshbon is destroyed as far as Dibon. We demolished them as far as Nophah, which reaches to Medeba.”
NUM	21	31	이스라엘이 아모리인의 땅에 거하였더니	Thus Israel dwelt in the land of the Amorites.	So Israel lived in the land of the Amorites.
NUM	21	32	모세가 또 보내어 야셀을 정탐케 하고 그 촌락들을 취하고 그 곳에 있던 아모리인을 몰아 내었더라	And Moses sent to spy out Jaazer, and they took the villages thereof, and drove out the Amorites that were there.	After Moses had sent spies to Jazer, Israel captured its villages and drove out the Amorites who were there.
NUM	21	33	돌이켜 바산 길로 올라가매 바산 왕 옥이 그 백성을 다 거느리고 나와서 그들을 맞아 에드레이에서 싸우려 하는지라	And they turned and went up by the way of Bashan: and Og the king of Bashan went out against them, he, and all his people, to the battle at Edrei.	Then they turned and went up the road to Bashan, and Og king of Bashan and his whole army came out to meet them in battle at Edrei.
NUM	21	34	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 그를 두려워 말라 내가 그와 그 백성과 그 땅을 네 손에 붙였나니 너는 헤스본에 거하던 아모리인의 왕 시혼에게 행한 것 같이 그에게도 행할지니라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Fear him not: for I have delivered him into thy hand, and all his people, and his land; and thou shalt do to him as thou didst unto Sihon king of the Amorites, which dwelt at Heshbon.	But the LORD said to Moses, “Do not fear him, for I have delivered him into your hand, along with all his people and his land. Do to him as you did to Sihon king of the Amorites, who lived in Heshbon.”
NUM	21	35	이에 그와 그 아들들과 그 백성을 다 쳐서 한 사람도 남기지 아니하고 그 땅을 점령하였더라	So they smote him, and his sons, and all his people, until there was none left him alive: and they possessed his land.	So they struck down Og, along with his sons and his whole army, until no remnant was left. And they took possession of his land.
NUM	22	1	이스라엘 자손이 또 진행하여 모압 평지에 진 쳤으니 요단 건너편 곧 여리고 맞은편이더라	And the children of Israel set forward, and pitched in the plains of Moab on this side Jordan by Jericho.	Then the Israelites traveled on and camped in the plains of Moab near the Jordan, across from Jericho.
NUM	22	2	십볼의 아들 발락이 이스라엘이 아모리인에게 행한 모든 일을 보았으므로	And Balak the son of Zippor saw all that Israel had done to the Amorites.	Now Balak son of Zippor saw all that Israel had done to the Amorites,
NUM	22	3	모압이 심히 두려워하였으니 이스라엘 백성의 많음을 인함이라 모압이 이스라엘 자손의 연고로 번민하여	And Moab was sore afraid of the people, because they were many: and Moab was distressed because of the children of Israel.	and Moab was terrified of the people because they were numerous. Indeed, Moab dreaded the Israelites.
NUM	22	4	미디안 장로들에게 이르되 이제 이 무리가 소가 밭의 풀을 뜯어먹음 같이 우리 사면에 있는 것을 다 뜯어먹으리로다 하니 때에 십볼의 아들 발락이 모압 왕이었더라	And Moab said unto the elders of Midian, Now shall this company lick up all that are round about us, as the ox licketh up the grass of the field. And Balak the son of Zippor was king of the Moabites at that time.	So the Moabites said to the elders of Midian, “This horde will devour everything around us, as an ox licks up the grass of the field.” Since Balak son of Zippor was king of Moab at that time,
NUM	22	5	그가 사자를 브올의 아들 발람의 본향 강변 브돌에 보내어 발람을 부르게 하여 가로되 보라 한 민족이 애굽에서 나왔는데 그들이 지면에 덮여서 우리 맞은편에 거하였고	He sent messengers therefore unto Balaam the son of Beor to Pethor, which is by the river of the land of the children of his people, to call him, saying, Behold, there is a people come out from Egypt: behold, they cover the face of the earth, and they abide over against me:	he sent messengers to Balaam son of Beor at Pethor, which is by the Euphrates in the land of his people. “Behold, a people has come out of Egypt,” said Balak. “They cover the face of the land and have settled next to me.
NUM	22	6	우리보다 강하니 청컨대 와서 나를 위하여 이 백성을 저주하라 내가 혹 쳐서 이기어 이 땅에서 몰아 내리라 그대가 복을 비는 자는 복을 받고 저주하는 자는 저주를 받을 줄을 내가 앎이니라	Come now therefore, I pray thee, curse me this people; for they are too mighty for me: peradventure I shall prevail, that we may smite them, and that I may drive them out of the land: for I wot that he whom thou blessest is blessed, and he whom thou cursest is cursed.	So please come now and put a curse on this people, because they are too mighty for me. Perhaps I may be able to defeat them and drive them out of the land; for I know that those you bless are blessed, and those you curse are cursed.”
NUM	22	7	모압 장로들과 미디안 장로들이 손에 복술의 예물을 가지고 떠나 발람에게 이르러 발락의 말로 그에게 고하매	And the elders of Moab and the elders of Midian departed with the rewards of divination in their hand; and they came unto Balaam, and spake unto him the words of Balak.	The elders of Moab and Midian departed with the fees for divination in hand. They came to Balaam and relayed to him the words of Balak.
NUM	22	8	발람이 그들에게 이르되 이 밤에 여기서 유숙하라 여호와께서 내게 이르시는 대로 너희에게 대답하리라 모압 귀족들이 발람에게서 유하니라	And he said unto them, Lodge here this night, and I will bring you word again, as the Lord shall speak unto me: and the princes of Moab abode with Balaam.	“Spend the night here,” Balaam replied, “and I will give you the answer that the LORD speaks to me.” So the princes of Moab stayed with Balaam.
NUM	22	9	하나님이 발람에게 임하여 가라사대 너와 함께 한 이 사람들이 누구냐	And God came unto Balaam, and said, What men are these with thee?	Then God came to Balaam and asked, “Who are these men with you?”
NUM	22	10	발람이 하나님께 고하되 모압 왕 십볼의 아들 발락이 내게 보낸 자라 이르기를	And Balaam said unto God, Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab, hath sent unto me, saying,	And Balaam said to God, “Balak son of Zippor, king of Moab, sent me this message:
NUM	22	11	보라 애굽에서 나온 민족이 있어 지면에 덮였으니 이제 와서 나를 위하여 그들을 저주하라 내가 혹 그들을 쳐서 몰아낼 수 있으리라 하나이다	Behold, there is a people come out of Egypt, which covereth the face of the earth: come now, curse me them; peradventure I shall be able to overcome them, and drive them out.	‘Behold, a people has come out of Egypt, and they cover the face of the land. Now come and put a curse on them for me. Perhaps I may be able to fight against them and drive them away.’”
NUM	22	12	하나님이 발람에게 이르시되 너는 그들과 함께 가지도 말고 그 백성들을 저주하지도 말라 그들은 복을 받은 자니라	And God said unto Balaam, Thou shalt not go with them; thou shalt not curse the people: for they are blessed.	But God said to Balaam, “Do not go with them. You are not to curse this people, for they are blessed.”
NUM	22	13	발람이 아침에 일어나서 발락의 귀족들에게 이르되 너희는 너희 땅으로 돌아가라 내가 너희와 함께 가기를 여호와께서 허락지 아니하시느니라	And Balaam rose up in the morning, and said unto the princes of Balak, Get you into your land: for the Lord refuseth to give me leave to go with you.	So Balaam got up the next morning and said to Balak’s princes, “Go back to your homeland, because the LORD has refused to let me go with you.”
NUM	22	14	모압 귀족들이 일어나 발락에게로 가서 고하되 발람이 우리와 함께 오기를 거절하더이다	And the princes of Moab rose up, and they went unto Balak, and said, Balaam refuseth to come with us.	And the princes of Moab arose, returned to Balak, and said, “Balaam refused to come with us.”
NUM	22	15	발락이 다시 그들보다 더 높은 귀족들을 더 많이 보내매	And Balak sent yet again princes, more, and more honourable than they.	Then Balak sent other princes, more numerous and more distinguished than the first messengers.
NUM	22	16	그들이 발람에게로 나아가서 그에게 이르되 십볼의 아들 발락의 말씀에 청컨대 아무 것에도 거리끼지 말고 내게로 오라	And they came to Balaam, and said to him, Thus saith Balak the son of Zippor, Let nothing, I pray thee, hinder thee from coming unto me:	They came to Balaam and said, “This is what Balak son of Zippor says: ‘Please let nothing hinder you from coming to me,
NUM	22	17	내가 그대를 높여 크게 존귀케 하고 그대가 내게 말하는 것은 무엇이든지 시행하리니 청컨대 와서 나를 위하여 이 백성을 저주하라 하시더이다	For I will promote thee unto very great honour, and I will do whatsoever thou sayest unto me: come therefore, I pray thee, curse me this people.	for I will honor you richly and do whatever you say. So please come and put a curse on this people for me!’”
NUM	22	18	발람이 발락의 신하들에게 대답하여 가로되 발락이 그 집에 은금을 가득히 채워서 내게 줄지라도 내가 능히 여호와 내 하나님의 말씀을 어기어 덜하거나 더하지 못하겠노라	And Balaam answered and said unto the servants of Balak, If Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord my God, to do less or more.	But Balaam replied to the servants of Balak, “If Balak were to give me his house full of silver and gold, I could not do anything small or great to go beyond the command of the LORD my God.
NUM	22	19	그런즉 이제 너희도 이 밤에 여기서 유하라 여호와께서 내게 무슨 말씀을 더하실는지 알아 보리라	Now therefore, I pray you, tarry ye also here this night, that I may know what the Lord will say unto me more.	So now, please stay here overnight as the others did, that I may find out what else the LORD has to tell me.”
NUM	22	20	밤에 하나님이 발람에게 임하여 이르시되 그 사람들이 너를 부르러 왔거든 일어나 함께 가라 그러나 내가 네게 이르는 말만 준행할지니라	And God came unto Balaam at night, and said unto him, If the men come to call thee, rise up, and go with them; but yet the word which I shall say unto thee, that shalt thou do.	That night God came to Balaam and said, “Since these men have come to summon you, get up and go with them, but you must only do what I tell you.”
NUM	22	21	발람이 아침에 일어나서 자기 나귀에 안장을 지우고 모압 귀족들과 함께 행하니	And Balaam rose up in the morning, and saddled his ass, and went with the princes of Moab.	So in the morning Balaam got up, saddled his donkey, and went with the princes of Moab.
NUM	22	22	그가 행함을 인하여 하나님이 진노하심으로 여호와의 사자가 그를 막으려고 길에 서니라 발람은 자기 나귀를 타고 그 두 종은 그와 함께 있더니	And God’s anger was kindled because he went: and the angel of the Lord stood in the way for an adversary against him. Now he was riding upon his ass, and his two servants were with him.	Then God’s anger was kindled because Balaam was going along, and the angel of the LORD stood in the road to oppose him. Balaam was riding his donkey, and his two servants were with him.
NUM	22	23	나귀가 여호와의 사자가 칼을 빼어 손에 들고 길에 선 것을 보고 길에서 떠나 밭으로 들어간지라 발람이 나귀를 길로 돌이키려고 채찍질하니	And the ass saw the angel of the Lord standing in the way, and his sword drawn in his hand: and the ass turned aside out of the way, and went into the field: and Balaam smote the ass, to turn her into the way.	When the donkey saw the angel of the LORD standing in the road with a drawn sword in his hand, she turned off the path and went into a field. So Balaam beat her to return her to the path.
NUM	22	24	여호와의 사자는 포도원 사이 좁은 길에 섰고 좌우에는 담이 있더라	But the angel of the Lord stood in a path of the vineyards, a wall being on this side, and a wall on that side.	Then the angel of the LORD stood in a narrow passage between two vineyards, with walls on either side.
NUM	22	25	나귀가 여호와의 사자를 보고 몸을 담에 대고 발람의 발을 그 담에 비비어 상하게 하매 발람이 다시 채찍질하니	And when the ass saw the angel of the Lord, she thrust herself unto the wall, and crushed Balaam’s foot against the wall: and he smote her again.	And the donkey saw the angel of the LORD and pressed herself against the wall, crushing Balaam’s foot against it. So he beat her once again.
NUM	22	26	여호와의 사자가 더 나아가서 좌우로 피할 데 없는 좁은 곳에 선지라	And the angel of the Lord went further, and stood in a narrow place, where was no way to turn either to the right hand or to the left.	And the angel of the LORD moved on ahead and stood in a narrow place where there was no room to turn to the right or left.
NUM	22	27	나귀가 여호와의 사자를 보고 발람의 밑에 엎드리니 발람이 노하여 자기 지팡이로 나귀를 때리는 지라	And when the ass saw the angel of the Lord, she fell down under Balaam: and Balaam’s anger was kindled, and he smote the ass with a staff.	When the donkey saw the angel of the LORD, she lay down under Balaam, and he became furious and beat her with his staff.
NUM	22	28	여호와께서 나귀 입을 여시니 발람에게 이르되 내가 네게 무엇을 하였기에 나를 이같이 세 번을 때리느뇨	And the Lord opened the mouth of the ass, and she said unto Balaam, What have I done unto thee, that thou hast smitten me these three times?	Then the LORD opened the donkey’s mouth, and she said to Balaam, “What have I done to you that you have beaten me these three times?”
NUM	22	29	발람이 나귀에게 말하되 네가 나를 거역하는 연고니 내 손에 칼이 있었더면 곧 너를 죽였으리라	And Balaam said unto the ass, Because thou hast mocked me: I would there were a sword in mine hand, for now would I kill thee.	Balaam answered the donkey, “You have made a fool of me! If I had a sword in my hand, I would kill you right now!”
NUM	22	30	나귀가 발람에게 이르되 나는 네가 오늘까지 네 일생에 타는 나귀가 아니냐 내가 언제든지 네게 이같이 하는 행습이 있더냐 가로되 없었느니라	And the ass said unto Balaam, Am not I thine ass, upon which thou hast ridden ever since I was thine unto this day? was I ever wont to do so unto thee? And he said, Nay.	But the donkey said to Balaam, “Am I not the donkey you have ridden all your life until today? Have I ever treated you this way before?” “No,” he replied.
NUM	22	31	때에 여호와께서 발람의 눈을 밝히시매 여호와의 사자가 손에 칼을 빼어들고 길에 선 것을 보고 머리를 숙이고 엎드리니	Then the Lord opened the eyes of Balaam, and he saw the angel of the Lord standing in the way, and his sword drawn in his hand: and he bowed down his head, and fell flat on his face.	Then the LORD opened Balaam’s eyes, and he saw the angel of the LORD standing in the road with a drawn sword in his hand. And Balaam bowed low and fell facedown.
NUM	22	32	여호와의 사자가 그에게 이르되 너는 어찌하여 네 나귀를 이같이 세 번 때렸느냐 보라 네 길이 내 앞에 패역하므로 내가 너를 막으려고 나왔더니	And the angel of the Lord said unto him, Wherefore hast thou smitten thine ass these three times? behold, I went out to withstand thee, because thy way is perverse before me:	The angel of the LORD asked him, “Why have you beaten your donkey these three times? Behold, I have come out to oppose you, because your way is perverse before me.
NUM	22	33	나귀가 나를 보고 이같이 세 번을 돌이켜 내 앞에서 피하였느니라 나귀가 만일 돌이켜 나를 피하지 아니하였더면 내가 벌써 너를 죽이고 나귀는 살렸으리라	And the ass saw me, and turned from me these three times: unless she had turned from me, surely now also I had slain thee, and saved her alive.	The donkey saw me and turned away from me these three times. If she had not turned away, then by now I would surely have killed you and let her live.”
NUM	22	34	발람이 여호와의 사자에게 말씀하되 내가 범죄하였나이다 당신이 나를 막으려고 길에 서신 줄 내가 알지 못하였나이다 당신이 이를 기뻐하지 아니하시면 나는 돌아가겠나이다	And Balaam said unto the angel of the Lord, I have sinned; for I knew not that thou stoodest in the way against me: now therefore, if it displease thee, I will get me back again.	“I have sinned,” Balaam said to the angel of the LORD, “for I did not realize that you were standing in the road to confront me. And now, if this is displeasing in your sight, I will go back home.”
NUM	22	35	여호와의 사자가 발람에게 이르되 그 사람들과 함께 가라 내가 네게 이르는 말만 말할지니라 발람이 발락의 귀족들과 함께 가니라	And the angel of the Lord said unto Balaam, Go with the men: but only the word that I shall speak unto thee, that thou shalt speak. So Balaam went with the princes of Balak.	But the angel of the LORD said to Balaam, “Go with the men, but you are to speak only what I tell you.” So Balaam went with the princes of Balak.
NUM	22	36	발락이 발람의 온다 함을 듣고 모압 변경의 끝 아르논 가에 있는 성읍까지 가서 그를 영접하고	And when Balak heard that Balaam was come, he went out to meet him unto a city of Moab, which is in the border of Arnon, which is in the utmost coast.	When Balak heard that Balaam was coming, he went out to meet him at the Moabite city on the Arnon border, at the edge of his territory.
NUM	22	37	발락이 발람에게 이르되 내가 특별히 보내어 그대를 부르지 아니하였느냐 그대가 어찌 내게 오지 아니하였느냐 내가 어찌 그대를 높여 존귀케 하지 못하겠느냐	And Balak said unto Balaam, Did I not earnestly send unto thee to call thee? wherefore camest thou not unto me? am I not able indeed to promote thee to honour?	And he said to Balaam, “Did I not send you an urgent summons? Why did you not come to me? Am I really not able to richly reward you?”
NUM	22	38	발람이 발락에게 이르되 내가 오기는 하였으나 무엇을 임의로 말할 수 있으리이까 하나님이 내 입에 주시는 말씀 그것을 말할 뿐이니이다	And Balaam said unto Balak, Lo, I am come unto thee: have I now any power at all to say any thing? the word that God putteth in my mouth, that shall I speak.	“See, I have come to you,” Balaam replied, “but can I say just anything? I must speak only the word that God puts in my mouth.”
NUM	22	39	발람이 발락과 동행하여 기럇후솟에 이르러서는	And Balaam went with Balak, and they came unto Kirjath–huzoth.	So Balaam accompanied Balak, and they came to Kiriath-huzoth.
NUM	22	40	발락이 우양을 잡아 발람과 그와 함께 한 귀족을 대접하였더라	And Balak offered oxen and sheep, and sent to Balaam, and to the princes that were with him.	Balak sacrificed cattle and sheep, and he gave portions to Balaam and the princes who were with him.
NUM	22	41	아침에 발락이 발람과 함께 하고 그를 인도하여 바알의 산당에 오르매 발람이 거기서 이스라엘 백성의 진 끝까지 보니라	And it came to pass on the morrow, that Balak took Balaam, and brought him up into the high places of Baal, that thence he might see the utmost part of the people.	The next morning, Balak took Balaam and brought him up to Bamoth-baal. From there he could see the outskirts of the camp of the people.
NUM	23	1	발람이 발락에게 이르되 나를 위하여 여기 일곱 단을 쌓고 거기 수송아지 일곱과 수양 일곱을 준비하소서 하매	And Balaam said unto Balak, Build me here seven altars, and prepare me here seven oxen and seven rams.	Then Balaam said to Balak, “Build for me seven altars here, and prepare for me seven bulls and seven rams.”
NUM	23	2	발락이 발람의 말대로 준비한 후에 발락과 발람이 매 단에 수송아지 하나와 수양 하나를 드리니라	And Balak did as Balaam had spoken; and Balak and Balaam offered on every altar a bullock and a ram.	So Balak did as Balaam had instructed, and Balak and Balaam offered a bull and a ram on each altar.
NUM	23	3	발람이 발락에게 이르되 당신의 번제물 곁에 서소서 나는 저리로 갈지라 여호와께서 혹시 오셔서 나를 만나시리니 그가 내게 지시하시는 것은 다 당신에게 고하리이다 하고 사태난 산에 이른즉	And Balaam said unto Balak, Stand by thy burnt offering, and I will go: peradventure the Lord will come to meet me: and whatsoever he sheweth me I will tell thee. And he went to an high place.	“Stay here by your burnt offering while I am gone,” Balaam said to Balak. “Perhaps the LORD will meet with me. And whatever He reveals to me, I will tell you.” So Balaam went off to a barren height,
NUM	23	4	하나님이 발람에게 임하시는지라 발람이 고하되 내가 일곱 단을 베풀고 매 단에 수송아지 하나와 수양 하나를 드렸나이다	And God met Balaam: and he said unto him, I have prepared seven altars, and I have offered upon every altar a bullock and a ram.	and God met with him. “I have set up seven altars,” Balaam said, “and on each altar I have offered a bull and a ram.”
NUM	23	5	여호와께서 발람의 입에 말씀을 주어 가라사대 발락에게 돌아가서 이렇게 말할지니라	And the Lord put a word in Balaam’s mouth, and said, Return unto Balak, and thus thou shalt speak.	Then the LORD put a message in Balaam’s mouth, saying, “Return to Balak and give him this message.”
NUM	23	6	그가 발락에게 돌아간즉 발락과 모압 모든 귀족이 번제물 곁에 함께 섰더라	And he returned unto him, and, lo, he stood by his burnt sacrifice, he, and all the princes of Moab.	So he returned to Balak, who was standing there beside his burnt offering, with all the princes of Moab.
NUM	23	7	발람이 노래를 지어 가로되 발락이 나를 아람에서, 모압 왕이 동편 산에서 데려다가 이르기를 와서 나를 위하여 야곱을 저주하라, 와서 이스라엘을 꾸짖으라 하도다	And he took up his parable, and said, Balak the king of Moab hath brought me from Aram, out of the mountains of the east, saying, Come, curse me Jacob, and come, defy Israel.	And Balaam lifted up an oracle, saying: “Balak brought me from Aram, the king of Moab from the mountains of the east. ‘Come,’ he said, ‘put a curse on Jacob for me; come and denounce Israel!’
NUM	23	8	하나님이 저주치 않으신 자를 내 어찌 저주하며 여호와께서 꾸짖지 않으신 자를 내 어찌 꾸짖을꼬	How shall I curse, whom God hath not cursed? or how shall I defy, whom the Lord hath not defied?	How can I curse what God has not cursed? How can I denounce what the LORD has not denounced?
NUM	23	9	내가 바위 위에서 그들을 보며 작은 산에서 그들을 바라보니 이 백성은 홀로 처할 것이라 그를 열방 중의 하나로 여기지 않으리로다	For from the top of the rocks I see him, and from the hills I behold him: lo, the people shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among the nations.	For I see them from atop the rocky cliffs, and I watch them from the hills. Behold, a people dwelling apart, not reckoning themselves among the nations.
NUM	23	10	야곱의 티끌을 뉘 능히 계산하며 이스라엘 사분지 일을 뉘 능히 계수할꼬 나는 의인의 죽음 같이 죽기를 원하며 나의 종말이 그와 같기를 바라도다 하매	Who can count the dust of Jacob, and the number of the fourth part of Israel? Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his!	Who can count the dust of Jacob or number even a fourth of Israel? Let me die the death of the righteous; let my end be like theirs!”
NUM	23	11	발락이 발람에게 이르되 그대가 어찌 내게 이같이 행하느냐 나의 원수를 저주하라고 그대를 데려왔거늘 그대가 온전히 축복하였도다	And Balak said unto Balaam, What hast thou done unto me? I took thee to curse mine enemies, and, behold, thou hast blessed them altogether.	Then Balak said to Balaam, “What have you done to me? I brought you here to curse my enemies, and behold, you have only blessed them!”
NUM	23	12	대답하여 가로되 여호와께서 내 입에 주신 말씀을 내가 어찌 말하지 아니할 수 있으리이까	And he answered and said, Must I not take heed to speak that which the Lord hath put in my mouth?	But Balaam replied, “Should I not speak exactly what the LORD puts in my mouth?”
NUM	23	13	발락이 가로되 나와 함께 그들을 달리 볼 곳으로 가자 거기서는 그들을 다 보지 못하고 그 끝만 보리니 거기서 나를 위하여 그들을 저주하라 하고	And Balak said unto him, Come, I pray thee, with me unto another place, from whence thou mayest see them: thou shalt see but the utmost part of them, and shalt not see them all: and curse me them from thence.	Then Balak said to him, “Please come with me to another place where you can see them. You will only see the outskirts of their camp—not all of them. And from there, curse them for me.”
NUM	23	14	소빔 들로 인도하여 비스가 꼭대기에 이르러 일곱 단을 쌓고 매 단에 수송아지 하나와 수양 하나를 드리니	And he brought him into the field of Zophim, to the top of Pisgah, and built seven altars, and offered a bullock and a ram on every altar.	So Balak took him to the field of Zophim, to the top of Pisgah, where he built seven altars and offered a bull and a ram on each altar.
NUM	23	15	발람이 발락에게 이르되 내가 저기서 여호와를 만날 동안에 여기 당신의 번제물 곁에 서소서 하니라	And he said unto Balak, Stand here by thy burnt offering, while I meet the Lord yonder.	Balaam said to Balak, “Stay here beside your burnt offering while I meet the LORD over there.”
NUM	23	16	여호와께서 발람에게 임하사 그 입에 말씀을 주어 가라사대 발락에게로 돌아가서 이렇게 말할지니라	And the Lord met Balaam, and put a word in his mouth, and said, Go again unto Balak, and say thus.	And the LORD met with Balaam and put a message in his mouth, saying, “Return to Balak and speak what I tell you.”
NUM	23	17	발람이 와서 본즉 발락이 번제물 곁에 섰고 모압 귀족들이 함께 있더라 발락이 발람에게 이르되 여호와께서 무슨 말씀을 하시더냐	And when he came to him, behold, he stood by his burnt offering, and the princes of Moab with him. And Balak said unto him, What hath the Lord spoken?	So he returned to Balak, who was standing there by his burnt offering with the princes of Moab. “What did the LORD say?” Balak asked.
NUM	23	18	발람이 노래를 지어 가로되 발락이여 일어나 들을지어다 십볼의 아들이여 나를 자세히 들으라	And he took up his parable, and said, Rise up, Balak, and hear; hearken unto me, thou son of Zippor:	Then Balaam lifted up an oracle, saying: “Arise, O Balak, and listen; give ear to me, O son of Zippor.
NUM	23	19	하나님은 인생이 아니시니 식언치 않으시고 인자가 아니시니 후회가 없으시도다 어찌 그 말씀하신 바를 행치 않으시며 하신 말씀을 실행치 않으시랴	God is not a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he should repent: hath he said, and shall he not do it? or hath he spoken, and shall he not make it good?	God is not a man, that He should lie, or a son of man, that He should change His mind. Does He speak and not act? Does He promise and not fulfill?
NUM	23	20	내가 축복의 명을 받았으니 그가 하신 축복을 내가 돌이킬 수 없도다	Behold, I have received commandment to bless: and he hath blessed; and I cannot reverse it.	I have indeed received a command to bless; He has blessed, and I cannot change it.
NUM	23	21	여호와는 야곱의 허물을 보지 아니하시며 이스라엘의 패역을 보지 아니하시는도다 여호와 그의 하나님이 그와 함께 계시니 왕을 부르는 소리가 그 중에 있도다	He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither hath he seen perverseness in Israel: the Lord his God is with him, and the shout of a king is among them.	He considers no disaster for Jacob; He sees no trouble for Israel. The LORD their God is with them, and the shout of the King is among them.
NUM	23	22	하나님이 그들을 애굽에서 인도하여 내었으니 그 힘이 들소와 같도다	God brought them out of Egypt; he hath as it were the strength of an unicorn.	God brought them out of Egypt with strength like a wild ox.
NUM	23	23	야곱을 해할 사술이 없고 이스라엘을 해할 복술이 없도다 이 때에 야곱과 이스라엘에 대하여 논할진대 하나님의 행하신 일이 어찌 그리 크뇨 하리로다	Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any divination against Israel: according to this time it shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, What hath God wrought!	For there is no spell against Jacob and no divination against Israel. It will now be said of Jacob and Israel, ‘What great things God has done!’
NUM	23	24	이 백성이 암사자 같이 일어나고 수사자 같이 일어나서 움킨 것을 먹으며 죽인 피를 마시기 전에는 눕지 아니하리로다 하매	Behold, the people shall rise up as a great lion, and lift up himself as a young lion: he shall not lie down until he eat of the prey, and drink the blood of the slain.	Behold, the people rise like a lioness; they rouse themselves like a lion, not resting until they devour their prey and drink the blood of the slain.”
NUM	23	25	발락이 발람에게 이르되 그들을 저주하지도 말고 축복하지도 말라	And Balak said unto Balaam, Neither curse them at all, nor bless them at all.	Now Balak said to Balaam, “Then neither curse them at all nor bless them at all!”
NUM	23	26	발람이 발락에게 대답하여 가로되 내가 당신에게 고하여 이르기를 여호와께서 말씀하신 것은 내가 그대로 하지 않을 수 없다고 하지 아니하더이까	But Balaam answered and said unto Balak, Told not I thee, saying, All that the Lord speaketh, that I must do?	But Balaam replied, “Did I not tell you that whatever the LORD says, I must do?”
NUM	23	27	발락이 발람에게 또 이르되 오라 내가 너를 다른 곳으로 인도하리니 네가 거기서 나를 위하여 그들을 저주하기를 하나님이 혹시 기뻐하시리라 하고	And Balak said unto Balaam, Come, I pray thee, I will bring thee unto another place; peradventure it will please God that thou mayest curse me them from thence.	“Please come,” said Balak, “I will take you to another place. Perhaps it will please God that you curse them for me from there.”
NUM	23	28	발락이 발람을 인도하여 광야가 내려다 보이는 브올 산 꼭대기에 이르니	And Balak brought Balaam unto the top of Peor, that looketh toward Jeshimon.	And Balak took Balaam to the top of Peor, which overlooks the wasteland.
NUM	23	29	발람이 발락에게 이르되 나를 위하여 여기 일곱 단을 쌓고 거기 수송아지 일곱과 수양 일곱을 준비하소서	And Balaam said unto Balak, Build me here seven altars, and prepare me here seven bullocks and seven rams.	Then Balaam said, “Build for me seven altars here, and prepare for me seven bulls and seven rams.”
NUM	23	30	발락이 발람의 말대로 행하여 매 단에 수송아지 하나와 수양 하나를 드리니라	And Balak did as Balaam had said, and offered a bullock and a ram on every altar.	So Balak did as Balaam had instructed, and he offered a bull and a ram on each altar.
NUM	24	1	발람이 자기와 이스라엘을 축복하는 것을 여호와께서 선히 여기심을 보고 전과 같이 사술을 쓰지 아니하고 그 낯을 광야로 향하여	And when Balaam saw that it pleased the Lord to bless Israel, he went not, as at other times, to seek for enchantments, but he set his face toward the wilderness.	And when Balaam saw that it pleased the LORD to bless Israel, he did not resort to sorcery as on previous occasions, but he turned his face toward the wilderness.
NUM	24	2	눈을 들어 이스라엘이 그 지파대로 거하는 것을 보는 동시에 하나님의 신이 그 위에 임하신지라	And Balaam lifted up his eyes, and he saw Israel abiding in his tents according to their tribes; and the spirit of God came upon him.	When Balaam looked up and saw Israel encamped tribe by tribe, the Spirit of God came upon him,
NUM	24	3	그가 노래를 지어 가로되 브올의 아들 발람이 말하며 눈을 감았던 자가 말하며	And he took up his parable, and said, Balaam the son of Beor hath said, and the man whose eyes are open hath said:	and he lifted up an oracle, saying: “This is the prophecy of Balaam son of Beor, the prophecy of a man whose eyes are open,
NUM	24	4	하나님의 말씀을 듣는 자, 전능자의 이상을 보는 자, 엎드려서 눈을 뜬자가 말하기를	He hath said, which heard the words of God, which saw the vision of the Almighty, falling into a trance, but having his eyes open:	the prophecy of one who hears the words of God, who sees a vision from the Almighty, who bows down with eyes wide open:
NUM	24	5	야곱이여 네 장막이, 이스라엘이여 네 거처가 어찌 그리 아름다운고	How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy tabernacles, O Israel!	How lovely are your tents, O Jacob, your dwellings, O Israel!
NUM	24	6	그 벌어짐이 골짜기 같고 강 가의 동산 같으며 여호와의 심으신 침향목들 같고 물가의 백향목들 같도다	As the valleys are they spread forth, as gardens by the river’s side, as the trees of lign aloes which the Lord hath planted, and as cedar trees beside the waters.	They spread out like palm groves, like gardens beside a stream, like aloes the LORD has planted, like cedars beside the waters.
NUM	24	7	그 통에서는 물이 넘치겠고 그 종자는 많은 물가에 있으리로다 그 왕이 아각보다 높으니 그 나라가 진흥하리로다	He shall pour the water out of his buckets, and his seed shall be in many waters, and his king shall be higher than Agag, and his kingdom shall be exalted.	Water will flow from his buckets, and his seed will have abundant water. His king will be greater than Agag, and his kingdom will be exalted.
NUM	24	8	하나님이 그를 애굽에서 인도하여 내셨으니 그 힘이 들소와 같도다 그 적국을 삼키고 그들의 뼈를 꺽으며 화살을 쏘아 꿰뚫으리로다	God brought him forth out of Egypt; he hath as it were the strength of an unicorn: he shall eat up the nations his enemies, and shall break their bones, and pierce them through with his arrows.	God brought him out of Egypt with strength like a wild ox, to devour hostile nations and crush their bones, to pierce them with arrows.
NUM	24	9	꿇어 앉고 누움이 수사자와 같고 암사자와도 같으니 일으킨 자 누구이랴 너를 축복하는 자마다 복을 받을 것이요 너를 저주하는 자마다 저주를 받을지로다	He couched, he lay down as a lion, and as a great lion: who shall stir him up? Blessed is he that blesseth thee, and cursed is he that curseth thee.	He crouches, he lies down like a lion; like a lioness, who dares to rouse him? Blessed are those who bless you and cursed are those who curse you.”
NUM	24	10	발락이 발람에게 노하여 손뼉을 치며 발람에게 말하되 내가 그대를 부른 것은 내 원수를 저주하라 함이어늘 그대가 이같이 세 번 그들을 축복하였도다	And Balak’s anger was kindled against Balaam, and he smote his hands together: and Balak said unto Balaam, I called thee to curse mine enemies, and, behold, thou hast altogether blessed them these three times.	Then Balak’s anger burned against Balaam, and he struck his hands together and said to Balaam, “I summoned you to curse my enemies, but behold, you have persisted in blessing them these three times.
NUM	24	11	그러므로 그대는 이제 그대의 곳으로 달려가라 내가 그대를 높여 심히 존귀케 하기로 뜻하였더니 여호와가 그대를 막아 존귀치 못하게 하셨도다	Therefore now flee thou to thy place: I thought to promote thee unto great honour; but, lo, the Lord hath kept thee back from honour.	Therefore, flee at once to your home! I said I would richly reward you, but instead the LORD has denied your reward.”
NUM	24	12	발람이 발락에게 이르되 당신이 내게 보낸 사자들에게 내가 고하여 이르지 아니하였나이까	And Balaam said unto Balak, Spake I not also to thy messengers which thou sentest unto me, saying,	Balaam answered Balak, “Did I not already tell the messengers you sent me
NUM	24	13	가령 발락이 그 집에 은금을 가득히 채워서 내게 줄지라도 나는 여호와의 말씀을 어기고 선악간 임의로 행하지 못하고 여호와께서 말씀하신 대로 말하리라 하지 아니하였나이까	If Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the commandment of the Lord, to do either good or bad of mine own mind; but what the Lord saith, that will I speak?	that even if Balak were to give me his house full of silver and gold, I could not do anything of my own accord, good or bad, to go beyond the command of the LORD? I will speak whatever the LORD says.
NUM	24	14	이제 나는 내 백성에게로 돌아가거니와 들으소서 내가 이 백성이 후일에 당신의 백성에게 어떻게 할 것을 당신에게 고하리이다 하고	And now, behold, I go unto my people: come therefore, and I will advertise thee what this people shall do to thy people in the latter days.	Now I am going back to my people, but come, let me warn you what this people will do to your people in the days to come.”
NUM	24	15	노래를 지어 가로되 브올의 아들 발람이 말하며 눈을 감았던 자가 말하며	And he took up his parable, and said, Balaam the son of Beor hath said, and the man whose eyes are open hath said:	Then Balaam lifted up an oracle, saying, “This is the prophecy of Balaam son of Beor, the prophecy of a man whose eyes are open,
NUM	24	16	하나님의 말씀을 듣는 자가 말하며 지극히 높으신 자의 지식을 아는 자, 전능자의 이상을 보는 자, 엎드려서 눈을 뜬 자가 말하기를	He hath said, which heard the words of God, and knew the knowledge of the most High, which saw the vision of the Almighty, falling into a trance, but having his eyes open:	the prophecy of one who hears the words of God, who has knowledge from the Most High, who sees a vision from the Almighty, who bows down with eyes wide open:
NUM	24	17	내가 그를 보아도 이 때의 일이 아니며 내가 그를 바라보아도 가까운 일이 아니로다 한 별이 야곱에게서 나오며 한 홀이 이스라엘에게서 일어나서 모압을 이편에서 저편까지 쳐서 파하고 또 소동하는 자식들을 다 멸하리로다	I shall see him, but not now: I shall behold him, but not nigh: there shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Sceptre shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite the corners of Moab, and destroy all the children of Sheth.	I see him, but not now; I behold him, but not near. A star will come forth from Jacob, and a scepter will arise from Israel. He will crush the skulls of Moab and strike down all the sons of Sheth.
NUM	24	18	그 원수 에돔은 그들의 산업이 되며 그 원수 세일도 그들의 산업이 되고 그 동시에 이스라엘은 용감히 행동하리로다	And Edom shall be a possession, Seir also shall be a possession for his enemies; and Israel shall do valiantly.	Edom will become a possession, as will Seir, his enemy; but Israel will perform with valor.
NUM	24	19	주권자가 야곱에게서 나서 남은 자들을 그 성읍에서 멸절하리로다 하고	Out of Jacob shall come he that shall have dominion, and shall destroy him that remaineth of the city.	A ruler will come from Jacob and destroy the survivors of the city.”
NUM	24	20	또 아말렉을 바라보며 노래를 지어 가로되 아말렉은 열국 중 으뜸이나 종말은 멸망에 이르리로다	And when he looked on Amalek, he took up his parable, and said, Amalek was the first of the nations; but his latter end shall be that he perish for ever.	Then Balaam saw Amalek and lifted up an oracle, saying: “Amalek was first among the nations, but his end is destruction.”
NUM	24	21	또 가인 족속을 바라보며 노래를 지어 가로되 너의 거처가 견고하니 네 보금자리는 바위에 있도다	And he looked on the Kenites, and took up his parable, and said, Strong is thy dwellingplace, and thou puttest thy nest in a rock.	Next he saw the Kenites and lifted up an oracle, saying: “Your dwelling place is secure, and your nest is set in a cliff.
NUM	24	22	그러나 가인이 쇠미하리니 나중에는 앗수르의 포로가 되리로다 하고	Nevertheless the Kenite shall be wasted, until Asshur shall carry thee away captive.	Yet Kain will be destroyed when Asshur takes you captive.”
NUM	24	23	또 노래를 지어 가로되 슬프다 하나님이 이 일을 행하시리니 그 때에 살 자가 누구이랴	And he took up his parable, and said, Alas, who shall live when God doeth this!	Once more Balaam lifted up an oracle, saying: “Ah, who can live unless God has ordained it?
NUM	24	24	깃딤 해변에서 배들이 와서 앗수르를 학대하며 에벨을 괴롭게 하리라마는 그도 멸망하리로다 하고	And ships shall come from the coast of Chittim, and shall afflict Asshur, and shall afflict Eber, and he also shall perish for ever.	Ships will come from the coasts of Cyprus; they will subdue Asshur and Eber, but they too will perish forever.”
NUM	24	25	발람이 일어나 자기 곳으로 돌아갔고 발락도 자기 길로 갔더라	And Balaam rose up, and went and returned to his place: and Balak also went his way.	Then Balaam arose and returned to his homeland, and Balak also went on his way.
NUM	25	1	이스라엘이 싯딤에 머물러 있더니 그 백성이 모압 여자들과 음행하기를 시작하니라	And Israel abode in Shittim, and the people began to commit whoredom with the daughters of Moab.	While Israel was staying in Shittim, the men began to indulge in sexual immorality with the daughters of Moab,
NUM	25	2	그 여자들이 그 신들에게 제사할 때에 백성을 청하매 백성이 먹고 그들의 신들에게 절하므로	And they called the people unto the sacrifices of their gods: and the people did eat, and bowed down to their gods.	who also invited them to the sacrifices for their gods. And the people ate and bowed down to these gods.
NUM	25	3	이스라엘이 바알브올에게 부속된지라 여호와께서 이스라엘에게 진노하시니라	And Israel joined himself unto Baal–peor: and the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel.	So Israel joined in worshiping Baal of Peor, and the anger of the LORD burned against them.
NUM	25	4	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 백성의 두령들을 잡아 태양을 향하여 여호와 앞에 목매어 달라 그리하면 여호와의 진노가 이스라엘을 떠나리라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Take all the heads of the people, and hang them up before the Lord against the sun, that the fierce anger of the Lord may be turned away from Israel.	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Take all the leaders of the people and execute them in broad daylight before the LORD, so that His fierce anger may turn away from Israel.”
NUM	25	5	모세가 이스라엘 사사들에게 이르되 너희는 각기 관할하는 자 중에 바알브올에게 부속한 사람들을 죽이라 하니라	And Moses said unto the judges of Israel, Slay ye every one his men that were joined unto Baal–peor.	So Moses told the judges of Israel, “Each of you must kill all of his men who have joined in worshiping Baal of Peor.”
NUM	25	6	이스라엘 자손의 온 회중이 회막문에서 울 때에 이스라엘 자손 한 사람이 모세와 온 회중의 목전에 미디안의 한 여인을 데리고 그 형제에게로 온지라	And, behold, one of the children of Israel came and brought unto his brethren a Midianitish woman in the sight of Moses, and in the sight of all the congregation of the children of Israel, who were weeping before the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.	Just then an Israelite man brought to his family a Midianite woman in the sight of Moses and the whole congregation of Israel while they were weeping at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting.
NUM	25	7	제사장 아론의 손자 엘르아살의 아들 비느하스가 보고 회중의 가운데서 일어나 손에 창을 들고	And when Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, saw it, he rose up from among the congregation, and took a javelin in his hand;	On seeing this, Phinehas son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, got up from the assembly, took a spear in his hand,
NUM	25	8	그 이스라엘 남자를 따라 그의 막에 들어가서 이스라엘 남자와 그 여인의 배를 꿰뚫어서 두 사람을 죽이니 염병이 이스라엘 자손에게서 그쳤더라	And he went after the man of Israel into the tent, and thrust both of them through, the man of Israel, and the woman through her belly. So the plague was stayed from the children of Israel.	followed the Israelite into his tent, and drove the spear through both of them—through the Israelite and on through the belly of the woman. So the plague against the Israelites was halted,
NUM	25	9	그 염병으로 죽은 자가 이만 사천 명이었더라	And those that died in the plague were twenty and four thousand.	but those who died in the plague numbered 24,000.
NUM	25	10	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	25	11	제사장 아론의 손자 엘르아살의 아들 비느하스가 나의 질투심으로 질투하여 이스라엘 자손 중에서 나의 노를 돌이켜서 나의 질투심으로 그들을 진멸하지 않게 하였도다	Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, hath turned my wrath away from the children of Israel, while he was zealous for my sake among them, that I consumed not the children of Israel in my jealousy.	“Phinehas son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, has turned My wrath away from the Israelites; for he was zealous for My sake among them, so that I did not consume the Israelites in My zeal.
NUM	25	12	그러므로 말하라 내가 그에게 나의 평화의 언약을 주리니	Wherefore say, Behold, I give unto him my covenant of peace:	Declare, therefore, that I am granting him My covenant of peace.
NUM	25	13	그와 그 후손에게 영원한 제사장 직분의 언약이라 그가 그 하나님을 위하여 질투하여 이스라엘 자손을 속죄하였음이니라	And he shall have it, and his seed after him, even the covenant of an everlasting priesthood; because he was zealous for his God, and made an atonement for the children of Israel.	It will be a covenant of permanent priesthood for him and his descendants, because he was zealous for his God and made atonement for the Israelites.”
NUM	25	14	죽임을 당한 이스라엘 남자 곧 미디안 여인과 함께 죽임을 당한 자의 이름은 시므리니 살루의 아들이요 시므온인의 종족 중 한 족장이며	Now the name of the Israelite that was slain, even that was slain with the Midianitish woman, was Zimri, the son of Salu, a prince of a chief house among the Simeonites.	The name of the Israelite who was slain with the Midianite woman was Zimri son of Salu, the leader of a Simeonite family.
NUM	25	15	죽임을 당한 미디안 여인의 이름은 고스비니 수르의 딸이라 수르는 미디안 백성 한 종족의 두령이었더라	And the name of the Midianitish woman that was slain was Cozbi, the daughter of Zur; he was head over a people, and of a chief house in Midian.	And the name of the slain Midianite woman was Cozbi, the daughter of Zur, a tribal chief of a Midianite family.
NUM	25	16	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	And the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	25	17	미디안인들을 박해하며 그들을 치라	Vex the Midianites, and smite them:	“Attack the Midianites and strike them dead.
NUM	25	18	이는 그들이 궤계로 너희를 박해하되 브올의 일과 미디안 족장의 딸 곧 브올의 일로 염병이 일어난 날에 죽임을 당한 그들의 자매 고스비의 사건으로 너희를 유혹하였음이니라	For they vex you with their wiles, wherewith they have beguiled you in the matter of Peor, and in the matter of Cozbi, the daughter of a prince of Midian, their sister, which was slain in the day of the plague for Peor’s sake.	For they assailed you deceitfully when they seduced you in the matter of Peor and their sister Cozbi, the daughter of the Midianite leader, the woman who was killed on the day the plague came because of Peor.”
NUM	26	1	염병 후에 여호와께서 모세와 제사장 아론의 아들 엘르아살에게 일러 가라사대	And it came to pass after the plague, that the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, saying,	After the plague had ended, the LORD said to Moses and Eleazar son of Aaron the priest,
NUM	26	2	이스라엘 자손의 온 회중의 총수를 그 조상의 집을 따라 조사하되 이스라엘 중에 무릇 이십 세 이상으로 능히 싸움에 나갈만한 자를 계수하라 하니	Take the sum of all the congregation of the children of Israel, from twenty years old and upward, throughout their fathers’ house, all that are able to go to war in Israel.	“Take a census of the whole congregation of Israel by the houses of their fathers—all those twenty years of age or older who can serve in the army of Israel.”
NUM	26	3	모세와 제사장 엘르아살이 여리고 맞은편 요단 가 모압 평지에서 그들에게 고하여 가로되	And Moses and Eleazar the priest spake with them in the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho, saying,	So on the plains of Moab by the Jordan, across from Jericho, Moses and Eleazar the priest issued the instruction,
NUM	26	4	여호와께서 애굽 땅에서 나온 모세와 이스라엘 자손에게 명하신 대로 너희는 이십 세 이상된 자를 계수하라 하니라	Take the sum of the people, from twenty years old and upward; as the Lord commanded Moses and the children of Israel, which went forth out of the land of Egypt.	“Take a census of the men twenty years of age or older, as the LORD has commanded Moses.” And these were the Israelites who came out of the land of Egypt:
NUM	26	5	이스라엘의 장자는 르우벤이라 르우벤 자손은 하녹에게서 난 하녹 가족과 발루에게서 난 발루 가족과	Reuben, the eldest son of Israel: the children of Reuben; Hanoch, of whom cometh the family of the Hanochites: of Pallu, the family of the Palluites:	Reuben was the firstborn of Israel. These were the descendants of Reuben: The Hanochite clan from Hanoch, the Palluite clan from Pallu,
NUM	26	6	헤스론에게서 난 헤스론 가족과 갈미에게서 난 갈미 가족이니	Of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites: of Carmi, the family of the Carmites.	the Hezronite clan from Hezron, and the Carmite clan from Carmi.
NUM	26	7	이는 르우벤 가족들이라 계수함을 입은 자가 사만 삼천칠백삼십 명이요	These are the families of the Reubenites: and they that were numbered of them were forty and three thousand and seven hundred and thirty.	These were the clans of Reuben, and their registration numbered 43,730.
NUM	26	8	발루의 아들은 엘리압이요	And the sons of Pallu; Eliab.	Now the son of Pallu was Eliab,
NUM	26	9	엘리압의 아들은 느무엘과 다단과 아비람이라 이 다단과 아비람은 회중 가운데서 부름을 받은 자러니 고라의 무리에 들어가서 모세와 아론을 거스려 여호와께 패역할 때에	And the sons of Eliab; Nemuel, and Dathan, and Abiram. This is that Dathan and Abiram, which were famous in the congregation, who strove against Moses and against Aaron in the company of Korah, when they strove against the Lord:	and the sons of Eliab were Nemuel, Dathan, and Abiram. It was Dathan and Abiram, chosen by the congregation, who fought against Moses and Aaron with the followers of Korah who rebelled against the LORD.
NUM	26	10	땅이 그 입을 열어서 그 무리와 고라를 삼키매 그들이 죽었고 당시에 불이 이백오십 명을 삼켜 징계가 되게 하였으나	And the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up together with Korah, when that company died, what time the fire devoured two hundred and fifty men: and they became a sign.	And the earth opened its mouth and swallowed them along with Korah, whose followers died when the fire consumed 250 men. They serve as a warning sign.
NUM	26	11	그러나 고라의 아들들은 죽지 아니하였더라	Notwithstanding the children of Korah died not.	However, the line of Korah did not die out.
NUM	26	12	시므온 자손은 그 종족대로 이러하니 느무엘에게서 난 느무엘 가족과 야민에게서 난 야민 가족과 야긴에게서 난 야긴 가족과	The sons of Simeon after their families: of Nemuel, the family of the Nemuelites: of Jamin, the family of the Jaminites: of Jachin, the family of the Jachinites:	These were the descendants of Simeon by their clans: The Nemuelite clan from Nemuel, the Jaminite clan from Jamin, the Jachinite clan from Jachin,
NUM	26	13	세라에게서 난 세라 가족과 사울에게서 난 사울 가족이라	Of Zerah, the family of the Zarhites: of Shaul, the family of the Shaulites.	the Zerahite clan from Zerah, and the Shaulite clan from Shaul.
NUM	26	14	이는 시므온 종족들이니 계수함을 입은 자가 이만 이천이백 명이었더라	These are the families of the Simeonites, twenty and two thousand and two hundred.	These were the clans of Simeon, and there were 22,200 men.
NUM	26	15	갓 자손은 그 종족대로 이러하니 스본에게서 난 스본 가족과 학기에게서 난 학기 가족과 수니에게서 난 수니 가족과	The children of Gad after their families: of Zephon, the family of the Zephonites: of Haggi, the family of the Haggites: of Shuni, the family of the Shunites:	These were the descendants of Gad by their clans: The Zephonite clan from Zephon, the Haggite clan from Haggi, the Shunite clan from Shuni,
NUM	26	16	오스니에게서 난 오스니 가족과 에리에게서 난 에리 가족과	Of Ozni, the family of the Oznites: of Eri, the family of the Erites:	the Oznite clan from Ozni, the Erite clan from Eri,
NUM	26	17	아롯에게서 난 아롯 가족과 아렐리에게서 난 아렐리 가족이라	Of Arod, the family of the Arodites: of Areli, the family of the Arelites.	the Arodite clan from Arod, and the Arelite clan from Areli.
NUM	26	18	이는 갓 자손의 종족들이니 계수함을 입은 자가 사만 오백 명이었더라	These are the families of the children of Gad according to those that were numbered of them, forty thousand and five hundred.	These were the clans of Gad, and their registration numbered 40,500.
NUM	26	19	유다의 아들은 에르와 오난이라 이 에르와 오난은 가나안 땅에서 죽었고	The sons of Judah were Er and Onan: and Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan.	The sons of Judah were Er and Onan, but they died in the land of Canaan.
NUM	26	20	유다의 자손은 그 종족대로 이러하니 셀라에게서 난 셀라 가족과 베레스에게서 난 베레스 가족과 세라에게서 난 세라 가족이며	And the sons of Judah after their families were; of Shelah, the family of the Shelanites: of Pharez, the family of the Pharzites: of Zerah, the family of the Zarhites.	These were the descendants of Judah by their clans: The Shelanite clan from Shelah, the Perezite clan from Perez, and the Zerahite clan from Zerah.
NUM	26	21	또 베레스 자손은 이러하니 헤스론에게서 난 헤스론 가족과 하물에게서 난 하물 가족이라	And the sons of Pharez were; of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites: of Hamul, the family of the Hamulites.	And these were the descendants of Perez: the Hezronite clan from Hezron and the Hamulite clan from Hamul.
NUM	26	22	이는 유다 종족들이니 계수함을 입은 자가 칠만 육천오백 명이었더라	These are the families of Judah according to those that were numbered of them, threescore and sixteen thousand and five hundred.	These were the clans of Judah, and their registration numbered 76,500.
NUM	26	23	잇사갈 자손은 그 종족대로 이러하니 돌라에게서 난 돌라 가족과 부와에게서 난 부니 가족과	Of the sons of Issachar after their families: of Tola, the family of the Tolaites: of Pua, the family of the Punites:	These were the descendants of Issachar by their clans: The Tolaite clan from Tola, the Punite clan from Puvah,
NUM	26	24	야숩에게서 난 야숩 가족과 시므론에게서 난 시므론 가족이라	Of Jashub, the family of the Jashubites: of Shimron, the family of the Shimronites.	the Jashubite clan from Jashub, and the Shimronite clan from Shimron.
NUM	26	25	이는 잇사갈 종족들이니 계수함을 입은 자가 육만 사천삼백 명이었더라	These are the families of Issachar according to those that were numbered of them, threescore and four thousand and three hundred.	These were the clans of Issachar, and their registration numbered 64,300.
NUM	26	26	스불론 자손들은 그 종족대로 이러하니 세렛에게서 난 세렛 가족과 엘론에게서 난 엘론 가족과 얄르엘에게서 난 얄르엘 가족이라	Of the sons of Zebulun after their families: of Sered, the family of the Sardites: of Elon, the family of the Elonites: of Jahleel, the family of the Jahleelites.	These were the descendants of Zebulun by their clans: The Seredite clan from Sered, the Elonite clan from Elon, and the Jahleelite clan from Jahleel.
NUM	26	27	이는 스불론 종족들이니 계수함을 입은 자가 육만 오백 명이었더라	These are the families of the Zebulunites according to those that were numbered of them, threescore thousand and five hundred.	These were the clans of Zebulun, and their registration numbered 60,500.
NUM	26	28	요셉의 아들들은 그 종족대로 므낫세와 에브라임이요	The sons of Joseph after their families were Manasseh and Ephraim.	The descendants of Joseph included the clans of Manasseh and Ephraim.
NUM	26	29	므낫세의 자손 중 마길에게서 난 것은 마길 가족이라 마길이 길르앗을 낳았고 길르앗에게서 난 것은 길르앗 가족이라	Of the sons of Manasseh: of Machir, the family of the Machirites: and Machir begat Gilead: of Gilead come the family of the Gileadites.	These were the descendants of Manasseh: The Machirite clan from Machir, the father of Gilead, and the Gileadite clan from Gilead.
NUM	26	30	길르앗 자손은 이러하니 이에셀에게서 난 이에셀 가족과 헬렉에게서 난 헬렉 가족과	These are the sons of Gilead: of Jeezer, the family of the Jeezerites: of Helek, the family of the Helekites:	These were the descendants of Gilead: the Iezerite clan from Iezer, the Helekite clan from Helek,
NUM	26	31	아스리엘에게서 난 아스리엘 가족과 세겜에게서 난 세겜 가족과	And of Asriel, the family of the Asrielites: and of Shechem, the family of the Shechemites:	the Asrielite clan from Asriel, the Shechemite clan from Shechem,
NUM	26	32	스미다에게서 난 스미다 가족과 헤벨에게서 난 헤벨 가족이며	And of Shemida, the family of the Shemidaites: and of Hepher, the family of the Hepherites.	the Shemidaite clan from Shemida, and the Hepherite clan from Hepher.
NUM	26	33	헤벨의 아들 슬로브핫은 아들이 없고 딸뿐이라 그 딸의 이름은 말라와 노아와 호글라와 밀가와 디르사니	And Zelophehad the son of Hepher had no sons, but daughters: and the names of the daughters of Zelophehad were Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.	Now Zelophehad son of Hepher had no sons but only daughters. The names of his daughters were Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.
NUM	26	34	이는 므낫세의 종족들이라 계수함을 입은 자가 오만 이천칠백 명이었더라	These are the families of Manasseh, and those that were numbered of them, fifty and two thousand and seven hundred.	These were the clans of Manasseh, and their registration numbered 52,700.
NUM	26	35	에브라임 자손은 그 종족대로 이러하니 수델라에게서 난 수델라 가족과 베겔에게서 난 베겔 가족과 다한에게서 난 다한 가족이며	These are the sons of Ephraim after their families: of Shuthelah, the family of the Shuthalhites: of Becher, the family of the Bachrites: of Tahan, the family of the Tahanites.	These were the descendants of Ephraim by their clans: The Shuthelahite clan from Shuthelah, the Becherite clan from Becher, and the Tahanite clan from Tahan.
NUM	26	36	수델라 자손은 이러하니 에란에게서 난 에란 가족이라	And these are the sons of Shuthelah: of Eran, the family of the Eranites.	And the descendants of Shuthelah were the Eranite clan from Eran.
NUM	26	37	이는 에브라임 자손의 종족들이니 계수함을 입은 자가 삼만 이천오백 명이라 이상은 그 종족을 따른 요셉 자손이었더라	These are the families of the sons of Ephraim according to those that were numbered of them, thirty and two thousand and five hundred. These are the sons of Joseph after their families.	These were the clans of Ephraim, and their registration numbered 32,500. These clans were the descendants of Joseph.
NUM	26	38	베냐민 자손들은 그 종족대로 이러하니 벨라에게서 난 벨라 가족과 아스벨에게서 난 아스벨 가족과 아히람에게서 난 아히람 가족과	The sons of Benjamin after their families: of Bela, the family of the Belaites: of Ashbel, the family of the Ashbelites: of Ahiram, the family of the Ahiramites:	These were the descendants of Benjamin by their clans: The Belaite clan from Bela, the Ashbelite clan from Ashbel, the Ahiramite clan from Ahiram,
NUM	26	39	스부밤에게서 난 스부밤 가족과 후밤에게서 난 후밤 가족이며	Of Shupham, the family of the Shuphamites: of Hupham, the family of the Huphamites.	the Shuphamite clan from Shupham, and the Huphamite clan from Hupham.
NUM	26	40	벨라의 아들은 아릇과 나아만이라 아릇에게서 아릇 가족과 나아만에게서 나아만 가족이 났으니	And the sons of Bela were Ard and Naaman: of Ard, the family of the Ardites: and of Naaman, the family of the Naamites.	And the descendants of Bela from Ard and Naaman were the Ardite clan from Ard and the Naamite clan from Naaman.
NUM	26	41	이는 그들의 종족을 따른 베냐민 자손이라 계수함을 입은 자가 사만 오천육백 명이었더라	These are the sons of Benjamin after their families: and they that were numbered of them were forty and five thousand and six hundred.	These were the clans of Benjamin, and their registration numbered 45,600.
NUM	26	42	단 자손은 그 종족대로 이러하니라 수함에게서 수함 가족이 났으니 이는 그들의 종족을 따른 단 가족들이라	These are the sons of Dan after their families: of Shuham, the family of the Shuhamites. These are the families of Dan after their families.	These were the descendants of Dan by their clans: The Shuhamite clan from Shuham. These were the clans of Dan.
NUM	26	43	수함 모든 가족의 계수함을 입은 자가 육만 사천사백 명이었더라	All the families of the Shuhamites, according to those that were numbered of them, were threescore and four thousand and four hundred.	All of them were Shuhamite clans, and their registration numbered 64,400.
NUM	26	44	아셀 자손은 그 종족대로 이러하니 임나에게서 난 임나 가족과 이스위에게서 난 이스위 가족과 브리아에게서 난 브리아 가족이며	Of the children of Asher after their families: of Jimna, the family of the Jimnites: of Jesui, the family of the Jesuites: of Beriah, the family of the Beriites.	These were the descendants of Asher by their clans: The Imnite clan from Imnah, the Ishvite clan from Ishvi, and the Beriite clan from Beriah.
NUM	26	45	브리아의 자손 중 헤벨에게서 난 헤벨 가족과 말기엘에게서 난 말기엘 가족이며	Of the sons of Beriah: of Heber, the family of the Heberites: of Malchiel, the family of the Malchielites.	And these were the descendants of Beriah: the Heberite clan from Heber and the Malchielite clan from Malchiel.
NUM	26	46	아셀의 딸의 이름은 세라라	And the name of the daughter of Asher was Sarah.	And the name of Asher’s daughter was Serah.
NUM	26	47	이는 아셀 자손의 종족들이니 계수함을 입은 자가 오만 삼천사백 명이었더라	These are the families of the sons of Asher according to those that were numbered of them; who were fifty and three thousand and four hundred.	These were the clans of Asher, and their registration numbered 53,400.
NUM	26	48	납달리 자손은 그 종족대로 이러하니 야셀에게서 난 야셀 가족과 구니에게서 난 구니 가족과	Of the sons of Naphtali after their families: of Jahzeel, the family of the Jahzeelites: of Guni, the family of the Gunites:	These were the descendants of Naphtali by their clans: The Jahzeelite clan from Jahzeel, the Gunite clan from Guni,
NUM	26	49	예셀에게서 난 예셀 가족과 실렘에게서 난 실렘 가족이라	Of Jezer, the family of the Jezerites: of Shillem, the family of the Shillemites.	the Jezerite clan from Jezer, and the Shillemite clan from Shillem.
NUM	26	50	이는 그 종족을 따른 납달리 가족들이니 계수함을 입은 자가 사만 오천사백 명이었더라	These are the families of Naphtali according to their families: and they that were numbered of them were forty and five thousand and four hundred.	These were the clans of Naphtali, and their registration numbered 45,400.
NUM	26	51	이스라엘 자손의 계수함을 입은 자가 육십만 일천칠백삼십 명이었더라	These were the numbered of the children of Israel, six hundred thousand and a thousand seven hundred and thirty.	These men of Israel numbered 601,730 in all.
NUM	26	52	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	26	53	이 계수대로 땅을 나눠 주어 기업을 삼게 하라	Unto these the land shall be divided for an inheritance according to the number of names.	“The land is to be divided among the tribes as an inheritance, according to the number of names.
NUM	26	54	수가 많은 자에게는 기업을 많이 줄 것이요 수가 적은 자에게는 기업을 적게 줄 것이니 그들의 계수함을 입은 수대로 각기 기업을 주되	To many thou shalt give the more inheritance, and to few thou shalt give the less inheritance: to every one shall his inheritance be given according to those that were numbered of him.	Increase the inheritance for a large tribe and decrease it for a small one; each tribe is to receive its inheritance according to the number of those registered.
NUM	26	55	오직 그 땅을 제비뽑아 나누어 그들의 조상 지파의 이름을 따라 얻게 할지니라	Notwithstanding the land shall be divided by lot: according to the names of the tribes of their fathers they shall inherit.	Indeed, the land must be divided by lot; they shall receive their inheritance according to the names of the tribes of their fathers.
NUM	26	56	그 다소를 물론하고 그 기업을 제비 뽑아 나눌지니라	According to the lot shall the possession thereof be divided between many and few.	Each inheritance is to be divided by lot among the larger and smaller tribes.”
NUM	26	57	레위인의 계수함을 입은 자는 그 종족대로 이러하니 게르손에게서 난 게르손 가족과 고핫에게서 난 고핫 가족과 므라리에게서 난 므라리 가족이며	And these are they that were numbered of the Levites after their families: of Gershon, the family of the Gershonites: of Kohath, the family of the Kohathites: of Merari, the family of the Merarites.	Now these were the Levites numbered by their clans: The Gershonite clan from Gershon, the Kohathite clan from Kohath, and the Merarite clan from Merari.
NUM	26	58	레위 종족들은 이러하니 립니 가족과 헤브론 가족과 말리 가족과 무시 가족과 고라 가족이라 고핫은 아므람을 낳았으며	These are the families of the Levites: the family of the Libnites, the family of the Hebronites, the family of the Mahlites, the family of the Mushites, the family of the Korathites. And Kohath begat Amram.	These were the families of the Levites: The Libnite clan, the Hebronite clan, the Mahlite clan, the Mushite clan, and the Korahite clan. Now Kohath was the father of Amram,
NUM	26	59	아므람의 처의 이름은 요게벳이니 레위의 딸이요 애굽에서 레위에게서 난 자라 그가 아므람에게서 아론과 모세와 그 누이 미리암을 낳았고	And the name of Amram’s wife was Jochebed, the daughter of Levi, whom her mother bare to Levi in Egypt: and she bare unto Amram Aaron and Moses, and Miriam their sister.	and Amram’s wife was named Jochebed. She was also a daughter of Levi, born to Levi in Egypt. To Amram she bore Aaron, Moses, and their sister Miriam.
NUM	26	60	아론에게서는 나답과 아비후와 엘르아살과 이다말이 났더니	And unto Aaron was born Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.	Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar were born to Aaron,
NUM	26	61	나답과 아비후는 다른 불을 여호와 앞에 드리다가 죽었더라	And Nadab and Abihu died, when they offered strange fire before the Lord.	but Nadab and Abihu died when they offered unauthorized fire before the LORD.
NUM	26	62	레위인의 일 개월 이상으로 계수함을 입은 모든 남자가 이만 삼천 명이었더라 그들은 이스라엘 자손 중 계수에 들지 아니하였으니 이는 이스라엘 자손 중에서 그들에게 준 기업이 없음이었더라	And those that were numbered of them were twenty and three thousand, all males from a month old and upward: for they were not numbered among the children of Israel, because there was no inheritance given them among the children of Israel.	The registration of the Levites totaled 23,000, every male a month old or more; they were not numbered among the other Israelites, because no inheritance was given to them among the Israelites.
NUM	26	63	이는 모세와 제사장 엘르아살의 계수한 자라 그들이 여리고 맞은편 요단 가 모압 평지에서 이스라엘 자손을 계수한 중에는	These are they that were numbered by Moses and Eleazar the priest, who numbered the children of Israel in the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho.	These were the ones numbered by Moses and Eleazar the priest when they counted the Israelites on the plains of Moab by the Jordan, across from Jericho.
NUM	26	64	모세와 제사장 아론이 시내 광야에서 계수한 이스라엘 자손은 한사람도 들지 못하였으니	But among these there was not a man of them whom Moses and Aaron the priest numbered, when they numbered the children of Israel in the wilderness of Sinai.	Among all these, however, there was not one who had been numbered by Moses and Aaron the priest when they counted the Israelites in the Wilderness of Sinai.
NUM	26	65	이는 여호와께서 그들에게 대하여 말씀하시기를 그들이 반드시 광야에서 죽으리라 하셨음이라 이러므로 여분네의 아들 갈렙과 눈의 아들 여호수아 외에는 한 사람도 남지 아니하였더라	For the Lord had said of them, They shall surely die in the wilderness. And there was not left a man of them, save Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun.	For the LORD had told them that they would surely die in the wilderness. Not one was left except Caleb son of Jephunneh and Joshua son of Nun.
NUM	27	1	요셉의 아들 므낫세 가족에 므낫세의 현손 마길의 증손 길르앗의 손자 헤벨의 아들 슬로브핫의 딸들이 나아왔으니 그 딸들의 이름은 말라와 노아와 호글라와 밀가와 디르사라	Then came the daughters of Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the families of Manasseh the son of Joseph: and these are the names of his daughters; Mahlah, Noah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Tirzah.	Now the daughters of Zelophehad son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, belonged to the clans of Manasseh son of Joseph. These were the names of his daughters: Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah. They approached
NUM	27	2	그들이 회막문에서 모세와 제사장 엘르아살과 족장들과 온 회중 앞에 서서 가로되	And they stood before Moses, and before Eleazar the priest, and before the princes and all the congregation, by the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, saying,	the entrance to the Tent of Meeting, stood before Moses, Eleazar the priest, the leaders, and the whole congregation, and said,
NUM	27	3	우리 아버지가 광야에서 죽었으나 여호와를 거스려 모인 고라의 무리에 들지 아니하고 자기 죄에 죽었고 아들이 없나이다	Our father died in the wilderness, and he was not in the company of them that gathered themselves together against the Lord in the company of Korah; but died in his own sin, and had no sons.	“Our father died in the wilderness, but he was not among the followers of Korah who gathered together against the LORD. Instead, he died because of his own sin, and he had no sons.
NUM	27	4	어찌하여 아들이 없다고 우리 아버지의 이름이 그 가족 중에서 삭제되리이까 우리 아버지의 형제 중에서 우리에게 기업을 주소서 하매	Why should the name of our father be done away from among his family, because he hath no son? Give unto us therefore a possession among the brethren of our father.	Why should the name of our father disappear from his clan because he had no sons? Give us property among our father’s brothers.”
NUM	27	5	모세가 그 사연을 여호와께 품하니라	And Moses brought their cause before the Lord.	So Moses brought their case before the LORD,
NUM	27	6	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	and the LORD answered him,
NUM	27	7	슬로브핫 딸들의 말이 옳으니 너는 반드시 그들의 아비의 형제 중에서 그들에게 기업을 주어 얻게 하되 그 아비의 기업으로 그들에게 돌릴지니라	The daughters of Zelophehad speak right: thou shalt surely give them a possession of an inheritance among their father’s brethren; and thou shalt cause the inheritance of their father to pass unto them.	“The daughters of Zelophehad speak correctly. You certainly must give them property as an inheritance among their father’s brothers, and transfer their father’s inheritance to them.
NUM	27	8	너는 이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 이르기를 사람이 죽고 아들이 없거든 그 기업을 그 딸에게 돌릴 것이요	And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If a man die, and have no son, then ye shall cause his inheritance to pass unto his daughter.	Furthermore, you shall say to the Israelites, ‘If a man dies and leaves no son, you are to transfer his inheritance to his daughter.
NUM	27	9	딸도 없거든 그 기업을 그 형제에게 줄 것이요	And if he have no daughter, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his brethren.	If he has no daughter, give his inheritance to his brothers.
NUM	27	10	형제도 없거든 그 기업을 그 아비의 형제에게 줄 것이요	And if he have no brethren, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his father’s brethren.	If he has no brothers, give his inheritance to his father’s brothers.
NUM	27	11	그 아비의 형제도 없거든 그 기업을 가장 가까운 친족에게 주어 얻게 할지니라 하고 나 여호와가 너 모세에게 명한 대로 이스라엘 자손에게 판결의 율례가 되게 할지니라	And if his father have no brethren, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his kinsman that is next to him of his family, and he shall possess it: and it shall be unto the children of Israel a statute of judgment, as the Lord commanded Moses.	And if his father has no brothers, give his inheritance to the next of kin from his clan, that he may take possession of it. This is to be a statutory ordinance for the Israelites, as the LORD has commanded Moses.’”
NUM	27	12	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 너는 이 아바림 산에 올라가서 내가 이스라엘 자손에게 준 땅을 바라보라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Get thee up into this mount Abarim, and see the land which I have given unto the children of Israel.	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Go up this mountain of the Abarim range and see the land that I have given the Israelites.
NUM	27	13	본 후에는 네 형 아론의 돌아간 것 같이 너도 조상에게로 돌아가리니	And when thou hast seen it, thou also shalt be gathered unto thy people, as Aaron thy brother was gathered.	After you have seen it, you too will be gathered to your people, as your brother Aaron was;
NUM	27	14	이는 신 광야에서 회중이 분쟁할제 너희가 내 명을 거역하고 그 물 가에서 나의 거룩함을 그들의 목전에 나타내지 아니하였음이니라 이 물은 신 광야 가데스의 므리바 물이니라	For ye rebelled against my commandment in the desert of Zin, in the strife of the congregation, to sanctify me at the water before their eyes: that is the water of Meribah in Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin.	for when the congregation contended in the Wilderness of Zin, both of you rebelled against My command to show My holiness in their sight regarding the waters.” Those were the waters of Meribah in Kadesh, in the Wilderness of Zin.
NUM	27	15	모세가 여호와께 여짜와 가로되	And Moses spake unto the Lord, saying,	So Moses appealed to the LORD,
NUM	27	16	여호와, 모든 육체의 생명의 하나님이시여 원컨대 한 사람을 이 회중 위에 세워서	Let the Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the congregation,	“May the LORD, the God of the spirits of all flesh, appoint a man over the congregation
NUM	27	17	그로 그들 앞에 출입하며 그들을 인도하여 출입하게 하사 여호와의 회중으로 목자 없는 양과 같이 되지 않게 하옵소서	Which may go out before them, and which may go in before them, and which may lead them out, and which may bring them in; that the congregation of the Lord be not as sheep which have no shepherd.	who will go out and come in before them, and who will lead them out and bring them in, so that the congregation of the LORD will not be like sheep without a shepherd.”
NUM	27	18	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 눈의 아들 여호수아는 신에 감동된 자니 너는 데려다가 그에게 안수하고	And the Lord said unto Moses, Take thee Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom is the spirit, and lay thine hand upon him;	And the LORD replied to Moses, “Take Joshua son of Nun, a man with the Spirit in him, and lay your hands on him.
NUM	27	19	그를 제사장 엘르아살과 온 회중 앞에 세우고 그들의 목전에서 그에게 위탁하여	And set him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation; and give him a charge in their sight.	Have him stand before Eleazar the priest and the whole congregation, and commission him in their sight.
NUM	27	20	네 존귀를 그에게 돌려 이스라엘 자손의 온 회중으로 그에게 복종하게 하라	And thou shalt put some of thine honour upon him, that all the congregation of the children of Israel may be obedient.	Confer on him some of your authority, so that the whole congregation of Israel will obey him.
NUM	27	21	그는 제사장 엘르아살 앞에 설 것이요 엘르아살은 그를 위하여 우림의 판결법으로 여호와 앞에 물을 것이며 그와 온 이스라엘 자손 곧 온 회중은 엘르아살의 말을 좇아 나가며 들어올 것이니라	And he shall stand before Eleazar the priest, who shall ask counsel for him after the judgment of Urim before the Lord: at his word shall they go out, and at his word they shall come in, both he, and all the children of Israel with him, even all the congregation.	He shall stand before Eleazar the priest, who will seek counsel for him before the LORD by the judgment of the Urim. At his command, he and all the Israelites with him—the entire congregation—will go out and come in.”
NUM	27	22	모세가 여호와께서 자기에게 명하신 대로 하여 여호수아를 데려다가 제사장 엘르아살과 온 회중 앞에 세우고	And Moses did as the Lord commanded him: and he took Joshua, and set him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation:	Moses did as the LORD had commanded him. He took Joshua, had him stand before Eleazar the priest and the whole congregation,
NUM	27	23	그에게 안수하여 위탁하되 여호와께서 자기에게 명하신 대로 하였더라	And he laid his hands upon him, and gave him a charge, as the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses.	and laid his hands on him and commissioned him, as the LORD had instructed through Moses.
NUM	28	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	28	2	이스라엘 자손에게 명하여 그들에게 이르라 나의 예물, 나의 식물되는 화제, 나의 향기로운 것은 너희가 그 정한 시기에 삼가 내게 드릴지니라	Command the children of Israel, and say unto them, My offering, and my bread for my sacrifices made by fire, for a sweet savour unto me, shall ye observe to offer unto me in their due season.	“Command the Israelites and say to them: See that you present to Me at its appointed time the food for My offerings by fire, as a pleasing aroma to Me.
NUM	28	3	또 그들에게 이르라 너희가 여호와께 드릴 화제는 이러하니 일 년 되고 흠 없는 수양을 매일 둘씩 상번제로 드리되	And thou shalt say unto them, This is the offering made by fire which ye shall offer unto the Lord; two lambs of the first year without spot day by day, for a continual burnt offering.	And tell them that this is the offering made by fire you are to present to the LORD as a regular burnt offering each day: two unblemished year-old male lambs.
NUM	28	4	한 어린 양은 아침에 드리고 한 어린 양은 해 질 때에 드릴 것이요	The one lamb shalt thou offer in the morning, and the other lamb shalt thou offer at even;	Offer one lamb in the morning and the other at twilight,
NUM	28	5	또 고운 가루 에바 십분지 일에 빻아낸 기름 힌 사분지 일을 섞어서 소제로 드릴 것이니	And a tenth part of an ephah of flour for a meat offering, mingled with the fourth part of an hin of beaten oil.	along with a tenth of an ephah of fine flour as a grain offering, mixed with a quarter hin of oil from pressed olives.
NUM	28	6	이는 시내 산에서 정한 상번제로서 여호와께 드리는 향기로운 화제며	It is a continual burnt offering, which was ordained in mount Sinai for a sweet savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the Lord.	This is a regular burnt offering established at Mount Sinai as a pleasing aroma, an offering made by fire to the LORD.
NUM	28	7	또 그 전제는 어린 양 하나에 힌 사분지 일을 드리되 거룩한 곳에서 여호와께 독주의 전제를 부어 드릴 것이며	And the drink offering thereof shall be the fourth part of an hin for the one lamb: in the holy place shalt thou cause the strong wine to be poured unto the Lord for a drink offering.	The drink offering accompanying each lamb shall be a quarter hin. Pour out the offering of fermented drink to the LORD in the sanctuary area.
NUM	28	8	해 질 때에는 그 한 어린 양을 드리되 그 소제와 전제를 아침 것 같이 여호와께 향기로운 화제로 드릴 것이니라	And the other lamb shalt thou offer at even: as the meat offering of the morning, and as the drink offering thereof, thou shalt offer it, a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord.	And offer the second lamb at twilight, with the same grain offering and drink offering as in the morning. It is an offering made by fire, a pleasing aroma to the LORD.
NUM	28	9	안식일에는 일 년 되고 흠 없는 수양 둘과 고운 가루 에바 십분지 이에 기름 섞은 소제와 그 전제를 드릴 것이니	And on the sabbath day two lambs of the first year without spot, and two tenth deals of flour for a meat offering, mingled with oil, and the drink offering thereof:	On the Sabbath day, present two unblemished year-old male lambs, accompanied by a grain offering of two-tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil, as well as a drink offering.
NUM	28	10	이는 매 안식일의 번제라 상번제와 그 전제 외에니라	This is the burnt offering of every sabbath, beside the continual burnt offering, and his drink offering.	This is the burnt offering for every Sabbath, in addition to the regular burnt offering and its drink offering.
NUM	28	11	월삭에는 수송아지 둘과 수양 하나와 일 년 되고 흠 없은 수양 일곱으로 여호와께 번제를 드리되	And in the beginnings of your months ye shall offer a burnt offering unto the Lord; two young bullocks, and one ram, seven lambs of the first year without spot;	At the beginning of every month, you are to present to the LORD a burnt offering of two young bulls, one ram, and seven male lambs a year old, all unblemished,
NUM	28	12	매 수송아지에는 고운 가루 에바 십분지 삼에 기름 섞은 소제와 수양 하나에는 고운 가루 에바 십분지 이에 기름 섞은 소제와	And three tenth deals of flour for a meat offering, mingled with oil, for one bullock; and two tenth deals of flour for a meat offering, mingled with oil, for one ram;	along with three-tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering with each bull, two-tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering with the ram,
NUM	28	13	매 어린 양에는 고운 가루 에바 십분지 일에 기름 섞은 소제를 향기로운 번제로 여호와께 화제로 드릴 것이며	And a several tenth deal of flour mingled with oil for a meat offering unto one lamb; for a burnt offering of a sweet savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the Lord.	and a tenth of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil as a grain offering with each lamb. This is a burnt offering, a pleasing aroma, an offering made by fire to the LORD.
NUM	28	14	그 전제는 수송아지 하나에 포도주 반 힌이요 수양 하나에 삼분지 일 힌이요 어린 양 하나에 사분지 일 힌이니 이는 일 년 중 매 월삭의 번제며	And their drink offerings shall be half an hin of wine unto a bullock, and the third part of an hin unto a ram, and a fourth part of an hin unto a lamb: this is the burnt offering of every month throughout the months of the year.	Their drink offerings shall be half a hin of wine with each bull, a third of a hin with the ram, and a quarter hin with each lamb. This is the monthly burnt offering to be made at each new moon throughout the year.
NUM	28	15	또 상번제와 그 전제 외에 수염소 하나를 속죄제로 여호와께 드릴 것이니라	And one kid of the goats for a sin offering unto the Lord shall be offered, beside the continual burnt offering, and his drink offering.	In addition to the regular burnt offering with its drink offering, one male goat is to be presented to the LORD as a sin offering.
NUM	28	16	정월 십사일은 여호와의 유월절이며	And in the fourteenth day of the first month is the passover of the Lord.	The fourteenth day of the first month is the LORD’s Passover.
NUM	28	17	또 그 달 십오일 부터는 절일이니 칠 일 동안 무교병을 먹을 것이며	And in the fifteenth day of this month is the feast: seven days shall unleavened bread be eaten.	On the fifteenth day of this month, there shall be a feast; for seven days unleavened bread is to be eaten.
NUM	28	18	그 첫날에는 성회로 모일 것이요 아무 노동도 하지 말 것이며	In the first day shall be an holy convocation; ye shall do no manner of servile work therein:	On the first day there is to be a sacred assembly; you must not do any regular work.
NUM	28	19	수송아지 둘과 수양 하나와 일 년 된 수양 일곱을 다 흠 없은 것으로 여호와께 화제를 드려 번제가 되게 할 것이며	But ye shall offer a sacrifice made by fire for a burnt offering unto the Lord; two young bullocks, and one ram, and seven lambs of the first year: they shall be unto you without blemish:	Present to the LORD an offering made by fire, a burnt offering of two young bulls, one ram, and seven male lambs a year old, all unblemished.
NUM	28	20	그 소제로는 고운 가루에 기름을 섞어서 쓰되 수송아지 하나에는 에바 십분지 삼이요 수양 하나에는 에바 십분지 이를 드리고	And their meat offering shall be of flour mingled with oil: three tenth deals shall ye offer for a bullock, and two tenth deals for a ram;	The grain offering shall consist of fine flour mixed with oil; offer three-tenths of an ephah with each bull, two-tenths of an ephah with the ram,
NUM	28	21	어린 양 일곱에는 매 어린 양에 에바 십분지 일을 드릴 것이며	A several tenth deal shalt thou offer for every lamb, throughout the seven lambs:	and a tenth of an ephah with each of the seven lambs.
NUM	28	22	또 너희를 속하기 위하여 수염소 하나로 속죄제를 드리되	And one goat for a sin offering, to make an atonement for you.	Include one male goat as a sin offering to make atonement for you.
NUM	28	23	아침의 번제 곧 상번제 외에 그것들을 드릴 것이니라	Ye shall offer these beside the burnt offering in the morning, which is for a continual burnt offering.	You are to present these in addition to the regular morning burnt offering.
NUM	28	24	너희는 이 순서대로 칠 일 동안 매일 여호와께 향기로운 화제의 식물을 드리되 상번제와 그 전제 외에 드릴 것이며	After this manner ye shall offer daily, throughout the seven days, the meat of the sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord: it shall be offered beside the continual burnt offering, and his drink offering.	Offer the same food each day for seven days as an offering made by fire, a pleasing aroma to the LORD. It is to be offered with its drink offering and the regular burnt offering.
NUM	28	25	제칠일에는 성회로 모일 것이요 아무 노동도 하지 말 것이니라	And on the seventh day ye shall have an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work.	On the seventh day you shall hold a sacred assembly; you must not do any regular work.
NUM	28	26	칠칠절 처음 익은 열매 드리는 날에 너희가 여호와께 새 소제를 드릴 때에도 성회로 모일 것이요 아무 노동도 하지 말 것이며	Also in the day of the firstfruits, when ye bring a new meat offering unto the Lord, after your weeks be out, ye shall have an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work:	On the day of firstfruits, when you present an offering of new grain to the LORD during the Feast of Weeks, you are to hold a sacred assembly; you must not do any regular work.
NUM	28	27	수송아지 둘과 수양 하나와 일 년 된 수양 일곱으로 여호와께 향기로운 번제를 드릴 것이며	But ye shall offer the burnt offering for a sweet savour unto the Lord; two young bullocks, one ram, seven lambs of the first year;	Present a burnt offering of two young bulls, one ram, and seven male lambs a year old as a pleasing aroma to the LORD,
NUM	28	28	그 소제로는 고운 가루에 기름을 섞어서 쓰되 매 수송아지에는 에바 십분지 삼이요 수양 하나에는 에바 십분지 이요	And their meat offering of flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals unto one bullock, two tenth deals unto one ram,	together with their grain offerings of fine flour mixed with oil—three-tenths of an ephah with each bull, two-tenths of an ephah with the ram,
NUM	28	29	어린 양 일곱에는 매 어린 양에 에바 십분지 일을 드릴 것이며	A several tenth deal unto one lamb, throughout the seven lambs;	and a tenth of an ephah with each of the seven lambs.
NUM	28	30	또 너희를 속하기 위하여 수염소 하나를 드리되	And one kid of the goats, to make an atonement for you.	Include one male goat to make atonement for you.
NUM	28	31	너희는 다 흠 없는 것으로 상번제와 그 소제와 전제 외에 그것들을 드릴 것이니라	Ye shall offer them beside the continual burnt offering, and his meat offering, (they shall be unto you without blemish) and their drink offerings.	Offer them with their drink offerings in addition to the regular burnt offering and its grain offering. The animals must be unblemished.
NUM	29	1	칠월에 이르러는 그 달 초일일에 성회로 모이고 아무 노동도 하지 말라 이는 너희가 나팔을 불 날이니라	And in the seventh month, on the first day of the month, ye shall have an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work: it is a day of blowing the trumpets unto you.	“On the first day of the seventh month, you are to hold a sacred assembly, and you must not do any regular work. This will be a day for you to sound the trumpets.
NUM	29	2	너희는 수송아지 하나와 수양 하나와 일년 되고 흠 없는 수양 일곱을 여호와께 향기로운 번제로 드릴 것이며	And ye shall offer a burnt offering for a sweet savour unto the Lord; one young bullock, one ram, and seven lambs of the first year without blemish:	As a pleasing aroma to the LORD, you are to present a burnt offering of one young bull, one ram, and seven male lambs a year old, all unblemished,
NUM	29	3	그 소제로는 고운 가루에 기름을 섞어서 쓰되 수송아지에는 에바 십분지 삼이요 수양에는 에바 십분지 이요	And their meat offering shall be of flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals for a bullock, and two tenth deals for a ram,	together with their grain offerings of fine flour mixed with oil—three-tenths of an ephah with the bull, two-tenths of an ephah with the ram,
NUM	29	4	어린 양 일곱에는 매 어린 양에 에바 십분지 일을 드릴 것이며	And one tenth deal for one lamb, throughout the seven lambs:	and a tenth of an ephah with each of the seven male lambs.
NUM	29	5	또 너희를 속하기 위하여 수염소 하나를 속죄제로 드리되	And one kid of the goats for a sin offering, to make an atonement for you:	Include one male goat as a sin offering to make atonement for you.
NUM	29	6	월삭의 번제와 그 소제와 상번제와 그 소제와 그 전제 외에 그 규례를 따라 향기로운 화제로 여호와께 드릴 것이니라	Beside the burnt offering of the month, and his meat offering, and the daily burnt offering, and his meat offering, and their drink offerings, according unto their manner, for a sweet savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the Lord.	These are in addition to the monthly and daily burnt offerings with their prescribed grain offerings and drink offerings. They are a pleasing aroma, an offering made by fire to the LORD.
NUM	29	7	칠월 십일에는 너희가 성회로 모일 것이요 마음을 괴롭게 하고 아무 노동도 하지 말 것이며	And ye shall have on the tenth day of this seventh month an holy convocation; and ye shall afflict your souls: ye shall not do any work therein:	On the tenth day of this seventh month, you are to hold a sacred assembly, and you shall humble yourselves; you must not do any work.
NUM	29	8	너희는 수송아지 하나와 수양 하나와 일 년 된 수양 일곱을 다 흠 없는 것으로 여호와께 향기로운 번제를 드릴 것이며	But ye shall offer a burnt offering unto the Lord for a sweet savour; one young bullock, one ram, and seven lambs of the first year; they shall be unto you without blemish:	Present as a pleasing aroma to the LORD a burnt offering of one young bull, one ram, and seven male lambs a year old, all unblemished,
NUM	29	9	그 소제로는 고운 가루에 기름을 섞어서 쓰되 수송아지 하나에는 에바 십분지 삼이요 수양 하나에는 에바 십분지 이요	And their meat offering shall be of flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals to a bullock, and two tenth deals to one ram,	together with their grain offerings of fine flour mixed with oil—three-tenths of an ephah with the bull, two-tenths of an ephah with the ram,
NUM	29	10	어린 양 일곱에는 매 어린 양에 에바 십분지 일을 드릴 것이며	A several tenth deal for one lamb, throughout the seven lambs:	and a tenth of an ephah with each of the seven lambs.
NUM	29	11	또 수염소 하나를 속죄제로 드릴 것이니 이는 속죄제와 상번제와 그 소제와 그 전제 외에니라	One kid of the goats for a sin offering; beside the sin offering of atonement, and the continual burnt offering, and the meat offering of it, and their drink offerings.	Include one male goat for a sin offering, in addition to the sin offering of atonement and the regular burnt offering with its grain offering and drink offerings.
NUM	29	12	칠월 십오일에는 너희가 너희 성회로 모일 것이요 아무 노동도 하지 말 것이며 칠 일 동안 여호와 앞에 절기를 지킬 것이라	And on the fifteenth day of the seventh month ye shall have an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work, and ye shall keep a feast unto the Lord seven days:	On the fifteenth day of the seventh month, you are to hold a sacred assembly; you must not do any regular work, and you shall observe a feast to the LORD for seven days.
NUM	29	13	너희 번제로 여호와께 향기로운 화제를 드리되 수송아지 열셋과 수양 둘과 일 년 된 수양 열넷을 다 흠 없는 것으로 드릴 것이며	And ye shall offer a burnt offering, a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord; thirteen young bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs of the first year; they shall be without blemish:	As a pleasing aroma to the LORD, you are to present an offering made by fire, a burnt offering of thirteen young bulls, two rams, and fourteen male lambs a year old, all unblemished,
NUM	29	14	그 소제로는 고운 가루에 기름을 섞어서 수송아지 열셋에는 각기 에바 십분지 삼이요 수양 둘에는 각기 에바 십분지 이요	And their meat offering shall be of flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals unto every bullock of the thirteen bullocks, two tenth deals to each ram of the two rams,	along with the grain offering of three-tenths of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil with each of the thirteen bulls, two-tenths of an ephah with each of the two rams,
NUM	29	15	어린 양 열넷에는 각기 에바 십분지 일을 드릴 것이며	And a several tenth deal to each lamb of the fourteen lambs:	and a tenth of an ephah with each of the fourteen lambs.
NUM	29	16	또 수염소 하나를 속죄제로 드릴지니 상번제와 그 소제와 그 전제 외에니라	And one kid of the goats for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his meat offering, and his drink offering.	Include one male goat as a sin offering, in addition to the regular burnt offering with its grain offering and drink offering.
NUM	29	17	둘째 날에는 수송아지 열둘과 수양 둘과 일 년 되고 흠 없는 수양 열넷을 드릴 것이며	And on the second day ye shall offer twelve young bullocks, two rams, fourteen lambs of the first year without spot:	On the second day you are to present twelve young bulls, two rams, and fourteen male lambs a year old, all unblemished,
NUM	29	18	그 소제와 전제는 수송아지와 수양과 어린 양의 수효를 따라서 규례대로 할 것이며	And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner:	along with the grain and drink offerings for the bulls, rams, and lambs, according to the number prescribed.
NUM	29	19	또 수염소 하나를 속죄제로 드릴지니 상번제와 그 소제와 그 전제 외에니라	And one kid of the goats for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and the meat offering thereof, and their drink offerings.	Include one male goat as a sin offering, in addition to the regular burnt offering with its grain offering and drink offering.
NUM	29	20	셋째 날에는 수송아지 열하나와 수양 둘과 일 년 되고 흠 없는 수양 열넷을 드릴 것이며	And on the third day eleven bullocks, two rams, fourteen lambs of the first year without blemish;	On the third day you are to present eleven bulls, two rams, and fourteen male lambs a year old, all unblemished,
NUM	29	21	그 소제와 전제는 수송아지와 수양과 어린 양의 수효를 따라서 규례대로 할 것이며	And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner:	along with the grain and drink offerings for the bulls, rams, and lambs, according to the number prescribed.
NUM	29	22	또 수염소 하나를 속죄제로 드릴지니 상번제와 그 소제와 그 전제 외에니라	And one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and his meat offering, and his drink offering.	Include one male goat as a sin offering, in addition to the regular burnt offering with its grain offering and drink offering.
NUM	29	23	넷째 날에는 수송아지 열과 수양 둘과 일 년 되고 흠 없는 수양 열넷을 드릴 것이며	And on the fourth day ten bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs of the first year without blemish:	On the fourth day you are to present ten bulls, two rams, and fourteen male lambs a year old, all unblemished,
NUM	29	24	그 소제와 전제는 수송아지와 수양과 어린 양의 수효를 따라서 규례대로 할 것이며	Their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner:	along with the grain and drink offerings for the bulls, rams, and lambs, according to the number prescribed.
NUM	29	25	또 수염소 하나를 속죄제로 드릴지니 상번제와 그 소제와 그 전제 외에니라	And one kid of the goats for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his meat offering, and his drink offering.	Include one male goat as a sin offering, in addition to the regular burnt offering with its grain offering and drink offering.
NUM	29	26	다섯째 날에는 수송아지 아홉과 수양 둘과 일 년 되고 흠 없는 수양 열넷을 드릴 것이며	And on the fifth day nine bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs of the first year without spot:	On the fifth day you are to present nine bulls, two rams, and fourteen male lambs a year old, all unblemished,
NUM	29	27	그 소제와 전제는 수송아지와 수양과 어린 양의 수효를 따라서 규례대로 할 것이며	And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner:	along with the grain and drink offerings for the bulls, rams, and lambs, according to the number prescribed.
NUM	29	28	또 수염소 하나를 속죄제로 드릴지니 상번제와 그 소제와 그 전제 외에니라	And one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and his meat offering, and his drink offering.	Include one male goat as a sin offering, in addition to the regular burnt offering with its grain offering and drink offering.
NUM	29	29	여섯째 날에는 수송아지 여덟과 수양 둘과 일 년 되고 흠 없는 수양 열넷을 드릴 것이며	And on the sixth day eight bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs of the first year without blemish:	On the sixth day you are to present eight bulls, two rams, and fourteen male lambs a year old, all unblemished,
NUM	29	30	그 소제와 전제는 수송아지와 수양과 어린 양의 수효를 따라서 규례대로 할 것이며	And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner:	along with the grain and drink offerings for the bulls, rams, and lambs, according to the number prescribed.
NUM	29	31	또 수염소 하나를 속죄제로 드릴지니 상번제와 그 소제와 그 전제 외에니라	And one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his meat offering, and his drink offering.	Include one male goat as a sin offering, in addition to the regular burnt offering with its grain offering and drink offering.
NUM	29	32	일곱째 날에는 수송아지 일곱과 수양 둘과 일 년 되고 흠 없는 수양 열넷을 드릴 것이며	And on the seventh day seven bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs of the first year without blemish:	On the seventh day you are to present seven bulls, two rams, and fourteen male lambs a year old, all unblemished,
NUM	29	33	그 소제와 전제는 수송아지와 수양과 어린 양의 수효를 따라서 규례대로 할 것이며	And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner:	along with the grain and drink offerings for the bulls, rams, and lambs, according to the number prescribed.
NUM	29	34	또 수염소 하나를 속죄제로 드릴지니 상번제와 그 소제와 그 전제 외에니라	And one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his meat offering, and his drink offering.	Include one male goat as a sin offering, in addition to the regular burnt offering with its grain offering and drink offering.
NUM	29	35	여덟째 날에는 거룩한 대회로 모일 것이요 아무 노동도 하지 말 것이며	On the eighth day ye shall have a solemn assembly: ye shall do no servile work therein:	On the eighth day you are to hold a solemn assembly; you must not do any regular work.
NUM	29	36	번제로 여호와께 향기로운 화제를 드리되 수송아지 하나와 수양 하나와 일 년 되고 흠 없는 수양 일곱을 드릴 것이며	But ye shall offer a burnt offering, a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord: one bullock, one ram, seven lambs of the first year without blemish:	As a pleasing aroma to the LORD, you are to present an offering made by fire, a burnt offering of one bull, one ram, and seven male lambs a year old, all unblemished,
NUM	29	37	그 소제와 전제는 수송아지와 수양과 어린 양의 수효를 따라서 규례대로 할 것이며	Their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullock, for the ram, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the manner:	along with the grain and drink offerings for the bulls, rams, and lambs, according to the number prescribed.
NUM	29	38	또 수염소 하나를 속죄제로 드릴지니 상번제와 그 소제와 그 전제 외에니라	And one goat for a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and his meat offering, and his drink offering.	Include one male goat as a sin offering, in addition to the regular burnt offering with its grain offering and drink offering.
NUM	29	39	너희가 이 절기를 당하거든 여호와께 이같이 드릴지니 이는 너희 서원제나 낙헌제 외에 번제, 소제, 전제, 화목제를 드릴 것이니라	These things ye shall do unto the Lord in your set feasts, beside your vows, and your freewill offerings, for your burnt offerings, and for your meat offerings, and for your drink offerings, and for your peace offerings.	You are to present these offerings to the LORD at your appointed times, in addition to your vow and freewill offerings, whether burnt offerings, grain offerings, drink offerings, or peace offerings.”
NUM	29	40	모세가 여호와께서 자기로 명하신 모든 일을 이스라엘 자손에게 고하니라	And Moses told the children of Israel according to all that the Lord commanded Moses.	So Moses spoke all this to the Israelites just as the LORD had commanded him.
NUM	30	1	모세가 이스라엘 자손 지파의 두령들에게 일러 가로되 여호와의 명령이 이러하니라	And Moses spake unto the heads of the tribes concerning the children of Israel, saying, This is the thing which the Lord hath commanded.	Then Moses said to the heads of the tribes of Israel, “This is what the LORD has commanded:
NUM	30	2	사람이 여호와께 서원하였거나 마음을 제어하기로 서약하였거든 파약하지 말고 그 입에서 나온 대로 다 행할 것이니라	If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath to bind his soul with a bond; he shall not break his word, he shall do according to all that proceedeth out of his mouth.	If a man makes a vow to the LORD or swears an oath to obligate himself by a pledge, he must not break his word; he must do everything he has promised.
NUM	30	3	또 여자가 만일 어려서 그 아비 집에 있을 때에 여호와께 서원한 일이나 스스로 제어하려 한 일이 있다 하자	If a woman also vow a vow unto the Lord, and bind herself by a bond, being in her father’s house in her youth;	And if a woman in her father’s house during her youth makes a vow to the LORD or obligates herself by a pledge,
NUM	30	4	그 아비가 그의 서원이나 그 마음을 제어하려는 서약을 듣고도 그에게 아무 말이 없으면 그 모든 서원을 행할 것이요 그 마음을 제어하려는 서약을 지킬 것이니라	And her father hear her vow, and her bond wherewith she hath bound her soul, and her father shall hold his peace at her: then all her vows shall stand, and every bond wherewith she hath bound her soul shall stand.	and her father hears about her vow or pledge but says nothing to her, then all the vows or pledges by which she has bound herself shall stand.
NUM	30	5	그러나 그 아비가 그것을 듣는 날에 허락지 아니하면 그 서원과 마음을 제어하려던 서약이 이루지 못할 것이니 그 아비가 허락지 아니하였은즉 여호와께서 사하시리라	But if her father disallow her in the day that he heareth; not any of her vows, or of her bonds wherewith she hath bound her soul, shall stand: and the Lord shall forgive her, because her father disallowed her.	But if her father prohibits her on the day he hears about it, then none of the vows or pledges by which she has bound herself shall stand. The LORD will absolve her because her father has prohibited her.
NUM	30	6	또 혹시 남편을 맞을 때에 서원이나 마음을 제어하려는 서약을 경솔히 그 입에서 발하였다 하자	And if she had at all an husband, when she vowed, or uttered ought out of her lips, wherewith she bound her soul;	If a woman marries while under a vow or rash promise by which she has bound herself,
NUM	30	7	그 남편이 그것을 듣고 그 듣는 날에 그에게 아무 말이 없으면 그 서원을 행할 것이요 그 마음을 제어하려는 서약을 지킬 것이니라	And her husband heard it, and held his peace at her in the day that he heard it: then her vows shall stand, and her bonds wherewith she bound her soul shall stand.	and her husband hears of it but says nothing to her on that day, then the vows or pledges by which she has bound herself shall stand.
NUM	30	8	그러나 그 남편이 그것을 듣는 날에 허락지 아니하면 그 서원과 마음을 제어하려고 경솔히 입술에서 발한 서약이 무효될 것이니 여호와께서 그 여자를 사하시리라	But if her husband disallowed her on the day that he heard it; then he shall make her vow which she vowed, and that which she uttered with her lips, wherewith she bound her soul, of none effect: and the Lord shall forgive her.	But if her husband prohibits her when he hears of it, he nullifies the vow that binds her or the rash promise she has made, and the LORD will absolve her.
NUM	30	9	과부나 이혼 당한 여자의 서원이나 무릇 그 마음을 제어하려는 서약은 지킬 것이니라	But every vow of a widow, and of her that is divorced, wherewith they have bound their souls, shall stand against her.	Every vow a widow or divorced woman pledges to fulfill is binding on her.
NUM	30	10	부녀가 혹시 그 남편의 집에 있어 서원을 하였다든지 마음을 제어하려고 서약하였다 하자	And if she vowed in her husband’s house, or bound her soul by a bond with an oath;	If a woman in her husband’s house has made a vow or put herself under an obligation with an oath,
NUM	30	11	그 남편이 그것을 듣고도 아무 말이 없고 금함이 없으면 그 서원은 무릇 행할 것이요 그 마음을 제어하려는 서약은 무릇 지킬 것이니라	And her husband heard it, and held his peace at her, and disallowed her not: then all her vows shall stand, and every bond wherewith she bound her soul shall stand.	and her husband hears of it but says nothing to her and does not prohibit her, then all the vows or pledges by which she has bound herself shall stand.
NUM	30	12	그러나 그 남편이 그것을 듣는 날에 무효케 하면 그 서원과 마음을 제어하려던 일에 대하여 입술에서 낸 것을 무엇이든지 이루지 못하나니 그 남편이 그것을 무효케 하였은즉 여호와께서 그 부녀를 사하시느니라	But if her husband hath utterly made them void on the day he heard them; then whatsoever proceeded out of her lips concerning her vows, or concerning the bond of her soul, shall not stand: her husband hath made them void; and the Lord shall forgive her.	But if her husband nullifies them on the day he hears of them, then nothing that came from her lips, whether her vows or pledges, shall stand. Her husband has nullified them, and the LORD will absolve her.
NUM	30	13	무릇 서원과 무릇 마음을 괴롭게 하려는 서약은 그 남편이 그것을 지키게도 할 수 있고 무효케도 할 수 있나니	Every vow, and every binding oath to afflict the soul, her husband may establish it, or her husband may make it void.	Her husband may confirm or nullify any vow or any sworn pledge to deny herself.
NUM	30	14	그 남편이 일향 말이 없으면 아내의 서원과 스스로 제어하려는 일을 지키게 하는 것이니 이는 그가 그것을 들을 때에 그 아내에게 아무 말도 아니하였으므로 지키게 됨이니라	But if her husband altogether hold his peace at her from day to day; then he establisheth all her vows, or all her bonds, which are upon her: he confirmeth them, because he held his peace at her in the day that he heard them.	But if her husband says nothing to her from day to day, then he confirms all the vows and pledges that bind her. He has confirmed them, because he said nothing to her on the day he heard about them.
NUM	30	15	그러나 그 남편이 들은지 얼마 후에 그것을 무효케 하면 그가 아내의 죄를 담당할 것이니라	But if he shall any ways make them void after that he hath heard them; then he shall bear her iniquity.	But if he nullifies them after he hears of them, then he will bear her iniquity.”
NUM	30	16	이는 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 율례니 남편이 아내에게, 아비가 자기 집에 있는 유년 여자에게 대한 것이니라	These are the statutes, which the Lord commanded Moses, between a man and his wife, between the father and his daughter, being yet in her youth in her father’s house.	These are the statutes that the LORD commanded Moses concerning the relationship between a man and his wife, and between a father and a young daughter still in his home.
NUM	31	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	And the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	31	2	이스라엘 자손의 원수를 미디안에게 갚으라 그 후에 네가 네 조상에게로 돌아가리라	Avenge the children of Israel of the Midianites: afterward shalt thou be gathered unto thy people.	“Take vengeance on the Midianites for the Israelites. After that, you will be gathered to your people.”
NUM	31	3	모세가 백성에게 일러 가로되 너희 중에서 사람을 택하여 싸움에 나갈 준비를 시키고 미디안을 치러 보내어서 여호와의 원수를 미디안에게 갚되	And Moses spake unto the people, saying, Arm some of yourselves unto the war, and let them go against the Midianites, and avenge the Lord of Midian.	So Moses told the people, “Arm some of your men for war, that they may go against the Midianites and execute the LORD’s vengeance on them.
NUM	31	4	이스라엘 모든 지파에 대하여 각 지파에서 일천 인씩을 싸움에 보낼지니라 하매	Of every tribe a thousand, throughout all the tribes of Israel, shall ye send to the war.	Send into battle a thousand men from each tribe of Israel.”
NUM	31	5	매 지파에서 일천 인씩 이스라엘 천만 인 중에서 일만 이천 인을 택하여 무장을 시킨지라	So there were delivered out of the thousands of Israel, a thousand of every tribe, twelve thousand armed for war.	So a thousand men were recruited from each tribe of Israel—twelve thousand armed for war.
NUM	31	6	모세가 매 지파에 일천 인씩 싸움에 보내되 제사장 엘르아살의 아들 비느하스에게 성소의 기구와 신호 나팔을 들려서 그들과 함께 싸움에 보내매	And Moses sent them to the war, a thousand of every tribe, them and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, to the war, with the holy instruments, and the trumpets to blow in his hand.	And Moses sent the thousand from each tribe into battle, along with Phinehas son of Eleazar the priest, who took with him the vessels of the sanctuary and the trumpets for signaling.
NUM	31	7	그들이 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 미디안을 쳐서 그 남자를 다 죽였고	And they warred against the Midianites, as the Lord commanded Moses; and they slew all the males.	Then they waged war against Midian, as the LORD had commanded Moses, and they killed every male.
NUM	31	8	그 죽인 자 외에 미디안의 다섯 왕을 죽였으니 미디안의 왕들은 에위와 레겜과 수르와 후르와 레바이며 또 브올의 아들 발람을 칼로 죽였더라	And they slew the kings of Midian, beside the rest of them that were slain; namely, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, five kings of Midian: Balaam also the son of Beor they slew with the sword.	Among the slain were Evi, Rekem, Zur, Hur, and Reba—the five kings of Midian. They also killed Balaam son of Beor with the sword.
NUM	31	9	이스라엘 자손이 미디안의 부녀들과 그 아이들을 사로잡고 그 가축과 양떼와 재물을 다 탈취하고	And the children of Israel took all the women of Midian captives, and their little ones, and took the spoil of all their cattle, and all their flocks, and all their goods.	The Israelites captured the Midianite women and their children, and they plundered all their herds, flocks, and goods.
NUM	31	10	그 거처하는 성읍들과 촌락을 다 불사르고	And they burnt all their cities wherein they dwelt, and all their goodly castles, with fire.	Then they burned all the cities where the Midianites had lived, as well as all their encampments,
NUM	31	11	탈취한 것, 노략한 것, 사람과 짐승을 다 취하니라	And they took all the spoil, and all the prey, both of men and of beasts.	and carried away all the plunder and spoils, both people and animals.
NUM	31	12	그들이 사로잡은 자와 노략한 것과 탈취한 것을 가지고 여리고 맞은편 요단 가 모압 평지의 진에 이르러 모세와 제사장 엘르아살과 이스라엘 자손의 회중에게로 나아오니라	And they brought the captives, and the prey, and the spoil, unto Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and unto the congregation of the children of Israel, unto the camp at the plains of Moab, which are by Jordan near Jericho.	They brought the captives, spoils, and plunder to Moses, to Eleazar the priest, and to the congregation of Israel at the camp on the plains of Moab, by the Jordan across from Jericho.
NUM	31	13	모세와 제사장 엘르아살과 회중의 족장들이 다 진 밖에 나가서 영접하다가	And Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and all the princes of the congregation, went forth to meet them without the camp.	And Moses, Eleazar the priest, and all the leaders of the congregation went to meet them outside the camp.
NUM	31	14	모세가 군대의 장관 곧 싸움에서 돌아온 천부장들과 백부장들에게 노하니라	And Moses was wroth with the officers of the host, with the captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, which came from the battle.	But Moses was angry with the officers of the army—the commanders of thousands and commanders of hundreds—who were returning from the battle.
NUM	31	15	모세가 그들에게 이르되 너희가 여자들을 다 살려두었느냐	And Moses said unto them, Have ye saved all the women alive?	“Have you spared all the women?” he asked them.
NUM	31	16	보라 이들이 발람의 꾀를 좇아 이스라엘 자손으로 브올의 사건에 여호와 앞에 범죄케 하여 여호와의 회중에 염병이 일어나게 하였느니라	Behold, these caused the children of Israel, through the counsel of Balaam, to commit trespass against the Lord in the matter of Peor, and there was a plague among the congregation of the Lord.	“Look, these women caused the sons of Israel, through the counsel of Balaam, to turn unfaithfully against the LORD at Peor, so that the plague struck the congregation of the LORD.
NUM	31	17	그러므로 아이들 중에 남자는 다 죽이고 남자와 동침하여 사내를 안 여자는 다 죽이고	Now therefore kill every male among the little ones, and kill every woman that hath known man by lying with him.	So now, kill all the boys, as well as every woman who has had relations with a man,
NUM	31	18	남자와 동침하지 아니하여 사내를 알지 못하는 여자들은 다 너희를 위하여 살려둘 것이니라	But all the women children, that have not known a man by lying with him, keep alive for yourselves.	but spare for yourselves every girl who has never had relations with a man.
NUM	31	19	너희는 칠 일 동안 진 밖에 주둔하라 무릇 살인자나 죽임을 당한 시체를 만진 자나 제삼일과 제칠일에 몸을 깨끗케 하고 너희의 포로도 깨끗케 할 것이며	And do ye abide without the camp seven days: whosoever hath killed any person, and whosoever hath touched any slain, purify both yourselves and your captives on the third day, and on the seventh day.	All of you who have killed a person or touched the dead are to remain outside the camp for seven days. On the third day and the seventh day you are to purify both yourselves and your captives.
NUM	31	20	무릇 의복과 무릇 가죽으로 만든 것과 무릇 염소털로 만든 것과 무릇 나무로 만든 것을 다 깨끗케 할지니라	And purify all your raiment, and all that is made of skins, and all work of goats’ hair, and all things made of wood.	And purify every garment and leather good, everything made of goat’s hair, and every article of wood.”
NUM	31	21	제사장 엘르아살이 싸움에 나갔던 군인들에게 이르되 이는 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 법률이니라	And Eleazar the priest said unto the men of war which went to the battle, This is the ordinance of the law which the Lord commanded Moses;	Then Eleazar the priest said to the soldiers who had gone into battle, “This is the statute of the law which the LORD has commanded Moses:
NUM	31	22	금, 은, 동, 철과 상납과 납의	Only the gold, and the silver, the brass, the iron, the tin, and the lead,	Only the gold, silver, bronze, iron, tin, and lead—
NUM	31	23	무릇 불에 견딜 만한 물건은 불을 지나게 하라 그리하면 깨끗하려니와 오히려 정결케 하는 물로 그것을 깨끗케 할 것이며 무릇 불에 견디지 못할 모든 것은 물을 지나게 할 것이니라	Every thing that may abide the fire, ye shall make it go through the fire, and it shall be clean: nevertheless it shall be purified with the water of separation: and all that abideth not the fire ye shall make go through the water.	everything that can withstand the fire—must be put through the fire, and it will be clean. But it must still be purified with the water of purification. And everything that cannot withstand the fire must pass through the water.
NUM	31	24	너희는 제칠일에 옷을 빨아서 깨끗케 한 후에 진에 들어올지니라	And ye shall wash your clothes on the seventh day, and ye shall be clean, and afterward ye shall come into the camp.	On the seventh day you are to wash your clothes, and you will be clean. After that you may enter the camp.”
NUM	31	25	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	The LORD said to Moses,
NUM	31	26	너는 제사장 엘르아살과 회중의 족장들을 더불어 이 탈취한 사람과 짐승을 계수하고	Take the sum of the prey that was taken, both of man and of beast, thou, and Eleazar the priest, and the chief fathers of the congregation:	“You and Eleazar the priest and the family heads of the congregation are to take a count of what was captured, both of man and beast.
NUM	31	27	그 얻은 물건을 반분하여 그 절반은 싸움에 나갔던 군인들에게 주고 절반은 회중에게 주고	And divide the prey into two parts; between them that took the war upon them, who went out to battle, and between all the congregation:	Then divide the captives between the troops who went out to battle and the rest of the congregation.
NUM	31	28	싸움에 나갔던 군인들로는 사람이나 소나 나귀나 양떼의 오백분지 일을 여호와께 드리게 하되	And levy a tribute unto the Lord of the men of war which went out to battle: one soul of five hundred, both of the persons, and of the beeves, and of the asses, and of the sheep:	Set aside a tribute for the LORD from what belongs to the soldiers who went into battle: one out of every five hundred, whether persons, cattle, donkeys, or sheep.
NUM	31	29	곧 이를 그들의 절반에서 취하여 여호와의 거제로 제사장 엘르아살에게 주고	Take it of their half, and give it unto Eleazar the priest, for an heave offering of the Lord.	Take it from their half and give it to Eleazar the priest as an offering to the LORD.
NUM	31	30	또 이스라엘 자손의 얻은 절반에서는 사람이나 소나 나귀나 양떼나 각종 짐승을 오십분지 일을 취하여 여호와의 성막을 맡은 레위인에게 주라	And of the children of Israel’s half, thou shalt take one portion of fifty, of the persons, of the beeves, of the asses, and of the flocks, of all manner of beasts, and give them unto the Levites, which keep the charge of the tabernacle of the Lord.	From the Israelites’ half, take one out of every fifty, whether persons, cattle, donkeys, sheep, or other animals, and give them to the Levites who keep charge of the tabernacle of the LORD.”
NUM	31	31	모세와 제사장 엘르아살이 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 하니라	And Moses and Eleazar the priest did as the Lord commanded Moses.	So Moses and Eleazar the priest did as the LORD had commanded Moses,
NUM	31	32	그 탈취물 곧 군인들의 다른 탈취물 외에 양이 육십칠만 오천이요	And the booty, being the rest of the prey which the men of war had caught, was six hundred thousand and seventy thousand and five thousand sheep,	and this plunder remained from the spoils the soldiers had taken: 675,000 sheep,
NUM	31	33	소가 칠만 이천이요	And threescore and twelve thousand beeves,	72,000 cattle,
NUM	31	34	나귀가 육만 일천이요	And threescore and one thousand asses,	61,000 donkeys,
NUM	31	35	사람은 남자와 동침하지 아니하여서 사내를 알지 못하는 여자가 도합 삼만 이천이니	And thirty and two thousand persons in all, of women that had not known man by lying with him.	and 32,000 women who had not slept with a man.
NUM	31	36	그 절반 곧 싸움에 나갔던 자들의 소유가 양이 삼십삼만 칠천오백이라	And the half, which was the portion of them that went out to war, was in number three hundred thousand and seven and thirty thousand and five hundred sheep:	This was the half portion for those who had gone to war:
NUM	31	37	여호와께 세로 드린 양이 육백칠십오요	And the Lord’s tribute of the sheep was six hundred and threescore and fifteen.	337,500 sheep, including a tribute to the LORD of 675,
NUM	31	38	소가 삼만 육천이라 그 중에서 여호와께 세로 드린 것이 칠십이 두요	And the beeves were thirty and six thousand; of which the Lord’s tribute was threescore and twelve.	36,000 cattle, including a tribute to the LORD of 72,
NUM	31	39	나귀가 삼만 오백이라 그 중에서 여호와께 세로 드린 것이 육십일이요	And the asses were thirty thousand and five hundred; of which the Lord’s tribute was threescore and one.	30,500 donkeys, including a tribute to the LORD of 61,
NUM	31	40	사람이 일만 육천이라 그 중에서 여호와께 세로 드린 자가 삼십이 명이니	And the persons were sixteen thousand; of which the Lord’s tribute was thirty and two persons.	and 16,000 people, including a tribute to the LORD of 32.
NUM	31	41	여호와께 거제의 세로 드린 것을 모세가 제사장 엘르아살에게 주었으니 여호와께서 모세에게 명하심과 같았더라	And Moses gave the tribute, which was the Lord’s heave offering, unto Eleazar the priest, as the Lord commanded Moses.	Moses gave the tribute to Eleazar the priest as an offering for the LORD, as the LORD had commanded Moses.
NUM	31	42	모세가 싸움에 나갔던 자에게서 나누어 취하여 이스라엘 자손에게 준 절반	And of the children of Israel’s half, which Moses divided from the men that warred,	From the Israelites’ half, which Moses had set apart from the men who had gone to war,
NUM	31	43	곧 회중의 얻은 절반은 양이 삼십삼만 칠천오백이요	(Now the half that pertained unto the congregation was three hundred thousand and thirty thousand and seven thousand and five hundred sheep,	this half belonged to the congregation: 337,500 sheep,
NUM	31	44	소가 삼만 육천이요	And thirty and six thousand beeves,	36,000 cattle,
NUM	31	45	나귀가 삼만 오백이요	And thirty thousand asses and five hundred,	30,500 donkeys,
NUM	31	46	사람이 일만 육천이라	And sixteen thousand persons;)	and 16,000 people.
NUM	31	47	이스라엘 자손의 그 절반에서 모세가 사람이나 짐승의 오십분지 일을 취하여 여호와의 장막을 맡은 레위인에게 주었으니 여호와께서 모세에게 명하심과 같았더라	Even of the children of Israel’s half, Moses took one portion of fifty, both of man and of beast, and gave them unto the Levites, which kept the charge of the tabernacle of the Lord; as the Lord commanded Moses.	From the Israelites’ half, Moses took one out of every fifty persons and animals and gave them to the Levites who kept charge of the tabernacle of the LORD, as the LORD had commanded him.
NUM	31	48	군대의 장관들 곧 천부장과 백부장들이 모세에게 나아와서	And the officers which were over thousands of the host, the captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds, came near unto Moses:	Then the officers who were over the units of the army—the commanders of thousands and of hundreds—approached Moses
NUM	31	49	그에게 고하되 당신의 종들의 영솔한 군인을 계수한즉 우리 중 한 사람도 축나지 아니하였기로	And they said unto Moses, Thy servants have taken the sum of the men of war which are under our charge, and there lacketh not one man of us.	and said, “Your servants have counted the soldiers under our command, and not one of us is missing.
NUM	31	50	우리 각 사람의 얻은바 금 패물 곧 발목고리, 손목고리, 인장반지, 귀고리, 팔고리들을 여호와의 예물로 우리의 생명을 위하여 여호와 앞에 속죄하려고 가져왔나이다	We have therefore brought an oblation for the Lord, what every man hath gotten, of jewels of gold, chains, and bracelets, rings, earrings, and tablets, to make an atonement for our souls before the Lord.	So we have brought to the LORD an offering of the gold articles each man acquired—armlets, bracelets, rings, earrings, and necklaces—to make atonement for ourselves before the LORD.”
NUM	31	51	모세와 제사장 엘르아살이 그들에게서 그 금으로 만든 모든 패물을 취한즉	And Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of them, even all wrought jewels.	So Moses and Eleazar the priest received from them all the articles made out of gold.
NUM	31	52	천부장과 백부장들이 여호와께 드린 거제의 금의 도합이 일만 육천칠백오십 세겔이니	And all the gold of the offering that they offered up to the Lord, of the captains of thousands, and of the captains of hundreds, was sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty shekels.	All the gold that the commanders of thousands and of hundreds presented as an offering to the LORD weighed 16,750 shekels.
NUM	31	53	군인들이 각기 자기를 위하여 탈취한 것이라	(For the men of war had taken spoil, every man for himself.)	Each of the soldiers had taken plunder for himself.
NUM	31	54	모세와 제사장 엘르아살이 천부장과 백부장들에게서 금을 취하여 회막에 드려서 여호와 앞에 이스라엘 자손의 기념을 삼았더라	And Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and brought it into the tabernacle of the congregation, for a memorial for the children of Israel before the Lord.	And Moses and Eleazar the priest received the gold from the commanders of thousands and of hundreds and brought it into the Tent of Meeting as a memorial for the Israelites before the LORD.
NUM	32	1	르우벤 자손과 갓 자손은 심히 많은 가축 떼가 있었더라 그들이 야셀 땅과 길르앗 땅을 본즉 그 곳은 가축에 적당한 곳인지라	Now the children of Reuben and the children of Gad had a very great multitude of cattle: and when they saw the land of Jazer, and the land of Gilead, that, behold, the place was a place for cattle;	Now the Reubenites and Gadites, who had very large herds and flocks, surveyed the lands of Jazer and Gilead, and they saw that the region was suitable for livestock.
NUM	32	2	갓 자손과 르우벤 자손이 와서 모세와 제사장 엘르아살과 회중 족장들에게 말하여 가로되	The children of Gad and the children of Reuben came and spake unto Moses, and to Eleazar the priest, and unto the princes of the congregation, saying,	So the Gadites and Reubenites came to Moses, Eleazar the priest, and the leaders of the congregation, and said,
NUM	32	3	아다롯과 디본과 야셀과 니므라와 헤스본과 엘르알레와 스밤과 느보와 브온	Ataroth, and Dibon, and Jazer, and Nimrah, and Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Shebam, and Nebo, and Beon,	“Ataroth, Dibon, Jazer, Nimrah, Heshbon, Elealeh, Sebam, Nebo, and Beon,
NUM	32	4	곧 여호와께서 이스라엘 회중 앞에서 쳐서 멸하신 땅은 가축에 적당한 곳이요 당신의 종들에게는 가축이 있나이다	Even the country which the Lord smote before the congregation of Israel, is a land for cattle, and thy servants have cattle:	which the LORD conquered before the congregation of Israel, are suitable for livestock—and your servants have livestock.”
NUM	32	5	또 가로되 우리가 만일 당신에게 은혜를 입었으면 이 땅을 당신의 종들에게 산업으로 주시고 우리로 요단을 건너지 않게 하소서	Wherefore, said they, if we have found grace in thy sight, let this land be given unto thy servants for a possession, and bring us not over Jordan.	“If we have found favor in your sight,” they said, “let this land be given to your servants as a possession. Do not make us cross the Jordan.”
NUM	32	6	모세가 갓 자손과 르우벤 자손에게 이르되 너희 형제들은 싸우러 가거늘 너희는 여기 앉았고자 하느냐	And Moses said unto the children of Gad and to the children of Reuben, Shall your brethren go to war, and shall ye sit here?	But Moses asked the Gadites and Reubenites, “Shall your brothers go to war while you sit here?
NUM	32	7	너희가 어찌하여 이스라엘 자손으로 낙심케 하여서 여호와께서 그들에게 주신 땅으로 건너갈 수 없게 하려느냐	And wherefore discourage ye the heart of the children of Israel from going over into the land which the Lord hath given them?	Why are you discouraging the Israelites from crossing into the land that the LORD has given them?
NUM	32	8	너희 열조도 내가 가데스바네아에서 그 땅을 보라고 보내었을 때에 그리하였었나니	Thus did your fathers, when I sent them from Kadesh–barnea to see the land.	This is what your fathers did when I sent them from Kadesh-barnea to inspect the land.
NUM	32	9	그들이 에스골 골짜기에 올라가서 그 땅을 보고 이스라엘 자손으로 낙심케 하여서 여호와께서 그들에게 주신 땅으로 갈 수 없게 하였었느니라	For when they went up unto the valley of Eshcol, and saw the land, they discouraged the heart of the children of Israel, that they should not go into the land which the Lord had given them.	For when your fathers went up to the Valley of Eshcol and saw the land, they discouraged the Israelites from entering the land that the LORD had given them.
NUM	32	10	그때에 여호와께서 진노하사 맹세하여 가라사대	And the Lord’s anger was kindled the same time, and he sware, saying,	So the anger of the LORD was kindled that day, and He swore an oath, saying,
NUM	32	11	애굽에서 나온 자들의 이십 세 이상으로는 한 사람도 내가 아브라함과 이삭과 야곱에게 맹세한 땅을 정녕히 보지 못하리니 이는 그들이 나를 온전히 순종치 아니하였음이니라	Surely none of the men that came up out of Egypt, from twenty years old and upward, shall see the land which I sware unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob; because they have not wholly followed me:	‘Because they did not follow Me wholeheartedly, not one of the men twenty years of age or older who came out of Egypt will see the land that I swore to give Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob—
NUM	32	12	다만 그나스 사람 여분네의 아들 갈렙과 눈의 아들 여호수아는 볼 것은 여호와를 온전히 순종하였음이니라 하시고	Save Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite, and Joshua the son of Nun: for they have wholly followed the Lord.	not one except Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite and Joshua son of Nun—because they did follow the LORD wholeheartedly.’
NUM	32	13	여호와께서 이스라엘에게 진노하사 그들로 사십 년 동안 광야에 유리하게 하심으로 여호와의 목전에 악을 행한 그 세대가 필경은 다 소멸하였느니라	And the Lord’s anger was kindled against Israel, and he made them wander in the wilderness forty years, until all the generation, that had done evil in the sight of the Lord, was consumed.	The anger of the LORD burned against Israel, and He made them wander in the wilderness forty years, until the whole generation who had done evil in His sight was gone.
NUM	32	14	보라 너희는 너희의 열조를 계대하여 일어난 죄인의 종류로서 이스라엘을 향하신 여호와의 노를 더욱 심하게 하는도다	And, behold, ye are risen up in your fathers’ stead, an increase of sinful men, to augment yet the fierce anger of the Lord toward Israel.	Now behold, you, a brood of sinners, have risen up in place of your fathers to further stoke the burning anger of the LORD against Israel.
NUM	32	15	너희가 만일 돌이켜 여호와를 떠나면 여호와께서 또 이 백성을 광야에 버리시리니 그리하면 너희가 이 모든 백성을 멸망시키리라	For if ye turn away from after him, he will yet again leave them in the wilderness; and ye shall destroy all this people.	For if you turn away from following Him, He will once again leave this people in the wilderness, and you will be the cause of their destruction.”
NUM	32	16	그들이 모세에게 가까이 나아와 가로되 우리가 이 곳에 우리 가축을 위하여 우리를 짓고 우리 유아들을 위하여 성읍을 건축하고	And they came near unto him, and said, We will build sheepfolds here for our cattle, and cities for our little ones:	Then the Gadites and Reubenites approached Moses and said, “We want to build sheepfolds here for our livestock and cities for our little ones.
NUM	32	17	이 땅 거민의 연고로 우리 유아들로 그 견고한 성읍에 거하게 한 후에 우리는 무장하고 이스라엘 자손을 그곳으로 인도하기까지 그들의 앞에 행하고	But we ourselves will go ready armed before the children of Israel, until we have brought them unto their place: and our little ones shall dwell in the fenced cities because of the inhabitants of the land.	But we will arm ourselves and be ready to go ahead of the Israelites until we have brought them into their place. Meanwhile, our little ones will remain in the fortified cities for protection from the inhabitants of the land.
NUM	32	18	이스라엘 자손이 각기 기업을 얻기까지 우리 집으로 돌아오지 아니하겠사오며	We will not return unto our houses, until the children of Israel have inherited every man his inheritance.	We will not return to our homes until every Israelite has taken possession of his inheritance.
NUM	32	19	우리는 요단 이편 곧 동편에서 산업을 얻었사오니 그들과 함께 요단 저편에서는 기업을 얻지 아니하겠나이다	For we will not inherit with them on yonder side Jordan, or forward; because our inheritance is fallen to us on this side Jordan eastward.	Yet we will not have an inheritance with them across the Jordan and beyond, because our inheritance has come to us on the east side of the Jordan.”
NUM	32	20	모세가 그들에게 이르되 너희가 만일 이 일을 행하여 무장하고 여호와 앞에서 가서 싸우되	And Moses said unto them, If ye will do this thing, if ye will go armed before the Lord to war,	Moses replied, “If you will do this—if you will arm yourselves before the LORD for battle,
NUM	32	21	너희가 다 무장하고 여호와 앞에서 요단을 건너가서 여호와께서 그 원수를 자기 앞에서 쫓아내시고	And will go all of you armed over Jordan before the Lord, until he hath driven out his enemies from before him,	and if every one of your armed men crosses the Jordan before the LORD, until He has driven His enemies out before Him,
NUM	32	22	그 땅으로 여호와 앞에 복종케 하시기까지 싸우면 여호와의 앞에서나 이스라엘의 앞에서나 무죄히 돌아오겠고 이 땅은 여호와 앞에서 너희의 산업이 되리라마는	And the land be subdued before the Lord: then afterward ye shall return, and be guiltless before the Lord, and before Israel; and this land shall be your possession before the Lord.	then when the land is subdued before the LORD, you may return and be free of obligation to the LORD and to Israel. And this land will belong to you as a possession before the LORD.
NUM	32	23	너희가 만일 그같이 아니하면 여호와께 범죄함이니 너희 죄가 정녕 너희를 찾아낼줄 알라	But if ye will not do so, behold, ye have sinned against the Lord: and be sure your sin will find you out.	But if you do not do this, you will certainly sin against the LORD—and be assured that your sin will find you out.
NUM	32	24	너희는 유아들을 위하여 성읍을 건축하고 양을 위하여 우리를 지으라 그리하고 너희 입에서 낸 대로 행하라	Build you cities for your little ones, and folds for your sheep; and do that which hath proceeded out of your mouth.	Build cities for your little ones and folds for your flocks, but do what you have promised.”
NUM	32	25	갓 자손과 르우벤 자손이 모세에게 대답하여 가로되 우리 주의 명대로 종들이 행할 것이라	And the children of Gad and the children of Reuben spake unto Moses, saying, Thy servants will do as my lord commandeth.	The Gadites and Reubenites said to Moses, “Your servants will do just as our lord commands.
NUM	32	26	우리의 어린 자와 아내와 양떼와 모든 가축은 이곳 길르앗 성읍 들에 두고	Our little ones, our wives, our flocks, and all our cattle, shall be there in the cities of Gilead:	Our children, our wives, our livestock, and all our animals will remain here in the cities of Gilead.
NUM	32	27	우리 주의 말씀대로 종들은 무장하고 여호와 앞에서 다 건너가서 싸우리이다	But thy servants will pass over, every man armed for war, before the Lord to battle, as my lord saith.	But your servants are equipped for war, and every man will cross over to the battle before the LORD, just as our lord says.”
NUM	32	28	이에 모세가 그들에게 대하여 제사장 엘르아살과 눈의 아들 여호수아와 이스라엘 자손 지파의 두령들에게 명하니라	So concerning them Moses commanded Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the chief fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel:	So Moses gave orders about them to Eleazar the priest, to Joshua son of Nun, and to the family leaders of the tribes of Israel.
NUM	32	29	모세가 그들에게 이르되 갓 자손과 르우벤 자손이 만일 각기 무장하고 너희와 함께 요단을 건너가서 여호와 앞에서 싸워서 그 땅이 너희 앞에 항복하기에 이르거든 길르앗 땅을 그들에게 산업으로 줄 것이니라	And Moses said unto them, If the children of Gad and the children of Reuben will pass with you over Jordan, every man armed to battle, before the Lord, and the land shall be subdued before you; then ye shall give them the land of Gilead for a possession:	And Moses said to them, “If the Gadites and Reubenites cross the Jordan with you, with every man armed for battle before the LORD, and the land is subdued before you, then you are to give them the land of Gilead as a possession.
NUM	32	30	그러나 그들이 만일 너희와 함께 무장하고 건너지 아니하거든 가나안 땅에서 너희 중에 산업을 줄 것이니라	But if they will not pass over with you armed, they shall have possessions among you in the land of Canaan.	But if they do not arm themselves and go across with you, then they must accept their possession among you in the land of Canaan.”
NUM	32	31	갓 자손과 르우벤 자손이 대답하여 가로되 여호와께서 당신의 종들에게 명하신 대로 우리가 행할 것이라	And the children of Gad and the children of Reuben answered, saying, As the Lord hath said unto thy servants, so will we do.	The Gadites and Reubenites replied, “As the LORD has spoken to your servants, so we will do.
NUM	32	32	우리가 무장하고 여호와 앞에서 가나안 땅에 건너가서 요단 이편으로 우리의 산업이 되게 하리이다	We will pass over armed before the Lord into the land of Canaan, that the possession of our inheritance on this side Jordan may be ours.	We will cross over into the land of Canaan armed before the LORD, that we may have our inheritance on this side of the Jordan.”
NUM	32	33	모세가 갓 자손과 르우벤 자손과 요셉의 아들 므낫세 반 지파에게 아모리인의 왕 시혼의 국토와 바산 왕 옥의 국토를 주되 곧 그 나라와 그 경내 성읍들과 그 성읍들의 사면 땅을 그들에게 주매	And Moses gave unto them, even to the children of Gad, and to the children of Reuben, and unto half the tribe of Manasseh the son of Joseph, the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, and the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, the land, with the cities thereof in the coasts, even the cities of the country round about.	So Moses gave to the Gadites, to the Reubenites, and to the half-tribe of Manasseh son of Joseph the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites and the kingdom of Og king of Bashan—the land including its cities and the territory surrounding them.
NUM	32	34	갓 자손은 디본과 아다롯과 아로엘과	And the children of Gad built Dibon, and Ataroth, and Aroer,	And the Gadites built up Dibon, Ataroth, Aroer,
NUM	32	35	아다롯소반과 야셀과 욕브하와	And Atroth, Shophan, and Jaazer, and Jogbehah,	Atroth-shophan, Jazer, Jogbehah,
NUM	32	36	벧니므라와 벧하란들의 견고한 성읍을 건축하였고 또 양을 위하여 우리를 지었으며	And Beth–nimrah, and Beth–haran, fenced cities: and folds for sheep.	Beth-nimrah, and Beth-haran as fortified cities, and they built folds for their flocks.
NUM	32	37	르우벤 자손은 헤스본과 엘르알레와 기랴다임과	And the children of Reuben built Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Kirjathaim,	The Reubenites built up Heshbon, Elealeh, Kiriathaim,
NUM	32	38	느보와 바알므온들을 건축하고 그 이름을 고쳤고 또 십마를 건축하고 건축한 성읍들에 새 이름을 주었고	And Nebo, and Baal–meon, (their names being changed,) and Shibmah: and gave other names unto the cities which they builded.	as well as Nebo and Baal-meon (whose names were changed), and Sibmah. And they renamed the cities they rebuilt.
NUM	32	39	므낫세의 아들 마길의 자손은 가서 길르앗을 쳐서 취하고 거기 있는 아모리인을 쫓아내매	And the children of Machir the son of Manasseh went to Gilead, and took it, and dispossessed the Amorite which was in it.	The descendants of Machir son of Manasseh went to Gilead, captured it, and drove out the Amorites who were there.
NUM	32	40	모세가 길르앗을 므낫세의 아들 마길에게 주매 그가 거기 거하였고	And Moses gave Gilead unto Machir the son of Manasseh; and he dwelt therein.	So Moses gave Gilead to the clan of Machir son of Manasseh, and they settled there.
NUM	32	41	므낫세의 아들 야일은 가서 그 촌락들을 취하고 하봇야일이라 칭하였으며	And Jair the son of Manasseh went and took the small towns thereof, and called them Havoth–jair.	Jair, a descendant of Manasseh, went and captured their villages and called them Havvoth-jair.
NUM	32	42	노바는 가서 그낫과 그 향촌을 취하고 자기 이름을 따라서 노바라 칭하였더라	And Nobah went and took Kenath, and the villages thereof, and called it Nobah, after his own name.	And Nobah went and captured Kenath and its villages and called it Nobah, after his own name.
NUM	33	1	이스라엘 자손이 모세와 아론의 관할하에 그 항오대로 애굽 땅에서 나오던 때의 노정이 이러하니라	These are the journeys of the children of Israel, which went forth out of the land of Egypt with their armies under the hand of Moses and Aaron.	These are the journeys of the Israelites when they came out of the land of Egypt by their divisions under the leadership of Moses and Aaron.
NUM	33	2	모세가 여호와의 명대로 그 노정을 따라 그 진행한 것을 기록하였으니 그 진행한 대로 그 노정은 이러하니라	And Moses wrote their goings out according to their journeys by the commandment of the Lord: and these are their journeys according to their goings out.	At the LORD’s command, Moses recorded the stages of their journey. These are the stages listed by their starting points:
NUM	33	3	그들이 정월 십오일에 라암셋에서 발행하였으니 곧 유월절 다음날이라 이스라엘 자손이 애굽 모든 사람의 목전에서 큰 권능으로 나왔으니	And they departed from Rameses in the first month, on the fifteenth day of the first month; on the morrow after the passover the children of Israel went out with an high hand in the sight of all the Egyptians.	On the fifteenth day of the first month, on the day after the Passover, the Israelites set out from Rameses. They marched out defiantly in full view of all the Egyptians,
NUM	33	4	애굽인은 여호와께서 그들 중에 치신 그 모든 장자를 장사하는 때라 여호와께서 그들의 신들에게도 벌을 주셨더라	For the Egyptians buried all their firstborn, which the Lord had smitten among them: upon their gods also the Lord executed judgments.	who were burying all their firstborn, whom the LORD had struck down among them; for the LORD had executed judgment against their gods.
NUM	33	5	이스라엘 자손이 라암셋에서 발행하여 숙곳에 진 쳤고	And the children of Israel removed from Rameses, and pitched in Succoth.	The Israelites set out from Rameses and camped at Succoth.
NUM	33	6	숙곳에서 발행하여 광야 끝 에담에 진 쳤고	And they departed from Succoth, and pitched in Etham, which is in the edge of the wilderness.	They set out from Succoth and camped at Etham, on the edge of the wilderness.
NUM	33	7	에담에서 발행하여 바알스본 앞 비하히롯으로 돌아가서 믹돌 앞에 진 쳤고	And they removed from Etham, and turned again unto Pi–hahiroth, which is before Baal–zephon: and they pitched before Migdol.	They set out from Etham and turned back to Pi-hahiroth, opposite Baal-zephon, and they camped near Migdol.
NUM	33	8	하히롯 앞에서 발행하여 바다 가운데로 지나 광야에 이르고 에담 광야로 삼 일 길쯤 들어가서 마라에 진 쳤고	And they departed from before Pi–hahiroth, and passed through the midst of the sea into the wilderness, and went three days’ journey in the wilderness of Etham, and pitched in Marah.	They set out from Pi-hahiroth and crossed through the sea, into the wilderness, and they journeyed three days into the Wilderness of Etham and camped at Marah.
NUM	33	9	마라에서 발행하여 엘림에 이르니 엘림에는 샘물 열둘과 종려 칠십 주가 있으므로 거기 진 쳤고	And they removed from Marah, and came unto Elim: and in Elim were twelve fountains of water, and threescore and ten palm trees; and they pitched there.	They set out from Marah and came to Elim, where there were twelve springs and seventy palm trees, and they camped there.
NUM	33	10	엘림에서 발행하여 홍해 가에 진 쳤고	And they removed from Elim, and encamped by the Red sea.	They set out from Elim and camped by the Red Sea.
NUM	33	11	홍해 가에서 발행하여 신 광야에 진 쳤고	And they removed from the Red sea, and encamped in the wilderness of Sin.	They set out from the Red Sea and camped in the Desert of Sin.
NUM	33	12	신 광야에서 발행하여	And they took their journey out of the wilderness of Sin, and encamped in Dophkah.	They set out from the Desert of Sin and camped at Dophkah.
NUM	33	13	돕가에 진 쳤고 돕가에서 발행하여 알루스에 진 쳤고	And they departed from Dophkah, and encamped in Alush.	They set out from Dophkah and camped at Alush.
NUM	33	14	알루스에서 발행하여 르비딤에 진 쳤는데 거기는 백성의 마실 물이 없었더라	And they removed from Alush, and encamped at Rephidim, where was no water for the people to drink.	They set out from Alush and camped at Rephidim, where there was no water for the people to drink.
NUM	33	15	르비딤에서 발행하여 시내 광야에 진 쳤고	And they departed from Rephidim, and pitched in the wilderness of Sinai.	They set out from Rephidim and camped in the Wilderness of Sinai.
NUM	33	16	시내 광야에서 발행하여 기브롯핫다아와에 진 쳤고	And they removed from the desert of Sinai, and pitched at Kibroth–hattaavah.	They set out from the Wilderness of Sinai and camped at Kibroth-hattaavah.
NUM	33	17	기브롯핫다아와에서 발행하여 하세롯에 진 쳤고	And they departed from Kibroth–hattaavah, and encamped at Hazeroth.	They set out from Kibroth-hattaavah and camped at Hazeroth.
NUM	33	18	하세롯에서 발행하여 릿마에 진 쳤고	And they departed from Hazeroth, and pitched in Rithmah.	They set out from Hazeroth and camped at Rithmah.
NUM	33	19	릿마에서 발행하여 림몬베레스에 진 쳤고	And they departed from Rithmah, and pitched at Rimmon–parez.	They set out from Rithmah and camped at Rimmon-perez.
NUM	33	20	림몬베레스에서 발행하여 립나에 진 쳤고	And they departed from Rimmon–parez, and pitched in Libnah.	They set out from Rimmon-perez and camped at Libnah.
NUM	33	21	립나에서 발행하여 릿사에 진 쳤고	And they removed from Libnah, and pitched at Rissah.	They set out from Libnah and camped at Rissah.
NUM	33	22	릿사에서 발행하여 그헬라다에 진 쳤고	And they journeyed from Rissah, and pitched in Kehelathah.	They set out from Rissah and camped at Kehelathah.
NUM	33	23	그헬라다에서 발행하여 세벨 산에 진 쳤고	And they went from Kehelathah, and pitched in mount Shapher.	They set out from Kehelathah and camped at Mount Shepher.
NUM	33	24	세벨 산에서 발행하여 하라다에 진 쳤고	And they removed from mount Shapher, and encamped in Haradah.	They set out from Mount Shepher and camped at Haradah.
NUM	33	25	하라다에서 발행하여 막헬롯에 진 쳤고	And they removed from Haradah, and pitched in Makheloth.	They set out from Haradah and camped at Makheloth.
NUM	33	26	막헬롯에서 발행하여 다핫에 진 쳤고	And they removed from Makheloth, and encamped at Tahath.	They set out from Makheloth and camped at Tahath.
NUM	33	27	다핫에서 발행하여 데라에 진 쳤고	And they departed from Tahath, and pitched at Tarah.	They set out from Tahath and camped at Terah.
NUM	33	28	데라에서 발행하여 밋가에 진 쳤고	And they removed from Tarah, and pitched in Mithcah.	They set out from Terah and camped at Mithkah.
NUM	33	29	밋가에서 발행하여 하스모나에 진 쳤고	And they went from Mithcah, and pitched in Hashmonah.	They set out from Mithkah and camped at Hashmonah.
NUM	33	30	하스모나에서 발행하여 모세롯에 진 쳤고	And they departed from Hashmonah, and encamped at Moseroth.	They set out from Hashmonah and camped at Moseroth.
NUM	33	31	모세롯에서 발행하여 브네야아간에 진 쳤고	And they departed from Moseroth, and pitched in Bene–jaakan.	They set out from Moseroth and camped at Bene-jaakan.
NUM	33	32	브네야아간에서 발행하여 홀하깃갓에 진 쳤고	And they removed from Bene–jaakan, and encamped at Hor–hagidgad.	They set out from Bene-jaakan and camped at Hor-haggidgad.
NUM	33	33	홀하깃갓에서 발행하여 욧바다에 진 쳤고	And they went from Hor–hagidgad, and pitched in Jotbathah.	They set out from Hor-haggidgad and camped at Jotbathah.
NUM	33	34	욧바다에서 발행하여 아브로나에 진 쳤고	And they removed from Jotbathah, and encamped at Ebronah.	They set out from Jotbathah and camped at Abronah.
NUM	33	35	아브로나에서 발행하여 에시온게벨에 진 쳤고	And they departed from Ebronah, and encamped at Ezion–gaber.	They set out from Abronah and camped at Ezion-geber.
NUM	33	36	에시온게벨에서 발행하여 신 광야 곧 가데스에 진 쳤고	And they removed from Ezion–gaber, and pitched in the wilderness of Zin, which is Kadesh.	They set out from Ezion-geber and camped at Kadesh in the Wilderness of Zin.
NUM	33	37	가데스에서 발행하여 에돔 국경 호르 산에 진 쳤더라	And they removed from Kadesh, and pitched in mount Hor, in the edge of the land of Edom.	They set out from Kadesh and camped at Mount Hor, on the outskirts of the land of Edom.
NUM	33	38	이스라엘 자손이 애굽 땅에서 나온 지 사십년 오월 일일에 제사장 아론이 여호와의 명으로 호르 산에 올라가 거기서 죽었으니	And Aaron the priest went up into mount Hor at the commandment of the Lord, and died there, in the fortieth year after the children of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the first day of the fifth month.	At the LORD’s command, Aaron the priest climbed Mount Hor and died there on the first day of the fifth month, in the fortieth year after the Israelites had come out of the land of Egypt.
NUM	33	39	아론이 호르 산에서 죽던 때에 나이 일백이십삼 세이었더라	And Aaron was an hundred and twenty and three years old when he died in mount Hor.	Aaron was 123 years old when he died on Mount Hor.
NUM	33	40	가나안 땅 남방에 거한 가나안 사람 아랏 왕이 이스라엘의 옴을 들었더라	And king Arad the Canaanite, which dwelt in the south in the land of Canaan, heard of the coming of the children of Israel.	Now the Canaanite king of Arad, who lived in the Negev in the land of Canaan, heard that the Israelites were coming.
NUM	33	41	그들이 호르 산에서 발행하여 살모나에 진 쳤고	And they departed from mount Hor, and pitched in Zalmonah.	And the Israelites set out from Mount Hor and camped at Zalmonah.
NUM	33	42	살모나에서 발행하여 부논에 진 쳤고	And they departed from Zalmonah, and pitched in Punon.	They set out from Zalmonah and camped at Punon.
NUM	33	43	부논에서 발행하여 오봇에 진 쳤고	And they departed from Punon, and pitched in Oboth.	They set out from Punon and camped at Oboth.
NUM	33	44	오봇에서 발행하여 모압 변경 이예아바림에 진 쳤고	And they departed from Oboth, and pitched in Ije–abarim, in the border of Moab.	They set out from Oboth and camped at Iye-abarim on the border of Moab.
NUM	33	45	이임에서 발행하여 디본갓에 진 쳤고	And they departed from Iim, and pitched in Dibon–gad.	They set out from Iyim and camped at Dibon-gad.
NUM	33	46	디본갓에서 발행하여 알몬디블라다임에 진 쳤고	And they removed from Dibon–gad, and encamped in Almon–diblathaim.	They set out from Dibon-gad and camped at Almon-diblathaim.
NUM	33	47	알몬디블라다임에서 발행하여 느보 앞 아바림 산에 진 쳤고	And they removed from Almon–diblathaim, and pitched in the mountains of Abarim, before Nebo.	They set out from Almon-diblathaim and camped in the mountains of Abarim facing Nebo.
NUM	33	48	아바림 산에서 발행하여 여리고 맞은편 요단 가 모압 평지에 진쳤으니	And they departed from the mountains of Abarim, and pitched in the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho.	They set out from the mountains of Abarim and camped on the plains of Moab by the Jordan across from Jericho.
NUM	33	49	요단 가 모압 평지의 진이 벧여시못에서부터 아벨싯딤에 미쳤었더라	And they pitched by Jordan, from Beth–jesimoth even unto Abel–shittim in the plains of Moab.	And there on the plains of Moab they camped by the Jordan, from Beth-jeshimoth to Abel-shittim.
NUM	33	50	여리고 맞은편 요단 가 모압 평지에서 여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses in the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho, saying,	On the plains of Moab by the Jordan across from Jericho, the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	33	51	이스라엘 자손에게 말하여 그들에게 이르라 너희가 요단을 건너 가나안 땅에 들어가거든	Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye are passed over Jordan into the land of Canaan;	“Speak to the Israelites and tell them: When you cross the Jordan into the land of Canaan,
NUM	33	52	그 땅 거민을 너희 앞에서 다 몰아내고 그 새긴 석상과 부어 만든 우상을 다 파멸하며 산당을 다 훼파하고	Then ye shall drive out all the inhabitants of the land from before you, and destroy all their pictures, and destroy all their molten images, and quite pluck down all their high places:	you must drive out before you all the inhabitants of the land, destroy all their carved images and cast idols, and demolish all their high places.
NUM	33	53	그 땅을 취하여 거기 거하라 내가 그 땅을 너희 산업으로 너희에게 주었음이라	And ye shall dispossess the inhabitants of the land, and dwell therein: for I have given you the land to possess it.	You are to take possession of the land and settle in it, for I have given you the land to possess.
NUM	33	54	너희의 가족을 따라서 그 땅을 제비뽑아 나눌 것이니 수가 많으면 많은 기업을 주고 적으면 적은 기업을 주되 각기 제비뽑힌 대로 그 소유가 될 것인즉 너희 열조의 지파를 따라 기업을 얻을 것이니라	And ye shall divide the land by lot for an inheritance among your families: and to the more ye shall give the more inheritance, and to the fewer ye shall give the less inheritance: every man’s inheritance shall be in the place where his lot falleth; according to the tribes of your fathers ye shall inherit.	And you are to divide the land by lot according to your clans. Give a larger inheritance to a larger clan and a smaller inheritance to a smaller one. Whatever falls to each one by lot will be his. You will receive an inheritance according to the tribes of your fathers.
NUM	33	55	너희가 만일 그 땅 거민을 너희 앞에서 몰아내지 아니하면 너희의 남겨둔 자가 너희의 눈에 가시와 너희의 옆구리에 찌르는 것이 되어 너희 거하는 땅에서 너희를 괴롭게 할 것이요	But if ye will not drive out the inhabitants of the land from before you; then it shall come to pass, that those which ye let remain of them shall be pricks in your eyes, and thorns in your sides, and shall vex you in the land wherein ye dwell.	But if you do not drive out the inhabitants of the land before you, those you allow to remain will become barbs in your eyes and thorns in your sides; they will harass you in the land where you settle.
NUM	33	56	나는 그들에게 행하기로 생각한 것을 너희에게 행하리라	Moreover it shall come to pass, that I shall do unto you, as I thought to do unto them.	And then I will do to you what I had planned to do to them.”
NUM	34	1	여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	34	2	너는 이스라엘 자손에게 명하여 그들에게 이르라 너희가 가나안 땅에 들어가는 때에 그 땅은 너희의 기업이 되리니 곧 가나안 사방 지경이라	Command the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come into the land of Canaan; (this is the land that shall fall unto you for an inheritance, even the land of Canaan with the coasts thereof:)	“Command the Israelites and say to them: When you enter the land of Canaan, it will be allotted to you as an inheritance with these boundaries:
NUM	34	3	너희 남방은 에돔 곁에 접근한 신 광야니 너희 남편 경계는 동편으로 염해 끝에서 시작하여	Then your south quarter shall be from the wilderness of Zin along by the coast of Edom, and your south border shall be the outmost coast of the salt sea eastward:	Your southern border will extend from the Wilderness of Zin along the border of Edom. On the east, your southern border will run from the end of the Salt Sea,
NUM	34	4	돌아서 아그람빔 언덕 남편에 이르고 신을 지나 가데스바네아 남방에 이르고 또 하살아달을 지나 아스몬에 이르고	And your border shall turn from the south to the ascent of Akrabbim, and pass on to Zin: and the going forth thereof shall be from the south to Kadesh–barnea, and shall go on to Hazar–addar, and pass on to Azmon:	cross south of the Ascent of Akrabbim, continue to Zin, and go south of Kadesh-barnea. Then it will go on to Hazar-addar and proceed to Azmon,
NUM	34	5	아스몬에서 돌아서 애굽 시내를 지나 바다까지 이르느니라	And the border shall fetch a compass from Azmon unto the river of Egypt, and the goings out of it shall be at the sea.	where it will turn from Azmon, join the Brook of Egypt, and end at the Sea.
NUM	34	6	서편 경계는 대해가 경계가 되나니 이는 너희의 서편 경계니라	And as for the western border, ye shall even have the great sea for a border: this shall be your west border.	Your western border will be the coastline of the Great Sea; this will be your boundary on the west.
NUM	34	7	북편 경계는 이러하니 대해에서부터 호르 산까지 긋고	And this shall be your north border: from the great sea ye shall point out for you mount Hor:	Your northern border will run from the Great Sea directly to Mount Hor,
NUM	34	8	호르 산에서 그어 하맛 어귀에 이르러 스닷에 미치고	From mount Hor ye shall point out your border unto the entrance of Hamath; and the goings forth of the border shall be to Zedad:	and from Mount Hor to Lebo-hamath, then extend to Zedad,
NUM	34	9	그 경계가 또 시브론을 지나 하살에난에 미치나니 이는 너희 북편 경계니라	And the border shall go on to Ziphron, and the goings out of it shall be at Hazar–enan: this shall be your north border.	continue to Ziphron, and end at Hazar-enan. This will be your boundary on the north.
NUM	34	10	너희의 동편 경계는 하살에난에서 그어 스밤에 이르고	And ye shall point out your east border from Hazar–enan to Shepham:	And your eastern border will run straight from Hazar-enan to Shepham,
NUM	34	11	그 경계가 또 스밤에서 리블라로 내려가서 아인 동편에 이르고 또 내려가서 긴네렛 동편 해변에 미치고	And the coast shall go down from Shepham to Riblah, on the east side of Ain; and the border shall descend, and shall reach unto the side of the sea of Chinnereth eastward:	then go down from Shepham to Riblah on the east side of Ain and continue along the slopes east of the Sea of Chinnereth.
NUM	34	12	그 경계가 또 요단으로 내려가서 염해에 미치나니 너희 땅의 사방 경계가 이러하니라	And the border shall go down to Jordan, and the goings out of it shall be at the salt sea: this shall be your land with the coasts thereof round about.	Then the border will go down along the Jordan and end at the Salt Sea. This will be your land, defined by its borders on all sides.”
NUM	34	13	모세가 이스라엘 자손에게 명하여 가로되 이는 너희가 제비뽑아 얻을 땅이라 여호와께서 이것을 아홉 지파와 반 지파에게 주라고 명하셨나니	And Moses commanded the children of Israel, saying, This is the land which ye shall inherit by lot, which the Lord commanded to give unto the nine tribes, and to the half tribe:	So Moses commanded the Israelites, “Apportion this land by lot as an inheritance. The LORD has commanded that it be given to the nine and a half tribes.
NUM	34	14	이는 르우벤 자손의 지파와 갓 자손의 지파가 함께 그들의 종족대로 그 기업을 받았고 므낫세의 반 지파도 기업을 받았음이라	For the tribe of the children of Reuben according to the house of their fathers, and the tribe of the children of Gad according to the house of their fathers, have received their inheritance; and half the tribe of Manasseh have received their inheritance:	For the tribes of the Reubenites and Gadites, along with the half-tribe of Manasseh, have already received their inheritance.
NUM	34	15	이 두 지파와 반 지파가 여리고 맞은편 요단 건너편 곧 해 돋는 편에서 그 기업을 받았느니라	The two tribes and the half tribe have received their inheritance on this side Jordan near Jericho eastward, toward the sunrising.	These two and a half tribes have received their inheritance across the Jordan from Jericho, toward the sunrise.”
NUM	34	16	여호와께서 또 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	34	17	너희에게 땅을 기업으로 나눈 자의 이름이 이러하니 제사장 엘르아살과 눈의 아들 여호수아니라	These are the names of the men which shall divide the land unto you: Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun.	“These are the names of the men who are to assign the land as an inheritance for you: Eleazar the priest and Joshua son of Nun.
NUM	34	18	너희가 또 기업의 땅을 나누기 위하여 매 지파에 한 족장씩 택하라	And ye shall take one prince of every tribe, to divide the land by inheritance.	Appoint one leader from each tribe to distribute the land.
NUM	34	19	그 사람들의 이름은 이러하니 유다 지파에서는 여분네의 아들 갈렙이요	And the names of the men are these: Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh.	These are their names: Caleb son of Jephunneh from the tribe of Judah;
NUM	34	20	시므온 지파에서는 암미훗의 아들 스므엘이요	And of the tribe of the children of Simeon, Shemuel the son of Ammihud.	Shemuel son of Ammihud from the tribe of Simeon;
NUM	34	21	베냐민 지파에서는 기슬론의 아들 엘리닷이요	Of the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad the son of Chislon.	Elidad son of Chislon from the tribe of Benjamin;
NUM	34	22	단 자손의 지파의 족장 요글리의 아들 북기요	And the prince of the tribe of the children of Dan, Bukki the son of Jogli.	Bukki son of Jogli, a leader from the tribe of Dan;
NUM	34	23	요셉 자손 중 므낫세 자손 지파의 족장 에봇의 아들 한니엘이요	The prince of the children of Joseph, for the tribe of the children of Manasseh, Hanniel the son of Ephod.	Hanniel son of Ephod, a leader from the tribe of Manasseh son of Joseph;
NUM	34	24	에브라임 자손 지파의 족장 십단의 아들 그므엘이요	And the prince of the tribe of the children of Ephraim, Kemuel the son of Shiphtan.	Kemuel son of Shiphtan, a leader from the tribe of Ephraim;
NUM	34	25	스블론 자손 지파의 족장 바르삭의 아들 엘리사반이요	And the prince of the tribe of the children of Zebulun, Elizaphan the son of Parnach.	Eli-zaphan son of Parnach, a leader from the tribe of Zebulun;
NUM	34	26	잇사갈 자손 지파의 족장 앗산의 아들 발디엘이요	And the prince of the tribe of the children of Issachar, Paltiel the son of Azzan.	Paltiel son of Azzan, a leader from the tribe of Issachar;
NUM	34	27	아셀 자손 지파의 족장 슬로미의 아들 아히훗이요	And the prince of the tribe of the children of Asher, Ahihud the son of Shelomi.	Ahihud son of Shelomi, a leader from the tribe of Asher;
NUM	34	28	납달리 자손 지파의 족장 암미훗의 아들 브다헬이니라 하셨으니	And the prince of the tribe of the children of Naphtali, Pedahel the son of Ammihud.	and Pedahel son of Ammihud, a leader from the tribe of Naphtali.”
NUM	34	29	여호와께서 명하사 가나안 땅에서 이스라엘 자손에게 기업을 나누게 하신 자들이 이러하였더라	These are they whom the Lord commanded to divide the inheritance unto the children of Israel in the land of Canaan.	These are the ones whom the LORD commanded to apportion the inheritance to the Israelites in the land of Canaan.
NUM	35	1	여호와께서 여리고 맞은편 요단 가 모압 평지에서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses in the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho, saying,	Again the LORD spoke to Moses on the plains of Moab by the Jordan across from Jericho:
NUM	35	2	이스라엘 자손에게 명하여 그들의 얻은 기업에서 레위인에게 거할 성읍들을 주게 하고 너희는 또 그 성읍 사면의 들을 레위인에게 주어서	Command the children of Israel, that they give unto the Levites of the inheritance of their possession cities to dwell in; and ye shall give also unto the Levites suburbs for the cities round about them.	“Command the Israelites to give, from the inheritance they will possess, cities for the Levites to live in and pasturelands around the cities.
NUM	35	3	성읍으로는 그들의 거처가 되게 하고 들로는 그들의 가축과 물산과 짐승들을 둘 곳이 되게 할 것이라	And the cities shall they have to dwell in; and the suburbs of them shall be for their cattle, and for their goods, and for all their beasts.	The cities will be for them to live in, and the pasturelands will be for their herds, their flocks, and all their other livestock.
NUM	35	4	너희가 레위인에게 줄 성읍들의 들은 성벽에서부터 밖으로 사면 이천 규빗이라	And the suburbs of the cities, which ye shall give unto the Levites, shall reach from the wall of the city and outward a thousand cubits round about.	The pasturelands around the cities you are to give the Levites will extend a thousand cubits from the wall on every side.
NUM	35	5	성을 중앙에 두고 성 밖 동편으로 이천 규빗, 남편으로 이천 규빗, 서편으로 이천 규빗, 북편으로 이천 규빗을 측량할지니 이는 그들의 성읍의 들이며	And ye shall measure from without the city on the east side two thousand cubits, and on the south side two thousand cubits, and on the west side two thousand cubits, and on the north side two thousand cubits; and the city shall be in the midst: this shall be to them the suburbs of the cities.	You are also to measure two thousand cubits outside the city on the east, two thousand on the south, two thousand on the west, and two thousand on the north, with the city in the center. These areas will serve as larger pasturelands for the cities.
NUM	35	6	너희가 레위인에게 줄 성읍은 살인자로 피케 할 도피성으로 여섯 성읍이요 그 외에 사십이 성읍이라	And among the cities which ye shall give unto the Levites there shall be six cities for refuge, which ye shall appoint for the manslayer, that he may flee thither: and to them ye shall add forty and two cities.	Six of the cities you give the Levites are to be appointed as cities of refuge, to which a manslayer may flee. In addition to these, give the Levites forty-two other cities.
NUM	35	7	너희가 레위인에게 모두 사십팔 성읍을 주고 그들도 함께 주되	So all the cities which ye shall give to the Levites shall be forty and eight cities: them shall ye give with their suburbs.	The total number of cities you give the Levites will be forty-eight, with their corresponding pasturelands.
NUM	35	8	이스라엘 자손의 산업에서 레위인에게 너희가 성읍을 줄 때에 많이 얻은 자에게서는 많이 취하여 주고 적게 얻은 자에게서는 적게 취하여 줄 것이라 각기 얻은 산업을 따라서 그 성읍들을 레위인에게 줄지니라	And the cities which ye shall give shall be of the possession of the children of Israel: from them that have many ye shall give many; but from them that have few ye shall give few: every one shall give of his cities unto the Levites according to his inheritance which he inheriteth.	The cities that you apportion from the territory of the Israelites should be given to the Levites in proportion to the inheritance of each tribe: more from a larger tribe and less from a smaller one.”
NUM	35	9	여호와께서 또 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,	Then the LORD said to Moses,
NUM	35	10	이스라엘 자손에게 말하여 그들에게 이르라 너희가 요단을 건너 가나안 땅에 들어 가거든	Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be come over Jordan into the land of Canaan;	“Speak to the Israelites and tell them: When you cross the Jordan into the land of Canaan,
NUM	35	11	너희를 위하여 성읍을 도피성으로 정하여 그릇 살인한 자로 그리로 피하게 하라	Then ye shall appoint you cities to be cities of refuge for you; that the slayer may flee thither, which killeth any person at unawares.	designate cities to serve as your cities of refuge, so that a person who kills someone unintentionally may flee there.
NUM	35	12	이는 너희가 보수할 자에게서 도피하는 성을 삼아 살인자가 회중 앞에 서서 판결을 받기까지 죽지 않게 하기 위함이니라	And they shall be unto you cities for refuge from the avenger; that the manslayer die not, until he stand before the congregation in judgment.	You are to have these cities as a refuge from the avenger, so that the manslayer will not die until he stands trial before the assembly.
NUM	35	13	너희가 줄 성읍 중에 여섯으로 도피성이 되게 하되	And of these cities which ye shall give six cities shall ye have for refuge.	The cities you select will be your six cities of refuge.
NUM	35	14	세 성읍은 요단 이 편에서 주고 세 성읍은 가나안 땅에서 주어 도피성이 되게 하라	Ye shall give three cities on this side Jordan, and three cities shall ye give in the land of Canaan, which shall be cities of refuge.	Select three cities across the Jordan and three in the land of Canaan as cities of refuge.
NUM	35	15	이 여섯 성읍은 이스라엘 자손과 타국인과 이스라엘 중에 우거하는 자의 도피성이 되리니 무릇 그릇 살인한 자가 그리로 도피할 수 있으리라	These six cities shall be a refuge, both for the children of Israel, and for the stranger, and for the sojourner among them: that every one that killeth any person unawares may flee thither.	These six cities will serve as a refuge for the Israelites and for the foreigner or stranger among them, so that anyone who kills a person unintentionally may flee there.
NUM	35	16	만일 철 연장으로 사람을 쳐죽이면 이는 고살한 자니 그 고살자를 반드시 죽일 것이요	And if he smite him with an instrument of iron, so that he die, he is a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to death.	If, however, anyone strikes a person with an iron object and kills him, he is a murderer; the murderer must surely be put to death.
NUM	35	17	만일 사람을 죽일 만한 돌을 손에 들고 사람을 쳐죽이면 이는 고살한 자니 그 고살자를 반드시 죽일 것이요	And if he smite him with throwing a stone, wherewith he may die, and he die, he is a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to death.	Or if anyone has in his hand a stone of deadly size, and he strikes and kills another, he is a murderer; the murderer must surely be put to death.
NUM	35	18	만일 사람을 죽일 만한 나무 연장을 손에 들고 사람을 쳐죽이면 이는 고살한 자니 그 고살자를 반드시 죽일 것이니라	Or if he smite him with an hand weapon of wood, wherewith he may die, and he die, he is a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to death.	If anyone has in his hand a deadly object of wood, and he strikes and kills another, he is a murderer; the murderer must surely be put to death.
NUM	35	19	피를 보수하는 자가 그 고살자를 친히 죽일 것이니 그를 만나거든 죽일 것이요	The revenger of blood himself shall slay the murderer: when he meeteth him, he shall slay him.	The avenger of blood is to put the murderer to death; when he finds him, he is to kill him.
NUM	35	20	만일 미워하는 까닭에 밀쳐 죽이거나 기회를 엿보아 무엇을 던져 죽이거나	But if he thrust him of hatred, or hurl at him by laying of wait, that he die;	Likewise, if anyone maliciously pushes another or intentionally throws an object at him and kills him,
NUM	35	21	원한으로 인하여 손으로 쳐죽이면 그 친 자를 반드시 죽일 것이니 이는 고살하였음이라 피를 보수하는 자가 그 고살자를 만나거든 죽일 것이니라	Or in enmity smite him with his hand, that he die: he that smote him shall surely be put to death; for he is a murderer: the revenger of blood shall slay the murderer, when he meeteth him.	or if in hostility he strikes him with his hand and he dies, the one who struck him must surely be put to death; he is a murderer. When the avenger of blood finds the murderer, he is to kill him.
NUM	35	22	원한 없이 우연히 사람을 밀치거나 기회를 엿봄이 없이 무엇을 던지거나	But if he thrust him suddenly without enmity, or have cast upon him any thing without laying of wait,	But if anyone pushes a person suddenly, without hostility, or throws an object at him unintentionally,
NUM	35	23	보지 못하고 사람을 죽일 만한 돌을 던져서 죽였다 하자 이는 원한도 없고 해하려 한 것도 아닌즉	Or with any stone, wherewith a man may die, seeing him not, and cast it upon him, that he die, and was not his enemy, neither sought his harm:	or without looking drops a heavy stone that kills him, but he was not an enemy and did not intend to harm him,
NUM	35	24	회중이 친 자와 피를 보수하는 자 간에 이 규례대로 판결하여	Then the congregation shall judge between the slayer and the revenger of blood according to these judgments:	then the congregation must judge between the slayer and the avenger of blood according to these ordinances.
NUM	35	25	피를 보수하는 자의 손에서 살인자를 건져내어 그가 피하였던 도피성으로 돌려 보낼 것이요 그는 거룩한 기름 부음을 받은 대제사장의 죽기까지 거기 거할 것이니라	And the congregation shall deliver the slayer out of the hand of the revenger of blood, and the congregation shall restore him to the city of his refuge, whither he was fled: and he shall abide in it unto the death of the high priest, which was anointed with the holy oil.	The assembly is to protect the manslayer from the hand of the avenger of blood. Then the assembly will return him to the city of refuge to which he fled, and he must live there until the death of the high priest, who was anointed with the holy oil.
NUM	35	26	그러나 살인자가 어느 때든지 그 피하였던 도피성 지경 밖에 나갔다 하자	But if the slayer shall at any time come without the border of the city of his refuge, whither he was fled;	But if the manslayer ever goes outside the limits of the city of refuge to which he fled
NUM	35	27	피를 보수하는 자가 도피성 지경 밖에서 그 살인자를 만나 죽일지라도 위하여 피흘린 죄가 없나니	And the revenger of blood find him without the borders of the city of his refuge, and the revenger of blood kill the slayer; he shall not be guilty of blood:	and the avenger of blood finds him outside of his city of refuge and kills him, then the avenger will not be guilty of bloodshed
NUM	35	28	이는 살인자가 대제사장의 죽기까지 그 도피성에 유하였을 것임이라 대제사장의 죽은 후에는 그 살인자가 자기의 산업의 땅으로 돌아갈 수 있느니라	Because he should have remained in the city of his refuge until the death of the high priest: but after the death of the high priest the slayer shall return into the land of his possession.	because the manslayer must remain in his city of refuge until the death of the high priest. Only after the death of the high priest may he return to the land he owns.
NUM	35	29	이는 너희 대대로 거하는 곳에서 판단하는 율례라	So these things shall be for a statute of judgment unto you throughout your generations in all your dwellings.	This will be a statutory ordinance for you for the generations to come, wherever you live.
NUM	35	30	무릇 사람을 죽인 자 곧 고살자를 증인들의 말을 따라서 죽일 것이나 한 증인의 증거만 따라서 죽이지 말 것이요	Whoso killeth any person, the murderer shall be put to death by the mouth of witnesses: but one witness shall not testify against any person to cause him to die.	If anyone kills a person, the murderer is to be put to death on the testimony of the witnesses. But no one is to be put to death based on the testimony of a lone witness.
NUM	35	31	살인죄를 범한 고살자의 생명의 속전을 받지 말고 반드시 죽일 것이며	Moreover ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer, which is guilty of death: but he shall be surely put to death.	You are not to accept a ransom for the life of a murderer who deserves to die; he must surely be put to death.
NUM	35	32	또 도피성에 피한 자를 대제사장의 죽기 전에는 속전을 받고 그의 땅으로 돌아가 거하게 하지 말 것이니라	And ye shall take no satisfaction for him that is fled to the city of his refuge, that he should come again to dwell in the land, until the death of the priest.	Nor should you accept a ransom for the person who flees to a city of refuge and allow him to return and live on his own land before the death of the high priest.
NUM	35	33	너희는 거하는 땅을 더럽히지 말라 피는 땅을 더럽히나니 피 흘림을 받은 땅은 이를 흘리게 한 자의 피가 아니면 속할 수 없느니라	So ye shall not pollute the land wherein ye are: for blood it defileth the land: and the land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it.	Do not pollute the land where you live, for bloodshed pollutes the land, and no atonement can be made for the land on which the blood is shed, except by the blood of the one who shed it.
NUM	35	34	너희는 너희 거하는 땅 곧 나의 거하는 땅을 더럽히지 말라 나 여호와가 이스라엘 자손 중에 거함이니라	Defile not therefore the land which ye shall inhabit, wherein I dwell: for I the Lord dwell among the children of Israel.	Do not defile the land where you live and where I dwell. For I, the LORD, dwell among the Israelites.”
NUM	36	1	요셉 자손의 자손 중 므낫세의 손자 마길의 아들 길르앗 자손 가족의 두령들이 나아와 모세와 이스라엘 자손의 두령 된 족장들 앞에 말하여	And the chief fathers of the families of the children of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the families of the sons of Joseph, came near, and spake before Moses, and before the princes, the chief fathers of the children of Israel:	Now the family heads of the clan of Gilead son of Machir son of Manasseh, one of the clans of Joseph, approached Moses and the leaders who were the heads of the Israelite families and addressed them,
NUM	36	2	가로되 여호와께서 우리 주에게 명하사 이스라엘 자손에게 그 기업의 땅을 제비 뽑아 주게 하셧고 여호와께서 또 우리 주에게 명하사 우리 형제 슬로브핫의 기업으로 그 딸들에게 주게 하였은즉	And they said, The Lord commanded my lord to give the land for an inheritance by lot to the children of Israel: and my lord was commanded by the Lord to give the inheritance of Zelophehad our brother unto his daughters.	saying, “When the LORD commanded my lord to give the land as an inheritance to the Israelites by lot, He also commanded him to give the inheritance of our brother Zelophehad to his daughters.
NUM	36	3	그들이 만일 이스라엘 자손의 다른 지파 남자들에게 시집가면 그들의 기업은 우리 조상의 기업에서 감삭되고 그들의 속할 그 지파의 기업에 첨가되리니 그러면 우리 제비 뽑은 기업에서 감삭될 것이요	And if they be married to any of the sons of the other tribes of the children of Israel, then shall their inheritance be taken from the inheritance of our fathers, and shall be put to the inheritance of the tribe whereunto they are received: so shall it be taken from the lot of our inheritance.	But if they marry any of the men from the other tribes of Israel, their inheritance will be withdrawn from the portion of our fathers and added to the tribe into which they marry. So our allotted inheritance would be taken away.
NUM	36	4	이스라엘 자손의 희년을 당하여 그 기업이 그가 속한 지파에 첨가될 것이라 그런즉 그들의 기업은 우리 조상 지파의 기업에서 아주 감삭되리이다	And when the jubile of the children of Israel shall be, then shall their inheritance be put unto the inheritance of the tribe whereunto they are received: so shall their inheritance be taken away from the inheritance of the tribe of our fathers.	And when the Jubilee for the Israelites comes, their inheritance will be added to the tribe into which they marry and taken away from the tribe of our fathers.”
NUM	36	5	모세가 여호와의 말씀으로 이스라엘에게 명하여 가로되 요셉 자손 지파의 말이 옳도다	And Moses commanded the children of Israel according to the word of the Lord, saying, The tribe of the sons of Joseph hath said well.	So at the word of the LORD, Moses commanded the Israelites: “The tribe of the sons of Joseph speaks correctly.
NUM	36	6	슬로브핫의 딸들에게 대한 여호와의 명이 이러하니라 이르시되 슬로브핫의 딸들은 마음대로 시집가려니와 오직 그 조상 지파의 가족에게로만 시집갈지니	This is the thing which the Lord doth command concerning the daughters of Zelophehad, saying, Let them marry to whom they think best; only to the family of the tribe of their father shall they marry.	This is what the LORD has commanded concerning the daughters of Zelophehad: They may marry anyone they please, provided they marry within a clan of the tribe of their father.
NUM	36	7	그리하면 이스라엘 자손의 기업이 이 지파에서 저 지파로 옮기지 않고 이스라엘 자손이 다 각기 조상 지파의 기업을 지킬 것이니라 하셨나니	So shall not the inheritance of the children of Israel remove from tribe to tribe: for every one of the children of Israel shall keep himself to the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers.	No inheritance in Israel may be transferred from tribe to tribe, because each of the Israelites is to retain the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers.
NUM	36	8	이스라엘 자손의 지파 중 무릇 그 기업을 이은 딸들은 자기 조상 지파 가족되는 사람에게로 시집갈 것이라 그리하면 이스라엘 자손이 각기 조상의 기업을 보존하게 되어서	And every daughter, that possesseth an inheritance in any tribe of the children of Israel, shall be wife unto one of the family of the tribe of her father, that the children of Israel may enjoy every man the inheritance of his fathers.	Every daughter who possesses an inheritance from any Israelite tribe must marry within a clan of the tribe of her father, so that every Israelite will possess the inheritance of his fathers.
NUM	36	9	그 기업으로 이 지파에서 저 지파로 옮기게 하지 아니하고 이스라엘 자손 지파가 각각 자기 기업을 지키리라	Neither shall the inheritance remove from one tribe to another tribe; but every one of the tribes of the children of Israel shall keep himself to his own inheritance.	No inheritance may be transferred from one tribe to another, for each tribe of Israel must retain its inheritance.”
NUM	36	10	슬로브핫의 딸들이 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 행하니라	Even as the Lord commanded Moses, so did the daughters of Zelophehad:	So the daughters of Zelophehad did as the LORD had commanded Moses.
NUM	36	11	슬로브핫의 딸 말라와 디르사와 호글라와 밀가와 노아가 다 그 아비 형제의 아들들에게로 시집가되	For Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Noah, the daughters of Zelophehad, were married unto their father’s brothers’ sons:	Mahlah, Tirzah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Noah, the daughters of Zelophehad, were married to cousins on their father’s side.
NUM	36	12	그들이 요셉의 아들 므낫세 자손의 가족에게로 시집 간 고로 그 기업이 그 아비 가족의 지파에 여전히 있었더라	And they were married into the families of the sons of Manasseh the son of Joseph, and their inheritance remained in the tribe of the family of their father.	They married within the clans of the descendants of Manasseh son of Joseph, and their inheritance remained within the tribe of their father’s clan.
NUM	36	13	이는 여리고 맞은편 요단 가 모압 평지에서 여호와께서 모세로 이스라엘 자손에게 명하신 명령과 규례니라	These are the commandments and the judgments, which the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses unto the children of Israel in the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho.	These are the commandments and ordinances that the LORD gave the Israelites through Moses on the plains of Moab by the Jordan across from Jericho.
DEU	1	1	이는 모세가 요단 저편 숩 맞은편의 아라바 광야 곧 바란과 도벨과 라반과 하세롯과 디사합 사이에서 이스라엘 무리에게 선포한 말씀이니라	These be the words which Moses spake unto all Israel on this side Jordan in the wilderness, in the plain over against the Red sea, between Paran, and Tophel, and Laban, and Hazeroth, and Dizahab.	These are the words that Moses spoke to all Israel in the wilderness east of the Jordan—in the Arabah opposite Suph—between Paran and Tophel, Laban, Hazeroth, and Dizahab.
DEU	1	2	호렙 산에서 세일 산을 지나 가데스 바네아에까지 열하룻 길이었더라	(There are eleven days’ journey from Horeb by the way of mount Seir unto Kadesh–barnea.)	It is an eleven-day journey from Horeb to Kadesh-barnea by way of Mount Seir.
DEU	1	3	제사십년 십일월 그 달 초일일에 모세가 이스라엘 자손에게 여호와께서 그들을 위하여 자기에게 주신 명령을 다 고하였으니	And it came to pass in the fortieth year, in the eleventh month, on the first day of the month, that Moses spake unto the children of Israel, according unto all that the Lord had given him in commandment unto them;	In the fortieth year, on the first day of the eleventh month, Moses proclaimed to the Israelites all that the LORD had commanded him concerning them.
DEU	1	4	때는 모세가 헤스본에 거하는 아모리 왕 시혼을 쳐 죽이고 에드레이에서 아스다롯에 거하는 바산 왕 옥을 쳐 죽인 후라	After he had slain Sihon the king of the Amorites, which dwelt in Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan, which dwelt at Astaroth in Edrei:	This was after he had defeated Sihon king of the Amorites, who lived in Heshbon, and then at Edrei had defeated Og king of Bashan, who lived in Ashtaroth.
DEU	1	5	모세가 요단 저편 모압 땅에서 이 율법 설명하기를 시작하였더라 일렀으되	On this side Jordan, in the land of Moab, began Moses to declare this law, saying,	On the east side of the Jordan in the land of Moab, Moses began to explain this law, saying:
DEU	1	6	우리 하나님 여호와께서 호렙 산에서 우리에게 말씀하여 이르시기를 너희가 이 산에서 거한지 오래니	The Lord our God spake unto us in Horeb, saying, Ye have dwelt long enough in this mount:	The LORD our God said to us at Horeb: “You have stayed at this mountain long enough.
DEU	1	7	방향을 돌려 진행하여 아모리 족속의 산지로 가고 그 근지 곳곳으로 가고 아라바와 산지와 평지와 남방과 해변과 가나안 족속의 땅과 레바논과 큰 강 유브라데까지 가라 하셨나니	Turn you, and take your journey, and go to the mount of the Amorites, and unto all the places nigh thereunto, in the plain, in the hills, and in the vale, and in the south, and by the sea side, to the land of the Canaanites, and unto Lebanon, unto the great river, the river Euphrates.	Resume your journey and go to the hill country of the Amorites; go to all the neighboring peoples in the Arabah, in the hill country, in the foothills, in the Negev, and along the seacoast to the land of the Canaanites and to Lebanon, as far as the great River Euphrates.
DEU	1	8	여호와께서 너희의 열조 아브라함과 이삭과 야곱에게 맹세하사 그들과 그 후손에게 주리라 하신 땅이 너희 앞에 있으니 들어가서 얻을지니라	Behold, I have set the land before you: go in and possess the land which the Lord sware unto your fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to give unto them and to their seed after them.	See, I have placed the land before you. Enter and possess the land that the LORD swore He would give to your fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and to their descendants after them.”
DEU	1	9	그 때에 내가 너희에게 말하여 이르기를 나는 홀로 너희 짐을 질 수 없도다	And I spake unto you at that time, saying, I am not able to bear you myself alone:	At that time I said to you, “I cannot carry the burden for you alone.
DEU	1	10	너희 하나님 여호와께서 너희를 번성케 하셨으므로 너희가 오늘날 하늘의 별 같이 많거니와	The Lord your God hath multiplied you, and, behold, ye are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude.	The LORD your God has multiplied you, so that today you are as numerous as the stars in the sky.
DEU	1	11	너희 열조의 하나님 여호와께서 너희를 현재보다 천 배나 많게 하시며 너희에게 허락하신 것과 같이 너희에게 복 주시기를 원하노라	(The Lord God of your fathers make you a thousand times so many more as ye are, and bless you, as he hath promised you!)	May the LORD, the God of your fathers, increase you a thousand times over and bless you as He has promised.
DEU	1	12	그런즉 나 홀로 어찌 능히 너희의 괴로운 것과 너희의 무거운 짐과 너희의 다툼을 담당할 수 있으랴	How can I myself alone bear your cumbrance, and your burden, and your strife?	But how can I bear your troubles, burdens, and disputes all by myself?
DEU	1	13	너희의 각 지파에서 지혜와 지식이 있는 유명한 자를 택하라 내가 그들을 세워 너희 두령을 삼으리라 한즉	Take you wise men, and understanding, and known among your tribes, and I will make them rulers over you.	Choose for yourselves wise, understanding, and respected men from each of your tribes, and I will appoint them as your leaders.”
DEU	1	14	너희가 대답하여 이르기를 당신의 말씀대로 하는 것이 좋다 하기에	And ye answered me, and said, The thing which thou hast spoken is good for us to do.	And you answered me and said, “What you propose to do is good.”
DEU	1	15	내가 너희 지파의 두령으로 지혜가 있는 유명한 자를 취하여 너희의 어른을 삼되 곧 각 지파를 따라 천부장과 백부장과 오십부장과 십부장과 패장을 삼고	So I took the chief of your tribes, wise men, and known, and made them heads over you, captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, and captains over fifties, and captains over tens, and officers among your tribes.	So I took the leaders of your tribes, wise and respected men, and appointed them as leaders over you—as commanders of thousands, of hundreds, of fifties, and of tens, and as officers for your tribes.
DEU	1	16	내가 그 때에 너희 재판장들에게 명하여 이르기를 너희가 너희 형제 중에 송사를 들을 때에 양방간에 공정히 판결할 것이며 그들 중의 타국인에게도 그리 할것이라	And I charged your judges at that time, saying, Hear the causes between your brethren, and judge righteously between every man and his brother, and the stranger that is with him.	At that time I charged your judges: “Hear the disputes between your brothers, and judge fairly between a man and his brother or a foreign resident.
DEU	1	17	재판은 하나님께 속한 것인즉 너희는 재판에 외모를 보지 말고 귀천을 일반으로 듣고 사람의 낯을 두려워 말것이며 스스로 결단하기 어려운 일이거든 내게로 돌리라 내가 들으리라 하였고	Ye shall not respect persons in judgment; but ye shall hear the small as well as the great; ye shall not be afraid of the face of man; for the judgment is God’s: and the cause that is too hard for you, bring it unto me, and I will hear it.	Show no partiality in judging; hear both small and great alike. Do not be intimidated by anyone, for judgment belongs to God. And bring to me any case too difficult for you, and I will hear it.”
DEU	1	18	내가 너희의 행할 모든 일을 그 때에 너희에게 다 명하였느니라	And I commanded you at that time all the things which ye should do.	And at that time I commanded you all the things you were to do.
DEU	1	19	우리 하나님 여호와께서 우리에게 명하신 대로 우리가 호렙 산에서 발행하여 너희의 본바 크고 두려운 광야를 지나 아모리 족속 산지 길로 가데스 바네아에 이른 때에	And when we departed from Horeb, we went through all that great and terrible wilderness, which ye saw by the way of the mountain of the Amorites, as the Lord our God commanded us; and we came to Kadesh–barnea.	And just as the LORD our God had commanded us, we set out from Horeb and went toward the hill country of the Amorites, through all the vast and terrifying wilderness you have seen. When we reached Kadesh-barnea,
DEU	1	20	내가 너희에게 이르기를 우리 하나님 여호와께서 우리에게 주신 아모리 족속의 산지에 너희가 이르렀나니	And I said unto you, Ye are come unto the mountain of the Amorites, which the Lord our God doth give unto us.	I said: “You have reached the hill country of the Amorites, which the LORD our God is giving us.
DEU	1	21	너희 하나님 여호와께서 이 땅을 너희 앞에 두셨은즉 너희 열조의 하나님 여호와께서 너희에게 이르신 대로 올라가서 얻으라 두려워 말라 주저하지 말라 한즉	Behold, the Lord thy God hath set the land before thee: go up and possess it, as the Lord God of thy fathers hath said unto thee; fear not, neither be discouraged.	See, the LORD your God has placed the land before you. Go up and take possession of it as the LORD, the God of your fathers, has told you. Do not be afraid or discouraged.”
DEU	1	22	너희가 다 내 앞으로 나아와 말하기를 우리가 사람을 우리 앞서 보내어 우리를 위하여 그 땅을 정탐하고 어느 길로 올라가야 할 것과 어느 성읍으로 들어가야 할 것을 우리에게 회보케 하자 하기에	And ye came near unto me every one of you, and said, We will send men before us, and they shall search us out the land, and bring us word again by what way we must go up, and into what cities we shall come.	Then all of you approached me and said, “Let us send men ahead of us to search out the land and bring us word of what route to follow and which cities to enter.”
DEU	1	23	내가 그 말을 선히 여겨 너희 중에서 매 지파에 한 사람씩 열둘을 택하매	And the saying pleased me well: and I took twelve men of you, one of a tribe:	The plan seemed good to me, so I selected twelve men from among you, one from each tribe.
DEU	1	24	그들이 앞으로 가서 산지에 올라 에스골 골짜기에 이르러 그곳을 정탐하고	And they turned and went up into the mountain, and came unto the valley of Eshcol, and searched it out.	They left and went up into the hill country, and came to the Valley of Eshcol and spied out the land.
DEU	1	25	그 땅의 과실을 손에 가지고 우리에게로 돌아와서 우리에게 회보하여 이르되 우리의 하나님 여호와께서 우리에게 주시는 땅이 좋더라 하였느니라	And they took of the fruit of the land in their hands, and brought it down unto us, and brought us word again, and said, It is a good land which the Lord our God doth give us.	They took some of the fruit of the land in their hands, carried it down to us, and brought us word: “It is a good land that the LORD our God is giving us.”
DEU	1	26	그러나 너희가 올라가기를 즐겨 아니하고 너희 하나님 여호와의 명을 거역하여	Notwithstanding ye would not go up, but rebelled against the commandment of the Lord your God:	But you were unwilling to go up; you rebelled against the command of the LORD your God.
DEU	1	27	장막 중에서 원망하여 이르기를 여호와께서 우리를 미워하시는 고로 아모리 족속의 손에 붙여 멸하시려고 우리를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내셨도다	And ye murmured in your tents, and said, Because the Lord hated us, he hath brought us forth out of the land of Egypt, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us.	You grumbled in your tents and said, “Because the LORD hates us, He has brought us out of the land of Egypt to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites to be annihilated.
DEU	1	28	우리가 어디로 갈꼬 우리의 형제들이 우리로 낙심케 하여 말하기를 그 백성은 우리보다 장대하며 그 성읍은 크고 성곽은 하늘에 닿았으며 우리가 또 거기서 아낙 자손을 보았노라 하는도다 하기로	Whither shall we go up? our brethren have discouraged our heart, saying, The people is greater and taller than we; the cities are great and walled up to heaven; and moreover we have seen the sons of the Anakims there.	Where can we go? Our brothers have made our hearts melt, saying: ‘The people are larger and taller than we are; the cities are large, with walls up to the heavens. We even saw the descendants of the Anakim there.’”
DEU	1	29	내가 너희에게 말하기를 그들을 무서워 말라 두려워하지 말라	Then I said unto you, Dread not, neither be afraid of them.	So I said to you: “Do not be terrified or afraid of them!
DEU	1	30	너희 앞서 행하시는 너희 하나님 여호와께서 애굽에서 너희를 위하여 너희 목전에서 모든 일을 행하신 것 같이 이제도 너희를 위하여 싸우실 것이며	The Lord your God which goeth before you, he shall fight for you, according to all that he did for you in Egypt before your eyes;	The LORD your God, who goes before you, will fight for you, just as you saw Him do for you in Egypt
DEU	1	31	광야에서도 너희가 당하였거니와 사람이 자기 아들을 안음 같이 너희 하나님 여호와께서 너희의 행로 중에 너희를 안으사 이곳까지 이르게 하셨느니라 하나	And in the wilderness, where thou hast seen how that the Lord thy God bare thee, as a man doth bear his son, in all the way that ye went, until ye came into this place.	and in the wilderness, where the LORD your God carried you, as a man carries his son, all the way by which you traveled until you reached this place.”
DEU	1	32	이 일에 너희가 너희 하나님 여호와를 믿지 아니하였도다	Yet in this thing ye did not believe the Lord your God,	But in spite of all this, you did not trust the LORD your God,
DEU	1	33	그는 너희 앞서 행하시며 장막 칠 곳을 찾으시고 밤에는 불로, 낮에는 구름으로 너희의 행할 길을 지시하신 자니라	Who went in the way before you, to search you out a place to pitch your tents in, in fire by night, to shew you by what way ye should go, and in a cloud by day.	who went before you on the journey, in the fire by night and in the cloud by day, to seek out a place for you to camp and to show you the road to travel.
DEU	1	34	여호와께서 너희의 말소리를 들으시고 노하사 맹세하여 가라사대	And the Lord heard the voice of your words, and was wroth, and sware, saying,	When the LORD heard your words, He grew angry and swore an oath, saying,
DEU	1	35	이 악한 세대 사람들 중에는 내가 그들의 열조에게 주기로 맹세한 좋은 땅을 볼 자가 하나도 없으리라	Surely there shall not one of these men of this evil generation see that good land, which I sware to give unto your fathers,	“Not one of the men of this evil generation shall see the good land I swore to give your fathers,
DEU	1	36	오직 여분네의 아들 갈렙은 온전히 여호와를 순종하였은즉 그는 그것을 볼 것이요 그가 밟은 땅을 내가 그와 그의 자손에게 주리라 하시고	Save Caleb the son of Jephunneh; he shall see it, and to him will I give the land that he hath trodden upon, and to his children, because he hath wholly followed the Lord.	except Caleb son of Jephunneh. He will see it, and I will give him and his descendants the land on which he has set foot, because he followed the LORD wholeheartedly.”
DEU	1	37	여호와께서 너희의 연고로 내게도 진노하사 가라사대 너도 그리로 들어가지 못하리라	Also the Lord was angry with me for your sakes, saying, Thou also shalt not go in thither.	The LORD was also angry with me on your account, and He said, “Not even you shall enter the land.
DEU	1	38	너의 종자 눈의 아들 여호수아는 그리로 들어갈 것이니 너는 그를 담대케 하라 그가 이스라엘에게 그 땅을 기업으로 얻게 하리라	But Joshua the son of Nun, which standeth before thee, he shall go in thither: encourage him: for he shall cause Israel to inherit it.	Joshua son of Nun, who stands before you, will enter it. Encourage him, for he will enable Israel to inherit the land.
DEU	1	39	또 너희가 사로잡히리라 하던 너희의 아이들과 당일에 선악을 분변치 못하던 너희 자녀들 그들은 그리로 들어갈 것이라 내가 그 땅을 그들에게 주어 산업이 되게 하리라	Moreover your little ones, which ye said should be a prey, and your children, which in that day had no knowledge between good and evil, they shall go in thither, and unto them will I give it, and they shall possess it.	And the little ones you said would become captives—your children who on that day did not know good from evil—will enter the land that I will give them, and they will possess it.
DEU	1	40	너희는 회정하여 홍해 길로 하여 광야로 들어갈지니라 하시매	But as for you, turn you, and take your journey into the wilderness by the way of the Red sea.	But you are to turn back and head for the wilderness along the route to the Red Sea.”
DEU	1	41	너희가 대답하여 내게 이르기를 우리가 여호와께 범죄하였사오니 우리 하나님께서 우리에게 명하신 대로 우리가 올라가서 싸우리이다 하고 너희가 각각 병기를 띠고 경솔히 산지로 올라가려 할 때에	Then ye answered and said unto me, We have sinned against the Lord, we will go up and fight, according to all that the Lord our God commanded us. And when ye had girded on every man his weapons of war, ye were ready to go up into the hill.	“We have sinned against the LORD,” you replied. “We will go up and fight, as the LORD our God has commanded us.” Then each of you put on his weapons of war, thinking it easy to go up into the hill country.
DEU	1	42	여호와께서 내게 이르시되 너는 그들에게 이르기를 너희는 올라가지 말라 싸우지도 말라 내가 너희 중에 있지 아니하니 너희가 대적에게 패할까 하노라 하셨다 하라 하시기로	And the Lord said unto me, Say unto them, Go not up, neither fight; for I am not among you; lest ye be smitten before your enemies.	But the LORD said to me, “Tell them not to go up and fight, for I am not with you to keep you from defeat by your enemies.”
DEU	1	43	내가 너희에게 고하였으나 너희가 듣지 아니하고 여호와의 명을 거역하고 천자히 산지로 올라가매	So I spake unto you; and ye would not hear, but rebelled against the commandment of the Lord, and went presumptuously up into the hill.	So I spoke to you, but you would not listen. You rebelled against the command of the LORD and presumptuously went up into the hill country.
DEU	1	44	그 산지에 거하는 아모리 족속이 너희를 마주 나와서 벌떼 같이 너희를 쫓아 세일 산에서 쳐서 호르마까지 미친지라	And the Amorites, which dwelt in that mountain, came out against you, and chased you, as bees do, and destroyed you in Seir, even unto Hormah.	Then the Amorites who lived in the hills came out against you and chased you like a swarm of bees. They routed you from Seir all the way to Hormah.
DEU	1	45	너희가 돌아와서 여호와 앞에서 통곡하나 여호와께서 너희의 소리를 듣지 아니하시며 너희에게 귀를 기울이지 아니하셨으므로	And ye returned and wept before the Lord; but the Lord would not hearken to your voice, nor give ear unto you.	And you returned and wept before the LORD, but He would not listen to your voice or give ear to you.
DEU	1	46	너희가 가데스에 여러날 동안 거하였었나니 곧 너희가 그 곳에 거하던 날 수대로니라	So ye abode in Kadesh many days, according unto the days that ye abode there.	For this reason you stayed in Kadesh for a long time—a very long time.
DEU	2	1	우리가 회정하여 여호와께서 내게 명하신 대로 홍해 길로 광야에 들어가서 여러날 동안 세일 산을 두루 행하더니	Then we turned, and took our journey into the wilderness by the way of the Red sea, as the Lord spake unto me: and we compassed mount Seir many days.	Then we turned back and headed for the wilderness by way of the Red Sea, as the LORD had instructed me, and for many days we wandered around Mount Seir.
DEU	2	2	여호와께서 내게 고하여 이르시되	And the Lord spake unto me, saying,	At this time the LORD said to me,
DEU	2	3	너희가 이 산을 두루 행한지 오래니 돌이켜 북으로 나아가라	Ye have compassed this mountain long enough: turn you northward.	“You have been wandering around this hill country long enough; turn to the north
DEU	2	4	너는 또 백성에게 명하여 이르기를 너희는 세일에 거하는 너희 동족 에서의 자손의 지경으로 지날진대 그들이 너희를 두려워하리니 너희는 깊이 스스로 삼가고	And command thou the people, saying, Ye are to pass through the coast of your brethren the children of Esau, which dwell in Seir; and they shall be afraid of you: take ye good heed unto yourselves therefore:	and command the people: ‘You will pass through the territory of your brothers, the descendants of Esau, who live in Seir. They will be afraid of you, so you must be very careful.
DEU	2	5	그들과 다투지 말라 그들의 땅은 한 발자국도 너희에게 주지 아니하리니 이는 내가 세일 산을 에서에게 기업으로 주었음이로라	Meddle not with them; for I will not give you of their land, no, not so much as a foot breadth; because I have given mount Seir unto Esau for a possession.	Do not provoke them, for I will not give you any of their land, not even a footprint, because I have given Mount Seir to Esau as his possession.
DEU	2	6	너희는 돈으로 그들에게서 양식을 사서 먹으며 돈으로 그들에게서 물을 사서 마시라	Ye shall buy meat of them for money, that ye may eat; and ye shall also buy water of them for money, that ye may drink.	You are to pay them in silver for the food you eat and the water you drink.’”
DEU	2	7	네 하나님 여호와가 너의 하는 모든 일에 네게 복을 주고 네가 이 큰 광야에 두루 행함을 알고 네 하나님 여호와가 이 사십 년 동안을 너와 함께 하였으므로 네게 부족함이 없었느니라 하셨다 하라 하시기로	For the Lord thy God hath blessed thee in all the works of thy hand: he knoweth thy walking through this great wilderness: these forty years the Lord thy God hath been with thee; thou hast lacked nothing.	Indeed, the LORD your God has blessed you in all the work of your hands. He has watched over your journey through this vast wilderness. The LORD your God has been with you these forty years, and you have lacked nothing.
DEU	2	8	우리가 세일 산에 거하는 우리 동족 에서의 자손을 떠나서 아라바를 지나며 엘랏과 에시온 게벨 곁으로 지나 행하고 돌이켜 모압 광야 길로 진행할 때에	And when we passed by from our brethren the children of Esau, which dwelt in Seir, through the way of the plain from Elath, and from Ezion–gaber, we turned and passed by the way of the wilderness of Moab.	So we passed by our brothers, the descendants of Esau, who live in Seir. We turned away from the Arabah road, which comes up from Elath and Ezion-geber, and traveled along the road of the Wilderness of Moab.
DEU	2	9	여호와께서 내게 이르시되 모압을 괴롭게 말라 그와 싸우지도 말라 그 땅을 내가 네게 기업으로 주지 아니하리니 이는 내가 롯 자손에게 아르를 기업으로 주었음이로라	And the Lord said unto me, Distress not the Moabites, neither contend with them in battle: for I will not give thee of their land for a possession; because I have given Ar unto the children of Lot for a possession.	Then the LORD said to me, “Do not harass the Moabites or provoke them to war, for I will not give you any of their land, because I have given Ar to the descendants of Lot as their possession.”
DEU	2	10	(옛적에 엠 사람이 거기 거하여 강하고 많고 아낙 족속과 같이 키가 크므로	The Emims dwelt therein in times past, a people great, and many, and tall, as the Anakims;	(The Emites used to live there, a people great and many, as tall as the Anakites.
DEU	2	11	그들을 아낙 족속과 같이 르바임이라 칭하였으나 모압 사람은 그들을 에밈이라 칭하였으며	Which also were accounted giants, as the Anakims; but the Moabites call them Emims.	Like the Anakites, they were also regarded as Rephaim, though the Moabites called them Emites.
DEU	2	12	호리 사람도 세일에 거하였더니 에서의 자손이 그들을 멸하고 대신하여 그 땅에 거하였으니 이스라엘이 여호와의 주신 기업의 땅에서 행한 것과 일반이었느니라)	The Horims also dwelt in Seir beforetime; but the children of Esau succeeded them, when they had destroyed them from before them, and dwelt in their stead; as Israel did unto the land of his possession, which the Lord gave unto them.	The Horites used to live in Seir, but the descendants of Esau drove them out. They destroyed the Horites from before them and settled in their place, just as Israel did in the land that the LORD gave them as their possession.)
DEU	2	13	이제 너희는 일어나서 세렛 시내를 건너가라 하시기로 우리가 세렛 시내를 건넜으니	Now rise up, said I, and get you over the brook Zered. And we went over the brook Zered.	“Now arise and cross over the Brook of Zered.” So we crossed over the Brook of Zered.
DEU	2	14	가데스 바네아에서 떠나 세렛 시내를 건너기까지 삼십팔 년 동안이라 이 때에는 그 시대의 모든 군인들이 여호와께서 그들에게 맹세하신 대로 진 중에서 다 멸절되었나니	And the space in which we came from Kadesh–barnea, until we were come over the brook Zered, was thirty and eight years; until all the generation of the men of war were wasted out from among the host, as the Lord sware unto them.	The time we spent traveling from Kadesh-barnea until we crossed over the Brook of Zered was thirty-eight years, until that entire generation of fighting men had perished from the camp, as the LORD had sworn to them.
DEU	2	15	여호와께서 손으로 그들을 치사 진 중에서 멸하신고로 필경은 다 멸절되었느니라	For indeed the hand of the Lord was against them, to destroy them from among the host, until they were consumed.	Indeed, the LORD’s hand was against them, to eliminate them from the camp, until they had all perished.
DEU	2	16	모든 군인이 사망하여 백성 중에서 진멸된 후에	So it came to pass, when all the men of war were consumed and dead from among the people,	Now when all the fighting men among the people had died,
DEU	2	17	여호와께서 내게 일러 가라사대	That the Lord spake unto me, saying,	the LORD said to me,
DEU	2	18	내가 오늘 모압 변경 아르를 지나리니	Thou art to pass over through Ar, the coast of Moab, this day:	“Today you are going to cross the border of Moab at Ar.
DEU	2	19	암몬 족속에게 가까이 이르거든 그들을 괴롭게 말라 그들과 다투지도 말라 암몬 족속의 땅은 내가 네게 기업으로 주지 아니하리니 이는 내가 그것을 롯 자손에게 기업으로 주었음이로라	And when thou comest nigh over against the children of Ammon, distress them not, nor meddle with them: for I will not give thee of the land of the children of Ammon any possession; because I have given it unto the children of Lot for a possession.	But when you get close to the Ammonites, do not harass them or provoke them, for I will not give you any of the land of the Ammonites. I have given it to the descendants of Lot as their possession.”
DEU	2	20	(이곳도 르비임의 땅이라 하였었나니 전에 르바임이 거기 거하였었음이요 암몬 족속은 그들을 삼숨밈이라 일컬었었으며	(That also was accounted a land of giants: giants dwelt therein in old time; and the Ammonites call them Zamzummims;	(That too was regarded as the land of the Rephaim, who used to live there, though the Ammonites called them Zamzummites.
DEU	2	21	그 백성은 강하고 많고 아낙 족속과 같이 키가 크나 여호와께서 암몬 족속 앞에서 그들을 멸하셨으므로 암몬 족속이 대신하여 그 땅에 거하였으니	A people great, and many, and tall, as the Anakims; but the Lord destroyed them before them; and they succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead:	They were a people great and many, as tall as the Anakites. But the LORD destroyed them from before the Ammonites, who drove them out and settled in their place,
DEU	2	22	마치 세일에 거한 에서 자손 앞에 호리 사람을 멸하심과 일반이라 그들이 호리 사람을 쫓아 내고 대신하여 오늘까지 거기 거하였으며	As he did to the children of Esau, which dwelt in Seir, when he destroyed the Horims from before them; and they succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead even unto this day:	just as He had done for the descendants of Esau who lived in Seir, when He destroyed the Horites from before them. They drove them out and have lived in their place to this day.
DEU	2	23	또 갑돌에서 나온 갑돌 사람이 가사까지 각 촌에 거하는 아위 사람을 멸하고 그들을 대신하여 거기 거하였었느니라)	And the Avims which dwelt in Hazerim, even unto Azzah, the Caphtorims, which came forth out of Caphtor, destroyed them, and dwelt in their stead.)	And the Avvim, who lived in villages as far as Gaza, were destroyed by the Caphtorites, who came out of Caphtor and settled in their place.)
DEU	2	24	너희는 일어나 진행하여 아르논 골짜기를 건너라 내가 헤스본 왕 아모리 사람 시혼과 그 땅을 네 손에 붙였은즉 비로소 더불어 싸워서 그 땅을 얻으라	Rise ye up, take your journey, and pass over the river Arnon: behold, I have given into thine hand Sihon the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and his land: begin to possess it, and contend with him in battle.	“Arise, set out, and cross the Arnon Valley. See, I have delivered into your hand Sihon the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and his land. Begin to take possession of it and engage him in battle.
DEU	2	25	오늘부터 내가 천하 만민으로 너를 무서워하며 너를 두려워하게 하리니 그들이 네 명성을 듣고 떨며 너로 인하여 근심하리라 하셨느니라	This day will I begin to put the dread of thee and the fear of thee upon the nations that are under the whole heaven, who shall hear report of thee, and shall tremble, and be in anguish because of thee.	This very day I will begin to put the dread and fear of you upon all the nations under heaven. They will hear the reports of you and tremble in anguish because of you.”
DEU	2	26	내가 그데못 광야에서 헤스본 왕 시혼에게 사자를 보내어 평화의 말로 이르기를	And I sent messengers out of the wilderness of Kedemoth unto Sihon king of Heshbon with words of peace, saying,	So from the Wilderness of Kedemoth I sent messengers with an offer of peace to Sihon king of Heshbon, saying,
DEU	2	27	나를 네 땅으로 통과하게 하라 내가 대로로만 행하고 좌로나 우로나 치우치지 아니하리라	Let me pass through thy land: I will go along by the high way, I will neither turn unto the right hand nor to the left.	“Let us pass through your land; we will stay on the main road. We will not turn to the right or to the left.
DEU	2	28	너는 돈을 받고 양식을 팔아 나로 먹게 하고 돈을 받고 물을 주어 나로 마시게 하라 나는 도보로 지날 뿐인즉	Thou shalt sell me meat for money, that I may eat; and give me water for money, that I may drink: only I will pass through on my feet;	You can sell us food to eat and water to drink in exchange for silver. Only let us pass through on foot,
DEU	2	29	세일에 거하는 에서 자손과 아르에 거하는 모압 사람이 내게 행한 것 같이 하라 그리하면 내가 요단을 건너서 우리 하나님 여호와께서 우리에게 주시는 땅에 이르리라 하나	(As the children of Esau which dwell in Seir, and the Moabites which dwell in Ar, did unto me;) until I shall pass over Jordan into the land which the Lord our God giveth us.	just as the descendants of Esau who live in Seir and the Moabites who live in Ar did for us, until we cross the Jordan into the land that the LORD our God is giving us.”
DEU	2	30	헤스본 왕 시혼이 우리의 통과하기를 허락지 아니하였으니 이는 너의 하나님 여호와께서 그를 네 손에 붙이시려고 그 성품을 완강케 하셨고 그 마음을 강퍅케 하셨음이라 오늘날과 같으니라	But Sihon king of Heshbon would not let us pass by him: for the Lord thy God hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, that he might deliver him into thy hand, as appeareth this day.	But Sihon king of Heshbon would not let us pass through, for the LORD your God had made his spirit stubborn and his heart obstinate, that He might deliver him into your hand, as is the case this day.
DEU	2	31	때에 여호와께서 내게 이르시되 내가 비로소 시혼과 그 땅을 네게 붙이노니 너는 이제부터 그 땅을 얻어서 기업으로 삼으라 하시더니	And the Lord said unto me, Behold, I have begun to give Sihon and his land before thee: begin to possess, that thou mayest inherit his land.	Then the LORD said to me, “See, I have begun to deliver Sihon and his land over to you. Now begin to conquer and possess his land.”
DEU	2	32	시혼이 그 모든 백성을 거느리고 나와서 우리를 대적하여 야하스에서 싸울 때에	Then Sihon came out against us, he and all his people, to fight at Jahaz.	So Sihon and his whole army came out for battle against us at Jahaz.
DEU	2	33	우리 하나님 여호와께서 그를 우리에게 붙이시매 우리가 그와 그 아들들과 그 모든 백성을 쳤고	And the Lord our God delivered him before us; and we smote him, and his sons, and all his people.	And the LORD our God delivered him over to us, and we defeated him and his sons and his whole army.
DEU	2	34	그 때에 우리가 그 모든 성읍을 취하고 그 각 성읍을 그 남녀와 유아와 함께 하나도 남기지 아니하고 진멸하였고	And we took all his cities at that time, and utterly destroyed the men, and the women, and the little ones, of every city, we left none to remain:	At that time we captured all his cities and devoted to destruction the people of every city, including women and children. We left no survivors.
DEU	2	35	오직 그 육축과 성읍에서 탈취한 것은 우리의 소유로 삼았으며	Only the cattle we took for a prey unto ourselves, and the spoil of the cities which we took.	We carried off for ourselves only the livestock and the plunder from the cities we captured.
DEU	2	36	우리 하나님 여호와께서 그 모든 땅을 우리에게 붙이심으로 아르논 골짜기 가에 있는 아로엘과 골짜기 가운데 있는 성읍으로부터 길르앗에까지 우리가 모든 높은 성읍을 취하지 못한 것이 하나도 없었으나	From Aroer, which is by the brink of the river of Arnon, and from the city that is by the river, even unto Gilead, there was not one city too strong for us: the Lord our God delivered all unto us:	From Aroer on the rim of the Arnon Valley, along with the city in the valley, even as far as Gilead, not one city had walls too high for us. The LORD our God gave us all of them.
DEU	2	37	오직 암몬 족속의 땅 얍복강 가와 산지에 있는 성읍들과 무릇 우리 하나님 여호와께서 우리의 가기를 금하신 곳은 네가 가까이 하지 못하였느니라	Only unto the land of the children of Ammon thou camest not, nor unto any place of the river Jabbok, nor unto the cities in the mountains, nor unto whatsoever the Lord our God forbad us.	But you did not go near the land of the Ammonites, or the land along the banks of the Jabbok River, or the cities of the hill country, or any place that the LORD our God had forbidden.
DEU	3	1	우리가 돌이켜 바산으로 올라가매 바산 왕 옥이 그 모든 백성을 거느리고 나와서 우리를 대적하여 에드레이에서 싸우는지라	Then we turned, and went up the way to Bashan: and Og the king of Bashan came out against us, he and all his people, to battle at Edrei.	Then we turned and went up the road to Bashan, and Og king of Bashan and his whole army came out to meet us in battle at Edrei.
DEU	3	2	여호와께서 내게 이르시되 그를 두려워 말라 내가 그와 그 모든 백성과 그 땅을 네 손에 붙였으니 네가 헤스본에 거하던 아모리 족속의 왕 시혼에게 행한 것과 같이 그에게 행할 것이니라 하시고	And the Lord said unto me, Fear him not: for I will deliver him, and all his people, and his land, into thy hand; and thou shalt do unto him as thou didst unto Sihon king of the Amorites, which dwelt at Heshbon.	But the LORD said to me, “Do not fear him, for I have delivered him into your hand, along with all his people and his land. Do to him as you did to Sihon king of the Amorites, who lived in Heshbon.”
DEU	3	3	우리 하나님 여호와께서 바산 왕 옥과 그 모든 백성을 우리 손에 붙이시매 우리가 그들을 쳐서 한 사람도 남기지 아니하였느니라	So the Lord our God delivered into our hands Og also, the king of Bashan, and all his people: and we smote him until none was left to him remaining.	So the LORD our God also delivered Og king of Bashan and his whole army into our hands. We struck them down until no survivor was left.
DEU	3	4	그 때에 우리가 그들에게서 빼앗지 아니한 성읍이 하나도 없이 다 빼앗았는데 그 성읍이 육십이니 곧 아르곱 온 지방이요 바산에 있는 옥의 나라이라	And we took all his cities at that time, there was not a city which we took not from them, threescore cities, all the region of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan.	At that time we captured all sixty of his cities. There was not a single city we failed to take—the entire region of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan.
DEU	3	5	그 모든 성읍에 높은 성벽이 둘려 있고 문과 빗장이 있어 견고하며 그 외에 성벽 없는 고을이 심히 많았느니라	All these cities were fenced with high walls, gates, and bars; beside unwalled towns a great many.	All these cities were fortified with high walls and gates and bars, and there were many more unwalled villages.
DEU	3	6	우리가 헤스본 왕 시혼에게 행한 것과 같이 그 성읍들을 진멸하되 각 성읍의 남녀와 유아를 진멸하였으나	And we utterly destroyed them, as we did unto Sihon king of Heshbon, utterly destroying the men, women, and children, of every city.	We devoted them to destruction, as we had done to Sihon king of Heshbon, utterly destroying the men, women, and children of every city.
DEU	3	7	오직 모든 육축과 그 성읍들에서 탈취한 것은 우리의 소유로 삼았으며	But all the cattle, and the spoil of the cities, we took for a prey to ourselves.	But all the livestock and plunder of the cities we carried off for ourselves.
DEU	3	8	그 때에 우리가 요단강 이편 땅을 아르논 골짜기에서부터 헤르몬 산에까지 아모리 족속의 두 왕에게서 취하였으니	And we took at that time out of the hand of the two kings of the Amorites the land that was on this side Jordan, from the river of Arnon unto mount Hermon;	At that time we took from the two kings of the Amorites the land across the Jordan, from the Arnon Valley as far as Mount Hermon—
DEU	3	9	(헤르몬 산을 시돈 사람은 시룐이라 칭하고 아모리 족속은 스닐이라 칭하였느니라)	(Which Hermon the Sidonians call Sirion; and the Amorites call it Shenir;)	which the Sidonians call Sirion but the Amorites call Senir—
DEU	3	10	우리의 취한 것은 평원의 모든 성읍과 길르앗 온 땅과 바산의 온 땅 곧 옥의 나라 바산의 성읍 살르가와 에드레이까지니라	All the cities of the plain, and all Gilead, and all Bashan, unto Salchah and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan.	all the cities of the plateau, all of Gilead, and all of Bashan as far as the cities of Salecah and Edrei in the kingdom of Og.
DEU	3	11	(르바임 족속의 남은 자는 바산 왕 옥뿐이었으며 그의 침상은 철 침상이라 지금 오히려 암몬 족속의 랍바에 있지 아니하냐 그것을 사람의 보통 규빗으로 재면 그 장이 아홉 규빗이요 광이 네 규빗이니라)	For only Og king of Bashan remained of the remnant of giants; behold, his bedstead was a bedstead of iron; is it not in Rabbath of the children of Ammon? nine cubits was the length thereof, and four cubits the breadth of it, after the cubit of a man.	(For only Og king of Bashan had remained of the remnant of the Rephaim. His bed of iron, nine cubits long and four cubits wide, is still in Rabbah of the Ammonites.)
DEU	3	12	그 때에 우리가 이 땅을 얻으매 아르논 골짜기 곁에 아로엘에서부터 길르앗 산지 절반과 그 성읍들을 내가 르우벤 자손과 갓 자손에게 주었고	And this land, which we possessed at that time, from Aroer, which is by the river Arnon, and half mount Gilead, and the cities thereof, gave I unto the Reubenites and to the Gadites.	So at that time we took possession of this land. To the Reubenites and Gadites I gave the land beyond Aroer along the Arnon Valley, and half the hill country of Gilead, along with its cities.
DEU	3	13	길르앗의 남은 땅과 옥의 나라이었던 아르곱 온 지방 곧 온 바산으로는 내가 므낫세 반 지파에게 주었노라 (바산을 옛적에는 르바임의 땅이라 칭하더니	And the rest of Gilead, and all Bashan, being the kingdom of Og, gave I unto the half tribe of Manasseh; all the region of Argob, with all Bashan, which was called the land of giants.	To the half-tribe of Manasseh I gave the rest of Gilead and all of Bashan, the kingdom of Og. (The entire region of Argob, the whole territory of Bashan, used to be called the land of the Rephaim.)
DEU	3	14	므낫세의 아들 야일이 그술 족속과 마아갓 족속의 경계까지의 아르곱 온 지방을 취하고 자기의 이름으로 이 바산을 하봇야일이라 칭하여 오늘까지 이르느니라)	Jair the son of Manasseh took all the country of Argob unto the coasts of Geshuri and Maachathi; and called them after his own name, Bashan–havoth–jair, unto this day.	Jair, a descendant of Manasseh, took the whole region of Argob as far as the border of the Geshurites and Maacathites. He renamed Bashan after himself, Havvoth-jair, by which it is called to this day.
DEU	3	15	내가 마길에게 길르앗을 주었고	And I gave Gilead unto Machir.	To Machir I gave Gilead,
DEU	3	16	르우벤 자손과 갓 자손에게는 길르앗에서부터 아르논 골짜기까지 주었으되 그 골짜기의 중앙으로 지경을 정하였으니 곧 암몬 자손의 지경 얍복 강까지며	And unto the Reubenites and unto the Gadites I gave from Gilead even unto the river Arnon half the valley, and the border even unto the river Jabbok, which is the border of the children of Ammon;	and to the Reubenites and Gadites I gave the territory from Gilead to the Arnon Valley (the middle of the valley was the border) and up to the Jabbok River, the border of the Ammonites.
DEU	3	17	또는 아라바와 요단과 그 가요 긴네렛에서 아라바 바다 곧 염해와 비스가 산록에 이르기까지의 동편 지경이니라	The plain also, and Jordan, and the coast thereof, from Chinnereth even unto the sea of the plain, even the salt sea, under Ashdoth–pisgah eastward.	The Jordan River in the Arabah bordered it from Chinnereth to the Sea of the Arabah (the Salt Sea) with the slopes of Pisgah to the east.
DEU	3	18	그 때에 내가 이 땅을 받은 너희에게 명하여 이르기를 너희의 하나님 여호와께서 이 땅을 너희에게 주어 기업이 되게 하셨은즉 너희 군인들은 무장하고 너희의 형제 이스라엘 자손의 선봉이 되어 건너가되	And I commanded you at that time, saying, The Lord your God hath given you this land to possess it: ye shall pass over armed before your brethren the children of Israel, all that are meet for the war.	At that time I commanded you: “The LORD your God has given you this land to possess. All your men of valor are to cross over, armed for battle, ahead of your brothers, the Israelites.
DEU	3	19	너희에게 육축이 많은 줄 내가 아노니 너희의 처자와 육축은 내가 너희에게 준 성읍에 머무르라	But your wives, and your little ones, and your cattle, (for I know that ye have much cattle,) shall abide in your cities which I have given you;	But your wives, your children, and your livestock—I know that you have much livestock—may remain in the cities I have given you,
DEU	3	20	여호와께서 너희에게 주신 것 같이 너희 형제에게 안식을 주시리니 그들도 요단 저편에서 너희 하나님 여호와의 주시는 땅을 얻어 기업을 삼기에 이르거든 너희는 각기 내가 준 기업으로 돌아갈 것이니라 하고	Until the Lord have given rest unto your brethren, as well as unto you, and until they also possess the land which the Lord your God hath given them beyond Jordan: and then shall ye return every man unto his possession, which I have given you.	until the LORD gives rest to your brothers as He has to you, and they too have taken possession of the land that the LORD your God is giving them across the Jordan. Then each of you may return to the possession I have given you.”
DEU	3	21	그 때에 내가 여호수아에게 명하여 이르기를 너희 하나님 여호와께서 이 두 왕에게 행하신 모든 일을 네가 목도하였거니와 네가 가는 모든 나라에도 여호와께서 이와 같이 행하시리니	And I commanded Joshua at that time, saying, Thine eyes have seen all that the Lord your God hath done unto these two kings: so shall the Lord do unto all the kingdoms whither thou passest.	And at that time I commanded Joshua: “Your own eyes have seen all that the LORD your God has done to these two kings. The LORD will do the same to all the kingdoms you are about to enter.
DEU	3	22	너희는 그들을 두려워하지 말라 너희 하나님 여호와 그가 너희를 위하여 싸우시리라 하였노라	Ye shall not fear them: for the Lord your God he shall fight for you.	Do not be afraid of them, for the LORD your God Himself will fight for you.”
DEU	3	23	그 때에 내가 여호와께 간구하기를	And I besought the Lord at that time, saying,	At that time I also pleaded with the LORD:
DEU	3	24	주 여호와여 주께서 주의 크심과 주의 권능을 주의 종에게 나타내시기를 시작하였사오니 천지간에 무슨 신이 능히 주의 행하신 일 곧 주의 큰 능력으로 행하신 일 같이 행할 수 있으리이까	O Lord God, thou hast begun to shew thy servant thy greatness, and thy mighty hand: for what God is there in heaven or in earth, that can do according to thy works, and according to thy might?	“O Lord GOD, You have begun to show Your greatness and power to Your servant. For what god in heaven or on earth can perform such works and mighty acts as Yours?
DEU	3	25	구하옵나니 나로 건너가게 하사 요단 저편에 있는 아름다운 땅 아름다운 산과 레바논을 보게 하옵소서 하되	I pray thee, let me go over, and see the good land that is beyond Jordan, that goodly mountain, and Lebanon.	Please let me cross over and see the good land beyond the Jordan—that pleasant hill country as well as Lebanon!”
DEU	3	26	여호와께서 너희의 연고로 내게 진노하사 내 말을 듣지 아니하시고 내게 이르시기를 그만해도 족하니 이 일로 다시 내게 말하지 말라	But the Lord was wroth with me for your sakes, and would not hear me: and the Lord said unto me, Let it suffice thee; speak no more unto me of this matter.	But the LORD was angry with me on account of you, and He would not listen to me. “That is enough,” the LORD said to me. “Do not speak to Me again about this matter.
DEU	3	27	너는 비스가 산 꼭대기에 올라가서 눈을 들어 동서 남북을 바라고 네 눈으로 그 땅을 보라 네가 이 요단을 건너지 못할 것임이니라	Get thee up into the top of Pisgah, and lift up thine eyes westward, and northward, and southward, and eastward, and behold it with thine eyes: for thou shalt not go over this Jordan.	Go to the top of Pisgah and look to the west and north and south and east. See the land with your own eyes, for you will not cross this Jordan.
DEU	3	28	너는 여호수아에게 명하고 그를 담대케 하며 그를 강경케 하라 그는 이 백성을 거느리고 건너가서 네가 볼 땅을 그들로 기업으로 얻게 하리라 하셨느니라	But charge Joshua, and encourage him, and strengthen him: for he shall go over before this people, and he shall cause them to inherit the land which thou shalt see.	But commission Joshua, encourage him, and strengthen him, for he will cross over ahead of the people and enable them to inherit the land that you will see.”
DEU	3	29	그때에 우리가 벨브올 맞은편 골짜기에 거하였었느니라	So we abode in the valley over against Beth–peor.	So we stayed in the valley opposite Beth-peor.
DEU	4	1	이스라엘아 이제 내가 너희에게 가르치는 규례와 법도를 듣고 준행하라 그리하면 너희가 살 것이요 너희의 열조의 하나님 여호와께서 너희에게 주시는 땅에 들어가서 그것을 얻게 되리라	Now therefore hearken, O Israel, unto the statutes and unto the judgments, which I teach you, for to do them, that ye may live, and go in and possess the land which the Lord God of your fathers giveth you.	Hear now, O Israel, the statutes and ordinances I am teaching you to follow, so that you may live and may enter and take possession of the land that the LORD, the God of your fathers, is giving you.
DEU	4	2	내가 너희에게 명하는 말을 너희는 가감하지 말고 내가 너희에게 명하는 너희 하나님 여호와의 명령을 지키라	Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord your God which I command you.	You must not add to or subtract from what I command you, so that you may keep the commandments of the LORD your God that I am giving you.
DEU	4	3	여호와께서 바알브올의 일을 인하여 행하신 바를 너희가 목도하였거니와 바알브올을 좇은 모든 사람을 너의 하나님 여호와께서 너의 중에서 진멸하셨으되	Your eyes have seen what the Lord did because of Baal–peor: for all the men that followed Baal–peor, the Lord thy God hath destroyed them from among you.	Your eyes have seen what the LORD did at Baal-peor, for the LORD your God destroyed from among you all who followed Baal of Peor.
DEU	4	4	오직 너희의 하나님 여호와께 붙어 떠나지 않은 너희는 오늘까지 다 생존하였느니라	But ye that did cleave unto the Lord your God are alive every one of you this day.	But you who held fast to the LORD your God are alive to this day, every one of you.
DEU	4	5	내가 나의 하나님 여호와의 명하신 대로 규례와 법도를 너희에게 가르쳤나니 이는 너희로 들어가서 기업으로 얻을 땅에서 그대로 행하게 하려 함인즉	Behold, I have taught you statutes and judgments, even as the Lord my God commanded me, that ye should do so in the land whither ye go to possess it.	See, I have taught you statutes and ordinances just as the LORD my God has commanded me, so that you may follow them in the land that you are about to enter and possess.
DEU	4	6	너희는 지켜 행하라 그리함은 열국 앞에 너희의 지혜요 너희의 지식이라 그들이 이 모든 규례를 듣고 이르기를 이 큰 나라 사람은 과연 지혜와 지식이 있는 백성이로다 하리라	Keep therefore and do them; for this is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the nations, which shall hear all these statutes, and say, Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people.	Observe them carefully, for this will show your wisdom and understanding in the sight of the peoples, who will hear of all these statutes and say, “Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people.”
DEU	4	7	우리 하나님 여호와께서 우리가 그에게 기도할 때마다 우리에게 가까이 하심과 같이 그 신의 가까이 함을 얻은 나라가 어디 있느냐	For what nation is there so great, who hath God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things that we call upon him for?	For what nation is great enough to have a god as near to them as the LORD our God is to us whenever we call on Him?
DEU	4	8	오늘 내가 너희에게 선포하는 이 율법과 같이 그 규례와 법도가 공의로운 큰 나라가 어디 있느냐	And what nation is there so great, that hath statutes and judgments so righteous as all this law, which I set before you this day?	And what nation is great enough to have righteous statutes and ordinances like this entire law I set before you today?
DEU	4	9	오직 너는 스스로 삼가며 네 마음을 힘써 지키라 두렵건대 네가 그 목도한 일을 잊어버릴까 하노라 두렵건대 네 생존하는 날 동안에 그 일들이 네 마음 속에서 떠날까 하노라 너는 그 일들을 네 아들들과 네 손자들에게 알게 하라	Only take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life: but teach them thy sons, and thy sons’ sons;	Only be on your guard and diligently watch yourselves, so that you do not forget the things your eyes have seen, and so that they do not slip from your heart as long as you live. Teach them to your children and grandchildren.
DEU	4	10	네가 호렙 산에서 네 하나님 여호와 앞에 섰던 날에 여호와께서 내게 이르시기를 나를 위하여 백성을 모으라 내가 그들에게 내 말을 들려서 그들로 세상에 사는 날 동안 나 경외함을 배우게 하며 그 자녀에게 가르치게 하려 하노라 하시매	Specially the day that thou stoodest before the Lord thy God in Horeb, when the Lord said unto me, Gather me the people together, and I will make them hear my words, that they may learn to fear me all the days that they shall live upon the earth, and that they may teach their children.	The day you stood before the LORD your God at Horeb, the LORD said to me, “Gather the people before Me to hear My words, so that they may learn to fear Me all the days they live on the earth, and that they may teach them to their children.”
DEU	4	11	너희가 가까이 나아와서 산 아래 서니 그 산에 불이 붙어 화염이 충천하고 유암과 구름과 흑암이 덮였는데	And ye came near and stood under the mountain; and the mountain burned with fire unto the midst of heaven, with darkness, clouds, and thick darkness.	You came near and stood at the base of the mountain, a mountain blazing with fire to the heavens, with black clouds and deep darkness.
DEU	4	12	여호와께서 화염 중에서 너희에게 말씀하시되 음성뿐이므로 너희가 그 말소리만 듣고 형상은 보지 못하였느니라	And the Lord spake unto you out of the midst of the fire: ye heard the voice of the words, but saw no similitude; only ye heard a voice.	And the LORD spoke to you out of the fire. You heard the sound of the words, but saw no form; there was only a voice.
DEU	4	13	여호와께서 그 언약을 너희에게 반포하시고 너희로 지키라 명하셨으니 곧 십계명이며 두 돌판에 친히 쓰신 것이라	And he declared unto you his covenant, which he commanded you to perform, even ten commandments; and he wrote them upon two tables of stone.	He declared to you His covenant, which He commanded you to follow—the Ten Commandments that He wrote on two tablets of stone.
DEU	4	14	그 때에 여호와께서 내게 명하사 너희에게 규례와 법도를 교훈하게 하셨나니 이는 너희로 건너가서 얻을 땅에서 행하게 하심이니라	And the Lord commanded me at that time to teach you statutes and judgments, that ye might do them in the land whither ye go over to possess it.	At that time the LORD commanded me to teach you the statutes and ordinances you are to follow in the land that you are crossing the Jordan to possess.
DEU	4	15	여호와께서 호렙 산 화염 중에서 너희에게 말씀하시던 날에 너희가 아무 형상도 보지 못하였은즉 너희는 깊이 삼가라	Take ye therefore good heed unto yourselves; for ye saw no manner of similitude on the day that the Lord spake unto you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire:	So since you saw no form of any kind on the day the LORD spoke to you out of the fire at Horeb, be careful
DEU	4	16	두렵건대 스스로 부패하여 자기를 위하여 아무 형상대로든지 우상을 새겨 만들되 남자의 형상이라든지, 여자의 형상이라든지,	Lest ye corrupt yourselves, and make you a graven image, the similitude of any figure, the likeness of male or female,	that you do not act corruptly and make an idol for yourselves of any form or shape, whether in the likeness of a male or female,
DEU	4	17	땅 위에 있는 아무 짐승의 형상이라든지, 하늘에 나는 아무 새의 형상이라든지,	The likeness of any beast that is on the earth, the likeness of any winged fowl that flieth in the air,	of any beast that is on the earth or bird that flies in the air,
DEU	4	18	땅 위에 기는 아무 곤충의 형상이라든지, 땅 아래 물 속에 있는 아무 어족의 형상이라든지 만들까 하노라	The likeness of any thing that creepeth on the ground, the likeness of any fish that is in the waters beneath the earth:	or of any creature that crawls on the ground or fish that is in the waters below.
DEU	4	19	또 두렵건대 네가 하늘을 향하여 눈을 들어 일월 성신 하늘 위의 군중 곧 너희 하나님 여호와께서 천하 만민을 위하여 분정하신 것을 보고 미혹하여 그것에 경배하며 섬길까 하노라	And lest thou lift up thine eyes unto heaven, and when thou seest the sun, and the moon, and the stars, even all the host of heaven, shouldest be driven to worship them, and serve them, which the Lord thy God hath divided unto all nations under the whole heaven.	When you look to the heavens and see the sun and moon and stars—all the host of heaven—do not be enticed to bow down and worship what the LORD your God has apportioned to all the nations under heaven.
DEU	4	20	여호와께서 너희를 택하시고 너희를 쇠풀무 곧 애굽에서 인도하여 내사 자기 기업의 백성을 삼으신 것이 오늘과 같아도	But the Lord hath taken you, and brought you forth out of the iron furnace, even out of Egypt, to be unto him a people of inheritance, as ye are this day.	Yet the LORD has taken you and brought you out of the iron furnace, out of Egypt, to be the people of His inheritance, as you are today.
DEU	4	21	여호와께서 너희로 인하여 내게 진노하사 나로 요단을 건너지 못하며 네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 기업으로 주신 그 아름다운 땅에 들어가지 못하게 하리라고 맹세하셨은즉	Furthermore the Lord was angry with me for your sakes, and sware that I should not go over Jordan, and that I should not go in unto that good land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee for an inheritance:	The LORD, however, was angry with me on account of you, and He swore that I would not cross the Jordan to enter the good land that the LORD your God is giving you as an inheritance.
DEU	4	22	나는 이 땅에서 죽고 요단을 건너지 못하려니와 너희는 건너가서 그 아름다운 땅을 얻으리니	But I must die in this land, I must not go over Jordan: but ye shall go over, and possess that good land.	For I will not be crossing the Jordan, because I must die in this land. But you shall cross over and take possession of that good land.
DEU	4	23	너희는 스스로 삼가서 너희 하나님 여호와께서 너희와 세우신 언약을 잊어버려서 네 하나님 여호와께서 금하신 아무 형상의 우상이든지 조각하지 말라	Take heed unto yourselves, lest ye forget the covenant of the Lord your God, which he made with you, and make you a graven image, or the likeness of any thing, which the Lord thy God hath forbidden thee.	Be careful that you do not forget the covenant of the LORD your God that He made with you; do not make an idol for yourselves in the form of anything He has forbidden you.
DEU	4	24	네 하나님 여호와는 소멸하는 불이시요 질투하는 하나님이시니라	For the Lord thy God is a consuming fire, even a jealous God.	For the LORD your God is a consuming fire, a jealous God.
DEU	4	25	네가 그 땅에서 아들을 낳고 손자를 얻으며 오래 살 때에 만일 스스로 부패하여 무슨 형상의 우상이든지 조각하여 네 하나님 여호와 앞에 악을 행함으로 그의 노를 격발하면	When thou shalt beget children, and children’s children, and ye shall have remained long in the land, and shall corrupt yourselves, and make a graven image, or the likeness of any thing, and shall do evil in the sight of the Lord thy God, to provoke him to anger:	After you have children and grandchildren and you have been in the land a long time, if you then act corruptly and make an idol of any form—doing evil in the sight of the LORD your God and provoking Him to anger—
DEU	4	26	내가 오늘날 천지를 불러 증거를 삼노니 너희가 요단을 건너가서 얻는 땅에서 속히 망할 것이라 너희가 거기서 너희 날이 길지 못하고 전멸될 것이니라	I call heaven and earth to witness against you this day, that ye shall soon utterly perish from off the land whereunto ye go over Jordan to possess it; ye shall not prolong your days upon it, but shall utterly be destroyed.	I call heaven and earth as witnesses against you this day that you will quickly perish from the land that you are crossing the Jordan to possess. You will not live long upon it, but will be utterly destroyed.
DEU	4	27	여호와께서 너희를 열국 중에 흩으실 것이요 여호와께서 너희를 쫓아 보내실 그 열국 중에 너희의 남은 수가 많지 못할 것이며	And the Lord shall scatter you among the nations, and ye shall be left few in number among the heathen, whither the Lord shall lead you.	Then the LORD will scatter you among the peoples, and only a few of you will survive among the nations to which the LORD will drive you.
DEU	4	28	너희는 거기서 사람의 손으로 만든바 보지도 못하며 듣지도 못하며 먹지도 못하며 냄새도 맡지 못하는 목석의 신들을 섬기리라	And there ye shall serve gods, the work of men’s hands, wood and stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell.	And there you will serve man-made gods of wood and stone, which cannot see or hear or eat or smell.
DEU	4	29	그러나 네가 거기서 네 하나님 여호와를 구하게 되리니 만일 마음을 다하고 성품을 다하여 그를 구하면 만나리라	But if from thence thou shalt seek the Lord thy God, thou shalt find him, if thou seek him with all thy heart and with all thy soul.	But if from there you will seek the LORD your God, you will find Him if you seek Him with all your heart and with all your soul.
DEU	4	30	이 모든 일이 네게 임하여 환난을 당하다가 끝날에 네가 네 하나님 여호와께로 돌아와서 그 말씀을 청종하리니	When thou art in tribulation, and all these things are come upon thee, even in the latter days, if thou turn to the Lord thy God, and shalt be obedient unto his voice;	When you are in distress and all these things have happened to you, then in later days you will return to the LORD your God and listen to His voice.
DEU	4	31	네 하나님 여호와는 자비하신 하나님이심이라 그가 너를 버리지 아니하시며 너를 멸하지 아니하시며 네 열조에게 맹세하신 언약을 잊지 아니하시리라	(For the Lord thy God is a merciful God;) he will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, nor forget the covenant of thy fathers which he sware unto them.	For the LORD your God is a merciful God; He will not abandon you or destroy you or forget the covenant with your fathers, which He swore to them by oath.
DEU	4	32	네가 있기 전 하나님이 사람을 세상에 창조하신 날부터 지금까지 지나간 날을 상고하여 보라 하늘 이 끝에서 저 끝까지 이런 큰 일이 있었느냐 이런 일을 들은 적이 있었느냐	For ask now of the days that are past, which were before thee, since the day that God created man upon the earth, and ask from the one side of heaven unto the other, whether there hath been any such thing as this great thing is, or hath been heard like it?	Indeed, ask now from one end of the heavens to the other about the days that long preceded you, from the day that God created man on earth: Has anything as great as this ever happened or been reported?
DEU	4	33	어떤 국민이 불 가운데서 말씀하시는 하나님의 음성을 너처럼 듣고 생존하였었느냐	Did ever people hear the voice of God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as thou hast heard, and live?	Has a people ever heard the voice of God speaking out of the fire, as you have, and lived?
DEU	4	34	어떤 신이 와서 시험과 이적과 기사와 전쟁과 강한 손과 편 팔과 크게 두려운 일로 한 민족을 다른 민족에게서 인도하여 낸 일이 있느냐 이는 다 너희 하나님 여호와께서 애굽에서 너희를 위하여 너희의 목전에서 행하신 일이라	Or hath God assayed to go and take him a nation from the midst of another nation, by temptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty hand, and by a stretched out arm, and by great terrors, according to all that the Lord your God did for you in Egypt before your eyes?	Or has any god tried to take as his own a nation out of another nation—by trials, signs, wonders, and war, by a strong hand and an outstretched arm, and by great terrors—as the LORD your God did for you in Egypt, before your eyes?
DEU	4	35	이것을 네게 나타내심은 여호와는 하나님이시요 그 외에는 다른 신이 없음을 네게 알게 하려 하심이니라	Unto thee it was shewed, that thou mightest know that the Lord he is God; there is none else beside him.	You were shown these things so that you would know that the LORD is God; there is no other besides Him.
DEU	4	36	여호와께서 너를 교훈하시려고 하늘에서부터 그 음성을 너로 듣게 하시며 땅에서는 그 큰 불을 네게 보이시고 너로 불 가운데서 나오는 그 말씀을 듣게 하셨느니라	Out of heaven he made thee to hear his voice, that he might instruct thee: and upon earth he shewed thee his great fire; and thou heardest his words out of the midst of the fire.	He let you hear His voice from heaven to discipline you, and on earth He showed you His great fire, and you heard His words out of the fire.
DEU	4	37	여호와께서 네 열조를 사랑하신고로 그 후손 너를 택하시고 큰 권능으로 친히 인도하여 애굽에서 나오게 하시며	And because he loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their seed after them, and brought thee out in his sight with his mighty power out of Egypt;	Because He loved your fathers, He chose their descendants after them and brought you out of Egypt by His presence and great power,
DEU	4	38	너보다 강대한 열국을 네 앞에서 쫓아내고 너를 그들의 땅으로 인도하여 들여서 그것을 네게 기업으로 주려 하심이 오늘날과 같으니라	To drive out nations from before thee greater and mightier than thou art, to bring thee in, to give thee their land for an inheritance, as it is this day.	to drive out before you nations greater and mightier than you, and to bring you into their land and give it to you for your inheritance, as it is this day.
DEU	4	39	그런즉 너는 오늘날 상천 하지에 오직 여호와는 하나님이시요 다른 신이 없는 줄을 알아 명심하고	Know therefore this day, and consider it in thine heart, that the Lord he is God in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath: there is none else.	Know therefore this day and take to heart that the LORD is God in heaven above and on the earth below; there is no other.
DEU	4	40	오늘 내가 네게 명하는 여호와의 규례와 명령을 지키라 너와 네 후손이 복을 받아 네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 주시는 땅에서 한 없이 오래 살리라	Thou shalt keep therefore his statutes, and his commandments, which I command thee this day, that it may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee, and that thou mayest prolong thy days upon the earth, which the Lord thy God giveth thee, for ever.	Keep His statutes and commandments, which I am giving you today, so that you and your children after you may prosper, and that you may live long in the land that the LORD your God is giving you for all time.
DEU	4	41	때에 모세가 요단 이편 해 돋는 편에서 세 성읍을 구별하였으니	Then Moses severed three cities on this side Jordan toward the sunrising;	Then Moses set aside three cities across the Jordan to the east
DEU	4	42	이는 과거에 원혐이 없이 부지중에 오살한 자로 그곳으로 도피케 하기 위함이며 그 한 성읍으로 도피한 자로 그 생명을 보존케 하기 위함이라	That the slayer might flee thither, which should kill his neighbour unawares, and hated him not in times past; and that fleeing unto one of these cities he might live:	to which a manslayer could flee after killing his neighbor unintentionally without prior malice. To save one’s own life, he could flee to one of these cities:
DEU	4	43	하나는 광야 평원에 있는 베셀이라 르우벤 지파를 위한 것이요 하나는 길르앗 라못이라 갓 지파를 위한 것이요 하나는 바산 골란이라 므낫세 지파를 위한 것이었더라	Namely, Bezer in the wilderness, in the plain country, of the Reubenites; and Ramoth in Gilead, of the Gadites; and Golan in Bashan, of the Manassites.	Bezer in the wilderness on the plateau belonging to the Reubenites, Ramoth in Gilead belonging to the Gadites, or Golan in Bashan belonging to the Manassites.
DEU	4	44	모세가 이스라엘 자손에게 선포한 율법이 이러하니라	And this is the law which Moses set before the children of Israel:	This is the law that Moses set before the Israelites.
DEU	4	45	이스라엘 자손이 애굽에서 나온 후에 증거하신 것과 규례와 법도를 모세가 선포하였으니	These are the testimonies, and the statutes, and the judgments, which Moses spake unto the children of Israel, after they came forth out of Egypt,	These are the testimonies, statutes, and ordinances that Moses proclaimed to them after they had come out of Egypt,
DEU	4	46	요단 동편 벳브올 맞은편 골짜기에서라 이 땅은 헤스본에 거하는 아모리 족속의 왕 시혼에게 속하였더니 모세와 이스라엘 자손이 애굽에서 나온 후에 그를 쳐서 멸하고	On this side Jordan, in the valley over against Beth–peor, in the land of Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt at Heshbon, whom Moses and the children of Israel smote, after they were come forth out of Egypt:	while they were in the valley across the Jordan facing Beth-peor in the land of Sihon king of the Amorites, who lived in Heshbon and was defeated by Moses and the Israelites after they had come out of Egypt.
DEU	4	47	그 땅을 기업으로 얻었고 또 바산 왕 옥의 땅을 얻었으니 그 두 사람은 아모리 족속의 왕으로서 요단 이편 해 돋는 편에 거하였었으며	And they possessed his land, and the land of Og king of Bashan, two kings of the Amorites, which were on this side Jordan toward the sunrising;	They took possession of the land belonging to Sihon and to Og king of Bashan—the two Amorite kings across the Jordan to the east—
DEU	4	48	그 얻은 땅은 아르논 골짜기 가의 아로엘에서부터 시온 산 곧 헤르몬 산까지요	From Aroer, which is by the bank of the river Arnon, even unto mount Sion, which is Hermon,	extending from Aroer on the rim of the Arnon Valley as far as Mount Siyon (that is, Hermon),
DEU	4	49	요단 이편 곧 그 동편 온 아라바니 비스가 산록 아래 아라바의 바다까지니라	And all the plain on this side Jordan eastward, even unto the sea of the plain, under the springs of Pisgah.	including all the Arabah on the east side of the Jordan and as far as the Sea of the Arabah, below the slopes of Pisgah.
DEU	5	1	모세가 온 이스라엘을 불러 그들에게 이르되 이스라엘아 오늘 내가 너희 귀에 말하는 규례와 법도를 듣고 그것을 배우며 지켜 행하라	And Moses called all Israel, and said unto them, Hear, O Israel, the statutes and judgments which I speak in your ears this day, that ye may learn them, and keep, and do them.	Then Moses summoned all Israel and said to them: Hear, O Israel, the statutes and ordinances that I declare in your hearing this day. Learn them and observe them carefully.
DEU	5	2	우리 하나님 여호와께서 호렙 산에서 우리와 언약을 세우셨나니	The Lord our God made a covenant with us in Horeb.	The LORD our God made a covenant with us at Horeb.
DEU	5	3	이 언약은 여호와께서 우리 열조와 세우신 것이 아니요 오늘날 여기 살아 있는 우리 곧 우리와 세우신 것이라	The Lord made not this covenant with our fathers, but with us, even us, who are all of us here alive this day.	He did not make this covenant with our fathers, but with all of us who are alive here today.
DEU	5	4	여호와께서 산 위 불 가운데서 너희와 대면하여 말씀하시매	The Lord talked with you face to face in the mount out of the midst of the fire,	The LORD spoke with you face to face out of the fire on the mountain.
DEU	5	5	그 때에 너희가 불을 두려워하여 산에 오르지 못하므로 내가 여호와와 너희 중간에 서서 여호와의 말씀을 너희에게 전하였노라 여호와께서 가라사대	(I stood between the Lord and you at that time, to shew you the word of the Lord: for ye were afraid by reason of the fire, and went not up into the mount;) saying,	At that time I was standing between the LORD and you to declare to you the word of the LORD, because you were afraid of the fire and would not go up the mountain. And He said:
DEU	5	6	나는 너를 애굽 땅에서 종 되었던 집에서 인도하여 낸 너희 하나님 여호와로라	I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.	“I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery.
DEU	5	7	나 외에는 위하는 신들을 네게 있게 말지니라	Thou shalt have none other gods before me.	You shall have no other gods before Me.
DEU	5	8	너는 자기를 위하여 새긴 우상을 만들지 말고 위로 하늘에 있는 것이나 아래로 땅에 있는 것이나 땅 밑 물 속에 있는 것의 아무 형상이든지 만들지 말며	Thou shalt not make thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the waters beneath the earth:	You shall not make for yourself an idol in the form of anything in the heavens above, on the earth below, or in the waters beneath.
DEU	5	9	그것들에게 절하지 말며 그것들을 섬기지 말라 나 여호와 너의 하나님은 질투하는 하나님인즉 나를 미워하는 자의 죄를 갚되 아비로부터 아들에게로 삼 사대까지 이르게 하거니와	Thou shalt not bow down thyself unto them, nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me,	You shall not bow down to them or worship them; for I, the LORD your God, am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers on their children to the third and fourth generations of those who hate Me,
DEU	5	10	나를 사랑하고 내 계명을 지키는 자에게는 천대까지 은혜를 베푸느니라	And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments.	but showing loving devotion to a thousand generations of those who love Me and keep My commandments.
DEU	5	11	너는 너의 하나님 여호와의 이름을 망령되이 일컫지 말라 나 여호와는 나의 이름을 망령되이 일컫는 자를 죄 없는 줄로 인정치 아니하리라	Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.	You shall not take the name of the LORD your God in vain, for the LORD will not leave anyone unpunished who takes His name in vain.
DEU	5	12	여호와 너의 하나님이 네게 명한 대로 안식일을 지켜 거룩하게 하라	Keep the sabbath day to sanctify it, as the Lord thy God hath commanded thee.	Observe the Sabbath day by keeping it holy, as the LORD your God has commanded you.
DEU	5	13	엿새 동안은 힘써 네 모든 일을 행할 것이나	Six days thou shalt labour, and do all thy work:	Six days you shall labor and do all your work,
DEU	5	14	제칠일은 너의 하나님 여호와의 안식인즉 너나 네 아들이나 네 딸이나 네 남종이나 네 여종이나 네 소나 네 나귀나 네 모든 육축이나 네 문 안에 유하는 객이라도 아무 일도 하지 말고 네 남종이나 네 여종으로 너 같이 안식하게 할지니라	But the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thine ox, nor thine ass, nor any of thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates; that thy manservant and thy maidservant may rest as well as thou.	but the seventh day is a Sabbath to the LORD your God, on which you must not do any work—neither you, nor your son or daughter, nor your manservant or maidservant, nor your ox or donkey or any of your livestock, nor the foreigner within your gates, so that your manservant and maidservant may rest as you do.
DEU	5	15	너는 기억하라 네가 애굽 땅에서 종이 되었더니 너의 하나님 여호와가 강한 손과 편 팔로 너를 거기서 인도하여 내었나니 그러므로 너의 하나님 여호와가 너를 명하여 안식일을 지키라 하느니라	And remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence through a mighty hand and by a stretched out arm: therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the sabbath day.	Remember that you were a slave in the land of Egypt, and that the LORD your God brought you out of there with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm. That is why the LORD your God has commanded you to keep the Sabbath day.
DEU	5	16	너는 너의 하나님 여호와의 명한 대로 네 부모를 공경하라 그리하면 너의 하나님 여호와가 네게 준 땅에서 네가 생명이 길고 복을 누리리라	Honour thy father and thy mother, as the Lord thy God hath commanded thee; that thy days may be prolonged, and that it may go well with thee, in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.	Honor your father and your mother, as the LORD your God has commanded you, so that your days may be long and that it may go well with you in the land that the LORD your God is giving you.
DEU	5	17	살인하지 말지니라	Thou shalt not kill.	You shall not murder.
DEU	5	18	간음하지도 말지니라	Neither shalt thou commit adultery.	You shall not commit adultery.
DEU	5	19	도적질하지도 말지니라	Neither shalt thou steal.	You shall not steal.
DEU	5	20	네 이웃에 대하여 거짓 증거하지도 말지니라	Neither shalt thou bear false witness against thy neighbour.	You shall not bear false witness against your neighbor.
DEU	5	21	네 이웃의 아내를 탐내지도 말지니라 네 이웃의 집이나 그의 밭이나 그의 남종이나 그의 여종이나 그의 소나 그의 나귀나 무릇 네 이웃의 소유를 탐내지 말지니라	Neither shalt thou desire thy neighbour’s wife, neither shalt thou covet thy neighbour’s house, his field, or his manservant, or his maidservant, his ox, or his ass, or any thing that is thy neighbour’s.	You shall not covet your neighbor’s wife. You shall not covet your neighbor’s house or field, or his manservant or maidservant, or his ox or donkey, or anything that belongs to your neighbor.”
DEU	5	22	여호와께서 이 모든 말씀을 산 위 불 가운데, 구름 가운데, 흑암 가운데서 큰 음성으로 너희 총회에 이르신 후에 더 말씀하지 아니하시고 그것을 두 돌판에 써서 내게 주셨느니라	These words the Lord spake unto all your assembly in the mount out of the midst of the fire, of the cloud, and of the thick darkness, with a great voice: and he added no more. And he wrote them in two tables of stone, and delivered them unto me.	The LORD spoke these commandments in a loud voice to your whole assembly out of the fire, the cloud, and the deep darkness on the mountain; He added nothing more. And He wrote them on two tablets of stone and gave them to me.
DEU	5	23	산이 불에 타며 캄캄한 가운데서 나오는 그 소리를 너희가 듣고 너희 지파의 두령과 장로들이 내게 나아와	And it came to pass, when ye heard the voice out of the midst of the darkness, (for the mountain did burn with fire,) that ye came near unto me, even all the heads of your tribes, and your elders;	And when you heard the voice out of the darkness while the mountain was blazing with fire, all the heads of your tribes and your elders approached me,
DEU	5	24	말하되 우리 하나님 여호와께서 그 영광과 위엄을 우리에게 보이시매 불 가운데서 나오는 음성을 우리가 들었고 하나님이 사람과 말씀하시되 그 사람이 생존하는 것을 오늘날 우리가 보았나이다	And ye said, Behold, the Lord our God hath shewed us his glory and his greatness, and we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire: we have seen this day that God doth talk with man, and he liveth.	and you said, “Behold, the LORD our God has shown us His glory and greatness, and we have heard His voice out of the fire. Today we have seen that a man can live even if God speaks with him.
DEU	5	25	이제 우리가 죽을 까닭이 무엇이니이까 이 큰 불이 우리를 삼킬 것이요 우리가 우리 하나님 여호와의 음성을 다시 들으면 죽을 것이라	Now therefore why should we die? for this great fire will consume us: if we hear the voice of the Lord our God any more, then we shall die.	But now, why should we die? For this great fire will consume us, and we will die, if we hear the voice of the LORD our God any longer.
DEU	5	26	무릇 육신을 가진 자가 우리처럼 사시는 하나님의 음성이 불 가운데서 발함을 듣고 생존한 자가 누구니이까	For who is there of all flesh, that hath heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as we have, and lived?	For who of all flesh has heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the fire, as we have, and survived?
DEU	5	27	당신은 가까이 나아가서 우리 하나님 여호와의 하시는 말씀을 다 듣고 우리 하나님 여호와의 당신에게 이르시는 것을 다 우리에게 전하소서 우리가 듣고 행하겠나이다 하였느니라	Go thou near, and hear all that the Lord our God shall say: and speak thou unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee; and we will hear it, and do it.	Go near and listen to all that the LORD our God says. Then you can tell us everything the LORD our God tells you; we will listen and obey.”
DEU	5	28	여호와께서 너희가 내게 말할 때에 너희의 말하는 소리를 들으신지라 여호와께서 내게 이르시되 이 백성이 네게 말하는 그 말소리를 내가 들은즉 그 말이 다 옳도다	And the Lord heard the voice of your words, when ye spake unto me; and the Lord said unto me, I have heard the voice of the words of this people, which they have spoken unto thee: they have well said all that they have spoken.	And the LORD heard the words you spoke to me, and He said to me, “I have heard the words that these people have spoken to you. They have done well in all that they have spoken.
DEU	5	29	다만 그들이 항상 이같은 마음을 품어 나를 경외하며 나의 모든 명령을 지켜서 그들과 그 자손이 영원히 복받기를 원하노라	O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my commandments always, that it might be well with them, and with their children for ever!	If only they had such a heart to fear Me and keep all My commandments always, so that it might be well with them and with their children forever.
DEU	5	30	가서 그들에게 각기 장막으로 돌아가라 이르고	Go say to them, Get you into your tents again.	Go and tell them: ‘Return to your tents.’
DEU	5	31	너는 여기 내 곁에 섰으라 내가 모든 명령과 규례와 법도를 네게 이르리니 너는 그것을 그들에게 가르쳐서 내가 그들에게 기업으로 주는 땅에서 그들로 이를 행하게 하라 하셨나니	But as for thee, stand thou here by me, and I will speak unto thee all the commandments, and the statutes, and the judgments, which thou shalt teach them, that they may do them in the land which I give them to possess it.	But you stand here with Me, that I may speak to you all the commandments and statutes and ordinances you are to teach them to follow in the land that I am giving them to possess.”
DEU	5	32	그런즉 너희 하나님 여호와께서 너희에게 명령하신 대로 너희는 삼가 행하여 좌로나 우로나 치우치지 말고	Ye shall observe to do therefore as the Lord your God hath commanded you: ye shall not turn aside to the right hand or to the left.	So be careful to do as the LORD your God has commanded you; you are not to turn aside to the right or to the left.
DEU	5	33	너희 하나님 여호와께서 너희에게 명하신 모든 도를 행하라 그리하면 너희가 삶을 얻고 복을 얻어서 너희의 얻은 땅에서 너희의 날이 장구하리라	Ye shall walk in all the ways which the Lord your God hath commanded you, that ye may live, and that it may be well with you, and that ye may prolong your days in the land which ye shall possess.	You must walk in all the ways that the LORD your God has commanded you, so that you may live and prosper and prolong your days in the land that you will possess.
DEU	6	1	이는 곧 너희 하나님 여호와께서 너희에게 가르치라 명하신 바 명령과 규례와 법도라 너희가 건너가서 얻을 땅에서 행할 것이니	Now these are the commandments, the statutes, and the judgments, which the Lord your God commanded to teach you, that ye might do them in the land whither ye go to possess it:	These are the commandments and statutes and ordinances that the LORD your God has instructed me to teach you to follow in the land that you are about to enter and possess,
DEU	6	2	곧 너와 네 아들과 네 손자로 평생에 네 하나님 여호와를 경외하며 내가 너희에게 명한 그 모든 규례와 명령을 지키게 하기 위한 것이며 또 네 날을 장구케 하기 위한 것이라	That thou mightest fear the Lord thy God, to keep all his statutes and his commandments, which I command thee, thou, and thy son, and thy son’s son, all the days of thy life; and that thy days may be prolonged.	so that you and your children and grandchildren may fear the LORD your God all the days of your lives by keeping all His statutes and commandments that I give you, and so that your days may be prolonged.
DEU	6	3	이스라엘아 듣고 삼가 그것을 행하라 그리하면 네가 복을 얻고 네 열조의 하나님 여호와께서 네게 허락하심 같이 젖과 꿀이 흐르는 땅에서 너의 수효가 심히 번성하리라	Hear therefore, O Israel, and observe to do it; that it may be well with thee, and that ye may increase mightily, as the Lord God of thy fathers hath promised thee, in the land that floweth with milk and honey.	Hear, O Israel, and be careful to observe them, so that you may prosper and multiply greatly in a land flowing with milk and honey, just as the LORD, the God of your fathers, has promised you.
DEU	6	4	이스라엘아 들으라 우리 하나님 여호와는 오직 하나인 여호와시니	Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord:	Hear, O Israel: The LORD our God, the LORD is One.
DEU	6	5	너는 마음을 다하고 성품을 다하고 힘을 다하여 네 하나님 여호와를 사랑하라	And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.	And you shall love the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength.
DEU	6	6	오늘날 내가 네게 명하는 이 말씀을 너는 마음에 새기고	And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart:	These words I am commanding you today are to be upon your hearts.
DEU	6	7	네 자녀에게 부지런히 가르치며 집에 앉았을 때에든지 길에 행할 때에든지 누웠을 때에든지 일어날 때에든지 이 말씀을 강론할 것이며	And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.	And you shall teach them diligently to your children and speak of them when you sit at home and when you walk along the road, when you lie down and when you get up.
DEU	6	8	너는 또 그것을 네 손목에 매어 기호를 삼으며 네 미간에 붙여 표를 삼고	And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes.	Tie them as reminders on your hands and bind them on your foreheads.
DEU	6	9	또 네 집 문설주와 바깥 문에 기록할지니라	And thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy gates.	Write them on the doorposts of your houses and on your gates.
DEU	6	10	네 하나님 여호와께서 네 열조 아브라함과 이삭과 야곱을 향하여 네게 주리라 맹세하신 땅으로 너로 들어가게 하시고 네가 건축하지 아니한 크고 아름다운 성읍을 얻게 하시며	And it shall be, when the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the land which he sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give thee great and goodly cities, which thou buildedst not,	And when the LORD your God brings you into the land He swore to your fathers, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that He would give you—a land with great and splendid cities that you did not build,
DEU	6	11	네가 채우지 아니한 아름다운 물건이 가득한 집을 얻게 하시며 네가 파지 아니한 우물을 얻게 하시며 네가 심지 아니한 포도원과 감람 나무를 얻게 하사 너로 배불리 먹게 하실 때에	And houses full of all good things, which thou filledst not, and wells digged, which thou diggedst not, vineyards and olive trees, which thou plantedst not; when thou shalt have eaten and be full;	with houses full of every good thing with which you did not fill them, with wells that you did not dig, and with vineyards and olive groves that you did not plant—and when you eat and are satisfied,
DEU	6	12	너는 조심하여 너를 애굽 땅 종 되었던 집에서 인도하여 내신 여호와를 잊지 말고	Then beware lest thou forget the Lord, which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.	be careful not to forget the LORD who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery.
DEU	6	13	네 하나님 여호와를 경외하며 섬기며 그 이름으로 맹세할 것이니라	Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shalt swear by his name.	Fear the LORD your God, serve Him only, and take your oaths in His name.
DEU	6	14	너희는 다른 신들 곧 네 사면에 있는 백성의 신들을 좇지 말라	Ye shall not go after other gods, of the gods of the people which are round about you;	Do not follow other gods, the gods of the peoples around you.
DEU	6	15	너희 중에 계신 너희 하나님 여호와는 질투하시는 하나님이신즉 너희 하나님 여호와께서 네게 진노하사 너를 지면에서 멸절시키실까 두려워하노라	(For the Lord thy God is a jealous God among you) lest the anger of the Lord thy God be kindled against thee, and destroy thee from off the face of the earth.	For the LORD your God, who is among you, is a jealous God. Otherwise the anger of the LORD your God will be kindled against you, and He will wipe you off the face of the earth.
DEU	6	16	너희가 맛사에서 시험한 것 같이 너희의 하나님 여호와를 시험하지 말고	Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God, as ye tempted him in Massah.	Do not test the LORD your God as you tested Him at Massah.
DEU	6	17	너희의 하나님 여호와께서 너희에게 명하신 명령과 증거하신 것과 규례를 삼가 지키며	Ye shall diligently keep the commandments of the Lord your God, and his testimonies, and his statutes, which he hath commanded thee.	You are to diligently keep the commandments of the LORD your God and the testimonies and statutes He has given you.
DEU	6	18	여호와의 보시기에 정직하고 선량한 일을 행하라 그리하면 네가 복을 얻고 여호와께서 네 열조에게 맹세하사 네 대적을 몰수히 네 앞에서 쫓아내리라 하신 아름다운 땅을 들어가서 얻으리니 여호와의 말씀과 같으리라	And thou shalt do that which is right and good in the sight of the Lord: that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest go in and possess the good land which the Lord sware unto thy fathers,	Do what is right and good in the sight of the LORD, so that it may be well with you and that you may enter and possess the good land that the LORD your God swore to give your fathers,
DEU	6	19	(앞절과 동일)	To cast out all thine enemies from before thee, as the Lord hath spoken.	driving out all your enemies before you, as the LORD has said.
DEU	6	20	후일에 네 아들이 네게 묻기를 우리 하나님 여호와의 명하신 증거와 말씀과 규례와 법도가 무슨 뜻이뇨 하거든	And when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, What mean the testimonies, and the statutes, and the judgments, which the Lord our God hath commanded you?	In the future, when your son asks, “What is the meaning of the decrees and statutes and ordinances that the LORD our God has commanded you?”
DEU	6	21	너는 네 아들에게 이르기를 우리가 옛적에 애굽에서 바로의 종이 되었더니 여호와께서 권능의 손으로 우리를 애굽에서 인도하여 내셨나니	Then thou shalt say unto thy son, We were Pharaoh’s bondmen in Egypt; and the Lord brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand:	then you are to tell him, “We were slaves of Pharaoh in Egypt, but the LORD brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand.
DEU	6	22	곧 여호와께서 우리의 목전에서 크고 두려운 이적과 기사를 애굽과 바로와 그 온 집에 베푸시고	And the Lord shewed signs and wonders, great and sore, upon Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his household, before our eyes:	Before our eyes the LORD inflicted great and devastating signs and wonders on Egypt, on Pharaoh, and on all his household.
DEU	6	23	우리 열조에게 맹세하신 땅으로 우리에게 주어 들어가게 하시려고 우리를 거기서 인도하여 내시고	And he brought us out from thence, that he might bring us in, to give us the land which he sware unto our fathers.	But He brought us out from there to lead us in and give us the land that He had sworn to our fathers.
DEU	6	24	여호와께서 우리에게 이 모든 규례를 지키라 명하셨으니 이는 우리로 우리 하나님 여호와를 경외하여 항상 복을 누리게 하기 위하심이며 또 여호와께서 우리로 오늘날과 같이 생활하게 하려 하심이라	And the Lord commanded us to do all these statutes, to fear the Lord our God, for our good always, that he might preserve us alive, as it is at this day.	And the LORD commanded us to observe all these statutes and to fear the LORD our God, that we may always be prosperous and preserved, as we are to this day.
DEU	6	25	우리가 그 명하신 대로 이 모든 명령을 우리 하나님 여호와 앞에서 삼가 지키면 그것이 곧 우리의 의로움이니라 할지니라	And it shall be our righteousness, if we observe to do all these commandments before the Lord our God, as he hath commanded us.	And if we are careful to observe every one of these commandments before the LORD our God, as He has commanded us, then that will be our righteousness.”
DEU	7	1	네 하나님 여호와께서 너를 인도하사 네가 가서 얻을 땅으로 들이시고 네 앞에서 여러 민족 헷 족속과 기르가스 족속과 아모리 족속과 가나안 족속과 브리스 족속과 히위 족속과 여부스 족속 곧 너보다 많고 힘이 있는 일곱 족속을 쫓아내실 때에	When the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the land whither thou goest to possess it, and hath cast out many nations before thee, the Hittites, and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, seven nations greater and mightier than thou;	When the LORD your God brings you into the land that you are entering to possess, and He drives out before you many nations—the Hittites, Girgashites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites, seven nations larger and stronger than you—
DEU	7	2	네 하나님 여호와께서 그들을 네게 붙여 너로 치게 하시리니 그 때에 너는 그들을 진멸할 것이라 그들과 무슨 언약도 말 것이요 그들을 불쌍히 여기지도 말 것이며	And when the Lord thy God shall deliver them before thee; thou shalt smite them, and utterly destroy them; thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor shew mercy unto them:	and when the LORD your God has delivered them over to you to defeat them, then you must devote them to complete destruction. Make no treaty with them and show them no mercy.
DEU	7	3	또 그들과 혼인하지 말지니 네 딸을 그 아들에게 주지 말 것이요 그 딸로 네 며느리를 삼지 말 것은	Neither shalt thou make marriages with them; thy daughter thou shalt not give unto his son, nor his daughter shalt thou take unto thy son.	Do not intermarry with them. Do not give your daughters to their sons or take their daughters for your sons,
DEU	7	4	그가 네 아들을 유혹하여 그로 여호와를 떠나고 다른 신들을 섬기게 하므로 여호와께서 너희에게 진노하사 갑자기 너희를 멸하실 것임이니라	For they will turn away thy son from following me, that they may serve other gods: so will the anger of the Lord be kindled against you, and destroy thee suddenly.	because they will turn your sons away from following Me to serve other gods. Then the anger of the LORD will burn against you, and He will swiftly destroy you.
DEU	7	5	오직 너희가 그들에게 행할 것은 이러하니 그들의 단을 헐며 주상을 깨뜨리며 아세라 목상을 찍으며 조각한 우상들을 불사를 것이니라	But thus shall ye deal with them; ye shall destroy their altars, and break down their images, and cut down their groves, and burn their graven images with fire.	Instead, this is what you are to do to them: tear down their altars, smash their sacred pillars, cut down their Asherah poles, and burn their idols in the fire.
DEU	7	6	너는 여호와 네 하나님의 성민이라 네 하나님 여호와께서 지상 만민 중에서 너를 자기 기업의 백성으로 택하셨나니	For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God: the Lord thy God hath chosen thee to be a special people unto himself, above all people that are upon the face of the earth.	For you are a people holy to the LORD your God. The LORD your God has chosen you to be a people for His prized possession out of all peoples on the face of the earth.
DEU	7	7	여호와께서 너희를 기뻐하시고 너희를 택하심은 너희가 다른 민족보다 수효가 많은 연고가 아니라 너희는 모든 민족 중에 가장 적으니라	The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye were more in number than any people; for ye were the fewest of all people:	The LORD did not set His affection on you and choose you because you were more numerous than the other peoples, for you were the fewest of all peoples.
DEU	7	8	여호와께서 다만 너희를 사랑하심을 인하여 또는 너희 열조에게 하신 맹세를 지키려 하심을 인하여 자기의 권능의 손으로 너희를 인도하여 내시되 너희를 그 종 되었던 집에서 애굽 왕 바로의 손에서 속량하셨나니	But because the Lord loved you, and because he would keep the oath which he had sworn unto your fathers, hath the Lord brought you out with a mighty hand, and redeemed you out of the house of bondmen, from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt.	But because the LORD loved you and kept the oath He swore to your fathers, He brought you out with a mighty hand and redeemed you from the house of slavery, from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt.
DEU	7	9	그런즉 너는 알라 오직 네 하나님 여호와는 하나님이시요 신실하신 하나님이시라 그를 사랑하고 그 계명을 지키는 자에게는 천 대까지 그 언약을 이행하시며 인애를 베푸시되	Know therefore that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God, which keepeth covenant and mercy with them that love him and keep his commandments to a thousand generations;	Know therefore that the LORD your God is God, the faithful God who keeps His covenant of loving devotion for a thousand generations of those who love Him and keep His commandments.
DEU	7	10	그를 미워하는 자에게는 당장에 보응하여 멸하시나니 여호와는 자기를 미워하는 자에게 지체하지 아니하시고 당장에 그에게 보응하시느니라	And repayeth them that hate him to their face, to destroy them: he will not be slack to him that hateth him, he will repay him to his face.	But those who hate Him He repays to their faces with destruction; He will not hesitate to repay to his face the one who hates Him.
DEU	7	11	그런즉 너는 오늘날 내가 네게 명하는 명령과 규례와 법도를 지켜 행할지니라	Thou shalt therefore keep the commandments, and the statutes, and the judgments, which I command thee this day, to do them.	So keep the commandments and statutes and ordinances that I am giving you to follow this day.
DEU	7	12	너희가 이 모든 법도를 듣고 지켜 행하면 네 하나님 여호와께서 네 열조에게 맹세하신 언약을 지켜 네게 인애를 베푸실 것이라	Wherefore it shall come to pass, if ye hearken to these judgments, and keep, and do them, that the Lord thy God shall keep unto thee the covenant and the mercy which he sware unto thy fathers:	If you listen to these ordinances and keep them carefully, then the LORD your God will keep His covenant and the loving devotion that He swore to your fathers.
DEU	7	13	곧 너를 사랑하시고 복을 주사 너로 번성케 하시되 네게 주리라고 네 열조에게 맹세하신 땅에서 네 소생에게 은혜를 베푸시며 네 토지 소산과 곡식과 포도주와 기름을 풍성케 하시고 네 소와 양을 번식케 하시리니	And he will love thee, and bless thee, and multiply thee: he will also bless the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy land, thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep, in the land which he sware unto thy fathers to give thee.	He will love you and bless you and multiply you. He will bless the fruit of your womb and the produce of your land—your grain, new wine, and oil, the young of your herds and the lambs of your flocks—in the land that He swore to your fathers to give you.
DEU	7	14	네가 복을 받음이 만민보다 우승하여 너희 중의 남녀와 너희 짐승의 암수에 생육하지 못함이 없을 것이며	Thou shalt be blessed above all people: there shall not be male or female barren among you, or among your cattle.	You will be blessed above all peoples; among you there will be no barren man or woman or livestock.
DEU	7	15	여호와께서 또 모든 질병을 네게서 멀리하사 너희가 아는 바 그 애굽의 악질이 네게 임하지 않게 하시고 너를 미워하는 모든 자에게 임하게 하실 것이라	And the Lord will take away from thee all sickness, and will put none of the evil diseases of Egypt, which thou knowest, upon thee; but will lay them upon all them that hate thee.	And the LORD will remove from you all sickness. He will not lay upon you any of the terrible diseases you knew in Egypt, but He will inflict them on all who hate you.
DEU	7	16	네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 붙이신 모든 민족을 네 눈이 긍휼히 보지 말고 진멸하고 그 신을 섬기지 말라 그것이 네게 올무가 되리라	And thou shalt consume all the people which the Lord thy God shall deliver thee; thine eye shall have no pity upon them: neither shalt thou serve their gods; for that will be a snare unto thee.	You must destroy all the peoples the LORD your God will deliver to you. Do not look on them with pity. Do not worship their gods, for that will be a snare to you.
DEU	7	17	네가 혹시 심중에 이르기를 이 민족들이 나보다 많으니 내가 어찌 그를 쫓아 낼 수 있으리요 하리라마는	If thou shalt say in thine heart, These nations are more than I; how can I dispossess them?	You may say in your heart, “These nations are greater than we are; how can we drive them out?”
DEU	7	18	그들을 두려워 말고 네 하나님 여호와께서 바로와 온 애굽에 행하신 것을 잘 기억하되	Thou shalt not be afraid of them: but shalt well remember what the Lord thy God did unto Pharaoh, and unto all Egypt;	But do not be afraid of them. Be sure to remember what the LORD your God did to Pharaoh and all Egypt:
DEU	7	19	네 하나님 여호와께서 너를 인도하여 내실 때에 네가 목도한 큰 시험과 이적과 기사와 강한 손과 편 팔을 기억하라 그와 같이 네 하나님 여호와께서 네가 두려워하는 모든 민족에게 행하실 것이요	The great temptations which thine eyes saw, and the signs, and the wonders, and the mighty hand, and the stretched out arm, whereby the Lord thy God brought thee out: so shall the Lord thy God do unto all the people of whom thou art afraid.	the great trials that you saw, the signs and wonders, and the mighty hand and outstretched arm by which the LORD your God brought you out. The LORD your God will do the same to all the peoples you now fear.
DEU	7	20	네 하나님 여호와께서 또 왕벌을 그들 중에 보내어 그들의 남은 자와 너를 피하여 숨은 자를 멸하시리니	Moreover the Lord thy God will send the hornet among them, until they that are left, and hide themselves from thee, be destroyed.	Moreover, the LORD your God will send the hornet against them until even the survivors hiding from you have perished.
DEU	7	21	너는 그들을 두려워 말라 너희 하나님 여호와 곧 크고 두려운 하나님이 너희 중에 계심이니라	Thou shalt not be affrighted at them: for the Lord thy God is among you, a mighty God and terrible.	Do not be terrified by them, for the LORD your God, who is among you, is a great and awesome God.
DEU	7	22	네 하나님 여호와께서 이 민족들을 네 앞에서 점점 쫓아내시리니 너는 그들을 급히 멸하지 말라 두렵건대 들짐승이 번성하여 너를 해할까 하노라	And the Lord thy God will put out those nations before thee by little and little: thou mayest not consume them at once, lest the beasts of the field increase upon thee.	The LORD your God will drive out these nations before you little by little. You will not be enabled to eliminate them all at once, or the wild animals would multiply around you.
DEU	7	23	네 하나님 여호와께서 그들을 네게 붙이시고 그들을 크게 요란케 하여 필경은 진멸하시고	But the Lord thy God shall deliver them unto thee, and shall destroy them with a mighty destruction, until they be destroyed.	But the LORD your God will give them over to you and throw them into great confusion, until they are destroyed.
DEU	7	24	그들의 왕들을 네 손에 붙이시리니 너는 그 이름을 천하에서 제하여 버리라 너를 당할 자가 없이 네가 필경은 그들을 진멸하리라	And he shall deliver their kings into thine hand, and thou shalt destroy their name from under heaven: there shall no man be able to stand before thee, until thou have destroyed them.	He will hand their kings over to you, and you will wipe out their names from under heaven. No one will be able to stand against you; you will annihilate them.
DEU	7	25	너는 그들의 조각한 신상들을 불사르고 그것에 입힌 은이나 금을 탐내지 말며 취하지 말라 두렵건대 네가 그것으로 인하여 올무에 들까 하노니 이는 네 하나님 여호와의 가증히 여기시는 것임이니라	The graven images of their gods shall ye burn with fire: thou shalt not desire the silver or gold that is on them, nor take it unto thee, lest thou be snared therein: for it is an abomination to the Lord thy God.	You must burn up the images of their gods; do not covet the silver and gold that is on them or take it for yourselves, or you will be ensnared by it; for it is detestable to the LORD your God.
DEU	7	26	너는 가증한 것을 네 집에 들이지 말라 너도 그와 같이 진멸당할 것이 될까 하노라 너는 그것을 극히 꺼리며 심히 미워하라 그것은 진멸당할 것임이니라	Neither shalt thou bring an abomination into thine house, lest thou be a cursed thing like it: but thou shalt utterly detest it, and thou shalt utterly abhor it; for it is a cursed thing.	And you must not bring any detestable thing into your house, or you, like it, will be set apart for destruction. You are to utterly detest and abhor it, because it is set apart for destruction.
DEU	8	1	내가 오늘날 명하는 모든 명령을 너희는 지켜 행하라 그리하면 너희가 살고 번성하고 여호와께서 너희의 열조에게 맹세하신 땅에 들어가서 그것을 얻으리라	All the commandments which I command thee this day shall ye observe to do, that ye may live, and multiply, and go in and possess the land which the Lord sware unto your fathers.	You must carefully follow every commandment I am giving you today, so that you may live and multiply, and enter and possess the land that the LORD swore to give your fathers.
DEU	8	2	네 하나님 여호와께서 이 사십 년 동안에 너로 광야의 길을 걷게 하신 것을 기억하라 이는 너를 낮추시며 너를 시험하사 네 마음이 어떠한지 그 명령을 지키는지 아니 지키는지 알려 하심이라	And thou shalt remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee, to know what was in thine heart, whether thou wouldest keep his commandments, or no.	Remember that these forty years the LORD your God led you all the way in the wilderness, so that He might humble you and test you in order to know what was in your heart, whether or not you would keep His commandments.
DEU	8	3	너를 낮추시며 너로 주리게 하시며 또 너도 알지 못하며 네 열조도 알지 못하던 만나를 네게 먹이신 것은 사람이 떡으로만 사는 것이 아니요 여호와의 입에서 나오는 모든 말씀으로 사는 줄을 너로 알게 하려 하심이니라	And he humbled thee, and suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee with manna, which thou knewest not, neither did thy fathers know; that he might make thee know that man doth not live by bread only, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord doth man live.	He humbled you, and in your hunger He gave you manna to eat, which neither you nor your fathers had known, so that you might understand that man does not live on bread alone, but on every word that comes from the mouth of the LORD.
DEU	8	4	이 사십 년 동안에 네 의복이 해어지지 아니하였고 네 발이 부릍지 아니하였느니라	Thy raiment waxed not old upon thee, neither did thy foot swell, these forty years.	Your clothing did not wear out and your feet did not swell during these forty years.
DEU	8	5	너는 사람이 그 아들을 징계함 같이 네 하나님 여호와께서 너를 징계하시는 줄 마음에 생각하고	Thou shalt also consider in thine heart, that, as a man chasteneth his son, so the Lord thy God chasteneth thee.	So know in your heart that just as a man disciplines his son, so the LORD your God disciplines you.
DEU	8	6	네 하나님 여호와의 명령을 지켜 그 도를 행하며 그를 경외할지니라	Therefore thou shalt keep the commandments of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to fear him.	Therefore you shall keep the commandments of the LORD your God, walking in His ways and fearing Him.
DEU	8	7	네 하나님 여호와께서 너를 아름다운 땅에 이르게 하시나니 그곳은 골짜기에든지 산지에든지 시내와 분천과 샘이 흐르고	For the Lord thy God bringeth thee into a good land, a land of brooks of water, of fountains and depths that spring out of valleys and hills;	For the LORD your God is bringing you into a good land, a land of brooks and fountains and springs that flow through the valleys and hills;
DEU	8	8	밀과 보리의 소산지요 포도와 무화과와 석류와 감람들의 나무와 꿀의 소산지라	A land of wheat, and barley, and vines, and fig trees, and pomegranates; a land of oil olive, and honey;	a land of wheat, barley, vines, fig trees, and pomegranates; a land of olive oil and honey;
DEU	8	9	너의 먹는 식물의 결핍함이 없고 네게 아무 부족함이 없는 땅이며 그 땅의 돌은 철이요 산에서는 동을 캘 것이라	A land wherein thou shalt eat bread without scarceness, thou shalt not lack any thing in it; a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou mayest dig brass.	a land where you will eat food without scarcity, where you will lack nothing; a land whose rocks are iron and whose hills are ready to be mined for copper.
DEU	8	10	네가 먹어서 배불리고 네 하나님 여호와께서 옥토로 네게 주셨음을 인하여 그를 찬송하리라	When thou hast eaten and art full, then thou shalt bless the Lord thy God for the good land which he hath given thee.	When you eat and are satisfied, you are to bless the LORD your God for the good land that He has given you.
DEU	8	11	내가 오늘날 네게 명하는 여호와의 명령과 법도와 규례를 지키지 아니하고 네 하나님 여호와를 잊어버리게 되지 않도록 삼갈지어다	Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, in not keeping his commandments, and his judgments, and his statutes, which I command thee this day:	Be careful not to forget the LORD your God by failing to keep His commandments and ordinances and statutes, which I am giving you this day.
DEU	8	12	네가 먹어서 배불리고 아름다운 집을 짓고 거하게 되며	Lest when thou hast eaten and art full, and hast built goodly houses, and dwelt therein;	Otherwise, when you eat and are satisfied, when you build fine houses in which to dwell,
DEU	8	13	또 네 우양이 번성하며 네 은금이 증식되며 네 소유가 다 풍부하게 될 때에	And when thy herds and thy flocks multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and all that thou hast is multiplied;	and when your herds and flocks grow large and your silver and gold increase and all that you have is multiplied,
DEU	8	14	두렵건대 네 마음이 교만하여 네 하나님 여호와를 잊어버릴까 하노라 여호와는 너를 애굽 땅 종 되었던 집에서 이끌어 내시고	Then thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God, which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage;	then your heart will become proud, and you will forget the LORD your God who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery.
DEU	8	15	너를 인도하여 그 광대하고 위험한 광야 곧 불뱀과 전갈이 있고 물이 없는 간조한 땅을 지나게 하셨으며 또 너를 위하여 물을 굳은 반석에서 내셨으며	Who led thee through that great and terrible wilderness, wherein were fiery serpents, and scorpions, and drought, where there was no water; who brought thee forth water out of the rock of flint;	He led you through the vast and terrifying wilderness with its venomous snakes and scorpions, a thirsty and waterless land. He brought you water from the rock of flint.
DEU	8	16	네 열조도 알지 못하던 만나를 광야에서 네게 먹이셨나니 이는 다 너를 낮추시며 너를 시험하사 마침내 네게 복을 주려 하심이었느니라	Who fed thee in the wilderness with manna, which thy fathers knew not, that he might humble thee, and that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy latter end;	He fed you in the wilderness with manna that your fathers had not known, in order to humble you and test you, so that in the end He might cause you to prosper.
DEU	8	17	또 두렵건대 네가 마음에 이르기를 내 능과 내 손의 힘으로 내가 이 재물을 얻었다 할까 하노라	And thou say in thine heart, My power and the might of mine hand hath gotten me this wealth.	You might say in your heart, “The power and strength of my hands have made this wealth for me.”
DEU	8	18	네 하나님 여호와를 기억하라 그가 네게 재물 얻을 능을 주셨음이라 이같이 하심은 네 열조에게 맹세하신 언약을 오늘과 같이 이루려 하심이니라	But thou shalt remember the Lord thy God: for it is he that giveth thee power to get wealth, that he may establish his covenant which he sware unto thy fathers, as it is this day.	But remember that it is the LORD your God who gives you the power to gain wealth, in order to confirm His covenant that He swore to your fathers even to this day.
DEU	8	19	네가 만일 네 하나님 여호와를 잊어버리고 다른 신들을 좇아 그들을 섬기며 그들에게 절하면 내가 너희에게 증거하노니 너희가 정녕히 멸망할 것이라	And it shall be, if thou do at all forget the Lord thy God, and walk after other gods, and serve them, and worship them, I testify against you this day that ye shall surely perish.	If you ever forget the LORD your God and go after other gods to worship and bow down to them, I testify against you today that you will surely perish.
DEU	8	20	여호와께서 너희의 앞에서 멸망시키신 민족들 같이 너희도 멸망하리니 이는 너희가 너희 하나님 여호와의 소리를 청종치 아니함이니라	As the nations which the Lord destroyeth before your face, so shall ye perish; because ye would not be obedient unto the voice of the Lord your God.	Like the nations that the LORD has destroyed before you, so you will perish if you do not obey the LORD your God.
DEU	9	1	이스라엘아 들으라 네가 오늘 요단을 건너 너보다 강대한 나라들로 들어가서 그것을 얻으리니 그 성읍들은 크고 성벽은 하늘에 닿았으며	Hear, O Israel: Thou art to pass over Jordan this day, to go in to possess nations greater and mightier than thyself, cities great and fenced up to heaven,	Hear, O Israel: Today you are about to cross the Jordan to go in and dispossess nations greater and stronger than you, with large cities fortified to the heavens.
DEU	9	2	그 백성은 네가 아는바 장대한 아낙 자손이라 그에게 대한 말을 네가 들었나니 이르기를 누가 아낙 자손을 능히 당하리요 하거니와	A people great and tall, the children of the Anakims, whom thou knowest, and of whom thou hast heard say, Who can stand before the children of Anak!	The people are strong and tall, the descendants of the Anakim. You know about them, and you have heard it said, “Who can stand up to the sons of Anak?”
DEU	9	3	오늘날 너는 알라 네 하나님 여호와께서 맹렬한 불과 같이 네 앞에 나아가신즉 여호와께서 그들을 파하사 네 앞에 엎드러지게 하시리니 여호와께서 네게 말씀하신 것 같이 너는 그들을 쫓아내며 속히 그들을 멸할 것이라	Understand therefore this day, that the Lord thy God is he which goeth over before thee; as a consuming fire he shall destroy them, and he shall bring them down before thy face: so shalt thou drive them out, and destroy them quickly, as the Lord hath said unto thee.	But understand that today the LORD your God goes across ahead of you as a consuming fire; He will destroy them and subdue them before you. And you will drive them out and annihilate them swiftly, as the LORD has promised you.
DEU	9	4	네 하나님 여호와께서 그들을 네 앞에서 쫓아내신 후에 네가 심중에 이르기를 나의 의로움을 인하여 여호와께서 나를 이 땅으로 인도하여 들여서 그것을 얻게 하셨다 하지 말라 실상은 이 민족들이 악함을 인하여 여호와께서 그들을 네 앞에서 쫓아내심이니라	Speak not thou in thine heart, after that the Lord thy God hath cast them out from before thee, saying, For my righteousness the Lord hath brought me in to possess this land: but for the wickedness of these nations the Lord doth drive them out from before thee.	When the LORD your God has driven them out before you, do not say in your heart, “Because of my righteousness the LORD has brought me in to possess this land.” Rather, the LORD is driving out these nations before you because of their wickedness.
DEU	9	5	네가 가서 그 땅을 얻음은 너의 의로움을 인함도 아니며 네 마음이 정직함을 인함도 아니요 이 민족들의 악함을 인하여 네 하나님 여호와께서 그들을 네 앞에서 쫓아내심이라 여호와께서 이같이 하심은 네 열조 아브라함과 이삭과 야곱에게 하신 맹세를 이루려 하심이니라	Not for thy righteousness, or for the uprightness of thine heart, dost thou go to possess their land: but for the wickedness of these nations the Lord thy God doth drive them out from before thee, and that he may perform the word which the Lord sware unto thy fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.	It is not because of your righteousness or uprightness of heart that you are going in to possess their land, but it is because of their wickedness that the LORD your God is driving out these nations before you, to keep the promise He swore to your fathers, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
DEU	9	6	그러므로 네가 알 것은 네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 이 아름다운 땅을 기업으로 주신 것이 네 의로움을 인함이 아니니라 너는 목이 곧은 백성이니라	Understand therefore, that the Lord thy God giveth thee not this good land to possess it for thy righteousness; for thou art a stiffnecked people.	Understand, then, that it is not because of your righteousness that the LORD your God is giving you this good land to possess, for you are a stiff-necked people.
DEU	9	7	너는 광야에서 네 하나님 여호와를 격노케 하던 일을 잊지 말고 기억하라 네가 애굽 땅에서 나오던 날부터 이곳에 이르기까지 늘 여호와를 거역하였으되	Remember, and forget not, how thou provokedst the Lord thy God to wrath in the wilderness: from the day that thou didst depart out of the land of Egypt, until ye came unto this place, ye have been rebellious against the Lord.	Remember this, and never forget how you provoked the LORD your God in the wilderness. From the day you left the land of Egypt until you reached this place, you have been rebelling against the LORD.
DEU	9	8	호렙 산에서 너희가 여호와를 격노케 하였으므로 여호와께서 진노하사 너희를 멸하려 하셨느니라	Also in Horeb ye provoked the Lord to wrath, so that the Lord was angry with you to have destroyed you.	At Horeb you provoked the LORD, and He was angry enough to destroy you.
DEU	9	9	그 때에 내가 돌판들 곧 여호와께서 너희와 세우신 언약의 돌판들을 받으려고 산에 올라가서 사십 주야를 산에 거하며 떡도 먹지 아니하고 물도 마시지 아니하였더니	When I was gone up into the mount to receive the tables of stone, even the tables of the covenant which the Lord made with you, then I abode in the mount forty days and forty nights, I neither did eat bread nor drink water:	When I went up on the mountain to receive the tablets of stone, the tablets of the covenant that the LORD made with you, I stayed on the mountain forty days and forty nights. I ate no bread and drank no water.
DEU	9	10	여호와께서 두 돌판을 네게 주셨나니 그 판의 글은 하나님이 친수로 기록하신 것이요 너희 총회 날에 여호와께서 산상 불 가운데서 너희에게 이르신 모든 말씀이니라	And the Lord delivered unto me two tables of stone written with the finger of God; and on them was written according to all the words, which the Lord spake with you in the mount out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly.	Then the LORD gave me the two stone tablets, inscribed by the finger of God with the exact words that the LORD spoke to you out of the fire on the mountain on the day of the assembly.
DEU	9	11	사십 주야가 지난 후에 여호와께서 내게 돌판 곧 언약의 두 돌판을 주시고	And it came to pass at the end of forty days and forty nights, that the Lord gave me the two tables of stone, even the tables of the covenant.	And at the end of forty days and forty nights, the LORD gave me the two stone tablets, the tablets of the covenant.
DEU	9	12	내게 이르시되 일어나 여기서 속히 내려가라 네가 애굽에서 인도하여 낸 내 백성이 스스로 부패하여 내가 그들에게 명한 도를 속히 떠나 자기를 위하여 우상을 부어 만들었느니라	And the Lord said unto me, Arise, get thee down quickly from hence; for thy people which thou hast brought forth out of Egypt have corrupted themselves; they are quickly turned aside out of the way which I commanded them; they have made them a molten image.	And the LORD said to me, “Get up and go down from here at once, for your people, whom you brought out of Egypt, have corrupted themselves. How quickly they have turned aside from the way that I commanded them! They have made for themselves a molten image.”
DEU	9	13	여호와께서 또 내게 일러 가라사대 내가 이 백성을 보았노라 보라 이는 목이 곧은 백성이니라	Furthermore the Lord spake unto me, saying, I have seen this people, and, behold, it is a stiffnecked people:	The LORD also said to me, “I have seen this people, and they are indeed a stiff-necked people.
DEU	9	14	나를 막지 말라 내가 그들을 멸하여 그 이름을 천하에서 도말하고 너로 그들보다 강대한 나라가 되게 하리라 하시기로	Let me alone, that I may destroy them, and blot out their name from under heaven: and I will make of thee a nation mightier and greater than they.	Leave Me alone, so that I may destroy them and blot out their name from under heaven. Then I will make you into a nation mightier and greater than they are.”
DEU	9	15	내가 돌이켜 산에서 내려 오는데 산에는 불이 붙었고 언약의 두 돌판은 내 손에 있었느니라	So I turned and came down from the mount, and the mount burned with fire: and the two tables of the covenant were in my two hands.	So I went back down the mountain while it was blazing with fire, with the two tablets of the covenant in my hands.
DEU	9	16	내가 본즉 너희가 너희 하나님 여호와께 범죄하여 자기를 위하여 송아지를 부어 만들어서 급속히 여호와의 명하신 도를 떠났기로	And I looked, and, behold, ye had sinned against the Lord your God, and had made you a molten calf: ye had turned aside quickly out of the way which the Lord had commanded you.	And I saw how you had sinned against the LORD your God; you had made for yourselves a molten calf. You had turned aside quickly from the way that the LORD had commanded you.
DEU	9	17	내가 그 두 돌판을 내 두 손에서 들어 던져 너희의 목전에서 깨뜨렸었노라	And I took the two tables, and cast them out of my two hands, and brake them before your eyes.	So I took the two tablets and threw them out of my hands, shattering them before your eyes.
DEU	9	18	그리고 내가 전과 같이 사십 주야를 여호와 앞에 엎드려서 떡도 먹지 아니하고 물도 마시지 아니하였으니 이는 너희가 여호와의 목전에 악을 행하여 그를 격노케 하여 크게 죄를 얻었음이라	And I fell down before the Lord, as at the first, forty days and forty nights: I did neither eat bread, nor drink water, because of all your sins which ye sinned, in doing wickedly in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger.	Then I fell down before the LORD for forty days and forty nights, as I had done the first time. I did not eat bread or drink water because of all the sin you had committed in doing what was evil in the sight of the LORD and provoking Him to anger.
DEU	9	19	여호와께서 심히 분노하사 너희를 멸하려 하셨으므로 내가 두려워 하였었노라 그러나 여호와께서 그 때에도 내 말을 들으셨고	For I was afraid of the anger and hot displeasure, wherewith the Lord was wroth against you to destroy you. But the Lord hearkened unto me at that time also.	For I was afraid of the anger and wrath that the LORD had directed against you, enough to destroy you. But the LORD listened to me this time as well.
DEU	9	20	여호와께서 또 아론에게 진노하사 그를 멸하려 하셨으므로 내가 그 때에도 아론을 위하여 기도하고	And the Lord was very angry with Aaron to have destroyed him: and I prayed for Aaron also the same time.	The LORD was angry enough with Aaron to destroy him, but at that time I also prayed for Aaron.
DEU	9	21	너희의 죄 곧 너희의 만든 송아지를 취하여 불살라 찧고 티끌 같이 가늘게 갈아 그 가루를 산에서 흘러내리는 시내에 뿌렸었느니라	And I took your sin, the calf which ye had made, and burnt it with fire, and stamped it, and ground it very small, even until it was as small as dust: and I cast the dust thereof into the brook that descended out of the mount.	And I took that sinful thing, the calf you had made, and burned it in the fire. Then I crushed it and ground it to powder as fine as dust, and I cast it into the stream that came down from the mountain.
DEU	9	22	너희가 다베라와 맛사와 기브롯 핫다아와에서도 여호와를 격노케 하였느니라	And at Taberah, and at Massah, and at Kibroth–hattaavah, ye provoked the Lord to wrath.	You continued to provoke the LORD at Taberah, at Massah, and at Kibroth-hattaavah.
DEU	9	23	여호와께서 너희를 가데스 바네아에서 떠나게 하실 때에 이르시를 너희는 올라가서 내가 너희에게 준 땅을 얻으라 하시되 너희가 너희 하나님 여호와의 명령을 거역하여 믿지 아니하고 그 말씀을 듣지 아니하였나니	Likewise when the Lord sent you from Kadesh–barnea, saying, Go up and possess the land which I have given you; then ye rebelled against the commandment of the Lord your God, and ye believed him not, nor hearkened to his voice.	And when the LORD sent you out from Kadesh-barnea, He said, “Go up and possess the land that I have given you.” But you rebelled against the command of the LORD your God. You neither believed Him nor obeyed Him.
DEU	9	24	내가 너희를 알던 날부터 오므로 너희가 항상 여호와를 거역하였느니라	Ye have been rebellious against the Lord from the day that I knew you.	You have been rebelling against the LORD since the day I came to know you.
DEU	9	25	그 때에 여호와께서 너희를 멸하겠다 하셨으므로 내가 여전히 사십 주야를 여호와 앞에 엎드리고	Thus I fell down before the Lord forty days and forty nights, as I fell down at the first; because the Lord had said he would destroy you.	So I fell down before the LORD for forty days and forty nights, because the LORD had said He would destroy you.
DEU	9	26	여호와께 간구하여 가로되 주 여호와여 주께서 큰 위엄으로 속하시고 강한 손으로 애굽에서 인도하여 내신 주의 백성 곧 주의 기업을 멸하지 마옵소서	I prayed therefore unto the Lord, and said, O Lord God, destroy not thy people and thine inheritance, which thou hast redeemed through thy greatness, which thou hast brought forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand.	And I prayed to the LORD and said, “O Lord GOD, do not destroy Your people, Your inheritance, whom You redeemed through Your greatness and brought out of Egypt with a mighty hand.
DEU	9	27	주의 종 아브라함과 이삭과 야곱을 생각하사 이 백성의 강퍅과 악과 죄를 보지 마옵소서	Remember thy servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; look not unto the stubbornness of this people, nor to their wickedness, nor to their sin:	Remember Your servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Overlook the stubbornness of this people and the wickedness of their sin.
DEU	9	28	주께서 우리를 인도하여 내신 그 땅 백성이 말하기를 여호와께서 그들에게 허락하신 땅으로 그들을 인도하여 들일 능력도 없고 그들을 미워도 하사 광야에서 죽이려고 인도하여 내셨다 할까 두려워하나이다	Lest the land whence thou broughtest us out say, Because the Lord was not able to bring them into the land which he promised them, and because he hated them, he hath brought them out to slay them in the wilderness.	Otherwise, those in the land from which You brought us out will say, ‘Because the LORD was not able to bring them into the land He had promised them, and because He hated them, He has brought them out to kill them in the wilderness.’
DEU	9	29	그들은 주의 큰 능력과 펴신 팔로 인도하여 내신 주의 백성 곧 주의 기업이로소이다 하였었노라	Yet they are thy people and thine inheritance, which thou broughtest out by thy mighty power and by thy stretched out arm.	But they are Your people, Your inheritance, whom You brought out by Your great power and outstretched arm.”
DEU	10	1	그 때에 여호와께서 내게 이르시기를 너는 처음과 같은 두 돌판을 다듬어 가지고 산에 올라 내게로 나아오고 또 나무궤 하나를 만들라	At that time the Lord said unto me, Hew thee two tables of stone like unto the first, and come up unto me into the mount, and make thee an ark of wood.	At that time the LORD said to me, “Chisel out two stone tablets like the originals, come up to Me on the mountain, and make an ark of wood.
DEU	10	2	네가 깨뜨린 처음 판에 쓴 말을 내가 그 판에 쓰리니 너는 그것을 그 궤에 넣으라 하시기로	And I will write on the tables the words that were in the first tables which thou brakest, and thou shalt put them in the ark.	And I will write on the tablets the words that were on the first tablets, which you broke; and you are to place them in the ark.”
DEU	10	3	내가 싯딤나무로 궤를 만들고 처음것과 같은 돌판 둘을 다듬어 손에 들고 산에 오르매	And I made an ark of shittim wood, and hewed two tables of stone like unto the first, and went up into the mount, having the two tables in mine hand.	So I made an ark of acacia wood, chiseled out two stone tablets like the originals, and went up the mountain with the two tablets in my hands.
DEU	10	4	여호와께서 그 총회 날에 산 위 불 가운데서 너희에게 이르신 십계명을 처음과 같이 그 판에 쓰시고 그것을 내게 주시기로	And he wrote on the tables, according to the first writing, the ten commandments, which the Lord spake unto you in the mount out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly: and the Lord gave them unto me.	And the LORD wrote on the tablets what had been written previously, the Ten Commandments that He had spoken to you on the mountain out of the fire on the day of the assembly. The LORD gave them to me,
DEU	10	5	내가 돌이켜 산에서 내려와서 여호와께서 내게 명하신 대로 그 판을 내가 만든 궤에 넣었더니 지금까지 있느니라	And I turned myself and came down from the mount, and put the tables in the ark which I had made; and there they be, as the Lord commanded me.	and I went back down the mountain and placed the tablets in the ark I had made, as the LORD had commanded me; and there they have remained.
DEU	10	6	(이스라엘 자손이 브에롯 브네야아간에서 발행하여 모세라에 이르러서는 아론이 거기서 죽고 거기 장사되었고 그 아들 엘르아살이 그를 이어 제사장의 직임을 행하였으며	And the children of Israel took their journey from Beeroth of the children of Jaakan to Mosera: there Aaron died, and there he was buried; and Eleazar his son ministered in the priest’s office in his stead.	The Israelites traveled from Beeroth Bene-jaakan to Moserah, where Aaron died and was buried, and Eleazar his son succeeded him as priest.
DEU	10	7	또 거기서 발행하여 굿고다에 이르고 굿고다에서 발행하여 욧바다에 이른즉 그 땅에는 시내가 많았었으며	From thence they journeyed unto Gudgodah; and from Gudgodah to Jotbath, a land of rivers of waters.	From there they traveled to Gudgodah, and from Gudgodah to Jotbathah, a land with streams of water.
DEU	10	8	그 때에 여호와께서 레위 지파를 구별하여 여호와의 언약 궤를 메이며 여호와 앞에 서서 그를 섬기며 또 여호와의 이름으로 축복하게 하셨고 그 일은 오늘날까지 이르느니라	At that time the Lord separated the tribe of Levi, to bear the ark of the covenant of the Lord, to stand before the Lord to minister unto him, and to bless in his name, unto this day.	At that time the LORD set apart the tribe of Levi to carry the ark of the covenant of the LORD, to stand before the LORD to serve Him, and to pronounce blessings in His name, as they do to this day.
DEU	10	9	그러므로 레위는 그 형제 중에 분깃이 없으며 기업이 없고 네 하나님 여호와께서 그에게 말씀하심 같이 여호와가 그의 기업이시니라)	Wherefore Levi hath no part nor inheritance with his brethren; the Lord is his inheritance, according as the Lord thy God promised him.	That is why Levi has no portion or inheritance among his brothers; the LORD is his inheritance, as the LORD your God promised him.
DEU	10	10	내가 처음과 같이 사십 주야를 산에서 유하였고 그 때에도 여호와께서 내 말을 들으사 너를 참아 멸하지 아니하시고	And I stayed in the mount, according to the first time, forty days and forty nights; and the Lord hearkened unto me at that time also, and the Lord would not destroy thee.	I stayed on the mountain forty days and forty nights, like the first time, and that time the LORD again listened to me and agreed not to destroy you.
DEU	10	11	여호와께서 내게 이르시되 일어나서 백성 앞서 진행하라 내가 그들에게 주리라고 그 열조에게 맹세한 땅에 그들이 들어가서 그것을 얻으리라 하셨느니라	And the Lord said unto me, Arise, take thy journey before the people, that they may go in and possess the land, which I sware unto their fathers to give unto them.	Then the LORD said to me, “Get up. Continue your journey ahead of the people, that they may enter and possess the land that I swore to their fathers to give them.”
DEU	10	12	이스라엘아 네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 요구하시는 것이 무엇이냐 곧 네 하나님 여호와를 경외하여 그 모든 도를 행하고 그를 사랑하며 마음을 다하고 성품을 다하여 네 하나님 여호와를 섬기고	And now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul,	And now, O Israel, what does the LORD your God ask of you but to fear the LORD your God by walking in all His ways, to love Him, to serve the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul,
DEU	10	13	내가 오늘날 네 행복을 위하여 네게 명하는 여호와의 명령과 규례를 지킬 것이 아니냐	To keep the commandments of the Lord, and his statutes, which I command thee this day for thy good?	and to keep the commandments and statutes of the LORD that I am giving you this day for your own good?
DEU	10	14	하늘과 모든 하늘의 하늘과 땅과 그 위의 만물은 본래 네 하나님 여호와께 속한 것이로되	Behold, the heaven and the heaven of heavens is the Lord’s thy God, the earth also, with all that therein is.	Behold, to the LORD your God belong the heavens, even the highest heavens, and the earth and everything in it.
DEU	10	15	여호와께서 오직 네 열조를 기뻐하시고 그들을 사랑하사 그 후손 너희를 만민 중에서 택하셨음이 오늘날과 같으니라	Only the Lord had a delight in thy fathers to love them, and he chose their seed after them, even you above all people, as it is this day.	Yet the LORD has set His affection on your fathers and loved them. And He has chosen you, their descendants after them, above all the peoples, even to this day.
DEU	10	16	그러므로 너희는 마음에 할례를 행하고 다시는 목을 곧게 하지말라	Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart, and be no more stiffnecked.	Circumcise your hearts, therefore, and stiffen your necks no more.
DEU	10	17	너희의 하나님 여호와는 신의 신이시며 주의 주시요 크고 능하시며 두려우신 하나님 이시라 사람을 외모로 보지 아니하시며 뇌물을 받지 아니하시고	For the Lord your God is God of gods, and Lord of lords, a great God, a mighty, and a terrible, which regardeth not persons, nor taketh reward:	For the LORD your God is God of gods and Lord of lords, the great, mighty, and awesome God, showing no partiality and accepting no bribe.
DEU	10	18	고아와 과부를 위하여 신원하시며 나그네를 사랑하사 그에게 식물과 의복을 주시나니	He doth execute the judgment of the fatherless and widow, and loveth the stranger, in giving him food and raiment.	He executes justice for the fatherless and widow, and He loves the foreigner, giving him food and clothing.
DEU	10	19	너희는 나그네를 사랑하라 전에 너희도 애굽 땅에서 나그네 되었었음이니라	Love ye therefore the stranger: for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.	So you also must love the foreigner, since you yourselves were foreigners in the land of Egypt.
DEU	10	20	네 하나님 여호와를 경외하여 그를 섬기며 그에게 친근히 하고 그 이름으로 맹세하라	Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God; him shalt thou serve, and to him shalt thou cleave, and swear by his name.	You are to fear the LORD your God and serve Him. Hold fast to Him and take your oaths in His name.
DEU	10	21	그는 네 찬송이시요 네 하나님이시라 네가 목도한바 이같이 크고 두려운 일을 너를 위하여 행하셨느니라	He is thy praise, and he is thy God, that hath done for thee these great and terrible things, which thine eyes have seen.	He is your praise and He is your God, who has done for you these great and awesome wonders that your eyes have seen.
DEU	10	22	애굽에 내려간 네 열조가 겨우 칠십 인이었으나 이제는 네 하나님 여호와께서 너를 하늘의 별 같이 많게 하셨느니라	Thy fathers went down into Egypt with threescore and ten persons; and now the Lord thy God hath made thee as the stars of heaven for multitude.	Your fathers went down to Egypt, seventy in all, and now the LORD your God has made you as numerous as the stars in the sky.
DEU	11	1	그런즉 네 하나님 여호와를 사랑하여 그 직임과 법도와 규례와 명령을 항상 지키라	Therefore thou shalt love the Lord thy God, and keep his charge, and his statutes, and his judgments, and his commandments, alway.	You shall therefore love the LORD your God and always keep His charge, His statutes, His ordinances, and His commandments.
DEU	11	2	너희의 자녀는 알지도 못하고 보지도 못하였으나 너희가 오늘날 기억할 것은 너희 하나님 여호와의 징계와 그 위엄과 그 강한 손과 펴신 팔과	And know ye this day: for I speak not with your children which have not known, and which have not seen the chastisement of the Lord your God, his greatness, his mighty hand, and his stretched out arm,	Know this day that it is not your children who have known and seen the discipline of the LORD your God: His greatness, His mighty hand, and His outstretched arm;
DEU	11	3	애굽에서 그 왕 바로와 그 전국에 행하신 이적과 기사와	And his miracles, and his acts, which he did in the midst of Egypt unto Pharaoh the king of Egypt, and unto all his land;	the signs and works He did in Egypt to Pharaoh king of Egypt and all his land;
DEU	11	4	또 여호와께서 애굽 군대와 그 말과 그 병거에 행하신 일 곧 그들이 너희를 따를 때에 홍해 물로 그들을 덮어 멸하사 오늘까지 이른 것과	And what he did unto the army of Egypt, unto their horses, and to their chariots; how he made the water of the Red sea to overflow them as they pursued after you, and how the Lord hath destroyed them unto this day;	what He did to the Egyptian army and horses and chariots when He made the waters of the Red Sea engulf them as they pursued you, and how He destroyed them completely, even to this day;
DEU	11	5	또 너희가 이곳에 이르기까지 광야에서 너희에게 행하신 일과	And what he did unto you in the wilderness, until ye came into this place;	what He did for you in the wilderness until you reached this place;
DEU	11	6	르우벤 자손 엘리압의 아들 다단과 아비람에게 하신 일 곧 온 이스라엘의 한가운데서 땅으로 입을 열어서 그들과 그 가족과 그 장막과 그를 따르는 모든 생물을 삼키게 하신 일이라	And what he did unto Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, the son of Reuben: how the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their households, and their tents, and all the substance that was in their possession, in the midst of all Israel:	and what He did in the midst of all the Israelites to Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab the Reubenite, when the earth opened its mouth and swallowed them, their households, their tents, and every living thing that belonged to them.
DEU	11	7	너희가 여호와의 행하신 이 모든 큰 일을 목도하였느니라	But your eyes have seen all the great acts of the Lord which he did.	For it is your own eyes that have seen every great work that the LORD has done.
DEU	11	8	그러므로 너희는 내가 오늘날 너희에게 명하는 모든 명령을 지키라 그리하면 너희가 강성할 것이요 너희가 건너가서 얻을 땅에 들어가서 그것을 얻을 것이며	Therefore shall ye keep all the commandments which I command you this day, that ye may be strong, and go in and possess the land, whither ye go to possess it;	You shall therefore keep every commandment I am giving you today, so that you may have the strength to go in and possess the land that you are crossing the Jordan to possess,
DEU	11	9	또 여호와께서 너희의 열조에게 맹세하사 그와 그 후손에게 주리라고 하신 땅 곧 젖과 꿀이 흐르는 땅에서 너희의 날이 장구하리라	And that ye may prolong your days in the land, which the Lord sware unto your fathers to give unto them and to their seed, a land that floweth with milk and honey.	and so that you may live long in the land that the LORD swore to your fathers to give them and their descendants, a land flowing with milk and honey.
DEU	11	10	네가 들어가 얻으려 하는 땅은 네가 나온 애굽 땅과 같지 아니하니 거기서는 너희가 파종한 후에 발로 물대기를 채소 밭에 댐과 같이 하였거니와	For the land, whither thou goest in to possess it, is not as the land of Egypt, from whence ye came out, where thou sowedst thy seed, and wateredst it with thy foot, as a garden of herbs:	For the land that you are entering to possess is not like the land of Egypt, from which you have come, where you sowed your seed and irrigated on foot, like a vegetable garden.
DEU	11	11	너희가 건너가서 얻을 땅은 산과 골짜기가 있어서 하늘에서 내리는 비를 흡수하는 땅이요	But the land, whither ye go to possess it, is a land of hills and valleys, and drinketh water of the rain of heaven:	But the land that you are crossing the Jordan to possess is a land of mountains and valleys that drinks in the rain from heaven.
DEU	11	12	네 하나님 여호와께서 권고하시는 땅이라 세초부터 세말까지 네 하나님 여호와의 눈이 항상 그 위에 있느니라	A land which the Lord thy God careth for: the eyes of the Lord thy God are always upon it, from the beginning of the year even unto the end of the year.	It is a land for which the LORD your God cares; the eyes of the LORD your God are always on it, from the beginning to the end of the year.
DEU	11	13	내가 오늘날 너희에게 명하는 나의 명령을 너희가 만일 청종하고 너희의 하나님 여호와를 사랑하여 마음을 다하고 성품을 다하여 섬기면	And it shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken diligently unto my commandments which I command you this day, to love the Lord your God, and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul,	So if you carefully obey the commandments I am giving you today, to love the LORD your God and to serve Him with all your heart and with all your soul,
DEU	11	14	여호와께서 너희 땅에 이른비, 늦은비를 적당한 때에 내리시리니 너희가 곡식과 포도주와 기름을 얻을 것이요	That I will give you the rain of your land in his due season, the first rain and the latter rain, that thou mayest gather in thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil.	then I will provide rain for your land in season, the autumn and spring rains, that you may gather your grain, new wine, and oil.
DEU	11	15	또 육축을 위하여 들에 풀이 나게 하시리니 네가 먹고 배부를 것이라	And I will send grass in thy fields for thy cattle, that thou mayest eat and be full.	And I will provide grass in the fields for your livestock, and you will eat and be satisfied.
DEU	11	16	너희는 스스로 삼가라 두렵건대 마음에 미혹하여 돌이켜 다른 신들을 섬기며 그것에 절하므로	Take heed to yourselves, that your heart be not deceived, and ye turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship them;	But be careful that you are not enticed to turn aside to worship and bow down to other gods,
DEU	11	17	여호와께서 너희에게 진노하사 하늘을 닫아 비를 내리지 아니하여 땅으로 소산을 내지 않게 하시므로 너희가 여호와의 주신 아름다운 땅에서 속히 멸망할까 하노라	And then the Lord’s wrath be kindled against you, and he shut up the heaven, that there be no rain, and that the land yield not her fruit; and lest ye perish quickly from off the good land which the Lord giveth you.	or the anger of the LORD will be kindled against you. He will shut the heavens so that there will be no rain, nor will the land yield its produce, and you will soon perish from the good land that the LORD is giving you.
DEU	11	18	이러므로 너희는 나의 이 말을 너희 마음과 뜻에 두고 또 그것으로 너희 손목에 매어 기호를 삼고 너희 미간에 붙여 표를 삼으며	Therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your heart and in your soul, and bind them for a sign upon your hand, that they may be as frontlets between your eyes.	Fix these words of mine in your hearts and minds; tie them as reminders on your hands and bind them on your foreheads.
DEU	11	19	또 그것을 너희의 자녀에게 가르치며 집에 앉았을 때에든지, 길에 행할 때에든지, 누웠을 때에든지, 일어날 때에든지 이 말씀을 강론하고	And ye shall teach them your children, speaking of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.	Teach them to your children, speaking about them when you sit at home and when you walk along the road, when you lie down and when you get up.
DEU	11	20	또 네 집 문설주와 바깥 문에 기록하라	And thou shalt write them upon the door posts of thine house, and upon thy gates:	Write them on the doorposts of your houses and on your gates,
DEU	11	21	그리하면 여호와께서 너희 열조에게 주리라고 맹세하신 땅에서 너희의 날과 너희 자녀의 날이 많아서 하늘이 땅을 덮는 날의 장구함 같으리라	That your days may be multiplied, and the days of your children, in the land which the Lord sware unto your fathers to give them, as the days of heaven upon the earth.	so that as long as the heavens are above the earth, your days and those of your children may be multiplied in the land that the LORD swore to give your fathers.
DEU	11	22	너희가 만일 내가 너희에게 명하는 이 모든 명령을 잘 지켜 행하여 너희 하나님 여호와를 사랑하고 그 모든 도를 행하여 그에게 부종하면	For if ye shall diligently keep all these commandments which I command you, to do them, to love the Lord your God, to walk in all his ways, and to cleave unto him;	For if you carefully keep all these commandments I am giving you to follow—to love the LORD your God, to walk in all His ways, and to hold fast to Him—
DEU	11	23	여호와께서 그 모든 나라 백성을 너희 앞에서 다 쫓아내실 것이라 너희가 너희보다 강대한 나라들을 얻을 것인즉	Then will the Lord drive out all these nations from before you, and ye shall possess greater nations and mightier than yourselves.	then the LORD will drive out all these nations before you, and you will dispossess nations greater and stronger than you.
DEU	11	24	너희의 발바닥으로 밟는 곳은 다 너희 소유가 되리니 너희의 경계는 곧 광야에서부터 레바논까지와 유브라데 하수라 하는 하수에서 서해까지라	Every place whereon the soles of your feet shall tread shall be yours: from the wilderness and Lebanon, from the river, the river Euphrates, even unto the uttermost sea shall your coast be.	Every place where the sole of your foot treads will be yours. Your territory will extend from the wilderness to Lebanon, and from the Euphrates River to the Western Sea.
DEU	11	25	너희 하나님 여호와께서 너희에게 말씀하신 대로 너희 밟는 모든 땅 사람들로 너희를 두려워하고 무서워하게 하시리니 너희를 능히 당할 사람이 없으리라	There shall no man be able to stand before you: for the Lord your God shall lay the fear of you and the dread of you upon all the land that ye shall tread upon, as he hath said unto you.	No man will be able to stand against you; the LORD your God will put the fear and dread of you upon all the land, wherever you set foot, as He has promised you.
DEU	11	26	내가 오늘날 복과 저주를 너희 앞에 두나니	Behold, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse;	See, today I am setting before you a blessing and a curse—
DEU	11	27	너희가 만일 내가 오늘날 너희에게 명하는 너희 하나님 여호와의 명령을 들으면 복이 될 것이요	A blessing, if ye obey the commandments of the Lord your God, which I command you this day:	a blessing if you obey the commandments of the LORD your God that I am giving you today,
DEU	11	28	너희가 만일 내가 오늘날 너희에게 명하는 도에서 돌이켜 떠나 너희 하나님 여호와의 명령을 듣지 아니하고 본래 알지 못하던 다른 신들을 좇으면 저주를 받으리라	And a curse, if ye will not obey the commandments of the Lord your God, but turn aside out of the way which I command you this day, to go after other gods, which ye have not known.	but a curse if you disobey the commandments of the LORD your God and turn aside from the path I command you today by following other gods, which you have not known.
DEU	11	29	네 하나님 여호와께서 네가 가서 얻을 땅으로 너를 인도하여 들이실 때에 너는 그리심 산에서 축복을 선포하고 에발 산에서 저주를 선포하라	And it shall come to pass, when the Lord thy God hath brought thee in unto the land whither thou goest to possess it, that thou shalt put the blessing upon mount Gerizim, and the curse upon mount Ebal.	When the LORD your God brings you into the land you are entering to possess, you are to proclaim the blessing on Mount Gerizim and the curse on Mount Ebal.
DEU	11	30	이 두 산은 요단강 저편 곧 해 지는 편으로 가는 길 뒤 길갈 맞은편 모레 상수리나무 곁의 아라바에 거하는 가나안 족속의 땅에 있지 아니하냐	Are they not on the other side Jordan, by the way where the sun goeth down, in the land of the Canaanites, which dwell in the champaign over against Gilgal, beside the plains of Moreh?	Are not these mountains across the Jordan, west of the road toward the sunset, in the land of the Canaanites who live in the Arabah opposite Gilgal near the Oak of Moreh?
DEU	11	31	너희가 요단을 건너 너희 하나님 여호와께서 너희에게 주시는 땅에 들어가서 얻으려 하나니 반드시 그것을 얻어 거기 거할지라	For ye shall pass over Jordan to go in to possess the land which the Lord your God giveth you, and ye shall possess it, and dwell therein.	For you are about to cross the Jordan to enter and possess the land that the LORD your God is giving you. When you take possession of it and settle in it,
DEU	11	32	내가 오늘날 너희 앞에 베푸는 모든 규례와 법도를 너희는 지켜 행할지니라	And ye shall observe to do all the statutes and judgments which I set before you this day.	be careful to follow all the statutes and ordinances that I am setting before you today.
DEU	12	1	네 열조의 하나님 여호와께서 네게 주셔서 얻게 하신 땅에서 너희가 평생에 지켜 행할 규례와 법도는 이러하니라	These are the statutes and judgments, which ye shall observe to do in the land, which the Lord God of thy fathers giveth thee to possess it, all the days that ye live upon the earth.	These are the statutes and ordinances you must be careful to follow all the days you live in the land that the LORD, the God of your fathers, has given you to possess.
DEU	12	2	너희가 쫓아 낼 민족들이 그 신들을 섬기는 곳은 높은 산이든지 작은 산이든지 푸른 나무 아래든지 무론하고 그 모든 곳을 너희가 마땅히 파멸하며	Ye shall utterly destroy all the places, wherein the nations which ye shall possess served their gods, upon the high mountains, and upon the hills, and under every green tree:	Destroy completely all the places where the nations you are dispossessing have served their gods—atop the high mountains, on the hills, and under every green tree.
DEU	12	3	그 단을 헐며 주상을 깨뜨리며 아세라 상을 불사르고 또 그 조각한 신상들을 찍어서 그 이름을 그곳에서 멸하라	And ye shall overthrow their altars, and break their pillars, and burn their groves with fire; and ye shall hew down the graven images of their gods, and destroy the names of them out of that place.	Tear down their altars, smash their sacred pillars, burn up their Asherah poles, cut down the idols of their gods, and wipe out their names from every place.
DEU	12	4	너희 하나님 여호와에게는 너희가 그처럼 행하지 말고	Ye shall not do so unto the Lord your God.	You shall not worship the LORD your God in this way.
DEU	12	5	오직 너희 하나님 여호와께서 자기 이름을 두시려고 너희 모든 지파 중에서 택하신 곳인 그 거하실 곳으로 찾아 나아가서	But unto the place which the Lord your God shall choose out of all your tribes to put his name there, even unto his habitation shall ye seek, and thither thou shalt come:	Instead, you must seek the place the LORD your God will choose from among all your tribes to establish as a dwelling for His Name, and there you must go.
DEU	12	6	너희 번제와 너희 희생과 너희의 십일조와 너희 손의 거제와 너희 서원제와 낙헌 예물과 너희 우양의 처음 낳은 것들을 너희는 그리로 가져다가 드리고	And thither ye shall bring your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and heave offerings of your hand, and your vows, and your freewill offerings, and the firstlings of your herds and of your flocks:	To that place you are to bring your burnt offerings and sacrifices, your tithes and heave offerings, your vow offerings and freewill offerings, as well as the firstborn of your herds and flocks.
DEU	12	7	거기 곧 너희 하나님 여호와 앞에서 먹고 너희 하나님 여호와께서 너희 손으로 수고한 일에 복 주심을 인하여 너희와 너희 가족이 즐거워할지니라	And there ye shall eat before the Lord your God, and ye shall rejoice in all that ye put your hand unto, ye and your households, wherein the Lord thy God hath blessed thee.	There, in the presence of the LORD your God, you and your households shall eat and rejoice in all you do, because the LORD your God has blessed you.
DEU	12	8	우리가 오늘날 여기서는 각기 소견대로 하였거니와 너희가 거기서는 하지 말지니라	Ye shall not do after all the things that we do here this day, every man whatsoever is right in his own eyes.	You are not to do as we are doing here today, where everyone does what seems right in his own eyes.
DEU	12	9	너희가 너희 하나님 여호와의 주시는 안식과 기업에 아직은 이르지 못하였거니와	For ye are not as yet come to the rest and to the inheritance, which the Lord your God giveth you.	For you have not yet come to the resting place and the inheritance that the LORD your God is giving you.
DEU	12	10	너희가 요단을 건너 너희 하나님 여호와께서 너희에게 기업으로 주시는 땅에 거하게 될 때 또는 여호와께서 너희로 너희 사방의 모든 대적을 이기게 하시고 너희에게 안식을 주사 너희로 평안히 거하게 하실 때에	But when ye go over Jordan, and dwell in the land which the Lord your God giveth you to inherit, and when he giveth you rest from all your enemies round about, so that ye dwell in safety;	When you cross the Jordan and live in the land that the LORD your God is giving you as an inheritance, and He gives you rest from all the enemies around you and you dwell securely,
DEU	12	11	너희는 너희 하나님 여호와께서 자기 이름을 두시려고 한 곳을 택하실 그 곳으로 나의 명하는 것을 모두 가지고 갈지니 곧 너희 번제와 너희 희생과 너희 십일조와 너희 손의 거제와 너희가 여호와께 서원하는 모든 아름다운 서원물을 가져가고	Then there shall be a place which the Lord your God shall choose to cause his name to dwell there; thither shall ye bring all that I command you; your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, your tithes, and the heave offering of your hand, and all your choice vows which ye vow unto the Lord:	then the LORD your God will choose a dwelling for His Name. And there you are to bring everything I command you: your burnt offerings and sacrifices, your tithes and special gifts, and all the choice offerings you vow to the LORD.
DEU	12	12	너희와 너희 자녀와 노비와 함께 너희 하나님 여호와 앞에서 즐거워할 것이요 네 성중에 거하는 레위인과도 그리할찌니 레위인은 너희 중에 분깃이나 기업이 없음이니라	And ye shall rejoice before the Lord your God, ye, and your sons, and your daughters, and your menservants, and your maidservants, and the Levite that is within your gates; forasmuch as he hath no part nor inheritance with you.	And you shall rejoice before the LORD your God—you, your sons and daughters, your menservants and maidservants, and the Levite within your gates, since he has no portion or inheritance among you.
DEU	12	13	너는 삼가서 네게 보이는 아무 곳에서든지 번제를 드리지 말고	Take heed to thyself that thou offer not thy burnt offerings in every place that thou seest:	Be careful not to offer your burnt offerings in just any place you see;
DEU	12	14	오직 너희의 한 지파 중에 여호와의 택하실 그 곳에서 너는 번제를 드리고 또 내가 네게 명하는 모든 것을 거기서 행할지니라	But in the place which the Lord shall choose in one of thy tribes, there thou shalt offer thy burnt offerings, and there thou shalt do all that I command thee.	you must offer them only in the place the LORD will choose in one of your tribal territories, and there you shall do all that I command you.
DEU	12	15	그러나 네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 주신 복을 따라 각 성에서 네 마음에 즐기는 대로 생축을 잡아 그 고기를 먹을 수 있나니 곧 정한 자나 부정한 자를 무론하고 노루나 사슴을 먹음과 같이 먹으려니와	Notwithstanding thou mayest kill and eat flesh in all thy gates, whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, according to the blessing of the Lord thy God which he hath given thee: the unclean and the clean may eat thereof, as of the roebuck, and as of the hart.	But whenever you want, you may slaughter and eat meat within any of your gates, according to the blessing the LORD your God has given you. Both the ceremonially clean and unclean may eat it as they would a gazelle or deer,
DEU	12	16	오직 그 피는 먹지 말고 물 같이 땅에 쏟을 것이며	Only ye shall not eat the blood; ye shall pour it upon the earth as water.	but you must not eat the blood; pour it on the ground like water.
DEU	12	17	너는 곡식과 포도주와 기름의 십일조와 네 우양의 처음 낳은 것과 너의 서원을 갚는 예물과 너의 낙헌 예물과 네 손의 거제물은 너의 각 성에서 먹지 말고	Thou mayest not eat within thy gates the tithe of thy corn, or of thy wine, or of thy oil, or the firstlings of thy herds or of thy flock, nor any of thy vows which thou vowest, nor thy freewill offerings, or heave offering of thine hand:	Within your gates you must not eat the tithe of your grain or new wine or oil, the firstborn of your herds or flocks, any of the offerings that you have vowed to give, or your freewill offerings or special gifts.
DEU	12	18	오직 네 하나님 여호와께서 택하실 곳에서 네 하나님 여호와 앞에서 너는 네 자녀와 노비와 성중에 거하는 레위인과 함께 그것을 먹고 또 네 손으로 수고한 모든 일을 인하여 네 하나님 여호와 앞에서 즐거워하되	But thou must eat them before the Lord thy God in the place which the Lord thy God shall choose, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite that is within thy gates: and thou shalt rejoice before the Lord thy God in all that thou puttest thine hands unto.	Instead, you must eat them in the presence of the LORD your God at the place the LORD your God will choose—you, your sons and daughters, your menservants and maidservants, and the Levite within your gates. Rejoice before the LORD your God in all you do,
DEU	12	19	너는 삼가서 네 땅에 거하는 동안에 레위인을 저버리지 말지니라	Take heed to thyself that thou forsake not the Levite as long as thou livest upon the earth.	and be careful not to neglect the Levites as long as you live in your land.
DEU	12	20	네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 허락하신 대로 네 지경을 넓히신 후에 네 마음에 고기를 먹고자 하여 이르기를 내가 고기를 먹으리라 하면 네가 무릇 마음에 좋아하는 대로 고기를 먹을 수 있으리니	When the Lord thy God shall enlarge thy border, as he hath promised thee, and thou shalt say, I will eat flesh, because thy soul longeth to eat flesh; thou mayest eat flesh, whatsoever thy soul lusteth after.	When the LORD your God expands your territory as He has promised, and you crave meat and say, “I want to eat meat,” you may eat it whenever you want.
DEU	12	21	만일 네 하나님 여호와께서 자기 이름을 두시려고 택하신 곳이 네게서 멀거든 내가 네게 명한 대로 너는 여호와의 주신 우양을 잡아 너의 각 성에서 네가 무릇 마음에 좋아하는 것을 먹되	If the place which the Lord thy God hath chosen to put his name there be too far from thee, then thou shalt kill of thy herd and of thy flock, which the Lord hath given thee, as I have commanded thee, and thou shalt eat in thy gates whatsoever thy soul lusteth after.	If the place where the LORD your God chooses to put His Name is too far from you, then you may slaughter any of the herd or flock He has given you, as I have commanded you, and you may eat it within your gates whenever you want.
DEU	12	22	정한 자나 부정한 자를 무론하고 노루나 사슴을 먹음 같이 먹을 수 있거니와	Even as the roebuck and the hart is eaten, so thou shalt eat them: the unclean and the clean shall eat of them alike.	Indeed, you may eat it as you would eat a gazelle or deer; both the ceremonially unclean and the clean may eat it.
DEU	12	23	오직 크게 삼가서 그 피는 먹지 말라 피는 그 생명인즉 네가 그 생명을 고기와 아울러 먹지 못하리니	Only be sure that thou eat not the blood: for the blood is the life; and thou mayest not eat the life with the flesh.	Only be sure not to eat the blood, because the blood is the life, and you must not eat the life with the meat.
DEU	12	24	너는 그것을 먹지 말고 물 같이 땅에 쏟으라	Thou shalt not eat it; thou shalt pour it upon the earth as water.	You must not eat the blood; pour it on the ground like water.
DEU	12	25	너는 피를 먹지 말라 네가 이같이 여호와께서 의롭게 여기시는 일을 행하면 너와 네 후손이 복을 누리리라	Thou shalt not eat it; that it may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee, when thou shalt do that which is right in the sight of the Lord.	Do not eat it, so that it may go well with you and your children after you, because you will be doing what is right in the eyes of the LORD.
DEU	12	26	오직 네 성물과 서원물을 여호와께서 택하신 곳으로 가지고 가라	Only thy holy things which thou hast, and thy vows, thou shalt take, and go unto the place which the Lord shall choose:	But you are to take your holy things and your vow offerings and go to the place the LORD will choose.
DEU	12	27	네가 번제를 드릴 때에는 그 고기와 피를 네 하나님 여호와의 단에 드릴 것이요 다른 제 희생을 드릴 때에는 그 피를 네 하나님 여호와의 단 위에 붓고 그 고기는 먹을지니라	And thou shalt offer thy burnt offerings, the flesh and the blood, upon the altar of the Lord thy God: and the blood of thy sacrifices shall be poured out upon the altar of the Lord thy God, and thou shalt eat the flesh.	Present the meat and blood of your burnt offerings on the altar of the LORD your God. The blood of your other sacrifices must be poured out beside the altar of the LORD your God, but you may eat the meat.
DEU	12	28	내가 네게 명하는 이 모든 말을 너는 듣고 지키라 네 하나님 여호와의 목전에 선과 의를 행하면 너와 네 후손에게 영원히 복이 있으리라	Observe and hear all these words which I command thee, that it may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee for ever, when thou doest that which is good and right in the sight of the Lord thy God.	Be careful to obey all these things I command you, so that it may always go well with you and your children after you, because you will be doing what is good and right in the eyes of the LORD your God.
DEU	12	29	네 하나님 여호와께서 네가 들어가서 쫓아낼 그 민족들을 네 앞에서 멸절하시고 너로 그 땅을 얻어 거기 거하게 하실 때에	When the Lord thy God shall cut off the nations from before thee, whither thou goest to possess them, and thou succeedest them, and dwellest in their land;	When the LORD your God cuts off before you the nations you are entering to dispossess, and you drive them out and live in their land,
DEU	12	30	너는 스스로 삼가서 네 앞에서 멸망한 그들의 자취를 밟아 올무에 들지 말라 또 그들의 신을 탐구하여 이르기를 이 민족들은 그 신들을 어떻게 위하였는고 나도 그와 같이 하겠다 하지 말라	Take heed to thyself that thou be not snared by following them, after that they be destroyed from before thee; and that thou enquire not after their gods, saying, How did these nations serve their gods? even so will I do likewise.	be careful not to be ensnared by their ways after they have been destroyed before you. Do not inquire about their gods, asking, “How do these nations serve their gods? I will do likewise.”
DEU	12	31	네 하나님 여호와께는 네가 그와 같이 행하지 못할 것이라 그들은 여호와의 꺼리시며 가증히 여기시는 일을 그 신들에게 행하여 심지어 그 자녀를 불살라 그 신들에게 드렸느니라	Thou shalt not do so unto the Lord thy God: for every abomination to the Lord, which he hateth, have they done unto their gods; for even their sons and their daughters they have burnt in the fire to their gods.	You must not worship the LORD your God in this way, because they practice for their gods every abomination which the LORD hates. They even burn their sons and daughters in the fire as sacrifices to their gods.
DEU	12	32	내가 너희에게 명하는 이 모든 말을 너희는 지켜 행하고 그것에 가감하지 말지니라	What thing soever I command you, observe to do it: thou shalt not add thereto, nor diminish from it.	See that you do everything I command you; do not add to it or subtract from it.
DEU	13	1	너희 중에 선지자나 꿈 꾸는 자가 일어나서 이적과 기사를 네게 보이고	If there arise among you a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and giveth thee a sign or a wonder,	If a prophet or dreamer of dreams arises among you and proclaims a sign or wonder to you,
DEU	13	2	네게 말하기를 네가 본래 알지 못하던 다른 신들을 우리가 좇아 섬기자 하며 이적과 기사가 그 말대로 이룰지라도	And the sign or the wonder come to pass, whereof he spake unto thee, saying, Let us go after other gods, which thou hast not known, and let us serve them;	and if the sign or wonder he has spoken to you comes about, but he says, “Let us follow other gods (which you have not known) and let us worship them,”
DEU	13	3	너는 그 선지자나 꿈꾸는 자의 말을 청종하지 말라 이는 너희 하나님 여호와께서 너희가 마음을 다하고 성품을 다하여 너희 하나님 여호와를 사랑하는 여부를 알려 하사 너희를 시험하심이니라	Thou shalt not hearken unto the words of that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams: for the Lord your God proveth you, to know whether ye love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul.	you must not listen to the words of that prophet or dreamer. For the LORD your God is testing you to find out whether you love Him with all your heart and with all your soul.
DEU	13	4	너희는 너희 하나님 여호와를 순종하며 그를 경외하며 그 명령을 지키며 그 목소리를 청종하며 그를 섬기며 그에게 부종하고	Ye shall walk after the Lord your God, and fear him, and keep his commandments, and obey his voice, and ye shall serve him, and cleave unto him.	You are to follow the LORD your God and fear Him. Keep His commandments and listen to His voice; serve Him and hold fast to Him.
DEU	13	5	그 선지자나 꿈 꾸는 자는 죽이라 이는 그가 너희로 너희를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내시며 종 되었던 집에서 속량하여 취하신 너희 하나님 여호와를 배반케 하려 하며 너희 하나님 여호와께서 네게 행하라 명하신 도에서 너를 꾀어 내려고 말하였음이라 너는 이같이 하여 너희 중에서 악을 제할지니라	And that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams, shall be put to death; because he hath spoken to turn you away from the Lord your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed you out of the house of bondage, to thrust thee out of the way which the Lord thy God commanded thee to walk in. So shalt thou put the evil away from the midst of thee.	Such a prophet or dreamer must be put to death, because he has advocated rebellion against the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt and redeemed you from the house of slavery; he has tried to turn you from the way in which the LORD your God has commanded you to walk. So you must purge the evil from among you.
DEU	13	6	네 동복 형제나 네 자녀나 네 품의 아내나 너와 생명을 함께 하는 친구가 가만히 너를 꾀어 이르기를 너와 네 열조가 알지 못하던 다른 신들	If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as thine own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which thou hast not known, thou, nor thy fathers;	If your very own brother, or your son or daughter, or the wife you embrace, or your closest friend secretly entices you, saying, “Let us go and worship other gods” (which neither you nor your fathers have known,
DEU	13	7	곧 네 사방에 둘러 있는 민족 혹 네게서 가깝든지 네게서 멀든지 땅 이 끝에서 저 끝까지 있는 민족의 신들을 우리가 가서 섬기자 할지라도	Namely, of the gods of the people which are round about you, nigh unto thee, or far off from thee, from the one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth;	the gods of the peoples around you, whether near or far, whether from one end of the earth or the other),
DEU	13	8	너는 그를 좇지 말며 듣지 말며 긍휼히 보지 말며 애석히 여기지 말며 덮어 숨기지 말고	Thou shalt not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him; neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou spare, neither shalt thou conceal him:	you must not yield to him or listen to him. Show him no pity, and do not spare him or shield him.
DEU	13	9	너는 용서없이 그를 죽이되 죽일 때에 네가 먼저 그에게 손을 대고 후에 뭇 백성이 손을 대라	But thou shalt surely kill him; thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and afterwards the hand of all the people.	Instead, you must surely kill him. Your hand must be the first against him to put him to death, and then the hands of all the people.
DEU	13	10	그는 애굽 땅 종 되었던 집에서 너를 인도하여 내신 네 하나님 여호와에게서 너를 꾀어 떠나게 하려한 자니 너는 돌로 쳐 죽이라	And thou shalt stone him with stones, that he die; because he hath sought to thrust thee away from the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.	Stone him to death for trying to turn you away from the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery.
DEU	13	11	그리하면 온 이스라엘이 듣고 두려워하여 이같은 악을 다시는 너희 중에서 행하지 못하리라	And all Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any such wickedness as this is among you.	Then all Israel will hear and be afraid, and will never again do such a wicked thing among you.
DEU	13	12	네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 주어 거하게 하시는 한 성읍에 대하여 네게 소문이 들리기를	If thou shalt hear say in one of thy cities, which the Lord thy God hath given thee to dwell there, saying,	If, regarding one of the cities the LORD your God is giving you to inhabit, you hear it said
DEU	13	13	너희 중 어떤 잡류가 일어나서 그 성읍 거민을 유혹하여 이르기를 너희가 알지 못하던 다른 신들을 우리가 가서 섬기자 한다 하거든	Certain men, the children of Belial, are gone out from among you, and have withdrawn the inhabitants of their city, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which ye have not known;	that wicked men have arisen from among you and have led the people of their city astray, saying, “Let us go and serve other gods” (which you have not known),
DEU	13	14	너는 자세히 묻고 살펴보아서 이런 가증한 일이 참 사실로 너희 중에 있으면	Then shalt thou enquire, and make search, and ask diligently; and, behold, if it be truth, and the thing certain, that such abomination is wrought among you;	then you must inquire, investigate, and interrogate thoroughly. And if it is established with certainty that this abomination has been committed among you,
DEU	13	15	너는 마땅히 그 성읍 거민을 칼날로 죽이고 그 성읍과 그 중에 거하는 모든 것과 그 생축을 칼날로 진멸하고	Thou shalt surely smite the inhabitants of that city with the edge of the sword, destroying it utterly, and all that is therein, and the cattle thereof, with the edge of the sword.	you must surely put the inhabitants of that city to the sword. Devote to destruction all its people and livestock.
DEU	13	16	또 그 속에서 빼앗아 얻은 물건을 다 거리에 모아 놓고 그 성읍과 그 탈취물 전부를 불살라 네 하나님 여호와께 드릴지니 그 성읍은 영영히 무더기가 되어 다시는 건축됨이 없을 것이니라	And thou shalt gather all the spoil of it into the midst of the street thereof, and shalt burn with fire the city, and all the spoil thereof every whit, for the Lord thy God: and it shall be an heap for ever; it shall not be built again.	And you are to gather all its plunder in the middle of the public square, and completely burn the city and all its plunder as a whole burnt offering to the LORD your God. The city must remain a mound of ruins forever, never to be rebuilt.
DEU	13	17	너는 이 진멸할 물건을 조금도 네 손에 대지 말라 그리하면 여호와께서 그 진노를 그치시고 너를 긍휼히 여기시고 자비를 더하사 너의 열조에게 맹세하심 같이 네 수효를 번성케 하실 것이라	And there shall cleave nought of the cursed thing to thine hand: that the Lord may turn from the fierceness of his anger, and shew thee mercy, and have compassion upon thee, and multiply thee, as he hath sworn unto thy fathers;	Nothing devoted to destruction shall cling to your hands, so that the LORD will turn from His fierce anger, grant you mercy, show you compassion, and multiply you as He swore to your fathers,
DEU	13	18	네가 만일 네 하나님 여호와의 말씀을 듣고 오늘날 내가 네게 명하는 그 모든 명령을 지켜 네 하나님 여호와의 목전에 정직을 행하면 이같이 되리라	When thou shalt hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep all his commandments which I command thee this day, to do that which is right in the eyes of the Lord thy God.	because you obey the LORD your God, keeping all His commandments I am giving you today and doing what is right in the eyes of the LORD your God.
DEU	14	1	너희는 너희 하나님 여호와의 자녀니 죽은 자를 위하여 자기 몸을 베지 말며 눈썹 사이 이마 위의 털을 밀지 말라	Ye are the children of the Lord your God: ye shall not cut yourselves, nor make any baldness between your eyes for the dead.	You are sons of the LORD your God; do not cut yourselves or shave your foreheads on behalf of the dead,
DEU	14	2	너는 너의 하나님 여호와의 성민이라 여호와께서 지상 만민 중에서 너를 택하여 자기의 기업의 백성을 삼으셨느니라	For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God, and the Lord hath chosen thee to be a peculiar people unto himself, above all the nations that are upon the earth.	for you are a people holy to the LORD your God. The LORD has chosen you to be a people for His prized possession out of all the peoples on the face of the earth.
DEU	14	3	너는 가증한 물건은 무엇이든지 먹지 말라	Thou shalt not eat any abominable thing.	You must not eat any detestable thing.
DEU	14	4	너희의 먹을 만한 짐승은 이러하니 곧 소와 양과 염소와	These are the beasts which ye shall eat: the ox, the sheep, and the goat,	These are the animals that you may eat: The ox, the sheep, the goat,
DEU	14	5	사슴과 노루와 불그스럼한 사슴과 산염소와 볼기 흰 노루와 뿔 긴 사슴과 산양들	The hart, and the roebuck, and the fallow deer, and the wild goat, and the pygarg, and the wild ox, and the chamois.	the deer, the gazelle, the roe deer, the wild goat, the ibex, the antelope, and the mountain sheep.
DEU	14	6	무릇 짐승 중에 굽이 갈라져 쪽발도 되고 새김질도 하는 것은 너희가 먹을 것이니라	And every beast that parteth the hoof, and cleaveth the cleft into two claws, and cheweth the cud among the beasts, that ye shall eat.	You may eat any animal that has a split hoof divided in two and that chews the cud.
DEU	14	7	다만 새김질을 하거나 굽이 갈라진 짐승 중에도 너희가 먹지 못할 것은 이것이니 곧 약대와 토끼와 사반 그것들은 새김질을 하나 굽이 갈라지지 아니하였으니 너희에게 부정하고	Nevertheless these ye shall not eat of them that chew the cud, or of them that divide the cloven hoof; as the camel, and the hare, and the coney: for they chew the cud, but divide not the hoof; therefore they are unclean unto you.	But of those that chew the cud or have a completely divided hoof, you are not to eat the following: the camel, the rabbit, or the rock badger.
DEU	14	8	돼지는 굽은 갈라졌으나 새김질을 못하므로 너희에게 부정하니 너희는 이런 것의 고기를 먹지 말 것이며 그 사체도 만지지 말 것이니라	And the swine, because it divideth the hoof, yet cheweth not the cud, it is unclean unto you: ye shall not eat of their flesh, nor touch their dead carcase.	Although they chew the cud, they do not have a divided hoof. They are unclean for you, as well as the pig; though it has a divided hoof, it does not chew the cud. It is unclean for you. You must not eat its meat or touch its carcass.
DEU	14	9	물에 있는 어족 중에 이런 것은 너희가 먹을 것이니 무릇 지느러미와 비늘 있는 것은 너희가 먹을 것이요	These ye shall eat of all that are in the waters: all that have fins and scales shall ye eat:	Of all the creatures that live in the water, you may eat anything with fins and scales,
DEU	14	10	무릇 지느러미와 비늘이 없는 것은 너희가 먹지 말지니 이는 너희에게 부정하니라	And whatsoever hath not fins and scales ye may not eat; it is unclean unto you.	but you may not eat anything that does not have fins and scales; it is unclean for you.
DEU	14	11	무릇 정한 새는 너희가 먹으려니와	Of all clean birds ye shall eat.	You may eat any clean bird,
DEU	14	12	이런 것은 너희가 먹지 못할지니 곧 독수리와 솔개와 어응과	But these are they of which ye shall not eat: the eagle, and the ossifrage, and the ospray,	but these you may not eat: the eagle, the bearded vulture, the black vulture,
DEU	14	13	매와 새매와 매의 종류와	And the glede, and the kite, and the vulture after his kind,	the red kite, the falcon, any kind of kite,
DEU	14	14	까마귀 종류와	And every raven after his kind,	any kind of raven,
DEU	14	15	타조와 다호마스와 갈매기와 새매 종류와	And the owl, and the night hawk, and the cuckow, and the hawk after his kind,	the ostrich, the screech owl, the gull, any kind of hawk,
DEU	14	16	올빼미와 부엉이와 따오기와	The little owl, and the great owl, and the swan,	the little owl, the great owl, the white owl,
DEU	14	17	당아와 올응과 노자와	And the pelican, and the gier eagle, and the cormorant,	the desert owl, the osprey, the cormorant,
DEU	14	18	학과 황새 종류와 대승과 박쥐며	And the stork, and the heron after her kind, and the lapwing, and the bat.	the stork, any kind of heron, the hoopoe, or the bat.
DEU	14	19	또 무릇 날기도 하고 기어 다니기도 하는 것은 너희에게 부정하니 너희는 먹지 말 것이나	And every creeping thing that flieth is unclean unto you: they shall not be eaten.	All flying insects are unclean for you; they may not be eaten.
DEU	14	20	무릇 정한 새는 너희가 먹을지니라	But of all clean fowls ye may eat.	But you may eat any clean bird.
DEU	14	21	너희는 너희 하나님 여호와의 성민이라 무릇 스스로 죽은 것은 먹지 말 것이니 그것을 성중에 우거하는 객에게 주어 먹게 하거나 이방인에게 팔아도 가하니라 너는 염소 새끼를 그 어미의 젖에 삶지 말지니라	Ye shall not eat of any thing that dieth of itself: thou shalt give it unto the stranger that is in thy gates, that he may eat it; or thou mayest sell it unto an alien: for thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother’s milk.	You are not to eat any carcass; you may give it to the foreigner residing within your gates, and he may eat it, or you may sell it to a foreigner. For you are a holy people belonging to the LORD your God. You must not cook a young goat in its mother’s milk.
DEU	14	22	너는 마땅히 매년에 토지 소산의 십일조를 드릴 것이며	Thou shalt truly tithe all the increase of thy seed, that the field bringeth forth year by year.	You must be sure to set aside a tenth of all the produce brought forth each year from your fields.
DEU	14	23	네 하나님 여호와 앞 곧 여호와께서 그 이름을 두시려고 택하신 곳에서 네 곡식과 포도주와 기름의 십일조를 먹으며 또 네 우양의 처음 난 것을 먹고 네 하나님 여호와 경외하기를 항상 배울 것이니라	And thou shalt eat before the Lord thy God, in the place which he shall choose to place his name there, the tithe of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil, and the firstlings of thy herds and of thy flocks; that thou mayest learn to fear the Lord thy God always.	And you are to eat a tenth of your grain, new wine, and oil, and the firstborn of your herds and flocks, in the presence of the LORD your God at the place He will choose as a dwelling for His Name, so that you may learn to fear the LORD your God always.
DEU	14	24	그러나 네 하나님 여호와께서 그 이름을 두시려고 택하신 곳이 네게서 너무 멀고 행로가 어려워서 그 풍부히 주신 것을 가지고 갈 수 없거든	And if the way be too long for thee, so that thou art not able to carry it; or if the place be too far from thee, which the Lord thy God shall choose to set his name there, when the Lord thy God hath blessed thee:	But if the distance is too great for you to carry that with which the LORD your God has blessed you, because the place where the LORD your God will choose to put His Name is too far away,
DEU	14	25	그것을 돈으로 바꾸어 그 돈을 싸서 가지고 네 하나님 여호와의 택하신 곳으로 가서	Then shalt thou turn it into money, and bind up the money in thine hand, and shalt go unto the place which the Lord thy God shall choose:	then exchange it for money, take the money in your hand, and go to the place the LORD your God will choose.
DEU	14	26	무릇 네 마음에 좋아하는 것을 그 돈으로 사되 우양이나 포도주나 독주 등 무릇 네 마음에 원하는 것을 구하고 거기 네 하나님 여호와의 앞에서 너와 네 권속이 함께 먹고 즐거워할 것이며	And thou shalt bestow that money for whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, for oxen, or for sheep, or for wine, or for strong drink, or for whatsoever thy soul desireth: and thou shalt eat there before the Lord thy God, and thou shalt rejoice, thou, and thine household,	Then you may spend the money on anything you desire: cattle, sheep, wine, strong drink, or anything you wish. You are to feast there in the presence of the LORD your God and rejoice with your household.
DEU	14	27	네 성읍에 거하는 레위인은 너희 중에 분깃이나 기업이 없는 자니 또한 저버리지 말지니라	And the Levite that is within thy gates; thou shalt not forsake him; for he hath no part nor inheritance with thee.	And do not neglect the Levite within your gates, since he has no portion or inheritance among you.
DEU	14	28	매 삼년 끝에 그 해 소산의 십분 일을 다 내어 네 성읍에 저축하여	At the end of three years thou shalt bring forth all the tithe of thine increase the same year, and shalt lay it up within thy gates:	At the end of every three years, bring a tenth of all your produce for that year and lay it up within your gates.
DEU	14	29	너희 중에 분깃이나 기업이 없는 레위인과 네 성중에 우거하는 객과 및 고아와 과부들로 와서 먹어 배부르게 하라 그리하면 네 하나님 여호와께서 너의 손으로 하는 범사에 네게 축복을 주시리라	And the Levite, (because he hath no part nor inheritance with thee,) and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, which are within thy gates, shall come, and shall eat and be satisfied; that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all the work of thine hand which thou doest.	Then the Levite (because he has no portion or inheritance among you), the foreigner, the fatherless, and the widow within your gates may come and eat and be satisfied. And the LORD your God will bless you in all the work of your hands.
DEU	15	1	매 칠년 끝에 면제하라	At the end of every seven years thou shalt make a release.	At the end of every seven years you must cancel debts.
DEU	15	2	면제의 규례는 이러하니라 무릇 그 이웃에게 꾸어준 채주는 그것을 면제하고 그 이웃에게나 그 형제에게 독촉하지 말지니 이 해는 여호와의 면제년이라 칭함이니라	And this is the manner of the release: Every creditor that lendeth ought unto his neighbour shall release it; he shall not exact it of his neighbour, or of his brother; because it is called the Lord’s release.	This is the manner of remission: Every creditor shall cancel what he has loaned to his neighbor. He is not to collect anything from his neighbor or brother, because the LORD’s time of release has been proclaimed.
DEU	15	3	이방인에게는 네가 독촉하려니와 네 형제에게 꾸인 것은 네 손에서 면제하라	Of a foreigner thou mayest exact it again: but that which is thine with thy brother thine hand shall release;	You may collect something from a foreigner, but you must forgive whatever your brother owes you.
DEU	15	4	네가 만일 네 하나님 여호와의 말씀만 듣고 내가 오늘날 네게 명하는 그 명령을 다 지켜 행하면 네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 유업으로 주신 땅에서 네가 정녕 복을 받으리니 너희 중에 가난한 자가 없으리라	Save when there shall be no poor among you; for the Lord shall greatly bless thee in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee for an inheritance to possess it:	There will be no poor among you, however, because the LORD will surely bless you in the land that the LORD your God is giving you to possess as an inheritance,
DEU	15	5	(앞절과 동일)	Only if thou carefully hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all these commandments which I command thee this day.	if only you obey the LORD your God and are careful to follow all these commandments I am giving you today.
DEU	15	6	네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 허락하신 대로 네게 복을 주시리니 네가 여러 나라에 꾸어 줄지라도 너는 꾸지 아니하겠고 네가 여러 나라를 치리할지라도 너는 치리함을 받지 아니하리라	For the Lord thy God blesseth thee, as he promised thee: and thou shalt lend unto many nations, but thou shalt not borrow; and thou shalt reign over many nations, but they shall not reign over thee.	When the LORD your God blesses you as He has promised, you will lend to many nations but borrow from none; you will rule over many nations but be ruled by none.
DEU	15	7	네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 주신 땅 어느 성읍에서든지 가난한 형제가 너와 함께 거하거든 그 가난한 형제에게 네 마음을 강퍅히 하지 말며 네 손을 움켜 쥐지 말고	If there be among you a poor man of one of thy brethren within any of thy gates in thy land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother:	If there is a poor man among your brothers within any of the gates in the land that the LORD your God is giving you, then you are not to harden your heart or shut your hand from your poor brother.
DEU	15	8	반드시 네 손을 그에게 펴서 그 요구하는 대로 쓸 것을 넉넉히 꾸어주라	But thou shalt open thine hand wide unto him, and shalt surely lend him sufficient for his need, in that which he wanteth.	Instead, you are to open your hand to him and freely loan him whatever he needs.
DEU	15	9	삼가 너는 마음에 악념을 품지 말라 곧 이르기를 제칠년 면제년이 가까웠다 하고 네 궁핍한 형제에게 악한 눈을 들고 아무 것도 주지 아니하면 그가 너를 여호와께 호소하리니 네가 죄를 얻을 것이라	Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, saying, The seventh year, the year of release, is at hand; and thine eye be evil against thy poor brother, and thou givest him nought; and he cry unto the Lord against thee, and it be sin unto thee.	Be careful not to harbor this wicked thought in your heart: “The seventh year, the year of release, is near,” so that you look upon your poor brother begrudgingly and give him nothing. He will cry out to the LORD against you, and you will be guilty of sin.
DEU	15	10	너는 반드시 그에게 구제할 것이요 구제할 때에는 아끼는 마음을 품지 말 것이시라 이로 인하여 네 하나님 여호와께서 네 범사와 네 손으로 하는바에 네게 복을 주시리라	Thou shalt surely give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved when thou givest unto him: because that for this thing the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou puttest thine hand unto.	Give generously to him, and do not let your heart be grieved when you do so. And because of this the LORD your God will bless you in all your work and in everything to which you put your hand.
DEU	15	11	땅에는 언제든지 가난한 자가 그치지 아니하겠으므로 내가 네게 명하여 이르노니 너는 반드시 네 경내 네 형제의 곤란한 자와 궁핍한 자에게 네 손을 펼지니라	For the poor shall never cease out of the land: therefore I command thee, saying, Thou shalt open thine hand wide unto thy brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy, in thy land.	For there will never cease to be poor in the land; that is why I am commanding you to open wide your hand to your brother and to the poor and needy in your land.
DEU	15	12	네 동족 히브리 남자나 히브리 여자가 네게 팔렸다 하자 만일 육 년을 너를 섬겼거든 제칠년에 너는 그를 놓아 자유하게 할 것이요	And if thy brother, an Hebrew man, or an Hebrew woman, be sold unto thee, and serve thee six years; then in the seventh year thou shalt let him go free from thee.	If a fellow Hebrew, a man or a woman, is sold to you and serves you six years, then in the seventh year you must set him free.
DEU	15	13	그를 놓아 자유하게 할 때에는 공수로 가게 하지 말고	And when thou sendest him out free from thee, thou shalt not let him go away empty:	And when you release him, do not send him away empty-handed.
DEU	15	14	네 양 무리 중에서와 타작 마당에서와 포도주 틀에서 그에게 후히 줄지니 곧 네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 복을 주신 대로 그에게 줄지니라	Thou shalt furnish him liberally out of thy flock, and out of thy floor, and out of thy winepress: of that wherewith the Lord thy God hath blessed thee thou shalt give unto him.	You are to furnish him liberally from your flock, your threshing floor, and your winepress. You shall give to him as the LORD your God has blessed you.
DEU	15	15	너는 애굽 땅에서 종 되었던 것과 네 하나님 여호와께서 너를 속하셨음을 기억하라 그를 인하여 내가 오늘날 이같이 네게 명하노라	And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of Egypt, and the Lord thy God redeemed thee: therefore I command thee this thing to day.	Remember that you were slaves in the land of Egypt, and the LORD your God redeemed you; that is why I am giving you this command today.
DEU	15	16	종이 만일 너와 네 집을 사랑하므로 너와 동거하기를 좋게 여겨 네게 향하여 내가 주인을 떠나지 아니하겠노라 하거든	And it shall be, if he say unto thee, I will not go away from thee; because he loveth thee and thine house, because he is well with thee;	But if your servant says to you, ‘I do not want to leave you,’ because he loves you and your household and is well off with you,
DEU	15	17	송곳을 취하여 그의 귀를 문에 대고 뚫으라 그리하면 그가 영영히 네 종이 되리라 네 여종에게도 일례로 할지니라	Then thou shalt take an aul, and thrust it through his ear unto the door, and he shall be thy servant for ever. And also unto thy maidservant thou shalt do likewise.	then take an awl and pierce it through his ear into the door, and he will become your servant for life. And treat your maidservant the same way.
DEU	15	18	그가 육 년 동안에 품군의 삯의 배나 받을 만큼 너를 섬겼은즉 너는 그를 놓아 자유하게 하기를 어렵게 여기지 말라 그리하면 네 하나님 여호와께서 너의 범사에 네게 복을 주시리라	It shall not seem hard unto thee, when thou sendest him away free from thee; for he hath been worth a double hired servant to thee, in serving thee six years: and the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all that thou doest.	Do not regard it as a hardship to set your servant free, because his six years of service were worth twice the wages of a hired hand. And the LORD your God will bless you in all you do.
DEU	15	19	너는 우양의 처음 난 수컷은 구별하여 네 하나님 여호와께 드릴 것이니 네 소의 첫 새끼는 부리지 말고 네 양의 첫 새끼의 털은 깍지 말고	All the firstling males that come of thy herd and of thy flock thou shalt sanctify unto the Lord thy God: thou shalt do no work with the firstling of thy bullock, nor shear the firstling of thy sheep.	You must set apart to the LORD your God every firstborn male produced by your herds and flocks. You are not to put the firstborn of your oxen to work, nor are you to shear the firstborn of your flock.
DEU	15	20	너와 네 가족이 매년에 여호와의 택하신 곳 네 하나님 여호와 앞에서 먹을지니라	Thou shalt eat it before the Lord thy God year by year in the place which the Lord shall choose, thou and thy household.	Each year you and your household are to eat it before the LORD your God in the place the LORD will choose.
DEU	15	21	그러나 그 짐승이 흠이 있어서 절거나 눈이 멀었거나 무슨 흠이 있든지 네 하나님 여호와께 잡아 드리지 못할지니	And if there be any blemish therein, as if it be lame, or blind, or have any ill blemish, thou shalt not sacrifice it unto the Lord thy God.	But if an animal has a defect, is lame or blind, or has any serious flaw, you must not sacrifice it to the LORD your God.
DEU	15	22	네 성중에서 먹되 부정한 자나 정한 자가 다 같이 먹기를 노루와 사슴을 먹음 같이 할 것이요	Thou shalt eat it within thy gates: the unclean and the clean person shall eat it alike, as the roebuck, and as the hart.	Eat it within your gates; both the ceremonially unclean and clean may eat it as they would a gazelle or a deer.
DEU	15	23	오직 피는 먹지 말고 물 같이 땅에 쏟을 지니라	Only thou shalt not eat the blood thereof; thou shalt pour it upon the ground as water.	But you must not eat the blood; pour it on the ground like water.
DEU	16	1	아빕월을 지켜 네 하나님 여호와의 유월절 예식을 행하라 이는 아빕월에 네 하나님 여호와께서 밤에 너를 애굽에서 인도하여 내셨음이라	Observe the month of Abib, and keep the passover unto the Lord thy God: for in the month of Abib the Lord thy God brought thee forth out of Egypt by night.	Observe the month of Abib and celebrate the Passover to the LORD your God, because in the month of Abib the LORD your God brought you out of Egypt by night.
DEU	16	2	여호와께서 그 이름을 두시려고 택하신 곳에서 우양으로 네 하나님 여호와께 유월절 제사를 드리되	Thou shalt therefore sacrifice the passover unto the Lord thy God, of the flock and the herd, in the place which the Lord shall choose to place his name there.	You are to offer to the LORD your God the Passover sacrifice from the herd or flock in the place the LORD will choose as a dwelling for His Name.
DEU	16	3	유교병을 그것과 아울러 먹지 말고 칠 일 동안은 무교병 곧 고난의 떡을 그것과 아울러 먹으라 이는 네가 애굽 땅에서 급속히 나왔음이니 이같이 행하여 너의 평생에 항상 네가 애굽 땅에서 나온 날을 기억할 것이니라	Thou shalt eat no leavened bread with it; seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread therewith, even the bread of affliction; for thou camest forth out of the land of Egypt in haste: that thou mayest remember the day when thou camest forth out of the land of Egypt all the days of thy life.	You must not eat leavened bread with it; for seven days you are to eat with it unleavened bread, the bread of affliction, because you left the land of Egypt in haste—so that you may remember for the rest of your life the day you left the land of Egypt.
DEU	16	4	그 칠 일 동안에는 네 사경 내에 누룩이 보이지 않게 할 것이요 또 네가 첫날 해 질 때에 제사드린 고기를 밤을 지내어 아침까지 두지 말 것이며	And there shall be no leavened bread seen with thee in all thy coast seven days; neither shall there any thing of the flesh, which thou sacrificedst the first day at even, remain all night until the morning.	No leaven is to be found in all your land for seven days, and none of the meat you sacrifice in the evening of the first day shall remain until morning.
DEU	16	5	유월절 제사를 네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 주신 각 성에서 드리지 말고	Thou mayest not sacrifice the passover within any of thy gates, which the Lord thy God giveth thee:	You are not to sacrifice the Passover animal in any of the towns that the LORD your God is giving you.
DEU	16	6	오직 네 하나님 여호와께서 그 이름을 두시려고 택하신 곳에서 네가 애굽에서 나오던 시각 곧 초저녁 해 질 때에 드리고	But at the place which the Lord thy God shall choose to place his name in, there thou shalt sacrifice the passover at even, at the going down of the sun, at the season that thou camest forth out of Egypt.	You must only offer the Passover sacrifice at the place the LORD your God will choose as a dwelling for His Name. Do this in the evening as the sun sets, at the same time you departed from Egypt.
DEU	16	7	네 하나님 여호와께서 택하신 곳에서 그 고기를 구워먹고 아침에 네 장막으로 돌아갈 것이니라	And thou shalt roast and eat it in the place which the Lord thy God shall choose: and thou shalt turn in the morning, and go unto thy tents.	And you shall roast it and eat it in the place the LORD your God will choose, and in the morning you shall return to your tents.
DEU	16	8	너는 육 일 동안은 무교병을 먹고 제칠일에 네 하나님 여호와 앞에 성회로 모이고 아무 노동도 하지 말지니라	Six days thou shalt eat unleavened bread: and on the seventh day shall be a solemn assembly to the Lord thy God: thou shalt do no work therein.	For six days you must eat unleavened bread, and on the seventh day you shall hold a solemn assembly to the LORD your God, and you must not do any work.
DEU	16	9	칠 주를 계속할지니 곡식에 낫을 대는 첫날부터 칠 주를 계수하여	Seven weeks shalt thou number unto thee: begin to number the seven weeks from such time as thou beginnest to put the sickle to the corn.	You are to count off seven weeks from the time you first put the sickle to the standing grain.
DEU	16	10	네 하나님 여호와 앞에 칠칠절을 지키되 네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 복을 주신 대로 네 힘을 헤아려 자원하는 예물을 드리고	And thou shalt keep the feast of weeks unto the Lord thy God with a tribute of a freewill offering of thine hand, which thou shalt give unto the Lord thy God, according as the Lord thy God hath blessed thee:	And you shall celebrate the Feast of Weeks to the LORD your God with a freewill offering that you give in proportion to how the LORD your God has blessed you,
DEU	16	11	너와 네 자녀와 노비와 네 성중에 거하는 레위인과 및 너희 중에 있는 객과 고아와 과부가 함께 네 하나님 여호와께서 그 이름을 두시려고 택하신 곳에서 네 하나님 여호와 앞에서 즐거워할지니라	And thou shalt rejoice before the Lord thy God, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite that is within thy gates, and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, that are among you, in the place which the Lord thy God hath chosen to place his name there.	and you shall rejoice before the LORD your God in the place He will choose as a dwelling for His Name—you, your sons and daughters, your menservants and maidservants, and the Levite within your gates, as well as the foreigner, the fatherless, and the widows among you.
DEU	16	12	너는 애굽에서 종 되었던 것을 기억하고 이 규례를 지켜 행할지니라	And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt: and thou shalt observe and do these statutes.	Remember that you were slaves in Egypt, and carefully follow these statutes.
DEU	16	13	너희 타작 마당과 포도주 틀의 소출을 수장한 후에 칠 일 동안 초막절을 지킬 것이요	Thou shalt observe the feast of tabernacles seven days, after that thou hast gathered in thy corn and thy wine:	You are to celebrate the Feast of Tabernacles for seven days after you have gathered the produce of your threshing floor and your winepress.
DEU	16	14	절기를 지킬 때에는 너와 네 자녀와 노비와 네 성중에 거하는 레위인과 객과 고아와 과부가 함께 연락하되	And thou shalt rejoice in thy feast, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite, the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, that are within thy gates.	And you shall rejoice in your feast—you, your sons and daughters, your menservants and maidservants, and the Levite, as well as the foreigner, the fatherless, and the widows among you.
DEU	16	15	네 하나님 여호와께서 택하신 곳에서 너는 칠 일 동안 네 하나님 여호와 앞에서 절기를 지키고 네 하나님 여호와께서 네 모든 물산과 네 손을 댄 모든 일에 복 주실 것을 인하여 너는 온전히 즐거워할지니라	Seven days shalt thou keep a solemn feast unto the Lord thy God in the place which the Lord shall choose: because the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thine increase, and in all the works of thine hands, therefore thou shalt surely rejoice.	For seven days you shall celebrate a feast to the LORD your God in the place He will choose, because the LORD your God will bless you in all your produce and in all the work of your hands, so that your joy will be complete.
DEU	16	16	너의 중 모든 남자는 일 년 삼차 곧 무교절과 칠칠절과 초막절에 네 하나님 여호와의 택하신 곳에서 여호와께 보이되 공수로 여호와께 보이지 말고	Three times in a year shall all thy males appear before the Lord thy God in the place which he shall choose; in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles: and they shall not appear before the Lord empty:	Three times a year all your men are to appear before the LORD your God in the place He will choose: at the Feast of Unleavened Bread, the Feast of Weeks, and the Feast of Tabernacles. No one should appear before the LORD empty-handed.
DEU	16	17	각 사람이 네 하나님 여호와의 주신 복을 따라 그 힘대로 물건을 드릴지니라	Every man shall give as he is able, according to the blessing of the Lord thy God which he hath given thee.	Everyone must appear with a gift as he is able, according to the blessing the LORD your God has given you.
DEU	16	18	네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 주시는 각 성에서 네 지파를 따라 재판장과 유사를 둘 것이요 그들은 공의로 백성을 재판할 것이니라	Judges and officers shalt thou make thee in all thy gates, which the Lord thy God giveth thee, throughout thy tribes: and they shall judge the people with just judgment.	You are to appoint judges and officials for your tribes in every town that the LORD your God is giving you. They are to judge the people with righteous judgment.
DEU	16	19	너는 굽게 판단하지 말며 사람을 외모로 보지 말며 또 뇌물을 받지 말라 뇌물은 지혜자의 눈을 어둡게 하고 의인의 말을 굽게 하느니라	Thou shalt not wrest judgment; thou shalt not respect persons, neither take a gift: for a gift doth blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous.	Do not deny justice or show partiality. Do not accept a bribe, for a bribe blinds the eyes of the wise and twists the words of the righteous.
DEU	16	20	너는 마땅히 공의만 좇으라 그리하면 네가 살겠고 네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 주시는 땅을 얻으리라	That which is altogether just shalt thou follow, that thou mayest live, and inherit the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.	Pursue justice, and justice alone, so that you may live, and you may possess the land that the LORD your God is giving you.
DEU	16	21	네 하나님 여호와를 위하여 쌓은 단 곁에 아무 나무로든지 아세라 상을 세우지 말며	Thou shalt not plant thee a grove of any trees near unto the altar of the Lord thy God, which thou shalt make thee.	Do not set up any wooden Asherah pole next to the altar you will build for the LORD your God,
DEU	16	22	자기를 위하여 주상을 세우지 말라 네 하나님 여호와께서 미워하시느니라	Neither shalt thou set thee up any image; which the Lord thy God hateth.	and do not set up for yourselves a sacred pillar, which the LORD your God hates.
DEU	17	1	무릇 흠이나 악질이 있는 우양은 네 하나님 여호와께 드리지 말지니 이는 네 하나님 여호와께 가증한 것이 됨이니라	Thou shalt not sacrifice unto the Lord thy God any bullock, or sheep, wherein is blemish, or any evilfavouredness: for that is an abomination unto the Lord thy God.	You shall not sacrifice to the LORD your God an ox or a sheep with any defect or serious flaw, for that is detestable to the LORD your God.
DEU	17	2	네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 주시는 어느 성중에서든지 너의 가운데 혹시 어떤 남자나 여자가 네 하나님 여호와의 목전에 악을 행하여 그 언약을 어기고	If there be found among you, within any of thy gates which the Lord thy God giveth thee, man or woman, that hath wrought wickedness in the sight of the Lord thy God, in transgressing his covenant,	If a man or woman among you in one of the towns that the LORD your God gives you is found doing evil in the sight of the LORD your God by transgressing His covenant
DEU	17	3	가서 다른 신들을 섬겨 그것에게 절하며 내가 명하지 아니한 일월성신에게 절한다 하자	And hath gone and served other gods, and worshipped them, either the sun, or moon, or any of the host of heaven, which I have not commanded;	and going to worship other gods, bowing down to them or to the sun or moon or any of the host of heaven—which I have forbidden—
DEU	17	4	혹이 그 일을 네게 고하므로 네가 듣거든 자세히 사실하여 볼지니 만일 그 일과 말이 확실하여 이스라엘 중에 이런 가증한 일을 행함이 있으면	And it be told thee, and thou hast heard of it, and enquired diligently, and, behold, it be true, and the thing certain, that such abomination is wrought in Israel:	and if it is reported and you hear about it, you must investigate it thoroughly. If the report is true and such an abomination has happened in Israel,
DEU	17	5	너는 그 악을 행한 남자나 여자를 네 성문으로 끌어내고 돌로 그 남자나 여자를 쳐 죽이되	Then shalt thou bring forth that man or that woman, which have committed that wicked thing, unto thy gates, even that man or that woman, and shalt stone them with stones, till they die.	you must bring out to your gates the man or woman who has done this evil thing, and you must stone that person to death.
DEU	17	6	죽일 자를 두 사람이나 세 사람의 증거로 죽일 것이요 한 사람의 증거로는 죽이지 말 것이며	At the mouth of two witnesses, or three witnesses, shall he that is worthy of death be put to death; but at the mouth of one witness he shall not be put to death.	On the testimony of two or three witnesses a man shall be put to death, but he shall not be executed on the testimony of a lone witness.
DEU	17	7	이런 자를 죽임에는 증인이 먼저 그에게 손을 댄 후에 뭇 백성이 손을 댈지니라 너는 이와 같이 하여 너의 중에 악을 제할지니라	The hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him to put him to death, and afterward the hands of all the people. So thou shalt put the evil away from among you.	The hands of the witnesses shall be the first in putting him to death, and after that, the hands of all the people. So you must purge the evil from among you.
DEU	17	8	네 성중에서 송사로 다투는 일이 있으되 서로 피를 흘렸거나 다투었거나 구타하였거나 하여 네가 판결하기 어려운 일이 생기거든 너는 일어나 네 하나님 여호와의 택하실 곳으로 올라가서	If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between blood and blood, between plea and plea, and between stroke and stroke, being matters of controversy within thy gates: then shalt thou arise, and get thee up into the place which the Lord thy God shall choose;	If a case is too difficult for you to judge, whether the controversy within your gates is regarding bloodshed, lawsuits, or assaults, you must go up to the place the LORD your God will choose.
DEU	17	9	레위 사람 제사장과 당시 재판장에게로 나아가서 물으라 그리하면 그들이 어떻게 판결할 것을 네게 가르치리니	And thou shalt come unto the priests the Levites, and unto the judge that shall be in those days, and enquire; and they shall shew thee the sentence of judgment:	You are to go to the Levitical priests and to the judge who presides at that time. Inquire of them, and they will give you a verdict in the case.
DEU	17	10	여호와께서 택하신 곳에서 그들이 네게 보이는 판결의 뜻대로 네가 행하되 무릇 그들이 네게 가르치는 대로 삼가 행할 것이니	And thou shalt do according to the sentence, which they of that place which the Lord shall choose shall shew thee; and thou shalt observe to do according to all that they inform thee:	You must abide by the verdict they give you at the place the LORD will choose. Be careful to do everything they instruct you,
DEU	17	11	곧 그들이 네게 가르치는 법률의 뜻대로 그들이 네게 고하는 판결대로 행할 것이요 그들이 네게 보이는 판결을 어기어서 좌로나 우로나 치우치지 말 것이니라	According to the sentence of the law which they shall teach thee, and according to the judgment which they shall tell thee, thou shalt do: thou shalt not decline from the sentence which they shall shew thee, to the right hand, nor to the left.	according to the terms of law they give and the verdict they proclaim. Do not turn aside to the right or to the left from the decision they declare to you.
DEU	17	12	사람이 만일 천자히 하고 네 하나님 여호와 앞에 서서 섬기는 제사장이나 재판장을 듣지 아니하거든 그 사람을 죽여 이스라엘 중에서 악을 제하여 버리라	And the man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the priest that standeth to minister there before the Lord thy God, or unto the judge, even that man shall die: and thou shalt put away the evil from Israel.	But the man who acts presumptuously, refusing to listen either to the priest who stands there to serve the LORD your God, or to the judge, must be put to death. You must purge the evil from Israel.
DEU	17	13	그리하면 온 백성이 듣고 두려워하여 다시는 천자히 행치 아니하리라	And all the people shall hear, and fear, and do no more presumptuously.	Then all the people will hear and be afraid, and will no longer behave arrogantly.
DEU	17	14	네가 네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 주시는 땅에 이르러서 그 땅을 얻어 거할 때에 만일 우리도 우리 주위의 열국 같이 우리 위에 왕을 세우리라는 뜻이 나거든	When thou art come unto the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, and shalt possess it, and shalt dwell therein, and shalt say, I will set a king over me, like as all the nations that are about me;	When you enter the land that the LORD your God is giving you and have taken possession of it and settled in it, and you say, “Let us set a king over us like all the nations around us,”
DEU	17	15	반드시 네 하나님 여호와의 택하신 자를 네 위에 왕으로 세울 것이며 네 위에 왕을 세우려면 네 형제 중에서 한 사람으로 할 것이요 네 형제 아닌 타국인을 네 위에 세우지 말 것이며	Thou shalt in any wise set him king over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose: one from among thy brethren shalt thou set king over thee: thou mayest not set a stranger over thee, which is not thy brother.	you are to appoint over yourselves the king whom the LORD your God shall choose. Appoint a king from among your brothers; you are not to set over yourselves a foreigner who is not one of your brothers.
DEU	17	16	왕 된 자는 말을 많이 두지 말 것이요 말을 많이 얻으려고 그 백성을 애굽으로 돌아가게 말 것이니 이는 여호와께서 너희에게 이르시기를 너희가 이 후에는 그 길로 다시 돌아가지 말 것이라 하셨음이며	But he shall not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the people to return to Egypt, to the end that he should multiply horses: forasmuch as the Lord hath said unto you, Ye shall henceforth return no more that way.	But the king must not acquire many horses for himself or send the people back to Egypt to acquire more horses, for the LORD has said, ‘You are never to go back that way again.’
DEU	17	17	아내를 많이 두어서 그 마음이 미혹되게 말것이며 은금을 자기를 위하여 많이 쌓지 말것이니라	Neither shall he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn not away: neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and gold.	He must not take many wives for himself, lest his heart go astray. He must not accumulate for himself large amounts of silver and gold.
DEU	17	18	그가 왕위에 오르거든 레위 사람 제사장 앞에 보관한 이 율법서를 등사하여	And it shall be, when he sitteth upon the throne of his kingdom, that he shall write him a copy of this law in a book out of that which is before the priests the Levites:	When he is seated on his royal throne, he must write for himself a copy of this instruction on a scroll in the presence of the Levitical priests.
DEU	17	19	평생에 자기 옆에 두고 읽어서 그 하나님 여호와 경외하기를 배우며 이 율법의 모든 말과 이 규례를 지켜 행할 것이라	And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life: that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words of this law and these statutes, to do them:	It is to remain with him, and he is to read from it all the days of his life, so that he may learn to fear the LORD his God by carefully observing all the words of this instruction and these statutes.
DEU	17	20	그리하면 그의 마음이 그 형제 위에 교만하지 아니하고 이 명령에서 떠나 좌로나 우로나 치우치지 아니하리니 이스라엘 중에서 그와 그의 자손의 왕위에 있는 날이 장구하리라	That his heart be not lifted up above his brethren, and that he turn not aside from the commandment, to the right hand, or to the left: to the end that he may prolong his days in his kingdom, he, and his children, in the midst of Israel.	Then his heart will not be exalted above his countrymen, and he will not turn aside from the commandment, to the right or to the left, in order that he and his sons may reign many years over his kingdom in Israel.
DEU	18	1	레위 사람 제사장과 레위의 온 지파는 이스라엘 중에 분깃도 없고 기업도 없을지니 그들은 여호와의 화제물과 그 기업을 먹을 것이라	The priests the Levites, and all the tribe of Levi, shall have no part nor inheritance with Israel: they shall eat the offerings of the Lord made by fire, and his inheritance.	The Levitical priests—indeed the whole tribe of Levi—shall have no portion or inheritance with Israel. They are to eat the offerings made by fire to the LORD; that is their inheritance.
DEU	18	2	그들이 그 형제 중에 기업이 없을 것은 그들에게 대하여 말씀하심 같이 여호와께서 그들의 기업이 되심이니라	Therefore shall they have no inheritance among their brethren: the Lord is their inheritance, as he hath said unto them.	Although they have no inheritance among their brothers, the LORD is their inheritance, as He promised them.
DEU	18	3	제사장이 백성에게서 받을 응식은 이러하니 곧 그 드리는 제물의 우양을 물론하고 그 앞 넓적다리와 두 볼과 위라 이것을 제사장에게 줄 것이요	And this shall be the priest’s due from the people, from them that offer a sacrifice, whether it be ox or sheep; and they shall give unto the priest the shoulder, and the two cheeks, and the maw.	This shall be the priests’ share from the people who offer a sacrifice, whether a bull or a sheep: the priests are to be given the shoulder, the jowls, and the stomach.
DEU	18	4	또 너의 처음 된 곡식과 포도주와 기름과 너의 처음 깍은 양털을 네가 그에게 줄 것이니	The firstfruit also of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil, and the first of the fleece of thy sheep, shalt thou give him.	You are to give them the firstfruits of your grain, new wine, and oil, and the first wool sheared from your flock.
DEU	18	5	이는 네 하나님 여호와께서 네 모든 지파 중에서 그를 택하여 내시고 그와 그의 자손으로 영영히 여호와의 이름으로 서서 섬기게 하셨음이니라	For the Lord thy God hath chosen him out of all thy tribes, to stand to minister in the name of the Lord, him and his sons for ever.	For the LORD your God has chosen Levi and his sons out of all your tribes to stand and minister in His name for all time.
DEU	18	6	이스라엘 온 땅 어느 성읍에든지 거하는 레위인이 간절한 소원이 있어 그 거한 곳을 떠나 여호와의 택하신 곳에 이르면	And if a Levite come from any of thy gates out of all Israel, where he sojourned, and come with all the desire of his mind unto the place which the Lord shall choose;	Now if a Levite moves from any town of residence throughout Israel and comes in all earnestness to the place the LORD will choose,
DEU	18	7	여호와 앞에 선 그 형제 모든 레위인과 일반으로 그 하나님 여호와의 이름으로 섬길 수 있나니	Then he shall minister in the name of the Lord his God, as all his brethren the Levites do, which stand there before the Lord.	then he shall serve in the name of the LORD his God like all his fellow Levites who stand there before the LORD.
DEU	18	8	그 사람의 응식은 그들과 같을 것이요 그 상속 산업을 판 돈은 이 외에 그에게 속할 것이니라	They shall have like portions to eat, beside that which cometh of the sale of his patrimony.	They shall eat equal portions, even though he has received money from the sale of his father’s estate.
DEU	18	9	네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 주시는 땅에 들어가거든 너는 그 민족들의 가증한 행위를 본받지 말 것이니	When thou art come into the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not learn to do after the abominations of those nations.	When you enter the land that the LORD your God is giving you, do not imitate the detestable ways of the nations there.
DEU	18	10	그 아들이나 딸을 불 가운데로 지나게 하는 자나 복술자나 길흉을 말하는 자나 요술을 하는 자나 무당이나	There shall not be found among you any one that maketh his son or his daughter to pass through the fire, or that useth divination, or an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch,	Let no one be found among you who sacrifices his son or daughter in the fire, practices divination or conjury, interprets omens, practices sorcery,
DEU	18	11	진언자나 신접자나 박수나 초혼자를 너의 중에 용납하지 말라	Or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer.	casts spells, consults a medium or spiritist, or inquires of the dead.
DEU	18	12	무릇 이런 일을 행하는 자는 여호와께서 가증히 여기시나니 이런 가증한 일로 인하여 네 하나님 여호와께서 그들을 네 앞에서 쫓아 내시느니라	For all that do these things are an abomination unto the Lord: and because of these abominations the Lord thy God doth drive them out from before thee.	For whoever does these things is detestable to the LORD. And because of these detestable things, the LORD your God is driving out the nations before you.
DEU	18	13	너는 네 하나님 여호와 앞에 완전하라	Thou shalt be perfect with the Lord thy God.	You must be blameless before the LORD your God.
DEU	18	14	네가 쫓아낼 이 민족들은 길흉을 말하는 자나 복술자의 말을 듣거니와 네게는 네 하나님 여호와께서 이런 일을 용납지 아니하시느니라	For these nations, which thou shalt possess, hearkened unto observers of times, and unto diviners: but as for thee, the Lord thy God hath not suffered thee so to do.	Though these nations, which you will dispossess, listen to conjurers and diviners, the LORD your God has not permitted you to do so.
DEU	18	15	네 하나님 여호와께서 너의 중 네 형제 중에서 나와 같은 선지자 하나를 너를 위하여 일으키시리니 너희는 그를 들을지니라	The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken;	The LORD your God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among your brothers. You must listen to him.
DEU	18	16	이것이 곧 네가 총회의 날에 호렙 산에서 너의 하나님 여호와께 구한 것이라 곧 네가 말하기를 나로 다시는 나의 하나님 여호와의 음성을 듣지 않게 하시고 다시는 이 큰 불을 보지 않게 하소서 두렵건대 내가 죽을까 하나이다 하매	According to all that thou desiredst of the Lord thy God in Horeb in the day of the assembly, saying, Let me not hear again the voice of the Lord my God, neither let me see this great fire any more, that I die not.	This is what you asked of the LORD your God at Horeb on the day of the assembly, when you said, “Let us not hear the voice of the LORD our God or see this great fire anymore, so that we will not die!”
DEU	18	17	여호와께서 이르시되 그들의 말이 옳도다	And the Lord said unto me, They have well spoken that which they have spoken.	Then the LORD said to me, “They have spoken well.
DEU	18	18	내가 그들의 형제 중에 너와 같은 선지자 하나를 그들을 위하여 일으키고 내 말을 그 입에 두리니 내가 그에게 명하는 것을 그가 무리에게 다 고하리라	I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth; and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him.	I will raise up for them a prophet like you from among their brothers. I will put My words in his mouth, and he will tell them everything I command him.
DEU	18	19	무릇 그가 내 이름으로 고하는 내 말을 듣지 아니하는 자는 내게 벌을 받을 것이요	And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him.	And I will hold accountable anyone who does not listen to My words that the prophet speaks in My name.
DEU	18	20	내가 고하라고 명하지 아니한 말을 어떤 선지자가 만일 방자히 내 이름으로 고하든지 다른 신들의 이름으로 말하면 그 선지자는 죽임을 당하리라 하셨느니라	But the prophet, which shall presume to speak a word in my name, which I have not commanded him to speak, or that shall speak in the name of other gods, even that prophet shall die.	But if any prophet dares to speak a message in My name that I have not commanded him to speak, or to speak in the name of other gods, that prophet must be put to death.”
DEU	18	21	네가 혹시 심중에 이르기를 그 말이 여호와의 이르신 말씀인지 우리가 어떻게 알리요 하리라	And if thou say in thine heart, How shall we know the word which the Lord hath not spoken?	You may ask in your heart, “How can we recognize a message that the LORD has not spoken?”
DEU	18	22	만일 선지자가 있어서 여호와의 이름으로 말한 일에 증험도 없고 성취함도 없으면 이는 여호와의 말씀하신 것이 아니요 그 선지자가 방자히 한 말이니 너는 그를 두려워 말지니라	When a prophet speaketh in the name of the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which the Lord hath not spoken, but the prophet hath spoken it presumptuously: thou shalt not be afraid of him.	When a prophet speaks in the name of the LORD and the message does not come to pass or come true, that is a message the LORD has not spoken. The prophet has spoken presumptuously. Do not be afraid of him.
DEU	19	1	네 하나님 여호와께서 이 열국을 멸절하시고 네 하나님 여호와께서 그 땅을 네게 주시므로 네가 필경 그것을 얻고 그들의 각 성읍과 각 가옥에 거할 때에	When the Lord thy God hath cut off the nations, whose land the Lord thy God giveth thee, and thou succeedest them, and dwellest in their cities, and in their houses;	When the LORD your God has cut off the nations whose land He is giving you, and when you have driven them out and settled in their cities and houses,
DEU	19	2	네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 기업으로 주신 땅 가운데서 세 성읍을 너를 위하여 구별하고	Thou shalt separate three cities for thee in the midst of thy land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee to possess it.	then you are to set apart for yourselves three cities within the land that the LORD your God is giving you to possess.
DEU	19	3	네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 유업으로 주시는 땅의 전체를 삼 구로 분하여 그 도로를 닦고 무릇 살인자를 그 성읍으로 도피케 하라	Thou shalt prepare thee a way, and divide the coasts of thy land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee to inherit, into three parts, that every slayer may flee thither.	You are to build roads for yourselves and divide into three regions the land that the LORD your God is giving you as an inheritance, so that any manslayer can flee to these cities.
DEU	19	4	살인자가 그리로 도피하여 살만한 경위는 이러하니 곧 누구든지 본래 혐원이 없이 부지 중에 그 이웃을 죽인 일,	And this is the case of the slayer, which shall flee thither, that he may live: Whoso killeth his neighbour ignorantly, whom he hated not in time past;	Now this is the situation regarding the manslayer who flees to one of these cities to save his life, having killed his neighbor accidentally, without intending to harm him:
DEU	19	5	가령 사람이 그 이웃과 함께 벌목하러 삼림에 들어가서 손에 도끼를 들고 벌목하려고 찍을 때에 도끼가 자루에서 빠져 그 이웃을 맞춰 그로 죽게함 같은 것이라 이런 사람은 그 성읍 중 하나로 도피하여 생명을 보존할 것이니라	As when a man goeth into the wood with his neighbour to hew wood, and his hand fetcheth a stroke with the axe to cut down the tree, and the head slippeth from the helve, and lighteth upon his neighbour, that he die; he shall flee unto one of those cities, and live:	If he goes into the forest with his neighbor to cut timber and swings his axe to chop down a tree, but the blade flies off the handle and strikes and kills his neighbor, he may flee to one of these cities to save his life.
DEU	19	6	그 사람이 그에게 본래 혐원이 없으니 죽이기에 합당치 아니하나 두렵건대 보수자의 마음이 뜨거워서 살인자를 따르는데 그 가는 길이 멀면 그를 따라 미쳐서 죽일까 하노라	Lest the avenger of the blood pursue the slayer, while his heart is hot, and overtake him, because the way is long, and slay him; whereas he was not worthy of death, inasmuch as he hated him not in time past.	Otherwise, the avenger of blood might pursue the manslayer in a rage, overtake him if the distance is great, and strike him dead though he did not deserve to die, since he did not intend any harm.
DEU	19	7	그러므로 내가 네게 명하기를 세 성읍을 너를 위하여 구별하라 하노라	Wherefore I command thee, saying, Thou shalt separate three cities for thee.	This is why I am commanding you to set apart for yourselves three cities.
DEU	19	8	네 하나님 여호와께서 네 열조에게 맹세하신 대로 네 지경을 넓혀 네 열조에게 주리라고 말씀하신 땅을 다 네게 주실 때	And if the Lord thy God enlarge thy coast, as he hath sworn unto thy fathers, and give thee all the land which he promised to give unto thy fathers;	And if the LORD your God enlarges your territory, as He swore to your fathers, and gives you all the land He promised them,
DEU	19	9	또 네가 나의 오늘날 네게 명하는 이 모든 명령을 지켜 행하여 네 하나님 여호와를 사랑하고 항상 그 길로 행할 때에는 이 셋 외에 세 성읍을 더하여	If thou shalt keep all these commandments to do them, which I command thee this day, to love the Lord thy God, and to walk ever in his ways; then shalt thou add three cities more for thee, beside these three:	and if you carefully keep all these commandments I am giving you today, loving the LORD your God and walking in His ways at all times, then you are to add three more cities to these three.
DEU	19	10	네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 기업으로 주시는 땅에서 무죄한 피를 흘림이 없게 하라 이같이 하면 그 피가 네게로 돌아가지 아니하리라	That innocent blood be not shed in thy land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee for an inheritance, and so blood be upon thee.	Thus innocent blood will not be shed in the land that the LORD your God is giving you as an inheritance, so that you will not be guilty of bloodshed.
DEU	19	11	그러나 만일 사람이 그 이웃을 미워하여 엎드려 그를 기다리다가 일어나 쳐서 그 생명을 상하여 죽게 하고 이 한 성읍으로 도피하거든	But if any man hate his neighbour, and lie in wait for him, and rise up against him, and smite him mortally that he die, and fleeth into one of these cities:	If, however, a man hates his neighbor and lies in wait, attacks him and kills him, and then flees to one of these cities,
DEU	19	12	그 본 성읍 장로들이 사람을 보내어 그를 거기서 잡아다가 보수자의 손에 넘겨 죽이게 할 것이라	Then the elders of his city shall send and fetch him thence, and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of blood, that he may die.	the elders of his city must send for him, bring him back, and hand him over to the avenger of blood to die.
DEU	19	13	네 눈이 그를 긍휼히 보지 말고 무죄한 피 흘린 죄를 이스라엘에서 제하라 그리하면 네게 복이 있으리라	Thine eye shall not pity him, but thou shalt put away the guilt of innocent blood from Israel, that it may go well with thee.	You must show him no pity. You are to purge from Israel the guilt of shedding innocent blood, that it may go well with you.
DEU	19	14	네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 주어 얻게 하시는 땅 곧 네 기업된 소유의 땅에서 선인의 정한 네 이웃의 경계표를 이동하지 말지니라	Thou shalt not remove thy neighbour’s landmark, which they of old time have set in thine inheritance, which thou shalt inherit in the land that the Lord thy God giveth thee to possess it.	You must not move your neighbor’s boundary marker, which was set up by your ancestors to mark the inheritance you shall receive in the land that the LORD your God is giving you to possess.
DEU	19	15	사람이 아무 악이든지 무릇 범한 죄는 한 증인으로만 정할 것이 아니요 두 증인의 입으로나 세 증인의 입으로 그 사건을 확정할 것이며	One witness shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or for any sin, in any sin that he sinneth: at the mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall the matter be established.	A lone witness is not sufficient to establish any wrongdoing or sin against a man, regardless of what offense he may have committed. A matter must be established by the testimony of two or three witnesses.
DEU	19	16	만일 위증하는 자가 있어 아무 사람이 악을 행하였다 말함이 있으면	If a false witness rise up against any man to testify against him that which is wrong;	If a false witness testifies against someone, accusing him of a crime,
DEU	19	17	그 논쟁하는 양방이 같이 하나님 앞에 나아가 당시 제사장과 재판장 앞에 설 것이요	Then both the men, between whom the controversy is, shall stand before the Lord, before the priests and the judges, which shall be in those days;	both parties to the dispute must stand in the presence of the LORD, before the priests and judges who are in office at that time.
DEU	19	18	재판장은 자세히 사실하여 그 증인이 위증인이라 그 형제를 거짓으로 무함한 것이 판명되거든	And the judges shall make diligent inquisition: and, behold, if the witness be a false witness, and hath testified falsely against his brother;	The judges shall investigate thoroughly, and if the witness is proven to be a liar who has falsely accused his brother,
DEU	19	19	그가 그 형제에게 행하려고 꾀 한대로 그에게 행하여 너희 중에서 악을 제하라	Then shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done unto his brother: so shalt thou put the evil away from among you.	you must do to him as he intended to do to his brother. So you must purge the evil from among you.
DEU	19	20	그리하면 그 남은 자들이 듣고 두려워하여 이후부터는 이런 악을 너희 중에서 다시 행하지 아니하리라	And those which remain shall hear, and fear, and shall henceforth commit no more any such evil among you.	Then the rest of the people will hear and be afraid, and they will never again do anything so evil among you.
DEU	19	21	네 눈이 긍휼히 보지 말라 생명은 생명으로, 눈은 눈으로, 이는 이로, 손은 손으로, 발은 발로니라	And thine eye shall not pity; but life shall go for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.	You must show no pity: life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, and foot for foot.
DEU	20	1	네가 나가 대적과 싸우려 할 때에 말과 병거와 민중이 너보다 많음을 볼지라도 그들을 두려워 말라 애굽 땅에서 너를 인도하여 내신 네 하나님 여호와께서 너와 함께 하시느니라	When thou goest out to battle against thine enemies, and seest horses, and chariots, and a people more than thou, be not afraid of them: for the Lord thy God is with thee, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.	When you go out to war against your enemies and see horses, chariots, and an army larger than yours, do not be afraid of them; for the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, is with you.
DEU	20	2	너희가 싸울 곳에 가까이 가거든 제사장은 백성에게 나아가서 고하여	And it shall be, when ye are come nigh unto the battle, that the priest shall approach and speak unto the people,	When you are about to go into battle, the priest is to come forward and address the army,
DEU	20	3	그들에게 이르기를 이스라엘아 들으라 너희가 오늘날 너희의 대적과 싸우려고 나아왔으니 마음에 겁내지 말며 두려워 말며 떨지 말며 그들로 인하여 놀라지 말라	And shall say unto them, Hear, O Israel, ye approach this day unto battle against your enemies: let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble, neither be ye terrified because of them;	saying to them, “Hear, O Israel, today you are going into battle with your enemies. Do not be fainthearted or afraid; do not be alarmed or terrified because of them.
DEU	20	4	너희 하나님 여호와는 너희와 함께 행하시며 너희를 위하여 너희 대적을 치고 너희를 구원하시는 자니라 할 것이며	For the Lord your God is he that goeth with you, to fight for you against your enemies, to save you.	For the LORD your God goes with you to fight for you against your enemies, to give you the victory.”
DEU	20	5	유사들은 백성에게 고하여 이르기를 새집을 건축하고 낙성식을 행치 못한 자가 있느냐 그는 집으로 돌아갈지니 전사하면 타인이 낙성식을 행할까 하노라	And the officers shall speak unto the people, saying, What man is there that hath built a new house, and hath not dedicated it? let him go and return to his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man dedicate it.	Furthermore, the officers are to address the army, saying, “Has any man built a new house and not dedicated it? Let him return home, or he may die in battle and another man dedicate it.
DEU	20	6	포도원을 만들고 그 과실을 먹지 못한 자가 있느냐 그는 집으로 돌아갈지니 전사하면 타인이 그 과실을 먹을까 하노라	And what man is he that hath planted a vineyard, and hath not yet eaten of it? let him also go and return unto his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man eat of it.	Has any man planted a vineyard and not begun to enjoy its fruit? Let him return home, or he may die in battle and another man enjoy its fruit.
DEU	20	7	여자와 약혼하고 그를 취하지 못한 자가 있느냐 그는 집으로 돌아갈지니 전사하면 타인이 그를 취할까 하노라 하고	And what man is there that hath betrothed a wife, and hath not taken her? let him go and return unto his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man take her.	Has any man become pledged to a woman and not married her? Let him return home, or he may die in battle and another man marry her.”
DEU	20	8	유사들은 오히려 또 백성에게 고하여 이르기를 두려워서 마음에 겁내는 자가 있느냐 그는 집으로 돌아갈지니 그 형제들의 마음도 그의 마음과 같이 떨어질까 하노라 하여	And the officers shall speak further unto the people, and they shall say, What man is there that is fearful and fainthearted? let him go and return unto his house, lest his brethren’s heart faint as well as his heart.	Then the officers shall speak further to the army, saying, “Is any man afraid or fainthearted? Let him return home, so that the hearts of his brothers will not melt like his own.”
DEU	20	9	백성에게 이르기를 필한 후에 군대의 장관들을 세워 무리를 거느리게 할지니라	And it shall be, when the officers have made an end of speaking unto the people, that they shall make captains of the armies to lead the people.	When the officers have finished addressing the army, they are to appoint commanders to lead it.
DEU	20	10	네가 어떤 성읍으로 나아가서 치려할 때에 그 성에 먼저 평화를 선언하라	When thou comest nigh unto a city to fight against it, then proclaim peace unto it.	When you approach a city to fight against it, you are to make an offer of peace.
DEU	20	11	그 성읍이 만일 평화하기로 회답하고 너를 향하여 성문을 열거든 그 온 거민으로 네게 공을 바치고 너를 섬기게 할 것이요	And it shall be, if it make thee answer of peace, and open unto thee, then it shall be, that all the people that is found therein shall be tributaries unto thee, and they shall serve thee.	If they accept your offer of peace and open their gates, all the people there will become forced laborers to serve you.
DEU	20	12	만일 너와 평화하기를 싫어하고 너를 대적하여 싸우려 하거든 너는 그 성읍을 에워쌀 것이며	And if it will make no peace with thee, but will make war against thee, then thou shalt besiege it:	But if they refuse to make peace with you and wage war against you, lay siege to that city.
DEU	20	13	네 하나님 여호와께서 그 성읍을 네 손에 붙이시거든 너는 칼날로 그 속의 남자를 다 쳐 죽이고	And when the Lord thy God hath delivered it into thine hands, thou shalt smite every male thereof with the edge of the sword:	When the LORD your God has delivered it into your hand, you must put every male to the sword.
DEU	20	14	오직 여자들과 유아들과 육축과 무릇 그 성중에서 네가 탈취한 모든 것은 네 것이니 취하라 네가 대적에게서 탈취한 것은 네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 주신 것인즉 너는 그것을 누릴지니라	But the women, and the little ones, and the cattle, and all that is in the city, even all the spoil thereof, shalt thou take unto thyself; and thou shalt eat the spoil of thine enemies, which the Lord thy God hath given thee.	But the women, children, livestock, and whatever else is in the city—all its spoil—you may take as plunder, and you shall use the spoil of your enemies that the LORD your God gives you.
DEU	20	15	네가 네게서 멀리 떠난 성읍들 곧 이 민족들에게 속하지 아니한 성읍들에게는 이같이 행하려니와	Thus shalt thou do unto all the cities which are very far off from thee, which are not of the cities of these nations.	This is how you are to treat all the cities that are far away from you and do not belong to the nations nearby.
DEU	20	16	오직 네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 기업으로 주시는 이 민족들의 성읍에서는 호흡 있는 자를 하나도 살리지 말지니	But of the cities of these people, which the Lord thy God doth give thee for an inheritance, thou shalt save alive nothing that breatheth:	However, in the cities of the nations that the LORD your God is giving you as an inheritance, you must not leave alive anything that breathes.
DEU	20	17	곧 헷 족속과 아모리 족속과 가나안 족속과 브리스 족속과 여부스 족속을 네가 진멸하되 네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 명하신 대로 하라	But thou shalt utterly destroy them; namely, the Hittites, and the Amorites, the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites; as the Lord thy God hath commanded thee:	For you must devote them to complete destruction—the Hittites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites—as the LORD your God has commanded you,
DEU	20	18	이는 그들이 그 신들에게 행하는 모든 가증한 일로 너희에게 가르쳐 본받게 하여 너희로 너희의 하나님 여호와께 범죄케 할까 함이니라	That they teach you not to do after all their abominations, which they have done unto their gods; so should ye sin against the Lord your God.	so that they cannot teach you to do all the detestable things they do for their gods, and so cause you to sin against the LORD your God.
DEU	20	19	너희가 어느 성읍을 오래 동안 에워싸고 쳐서 취하려 할 때에도 도끼를 둘러 그 곳의 나무를 작벌하지 말라 이는 너희의 먹을 것이 될 것임이니 찍지 말라 밭의 수목이 사람이냐 너희가 어찌 그것을 에워싸겠느냐	When thou shalt besiege a city a long time, in making war against it to take it, thou shalt not destroy the trees thereof by forcing an axe against them: for thou mayest eat of them, and thou shalt not cut them down (for the tree of the field is man’s life) to employ them in the siege:	When you lay siege to a city for an extended time while fighting against it to capture it, you must not destroy its trees by putting an axe to them, because you can eat their fruit. You must not cut them down. Are the trees of the field human, that you should besiege them?
DEU	20	20	오직 과목이 아닌 줄로 아는 수목은 작벌하여 너희와 싸우는 그 성읍을 치는 기구를 만들어 그 성읍을 함락시킬 때까지 쓸지니라	Only the trees which thou knowest that they be not trees for meat, thou shalt destroy and cut them down; and thou shalt build bulwarks against the city that maketh war with thee, until it be subdued.	But you may destroy the trees that you know do not produce fruit. Use them to build siege works against the city that is waging war against you, until it falls.
DEU	21	1	네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 주어 얻게 하시는 땅에서 혹시 피살한 시체가 들에 엎드러진 것을 발견하고 그 쳐 죽인 자가 누구인지 알지 못하거든	If one be found slain in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee to possess it, lying in the field, and it be not known who hath slain him:	If one is found slain, lying in a field in the land that the LORD your God is giving you to possess, and it is not known who killed him,
DEU	21	2	너의 장로들과 재판장들이 나가서 그 피살한 곳에서 사면에 있는 각 성읍의 원근을 잴 것이요	Then thy elders and thy judges shall come forth, and they shall measure unto the cities which are round about him that is slain:	your elders and judges must come out and measure the distance from the victim to the neighboring cities.
DEU	21	3	그 피살한 곳에서 제일 가까운 성읍 곧 그 성읍의 장로들이 아직 부리우지 아니하고 멍에를 메지 아니한 암송아지를 취하고	And it shall be, that the city which is next unto the slain man, even the elders of that city shall take an heifer, which hath not been wrought with, and which hath not drawn in the yoke;	Then the elders of the city nearest the victim shall take a heifer that has never been yoked or used for work,
DEU	21	4	성읍의 장로들이 물이 항상 흐르고 갈지도 심지도 못하는 골짜기로 그 송아지를 끌고 가서 그 골짜기에서 그 송아지의 목을 꺾을 것이요	And the elders of that city shall bring down the heifer unto a rough valley, which is neither eared nor sown, and shall strike off the heifer’s neck there in the valley:	bring the heifer to a valley with running water that has not been plowed or sown, and break its neck there by the stream.
DEU	21	5	레위 자손 제사장들도 그리로 올지니 그들은 네 하나님 여호와께서 택하사 자기를 섬기게 하시며 또 여호와의 이름으로 축복하게 하신 자라 모든 소송과 모든 투쟁이 그들의 말대로 판결될 것이니라	And the priests the sons of Levi shall come near; for them the Lord thy God hath chosen to minister unto him, and to bless in the name of the Lord; and by their word shall every controversy and every stroke be tried:	And the priests, the sons of Levi, shall come forward, for the LORD your God has chosen them to serve Him and pronounce blessings in His name and to give a ruling in every dispute and case of assault.
DEU	21	6	그 피살된 곳에서 제일 가까운 성읍의 모든 장로들은 그 골짜기에서 목을 꺾은 암송아지 위에 손을 씻으며	And all the elders of that city, that are next unto the slain man, shall wash their hands over the heifer that is beheaded in the valley:	Then all the elders of the city nearest the victim shall wash their hands by the stream over the heifer whose neck has been broken,
DEU	21	7	말하기를 우리의 손이 이 피를 흘리지 아니하였고 우리의 눈이 이것을 보지도 못하였나이다	And they shall answer and say, Our hands have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it.	and they shall declare, “Our hands did not shed this blood, nor did our eyes see it.
DEU	21	8	여호와여 주께서 속량하신 주의 백성 이스라엘을 사하시고 무죄한 피를 주의 백성 이스라엘 중에 머물러 두지 마옵소서 하면 그 피흘린 죄가 사함을 받으리니	Be merciful, O Lord, unto thy people Israel, whom thou hast redeemed, and lay not innocent blood unto thy people of Israel’s charge. And the blood shall be forgiven them.	Accept this atonement, O LORD, for Your people Israel whom You have redeemed, and do not hold the shedding of innocent blood against them.” And the bloodshed will be atoned for.
DEU	21	9	너는 이와 같이 여호와의 보시기에 정직한 일을 행하여 무죄자의 피흘린 죄를 너희 중에서 제할지니라	So shalt thou put away the guilt of innocent blood from among you, when thou shalt do that which is right in the sight of the Lord.	So you shall purge from among you the guilt of shedding innocent blood, since you have done what is right in the eyes of the LORD.
DEU	21	10	네가 나가서 대적과 싸움함을 당하여 네 하나님 여호와께서 그들을 네 손에 붙이시므로 네가 그들을 사로잡은 후에	When thou goest forth to war against thine enemies, and the Lord thy God hath delivered them into thine hands, and thou hast taken them captive,	When you go to war against your enemies and the LORD your God delivers them into your hand and you take them captive,
DEU	21	11	네가 만일 그 포로 중의 아리따운 여자를 보고 연련하여 아내를 삼고자 하거든	And seest among the captives a beautiful woman, and hast a desire unto her, that thou wouldest have her to thy wife;	if you see a beautiful woman among them, and you desire her and want to take her as your wife,
DEU	21	12	그를 네 집으로 데려갈 것이요 그는 그 머리를 밀고 손톱을 베고	Then thou shalt bring her home to thine house; and she shall shave her head, and pare her nails;	then you shall bring her into your house. She must shave her head, trim her nails,
DEU	21	13	또 포로의 의복을 벗고 네 집에 거하며 그 부모를 위하여 일 개월 동안 애곡한 후에 네가 그에게로 들어가서 그 남편이 되고 그는 네 아내가 될 것이요	And she shall put the raiment of her captivity from off her, and shall remain in thine house, and bewail her father and her mother a full month: and after that thou shalt go in unto her, and be her husband, and she shall be thy wife.	and put aside the clothing of her captivity. After she has lived in your house a full month and mourned her father and mother, you may have relations with her and be her husband, and she shall be your wife.
DEU	21	14	그 후에 네가 그를 기뻐하지 아니하거든 그 마음대로 가게 하고 결코 돈을 받고 팔지 말지라 네가 그를 욕보였은즉 종으로 여기지 말지니라	And it shall be, if thou have no delight in her, then thou shalt let her go whither she will; but thou shalt not sell her at all for money, thou shalt not make merchandise of her, because thou hast humbled her.	And if you are not pleased with her, you are to let her go wherever she wishes. But you must not sell her for money or treat her as a slave, since you have dishonored her.
DEU	21	15	어떤 사람이 두 아내를 두었는데 하나는 사랑을 받고 하나는 미움을 받다가 그 사랑을 받는 자와 미움을 받는 자가 둘 다 아들을 낳았다 하자 그 미움을 받는 자의 소생이 장자여든	If a man have two wives, one beloved, and another hated, and they have born him children, both the beloved and the hated; and if the firstborn son be hers that was hated:	If a man has two wives, one beloved and the other unloved, and both bear him sons, but the unloved wife has the firstborn son,
DEU	21	16	자기의 소유를 그 아들들에게 기업으로 나누는 날에 그 사랑을 받는 자의 아들로 장자를 삼아 참 장자 곧 미움을 받는 자의 아들보다 앞세우지 말고	Then it shall be, when he maketh his sons to inherit that which he hath, that he may not make the son of the beloved firstborn before the son of the hated, which is indeed the firstborn:	when that man assigns his inheritance to his sons he must not appoint the son of the beloved wife as the firstborn over the son of the unloved wife.
DEU	21	17	반드시 그 미움을 받는 자의 아들을 장자로 인정하여 자기의 소유에서 그에게는 두 몫을 줄 것이니 그는 자기의 기력의 시작이라 장자의 권리가 그에게 있음이니라	But he shall acknowledge the son of the hated for the firstborn, by giving him a double portion of all that he hath: for he is the beginning of his strength; the right of the firstborn is his.	Instead, he must acknowledge the firstborn, the son of his unloved wife, by giving him a double portion of all that he has. For that son is the firstfruits of his father’s strength; the right of the firstborn belongs to him.
DEU	21	18	사람에게 완악하고 패역한 아들이 있어 그 아비의 말이나 그 어미의 말을 순종치 아니하고 부모가 징책하여도 듣지 아니하거든	If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which will not obey the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, and that, when they have chastened him, will not hearken unto them:	If a man has a stubborn and rebellious son who does not obey his father and mother and does not listen to them when disciplined,
DEU	21	19	부모가 그를 잡아가지고 성문에 이르러 그 성읍 장로들에게 나아가서	Then shall his father and his mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the elders of his city, and unto the gate of his place;	his father and mother are to lay hold of him and bring him to the elders of his city, to the gate of his hometown,
DEU	21	20	그 성읍 장로들에게 말하기를 우리의 이 자식은 완악하고 패역하여 우리 말을 순종치 아니하고 방탕하며 술에 잠긴 자라 하거든	And they shall say unto the elders of his city, This our son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our voice; he is a glutton, and a drunkard.	and say to the elders, “This son of ours is stubborn and rebellious; he does not obey us. He is a glutton and a drunkard.”
DEU	21	21	그 성읍의 모든 사람들이 그를 돌로 쳐 죽일지니 이같이 네가 너의 중에 악을 제하라 그리하면 온 이스라엘이 듣고 두려워하리라	And all the men of his city shall stone him with stones, that he die: so shalt thou put evil away from among you; and all Israel shall hear, and fear.	Then all the men of his city will stone him to death. So you must purge the evil from among you, and all Israel will hear and be afraid.
DEU	21	22	사람이 만일 죽을 죄를 범하므로 네가 그를 죽여 나무 위에 달거든	And if a man have committed a sin worthy of death, and he be to be put to death, and thou hang him on a tree:	If a man has committed a sin worthy of death, and he is executed, and you hang his body on a tree,
DEU	21	23	그 시체를 나무 위에 밤새도록 두지 말고 당일에 장사하여 네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 기업으로 주시는 땅을 더럽히지 말라 나무에 달린 자는 하나님께 저주를 받았음이니라	His body shall not remain all night upon the tree, but thou shalt in any wise bury him that day; (for he that is hanged is accursed of God;) that thy land be not defiled, which the Lord thy God giveth thee for an inheritance.	you must not leave the body on the tree overnight, but you must be sure to bury him that day, because anyone who is hung on a tree is under God’s curse. You must not defile the land that the LORD your God is giving you as an inheritance.
DEU	22	1	네 형제의 우양의 길 잃은 것을 보거든 못본체 하지 말고 너는 반드시 끌어다가 네 형제에게 돌릴 것이요	Thou shalt not see thy brother’s ox or his sheep go astray, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt in any case bring them again unto thy brother.	If you see your brother’s ox or sheep straying, you must not ignore it; be sure to return it to your brother.
DEU	22	2	네 형제가 네게서 멀거나 네가 혹 그를 알지 못하거든 그 짐승을 네 집으로 끌고 와서 네 형제가 찾기까지 네게 두었다가 그에게 돌릴지니	And if thy brother be not nigh unto thee, or if thou know him not, then thou shalt bring it unto thine own house, and it shall be with thee until thy brother seek after it, and thou shalt restore it to him again.	If your brother does not live near you, or if you do not know who he is, you are to take the animal home to remain with you until your brother comes seeking it; then you can return it to him.
DEU	22	3	나귀라도 그리하고 의복이라도 그리하고 무릇 형제의 잃은 아무 것이든지 네가 얻거든 다 그리하고 못본체 하지 말 것이며	In like manner shalt thou do with his ass; and so shalt thou do with his raiment; and with all lost thing of thy brother’s, which he hath lost, and thou hast found, shalt thou do likewise: thou mayest not hide thyself.	And you shall do the same for his donkey, his cloak, or anything your brother has lost and you have found. You must not ignore it.
DEU	22	4	네 형제의 나귀나 소가 길에 넘어진 것을 보거든 못본체 하지말고 너는 반드시 형제를 도와서 그것을 일으킬지니라	Thou shalt not see thy brother’s ass or his ox fall down by the way, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt surely help him to lift them up again.	If you see your brother’s donkey or ox fallen on the road, you must not ignore it; you must help him lift it up.
DEU	22	5	여자는 남자의 의복을 입지 말 것이요 남자는 여자의 의복을 입지 말 것이라 이같이 하는 자는 네 하나님 여호와께 가증한 자니라	The woman shall not wear that which pertaineth unto a man, neither shall a man put on a woman’s garment: for all that do so are abomination unto the Lord thy God.	A woman must not wear men’s clothing, and a man must not wear women’s clothing, for whoever does these things is detestable to the LORD your God.
DEU	22	6	노중에서 나무에나 땅에 있는 새의 보금자리에 새 새끼나 알이 있고 어미새가 그 새끼나 알을 품은 것을 만나거든 그 어미새와 새끼를 아울러 취하지 말고	If a bird’s nest chance to be before thee in the way in any tree, or on the ground, whether they be young ones, or eggs, and the dam sitting upon the young, or upon the eggs, thou shalt not take the dam with the young:	If you come across a bird’s nest with chicks or eggs, either in a tree or on the ground along the road, and the mother is sitting on the chicks or eggs, you must not take the mother along with the young.
DEU	22	7	어미는 반드시 놓아 줄 것이요 새끼는 취하여도 가하니 그리하면 네가 복을 누리고 장수하리라	But thou shalt in any wise let the dam go, and take the young to thee; that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest prolong thy days.	You may take the young, but be sure to let the mother go, so that it may be well with you and that you may prolong your days.
DEU	22	8	네가 새 집을 건축할 때에 지붕에 난간을 만들어 사람으로 떨어지지 않게 하라 그 피 흐른 죄가 네 집에 돌아갈까 하노라	When thou buildest a new house, then thou shalt make a battlement for thy roof, that thou bring not blood upon thine house, if any man fall from thence.	If you build a new house, you are to construct a railing around your roof, so that you do not bring bloodguilt on your house if someone falls from it.
DEU	22	9	네 포도원에 두 종자를 섞어 뿌리지 말라 그리하면 네가 뿌린 씨의 열매와 포도원의 소산이 빼앗김이 될까 하노라	Thou shalt not sow thy vineyard with divers seeds: lest the fruit of thy seed which thou hast sown, and the fruit of thy vineyard, be defiled.	Do not plant your vineyard with two types of seed; if you do, the entire harvest will be defiled—both the crop you plant and the fruit of your vineyard.
DEU	22	10	너는 소와 나귀를 겨리하여 갈지 말며	Thou shalt not plow with an ox and an ass together.	Do not plow with an ox and a donkey yoked together.
DEU	22	11	양털과 베실로 섞어 짠 것을 입지 말지니라	Thou shalt not wear a garment of divers sorts, as of woollen and linen together.	Do not wear clothes of wool and linen woven together.
DEU	22	12	입는 겉 옷 네 귀에 술을 만들지니라	Thou shalt make thee fringes upon the four quarters of thy vesture, wherewith thou coverest thyself.	You are to make tassels on the four corners of the cloak you wear.
DEU	22	13	누구든지 아내를 취하여 그와 동침한 후에 그를 미워하여	If any man take a wife, and go in unto her, and hate her,	Suppose a man marries a woman, has relations with her, and comes to hate her,
DEU	22	14	비방거리를 만들어 그에게 누명을 씌워 가로되 내가 이 여자를 취하였더니 그와 동침할 때에 그의 처녀인 표적을 보지 못하였노라 하면	And give occasions of speech against her, and bring up an evil name upon her, and say, I took this woman, and when I came to her, I found her not a maid:	and he then accuses her of shameful conduct and gives her a bad name, saying, “I married this woman and had relations with her, but I discovered she was not a virgin.”
DEU	22	15	그 처녀의 부모가 처녀의 처녀인 표를 얻어 가지고 그 성읍문 장로들에게로 가서	Then shall the father of the damsel, and her mother, take and bring forth the tokens of the damsel’s virginity unto the elders of the city in the gate:	Then the young woman’s father and mother shall bring the proof of her virginity to the city elders at the gate
DEU	22	16	처녀의 아비가 장로들에게 말하기를 내 딸을 이 사람에게 아내로 주었더니 그가 미워하여	And the damsel’s father shall say unto the elders, I gave my daughter unto this man to wife, and he hateth her;	and say to the elders, “I gave my daughter in marriage to this man, but he has come to hate her.
DEU	22	17	비방거리를 만들어 말하기를 내가 네 딸의 처녀인 표적을 보지 못하였노라 하나 보라 내 딸의 처녀인 표적이 이것이라 하고 그 부모가 그 자리 옷을 그 성읍 장로들 앞에 펼 것이요	And, lo, he hath given occasions of speech against her, saying, I found not thy daughter a maid; and yet these are the tokens of my daughter’s virginity. And they shall spread the cloth before the elders of the city.	And now he has accused her of shameful conduct, saying, ‘I discovered that your daughter was not a virgin.’ But here is the proof of her virginity.” And they shall spread out the cloth before the city elders.
DEU	22	18	그 성읍 장로들은 그 사람을 잡아 때리고	And the elders of that city shall take that man and chastise him;	Then the elders of that city shall take the man and punish him.
DEU	22	19	이스라엘 처녀에게 누명 씌움을 인하여 그에게서 은 일백 세겔을 벌금으로 받아 여자의 아비에게 주고 그 여자로 그 남자의 평생에 버리지 못할 아내가 되게 하려니와	And they shall amerce him in an hundred shekels of silver, and give them unto the father of the damsel, because he hath brought up an evil name upon a virgin of Israel: and she shall be his wife; he may not put her away all his days.	They are also to fine him a hundred shekels of silver and give them to the young woman’s father, because this man has given a virgin of Israel a bad name. And she shall remain his wife; he must not divorce her as long as he lives.
DEU	22	20	그 일이 참되어 그 처녀에게 처녀인 표적이 없거든	But if this thing be true, and the tokens of virginity be not found for the damsel:	If, however, this accusation is true, and no proof of the young woman’s virginity can be found,
DEU	22	21	처녀를 그 아비 집 문에서 끌어내고 그 성읍 사람들이 그를 돌로 쳐 죽일지니 이는 그가 그 아비 집에서 창기의 행동을 하여 이스라엘 중에서 악을 행하였음이라 너는 이와 같이 하여 너의 중에 악을 제할지니라	Then they shall bring out the damsel to the door of her father’s house, and the men of her city shall stone her with stones that she die: because she hath wrought folly in Israel, to play the whore in her father’s house: so shalt thou put evil away from among you.	she shall be brought to the door of her father’s house, and there the men of her city will stone her to death. For she has committed an outrage in Israel by being promiscuous in her father’s house. So you must purge the evil from among you.
DEU	22	22	남자가 유부녀와 통간함을 보거든 그 통간한 남자와 그 여자를 둘 다 죽여 이스라엘 중에 악을 제할지니라	If a man be found lying with a woman married to an husband, then they shall both of them die, both the man that lay with the woman, and the woman: so shalt thou put away evil from Israel.	If a man is found lying with another man’s wife, both the man who slept with her and the woman must die. You must purge the evil from Israel.
DEU	22	23	처녀인 여자가 남자와 약혼한 후에 어떤 남자가 그를 성읍 중에서 만나 통간하면	If a damsel that is a virgin be betrothed unto an husband, and a man find her in the city, and lie with her;	If there is a virgin pledged in marriage to a man, and another man encounters her in the city and sleeps with her,
DEU	22	24	너희는 그들을 둘 다 성읍 문으로 끌어내고 그들을 돌로 쳐 죽일 것이니 그 처녀는 성읍 중에 있어서도 소리지르지 아니하였음이요 그 남자는 그 이웃의 아내를 욕보였음이라 너는 이같이 하여 너의 중에 악을 제할지니라	Then ye shall bring them both out unto the gate of that city, and ye shall stone them with stones that they die; the damsel, because she cried not, being in the city; and the man, because he hath humbled his neighbour’s wife: so thou shalt put away evil from among you.	you must take both of them out to the gate of that city and stone them to death—the young woman because she did not cry out in the city, and the man because he has violated his neighbor’s wife. So you must purge the evil from among you.
DEU	22	25	만일 남자가 어떤 약혼한 처녀를 들에서 만나서 강간하였거든 그 강간한 남자만 죽일 것이요	But if a man find a betrothed damsel in the field, and the man force her, and lie with her: then the man only that lay with her shall die:	But if the man encounters a betrothed woman in the open country, and he overpowers her and lies with her, only the man who has done this must die.
DEU	22	26	처녀에게는 아무 것도 행치 말 것은 처녀에게는 죽일 죄가 없음이라 이 일은 사람이 일어나 그 이웃을 쳐 죽인 것과 일반이라	But unto the damsel thou shalt do nothing; there is in the damsel no sin worthy of death: for as when a man riseth against his neighbour, and slayeth him, even so is this matter:	Do nothing to the young woman, because she has committed no sin worthy of death. This case is just like one in which a man attacks his neighbor and murders him.
DEU	22	27	남자가 처녀를 들에서 만난 까닭에 그 약혼한 처녀가 소리질러도 구원할 자가 없었음이니라	For he found her in the field, and the betrothed damsel cried, and there was none to save her.	When he found her in the field, the betrothed woman cried out, but there was no one to save her.
DEU	22	28	만일 남자가 어떤 약혼하지 아니한 처녀를 만나 그를 붙들고 통간하는 중 그 두 사람이 발견되거든	If a man find a damsel that is a virgin, which is not betrothed, and lay hold on her, and lie with her, and they be found;	If a man encounters a virgin who is not pledged in marriage, and he seizes her and lies with her, and they are discovered,
DEU	22	29	그 통간한 남자는 그 처녀의 아비에게 은 오십 세겔을 주고 그 처녀로 아내를 삼을 것이라 그가 그 처녀를 욕보였은즉 평생에 그를 버리지 못하리라	Then the man that lay with her shall give unto the damsel’s father fifty shekels of silver, and she shall be his wife; because he hath humbled her, he may not put her away all his days.	then the man who lay with her must pay the young woman’s father fifty shekels of silver, and she must become his wife because he has violated her. He must not divorce her as long as he lives.
DEU	22	30	사람이 그 아비의 후실을 취하여 아비의 하체를 드러내지 말지니라	A man shall not take his father’s wife, nor discover his father’s skirt.	A man is not to marry his father’s wife, so that he will not dishonor his father’s marriage bed.
DEU	23	1	신낭이 상한 자나 신을 베인 자는 여호와의 총회에 들어오지 못하리라	He that is wounded in the stones, or hath his privy member cut off, shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord.	No man with crushed or severed genitals may enter the assembly of the LORD.
DEU	23	2	사생자는 여호와의 총회에 들어오지 못하리니 십대까지라도 여호와의 총회에 들어오지 못하리라	A bastard shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord; even to his tenth generation shall he not enter into the congregation of the Lord.	No one of illegitimate birth may enter the assembly of the LORD, nor may any of his descendants, even to the tenth generation.
DEU	23	3	암몬 사람과 모압 사람은 여호와의 총회에 들어오지 못하리니 그들에게 속한 자는 십대뿐아니라 영원히 여호와의 총회에 들어오지 못하리라	An Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord; even to their tenth generation shall they not enter into the congregation of the Lord for ever:	No Ammonite or Moabite or any of their descendants may enter the assembly of the LORD, even to the tenth generation.
DEU	23	4	그들은 너희가 애굽에서 나올 때에 떡과 물로 너희를 길에서 영접하지 아니하고 메소보다미아의 브돌 사람 브올의 아들 발람에게 뇌물을 주어 너희를 저주케 하려 하였으나	Because they met you not with bread and with water in the way, when ye came forth out of Egypt; and because they hired against thee Balaam the son of Beor of Pethor of Mesopotamia, to curse thee.	For they did not meet you with food and water on your way out of Egypt, and they hired Balaam son of Beor from Pethor in Aram-naharaim to curse you.
DEU	23	5	네 하나님 여호와께서 너를 사랑하시므로 발람의 말을 듣지 아니하시고 그 저주를 변하여 복이 되게 하셨나니	Nevertheless the Lord thy God would not hearken unto Balaam; but the Lord thy God turned the curse into a blessing unto thee, because the Lord thy God loved thee.	Yet the LORD your God would not listen to Balaam, and the LORD your God turned the curse into a blessing for you, because the LORD your God loves you.
DEU	23	6	너의 평생에 그들의 평안과 형통을 영영히 구하지 말지니라	Thou shalt not seek their peace nor their prosperity all thy days for ever.	You are not to seek peace or prosperity from them as long as you live.
DEU	23	7	너는 에돔 사람을 미워하지 말라 그는 너의 형제니라 애굽 사람을 미워하지 말라 네가 그의 땅에서 객이 되었음이니라	Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite; for he is thy brother: thou shalt not abhor an Egyptian; because thou wast a stranger in his land.	Do not despise an Edomite, for he is your brother. Do not despise an Egyptian, because you lived as a foreigner in his land.
DEU	23	8	그들의 삼대후 자손은 여호와의 총회에 들어올 수 있느리라	The children that are begotten of them shall enter into the congregation of the Lord in their third generation.	The third generation of children born to them may enter the assembly of the LORD.
DEU	23	9	네가 대적을 치러 출진할 때에 모든 악한 일을 스스로 삼갈지니	When the host goeth forth against thine enemies, then keep thee from every wicked thing.	When you are encamped against your enemies, then you shall keep yourself from every wicked thing.
DEU	23	10	너희 중에 누가 밤에 몽설함으로 부정하거든 진 밖으로 나가고 진 안에 들어오지 아니하다가	If there be among you any man, that is not clean by reason of uncleanness that chanceth him by night, then shall he go abroad out of the camp, he shall not come within the camp:	If any man among you becomes unclean because of a nocturnal emission, he must leave the camp and stay outside.
DEU	23	11	해 질 때에 목욕하고 해 진 후에 진에 들어올 것이요	But it shall be, when evening cometh on, he shall wash himself with water: and when the sun is down, he shall come into the camp again.	When evening approaches, he must wash with water, and when the sun sets he may return to the camp.
DEU	23	12	너의 진 밖에 변소를 베풀고 그리로 나가되	Thou shalt have a place also without the camp, whither thou shalt go forth abroad:	You must have a place outside the camp to go and relieve yourself.
DEU	23	13	너의 기구에 작은 삽을 더하여 밖에 나가서 대변을 통할 때에 그것으로 땅을 팔 것이요 몸을 돌이켜 그 배설물을 덮을지니	And thou shalt have a paddle upon thy weapon; and it shall be, when thou wilt ease thyself abroad, thou shalt dig therewith, and shalt turn back and cover that which cometh from thee:	And you must have a digging tool in your equipment so that when you relieve yourself you can dig a hole and cover up your excrement.
DEU	23	14	이는 네 하나님 여호와께서 너를 구원하시고 적군을 네게 붙이시려고 네 진중에 행하심이라 그러므로 네 진을 거룩히 하라 그리하면 네게서 불합한 것을 보시지 않으므로 너를 떠나지 아니하시리라	For the Lord thy God walketh in the midst of thy camp, to deliver thee, and to give up thine enemies before thee; therefore shall thy camp be holy: that he see no unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee.	For the LORD your God walks throughout your camp to protect you and deliver your enemies to you. Your camp must be holy, lest He see anything unclean among you and turn away from you.
DEU	23	15	종이 그 주인을 피하여 네게로 도망하거든 너는 그 주인에게로 돌리지 말고	Thou shalt not deliver unto his master the servant which is escaped from his master unto thee:	Do not return a slave to his master if he has taken refuge with you.
DEU	23	16	그가 너의 성읍 중에서 기뻐하는 곳을 택하는 대로 너와 함께 네 가운데 거하게 하고 그를 압제하지 말지니라	He shall dwell with thee, even among you, in that place which he shall choose in one of thy gates, where it liketh him best: thou shalt not oppress him.	Let him live among you wherever he chooses, in the town of his pleasing. Do not oppress him.
DEU	23	17	이스라엘 여자 중에 창기가 있지 못할 것이요 이스라엘 남자 중에 미동이 있지 못할지니	There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a sodomite of the sons of Israel.	No daughter or son of Israel is to be a shrine prostitute.
DEU	23	18	창기의 번 돈과 개 같은 자의 소득은 아무 서원하는 일로든지 네 하나님 여호와의 전에 가져오지 말라 이 둘은 다 네 하나님 여호와께 가증한 것임이니라	Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog, into the house of the Lord thy God for any vow: for even both these are abomination unto the Lord thy God.	You must not bring the wages of a prostitute, whether female or male, into the house of the LORD your God to fulfill any vow, because both are detestable to the LORD your God.
DEU	23	19	네가 형제에게 꾸이거든 이식을 취하지 말지니 곧 돈의 이식, 식물의 이식, 무릇 이식을 낼만한 것의 이식을 취하지 말 것이라	Thou shalt not lend upon usury to thy brother; usury of money, usury of victuals, usury of any thing that is lent upon usury:	Do not charge your brother interest on money, food, or any other type of loan.
DEU	23	20	타국인에게 네가 꾸이면 이식을 취하여도 가하거니와 너의 형제에게 꾸이거든 이식을 취하지 말라 그리하면 네 하나님 여호와께서 네가 들어가서 얻을 땅에서 네 손으로 하는 범사에 복을 내리시리라	Unto a stranger thou mayest lend upon usury; but unto thy brother thou shalt not lend upon usury: that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all that thou settest thine hand to in the land whither thou goest to possess it.	You may charge a foreigner interest, but not your brother, so that the LORD your God may bless you in everything to which you put your hand in the land that you are entering to possess.
DEU	23	21	네 하나님 여호와께 서원하거든 갚기를 더디 하지 말라 네 하나님 여호와께서 반드시 그것을 네게 요구하시리니 더디면 네게 죄라	When thou shalt vow a vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shalt not slack to pay it: for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee; and it would be sin in thee.	If you make a vow to the LORD your God, do not be slow to keep it, because He will surely require it of you, and you will be guilty of sin.
DEU	23	22	네가 서원치 아니하였으면 무죄하니라마는	But if thou shalt forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in thee.	But if you refrain from making a vow, you will not be guilty of sin.
DEU	23	23	네 입에서 낸 것은 그대로 실행하기를 주의하라 무릇 자원한 예물은 네 하나님 여호와께 네가 서원하여 입으로 언약한 대로 행할지니라	That which is gone out of thy lips thou shalt keep and perform; even a freewill offering, according as thou hast vowed unto the Lord thy God, which thou hast promised with thy mouth.	Be careful to follow through on what comes from your lips, because you have freely vowed to the LORD your God with your own mouth.
DEU	23	24	네 이웃의 포도원에 들어갈 때에 마음대로 그 포도를 배불리 먹어도 가하니라 그러나 그릇에 담지 말 것이요	When thou comest into thy neighbour’s vineyard, then thou mayest eat grapes thy fill at thine own pleasure; but thou shalt not put any in thy vessel.	When you enter your neighbor’s vineyard, you may eat your fill of grapes, but you must not put any in your basket.
DEU	23	25	네 이웃의 곡식 밭에 들어갈 때에 네가 손으로 그 이삭을 따도 가하니라 그러나 이웃의 곡식 밭에 낫을 대지 말지니라	When thou comest into the standing corn of thy neighbour, then thou mayest pluck the ears with thine hand; but thou shalt not move a sickle unto thy neighbour’s standing corn.	When you enter your neighbor’s grainfield, you may pluck the heads of grain with your hand, but you must not put a sickle to your neighbor’s grain.
DEU	24	1	사람이 아내를 취하여 데려온 후에 수치되는 일이 그에게 있음을 발견하고 그를 기뻐하지 아니하거든 이혼 증서를 써서 그 손에 주고 그를 자기 집에서 내어보낼 것이요	When a man hath taken a wife, and married her, and it come to pass that she find no favour in his eyes, because he hath found some uncleanness in her: then let him write her a bill of divorcement, and give it in her hand, and send her out of his house.	If a man marries a woman, but she becomes displeasing to him because he finds some indecency in her, he may write her a certificate of divorce, hand it to her, and send her away from his house.
DEU	24	2	그 여자는 그 집에서 나가서 다른 사람의 아내가 되려니와	And when she is departed out of his house, she may go and be another man’s wife.	If, after leaving his house, she goes and becomes another man’s wife,
DEU	24	3	그 후부도 그를 미워하여 이혼 증서를 써서 그 손에 주고 그를 자기 집에서 내어 보내었거나 혹시 그를 아내로 취한 후부가 죽었다 하자	And if the latter husband hate her, and write her a bill of divorcement, and giveth it in her hand, and sendeth her out of his house; or if the latter husband die, which took her to be his wife;	and the second man hates her, writes her a certificate of divorce, hands it to her, and sends her away from his house, or if he dies,
DEU	24	4	그 여자가 이미 몸을 더럽혔은즉 그를 내어 보낸 전부가 그를 다시 아내로 취하지 말지니 이 일은 여호와 앞에 가증한 것이라 네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 기업으로 주시는 땅으로 너는 범죄케 하지 말지니라	Her former husband, which sent her away, may not take her again to be his wife, after that she is defiled; for that is abomination before the Lord: and thou shalt not cause the land to sin, which the Lord thy God giveth thee for an inheritance.	then the husband who divorced her first may not remarry her after she has been defiled, for that is an abomination to the LORD. You must not bring sin upon the land that the LORD your God is giving you as an inheritance.
DEU	24	5	사람이 새로이 아내를 취하였거든 그를 군대로 내어 보내지 말 것이요 무슨 직무든지 그에게 맡기지 말 것이며 그는 일 년 동안 집에 한가히 거하여 그 취한 아내를 즐겁게 할지니라	When a man hath taken a new wife, he shall not go out to war, neither shall he be charged with any business: but he shall be free at home one year, and shall cheer up his wife which he hath taken.	If a man is newly married, he must not be sent to war or be pressed into any duty. For one year he is free to stay at home and bring joy to the wife he has married.
DEU	24	6	사람이 맷돌의 전부나 그 윗짝만이나 전집하지 말지니 이는 그 생명을 전집함이니라	No man shall take the nether or the upper millstone to pledge: for he taketh a man’s life to pledge.	Do not take a pair of millstones or even an upper millstone as security for a debt, because that would be taking one’s livelihood as security.
DEU	24	7	사람이 자기 형제 곧 이스라엘 자손 중 한 사람을 후려다가 그를 부리거나 판 것이 발견되거든 그 후린 자를 죽일지니 이같이 하여 너의 중에 악을 제할지니라	If a man be found stealing any of his brethren of the children of Israel, and maketh merchandise of him, or selleth him; then that thief shall die; and thou shalt put evil away from among you.	If a man is caught kidnapping one of his Israelite brothers, whether he treats him as a slave or sells him, the kidnapper must die. So you must purge the evil from among you.
DEU	24	8	너는 문둥병에 대하여 삼가서 레위 사람 제사장들이 너희에게 가르치는 대로 네가 힘써 다 행하되 곧 네가 그들에게 명한 대로 너희는 주의하여 행하라	Take heed in the plague of leprosy, that thou observe diligently, and do according to all that the priests the Levites shall teach you: as I commanded them, so ye shall observe to do.	In cases of infectious skin diseases, be careful to diligently follow everything the Levitical priests instruct you. Be careful to do as I have commanded them.
DEU	24	9	너희가 애굽에서 나오는 길에서 네 하나님 여호와께서 미리암에게 행하신 일을 기억할지니라	Remember what the Lord thy God did unto Miriam by the way, after that ye were come forth out of Egypt.	Remember what the LORD your God did to Miriam on the journey after you came out of Egypt.
DEU	24	10	무릇 네 이웃에게 꾸어줄 때에 네가 그 집에 들어가서 전집물을 취하지 말고	When thou dost lend thy brother any thing, thou shalt not go into his house to fetch his pledge.	When you lend anything to your neighbor, do not enter his house to collect security.
DEU	24	11	너는 밖에 섰고 네게 꾸는 자가 전집물을 가지고 나와서 네게 줄 것이며	Thou shalt stand abroad, and the man to whom thou dost lend shall bring out the pledge abroad unto thee.	You are to stand outside while the man to whom you are lending brings the security out to you.
DEU	24	12	그가 가난한 자여든 너는 그의 전집물을 가지고 자지 말고	And if the man be poor, thou shalt not sleep with his pledge:	If he is a poor man, you must not go to sleep with the security in your possession;
DEU	24	13	해 질 때에 전집물을 반드시 그에게 돌릴 것이라 그리하면 그가 그 옷을 입고 자며 너를 위하여 축복하리니 그 일이 네 하나님 여호와 앞에서 네 의로움이 되리라	In any case thou shalt deliver him the pledge again when the sun goeth down, that he may sleep in his own raiment, and bless thee: and it shall be righteousness unto thee before the Lord thy God.	be sure to return it to him by sunset, so that he may sleep in his own cloak and bless you, and this will be credited to you as righteousness before the LORD your God.
DEU	24	14	곤궁하고 빈한한 품꾼은 너의 형제든지 네 땅 성문 안에 우거하는 객이든지 그를 학대하지 말며	Thou shalt not oppress an hired servant that is poor and needy, whether he be of thy brethren, or of thy strangers that are in thy land within thy gates:	Do not oppress a hired hand who is poor and needy, whether he is a brother or a foreigner residing in one of your towns.
DEU	24	15	그 품삯을 당일에 주고 해 진 후까지 끌지 말라 이는 그가 빈궁하므로 마음에 품삯을 사모함이라 두렵건대 그가 너를 여호와께 호소하면 죄가 네게로 돌아갈까 하노라	At his day thou shalt give him his hire, neither shall the sun go down upon it; for he is poor, and setteth his heart upon it: lest he cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee.	You are to pay his wages each day before sunset, because he is poor and depends on them. Otherwise he may cry out to the LORD against you, and you will be guilty of sin.
DEU	24	16	아비는 그 자식들을 인하여 죽임을 당치 않을 것이요 자식들은 그 아비를 인하여 죽임을 당치 않을 것이라 각 사람은 자기 죄에 죽임을 당할 것이니라	The fathers shall not be put to death for the children, neither shall the children be put to death for the fathers: every man shall be put to death for his own sin.	Fathers shall not be put to death for their children, nor children for their fathers; each is to die for his own sin.
DEU	24	17	너는 객이나 고아의 송사를 억울하게 말며 과부의 옷을 전집하지 말라	Thou shalt not pervert the judgment of the stranger, nor of the fatherless; nor take a widow’s raiment to pledge:	Do not deny justice to the foreigner or the fatherless, and do not take a widow’s cloak as security.
DEU	24	18	너는 애굽에서 종이 되었던 일과 네 하나님 여호와께서 너를 거기서 속량하신 것을 기억하라 이러므로 내가 네게 이 일을 행하라 명하노라	But thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt, and the Lord thy God redeemed thee thence: therefore I command thee to do this thing.	Remember that you were slaves in Egypt, and the LORD your God redeemed you from that place. Therefore I am commanding you to do this.
DEU	24	19	네가 밭에서 곡식을 벨 때에 그 한 뭇을 밭에 잊어버렸거든 다시 가서 취하지 말고 객과 고아와 과부를 위하여 버려두라 그리하면 네 하나님 여호와께서 네 손으로 하는 범사에 복을 내리시리라	When thou cuttest down thine harvest in thy field, and hast forgot a sheaf in the field, thou shalt not go again to fetch it: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow: that the Lord thy God may bless thee in all the work of thine hands.	If you are harvesting in your field and forget a sheaf there, do not go back to get it. It is to be left for the foreigner, the fatherless, and the widow, so that the LORD your God may bless you in all the work of your hands.
DEU	24	20	네가 네 감람나무를 떤 후에 그 가지를 다시 살피지 말고 그 남은 것은 객과 고아와 과부를 위하여 버려두며	When thou beatest thine olive tree, thou shalt not go over the boughs again: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow.	When you beat the olives from your trees, you must not go over the branches again. What remains will be for the foreigner, the fatherless, and the widow.
DEU	24	21	네가 네 포도원의 포도를 딴 후에 그 남은 것을 다시 따지 말고 객과 고아와 과부를 위하여 버려두라	When thou gatherest the grapes of thy vineyard, thou shalt not glean it afterward: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow.	When you gather the grapes of your vineyard, you must not go over the vines again. What remains will be for the foreigner, the fatherless, and the widow.
DEU	24	22	너는 애굽 땅에서 종 되었던 것을 기억하라 이러므로 내가 네게 이 일을 행하라 명하노라	And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of Egypt: therefore I command thee to do this thing.	Remember that you were slaves in the land of Egypt. Therefore I am commanding you to do this.
DEU	25	1	사람과 사람 사이에 시비가 생겨서 재판을 청하거든 재판장은 그들을 재판하여 의인은 의롭다 하고 악인은 정죄할 것이며	If there be a controversy between men, and they come unto judgment, that the judges may judge them; then they shall justify the righteous, and condemn the wicked.	If there is a dispute between men, they are to go to court to be judged, so that the innocent may be acquitted and the guilty condemned.
DEU	25	2	악인에게 태형이 합당하거든 재판장은 그를 엎드리게 하고 그 죄의 경중대로 여수이 자기 앞에서 때리게 하라	And it shall be, if the wicked man be worthy to be beaten, that the judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his face, according to his fault, by a certain number.	If the guilty man deserves to be beaten, the judge shall have him lie down and be flogged in his presence with the number of lashes his crime warrants.
DEU	25	3	사십까지는 때리려니와 그것을 넘기지는 못할지니 만일 그것을 넘겨 과다히 때리면 네가 네 형제로 천히 여김을 받게 할까 하노라	Forty stripes he may give him, and not exceed: lest, if he should exceed, and beat him above these with many stripes, then thy brother should seem vile unto thee.	He may receive no more than forty lashes, lest your brother be beaten any more than that and be degraded in your sight.
DEU	25	4	곡식 떠는 소의 입에 망을 씌우지 말지니라	Thou shalt not muzzle the ox when he treadeth out the corn.	Do not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain.
DEU	25	5	형제가 동거하는데 그 중 하나가 죽고 아들이 없거든 그 죽은 자의 아내는 나가서 타인에게 시집가지 말 것이요 그 남편의 형제가 그에게로 들어가서 그를 취하여 아내를 삼아 그의 남편의 형제 된 의무를 그에게 다 행할 것이요	If brethren dwell together, and one of them die, and have no child, the wife of the dead shall not marry without unto a stranger: her husband’s brother shall go in unto her, and take her to him to wife, and perform the duty of an husband’s brother unto her.	When brothers dwell together and one of them dies without a son, the widow must not marry outside the family. Her husband’s brother is to take her as his wife and fulfill the duty of a brother-in-law for her.
DEU	25	6	그 여인의 낳은 첫 아들로 그 죽은 형제의 후사를 잇게 하여 그 이름을 이스라엘 중에서 끊어지지 않게 할 것이니라	And it shall be, that the firstborn which she beareth shall succeed in the name of his brother which is dead, that his name be not put out of Israel.	The first son she bears will carry on the name of the dead brother, so that his name will not be blotted out from Israel.
DEU	25	7	그러나 그 사람이 만일 그 형제의 아내 취하기를 즐겨하지 아니하거든 그 형제의 아내는 그 성문 장로들에게로 나아가서 말하기를 내 남편의 형제가 그 형제의 이름을 이스라엘 중에 잇기를 싫어하여 남편의 형제된 의무를 내게 행치 아니하나이다 할 것이요	And if the man like not to take his brother’s wife, then let his brother’s wife go up to the gate unto the elders, and say, My husband’s brother refuseth to raise up unto his brother a name in Israel, he will not perform the duty of my husband’s brother.	But if the man does not want to marry his brother’s widow, she is to go to the elders at the city gate and say, “My husband’s brother refuses to preserve his brother’s name in Israel. He is not willing to perform the duty of a brother-in-law for me.”
DEU	25	8	그 성읍 장로들은 그를 불러다가 이를 것이며 그가 이미 정한 뜻대로 말하기를 내가 그 여자 취하기를 즐겨 아니하노라 하거든	Then the elders of his city shall call him, and speak unto him: and if he stand to it, and say, I like not to take her;	Then the elders of his city shall summon him and speak with him. If he persists and says, “I do not want to marry her,”
DEU	25	9	그 형제의 아내가 장로들 앞에서 그에게 나아가서 그의 발에서 신을 벗기고 그 얼굴에 침을 뱉으며 이르기를 그 형제의 집 세우기를 즐겨 아니하는 자에게는 이같이 할 것이라 할 것이며	Then shall his brother’s wife come unto him in the presence of the elders, and loose his shoe from off his foot, and spit in his face, and shall answer and say, So shall it be done unto that man that will not build up his brother’s house.	his brother’s widow shall go up to him in the presence of the elders, remove his sandal, spit in his face, and declare, “This is what is done to the man who will not maintain his brother’s line.”
DEU	25	10	이스라엘 중에서 그의 이름을 신 벗기운 자의 집이라 칭할 것이니라	And his name shall be called in Israel, The house of him that hath his shoe loosed.	And his family name in Israel will be called “The House of the Unsandaled.”
DEU	25	11	두 사람이 서로 싸울 때에 한 사람의 아내가 그 남편을 그 치는 자의 손에서 구하려 하여 가까이 가서 손을 벌려 그 사람의 음낭을 잡거든	When men strive together one with another, and the wife of the one draweth near for to deliver her husband out of the hand of him that smiteth him, and putteth forth her hand, and taketh him by the secrets:	If two men are fighting, and the wife of one steps in to rescue her husband from the one striking him, and she reaches out her hand and grabs his genitals,
DEU	25	12	너는 그 여인의 손을 찍어 버릴 것이고 네 눈이 그를 불쌍히 보지 말지니라	Then thou shalt cut off her hand, thine eye shall not pity her.	you are to cut off her hand. You must show her no pity.
DEU	25	13	너는 주머니에 같지 않은 저울추 곧 큰 것과 작은 것을 넣지 말 것이며	Thou shalt not have in thy bag divers weights, a great and a small.	You shall not have two differing weights in your bag, one heavy and one light.
DEU	25	14	네 집에 같지 않은 되 곧 큰 것과 작은 것을 두지 말 것이요	Thou shalt not have in thine house divers measures, a great and a small.	You shall not have two differing measures in your house, one large and one small.
DEU	25	15	오직 십분 공정한 저울추를 두며 십분 공정한 되를 둘 것이라 그리하면 네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 주시는 땅에서 네 날이 장구하리라	But thou shalt have a perfect and just weight, a perfect and just measure shalt thou have: that thy days may be lengthened in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.	You must maintain accurate and honest weights and measures, so that you may live long in the land that the LORD your God is giving you.
DEU	25	16	무릇 이같이 하는 자, 무릇 부정당히 행하는 자는 네 하나님 여호와께 가증하니라	For all that do such things, and all that do unrighteously, are an abomination unto the Lord thy God.	For everyone who behaves dishonestly in regard to these things is detestable to the LORD your God.
DEU	25	17	너희가 애굽에서 나오는 길에 아말렉이 네게 행한 일을 기억하라	Remember what Amalek did unto thee by the way, when ye were come forth out of Egypt;	Remember what the Amalekites did to you along your way from Egypt,
DEU	25	18	곧 그들이 하나님을 두려워하지 아니하고 너를 길에서 만나 너의 피곤함을 타서 네 뒤에 떨어진 약한 자들을 쳤느니라	How he met thee by the way, and smote the hindmost of thee, even all that were feeble behind thee, when thou wast faint and weary; and he feared not God.	how they met you on your journey when you were tired and weary, and they attacked all your stragglers; they had no fear of God.
DEU	25	19	그러므로 네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 주어 기업으로 얻게 하시는 땅에서 네 하나님 여호와께서 너로 사면에 있는 모든 대적을 벗어나게 하시고 네게 안식을 주실 때에 너는 아말렉의 이름을 천하에서 도말할지니라 너는 잊지 말지니라	Therefore it shall be, when the Lord thy God hath given thee rest from all thine enemies round about, in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee for an inheritance to possess it, that thou shalt blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven; thou shalt not forget it.	When the LORD your God gives you rest from the enemies around you in the land that He is giving you to possess as an inheritance, you are to blot out the memory of Amalek from under heaven. Do not forget!
DEU	26	1	네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 기업으로 주사 얻게 하시는 땅에 네가 들어가서 거기 거할 때에	And it shall be, when thou art come in unto the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee for an inheritance, and possessest it, and dwellest therein;	When you enter the land that the LORD your God is giving you as an inheritance, and you take possession of it and settle in it,
DEU	26	2	네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 주시는 땅에서 그 토지 모든 소산의 맏물을 거둔 후에 그것을 취하여 광주리에 담고 네 하나님 여호와께서 그 이름을 두시려고 택하신 곳으로 그것을 가지고 가서	That thou shalt take of the first of all the fruit of the earth, which thou shalt bring of thy land that the Lord thy God giveth thee, and shalt put it in a basket, and shalt go unto the place which the Lord thy God shall choose to place his name there.	you are to take some of the firstfruits of all your produce from the soil of the land that the LORD your God is giving you and put them in a basket. Then go to the place the LORD your God will choose as a dwelling for His Name,
DEU	26	3	당시 제사장에게 나아가서 그에게 이르기를 내가 오늘날 당신의 하나님 여호와께 고하나이다 내가 여호와께서 우리에게 주리라고 우리 열조에게 맹세하신 땅에 이르렀나이다 할 것이요	And thou shalt go unto the priest that shall be in those days, and say unto him, I profess this day unto the Lord thy God, that I am come unto the country which the Lord sware unto our fathers for to give us.	to the priest who is serving at that time, and say to him, “I declare today to the LORD your God that I have entered the land that the LORD swore to our fathers to give us.”
DEU	26	4	제사장은 네 손에서 그 광주리를 취하여다가 네 하나님 여호와의 단 앞에 놓을 것이며	And the priest shall take the basket out of thine hand, and set it down before the altar of the Lord thy God.	Then the priest shall take the basket from your hands and place it before the altar of the LORD your God,
DEU	26	5	너는 또 네 하나님 여호와 앞에 아뢰기를 내 조상은 유리하는 아람 사람으로서 소수의 사람을 거느리고 애굽에 내려가서 거기 우거하여 필경은 거기서 크고 강하고 번성한 민족이 되었더니	And thou shalt speak and say before the Lord thy God, A Syrian ready to perish was my father, and he went down into Egypt, and sojourned there with a few, and became there a nation, great, mighty, and populous:	and you are to declare before the LORD your God, “My father was a wandering Aramean, and he went down to Egypt few in number and lived there and became a great nation, mighty and numerous.
DEU	26	6	애굽 사람이 우리를 학대하며 우리를 괴롭게 하며 우리에게 중역을 시키므로	And the Egyptians evil entreated us, and afflicted us, and laid upon us hard bondage:	But the Egyptians mistreated us and afflicted us, putting us to hard labor.
DEU	26	7	우리가 우리 조상의 하나님 여호와께 부르짖었더니 여호와께서 우리 음성을 들으시고 우리의 고통과 신고와 압제를 하감하시고	And when we cried unto the Lord God of our fathers, the Lord heard our voice, and looked on our affliction, and our labour, and our oppression:	So we called out to the LORD, the God of our fathers; and the LORD heard our voice and saw our affliction, toil, and oppression.
DEU	26	8	여호와께서 강한 손과 편 팔과 큰 위엄과 이적과 기사로 우리를 애굽에서 인도하여 내시고	And the Lord brought us forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with great terribleness, and with signs, and with wonders:	Then the LORD brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm, with great terror, signs, and wonders.
DEU	26	9	이 곳으로 인도하사 이 땅 곧 젖과 꿀이 흐르는 땅을 주셨나이다	And he hath brought us into this place, and hath given us this land, even a land that floweth with milk and honey.	And He brought us to this place and gave us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey.
DEU	26	10	여호와여 이제 내가 주께서 내게 주신 토지 소산의 맏물을 가져왔나이다 하고 너는 그것을 네 하나님 여호와 앞에 두고 네 하나님 여호와 앞에 경배할 것이며	And now, behold, I have brought the firstfruits of the land, which thou, O Lord, hast given me. And thou shalt set it before the Lord thy God, and worship before the Lord thy God:	And now, behold, I have brought the firstfruits of the land that You, O LORD, have given me.” Then you are to place the basket before the LORD your God and bow down before Him.
DEU	26	11	네 하나님 여호와께서 너와 네 집에 주신 모든 복을 인하여 너는 레위인과 너의 중에 우거하는 객과 함께 즐거워할지니라	And thou shalt rejoice in every good thing which the Lord thy God hath given unto thee, and unto thine house, thou, and the Levite, and the stranger that is among you.	So you shall rejoice—you, the Levite, and the foreigner dwelling among you—in all the good things the LORD your God has given to you and your household.
DEU	26	12	제삼년 곧 십일조를 드리는 해에 네 모든 소산의 십일조 다 내기를 마친 후에 그것을 레위인과 객과 고아와 과부에게 주어서 네 성문 안에서 먹어 배부르게 하라	When thou hast made an end of tithing all the tithes of thine increase the third year, which is the year of tithing, and hast given it unto the Levite, the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, that they may eat within thy gates, and be filled;	When you have finished laying aside a tenth of all your produce in the third year, the year of the tithe, you are to give it to the Levite, the foreigner, the fatherless, and the widow, that they may eat and be filled within your gates.
DEU	26	13	그리할 때에 네 하나님 여호와 앞에 고하기를 내가 성물을 내 집에서 내어 레위인과 객과 고아와 과부에게 주기를 주께서 내게 명하신 명령대로 하였사오니 내가 주의 명령을 범치도 아니하였고 잊지도 아니하였나이다	Then thou shalt say before the Lord thy God, I have brought away the hallowed things out of mine house, and also have given them unto the Levite, and unto the stranger, to the fatherless, and to the widow, according to all thy commandments which thou hast commanded me: I have not transgressed thy commandments, neither have I forgotten them:	Then you shall declare in the presence of the LORD your God, “I have removed from my house the sacred portion and have given it to the Levite, the foreigner, the fatherless, and the widow, according to all the commandments You have given me. I have not transgressed or forgotten Your commandments.
DEU	26	14	내가 애곡하는 날에 이 성물을 먹지 아니하였고 부정한 몸으로 이를 떼어두지 아니하였고 죽은 자를 위하여 이를 쓰지 아니하였고 내 하나님 여호와의 말씀을 청종하여 주께서 내게 명령하신 대로 다 행하였사오니	I have not eaten thereof in my mourning, neither have I taken away ought thereof for any unclean use, nor given ought thereof for the dead: but I have hearkened to the voice of the Lord my God, and have done according to all that thou hast commanded me.	I have not eaten any of the sacred portion while in mourning, or removed any of it while unclean, or offered any of it for the dead. I have obeyed the LORD my God; I have done everything You commanded me.
DEU	26	15	원컨대 주의 거룩한 처소 하늘에서 하감하시고 주의 백성 이스라엘에게 복을 주시며 우리 열조에게 맹세하여 우리에게 주신 바 젖과 꿀이 흐르는 땅에 복을 내리소서 할지니라	Look down from thy holy habitation, from heaven, and bless thy people Israel, and the land which thou hast given us, as thou swarest unto our fathers, a land that floweth with milk and honey.	Look down from Your holy habitation, from heaven, and bless Your people Israel and the land You have given us as You swore to our fathers—a land flowing with milk and honey.”
DEU	26	16	오늘날 네 하나님 여호와께서 이 규례와 법도를 행하라고 네게 명하시나니 그런즉 너는 마음을 다하고 성품을 다하여 지켜 행하라	This day the Lord thy God hath commanded thee to do these statutes and judgments: thou shalt therefore keep and do them with all thine heart, and with all thy soul.	The LORD your God commands you this day to follow these statutes and ordinances. You must be careful to follow them with all your heart and with all your soul.
DEU	26	17	네가 오늘날 여호와를 네 하나님으로 인정하고 또 그 도를 행하고 그 규례와 명령과 법도를 지키며 그 소리를 들으리라 확언하였고	Thou hast avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his judgments, and to hearken unto his voice:	Today you have proclaimed that the LORD is your God and that you will walk in His ways, keep His statutes and commandments and ordinances, and listen to His voice.
DEU	26	18	여호와께서도 네게 말씀하신 대로 오늘날 너를 자기의 보배로운 백성으로 인정하시고 또 그 모든 명령을 지키게 하리라 확언하셨은즉	And the Lord hath avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, as he hath promised thee, and that thou shouldest keep all his commandments;	And today the LORD has proclaimed that you are His people and treasured possession as He promised, that you are to keep all His commandments,
DEU	26	19	여호와께서 너의 칭찬과 명예와 영광으로 그 지으신 모든 민족 위에 뛰어나게 하시고 그 말씀하신 대로 너로 네 하나님 여호와의 성민이 되게 하시리라	And to make thee high above all nations which he hath made, in praise, and in name, and in honour; and that thou mayest be an holy people unto the Lord thy God, as he hath spoken.	that He will set you high in praise and name and honor above all the nations He has made, and that you will be a holy people to the LORD your God, as He has promised.
DEU	27	1	모세가 이스라엘 장로들로 더불어 백성에게 명하여 가로되 내가 오늘날 너희에게 명하는 이 명령을 너희는 다 지킬지니라	And Moses with the elders of Israel commanded the people, saying, Keep all the commandments which I command you this day.	Then Moses and the elders of Israel commanded the people: “Keep all the commandments I am giving you today.
DEU	27	2	너희가 요단을 건너 네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 주시는 땅에 들어가는 날에 큰 돌들을 세우고 석회를 바르라	And it shall be on the day when ye shall pass over Jordan unto the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, that thou shalt set thee up great stones, and plaister them with plaister:	And on the day you cross the Jordan into the land that the LORD your God is giving you, set up large stones and coat them with plaster.
DEU	27	3	이미 건넌 후에 이 율법의 모든 말씀을 그 위에 기록하라 그리하면 네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 주시는 땅 곧 젖과 꿀이 흐르는 땅에 네가 들어가기를 네 열조의 하나님 여호와께서 네게 말씀하신 대로 하리니	And thou shalt write upon them all the words of this law, when thou art passed over, that thou mayest go in unto the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, a land that floweth with milk and honey; as the Lord God of thy fathers hath promised thee.	Write on them all the words of this law when you have crossed over to enter the land that the LORD your God is giving you, a land flowing with milk and honey, just as the LORD, the God of your fathers, has promised you.
DEU	27	4	너희가 요단을 건너거든 내가 오늘날 너희에게 명하는 이 돌들을 에발 산에 세우고 그 위에 석회를 바를 것이며	Therefore it shall be when ye be gone over Jordan, that ye shall set up these stones, which I command you this day, in mount Ebal, and thou shalt plaister them with plaister.	And when you have crossed the Jordan, you are to set up these stones on Mount Ebal, as I am commanding you today, and you are to coat them with plaster.
DEU	27	5	또 거기서 네 하나님 여호와를 위하여 단 곧 돌단을 쌓되 그것에 철기를 대지 말지니라	And there shalt thou build an altar unto the Lord thy God, an altar of stones: thou shalt not lift up any iron tool upon them.	Moreover, you are to build there an altar to the LORD your God, an altar of stones. You must not use any iron tool on them.
DEU	27	6	너는 다듬지 않은 돌로 네 하나님 여호와의 단을 쌓고 그 위에 하나님 여호와께 번제를 드릴 것이며	Thou shalt build the altar of the Lord thy God of whole stones: and thou shalt offer burnt offerings thereon unto the Lord thy God:	You shall build the altar of the LORD your God with uncut stones and offer upon it burnt offerings to the LORD your God.
DEU	27	7	또 화목제를 드리고 거기서 먹으며 네 하나님 여호와 앞에서 즐거워하라	And thou shalt offer peace offerings, and shalt eat there, and rejoice before the Lord thy God.	There you are to sacrifice your peace offerings, eating them and rejoicing in the presence of the LORD your God.
DEU	27	8	너는 이 율법의 모든 말씀을 그 돌들 위에 명백히 기록할지니라	And thou shalt write upon the stones all the words of this law very plainly.	And you shall write distinctly upon these stones all the words of this law.”
DEU	27	9	모세가 레위 제사장들로 더불어 온 이스라엘에게 고하여 가로되 이스라엘아 잠잠히 들으라 오늘날 네가 네 하나님 여호와의 백성이 되었으니	And Moses and the priests the Levites spake unto all Israel, saying, Take heed, and hearken, O Israel; this day thou art become the people of the Lord thy God.	Then Moses and the Levitical priests spoke to all Israel: “Be silent, O Israel, and listen! This day you have become the people of the LORD your God.
DEU	27	10	그런즉 네 하나님 여호와의 말씀을 복종하여 내가 오늘날 네게 명하는 그 명령과 규례를 행할지니라	Thou shalt therefore obey the voice of the Lord thy God, and do his commandments and his statutes, which I command thee this day.	You shall therefore obey the voice of the LORD your God and follow His commandments and statutes I am giving you today.”
DEU	27	11	모세가 당일에 백성에게 명하여 가로되	And Moses charged the people the same day, saying,	On that day Moses commanded the people:
DEU	27	12	너희가 요단을 건넌 후에 시므온과 레위와 유다와 잇사갈과 요셉과 베냐민은 백성을 축복하기 위하여 그리심 산에 서고	These shall stand upon mount Gerizim to bless the people, when ye are come over Jordan; Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Joseph, and Benjamin:	“When you have crossed the Jordan, these tribes shall stand on Mount Gerizim to bless the people: Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Joseph, and Benjamin.
DEU	27	13	르우벤과 갓과 아셀과 스불론과 단과 납달리는 저주하기 위하여 에발 산에 서고	And these shall stand upon mount Ebal to curse; Reuben, Gad, and Asher, and Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali.	And these tribes shall stand on Mount Ebal to deliver the curse: Reuben, Gad, Asher, Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali.
DEU	27	14	레위 사람은 큰 소리로 이스라엘 모든 사람에게 말하여 이르기를	And the Levites shall speak, and say unto all the men of Israel with a loud voice,	Then the Levites shall proclaim in a loud voice to every Israelite:
DEU	27	15	장색의 손으로 조각하였거나 부어 만든 우상은 여호와께 가증하니 그것을 만들어 은밀히 세우는 자는 저주를 받을 것이라 할 것이요 모든 백성은 응답하여 아멘 할지니라	Cursed be the man that maketh any graven or molten image, an abomination unto the Lord, the work of the hands of the craftsman, and putteth it in a secret place. And all the people shall answer and say, Amen.	‘Cursed is the man who makes a carved idol or molten image—an abomination to the LORD, the work of the hands of a craftsman—and sets it up in secret.’ And let all the people say, ‘Amen!’
DEU	27	16	그 부모를 경홀히 여기는 자는 저주를 받을 것이라 할 것이요 모든 백성은 아멘 할지니라	Cursed be he that setteth light by his father or his mother. And all the people shall say, Amen.	‘Cursed is he who dishonors his father or mother.’ And let all the people say, ‘Amen!’
DEU	27	17	그 이웃의 지계표를 옮기는 자는 저주를 받을 것이라 할 것이요 모든 백성은 아멘 할지니라	Cursed be he that removeth his neighbour’s landmark. And all the people shall say, Amen.	‘Cursed is he who moves his neighbor’s boundary stone.’ And let all the people say, ‘Amen!’
DEU	27	18	소경으로 길을 잃게 하는 자는 저주를 받을 것이라 할 것이요 모든 백성은 아멘 할지니라	Cursed be he that maketh the blind to wander out of the way. And all the people shall say, Amen.	‘Cursed is he who lets a blind man wander in the road.’ And let all the people say, ‘Amen!’
DEU	27	19	객이나 고아나 과부의 송사를 억울케 하는 자는 저주를 받을 것이라 할 것이요 모든 백성은 아멘 할지니라	Cursed be he that perverteth the judgment of the stranger, fatherless, and widow. And all the people shall say, Amen.	‘Cursed is he who withholds justice from the foreigner, the fatherless, or the widow.’ And let all the people say, ‘Amen!’
DEU	27	20	계모와 구합하는 자는 그 아비의 하체를 드러내었으니 저주를 받을 것이라 할 것이요 모든 백성은 아멘 할지니라	Cursed be he that lieth with his father’s wife; because he uncovereth his father’s skirt. And all the people shall say, Amen.	‘Cursed is he who sleeps with his father’s wife, for he has violated his father’s marriage bed.’ And let all the people say, ‘Amen!’
DEU	27	21	무릇 짐승과 교합하는 자는 저주를 받을 것이라 할 것이요 모든 백성은 아멘 할지니라	Cursed be he that lieth with any manner of beast. And all the people shall say, Amen.	‘Cursed is he who lies with any animal.’ And let all the people say, ‘Amen!’
DEU	27	22	그 자매 곧 그 아비의 딸이나 어미의 딸과 구합하는 자는 저주를 받을 것이라 할 것이요 모든 백성은 아멘 할지니라	Cursed be he that lieth with his sister, the daughter of his father, or the daughter of his mother. And all the people shall say, Amen.	‘Cursed is he who sleeps with his sister, the daughter of his father or the daughter of his mother.’ And let all the people say, ‘Amen!’
DEU	27	23	장모와 구합하는 자는 저주를 받을 것이라 할 것이요 모든 백성은 아멘 할지니라	Cursed be he that lieth with his mother in law. And all the people shall say, Amen.	‘Cursed is he who sleeps with his mother-in-law.’ And let all the people say, ‘Amen!’
DEU	27	24	그 이웃을 암살하는 자는 저주를 받을 것이라 할 것이요 모든 백성은 아멘 할지니라	Cursed be he that smiteth his neighbour secretly. And all the people shall say, Amen.	‘Cursed is he who strikes down his neighbor in secret.’ And let all the people say, ‘Amen!’
DEU	27	25	무죄자를 죽이려고 뇌물을 받는 자는 저주를 받을 것이라 할 것이요 모든 백성은 아멘 할지니라	Cursed be he that taketh reward to slay an innocent person. And all the people shall say, Amen.	‘Cursed is he who accepts a bribe to kill an innocent person.’ And let all the people say, ‘Amen!’
DEU	27	26	이 율법의 모든 말씀을 실행치 아니하는 자는 저주를 받을 것이라 할 것이요 모든 백성은 아멘 할지니라	Cursed be he that confirmeth not all the words of this law to do them. And all the people shall say, Amen.	‘Cursed is he who does not put the words of this law into practice.’ And let all the people say, ‘Amen!’
DEU	28	1	네가 네 하나님 여호와의 말씀을 삼가 듣고 내가 오늘날 네게 명하는 그 모든 명령을 지켜 행하면 네 하나님 여호와께서 너를 세계 모든 민족 위에 뛰어나게 하실 것이라	And it shall come to pass, if thou shalt hearken diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and to do all his commandments which I command thee this day, that the Lord thy God will set thee on high above all nations of the earth:	“Now if you faithfully obey the voice of the LORD your God and are careful to follow all His commandments I am giving you today, the LORD your God will set you high above all the nations of the earth.
DEU	28	2	네가 네 하나님 여호와의 말씀을 순종하면 이 모든 복이 네게 임하며 네게 미치리니	And all these blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee, if thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God.	And all these blessings will come upon you and overtake you, if you will obey the voice of the LORD your God:
DEU	28	3	성읍에서도 복을 받고 들에서도 복을 받을 것이며	Blessed shalt thou be in the city, and blessed shalt thou be in the field.	You will be blessed in the city and blessed in the country.
DEU	28	4	네 몸의 소생과 네 토지의 소산과 네 짐승의 새끼와 우양의 새끼가 복을 받을 것이며	Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy cattle, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep.	The fruit of your womb will be blessed, as well as the produce of your land and the offspring of your livestock— the calves of your herds and the lambs of your flocks.
DEU	28	5	네 광주리와 떡반죽 그릇이 복을 받을 것이며	Blessed shall be thy basket and thy store.	Your basket and kneading bowl will be blessed.
DEU	28	6	네가 들어와도 복을 받고 나가도 복을 받을 것이니라	Blessed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and blessed shalt thou be when thou goest out.	You will be blessed when you come in and blessed when you go out.
DEU	28	7	네 대적들이 일어나 너를 치려하면 여호와께서 그들을 네 앞에서 패하게 하시리니 그들이 한 길로 너를 치러 들어왔으나 네 앞에서 일곱 길로 도망하리라	The Lord shall cause thine enemies that rise up against thee to be smitten before thy face: they shall come out against thee one way, and flee before thee seven ways.	The LORD will cause the enemies who rise up against you to be defeated before you. They will march out against you in one direction but flee from you in seven.
DEU	28	8	여호와께서 명하사 네 창고와 네 손으로 하는 모든 일에 복을 내리시고 네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 주시는 땅에서 네게 복을 주실 것이며	The Lord shall command the blessing upon thee in thy storehouses, and in all that thou settest thine hand unto; and he shall bless thee in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.	The LORD will decree a blessing on your barns and on everything to which you put your hand; the LORD your God will bless you in the land He is giving you.
DEU	28	9	네가 네 하나님 여호와의 명령을 지켜 그 길로 행하면 여호와께서 네게 맹세하신 대로 너를 세워 자기의 성민이 되게 하시리니	The Lord shall establish thee an holy people unto himself, as he hath sworn unto thee, if thou shalt keep the commandments of the Lord thy God, and walk in his ways.	The LORD will establish you as His holy people, just as He has sworn to you, if you keep the commandments of the LORD your God and walk in His ways.
DEU	28	10	너를 여호와의 이름으로 일컬음을 세계 만민이 보고 너를 두려워하리라	And all people of the earth shall see that thou art called by the name of the Lord; and they shall be afraid of thee.	Then all the peoples of the earth will see that you are called by the name of the LORD, and they will stand in awe of you.
DEU	28	11	여호와께서 네게 주리라고 네 열조에게 맹세하신 땅에서 네게 복을 주사 네 몸의 소생과 육축의 새끼와 토지의 소산으로 많게 하시며	And the Lord shall make thee plenteous in goods, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy ground, in the land which the Lord sware unto thy fathers to give thee.	The LORD will make you prosper abundantly—in the fruit of your womb, the offspring of your livestock, and the produce of your land—in the land that the LORD swore to your fathers to give you.
DEU	28	12	여호와께서 너를 위하여 하늘의 아름다운 보고를 열으사 네 땅에 때를 따라 비를 내리시고 네 손으로 하는 모든 일에 복을 주시리니 네가 많은 민족에게 꾸어줄찌라도 너는 꾸지 아니할 것이요	The Lord shall open unto thee his good treasure, the heaven to give the rain unto thy land in his season, and to bless all the work of thine hand: and thou shalt lend unto many nations, and thou shalt not borrow.	The LORD will open the heavens, His abundant storehouse, to send rain on your land in season and to bless all the work of your hands. You will lend to many nations, but borrow from none.
DEU	28	13	여호와께서 너로 머리가 되고 꼬리가 되지 않게 하시며 위에만 있고 아래에 있지 않게 하시리니 오직 너는 내가 오늘날 네게 명하는 네 하나님 여호와의 명령을 듣고 지켜 행하며	And the Lord shall make thee the head, and not the tail; and thou shalt be above only, and thou shalt not be beneath; if that thou hearken unto the commandments of the Lord thy God, which I command thee this day, to observe and to do them:	The LORD will make you the head and not the tail; you will only move upward and never downward, if you hear and carefully follow the commandments of the LORD your God, which I am giving you today.
DEU	28	14	내가 오늘날 너희에게 명하는 그 말씀을 떠나 좌로나 우로나 치우치지 아니하고 다른 신을 따라 섬기지 아니하면 이와 같으리라	And thou shalt not go aside from any of the words which I command thee this day, to the right hand, or to the left, to go after other gods to serve them.	Do not turn aside to the right or to the left from any of the words I command you today, and do not go after other gods to serve them.
DEU	28	15	네가 만일 네 하나님 여호와의 말씀을 순종하지 아니하여 내가 오늘날 네게 명하는 그 모든 명령과 규례를 지켜 행하지 아니하면 이 모든 저주가 네게 임하고 네게 미칠 것이니	But it shall come to pass, if thou wilt not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all his commandments and his statutes which I command thee this day; that all these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee:	If, however, you do not obey the LORD your God by carefully following all His commandments and statutes I am giving you today, all these curses will come upon you and overtake you:
DEU	28	16	네가 성읍에서도 저주를 받으며 들에서도 저주를 받을 것이요	Cursed shalt thou be in the city, and cursed shalt thou be in the field.	You will be cursed in the city and cursed in the country.
DEU	28	17	또 네 광주리와 떡반죽 그릇이 저주를 받을 것이요	Cursed shall be thy basket and thy store.	Your basket and kneading bowl will be cursed.
DEU	28	18	네 몸의 소생과 네 토지의 소산과 네 우양의 새끼가 저주를 받을 것이며	Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy land, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep.	The fruit of your womb will be cursed, as well as the produce of your land, the calves of your herds, and the lambs of your flocks.
DEU	28	19	네가 들어와도 저주를 받고 나가도 저주를 받으리라	Cursed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and cursed shalt thou be when thou goest out.	You will be cursed when you come in and cursed when you go out.
DEU	28	20	네가 악을 행하여 그를 잊으므로 네 손으로 하는 모든 일에 여호와께서 저주와 공구와 견책을 내리사 망하여 속히 파멸케 하실 것이며	The Lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke, in all that thou settest thine hand unto for to do, until thou be destroyed, and until thou perish quickly; because of the wickedness of thy doings, whereby thou hast forsaken me.	The LORD will send curses upon you, confusion and reproof in all to which you put your hand, until you are destroyed and quickly perish because of the wickedness you have committed in forsaking Him.
DEU	28	21	여호와께서 네 몸에 염병이 들게 하사 네가 들어가 얻을 땅에서 필경 너를 멸하실 것이며	The Lord shall make the pestilence cleave unto thee, until he have consumed thee from off the land, whither thou goest to possess it.	The LORD will make the plague cling to you until He has exterminated you from the land that you are entering to possess.
DEU	28	22	여호와께서 폐병과 열병과 상한과 학질과 한재와 풍재와 썩는 재앙으로 너를 치시리니 이 재앙들이 너를 따라서 너를 진멸케 할 것이라	The Lord shall smite thee with a consumption, and with a fever, and with an inflammation, and with an extreme burning, and with the sword, and with blasting, and with mildew; and they shall pursue thee until thou perish.	The LORD will strike you with wasting disease, with fever and inflammation, with scorching heat and drought, and with blight and mildew; these will pursue you until you perish.
DEU	28	23	네 머리 위의 하늘은 놋이 되고 네 아래의 땅은 철이 될 것이며	And thy heaven that is over thy head shall be brass, and the earth that is under thee shall be iron.	The sky over your head will be bronze, and the earth beneath you iron.
DEU	28	24	여호와께서 비 대신에 티끌과 모래를 네 땅에 내리시리니 그것들이 하늘에서 네 위에 내려서 필경 너를 멸하리라	The Lord shall make the rain of thy land powder and dust: from heaven shall it come down upon thee, until thou be destroyed.	The LORD will turn the rain of your land into dust and powder; it will descend on you from the sky until you are destroyed.
DEU	28	25	여호와께서 너로 네 대적 앞에 패하게 하시리니 네가 한 길로 그들을 치러 나가서는 그들의 앞에서 일곱 길로 도망할 것이며 네가 또 세계 만국 중에 흩음을 당하고	The Lord shall cause thee to be smitten before thine enemies: thou shalt go out one way against them, and flee seven ways before them: and shalt be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth.	The LORD will cause you to be defeated before your enemies. You will march out against them in one direction but flee from them in seven. You will be an object of horror to all the kingdoms of the earth.
DEU	28	26	네 시체가 공중의 모든 새와 땅 짐승들의 밥이 될 것이나 그것들을 쫓아 줄 자가 없을 것이며	And thy carcase shall be meat unto all fowls of the air, and unto the beasts of the earth, and no man shall fray them away.	Your corpses will be food for all the birds of the air and beasts of the earth, with no one to scare them away.
DEU	28	27	여호와께서 애굽의 종기와 치질과 괴혈병과 개창으로 너를 치시리니 네가 치료함을 얻지 못할 것이며	The Lord will smite thee with the botch of Egypt, and with the emerods, and with the scab, and with the itch, whereof thou canst not be healed.	The LORD will afflict you with the boils of Egypt, with tumors and scabs and itch from which you cannot be cured.
DEU	28	28	여호와께서 또 너를 미침과 눈멂과 경심증으로 치시리니	The Lord shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart:	The LORD will afflict you with madness, blindness, and confusion of mind,
DEU	28	29	소경이 어두운데서 더듬는 것과 같이 네가 백주에도 더듬고 네 길이 형통치 못하여 항상 압제와 노략을 당할 뿐이니 너를 구원할 자가 없을 것이며	And thou shalt grope at noonday, as the blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shalt not prosper in thy ways: and thou shalt be only oppressed and spoiled evermore, and no man shall save thee.	and at noon you will grope about like a blind man in the darkness. You will not prosper in your ways. Day after day you will be oppressed and plundered, with no one to save you.
DEU	28	30	네가 여자와 약혼하였으나 다른 사람이 그와 같이 잘 것이요 집을 건축하였으나 거기 거하지 못할 것이요 포도원을 심었으나 네가 그 과실을 쓰지 못할 것이며	Thou shalt betroth a wife, and another man shall lie with her: thou shalt build an house, and thou shalt not dwell therein: thou shalt plant a vineyard, and shalt not gather the grapes thereof.	You will be pledged in marriage to a woman, but another man will violate her. You will build a house but will not live in it. You will plant a vineyard but will not enjoy its fruit.
DEU	28	31	네 소를 네 목전에서 잡았으나 네가 먹지 못할 것이며 네 나귀를 네 목전에서 빼앗아감을 당하여도 도로 찾지 못할 것이며 네 양을 대적에게 빼앗길 것이나 너를 도와 줄 자가 없을 것이며	Thine ox shall be slain before thine eyes, and thou shalt not eat thereof: thine ass shall be violently taken away from before thy face, and shall not be restored to thee: thy sheep shall be given unto thine enemies, and thou shalt have none to rescue them.	Your ox will be slaughtered before your eyes, but you will not eat any of it. Your donkey will be taken away and not returned to you. Your flock will be given to your enemies, and no one will save you.
DEU	28	32	네 자녀를 다른 민족에게 빼앗기고 종일 생각하고 알아봄으로 눈이 쇠하여지나 네 손에 능이 없을 것이며	Thy sons and thy daughters shall be given unto another people, and thine eyes shall look, and fail with longing for them all the day long: and there shall be no might in thine hand.	Your sons and daughters will be given to another nation, while your eyes grow weary looking for them day after day, with no power in your hand.
DEU	28	33	네 토지 소산과 네 수고로 얻은 것을 네가 알지 못하는 민족이 먹겠고 너는 항상 압제와 학대를 받을 뿐이리니	The fruit of thy land, and all thy labours, shall a nation which thou knowest not eat up; and thou shalt be only oppressed and crushed alway:	A people you do not know will eat the produce of your land and of all your toil. All your days you will be oppressed and crushed.
DEU	28	34	이러므로 네 눈에 보이는 일로 인하여 네가 미치리라	So that thou shalt be mad for the sight of thine eyes which thou shalt see.	You will be driven mad by the sights you see.
DEU	28	35	여호와께서 네 무릎과 다리를 쳐서 고치지 못할 심한 종기로 발하게 하여 발바닥으로 정수리까지 이르게 하시리라	The Lord shall smite thee in the knees, and in the legs, with a sore botch that cannot be healed, from the sole of thy foot unto the top of thy head.	The LORD will afflict you with painful, incurable boils on your knees and thighs, from the soles of your feet to the top of your head.
DEU	28	36	여호와께서 너와 네가 세울 네 임금을 너와 네 열조가 알지 못하던 나라로 끌어가시리니 네가 거기서 목석으로 만든 다른 신들을 섬길 것이며	The Lord shall bring thee, and thy king which thou shalt set over thee, unto a nation which neither thou nor thy fathers have known; and there shalt thou serve other gods, wood and stone.	The LORD will bring you and the king you appoint to a nation neither you nor your fathers have known, and there you will worship other gods—gods of wood and stone.
DEU	28	37	여호와께서 너를 끌어 가시는 모든 민족 중에서 네가 놀램과 속담과 비방거리가 될 것이라	And thou shalt become an astonishment, a proverb, and a byword, among all nations whither the Lord shall lead thee.	You will become an object of horror, scorn, and ridicule among all the nations to which the LORD will drive you.
DEU	28	38	네가 많은 종자를 들에 심을지라도 메뚜기가 먹으므로 거둘 것이 적을 것이며	Thou shalt carry much seed out into the field, and shalt gather but little in; for the locust shall consume it.	You will sow much seed in the field but harvest little, because the locusts will consume it.
DEU	28	39	네가 포도원을 심고 다스릴지라도 벌레가 먹으므로 포도를 따지 못하고 포도주를 마시지 못할 것이며	Thou shalt plant vineyards, and dress them, but shalt neither drink of the wine, nor gather the grapes; for the worms shall eat them.	You will plant and cultivate vineyards, but will neither drink the wine nor gather the grapes, because worms will eat them.
DEU	28	40	네 모든 경내에 감람나무가 있을지라도 그 열매가 떨어지므로 그 기름을 네 몸에 바르지 못할 것이며	Thou shalt have olive trees throughout all thy coasts, but thou shalt not anoint thyself with the oil; for thine olive shall cast his fruit.	You will have olive trees throughout your territory but will never anoint yourself with oil, because the olives will drop off.
DEU	28	41	네가 자녀를 낳을지라도 그들이 포로가 되므로 네게 있지 못할 것이며	Thou shalt beget sons and daughters, but thou shalt not enjoy them; for they shall go into captivity.	You will father sons and daughters, but they will not remain yours, because they will go into captivity.
DEU	28	42	네 모든 나무와 토지 소산은 메뚜기가 먹을 것이며	All thy trees and fruit of thy land shall the locust consume.	Swarms of locusts will consume all your trees and the produce of your land.
DEU	28	43	너의 중에 우거하는 이방인은 점점 높아져서 네 위에 뛰어나고 너는 점점 낮아질 것이며	The stranger that is within thee shall get up above thee very high; and thou shalt come down very low.	The foreigner living among you will rise higher and higher above you, while you sink down lower and lower.
DEU	28	44	그는 네게 꾸일지라도 너는 그에게 뀌지 못하리니 그는 머리가 되고 너는 꼬리가 될 것이라	He shall lend to thee, and thou shalt not lend to him: he shall be the head, and thou shalt be the tail.	He will lend to you, but you will not lend to him. He will be the head, and you will be the tail.
DEU	28	45	네가 네 하나님 여호와의 말씀을 순종치 아니하고 네게 명하신 그 명령과 규례를 지키지 아니하므로 이 모든 저주가 네게 임하고 너를 따르고 네게 미쳐서 필경 너를 멸하리니	Moreover all these curses shall come upon thee, and shall pursue thee, and overtake thee, till thou be destroyed; because thou hearkenedst not unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep his commandments and his statutes which he commanded thee:	All these curses will come upon you. They will pursue you and overtake you until you are destroyed, since you did not obey the LORD your God and keep the commandments and statutes He gave you.
DEU	28	46	이 모든 저주가 너와 네 자손에게 영원히 있어서 표적과 감계가 되리라	And they shall be upon thee for a sign and for a wonder, and upon thy seed for ever.	These curses will be a sign and a wonder upon you and your descendants forever.
DEU	28	47	네가 모든 것이 풍족하여도 기쁨과 즐거운 마음으로 네 하나님 여호와를 섬기지 아니함을 인하여	Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulness, and with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things;	Because you did not serve the LORD your God with joy and gladness of heart in all your abundance,
DEU	28	48	네가 주리고 목마르고 헐벗고 모든 것이 핍절한 중에서 여호와께서 보내사 너를 치게 하실 대적을 섬기게 될 것이니 그가 철 멍에를 네 목에 메워서 필경 너를 멸할 것이라	Therefore shalt thou serve thine enemies which the Lord shall send against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all things: and he shall put a yoke of iron upon thy neck, until he have destroyed thee.	you will serve your enemies the LORD will send against you in famine, thirst, nakedness, and destitution. He will place an iron yoke on your neck until He has destroyed you.
DEU	28	49	곧 여호와께서 원방에서 땅 끝에서 한 민족을 독수리의 날음 같이 너를 치러 오게 하시리니 이는 네가 그 언어를 알지 못하는 민족이요	The Lord shall bring a nation against thee from far, from the end of the earth, as swift as the eagle flieth; a nation whose tongue thou shalt not understand;	The LORD will bring a nation from afar, from the ends of the earth, to swoop down upon you like an eagle—a nation whose language you will not understand,
DEU	28	50	그 용모가 흉악한 민족이라 노인을 돌아보지 아니하며 유치를 긍휼히 여기지 아니하며	A nation of fierce countenance, which shall not regard the person of the old, nor shew favour to the young:	a ruthless nation with no respect for the old and no pity for the young.
DEU	28	51	네 육축의 새끼와 네 토지의 소산을 먹어서 필경은 너를 멸망시키며 또 곡식이나 포도주나 기름이나 소의 새끼나 양의 새끼를 위하여 남기지 아니하고 필경은 너를 멸절시키리라	And he shall eat the fruit of thy cattle, and the fruit of thy land, until thou be destroyed: which also shall not leave thee either corn, wine, or oil, or the increase of thy kine, or flocks of thy sheep, until he have destroyed thee.	They will eat the offspring of your livestock and the produce of your land until you are destroyed. They will leave you no grain or new wine or oil, no calves of your herds or lambs of your flocks, until they have caused you to perish.
DEU	28	52	그들이 전국에서 네 모든 성읍을 에워싸고 네가 의뢰하는바 높고 견고한 성벽을 다 헐며 네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 주시는 땅의 모든 성읍에서 너를 에워싸리니	And he shall besiege thee in all thy gates, until thy high and fenced walls come down, wherein thou trustedst, throughout all thy land: and he shall besiege thee in all thy gates throughout all thy land, which the Lord thy God hath given thee.	They will besiege all the cities throughout your land, until the high and fortified walls in which you trust have fallen. They will besiege all your cities throughout the land that the LORD your God has given you.
DEU	28	53	네가 대적에게 에워싸이고 맹렬히 쳐서 곤란케 함을 당하므로 네 하나님 여호와께서 네게 주신 자녀 곧 네 몸의 소생의 고기를 먹을 것이라	And thou shalt eat the fruit of thine own body, the flesh of thy sons and of thy daughters, which the Lord thy God hath given thee, in the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine enemies shall distress thee:	Then you will eat the fruit of your womb, the flesh of the sons and daughters whom the LORD your God has given you, in the siege and distress that your enemy will inflict on you.
DEU	28	54	너희 중에 유순하고 연약한 남자라도 그 형제와 그 품의 아내와 그 남은 자녀를 질시하여	So that the man that is tender among you, and very delicate, his eye shall be evil toward his brother, and toward the wife of his bosom, and toward the remnant of his children which he shall leave:	The most gentle and refined man among you will begrudge his brother, the wife he embraces, and the rest of his children who have survived,
DEU	28	55	자기의 먹는 그 자녀의 고기를 그 중 누구에게든지 주지 아니하리니 이는 네 대적이 네 모든 성읍을 에워싸고 맹렬히 너를 쳐서 곤란케 하므로 아무 것도 그에게 남음이 없는 연고일 것이며	So that he will not give to any of them of the flesh of his children whom he shall eat: because he hath nothing left him in the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine enemies shall distress thee in all thy gates.	refusing to share with any of them the flesh of his children he will eat because he has nothing left in the siege and distress that your enemy will inflict on you within all your gates.
DEU	28	56	또 너희 중에 유순하고 연약한 부녀 곧 유순하고 연약하여 그 발바닥으로 땅을 밟아 보지도 아니하던 자라도 그 품의 남편과 그 자녀를 질시하여	The tender and delicate woman among you, which would not adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for delicateness and tenderness, her eye shall be evil toward the husband of her bosom, and toward her son, and toward her daughter,	The most gentle and refined woman among you, so gentle and refined she would not venture to set the sole of her foot on the ground, will begrudge the husband she embraces and her son and daughter
DEU	28	57	그 다리 사이에서 나온 태와 자기의 낳은 어린 자식을 가만히 먹으리니 이는 네 대적이 네 생명을 에워싸고 맹렬히 쳐서 곤란케 하므로 아무 것도 얻지 못함이리라	And toward her young one that cometh out from between her feet, and toward her children which she shall bear: for she shall eat them for want of all things secretly in the siege and straitness, wherewith thine enemy shall distress thee in thy gates.	the afterbirth that comes from between her legs and the children she bears, because she will secretly eat them for lack of anything else in the siege and distress that your enemy will inflict on you within your gates.
DEU	28	58	네가 만일 이 책에 기록한 이 율법의 모든 말씀을 지켜 행하지 아니하고 네 하나님 여호와라 하는 영화롭고 두려운 이름을 경외하지 아니하면	If thou wilt not observe to do all the words of this law that are written in this book, that thou mayest fear this glorious and fearful name, THE LORD THY GOD;	If you are not careful to observe all the words of this law which are written in this book, that you may fear this glorious and awesome name—the LORD your God—
DEU	28	59	여호와께서 너의 재앙과 네 자손의 재앙을 극렬하게 하시리니 그 재앙이 크고 오래고 질병이 중하고 오랠 것이라	Then the Lord will make thy plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, even great plagues, and of long continuance, and sore sicknesses, and of long continuance.	He will bring upon you and your descendants extraordinary disasters, severe and lasting plagues, and terrible and chronic sicknesses.
DEU	28	60	여호와께서 네가 두려워하던 애굽의 모든 질병을 네게로 가져다가 네 몸에 들어붓게 하실 것이며	Moreover he will bring upon thee all the diseases of Egypt, which thou wast afraid of; and they shall cleave unto thee.	He will afflict you again with all the diseases you dreaded in Egypt, and they will cling to you.
DEU	28	61	또 이 율법 책에 기록지 아니한 모든 질병과 모든 재앙을 너의 멸망하기까지 여호와께서 네게 내리실 것이니	Also every sickness, and every plague, which is not written in the book of this law, them will the Lord bring upon thee, until thou be destroyed.	The LORD will also bring upon you every sickness and plague not recorded in this Book of the Law, until you are destroyed.
DEU	28	62	너희가 하늘의 별 같이 많았을지라도 네 하나님 여호와의 말씀을 순종치 아니하므로 남는 자가 얼마되지 못할 것이라	And ye shall be left few in number, whereas ye were as the stars of heaven for multitude; because thou wouldest not obey the voice of the Lord thy God.	You who were as numerous as the stars in the sky will be left few in number, because you would not obey the voice of the LORD your God.
DEU	28	63	이왕에 여호와께서 너희에게 선을 행하시고 너희로 번성케 하시기를 기뻐하시던 것 같이 이제는 여호와께서 너희를 망하게 하시며 멸하시기를 기뻐하시리니 너희가 들어가 얻는 땅에서 뽑힐 것이요	And it shall come to pass, that as the Lord rejoiced over you to do you good, and to multiply you; so the Lord will rejoice over you to destroy you, and to bring you to nought; and ye shall be plucked from off the land whither thou goest to possess it.	Just as it pleased the LORD to make you prosper and multiply, so also it will please Him to annihilate you and destroy you. And you will be uprooted from the land you are entering to possess.
DEU	28	64	여호와께서 너를 땅 이 끝에서 저 끝까지 만민 중에 흩으시리니 네가 그 곳에서 너와 네 열조의 알지 못하던 목석 우상을 섬길 것이라	And the Lord shall scatter thee among all people, from the one end of the earth even unto the other; and there thou shalt serve other gods, which neither thou nor thy fathers have known, even wood and stone.	Then the LORD will scatter you among all the nations, from one end of the earth to the other, and there you will worship other gods, gods of wood and stone, which neither you nor your fathers have known.
DEU	28	65	그 열국 중에서 네가 평안함을 얻지 못하며 네 발바닥을 쉴 곳도 얻지 못하고 오직 여호와께서 거기서 너의 마음으로 떨고 눈으로 쇠하고 정신으로 산란케 하시리니	And among these nations shalt thou find no ease, neither shall the sole of thy foot have rest: but the Lord shall give thee there a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of mind:	Among those nations you will find no repose, not even a resting place for the sole of your foot. There the LORD will give you a trembling heart, failing eyes, and a despairing soul.
DEU	28	66	네 생명이 의심나는 곳에 달린 것 같아서 주야로 두려워하며 네 생명을 확신할 수 없을 것이라	And thy life shall hang in doubt before thee; and thou shalt fear day and night, and shalt have none assurance of thy life:	So your life will hang in doubt before you, and you will be afraid night and day, never certain of survival.
DEU	28	67	네 마음의 두려움과 눈의 보는 것으로 인하여 아침에는 이르기를 아하 저녁이 되었으면 좋겠다 할 것이요 저녁에는 이르기를 아하 아침이 되었으면 좋겠다 하리라	In the morning thou shalt say, Would God it were even! and at even thou shalt say, Would God it were morning! for the fear of thine heart wherewith thou shalt fear, and for the sight of thine eyes which thou shalt see.	In the morning you will say, ‘If only it were evening!’ and in the evening you will say, ‘If only it were morning!’—because of the dread in your hearts of the terrifying sights you will see.
DEU	28	68	여호와께서 너를 배에 실으시고 전에 네게 고하여 이르시기를 네가 다시는 그 길을 보지 아니하리라 하시던 그 길로 너를 애굽으로 끌어가실 것이라 거기서 너희가 너희 몸을 대적에게 노비로 팔려하나 너희를 살 자가 없으리라	And the Lord shall bring thee into Egypt again with ships, by the way whereof I spake unto thee, Thou shalt see it no more again: and there ye shall be sold unto your enemies for bondmen and bondwomen, and no man shall buy you.	The LORD will return you to Egypt in ships by a route that I said you should never see again. There you will sell yourselves to your enemies as male and female slaves, but no one will buy you.”
DEU	29	1	호렙에서 이스라엘 자손과 세우신 언약 외에 여호와께서 모세에게 명하사 모압 땅에서 또 그들과 세우신 언약의 말씀이 이러하니라	These are the words of the covenant, which the Lord commanded Moses to make with the children of Israel in the land of Moab, beside the covenant which he made with them in Horeb.	These are the words of the covenant that the LORD commanded Moses to make with the Israelites in the land of Moab, in addition to the covenant He had made with them at Horeb.
DEU	29	2	모세가 온 이스라엘을 소집하고 그들에게 이르되 여호와께서 애굽 땅에서 너희 목전에 바로와 그 모든 신하와 그 온 땅에 행하신 모든 일을 너희가 보았나니	And Moses called unto all Israel, and said unto them, Ye have seen all that the Lord did before your eyes in the land of Egypt unto Pharaoh, and unto all his servants, and unto all his land;	Moses summoned all Israel and proclaimed to them, “You have seen with your own eyes everything the LORD did in Egypt to Pharaoh, to all his officials, and to all his land.
DEU	29	3	곧 그 큰 시험과 이적과 큰 기사를 네가 목도하였느니라	The great temptations which thine eyes have seen, the signs, and those great miracles:	You saw with your own eyes the great trials, and those miraculous signs and wonders.
DEU	29	4	그러나 깨닫는 마음과 보는 눈과 듣는 귀는 오늘날까지 여호와께서 너희에게 주지 아니하셨느니라	Yet the Lord hath not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, unto this day.	Yet to this day the LORD has not given you a mind to understand, eyes to see, or ears to hear.
DEU	29	5	주께서 사십 년 동안 너희를 인도하여 광야를 통행케 하셨거니와 너희 몸의 옷이 낡지 아니하였고 너희 발의 신이 해어지지 아니하였으며	And I have led you forty years in the wilderness: your clothes are not waxen old upon you, and thy shoe is not waxen old upon thy foot.	For forty years I led you in the wilderness, yet your clothes and sandals did not wear out.
DEU	29	6	너희로 떡도 먹지 못하며 포도주나 독주를 마시지 못하게 하셨음은 주는 너희 하나님 여호와이신 줄을 알게 하려 하심이니라	Ye have not eaten bread, neither have ye drunk wine or strong drink: that ye might know that I am the Lord your God.	You ate no bread and drank no wine or strong drink, so that you might know that I am the LORD your God.
DEU	29	7	너희가 이곳에 올 때에 헤스본 왕 시혼과 바산 왕 옥이 우리와 싸우러 나왔으므로 우리가 그들을 치고	And when ye came unto this place, Sihon the king of Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan, came out against us unto battle, and we smote them:	When you reached this place, Sihon king of Heshbon and Og king of Bashan came out against us in battle, but we defeated them.
DEU	29	8	그 땅을 취하여 르우벤과 갓과 므낫세 반 지파에게 기업으로 주었나니	And we took their land, and gave it for an inheritance unto the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to the half tribe of Manasseh.	We took their land and gave it as an inheritance to the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh.
DEU	29	9	그런즉 너희는 이 언약의 말씀을 지켜 행하라 그리하면 너희의 하는 모든 일이 형통하리라	Keep therefore the words of this covenant, and do them, that ye may prosper in all that ye do.	So keep and follow the words of this covenant, that you may prosper in all you do.
DEU	29	10	오늘날 너희 곧 너희 두령과 너희 지파와 너희 장로들과 너희 유사와 이스라엘 모든 남자와	Ye stand this day all of you before the Lord your God; your captains of your tribes, your elders, and your officers, with all the men of Israel,	All of you are standing today before the LORD your God—you leaders of tribes, elders, officials, and all the men of Israel,
DEU	29	11	너희 유아들과 너희 아내와 및 네 진중에 있는 객과 무릇 너를 위하여 나무를 패는 자로부터 물 긷는 자까지 다 너희 하나님 여호와 앞에 선 것은	Your little ones, your wives, and thy stranger that is in thy camp, from the hewer of thy wood unto the drawer of thy water:	your children and wives, and the foreigners in your camps who cut your wood and draw your water—
DEU	29	12	너의 하나님 여호와의 언약에 참예하며 또 너의 하나님 여호와께서 오늘날 네게 향하여 하시는 맹세에 참예하여	That thou shouldest enter into covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his oath, which the Lord thy God maketh with thee this day:	so that you may enter into the covenant of the LORD your God, which He is making with you today, and into His oath,
DEU	29	13	여호와께서 이왕에 네게 말씀하신 대로 또 네 열조 아브라함과 이삭과 야곱에게 맹세하신 대로 오늘날 너를 세워 자기 백성을 삼으시고 자기는 친히 네 하나님이 되시려 함이니라	That he may establish thee to day for a people unto himself, and that he may be unto thee a God, as he hath said unto thee, and as he hath sworn unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.	and so that He may establish you today as His people, and He may be your God as He promised you and as He swore to your fathers, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
DEU	29	14	내가 이 언약과 맹세를 너희에게만 세우는 것이 아니라	Neither with you only do I make this covenant and this oath;	I am making this covenant and this oath not only with you,
DEU	29	15	오늘날 우리 하나님 여호와 앞에서 우리와 함께 여기 선 자와 오늘날 우리와 함께 여기 있지 아니한 자에게까지니	But with him that standeth here with us this day before the Lord our God, and also with him that is not here with us this day:	but also with those who are standing here with us today in the presence of the LORD our God, as well as with those who are not here today.
DEU	29	16	(우리가 애굽 땅에 어떻게 거하였었는지 너희가 여러 나라를 어떻게 통과하여 왔었는지 너희가 알며	(For ye know how we have dwelt in the land of Egypt; and how we came through the nations which ye passed by;	For you yourselves know how we lived in the land of Egypt and how we passed through the nations on the way here.
DEU	29	17	너희가 또 그들 중에 있는 가증한 것과 목석과 은금의 우상을 보았느니라)	And ye have seen their abominations, and their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold, which were among them:)	You saw the abominations and idols among them made of wood and stone, of silver and gold.
DEU	29	18	너희 중에 남자나 여자나 가족이나 지파나 오늘날 그 마음이 우리 하나님 여호와를 떠나서 그 모든 민족의 신들에게 가서 섬길까 염려하며 독초와 쑥의 뿌리가 너희 중에 생겨서	Lest there should be among you man, or woman, or family, or tribe, whose heart turneth away this day from the Lord our God, to go and serve the gods of these nations; lest there should be among you a root that beareth gall and wormwood;	Make sure there is no man or woman, clan or tribe among you today whose heart turns away from the LORD our God to go and worship the gods of those nations. Make sure there is no root among you that bears such poisonous and bitter fruit,
DEU	29	19	이 저주의 말을 듣고도 심중에 스스로 위로하여 이르기를 내가 내 마음을 강퍅케 하여 젖은 것과 마른 것을 멸할지라도 평안하리라 할까 염려함이라	And it come to pass, when he heareth the words of this curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst:	because when such a person hears the words of this oath, he invokes a blessing on himself, saying, ‘I will have peace, even though I walk in the stubbornness of my own heart.’ This will bring disaster on the watered land as well as the dry.
DEU	29	20	여호와는 이런 자를 사하지 않으실 뿐 아니라 여호와의 분노와 질투의 불로 그의 위에 붓게 하시며 또 이 책에 기록된 모든 저주로 그에게 더하실 것이라 여호와께서 필경은 그의 이름을 천하에서 도말하시되	The Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven.	The LORD will never be willing to forgive him. Instead, His anger and jealousy will burn against that man, and every curse written in this book will fall upon him. The LORD will blot out his name from under heaven
DEU	29	21	여호와께서 곧 이스라엘 모든 지파 중에서 그를 구별하시고 이 율법 책에 기록된 언약의 모든 저주대로 그에게 화를 더하시리라	And the Lord shall separate him unto evil out of all the tribes of Israel, according to all the curses of the covenant that are written in this book of the law:	and single him out from all the tribes of Israel for disaster, according to all the curses of the covenant written in this Book of the Law.
DEU	29	22	너희 뒤에 일어나는 너희 자손과 원방에서 오는 객이 그 땅의 재앙과 여호와께서 그 땅에 유행시키시는 질병을 보며	So that the generation to come of your children that shall rise up after you, and the stranger that shall come from a far land, shall say, when they see the plagues of that land, and the sicknesses which the Lord hath laid upon it;	Then the generation to come—your sons who follow you and the foreigner who comes from a distant land—will see the plagues of the land and the sicknesses the LORD has inflicted on it.
DEU	29	23	그 온 땅이 유황이 되며 소금이 되며 또 불에 타서 심지도 못하며 결실함도 없으며 거기 아무 풀도 나지 아니함이 옛적에 여호와께서 진노와 분한으로 훼멸하신 소돔과 고모라와 아드마와 스보임의 무너짐과 같음을 보고 말할 것이요	And that the whole land thereof is brimstone, and salt, and burning, that it is not sown, nor beareth, nor any grass groweth therein, like the overthrow of Sodom, and Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim, which the Lord overthrew in his anger, and in his wrath:	All its soil will be a burning waste of sulfur and salt, unsown and unproductive, with no plant growing on it, just like the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboiim, which the LORD overthrew in His fierce anger.
DEU	29	24	열방 사람들도 말하기를 여호와께서 어찌하여 이 땅에 이같이 행하셨느뇨 이같이 크고 열렬하게 노하심은 무슨 뜻이뇨 하면	Even all nations shall say, Wherefore hath the Lord done thus unto this land? what meaneth the heat of this great anger?	So all the nations will ask, ‘Why has the LORD done such a thing to this land? Why this great outburst of anger?’
DEU	29	25	그 때에 사람이 대답하기를 그 무리가 자기의 조상의 하나님 여호와께서 그 조상을 애굽에서 인도하여 내실 때에 더불어 세우신 언약을 버리고	Then men shall say, Because they have forsaken the covenant of the Lord God of their fathers, which he made with them when he brought them forth out of the land of Egypt:	And the people will answer, ‘It is because they abandoned the covenant of the LORD, the God of their fathers, which He made with them when He brought them out of the land of Egypt.
DEU	29	26	가서 자기들이 알지도 못하고 여호와께서 그들에게 주시지도 아니한 다른 신들을 섬겨 그에게 절한 까닭이라	For they went and served other gods, and worshipped them, gods whom they knew not, and whom he had not given unto them:	They went and served other gods, and they worshiped gods they had not known—gods that the LORD had not given to them.
DEU	29	27	이러므로 여호와께서 이 땅을 향하여 진노하사 이 책에 기록된 모든 저주대로 재앙을 내리시고	And the anger of the Lord was kindled against this land, to bring upon it all the curses that are written in this book:	Therefore the anger of the LORD burned against this land, and He brought upon it every curse written in this book.
DEU	29	28	여호와께서 또 진노와 분한과 크게 통한하심으로 그들을 이 땅에서 뽑아내사 다른 나라에 던져 보내심이 오늘날과 같다 하리라	And the Lord rooted them out of their land in anger, and in wrath, and in great indignation, and cast them into another land, as it is this day.	The LORD uprooted them from their land in His anger, rage, and great wrath, and He cast them into another land, where they are today.’
DEU	29	29	오묘한 일은 우리 하나님 여호와께 속하였거니와 나타난 일은 영구히 우리와 우리 자손에게 속하였나니 이는 우리로 이 율법의 모든 말씀을 행하게 하심이니라	The secret things belong unto the Lord our God: but those things which are revealed belong unto us and to our children for ever, that we may do all the words of this law.	The secret things belong to the LORD our God, but the things revealed belong to us and to our children forever, so that we may follow all the words of this law.
DEU	30	1	내가 네게 진술한 모든 복과 저주가 네게 임하므로 네가 네 하나님 여호와께 쫓겨간 모든 나라 가운데서 이 일이 마음에서 기억이 나거든	And it shall come to pass, when all these things are come upon thee, the blessing and the curse, which I have set before thee, and thou shalt call them to mind among all the nations, whither the Lord thy God hath driven thee,	“When all these things come upon you—the blessings and curses I have set before you—and you call them to mind in all the nations to which the LORD your God has banished you,
DEU	30	2	너와 네 자손이 네 하나님 여호와께로 돌아와 내가 오늘날 네게 명한 것을 온전히 따라서 마음을 다하고 성품을 다하여 여호와의 말씀을 순종하면	And shalt return unto the Lord thy God, and shalt obey his voice according to all that I command thee this day, thou and thy children, with all thine heart, and with all thy soul;	and when you and your children return to the LORD your God and obey His voice with all your heart and all your soul according to everything I am giving you today,
DEU	30	3	네 하나님 여호와께서 마음을 돌이키시고 너를 긍휼히 여기사 네 포로를 돌리시되 네 하나님 여호와께서 너를 흩으신 그 모든 백성 중에서 너를 모으시리니	That then the Lord thy God will turn thy captivity, and have compassion upon thee, and will return and gather thee from all the nations, whither the Lord thy God hath scattered thee.	then He will restore you from captivity and have compassion on you and gather you from all the nations to which the LORD your God has scattered you.
DEU	30	4	너의 쫓겨간 자들이 하늘 가에 있을지라도 네 하나님 여호와께서 거기서 너를 모으실 것이며 거기서부터 너를 이끄실 것이라	If any of thine be driven out unto the outmost parts of heaven, from thence will the Lord thy God gather thee, and from thence will he fetch thee:	Even if you have been banished to the farthest horizon, He will gather you and return you from there.
DEU	30	5	네 하나님 여호와께서 너를 네 열조가 얻은 땅으로 돌아오게 하사 너로 다시 그것을 얻게 하실 것이며 여호와께서 또 네게 선을 행하사 너로 네 열조보다 더 번성케 하실 것이며	And the Lord thy God will bring thee into the land which thy fathers possessed, and thou shalt possess it; and he will do thee good, and multiply thee above thy fathers.	And the LORD your God will bring you into the land your fathers possessed, and you will take possession of it. He will cause you to prosper and multiply more than your fathers.
DEU	30	6	네 하나님 여호와께서 네 마음과 네 자손의 마음에 할례를 베푸사 너로 마음을 다하며 성품을 다하여 네 하나님 여호와를 사랑하게 하사 너로 생명을 얻게 하실 것이며	And the Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou mayest live.	The LORD your God will circumcise your hearts and the hearts of your descendants, and you will love Him with all your heart and with all your soul, so that you may live.
DEU	30	7	네 하나님 여호와께서 네 대적과 너를 미워하고 핍박하던 자에게 이 모든 저주로 임하게 하시리니	And the Lord thy God will put all these curses upon thine enemies, and on them that hate thee, which persecuted thee.	Then the LORD your God will put all these curses upon your enemies who hate you and persecute you.
DEU	30	8	너는 돌아와 다시 여호와의 말씀을 순종하고 내가 오늘날 네게 명한 그 모든 명령을 행할 것이라	And thou shalt return and obey the voice of the Lord, and do all his commandments which I command thee this day.	And you will again obey the voice of the LORD and follow all His commandments I am giving you today.
DEU	30	9	네가 네 하나님 여호와의 말씀을 순종하여 이 율법 책에 기록된 그 명령과 규례를 지키고 네 마음을 다하며 성품을 다하여 여호와 네 하나님께 돌아오면 네 하나님 여호와께서 네 손으로 하는 모든 일과 네 몸의 소생과 네 육축의 새끼와 네 토지 소산을 많게 하시고 네게 복을 주시되 곧 여호와께서 네 열조를 기뻐하신 것과 같이 너를 다시 기뻐하사 네게 복을 주시리라	And the Lord thy God will make thee plenteous in every work of thine hand, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy land, for good: for the Lord will again rejoice over thee for good, as he rejoiced over thy fathers:	So the LORD your God will make you abound in all the work of your hands and in the fruit of your womb, the offspring of your livestock, and the produce of your land. Indeed, the LORD will again delight in your goodness, as He delighted in that of your fathers,
DEU	30	10	(앞절과 동일)	If thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep his commandments and his statutes which are written in this book of the law, and if thou turn unto the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul.	if you obey the LORD your God by keeping His commandments and statutes that are written in this Book of the Law, and if you turn to Him with all your heart and with all your soul.
DEU	30	11	내가 오늘날 네게 명한 이 명령은 네게 어려운 것도 아니요 먼 것도 아니라	For this commandment which I command thee this day, it is not hidden from thee, neither is it far off.	For this commandment I give you today is not too difficult for you or beyond your reach.
DEU	30	12	하늘에 있는 것이 아니니 네가 이르기를 누가 우리를 위하여 하늘에 올라가서 그 명령을 우리에게로 가지고 와서 우리에게 들려 행하게 할꼬 할 것이 아니요	It is not in heaven, that thou shouldest say, Who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it?	It is not in heaven, that you should need to ask, ‘Who will ascend into heaven to get it for us and proclaim it, that we may obey it?’
DEU	30	13	이것이 바다 밖에 있는 것이 아니니 네가 이르기를 누가 우리를 위하여 바다를 건너가서 그 명령을 우리에게로 가지고 와서 우리에게 들려 행하게 할꼬 할 것도 아니라	Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou shouldest say, Who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it?	And it is not beyond the sea, that you should need to ask, ‘Who will cross the sea to get it for us and proclaim it, that we may obey it?’
DEU	30	14	오직 그 말씀이 네게 심히 가까워서 네 입에 있으며 네 마음에 있은즉 네가 이를 행할 수 있느니라	But the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it.	But the word is very near you; it is in your mouth and in your heart, so that you may obey it.
DEU	30	15	보라 내가 오늘날 생명과 복과 사망과 화를 네 앞에 두었나니	See, I have set before thee this day life and good, and death and evil;	See, I have set before you today life and goodness, as well as death and disaster.
DEU	30	16	곧 내가 오늘날 너를 명하여 네 하나님 여호와를 사랑하고 그 모든 길로 행하며 그 명령과 규례와 법도를 지키라 하는 것이라 그리하면 네가 생존하며 번성할 것이요 또 네 하나님 여호와께서 네가 가서 얻을 땅에서 네게 복을 주실 것임이니라	In that I command thee this day to love the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his commandments and his statutes and his judgments, that thou mayest live and multiply: and the Lord thy God shall bless thee in the land whither thou goest to possess it.	For I am commanding you today to love the LORD your God, to walk in His ways, and to keep His commandments, statutes, and ordinances, so that you may live and increase, and the LORD your God may bless you in the land that you are entering to possess.
DEU	30	17	그러나 네가 만일 마음을 돌이켜 듣지 아니하고 유혹을 받아서 다른 신들에게 절하고 그를 섬기면	But if thine heart turn away, so that thou wilt not hear, but shalt be drawn away, and worship other gods, and serve them;	But if your heart turns away and you do not listen, but are drawn away to bow down to other gods and worship them,
DEU	30	18	내가 오늘날 너희에게 선언하노니 너희가 반드시 망할 것이라 너희가 요단을 건너가서 얻을 땅에서 너희의 날이 장구치 못할 것이니라	I denounce unto you this day, that ye shall surely perish, and that ye shall not prolong your days upon the land, whither thou passest over Jordan to go to possess it.	I declare to you today that you will surely perish; you shall not prolong your days in the land that you are crossing the Jordan to possess.
DEU	30	19	내가 오늘날 천지를 불러서 너희에게 증거를 삼노라 내가 생명과 사망과 복과 저주를 네 앞에 두었은즉 너와 네 자손이 살기 위하여 생명을 택하고	I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live:	I call heaven and earth as witnesses against you today that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing. Therefore choose life, so that you and your descendants may live,
DEU	30	20	네 하나님 여호와를 사랑하고 그 말씀을 순종하며 또 그에게 부종하라 그는 네 생명이시요 네 장수시니 여호와께서 네 열조 아브라함과 이삭과 야곱에게 주리라고 맹세하신 땅에 네가 거하리라	That thou mayest love the Lord thy God, and that thou mayest obey his voice, and that thou mayest cleave unto him: for he is thy life, and the length of thy days: that thou mayest dwell in the land which the Lord sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give them.	and that you may love the LORD your God, obey Him, and hold fast to Him. For He is your life, and He will prolong your life in the land that the LORD swore to give to your fathers, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.”
DEU	31	1	모세가 가서 온 이스라엘에게 이 말씀을 베푸니라	And Moses went and spake these words unto all Israel.	When Moses had finished speaking these words to all Israel,
DEU	31	2	곧 그들에게 이르되 내가 오늘날 일백이십 세라 내가 더는 출입하기 능치 못하고 여호와께서도 내게 이르시기를 너는 이 요단을 건너지 못하리라 하셨느니라	And he said unto them, I am an hundred and twenty years old this day; I can no more go out and come in: also the Lord hath said unto me, Thou shalt not go over this Jordan.	he said to them, “I am now a hundred and twenty years old; I am no longer able to come and go, and the LORD has said to me, ‘You shall not cross the Jordan.’
DEU	31	3	여호와께서 이미 말씀하신 것과 같이 여호수아가 너를 거느리고 건널 것이요 네 하나님 여호와 그가 네 앞서 건너가사 이 민족들을 네 앞에서 멸하시고 너로 그 땅을 얻게 하실 것이며	The Lord thy God, he will go over before thee, and he will destroy these nations from before thee, and thou shalt possess them: and Joshua, he shall go over before thee, as the Lord hath said.	The LORD your God Himself will cross over ahead of you. He will destroy these nations before you, and you will dispossess them. Joshua will cross ahead of you, as the LORD has said.
DEU	31	4	여호와께서 이미 멸하신 아모리 왕 시혼과 옥과 및 그 땅에 행하신 것과 같이 그들에게도 행하실 것이라	And the Lord shall do unto them as he did to Sihon and to Og, kings of the Amorites, and unto the land of them, whom he destroyed.	And the LORD will do to them as He did to Sihon and Og, the kings of the Amorites, when He destroyed them along with their land.
DEU	31	5	여호와께서 그들을 너희 앞에 붙이시리니 너희는 내가 너희에게 명한 모든 명령대로 그들에게 행할 것이라	And the Lord shall give them up before your face, that ye may do unto them according unto all the commandments which I have commanded you.	The LORD will deliver them over to you, and you must do to them exactly as I have commanded you.
DEU	31	6	너는 마음을 강하게 하고 담대히 하라 그들을 두려워 말라 그들 앞에서 떨지 말라 이는 네 하나님 여호와 그가 너와 함께 행하실 것임이라 반드시 너를 떠나지 아니하시며 버리지 아니하시리라 하고	Be strong and of a good courage, fear not, nor be afraid of them: for the Lord thy God, he it is that doth go with thee; he will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.	Be strong and courageous; do not be afraid or terrified of them, for it is the LORD your God who goes with you; He will never leave you nor forsake you.”
DEU	31	7	모세가 여호수아를 불러 온 이스라엘 목전에서 그에게 이르되 너는 마음을 강하게 하고 담대히 하라 너는 이 백성을 거느리고 여호와께서 그들의 열조에게 주리라고 맹세하신 땅에 들어가서 그들로 그 땅을 얻게 하라	And Moses called unto Joshua, and said unto him in the sight of all Israel, Be strong and of a good courage: for thou must go with this people unto the land which the Lord hath sworn unto their fathers to give them; and thou shalt cause them to inherit it.	Then Moses called for Joshua and said to him in the presence of all Israel, “Be strong and courageous, for you will go with this people into the land that the LORD swore to their fathers to give them, and you shall give it to them as an inheritance.
DEU	31	8	여호와 그가 네 앞서 행하시며 너와 함께 하사 너를 떠나지 아니하시며 버리지 아니하시리니 너는 두려워 말라 놀라지 말라	And the Lord, he it is that doth go before thee; he will be with thee, he will not fail thee, neither forsake thee: fear not, neither be dismayed.	The LORD Himself goes before you; He will be with you. He will never leave you nor forsake you. Do not be afraid or discouraged.”
DEU	31	9	모세가 이 율법을 써서 여호와의 언약궤를 메는 레위 자손 제사장들과 이스라엘 모든 장로에게 주고	And Moses wrote this law, and delivered it unto the priests the sons of Levi, which bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and unto all the elders of Israel.	So Moses wrote down this law and gave it to the priests, the sons of Levi, who carried the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and to all the elders of Israel.
DEU	31	10	그들에게 명하여 이르기를 매 칠년 끝 해 곧 정기 면제년의 초막절에	And Moses commanded them, saying, At the end of every seven years, in the solemnity of the year of release, in the feast of tabernacles,	Then Moses commanded them, “At the end of every seven years, at the appointed time in the year of remission of debt, during the Feast of Tabernacles,
DEU	31	11	온 이스라엘이 네 하나님 여호와 앞 그 택하신 곳에 모일 때에 이 율법을 낭독하여 온 이스라엘로 듣게 할지니	When all Israel is come to appear before the Lord thy God in the place which he shall choose, thou shalt read this law before all Israel in their hearing.	when all Israel comes before the LORD your God at the place He will choose, you are to read this law in the hearing of all Israel.
DEU	31	12	곧 백성의 남녀와 유치와 네 성안에 우거하는 타국인을 모으고 그들로 듣고 배우고 네 하나님 여호와를 경외하며 이 율법의 모든 말씀을 지켜 행하게 하고	Gather the people together, men, and women, and children, and thy stranger that is within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear the Lord your God, and observe to do all the words of this law:	Assemble the people—men, women, children, and the foreigners within your gates—so that they may listen and learn to fear the LORD your God and to follow carefully all the words of this law.
DEU	31	13	또 너희가 요단을 건너가서 얻을 땅에 거할 동안에 이 말씀을 알지 못하는 그들의 자녀로 듣고 네 하나님 여호와 경외하기를 배우게 할지니라	And that their children, which have not known any thing, may hear, and learn to fear the Lord your God, as long as ye live in the land whither ye go over Jordan to possess it.	Then their children who do not know the law will listen and learn to fear the LORD your God, as long as you live in the land that you are crossing the Jordan to possess.”
DEU	31	14	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 너의 죽을 기한이 가까웠으니 여호수아를 불러서 함께 회막으로 나아오라 내가 그에게 명을 내리리라 모세와 여호수아가 나아가서 회막에 서니	And the Lord said unto Moses, Behold, thy days approach that thou must die: call Joshua, and present yourselves in the tabernacle of the congregation, that I may give him a charge. And Moses and Joshua went, and presented themselves in the tabernacle of the congregation.	Then the LORD said to Moses, “Behold, the time of your death is near. Call Joshua and present yourselves at the Tent of Meeting, so that I may commission him.” So Moses and Joshua went and presented themselves at the Tent of Meeting.
DEU	31	15	여호와께서 구름 기둥 가운데서 장막에 나타나시고 구름 기둥은 장막 문 위에 머물렀더라	And the Lord appeared in the tabernacle in a pillar of a cloud: and the pillar of the cloud stood over the door of the tabernacle.	Then the LORD appeared at the tent in a pillar of cloud, and the cloud stood over the entrance to the tent.
DEU	31	16	여호와께서 모세에게 이르시되 너는 너의 열조와 함께 자려니와 이 백성은 들어가 거할 그 땅에서 일어나서 이방신들을 음란히 좇아 나를 버리며 내가 그들과 세운 언약을 어길 것이라	And the Lord said unto Moses, Behold, thou shalt sleep with thy fathers; and this people will rise up, and go a whoring after the gods of the strangers of the land, whither they go to be among them, and will forsake me, and break my covenant which I have made with them.	And the LORD said to Moses, “You will soon rest with your fathers, and these people will rise up and prostitute themselves with the foreign gods of the land they are entering. They will forsake Me and break the covenant I have made with them.
DEU	31	17	그 때에 내가 그들에게 진노하여 그들을 버리며 내 얼굴을 숨겨 그들에게 보이지 않게 할 것인즉 그들이 삼킴을 당하여 허다한 재앙과 환난이 그들에게 임할 그 때에 그들이 말하기를 이 재앙이 우리에게 임함은 우리 하나님이 우리 중에 계시지 않은 까닭이 아니뇨 할 것이라	Then my anger shall be kindled against them in that day, and I will forsake them, and I will hide my face from them, and they shall be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall befall them; so that they will say in that day, Are not these evils come upon us, because our God is not among us?	On that day My anger will burn against them, and I will abandon them and hide My face from them, so that they will be consumed, and many troubles and afflictions will befall them. On that day they will say, ‘Have not these disasters come upon us because our God is no longer with us?’
DEU	31	18	그들이 돌이켜 다른 신을 좇는 모든 악행을 인하여 내가 그 때에 반드시 내 얼굴을 숨기리라	And I will surely hide my face in that day for all the evils which they shall have wrought, in that they are turned unto other gods.	And on that day I will surely hide My face because of all the evil they have done by turning to other gods.
DEU	31	19	그러므로 이제 너희는 이 노래를 써서 이스라엘 자손에게 가르쳐서 그 입으로 부르게 하여 이 노래로 나를 위하여 이스라엘 자손에게 증거가 되게 하라	Now therefore write ye this song for you, and teach it the children of Israel: put it in their mouths, that this song may be a witness for me against the children of Israel.	Now therefore, write down for yourselves this song and teach it to the Israelites; have them recite it, so that it may be a witness for Me against them.
DEU	31	20	내가 그들의 열조에게 맹세한바 젖과 꿀이 흐르는 땅으로 그들을 인도하여 들인 후에 그들이 먹어 배부르고 살지면 돌이켜 다른 신들을 섬기며 나를 멸시하여 내 언약을 어기리니	For when I shall have brought them into the land which I sware unto their fathers, that floweth with milk and honey; and they shall have eaten and filled themselves, and waxen fat; then will they turn unto other gods, and serve them, and provoke me, and break my covenant.	When I have brought them into the land that I swore to give their fathers, a land flowing with milk and honey, they will eat their fill and prosper. Then they will turn to other gods and worship them, and they will reject Me and break My covenant.
DEU	31	21	그들이 재앙과 환난을 당할 때에 그들의 자손이 부르기를 잊지 아니한 이 노래가 그들 앞에 증인처럼 되리라 나는 내가 맹세한 땅으로 그들을 인도하여 들이기 전 오늘날에 나는 그들의 상상하는 바를 아노라	And it shall come to pass, when many evils and troubles are befallen them, that this song shall testify against them as a witness; for it shall not be forgotten out of the mouths of their seed: for I know their imagination which they go about, even now, before I have brought them into the land which I sware.	And when many troubles and afflictions have come upon them, this song will testify against them, because it will not be forgotten from the lips of their descendants. For I know their inclination, even before I bring them into the land that I swore to give them.”
DEU	31	22	모세가 당일에 이 노래를 써서 이스라엘 자손에게 가르쳤더라	Moses therefore wrote this song the same day, and taught it the children of Israel.	So that very day Moses wrote down this song and taught it to the Israelites.
DEU	31	23	여호와께서 또 눈의 아들 여호수아에게 명하여 가라사대 너는 이스라엘 자손을 인도하여 내가 그들에게 맹세한 땅으로 들어가게 하리니 마음을 강하게 하고 담대히 하라 내가 너와 함께 하리라	And he gave Joshua the son of Nun a charge, and said, Be strong and of a good courage: for thou shalt bring the children of Israel into the land which I sware unto them: and I will be with thee.	Then the LORD commissioned Joshua son of Nun and said, “Be strong and courageous, for you will bring the Israelites into the land that I swore to give them, and I will be with you.”
DEU	31	24	모세가 이 율법의 말씀을 다 책에 써서 마친 후에	And it came to pass, when Moses had made an end of writing the words of this law in a book, until they were finished,	When Moses had finished writing in a book the words of this law from beginning to end,
DEU	31	25	여호와의 언약궤를 메는 레위 사람에게 명하여 가로되	That Moses commanded the Levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord, saying,	he gave this command to the Levites who carried the ark of the covenant of the LORD:
DEU	31	26	이 율법책을 가져다가 너희 하나님 여호와의 언약궤 곁에 두어 너희에게 증거가 되게 하라	Take this book of the law, and put it in the side of the ark of the covenant of the Lord your God, that it may be there for a witness against thee.	“Take this Book of the Law and place it beside the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, so that it may remain there as a witness against you.
DEU	31	27	내가 너희의 패역함과 목이 곧은 것을 아나니 오늘날 내가 생존하여 너희와 함께 하여도 너희가 여호와를 거역하였거든 하물며 내가 죽은 후의 일이랴	For I know thy rebellion, and thy stiff neck: behold, while I am yet alive with you this day, ye have been rebellious against the Lord; and how much more after my death?	For I know how rebellious and stiff-necked you are. If you are already rebelling against the LORD while I am still alive, how much more will you rebel after my death!
DEU	31	28	너희 지파 모든 장로와 유사들을 내 앞에 모으라 내가 이 말씀을 그들의 귀에 들리고 그들에게 천지로 증거를 삼으리라	Gather unto me all the elders of your tribes, and your officers, that I may speak these words in their ears, and call heaven and earth to record against them.	Assemble before me all the elders of your tribes and all your officers so that I may speak these words in their hearing and call heaven and earth to witness against them.
DEU	31	29	내가 알거니와 내가 죽은 후에 너희가 스스로 부패하여 내가 너희에게 명한 길을 떠나서 여호와의 목전에 악을 행하여 너희의 손으로 하는 일로 그를 격노케 하므로 너희가 말세에 재앙을 당하리라 하니라	For I know that after my death ye will utterly corrupt yourselves, and turn aside from the way which I have commanded you; and evil will befall you in the latter days; because ye will do evil in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger through the work of your hands.	For I know that after my death you will become utterly corrupt and turn from the path I have commanded you. And in the days to come, disaster will befall you because you will do evil in the sight of the LORD to provoke Him to anger by the work of your hands.”
DEU	31	30	모세가 이스라엘 총회에게 이 노래의 말씀을 끝까지 읽어 들리니라	And Moses spake in the ears of all the congregation of Israel the words of this song, until they were ended.	Then Moses recited aloud to the whole assembly of Israel the words of this song from beginning to end:
DEU	32	1	하늘이여 귀를 기울이라 내가 말하리라 땅은 내 입의 말을 들을지어다	Give ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak; and hear, O earth, the words of my mouth.	Give ear, O heavens, and I will speak; hear, O earth, the words of my mouth.
DEU	32	2	나의 교훈은 내리는 비요 나의 말은 맺히는 이슬이요 연한 풀 위에 가는 비요 채소 위에 단 비로다	My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distil as the dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass:	Let my teaching fall like rain and my speech settle like dew, like gentle rain on new grass, like showers on tender plants.
DEU	32	3	내가 여호와의 이름을 전파하리니 너희는 위엄을 우리 하나님께 돌릴지어다	Because I will publish the name of the Lord: ascribe ye greatness unto our God.	For I will proclaim the name of the LORD. Ascribe greatness to our God!
DEU	32	4	그는 반석이시니 그 공덕이 완전하고 그 모든 길이 공평하며 진실무망하신 하나님이시니 공의로우시고 정직하시도다	He is the Rock, his work is perfect: for all his ways are judgment: a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he.	He is the Rock, His work is perfect; all His ways are just. A God of faithfulness without injustice, righteous and upright is He.
DEU	32	5	그들이 여호와를 향하여 악을 행하니 하나님의 자녀가 아니요 흠이 있는 사곡한 종류로다	They have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his children: they are a perverse and crooked generation.	His people have acted corruptly toward Him; the spot on them is not that of His children, but of a perverse and crooked generation.
DEU	32	6	우매무지한 백성아 여호와께 이같이 보답하느냐 그는 너를 얻으신 너의 아버지가 아니시냐 너를 지으시고 세우셨도다	Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? is not he thy father that hath bought thee? hath he not made thee, and established thee?	Is this how you repay the LORD, O foolish and senseless people? Is He not your Father and Creator? Has He not made you and established you?
DEU	32	7	옛날을 기억하라 역대의 연대를 생각하라 네 아비에게 물으라 그가 네게 설명할 것이요 네 어른들에게 물으라 그들이 네게 이르리로다	Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations: ask thy father, and he will shew thee; thy elders, and they will tell thee.	Remember the days of old; consider the years long past. Ask your father, and he will tell you, your elders, and they will inform you.
DEU	32	8	지극히 높으신 자가 열국의 기업을 주실 때, 인종을 분정하실 때에 이스라엘 자손의 수효대로 민족들의 경계를 정하셨도다	When the most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel.	When the Most High gave the nations their inheritance, when He divided the sons of man, He set the boundaries of the peoples according to the number of the sons of God.
DEU	32	9	여호와의 분깃은 자기 백성이라 야곱은 그 택하신 기업이로다	For the Lord’s portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance.	But the LORD’s portion is His people, Jacob His allotted inheritance.
DEU	32	10	여호와께서 그를 황무지에서, 짐승의 부르짖는 광야에서 만나시고 호위하시며 보호하시며 자기 눈동자 같이 지키셨도다	He found him in a desert land, and in the waste howling wilderness; he led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the apple of his eye.	He found him in a desert land, in a barren, howling wilderness; He surrounded him, He instructed him, He guarded him as the apple of His eye.
DEU	32	11	마치 독수리가 그 보금자리를 어지럽게 하며 그 새끼 위에 너풀거리며 그 날개를 펴서 새끼를 받으며 그 날개 위에 그것을 업는 것 같이	As an eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her wings:	As an eagle stirs up its nest and hovers over its young, He spread His wings to catch them and carried them on His pinions.
DEU	32	12	여호와께서 홀로 그들을 인도하셨고 함께 한 다른 신이 없었도다	So the Lord alone did lead him, and there was no strange god with him.	The LORD alone led him, and no foreign god was with him.
DEU	32	13	여호와께서 그로 땅의 높은 곳을 타고 다니게 하시며 밭의 소산을 먹게 하시며 반석에서 꿀을, 굳은 반석에서 기름을 빨게 하시며	He made him ride on the high places of the earth, that he might eat the increase of the fields; and he made him to suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock;	He made him ride on the heights of the land and fed him the produce of the field. He nourished him with honey from the rock and oil from the flinty crag,
DEU	32	14	소의 젖 기름과 양의 젖과 어린 양의 기름과 바산 소산의 수양과 염소와 지극히 아름다운 밀을 먹이시며 또 포도즙의 붉은 술을 마시우셨도다	Butter of kine, and milk of sheep, with fat of lambs, and rams of the breed of Bashan, and goats, with the fat of kidneys of wheat; and thou didst drink the pure blood of the grape.	with curds from the herd and milk from the flock, with the fat of lambs, with rams from Bashan, and goats, with the choicest grains of wheat. From the juice of the finest grapes you drank the wine.
DEU	32	15	그러한데 여수룬이 살찌매 발로 찼도다 네가 살찌고 부대하고 윤택하매 자기를 지으신 하나님을 버리며 자기를 구원하신 반석을 경홀히 여겼도다	But Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked: thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with fatness; then he forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation.	But Jeshurun grew fat and kicked— becoming fat, bloated, and gorged. He abandoned the God who made him and scorned the Rock of his salvation.
DEU	32	16	그들이 다른 신으로 그의 질투를 일으키며 가증한 것으로 그의 진노를 격발하였도다	They provoked him to jealousy with strange gods, with abominations provoked they him to anger.	They provoked His jealousy with foreign gods; they enraged Him with abominations.
DEU	32	17	그들은 하나님께 제사하지 아니하고 마귀에게 하였으니 곧 그들의 알지 못하던 신, 근래에 일어난 새 신, 너희 열조의 두려워하지 않던 것들이로다	They sacrificed unto devils, not to God; to gods whom they knew not, to new gods that came newly up, whom your fathers feared not.	They sacrificed to demons, not to God, to gods they had not known, to newly arrived gods, which your fathers did not fear.
DEU	32	18	너를 낳은 반석은 네가 상관치 아니하고 너를 내신 하나님은 네가 잊었도다	Of the Rock that begat thee thou art unmindful, and hast forgotten God that formed thee.	You ignored the Rock who brought you forth; you forgot the God who gave you birth.
DEU	32	19	여호와께서 보시고 미워하셨으니 그 자녀가 그를 격노케 한 연고로다	And when the Lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of the provoking of his sons, and of his daughters.	When the LORD saw this, He rejected them, provoked to anger by His sons and daughters.
DEU	32	20	여호와의 말씀에 내가 내 얼굴을 숨겨 그들에게 보이지 않게 하고 그들의 종말의 어떠함을 보리니 그들은 심히 패역한 종류요 무신한 자녀임이로다	And he said, I will hide my face from them, I will see what their end shall be: for they are a very froward generation, children in whom is no faith.	He said: “I will hide My face from them; I will see what will be their end. For they are a perverse generation— children of unfaithfulness.
DEU	32	21	그들이 하나님이 아닌 자로 나의 질투를 일으키며 그들의 허무한 것으로 나의 진노를 격발하였으니 나도 백성이 되지 아니한 자로 그들의 시기가 나게 하며 우준한 민족으로 그들의 분노를 격발하리로다	They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God; they have provoked me to anger with their vanities: and I will move them to jealousy with those which are not a people; I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation.	They have provoked My jealousy by that which is not God; they have enraged Me with their worthless idols. So I will make them jealous by those who are not a people; I will make them angry by a nation without understanding.
DEU	32	22	내 분노의 불이 일어나서 음부 깊은 곳까지 사르며 땅의 그 소산을 삼키며 산들의 터도 붙게 하는도다	For a fire is kindled in mine anger, and shall burn unto the lowest hell, and shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on fire the foundations of the mountains.	For a fire has been kindled by My anger, and it burns to the depths of Sheol; it consumes the earth and its produce, and scorches the foundations of the mountains.
DEU	32	23	내가 재앙을 그들의 위에 쌓으며 나의 살을 다하여 그들을 쏘리로다	I will heap mischiefs upon them; I will spend mine arrows upon them.	I will heap disasters upon them; I will spend My arrows against them.
DEU	32	24	그들이 주리므로 파리하며 불 같은 더위와 독한 파멸에게 삼키울 것이라 내가 들짐승의 이와 티끌에 기는 것의 독을 그들에게 보내리로다	They shall be burnt with hunger, and devoured with burning heat, and with bitter destruction: I will also send the teeth of beasts upon them, with the poison of serpents of the dust.	They will be wasted from hunger and ravaged by pestilence and bitter plague; I will send the fangs of wild beasts against them, with the venom of vipers that slither in the dust.
DEU	32	25	밖으로는 칼에, 방안에서는 놀람에 멸망하리니 청년 남자와 처녀와 젖 먹는 아이와 백발 노인까지리로다	The sword without, and terror within, shall destroy both the young man and the virgin, the suckling also with the man of gray hairs.	Outside, the sword will take their children, and inside, terror will strike the young man and the young woman, the infant and the gray-haired man.
DEU	32	26	내가 그들을 흩어서 인간에서 그 기억이 끊어지게 하리라 하였다마는	I said, I would scatter them into corners, I would make the remembrance of them to cease from among men:	I would have said that I would cut them to pieces and blot out their memory from mankind,
DEU	32	27	대적을 격동할까 염려라 원수가 오해하고 말하기를 우리 수단이 높음이요 여호와의 행함이 아니라 할까 염려라 하시도다	Were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversaries should behave themselves strangely, and lest they should say, Our hand is high, and the Lord hath not done all this.	if I had not dreaded the taunt of the enemy, lest their adversaries misunderstand and say: ‘Our own hand has prevailed; it was not the LORD who did all this.’”
DEU	32	28	그들은 모략이 없는 국민이라 그 중에 지식이 없도다	For they are a nation void of counsel, neither is there any understanding in them.	Israel is a nation devoid of counsel, with no understanding among them.
DEU	32	29	그들이 지혜가 있어서 이것을 깨닫고 자기의 종말을 생각하였으면	O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end!	If only they were wise, they would understand it; they would comprehend their fate.
DEU	32	30	그들의 반석이 그들을 팔지 아니하였고 여호와께서 그들을 내어 주지 아니하셨더면 어찌 한 사람이 천을 쫓으며 두 사람이 만을 도망케 하였을까	How should one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, except their Rock had sold them, and the Lord had shut them up?	How could one man pursue a thousand, or two put ten thousand to flight, unless their Rock had sold them, unless the LORD had given them up?
DEU	32	31	대적의 반석이 우리의 반석과 같지 못하니 대적도 스스로 판단하도다	For their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being judges.	For their rock is not like our Rock, even our enemies concede.
DEU	32	32	그들의 포도나무는 소돔의 포도나무요 고모라의 밭의 소산이라 그들의 포도는 쓸개포도니 그 송이는 쓰며	For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah: their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter:	But their vine is from the vine of Sodom and from the fields of Gomorrah. Their grapes are poisonous; their clusters are bitter.
DEU	32	33	그들의 포도주는 뱀의 독이요 독사의 악독이라	Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of asps.	Their wine is the venom of serpents, the deadly poison of cobras.
DEU	32	34	이것이 내게 쌓이고 내 곳간에 봉하여 있지 아니한가	Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my treasures?	“Have I not stored up these things, sealed up within My vaults?
DEU	32	35	보수는 내 것이라 그들의 실족할 그 때에 갚으리로다 그들의 환난의 날이 가까우니 당할 그 일이 속히 임하리로다	To me belongeth vengeance, and recompence; their foot shall slide in due time: for the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things that shall come upon them make haste.	Vengeance is Mine; I will repay. In due time their foot will slip; for their day of disaster is near, and their doom is coming quickly.”
DEU	32	36	여호와께서 자기 백성을 판단하시고 그 종들을 인하여 후회하시리니 곧 그들의 무력함과 갇힌 자나 놓인 자가 없음을 보시는 때에로다	For the Lord shall judge his people, and repent himself for his servants, when he seeth that their power is gone, and there is none shut up, or left.	For the LORD will vindicate His people and have compassion on His servants when He sees that their strength is gone and no one remains, slave or free.
DEU	32	37	여호와의 말씀에 그들의 신들이 어디 있으며 그들의 피하던 반석이 어디 있느냐	And he shall say, Where are their gods, their rock in whom they trusted,	He will say: “Where are their gods, the rock in which they took refuge,
DEU	32	38	그들의 희생의 고기를 먹던 것들, 전제의 술을 마시던 것들로 일어나서 너희를 돕게 하라 너희의 보장이 되게 하라	Which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank the wine of their drink offerings? let them rise up and help you, and be your protection.	which ate the fat of their sacrifices and drank the wine of their drink offerings? Let them rise up and help you; let them give you shelter!
DEU	32	39	이제는 나 곧 내가 그인 줄 알라 나와 함께 하는 신이 없도다 내가 죽이기도 하며 살리기도 하며 상하게도 하며 낫게도 하나니 내 손에서 능히 건질 자 없도다	See now that I, even I, am he, and there is no god with me: I kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal: neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand.	See now that I am He; there is no God besides Me. I bring death and I give life; I wound and I heal, and there is no one who can deliver from My hand.
DEU	32	40	내가 하늘을 향하여 내 손을 들고 말하노라 나의 영원히 삶을 두고 맹세하노니	For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever.	For I lift up My hand to heaven and declare: As surely as I live forever,
DEU	32	41	나의 번쩍이는 칼을 갈며 내 손에 심판을 잡고 나의 대적에게 보수하며 나를 미워하는 자에게 보응할 것이라	If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on judgment; I will render vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me.	when I sharpen My flashing sword, and My hand grasps it in judgment, I will take vengeance on My adversaries and repay those who hate Me.
DEU	32	42	나의 화살로 피에 취하게 하고 나의 칼로 그 고기를 삼키게 하리니 곧 피살자와 포로된 자의 피요 대적의 장관의 머리로다 하시도다	I will make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh; and that with the blood of the slain and of the captives, from the beginning of revenges upon the enemy.	I will make My arrows drunk with blood, while My sword devours flesh— the blood of the slain and captives, the heads of the enemy leaders.”
DEU	32	43	너희 열방은 주의 백성과 즐거워하라 주께서 그 종들의 피를 갚으사 그 대적에게 보수하시고 자기 땅과 백성을 위하여 속죄하시리로다	Rejoice, O ye nations, with his people: for he will avenge the blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will be merciful unto his land, and to his people.	Rejoice, O heavens, with Him, and let all God’s angels worship Him. Rejoice, O nations, with His people; for He will avenge the blood of His children. He will take vengeance on His adversaries and repay those who hate Him; He will cleanse His land and His people.
DEU	32	44	모세와 눈의 아들 호세아가 와서 이 노래의 모든 말씀을 백성에게 말하여 들리니라	And Moses came and spake all the words of this song in the ears of the people, he, and Hoshea the son of Nun.	Then Moses came with Joshua son of Nun and recited all the words of this song in the hearing of the people.
DEU	32	45	모세가 이 모든 말씀을 온 이스라엘에게 말하기를 마치고	And Moses made an end of speaking all these words to all Israel:	When Moses had finished reciting all these words to all Israel,
DEU	32	46	그들에게 이르되 내가 오늘날 너희에게 증거한 모든 말을 너희 마음에 두고 너희 자녀에게 명하여 이 율법의 모든 말씀을 지켜 행하게 하라	And he said unto them, Set your hearts unto all the words which I testify among you this day, which ye shall command your children to observe to do, all the words of this law.	he said to them, “Take to heart all these words I testify among you today, so that you may command your children to carefully follow all the words of this law.
DEU	32	47	이는 너희에게 허사가 아니라 너희의 생명이니 이 일로 인하여 너희가 요단을 건너 얻을 땅에서 너희의 날이 장구하리라	For it is not a vain thing for you; because it is your life: and through this thing ye shall prolong your days in the land, whither ye go over Jordan to possess it.	For they are not idle words to you, because they are your life, and by them you will live long in the land that you are crossing the Jordan to possess.”
DEU	32	48	당일에 여호와께서 모세에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Moses that selfsame day, saying,	On that same day the LORD said to Moses,
DEU	32	49	너는 여리고 맞은편 모압 땅에 있는 아바림 산에 올라 느보 산에 이르러 내가 이스라엘 자손에게 기업으로 주는 가나안 땅을 바라보라	Get thee up into this mountain Abarim, unto mount Nebo, which is in the land of Moab, that is over against Jericho; and behold the land of Canaan, which I give unto the children of Israel for a possession:	“Go up into the Abarim Range to Mount Nebo, in the land of Moab across from Jericho, and view the land of Canaan, which I am giving to the Israelites as their own possession.
DEU	32	50	네 형 아론이 호르 산에서 죽어 그 조상에게로 돌아간 것 같이 너도 올라가는 이 산에서 죽어 네 조상에게로 돌아가리니	And die in the mount whither thou goest up, and be gathered unto thy people; as Aaron thy brother died in mount Hor, and was gathered unto his people:	And there on the mountain that you climb, you will die and be gathered to your people, just as your brother Aaron died on Mount Hor and was gathered to his people.
DEU	32	51	이는 너희가 신 광야 가데스의 므리바 물 가에서 이스라엘 자손 중 내게 범죄하여 나의 거룩함을 이스라엘 자손 중에서 나타내지 아니한 연고라	Because ye trespassed against me among the children of Israel at the waters of Meribah–Kadesh, in the wilderness of Zin; because ye sanctified me not in the midst of the children of Israel.	For at the waters of Meribah-kadesh in the Wilderness of Zin, both of you broke faith with Me among the Israelites by failing to treat Me as holy in their presence.
DEU	32	52	내가 이스라엘 자손에게 주는 땅을 네가 바라보기는 하려니와 그리로 들어가지는 못하리라 하시니라	Yet thou shalt see the land before thee; but thou shalt not go thither unto the land which I give the children of Israel.	Although you shall see from a distance the land that I am giving the Israelites, you shall not enter it.”
DEU	33	1	하나님의 사람 모세가 죽기 전에 이스라엘 자손을 위하여 축복함이 이러하니라	And this is the blessing, wherewith Moses the man of God blessed the children of Israel before his death.	This is the blessing that Moses the man of God pronounced upon the Israelites before his death.
DEU	33	2	일렀으되 여호와께서 시내에서 오시고 세일 산에서 일어나시고 바란 산에서 비취시고 일만 성도 가운데서 강림하셨고 그 오른손에는 불 같은 율법이 있도다	And he said, The Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them; he shined forth from mount Paran, and he came with ten thousands of saints: from his right hand went a fiery law for them.	He said: “The LORD came from Sinai and dawned upon us from Seir; He shone forth from Mount Paran and came with myriads of holy ones, with flaming fire at His right hand.
DEU	33	3	여호와께서 백성을 사랑하시나니 모든 성도가 그 수중에 있으며 주의 발 아래에 앉아서 주의 말씀을 받는도다	Yea, he loved the people; all his saints are in thy hand: and they sat down at thy feet; every one shall receive of thy words.	Surely You love the people; all the holy ones are in Your hand, and they sit down at Your feet; each receives Your words—
DEU	33	4	모세가 우리에게 율법을 명하였으니 곧 야곱의 총회의 기업이로다	Moses commanded us a law, even the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob.	the law that Moses gave us, the possession of the assembly of Jacob.
DEU	33	5	여수룬에 왕이 있었으니 곧 백성의 두령이 모이고 이스라엘 모든 지파가 함께 한 때에로다	And he was king in Jeshurun, when the heads of the people and the tribes of Israel were gathered together.	So the LORD became King in Jeshurun when the leaders of the people gathered, when the tribes of Israel came together.
DEU	33	6	르우벤은 살고 죽지 아니하고 그 인수가 적지 않기를 원하도다	Let Reuben live, and not die; and let not his men be few.	Let Reuben live and not die, nor his men be few.”
DEU	33	7	유다에 대한 축복은 이러하니라 일렀으되 여호와여 유다의 음성을 들으시고 그 백성에게로 인도하시오며 그 손으로 자기를 위하여 싸우게 하시고 주께서 도우사 그로 그 대적을 치게 하시기를 원하나이다	And this is the blessing of Judah: and he said, Hear, Lord, the voice of Judah, and bring him unto his people: let his hands be sufficient for him; and be thou an help to him from his enemies.	And concerning Judah he said: “O LORD, hear the cry of Judah and bring him to his people. With his own hands he defends his cause, but may You be a help against his foes.”
DEU	33	8	레위에 대하여는 일렀으되 주의 둠밈과 우림이 주의 경건한 자에게 있도다 주께서 그를 맛사에서 시험하시고 므리바 물 가에서 그와 다투셨도다	And of Levi he said, Let thy Thummim and thy Urim be with thy holy one, whom thou didst prove at Massah, and with whom thou didst strive at the waters of Meribah;	Concerning Levi he said: “Give Your Thummim to Levi and Your Urim to Your godly one, whom You tested at Massah and contested at the waters of Meribah.
DEU	33	9	그는 그 부모에게 대하여 이르기를 내가 그들을 보지 못하였다 하며 그 형제들을 인정치 아니하며 그 자녀를 알지 아니한 것은 주의 말씀을 준행하고 주의 언약을 지킴을 인함이로다	Who said unto his father and to his mother, I have not seen him; neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children: for they have observed thy word, and kept thy covenant.	He said of his father and mother, ‘I do not consider them.’ He disregarded his brothers and did not know his own sons, for he kept Your word and maintained Your covenant.
DEU	33	10	주의 법도를 야곱에게, 주의 율법을 이스라엘에게 가르치며 주 앞에 분향하고 온전한 번제를 주의 단 위에 드리리로다	They shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law: they shall put incense before thee, and whole burnt sacrifice upon thine altar.	He will teach Your ordinances to Jacob and Your law to Israel; he will set incense before You and whole burnt offerings on Your altar.
DEU	33	11	여호와여 그 재산을 풍족케 하시고 그 손의 일을 받으소서 그를 대적하여 일어나는 자와 미워하는 자의 허리를 꺽으사 다시 일어나지 못하게 하옵소서	Bless, Lord, his substance, and accept the work of his hands: smite through the loins of them that rise against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not again.	Bless his substance, O LORD, and accept the work of his hands. Smash the loins of those who rise against him, and of his foes so they can rise no more.”
DEU	33	12	베냐민에 대하여는 일렀으되 여호와의 사랑을 입은 자는 그 곁에 안전히 거하리로다 여호와께서 그를 날이 맞도록 보호하시고 그로 자기 어깨 사이에 처하게 하시리로다	And of Benjamin he said, The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by him; and the Lord shall cover him all the day long, and he shall dwell between his shoulders.	Concerning Benjamin he said: “May the beloved of the LORD rest secure in Him; God shields him all day long, and upon His shoulders he rests.”
DEU	33	13	요셉에 대하여는 일렀으되 원컨대 그 땅이 여호와께 복을 받아 하늘의 보물인 이슬과 땅 아래 저장한 물과	And of Joseph he said, Blessed of the Lord be his land, for the precious things of heaven, for the dew, and for the deep that coucheth beneath,	Concerning Joseph he said: “May his land be blessed by the LORD with the precious dew from heaven above and the deep waters that lie beneath,
DEU	33	14	태양이 결실케 하는 보물과 태음이 자라게 하는 보물과	And for the precious fruits brought forth by the sun, and for the precious things put forth by the moon,	with the bountiful harvest from the sun and the abundant yield of the seasons,
DEU	33	15	옛 산의 상품물과 영원한 작은 산의 보물과	And for the chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the precious things of the lasting hills,	with the best of the ancient mountains and the bounty of the everlasting hills,
DEU	33	16	땅의 보물과 거기 충만한 것과 가시떨기 나무 가운데 거하시던 자의 은혜로 인하여 복이 요셉의 머리에, 그 형제 중 구별한 자의 정수리에 임할지로다	And for the precious things of the earth and fulness thereof, and for the good will of him that dwelt in the bush: let the blessing come upon the head of Joseph, and upon the top of the head of him that was separated from his brethren.	with the choice gifts of the land and everything in it, and with the favor of Him who dwelt in the burning bush. May these rest on the head of Joseph and crown the brow of the prince of his brothers.
DEU	33	17	그는 첫 수송아지 같이 위엄이 있으니 그 뿔이 들소의 뿔 같도다 이것으로 열방을 받아 땅 끝까지 이르리니 곧 에브라임의 만만이요 므낫세의 천천이리로다	His glory is like the firstling of his bullock, and his horns are like the horns of unicorns: with them he shall push the people together to the ends of the earth: and they are the ten thousands of Ephraim, and they are the thousands of Manasseh.	His majesty is like a firstborn bull, and his horns are like those of a wild ox. With them he will gore the nations, even to the ends of the earth. Such are the myriads of Ephraim, and such are the thousands of Manasseh.”
DEU	33	18	스불론에 대하여는 일렀으되 스불론이여 너는 나감을 기뻐하라 잇사갈이여 너는 장막에 있음을 즐거워하라	And of Zebulun he said, Rejoice, Zebulun, in thy going out; and, Issachar, in thy tents.	Concerning Zebulun he said: “Rejoice, Zebulun, in your journeys, and Issachar, in your tents.
DEU	33	19	그들이 열국 백성을 불러 산에 이르게 하고 거기서 의로운 제사를 드릴 것이며 바다의 풍부한 것, 모래에 감추인 보배를 흡수하리로다	They shall call the people unto the mountain; there they shall offer sacrifices of righteousness: for they shall suck of the abundance of the seas, and of treasures hid in the sand.	They will call the peoples to a mountain; there they will offer sacrifices of righteousness. For they will feast on the abundance of the seas and the hidden treasures of the sand.”
DEU	33	20	갓에 대하여는 일렀으되 갓을 광대케 하시는 자에게 찬송을 부를지어다 갓이 암사자 같이 엎드리고 팔과 정수리를 찢는도다	And of Gad he said, Blessed be he that enlargeth Gad: he dwelleth as a lion, and teareth the arm with the crown of the head.	Concerning Gad he said: “Blessed is he who enlarges the domain of Gad! He lies down like a lion and tears off an arm or a head.
DEU	33	21	그가 자기를 위하여 먼저 기업을 택하였으니 곧 법 세운 자의 분깃으로 예비된 것이로다 그가 백성의 두령들과 함께 와서 여호와의 공의와 이스라엘과 세우신 법도를 행하도다	And he provided the first part for himself, because there, in a portion of the lawgiver, was he seated; and he came with the heads of the people, he executed the justice of the Lord, and his judgments with Israel.	He chose the best land for himself, because a ruler’s portion was reserved for him there. He came with the leaders of the people; he administered the LORD’s justice and His ordinances for Israel.”
DEU	33	22	단에 대하여는 일렀으되 단은 바산에서 뛰어 나오는 사자의 새끼로다	And of Dan he said, Dan is a lion’s whelp: he shall leap from Bashan.	Concerning Dan he said: “Dan is a lion’s cub, leaping out of Bashan.”
DEU	33	23	납달리에 대하여는 일렀으되 은혜가 족하고 여호와의 복이 가득한 납달리여 너는 서방과 남방을 얻을지로다	And of Naphtali he said, O Naphtali, satisfied with favour, and full with the blessing of the Lord: possess thou the west and the south.	Concerning Naphtali he said: “Naphtali is abounding with favor, full of the blessing of the LORD; he shall take possession of the sea and the south.”
DEU	33	24	아셀에 대하여는 일렀으되 아셀은 다자한 복을 받으며 그 형제에게 기쁨이 되며 그 발이 기름에 잠길지로다	And of Asher he said, Let Asher be blessed with children; let him be acceptable to his brethren, and let him dip his foot in oil.	And concerning Asher he said: “May Asher be the most blessed of sons; may he be the most favored among his brothers and dip his foot in oil.
DEU	33	25	네 문빗장은 철과 놋이 될 것이니 네 사는 날을 따라서 능력이 있으리로다	Thy shoes shall be iron and brass; and as thy days, so shall thy strength be.	May the bolts of your gate be iron and bronze, and may your strength match your days.”
DEU	33	26	여수룬이여 하나님 같은 자 없도다 그가 너를 도우시려고 하늘을 타시고 궁창에서 위엄을 나타내시는도다	There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun, who rideth upon the heaven in thy help, and in his excellency on the sky.	“There is none like the God of Jeshurun, who rides the heavens to your aid, and the clouds in His majesty.
DEU	33	27	영원하신 하나님이 너의 처소가 되시니 그 영원하신 팔이 네 아래 있도다 그가 네 앞에서 대적을 쫓으시며 멸하라 하시도다	The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms: and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee; and shall say, Destroy them.	The eternal God is your dwelling place, and underneath are the everlasting arms. He drives out the enemy before you, giving the command, ‘Destroy him!’
DEU	33	28	이스라엘이 안전히 거하며 야곱의 샘은 곡식과 새 포도주의 땅에 홀로 있나니 곧 그의 하늘이 이슬을 내리는 곳에로다	Israel then shall dwell in safety alone: the fountain of Jacob shall be upon a land of corn and wine; also his heavens shall drop down dew.	So Israel dwells securely; the fountain of Jacob lives untroubled in a land of grain and new wine, where even the heavens drip with dew.
DEU	33	29	이스라엘이여 너는 행복자로다 여호와의 구원을 너 같이 얻은 백성이 누구뇨 그는 너를 돕는 방패시요 너의 영광의 칼이시로다 네 대적이 네게 복종하리니 네가 그들의 높은 곳을 밟으리로다	Happy art thou, O Israel: who is like unto thee, O people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy excellency! and thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee; and thou shalt tread upon their high places.	Blessed are you, O Israel! Who is like you, a people saved by the LORD? He is the shield that protects you, the sword in which you boast. Your enemies will cower before you, and you shall trample their high places.”
DEU	34	1	모세가 모압 평지에서 느보 산에 올라 여리고 맞은편 비스가 산 꼭대기에 이르매 여호와께서 길르앗 온 땅을 단까지 보이시고	And Moses went up from the plains of Moab unto the mountain of Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, that is over against Jericho. And the Lord shewed him all the land of Gilead, unto Dan,	Then Moses went up from the plains of Moab to Mount Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, which faces Jericho. And the LORD showed him the whole land—from Gilead as far as Dan,
DEU	34	2	또 온 납달리와 에브라임과 므낫세의 땅과 서해까지의 유다 온 땅과	And all Naphtali, and the land of Ephraim, and Manasseh, and all the land of Judah, unto the utmost sea,	all of Naphtali, the land of Ephraim and Manasseh, all the land of Judah as far as the Western Sea,
DEU	34	3	남방과 종려의 성읍 여리고 골짜기 평지를 소알까지 보이시고	And the south, and the plain of the valley of Jericho, the city of palm trees, unto Zoar.	the Negev, and the region from the Valley of Jericho (the City of Palms) all the way to Zoar.
DEU	34	4	여호와께서 그에게 이르시되 이는 내가 아브라함과 이삭과 야곱에게 맹세하여 그 후손에게 주리라 한 땅이라 내가 네 눈으로 보게 하였거니와 너는 그리로 건너가지 못하리라 하시매	And the Lord said unto him, This is the land which I sware unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, saying, I will give it unto thy seed: I have caused thee to see it with thine eyes, but thou shalt not go over thither.	And the LORD said to him, “This is the land that I swore to give Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob when I said, ‘I will give it to your descendants.’ I have let you see it with your own eyes, but you will not cross into it.”
DEU	34	5	이에 여호와의 종 모세가 여호와의 말씀대로 모압 땅에서 죽어	So Moses the servant of the Lord died there in the land of Moab, according to the word of the Lord.	So Moses the servant of the LORD died there in the land of Moab, as the LORD had said.
DEU	34	6	벧브올 맞은편 모압 땅에 있는 골짜기에 장사되었고 오늘까지 그 묘를 아는 자 없으니라	And he buried him in a valley in the land of Moab, over against Beth–peor: but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day.	And He buried him in a valley in the land of Moab facing Beth-peor, and no one to this day knows the location of his grave.
DEU	34	7	모세의 죽을 때 나이 일백이십 세나 그 눈이 흐리지 아니하였고 기력이 쇠하지 아니하였더라	And Moses was an hundred and twenty years old when he died: his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated.	Moses was a hundred and twenty years old when he died, yet his eyes were not weak, and his vitality had not diminished.
DEU	34	8	이스라엘 자손이 모압 평지에서 애곡하는 기한이 맞도록 모세를 위하여 삼십 일을 애곡하니라	And the children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab thirty days: so the days of weeping and mourning for Moses were ended.	The Israelites grieved for Moses in the plains of Moab thirty days, until the time of weeping and mourning for Moses came to an end.
DEU	34	9	모세가 눈의 아들 여호수아에게 안수하였으므로 그에게 지혜의 신이 충만하니 이스라엘 자손이 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 여호수아의 말을 순종하였더라	And Joshua the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom; for Moses had laid his hands upon him: and the children of Israel hearkened unto him, and did as the Lord commanded Moses.	Now Joshua son of Nun was filled with the spirit of wisdom because Moses had laid his hands on him. So the Israelites obeyed him and did as the LORD had commanded Moses.
DEU	34	10	그 후에는 이스라엘에 모세와 같은 선지자가 일어나지 못하였나니 모세는 여호와께서 대면하여 아시던 자요	And there arose not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face,	Since that time, no prophet has risen in Israel like Moses, whom the LORD knew face to face—
DEU	34	11	여호와께서 그를 애굽 땅에 보내사 바로와 그 모든 신하와 그 온 땅에 모든 이적과 기사와	In all the signs and the wonders, which the Lord sent him to do in the land of Egypt to Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land,	no prophet who did all the signs and wonders that the LORD sent Moses to do in the land of Egypt to Pharaoh and to all his officials and all his land,
DEU	34	12	모든 큰 권능과 위엄을 행하게 하시매 온 이스라엘 목전에서 그것을 행한 자더라	And in all that mighty hand, and in all the great terror which Moses shewed in the sight of all Israel.	and no prophet who performed all the mighty acts of power and awesome deeds that Moses did in the sight of all Israel.
JOS	1	1	여호와의 종 모세가 죽은 후에 여호와께서 모세의 시종 눈의 아들 여호수아에게 일러 가라사대	Now after the death of Moses the servant of the Lord it came to pass, that the Lord spake unto Joshua the son of Nun, Moses’ minister, saying,	Now after the death of His servant Moses, the LORD spoke to Joshua son of Nun, Moses’ assistant, saying,
JOS	1	2	내 종 모세가 죽었으니 이제 너는 이 모든 백성으로 더불어 일어나 이 요단을 건너 내가 그들 곧 이스라엘 자손에게 주는 땅으로 가라	Moses my servant is dead; now therefore arise, go over this Jordan, thou, and all this people, unto the land which I do give to them, even to the children of Israel.	“Moses My servant is dead. Now therefore arise, you and all these people, and cross over the Jordan into the land that I am giving to the children of Israel.
JOS	1	3	내가 모세에게 말한 바와 같이 무릇 너희 발바닥으로 밟는 곳을 내가 다 너희에게 주었노니	Every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, that have I given unto you, as I said unto Moses.	I have given you every place where the sole of your foot will tread, just as I promised to Moses.
JOS	1	4	곧 광야와 이 레바논에서부터 큰 하수 유브라데에 이르는 헷 족속의 온 땅과 또 해 지는 편 대해까지 너희 지경이 되리라	From the wilderness and this Lebanon even unto the great river, the river Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites, and unto the great sea toward the going down of the sun, shall be your coast.	Your territory shall extend from the wilderness and Lebanon to the great River Euphrates—all the land of the Hittites—and west as far as the Great Sea.
JOS	1	5	너의 평생에 너를 능히 당할 자 없으리니 내가 모세와 함께 있던것 같이 너의 함께 있을 것임이라 내가 너를 떠나지 아니하며 버리지 아니하리니	There shall not any man be able to stand before thee all the days of thy life: as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee: I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.	No one shall stand against you all the days of your life. As I was with Moses, so will I be with you; I will never leave you nor forsake you.
JOS	1	6	마음을 강하게 하라 담대히 하라 너는 이 백성으로 내가 그 조상에게 맹세하여 주리라 한 땅을 얻게 하리라	Be strong and of a good courage: for unto this people shalt thou divide for an inheritance the land, which I sware unto their fathers to give them.	Be strong and courageous, for you shall give these people the inheritance of the land that I swore to their fathers I would give them.
JOS	1	7	오직 너는 마음을 강하게 하고 극히 담대히 하여 나의 종 모세가 네게 명한 율법을 다 지켜 행하고 좌로나 우로나 치우치지 말라 그리하면 어디로 가든지 형통하리니	Only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou mayest observe to do according to all the law, which Moses my servant commanded thee: turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest prosper whithersoever thou goest.	Above all, be strong and very courageous. Be careful to observe all the law that My servant Moses commanded you. Do not turn from it to the right or to the left, so that you may prosper wherever you go.
JOS	1	8	이 율법책을 네 입에서 떠나지 말게 하며 주야로 그것을 묵상하여 그 가운데 기록한대로 다 지켜 행하라 그리하면 네 길이 평탄하게 될 것이라 네가 형통하리라	This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to do according to all that is written therein: for then thou shalt make thy way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success.	This Book of the Law must not depart from your mouth; meditate on it day and night, so that you may be careful to do everything written in it. For then you will prosper and succeed in all you do.
JOS	1	9	내가 네게 명한 것이 아니냐 마음을 강하게 하고 담대히 하라 두려워 말며 놀라지 말라 네가 어디로 가든지 네 하나님 여호와가 너와 함께 하느니라 하시니라	Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the Lord thy God is with thee whithersoever thou goest.	Have I not commanded you to be strong and courageous? Do not be afraid; do not be discouraged, for the LORD your God is with you wherever you go.”
JOS	1	10	이에 여호수아가 백성의 유사들에게 명하여 가로되	Then Joshua commanded the officers of the people, saying,	Then Joshua commanded the officers of the people:
JOS	1	11	진 중에 두루 다니며 백성에게 명하여 이르기를 양식을 예비하라 삼 일 안에 너희가 이 요단을 건너 너희 하나님 여호와께서 너희에게 주사 얻게 하시는 땅을 얻기 위하여 들어갈 것임이니라 하라	Pass through the host, and command the people, saying, Prepare you victuals; for within three days ye shall pass over this Jordan, to go in to possess the land, which the Lord your God giveth you to possess it.	“Go through the camp and tell the people, ‘Prepare your provisions, for within three days you will cross the Jordan to go in and take possession of the land that the LORD your God is giving you to possess.’”
JOS	1	12	여호수아가 또 르우벤 지파와 갓 지파와	And to the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to half the tribe of Manasseh, spake Joshua, saying,	But to the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, Joshua said,
JOS	1	13	므낫세 반 지파에게 일러 가로되 여호와의 종 모세가 너희에게 명하여 이르기를 너희 하나님 여호와께서 너희에게 안식을 주시며 이 땅을 너희에게 주시리라 하였나니 너희는 그 말을 기억하라	Remember the word which Moses the servant of the Lord commanded you, saying, The Lord your God hath given you rest, and hath given you this land.	“Remember what Moses the servant of the LORD commanded you when he said, ‘The LORD your God will give you rest, and He will give you this land.’
JOS	1	14	너희 처자와 가축은 모세가 너희에게 준 요단 이편 땅에 머무르려니와 너희 용사들은 무장하고 너희의 형제보다 앞서 건너가서 그들을 돕고	Your wives, your little ones, and your cattle, shall remain in the land which Moses gave you on this side Jordan; but ye shall pass before your brethren armed, all the mighty men of valour, and help them;	Your wives, your young children, and your livestock may remain in the land that Moses gave you on this side of the Jordan. But all your mighty men of valor must be armed for battle to cross over ahead of your brothers and help them,
JOS	1	15	여호와께서 너희로 안식하게 하신 것 같이 너희 형제도 안식하게 되며 그들도 너희 하나님 여호와께서 주시는 땅을 얻게 되거든 너희는 너희 소유지 곧 여호와의 종 모세가 너희에게 준 요단 이편 해 돋는 편으로 돌아와서 그것을 차지할지니라	Until the Lord have given your brethren rest, as he hath given you, and they also have possessed the land which the Lord your God giveth them: then ye shall return unto the land of your possession, and enjoy it, which Moses the Lord’s servant gave you on this side Jordan toward the sunrising.	until the LORD gives them rest as He has done for you, and your brothers also possess the land that the LORD your God is giving them. Then you may return to the land of your inheritance and take possession of that which Moses the servant of the LORD gave you on the east side of the Jordan.”
JOS	1	16	그들이 여호수아에게 대답하여 가로되 당신이 우리에게 명하신 것은 우리가 다 행할 것이요 당신이 우리를 보내시는 곳에는 우리가 가리이다	And they answered Joshua, saying, All that thou commandest us we will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go.	So they answered Joshua, “Everything you have commanded us we will do, and everywhere you send us we will go.
JOS	1	17	우리는 범사에 모세를 청종한 것 같이 당신을 청종하려니와 오직 당신의 하나님 여호와께서 모세와 함께 계시던 것 같이 당신과 함께 계시기를 원하나이다	According as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto thee: only the Lord thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses.	Just as we obeyed Moses in all things, so we will obey you. And may the LORD your God be with you, as He was with Moses.
JOS	1	18	누구든지 당신의 명령을 거역하며 무릇 당신의 시키는 말씀을 청종치 아니하는 자 그는 죽임을 당하리니 오직 당신은 마음을 강하게 하시며 담대히 하소서	Whosoever he be that doth rebel against thy commandment, and will not hearken unto thy words in all that thou commandest him, he shall be put to death: only be strong and of a good courage.	Anyone who rebels against your order and does not obey your words, all that you command him, will be put to death. Above all, be strong and courageous!”
JOS	2	1	눈의 아들 여호수아가 싯딤에서 두 사람을 정탐으로 가만히 보내며 그들에게 이르되 가서 그 땅과 여리고를 엿보라 하매 그들이 가서 라합이라 하는 기생의 집에 들어가 거기서 유숙하더니	And Joshua the son of Nun sent out of Shittim two men to spy secretly, saying, Go view the land, even Jericho. And they went, and came into an harlot’s house, named Rahab, and lodged there.	Then Joshua son of Nun secretly sent two spies from Shittim, saying, “Go, inspect the land, especially Jericho.” So they went and entered the house of a prostitute named Rahab and stayed there.
JOS	2	2	혹이 여리고 왕에게 고하여 가로되 보소서 이 밤에 이스라엘 자손 몇 사람이 땅을 탐지하러 이리로 들어왔나이다	And it was told the king of Jericho, saying, Behold, there came men in hither to night of the children of Israel to search out the country.	And it was reported to the king of Jericho: “Behold, some men of Israel have come here tonight to spy out the land.”
JOS	2	3	여리고 왕이 라합에게 기별하여 가로되 네게로 와서 네 집에 들어간 사람들을 끌어내라 그들은 이 온 땅을 탐지하러 왔느니라	And the king of Jericho sent unto Rahab, saying, Bring forth the men that are come to thee, which are entered into thine house: for they be come to search out all the country.	So the king of Jericho sent to Rahab and said, “Bring out the men who came to you and entered your house, for they have come to spy out the whole land.”
JOS	2	4	그 여인이 그 두 사람을 이미 숨긴지라 가로되 과연 그 사람들이 내게 왔었으나 그들이 어디로서인지 나는 알지 못하였고	And the woman took the two men, and hid them, and said thus, There came men unto me, but I wist not whence they were:	But the woman had taken the two men and hidden them. So she said, “Yes, the men did come to me, but I did not know where they had come from.
JOS	2	5	그 사람들이 어두워 성문을 닫을 때쯤 되어 나갔으니 어디로 갔는지 알지 못하되 급히 따라가라 그리하면 그들에게 미치리라 하였으나	And it came to pass about the time of shutting of the gate, when it was dark, that the men went out: whither the men went I wot not: pursue after them quickly; for ye shall overtake them.	At dusk, when the gate was about to close, the men went out, and I do not know which way they went. Pursue them quickly, and you may catch them!”
JOS	2	6	실상은 그가 이미 그들을 이끌고 지붕에 올라가서 그 지붕에 벌여놓은 삼대에 숨겼더라	But she had brought them up to the roof of the house, and hid them with the stalks of flax, which she had laid in order upon the roof.	(But Rahab had taken them up to the roof and hidden them among the stalks of flax that she had laid out there.)
JOS	2	7	그 사람들은 요단 길로 나루턱까지 따라갔고 그 따르는 자들이 나가자 곧 성문을 닫았더라	And the men pursued after them the way to Jordan unto the fords: and as soon as they which pursued after them were gone out, they shut the gate.	So the king’s men set out in pursuit of the spies along the road to the fords of the Jordan, and as soon as they had gone out, the gate was shut.
JOS	2	8	두 사람이 눕기 전에 라합이 지붕에 올라가서 그들에게 이르러	And before they were laid down, she came up unto them upon the roof;	Before the spies lay down for the night, Rahab went up on the roof
JOS	2	9	말하되 여호와께서 이 땅을 너희에게 주신 줄을 내가 아노라 우리가 너희를 심히 두려워하고 이 땅 백성이 다 너희 앞에 간담이 녹나니	And she said unto the men, I know that the Lord hath given you the land, and that your terror is fallen upon us, and that all the inhabitants of the land faint because of you.	and said to them, “I know that the LORD has given you this land and that the fear of you has fallen on us, so that all who dwell in the land are melting in fear of you.
JOS	2	10	이는 너희가 애굽에서 나올 때에 여호와께서 너희 앞에서 홍해 물을 마르게 하신 일과 너희가 요단 저편에 있는 아모리 사람의 두 왕 시혼과 옥에게 행한 일 곧 그들을 전멸시킨 일을 우리가 들었음이라	For we have heard how the Lord dried up the water of the Red sea for you, when ye came out of Egypt; and what ye did unto the two kings of the Amorites, that were on the other side Jordan, Sihon and Og, whom ye utterly destroyed.	For we have heard how the LORD dried up the waters of the Red Sea before you when you came out of Egypt, and what you did to Sihon and Og, the two kings of the Amorites across the Jordan, whom you devoted to destruction.
JOS	2	11	우리가 듣자 곧 마음이 녹았고 너희의 연고로 사람이 정신을 잃었나니 너희 하나님 여호와는 상천 하지에 하나님이시니라	And as soon as we had heard these things, our hearts did melt, neither did there remain any more courage in any man, because of you: for the Lord your God, he is God in heaven above, and in earth beneath.	When we heard this, our hearts melted and everyone’s courage failed because of you, for the LORD your God is God in the heavens above and on the earth below.
JOS	2	12	그러므로 청하노니 내가 너희를 선대하였은즉 너희도 내 아버지의 집을 선대하여 나의 부모와 남녀 형제와 무릇 그들에게 있는 모든 자를 살려주어 우리 생명을 죽는데서 건져내기로 이제 여호와로 맹세하고 내게 진실한 표를 내라	Now therefore, I pray you, swear unto me by the Lord, since I have shewed you kindness, that ye will also shew kindness unto my father’s house, and give me a true token:	Now therefore, please swear to me by the LORD that you will indeed show kindness to my family, because I showed kindness to you. Give me a sure sign
JOS	2	13	12절과 상동	And that ye will save alive my father, and my mother, and my brethren, and my sisters, and all that they have, and deliver our lives from death.	that you will spare the lives of my father and mother, my brothers and sisters, and all who belong to them, and that you will deliver us from death.”
JOS	2	14	두 사람이 그에게 이르되 네가 우리의 이 일을 누설치 아니하면 우리의 생명으로 너희를 대신이라도 할 것이요 여호와께서 우리에게 이 땅을 주실 때에는 인자하고 진실하게 너를 대우하리라	And the men answered her, Our life for yours, if ye utter not this our business. And it shall be, when the Lord hath given us the land, that we will deal kindly and truly with thee.	“Our lives for your lives!” the men agreed. “If you do not report our mission, we will show you kindness and faithfulness when the LORD gives us the land.”
JOS	2	15	라합이 그들을 창에서 줄로 달아내리우니 그 집이 성벽 위에 있으므로 그가 성벽 위에 거하였음이라	Then she let them down by a cord through the window: for her house was upon the town wall, and she dwelt upon the wall.	Then Rahab let them down by a rope through the window, since the house where she lived was built into the wall of the city.
JOS	2	16	라합이 그들에게 이르되 두렵건대 따르는 사람들이 너희를 만날까 하노니 너희는 산으로 가서 거기 사흘을 숨었다가 따르는 자들이 돌아간 후에 너희 길을 갈지니라	And she said unto them, Get you to the mountain, lest the pursuers meet you; and hide yourselves there three days, until the pursuers be returned: and afterward may ye go your way.	“Go to the hill country,” she said, “so that your pursuers will not find you. Hide yourselves there for three days until they have returned; then go on your way.”
JOS	2	17	두 사람이 그에게 이르되 네가 우리로 서약케 한 이 맹세에 대하여 우리가 허물이 없게 하리니	And the men said unto her, We will be blameless of this thine oath which thou hast made us swear.	The men said to her, “We will not be bound by this oath you made us swear
JOS	2	18	우리가 이 땅에 들어올 때에 우리를 달아내리운 창에 이 붉은 줄을 내고 네 부모와 형제와 네 아비의 가족을 다 네 집에 모으라	Behold, when we come into the land, thou shalt bind this line of scarlet thread in the window which thou didst let us down by: and thou shalt bring thy father, and thy mother, and thy brethren, and all thy father’s household, home unto thee.	unless, when we enter the land, you have tied this scarlet cord in the window through which you let us down, and unless you have brought your father and mother and brothers and all your family into your house.
JOS	2	19	누구든지 네 집 문을 나서 거리로 가면 그 피가 그의 머리로 돌아갈 것이요 우리는 허물이 없으리라 그러나 누구든지 너와 함께 집에 있는 자에게 누가 손을 대면 그 피는 우리의 머리로 돌아오려니와	And it shall be, that whosoever shall go out of the doors of thy house into the street, his blood shall be upon his head, and we will be guiltless: and whosoever shall be with thee in the house, his blood shall be on our head, if any hand be upon him.	If anyone goes out the door of your house into the street, his blood will be on his own head, and we will be innocent. But if a hand is laid on anyone with you in the house, his blood will be on our heads.
JOS	2	20	네가 우리의 이 일을 누설하면 네가 우리로 서약케 한 맹세에 대하여 우리에게 허물이 없으리라	And if thou utter this our business, then we will be quit of thine oath which thou hast made us to swear.	And if you report our mission, we will be released from the oath you made us swear.”
JOS	2	21	라합이 가로되 너희의 말대로 할 것이라 하고 그들을 보내어 가게 하고 붉은 줄을 창문에 매니라	And she said, According unto your words, so be it. And she sent them away, and they departed: and she bound the scarlet line in the window.	“Let it be as you say,” she replied, and she sent them away. And when they had gone, she tied the scarlet cord in the window.
JOS	2	22	그들이 가서 산에 이르러 따르는 자가 돌아가도록 사흘을 거기 유하매 따르는 자가 그들을 길에서 두루 찾다가 만나지 못하니라	And they went, and came unto the mountain, and abode there three days, until the pursuers were returned: and the pursuers sought them throughout all the way, but found them not.	So the spies went out into the hill country and stayed there three days, until their pursuers had returned without finding them, having searched all along the road.
JOS	2	23	그 두 사람이 돌이켜 산에서 내려와 강을 건너 눈의 아들 여호수아에게 나아와서 그 당한 모든 일을 고하고	So the two men returned, and descended from the mountain, and passed over, and came to Joshua the son of Nun, and told him all things that befell them:	Then the two men started back, came down from the hill country, and crossed the river. So they came to Joshua son of Nun and reported all that had happened to them.
JOS	2	24	또 여호수아에게 이르되 진실로 여호와께서 그 온 땅을 우리 손에 붙이셨으므로 그 땅의 모든 거민이 우리 앞에서 간담이 녹더이다	And they said unto Joshua, Truly the Lord hath delivered into our hands all the land; for even all the inhabitants of the country do faint because of us.	“The LORD has surely delivered the entire land into our hands,” they said to Joshua. “Indeed, all who dwell in the land are melting in fear of us.”
JOS	3	1	여호수아가 아침에 일찍이 일어나서 이스라엘 사람들로 더불어 싯딤에서 떠나 요단에 이르러서는 건너지 아니하고 거기서 유숙하니라	And Joshua rose early in the morning; and they removed from Shittim, and came to Jordan, he and all the children of Israel, and lodged there before they passed over.	Early the next morning Joshua got up and left Shittim with all the Israelites. They went as far as the Jordan, where they camped before crossing over.
JOS	3	2	삼 일 후에 유사들이 진중으로 두루 다니며	And it came to pass after three days, that the officers went through the host;	After three days the officers went through the camp
JOS	3	3	백성에게 명하여 가로되 너희는 레위 사람 제사장들이 너희 하나님 여호와의 언약궤 메는 것을 보거든 너희 곳을 떠나 그 뒤를 좇으라	And they commanded the people, saying, When ye see the ark of the covenant of the Lord your God, and the priests the Levites bearing it, then ye shall remove from your place, and go after it.	and commanded the people: “When you see the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God being carried by the Levitical priests, you are to set out from your positions and follow it.
JOS	3	4	그러나 너희와 그 사이 상거가 이천 규빗쯤 되게 하고 그것에 가까이 하지는 말라 그리하면 너희 행할 길을 알리니 너희가 이전에 이 길을 지나보지 못하였음이니라	Yet there shall be a space between you and it, about two thousand cubits by measure: come not near unto it, that ye may know the way by which ye must go: for ye have not passed this way heretofore.	But keep a distance of about two thousand cubits between yourselves and the ark. Do not go near it, so that you can see the way to go, since you have never traveled this way before.”
JOS	3	5	여호수아가 또 백성에게 이르되 너희는 스스로 성결케 하라 여호와께서 내일 너희 가운데 기사를 행하시리라	And Joshua said unto the people, Sanctify yourselves: for to morrow the Lord will do wonders among you.	Then Joshua told the people, “Consecrate yourselves, for tomorrow the LORD will do wonders among you.”
JOS	3	6	여호수아가 또 제사장들에게 일러 가로되 언약궤를 메고 백성 앞서 건너라 하매 곧 언약궤를 메고 백성 앞서 나아가니라	And Joshua spake unto the priests, saying, Take up the ark of the covenant, and pass over before the people. And they took up the ark of the covenant, and went before the people.	And he said to the priests, “Take the ark of the covenant and go on ahead of the people.” So they carried the ark of the covenant and went ahead of them.
JOS	3	7	여호와께서 여호수아에게 이르시되 내가 오늘부터 시작하여 너를 온 이스라엘의 목전에서 크게 하여 내가 모세와 함께 있던 것 같이 너와 함께 있는 것을 그들로 알게 하리라	And the Lord said unto Joshua, This day will I begin to magnify thee in the sight of all Israel, that they may know that, as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee.	Now the LORD said to Joshua, “Today I will begin to exalt you in the sight of all Israel, so they may know that I am with you just as I was with Moses.
JOS	3	8	너는 언약궤를 멘 제사장들에게 명하여 이르기를 너희가 요단 물 가에 이르거든 요단에 들어서라 하라	And thou shalt command the priests that bear the ark of the covenant, saying, When ye are come to the brink of the water of Jordan, ye shall stand still in Jordan.	Command the priests carrying the ark of the covenant: ‘When you reach the edge of the waters, stand in the Jordan.’”
JOS	3	9	여호수아가 이스라엘 자손에게 이르되 이리 와서 너희 하나님 여호와의 말씀을 들으라 하고	And Joshua said unto the children of Israel, Come hither, and hear the words of the Lord your God.	So Joshua told the Israelites, “Come here and listen to the words of the LORD your God.”
JOS	3	10	또 말하되 사시는 하나님이 너희 가운데 계시사 가나안 족속과 헷 족속과 히위 족속과 브리스 족속과 기르가스 족속과 아모리 족속과 여부스 족속을 너희 앞에서 정녕히 쫓아내실 줄을 이 일로 너희가 알리라	And Joshua said, Hereby ye shall know that the living God is among you, and that he will without fail drive out from before you the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Hivites, and the Perizzites, and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Jebusites.	He continued, “This is how you will know that the living God is among you and that He will surely drive out before you the Canaanites, Hittites, Hivites, Perizzites, Girgashites, Amorites, and Jebusites.
JOS	3	11	보라 온 땅의 주의 언약궤가 너희 앞서 요단으로 들어가나니	Behold, the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth passeth over before you into Jordan.	Behold, the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth will go ahead of you into the Jordan.
JOS	3	12	이제 이스라엘 지파 중에서 매 지파에 한 사람씩 십이 명을 택하라	Now therefore take you twelve men out of the tribes of Israel, out of every tribe a man.	Now choose twelve men from the tribes of Israel, one from each tribe.
JOS	3	13	온 땅의 주 여호와의 궤를 멘 제사장들의 발바닥이 요단 물을 밟고 멈추면 요단 물 곧 위에서부터 흘러 내리던 물이 끊어지고 쌓여 서리라	And it shall come to pass, as soon as the soles of the feet of the priests that bear the ark of the Lord, the Lord of all the earth, shall rest in the waters of Jordan, that the waters of Jordan shall be cut off from the waters that come down from above; and they shall stand upon an heap.	When the feet of the priests who carry the ark of the LORD—the Lord of all the earth—touch down in the waters of the Jordan, its flowing waters will be cut off and will stand up in a heap.”
JOS	3	14	백성이 요단을 건너려고 자기들의 장막을 떠날 때에 제사장들은 언약궤를 메고 백성 앞에서 행하니라	And it came to pass, when the people removed from their tents, to pass over Jordan, and the priests bearing the ark of the covenant before the people;	So when the people broke camp to cross the Jordan, the priests carried the ark of the covenant ahead of them.
JOS	3	15	(요단이 모맥 거두는 시기에는 항상 언덕에 넘치더라) 궤를 멘 자들이 요단에 이르며 궤를 멘 제사장들의 발이 물가에 잠기자	And as they that bare the ark were come unto Jordan, and the feet of the priests that bare the ark were dipped in the brim of the water, (for Jordan overfloweth all his banks all the time of harvest,)	Now the Jordan overflows its banks throughout the harvest season. But as soon as the priests carrying the ark reached the Jordan and their feet touched the water’s edge,
JOS	3	16	곧 위에서부터 흘러 내리던 물이 그쳐서 심히 멀리 사르단에 가까운 아담 읍 변방에 일어나 쌓이고 아라바의 바다 염해로 향하여 흘러가는 물은 온전히 끊어지매 백성이 여리고 앞으로 바로 건널새	That the waters which came down from above stood and rose up upon an heap very far from the city Adam, that is beside Zaretan: and those that came down toward the sea of the plain, even the salt sea, failed, and were cut off: and the people passed over right against Jericho.	the flowing water stood still. It backed up as far upstream as Adam, a city in the area of Zarethan, while the water flowing toward the Sea of the Arabah (the Salt Sea) was completely cut off. So the people crossed over opposite Jericho.
JOS	3	17	여호와의 언약궤를 멘 제사장들은 요단 가운데 마른 땅에 굳게 섰고 온 이스라엘 백성은 마른 땅으로 행하여 요단을 건너니라	And the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord stood firm on dry ground in the midst of Jordan, and all the Israelites passed over on dry ground, until all the people were passed clean over Jordan.	The priests carrying the ark of the covenant of the LORD stood firm on dry ground in the middle of the Jordan, while all Israel crossed over the dry ground, until the entire nation had crossed the Jordan.
JOS	4	1	온 백성이 요단 건너기를 마치매 여호와께서 여호수아에게 일러 가라사대	And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over Jordan, that the Lord spake unto Joshua, saying,	When the whole nation had finished crossing the Jordan, the LORD said to Joshua,
JOS	4	2	백성의 매 지파에 한 사람씩 열두 사람을 택하고	Take you twelve men out of the people, out of every tribe a man,	“Choose twelve men from among the people, one from each tribe,
JOS	4	3	그들에게 명하여 이르기를 요단 가운데 제사장들의 발이 굳게 선 그곳에서 돌 열둘을 취하고 그것을 가져다가 오늘밤 너희의 유숙할 그 곳에 두라 하라	And command ye them, saying, Take you hence out of the midst of Jordan, out of the place where the priests’ feet stood firm, twelve stones, and ye shall carry them over with you, and leave them in the lodging place, where ye shall lodge this night.	and command them: ‘Take up for yourselves twelve stones from the middle of the Jordan where the priests were standing, carry them with you, and set them down in the place where you spend the night.’”
JOS	4	4	여호수아가 이스라엘 자손 중에서 매 지파에 한 사람씩 예비한 그 열두 사람을 불러서	Then Joshua called the twelve men, whom he had prepared of the children of Israel, out of every tribe a man:	So Joshua summoned the twelve men he had appointed from the Israelites, one from each tribe,
JOS	4	5	그들에게 이르되 요단 가운데 너희 하나님 여호와의 궤 앞으로 들어가서 이스라엘 자손들의 지파 수대로 각기 돌 한 개씩 취하여 어깨에 메라	And Joshua said unto them, Pass over before the ark of the Lord your God into the midst of Jordan, and take ye up every man of you a stone upon his shoulder, according unto the number of the tribes of the children of Israel:	and said to them, “Cross over before the ark of the LORD your God into the middle of the Jordan. Each of you is to take a stone upon his shoulder, according to the number of the tribes of Israel,
JOS	4	6	이것이 너희 중에 표징이 되리라 후일에 너희 자손이 물어 가로되 이 돌들은 무슨 뜻이뇨 하거든	That this may be a sign among you, that when your children ask their fathers in time to come, saying, What mean ye by these stones?	to serve as a sign among you. In the future, when your children ask, ‘What do these stones mean to you?’
JOS	4	7	그들에게 이르기를 요단 물이 여호와의 언약궤 앞에서 끊어졌었나니 곧 언약궤가 요단을 건널 때에 요단 물이 끊어졌으므로 이 돌들이 이스라엘 자손에게 영영한 기념이 되리라 하라	Then ye shall answer them, That the waters of Jordan were cut off before the ark of the covenant of the Lord; when it passed over Jordan, the waters of Jordan were cut off: and these stones shall be for a memorial unto the children of Israel for ever.	you are to tell them, ‘The waters of the Jordan were cut off before the ark of the covenant of the LORD. When it crossed the Jordan, the waters were cut off.’ Therefore these stones will be a memorial to the Israelites forever.”
JOS	4	8	이스라엘 자손들이 여호수아의 명한 대로 행하되 여호와께서 여호수아에게 이르신 대로 이스라엘 자손들의 지파 수를 따라 요단 가운데서 돌 열둘을 취하여 자기들의 유숙할 곳으로 가져다가 거기 두었더라	And the children of Israel did so as Joshua commanded, and took up twelve stones out of the midst of Jordan, as the Lord spake unto Joshua, according to the number of the tribes of the children of Israel, and carried them over with them unto the place where they lodged, and laid them down there.	Thus the Israelites did as Joshua had commanded them. They took up twelve stones from the middle of the Jordan, one for each tribe of Israel, just as the LORD had told Joshua; and they carried them to the camp, where they set them down.
JOS	4	9	여호수아가 또 요단 가운데 곧 언약궤를 멘 제사장들의 발이 선 곳에 돌 열둘을 세웠더니 오늘까지 거기 있더라	And Joshua set up twelve stones in the midst of Jordan, in the place where the feet of the priests which bare the ark of the covenant stood: and they are there unto this day.	Joshua also set up twelve stones in the middle of the Jordan, in the place where the priests who carried the ark of the covenant stood. And the stones are there to this day.
JOS	4	10	궤를 멘 제사장들이 여호와께서 여호수아에게 명하사 백성에게 이르게 하신 일 곧 모세가 여호수아에게 명한 일이 다 마치기까지 요단 가운데 섰고 백성은 속히 건넜으며	For the priests which bare the ark stood in the midst of Jordan, until every thing was finished that the Lord commanded Joshua to speak unto the people, according to all that Moses commanded Joshua: and the people hasted and passed over.	Now the priests who carried the ark remained standing in the middle of the Jordan until the people had completed everything the LORD had commanded Joshua to tell them, just as Moses had directed Joshua. The people hurried across,
JOS	4	11	모든 백성이 건너기를 마친 후에 여호와의 궤와 제사장들이 백성의 목전에서 건넜으며	And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over, that the ark of the Lord passed over, and the priests, in the presence of the people.	and after everyone had finished crossing, the priests with the ark of the LORD crossed in the sight of the people.
JOS	4	12	르우벤 자손과 갓 자손과 므낫세 반 지파는 모세가 그들에게 이른 것 같이 무장하고 이스라엘 자손들보다 앞서 건너갔으니	And the children of Reuben, and the children of Gad, and half the tribe of Manasseh, passed over armed before the children of Israel, as Moses spake unto them:	The Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh crossed over before the Israelites, armed for battle as Moses had instructed them.
JOS	4	13	사만 명 가량이라 무장하고 여호와 앞에서 건너가서 싸우려고 여리고 평지에 이르니라	About forty thousand prepared for war passed over before the Lord unto battle, to the plains of Jericho.	About 40,000 troops armed for battle crossed over before the LORD into the plains of Jericho.
JOS	4	14	그 날에 여호와께서 모든 이스라엘의 목전에서 여호수아를 크게 하시매 그의 생존한 날 동안에 백성이 두려워하기를 모세를 두려워하던 것 같이 하였더라	On that day the Lord magnified Joshua in the sight of all Israel; and they feared him, as they feared Moses, all the days of his life.	On that day the LORD exalted Joshua in the sight of all Israel, and they revered him all the days of his life, just as they had revered Moses.
JOS	4	15	여호와께서 여호수아에게 일러 가라사대	And the Lord spake unto Joshua, saying,	Then the LORD said to Joshua,
JOS	4	16	증거궤를 멘 제사장들을 명하여 요단에서 올라오게 하라 하신지라	Command the priests that bear the ark of the testimony, that they come up out of Jordan.	“Command the priests who carry the ark of the Testimony to come up from the Jordan.”
JOS	4	17	여호수아가 제사장들에게 명하여 요단에서 올라오라 하매	Joshua therefore commanded the priests, saying, Come ye up out of Jordan.	So Joshua commanded the priests, “Come up from the Jordan.”
JOS	4	18	여호와의 언약궤를 멘 제사장들이 요단 가운데서 나오며 그 발바닥으로 육지를 밟는 동시에 요단 물이 본 곳으로 도로 흘러 여전히 언덕에 넘쳤더라	And it came to pass, when the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord were come up out of the midst of Jordan, and the soles of the priests’ feet were lifted up unto the dry land, that the waters of Jordan returned unto their place, and flowed over all his banks, as they did before.	When the priests carrying the ark of the covenant of the LORD came up out of the Jordan and their feet touched the dry land, the waters of the Jordan returned to their course and overflowed all the banks as before.
JOS	4	19	정월 십일에 백성이 요단에서 올라와서 여리고 동편 지경 길갈에 진 치매	And the people came up out of Jordan on the tenth day of the first month, and encamped in Gilgal, in the east border of Jericho.	On the tenth day of the first month the people went up from the Jordan and camped at Gilgal on the eastern border of Jericho.
JOS	4	20	여호수아가 그 요단에서 가져온 열두 돌을 길갈에 세우고	And those twelve stones, which they took out of Jordan, did Joshua pitch in Gilgal.	And there at Gilgal Joshua set up the twelve stones they had taken from the Jordan.
JOS	4	21	이스라엘 자손들에게 일러 가로되 후일에 너희 자손이 그 아비에게 묻기를 이 돌은 무슨 뜻이냐 하거든	And he spake unto the children of Israel, saying, When your children shall ask their fathers in time to come, saying, What mean these stones?	Then Joshua said to the Israelites, “In the future, when your children ask their fathers, ‘What is the meaning of these stones?’
JOS	4	22	너희는 자손에게 알게 하여 이르기를 이스라엘이 마른 땅을 밟고 이 요단을 건넜음이라	Then ye shall let your children know, saying, Israel came over this Jordan on dry land.	you are to tell them, ‘Israel crossed the Jordan on dry ground.’
JOS	4	23	너희 하나님 여호와께서 요단 물을 너희 앞에 마르게 하사 너희로 건너게 하신 것이 너희 하나님 여호와께서 우리 앞에 홍해를 말리시고 우리로 건너게 하심과 같았나니	For the Lord your God dried up the waters of Jordan from before you, until ye were passed over, as the Lord your God did to the Red sea, which he dried up from before us, until we were gone over:	For the LORD your God dried up the waters of the Jordan before you until you had crossed over, just as He did to the Red Sea, which He dried up before us until we had crossed over.
JOS	4	24	이는 땅의 모든 백성으로 여호와의 손이 능하심을 알게 하며 너희로 너희 하나님 여호와를 영원토록 경외하게 하려 하심이라 하라	That all the people of the earth might know the hand of the Lord, that it is mighty: that ye might fear the Lord your God for ever.	He did this so that all the peoples of the earth may know that the hand of the LORD is mighty, and so that you may always fear the LORD your God.”
JOS	5	1	요단 서편의 아모리 사람의 모든 왕과 해변의 가나안 사람의 모든 왕이 여호와께서 요단 물을 이스라엘 자손들 앞에서 말리시고 우리를 건네셨음을 듣고 마음이 녹았고 이스라엘 자손들의 연고로 정신을 잃었더라	And it came to pass, when all the kings of the Amorites, which were on the side of Jordan westward, and all the kings of the Canaanites, which were by the sea, heard that the Lord had dried up the waters of Jordan from before the children of Israel, until we were passed over, that their heart melted, neither was there spirit in them any more, because of the children of Israel.	Now when all the Amorite kings west of the Jordan and all the Canaanite kings along the coast heard how the LORD had dried up the waters of the Jordan before the Israelites until they had crossed over, their hearts melted and their spirits failed for fear of the Israelites.
JOS	5	2	그때에 여호와께서 여호수아에게 이르시되 너는 부싯돌로 칼을 만들어 이스라엘 자손들에게 다시 할례를 행하라 하시매	At that time the Lord said unto Joshua, Make thee sharp knives, and circumcise again the children of Israel the second time.	At that time the LORD said to Joshua, “Make flint knives and circumcise the sons of Israel once again.”
JOS	5	3	여호수아가 부싯돌로 칼을 만들어 할례산에서 이스라엘 자손들에게 할례를 행하니라	And Joshua made him sharp knives, and circumcised the children of Israel at the hill of the foreskins.	So Joshua made flint knives and circumcised the sons of Israel at Gibeath-haaraloth.
JOS	5	4	여호수아가 할례를 시행한 까닭은 이것이니 애굽에서 나온 모든 백성 중 남자 곧 모든 군사는 애굽에서 나온 후 광야 노중에서 죽었는데	And this is the cause why Joshua did circumcise: All the people that came out of Egypt, that were males, even all the men of war, died in the wilderness by the way, after they came out of Egypt.	Now this is why Joshua circumcised them: All those who came out of Egypt—all the men of war—had died on the journey in the wilderness after they had left Egypt.
JOS	5	5	그 나온 백성은 다 할례를 받았으나 오직 애굽에서 나온 후 광야 노중에서 난 자는 할례를 받지 못하였음이라	Now all the people that came out were circumcised: but all the people that were born in the wilderness by the way as they came forth out of Egypt, them they had not circumcised.	Though all who had come out were circumcised, none of those born in the wilderness on the journey from Egypt had been circumcised.
JOS	5	6	이스라엘 자손들이 여호와의 말씀을 청종치 아니하므로 여호와께서 그들에게 대하여 맹세하사 그들의 열조에게 맹세하여 우리에게 주마 하신 땅 곧 젖과 꿀이 흐르는 땅을 그들로 보지 못하게 하리라 하시매 애굽에서 나온 족속 곧 군사들이 다 멸절하기까지 사십 년 동안을 광야에 행하였더니	For the children of Israel walked forty years in the wilderness, till all the people that were men of war, which came out of Egypt, were consumed, because they obeyed not the voice of the Lord: unto whom the Lord sware that he would not shew them the land, which the Lord sware unto their fathers that he would give us, a land that floweth with milk and honey.	For the Israelites had wandered in the wilderness forty years, until all the nation’s men of war who had come out of Egypt had died, since they did not obey the LORD. So the LORD vowed never to let them see the land He had sworn to their fathers to give us, a land flowing with milk and honey.
JOS	5	7	그들의 대를 잇게 하신 이 자손에게 여호수아가 할례를 행하였으니 길에서는 그들에게 할례를 행치 못하였으므로 할례 없는 자가 되었음이었더라	And their children, whom he raised up in their stead, them Joshua circumcised: for they were uncircumcised, because they had not circumcised them by the way.	And Joshua raised up their sons in their place, and these were the ones he circumcised. Until this time they were still uncircumcised, since they had not been circumcised along the way.
JOS	5	8	온 백성에게 할례 행하기를 필하매 백성이 진중 각 처소에 처하여 낫기를 기다릴 때에	And it came to pass, when they had done circumcising all the people, that they abode in their places in the camp, till they were whole.	And after all the nation had been circumcised, they stayed there in the camp until they were healed.
JOS	5	9	여호와께서 여호수아에게 이르시되 내가 오늘날 애굽의 수치를 너희에게서 굴러가게 하였다 하셨으므로 그 곳 이름을 오늘까지 길갈이라 하느니라	And the Lord said unto Joshua, This day have I rolled away the reproach of Egypt from off you. Wherefore the name of the place is called Gilgal unto this day.	Then the LORD said to Joshua, “Today I have rolled away the reproach of Egypt from you.” So that place has been called Gilgal to this day.
JOS	5	10	이스라엘 자손들이 길갈에 진 쳤고 그 달 십사일 저녁에는 여리고 평지에서 유월절을 지켰고	And the children of Israel encamped in Gilgal, and kept the passover on the fourteenth day of the month at even in the plains of Jericho.	On the evening of the fourteenth day of the month, while the Israelites were camped at Gilgal on the plains of Jericho, they kept the Passover.
JOS	5	11	유월절 이튿날에 그 땅 소산을 먹되 그 날에 무교병과 볶은 곡식을 먹었더니	And they did eat of the old corn of the land on the morrow after the passover, unleavened cakes, and parched corn in the selfsame day.	The day after the Passover, on that very day, they ate unleavened bread and roasted grain from the produce of the land.
JOS	5	12	그 땅 소산을 먹은 다음 날에 만나가 그쳤으니 이스라엘 사람들이 다시는 만나를 얻지 못하였고 그 해에 가나안 땅의 열매를 먹었더라	And the manna ceased on the morrow after they had eaten of the old corn of the land; neither had the children of Israel manna any more; but they did eat of the fruit of the land of Canaan that year.	And the day after they had eaten from the produce of the land, the manna ceased. There was no more manna for the Israelites, so that year they began to eat the crops of the land of Canaan.
JOS	5	13	여호수아가 여리고에 가까웠을 때에 눈을 들어 본즉 한 사람이 칼을 빼어 손에 들고 마주 섰는지라 여호수아가 나아가서 그에게 묻되 너는 우리를 위하느냐 우리의 대적을 위하느냐	And it came to pass, when Joshua was by Jericho, that he lifted up his eyes and looked, and, behold, there stood a man over against him with his sword drawn in his hand: and Joshua went unto him, and said unto him, Art thou for us, or for our adversaries?	Now when Joshua was near Jericho, he looked up and saw a man standing in front of him with a drawn sword in His hand. Joshua approached Him and asked, “Are You for us or for our enemies?”
JOS	5	14	그가 가로되 아니라 나는 여호와의 군대 장관으로 이제 왔느니라 여호수아가 땅에 엎드려 절하고 가로되 나의 주여 종에게 무슨 말씀을 하려 하시나이까	And he said, Nay; but as captain of the host of the Lord am I now come. And Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did worship, and said unto him, What saith my lord unto his servant?	“Neither,” He replied. “I have now come as Commander of the LORD’s army.” Then Joshua fell facedown in reverence and asked Him, “What does my Lord have to say to His servant?”
JOS	5	15	여호와의 군대 장관이 여호수아에게 이르되 네 발에서 신을 벗으라 네가 선 곳은 거룩하니라 여호수아가 그대로 행하니라	And the captain of the Lord’s host said unto Joshua, Loose thy shoe from off thy foot; for the place whereon thou standest is holy. And Joshua did so.	The Commander of the LORD’s army replied, “Take off your sandals, for the place where you are standing is holy.” And Joshua did so.
JOS	6	1	이스라엘 자손들로 인하여 여리고는 굳게 닫혔고 출입하는 자 없더라	Now Jericho was straitly shut up because of the children of Israel: none went out, and none came in.	Now Jericho was tightly shut up because of the Israelites. No one went out and no one came in.
JOS	6	2	여호와께서 여호수아에게 이르시되 보라 내가 여리고와 그 왕과 용사들을 네 손에 붙였으니	And the Lord said unto Joshua, See, I have given into thine hand Jericho, and the king thereof, and the mighty men of valour.	And the LORD said to Joshua, “Behold, I have delivered Jericho into your hand, along with its king and its mighty men of valor.
JOS	6	3	너희 모든 군사는 성을 둘러 성 주위를 매일 한 번씩 돌되 엿새 동안을 그리하라	And ye shall compass the city, all ye men of war, and go round about the city once. Thus shalt thou do six days.	March around the city with all the men of war, circling the city one time. Do this for six days.
JOS	6	4	제사장 일곱은 일곱 양각나팔을 잡고 언약궤 앞에서 행할 것이요 제칠일에는 성을 일곱 번 돌며 제사장들은 나팔을 불 것이며	And seven priests shall bear before the ark seven trumpets of rams’ horns: and the seventh day ye shall compass the city seven times, and the priests shall blow with the trumpets.	Have seven priests carry seven rams’ horns in front of the ark. Then on the seventh day, march around the city seven times, while the priests blow the horns.
JOS	6	5	제사장들이 양각나팔을 길게 울려 불어서 그 나팔 소리가 너희에게 들릴 때에는 백성은 다 큰 소리로 외쳐 부를 것이라 그리하면그 성벽이 무너져 내리리니 백성은 각기 앞으로 올라갈지니라 하시매	And it shall come to pass, that when they make a long blast with the ram’s horn, and when ye hear the sound of the trumpet, all the people shall shout with a great shout; and the wall of the city shall fall down flat, and the people shall ascend up every man straight before him.	And when there is a long blast of the ram’s horn and you hear its sound, have all the people give a mighty shout. Then the wall of the city will collapse and all your people will charge straight into the city.”
JOS	6	6	눈의 아들 여호수아가 제사장들을 불러서 그들에게 이르되 너희는 언약궤를 메고 일곱 제사장은 일곱 양각나팔을 잡고 여호와의 궤 앞에서 행하라 하고	And Joshua the son of Nun called the priests, and said unto them, Take up the ark of the covenant, and let seven priests bear seven trumpets of rams’ horns before the ark of the Lord.	So Joshua son of Nun summoned the priests and said, “Take up the ark of the covenant and have seven priests carry seven rams’ horns in front of the ark of the LORD.”
JOS	6	7	또 백성에게 이르되 나아가서 성을 돌되 무장한 자들이 여호와의 궤 앞에 행할지니라	And he said unto the people, Pass on, and compass the city, and let him that is armed pass on before the ark of the Lord.	And he told the people, “Advance and march around the city, with the armed troops going ahead of the ark of the LORD.”
JOS	6	8	여호수아가 백성에게 이르기를 마치매 제사장 일곱이 일곱 양각 나팔을 잡고 여호와 앞에서 진행하며 나팔을 불고 여호와의 언약궤는 그 뒤를 따르며	And it came to pass, when Joshua had spoken unto the people, that the seven priests bearing the seven trumpets of rams’ horns passed on before the Lord, and blew with the trumpets: and the ark of the covenant of the Lord followed them.	After Joshua had spoken to the people, seven priests carrying seven rams’ horns before the LORD advanced and blew the horns, and the ark of the covenant of the LORD followed them.
JOS	6	9	무장한 자들은 나팔 부는 제사장들 앞에서 진행하며 후군은 궤 뒤에 행하고 제사장들은 나팔을 불며 행하더라	And the armed men went before the priests that blew with the trumpets, and the rereward came after the ark, the priests going on, and blowing with the trumpets.	While the horns continued to sound, the armed troops marched ahead of the priests who blew the horns, and the rear guard followed the ark.
JOS	6	10	여호수아가 백성에게 명하여 가로되 너희는 외치지 말며 너희 음성을 들레지 말며 너희 입에서 아무 말도 내지 말라 그리하다가 내가 너희에게 명하여 외치라 하는 날에 외칠지니라 하고	And Joshua had commanded the people, saying, Ye shall not shout, nor make any noise with your voice, neither shall any word proceed out of your mouth, until the day I bid you shout; then shall ye shout.	But Joshua had commanded the people: “Do not give a battle cry or let your voice be heard; do not let one word come out of your mouth until the day I tell you to shout. Then you are to shout!”
JOS	6	11	여호와의 궤로 성을 한 번 돌게 하니라 무리가 진에 돌아와서 진에서 자니라	So the ark of the Lord compassed the city, going about it once: and they came into the camp, and lodged in the camp.	So he had the ark of the LORD carried around the city, circling it once. And the people returned to the camp and spent the night there.
JOS	6	12	여호수아가 아침에 일찍이 일어나니라 제사장들이 여호와의 궤를 메고	And Joshua rose early in the morning, and the priests took up the ark of the Lord.	Joshua got up early the next morning, and the priests took the ark of the LORD.
JOS	6	13	일곱 제사장은 일곱 양각나팔을 잡고 여호와의 궤 앞에서 계속 진행하며 나팔을 불고 무장한 자들은 그 앞에 행하며 후군은 여호와의 궤 뒤에 행하고 제사장들은 나팔을 불며 행하니라	And seven priests bearing seven trumpets of rams’ horns before the ark of the Lord went on continually, and blew with the trumpets: and the armed men went before them; but the rereward came after the ark of the Lord, the priests going on, and blowing with the trumpets.	And the seven priests carrying seven rams’ horns kept marching ahead of the ark of the LORD and blowing the horns. The armed troops went in front of them and the rear guard followed the ark of the LORD, while the horns kept sounding.
JOS	6	14	그 제이일에도 성을 한번 돌고 진에 돌아오니라 엿새 동안을 이같이 행하니라	And the second day they compassed the city once, and returned into the camp: so they did six days.	So on the second day they marched around the city once and returned to the camp. They did this for six days.
JOS	6	15	제칠일 새벽에 그들이 일찍이 일어나서 여전한 방식으로 성을 일곱 번 도니 성을 일곱 번 돌기는 그 날뿐이었더라	And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they rose early about the dawning of the day, and compassed the city after the same manner seven times: only on that day they compassed the city seven times.	Then on the seventh day, they got up at dawn and marched around the city seven times in the same manner. That was the only day they circled the city seven times.
JOS	6	16	일곱 번째에 제사장들이 나팔을 불 때에 여호수아가 백성에게 이르되 외치라 여호와께서 너희에게 이 성을 주셨느니라	And it came to pass at the seventh time, when the priests blew with the trumpets, Joshua said unto the people, Shout; for the Lord hath given you the city.	After the seventh time around, the priests blew the horns, and Joshua commanded the people, “Shout! For the LORD has given you the city!
JOS	6	17	이 성과 그 가운데 모든 물건은 여호와께 바치되 기생 라합과 무릇 그 집에 동거하는 자는 살리라 이는 그가 우리의 보낸 사자를 숨겼음이니라	And the city shall be accursed, even it, and all that are therein, to the Lord: only Rahab the harlot shall live, she and all that are with her in the house, because she hid the messengers that we sent.	Now the city and everything in it must be devoted to the LORD for destruction. Only Rahab the prostitute and all those with her in her house will live, because she hid the spies we sent.
JOS	6	18	너희는 바칠 물건을 스스로 삼가라 너희가 그것을 바친 후에 그 바친 어느 것이든지 취하면 이스라엘 진으로 바침이 되어 화를 당케 할까 두려워하노라	And ye, in any wise keep yourselves from the accursed thing, lest ye make yourselves accursed, when ye take of the accursed thing, and make the camp of Israel a curse, and trouble it.	But keep away from the things devoted to destruction, lest you yourself be set apart for destruction. If you take any of these, you will set apart the camp of Israel for destruction and bring disaster upon it.
JOS	6	19	은금과 동철 기구들은 다 여호와께 구별될 것이니 그것을 여호와의 곳간에 들일지니라	But all the silver, and gold, and vessels of brass and iron, are consecrated unto the Lord: they shall come into the treasury of the Lord.	For all the silver and gold and all the articles of bronze and iron are holy to the LORD; they must go into His treasury.”
JOS	6	20	이에 백성은 외치고 제사장들은 나팔을 불매 백성이 나팔 소리를 듣는 동시에 크게 소리질러 외치니 성벽이 무너져 내린지라 백성이 각기 앞으로 나아가 성에 들어가서 그 성을 취하고	So the people shouted when the priests blew with the trumpets: and it came to pass, when the people heard the sound of the trumpet, and the people shouted with a great shout, that the wall fell down flat, so that the people went up into the city, every man straight before him, and they took the city.	So when the rams’ horns sounded, the people shouted. When they heard the blast of the horn, the people gave a great shout, and the wall collapsed. Then all the people charged straight into the city and captured it.
JOS	6	21	성 중에 있는 것을 다 멸하되 남녀 노유와 우양과 나귀를 칼날로 멸하니라	And they utterly destroyed all that was in the city, both man and woman, young and old, and ox, and sheep, and ass, with the edge of the sword.	At the edge of the sword they devoted to destruction everything in the city—man and woman, young and old, oxen, sheep, and donkeys.
JOS	6	22	여호수아가 그 땅을 정탐한 두 사람에게 이르되 그 기생의 집에 들어 가서 너희가 그 여인에게 맹세한 대로 그와 그에게 속한 모든 것을 이끌어내라 하매	But Joshua had said unto the two men that had spied out the country, Go into the harlot’s house, and bring out thence the woman, and all that she hath, as ye sware unto her.	Meanwhile, Joshua told the two men who had spied out the land, “Go into the house of the prostitute and bring out the woman and all who are with her, just as you promised her.”
JOS	6	23	정탐한 소년들이 들어가서 라합과 그 부모와 그 형제와 그에게 속한 모든 것을 이끌어 내고 또 그 친족도 다 이끌어 내어 그들을 이스라엘 진 밖에 두고	And the young men that were spies went in, and brought out Rahab, and her father, and her mother, and her brethren, and all that she had; and they brought out all her kindred, and left them without the camp of Israel.	So the young spies went in and brought out Rahab, her father and mother and brothers, and all who belonged to her. They brought out her whole family and settled them outside the camp of Israel.
JOS	6	24	무리가 불로 성읍과 그 가운데 있는 모든 것을 사르고 은금과 동철 기구는 여호와의 집 곳간에 두었더라	And they burnt the city with fire, and all that was therein: only the silver, and the gold, and the vessels of brass and of iron, they put into the treasury of the house of the Lord.	Then the Israelites burned up the city and everything in it. However, they put the silver and gold and articles of bronze and iron into the treasury of the LORD’s house.
JOS	6	25	여호수아가 기생 라합과 그 아비의 가족과 그에게 속한 모든 것을 살렸으므로 그가 오늘날까지 이스라엘 중에 거하였으니 이는 여호수아가 여리고를 탐지하려고 보낸 사자를 숨겼음이었더라	And Joshua saved Rahab the harlot alive, and her father’s household, and all that she had; and she dwelleth in Israel even unto this day; because she hid the messengers, which Joshua sent to spy out Jericho.	And Joshua spared Rahab the prostitute, with her father’s household and all who belonged to her, because she hid the men Joshua had sent to spy out Jericho. So she has lived among the Israelites to this day.
JOS	6	26	여호수아가 그 때에 맹세로 무리를 경계하여 가로되 이 여리고 성을 누구든지 일어나서 건축하는 자는 여호와 앞에서 저주를 받을 것이라 그 기초를 쌓을 때에 장자를 잃을 것이요 문을 세울 때에 계자를 잃으리라 하였더라	And Joshua adjured them at that time, saying, Cursed be the man before the Lord, that riseth up and buildeth this city Jericho: he shall lay the foundation thereof in his firstborn, and in his youngest son shall he set up the gates of it.	At that time Joshua invoked this solemn oath: “Cursed before the LORD is the man who rises up and rebuilds this city, Jericho; at the cost of his firstborn he will lay its foundations; at the cost of his youngest he will set up its gates.”
JOS	6	27	여호와께서 여호수아와 함께 하시니 여호수아의 명성이 그 온 땅에 퍼지니라	So the Lord was with Joshua; and his fame was noised throughout all the country.	So the LORD was with Joshua, and his fame spread throughout the land.
JOS	7	1	이스라엘 자손들이 바친 물건을 인하여 범죄하였으니 이는 유다 지파 세라의 증손 삽디의 손자 갈미의 아들 아간이 바친 물건을 취하였음이라 여호와께서 이스라엘 자손들에게 진노하시니라	But the children of Israel committed a trespass in the accursed thing: for Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, took of the accursed thing: and the anger of the Lord was kindled against the children of Israel.	The Israelites, however, acted unfaithfully regarding the things devoted to destruction. Achan son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, took some of what was set apart. So the anger of the LORD burned against the Israelites.
JOS	7	2	여호수아가 여리고에서 사람을 벧엘 동편 벧아웬 곁에 있는 아이로 보내며 그들에게 일러 가로되 올라가서 그 땅을 정탐하라 하매 그 사람들이 올라가서 아이를 정탐하고	And Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai, which is beside Beth–aven, on the east side of Beth–el, and spake unto them, saying, Go up and view the country. And the men went up and viewed Ai.	Meanwhile, Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai, which is near Beth-aven to the east of Bethel, and told them, “Go up and spy out the land.” So the men went up and spied out Ai.
JOS	7	3	여호수아에게로 돌아와서 그에게 이르되 백성을 다 올라가게 말고 이삼천 명만 올라가서 아이를 치게 하소서 그들은 소수니 모든 백성을 그리로 보내어 수고롭게 마소서 하므로	And they returned to Joshua, and said unto him, Let not all the people go up; but let about two or three thousand men go up and smite Ai; and make not all the people to labour thither; for they are but few.	On returning to Joshua, they reported, “There is no need to send all the people; two or three thousand men are enough to go up and attack Ai. Since the people of Ai are so few, you need not wear out all our people there.”
JOS	7	4	백성중 삼천 명쯤 그리로 올라갔다가 아이 사람 앞에서 도망하니	So there went up thither of the people about three thousand men: and they fled before the men of Ai.	So about three thousand men went up, but they fled before the men of Ai.
JOS	7	5	아이 사람이 그들의 삼십육 인쯤 죽이고 성문 앞에서부터 스바림까지 쫓아와서 내려가는 비탈에서 쳤으므로 백성의 마음이 녹아 물 같이 된지라	And the men of Ai smote of them about thirty and six men: for they chased them from before the gate even unto Shebarim, and smote them in the going down: wherefore the hearts of the people melted, and became as water.	And the men of Ai struck down about thirty-six of them, chasing them from the gate as far as the quarries and striking them down on the slopes. So the hearts of the people melted and became like water.
JOS	7	6	여호수아가 옷을 찢고 이스라엘 장로들과 함께 여호와의 궤 앞에서 땅에 엎드려 머리에 티끌을 무릅쓰고 저물도록 있다가	And Joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face before the ark of the Lord until the eventide, he and the elders of Israel, and put dust upon their heads.	Then Joshua tore his clothes and fell facedown before the ark of the LORD until evening, as did the elders of Israel; and they all sprinkled dust on their heads.
JOS	7	7	여호수아가 가로되 슬프도소이다 주 여호와여 어찌하여 이 백성을 인도하여 요단을 건너게 하시고 우리를 아모리 사람의 손에 붙여 멸망시키려 하셨나이까 우리가 요단 저편을 족하게 여겨 거하였더면 좋을뻔 하였나이다	And Joshua said, Alas, O Lord God, wherefore hast thou at all brought this people over Jordan, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us? would to God we had been content, and dwelt on the other side Jordan!	“O, Lord GOD,” Joshua said, “why did You ever bring this people across the Jordan to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites to be destroyed? If only we had been content to stay on the other side of the Jordan!
JOS	7	8	주여 이스라엘이 그 대적 앞에서 돌아섰으니 내가 무슨 말을 하오리이까	O Lord, what shall I say, when Israel turneth their backs before their enemies!	O Lord, what can I say, now that Israel has turned its back and run from its enemies?
JOS	7	9	가나안 사람과 이 땅 모든 거민이 이를 듣고 우리를 둘러싸고 우리 이름을 세상에서 끊으리니 주의 크신 이름을 위하여 어떻게 하시려나이까	For the Canaanites and all the inhabitants of the land shall hear of it, and shall environ us round, and cut off our name from the earth: and what wilt thou do unto thy great name?	When the Canaanites and all who live in the land hear about this, they will surround us and wipe out our name from the earth. Then what will You do for Your great name?”
JOS	7	10	여호와께서 여호수아에게 이르시되 일어나라 어찌하여 이렇게 엎드렸느냐	And the Lord said unto Joshua, Get thee up; wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face?	But the LORD said to Joshua, “Stand up! Why have you fallen on your face?
JOS	7	11	이스라엘이 범죄하여 내가 그들에게 명한 나의 언약을 어기었나니 곧 그들이 바친 물건을 취하고 도적하고 사기하여 자기 기구 가운데 두었느니라	Israel hath sinned, and they have also transgressed my covenant which I commanded them: for they have even taken of the accursed thing, and have also stolen, and dissembled also, and they have put it even among their own stuff.	Israel has sinned; they have transgressed My covenant that I commanded them, and they have taken some of what was devoted to destruction. Indeed, they have stolen and lied, and they have put these things with their own possessions.
JOS	7	12	그러므로 이스라엘 자손들이 자기 대적을 능히 당치 못하고 그 앞에서 돌아섰나니 이는 자기도 바친 것이 됨이라 그 바친 것을 너희 중에서 멸하지 아니하면 내가 다시는 너희와 함께 있지 아니하리라	Therefore the children of Israel could not stand before their enemies, but turned their backs before their enemies, because they were accursed: neither will I be with you any more, except ye destroy the accursed from among you.	This is why the Israelites cannot stand against their enemies. They will turn their backs and run from their enemies, because they themselves have been set apart for destruction. I will no longer be with you unless you remove from among you whatever is devoted to destruction.
JOS	7	13	너는 일어나서 백성을 성결케 하여 이르기를 너희는 스스로 성결케 하여 내일을 기다리라 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와의 말씀에 이스라엘아 너의 중에 바친 물건이 있나니 네가 그 바친 물건을 너의 중에서 제하기 전에는 너의 대적을 당치 못하리라	Up, sanctify the people, and say, Sanctify yourselves against to morrow: for thus saith the Lord God of Israel, There is an accursed thing in the midst of thee, O Israel: thou canst not stand before thine enemies, until ye take away the accursed thing from among you.	Get up and consecrate the people, saying, ‘Consecrate yourselves for tomorrow, for this is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: Among you, O Israel, there are things devoted to destruction. You cannot stand against your enemies until you remove them.
JOS	7	14	아침에 너희는 너희 지파대로 가까이 나아오라 여호와께 뽑히는 지파는 그 족속대로 가까이 나아올 것이요 여호와께 뽑히는 족속은 그 가족대로 가까이 나아올 것이요 여호와께 뽑히는 가족은 각 남자대로 가까이 나아올 것이며	In the morning therefore ye shall be brought according to your tribes: and it shall be, that the tribe which the Lord taketh shall come according to the families thereof; and the family which the Lord shall take shall come by households; and the household which the Lord shall take shall come man by man.	In the morning you must present yourselves tribe by tribe. The tribe that the LORD selects shall come forward clan by clan, and the clan that the LORD selects shall come forward family by family, and the family that the LORD selects shall come forward man by man.
JOS	7	15	바친 물건을 가진 자로 뽑힌 자를 불사르되 그와 그 모든 소유를 그리하라 이는 여호와의 언약을 어기고 이스라엘 가운데서 망령된 일을 행하였음이라 하셨다 하라	And it shall be, that he that is taken with the accursed thing shall be burnt with fire, he and all that he hath: because he hath transgressed the covenant of the Lord, and because he hath wrought folly in Israel.	The one who is caught with the things devoted to destruction must be burned, along with all that belongs to him, because he has transgressed the covenant of the LORD and committed an outrage in Israel.’”
JOS	7	16	이에 여호수아가 아침 일찍이 일어나서 이스라엘을 그 지파대로 가까이 나아오게 하였더니 유다 지파가 뽑혔고	So Joshua rose up early in the morning, and brought Israel by their tribes; and the tribe of Judah was taken:	So Joshua arose early the next morning and had Israel come forward tribe by tribe, and the tribe of Judah was selected.
JOS	7	17	유다 족속을 가까이 나아오게 하였더니 세라 족속이 뽑혔고 세라 족속의 각 남자를 가까이 나아오게 하였더니 삽디가 뽑혔고	And he brought the family of Judah; and he took the family of the Zarhites: and he brought the family of the Zarhites man by man; and Zabdi was taken:	He had the clans of Judah come forward, and the clan of the Zerahites was selected. He had the clan of the Zerahites come forward, and the family of Zabdi was selected.
JOS	7	18	삽디의 가족 각 남자를 가까이 나아오게 하였더니 유다 지파 세라의 증손이요 삽디의 손자요 갈미의 아들인 아간이 뽑혔더라	And he brought his household man by man; and Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was taken.	And he had the family of Zabdi come forward man by man, and Achan son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was selected.
JOS	7	19	여호수아가 아간에게 이르되 내 아들아 청하노라 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께 영광을 돌려 그 앞에 자복하고 네 행한 일을 내게 고하라 그 일을 내게 숨기지 말라	And Joshua said unto Achan, My son, give, I pray thee, glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto him; and tell me now what thou hast done; hide it not from me.	So Joshua said to Achan, “My son, give glory to the LORD, the God of Israel, and make a confession to Him. I urge you to tell me what you have done; do not hide it from me.”
JOS	7	20	아간이 여호수아에게 대답하여 가로되 참으로 나는 이스라엘 하나님 여호와께 범죄하여 여차 여차히 행하였나이다	And Achan answered Joshua, and said, Indeed I have sinned against the Lord God of Israel, and thus and thus have I done:	“It is true,” Achan replied, “I have sinned against the LORD, the God of Israel. This is what I did:
JOS	7	21	내가 노략한 물건 중에 시날 산의 아름다운 외투 한 벌과 은 이백 세겔과 오십 세겔중의 금덩이 하나를 보고 탐내어 취하였나이다 보소서 이제 그 물건들을 내 장막 가운데 땅 속에 감추었는데 은은 그 밑에 있나이다	When I saw among the spoils a goodly Babylonish garment, and two hundred shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, then I coveted them, and took them; and, behold, they are hid in the earth in the midst of my tent, and the silver under it.	When I saw among the spoils a beautiful cloak from Shinar, two hundred shekels of silver, and a bar of gold weighing fifty shekels, I coveted them and took them. They are hidden in the ground inside my tent, with the silver underneath.”
JOS	7	22	이에 여호수아가 사자를 보내매 그의 장막에 달려가 본즉 물건이 그의 장막 안에 감취었는데 은은 그 밑에 있는지라	So Joshua sent messengers, and they ran unto the tent; and, behold, it was hid in his tent, and the silver under it.	So Joshua sent messengers who ran to the tent, and there it all was, hidden in his tent, with the silver underneath.
JOS	7	23	그들이 그것을 장막 가운데서 취하여 여호수아와 이스라엘 모든 자손에게로 가져오매 그들이 그것을 여호와 앞에 놓으니라	And they took them out of the midst of the tent, and brought them unto Joshua, and unto all the children of Israel, and laid them out before the Lord.	They took the things from inside the tent, brought them to Joshua and all the Israelites, and spread them out before the LORD.
JOS	7	24	여호수아가 이스라엘 모든 사람으로 더불어 세라의 아들 아간을 잡고 그 은과 외투와 금덩이와 그 아들들과 딸들과 소들과 나귀들과 양들과 장막과 무릇 그에게 속한 모든 것을 이끌고 아골 골짜기로 가서	And Joshua, and all Israel with him, took Achan the son of Zerah, and the silver, and the garment, and the wedge of gold, and his sons, and his daughters, and his oxen, and his asses, and his sheep, and his tent, and all that he had: and they brought them unto the valley of Achor.	Then Joshua, together with all Israel, took Achan son of Zerah, the silver, the cloak, the bar of gold, his sons and daughters, his oxen and donkeys and sheep, his tent, and everything else he owned, and brought them to the Valley of Achor.
JOS	7	25	여호수아가 가로되 네가 어찌하여 우리를 괴롭게 하였느뇨 여호와께서 오늘날 너를 괴롭게 하시리라 하니 온 이스라엘이 그를 돌로 치고 그것들도 돌로 치고 불사르고	And Joshua said, Why hast thou troubled us? the Lord shall trouble thee this day. And all Israel stoned him with stones, and burned them with fire, after they had stoned them with stones.	“Why have you brought this trouble upon us?” said Joshua. “Today the LORD will bring trouble upon you!” And all Israel stoned him to death. Then they stoned the others and burned their bodies.
JOS	7	26	그 위에 돌 무더기를 크게 쌓았더니 오늘날까지 있더라 여호와께서 그 극렬한 분노를 그치시니 그러므로 그곳 이름을 오늘날까지 아골 골짜기라 부르더라	And they raised over him a great heap of stones unto this day. So the Lord turned from the fierceness of his anger. Wherefore the name of that place was called, The valley of Achor, unto this day.	And they heaped over Achan a large pile of rocks that remains to this day. So the LORD turned from His burning anger. Therefore that place is called the Valley of Achor to this day.
JOS	8	1	여호와께서 여호수아에게 이르시되 두려워 말라 놀라지 말라 군사를 다 거느리고 일어나 아이로 올라가라 보라 내가 아이 왕과 그 백성과 그 성읍과 그 땅을 다 네 손에 주었노니	And the Lord said unto Joshua, Fear not, neither be thou dismayed: take all the people of war with thee, and arise, go up to Ai: see, I have given into thy hand the king of Ai, and his people, and his city, and his land:	Then the LORD said to Joshua, “Do not be afraid or discouraged. Take the whole army with you, and go up and attack Ai. See, I have delivered into your hand the king of Ai, his people, his city, and his land.
JOS	8	2	너는 여리고와 그 왕에게 행한 것 같이 아이와 그 왕에게 행하되 오직 거기서 탈취할 물건과 가축은 스스로 취하라 너는 성 뒤에 복병할지니라	And thou shalt do to Ai and her king as thou didst unto Jericho and her king: only the spoil thereof, and the cattle thereof, shall ye take for a prey unto yourselves: lay thee an ambush for the city behind it.	And you shall do to Ai and its king as you did to Jericho and its king, except that you may carry off their plunder and livestock for yourselves. Set up an ambush behind the city.”
JOS	8	3	이에 여호수아가 일어나서 군사와 함께 아이로 올라가려 하여 용사 삼만 명을 뽑아 밤에 보내며	So Joshua arose, and all the people of war, to go up against Ai: and Joshua chose out thirty thousand mighty men of valour, and sent them away by night.	So Joshua and the whole army set out to attack Ai. Joshua chose 30,000 mighty men of valor and sent them out at night
JOS	8	4	그들에게 명하여 가로되 너희는 성읍 뒤로 가서 성읍을 향하고 매복하되 그 성읍에 너무 멀리 하지 말고 다 스스로 예비하라	And he commanded them, saying, Behold, ye shall lie in wait against the city, even behind the city: go not very far from the city, but be ye all ready:	with these orders: “Pay attention. You are to lie in ambush behind the city, not too far from it. All of you must be ready.
JOS	8	5	나와 나를 좇는 모든 백성은 다 성읍으로 가까이 가리니 그들이 처음과 같이 우리에게로 쳐 올라올 것이라 그리할 때에 우리가 그들 앞에서 도망하면	And I, and all the people that are with me, will approach unto the city: and it shall come to pass, when they come out against us, as at the first, that we will flee before them,	Then I and all the troops with me will advance on the city. When they come out against us as they did the first time, we will flee from them.
JOS	8	6	그들이 나와서 우리를 따르며 스스로 이르기를 그들이 처음과 같이 우리 앞에서 도망한다 하고 우리의 유인을 받아 그 성읍에서 멀리 떠날 것이라 우리가 그 앞에서 도망하거든	(For they will come out after us) till we have drawn them from the city; for they will say, They flee before us, as at the first: therefore we will flee before them.	They will pursue us until we have drawn them away from the city, for they will say, ‘The Israelites are running away from us as they did before.’ So as we flee from them,
JOS	8	7	너희는 매복한 곳에서 일어나서 그 성읍을 점령하라 너희 하나님 여호와께서 너희 손에 붙이시리라	Then ye shall rise up from the ambush, and seize upon the city: for the Lord your God will deliver it into your hand.	you are to rise from the ambush and seize the city, for the LORD your God will deliver it into your hand.
JOS	8	8	너희가 성읍을 취하거든 그것을 불살라 여호와의 말씀대로 행하라 보라 내가 너희에게 명하였느니라 하고	And it shall be, when ye have taken the city, that ye shall set the city on fire: according to the commandment of the Lord shall ye do. See, I have commanded you.	And when you have taken the city, set it on fire. Do as the LORD has commanded! See, I have given you orders.”
JOS	8	9	그들을 보내매 그들이 복병할 곳으로 가서 아이 서편 벧엘과 아이 사이에 매복하였고 여호수아는 그 밤에 백성 가운데서 잤더라	Joshua therefore sent them forth: and they went to lie in ambush, and abode between Beth–el and Ai, on the west side of Ai: but Joshua lodged that night among the people.	So Joshua sent them out, and they went to the place of ambush and lay in wait between Bethel and Ai, to the west of Ai. But Joshua spent that night among the people.
JOS	8	10	여호수아가 아침에 일찍이 일어나서 백성을 점고하고 이스라엘 장로들로 더불어 백성 앞서 아이로 올라가매	And Joshua rose up early in the morning, and numbered the people, and went up, he and the elders of Israel, before the people to Ai.	Joshua got up early the next morning and mobilized his men, and he and the elders of Israel marched before them up to Ai.
JOS	8	11	그를 좇은 군사가 다 올라가서 성읍 앞에 가까이 이르러 아이 북편에 진치니 그와 아이 사이에는 한 골짜기가 있었더라	And all the people, even the people of war that were with him, went up, and drew nigh, and came before the city, and pitched on the north side of Ai: now there was a valley between them and Ai.	Then all the troops who were with him marched up and approached the city. They arrived in front of Ai and camped to the north of it, with the valley between them and the city.
JOS	8	12	그가 오천 명 가량을 택하여 성읍 서편 벧엘과 아이 사이에 또 매복시키니	And he took about five thousand men, and set them to lie in ambush between Beth–el and Ai, on the west side of the city.	Now Joshua had taken about five thousand men and set up an ambush between Bethel and Ai, to the west of the city.
JOS	8	13	이와 같이 성읍 북편에는 온 군대가 있고 성읍 서편에는 복병이 있었더라 여호수아가 그 밤에 골짜기 가운데로 들어가니	And when they had set the people, even all the host that was on the north of the city, and their liers in wait on the west of the city, Joshua went that night into the midst of the valley.	So the forces were stationed with the main camp to the north of the city and the rear guard to the west of the city. And that night Joshua went into the valley.
JOS	8	14	아이 왕이 이를 보고 그 성읍 백성과 함께 일찍이 일어나서 급히 나가 아라바 앞에 이르러 정한 때에 이스라엘과 싸우려 하고 성읍 뒤에 복병이 있는 줄은 알지 못하였더라	And it came to pass, when the king of Ai saw it, that they hasted and rose up early, and the men of the city went out against Israel to battle, he and all his people, at a time appointed, before the plain; but he wist not that there were liers in ambush against him behind the city.	When the king of Ai saw the Israelites, he hurried out early in the morning with the men of the city to engage them in battle at an appointed place overlooking the Arabah. But he did not know that an ambush had been set up against him behind the city.
JOS	8	15	여호수아와 온 이스라엘이 그들 앞에서 거짓 패하여 광야 길로 도망하매	And Joshua and all Israel made as if they were beaten before them, and fled by the way of the wilderness.	Joshua and all Israel let themselves be beaten back before them, and they fled toward the wilderness.
JOS	8	16	그 성 모든 백성이 그들을 따르려고 모여서 여호수아를 따르며 유인함을 입어 성을 멀리 떠나니	And all the people that were in Ai were called together to pursue after them: and they pursued after Joshua, and were drawn away from the city.	Then all the men of Ai were summoned to pursue them, and they followed Joshua and were drawn away from the city.
JOS	8	17	아이와 벧엘에 이스라엘을 따라가지 아니한 자가 하나도 없으며 성문을 열어 놓고 이스라엘을 따랐더라	And there was not a man left in Ai or Beth–el, that went not out after Israel: and they left the city open, and pursued after Israel.	Not a man was left in Ai or Bethel who did not go out after Israel, leaving the city wide open while they pursued Israel.
JOS	8	18	여호와께서 여호수아에게 이르시되 네 손에 잡은 단창을 들어 아이를 가리키라 내가 이 성읍을 네 손에 주리라 여호수아가 그 손에 잡은 단창을 들어 성읍을 가리키니	And the Lord said unto Joshua, Stretch out the spear that is in thy hand toward Ai; for I will give it into thine hand. And Joshua stretched out the spear that he had in his hand toward the city.	Then the LORD said to Joshua, “Hold out your battle lance toward Ai, for into your hand I will deliver the city.” So Joshua held out his battle lance toward Ai,
JOS	8	19	그 손을 드는 순간에 복병이 그 처소에서 급히 일어나 성읍에 달려 들어가서 점령하고 곧 성읍에 불을 놓았더라	And the ambush arose quickly out of their place, and they ran as soon as he had stretched out his hand: and they entered into the city, and took it, and hasted and set the city on fire.	and as soon as he did so, the men in ambush rose quickly from their position. They rushed forward, entered the city, captured it, and immediately set it on fire.
JOS	8	20	아이 사람이 뒤를 돌아본즉 그 성읍에 연기가 하늘에 닿은 것이 보이니 이 길로도 저 길로도 도망할 수 없이 되었고 광야로 도망하던 이스라엘 백성은 그 따르던 자에게로 돌이켰더라	And when the men of Ai looked behind them, they saw, and, behold, the smoke of the city ascended up to heaven, and they had no power to flee this way or that way: and the people that fled to the wilderness turned back upon the pursuers.	When the men of Ai turned and looked back, the smoke of the city was rising into the sky. They could not escape in any direction, and the troops who had fled to the wilderness now became the pursuers.
JOS	8	21	여호수아와 온 이스라엘이 그 복병이 성읍을 점령함과 성읍에 연기가 오름을 보고 다시 돌이켜 아이 사람을 죽이고	And when Joshua and all Israel saw that the ambush had taken the city, and that the smoke of the city ascended, then they turned again, and slew the men of Ai.	When Joshua and all Israel saw that the men in ambush had captured the city and that smoke was rising from it, they turned around and struck down the men of Ai.
JOS	8	22	복병도 성읍에서 나와 그들을 치매 그들이 이스라엘 중간에 든지라 혹은 이 편에서 혹은 저 편에서 쳐 죽여서 한 사람도 남거나 도망하지 못하게 하였고	And the other issued out of the city against them; so they were in the midst of Israel, some on this side, and some on that side: and they smote them, so that they let none of them remain or escape.	Meanwhile, those in the ambush came out of the city against them, and the men of Ai were trapped between the Israelite forces on both sides. So Israel struck them down until no survivor or fugitive remained.
JOS	8	23	아이 왕을 사로잡아 여호수아 앞으로 끌어왔더라	And the king of Ai they took alive, and brought him to Joshua.	But they took the king of Ai alive and brought him to Joshua.
JOS	8	24	이스라엘이 자기를 광야로 따르던 아이 모든 거민을 들에서 죽이되 그들을 다 칼날에 엎드러지게 하여 진멸하기를 마치고 온 이스라엘이 아이로 돌아와서 칼날로 죽이매	And it came to pass, when Israel had made an end of slaying all the inhabitants of Ai in the field, in the wilderness wherein they chased them, and when they were all fallen on the edge of the sword, until they were consumed, that all the Israelites returned unto Ai, and smote it with the edge of the sword.	When Israel had finished killing all the men of Ai who had pursued them into the field and wilderness, and when every last one of them had fallen by the sword, all the Israelites returned to Ai and put it to the sword as well.
JOS	8	25	그 날에 아이 사람의 전부가 죽었으니 남녀가 일만 이천이라	And so it was, that all that fell that day, both of men and women, were twelve thousand, even all the men of Ai.	A total of twelve thousand men and women fell that day—all the people of Ai.
JOS	8	26	아이 거민을 진멸하기까지 여호수아가 단창을 잡아 든 손을 거두지 아니하였고	For Joshua drew not his hand back, wherewith he stretched out the spear, until he had utterly destroyed all the inhabitants of Ai.	Joshua did not draw back the hand that held his battle lance until he had devoted to destruction all who lived in Ai.
JOS	8	27	오직 그 성읍의 가축과 노략한 것은 여호와께서 여호수아에게 명하신 대로 이스라엘이 탈취하였더라	Only the cattle and the spoil of that city Israel took for a prey unto themselves, according unto the word of the Lord which he commanded Joshua.	Israel took for themselves only the cattle and plunder of that city, as the LORD had commanded Joshua.
JOS	8	28	이에 여호수아가 아이를 불살라 그것으로 영원한 무더기를 만들었더니 오늘까지 황폐하였으며	And Joshua burnt Ai, and made it an heap for ever, even a desolation unto this day.	So Joshua burned Ai and made it a permanent heap of ruins, a desolation to this day.
JOS	8	29	그가 또 아이 왕을 저녁 때까지 나무에 달았다가 해 질 때에 명하여 그 시체를 나무에서 내려 그 성문 어귀에 던지고 그 위에 돌로 큰 무더기를 쌓았더니 그것이 오늘까지 있더라	And the king of Ai he hanged on a tree until eventide: and as soon as the sun was down, Joshua commanded that they should take his carcase down from the tree, and cast it at the entering of the gate of the city, and raise thereon a great heap of stones, that remaineth unto this day.	He hung the king of Ai on a tree until evening, and at sunset Joshua commanded that they take down the body from the tree and throw it down at the entrance of the city gate. And over it they raised a large pile of rocks, which remains to this day.
JOS	8	30	때에 여호수아가 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와를 위하여 에발 산에 한 단을 쌓았으니	Then Joshua built an altar unto the Lord God of Israel in mount Ebal,	At that time Joshua built an altar on Mount Ebal to the LORD, the God of Israel,
JOS	8	31	이는 여호와의 종 모세가 이스라엘 자손에게 명한것과 모세의 율법책에 기록된 대로 철 연장으로 다듬지 아니한 새 돌로 만든 단이라 무리가 여호와께 번제와 화목제를 그 위에 드렸으며	As Moses the servant of the Lord commanded the children of Israel, as it is written in the book of the law of Moses, an altar of whole stones, over which no man hath lift up any iron: and they offered thereon burnt offerings unto the Lord, and sacrificed peace offerings.	just as Moses the servant of the LORD had commanded the Israelites. He built it according to what is written in the Book of the Law of Moses: “an altar of uncut stones on which no iron tool has been used.” And on it they offered burnt offerings to the LORD, and they sacrificed peace offerings.
JOS	8	32	여호수아가 거기서 모세의 기록한 율법을 이스라엘 자손의 목전에서 그 돌에 기록하매	And he wrote there upon the stones a copy of the law of Moses, which he wrote in the presence of the children of Israel.	And there in the presence of the Israelites, Joshua inscribed on the stones a copy of the law of Moses, which he had written.
JOS	8	33	온 이스라엘과 그 장로들과 유사들과 재판장들과 본토인뿐 아니라 이방인까지 여호와의 언약궤를 멘 레위 사람 제사장들 앞에서 궤의 좌우에 서되 절반은 그리심 산 앞에, 절반은 에발 산 앞에 섰으니 이는 이왕에 여호와의 종 모세가 이스라엘 백성에게 축복하라고 명한 대로 함이라	And all Israel, and their elders, and officers, and their judges, stood on this side the ark and on that side before the priests the Levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord, as well the stranger, as he that was born among them; half of them over against mount Gerizim, and half of them over against mount Ebal; as Moses the servant of the Lord had commanded before, that they should bless the people of Israel.	All Israel, foreigners and citizens alike, with their elders, officers, and judges, stood on both sides of the ark of the covenant of the LORD facing the Levitical priests who carried it. Half of the people stood in front of Mount Gerizim and half of them in front of Mount Ebal, as Moses the servant of the LORD had commanded earlier, to bless the people of Israel.
JOS	8	34	그 후에 여호수아가 무릇 율법책에 기록된 대로 축복과 저주하는 율법의 모든 말씀을 낭독하였으니	And afterward he read all the words of the law, the blessings and cursings, according to all that is written in the book of the law.	Afterward, Joshua read aloud all the words of the law—the blessings and the curses—according to all that is written in the Book of the Law.
JOS	8	35	모세의 명한 것은 여호수아가 이스라엘 온 회중과 여인과 아이와 그들 중에 동거하는 객들 앞에 낭독하지 아니한 말이 하나도 없었더라	There was not a word of all that Moses commanded, which Joshua read not before all the congregation of Israel, with the women, and the little ones, and the strangers that were conversant among them.	There was not a word of all that Moses had commanded that Joshua failed to read before the whole assembly of Israel, including the women, the little ones, and the foreigners who lived among them.
JOS	9	1	요단 서편 산지와 평지와 레바논 앞 대 해변에 있는 헷 사람과 아모리 사람과 가나안 사람과 브리스 사람과 히위 사람과 여부스 사람의 모든 왕이 이 일을 듣고	And it came to pass, when all the kings which were on this side Jordan, in the hills, and in the valleys, and in all the coasts of the great sea over against Lebanon, the Hittite, and the Amorite, the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, heard thereof;	Now when news of this reached all the kings west of the Jordan—those in the hill country, the foothills, and all along the coast of the Great Sea toward Lebanon (the Hittites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites)—
JOS	9	2	모여서 일심으로 여호수아와 이스라엘로 더불어 싸우려 하더라	That they gathered themselves together, to fight with Joshua and with Israel, with one accord.	they came together to wage war against Joshua and Israel.
JOS	9	3	기브온 거민들이 여호수아의 여리고와 아이에 행한 일을 듣고	And when the inhabitants of Gibeon heard what Joshua had done unto Jericho and to Ai,	But the people of Gibeon, having heard what Joshua had done to Jericho and Ai,
JOS	9	4	꾀를 내어 사신의 모양을 꾸미되 해어진 전대와 해어지고 찢어져서 기운 가죽 포도주 부대를 나귀에 싣고	They did work wilily, and went and made as if they had been ambassadors, and took old sacks upon their asses, and wine bottles, old, and rent, and bound up;	acted deceptively and set out as envoys, carrying on their donkeys worn-out sacks and old wineskins, cracked and mended.
JOS	9	5	그 발에는 낡아 기운 신을 신고 낡은 옷을 입고 다 마르고 곰팡이 난 떡을 예비하고	And old shoes and clouted upon their feet, and old garments upon them; and all the bread of their provision was dry and mouldy.	They put worn, patched sandals on their feet and threadbare clothing on their bodies, and their whole supply of bread was dry and moldy.
JOS	9	6	그들이 길갈 진으로 와서 여호수아에게 이르러 그와 이스라엘 사람들에게 이르되 우리는 원방에서 왔나이다 이제 우리와 약조하사이다	And they went to Joshua unto the camp at Gilgal, and said unto him, and to the men of Israel, We be come from a far country: now therefore make ye a league with us.	They went to Joshua in the camp at Gilgal and said to him and the men of Israel, “We have come from a distant land; please make a treaty with us.”
JOS	9	7	이스라엘 사람들이 히위 사람들에게 이르되 너희가 우리 중에 거하는 듯하니 우리가 어떻게 너희와 약조할 수 있으랴	And the men of Israel said unto the Hivites, Peradventure ye dwell among us; and how shall we make a league with you?	But the men of Israel said to the Hivites, “Perhaps you dwell near us. How can we make a treaty with you?”
JOS	9	8	그들이 여호수아에게 이르되 우리는 당신의 종이니이다 여호수아가 그들에게 묻되 너희는 누구며 어디서 왔느뇨	And they said unto Joshua, We are thy servants. And Joshua said unto them, Who are ye? and from whence come ye?	“We are your servants,” they said to Joshua. Then Joshua asked them, “Who are you and where have you come from?”
JOS	9	9	그들이 여호수아에게 대답하되 종들은 당신의 하나님 여호와의 이름을 인하여 심히 먼 지방에서 왔사오니 이는 우리가 그의 명성과 그가 애굽에서 행하신 모든 일을 들으며	And they said unto him, From a very far country thy servants are come because of the name of the Lord thy God: for we have heard the fame of him, and all that he did in Egypt,	“Your servants have come from a very distant land,” they replied, “because of the fame of the LORD your God. For we have heard the reports about Him: all that He did in Egypt,
JOS	9	10	또 그가 요단 동편에 있는 아모리 사람의 두 왕 곧 헤스본 왕 시혼과 아스다롯에 있는 바산 왕 옥에게 행하신 모든 일을 들었음이니이다	And all that he did to the two kings of the Amorites, that were beyond Jordan, to Sihon king of Heshbon, and to Og king of Bashan, which was at Ashtaroth.	and all that He did to the two kings of the Amorites beyond the Jordan—Sihon king of Heshbon and Og king of Bashan, who reigned in Ashtaroth.
JOS	9	11	그러므로 우리 장로들과 우리 나라의 모든 거민이 우리에게 일러 가로되 너희는 여행할 양식을 손에 가지고 가서 그들을 맞아서 그들에게 이르기를 우리는 당신들의 종이니 청컨대 이제 우리와 약조하사이다 하라 하였나이다	Wherefore our elders and all the inhabitants of our country spake to us, saying, Take victuals with you for the journey, and go to meet them, and say unto them, We are your servants: therefore now make ye a league with us.	So the elders and inhabitants of our land told us, ‘Take provisions for your journey; go to meet them and say to them: We are your servants. Please make a treaty with us.’
JOS	9	12	우리의 이 떡은 우리가 당신들에게로 오려고 떠나던 날에 우리들의 집에서 오히려 뜨거운 것을 양식으로 취하였더니 보소서 이제 말랐고 곰팡이 났으며	This our bread we took hot for our provision out of our houses on the day we came forth to go unto you; but now, behold, it is dry, and it is mouldy:	This bread of ours was warm when we packed it at home on the day we left to come to you. But take a look, it is now dry and moldy.
JOS	9	13	또 우리가 포도주를 담은 이 가죽 부대도 새 것이더니 찢어지게 되었으며 우리의 이 옷과 신도 여행이 심히 길므로 인하여 낡아졌나이다 한지라	And these bottles of wine, which we filled, were new; and, behold, they be rent: and these our garments and our shoes are become old by reason of the very long journey.	These wineskins were new when we filled them, but look, they are cracked. And these clothes and sandals are worn out from our very long journey.”
JOS	9	14	무리가 그들의 양식을 취하고 어떻게 할 것을 여호와께 묻지 아니하고	And the men took of their victuals, and asked not counsel at the mouth of the Lord.	Then the men of Israel sampled their provisions, but did not seek the counsel of the LORD.
JOS	9	15	여호수아가 곧 그들과 화친하여 그들을 살리리라는 언약을 맺고 회중 족장들이 그들에게 맹세하였더라	And Joshua made peace with them, and made a league with them, to let them live: and the princes of the congregation sware unto them.	And Joshua made a treaty of peace with them to let them live, and the leaders of the congregation swore an oath to them.
JOS	9	16	그들과 언약을 맺은 후 삼 일이 지나서야 그들은 근린에 있어 자기들 중에 거주하는 자라 함을 들으니라	And it came to pass at the end of three days after they had made a league with them, that they heard that they were their neighbours, and that they dwelt among them.	Three days after they had made the treaty with the Gibeonites, the Israelites learned that they were neighbors, living among them.
JOS	9	17	이스라엘 자손이 진행하여 제삼일에 그들의 여러 성읍에 이르렀으니 그 성읍은 기브온과 그비라와 브에롯과 기럇여아림이라	And the children of Israel journeyed, and came unto their cities on the third day. Now their cities were Gibeon, and Chephirah, and Beeroth, and Kirjath–jearim.	So the Israelites set out and on the third day arrived at their cities—Gibeon, Chephirah, Beeroth, and Kiriath-jearim.
JOS	9	18	그러나 회중 족장들이 이스라엘 하나님 여호와로 그들에게 맹세한 고로 이스라엘 자손이 그들을 치지 못한지라 그러므로 회중이 다 족장들을 원망하니	And the children of Israel smote them not, because the princes of the congregation had sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel. And all the congregation murmured against the princes.	But the Israelites did not attack them, because the leaders of the congregation had sworn an oath to them by the LORD, the God of Israel. And the whole congregation grumbled against the leaders.
JOS	9	19	모든 족장이 온 회중에게 이르되 우리가 이스라엘 하나님 여호와로 그들에게 맹세하였은즉 이제 그들을 건드리지 못하리라	But all the princes said unto all the congregation, We have sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel: now therefore we may not touch them.	All the leaders answered, “We have sworn an oath to them by the LORD, the God of Israel, and now we cannot touch them.
JOS	9	20	우리가 그들에게 맹세한 맹약을 인하여 진노가 우리에게 임할까 하노니 이렇게 행하여 그들을 살리리라 하고	This we will do to them; we will even let them live, lest wrath be upon us, because of the oath which we sware unto them.	This is how we will treat them: We will let them live, so that no wrath will fall on us because of the oath we swore to them.”
JOS	9	21	무리에게 이르되 그들을 살리라 하니 족장들이 그들에게 이른 대로 그들이 온 회중을 위하여 나무 패며 물 긷는 자가 되었더라	And the princes said unto them, Let them live; but let them be hewers of wood and drawers of water unto all the congregation; as the princes had promised them.	They continued, “Let them live, but let them be woodcutters and water carriers for the whole congregation.” So the leaders kept their promise.
JOS	9	22	여호수아가 그들을 불러다가 일러 가로되 너희가 우리 가운데 거주하거늘 어찌하여 우리는 너희에게서 심히 멀다 하여 우리를 속였느냐	And Joshua called for them, and he spake unto them, saying, Wherefore have ye beguiled us, saying, We are very far from you; when ye dwell among us?	Then Joshua summoned the Gibeonites and said, “Why did you deceive us by telling us you live far away from us, when in fact you live among us?
JOS	9	23	그러므로 너희가 저주를 받나니 너희가 영영히 종이 되어서 다 내 하나님의 집을 위하여 나무 패며 물 긷는 자가 되리라	Now therefore ye are cursed, and there shall none of you be freed from being bondmen, and hewers of wood and drawers of water for the house of my God.	Now therefore you are under a curse and will perpetually serve as woodcutters and water carriers for the house of my God.”
JOS	9	24	그들이 여호수아에게 대답하여 가로되 당신의 하나님 여호와께서 그 종 모세에게 명하사 이 땅을 다 당신들에게 주고 이 땅 모든 거민을 당신들의 앞에서 멸하라 하신 것이 당신의 종에게 분명히 들리므로 당신들을 인하여 우리 생명을 잃을까 심히 두려워하여 이같이 하였나이다	And they answered Joshua, and said, Because it was certainly told thy servants, how that the Lord thy God commanded his servant Moses to give you all the land, and to destroy all the inhabitants of the land from before you, therefore we were sore afraid of our lives because of you, and have done this thing.	The Gibeonites answered, “Your servants were told clearly that the LORD your God had commanded His servant Moses to give you all the land and wipe out all its inhabitants before you. So we greatly feared for our lives because of you, and that is why we have done this.
JOS	9	25	보소서 이제 우리가 당신의 손에 있으니 당신의 의향에 좋고 옳은 대로 우리에게 행하소서 한지라	And now, behold, we are in thine hand: as it seemeth good and right unto thee to do unto us, do.	Now we are in your hands. Do to us whatever seems good and right to you.”
JOS	9	26	여호수아가 곧 그대로 그들에게 행하여 그들을 이스라엘 자손의 손에서 건져서 죽이지 못하게 하니라	And so did he unto them, and delivered them out of the hand of the children of Israel, that they slew them not.	So Joshua did this and delivered them from the hands of the Israelites, and they did not kill the Gibeonites.
JOS	9	27	그 날에 여호수아가 그들로 여호와의 택하신 곳에서 회중을 위하며 여호와의 단을 위하여 나무 패며 물 긷는 자를 삼았더니 오늘까지 이르니라	And Joshua made them that day hewers of wood and drawers of water for the congregation, and for the altar of the Lord, even unto this day, in the place which he should choose.	On that day he made them woodcutters and water carriers, as they are to this day for the congregation of the LORD and for the altar at the place He would choose.
JOS	10	1	여호수아가 아이를 취하여 진멸하되 여리고와 그 왕에게 행한 것 같이 아이와 그 왕에게 행한 것과 또 기브온 거민이 이스라엘과 화친하여 그 중에 있다함을 예루살렘 왕 아도니세덱이 듣고	Now it came to pass, when Adoni–zedek king of Jerusalem had heard how Joshua had taken Ai, and had utterly destroyed it; as he had done to Jericho and her king, so he had done to Ai and her king; and how the inhabitants of Gibeon had made peace with Israel, and were among them;	Now Adoni-zedek king of Jerusalem heard that Joshua had captured Ai and devoted it to destruction—doing to Ai and its king as he had done to Jericho and its king—and that the people of Gibeon had made peace with Israel and were living near them.
JOS	10	2	크게 두려워하였으니 이는 기브온은 왕도와 같은 큰 성임이요 아이보다 크고 그 사람들은 다 강함이라	That they feared greatly, because Gibeon was a great city, as one of the royal cities, and because it was greater than Ai, and all the men thereof were mighty.	So Adoni-zedek and his people were greatly alarmed, because Gibeon was a great city, like one of the royal cities; it was larger than Ai, and all its men were mighty.
JOS	10	3	예루살렘 왕 아도니세덱이 헤브론 왕 호함과 야르뭇 왕 비람과 라기스 왕 야비아와 에글론 왕 드빌에게 보내어 가로되	Wherefore Adoni–zedek king of Jerusalem sent unto Hoham king of Hebron, and unto Piram king of Jarmuth, and unto Japhia king of Lachish, and unto Debir king of Eglon, saying,	Therefore Adoni-zedek king of Jerusalem sent word to Hoham king of Hebron, Piram king of Jarmuth, Japhia king of Lachish, and Debir king of Eglon, saying,
JOS	10	4	내게로 올라와 나를 도우라 우리가 기브온을 치자 이는 기브온이 여호수아와 이스라엘 자손으로 더불어 화친하였음이니라 하매	Come up unto me, and help me, that we may smite Gibeon: for it hath made peace with Joshua and with the children of Israel.	“Come up and help me. We will attack Gibeon, because they have made peace with Joshua and the Israelites.”
JOS	10	5	이러므로 아모리 다섯 왕 곧 예루살렘 왕과 헤브론 왕과 야르뭇 왕과 라기스 왕과 에글론 왕이 함께 모여 자기들의 모든 군대를 거느리고 올라와서 기브온에 대진하고 싸우니라	Therefore the five kings of the Amorites, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, the king of Eglon, gathered themselves together, and went up, they and all their hosts, and encamped before Gibeon, and made war against it.	So the five kings of the Amorites—the kings of Jerusalem, Hebron, Jarmuth, Lachish, and Eglon—joined forces and advanced with all their armies. They camped before Gibeon and made war against it.
JOS	10	6	기브온 사람들이 길갈 진에 보내어 여호수아에게 전언하되 당신의 종들 돕기를 더디게 마시고 속히 우리에게 올라와서 우리를 구조하소서 산지에 거하는 아모리 사람의 왕들이 다 모여 우리를 치나이다 하매	And the men of Gibeon sent unto Joshua to the camp to Gilgal, saying, Slack not thy hand from thy servants; come up to us quickly, and save us, and help us: for all the kings of the Amorites that dwell in the mountains are gathered together against us.	Then the men of Gibeon sent word to Joshua in the camp at Gilgal: “Do not abandon your servants. Come quickly and save us! Help us, because all the kings of the Amorites from the hill country have joined forces against us.”
JOS	10	7	여호수아가 모든 군사와 용사로 더불어 길갈에서 올라가니라	So Joshua ascended from Gilgal, he, and all the people of war with him, and all the mighty men of valour.	So Joshua and his whole army, including all the mighty men of valor, came from Gilgal.
JOS	10	8	때에 여호와께서 여호수아에게 이르시되 그들을 두려워 말라 내가 그들을 네 손에 붙였으니 그들의 한 사람도 너를 당할 자 없으리라 하신지라	And the Lord said unto Joshua, Fear them not: for I have delivered them into thine hand; there shall not a man of them stand before thee.	The LORD said to Joshua, “Do not be afraid of them, for I have delivered them into your hand. Not one of them shall stand against you.”
JOS	10	9	여호수아가 길갈에서 밤새도록 올라가서 그들에게 갑자기 이르니	Joshua therefore came unto them suddenly, and went up from Gilgal all night.	After marching all night from Gilgal, Joshua caught them by surprise.
JOS	10	10	여호와께서 그들을 이스라엘 앞에서 패하게 하시므로 여호수아가 그들을 기브온에서 크게 도륙하고 벧호론에 올라가는 비탈에서 추격하여 아세가와 막게다까지 이르니라	And the Lord discomfited them before Israel, and slew them with a great slaughter at Gibeon, and chased them along the way that goeth up to Beth–horon, and smote them to Azekah, and unto Makkedah.	And the LORD threw them into confusion before Israel, who defeated them in a great slaughter at Gibeon, pursued them along the ascent to Beth-horon, and struck them down as far as Azekah and Makkedah.
JOS	10	11	그들이 이스라엘 앞에서 도망하여 벧호론의 비탈에서 내려갈 때에 여호와께서 하늘에서 큰 덩이 우박을 아세가에 이르기까지 내리우시매 그들이 죽었으니 이스라엘 자손의 칼에 죽은 자보다 우박에 죽은 자가 더욱 많았더라	And it came to pass, as they fled from before Israel, and were in the going down to Beth–horon, that the Lord cast down great stones from heaven upon them unto Azekah, and they died: they were more which died with hailstones than they whom the children of Israel slew with the sword.	As they fled before Israel along the descent from Beth-horon to Azekah, the LORD cast down on them large hailstones from the sky, and more of them were killed by the hailstones than by the swords of the Israelites.
JOS	10	12	여호와께서 아모리 사람을 이스라엘 자손에게 붙이시던 날에 여호수아가 여호와께 고하되 이스라엘 목전에서 가로되 태양아 너는 기브온 위에 머무르라 달아 너도 아얄론 골짜기에 그리할지어다 하매	Then spake Joshua to the Lord in the day when the Lord delivered up the Amorites before the children of Israel, and he said in the sight of Israel, Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon; and thou, Moon, in the valley of Ajalon.	On the day that the LORD gave the Amorites over to the Israelites, Joshua spoke to the LORD in the presence of Israel: “O sun, stand still over Gibeon, O moon, over the Valley of Aijalon.”
JOS	10	13	태양이 머물고 달이 그치기를 백성이 그 대적에게 원수를 갚도록 하였느니라 야살의 책에 기록되기를 태양이 중천에 머물러서 거의 종일토록 속히 내려가지 아니하였다 하지 아니하였느냐	And the sun stood still, and the moon stayed, until the people had avenged themselves upon their enemies. Is not this written in the book of Jasher? So the sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and hasted not to go down about a whole day.	So the sun stood still and the moon stopped until the nation took vengeance upon its enemies. Is this not written in the Book of Jashar? “So the sun stopped in the middle of the sky and delayed going down about a full day.”
JOS	10	14	여호와께서 사람의 목소리를 들으신 이 같은 날은 전에도 없었고 후에도 없었나니 이는 여호와께서 이스라엘을 위하여 싸우셨음이니라	And there was no day like that before it or after it, that the Lord hearkened unto the voice of a man: for the Lord fought for Israel.	There has been no day like it before or since, when the LORD listened to the voice of a man, because the LORD fought for Israel.
JOS	10	15	여호수아가 온 이스라엘로 더불어 길갈 진으로 돌아왔더라	And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to Gilgal.	Then Joshua returned with all Israel to the camp at Gilgal.
JOS	10	16	그 다섯 왕이 도망하여 막게다의 굴에 숨었더니	But these five kings fled, and hid themselves in a cave at Makkedah.	Now the five kings had fled and hidden in the cave at Makkedah.
JOS	10	17	혹이 여호수아에게 고하여 가로되 막게다의 굴에 그 다섯 왕의 숨은 것을 발견하였나이다	And it was told Joshua, saying, The five kings are found hid in a cave at Makkedah.	And Joshua was informed: “The five kings have been found; they are hiding in the cave at Makkedah.”
JOS	10	18	여호수아가 가로되 굴 어귀에 큰 돌을 굴려 막고 사람을 그 곁에 두어 그들을 지키게 하고	And Joshua said, Roll great stones upon the mouth of the cave, and set men by it for to keep them:	So Joshua said, “Roll large stones against the mouth of the cave, and post men there to guard them.
JOS	10	19	너희는 지체 말고 너희 대적의 뒤를 따라가 그 후군을 쳐서 그들로 자기들의 성읍에 들어가지 못하게 하라 너희 하나님 여호와께서 그들을 너희 손에 붙이셨느니라 하고	And stay ye not, but pursue after your enemies, and smite the hindmost of them; suffer them not to enter into their cities: for the Lord your God hath delivered them into your hand.	But you, do not stop there. Pursue your enemies and attack them from behind. Do not let them reach their cities, for the LORD your God has delivered them into your hand.”
JOS	10	20	여호수아와 이스라엘 자손이 그들을 크게 도륙하여 거의 진멸시켰고 그 남은 몇 사람은 견고한 성으로 들어가므로	And it came to pass, when Joshua and the children of Israel had made an end of slaying them with a very great slaughter, till they were consumed, that the rest which remained of them entered into fenced cities.	So Joshua and the Israelites continued to inflict a terrible slaughter until they had finished them off, and the remaining survivors retreated to the fortified cities.
JOS	10	21	모든 백성이 평안히 막게다 진으로 돌아와 여호수아에게 이르렀으나 혀를 놀려 이스라엘 자손을 대적하는 자가 없었더라	And all the people returned to the camp to Joshua at Makkedah in peace: none moved his tongue against any of the children of Israel.	The whole army returned safely to Joshua in the camp at Makkedah, and no one dared to utter a word against the Israelites.
JOS	10	22	때에 여호수아가 가로되 굴 어귀를 열고 그 굴에서 그 다섯 왕을 내게로 끌어내라 하매	Then said Joshua, Open the mouth of the cave, and bring out those five kings unto me out of the cave.	Then Joshua said, “Open the mouth of the cave and bring those five kings out to me.”
JOS	10	23	그들이 그대로 하여 그 다섯 왕 곧 예루살렘 왕과 헤브론 왕과 야르뭇 왕과 라기스 왕과 에글론 왕을 굴에서 그에게로 끌어내니라	And they did so, and brought forth those five kings unto him out of the cave, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and the king of Eglon.	So they brought the five kings out of the cave—the kings of Jerusalem, Hebron, Jarmuth, Lachish, and Eglon.
JOS	10	24	그 왕들을 여호수아에게로 끌어내매 여호수아가 이스라엘 모든 사람을 부르고 자기와 함께 갔던 군장들에게 이르되 가까이 와서 이 왕들의 목을 발로 밟으라 가까이 와서 그들의 목을 밟으매	And it came to pass, when they brought out those kings unto Joshua, that Joshua called for all the men of Israel, and said unto the captains of the men of war which went with him, Come near, put your feet upon the necks of these kings. And they came near, and put their feet upon the necks of them.	When they had brought the kings to Joshua, he summoned all the men of Israel and said to the army commanders who had accompanied him, “Come here and put your feet on the necks of these kings.” So the commanders came forward and put their feet on their necks.
JOS	10	25	여호수아가 군장들에게 이르되 두려워 말며 놀라지 말고 마음을 강하게 하고 담대히 하라 너희가 더불어 싸우는 모든 대적에게 여호와께서 다 이와 같이 하시리라 하고	And Joshua said unto them, Fear not, nor be dismayed, be strong and of good courage: for thus shall the Lord do to all your enemies against whom ye fight.	“Do not be afraid or discouraged,” Joshua said. “Be strong and courageous, for the LORD will do this to all the enemies you fight.”
JOS	10	26	그 후에 여호수아가 그 왕들을 쳐 죽여 다섯 나무에 매어 달고 석양까지 나무에 달린대로 두었다가	And afterward Joshua smote them, and slew them, and hanged them on five trees: and they were hanging upon the trees until the evening.	After this, Joshua struck down and killed the kings, and he hung their bodies on five trees and left them there until evening.
JOS	10	27	해 질 때에 여호수아가 명하매 그 시체를 나무에서 내리어 그들의 숨었던 굴에 들여 던지고 굴 어귀를 큰 돌로 막았더니 오늘날까지 있더라	And it came to pass at the time of the going down of the sun, that Joshua commanded, and they took them down off the trees, and cast them into the cave wherein they had been hid, and laid great stones in the cave’s mouth, which remain until this very day.	At sunset Joshua ordered that they be taken down from the trees and thrown into the cave in which they had hidden. Then large stones were placed against the mouth of the cave, and the stones are there to this day.
JOS	10	28	그 날에 여호수아가 막게다를 취하고 칼날로 그 성읍과 왕을 쳐서 그 성읍과 그 중에 있는 모든 사람을 진멸하여 한 사람도 남기지 아니하였으니 막게다 왕에게 행한 것이 여리고 왕에게 행한 것과 일반이었더라	And that day Joshua took Makkedah, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and the king thereof he utterly destroyed, them, and all the souls that were therein; he let none remain: and he did to the king of Makkedah as he did unto the king of Jericho.	On that day Joshua captured Makkedah and put it to the sword, along with its king. He devoted to destruction everyone in the city, leaving no survivors. So he did to the king of Makkedah as he had done to the king of Jericho.
JOS	10	29	여호수아가 온 이스라엘로 더불어 막게다에서 립나로 나아가서 립나와 싸우매	Then Joshua passed from Makkedah, and all Israel with him, unto Libnah, and fought against Libnah:	Then Joshua and all Israel with him moved on from Makkedah to Libnah and fought against Libnah.
JOS	10	30	여호와께서 또 그 성읍과 그 왕을 이스라엘의 손에 붙이신지라 칼날로 그 성읍과 그 중의 모든 사람을 쳐서 멸하여 한 사람도 남기지 아니하였으니 그 왕에게 행한 것이 여리고 왕에게 행한 것과 일반이었더라	And the Lord delivered it also, and the king thereof, into the hand of Israel; and he smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were therein; he let none remain in it; but did unto the king thereof as he did unto the king of Jericho.	And the LORD also delivered that city and its king into the hand of Israel, and Joshua put all the people to the sword, leaving no survivors. And he did to the king of Libnah as he had done to the king of Jericho.
JOS	10	31	여호수아가 또 온 이스라엘로 더불어 립나에서 라기스로 나아가서 대진하고 싸우더니	And Joshua passed from Libnah, and all Israel with him, unto Lachish, and encamped against it, and fought against it:	And Joshua and all Israel with him moved on from Libnah to Lachish. They laid siege to it and fought against it.
JOS	10	32	여호와께서 라기스를 이스라엘의 손에 붙이신지라 이튿날에 그 성읍을 취하고 칼날로 그것과 그 중의 모든 사람을 쳐서 멸하였으니 립나에 행한 것과 일반이었더라	And the Lord delivered Lachish into the hand of Israel, which took it on the second day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were therein, according to all that he had done to Libnah.	And the LORD delivered Lachish into the hand of Israel, and Joshua captured it on the second day. He put all the people to the sword, just as he had done to Libnah.
JOS	10	33	때에 게셀 왕 호람이 라기스를 도우려고 올라오므로 여호수아가 그와 그 백성을 쳐서 한 사람도 남기지 아니하였더라	Then Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish; and Joshua smote him and his people, until he had left him none remaining.	At that time Horam king of Gezer went to help Lachish, but Joshua struck him down along with his people, leaving no survivors.
JOS	10	34	여호수아가 온 이스라엘로 더불어 라기스에서 에글론으로 나아가서 대진하고 싸워	And from Lachish Joshua passed unto Eglon, and all Israel with him; and they encamped against it, and fought against it:	So Joshua moved on from Lachish to Eglon, and all Israel with him. They laid siege to it and fought against it.
JOS	10	35	그 날에 그 성읍을 취하고 칼날로 그것을 쳐서 그 중에 있는 모든 사람을 당일에 진멸하였으니 라기스에 행한 것과 일반이었더라	And they took it on that day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were therein he utterly destroyed that day, according to all that he had done to Lachish.	That day they captured Eglon and put it to the sword, and Joshua devoted to destruction everyone in the city, just as he had done to Lachish.
JOS	10	36	여호수아가 또 온 이스라엘로 더불어 에글론에서 헤브론으로 올라가서 싸워	And Joshua went up from Eglon, and all Israel with him, unto Hebron; and they fought against it:	Then Joshua and all Israel with him went up from Eglon to Hebron and fought against it.
JOS	10	37	그 성읍을 취하고 그것과 그 왕과 그 속한 성읍들과 그 중의 모든 사람을 칼날로 쳐서 하나도 남기지 아니하였으니 그 성읍과 그 중의 모든 사람을 진멸한 것이 에글론에 행한 것과 일반이었더라	And they took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and the king thereof, and all the cities thereof, and all the souls that were therein; he left none remaining, according to all that he had done to Eglon; but destroyed it utterly, and all the souls that were therein.	They captured it and put to the sword its king, all its villages, and all the people. Joshua left no survivors, just as he had done at Eglon; he devoted to destruction Hebron and everyone in it.
JOS	10	38	여호수아가 온 이스라엘로 더불어 돌아와서 드빌에 이르러 싸워	And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, to Debir; and fought against it:	Finally Joshua and all Israel with him turned toward Debir and fought against it.
JOS	10	39	그 성읍과 그 왕과 그 속한 성읍들을 취하고 칼날로 그 성읍을 쳐서 그 중의 모든 사람을 진멸하고 하나도 남기지 아니하였으니 드빌과 그 왕에게 행한 것이 헤브론에 행한 것과 일반이요 립나와 그 왕에게 행한 것과 일반이었더라	And he took it, and the king thereof, and all the cities thereof; and they smote them with the edge of the sword, and utterly destroyed all the souls that were therein; he left none remaining: as he had done to Hebron, so he did to Debir, and to the king thereof; as he had done also to Libnah, and to her king.	And they captured Debir, its king, and all its villages. They put them to the sword and devoted to destruction everyone in the city, leaving no survivors. Joshua did to Debir and its king as he had done to Hebron and as he had done to Libnah and its king.
JOS	10	40	이와 같이 여호수아가 온 땅 곧 산지와 남방과 평지와 경사지와 그 모든 왕을 쳐서 하나도 남기지 아니하고 무릇 호흡이 있는 자는 진멸하였으니 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와의 명하신 것과 같았더라	So Joshua smote all the country of the hills, and of the south, and of the vale, and of the springs, and all their kings: he left none remaining, but utterly destroyed all that breathed, as the Lord God of Israel commanded.	So Joshua conquered the whole region—the hill country, the Negev, the foothills, and the slopes, together with all their kings—leaving no survivors. He devoted to destruction everything that breathed, just as the LORD, the God of Israel, had commanded.
JOS	10	41	여호수아가 또 가데스 바네아에서 가사까지와 온 고센 땅을 기브온에 이르기까지 치매	And Joshua smote them from Kadesh–barnea even unto Gaza, and all the country of Goshen, even unto Gibeon.	Joshua conquered the area from Kadesh-barnea to Gaza, and the whole region of Goshen as far as Gibeon.
JOS	10	42	이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께서 이스라엘을 위하여 싸우신고로 여호수아가 이 모든 왕과 그 땅을 단번에 취하니라	And all these kings and their land did Joshua take at one time, because the Lord God of Israel fought for Israel.	And because the LORD, the God of Israel, fought for Israel, Joshua captured all these kings and their land in one campaign.
JOS	10	43	여호수아가 온 이스라엘로 더불어 길갈 진으로 돌아왔더라	And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to Gilgal.	Then Joshua returned with all Israel to the camp at Gilgal.
JOS	11	1	하솔 왕 야빈이 이 소식을 듣고 마돈 왕 요밥과 시므론 왕과 악삽 왕과	And it came to pass, when Jabin king of Hazor had heard those things, that he sent to Jobab king of Madon, and to the king of Shimron, and to the king of Achshaph,	Now when Jabin king of Hazor heard about these things, he sent word to Jobab king of Madon; to the kings of Shimron and Achshaph;
JOS	11	2	및 붑방 산지와 긴네롯 남편 아라바와 평지와 서방 돌의 높은 곳에 있는 왕들과	And to the kings that were on the north of the mountains, and of the plains south of Chinneroth, and in the valley, and in the borders of Dor on the west,	to the kings of the north in the mountains, in the Arabah south of Chinnereth, in the foothills, and in Naphoth-dor to the west;
JOS	11	3	동서편 가나안 사람과 아모리 사람과 헷 사람과 브리스 사람과 산지의 여부스 사람과 미스바 땅 헤르몬 산 아래 히위 사람들에게 사람을 보내매	And to the Canaanite on the east and on the west, and to the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Jebusite in the mountains, and to the Hivite under Hermon in the land of Mizpeh.	to the Canaanites in the east and west; to the Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, and Jebusites in the hill country; and to the Hivites at the foot of Hermon in the land of Mizpah.
JOS	11	4	그들이 그 모든 군대를 거느리고 나왔으니 민중이 많아 해변의 수다한 모래 같고 말과 병거도 심히 많았으며	And they went out, they and all their hosts with them, much people, even as the sand that is upon the sea shore in multitude, with horses and chariots very many.	So these kings came out with all their armies, a multitude as numerous as the sand on the seashore, along with a great number of horses and chariots.
JOS	11	5	이 왕들이 모여 나아와서 이스라엘과 싸우려고 메롬 물 가에 함께 진 쳤더라	And when all these kings were met together, they came and pitched together at the waters of Merom, to fight against Israel.	All these kings joined forces and encamped at the waters of Merom to fight against Israel.
JOS	11	6	여호와께서 여호수아에게 이르시되 그들을 인하여 두려워 말라 내일 이맘 때에 내가 그들을 이스라엘 앞에 붙여 몰살시키리니 너는 그들의 말 뒷발의 힘줄을 끊고 불로 그 병거를 사르라	And the Lord said unto Joshua, Be not afraid because of them: for to morrow about this time will I deliver them up all slain before Israel: thou shalt hough their horses, and burn their chariots with fire.	Then the LORD said to Joshua, “Do not be afraid of them, for by this time tomorrow I will deliver all of them slain before Israel. You are to hamstring their horses and burn up their chariots.”
JOS	11	7	이에 여호수아가 모든 군사와 함께 메롬 물 가로 가서 졸지에 습격할 때에	So Joshua came, and all the people of war with him, against them by the waters of Merom suddenly; and they fell upon them.	So by the waters of Merom, Joshua and his whole army came upon them suddenly and attacked them,
JOS	11	8	여호와께서 그들을 이스라엘의 손에 붙이신고로 그들을 격파하고 큰 시돈과 미스르봇 마임까지 쫓고 동편에서는 미스바 골짜기까지 쫓아가서 한 사람도 남기지 아니하고 쳐 죽이고	And the Lord delivered them into the hand of Israel, who smote them, and chased them unto great Zidon, and unto Misrephoth–maim, and unto the valley of Mizpeh eastward; and they smote them, until they left them none remaining.	and the LORD delivered them into the hand of Israel, who struck them down and pursued them all the way to Greater Sidon and Misrephoth-maim, and eastward as far as the Valley of Mizpeh. They struck them down, leaving no survivors.
JOS	11	9	여호수아가 여호와께서 자기에게 명하신 대로 행하여 그들의 말 뒷발의 힘줄을 끊고 불로 그 병거를 살랐더라	And Joshua did unto them as the Lord bade him: he houghed their horses, and burnt their chariots with fire.	Joshua treated them as the LORD had told him; he hamstrung their horses and burned up their chariots.
JOS	11	10	하솔은 본래 그 모든 나라의 머리였더니 그 때에 여호수아가 돌아와서 하솔을 취하고 그 왕을 칼날로 쳐 죽이고	And Joshua at that time turned back, and took Hazor, and smote the king thereof with the sword: for Hazor beforetime was the head of all those kingdoms.	At that time Joshua turned back and captured Hazor and put its king to the sword, because Hazor was formerly the head of all these kingdoms.
JOS	11	11	그 가운데 모든 사람을 칼날로 쳐서 진멸하여 호흡이 있는 자는 하나도 남기지 아니하였고 또 불로 하솔을 살랐으며	And they smote all the souls that were therein with the edge of the sword, utterly destroying them: there was not any left to breathe: and he burnt Hazor with fire.	The Israelites put everyone in Hazor to the sword, devoting them to destruction. Nothing that breathed remained, and Joshua burned down Hazor itself.
JOS	11	12	여호수아가 그 왕들의 모든 성읍과 그 모든 왕을 취하여 칼날로 쳐서 진멸하여 여호와의 종 모세의 명한 것과 같이 하였으되	And all the cities of those kings, and all the kings of them, did Joshua take, and smote them with the edge of the sword, and he utterly destroyed them, as Moses the servant of the Lord commanded.	Joshua captured all these kings and their cities and put them to the sword. He devoted them to destruction, as Moses the LORD’s servant had commanded.
JOS	11	13	여호수아가 하솔만 불살랐고 산 위에 건축된 성읍들은 이스라엘이 불사르지 아니하였으며	But as for the cities that stood still in their strength, Israel burned none of them, save Hazor only; that did Joshua burn.	Yet Israel did not burn any of the cities built on their mounds, except Hazor, which Joshua burned.
JOS	11	14	이 성읍들의 모든 재물과 가축은 이스라엘 자손들이 탈취하고 모든 사람은 칼날로 쳐서 진멸하여 호흡이 있는 자는 하나도 남기지 아니하였으니	And all the spoil of these cities, and the cattle, the children of Israel took for a prey unto themselves; but every man they smote with the edge of the sword, until they had destroyed them, neither left they any to breathe.	The Israelites took for themselves all the plunder and livestock of these cities, but they put all the people to the sword until they had completely destroyed them, not sparing anyone who breathed.
JOS	11	15	여호와께서 그 종 모세에게 명하신 것을 모세는 여호수아에게 명하였고 여호수아는 그대로 행하여 여호와께서 무릇 모세에게 명하신 것을 하나도 행치 아니한 것이 없었더라	As the Lord commanded Moses his servant, so did Moses command Joshua, and so did Joshua; he left nothing undone of all that the Lord commanded Moses.	As the LORD had commanded His servant Moses, so Moses commanded Joshua. That is what Joshua did, leaving nothing undone of all that the LORD had commanded Moses.
JOS	11	16	여호수아가 이같이 그 온 땅 곧 산지와 온 남방과 고센 온 땅과 평지와 아라바와 이스라엘의 산지와 그 평지를 취하였으니	So Joshua took all that land, the hills, and all the south country, and all the land of Goshen, and the valley, and the plain, and the mountain of Israel, and the valley of the same;	So Joshua took this entire region: the hill country, all the Negev, all the land of Goshen, the western foothills, the Arabah, and the mountains of Israel and their foothills,
JOS	11	17	곧 세일로 올라가는 할락 산에서부터 헤르몬 산 아래 레바논 골짜기의 바알갓까지라 그 모든 왕을 잡아 쳐죽였으며	Even from the mount Halak, that goeth up to Seir, even unto Baal–gad in the valley of Lebanon under mount Hermon: and all their kings he took, and smote them, and slew them.	from Mount Halak, which rises toward Seir, as far as Baal-gad in the Valley of Lebanon at the foot of Mount Hermon. He captured all their kings and struck them down, putting them to death.
JOS	11	18	여호수아가 그 모든 왕과 싸운지는 여러 날이라	Joshua made war a long time with all those kings.	Joshua waged war against all these kings for a long period of time.
JOS	11	19	기브온 거민 히위 사람 외에는 이스라엘 자손과 화친한 성읍이 하나도 없고 다 이스라엘 자손에게 쳐서 취한 바 되었으니	There was not a city that made peace with the children of Israel, save the Hivites the inhabitants of Gibeon: all other they took in battle.	No city made peace with the Israelites except the Hivites living in Gibeon; all others were taken in battle.
JOS	11	20	그들의 마음이 강퍅하여 이스라엘을 대적하여 싸우러 온 것은 여호와께서 그리하게 하신 것이라 그들로 저주받은 자 되게 하여 은혜를 입지 못하게 하시고 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 진멸하려 하심이었더라	For it was of the Lord to harden their hearts, that they should come against Israel in battle, that he might destroy them utterly, and that they might have no favour, but that he might destroy them, as the Lord commanded Moses.	For it was of the LORD to harden their hearts to engage Israel in battle, so that they would be set apart for destruction and would receive no mercy, being annihilated as the LORD had commanded Moses.
JOS	11	21	그 때에 여호수아가 가서 산지와 헤브론과 드빌과 아납과 유다 온 산지와 이스라엘의 온 산지에서 아낙 사람을 멸절하고 그가 또 그 성읍들을 진멸하였으므로	And at that time came Joshua, and cut off the Anakims from the mountains, from Hebron, from Debir, from Anab, and from all the mountains of Judah, and from all the mountains of Israel: Joshua destroyed them utterly with their cities.	At that time Joshua proceeded to eliminate the Anakim from the hill country of Hebron, Debir, and Anab, and from all the hill country of Judah and of Israel. Joshua devoted them to destruction, along with their cities.
JOS	11	22	이스라엘 자손의 땅 안에는 아낙 사람이 하나도 남음이 없고 가사와 가드와 아스돗에만 약간 남았었더라	There was none of the Anakims left in the land of the children of Israel: only in Gaza, in Gath, and in Ashdod, there remained.	No Anakim were left in the land of the Israelites; only in Gaza, Gath, and Ashdod did any survive.
JOS	11	23	이와 같이 여호수아가 여호와께서 모세에게 이르신 말씀대로 그 온 땅을 취하여 이스라엘 지파의 구별을 따라 기업으로 주었더라 그 땅에 전쟁이 그쳤더라	So Joshua took the whole land, according to all that the Lord said unto Moses; and Joshua gave it for an inheritance unto Israel according to their divisions by their tribes. And the land rested from war.	So Joshua took the entire land, in keeping with all that the LORD had spoken to Moses. And Joshua gave it as an inheritance to Israel according to the allotments to their tribes. Then the land had rest from war.
JOS	12	1	이스라엘 자손이 요단 저편 해 돋는 편 곧 아르논 골짜기에서 헤르몬 산까지의 동방 온 아라바를 점령하고 그 땅에서 쳐 죽인 왕들은 이러하니라	Now these are the kings of the land, which the children of Israel smote, and possessed their land on the other side Jordan toward the rising of the sun, from the river Arnon unto mount Hermon, and all the plain on the east:	Now these are the kings of the land whom the Israelites struck down and whose lands they took beyond the Jordan to the east, from the Arnon Valley to Mount Hermon, including all the Arabah eastward:
JOS	12	2	헤스본에 거하던 아모리 사람의 왕 시혼이라 그 다스리던 땅은 아르논 골짜기 가에 있는 아로엘에서부터 골짜기 가운데 성읍과 길르앗 절반 곧 암몬 자손의 지경 얍복 강까지며	Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt in Heshbon, and ruled from Aroer, which is upon the bank of the river Arnon, and from the middle of the river, and from half Gilead, even unto the river Jabbok, which is the border of the children of Ammon;	Sihon king of the Amorites, who lived in Heshbon. He ruled from Aroer on the rim of the Arnon Valley, along the middle of the valley, up to the Jabbok River (the border of the Ammonites), that is, half of Gilead,
JOS	12	3	또 동방 아라바 긴네롯 바다까지며 또 동방 아라바의 바다 곧 염해의 벧여시못으로 통한 길까지와 남편으로 비스가 산록까지며	And from the plain to the sea of Chinneroth on the east, and unto the sea of the plain, even the salt sea on the east, the way to Beth–jeshimoth; and from the south, under Ashdoth–pisgah:	as well as the Arabah east of the Sea of Chinnereth to the Sea of the Arabah (the Salt Sea), eastward through Beth-jeshimoth, and southward below the slopes of Pisgah.
JOS	12	4	또 르바의 남은 족속으로서 아스다롯과 에브레이에 거하던 바산 왕 옥이라	And the coast of Og king of Bashan, which was of the remnant of the giants, that dwelt at Ashtaroth and at Edrei,	And Og king of Bashan, one of the remnant of the Rephaim, who lived in Ashtaroth and Edrei.
JOS	12	5	그 치리하던 땅은 헤르몬 산과 살르가와 온 바산과 및 그술 사람과 마아가 사람의 지경까지의 길르앗 절반이니 헤스본 왕 시혼의 지경에 접한 것이라	And reigned in mount Hermon, and in Salcah, and in all Bashan, unto the border of the Geshurites and the Maachathites, and half Gilead, the border of Sihon king of Heshbon.	He ruled over Mount Hermon, Salecah, all of Bashan up to the border of the Geshurites and Maacathites, and half of Gilead to the border of Sihon king of Heshbon.
JOS	12	6	여호와의 종 모세와 이스라엘 자손이 그들을 치고 여호와의 종 모세가 그 땅을 르우벤 사람과 갓 사람과 므낫세 반 지파에게 기업으로 주었더라	Them did Moses the servant of the Lord and the children of Israel smite: and Moses the servant of the Lord gave it for a possession unto the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh.	Moses, the servant of the LORD, and the Israelites had struck them down and given their land as an inheritance to the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh.
JOS	12	7	여호수아와 이스라엘 자손이 요단 이편 곧 서편 레바논 골짜기의 바알갓에서부터 세일로 올라가는 곳 할락 산까지에서 쳐서 멸한 왕들은 이러하니 (그 땅을 여호수아가 이스라엘의 구별을 따라 그 지파에게 기업으로 주었으니	And these are the kings of the country which Joshua and the children of Israel smote on this side Jordan on the west, from Baal–gad in the valley of Lebanon even unto the mount Halak, that goeth up to Seir; which Joshua gave unto the tribes of Israel for a possession according to their divisions;	And these are the kings of the land that Joshua and the Israelites conquered beyond the Jordan to the west, from Baal-gad in the Valley of Lebanon to Mount Halak, which rises toward Seir (according to the allotments to the tribes of Israel, Joshua gave them as an inheritance
JOS	12	8	곧 산지와 평지와 아라바와 경사지와 광야와 남방 곧 헷 사람과 아모리 사람과 가나안 사람과 브리스 사람과 히위 사람과 여부스 사람의 땅이라)	In the mountains, and in the valleys, and in the plains, and in the springs, and in the wilderness, and in the south country; the Hittites, the Amorites, and the Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites:	the hill country, the foothills, the Arabah, the slopes, the wilderness, and the Negev—the lands of the Hittites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites):
JOS	12	9	하나는 여리고 왕이요 하나는 벧엘 곁의 아이 왕이요	The king of Jericho, one; the king of Ai, which is beside Beth–el, one;	the king of Jericho, one; the king of Ai, which is near Bethel, one;
JOS	12	10	하나는 예루살렘 왕이요 하나는 헤브론 왕이요 하나는 야르뭇 왕이요	The king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebron, one;	the king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebron, one;
JOS	12	11	하나는 라기스 왕이요	The king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lachish, one;	the king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lachish, one;
JOS	12	12	하나는 에글론 왕이요 하나는 게셀 왕이요	The king of Eglon, one; the king of Gezer, one;	the king of Eglon, one; the king of Gezer, one;
JOS	12	13	하나는 드빌 왕이요 하나는 게델 왕이요	The king of Debir, one; the king of Geder, one;	the king of Debir, one; the king of Geder, one;
JOS	12	14	하나는 호르마 왕이요 하나는 아랏 왕이요	The king of Hormah, one; the king of Arad, one;	the king of Hormah, one; the king of Arad, one;
JOS	12	15	하나는 립나 왕이요 하나는 아둘람 왕이요	The king of Libnah, one; the king of Adullam, one;	the king of Libnah, one; the king of Adullam, one;
JOS	12	16	하나는 막게다 왕이요 하나는 벧엘 왕이요	The king of Makkedah, one; the king of Beth–el, one;	the king of Makkedah, one; the king of Bethel, one;
JOS	12	17	하나는 답부아 왕이요 하나는 헤벨 왕이요	The king of Tappuah, one; the king of Hepher, one;	the king of Tappuah, one; the king of Hepher, one;
JOS	12	18	하나는 아벡 왕이요 하나는 랏사론 왕이요	The king of Aphek, one; the king of Lasharon, one;	the king of Aphek, one; the king of Lasharon, one;
JOS	12	19	하나는 마돈 왕이요 하나는 하솔 왕이요	The king of Madon, one; the king of Hazor, one;	the king of Madon, one; the king of Hazor, one;
JOS	12	20	하나는 시므론 므론 왕이요 하나는 악삽 왕이요	The king of Shimron–meron, one; the king of Achshaph, one;	the king of Shimron-meron, one; the king of Achshaph, one;
JOS	12	21	하나는 다아낙 왕이요 하나는 므깃도 왕이요	The king of Taanach, one; the king of Megiddo, one;	the king of Taanach, one; the king of Megiddo, one;
JOS	12	22	하나는 게데스 왕이요 하나는 갈멜의 욕느암 왕이요	The king of Kedesh, one; the king of Jokneam of Carmel, one;	the king of Kedesh, one; the king of Jokneam in Carmel, one;
JOS	12	23	하나는 돌의 높은 곳의 돌 왕이요 하나는 길갈의 고임 왕이요	The king of Dor in the coast of Dor, one; the king of the nations of Gilgal, one;	the king of Dor in Naphath-dor, one; the king of Goiim in Gilgal, one;
JOS	12	24	하나는 디르사 왕이라 도합 삼십일 왕이었더라	The king of Tirzah, one: all the kings thirty and one.	and the king of Tirzah, one. So there were thirty-one kings in all.
JOS	13	1	여호수아가 나이 많아 늙으매 여호와께서 그에게 이르시되 너는 나이 많아 늙었고 얻을 땅의 남은 것은 매우 많도다	Now Joshua was old and stricken in years; and the Lord said unto him, Thou art old and stricken in years, and there remaineth yet very much land to be possessed.	Now Joshua was old and well along in years, and the LORD said to him, “You are old and well along in years, but very much of the land remains to be possessed.
JOS	13	2	이 남은 땅은 이러하니 블레셋 사람의 온 지방과 그술 사람의 전경	This is the land that yet remaineth: all the borders of the Philistines, and all Geshuri,	This is the land that remains:
JOS	13	3	곧 애굽 앞 시홀 시내에서부터 가나안 사람에게 속한 북방 에그론 지경까지와 블레셋 사람의 다섯 방백의 땅 곧 가사 사람과 아스돗 사람과 아스글론 사람과 가드 사람과 에그론 사람과 또 남방 아위 사람의 땅과	From Sihor, which is before Egypt, even unto the borders of Ekron northward, which is counted to the Canaanite: five lords of the Philistines; the Gazathites, and the Ashdothites, the Eshkalonites, the Gittites, and the Ekronites; also the Avites:	All the territory of the Philistines and the Geshurites, from the Shihor east of Egypt to the territory of Ekron on the north (considered to be Canaanite territory)—that of the five Philistine rulers of Gaza, Ashdod, Ashkelon, Gath, and Ekron, as well as that of the Avvites;
JOS	13	4	또 가나안 사람의 온 땅과 시돈 사람에게 속한 므아라와 아모리 사람의 지경 아벡까지와	From the south, all the land of the Canaanites, and Mearah that is beside the Sidonians, unto Aphek, to the borders of the Amorites:	to the south, all the land of the Canaanites, from Mearah of the Sidonians to Aphek, as far as the border of the Amorites;
JOS	13	5	또 그발 사람의 땅과 동편 온 레바논 곧 헤르몬 산 아래 바알갓에서부터 하맛에 들어가는 곳까지와	And the land of the Giblites, and all Lebanon, toward the sunrising, from Baal–gad under mount Hermon unto the entering into Hamath.	the land of the Gebalites; and all Lebanon to the east, from Baal-gad below Mount Hermon to Lebo-hamath.
JOS	13	6	또 레바논에서부터 미스르봇마임까지의 산지 모든 거민 곧 모든 시돈 사람의 땅이라 내가 그들을 이스라엘 자손 앞에서 쫓아내리니 너는 나의 명한 대로 그 땅을 이스라엘에게 분배하여 기업이 되게 하되	All the inhabitants of the hill country from Lebanon unto Misrephoth–maim, and all the Sidonians, them will I drive out from before the children of Israel: only divide thou it by lot unto the Israelites for an inheritance, as I have commanded thee.	All the inhabitants of the hill country from Lebanon to Misrephoth-maim—all the Sidonians—I Myself will drive out before the Israelites. Be sure to divide it by lot as an inheritance to Israel, as I have commanded you.
JOS	13	7	너는 이 땅을 아홉 지파와 므낫세 반 지파에게 나누어 기업이 되게 하라 하셨더라	Now therefore divide this land for an inheritance unto the nine tribes, and the half tribe of Manasseh,	Now therefore divide this land as an inheritance to the nine tribes and the half-tribe of Manasseh.”
JOS	13	8	므낫세 반 지파와 함께 르우벤 사람과 갓 사람은 요단 동편에서 그 기업을 모세에게 받았는데 여호와의 종 모세가 그들에게 준 것은 이러하니	With whom the Reubenites and the Gadites have received their inheritance, which Moses gave them, beyond Jordan eastward, even as Moses the servant of the Lord gave them;	The other half of Manasseh, along with the Reubenites and Gadites, had received the inheritance Moses had given them beyond the Jordan to the east, just as Moses the servant of the LORD had assigned to them:
JOS	13	9	곧 아르논 골짜기 가에 있는 아로엘에서부터 골짜기 가운데 있는 성읍과 디본까지 이르는 메드바 온 평지와	From Aroer, that is upon the bank of the river Arnon, and the city that is in the midst of the river, and all the plain of Medeba unto Dibon;	The area from Aroer on the rim of the Arnon Valley, along with the city in the middle of the valley, the whole plateau of Medeba as far as Dibon,
JOS	13	10	헤스본에 도읍하였던 아모리 사람의 왕 시혼의 모든 성읍 곧 암몬 자손의 지경까지와	And all the cities of Sihon king of the Amorites, which reigned in Heshbon, unto the border of the children of Ammon;	and all the cities of Sihon king of the Amorites who reigned in Heshbon, as far as the border of the Ammonites;
JOS	13	11	길르앗과 및 그술 사람과 마아갓 사람의 지경과 온 헤르몬 산과 살르가까지 이른 온 바산	And Gilead, and the border of the Geshurites and Maachathites, and all mount Hermon, and all Bashan unto Salcah;	also Gilead and the territory of the Geshurites and Maacathites, all of Mount Hermon, and all Bashan as far as Salecah—
JOS	13	12	곧 르바의 남은 족속으로서 아스다롯과 에드레이에 도읍하였던 바산 왕 옥의 온 나라라 모세가 이 땅의 사람들을 쳐서 쫓아내었어도	All the kingdom of Og in Bashan, which reigned in Ashtaroth and in Edrei, who remained of the remnant of the giants: for these did Moses smite, and cast them out.	the whole kingdom of Og in Bashan, who had reigned in Ashtaroth and Edrei and had remained as a remnant of the Rephaim. Moses had struck them down and dispossessed them,
JOS	13	13	그술 사람과 마아갓 사람은 이스라엘 자손이 쫓아내지 아니하였으므로 그술과 마아갓이 오늘날까지 이스라엘 가운데 거하더라	Nevertheless the children of Israel expelled not the Geshurites, nor the Maachathites: but the Geshurites and the Maachathites dwell among the Israelites until this day.	but the Israelites did not drive out the Geshurites or the Maacathites. So Geshur and Maacath dwell among the Israelites to this day.
JOS	13	14	오직 레위 지파에게는 여호수아가 기업으로 준 것이 없었으니 이는 이스라엘 하나님 여호와께 드리는 화제물이 그 기업이 됨이 그에게 이르신 말씀과 같음이었더라	Only unto the tribe of Levi he gave none inheritance; the sacrifices of the Lord God of Israel made by fire are their inheritance, as he said unto them.	To the tribe of Levi, however, Moses had given no inheritance. The offerings made by fire to the LORD, the God of Israel, are their inheritance, just as He had promised them.
JOS	13	15	모세가 르우벤 자손의 지파에게 그 가족을 따라서 주었으니	And Moses gave unto the tribe of the children of Reuben inheritance according to their families.	This is what Moses had given to the clans of the tribe of Reuben:
JOS	13	16	그 지경은 아르논 골짜기 가에 있는 아로엘에서부터 골짜기 가운데 있는 성읍과 메드바 곁에 있는 온 평지와	And their coast was from Aroer, that is on the bank of the river Arnon, and the city that is in the midst of the river, and all the plain by Medeba;	The territory from Aroer on the rim of the Arnon Valley, along with the city in the middle of the valley, to the whole plateau beyond Medeba,
JOS	13	17	헤스본과 그 평지에 있는 모든 성읍 곧 디본과 바못 바알과 벧 바알 므온과	Heshbon, and all her cities that are in the plain; Dibon, and Bamoth–baal, and Beth–baal–meon,	to Heshbon and all its cities on the plateau, including Dibon, Bamoth-baal, Beth-baal-meon,
JOS	13	18	야하스와 그데못과 메바앗과	And Jahazah, and Kedemoth, and Mephaath,	Jahaz, Kedemoth, Mephaath,
JOS	13	19	기랴다임과 십마와 골짜기 가운데 산에 있는 세렛 사할과	And Kirjathaim, and Sibmah, and Zareth–shahar in the mount of the valley,	Kiriathaim, Sibmah, Zereth-shahar on the hill in the valley,
JOS	13	20	벧브올과 비스가 산록과 벧여시못과	And Beth–peor, and Ashdoth–pisgah, and Beth–jeshimoth,	Beth-peor, the slopes of Pisgah, and Beth-jeshimoth—
JOS	13	21	평지 모든 성읍과 헤스본에 도읍한 아모리 사람 시혼의 온 나라라 모세가 시혼을 그 땅에 거하는 시혼의 방백 곧 미디안의 귀족 에위와 레겜과 술과 훌과 레바와 함께 죽였으며	And all the cities of the plain, and all the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, which reigned in Heshbon, whom Moses smote with the princes of Midian, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, which were dukes of Sihon, dwelling in the country.	all the cities of the plateau and all the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, who reigned in Heshbon until Moses killed him and the chiefs of Midian (Evi, Rekem, Zur, Hur, and Reba), the princes of Sihon who lived in the land.
JOS	13	22	이스라엘 자손이 그들을 도륙하는 중에 브올의 아들 술사 발람도 칼날로 죽였었더라	Balaam also the son of Beor, the soothsayer, did the children of Israel slay with the sword among them that were slain by them.	The Israelites also killed the diviner Balaam son of Beor along with the others they put to the sword.
JOS	13	23	르우벤 자손의 서편 경계는 요단과 그 강 가라 이상은 르우벤 자손의 기업으로 그 가족대로 받은 성읍과 촌락이니라	And the border of the children of Reuben was Jordan, and the border thereof. This was the inheritance of the children of Reuben after their families, the cities and the villages thereof.	And the border of the Reubenites was the bank of the Jordan. This was the inheritance of the clans of the Reubenites, including the cities and villages.
JOS	13	24	모세가 갓 지파 곧 갓 자손에게도 그 가족을 따라서 주었으니	And Moses gave inheritance unto the tribe of Gad, even unto the children of Gad according to their families.	This is what Moses had given to the clans of the tribe of Gad:
JOS	13	25	그 지경은 야셀과 길르앗 모든 성읍과 암몬 자손의 땅 절반 곧 랍바 앞의 아로엘까지와	And their coast was Jazer, and all the cities of Gilead, and half the land of the children of Ammon, unto Aroer that is before Rabbah;	The territory of Jazer, all the cities of Gilead, and half the land of the Ammonites as far as Aroer, near Rabbah;
JOS	13	26	헤스본에서 라맛 미스베와 브도님까지와 마하나임에서 드빌 지경까지와	And from Heshbon unto Ramath–mizpeh, and Betonim; and from Mahanaim unto the border of Debir;	the territory from Heshbon to Ramath-mizpeh and Betonim, and from Mahanaim to the border of Debir;
JOS	13	27	골짜기에 있는 벧 하람과 벧니므라와 숙곳과 사본 곧 헤스본 왕 시혼의 나라의 남은 땅 요단과 그 강 가에서부터 요단 동편 긴네렛 바다의 끝까지라	And in the valley, Beth–aram, and Beth–nimrah, and Succoth, and Zaphon, the rest of the kingdom of Sihon king of Heshbon, Jordan and his border, even unto the edge of the sea of Chinnereth on the other side Jordan eastward.	and in the valley, Beth-haram, Beth-nimrah, Succoth, and Zaphon, with the rest of the kingdom of Sihon king of Heshbon (the territory on the east side of the Jordan up to the edge of the Sea of Chinnereth).
JOS	13	28	이는 갓 자손의 기업으로 그 가족대로 받은 성읍과 촌락이니라	This is the inheritance of the children of Gad after their families, the cities, and their villages.	This was the inheritance of the clans of the Gadites, including the cities and villages.
JOS	13	29	모세가 므낫세 반 지파에게 주었으되 므낫세 자손의 반 지파에게 그 가족대로 주었으니	And Moses gave inheritance unto the half tribe of Manasseh: and this was the possession of the half tribe of the children of Manasseh by their families.	This is what Moses had given to the clans of the half-tribe of Manasseh, that is, to half the tribe of the descendants of Manasseh:
JOS	13	30	그 지경은 마하나임에서부터 온 바산 곧 바산 왕 옥의 전국과 바산 경내 야일의 모든 고을 육십 성읍과	And their coast was from Mahanaim, all Bashan, all the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, and all the towns of Jair, which are in Bashan, threescore cities:	The territory from Mahanaim through all Bashan—all the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, including all the towns of Jair that are in Bashan, sixty cities;
JOS	13	31	길르앗 절반과 바산 왕 옥의 나라 성읍 아스다롯과 에드레이라 이는 므낫세의 아들 마길의 자손에게 돌린 것이니 곧 마길 자손의 절반이 그 가족대로 받으니라	And half Gilead, and Ashtaroth, and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan, were pertaining unto the children of Machir the son of Manasseh, even to the one half of the children of Machir by their families.	half of Gilead; and Ashtaroth and Edrei, the royal cities of Og in Bashan. All this was for the clans of the descendants of Machir son of Manasseh, that is, half of the descendants of Machir.
JOS	13	32	요단 동편 여리고 맞은편 모압 평지에서 모세가 분배한 기업이 이러하여도	These are the countries which Moses did distribute for inheritance in the plains of Moab, on the other side Jordan, by Jericho, eastward.	These were the portions Moses had given them on the plains of Moab beyond the Jordan, east of Jericho.
JOS	13	33	오직 레위 지파에게는 모세가 기업을 주지 아니하였으니 이는 그들에게 말씀하심 같이 이스라엘 하나님 여호와께서 그 기업이 되심이었더라	But unto the tribe of Levi Moses gave not any inheritance: the Lord God of Israel was their inheritance, as he said unto them.	To the tribe of Levi, however, Moses had given no inheritance. The LORD, the God of Israel, is their inheritance, just as He had promised them.
JOS	14	1	이스라엘 자손이 가나안 땅에서 취한 기업 곧 제사장 엘르아살과 눈의 아들 여호수아와 이스라엘 자손 지파의 족장들이 분배한 것이 아래와 같으니라	And these are the countries which the children of Israel inherited in the land of Canaan, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel, distributed for inheritance to them.	Now these are the portions that the Israelites inherited in the land of Canaan, as distributed by Eleazar the priest, Joshua son of Nun, and the heads of the families of the tribes of Israel.
JOS	14	2	여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 대로 그들의 기업을 제비 뽑아 아홉 지파와 반 지파에게 주었으니	By lot was their inheritance, as the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses, for the nine tribes, and for the half tribe.	Their inheritance was assigned by lot for the nine and a half tribes, as the LORD had commanded through Moses.
JOS	14	3	두 지파와 반 지파의 기업은 모세가 요단 저편에서 주었음이요 레위 자손에게는 그들 가운데서 기업을 주지 아니하였으니	For Moses had given the inheritance of two tribes and an half tribe on the other side Jordan: but unto the Levites he gave none inheritance among them.	For Moses had given the inheritance east of the Jordan to the other two and a half tribes. But he granted no inheritance among them to the Levites.
JOS	14	4	요셉 자손은 므낫세와 에브라임의 두 지파가 되었음이라 이 땅에서 레위 사람에게 아무 분깃도 주지 아니하고 오직 거할 성읍들과 가축과 재물을 둘 들만 줄 뿐으로	For the children of Joseph were two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim: therefore they gave no part unto the Levites in the land, save cities to dwell in, with their suburbs for their cattle and for their substance.	The descendants of Joseph became two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim. And no portion of the land was given to the Levites, except for cities in which to live, along with pasturelands for their flocks and herds.
JOS	14	5	이스라엘 자손이 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 것과 같이 행하여 그 땅을 나누었더라	As the Lord commanded Moses, so the children of Israel did, and they divided the land.	So the Israelites did as the LORD had commanded Moses, and they divided the land.
JOS	14	6	때에 유다 자손이 길갈에 있는 여호수아에게 나아오고 그니스 사람 여분네의 아들 갈렙이 여호수아에게 말하되 여호와께서 가데스 바네아에서 나와 당신에게 대하여 하나님의 사람 모세에게 이르신 일을 당신이 아시는 바라	Then the children of Judah came unto Joshua in Gilgal: and Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite said unto him, Thou knowest the thing that the Lord said unto Moses the man of God concerning me and thee in Kadesh–barnea.	Then the sons of Judah approached Joshua at Gilgal, and Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite said to him, “You know what the LORD said to Moses the man of God at Kadesh-barnea about you and me.
JOS	14	7	내 나이 사십 세에 여호와의 종 모세가 가데스 바네아에서 나를 보내어 이 땅을 정탐케 하므로 내 마음에 성실한 대로 그에게 보고하였고	Forty years old was I when Moses the servant of the Lord sent me from Kadesh–barnea to espy out the land; and I brought him word again as it was in mine heart.	I was forty years old when Moses the servant of the LORD sent me from Kadesh-barnea to spy out the land, and I brought back to him an honest report.
JOS	14	8	나와 함께 올라갔던 내 형제들은 백성의 간담을 녹게 하였으나 나는 나의 하나님 여호와를 온전히 좇았으므로	Nevertheless my brethren that went up with me made the heart of the people melt: but I wholly followed the Lord my God.	Although my brothers who went with me made the hearts of the people melt with fear, I remained loyal to the LORD my God.
JOS	14	9	그 날에 모세가 맹세하여 가로되 네가 나의 하나님 여호와를 온전히 좇았은즉 네 발로 밟는 땅은 영영히 너와 네 자손의 기업이 되리라 하였나이다	And Moses sware on that day, saying, Surely the land whereon thy feet have trodden shall be thine inheritance, and thy children’s for ever, because thou hast wholly followed the Lord my God.	On that day Moses swore to me, saying, ‘Surely the land on which you have set foot will be an inheritance to you and your children forever, because you have wholly followed the LORD my God.’
JOS	14	10	이제 보소서 여호와께서 이 말씀을 모세에게 이르신 때로부터 이스라엘이 광야에 행한 이 사십오 년 동안을 여호와께서 말씀하신 대로 나를 생존케 하셨나이다 오늘날 내가 팔십오 세로되	And now, behold, the Lord hath kept me alive, as he said, these forty and five years, even since the Lord spake this word unto Moses, while the children of Israel wandered in the wilderness: and now, lo, I am this day fourscore and five years old.	Now behold, as the LORD promised, He has kept me alive these forty-five years since He spoke this word to Moses, while Israel wandered in the wilderness. So here I am today, eighty-five years old,
JOS	14	11	모세가 나를 보내던 날과 같이 오늘날 오히려 강건하니 나의 힘이 그때나 이제나 일반이라 싸움에나 출입에 감당할 수 있사온즉	As yet I am as strong this day as I was in the day that Moses sent me: as my strength was then, even so is my strength now, for war, both to go out, and to come in.	still as strong today as I was the day Moses sent me out. As my strength was then, so it is now for war, for going out, and for coming in.
JOS	14	12	그 날에 여호와께서 말씀하신 이 산지를 내게 주소서 당신도 그 날에 들으셨거니와 그 곳에는 아낙 사람이 있고 그 성읍들은 크고 견고할지라도 여호와께서 혹시 나와 함께 하시면 내가 필경 여호와의 말씀하신 대로 그들을 쫓아내리이다	Now therefore give me this mountain, whereof the Lord spake in that day; for thou heardest in that day how the Anakims were there, and that the cities were great and fenced: if so be the Lord will be with me, then I shall be able to drive them out, as the Lord said.	Now therefore give me this hill country that the LORD promised me on that day, for you yourself heard then that the Anakim were there, with great and fortified cities. Perhaps with the LORD’s help I will drive them out, as the LORD has spoken.”
JOS	14	13	여호수아가 여분네의 아들 갈렙을 위하여 축복하고 헤브론을 그에게 주어 기업을 삼게 하매	And Joshua blessed him, and gave unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh Hebron for an inheritance.	Then Joshua blessed Caleb son of Jephunneh and gave him Hebron as his inheritance.
JOS	14	14	헤브론이 그니스 사람 여분네의 아들 갈렙의 기업이 되어 오늘날까지 이르렀으니 이는 그가 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와를 온전히 좇았음이며	Hebron therefore became the inheritance of Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite unto this day, because that he wholly followed the Lord God of Israel.	Therefore Hebron belongs to Caleb son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite as an inheritance to this day, because he wholly followed the LORD, the God of Israel.
JOS	14	15	헤브론의 옛 이름은 기럇 아르바라 아르바는 아낙 사람 가운데 가장 큰 사람이었더라 그 땅에 전쟁이 그쳤더라	And the name of Hebron before was Kirjath–arba; which Arba was a great man among the Anakims. And the land had rest from war.	(Hebron used to be called Kiriath-arba, after Arba, the greatest man among the Anakim.) Then the land had rest from war.
JOS	15	1	유다 자손의 지파가 그 가족대로 제비 뽑은 땅의 극남단은 에돔 지경에 이르고 또 남으로 신 광야까지라	This then was the lot of the tribe of the children of Judah by their families; even to the border of Edom the wilderness of Zin southward was the uttermost part of the south coast.	Now the allotment for the clans of the tribe of Judah extended to the border of Edom, to the Wilderness of Zin at the extreme southern boundary:
JOS	15	2	그 남편 경계는 염해의 극단 곧 남향한 해만에서부터	And their south border was from the shore of the salt sea, from the bay that looketh southward:	Their southern border started at the bay on the southern tip of the Salt Sea,
JOS	15	3	아그랍빔 비탈 남편으로 지나 신에 이르고 가데스 바네아 남편으로 올라가서 헤스론을 지나며 아달로 올라가서 돌이켜 갈가에 이르고	And it went out to the south side to Maaleh–acrabbim, and passed along to Zin, and ascended up on the south side unto Kadesh–barnea, and passed along to Hezron, and went up to Adar, and fetched a compass to Karkaa:	proceeded south of the Ascent of Akrabbim, continued on to Zin, went over to the south of Kadesh-barnea, ran past Hezron up to Addar, and curved toward Karka.
JOS	15	4	거기서 아스몬에 이르고 애굽 시내에 미치며 바다에 이르러 경계의 끝이 되나니 이것이 너희 남편 경계가 되리라	From thence it passed toward Azmon, and went out unto the river of Egypt; and the goings out of that coast were at the sea: this shall be your south coast.	It proceeded to Azmon, joined the Brook of Egypt, and ended at the Sea. This was their southern border.
JOS	15	5	그 동편 경계는 염해니 요단 끝까지요 그 북편 경계는 요단 끝에 당한 해만에서부터	And the east border was the salt sea, even unto the end of Jordan. And their border in the north quarter was from the bay of the sea at the uttermost part of Jordan:	The eastern border was the Salt Sea as far as the mouth of the Jordan.
JOS	15	6	벧호글라로 올라가서 벧 아라바 북편을 지나 르우벤 자손 보한의 돌에 이르고	And the border went up to Beth–hogla, and passed along by the north of Beth–arabah; and the border went up to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben:	The northern border started from the bay of the sea at the mouth of the Jordan, went up to Beth-hoglah, proceeded north of Beth-arabah, and went up to the Stone of Bohan son of Reuben.
JOS	15	7	또 아골 골짜기에서부터 드빌을 지나 북으로 올라가서 강 남편에 있는 아둠빔 비탈 맞은편 길갈을 향하고 나아가 엔 세메스 물을 지나 엔로겔에 이르며	And the border went up toward Debir from the valley of Achor, and so northward, looking toward Gilgal, that is before the going up to Adummim, which is on the south side of the river: and the border passed toward the waters of En–shemesh, and the goings out thereof were at En–rogel:	Then the border went up to Debir from the Valley of Achor, turning north to Gilgal, which faces the Ascent of Adummim south of the ravine. It continued along the waters of En-shemesh and came out at En-rogel.
JOS	15	8	또 힌놈의 아들의 골짜기로 올라가서 여부스 곧 예루살렘 남편 어깨에 이르며 또 힌놈의 골짜기 앞 서편에 있는 산 꼭대기로 올라가나니 이곳은 르바임 골짜기 북편 끝이며	And the border went up by the valley of the son of Hinnom unto the south side of the Jebusite; the same is Jerusalem: and the border went up to the top of the mountain that lieth before the valley of Hinnom westward, which is at the end of the valley of the giants northward:	From there the border went up the Valley of Hinnom along the southern slope of the Jebusites (that is, Jerusalem) and ascended to the top of the hill that faces the Valley of Hinnom on the west, at the northern end of the Valley of Rephaim.
JOS	15	9	또 이 산 꼭대기에서부터 넵도아 샘물까지 이르러 에브론 산 성읍들에 미치고 또 바알라 곧 기럇 여아림에 미치며	And the border was drawn from the top of the hill unto the fountain of the water of Nephtoah, and went out to the cities of mount Ephron; and the border was drawn to Baalah, which is Kirjath–jearim:	From the hilltop the border curved to the spring of the Waters of Nephtoah, proceeded to the cities of Mount Ephron, and then bent around toward Baalah (that is, Kiriath-jearim).
JOS	15	10	또 바알라에서부터 서편으로 돌이켜 세일 산에 이르러 여아림 산 곧 그살론 곁 북편에 이르고 또 벧 세메스로 내려가서 딤나로 지나고	And the border compassed from Baalah westward unto mount Seir, and passed along unto the side of mount Jearim, which is Chesalon, on the north side, and went down to Beth–shemesh, and passed on to Timnah:	The border curled westward from Baalah to Mount Seir, ran along the northern slope of Mount Jearim (that is, Chesalon), went down to Beth-shemesh, and crossed to Timnah.
JOS	15	11	또 에그론 북편으로 나아가 식그론에 이르러 바알라 산에 미치고 얍느엘에 이르나니 그 끝은 바다며	And the border went out unto the side of Ekron northward: and the border was drawn to Shicron, and passed along to mount Baalah, and went out unto Jabneel; and the goings out of the border were at the sea.	Then it went out to the northern slope of Ekron, curved toward Shikkeron, proceeded to Mount Baalah, went on to Jabneel, and ended at the Sea.
JOS	15	12	서편 경계는 대해와 그 해변이니 유다 자손이 그 가족대로 얻은 사면 경계가 이러하니라	And the west border was to the great sea, and the coast thereof. This is the coast of the children of Judah round about according to their families.	And the western border was the coastline of the Great Sea. These are the boundaries around the clans of the descendants of Judah.
JOS	15	13	여호와께서 여호수아에게 명하신 대로 여호수아가 기럇 아르바 곧 헤브론 성을 유다 자손 중에서 분깃으로 여분네의 아들 갈렙에게 주었으니 아르바는 아낙의 아비였더라	And unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh he gave a part among the children of Judah, according to the commandment of the Lord to Joshua, even the city of Arba the father of Anak, which city is Hebron.	According to the LORD’s command to him, Joshua gave Caleb son of Jephunneh a portion among the sons of Judah—Kiriath-arba, that is, Hebron. (Arba was the forefather of Anak.)
JOS	15	14	갈렙이 거기서 아낙의 소생 곧 그 세 아들 세새와 아히만과 달매를 쫓아내었고	And Caleb drove thence the three sons of Anak, Sheshai, and Ahiman, and Talmai, the children of Anak.	And Caleb drove out from there the three sons of Anak—the descendants of Sheshai, Ahiman, and Talmai, the children of Anak.
JOS	15	15	거기서 올라가서 드빌 거민을 쳤는데 드빌의 본 이름은 기럇 세벨이라	And he went up thence to the inhabitants of Debir: and the name of Debir before was Kirjath–sepher.	From there he marched against the inhabitants of Debir (formerly known as Kiriath-sepher).
JOS	15	16	갈렙이 말하기를 기럇 세벨을 쳐서 그것을 취하는 자에게는 내가 내 딸 악사를 아내로 주리라 하였더니	And Caleb said, He that smiteth Kirjath–sepher, and taketh it, to him will I give Achsah my daughter to wife.	And Caleb said, “To the man who strikes down Kiriath-sepher and captures it, I will give my daughter Acsah in marriage.”
JOS	15	17	갈렙의 아우요 그나스의 아들인 옷니엘이 그것을 취함으로 갈렙이 그 딸 악사를 그에게 아내로 주었더라	And Othniel the son of Kenaz, the brother of Caleb, took it: and he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife.	So Othniel son of Caleb’s brother Kenaz captured the city, and Caleb gave his daughter Acsah to him in marriage.
JOS	15	18	악사가 출가할 때에 그에게 청하여 자기 아비에게 밭을 구하자 하고 나귀에서 내리매 갈렙이 그에게 묻되 네가 무엇을 원하느냐	And it came to pass, as she came unto him, that she moved him to ask of her father a field: and she lighted off her ass; and Caleb said unto her, What wouldest thou?	One day Acsah came to Othniel and urged him to ask her father for a field. When she got off her donkey, Caleb asked her, “What do you desire?”
JOS	15	19	가로되 내게 복을 주소서 아버지께서 나를 남방 땅으로 보내시오니 샘물도 내게 주소서 하매 갈렙이 윗 샘과 아랫 샘을 그에게 주었더라	Who answered, Give me a blessing; for thou hast given me a south land; give me also springs of water. And he gave her the upper springs, and the nether springs.	“Give me a blessing,” she answered. “Since you have given me land in the Negev, give me springs of water as well.” So Caleb gave her both the upper and lower springs.
JOS	15	20	유다 자손의 지파가 그 가족대로 얻은 기업은 이러하니라	This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Judah according to their families.	This is the inheritance of the clans of the tribe of Judah.
JOS	15	21	유다 자손의 지파의 남으로 에돔 경계에 접근한 성읍들은 갑스엘과 에델과 야굴과	And the uttermost cities of the tribe of the children of Judah toward the coast of Edom southward were Kabzeel, and Eder, and Jagur,	These were the southernmost cities of the tribe of Judah in the Negev toward the border of Edom:
JOS	15	22	기나와 디모나와 아다다와	And Kinah, and Dimonah, and Adadah,	Kabzeel, Eder, Jagur, Kinah, Dimonah, Adadah,
JOS	15	23	게데스와 하솔과 잇난과	And Kedesh, and Hazor, and Ithnan,	Kedesh, Hazor, Ithnan,
JOS	15	24	십과 델렘과 브알롯과	Ziph, and Telem, and Bealoth,	Ziph, Telem, Bealoth,
JOS	15	25	하솔 하닷다와 그리욧 헤스론 곧 하솔과	And Hazor, Hadattah, and Kerioth, and Hezron, which is Hazor,	Hazor-hadattah, Kerioth-hezron (that is, Hazor),
JOS	15	26	아맘과 세마와 몰라다와	Amam, and Shema, and Moladah,	Amam, Shema, Moladah,
JOS	15	27	하살 갓다와 헤스몬과 벧 벨렛과	And Hazar–gaddah, and Heshmon, and Beth–palet,	Hazar-gaddah, Heshmon, Beth-pelet,
JOS	15	28	하살 수알과 브엘세바와 비스요댜와	And Hazar–shual, and Beer–sheba, and Bizjothjah,	Hazar-shual, Beersheba, Biziothiah,
JOS	15	29	바알라와 이임과 에셈과	Baalah, and Iim, and Azem,	Baalah, Iim, Ezem,
JOS	15	30	엘돌랏과 그실과 홀마와	And Eltolad, and Chesil, and Hormah,	Eltolad, Chesil, Hormah,
JOS	15	31	시글락과 맛만나와 산산나와 르바옷과	And Ziklag, and Madmannah, and Sansannah,	Ziklag, Madmannah, Sansannah,
JOS	15	32	실힘과 아인과 림몬이니 모두 이십구 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이었으며	And Lebaoth, and Shilhim, and Ain, and Rimmon: all the cities are twenty and nine, with their villages:	Lebaoth, Shilhim, Ain, and Rimmon—twenty-nine cities in all, along with their villages.
JOS	15	33	평지에는 에스다올과 소라와 아스나와	And in the valley, Eshtaol, and Zoreah, and Ashnah,	These were in the foothills:
JOS	15	34	사노아와 엔간님과 답부아와 에남과	And Zanoah, and En–gannim, Tappuah, and Enam,	Eshtaol, Zorah, Ashnah, Zanoah, En-gannim, Tappuah, Enam,
JOS	15	35	야르뭇과 아둘람과 소고와 아세가와	Jarmuth, and Adullam, Socoh, and Azekah,	Jarmuth, Adullam, Socoh, Azekah,
JOS	15	36	사아라임과 아디다임과 그데라와 그데로다임이니 모두 십사 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이었으며	And Sharaim, and Adithaim, and Gederah, and Gederothaim; fourteen cities with their villages:	Shaaraim, Adithaim, and Gederah (or Gederothaim)—fourteen cities, along with their villages.
JOS	15	37	스난과 하다사와 믹달갓과	Zenan, and Hadashah, and Migdal–gad,	Zenan, Hadashah, Migdal-gad,
JOS	15	38	딜르안과 미스베와 욕드엘과	And Dilean, and Mizpeh, and Joktheel,	Dilan, Mizpeh, Joktheel,
JOS	15	39	라기스와 보스갓과 에글론과	Lachish, and Bozkath, and Eglon,	Lachish, Bozkath, Eglon,
JOS	15	40	갑본과 라맘과 기들리스와	And Cabbon, and Lahmam, and Kithlish,	Cabbon, Lahmas, Chitlish,
JOS	15	41	그데롯과 벧다곤과 나아마와 막게다니 모두 십육 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이었으며	And Gederoth, Beth–dagon, and Naamah, and Makkedah; sixteen cities with their villages:	Gederoth, Beth-dagon, Naamah, and Makkedah—sixteen cities, along with their villages.
JOS	15	42	립나와 에델과 아산과	Libnah, and Ether, and Ashan,	Libnah, Ether, Ashan,
JOS	15	43	입다와 아스나와 느십과	And Jiphtah, and Ashnah, and Nezib,	Iphtah, Ashnah, Nezib,
JOS	15	44	그일라와 악십과 마레사니 모두 아홉 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이었으며	And Keilah, and Achzib, and Mareshah; nine cities with their villages:	Keilah, Achzib, and Mareshah—nine cities, along with their villages.
JOS	15	45	에그론과 그 향리와 촌락과	Ekron, with her towns and her villages:	Ekron, with its towns and villages;
JOS	15	46	에그론에서부터 바다까지 아스돗 곁에 있는 모든 성읍과 그 촌락이었으며	From Ekron even unto the sea, all that lay near Ashdod, with their villages:	from Ekron to the sea, all the cities near Ashdod, along with their villages;
JOS	15	47	아스돗과 그 향리와 촌락과 가사와 그 향리와 촌락이니 애굽 시내와 대해 가에 이르기까지였으며	Ashdod with her towns and her villages, Gaza with her towns and her villages, unto the river of Egypt, and the great sea, and the border thereof:	Ashdod, with its towns and villages; Gaza, with its towns and villages, as far as the Brook of Egypt and the coastline of the Great Sea.
JOS	15	48	산지는 사밀과 얏딜과 소고와	And in the mountains, Shamir, and Jattir, and Socoh,	These were in the hill country:
JOS	15	49	단나와 기럇 산나 곧 드빌과	And Dannah, and Kirjath–sannah, which is Debir,	Shamir, Jattir, Socoh, Dannah, Kiriath-sannah (that is, Debir),
JOS	15	50	아납과 에스드모와 아님과	And Anab, and Eshtemoh, and Anim,	Anab, Eshtemoh, Anim,
JOS	15	51	고센과 홀론과 길로니 모두 십일 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이었으며	And Goshen, and Holon, and Giloh; eleven cities with their villages:	Goshen, Holon, and Giloh—eleven cities, along with their villages.
JOS	15	52	아랍과 두마와 에산과	Arab, and Dumah, and Eshean,	Arab, Dumah, Eshan,
JOS	15	53	야님과 벧 답부아와 아베가와	And Janum, and Beth–tappuah, and Aphekah,	Janim, Beth-tappuah, Aphekah,
JOS	15	54	훔다와 기럇 아르바 곧 헤브론과 시올이니 모두 아홉 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이었으며	And Humtah, and Kirjath–arba, which is Hebron, and Zior; nine cities with their villages:	Humtah, Kiriath-arba (that is, Hebron), and Zior—nine cities, along with their villages.
JOS	15	55	마온과 갈멜과 십과 윳다와	Maon, Carmel, and Ziph, and Juttah,	Maon, Carmel, Ziph, Juttah,
JOS	15	56	이스르엘과 욕드암과 사노아와	And Jezreel, and Jokdeam, and Zanoah,	Jezreel, Jokdeam, Zanoah,
JOS	15	57	가인과 기브아와 딤나니 모두 열 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이었으며	Cain, Gibeah, and Timnah; ten cities with their villages:	Kain, Gibeah, and Timnah—ten cities, along with their villages.
JOS	15	58	할훌과 벧술과 그돌과	Halhul, Beth–zur, and Gedor,	Halhul, Beth-zur, Gedor,
JOS	15	59	마아랏과 벧 아놋과 엘드곤이니 모두 여섯 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이었으며	And Maarath, and Beth–anoth, and Eltekon; six cities with their villages:	Maarath, Beth-anoth, and Eltekon—six cities, along with their villages.
JOS	15	60	기럇 바알 곧 기럇 여아림과 라빠니 모두 두 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이었으며	Kirjath–baal, which is Kirjath–jearim, and Rabbah; two cities with their villages:	Kiriath-baal (that is, Kiriath-jearim), and Rabbah—two cities, along with their villages.
JOS	15	61	광야에는 벧 아라바와 밋딘과 스가가와	In the wilderness, Beth–arabah, Middin, and Secacah,	These were in the wilderness:
JOS	15	62	닙산과 염성과 엔 게디니 모두 여섯 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이었더라	And Nibshan, and the city of Salt, and En–gedi; six cities with their villages.	Beth-arabah, Middin, Secacah, Nibshan, the City of Salt, and En-gedi—six cities, along with their villages.
JOS	15	63	예루살렘 거민 여부스 사람을 유다 자손이 쫓아내지 못하였으므로 여부스 사람이 오늘날까지 유다 자손과 함께 예루살렘에 거하니라	As for the Jebusites the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the children of Judah could not drive them out: but the Jebusites dwell with the children of Judah at Jerusalem unto this day.	But the descendants of Judah could not drive out the Jebusites living in Jerusalem. So to this day the Jebusites live there among the descendants of Judah.
JOS	16	1	요셉 자손이 제비 뽑은 것은 여리고 곁 요단 곧 여리고 물 동편 광야에서부터 나아가 여리고로 말미암아 올라가서 산지를 지나 벧엘에 이르고	And the lot of the children of Joseph fell from Jordan by Jericho, unto the water of Jericho on the east, to the wilderness that goeth up from Jericho throughout mount Beth–el,	The allotment for the descendants of Joseph extended from the Jordan at Jericho to the waters of Jericho on the east, through the wilderness that goes up from Jericho into the hill country of Bethel.
JOS	16	2	벧엘에서부터 루스로 나아가 아렉 사람의 경계로 지나 아다롯에 이르고	And goeth out from Beth–el to Luz, and passeth along unto the borders of Archi to Ataroth,	It went on from Bethel (that is, Luz) and proceeded to the border of the Archites in Ataroth.
JOS	16	3	서편으로 내려가서 야블렛 사람의 경계에 이르러 아래 벧 호론 곧 게셀에 미치고 그 끝은 바다라	And goeth down westward to the coast of Japhleti, unto the coast of Beth–horon the nether, and to Gezer: and the goings out thereof are at the sea.	Then it descended westward to the border of the Japhletites as far as the border of Lower Beth-horon and on to Gezer, and it ended at the Sea.
JOS	16	4	요셉의 자손 므낫세와 에브라임이 그 기업을 얻었더라	So the children of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim, took their inheritance.	So Ephraim and Manasseh, the sons of Joseph, received their inheritance.
JOS	16	5	에브라임 자손의 그 가족대로 얻은 것의 경계는 이러하니라 그 기업의 경계는 동으로 아다롯 앗달에서 윗 벧 호론에 이르고	And the border of the children of Ephraim according to their families was thus: even the border of their inheritance on the east side was Ataroth–addar, unto Beth–horon the upper;	This was the territory of the descendants of Ephraim by their clans: The border of their inheritance went from Ataroth-addar in the east to Upper Beth-horon
JOS	16	6	또 서편으로 나아가 북편 믹므다에 이르고 동편으로 돌아 다아낫 실로에 이르러 야노아 동편을 지나고	And the border went out toward the sea to Michmethah on the north side; and the border went about eastward unto Taanath–shiloh, and passed by it on the east to Janohah;	and out toward the Sea. From Michmethath on the north it turned eastward toward Taanath-shiloh and passed by it to Janoah on the east.
JOS	16	7	야노아에서부터 아다롯과 나아라도 내려가서 여리고에 미치며 요단으로 나아가고	And it went down from Janohah to Ataroth, and to Naarath, and came to Jericho, and went out at Jordan.	From Janoah it went down to Ataroth and Naarah, and then reached Jericho and came out at the Jordan.
JOS	16	8	또 답부아에서부터 서편으로 지나서 가나 시내에 미치나니 그 끝은 바다라 에브라임 자손의 지파가 그 가족대로 얻은 기업이 이러하였고	The border went out from Tappuah westward unto the river Kanah; and the goings out thereof were at the sea. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Ephraim by their families.	From Tappuah the border went westward to the Brook of Kanah and ended at the Sea. This was the inheritance of the clans of the tribe of Ephraim,
JOS	16	9	그 외에 므낫세 자손의 기업 중에서 에브라임 자손을 위하여 구별한 모든 성읍과 촌락도 있었더라	And the separate cities for the children of Ephraim were among the inheritance of the children of Manasseh, all the cities with their villages.	along with all the cities and villages set apart for the descendants of Ephraim within the inheritance of Manasseh.
JOS	16	10	그들이 게셀에 거하는 가나안 사람을 쫓아내지 아니하였으므로 가나안 사람이 오늘날까지 에브라임 가운데 거하며 사역하는 종이 되니라	And they drave not out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer: but the Canaanites dwell among the Ephraimites unto this day, and serve under tribute.	But they did not drive out the Canaanites who lived in Gezer. So the Canaanites dwell among the Ephraimites to this day, but they are forced laborers.
JOS	17	1	므낫세 지파를 위하여 제비 뽑은 것은 이러하니라 므낫세는 요셉의 장자이었고 므낫세의 장자 마길은 길르앗의 아비라 그는 무사이어서 길르앗과 바산을 얻었으므로	There was also a lot for the tribe of Manasseh; for he was the firstborn of Joseph; to wit, for Machir the firstborn of Manasseh, the father of Gilead: because he was a man of war, therefore he had Gilead and Bashan.	Now this was the allotment for the tribe of Manasseh as Joseph’s firstborn son, namely for Machir the firstborn of Manasseh and father of the Gileadites, who had received Gilead and Bashan because Machir was a man of war.
JOS	17	2	므낫세의 남은 자손을 위하여 그 가족대로 제비를 뽑았는데 그들은 곧 아비에셀의 자손과 헬렉의 자손과 아스리엘의 자손과 세겜의 자손과 헤벨의 자손과 스미다의 자손이니 그들의 가족대로 요셉의 아들 므낫세의 남 자손이며	There was also a lot for the rest of the children of Manasseh by their families; for the children of Abiezer, and for the children of Helek, and for the children of Asriel, and for the children of Shechem, and for the children of Hepher, and for the children of Shemida: these were the male children of Manasseh the son of Joseph by their families.	So this allotment was for the rest of the descendants of Manasseh—the clans of Abiezer, Helek, Asriel, Shechem, Hepher, and Shemida. These are the other male descendants of the clans of Manasseh son of Joseph.
JOS	17	3	헤벨의 아들 길르앗의 손자 마길의 증손 므낫세의 현손 슬로브핫은 아들이 없고 딸뿐이요 그 딸들의 이름은 말라와 노아와 호글라와 밀가와 디르사라	But Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, had no sons, but daughters: and these are the names of his daughters, Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.	But Zelophehad son of Hepher (the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh) had no sons but only daughters. These are the names of his daughters: Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.
JOS	17	4	그들이 제사장 엘르아살과 눈의 아들 여호수아와 방백들 앞에 나아와서 말하기를 여호와께서 모세에게 명하사 우리 형제 중에서 우리에게 기업을 주라 하셨다 하매 여호와의 명령을 따라 그들에게 기업을 그 아비 형제 중에서 주므로	And they came near before Eleazar the priest, and before Joshua the son of Nun, and before the princes, saying, The Lord commanded Moses to give us an inheritance among our brethren. Therefore according to the commandment of the Lord he gave them an inheritance among the brethren of their father.	They approached Eleazar the priest, Joshua son of Nun, and the leaders, and said, “The LORD commanded Moses to give us an inheritance among our brothers.” So Joshua gave them an inheritance among their father’s brothers, in keeping with the command of the LORD.
JOS	17	5	요단 동편 길르앗과 바산 외에 므낫세에게 열 분깃이 돌아갔으니	And there fell ten portions to Manasseh, beside the land of Gilead and Bashan, which were on the other side Jordan;	Thus ten shares fell to Manasseh, in addition to the land of Gilead and Bashan beyond the Jordan,
JOS	17	6	므낫세의 여손들이 그 남 자손 중에서 기업을 얻은 까닭이었으며 길르앗 땅은 므낫세의 남은 자손에게 속하였더라	Because the daughters of Manasseh had an inheritance among his sons: and the rest of Manasseh’s sons had the land of Gilead.	because the daughters of Manasseh received an inheritance among his sons. And the land of Gilead belonged to the rest of the sons of Manasseh.
JOS	17	7	므낫세의 경계는 아셀에서부터 세겜 앞 믹므닷에 미치고 우편으로 가서 엔답부아 거민의 땅에 이르나니	And the coast of Manasseh was from Asher to Michmethah, that lieth before Shechem; and the border went along on the right hand unto the inhabitants of En–tappuah.	Now the border of Manasseh went from Asher to Michmethath near Shechem, then southward to include the inhabitants of En-tappuah.
JOS	17	8	답부아 땅은 므낫세에게 속하였으되 므낫세 경계에 있는 답부아 읍은 에브라임 자손에게 속하였으며	Now Manasseh had the land of Tappuah: but Tappuah on the border of Manasseh belonged to the children of Ephraim;	The region of Tappuah belonged to Manasseh, but Tappuah itself, on the border of Manasseh, belonged to Ephraim.
JOS	17	9	또 경계가 가나 시내로 내려가서 그 시내 남편에 이르나니 므낫세의 성읍 중에 이 성읍들은 에브라임에게 속하였으며 므낫세의 경계는 그 시내 북편이요 그 끝은 바다며	And the coast descended unto the river Kanah, southward of the river: these cities of Ephraim are among the cities of Manasseh: the coast of Manasseh also was on the north side of the river, and the outgoings of it were at the sea:	From there the border continued southward to the Brook of Kanah. There were cities belonging to Ephraim among the cities of Manasseh, but the border of Manasseh was on the north side of the brook and ended at the Sea.
JOS	17	10	그 남편은 에브라임에 속하였고 북편은 므낫세에 속하였고 바다가 그 경계가 되었으며 그들의 땅의 북은 아셀에 미쳤고 동은 잇사갈에 미쳤으며	Southward it was Ephraim’s, and northward it was Manasseh’s, and the sea is his border; and they met together in Asher on the north, and in Issachar on the east.	Ephraim’s territory was to the south, and Manasseh’s was to the north, having the Sea as its border and adjoining Asher on the north and Issachar on the east.
JOS	17	11	잇사갈과 아셀에도 므낫세의 소유가 있으니 곧 벧스안과 그 향리와 이블르암과 그 향리와 돌의 거민과 그 향리요 또 엔돌 거민과 그 향리와 다아낙 거민과 그 향리와 므깃도 거민과 그 향리들 세 높은 곳이라	And Manasseh had in Issachar and in Asher Beth–shean and her towns, and Ibleam and her towns, and the inhabitants of Dor and her towns, and the inhabitants of Endor and her towns, and the inhabitants of Taanach and her towns, and the inhabitants of Megiddo and her towns, even three countries.	Within Issachar and Asher, Manasseh was assigned Beth-shean, Ibleam, Dor (that is, Naphath), Endor, Taanach, and Megiddo, each with their surrounding settlements.
JOS	17	12	그러나 므낫세 자손이 그 성읍들의 거민을 쫓아내지 못하매 가나안 사람이 결심하고 그 땅에 거하였더니	Yet the children of Manasseh could not drive out the inhabitants of those cities; but the Canaanites would dwell in that land.	But the descendants of Manasseh were unable to occupy these cities, because the Canaanites were determined to stay in this land.
JOS	17	13	이스라엘 자손이 강성한 후에야 가나안 사람에게 사역을 시켰고 다 쫓아내지 아니하였더라	Yet it came to pass, when the children of Israel were waxen strong, that they put the Canaanites to tribute; but did not utterly drive them out.	However, when the Israelites grew stronger, they put the Canaanites to forced labor; but they failed to drive them out completely.
JOS	17	14	요셉 자손이 여호수아에게 말하여 가로되 여호와께서 지금까지 내게 복을 주시므로 내가 큰 민족이 되었거늘 당신이 나의 기업을 위하여 한 제비, 한 분깃으로만 내게 주심은 어찜이니이까	And the children of Joseph spake unto Joshua, saying, Why hast thou given me but one lot and one portion to inherit, seeing I am a great people, forasmuch as the Lord hath blessed me hitherto?	Then the sons of Joseph said to Joshua, “Why have you given us only one portion as an inheritance? We have many people, because the LORD has blessed us abundantly.”
JOS	17	15	여호수아가 그들에게 이르되 네가 큰 민족이 되므로 에브라임 산지가 네게 너무 좁을진대 브리스 사람과 르바임 사람의 땅 삼림에 올라가서 스스로 개척하라	And Joshua answered them, If thou be a great people, then get thee up to the wood country, and cut down for thyself there in the land of the Perizzites and of the giants, if mount Ephraim be too narrow for thee.	Joshua answered them, “If you have so many people that the hill country of Ephraim is too small for you, go to the forest and clear for yourself an area in the land of the Perizzites and the Rephaim.”
JOS	17	16	요셉 자손이 가로되 그 산지는 우리에게 넉넉지도 못하고 골짜기 땅에 거하는 가나안 사람에게는 벧스안과 그 향리에 거하는 자든지 이스르엘 골짜기에 거하는 자든지 다 철병거가 있나이다	And the children of Joseph said, The hill is not enough for us: and all the Canaanites that dwell in the land of the valley have chariots of iron, both they who are of Beth–shean and her towns, and they who are of the valley of Jezreel.	“The hill country is not enough for us,” they replied, “and all the Canaanites who live in the valley have iron chariots, both in Beth-shean with its towns and in the Valley of Jezreel.”
JOS	17	17	여호수아가 다시 요셉의 족속 곧 에브라임과 므낫세에게 일러 가로되 너는 큰 민족이요 큰 권능이 있은즉 한 분깃만 가질 것이 아니라	And Joshua spake unto the house of Joseph, even to Ephraim and to Manasseh, saying, Thou art a great people, and hast great power: thou shalt not have one lot only:	So Joshua said to the house of Joseph—to Ephraim and Manasseh—“You have many people and great strength. You shall not have just one allotment,
JOS	17	18	그 산지도 네 것이 되리니 비록 삼림이라도 네가 개척하라 그 끝까지 네 것이 되리라 가나안 사람이 비록 철병거를 가졌고 강할지라도 네가 능히 그를 쫓아내리라	But the mountain shall be thine; for it is a wood, and thou shalt cut it down: and the outgoings of it shall be thine: for thou shalt drive out the Canaanites, though they have iron chariots, and though they be strong.	because the hill country will be yours as well. It is a forest; clear it, and its farthest limits will be yours. Although the Canaanites have iron chariots and although they are strong, you can drive them out.”
JOS	18	1	이스라엘 자손의 온 회중이 실로에 모여서 거기 회막을 세웠으니 그 땅이 이미 그들의 앞에 돌아와 복종하였음이나	And the whole congregation of the children of Israel assembled together at Shiloh, and set up the tabernacle of the congregation there. And the land was subdued before them.	Then the whole congregation of Israel assembled at Shiloh and set up the Tent of Meeting there. And though the land was subdued before them,
JOS	18	2	이스라엘 자손 중에 그 기업의 분배를 얻지 못한 자가 오히려 일곱 지파라	And there remained among the children of Israel seven tribes, which had not yet received their inheritance.	there were still seven tribes of Israel who had not yet received their inheritance.
JOS	18	3	여호수아가 이스라엘 자손에게 이르되 너희가 너희 열조의 하나님 여호와께서 너희에게 주신 땅을 취하러 가기를 어느 때까지 지체하겠느냐	And Joshua said unto the children of Israel, How long are ye slack to go to possess the land, which the Lord God of your fathers hath given you?	So Joshua said to the Israelites, “How long will you put off entering and possessing the land that the LORD, the God of your fathers, has given you?
JOS	18	4	너희는 매 지파에 삼 인씩 선정하라 내가 그들을 보내리니 그들은 일어나서 그 땅에 두루 다니며 그 기업에 상당하게 그려가지고 내게로 돌아올 것이라	Give out from among you three men for each tribe: and I will send them, and they shall rise, and go through the land, and describe it according to the inheritance of them; and they shall come again to me.	Appoint three men from each tribe, and I will send them out to survey the land and map it out, according to the inheritance of each. Then they will return to me
JOS	18	5	그들이 그 땅을 일곱 부분에 나누되 유다는 남편 자기 경내에 거하고 요셉의 족속은 그 북편 자기 경내에 거한즉	And they shall divide it into seven parts: Judah shall abide in their coast on the south, and the house of Joseph shall abide in their coasts on the north.	and divide the land into seven portions. Judah shall remain in their territory in the south, and the house of Joseph shall remain in their territory in the north.
JOS	18	6	그 남은 땅을 일곱 부분으로 그려서 이곳 내게로 가져올지니 내가 여기서 너희를 위하여 우리 하나님 여호와 앞에서 제비 뽑으리라	Ye shall therefore describe the land into seven parts, and bring the description hither to me, that I may cast lots for you here before the Lord our God.	When you have mapped out the seven portions of land and brought it to me, I will cast lots for you here in the presence of the LORD our God.
JOS	18	7	레위 사람은 너희 중에 분깃이 없나니 여호와의 제사장 직분이 그들의 기업이 됨이며 갓과 르우벤과 므낫세 반 지파는 요단 저편 동편에서 이미 기업을 받았나니 이는 여호와의 종 모세가 그들에게 준 것이니라	But the Levites have no part among you; for the priesthood of the Lord is their inheritance: and Gad, and Reuben, and half the tribe of Manasseh, have received their inheritance beyond Jordan on the east, which Moses the servant of the Lord gave them.	The Levites, however, have no portion among you, because their inheritance is the priesthood of the LORD. And Gad, Reuben, and half the tribe of Manasseh have already received the inheritance that Moses the servant of the LORD gave them beyond the Jordan to the east.”
JOS	18	8	그 사람들이 일어나 떠나니 여호수아가 땅을 그리러 가는 그들에게 명하여 가로되 가서 그 땅으로 두루 다니며 그려가지고 내게로 돌아오라 내가 여기 실로에서 여호와 앞에서 너희를 위하여 제비 뽑으리라	And the men arose, and went away: and Joshua charged them that went to describe the land, saying, Go and walk through the land, and describe it, and come again to me, that I may here cast lots for you before the Lord in Shiloh.	As the men got up to go out, Joshua commanded them to map out the land, saying, “Go and survey the land, map it out, and return to me. Then I will cast lots for you here in Shiloh in the presence of the LORD.”
JOS	18	9	그 사람들이 가서 그 땅으로 두루 다니며 성읍들을 따라서 일곱 부분으로 책에 그리고 실로 진에 돌아와 여호수아에게 나아오니	And the men went and passed through the land, and described it by cities into seven parts in a book, and came again to Joshua to the host at Shiloh.	So the men departed and went throughout the land, mapping it city by city into seven portions. Then they returned with the document to Joshua at the camp in Shiloh.
JOS	18	10	여호수아가 그들을 위하여 실로 여호와 앞에서 제비 뽑고 그가 거기서 이스라엘 자손의 분파대로 땅을 분배하였더라	And Joshua cast lots for them in Shiloh before the Lord: and there Joshua divided the land unto the children of Israel according to their divisions.	And Joshua cast lots for them in the presence of the LORD at Shiloh, where he distributed the land to the Israelites according to their divisions.
JOS	18	11	베냐민 자손 지파를 위하여 그 가족대로 제비를 뽑았으니 그 제비 뽑은 땅의 경계는 유다 자손과 요셉 자손의 중간이라	And the lot of the tribe of the children of Benjamin came up according to their families: and the coast of their lot came forth between the children of Judah and the children of Joseph.	The first lot came up for the clans of the tribe of Benjamin. Their allotted territory lay between the tribes of Judah and Joseph:
JOS	18	12	그 북방 경계는 요단에서부터 여리고 북편으로 올라가서 서편 산지를 넘어서 또 올라가서 벧아웬 황무지에 이르며	And their border on the north side was from Jordan; and the border went up to the side of Jericho on the north side, and went up through the mountains westward; and the goings out thereof were at the wilderness of Beth–aven.	On the north side their border began at the Jordan, went up past the northern slope of Jericho, headed west through the hill country, and came out at the wilderness of Beth-aven.
JOS	18	13	또 그 경계가 거기서부터 루스로 나아가서 루스 남편에 이르나니 루스는 곧 벧엘이며 또 그 경계가 아다롯 앗달로 내려가서 아래 벧 호론 남편 산 곁으로 지나고	And the border went over from thence toward Luz, to the side of Luz, which is Beth–el, southward; and the border descended to Ataroth–adar, near the hill that lieth on the south side of the nether Beth–horon.	From there the border crossed over to the southern slope of Luz (that is, Bethel) and went down to Ataroth-addar on the hill south of Lower Beth-horon.
JOS	18	14	벧 호론 앞 남편 산에서부터 서방으로 돌아 남편으로 향하여 유다 자손의 성읍 기럇바알 곧 기럇 여아림에 이르러 끝이 되나니 이는 서방 경계며	And the border was drawn thence, and compassed the corner of the sea southward, from the hill that lieth before Beth–horon southward; and the goings out thereof were at Kirjath–baal, which is Kirjath–jearim, a city of the children of Judah: this was the west quarter.	On the west side the border curved southward from the hill facing Beth-horon on the south and came out at Kiriath-baal (that is, Kiriath-jearim), a city of the sons of Judah. This was the western side.
JOS	18	15	남방 경계는 기럇 여아림 끝에서부터 서편으로 나아가 넵도아 물 근원에 이르고	And the south quarter was from the end of Kirjath–jearim, and the border went out on the west, and went out to the well of waters of Nephtoah:	On the south side the border began at the outskirts of Kiriath-jearim and extended westward to the spring at the Waters of Nephtoah.
JOS	18	16	르바임 골짜기 북편 힌놈의 아들 골짜기 앞에 있는 산 끝으로 내려가고 또 힌놈의 골짜기로 내려가서 여부스 남편에 이르러 엔 로겔로 내려가고	And the border came down to the end of the mountain that lieth before the valley of the son of Hinnom, and which is in the valley of the giants on the north, and descended to the valley of Hinnom, to the side of Jebusi on the south, and descended to En–rogel,	Then it went down to the foot of the hill that faces the Valley of Hinnom at the northern end of the Valley of Rephaim and ran down the Valley of Hinnom toward the southern slope of the Jebusites and downward to En-rogel.
JOS	18	17	또 북향하여 엔 세메스로 나아가서 아둠밈 비탈 맞은편 글릴롯으로 나아가서 르우벤 자손 보한의 돌까지 내려 가고	And was drawn from the north, and went forth to En–shemesh, and went forth toward Geliloth, which is over against the going up of Adummim, and descended to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben,	From there it curved northward and proceeded to En-shemesh and on to Geliloth facing the Ascent of Adummim, and continued down to the Stone of Bohan son of Reuben.
JOS	18	18	북으로 아라바 맞은편을 지나 아라바로 내려가고	And passed along toward the side over against Arabah northward, and went down unto Arabah:	Then it went on to the northern slope of Beth-arabah and went down into the valley.
JOS	18	19	또 북으로 벧 호글라 곁을 지나서 요단 남단에 당한 염해의 북편 해만이 그 경계의 끝이 되나니 이는 남편 경계며	And the border passed along to the side of Beth–hoglah northward: and the outgoings of the border were at the north bay of the salt sea at the south end of Jordan: this was the south coast.	The border continued to the northern slope of Beth-hoglah and came out at the northern bay of the Salt Sea, at the mouth of the Jordan. This was the southern border.
JOS	18	20	동방 경계는 요단이니 이는 베냐민 자손이 그 가족대로 얻은 기업의 사면 경계이었더라	And Jordan was the border of it on the east side. This was the inheritance of the children of Benjamin, by the coasts thereof round about, according to their families.	On the east side the border was the Jordan. These were the borders around the inheritance of the clans of the tribe of Benjamin.
JOS	18	21	베냐민 자손의 지파가 그 가족대로 얻은 성읍들은 여리고와 벧 호글라와 에멕 그시스와	Now the cities of the tribe of the children of Benjamin according to their families were Jericho, and Beth–hoglah, and the valley of Keziz,	These were the cities of the clans of the tribe of Benjamin:
JOS	18	22	벧 아라바와 스마라임과 벧엘과	And Beth–arabah, and Zemaraim, and Beth–el,	Jericho, Beth-hoglah, Emek-keziz, Beth-arabah, Zemaraim, Bethel,
JOS	18	23	아윔과 바라와 오브라와	And Avim, and Parah, and Ophrah,	Avvim, Parah, Ophrah,
JOS	18	24	그발 암모니와 오브니와 게바니 십 이 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이며	And Chephar–haammonai, and Ophni, and Gaba; twelve cities with their villages:	Chephar-ammoni, Ophni, and Geba—twelve cities, along with their villages.
JOS	18	25	기브온과 라마와 브에롯과	Gibeon, and Ramah, and Beeroth,	Gibeon, Ramah, Beeroth,
JOS	18	26	미스베와 그비라와 모사와	And Mizpeh, and Chephirah, and Mozah,	Mizpeh, Chephirah, Mozah,
JOS	18	27	레겜과 이르브엘과 다랄라와	And Rekem, and Irpeel, and Taralah,	Rekem, Irpeel, Taralah,
JOS	18	28	셀라와 엘렙과 여부스 곧 예루살렘과 기부앗과 기럇이니 십사 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이라 이는 베냐민 자손이 그 가족대로 얻은 기업이었더라	And Zelah, Eleph, and Jebusi, which is Jerusalem, Gibeath, and Kirjath; fourteen cities with their villages. This is the inheritance of the children of Benjamin according to their families.	Zelah, Haeleph, Jebus (that is, Jerusalem), Gibeah, and Kiriath-jearim —fourteen cities, along with their villages. This was the inheritance of the clans of the tribe of Benjamin.
JOS	19	1	둘째로 시므온 곧 시므온 자손의 지파를 위하여 그 가족대로 제비를 뽑았으니 그 기업은 유다 자손의 기업 중에서라	And the second lot came forth to Simeon, even for the tribe of the children of Simeon according to their families: and their inheritance was within the inheritance of the children of Judah.	The second lot came out for the clans of the tribe of Simeon:
JOS	19	2	그 얻은 기업은 브엘세바 곧 세바와 몰라다와	And they had in their inheritance Beer–sheba, Sheba, and Moladah,	Their inheritance lay within the territory of Judah and included Beersheba (or Sheba), Moladah,
JOS	19	3	하살 수알과 발라와 에셈과	And Hazar–shual, and Balah, and Azem,	Hazar-shual, Balah, Ezem,
JOS	19	4	엘돌랏과 브둘과 호르마와	And Eltolad, and Bethul, and Hormah,	Eltolad, Bethul, Hormah,
JOS	19	5	시글락과 벧 말가봇과 하살수사와	And Ziklag, and Beth–marcaboth, and Hazar–susah,	Ziklag, Beth-marcaboth, Hazar-susah,
JOS	19	6	벧 르바옷과 사루헨이니 십삼 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이며	And Beth–lebaoth, and Sharuhen; thirteen cities and their villages:	Beth-lebaoth, and Sharuhen—thirteen cities, along with their villages.
JOS	19	7	또 아인과 림몬과 에델과 아산이니 네 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이며	Ain, Remmon, and Ether, and Ashan; four cities and their villages:	Ain, Rimmon, Ether, and Ashan—four cities, along with their villages,
JOS	19	8	또 남방 라마 곧 바알랏 브엘까지 이 성들을 둘러 있는 모든 촌락이니 이는 시므온 자손의 지파가 그 가족대로 얻은 기업이라	And all the villages that were round about these cities to Baalath–beer, Ramath of the south. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Simeon according to their families.	and all the villages surrounding these cities as far as Baalath-beer (Ramah of the Negev). This was the inheritance of the clans of the tribe of Simeon.
JOS	19	9	시므온 자손의 이 기업은 유다 자손의 기업 중에서 취하였으니 이는 유다 자손의 분깃이 자기들에게 너무 많으므로 시므온 자손이 자기의 기업을 그들의 기업 중에서 얻음이었더라	Out of the portion of the children of Judah was the inheritance of the children of Simeon: for the part of the children of Judah was too much for them: therefore the children of Simeon had their inheritance within the inheritance of them.	The inheritance of the Simeonites was taken from the territory of Judah, because the share for Judah’s descendants was too large for them. So the Simeonites received an inheritance within Judah’s portion.
JOS	19	10	셋째로 스불론 자손을 위하여 그 가족대로 제비를 뽑았으니 그 기업의 경계는 사릿에 미치고	And the third lot came up for the children of Zebulun according to their families: and the border of their inheritance was unto Sarid:	The third lot came up for the clans of the tribe of Zebulun:
JOS	19	11	서편으로 올라가서 마랄라에 이르러 답베셋에 미치고 욕느암 앞 시내에 미치며	And their border went up toward the sea, and Maralah, and reached to Dabbasheth, and reached to the river that is before Jokneam;	The border of their inheritance stretched as far as Sarid. It went up westward to Maralah, reached Dabbesheth, and met the brook east of Jokneam.
JOS	19	12	사릿에서부터 동편으로 돌아 해 뜨는 편을 향하고 기슬롯 다볼의 경계에 이르고 다브랏으로 나가서 야비아로 올라가고	And turned from Sarid eastward toward the sunrising unto the border of Chisloth–tabor, and then goeth out to Daberath, and goeth up to Japhia,	From Sarid it turned eastward along the border of Chisloth-tabor and went on to Daberath and up to Japhia.
JOS	19	13	또 거기서부터 동편으로 가드 헤벨을 지나 엣 가신에 이르고 네아까지 연한 림몬으로 나아가서	And from thence passeth on along on the east to Gittah–hepher, to Ittah–kazin, and goeth out to Remmon–methoar to Neah;	From there it crossed eastward to Gath-hepher and to Eth-kazin; it extended to Rimmon and curved around toward Neah.
JOS	19	14	북으로 돌아 한나돈에 이르고 입다엘 골짜기에 이르러 끝이 되며	And the border compasseth it on the north side to Hannathon: and the outgoings thereof are in the valley of Jiphthah–el:	Then the border circled around the north side of Neah to Hannathon and ended at the Valley of Iphtah-el.
JOS	19	15	또 갓닷과 나할랄과 시므론과 이달라와 베들레헴이니 모두 십이 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이라	And Kattath, and Nahallal, and Shimron, and Idalah, and Beth–lehem: twelve cities with their villages.	It also included Kattath, Nahalal, Shimron, Idalah, and Bethlehem. There were twelve cities, along with their villages.
JOS	19	16	스불론 자손이 그 가족대로 얻은 기업은 이 성읍들과 그 촌락이었더라	This is the inheritance of the children of Zebulun according to their families, these cities with their villages.	This was the inheritance of the clans of the tribe of Zebulun, including these cities and their villages.
JOS	19	17	넷째로 잇사갈 곧 잇사갈 자손을 위하여 그 가족대로 제비를 뽑았으니	And the fourth lot came out to Issachar, for the children of Issachar according to their families.	The fourth lot came out for the clans of the tribe of Issachar:
JOS	19	18	그 지경 안은 이스르엘과 그술롯과 수넴과	And their border was toward Jezreel, and Chesulloth, and Shunem,	Their territory included Jezreel, Chesulloth, Shunem,
JOS	19	19	하바라임과 시온과 아나하랏과	And Hapharaim, and Shion, and Anaharath,	Hapharaim, Shion, Anaharath,
JOS	19	20	랍빗과 기시온과 에베스와	And Rabbith, and Kishion, and Abez,	Rabbith, Kishion, Ebez,
JOS	19	21	레멧과 언간님과 엔핫다와 벧 바세스며	And Remeth, and En–gannim, and En–haddah, and Beth–pazzez;	Remeth, En-gannim, En-haddah, and Beth-pazzez.
JOS	19	22	그 경계는 다볼과 사하수마와 벧 세메스에 미치고 그 끝은 요단이니 모두 십육 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이라	And the coast reacheth to Tabor, and Shahazimah, and Beth–shemesh; and the outgoings of their border were at Jordan: sixteen cities with their villages.	The border reached Tabor, Shahazumah, and Beth-shemesh, and ended at the Jordan. There were sixteen cities, along with their villages.
JOS	19	23	잇사갈 자손 지파가 그 가족대로 얻은 기업은 이 성읍들과 그 촌락이었더라	This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Issachar according to their families, the cities and their villages.	This was the inheritance of the clans of the tribe of Issachar, including these cities and their villages.
JOS	19	24	다섯째로 아셀 자손의 지파를 위하여 그 가족대로 제비를 뽑았으니	And the fifth lot came out for the tribe of the children of Asher according to their families.	The fifth lot came out for the clans of the tribe of Asher:
JOS	19	25	그 지경 안은 헬갓과 할리와 베덴과 악삽과	And their border was Helkath, and Hali, and Beten, and Achshaph,	Their territory included Helkath, Hali, Beten, Achshaph,
JOS	19	26	알람멜렉과 아맛과 미살이며 그 경계의 서편은 갈멜에 미치며 시홀림낫에 미치고	And Alammelech, and Amad, and Misheal; and reacheth to Carmel westward, and to Shihor–libnath;	Allammelech, Amad, and Mishal. On the west the border touched Carmel and Shihor-libnath,
JOS	19	27	꺾여 해 돋는 편을 향하여 벧 다곤에 이르며 스불론에 달하고 북편으로 입다 엘 골짜기에 미쳐서 벧에멕과 느이엘에 이르고 가불좌편으로 나가서	And turneth toward the sunrising to Beth–dagon, and reacheth to Zebulun, and to the valley of Jiphthah–el toward the north side of Beth–emek, and Neiel, and goeth out to Cabul on the left hand,	then turned eastward toward Beth-dagon, touched Zebulun and the Valley of Iphtah-el, and went north to Beth-emek and Neiel, passing Cabul on the left.
JOS	19	28	에브론과 르홉과 함몬과 가나를 지나 큰 시돈까지 이르고	And Hebron, and Rehob, and Hammon, and Kanah, even unto great Zidon;	It went on to Ebron, Rehob, Hammon, and Kanah, as far as Greater Sidon.
JOS	19	29	돌아서 라마와 견고한 성읍 두로에 이르고 돌아서 호사에 이르고 악십 지방 곁 바다가 끝이 되며	And then the coast turneth to Ramah, and to the strong city Tyre; and the coast turneth to Hosah; and the outgoings thereof are at the sea from the coast to Achzib:	The border then turned back toward Ramah as far as the fortified city of Tyre, turned toward Hosah, and came out at the Sea in the region of Achzib,
JOS	19	30	또 움마와 아벡과 르홉이니 모두 이십이 성읍과 그 촌락이라	Ummah also, and Aphek, and Rehob: twenty and two cities with their villages.	Ummah, Aphek, and Rehob. There were twenty-two cities, along with their villages.
JOS	19	31	아셀 자손의 지파가 그 가족대로 얻은 기업은 이 성읍들과 그 촌락이었더라	This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Asher according to their families, these cities with their villages.	This was the inheritance of the clans of the tribe of Asher, including these cities and their villages.
JOS	19	32	여섯째로 납달리 자손을 위하여 납달리 자손의 가족대로 제비를 뽑았으니	The sixth lot came out to the children of Naphtali, even for the children of Naphtali according to their families.	The sixth lot came out for the clans of the tribe of Naphtali:
JOS	19	33	그 경계는 헬렙과 사아난님의 상수리나무에서부터 아다미 네겝과 얍느엘을 지나 락굼까지요 그 끝은 요단이며	And their coast was from Heleph, from Allon to Zaanannim, and Adami, Nekeb, and Jabneel, unto Lakum; and the outgoings thereof were at Jordan:	Their border started at Heleph and the great tree of Zaanannim, passing Adami-nekeb and Jabneel as far as Lakkum and ending at the Jordan.
JOS	19	34	서편으로 돌아 아스놋 다볼에 이르고 그곳에서부터 나가 훅곡에 이르러는 남은 스불론에 접하였고 서는 아셀에 접하였으며 해 돋는 편은 유다에 달한 요단이며	And then the coast turneth westward to Aznoth–tabor, and goeth out from thence to Hukkok, and reacheth to Zebulun on the south side, and reacheth to Asher on the west side, and to Judah upon Jordan toward the sunrising.	Then the border turned westward to Aznoth-tabor and ran from there to Hukkok, touching Zebulun on the south side, Asher on the west, and Judah at the Jordan on the east.
JOS	19	35	그 견고한 성읍들은 싯딤과 세르와 함맛과 락갓과 긴네렛과	And the fenced cities are Ziddim, Zer, and Hammath, Rakkath, and Chinnereth,	The fortified cities were Ziddim, Zer, Hammath, Rakkath, Chinnereth,
JOS	19	36	아다마와 라마와 하솔과	And Adamah, and Ramah, and Hazor,	Adamah, Ramah, Hazor,
JOS	19	37	게데스와 에드레이와 엔 하솔과	And Kedesh, and Edrei, and En–hazor,	Kedesh, Edrei, En-hazor,
JOS	19	38	이론과 믹다렐과 호렘과 벧 아낫과 벧 세메스니 모두 십구 성읍이요 또 그 촌락이라	And Iron, and Migdal–el, Horem, and Beth–anath, and Beth–shemesh; nineteen cities with their villages.	Iron, Migdal-el, Horem, Beth-anath, and Beth-shemesh. There were nineteen cities, along with their villages.
JOS	19	39	납달리 자손의 지파가 그 가족대로 얻은 기업은 이 성읍들과 그 촌락이었더라	This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Naphtali according to their families, the cities and their villages.	This was the inheritance of the clans of the tribe of Naphtali, including these cities and their villages.
JOS	19	40	일곱째로 단 자손의 지파를 위하여 그 가족대로 제비를 뽑았으니	And the seventh lot came out for the tribe of the children of Dan according to their families.	The seventh lot came out for the clans of the tribe of Dan:
JOS	19	41	그 기업의 지경은 소라와 에스다올과 이르세메스와	And the coast of their inheritance was Zorah, and Eshtaol, and Ir–shemesh,	The territory of their inheritance included Zorah, Eshtaol, Ir-shemesh,
JOS	19	42	사알랍빈과 아얄론과 이들라와	And Shaalabbin, and Ajalon, and Jethlah,	Shaalabbin, Aijalon, Ithlah,
JOS	19	43	엘론과 딤나와 에그론과	And Elon, and Thimnathah, and Ekron,	Elon, Timnah, Ekron,
JOS	19	44	엘드게와 깁브돈과 바알랏과	And Eltekeh, and Gibbethon, and Baalath,	Eltekeh, Gibbethon, Baalath,
JOS	19	45	여훗과 브네브락과 가드 림몬과	And Jehud, and Bene–berak, and Gath–rimmon,	Jehud, Bene-berak, Gath-rimmon,
JOS	19	46	메얄곤과 락곤과 욥바 맞은편 경계까지라	And Me–jarkon, and Rakkon, with the border before Japho.	Me-jarkon, and Rakkon, including the territory across from Joppa.
JOS	19	47	그런데 단 자손의 지경이 더욱 확장되었으니 이는 단 자손이 올라가서 레센을 쳐서 취하여 칼날로 치고 그것을 얻어 거기 거하였음이라 그 조상 단의 이름을 따라서 레센을 단이라 하였더라	And the coast of the children of Dan went out too little for them: therefore the children of Dan went up to fight against Leshem, and took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and possessed it, and dwelt therein, and called Leshem, Dan, after the name of Dan their father.	(Later, when the territory of the Danites was lost to them, they went up and fought against Leshem, captured it, and put it to the sword. So they took possession of Leshem, settled there, and renamed it after their father Dan.)
JOS	19	48	단 자손의 지파가 그 가족대로 얻은 기업은 이 성읍들과 그 촌락이었더라	This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Dan according to their families, these cities with their villages.	This was the inheritance of the clans of the tribe of Dan, including these cities and their villages.
JOS	19	49	이스라엘 자손이 그 경계를 따라서 기업의 땅 나누기를 마치고 자기들 중에서 눈의 아들 여호수아에게 기업을 주었으되	When they had made an end of dividing the land for inheritance by their coasts, the children of Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua the son of Nun among them:	When they had finished distributing the land into its territories, the Israelites gave Joshua son of Nun an inheritance among them,
JOS	19	50	곧 여호와의 명령대로 여호수아의 구한 성읍 에브라임 산지 딤낫세라를 주매 여호수아가 그 성읍을 중건하고 거기 거하였었더라	According to the word of the Lord they gave him the city which he asked, even Timnath–serah in mount Ephraim: and he built the city, and dwelt therein.	as the LORD had commanded. They gave him the city of Timnath-serah in the hill country of Ephraim, as he requested. He rebuilt the city and settled in it.
JOS	19	51	제사장 엘르아살과 눈의 아들 여호수아와 이스라엘 자손 지파의 족장들이 실로에서 회막 문 여호와 앞에서 제비 뽑아 나눈 기업이 이러하니라 이에 땅 나누는 일이 마쳤더라	These are the inheritances, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel, divided for an inheritance by lot in Shiloh before the Lord, at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. So they made an end of dividing the country.	These are the inheritances that Eleazar the priest, Joshua son of Nun, and the heads of the families distributed by lot to the tribes of Israel at Shiloh before the LORD at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting. So they finished dividing up the land.
JOS	20	1	여호와께서 여호수아에게 일러 가라사대	The Lord also spake unto Joshua, saying,	Then the LORD said to Joshua,
JOS	20	2	이스라엘 자손에게 고하여 이르라 내가 모세로 너희에게 말한 도피성을 택정하여	Speak to the children of Israel, saying, Appoint out for you cities of refuge, whereof I spake unto you by the hand of Moses:	“Tell the Israelites to designate the cities of refuge, as I instructed you through Moses,
JOS	20	3	부지중 오살한 자를 그리로 도망하게 하라 이는 너희 중 피의 보수자를 피할 곳이니라	That the slayer that killeth any person unawares and unwittingly may flee thither: and they shall be your refuge from the avenger of blood.	so that anyone who kills another unintentionally or accidentally may flee there. These will be your refuge from the avenger of blood.
JOS	20	4	그 성읍들의 하나에 도피하는 자는 그 성읍에 들어가는 문 어귀에 서서 그 성읍 장로들의 귀에 자기의 사고를 고할 것이요 그들은 그를 받아 성읍에 들여 한 곳을 주어 자기들 중에 거하게 하고	And when he that doth flee unto one of those cities shall stand at the entering of the gate of the city, and shall declare his cause in the ears of the elders of that city, they shall take him into the city unto them, and give him a place, that he may dwell among them.	When someone flees to one of these cities, stands at the entrance of the city gate, and states his case before its elders, they are to bring him into the city and give him a place to live among them.
JOS	20	5	피의 보수자가 그 뒤를 따라온다 할지라도 그들은 그 살인자를 그의 손에 내어주지 말지니 이는 본래 미워함이 없이 부지중에 그 이웃을 죽였음이라	And if the avenger of blood pursue after him, then they shall not deliver the slayer up into his hand; because he smote his neighbour unwittingly, and hated him not beforetime.	Now if the avenger of blood pursues him, they must not surrender the manslayer into his hand, because that man killed his neighbor accidentally without prior malice.
JOS	20	6	그 살인자가 회중의 앞에 서서 재판을 받기까지나 당시 대제사장의 죽기까지 그 성읍에 거하다가 그 후에 그 살인자가 본 성읍 곧 자기가 도망하여 나온 그 성읍의 자기 집으로 돌아갈지니라	And he shall dwell in that city, until he stand before the congregation for judgment, and until the death of the high priest that shall be in those days: then shall the slayer return, and come unto his own city, and unto his own house, unto the city from whence he fled.	He is to stay in that city until he stands trial before the assembly and until the death of the high priest serving at that time. Then the manslayer may return to his own home in the city from which he fled.”
JOS	20	7	무리가 납달리의 산지 갈릴리 게데스와 에브라임 산지의 세겜과 유다 산지의 기럇 아르바 곧 헤브론을 구별하였고	And they appointed Kedesh in Galilee in mount Naphtali, and Shechem in mount Ephraim, and Kirjath–arba, which is Hebron, in the mountain of Judah.	So they set apart Kedesh in Galilee in the hill country of Naphtali, Shechem in the hill country of Ephraim, and Kiriath-arba (that is, Hebron) in the hill country of Judah.
JOS	20	8	또 여리고 동 요단 저편 르우벤 지파 중에서 평지 광야의 베셀과 갓 지파 중에서 길르앗라못과 므낫세 지파 중에서 바산 골란을 택하였으니	And on the other side Jordan by Jericho eastward, they assigned Bezer in the wilderness upon the plain out of the tribe of Reuben, and Ramoth in Gilead out of the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Bashan out of the tribe of Manasseh.	And beyond the Jordan, east of Jericho, they designated Bezer on the wilderness plateau from the tribe of Reuben, Ramoth in Gilead from the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Bashan from the tribe of Manasseh.
JOS	20	9	이는 곧 이스라엘 모든 자손과 그들 중에 우거하는 객을 위하여 선정한 성읍들로서 누구든지 부지중 살인한 자로 그리로 도망하여 피의 보수자의 손에 죽지 않게 하기 위함이며 그는 회중 앞에 설 때까지 거기 있을것이니라	These were the cities appointed for all the children of Israel, and for the stranger that sojourneth among them, that whosoever killeth any person at unawares might flee thither, and not die by the hand of the avenger of blood, until he stood before the congregation.	These are the cities appointed for all the Israelites and foreigners among them, so that anyone who kills a person unintentionally may flee there and not die by the hand of the avenger of blood prior to standing trial before the assembly.
JOS	21	1	때에 레위 사람의 족장들이 제사장 엘르아살과 눈의 아들 여호수아와 이스라엘 자손의 지파 족장들에게 나아와	Then came near the heads of the fathers of the Levites unto Eleazar the priest, and unto Joshua the son of Nun, and unto the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel;	Now the family heads of the Levites approached Eleazar the priest, Joshua son of Nun, and the heads of the other tribes of Israel
JOS	21	2	가나안 땅 실로에서 그들에게 말하여 가로되 여호와께서 모세로 명하사 우리의 거할 성읍들과 우리의 가축 먹일 그들을 우리에게 주라 하셨었나이다 하매	And they spake unto them at Shiloh in the land of Canaan, saying, The Lord commanded by the hand of Moses to give us cities to dwell in, with the suburbs thereof for our cattle.	at Shiloh in the land of Canaan and said to them, “The LORD commanded through Moses that we be given cities in which to live, together with pasturelands for our livestock.”
JOS	21	3	이스라엘 자손이 여호와의 명을 따라 자기의 기업에서 이 아래 성읍들과 그들을 레위 사람에게 주니라	And the children of Israel gave unto the Levites out of their inheritance, at the commandment of the Lord, these cities and their suburbs.	So by the command of the LORD, the Israelites gave the Levites these cities and their pasturelands out of their own inheritance:
JOS	21	4	그핫 가족을 위하여 제비를 뽑았는데 레위 사람 중 제사장 아론의 자손들은 유다 지파와 시므온 지파와 베냐민 지파 중에서 제비대로 십삼 성읍을 얻었고	And the lot came out for the families of the Kohathites: and the children of Aaron the priest, which were of the Levites, had by lot out of the tribe of Judah, and out of the tribe of Simeon, and out of the tribe of Benjamin, thirteen cities.	The first lot came out for the Kohathite clans. The Levites who were descendants of Aaron the priest received thirteen cities by lot from the tribes of Judah, Simeon, and Benjamin.
JOS	21	5	그 남은 그핫 자손들은 에브라임 지파의 가족과 단 지파와 므낫세 반 지파 중에서 제비대로 열 성읍을 얻었으며	And the rest of the children of Kohath had by lot out of the families of the tribe of Ephraim, and out of the tribe of Dan, and out of the half tribe of Manasseh, ten cities.	The remaining descendants of Kohath received ten cities by lot from the tribes of Ephraim, Dan, and the half-tribe of Manasseh.
JOS	21	6	게르손 자손들은 잇사갈 지파의 가족들과 아셀 지파와 납달리 지파와 바산에 있는 므낫세 반 지파 중에서 제비대로 십삼 성읍을 얻었더라	And the children of Gershon had by lot out of the families of the tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of the half tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen cities.	The descendants of Gershon received thirteen cities by lot from the tribes of Issachar, Asher, Naphtali, and the half-tribe of Manasseh in Bashan.
JOS	21	7	므라리 자손들은 그 가족대로 르우벤 지파와 갓 지파와 스불론 지파 중에서 십이 성읍을 얻었더라	The children of Merari by their families had out of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities.	And the descendants of Merari received twelve cities from the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and Zebulun.
JOS	21	8	여호와께서 모세로 명하신 대로 이스라엘 자손이 제비 뽑아 레위 사람에게 준 성읍들과 그들이 이러하니라	And the children of Israel gave by lot unto the Levites these cities with their suburbs, as the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses.	So the Israelites allotted to the Levites these cities, together with their pasturelands, as the LORD had commanded through Moses.
JOS	21	9	유다 자손의 지파와 시므온 자손의 지파 중에서는 이 아래 기명한 성읍들을 주었는데	And they gave out of the tribe of the children of Judah, and out of the tribe of the children of Simeon, these cities which are here mentioned by name,	From the tribes of Judah and Simeon, they designated these cities by name
JOS	21	10	레위 자손 중 그핫 가족들에 속한 아론 자손이 첫째로 제비 뽑혔으므로	Which the children of Aaron, being of the families of the Kohathites, who were of the children of Levi, had: for theirs was the first lot.	to the descendants of Aaron from the Kohathite clans of the Levites, because the first lot fell to them:
JOS	21	11	아낙의 아비 아르바의 성읍 유다 산지 기럇 아르바 곧 헤브론과 그 사면 들을 그들에게 주었고	And they gave them the city of Arba the father of Anak, which city is Hebron, in the hill country of Judah, with the suburbs thereof round about it.	They gave them Kiriath-arba (that is, Hebron), with its surrounding pasturelands, in the hill country of Judah. (Arba was the father of Anak.)
JOS	21	12	오직 그 성읍의 밭과 촌락은 여분네의 아들 갈렙에게 주어 소유가 되게 하였더라	But the fields of the city, and the villages thereof, gave they to Caleb the son of Jephunneh for his possession.	But they had given the fields and villages around the city to Caleb son of Jephunneh as his possession.
JOS	21	13	제사장 아론 자손에게 준 것은 살인자의 도피성 헤브론과 그 들이요 또 립나와 그 들과	Thus they gave to the children of Aaron the priest Hebron with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Libnah with her suburbs,	So to the descendants of Aaron the priest they gave these cities, together with their pasturelands: Hebron, a city of refuge for the manslayer, Libnah,
JOS	21	14	얏딜과 그 들과 에스드모아와 그 들과	And Jattir with her suburbs, and Eshtemoa with her suburbs,	Jattir, Eshtemoa,
JOS	21	15	홀론과 그 들과 드빌과 그 들과	And Holon with her suburbs, and Debir with her suburbs,	Holon, Debir,
JOS	21	16	아인과 그 들과 윳다와 그 들과 벧 세메스와 그 들이니 이 두 지파에서 아홉 성읍을 내었고	And Ain with her suburbs, and Juttah with her suburbs, and Beth–shemesh with her suburbs; nine cities out of those two tribes.	Ain, Juttah, and Beth-shemesh—nine cities from these two tribes, together with their pasturelands.
JOS	21	17	또 베냐민 지파 중에서는 기브온과 그 들과 게바와 그 들과	And out of the tribe of Benjamin, Gibeon with her suburbs, Geba with her suburbs,	And from the tribe of Benjamin they gave them Gibeon, Geba,
JOS	21	18	아나돗과 그 들과 알몬과 그 들 곧 네 성읍을 내었으니	Anathoth with her suburbs, and Almon with her suburbs; four cities.	Anathoth, and Almon—four cities, together with their pasturelands.
JOS	21	19	제사장 아론 자손의 성읍이 모두 십삼 성읍과 그 들이었더라	All the cities of the children of Aaron, the priests, were thirteen cities with their suburbs.	In all, thirteen cities, together with their pasturelands, were given to the priests, the descendants of Aaron.
JOS	21	20	그 남은 레위 사람 그핫 자손의 가족 곧 그핫 자손에게는 제비 뽑아 에브라임 지파 중에서 그 성읍들을 주었으니	And the families of the children of Kohath, the Levites which remained of the children of Kohath, even they had the cities of their lot out of the tribe of Ephraim.	The remaining Kohathite clans of the Levites were allotted these cities:
JOS	21	21	곧 살인자의 도피성 에브라임 산지 세겜과 그 들이요 또 게셀과 그 들과	For they gave them Shechem with her suburbs in mount Ephraim, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Gezer with her suburbs,	From the tribe of Ephraim they were given Shechem in the hill country of Ephraim (a city of refuge for the manslayer), Gezer,
JOS	21	22	깁사임과 그 들과 벧 호론과 그 들이니 네 성읍이요	And Kibzaim with her suburbs, and Beth–horon with her suburbs; four cities.	Kibzaim, and Beth-horon—four cities, together with their pasturelands.
JOS	21	23	또 단 지파 중에서 준 것은 엘드게와 그 들과 깁브돈과 그 들과	And out of the tribe of Dan, Eltekeh with her suburbs, Gibbethon with her suburbs,	From the tribe of Dan they were given Elteke, Gibbethon,
JOS	21	24	아얄론과 그 들과 가드 림몬과 그 들이니 네 성읍이요	Aijalon with her suburbs, Gath–rimmon with her suburbs; four cities.	Aijalon, and Gath-rimmon—four cities, together with their pasturelands.
JOS	21	25	또 므낫세 반 지파 중에서 준 것은 다아낙과 그 들과 가드림몬과 그 들이니 두 성읍이라	And out of the half tribe of Manasseh, Tanach with her suburbs, and Gath–rimmon with her suburbs; two cities.	And from the half-tribe of Manasseh they were given Taanach and Gath-rimmon—two cities, together with their pasturelands.
JOS	21	26	그핫 자손의 남은 가족의 성읍이 모두 열과 그 들이었더라	All the cities were ten with their suburbs for the families of the children of Kohath that remained.	In all, ten cities, together with their pasturelands, were given to the rest of the Kohathite clans.
JOS	21	27	레위 가족의 게르손 자손들에게는 므낫세 반 지파 중에서 살인자의 도피성 바산 골란과 그 들을 주었고 또 브에스드라와 그 들을 주었으니 두 성읍이요	And unto the children of Gershon, of the families of the Levites, out of the other half tribe of Manasseh they gave Golan in Bashan with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Beesh–terah with her suburbs; two cities.	This is what the Levite clans of the Gershonites were given: From the half-tribe of Manasseh they were given Golan in Bashan, a city of refuge for the manslayer, and Beeshterah—two cities, together with their pasturelands.
JOS	21	28	잇사갈 지파 중에서는 기시온과 그 들과 다브랏과 그 들과	And out of the tribe of Issachar, Kishon with her suburbs, Dabareh with her suburbs,	From the tribe of Issachar they were given Kishion, Daberath,
JOS	21	29	야르뭇과 그 들과 언 간님과 그 들을 주었으니 네 성읍이요	Jarmuth with her suburbs, En–gannim with her suburbs; four cities.	Jarmuth, and En-gannim—four cities, together with their pasturelands.
JOS	21	30	아셀 지파 중에서는 미살과 그 들과 압돈과 그 들과	And out of the tribe of Asher, Mishal with her suburbs, Abdon with her suburbs,	From the tribe of Asher they were given Mishal, Abdon,
JOS	21	31	헬갓과 그 들과 르홉과 그 들을 주었으니 네 성읍이요	Helkath with her suburbs, and Rehob with her suburbs; four cities.	Helkath, and Rehob—four cities, together with their pasturelands.
JOS	21	32	납달리 지파 중에서는 살인자의 도피성 갈릴리 게데스와 그 들을 주었고 또 함못 돌과 그 들과 가르단과 그 들을 주었으니 세 성읍이라	And out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Hammoth–dor with her suburbs, and Kartan with her suburbs; three cities.	And from the tribe of Naphtali they were given Kedesh in Galilee (a city of refuge for the manslayer), Hammoth-dor, and Kartan—three cities, together with their pasturelands.
JOS	21	33	게르손 사람이 그 가족대로 얻은 성읍이 모두 열 세 성읍과 그 들이었더라	All the cities of the Gershonites according to their families were thirteen cities with their suburbs.	In all, thirteen cities, together with their pasturelands, were given to the Gershonite clans.
JOS	21	34	그 남은 레위 사람 므라리 자손의 가족들에게 준 것은 스불론 지파 중에서 욕느암과 그 들과 가르다와 그 들과	And unto the families of the children of Merari, the rest of the Levites, out of the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam with her suburbs, and Kartah with her suburbs,	This is what the Merarite clan (the rest of the Levites) were given:
JOS	21	35	딤나와 그 들과 나할랄과 그 들이니 네 성읍이요	Dimnah with her suburbs, Nahalal with her suburbs; four cities.	From the tribe of Zebulun they were given Jokneam, Kartah, Dimnah, and Nahalal—four cities, together with their pasturelands.
JOS	21	36	르우벤 지파 중에서 준 것은 베셀과 그 들과 야하스와 그 들과	And out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer with her suburbs, and Jahazah with her suburbs,	From the tribe of Reuben they were given Bezer, Jahaz,
JOS	21	37	그데못과 그 들과 므바앗과 그 들이니 네 성읍이요	Kedemoth with her suburbs, and Mephaath with her suburbs; four cities.	Kedemoth, and Mephaath—four cities, together with their pasturelands.
JOS	21	38	갓 지파 중에서 준 것은 살인자의 도피성 길르앗 라못과 그 들이요 또 마하나임과 그 들과	And out of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Mahanaim with her suburbs,	And from the tribe of Gad they were given Ramoth in Gilead, a city of refuge for the manslayer, Mahanaim,
JOS	21	39	헤스본과 그 들과 야셀과 그 들이니 모두 네 성읍이라	Heshbon with her suburbs, Jazer with her suburbs; four cities in all.	Heshbon, and Jazer—four cities in all, together with their pasturelands.
JOS	21	40	이는 레위 가족의 남은 자 곧 므라리 자손이 그 가족대로 얻은 성읍이니 그 제비 뽑아 얻은 성읍이 십이 성읍이었더라	So all the cities for the children of Merari by their families, which were remaining of the families of the Levites, were by their lot twelve cities.	In all, twelve cities were allotted to the clans of Merari, the remaining Levite clans.
JOS	21	41	레위 사람의 이스라엘 자손의 기업 중에서 얻은 성읍이 모두 사십팔 성읍이요 또 그 들이라	All the cities of the Levites within the possession of the children of Israel were forty and eight cities with their suburbs.	For the Levites, then, there were forty-eight cities in all, together with their pasturelands, within the territory of the Israelites.
JOS	21	42	이 각 성읍의 사면에 들이 있었고 모든 성읍이 다 그러하였더라	These cities were every one with their suburbs round about them: thus were all these cities.	Each of these cities had its own surrounding pasturelands; this was true for all the cities.
JOS	21	43	여호와께서 이스라엘의 열조에게 맹세하사 주마 하신 온 땅을 이와 같이 이스라엘에게 다 주셨으므로 그들이 그것을 얻어 거기 거하였으며	And the Lord gave unto Israel all the land which he sware to give unto their fathers; and they possessed it, and dwelt therein.	Thus the LORD gave Israel all the land He had sworn to give their fathers, and they took possession of it and settled in it.
JOS	21	44	여호와께서 그들의 사방에 안식을 주셨으되 그 열조에게 맹세하신 대로 하셨으므로 그 모든 대적이 그들을 당한 자가 하나도 없었으니 이는 여호와께서 그들의 모든 대적을 그들의 손에 붙이셨음이라	And the Lord gave them rest round about, according to all that he sware unto their fathers: and there stood not a man of all their enemies before them; the Lord delivered all their enemies into their hand.	And the LORD gave them rest on every side, just as He had sworn to their fathers. None of their enemies could stand against them, for the LORD delivered all their enemies into their hand.
JOS	21	45	여호와께서 이스라엘 족속에게 말씀하신 선한 일이 하나도 남음이 없이 다 응하였더라	There failed not ought of any good thing which the Lord had spoken unto the house of Israel; all came to pass.	Not one of all the LORD’s good promises to the house of Israel had failed; everything was fulfilled.
JOS	22	1	그 때에 여호수아가 르우벤 사람과 갓 사람과 므낫세 반 지파를 불러서	Then Joshua called the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh,	Then Joshua summoned the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh
JOS	22	2	그들에게 이르되 여호와의 종 모세가 너희에게 명한 것을 너희가 다 지키며 또 내가 너희에게 명한 모든 일에 내 말을 너희가 청종하여	And said unto them, Ye have kept all that Moses the servant of the Lord commanded you, and have obeyed my voice in all that I commanded you:	and told them, “You have done all that Moses the servant of the LORD commanded you, and you have obeyed my voice in all that I commanded you.
JOS	22	3	오늘날까지 날이 오래도록 너희가 너희 형제를 떠나지 아니하고 오직 너희 하나님 여호와의 명하신 그 책임을 지키도다	Ye have not left your brethren these many days unto this day, but have kept the charge of the commandment of the Lord your God.	All this time you have not deserted your brothers, up to this very day, but have kept the charge given you by the LORD your God.
JOS	22	4	이제는 너희 하나님 여호와꼐서 이미 말씀하신 대로 너희 형제에게 안식을 주셨으니 그런즉 이제 너희는 여호와의 종 모세가 요단 저편에서 너희에게 준 소유지로 가서 너희의 장막으로 돌아가되	And now the Lord your God hath given rest unto your brethren, as he promised them: therefore now return ye, and get you unto your tents, and unto the land of your possession, which Moses the servant of the Lord gave you on the other side Jordan.	And now that the LORD your God has given your brothers rest as He promised them, you may return to your homes in the land that Moses the servant of the LORD gave you across the Jordan.
JOS	22	5	크게 삼가 여호와의 종 모세가 너희에게 명한 명령과 율법을 행하여 너희 하나님 여호와를 사랑하고 그 모든 길로 행하며 그 계명을 지켜 그에게 친근히 하고 너희 마음을 다하며 성품을 다하여 그를 섬길지니라 하고	But take diligent heed to do the commandment and the law, which Moses the servant of the Lord charged you, to love the Lord your God, and to walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and to cleave unto him, and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul.	But be very careful to observe the commandment and the law that Moses the servant of the LORD gave you: to love the LORD your God, to walk in all His ways, to keep His commandments, to hold fast to Him, and to serve Him with all your heart and with all your soul.”
JOS	22	6	여호수아가 그들에게 축복하여 보내매 그들이 자기 장막으로 갔더라	So Joshua blessed them, and sent them away: and they went unto their tents.	So Joshua blessed them and sent them on their way, and they went to their homes.
JOS	22	7	므낫세 반 지파에게는 모세가 바산에서 기업을 주었고 기타 반 지파에게는 여호수아가 요단 이편 서편에서 그 형제 중에서 기업을 준지라 여호수아가 그들을 그 장막으로 돌려보낼 때에 그들에게 축복하고	Now to the one half of the tribe of Manasseh Moses had given possession in Bashan: but unto the other half thereof gave Joshua among their brethren on this side Jordan westward. And when Joshua sent them away also unto their tents, then he blessed them,	(To the half-tribe of Manasseh Moses had given land in Bashan, and to the other half Joshua gave land on the west side of the Jordan among their brothers.) When Joshua sent them to their homes he blessed them,
JOS	22	8	일러 가로되 너희는 많은 재산과 심히 많은 가축과 은, 금, 동, 철과 심히 많은 의복을 가지고 너희의 장막으로 돌아가서 너희 대적에게서 탈취한 것을 너희 형제와 나눌지니라 하매	And he spake unto them, saying, Return with much riches unto your tents, and with very much cattle, with silver, and with gold, and with brass, and with iron, and with very much raiment: divide the spoil of your enemies with your brethren.	saying, “Return to your homes with your great wealth, with immense herds of livestock, with silver, gold, bronze, iron, and very many clothes. Divide with your brothers the spoil of your enemies.”
JOS	22	9	르우벤 자손과 갓 자손과 므낫세 반 지파가 가나안 땅 실로에서 이스라엘 자손을 떠나 여호와께서 모세로 명하신 대로 얻은 땅 곧 그 소유지 길르앗으로 가니라	And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh returned, and departed from the children of Israel out of Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan, to go unto the country of Gilead, to the land of their possession, whereof they were possessed, according to the word of the Lord by the hand of Moses.	So the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh left the Israelites at Shiloh in the land of Canaan to return to their own land of Gilead, which they had acquired according to the command of the LORD through Moses.
JOS	22	10	르우벤 자손과 므낫세 반 지파가 가나안 땅 요단 언덕 가에 이르자 거기서 요단 가에 단을 쌓았는데 볼만한 큰 단이었더라	And when they came unto the borders of Jordan, that are in the land of Canaan, the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh built there an altar by Jordan, a great altar to see to.	And when they came to Geliloth near the Jordan in the land of Canaan, the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh built an imposing altar there by the Jordan.
JOS	22	11	이스라엘 자손이 들은즉 이르기를 르우벤 자손과 갓 자손과 므낫세 반 지파가 가나안 땅의 맨 앞편 요단 언덕 가 이스라엘 자손에게 속한 편에 단을 쌓았다 하는지라	And the children of Israel heard say, Behold, the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh have built an altar over against the land of Canaan, in the borders of Jordan, at the passage of the children of Israel.	Then the Israelites received the report: “Behold, the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh have built an altar on the border of the land of Canaan, at Geliloth near the Jordan on the Israelite side.”
JOS	22	12	이스라엘 자손이 이를 듣자 곧 이스라엘 자손의 온 회중이 실로에 모여서 그들과 싸우러 가려하니라	And when the children of Israel heard of it, the whole congregation of the children of Israel gathered themselves together at Shiloh, to go up to war against them.	And when they heard this, the whole congregation of Israel assembled at Shiloh to go to war against them.
JOS	22	13	이스라엘 자손이 제사장 엘르아살의 아들 비느하스를 길르앗 땅으로 보내어 르우벤 자손과 갓 자손과 므낫세 반 지파를 보게 하되	And the children of Israel sent unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the half tribe of Manasseh, into the land of Gilead, Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest,	The Israelites sent Phinehas son of Eleazar the priest to the land of Gilead, to the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh.
JOS	22	14	이스라엘 각 지파에서 한 방백씩 열 방백을 그와 함께 하게 하니 그들은 각기 이스라엘 천만인 중 족속의 두령이라	And with him ten princes, of each chief house a prince throughout all the tribes of Israel; and each one was an head of the house of their fathers among the thousands of Israel.	With him they sent ten chiefs—one family leader from each tribe of Israel, each the head of a family among the clans of Israel.
JOS	22	15	그들이 길르앗 땅에 이르러 르우벤 자손과 갓 자손과 므낫세 반 지파에게 나아가서 그들에게 말하여 가로되	And they came unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the half tribe of Manasseh, unto the land of Gilead, and they spake with them, saying,	They went to the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh in the land of Gilead and said to them,
JOS	22	16	여호와의 온 회중이 말하기를 너희가 어찌하여 이스라엘 하나님께 범죄하여 오늘날 여호와를 좇는 데서 떠나서 자기를 위하여 단을 쌓아 여호와를 거역하고자 하느냐	Thus saith the whole congregation of the Lord, What trespass is this that ye have committed against the God of Israel, to turn away this day from following the Lord, in that ye have builded you an altar, that ye might rebel this day against the Lord?	“This is what the whole congregation of the LORD says: ‘What is this breach of faith you have committed today against the God of Israel by turning away from the LORD and building for yourselves an altar, that you might rebel against the LORD this day?
JOS	22	17	브올의 죄악으로 인하여 여호와의 회중에 재앙이 내렸으나 오늘날까지 우리가 그 죄에서 정결함을 얻지 못하였거늘 그 죄악이 우리에게 부족하여서	Is the iniquity of Peor too little for us, from which we are not cleansed until this day, although there was a plague in the congregation of the Lord,	Was not the sin of Peor enough for us, from which we have not cleansed ourselves to this day? It even brought a plague upon the congregation of the LORD.
JOS	22	18	오늘날 너희가 돌이켜 여호와를 좇지 않고자 하느냐 너희가 오늘날 여호와를 배역하면 내일은 그가 이스라엘 온 회중에게 진노하시리라	But that ye must turn away this day from following the Lord? and it will be, seeing ye rebel to day against the Lord, that to morrow he will be wroth with the whole congregation of Israel.	And now, would you turn away from the LORD? If you rebel today against the LORD, tomorrow He will be angry with the whole congregation of Israel.
JOS	22	19	그런데 너희 소유지가 만일 깨끗지 아니하거든 여호와의 성막이 있는 여호와의 소유지로 건너와 우리 중에서 소유를 취할 것이니라 오직 우리 하나님 여호와의 단 외에 다른 단을 쌓음으로 여호와께 패역하지 말며 우리에게도 패역하지 말라	Notwithstanding, if the land of your possession be unclean, then pass ye over unto the land of the possession of the Lord, wherein the Lord’s tabernacle dwelleth, and take possession among us: but rebel not against the Lord, nor rebel against us, in building you an altar beside the altar of the Lord our God.	If indeed the land of your inheritance is unclean, then cross over to the land of the LORD’s possession, where the LORD’s tabernacle stands, and take possession of it among us. But do not rebel against the LORD or against us by building for yourselves an altar other than the altar of the LORD our God.
JOS	22	20	세라의 아들 아간이 바친 물건에 대하여 범죄하므로 이스라엘 온 회중에 진노가 임하지 아니하였었느냐 그 죄악으로 망한 자가 그 사람뿐이 아니었느니라	Did not Achan the son of Zerah commit a trespass in the accursed thing, and wrath fell on all the congregation of Israel? and that man perished not alone in his iniquity.	Was not Achan son of Zerah unfaithful regarding what was set apart for destruction, bringing wrath upon the whole congregation of Israel? Yet it was not only Achan who perished because of his sin!’”
JOS	22	21	르우벤 자손과 갓 자손과 므낫세 반 지파가 이스라엘 천만인의 두령에게 대답하여 가로되	Then the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh answered, and said unto the heads of the thousands of Israel,	Then the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh answered the leaders of the clans of Israel:
JOS	22	22	전능하신 자 하나님 여호와, 전능하신 자 하나님 여호와께서 아시나니 이스라엘도 장차 알리라 이 일이 만일 여호와께 패역함이거나 범죄함이거든 주는 오늘날 우리를 구원치 마시옵소서	The Lord God of gods, the Lord God of gods, he knoweth, and Israel he shall know; if it be in rebellion, or if in transgression against the Lord, (save us not this day,)	“The LORD, the Mighty One, is God! The LORD, the Mighty One, is God! He knows, and may Israel also know. If this was in rebellion or breach of faith against the LORD, do not spare us today.
JOS	22	23	우리가 단을 쌓은 것이 돌이켜 여호와를 좇지 아니하려 함이거나 혹시 그 위에 번제나 소제를 드리려 함이거나 혹시 화목제물을 드리려 함이어든 여호와는 친히 벌하시옵소서	That we have built us an altar to turn from following the Lord, or if to offer thereon burnt offering or meat offering, or if to offer peace offerings thereon, let the Lord himself require it;	If we have built for ourselves an altar to turn away from Him and to offer burnt offerings and grain offerings on it, or to sacrifice fellowship offerings on it, may the LORD Himself hold us accountable.
JOS	22	24	우리가 목적이 있어서 주의하고 이같이 하였노라 곧 생각하기를 후일에 너희 자손이 우리 자손에게 말하여 이르기를 너희가 이스라엘 하나님 여호와와 무슨 상관이 있느냐	And if we have not rather done it for fear of this thing, saying, In time to come your children might speak unto our children, saying, What have ye to do with the Lord God of Israel?	But in fact we have done this for fear that in the future your descendants might say to ours, ‘What have you to do with the LORD, the God of Israel?
JOS	22	25	너희 르우벤 자손 갓 자손아 여호와께서 우리와 너희 사이에 요단으로 경계를 삼으셨나니 너희는 여호와께 분의가 없느니라 하여 너희 자손이 우리 자손으로 여호와 경외하기를 그치게 할까 하여	For the Lord hath made Jordan a border between us and you, ye children of Reuben and children of Gad; ye have no part in the Lord: so shall your children make our children cease from fearing the Lord.	For the LORD has made the Jordan a border between us and you Reubenites and Gadites. You have no share in the LORD!’ So your descendants could cause ours to stop fearing the LORD.
JOS	22	26	우리가 말하기를 우리가 이제 한 단 쌓기를 예비하자 하였노니 이는 번제를 위함도 아니요 다른 제사를 위함도 아니라	Therefore we said, Let us now prepare to build us an altar, not for burnt offering, nor for sacrifice:	That is why we said, ‘Let us take action and build an altar for ourselves, but not for burnt offerings or sacrifices.
JOS	22	27	우리가 여호와 앞에서 우리 번제와 우리 다른 제사와 우리 화목제로 섬기는 것을 우리와 너희 사이와 우리의 후대 사이에 증거가 되게 할 뿐으로서 너희 자손으로 후일에 우리 자손에게 이르기를 너희는 여호와께 분의가 없다 못하게 하려 함이로라	But that it may be a witness between us, and you, and our generations after us, that we might do the service of the Lord before him with our burnt offerings, and with our sacrifices, and with our peace offerings; that your children may not say to our children in time to come, Ye have no part in the Lord.	Rather, let it be a witness between us and you and the generations to come, that we will worship the LORD in His presence with our burnt offerings, sacrifices, and peace offerings.’ Then in the future, your descendants cannot say to ours, ‘You have no share in the LORD!’
JOS	22	28	우리가 말하였거니와 만일 그들이 후일에 우리에게나 우리 후대에게 이같이 말하면 우리가 말하기를 우리 열조가 지은 여호와의 단 모형을 보라 이는 번제를 위한 것도 아니요 다른 제사를 위한 것도 아니라 오직 우리와 너희 사이에 증거만 되게 할뿐이라	Therefore said we, that it shall be, when they should so say to us or to our generations in time to come, that we may say again, Behold the pattern of the altar of the Lord, which our fathers made, not for burnt offerings, nor for sacrifices; but it is a witness between us and you.	Therefore we said, ‘If they ever say this to us or to our descendants, we will answer: Look at the replica of the altar of the LORD that our fathers made, not for burnt offerings or sacrifices, but as a witness between us and you.’
JOS	22	29	우리가 번제나 소제나 다른 제사를 위하여 우리 하나님 여호와의 성막 앞에 있는 단 외에 단을 쌓음으로 여호와께 패역하고 오늘날 여호와를 좇음에서 떠나려 함은 결단코 아니니라 하리라	God forbid that we should rebel against the Lord, and turn this day from following the Lord, to build an altar for burnt offerings, for meat offerings, or for sacrifices, beside the altar of the Lord our God that is before his tabernacle.	Far be it from us to rebel against the LORD and turn away from Him today by building an altar for burnt offerings, grain offerings, or sacrifices, other than the altar of the LORD our God, which stands before His tabernacle.”
JOS	22	30	제사장 비느하스와 그와 함께한 회중의 방백 곧 이스라엘 천만인의 두령들이 르우벤 자손과 갓 자손과 므낫세 자손의 말을 듣고 좋게 여긴지라	And when Phinehas the priest, and the princes of the congregation and heads of the thousands of Israel which were with him, heard the words that the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the children of Manasseh spake, it pleased them.	When Phinehas the priest and the chiefs of the congregation—the heads of Israel’s clans who were with him—heard what the descendants of Reuben, Gad, and Manasseh had to say, they were satisfied.
JOS	22	31	제사장 엘르아살의 아들 비느하스가 르우벤 자손과 갓 자손과 므낫세 자손에게 이르되 우리가 오늘날 여호와께서 우리 중에 계신줄을 아노니 이는 너희가 이 죄를 여호와께 범치 아니하였음이라 너희가 이제 이스라엘 자손을 여호와의 손에서 건져내었느니라 하고	And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest said unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the children of Manasseh, This day we perceive that the Lord is among us, because ye have not committed this trespass against the Lord: now ye have delivered the children of Israel out of the hand of the Lord.	Phinehas son of Eleazar the priest said to the descendants of Reuben, Gad, and Manasseh, “Today we know that the LORD is among us, because you have not committed this breach of faith against Him. Consequently, you have delivered the Israelites from the hand of the LORD.”
JOS	22	32	제사장 엘르아살의 아들 비느하스와 방백들이 르우벤 자손과 갓 자손을 떠나 길르앗 땅에서 가나안 땅에 돌아와 이스라엘 자손에게 이르러 회보하매	And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, and the princes, returned from the children of Reuben, and from the children of Gad, out of the land of Gilead, unto the land of Canaan, to the children of Israel, and brought them word again.	Then Phinehas son of Eleazar the priest, together with the other leaders, returned to the Israelites in the land of Canaan and brought back a report regarding the Reubenites and Gadites in the land of Gilead.
JOS	22	33	그 일이 이스라엘 자손을 즐겁게 한지라 이스라엘 자손이 하나님을 찬송하고 르우벤 자손과 갓 자손의 거하는 땅에 가서 싸워 그것을 멸하자 하는 말을 다시 하지 아니하였더라	And the thing pleased the children of Israel; and the children of Israel blessed God, and did not intend to go up against them in battle, to destroy the land wherein the children of Reuben and Gad dwelt.	The Israelites were satisfied with the report, and they blessed God and spoke no more about going to war against them to destroy the land where the Reubenites and Gadites lived.
JOS	22	34	르우벤 자손과 갓 자손이 그 단을 엣이라 칭하였으니 우리 사이에 이 단은 여호와께서 하나님이 되시는 증거라 함이었더라	And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad called the altar Ed: for it shall be a witness between us that the Lord is God.	So the Reubenites and Gadites named the altar Witness, for they said, “It is a witness between us that the LORD is God.”
JOS	23	1	여호와께서 이스라엘의 사방 대적을 다 멸하시고 안식을 이스라엘에게 주신 지 오랜 후에 여호수아가 나이 많아 늙은지라	And it came to pass a long time after that the Lord had given rest unto Israel from all their enemies round about, that Joshua waxed old and stricken in age.	A long time after the LORD had given Israel rest from all the enemies around them, when Joshua was old and well along in years,
JOS	23	2	여호수아가 온 이스라엘 곧 그 장로들과 두령들과 재판장들과 유사들을 불러다가 그들에게 이르되 나는 나이 많아 늙었도다	And Joshua called for all Israel, and for their elders, and for their heads, and for their judges, and for their officers, and said unto them, I am old and stricken in age:	he summoned all Israel, including its elders, leaders, judges, and officers. “I am old and well along in years,” he said,
JOS	23	3	너희 하나님 여호와께서 너희를 위하여 이 모든 나라에 행하신 일을 너희가 다 보았거니와 너희 하나님 여호와 그는 너희를 위하여 싸우신 자시니라	And ye have seen all that the Lord your God hath done unto all these nations because of you; for the Lord your God is he that hath fought for you.	“and you have seen everything that the LORD your God has done to all these nations for your sake, because it was the LORD your God who fought for you.
JOS	23	4	보라 내가 요단에서부터 해 지는 편 대해까지의 남아있는 나라들과 이미 멸한 모든 나라를 내가 너희를 위하여 제비 뽑아 너희 지파에게 기업이 되게 하였느니라	Behold, I have divided unto you by lot these nations that remain, to be an inheritance for your tribes, from Jordan, with all the nations that I have cut off, even unto the great sea westward.	See, I have allotted as an inheritance to your tribes these remaining nations, including all the nations I have already cut off, from the Jordan westward to the Great Sea.
JOS	23	5	너희 하나님 여호와 그가 너희 앞에서 그들을 쫓으사 너희 목전에서 떠나게 하시리니 너희 하나님 여호와께서 너희에게 말씀하신 대로 너희가 그 땅을 차지할 것이라	And the Lord your God, he shall expel them from before you, and drive them from out of your sight; and ye shall possess their land, as the Lord your God hath promised unto you.	The LORD your God will push them out of your way and drive them out before you, so that you can take possession of their land, as the LORD your God promised you.
JOS	23	6	그러므로 너희는 크게 힘써 모세의 율법 책에 기록된 것을 다 지켜 행하라 그것을 떠나 좌로나 우로나 치우치지 말라	Be ye therefore very courageous to keep and to do all that is written in the book of the law of Moses, that ye turn not aside therefrom to the right hand or to the left;	Be very strong, then, so that you can keep and obey all that is written in the Book of the Law of Moses, not turning aside from it to the right or to the left.
JOS	23	7	너희 중에 남아 있는 이 나라들 중에 가지 말라 그 신들의 이름을 부르지 말라 그것을 가리켜 맹세하지 말라 또 그것을 섬겨서 그것에게 절하지 말라	That ye come not among these nations, these that remain among you; neither make mention of the name of their gods, nor cause to swear by them, neither serve them, nor bow yourselves unto them:	So you are not to associate with these nations that remain among you. You must not call on the names of their gods or swear by them, and you must not serve them or bow down to them.
JOS	23	8	오직 너희 하나님 여호와를 친근히 하기를 오늘날까지 행한 것 같이 하라	But cleave unto the Lord your God, as ye have done unto this day.	Instead, you shall hold fast to the LORD your God, as you have done to this day.
JOS	23	9	대저 여호와께서 강대한 나라들을 너희 앞에서 쫓아내셨으므로 오늘날까지 너희를 당한 자가 하나도 없었느니라	For the Lord hath driven out from before you great nations and strong: but as for you, no man hath been able to stand before you unto this day.	The LORD has driven out great and powerful nations before you, and to this day no one can stand against you.
JOS	23	10	너희 중 한 사람이 천 명을 쫓으리니 이는 너희 하나님 여호와 그가 너희에게 말씀하신 것 같이 너희를 위하여 싸우심이라	One man of you shall chase a thousand: for the Lord your God, he it is that fighteth for you, as he hath promised you.	One of you can put a thousand to flight, because the LORD your God fights for you, just as He promised.
JOS	23	11	그러므로 스스로 조심하여 너희 하나님 여호와를 사랑하라	Take good heed therefore unto yourselves, that ye love the Lord your God.	Therefore watch yourselves carefully, that you love the LORD your God.
JOS	23	12	너희가 만일 퇴보하여 너희 중에 빠져 남아 있는 이 민족들을 친근히 하여 더불어 혼인하며 피차 왕래하면	Else if ye do in any wise go back, and cleave unto the remnant of these nations, even these that remain among you, and shall make marriages with them, and go in unto them, and they to you:	For if you turn away and cling to the rest of these nations that remain among you, and if you intermarry and associate with them,
JOS	23	13	정녕히 알라 너희 하나님 여호와께서 이 민족들을 너희 목전에서 다시는 쫓아내지 아니하시리니 그들이 너희에게 올무가 되며 덫이 되며 너희 옆구리에 채찍이 되며 너희 눈에 가시가 되어서 너희가 필경은 너희 하나님 여호와께서 너희에게 주신 이 아름다운 땅에서 멸절하리라	Know for a certainty that the Lord your God will no more drive out any of these nations from before you; but they shall be snares and traps unto you, and scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until ye perish from off this good land which the Lord your God hath given you.	know for sure that the LORD your God will no longer drive out these nations before you. Instead, they will become for you a snare and a trap, a scourge in your sides and thorns in your eyes, until you perish from this good land that the LORD your God has given you.
JOS	23	14	보라 나는 오늘날 온 세상이 가는 길로 가려니와 너희 하나님 여호와께서 너희에게 대하여 말씀하신 모든 선한 일이 하나도 틀리지 아니하고 다 너희에게 응하여 그 중에 하나도 어김이 없음을 너희 모든 사람의 마음과 뜻에 아는 바라	And, behold, this day I am going the way of all the earth: and ye know in all your hearts and in all your souls, that not one thing hath failed of all the good things which the Lord your God spake concerning you; all are come to pass unto you, and not one thing hath failed thereof.	Now behold, today I am going the way of all the earth, and you know with all your heart and soul that not one of the good promises the LORD your God made to you has failed. Everything was fulfilled for you; not one promise has failed.
JOS	23	15	너희 하나님 여호와께서 너희에게 말씀하신 모든 선한 일이 너희에게 임한 것 같이 여호와께서 모든 불길한 일도 너희에게 임하게 하사 너희 하나님 여호와께서 너희에게 주신 이 아름다운 땅에서 너희를 멸절하기까지 하실 것이라	Therefore it shall come to pass, that as all good things are come upon you, which the Lord your God promised you; so shall the Lord bring upon you all evil things, until he have destroyed you from off this good land which the Lord your God hath given you.	But just as every good thing the LORD your God promised you has come to pass, likewise the LORD will bring upon you the calamity He has threatened, until He has destroyed you from this good land He has given you.
JOS	23	16	만일 너희가 너희 하나님 여호와께서 너희에게 명하신 언약을 범하고 가서 다른 신들을 섬겨 그에게 절하면 여호와의 진노가 너희에게 미치리니 너희에게 주신 아름다운 땅에서 너희가 속히 망하리라	When ye have transgressed the covenant of the Lord your God, which he commanded you, and have gone and served other gods, and bowed yourselves to them; then shall the anger of the Lord be kindled against you, and ye shall perish quickly from off the good land which he hath given unto you.	If you transgress the covenant of the LORD your God, which He commanded you, and go and serve other gods and bow down to them, then the anger of the LORD will burn against you, and you will quickly perish from this good land He has given you.”
JOS	24	1	여호수아가 이스라엘 모든 지파를 세겜에 모으고 이스라엘 장로들과 그 두령들과 재판장들과 유사들을 부르매 그들이 하나님 앞에 보인지라	And Joshua gathered all the tribes of Israel to Shechem, and called for the elders of Israel, and for their heads, and for their judges, and for their officers; and they presented themselves before God.	Then Joshua assembled all the tribes of Israel at Shechem. He summoned the elders, leaders, judges, and officers of Israel, and they presented themselves before God.
JOS	24	2	여호수아가 모든 백성에게 이르되 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 말씀에 옛적에 너희 조상들 곧 아브라함의 아비, 나홀의 아비 데라 가 강 저편에 거하여 다른 신들을 섬겼으나	And Joshua said unto all the people, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time, even Terah, the father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor: and they served other gods.	And Joshua said to all the people, “This is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: ‘Long ago your fathers, including Terah the father of Abraham and Nahor, lived beyond the Euphrates and worshiped other gods.
JOS	24	3	내가 너희 조상 아브라함을 강 저편에서 이끌어내어 가나안으로 인도하여 온 땅을 두루 행하게 하고 그 씨를 번성케 하려고 그에게 이삭을 주었고	And I took your father Abraham from the other side of the flood, and led him throughout all the land of Canaan, and multiplied his seed, and gave him Isaac.	But I took your father Abraham from beyond the Euphrates and led him through all the land of Canaan, and I multiplied his descendants. I gave him Isaac,
JOS	24	4	이삭에게는 야곱과 에서를 주었으며 에서에게는 세일 산을 소유로 주었으나 야곱과 그 자손들은 애굽으로 내려갔으므로	And I gave unto Isaac Jacob and Esau: and I gave unto Esau mount Seir, to possess it; but Jacob and his children went down into Egypt.	and to Isaac I gave Jacob and Esau. I gave Esau Mount Seir to possess, but Jacob and his sons went down to Egypt.
JOS	24	5	내가 모세와 아론을 보내었고 또 애굽에 재앙을 내렸나니 곧 내가 그 가운데 행한 것과 같고 그 후에 너희를 인도하여 내었었노라	I sent Moses also and Aaron, and I plagued Egypt, according to that which I did among them: and afterward I brought you out.	Then I sent Moses and Aaron, and I afflicted the Egyptians by what I did there, and afterward I brought you out.
JOS	24	6	내가 너희 열조를 애굽에서 인도하여 내어 바다에 이르게 한즉 애굽 사람이 병거와 마병을 거느리고 너희 열조를 홍해까지 따르므로	And I brought your fathers out of Egypt: and ye came unto the sea; and the Egyptians pursued after your fathers with chariots and horsemen unto the Red sea.	When I brought your fathers out of Egypt and you reached the Red Sea, the Egyptians pursued them with chariots and horsemen as far as the Red Sea.
JOS	24	7	너희 열조가 나 여호와께 부르짖기로 내가 너희와 애굽 사람 사이에 흑암을 두고 바다를 이끌어 그들을 덮었었나니 내가 애굽에서 행한 일을 너희가 목도하였으며 또 너희가 여러 날을 광야에 거하였었느니라	And when they cried unto the Lord, he put darkness between you and the Egyptians, and brought the sea upon them, and covered them; and your eyes have seen what I have done in Egypt: and ye dwelt in the wilderness a long season.	So your fathers cried out to the LORD, and He put darkness between you and the Egyptians, over whom He brought the sea and engulfed them. Your very eyes saw what I did to the Egyptians. Then you lived in the wilderness for a long time.
JOS	24	8	내가 또 너희를 인도하여 요단 저편에 거하는 아모리 사람의 땅으로 들어가게 하매 그들이 너희와 싸우기로 내가 그들을 너희 손에 붙이매 너희가 그 땅을 점령하였고 나는 그들을 너희 앞에서 멸절시켰으며	And I brought you into the land of the Amorites, which dwelt on the other side Jordan; and they fought with you: and I gave them into your hand, that ye might possess their land; and I destroyed them from before you.	Later, I brought you to the land of the Amorites who lived beyond the Jordan. They fought against you, but I delivered them into your hand, that you should possess their land when I destroyed them before you.
JOS	24	9	때에 모압 왕 십볼의 아들 발락이 일어나 이스라엘을 대적하여 사람을 보내어 브올의 아들 발람을 불러다가 너희를 저주케 하려 하였으나	Then Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab, arose and warred against Israel, and sent and called Balaam the son of Beor to curse you:	Then Balak son of Zippor, the king of Moab, set out to fight against Israel. He sent for Balaam son of Beor to curse you,
JOS	24	10	내가 발람을 듣기를 원치 아니한고로 그가 오히려 너희에게 축복하였고 나는 너희를 그 손에서 건져 내었으며	But I would not hearken unto Balaam; therefore he blessed you still: so I delivered you out of his hand.	but I would not listen to Balaam. So he blessed you again and again, and I delivered you from his hand.
JOS	24	11	너희가 요단을 건너 여리고에 이른즉 여리고 사람과 아모리 사람과 브리스 사람과 가나안 사람과 헷 사람과 기르가스 사람과 히위 사람과 여부스 사람들이 너희와 싸우기로 내가 그들을 너희의 손에 붙였으며	And ye went over Jordan, and came unto Jericho: and the men of Jericho fought against you, the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Girgashites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites; and I delivered them into your hand.	After this, you crossed the Jordan and came to Jericho. The people of Jericho fought against you, as did the Amorites, Perizzites, Canaanites, Hittites, Girgashites, Hivites, and Jebusites, and I delivered them into your hand.
JOS	24	12	내가 왕벌을 너희 앞에 보내어 그 아모리 사람의 두 왕을 너희 앞에서 쫓아내게 하였나니 너희 칼로나 너희 활로나 이같이 한 것이 아니며	And I sent the hornet before you, which drave them out from before you, even the two kings of the Amorites; but not with thy sword, nor with thy bow.	I sent the hornet ahead of you, and it drove out the two Amorite kings before you, but not by your own sword or bow.
JOS	24	13	내가 또 너희의 수고하지 아니한 땅과 너희가 건축지 아니한 성읍을 너희에게 주었더니 너희가 그 가운데 거하며 너희가 또 자기의 심지 아니한 포도원과 감람원의 과실을 먹는다 하셨느니라	And I have given you a land for which ye did not labour, and cities which ye built not, and ye dwell in them; of the vineyards and oliveyards which ye planted not do ye eat.	So I gave you a land on which you did not toil and cities that you did not build, and now you live in them and eat from vineyards and olive groves that you did not plant.’
JOS	24	14	그러므로 이제는 여호와를 경외하며 성실과 진정으로 그를 섬길 것이라 너희의 열조가 강 저편과 애굽에서 섬기던 신들을 제하여 버리고 여호와만 섬기라	Now therefore fear the Lord, and serve him in sincerity and in truth: and put away the gods which your fathers served on the other side of the flood, and in Egypt; and serve ye the Lord.	Now, therefore, fear the LORD and serve Him in sincerity and truth; cast aside the gods your fathers served beyond the Euphrates and in Egypt, and serve the LORD.
JOS	24	15	만일 여호와를 섬기는 것이 너희에게 좋지 않게 보이거든 너희 열조가 강 저편에서 섬기던 신이든지 혹 너희의 거하는 땅 아모리 사람의 신이든지 너희 섬길 자를 오늘날 택하라 오직 나와 내 집은 여호와를 섬기겠노라	And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom ye will serve; whether the gods which your fathers served that were on the other side of the flood, or the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell: but as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.	But if it is unpleasing in your sight to serve the LORD, then choose for yourselves this day whom you will serve, whether the gods your fathers served beyond the Euphrates, or the gods of the Amorites in whose land you are living. As for me and my house, we will serve the LORD!”
JOS	24	16	백성이 대답하여 가로되 여호와를 버리고 다른 신들 섬기는 일을 우리가 결단코 하지 아니하오리니	And the people answered and said, God forbid that we should forsake the Lord, to serve other gods;	The people replied, “Far be it from us to forsake the LORD to serve other gods!
JOS	24	17	이는 우리 하나님 여호와 그가 우리와 우리 열조를 인도하여 애굽 땅 종 되었던 집에서 나오게 하시고 우리 목전에서 그 큰 이적들을 행하시고 우리가 행한 모든 길에서, 우리의 지난 모든 백성 중에서 우리를 보호하셨음이며	For the Lord our God, he it is that brought us up and our fathers out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage, and which did those great signs in our sight, and preserved us in all the way wherein we went, and among all the people through whom we passed:	For the LORD our God brought us and our fathers out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery, and performed these great signs before our eyes. He also protected us throughout our journey and among all the nations through which we traveled.
JOS	24	18	여호와께서 또 모든 백성 곧 이 땅에 거하던 아모리 사람을 우리 앞에서 쫓아내셨음이라 그러므로 우리도 여호와를 섬기리니 그는 우리 하나님이심이니이다	And the Lord drave out from before us all the people, even the Amorites which dwelt in the land: therefore will we also serve the Lord; for he is our God.	And the LORD drove out before us all the nations, including the Amorites who lived in the land. We too will serve the LORD, because He is our God!”
JOS	24	19	여호수아가 백성에게 이르되 너희가 여호와를 능히 섬기지 못할 것은 그는 거룩하신 하나님이시요 질투하는 하나님이시니 너희 허물과 죄를 사하지 아니하실 것임이라	And Joshua said unto the people, Ye cannot serve the Lord: for he is an holy God; he is a jealous God; he will not forgive your transgressions nor your sins.	But Joshua said to the people, “You are not able to serve the LORD, for He is a holy God; He is a jealous God; He will not forgive your rebellion or your sins.
JOS	24	20	만일 너희가 여호와를 버리고 이방신들을 섬기면 너희에게 복을 내리신 후에라도 돌이켜 너희에게 화를 내리시고 너희를 멸하시리라	If ye forsake the Lord, and serve strange gods, then he will turn and do you hurt, and consume you, after that he hath done you good.	If you forsake the LORD and serve foreign gods, He will turn and bring disaster on you and consume you, even after He has been good to you.”
JOS	24	21	백성이 여호수아에게 말하되 아니니이다 우리가 정녕 여호와를 섬기겠나이다	And the people said unto Joshua, Nay; but we will serve the Lord.	“No!” replied the people. “We will serve the LORD!”
JOS	24	22	여호수아가 백성에게 이르되 너희가 여호와를 택하고 그를 섬기리라 하였으니 스스로 증인이 되었느니라 그들이 가로되 우리가 증인이 되었나이다	And Joshua said unto the people, Ye are witnesses against yourselves that ye have chosen you the Lord, to serve him. And they said, We are witnesses.	Then Joshua told them, “You are witnesses against yourselves that you have chosen to serve the LORD.” “We are witnesses!” they said.
JOS	24	23	여호수아가 가로되 그러면 이제 너희 중에 있는 이방신들을 제하여 버리고 너희 마음을 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께로 향하라	Now therefore put away, said he, the strange gods which are among you, and incline your heart unto the Lord God of Israel.	“Now, therefore,” he said, “get rid of the foreign gods among you and incline your hearts to the LORD, the God of Israel.”
JOS	24	24	백성이 여호수아에게 말하되 우리 하나님 여호와를 우리가 섬기고 그 목소리를 우리가 청종하리이다 한지라	And the people said unto Joshua, The Lord our God will we serve, and his voice will we obey.	So the people said to Joshua, “We will serve the LORD our God and obey His voice.”
JOS	24	25	그 날에 여호수아가 세겜에서 백성으로 더불어 언약을 세우고 그들을 위하여 율례와 법도를 베풀었더라	So Joshua made a covenant with the people that day, and set them a statute and an ordinance in Shechem.	On that day Joshua made a covenant for the people, and there at Shechem he established for them a statute and ordinance.
JOS	24	26	여호수아가 이 모든 말씀을 하나님의 율법책에 기록하고 큰 돌을 취하여 거기 여호와의 성소 곁에 있는 상수리나무 아래 세우고	And Joshua wrote these words in the book of the law of God, and took a great stone, and set it up there under an oak, that was by the sanctuary of the Lord.	Joshua recorded these things in the Book of the Law of God. Then he took a large stone and set it up there under the oak that was near the sanctuary of the LORD.
JOS	24	27	모든 백성에게 이르되 보라 이 돌이 우리에게 증거가 되리니 이는 여호와께서 우리에게 하신 모든 말씀을 이 돌이 들었음이라 그런즉 너희로 너희 하나님을 배반치 않게 하도록 이 돌이 증거가 되리라 하고	And Joshua said unto all the people, Behold, this stone shall be a witness unto us; for it hath heard all the words of the Lord which he spake unto us: it shall be therefore a witness unto you, lest ye deny your God.	And Joshua said to all the people, “You see this stone. It will be a witness against us, for it has heard all the words the LORD has spoken to us, and it will be a witness against you if you ever deny your God.”
JOS	24	28	백성을 보내어 각기 기업으로 돌아가게 하였더라	So Joshua let the people depart, every man unto his inheritance.	Then Joshua sent the people away, each to his own inheritance.
JOS	24	29	이 일 후에 여호와의 종 눈의 아들 여호수아가 일백십 세에 죽으매	And it came to pass after these things, that Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the Lord, died, being an hundred and ten years old.	Some time later, Joshua son of Nun, the servant of the LORD, died at the age of 110.
JOS	24	30	무리가 그를 그의 기업의 경내 딤낫 세라에 장사하였으니 딤낫 세라는 에브라임 산지 가아스 산 북이었더라	And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in Timnath–serah, which is in mount Ephraim, on the north side of the hill of Gaash.	And they buried him in the land of his inheritance, at Timnath-serah in the hill country of Ephraim, north of Mount Gaash.
JOS	24	31	이스라엘이 여호수아의 사는 날 동안과 여호수아 뒤에 생존한 장로들 곧 여호와께서 이스라엘을 위하여 행하신 모든 일을 아는 자의 사는 날 동안 여호와를 섬겼더라	And Israel served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders that overlived Joshua, and which had known all the works of the Lord, that he had done for Israel.	Israel had served the LORD throughout the days of Joshua and of the elders who outlived him and who had experienced all the works that the LORD had done for Israel.
JOS	24	32	이스라엘 자손이 애굽에서 이끌어 낸 요셉의 뼈를 세겜에 장사하였으니 이곳은 야곱이 세겜의 아비 하몰의 자손에게 금 일백 개를 주고 산 땅이라 그것이 요셉 자손의 기업이 되었더라	And the bones of Joseph, which the children of Israel brought up out of Egypt, buried they in Shechem, in a parcel of ground which Jacob bought of the sons of Hamor the father of Shechem for an hundred pieces of silver: and it became the inheritance of the children of Joseph.	And the bones of Joseph, which the Israelites had brought up out of Egypt, were buried at Shechem in the plot of land that Jacob had purchased from the sons of Hamor, Shechem’s father, for a hundred pieces of silver. So it became an inheritance for Joseph’s descendants.
JOS	24	33	아론의 아들 엘르아살도 죽으매 무리가 그를 그 아들 비느하스가 에브라임 산지에서 받은 산에 장사하였더라	And Eleazar the son of Aaron died; and they buried him in a hill that pertained to Phinehas his son, which was given him in mount Ephraim.	Eleazar son of Aaron also died, and they buried him at Gibeah, which had been given to his son Phinehas in the hill country of Ephraim.
JDG	1	1	여호수아가 죽은 후에 이스라엘 자손이 여호와께 묻자와 가로되 우리 중 누가 먼저 올라가서 가나안 사람과 싸우리이까	Now after the death of Joshua it came to pass, that the children of Israel asked the Lord, saying, Who shall go up for us against the Canaanites first, to fight against them?	After the death of Joshua, the Israelites inquired of the LORD, “Who will be the first to go up and fight for us against the Canaanites?”
JDG	1	2	여호와께서 가라사대 유다가 올라갈지니라 보라 내가 이 땅을 그 손에 붙였노라 하시니라	And the Lord said, Judah shall go up: behold, I have delivered the land into his hand.	“Judah shall go up,” answered the LORD. “Indeed, I have delivered the land into their hands.”
JDG	1	3	유다가 그 형제 시므온에게 이르되 나의 제비 뽑아 얻은 땅에 나와 함께 올라가서 가나안 사람과 싸우자 그리하면 나도 너의 제비 뽑아 얻은 땅에 함께 가리라 이에 시므온이 그와 함께 가니라	And Judah said unto Simeon his brother, Come up with me into my lot, that we may fight against the Canaanites; and I likewise will go with thee into thy lot. So Simeon went with him.	Then the men of Judah said to their brothers the Simeonites, “Come up with us to our allotted territory, and let us fight against the Canaanites. And we likewise will go with you to your territory.” So the Simeonites went with them.
JDG	1	4	유다가 올라가매 여호와께서 가나안 사람과 브리스 사람을 그들의 손에 붙이신지라 그들이 베섹에서 일만 명을 죽이고	And Judah went up; and the Lord delivered the Canaanites and the Perizzites into their hand: and they slew of them in Bezek ten thousand men.	When Judah attacked, the LORD delivered the Canaanites and Perizzites into their hands, and they struck down ten thousand men at Bezek.
JDG	1	5	또 베섹에서 아도니 베섹을 만나서 그와 싸워 가나안 사람과 브리스 사람을 죽이니	And they found Adoni–bezek in Bezek: and they fought against him, and they slew the Canaanites and the Perizzites.	And there they found Adoni-bezek and fought against him, striking down the Canaanites and Perizzites.
JDG	1	6	아도니 베섹이 도망하는지라 그를 쫓아가서 잡아 그 수족의 엄지 가락을 끊으매	But Adoni–bezek fled; and they pursued after him, and caught him, and cut off his thumbs and his great toes.	As Adoni-bezek fled, they pursued him, seized him, and cut off his thumbs and big toes.
JDG	1	7	아도니 베섹이 가로되 옛적에 칠십 왕이 그 수족의 엄지가락을 찍히고 내 상 아래서 먹을 것을 줍더니 하나님이 나의 행한 대로 내게 갚으심이로다 하니라 무리가 그를 끌고 예루살렘에 이르렀더니 그가 거기서 죽었더라	And Adoni–bezek said, Threescore and ten kings, having their thumbs and their great toes cut off, gathered their meat under my table: as I have done, so God hath requited me. And they brought him to Jerusalem, and there he died.	Then Adoni-bezek said, “Seventy kings with their thumbs and big toes cut off have gathered the scraps under my table. As I have done to them, so God has repaid me.” And they brought him to Jerusalem, where he died.
JDG	1	8	유다 자손이 예루살렘을 쳐서 취하여 칼날로 치고 성을 불살랐으며	Now the children of Judah had fought against Jerusalem, and had taken it, and smitten it with the edge of the sword, and set the city on fire.	Then the men of Judah fought against Jerusalem and captured it. They put the city to the sword and set it on fire.
JDG	1	9	그 후에 유다 자손이 내려가서 산지와 남방과 평지에 거한 가나안 사람과 싸웠고	And afterward the children of Judah went down to fight against the Canaanites, that dwelt in the mountain, and in the south, and in the valley.	Afterward, the men of Judah marched down to fight against the Canaanites living in the hill country, in the Negev, and in the foothills.
JDG	1	10	유다가 또 가서 헤브론에 거한 가나안 사람을 쳐서 세새와 아히만과 달매를 죽였더라 헤브론의 본 이름은 기럇 아르바이었더라	And Judah went against the Canaanites that dwelt in Hebron: (now the name of Hebron before was Kirjath–arba:) and they slew Sheshai, and Ahiman, and Talmai.	Judah also marched against the Canaanites who were living in Hebron (formerly known as Kiriath-arba), and they struck down Sheshai, Ahiman, and Talmai.
JDG	1	11	거기서 나아가서 드빌의 거민들을 쳤으니 드빌의 본 이름은 기럇 세벨이라	And from thence he went against the inhabitants of Debir: and the name of Debir before was Kirjath–sepher:	From there they marched against the inhabitants of Debir (formerly known as Kiriath-sepher).
JDG	1	12	갈렙이 말하기를 기럇 세벨을 쳐서 그것을 취하는 자에게는 내 딸 악사를 아내로 주리라 하였더니	And Caleb said, He that smiteth Kirjath–sepher, and taketh it, to him will I give Achsah my daughter to wife.	And Caleb said, “To the man who strikes down Kiriath-sepher and captures it, I will give my daughter Acsah in marriage.”
JDG	1	13	갈렙의 아우요 그나스의 아들인 옷니엘이 그것을 취한고로 갈렙이 그 딸 악사를 그에게 아내로 주었더라	And Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb’s younger brother, took it: and he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife.	So Othniel son of Caleb’s younger brother Kenaz captured the city, and Caleb gave his daughter Acsah to him in marriage.
JDG	1	14	악사가 출가할 때에 그에게 청하여 자기 아비에게 밭을 구하자 하고 나귀에서 내리매 갈렙이 묻되 네가 무엇을 원하느냐	And it came to pass, when she came to him, that she moved him to ask of her father a field: and she lighted from off her ass; and Caleb said unto her, What wilt thou?	One day Acsah came to Othniel and urged him to ask her father for a field. When she got off her donkey, Caleb asked her, “What do you desire?”
JDG	1	15	가로되 내게 복을 주소서 아버지께서 나를 남방으로 보내시니 샘물도 내게 주소서 하매 갈렙이 윗샘과 아랫샘을 그에게 주었더라	And she said unto him, Give me a blessing: for thou hast given me a south land; give me also springs of water. And Caleb gave her the upper springs and the nether springs.	“Give me a blessing,” she answered. “Since you have given me land in the Negev, give me springs of water as well.” So Caleb gave her both the upper and lower springs.
JDG	1	16	모세의 장인은 겐 사람이라 그 자손이 유다 자손과 함께 종려나무 성읍에서 올라가서 아랏 남방의 유다 황무지에 이르러 그 백성 중에 거하니라	And the children of the Kenite, Moses’ father in law, went up out of the city of palm trees with the children of Judah into the wilderness of Judah, which lieth in the south of Arad; and they went and dwelt among the people.	Now the descendants of Moses’ father-in-law, the Kenite, went up with the men of Judah from the City of Palms to the Wilderness of Judah in the Negev near Arad. They went to live among the people.
JDG	1	17	유다가 그 형제 시므온과 함께 가서 스밧에 거한 가나안 사람을 쳐서 그곳을 진멸하였으므로 그 성읍 이름을 호르마라 하니라	And Judah went with Simeon his brother, and they slew the Canaanites that inhabited Zephath, and utterly destroyed it. And the name of the city was called Hormah.	Then the men of Judah went with their brothers the Simeonites, attacked the Canaanites living in Zephath, and devoted the city to destruction. So it was called Hormah.
JDG	1	18	유다가 또 가사와 그 경내와 아스글론과 그 경내와 에그론과 그 경내를 취하였고	Also Judah took Gaza with the coast thereof, and Askelon with the coast thereof, and Ekron with the coast thereof.	And Judah also captured Gaza, Ashkelon, and Ekron—each with its territory.
JDG	1	19	여호와께서 유다와 함께 하신고로 그가 산지 거민을 쫓아내었으나 골짜기의 거민들은 철병거가 있으므로 그들을 쫓아내지 못하였으며	And the Lord was with Judah; and he drave out the inhabitants of the mountain; but could not drive out the inhabitants of the valley, because they had chariots of iron.	The LORD was with Judah, and they took possession of the hill country; but they could not drive out the inhabitants of the plains because they had chariots of iron.
JDG	1	20	무리가 모세의 명한 대로 헤브론을 갈렙에게 주었더니 그가 거기서 아낙의 세 아들을 쫓아내었고	And they gave Hebron unto Caleb, as Moses said: and he expelled thence the three sons of Anak.	Just as Moses had promised, Judah gave Hebron to Caleb, who drove out the descendants of the three sons of Anak.
JDG	1	21	베냐민 자손은 예루살렘에 거한 여부스 사람을 쫓아내지 못하였으므로 여부스 사람이 베냐민 자손과 함께 오늘날까지 예루살렘에 거하더라	And the children of Benjamin did not drive out the Jebusites that inhabited Jerusalem; but the Jebusites dwell with the children of Benjamin in Jerusalem unto this day.	The Benjamites, however, failed to drive out the Jebusites living in Jerusalem. So to this day the Jebusites live there among the Benjamites.
JDG	1	22	요셉 족속도 벧엘을 치러 올라가니 여호와께서 그와 함께 하시니라	And the house of Joseph, they also went up against Beth–el: and the Lord was with them.	The house of Joseph also attacked Bethel, and the LORD was with them.
JDG	1	23	요셉 족속이 벧엘을 정탐케 하였는데 그 성읍의 본 이름은 루스라	And the house of Joseph sent to descry Beth–el. (Now the name of the city before was Luz.)	They sent spies to Bethel (formerly known as Luz),
JDG	1	24	탐정이 그 성읍에서 한 사람의 나오는 것을 보고 그에게 이르되 청하노니 이 성읍의 입구를 우리에게 가르치라 그리하면 너를 선대하리라 하매	And the spies saw a man come forth out of the city, and they said unto him, Shew us, we pray thee, the entrance into the city, and we will shew thee mercy.	and when the spies saw a man coming out of the city, they said to him, “Please show us how to get into the city, and we will treat you kindly.”
JDG	1	25	그 사람이 성읍의 입구를 가르친지라 이에 칼날로 그 성읍을 쳤으되 오직 그 사람과 그 가족을 놓아 보내매	And when he shewed them the entrance into the city, they smote the city with the edge of the sword; but they let go the man and all his family.	So the man showed them the entrance to the city, and they put the city to the sword but released that man and all his family.
JDG	1	26	그 사람이 헷 사람의 땅에 가서 성읍을 건축하고 그 이름을 루스라 하였더니 오늘날까지 그곳의 이름이더라	And the man went into the land of the Hittites, and built a city, and called the name thereof Luz: which is the name thereof unto this day.	And the man went to the land of the Hittites, built a city, and called it Luz, which is its name to this day.
JDG	1	27	므낫세가 벧스안과 그 향리의 거민과 다아낙과 그 향리의 거민과 돌과 그 향리의 거민과 이블르암과 그 향리의 거민과 므깃도와 그 향리의 거민들을 쫓아내지 못하매 가나안 사람이 결심하고 그 땅에 거하였더니	Neither did Manasseh drive out the inhabitants of Beth–shean and her towns, nor Taanach and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Dor and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Ibleam and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Megiddo and her towns: but the Canaanites would dwell in that land.	At that time Manasseh failed to drive out the inhabitants of Beth-shean, Taanach, Dor, Ibleam, Megiddo, and their villages; for the Canaanites were determined to dwell in that land.
JDG	1	28	이스라엘이 강성한 후에야 가나안 사람에게 사역을 시켰고 다 쫓아내지 아니하였더라	And it came to pass, when Israel was strong, that they put the Canaanites to tribute, and did not utterly drive them out.	When Israel became stronger, they pressed the Canaanites into forced labor, but they never drove them out completely.
JDG	1	29	에브라임이 게셀에 거한 가나안 사람을 쫓아내지 못하매 가나안 사람이 게셀에서 그들 중에 거하였더라	Neither did Ephraim drive out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer; but the Canaanites dwelt in Gezer among them.	Ephraim also failed to drive out the Canaanites living in Gezer; so the Canaanites continued to dwell among them in Gezer.
JDG	1	30	스불론은 기드론 거민과 나할롤 거민을 쫓아내지 못하였으나 가나안 사람이 그들 중에 거하여 사역을 하였더라	Neither did Zebulun drive out the inhabitants of Kitron, nor the inhabitants of Nahalol; but the Canaanites dwelt among them, and became tributaries.	Zebulun failed to drive out the inhabitants of Kitron and Nahalol; so the Canaanites lived among them and served as forced laborers.
JDG	1	31	아셀이 악고 거민과 시돈 거민과 알랍과 악십과 헬바와 아빅과 르홉 거민을 쫓아내지 못하고	Neither did Asher drive out the inhabitants of Accho, nor the inhabitants of Zidon, nor of Ahlab, nor of Achzib, nor of Helbah, nor of Aphik, nor of Rehob:	Asher failed to drive out the inhabitants of Acco, Sidon, Ahlab, Achzib, Helbah, Aphik, and Rehob.
JDG	1	32	그 땅 거민 가나안 사람 가운데 거하였으니 이는 쫓아내지 못함이었더라	But the Asherites dwelt among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land: for they did not drive them out.	So the Asherites lived among the Canaanite inhabitants of the land, because they did not drive them out.
JDG	1	33	납달리가 벧세메스 거민과 벧아낫 거민을 쫓아내지 못하고 그땅 거민 가나안 사람 가운데 거하였으나 벧세메스와 벧아낫 거민들이 그들에게 사역을 하였더라	Neither did Naphtali drive out the inhabitants of Beth–shemesh, nor the inhabitants of Beth–anath; but he dwelt among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land: nevertheless the inhabitants of Beth–shemesh and of Beth–anath became tributaries unto them.	Naphtali failed to drive out the inhabitants of Beth-shemesh and Beth-anath. So the Naphtalites also lived among the Canaanite inhabitants of the land, but the inhabitants of Beth-shemesh and Beth-anath served them as forced laborers.
JDG	1	34	아모리 사람이 단 자손을 산지로 쫓아들이고 골짜기에 내려오기를 용납지 아니하고	And the Amorites forced the children of Dan into the mountain: for they would not suffer them to come down to the valley:	The Amorites forced the Danites into the hill country and did not allow them to come down into the plain.
JDG	1	35	결심하고 헤레스 산과 아얄론과 사알빔에 거하였더니 요셉 족속이 강성하매 아모리 사람이 필경은 사역을 하였으며	But the Amorites would dwell in mount Heres in Aijalon, and in Shaalbim: yet the hand of the house of Joseph prevailed, so that they became tributaries.	And the Amorites were determined to dwell in Mount Heres, Aijalon, and Shaalbim. But when the house of Joseph grew in strength, they pressed the Amorites into forced labor.
JDG	1	36	아모리 사람의 지계는 아그랍빔 비탈의 바위부터 그 위였더라	And the coast of the Amorites was from the going up to Akrabbim, from the rock, and upward.	And the border of the Amorites extended from the Ascent of Akrabbim to Sela and beyond.
JDG	2	1	여호와의 사자가 길갈에서부터 보김에 이르러 가로되 내가 너희로 애굽에서 나오게 하고 인도하여 너희 열조에게 맹세한 땅으로 이끌어 왔으며 또 내가 이르기를 내가 너희에게 세운 언약을 영원히 어기지 아니하리니	And an angel of the Lord came up from Gilgal to Bochim, and said, I made you to go up out of Egypt, and have brought you unto the land which I sware unto your fathers; and I said, I will never break my covenant with you.	Now the angel of the LORD went up from Gilgal to Bochim and said, “I brought you up out of Egypt and led you into the land that I had promised to your fathers, and I said, ‘I will never break My covenant with you,
JDG	2	2	너희는 이 땅 거민과 언약을 세우지 말며 그들의 단을 헐라 하였거늘 너희가 내 목소리를 청종치 아니하였도다 그리함은 어찜이뇨	And ye shall make no league with the inhabitants of this land; ye shall throw down their altars: but ye have not obeyed my voice: why have ye done this?	and you are not to make a covenant with the people of this land, but you shall tear down their altars.’ Yet you have not obeyed My voice. What is this you have done?
JDG	2	3	그러므로 내가 또 말하기를 내가 그들을 너희 앞에서 쫓아내지 아니하리니 그들이 너희 옆구리에 가시가 될 것이며 그들의 신들이 너희에게 올무가 되리라 하였노라	Wherefore I also said, I will not drive them out from before you; but they shall be as thorns in your sides, and their gods shall be a snare unto you.	So now I tell you that I will not drive out these people before you; they will be thorns in your sides, and their gods will be a snare to you.”
JDG	2	4	여호와의 사자가 이스라엘 모든 자손에게 이 말씀을 이르매 백성이 소리를 높여 운지라	And it came to pass, when the angel of the Lord spake these words unto all the children of Israel, that the people lifted up their voice, and wept.	When the angel of the LORD had spoken these words to all the Israelites, the people lifted up their voices and wept.
JDG	2	5	그러므로 그곳을 이름하여 보김이라 하니라 무리가 거기서 여호와께 제사를 드렸더라	And they called the name of that place Bochim: and they sacrificed there unto the Lord.	So they called that place Bochim and offered sacrifices there to the LORD.
JDG	2	6	전에 여호수아가 백성을 보내매 이스라엘 자손이 각기 그 기업으로 가서 땅을 차지하였고	And when Joshua had let the people go, the children of Israel went every man unto his inheritance to possess the land.	After Joshua had dismissed the people, the Israelites went out to take possession of the land, each to his own inheritance.
JDG	2	7	백성이 여호수아의 사는 날 동안과 여호수아 뒤에 생존한 장로들 곧 여호와께서 이스라엘을 위하여 행하신 모든 큰 일을 본 자의 사는 날 동안에 여호와를 섬겼더라	And the people served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders that outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great works of the Lord, that he did for Israel.	And the people served the LORD throughout the days of Joshua and of the elders who outlived him, who had seen all the great works that the LORD had done for Israel.
JDG	2	8	여호와의 종 눈의 아들 여호수아가 일백십 세에 죽으매	And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the Lord, died, being an hundred and ten years old.	And Joshua son of Nun, the servant of the LORD, died at the age of 110.
JDG	2	9	무리가 그의 기업의 경내 에브라임 산지 가아스 산 북 딤낫 헤레스에 장사하였고	And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in Timnath–heres, in the mount of Ephraim, on the north side of the hill Gaash.	They buried him in the land of his inheritance, at Timnath-heres in the hill country of Ephraim, north of Mount Gaash.
JDG	2	10	그 세대 사람도 다 그 열조에게로 돌아갔고 그 후에 일어난 다른 세대는 여호와를 알지 못하며 여호와께서 이스라엘을 위하여 행하신 일도 알지 못하였더라	And also all that generation were gathered unto their fathers: and there arose another generation after them, which knew not the Lord, nor yet the works which he had done for Israel.	After that whole generation had also been gathered to their fathers, another generation rose up who did not know the LORD or the works that He had done for Israel.
JDG	2	11	이스라엘 자손이 여호와의 목전에 악을 행하여 바알들을 섬기며	And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and served Baalim:	And the Israelites did evil in the sight of the LORD and served the Baals.
JDG	2	12	애굽 땅에서 그들을 인도하여 내신 그 열조의 하나님 여호와를 버리고 다른 신 곧 그 사방에 있는 백성의 신들을 좇아 그들에게 절하여 여호와를 진노하시게 하였으되	And they forsook the Lord God of their fathers, which brought them out of the land of Egypt, and followed other gods, of the gods of the people that were round about them, and bowed themselves unto them, and provoked the Lord to anger.	Thus they forsook the LORD, the God of their fathers, who had brought them out of the land of Egypt, and they followed after various gods of the peoples around them. They bowed down to them and provoked the LORD to anger,
JDG	2	13	곧 그들이 여호와를 버리고 바알과 아스다롯을 섬겼으므로	And they forsook the Lord, and served Baal and Ashtaroth.	for they forsook Him and served Baal and the Ashtoreths.
JDG	2	14	여호와께서 이스라엘에게 진노하사 노략하는 자의 손에 붙여 그들로 노략을 당케 하시며 또 사방 모든 대적의 손에 파시매 그들이 다시는 대적을 당치 못하였으며	And the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he delivered them into the hands of spoilers that spoiled them, and he sold them into the hands of their enemies round about, so that they could not any longer stand before their enemies.	Then the anger of the LORD burned against Israel, and He delivered them into the hands of those who plundered them. He sold them into the hands of their enemies all around, whom they were no longer able to resist.
JDG	2	15	그들이 어디를 가든지 여호와의 손이 그들에게 재앙을 내리시매 곧 여호와께서 말씀하신 것과 같고 여호와께서 그들에게 맹세하신 것과 같아서 그들의 괴로움이 심하였더라	Whithersoever they went out, the hand of the Lord was against them for evil, as the Lord had said, and as the Lord had sworn unto them: and they were greatly distressed.	Wherever Israel marched out, the hand of the LORD was against them to bring calamity, just as He had sworn to them. So they were greatly distressed.
JDG	2	16	여호와께서 사사를 세우사 노략하는 자의 손에서 그들을 건져내게 하셨으나	Nevertheless the Lord raised up judges, which delivered them out of the hand of those that spoiled them.	Then the LORD raised up judges, who saved them from the hands of those who plundered them.
JDG	2	17	그들이 그 사사도 청종치 아니하고 돌이켜 다른 신들을 음란하듯 좇아 그들에게 절하고 여호와의 명령을 순종하던 그 열조의 행한 길을 속히 치우쳐 떠나서 그와 같이 행치 아니하였더라	And yet they would not hearken unto their judges, but they went a whoring after other gods, and bowed themselves unto them: they turned quickly out of the way which their fathers walked in, obeying the commandments of the Lord; but they did not so.	Israel, however, did not listen to their judges. Instead, they prostituted themselves with other gods and bowed down to them. They quickly turned from the way of their fathers, who had walked in obedience to the LORD’s commandments; they did not do as their fathers had done.
JDG	2	18	여호와께서 그들을 위하여 사사를 세우실 때에는 그 사사와 함께 하셨고 그 사사의 사는 날 동안에는 여호와께서 그들을 대적의 손에서 구원하셨으니 이는 그들이 대적에게 압박과 괴롭게 함을 받아 슬피 부르짖으므로 여호와께서 뜻을 돌이키셨음이어늘	And when the Lord raised them up judges, then the Lord was with the judge, and delivered them out of the hand of their enemies all the days of the judge: for it repented the Lord because of their groanings by reason of them that oppressed them and vexed them.	Whenever the LORD raised up a judge for the Israelites, He was with that judge and saved them from the hands of their enemies while the judge was still alive; for the LORD was moved to pity by their groaning under those who oppressed them and afflicted them.
JDG	2	19	그 사사가 죽은 후에는 그들이 돌이켜 그 열조보다 더욱 패괴하여 다른 신들을 좇아 섬겨 그들에게 절하고 그 행위와 패역한 길을 그치지 아니하였으므로	And it came to pass, when the judge was dead, that they returned, and corrupted themselves more than their fathers, in following other gods to serve them, and to bow down unto them; they ceased not from their own doings, nor from their stubborn way.	But when the judge died, the Israelites became even more corrupt than their fathers, going after other gods to serve them and bow down to them. They would not give up their evil practices and stubborn ways.
JDG	2	20	여호와께서 이스라엘에게 진노하여 이르시되 이 백성이 내가 그 열조와 세운 언약을 어기고 나의 목소리를 청종치 아니하였은즉	And the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel; and he said, Because that this people hath transgressed my covenant which I commanded their fathers, and have not hearkened unto my voice;	So the anger of the LORD burned against Israel, and He said, “Because this nation has transgressed the covenant I laid down for their fathers and has not heeded My voice,
JDG	2	21	나도 여호수아가 죽을 때에 남겨둔 열국을 다시는 그들의 앞에서 하나도 쫓아내지 아니하리니	I also will not henceforth drive out any from before them of the nations which Joshua left when he died:	I will no longer drive out before them any of the nations Joshua left when he died.
JDG	2	22	이는 이스라엘이 그 열조의 지킨 것 같이 나 여호와의 도를 지켜 행하나 아니하나 그들로 시험하려 함이라 하시니라	That through them I may prove Israel, whether they will keep the way of the Lord to walk therein, as their fathers did keep it, or not.	In this way I will test whether Israel will keep the way of the LORD by walking in it as their fathers did.”
JDG	2	23	그 열국을 머물러두사 속히 쫓아내지 아니하시며 여호수아의 손에 붙이지 아니하셨음이 이를 인함이었더라	Therefore the Lord left those nations, without driving them out hastily; neither delivered he them into the hand of Joshua.	That is why the LORD had left those nations in place and had not driven them out immediately by delivering them into the hand of Joshua.
JDG	3	1	여호와께서 가나안 전쟁을 알지 못한 이스라엘을 시험하려 하시며	Now these are the nations which the Lord left, to prove Israel by them, even as many of Israel as had not known all the wars of Canaan;	These are the nations that the LORD left to test all the Israelites who had not known any of the wars in Canaan,
JDG	3	2	이스라엘 자손의 세대 중에 아직 전쟁을 알지 못하는 자에게 그것을 가르쳐 알게 하려하사 남겨두신 열국은	Only that the generations of the children of Israel might know, to teach them war, at the least such as before knew nothing thereof;	if only to teach warfare to the subsequent generations of Israel, especially to those who had not known it formerly:
JDG	3	3	블레셋 다섯 방백과 가나안 모든 사람과 시돈 사람과 바알 헤르몬 산에서부터 하맛 어구까지 레바논 산에 거하는 히위 사람이라	Namely, five lords of the Philistines, and all the Canaanites, and the Sidonians, and the Hivites that dwelt in mount Lebanon, from mount Baal–hermon unto the entering in of Hamath.	the five rulers of the Philistines, all the Canaanites, the Sidonians, and the Hivites who lived in the mountains of Lebanon from Mount Baal-hermon to Lebo-hamath.
JDG	3	4	남겨두신 이 열국으로 이스라엘을 시험하사 여호와께서 모세로 그들의 열조에게 명하신 명령들을 청종하나 알고자 하셨더라	And they were to prove Israel by them, to know whether they would hearken unto the commandments of the Lord, which he commanded their fathers by the hand of Moses.	These nations were left to test the Israelites, to find out whether they would keep the commandments of the LORD, which He had given their fathers through Moses.
JDG	3	5	이스라엘 자손은 마침내 가나안 사람과 헷 사람과 아모리 사람과 브리스 사람과 히위 사람과 여브스 사람 사이에 거하여	And the children of Israel dwelt among the Canaanites, Hittites, and Amorites, and Perizzites, and Hivites, and Jebusites:	Thus the Israelites continued to live among the Canaanites, Hittites, Amorites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites.
JDG	3	6	그들의 딸들을 취하여 아내를 삼으며 자기 딸들을 그들의 아들에게 주며 또 그들의 신들을 섬겼더라	And they took their daughters to be their wives, and gave their daughters to their sons, and served their gods.	And they took the daughters of these people in marriage, gave their own daughters to their sons, and served their gods.
JDG	3	7	이스라엘 자손이 여호와 목전에 악을 행하여 자기들의 하나님 여호와를 잊어버리고 바알들과 아세라들을 섬긴지라	And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and forgat the Lord their God, and served Baalim and the groves.	So the Israelites did evil in the sight of the LORD; they forgot the LORD their God and served the Baals and the Asherahs.
JDG	3	8	여호와께서 이스라엘에게 진노하사 그들을 메소보다미아 왕 구산 리사다임의 손에 파셨으므로 이스라엘 자손이 구산 리사다임을 팔 년을 섬겼더니	Therefore the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he sold them into the hand of Chushan–rishathaim king of Mesopotamia: and the children of Israel served Chushan–rishathaim eight years.	Then the anger of the LORD burned against Israel, and He sold them into the hand of Cushan-rishathaim king of Aram-naharaim, and the Israelites served him eight years.
JDG	3	9	이스라엘 자손이 여호와께 부르짖으매 여호와께서 그들을 위하여 한 구원자를 세워 구원하게 하시니 그는 곧 갈렙의 아우 그나스의 아들 옷니엘이라	And when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, the Lord raised up a deliverer to the children of Israel, who delivered them, even Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb’s younger brother.	But when the Israelites cried out to the LORD, He raised up Othniel son of Caleb’s younger brother Kenaz as a deliverer to save them.
JDG	3	10	여호와의 신이 그에게 임하셨으므로 그가 이스라엘 사사가 되어 나가서 싸울 때에 여호와께서 메소보다미아 왕 구산 리사다임을 그 손에 붙이시매 옷니엘의 손이 구산 리사다임을 이기니라	And the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he judged Israel, and went out to war: and the Lord delivered Chushan–rishathaim king of Mesopotamia into his hand; and his hand prevailed against Chushan–rishathaim.	The Spirit of the LORD came upon him, and he became Israel’s judge and went out to war. And the LORD delivered Cushan-rishathaim king of Aram into the hand of Othniel, who prevailed against him.
JDG	3	11	그 땅이 태평한지 사십 년에 그나스의 아들 옷니엘이 죽었더라	And the land had rest forty years. And Othniel the son of Kenaz died.	So the land had rest for forty years, until Othniel son of Kenaz died.
JDG	3	12	이스라엘 자손이 또 여호와의 목전에 악을 행하니라 이스라엘 자손이 여호와의 목전에 악을 행하므로 여호와께서 모압 왕 에글론을 강성케하사 그들을 대적하게 하시매	And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the Lord: and the Lord strengthened Eglon the king of Moab against Israel, because they had done evil in the sight of the Lord.	Once again the Israelites did evil in the sight of the LORD. So He gave Eglon king of Moab power over Israel, because they had done evil in the sight of the LORD.
JDG	3	13	에글론이 암몬과 아말렉 자손들을 모아가지고 와서 이스라엘을 쳐서 종려나무 성읍을 점령한지라	And he gathered unto him the children of Ammon and Amalek, and went and smote Israel, and possessed the city of palm trees.	After enlisting the Ammonites and Amalekites to join forces with him, Eglon attacked and defeated Israel, taking possession of the City of Palms.
JDG	3	14	이에 이스라엘 자손이 모압 왕 에글론을 십팔 년을 섬기니라	So the children of Israel served Eglon the king of Moab eighteen years.	The Israelites served Eglon king of Moab eighteen years.
JDG	3	15	이스라엘 자손이 여호와께 부르짖으매 여호와께서 그들을 위하여 한 구원자를 세우셨으니 그는 곧 베냐민 사람 게라의 아들 왼손잡이 에훗이라 이스라엘 자손이 그를 의탁하여 모압 왕 에글론에게 공물을 바칠 때에	But when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, the Lord raised them up a deliverer, Ehud the son of Gera, a Benjamite, a man lefthanded: and by him the children of Israel sent a present unto Eglon the king of Moab.	And again they cried out to the LORD, and He raised up Ehud son of Gera, a left-handed Benjamite, as their deliverer. So they sent him with tribute to Eglon king of Moab.
JDG	3	16	에훗이 장이 한 규빗 되는 좌우에 날선 칼을 만들어 우편 다리 옷 속에 차고	But Ehud made him a dagger which had two edges, of a cubit length; and he did gird it under his raiment upon his right thigh.	Now Ehud had made for himself a double-edged sword a cubit long. He strapped it to his right thigh under his cloak
JDG	3	17	공물을 모압 왕 에글론에게 바쳤는데 에글론은 심히 비둔한 자이었더라	And he brought the present unto Eglon king of Moab: and Eglon was a very fat man.	and brought the tribute to Eglon king of Moab, who was an obese man.
JDG	3	18	에훗이 공물 바치기를 마친 후에 공물을 메고 온 자들을 보내고	And when he had made an end to offer the present, he sent away the people that bare the present.	After Ehud had finished presenting the tribute, he ushered out those who had carried it.
JDG	3	19	자기는 길갈 근처 돌 뜨는 곳에서부터 돌아와서 가로되 왕이여 내가 은밀한 일을 왕에게 고하려 하나이다 왕이 명하여 종용케 하라 하매 모셔 선 자들이 다 물러간지라	But he himself turned again from the quarries that were by Gilgal, and said, I have a secret errand unto thee, O king: who said, Keep silence. And all that stood by him went out from him.	But upon reaching the idols near Gilgal, he himself turned back and said, “I have a secret message for you, O king.” “Silence,” said the king, and all his attendants left him.
JDG	3	20	에훗이 왕의 앞으로 나아가니 왕은 서늘한 다락방에 홀로 앉아 있는 중이라 에훗이 가로되 내가 하나님의 명을 받들어 왕에게 고할 일이 있나이다 하매 왕이 그 좌석에서 일어나니	And Ehud came unto him; and he was sitting in a summer parlour, which he had for himself alone. And Ehud said, I have a message from God unto thee. And he arose out of his seat.	Then Ehud approached him while he was sitting alone in the coolness of his upper room. “I have a word from God for you,” Ehud said, and the king rose from his seat.
JDG	3	21	에훗이 왼손으로 우편 다리에서 칼을 빼어 왕의 몸을 찌르매	And Ehud put forth his left hand, and took the dagger from his right thigh, and thrust it into his belly:	And Ehud reached with his left hand, pulled the sword from his right thigh, and plunged it into Eglon’s belly.
JDG	3	22	칼자루도 날을 따라 들어가서 그 끝이 등뒤까지 나갔고 그가 칼을 그 몸에서 빼어내지 아니하였으므로 기름이 칼날에 엉기었더라	And the haft also went in after the blade; and the fat closed upon the blade, so that he could not draw the dagger out of his belly; and the dirt came out.	Even the handle sank in after the blade, and Eglon’s fat closed in over it, so that Ehud did not withdraw the sword from his belly. And Eglon’s bowels emptied.
JDG	3	23	에훗이 현관에 나와서 다락문들을 닫아 잠그니라	Then Ehud went forth through the porch, and shut the doors of the parlour upon him, and locked them.	Then Ehud went out through the porch, closing and locking the doors of the upper room behind him.
JDG	3	24	에훗이 나간 후에 왕의 신하들이 와서 다락문이 잠겼음을 보고 가로되 왕이 필연 다락방에서 발을 가리우신다 하고	When he was gone out, his servants came; and when they saw that, behold, the doors of the parlour were locked, they said, Surely he covereth his feet in his summer chamber.	After Ehud was gone, Eglon’s servants came in and found the doors of the upper room locked. “He must be relieving himself in the cool room,” they said.
JDG	3	25	그들이 오래 기다려도 왕이 다락문을 열지 아니하는지라 열쇠를 취하여 열고 본즉 자기 주가 이미 죽어 땅에 엎드러졌더라	And they tarried till they were ashamed: and, behold, he opened not the doors of the parlour; therefore they took a key, and opened them: and, behold, their lord was fallen down dead on the earth.	So they waited until they became worried and saw that he had still not opened the doors of the upper room. Then they took the key and opened the doors—and there was their lord lying dead on the floor.
JDG	3	26	그들의 기다리는 동안에 에훗이 피하여 돌 뜨는 곳을 지나 스이라로 도망하니라	And Ehud escaped while they tarried, and passed beyond the quarries, and escaped unto Seirath.	Ehud, however, had escaped while the servants waited. He passed by the idols and escaped to Seirah.
JDG	3	27	그가 이르러서는 에브라임 산지에서 나팔을 불매 이스라엘 자손이 산지에서 그를 따라 내려오니 에훗이 앞서 가며	And it came to pass, when he was come, that he blew a trumpet in the mountain of Ephraim, and the children of Israel went down with him from the mount, and he before them.	On arriving in Seirah, he blew the ram’s horn throughout the hill country of Ephraim. The Israelites came down with him from the hills, and he became their leader.
JDG	3	28	무리에게 이르되 나를 따르라 여호와께서 너희 대적 모압 사람을 너희의 손에 붙이셨느니라 하매 무리가 에훗을 따라 내려가서 모압 맞은편 요단강 나루를 잡아 지켜 한 사람도 건너지 못하게 하였고	And he said unto them, Follow after me: for the Lord hath delivered your enemies the Moabites into your hand. And they went down after him, and took the fords of Jordan toward Moab, and suffered not a man to pass over.	“Follow me,” he told them, “for the LORD has delivered your enemies the Moabites into your hand.” So they followed him down and seized the fords of the Jordan leading to Moab, and did not allow anyone to cross over.
JDG	3	29	그 때에 모압 사람 일만 명 가량을 죽였으니 다 역사요 용사라 한 사람도 피하지 못하였더라	And they slew of Moab at that time about ten thousand men, all lusty, and all men of valour; and there escaped not a man.	At that time they struck down about ten thousand Moabites, all robust and valiant men. Not one of them escaped.
JDG	3	30	그 날에 모압 사람이 이스라엘의 수하에 항복하매 그 땅이 팔십 년 동안 태평하였더라	So Moab was subdued that day under the hand of Israel. And the land had rest fourscore years.	So Moab was subdued under the hand of Israel that day, and the land had rest for eighty years.
JDG	3	31	에훗의 후에 아낫의 아들 삼갈이 사사로 있어 소 모는 막대기로 블레셋 사람 육백 명을 죽였고 그도 이스라엘을 구원하였더라	And after him was Shamgar the son of Anath, which slew of the Philistines six hundred men with an ox goad: and he also delivered Israel.	After Ehud came Shamgar son of Anath. And he too saved Israel, striking down six hundred Philistines with an oxgoad.
JDG	4	1	에훗의 죽은 후에 이스라엘 자손이 또 여호와의 목전에 악을 행하매	And the children of Israel again did evil in the sight of the Lord, when Ehud was dead.	After Ehud died, the Israelites again did evil in the sight of the LORD.
JDG	4	2	여호와께서 하솔에 도읍한 가나안 왕 야빈의 손에 그들을 파셨는데 그 군대 장관은 이방 하로셋에 거하는 시스라요	And the Lord sold them into the hand of Jabin king of Canaan, that reigned in Hazor; the captain of whose host was Sisera, which dwelt in Harosheth of the Gentiles.	So the LORD sold them into the hand of Jabin king of Canaan, who reigned in Hazor. The commander of his forces was Sisera, who lived in Harosheth-hagoyim.
JDG	4	3	야빈 왕은 철병거 구백 승이 있어서 이십 년 동안 이스라엘 자손을 심히 학대한고로 이스라엘 자손이 여호와께 부르짖었더라	And the children of Israel cried unto the Lord: for he had nine hundred chariots of iron; and twenty years he mightily oppressed the children of Israel.	Then the Israelites cried out to the LORD, because Jabin had nine hundred chariots of iron, and he had harshly oppressed the Israelites for twenty years.
JDG	4	4	그 때에 랍비돗의 아내 여선지 드보라가 이스라엘의 사사가 되었는데	And Deborah, a prophetess, the wife of Lapidoth, she judged Israel at that time.	Now Deborah, a prophetess, the wife of Lappidoth, was judging Israel at that time.
JDG	4	5	그는 에브라임 산지 라마와 벧엘 사이 드보라의 종려나무 아래 거하였고 이스라엘 자손은 그에게 나아가 재판을 받더라	And she dwelt under the palm tree of Deborah between Ramah and Beth–el in mount Ephraim: and the children of Israel came up to her for judgment.	And she would sit under the Palm of Deborah between Ramah and Bethel in the hill country of Ephraim, where the Israelites would go up to her for judgment.
JDG	4	6	드보라가 보내어 아비노암의 아들 바락을 납달리 게데스에서 불러다가 그에게 이르되 이스라엘 하나님 여호와께서 이같이 명하지 아니하셨느냐 이르시기를 너는 납달리 자손과 스불론 자손 일만 명을 거느리고 다볼 산으로 가라	And she sent and called Barak the son of Abinoam out of Kedesh–naphtali, and said unto him, Hath not the Lord God of Israel commanded, saying, Go and draw toward mount Tabor, and take with thee ten thousand men of the children of Naphtali and of the children of Zebulun?	She summoned Barak son of Abinoam from Kedesh in Naphtali and said to him, “Surely the LORD, the God of Israel, is commanding you: ‘Go and march to Mount Tabor, taking with you ten thousand men of Naphtali and Zebulun.
JDG	4	7	내가 야빈의 군대 장관 시스라와 그 병거들과 그 무리를 기손 강으로 이끌어 네게 이르게 하고 그를 네 손에 붙이리라 하셨느니라	And I will draw unto thee to the river Kishon Sisera, the captain of Jabin’s army, with his chariots and his multitude; and I will deliver him into thine hand.	And I will draw out Sisera the commander of Jabin’s army, his chariots, and his troops to the River Kishon, and I will deliver him into your hand.’”
JDG	4	8	바락이 그에게 이르되 당신이 나와 함께 가면 내가 가려니와 당신이 나와 함께 가지 아니하면 나는 가지 않겠노라	And Barak said unto her, If thou wilt go with me, then I will go: but if thou wilt not go with me, then I will not go.	Barak said to her, “If you will go with me, I will go; but if you will not go with me, I will not go.”
JDG	4	9	가로되 내가 반드시 너와 함께 가리라 그러나 네가 이제 가는 일로는 영광을 얻지 못하리니 이는 여호와께서 시스라를 여인의 손에 파실것임이니라 하고 드보라가 일어나 바락과 함께 게데스로 가니라	And she said, I will surely go with thee: notwithstanding the journey that thou takest shall not be for thine honour; for the Lord shall sell Sisera into the hand of a woman. And Deborah arose, and went with Barak to Kedesh.	“I will certainly go with you,” Deborah replied, “but the road you are taking will bring you no honor, because the LORD will be selling Sisera into the hand of a woman.” So Deborah got up and went with Barak to Kedesh,
JDG	4	10	바락이 스불론과 납달리를 게데스로 부르니 일만 인이 그를 따라 올라가고 드보라도 그와 함께 올라가니라	And Barak called Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedesh; and he went up with ten thousand men at his feet: and Deborah went up with him.	where he summoned Zebulun and Naphtali. Ten thousand men followed him, and Deborah also went with him.
JDG	4	11	모세의 장인 호밥의 자손 중 겐 사람 헤벨이 자기 족속을 떠나 게데스에 가까운 사아난님 상수리나무 곁에 이르러 장막을 쳤더라	Now Heber the Kenite, which was of the children of Hobab the father in law of Moses, had severed himself from the Kenites, and pitched his tent unto the plain of Zaanaim, which is by Kedesh.	Now Heber the Kenite had moved away from the Kenites, the descendants of Hobab the father-in-law of Moses, and had pitched his tent by the great tree of Zaanannim, which was near Kedesh.
JDG	4	12	아비노암의 아들 바락이 다볼 산에 오른 것을 혹이 시스라에게 고하매	And they shewed Sisera that Barak the son of Abinoam was gone up to mount Tabor.	When Sisera was told that Barak son of Abinoam had gone up Mount Tabor,
JDG	4	13	시스라가 모든 병거 곧 철병거 구백 승과 자기와 함께 있는 온 군사를 이방 하로셋에서부터 기손 강으로 모은지라	And Sisera gathered together all his chariots, even nine hundred chariots of iron, and all the people that were with him, from Harosheth of the Gentiles unto the river of Kishon.	he summoned all nine hundred of his iron chariots and all the men with him, from Harosheth-hagoyim to the River Kishon.
JDG	4	14	드보라가 바락에게 이르되 일어나라 이는 여호와께서 시스라를 네 손에 붙이신 날이라 여호와께서 너의 앞서 행하지 아니하시느냐 이에 바락이 일만 명을 거느리고 다볼 산에서 내려가니	And Deborah said unto Barak, Up; for this is the day in which the Lord hath delivered Sisera into thine hand: is not the Lord gone out before thee? So Barak went down from mount Tabor, and ten thousand men after him.	Then Deborah said to Barak, “Arise, for this is the day that the LORD has delivered Sisera into your hand. Has not the LORD gone before you?” So Barak came down from Mount Tabor with ten thousand men following him.
JDG	4	15	여호와께서 바락의 앞에서 시스라와 그 모든 병거와 그 온 군대를 칼날로 쳐서 패하게 하시매 시스라가 병거에서 내려 도보로 도망한지라	And the Lord discomfited Sisera, and all his chariots, and all his host, with the edge of the sword before Barak; so that Sisera lighted down off his chariot, and fled away on his feet.	And in front of him the LORD routed with the sword Sisera, all his charioteers, and all his army. Sisera abandoned his chariot and fled on foot.
JDG	4	16	바락이 그 병거들과 군대를 추격하여 이방 하로셋에 이르니 시스라의 온 군대가 다 칼에 엎드러졌고 남은 자가 없었더라	But Barak pursued after the chariots, and after the host, unto Harosheth of the Gentiles: and all the host of Sisera fell upon the edge of the sword; and there was not a man left.	Then Barak pursued the chariots and army as far as Harosheth-hagoyim, and the whole army of Sisera fell by the sword; not a single man was left.
JDG	4	17	시스라가 도보로 도망하여 겐사람 헤벨의 아내 야엘의 장막에 이르렀으니 하솔 왕 야빈은 겐 사람 헤벨의 집과 화평이 있음이라	Howbeit Sisera fled away on his feet to the tent of Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite: for there was peace between Jabin the king of Hazor and the house of Heber the Kenite.	Meanwhile, Sisera had fled on foot to the tent of Jael, the wife of Heber the Kenite, because there was peace between Jabin king of Hazor and the house of Heber the Kenite.
JDG	4	18	야엘이 나가 시스라를 영접하며 그에게 말하되 나의 주여 들어오소서 내게로 들어오시고 두려워하지 마소서 하매 그 장막에 들어가니 야엘이 이불로 덮으니라	And Jael went out to meet Sisera, and said unto him, Turn in, my lord, turn in to me; fear not. And when he had turned in unto her into the tent, she covered him with a mantle.	Jael went out to greet Sisera and said to him, “Come in, my lord. Come in with me. Do not be afraid.” So he entered her tent, and she covered him with a blanket.
JDG	4	19	시스라가 그에게 말하되 청하노니 내게 물을 조금 마시우라 내가 목이 마르도다 하매 젖부대를 열어 그에게 마시우고 그를 덮으니	And he said unto her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water to drink; for I am thirsty. And she opened a bottle of milk, and gave him drink, and covered him.	Sisera said to her, “Please give me a little water to drink, for I am thirsty.” So she opened a container of milk, gave him a drink, and covered him again.
JDG	4	20	그가 또 가로되 장막문에 섰다가 만일 사람이 와서 네게 묻기를 여기 어떤 사람이 있느냐 하거든 너는 없다 하라 하고	Again he said unto her, Stand in the door of the tent, and it shall be, when any man doth come and enquire of thee, and say, Is there any man here? that thou shalt say, No.	“Stand at the entrance to the tent,” he said, “and if anyone comes and asks you, ‘Is there a man here?’ say, ‘No.’”
JDG	4	21	그가 곤비하여 깊이 잠든지라 헤벨의 아내 야엘이 장막 말뚝을 취하고 손에 방망이를 들고 그에게로 가만히 가서 말뚝을 그 살쩍에 박으매 말뚝이 꿰뚫고 땅에 박히니 시스라가 기절하여 죽으니라	Then Jael Heber’s wife took a nail of the tent, and took an hammer in her hand, and went softly unto him, and smote the nail into his temples, and fastened it into the ground: for he was fast asleep and weary. So he died.	But as he lay sleeping from exhaustion, Heber’s wife Jael took a tent peg, grabbed a hammer, and went silently to Sisera. She drove the peg through his temple and into the ground, and he died.
JDG	4	22	바락이 시스라를 따를 때에 야엘이 나가서 그를 맞아 가로되 오라 내가 너의 찾는 사람을 네게 보이리라 바락이 그에게 들어가 보니 시스라가 죽어 누웠고 말뚝은 그 살쩍에 박혔더라	And, behold, as Barak pursued Sisera, Jael came out to meet him, and said unto him, Come, and I will shew thee the man whom thou seekest. And when he came into her tent, behold, Sisera lay dead, and the nail was in his temples.	When Barak arrived in pursuit of Sisera, Jael went out to greet him and said to him, “Come, and I will show you the man you are seeking.” So he went in with her, and there lay Sisera dead, with a tent peg through his temple.
JDG	4	23	이와 같이 이 날에 하나님이 가나안 왕 야빈을 이스라엘 자손 앞에 패하게 하신지라	So God subdued on that day Jabin the king of Canaan before the children of Israel.	On that day God subdued Jabin king of Canaan before the Israelites.
JDG	4	24	이스라엘 자손의 손이 가나안 왕 야빈을 점점 더 이기어서 마침내 가나안 왕 야빈을 진멸하였더라	And the hand of the children of Israel prospered, and prevailed against Jabin the king of Canaan, until they had destroyed Jabin king of Canaan.	And the hand of the Israelites grew stronger and stronger against Jabin king of Canaan until they destroyed him.
JDG	5	1	이날에 드보라와 아비노암의 아들 바락이 노래하여 가로되	Then sang Deborah and Barak the son of Abinoam on that day, saying,	On that day Deborah and Barak son of Abinoam sang this song:
JDG	5	2	이스라엘의 두령이 그를 영솔하였고 백성이 즐거이 헌신하였으니 여호와를 찬송하라	Praise ye the Lord for the avenging of Israel, when the people willingly offered themselves.	“When the princes take the lead in Israel, when the people volunteer, bless the LORD.
JDG	5	3	너희 왕들아 들으라 방백들아 귀를 기울이라 나 곧 내가 여호와를 노래할 것이요 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와를 찬송하리로다	Hear, O ye kings; give ear, O ye princes; I, even I, will sing unto the Lord; I will sing praise to the Lord God of Israel.	Listen, O kings! Give ear, O princes! I will sing to the LORD; I will sing praise to the LORD, the God of Israel.
JDG	5	4	여호와여 주께서 세일에서부터 나오시고 에돔 들에서부터 진행하실 때에 땅이 진동하고 하늘도 새어서 구름이 물을 내렸나이다	Lord, when thou wentest out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of the field of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens dropped, the clouds also dropped water.	O LORD, when You went out from Seir, when You marched from the land of Edom, the earth trembled, the heavens poured out rain, and the clouds poured down water.
JDG	5	5	산들이 여호와 앞에서 진동하니 저 시내 산도 이스라엘 하나님 여호와 앞에서 진동하였도다	The mountains melted from before the Lord, even that Sinai from before the Lord God of Israel.	The mountains quaked before the LORD, the One of Sinai, before the LORD, the God of Israel.
JDG	5	6	아낫의 아들 삼갈의 날에 또는 야엘의 날에는 대로가 비었고 행인들은 소로로 다녔도다	In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the highways were unoccupied, and the travellers walked through byways.	In the days of Shamgar son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the highways were deserted and the travelers took the byways.
JDG	5	7	이스라엘에 관원이 그치고 그쳤더니 나 드보라가 일어났고 내가 일어나서 이스라엘의 어미가 되었도다	The inhabitants of the villages ceased, they ceased in Israel, until that I Deborah arose, that I arose a mother in Israel.	Life in the villages ceased; it ended in Israel, until I, Deborah, arose, a mother in Israel.
JDG	5	8	무리가 새 신들을 택하였으므로 그 때에 전쟁이 성문에 미쳤으나 이스라엘 사만 명 중에 방패와 창이 보였던고	They chose new gods; then was war in the gates: was there a shield or spear seen among forty thousand in Israel?	When they chose new gods, then war came to their gates. Not a shield or spear was found among forty thousand in Israel.
JDG	5	9	내 마음이 이스라엘의 방백을 사모함은 그들이 백성 중에서 즐거이 헌신하였음이라 여호와를 찬송하라	My heart is toward the governors of Israel, that offered themselves willingly among the people. Bless ye the Lord.	My heart is with the princes of Israel, with the volunteers among the people. Bless the LORD!
JDG	5	10	흰 나귀를 탄 자들, 귀한 화문석에 앉은 자들, 길에 행하는 자들아 선파할지어다	Speak, ye that ride on white asses, ye that sit in judgment, and walk by the way.	You who ride white donkeys, who sit on saddle blankets, and you who travel the road, ponder
JDG	5	11	활 쏘는 자의 지꺼림에서, 멀리 떨어진 물 긷는 곳에서도 여호와의 의로우신 일을 칭술하라 그의 이스라엘을 다스리시는 의로우신 일을 칭술하라 그 때에 여호와의 백성이 성문에 내려갔도다	They that are delivered from the noise of archers in the places of drawing water, there shall they rehearse the righteous acts of the Lord, even the righteous acts toward the inhabitants of his villages in Israel: then shall the people of the Lord go down to the gates.	the voices of the singers at the watering places. There they shall recount the righteous acts of the LORD, the righteous deeds of His villagers in Israel. Then the people of the LORD went down to the gates:
JDG	5	12	깰지어다 깰지어다 드보라여 깰지어다 깰지어다 너는 노래할지어다 일어날지어다 바락이여 아비노암의 아들이여 네 사로잡은 자를 끌고 갈지어다	Awake, awake, Deborah: awake, awake, utter a song: arise, Barak, and lead thy captivity captive, thou son of Abinoam.	‘Awake, awake, O Deborah! Awake, awake, sing a song! Arise, O Barak, and take hold of your captives, O son of Abinoam!’
JDG	5	13	그 때에 남은 귀인과 백성이 내려왔고 여호와께서 나를 위하여 용사를 치시려고 강림하셨도다	Then he made him that remaineth have dominion over the nobles among the people: the Lord made me have dominion over the mighty.	Then the survivors came down to the nobles; the people of the LORD came down to me against the mighty.
JDG	5	14	에브라임에게서 나온 자는 아말렉에 뿌리 박힌 자요 그 다음에 베냐민은 너희 백성 중에 섞였으며 마길에게서는 다스리는 자들이 내려왔고 스불론에게서는 대장군의 지팡이를 잡은 자가 내려왔도다	Out of Ephraim was there a root of them against Amalek; after thee, Benjamin, among thy people; out of Machir came down governors, and out of Zebulun they that handle the pen of the writer.	Some came from Ephraim, with their roots in Amalek; Benjamin came with your people after you. The commanders came down from Machir, the bearers of the marshal’s staff from Zebulun.
JDG	5	15	잇사갈의 방백들이 드보라와 함께 하니 잇사갈의 심사를 바락도 가졌도다 그 발을 좇아 골짜기로 달려 내려가니 르우벤 시냇가에 큰 결심이 있었도다	And the princes of Issachar were with Deborah; even Issachar, and also Barak: he was sent on foot into the valley. For the divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of heart.	The princes of Issachar were with Deborah, and Issachar was with Barak, rushing into the valley at his heels. In the clans of Reuben there was great indecision.
JDG	5	16	네가 양의 우리 가운데 앉아서 목자의 저 부는 소리를 들음은 어찜이뇨 르우벤 시냇가에서 마음에 크게 살핌이 있도다	Why abodest thou among the sheepfolds, to hear the bleatings of the flocks? For the divisions of Reuben there were great searchings of heart.	Why did you sit among the sheepfolds to hear the whistling for the flocks? In the clans of Reuben there was great indecision.
JDG	5	17	길르앗은 요단 저편에 거하거늘 단은 배에 머무름은 어찜이뇨 아셀은 해빈에 앉고 자기 시냇가에 거하도다	Gilead abode beyond Jordan: and why did Dan remain in ships? Asher continued on the sea shore, and abode in his breaches.	Gilead remained beyond the Jordan. Dan, why did you linger by the ships? Asher stayed at the coast and remained in his harbors.
JDG	5	18	스불론은 죽음을 무릅쓰고 생명을 아끼지 아니한 백성이요 납달리도 들의 높은 곳에서 그러하도다	Zebulun and Naphtali were a people that jeoparded their lives unto the death in the high places of the field.	Zebulun was a people who risked their lives; Naphtali, too, on the heights of the battlefield.
JDG	5	19	열왕이 와서 싸울 때에 가나안 열왕이 므깃도 물 가 다아낙에서 싸웠으나 돈을 탈취하지 못하였도다	The kings came and fought, then fought the kings of Canaan in Taanach by the waters of Megiddo; they took no gain of money.	Kings came and fought; then the kings of Canaan fought at Taanach by the waters of Megiddo, but they took no plunder of silver.
JDG	5	20	별들이 하늘에서부터 싸우되 그 다니는 길에서 시스라와 싸웠도다	They fought from heaven; the stars in their courses fought against Sisera.	From the heavens the stars fought; from their courses they fought against Sisera.
JDG	5	21	기손 강은 그 무리를 표류시켰으니 이 기손 강은 옛 강이라 내 영혼아 네가 힘 있는 자를 밟았도다	The river of Kishon swept them away, that ancient river, the river Kishon. O my soul, thou hast trodden down strength.	The River Kishon swept them away, the ancient river, the River Kishon. March on, O my soul, in strength!
JDG	5	22	그 때에 군마가 빨리 달리니 말굽소리는 땅을 울리도다	Then were the horsehoofs broken by the means of the pransings, the pransings of their mighty ones.	Then the hooves of horses thundered— the mad galloping of his stallions.
JDG	5	23	여호와의 사자의 말씀에 메로스를 저주하라 너희가 거듭거듭 그 거민을 저주할 것은 그들이 와서 여호와를 돕지 아니하며 여호와를 도와 용사를 치지 아니함이니라 하시도다	Curse ye Meroz, said the angel of the Lord, curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof; because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against the mighty.	‘Curse Meroz,’ says the angel of the LORD. ‘Bitterly curse her inhabitants; for they did not come to help the LORD, to help the LORD against the mighty.’
JDG	5	24	겐 사람 헤벨의 아내 야엘은 다른 여인보다 복을 받을 것이니 장막에 거한 여인보다 더욱 복을 받을 것이로다	Blessed above women shall Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite be, blessed shall she be above women in the tent.	Most blessed among women is Jael, the wife of Heber the Kenite, most blessed of tent-dwelling women.
JDG	5	25	시스라가 물을 구하매 우유를 주되 곧 엉긴 젖을 귀한 그릇에 담아주었고	He asked water, and she gave him milk; she brought forth butter in a lordly dish.	He asked for water, and she gave him milk. In a magnificent bowl she brought him curds.
JDG	5	26	손으로 장막 말뚝을 잡으며 오른손에 장인의 방망이를 들고 그 방망이로 시스라를 쳐서 머리를 뚫되 곧 살쩍을 꿰뚫었도다	She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmen’s hammer; and with the hammer she smote Sisera, she smote off his head, when she had pierced and stricken through his temples.	She reached for the tent peg, her right hand for the workman’s hammer. She struck Sisera and crushed his skull; she shattered and pierced his temple.
JDG	5	27	그가 그의 발 앞에 꾸부러지며 엎드러지고 쓰러졌고 그의 발 앞에 꾸부러져 엎드러져서 그 꾸부러진 곳에 엎드러져 죽었도다	At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down: at her feet he bowed, he fell: where he bowed, there he fell down dead.	At her feet he collapsed, he fell, there he lay still; at her feet he collapsed, he fell; where he collapsed, there he fell dead.
JDG	5	28	시스라의 어미가 창문으로 바라보며 살창에서 부르짖기를 그의 병거가 어찌하여 더디 오는고 그의 병거 바퀴가 어찌하여 더디 구는고 하매	The mother of Sisera looked out at a window, and cried through the lattice, Why is his chariot so long in coming? why tarry the wheels of his chariots?	Sisera’s mother looked through the window; she peered through the lattice and lamented: ‘Why is his chariot so long in coming? What has delayed the clatter of his chariots?’
JDG	5	29	그 지혜로운 시녀들이 대답하였겠고 그도 스스로 대답하기를	Her wise ladies answered her, yea, she returned answer to herself,	Her wisest ladies answer; indeed she keeps telling herself,
JDG	5	30	그들이 어찌 노략물을 얻지 못하였으랴 그것을 나누지 못하였으랴 사람마다 한 두 처녀를 얻었으리로다 시스라는 채색옷을 노략하였으리니 그것은 수놓은 채색옷이리로다 곧 양편에 수놓은 채색옷이리니 노략한 자의 목에 꾸미리로다 하였으리라	Have they not sped? have they not divided the prey; to every man a damsel or two; to Sisera a prey of divers colours, a prey of divers colours of needlework, of divers colours of needlework on both sides, meet for the necks of them that take the spoil?	‘Are they not finding and dividing the spoil— a girl or two for each warrior, a plunder of dyed garments for Sisera, the spoil of embroidered garments for the neck of the looter?’
JDG	5	31	여호와여 주의 대적은 다 이와 같이 망하게 하시고 주를 사랑하는 자는 해가 힘있게 돋음 같게 하시옵소서 하니라 그 땅이 사십 년 동안 태평하였더라	So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord: but let them that love him be as the sun when he goeth forth in his might. And the land had rest forty years.	So may all Your enemies perish, O LORD! But may those who love You shine like the sun at its brightest.” And the land had rest for forty years.
JDG	6	1	이스라엘 자손이 또 여호와의 목전에 악을 행하였으므로 여호와께서 칠 년 동안 그들을 미디안의 손에 붙이시니	And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord: and the Lord delivered them into the hand of Midian seven years.	Again the Israelites did evil in the sight of the LORD; so He delivered them into the hand of Midian for seven years,
JDG	6	2	미디안의 손이 이스라엘을 이긴지라 이스라엘 자손이 미디안을 인하여 산에서 구멍과 굴과 산성을 자기를 위하여 만들었으며	And the hand of Midian prevailed against Israel: and because of the Midianites the children of Israel made them the dens which are in the mountains, and caves, and strong holds.	and the hand of Midian prevailed against Israel. Because of the Midianites, the Israelites prepared shelters for themselves in the mountains, caves, and strongholds.
JDG	6	3	이스라엘이 파종한 때면 미디안 사람, 아말렉 사람, 동방 사람이 치러 올라와서	And so it was, when Israel had sown, that the Midianites came up, and the Amalekites, and the children of the east, even they came up against them;	Whenever the Israelites would plant their crops, the Midianites, Amalekites, and other people of the east would come up and invade them,
JDG	6	4	진을 치고 가사에 이르도록 토지 소산을 멸하여 이스라엘 가운데 식물을 남겨두지 아니하며 양이나 소나 나귀도 남기지 아니하니	And they encamped against them, and destroyed the increase of the earth, till thou come unto Gaza, and left no sustenance for Israel, neither sheep, nor ox, nor ass.	encamping against them as far as Gaza and destroying the produce of the land. They left Israel with no sustenance, neither sheep nor oxen nor donkeys.
JDG	6	5	이는 그들이 그 짐승과 장막을 가지고 올라와서 메뚜기떼 같이 들어오니 그 사람과 약대가 무수함이라 그들이 그 땅에 들어와 멸하려 하니	For they came up with their cattle and their tents, and they came as grasshoppers for multitude; for both they and their camels were without number: and they entered into the land to destroy it.	For the Midianites came with their livestock and their tents like a great swarm of locusts. They and their camels were innumerable, and they entered the land to ravage it.
JDG	6	6	이스라엘이 미디안을 인하여 미약함이 심한지라 이에 이스라엘 자손이 여호와께 부르짖었더라	And Israel was greatly impoverished because of the Midianites; and the children of Israel cried unto the Lord.	Israel was greatly impoverished by Midian, and the Israelites cried out to the LORD.
JDG	6	7	이스라엘 자손이 미디안을 인하여 여호와께 부르짖은고로	And it came to pass, when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord because of the Midianites,	Now when the Israelites cried out to the LORD because of Midian,
JDG	6	8	여호와께서 이스라엘 자손에게 한 선지자를 보내사 그들에게 이르되 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 말씀에 내가 너희를 애굽에서 인도하여 내며 너희를 그 종 되었던 집에서 나오게 하여	That the Lord sent a prophet unto the children of Israel, which said unto them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, I brought you up from Egypt, and brought you forth out of the house of bondage;	He sent them a prophet, who told them, “This is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: I brought you up out of Egypt, out of the house of slavery.
JDG	6	9	애굽 사람의 손과 너희를 학대하는 모든 자의 손에서 너희를 건져 내고 그들을 너희 앞에서 쫓아내고 그 땅을 너희에게 주었으며	And I delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all that oppressed you, and drave them out from before you, and gave you their land;	I delivered you out of the hands of Egypt and all your oppressors. I drove them out before you and gave you their land.
JDG	6	10	내가 또 너희에게 이르기를 나는 너희 하나님 여호와니 너희의 거하는 아모리 사람의 땅의 신들을 두려워 말라 하였으나 너희가 내 목소리를 청종치 아니하였느니라 하셨다 하니라	And I said unto you, I am the Lord your God; fear not the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell: but ye have not obeyed my voice.	And I said to you: ‘I am the LORD your God. You must not fear the gods of the Amorites, in whose land you dwell.’ But you did not obey Me.”
JDG	6	11	여호와의 사자가 아비에셀 사람 요아스에게 속한 오브라에 이르러 상수리나무 아래 앉으니라 마침 요아스의 아들 기드온이 미디안 사람에게 알리지 아니하려 하여 밀을 포도주 틀에서 타작하더니	And there came an angel of the Lord, and sat under an oak which was in Ophrah, that pertained unto Joash the Abi–ezrite: and his son Gideon threshed wheat by the winepress, to hide it from the Midianites.	Then the angel of the LORD came and sat down under the oak in Ophrah that belonged to Joash the Abiezrite, where his son Gideon was threshing wheat in a winepress to hide it from the Midianites.
JDG	6	12	여호와의 사자가 기드온에게 나타나 이르되 큰 용사여 여호와께서 너와 함께 계시도다	And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him, and said unto him, The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of valour.	And the angel of the LORD appeared to Gideon and said, “The LORD is with you, O mighty man of valor.”
JDG	6	13	기드온이 그에게 대답하되 나의 주여 여호와께서 우리와 함께 계시면 어찌하여 이 모든 일이 우리에게 미쳤나이까 또 우리 열조가 일찍 우리에게 이르기를 여호와께서 우리를 애굽에서 나오게 하신 것이 아니냐 한 그 모든 이적이 어디 있나이까 이제 여호와께서 우리를 버리사 미디안의 손에 붙이셨나이다	And Gideon said unto him, Oh my Lord, if the Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen us? and where be all his miracles which our fathers told us of, saying, Did not the Lord bring us up from Egypt? but now the Lord hath forsaken us, and delivered us into the hands of the Midianites.	“Please, my Lord,” Gideon replied, “if the LORD is with us, why has all this happened to us? And where are all His wonders of which our fathers told us, saying, ‘Has not the LORD brought us up out of Egypt?’ But now the LORD has forsaken us and delivered us into the hand of Midian.”
JDG	6	14	여호와께서 그를 돌아보아 가라사대 너는 이 네 힘을 의지하고 가서 이스라엘을 미디안의 손에서 구원하라 내가 너를 보낸 것이 아니냐	And the Lord looked upon him, and said, Go in this thy might, and thou shalt save Israel from the hand of the Midianites: have not I sent thee?	The LORD turned to him and said, “Go in the strength you have and save Israel from the hand of Midian. Am I not sending you?”
JDG	6	15	기드온이 그에게 대답하되 주여 내가 무엇으로 이스라엘을 구원하리이까 보소서 나의 집은 므낫세 중에 극히 약하고 나는 내 아비 집에서 제일 작은 자니이다	And he said unto him, Oh my Lord, wherewith shall I save Israel? behold, my family is poor in Manasseh, and I am the least in my father’s house.	“Please, my Lord,” Gideon replied, “how can I save Israel? Indeed, my clan is the weakest in Manasseh, and I am the youngest in my father’s house.”
JDG	6	16	여호와께서 그에게 이르시되 내가 반드시 너와 함께 하리니 네가 미디안 사람 치기를 한 사람을 치듯 하리라	And the Lord said unto him, Surely I will be with thee, and thou shalt smite the Midianites as one man.	“Surely I will be with you,” the LORD replied, “and you will strike down all the Midianites as one man.”
JDG	6	17	기드온이 그에게 대답하되 내가 주께 은혜를 얻었사오면 나와 말씀하신 이가 주 되시는 표징을 내게 보이소서	And he said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy sight, then shew me a sign that thou talkest with me.	Gideon answered, “If I have found favor in Your sight, give me a sign that it is You speaking with me.
JDG	6	18	내가 예물을 가지고 다시 주께로 와서 그것을 주 앞에 드리기까지 이곳을 떠나지 마시기를 원하나이다 그가 가로되 내가 너 돌아오기를 기다리리라	Depart not hence, I pray thee, until I come unto thee, and bring forth my present, and set it before thee. And he said, I will tarry until thou come again.	Please do not depart from this place until I return to You. Let me bring my offering and set it before You.” And the LORD said, “I will stay until you return.”
JDG	6	19	기드온이 가서 염소 새끼 하나를 준비하고 가루 한 에바로 무교전병을 만들고 고기를 소쿠리에 담고 국을 양푼에 담아서 상수리나무 아래 그에게로 가져다가 드리매	And Gideon went in, and made ready a kid, and unleavened cakes of an ephah of flour: the flesh he put in a basket, and he put the broth in a pot, and brought it out unto him under the oak, and presented it.	So Gideon went in and prepared a young goat and unleavened bread and an ephah of flour. He placed the meat in a basket and the broth in a pot and brought them out to present to Him under the oak.
JDG	6	20	하나님의 사자가 그에게 이르되 고기와 무교전병을 가져 이 반석 위에 두고 그 위에 국을 쏟으라 기드온이 그대로 하니	And the angel of God said unto him, Take the flesh and the unleavened cakes, and lay them upon this rock, and pour out the broth. And he did so.	And the angel of God said to him, “Take the meat and the unleavened bread, lay them on this rock, and pour out the broth.” And Gideon did so.
JDG	6	21	여호와의 사자가 손에 잡은 지팡이 끝을 내밀어 고기와 무교전병에 대매 불이 반석에서 나와 고기와 무교전병을 살랐고 여호와의 사자는 떠나서 보이지 아니한지라	Then the angel of the Lord put forth the end of the staff that was in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes; and there rose up fire out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and the unleavened cakes. Then the angel of the Lord departed out of his sight.	Then the angel of the LORD extended the tip of the staff that was in his hand and touched the meat and the unleavened bread. And fire flared from the rock and consumed the meat and the unleavened bread. Then the angel of the LORD vanished from his sight.
JDG	6	22	기드온이 그가 여호와의 사자인줄 알고 가로되 슬프도소이다 주 여호와여 내가 여호와의 사자를 대면하여 보았나이다	And when Gideon perceived that he was an angel of the Lord, Gideon said, Alas, O Lord God! for because I have seen an angel of the Lord face to face.	When Gideon realized that it was the angel of the LORD, he said, “Oh no, Lord GOD! I have seen the angel of the LORD face to face!”
JDG	6	23	여호와께서 그에게 이르시되 너는 안심하라 두려워 말라 죽지 아니하리라 하시니라	And the Lord said unto him, Peace be unto thee; fear not: thou shalt not die.	But the LORD said to him, “Peace be with you. Do not be afraid, for you will not die.”
JDG	6	24	기드온이 여호와를 위하여 거기서 단을 쌓고 이름을 여호와 살롬이라 하였더라 그것이 오늘까지 아비에셀 사람에게 속한 오브라에 있더라	Then Gideon built an altar there unto the Lord, and called it Jehovah–shalom: unto this day it is yet in Ophrah of the Abi–ezrites.	So Gideon built an altar to the LORD there and called it The LORD Is Peace. To this day it stands in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.
JDG	6	25	이날 밤에 여호와께서 기드온에게 이르시되 네 아비의 수소 곧 칠 년된 둘째 수소를 취하고 네 아비에게 있는 바알의 단을 헐며 단 곁의 아세라 상을 찍고	And it came to pass the same night, that the Lord said unto him, Take thy father’s young bullock, even the second bullock of seven years old, and throw down the altar of Baal that thy father hath, and cut down the grove that is by it:	On that very night the LORD said to Gideon, “Take your father’s young bull and a second bull seven years old, tear down your father’s altar to Baal, and cut down the Asherah pole beside it.
JDG	6	26	또 이 견고한 성 위에 네 하나님 여호와를 위하여 규례대로 한 단을 쌓고 그 둘째 수소를 취하여 네가 찍은 아세라나무로 번제를 드릴지니라	And build an altar unto the Lord thy God upon the top of this rock, in the ordered place, and take the second bullock, and offer a burnt sacrifice with the wood of the grove which thou shalt cut down.	Then build a proper altar to the LORD your God on the top of this stronghold. And with the wood of the Asherah pole you cut down, take the second bull and offer it as a burnt offering.”
JDG	6	27	이에 기드온이 종 열을 데리고 여호와의 말씀하신 대로 행하되 아비의 가족과 그 성읍 사람들을 두려워하므로 이 일을 감히 백주에 행하지 못하고 밤에 행하니라	Then Gideon took ten men of his servants, and did as the Lord had said unto him: and so it was, because he feared his father’s household, and the men of the city, that he could not do it by day, that he did it by night.	So Gideon took ten of his servants and did as the LORD had told him. But because he was too afraid of his father’s household and the men of the city, he did it by night rather than in the daytime.
JDG	6	28	성읍 사람들이 아침에 일찍이 일어나 본즉 바알의 단이 훼파되었으며 단 곁의 아세라가 찍혔고 새로 쌓은 단 위에 그 둘째 수소를 드렸는지라	And when the men of the city arose early in the morning, behold, the altar of Baal was cast down, and the grove was cut down that was by it, and the second bullock was offered upon the altar that was built.	When the men of the city got up in the morning, there was Baal’s altar torn down, with the Asherah pole cut down beside it and the second bull offered up on the newly built altar.
JDG	6	29	서로 물어 가로되 이것이 누구의 소위인고 하고 그들이 캐어 물은 후에 가로되 요아스의 아들 기드온이 이를 행하였도다 하고	And they said one to another, Who hath done this thing? And when they enquired and asked, they said, Gideon the son of Joash hath done this thing.	“Who did this?” they said to one another. And after they had investigated thoroughly, they were told, “Gideon son of Joash did it.”
JDG	6	30	성읍 사람들이 요아스에게 이르되 네 아들을 끌어내라 그는 당연히 죽을지니 이는 바알의 단을 훼파하고 단 곁의 아세라를 찍었음이니라	Then the men of the city said unto Joash, Bring out thy son, that he may die: because he hath cast down the altar of Baal, and because he hath cut down the grove that was by it.	Then the men of the city said to Joash, “Bring out your son. He must die, because he has torn down Baal’s altar and cut down the Asherah pole beside it.”
JDG	6	31	요아스가 자기를 둘러선 모든자에게 이르되 너희가 바알을 위하여 쟁론하느냐 너희가 바알을 구원하겠느냐 그를 위하여 쟁론하는 자는 이 아침에 죽음을 당하리라 바알이 과연 신일진대 그 단을 훼파하였은즉 스스로 쟁론할 것이니라 하니라	And Joash said unto all that stood against him, Will ye plead for Baal? will ye save him? he that will plead for him, let him be put to death whilst it is yet morning: if he be a god, let him plead for himself, because one hath cast down his altar.	But Joash said to all who stood against him, “Are you contending for Baal? Are you trying to save him? Whoever pleads his case will be put to death by morning! If Baal is a god, let him contend for himself with the one who has torn down his altar.”
JDG	6	32	그 날에 기드온을 여룹바알이라 하였으니 이는 그가 바알의 단을 훼파하였은즉 바알이 더불어 쟁론할 것이라 함이었더라	Therefore on that day he called him Jerubbaal, saying, Let Baal plead against him, because he hath thrown down his altar.	So on that day Gideon was called Jerubbaal, that is to say, “Let Baal contend with him,” because he had torn down Baal’s altar.
JDG	6	33	때에 미디안 사람과 아말렉 사람과 동방 사람들이 다 모여 요단을 건너와서 이스르엘 골짜기에 진을 친지라	Then all the Midianites and the Amalekites and the children of the east were gathered together, and went over, and pitched in the valley of Jezreel.	Then all the Midianites, Amalekites, and other people of the east gathered together, crossed over the Jordan, and camped in the Valley of Jezreel.
JDG	6	34	여호와의 신이 기드온에게 강림하시니 기드온이 나팔을 불매 아비에셀 족속이 다 모여서 그를 좇고	But the Spirit of the Lord came upon Gideon, and he blew a trumpet; and Abi–ezer was gathered after him.	So the Spirit of the LORD came upon Gideon, who blew the ram’s horn and rallied the Abiezrites behind him.
JDG	6	35	기드온이 또 사자를 온 므낫세에 두루 보내매 그들도 모여서 그를 좇고 또 사자를 아셀과 스불론과 납달리에 보내매 그 무리도 올라와서 그를 영접하더라	And he sent messengers throughout all Manasseh; who also was gathered after him: and he sent messengers unto Asher, and unto Zebulun, and unto Naphtali; and they came up to meet them.	Calling them to arms, Gideon sent messengers throughout Manasseh, as well as Asher, Zebulun, and Naphtali, so that they came up to meet him.
JDG	6	36	기드온이 하나님께 여짜오되 주께서 이미 말씀하심 같이 내 손으로 이스라엘을 구원하려 하시거든	And Gideon said unto God, If thou wilt save Israel by mine hand, as thou hast said,	Then Gideon said to God, “If You are going to save Israel by my hand, as You have said,
JDG	6	37	보소서 내가 양털 한 뭉치를 타작마당에 두리니 이슬이 양털에만 있고 사면 땅은 마르면 주께서 이미 말씀하심 같이 내 손으로 이스라엘을 구원하실 줄 내가 알겠나이다 하였더니	Behold, I will put a fleece of wool in the floor; and if the dew be on the fleece only, and it be dry upon all the earth beside, then shall I know that thou wilt save Israel by mine hand, as thou hast said.	then behold, I will place a fleece of wool on the threshing floor. If there is dew only on the fleece and all the ground is dry, then I will know that You are going to save Israel by my hand, as You have said.”
JDG	6	38	그대로 된지라 이튿날 기드온이 일찍이 일어나서 양털을 취하여 이슬을 짜니 물이 그릇에 가득하더라	And it was so: for he rose up early on the morrow, and thrust the fleece together, and wringed the dew out of the fleece, a bowl full of water.	And that is what happened. When Gideon arose the next morning, he squeezed the fleece and wrung out the dew—a bowlful of water.
JDG	6	39	기드온이 또 하나님께 여짜오되 주여 내게 진노하지 마옵소서 내가 이번만 말하리이다 구하옵나니 나로 다시 한번 양털로 시험하게 하소서 양털만 마르고 사면 땅에는 다 이슬이 있게 하옵소서 하였더니	And Gideon said unto God, Let not thine anger be hot against me, and I will speak but this once: let me prove, I pray thee, but this once with the fleece; let it now be dry only upon the fleece, and upon all the ground let there be dew.	Then Gideon said to God, “Do not be angry with me; let me speak one more time. Please allow me one more test with the fleece. This time let it be dry, and the ground covered with dew.”
JDG	6	40	이 밤에 하나님이 그대로 행하시니 곧 양털만 마르고 사면 땅에는 다 이슬이 있었더라	And God did so that night: for it was dry upon the fleece only, and there was dew on all the ground.	And that night God did so. Only the fleece was dry, and dew covered the ground.
JDG	7	1	여룹바알이라 하는 기드온과 그를 좇은 모든 백성이 일찍이 일어나서 하롯샘 곁에 진쳤고 미디안의 진은 그들의 북편이요 모레 산 앞 골짜기에 있었더라	Then Jerubbaal, who is Gideon, and all the people that were with him, rose up early, and pitched beside the well of Harod: so that the host of the Midianites were on the north side of them, by the hill of Moreh, in the valley.	Early in the morning Jerubbaal (that is, Gideon) and all the men with him camped beside the spring of Harod. And the camp of Midian was north of them in the valley near the hill of Moreh.
JDG	7	2	여호와께서 기드온에게 이르시되 너를 좇은 백성이 너무 많은즉 내가 그들의 손에 미디안 사람을 붙이지 아니하리니 이는 이스라엘이 나를 거스려 자긍하기를 내 손이 나를 구원하였다 할까 함이니라	And the Lord said unto Gideon, The people that are with thee are too many for me to give the Midianites into their hands, lest Israel vaunt themselves against me, saying, Mine own hand hath saved me.	Then the LORD said to Gideon, “You have too many people for Me to deliver Midian into their hands, lest Israel glorify themselves over Me, saying, ‘My own hand has saved me.’
JDG	7	3	이제 너는 백성의 귀에 고하여 이르기를 누구든지 두려워서 떠는 자여든 길르앗 산에서 떠나 돌아가라 하라 하시니 이에 돌아간 백성이 이만 이천 명이요 남은 자가 일만 명이었더라	Now therefore go to, proclaim in the ears of the people, saying, Whosoever is fearful and afraid, let him return and depart early from mount Gilead. And there returned of the people twenty and two thousand; and there remained ten thousand.	Now, therefore, proclaim in the hearing of the people: ‘Whoever is fearful and trembling may turn back and leave Mount Gilead.’” So twenty-two thousand of them turned back, but ten thousand remained.
JDG	7	4	여호와께서 또 기드온에게 이르시되 백성이 아직도 많으니 그들을 인도하여 물가로 내려가라 거기서 내가 너를 위하여 그들을 시험하리라 무릇 내가 누구를 가리켜 이르기를 이가 너와 함께 가리라 하면 그는 너와 함께 갈 것이요 내가 누구를 가리켜 이르기를 이는 너와 함께 가지 말 것이니라 하면 그는 가지 말 것이니라	And the Lord said unto Gideon, The people are yet too many; bring them down unto the water, and I will try them for thee there: and it shall be, that of whom I say unto thee, This shall go with thee, the same shall go with thee; and of whomsoever I say unto thee, This shall not go with thee, the same shall not go.	Then the LORD said to Gideon, “There are still too many people. Take them down to the water, and I will sift them for you there. If I say to you, ‘This one shall go with you,’ he shall go. But if I say, ‘This one shall not go with you,’ he shall not go.”
JDG	7	5	이에 백성을 인도하여 물 가에 내려가매 여호와께서 기드온에게 이르시되 무릇 개의 핥는 것 같이 그 혀로 물을 핥는 자는 너는 따로 세우고 또 무릇 무릎을 꿇고 마시는 자도 그같이 하라 하시더니	So he brought down the people unto the water: and the Lord said unto Gideon, Every one that lappeth of the water with his tongue, as a dog lappeth, him shalt thou set by himself; likewise every one that boweth down upon his knees to drink.	So Gideon brought the people down to the water, and the LORD said to him, “Separate those who lap the water with their tongues like a dog from those who kneel to drink.”
JDG	7	6	손으로 움켜 입에 대고 핥는 자의 수는 삼백 명이요 그 외의 백성은 다 무릎을 꿇고 물을 마신지라	And the number of them that lapped, putting their hand to their mouth, were three hundred men: but all the rest of the people bowed down upon their knees to drink water.	And the number of those who lapped the water with their hands to their mouths was three hundred men; all the others knelt to drink.
JDG	7	7	여호와께서 기드온에게 이르시되 내가 이 물을 핥아 먹은 삼백 명으로 너희를 구원하며 미디안 사람을 네 손에 붙이리니 남은 백성은 각각 그 처소로 돌아갈 것이니라 하시니	And the Lord said unto Gideon, By the three hundred men that lapped will I save you, and deliver the Midianites into thine hand: and let all the other people go every man unto his place.	Then the LORD said to Gideon, “With the three hundred men who lapped the water I will save you and deliver the Midianites into your hand. But all the others are to go home.”
JDG	7	8	이에 백성이 양식과 나팔을 손에 든지라 기드온이 이스라엘의 모든 사람을 각각 그 장막으로 돌려보내고 그 삼백 명은 머물러 두니라 미디안 진은 그 아래 골짜기 가운데 있었더라	So the people took victuals in their hand, and their trumpets: and he sent all the rest of Israel every man unto his tent, and retained those three hundred men: and the host of Midian was beneath him in the valley.	So Gideon sent the rest of the Israelites to their tents but kept the three hundred men, who took charge of the provisions and rams’ horns of the others. And the camp of Midian lay below him in the valley.
JDG	7	9	이 밤에 여호와께서 기드온에게 이르시되 일어나 내려가서 적진을 치라 내가 그것을 네 손에 붙였느니라	And it came to pass the same night, that the Lord said unto him, Arise, get thee down unto the host; for I have delivered it into thine hand.	That night the LORD said to Gideon, “Get up and go down against the camp, for I have delivered it into your hand.
JDG	7	10	만일 네가 내려가기를 두려워하거든 네 부하 부라를 데리고 그 진으로 내려가서	But if thou fear to go down, go thou with Phurah thy servant down to the host:	But if you are afraid to do so, then go down to the camp with your servant Purah
JDG	7	11	그들의 하는 말을 들으라 그 후에 네 손이 강하여져서 능히 내려가서 그 진을 치리라 기드온이 이에 그 부하 부라를 데리고 군대가 있는 진 가에 내려간즉	And thou shalt hear what they say; and afterward shall thine hands be strengthened to go down unto the host. Then went he down with Phurah his servant unto the outside of the armed men that were in the host.	and listen to what they are saying. Then your hands will be strengthened to attack the camp.” So he went with Purah his servant to the outposts where armed men were guarding the camp.
JDG	7	12	미디안 사람과 아말렉 사람과 동방의 모든 사람이 골짜기에 누웠는데 메뚜기의 중다함 같고 그 약대의 무수함이 해변의 모래가 수다함 같은지라	And the Midianites and the Amalekites and all the children of the east lay along in the valley like grasshoppers for multitude; and their camels were without number, as the sand by the sea side for multitude.	Now the Midianites, Amalekites, and all the other people of the east had settled in the valley like a swarm of locusts, and their camels were as countless as the sand on the seashore.
JDG	7	13	기드온이 그곳에 이른즉 어떤 사람이 그 동무에게 꿈을 말하여 이르기를 내가 한 꿈을 꾸었는데 꿈에 보리떡 한 덩어리가 미디안 진으로 굴러 들어와서 한 장막에 이르러 그것을 쳐서 무너뜨려 엎드러뜨리니 곧 쓰러지더라	And when Gideon was come, behold, there was a man that told a dream unto his fellow, and said, Behold, I dreamed a dream, and, lo, a cake of barley bread tumbled into the host of Midian, and came unto a tent, and smote it that it fell, and overturned it, that the tent lay along.	And as Gideon arrived, a man was telling his friend about a dream. “Behold, I had a dream,” he said, “and I saw a loaf of barley bread come tumbling into the Midianite camp. It struck the tent so hard that the tent overturned and collapsed.”
JDG	7	14	그 동무가 대답하여 가로되 이는 다른 것이 아니라 이스라엘 사람 요아스의 아들 기드온의 칼날이라 하나님이 미디안과 그 모든 군대를 그의 손에 붙이셨느니라 하더라	And his fellow answered and said, This is nothing else save the sword of Gideon the son of Joash, a man of Israel: for into his hand hath God delivered Midian, and all the host.	His friend replied: “This is nothing less than the sword of Gideon son of Joash, the Israelite. God has delivered Midian and the whole camp into his hand.”
JDG	7	15	기드온이 그 꿈과 해몽하는 말을 듣고 경배하고 이스라엘 진중에 돌아와서 이르되 일어나라 여호와께서 미디안 군대를 너희 손에 붙이셨느니라 하고	And it was so, when Gideon heard the telling of the dream, and the interpretation thereof, that he worshipped, and returned into the host of Israel, and said, Arise; for the Lord hath delivered into your hand the host of Midian.	When Gideon heard the dream and its interpretation, he bowed in worship. He returned to the camp of Israel and said, “Get up, for the LORD has delivered the camp of Midian into your hand.”
JDG	7	16	삼백 명을 세 대로 나누고 각 손에 나팔과 빈 항아리를 들리고 항아리 안에는 횃불을 감추게 하고	And he divided the three hundred men into three companies, and he put a trumpet in every man’s hand, with empty pitchers, and lamps within the pitchers.	And he divided the three hundred men into three companies and gave each man a ram’s horn in one hand and a large jar in the other, containing a torch.
JDG	7	17	그들에게 이르되 너희는 나만 보고 나의 하는 대로 하되 내가 그 진 가에 이르러서 하는 대로 너희도 그리하여	And he said unto them, Look on me, and do likewise: and, behold, when I come to the outside of the camp, it shall be that, as I do, so shall ye do.	“Watch me and do as I do,” Gideon said. “When I come to the outskirts of the camp, do exactly as I do.
JDG	7	18	나와 나를 좇는 자가 다 나팔을 불거든 너희도 그 진 사면에서 또한 나팔을 불며 이르기를 여호와를 위하라 기드온을 위하라 하라 하니라	When I blow with a trumpet, I and all that are with me, then blow ye the trumpets also on every side of all the camp, and say, The sword of the Lord, and of Gideon.	When I and all who are with me blow our horns, then you are also to blow your horns from all around the camp and shout, ‘For the LORD and for Gideon!’”
JDG	7	19	기드온과 그들을 좇은 일백 명이 이경 초에 진 가에 이른즉 번병의 체번할 때라 나팔을 불며 손에 가졌던 항아리를 부수니라	So Gideon, and the hundred men that were with him, came unto the outside of the camp in the beginning of the middle watch; and they had but newly set the watch: and they blew the trumpets, and brake the pitchers that were in their hands.	Gideon and the hundred men with him reached the outskirts of the camp at the beginning of the middle watch, just after the changing of the guard. They blew their horns and broke the jars that were in their hands.
JDG	7	20	세 대가 나팔을 불며 항아리를 부수고 좌수에 횃불을 들고 우수에 나팔을 들어 불며 외쳐 가로되 여호와와 기드온의 칼이여 하고	And the three companies blew the trumpets, and brake the pitchers, and held the lamps in their left hands, and the trumpets in their right hands to blow withal: and they cried, The sword of the Lord, and of Gideon.	The three companies blew their horns and shattered their jars. Holding the torches in their left hands and the horns in their right hands, they shouted, “A sword for the LORD and for Gideon!”
JDG	7	21	각기 당처에 서서 그 진을 사면으로 에워싸매 그 온 적군이 달음질하고 부르짖으며 도망하였는데	And they stood every man in his place round about the camp: and all the host ran, and cried, and fled.	Each Israelite took his position around the camp, and the entire Midianite army fled, crying out as they ran.
JDG	7	22	삼백 명이 나팔을 불 때에 여호와께서 그 온 적군으로 동무끼리 칼날로 치게 하시므로 적군이 도망하여 스레라의 벧 싯다에 이르고 또 답밧에 가까운 아벨므홀라의 경계에 이르렀으며	And the three hundred blew the trumpets, and the Lord set every man’s sword against his fellow, even throughout all the host: and the host fled to Beth–shittah in Zererath, and to the border of Abel–meholah, unto Tabbath.	And when the three hundred rams’ horns sounded, the LORD set all the men in the camp against one another with their swords. The army fled to Beth-shittah toward Zererah as far as the border of Abel-meholah near Tabbath.
JDG	7	23	이스라엘 사람들은 납달리와 아셀과 므낫세에서부터 모여서 미디안 사람을 쫓았더라	And the men of Israel gathered themselves together out of Naphtali, and out of Asher, and out of all Manasseh, and pursued after the Midianites.	Then the men of Israel were called out from Naphtali, Asher, and all Manasseh, and they pursued the Midianites.
JDG	7	24	기드온이 사자를 보내어 에브라임 온 산지로 두루 행하게 하여 이르기를 내려와서 미디안 사람을 치고 그들을 앞질러 벧 바라와 요단에 이르기까지 나루턱을 취하라 하매 이에 에브라임 사람들이 다 모여서 벧 바라와 요단에 이르기까지 그 나루턱을 취하고	And Gideon sent messengers throughout all mount Ephraim, saying, Come down against the Midianites, and take before them the waters unto Beth–barah and Jordan. Then all the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together, and took the waters unto Beth–barah and Jordan.	Gideon sent messengers throughout the hill country of Ephraim to say, “Come down against the Midianites and seize the waters of the Jordan ahead of them as far as Beth-barah.” So all the men of Ephraim were called out, and they captured the waters of the Jordan as far as Beth-barah.
JDG	7	25	또 미디안 두 방백 오렙과 스엡을 사로잡아 오렙은 오렙 바위에서 죽이고 스엡은 스엡 포도주 틀에서 죽이고 미디안 사람을 추격하고 오렙과 스엡의 머리를 가지고 요단 저편에서 기드온에게로 나아오니라	And they took two princes of the Midianites, Oreb and Zeeb; and they slew Oreb upon the rock Oreb, and Zeeb they slew at the winepress of Zeeb, and pursued Midian, and brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to Gideon on the other side Jordan.	They also captured Oreb and Zeeb, the two princes of Midian; and they killed Oreb at the rock of Oreb and Zeeb at the winepress of Zeeb. So they pursued the Midianites and brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to Gideon on the other side of the Jordan.
JDG	8	1	에브라임 사람들이 기드온에게 이르되 네가 미디안과 싸우러 갈 때에 우리를 부르지 아니하였으니 우리를 이같이 대접함은 어찜이뇨 하고 크게 다투는지라	And the men of Ephraim said unto him, Why hast thou served us thus, that thou calledst us not, when thou wentest to fight with the Midianites? And they did chide with him sharply.	Then the men of Ephraim said to Gideon, “Why have you done this to us? Why did you fail to call us when you went to fight against Midian?” And they contended with him violently.
JDG	8	2	기드온이 그들에게 이르되 나의 이제 행한 일이 너희의 한 것에 비교 되겠느냐 에브라임의 끝물 포도가 아비에셀의 맏물 포도보다 낫지 아니하냐	And he said unto them, What have I done now in comparison of you? Is not the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim better than the vintage of Abi–ezer?	But Gideon answered them, “Now what have I accomplished compared to you? Are not the gleanings of Ephraim better than the grape harvest of Abiezer?
JDG	8	3	하나님이 미디안 방백 오렙과 스엡을 너희 손에 붙이셨으니 나의 한 일이 어찌 능히 너희의 한 것에 비교되겠느냐 기드온이 이 말을 하매 그들의 노가 풀리니라	God hath delivered into your hands the princes of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb: and what was I able to do in comparison of you? Then their anger was abated toward him, when he had said that.	God has delivered Oreb and Zeeb, the two princes of Midian, into your hand. What was I able to do compared to you?” When he had said this, their anger against him subsided.
JDG	8	4	기드온과 그 좇은 자 삼백 명이 요단에 이르러 건너고 비록 피곤하나 따르며	And Gideon came to Jordan, and passed over, he, and the three hundred men that were with him, faint, yet pursuing them.	Then Gideon and his three hundred men came to the Jordan and crossed it, exhausted yet still in pursuit.
JDG	8	5	그가 숙곳 사람들에게 이르되 나의 종자가 피곤하여 하니 청컨대 그들에게 떡덩이를 주라 나는 미디안 두 왕 세바와 살문나를 따르노라	And he said unto the men of Succoth, Give, I pray you, loaves of bread unto the people that follow me; for they be faint, and I am pursuing after Zebah and Zalmunna, kings of Midian.	So Gideon said to the men of Succoth, “Please give my troops some bread, for they are exhausted, and I am still pursuing Zebah and Zalmunna, the kings of Midian.”
JDG	8	6	숙곳 방백들이 가로되 세바와 살문나의 손이 지금 어찌 네 손에 있관대 우리가 네 군대에게 떡을 주겠느냐	And the princes of Succoth said, Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thine army?	But the leaders of Succoth asked, “Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna already in your possession, that we should give bread to your army?”
JDG	8	7	기드온이 가로되 그러면 여호와께서 세바와 살문나를 내 손에 붙이신 후에 내가 들가시와 찔레로 너희 살을 찢으리라 하고	And Gideon said, Therefore when the Lord hath delivered Zebah and Zalmunna into mine hand, then I will tear your flesh with the thorns of the wilderness and with briers.	“Very well,” Gideon replied, “when the LORD has delivered Zebah and Zalmunna into my hand, I will tear your flesh with the thorns and briers of the wilderness!”
JDG	8	8	거기서 브누엘에 올라가서 그들에게도 그같이 구한즉 브누엘 사람들의 대답도 숙곳 사람들의 대답과 같은지라	And he went up thence to Penuel, and spake unto them likewise: and the men of Penuel answered him as the men of Succoth had answered him.	From there he went up to Penuel and asked the same from them, but the men of Penuel gave the same response as the men of Succoth.
JDG	8	9	기드온이 또 브누엘 사람들에게 일러 가로되 내가 평안이 돌아올 때에 이 망대를 헐리라 하니라	And he spake also unto the men of Penuel, saying, When I come again in peace, I will break down this tower.	So Gideon told the men of Penuel, “When I return in triumph, I will tear down this tower!”
JDG	8	10	이 때에 세바와 살문나가 갈골에 있는데 동방 사람의 모든 군대 중에 칼 든 자 십이만 명이 죽었고 그들을 좇아 거기 있더라	Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor, and their hosts with them, about fifteen thousand men, all that were left of all the hosts of the children of the east: for there fell an hundred and twenty thousand men that drew sword.	Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor with their army of about fifteen thousand men—all that were left of the armies of the people of the east. A hundred and twenty thousand swordsmen had already fallen.
JDG	8	11	적군이 안연히 있는 중에 기드온이 노바와 욕브하 동편 장막에 거한 자의 길로 올라가서 적군을 치니	And Gideon went up by the way of them that dwelt in tents on the east of Nobah and Jogbehah, and smote the host: for the host was secure.	And Gideon went up by way of the caravan route east of Nobah and Jogbehah, and he attacked their army, taking them by surprise.
JDG	8	12	세바와 살문나가 도망하는지라 기드온이 추격하여 미디안 두 왕 세바와 살문나를 사로잡고 그 온 군대를 파하니라	And when Zebah and Zalmunna fled, he pursued after them, and took the two kings of Midian, Zebah and Zalmunna, and discomfited all the host.	When Zebah and Zalmunna fled, Gideon pursued and captured these two kings of Midian, routing their entire army.
JDG	8	13	요아스의 아들 기드온이 헤레스 비탈 전장에서 돌아오다가	And Gideon the son of Joash returned from battle before the sun was up,	After this, Gideon son of Joash returned from the battle along the Ascent of Heres.
JDG	8	14	숙곳 사람 중 한 소년을 잡아 신문하매 숙곳 방백과 장로 칠십칠 인을 그를 위하여 기록한지라	And caught a young man of the men of Succoth, and enquired of him: and he described unto him the princes of Succoth, and the elders thereof, even threescore and seventeen men.	There he captured a young man of Succoth and interrogated him. The young man wrote down for him the names of the seventy-seven leaders and elders of Succoth.
JDG	8	15	기드온이 숙곳 사람들에게 이르러 가로되 너희가 전에 나를 기롱하여 이르기를 세바와 살문나의 손이 지금 어찌 네 손에 있관대 우리가 네 피곤한 사람에게 떡을 주겠느냐 한 그 세바와 살문나를 보라 하고	And he came unto the men of Succoth, and said, Behold Zebah and Zalmunna, with whom ye did upbraid me, saying, Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thy men that are weary?	And Gideon went to the men of Succoth and said, “Here are Zebah and Zalmunna, about whom you taunted me, saying, ‘Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna already in your possession, that we should give bread to your weary men?’”
JDG	8	16	그 성읍 장로들을 잡고 들가시와 질려로 숙곳 사람들을 징벌하고	And he took the elders of the city, and thorns of the wilderness and briers, and with them he taught the men of Succoth.	Then he took the elders of the city, and using the thorns and briers of the wilderness, he disciplined the men of Succoth.
JDG	8	17	브누엘 망대를 헐며 그 성읍 사람들을 죽이니라	And he beat down the tower of Penuel, and slew the men of the city.	He also pulled down the tower of Penuel and killed the men of the city.
JDG	8	18	이에 세바와 살문나에게 묻되 너희가 다볼에서 죽인 자들은 어떠한 자이더뇨 대답하되 그들이 너와 같아서 모두 왕자 같더라	Then said he unto Zebah and Zalmunna, What manner of men were they whom ye slew at Tabor? And they answered, As thou art, so were they; each one resembled the children of a king.	Next, Gideon asked Zebah and Zalmunna, “What kind of men did you kill at Tabor?” “Men like you,” they answered, “each one resembling the son of a king.”
JDG	8	19	가로되 그들은 내 형제 내 어머니의 아들이니라 내가 여호와의 사심으로 맹세하노니 너희가 만일 그들을 살렸더면 나도 너희를 죽이지 아니하였으리라 하고	And he said, They were my brethren, even the sons of my mother: as the Lord liveth, if ye had saved them alive, I would not slay you.	“They were my brothers,” Gideon replied, “the sons of my mother! As surely as the LORD lives, if you had let them live, I would not kill you.”
JDG	8	20	그 장자 여델에게 이르되 일어나 그들을 죽이라 하였으나 그 소년이 칼을 빼지 못하였으니 이는 아직 어려서 두려워함이었더라	And he said unto Jether his firstborn, Up, and slay them. But the youth drew not his sword: for he feared, because he was yet a youth.	So he said to Jether, his firstborn, “Get up and kill them.” But the young man did not draw his sword; he was fearful because he was still a youth.
JDG	8	21	세바와 살문나가 가로되 네가 일어나 우리를 치라 대저 사람이 어떠하면 그 힘도 그러하니라 기드온이 일어나서 세바와 살문나를 죽이고 그 약대 목에 꾸몄던 새 달 형상의 장식을 취하니라	Then Zebah and Zalmunna said, Rise thou, and fall upon us: for as the man is, so is his strength. And Gideon arose, and slew Zebah and Zalmunna, and took away the ornaments that were on their camels’ necks.	Then Zebah and Zalmunna said, “Get up and kill us yourself, for as the man is, so is his strength.” So Gideon got up and killed Zebah and Zalmunna, and he took the crescent ornaments from the necks of their camels.
JDG	8	22	때에 이스라엘 사람들이 기드온에게 이르되 당신이 우리를 미디안의 손에서 구원하셨으니 당신과 당신의 아들과 당신의 손자가 우리를 다스리소서	Then the men of Israel said unto Gideon, Rule thou over us, both thou, and thy son, and thy son’s son also: for thou hast delivered us from the hand of Midian.	Then the Israelites said to Gideon, “Rule over us—you and your son and grandson—for you have saved us from the hand of Midian.”
JDG	8	23	기드온이 그들에게 이르되 내가 너희를 다스리지 아니하겠고 나의 아들도 너희를 다스리지 아니할 것이요 여호와께서 너희를 다스리시리라	And Gideon said unto them, I will not rule over you, neither shall my son rule over you: the Lord shall rule over you.	But Gideon replied, “I will not rule over you, nor will my son. The LORD shall rule over you.”
JDG	8	24	기드온이 또 그들에게 이르되 내가 너희에게 한 일을 청구하노니 너희는 각기 탈취한 귀고리를 내게 줄지니라 하니 그 대적은 이스마엘 사람이므로 금 귀고리가 있었음이라	And Gideon said unto them, I would desire a request of you, that ye would give me every man the earrings of his prey. (For they had golden earrings, because they were Ishmaelites.)	Then he added, “Let me make a request of you, that each of you give me an earring from his plunder.” (For the enemies had gold earrings because they were Ishmaelites.)
JDG	8	25	무리가 대답하되 우리가 즐거이 드리리이다 하고 겉옷을 펴고 각기 탈취한 귀고리를 그 가운데 던지니	And they answered, We will willingly give them. And they spread a garment, and did cast therein every man the earrings of his prey.	“We will give them gladly,” they replied. So they spread out a garment, and each man threw an earring from his plunder onto it.
JDG	8	26	기드온의 청한 바 금 귀고리 중 수가 금 일천칠백 세겔이요 그 외에 또 새 달 형상의 장식과 패물과 미디안 왕들의 입었던 자색 의복과 그 약대 목에 둘렀던 사슬이 있었더라	And the weight of the golden earrings that he requested was a thousand and seven hundred shekels of gold; beside ornaments, and collars, and purple raiment that was on the kings of Midian, and beside the chains that were about their camels’ necks.	The weight of the gold earrings he had requested was 1,700 shekels, in addition to the crescent ornaments, the pendants, the purple garments of the kings of Midian, and the chains from the necks of their camels.
JDG	8	27	기드온이 그 금으로 에봇 하나를 만들어서 자기의 성읍 오브라에 두었더니 온 이스라엘이 그것을 음란하게 위하므로 그것이 기드온과 그 집에 올무가 되니라	And Gideon made an ephod thereof, and put it in his city, even in Ophrah: and all Israel went thither a whoring after it: which thing became a snare unto Gideon, and to his house.	From all this Gideon made an ephod, which he placed in Ophrah, his hometown. But soon all Israel prostituted themselves by worshiping it there, and it became a snare to Gideon and his household.
JDG	8	28	미디안이 이스라엘 자손 앞에 복종하여 다시는 그 머리를 들지 못하였으므로 기드온의 사는 날 동안 사십 년에 그 땅이 태평하였더라	Thus was Midian subdued before the children of Israel, so that they lifted up their heads no more. And the country was in quietness forty years in the days of Gideon.	In this way Midian was subdued before the Israelites and did not raise its head again. So the land had rest for forty years in the days of Gideon,
JDG	8	29	요아스의 아들 여룹바알이 돌아가서 자기 집에 거하였는데	And Jerubbaal the son of Joash went and dwelt in his own house.	and he—Jerubbaal son of Joash—returned home and settled down.
JDG	8	30	기드온이 아내가 많으므로 몸에서 낳은 아들이 칠십 인이었고	And Gideon had threescore and ten sons of his body begotten: for he had many wives.	Gideon had seventy sons of his own, since he had many wives.
JDG	8	31	세겜에 있는 첩도 아들을 낳았으므로 그 이름을 아비멜렉이라 하였더라	And his concubine that was in Shechem, she also bare him a son, whose name he called Abimelech.	His concubine, who dwelt in Shechem, also bore him a son, and he named him Abimelech.
JDG	8	32	요아스의 아들 기드온이 나이 많아 죽으매 아비에셀 사람의 오브라에 있는 그의 아비 요아스의 묘실에 장사하였더라	And Gideon the son of Joash died in a good old age, and was buried in the sepulchre of Joash his father, in Ophrah of the Abi–ezrites.	Later, Gideon son of Joash died at a ripe old age and was buried in the tomb of his father Joash in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.
JDG	8	33	기드온이 이미 죽으매 이스라엘 자손이 돌이켜 바알들을 음란하게 위하고 또 바알브릿을 자기들의 신으로 삼고	And it came to pass, as soon as Gideon was dead, that the children of Israel turned again, and went a whoring after Baalim, and made Baal–berith their god.	And as soon as Gideon was dead, the Israelites turned and prostituted themselves with the Baals, and they set up Baal-berith as their god.
JDG	8	34	사면 모든 대적의 손에서 자기들을 건져내신 여호와 자기들의 하나님을 기억지 아니하며	And the children of Israel remembered not the Lord their God, who had delivered them out of the hands of all their enemies on every side:	The Israelites failed to remember the LORD their God who had delivered them from the hands of all their enemies on every side.
JDG	8	35	또 여룹바알이라 하는 기드온의 이스라엘에게 베푼 모든 은혜를 따라서 그의 집을 후대치도 아니하였더라	Neither shewed they kindness to the house of Jerubbaal, namely, Gideon, according to all the goodness which he had shewed unto Israel.	They did not show kindness to the house of Jerubbaal (that is, Gideon) for all the good things he had done for Israel.
JDG	9	1	여룹바알의 아들 아비멜렉이 세겜에 가서 그 어미의 형제에게 이르러 그들과 외조부의 온 가족에게 말하여 가로되	And Abimelech the son of Jerubbaal went to Shechem unto his mother’s brethren, and communed with them, and with all the family of the house of his mother’s father, saying,	Now Abimelech son of Jerubbaal went to his mother’s brothers at Shechem and said to them and to all the clan of his mother,
JDG	9	2	청하노니 너희는 세겜 사람들의 귀에 말하라 여룹바알의 아들 칠십 인이 다 너희를 다스림과 한 사람이 너희를 다스림이 어느 것이 너희에게 나으냐 또 나는 너희의 골육지친임을 생각하라	Speak, I pray you, in the ears of all the men of Shechem, Whether is better for you, either that all the sons of Jerubbaal, which are threescore and ten persons, reign over you, or that one reign over you? remember also that I am your bone and your flesh.	“Please ask all the leaders of Shechem, ‘Is it better for you that seventy men, all the sons of Jerubbaal, rule over you, or just one man?’ Remember that I am your own flesh and blood.”
JDG	9	3	그 어미의 형제들이 그를 위하여 이 모든 말을 온 세겜 사람들의 귀에 고하매 그들의 마음이 아비멜렉에게로 기울어서 말하기를 그는 우리 형제라 하고	And his mother’s brethren spake of him in the ears of all the men of Shechem all these words: and their hearts inclined to follow Abimelech; for they said, He is our brother.	And when his mother’s brothers spoke all these words about him in the presence of all the leaders of Shechem, their hearts were inclined to follow Abimelech, for they said, “He is our brother.”
JDG	9	4	바알브릿 묘에서 은 칠십 개를 내어 그에게 주매 아비멜렉이 그것으로 방탕하고 경박한 유를 사서 자기를 좇게 하고	And they gave him threescore and ten pieces of silver out of the house of Baal–berith, wherewith Abimelech hired vain and light persons, which followed him.	So they gave him seventy shekels of silver from the temple of Baal-berith, with which Abimelech hired some worthless and reckless men to follow him.
JDG	9	5	오브라에 있는 그 아비의 집으로 가서 여룹바알의 아들 곧 자기 형제 칠십 인을 한 반석 위에서 죽였으되 오직 여룹바알의 말째 아들 요담은 스스로 숨었으므로 남으니라	And he went unto his father’s house at Ophrah, and slew his brethren the sons of Jerubbaal, being threescore and ten persons, upon one stone: notwithstanding yet Jotham the youngest son of Jerubbaal was left; for he hid himself.	He went to his father’s house in Ophrah, and on one stone murdered his seventy brothers, the sons of Jerubbaal. But Jotham, the youngest son of Jerubbaal, survived, because he hid himself.
JDG	9	6	세겜 모든 사람과 밀로 모든 족속이 모여 가서 세겜에 있는 기둥 상수리나무 아래서 아비멜렉으로 왕을 삼으니라	And all the men of Shechem gathered together, and all the house of Millo, and went, and made Abimelech king, by the plain of the pillar that was in Shechem.	Then all the leaders of Shechem and Beth-millo gathered beside the oak at the pillar in Shechem and proceeded to make Abimelech their king.
JDG	9	7	혹이 요담에게 그 일을 고하매 요담이 그리심 산 꼭대기로 가서 서서 소리를 높이 외쳐 그들에게 이르되 세겜 사람들아 나를 들으라 그리하여야 하나님이 너희를 들으시리라	And when they told it to Jotham, he went and stood in the top of mount Gerizim, and lifted up his voice, and cried, and said unto them, Hearken unto me, ye men of Shechem, that God may hearken unto you.	When this was reported to Jotham, he climbed to the top of Mount Gerizim, raised his voice, and cried out: “Listen to me, O leaders of Shechem, and may God listen to you.
JDG	9	8	하루는 나무들이 나가서 기름을 부어 왕을 삼으려 하여 감람나무에게 이르되 너는 우리 왕이 되라 하매	The trees went forth on a time to anoint a king over them; and they said unto the olive tree, Reign thou over us.	One day the trees set out to anoint a king for themselves. They said to the olive tree, ‘Reign over us.’
JDG	9	9	감람나무가 그들에게 이르되 나의 기름은 하나님과 사람을 영화롭게 하나니 내가 어찌 그것을 버리고 가서 나무들 위에 요동하리요 한지라	But the olive tree said unto them, Should I leave my fatness, wherewith by me they honour God and man, and go to be promoted over the trees?	But the olive tree replied, ‘Should I stop giving my oil that honors both God and man, to hold sway over the trees?’
JDG	9	10	나무들이 또 무화과 나무에게 이르되 너는 와서 우리의 왕이 되라 하매	And the trees said to the fig tree, Come thou, and reign over us.	Then the trees said to the fig tree, ‘Come and reign over us.’
JDG	9	11	무화과 나무가 그들에게 이르되 나의 단 것, 나의 아름다운 실과를 내가 어찌 버리고 가서 나무들 위에 요동하리요 한지라	But the fig tree said unto them, Should I forsake my sweetness, and my good fruit, and go to be promoted over the trees?	But the fig tree replied, ‘Should I stop giving my sweetness and my good fruit, to hold sway over the trees?’
JDG	9	12	나무들이 또 포도나무에게 이르되 너는 와서 우리의 왕이 되라 하매	Then said the trees unto the vine, Come thou, and reign over us.	Then the trees said to the grapevine, ‘Come and reign over us.’
JDG	9	13	포도나무가 그들에게 이르되 하나님과 사람을 기쁘게 하는 나의 새 술을 내가 어찌 버리고 가서 나무들 위에 요동하리요 한지라	And the vine said unto them, Should I leave my wine, which cheereth God and man, and go to be promoted over the trees?	But the grapevine replied, ‘Should I stop giving my wine that cheers both God and man, to hold sway over the trees?’
JDG	9	14	이에 모든 나무가 가시나무에게 이르되 너는 와서 우리의 왕이 되라 하매	Then said all the trees unto the bramble, Come thou, and reign over us.	Finally all the trees said to the thornbush, ‘Come and reign over us.’
JDG	9	15	가시나무가 나무들에게 이르되 너희가 참으로 내게 기름을 부어 너희 왕을 삼겠거든 와서 내 그늘에 피하라 그리하지 아니하면 불이 가시나무에서 나와서 레바논의 백향목을 사를 것이니라 하였느니라	And the bramble said unto the trees, If in truth ye anoint me king over you, then come and put your trust in my shadow: and if not, let fire come out of the bramble, and devour the cedars of Lebanon.	But the thornbush replied, ‘If you really are anointing me as king over you, come and find refuge in my shade. But if not, may fire come out of the thornbush and consume the cedars of Lebanon.’
JDG	9	16	이제 너희가 아비멜렉을 세워 왕을 삼았으니 너희 행한 것이 과연 진실하고 의로우냐 이것이 여룹바알과 그 집을 선대함이냐 이것이 그 행한 대로 그에게 보답함이냐	Now therefore, if ye have done truly and sincerely, in that ye have made Abimelech king, and if ye have dealt well with Jerubbaal and his house, and have done unto him according to the deserving of his hands;	Now if you have acted faithfully and honestly in making Abimelech king, if you have done well by Jerubbaal and his family, and if you have done to him as he deserves—
JDG	9	17	우리 아버지가 전에 죽음을 무릅쓰고 너희를 위하여 싸워 미디안의 손에서 너희를 건져내었거늘	(For my father fought for you, and adventured his life far, and delivered you out of the hand of Midian:	for my father fought for you and risked his life to deliver you from the hand of Midian,
JDG	9	18	너희가 오늘날 일어나서 우리 아버지의 집을 쳐서 그 아들 칠십 인을 한 반석 위에서 죽이고 그 여종의 아들 아비멜렉이 너희 형제가 된다고 그를 세워 세겜 사람의 왕을 삼았도다	And ye are risen up against my father’s house this day, and have slain his sons, threescore and ten persons, upon one stone, and have made Abimelech, the son of his maidservant, king over the men of Shechem, because he is your brother;)	but you have risen up against my father’s house this day and killed his seventy sons on a single stone, and you have made Abimelech, the son of his maidservant, king over the leaders of Shechem because he is your brother—
JDG	9	19	만일 너희가 오늘날 여룹바알과 그 집을 대접한 것이 진실과 의로움이면 너희가 아비멜렉을 인하여 즐길 것이요 아비멜렉도 너희를 인하여 즐기려니와	If ye then have dealt truly and sincerely with Jerubbaal and with his house this day, then rejoice ye in Abimelech, and let him also rejoice in you:	if you have acted faithfully and honestly toward Jerubbaal and his house this day, then may you rejoice in Abimelech, and he in you.
JDG	9	20	그렇지 아니하면 아비멜렉에게서 불이 나와서 세겜 사람들과 밀로 족속을 사를 것이요 세겜 사람들과 밀로 족속에게서도 불이 나와서 아비멜렉을 사를 것이니라 하고	But if not, let fire come out from Abimelech, and devour the men of Shechem, and the house of Millo; and let fire come out from the men of Shechem, and from the house of Millo, and devour Abimelech.	But if not, may fire come from Abimelech and consume the leaders of Shechem and Beth-millo, and may fire come from the leaders of Shechem and Beth-millo and consume Abimelech.”
JDG	9	21	요담이 그 형제 아비멜렉을 두려워하여 달려 도망하여 브엘로 가서 거기 거하니라	And Jotham ran away, and fled, and went to Beer, and dwelt there, for fear of Abimelech his brother.	Then Jotham ran away, escaping to Beer, and he lived there for fear of his brother Abimelech.
JDG	9	22	아비멜렉이 이스라엘을 다스린지 삼 년에	When Abimelech had reigned three years over Israel,	After Abimelech had reigned over Israel for three years,
JDG	9	23	하나님이 아비멜렉과 세겜 사람들 사이에 악한 신을 보내시매 세겜 사람들이 아비멜렉을 배반하였으니	Then God sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the men of Shechem; and the men of Shechem dealt treacherously with Abimelech:	God sent a spirit of animosity between Abimelech and the leaders of Shechem and caused them to treat Abimelech deceitfully,
JDG	9	24	이는 여룹바알의 아들 칠십 인에게 행한 포학한 일을 갚되 그 형제를 죽여 피 흘린 죄를 아비멜렉과 아비멜렉의 손을 도와서 그 형제를 죽이게 한 세겜 사람에게로 돌아가게 하심이라	That the cruelty done to the threescore and ten sons of Jerubbaal might come, and their blood be laid upon Abimelech their brother, which slew them; and upon the men of Shechem, which aided him in the killing of his brethren.	in order that the crime against the seventy sons of Jerubbaal might come to justice and their blood be avenged on their brother Abimelech and on the leaders of Shechem, who had helped him murder his brothers.
JDG	9	25	세겜 사람들이 산들 꼭대기에 사람을 매복하여 아비멜렉을 엿보게 하고 무릇 그 길로 지나는 자를 다 겁탈하게 하니 혹이 그것을 아비멜렉에게 고하니라	And the men of Shechem set liers in wait for him in the top of the mountains, and they robbed all that came along that way by them: and it was told Abimelech.	The leaders of Shechem set up an ambush against Abimelech on the hilltops, and they robbed all who passed by them on the road. So this was reported to Abimelech.
JDG	9	26	에벳의 아들 가알이 그 형제로 더불어 세겜에 이르니 세겜 사람들이 그를 의뢰하니라	And Gaal the son of Ebed came with his brethren, and went over to Shechem: and the men of Shechem put their confidence in him.	Meanwhile, Gaal son of Ebed came with his brothers and crossed into Shechem, and the leaders of Shechem put their confidence in him.
JDG	9	27	그들이 밭에 가서 포도를 거두어다가 밟아 짜서 연회를 배설하고 그 신당에 들어가서 먹고 마시며 아비멜렉을 저주하니	And they went out into the fields, and gathered their vineyards, and trode the grapes, and made merry, and went into the house of their god, and did eat and drink, and cursed Abimelech.	And after they had gone out into the fields, gathered grapes from their vineyards, and trodden them, they held a festival and went into the house of their god; and as they ate and drank, they cursed Abimelech.
JDG	9	28	에벳의 아들 가알이 가로되 아비멜렉은 누구며 세겜은 누구기에 우리가 아비멜렉을 섬기리요 그가 여룹바알의 아들이 아니야 그 장관은 스불이 아니냐 차라리 세겜의 아비 하몰의 후손을 섬길 것이라 우리가 어찌 아비멜렉을 섬기리요	And Gaal the son of Ebed said, Who is Abimelech, and who is Shechem, that we should serve him? is not he the son of Jerubbaal? and Zebul his officer? serve the men of Hamor the father of Shechem: for why should we serve him?	Then Gaal son of Ebed said, “Who is Abimelech, and who is Shechem, that we should serve him? Is he not the son of Jerubbaal, and is not Zebul his officer? You are to serve the men of Hamor, the father of Shechem. Why should we serve Abimelech?
JDG	9	29	아하, 이 백성이 내 수하에 있었더면 내가 아비멜렉을 제하였으리라 하고 아비멜렉에게 네 군대를 더하고 나오라고 말하니라	And would to God this people were under my hand! then would I remove Abimelech. And he said to Abimelech, Increase thine army, and come out.	If only this people were under my authority, I would remove Abimelech; I would say to him, ‘Muster your army and come out!’”
JDG	9	30	그 성읍 장관 스불이 에벳의 아들 가알의 말을 듣고 노하여	And when Zebul the ruler of the city heard the words of Gaal the son of Ebed, his anger was kindled.	When Zebul the governor of the city heard the words of Gaal son of Ebed, he burned with anger.
JDG	9	31	사자를 아비멜렉에게 가만히 보내어 가로되 보소서 에벳의 아들 가알과 그 형제가 세겜에 이르러 성읍 무리를 충동하여 당신을 대적하게 하나니	And he sent messengers unto Abimelech privily, saying, Behold, Gaal the son of Ebed and his brethren be come to Shechem; and, behold, they fortify the city against thee.	So he covertly sent messengers to Abimelech to say, “Look, Gaal son of Ebed and his brothers have come to Shechem and are stirring up the city against you.
JDG	9	32	당신은 당신을 좇은 백성으로 더불어 밤에 일어나서 밭에 매복하였다가	Now therefore up by night, thou and the people that is with thee, and lie in wait in the field:	Now then, tonight you and the people with you are to come and lie in wait in the fields.
JDG	9	33	아침 해 뜰 때에 당신은 일찍이 일어나 이 성읍을 엄습하면 가알과 그를 좇은 백성이 나와서 당신을 대적하리니 당신은 기회를 보아 그들에게 행하소서	And it shall be, that in the morning, as soon as the sun is up, thou shalt rise early, and set upon the city: and, behold, when he and the people that is with him come out against thee, then mayest thou do to them as thou shalt find occasion.	And in the morning at sunrise, get up and advance against the city. When Gaal and his men come out against you, do to them whatever you are able.”
JDG	9	34	아비멜렉과 그를 좇은 모든 백성이 밤에 일어나 네 떼로 나눠 세겜을 대하여 매복하였더니	And Abimelech rose up, and all the people that were with him, by night, and they laid wait against Shechem in four companies.	So Abimelech and all his troops set out by night and lay in wait against Shechem in four companies.
JDG	9	35	에벳의 아들 가알이 나와서 성읍문 입구에 설 때에 아비멜렉과 그를 좇은 백성이 매복하였던 곳에서 일어난지라	And Gaal the son of Ebed went out, and stood in the entering of the gate of the city: and Abimelech rose up, and the people that were with him, from lying in wait.	Now Gaal son of Ebed went out and stood at the entrance of the city gate just as Abimelech and his men came out from their hiding places.
JDG	9	36	가알이 그 백성을 보고 스불에게 이르되 보라 백성이 산 꼭대기에서부터 내려오는도다 스불이 그에게 대답하되 네가 산 그림자를 사람으로 보았느니라	And when Gaal saw the people, he said to Zebul, Behold, there come people down from the top of the mountains. And Zebul said unto him, Thou seest the shadow of the mountains as if they were men.	When Gaal saw the people, he said to Zebul, “Look, people are coming down from the mountains!” But Zebul replied, “The shadows of the mountains look like men to you.”
JDG	9	37	가알이 다시 말하여 가로되 보라 백성이 밭 가운데로 좇아 내려오고 또 한 떼는 므오느님 상수리나무 길로 좇아 오는도다	And Gaal spake again and said, See there come people down by the middle of the land, and another company come along by the plain of Meonenim.	Then Gaal spoke up again, “Look, people are coming down from the center of the land, and one company is coming by way of the Diviners’ Oak.”
JDG	9	38	스불이 그에게 이르되 네가 전에 말하기를 아비멜렉이 누구관데 우리가 그를 섬기리요 하던 그 입이 이제 어디 있느냐 이가 너의 업신여기던 백성이 아니냐 청하노니 이제 나가서 그들과 싸우라	Then said Zebul unto him, Where is now thy mouth, wherewith thou saidst, Who is Abimelech, that we should serve him? is not this the people that thou hast despised? go out, I pray now, and fight with them.	“Where is your gloating now?” Zebul replied. “You said, ‘Who is Abimelech that we should serve him?’ Are these not the people you ridiculed? Go out now and fight them!”
JDG	9	39	가알이 세겜 사람들의 앞서 나가서 아비멜렉과 싸우다가	And Gaal went out before the men of Shechem, and fought with Abimelech.	So Gaal went out before the leaders of Shechem and fought against Abimelech,
JDG	9	40	아비멜렉에게 쫓겨 그 앞에서 도망하였고 상하여 엎드러진 자가 많아서 성문 입구까지 이르렀더라	And Abimelech chased him, and he fled before him, and many were overthrown and wounded, even unto the entering of the gate.	but Abimelech pursued him, and Gaal fled before him. And many Shechemites fell wounded all the way to the entrance of the gate.
JDG	9	41	아비멜렉은 아루마에 거하고 스불은 가알과 그 형제를 쫓아내어 세겜에 거하지 못하게 하더니	And Abimelech dwelt at Arumah: and Zebul thrust out Gaal and his brethren, that they should not dwell in Shechem.	Abimelech stayed in Arumah, and Zebul drove Gaal and his brothers out of Shechem.
JDG	9	42	이튿날 백성이 밭으로 나오매 혹이 그것을 아비멜렉에게 고하니라	And it came to pass on the morrow, that the people went out into the field; and they told Abimelech.	The next day the people of Shechem went out into the fields, and this was reported to Abimelech.
JDG	9	43	아비멜렉이 자기 백성을 세 떼로 나눠 밭에 매복하였더니 백성이 성에서 나오는 것을 보고 일어나서 그들을 치되	And he took the people, and divided them into three companies, and laid wait in the field, and looked, and, behold, the people were come forth out of the city; and he rose up against them, and smote them.	So he took his men, divided them into three companies, and lay in wait in the fields. When he saw the people coming out of the city, he rose up against them and attacked them.
JDG	9	44	아비멜렉과 그를 좇은 떼는 앞으로 달려가서 성문 입구에 서고 그 나머지 두 떼는 밭에 있는 모든 자에게 달려들어 그들을 죽이니	And Abimelech, and the company that was with him, rushed forward, and stood in the entering of the gate of the city: and the two other companies ran upon all the people that were in the fields, and slew them.	Then Abimelech and the companies with him rushed forward and took their stand at the entrance of the city gate. The other two companies rushed against all who were in the fields and struck them down.
JDG	9	45	아비멜렉이 그날 종일토록 그 성을 쳐서 필경은 취하고 거기 있는 백성을 죽이며 그 성을 헐고 소금을 뿌리니라	And Abimelech fought against the city all that day; and he took the city, and slew the people that was therein, and beat down the city, and sowed it with salt.	And all that day Abimelech fought against the city until he had captured it and killed its people. Then he demolished the city and sowed it with salt.
JDG	9	46	세겜 망대의 사람들이 이를 듣고 엘브릿 신당의 보장으로 들어갔더니	And when all the men of the tower of Shechem heard that, they entered into an hold of the house of the god Berith.	On hearing of this, all the leaders in the tower of Shechem entered the inner chamber of the temple of El-berith.
JDG	9	47	세겜 망대의 모든 사람의 모인 것이 아비멜렉에게 들리매	And it was told Abimelech, that all the men of the tower of Shechem were gathered together.	And when Abimelech was told that all the leaders in the tower of Shechem were gathered there,
JDG	9	48	아비멜렉과 그를 좇은 모든 백성이 살몬 산에 오르고 아비멜렉이 손에 도끼를 들고 나무가지를 찍고 그것을 가져 자기 어깨에 메고 좇은 백성에게 이르되 너희는 나의 행하는 것을 보나니 빨리 나와 같이 행하라 하니	And Abimelech gat him up to mount Zalmon, he and all the people that were with him; and Abimelech took an axe in his hand, and cut down a bough from the trees, and took it, and laid it on his shoulder, and said unto the people that were with him, What ye have seen me do, make haste, and do as I have done.	he and all his men went up to Mount Zalmon. Abimelech took his axe in his hand and cut a branch from the trees, which he lifted to his shoulder, saying to his men, “Hurry and do what you have seen me do.”
JDG	9	49	모든 백성도 각각 나무가지를 찍어서 아비멜렉을 좇아 보장에 대어 놓고 그곳에 불을 놓으매 세겜 망대에 있는 사람들도 다 죽었으니 남녀가 대략 일천 명이었더라	And all the people likewise cut down every man his bough, and followed Abimelech, and put them to the hold, and set the hold on fire upon them; so that all the men of the tower of Shechem died also, about a thousand men and women.	So each man also cut his own branch and followed Abimelech. Then they piled the branches against the inner chamber and set it on fire above them, killing everyone in the tower of Shechem, about a thousand men and women.
JDG	9	50	아비멜렉이 데베스에 가서 데베스를 대하여 진 치고 그것을 취하였더니	Then went Abimelech to Thebez, and encamped against Thebez, and took it.	Then Abimelech went to Thebez, encamped against it, and captured it.
JDG	9	51	성중에 견고한 망대가 있으므로 그 성 백성의 남녀가 모두 그리로 도망하여 들어가서 문을 잠그고 망대 꼭대기로 올라간지라	But there was a strong tower within the city, and thither fled all the men and women, and all they of the city, and shut it to them, and gat them up to the top of the tower.	But there was a strong tower inside the city, and all the men, women, and leaders of the city fled there. They locked themselves in and went up to the roof of the tower.
JDG	9	52	아비멜렉이 망대 앞에 이르러서 치며 망대의 문에 가까이 나아가서 그것을 불사르려 하더니	And Abimelech came unto the tower, and fought against it, and went hard unto the door of the tower to burn it with fire.	When Abimelech came to attack the tower, he approached its entrance to set it on fire.
JDG	9	53	한 여인이 맷돌 윗짝을 아비멜렉의 머리 위에 내려던져 그 두골을 깨뜨리니	And a certain woman cast a piece of a millstone upon Abimelech’s head, and all to brake his skull.	But a woman dropped an upper millstone on Abimelech’s head, crushing his skull.
JDG	9	54	아비멜렉이 자기의 병기 잡은 소년을 급히 불러 그에게 이르되 너는 칼을 빼어 나를 죽이라 사람들이 나를 가리켜 이르기를 그가 여인에게 죽었다 할까 하노라 소년이 찌르매 그가 곧 죽은지라	Then he called hastily unto the young man his armourbearer, and said unto him, Draw thy sword, and slay me, that men say not of me, A woman slew him. And his young man thrust him through, and he died.	He quickly called his armor-bearer, saying, “Draw your sword and kill me, lest they say of me, ‘A woman killed him.’” So Abimelech’s armor-bearer ran his sword through him, and he died.
JDG	9	55	이스라엘 사람들이 아비멜렉의 죽은 것을 보고 각각 자기 처소로 떠나갔더라	And when the men of Israel saw that Abimelech was dead, they departed every man unto his place.	And when the Israelites saw that Abimelech was dead, they all went home.
JDG	9	56	아비멜렉이 그 형제 칠십 인을 죽여 자기 아비에게 행한 악을 하나님이 이같이 갚으셨고	Thus God rendered the wickedness of Abimelech, which he did unto his father, in slaying his seventy brethren:	In this way God repaid the wickedness that Abimelech had done to his father in murdering his seventy brothers.
JDG	9	57	또 세겜 사람들의 모든 악을 하나님이 그들의 머리에 갚으셨으니 여룹바알의 아들 요담의 저주가 그들에게 응하니라	And all the evil of the men of Shechem did God render upon their heads: and upon them came the curse of Jotham the son of Jerubbaal.	And God also brought all the wickedness of the men of Shechem back upon their own heads. So the curse of Jotham son of Jerubbaal came upon them.
JDG	10	1	아비멜렉의 후에 잇사갈 사람 도도의 손자 부아의 아들 돌라가 일어나서 이스라엘을 구원하니라 그가 에브라임 산지 사밀에 거하여	And after Abimelech there arose to defend Israel Tola the son of Puah, the son of Dodo, a man of Issachar; and he dwelt in Shamir in mount Ephraim.	After the time of Abimelech, a man of Issachar, Tola son of Puah, the son of Dodo, rose up to save Israel. He lived in Shamir, in the hill country of Ephraim.
JDG	10	2	이스라엘의 사사가 된지 이십삼 년만에 죽으매 사밀에 장사되었더라	And he judged Israel twenty and three years, and died, and was buried in Shamir.	Tola judged Israel twenty-three years, and when he died, he was buried in Shamir.
JDG	10	3	그 후에 길르앗 사람 야일이 일어나서 이십이 년 동안 이스라엘의 사사가 되니라	And after him arose Jair, a Gileadite, and judged Israel twenty and two years.	Tola was followed by Jair the Gileadite, who judged Israel twenty-two years.
JDG	10	4	그에게 아들 삼십이 있어 어린 나귀 삼십을 탔고 성읍 삼십을 두었었는데 그 성들은 길르앗 땅에 있고 오늘까지 하봇야일이라 칭하더라	And he had thirty sons that rode on thirty ass colts, and they had thirty cities, which are called Havoth–jair unto this day, which are in the land of Gilead.	He had thirty sons who rode on thirty donkeys. And they had thirty towns in the land of Gilead, which to this day are called Havvoth-jair.
JDG	10	5	야일이 죽으매 가몬에 장사되었더라	And Jair died, and was buried in Camon.	When Jair died, he was buried in Kamon.
JDG	10	6	이스라엘 자손이 다시 여호와의 목전에 악을 행하여 바알들과 아스다롯과 아람의 신들과 시돈의 신들과 모압의 신들과 암몬 자손의 신들과 블레셋 사람의 신들을 섬기고 여호와를 버려 그를 섬기지 아니하므로	And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the Lord, and served Baalim, and Ashtaroth, and the gods of Syria, and the gods of Zidon, and the gods of Moab, and the gods of the children of Ammon, and the gods of the Philistines, and forsook the Lord, and served not him.	And again the Israelites did evil in the sight of the LORD. They served the Baals, the Ashtoreths, the gods of Aram, Sidon, and Moab, and the gods of the Ammonites and Philistines. Thus they forsook the LORD and did not serve Him.
JDG	10	7	여호와께서 이스라엘에게 진노하사 블레셋 사람의 손과 암몬 자손의 손에 파시매	And the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he sold them into the hands of the Philistines, and into the hands of the children of Ammon.	So the anger of the LORD burned against Israel, and He sold them into the hands of the Philistines and Ammonites,
JDG	10	8	그들이 그 해부터 이스라엘 자손을 학대하니 요단 저편 길르앗 아모리 사람의 땅에 거한 이스라엘 자손이 십팔 년 동안 학대를 당하였고	And that year they vexed and oppressed the children of Israel: eighteen years, all the children of Israel that were on the other side Jordan in the land of the Amorites, which is in Gilead.	who that very year harassed and oppressed the Israelites, and did so for eighteen years to all the Israelites on the other side of the Jordan in Gilead, the land of the Amorites.
JDG	10	9	암몬 자손이 또 요단을 건너서 유다와 베냐민과 에브라임 족속을 치므로 이스라엘의 곤고가 심하였더라	Moreover the children of Ammon passed over Jordan to fight also against Judah, and against Benjamin, and against the house of Ephraim; so that Israel was sore distressed.	The Ammonites also crossed the Jordan to fight against Judah, Benjamin, and the house of Ephraim, and Israel was in deep distress.
JDG	10	10	이스라엘 자손이 여호와께 부르짖어 가로되 우리가 우리 하나님을 버리고 바알들을 섬김으로 주께 범죄하였나이다	And the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, saying, We have sinned against thee, both because we have forsaken our God, and also served Baalim.	Then the Israelites cried out to the LORD, saying, “We have sinned against You, for we have indeed forsaken our God and served the Baals.”
JDG	10	11	여호와께서 이스라엘 자손에게 이르시되 내가 애굽 사람과 아모리 사람과 암몬 자손과 블레셋 사람에게서 너희를 구원하지 아니하였느냐	And the Lord said unto the children of Israel, Did not I deliver you from the Egyptians, and from the Amorites, from the children of Ammon, and from the Philistines?	The LORD replied, “When the Egyptians, Amorites, Ammonites, Philistines,
JDG	10	12	또 시돈 사람과 아말렉 사람과 마온 사람이 너희를 압제할 때에 너희가 내게 부르짖으므로 내가 너희를 그들의 손에서 구원하였거늘	The Zidonians also, and the Amalekites, and the Maonites, did oppress you; and ye cried to me, and I delivered you out of their hand.	Sidonians, Amalekites, and Maonites oppressed you and you cried out to Me, did I not save you from their hands?
JDG	10	13	너희가 나를 버리고 다른 신들을 섬기니 그러므로 내가 다시는 너희를 구원치 아니하리라	Yet ye have forsaken me, and served other gods: wherefore I will deliver you no more.	But you have forsaken Me and served other gods, so I will no longer save you.
JDG	10	14	가서 너희가 택한 신들에게 부르짖어서 환난 때에 그들로 너희를 구원하게 하라	Go and cry unto the gods which ye have chosen; let them deliver you in the time of your tribulation.	Go and cry out to the gods you have chosen. Let them save you in your time of trouble.”
JDG	10	15	이스라엘 자손이 여호와께 여짜오되 우리가 범죄하였사오니 주의 보시기에 좋은 대로 우리에게 행하시려니와 오직 주께 구하옵나니 오늘날 우리를 건져 내옵소서 하고	And the children of Israel said unto the Lord, We have sinned: do thou unto us whatsoever seemeth good unto thee; deliver us only, we pray thee, this day.	“We have sinned,” the Israelites said to the LORD. “Deal with us as You see fit; but please deliver us today!”
JDG	10	16	자기 가운데서 이방 신들을 제하여 버리고 여호와를 섬기매 여호와께서 이스라엘의 곤고를 인하여 마음에 근심하시니라	And they put away the strange gods from among them, and served the Lord: and his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel.	So they put away the foreign gods from among them and served the LORD, and He could no longer bear the misery of Israel.
JDG	10	17	그 때에 암몬 자손이 모여서 길르앗에 진 쳤으므로 이스라엘 자손도 모여서 미스바에 진 치고	Then the children of Ammon were gathered together, and encamped in Gilead. And the children of Israel assembled themselves together, and encamped in Mizpeh.	Then the Ammonites were called to arms and camped in Gilead, and the Israelites assembled and camped at Mizpah.
JDG	10	18	길르앗 백성과 방백들이 서로 이르되 누가 먼저 나가서 암몬 자손과 싸움을 시작할꼬 그가 길르앗 모든 거민의 머리가 되리라 하니라	And the people and princes of Gilead said one to another, What man is he that will begin to fight against the children of Ammon? he shall be head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.	And the rulers of Gilead said to one another, “Whoever will launch the attack against the Ammonites will be the head of all who live in Gilead.”
JDG	11	1	길르앗 사람 큰 용사 입다는 기생이 길르앗에게 낳은 아들이었고	Now Jephthah the Gileadite was a mighty man of valour, and he was the son of an harlot: and Gilead begat Jephthah.	Now Jephthah the Gileadite was a mighty man of valor; he was the son of a prostitute, and Gilead was his father.
JDG	11	2	길르앗의 아내도 아들들을 낳았더라 아내의 아들들이 자라매 입다를 쫓아내며 그에게 이르되 너는 다른 여인의 자식이니 우리 아버지 집 기업을 잇지 못하리라 한지라	And Gilead’s wife bare him sons; and his wife’s sons grew up, and they thrust out Jephthah, and said unto him, Thou shalt not inherit in our father’s house; for thou art the son of a strange woman.	And Gilead’s wife bore him sons who grew up, drove Jephthah out, and said to him, “You shall have no inheritance in our father’s house, because you are the son of another woman.”
JDG	11	3	이에 입다가 그 형제를 피하여 돕 땅에 거하매 잡류가 그에게로 모여와서 그와 함께 출입하였더라	Then Jephthah fled from his brethren, and dwelt in the land of Tob: and there were gathered vain men to Jephthah, and went out with him.	So Jephthah fled from his brothers and settled in the land of Tob, where worthless men gathered around him and traveled with him.
JDG	11	4	얼마 후에 암몬 자손이 이스라엘을 치려 하니라	And it came to pass in process of time, that the children of Ammon made war against Israel.	Some time later, when the Ammonites fought against Israel
JDG	11	5	암몬 자손이 이스라엘을 치려 할 때에 길르앗 장로들이 입다를 데려 오려고 돕 땅에 가서	And it was so, that when the children of Ammon made war against Israel, the elders of Gilead went to fetch Jephthah out of the land of Tob:	and made war with them, the elders of Gilead went to get Jephthah from the land of Tob.
JDG	11	6	입다에게 이르되 우리가 암몬 자손과 싸우려 하나니 당신은 와서 우리의 장관이 되라	And they said unto Jephthah, Come, and be our captain, that we may fight with the children of Ammon.	“Come,” they said, “be our commander, so that we can fight against the Ammonites.”
JDG	11	7	입다가 길르앗 장로들에게 이르되 너희가 전에 나를 미워하여 내 아버지 집에서 쫓아내지 아니하였느냐 이제 너희가 환난을 당하였다고 어찌하여 내게 왔느냐	And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead, Did not ye hate me, and expel me out of my father’s house? and why are ye come unto me now when ye are in distress?	Jephthah replied to the elders of Gilead, “Did you not hate me and expel me from my father’s house? Why then have you come to me now, when you are in distress?”
JDG	11	8	길르앗 장로들이 대답하되 이제 우리가 당신을 찾아온 것은 우리와 함께 가서 암몬 자손과 싸우려 하게 함이니 그리하면 우리 길르앗 모든 거민의 머리가 되리라	And the elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah, Therefore we turn again to thee now, that thou mayest go with us, and fight against the children of Ammon, and be our head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.	They answered Jephthah, “This is why we now turn to you, that you may go with us, fight the Ammonites, and become leader over all of us who live in Gilead.”
JDG	11	9	입다가 길르앗 장로들에게 이르되 너희가 나를 데리고 본향으로 돌아가서 암몬 자손과 싸우게 할 때에 만일 여호와께서 그들을 네게 붙이시면 내가 과연 너희 머리가 되겠느냐	And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead, If ye bring me home again to fight against the children of Ammon, and the Lord deliver them before me, shall I be your head?	But Jephthah asked them, “If you take me back to fight the Ammonites and the LORD gives them to me, will I really be your leader?”
JDG	11	10	길르앗 장로들이 입다에게 이르되 여호와는 우리 사이의 증인이시니 당신의 말대로 우리가 반드시 행하리이다	And the elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah, The Lord be witness between us, if we do not so according to thy words.	And the elders of Gilead said to Jephthah, “The LORD is our witness if we do not do as you say.”
JDG	11	11	이에 입다가 길르앗 장로들과 함께 가니 백성이 그로 자기들의 머리와 장관을 삼은지라 입다가 미스바에서 자기의 말을 다 여호와 앞에 고하니라	Then Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead, and the people made him head and captain over them: and Jephthah uttered all his words before the Lord in Mizpeh.	So Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead, and the people made him their leader and commander. And Jephthah repeated all his terms in the presence of the LORD at Mizpah.
JDG	11	12	입다가 암몬 자손의 왕에게 사자를 보내어 이르되 네가 나와 무슨 상관이 있기에 내 땅을 치러 내게 왔느냐	And Jephthah sent messengers unto the king of the children of Ammon, saying, What hast thou to do with me, that thou art come against me to fight in my land?	Then Jephthah sent messengers to the king of the Ammonites, saying, “What do you have against me that you have come to fight against my land?”
JDG	11	13	암몬 자손의 왕이 입다의 사자에게 대답하되 이스라엘이 애굽에서 올라올 때에 아르논에서부터 얍복과 요단까지 내 땅을 취한 연고니 이제 그것을 화평히 다시 돌리라	And the king of the children of Ammon answered unto the messengers of Jephthah, Because Israel took away my land, when they came up out of Egypt, from Arnon even unto Jabbok, and unto Jordan: now therefore restore those lands again peaceably.	The king of the Ammonites answered Jephthah’s messengers, “When Israel came up out of Egypt, they seized my land, from the Arnon to the Jabbok and all the way to the Jordan. Now, therefore, restore it peaceably.”
JDG	11	14	입다가 암몬 자손의 왕에게 다시 사자를 보내어	And Jephthah sent messengers again unto the king of the children of Ammon:	Jephthah again sent messengers to the king of the Ammonites
JDG	11	15	그에게 이르되 입다가 말하노라 이스라엘이 모압 땅과 암몬 자손의 땅을 취하지 아니하였느니라	And said unto him, Thus saith Jephthah, Israel took not away the land of Moab, nor the land of the children of Ammon:	to tell him, “This is what Jephthah says: Israel did not take away the land of Moab or of the Ammonites.
JDG	11	16	이스라엘이 애굽에서 올라올 때에 광야로 행하여 홍해에 이르고 가데스에 이르러서는	But when Israel came up from Egypt, and walked through the wilderness unto the Red sea, and came to Kadesh;	But when Israel came up out of Egypt, they traveled through the wilderness to the Red Sea and came to Kadesh.
JDG	11	17	이스라엘이 사자를 에돔 왕에게 보내어 이르기를 청컨대 나를 용납하여 네 땅 가운데로 지나게 하라 하였으나 에돔 왕이 이를 듣지 아니하였고 또 그같이 사람을 모압 왕에게 보내었으나 그도 허락지 아니함으로 이스라엘이 아데스에 유하였더니	Then Israel sent messengers unto the king of Edom, saying, Let me, I pray thee, pass through thy land: but the king of Edom would not hearken thereto. And in like manner they sent unto the king of Moab: but he would not consent: and Israel abode in Kadesh.	Then Israel sent messengers to the king of Edom, saying, ‘Please let us pass through your land,’ but the king of Edom would not listen. They also sent messengers to the king of Moab, but he would not consent. So Israel stayed in Kadesh.
JDG	11	18	그 후에 광야를 지나 에돔 땅과 모압 땅을 둘러 행하여 모압 땅 동편에서부터 와서 아르논은 모압 경계이므로 그 경내에는 들어가지 아니하였으며	Then they went along through the wilderness, and compassed the land of Edom, and the land of Moab, and came by the east side of the land of Moab, and pitched on the other side of Arnon, but came not within the border of Moab: for Arnon was the border of Moab.	Then Israel traveled through the wilderness and bypassed the lands of Edom and Moab. They came to the east side of the land of Moab and camped on the other side of the Arnon. But they did not enter the territory of Moab, since the Arnon was its border.
JDG	11	19	이스라엘이 헤스본 왕 곧 아모리 왕 시혼에게 사자를 보내어 그에게 이르되 청컨대 우리를 용납하여 당신의 땅으로 지나 우리 곳에 이르게 하라 하였으나	And Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites, the king of Heshbon; and Israel said unto him, Let us pass, we pray thee, through thy land into my place.	And Israel sent messengers to Sihon king of the Amorites, who ruled in Heshbon, and said to him, ‘Please let us pass through your land into our own place.’
JDG	11	20	시혼이 이스라엘을 믿지 아니하여 그 지경으로 지나지 못하게 할뿐 아니라 그 모든 백성을 모아 야하스에 진 치고 이스라엘을 치므로	But Sihon trusted not Israel to pass through his coast: but Sihon gathered all his people together, and pitched in Jahaz, and fought against Israel.	But Sihon would not trust Israel to pass through his territory. So he gathered all his people, encamped in Jahaz, and fought with Israel.
JDG	11	21	이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께서 시혼과 그 모든 백성을 이스라엘의 손에 붙이시매 이스라엘이 쳐서 그 땅 거민 아모리 사람의 온 땅을 취하되	And the Lord God of Israel delivered Sihon and all his people into the hand of Israel, and they smote them: so Israel possessed all the land of the Amorites, the inhabitants of that country.	Then the LORD, the God of Israel, delivered Sihon and all his people into the hand of Israel, who defeated them. So Israel took possession of all the land of the Amorites who inhabited that country,
JDG	11	22	아르논에서부터 얍복까지와 광야에서부터 요단까지 아모리 사람의 온 지경을 취하었느니라	And they possessed all the coasts of the Amorites, from Arnon even unto Jabbok, and from the wilderness even unto Jordan.	seizing all the land from the Arnon to the Jabbok and from the wilderness to the Jordan.
JDG	11	23	이스라엘 하나님 여호와께서 이같이 아모리 사람을 자기 백성 이스라엘 앞에서 쫓아내셨거늘 네가 그 땅을 얻고자 하는 것이 가하냐	So now the Lord God of Israel hath dispossessed the Amorites from before his people Israel, and shouldest thou possess it?	Now since the LORD, the God of Israel, has driven out the Amorites from before His people Israel, should you now possess it?
JDG	11	24	네 신 그모스가 네게 주어 얻게 한 땅을 네가 얻지 않겠느냐 우리 하나님 여호와께서 우리 앞에서 어떤 사람이든지 쫓아내시면 그 땅을 우리가 얻으리라	Wilt not thou possess that which Chemosh thy god giveth thee to possess? So whomsoever the Lord our God shall drive out from before us, them will we possess.	Do you not possess whatever your god Chemosh grants you? So also, we possess whatever the LORD our God has granted us.
JDG	11	25	이제 네가 모압 왕 십볼의 아들 발락보다 나은 것이 있느냐 그가 이스라엘로 더불어 다툰 일이 있었느냐 싸운 일이 있었느냐	And now art thou any thing better than Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab? did he ever strive against Israel, or did he ever fight against them,	Are you now so much better than Balak son of Zippor, king of Moab? Did he ever contend with Israel or fight against them?
JDG	11	26	이스라엘이 헤스본과 그 향촌들과 아로엘과 그 향촌들과 아르논 연안에 있는 모든 성읍에 거한지 삼백 년이어늘 그 동안 너희가 어찌하여 도로 찾지 아니하였느냐	While Israel dwelt in Heshbon and her towns, and in Aroer and her towns, and in all the cities that be along by the coasts of Arnon, three hundred years? why therefore did ye not recover them within that time?	For three hundred years Israel has lived in Heshbon, Aroer, and their villages, as well as all the cities along the banks of the Arnon. Why did you not take them back during that time?
JDG	11	27	내가 네게 죄를 짓지 아니하였거늘 네가 나를 쳐서 내게 악을 행하고자 하는도다 원컨대 심판하시는 여호와는 오늘날 이스라엘 자손과 암몬 자손의 사이에 판결하시옵소서 하나	Wherefore I have not sinned against thee, but thou doest me wrong to war against me: the Lord the Judge be judge this day between the children of Israel and the children of Ammon.	I have not sinned against you, but you have done me wrong by waging war against me. May the LORD, the Judge, decide today between the Israelites and the Ammonites.”
JDG	11	28	암몬 자손의 왕이 입다의 보내어 말한 것을 듣지 아니하였더라	Howbeit the king of the children of Ammon hearkened not unto the words of Jephthah which he sent him.	But the king of the Ammonites paid no heed to the message Jephthah sent him.
JDG	11	29	이에 여호와의 신이 입다에게 임하시니 입다가 길르앗과 므낫세를 지나서 길르앗 미스베에 이르고 길르앗 미스베에서부터 암몬 자손들에게로 나아갈 때에	Then the Spirit of the Lord came upon Jephthah, and he passed over Gilead, and Manasseh, and passed over Mizpeh of Gilead, and from Mizpeh of Gilead he passed over unto the children of Ammon.	Then the Spirit of the LORD came upon Jephthah, and he passed through Gilead and Manasseh, then through Mizpah of Gilead. And from there he advanced against the Ammonites.
JDG	11	30	그가 여호와께 서원하여 가로되 주께서 과연 암몬 자손을 내게 붙이시면	And Jephthah vowed a vow unto the Lord, and said, If thou shalt without fail deliver the children of Ammon into mine hands,	Jephthah made this vow to the LORD: “If indeed You will deliver the Ammonites into my hand,
JDG	11	31	내가 암몬 자손에게서 평안히 돌아올 때에 누구든지 내 집 문에서 나와서 나를 영접하는 그는 여호와께 돌릴 것이니 내가 그를 번제로 드리겠나이다 하니라	Then it shall be, that whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of my house to meet me, when I return in peace from the children of Ammon, shall surely be the Lord’s, and I will offer it up for a burnt offering.	then whatever comes out the door of my house to greet me on my triumphant return from the Ammonites will belong to the LORD, and I will offer it up as a burnt offering.”
JDG	11	32	이에 입다가 암몬 자손에게 이르러 그들과 싸우더니 여호와께서 그들을 그 손에 붙이시매	So Jephthah passed over unto the children of Ammon to fight against them; and the Lord delivered them into his hands.	So Jephthah crossed over to the Ammonites to fight against them, and the LORD delivered them into his hand.
JDG	11	33	아로엘에서부터 민닛에 이르기까지 이십 성읍을 치고 또 아벨 그라밈까지 크게 도륙하니 이에 암몬 자손이 이스라엘 자손 앞에 항복하였더라	And he smote them from Aroer, even till thou come to Minnith, even twenty cities, and unto the plain of the vineyards, with a very great slaughter. Thus the children of Ammon were subdued before the children of Israel.	With a great blow he devastated twenty cities from Aroer to the vicinity of Minnith, as far as Abel-keramim. So the Ammonites were subdued before the Israelites.
JDG	11	34	입다가 미스바에 돌아와 자기 집에 이를 때에 그 딸이 소고를 잡고 춤추며 나와서 영접하니 그의 무남독녀라	And Jephthah came to Mizpeh unto his house, and, behold, his daughter came out to meet him with timbrels and with dances: and she was his only child; beside her he had neither son nor daughter.	And when Jephthah returned home to Mizpah, there was his daughter coming out to meet him with tambourines and dancing! She was his only child; he had no son or daughter besides her.
JDG	11	35	입다가 이를 보고 자기 옷을 찢으며 가로되 슬프다 내 딸이여 너는 나로 하여금 참담케 하는 자요 너는 나를 괴롭게 하는 자 중의 하나이로다 내가 여호와를 향하여 입을 열었으니 능히 돌이키지 못하리로다	And it came to pass, when he saw her, that he rent his clothes, and said, Alas, my daughter! thou hast brought me very low, and thou art one of them that trouble me: for I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and I cannot go back.	As soon as Jephthah saw her, he tore his clothes and said, “No! Not my daughter! You have brought me to my knees! You have brought great misery upon me, for I have given my word to the LORD and cannot take it back.”
JDG	11	36	딸이 그에게 이르되 나의 아버지여 아버지께서 여호와를 향하여 입을 여셨으니 아버지 입에서 낸 말씀대로 내게 행하소서 이는 여호와께서 아버지를 위하여 아버지의 대적 암몬 자손에게 원수를 갚으셨음이니이다	And she said unto him, My father, if thou hast opened thy mouth unto the Lord, do to me according to that which hath proceeded out of thy mouth; forasmuch as the Lord hath taken vengeance for thee of thine enemies, even of the children of Ammon.	“My father,” she replied, “you have given your word to the LORD. Do to me as you have said, for the LORD has avenged you of your enemies, the Ammonites.”
JDG	11	37	아비에게 또 이르되 이 일만 내게 허락하사 나를 두 달만 용납하소서 내가 나의 동무들과 함께 산에 올라가서 나의 처녀로 죽음을 인하여 애곡하겠나이다	And she said unto her father, Let this thing be done for me: let me alone two months, that I may go up and down upon the mountains, and bewail my virginity, I and my fellows.	She also said to her father, “Let me do this one thing: Let me wander for two months through the mountains with my friends and mourn my virginity.”
JDG	11	38	이르되 가라 하고 두달 위한하고 보내니 그가 동무들과 함께 가서 산 위에서 처녀로 죽음을 인하여 애곡하고	And he said, Go. And he sent her away for two months: and she went with her companions, and bewailed her virginity upon the mountains.	“Go,” he said. And he sent her away for two months. So she left with her friends and mourned her virginity upon the mountains.
JDG	11	39	두 달만에 그 아비에게로 돌아온지라 아비가 그 서원한 대로 딸에게 행하니 딸이 남자를 알지 못하고 죽으니라 이로부터 이스라엘 가운데 규례가 되어	And it came to pass at the end of two months, that she returned unto her father, who did with her according to his vow which he had vowed: and she knew no man. And it was a custom in Israel,	After two months, she returned to her father, and he did to her as he had vowed. And she had never had relations with a man. So it has become a custom in Israel
JDG	11	40	이스라엘 여자들이 해마다 가서 길르앗 사람 입다의 딸을 위하여 나흘씩 애곡하더라	That the daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite four days in a year.	that each year the young women of Israel go out for four days to lament the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite.
JDG	12	1	에브라임 사람들이 모여 북으로 가서 입다에게 이르되 네가 암몬자손과 싸우러 건너갈 때에 어찌하여 우리를 불러 너와 함께 가게 하지 아니하였느냐 우리가 반드시 불로 너와 네 집을 사르리라	And the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together, and went northward, and said unto Jephthah, Wherefore passedst thou over to fight against the children of Ammon, and didst not call us to go with thee? we will burn thine house upon thee with fire.	Then the men of Ephraim assembled and crossed the Jordan to Zaphon. They said to Jephthah, “Why have you crossed over to fight the Ammonites without calling us to go with you? We will burn your house down with you inside!”
JDG	12	2	입다가 그들에게 이르되 나와 나의 백성이 암몬 자손과 크게 다툴 때에 내가 너희를 부르되 너희가 나를 그들의 손에서 구원하지 아니한고로	And Jephthah said unto them, I and my people were at great strife with the children of Ammon; and when I called you, ye delivered me not out of their hands.	But Jephthah replied, “My people and I had a serious conflict with the Ammonites, and when I called, you did not save me out of their hands.
JDG	12	3	내가 너희의 구원치 아니하는 것을 보고 내 생명을 돌아보지 아니하고 건너가서 암몬 자손을 쳤더니 여호와께서 그들을 내 손에 붙이셨거늘 너희가 어찌하여 오늘날 내게 올라와서 나로 더불어 싸우고자 하느냐 하고	And when I saw that ye delivered me not, I put my life in my hands, and passed over against the children of Ammon, and the Lord delivered them into my hand: wherefore then are ye come up unto me this day, to fight against me?	When I saw that you would not save me, I risked my life and crossed over to the Ammonites, and the LORD delivered them into my hand. Why then have you come today to fight against me?”
JDG	12	4	입다가 길르앗 사람을 다 모으고 에브라임과 싸웠더니 길르앗 사람들이 에브라임을 쳐서 파하였으니 이는 에브라임의 말이 너희 길르앗 사람은 본래 에브라임에서 도망한 자로서 에브라임과 므낫세 중에 있다 하였음이라	Then Jephthah gathered together all the men of Gilead, and fought with Ephraim: and the men of Gilead smote Ephraim, because they said, Ye Gileadites are fugitives of Ephraim among the Ephraimites, and among the Manassites.	Jephthah then gathered all the men of Gilead and fought against Ephraim. And the men of Gilead struck them down because the Ephraimites had said, “You Gileadites are fugitives in Ephraim, living in the territories of Ephraim and Manasseh.”
JDG	12	5	길르앗 사람이 에브라임 사람 앞서 요단 나루턱을 잡아 지키고 에브라임 사람의 도망하는 자가 말하기를 청컨대 나로 건너게 하라 하면 그에게 묻기를 네가 에브라임 사람이냐 하여 그가 만일 아니라 하면	And the Gileadites took the passages of Jordan before the Ephraimites: and it was so, that when those Ephraimites which were escaped said, Let me go over; that the men of Gilead said unto him, Art thou an Ephraimite? If he said, Nay;	The Gileadites captured the fords of the Jordan leading to Ephraim, and whenever a fugitive from Ephraim would say, “Let me cross over,” the Gileadites would ask him, “Are you an Ephraimite?” If he answered, “No,”
JDG	12	6	그에게 이르기를 십볼렛이라 하라 하여 에브라임 사람이 능히 구음을 바로 하지 못하고 씹볼렛이라 하면 길르앗 사람이 곧 그를 잡아서 요단 나루턱에서 죽였더라 그 때에 에브라임 사람의 죽은 자가 사만 이천 명이었더라	Then said they unto him, Say now Shibboleth: and he said Sibboleth: for he could not frame to pronounce it right. Then they took him, and slew him at the passages of Jordan: and there fell at that time of the Ephraimites forty and two thousand.	they told him, “Please say Shibboleth.” If he said, “Sibboleth,” because he could not pronounce it correctly, they seized him and killed him at the fords of the Jordan. So at that time 42,000 Ephraimites were killed.
JDG	12	7	입다가 이스라엘 사사가 된지 육 년이라 길르앗 사람 입다가 죽으매 길르앗 한 성읍에 장사되었더라	And Jephthah judged Israel six years. Then died Jephthah the Gileadite, and was buried in one of the cities of Gilead.	Jephthah judged Israel six years, and when he died, he was buried in one of the cities of Gilead.
JDG	12	8	그의 뒤에는 베들레헴 입산이 이스라엘의 사사이었더라	And after him Ibzan of Beth–lehem judged Israel.	After Jephthah, Ibzan of Bethlehem judged Israel.
JDG	12	9	그가 아들 삼십과 딸 삼십을 두었더니 딸들은 타국으로 시집 보내었고 아들들을 위하여는 타국에서 여자 삼십을 데려왔더라 그 가 이스라엘 사사가 된지 칠 년이라	And he had thirty sons, and thirty daughters, whom he sent abroad, and took in thirty daughters from abroad for his sons. And he judged Israel seven years.	He had thirty sons, as well as thirty daughters whom he gave in marriage to men outside his clan; and for his sons he brought back thirty wives from elsewhere. Ibzan judged Israel seven years.
JDG	12	10	입산이 죽으매 베들레헴에 장사되었더라	Then died Ibzan, and was buried at Beth–lehem.	Then Ibzan died, and he was buried in Bethlehem.
JDG	12	11	그의 뒤에는 스불론 사람 엘론이 이스라엘의 사사가 되어 십 년 동안 이스라엘을 다스렸더라	And after him Elon, a Zebulonite, judged Israel; and he judged Israel ten years.	After Ibzan, Elon the Zebulunite judged Israel ten years.
JDG	12	12	스불론 사람 엘론이 죽으매 스불론 땅 아얄론에 장사되었더라	And Elon the Zebulonite died, and was buried in Aijalon in the country of Zebulun.	Then Elon the Zebulunite died, and he was buried in Aijalon in the land of Zebulun.
JDG	12	13	그의 뒤에는 비라돈 사람 힐렐의 아들 압돈이 이스라엘의 사사이었더라	And after him Abdon the son of Hillel, a Pirathonite, judged Israel.	After Elon, Abdon son of Hillel, from Pirathon, judged Israel.
JDG	12	14	그에게 아들 사십과 손자 삼십이 있어서 어린 나귀 칠십 필을 탔었더라 압돈이 이스라엘의 사사가 된지 팔 년이라	And he had forty sons and thirty nephews, that rode on threescore and ten ass colts: and he judged Israel eight years.	He had forty sons and thirty grandsons, who rode on seventy donkeys. And he judged Israel eight years.
JDG	12	15	비라돈 사람 힐렐의 아들 압돈이 죽으매 에브라임 땅 아말렉 사람의 산지 비라돈에 장사되었더라	And Abdon the son of Hillel the Pirathonite died, and was buried in Pirathon in the land of Ephraim, in the mount of the Amalekites.	Then Abdon son of Hillel, from Pirathon, died, and he was buried at Pirathon in Ephraim, in the hill country of the Amalekites.
JDG	13	1	이스라엘 자손이 다시 여호와의 목전에 악을 행하였으므로 여호와께서 그들을 사십 년 동안 블레셋 사람의 손에 붙이시니라	And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the Lord; and the Lord delivered them into the hand of the Philistines forty years.	Again the Israelites did evil in the sight of the LORD, so He delivered them into the hand of the Philistines for forty years.
JDG	13	2	소라 땅에 단 지파의 가족 중 마노아라 이름하는 자가 있더라 그 아내가 잉태하지 못하므로 생산치 못하더니	And there was a certain man of Zorah, of the family of the Danites, whose name was Manoah; and his wife was barren, and bare not.	Now there was a man from Zorah named Manoah, from the clan of the Danites, whose wife was barren and had no children.
JDG	13	3	여호와의 사자가 그 여인에게 나타나시고 그에게 이르시되 보라 네가 본래 잉태하지 못하므로 생산치 못하였으나 이제 잉태하여 아들을 낳으리니	And the angel of the Lord appeared unto the woman, and said unto her, Behold now, thou art barren, and bearest not: but thou shalt conceive, and bear a son.	The angel of the LORD appeared to the woman and said to her, “It is true that you are barren and have no children; but you will conceive and give birth to a son.
JDG	13	4	그러므로 너는 삼가서 포도주와 독주를 마시지 말지며 무릇 부정한 것을 먹지 말지니라	Now therefore beware, I pray thee, and drink not wine nor strong drink, and eat not any unclean thing:	Now please be careful not to drink wine or strong drink, and not to eat anything unclean.
JDG	13	5	보라 네가 잉태하여 아들을 낳으리니 그 머리에 삭도를 대지 말라 이 아이는 태에서 나옴으로부터 하나님께 바치운 나실인이 됨이라 그가 블레셋 사람의 손에서 이스라엘을 구원하기 시작하리라	For, lo, thou shalt conceive, and bear a son; and no razor shall come on his head: for the child shall be a Nazarite unto God from the womb: and he shall begin to deliver Israel out of the hand of the Philistines.	For behold, you will conceive and give birth to a son. And no razor shall come over his head, because the boy will be a Nazirite to God from the womb, and he will begin the deliverance of Israel from the hand of the Philistines.”
JDG	13	6	이에 그 여인이 가서 그 남편에게 고하여 가로되 하나님의 사람이 내게 임하였는데 그 용모가 하나님의 사자의 용모 같아서 심히 두려우므로 어디서부터 온 것을 내가 묻지 못하였고 그도 자기 이름을 내게 이르지 아니하였으며	Then the woman came and told her husband, saying, A man of God came unto me, and his countenance was like the countenance of an angel of God, very terrible: but I asked him not whence he was, neither told he me his name:	So the woman went and told her husband, “A man of God came to me. His appearance was like the angel of God, exceedingly awesome. I did not ask him where he came from, and he did not tell me his name.
JDG	13	7	그가 내게 이르기를 보라 네가 잉태하여 아들을 낳으리니 포도주와 독주를 마시지 말며 무릇 부정한 것을 먹지 말라 이 아이는 태에서 나옴으로부터 죽을 날까지 하나님께 바치운 나실인이 됨이라 하더이다	But he said unto me, Behold, thou shalt conceive, and bear a son; and now drink no wine nor strong drink, neither eat any unclean thing: for the child shall be a Nazarite to God from the womb to the day of his death.	But he said to me, ‘Behold, you will conceive and give birth to a son. Now, therefore, do not drink wine or strong drink, and do not eat anything unclean, because the boy will be a Nazirite to God from the womb until the day of his death.’”
JDG	13	8	마노아가 여호와께 기도하여 가로되 주여 구하옵나니 주의 보내셨던 하나님의 사람을 우리에게 다시 임하게 하사 그로 우리가 그 낳을 아이에게 어떻게 행할 것을 우리에게 가르치게 하소서	Then Manoah intreated the Lord, and said, O my Lord, let the man of God which thou didst send come again unto us, and teach us what we shall do unto the child that shall be born.	Then Manoah prayed to the LORD, “Please, O Lord, let the man of God You sent us come to us again to teach us how to raise the boy who is to be born.”
JDG	13	9	하나님이 마노아의 목소리를 들으시니라 여인이 밭에 앉았을 때에 하나님의 사자가 다시 그에게 임하셨으나 그 남편 마노아는 함께 있지 아니한지라	And God hearkened to the voice of Manoah; and the angel of God came again unto the woman as she sat in the field: but Manoah her husband was not with her.	And God listened to the voice of Manoah, and the angel of God returned to the woman as she was sitting in the field; but her husband Manoah was not with her.
JDG	13	10	여인이 급히 달려가서 그 남편에게 고하여 가로되 보소서 전일에 내게 임하였던 사람이 또 내게 나타났나이다	And the woman made haste, and ran, and shewed her husband, and said unto him, Behold, the man hath appeared unto me, that came unto me the other day.	The woman ran quickly to tell her husband, “Behold, the man who came to me the other day has reappeared!”
JDG	13	11	마노아가 일어나 아내를 따라가서 그 사람에게 이르러 그에게 묻되 당신이 이 여인에게 말씀하신 사람이니이까 가라사대 그로라	And Manoah arose, and went after his wife, and came to the man, and said unto him, Art thou the man that spakest unto the woman? And he said, I am.	So Manoah got up and followed his wife. When he came to the man, he asked, “Are you the man who spoke to my wife?” “I am,” he said.
JDG	13	12	마노아가 가로되 당신의 말씀대로 되기를 원하나이다 이 아이를 어떻게 기르오며 우리가 그에게 어떻게 행하오리이까	And Manoah said, Now let thy words come to pass. How shall we order the child, and how shall we do unto him?	Then Manoah asked, “When your words come to pass, what will be the boy’s rule of life and mission?”
JDG	13	13	여호와의 사자가 마노아에게 이르시되 내가 여인에게 말한 것들을 그가 다 삼가서	And the angel of the Lord said unto Manoah, Of all that I said unto the woman let her beware.	So the angel of the LORD answered Manoah, “Your wife is to do everything I told her.
JDG	13	14	포도나무의 소산을 먹지 말며 포도주와 독주를 마시지 말며 무릇 부정한 것을 먹지 말아서 내가 그에게 명한 것은 다 지킬 것이니라	She may not eat of any thing that cometh of the vine, neither let her drink wine or strong drink, nor eat any unclean thing: all that I commanded her let her observe.	She must not eat anything that comes from the vine, nor drink any wine or strong drink, nor eat anything unclean. She must do everything I have commanded her.”
JDG	13	15	마노아가 여호와의 사자에게 말씀하되 구하옵나니 당신은 우리에게 머물러서 우리가 당신을 위하여 염소 새끼 하나를 준비하게 하소서	And Manoah said unto the angel of the Lord, I pray thee, let us detain thee, until we shall have made ready a kid for thee.	“Please stay here,” Manoah said to the angel of the LORD, “and we will prepare a young goat for you.”
JDG	13	16	여호와의 사자가 마노아에게 이르시되 네가 비록 나를 머물리나 내가 너의 식물을 먹지 아니하리라 번제를 준비하려거든 마땅히 여호와께 드릴지니라 하니 이는 마노아가 여호와의 사자인줄 알지 못함을 인함이었더라	And the angel of the Lord said unto Manoah, Though thou detain me, I will not eat of thy bread: and if thou wilt offer a burnt offering, thou must offer it unto the Lord. For Manoah knew not that he was an angel of the Lord.	And the angel of the LORD replied, “Even if I stay, I will not eat your food. But if you prepare a burnt offering, offer it to the LORD.” For Manoah did not know that it was the angel of the LORD.
JDG	13	17	마노아가 또 여호와의 사자에게 말씀하되 당신의 이름이 무엇이니이까 당신의 말씀이 이룰 때에 우리가 당신을 존숭하리이다	And Manoah said unto the angel of the Lord, What is thy name, that when thy sayings come to pass we may do thee honour?	Then Manoah said to the angel of the LORD, “What is your name, so that we may honor you when your word comes to pass?”
JDG	13	18	여호와의 사자가 그에게 이르시되 어찌하여 이를 묻느냐 내 이름은 기묘니라	And the angel of the Lord said unto him, Why askest thou thus after my name, seeing it is secret?	“Why do you ask my name,” said the angel of the LORD, “since it is beyond comprehension?”
JDG	13	19	이에 마노아가 염소 새끼 하나와 소제물을 취하여 반석 위에서 여호와께 드리매 사자가 이적을 행한지라 마노아와 그 아내가 본즉	So Manoah took a kid with a meat offering, and offered it upon a rock unto the Lord: and the angel did wondrously; and Manoah and his wife looked on.	Then Manoah took a young goat and a grain offering and offered them on a rock to the LORD. And as Manoah and his wife looked on, the LORD did a marvelous thing.
JDG	13	20	불꽃이 단에서부터 하늘로 올라가는 동시에 여호와의 사자가 단 불꽃 가운데로 좇아 올라간지라 마노아와 그 아내가 이것을 보고 얼굴을 땅에 대고 엎드리니라	For it came to pass, when the flame went up toward heaven from off the altar, that the angel of the Lord ascended in the flame of the altar. And Manoah and his wife looked on it, and fell on their faces to the ground.	When the flame went up from the altar to the sky, the angel of the LORD ascended in the flame. When Manoah and his wife saw this, they fell facedown to the ground.
JDG	13	21	여호와의 사자가 마노아와 그 아내에게 다시 나타나지 아니하니 마노아가 이에 그가 여호와의 사자인줄 알고	But the angel of the Lord did no more appear to Manoah and to his wife. Then Manoah knew that he was an angel of the Lord.	And when the angel of the LORD did not appear again to Manoah and his wife, Manoah realized that it had been the angel of the LORD.
JDG	13	22	그 아내에게 이르되 우리가 하나님을 보았으니 반드시 죽으리로다	And Manoah said unto his wife, We shall surely die, because we have seen God.	“We are going to die,” he said to his wife, “for we have seen God!”
JDG	13	23	그 아내가 그에게 이르되 여호와께서 우리를 죽이려 하셨더면 우리 손에서 번제와 소제를 받지 아니하셨을 것이며 이제 이런 말씀도 우리에게 이르지 아니하셨으리이다 하였더라	But his wife said unto him, If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a burnt offering and a meat offering at our hands, neither would he have shewed us all these things, nor would as at this time have told us such things as these.	But his wife replied, “If the LORD had intended to kill us, He would not have accepted the burnt offering and the grain offering from our hands, nor would He have shown us all these things or spoken to us this way.”
JDG	13	24	여인이 아들을 낳으매 이름을 삼손이라 하니라 아이가 자라매 여호와께서 그에게 복을 주시더니	And the woman bare a son, and called his name Samson: and the child grew, and the Lord blessed him.	So the woman gave birth to a son and named him Samson. The boy grew, and the LORD blessed him.
JDG	13	25	소라와 에스다올 사이 마하네단에서 여호와의 신이 비로소 그에게 감동하시니라	And the Spirit of the Lord began to move him at times in the camp of Dan between Zorah and Eshtaol.	And the Spirit of the LORD began to stir him at Mahaneh-dan, between Zorah and Eshtaol.
JDG	14	1	삼손이 딤나에 내려가서 거기서 블레셋 딸 중 한 여자를 보고	And Samson went down to Timnath, and saw a woman in Timnath of the daughters of the Philistines.	One day Samson went down to Timnah, where he saw a young Philistine woman.
JDG	14	2	도로 올라와서 자기 부모에게 말하여 가로되 내가 딤나에서 블레셋 사람의 딸 중 한 여자를 보았사오니 이제 그를 취하여 내 아내를 삼게 하소서	And he came up, and told his father and his mother, and said, I have seen a woman in Timnath of the daughters of the Philistines: now therefore get her for me to wife.	So he returned and told his father and mother, “I have seen a daughter of the Philistines in Timnah. Now get her for me as a wife.”
JDG	14	3	부모가 그에게 이르되 네 형제들의 딸 중에나 내 백성 중에 어찌 여자가 없어서 네가 할례받지 아니한 블레셋 사람에게 가서 아내를 취하려 하느냐 삼손이 아비에게 이르되 내가 그 여자를 좋아하오니 나를 위하여 그를 데려오소서 하니	Then his father and his mother said unto him, Is there never a woman among the daughters of thy brethren, or among all my people, that thou goest to take a wife of the uncircumcised Philistines? And Samson said unto his father, Get her for me; for she pleaseth me well.	But his father and mother replied, “Can’t you find a young woman among your relatives or among any of our people? Must you go to the uncircumcised Philistines to get a wife?” But Samson told his father, “Get her for me, for she is pleasing to my eyes.”
JDG	14	4	이 때에 블레셋 사람이 이스라엘을 관할한고로 삼손이 틈을 타서 블레셋 사람을 치려 함이었으나 그 부모는 이 일이 여호와께로서 나온 것인 줄은 알지 못하였더라	But his father and his mother knew not that it was of the Lord, that he sought an occasion against the Philistines: for at that time the Philistines had dominion over Israel.	(Now his father and mother did not know this was from the LORD, who was seeking an occasion to move against the Philistines; for at that time the Philistines were ruling over Israel.)
JDG	14	5	삼손이 그 부모와 함께 딤나에 내려가서 딤나의 포도원에 이른즉 어린 사자가 그를 맞아 소리 지르는지라	Then went Samson down, and his father and his mother, to Timnath, and came to the vineyards of Timnath: and, behold, a young lion roared against him.	Then Samson went down to Timnah with his father and mother and came to the vineyards of Timnah. Suddenly a young lion came roaring at him,
JDG	14	6	삼손이 여호와의 신에게 크게 감동되어 손에 아무 것도 없어도 그 사자를 염소 새끼를 찢음 같이 찢었으나 그는 그 행한 일을 부모에게도 고하지 아니하였고	And the Spirit of the Lord came mightily upon him, and he rent him as he would have rent a kid, and he had nothing in his hand: but he told not his father or his mother what he had done.	and the Spirit of the LORD came powerfully upon him, and he tore the lion apart with his bare hands as one would tear a young goat. But he did not tell his father or mother what he had done.
JDG	14	7	그가 내려가서 그 여자와 말하며 그를 기뻐하였더라	And he went down, and talked with the woman; and she pleased Samson well.	Then Samson continued on his way down and spoke to the woman, because she was pleasing to his eyes.
JDG	14	8	얼마 후에 삼손이 그 여자를 취하려고 다시 가더니 돌이켜 그 사자의 주검을 본즉 사자의 몸에 벌떼와 꿀이 있는지라	And after a time he returned to take her, and he turned aside to see the carcase of the lion: and, behold, there was a swarm of bees and honey in the carcase of the lion.	When Samson returned later to take her, he left the road to see the lion’s carcass, and in it was a swarm of bees, along with their honey.
JDG	14	9	손으로 그 꿀을 취하여 행하며 먹고 그 부모에게 이르러 그들에게 그것을 드려서 먹게 하였으나 그 꿀을 사자의 몸에서 취하였다고는 고하지 아니하였더라	And he took thereof in his hands, and went on eating, and came to his father and mother, and he gave them, and they did eat: but he told not them that he had taken the honey out of the carcase of the lion.	So he scooped some honey into his hands and ate it as he went along. And when he returned to his father and mother, he gave some to them and they ate it. But he did not tell them that he had taken the honey from the lion’s carcass.
JDG	14	10	삼손의 아비가 여자에게로 내려가매 삼손이 거기서 잔치를 배설하였으니 소년은 이렇게 행하는 풍속이 있음이더라	So his father went down unto the woman: and Samson made there a feast; for so used the young men to do.	Then his father went to visit the woman, and Samson prepared a feast there, as was customary for the bridegroom.
JDG	14	11	무리가 삼손을 보고 삼십 명을 데려다가 동무를 삼아 그와 함께 하게 한지라	And it came to pass, when they saw him, that they brought thirty companions to be with him.	And when the Philistines saw him, they selected thirty men to accompany him.
JDG	14	12	삼손이 그들에게 이르되 이제 내가 너희에게 수수께끼를 하리니 잔치하는 칠 일 동안에 너희가 능히 그것을 풀어서 내게 고하면 내가 베옷 삼십 벌과 겉옷 삼십 벌을 너희에게 주리라	And Samson said unto them, I will now put forth a riddle unto you: if ye can certainly declare it me within the seven days of the feast, and find it out, then I will give you thirty sheets and thirty change of garments:	“Let me tell you a riddle,” Samson said to them. “If you can solve it for me within the seven days of the feast, I will give you thirty linen garments and thirty sets of clothes.
JDG	14	13	그러나 그것을 능히 내게 고하지 못하면 너희가 내게 베옷 삼십 벌과 겉옷 삼십 벌을 줄지니라 그들이 이르되 너는 수수께끼를 하여 우리로 듣게 하라	But if ye cannot declare it me, then shall ye give me thirty sheets and thirty change of garments. And they said unto him, Put forth thy riddle, that we may hear it.	But if you cannot solve it, you must give me thirty linen garments and thirty sets of clothes.” “Tell us your riddle,” they replied. “Let us hear it.”
JDG	14	14	삼손이 그들에게 이르되 먹는 자에게서 먹는 것이 나오고 강한 자에게서 단 것이 나왔느니라 그들이 삼 일이 되도록 수수께끼를 풀지 못하였더라	And he said unto them, Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth sweetness. And they could not in three days expound the riddle.	So he said to them: “Out of the eater came something to eat, and out of the strong came something sweet.” For three days they were unable to explain the riddle.
JDG	14	15	제칠일에 이르러 그들이 삼손의 아내에게 이르되 너는 네 남편을 꾀어 그 수수께끼를 우리에게 알리게 하라 그렇지 아니하면 너와 네 아비의 집을 불사르리라 너희가 우리의 소유를 취하고자하여 우리를 청하였느냐 그렇지 아니하냐	And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they said unto Samson’s wife, Entice thy husband, that he may declare unto us the riddle, lest we burn thee and thy father’s house with fire: have ye called us to take that we have? is it not so?	So on the fourth day they said to Samson’s wife, “Entice your husband to explain the riddle to us, or we will burn you and your father’s household to death. Did you invite us here to rob us?”
JDG	14	16	삼손의 아내가 그의 앞에서 울며 가로되 당신이 나를 미워할 뿐이요 사랑치 아니하는도다 우리 민족에게 수수께끼를 말하고 그 뜻을 내게 풀어 이르지 아니하도다 삼손이 그에게 대답하되 보라 내가 그것을 나의 부모에게도 풀어 고하지 아니하였거든 어찌 그대에게 풀어 이르리요 하였으나	And Samson’s wife wept before him, and said, Thou dost but hate me, and lovest me not: thou hast put forth a riddle unto the children of my people, and hast not told it me. And he said unto her, Behold, I have not told it my father nor my mother, and shall I tell it thee?	Then Samson’s wife came to him, weeping, and said, “You hate me! You do not really love me! You have posed to my people a riddle, but have not explained it to me.” “Look,” he said, “I have not even explained it to my father or mother, so why should I explain it to you?”
JDG	14	17	칠 일 잔치할 동안에 그 아내가 앞에서 울며 강박함을 인하여 제칠일에는 그가 그 아내에게 수수께끼를 풀어 이르매 그 아내가 그것을 그 민족에게 고하였더라	And she wept before him the seven days, while their feast lasted: and it came to pass on the seventh day, that he told her, because she lay sore upon him: and she told the riddle to the children of her people.	She wept the whole seven days of the feast, and finally on the seventh day, because she had pressed him so much, he told her the answer. And in turn she explained the riddle to her people.
JDG	14	18	제칠일 해 지기 전에 성읍 사람들이 삼손에게 이르되 무엇이 꿀보다 달겠으며 무엇이 사자보다 강하겠느냐 한지라 삼손이 그들에게 대답하되 너희가 내 암송아지로 밭갈지 아니하였더면 나의 수수께끼를 능히 풀지 못하였으리라 하니라	And the men of the city said unto him on the seventh day before the sun went down, What is sweeter than honey? and what is stronger than a lion? And he said unto them, If ye had not plowed with my heifer, ye had not found out my riddle.	Before sunset on the seventh day, the men of the city said to Samson: “What is sweeter than honey? And what is stronger than a lion?” So he said to them: “If you had not plowed with my heifer, you would not have solved my riddle!”
JDG	14	19	여호와의 신이 삼손에게 크게 임하시매 삼손이 아스글론에 내려가서 그곳 사람 삼십 명을 쳐 죽이고 노략하여 수수께끼 푼 자들에게 옷을 주고 심히 노하여 아비 집으로 올라갔고	And the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he went down to Ashkelon, and slew thirty men of them, and took their spoil, and gave change of garments unto them which expounded the riddle. And his anger was kindled, and he went up to his father’s house.	Then the Spirit of the LORD came mightily upon him, and he went down to Ashkelon, killed thirty of their men, took their apparel, and gave their clothes to those who had solved the riddle. And burning with anger, Samson returned to his father’s house,
JDG	14	20	삼손의 아내는 삼손의 친구 되었던 그 동무에게 준바 되었더라	But Samson’s wife was given to his companion, whom he had used as his friend.	and his wife was given to one of the men who had accompanied him.
JDG	15	1	얼마 후 밀 거둘 때에 삼손이 염소 새끼를 가지고 그 아내에게로 찾아 가서 가로되 내가 침실에 들어가 아내를 보고자 하노라 장인이 들어 오지 못하게 하고	But it came to pass within a while after, in the time of wheat harvest, that Samson visited his wife with a kid; and he said, I will go in to my wife into the chamber. But her father would not suffer him to go in.	Later on, at the time of the wheat harvest, Samson took a young goat and went to visit his wife. “I want to go to my wife in her room,” he said. But her father would not let him enter.
JDG	15	2	가로되 네가 그를 심히 미워하는 줄로 내가 생각한 고로 그를 네 동무에게 주었노라 그 동생이 그보다 더욱 아름답지 아니하냐 청하노니 너는 그의 대신에 이를 취하라	And her father said, I verily thought that thou hadst utterly hated her; therefore I gave her to thy companion: is not her younger sister fairer than she? take her, I pray thee, instead of her.	“I was sure that you thoroughly hated her,” said her father, “so I gave her to one of the men who accompanied you. Is not her younger sister more beautiful than she? Please take her instead.”
JDG	15	3	삼손이 그들에게 이르되 이번은 내가 블레셋 사람을 해할지라도 그들에게 대하여 내게 허물이 없을 것이니라 하고	And Samson said concerning them, Now shall I be more blameless than the Philistines, though I do them a displeasure.	Samson said to them, “This time I will be blameless in doing harm to the Philistines.”
JDG	15	4	삼손이 가서 여우 삼백을 붙들어서 그 꼬리와 꼬리를 매고 홰를 취하고 그 두 꼬리 사이에 한 홰를 달고	And Samson went and caught three hundred foxes, and took firebrands, and turned tail to tail, and put a firebrand in the midst between two tails.	Then Samson went out and caught three hundred foxes. And he took torches, turned the foxes tail-to-tail, and fastened a torch between each pair of tails.
JDG	15	5	홰에 불을 켜고 그것을 블레셋 사람의 곡식 밭으로 몰아 들여서 곡식 단과 아직 베지 아니한 곡식과 감람원을 사른지라	And when he had set the brands on fire, he let them go into the standing corn of the Philistines, and burnt up both the shocks, and also the standing corn, with the vineyards and olives.	Then he lit the torches and released the foxes into the standing grain of the Philistines, burning up the piles of grain and the standing grain, as well as the vineyards and olive groves.
JDG	15	6	블레셋 사람이 가로되 누가 이 일을 행하였느냐 혹이 대답하되 딤나 사람의 사위 삼손이니 장인이 삼손의 아내를 취하여 그 동무 되었던 자에게 준 연고니라 블레셋 사람이 올라가서 그 여인과 그의 아비를 불사르니라	Then the Philistines said, Who hath done this? And they answered, Samson, the son in law of the Timnite, because he had taken his wife, and given her to his companion. And the Philistines came up, and burnt her and her father with fire.	“Who did this?” the Philistines demanded. “It was Samson, the son-in-law of the Timnite,” they were told. “For his wife was given to his companion.” So the Philistines went up and burned her and her father to death.
JDG	15	7	삼손이 그들에게 이르되 너희가 이같이 행하였은즉 내가 너희에게 원수를 갚은 후에야 말리라 하고	And Samson said unto them, Though ye have done this, yet will I be avenged of you, and after that I will cease.	And Samson told them, “Because you have done this, I will not rest until I have taken vengeance upon you.”
JDG	15	8	블레셋 사람을 크게 도륙하고 내려가서 에담 바위 틈에 거하니라	And he smote them hip and thigh with a great slaughter: and he went down and dwelt in the top of the rock Etam.	And he struck them ruthlessly with a great slaughter, and then went down and stayed in the cave at the rock of Etam.
JDG	15	9	이에 블레셋 사람이 올라와서 유다에 진을 치고 레히에 편만한지라	Then the Philistines went up, and pitched in Judah, and spread themselves in Lehi.	Then the Philistines went up, camped in Judah, and deployed themselves near the town of Lehi.
JDG	15	10	유다 사람들이 가로되 너희가 어찌하여 올라와서 우리를 치느냐 그들이 대답하되 우리가 올라오기는 삼손을 결박하여 그가 우리에게 행한 대로 그에게 행하려 함이로라	And the men of Judah said, Why are ye come up against us? And they answered, To bind Samson are we come up, to do to him as he hath done to us.	“Why have you attacked us?” said the men of Judah. The Philistines replied, “We have come to arrest Samson and pay him back for what he has done to us.”
JDG	15	11	유다 사람 삼천 명이 에담 바위 틈에 내려가서 삼손에게 이르되 너는 블레셋 사람이 우리를 관할하는 줄을 알지 못하느냐 네가 어찌하여 우리에게 이같이 행하였느냐 삼손이 그들에게 이르되 그들이 내게 행한 대로 나도 그들에게 행하였노라	Then three thousand men of Judah went to the top of the rock Etam, and said to Samson, Knowest thou not that the Philistines are rulers over us? what is this that thou hast done unto us? And he said unto them, As they did unto me, so have I done unto them.	In response, three thousand men of Judah went to the cave at the rock of Etam, and they asked Samson, “Do you not realize that the Philistines rule over us? What have you done to us?” “I have done to them what they did to me,” he replied.
JDG	15	12	그들이 삼손에게 이르되 우리가 너를 결박하여 블레셋 사람의 손에 붙이려고 이제 내려왔노라 삼손이 그들에게 이르되 너희는 친히 나를 치지 않겠다고 내게 맹세하라	And they said unto him, We are come down to bind thee, that we may deliver thee into the hand of the Philistines. And Samson said unto them, Swear unto me, that ye will not fall upon me yourselves.	But they said to him, “We have come down to arrest you and hand you over to the Philistines.” Samson replied, “Swear to me that you will not kill me yourselves.”
JDG	15	13	그들이 삼손에게 일러 가로되 아니라 우리가 다만 너를 단단히 결박하여 그들의 손에 붙일 뿐이요 우리가 결단코 너를 죽이지 아니하리라 하고 새 줄 둘로 결박하고 바위 틈에서 그를 끌어내니라	And they spake unto him, saying, No; but we will bind thee fast, and deliver thee into their hand: but surely we will not kill thee. And they bound him with two new cords, and brought him up from the rock.	“No,” they answered, “we will not kill you, but we will tie you up securely and hand you over to them.” So they bound him with two new ropes and led him up from the rock.
JDG	15	14	삼손이 레히에 이르매 블레셋 사람이 그에게로 마주 나가며 소리지르는 동시에 여호와의 신의 권능이 삼손에게 임하매 그 팔 위의 줄이 불탄 삼과 같아서 그 결박되었던 손에서 떨어진지라	And when he came unto Lehi, the Philistines shouted against him: and the Spirit of the Lord came mightily upon him, and the cords that were upon his arms became as flax that was burnt with fire, and his bands loosed from off his hands.	When Samson arrived in Lehi, the Philistines came out shouting against him. And the Spirit of the LORD came mightily upon him. The ropes on his arms became like burnt flax, and the bonds broke loose from his hands.
JDG	15	15	삼손이 나귀의 새 턱뼈를 보고 손을 내밀어 취하고 그것으로 일천 명을 죽이고	And he found a new jawbone of an ass, and put forth his hand, and took it, and slew a thousand men therewith.	He found the fresh jawbone of a donkey, reached out his hand and took it, and struck down a thousand men.
JDG	15	16	가로되 나귀의 턱뼈로 한 더미 두 더미를 쌓았음이여 나귀의 턱뼈로 내가 일천 명을 죽였도다	And Samson said, With the jawbone of an ass, heaps upon heaps, with the jaw of an ass have I slain a thousand men.	Then Samson said: “With the jawbone of a donkey I have piled them into heaps. With the jawbone of a donkey I have slain a thousand men.”
JDG	15	17	말을 마치고 턱뼈를 그 손에서 내어던지고 그곳을 라맛 레히라 이름하였더라	And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking, that he cast away the jawbone out of his hand, and called that place Ramath–lehi.	And when Samson had finished speaking, he cast the jawbone from his hand; and he named that place Ramath-lehi.
JDG	15	18	삼손이 심히 목마르므로 여호와께 부르짖어 가로되 주께서 종의 손으로 이 큰 구원을 베푸셨사오나 내가 이제 목말라 죽어서 할례 받지 못한 자의 손에 빠지겠나이다	And he was sore athirst, and called on the Lord, and said, Thou hast given this great deliverance into the hand of thy servant: and now shall I die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the uncircumcised?	And being very thirsty, Samson cried out to the LORD, “You have accomplished this great deliverance through Your servant. Must I now die of thirst and fall into the hands of the uncircumcised?”
JDG	15	19	하나님이 레히에 한 우묵한 곳을 터치시니 물이 거기서 솟아나오는지라 삼손이 그것을 마시고 정신이 회복되어 소생하니 그러므로 그 샘 이름은 엔학고레라 이 샘이 레히에 오늘까지 있더라	But God clave an hollow place that was in the jaw, and there came water thereout; and when he had drunk, his spirit came again, and he revived: wherefore he called the name thereof En–hakkore, which is in Lehi unto this day.	So God opened up the hollow place in Lehi, and water came out of it. When Samson drank, his strength returned, and he was revived. That is why he named it En-hakkore, and it remains in Lehi to this day.
JDG	15	20	블레셋 사람의 때에 삼손이 이스라엘 사사로 이십 년을 지내었더라	And he judged Israel in the days of the Philistines twenty years.	And Samson judged Israel for twenty years in the days of the Philistines.
JDG	16	1	삼손이 가사에 가서 거기서 한 기생을 보고 그에게로 들어갔더니	Then went Samson to Gaza, and saw there an harlot, and went in unto her.	One day Samson went to Gaza, where he saw a prostitute and went in to spend the night with her.
JDG	16	2	혹이 가사 사람에게 고하여 가로되 삼손이 여기 왔다 하매 곧 그를 에워싸고 밤새도록 성문에 매복하고 밤새도록 종용히 하며 이르기를 새벽이 되거든 그를 죽이리라 하였더라	And it was told the Gazites, saying, Samson is come hither. And they compassed him in, and laid wait for him all night in the gate of the city, and were quiet all the night, saying, In the morning, when it is day, we shall kill him.	When the Gazites heard that Samson was there, they surrounded that place and lay in wait for him all night at the city gate. They were quiet throughout the night, saying, “Let us wait until dawn; then we will kill him.”
JDG	16	3	삼손이 밤중까지 누웠다가 그 밤중에 일어나 성문짝들과 두 설주와 빗장을 빼어 그것을 모두 어깨에 메고 헤브론 앞산 꼭대기로 가니라	And Samson lay till midnight, and arose at midnight, and took the doors of the gate of the city, and the two posts, and went away with them, bar and all, and put them upon his shoulders, and carried them up to the top of an hill that is before Hebron.	But Samson lay there only until midnight, when he got up, took hold of the doors of the city gate and both gateposts, and pulled them out, bar and all. Then he put them on his shoulders and took them to the top of the mountain overlooking Hebron.
JDG	16	4	이 후에 삼손이 소렉 골짜기의 들릴라라 이름하는 여인을 사랑하매	And it came to pass afterward, that he loved a woman in the valley of Sorek, whose name was Delilah.	Some time later, Samson fell in love with a woman in the Valley of Sorek, whose name was Delilah.
JDG	16	5	블레셋 사람의 방백들이 그 여인에게로 올라와서 그에게 이르되 삼손을 꾀어서 무엇으로 말미암아 그 큰 힘이 있는지 우리가 어떻게 하면 그를 이기어서 결박하여 곤고케 할 수 있을는지 알아보라 그리하면 우리가 각각 은 일천일백을 네게 주리라	And the lords of the Philistines came up unto her, and said unto her, Entice him, and see wherein his great strength lieth, and by what means we may prevail against him, that we may bind him to afflict him: and we will give thee every one of us eleven hundred pieces of silver.	The lords of the Philistines went to her and said, “Entice him and find out the source of his great strength and how we can overpower him to tie him up and subdue him. Then each one of us will give you eleven hundred shekels of silver.”
JDG	16	6	들릴라가 삼손에게 말하되 청컨대 당신의 큰 힘이 무엇으로 말미암아 있으며 어떻게 하면 능히 당신을 결박하여 곤고케 할 수 있을는지 내게 말하라	And Delilah said to Samson, Tell me, I pray thee, wherein thy great strength lieth, and wherewith thou mightest be bound to afflict thee.	So Delilah said to Samson, “Please tell me the source of your great strength and how you can be tied up and subdued.”
JDG	16	7	삼손이 그에게 이르되 만일 마르지 아니한 푸른 칡 일곱으로 나를 결박하면 내가 약하여져서 다른 사람과 같으리라	And Samson said unto her, If they bind me with seven green withs that were never dried, then shall I be weak, and be as another man.	Samson told her, “If they tie me up with seven fresh bowstrings that have not been dried, I will become as weak as any other man.”
JDG	16	8	블레셋 사람의 방백들이 마르지 아니한 푸른 칡 일곱을 여인에게로 가져오매 그가 그것으로 삼손을 결박하고	Then the lords of the Philistines brought up to her seven green withs which had not been dried, and she bound him with them.	So the lords of the Philistines brought her seven fresh bowstrings that had not been dried, and she tied him up with them.
JDG	16	9	이미 사람을 내실에 매복시켰으므로 삼손에게 말하되 삼손이여 블레셋 사람이 당신에게 미쳤느니라 하니 삼손이 그 칡 끊기를 불탄 삼실을 끊음 같이 하였고 그 힘의 근본은 여전히 알지 못하니라	Now there were men lying in wait, abiding with her in the chamber. And she said unto him, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And he brake the withs, as a thread of tow is broken when it toucheth the fire. So his strength was not known.	While the men were hidden in her room, she called out, “Samson, the Philistines are here!” But he snapped the bowstrings like a strand of yarn seared by a flame. So the source of his strength remained unknown.
JDG	16	10	들릴라가 삼손에게 이르되 보라 당신이 나를 희롱하여 내게 거짓말을 하였도다 청컨대 무엇으로 하면 당신을 결박할 수 있을는지 이제는 내게 말하라	And Delilah said unto Samson, Behold, thou hast mocked me, and told me lies: now tell me, I pray thee, wherewith thou mightest be bound.	Then Delilah said to Samson, “You have mocked me and lied to me! Now please tell me how you can be tied up.”
JDG	16	11	삼손이 그에게 이르되 만일 쓰지 아니한 새 줄로 나를 결박하면 내가 약하여져서 다른 사람과 같으리라	And he said unto her, If they bind me fast with new ropes that never were occupied, then shall I be weak, and be as another man.	He replied, “If they tie me up with new ropes that have never been used, I will become as weak as any other man.”
JDG	16	12	들릴라가 새 줄을 취하고 그것으로 그를 결박하고 그에게 이르되 삼손이여 블레셋 사람이 당신에게 미쳤느니라 하니 삼손이 팔 위의 줄 끊기를 실을 끊음 같이 하였고 그 때에도 사람이 내실에 매복하였였더라	Delilah therefore took new ropes, and bound him therewith, and said unto him, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And there were liers in wait abiding in the chamber. And he brake them from off his arms like a thread.	So Delilah took new ropes, tied him up with them, and called out, “Samson, the Philistines are here!” But while the men were hidden in her room, he snapped the ropes off his arms like they were threads.
JDG	16	13	들릴라가 삼손에게 이르되 당신이 이 때까지 나를 희롱하여 내게 거짓말을 하였도다 내가 무엇으로 하면 당신을 결박할 수 있을는지 내게 말하라 삼손이 그에게 이르되 그대가 만일 나의 머리털 일곱 가닥을 위선에 섞어 짜면 되리라	And Delilah said unto Samson, Hitherto thou hast mocked me, and told me lies: tell me wherewith thou mightest be bound. And he said unto her, If thou weavest the seven locks of my head with the web.	Then Delilah said to Samson, “You have mocked me and lied to me all along! Tell me how you can be tied up.” He told her, “If you weave the seven braids of my head into the web of a loom and tighten it with a pin, I will become as weak as any other man.”
JDG	16	14	들릴라가 바디로 그 머리털을 단단히 짜고 그에게 이르되 삼손이여 블레셋 사람이 당신에게 미쳤느니라 하니 삼손이 잠을 깨어 직조틀의 바디와 위선을 다 빼어내니라	And she fastened it with the pin, and said unto him, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And he awaked out of his sleep, and went away with the pin of the beam, and with the web.	So while he slept, Delilah took the seven braids of his hair and wove them into the web.Then she tightened it with a pin and called to him, “Samson, the Philistines are here!” But he awoke from his sleep and pulled out the pin with the loom and the web.
JDG	16	15	들릴라가 삼손에게 이르되 당신의 마음이 내게 있지 아니하면서 당신이 어찌 나를 사랑한다 하느뇨 당신이 이 세 번 나를 희롱하고 당신의 큰 힘이 무엇으로 말미암아 있는 것을 말하지 아니하였도다 하며	And she said unto him, How canst thou say, I love thee, when thine heart is not with me? thou hast mocked me these three times, and hast not told me wherein thy great strength lieth.	“How can you say, ‘I love you,’” she asked, “when your heart is not with me? This is the third time you have mocked me and failed to reveal to me the source of your great strength!”
JDG	16	16	날마다 그 말로 그를 재촉하여 조르매 삼손의 마음이 번뇌하여 죽을 지경이라	And it came to pass, when she pressed him daily with her words, and urged him, so that his soul was vexed unto death;	Finally, after she had pressed him daily with her words and pleaded until he was sick to death,
JDG	16	17	삼손이 진정을 토하여 그에게 이르되 내 머리에는 삭도를 대지 아니하였나니 이는 내가 모태에서 허나님의 나실인이 되었음이라 만일 내 머리가 밀리우면 내 힘이 내게서 떠나고 나는 약하여져서 다른 사람과 같으리라	That he told her all his heart, and said unto her, There hath not come a razor upon mine head; for I have been a Nazarite unto God from my mother’s womb: if I be shaven, then my strength will go from me, and I shall become weak, and be like any other man.	Samson told her all that was in his heart: “My hair has never been cut, because I have been a Nazirite to God from my mother’s womb. If I am shaved, my strength will leave me, and I will become as weak as any other man.”
JDG	16	18	들릴라가 삼손의 진정을 다 토함을 보고 보내어 블레셋 사람의 방백들을 불러 가로되 삼손이 내게 진정을 토하였으니 이제 한 번만 올라오라 블레셋 방백들이 손에 은을 가지고 여인에게로 올라오니라	And when Delilah saw that he had told her all his heart, she sent and called for the lords of the Philistines, saying, Come up this once, for he hath shewed me all his heart. Then the lords of the Philistines came up unto her, and brought money in their hand.	When Delilah realized that he had revealed to her all that was in his heart, she sent this message to the lords of the Philistines: “Come up once more, for he has revealed to me all that is in his heart.” Then the lords of the Philistines came to her, bringing the money in their hands.
JDG	16	19	들릴라가 삼손으로 자기 무릎을 베고 자게 하고 사람을 불러 그 머리털 일곱 가닥을 밀고 괴롭게 하여본즉 그 힘이 없어졌더라	And she made him sleep upon her knees; and she called for a man, and she caused him to shave off the seven locks of his head; and she began to afflict him, and his strength went from him.	And having lulled him to sleep on her lap, she called a man to shave off the seven braids of his head. In this way she began to subdue him, and his strength left him.
JDG	16	20	들릴라가 가로되 삼손이여 블레셋 사람이 당신에게 미쳤느니라 하니 삼손이 잠을 깨며 이르기를 내가 전과 같이 나가서 몸을 떨치리라 하여도 여호와께서 이미 자기를 떠나신 줄을 깨닫지 못하였더라	And she said, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And he awoke out of his sleep, and said, I will go out as at other times before, and shake myself. And he wist not that the Lord was departed from him.	Then she called out, “Samson, the Philistines are here!” When Samson awoke from his sleep, he thought, “I will escape as I did before and shake myself free.” But he did not know that the LORD had departed from him.
JDG	16	21	블레셋 사람이 그를 잡아 그 눈을 빼고 끌고 가사에 내려가 놋줄로 매고 그로 옥중에서 맷돌을 돌리게 하였더라	But the Philistines took him, and put out his eyes, and brought him down to Gaza, and bound him with fetters of brass; and he did grind in the prison house.	Then the Philistines seized him, gouged out his eyes, and brought him down to Gaza, where he was bound with bronze shackles and forced to grind grain in the prison.
JDG	16	22	그의 머리털이 밀리운 후에 다시 자라기 시작하니라	Howbeit the hair of his head began to grow again after he was shaven.	However, the hair of his head began to grow back after it had been shaved.
JDG	16	23	블레셋 사람의 방백이 가로되 우리의 신이 우리 원수 삼손을 우리 손에 붙였다 하고 다 모여 그 신 다곤에게 큰 제사를 드리고 즐거워하고	Then the lords of the Philistines gathered them together for to offer a great sacrifice unto Dagon their god, and to rejoice: for they said, Our god hath delivered Samson our enemy into our hand.	Now the lords of the Philistines gathered together to offer a great sacrifice to their god Dagon. They rejoiced and said, “Our god has delivered Samson our enemy into our hands.”
JDG	16	24	백성들도 삼손을 보았으므로 가로되 우리 토지를 헐고 우리 많은 사람을 죽인 원수를 우리의 신이 우리 손에 붙였다 하고 자기 신을 찬송하며	And when the people saw him, they praised their god: for they said, Our god hath delivered into our hands our enemy, and the destroyer of our country, which slew many of us.	And when the people saw him, they praised their god, saying: “Our god has delivered into our hands our enemy who destroyed our land and multiplied our dead.”
JDG	16	25	그들의 마음이 즐거울 때에 이르되 삼손을 불러다가 우리를 위하여 재주를 부리게 하자 하고 옥에서 삼손을 불러내매 삼손이 그들을 위하여 재주를 부리니라 그들이 삼손을 두 기둥 사이에 세웠더니	And it came to pass, when their hearts were merry, that they said, Call for Samson, that he may make us sport. And they called for Samson out of the prison house; and he made them sport: and they set him between the pillars.	And while their hearts were merry, they said, “Call for Samson to entertain us.” So they called Samson out of the prison to entertain them. And they stationed him between the pillars.
JDG	16	26	삼손이 자기 손을 붙든 소년에게 이르되 나로 이 집을 버틴 기둥을 찾아서 그것을 의지하게 하라 하니라	And Samson said unto the lad that held him by the hand, Suffer me that I may feel the pillars whereupon the house standeth, that I may lean upon them.	Samson said to the servant who held his hand, “Lead me where I can feel the pillars supporting the temple, so I can lean against them.”
JDG	16	27	그 집에는 남녀가 가득하니 블레셋 모든 방백도 거기 있고 지붕에 있는 남녀도 삼천 명 가량이라 다 삼손의 재주 부리는 것을 보더라	Now the house was full of men and women; and all the lords of the Philistines were there; and there were upon the roof about three thousand men and women, that beheld while Samson made sport.	Now the temple was full of men and women; all the lords of the Philistines were there, and about three thousand men and women were on the roof watching Samson entertain them.
JDG	16	28	삼손이 여호와께 부르짖어 가로되 주 여호와여 구하옵나니 나를 생각하옵소서 하나님이여 구하옵나니 이번만 나로 강하게 하사 블레셋 사람이 나의 두 눈을 뺀 원수를 단번에 갚게 하옵소서 하고	And Samson called unto the Lord, and said, O Lord God, remember me, I pray thee, and strengthen me, I pray thee, only this once, O God, that I may be at once avenged of the Philistines for my two eyes.	Then Samson called out to the LORD: “O Lord GOD, please remember me. Strengthen me, O God, just once more, so that with one vengeful blow I may pay back the Philistines for my two eyes.”
JDG	16	29	집을 버틴 두 가운데 기둥을 하나는 왼손으로, 하나는 오른손으로 껴 의지하고	And Samson took hold of the two middle pillars upon which the house stood, and on which it was borne up, of the one with his right hand, and of the other with his left.	And Samson reached out for the two central pillars supporting the temple. Bracing himself against them with his right hand on one pillar and his left hand on the other,
JDG	16	30	가로되 블레셋 사람과 함께 죽기를 원하노라 하고 힘을 다하여 몸을 굽히매 그 집이 곧 무너져 그 안에 있는 모든 방백과 온 백성에게 덮이니 삼손이 죽을 때에 죽인 자가 살았을 때에 죽인 자보다 더욱 많았더라	And Samson said, Let me die with the Philistines. And he bowed himself with all his might; and the house fell upon the lords, and upon all the people that were therein. So the dead which he slew at his death were more than they which he slew in his life.	Samson said, “Let me die with the Philistines.” Then he pushed with all his might, and the temple fell on the lords and all the people in it. So in his death he killed more than he had killed in his life.
JDG	16	31	그의 형제와 아비의 온 집이 다 내려가서 그 시체를 취하여 가지고 올라와서 소라와 에스다올 사이 그 아비 마노아의 장지에 장사하니라 삼손이 이스라엘 사사로 이십 년을 지내었더라	Then his brethren and all the house of his father came down, and took him, and brought him up, and buried him between Zorah and Eshtaol in the buryingplace of Manoah his father. And he judged Israel twenty years.	Then Samson’s brothers and his father’s family came down, carried him back, and buried him between Zorah and Eshtaol in the tomb of his father Manoah. And he had judged Israel twenty years.
JDG	17	1	에브라임 산지에 미가라 이름하는 사람이 있더니	And there was a man of mount Ephraim, whose name was Micah.	Now a man named Micah from the hill country of Ephraim
JDG	17	2	그 어미에게 이르되 어머니께서 은 일천일백을 잃어버리셨으므로 저주하시고 내 귀에도 말씀하셨더니 보소서 그 은이 내게 있나이다 내가 그것을 취하였나이다 어미가 가로되 내 아들이 여호와께 복 받기를 원하노라 하니라	And he said unto his mother, The eleven hundred shekels of silver that were taken from thee, about which thou cursedst, and spakest of also in mine ears, behold, the silver is with me; I took it. And his mother said, Blessed be thou of the Lord, my son.	said to his mother, “The eleven hundred shekels of silver that were taken from you and about which I heard you utter a curse—I have the silver here with me; I took it.” Then his mother said, “Blessed be my son by the LORD!”
JDG	17	3	미가가 은 일천일백을 그 어미에게 도로 주매 어미가 가로되 내가 내 아들을 위하여 한 신상을 새기며 한 신상을 부어만들 차로 내 손에서 이 은을 여호와께 거룩히 드리노라 그러므로 내가 이제 이 은을 네게 도로 돌리리라	And when he had restored the eleven hundred shekels of silver to his mother, his mother said, I had wholly dedicated the silver unto the Lord from my hand for my son, to make a graven image and a molten image: now therefore I will restore it unto thee.	And when he had returned the eleven hundred shekels of silver to his mother, she said, “I wholly dedicate the silver to the LORD for my son’s benefit, to make a graven image and a molten idol. Therefore I will now return it to you.”
JDG	17	4	미가가 그 은을 어미에게 도로 주었으므로 어미가 그 은 이백을 취하여 은장색에게 주어 한 신상을 새기며 한 신상을 부어 만들었더니 그 신상이 미가의 집에 있더라	Yet he restored the money unto his mother; and his mother took two hundred shekels of silver, and gave them to the founder, who made thereof a graven image and a molten image: and they were in the house of Micah.	So he returned the silver to his mother, and she took two hundred shekels of silver and gave them to a silversmith, who made them into a graven image and a molten idol. And they were placed in the house of Micah.
JDG	17	5	이 사람 미가에게 신당이 있으므로 또 에봇과 드라빔을 만들고 한 아들을 세워 제사장을 삼았더라	And the man Micah had an house of gods, and made an ephod, and teraphim, and consecrated one of his sons, who became his priest.	Now this man Micah had a shrine, and he made an ephod and some household idols, and ordained one of his sons as his priest.
JDG	17	6	그 때에는 이스라엘에 왕이 없으므로 사람마다 자기 소견에 옳은 대로 행하였더라	In those days there was no king in Israel, but every man did that which was right in his own eyes.	In those days there was no king in Israel; everyone did what was right in his own eyes.
JDG	17	7	유다 가족에 속한 유다 베들레헴에 한 소년이 있으니 그는 레위인으로서 거기 우거하였더라	And there was a young man out of Beth–lehem–judah of the family of Judah, who was a Levite, and he sojourned there.	And there was a young Levite from Bethlehem in Judah who had been residing within the clan of Judah.
JDG	17	8	이 사람이 거할 곳을 찾고자 하여 그 성읍 유다 베들레헴을 떠나서 행하다가 에브라임 산지로 가서 미가의 집에 이르매	And the man departed out of the city from Beth–lehem–judah to sojourn where he could find a place: and he came to mount Ephraim to the house of Micah, as he journeyed.	This man left the city of Bethlehem in Judah to settle where he could find a place. And as he traveled, he came to Micah’s house in the hill country of Ephraim.
JDG	17	9	미가가 그에게 묻되 너는 어디서부터 오느뇨 그가 이르되 나는 유다 베들레헴의 레위인으로서 거할 곳을 찾으러 가노라	And Micah said unto him, Whence comest thou? And he said unto him, I am a Levite of Beth–lehem–judah, and I go to sojourn where I may find a place.	“Where are you from?” Micah asked him. “I am a Levite from Bethlehem in Judah,” he replied, “and I am on my way to settle wherever I can find a place.”
JDG	17	10	미가가 그에게 이르되 네가 나와 함께 거하여 나를 위하여 아비와 제사장이 되라 내가 해마다 은 열과 의복 한 벌과 식물을 주리라 하므로 레위인이 들어갔더니	And Micah said unto him, Dwell with me, and be unto me a father and a priest, and I will give thee ten shekels of silver by the year, and a suit of apparel, and thy victuals. So the Levite went in.	“Stay with me,” Micah said to him, “and be my father and priest, and I will give you ten shekels of silver per year, a suit of clothes, and your provisions.” So the Levite went in
JDG	17	11	레위인이 그 사람과 함께 거하기를 만족히 여겼으니 이는 그 소년이 미가의 아들 중 하나 같이 됨이라	And the Levite was content to dwell with the man; and the young man was unto him as one of his sons.	and agreed to stay with him, and the young man became like a son to Micah.
JDG	17	12	미가가 레위인을 거룩히 구별하매 소년이 미가의 제사장이 되어 그 집에 거한지라	And Micah consecrated the Levite; and the young man became his priest, and was in the house of Micah.	Micah ordained the Levite, and the young man became his priest and lived in his house.
JDG	17	13	이에 미가가 가로되 레위인이 내 제사장이 되었으니 이제 여호와께서 내게 복 주실 줄을 아노라 하니라	Then said Micah, Now know I that the Lord will do me good, seeing I have a Levite to my priest.	Then Micah said, “Now I know that the LORD will be good to me, because a Levite has become my priest.”
JDG	18	1	그 때에 이스라엘에 왕이 없었고 단 지파는 이 때에 거할 기업의 땅을 구하는 중이었으니 이는 그들이 이스라엘 지파 중에서 이때까지 기업의 땅 분배함을 얻지 못하였음이라	In those days there was no king in Israel: and in those days the tribe of the Danites sought them an inheritance to dwell in; for unto that day all their inheritance had not fallen unto them among the tribes of Israel.	In those days there was no king in Israel, and the tribe of the Danites was looking for territory to occupy. For up to that time they had not come into an inheritance among the tribes of Israel.
JDG	18	2	단 자손이 소라와 에스다올에서부터 자기 온 가족 중 용맹 있는 다섯 사람을 보내어 땅을 탐지하고 살피게 하며 그들에게 이르되 너희는 가서 땅을 살펴보라 하매 그들이 에브라임 산지에 가서 미가의 집에 이르러 거기서 유숙하니라	And the children of Dan sent of their family five men from their coasts, men of valour, from Zorah, and from Eshtaol, to spy out the land, and to search it; and they said unto them, Go, search the land: who when they came to mount Ephraim, to the house of Micah, they lodged there.	So the Danites sent out five men from their clans, men of valor from Zorah and Eshtaol, to spy out the land and explore it. “Go and explore the land,” they told them. The men entered the hill country of Ephraim and came to the house of Micah, where they spent the night.
JDG	18	3	그들이 미가의 집에 가까이 올 때에 레위 소년의 음성을 알아듣고 그리로 돌이켜 가서 그에게 이르되 누가 너를 이리로 인도하였으며 네가 여기서 무엇을 하며 여기서 무엇을 얻었느냐	When they were by the house of Micah, they knew the voice of the young man the Levite: and they turned in thither, and said unto him, Who brought thee hither? and what makest thou in this place? and what hast thou here?	And while they were near Micah’s house, they recognized the voice of the young Levite; so they went over and asked him, “Who brought you here? What are you doing in this place? Why are you here?”
JDG	18	4	그가 그들에게 이르되 미가가 여차여차히 나를 대접하여 나를 고빙하여 나로 자기 제사장을 삼았느니라	And he said unto them, Thus and thus dealeth Micah with me, and hath hired me, and I am his priest.	“Micah has done this and that for me,” he replied, “and he has hired me to be his priest.”
JDG	18	5	그들이 그에게 이르되 청컨대 우리를 위하여 하나님께 물어보아서 우리의 행하는 길이 형통할는지 우리에게 알게 하라	And they said unto him, Ask counsel, we pray thee, of God, that we may know whether our way which we go shall be prosperous.	Then they said to him, “Please inquire of God to determine whether we will have a successful journey.”
JDG	18	6	그 제사장이 그들에게 이르되 평안히 가라 너희의 행하는 길은 여호와 앞에 있느니라	And the priest said unto them, Go in peace: before the Lord is your way wherein ye go.	And the priest told them, “Go in peace. The LORD is watching over your journey.”
JDG	18	7	이에 다섯 사람이 떠나 라이스에 이르러 거기 있는 백성을 본즉 염려 없이 거하여 시돈 사람 같이 한가하고 평안하니 그 땅에는 권세 잡은 자가 없어서 무슨 일에든지 괴롭게 함이 없고 시돈 사람과 상거가 멀며 아무 사람과도 상관하지 아니함이라	Then the five men departed, and came to Laish, and saw the people that were therein, how they dwelt careless, after the manner of the Zidonians, quiet and secure; and there was no magistrate in the land, that might put them to shame in any thing; and they were far from the Zidonians, and had no business with any man.	So the five men departed and came to Laish, where they saw that the people were living securely, like the Sidonians, tranquil and unsuspecting. There was nothing lacking in the land and no oppressive ruler. And they were far away from the Sidonians and had no alliance with anyone.
JDG	18	8	그들이 소라와 에스다올에 돌아와서 그 형제에게 이르매 형제들이 그들에게 묻되 너희 보기에 어떠하더뇨	And they came unto their brethren to Zorah and Eshtaol: and their brethren said unto them, What say ye?	When the men returned to Zorah and Eshtaol, their brothers asked them, “What did you find?”
JDG	18	9	가로대 일어나서 그들을 치러 올라가자 우리가 그 땅을 본즉 매우 좋더라 너희는 가만히 있느냐 나아가서 그 땅 얻기를 게을리 말라	And they said, Arise, that we may go up against them: for we have seen the land, and, behold, it is very good: and are ye still? be not slothful to go, and to enter to possess the land.	They answered, “Come on, let us go up against them, for we have seen the land, and it is very good. Why would you fail to act? Do not hesitate to go there and take possession of the land!
JDG	18	10	너희가 가면 평안한 백성을 만날 것이요 그 땅은 넓고 그 곳에는 세상에 있는 것이 하나도 부족함이 없느니라	When ye go, ye shall come unto a people secure, and to a large land: for God hath given it into your hands; a place where there is no want of any thing that is in the earth.	When you enter, you will come to an unsuspecting people and a spacious land, for God has delivered it into your hand. It is a place where nothing on earth is lacking.”
JDG	18	11	단 지파 가족 중 육백 명이 병기를 띠고 소라와 에스다올에서 출발하여	And there went from thence of the family of the Danites, out of Zorah and out of Eshtaol, six hundred men appointed with weapons of war.	So six hundred Danites departed from Zorah and Eshtaol, armed with weapons of war.
JDG	18	12	올라가서 유다 기럇여아림에 진 치니 이러므로 그곳 이름이 오늘까지 마하네단이며 그곳은 기럇여아림 뒤에 있더라	And they went up, and pitched in Kirjath–jearim, in Judah: wherefore they called that place Mahaneh–dan unto this day: behold, it is behind Kirjath–jearim.	They went up and camped at Kiriath-jearim in Judah. That is why the place west of Kiriath-jearim is called Mahaneh-dan to this day.
JDG	18	13	무리가 거기서 떠나서 에브라임 산지 미가의 집에 이르니라	And they passed thence unto mount Ephraim, and came unto the house of Micah.	And from there they traveled to the hill country of Ephraim and came to Micah’s house.
JDG	18	14	전에 라이스 땅을 탐지하러 갔던 다섯 사람이 그 형제들에게 말하여 가로되 이 집에 에봇과 드라빔과 새긴 신상과 부어만든 신상이 있는 줄을 너희가 아느냐 그런즉 이제 너희는 마땅히 행할 것을 생각하라 하고	Then answered the five men that went to spy out the country of Laish, and said unto their brethren, Do ye know that there is in these houses an ephod, and teraphim, and a graven image, and a molten image? now therefore consider what ye have to do.	Then the five men who had gone to spy out the land of Laish said to their brothers, “Did you know that one of these houses has an ephod, household gods, a graven image, and a molten idol? Now think about what you should do.”
JDG	18	15	다섯 사람이 그 편으로 향하여 소년 레위 사람의 집 곧 미가의 집에 이르러 문안하고	And they turned thitherward, and came to the house of the young man the Levite, even unto the house of Micah, and saluted him.	So they turned aside there and went to the home of the young Levite, the house of Micah, and greeted him.
JDG	18	16	단 자손 육백 명은 병기를 띠고 문 입구에 서니라	And the six hundred men appointed with their weapons of war, which were of the children of Dan, stood by the entering of the gate.	The six hundred Danites stood at the entrance of the gate, armed with their weapons of war.
JDG	18	17	땅을 탐지하러 갔던 다섯 사람이 그리로 들어가서 새긴 신상과 에봇과 드라빔과 부어 만든 신상을 취할 때에 제사장은 병기를 띤 육백 명과 함께 문 입구에 섰더니	And the five men that went to spy out the land went up, and came in thither, and took the graven image, and the ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image: and the priest stood in the entering of the gate with the six hundred men that were appointed with weapons of war.	And the five men who had gone to spy out the land went inside and took the graven image, the ephod, the household idols, and the molten idol, while the priest stood at the entrance of the gate with the six hundred armed men.
JDG	18	18	그 다섯 사람이 미가의 집에 들어가서 그 새긴 신상과 에봇과 드라빔과 부어 만든 신상을 취하여 내매 제사장이 그들에게 묻되 너희가 무엇을 하느냐	And these went into Micah’s house, and fetched the carved image, the ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image. Then said the priest unto them, What do ye?	When they entered Micah’s house and took the graven image, the ephod, the household idols, and the molten idol, the priest said to them, “What are you doing?”
JDG	18	19	그들이 그에게 이르되 잠잠하라 네 손을 입에 대라 우리와 함께 가서 우리의 아비와 제사장이 되라 네가 한 사람의 집의 제사장이 되는 것과 이스라엘 한 지파, 한 가족의 제사장이 되는 것이 어느 것이 낫겠느냐	And they said unto him, Hold thy peace, lay thine hand upon thy mouth, and go with us, and be to us a father and a priest: is it better for thee to be a priest unto the house of one man, or that thou be a priest unto a tribe and a family in Israel?	“Be quiet,” they told him. “Put your hand over your mouth and come with us and be a father and a priest to us. Is it better for you to be a priest for the house of one person or a priest for a tribe and family in Israel?”
JDG	18	20	제사장이 마음에 기뻐하여 에봇과 드라빔과 새긴 우상을 취하고 그 백성 중으로 들어가니라	And the priest’s heart was glad, and he took the ephod, and the teraphim, and the graven image, and went in the midst of the people.	So the priest was glad and took the ephod, the household idols, and the graven image, and went with the people.
JDG	18	21	그들이 돌이켜서 어린 아이들과 가축과 물품을 앞에 두고 진행하더니	So they turned and departed, and put the little ones and the cattle and the carriage before them.	Putting their small children, their livestock, and their possessions in front of them, they turned and departed.
JDG	18	22	미가의 집을 멀리 떠난 때에 미가의 이웃집 사람들이 모여서 단 자손을 따라 미쳐서는	And when they were a good way from the house of Micah, the men that were in the houses near to Micah’s house were gathered together, and overtook the children of Dan.	After they were some distance from Micah’s house, the men in the houses near Micah’s house mobilized and overtook the Danites.
JDG	18	23	단 자손을 부르는지라 그들이 낯을 돌이켜 미가에게 이르되 네가 무슨 일로 이같이 모아가지고 왔느냐	And they cried unto the children of Dan. And they turned their faces, and said unto Micah, What aileth thee, that thou comest with such a company?	When they called out after them, the Danites turned to face them and said to Micah, “What is the matter with you that you have called out such a company?”
JDG	18	24	미가가 가로되 나의 지은 신들과 제사장을 취하여 갔으니 내게 오히려 있는 것이 무엇이냐 너희가 어찌하여 나더러 무슨 일이냐 하느냐	And he said, Ye have taken away my gods which I made, and the priest, and ye are gone away: and what have I more? and what is this that ye say unto me, What aileth thee?	He replied, “You took the gods I had made, and my priest, and went away. What else do I have? How can you say to me, ‘What is the matter with you?’”
JDG	18	25	단 자손이 그에게 이르되 네 목소리를 우리에게 들리게 말라 노한 자들이 너희를 쳐서 네 생명과 네 가족의 생명을 잃게 할까 하노라 하고	And the children of Dan said unto him, Let not thy voice be heard among us, lest angry fellows run upon thee, and thou lose thy life, with the lives of thy household.	The Danites said to him, “Do not raise your voice against us, or angry men will attack you, and you and your family will lose your lives.”
JDG	18	26	단 자손이 자기 길을 행한지라 미가가 단 자손이 자기보다 강한 것을 보고 돌이켜 집으로 돌아갔더라	And the children of Dan went their way: and when Micah saw that they were too strong for him, he turned and went back unto his house.	So the Danites went on their way, and Micah turned to go back home, because he saw that they were too strong for him.
JDG	18	27	단 자손이 미가의 지은 것과 그 제사장을 취하고 라이스에 이르러 한가하고 평안한 백성을 만나 칼날로 그들을 치며 불로 그 성읍을 사르되	And they took the things which Micah had made, and the priest which he had, and came unto Laish, unto a people that were at quiet and secure: and they smote them with the edge of the sword, and burnt the city with fire.	After they had taken Micah’s idols and his priest, they went to Laish, to a tranquil and unsuspecting people, and they struck them with their swords and burned down the city.
JDG	18	28	그들을 구원할 자가 없었으니 그 성읍이 베드르흡 가까운 골짜기에 있어서 시돈과 상거가 멀고 상종하는 사람도 없음이었더라 단 자손이 성읍을 중건하고 거기 거하며	And there was no deliverer, because it was far from Zidon, and they had no business with any man; and it was in the valley that lieth by Beth–rehob. And they built a city, and dwelt therein.	There was no one to deliver them, because the city was far from Sidon and had no alliance with anyone; it was in a valley near Beth-rehob. And the Danites rebuilt the city and lived there.
JDG	18	29	이스라엘의 소생 그 조상 단의 이름을 따라 그 성읍을 단이라 하니라 그 성읍의 본 이름은 라이스더라	And they called the name of the city Dan, after the name of Dan their father, who was born unto Israel: howbeit the name of the city was Laish at the first.	They named it Dan, after their forefather Dan, who was born to Israel—though the city was formerly named Laish.
JDG	18	30	단 자손이 자기를 위하여 그 새긴 신상을 세웠고 모세의 손자 게르손의 아들 요나단과 그 자손은 단 지파의 제사장이 되어 이 백성이 사로 잡히는 날까지 이르렀더라	And the children of Dan set up the graven image: and Jonathan, the son of Gershom, the son of Manasseh, he and his sons were priests to the tribe of Dan until the day of the captivity of the land.	The Danites set up idols for themselves, and Jonathan son of Gershom, the son of Moses, and his sons were priests for the tribe of Dan until the day of the captivity of the land.
JDG	18	31	하나님의 집이 실로에 있을 동안에 미가의 지은바 새긴 신상이 단 자손에게 있었더라	And they set them up Micah’s graven image, which he made, all the time that the house of God was in Shiloh.	So they set up for themselves Micah’s graven image, and it was there the whole time the house of God was in Shiloh.
JDG	19	1	이스라엘에 왕이 없을 그 때에 에브라임 산지 구석에 우거하는 어떤 레위 사람이 유다 베들레헴에서 첩을 취하였더니	And it came to pass in those days, when there was no king in Israel, that there was a certain Levite sojourning on the side of mount Ephraim, who took to him a concubine out of Beth–lehem–judah.	Now in those days, when there was no king in Israel, a Levite who lived in the remote hill country of Ephraim took for himself a concubine from Bethlehem in Judah.
JDG	19	2	그 첩이 행음하고 남편을 떠나 유다 베들레헴 그 아비의 집에 돌아가서 거기서 넉달의 날을 보내매	And his concubine played the whore against him, and went away from him unto her father’s house to Beth–lehem–judah, and was there four whole months.	But she was unfaithful to him and left him to return to her father’s house in Bethlehem in Judah. After she had been there four months,
JDG	19	3	그 남편이 그 여자에게 다정히 말하고 그를 데려오고자 하여 하인 하나와 나귀 두 필을 데리고 그에게로 가매 여자가 그를 인도하여 아비의 집에 들어가니 그 여자의 아비가 그를 보고 환영하니라	And her husband arose, and went after her, to speak friendly unto her, and to bring her again, having his servant with him, and a couple of asses: and she brought him into her father’s house: and when the father of the damsel saw him, he rejoiced to meet him.	her husband got up and went after her to speak kindly to her and bring her back, taking his servant and a pair of donkeys. So the girl brought him into her father’s house, and when her father saw him, he gladly welcomed him.
JDG	19	4	그 첩장인 곧 여자의 아비가 그를 머물리매 그가 삼 일을 그와 함께 거하며 먹고 마시며 거기서 유숙하다가	And his father in law, the damsel’s father, retained him; and he abode with him three days: so they did eat and drink, and lodged there.	His father-in-law, the girl’s father, persuaded him to stay, so he remained with him three days, eating, drinking, and lodging there.
JDG	19	5	나흘 만에 일찍이 일어나 떠나고자 하매 여자의 아비가 그 사위에게 이르되 떡을 조금 먹어 그대의 기력을 도운 후에 그대의 길을 행하라	And it came to pass on the fourth day, when they arose early in the morning, that he rose up to depart: and the damsel’s father said unto his son in law, Comfort thine heart with a morsel of bread, and afterward go your way.	On the fourth day, they got up early in the morning and prepared to depart, but the girl’s father said to his son-in-law, “Refresh your heart with a morsel of bread, and then you can go.”
JDG	19	6	두 사람이 앉아서 함께 먹고 마시매 여자의 아비가 그 사람에게 이르되 청하노니 이 밤을 여기서 유숙하여 그대의 마음을 즐겁게 하라	And they sat down, and did eat and drink both of them together: for the damsel’s father had said unto the man, Be content, I pray thee, and tarry all night, and let thine heart be merry.	So they sat down and the two of them ate and drank together. Then the girl’s father said to the man, “Please agree to stay overnight and let your heart be merry.”
JDG	19	7	그 사람이 일어나서 가고자 하되 첩장인의 간청으로 다시 유숙하더니	And when the man rose up to depart, his father in law urged him: therefore he lodged there again.	The man got up to depart, but his father-in-law persuaded him, so he stayed there that night.
JDG	19	8	다섯째 날 아침에 일찍이 일어나 떠나고자 하매 여자의 아비가 이르되 청하노니 그대의 기력을 돕고 해가 기울도록 머물라 하므로 두 사람이 함께 먹고	And he arose early in the morning on the fifth day to depart: and the damsel’s father said, Comfort thine heart, I pray thee. And they tarried until afternoon, and they did eat both of them.	On the fifth day, he got up early in the morning to depart, but the girl’s father said, “Please refresh your heart.” So they waited until late afternoon and the two of them ate.
JDG	19	9	그 사람이 첩과 하인으로 더불어 일어나 떠나고자 하매 그 첩장인 곧 여자의 아비가 그에게 이르되 보라 이제 해가 저물어가니 청컨대 이 밤도 유숙하라 보라 해가 기울었느니라 그대는 여기서 유숙하여 그대의 마음을 즐겁게 하고 내일 일찍이 그대의 길을 행하여 그대의 집으로 돌아가라	And when the man rose up to depart, he, and his concubine, and his servant, his father in law, the damsel’s father, said unto him, Behold, now the day draweth toward evening, I pray you tarry all night: behold, the day groweth to an end, lodge here, that thine heart may be merry; and to morrow get you early on your way, that thou mayest go home.	When the man got up to depart with his concubine and his servant, his father-in-law, the girl’s father, said to him, “Look, the day is drawing to a close. Please spend the night. See, the day is almost over. Spend the night here, that your heart may be merry. Then you can get up early tomorrow for your journey home.”
JDG	19	10	그 사람이 다시 밤을 지내고자 아니하여 일어나 떠나서 여부스 맞은편에 이르렀으니 여부스는 곧 예루살렘이라 안장 지운 나귀 둘과 첩이 그와 함께 하였더라	But the man would not tarry that night, but he rose up and departed, and came over against Jebus, which is Jerusalem; and there were with him two asses saddled, his concubine also was with him.	But the man was unwilling to spend the night. He got up and departed, and arrived opposite Jebus (that is, Jerusalem), with his two saddled donkeys and his concubine.
JDG	19	11	그들이 여부스에 가까웠을 때에 해가 지려 하는지라 종이 주인에게 이르되 청컨대 우리가 돌이켜 여부스 사람의 이 성읍에 들어가서 유숙하사이다	And when they were by Jebus, the day was far spent; and the servant said unto his master, Come, I pray thee, and let us turn in into this city of the Jebusites, and lodge in it.	When they were near Jebus and the day was almost gone, the servant said to his master, “Please, let us stop at this Jebusite city and spend the night here.”
JDG	19	12	주인이 그에게 이르되 우리가 돌이켜 이스라엘 자손에게 속하지 아니한 외인의 성읍으로 들어갈 것이 아니니 기브아로 나아가리라 하고	And his master said unto him, We will not turn aside hither into the city of a stranger, that is not of the children of Israel; we will pass over to Gibeah.	But his master replied, “We will not turn aside to the city of foreigners, where there are no Israelites. We will go on to Gibeah.”
JDG	19	13	또 그 종에게 이르되 우리가 기브아나 라마 중 한 곳에 나아가 거기서 유숙하자 하고	And he said unto his servant, Come, and let us draw near to one of these places to lodge all night, in Gibeah, or in Ramah.	He continued, “Come, let us try to reach one of these towns to spend the night in Gibeah or Ramah.”
JDG	19	14	모두 앞으로 행하더니 베냐민에 속한 기브아에 가까이 이르러는 해가 진지라	And they passed on and went their way; and the sun went down upon them when they were by Gibeah, which belongeth to Benjamin.	So they continued on their journey, and the sun set as they neared Gibeah in Benjamin.
JDG	19	15	기브아에 가서 유숙하려고 그리로 돌이켜 들어가서 성읍 거리에 앉았으나 그를 집으로 영접하여 유숙케 하는 자가 없었더라	And they turned aside thither, to go in and to lodge in Gibeah: and when he went in, he sat him down in a street of the city: for there was no man that took them into his house to lodging.	They stopped to go in and lodge in Gibeah. The Levite went in and sat down in the city square, but no one would take them into his home for the night.
JDG	19	16	이미 저물매 한 노인이 밭에서 일하다가 돌아오니 그 사람은 본래 에브라임 산지 사람으로서 기브아에 우거하는 자요 그곳 사람들은 베냐민 사람이더라	And, behold, there came an old man from his work out of the field at even, which was also of mount Ephraim; and he sojourned in Gibeah: but the men of the place were Benjamites.	That evening an old man from the hill country of Ephraim, who was residing in Gibeah (the men of that place were Benjamites), came in from his work in the field.
JDG	19	17	노인이 눈을 들어 성읍 거리에 행객이 있는 것을 본지라 노인이 묻되 그대는 어디로 가며 어디서 왔느뇨	And when he had lifted up his eyes, he saw a wayfaring man in the street of the city: and the old man said, Whither goest thou? and whence comest thou?	When he looked up and saw the traveler in the city square, the old man asked, “Where are you going, and where have you come from?”
JDG	19	18	그가 그에게 이르되 우리는 유다 베들레헴에서 에브라임 산지 구석으로 가나이다 나는 그곳 사람으로서 유다 베들레헴에 갔다가 이제 여호와의 집으로 가는 중인데 나를 자기 집으로 영접하는 사람이 없나이다	And he said unto him, We are passing from Beth–lehem–judah toward the side of mount Ephraim; from thence am I: and I went to Beth–lehem–judah, but I am now going to the house of the Lord; and there is no man that receiveth me to house.	The Levite replied, “We are traveling from Bethlehem in Judah to the remote hill country of Ephraim, where I am from. I went to Bethlehem in Judah, and now I am going to the house of the LORD; but no one has taken me into his home,
JDG	19	19	우리에게는 나귀들에게 먹일 짚과 보리가 있고 나와 당신의 여종과 당신의 종 우리들과 함께한 소년의 먹을 양식과 포도주가 있어 무엇이든지 부족함이 없나이다	Yet there is both straw and provender for our asses; and there is bread and wine also for me, and for thy handmaid, and for the young man which is with thy servants: there is no want of any thing.	even though there is both straw and feed for our donkeys, and bread and wine for me and the maidservant and young man with me. There is nothing that we, your servants, lack.”
JDG	19	20	노인이 가로되 그대는 안심하라 그대의 모든 쓸 것은 나의 담책이니 거리에서는 자지 말라 하고	And the old man said, Peace be with thee; howsoever let all thy wants lie upon me; only lodge not in the street.	“Peace to you,” said the old man. “Let me supply everything you need. Only do not spend the night in the square.”
JDG	19	21	그를 데리고 자기 집에 들어가서 나귀에게 먹이니 그들이 발을 씻고 먹고 마시니라	So he brought him into his house, and gave provender unto the asses: and they washed their feet, and did eat and drink.	So he brought him to his house and fed his donkeys. And they washed their feet and ate and drank.
JDG	19	22	그들이 마음을 즐겁게 할 때에 그 성읍의 비류들이 그 집을 에워 싸고 문을 두들기며 집 주인 노인에게 말하여 가로되 네 집에 들어온 사람을 끌어내라 우리가 그를 상관하리라	Now as they were making their hearts merry, behold, the men of the city, certain sons of Belial, beset the house round about, and beat at the door, and spake to the master of the house, the old man, saying, Bring forth the man that came into thine house, that we may know him.	While they were enjoying themselves, suddenly the wicked men of the city surrounded the house. Pounding on the door, they said to the old man who owned the house, “Bring out the man who came to your house, so we can have relations with him!”
JDG	19	23	집 주인 그 사람이 그들에게로 나와서 이르되 아니라 내 형제들아 청하노니 악을 행치 말라 이 사람이 내 집에 들었으니 이런 망령된 일을 행치 말라	And the man, the master of the house, went out unto them, and said unto them, Nay, my brethren, nay, I pray you, do not so wickedly; seeing that this man is come into mine house, do not this folly.	The owner of the house went out and said to them, “No, my brothers, do not do this wicked thing! After all, this man is a guest in my house. Do not commit this outrage.
JDG	19	24	보라 여기 내 처녀 딸과 이 사람의 첩이 있은즉 내가 그들을 끌어 내리니 너희가 그들을 욕보이든지 어찌하든지 임의로 하되 오직 이 사람에게는 이런 망령된 일을 행치 말라 하나	Behold, here is my daughter a maiden, and his concubine; them I will bring out now, and humble ye them, and do with them what seemeth good unto you: but unto this man do not so vile a thing.	Look, let me bring out my virgin daughter and the man’s concubine, and you can use them and do with them as you wish. But do not do such a vile thing to this man.”
JDG	19	25	무리가 듣지 아니하므로 그 사람이 자기 첩을 무리에게로 붙들어내매 그들이 그에게 행음하여 밤새도록 욕보이다가 새벽 미명에 놓은지라	But the men would not hearken to him: so the man took his concubine, and brought her forth unto them; and they knew her, and abused her all the night until the morning: and when the day began to spring, they let her go.	But the men would not listen to him. So the Levite took his concubine and sent her outside to them, and they raped her and abused her throughout the night, and at dawn they let her go.
JDG	19	26	동틀 때에 여인이 그 주인의 우거한 그 사람의 집 문에 이르러 엎드러져 밝기까지 거기 누웠더라	Then came the woman in the dawning of the day, and fell down at the door of the man’s house where her lord was, till it was light.	Early that morning, the woman went back to the house where her master was staying, collapsed at the doorway, and lay there until it was light.
JDG	19	27	그의 주인이 일찍이 일어나 집 문을 열고 떠나고자 하더니 그 여인이 집 문에 엎드러지고 그 두 손이 문지방에 있는 것을 보고	And her lord rose up in the morning, and opened the doors of the house, and went out to go his way: and, behold, the woman his concubine was fallen down at the door of the house, and her hands were upon the threshold.	In the morning, when her master got up and opened the doors of the house to go out on his journey, there was his concubine, collapsed in the doorway of the house, with her hands on the threshold.
JDG	19	28	그에게 이르되 일어나라 우리가 떠나가자 하나 아무 대답이 없는지라 이에 그 시체를 나귀에 싣고 행하여 자기 곳에 돌아가서	And he said unto her, Up, and let us be going. But none answered. Then the man took her up upon an ass, and the man rose up, and gat him unto his place.	“Get up,” he told her. “Let us go.” But there was no response. So the man put her on his donkey and set out for home.
JDG	19	29	그 집에 이르러서는 칼을 취하여 첩의 시체를 붙들어 그 마디를 찍어 열두 덩이에 나누고 그것을 이스라엘 사방에 두루 보내매	And when he was come into his house, he took a knife, and laid hold on his concubine, and divided her, together with her bones, into twelve pieces, and sent her into all the coasts of Israel.	When he reached his house, he picked up a knife, took hold of his concubine, cut her limb by limb into twelve pieces, and sent her throughout the territory of Israel.
JDG	19	30	그것을 보는 자가 다 가로되 이스라엘 자손이 애굽 땅에서 나온 날부터 오늘날까지 이런 일은 행치도 아니하였고 보지도 못하였도다 생각하고 상의한 후에 말하자 하니라	And it was so, that all that saw it said, There was no such deed done nor seen from the day that the children of Israel came up out of the land of Egypt unto this day: consider of it, take advice, and speak your minds.	And everyone who saw it said, “Nothing like this has been seen or done from the day the Israelites came out of the land of Egypt until this day. Think it over, take counsel, and speak up!”
JDG	20	1	이에 모든 이스라엘 자손이 단에서부터 브엘세바까지와 길르앗 땅에서 나왔는데 그 회중이 일제히 미스바에서 여호와 앞에 모였으니	Then all the children of Israel went out, and the congregation was gathered together as one man, from Dan even to Beer–sheba, with the land of Gilead, unto the Lord in Mizpeh.	Then all the Israelites from Dan to Beersheba and from the land of Gilead came out, and the congregation assembled as one man before the LORD at Mizpah.
JDG	20	2	온 백성의 어른 곧 이스라엘 모든 지파의 어른들은 하나님 백성의 총회에 섰고 칼을 빼는 보병은 사십만이었으며	And the chief of all the people, even of all the tribes of Israel, presented themselves in the assembly of the people of God, four hundred thousand footmen that drew sword.	The leaders of all the people and all the tribes of Israel presented themselves in the assembly of God’s people: 400,000 men on foot, armed with swords.
JDG	20	3	이스라엘 자손의 미스바에 올라간 것을 베냐민 자손이 들었더라 이스라엘 자손이 가로되 이 악한 일의 정형을 우리에게 고하라	(Now the children of Benjamin heard that the children of Israel were gone up to Mizpeh.) Then said the children of Israel, Tell us, how was this wickedness?	(Meanwhile the Benjamites heard that the Israelites had gone up to Mizpah.) And the Israelites asked, “Tell us, how did this wicked thing happen?”
JDG	20	4	레위 사람 곧 죽임을 당한 여인의 남편이 대답하여 가로되 내가 내 첩으로 더불어 베냐민에 속한 기브아에 유숙하러 갔더니	And the Levite, the husband of the woman that was slain, answered and said, I came into Gibeah that belongeth to Benjamin, I and my concubine, to lodge.	So the Levite, the husband of the murdered woman, answered: “I and my concubine came to Gibeah in Benjamin to spend the night.
JDG	20	5	기브아 사람들이 나를 치러 일어나서 밤에 나의 우거한 집을 에워싸고 나를 죽이려 하고 내 첩을 욕보여서 그로 죽게 한지라	And the men of Gibeah rose against me, and beset the house round about upon me by night, and thought to have slain me: and my concubine have they forced, that she is dead.	And during the night, the men of Gibeah rose up against me and surrounded the house. They intended to kill me, but they abused my concubine, and she died.
JDG	20	6	내가 내 첩의 시체를 취하여 쪼개어 이스라엘 기업의 온 땅에 보내었노니 이는 그들이 이스라엘 중에서 음행과 망령된 일을 행하였음을 인함이로라	And I took my concubine, and cut her in pieces, and sent her throughout all the country of the inheritance of Israel: for they have committed lewdness and folly in Israel.	Then I took my concubine, cut her into pieces, and sent her throughout the land of Israel’s inheritance, because they had committed a lewd and disgraceful act in Israel.
JDG	20	7	이스라엘 자손들아 너희가 다 여기 있은즉 너희의 의견과 방책을 낼지니라	Behold, ye are all children of Israel; give here your advice and counsel.	Behold, all you Israelites, give your advice and verdict here and now.”
JDG	20	8	모든 백성이 일제히 일어나며 가로되 우리가 하나라도 자기 장막으로 돌아가지 아니하며 하나라도 자기 집으로 들어가지 아니하고	And all the people arose as one man, saying, We will not any of us go to his tent, neither will we any of us turn into his house.	Then all the people stood as one man and said, “Not one of us will return to his tent or to his house.
JDG	20	9	우리가 기브아 사람에게 이렇게 행하리니 곧 제비 뽑아서 그들을 치되	But now this shall be the thing which we will do to Gibeah; we will go up by lot against it;	Now this is what we will do to Gibeah: We will go against it as the lot dictates.
JDG	20	10	우리가 이스라엘 모든 지파 중에서 백에 열, 천에 백, 만에 천을 취하고 그 백성을 위하여 양식을 예비하고 그들로 베냐민의 기브아에 가서 그 무리의 이스라엘 중에서 망령된 일을 행한 대로 징계하게 하리라 하니라	And we will take ten men of an hundred throughout all the tribes of Israel, and an hundred of a thousand, and a thousand out of ten thousand, to fetch victual for the people, that they may do, when they come to Gibeah of Benjamin, according to all the folly that they have wrought in Israel.	We will take ten men out of every hundred from all the tribes of Israel, and a hundred out of every thousand, and a thousand out of every ten thousand, to supply provisions for the army when they go to Gibeah in Benjamin to punish them for the atrocity they have committed in Israel.”
JDG	20	11	이와 같이 이스라엘 모든 사람이 하나 같이 합심하여 그 성읍을 치려고 모였더라	So all the men of Israel were gathered against the city, knit together as one man.	So all the men of Israel gathered as one man, united against the city.
JDG	20	12	이스라엘 지파들이 베냐민 온 지파에 사람들을 보내어 두루 행하며 이르기를 너희 중에서 생긴 이 악이 어찜이뇨	And the tribes of Israel sent men through all the tribe of Benjamin, saying, What wickedness is this that is done among you?	And the tribes of Israel sent men throughout the tribe of Benjamin, saying, “What is this wickedness that has occurred among you?
JDG	20	13	그런즉 이제 기브아 사람 곧 그 비류를 우리에게 붙여서 우리로 죽여 이스라엘 중에 악을 제하여 버리게 하라 하나 베냐민 자손이 그 형제 이스라엘 자손의 말을 듣지 아니하고	Now therefore deliver us the men, the children of Belial, which are in Gibeah, that we may put them to death, and put away evil from Israel. But the children of Benjamin would not hearken to the voice of their brethren the children of Israel:	Hand over the wicked men of Gibeah so we can put them to death and purge Israel of this evil.” But the Benjamites refused to heed the voice of their fellow Israelites.
JDG	20	14	도리어 각 성읍에서 기브아에 모이고 나가서 이스라엘 자손과 싸우고자 하니	But the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together out of the cities unto Gibeah, to go out to battle against the children of Israel.	And from their cities they came together at Gibeah to go out and fight against the Israelites.
JDG	20	15	그 때에 성읍들에서 나온 베냐민 자손의 수는 칼을 빼는 자가 모두 이만 육천이요 그 외에 기브아 거민 중 택한 자가 칠백인데	And the children of Benjamin were numbered at that time out of the cities twenty and six thousand men that drew sword, beside the inhabitants of Gibeah, which were numbered seven hundred chosen men.	On that day the Benjamites mobilized 26,000 swordsmen from their cities, in addition to the 700 select men of Gibeah.
JDG	20	16	이 모든 백성 중에서 택한 칠백 명은 다 왼손잡이라 물매로 돌을 던지면 호리도 틀림이 없는 자더라	Among all this people there were seven hundred chosen men lefthanded; every one could sling stones at an hair breadth, and not miss.	Among all these soldiers there were 700 select left-handers, each of whom could sling a stone at a hair without missing.
JDG	20	17	베냐민 자손 외에 이스라엘 사람의 칼을 빼는 자의 수는 사십만 명이니 다 전사라	And the men of Israel, beside Benjamin, were numbered four hundred thousand men that drew sword: all these were men of war.	The Israelites, apart from Benjamin, mobilized 400,000 swordsmen, each one an experienced warrior.
JDG	20	18	이스라엘 자손이 일어나 벧엘에 올라가서 하나님께 묻자와 가로되 우리 중에 누가 먼저 올라가서 베냐민 자손과 싸우리이까 여호와께서 가라사대 유다가 먼저 일지니라	And the children of Israel arose, and went up to the house of God, and asked counsel of God, and said, Which of us shall go up first to the battle against the children of Benjamin? And the Lord said, Judah shall go up first.	The Israelites set out, went up to Bethel, and inquired of God, “Who of us shall go up first to fight against the Benjamites?” “Judah will be first,” the LORD replied.
JDG	20	19	이스라엘 자손이 아침에 일어나 기브아를 대하여 진을 치니라	And the children of Israel rose up in the morning, and encamped against Gibeah.	The next morning the Israelites set out and camped near Gibeah.
JDG	20	20	이스라엘 사람들이 나가서 항오를 벌이고 거기서 그들과 싸우고자 하매	And the men of Israel went out to battle against Benjamin; and the men of Israel put themselves in array to fight against them at Gibeah.	And the men of Israel went out to fight against Benjamin and took up their battle positions at Gibeah.
JDG	20	21	베냐민 자손이 기브아에서 나와서 당일에 이스라엘 사람 이만 이천을 땅에 엎드러뜨렸으나	And the children of Benjamin came forth out of Gibeah, and destroyed down to the ground of the Israelites that day twenty and two thousand men.	And the Benjamites came out of Gibeah and cut down 22,000 Israelites on the battlefield that day.
JDG	20	22	이스라엘 사람들이 스스로 용기를 내어 첫날 항오를 벌였던 곳에 다시 항오를 벌이니라	And the people the men of Israel encouraged themselves, and set their battle again in array in the place where they put themselves in array the first day.	But the Israelite army took courage and again took their battle positions in the same place where they had arrayed themselves on the first day.
JDG	20	23	이스라엘 자손이 올라가서 여호와 앞에서 저물도록 울며 여호와께 묻자와 가로되 내가 다시 나아가서 나의 형제 베냐민 자손과 싸우리이까 여호와께서 가라사대 올라가서 치라 하시니라	(And the children of Israel went up and wept before the Lord until even, and asked counsel of the Lord, saying, Shall I go up again to battle against the children of Benjamin my brother? And the Lord said, Go up against him.)	They went up and wept before the LORD until evening, inquiring of Him, “Should we again draw near for battle against our brothers the Benjamites?” And the LORD answered, “Go up against them.”
JDG	20	24	그 이튿날에 이스라엘 자손이 베냐민 자손을 치러 나아가매	And the children of Israel came near against the children of Benjamin the second day.	On the second day the Israelites advanced against the Benjamites.
JDG	20	25	베냐민도 그 이튿날에 기브아에서 그들을 치러 나와서 다시 이스라엘 자손 일만 팔천을 땅에 엎드러뜨렸으니 다 칼을 빼는 자였더라	And Benjamin went forth against them out of Gibeah the second day, and destroyed down to the ground of the children of Israel again eighteen thousand men; all these drew the sword.	That same day the Benjamites came out against them from Gibeah and cut down another 18,000 Israelites, all of them armed with swords.
JDG	20	26	이에 온 이스라엘 자손 모든 백성이 올라가서 벧엘에 이르러 울며 거기서 여호와 앞에 앉고 그 날이 저물도록 금식하고 번제와 화목제를 여호와 앞에 드리고	Then all the children of Israel, and all the people, went up, and came unto the house of God, and wept, and sat there before the Lord, and fasted that day until even, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before the Lord.	Then the Israelites, all the people, went up to Bethel, where they sat weeping before the LORD. That day they fasted until evening and presented burnt offerings and peace offerings to the LORD.
JDG	20	27	여호와께 물으니라 (그 때에는 하나님의 언약궤가 거기 있고	And the children of Israel enquired of the Lord, (for the ark of the covenant of God was there in those days,	And the Israelites inquired of the LORD. (In those days the ark of the covenant of God was there,
JDG	20	28	아론의 손자 엘르아살의 아들 비느하스가 그 앞에 모셨더라) 이스라엘 자손이 묻자오되 내가 다시 나가 나의 형제 베냐민 자손과 싸우리이까 말리이까 여호와께서 가라사대 올라가라 내일은 내가 그를 네 손에 붙이리라	And Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, stood before it in those days,) saying, Shall I yet again go out to battle against the children of Benjamin my brother, or shall I cease? And the Lord said, Go up; for to morrow I will deliver them into thine hand.	and Phinehas son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, served before it.) The Israelites asked, “Should we again go out to battle against our brothers the Benjamites, or should we stop?” The LORD answered, “Fight, for tomorrow I will deliver them into your hand.”
JDG	20	29	이스라엘이 기브아 사면에 군사를 매복하니라	And Israel set liers in wait round about Gibeah.	So Israel set up an ambush around Gibeah.
JDG	20	30	이스라엘 자손이 제삼일에 베냐민 자손에게로 치러 올라가서 전과 같이 기브아를 대하여 항오를 벌이매	And the children of Israel went up against the children of Benjamin on the third day, and put themselves in array against Gibeah, as at other times.	On the third day the Israelites went up against the Benjamites and arrayed themselves against Gibeah as they had done before.
JDG	20	31	베냐민 자손이 나와서 백성을 맞더니 꾀임에 빠져 성읍을 떠났더라 그들이 큰 길 곧 한편은 벧엘로 올라가는 길이요 한편은 기브아의 들로 가는 길에서 백성을 쳐서 전과 같이 이스라엘 사람 삼십 명 가량을 죽이기 시작하며	And the children of Benjamin went out against the people, and were drawn away from the city; and they began to smite of the people, and kill, as at other times, in the highways, of which one goeth up to the house of God, and the other to Gibeah in the field, about thirty men of Israel.	The Benjamites came out against them and were drawn away from the city. They began to attack the people as before, killing about thirty men of Israel in the fields and on the roads, one of which led up to Bethel and the other to Gibeah.
JDG	20	32	스스로 이르기를 이들이 처음과 같이 우리 앞에서 패한다 하나 이스라엘 자손은 이르기를 우리가 도망하여 그들을 성읍에서 큰 길로 꾀어내자 하고	And the children of Benjamin said, They are smitten down before us, as at the first. But the children of Israel said, Let us flee, and draw them from the city unto the highways.	“We are defeating them as before,” said the Benjamites. But the Israelites said, “Let us retreat and draw them away from the city onto the roads.”
JDG	20	33	이스라엘 사람이 모두 그 처소에서 일어나서 바알다말에 항오를 별였고 그 복병은 그 처소 곧 기브아 초장에서 쏟아져 나왔더라	And all the men of Israel rose up out of their place, and put themselves in array at Baal–tamar: and the liers in wait of Israel came forth out of their places, even out of the meadows of Gibeah.	So all the men of Israel got up from their places and arrayed themselves at Baal-tamar, and the Israelites in ambush charged from their positions west of Gibeah.
JDG	20	34	온 이스라엘 사람 중에서 택한 사람 일만이 기브아에 이르러 치매 싸움이 심히 맹렬하나 베냐민 사람은 화가 자기에게 미친줄을 알지 못하였더라	And there came against Gibeah ten thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and the battle was sore: but they knew not that evil was near them.	Then 10,000 select men from all Israel made a frontal assault against Gibeah, and the battle was fierce. But the Benjamites did not realize that disaster was upon them.
JDG	20	35	여호와께서 이스라엘 앞에서 베냐민을 쳐서 파하게 하시매 당일에 이스라엘 자손이 베냐민 사람 이만 오천일백을 죽였으니 다 칼을 빼는 자이었더라	And the Lord smote Benjamin before Israel: and the children of Israel destroyed of the Benjamites that day twenty and five thousand and an hundred men: all these drew the sword.	The LORD defeated Benjamin in the presence of Israel, and on that day the Israelites slaughtered 25,100 Benjamites, all armed with swords.
JDG	20	36	이에 베냐민 자손이 자기가 패한 것을 깨달았으니 이는 이스라엘 사람이 기브아에 매복한 군사를 믿고 잠간 베냐민 사람 앞을 피하매	So the children of Benjamin saw that they were smitten: for the men of Israel gave place to the Benjamites, because they trusted unto the liers in wait which they had set beside Gibeah.	Then the Benjamites realized they had been defeated. Now the men of Israel had retreated before Benjamin because they were relying on the ambush they had set against Gibeah.
JDG	20	37	복병이 급히 나와 기브아에 돌입하고 나아가며 칼날로 온 성읍을 쳤음이더라	And the liers in wait hasted, and rushed upon Gibeah; and the liers in wait drew themselves along, and smote all the city with the edge of the sword.	The men in ambush rushed suddenly against Gibeah; they advanced and put the whole city to the sword.
JDG	20	38	처음에 이스라엘 사람과 복병 사이에 상약하기를 성읍에서 큰 연기가 치미는 것으로 군호를 삼자 하고	Now there was an appointed sign between the men of Israel and the liers in wait, that they should make a great flame with smoke rise up out of the city.	The men of Israel had arranged a signal with the men in ambush: When they sent up a great cloud of smoke from the city,
JDG	20	39	이스라엘 사람은 싸우다가 물러가고 베냐민 사람은 이스라엘 사람 삼십 명 가량을 쳐 죽이기를 시작하며 이르기를 이들이 정녕 처음 싸움 같이 우리에게 패한다 하다가	And when the men of Israel retired in the battle, Benjamin began to smite and kill of the men of Israel about thirty persons: for they said, Surely they are smitten down before us, as in the first battle.	the men of Israel would turn in the battle. When the Benjamites had begun to strike them down, killing about thirty men of Israel, they said, “They are defeated before us as in the first battle.”
JDG	20	40	연기 구름이 기둥 같이 성읍 가운데서 일어날 때에 베냐민 사람이 돌아보매 온 성읍에 연기가 하늘에 닿았고	But when the flame began to arise up out of the city with a pillar of smoke, the Benjamites looked behind them, and, behold, the flame of the city ascended up to heaven.	But when the column of smoke began to go up from the city, the Benjamites looked behind them and saw the whole city going up in smoke.
JDG	20	41	이스라엘 사람은 돌이키는지라 베냐민 사람이 화가 자기에게 미친 것을 보고 심히 놀라	And when the men of Israel turned again, the men of Benjamin were amazed: for they saw that evil was come upon them.	Then the men of Israel turned back on them, and the men of Benjamin were terrified when they realized that disaster had come upon them.
JDG	20	42	이스라엘 사람 앞에서 몸을 돌이켜 광야 길로 향하였으나 군사가 급히 추격하며 각 성읍에서 나온 자를 그 가운데서 진멸하니라	Therefore they turned their backs before the men of Israel unto the way of the wilderness; but the battle overtook them; and them which came out of the cities they destroyed in the midst of them.	So they fled before the men of Israel toward the wilderness, but the battle overtook them, and the men coming out of the cities struck them down there.
JDG	20	43	그들이 베냐민 사람을 에워쌌더니 기브아 앞 동편까지 쫓으며 그 쉬는 곳에서 짓밟으매	Thus they inclosed the Benjamites round about, and chased them, and trode them down with ease over against Gibeah toward the sunrising.	They surrounded the Benjamites, pursued them, and easily overtook them in the vicinity of Gibeah on the east.
JDG	20	44	베냐민 중에서 엎드러진 자가 일만 팔천이니 다 용사더라	And there fell of Benjamin eighteen thousand men; all these were men of valour.	And 18,000 Benjamites fell, all men of valor.
JDG	20	45	그들이 몸을 돌이켜 광야로 도망하여 림몬 바위에 이르는 큰 길에서 이스라엘이 또 오천 명을 이삭 줍듯 하고 또 급히 따라 기돔에 이르러 또 이천 명을 죽였으니	And they turned and fled toward the wilderness unto the rock of Rimmon: and they gleaned of them in the highways five thousand men; and pursued hard after them unto Gidom, and slew two thousand men of them.	Then the Benjamites turned and fled toward the wilderness to the rock of Rimmon, and Israel cut down 5,000 men on the roads. And they overtook them at Gidom and struck down 2,000 more.
JDG	20	46	이 날에 베냐민의 칼을 빼는 자의 엎드러진 것이 모두 이만 오천이니 다 용사더라	So that all which fell that day of Benjamin were twenty and five thousand men that drew the sword; all these were men of valour.	That day 25,000 Benjamite swordsmen fell, all men of valor.
JDG	20	47	베냐민 육백 명이 돌이켜 광야로 도망하여 림몬 바위에 이르러 거기서 넉 달을 지내었더라	But six hundred men turned and fled to the wilderness unto the rock Rimmon, and abode in the rock Rimmon four months.	But 600 men turned and fled into the wilderness to the rock of Rimmon, where they stayed four months.
JDG	20	48	이스라엘 사람이 베냐민 자손에게로 돌아와서 온 성읍과 가축과 만나는 자를 다 칼날로 치고 닥치는 성읍마다 다 불살랐더라	And the men of Israel turned again upon the children of Benjamin, and smote them with the edge of the sword, as well the men of every city, as the beast, and all that came to hand: also they set on fire all the cities that they came to.	And the men of Israel turned back against the other Benjamites and put to the sword all the cities, including the animals and everything else they found. And they burned down all the cities in their path.
JDG	21	1	이스라엘 사람들이 미스바에서 맹세하여 이르기를 우리 중에 누구든지 딸을 베냐민 사람에게 아내로 주지 아니하리라 하였더라	Now the men of Israel had sworn in Mizpeh, saying, There shall not any of us give his daughter unto Benjamin to wife.	Now the men of Israel had sworn an oath at Mizpah, saying, “Not one of us will give his daughter in marriage to a Benjamite.”
JDG	21	2	백성이 벧엘에 이르러 거기서 저녁까지 하나님 앞에 앉아서 대성 통곡하여	And the people came to the house of God, and abode there till even before God, and lifted up their voices, and wept sore;	So the people came to Bethel and sat there before God until evening, lifting up their voices and weeping bitterly.
JDG	21	3	가로되 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와여 오늘날 이스라엘 중에 어찌하여 한 지파가 이즈러졌나이까 하더니	And said, O Lord God of Israel, why is this come to pass in Israel, that there should be to day one tribe lacking in Israel?	“Why, O LORD God of Israel,” they cried out, “has this happened in Israel? Today in Israel one tribe is missing!”
JDG	21	4	이튿날에 백성이 일찍이 일어나서 거기 한 단을 쌓고 번제와 화목제를 드렸더라	And it came to pass on the morrow, that the people rose early, and built there an altar, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings.	The next day the people got up early, built an altar there, and presented burnt offerings and peace offerings.
JDG	21	5	이스라엘 자손이 가로되 이스라엘 온 지파 중에 총회와 함께 하여 여호와 앞에 올라오지 아니한 자가 누구뇨 하니 이는 그들이 크게 맹세하기를 미스바에 와서 여호와 앞에 이르지 아니하는 자는 반드시 죽일 것이라 하였음이라	And the children of Israel said, Who is there among all the tribes of Israel that came not up with the congregation unto the Lord? For they had made a great oath concerning him that came not up to the Lord to Mizpeh, saying, He shall surely be put to death.	The Israelites asked, “Who among all the tribes of Israel did not come to the assembly before the LORD?” For they had taken a solemn oath that anyone who failed to come up before the LORD at Mizpah would surely be put to death.
JDG	21	6	이스라엘 자손이 그 형제 베냐민을 위하여 뉘우쳐 가로되 오늘날 이스라엘 중에 한 지파가 끊쳤도다	And the children of Israel repented them for Benjamin their brother, and said, There is one tribe cut off from Israel this day.	And the Israelites grieved for their brothers, the Benjamites, and said, “Today a tribe is cut off from Israel.
JDG	21	7	그 남은 자들에게 우리가 어떻게 하면 아내를 얻게 하리요 우리가 전에 여호와로 맹세하여 우리 딸을 그들의 아내로 주지 아니하리라 하였도다	How shall we do for wives for them that remain, seeing we have sworn by the Lord that we will not give them of our daughters to wives?	What should we do about wives for the survivors, since we have sworn by the LORD not to give them our daughters in marriage?”
JDG	21	8	또 가로되 이스라엘 지파 중 미스바에 올라와서 여호와께 이르지 아니한 자가 누구뇨 하고 본즉 야베스 길르앗에서는 한 사람도 진에 이르러 총회에 참여치 아니하였으니	And they said, What one is there of the tribes of Israel that came not up to Mizpeh to the Lord? And, behold, there came none to the camp from Jabesh–gilead to the assembly.	So they asked, “Which one of the tribes of Israel failed to come up before the LORD at Mizpah?” And, in fact, no one from Jabesh-gilead had come to the camp for the assembly.
JDG	21	9	백성을 계수할 때에 야베스 길르앗 거민이 하나도 거기 없음을 보았음이라	For the people were numbered, and, behold, there were none of the inhabitants of Jabesh–gilead there.	For when the people were counted, none of the residents of Jabesh-gilead were there.
JDG	21	10	회중이 큰 용사 일만 이천을 그리로 보내며 그들에게 명하여 가로되 가서 야베스 길르앗 거민과 및 부녀와 어린 아이를 칼날로 치라	And the congregation sent thither twelve thousand men of the valiantest, and commanded them, saying, Go and smite the inhabitants of Jabesh–gilead with the edge of the sword, with the women and the children.	So the congregation sent 12,000 of their most valiant men and commanded them: “Go and put to the sword those living in Jabesh-gilead, including women and children.
JDG	21	11	너희의 행할 일은 모든 남자와 남자와 잔 여자를 진멸할 것이니라 하였더니	And this is the thing that ye shall do, Ye shall utterly destroy every male, and every woman that hath lain by man.	This is what you are to do: Devote to destruction every male, as well as every female who has had relations with a man.”
JDG	21	12	그들이 야베스 길르앗 거민 중에서 젊은 처녀 사백 인을 얻었으니 이는 아직 남자와 자지 아니하여서 남자를 알지 못하는 자라 그들이 실로 진으로 끌어 오니라 이는 가나안 땅이더라	And they found among the inhabitants of Jabesh–gilead four hundred young virgins, that had known no man by lying with any male: and they brought them unto the camp to Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan.	So they found among the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead four hundred young women who had not had relations with a man, and they brought them to the camp at Shiloh in the land of Canaan.
JDG	21	13	온 회중이 림몬 바위에 있는 베냐민 자손에게 보내어 평화를 공포하게 하였더니	And the whole congregation sent some to speak to the children of Benjamin that were in the rock Rimmon, and to call peaceably unto them.	Then the whole congregation sent a message of peace to the Benjamites who were at the rock of Rimmon.
JDG	21	14	그 때에 베냐민이 돌아온지라 이에 이스라엘 사람이 야베스 길르앗 여인 중에서 살려둔 여자를 그들에게 주었으나 오히려 부족하므로	And Benjamin came again at that time; and they gave them wives which they had saved alive of the women of Jabesh–gilead: and yet so they sufficed them not.	And at that time the Benjamites returned and were given the women who were spared from Jabesh-gilead. But there were not enough women for all of them.
JDG	21	15	백성들이 베냐민을 위하여 뉘우쳤으니 이는 여호와께서 이스라엘 지파들 중에 한 지파가 궐이 나게 하셨음이더라	And the people repented them for Benjamin, because that the Lord had made a breach in the tribes of Israel.	The people grieved for Benjamin, because the LORD had made a void in the tribes of Israel.
JDG	21	16	회중 장로들이 가로되 베냐민의 여인이 다 멸절되었으니 이제 그 남은 자들에게 어떻게 하여야 아내를 얻게 할꼬	Then the elders of the congregation said, How shall we do for wives for them that remain, seeing the women are destroyed out of Benjamin?	Then the elders of the congregation said, “What should we do about wives for those who remain, since the women of Benjamin have been destroyed?”
JDG	21	17	또 가로되 베냐민의 도망하여 면한 자에게 마땅히 기업이 있어야 하리니 그리하면 이스라엘 중에 한 지파가 사라짐이 없으리라	And they said, There must be an inheritance for them that be escaped of Benjamin, that a tribe be not destroyed out of Israel.	They added, “There must be heirs for the survivors of Benjamin, so that a tribe of Israel will not be wiped out.
JDG	21	18	그러나 우리가 우리의 딸을 그들의 아내로 주지 못하리니 이는 이스라엘 자손이 맹세하여 이르기를 딸을 베냐민에게 아내로 주는 자는 저주를 받으리라 하였음이로다	Howbeit we may not give them wives of our daughters: for the children of Israel have sworn, saying, Cursed be he that giveth a wife to Benjamin.	But we cannot give them our daughters as wives.” For the Israelites had sworn, “Cursed is he who gives a wife to a Benjamite.”
JDG	21	19	또 가로되 보라 벧엘 북편, 르보나 남편 벧엘에서 세겜으로 올라가는 큰 길 동편 실로에 매년 여호와의 절기가 있도다 하고	Then they said, Behold, there is a feast of the Lord in Shiloh yearly in a place which is on the north side of Beth–el, on the east side of the highway that goeth up from Beth–el to Shechem, and on the south of Lebonah.	“But look,” they said, “there is a yearly feast to the LORD in Shiloh, which is north of Bethel east of the road that goes up from Bethel to Shechem, and south of Lebonah.”
JDG	21	20	베냐민 자손에게 명하여 가로되 가서 포도원에 숨어	Therefore they commanded the children of Benjamin, saying, Go and lie in wait in the vineyards;	So they commanded the Benjamites: “Go, hide in the vineyards
JDG	21	21	보다가 실로의 여자들이 무도하러 나오거든 너희는 포도원에서 나와서 실로의 딸 중에서 각각 그 아내로 붙들어 가지고 베냐민 땅으로 돌아가라	And see, and, behold, if the daughters of Shiloh come out to dance in dances, then come ye out of the vineyards, and catch you every man his wife of the daughters of Shiloh, and go to the land of Benjamin.	and watch. When you see the daughters of Shiloh come out to perform their dances, each of you is to come out of the vineyards, catch for himself a wife from the daughters of Shiloh, and go to the land of Benjamin.
JDG	21	22	만일 그 아비나 형제가 와서 우리에게 쟁론하면 우리가 그에게 말하기를 청컨대 너희는 우리에게 은혜를 베풀어 그들을 우리에게 줄지니라 이는 우리가 전쟁할 때에 각 사람을 위하여 그 아내를 얻어 주지 못하였고 너희가 자의로 그들에게 준것이 아니니 너희에게 죄가 없을 것임이니라 하겠노라 하매	And it shall be, when their fathers or their brethren come unto us to complain, that we will say unto them, Be favourable unto them for our sakes: because we reserved not to each man his wife in the war: for ye did not give unto them at this time, that ye should be guilty.	When their fathers or brothers come to us to complain, we will tell them, ‘Do us a favor by helping them, since we did not get wives for each of them in the war. Since you did not actually give them your daughters, you have no guilt.’”
JDG	21	23	베냐민 자손이 그같이 행하여 춤추는 여자 중에서 자기들의 수효대로 아내로 붙들어 가지고 자기 기업에 돌아가서 성읍들을 중건하고 거기 거하니라	And the children of Benjamin did so, and took them wives, according to their number, of them that danced, whom they caught: and they went and returned unto their inheritance, and repaired the cities, and dwelt in them.	The Benjamites did as instructed and carried away the number of women they needed from the dancers they caught. They went back to their own inheritance, rebuilt their cities, and settled in them.
JDG	21	24	그 때에 이스라엘 자손이 그곳을 떠나 각각 그 지파, 그 가족에게로 돌아가되 곧 각각 그곳에서 나와서 자기 기업으로 돌아갔더라	And the children of Israel departed thence at that time, every man to his tribe and to his family, and they went out from thence every man to his inheritance.	And at that time, each of the Israelites returned from there to his own tribe and clan, each to his own inheritance.
JDG	21	25	그 때에 이스라엘에 왕이 없으므로 사람이 각각 그 소견에 옳은 대로 행하였더라	In those days there was no king in Israel: every man did that which was right in his own eyes.	In those days there was no king in Israel; everyone did what was right in his own eyes.
RUT	1	1	사사들의 치리하던 때에 그 땅에 흉년이 드니라 유다 베들레헴에 한 사람이 그 아내와 두 아들을 데리고 모압 지방에 가서 우거하였는데	Now it came to pass in the days when the judges ruled, that there was a famine in the land. And a certain man of Beth–lehem–judah went to sojourn in the country of Moab, he, and his wife, and his two sons.	In the days when the judges ruled, there was a famine in the land. And a certain man from Bethlehem in Judah, with his wife and two sons, went to reside in the land of Moab.
RUT	1	2	그 사람의 이름은 엘리멜렉이요 그 아내의 이름은 나오미요 그 두 아들의 이름은 말론과 기룐이니 유다 베들레헴 에브랏 사람들이더라 그들이 모압 지방에 들어가서 거기 유하더니	And the name of the man was Elimelech, and the name of his wife Naomi, and the name of his two sons Mahlon and Chilion, Ephrathites of Beth–lehem–judah. And they came into the country of Moab, and continued there.	The man’s name was Elimelech, his wife’s name was Naomi, and the names of his two sons were Mahlon and Chilion. They were Ephrathites from Bethlehem in Judah, and they entered the land of Moab and settled there.
RUT	1	3	나오미의 남편 엘리멜렉이 죽고 나오미와 그 두 아들이 남았으며	And Elimelech Naomi’s husband died; and she was left, and her two sons.	Then Naomi’s husband Elimelech died, and she was left with her two sons,
RUT	1	4	그들은 모압 여자 중에서 아내를 취하였는데 하나의 이름은 오르바요 하나의 이름은 룻이더라 거기 거한지 십 년 즈음에	And they took them wives of the women of Moab; the name of the one was Orpah, and the name of the other Ruth: and they dwelled there about ten years.	who took Moabite women as their wives, one named Orpah and the other named Ruth. And after they had lived in Moab about ten years,
RUT	1	5	말론과 기룐 두 사람이 다 죽고 그 여인은 두 아들과 남편의 뒤에 남았더라	And Mahlon and Chilion died also both of them; and the woman was left of her two sons and her husband.	both Mahlon and Chilion also died, and Naomi was left without her two sons and without her husband.
RUT	1	6	그가 모압 지방에 있어서 여호와께서 자기 백성을 권고하사 그들에게 양식을 주셨다 함을 들었으므로 이에 두 자부와 함께 일어나 모압 지방에서 돌아오려 하여	Then she arose with her daughters in law, that she might return from the country of Moab: for she had heard in the country of Moab how that the Lord had visited his people in giving them bread.	When Naomi heard in Moab that the LORD had attended to His people by providing them with food, she and her daughters-in-law prepared to leave the land of Moab.
RUT	1	7	있던 곳을 떠나고 두 자부도 그와 함께하여 유다 땅으로 돌아오려고 길을 행하다가	Wherefore she went forth out of the place where she was, and her two daughters in law with her; and they went on the way to return unto the land of Judah.	Accompanied by her two daughters-in-law, she left the place where she had been living and set out on the road leading back to the land of Judah.
RUT	1	8	나오미가 두 자부에게 이르되 너희는 각각 어미의 집으로 돌아가라 너희가 죽은 자와 나를 선대한 것 같이 여호와께서 너희를 선대하시기를 원하며	And Naomi said unto her two daughters in law, Go, return each to her mother’s house: the Lord deal kindly with you, as ye have dealt with the dead, and with me.	Then Naomi said to her two daughters-in-law, “Go back, each of you to your mother’s home. May the LORD show you loving devotion, as you have shown to your dead and to me.
RUT	1	9	여호와께서 너희로 각각 남편의 집에서 평안함을 얻게 하시기를 원하노라 하고 그들에게 입맞추매 그들이 소리를 높여 울며	The Lord grant you that ye may find rest, each of you in the house of her husband. Then she kissed them; and they lifted up their voice, and wept.	May the LORD enable each of you to find rest in the home of your new husband.” And she kissed them as they wept aloud
RUT	1	10	나오미에게 이르되 아니니이다 우리는 어머니와 함께 어머니의 백성에게로 돌아가겠나이다	And they said unto her, Surely we will return with thee unto thy people.	and said, “Surely we will return with you to your people.”
RUT	1	11	나오미가 가로되 내 딸들아 돌아가라 너희가 어찌 나와 함께 가려느냐 나의 태중에 너희 남편될 아들들이 오히려 있느냐	And Naomi said, Turn again, my daughters: why will ye go with me? are there yet any more sons in my womb, that they may be your husbands?	But Naomi replied, “Return home, my daughters. Why would you go with me? Are there still sons in my womb to become your husbands?
RUT	1	12	내 딸들아 돌이켜 너희 길로 가라 나는 늙었으니 남편을 두지 못할지라 가령 내가 소망이 있다고 말한다든지 오늘 밤에 남편을 두어서 아들들을 생산한다 하자	Turn again, my daughters, go your way; for I am too old to have an husband. If I should say, I have hope, if I should have an husband also to night, and should also bear sons;	Return home, my daughters. Go on, for I am too old to have another husband. Even if I thought there was hope for me to have a husband tonight and to bear sons,
RUT	1	13	너희가 어찌 그것을 인하여 그들의 자라기를 기다리겠느냐 어찌 그것을 인하여 남편두기를 멈추겠느냐 내 딸들아 그렇지 아니하니라 여호와의 손이 나를 치셨으므로 나는 너희로 인하여 더욱 마음이 아프도다	Would ye tarry for them till they were grown? would ye stay for them from having husbands? nay, my daughters; for it grieveth me much for your sakes that the hand of the Lord is gone out against me.	would you wait for them to grow up? Would you refrain from having husbands? No, my daughters, it grieves me very much for your sakes that the hand of the LORD has gone out against me.”
RUT	1	14	그들이 소리를 높여 다시 울더니 오르바는 그 시모에게 입맞추되 룻은 그를 붙좇았더라	And they lifted up their voice, and wept again: and Orpah kissed her mother in law; but Ruth clave unto her.	Again they wept aloud, and Orpah kissed her mother-in-law goodbye, but Ruth clung to her.
RUT	1	15	나오미가 또 가로되 보라 네 동서는 그 백성과 그 신에게로 돌아가나니 너도 동서를 따라 돌아가라	And she said, Behold, thy sister in law is gone back unto her people, and unto her gods: return thou after thy sister in law.	“Look,” said Naomi, “your sister-in-law has gone back to her people and her gods; follow her back home.”
RUT	1	16	룻이 가로되 나로 어머니를 떠나며 어머니를 따르지 말고 돌아가라 강권하지 마옵소서 어머니께서 가시는 곳에 나도 가고 어머니께서 유숙하시는 곳에서 나도 유숙하겠나이다 어머니의 백성이 나의 백성이 되고 어머니의 하나님이 나의 하나님이 되시리니	And Ruth said, Intreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following after thee: for whither thou goest, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God:	But Ruth replied: “Do not urge me to leave you or to turn from following you. For wherever you go, I will go, and wherever you live, I will live; your people will be my people, and your God will be my God.
RUT	1	17	어머니께서 죽으시는 곳에서 나도 죽어 거기 장사될 것이라 만일 내가 죽는 일 외에 어머니와 떠나면 여호와께서 내게 벌을 내리시고 더 내리시기를 원하나이다	Where thou diest, will I die, and there will I be buried: the Lord do so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and me.	Where you die, I will die, and there I will be buried. May the LORD punish me, and ever so severely, if anything but death separates you and me.”
RUT	1	18	나오미가 룻의 자기와 함께 가기로 굳게 결심함을 보고 그에게 말하기를 그치니라	When she saw that she was stedfastly minded to go with her, then she left speaking unto her.	When Naomi saw that Ruth was determined to go with her, she stopped trying to persuade her.
RUT	1	19	이에 그 두 사람이 행하여 베들레헴까지 이르니라 베들레헴에 이를 때에 온 성읍이 그들을 인하여 떠들며 이르기를 이가 나오미냐 하는지라	So they two went until they came to Beth–lehem. And it came to pass, when they were come to Beth–lehem, that all the city was moved about them, and they said, Is this Naomi?	So Naomi and Ruth traveled until they came to Bethlehem. When they entered Bethlehem, the whole city was stirred because of them, and the women of the city exclaimed, “Can this be Naomi?”
RUT	1	20	나오미가 그들에게 이르되 나를 나오미라 칭하지 말고 마라라 칭하라 이는 전능자가 나를 심히 괴롭게 하셨음이니라	And she said unto them, Call me not Naomi, call me Mara: for the Almighty hath dealt very bitterly with me.	“Do not call me Naomi,” she replied. “Call me Mara, because the Almighty has dealt quite bitterly with me.
RUT	1	21	내가 풍족하게 나갔더니 여호와께서 나로 비어 돌아오게 하셨느니라 여호와께서 나를 징벌하셨고 전능자가 나를 괴롭게 하셨거늘 너희가 어찌 나를 나오미라 칭하느뇨 하니라	I went out full, and the Lord hath brought me home again empty: why then call ye me Naomi, seeing the Lord hath testified against me, and the Almighty hath afflicted me?	I went away full, but the LORD has brought me back empty. Why call me Naomi? After all, the LORD has testified against me, and the Almighty has afflicted me.”
RUT	1	22	나오미가 모압 지방에서 그 자부 모압 여인 룻과 함께 돌아왔는데 그들이 보리 추수 시작할 때에 베들레헴에 이르렀더라	So Naomi returned, and Ruth the Moabitess, her daughter in law, with her, which returned out of the country of Moab: and they came to Beth–lehem in the beginning of barley harvest.	So Naomi returned from the land of Moab with her daughter-in-law Ruth the Moabitess. And they arrived in Bethlehem at the beginning of the barley harvest.
RUT	2	1	나오미의 남편 엘리멜렉의 친족 중 유력한 자가 있으니 이름은 보아스더라	And Naomi had a kinsman of her husband’s, a mighty man of wealth, of the family of Elimelech; and his name was Boaz.	Now Naomi had a relative on her husband’s side, a prominent man of noble character from the clan of Elimelech, whose name was Boaz.
RUT	2	2	모압 여인 룻이 나오미에게 이르되 나로 밭에 가게 하소서 내가 뉘게 은혜를 입으면 그를 따라서 이삭을 줍겠나이다 나오미가 그에게 이르되 내 딸아 갈지어다 하매	And Ruth the Moabitess said unto Naomi, Let me now go to the field, and glean ears of corn after him in whose sight I shall find grace. And she said unto her, Go, my daughter.	And Ruth the Moabitess said to Naomi, “Please let me go into the fields and glean heads of grain after someone in whose sight I may find favor.” “Go ahead, my daughter,” Naomi replied.
RUT	2	3	룻이 가서 베는 자를 따라 밭에서 이삭을 줍는데 우연히 엘리멜렉의 친족 보아스에게 속한 밭에 이르렀더라	And she went, and came, and gleaned in the field after the reapers: and her hap was to light on a part of the field belonging unto Boaz, who was of the kindred of Elimelech.	So Ruth departed and went out into the field and gleaned after the harvesters. And she happened to come to the part of the field belonging to Boaz, who was from the clan of Elimelech.
RUT	2	4	마침 보아스가 베들레헴에서부터 와서 베는 자들에게 이르되 여호와께서 너희가 함께 하시기를 원하노라 그들이 대답하되 여호와께서 당신에게 복 주시기를 원하나이다	And, behold, Boaz came from Beth–lehem, and said unto the reapers, The Lord be with you. And they answered him, The Lord bless thee.	Just then Boaz arrived from Bethlehem and said to the harvesters, “The LORD be with you.” “The LORD bless you,” they replied.
RUT	2	5	보아스가 베는 자들을 거느린 사환에게 이르되 이는 뉘 소녀냐	Then said Boaz unto his servant that was set over the reapers, Whose damsel is this?	And Boaz asked the foreman of his harvesters, “Whose young woman is this?”
RUT	2	6	베는 자를 거느린 사환이 대답하여 가로되 이는 나오미와 함께 모압 지방에서 돌아온 모압 소녀인데	And the servant that was set over the reapers answered and said, It is the Moabitish damsel that came back with Naomi out of the country of Moab:	The foreman answered, “She is the Moabitess who returned with Naomi from the land of Moab.
RUT	2	7	그의 말이 나로 베는 자를 따라 단 사이에서 이삭을 줍게 하소서 하였고 아침부터 와서는 잠시 집에서 쉰 외에 지금까지 계속하는 중이니이다	And she said, I pray you, let me glean and gather after the reapers among the sheaves: so she came, and hath continued even from the morning until now, that she tarried a little in the house.	She has said, ‘Please let me glean and gather among the sheaves after the harvesters.’ So she came out and has continued from morning until now, except that she rested a short time in the shelter.”
RUT	2	8	보아스가 룻에게 이르되 내 딸아 들으라 이삭을 주우러 다른 밭으로 가지 말며 여기서 떠나지 말고 나의 소녀들과 함께 있으라	Then said Boaz unto Ruth, Hearest thou not, my daughter? Go not to glean in another field, neither go from hence, but abide here fast by my maidens:	Then Boaz said to Ruth, “Listen, my daughter. Do not go and glean in another field, and do not go away from this place, but stay here close to my servant girls.
RUT	2	9	그들의 베는 밭을 보고 그들을 따르라 내가 그 소년들에게 명하여 너를 건드리지 말라 하였느니라 목이 마르거든 그릇에 가서 소년들의 길어 온 것을 마실지니라	Let thine eyes be on the field that they do reap, and go thou after them: have I not charged the young men that they shall not touch thee? and when thou art athirst, go unto the vessels, and drink of that which the young men have drawn.	Let your eyes be on the field they are harvesting, and follow along after these girls. Indeed, I have ordered the young men not to touch you. And when you are thirsty, go and drink from the jars the young men have filled.”
RUT	2	10	룻이 땅에 엎드려 절하며 그에게 이르되 나는 이방 여인이어늘 당신이 어찌하여 내게 은혜를 베푸시며 나를 돌아보시나이까	Then she fell on her face, and bowed herself to the ground, and said unto him, Why have I found grace in thine eyes, that thou shouldest take knowledge of me, seeing I am a stranger?	At this, she fell on her face, bowing low to the ground, and said to him, “Why have I found such favor in your eyes that you should take notice of me, even though I am a foreigner?”
RUT	2	11	보아스가 그에게 대답하여 가로되 네 남편이 죽은 후로 네가 시모에게 행한 모든 것과 네 부모와 고국을 떠나 전에 알지 못하던 백성에게로 온 일이 내게 분명히 들렸느니라	And Boaz answered and said unto her, It hath fully been shewed me, all that thou hast done unto thy mother in law since the death of thine husband: and how thou hast left thy father and thy mother, and the land of thy nativity, and art come unto a people which thou knewest not heretofore.	Boaz replied, “I have been made fully aware of all you have done for your mother-in-law since the death of your husband, how you left your father and mother and the land of your birth, and how you came to a people you did not know before.
RUT	2	12	여호와께서 네 행한 일을 보응하시기를 원하며 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께서 그 날개 아래 보호를 받으러 온 네게 온전한 상 주시기를 원하노라	The Lord recompense thy work, and a full reward be given thee of the Lord God of Israel, under whose wings thou art come to trust.	May the LORD repay your work, and may you receive a rich reward from the LORD, the God of Israel, under whose wings you have taken refuge.”
RUT	2	13	룻이 가로되 내 주여 내가 당신께 은혜 입기를 원하나이다 나는 당신의 시녀의 하나와 같지 못하오나 당신이 이 시녀를 위로하시고 마음을 기쁘게 하는 말씀을 하셨나이다	Then she said, Let me find favour in thy sight, my lord; for that thou hast comforted me, and for that thou hast spoken friendly unto thine handmaid, though I be not like unto one of thine handmaidens.	“My lord,” she said, “may I continue to find favor in your eyes, for you have comforted and spoken kindly to your maidservant, though I am not like one of your servant girls.”
RUT	2	14	식사할 때에 보아스가 룻에게 이르되 이리로 와서 떡을 먹으며 네 떡 조각을 초에 찍으라 룻이 곡식 베는 자 곁에 앉으니 그가 볶은 곡식을 주매 룻이 배불리 먹고 남았더라	And Boaz said unto her, At mealtime come thou hither, and eat of the bread, and dip thy morsel in the vinegar. And she sat beside the reapers: and he reached her parched corn, and she did eat, and was sufficed, and left.	At mealtime Boaz said to her, “Come over here; have some bread and dip it into the vinegar sauce.” So she sat down beside the harvesters, and he offered her roasted grain, and she ate and was satisfied and had some left over.
RUT	2	15	롯이 이삭을 주우러 일어날 때에 보아스가 자기 소년들에게 명하여 가로되 그로 곡식 단 사이에서 줍게 하고 책망하지 말며	And when she was risen up to glean, Boaz commanded his young men, saying, Let her glean even among the sheaves, and reproach her not:	When Ruth got up to glean, Boaz ordered his young men, “Even if she gathers among the sheaves, do not insult her.
RUT	2	16	또 그를 위하여 줌에서 조금씩 뽑아 버려서 그로 줍게 하고 꾸짖지 말라 하니라	And let fall also some of the handfuls of purpose for her, and leave them, that she may glean them, and rebuke her not.	Rather, pull out for her some stalks from the bundles and leave them for her to gather. Do not rebuke her.”
RUT	2	17	룻이 밭에서 저녁까지 줍고 그 주운 것을 떠니 보리가 한 에바쯤 되는지라	So she gleaned in the field until even, and beat out that she had gleaned: and it was about an ephah of barley.	So Ruth gathered grain in the field until evening. And when she beat out what she had gleaned, it was about an ephah of barley.
RUT	2	18	그것을 가지고 성읍에 들어가서 시모에게 그 주운 것을 보이고 그 배불리 먹고 남긴 것을 내어 시모에게 드리매	And she took it up, and went into the city: and her mother in law saw what she had gleaned: and she brought forth, and gave to her that she had reserved after she was sufficed.	She picked up the grain and went into the town, where her mother-in-law saw what she had gleaned. And she brought out what she had saved from her meal and gave it to Naomi.
RUT	2	19	시모가 그에게 이르되 오늘 어디서 주웠느냐 어디서 일을 하였느냐 너를 돌아본 자에게 복이 있기를 원하노라 룻이 누구에게서 일한 것을 시모에게 알게 하여 가로되 오늘 일하게 한 사람의 이름은 보아스니이다	And her mother in law said unto her, Where hast thou gleaned to day? and where wroughtest thou? blessed be he that did take knowledge of thee. And she shewed her mother in law with whom she had wrought, and said, The man’s name with whom I wrought to day is Boaz.	Then her mother-in-law asked her, “Where did you glean today, and where did you work? Blessed be the man who noticed you.” So she told her mother-in-law where she had worked. “The name of the man I worked with today is Boaz,” she said.
RUT	2	20	나오미가 자부에게 이르되 여호와의 복이 그에게 있기를 원하노라 그가 생존한 자와 사망한 자에게 은혜 베풀기를 그치지 아니하도다 나오미가 또 그에게 이르되 그 사람은 우리의 근족이니 우리 기업을 무를 자 중 하나이니라	And Naomi said unto her daughter in law, Blessed be he of the Lord, who hath not left off his kindness to the living and to the dead. And Naomi said unto her, The man is near of kin unto us, one of our next kinsmen.	Then Naomi said to her daughter-in-law, “May he be blessed by the LORD, who has not withdrawn His kindness from the living or the dead.” Naomi continued, “The man is a close relative. He is one of our kinsman-redeemers.”
RUT	2	21	모압 여인 룻이 가로되 그가 내게 또 이르기를 내 추수를 다 마치기까지 너는 내 소년들에게 가까이 있으라 하더이다	And Ruth the Moabitess said, He said unto me also, Thou shalt keep fast by my young men, until they have ended all my harvest.	Then Ruth the Moabitess said, “He also told me, ‘Stay with my young men until they have finished gathering all my harvest.’”
RUT	2	22	나오미가 자부 룻에게 이르되 내 딸아 너는 그 소녀들과 함께 나가고 다른 밭에서 사람을 만나지 아니하는 것이 좋으니라	And Naomi said unto Ruth her daughter in law, It is good, my daughter, that thou go out with his maidens, that they meet thee not in any other field.	And Naomi said to her daughter-in-law Ruth, “My daughter, it is good for you to work with his young women, so that nothing will happen to you in another field.”
RUT	2	23	이에 룻이 보아스의 소녀들에게 가까이 있어서 보리 추수와 밀 추수를 마치기까지 이삭을 주우며 그 시모와 함께 거하니라	So she kept fast by the maidens of Boaz to glean unto the end of barley harvest and of wheat harvest; and dwelt with her mother in law.	So Ruth stayed close to the servant girls of Boaz to glean grain until the barley and wheat harvests were finished. And she lived with her mother-in-law.
RUT	3	1	룻의 시모 나오미가 그에게 이르되 내 딸아 내가 너를 위하여 안식할 곳을 구하여 너로 복되게 하여야 하지 않겠느냐	Then Naomi her mother in law said unto her, My daughter, shall I not seek rest for thee, that it may be well with thee?	One day Ruth’s mother-in-law Naomi said to her, “My daughter, should I not seek a resting place for you, that it may be well with you?
RUT	3	2	네가 함께 하던 시녀들을 둔 보아스는 우리의 친족이 아니냐 그가 오늘 밤에 타작 마당에서 보리를 까불리라	And now is not Boaz of our kindred, with whose maidens thou wast? Behold, he winnoweth barley to night in the threshingfloor.	Now is not Boaz, with whose servant girls you have been working, a relative of ours? In fact, tonight he is winnowing barley on the threshing floor.
RUT	3	3	그런즉 너는 목욕하고 기름을 바르고 의복을 입고 타작 마당에 내려가서 그 사람이 먹고 마시기를 다하기까지는 그에게 보이지 말고	Wash thyself therefore, and anoint thee, and put thy raiment upon thee, and get thee down to the floor: but make not thyself known unto the man, until he shall have done eating and drinking.	Therefore wash yourself, put on perfume, and wear your best clothes. Go down to the threshing floor, but do not let the man know you are there until he has finished eating and drinking.
RUT	3	4	그가 누울 때에 너는 그 눕는 곳을 알았다가 들어 가서 그 발치 이불을 들고 거기 누우라 그가 너의 할 일을 네게 고하리라	And it shall be, when he lieth down, that thou shalt mark the place where he shall lie, and thou shalt go in, and uncover his feet, and lay thee down; and he will tell thee what thou shalt do.	When he lies down, note the place where he lies. Then go in and uncover his feet, and lie down, and he will explain to you what you should do.”
RUT	3	5	룻이 시모에게 이르되 어머니의 말씀대로 내가 다 행하리이다 하니라	And she said unto her, All that thou sayest unto me I will do.	“I will do everything you say,” Ruth answered.
RUT	3	6	그가 타작 마당으로 내려가서 시모의 명대로 다 하니라	And she went down unto the floor, and did according to all that her mother in law bade her.	So she went down to the threshing floor and did everything her mother-in-law had instructed her to do.
RUT	3	7	보아스가 먹고 마시고 마음이 즐거워서 가서 노적가리 곁에 눕는지라 룻이 가만히 가서 그 발치 이불을 들고 거기 누웠더라	And when Boaz had eaten and drunk, and his heart was merry, he went to lie down at the end of the heap of corn: and she came softly, and uncovered his feet, and laid her down.	After Boaz had finished eating and drinking and was in good spirits, he went to lie down at the end of the heap of grain. Then Ruth went in secretly, uncovered his feet, and lay down.
RUT	3	8	밤중에 그 사람이 놀라 몸을 돌이켜 본즉 한 여인이 자기 발치에 누웠는지라	And it came to pass at midnight, that the man was afraid, and turned himself: and, behold, a woman lay at his feet.	At midnight, Boaz was startled, turned over, and there lying at his feet was a woman!
RUT	3	9	가로되 네가 누구뇨 대답하되 나는 당신의 시녀 룻이오니 당신의 옷자락으로 시녀를 덮으소서 당신은 우리 기업을 무를 자가 됨이니이다	And he said, Who art thou? And she answered, I am Ruth thine handmaid: spread therefore thy skirt over thine handmaid; for thou art a near kinsman.	“Who are you?” he asked. “I am your servant Ruth,” she replied. “Spread the corner of your garment over me, for you are a kinsman-redeemer.”
RUT	3	10	가로되 내 딸아 여호와께서 네게 복주시기를 원하노라 네가 빈부를 물론하고 연소한 자를 좇지 아니하였으니 너의 베푼 인애가 처음보다 나중이 더하도다	And he said, Blessed be thou of the Lord, my daughter: for thou hast shewed more kindness in the latter end than at the beginning, inasmuch as thou followedst not young men, whether poor or rich.	Then Boaz said, “May the LORD bless you, my daughter. You have shown more kindness now than before, because you have not run after the younger men, whether rich or poor.
RUT	3	11	내 딸아 두려워말라 내가 네 말대로 네게 다 행하리라 네가 현숙한 여자인줄 나의 성읍 백성이 다 아느니라	And now, my daughter, fear not; I will do to thee all that thou requirest: for all the city of my people doth know that thou art a virtuous woman.	And now do not be afraid, my daughter. I will do for you whatever you request, since all my fellow townspeople know that you are a woman of noble character.
RUT	3	12	참으로 나는 네 기업을 무를 자나 무를 자가 나보다 더 가까운 친족이 있으니	And now it is true that I am thy near kinsman: howbeit there is a kinsman nearer than I.	Yes, it is true that I am a kinsman-redeemer, but there is a redeemer nearer than I.
RUT	3	13	이 밤에 여기서 머무르라 아침에 그가 기업 무를 자의 책임을 네게 이행하려 하면 좋으니 그가 그 기업 무를 자의 책임을 행할 것이니라 만일 그가 기업 무를 자의 책임을 네게 이행코자 아니하면 여호와의 사심으로 맹세하노니 내가 기업 무를 자의 책임을 네게 행하리라 아침까지 누울지니라	Tarry this night, and it shall be in the morning, that if he will perform unto thee the part of a kinsman, well; let him do the kinsman’s part: but if he will not do the part of a kinsman to thee, then will I do the part of a kinsman to thee, as the Lord liveth: lie down until the morning.	Stay here tonight, and in the morning, if he wants to redeem you, good. Let him redeem you. But if he does not want to redeem you, as surely as the LORD lives, I will. Now lie here until morning.”
RUT	3	14	룻이 새벽까지 그 발치에 누웠다가 사람이 피차 알아보기 어려울 때에 일어났으니 보아스의 말에 여인이 타작 마당에 들어온 것을 사람이 알지 못하여야 할 것이라 하였음이라	And she lay at his feet until the morning: and she rose up before one could know another. And he said, Let it not be known that a woman came into the floor.	So she lay down at his feet until morning, but she got up before anyone else could recognize her. Then Boaz said, “Do not let it be known that a woman came to the threshing floor.”
RUT	3	15	보아스가 가로되 네 겉옷을 가져다가 펴서 잡으라 펴서 잡으니 보리를 여섯번 되어 룻에게 이워주고 성으로 들어가니라	Also he said, Bring the vail that thou hast upon thee, and hold it. And when she held it, he measured six measures of barley, and laid it on her: and she went into the city.	And he told her, “Bring the shawl you are wearing and hold it out.” When she did so, he shoveled six measures of barley into her shawl. Then he went into the city.
RUT	3	16	룻이 시모에게 이르니 그가 가로되 내 딸아 어떻게 되었느냐 룻이 그 사람의 자기에게 행한 것을 다 고하고	And when she came to her mother in law, she said, Who art thou, my daughter? And she told her all that the man had done to her.	When Ruth returned to her mother-in-law, Naomi asked her, “How did it go, my daughter?” Then Ruth told her all that Boaz had done for her.
RUT	3	17	가로되 그가 내게 이 보리를 여섯번 되어 주며 이르기를 빈손으로 네 시모에게 가지말라 하더이다	And she said, These six measures of barley gave he me; for he said to me, Go not empty unto thy mother in law.	And she said, “He gave me these six measures of barley, for he said, ‘Do not go back to your mother-in-law empty-handed.’”
RUT	3	18	이에 시모가 가로되 내 딸아 이 사건이 어떻게 되는 것을 알기까지 가만히 앉아 있으라 그 사람이 오늘날 이 일을 성취하기 전에는 쉬지 아니하리라	Then said she, Sit still, my daughter, until thou know how the matter will fall: for the man will not be in rest, until he have finished the thing this day.	“Wait, my daughter,” said Naomi, “until you find out how things go, for he will not rest unless he has resolved the matter today.”
RUT	4	1	보아스가 성문에 올라가서 거기 앉았더니 마침 보아스의 말하던 기업 무를 자가 지나는지라 보아스가 그에게 이르되 아무여 이리로 와서 앉으라 그가 와서 앉으매	Then went Boaz up to the gate, and sat him down there: and, behold, the kinsman of whom Boaz spake came by; unto whom he said, Ho, such a one! turn aside, sit down here. And he turned aside, and sat down.	Meanwhile, Boaz went to the gate and sat down there. Soon the kinsman-redeemer of whom he had spoken came along, and Boaz said, “Come over here, my friend, and sit down.” So he went over and sat down.
RUT	4	2	보아스가 성읍 장로 십 인을 청하여 가로되 당신들은 여기 앉으라 그들이 앉으매	And he took ten men of the elders of the city, and said, Sit ye down here. And they sat down.	Then Boaz took ten of the elders of the city and said, “Sit here,” and they did so.
RUT	4	3	보아스가 그 기업 무를 자에게 이르되 모압 지방에서 돌아온 나오미가 우리 형제 엘리멜렉의 소유지를 관할하므로	And he said unto the kinsman, Naomi, that is come again out of the country of Moab, selleth a parcel of land, which was our brother Elimelech’s:	And he said to the kinsman-redeemer, “Naomi, who has returned from the land of Moab, is selling the piece of land that belonged to our brother Elimelech.
RUT	4	4	내가 여기 앉은 자들과 내 백성의 장로들 앞에서 그것을 사라고 네게 고하여 알게 하려 하였노라 네가 무르려면 무르려니와 네가 무르지 아니하려거든 내게 고하여 알게 하라 네 다음은 나요 그 외에는 무를 자가 없느니라 그가 가로되 내가 무르리라	And I thought to advertise thee, saying, Buy it before the inhabitants, and before the elders of my people. If thou wilt redeem it, redeem it: but if thou wilt not redeem it, then tell me, that I may know: for there is none to redeem it beside thee; and I am after thee. And he said, I will redeem it.	I thought I should inform you that you may buy it back in the presence of those seated here and in the presence of the elders of my people. If you want to redeem it, do so. But if you will not redeem it, tell me so I may know, because there is no one but you to redeem it, and I am next after you.” “I will redeem it,” he replied.
RUT	4	5	보아스가 가로되 네가 나오미의 손에서 그 밭을 사는 날에 곧 죽은 자의 아내 모압 여인 룻에게서 사서 그 죽은 자의 기업을 그 이름으로 잇게 하여야 할지니라	Then said Boaz, What day thou buyest the field of the hand of Naomi, thou must buy it also of Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of the dead, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance.	Then Boaz said, “On the day you buy the land from Naomi and also from Ruth the Moabitess, you must also acquire the widow of the deceased in order to raise up the name of the deceased on his inheritance.”
RUT	4	6	그 기업 무를 자가 가로되 나는 내 기업에 손해가 있을까하여 나를 위하여 무르지 못하노니 나의 무를 권리를 네가 취하라 나는 무르지 못하겠노라	And the kinsman said, I cannot redeem it for myself, lest I mar mine own inheritance: redeem thou my right to thyself; for I cannot redeem it.	The kinsman-redeemer replied, “I cannot redeem it myself, or I would jeopardize my own inheritance. Take my right of redemption, because I cannot redeem it.”
RUT	4	7	옛적 이스라엘 중에 모든 것을 무르거나 교환하는 일을 확정하기 위하여 사람이 그 신을 벗어 그 이웃에게 주더니 이것이 이스라엘의 증명하는 전례가 된지라	Now this was the manner in former time in Israel concerning redeeming and concerning changing, for to confirm all things; a man plucked off his shoe, and gave it to his neighbour: and this was a testimony in Israel.	Now in former times in Israel, concerning the redemption or exchange of property, to make any matter legally binding a man would remove his sandal and give it to the other party, and this was a confirmation in Israel.
RUT	4	8	이에 그 기업 무를 자가 보아스에게 이르되 네가 너를 위하여 사라 하고 그 신을 벗는지라	Therefore the kinsman said unto Boaz, Buy it for thee. So he drew off his shoe.	So the kinsman-redeemer removed his sandal and said to Boaz, “Buy it for yourself.”
RUT	4	9	보아스가 장로들과 모든 백성에게 이르되 내가 엘리멜렉과 기룐과 말론에게 있던 모든 것을 나오미의 손에서 산 일에 너희가 오늘날 증인이 되었고	And Boaz said unto the elders, and unto all the people, Ye are witnesses this day, that I have bought all that was Elimelech’s, and all that was Chilion’s and Mahlon’s, of the hand of Naomi.	At this, Boaz said to the elders and all the people, “You are witnesses today that I am buying from Naomi all that belonged to Elimelech, Chilion, and Mahlon.
RUT	4	10	또 말론의 아내 모압 여인 룻을 사서 나의 아내로 취하고 그 죽은 자의 기업을 그 이름으로 잇게 하여 그 이름이 그 형제 중과 그곳 성문에서 끊어지지 않게 함에 너희가 오늘날 증인이 되었느니라	Moreover Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of Mahlon, have I purchased to be my wife, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance, that the name of the dead be not cut off from among his brethren, and from the gate of his place: ye are witnesses this day.	Moreover, I have acquired Ruth the Moabitess, Mahlon’s widow, as my wife, to raise up the name of the deceased through his inheritance, so that his name will not disappear from among his brothers or from the gate of his home. You are witnesses today.”
RUT	4	11	성문에 있는 모든 백성과 장로들이 가로되 우리가 증인이 되노니 여호와께서 네 집에 들어가는 여인으로 이스라엘 집을 세운 라헬, 레아 두 사람과 같게 하시고 너로 에브랏에서 유력하고 베들레헴에서 유명케 하시기를 원하며	And all the people that were in the gate, and the elders, said, We are witnesses. The Lord make the woman that is come into thine house like Rachel and like Leah, which two did build the house of Israel: and do thou worthily in Ephratah, and be famous in Beth–lehem:	“We are witnesses,” said the elders and all the people at the gate. “May the LORD make the woman entering your home like Rachel and Leah, who together built up the house of Israel. May you be prosperous in Ephrathah and famous in Bethlehem.
RUT	4	12	여호와께서 이 소년 여자로 네게 후사를 주사 네 집으로 다말이 유다에게 낳아준 베레스의 집과 같게 하시기를 원하노라	And let thy house be like the house of Pharez, whom Tamar bare unto Judah, of the seed which the Lord shall give thee of this young woman.	And may your house become like the house of Perez, whom Tamar bore to Judah, because of the offspring the LORD will give you by this young woman.”
RUT	4	13	이에 보아스가 룻을 취하여 아내를 삼고 그와 동침하였더니 여호와께서 그로 잉태케 하시므로 그가 아들을 낳은지라	So Boaz took Ruth, and she was his wife: and when he went in unto her, the Lord gave her conception, and she bare a son.	So Boaz took Ruth, and she became his wife. And when he had relations with her, the LORD enabled her to conceive, and she gave birth to a son.
RUT	4	14	여인들이 나오미에게 이르되 찬송할지로다 여호와께서 오늘날 네게 기업 무를 자가 없게 아니하셨도다 이 아이의 이름이 이스라엘 중에 유명하게 되기를 원하노라	And the women said unto Naomi, Blessed be the Lord, which hath not left thee this day without a kinsman, that his name may be famous in Israel.	Then the women said to Naomi, “Blessed be the LORD, who has not left you this day without a kinsman-redeemer. May his name become famous in Israel.
RUT	4	15	이는 네 생명의 회복자며 네 노년의 봉양자라 곧 너를 사랑하며 일곱 아들보다 귀한 자부가 낳은 자로다	And he shall be unto thee a restorer of thy life, and a nourisher of thine old age: for thy daughter in law, which loveth thee, which is better to thee than seven sons, hath born him.	He will renew your life and sustain you in your old age. For your daughter-in-law, who loves you and is better to you than seven sons, has given him birth.”
RUT	4	16	나오미가 아기를 취하여 품에 품고 그의 양육자가 되니	And Naomi took the child, and laid it in her bosom, and became nurse unto it.	And Naomi took the child, placed him on her lap, and became a nurse to him.
RUT	4	17	그 이웃 여인들이 그에게 이름을 주되 나오미가 아들을 낳았다 하여 그 이름을 오벳이라 하였는데 그는 다윗의 아비인 이새의 아비였더라	And the women her neighbours gave it a name, saying, There is a son born to Naomi; and they called his name Obed: he is the father of Jesse, the father of David.	The neighbor women said, “A son has been born to Naomi,” and they named him Obed. He became the father of Jesse, the father of David.
RUT	4	18	베레스의 세계는 이러하니라 베레스는 헤스론을 낳았고	Now these are the generations of Pharez: Pharez begat Hezron,	Now these are the generations of Perez: Perez was the father of Hezron,
RUT	4	19	헤스론은 람을 낳았고 람은 암미나답을 낳았고	And Hezron begat Ram, and Ram begat Amminadab,	Hezron was the father of Ram, Ram was the father of Amminadab,
RUT	4	20	암미나답은 나손을 낳았고 나손은 살몬을 낳았고	And Amminadab begat Nahshon, and Nahshon begat Salmon,	Amminadab was the father of Nahshon, Nahshon was the father of Salmon,
RUT	4	21	살몬은 보아스를 낳았고 보아스는 오벳을 낳았고	And Salmon begat Boaz, and Boaz begat Obed,	Salmon was the father of Boaz, Boaz was the father of Obed,
RUT	4	22	오벳은 이새를 낳았고 이새는 다윗을 낳았더라	And Obed begat Jesse, and Jesse begat David.	Obed was the father of Jesse, and Jesse was the father of David.
1SA	1	1	에브라임 산지 라마다임소빔에 에브라임 사람 엘가나라 하는 자가 있으니 그는 여로함의 아들이요 엘리후의 손자요 도후의 증손이요 숩의 현손이더라	Now there was a certain man of Ramathaim–zophim, of mount Ephraim, and his name was Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the son of Tohu, the son of Zuph, an Ephrathite:	Now there was a man named Elkanah who was from Ramathaim-zophim in the hill country of Ephraim. He was the son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the son of Tohu, the son of Zuph, an Ephraimite.
1SA	1	2	그에게 두 아내가 있으니 하나의 이름은 한나요 하나의 이름은 브닌나라 브닌나는 자식이 있고 한나는 무자하더라	And he had two wives; the name of the one was Hannah, and the name of the other Peninnah: and Peninnah had children, but Hannah had no children.	He had two wives, one named Hannah and the other Peninnah. And Peninnah had children, but Hannah had none.
1SA	1	3	이 사람이 매년에 자기 성읍에서 나와서 실로에 올라가서 만군의 여호와께 경배하며 제사를 드렸는데 엘리의 두 아들 홉니와 비느하스가 여호와의 제사장으로 거기 있었더라	And this man went up out of his city yearly to worship and to sacrifice unto the Lord of hosts in Shiloh. And the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, the priests of the Lord, were there.	Year after year Elkanah would go up from his city to worship and sacrifice to the LORD of Hosts at Shiloh, where Eli’s two sons, Hophni and Phinehas, were priests to the LORD.
1SA	1	4	엘가나가 제사를 드리는 날에는 제물의 분깃을 그 아내 브닌나와 그 모든 자녀에게 주고	And when the time was that Elkanah offered, he gave to Peninnah his wife, and to all her sons and her daughters, portions:	And whenever the day came for Elkanah to present his sacrifice, he would give portions to his wife Peninnah and to all her sons and daughters.
1SA	1	5	한나에게는 갑절을 주니 이는 그를 사랑함이라 그러나 여호와께서 그로 성태치 못하게 하시니	But unto Hannah he gave a worthy portion; for he loved Hannah: but the Lord had shut up her womb.	But to Hannah he would give a double portion, for he loved her even though the LORD had closed her womb.
1SA	1	6	여호와께서 그로 성태치 못하게 하시므로 그 대적 브닌나가 그를 심히 격동하여 번민케 하더라	And her adversary also provoked her sore, for to make her fret, because the Lord had shut up her womb.	Because the LORD had closed Hannah’s womb, her rival would provoke her and taunt her viciously.
1SA	1	7	매년에 한나가 여호와의 집에 올라갈 때마다 남편이 그같이 하매 브닌나가 그를 격동시키므로 그가 울고 먹지 아니하니	And as he did so year by year, when she went up to the house of the Lord, so she provoked her; therefore she wept, and did not eat.	And this went on year after year. Whenever Hannah went up to the house of the LORD, her rival taunted her until she wept and would not eat.
1SA	1	8	그 남편 엘가나가 그에게 이르되 한나여 어찌하여 울며 어찌하여 먹지 아니하며 어찌하여 그대의 마음이 슬프뇨 내가 그대에게 열 아들보다 낫지 아니하뇨	Then said Elkanah her husband to her, Hannah, why weepest thou? and why eatest thou not? and why is thy heart grieved? am not I better to thee than ten sons?	“Hannah, why are you crying?” her husband Elkanah asked. “Why won’t you eat? Why is your heart so grieved? Am I not better to you than ten sons?”
1SA	1	9	그들이 실로에서 먹고 마신 후에 한나가 일어나니 때에 제사장 엘리는 여호와의 전 문설주 곁 그 의자에 앉았더라	So Hannah rose up after they had eaten in Shiloh, and after they had drunk. Now Eli the priest sat upon a seat by a post of the temple of the Lord.	So after they had finished eating and drinking in Shiloh, Hannah stood up. Now Eli the priest was sitting on a chair by the doorpost of the temple of the LORD.
1SA	1	10	한나가 마음이 괴로워서 여호와께 기도하고 통곡하며	And she was in bitterness of soul, and prayed unto the Lord, and wept sore.	In her bitter distress, Hannah prayed to the LORD and wept with many tears.
1SA	1	11	서원하여 가로되 만군의 여호와여 만일 주의 여종의 고통을 돌아보시고 나를 생각하시고 주의 여종을 잊지 아니하사 아들을 주시면 내가 그의 평생에 그를 여호와께 드리고 삭도를 그 머리에 대지 아니하겠나이다	And she vowed a vow, and said, O Lord of hosts, if thou wilt indeed look on the affliction of thine handmaid, and remember me, and not forget thine handmaid, but wilt give unto thine handmaid a man child, then I will give him unto the Lord all the days of his life, and there shall no razor come upon his head.	And she made a vow, pleading, “O LORD of Hosts, if only You will look upon the affliction of Your maidservant and remember me, not forgetting Your maidservant but giving her a son, then I will dedicate him to the LORD all the days of his life, and no razor shall ever come over his head.”
1SA	1	12	그가 여호와 앞에 오래 기도하는 동안에 엘리가 그의 입을 주목한즉	And it came to pass, as she continued praying before the Lord, that Eli marked her mouth.	As Hannah kept on praying before the LORD, Eli watched her mouth.
1SA	1	13	한나가 속으로 말하매 입술만 동하고 음성은 들리지 아니하므로 엘리는 그가 취한 줄로 생각한지라	Now Hannah, she spake in her heart; only her lips moved, but her voice was not heard: therefore Eli thought she had been drunken.	Hannah was praying in her heart, and though her lips were moving, her voice could not be heard. So Eli thought she was drunk
1SA	1	14	엘리가 그에게 이르되 네가 언제까지 취하여 있겠느냐 포도주를 끊으라	And Eli said unto her, How long wilt thou be drunken? put away thy wine from thee.	and said to her, “How long will you be drunk? Put away your wine!”
1SA	1	15	한나가 대답하여 가로되 나의 주여 그렇지 아니하니이다 나는 마음이 슬픈 여자라 포도주나 독주를 마신 것이 아니요 여호와 앞에 나의 심정을 통한 것뿐이오니	And Hannah answered and said, No, my lord, I am a woman of a sorrowful spirit: I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but have poured out my soul before the Lord.	“No, my lord,” Hannah replied. “I am a woman oppressed in spirit. I have not had any wine or strong drink, but I have poured out my soul before the LORD.
1SA	1	16	당신의 여종을 악한 여자로 여기지 마옵소서 내가 지금까지 말한 것은 나의 원통함과 격동됨이 많음을 인함이니이다	Count not thine handmaid for a daughter of Belial: for out of the abundance of my complaint and grief have I spoken hitherto.	Do not take your servant for a wicked woman; for all this time I have been praying out of the depth of my anguish and grief.”
1SA	1	17	엘리가 대답하여 가로되 평안히 가라 이스라엘의 하나님이 너의 기도하여 구한 것을 허락하시기를 원하노라	Then Eli answered and said, Go in peace: and the God of Israel grant thee thy petition that thou hast asked of him.	“Go in peace,” Eli replied, “and may the God of Israel grant the petition you have asked of Him.”
1SA	1	18	가로되 당신의 여종이 당신께 은혜 입기를 원하나이다 하고 가서 먹고 얼굴에 다시는 수색이 없으니라	And she said, Let thine handmaid find grace in thy sight. So the woman went her way, and did eat, and her countenance was no more sad.	“May your maidservant find favor with you,” said Hannah. Then she went on her way, and she began eating again, and her face was no longer downcast.
1SA	1	19	그들이 아침에 일찍이 일어나 여호와 앞에 경배하고 돌아가서 라마의 자기 집에 이르니라 엘가나가 그 아내 한나와 동침하매 여호와께서 그를 생각하신지라	And they rose up in the morning early, and worshipped before the Lord, and returned, and came to their house to Ramah: and Elkanah knew Hannah his wife; and the Lord remembered her.	The next morning Elkanah and Hannah got up early to bow in worship before the LORD, and then returned home to Ramah. And Elkanah had relations with his wife Hannah, and the LORD remembered her.
1SA	1	20	한나가 잉태하고 때가 이르매 아들을 낳아 사무엘이라 이름하였으니 이는 내가 여호와께 그를 구하였다 함이더라	Wherefore it came to pass, when the time was come about after Hannah had conceived, that she bare a son, and called his name Samuel, saying, Because I have asked him of the Lord.	So in the course of time, Hannah conceived and gave birth to a son. She named him Samuel, saying, “Because I have asked for him from the LORD.”
1SA	1	21	그 사람 엘가나와 그 온 집이 여호와께 매년제와 그 서원제를 드리러 올라갈 때에	And the man Elkanah, and all his house, went up to offer unto the Lord the yearly sacrifice, and his vow.	Then Elkanah and all his house went up to make the annual sacrifice to the LORD and to fulfill his vow,
1SA	1	22	오직 한나는 올라가지 아니하고 그 남편에게 이르되 아이를 젖 떼거든 내가 그를 데리고 가서 여호와 앞에 뵈게 하고 거기 영영히 있게 하리이다	But Hannah went not up; for she said unto her husband, I will not go up until the child be weaned, and then I will bring him, that he may appear before the Lord, and there abide for ever.	but Hannah did not go. “After the boy is weaned,” she said to her husband, “I will take him to appear before the LORD and to stay there permanently.”
1SA	1	23	그 남편 엘가나가 그에게 이르되 그대의 소견에 선한 대로 하여 그를 젖 떼기까지 기다리라 오직 여호와께서 그 말씀대로 이루시기를 원하노라 이에 그 여자가 그 아들을 양육하며 그 젖 떼기까지 기다리다가	And Elkanah her husband said unto her, Do what seemeth thee good; tarry until thou have weaned him; only the Lord establish his word. So the woman abode, and gave her son suck until she weaned him.	“Do what you think is best,” her husband Elkanah replied, “and stay here until you have weaned him. Only may the LORD confirm His word.” So Hannah stayed and nursed her son until she had weaned him.
1SA	1	24	젖을 뗀 후에 그를 데리고 올라갈새 수소 셋과 가루 한 에바와 포도주 한 가죽부대를 가지고 실로 여호와의 집에 나아갔는데 아이가 어리더라	And when she had weaned him, she took him up with her, with three bullocks, and one ephah of flour, and a bottle of wine, and brought him unto the house of the Lord in Shiloh: and the child was young.	Once she had weaned him, Hannah took the boy with her, along with a three-year-old bull, an ephah of flour, and a skin of wine. Though the boy was still young, she brought him to the house of the LORD at Shiloh.
1SA	1	25	그들이 수소를 잡고 아이를 데리고 엘리에게 가서	And they slew a bullock, and brought the child to Eli.	And when they had slaughtered the bull, they brought the boy to Eli.
1SA	1	26	한나가 가로되 나의 주여 당신의 사심으로 맹세하나이다 나는 여기서 나의 주 당신 곁에 서서 여호와께 기도하던 여자라	And she said, Oh my lord, as thy soul liveth, my lord, I am the woman that stood by thee here, praying unto the Lord.	“Please, my lord,” said Hannah, “as surely as you live, my lord, I am the woman who stood here beside you praying to the LORD.
1SA	1	27	이 아이를 위하여 내가 기도하였더니 여호와께서 나의 구하여 기도한 바를 허락하신지라	For this child I prayed; and the Lord hath given me my petition which I asked of him:	I prayed for this boy, and since the LORD has granted me what I asked of Him,
1SA	1	28	그러므로 나도 그를 여호와께 드리되 그의 평생을 여호와께 드리나이다 하고 그 아이는 거기서 여호와께 경배하니라	Therefore also I have lent him to the Lord; as long as he liveth he shall be lent to the Lord. And he worshipped the Lord there.	I now dedicate the boy to the LORD. For as long as he lives, he is dedicated to the LORD.” So they worshiped the LORD there.
1SA	2	1	한나가 기도하여 가로되 내 마음이 여호와를 인하여 즐거워하며 내 뿔이 여호와를 인하여 높아졌으며 내 입이 내 원수들을 향하여 크게 열렸으니 이는 내가 주의 구원을 인하여 기뻐함이니이다	And Hannah prayed, and said, My heart rejoiceth in the Lord, mine horn is exalted in the Lord: my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies; because I rejoice in thy salvation.	At that time Hannah prayed: “My heart rejoices in the LORD in whom my horn is exalted. My mouth speaks boldly against my enemies, for I rejoice in Your salvation.
1SA	2	2	여호와와 같이 거룩하신 이가 없으시니 이는 주 밖에 다른 이가 없고 우리 하나님 같은 반석도 없으심이니이다	There is none holy as the Lord: for there is none beside thee: neither is there any rock like our God.	There is no one holy like the LORD. Indeed, there is no one besides You! And there is no Rock like our God.
1SA	2	3	심히 교만한 말을 다시 하지 말 것이며 오만한 말을 너희 입에서 내지 말지어다 여호와는 지식의 하나님이시라 행동을 달아보시느니라	Talk no more so exceeding proudly; let not arrogancy come out of your mouth: for the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed.	Do not boast so proudly, or let arrogance come from your mouth, for the LORD is a God who knows, and by Him actions are weighed.
1SA	2	4	용사의 활은 꺾이고 넘어진 자는 힘으로 띠를 띠도다	The bows of the mighty men are broken, and they that stumbled are girded with strength.	The bows of the mighty are broken, but the feeble are equipped with strength.
1SA	2	5	유족하던 자들은 양식을 위하여 품을 팔고 주리던 자들은 다시 주리지 않도다 전에 잉태치 못하던 자는 일곱을 낳았고 많은 자녀를 둔 자는 쇠약하도다	They that were full have hired out themselves for bread; and they that were hungry ceased: so that the barren hath born seven; and she that hath many children is waxed feeble.	The well-fed hire themselves out for food, but the starving hunger no more. The barren woman gives birth to seven, but she who has many sons pines away.
1SA	2	6	여호와는 죽이기도 하시고 살리기도 하시며 음부에 내리게도 하시고 올리기도 하시는도다	The Lord killeth, and maketh alive: he bringeth down to the grave, and bringeth up.	The LORD brings death and gives life; He brings down to Sheol and raises up.
1SA	2	7	여호와는 가난하게도 하시고 부하게도 하시며 낮추기도 하시고 높이기도 하시는도다	The Lord maketh poor, and maketh rich: he bringeth low, and lifteth up.	The LORD sends poverty and wealth; He humbles and He exalts.
1SA	2	8	가난한 자를 진토에서 일으키시며 빈핍한 자를 거름더미에서 드사 귀족들과 함께 앉게 하시며 영광의 위를 차지하게 하시는도다 땅의 기둥들은 여호와의 것이라 여호와께서 세계를 그 위에 세우셨도다	He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth up the beggar from the dunghill, to set them among princes, and to make them inherit the throne of glory: for the pillars of the earth are the Lord’s, and he hath set the world upon them.	He raises the poor from the dust and lifts the needy from the ash heap. He seats them among princes and bestows on them a throne of honor. For the foundations of the earth are the LORD’s, and upon them He has set the world.
1SA	2	9	그가 그 거룩한 자들의 발을 지키실 것이요 악인으로 흑암 중에서 잠잠케 하시리니 힘으로는 이길 사람이 없음이로다	He will keep the feet of his saints, and the wicked shall be silent in darkness; for by strength shall no man prevail.	He guards the steps of His faithful ones, but the wicked perish in darkness; for by his own strength shall no man prevail.
1SA	2	10	여호와를 대적하는 자는 산산이 깨어질 것이라 하늘 우뢰로 그들을 치시리로다 여호와께서 땅 끝까지 심판을 베푸시고 자기 왕에게 힘을 주시며 자기의 기름부음을 받은 자의 뿔을 높이시리로다 하니라	The adversaries of the Lord shall be broken to pieces; out of heaven shall he thunder upon them: the Lord shall judge the ends of the earth; and he shall give strength unto his king, and exalt the horn of his anointed.	Those who oppose the LORD will be shattered. He will thunder from heaven against them. The LORD will judge the ends of the earth and will give power to His king. He will exalt the horn of His anointed.”
1SA	2	11	엘가나는 라마의 자기 집으로 돌아가고 그 아이는 제사장 엘리 앞에서 여호와를 섬기니라	And Elkanah went to Ramah to his house. And the child did minister unto the Lord before Eli the priest.	Then Elkanah went home to Ramah, but the boy began ministering to the LORD before Eli the priest.
1SA	2	12	엘리의 아들들은 불량자라 여호와를 알지 아니하더라	Now the sons of Eli were sons of Belial; they knew not the Lord.	Now the sons of Eli were wicked men; they had no regard for the LORD
1SA	2	13	그 제사장들이 백성에게 행하는 습관은 이러하니 곧 아무 사람이 제사를 드리고 그 고기를 삶을 때에 제사장의 사환이 손에 세살 갈고리를 가지고 와서	And the priests’ custom with the people was, that, when any man offered sacrifice, the priest’s servant came, while the flesh was in seething, with a fleshhook of three teeth in his hand;	or for the custom of the priests with the people. When any man offered a sacrifice, the servant of the priest would come with a three-pronged meat fork while the meat was boiling
1SA	2	14	그것으로 남비에나 솥에나 큰 솥에나 가마에 찔러 넣어서 갈고리에 걸려 나오는 것은 제사장이 자기 것으로 취하되 실로에서 무릇 그곳에 온 이스라엘 사람에게 이같이 할 뿐 아니라	And he struck it into the pan, or kettle, or caldron, or pot; all that the fleshhook brought up the priest took for himself. So they did in Shiloh unto all the Israelites that came thither.	and plunge it into the pan or kettle or cauldron or cooking pot. And the priest would claim for himself whatever the meat fork brought up. This is how they treated all the Israelites who came to Shiloh.
1SA	2	15	기름을 태우기 전에도 제사장의 사환이 와서 제사 드리는 사람에게 이르기를 제사장에게 구워 드릴 고기를 내라 그가 네게 삶은 고기를 원치 아니하고 날것을 원하신다 하다가	Also before they burnt the fat, the priest’s servant came, and said to the man that sacrificed, Give flesh to roast for the priest; for he will not have sodden flesh of thee, but raw.	Even before the fat was burned, the servant of the priest would come and say to the man who was sacrificing, “Give the priest some meat to roast, because he will not accept boiled meat from you, but only raw.”
1SA	2	16	그 사람이 이르기를 반드시 먼저 기름을 태운 후에 네 마음에 원하는 대로 취하라 하면 그가 말하기를 아니라 지금 내게 내라 그렇지 아니하면 내가 억지로 빼앗으리라 하였으니	And if any man said unto him, Let them not fail to burn the fat presently, and then take as much as thy soul desireth; then he would answer him, Nay; but thou shalt give it me now: and if not, I will take it by force.	And if any man said to him, “The fat must be burned first; then you may take whatever you want,” the servant would reply, “No, you must give it to me right now. If you refuse, I will take it by force!”
1SA	2	17	이 소년들의 죄가 여호와 앞에 심히 큼은 그들이 여호와의 제사를 멸시함이었더라	Wherefore the sin of the young men was very great before the Lord: for men abhorred the offering of the Lord.	Thus the sin of these young men was severe in the sight of the LORD, for they were treating the LORD’s offering with contempt.
1SA	2	18	사무엘이 어렸을 때에 세마포 에봇을 입고 여호와 앞에 섬겼더라	But Samuel ministered before the Lord, being a child, girded with a linen ephod.	Now Samuel was ministering before the LORD—a boy wearing a linen ephod.
1SA	2	19	그 어미가 매년제를 드리러 그 남편과 함께 올라갈 때마다 작은 겉옷을 지어다가 그에게 주었더니	Moreover his mother made him a little coat, and brought it to him from year to year, when she came up with her husband to offer the yearly sacrifice.	Each year his mother would make him a little robe and bring it to him when she went with her husband to offer the annual sacrifice.
1SA	2	20	엘리가 엘가나와 그 아내에게 축복하여 가로되 여호와께서 이 여인으로 말미암아 네게 후사를 주사 이가 여호와께 간구하여 얻어드린 아들을 대신하게 하시기를 원하노라 하였더니 그들이 그 집으로 돌아가매	And Eli blessed Elkanah and his wife, and said, The Lord give thee seed of this woman for the loan which is lent to the Lord. And they went unto their own home.	And Eli would bless Elkanah and his wife, saying, “May the LORD give you children by this woman in place of the one she dedicated to the LORD.” Then they would go home.
1SA	2	21	여호와께서 한나를 권고하사 그로 잉태하여 세 아들과 두 딸을 낳게 하셨고 아이 사무엘은 여호와 앞에서 자라니라	And the Lord visited Hannah, so that she conceived, and bare three sons and two daughters. And the child Samuel grew before the Lord.	So the LORD attended to Hannah, and she conceived and gave birth to three sons and two daughters. Meanwhile, the boy Samuel grew up in the presence of the LORD.
1SA	2	22	엘리가 매우 늙었더니 그 아들들이 온 이스라엘에게 행한 모든 일과 회막문에서 수종드는 여인과 동침하였음을 듣고	Now Eli was very old, and heard all that his sons did unto all Israel; and how they lay with the women that assembled at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.	Now Eli was very old, and he heard about everything his sons were doing to all Israel and how they were sleeping with the women who served at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting.
1SA	2	23	그들에게 이르되 너희가 어찌하여 이런 일을 하느냐 내가 너희의 악행을 이 모든 백성에게서 듣노라	And he said unto them, Why do ye such things? for I hear of your evil dealings by all this people.	“Why are you doing these things?” Eli said to his sons. “I hear about your wicked deeds from all these people.
1SA	2	24	내 아들아 그리 말라 내게 들리는 소문이 좋지 아니하니라 너희가 여호와의 백성으로 범과케 하는도다	Nay, my sons; for it is no good report that I hear: ye make the Lord’s people to transgress.	No, my sons; it is not a good report I hear circulating among the LORD’s people.
1SA	2	25	사람이 사람에게 범죄하면 하나님이 판결하시려니와 사람이 여호와께 범죄하면 누가 위하여 간구하겠느냐 하되 그들이 그 아비의 말을 듣지 아니하였으니 이는 여호와께서 그들을 죽이기로 뜻하셨음이었더라	If one man sin against another, the judge shall judge him: but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall intreat for him? Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto the voice of their father, because the Lord would slay them.	If a man sins against another man, God can intercede for him; but if a man sins against the LORD, who can intercede for him?” But they would not listen to their father, since the LORD intended to put them to death.
1SA	2	26	아이 사무엘이 점점 자라매 여호와와 사람들에게 은총을 더욱 받더라	And the child Samuel grew on, and was in favour both with the Lord, and also with men.	And the boy Samuel continued to grow in stature and in favor with the LORD and with man.
1SA	2	27	하나님의 사람이 엘리에게 와서 그에게 이르되 여호와의 말씀에 너희 조상의 집이 애굽에서 바로의 집에 속하였을 때에 내가 그들에게 나타나지 아니하였느냐	And there came a man of God unto Eli, and said unto him, Thus saith the Lord, Did I plainly appear unto the house of thy father, when they were in Egypt in Pharaoh’s house?	Then a man of God came to Eli and told him, “This is what the LORD says: ‘Did I not clearly reveal Myself to your father’s house when they were in Egypt under Pharaoh’s house?
1SA	2	28	이스라엘 모든 지파 중에서 내가 그를 택하여 나의 제사장을 삼아 그로 내 단에 올라 분향하며 내 앞에서 에봇을 입게 하지 아니하였느냐 이스라엘 자손의 드리는 모든 화제를 내가 네 조상의 집에 주지 아니하였느냐	And did I choose him out of all the tribes of Israel to be my priest, to offer upon mine altar, to burn incense, to wear an ephod before me? and did I give unto the house of thy father all the offerings made by fire of the children of Israel?	And out of all the tribes of Israel I selected your father to be My priest, to offer sacrifices on My altar, to burn incense, and to wear an ephod in My presence. I also gave to the house of your father all the offerings of the Israelites made by fire.
1SA	2	29	너희는 어찌하여 내가 나의 처소에서 명한 나의 제물과 예물을 밟으며 네 아들들을 나보다 더 중히 여겨 내 백성 이스라엘의 드리는 가장 좋은 것으로 스스로 살지게 하느냐	Wherefore kick ye at my sacrifice and at mine offering, which I have commanded in my habitation; and honourest thy sons above me, to make yourselves fat with the chiefest of all the offerings of Israel my people?	Why then do you kick at My sacrifice and offering that I have prescribed for My dwelling place? You have honored your sons more than Me by fattening yourselves with the best of all the offerings of My people Israel.’
1SA	2	30	그러므로 이스라엘의 하나님 나 여호와가 말하노라 내가 전에 네 집과 네 조상의 집이 내 앞에 영영히 행하리라 하였으나 이제 나 여호와가 말하노니 결단코 그렇게 아니하리라 나를 존중히 여기는 자를 내가 존중히 여기고 나를 멸시하는 자를 내가 경멸히 여기리라	Wherefore the Lord God of Israel saith, I said indeed that thy house, and the house of thy father, should walk before me for ever: but now the Lord saith, Be it far from me; for them that honour me I will honour, and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.	Therefore, the LORD, the God of Israel, declares: ‘I did indeed say that your house and the house of your father would walk before Me forever. But now the LORD declares: Far be it from Me! For I will honor those who honor Me, but those who despise Me will be disdained.
1SA	2	31	보라 내가 네 팔과 네 조상의 집 팔을 끊어 네 집에 노인이 하나도 없게 하는 날이 이를지라	Behold, the days come, that I will cut off thine arm, and the arm of thy father’s house, that there shall not be an old man in thine house.	Behold, the days are coming when I will cut off your strength and the strength of your father’s house, so that no older man will be left in your house.
1SA	2	32	이스라엘에게 모든 복을 베푸는 중에 너는 내 처소의 환난을 볼 것이요 네 집에 영영토록 노인이 없을 것이며	And thou shalt see an enemy in my habitation, in all the wealth which God shall give Israel: and there shall not be an old man in thine house for ever.	You will see distress in My dwelling place. Despite all that is good in Israel, no one in your house will ever again reach old age.
1SA	2	33	내 단에서 내가 끊어 버리지 아니할 너의 사람이 네 눈을 쇠잔케 하고 네 마음을 슬프게 할 것이요 네 집에 생산하는 모든 자가 젊어서 죽으리라	And the man of thine, whom I shall not cut off from mine altar, shall be to consume thine eyes, and to grieve thine heart: and all the increase of thine house shall die in the flower of their age.	And every one of you that I do not cut off from My altar, your eyes will fail and your heart will grieve. All your descendants will die by the sword of men.
1SA	2	34	네 두 아들 홉니와 비느하스가 한 날에 죽으리니 그 둘의 당할 그 일이 네게 표징이 되리라	And this shall be a sign unto thee, that shall come upon thy two sons, on Hophni and Phinehas; in one day they shall die both of them.	And this sign shall come to you concerning your two sons Hophni and Phinehas: They will both die on the same day.
1SA	2	35	내가 나를 위하여 충실한 제사장을 일으키리니 그 사람은 내 마음, 내 뜻대로 행할 것이라 내가 그를 위하여 견고한 집을 세우리니 그가 나의 기름부음을 받은 자 앞에서 영구히 행하리라	And I will raise me up a faithful priest, that shall do according to that which is in mine heart and in my mind: and I will build him a sure house; and he shall walk before mine anointed for ever.	Then I will raise up for Myself a faithful priest. He will do whatever is in My heart and mind. And I will build for him an enduring house, and he will walk before My anointed one for all time.
1SA	2	36	네 집에 남은 사람이 각기 와서 은 한 조각과 떡 한 덩이를 위하여 그에게 엎드려 가로되 청하노니 내게 한 제사장의 직분을 맡겨 나로 떡 조각을 먹게 하소서 하리라 하셨다 하니라	And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left in thine house shall come and crouch to him for a piece of silver and a morsel of bread, and shall say, Put me, I pray thee, into one of the priests’ offices, that I may eat a piece of bread.	And everyone left in your house will come and bow down to him for a piece of silver or a morsel of bread, pleading, “Please appoint me to some priestly office so that I can eat a piece of bread.”’”
1SA	3	1	아이 사무엘이 엘리 앞에서 여호와를 섬길 때에는 여호와의 말씀이 희귀하여 이상이 흔히 보이지 않았더라	And the child Samuel ministered unto the Lord before Eli. And the word of the Lord was precious in those days; there was no open vision.	And the boy Samuel ministered to the LORD before Eli. Now in those days the word of the LORD was rare and visions were scarce.
1SA	3	2	엘리의 눈이 점점 어두워 가서 잘 보지 못하는 그 때에 그가 자기 처소에 누웠고	And it came to pass at that time, when Eli was laid down in his place, and his eyes began to wax dim, that he could not see;	And at that time Eli, whose eyesight had grown so dim that he could not see, was lying in his room.
1SA	3	3	하나님의 등불은 아직 꺼지지 아니하였으며 사무엘은 하나님의 궤 있는 여호와의 전 안에 누웠더니	And ere the lamp of God went out in the temple of the Lord, where the ark of God was, and Samuel was laid down to sleep;	Before the lamp of God had gone out, Samuel was lying down in the temple of the LORD, where the ark of God was located.
1SA	3	4	여호와께서 사무엘을 부르시는지라 그가 대답하되 내가 여기 있나이다 하고	That the Lord called Samuel: and he answered, Here am I.	Then the LORD called to Samuel, and he answered, “Here I am.”
1SA	3	5	엘리에게로 달려가서 가로되 당신이 나를 부르셨기로 내가 여기 있나이다 가로되 나는 부르지 아니하였으니 다시 누우라 그가 가서 누웠더니	And he ran unto Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou calledst me. And he said, I called not; lie down again. And he went and lay down.	He ran to Eli and said, “Here I am, for you have called me.” “I did not call,” Eli replied. “Go back and lie down.” So he went and lay down.
1SA	3	6	여호와께서 다시 사무엘을 부르시는지라 사무엘이 일어나서 엘리에게로 가서 가로되 당신이 나를 부르셨기로 내가 여기 있나이다 대답하되 내 아들아 내가 부르지 아니하였으니 다시 누우라 하니라	And the Lord called yet again, Samuel. And Samuel arose and went to Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou didst call me. And he answered, I called not, my son; lie down again.	Once again the LORD called, “Samuel!” So Samuel got up, went to Eli, and said, “Here I am, for you have called me.” “My son, I did not call,” Eli replied. “Go back and lie down.”
1SA	3	7	사무엘이 아직 여호와를 알지 못하고 여호와의 말씀도 아직 그에게 나타나지 아니한 때라	Now Samuel did not yet know the Lord, neither was the word of the Lord yet revealed unto him.	Now Samuel did not yet know the LORD, because the word of the LORD had not yet been revealed to him.
1SA	3	8	여호와께서 세번째 사무엘을 부르시는지라 그가 일어나서 엘리에게로 가서 가로되 당신이 나를 부르셨기로 내가 여기 있나이다 엘리가 여호와께서 이 아이를 부르신 줄을 깨닫고	And the Lord called Samuel again the third time. And he arose and went to Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou didst call me. And Eli perceived that the Lord had called the child.	Once again, for the third time, the LORD called to Samuel. He got up, went to Eli, and said, “Here I am, for you have called me.” Then Eli realized that it was the LORD who was calling the boy.
1SA	3	9	이에 사무엘에게 이르되 가서 누웠다가 그가 너를 부르시거든 네가 말하기를 여호와여 말씀하옵소서 주의 종이 듣겠나이다 하라 이에 사무엘이 가서 자기 처소에 누우니라	Therefore Eli said unto Samuel, Go, lie down: and it shall be, if he call thee, that thou shalt say, Speak, Lord; for thy servant heareth. So Samuel went and lay down in his place.	“Go and lie down,” he said to Samuel, “and if He calls you, say, ‘Speak, LORD, for Your servant is listening.’” So Samuel went and lay down in his place.
1SA	3	10	여호와께서 임하여 서서 전과 같이 사무엘아 사무엘아 부르시는지라 사무엘이 가로되 말씀하옵소서 주의 종이 듣겠나이다	And the Lord came, and stood, and called as at other times, Samuel, Samuel. Then Samuel answered, Speak; for thy servant heareth.	Then the LORD came and stood there, calling as before, “Samuel! Samuel!” And Samuel answered, “Speak, for Your servant is listening.”
1SA	3	11	여호와께서 사무엘에게 이르시되 보라 내가 이스라엘 중에 한 일을 행하리니 그것을 듣는 자마다 두 귀가 울리리라	And the Lord said to Samuel, Behold, I will do a thing in Israel, at which both the ears of every one that heareth it shall tingle.	Then the LORD said to Samuel, “I am about to do something in Israel at which the ears of all who hear it will tingle.
1SA	3	12	내가 엘리의 집에 대하여 말한 것을 처음부터 끝까지 그 날에 그에게 다 이루리라	In that day I will perform against Eli all things which I have spoken concerning his house: when I begin, I will also make an end.	On that day I will carry out against Eli everything I have spoken about his family, from beginning to end.
1SA	3	13	내가 그 집을 영영토록 심판하겠다고 그에게 이른 것은 그의 아는 죄악을 인함이니 이는 그가 자기 아들들이 저주를 자청하되 금하지 아니하였음이니라	For I have told him that I will judge his house for ever for the iniquity which he knoweth; because his sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not.	I told him that I would judge his house forever for the iniquity of which he knows, because his sons blasphemed God and he did not restrain them.
1SA	3	14	그러므로 내가 엘리의 집에 대하여 맹세하기를 엘리 집의 죄악은 제물이나 예물로나 영영히 속함을 얻지 못하리라 하였노라	And therefore I have sworn unto the house of Eli, that the iniquity of Eli’s house shall not be purged with sacrifice nor offering for ever.	Therefore I have sworn to the house of Eli, ‘The iniquity of Eli’s house shall never be atoned for by sacrifice or offering.’”
1SA	3	15	사무엘이 아침까지 누웠다가 여호와의 집 문을 열었으나 그 이상을 엘리에게 알게 하기를 두려워하더니	And Samuel lay until the morning, and opened the doors of the house of the Lord. And Samuel feared to shew Eli the vision.	Samuel lay down until the morning; then he opened the doors of the house of the LORD. He was afraid to tell Eli the vision,
1SA	3	16	엘리가 사무엘을 불러 가로되 내 아들 사무엘아 하니 대답하되 내가 여기 있나이다	Then Eli called Samuel, and said, Samuel, my son. And he answered, Here am I.	but Eli called to him and said, “Samuel, my son.” “Here I am,” answered Samuel.
1SA	3	17	가로되 네게 무엇을 말씀하셨느냐 청하노니 내게 숨기지 말라 네게 말씀하신 모든 것을 하나라도 숨기면 하나님이 네게 벌을 내리시고 또 내리시기를 원하노라	And he said, What is the thing that the Lord hath said unto thee? I pray thee hide it not from me: God do so to thee, and more also, if thou hide any thing from me of all the things that he said unto thee.	“What was the message He gave you?” Eli asked. “Do not hide it from me. May God punish you, and ever so severely, if you hide from me anything He said to you.”
1SA	3	18	사무엘이 세세히 말하고 조금도 숨기지 아니하니 그가 가로되 이는 여호와시니 선하신 소견대로 하실 것이니라 하니라	And Samuel told him every whit, and hid nothing from him. And he said, It is the Lord: let him do what seemeth him good.	So Samuel told him everything and did not hide a thing from him. “He is the LORD,” replied Eli. “Let Him do what is good in His eyes.”
1SA	3	19	사무엘이 자라매 여호와께서 그와 함께 계셔서 그 말로 하나도 땅에 떨어지지 않게 하시니	And Samuel grew, and the Lord was with him, and did let none of his words fall to the ground.	And Samuel grew, and the LORD was with him, and He let none of Samuel’s words fall to the ground.
1SA	3	20	단에서부터 브엘세바까지의 온 이스라엘이 사무엘은 여호와의 선지자로 세우심을 입은 줄을 알았더라	And all Israel from Dan even to Beer–sheba knew that Samuel was established to be a prophet of the Lord.	So all Israel from Dan to Beersheba knew that Samuel was confirmed as a prophet of the LORD.
1SA	3	21	여호와께서 실로에서 다시 나타나시되 여호와께서 실로에서 여호와의 말씀으로 사무엘에게 자기를 나타내시니	And the Lord appeared again in Shiloh: for the Lord revealed himself to Samuel in Shiloh by the word of the Lord.	And the LORD continued to appear at Shiloh, because there He revealed Himself to Samuel by His word.
1SA	4	1	사무엘의 말이 온 이스라엘에 전파되니라 이스라엘은 나가서 블레셋 사람과 싸우려고 에벤에셀 곁에 진 치고 블레셋 사람은 아벡에 진 쳤더니	And the word of Samuel came to all Israel. Now Israel went out against the Philistines to battle, and pitched beside Eben–ezer: and the Philistines pitched in Aphek.	Thus the word of Samuel came to all Israel. Now the Israelites went out to meet the Philistines in battle and camped at Ebenezer, while the Philistines camped at Aphek.
1SA	4	2	이스라엘을 대하여 항오를 벌이니라 그 둘이 싸우다가 이스라엘이 블레셋 사람 앞에서 패하여 그들에게 전쟁에서 죽임을 당한 군사가 사천 명 가량이라	And the Philistines put themselves in array against Israel: and when they joined battle, Israel was smitten before the Philistines: and they slew of the army in the field about four thousand men.	The Philistines arrayed themselves against Israel, and as the battle spread, Israel was defeated by the Philistines, who struck down about four thousand men on the battlefield.
1SA	4	3	백성이 진으로 돌아오매 이스라엘 장로들이 가로되 여호와께서 어찌하여 우리로 오늘 블레셋 사람 앞에 패하게 하셨는고 여호와의 언약궤를 실로에서 우리에게로 가져다가 우리 중에 있게 하여 그것으로 우리를 우리 원수들의 손에서 구원하게 하자 하니	And when the people were come into the camp, the elders of Israel said, Wherefore hath the Lord smitten us to day before the Philistines? Let us fetch the ark of the covenant of the Lord out of Shiloh unto us, that, when it cometh among us, it may save us out of the hand of our enemies.	When the troops returned to the camp, the elders of Israel asked, “Why has the LORD brought defeat on us before the Philistines today? Let us bring the ark of the covenant of the LORD from Shiloh, so that it may go with us to save us from the hand of our enemies.”
1SA	4	4	이에 백성이 실로에 보내어 그룹 사이에 계신 만군의 여호와의 언약궤를 거기서 가져왔고 엘리의 두 아들 홉니와 비느하스는 하나님의 언약궤와 함께 거기 있었더라	So the people sent to Shiloh, that they might bring from thence the ark of the covenant of the Lord of hosts, which dwelleth between the cherubims: and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were there with the ark of the covenant of God.	So the people sent men to Shiloh, and they brought back the ark of the covenant of the LORD of Hosts, who sits enthroned between the cherubim. And the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were there with the ark of the covenant of God.
1SA	4	5	여호와의 언약궤가 진에 들어 올 때에 온 이스라엘이 큰 소리로 외치매 땅이 울린지라	And when the ark of the covenant of the Lord came into the camp, all Israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth rang again.	When the ark of the covenant of the LORD entered the camp, all the Israelites raised such a great shout that it shook the ground.
1SA	4	6	블레셋 사람이 그 외치는 소리를 듣고 가로되 히브리 진에서 큰 소리로 외침은 어찜이뇨 하다가 여호와의 궤가 진에 들어온 줄을 깨달은지라	And when the Philistines heard the noise of the shout, they said, What meaneth the noise of this great shout in the camp of the Hebrews? And they understood that the ark of the Lord was come into the camp.	On hearing the noise of the shout, the Philistines asked, “What is this loud shouting in the camp of the Hebrews?” And when they realized that the ark of the LORD had entered the camp,
1SA	4	7	블레셋 사람이 두려워하여 가로되 신이 진에 이르렀도다 하고 또 가로되 우리에게 화로다 전일에는 이런 일이 없었도다	And the Philistines were afraid, for they said, God is come into the camp. And they said, Woe unto us! for there hath not been such a thing heretofore.	the Philistines were afraid. “The gods have entered their camp!” they said. “Woe to us, for nothing like this has happened before.
1SA	4	8	우리에게 화로다 누가 우리를 이 능한 신들의 손에서 건지리요 그들은 광야에서 여러가지 재앙으로 애굽인을 친 신들이니라	Woe unto us! who shall deliver us out of the hand of these mighty Gods? these are the Gods that smote the Egyptians with all the plagues in the wilderness.	Woe to us! Who will deliver us from the hand of these mighty gods? These are the gods who struck the Egyptians with all kinds of plagues in the wilderness.
1SA	4	9	너희 블레셋 사람들아 강하게 되며 대장부가 되어라 너희가 히브리 사람의 종이 되기를 그들이 너희의 종이 되었던 것 같이 말고 대장부 같이 되어 싸우라 하고	Be strong, and quit yourselves like men, O ye Philistines, that ye be not servants unto the Hebrews, as they have been to you: quit yourselves like men, and fight.	Take courage and be men, O Philistines! Otherwise, you will serve the Hebrews just as they served you. Now be men and fight!”
1SA	4	10	블레셋 사람이 쳤더니 이스라엘이 패하여 각기 장막으로 도망하였고 살륙이 심히 커서 이스라엘 보병의 엎드러진 자가 삼만이었으며	And the Philistines fought, and Israel was smitten, and they fled every man into his tent: and there was a very great slaughter; for there fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen.	So the Philistines fought, and Israel was defeated, and each man fled to his tent. The slaughter was very great—thirty thousand foot soldiers of Israel fell.
1SA	4	11	하나님의 궤는 빼앗겼고 엘리의 두 아들 홉니와 비느하스는 죽임을 당하였더라	And the ark of God was taken; and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were slain.	The ark of God was captured, and Eli’s two sons, Hophni and Phinehas, died.
1SA	4	12	당일에 어떤 베냐민 사람이 진에서 달려나와 그 옷을 찢고 그 머리에 티끌을 무릅쓰고 실로에 이르니라	And there ran a man of Benjamin out of the army, and came to Shiloh the same day with his clothes rent, and with earth upon his head.	That same day a Benjamite ran from the battle line all the way to Shiloh, with his clothes torn and dirt on his head.
1SA	4	13	그가 이를 때는 엘리가 길 곁 자기 의자에 앉아 기다리며 그 마음이 여호와의 궤로 인하여 떨릴 즈음이라 그 사람이 성에 들어 오며 고하매 온 성이 부르짖는지라	And when he came, lo, Eli sat upon a seat by the wayside watching: for his heart trembled for the ark of God. And when the man came into the city, and told it, all the city cried out.	When he arrived, there was Eli, sitting on his chair beside the road and watching, because his heart trembled for the ark of God. When the man entered the city to give a report, the whole city cried out.
1SA	4	14	엘리가 그 부르짖는 소리를 듣고 가로되 이 훤화하는 소리는 어찜이뇨 그 사람이 빨리 와서 엘리에게 고하니	And when Eli heard the noise of the crying, he said, What meaneth the noise of this tumult? And the man came in hastily, and told Eli.	Eli heard the outcry and asked, “Why this commotion?” So the man hurried over and reported to Eli.
1SA	4	15	때에 엘리의 나이 구십팔이라 그 눈이 어두워서 보지 못하더라	Now Eli was ninety and eight years old; and his eyes were dim, that he could not see.	Now Eli was ninety-eight years old, and his gaze was fixed because he could not see.
1SA	4	16	그 사람이 엘리에게 고하되 나는 진 중에서 나온 자라 내가 오늘 진 중에서 도망하여 왔나이다 엘리가 가로되 내 아들아 일이 어찌 되었느냐	And the man said unto Eli, I am he that came out of the army, and I fled to day out of the army. And he said, What is there done, my son?	“I have just come from the battle,” the man said to Eli. “I fled from there today.” “What happened, my son?” Eli asked.
1SA	4	17	소식을 전하는 자가 대답하여 가로되 이스라엘이 블레셋 사람 앞에서 도망하였고 백성 중에는 큰 살륙이 있었고 당신의 두 아들 홉니와 비느하스도 죽임을 당하였고 하나님의 궤는 빼앗겼나이다	And the messenger answered and said, Israel is fled before the Philistines, and there hath been also a great slaughter among the people, and thy two sons also, Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, and the ark of God is taken.	The messenger answered, “Israel has fled before the Philistines, and there has been a great slaughter among the people. Your two sons, Hophni and Phinehas, are both dead, and the ark of God has been captured.”
1SA	4	18	하나님의 궤를 말할 때에 엘리가 자기 의자에서 자빠져 문 곁에서 목이 부러져 죽었으니 나이 많고 비둔한 연고라 그가 이스라엘 사사가 된지 사십 년이었더라	And it came to pass, when he made mention of the ark of God, that he fell from off the seat backward by the side of the gate, and his neck brake, and he died: for he was an old man, and heavy. And he had judged Israel forty years.	As soon as the ark of God was mentioned, Eli fell backward from his chair by the city gate, and being old and heavy, he broke his neck and died. And Eli had judged Israel forty years.
1SA	4	19	그의 며느리 비느하스의 아내가 잉태하여 산기가 가까웠더니 하나님의 궤 빼앗긴 것과 그 시부와 남편의 죽은 소문을 듣고 갑자기 아파서 몸을 구푸려 해산하고	And his daughter in law, Phinehas’ wife, was with child, near to be delivered: and when she heard the tidings that the ark of God was taken, and that her father in law and her husband were dead, she bowed herself and travailed; for her pains came upon her.	Now Eli’s daughter-in-law, the wife of Phinehas, was pregnant and about to give birth. When she heard the news of the capture of God’s ark and the deaths of her father-in-law and her husband, she collapsed and gave birth, for her labor pains overtook her.
1SA	4	20	죽어갈 때에 곁에 섰던 여인들이 그에게 이르되 두려워 말라 네가 아들을 낳았다 하되 그가 대답지도 아니하며 관념치도 아니하고	And about the time of her death the women that stood by her said unto her, Fear not; for thou hast born a son. But she answered not, neither did she regard it.	As she was dying, the women attending to her said, “Do not be afraid, for you have given birth to a son!” But she did not respond or pay any heed.
1SA	4	21	이르기를 영광이 이스라엘에서 떠났다 하고 아이 이름을 이가봇이라 하였으니 하나님의 궤가 빼앗겼고 그 시부와 남편이 죽었음을 인함이며	And she named the child I–chabod, saying, The glory is departed from Israel: because the ark of God was taken, and because of her father in law and her husband.	And she named the boy Ichabod, saying, “The glory has departed from Israel,” because the ark of God had been captured and her father-in-law and her husband had been killed.
1SA	4	22	또 이르기를 하나님의 궤를 빼앗겼으므로 영광이 이스라엘에서 떠났다 하였더라	And she said, The glory is departed from Israel: for the ark of God is taken.	“The glory has departed from Israel,” she said, “for the ark of God has been captured.”
1SA	5	1	블레셋 사람이 하나님의 궤를 빼앗아 가지고 에벤에셀에서부터 아스돗에 이르니라	And the Philistines took the ark of God, and brought it from Eben–ezer unto Ashdod.	After the Philistines had captured the ark of God, they took it from Ebenezer to Ashdod,
1SA	5	2	블레셋 사람이 하나님의 궤를 가지고 다곤의 당에 들어가서 다곤의 곁에 두었더니	When the Philistines took the ark of God, they brought it into the house of Dagon, and set it by Dagon.	carried it into the temple of Dagon, and set it beside his statue.
1SA	5	3	아스돗 사람이 이튿날 일찍이 일어나 본즉 다곤이 여호와의 궤 앞에서 엎드러져 그 얼굴이 땅에 닿았는지라 그들이 다곤을 일으켜 다시 그 자리에 세웠더니	And when they of Ashdod arose early on the morrow, behold, Dagon was fallen upon his face to the earth before the ark of the Lord. And they took Dagon, and set him in his place again.	When the people of Ashdod got up early the next morning, there was Dagon, fallen on his face before the ark of the LORD. So they took Dagon and returned him to his place.
1SA	5	4	그 이튿날 아침에 그들이 일찍이 일어나 본즉 다곤이 여호와의 궤 앞에서 엎드러져 얼굴이 땅에 닿았고 그 머리와 두 손목은 끊어져 문지방에 있고 다곤의 몸둥이만 남았더라	And when they arose early on the morrow morning, behold, Dagon was fallen upon his face to the ground before the ark of the Lord; and the head of Dagon and both the palms of his hands were cut off upon the threshold; only the stump of Dagon was left to him.	But when they got up early the next morning, there was Dagon, fallen on his face before the ark of the LORD, with his head and his hands broken off and lying on the threshold. Only the torso remained.
1SA	5	5	그러므로 다곤의 제사장들이나 다곤의 당에 들어가는 자는 오늘까지 아스돗에 있는 다곤의 문지방을 밟지 아니하더라	Therefore neither the priests of Dagon, nor any that come into Dagon’s house, tread on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod unto this day.	That is why, to this day, the priests of Dagon and all who enter the temple of Dagon in Ashdod do not step on the threshold.
1SA	5	6	여호와의 손이 아스돗 사람에게 엄중히 더하사 독종의 재앙으로 아스돗과 그 지경을 쳐서 망하게 하니	But the hand of the Lord was heavy upon them of Ashdod, and he destroyed them, and smote them with emerods, even Ashdod and the coasts thereof.	Now the hand of the LORD was heavy on the people of Ashdod and its vicinity, ravaging them and afflicting them with tumors.
1SA	5	7	아스돗 사람들이 이를 보고 가로되 이스라엘 신의 궤를 우리와 함께 있게 못할지라 그 손이 우리와 우리 신 다곤을 친다 하고	And when the men of Ashdod saw that it was so, they said, The ark of the God of Israel shall not abide with us: for his hand is sore upon us, and upon Dagon our god.	And when the men of Ashdod saw what was happening, they said, “The ark of the God of Israel must not stay here with us, because His hand is heavy upon us and upon our god Dagon.”
1SA	5	8	이에 보내어 블레셋 사람의 모든 방백을 모으고 가로되 우리가 이스라엘 신의 궤를 어찌할꼬 그들이 대답하되 이스라엘 신의 궤를 가드로 옮겨가라 하므로 이스라엘 신의 궤를 옮겨 갔더니	They sent therefore and gathered all the lords of the Philistines unto them, and said, What shall we do with the ark of the God of Israel? And they answered, Let the ark of the God of Israel be carried about unto Gath. And they carried the ark of the God of Israel about thither.	So they called together all the rulers of the Philistines and asked, “What shall we do with the ark of the God of Israel?” “It must be moved to Gath,” they replied. So they carried away the ark of the God of Israel.
1SA	5	9	그것을 옮겨간 후에 여호와의 손이 심히 큰 환난을 그 성에 더하사 성읍 사람의 작은 자와 큰 자를 다 쳐서 독종이 나게 하신지라	And it was so, that, after they had carried it about, the hand of the Lord was against the city with a very great destruction: and he smote the men of the city, both small and great, and they had emerods in their secret parts.	But after they had moved the ark to Gath, the LORD’s hand was also against that city, throwing it into great confusion and afflicting the men of the city, both young and old, with an outbreak of tumors.
1SA	5	10	이에 그들이 하나님의 궤를 에그론으로 보내니라 하나님의 궤가 에그론에 이른즉 에그론 사람이 부르짖어 가로되 그들이 이스라엘 신의 궤를 우리에게로 가져다가 우리와 우리 백성을 죽이려 한다 하고	Therefore they sent the ark of God to Ekron. And it came to pass, as the ark of God came to Ekron, that the Ekronites cried out, saying, They have brought about the ark of the God of Israel to us, to slay us and our people.	So they sent the ark of God to Ekron, but as it arrived, the Ekronites cried out, “They have brought us the ark of the God of Israel in order to kill us and our people!”
1SA	5	11	이에 보내어 블레셋 모든 방백을 모으고 가로되 이스라엘 신의 궤를 보내어 본처로 돌아가게 하고 우리와 우리 백성 죽임을 면케 하자 하니 이는 온 성이 사망의 환난을 당함이라 거기서 하나님의 손이 엄중하시므로	So they sent and gathered together all the lords of the Philistines, and said, Send away the ark of the God of Israel, and let it go again to his own place, that it slay us not, and our people: for there was a deadly destruction throughout all the city; the hand of God was very heavy there.	Then the Ekronites assembled all the rulers of the Philistines and said, “Send away the ark of the God of Israel. It must return to its place, so that it will not kill us and our people!” For a deadly confusion had pervaded the city; the hand of God was heavy upon it.
1SA	5	12	죽지 아니한 사람들은 독종으로 치심을 받아 성읍의 부르짖음이 하늘에 사무쳤더라	And the men that died not were smitten with the emerods: and the cry of the city went up to heaven.	Those who did not die were afflicted with tumors, and the outcry of the city went up to heaven.
1SA	6	1	여호와의 궤가 블레셋 사람의 지방에 있은지 일곱 달이라	And the ark of the Lord was in the country of the Philistines seven months.	When the ark of the LORD had been in the land of the Philistines seven months,
1SA	6	2	블레셋 사람이 제사장들과 복술자들을 불러서 이르되 우리가 여호와의 궤를 어떻게 할꼬 그것을 어떻게 본처로 보낼 것을 우리에게 가르치라	And the Philistines called for the priests and the diviners, saying, What shall we do to the ark of the Lord? tell us wherewith we shall send it to his place.	the Philistines summoned the priests and diviners, saying, “What shall we do with the ark of the LORD? Tell us how to send it back to its place.”
1SA	6	3	그들이 가로되 이스라엘 신의 궤를 보내려거든 거저 보내지 말고 그에게 속건제를 드려야 할지니라 그리하면 병도 낫고 그 손을 너희에게서 옮기지 아니하는 연고도 알리라	And they said, If ye send away the ark of the God of Israel, send it not empty; but in any wise return him a trespass offering: then ye shall be healed, and it shall be known to you why his hand is not removed from you.	They replied, “If you return the ark of the God of Israel, do not send it away empty, but by all means return it to Him with a guilt offering. Then you will be healed, and you will understand why His hand has not been lifted from you.”
1SA	6	4	그들이 가로되 무엇으로 그에게 드릴 속건제를 삼을꼬 가로되 블레셋 사람의 방백의 수효대로 금독종 다섯과 금쥐 다섯이라야 하리니 너희와 너희 방백에게 내린 재앙이 일반임이니라	Then said they, What shall be the trespass offering which we shall return to him? They answered, Five golden emerods, and five golden mice, according to the number of the lords of the Philistines: for one plague was on you all, and on your lords.	“What guilt offering should we send back to Him?” asked the Philistines. “Five gold tumors and five gold rats,” they said, “according to the number of rulers of the Philistines, since the same plague has struck both you and your rulers.
1SA	6	5	그러므로 너희는 너희 독종의 형상과 땅을 해롭게 하는 쥐의 형상을 만들어 이스라엘 신께 영화를 돌리라 그가 혹 그 손을 너희와 너희 신들과 너희 땅에서 경하게 하실까 하노라	Wherefore ye shall make images of your emerods, and images of your mice that mar the land; and ye shall give glory unto the God of Israel: peradventure he will lighten his hand from off you, and from off your gods, and from off your land.	Make images of your tumors and of the rats that are ravaging the land. Give glory to the God of Israel, and perhaps He will lift His hand from you and your gods and your land.
1SA	6	6	애굽인과 바로가 그 마음을 강퍅케 한 것 같이 어찌하여 너희가 너희 마음을 강퍅케 하겠느냐 그가 그들 중에서 기이하게 행한 후에 그들이 백성을 가게 하므로 백성이 떠나지 아니하였느냐	Wherefore then do ye harden your hearts, as the Egyptians and Pharaoh hardened their hearts? when he had wrought wonderfully among them, did they not let the people go, and they departed?	Why harden your hearts as the Egyptians and Pharaoh hardened theirs? When He afflicted them, did they not send the people on their way as they departed?
1SA	6	7	그러므로 새 수레를 만들고 멍에 메어 보지 아니한 젖 나는 소 둘을 끌어다가 수레를 소에 메우고 그 송아지들은 떼어 집으로 돌려 보내고	Now therefore make a new cart, and take two milch kine, on which there hath come no yoke, and tie the kine to the cart, and bring their calves home from them:	Now, therefore, prepare one new cart with two milk cows that have never been yoked. Hitch the cows to the cart, but take their calves away and pen them up.
1SA	6	8	여호와의 궤를 가져다가 수레에 싣고 속건제 드릴 금 보물은 상자에 담아 궤 곁에 두고 그것을 보내어 가게 하고	And take the ark of the Lord, and lay it upon the cart; and put the jewels of gold, which ye return him for a trespass offering, in a coffer by the side thereof; and send it away, that it may go.	Take the ark of the LORD, set it on the cart, and in a chest beside it put the gold objects you are sending Him as a guilt offering. Then send the ark on its way,
1SA	6	9	보아서 궤가 그 본 지경 길로 올라가서 벧세메스로 가면 이 큰 재앙은 그가 우리에게 내린 것이요 그렇지 아니하면 우리를 친 것이 그 손이 아니요 우연히 만난 것인 줄 알리라	And see, if it goeth up by the way of his own coast to Beth–shemesh, then he hath done us this great evil: but if not, then we shall know that it is not his hand that smote us; it was a chance that happened to us.	but keep watching it. If it goes up the road to its homeland, toward Beth-shemesh, it is the LORD who has brought on us this great disaster. But if it does not, then we will know that it was not His hand that punished us and that it happened by chance.”
1SA	6	10	그 사람들이 그같이 하여 젖나는 소 둘을 끌어다가 수레를 메우고 송아지들은 집에 가두고	And the men did so; and took two milch kine, and tied them to the cart, and shut up their calves at home:	So the men did as instructed. They took two milk cows, hitched them to the cart, and penned up their calves.
1SA	6	11	여호와의 궤와 및 금쥐와 그들의 독종의 형상을 담은 상자를 수레 위에 실으니	And they laid the ark of the Lord upon the cart, and the coffer with the mice of gold and the images of their emerods.	Then they put the ark of the LORD on the cart, along with the chest containing the gold rats and the images of the tumors.
1SA	6	12	암소가 벧세메스 길로 바로 행하여 대로로 가며 갈 때에 울고 좌우로 치우치지 아니하였고 블레셋 방백들은 벧세메스 경계까지 따라 가니라	And the kine took the straight way to the way of Beth–shemesh, and went along the highway, lowing as they went, and turned not aside to the right hand or to the left; and the lords of the Philistines went after them unto the border of Beth–shemesh.	And the cows headed straight up the road toward Beth-shemesh, staying on that one highway and lowing as they went, never straying to the right or to the left. The rulers of the Philistines followed behind them to the border of Beth-shemesh.
1SA	6	13	벧세메스 사람들이 골짜기에서 밀을 베다가 눈을 들어 궤를 보고 그것의 보임을 기뻐하더니	And they of Beth–shemesh were reaping their wheat harvest in the valley: and they lifted up their eyes, and saw the ark, and rejoiced to see it.	Now the people of Beth-shemesh were harvesting wheat in the valley, and when they looked up and saw the ark, they were overjoyed at the sight.
1SA	6	14	수레가 벧세메스 사람 여호수아의 밭 큰 돌 있는 곳에 이르러 선지라 무리가 수레의 나무를 패고 그 소를 번제로 여호와께 드리고	And the cart came into the field of Joshua, a Beth–shemite, and stood there, where there was a great stone: and they clave the wood of the cart, and offered the kine a burnt offering unto the Lord.	The cart came to the field of Joshua of Beth-shemesh and stopped there near a large rock. The people chopped up the cart and offered the cows as a burnt offering to the LORD.
1SA	6	15	레위인은 여호와의 궤와 그 궤와 함께 있는 금 보물 담긴 상자를 내려다가 큰 돌 위에 두매 그 날에 벧세메스 사람들이 여호와께 번제와 다른 제를 드리니라	And the Levites took down the ark of the Lord, and the coffer that was with it, wherein the jewels of gold were, and put them on the great stone: and the men of Beth–shemesh offered burnt offerings and sacrificed sacrifices the same day unto the Lord.	And the Levites took down the ark of the LORD and the chest containing the gold objects, and they placed them on the large rock. That day the men of Beth-shemesh offered burnt offerings and made sacrifices to the LORD.
1SA	6	16	블레셋 다섯 방백이 이것을 보고 그 날에 에그론으로 돌아갔더라	And when the five lords of the Philistines had seen it, they returned to Ekron the same day.	And when the five rulers of the Philistines saw this, they returned to Ekron that same day.
1SA	6	17	블레셋 사람이 여호와께 속건제로 드린 금독종은 이러하니 아스돗을 위하여 하나요 가사를 위하여 하나요 아스글론을 위하여 하나요 가드를 위하여 하나요 에그론을 위하여 하나이며	And these are the golden emerods which the Philistines returned for a trespass offering unto the Lord; for Ashdod one, for Gaza one, for Askelon one, for Gath one, for Ekron one;	As a guilt offering to the LORD, the Philistines had sent back one gold tumor for each city: Ashdod, Gaza, Ashkelon, Gath, and Ekron.
1SA	6	18	드린 바 금쥐는 여호와의 궤를 놓은 큰 돌에 이르기까지의 모든 견고한 성읍과 시골 동리 곧 다섯 방백에게 속한 사람의 모든 성읍의 수효대로였더라 그 돌은 벧세메스 사람 여호수아의 밭에 오늘까지 있더라	And the golden mice, according to the number of all the cities of the Philistines belonging to the five lords, both of fenced cities, and of country villages, even unto the great stone of Abel, whereon they set down the ark of the Lord: which stone remaineth unto this day in the field of Joshua, the Beth–shemite.	The number of gold rats also corresponded to the number of Philistine cities belonging to the five rulers—the fortified cities and their outlying villages. And the large rock on which they placed the ark of the LORD stands to this day in the field of Joshua of Beth-shemesh.
1SA	6	19	벧세메스 사람들이 여호와의 궤를 들여다 본고로 그들을 치사 (오만) 칠십 인을 죽이신지라 여호와께서 백성을 쳐서 크게 살륙하셨으므로 백성이 애곡하였더라	And he smote the men of Beth–shemesh, because they had looked into the ark of the Lord, even he smote of the people fifty thousand and threescore and ten men: and the people lamented, because the Lord had smitten many of the people with a great slaughter.	But God struck down some of the people of Beth-shemesh because they looked inside the ark of the LORD. He struck down seventy men, and the people mourned because the LORD had struck them with a great slaughter.
1SA	6	20	벧세메스 사람들이 가로되 이 거룩하신 하나님 여호와 앞에 누가 능히 서리요 그를 우리에게서 뉘게로 가시게 할꼬 하고	And the men of Beth–shemesh said, Who is able to stand before this holy Lord God? and to whom shall he go up from us?	The men of Beth-shemesh asked, “Who can stand in the presence of the LORD, this holy God? To whom should the ark go up from here?”
1SA	6	21	사자들을 기랏여아림 거민에게 보내어 가로되 블레셋 사람이 여호와의 궤를 도로 가져왔으니 너희는 내려와서 그것을 너희에게로 옮겨 가라	And they sent messengers to the inhabitants of Kirjath–jearim, saying, The Philistines have brought again the ark of the Lord; come ye down, and fetch it up to you.	So they sent messengers to the people of Kiriath-jearim, saying, “The Philistines have returned the ark of the LORD. Come down and take it up with you.”
1SA	7	1	기럇여아림 사람들이 와서 여호와의 궤를 옮겨 산에 사는 아비나답의 집에 들여 놓고 그 아들 엘리아살을 거룩히 구별하여 여호와의 궤를 지키게 하였더니	And the men of Kirjath–jearim came, and fetched up the ark of the Lord, and brought it into the house of Abinadab in the hill, and sanctified Eleazar his son to keep the ark of the Lord.	Then the men of Kiriath-jearim came for the ark of the LORD and took it into Abinadab’s house on the hill. And they consecrated his son Eleazar to guard the ark of the LORD.
1SA	7	2	궤가 기럇여아림에 들어간 날부터 이십 년 동안을 오래 있은지라 이스라엘 온 족속이 여호와를 사모하니라	And it came to pass, while the ark abode in Kirjath–jearim, that the time was long; for it was twenty years: and all the house of Israel lamented after the Lord.	And from that day a long time passed, twenty years in all, as the ark remained at Kiriath-jearim. And all the house of Israel mourned and sought after the LORD.
1SA	7	3	사무엘이 이스라엘 온 족속에게 일러 가로되 너희가 전심으로 여호와께 돌아오려거든 이방 신들과 아스다롯을 너희 중에서 제하고 너희 마음을 여호와께로 향하여 그만 섬기라 너희를 블레셋 사람의 손에서 건져내시리라	And Samuel spake unto all the house of Israel, saying, If ye do return unto the Lord with all your hearts, then put away the strange gods and Ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your hearts unto the Lord, and serve him only: and he will deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines.	Then Samuel said to all the house of Israel, “If you are returning to the LORD with all your hearts, then rid yourselves of the foreign gods and Ashtoreths among you, prepare your hearts for the LORD, and serve Him only. And He will deliver you from the hand of the Philistines.”
1SA	7	4	이에 이스라엘 자손이 바알들과 아스다롯을 제하고 여호와만 섬기니라	Then the children of Israel did put away Baalim and Ashtaroth, and served the Lord only.	So the Israelites put away the Baals and Ashtoreths and served only the LORD.
1SA	7	5	사무엘이 가로되 온 이스라엘은 미스바로 모이라 내가 너희를 위하여 여호와께 기도하리라 하매	And Samuel said, Gather all Israel to Mizpeh, and I will pray for you unto the Lord.	Then Samuel said, “Gather all Israel to Mizpah, and I will pray to the LORD on your behalf.”
1SA	7	6	그들이 미스바에 모여 물을 길어 여호와 앞에 붓고 그 날에 금식하고 거기서 가로되 우리가 여호와께 범죄하였나이다 하니라 사무엘이 미스바에서 이스라엘 자손을 다스리니라	And they gathered together to Mizpeh, and drew water, and poured it out before the Lord, and fasted on that day, and said there, We have sinned against the Lord. And Samuel judged the children of Israel in Mizpeh.	When they had gathered at Mizpah, they drew water and poured it out before the LORD. On that day they fasted, and there they confessed, “We have sinned against the LORD.” And Samuel judged the Israelites at Mizpah.
1SA	7	7	이스라엘 자손이 미스바에 모였다 함을 블레셋 사람이 듣고 그 방백들이 이스라엘을 치러 올라온지라 이스라엘 자손이 듣고 블레셋 사람을 두려워하여	And when the Philistines heard that the children of Israel were gathered together to Mizpeh, the lords of the Philistines went up against Israel. And when the children of Israel heard it, they were afraid of the Philistines.	When the Philistines heard that the Israelites had gathered at Mizpah, their rulers marched up toward Israel. And when the Israelites learned of this, they feared the Philistines
1SA	7	8	사무엘에게 이르되 당신은 우리를 위하여 우리 하나님 여호와께 쉬지 말고 부르짖어 우리를 블레셋 사람의 손에서 구원하시게 하소서	And the children of Israel said to Samuel, Cease not to cry unto the Lord our God for us, that he will save us out of the hand of the Philistines.	and said to Samuel, “Do not stop crying out to the LORD our God for us, that He may save us from the hand of the Philistines.”
1SA	7	9	사무엘이 젖 먹는 어린 양을 취하여 온전한 번제를 여호와께 드리고 이스라엘을 위하여 여호와께 부르짖으매 여호와께서 응답하셨더라	And Samuel took a sucking lamb, and offered it for a burnt offering wholly unto the Lord: and Samuel cried unto the Lord for Israel; and the Lord heard him.	Then Samuel took a suckling lamb and offered it as a whole burnt offering to the LORD. He cried out to the LORD on behalf of Israel, and the LORD answered him.
1SA	7	10	사무엘이 번제를 드릴 때에 블레셋 사람이 이스라엘과 싸우려고 가까이 오매 그 날에 여호와께서 블레셋 사람에게 큰 우뢰를 발하여 그들을 어지럽게 하시니 그들이 이스라엘 앞에 패한지라	And as Samuel was offering up the burnt offering, the Philistines drew near to battle against Israel: but the Lord thundered with a great thunder on that day upon the Philistines, and discomfited them; and they were smitten before Israel.	As the Philistines drew near to fight against Israel, Samuel was sacrificing the burnt offering. But that day the LORD thundered loudly against the Philistines and threw them into such confusion that they fled before Israel.
1SA	7	11	이스라엘 사람들이 미스바에서 나가서 블레셋 사람을 따라 벧갈 아래에 이르기까지 쳤더라	And the men of Israel went out of Mizpeh, and pursued the Philistines, and smote them, until they came under Beth–car.	Then the men of Israel charged out of Mizpah and pursued the Philistines, striking them down all the way to an area below Beth-car.
1SA	7	12	사무엘이 돌을 취하여 미스바와 센 사이에 세워 가로되 여호와께서 여기까지 우리를 도우셨다 하고 그이름을 에벤에셀이라 하니라	Then Samuel took a stone, and set it between Mizpeh and Shen, and called the name of it Eben–ezer, saying, Hitherto hath the Lord helped us.	Afterward, Samuel took a stone and set it up between Mizpah and Shen. He named it Ebenezer, saying, “Thus far the LORD has helped us.”
1SA	7	13	이에 블레셋 사람이 굴복하여 다시는 이스라엘 경내에 들어오지 못하였으며 여호와의 손이 사무엘의 사는 날 동안에 블레셋 사람을 막으시매	So the Philistines were subdued, and they came no more into the coast of Israel: and the hand of the Lord was against the Philistines all the days of Samuel.	So the Philistines were subdued, and they stopped invading the territory of Israel. And the hand of the LORD was against the Philistines all the days of Samuel.
1SA	7	14	블레셋 사람이 이스라엘에게서 빼앗았던 성읍이 에그론부터 가드까지 이스라엘에게 회복되니 이스라엘이 그 사방 지경을 블레셋 사람의 손에서 도로 찾았고 또 이스라엘과 아모리 사람 사이에 평화가 있었더라	And the cities which the Philistines had taken from Israel were restored to Israel, from Ekron even unto Gath; and the coasts thereof did Israel deliver out of the hands of the Philistines. And there was peace between Israel and the Amorites.	The cities from Ekron to Gath, which the Philistines had taken, were restored to Israel, who also delivered the surrounding territory from the hand of the Philistines. And there was peace between the Israelites and the Amorites.
1SA	7	15	사무엘이 사는 날 동안에 이스라엘을 다스렸으되	And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life.	So Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life.
1SA	7	16	해마다 벧엘과 길갈과 미스바로 순회하여 그 모든 곳에서 이스라엘을 다스렸고	And he went from year to year in circuit to Beth–el, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and judged Israel in all those places.	Every year he would go on a circuit from Bethel to Gilgal to Mizpah, judging Israel in all these places.
1SA	7	17	라마로 돌아왔으니 이는 거기 자기 집이 있음이라 거기서도 이스라엘을 다스렸으며 또 거기 여호와를 위하여 단을 쌓았더라	And his return was to Ramah; for there was his house; and there he judged Israel; and there he built an altar unto the Lord.	Then he would return to Ramah because his home was there, and there he judged Israel and built an altar to the LORD.
1SA	8	1	사무엘이 늙으매 그 아들들로 이스라엘 사사를 삼으니	And it came to pass, when Samuel was old, that he made his sons judges over Israel.	When Samuel grew old, he appointed his sons as judges over Israel.
1SA	8	2	장자의 이름은 요엘이요 차자의 이름은 아비야라 그들이 브엘세바에서 사사가 되니라	Now the name of his firstborn was Joel; and the name of his second, Abiah: they were judges in Beer–sheba.	The name of his firstborn son was Joel, and the name of his second was Abijah. They were judges in Beersheba.
1SA	8	3	그 아들들이 그 아비의 행위를 따르지 아니하고 이를 따라서 뇌물을 취하고 판결을 굽게 하니라	And his sons walked not in his ways, but turned aside after lucre, and took bribes, and perverted judgment.	But his sons did not walk in his ways; they turned aside toward dishonest gain, accepting bribes and perverting justice.
1SA	8	4	이스라엘 모든 장로가 모여 라마에 있는 사무엘에게 나아가서	Then all the elders of Israel gathered themselves together, and came to Samuel unto Ramah,	So all the elders of Israel gathered together and came to Samuel at Ramah.
1SA	8	5	그에게 이르되 보소서 당신은 늙고 당신의 아들들은 당신의 행위를 따르지 아니하니 열방과 같이 우리에게 왕을 세워 우리를 다스리게 하소서 한지라	And said unto him, Behold, thou art old, and thy sons walk not in thy ways: now make us a king to judge us like all the nations.	“Look,” they said, “you are old, and your sons do not walk in your ways. Now appoint a king to judge us like all the other nations.”
1SA	8	6	우리에게 왕을 주어 우리를 다스리게 하라 한 그것을 사무엘이 기뻐하지 아니하여 여호와께 기도하매	But the thing displeased Samuel, when they said, Give us a king to judge us. And Samuel prayed unto the Lord.	But when they said, “Give us a king to judge us,” their demand was displeasing in the sight of Samuel; so he prayed to the LORD.
1SA	8	7	여호와께서 사무엘에게 이르시되 백성이 네게 한 말을 다 들으라 그들이 너를 버림이 아니요 나를 버려 자기들의 왕이 되지 못하게 함이니라	And the Lord said unto Samuel, Hearken unto the voice of the people in all that they say unto thee: for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them.	And the LORD said to Samuel, “Listen to the voice of the people in all that they say to you. For it is not you they have rejected, but they have rejected Me as their king.
1SA	8	8	내가 그들을 애굽에서 인도하여낸 날부터 오늘날까지 그들이 모든 행사로 나를 버리고 다른 신들을 섬김 같이 네게도 그리하는도다	According to all the works which they have done since the day that I brought them up out of Egypt even unto this day, wherewith they have forsaken me, and served other gods, so do they also unto thee.	Just as they have done from the day I brought them up out of Egypt until this day, forsaking Me and serving other gods, so they are doing to you.
1SA	8	9	그러므로 그들의 말을 듣되 너는 그들에게 엄히 경계하고 그들을 다스릴 왕의 제도를 알게 하라	Now therefore hearken unto their voice: howbeit yet protest solemnly unto them, and shew them the manner of the king that shall reign over them.	Now listen to them, but you must solemnly warn them and show them the manner of the king who will reign over them.”
1SA	8	10	사무엘이 왕을 구하는 백성에게 여호와의 모든 말씀을 일러	And Samuel told all the words of the Lord unto the people that asked of him a king.	So Samuel spoke all the words of the LORD to the people who were asking him for a king.
1SA	8	11	가로되 너희를 다스릴 왕의 제도가 이러하니라 그가 너희 아들들을 취하여 그 병거와 말을 어거케 하리니 그들이 그 병거 앞에서 달릴 것이며	And he said, This will be the manner of the king that shall reign over you: He will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for his chariots, and to be his horsemen; and some shall run before his chariots.	He said, “This will be the manner of the king who will reign over you: He will take your sons and appoint them to his own chariots and horses, to run in front of his chariots.
1SA	8	12	그가 또 너희 아들들로 천부장과 오십부장을 삼을 것이며 자기 밭을 갈게 하고 자기 추수를 하게 할 것이며 자기 병거와 병거의 제구를 만들게 할 것이며	And he will appoint him captains over thousands, and captains over fifties; and will set them to ear his ground, and to reap his harvest, and to make his instruments of war, and instruments of his chariots.	He will appoint some for himself as commanders of thousands and of fifties, and others to plow his ground, to reap his harvest, to make his weapons of war, and to equip his chariots.
1SA	8	13	그가 또 너희 딸들을 취하여 향료 만드는 자와 요리하는 자와 뗘굽는 자를 삼을 것이며	And he will take your daughters to be confectionaries, and to be cooks, and to be bakers.	And he will take your daughters to be perfumers, cooks, and bakers.
1SA	8	14	그가 또 너희 밭과 포도원과 감람원의 제일 좋은 것을 취하여 자기 신하들에게 줄 것이며	And he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your oliveyards, even the best of them, and give them to his servants.	He will take the best of your fields and vineyards and olive groves and give them to his servants.
1SA	8	15	그가 또 너희 곡식과 포도원 소산의 십일조를 취하여 자기 관리와 신하에게 줄 것이며	And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and give to his officers, and to his servants.	He will take a tenth of your grain and grape harvest and give it to his officials and servants.
1SA	8	16	그가 또 너희 노비와 가장 아름다운 소년과 나귀들을 취하여 자기 일을 시킬 것이며	And he will take your menservants, and your maidservants, and your goodliest young men, and your asses, and put them to his work.	And he will take your menservants and maidservants and your best cattle and donkeys and put them to his own use.
1SA	8	17	너희 양떼의 십분 일을 취하리니 너희가 그 종이 될 것이라	He will take the tenth of your sheep: and ye shall be his servants.	He will take a tenth of your flocks, and you yourselves will become his slaves.
1SA	8	18	그 날에 너희가 너희 택한 왕을 인하여 부르짖되 그 날에 어호와께서 너희에게 응답지 아니하시리라	And ye shall cry out in that day because of your king which ye shall have chosen you; and the Lord will not hear you in that day.	When that day comes, you will beg for relief from the king you have chosen, but the LORD will not answer you on that day.”
1SA	8	19	백성이 사무엘의 말 듣기를 거절하여 가로되 아니로소이다 우리도 우리 왕이 있어야 하리니	Nevertheless the people refused to obey the voice of Samuel; and they said, Nay; but we will have a king over us;	Nevertheless, the people refused to listen to Samuel. “No!” they said. “We must have a king over us.
1SA	8	20	우리도 열방과 같이 되어 우리 왕이 우리를 다스리며 우리 앞에 나가서 우리의 싸움을 싸워야 할 것이니이다	That we also may be like all the nations; and that our king may judge us, and go out before us, and fight our battles.	Then we will be like all the other nations, with a king to judge us, to go out before us, and to fight our battles.”
1SA	8	21	사무엘이 백성의 모든 말을 듣고 여호와께 고하매	And Samuel heard all the words of the people, and he rehearsed them in the ears of the Lord.	Samuel listened to all the words of the people and repeated them in the hearing of the LORD.
1SA	8	22	여호와께서 사무엘에게 이르시되 그들의 말을 들어 왕을 세우라 하시니 사무엘이 이스라엘 사람들에게 이르되 너희는 각기 성읍으로 돌아가라 하니라	And the Lord said to Samuel, Hearken unto their voice, and make them a king. And Samuel said unto the men of Israel, Go ye every man unto his city.	“Listen to their voice,” the LORD said to Samuel. “Appoint a king for them.” Then Samuel told the men of Israel, “Everyone must go back to his city.”
1SA	9	1	베냐민 지파에 기스라 이름하는 유력한 사람이 있으니 그는 아비엘의 아들이요 스롤의 손자요 베고랏의 증손이요 아비아의 현손이라 베냐민 사람이더라	Now there was a man of Benjamin, whose name was Kish, the son of Abiel, the son of Zeror, the son of Bechorath, the son of Aphiah, a Benjamite, a mighty man of power.	Now there was a Benjamite, a powerful man, whose name was Kish son of Abiel, the son of Zeror, the son of Becorath, the son of Aphiah of Benjamin.
1SA	9	2	기스가 아들이 있으니 그 이름은 사울이요 준수한 소년이라 이스라엘 자손 중에 그보다 더 준수한 자가 없고 키는 모든 백성보다 어깨 위는 더하더라	And he had a son, whose name was Saul, a choice young man, and a goodly: and there was not among the children of Israel a goodlier person than he: from his shoulders and upward he was higher than any of the people.	And he had a son named Saul, choice and handsome, without equal among the Israelites—a head taller than any of the people.
1SA	9	3	사울의 아비 기스가 암나귀들을 잃고 그 아들 사울에게 이르되 너는 한 사환을 데리고 일어나 가서 암나귀들을 찾으라 하매	And the asses of Kish Saul’s father were lost. And Kish said to Saul his son, Take now one of the servants with thee, and arise, go seek the asses.	One day the donkeys of Saul’s father Kish wandered off, and Kish said to his son Saul, “Take one of the servants and go look for the donkeys.”
1SA	9	4	그가 에브라임 산지와 살리사 땅으로 두루 다니되 찾지 못하고 사알림 땅으로 두루 다니되 없고 베냐민 사람의 땅으로 두루 다니되 찾지 못하니라	And he passed through mount Ephraim, and passed through the land of Shalisha, but they found them not: then they passed through the land of Shalim, and there they were not: and he passed through the land of the Benjamites, but they found them not.	So Saul passed through the hill country of Ephraim and then through the land of Shalishah, but did not find the donkeys. He and the servant went through the region of Shaalim, but they were not there. Then they went through the land of Benjamin, and still they did not find them.
1SA	9	5	그들이 숩 땅에 이른 때에 사울이 함께 하는 사환에게 이르되 돌아가자 내 부친이 암나귀 생각은 고사하고 우리를 위하여 걱정하실까 두려워하노라	And when they were come to the land of Zuph, Saul said to his servant that was with him, Come, and let us return; lest my father leave caring for the asses, and take thought for us.	When they reached the land of Zuph, Saul said to his servant, “Come, let us go back, or my father will stop worrying about the donkeys and start worrying about us.”
1SA	9	6	대답하되 보소서 이 성에 하나님의 사람이 있는데 존중히 여김을 받는 사람이라 그가 말한 것은 반드시 다 응하나니 그리로 가사이다 그가 혹 우리의 갈 길을 가르칠까 하나이다	And he said unto him, Behold now, there is in this city a man of God, and he is an honourable man; all that he saith cometh surely to pass: now let us go thither; peradventure he can shew us our way that we should go.	“Look,” said the servant, “in this city there is a man of God who is highly respected; everything he says surely comes to pass. Let us go there now. Perhaps he will tell us which way to go.”
1SA	9	7	사울이 그 사환에게 이르되 우리가 가면 그 사람에게 무엇을 드리겠느냐 우리 그릇에 식물이 다하였으니 하나님의 사람에게 드릴 예물이 없도다 무엇이 있느냐	Then said Saul to his servant, But, behold, if we go, what shall we bring the man? for the bread is spent in our vessels, and there is not a present to bring to the man of God: what have we?	“If we do go,” Saul replied, “what can we give the man? For the bread in our packs is gone, and there is no gift to take to the man of God. What do we have?”
1SA	9	8	사환이 사울에게 다시 대답하여 가로되 보소서 내 손에 은 한 세겔의 사분 일이 있으니 하나님의 사람에게 드려 우리 길을 가르치게 하겠나이다	And the servant answered Saul again, and said, Behold, I have here at hand the fourth part of a shekel of silver: that will I give to the man of God, to tell us our way.	The servant answered him again. “Look,” he said, “I have here in my hand a quarter shekel of silver. I will give it to the man of God, and he will tell us our way.”
1SA	9	9	(옛적 이스라엘에 사람이 하나님께 가서 물으려 하면 말하기를 선견자에게로 가자 하였으니 지금 선지자라 하는 자를 옛적에는 선견자라 일컬었더라)	(Beforetime in Israel, when a man went to enquire of God, thus he spake, Come, and let us go to the seer: for he that is now called a Prophet was beforetime called a Seer.)	(Formerly in Israel, a man on his way to inquire of God would say, “Come, let us go to the seer.” For the prophet of today was formerly called the seer.)
1SA	9	10	사울이 그 사환에게 이르되 네 말이 옳다 가자 하고 그들이 하나님의 사람 있는 성으로 가니라	Then said Saul to his servant, Well said; come, let us go. So they went unto the city where the man of God was.	“Good,” said Saul to his servant. “Come, let us go.” So they set out for the city where the man of God was.
1SA	9	11	그들이 성을 향한 비탈길로 올라가다가 물 길러 나오는 소녀들을 만나 그들에게 묻되 선견자가 여기 있느냐	And as they went up the hill to the city, they found young maidens going out to draw water, and said unto them, Is the seer here?	And as they were climbing the hill to the city, they met some young women coming out to draw water and asked, “Is the seer here?”
1SA	9	12	그들이 대답하여 가로되 있나이다 보소서 그가 당신보다 앞섰으니 빨리 가소서 백성이 오늘 산당에서 제사를 드리므로 그가 오늘 성에 들어오셨나이다	And they answered them, and said, He is; behold, he is before you: make haste now, for he came to day to the city; for there is a sacrifice of the people to day in the high place:	“Yes, he is ahead of you,” they answered. “Hurry now, for today he has come to the city because the people have a sacrifice on the high place.
1SA	9	13	당신들이 성으로 들어가면 그가 먹으러 산당에 올라가기 전에 곧 만나리이다 그가 오기 전에는 백성이 먹지 아니하나니 이는 그가 제물을 축사한 후에야 청함을 받은 자가 먹음이라 그러므로 지금 올라가소서 금시로 만나리이다 하는지라	As soon as ye be come into the city, ye shall straightway find him, before he go up to the high place to eat: for the people will not eat until he come, because he doth bless the sacrifice; and afterwards they eat that be bidden. Now therefore get you up; for about this time ye shall find him.	As soon as you enter the city, you will find him before he goes up to the high place to eat. The people will not eat until he comes, because he must bless the sacrifice; after that, the guests will eat. Go up at once; you will find him.”
1SA	9	14	그들이 성읍으로 올라가서 그리로 들어갈 때에 사무엘이 마침 산당으로 올라가려고 마주 나오더라	And they went up into the city: and when they were come into the city, behold, Samuel came out against them, for to go up to the high place.	So Saul and his servant went up toward the city, and as they were entering it, there was Samuel coming toward them on his way up to the high place.
1SA	9	15	사울의 오기 전 날에 여호와께서 사무엘에게 알게 하여 가라사대	Now the Lord had told Samuel in his ear a day before Saul came, saying,	Now on the day before Saul’s arrival, the LORD had revealed to Samuel,
1SA	9	16	내일 이맘 때에 내가 베냐민 땅에서 한 사람을 네게 보내리니 너는 그에게 기름을 부어 내 백성 이스라엘의 지도자를 삼으라 그가 내 백성을 블레셋 사람의 손에서 구원하리라 내 백성의 부르짖음이 내게 상달하였으므로 내가 그들을 돌아 보았노라 하시더니	To morrow about this time I will send thee a man out of the land of Benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him to be captain over my people Israel, that he may save my people out of the hand of the Philistines: for I have looked upon my people, because their cry is come unto me.	“At this time tomorrow I will send you a man from the land of Benjamin, and you are to anoint him leader over My people Israel; he will save them from the hand of the Philistines. For I have looked upon My people, because their cry has come to Me.”
1SA	9	17	사무엘이 사울을 볼 때에 여호와께서 그에게 이르시되 보라 이는 내가 네게 말한 사람이니 이가 내 백성을 통할하리라 하시니라	And when Samuel saw Saul, the Lord said unto him, Behold the man whom I spake to thee of! this same shall reign over my people.	When Samuel saw Saul, the LORD told him, “Here is the man of whom I spoke; he shall rule over My people.”
1SA	9	18	사울이 성문 가운데 사무엘에게 나아가 가로되 선견자의 집이 어디인지 청컨대 내게 가르치소서	Then Saul drew near to Samuel in the gate, and said, Tell me, I pray thee, where the seer’s house is.	Saul approached Samuel in the gateway and asked, “Would you please tell me where the seer’s house is?”
1SA	9	19	사무엘이 사울에게 대답하여 가로되 내가 선견자니라 너는 내 앞서 산당으로 올라가라 너희가 오늘날 나와 함께 먹을 것이요 아침에는 내가 너를 보내되 네 마음에 있는 것을 다 네게 말하리라	And Samuel answered Saul, and said, I am the seer: go up before me unto the high place; for ye shall eat with me to day, and to morrow I will let thee go, and will tell thee all that is in thine heart.	“I am the seer,” Samuel replied. “Go up before me to the high place, for you shall eat with me today. And when I send you off in the morning, I will tell you all that is in your heart.
1SA	9	20	사흘 전에 잃은 네 암나귀들을 염려하지 말라 찾았느니라 온 이스라엘의 사모하는 자가 누구냐 너와 네 아비의 온 집이 아니냐	And as for thine asses that were lost three days ago, set not thy mind on them; for they are found. And on whom is all the desire of Israel? Is it not on thee, and on all thy father’s house?	As for the donkeys you lost three days ago, do not worry about them, for they have been found. And upon whom is all the desire of Israel, if not upon you and all your father’s house?”
1SA	9	21	사울이 대답하여 가로되 나는 이스라엘 지파의 가장 작은 지파 베냐민 사람이 아니오며 나의 가족은 베냐민 지파 모든 가족 중에 가장 미약하지 아니하니이까 당신이 어찌하여 내게 이같이 말씀하시나이까	And Saul answered and said, Am not I a Benjamite, of the smallest of the tribes of Israel? and my family the least of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin? wherefore then speakest thou so to me?	Saul replied, “Am I not a Benjamite from the smallest tribe of Israel, and is not my clan the least of all the clans of Benjamin? So why would you say such a thing to me?”
1SA	9	22	사무엘이 사울과 그 사환을 인도하여 객실로 들어가서 청한 자 중 수석에 앉게 하였는데 객은 삼십 명 가량이었더라	And Samuel took Saul and his servant, and brought them into the parlour, and made them sit in the chiefest place among them that were bidden, which were about thirty persons.	Then Samuel took Saul and his servant, brought them into the hall, and seated them in the place of honor among those who were invited—about thirty in all.
1SA	9	23	사무엘이 요리인에게 이르되 내가 네게 주며 네게 두라고 말한 그 부분을 가져오라	And Samuel said unto the cook, Bring the portion which I gave thee, of which I said unto thee, Set it by thee.	And Samuel said to the cook, “Bring the portion I gave you and told you to set aside.”
1SA	9	24	요리인이 넓적다리와 그것에 붙은 것을 가져다가 사울 앞에 놓는지라 사무엘이 가로되 보라 이는 두었던 것이니 네 앞에 놓고 먹으라 내가 백성을 청할 때부터 너를 위하여 이것을 두어서 이때를 기다리게 하였느니라 그 날에 사울이 사무엘과 함께 먹으니라	And the cook took up the shoulder, and that which was upon it, and set it before Saul. And Samuel said, Behold that which is left! set it before thee, and eat: for unto this time hath it been kept for thee since I said, I have invited the people. So Saul did eat with Samuel that day.	So the cook picked up the leg and what was attached to it and set it before Saul. Then Samuel said, “Here is what was kept back. It was set apart for you. Eat, for it has been kept for you for this occasion, from the time I said, ‘I have invited the people.’” So Saul dined with Samuel that day.
1SA	9	25	그들이 산당에서 내려 성에 들어가서는 사무엘이 사울과 함께 지붕에서 담화하고	And when they were come down from the high place into the city, Samuel communed with Saul upon the top of the house.	And after they had come down from the high place into the city, Samuel spoke with Saul on the roof of his house.
1SA	9	26	그들이 일찍이 일어날새 동틀 때 즈음이라 사무엘이 지붕에서 사울을 불러 가로되 일어나라 내가 너를 보내리라 하매 사울이 일어나고 그 두 사람 사울과 사무엘이 함께 밖으로 나가서	And they arose early: and it came to pass about the spring of the day, that Samuel called Saul to the top of the house, saying, Up, that I may send thee away. And Saul arose, and they went out both of them, he and Samuel, abroad.	They got up early in the morning, and just before dawn Samuel called to Saul on the roof, “Get ready, and I will send you on your way!” So Saul arose, and both he and Samuel went outside together.
1SA	9	27	성읍 끝에 이르매 사무엘이 사울에게 이르되 사환으로 우리를 앞서게 하라 사환이 앞서매 또 가로되 너는 이제 잠간 서 있으라 내가 하나님의 말씀을 네게 들리리라	And as they were going down to the end of the city, Samuel said to Saul, Bid the servant pass on before us, (and he passed on,) but stand thou still a while, that I may shew thee the word of God.	As they were going down to the edge of the city, Samuel said to Saul, “Tell the servant to go on ahead of us, but you stay for a while, and I will reveal to you the word of God.” So the servant went on.
1SA	10	1	이에 사무엘이 기름병을 취하여 사울의 머리에 붓고 입맞추어 가로되 여호와께서 네게 기름을 부으사 그 기업의 지도자를 삼지 아니하셨느냐	Then Samuel took a vial of oil, and poured it upon his head, and kissed him, and said, Is it not because the Lord hath anointed thee to be captain over his inheritance?	Then Samuel took a flask of oil, poured it on Saul’s head, kissed him, and said, “Has not the LORD anointed you ruler over His inheritance?
1SA	10	2	네가 오늘 나를 떠나가다가 베냐민 경계 셀사에 있는 라헬의 묘실 곁에서 두 사람을 만나리니 그들이 네게 이르기를 네가 찾으러 갔던 암나귀들을 찾은지라 네 아비가 암나귀들의 염려는 놓았으나 너희를 인하여 걱정하여 가로되 내 아들을 위하여 어찌하리요 하더라 할 것이요	When thou art departed from me to day, then thou shalt find two men by Rachel’s sepulchre in the border of Benjamin at Zelzah; and they will say unto thee, The asses which thou wentest to seek are found: and, lo, thy father hath left the care of the asses, and sorroweth for you, saying, What shall I do for my son?	When you leave me today, you will find two men at Rachel’s tomb in Zelzah on the border of Benjamin. They will say to you, ‘The donkeys you seek have been found, and now your father has stopped worrying about the donkeys and started worrying about you, asking, “What should I do about my son?”’
1SA	10	3	네가 거기서 더 나아가서 다볼 상수리나무에 이르면 거기서 하나님께 뵈려고 벧엘로 올라가는 세 사람이 너와 만나리니 하나는 염소 새끼 셋을 이끌었고 하나는 떡 세덩이를 가졌고 하나는 포도주 한 가죽부대를 가진 자라	Then shalt thou go on forward from thence, and thou shalt come to the plain of Tabor, and there shall meet thee three men going up to God to Beth–el, one carrying three kids, and another carrying three loaves of bread, and another carrying a bottle of wine:	Then you will go on from there until you come to the Oak of Tabor. Three men going up to God at Bethel will meet you there, one carrying three young goats, another carrying three loaves of bread, and another carrying a skin of wine.
1SA	10	4	그들이 네게 문안하고 떡 두 덩이를 주겠고 너는 그 손에서 받으리라	And they will salute thee, and give thee two loaves of bread; which thou shalt receive of their hands.	They will greet you and give you two loaves of bread, which you will accept from their hands.
1SA	10	5	그 후에 네가 하나님의 산에 이르리니 그곳에는 블레셋 사람의 영문이 있느니라 네가 그리로 가서 그 성읍으로 들어갈 때에 선지자의 무리가 산당에서부터 비파와 소고와 저와 수금을 앞세우고 예언하며 내려오는 것을 만날 것이요	After that thou shalt come to the hill of God, where is the garrison of the Philistines: and it shall come to pass, when thou art come thither to the city, that thou shalt meet a company of prophets coming down from the high place with a psaltery, and a tabret, and a pipe, and a harp, before them; and they shall prophesy:	After that you will come to Gibeah of God, where the Philistines have an outpost. As you approach the city, you will meet a group of prophets coming down from the high place, preceded by harps, tambourines, flutes, and lyres, and they will be prophesying.
1SA	10	6	네게는 여호와의 신이 크게 임하리니 너도 그들과 함께 예언을 하고 변하여 새 사람이 되리라	And the Spirit of the Lord will come upon thee, and thou shalt prophesy with them, and shalt be turned into another man.	Then the Spirit of the LORD will rush upon you, and you will prophesy with them; and you will be transformed into a different person.
1SA	10	7	이 징조가 네게 임하거든 너는 기회를 따라 행하라 하나님이 너와 함께 하시느니라	And let it be, when these signs are come unto thee, that thou do as occasion serve thee; for God is with thee.	When these signs have come, do as the occasion demands, for God is with you.
1SA	10	8	너는 나보다 앞서 길갈로 내려가라 내가 네게로 내려가서 번제와 화목제를 드리리니 내가 네게 가서 너의 행할 것을 가르칠 때까지 칠 일을 기다리라	And thou shalt go down before me to Gilgal; and, behold, I will come down unto thee, to offer burnt offerings, and to sacrifice sacrifices of peace offerings: seven days shalt thou tarry, till I come to thee, and shew thee what thou shalt do.	And you shall go before me to Gilgal, and surely I will come to you to offer burnt offerings and to sacrifice peace offerings. Wait seven days until I come to you and show you what you are to do.”
1SA	10	9	그가 사무엘에게서 떠나려고 몸을 돌이킬 때에 하나님이 새 마음을 주셨고 그 날 그 징조도 다 응하니라	And it was so, that when he had turned his back to go from Samuel, God gave him another heart: and all those signs came to pass that day.	As Saul turned to leave Samuel, God changed Saul’s heart, and all the signs came to pass that day.
1SA	10	10	그들이 산에 이를 때에 선지자의 무리가 그를 영접하고 하나님의 신이 사울에게 크게 임하므로 그가 그들 중에서 예언을 하니	And when they came thither to the hill, behold, a company of prophets met him; and the Spirit of God came upon him, and he prophesied among them.	When Saul and his servant arrived at Gibeah, a group of prophets met him. Then the Spirit of God rushed upon him, and he prophesied along with them.
1SA	10	11	전에 사울을 알던 모든 사람이 사울의 선지자들과 함께 예언함을 보고 서로 이르되 기스의 아들의 당한 일이 무엇이뇨 사울도 선지자들 중에 있느냐 하고	And it came to pass, when all that knew him beforetime saw that, behold, he prophesied among the prophets, then the people said one to another, What is this that is come unto the son of Kish? Is Saul also among the prophets?	All those who had formerly known Saul and saw him prophesying with the prophets asked one another, “What has happened to the son of Kish? Is Saul also among the prophets?”
1SA	10	12	그곳의 어떤 사람은 말하여 이르되 그들의 아비가 누구냐 한지라 그러므로 속담이 되어 가로되 사울도 선지자들 중에 있느냐 하더라	And one of the same place answered and said, But who is their father? Therefore it became a proverb, Is Saul also among the prophets?	Then a man who lived there replied, “And who is their father?” So the saying became a proverb: “Is Saul also among the prophets?”
1SA	10	13	사울이 예언하기를 마치고 산당으로 가니라	And when he had made an end of prophesying, he came to the high place.	And when Saul had finished prophesying, he went up to the high place.
1SA	10	14	사울의 숙부가 사울과 그 사환에게 이르되 너희가 어디로 갔더냐 사울이 가로되 암나귀들을 찾다가 얻지 못하므로 사무엘에게 갔었나이다	And Saul’s uncle said unto him and to his servant, Whither went ye? And he said, To seek the asses: and when we saw that they were no where, we came to Samuel.	Now Saul’s uncle asked him and his servant, “Where did you go?” “To look for the donkeys,” Saul replied. “When we saw they were not to be found, we went to Samuel.”
1SA	10	15	사울의 숙부가 가로되 청하노니 사무엘이 너희에게 이른 말을 내게 고하라	And Saul’s uncle said, Tell me, I pray thee, what Samuel said unto you.	“Tell me,” Saul’s uncle asked, “what did Samuel say to you?”
1SA	10	16	사울이 그 숙부에게 말하되 그가 암나귀들을 찾았다고 우리에게 분명히 말하더이다 하고 사무엘의 말하던 나라의 일은 고하지 아니하니라	And Saul said unto his uncle, He told us plainly that the asses were found. But of the matter of the kingdom, whereof Samuel spake, he told him not.	And Saul replied, “He assured us that the donkeys had been found.” But Saul did not tell his uncle what Samuel had said about the kingship.
1SA	10	17	사무엘이 백성을 미스바로 불러 여호와 앞에 모으고	And Samuel called the people together unto the Lord to Mizpeh;	After this, Samuel summoned the people to the LORD at Mizpah
1SA	10	18	이스라엘 자손에게 이르되 이스라엘 하나님 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시기를 내가 이스라엘을 애굽에서 인도하여 내고 너희를 애굽인의 손과 너희를 압제하는 모든 나라의 손에서 건져내었느니라 하셨거늘	And said unto the children of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, I brought up Israel out of Egypt, and delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all kingdoms, and of them that oppressed you:	and said to the Israelites, “This is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: ‘I brought Israel up out of Egypt, and I rescued you from the hands of the Egyptians and of all the kingdoms that oppressed you.’
1SA	10	19	너희가 너희를 모든 재난과 고통 중에서 친히 구원하여 내신 너희 하나님을 오늘날 버리고 이르기를 우리 위에 왕을 세우라 하도다 그런즉 이제 너희 지파대로 천 명씩 여호와 앞에 나아오라 하고	And ye have this day rejected your God, who himself saved you out of all your adversities and your tribulations; and ye have said unto him, Nay, but set a king over us. Now therefore present yourselves before the Lord by your tribes, and by your thousands.	But today you have rejected your God, who saves you from all your troubles and afflictions, and you have said to Him, ‘No, set a king over us.’ Now therefore present yourselves before the LORD by your tribes and clans.”
1SA	10	20	사무엘이 이에 이스라엘 모든 지파를 가까이 오게 하였더니 베냐민 지파가 뽑혔고	And when Samuel had caused all the tribes of Israel to come near, the tribe of Benjamin was taken.	Thus Samuel had all the tribes of Israel come forward, and the tribe of Benjamin was selected.
1SA	10	21	베냐민 지파를 그 가족대로 가까이 오게 하였더니 마드리의 가족이 뽑혔고 그 중에서 기스의 아들 사울이 뽑혔으나 그를 찾아도 만나지 못한지라	When he had caused the tribe of Benjamin to come near by their families, the family of Matri was taken, and Saul the son of Kish was taken: and when they sought him, he could not be found.	Then he had the tribe of Benjamin come forward by its clans, and the clan of Matri was selected. Finally, Saul son of Kish was selected. But when they looked for him, they could not find him.
1SA	10	22	그러므로 그들이 또 여호와께 묻되 그 사람이 여기 왔나이까 여호와께서 대답하시되 그가 행구 사이에 숨었느니라	Therefore they enquired of the Lord further, if the man should yet come thither. And the Lord answered, Behold, he hath hid himself among the stuff.	So again they inquired of the LORD, “Has the man come here yet?” And the LORD replied, “Behold, he has hidden himself among the baggage.”
1SA	10	23	그들이 달려가서 거기서 데려오매 그가 백성 중에 서니 다른 사람보다 어깨 위나 더 크더라	And they ran and fetched him thence: and when he stood among the people, he was higher than any of the people from his shoulders and upward.	So they ran and brought Saul, and when he stood among the people, he was a head taller than any of the others.
1SA	10	24	사무엘이 모든 백성에게 이르되 너희는 여호와의 택하신 자를 보느냐 모든 백성 중에 짝할 이가 없느니라 하니 모든 백성이 왕의 만세를 외쳐 부르니라	And Samuel said to all the people, See ye him whom the Lord hath chosen, that there is none like him among all the people? And all the people shouted, and said, God save the king.	Samuel said to all the people, “Do you see the one the LORD has chosen? There is no one like him among all the people.” And all the people shouted, “Long live the king!”
1SA	10	25	사무엘이 나라의 제도를 백성에게 말하고 책에 기록하여 여호와 앞에 두고 모든 백성을 각기 집으로 보내매	Then Samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom, and wrote it in a book, and laid it up before the Lord. And Samuel sent all the people away, every man to his house.	Then Samuel explained to the people the rights of kingship. He wrote them on a scroll and laid it up before the LORD. And Samuel sent all the people away, each to his own home.
1SA	10	26	사울도 기브아 자기 집으로 갈 때에 마음이 하나님께 감동된 유력한 자들은 그와 함께 갔어도	And Saul also went home to Gibeah; and there went with him a band of men, whose hearts God had touched.	Saul also went to his home in Gibeah, and the men of valor whose hearts God had touched went with him.
1SA	10	27	어떤 비류는 가로되 이 사람이 어떻게 우리를 구원하겠느냐 하고 멸시하며 예물을 드리지 아니하니라 그러나 그는 잠잠하였더라	But the children of Belial said, How shall this man save us? And they despised him, and brought him no presents. But he held his peace.	But some worthless men said, “How can this man save us?” So they despised him and brought him no gifts; but Saul remained silent about it.
1SA	11	1	암몬 사람 나하스가 올라와서 길르앗 야베스를 대하여 진 치매 야베스 모든 사람이 나하스에게 이르되 우리와 언약하자 그리하면 우리가 너를 섬기리라	Then Nahash the Ammonite came up, and encamped against Jabesh–gilead: and all the men of Jabesh said unto Nahash, Make a covenant with us, and we will serve thee.	Soon Nahash the Ammonite came up and laid siege to Jabesh-gilead. All the men of Jabesh said to him, “Make a treaty with us, and we will serve you.”
1SA	11	2	암몬 사람 나하스가 그들에게 이르되 내가 너희 오른눈을 다 빼어야 너희와 언약하리라 내가 온 이스라엘을 이같이 모욕하리라	And Nahash the Ammonite answered them, On this condition will I make a covenant with you, that I may thrust out all your right eyes, and lay it for a reproach upon all Israel.	But Nahash the Ammonite replied, “I will make a treaty with you on one condition, that I may put out everyone’s right eye and bring reproach upon all Israel.”
1SA	11	3	야베스 장로들이 이르되 우리에게 이레 유예를 주어 우리로 이스라엘 온 지경에 사자를 보내게 하라 우리를 구원할 자가 없으면 네게 나아가리라 하니라	And the elders of Jabesh said unto him, Give us seven days’ respite, that we may send messengers unto all the coasts of Israel: and then, if there be no man to save us, we will come out to thee.	“Hold off for seven days,” replied the elders of Jabesh, “and let us send messengers throughout Israel. If there is no one to save us, we will surrender to you.”
1SA	11	4	이에 사자가 사울의 기브아에 이르러 이 말을 백성에게 고하매 모든 백성이 소리를 높여 울더니	Then came the messengers to Gibeah of Saul, and told the tidings in the ears of the people: and all the people lifted up their voices, and wept.	When the messengers came to Gibeah of Saul and relayed these words in the hearing of the people, they all wept aloud.
1SA	11	5	마침 사울이 밭에서 소를 몰고 오다가 가로되 백성이 무슨 일로 우느냐 그들이 야베스 사람의 말로 고하니라	And, behold, Saul came after the herd out of the field; and Saul said, What aileth the people that they weep? And they told him the tidings of the men of Jabesh.	Just then Saul was returning from the field, behind his oxen. “What troubles the people?” asked Saul. “Why are they weeping?” And they relayed to him the words of the men from Jabesh.
1SA	11	6	사울이 이 말을 들을 때에 하나님의 신에게 크게 감동되매 그 노가 크게 일어나서	And the Spirit of God came upon Saul when he heard those tidings, and his anger was kindled greatly.	When Saul heard their words, the Spirit of God rushed upon him, and he burned with great anger.
1SA	11	7	한 겨리 소를 취하여 각을 뜨고 사자의 손으로 그것을 이스라엘 모든 지경에 두루 보내어 가로되 누구든지 나와서 사울과 사무엘을 좇지 아니하면 그 소들도 이와 같이 하리라 하였더니 여호와의 두려움이 백성에게 임하매 그들이 한 사람 같이 나온지라	And he took a yoke of oxen, and hewed them in pieces, and sent them throughout all the coasts of Israel by the hands of messengers, saying, Whosoever cometh not forth after Saul and after Samuel, so shall it be done unto his oxen. And the fear of the Lord fell on the people, and they came out with one consent.	He took a pair of oxen, cut them into pieces, and sent them by messengers throughout the land of Israel, proclaiming, “This is what will be done to the oxen of anyone who does not march behind Saul and Samuel.” Then the terror of the LORD fell upon the people, and they turned out as one man.
1SA	11	8	사울이 베섹에서 그들을 계수하니 이스라엘 자손이 삼십만이요 유다 사람이 삼만이더라	And when he numbered them in Bezek, the children of Israel were three hundred thousand, and the men of Judah thirty thousand.	And when Saul numbered them at Bezek, there were 300,000 Israelites and 30,000 men of Judah.
1SA	11	9	무리가 온 사자들에게 이르되 너희는 길르앗 야베스 사람에게 이같이 이르기를 내일 해가 더울 때에 너희가 구원을 얻으리라 하라 사자들이 돌아가서 야베스 사람들에게 고하매 그들이 기뻐하니라	And they said unto the messengers that came, Thus shall ye say unto the men of Jabesh–gilead, To morrow, by that time the sun be hot, ye shall have help. And the messengers came and shewed it to the men of Jabesh; and they were glad.	So they said to the messengers who had come, “Tell the men of Jabesh-gilead: ‘Deliverance will be yours tomorrow by the time the sun is hot.’” And when the messengers relayed this to the men of Jabesh, they rejoiced.
1SA	11	10	야베스 사람들이 이에 가로되 우리가 내일 너희에게 나아가리니 너희 소견에 좋을 대로 우리에게 다 행하라 하니라	Therefore the men of Jabesh said, To morrow we will come out unto you, and ye shall do with us all that seemeth good unto you.	Then the men of Jabesh said to Nahash, “Tomorrow we will come out, and you can do with us whatever seems good to you.”
1SA	11	11	이튿날에 사울이 백성을 삼 대에 나누고 새벽에 적진 중에 들어가서 날이 더울 때까지 암몬 사람을 치매 남은 자가 다 흩어져서 둘도 함께 한 자가 없었더라	And it was so on the morrow, that Saul put the people in three companies; and they came into the midst of the host in the morning watch, and slew the Ammonites until the heat of the day: and it came to pass, that they which remained were scattered, so that two of them were not left together.	The next day Saul organized the troops into three divisions, and during the morning watch they invaded the camp of the Ammonites and slaughtered them, until the hottest part of the day. And the survivors were so scattered that no two of them were left together.
1SA	11	12	백성이 사무엘에게 이르되 사울이 어찌 우리를 다스리겠느냐 한 자가 누구니이까 그들을 끌어내소서 우리가 죽이겠나이다	And the people said unto Samuel, Who is he that said, Shall Saul reign over us? bring the men, that we may put them to death.	Then the people said to Samuel, “Who said that Saul should not reign over us? Bring those men here so we can kill them!”
1SA	11	13	사울이 가로되 이 날에는 사람을 죽이지 못하리니 여호와께서 오늘날 이스라엘 중에 구원을 베푸셨음이니라	And Saul said, There shall not a man be put to death this day: for to day the Lord hath wrought salvation in Israel.	But Saul ordered, “No one shall be put to death this day, for today the LORD has worked salvation in Israel.”
1SA	11	14	사무엘이 백성에게 이르되 오라 우리가 길갈로 가서 나라를 새롭게 하자	Then said Samuel to the people, Come, and let us go to Gilgal, and renew the kingdom there.	Then Samuel said to the people, “Come, let us go to Gilgal and renew the kingship there.”
1SA	11	15	모든 백성이 길갈로 가서 거기서 여호와 앞에 사울로 왕을 삼고 거기서 여호와 앞에 화목제를 드리고 사울과 이스라엘 모든 사람이 거기서 크게 기뻐하니라	And all the people went to Gilgal; and there they made Saul king before the Lord in Gilgal; and there they sacrificed sacrifices of peace offerings before the Lord; and there Saul and all the men of Israel rejoiced greatly.	So all the people went to Gilgal and confirmed Saul as king in the presence of the LORD. There they sacrificed peace offerings before the LORD, and Saul and all the Israelites rejoiced greatly.
1SA	12	1	사무엘이 온 이스라엘에게 이르되 보라 너희가 내게 한 말을 내가 다 듣고 너희 위에 왕을 세웠더니	And Samuel said unto all Israel, Behold, I have hearkened unto your voice in all that ye said unto me, and have made a king over you.	Then Samuel said to all Israel, “I have listened to your voice in all that you have said to me, and I have set over you a king.
1SA	12	2	이제 왕이 너희 앞에 출입하느니라 보라 나는 늙어 머리가 희었고 내 아들들도 너희와 함께 있느니라 내가 어려서부터 오늘날까지 너희 앞에 출입하였거니와	And now, behold, the king walketh before you: and I am old and grayheaded; and, behold, my sons are with you: and I have walked before you from my childhood unto this day.	Now here is the king walking before you, and I am old and gray, and my sons are here with you. I have walked before you from my youth until this day.
1SA	12	3	내가 여기 있나니 여호와 앞과 그 기름 부음을 받은 자 앞에서 내게 대하여 증거하라 내가 뉘 소를 취하였느냐 뉘 나귀를 취하였느냐 누구를 속였느냐 누구를 압제하였느냐 내 눈을 흐리게 하는 뇌물을 뉘 손에서 취하였느냐 그리하였으면 내가 그것을 너희에게 갚으리라	Behold, here I am: witness against me before the Lord, and before his anointed: whose ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? and I will restore it you.	Here I am. Bear witness against me before the LORD and before His anointed: Whose ox or donkey have I taken? Whom have I cheated or oppressed? From whose hand have I accepted a bribe and closed my eyes? Tell me, and I will restore it to you.”
1SA	12	4	그들이 가로되 당신이 우리를 속이지 아니하였고 압제하지 아니하였고 뉘 손에서 아무 것도 취한 것이 없나이다	And they said, Thou hast not defrauded us, nor oppressed us, neither hast thou taken ought of any man’s hand.	“You have not wronged us or oppressed us,” they replied, “nor have you taken anything from the hand of man.”
1SA	12	5	사무엘이 백성에게 이르되 너희가 내 손에서 아무 것도 찾아낸 것이 없음을 여호와께서 너희에게 대하여 증거하시며 그 기름 부음을 받은 자도 오늘날 증거하느니라 그들이 가로되 그가 증거하시나이다	And he said unto them, The Lord is witness against you, and his anointed is witness this day, that ye have not found ought in my hand. And they answered, He is witness.	Samuel said to them, “The LORD is a witness against you, and His anointed is a witness today, that you have not found anything in my hand.” “He is a witness,” they replied.
1SA	12	6	사무엘이 백성에게 이르되 모세와 아론을 세우시며 너희 열조를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내신 이는 여호와시니	And Samuel said unto the people, It is the Lord that advanced Moses and Aaron, and that brought your fathers up out of the land of Egypt.	Then Samuel said to the people, “The LORD is the One who appointed Moses and Aaron, and who brought your fathers up out of the land of Egypt.
1SA	12	7	그런즉 가만히 섰으라 여호와께서 너희와 너희 열조에게 행하신 모든 의로운 일에 대하여 내가 여호와 앞에서 너희와 담론하리라	Now therefore stand still, that I may reason with you before the Lord of all the righteous acts of the Lord, which he did to you and to your fathers.	Now present yourselves, so that I may confront you before the LORD with all the righteous acts He has done for you and your fathers.
1SA	12	8	야곱이 애굽에 들어간 후 너희 열조가 여호와께 부르짖으매 여호와께서 모세와 아론을 보내사 그 두 사람으로 너희 열조를 애굽에서 인도하여 내어 이곳에 거하게 하셨으나	When Jacob was come into Egypt, and your fathers cried unto the Lord, then the Lord sent Moses and Aaron, which brought forth your fathers out of Egypt, and made them dwell in this place.	When Jacob went to Egypt, your fathers cried out to the LORD, and He sent them Moses and Aaron, who brought your fathers out of Egypt and settled them in this place.
1SA	12	9	그들이 그 하나님 여호와를 잊은지라 여호와께서 그들을 하솔 군장 시스라의 손과 블레셋 사람의 손과 모압 왕의 손에 붙이셨더니 그들이 치매	And when they forgat the Lord their God, he sold them into the hand of Sisera, captain of the host of Hazor, and into the hand of the Philistines, and into the hand of the king of Moab, and they fought against them.	But they forgot the LORD their God, and He sold them into the hand of Sisera the commander of the army of Hazor, and into the hands of the Philistines and the king of Moab, who fought against them.
1SA	12	10	백성이 여호와께 부르짖어 가로되 우리가 여호와를 버리고 바알들과 아스다롯을 섬기므로 범죄하였나이다 그러하오나 이제 우리를 원수들의 손에서 건져 내소서 그리하시면 우리가 주를 섬기겠나이다 하매	And they cried unto the Lord, and said, We have sinned, because we have forsaken the Lord, and have served Baalim and Ashtaroth: but now deliver us out of the hand of our enemies, and we will serve thee.	Then they cried out to the LORD and said, ‘We have sinned, for we have forsaken the LORD and served the Baals and Ashtoreths. Now deliver us from the hands of our enemies, that we may serve You.’
1SA	12	11	여호와께서 여룹바알과 베단과 입다와 나 사무엘을 보내사 너희를 너희 사방 원수의 손에서 건져내사 너희로 안전히 거하게 하셨거늘	And the Lord sent Jerubbaal, and Bedan, and Jephthah, and Samuel, and delivered you out of the hand of your enemies on every side, and ye dwelled safe.	So the LORD sent Jerubbaal, Barak, Jephthah, and Samuel, and He delivered you from the hands of your enemies on every side, and you dwelt securely.
1SA	12	12	너희가 암몬 자손의 왕 나하스의 너희를 치러 옴을 보고 너희 하나님 여호와께서는 너희의 왕이 되실지라도 너희가 내게 이르기를 아니라 우리를 다스릴 왕이 있어야 하겠다 하였도다	And when ye saw that Nahash the king of the children of Ammon came against you, ye said unto me, Nay; but a king shall reign over us: when the Lord your God was your king.	But when you saw that Nahash king of the Ammonites was moving against you, you said to me, ‘No, we must have a king to rule over us’—even though the LORD your God was your king.
1SA	12	13	이제 너희의 구한 왕 너희의 택한 왕을 보라 여호와께서 너희 위에 왕을 세우셨느니라	Now therefore behold the king whom ye have chosen, and whom ye have desired! and, behold, the Lord hath set a king over you.	Now here is the king you have chosen, the one you requested. Behold, the LORD has placed a king over you.
1SA	12	14	너희가 만일 여호와를 경외하여 그를 섬기며 그 목소리를 듣고 여호와의 명령을 거역하지 아니하며 또 너희와 너희를 다스리는 왕이 너희 하나님 여호와를 좇으면 좋으니라마는	If ye will fear the Lord, and serve him, and obey his voice, and not rebel against the commandment of the Lord, then shall both ye and also the king that reigneth over you continue following the Lord your God:	If you fear the LORD and serve Him and obey His voice, and if you do not rebel against the command of the LORD, and if both you and the king who reigns over you follow the LORD your God, then all will be well.
1SA	12	15	너희가 만일 여호와의 목소리를 듣지 아니하고 여호와의 명령을 거역하면 여호와의 손이 너희의 열조를 치신 것 같이 너희를 치실 것이라	But if ye will not obey the voice of the Lord, but rebel against the commandment of the Lord, then shall the hand of the Lord be against you, as it was against your fathers.	But if you disobey the LORD and rebel against His command, then the hand of the LORD will be against you as it was against your fathers.
1SA	12	16	너희는 이제 가만히 서서 여호와께서 너희 목전에 행하시는 이 큰 일을 보라	Now therefore stand and see this great thing, which the Lord will do before your eyes.	Now, therefore, stand and see this great thing that the LORD will do before your eyes.
1SA	12	17	오늘은 밀 베는 때가 아니냐 내가 여호와께 아뢰리니 여호와께서 우뢰와 비를 보내사 너희가 왕을 구한 일 곧 여호와의 목전에 범한 죄악이 큼을 너희로 밝히 알게 하시리라	Is it not wheat harvest to day? I will call unto the Lord, and he shall send thunder and rain; that ye may perceive and see that your wickedness is great, which ye have done in the sight of the Lord, in asking you a king.	Is it not the wheat harvest today? I will call on the LORD to send thunder and rain, so that you will know and see what a great evil you have committed in the sight of the LORD by asking for a king.”
1SA	12	18	이에 사무엘이 여호와께 아뢰매 여호와께서 그 날에 우뢰와 비를 보내시니 모든 백성이 여호와와 사무엘을 크게 두려워하니라	So Samuel called unto the Lord; and the Lord sent thunder and rain that day: and all the people greatly feared the Lord and Samuel.	So Samuel called to the LORD, and on that day the LORD sent thunder and rain. As a result, all the people greatly feared the LORD and Samuel.
1SA	12	19	모든 백성이 사무엘에게 이르되 당신의 종들을 위하여 당신의 하나님 여호와께 기도하여 우리로 죽지 않게 하소서 우리가 우리의 모든 죄에 왕을 구하는 악을 더하였나이다	And all the people said unto Samuel, Pray for thy servants unto the Lord thy God, that we die not: for we have added unto all our sins this evil, to ask us a king.	They pleaded with Samuel, “Pray to the LORD your God for your servants so that we will not die! For we have added to all our sins the evil of asking for a king.”
1SA	12	20	사무엘이 백성에게 이르되 두려워 말라 너희가 과연 이 모든 악을 행하였으나 여호와를 좇는데서 돌이키지 말고 오직 너희 마음을 다하여 여호와를 섬기라	And Samuel said unto the people, Fear not: ye have done all this wickedness: yet turn not aside from following the Lord, but serve the Lord with all your heart;	“Do not be afraid,” Samuel replied. “Even though you have committed all this evil, do not turn aside from following the LORD, but serve the LORD with all your heart.
1SA	12	21	돌이켜 유익하게도 못하며 구원하지도 못하는 헛된 것을 좇지 말라 그들은 헛되니라	And turn ye not aside: for then should ye go after vain things, which cannot profit nor deliver; for they are vain.	Do not turn aside after worthless things that cannot profit you or deliver you, for they are empty.
1SA	12	22	여호와께서는 너희로 자기 백성 삼으신 것을 기뻐하신 고로 그 크신 이름을 인하여 자기 백성을 버리지 아니하실 것이요	For the Lord will not forsake his people for his great name’s sake: because it hath pleased the Lord to make you his people.	Indeed, for the sake of His great name, the LORD will not abandon His people, because He was pleased to make you His own.
1SA	12	23	나는 너희를 위하여 기도하기를 쉬는 죄를 여호와 앞에 결단코 범치 아니하고 선하고 의로운 도로 너희를 가르칠 것인즉	Moreover as for me, God forbid that I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you: but I will teach you the good and the right way:	As for me, far be it from me that I should sin against the LORD by ceasing to pray for you. And I will continue to teach you the good and right way.
1SA	12	24	너희는 여호와께서 너희를 위하여 행하신 그 큰 일을 생각하여 오직 그를 경외하며 너희의 마음을 다하여 진실히 섬기라	Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth with all your heart: for consider how great things he hath done for you.	Above all, fear the LORD and serve Him faithfully with all your heart; consider what great things He has done for you.
1SA	12	25	만일 너희가 여전히 악을 행하면 너희와 너희 왕이 다 멸망하리라	But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your king.	But if you persist in doing evil, both you and your king will be swept away.”
1SA	13	1	사울이 왕이 될 때에 사십 세라 그가 이스라엘을 다스린지 이년에	Saul reigned one year; and when he had reigned two years over Israel,	Saul was thirty years old when he became king, and he reigned over Israel forty-two years.
1SA	13	2	이스라엘 사람 삼천을 택하여 그 중에서 이천은 자기와 함께 믹마스와 벧엘 산에 있게 하고 일천은 요나단과 함께 베냐민 기브아에 있게 하고 남은 백성은 각기 장막으로 보내니라	Saul chose him three thousand men of Israel; whereof two thousand were with Saul in Michmash and in mount Beth–el, and a thousand were with Jonathan in Gibeah of Benjamin: and the rest of the people he sent every man to his tent.	He chose for himself three thousand men of Israel: Two thousand were with Saul at Michmash and in the hill country of Bethel, and a thousand were with Jonathan in Gibeah of Benjamin. And the rest of the troops he sent away, each to his own home.
1SA	13	3	요나단이 게바에 있는 블레셋 사람의 수비대를 치매 블레셋 사람이 이를 들은지라 사울이 온 땅에 나팔을 불어 이르되 히브리 사람들은 들으라 하니	And Jonathan smote the garrison of the Philistines that was in Geba, and the Philistines heard of it. And Saul blew the trumpet throughout all the land, saying, Let the Hebrews hear.	Then Jonathan attacked the Philistine outpost at Geba, and the Philistines heard about it. So Saul blew the ram’s horn throughout the land, saying, “Let the Hebrews hear!”
1SA	13	4	온 이스라엘이 사울의 블레셋 사람의 수비대를 친 것과 이스라엘이 블레셋 사람의 가증히 여김이 되었다 함을 듣고 길갈로 모여 사울을 좇으니라	And all Israel heard say that Saul had smitten a garrison of the Philistines, and that Israel also was had in abomination with the Philistines. And the people were called together after Saul to Gilgal.	And all Israel heard the news: “Saul has attacked an outpost of the Philistines, and now Israel has become a stench to the Philistines!” Then the people were summoned to join Saul at Gilgal.
1SA	13	5	블레셋 사람이 이스라엘과 싸우려 하여 모였는데 병거가 삼만이요 마병이 육천이요 백성은 해변의 모래 같이 많더라 그들이 올라와서 벧아웬 동편 믹마스에 진 치매	And the Philistines gathered themselves together to fight with Israel, thirty thousand chariots, and six thousand horsemen, and people as the sand which is on the sea shore in multitude: and they came up, and pitched in Michmash, eastward from Beth–aven.	Now the Philistines assembled to fight against Israel with three thousand chariots, six thousand horsemen, and troops as numerous as the sand on the seashore. They went up and camped at Michmash, east of Beth-aven.
1SA	13	6	이스라엘 사람들이 위급함을 보고 절박하여 굴과 수풀과 바위틈과 은밀한 곳과 웅덩이에 숨으며	When the men of Israel saw that they were in a strait, (for the people were distressed,) then the people did hide themselves in caves, and in thickets, and in rocks, and in high places, and in pits.	Seeing that they were in danger because their troops were hard-pressed, the men of Israel hid in caves and thickets, among the rocks, and in cellars and cisterns.
1SA	13	7	어떤 히브리 사람들은 요단을 건너 갓과 길르앗 땅으로 가되 사울은 아직 길갈에 있고 그를 좇은 모든 백성은 떨더라	And some of the Hebrews went over Jordan to the land of Gad and Gilead. As for Saul, he was yet in Gilgal, and all the people followed him trembling.	Some Hebrews even crossed the Jordan into the land of Gad and Gilead. Saul, however, remained at Gilgal, and all his troops were quaking in fear.
1SA	13	8	사울이 사무엘의 정한 기한대로 이레를 기다리되 사무엘이 길갈로 오지 아니하매 백성이 사울에게서 흩어지는지라	And he tarried seven days, according to the set time that Samuel had appointed: but Samuel came not to Gilgal; and the people were scattered from him.	And Saul waited seven days for the time appointed by Samuel, but Samuel did not come to Gilgal, and the troops began to desert Saul.
1SA	13	9	사울이 가로되 번제와 화목제물을 이리로 가져오라 하여 번제를 드렸더니	And Saul said, Bring hither a burnt offering to me, and peace offerings. And he offered the burnt offering.	So he said, “Bring me the burnt offering and the peace offerings.” And he offered up the burnt offering.
1SA	13	10	번제 드리기를 필하자 사무엘이 온지라 사울이 나가 맞으며 문안하매	And it came to pass, that as soon as he had made an end of offering the burnt offering, behold, Samuel came; and Saul went out to meet him, that he might salute him.	Just as he finished offering the burnt offering, Samuel arrived, and Saul went out to greet him.
1SA	13	11	사무엘이 가로되 왕의 행한 것이 무엇이뇨 사울이 가로되 백성은 나에게서 흩어지고 당신은 정한 날 안에 오지 아니하고 블레셋 사람은 믹마스에 모였음을 내가 보았으므로	And Samuel said, What hast thou done? And Saul said, Because I saw that the people were scattered from me, and that thou camest not within the days appointed, and that the Philistines gathered themselves together at Michmash;	“What have you done?” Samuel asked. And Saul replied, “When I saw that the troops were deserting me, and that you did not come at the appointed time and the Philistines were gathering at Michmash,
1SA	13	12	이에 내가 이르기를 블레셋 사람은 나를 치러 길갈로 내려오겠거늘 내가 여호와께 은혜를 간구치 못하였다 하고 부득이하여 번제를 드렸나이다	Therefore said I, The Philistines will come down now upon me to Gilgal, and I have not made supplication unto the Lord: I forced myself therefore, and offered a burnt offering.	I thought, ‘Now the Philistines will descend upon me at Gilgal, and I have not sought the favor of the LORD.’ So I felt compelled to offer the burnt offering.”
1SA	13	13	사무엘이 사울에게 이르되 왕이 망령되이 행하였도다 왕이 왕의 하나님 여호와께서 왕에게 명하신 명령을 지키지 아니하였도다 그리하였더면 여호와께서 이스라엘 위에 왕의 나라를 영영히 세우셨을 것이어늘	And Samuel said to Saul, Thou hast done foolishly: thou hast not kept the commandment of the Lord thy God, which he commanded thee: for now would the Lord have established thy kingdom upon Israel for ever.	“You have acted foolishly,” Samuel declared. “You have not kept the command that the LORD your God gave you; if you had, the LORD would have established your kingdom over Israel for all time.
1SA	13	14	지금은 왕의 나라가 길지 못할 것이라 여호와께서 왕에게 명하신 바를 왕이 지키지 아니하였으므로 여호와께서 그 마음에 맞는 사람을 구하여 그 백성의 지도자를 삼으셨느니라 하고	But now thy kingdom shall not continue: the Lord hath sought him a man after his own heart, and the Lord hath commanded him to be captain over his people, because thou hast not kept that which the Lord commanded thee.	But now your kingdom will not endure; the LORD has sought a man after His own heart and appointed him ruler over His people, because you have not kept the command of the LORD.”
1SA	13	15	사무엘이 일어나 길갈에서 떠나 베냐민 기브아로 올라가니라 사울이 자기와 함께 한 백성을 계수하니 육백 명 가량이라	And Samuel arose, and gat him up from Gilgal unto Gibeah of Benjamin. And Saul numbered the people that were present with him, about six hundred men.	Then Samuel set out from Gilgal and went up to Gibeah in Benjamin. And Saul numbered the troops who were with him, about six hundred men.
1SA	13	16	사울과 그 아들 요나단과 그들과 함께한 백성은 베냐민 게바에 있고 블레셋 사람은 믹마스에 진 쳤더니	And Saul, and Jonathan his son, and the people that were present with them, abode in Gibeah of Benjamin: but the Philistines encamped in Michmash.	Now Saul and Jonathan his son and the troops with them were staying in Geba of Benjamin, while the Philistines camped at Michmash.
1SA	13	17	노략꾼들이 삼 대로 블레셋 사람의 진에서 나와서 한 대는 오브라길로 말미암아 수알 땅에 이르렀고	And the spoilers came out of the camp of the Philistines in three companies: one company turned unto the way that leadeth to Ophrah, unto the land of Shual:	And raiders went out of the Philistine camp in three divisions. One headed toward Ophrah in the land of Shual,
1SA	13	18	한 대는 벧호론 길로 향하였고 한 대는 광야를 향한 스보임 골짜기가 내려다 보이는 지경 길로 향하였더라	And another company turned the way to Beth–horon: and another company turned to the way of the border that looketh to the valley of Zeboim toward the wilderness.	another toward Beth-horon, and the third down the border road overlooking the Valley of Zeboim facing the wilderness.
1SA	13	19	때에 이스라엘 온 땅에 철공이 없어졌으니 이는 블레셋 사람이 말하기를 히브리 사람이 칼이나 창을 만들까 두렵다 하였음이라	Now there was no smith found throughout all the land of Israel: for the Philistines said, Lest the Hebrews make them swords or spears:	And no blacksmith could be found in all the land of Israel, because the Philistines had said, “The Hebrews must not be allowed to make swords or spears.”
1SA	13	20	온 이스라엘 사람이 각기 보습이나 삽이나 도끼나 괭이를 벼리려면 블레셋 사람에게로 내려갔었는데	But all the Israelites went down to the Philistines, to sharpen every man his share, and his coulter, and his axe, and his mattock.	Instead, all the Israelites would go down to the Philistines to sharpen their plowshares, mattocks, axes, and sickles.
1SA	13	21	곧 그들이 괭이나 삽이나 쇠스랑이나 도끼나 쇠채찍이 무딜 때에 그리하였으므로	Yet they had a file for the mattocks, and for the coulters, and for the forks, and for the axes, and to sharpen the goads.	The charge was a pim for sharpening a plowshare or mattock, a third of a shekel for sharpening a pitchfork or an axe, and a third of a shekel for repointing an oxgoad.
1SA	13	22	싸우는 날에 사울과 요나단과 함께한 백성의 손에는 칼이나 창이 없고 오직 사울과 그 아들 요나단에게만 있으니라	So it came to pass in the day of battle, that there was neither sword nor spear found in the hand of any of the people that were with Saul and Jonathan: but with Saul and with Jonathan his son was there found.	So on the day of battle not a sword or spear could be found in the hands of the troops with Saul and Jonathan; only Saul and his son Jonathan had weapons.
1SA	13	23	블레셋 사람의 부대가 나와서 믹마스 어귀에 이르렀더라	And the garrison of the Philistines went out to the passage of Michmash.	And a garrison of the Philistines had gone out to the pass at Michmash.
1SA	14	1	하루는 사울의 아들 요나단이 자기 병기를 든 소년에게 이르되 우리가 건너편 블레셋 사람의 부대에게로 건너가자 하고 그 아비에게는 고하지 아니하였더라	Now it came to pass upon a day, that Jonathan the son of Saul said unto the young man that bare his armour, Come, and let us go over to the Philistines’ garrison, that is on the other side. But he told not his father.	One day Jonathan son of Saul said to the young man bearing his armor, “Come, let us cross over to the Philistine outpost on the other side.” But Jonathan did not tell his father.
1SA	14	2	사울이 기브아 변경 미그론에 있는 석류나무 아래 머물렀고 함께한 백성은 육백 명 가량이며	And Saul tarried in the uttermost part of Gibeah under a pomegranate tree which is in Migron: and the people that were with him were about six hundred men;	Meanwhile, Saul was staying under the pomegranate tree in Migron on the outskirts of Gibeah. And the troops who were with him numbered about six hundred men,
1SA	14	3	아히야는 에봇을 입고 거기 있었으니 그는 이가봇의 형제 아히둡의 아들이요 비느하스의 손자요 실로에서 여호와의 제사장이 되었던 엘리의 증손이었더라 백성은 요나단의 간 줄을 알지 못하니라	And Ahiah, the son of Ahitub, I–chabod’s brother, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eli, the Lord’s priest in Shiloh, wearing an ephod. And the people knew not that Jonathan was gone.	including Ahijah, who was wearing an ephod. He was the son of Ichabod’s brother Ahitub son of Phinehas, the son of Eli the priest of the LORD in Shiloh. But the troops did not know that Jonathan had left.
1SA	14	4	요나단이 블레셋 사람의 부대에게로 건너가려 하는 어귀 사이 이편에도 험한 바위가 있고 저편에도 험한 바위가 있는데 하나의 이름은 보세스요 하나의 이름은 세네라	And between the passages, by which Jonathan sought to go over unto the Philistines’ garrison, there was a sharp rock on the one side, and a sharp rock on the other side: and the name of the one was Bozez, and the name of the other Seneh.	Now there were cliffs on both sides of the pass that Jonathan intended to cross to reach the Philistine outpost. One was named Bozez and the other Seneh.
1SA	14	5	한 바위는 북에서 믹마스 앞에 일어섰고 하나는 남에서 게바 앞에 일어섰더라	The forefront of the one was situate northward over against Michmash, and the other southward over against Gibeah.	One cliff stood to the north toward Michmash, and the other to the south toward Geba.
1SA	14	6	요나단이 자기 병기 든 소년에게 이르되 우리가 이 할례 없는 자들의 부대에게로 건너가자 여호와께서 우리를 위하여 일하실까 하노라 여호와의 구원은 사람의 많고 적음에 달리지 아니하였느니라	And Jonathan said to the young man that bare his armour, Come, and let us go over unto the garrison of these uncircumcised: it may be that the Lord will work for us: for there is no restraint to the Lord to save by many or by few.	Jonathan said to the young man bearing his armor, “Come, let us cross over to the outpost of these uncircumcised men. Perhaps the LORD will work on our behalf. Nothing can hinder the LORD from saving, whether by many or by few.”
1SA	14	7	병기 든 자가 그에게 이르되 당신의 마음에 있는 대로 다 행하여 앞서 가소서 내가 당신과 마음을 같이하여 따르리이다	And his armourbearer said unto him, Do all that is in thine heart: turn thee; behold, I am with thee according to thy heart.	His armor-bearer replied, “Do all that is in your heart. Go ahead; I am with you heart and soul.”
1SA	14	8	요나단이 가로되 보라 우리가 그 사람들에게로 건너가서 그들에게 보이리니	Then said Jonathan, Behold, we will pass over unto these men, and we will discover ourselves unto them.	“Very well,” said Jonathan, “we will cross over toward these men and show ourselves to them.
1SA	14	9	그들이 만일 이같이 우리에게 이르기를 우리가 너희에게로 가기를 기다리라 하면 우리는 우리 곳에 가만히 서서 그들에게로 올라가지 말 것이요	If they say thus unto us, Tarry until we come to you; then we will stand still in our place, and will not go up unto them.	If they say, ‘Wait until we come to you,’ then we will stay where we are and will not go up to them.
1SA	14	10	그들이 만일 이같이 말하기를 우리에게로 올라오라 하면 우리가 올라갈 것은 여호와께서 그들을 우리 손에 붙이셨음이니 이것이 우리에게 표징이 되리라 하고	But if they say thus, Come up unto us; then we will go up: for the Lord hath delivered them into our hand: and this shall be a sign unto us.	But if they say, ‘Come on up,’ then we will go up, because this will be our sign that the LORD has delivered them into our hands.”
1SA	14	11	둘이 다 블레셋 사람의 부대에게 보이매 블레셋 사람이 가로되 보라 히브리 사람이 그 숨었던 구멍에서 나온다 하고	And both of them discovered themselves unto the garrison of the Philistines: and the Philistines said, Behold, the Hebrews come forth out of the holes where they had hid themselves.	So the two of them showed themselves to the outpost of the Philistines, who exclaimed, “Look, the Hebrews are coming out of the holes in which they were hiding!”
1SA	14	12	그 부대 사람들이 요나단과 그 병기 든 자를 대하여 가로되 우리에게로 올라오라 너희에게 한 일을 보이리라 한지라 요나단이 자기 병기 든 자에게 이르되 나를 따라 올라오라 여호와께서 그들을 이스라엘의 손에 붙이셨느니라 하고	And the men of the garrison answered Jonathan and his armourbearer, and said, Come up to us, and we will shew you a thing. And Jonathan said unto his armourbearer, Come up after me: for the Lord hath delivered them into the hand of Israel.	So the men of the outpost called out to Jonathan and his armor-bearer, “Come on up, and we will teach you a lesson!” “Follow me,” Jonathan told his armor-bearer, “for the LORD has delivered them into the hand of Israel.”
1SA	14	13	요나단이 손발로 붙잡고 올라갔고 그 병기 든 자도 따랐더라 블레셋 사람들이 요나단 앞에서 엎드러지매 병기 든 자가 따라가며 죽였으니	And Jonathan climbed up upon his hands and upon his feet, and his armourbearer after him: and they fell before Jonathan; and his armourbearer slew after him.	So Jonathan climbed up on his hands and feet, with his armor-bearer behind him. And the Philistines fell before Jonathan, and his armor-bearer followed and finished them off.
1SA	14	14	요나단과 그 병기 든 자가 반일경 지단 안에서 처음으로 도륙한 자가 이십 인 가량이라	And that first slaughter, which Jonathan and his armourbearer made, was about twenty men, within as it were an half acre of land, which a yoke of oxen might plow.	In that first assault, Jonathan and his armor-bearer struck down about twenty men over half an acre of land.
1SA	14	15	들에 있는 진과 모든 백성 중에 떨림이 일어났고 부대와 노략꾼들도 떨었으며 땅도 진동하였으니 이는 큰 떨림이었더라	And there was trembling in the host, in the field, and among all the people: the garrison, and the spoilers, they also trembled, and the earth quaked: so it was a very great trembling.	Then terror struck the Philistines in the camp, in the field, and among all the people. Even those in the outposts and raiding parties trembled. Indeed, the earth quaked and panic spread from God.
1SA	14	16	베냐민 기브아에 있는 사울의 파수꾼이 바라본즉 허다한 블레셋 사람이 무너져 이리저리 흩어지더라	And the watchmen of Saul in Gibeah of Benjamin looked; and, behold, the multitude melted away, and they went on beating down one another.	Now when Saul’s watchmen at Gibeah in Benjamin looked and saw the troops melting away and scattering in every direction,
1SA	14	17	사울이 자기와 함께 한 백성에게 이르되 우리에게서 누가 나갔는지 점고하여 보라 하고 점고한즉 요나단과 그의 병기 든 자가 없어졌더라	Then said Saul unto the people that were with him, Number now, and see who is gone from us. And when they had numbered, behold, Jonathan and his armourbearer were not there.	Saul said to the troops who were with him, “Call the roll and see who has left us.” And when they had called the roll, they saw that Jonathan and his armor-bearer were not there.
1SA	14	18	사울이 아히야에게 이르되 하나님의 궤를 이리로 가져오라 하니 그 때에 하나님의 궤가 이스라엘 자손과 함께 있음이라	And Saul said unto Ahiah, Bring hither the ark of God. For the ark of God was at that time with the children of Israel.	Then Saul said to Ahijah, “Bring the ark of God.” (For at that time it was with the Israelites.)
1SA	14	19	사울이 제사장에게 말할 때에 블레셋 사람의 진에 소동이 점점 더한지라 사울이 제사장에게 이르되 네 손을 거두라 하고	And it came to pass, while Saul talked unto the priest, that the noise that was in the host of the Philistines went on and increased: and Saul said unto the priest, Withdraw thine hand.	While Saul was talking to the priest, the commotion in the Philistine camp continued to increase. So Saul said to the priest, “Withdraw your hand.”
1SA	14	20	사울과 그와 함께한 모든 백성이 모여 전장에 가서 본즉 블레셋 사람이 각각 칼로 그 동무를 치므로 크게 혼란하였더라	And Saul and all the people that were with him assembled themselves, and they came to the battle: and, behold, every man’s sword was against his fellow, and there was a very great discomfiture.	Then Saul and all his troops assembled and marched to the battle, and they found the Philistines in total confusion, with each man wielding the sword against his neighbor.
1SA	14	21	전에 블레셋 사람과 함께 하던 히브리 사람이 사방에서 블레셋 사람과 함께 와서 진에 들어왔더니 그들이 돌이켜 사울과 요나단과 함께한 이스라엘 사람과 합하였고	Moreover the Hebrews that were with the Philistines before that time, which went up with them into the camp from the country round about, even they also turned to be with the Israelites that were with Saul and Jonathan.	And the Hebrews who had previously gone up into the surrounding camps of the Philistines now went over to the Israelites who were with Saul and Jonathan.
1SA	14	22	에브라임 산지에 숨었던 이스라엘 모든 사람도 블레셋 사람의 도망함을 듣고 싸우러 나와서 그들을 추격하였더라	Likewise all the men of Israel which had hid themselves in mount Ephraim, when they heard that the Philistines fled, even they also followed hard after them in the battle.	When all the Israelites who had been hiding in the hill country of Ephraim heard that the Philistines were fleeing, they also joined Saul and Jonathan in the battle.
1SA	14	23	여호와께서 그 날에 이스라엘을 구원하시므로 전쟁이 벧아웬을 지나니라	So the Lord saved Israel that day: and the battle passed over unto Beth–aven.	So the LORD saved Israel that day, and the battle moved on beyond Beth-aven.
1SA	14	24	이 날에 이스라엘 백성이 피곤하였으니 이는 사울이 백성에게 맹세시켜 경계하여 이르기를 저녁 곧 내가 내 원수에게 보수하는 때까지 아무 식물이든지 먹는 사람은 저주를 받을지어다 하였음이라 그러므로 백성이 식물을 맛보지 못하고	And the men of Israel were distressed that day: for Saul had adjured the people, saying, Cursed be the man that eateth any food until evening, that I may be avenged on mine enemies. So none of the people tasted any food.	Now the men of Israel were in distress that day, for Saul had placed the troops under an oath, saying, “Cursed is the man who eats any food before evening, before I have taken vengeance on my enemies.” So none of the troops tasted any food.
1SA	14	25	그들이 다 수풀에 들어간즉 땅에 꿀이 있더라	And all they of the land came to a wood; and there was honey upon the ground.	Then all the troops entered the forest, and there was honey on the ground.
1SA	14	26	백성이 수풀로 들어갈 때에 꿀이 흐르는 것을 보고도 그들이 맹세를 두려워하여 손을 그 입에 대는 자가 없으나	And when the people were come into the wood, behold, the honey dropped; but no man put his hand to his mouth: for the people feared the oath.	And when they entered the forest and saw the flowing honey, not one of them put his hand to his mouth, because they feared the oath.
1SA	14	27	요나단은 그 아비가 맹세로 백성에게 명할 때에 듣지 못하였으므로 손에 가진 지팡이 끝을 내밀어 꿀을 찍고 그 손을 돌이켜 입에 대매 눈이 밝아졌더라	But Jonathan heard not when his father charged the people with the oath: wherefore he put forth the end of the rod that was in his hand, and dipped it in an honeycomb, and put his hand to his mouth; and his eyes were enlightened.	Jonathan, however, had not heard that his father had charged the people with the oath. So he reached out the end of the staff in his hand, dipped it into the honeycomb, and put his hand to his mouth; and his eyes brightened.
1SA	14	28	때에 백성 중 하나가 고하여 가로되 당신의 부친이 맹세로 백성에게 엄히 명하여 말씀하시기를 오늘날 식물을 먹는 사람은 저주를 받을지어다 하셨나이다 그러므로 백성이 피곤하였나이다	Then answered one of the people, and said, Thy father straitly charged the people with an oath, saying, Cursed be the man that eateth any food this day. And the people were faint.	Then one of the soldiers told him, “Your father bound the troops with a solemn oath, saying, ‘Cursed is the man who eats food today.’ That is why the people are faint.”
1SA	14	29	요나단이 가로되 내 부친이 이 땅으로 곤란케 하셨도다 보라 내가 이 꿀 조금을 맛보고도 내 눈이 이렇게 밝았거든	Then said Jonathan, My father hath troubled the land: see, I pray you, how mine eyes have been enlightened, because I tasted a little of this honey.	“My father has brought trouble to the land,” Jonathan replied. “Just look at how my eyes have brightened because I tasted a little of this honey.
1SA	14	30	하물며 백성이 오늘 그 대적에게서 탈취하여 얻은 것을 임의로 먹었더면 블레셋 사람을 살륙함이 더욱 많지 아니하였겠느냐	How much more, if haply the people had eaten freely to day of the spoil of their enemies which they found? for had there not been now a much greater slaughter among the Philistines?	How much better it would have been if the troops had eaten freely today from the plunder they took from their enemies! Would not the slaughter of the Philistines have been much greater?”
1SA	14	31	그 날에 백성이 믹마스에서부터 아얄론에 이르기까지 블레셋 사람을 쳤으므로 그들이 심히 피곤한지라	And they smote the Philistines that day from Michmash to Aijalon: and the people were very faint.	That day, after the Israelites had struck down the Philistines from Michmash to Aijalon, the people were very faint.
1SA	14	32	백성이 이에 탈취한 물건에 달려가서 양과 소와 송아지들을 취하고 그것을 땅에서 잡아 피 있는 채 먹었더니	And the people flew upon the spoil, and took sheep, and oxen, and calves, and slew them on the ground: and the people did eat them with the blood.	So they rushed greedily to the plunder, taking sheep, cattle, and calves. They slaughtered them on the ground and ate meat with the blood still in it.
1SA	14	33	무리가 사울에게 고하여 가로되 보소서 백성이 고기를 피채 먹어 여호와께 범죄하였나이다 사울이 가로되 너희가 무신하게 행하였도다 이제 큰 돌을 내게로 굴려오라 하고	Then they told Saul, saying, Behold, the people sin against the Lord, in that they eat with the blood. And he said, Ye have transgressed: roll a great stone unto me this day.	Then someone reported to Saul: “Look, the troops are sinning against the LORD by eating meat with the blood still in it.” “You have broken faith,” said Saul. “Roll a large stone over here at once.”
1SA	14	34	또 가로되 너희는 백성 중에 흩어져 다니며 이르기를 사람은 각기 소와 각기 양을 이리로 끌어다가 잡아 먹되 피 있는 채 먹어서 여호와께 범죄하지 말라 하매 그 밤에 모든 백성이 각각 자기의 소를 끌어다가 거기서 잡으니라	And Saul said, Disperse yourselves among the people, and say unto them, Bring me hither every man his ox, and every man his sheep, and slay them here, and eat; and sin not against the Lord in eating with the blood. And all the people brought every man his ox with him that night, and slew them there.	Then he said, “Go among the troops and tell them, ‘Each man must bring me his ox or his sheep, slaughter them in this place, and then eat. Do not sin against the LORD by eating meat with the blood still in it.’” So that night everyone brought his ox and slaughtered it there.
1SA	14	35	사울이 여호와를 위하여 단을 쌓았으니 이는 그가 여호와를 위하여 처음 쌓은 단이었더라	And Saul built an altar unto the Lord: the same was the first altar that he built unto the Lord.	Then Saul built an altar to the LORD; it was the first time he had built an altar to the LORD.
1SA	14	36	사울이 가로되 우리가 밤에 블레셋 사람을 쫓아 내려가서 동틀 때까지 그들 중에서 탈취하고 한 사람도 남기지 말자 무리가 가로대 왕의 소견에 좋은 대로 하소서 할 때에 제사장이 가로되 이리로 와서 하나님께로 나아가사이다 하매	And Saul said, Let us go down after the Philistines by night, and spoil them until the morning light, and let us not leave a man of them. And they said, Do whatsoever seemeth good unto thee. Then said the priest, Let us draw near hither unto God.	And Saul said, “Let us go down after the Philistines by night and plunder them until dawn, leaving no man alive!” “Do what seems good to you,” the troops replied. But the priest said, “We must consult God here.”
1SA	14	37	사울이 하나님께 묻자오되 내가 블레셋 사람을 쫓아 내려가리이까 주께서 그들을 이스라엘의 손에 붙이시겠나이까 하되 그 날에 대답지 아니하시는지라	And Saul asked counsel of God, Shall I go down after the Philistines? wilt thou deliver them into the hand of Israel? But he answered him not that day.	So Saul inquired of God, “Shall I go down after the Philistines? Will You give them into the hand of Israel?” But God did not answer him that day.
1SA	14	38	사울이 가로되 너희 백성의 어른들아 다 이리로 오라 오늘 이 죄가 뉘게 있나 알아 보자	And Saul said, Draw ye near hither, all the chief of the people: and know and see wherein this sin hath been this day.	Therefore Saul said, “Come here, all you leaders of the troops, and let us investigate how this sin has occurred today.
1SA	14	39	이스라엘을 구원하신 여호와의 사심으로 맹세하노니 내 아들 요나단에게 있다 할지라도 반드시 죽으리라 하되 모든 백성 중 한 사람도 대답지 아니하매	For, as the Lord liveth, which saveth Israel, though it be in Jonathan my son, he shall surely die. But there was not a man among all the people that answered him.	As surely as the LORD who saves Israel lives, even if it is my son Jonathan, he must die!” But not one of the troops said a word.
1SA	14	40	이에 그가 온 이스라엘에게 이르되 너희는 저편에 있으라 나와 내 아들 요나단은 이편에 있으리라 백성이 사울에게 말하되 왕의 소견에 좋은 대로 하소서 하니라	Then said he unto all Israel, Be ye on one side, and I and Jonathan my son will be on the other side. And the people said unto Saul, Do what seemeth good unto thee.	Then Saul said to all Israel, “You stand on one side, and I and my son Jonathan will stand on the other side.” “Do what seems good to you,” the troops replied.
1SA	14	41	이에 사울이 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께 아뢰되 원컨대 실상을 보이소서 하였더니 요나단과 사울이 뽑히고 백성은 면한지라	Therefore Saul said unto the Lord God of Israel, Give a perfect lot. And Saul and Jonathan were taken: but the people escaped.	So Saul said to the LORD, the God of Israel, “Why have You not answered Your servant this day? If the fault is with me or my son Jonathan, respond with Urim; but if the fault is with the men of Israel, respond with Thummim.” And Jonathan and Saul were selected, but the people were cleared of the charge.
1SA	14	42	사울이 가로되 나와 내 아들 요나단 사이에 뽑으라 하였더니 요나단이 뽑히니라	And Saul said, Cast lots between me and Jonathan my son. And Jonathan was taken.	Then Saul said, “Cast the lot between me and my son Jonathan.” And Jonathan was selected.
1SA	14	43	사울이 요나단에게 가로되 너의 행한 것을 내게 고하라 요나단이 고하여 가로되 내가 다만 내 손에 가진 지팡이 끝으로 꿀을 조금 맛보았을 뿐이오나 내가 죽을 수 밖에 없나이다	Then Saul said to Jonathan, Tell me what thou hast done. And Jonathan told him, and said, I did but taste a little honey with the end of the rod that was in mine hand, and, lo, I must die.	“Tell me what you have done,” Saul commanded him. So Jonathan told him, “I only tasted a little honey with the end of the staff that was in my hand. And now I must die?”
1SA	14	44	사울이 가로되 요나단아 네가 반드시 죽으리라 그렇지 않으면 하나님이 내게 벌을 내리시고 또 내리시기를 원하노라	And Saul answered, God do so and more also: for thou shalt surely die, Jonathan.	And Saul declared, “May God punish me, and ever so severely, if you, Jonathan, do not surely die!”
1SA	14	45	백성이 사울에게 말하되 이스라엘에 이 큰 구원을 이룬 요나단이 죽겠나이까 결단코 그렇지 아니하니이다 여호와의 사심으로 맹세하옵나니 그의 머리털 하나도 땅에 떨어지지 아니할 것은 그가 오늘 하나님과 동사하였음이니이다 하여 요나단을 구원하여 죽지 않게 하니라	And the people said unto Saul, Shall Jonathan die, who hath wrought this great salvation in Israel? God forbid: as the Lord liveth, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground; for he hath wrought with God this day. So the people rescued Jonathan, that he died not.	But the people said to Saul, “Must Jonathan die—he who accomplished such a great deliverance for Israel? Never! As surely as the LORD lives, not a hair of his head will fall to the ground, for with God’s help he has accomplished this today.” So the people rescued Jonathan, and he did not die.
1SA	14	46	사울이 블레셋 사람 따르기를 그치고 올라가매 블레셋 사람이 자기 곳으로 돌아가니라	Then Saul went up from following the Philistines: and the Philistines went to their own place.	Then Saul gave up his pursuit of the Philistines, and the Philistines returned to their own land.
1SA	14	47	사울이 이스라엘 왕위에 나아간 후에 사방에 있는 모든 대적 곧 모압과 암몬 자손과 에돔과 소바의 왕들과 블레셋 사람을 쳤는데 향하는 곳마다 이기었고	So Saul took the kingdom over Israel, and fought against all his enemies on every side, against Moab, and against the children of Ammon, and against Edom, and against the kings of Zobah, and against the Philistines: and whithersoever he turned himself, he vexed them.	After Saul had assumed the kingship over Israel, he fought against all his enemies on every side—the Moabites, the Ammonites, the Edomites, the kings of Zobah, and the Philistines. Wherever he turned, he routed them.
1SA	14	48	용맹 있게 아말렉 사람을 치고 이스라엘을 그 약탈하는 자의 손에서 건졌더라	And he gathered an host, and smote the Amalekites, and delivered Israel out of the hands of them that spoiled them.	He fought valiantly and defeated the Amalekites, delivering Israel from the hands of its plunderers.
1SA	14	49	사울의 아들은 요나단과 리스위와 말기수아요 그 두 딸의 이름은 이러하니 맏딸의 이름은 메랍이요 작은 딸의 이름은 미갈이며	Now the sons of Saul were Jonathan, and Ishui, and Melchi–shua: and the names of his two daughters were these; the name of the firstborn Merab, and the name of the younger Michal:	Now the sons of Saul were Jonathan, Ishvi, and Malchishua. His two daughters were named Merab (his firstborn) and Michal (his younger daughter).
1SA	14	50	사울의 아내의 이름은 아히노암이니 아히마아스의 딸이요 그 군장의 이름은 아브넬이니 사울의 숙부 넬의 아들이며	And the name of Saul’s wife was Ahinoam, the daughter of Ahimaaz: and the name of the captain of his host was Abner, the son of Ner, Saul’s uncle.	His wife’s name was Ahinoam daughter of Ahimaaz. The name of the commander of his army was Abner, the son of Saul’s uncle Ner.
1SA	14	51	사울의 아비는 기스요 아브넬의 아비는 넬이니 아비엘의 아들이었더라	And Kish was the father of Saul; and Ner the father of Abner was the son of Abiel.	Saul’s father Kish and Abner’s father Ner were sons of Abiel.
1SA	14	52	사울의 사는 날 동안에 블레셋 사람과 큰 싸움이 있었으므로 사울이 힘있는 자나 용맹있는 자를 보면 그들을 불러 모았더라	And there was sore war against the Philistines all the days of Saul: and when Saul saw any strong man, or any valiant man, he took him unto him.	And the war with the Philistines was fierce for all the days of Saul. So whenever he noticed any strong or brave man, Saul would enlist him.
1SA	15	1	사무엘이 사울에게 이르되 여호와께서 나를 보내어 왕에게 기름을 부어 그 백성 이스라엘 위에 왕을 삼으셨은즉 이제 왕은 여호와의 말씀을 들으소서	Samuel also said unto Saul, The Lord sent me to anoint thee to be king over his people, over Israel: now therefore hearken thou unto the voice of the words of the Lord.	Then Samuel said to Saul, “The LORD sent me to anoint you king over His people Israel. Now therefore, listen to the words of the LORD.
1SA	15	2	만군의 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시기를 아말렉이 이스라엘에게 행한 일 곧 애굽에서 나올 때에 길에서 대적한 일을 내가 추억하노니	Thus saith the Lord of hosts, I remember that which Amalek did to Israel, how he laid wait for him in the way, when he came up from Egypt.	This is what the LORD of Hosts says: ‘I witnessed what the Amalekites did to the Israelites when they ambushed them on their way up from Egypt.
1SA	15	3	지금 가서 아말렉을 쳐서 그들의 모든 소유를 남기지 말고 진멸하되 남녀와 소아와 젖먹는 아이와 우양과 약대와 나귀를 죽이라 하셨나이다	Now go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have, and spare them not; but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling, ox and sheep, camel and ass.	Now go and attack the Amalekites and devote to destruction all that belongs to them. Do not spare them, but put to death men and women, children and infants, oxen and sheep, camels and donkeys.’”
1SA	15	4	사울이 백성을 소집하고 그들을 들라임에서 계수하니 보병이 이십만이요 유다 사람이 일만이라	And Saul gathered the people together, and numbered them in Telaim, two hundred thousand footmen, and ten thousand men of Judah.	So Saul summoned the troops and numbered them at Telaim—200,000 foot soldiers and 10,000 men of Judah.
1SA	15	5	사울이 아말렉 성에 이르러 골짜기에 복병하니라	And Saul came to a city of Amalek, and laid wait in the valley.	Saul came to the city of Amalek and lay in wait in the valley.
1SA	15	6	사울이 겐 사람에게 이르되 아말렉 사람 중에서 떠나 내려가라 그들과 함께 너희를 멸하게 될까 하노라 이스라엘 모든 자손이 애굽에서 올라올 때에 너희가 그들을 선대하였느니라 이에 겐 사람이 아말렉 사람 중에서 떠나니라	And Saul said unto the Kenites, Go, depart, get you down from among the Amalekites, lest I destroy you with them: for ye shewed kindness to all the children of Israel, when they came up out of Egypt. So the Kenites departed from among the Amalekites.	And he warned the Kenites, “Since you showed kindness to all the Israelites when they came up out of Egypt, go on and get away from the Amalekites. Otherwise I will sweep you away with them.” So the Kenites moved away from the Amalekites.
1SA	15	7	사울이 하윌라에서부터 애굽 앞 술에 이르기까지 아말렉 사람을 치고	And Saul smote the Amalekites from Havilah until thou comest to Shur, that is over against Egypt.	Then Saul struck down the Amalekites all the way from Havilah to Shur, which is east of Egypt.
1SA	15	8	아말렉 사람의 왕 아각을 사로잡고 칼날로 그 모든 백성을 진멸하였으되	And he took Agag the king of the Amalekites alive, and utterly destroyed all the people with the edge of the sword.	He captured Agag king of Amalek alive, but devoted all the others to destruction with the sword.
1SA	15	9	사울과 백성이 아각과 그 양과 소의 가장 좋은 것 또는 기름진 것과 어린 양과 모든 좋은 것을 남기고 진멸키를 즐겨 아니하고 가치 없고 낮은 것은 진멸하니라	But Saul and the people spared Agag, and the best of the sheep, and of the oxen, and of the fatlings, and the lambs, and all that was good, and would not utterly destroy them: but every thing that was vile and refuse, that they destroyed utterly.	Saul and his troops spared Agag, along with the best of the sheep and cattle, the fat calves and lambs, and the best of everything else. They were unwilling to destroy them, but they devoted to destruction all that was despised and worthless.
1SA	15	10	여호와의 말씀이 사무엘에게 임하니라 가라사대	Then came the word of the Lord unto Samuel, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to Samuel, saying,
1SA	15	11	내가 사울을 세워 왕 삼은 것을 후회하노니 그가 돌이켜서 나를 좇지 아니하며 내 명령을 이루지 아니하였음이니라 하신지라 사무엘이 근심하여 온 밤을 여호와께 부르짖으니라	It repenteth me that I have set up Saul to be king: for he is turned back from following me, and hath not performed my commandments. And it grieved Samuel; and he cried unto the Lord all night.	“I regret that I have made Saul king, for he has turned away from following Me and has not carried out My instructions.” And Samuel was distressed and cried out to the LORD all that night.
1SA	15	12	사무엘이 사울을 만나려고 아침에 일찍이 일어났더니 혹이 사무엘에게 고하여 가로되 사울이 갈멜에 이르러 자기를 위하여 기념비를 세우고 돌이켜 행하여 길갈로 내려 갔다 하는지라	And when Samuel rose early to meet Saul in the morning, it was told Samuel, saying, Saul came to Carmel, and, behold, he set him up a place, and is gone about, and passed on, and gone down to Gilgal.	Early in the morning Samuel got up to confront Saul, but he was told, “Saul has gone to Carmel, and behold, he has set up a monument for himself and has turned and gone down to Gilgal.”
1SA	15	13	사무엘이 사울에게 이른즉 사울이 그에게 이르되 원컨대 당신은 여호와께 복을 받으소서 내가 여호와의 명령을 행하였나이다	And Samuel came to Saul: and Saul said unto him, Blessed be thou of the Lord: I have performed the commandment of the Lord.	When Samuel reached him, Saul said to him, “May the LORD bless you. I have carried out the LORD’s instructions.”
1SA	15	14	사무엘이 가로되 그러면 내 귀에 들어오는 이 양의 소리와 내게 들리는 소의 소리는 어찜이니이까	And Samuel said, What meaneth then this bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear?	But Samuel replied, “Then what is this bleating of sheep and lowing of cattle that I hear?”
1SA	15	15	사울이 가로되 그것은 무리가 아말렉 사람에게서 끌어 온 것인데 백성이 당신의 하나님 여호와께 제사하려 하여 양과 소의 가장 좋은 것을 남김이요 그 외의 것은 우리가 진멸하였나이다	And Saul said, They have brought them from the Amalekites: for the people spared the best of the sheep and of the oxen, to sacrifice unto the Lord thy God; and the rest we have utterly destroyed.	Saul answered, “The troops brought them from the Amalekites; they spared the best sheep and cattle to sacrifice to the LORD your God, but the rest we devoted to destruction.”
1SA	15	16	사무엘이 사울에게 이르되 가만히 계시옵소서 간 밤에 여호와께서 내게 이르신 것을 왕에게 말하리이다 가로되 말씀하소서	Then Samuel said unto Saul, Stay, and I will tell thee what the Lord hath said to me this night. And he said unto him, Say on.	“Stop!” exclaimed Samuel. “Let me tell you what the LORD said to me last night.” “Tell me,” Saul replied.
1SA	15	17	사무엘이 가로되 왕이 스스로 작게 여길 그 때에 이스라엘 지파의 머리가 되지 아니하셨나이까 여호와께서 왕에게 기름을 부어 이스라엘 왕을 삼으시고	And Samuel said, When thou wast little in thine own sight, wast thou not made the head of the tribes of Israel, and the Lord anointed thee king over Israel?	And Samuel said, “Although you were once small in your own eyes, have you not become the head of the tribes of Israel? The LORD anointed you king over Israel
1SA	15	18	또 왕을 길로 보내시며 이르시기를 가서 죄인 아말렉 사람을 진멸하되 다 없어지기까지 치라 하셨거늘	And the Lord sent thee on a journey, and said, Go and utterly destroy the sinners the Amalekites, and fight against them until they be consumed.	and sent you on a mission, saying, ‘Go and devote to destruction the sinful Amalekites. Fight against them until you have wiped them out.’
1SA	15	19	어찌하여 왕이 여호와의 목소리를 청종치 아니하고 탈취하기에만 급하여 여호와의 악하게 여기시는 것을 행하였나이까	Wherefore then didst thou not obey the voice of the Lord, but didst fly upon the spoil, and didst evil in the sight of the Lord?	So why did you not obey the LORD? Why did you rush upon the plunder and do evil in the sight of the LORD?”
1SA	15	20	사울이 사무엘에게 이르되 나는 실로 여호와의 목소리를 청종하여 여호와께서 보내신 길로 가서 아말렉 왕 아각을 끌어왔고 아말렉 사람을 진멸하였으나	And Saul said unto Samuel, Yea, I have obeyed the voice of the Lord, and have gone the way which the Lord sent me, and have brought Agag the king of Amalek, and have utterly destroyed the Amalekites.	“But I did obey the LORD,” Saul replied. “I went on the mission that the LORD gave me. I brought back Agag king of Amalek and devoted the Amalekites to destruction.
1SA	15	21	다만 백성이 그 마땅히 멸할 것 중에서 가장 좋은 것으로 길갈에서 당신의 하나님 여호와께 제사하려고 양과 소를 취하였나이다	But the people took of the spoil, sheep and oxen, the chief of the things which should have been utterly destroyed, to sacrifice unto the Lord thy God in Gilgal.	The troops took sheep and cattle from the plunder, the best of the things devoted to destruction, in order to sacrifice them to the LORD your God at Gilgal.”
1SA	15	22	사무엘이 가로되 여호와께서 번제와 다른 제사를 그 목소리 순종하는 것을 좋아하심 같이 좋아하시겠나이까 순종이 제사보다 낫고 듣는 것이 수양의 기름보다 나으니	And Samuel said, Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams.	But Samuel declared: “Does the LORD delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices as much as in obedience to His voice? Behold, obedience is better than sacrifice, and attentiveness is better than the fat of rams.
1SA	15	23	이는 거역하는 것은 사술의 죄와 같고 완고한 것은 사신 우상에게 절하는 죄와 같음이라 왕이 여호와의 말씀을 버렸으므로 여호와께서도 왕을 버려 왕이 되지 못하게 하셨나이다	For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry. Because thou hast rejected the word of the Lord, he hath also rejected thee from being king.	For rebellion is like the sin of divination, and arrogance is like the wickedness of idolatry. Because you have rejected the word of the LORD, He has rejected you as king.”
1SA	15	24	사울이 사무엘에게 이르되 내가 범죄하였나이다 내가 여호와의 명령과 당신의 말씀을 어긴 것은 내가 백성을 두려워하여 그 말을 청종하였음이니이다	And Saul said unto Samuel, I have sinned: for I have transgressed the commandment of the Lord, and thy words: because I feared the people, and obeyed their voice.	Then Saul said to Samuel, “I have sinned; I have transgressed the LORD’s commandment and your instructions, because I feared the people and obeyed their voice.
1SA	15	25	청하오니 지금 내 죄를 사하고 나와 함께 돌아가서 나로 여호와께 경배하게 하소서	Now therefore, I pray thee, pardon my sin, and turn again with me, that I may worship the Lord.	Now therefore, please forgive my sin and return with me so I can worship the LORD.”
1SA	15	26	사무엘이 사울에게 이르되 나는 왕과 함께 돌아가지 아니하리니 이는 왕이 여호와의 말씀을 버렸으므로 여호와께서 왕을 버려 이스라엘 왕이 되지 못하게 하셨음이니이다 하고	And Samuel said unto Saul, I will not return with thee: for thou hast rejected the word of the Lord, and the Lord hath rejected thee from being king over Israel.	“I will not return with you,” Samuel replied. “For you have rejected the word of the LORD, and He has rejected you as king over Israel.”
1SA	15	27	사무엘이 가려고 돌이킬 때에 사울이 그의 겉옷자락을 붙잡으매 찢어진지라	And as Samuel turned about to go away, he laid hold upon the skirt of his mantle, and it rent.	As Samuel turned to go, Saul grabbed the hem of his robe, and it tore.
1SA	15	28	사무엘이 그에게 이르되 여호와께서 오늘 이스라엘 나라를 왕에게서 떼어서 왕보다 나은 왕의 이웃에게 주셨나이다	And Samuel said unto him, The Lord hath rent the kingdom of Israel from thee this day, and hath given it to a neighbour of thine, that is better than thou.	So Samuel said to him, “The LORD has torn the kingdom of Israel from you today and has given it to your neighbor who is better than you.
1SA	15	29	이스라엘의 지존자는 거짓이나 변개함이 없으시니 그는 사람이 아니시므로 결코 변개치 않으심이니이다	And also the Strength of Israel will not lie nor repent: for he is not a man, that he should repent.	Moreover, the Glory of Israel does not lie or change His mind, for He is not a man, that He should change His mind.”
1SA	15	30	사울이 가로되 내가 범죄하였을지라도 청하옵나니 내 백성의 장로들의 앞과 이스라엘의 앞에서 나를 높이사 나와 함께 돌아가서 나로 당신의 하나님 여호와께 경배하게 하소서	Then he said, I have sinned: yet honour me now, I pray thee, before the elders of my people, and before Israel, and turn again with me, that I may worship the Lord thy God.	“I have sinned,” Saul replied. “Please honor me now before the elders of my people and before Israel. Come back with me, so that I may worship the LORD your God.”
1SA	15	31	이에 사무엘이 돌이켜 사울을 따라가매 사울이 여호와께 경배하니라	So Samuel turned again after Saul; and Saul worshipped the Lord.	So Samuel went back with Saul, and Saul worshiped the LORD.
1SA	15	32	사무엘이 가로되 너희는 아말렉 사람의 왕 아각을 내게로 이끌어 오라 하였더니 아각이 즐거이 오며 가로되 진실로 사망의 괴로움이 지났도다 하니라	Then said Samuel, Bring ye hither to me Agag the king of the Amalekites. And Agag came unto him delicately. And Agag said, Surely the bitterness of death is past.	Then Samuel said, “Bring me Agag king of the Amalekites.” Agag came to him cheerfully, for he thought, “Surely the bitterness of death is past.”
1SA	15	33	사무엘이 가로되 네 칼이 여인들로 무자케 한 것 같이 여인 중 네 어미가 무자하리라 하고 그가 길갈에서 여호와 앞에서 아각을 찍어 쪼개니라	And Samuel said, As thy sword hath made women childless, so shall thy mother be childless among women. And Samuel hewed Agag in pieces before the Lord in Gilgal.	But Samuel declared: “As your sword has made women childless, so your mother will be childless among women.” And Samuel hacked Agag to pieces before the LORD at Gilgal.
1SA	15	34	이에 사무엘은 라마로 가고 사울은 사울 기브아 본집으로 올라가니라	Then Samuel went to Ramah; and Saul went up to his house to Gibeah of Saul.	Then Samuel went to Ramah, but Saul went up to his home in Gibeah of Saul.
1SA	15	35	사무엘이 죽는 날까지 사울을 다시 가서 보지 아니하였으니 이는 그가 사울을 위하여 슬퍼함이었고 여호와께서는 사울로 이스라엘 왕 삼으신 것을 후회하셨더라	And Samuel came no more to see Saul until the day of his death: nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul: and the Lord repented that he had made Saul king over Israel.	And to the day of his death, Samuel never again visited Saul. Samuel mourned for Saul, and the LORD regretted that He had made Saul king over Israel.
1SA	16	1	여호와께서 사무엘에게 이르시되 내가 이미 사울을 버려 이스라엘 왕이 되지 못하게 하였거늘 네가 그를 위하여 언제까지 슬퍼하겠느냐 너는 기름을 뿔에 채워 가지고 가라 내가 너를 베들레헴 사람 이새에게로 보내리니 이는 내가 그 아들 중에서 한 왕을 예선하였음이니라	And the Lord said unto Samuel, How long wilt thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have rejected him from reigning over Israel? fill thine horn with oil, and go, I will send thee to Jesse the Beth–lehemite: for I have provided me a king among his sons.	Now the LORD said to Samuel, “How long are you going to mourn for Saul, since I have rejected him as king over Israel? Fill your horn with oil and go. I am sending you to Jesse of Bethlehem, for I have selected from his sons a king for Myself.”
1SA	16	2	사무엘이 가로되 내가 어찌 갈 수 있으리이까 사울이 들으면 나를 죽이리이다 여호와께서 가라사대 너는 암송아지를 끌고 가서 말하기를 내가 여호와께 제사를 드리러 왔다 하고	And Samuel said, How can I go? if Saul hear it, he will kill me. And the Lord said, Take an heifer with thee, and say, I am come to sacrifice to the Lord.	“How can I go?” Samuel asked. “Saul will hear of it and kill me!” The LORD answered, “Take a heifer with you and say, ‘I have come to sacrifice to the LORD.’
1SA	16	3	이새를 제사에 청하라 내가 너의 행할 일을 가르치리니 내가 네게 알게 하는 자에게 나를 위하여 기름을 부을지니라	And call Jesse to the sacrifice, and I will shew thee what thou shalt do: and thou shalt anoint unto me him whom I name unto thee.	Then invite Jesse to the sacrifice, and I will show you what you are to do. You are to anoint for Me the one I indicate.”
1SA	16	4	사무엘이 여호와의 말씀대로 행하여 베들레헴에 이르매 성읍 장로들이 떨며 그를 영접하여 가로되 평강을 위하여 오시나이까	And Samuel did that which the Lord spake, and came to Beth–lehem. And the elders of the town trembled at his coming, and said, Comest thou peaceably?	So Samuel did what the LORD had said and went to Bethlehem. When the elders of the town met him, they trembled and asked, “Do you come in peace?”
1SA	16	5	가로되 평강을 위함이니라 내가 여호와께 제사하러 왔으니 스스로 성결케 하고 와서 나와 함께 제사하자 하고 이새와 그 아들들을 성결케 하고 제사에 청하니라	And he said, Peaceably: I am come to sacrifice unto the Lord: sanctify yourselves, and come with me to the sacrifice. And he sanctified Jesse and his sons, and called them to the sacrifice.	“In peace,” he replied. “I have come to sacrifice to the LORD. Consecrate yourselves and come with me to the sacrifice.” Then he consecrated Jesse and his sons and invited them to the sacrifice.
1SA	16	6	그들이 오매 사무엘이 엘리압을 보고 마음에 이르기를 여호와의 기름 부으실 자가 과연 그 앞에 있도다 하였더니	And it came to pass, when they were come, that he looked on Eliab, and said, Surely the Lord’s anointed is before him.	When they arrived, Samuel saw Eliab and said, “Surely here before the LORD is His anointed.”
1SA	16	7	여호와께서 사무엘에게 이르시되 그 용모와 신장을 보지 말라 내가 이미 그를 버렸노라 나의 보는 것은 사람과 같지 아니하니 사람은 외모를 보거니와 나 여호와는 중심을 보느니라	But the Lord said unto Samuel, Look not on his countenance, or on the height of his stature; because I have refused him: for the Lord seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart.	But the LORD said to Samuel, “Do not consider his appearance or height, for I have rejected him; the LORD does not see as man does. For man sees the outward appearance, but the LORD sees the heart.”
1SA	16	8	이새가 아비나답을 불러 사무엘의 앞을 지나게 하매 사무엘이 가로되 이도 여호와께서 택하지 아니하셨느니라	Then Jesse called Abinadab, and made him pass before Samuel. And he said, Neither hath the Lord chosen this.	Then Jesse called Abinadab and presented him to Samuel, who said, “The LORD has not chosen this one either.”
1SA	16	9	이새가 삼마로 지나게 하매 사무엘이 가로되 이도 여호와께서 택하지 아니하셨느니라	Then Jesse made Shammah to pass by. And he said, Neither hath the Lord chosen this.	Next Jesse presented Shammah, but Samuel said, “The LORD has not chosen this one either.”
1SA	16	10	이새가 그 아들 일곱으로 다 사무엘 앞을 지나게 하나 사무엘이 이새에게 이르되 여호와께서 이들을 택하지 아니하셨느니라 하고	Again, Jesse made seven of his sons to pass before Samuel. And Samuel said unto Jesse, The Lord hath not chosen these.	Thus Jesse made seven of his sons pass before Samuel, but Samuel told him, “The LORD has not chosen any of these.”
1SA	16	11	또 이새에게 이르되 네 아들들이 다 여기 있느냐 이새가 가로되 아직 말째가 남았는데 그가 양을 지키나이다 사무엘이 이새에게 이르되 보내어 그를 데려오라 그가 여기 오기까지는 우리가 식사 자리에 앉지 아니하겠노라	And Samuel said unto Jesse, Are here all thy children? And he said, There remaineth yet the youngest, and, behold, he keepeth the sheep. And Samuel said unto Jesse, Send and fetch him: for we will not sit down till he come hither.	And Samuel asked him, “Are these all the sons you have?” “There is still the youngest,” Jesse replied, “but he is tending the sheep.” “Send for him,” Samuel replied. “For we will not sit down to eat until he arrives.”
1SA	16	12	이에 보내어 그를 데려오매 그의 빛이 붉고 눈이 빼어나고 얼굴이 아름답더라 여호와께서 가라사대 이가 그니 일어나 기름을 부으라	And he sent, and brought him in. Now he was ruddy, and withal of a beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to. And the Lord said, Arise, anoint him: for this is he.	So Jesse sent for his youngest son and brought him in. He was ruddy, with beautiful eyes and a handsome appearance. And the LORD said, “Rise and anoint him, for he is the one.”
1SA	16	13	사무엘이 기름 뿔을 취하여 그 형제 중에서 그에게 부었더니 이 날 이후로 다윗이 여호와의 신에게 크게 감동되니라 사무엘이 떠나서 라마로 가니라	Then Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst of his brethren: and the Spirit of the Lord came upon David from that day forward. So Samuel rose up, and went to Ramah.	So Samuel took the horn of oil and anointed him in the presence of his brothers, and the Spirit of the LORD rushed upon David from that day forward. Then Samuel set out and went to Ramah.
1SA	16	14	여호와의 신이 사울에게서 떠나고 여호와의 부리신 악신이 그를 번뇌케 한지라	But the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from the Lord troubled him.	After the Spirit of the LORD had departed from Saul, a spirit of distress from the LORD began to torment him.
1SA	16	15	사울의 신하들이 그에게 이르되 보소서 하나님의 부리신 악신이 왕을 번뇌케 하온즉	And Saul’s servants said unto him, Behold now, an evil spirit from God troubleth thee.	Saul’s servants said to him, “Surely a spirit of distress from God is tormenting you.
1SA	16	16	원컨대 우리 주는 주의 앞에 모시는 신하에게 명하여 수금 잘 탈줄 아는 사람을 구하게 하소서 하나님의 부리신 악신이 왕에게 이를 때에 그가 손으로 타면 왕이 나으시리이다	Let our lord now command thy servants, which are before thee, to seek out a man, who is a cunning player on an harp: and it shall come to pass, when the evil spirit from God is upon thee, that he shall play with his hand, and thou shalt be well.	Let our lord command your servants here to seek out someone who can skillfully play the harp. Whenever the spirit of distress from God is upon you, he is to play it, and you will be well.”
1SA	16	17	사울이 신하에게 이르되 나를 위하여 잘 타는 사람을 구하여 내게로 데려오라	And Saul said unto his servants, Provide me now a man that can play well, and bring him to me.	And Saul commanded his servants, “Find me someone who plays well, and bring him to me.”
1SA	16	18	소년 중 한사람이 대답하여 가로되 내가 베들레헴 사람 이새의 아들을 본즉 탈줄을 알고 호기와 무용과 구변이 있는 준수한 자라 여호와께서 그와 함께 계시더이다	Then answered one of the servants, and said, Behold, I have seen a son of Jesse the Beth–lehemite, that is cunning in playing, and a mighty valiant man, and a man of war, and prudent in matters, and a comely person, and the Lord is with him.	One of the servants answered, “I have seen a son of Jesse of Bethlehem who knows how to play the harp. He is a mighty man of valor, a warrior, eloquent and handsome, and the LORD is with him.”
1SA	16	19	사울이 이에 사자를 이새에게 보내어 이르되 양치는 네 아들 다윗을 내게로 보내라 하매	Wherefore Saul sent messengers unto Jesse, and said, Send me David thy son, which is with the sheep.	So Saul sent messengers to Jesse and said, “Send me your son David, who is with the sheep.”
1SA	16	20	이새가 떡과 한 가죽부대의 포도주와 염소 새끼를 나귀에 실리고 그 아들 다윗의 손으로 사울에게 보내니	And Jesse took an ass laden with bread, and a bottle of wine, and a kid, and sent them by David his son unto Saul.	And Jesse took a donkey loaded with bread, a skin of wine, and one young goat, and sent them to Saul with his son David.
1SA	16	21	다윗이 사울에게 이르러 그 앞에 모셔 서매 사울이 그를 크게 사랑하여 자기의 병기 든 자를 삼고	And David came to Saul, and stood before him: and he loved him greatly; and he became his armourbearer.	When David came to Saul and entered his service, Saul admired him greatly, and David became his armor-bearer.
1SA	16	22	이새에게 사람을 보내어 이르되 청컨대 다윗으로 내 앞에 모셔 서게 하라 그가 내게 은총을 얻었느니라 하니라	And Saul sent to Jesse, saying, Let David, I pray thee, stand before me; for he hath found favour in my sight.	Then Saul sent word to Jesse, saying, “Let David remain in my service, for I am pleased with him.”
1SA	16	23	하나님의 부리신 악신이 사울에게 이를 때에 다윗이 수금을 취하여 손으로 탄즉 사울이 상쾌하여 낫고 악신은 그에게서 떠나더라	And it came to pass, when the evil spirit from God was upon Saul, that David took an harp, and played with his hand: so Saul was refreshed, and was well, and the evil spirit departed from him.	And whenever the spirit from God came upon Saul, David would pick up his harp and play, and Saul would become well, and the spirit of distress would depart from him.
1SA	17	1	블레셋 사람들이 그 군대를 모으고 싸우고자 하여 유다에 속한 소고에 모여 소고와 아세가 사이의 에베스담밈에 진치매	Now the Philistines gathered together their armies to battle, and were gathered together at Shochoh, which belongeth to Judah, and pitched between Shochoh and Azekah, in Ephes–dammim.	Now the Philistines gathered their forces for war at Socoh in Judah, and they camped between Socoh and Azekah in Ephes-dammim.
1SA	17	2	사울과 이스라엘 사람들이 모여서 엘라 골짜기에 진치고 블레셋 사람을 대하여 항오를 벌였으니	And Saul and the men of Israel were gathered together, and pitched by the valley of Elah, and set the battle in array against the Philistines.	Saul and the men of Israel assembled and camped in the Valley of Elah, arraying themselves for battle against the Philistines.
1SA	17	3	블레셋 사람은 이편 산에 섰고 이스라엘은 저편 산에 섰고 사이에는 골짜기가 있었더라	And the Philistines stood on a mountain on the one side, and Israel stood on a mountain on the other side: and there was a valley between them.	The Philistines stood on one hill and the Israelites stood on another, with the valley between them.
1SA	17	4	블레셋 사람의 진에서 싸움을 돋우는 자가 왔는데 그 이름은 골리앗이요 가드 사람이라 그 신장은 여섯 규빗 한 뼘이요	And there went out a champion out of the camp of the Philistines, named Goliath, of Gath, whose height was six cubits and a span.	Then a champion named Goliath, who was from Gath, came out from the Philistine camp. He was six cubits and a span in height,
1SA	17	5	머리에는 놋투구를 썼고 몸에는 어린갑을 입었으니 그 갑옷의 중수가 놋 오천 세겔이며	And he had an helmet of brass upon his head, and he was armed with a coat of mail; and the weight of the coat was five thousand shekels of brass.	and he had a bronze helmet on his head. He wore a bronze coat of mail weighing five thousand shekels,
1SA	17	6	그 다리에는 놋경갑을 쳤고 어깨 사이에는 놋단창을 메었으니	And he had greaves of brass upon his legs, and a target of brass between his shoulders.	and he had armor of bronze on his legs and a javelin of bronze slung between his shoulders.
1SA	17	7	그 창자루는 베틀채 같고 창날은 철 육백 세겔이며 방패 든 자는 앞서 행하더라	And the staff of his spear was like a weaver’s beam; and his spear’s head weighed six hundred shekels of iron: and one bearing a shield went before him.	The shaft of his spear was like a weaver’s beam, and its iron point weighed six hundred shekels. In addition, his shield bearer went before him.
1SA	17	8	그가 서서 이스라엘 군대를 향하여 외쳐 가로되 너희가 어찌하여 나와서 항오를 벌였느냐 나는 블레셋 사람이 아니며 너희는 사울의 신복이 아니냐 너희는 한 사람을 택하여 내게로 내려보내라	And he stood and cried unto the armies of Israel, and said unto them, Why are ye come out to set your battle in array? am not I a Philistine, and ye servants to Saul? choose you a man for you, and let him come down to me.	And Goliath stood and shouted to the ranks of Israel, “Why do you come out and array yourselves for battle? Am I not a Philistine, and are you not servants of Saul? Choose one of your men and have him come down against me.
1SA	17	9	그가 능히 싸워서 나를 죽이면 우리가 너희의 종이 되겠고 만일 내가 이기어 그를 죽이면 너희가 우리의 종이 되어 우리를 섬길 것이니라	If he be able to fight with me, and to kill me, then will we be your servants: but if I prevail against him, and kill him, then shall ye be our servants, and serve us.	If he is able to fight me and kill me, then we will be your servants. But if I prevail against him and kill him, then you shall be our servants and labor for us.”
1SA	17	10	그 블레셋 사람이 또 가로되 내가 오늘날 이스라엘의 군대를 모욕하였으니 사람을 보내어 나로 더불어 싸우게 하라 한지라	And the Philistine said, I defy the armies of Israel this day; give me a man, that we may fight together.	Then the Philistine said, “I defy the ranks of Israel this day! Give me a man to fight!”
1SA	17	11	사울과 온 이스라엘이 블레셋 사람의 이 말을 듣고 놀라 크게 두려워하니라	When Saul and all Israel heard those words of the Philistine, they were dismayed, and greatly afraid.	On hearing the words of the Philistine, Saul and all the Israelites were dismayed and greatly afraid.
1SA	17	12	다윗은 유다 베들레헴 에브랏 사람 이새라 하는 자의 아들이었는데 이새는 사울 당시 사람 중에 나이 많아 늙은 자로서 여덟 아들이 있는 중	Now David was the son of that Ephrathite of Beth–lehem–judah, whose name was Jesse; and he had eight sons: and the man went among men for an old man in the days of Saul.	Now David was the son of a man named Jesse, an Ephrathite from Bethlehem of Judah who had eight sons in the days of Saul. And Jesse was old and well along in years.
1SA	17	13	그 장성한 세 아들은 사울을 따라 싸움에 나갔으니 싸움에 나간 세 아들의 이름은 장자 엘리압이요 그 다음은 아비나답이요 제삼은 삼마며	And the three eldest sons of Jesse went and followed Saul to the battle: and the names of his three sons that went to the battle were Eliab the firstborn, and next unto him Abinadab, and the third Shammah.	The three older sons of Jesse had followed Saul into battle: The firstborn was Eliab, the second was Abinadab, and the third was Shammah.
1SA	17	14	다윗은 말째라 장성한 삼 인은 사울을 좇았고	And David was the youngest: and the three eldest followed Saul.	And David was the youngest. The three oldest had followed Saul,
1SA	17	15	다윗은 사울에게로 왕래하며 베들레헴에서 그 아비의 양을 칠 때에	But David went and returned from Saul to feed his father’s sheep at Beth–lehem.	but David went back and forth from Saul to tend his father’s sheep in Bethlehem.
1SA	17	16	그 블레셋 사람이 사십 일을 조석으로 나와서 몸을 나타내었더라	And the Philistine drew near morning and evening, and presented himself forty days.	For forty days the Philistine came forward every morning and evening to take his stand.
1SA	17	17	이새가 그 아들 다윗에게 이르되 네 형들을 위하여 이 볶은 곡식 한 에바와 이 떡 열 덩이를 가지고 진으로 속히 가서 네 형들에게 주고	And Jesse said unto David his son, Take now for thy brethren an ephah of this parched corn, and these ten loaves, and run to the camp to thy brethren;	One day Jesse said to his son David, “Take this ephah of roasted grain and these ten loaves of bread for your brothers and hurry to their camp.
1SA	17	18	이 치스 열 덩이를 가져다가 그들의 천부장에게 주고 네 형들의 안부를 살피고 증표를 가져오라	And carry these ten cheeses unto the captain of their thousand, and look how thy brethren fare, and take their pledge.	Take also these ten portions of cheese to the commander of their unit. Check on the welfare of your brothers and bring back an assurance from them.
1SA	17	19	때에 사울과 그들과 이스라엘 모든 사람이 엘라 골짜기에서 블레셋 사람과 싸우는 중이더라	Now Saul, and they, and all the men of Israel, were in the valley of Elah, fighting with the Philistines.	They are with Saul and all the men of Israel in the Valley of Elah, fighting against the Philistines.”
1SA	17	20	다윗이 아침에 일찍이 일어나서 양을 양 지키는 자에게 맡기고 이새의 명한 대로 가지고 가서 진영에 이른즉 싸우려고 고함하며	And David rose up early in the morning, and left the sheep with a keeper, and took, and went, as Jesse had commanded him; and he came to the trench, as the host was going forth to the fight, and shouted for the battle.	So David got up early in the morning, left the flock with a keeper, loaded up, and set out as Jesse had instructed him. He reached the camp as the army was marching out to its position and shouting the battle cry.
1SA	17	21	이스라엘과 블레섹 사람이 항오를 벌이고 양군이 서로 대하였더라	For Israel and the Philistines had put the battle in array, army against army.	And Israel and the Philistines arrayed in formation against each other.
1SA	17	22	다윗이 그 짐을 짐 지키는 자의 손에 맡기고 군대로 달려가서 형들에게 문안하고	And David left his carriage in the hand of the keeper of the carriage, and ran into the army, and came and saluted his brethren.	Then David left his supplies in the care of the quartermaster and ran to the battle line. When he arrived, he asked his brothers how they were doing.
1SA	17	23	그들과 함께 말할 때에 마침 블레셋 사람의 싸움 돋우는 가드 사람 골리앗이라 하는 자가 그 항오에서 나와서 전과 같은 말을 하매 다윗이 들으니라	And as he talked with them, behold, there came up the champion, the Philistine of Gath, Goliath by name, out of the armies of the Philistines, and spake according to the same words: and David heard them.	And as he was speaking with them, suddenly the champion named Goliath, the Philistine from Gath, came forward from the Philistines and shouted his usual words, which David also heard.
1SA	17	24	이스라엘 모든 사람이 그 사람을 보고 심히 두려워하여 그 앞에서 도망하며	And all the men of Israel, when they saw the man, fled from him, and were sore afraid.	When all the men of Israel saw Goliath, they fled from him in great fear.
1SA	17	25	더러는 가로되 너희가 이 올라온 사람을 보았느냐 참으로 이스라엘을 모욕하러 왔도다 그를 죽이는 사람은 왕이 많은 재물로 부하게 하고 그 딸을 그에게 주고 그 아비의 집은 이스라엘 중에서 자유하게 하시리라	And the men of Israel said, Have ye seen this man that is come up? surely to defy Israel is he come up: and it shall be, that the man who killeth him, the king will enrich him with great riches, and will give him his daughter, and make his father’s house free in Israel.	Now the men of Israel had been saying, “Do you see this man who keeps coming out to defy Israel? To the man who kills him the king will give great riches. And he will give him his daughter in marriage and exempt his father’s house from taxation in Israel.”
1SA	17	26	다윗이 곁에 섰는 사람들에게 말하여 가로되 이 블레셋 사람을 죽여 이스라엘의 치욕을 제하는 사람에게는 어떠한 대우를 하겠느냐 이 할례 없는 블레셋 사람이 누구관대 사시는 하나님의 군대를 모욕하겠느냐	And David spake to the men that stood by him, saying, What shall be done to the man that killeth this Philistine, and taketh away the reproach from Israel? for who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he should defy the armies of the living God?	David asked the men who were standing with him, “What will be done for the man who kills this Philistine and removes this disgrace from Israel? Just who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he should defy the armies of the living God?”
1SA	17	27	백성이 전과 같이 말하여 가로되 그를 죽이는 사람에게는 여차 여차히 하시리라 하니라	And the people answered him after this manner, saying, So shall it be done to the man that killeth him.	The people told him about the offer, saying, “That is what will be done for the man who kills him.”
1SA	17	28	장형 엘리압이 다윗이 사람들에게 하는 말을 들은지라 그가 다윗에게 노를 발하여 가로되 네가 어찌하여 이리로 내려왔느냐 들에 있는 몇 양을 뉘게 맡겼느냐 나는 네 교만과 네 마음의 완악함을 아노니 네가 전쟁을 구경하러 왔도다	And Eliab his eldest brother heard when he spake unto the men; and Eliab’s anger was kindled against David, and he said, Why camest thou down hither? and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy pride, and the naughtiness of thine heart; for thou art come down that thou mightest see the battle.	Now when David’s oldest brother Eliab heard him speaking to the men, his anger burned against David. “Why have you come down here?” he asked. “And with whom did you leave those few sheep in the wilderness? I know your pride and wickedness of heart—you have come down to see the battle!”
1SA	17	29	다윗이 가로되 내가 무엇을 하였나이까 어찌 이유가 없으리이까 하고	And David said, What have I now done? Is there not a cause?	“What have I done now?” said David. “Was it not just a question?”
1SA	17	30	돌이켜 다른 사람을 향하여 전과 같이 말하매 백성이 전과 같이 대답하니라	And he turned from him toward another, and spake after the same manner: and the people answered him again after the former manner.	Then he turned from him toward another and asked about the offer, and those people answered him just as the first ones had answered.
1SA	17	31	혹이 다윗의 한 말을 듣고 그것을 사울에게 고하였으므로 사울이 다윗을 부른지라	And when the words were heard which David spake, they rehearsed them before Saul: and he sent for him.	Now David’s words were overheard and reported to Saul, who called for him.
1SA	17	32	다윗이 사울에게 고하되 그를 인하여 사람이 낙담하지 말 것이라 주의 종이 가서 저 블레셋 사람과 싸우리이다	And David said to Saul, Let no man’s heart fail because of him; thy servant will go and fight with this Philistine.	And David said to Saul, “Let no man’s heart fail on account of this Philistine. Your servant will go and fight him!”
1SA	17	33	사울이 다윗에게 이르되 네가 가서 저 블레셋 사람과 싸우기에 능치 못하리니 너는 소년이요 그는 어려서부터 용사임이니라	And Saul said to David, Thou art not able to go against this Philistine to fight with him: for thou art but a youth, and he a man of war from his youth.	But Saul replied, “You cannot go out against this Philistine to fight him. You are just a boy, and he has been a warrior from his youth.”
1SA	17	34	다윗이 사울에게 고하되 주의 종이 아비의 양을 지킬 때에 사자나 곰이 와서 양떼에서 새끼를 움키면	And David said unto Saul, Thy servant kept his father’s sheep, and there came a lion, and a bear, and took a lamb out of the flock:	David replied, “Your servant has been tending his father’s sheep, and whenever a lion or a bear came and carried off a lamb from the flock,
1SA	17	35	내가 따라가서 그것을 치고 그 입에서 새끼를 건져 내었고 그것이 일어나 나를 해하고자 하면 내가 그 수염을 잡고 그것을 쳐 죽였었나이다	And I went out after him, and smote him, and delivered it out of his mouth: and when he arose against me, I caught him by his beard, and smote him, and slew him.	I went after it, struck it down, and delivered the lamb from its mouth. If it reared up against me, I would grab it by its fur, strike it down, and kill it.
1SA	17	36	주의 종이 사자와 곰도 쳤은즉 사시는 하나님의 군대를 모욕한 이 할례 없는 블레셋 사람이리이까 그가 그 짐승의 하나와 같이 되리이다	Thy servant slew both the lion and the bear: and this uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he hath defied the armies of the living God.	Your servant has killed lions and bears; this uncircumcised Philistine will be like one of them, for he has defied the armies of the living God.”
1SA	17	37	또 가로되 여호와께서 나를 사자의 발톱과 곰의 발톱에서 건져 내셨은즉 나를 이 블레셋 사람의 손에서도 건져 내시리이다 사울이 다윗에게 이르되 가라 여호와께서 너와 함께 계시기를 원하노라	David said moreover, The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine. And Saul said unto David, Go, and the Lord be with thee.	David added, “The LORD, who delivered me from the claws of the lion and the bear, will deliver me from the hand of this Philistine.” “Go,” said Saul, “and may the LORD be with you.”
1SA	17	38	이에 사울이 자기 군복을 다윗에게 입히고 놋투구를 그 머리에 씌우고 또 그에게 갑옷을 입히매	And Saul armed David with his armour, and he put an helmet of brass upon his head; also he armed him with a coat of mail.	Then Saul clothed David in his own tunic, put a bronze helmet on his head, and dressed him in armor.
1SA	17	39	다윗이 칼을 군복 위에 차고는 익숙치 못하므로 시험적으로 걸어 보다가 사울에게 고하되 익숙치 못하니 이것을 입고 가지 못하겠나이다 하고 곧 벗고	And David girded his sword upon his armour, and he assayed to go; for he had not proved it. And David said unto Saul, I cannot go with these; for I have not proved them. And David put them off him.	David strapped his sword over the tunic and tried to walk, but he was not accustomed to them. “I cannot walk in these,” David said to Saul. “I am not accustomed to them.” So David took them off.
1SA	17	40	손에 막대기를 가지고 시내에서 매끄러운 돌 다섯을 골라서 자기 목자의 제구 곧 주머니에 넣고 손에 물매를 가지고 블레셋 사람에게로 나아가니라	And he took his staff in his hand, and chose him five smooth stones out of the brook, and put them in a shepherd’s bag which he had, even in a scrip; and his sling was in his hand: and he drew near to the Philistine.	And David took his staff in his hand, selected five smooth stones from the brook, and put them in the pouch of his shepherd’s bag. And with his sling in hand, he approached the Philistine.
1SA	17	41	블레셋 사람이 점점 행하여 다윗에게로 나아오는데 방패 든 자가 앞섰더라	And the Philistine came on and drew near unto David; and the man that bare the shield went before him.	Now the Philistine came closer and closer to David, with his shield-bearer before him.
1SA	17	42	그 블레셋 사람이 둘러보다가 다윗을 보고 업신여기니 이는 그가 젊고 붉고 용모가 아름다움이라	And when the Philistine looked about, and saw David, he disdained him: for he was but a youth, and ruddy, and of a fair countenance.	When the Philistine looked and saw David, he despised him because he was just a boy, ruddy and handsome.
1SA	17	43	블레셋 사람이 다윗에게 이르되 네가 나를 개로 여기고 막대기를 가지고 내게 나아왔느냐 하고 그 신들의 이름으로 다윗을 저주하고	And the Philistine said unto David, Am I a dog, that thou comest to me with staves? And the Philistine cursed David by his gods.	“Am I a dog,” he said to David, “that you come at me with sticks?” And the Philistine cursed David by his gods.
1SA	17	44	또 이르되 내게로 오라 내가 네 고기를 공중의 새들과 들짐승들에게 주리라	And the Philistine said to David, Come to me, and I will give thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the field.	“Come here,” he called to David, “and I will give your flesh to the birds of the air and the beasts of the field!”
1SA	17	45	다윗이 블레셋 사람에게 이르되 너는 칼과 창과 단창으로 내게 오거니와 나는 만군의 여호와의 이름 곧 네가 모욕하는 이스라엘 군대의 하나님의 이름으로 네게 가노라	Then said David to the Philistine, Thou comest to me with a sword, and with a spear, and with a shield: but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou hast defied.	But David said to the Philistine, “You come against me with sword and spear and javelin, but I come against you in the name of the LORD of Hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom you have defied.
1SA	17	46	오늘 여호와께서 너를 내 손에 붙이시리니 내가 너를 쳐서 네 머리를 베고 블레셋 군대의 시체로 오늘날 공중의 새와 땅의 들짐승에게 주어 온 땅으로 이스라엘에 하나님이 계신줄 알게 하겠고	This day will the Lord deliver thee into mine hand; and I will smite thee, and take thine head from thee; and I will give the carcases of the host of the Philistines this day unto the fowls of the air, and to the wild beasts of the earth; that all the earth may know that there is a God in Israel.	This day the LORD will deliver you into my hand. This day I will strike you down, cut off your head, and give the carcasses of the Philistines to the birds of the air and the creatures of the earth. Then the whole world will know that there is a God in Israel.
1SA	17	47	또 여호와의 구원하심이 칼과 창에 있지 아니함을 이 무리로 알게 하리라 전쟁은 여호와께 속한 것인즉 그가 너희를 우리 손에 붙이시리라	And all this assembly shall know that the Lord saveth not with sword and spear: for the battle is the Lord’s, and he will give you into our hands.	And all those assembled here will know that it is not by sword or spear that the LORD saves; for the battle is the LORD’s, and He will give all of you into our hands.”
1SA	17	48	블레셋 사람이 일어나 다윗에게로 마주 가까이 올 때에 다윗이 블레셋 사람에게로 마주 그 항오를 향하여 빨리 달리며	And it came to pass, when the Philistine arose, and came and drew nigh to meet David, that David hasted, and ran toward the army to meet the Philistine.	As the Philistine started forward to attack him, David ran quickly toward the battle line to meet him.
1SA	17	49	손을 주머니에 넣어 돌을 취하여 물매로 던져 블레셋 사람의 이마를 치매 돌이 그 이마에 박히니 땅에 엎드러지니라	And David put his hand in his bag, and took thence a stone, and slang it, and smote the Philistine in his forehead, that the stone sunk into his forehead; and he fell upon his face to the earth.	Then David reached into his bag, took out a stone, and slung it, striking the Philistine on the forehead. The stone sank into his forehead, and he fell facedown on the ground.
1SA	17	50	다윗이 이같이 물매와 돌로 블레셋 사람을 이기고 그를 쳐 죽였으나 자기 손에는 칼이 없었더라	So David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and with a stone, and smote the Philistine, and slew him; but there was no sword in the hand of David.	Thus David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and a stone; without a sword in his hand he struck down the Philistine and killed him.
1SA	17	51	다윗이 달려가서 블레셋 사람을 밟고 그의 칼을 그 집에서 빼어 내어 그 칼로 그를 죽이고 그 머리를 베니 블레셋 사람들이 자기 용사의 죽음을 보고 도망하는지라	Therefore David ran, and stood upon the Philistine, and took his sword, and drew it out of the sheath thereof, and slew him, and cut off his head therewith. And when the Philistines saw their champion was dead, they fled.	David ran and stood over him. He grabbed the Philistine’s sword and pulled it from its sheath and killed him; and he cut off his head with the sword. When the Philistines saw that their hero was dead, they turned and ran.
1SA	17	52	이스라엘과 유다 사람들이 일어나서 소리지르며 블레셋 사람을 쫓아 가이와 에그론 성문까지 이르렀고 블레셋 사람의 상한 자들은 사아라임 가는 길에서부터 가드와 에그론까지 엎드러졌더라	And the men of Israel and of Judah arose, and shouted, and pursued the Philistines, until thou come to the valley, and to the gates of Ekron. And the wounded of the Philistines fell down by the way to Shaaraim, even unto Gath, and unto Ekron.	Then the men of Israel and Judah charged forward with a shout and pursued the Philistines to the entrance of Gath and to the gates of Ekron. And the bodies of the Philistines were strewn along the Shaaraim road to Gath and Ekron.
1SA	17	53	이스라엘 자손이 블레셋 사람을 쫓다가 돌아와서 그들의 진을 노략하였고	And the children of Israel returned from chasing after the Philistines, and they spoiled their tents.	When the Israelites returned from their pursuit of the Philistines, they plundered their camps.
1SA	17	54	다윗은 블레셋 사람의 머리를 예루살렘으로 가져가고 갑주는 자기 장막에 두니라	And David took the head of the Philistine, and brought it to Jerusalem; but he put his armour in his tent.	David took the head of the Philistine and brought it to Jerusalem, and he put Goliath’s weapons in his own tent.
1SA	17	55	다윗이 블레셋 사람을 향하여 나감을 사울이 보고 군장 아브넬에게 묻되 아브넬아 이 소년이 뉘 아들이냐 아브넬이 가로되 왕이여 왕의 사심으로 맹세하옵나니 내가 알지 못하나이다 하매	And when Saul saw David go forth against the Philistine, he said unto Abner, the captain of the host, Abner, whose son is this youth? And Abner said, As thy soul liveth, O king, I cannot tell.	As Saul had watched David going out to confront the Philistine, he said to Abner the commander of the army, “Abner, whose son is this young man?” “As surely as you live, O king,” Abner replied, “I do not know.”
1SA	17	56	왕이 가로되 너는 이 청년이 누구의 아들인가 물어보라 하였더니	And the king said, Enquire thou whose son the stripling is.	“Find out whose son this young man is!” said the king.
1SA	17	57	다윗이 블레셋 사람을 죽이고 돌아올 때에 블레셋 사람의 머리가 그 손에 있는 채 아브넬이 그를 사울의 앞으로 인도하니	And as David returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, Abner took him, and brought him before Saul with the head of the Philistine in his hand.	So when David returned from killing the Philistine, still holding his head in his hand, Abner took him and brought him before Saul.
1SA	17	58	사울이 그에게 묻되 소년이여 누구의 아들이뇨 다윗이 대답하되 나는 주의 종 베들레헴 사람 이새의 아들이니이다	And Saul said to him, Whose son art thou, thou young man? And David answered, I am the son of thy servant Jesse the Beth–lehemite.	“Whose son are you, young man?” asked Saul. “I am the son of your servant Jesse of Bethlehem,” David replied.
1SA	18	1	다윗이 사울에게 말하기를 마치매 요나단의 마음이 다윗의 마음과 연락되어 요나단이 그를 자기 생명 같이 사랑하니라	And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking unto Saul, that the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, and Jonathan loved him as his own soul.	After David had finished speaking with Saul, the souls of Jonathan and David were knit together, and Jonathan loved him as himself.
1SA	18	2	그 날에 사울은 다윗을 머무르게 하고 그 아비의 집으로 다시 돌아가기를 허락지 아니하였고	And Saul took him that day, and would let him go no more home to his father’s house.	And from that day Saul kept David with him and did not let him return to his father’s house.
1SA	18	3	요나단은 다윗을 자기 생명 같이 사랑하여 더불어 언약을 맺었으며	Then Jonathan and David made a covenant, because he loved him as his own soul.	Then Jonathan made a covenant with David because he loved him as himself.
1SA	18	4	요나단이 자기의 입었던 겉옷을 벗어 다윗에게 주었고 그 군복과 칼과 활과 띠도 그리하였더라	And Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was upon him, and gave it to David, and his garments, even to his sword, and to his bow, and to his girdle.	And Jonathan removed the robe he was wearing and gave it to David, along with his tunic, his sword, his bow, and his belt.
1SA	18	5	다윗이 사울의 보내는 곳마다 가서 지혜롭게 행하매 사울이 그로 군대의 장을 삼았더니 온 백성이 합당히 여겼고 사울의 신하들도 합당히 여겼더라	And David went out whithersoever Saul sent him, and behaved himself wisely: and Saul set him over the men of war, and he was accepted in the sight of all the people, and also in the sight of Saul’s servants.	So David marched out and prospered in everything Saul sent him to do, and Saul set him over the men of war. And this was pleasing in the sight of all the people, and of Saul’s officers as well.
1SA	18	6	무리가 돌아올 때 곧 다윗이 블레셋 사람을 죽이고 돌아올 때에 여인들이 이스라엘 모든 성에서 나와서 노래하며 춤추며 소고와 경쇠를 가지고 왕 사울을 환영하는데	And it came to pass as they came, when David was returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, that the women came out of all cities of Israel, singing and dancing, to meet king Saul, with tabrets, with joy, and with instruments of musick.	As the troops were returning home after David had killed the Philistine, the women came out of all the cities of Israel to meet King Saul with singing and dancing, with joyful songs, and with tambourines and other instruments.
1SA	18	7	여인들이 뛰놀며 창화하여 가로되 사울의 죽인 자는 천천이요 다윗은 만만이로다 한지라	And the women answered one another as they played, and said, Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands.	And as the women danced, they sang out: “Saul has slain his thousands, and David his tens of thousands.”
1SA	18	8	사울이 이 말에 불쾌하여 심히 노하여 가로되 다윗에게는 만만을 돌리고 내게는 천천만 돌리니 그의 더 얻을 것이 나라 밖에 무엇이냐 하고	And Saul was very wroth, and the saying displeased him; and he said, They have ascribed unto David ten thousands, and to me they have ascribed but thousands: and what can he have more but the kingdom?	And Saul was furious and resented this song. “They have ascribed tens of thousands to David,” he said, “but only thousands to me. What more can he have but the kingdom?”
1SA	18	9	그 날 후로 사울이 다윗을 주목하였더라	And Saul eyed David from that day and forward.	And from that day forward Saul kept a jealous eye on David.
1SA	18	10	그 이튿날 하나님의 부리신 악신이 사울에게 힘있게 내리매 그가 집 가운데서 야료하는고로 다윗이 평일과 같이 손으로 수금을 타는데 때에 사울의 손에 창이 있는지라	And it came to pass on the morrow, that the evil spirit from God came upon Saul, and he prophesied in the midst of the house: and David played with his hand, as at other times: and there was a javelin in Saul’s hand.	The next day a spirit of distress sent from God came upon Saul, and he prophesied inside the house while David played the harp as usual. Now Saul was holding a spear,
1SA	18	11	그가 스스로 이르기를 내가 다윗을 벽에 박으리라 하고 그 창을 던졌으나 다윗이 그 앞에서 두 번 피하였더라	And Saul cast the javelin; for he said, I will smite David even to the wall with it. And David avoided out of his presence twice.	and he hurled it, thinking, “I will pin David to the wall.” But David eluded him twice.
1SA	18	12	여호와께서 사울을 떠나 다윗과 함께 계시므로 사울이 그를 두려워한지라	And Saul was afraid of David, because the Lord was with him, and was departed from Saul.	So Saul was afraid of David, because the LORD was with David but had departed from Saul.
1SA	18	13	그러므로 사울이 그로 자기를 떠나게 하고 천부장을 삼으매 그가 백성 앞에 출입하며	Therefore Saul removed him from him, and made him his captain over a thousand; and he went out and came in before the people.	Therefore Saul sent David away and gave him command of a thousand men. David led the troops out to battle and back,
1SA	18	14	그 모든 일을 지혜롭게 행하니라 여호와께서 그와 함께 계시니라	And David behaved himself wisely in all his ways; and the Lord was with him.	and he continued to prosper in all his ways, because the LORD was with him.
1SA	18	15	사울이 다윗의 크게 지혜롭게 행함을 보고 그를 두려워하였으나	Wherefore when Saul saw that he behaved himself very wisely, he was afraid of him.	When Saul saw that David was very successful, he was afraid of him.
1SA	18	16	온 이스라엘과 유다는 다윗을 사랑하였으니 그가 자기들 앞에 출입함을 인함이었더라	But all Israel and Judah loved David, because he went out and came in before them.	But all Israel and Judah loved David, because he was leading them out to battle and back.
1SA	18	17	사울이 다윗에게 이르되 내 맏딸 메랍을 네게 아내로 주리니 오직 너는 나를 위하여 용맹을 내어 여호와의 싸움을 싸우라 하니 이는 그가 생각하기를 내 손을 그에게 대지 말고 블레셋 사람의 손으로 그에게 대게 하리라 함이라	And Saul said to David, Behold my elder daughter Merab, her will I give thee to wife: only be thou valiant for me, and fight the Lord’s battles. For Saul said, Let not mine hand be upon him, but let the hand of the Philistines be upon him.	Then Saul said to David, “Here is my older daughter Merab. I will give her to you in marriage. Only be valiant for me and fight the LORD’s battles.” But Saul was thinking, “I need not raise my hand against him; let the hand of the Philistines be against him.”
1SA	18	18	다윗이 사울에게 이르되 내가 누구며 이스라엘 중에 내 친속이나 내 아비의 집이 무엇이관대 내가 왕의 사위가 되리이까 하였더니	And David said unto Saul, Who am I? and what is my life, or my father’s family in Israel, that I should be son in law to the king?	And David said to Saul, “Who am I, and what is my family or my father’s clan in Israel, that I should become the son-in-law of the king?”
1SA	18	19	사울의 딸 메랍을 다윗에게 줄 시기에 므홀랏 사람 아드리엘에게 아내로 준바 되었더라	But it came to pass at the time when Merab Saul’s daughter should have been given to David, that she was given unto Adriel the Meholathite to wife.	So when it was time to give Saul’s daughter Merab to David, she was given in marriage to Adriel of Meholah.
1SA	18	20	사울의 딸 미갈이 다윗을 사랑하매 혹이 사울에게 고한지라 사울이 그 일을 좋게 여겨	And Michal Saul’s daughter loved David: and they told Saul, and the thing pleased him.	Now Saul’s daughter Michal loved David, and when this was reported to Saul, it pleased him.
1SA	18	21	스스로 이르되 내가 딸을 그에게 주어서 그에게 올무가 되게 하고 블레셋 사람의 손으로 그를 치게 하리라 하고 이에 다윗에게 이르되 네가 오늘 다시 내 사위가 되리라 하니라	And Saul said, I will give him her, that she may be a snare to him, and that the hand of the Philistines may be against him. Wherefore Saul said to David, Thou shalt this day be my son in law in the one of the twain.	“I will give her to David,” Saul thought, “so that she may be a snare to him, and the hand of the Philistines may be against him.” So Saul said to David, “For a second time now you can be my son-in-law.”
1SA	18	22	사울이 그 신하들에게 명하되 너희는 다윗에게 비밀히 말하여 이르기를 보라 왕이 너를 기뻐하시고 모든 신하도 너를 사랑하나니 그런즉 네가 왕의 사위가 되는 것이 가하니라 하라	And Saul commanded his servants, saying, Commune with David secretly, and say, Behold, the king hath delight in thee, and all his servants love thee: now therefore be the king’s son in law.	Then Saul ordered his servants, “Speak to David privately and tell him, ‘Behold, the king is pleased with you, and all his servants love you. Now therefore, become his son-in-law.’”
1SA	18	23	사울의 신하들이 이 말로 다윗의 귀에 고하매 다윗이 가로되 왕의 사위 되는 것을 너희는 경한 일로 보느냐 나는 가난하고 천한 사람이로라 한지라	And Saul’s servants spake those words in the ears of David. And David said, Seemeth it to you a light thing to be a king’s son in law, seeing that I am a poor man, and lightly esteemed?	But when Saul’s servants relayed these words to David, he replied, “Does it seem trivial in your sight to be the son-in-law of the king? I am a poor man and lightly esteemed.”
1SA	18	24	사울의 신하들이 사울에게 고하여 가로되 다윗이 여차여차히 말하더이다	And the servants of Saul told him, saying, On this manner spake David.	And the servants told Saul what David had said.
1SA	18	25	사울이 가로되 너희는 다윗에게 이같이 말하기를 왕이 아무 폐백도 원치 아니하고 다만 왕의 원수의 보족으로 블레셋 사람의 양피 일백을 원하신다 하라 하였으니 이는 사울의 생각에 다윗을 블레셋 사람의 손에 죽게 하리라 함이라	And Saul said, Thus shall ye say to David, The king desireth not any dowry, but an hundred foreskins of the Philistines, to be avenged of the king’s enemies. But Saul thought to make David fall by the hand of the Philistines.	Saul replied, “Say to David, ‘The king desires no other dowry but a hundred Philistine foreskins as revenge on his enemies.’” But Saul intended to cause David’s death at the hands of the Philistines.
1SA	18	26	사울의 신하들이 이 말로 다윗에게 고하매 다윗이 왕의 사위 되는 것을 좋게 여기므로 만기가 되지 못하여서	And when his servants told David these words, it pleased David well to be the king’s son in law: and the days were not expired.	When the servants reported these terms to David, he was pleased to become the king’s son-in-law. Before the wedding day arrived,
1SA	18	27	다윗이 일어나서 그 종자와 함께 가서 블레셋 사람 이백 명을 죽이고 그 양피를 가져다가 수대로 왕께 드려 왕의 사위가 되고자 하니 사울이 그 딸 미갈을 다윗에게 아내로 주었더라	Wherefore David arose and went, he and his men, and slew of the Philistines two hundred men; and David brought their foreskins, and they gave them in full tale to the king, that he might be the king’s son in law. And Saul gave him Michal his daughter to wife.	David and his men went out and killed two hundred Philistines. He brought their foreskins and presented them as payment in full to become the king’s son-in-law. Then Saul gave his daughter Michal to David in marriage.
1SA	18	28	여호와께서 다윗과 함께 계심을 사울이 보고 알았고 사울의 딸 미갈도 그를 사랑하므로	And Saul saw and knew that the Lord was with David, and that Michal Saul’s daughter loved him.	When Saul realized that the LORD was with David and that his daughter Michal loved David,
1SA	18	29	사울이 다윗을 더욱 더욱 두려워하여 평생에 다윗의 대적이 되니라	And Saul was yet the more afraid of David; and Saul became David’s enemy continually.	he grew even more afraid of David. So from then on Saul was David’s enemy.
1SA	18	30	블레셋 사람의 방백들이 나오면 그들의 나올 때마다 다윗이 사울의 모든 신하보다 더 지혜롭게 행하매 이에 그 이름이 심히 귀중히 되니라	Then the princes of the Philistines went forth: and it came to pass, after they went forth, that David behaved himself more wisely than all the servants of Saul; so that his name was much set by.	Every time the Philistine commanders came out for battle, David was more successful than all of Saul’s officers, so that his name was highly esteemed.
1SA	19	1	사울이 그 아들 요나단과 그 모든 신하에게 다윗을 죽이라 말하였더니 사울의 아들 요나단이 다윗을 심히 기뻐하므로	And Saul spake to Jonathan his son, and to all his servants, that they should kill David.	Then Saul ordered his son Jonathan and all his servants to kill David. But Jonathan delighted greatly in David,
1SA	19	2	그가 다윗에게 고하여 가로되 내 부친 사울이 너를 죽이기를 꾀하시느니라 그러므로 이제 청하노니 아침에 조심하여 은밀한 곳에 숨어 있으라	But Jonathan Saul’s son delighted much in David: and Jonathan told David, saying, Saul my father seeketh to kill thee: now therefore, I pray thee, take heed to thyself until the morning, and abide in a secret place, and hide thyself:	so he warned David, saying, “My father Saul intends to kill you. Be on your guard in the morning; find a secret place and hide there.
1SA	19	3	내가 나가서 너 있는 들에서 내 부친 곁에 서서 네 일을 내 부친과 말하다가 무엇을 보거든 네게 알게 하리라 하고	And I will go out and stand beside my father in the field where thou art, and I will commune with my father of thee; and what I see, that I will tell thee.	I will go out and stand beside my father in the field where you are, so I can ask about you. And if I find out anything, I will tell you.”
1SA	19	4	요나단이 그 아비 사울에게 다윗을 포장하여 가로되 원컨대 왕은 신하 다윗에게 범죄치 마옵소서 그는 왕께 득죄하지 아니하였고 그가 왕께 행한 일은 심히 선함이니이다	And Jonathan spake good of David unto Saul his father, and said unto him, Let not the king sin against his servant, against David; because he hath not sinned against thee, and because his works have been to thee-ward very good:	Then Jonathan spoke well of David to his father Saul and said to him, “The king should not sin against his servant David; he has not sinned against you. In fact, his actions have been highly beneficial to you.
1SA	19	5	그가 자기 생명을 아끼지 아니하고 블레셋 사람을 죽였고 여호와께서는 온 이스라엘을 위하여 큰 구원을 이루셨으므로 왕이 이를 보고 기뻐하셨거늘 어찌 무고히 다윗을 죽여 무죄한 피를 흘려 범죄하려 하시나이까	For he did put his life in his hand, and slew the Philistine, and the Lord wrought a great salvation for all Israel: thou sawest it, and didst rejoice: wherefore then wilt thou sin against innocent blood, to slay David without a cause?	He took his life in his hands when he struck down the Philistine, and the LORD worked a great salvation for all Israel. You saw it and rejoiced, so why would you sin against innocent blood by killing David for no reason?”
1SA	19	6	사울이 요나단의 말을 듣고 맹세하되 여호와께서 사시거니와 그가 죽임을 당치 아니하리라	And Saul hearkened unto the voice of Jonathan: and Saul sware, As the Lord liveth, he shall not be slain.	Saul listened to the voice of Jonathan and swore an oath: “As surely as the LORD lives, David will not be put to death.”
1SA	19	7	요나단이 다윗을 불러 그 모든 일을 알게 하고 그를 사울에게로 인도하니 그가 사울 앞에 여전히 있으니라	And Jonathan called David, and Jonathan shewed him all those things. And Jonathan brought David to Saul, and he was in his presence, as in times past.	So Jonathan summoned David and told him all these things. Then Jonathan brought David to Saul to serve him as he had before.
1SA	19	8	전쟁이 다시 있으므로 다윗이 나가서 블레셋 사람들과 싸워 그들을 크게 도륙하매 그들이 그 앞에서 도망하니라	And there was war again: and David went out, and fought with the Philistines, and slew them with a great slaughter; and they fled from him.	When war broke out again, David went out and fought the Philistines and struck them with such a mighty blow that they fled before him.
1SA	19	9	사울이 손에 단창을 가지고 그 집에 앉았을 때에 여호와의 부리신 악신이 사울에게 접하였으므로 다윗이 손으로 수금을 탈 때에	And the evil spirit from the Lord was upon Saul, as he sat in his house with his javelin in his hand: and David played with his hand.	But as Saul was sitting in his house with his spear in his hand, a spirit of distress from the LORD came upon him. While David was playing the harp,
1SA	19	10	사울이 단창으로 다윗을 벽에 박으려 하였으나 그는 사울의 앞을 피하고 사울의 창은 벽에 박힌지라 다윗이 그 밤에 도피하매	And Saul sought to smite David even to the wall with the javelin; but he slipped away out of Saul’s presence, and he smote the javelin into the wall: and David fled, and escaped that night.	Saul tried to pin him to the wall with his spear. But the spear struck the wall and David eluded him, ran away, and escaped that night.
1SA	19	11	사울이 사자들을 다윗의 집에 보내어 그를 지키다가 아침에 그를 죽이게 하려 한지라 다윗의 아내 미갈이 다윗에게 일러 가로되 당신이 이 밤에 당신의 생명을 구하지 아니하면 내일에는 죽임을 당하리라 하고	Saul also sent messengers unto David’s house, to watch him, and to slay him in the morning: and Michal David’s wife told him, saying, If thou save not thy life to night, to morrow thou shalt be slain.	Then Saul sent messengers to David’s house to watch him and kill him in the morning. But David’s wife Michal warned him, “If you do not run for your life tonight, tomorrow you will be dead!”
1SA	19	12	미갈이 다윗을 창에서 달아 내리우매 그가 도망하여 피하니라	So Michal let David down through a window: and he went, and fled, and escaped.	So Michal lowered David from the window, and he ran away and escaped.
1SA	19	13	미갈이 우상을 취하여 침상에 뉘고 염소털로 엮은 것을 그 머리에 씌우고 의복으로 그것을 덮었더니	And Michal took an image, and laid it in the bed, and put a pillow of goats’ hair for his bolster, and covered it with a cloth.	Then Michal took a household idol and laid it in the bed, placed some goat hair on its head, and covered it with a garment.
1SA	19	14	사울이 사자들을 보내어 다윗을 잡으려 하매 미갈이 가로되 그가 병들었느니라	And when Saul sent messengers to take David, she said, He is sick.	When Saul sent the messengers to seize David, Michal said, “He is ill.”
1SA	19	15	사울이 또 사자들을 보내어 다윗을 보라 하며 이르되 그를 침상채 내게로 가져오라 내가 그를 죽이리라	And Saul sent the messengers again to see David, saying, Bring him up to me in the bed, that I may slay him.	But Saul sent the messengers back to see David and told them, “Bring him up to me in his bed so I can kill him.”
1SA	19	16	사자들이 들어가 본즉 침상에 우상이 있고 염소털로 엮은 것이 그 머리에 있었더라	And when the messengers were come in, behold, there was an image in the bed, with a pillow of goats’ hair for his bolster.	And when the messengers entered, there was the idol in the bed with the quilt of goats’ hair on its head.
1SA	19	17	사울이 미갈에게 이르되 너는 어찌하여 이처럼 나를 속여 내 대적을 놓아 피하게 하였느냐 미갈이 사울에게 대답하되 그가 내게 이르기를 나를 놓아 가게 하라 어찌하여 나로 너를 죽이게 하겠느냐 하더이다 하니라	And Saul said unto Michal, Why hast thou deceived me so, and sent away mine enemy, that he is escaped? And Michal answered Saul, He said unto me, Let me go; why should I kill thee?	And Saul said to Michal, “Why did you deceive me like this? You sent my enemy away and he has escaped!” Michal replied, “He said to me, ‘Help me get away, or I will kill you!’”
1SA	19	18	다윗이 도피하여 라마로 가서 사무엘에게로 나아가서 사울이 자기에게 행한 일을 다 고하였고 다윗과 사무엘이 나욧으로 가서 거하였더라	So David fled, and escaped, and came to Samuel to Ramah, and told him all that Saul had done to him. And he and Samuel went and dwelt in Naioth.	So David ran away and escaped. And he went to Samuel at Ramah and told him all that Saul had done to him. Then he and Samuel went to Naioth and stayed there.
1SA	19	19	혹이 사울에게 고하여 가로되 다윗이 라마 나욧에 있더이다 하매	And it was told Saul, saying, Behold, David is at Naioth in Ramah.	When Saul was told that David was at Naioth in Ramah,
1SA	19	20	사울이 다윗을 잡으려 사자들을 보내었더니 그들이 선지자 무리의 예언하는 것과 사무엘이 그들의 수령으로 선 것을 볼 때에 하나님의 신이 사울의 사자들에게 임하매 그들도 예언을 한지라	And Saul sent messengers to take David: and when they saw the company of the prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing as appointed over them, the Spirit of God was upon the messengers of Saul, and they also prophesied.	he sent messengers to capture him. But when they saw the group of prophets prophesying, with Samuel leading them, the Spirit of God came upon them, and Saul’s messengers also began to prophesy.
1SA	19	21	혹이 그것을 사울에게 고하매 사울이 다른 사자들을 보내었더니 그들도 예언을 한고로 사울이 세번째 다시 사자들을 보내었더니 그들도 예언을 한지라	And when it was told Saul, he sent other messengers, and they prophesied likewise. And Saul sent messengers again the third time, and they prophesied also.	When this was reported to Saul, he sent more messengers, but they began to prophesy as well. So Saul tried again and sent messengers a third time, and even they began to prophesy.
1SA	19	22	이에 사울도 라마로 가서 세구에 있는 큰 우물에 이르러 물어 가로되 사무엘과 다윗이 어디 있느냐 혹이 가로되 라마 나욧에 있나이다	Then went he also to Ramah, and came to a great well that is in Sechu: and he asked and said, Where are Samuel and David? And one said, Behold, they be at Naioth in Ramah.	Finally, Saul himself left for Ramah and came to the large cistern at Secu, where he asked, “Where are Samuel and David?” “At Naioth in Ramah,” he was told.
1SA	19	23	사울이 라마 나욧으로 가니라 하나님의 신이 그에게도 임하시니 그가 라마 나욧에 이르기까지 행하며 예언을 하였으며	And he went thither to Naioth in Ramah: and the Spirit of God was upon him also, and he went on, and prophesied, until he came to Naioth in Ramah.	So Saul went to Naioth in Ramah. But the Spirit of God came upon even Saul, and he walked along prophesying until he came to Naioth in Ramah.
1SA	19	24	그가 또 그 옷을 벗고 사무엘 앞에서 예언을 하며 종일 종야에 벌거벗은 몸으로 누웠었더라 그러므로 속담에 이르기를 사울도 선지자 중에 있느냐 하니라	And he stripped off his clothes also, and prophesied before Samuel in like manner, and lay down naked all that day and all that night. Wherefore they say, Is Saul also among the prophets?	Then Saul stripped off his robes and also prophesied before Samuel. And he collapsed and lay naked all that day and night. That is why it is said, “Is Saul also among the prophets?”
1SA	20	1	다윗이 라마 나욧에서 도망하여 와서 요나단에게 이르되 내가 무엇을 하였으며 내 죄악이 무엇이며 네 부친 앞에서 나의 죄가 무엇이관대 그가 내 생명을 찾느뇨	And David fled from Naioth in Ramah, and came and said before Jonathan, What have I done? what is mine iniquity? and what is my sin before thy father, that he seeketh my life?	Then David fled from Naioth in Ramah. He came to Jonathan and asked, “What have I done? What is my iniquity? How have I sinned against your father, that he wants to take my life?”
1SA	20	2	요나단이 그에게 이르되 결단코 아니라 네가 죽지 아니하리라 내 부친이 대소사를 내게 알게 아니하고는 행함이 없나니 내 부친이 어찌하여 이 일은 내게 숨기리요 그렇지 아니하니라	And he said unto him, God forbid; thou shalt not die: behold, my father will do nothing either great or small, but that he will shew it me: and why should my father hide this thing from me? it is not so.	“Far from it!” Jonathan replied. “You will not die. Indeed, my father does nothing, great or small, without telling me. So why would he hide this matter from me? This cannot be true!”
1SA	20	3	다윗이 또 맹세하여 가로되 내가 네게 은혜 받은 줄을 네 부친이 밝히 알고 스스로 이르기를 요나단이 슬퍼할까 두려운즉 그로 이를 알게 하지 아니하리라 함이니라 그러나 진실로 여호와의 사심과 네 생명으로 맹세하노니 나와 사망의 사이는 한 걸음뿐이니라	And David sware moreover, and said, Thy father certainly knoweth that I have found grace in thine eyes; and he saith, Let not Jonathan know this, lest he be grieved: but truly as the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, there is but a step between me and death.	But David again vowed, “Your father knows very well that I have found favor in your eyes, and he has said, ‘Jonathan must not know of this, or he will be grieved.’ As surely as the LORD lives and as you yourself live, there is but a step between me and death.”
1SA	20	4	요나단이 다윗에게 이르되 네 마음의 소원이 무엇이든지 내가 너를 위하여 그것을 이루리라	Then said Jonathan unto David, Whatsoever thy soul desireth, I will even do it for thee.	Then Jonathan said to David, “Whatever you desire, I will do for you.”
1SA	20	5	다윗이 요나단에게 이르되 내일은 월삭인즉 내가 마땅히 왕을 모시고 앉아 식사를 하여야 할 것이나 나를 보내어 제삼일 저녁까지 들에 숨게 하고	And David said unto Jonathan, Behold, to morrow is the new moon, and I should not fail to sit with the king at meat: but let me go, that I may hide myself in the field unto the third day at even.	So David told him, “Look, tomorrow is the New Moon, and I am supposed to dine with the king. Instead, let me go and hide in the field until the third evening from now.
1SA	20	6	네 부친이 만일 나를 자세히 묻거든 그 때에 너는 말하기를 다윗이 자기 성 베들레헴으로 급히 가기를 내게 허하라 간청하였사오니 이는 온 가족을 위하여 거기서 매년제를 드릴 때가 됨이니이다 하라	If thy father at all miss me, then say, David earnestly asked leave of me that he might run to Beth–lehem his city: for there is a yearly sacrifice there for all the family.	If your father misses me at all, tell him, ‘David urgently requested my permission to hurry to Bethlehem, his hometown, because there is an annual sacrifice for his whole clan.’
1SA	20	7	그의 말이 좋다 하면 네 종이 평안하려니와 그가 만일 노하면 나를 해하려고 결심한 줄을 알지니	If he say thus, It is well; thy servant shall have peace: but if he be very wroth, then be sure that evil is determined by him.	If he says, ‘Good,’ then your servant is safe, but if he is enraged, you will know he has evil intentions.
1SA	20	8	그런즉 원컨대 네 종에게 인자히 행하라 네가 네 종으로 여호와 앞에서 너와 맹약케 하였음이니라 그러나 내게 죄악이 있거든 네가 친히 나를 죽이라 나를 네 부친에게로 데려갈 것이 무엇이뇨	Therefore thou shalt deal kindly with thy servant; for thou hast brought thy servant into a covenant of the Lord with thee: notwithstanding, if there be in me iniquity, slay me thyself; for why shouldest thou bring me to thy father?	Therefore deal faithfully with your servant, for you have brought me into a covenant with you before the LORD. If there is iniquity in me, then kill me yourself; why should you bring me to your father?”
1SA	20	9	요나단이 가로되 이 일이 결코 네게 있지 아니하리라 내 부친이 너를 해하려 결심한줄 알면 내가 네게 이르지 아니하겠느냐	And Jonathan said, Far be it from thee: for if I knew certainly that evil were determined by my father to come upon thee, then would not I tell it thee?	“Never!” Jonathan replied. “If I ever found out that my father had evil intentions against you, would I not tell you?”
1SA	20	10	다윗이 요나단에게 이르되 네 부친이 혹 엄하게 네게 대답하면 누가 그것을 내게 고하겠느냐	Then said David to Jonathan, Who shall tell me? or what if thy father answer thee roughly?	Then David asked Jonathan, “Who will tell me if your father answers you harshly?”
1SA	20	11	요나단이 다윗에게 이르되 오라 우리가 들로 가자 하고 두 사람이 들로 가니라	And Jonathan said unto David, Come, and let us go out into the field. And they went out both of them into the field.	“Come,” he replied, “let us go out to the field.” So the two of them went out into the field,
1SA	20	12	요나단이 다윗에게 이르되 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께서 증거하시거니와 내가 내일이나 모레 이맘 때에 내 부친을 살펴서 너 다윗에게 대한 의향이 선하면 내가 보내어 네게 알게 하지 않겠느냐	And Jonathan said unto David, O Lord God of Israel, when I have sounded my father about to morrow any time, or the third day, and, behold, if there be good toward David, and I then send not unto thee, and shew it thee;	and Jonathan said, “By the LORD, the God of Israel, I will sound out my father by this time tomorrow or the next day. If he is favorable toward you, will I not send for you and tell you?
1SA	20	13	그러나 만일 내 부친이 너를 해하려 하거늘 내가 이 일을 네게 알게 하여 너를 보내어 평안히 가게 하지 아니하면 여호와께서 나 요나단에게 벌을 내리시고 또 내리시기를 원하노라 여호와께서 내 부친과 함께 하신 것 같이 너와 함께 하시기를 원하노니	The Lord do so and much more to Jonathan: but if it please my father to do thee evil, then I will shew it thee, and send thee away, that thou mayest go in peace: and the Lord be with thee, as he hath been with my father.	But if my father intends to bring evil on you, then may the LORD punish me, and ever so severely, if I do not tell you and send you on your way in safety. May the LORD be with you, just as He has been with my father.
1SA	20	14	너는 나의 사는 날 동안에 여호와의 인자를 내게 베풀어서 나로 죽지 않게 할 뿐 아니라	And thou shalt not only while yet I live shew me the kindness of the Lord, that I die not:	And as long as I live, treat me with the LORD’s loving devotion, that I may not die,
1SA	20	15	여호와께서 너 다윗의 대적들을 지면에서 다 끊어버리신 때에도 너는 네 인자를 내 집에서 영영히 끊어 버리지 말라 하고	But also thou shalt not cut off thy kindness from my house for ever: no, not when the Lord hath cut off the enemies of David every one from the face of the earth.	and do not ever cut off your loving devotion from my household—not even when the LORD cuts off every one of David’s enemies from the face of the earth.”
1SA	20	16	이에 요나단이 다윗의 집과 언약하기를 여호와께서는 다윗의 대적들을 치실지어다 하니라	So Jonathan made a covenant with the house of David, saying, Let the Lord even require it at the hand of David’s enemies.	So Jonathan made a covenant with the house of David, saying, “May the LORD hold David’s enemies accountable.”
1SA	20	17	요나단이 다윗을 사랑하므로 그로 다시 맹세케 하였으니 이는 자기 생명을 사랑함 같이 그를 사랑함이었더라	And Jonathan caused David to swear again, because he loved him: for he loved him as he loved his own soul.	And Jonathan had David reaffirm his vow out of love for him, for Jonathan loved David as he loved himself.
1SA	20	18	요나단이 다윗에게 이르되 내일은 월삭인즉 네 자리가 비므로 네가 없음을 자세히 물으실 것이라	Then Jonathan said to David, To morrow is the new moon: and thou shalt be missed, because thy seat will be empty.	Then Jonathan said to David, “Tomorrow is the New Moon, and you will be missed if your seat is empty.
1SA	20	19	너는 사흘을 있다가 빨리 내려가서 그 일이 있던 날에 숨었던 곳에 이르러 에셀 바위 곁에 있으라	And when thou hast stayed three days, then thou shalt go down quickly, and come to the place where thou didst hide thyself when the business was in hand, and shalt remain by the stone Ezel.	When you have stayed three days, hurry down to the place you hid on the day this trouble began, and remain beside the stone Ezel.
1SA	20	20	내가 과녁을 쏘려 함 같이 살 셋을 그 곁에 쏘고	And I will shoot three arrows on the side thereof, as though I shot at a mark.	I will shoot three arrows to the side of it, as if I were aiming at a target.
1SA	20	21	아이를 보내어 가서 살을 찾으라 하며 내가 짐짓 아이에게 이르기를 보라 살이 네 이편에 있으니 가져오라 하거든 너는 돌아올지니 여호와께서 사시거니와 네가 평안 무사할 것이요	And, behold, I will send a lad, saying, Go, find out the arrows. If I expressly say unto the lad, Behold, the arrows are on this side of thee, take them; then come thou: for there is peace to thee, and no hurt; as the Lord liveth.	Then I will send a boy and say, ‘Go, find the arrows!’ Now, if I expressly say to him, ‘Look, the arrows are on this side of you; bring them,’ then come, because as surely as the LORD lives, it is safe for you and there is no danger.
1SA	20	22	만일 아이에게 이르기를 보라 살이 네 앞편에 있다 하거든 네 길을 가라 여호와께서 너를 보내셨음이니라	But if I say thus unto the young man, Behold, the arrows are beyond thee; go thy way: for the Lord hath sent thee away.	But if I say to the young man, ‘Look, the arrows are beyond you,’ then you must go, for the LORD has sent you away.
1SA	20	23	너와 내가 말한 일에 대하여는 여호와께서 너와 나 사이에 영영토록 계시느니라	And as touching the matter which thou and I have spoken of, behold, the Lord be between thee and me for ever.	And as for the matter you and I have discussed, the LORD is a witness between you and me forever.”
1SA	20	24	다윗이 들에 숨으니라 월삭이 되매 왕이 앉아 음식을 먹을 때에	So David hid himself in the field: and when the new moon was come, the king sat him down to eat meat.	So David hid in the field, and when the New Moon had come, the king sat down to eat.
1SA	20	25	왕은 평시와 같이 벽 곁 자기 자리에 앉았고 요나단은 섰고 아브넬은 사울의 곁에 앉았고 다윗의 자리는 비었으나	And the king sat upon his seat, as at other times, even upon a seat by the wall: and Jonathan arose, and Abner sat by Saul’s side, and David’s place was empty.	He sat in his usual place by the wall, opposite Jonathan and beside Abner, but David’s place was empty.
1SA	20	26	그러나 그 날에는 사울이 아무 말도 아니하였으니 이는 생각하기를 그에게 무슨 사고가 있어서 부정한가보다 정녕히 부정한가보다 하였음이더니	Nevertheless Saul spake not any thing that day: for he thought, Something hath befallen him, he is not clean; surely he is not clean.	Saul said nothing that day because he thought, “Something has happened to David to make him ceremonially unclean—surely he is unclean.”
1SA	20	27	이튿날 곧 달의 제이일에도 다윗의 자리가 오히려 비었으므로 사울이 그 아들 요나단에게 묻되 이새의 아들이 어찌하여 어제와 오늘 식사에 나오지 아니하느뇨	And it came to pass on the morrow, which was the second day of the month, that David’s place was empty: and Saul said unto Jonathan his son, Wherefore cometh not the son of Jesse to meat, neither yesterday, nor to day?	But on the day after the New Moon, the second day, David’s place was still empty, and Saul asked his son Jonathan, “Why hasn’t the son of Jesse come to the meal either yesterday or today?”
1SA	20	28	요나단이 사울에게 대답하되 다윗이 내게 베들레헴으로 가기를 간청하여	And Jonathan answered Saul, David earnestly asked leave of me to go to Beth–lehem:	Jonathan answered, “David urgently requested my permission to go to Bethlehem,
1SA	20	29	가로되 청컨대 나로 가게 하라 우리 가족이 그 성에서 제사할 일이 있으므로 나의 형이 내게 오기를 명하였으니 내가 네게 사랑을 받거든 나로 가서 내 형들을 보게 하라 하였으므로 그가 왕의 식사 자리에 오지 아니하였나이다	And he said, Let me go, I pray thee; for our family hath a sacrifice in the city; and my brother, he hath commanded me to be there: and now, if I have found favour in thine eyes, let me get away, I pray thee, and see my brethren. Therefore he cometh not unto the king’s table.	saying, ‘Please let me go, because our clan is holding a sacrifice in the city, and my brother has told me to be there. So now, if I have found favor in your eyes, please let me go and see my brothers.’ That is why he did not come to the king’s table.”
1SA	20	30	사울이 요나단에게 노를 발하고 그에게 이르되 패역부도의 계집의 소생아 네가 이새의 아들을 택한 것이 네 수치와 네 어미의 벌거벗은 수치됨을 내가 어찌 알지 못하랴	Then Saul’s anger was kindled against Jonathan, and he said unto him, Thou son of the perverse rebellious woman, do not I know that thou hast chosen the son of Jesse to thine own confusion, and unto the confusion of thy mother’s nakedness?	Then Saul’s anger burned against Jonathan, and he said to him, “You son of a perverse and rebellious woman! Do I not know that you have chosen the son of Jesse to your own shame and to the disgrace of the mother who bore you?
1SA	20	31	이새의 아들이 땅에 사는 동안은 너와 네 나라가 든든히 서지 못하리라 그런즉 이제 보내어 그를 내게로 끌어오라 그는 죽어야 할 자니라	For as long as the son of Jesse liveth upon the ground, thou shalt not be established, nor thy kingdom. Wherefore now send and fetch him unto me, for he shall surely die.	For as long as the son of Jesse lives on this earth, neither you nor your kingship shall be established. Now send for him and bring him to me, for he must surely die!”
1SA	20	32	요나단이 그 부친 사울에게 대답하여 가로되 그가 죽을 일이 무엇이니이까 무엇을 행하였나이까	And Jonathan answered Saul his father, and said unto him, Wherefore shall he be slain? what hath he done?	“Why must he be put to death?” Jonathan replied. “What has he done?”
1SA	20	33	사울이 요나단에게 단창을 던져 치려 한지라 요나단이 그 부친이 다윗을 죽이기로 결심한줄 알고	And Saul cast a javelin at him to smite him: whereby Jonathan knew that it was determined of his father to slay David.	Then Saul hurled his spear at Jonathan to kill him; so Jonathan knew that his father was determined to kill David.
1SA	20	34	심히 노하여 식사 자리에서 떠나고 달의 제이일에는 먹지 아니하였으니 이는 그 부친이 다윗을 욕되게 하였으므로 다윗을 위하여 슬퍼함이었더라	So Jonathan arose from the table in fierce anger, and did eat no meat the second day of the month: for he was grieved for David, because his father had done him shame.	Jonathan got up from the table in fierce anger and did not eat any food that second day of the month, for he was grieved by his father’s shameful treatment of David.
1SA	20	35	아침에 요나단이 작은 아이를 데리고 다윗과 정한 시간에 들로 나가서	And it came to pass in the morning, that Jonathan went out into the field at the time appointed with David, and a little lad with him.	In the morning Jonathan went out to the field for the appointment with David, and a small boy was with him.
1SA	20	36	아이에게 이르되 달려가서 나의 쏘는 살을 찾으라 하고 아이가 달려갈 때에 요나단이 살을 그의 위로 지나치게 쏘니라	And he said unto his lad, Run, find out now the arrows which I shoot. And as the lad ran, he shot an arrow beyond him.	He said to the boy, “Run and find the arrows I shoot.” And as the boy ran, Jonathan shot an arrow beyond him.
1SA	20	37	아이가 요나단의 쏜 살 있는 곳에 이를 즈음에 요나단이 아이 뒤에서 외쳐 가로되 살이 네 앞편에 있지 아니하냐 하고	And when the lad was come to the place of the arrow which Jonathan had shot, Jonathan cried after the lad, and said, Is not the arrow beyond thee?	When the boy reached the place where Jonathan’s arrow had fallen, Jonathan called to him, “Isn’t the arrow beyond you?”
1SA	20	38	요나단이 아이 뒤에서 또 외치되 지체 말고 빨리 달음질하라 하매 요나단의 아이가 살을 주워 가지고 주인에게로 돌아왔으나	And Jonathan cried after the lad, Make speed, haste, stay not. And Jonathan’s lad gathered up the arrows, and came to his master.	Then Jonathan cried out, “Hurry! Make haste! Do not delay!” So the boy picked up the arrow and returned to his master.
1SA	20	39	그 아이는 아무런지 알지 못하고 요나단과 다윗만 그 일을 알았더라	But the lad knew not any thing: only Jonathan and David knew the matter.	But the boy did not know anything; only Jonathan and David knew the arrangement.
1SA	20	40	요나단이 그 병기를 아이에게 주며 이르되 이것을 가지고 성으로 가라	And Jonathan gave his artillery unto his lad, and said unto him, Go, carry them to the city.	Then Jonathan gave his equipment to the boy and said, “Go, take it back to the city.”
1SA	20	41	아이가 가매 다윗이 곧 바위 남편에서 일어나서 땅에 엎드려 세 번 절한 후에 피차 입맞추고 같이 울되 다윗이 더욱 심하더니	And as soon as the lad was gone, David arose out of a place toward the south, and fell on his face to the ground, and bowed himself three times: and they kissed one another, and wept one with another, until David exceeded.	When the young man had gone, David got up from the south side of the stone, fell facedown, and bowed three times. Then he and Jonathan kissed each other and wept together—though David wept more.
1SA	20	42	요나단이 다윗에게 이르되 평안히 가라 우리 두 사람이 여호와의 이름으로 맹세하여 이르기를 여호와께서 영원히 나와 너 사이에 계시고 내 자손과 네 자손 사이에 계시리라 하였느니라 다윗은 일어나 떠나고 요나단은 성으로 들어오니라	And Jonathan said to David, Go in peace, forasmuch as we have sworn both of us in the name of the Lord, saying, The Lord be between me and thee, and between my seed and thy seed for ever. And he arose and departed: and Jonathan went into the city.	And Jonathan said to David, “Go in peace, for the two of us have sworn in the name of the LORD, saying, ‘May the LORD be a witness between you and me, and between your descendants and mine forever.’” Then David got up and departed, and Jonathan went back into the city.
1SA	21	1	다윗이 놉에 가서 제사장 아히멜렉에게 이르니 아히멜렉이 떨며 다윗을 영접하며 그에게 이르되 어찌하여 네가 홀로 있고 함께 하는 자가 아무도 없느냐	Then came David to Nob to Ahimelech the priest: and Ahimelech was afraid at the meeting of David, and said unto him, Why art thou alone, and no man with thee?	Then David came to Nob, to Ahimelech the priest. And when Ahimelech met David, he trembled and asked him, “Why are you alone? Why is no one with you?”
1SA	21	2	다윗이 제사장 아히멜렉에게 이르되 왕이 내게 일을 명하고 이르시기를 내가 너를 보내는 바와 네게 명한 바 일의 아무 것이라도 사람에게 알게 하지 말라 하시기로 내가 나의 소년들을 여차여차한 곳으로 약정하였나이다	And David said unto Ahimelech the priest, The king hath commanded me a business, and hath said unto me, Let no man know any thing of the business whereabout I send thee, and what I have commanded thee: and I have appointed my servants to such and such a place.	“The king has given me a mission,” David replied. “He told me no one is to know about the mission or charge. And I have directed my young men to meet me at a certain place.
1SA	21	3	이제 당신의 수중에 무엇이 있나이까 떡 다섯 덩이나 무엇이든지 있는 대로 내 손에 주소서	Now therefore what is under thine hand? give me five loaves of bread in mine hand, or what there is present.	Now then, what do you have on hand? Give me five loaves of bread, or whatever can be found.”
1SA	21	4	제사장이 다윗에게 대답하여 가로되 항용 떡은 내 수중에 없으나 거룩한 떡은 있나니 그 소년들이 부녀를 가까이만 아니하였으면 주리라	And the priest answered David, and said, There is no common bread under mine hand, but there is hallowed bread; if the young men have kept themselves at least from women.	“There is no common bread on hand,” the priest replied, “but there is some consecrated bread—provided that the young men have kept themselves from women.”
1SA	21	5	다윗이 제사장에게 대답하여 가로되 우리가 참으로 삼 일 동안이나 부녀를 가까이 하지 아니하였나이다 나의 떠난 길이 보통 여행이라도 소년들의 그릇이 성결하겠거든 하물며 오늘날 그들의 그릇이 성결치 아니하겠나이까 하매	And David answered the priest, and said unto him, Of a truth women have been kept from us about these three days, since I came out, and the vessels of the young men are holy, and the bread is in a manner common, yea, though it were sanctified this day in the vessel.	David answered, “Women have indeed been kept from us, as is usual when I set out. And the equipment of the young men is holy, as it is even on common missions, and all the more at this time.”
1SA	21	6	제사장이 그 거룩한 떡을 주었으니 거기는 진설병 곧 여호와 앞에서 물려 낸 떡밖에 없음이라 이 떡은 더운 떡을 드리는 날에 물려낸 것이더라	So the priest gave him hallowed bread: for there was no bread there but the shewbread, that was taken from before the Lord, to put hot bread in the day when it was taken away.	So the priest gave him the consecrated bread, since there was no bread there but the Bread of the Presence, which had been removed from before the LORD and replaced with hot bread on the day it was taken away.
1SA	21	7	그 날에 사울의 신하 한 사람이 여호와 앞에 머물러 있었는데 그는 도엑이라 이름하는 에돔 사람이요 사울의 목자장이었더라	Now a certain man of the servants of Saul was there that day, detained before the Lord; and his name was Doeg, an Edomite, the chiefest of the herdmen that belonged to Saul.	Now one of Saul’s servants was there that day, detained before the LORD. And his name was Doeg the Edomite, the chief shepherd for Saul.
1SA	21	8	다윗이 아히멜렉에게 이르되 여기 당신의 수중에 창이나 칼이 없나이까 왕의 일이 급하므로 내가 내 칼과 병기를 가지지 못하였나이다	And David said unto Ahimelech, And is there not here under thine hand spear or sword? for I have neither brought my sword nor my weapons with me, because the king’s business required haste.	Then David asked Ahimelech, “Is there not a spear or sword on hand here? For I have brought neither my sword nor my weapons with me, because the king’s business was urgent.”
1SA	21	9	제사장이 가로되 네가 엘라 골짜기에서 죽인 블레셋 사람 골리앗의 칼이 보자기에 싸여 에봇 뒤에 있으니 네가 그것을 가지려거든 가지라 여기는 그 밖에 다른 것이 없느니라 다윗이 가로되 그같은 것이 또 없나니 내게 주소서	And the priest said, The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom thou slewest in the valley of Elah, behold, it is here wrapped in a cloth behind the ephod: if thou wilt take that, take it: for there is no other save that here. And David said, There is none like that; give it me.	The priest replied, “The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom you killed in the Valley of Elah, is here; it is wrapped in a cloth behind the ephod. If you want, you may take it. For there is no other but this one.” And David said, “There is none like it; give it to me.”
1SA	21	10	그 날에 다윗이 사울을 두려워하여 일어나 도망하여 가드 왕 아기스에게로 가니	And David arose, and fled that day for fear of Saul, and went to Achish the king of Gath.	That day David fled from Saul and went to Achish king of Gath.
1SA	21	11	아기스의 신하들이 아기스에게 고하되 이는 그 땅의 왕 다윗이 아니니이까 무리가 춤추며 이 사람의 일을 창화하여 가로되 사울의 죽인 자는 천천이요 다윗은 만만이로다 하지 아니하였나이까 한지라	And the servants of Achish said unto him, Is not this David the king of the land? did they not sing one to another of him in dances, saying, Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands?	But the servants of Achish said to him, “Is this not David, the king of the land? Did they not sing about him in their dances, saying: ‘Saul has slain his thousands, and David his tens of thousands’?”
1SA	21	12	다윗이 이 말을 그 마음에 두고 가드 왕 아기스를 심히 두려워하여	And David laid up these words in his heart, and was sore afraid of Achish the king of Gath.	Now David took these words to heart and was very much afraid of Achish the king of Gath.
1SA	21	13	그들의 앞에서 그 행동을 변하여 미친 체 하고 대문짝에 그적거리며 침을 수염에 흘리매	And he changed his behaviour before them, and feigned himself mad in their hands, and scrabbled on the doors of the gate, and let his spittle fall down upon his beard.	So he changed his behavior before them and feigned madness in their hands; he scratched on the doors of the gate and let his saliva run down his beard.
1SA	21	14	아기스가 그 신하에게 이르되 너희도 보거니와 이 사람이 미치광이로다 어찌하여 그를 내게로 데려왔느냐	Then said Achish unto his servants, Lo, ye see the man is mad: wherefore then have ye brought him to me?	Then Achish said to his servants, “Look, you can see that the man is insane! Why have you brought him to me?
1SA	21	15	내게 미치광이가 부족하여서 너희가 이 자를 데려다가 내 앞에서 미친 짓을 하게 하느냐 이 자가 어찌 내 집에 들어오겠느냐 하니라	Have I need of mad men, that ye have brought this fellow to play the mad man in my presence? shall this fellow come into my house?	Am I in need of madmen, that you have brought this man to rave in my presence? Must this man come into my house?”
1SA	22	1	그러므로 다윗이 그곳을 떠나 아둘람 굴로 도망하매 그 형제와 아비의 온 집이 듣고는 그리로 내려가서 그에게 이르렀고	David therefore departed thence, and escaped to the cave Adullam: and when his brethren and all his father’s house heard it, they went down thither to him.	So David left Gath and took refuge in the cave of Adullam. When his brothers and the rest of his father’s household heard about it, they went down to him there.
1SA	22	2	환난 당한 모든 자와 빚진 자와 마음이 원통한 자가 다 그에게로 모였고 그는 그 장관이 되었는데 그와 함께 한 자가 사백 명 가량이었더라	And every one that was in distress, and every one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented, gathered themselves unto him; and he became a captain over them: and there were with him about four hundred men.	And all who were distressed or indebted or discontented rallied around him, and he became their leader. About four hundred men were with him.
1SA	22	3	다윗이 거기서 모압 미스베로 가서 모압 왕에게 이르되 하나님이 나를 위하여 어떻게 하실 것을 내가 알기까지 나의 부모로 나와서 당신들과 함께 있게 하기를 청하나이다 하고	And David went thence to Mizpeh of Moab: and he said unto the king of Moab, Let my father and my mother, I pray thee, come forth, and be with you, till I know what God will do for me.	From there David went to Mizpeh of Moab, where he said to the king of Moab, “Please let my father and mother stay with you until I learn what God will do for me.”
1SA	22	4	부모를 인도하여 모압 왕 앞에 나아갔더니 그들이 다윗의 요새에 있을 동안에 모압 왕과 함께 있었더라	And he brought them before the king of Moab: and they dwelt with him all the while that David was in the hold.	So he left them in the care of the king of Moab, and they stayed with him the whole time David was in the stronghold.
1SA	22	5	선지자 갓이 다윗에게 이르되 이 요새에 있지 말고 떠나 유다땅으로 들어가라 다윗이 떠나 헤렛 수풀에 이르니라	And the prophet Gad said unto David, Abide not in the hold; depart, and get thee into the land of Judah. Then David departed, and came into the forest of Hareth.	Then the prophet Gad said to David, “Do not stay in the stronghold. Depart and go into the land of Judah.” So David left and went to the forest of Hereth.
1SA	22	6	사울이 다윗과 그와 함께 있는 사람들이 나타났다 함을 들으니라 때에 사울이 기브아 높은 곳에서 손에 단창을 들고 에셀나무 아래 앉았고 모든 신하들은 그 곁에 섰더니	When Saul heard that David was discovered, and the men that were with him, (now Saul abode in Gibeah under a tree in Ramah, having his spear in his hand, and all his servants were standing about him;)	Soon Saul learned that David and his men had been discovered. At that time Saul was in Gibeah, sitting under the tamarisk tree on the hill at Gibeah, with his spear in hand and all his servants standing around him.
1SA	22	7	사울이 곁에 선 신하들에게 이르되 너희 베냐민 사람들아 들으라 이새의 아들이 너희에게 각기 밭과 포도원을 주며 너희로 천부장, 백부장을 삼겠느냐	Then Saul said unto his servants that stood about him, Hear now, ye Benjamites; will the son of Jesse give every one of you fields and vineyards, and make you all captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds;	Then Saul said to his servants, “Listen, men of Benjamin! Is the son of Jesse giving all of you fields and vineyards and making you commanders of thousands or hundreds?
1SA	22	8	너희가 다 공모하여 나를 대적하며 내 아들이 이새의 아들과 맹약하였으되 내게 고발하는 자가 하나도 없고 나를 위하여 슬퍼하거나 내 아들이 내 신하를 선동하여 오늘이라도 매복하였다가 나를 치려 하는 것을 내게 고발하는 자가 하나도 없도다	That all of you have conspired against me, and there is none that sheweth me that my son hath made a league with the son of Jesse, and there is none of you that is sorry for me, or sheweth unto me that my son hath stirred up my servant against me, to lie in wait, as at this day?	Is that why all of you have conspired against me? Not one of you told me that my own son had made a covenant with the son of Jesse. Not one of you has shown concern for me or revealed to me that my son has stirred up my own servant to lie in wait against me, as is the case today.”
1SA	22	9	때에 에돔 사람 도엑이 사울의 신하 중에 섰더니 대답하여 가로되 이새의 아들이 놉에 와서 아히둡의 아들 아히멜렉에게 이른 것을 내가 보았었는데	Then answered Doeg the Edomite, which was set over the servants of Saul, and said, I saw the son of Jesse coming to Nob, to Ahimelech the son of Ahitub.	But Doeg the Edomite, who had stationed himself with Saul’s servants, answered: “I saw the son of Jesse come to Ahimelech son of Ahitub at Nob.
1SA	22	10	아히멜렉이 그를 위하여 여호와께 묻고 그에게 식물도 주고 블레셋 사람 골리앗의 칼도 주더이다	And he enquired of the Lord for him, and gave him victuals, and gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine.	Ahimelech inquired of the LORD for him and gave him provisions. He also gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine.”
1SA	22	11	왕이 보내어 아히둡의 아들 제사장 아히멜렉과 그 아비의 온 집 곧 놉에 있는 제사장들을 부르매 그들이 다 왕께 이른지라	Then the king sent to call Ahimelech the priest, the son of Ahitub, and all his father’s house, the priests that were in Nob: and they came all of them to the king.	Then the king sent messengers to summon Ahimelech the priest, the son of Ahitub, and his father’s whole family, who were priests at Nob. And all of them came to the king.
1SA	22	12	사울이 가로되 너 아히둡의 아들아 들으라 대답하되 내 주여 내가 여기 있나이다	And Saul said, Hear now, thou son of Ahitub. And he answered, Here I am, my lord.	“Listen now, son of Ahitub,” said Saul. “Here I am, my lord,” he replied.
1SA	22	13	사울이 그에게 이르되 네가 어찌하여 이새의 아들과 공모하여 나를 대적하여 그에게 떡과 칼을 주고 그를 위하여 하나님께 물어서 그로 오늘이라도 매복하였다가 나를 치게 하려 하였느뇨	And Saul said unto him, Why have ye conspired against me, thou and the son of Jesse, in that thou hast given him bread, and a sword, and hast enquired of God for him, that he should rise against me, to lie in wait, as at this day?	And Saul asked him, “Why have you and the son of Jesse conspired against me? You gave him bread and a sword and inquired of God for him so that he could rise up against me to lie in wait, as he is doing today.”
1SA	22	14	아히멜렉이 왕에게 대답하여 가로되 왕의 모든 신하 중에 다윗 같이 충실한 자가 누구인지요 그는 왕의 사위도 되고 왕의 모신도 되고 왕실에서 존귀한 자가 아니니이까	Then Ahimelech answered the king, and said, And who is so faithful among all thy servants as David, which is the king’s son in law, and goeth at thy bidding, and is honourable in thine house?	Ahimelech answered the king, “Who among all your servants is as faithful as David, the king’s son-in-law, the captain of your bodyguard who is honored in your house?
1SA	22	15	내가 그를 위하여 하나님께 물은 것이 오늘이 처음이니이까 결단코 아니니이다 원컨대 왕은 종과 종의 아비의 온 집에 아무 것도 돌리지 마옵소서 왕의 종은 이 모든 일의 대소간에 아는 것이 없나이다	Did I then begin to enquire of God for him? be it far from me: let not the king impute any thing unto his servant, nor to all the house of my father: for thy servant knew nothing of all this, less or more.	Was that day the first time I inquired of God for him? Far be it from me! Let not the king accuse your servant or any of my father’s household, for your servant knew nothing of this whole affair—not in part or in whole.”
1SA	22	16	왕이 가로되 아히멜렉아 네가 반드시 죽을 것이요 네 아비의 온 집도 그러하리라 하고	And the king said, Thou shalt surely die, Ahimelech, thou, and all thy father’s house.	But the king replied, “You will surely die, Ahimelech, you and all your father’s house!”
1SA	22	17	왕이 좌우의 시위자에게 이르되 돌이켜 가서 여호와의 제사장들을 죽이라 그들도 다윗과 합력하였고 또 그들이 다윗의 도망한 것을 알고도 내게 고발치 아니하였음이니라 하나 왕의 신하들이 손을 들어 여호와의 제사장들 죽이기를 싫어한지라	And the king said unto the footmen that stood about him, Turn, and slay the priests of the Lord; because their hand also is with David, and because they knew when he fled, and did not shew it to me. But the servants of the king would not put forth their hand to fall upon the priests of the Lord.	Then the king ordered the guards at his side, “Turn and kill the priests of the LORD, because they too sided with David. For they knew he was fleeing, but they did not tell me.” But the king’s servants would not lift a hand to strike the priests of the LORD.
1SA	22	18	왕이 도엑에게 이르되 너는 돌이켜 제사장들을 죽이라 하매 에돔 사람 도엑이 돌이켜 제사장들을 쳐서 그 날에 세마포 에봇 입은 자 팔십오 인을 죽였고	And the king said to Doeg, Turn thou, and fall upon the priests. And Doeg the Edomite turned, and he fell upon the priests, and slew on that day fourscore and five persons that did wear a linen ephod.	So the king ordered Doeg, “You turn and strike down the priests!” And Doeg the Edomite turned and struck down the priests himself. On that day he killed eighty-five men who wore the linen ephod.
1SA	22	19	제사장들의 성읍 놉의 남녀와 아이들과 젖먹는 자들과 소와 나귀와 양을 칼로 쳤더라	And Nob, the city of the priests, smote he with the edge of the sword, both men and women, children and sucklings, and oxen, and asses, and sheep, with the edge of the sword.	He also put to the sword Nob, the city of the priests, with its men and women, children and infants, oxen, donkeys, and sheep.
1SA	22	20	아히둡의 아들 아히멜렉의 아들 중 하나가 피하였으니 그 이름은 아비아달이라 그가 도망하여 다윗에게로 가서	And one of the sons of Ahimelech the son of Ahitub, named Abiathar, escaped, and fled after David.	But one of the sons of Ahimelech son of Ahitub escaped. His name was Abiathar, and he fled to David.
1SA	22	21	사울이 여호와의 제사장들 죽인 일을 다윗에게 고하매	And Abiathar shewed David that Saul had slain the Lord’s priests.	And Abiathar told David that Saul had killed the priests of the LORD.
1SA	22	22	다윗이 아비아달에게 이르되 그 날에 에돔 사람 도엑이 거기 있기로 그가 반드시 사울에게 고할 줄 내가 알았노라 네 아비 집의 모든 사람 죽은 것이 나의 연고로다	And David said unto Abiathar, I knew it that day, when Doeg the Edomite was there, that he would surely tell Saul: I have occasioned the death of all the persons of thy father’s house.	Then David said to Abiathar, “I knew that Doeg the Edomite was there that day, and that he was sure to tell Saul. I myself am responsible for the lives of everyone in your father’s house.
1SA	22	23	두려워 말고 내게 있으라 내 생명을 찾는 자가 네 생명도 찾는 자니 네가 나와 함께 있으면 보전하리라 하니라	Abide thou with me, fear not: for he that seeketh my life seeketh thy life: but with me thou shalt be in safeguard.	Stay with me; do not be afraid, for he who seeks your life is seeking mine as well. You will be safe with me.”
1SA	23	1	혹이 다윗에게 고하여 가로되 보소서 블레셋 사람이 그일라를 쳐서 그 타작 마당을 탈취하더이다	Then they told David, saying, Behold, the Philistines fight against Keilah, and they rob the threshingfloors.	Now it was reported to David, “Look, the Philistines are fighting against Keilah and looting the threshing floors.”
1SA	23	2	이에 다윗이 여호와께 묻자와 가로되 내가 가서 이 블레셋 사람을 치리이까 여호와께서 다윗에게 이르시되 가서 블레셋 사람을 치고 그일라를 구원하라 하시니	Therefore David enquired of the Lord, saying, Shall I go and smite these Philistines? And the Lord said unto David, Go, and smite the Philistines, and save Keilah.	So David inquired of the LORD, “Should I go and attack these Philistines?” And the LORD said to David, “Go and attack the Philistines and save Keilah.”
1SA	23	3	다윗의 사람들이 그에게 이르되 보소서 우리가 유다에 있기도 두렵거든 하물며 그일라에 가서 블레셋 사람의 군대를 치는 일이리이까	And David’s men said unto him, Behold, we be afraid here in Judah: how much more then if we come to Keilah against the armies of the Philistines?	But David’s men said to him, “Look, we are afraid here in Judah; how much more if we go to Keilah against the armies of the Philistines?”
1SA	23	4	다윗이 여호와께 다시 묻자온대 여호와께서 대답하여 가라사대 일어나 그일라로 내려가라 내가 블렛셋 사람을 네 손에 붙이리라 하신지라	Then David enquired of the Lord yet again. And the Lord answered him and said, Arise, go down to Keilah; for I will deliver the Philistines into thine hand.	Once again, David inquired of the LORD, and the LORD answered him: “Go at once to Keilah, for I will deliver the Philistines into your hand.”
1SA	23	5	다윗과 그의 사람들이 그일라로 가서 블레셋 사람과 싸워 그들을 크게 도륙하고 그들의 가축을 끌어오니라 다윗이 이와 같이 그일라 거민을 구원하니라	So David and his men went to Keilah, and fought with the Philistines, and brought away their cattle, and smote them with a great slaughter. So David saved the inhabitants of Keilah.	Then David and his men went to Keilah, fought against the Philistines, and carried off their livestock, striking them with a mighty blow. So David saved the people of Keilah.
1SA	23	6	아히멜렉의 아들 아비아달이 그일라 다윗에게로 도망할 때에 손에 에봇을 가지고 내려왔었더라	And it came to pass, when Abiathar the son of Ahimelech fled to David to Keilah, that he came down with an ephod in his hand.	(Now Abiathar son of Ahimelech had brought the ephod with him when he fled to David at Keilah.)
1SA	23	7	다윗이 그일라에 온 것을 혹이 사울에게 고하매 사울이 가로되 하나님이 그를 내 손에 붙이셨도다 그가 문과 문빗장이 있는 성에 들어갔으니 갇혔도다	And it was told Saul that David was come to Keilah. And Saul said, God hath delivered him into mine hand; for he is shut in, by entering into a town that hath gates and bars.	When Saul was told that David had gone to Keilah, he said, “God has delivered him into my hand, for he has trapped himself by entering a town with gates and bars.”
1SA	23	8	사울이 모든 백성을 군사로 불러 모으고 그일라로 내려가서 다윗과 그의 사람들을 에워싸려 하더니	And Saul called all the people together to war, to go down to Keilah, to besiege David and his men.	Then Saul summoned all his troops to go to war at Keilah and besiege David and his men.
1SA	23	9	다윗이 사울의 자기를 해하려 하는 계교를 알고 제사장 아비아달에게 이르되 에봇을 이리로 가져오라 하고	And David knew that Saul secretly practised mischief against him; and he said to Abiathar the priest, Bring hither the ephod.	When David learned that Saul was plotting evil against him, he said to Abiathar the priest, “Bring the ephod.”
1SA	23	10	다윗이 가로되 이스라엘 하나님 여호와여 사울이 나의 연고로 이성을 멸하려고 그일라로 내려오기를 꾀한다 함을 주의 종이 분명히 들었나이다	Then said David, O Lord God of Israel, thy servant hath certainly heard that Saul seeketh to come to Keilah, to destroy the city for my sake.	And David said, “O LORD, God of Israel, Your servant has heard that Saul intends to come to Keilah and destroy the city on my account.
1SA	23	11	그일라 사람들이 나를 그의 손에 붙이겠나이까 주의 종의 들은 대로 사울이 내려 오겠나이까 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와여 원컨대 주의 종에게 일러 주옵소서 여호와께서 가라사대 그가 내려 오리라	Will the men of Keilah deliver me up into his hand? will Saul come down, as thy servant hath heard? O Lord God of Israel, I beseech thee, tell thy servant. And the Lord said, He will come down.	Will the citizens of Keilah surrender me into his hand? Will Saul come down, as Your servant has heard? O LORD, God of Israel, please tell Your servant.” “He will,” said the LORD.
1SA	23	12	다윗이 가로되 그일라 사람들이 나와 내 사람들을 사울의 손에 붙이겠나이까 여호와께서 가라사대 그들이 너를 붙이리라	Then said David, Will the men of Keilah deliver me and my men into the hand of Saul? And the Lord said, They will deliver thee up.	So David asked, “Will the citizens of Keilah surrender me and my men into the hand of Saul?” “They will,” said the LORD.
1SA	23	13	다윗과 그의 사람 육백 명 가량이 일어나 그일라를 떠나서 갈 수 있는 곳으로 갔더니 다윗이 그일라에서 피한 것을 혹이 사울에게 고하매 사울이 가기를 그치니라	Then David and his men, which were about six hundred, arose and departed out of Keilah, and went whithersoever they could go. And it was told Saul that David was escaped from Keilah; and he forbare to go forth.	Then David and his men, about six hundred strong, set out and departed from Keilah, moving from place to place. When Saul was told that David had escaped from Keilah, he declined to go forth.
1SA	23	14	다윗이 황무지 요새에도 있었고 또 십 황무지 산골에도 유하였으므로 사울이 매일 찾되 하나님이 그를 그의 손에 붙이지 아니하시니라	And David abode in the wilderness in strong holds, and remained in a mountain in the wilderness of Ziph. And Saul sought him every day, but God delivered him not into his hand.	And David stayed in the wilderness strongholds and in the hill country of the Wilderness of Ziph. Day after day Saul searched for him, but God would not deliver David into his hand.
1SA	23	15	다윗이 사울의 자기 생명을 찾으려고 나온 것을 보았으므로 그가 십 황무지 수풀에 있었더니	And David saw that Saul was come out to seek his life: and David was in the wilderness of Ziph in a wood.	While David was in Horesh in the Wilderness of Ziph, he saw that Saul had come out to take his life.
1SA	23	16	사울의 아들 요나단이 일어나 수풀에 들어가서 다윗에게 이르러 그로 하나님을 힘있게 의지하게 하였는데	And Jonathan Saul’s son arose, and went to David into the wood, and strengthened his hand in God.	And Saul’s son Jonathan came to David in Horesh and strengthened his hand in God,
1SA	23	17	곧 요나단이 그에게 이르기를 두려워 말라 내 부친 사울의 손이 네게 미치지 못할 것이요 너는 이스라엘 왕이 되고 나는 네 다음이 될 것을 내 부친 사울도 안다 하니라	And he said unto him, Fear not: for the hand of Saul my father shall not find thee; and thou shalt be king over Israel, and I shall be next unto thee; and that also Saul my father knoweth.	saying, “Do not be afraid, for my father Saul will never lay a hand on you. And you will be king over Israel, and I will be your second-in-command. Even my father Saul knows this is true.”
1SA	23	18	두 사람이 여호와 앞에서 언약하고 다윗은 수풀에 거하고 요나단은 자기 집으로 돌아가니라	And they two made a covenant before the Lord: and David abode in the wood, and Jonathan went to his house.	So the two of them made a covenant before the LORD. And David remained in Horesh, while Jonathan went home.
1SA	23	19	때에 십 사람들이 기브아에 이르러 사울에게 나아와 가로되 다윗이 우리와 함께 광야 남편 하길라 산 수풀 요새에 숨지 아니하였나이까	Then came up the Ziphites to Saul to Gibeah, saying, Doth not David hide himself with us in strong holds in the wood, in the hill of Hachilah, which is on the south of Jeshimon?	Then the Ziphites came up to Saul at Gibeah and said, “Is not David hiding among us in the strongholds at Horesh, on the hill of Hachilah south of Jeshimon?
1SA	23	20	그러하온즉 왕은 내려오시기를 원하시는 대로 내려 오소서 그를 왕의 손에 붙일 것이 우리의 의무니이다	Now therefore, O king, come down according to all the desire of thy soul to come down; and our part shall be to deliver him into the king’s hand.	Now, O king, come down whenever your soul desires, and we will be responsible for delivering him into your hand.”
1SA	23	21	사울이 가로되 너희가 나를 긍휼히 여겼으니 여호와께 복받기를 원하노라	And Saul said, Blessed be ye of the Lord; for ye have compassion on me.	“May you be blessed by the LORD,” replied Saul, “for you have had compassion on me.
1SA	23	22	혹이 내게 말하기를 그가 심히 공교히 행동한다 하나니 너희는 가서 더 자세히 살펴서 그가 어디 은적하였으며 누가 거기서 그를 보았는지 알아보고	Go, I pray you, prepare yet, and know and see his place where his haunt is, and who hath seen him there: for it is told me that he dealeth very subtilly.	Please go and prepare further. Investigate and watch carefully where he goes and who has seen him there, for I am told that he is extremely cunning.
1SA	23	23	그가 숨어 있는 모든 곳을 탐지하고 실상을 내게 회보하라 내가 너희와 함께 가리니 그가 이 땅에 있으면 유다 천천인 중에서 그를 찾아내리라	See therefore, and take knowledge of all the lurking places where he hideth himself, and come ye again to me with the certainty, and I will go with you: and it shall come to pass, if he be in the land, that I will search him out throughout all the thousands of Judah.	Observe and find out all the places where he hides. Then come back to me with certainty, and I will go with you. If he is in the land, I will search him out among all the clans of Judah.”
1SA	23	24	그들이 일어나 사울보다 먼저 십으로 가니라 다윗과 그의 사람들이 광야 남편 마온 황무지 아라바에 있더니	And they arose, and went to Ziph before Saul: but David and his men were in the wilderness of Maon, in the plain on the south of Jeshimon.	So they set out and went to Ziph ahead of Saul. Now David and his men were in the Wilderness of Maon in the Arabah south of Jeshimon,
1SA	23	25	사울과 그의 사람들이 찾으러 온 것을 혹이 다윗에게 고하매 이에 다윗이 바위로 내려 마온 황무지에 있더니 사울이 듣고 마온 황무지로 다윗을 따라가서는	Saul also and his men went to seek him. And they told David: wherefore he came down into a rock, and abode in the wilderness of Maon. And when Saul heard that, he pursued after David in the wilderness of Maon.	and Saul and his men went to seek him. When David was told about it, he went down to the rock and stayed in the Wilderness of Maon. And when Saul heard of this, he pursued David there.
1SA	23	26	사울이 산 이편으로 가매 다윗과 그의 사람들은 산 저편으로 가며 다윗이 사울을 두려워하여 급히 피하려 하였으니 이는 사울과 그의 사람들이 다윗과 그의 사람들을 에워싸고 잡으려 함이었더라	And Saul went on this side of the mountain, and David and his men on that side of the mountain: and David made haste to get away for fear of Saul; for Saul and his men compassed David and his men round about to take them.	Saul was proceeding along one side of the mountain, and David and his men along the other side. Even though David was hurrying to get away, Saul and his men were closing in on David and his men to capture them.
1SA	23	27	사자가 사울에게 와서 가로되 급히 오소서 블레셋 사람이 땅을 침노하나이다	But there came a messenger unto Saul, saying, Haste thee, and come; for the Philistines have invaded the land.	Then a messenger came to Saul, saying, “Come quickly, for the Philistines have raided the land!”
1SA	23	28	이에 사울이 다윗 쫓기를 그치고 돌아와서 블레셋 사람을 치러 갔으므로 그곳을 셀라하마느곳이라 칭하니라	Wherefore Saul returned from pursuing after David, and went against the Philistines: therefore they called that place Sela–hammahlekoth.	So Saul broke off his pursuit of David and went to meet the Philistines. That is why that place is called Sela-hammahlekoth.
1SA	23	29	다윗이 거기서 올라가서 엔게디 요새에 거하니라	And David went up from thence, and dwelt in strong holds at En–gedi.	And David went up from there and lived in the strongholds of En-gedi.
1SA	24	1	사울이 블레셋 사람을 따르다가 돌아오매 혹이 그에게 고하여 가로되 보소서 다윗이 엔게디 황무지에 있더이다	And it came to pass, when Saul was returned from following the Philistines, that it was told him, saying, Behold, David is in the wilderness of En–gedi.	After Saul had returned from pursuing the Philistines, he was told, “David is in the wilderness of En-gedi.”
1SA	24	2	사울이 온 이스라엘에서 택한 사람 삼천을 거느리고 다윗과 그의 사람들을 찾으러 들염소 바위로 갈새	Then Saul took three thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and went to seek David and his men upon the rocks of the wild goats.	So Saul took three thousand chosen men from all Israel and went to look for David and his men in the region of the Rocks of the Wild Goats.
1SA	24	3	길 가 양의 우리에 이른즉 굴이 있는지라 사울이 그 발을 가리우러 들어가니라 다윗과 그의 사람들이 그 굴 깊은 곳에 있더니	And he came to the sheepcotes by the way, where was a cave; and Saul went in to cover his feet: and David and his men remained in the sides of the cave.	Soon Saul came to the sheepfolds along the road, where there was a cave, and he went in to relieve himself. And David and his men were hiding in the recesses of the cave.
1SA	24	4	다윗의 사람들이 가로되 보소서 여호와께서 당신에게 이르시기를 내가 원수를 네 손에 붙이리니 네 소견에 선한 대로 그에게 행하라 하시더니 이것이 그 날이니이다 다윗이 일어나서 사울의 겉옷자락을 가만히 베니라	And the men of David said unto him, Behold the day of which the Lord said unto thee, Behold, I will deliver thine enemy into thine hand, that thou mayest do to him as it shall seem good unto thee. Then David arose, and cut off the skirt of Saul’s robe privily.	So David’s men said to him, “This is the day about which the LORD said to you, ‘Behold, I will deliver your enemy into your hand, that you may do with him as you wish.’” Then David crept up secretly and cut off a corner of Saul’s robe.
1SA	24	5	그리한 후에 사울의 옷자락 벰을 인하여 다윗의 마음이 찔려	And it came to pass afterward, that David’s heart smote him, because he had cut off Saul’s skirt.	Afterward, David’s conscience was stricken because he had cut off the corner of Saul’s robe.
1SA	24	6	자기 사람들에게 이르되 내가 손을 들어 여호와의 기름 부음을 받은 내 주를 치는 것은 여호와의 금하시는 것이니 그는 여호와의 기름 부음을 받은 자가 됨이니라 하고	And he said unto his men, The Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my master, the Lord’s anointed, to stretch forth mine hand against him, seeing he is the anointed of the Lord.	So he said to his men, “The LORD forbid that I should do such a thing to my master, the LORD’s anointed. May I never lift my hand against him, since he is the LORD’s anointed.”
1SA	24	7	다윗이 이 말로 자기 사람들을 금하여 사울을 해하지 못하게 하니라 사울이 일어나 굴에서 나가 자기 길을 가니라	So David stayed his servants with these words, and suffered them not to rise against Saul. But Saul rose up out of the cave, and went on his way.	With these words David restrained his men, and he did not let them rise up against Saul. Then Saul left the cave and went on his way.
1SA	24	8	그 후에 다윗도 일어나 굴에서 나가 사울의 뒤에서 외쳐 가로되 내 주 왕이여 하매 사울이 돌아보는지라 다윗이 땅에 엎드려 절하고	David also arose afterward, and went out of the cave, and cried after Saul, saying, My lord the king. And when Saul looked behind him, David stooped with his face to the earth, and bowed himself.	After that, David got up, went out of the cave, and called out to Saul, “My lord the king!” When Saul looked behind him, David bowed facedown in reverence
1SA	24	9	사울에게 이르되 다윗이 왕을 해하려 한다고 하는 사람들의 말을 왕은 어찌하여 들으시나이까	And David said to Saul, Wherefore hearest thou men’s words, saying, Behold, David seeketh thy hurt?	and said to Saul, “Why do you listen to the words of men who say, ‘Look, David intends to harm you’?
1SA	24	10	오늘 여호와께서 굴에서 왕을 내 손에 붙이신 것을 왕이 아셨을 것이니이다 혹이 나를 권하여 왕을 죽이라 하였으나 내가 왕을 아껴 말하기를 나는 내 손을 들어 내 주를 해치 아니하리니 그는 여호와의 기름 부음을 받은 자가 됨이니라 하였나이다	Behold, this day thine eyes have seen how that the Lord had delivered thee to day into mine hand in the cave: and some bade me kill thee: but mine eye spared thee; and I said, I will not put forth mine hand against my lord; for he is the Lord’s anointed.	Behold, this day you have seen with your own eyes that the LORD delivered you into my hand in the cave. I was told to kill you, but I spared you and said, ‘I will not lift my hand against my lord, since he is the LORD’s anointed.’
1SA	24	11	나의 아버지여 보소서 내 손에 있는 왕의 옷자락을 보소서 내가 왕을 죽이지 아니하고 겉옷자락만 베었은즉 나의 손에 악이나 죄과가 없는 줄을 아실지니이다 왕은 내 생명을 찾아 해하려 하시나 나는 왕에게 범죄한 일이 없나이다	Moreover, my father, see, yea, see the skirt of thy robe in my hand: for in that I cut off the skirt of thy robe, and killed thee not, know thou and see that there is neither evil nor transgression in mine hand, and I have not sinned against thee; yet thou huntest my soul to take it.	See, my father, look at the corner of your robe in my hand. For I cut it off, but I did not kill you. See and know that there is no evil or rebellion in my hands. I have not sinned against you, even though you are hunting me down to take my life.
1SA	24	12	여호와께서는 나와 왕 사이를 판단하사 나를 위하여 왕에게 보복하시려니와 내 손으로는 왕을 해하지 않겠나이다	The Lord judge between me and thee, and the Lord avenge me of thee: but mine hand shall not be upon thee.	May the LORD judge between you and me, and may the LORD take vengeance on you, but my hand will never be against you.
1SA	24	13	옛 속담에 말하기를 악은 악인에게서 난다 하였으니 내 손이 왕을 해하지 아니하리이다	As saith the proverb of the ancients, Wickedness proceedeth from the wicked: but mine hand shall not be upon thee.	As the old proverb says, ‘Wickedness proceeds from the wicked.’ But my hand will never be against you.
1SA	24	14	이스라엘 왕이 누구를 따라 나왔으며 누구를 쫓나이까 죽은 개나 벼룩을 쫓음이니이다	After whom is the king of Israel come out? after whom dost thou pursue? after a dead dog, after a flea.	Against whom has the king of Israel come out? Whom are you pursuing? A dead dog? A flea?
1SA	24	15	그런즉 여호와께서 재판장이 되어 나와 왕 사이에 판결하사 나의 사정을 살펴 신원하시고 나를 왕의 손에서 건지시기를 원하나이다	The Lord therefore be judge, and judge between me and thee, and see, and plead my cause, and deliver me out of thine hand.	May the LORD be our judge and decide between you and me. May He take notice and plead my case and deliver me from your hand.”
1SA	24	16	다윗이 사울에게 이같이 말하기를 마치매 사울이 가로되 내 아들 다윗아 이것이 네 목소리냐 하고 소리를 높여 울며	And it came to pass, when David had made an end of speaking these words unto Saul, that Saul said, Is this thy voice, my son David? And Saul lifted up his voice, and wept.	When David had finished saying these things, Saul called back, “Is that your voice, David my son?” Then Saul wept aloud
1SA	24	17	다윗에게 이르되 나는 너를 학대하되 너는 나를 선대하니 너는 나보다 의롭도다	And he said to David, Thou art more righteous than I: for thou hast rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil.	and said to David, “You are more righteous than I, for you have rewarded me with good, though I have rewarded you with evil.
1SA	24	18	네가 나 선대한 것을 오늘 나타내었나니 여호와께서 나를 네 손에 붙이셨으나 네가 나를 죽이지 아니하였도다	And thou hast shewed this day how that thou hast dealt well with me: forasmuch as when the Lord had delivered me into thine hand, thou killedst me not.	And you have shown this day how well you have dealt with me; for when the LORD delivered me into your hand, you did not kill me.
1SA	24	19	사람이 그 원수를 만나면 그를 평안히 가게 하겠느냐 네가 오늘날 내게 행한 일을 인하여 여호와께서 네게 선으로 갚으시기를 원하노라	For if a man find his enemy, will he let him go well away? wherefore the Lord reward thee good for that thou hast done unto me this day.	When a man finds his enemy, does he let him go away unharmed? May the LORD reward you with good for what you have done for me this day.
1SA	24	20	보라 나는 네가 반드시 왕이 될 것을 알고 이스라엘 나라가 네 손에 견고히 설 것을 아노니	And now, behold, I know well that thou shalt surely be king, and that the kingdom of Israel shall be established in thine hand.	Now I know for sure that you will be king, and that the kingdom of Israel will be established in your hands.
1SA	24	21	그런즉 너는 내 후손을 끊지 아니하며 내 아비의 집에서 내 이름을 멸하지 아니할 것을 이제 여호와로 내게 맹세하라	Swear now therefore unto me by the Lord, that thou wilt not cut off my seed after me, and that thou wilt not destroy my name out of my father’s house.	So now, swear to me by the LORD that you will not cut off my descendants or wipe out my name from my father’s house.”
1SA	24	22	다윗이 사울에게 맹세하매 사울은 집으로 돌아가고 다윗과 그의 사람들은 요새로 올라가니라	And David sware unto Saul. And Saul went home; but David and his men gat them up unto the hold.	So David gave his oath to Saul. Then Saul returned home, but David and his men went up to the stronghold.
1SA	25	1	사무엘이 죽으매 온 이스라엘 무리가 모여 그를 애곡하며 라마 그의 집에서 그를 장사한지라 다윗이 일어나 바란 광야로 내려가니라	And Samuel died; and all the Israelites were gathered together, and lamented him, and buried him in his house at Ramah. And David arose, and went down to the wilderness of Paran.	When Samuel died, all Israel gathered to mourn for him; and they buried him at his home in Ramah. Then David set out and went down to the Wilderness of Paran.
1SA	25	2	마온에 한 사람이 있는데 그 업이 갈멜에 있고 심히 부하여 양이 삼천이요 염소가 일천이므로 그가 갈멜에서 그 양털을 깎고 있었으니	And there was a man in Maon, whose possessions were in Carmel; and the man was very great, and he had three thousand sheep, and a thousand goats: and he was shearing his sheep in Carmel.	Now there was a man in Maon whose business was in Carmel. He was a very wealthy man with a thousand goats and three thousand sheep, which he was shearing in Carmel.
1SA	25	3	그 사람의 이름은 나발이요 그 아내의 이름은 아비가일이라 그 여자는 총명하고 용모가 아름다우나 남자는 완고하고 행사가 악하며 그는 갈멜 족속이었더라	Now the name of the man was Nabal; and the name of his wife Abigail: and she was a woman of good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance: but the man was churlish and evil in his doings; and he was of the house of Caleb.	His name was Nabal, and his wife’s name was Abigail. She was an intelligent and beautiful woman, but her husband, a Calebite, was harsh and evil in his dealings.
1SA	25	4	다윗이 광야에 있어서 나발이 자기 양털을 깎는다 함을 들은지라	And David heard in the wilderness that Nabal did shear his sheep.	While David was in the wilderness, he heard that Nabal was shearing sheep.
1SA	25	5	다윗이 이에 열 소년을 보내며 그 소년들에게 이르되 너희는 갈멜로 올라가 나발에게 이르러 내 이름으로 그에게 문안하고	And David sent out ten young men, and David said unto the young men, Get you up to Carmel, and go to Nabal, and greet him in my name:	So David sent ten young men and instructed them, “Go up to Nabal at Carmel. Greet him in my name
1SA	25	6	이같이 그 부하게 사는 자에게 이르기를 너는 평강하라 네 집도 평강하라 네 소유의 모든 것도 평강하라	And thus shall ye say to him that liveth in prosperity, Peace be both to thee, and peace be to thine house, and peace be unto all that thou hast.	and say to him, ‘Long life to you, and peace to you and your house and to all that belongs to you.
1SA	25	7	네게 앙털 깎는 자들이 있다 함을 이제 내가 들었노라 네 목자들이 우리와 함께 있었으나 우리가 그들을 상치 아니하였고 그들이 갈멜에 있는 동안에 그들의 것을 하나도 잃지 아니하였나니	And now I have heard that thou hast shearers: now thy shepherds which were with us, we hurt them not, neither was there ought missing unto them, all the while they were in Carmel.	Now I hear that it is time for shearing. When your shepherds were with us, we did not harass them, and nothing of theirs was missing the whole time they were in Carmel.
1SA	25	8	네 소년들에게 물으면 그들이 네게 고하리라 그런즉 내 소년들로 네게 은혜를 얻게 하라 우리가 좋은 날에 왔은즉 네 손에 있는 대로 네 종들과 네 아들 다윗에게 주기를 원하노라 하더라 하라	Ask thy young men, and they will shew thee. Wherefore let the young men find favour in thine eyes: for we come in a good day: give, I pray thee, whatsoever cometh to thine hand unto thy servants, and to thy son David.	Ask your young men, and they will tell you. So let my young men find favor with you, for we have come on the day of a feast. Please give whatever you can afford to your servants and to your son David.’”
1SA	25	9	다윗의 소년들이 가서 다윗의 이름으로 이 모든 말을 나발에게 고하기를 마치매	And when David’s young men came, they spake to Nabal according to all those words in the name of David, and ceased.	When David’s young men arrived, they relayed all these words to Nabal on behalf of David. Then they waited.
1SA	25	10	나발이 다윗의 사환들에게 대답하여 가로되 다윗은 누구며 이새의 아들은 누구뇨 근일에 각기 주인에게서 억지로 떠나는 종이 많도다	And Nabal answered David’s servants, and said, Who is David? and who is the son of Jesse? there be many servants now a days that break away every man from his master.	But Nabal asked them, “Who is David? Who is this son of Jesse? Many servants these days are breaking away from their masters.
1SA	25	11	내가 어찌 내 떡과 물과 내 양털 깎는 자를 위하여 잡은 고기를 가져 어디로서인지 알지도 못하는 자들에게 주겠느냐 한지라	Shall I then take my bread, and my water, and my flesh that I have killed for my shearers, and give it unto men, whom I know not whence they be?	Why should I take my bread and water and the meat I have slaughtered for my shearers, and give them to these men whose origin I do not know?”
1SA	25	12	이에 다윗의 소년들이 돌이켜 자기 길로 행하여 돌아와서 이 모든 말로 그에게 고하매	So David’s young men turned their way, and went again, and came and told him all those sayings.	So David’s men turned around and went back, and they relayed to him all these words.
1SA	25	13	다윗이 자기 사람들에게 이르되 너희는 각기 칼을 차라 각기 칼을 차매 다윗도 자기 칼을 차고 사백 명 가량은 데리고 올라가고 이백 명은 소유물 곁에 있게 하니라	And David said unto his men, Gird ye on every man his sword. And they girded on every man his sword; and David also girded on his sword: and there went up after David about four hundred men; and two hundred abode by the stuff.	And David said to his men, “Strap on your swords!” So David and all his men put on their swords, and about four hundred men followed David, while two hundred stayed with the supplies.
1SA	25	14	소년 중 하나가 나발의 아내 아비가일에게 고하여 가로되 다윗이 우리 주인에게 문안하러 광야에서 사자들을 보내었거늘 주인이 그들을 수욕하였나이다	But one of the young men told Abigail, Nabal’s wife, saying, Behold, David sent messengers out of the wilderness to salute our master; and he railed on them.	Meanwhile, one of Nabal’s young men informed Nabal’s wife Abigail, “Look, David sent messengers from the wilderness to greet our master, but he scolded them.
1SA	25	15	우리가 들에 있어 그들과 상종할 동안에 그 사람들이 우리를 매우 선대하였으므로 우리가 상하거나 잃은 것이 없었으니	But the men were very good unto us, and we were not hurt, neither missed we any thing, as long as we were conversant with them, when we were in the fields:	Yet these men were very good to us. When we were in the field, we were not harassed, and nothing of ours went missing the whole time we lived among them.
1SA	25	16	우리가 양을 지키는 동안에 그들이 우리와 함께 있어 밤낮 우리에게 담이 되었음이라	They were a wall unto us both by night and day, all the while we were with them keeping the sheep.	They were a wall around us, both day and night, the whole time we were herding our sheep near them.
1SA	25	17	그런즉 이제 당신은 어떻게 할 것을 알아 생각하실지니 이는 다윗이 우리 주인과 주인의 온 집을 해하기로 결정하였음이니이다 주인은 불량한 사람이라 더불어 말할 수 없나이다	Now therefore know and consider what thou wilt do; for evil is determined against our master, and against all his household: for he is such a son of Belial, that a man cannot speak to him.	Now consider carefully what you must do, because disaster looms over our master and all his household. For he is such a scoundrel that nobody can speak to him!”
1SA	25	18	아비가일이 급히 떡 이백 덩이와 포도주 두 가죽 부대와 잡아 준비한 양 다섯과 볶은 곡식 다섯 세아와 건포도 백 송이와 무화과 뭉치 이백을 취하여 나귀들에게 싣고	Then Abigail made haste, and took two hundred loaves, and two bottles of wine, and five sheep ready dressed, and five measures of parched corn, and an hundred clusters of raisins, and two hundred cakes of figs, and laid them on asses.	Then Abigail hurried and took two hundred loaves of bread, two skins of wine, five butchered sheep, five seahs of roasted grain, a hundred clusters of raisins, and two hundred cakes of figs. She loaded them on donkeys
1SA	25	19	소년들에게 이르되 내 앞서 가라 나는 너희 뒤에 가리라 하고 그 남편 나발에게는 고하지 아니하니라	And she said unto her servants, Go on before me; behold, I come after you. But she told not her husband Nabal.	and said to her young men, “Go ahead of me. I will be right behind you.” But she did not tell her husband Nabal.
1SA	25	20	아비가일이 나귀를 타고 산 유벽한 곳으로 좇아 내려가더니 다윗과 그의 사람들이 자기에게로 마주 내려오는 것을 만나니라	And it was so, as she rode on the ass, that she came down by the covert of the hill, and, behold, David and his men came down against her; and she met them.	As Abigail came riding her donkey into a mountain ravine, she saw David and his men coming down toward her, and she met them.
1SA	25	21	다윗이 이미 말하기를 내가 이 자의 소유물을 광야에서 지켜 그 모든 것을 하나도 손실이 없게 한 것이 진실로 허사라 그가 악으로 나의 선을 갚는도다	Now David had said, Surely in vain have I kept all that this fellow hath in the wilderness, so that nothing was missed of all that pertained unto him: and he hath requited me evil for good.	Now David had just finished saying, “In vain I have protected all that belonged to this man in the wilderness. Nothing that belongs to him has gone missing, yet he has paid me back evil for good.
1SA	25	22	내가 그에게 속한 모든 것 중 한 남자라도 아침까지 남겨두면 하나님은 다윗에게 벌을 내리시고 또 내리시기를 원하노라 하였더라	So and more also do God unto the enemies of David, if I leave of all that pertain to him by the morning light any that pisseth against the wall.	May God punish David, and ever so severely, if I let one of Nabal’s men survive until morning.”
1SA	25	23	아비가일이 다윗을 보고 급히 나귀에서 내려 다윗의 앞에 엎드려 그 얼굴을 땅에 대니라	And when Abigail saw David, she hasted, and lighted off the ass, and fell before David on her face, and bowed herself to the ground,	When Abigail saw David, she quickly got off the donkey, fell facedown, and bowed before him.
1SA	25	24	그가 다윗의 발에 엎드려 가로되 내 주여 청컨대 이 죄악을 나 곧 내게로 돌리시고 여종으로 주의 귀에 말하게 하시고 이 여종의 말을 들으소서	And fell at his feet, and said, Upon me, my lord, upon me let this iniquity be: and let thine handmaid, I pray thee, speak in thine audience, and hear the words of thine handmaid.	She fell at his feet and said, “My lord, may the blame be on me alone, but please let your servant speak to you; hear the words of your servant.
1SA	25	25	원하옵나니 내 주는 이 불량한 사람 나발을 개의치 마옵소서 그 이름이 그에게 적당하니 그 이름이 나발이라 그는 미련한 자니이다 여종은 내 주의 보내신 소년들을 보지 못하였나이다	Let not my lord, I pray thee, regard this man of Belial, even Nabal: for as his name is, so is he; Nabal is his name, and folly is with him: but I thine handmaid saw not the young men of my lord, whom thou didst send.	My lord should pay no attention to this scoundrel Nabal, for he lives up to his name: His name means Fool, and folly accompanies him. I, your servant, did not see my lord’s young men whom you sent.
1SA	25	26	내 주여 여호와께서 사시고 내 주도 살아계시거니와 내 주의 손으로 피를 흘려 친히 보수하시는 일을 여호와께서 막으셨으니 내 주의 원수들과 내 주를 해하려 하는 자들은 나발과 같이 되기를 원하나이다	Now therefore, my lord, as the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, seeing the Lord hath withholden thee from coming to shed blood, and from avenging thyself with thine own hand, now let thine enemies, and they that seek evil to my lord, be as Nabal.	Now, my lord, as surely as the LORD lives and you yourself live, the LORD has held you back from coming to bloodshed and avenging yourself with your own hand. May your enemies and those who seek harm for my lord be like Nabal.
1SA	25	27	여종이 내 주에게 가져온 이 예물로 내 주를 좇는 이 소년들에게 주게 하시고	And now this blessing which thine handmaid hath brought unto my lord, let it even be given unto the young men that follow my lord.	Now let this gift your servant has brought to my lord be given to the young men who follow you.
1SA	25	28	주의 여종의 허물을 사하여 주옵소서 여호와께서 반드시 내 주를 위하여 든든한 집을 세우시리니 이는 내 주께서 여호와의 싸움을 싸우심이요 내 주의 일생에 내 주에게서 악한 일을 찾을 수 없음이니이다	I pray thee, forgive the trespass of thine handmaid: for the Lord will certainly make my lord a sure house; because my lord fighteth the battles of the Lord, and evil hath not been found in thee all thy days.	Please forgive your servant’s offense, for the LORD will surely make a lasting dynasty for my lord, because he fights the LORD’s battles. May no evil be found in you as long as you live.
1SA	25	29	사람이 일어나서 내 주를 쫓아 내 주의 생명을 찾을지라도 내 주의 생명은 내 주의 하나님 여호와와 함께 생명싸개 속에 싸였을 것이요 내 주의 원수들의 생명은 물매로 던지듯 여호와께서 그것을 던지시리이다	Yet a man is risen to pursue thee, and to seek thy soul: but the soul of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of life with the Lord thy God; and the souls of thine enemies, them shall he sling out, as out of the middle of a sling.	And should someone pursue you and seek your life, then the life of my lord will be bound securely by the LORD your God in the bundle of the living. But He shall fling away the lives of your enemies like stones from a sling.
1SA	25	30	여호와께서 내 주에 대하여 하신 말씀대로 모든 선을 내 주에게 행하사 내 주를 이스라엘의 지도자로 세우신 때에	And it shall come to pass, when the Lord shall have done to my lord according to all the good that he hath spoken concerning thee, and shall have appointed thee ruler over Israel;	When the LORD has done for my lord all the good He promised, and when He has appointed you ruler over Israel,
1SA	25	31	내 주께서 무죄한 피를 흘리셨다든지 내 주께서 친히 보수하셨다든지 함을 인하여 슬퍼하실 것도 없고 내 주의 마음에 걸리는 것도 없으시리니 다만 여호와께서 내 주를 후대하신 때에 원컨대 내 주의 여종을 생각하소서	That this shall be no grief unto thee, nor offence of heart unto my lord, either that thou hast shed blood causeless, or that my lord hath avenged himself: but when the Lord shall have dealt well with my lord, then remember thine handmaid.	then my lord will have no remorse or guilt of conscience over needless bloodshed and revenge. And when the LORD has dealt well with my lord, may you remember your maidservant.”
1SA	25	32	다윗이 아비가일에게 이르되 오늘날 너를 보내어 나를 영접케 하신 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와를 찬송할지로다	And David said to Abigail, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me:	Then David said to Abigail, “Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, who sent you to meet me this day!
1SA	25	33	또 네 지혜를 칭찬할지며 또 네게 복이 있을지로다 오늘날 내가 피를 흘릴 것과 친히 보수하는 것을 네가 막았느니라	And blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou, which hast kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and from avenging myself with mine own hand.	Blessed is your discernment, and blessed are you, because today you kept me from bloodshed and from avenging myself by my own hand.
1SA	25	34	나를 막아 너를 해하지 않게 하신 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와의 사심으로 맹세하노니 네가 급히 와서 나를 영접지 아니하였더면 밝는 아침에는 과연 나발에게 한 남자도 남겨두지 아니하였으리라	For in very deed, as the Lord God of Israel liveth, which hath kept me back from hurting thee, except thou hadst hasted and come to meet me, surely there had not been left unto Nabal by the morning light any that pisseth against the wall.	Otherwise, as surely as the LORD, the God of Israel, lives, who has restrained me from harming you, if you had not come quickly to meet me, then surely no male belonging to Nabal would have been left alive by morning light.”
1SA	25	35	다윗이 그가 가져온 것을 그의 손에서 받고 그에게 이르되 네 집으로 평안히 올라가라 내가 네 말을 듣고 네 청을 허락하노라	So David received of her hand that which she had brought him, and said unto her, Go up in peace to thine house; see, I have hearkened to thy voice, and have accepted thy person.	Then David accepted from her hand what she had brought him, and he said to her, “Go home in peace. See, I have heeded your voice and granted your request.”
1SA	25	36	아비가일이 나발에게로 돌아오니 그가 왕의 잔치 같은 잔치를 그 집에 배설하고 대취하여 마음에 기뻐하므로 아비가일이 밝는 아침까지는 다소간 말하지 아니하다가	And Abigail came to Nabal; and, behold, he held a feast in his house, like the feast of a king; and Nabal’s heart was merry within him, for he was very drunken: wherefore she told him nothing, less or more, until the morning light.	When Abigail returned to Nabal, there he was in the house, holding a feast fit for a king, in high spirits and very drunk. So she told him nothing until morning light.
1SA	25	37	아침에 나발이 포도주가 깬 후에 그 아내가 그에게 이 일을 고하매 그가 낙담하여 몸이 돌과 같이 되었더니	But it came to pass in the morning, when the wine was gone out of Nabal, and his wife had told him these things, that his heart died within him, and he became as a stone.	In the morning when Nabal was sober, his wife told him about these events, and his heart failed within him and he became like a stone.
1SA	25	38	한 열흘 후에 여호와께서 나발을 치시매 그가 죽으니라	And it came to pass about ten days after, that the Lord smote Nabal, that he died.	About ten days later, the LORD struck Nabal dead.
1SA	25	39	다윗이 나발의 죽었다 함을 듣고 가로되 나발에게 당한 나의 욕을 신설하사 종으로 악한 일을 하지 않게 하신 여호와를 찬송할지로다 여호와께서 나발의 악행을 그 머리에 돌리셨도다 하니라 다윗이 아비가일로 자기 아내를 삼으려고 보내어 그에게 말하게 하매	And when David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, Blessed be the Lord, that hath pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of Nabal, and hath kept his servant from evil: for the Lord hath returned the wickedness of Nabal upon his own head. And David sent and communed with Abigail, to take her to him to wife.	On hearing that Nabal was dead, David said, “Blessed be the LORD, who has upheld my cause against the reproach of Nabal and has restrained His servant from evil. For the LORD has brought the wickedness of Nabal down upon his own head.” Then David sent word to Abigail, asking for her in marriage.
1SA	25	40	다윗의 사환들이 갈멜에 가서 아비가일에게 이르러 그에게 일러 가로되 다윗이 당신을 아내로 삼고자 하여 우리를 당신께 보내더이다	And when the servants of David were come to Abigail to Carmel, they spake unto her, saying, David sent us unto thee, to take thee to him to wife.	When his servants came to Abigail at Carmel, they said, “David has sent us to take you as his wife.”
1SA	25	41	그가 일어나 몸을 굽혀 얼굴을 땅에 대고 가로되 내 주의 여종은 내 주의 사환들의 발 씻길 종이니이다 하고	And she arose, and bowed herself on her face to the earth, and said, Behold, let thine handmaid be a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my lord.	She arose, then bowed facedown and said, “Here is your maidservant, ready to serve and to wash the feet of my lord’s servants.”
1SA	25	42	급히 일어나서 나귀를 타고 따르는 처녀 다섯과 함께 다윗의 사자들을 따라가서 다윗의 아내가 되니라	And Abigail hasted, and arose, and rode upon an ass, with five damsels of hers that went after her; and she went after the messengers of David, and became his wife.	So Abigail hurried and got on a donkey, and attended by five of her maidens, she followed David’s messengers and became his wife.
1SA	25	43	다윗이 또 이스르엘 아히노암을 취하였더니 그들 두 사람이 자기 아내가 되니라	David also took Ahinoam of Jezreel; and they were also both of them his wives.	David had also married Ahinoam of Jezreel. So she and Abigail were both his wives.
1SA	25	44	사울이 그 딸 다윗의 아내 미갈을 갈림에 사는 라이스의 아들 발디에게 주었더라	But Saul had given Michal his daughter, David’s wife, to Phalti the son of Laish, which was of Gallim.	But Saul had given his daughter Michal, David’s wife, to Palti son of Laish, who was from Gallim.
1SA	26	1	십 사람이 기브아에 와서 사울에게 이르러 가로되 다윗이 광야 앞 하길라 산에 숨지 아니하였나이까	And the Ziphites came unto Saul to Gibeah, saying, Doth not David hide himself in the hill of Hachilah, which is before Jeshimon?	Then the Ziphites came to Saul at Gibeah and said, “Is not David hiding on the hill of Hachilah, opposite Jeshimon?”
1SA	26	2	사울이 일어나 십 황무지에서 다윗을 찾으려고 이스라엘에서 택한 사람 삼천과 함께 십 황무지로 내려가서	Then Saul arose, and went down to the wilderness of Ziph, having three thousand chosen men of Israel with him, to seek David in the wilderness of Ziph.	So Saul, accompanied by three thousand chosen men of Israel, went down to the Wilderness of Ziph to search for David there.
1SA	26	3	광야 앞 하길라 산 길 가에 진치니라 다윗이 황무지에 있더니 사울이 자기를 따라 황무지로 들어옴을 깨닫고	And Saul pitched in the hill of Hachilah, which is before Jeshimon, by the way. But David abode in the wilderness, and he saw that Saul came after him into the wilderness.	Saul camped beside the road at the hill of Hachilah opposite Jeshimon, but David was living in the wilderness. When he realized that Saul had followed him there,
1SA	26	4	이에 탐정을 보내어 사울이 과연 이른줄 알고	David therefore sent out spies, and understood that Saul was come in very deed.	David sent out spies to verify that Saul had arrived.
1SA	26	5	일어나 사울의 진 친 곳에 이르러 사울과 넬의 아들 군대장관 아브넬의 유하는 곳을 본즉 사울이 진 가운데 누웠고 백성은 그를 둘러 진 쳤더라	And David arose, and came to the place where Saul had pitched: and David beheld the place where Saul lay, and Abner the son of Ner, the captain of his host: and Saul lay in the trench, and the people pitched round about him.	Then David set out and went to the place where Saul had camped. He saw the place where Saul and Abner son of Ner, the general of his army, had lain down. Saul was lying inside the inner circle of the camp, with the troops camped around him.
1SA	26	6	이에 다윗이 헷 사람 아히멜렉과 스루야의 아들 요압의 아우 아비새에게 물어 가로되 누가 나로 더불어 진에 내려가서 사울에게 이르겠느냐 아비새가 가로되 내가 함께 가겠나이다	Then answered David and said to Ahimelech the Hittite, and to Abishai the son of Zeruiah, brother to Joab, saying, Who will go down with me to Saul to the camp? And Abishai said, I will go down with thee.	And David asked Ahimelech the Hittite and Abishai son of Zeruiah, Joab’s brother, “Who will go down with me to Saul in the camp?” “I will go with you,” answered Abishai.
1SA	26	7	다윗과 아비새가 밤에 그 백성에게 나아가 본즉 사울이 진 가운데 누워 자고 창은 머리 곁 땅에 꽂혔고 아브넬과 백성들은 그를 둘러 누웠는지라	So David and Abishai came to the people by night: and, behold, Saul lay sleeping within the trench, and his spear stuck in the ground at his bolster: but Abner and the people lay round about him.	That night David and Abishai came to the troops, and Saul was lying there asleep in the inner circle of the camp, with his spear stuck in the ground by his head. And Abner and the troops were lying around him.
1SA	26	8	아비새가 다윗에게 이르되 하나님이 오늘날 당신의 원수를 당신의 손에 붙이셨나이다 그러므로 청하오니 나로 창으로 그를 찔러서 단 번에 땅에 꽂게 하소서 내가 그를 두 번 찌를 것이 없으리이다	Then said Abishai to David, God hath delivered thine enemy into thine hand this day: now therefore let me smite him, I pray thee, with the spear even to the earth at once, and I will not smite him the second time.	Abishai said to David, “Today God has delivered your enemy into your hand. Now, therefore, please let me thrust the spear through him into the ground with one stroke. I will not need to strike him twice!”
1SA	26	9	다윗이 아비새에게 이르되 죽이지 말라 누구든지 손을 들어 여호와의 기름 부음을 받은 자를 치면 죄가 없겠느냐	And David said to Abishai, Destroy him not: for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lord’s anointed, and be guiltless?	But David said to Abishai, “Do not destroy him, for who can lift a hand against the LORD’s anointed and be guiltless?”
1SA	26	10	또 가로되 여호와께서 사시거니와 여호와께서 그를 치시리니 혹 죽을 날이 이르거나 혹 전장에 들어가서 망하리라	David said furthermore, As the Lord liveth, the Lord shall smite him; or his day shall come to die; or he shall descend into battle, and perish.	David added, “As surely as the LORD lives, the LORD Himself will strike him down; either his day will come and he will die, or he will go into battle and perish.
1SA	26	11	내가 손을 들어 여호와의 기름 부음을 받은 자를 치는 것을 여호와께서 금하시나니 너는 그의 머리 곁에 있는 창과 물병만 가지고 가자 하고	The Lord forbid that I should stretch forth mine hand against the Lord’s anointed: but, I pray thee, take thou now the spear that is at his bolster, and the cruse of water, and let us go.	But the LORD forbid that I should stretch out my hand against the LORD’s anointed. Instead, take the spear and water jug by his head, and let us go.”
1SA	26	12	다윗이 사울의 머리 곁에서 창과 물병을 가지고 떠나가되 깨든지 이를 보든지 알든지 하는 사람이 없었으니 이는 여호와께서 그들로 깊이 잠들게 하셨으므로 그들이 다 잠이었더라	So David took the spear and the cruse of water from Saul’s bolster; and they gat them away, and no man saw it, nor knew it, neither awaked: for they were all asleep; because a deep sleep from the Lord was fallen upon them.	So David took the spear and water jug by Saul’s head, and they departed. No one saw them or knew about it, nor did anyone wake up; they all remained asleep, because a deep sleep from the LORD had fallen on them.
1SA	26	13	이에 다윗이 건너편으로 가서 멀리 산꼭대기에 서니 상거가 멀더라	Then David went over to the other side, and stood on the top of an hill afar off; a great space being between them:	Then David crossed to the other side and stood atop the mountain at a distance; there was a wide gulf between them.
1SA	26	14	다윗이 백성과 넬의 아들 아브넬을 대하여 외쳐 가로되 아브넬아 너는 대답지 아니하느냐 아브넬이 대답하여 가로되 왕을 부르는 너는 누구냐	And David cried to the people, and to Abner the son of Ner, saying, Answerest thou not, Abner? Then Abner answered and said, Who art thou that criest to the king?	And David shouted to the troops and to Abner son of Ner, “Will you not answer me, Abner?” “Who calls to the king?” Abner replied.
1SA	26	15	다윗이 아브넬에게 이르되 네가 용사가 아니냐 이스라엘 중에 너 같은 자가 누구냐 그러한데 네가 어찌하여 네 주 왕을 보호하지 아니하느냐 백성 중 한 사람이 네 주 왕을 죽이려고 들어갔었느니라	And David said to Abner, Art not thou a valiant man? and who is like to thee in Israel? wherefore then hast thou not kept thy lord the king? for there came one of the people in to destroy the king thy lord.	So David said to Abner, “You are a man, aren’t you? And who in Israel is your equal? Why then did you not protect your lord the king when one of the people came to destroy him?
1SA	26	16	네 행한 이 일이 선치 못하도다 여호와께서 사시거니와 여호와의 기름 부음 받은 너희 주를 보호하지 아니하였으니 너희는 마땅히 죽을 자니라 이제 왕의 창과 왕의 머리 곁에 있던 물병이 어디 있나 보라	This thing is not good that thou hast done. As the Lord liveth, ye are worthy to die, because ye have not kept your master, the Lord’s anointed. And now see where the king’s spear is, and the cruse of water that was at his bolster.	This thing you have done is not good. As surely as the LORD lives, all of you deserve to die, since you did not protect your lord, the LORD’s anointed. Now look around. Where are the king’s spear and water jug that were by his head?”
1SA	26	17	사울이 다윗의 음성을 알아 듣고 가로되 내 아들 다윗아 이것이 네 음성이냐 다윗이 가로되 내 주 왕이여 내 음성이니이다	And Saul knew David’s voice, and said, Is this thy voice, my son David? And David said, It is my voice, my lord, O king.	Then Saul recognized David’s voice and asked, “Is that your voice, David my son?” “It is my voice, my lord and king,” David said.
1SA	26	18	또 가로되 내 주는 어찌하여 주의 종을 쫓으시나이까 내가 무엇을 하였으며 내 손에 무슨 악이 있나이까	And he said, Wherefore doth my lord thus pursue after his servant? for what have I done? or what evil is in mine hand?	And he continued, “Why is my lord pursuing his servant? What have I done? What evil is in my hand?
1SA	26	19	청컨대 내 주 왕은 이제 종의 말을 들으소서 만일 왕을 격동시켜 나를 해하려 하는 이가 여호와시면 여호와께서는 제물을 받으시기를 원하나이다마는 만일 인자들이면 그들이 여호와 앞에 저주를 받으리니 이는 그들이 이르기를 너는 가서 다른 신들을 섬기라 하고 오늘날 나를 쫓아내어 여호와의 기업에 붙지 못하게 함이니이다	Now therefore, I pray thee, let my lord the king hear the words of his servant. If the Lord have stirred thee up against me, let him accept an offering: but if they be the children of men, cursed be they before the Lord; for they have driven me out this day from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord, saying, Go, serve other gods.	Now please, may my lord the king hear the words of his servant: If the LORD has stirred you up against me, then may He accept an offering. But if men have done it, may they be cursed in the presence of the LORD! For today they have driven me away from sharing in the inheritance of the LORD, saying, ‘Go, serve other gods.’
1SA	26	20	그런즉 청컨대 여호와 앞에서 먼 이곳에서 이제 나의 피로 땅에 흐르지 말게 하옵소서 이는 산에서 메추라기를 사냥하는 자와 같이 이스라엘 왕이 한 벼룩을 수색하러 나오셨음이니이다	Now therefore, let not my blood fall to the earth before the face of the Lord: for the king of Israel is come out to seek a flea, as when one doth hunt a partridge in the mountains.	So do not let my blood fall to the ground far from the presence of the LORD. For the king of Israel has come out to look for a flea, like one who hunts a partridge in the mountains.”
1SA	26	21	사울이 가로되 내가 범죄하였도다 내 아들 다윗아 돌아오라 네가 오늘 내 생명을 귀중히 여겼은즉 내가 다시는 너를 해하려 하지 아니하리라 내가 어리석은 일을 하였으니 대단히 잘못 되었도다	Then said Saul, I have sinned: return, my son David: for I will no more do thee harm, because my soul was precious in thine eyes this day: behold, I have played the fool, and have erred exceedingly.	Then Saul replied, “I have sinned. Come back, David my son. I will never harm you again, because today you considered my life precious. I have played the fool and have committed a grave error!”
1SA	26	22	다윗이 대답하여 가로되 왕은 창을 보소서 한 소년을 보내어 가져가게 하소서	And David answered and said, Behold the king’s spear! and let one of the young men come over and fetch it.	“Here is the king’s spear,” David answered. “Let one of the young men come over and get it.
1SA	26	23	여호와께서 각 사람에게 그 의와 신실을 갚으시리니 이는 여호와께서 오늘날 왕을 내 손에 붙이셨으되 나는 손을 들어 여호와의 기름 부음을 받은 자 치기를 원치 아니하였음이니이다	The Lord render to every man his righteousness and his faithfulness: for the Lord delivered thee into my hand to day, but I would not stretch forth mine hand against the Lord’s anointed.	May the LORD repay every man for his righteousness and faithfulness. For the LORD delivered you into my hand today, but I would not stretch out my hand against the LORD’s anointed.
1SA	26	24	오늘날 왕의 생명을 내가 중히 여긴 것 같이 내 생명을 여호와께서 중히 여기셔서 모든 환난에서 나를 구하여 내시기를 바라나이다	And, behold, as thy life was much set by this day in mine eyes, so let my life be much set by in the eyes of the Lord, and let him deliver me out of all tribulation.	As surely as I valued your life today, so may the LORD value my life and rescue me from all trouble.”
1SA	26	25	사울이 다윗에게 이르되 내 아들 다윗아 네게 복이 있을지로다 네가 큰 일을 행하겠고 반드시 승리를 얻으리라 하니라 다윗은 자기 길로 가고 사울은 자기 곳으로 돌아가니라	Then Saul said to David, Blessed be thou, my son David: thou shalt both do great things, and also shalt still prevail. So David went on his way, and Saul returned to his place.	Saul said to him, “May you be blessed, David my son. You will accomplish great things and will surely prevail.” So David went on his way, and Saul returned home.
1SA	27	1	다윗이 그 마음에 생각하기를 내가 후일에는 사울의 손에 망하리니 블레셋 사람의 땅으로 피하여 들어가는 것이 상책이로다 사울이 이스라엘 온 경내에서 나를 수색하다가 절망하리니 내가 그 손에서 벗어나리라 하고	And David said in his heart, I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul: there is nothing better for me than that I should speedily escape into the land of the Philistines; and Saul shall despair of me, to seek me any more in any coast of Israel: so shall I escape out of his hand.	David, however, said to himself, “One of these days now I will be swept away by the hand of Saul. There is nothing better for me than to escape to the land of the Philistines. Then Saul will stop searching for me all over Israel, and I will slip out of his hand.”
1SA	27	2	일어나 함께 있는 육백 인으로 더불어 가드 왕 마옥의 아들 아기스에게로 건너가니라	And David arose, and he passed over with the six hundred men that were with him unto Achish, the son of Maoch, king of Gath.	So David set out with his six hundred men and went to Achish son of Maoch, the king of Gath.
1SA	27	3	다윗과 그의 사람들이 각기 가족을 거느리고 가드에서 아기스와 동거하였는데 다윗이 그 두 아내 이스르엘 여자 아히노암과 나발의 아내 되었던 갈멜 여자 아비가일과 함께 하였더니	And David dwelt with Achish at Gath, he and his men, every man with his household, even David with his two wives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the Carmelitess, Nabal’s wife.	David and his men settled in Gath with Achish. Each man had his family with him, and David had his two wives: Ahinoam of Jezreel and Abigail of Carmel, the widow of Nabal.
1SA	27	4	다윗이 가드에 도망한 것을 혹이 사울에게 고하매 사울이 다시는 그를 수색하지 아니하니라	And it was told Saul that David was fled to Gath: and he sought no more again for him.	And when Saul learned that David had fled to Gath, he no longer searched for him.
1SA	27	5	다윗이 아기스에게 이르되 내가 당신께 은혜를 받았거든 지방 성읍 중 한 곳을 주어 나로 거하게 하소서 당신의 종이 어찌 당신과 함께 왕도에 거하리이까	And David said unto Achish, If I have now found grace in thine eyes, let them give me a place in some town in the country, that I may dwell there: for why should thy servant dwell in the royal city with thee?	Then David said to Achish, “If I have found favor in your eyes, let me be assigned a place in one of the outlying towns, so I can live there. For why should your servant live in the royal city with you?”
1SA	27	6	아기스가 그 날에 시글락을 그에게 주었으므로 시글락이 오늘까지 유다 왕에게 속하니라	Then Achish gave him Ziklag that day: wherefore Ziklag pertaineth unto the kings of Judah unto this day.	That day Achish gave him Ziklag, and to this day it still belongs to the kings of Judah.
1SA	27	7	다윗이 블레셋 사람의 지방에 거한 날 수는 일년 넉달이었더라	And the time that David dwelt in the country of the Philistines was a full year and four months.	And the time that David lived in Philistine territory amounted to a year and four months.
1SA	27	8	다윗과 그의 사람들이 올라가서 그술 사람과 기르스 사람과 아말렉 사람을 침노하였으니 그들은 옛적부터 술과 애굽 땅으로 지나가는 지방의 거민이라	And David and his men went up, and invaded the Geshurites, and the Gezrites, and the Amalekites: for those nations were of old the inhabitants of the land, as thou goest to Shur, even unto the land of Egypt.	Now David and his men went up and raided the Geshurites, the Girzites, and the Amalekites. (From ancient times these people had inhabited the land extending to Shur and Egypt.)
1SA	27	9	다윗이 그 땅을 쳐서 남녀를 살려 두지 아니하고 양과 소와 나귀와 약대와 의복을 취하고 돌아와서 아기스에게 이르매	And David smote the land, and left neither man nor woman alive, and took away the sheep, and the oxen, and the asses, and the camels, and the apparel, and returned, and came to Achish.	Whenever David attacked a territory, he did not leave a man or woman alive, but he took the flocks and herds, the donkeys, camels, and clothing. Then he would return to Achish,
1SA	27	10	아기스가 가로되 너희가 오늘은 누구를 침노하였느냐 다윗이 가로되 유다 남방과 여라무엘 사람의 남방과 겐 사람의 남방이니이다	And Achish said, Whither have ye made a road to day? And David said, Against the south of Judah, and against the south of the Jerahmeelites, and against the south of the Kenites.	who would ask him, “What have you raided today?” And David would reply, “The Negev of Judah,” or “The Negev of Jerahmeel,” or “The Negev of the Kenites.”
1SA	27	11	다윗이 그 남녀를 살려 가드로 데려가지 아니한 것은 그의 생각에 그들이 우리에게 대하여 이르기를 다윗의 행사가 이러하여 블레셋 사람의 지방에 거하는 동안에 이같이 행하는 습관이 있다 할까 두려워함이었더라	And David saved neither man nor woman alive, to bring tidings to Gath, saying, Lest they should tell on us, saying, So did David, and so will be his manner all the while he dwelleth in the country of the Philistines.	David did not leave a man or woman alive to be brought to Gath, for he said, “Otherwise they will report us, saying, ‘This is what David did.’” And this was David’s custom the whole time he lived in Philistine territory.
1SA	27	12	아기스가 다윗을 믿고 말하기를 다윗이 자기 백성 이스라엘에게 심히 미움을 받게 하였으니 그는 영영히 내 사역자가 되리라 하니라	And Achish believed David, saying, He hath made his people Israel utterly to abhor him; therefore he shall be my servant for ever.	So Achish trusted David, thinking, “Since he has made himself an utter stench to his people Israel, he will be my servant forever.”
1SA	28	1	그 때에 블레셋 사람이 이스라엘을 쳐서 싸우려고 군대를 모집한지라 아기스가 다윗에게 이르되 너는 밝히 알라 너와 네 사람들이 나와 한가지로 나가서 군대에 참가할 것이니라	And it came to pass in those days, that the Philistines gathered their armies together for warfare, to fight with Israel. And Achish said unto David, Know thou assuredly, that thou shalt go out with me to battle, thou and thy men.	Now in those days the Philistines gathered their forces for warfare against Israel. So Achish said to David, “You must understand that you and your men are to go out to battle with me.”
1SA	28	2	다윗이 아기스에게 이르되 그러면 당신이 종의 행할 바를 아시리이다 아기스가 다윗에게 이르되 그러면 내가 너로 영영히 내 머리 지키는 자를 삼으리라 하니라	And David said to Achish, Surely thou shalt know what thy servant can do. And Achish said to David, Therefore will I make thee keeper of mine head for ever.	David replied, “Then you will come to know what your servant can do.” “Very well,” said Achish. “I will make you my bodyguard for life.”
1SA	28	3	사무엘이 죽었으므로 온 이스라엘이 그를 애곡하며 그의 본성 라마에 장사하였고 사울은 신접한 자와 박수를 그 땅에서 쫓아 내었었더라	Now Samuel was dead, and all Israel had lamented him, and buried him in Ramah, even in his own city. And Saul had put away those that had familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land.	Now by this time Samuel had died, and all Israel had mourned for him and buried him in Ramah, his own city. And Saul had removed the mediums and spiritists from the land.
1SA	28	4	블레셋 사람이 모여 수넴에 이르러 진 치매 사울이 온 이스라엘을 모아 길보아에 진 쳤더니	And the Philistines gathered themselves together, and came and pitched in Shunem: and Saul gathered all Israel together, and they pitched in Gilboa.	The Philistines came together and camped at Shunem, while Saul gathered all Israel and camped at Gilboa.
1SA	28	5	사울이 블레셋 사람의 군대를 보고 두려워서 그 마음이 크게 떨린지라	And when Saul saw the host of the Philistines, he was afraid, and his heart greatly trembled.	When Saul saw the Philistine army, he was afraid and trembled violently.
1SA	28	6	사울이 여호와께 묻자오되 여호와께서 꿈으로도, 우림으로도, 선지자로도 그에게 대답지 아니하시므로	And when Saul enquired of the Lord, the Lord answered him not, neither by dreams, nor by Urim, nor by prophets.	He inquired of the LORD, but the LORD did not answer him by dreams or Urim or prophets.
1SA	28	7	사울이 그 신하들에게 이르되 나를 위하여 신접한 여인을 찾으라 내가 그리로 가서 그에게 물으리라 그 신하들이 그에게 이르되 보소서 엔돌에 신접한 여인이 있나이다	Then said Saul unto his servants, Seek me a woman that hath a familiar spirit, that I may go to her, and enquire of her. And his servants said to him, Behold, there is a woman that hath a familiar spirit at En–dor.	Then Saul said to his servants, “Find me a woman who is a medium, so I can go and consult her.” “There is a medium at Endor,” his servants replied.
1SA	28	8	사울이 다른 옷을 입어 변장하고 두 사람과 함께 갈새 그들이 밤에 그 여인에게 이르러는 사울이 가로되 청하노니 나를 위하여 신접한 술법으로 내가 네게 말하는 사람을 불러올리라	And Saul disguised himself, and put on other raiment, and he went, and two men with him, and they came to the woman by night: and he said, I pray thee, divine unto me by the familiar spirit, and bring me him up, whom I shall name unto thee.	So Saul disguised himself by putting on different clothes, and he set out with two of his men. They came to the woman at night, and Saul said, “Consult a spirit for me. Bring up for me the one I name.”
1SA	28	9	여인이 그에게 이르되 네가 사울의 행한 일 곧 그가 신접한 자와 박수를 이 땅에서 멸절시켰음을 아나니 네가 어찌하여 내 생명에 올무를 놓아 나를 죽게 하려느냐	And the woman said unto him, Behold, thou knowest what Saul hath done, how he hath cut off those that have familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land: wherefore then layest thou a snare for my life, to cause me to die?	But the woman replied, “Surely you know what Saul has done, how he has killed the mediums and spiritists in the land. Why have you set a trap to get me killed?”
1SA	28	10	사울이 여호와로 그에게 맹세하여 가로되 여호와께서 사시거니와 네가 이 일로는 벌을 당치 아니하리라	And Saul sware to her by the Lord, saying, As the Lord liveth, there shall no punishment happen to thee for this thing.	Then Saul swore to her by the LORD: “As surely as the LORD lives, no punishment shall come upon you for this.”
1SA	28	11	여인이 가로되 내가 누구를 네게로 불러 올리랴 사울이 가로되 사무엘을 불러 올리라	Then said the woman, Whom shall I bring up unto thee? And he said, Bring me up Samuel.	“Whom shall I bring up for you?” the woman asked. “Bring up Samuel,” he replied.
1SA	28	12	여인이 사무엘을 보고 큰 소리로 외치며 사울에게 말하여 가로되 당신이 어찌하여 나를 속이셨나이까 당신이 사울이시니이다	And when the woman saw Samuel, she cried with a loud voice: and the woman spake to Saul, saying, Why hast thou deceived me? for thou art Saul.	But when the woman saw Samuel, she cried out in a loud voice and said to Saul, “Why have you deceived me? You are Saul!”
1SA	28	13	왕이 그에게 이르되 두려워 말라 네가 무엇을 보았느냐 여인이 사울에게 이르되 내가 신이 땅에서 올라오는 것을 보았나이다	And the king said unto her, Be not afraid: for what sawest thou? And the woman said unto Saul, I saw gods ascending out of the earth.	“Do not be afraid,” the king replied. “What do you see?” “I see a god coming up out of the earth,” the woman answered.
1SA	28	14	사울이 그에게 이르되 그 모양이 어떠하냐 그가 가로되 한 노인이 올라 오는데 그가 겉옷을 입었나이다 사울이 그가 사무엘인줄 알고 그 얼굴을 땅에 대고 절하니라	And he said unto her, What form is he of? And she said, An old man cometh up; and he is covered with a mantle. And Saul perceived that it was Samuel, and he stooped with his face to the ground, and bowed himself.	“What does he look like?” asked Saul. “An old man is coming up,” she replied. “And he is wearing a robe.” So Saul knew that it was Samuel, and he bowed facedown in reverence.
1SA	28	15	사무엘이 사울에게 이르되 네가 어찌하여 나를 불러 올려서 나로 분요케 하느냐 사울이 대답하되 나는 심히 군급하니이다 블레셋 사람은 나를 향하여 군대를 일으켰고 하나님은 나를 떠나서 다시는 선지자로도, 꿈으로도 내게 대답지 아니하시기로 나의 행할 일을 배우려고 당신을 불러 올렸나이다	And Samuel said to Saul, Why hast thou disquieted me, to bring me up? And Saul answered, I am sore distressed; for the Philistines make war against me, and God is departed from me, and answereth me no more, neither by prophets, nor by dreams: therefore I have called thee, that thou mayest make known unto me what I shall do.	Then Samuel said to Saul, “Why have you disturbed me by bringing me up?” “I am deeply distressed,” replied Saul. “The Philistines are fighting against me, and God has turned away from me. He no longer answers me, either by prophets or by dreams. So I have called on you to tell me what to do.”
1SA	28	16	사무엘이 가로되 여호와께서 너를 떠나 네 대적이 되셨거늘 네가 어찌하여 내게 묻느냐	Then said Samuel, Wherefore then dost thou ask of me, seeing the Lord is departed from thee, and is become thine enemy?	“Why do you consult me,” asked Samuel, “since the LORD has turned away from you and become your enemy?
1SA	28	17	여호와께서 나로 말씀하신 대로 네게 행하사 나라를 네 손에서 떼어 네 이웃 다윗에게 주셨느니라	And the Lord hath done to him, as he spake by me: for the Lord hath rent the kingdom out of thine hand, and given it to thy neighbour, even to David:	He has done exactly what He spoke through me: The LORD has torn the kingship out of your hand and given it to your neighbor David.
1SA	28	18	네가 여호와의 목소리를 순종치 아니하고 그의 진노를 아말렉에게 쏟지 아니하였으므로 여호와께서 오늘날 이 일을 네게 행하셨고	Because thou obeyedst not the voice of the Lord, nor executedst his fierce wrath upon Amalek, therefore hath the Lord done this thing unto thee this day.	Because you did not obey the LORD or carry out His burning anger against Amalek, the LORD has done this to you today.
1SA	28	19	여호와께서 이스라엘을 너와 함께 블레셋 사람의 손에 붙이시리니 내일 너와 네 아들들이 나와 함께 있으리라 여호와께서 또 이스라엘 군대를 블레셋 사람의 손에 붙이시리라	Moreover the Lord will also deliver Israel with thee into the hand of the Philistines: and to morrow shalt thou and thy sons be with me: the Lord also shall deliver the host of Israel into the hand of the Philistines.	Moreover, the LORD will deliver Israel with you into the hand of the Philistines, and tomorrow you and your sons will be with me. And the LORD will deliver the army of Israel into the hand of the Philistines.”
1SA	28	20	사울이 갑자기 땅에 온전히 엎드러지니 이는 사무엘의 말을 인하여 심히 두려워함이요 또 그 기력이 진하였으니 이는 그가 종일 종야에 식물을 먹지 못하였음이라	Then Saul fell straightway all along on the earth, and was sore afraid, because of the words of Samuel: and there was no strength in him; for he had eaten no bread all the day, nor all the night.	Immediately Saul fell flat on the ground, terrified by the words of Samuel. And his strength was gone, because he had not eaten anything all that day and night.
1SA	28	21	그 여인이 사울에게 이르러 그 심히 고통함을 보고 그에게 이르되 여종이 왕의 말씀을 듣고 나의 생명을 아끼지 아니하고 왕이 내게 이르신 말씀을 청종하였사오니	And the woman came unto Saul, and saw that he was sore troubled, and said unto him, Behold, thine handmaid hath obeyed thy voice, and I have put my life in my hand, and have hearkened unto thy words which thou spakest unto me.	When the woman came to Saul and saw how distraught he was, she said to him, “Look, your maidservant has obeyed your voice. I took my life in my hands and did as you told me.
1SA	28	22	그런즉 청컨대 이제 여종의 말을 들으사 나로 왕의 앞에 한 조각 떡을 드리게 하시고 왕은 잡수시고 길 가실 때에 기력을 얻으소서	Now therefore, I pray thee, hearken thou also unto the voice of thine handmaid, and let me set a morsel of bread before thee; and eat, that thou mayest have strength, when thou goest on thy way.	Now please listen to your servant and let me set a morsel of bread before you so you may eat and have the strength to go on your way.”
1SA	28	23	사울이 거절하여 가로되 내가 먹지 아니하겠노라 그 신하들과 여인이 강권하매 그 말을 듣고 땅에서 일어나 침상에 앉으니라	But he refused, and said, I will not eat. But his servants, together with the woman, compelled him; and he hearkened unto their voice. So he arose from the earth, and sat upon the bed.	Saul refused, saying, “I will not eat.” But his servants joined the woman in urging him, and he heeded their voice. He got up from the ground and sat on the bed.
1SA	28	24	여인의 집에 살진 송아지가 있으므로 그것을 급히 잡고 가루를 취하여 뭉쳐 무교병을 만들고 구워서	And the woman had a fat calf in the house; and she hasted, and killed it, and took flour, and kneaded it, and did bake unleavened bread thereof:	The woman had a fattened calf at her house, and she quickly slaughtered it. She also took flour, kneaded it, and baked unleavened bread.
1SA	28	25	사울의 앞에와 그 신하들의 앞에 드리니 그들이 먹고 일어나서 그 밤에 가니라	And she brought it before Saul, and before his servants; and they did eat. Then they rose up, and went away that night.	She served it to Saul and his servants, and they ate. And that night they got up and left.
1SA	29	1	블레셋 사람들은 그 모든 군대를 아벡에 모았고 이스라엘 사람들은 이스르엘에 있는 샘 곁에 진 쳤더라	Now the Philistines gathered together all their armies to Aphek: and the Israelites pitched by a fountain which is in Jezreel.	Now the Philistines brought all their forces together at Aphek, while Israel camped by the spring in Jezreel.
1SA	29	2	블레셋 사람의 장관들은 수백씩 수천씩 영솔하여 나아가고 다윗과 그의 사람들은 아기스와 함께 그 뒤에서 나아가더니	And the lords of the Philistines passed on by hundreds, and by thousands: but David and his men passed on in the rereward with Achish.	As the Philistine leaders marched out their units of hundreds and thousands, David and his men marched behind them with Achish.
1SA	29	3	블레셋 사람의 방백들이 가로되 이 히브리 사람들이 무엇을 하려느냐 아기스가 블레셋 사람의 방백들에게 이르되 이는 이스라엘 왕 사울의 신하 다윗이 아니냐 그가 나와 함께 있은지 여러 날 여러 해로되 그가 망명하여 온 날부터 오늘까지 내가 그의 허물을 보지 못하였노라	Then said the princes of the Philistines, What do these Hebrews here? And Achish said unto the princes of the Philistines, Is not this David, the servant of Saul the king of Israel, which hath been with me these days, or these years, and I have found no fault in him since he fell unto me unto this day?	Then the commanders of the Philistines asked, “What about these Hebrews?” Achish replied, “Is this not David, the servant of King Saul of Israel? He has been with me all these days, even years, and from the day he defected until today I have found no fault in him.”
1SA	29	4	블레셋 사람의 방백들이 그에게 노한지라 블레셋 방백들이 그에게 이르되 이 사람을 돌려 보내어 왕이 그에게 정하신 그 처소로 가게 하소서 그는 우리와 함께 싸움에 내려가지 못하리니 그가 전장에서 우리의 대적이 될까 하나이다 그가 무엇으로 그 주와 다시 화합하리이까 이사람들의 머리로 하지 아니하겠나이까	And the princes of the Philistines were wroth with him; and the princes of the Philistines said unto him, Make this fellow return, that he may go again to his place which thou hast appointed him, and let him not go down with us to battle, lest in the battle he be an adversary to us: for wherewith should he reconcile himself unto his master? should it not be with the heads of these men?	But the commanders of the Philistines were angry with Achish and told him, “Send that man back and let him return to the place you assigned him. He must not go down with us into battle only to become our adversary during the war. What better way for him to regain the favor of his master than with the heads of our men?
1SA	29	5	그들이 춤추며 창화하여 가로되 사울의 죽인 자는 천천이요 다윗은 만만이로다 하던 이 다윗이 아니니이까	Is not this David, of whom they sang one to another in dances, saying, Saul slew his thousands, and David his ten thousands?	Is this not the David about whom they sing in their dances: ‘Saul has slain his thousands, and David his tens of thousands’?”
1SA	29	6	아기스가 다윗을 불러 그에게 이르되 여호와께서 사시거니와 네가 정직하여 내게 온 날부터 오늘까지 네게 악이 있음을 보지 못하였으니 나와 함께 군중에 출입하는 것이 나의 소견에는 좋으나 장관들이 너를 좋아하지 아니하니	Then Achish called David, and said unto him, Surely, as the Lord liveth, thou hast been upright, and thy going out and thy coming in with me in the host is good in my sight: for I have not found evil in thee since the day of thy coming unto me unto this day: nevertheless the lords favour thee not.	So Achish summoned David and told him, “As surely as the LORD lives, you have been upright in my sight, and it seems right that you should march in and out with me in the army, because I have found no fault in you from the day you came to me until this day. But you have no favor in the sight of the leaders.
1SA	29	7	너는 돌이켜 평안히 가서 블레셋 사람의 장관들에게 거슬려 보이게 말라	Wherefore now return, and go in peace, that thou displease not the lords of the Philistines.	Therefore turn back now and go in peace, so that you will not do anything to displease the leaders of the Philistines.”
1SA	29	8	다윗이 아기스에게 이르되 내가 무엇을 하였나이까 내가 당신의 앞에 오늘까지 있는 동안에 당신이 종에게서 무엇을 보셨기에 나로 가서 내 주 왕의 원수와 싸우지 못하게 하시나이까	And David said unto Achish, But what have I done? and what hast thou found in thy servant so long as I have been with thee unto this day, that I may not go fight against the enemies of my lord the king?	“But what have I done?” David replied. “What have you found against your servant, from the day I came to you until today, to keep me from going along to fight against the enemies of my lord the king?”
1SA	29	9	아기스가 다윗에게 대답하여 가로되 네가 내 목전에 하나님의 사자 같이 선한 것을 내가 아나 블레셋 사람의 방백들은 말하기를 그가 우리와 함께 전장에 올라가지 못하리라 하니	And Achish answered and said to David, I know that thou art good in my sight, as an angel of God: notwithstanding the princes of the Philistines have said, He shall not go up with us to the battle.	Achish replied, “I know that you are as pleasing in my sight as an angel of God. But the commanders of the Philistines have said, ‘He must not go into battle with us.’
1SA	29	10	그런즉 너는 너와 함께 온 네 주의 신하들로 더불어 새벽에 일어나라 너희는 새벽에 일어나서 밝거든 곧 떠나라	Wherefore now rise up early in the morning with thy master’s servants that are come with thee: and as soon as ye be up early in the morning, and have light, depart.	Now then, get up early in the morning, along with your master’s servants who came with you, and go as soon as it is light.”
1SA	29	11	이에 다윗이 자기 사람들로 더불어 일찍이 아침에 일어나서 떠나 블레셋 사람의 땅으로 돌아가고 블레셋 사람은 이스르엘로 올라 가니라	So David and his men rose up early to depart in the morning, to return into the land of the Philistines. And the Philistines went up to Jezreel.	So David and his men got up early in the morning to return to the land of the Philistines. And the Philistines went up to Jezreel.
1SA	30	1	다윗과 그의 사람들이 제삼일에 시글락에 이를 때에 아말렉 사람들이 이미 남방과 시글락을 침노하였는데 그들이 시글락을 쳐서 불사르고	And it came to pass, when David and his men were come to Ziklag on the third day, that the Amalekites had invaded the south, and Ziklag, and smitten Ziklag, and burned it with fire;	On the third day David and his men arrived in Ziklag, and the Amalekites had raided the Negev, attacked Ziklag, and burned it down.
1SA	30	2	거기 있는 대소 여인들을 하나도 죽이지 아니하고 다 사로잡아 끌고 자기 길을 갔더라	And had taken the women captives, that were therein: they slew not any, either great or small, but carried them away, and went on their way.	They had taken captive the women and all who were there, both young and old. They had not killed anyone, but had carried them off as they went on their way.
1SA	30	3	다윗과 그의 사람들이 성에 이르러 본즉 성이 불탔고 자기들의 아내와 자녀들이 사로잡혔는지라	So David and his men came to the city, and, behold, it was burned with fire; and their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, were taken captives.	When David and his men came to the city, they found it burned down and their wives and sons and daughters taken captive.
1SA	30	4	다윗과 그와 함께 한 백성이 울 기력이 없도록 소리를 높여 울었더라	Then David and the people that were with him lifted up their voice and wept, until they had no more power to weep.	So David and the troops with him lifted up their voices and wept until they had no strength left to weep.
1SA	30	5	(다윗의 두 아내 이스르엘 여인 아히노암과 갈멜 사람 나발의 아내 되었던 아비가일도 사로잡혔더라)	And David’s two wives were taken captives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite.	David’s two wives, Ahinoam of Jezreel and Abigail the widow of Nabal of Carmel, had been taken captive.
1SA	30	6	백성이 각기 자녀들을 위하여 마음이 슬퍼서 다윗을 돌로 치자 하니 다윗이 크게 군급하였으나 그 하나님 여호와를 힘입고 용기를 얻었더라	And David was greatly distressed; for the people spake of stoning him, because the soul of all the people was grieved, every man for his sons and for his daughters: but David encouraged himself in the Lord his God.	And David was greatly distressed because the people spoke of stoning him, because the soul of every man grieved for his sons and daughters. But David found strength in the LORD his God.
1SA	30	7	다윗이 아히멜렉의 아들 제사장 아비아달에게 이르되 청컨대 에봇을 내게로 가져오라 아비아달이 에봇을 다윗에게로 가져오매	And David said to Abiathar the priest, Ahimelech’s son, I pray thee, bring me hither the ephod. And Abiathar brought thither the ephod to David.	Then David said to Abiathar the priest, the son of Ahimelech, “Bring me the ephod.” So Abiathar brought it to him,
1SA	30	8	다윗이 여호와께 묻자와 가로되 내가 이 군대를 쫓아가면 미치겠나이까 여호와께서 대답하시되 쫓아가라 네가 반드시 미치고 정녕 도로 찾으리라	And David enquired at the Lord, saying, Shall I pursue after this troop? shall I overtake them? And he answered him, Pursue: for thou shalt surely overtake them, and without fail recover all.	and David inquired of the LORD: “Should I pursue these raiders? Will I overtake them?” “Pursue them,” the LORD replied, “for you will surely overtake them and rescue the captives.”
1SA	30	9	이에 다윗과 그와 함께 한 육백 명이 가서 브솔 시내에 이르러는 뒤 떨어진 자를 거기 머물렀으되	So David went, he and the six hundred men that were with him, and came to the brook Besor, where those that were left behind stayed.	So David and his six hundred men went to the Brook of Besor, where some stayed behind
1SA	30	10	곧 피곤하여 브솔 시내를 건너지 못하는 이백 인을 머물렀고 다윗은 사백 인을 거느리고 쫓아가니라	But David pursued, he and four hundred men: for two hundred abode behind, which were so faint that they could not go over the brook Besor.	because two hundred men were too exhausted to cross the brook. But David and four hundred men continued in pursuit.
1SA	30	11	무리가 들에서 애굽 사람 하나를 만나 다윗에게로 데려다가 떡을 주어 먹게 하며 물을 마시우고	And they found an Egyptian in the field, and brought him to David, and gave him bread, and he did eat; and they made him drink water;	Now his men found an Egyptian in the field and brought him to David. They gave the man water to drink and food to eat—
1SA	30	12	무화과 뭉치에서 뗀 덩이 하나와 건포도 두 송이를 주었으니 그가 낮 사흘, 밤 사흘을 떡도 먹지 못하였고 물도 마시지 못하였음이라 그가 먹고 정신을 차리매	And they gave him a piece of a cake of figs, and two clusters of raisins: and when he had eaten, his spirit came again to him: for he had eaten no bread, nor drunk any water, three days and three nights.	a piece of a fig cake and two clusters of raisins. So he ate and was revived, for he had not had any food or water for three days and three nights.
1SA	30	13	다윗이 그에게 이르되 너는 뉘게 속하였으며 어디로서냐 가로되 나는 애굽 소년이요 아말렉 사람의 종이더니 사흘 전에 병이 들매 주인이 나를 버렸나이다	And David said unto him, To whom belongest thou? and whence art thou? And he said, I am a young man of Egypt, servant to an Amalekite; and my master left me, because three days agone I fell sick.	Then David asked him, “To whom do you belong, and where are you from?” “I am an Egyptian,” he replied, “the slave of an Amalekite. My master abandoned me three days ago when I fell ill.
1SA	30	14	우리가 그렛 사람의 남방과 유다에 속한 지방과 갈멜 남방을 침노하고 시글락을 불살랐나이다	We made an invasion upon the south of the Cherethites, and upon the coast which belongeth to Judah, and upon the south of Caleb; and we burned Ziklag with fire.	We raided the Negev of the Cherethites, the territory of Judah, and the Negev of Caleb, and we burned down Ziklag.”
1SA	30	15	다윗이 그에게 이르되 네가 나를 그 군대에게로 인도하겠느냐 그가 가로되 당신이 나를 죽이지도 아니하고 내 주인의 수중에 붙이지도 아니하겠다고 하나님으로 맹세하소서 그리하면 내가 당신을 이 군대에게로 인도하리이다	And David said to him, Canst thou bring me down to this company? And he said, Swear unto me by God, that thou wilt neither kill me, nor deliver me into the hands of my master, and I will bring thee down to this company.	“Will you lead me to these raiders?” David asked. And the man replied, “Swear to me by God that you will not kill me or deliver me into the hand of my master, and I will lead you to them.”
1SA	30	16	그가 인도하여 내려가니 그들이 온 땅에 편만하여 블레셋 사람의 땅과 유다 땅에서 크게 탈취하였음을 인하여 먹고 마시며 춤추는지라	And when he had brought him down, behold, they were spread abroad upon all the earth, eating and drinking, and dancing, because of all the great spoil that they had taken out of the land of the Philistines, and out of the land of Judah.	So he led David down, and there were the Amalekites spread out over all the land, eating, drinking, and celebrating the great amount of plunder they had taken from the land of the Philistines and the land of Judah.
1SA	30	17	다윗이 새벽부터 이튿날 저물때까지 그들을 치매 약대 타고 도망한 소년 사백 명 외에는 피한 사람이 없었더라	And David smote them from the twilight even unto the evening of the next day: and there escaped not a man of them, save four hundred young men, which rode upon camels, and fled.	And David struck them down from twilight until the evening of the next day. Not a man escaped, except four hundred young men who fled, riding off on camels.
1SA	30	18	다윗이 아말렉 사람의 취하였던 모든 것을 도로 찾고 그 두 아내를 구원하였고	And David recovered all that the Amalekites had carried away: and David rescued his two wives.	So David recovered everything the Amalekites had taken, including his two wives.
1SA	30	19	그들의 탈취하였던 것 곧 무리의 자녀들이나 빼앗겼던 것의 대소를 물론하고 아무 것도 잃은 것이 없이 다윗이 도로 찾아왔고	And there was nothing lacking to them, neither small nor great, neither sons nor daughters, neither spoil, nor any thing that they had taken to them: David recovered all.	Nothing was missing, young or old, son or daughter, or any of the plunder the Amalekites had taken. David brought everything back.
1SA	30	20	또 양떼와 소떼를 다 탈취하였더니 무리가 그 가축 앞에 몰고 가며 가로되 이는 다윗의 탈취한 것이라 하였더라	And David took all the flocks and the herds, which they drave before those other cattle, and said, This is David’s spoil.	And he recovered all the flocks and herds, which his men drove ahead of the other livestock, calling out, “This is David’s plunder!”
1SA	30	21	다윗이 이왕에 피곤하여 능히 자기를 따르지 못하므로 브솔 시내에 머물게 한 이백 인에게 오매 그들이 다윗과 그와 함께 한 백성을 영접하러 나온지라 다윗이 그 백성에게 이르러 문안하매	And David came to the two hundred men, which were so faint that they could not follow David, whom they had made also to abide at the brook Besor: and they went forth to meet David, and to meet the people that were with him: and when David came near to the people, he saluted them.	When David came to the two hundred men who had been too exhausted to follow him from the Brook of Besor, they came out to meet him and the troops with him. As David approached the men, he greeted them,
1SA	30	22	다윗과 함께 갔던 자 중에 악한 자와 비류들이 다 가로되 그들이 우리와 함께 가지 아니하였은즉 우리가 도로 찾은 물건은 무엇이든지 그들에게 주지 말고 각 사람의 처자만 주어서 데리고 떠나가게 하라 하는지라	Then answered all the wicked men and men of Belial, of those that went with David, and said, Because they went not with us, we will not give them ought of the spoil that we have recovered, save to every man his wife and his children, that they may lead them away, and depart.	but all the wicked and worthless men among those who had gone with David said, “Because they did not go with us, we will not share with them the plunder we recovered, except for each man’s wife and children. They may take them and go.”
1SA	30	23	다윗이 가로되 나의 형제들아 여호와께서 우리를 보호하시고 우리를 치러 온 그 군대를 우리 손에 붙이셨은즉 그가 우리에게 주신 것을 너희가 이같이 못하리라	Then said David, Ye shall not do so, my brethren, with that which the Lord hath given us, who hath preserved us, and delivered the company that came against us into our hand.	But David said, “My brothers, you must not do this with what the LORD has given us. He has protected us and delivered into our hands the raiders who came against us.
1SA	30	24	이 일에 누가 너희를 듣겠느냐 전장에 내려갔던 자의 분깃이나 소유물 곁에 머물렀던 자의 분깃이 일반일지니 같이 분배할 것이니라 하고	For who will hearken unto you in this matter? but as his part is that goeth down to the battle, so shall his part be that tarrieth by the stuff: they shall part alike.	Who will listen to your proposal? The share of the one who went to battle will match the share of the one who stayed with the supplies. They will share alike.”
1SA	30	25	그 날부터 다윗이 이것으로 이스라엘의 율례와 규례를 삼았더니 오늘까지 이르니라	And it was so from that day forward, that he made it a statute and an ordinance for Israel unto this day.	And so it has been from that day forward. David established this statute as an ordinance for Israel to this very day.
1SA	30	26	다윗이 시글락에 이르러 탈취물을 그 친구 유다 장로들에게 보내어 가로되 보라 여호와의 원수에게서 탈취한 것을 너희에게 선사하노라 하고	And when David came to Ziklag, he sent of the spoil unto the elders of Judah, even to his friends, saying, Behold a present for you of the spoil of the enemies of the Lord;	When David arrived in Ziklag, he sent some of the plunder to his friends, the elders of Judah, saying, “Here is a gift for you from the plunder of the LORD’s enemies.”
1SA	30	27	벧엘에 있는 자와 남방 라못에 있는 자와 얏딜에 있는 자와	To them which were in Beth–el, and to them which were in south Ramoth, and to them which were in Jattir,	He sent gifts to those in Bethel, Ramoth Negev, and Jattir;
1SA	30	28	아로엘에 있는 자와 십못에 있는 자와 에스드모아에 있는 자와	And to them which were in Aroer, and to them which were in Siphmoth, and to them which were in Eshtemoa,	to those in Aroer, Siphmoth, and Eshtemoa;
1SA	30	29	라갈에 있는 자와 여라므엘 사람의 성읍들에 있는 자와 겐 사람의 성읍들에 있는 자와	And to them which were in Rachal, and to them which were in the cities of the Jerahmeelites, and to them which were in the cities of the Kenites,	to those in Racal and in the cities of the Jerahmeelites and Kenites;
1SA	30	30	홀마에 있는 자와 고라산에 있는 자와 아닥에 있는 자와 헤브론에 있는 자에게와 다윗과 그의 사람들의 왕래하던 모든 곳에 보내었더라	And to them which were in Hormah, and to them which were in Chor–ashan, and to them which were in Athach,	to those in Hormah, Bor-ashan, and Athach;
1SA	30	31	(없음)	And to them which were in Hebron, and to all the places where David himself and his men were wont to haunt.	and to those in Hebron and in all the places where David and his men had roamed.
1SA	31	1	블레셋 사람이 이스라엘을 치매 이스라엘 사람들이 블레셋 사람 앞에서 도망하여 길보아 산에서 엎드러져 죽으니라	Now the Philistines fought against Israel: and the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines, and fell down slain in mount Gilboa.	Now the Philistines fought against Israel, and the men of Israel fled before them, and many fell slain on Mount Gilboa.
1SA	31	2	블레셋 사람들이 사울과 그 아들들을 쫓아 미쳐서 사울의 아들 요나단과 아비나답과 말기수아를 죽이니라	And the Philistines followed hard upon Saul and upon his sons; and the Philistines slew Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Malchi–shua, Saul’s sons.	The Philistines followed hard after Saul and his sons, and they killed Saul’s sons Jonathan, Abinadab, and Malchishua.
1SA	31	3	사울이 패전하매 활 쏘는 자가 따라 미치니 사울이 그 활 쏘는 자를 인하여 중상한지라	And the battle went sore against Saul, and the archers hit him; and he was sore wounded of the archers.	When the battle intensified against Saul, the archers overtook him and wounded him critically.
1SA	31	4	그가 병기 든 자에게 이르되 네 칼을 빼어 나를 찌르라 할례없는 자들이 와서 나를 찌르고 모욕할까 두려워하노라 하나 병기 든 자가 심히 두려워하여 즐겨 행치 아니하는지라 이에 사울이 자기 칼을 취하고 그 위에 엎드러지매	Then said Saul unto his armourbearer, Draw thy sword, and thrust me through therewith; lest these uncircumcised come and thrust me through, and abuse me. But his armourbearer would not; for he was sore afraid. Therefore Saul took a sword, and fell upon it.	Then Saul said to his armor-bearer, “Draw your sword and run it through me, or these uncircumcised men will come and run me through and torture me!” But his armor-bearer was terrified and refused to do it. So Saul took his own sword and fell on it.
1SA	31	5	병기 든 자가 사울의 죽음을 보고 자기도 자기 칼 위에 엎드러져 그와 함께 죽으니라	And when his armourbearer saw that Saul was dead, he fell likewise upon his sword, and died with him.	When his armor-bearer saw that Saul was dead, he too fell on his own sword and died with him.
1SA	31	6	사울과 그 세 아들과 병기 든 자와 그의 모든 사람이 다 그 날에 함께 죽었더라	So Saul died, and his three sons, and his armourbearer, and all his men, that same day together.	So Saul, his three sons, his armor-bearer, and all his men died together that same day.
1SA	31	7	골짜기 저편에 있는 이스라엘 사람과 요단 건너편에 있는 자들이 이스라엘 사람들의 도망한 것과 사울과 그 아들들의 죽었음을 보고 성읍들을 버리고 도망하매 블레셋 사람들이 이르러 거기 거하니라	And when the men of Israel that were on the other side of the valley, and they that were on the other side Jordan, saw that the men of Israel fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, they forsook the cities, and fled; and the Philistines came and dwelt in them.	When the Israelites along the valley and those on the other side of the Jordan saw that the army of Israel had fled and that Saul and his sons had died, they abandoned their cities and ran away. So the Philistines came and occupied their cities.
1SA	31	8	그 이튿날 블레셋 사람들이 죽은 자를 벗기러 왔다가 사울과 그 세 아들이 길보아 산에서 죽은 것을 보고	And it came to pass on the morrow, when the Philistines came to strip the slain, that they found Saul and his three sons fallen in mount Gilboa.	The next day, when the Philistines came to strip the dead, they found Saul and his three sons fallen on Mount Gilboa.
1SA	31	9	사울의 머리를 베고 그 갑옷을 벗기고 자기들의 신당과 백성에게 전파하기 위하여 그것을 블레셋 사람의 땅 사방에 보내고	And they cut off his head, and stripped off his armour, and sent into the land of the Philistines round about, to publish it in the house of their idols, and among the people.	They cut off Saul’s head, stripped off his armor, and sent messengers throughout the land of the Philistines to proclaim the news in the temples of their idols and among their people.
1SA	31	10	그 갑옷은 아스다롯의 집에 두고 그 시체는 벧산 성벽에 못 박으매	And they put his armour in the house of Ashtaroth: and they fastened his body to the wall of Beth–shan.	They put his armor in the temple of the Ashtoreths and hung his body on the wall of Beth-shan.
1SA	31	11	길르앗 야베스 거민들이 블레셋 사람들의 사울에게 행한 일을 듣고	And when the inhabitants of Jabesh–gilead heard of that which the Philistines had done to Saul;	When the people of Jabesh-gilead heard what the Philistines had done to Saul,
1SA	31	12	모든 장사가 일어나 밤새도록 가서 사울과 그 아들들의 시체를 벧산 성벽에서 취하여 가지고 야베스에 돌아와서 거기서 불사르고	All the valiant men arose, and went all night, and took the body of Saul and the bodies of his sons from the wall of Beth–shan, and came to Jabesh, and burnt them there.	all their men of valor set out, journeyed all night, and retrieved the bodies of Saul and his sons from the wall of Beth-shan. When they arrived at Jabesh, they burned the bodies there.
1SA	31	13	그 뼈를 가져다가 야베스 에셀나무 아래 장사하고 칠 일을 금식하였더라	And they took their bones, and buried them under a tree at Jabesh, and fasted seven days.	Then they took their bones and buried them under the tamarisk tree in Jabesh, and they fasted seven days.
2SA	1	1	사울의 죽은 후라 다윗이 아말렉 사람을 도륙하고 돌아와서 시글락에서 이틀을 유하더니	Now it came to pass after the death of Saul, when David was returned from the slaughter of the Amalekites, and David had abode two days in Ziklag;	After the death of Saul, David returned from the slaughter of the Amalekites and stayed in Ziklag two days.
2SA	1	2	제삼일에 한 사람이 사울의 진에서 나왔는데 그 옷은 찢어졌고 머리에는 흙이 있더라 저가 다윗에게 나아와 땅에 엎드려 절하매	It came even to pass on the third day, that, behold, a man came out of the camp from Saul with his clothes rent, and earth upon his head: and so it was, when he came to David, that he fell to the earth, and did obeisance.	On the third day a man with torn clothes and dust on his head arrived from Saul’s camp. When he came to David, he fell to the ground to pay him homage.
2SA	1	3	다윗이 저에게 묻되 너는 어디서 왔느냐 대답하되 이스라엘 진에서 도망하여 왔나이다	And David said unto him, From whence comest thou? And he said unto him, Out of the camp of Israel am I escaped.	“Where have you come from?” David asked. “I have escaped from the Israelite camp,” he replied.
2SA	1	4	다윗이 가로되 일이 어떻게 되었느뇨 너는 내게 고하라 저가 대답하되 군사가 전쟁 중에서 도망하기도 하였고 무리 중에 엎드러져 죽은 자도 많았고 사울과 그 아들 요나단도 죽었나이다	And David said unto him, How went the matter? I pray thee, tell me. And he answered, That the people are fled from the battle, and many of the people also are fallen and dead; and Saul and Jonathan his son are dead also.	“What was the outcome?” David asked. “Please tell me.” “The troops fled from the battle,” he replied. “Many of them fell and died. And Saul and his son Jonathan are also dead.”
2SA	1	5	다윗이 자기에게 고하는 소년에게 묻되 사울과 그 아들 요나단의 죽은 줄을 네가 어떻게 아느냐	And David said unto the young man that told him, How knowest thou that Saul and Jonathan his son be dead?	Then David asked the young man who had brought him the report, “How do you know that Saul and his son Jonathan are dead?”
2SA	1	6	그에게 고하는 소년이 가로되 내가 우연히 길보아 산에 올라 보니 사울이 자기 창을 의지하였고 병거와 기병은 저를 촉급히 따르는데	And the young man that told him said, As I happened by chance upon mount Gilboa, behold, Saul leaned upon his spear; and, lo, the chariots and horsemen followed hard after him.	“I happened to be on Mount Gilboa,” he replied, “and there was Saul, leaning on his spear, with the chariots and the cavalry closing in on him.
2SA	1	7	사울이 뒤로 돌이켜 나를 보고 부르시기로 내가 대답하되 내가 여기 있나이다 한즉	And when he looked behind him, he saw me, and called unto me. And I answered, Here am I.	When he turned around and saw me, he called out and I answered, ‘Here I am!’
2SA	1	8	내게 이르되 너는 누구냐 하시기로 내가 대답하되 나는 아말렉 사람이니이다 한즉	And he said unto me, Who art thou? And I answered him, I am an Amalekite.	‘Who are you?’ he asked. So I told him, ‘I am an Amalekite.’
2SA	1	9	또 내게 이르되 내 목숨이 아직 내게 완전히 있으므로 내가 고통에 들었나니 너는 내 곁에 서서 나를 죽이라 하시기로	He said unto me again, Stand, I pray thee, upon me, and slay me: for anguish is come upon me, because my life is yet whole in me.	Then he begged me, ‘Stand over me and kill me, for agony has seized me, but my life still lingers.’
2SA	1	10	저가 엎드러진 후에는 살 수 없는 줄을 내가 알고 그 곁에 서서 죽이고 그 머리에 있는 면류관과 팔에 있는 고리를 벗겨서 내 주께로 가져왔나이다	So I stood upon him, and slew him, because I was sure that he could not live after that he was fallen: and I took the crown that was upon his head, and the bracelet that was on his arm, and have brought them hither unto my lord.	So I stood over him and killed him, because I knew that after he had fallen he could not survive. And I took the crown that was on his head and the band that was on his arm, and I have brought them here to my lord.”
2SA	1	11	이에 다윗이 자기 옷을 잡아 찢으매 함께 있는 모든 사람도 그리하고	Then David took hold on his clothes, and rent them; and likewise all the men that were with him:	Then David took hold of his own clothes and tore them, and all the men who were with him did the same.
2SA	1	12	사울과 그 아들 요나단과 여호와의 백성과 이스라엘 족속이 칼에 죽음을 인하여 저녁때까지 슬퍼하여 울며 금식하니라	And they mourned, and wept, and fasted until even, for Saul, and for Jonathan his son, and for the people of the Lord, and for the house of Israel; because they were fallen by the sword.	They mourned and wept and fasted until evening for Saul and his son Jonathan, and for the people of the LORD and the house of Israel, because they had fallen by the sword.
2SA	1	13	다윗이 그 고한 소년에게 묻되 너는 어디 사람이냐 대답하되 나는 아말렉 사람 곧 외국인의 아들이니이다	And David said unto the young man that told him, Whence art thou? And he answered, I am the son of a stranger, an Amalekite.	And David inquired of the young man who had brought him the report, “Where are you from?” “I am the son of a foreigner,” he answered. “I am an Amalekite.”
2SA	1	14	다윗이 저에게 이르되 네가 어찌하여 손을 들어 여호와의 기름 부음 받은 자 죽이기를 두려워하지 아니하였느냐 하고	And David said unto him, How wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thine hand to destroy the Lord’s anointed?	So David asked him, “Why were you not afraid to lift your hand to destroy the LORD’s anointed?”
2SA	1	15	소년 중 하나를 불러 이르되 가까이 가서 저를 죽이라 하매 그가 치매 곧 죽으니라	And David called one of the young men, and said, Go near, and fall upon him. And he smote him that he died.	Then David summoned one of the young men and said, “Go, execute him!” So the young man struck him down, and he died.
2SA	1	16	다윗이 저에게 이르기를 네 피가 네 머리로 돌아갈지어다 네 입이 네게 대하여 증거하기를 내가 여호와의 기름 부음 받은 자를 죽였노라 함이니라 하였더라	And David said unto him, Thy blood be upon thy head; for thy mouth hath testified against thee, saying, I have slain the Lord’s anointed.	For David had said to the Amalekite, “Your blood be on your own head because your own mouth has testified against you, saying, ‘I killed the LORD’s anointed.’”
2SA	1	17	다윗이 이 슬픈 노래로 사울과 그 아들 요나단을 조상하고	And David lamented with this lamentation over Saul and over Jonathan his son:	Then David took up this lament for Saul and his son Jonathan,
2SA	1	18	명하여 그것을 유다 족속에게 가르치라 하였으니 곧 활 노래라 야살의 책에 기록되었으되	(Also he bade them teach the children of Judah the use of the bow: behold, it is written in the book of Jasher.)	and he ordered that the sons of Judah be taught the Song of the Bow. It is written in the Book of Jashar:
2SA	1	19	이스라엘아 너의 영광이 산 위에서 죽임을 당하였도다 오호라 두 용사가 엎드러졌도다	The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places: how are the mighty fallen!	“Your glory, O Israel, lies slain on your heights. How the mighty have fallen!
2SA	1	20	이 일을 가드에도 고하지 말며 아스글론 거리에도 전파하지 말지어다 블레셋 사람의 딸들이 즐거워할까, 할례받지 못한 자의 딸들이 개가를 부를까 염려로다	Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon; lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.	Tell it not in Gath; proclaim it not in the streets of Ashkelon, lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, and the daughters of the uncircumcised exult.
2SA	1	21	길보아 산들아 너희 위에 우로가 내리지 아니하며 제물 낼 밭도 없을지어다 거기서 두 용사의 방패가 버린바 됨이라 곧 사울의 방패가 기름 부음을 받지 않음 같이 됨이로다	Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew, neither let there be rain, upon you, nor fields of offerings: for there the shield of the mighty is vilely cast away, the shield of Saul, as though he had not been anointed with oil.	O mountains of Gilboa, may you have no dew or rain, no fields yielding offerings of grain. For there the shield of the mighty was defiled, the shield of Saul, no longer anointed with oil.
2SA	1	22	죽은 자의 피에서, 용사의 기름에서 요나단의 활이 물러가지 아니하였으며 사울의 칼이 헛되이 돌아오지 아니하였도다	From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the bow of Jonathan turned not back, and the sword of Saul returned not empty.	From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the bow of Jonathan did not retreat, and the sword of Saul did not return empty.
2SA	1	23	사울과 요나단이 생전에 사랑스럽고 아름다운 자러니 죽을 때에도 서로 떠나지 아니하였도다 저희는 독수리보다 빠르고 사자보다 강하였도다	Saul and Jonathan were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in their death they were not divided: they were swifter than eagles, they were stronger than lions.	Saul and Jonathan, beloved and delightful in life, were not divided in death. They were swifter than eagles, they were stronger than lions.
2SA	1	24	이스라엘 딸들아 사울을 슬퍼하여 울지어다 저가 붉은 옷으로 너희에게 화려하게 입혔고 금 노리개를 너희 옷에 채웠도다	Ye daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet, with other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your apparel.	O daughters of Israel, weep for Saul, who clothed you in scarlet and luxury, who decked your garments with ornaments of gold.
2SA	1	25	오호라 두 용사가 전쟁 중에 엎드러졌도다 요나단이 너의 산 위에서 죽임을 당하였도다	How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle! O Jonathan, thou wast slain in thine high places.	How the mighty have fallen in the thick of battle! Jonathan lies slain on your heights.
2SA	1	26	내 형 요나단이여 내가 그대를 애통함은 그대는 내게 심히 아름다움이라 그대가 나를 사랑함이 기이하여 여인의 사랑보다 승하였도다	I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan: very pleasant hast thou been unto me: thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women.	I grieve for you, Jonathan, my brother. You were delightful to me; your love to me was extraordinary, surpassing the love of women.
2SA	1	27	오호라 두 용사가 엎드러졌으며 싸우는 병기가 망하였도다 하였더라	How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!	How the mighty have fallen and the weapons of war have perished!”
2SA	2	1	그 후에 다윗이 여호와께 물어 가로되 내가 유다 한 성으로 올라가리이까 여호와께서 가라사대 올라가라 다윗이 가로되 어디로 가리이까 가라사대 헤브론으로 갈지니라	And it came to pass after this, that David enquired of the Lord, saying, Shall I go up into any of the cities of Judah? And the Lord said unto him, Go up. And David said, Whither shall I go up? And he said, Unto Hebron.	Some time later, David inquired of the LORD, “Should I go up to one of the towns of Judah?” “Go up,” the LORD answered. Then David asked, “Where should I go?” “To Hebron,” replied the LORD.
2SA	2	2	다윗이 그 두 아내 이스르엘 여인 아히노암과 갈멜 사람 나발의 아내 되었던 아비가일을 데리고 그리로 올라갈 때에	So David went up thither, and his two wives also, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail Nabal’s wife the Carmelite.	So David went there with his two wives, Ahinoam of Jezreel and Abigail the widow of Nabal of Carmel.
2SA	2	3	또 자기와 함께한 종자들과 그들의 권속들을 다 데리고 올라가서 헤브론 각 성에 거하게 하니라	And his men that were with him did David bring up, every man with his household: and they dwelt in the cities of Hebron.	David also took the men who were with him, each with his household, and they settled in the towns near Hebron.
2SA	2	4	유다 사람들이 와서 거기서 다윗에게 기름을 부어 유다 족속의 왕을 삼았더라 혹이 다윗에게 고하여 가로되 사울을 장사한 사람은 길르앗 야베스 사람들이니이다 하매	And the men of Judah came, and there they anointed David king over the house of Judah. And they told David, saying, That the men of Jabesh–gilead were they that buried Saul.	Then the men of Judah came to Hebron, and there they anointed David king over the house of Judah. And they told David, “It was the men of Jabesh-gilead who buried Saul.”
2SA	2	5	다윗이 길르앗 야베스 사람들에게 사자들을 보내어 가로되 너희가 너희 주 사울에게 이처럼 은혜를 베풀어 장사하였으니 여호와께 복을 받을지어다	And David sent messengers unto the men of Jabesh–gilead, and said unto them, Blessed be ye of the Lord, that ye have shewed this kindness unto your lord, even unto Saul, and have buried him.	So David sent messengers to the men of Jabesh-gilead to tell them, “The LORD bless you, because you showed this kindness to Saul your lord when you buried him.
2SA	2	6	너희가 이 일을 하였으니 이제 여호와께서 은혜와 진리로 너희에게 베푸시기를 원하고 나도 이 선한 일을 너희에게 갚으리니	And now the Lord shew kindness and truth unto you: and I also will requite you this kindness, because ye have done this thing.	Now may the LORD show you loving devotion and faithfulness, and I will also show you the same favor because you have done this.
2SA	2	7	이제 너희는 손을 강하게 하고 담대히 할지어다 너희 주 사울이 죽었고 또 유다 족속이 내게 기름을 부어 저희의 왕을 삼았음이니라	Therefore now let your hands be strengthened, and be ye valiant: for your master Saul is dead, and also the house of Judah have anointed me king over them.	Now then, be strong and courageous, for though Saul your lord is dead, the house of Judah has anointed me as their king.”
2SA	2	8	사울의 군장 넬의 아들 아브넬이 이미 사울의 아들 이스보셋을 데리고 마하나임으로 건너가서	But Abner the son of Ner, captain of Saul’s host, took Ish–bosheth the son of Saul, and brought him over to Mahanaim;	Meanwhile, Abner son of Ner, the commander of Saul’s army, took Saul’s son Ish-bosheth, moved him to Mahanaim,
2SA	2	9	길르앗과 아술과 이스르엘과 에브라임과 베냐민과 온 이스라엘의 왕을 삼았더라	And made him king over Gilead, and over the Ashurites, and over Jezreel, and over Ephraim, and over Benjamin, and over all Israel.	and made him king over Gilead, Asher, Jezreel, Ephraim, and Benjamin—over all Israel.
2SA	2	10	사울의 아들 이스보셋이 비로소 이스라엘 왕이 될 때에 나이 사십 세며 두 해 동안 위에 있으니라 유다 족속은 다윗을 따르니	Ish–bosheth Saul’s son was forty years old when he began to reign over Israel, and reigned two years. But the house of Judah followed David.	Saul’s son Ish-bosheth was forty years old when he began to reign over Israel, and he reigned for two years. The house of Judah, however, followed David.
2SA	2	11	다윗이 헤브론에서 유다 족속의 왕이 된 날 수는 일곱 해 여섯 달이더라	And the time that David was king in Hebron over the house of Judah was seven years and six months.	And the length of time that David was king in Hebron over the house of Judah was seven years and six months.
2SA	2	12	넬의 아들 아브넬과 사울의 아들 이스보셋의 신복들은 마하나임에서 나와서 기브온에 이르고	And Abner the son of Ner, and the servants of Ish–bosheth the son of Saul, went out from Mahanaim to Gibeon.	One day Abner son of Ner and the servants of Ish-bosheth son of Saul marched out from Mahanaim to Gibeon.
2SA	2	13	스루야의 아들 요압과 다윗의 신복들도 나와서 기브온 못가에서 저희를 만나 앉으니 이는 못 이편이요 저는 못 저편이라	And Joab the son of Zeruiah, and the servants of David, went out, and met together by the pool of Gibeon: and they sat down, the one on the one side of the pool, and the other on the other side of the pool.	So Joab son of Zeruiah, along with the servants of David, marched out and met them by the pool of Gibeon. And the two camps took up positions on opposite sides of the pool.
2SA	2	14	아브넬이 요압에게 이르되 청컨대 소년들로 일어나서 우리 앞에서 장난하게 하자 요압이 가로되 일어나게 하자 하매	And Abner said to Joab, Let the young men now arise, and play before us. And Joab said, Let them arise.	Then Abner said to Joab, “Let us have the young men get up and compete before us.” “Let them get up,” Joab replied.
2SA	2	15	저희가 일어나 그 수효대로 나아가니 베냐민과 사울의 아들 이스보셋의 편에 열둘이요 다윗의 신복 중에 열둘이라	Then there arose and went over by number twelve of Benjamin, which pertained to Ish–bosheth the son of Saul, and twelve of the servants of David.	So they got up and were counted off—twelve for Benjamin and Ish-bosheth son of Saul, and twelve for David.
2SA	2	16	각기 적수의 머리를 잡고 칼로 적수의 옆구리를 찌르매 일제히 쓰러진지라 그러므로 그곳을 헬갓 핫수림이라 일컬었으며 기브온에 있더라	And they caught every one his fellow by the head, and thrust his sword in his fellow’s side; so they fell down together: wherefore that place was called Helkath–hazzurim, which is in Gibeon.	Then each man grabbed his opponent by the head and thrust his sword into his opponent’s side, and they all fell together. So this place, which is in Gibeon, is called Helkath-hazzurim.
2SA	2	17	그 날에 싸움이 심히 맹렬하더니 아브넬과 이스라엘 사람들이 다윗의 신복들 앞에서 패하니라	And there was a very sore battle that day; and Abner was beaten, and the men of Israel, before the servants of David.	The battle that day was intense, and Abner and the men of Israel were defeated by the servants of David.
2SA	2	18	그곳에 스루야의 세 아들 요압과 아비새와 아사헬이 있었는데 아사헬의 발은 들노루 같이 빠르더라	And there were three sons of Zeruiah there, Joab, and Abishai, and Asahel: and Asahel was as light of foot as a wild roe.	The three sons of Zeruiah were there: Joab, Abishai, and Asahel. Now Asahel was fleet of foot like a wild gazelle,
2SA	2	19	아사헬이 아브넬을 쫓아 달려가되 좌우로 치우치지 않고 아브넬의 뒤를 쫓으니	And Asahel pursued after Abner; and in going he turned not to the right hand nor to the left from following Abner.	and he chased Abner, not turning to the right or to the left in his pursuit.
2SA	2	20	아브넬이 뒤를 돌아 보며 가로되 아사헬아 너냐 대답하되 내로라	Then Abner looked behind him, and said, Art thou Asahel? And he answered, I am.	And Abner glanced back and said, “Is that you, Asahel?” “It is,” Asahel replied.
2SA	2	21	아브넬이 저에게 이르되 너는 좌편으로나 우편으로나 치우쳐서 소년 하나를 잡아 그 군복을 빼앗으라 하되 아사헬이 치우치기를 원치 않고 그 뒤를 쫓으매	And Abner said to him, Turn thee aside to thy right hand or to thy left, and lay thee hold on one of the young men, and take thee his armour. But Asahel would not turn aside from following of him.	So Abner told him, “Turn to your right or to your left, seize one of the young men, and take his equipment for yourself.” But Asahel would not stop chasing him.
2SA	2	22	아브넬이 다시 아사헬에게 이르되 너는 나 쫓기를 그치라 내가 너를 쳐서 땅에 엎드러지게 할 까닭이 무엇이냐 그렇게 하면 내가 어떻게 네 형 요압을 대면하겠느냐 하되	And Abner said again to Asahel, Turn thee aside from following me: wherefore should I smite thee to the ground? how then should I hold up my face to Joab thy brother?	Once again, Abner warned Asahel, “Stop chasing me. Why should I strike you to the ground? How could I show my face to your brother Joab?”
2SA	2	23	저가 치우치기를 싫어하매 아브넬이 창 뒤 끝으로 그 배를 찌르니 창이 그 등을 꿰뚫고 나간지라 곧 그곳에 엎드러져 죽으매 아사헬의 엎드러져 죽은 곳에 이르는 자마다 머물러 섰더라	Howbeit he refused to turn aside: wherefore Abner with the hinder end of the spear smote him under the fifth rib, that the spear came out behind him; and he fell down there, and died in the same place: and it came to pass, that as many as came to the place where Asahel fell down and died stood still.	But Asahel refused to turn away; so Abner thrust the butt of his spear into his stomach, and it came out his back, and he fell dead on the spot. And every man paused when he came to the place where Asahel had fallen and died.
2SA	2	24	요압과 아비새가 아브넬의 뒤를 쫓아 기브온 거친 땅의 길가 기아 맞은편 암마 산에 이를 때에 해가 졌고	Joab also and Abishai pursued after Abner: and the sun went down when they were come to the hill of Ammah, that lieth before Giah by the way of the wilderness of Gibeon.	But Joab and Abishai pursued Abner. By sunset, they had gone as far as the hill of Ammah opposite Giah on the way to the wilderness of Gibeon.
2SA	2	25	베냐민 족속은 함께 모여 아브넬을 따라 한 떼를 이루고 작은 산꼭대기에 섰더라	And the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together after Abner, and became one troop, and stood on the top of an hill.	The Benjamites rallied to Abner, formed a single unit, and took their stand atop a hill.
2SA	2	26	아브넬이 요압에게 외쳐 가로되 칼이 영영히 사람을 상하겠느냐 마침내 참혹한 일이 생길 줄을 알지 못하느냐 네가 언제나 무리에게 그 형제 쫓기를 그치라 명하겠느냐	Then Abner called to Joab, and said, Shall the sword devour for ever? knowest thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end? how long shall it be then, ere thou bid the people return from following their brethren?	Then Abner called out to Joab: “Must the sword devour forever? Do you not realize that this will only end in bitterness? How long before you tell the troops to stop pursuing their brothers?”
2SA	2	27	요압이 가로되 하나님이 사시거니와 네가 흔단의 말을 내지 아니하였더면 무리가 아침에 다 돌아갔을 것이요 그 형제를 쫓지 아니하였으리라 하고	And Joab said, As God liveth, unless thou hadst spoken, surely then in the morning the people had gone up every one from following his brother.	“As surely as God lives,” Joab replied, “if you had not spoken up, the troops would have continued pursuing their brothers until morning.”
2SA	2	28	나팔을 불매 온 무리가 머물러 서고 다시는 이스라엘을 쫓아가지 아니하고 다시는 싸우지도 아니하니라	So Joab blew a trumpet, and all the people stood still, and pursued after Israel no more, neither fought they any more.	So Joab blew the ram’s horn, and all the troops stopped; they no longer pursued Israel or continued to fight.
2SA	2	29	아브넬과 그 종자들이 밤새도록 행하여 아라바를 지나 요단을 건너 비드론 온 땅을 지나 마하나임에 이르니라	And Abner and his men walked all that night through the plain, and passed over Jordan, and went through all Bithron, and they came to Mahanaim.	And all that night Abner and his men marched through the Arabah. They crossed the Jordan, marched all morning, and arrived at Mahanaim.
2SA	2	30	요압이 아브넬 쫓기를 그치고 돌아와서 무리를 다 모으니 다윗의 신복 중에 십구 인과 아사헬이 궐이 났으나	And Joab returned from following Abner: and when he had gathered all the people together, there lacked of David’s servants nineteen men and Asahel.	When Joab returned from pursuing Abner, he gathered all the troops. In addition to Asahel, nineteen of David’s servants were missing,
2SA	2	31	다윗의 신복들이 베냐민과 아브넬에게 속한 자들을 쳐서 삼백육십 명을 죽였더라	But the servants of David had smitten of Benjamin, and of Abner’s men, so that three hundred and threescore men died.	but they had struck down 360 Benjamites who were with Abner.
2SA	2	32	무리가 아사헬을 베들레헴에 있는 그 아비 묘에 장사하고 요압과 그 종자들이 밤새도록 행하여 헤브론에 이를 때에 날이 밝았더라	And they took up Asahel, and buried him in the sepulchre of his father, which was in Beth–lehem. And Joab and his men went all night, and they came to Hebron at break of day.	Later, they took Asahel and buried him in his father’s tomb in Bethlehem. Then Joab and his men marched all night and reached Hebron at daybreak.
2SA	3	1	사울의 집과 다윗의 집 사이에 전쟁이 오래매 다윗은 점점 강하여 가고 사울의 집은 점점 약하여 가니라	Now there was long war between the house of Saul and the house of David: but David waxed stronger and stronger, and the house of Saul waxed weaker and weaker.	Now the war between the house of Saul and the house of David was protracted. And David grew stronger and stronger, while the house of Saul grew weaker and weaker.
2SA	3	2	다윗이 헤브론에서 아들들을 낳았으되 맏아들은 암논이라 이스르엘 여인 아히노암의 소생이요	And unto David were sons born in Hebron: and his firstborn was Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess;	And sons were born to David in Hebron: His firstborn was Amnon, by Ahinoam of Jezreel;
2SA	3	3	둘째는 길르압이라 갈멜 사람 나발의 아내 되었던 아비가일의 소생이요 셋째는 압살롬이라 그술 왕 달매의 딸 마아가의 아들이요	And his second, Chileab, of Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite; and the third, Absalom the son of Maacah the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur;	his second was Chileab, by Abigail the widow of Nabal of Carmel; his third was Absalom, the son of Maacah daughter of King Talmai of Geshur;
2SA	3	4	넷째는 아도니야라 학깃의 아들이요 다섯째는 스바댜라 아비달의 아들이요	And the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith; and the fifth, Shephatiah the son of Abital;	his fourth was Adonijah, the son of Haggith; his fifth was Shephatiah, the son of Abital;
2SA	3	5	여섯째는 이드르암이라 다윗의 아내 에글라의 소생이니 이는 다윗이 헤브론에서 낳은 자들이더라	And the sixth, Ithream, by Eglah David’s wife. These were born to David in Hebron.	and his sixth was Ithream, by David’s wife Eglah. These sons were born to David in Hebron.
2SA	3	6	사울의 집과 다윗의 집 사이에 전쟁이 있는 동안에 아브넬이 사울의 집에서 점점 권세를 잡으니라	And it came to pass, while there was war between the house of Saul and the house of David, that Abner made himself strong for the house of Saul.	During the war between the house of Saul and the house of David, Abner had continued to strengthen his position in the house of Saul.
2SA	3	7	사울에게 첩이 있었으니 이름은 리스바요 아야의 딸이더라 이스보셋이 아브넬에게 이르되 네가 어찌하여 내 아버지의 첩을 통간하였느냐	And Saul had a concubine, whose name was Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah: and Ish–bosheth said to Abner, Wherefore hast thou gone in unto my father’s concubine?	Meanwhile, Saul had a concubine named Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah. So Ish-bosheth questioned Abner, “Why did you sleep with my father’s concubine?”
2SA	3	8	아브넬이 이스보셋의 말을 매우 분히 여겨 가로되 내가 유다의 개 대강이뇨 내가 오늘날 당신의 아버지 사울의 집과 그 형제와 그 친구에게 은혜를 베풀어서 당신을 다윗의 손에 내어주지 아니하였거늘 당신이 오늘날 이 여인에게 관한 허물을 내게 돌리는도다	Then was Abner very wroth for the words of Ish–bosheth, and said, Am I a dog’s head, which against Judah do shew kindness this day unto the house of Saul thy father, to his brethren, and to his friends, and have not delivered thee into the hand of David, that thou chargest me to day with a fault concerning this woman?	Abner was furious over Ish-bosheth’s accusation. “Am I the head of a dog that belongs to Judah?” he asked. “All this time I have been loyal to the house of your father Saul, to his brothers, and to his friends. I have not delivered you into the hand of David, but now you accuse me of wrongdoing with this woman!
2SA	3	9	여호와께서 다윗에게 맹세하신 대로 내가 이루게 아니하면 하나님이 아브넬에게 벌 위에 벌을 내리심이 마땅하니라	So do God to Abner, and more also, except, as the Lord hath sworn to David, even so I do to him;	May God punish Abner, and ever so severely, if I do not do for David what the LORD has sworn to him:
2SA	3	10	그 맹세는 곧 이 나라를 사울의 집에서 다윗에게 옮겨서 그 위를 단에서 브엘세바까지 이스라엘과 유다에 세우리라 하신 것이니라 하매	To translate the kingdom from the house of Saul, and to set up the throne of David over Israel and over Judah, from Dan even to Beer–sheba.	to transfer the kingdom from the house of Saul and to establish the throne of David over Israel and Judah, from Dan to Beersheba.”
2SA	3	11	이스보셋이 아브넬을 두려워하여 감히 한 말도 대답지 못하니라	And he could not answer Abner a word again, because he feared him.	And for fear of Abner, Ish-bosheth did not dare to say another word to him.
2SA	3	12	아브넬이 자기를 대신하여 사자들을 다윗에게 보내어 가로되 이 땅이 뉘 것이니이까 또 가로되 당신은 나로 더불어 언약하사이다 내 손이 당신을 도와 온 이스라엘로 당신에게 돌아가게 하리이다	And Abner sent messengers to David on his behalf, saying, Whose is the land? saying also, Make thy league with me, and, behold, my hand shall be with thee, to bring about all Israel unto thee.	Then Abner sent messengers in his place to say to David, “To whom does the land belong? Make your covenant with me, and surely my hand will be with you to bring all Israel over to you.”
2SA	3	13	다윗이 가로되 좋다 내가 너와 언약하려니와 내가 네게 한가지 일을 요구하노니 나를 보러 올 때에 위선 사울의 딸 미갈을 데리고 오라 그렇지 않으면 내 얼굴을 보지 못하리라 하고	And he said, Well; I will make a league with thee: but one thing I require of thee, that is, Thou shalt not see my face, except thou first bring Michal Saul’s daughter, when thou comest to see my face.	“Good,” replied David, “I will make a covenant with you. But there is one thing I require of you: Do not appear before me unless you bring Saul’s daughter Michal when you come to see me.”
2SA	3	14	사울의 아들 이스보셋에게 사자들을 보내어 이르되 내 처 미갈을 내게로 돌리라 저는 내가 전에 블레셋 사람의 양피 일백으로 정혼한 자니라	And David sent messengers to Ish–bosheth Saul’s son, saying, Deliver me my wife Michal, which I espoused to me for an hundred foreskins of the Philistines.	Then David sent messengers to say to Ish-bosheth son of Saul, “Give me back my wife, Michal, whom I betrothed to myself for a hundred Philistine foreskins.”
2SA	3	15	이스보셋이 보내어 그 남편 라이스의 아들 발디엘에게서 취하매	And Ish–bosheth sent, and took her from her husband, even from Phaltiel the son of Laish.	So Ish-bosheth sent and took Michal from her husband Paltiel son of Laish.
2SA	3	16	그 남편이 저와 함께 오되 울며 바후림까지 따라왔더니 아브넬이 저에게 돌아가라 하매 돌아가니라	And her husband went with her along weeping behind her to Bahurim. Then said Abner unto him, Go, return. And he returned.	Her husband followed her, weeping all the way to Bahurim. Then Abner said to him, “Go back.” So he returned home.
2SA	3	17	아브넬이 이스라엘 장로들에게 말하여 가로되 너희가 여러번 다윗으로 너희 임금 삼기를 구하였으니	And Abner had communication with the elders of Israel, saying, Ye sought for David in times past to be king over you:	Now Abner conferred with the elders of Israel and said, “In the past you sought David as your king.
2SA	3	18	이제 그대로 하라 여호와께서 이미 다윗에 대하여 말씀하시기를 내가 내 종 다윗의 손으로 내 백성 이스라엘을 구원하여 블레셋 사람의 손과 모든 대적의 손에서 벗어나게 하리라 하셨음이니라 하고	Now then do it: for the Lord hath spoken of David, saying, By the hand of my servant David I will save my people Israel out of the hand of the Philistines, and out of the hand of all their enemies.	Now take action, because the LORD has said to David, ‘Through My servant David I will save My people Israel from the hands of the Philistines and of all their enemies.’”
2SA	3	19	아브넬이 또 베냐민 사람의 귀에 말하고 이스라엘과 베냐민의 온 집이 선히 여기는 모든 것을 다윗의 귀에 고하려고 헤브론으로 가니라	And Abner also spake in the ears of Benjamin: and Abner went also to speak in the ears of David in Hebron all that seemed good to Israel, and that seemed good to the whole house of Benjamin.	Abner also spoke to the Benjamites and went to Hebron to tell David all that seemed good to Israel and to the whole house of Benjamin.
2SA	3	20	아브넬이 종자 이십 인으로 더불어 헤브론에 이르러 다윗에게 나아가니 다윗이 아브넬과 그 함께 한 사람을 위하여 잔치를 배설하였더라	So Abner came to David to Hebron, and twenty men with him. And David made Abner and the men that were with him a feast.	When Abner and twenty of his men came to David at Hebron, David held a feast for them.
2SA	3	21	아브넬이 다윗에게 고하되 내가 일어나 가서 온 이스라엘 무리를 내 주 왕의 앞에 모아 더불어 언약하게 하고 마음의 원하시는 대로 모든 것을 다스리시게 하리이다 이에 다윗이 아브넬을 보내매 저가 평안히 가니라	And Abner said unto David, I will arise and go, and will gather all Israel unto my lord the king, that they may make a league with thee, and that thou mayest reign over all that thine heart desireth. And David sent Abner away; and he went in peace.	Then Abner said to David, “Let me go at once, and I will gather all Israel to my lord the king, that they may make a covenant with you, and that you may rule over all that your heart desires.” So David dismissed Abner, and he went in peace.
2SA	3	22	다윗의 신복들과 요압이 적군을 치고 크게 노략한 물건을 가지고 돌아오니 아브넬은 이미 보냄을 받아 평안히 갔고 다윗과 함께 헤브론에 있지 아니한 때라	And, behold, the servants of David and Joab came from pursuing a troop, and brought in a great spoil with them: but Abner was not with David in Hebron; for he had sent him away, and he was gone in peace.	Just then David’s soldiers and Joab returned from a raid, bringing with them a great plunder. But Abner was not with David in Hebron because David had sent him on his way in peace.
2SA	3	23	요압과 그 함께 한 모든 군사가 돌아오매 혹이 요압에게 고하여 가로되 넬의 아들 아브넬이 왕에게 왔더니 왕이 보내매 저가 평안히 갔나이다	When Joab and all the host that was with him were come, they told Joab, saying, Abner the son of Ner came to the king, and he hath sent him away, and he is gone in peace.	When Joab and all his troops arrived, he was informed, “Abner son of Ner came to see the king, who sent him on his way in peace.”
2SA	3	24	요압이 왕에게 나아가 가로되 어찌 하심이니이까 아브넬이 왕에게 나아왔거늘 어찌하여 저를 보내어 잘 가게 하셨나이까	Then Joab came to the king, and said, What hast thou done? behold, Abner came unto thee; why is it that thou hast sent him away, and he is quite gone?	So Joab went to the king and said, “What have you done? Look, Abner came to you. Why did you dismiss him? Now he is getting away!
2SA	3	25	왕도 아시려니와 넬의 아들 아브넬의 온 것은 왕을 속임이라 왕의 출입하는 것을 알고 모든 하시는 것을 알려 함이니이다 하고	Thou knowest Abner the son of Ner, that he came to deceive thee, and to know thy going out and thy coming in, and to know all that thou doest.	Surely you realize that Abner son of Ner came to deceive you and to track your movements and all that you are doing.”
2SA	3	26	이에 다윗에게서 나와서 사자들을 보내어 아브넬을 쫓아가게 하였더니 시라 우물가에서 저를 데리고 돌아왔으나 다윗은 알지 못하였더라	And when Joab was come out from David, he sent messengers after Abner, which brought him again from the well of Sirah: but David knew it not.	As soon as Joab had left David, he sent messengers after Abner, who brought him back from the well of Sirah; but David was unaware of it.
2SA	3	27	아브넬이 헤브론으로 돌아오매 요압이 더불어 종용히 말하려는 듯이 저를 데리고 성문으로 들어가서 거기서 배를 찔러 죽이니 이는 자기의 동생 아사헬의 피를 인함이더라	And when Abner was returned to Hebron, Joab took him aside in the gate to speak with him quietly, and smote him there under the fifth rib, that he died, for the blood of Asahel his brother.	When Abner returned to Hebron, Joab pulled him aside into the gateway, as if to speak to him privately, and there Joab stabbed him in the stomach. So Abner died on account of the blood of Joab’s brother Asahel.
2SA	3	28	그 후에 다윗이 듣고 이르되 넬의 아들 아브넬의 피에 대하여 나와 내 나라는 여호와 앞에 영원히 무죄하니	And afterward when David heard it, he said, I and my kingdom are guiltless before the Lord for ever from the blood of Abner the son of Ner:	Afterward, David heard about this and said, “I and my kingdom are forever guiltless before the LORD concerning the blood of Abner son of Ner.
2SA	3	29	그 죄가 요압의 머리와 그 아비의 온 집으로 돌아갈지어다 또 요압의 집에서 백탁병자나 문둥병자나 지팡이를 의지하는 자나 칼에 죽는 자나 양식이 핍절한 자가 끊어지지 아니할지로다 하니라	Let it rest on the head of Joab, and on all his father’s house; and let there not fail from the house of Joab one that hath an issue, or that is a leper, or that leaneth on a staff, or that falleth on the sword, or that lacketh bread.	May it whirl over the heads of Joab and the entire house of his father, and may the house of Joab never be without one having a discharge or skin disease, or one who leans on a staff or falls by the sword or lacks food.”
2SA	3	30	요압과 그 동생 아비새가 아브넬을 죽인 것은 저가 기브온 전쟁에서 자기 동생 아사헬을 죽인 까닭이었더라	So Joab and Abishai his brother slew Abner, because he had slain their brother Asahel at Gibeon in the battle.	(Joab and his brother Abishai murdered Abner because he had killed their brother Asahel in the battle at Gibeon.)
2SA	3	31	다윗이 요압과 및 자기와 함께 있는 모든 백성에게 이르되 너희는 옷을 찢고 굵은 베를 띠고 아브넬 앞에서 애통하라 하니라 다윗 왕이 상여를 따라 가서	And David said to Joab, and to all the people that were with him, Rend your clothes, and gird you with sackcloth, and mourn before Abner. And king David himself followed the bier.	Then David ordered Joab and all the people with him, “Tear your clothes, put on sackcloth, and mourn before Abner.” And King David himself walked behind the funeral bier.
2SA	3	32	아브넬을 헤브론에 장사하고 아브넬의 무덤에서 소리를 높여 울고 백성도 다 우니라	And they buried Abner in Hebron: and the king lifted up his voice, and wept at the grave of Abner; and all the people wept.	When they buried Abner in Hebron, the king wept aloud at Abner’s tomb, and all the people wept.
2SA	3	33	왕이 아브넬을 위하여 애가를 지어 가로되 아브넬의 죽음이 어찌하여 미련한 자의 죽음 같은고	And the king lamented over Abner, and said, Died Abner as a fool dieth?	And the king sang this lament for Abner: “Should Abner die the death of a fool?
2SA	3	34	네 손이 결박되지 아니하였고 네 발이 착고에 채이지 아니하였거늘 불의한 자식의 앞에 엎드러짐 같이 네가 엎드러졌도다 하매 온 백성이 다시 그를 슬퍼하여 우니라	Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put into fetters: as a man falleth before wicked men, so fellest thou. And all the people wept again over him.	Your hands were not bound, your feet were not fettered. As a man falls before the wicked, so also you fell.” And all the people wept over him even more.
2SA	3	35	석양에 뭇 백성이 나아와 다윗에게 음식을 권하니 다윗이 맹세하여 가로되 내가 해지기 전에 떡이나 다른 것을 맛보면 하나님이 내게 벌 위에 벌을 내리심이 마땅하니라 하매	And when all the people came to cause David to eat meat while it was yet day, David sware, saying, So do God to me, and more also, if I taste bread, or ought else, till the sun be down.	Then all the people came and urged David to eat something while it was still day, but David took an oath, saying, “May God punish me, and ever so severely, if I taste bread or anything else before the sun sets!”
2SA	3	36	온 백성이 보고 기뻐하며 왕이 무슨 일을 하든지 무리가 다 기뻐하므로	And all the people took notice of it, and it pleased them: as whatsoever the king did pleased all the people.	All the people took note and were pleased. In fact, everything the king did pleased them.
2SA	3	37	이 날에야 온 백성과 온 이스라엘이 넬의 아들 아브넬을 죽인 것이 왕의 한 바가 아닌 줄을 아니라	For all the people and all Israel understood that day that it was not of the king to slay Abner the son of Ner.	So on that day all the troops and all Israel were convinced that the king had no part in the murder of Abner son of Ner.
2SA	3	38	왕이 그 신복에게 이르되 오늘 이스라엘의 방백이요 또는 대인이 죽은 것을 알지 못하느냐	And the king said unto his servants, Know ye not that there is a prince and a great man fallen this day in Israel?	Then the king said to his servants, “Do you not realize that a great prince has fallen today in Israel?
2SA	3	39	내가 기름 부음을 받은 왕이 되었으나 오늘날 약하여서 스루야의 아들인 이 사람들을 제어하기가 너무 어려우니 여호와는 악행한 자에게 그 악한 대로 갚으실지로다 하니라	And I am this day weak, though anointed king; and these men the sons of Zeruiah be too hard for me: the Lord shall reward the doer of evil according to his wickedness.	And I am weak this day, though anointed as king, and these men, the sons of Zeruiah, are too fierce for me. May the LORD repay the evildoer according to his evil!”
2SA	4	1	사울의 아들 이스보셋이 아브넬의 헤브론에서 죽었다 함을 듣고 손맥이 풀렸고 온 이스라엘이 놀라니라	And when Saul’s son heard that Abner was dead in Hebron, his hands were feeble, and all the Israelites were troubled.	Now when Ish-bosheth son of Saul heard that Abner had died in Hebron, he lost courage, and all Israel was dismayed.
2SA	4	2	사울의 아들 이스보셋에게 군장 두 사람이 있으니 하나의 이름은 바아나요 하나의 이름은 레갑이라 베냐민 족속 브에롯 사람 림몬의 아들들이더라 브에롯도 베냐민 지파에 속하였으니	And Saul’s son had two men that were captains of bands: the name of the one was Baanah, and the name of the other Rechab, the sons of Rimmon a Beerothite, of the children of Benjamin: (for Beeroth also was reckoned to Benjamin:	Saul’s son had two men who were leaders of raiding parties. One was named Baanah and the other Rechab; they were sons of Rimmon the Beerothite of the tribe of Benjamin—Beeroth is considered part of Benjamin,
2SA	4	3	일찍 브에롯 사람들이 깃다임으로 도망하여 오늘까지 거기 우거함이더라	And the Beerothites fled to Gittaim, and were sojourners there until this day.)	because the Beerothites fled to Gittaim and have lived there as foreigners to this day.
2SA	4	4	사울의 아들 요나단에게 절뚝발이 아들 하나가 있으니 이름은 므비보셋이라 전에 사울과 요나단의 죽은 소식이 이스르엘에서 올 때에 그 나이 다섯 살이었는데 그 유모가 안고 도망하더니 급히 도망하므로 아이가 떨어져 절게 되었더라	And Jonathan, Saul’s son, had a son that was lame of his feet. He was five years old when the tidings came of Saul and Jonathan out of Jezreel, and his nurse took him up, and fled: and it came to pass, as she made haste to flee, that he fell, and became lame. And his name was Mephibosheth.	And Jonathan son of Saul had a son who was lame in his feet. He was five years old when the report about Saul and Jonathan came from Jezreel. His nurse picked him up and fled, but as she was hurrying to escape, he fell and became lame. His name was Mephibosheth.
2SA	4	5	브에롯 사람 림몬의 아들 레갑과 바아나가 행하여 볕이 쬘 때 즈음에 이스보셋의 집에 이르니 마침 저가 낮잠을 자는지라	And the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, Rechab and Baanah, went, and came about the heat of the day to the house of Ish–bosheth, who lay on a bed at noon.	Now Rechab and Baanah, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, set out and arrived at the house of Ish-bosheth in the heat of the day, while the king was taking his midday nap.
2SA	4	6	레갑과 그 형제 바아나가 밀을 가지러 온 체하고 집 가운데로 들어가서 그 배를 찌르고 도망하였더라	And they came thither into the midst of the house, as though they would have fetched wheat; and they smote him under the fifth rib: and Rechab and Baanah his brother escaped.	They entered the interior of the house as if to get some wheat, and they stabbed him in the stomach. Then Rechab and his brother Baanah slipped away.
2SA	4	7	저희가 집에 들어가니 이스보셋이 침실에서 상 위에 누웠는지라 저를 쳐 죽이고 목을 베어 그 머리를 가지고 밤새도록 아라바 길로 행하여	For when they came into the house, he lay on his bed in his bedchamber, and they smote him, and slew him, and beheaded him, and took his head, and gat them away through the plain all night.	They had entered the house while Ish-bosheth was lying on his bed, and having stabbed and killed him, they beheaded him, took his head, and traveled all night by way of the Arabah.
2SA	4	8	헤브론에 이르러 다윗 왕에게 이스보셋의 머리를 드리며 고하되 왕의 생명을 해하려 하던 원수 사울의 아들 이스보셋의 머리가 여기 있나이다 여호와께서 오늘 우리 주 되신 왕의 원수를 사울과 그 자손에게 갚으셨나이다	And they brought the head of Ish–bosheth unto David to Hebron, and said to the king, Behold the head of Ish–bosheth the son of Saul thine enemy, which sought thy life; and the Lord hath avenged my lord the king this day of Saul, and of his seed.	They brought the head of Ish-bosheth to David at Hebron and said to the king, “Here is the head of Ish-bosheth son of Saul, your enemy who sought your life. Today the LORD has granted vengeance to my lord the king against Saul and his offspring.”
2SA	4	9	다윗이 브레롯 사람 림몬의 아들 레갑과 그 형제 바아나에게 대답하여 가로되 내 생명을 여러 환난 가운데서 건지신 여호와의 사심을 가리켜 맹세하노니	And David answered Rechab and Baanah his brother, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, and said unto them, As the Lord liveth, who hath redeemed my soul out of all adversity,	But David answered Rechab and his brother Baanah, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, “As surely as the LORD lives, who has redeemed my life from all distress,
2SA	4	10	전에 사람이 내게 고하기를 사울이 죽었다 하며 좋은 소식을 전하는 줄로 생각하였어도 내가 저를 잡아 시글락에서 죽여서 그것으로 그 기별의 갚음을 삼았거든	When one told me, saying, Behold, Saul is dead, thinking to have brought good tidings, I took hold of him, and slew him in Ziklag, who thought that I would have given him a reward for his tidings:	when someone told me, ‘Look, Saul is dead,’ and thought he was a bearer of good news, I seized him and put him to death at Ziklag. That was his reward for his news!
2SA	4	11	하물며 악인이 의인을 그 집 침상 위에서 죽인 것이겠느냐 그런즉 내가 저의 피흘린 죄를 너희에게 갚아서 너희를 이 땅에서 없이 하지 아니하겠느냐 하고	How much more, when wicked men have slain a righteous person in his own house upon his bed? shall I not therefore now require his blood of your hand, and take you away from the earth?	How much more, when wicked men kill a righteous man in his own house and on his own bed, shall I not now require his blood from your hands and remove you from the earth!”
2SA	4	12	소년들을 명하매 곧 저희를 죽이고 수족을 베어 헤브론 못가에 매어달고 이스보셋의 머리를 가져다가 헤브론에서 아브넬의 무덤에 장사하였더라	And David commanded his young men, and they slew them, and cut off their hands and their feet, and hanged them up over the pool in Hebron. But they took the head of Ish–bosheth, and buried it in the sepulchre of Abner in Hebron.	So David commanded his young men, and they killed Rechab and Baanah. They cut off their hands and feet and hung their bodies by the pool in Hebron, but they took the head of Ish-bosheth and buried it in Abner’s tomb in Hebron.
2SA	5	1	이스라엘 모든 지파가 헤브론에 이르러 다윗에게 나아와 말하여 가로되 보소서 우리는 왕의 골육이니이다	Then came all the tribes of Israel to David unto Hebron, and spake, saying, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.	Then all the tribes of Israel came to David at Hebron and said, “Here we are, your own flesh and blood.
2SA	5	2	전일 곧 사울이 우리의 왕이 되었을 때에도 이스라엘을 거느려 출입하게 한 자는 왕이시었고 여호와께서도 왕에게 말씀하시기를 네가 내 백성 이스라엘의 목자가 되며 이스라엘의 주권자가 되리라 하셨나이다 하니라	Also in time past, when Saul was king over us, thou wast he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel: and the Lord said to thee, Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be a captain over Israel.	Even in times past, while Saul was king over us, you were the one who led Israel out and brought them back. And to you the LORD said, ‘You will shepherd My people Israel, and you will be ruler over them.’”
2SA	5	3	이에 이스라엘 모든 장로가 헤브론에 이르러 왕에게 나아오매 다윗 왕이 헤브론에서 여호와 앞에서 저희와 언약을 세우매 저희가 다윗에게 기름을 부어 이스라엘 왕을 삼으니라	So all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron; and king David made a league with them in Hebron before the Lord: and they anointed David king over Israel.	So all the elders of Israel came to the king at Hebron, where King David made with them a covenant before the LORD. And they anointed him king over Israel.
2SA	5	4	다윗이 삼십 세에 위에 나아가서 사십 년을 다스렸으되	David was thirty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned forty years.	David was thirty years old when he became king, and he reigned forty years.
2SA	5	5	헤브론에서 칠 년 육 개월 동안 유다를 다스렸고 예루살렘에서 삼십삼 년 동안 온 이스라엘과 유다를 다스렸더라	In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months: and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and three years over all Israel and Judah.	In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months, and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty-three years over all Israel and Judah.
2SA	5	6	왕과 그 종자들이 예루살렘으로 가서 그 땅 거민 여부스 사람을 치려 하매 그 사람들이 다윗에게 말하여 가로되 네가 이리로 들어오지 못하리라 소경과 절뚝발이라도 너를 물리치리라 하니 저희 생각에는 다윗이 이리로 들어오지 못하리라 함이나	And the king and his men went to Jerusalem unto the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the land: which spake unto David, saying, Except thou take away the blind and the lame, thou shalt not come in hither: thinking, David cannot come in hither.	Now the king and his men marched to Jerusalem against the Jebusites who inhabited the land. The Jebusites said to David: “You will never get in here. Even the blind and lame can repel you.” For they thought, “David cannot get in here.”
2SA	5	7	다윗이 시온 산성을 빼앗았으니 이는 다윗 성이더라	Nevertheless David took the strong hold of Zion: the same is the city of David.	Nevertheless, David captured the fortress of Zion (that is, the City of David).
2SA	5	8	그 날에 다윗이 이르기를 누구든지 여부스 사람을 치거든 수구로 올라가서 다윗의 마음에 미워하는 절뚝발이와 소경을 치라 하였으므로 속담이 되어 이르기를 소경과 절뚝발이는 집에 들어오지 못하리라 하더라	And David said on that day, Whosoever getteth up to the gutter, and smiteth the Jebusites, and the lame and the blind, that are hated of David’s soul, he shall be chief and captain. Wherefore they said, The blind and the lame shall not come into the house.	On that day he said, “Whoever attacks the Jebusites must use the water shaft to reach the lame and blind who are despised by David.” That is why it is said, “The blind and the lame will never enter the palace.”
2SA	5	9	다윗이 그 산성에 거하여 다윗 성이라 이름하고 밀로에서부터 안으로 성을 둘러 쌓으니라	So David dwelt in the fort, and called it the city of David. And David built round about from Millo and inward.	So David took up residence in the fortress and called it the City of David. He built it up all the way around, from the supporting terraces inward.
2SA	5	10	만군의 하나님 여호와께서 함께 계시니 다윗이 점점 강성하여 가니라	And David went on, and grew great, and the Lord God of hosts was with him.	And David became greater and greater, for the LORD God of Hosts was with him.
2SA	5	11	두로 왕 히람이 다윗에게 사자들과 백향목과 목수와 석수를 보내매 저희가 다윗을 위하여 집을 지으니	And Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and cedar trees, and carpenters, and masons: and they built David an house.	Now Hiram king of Tyre sent envoys to David, along with cedar logs, carpenters, and stonemasons, and they built a palace for David.
2SA	5	12	다윗이 여호와께서 자기를 세우사 이스라엘 왕을 삼으신 것과 그 백성 이스라엘을 위하여 그 나라를 높이신 것을 아니라	And David perceived that the Lord had established him king over Israel, and that he had exalted his kingdom for his people Israel’s sake.	And David realized that the LORD had established him as king over Israel and had exalted his kingdom for the sake of His people Israel.
2SA	5	13	다윗이 헤브론에서 올라온 후에 예루살렘에서 처첩들을 더 취하였으므로 아들과 딸들이 또 다윗에게서 나니	And David took him more concubines and wives out of Jerusalem, after he was come from Hebron: and there were yet sons and daughters born to David.	After he had arrived from Hebron, David took more concubines and wives from Jerusalem, and more sons and daughters were born to him.
2SA	5	14	예루살렘에서 그에게서 난 자의 이름은 삼무아와 소밥과 나단과 솔로몬과	And these be the names of those that were born unto him in Jerusalem; Shammua, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon,	These are the names of the children born to him in Jerusalem: Shammua, Shobab, Nathan, Solomon,
2SA	5	15	입할과 엘리수아와 네벡과 야비아와	Ibhar also, and Elishua, and Nepheg, and Japhia,	Ibhar, Elishua, Nepheg, Japhia,
2SA	5	16	엘리사마와 엘랴다와 엘리벨렛이었더라	And Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphalet.	Elishama, Eliada, and Eliphelet.
2SA	5	17	이스라엘이 다윗에게 기름을 부어 이스라엘 왕을 삼았다 함을 블레셋 사람이 듣고 다윗을 찾으러 다 올라오매 다윗이 듣고 요해처로 나가니라	But when the Philistines heard that they had anointed David king over Israel, all the Philistines came up to seek David; and David heard of it, and went down to the hold.	When the Philistines heard that David had been anointed king over Israel, they all went in search of him; but David learned of this and went down to the stronghold.
2SA	5	18	블레셋 사람이 이미 이르러 르바임 골짜기에 편만한지라	The Philistines also came and spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim.	Now the Philistines had come and spread out in the Valley of Rephaim.
2SA	5	19	다윗이 여호와께 물어 가로되 내가 블레셋 사람에게로 올라가리이까 여호와께서 저희를 내 손에 붙이시겠나이까 여호와께서 다윗에게 말씀하시되 올라가라 내가 단정코 블레셋 사람을 네 손에 붙이리라 하신지라	And David enquired of the Lord, saying, Shall I go up to the Philistines? wilt thou deliver them into mine hand? And the Lord said unto David, Go up: for I will doubtless deliver the Philistines into thine hand.	So David inquired of the LORD, “Should I go up against the Philistines? Will You deliver them into my hand?” “Go,” replied the LORD, “for I will surely deliver the Philistines into your hand.”
2SA	5	20	다윗이 바알브라심에 이르러 거기서 저희를 치고 가로되 여호와께서 물을 흩음 같이 내 앞에서 내 대적을 흩으셨다 하므로 그곳 이름을 바알브라심이라 칭하니라	And David came to Baal–perazim, and David smote them there, and said, The Lord hath broken forth upon mine enemies before me, as the breach of waters. Therefore he called the name of that place Baal–perazim.	So David went to Baal-perazim, where he defeated the Philistines and said, “Like a bursting flood, the LORD has burst out against my enemies before me.” So he called that place Baal-perazim.
2SA	5	21	거기서 블레셋 사람들이 그 우상을 버렸으므로 다윗과 그 종자들이 치우니라	And there they left their images, and David and his men burned them.	There the Philistines abandoned their idols, and David and his men carried them away.
2SA	5	22	블레셋 사람이 다시 올라와서 르바임 골짜기에 편만한지라	And the Philistines came up yet again, and spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim.	Once again the Philistines came up and spread out in the Valley of Rephaim.
2SA	5	23	다윗이 여호와께 묻자온대 가라사대 올라가지 말고 저희 뒤로 돌아서 뽕나무 수풀 맞은편에서 저희를 엄습하되	And when David enquired of the Lord, he said, Thou shalt not go up; but fetch a compass behind them, and come upon them over against the mulberry trees.	So David inquired of the LORD, who answered, “Do not march straight up, but circle around behind them and attack them in front of the balsam trees.
2SA	5	24	뽕나무 꼭대기에서 걸음 걷는 소리가 들리거든 곧 동작하라 그 때에 여호와가 네 앞서 나아가서 블레셋 군대를 치리라 하신지라	And let it be, when thou hearest the sound of a going in the tops of the mulberry trees, that then thou shalt bestir thyself: for then shall the Lord go out before thee, to smite the host of the Philistines.	As soon as you hear the sound of marching in the tops of the balsam trees, move quickly, because this will mean that the LORD has marched out before you to strike the camp of the Philistines.”
2SA	5	25	이에 다윗이 여호와의 명대로 행하여 블레셋 사람을 쳐서 게바에서 게셀까지 이르니라	And David did so, as the Lord had commanded him; and smote the Philistines from Geba until thou come to Gazer.	So David did as the LORD had commanded him, and he struck down the Philistines all the way from Gibeon to Gezer.
2SA	6	1	다윗이 이스라엘에서 뺀 무리 삼만을 다시 모으고	Again, David gathered together all the chosen men of Israel, thirty thousand.	David again assembled the chosen men of Israel, thirty thousand in all.
2SA	6	2	일어나서 그 함께 있는 모든 사람으로 더불어 바알레유다로 가서 거기서 하나님의 궤를 메어 오려 하니 그 궤는 그룹들 사이에 좌정하신 만군의 여호와의 이름으로 이름하는 것이라	And David arose, and went with all the people that were with him from Baale of Judah, to bring up from thence the ark of God, whose name is called by the name of the Lord of hosts that dwelleth between the cherubims.	And he and all his troops set out for Baale of Judah to bring up from there the ark of God, which is called by the Name— the name of the LORD of Hosts, who is enthroned between the cherubim that are on it.
2SA	6	3	저희가 하나님의 궤를 새 수레에 싣고 산에 있는 아비나답의 집에서 나오는데 아비나답의 아들 웃사와 아효가 그 새 수레를 모니라	And they set the ark of God upon a new cart, and brought it out of the house of Abinadab that was in Gibeah: and Uzzah and Ahio, the sons of Abinadab, drave the new cart.	They set the ark of God on a new cart and brought it from the house of Abinadab, which was on the hill. Uzzah and Ahio, the sons of Abinadab, were guiding the new cart,
2SA	6	4	저희가 산에 있는 아비나답의 집에서 하나님의 궤를 싣고 나올 때에 아효는 궤 앞에서 행하고	And they brought it out of the house of Abinadab which was at Gibeah, accompanying the ark of God: and Ahio went before the ark.	bringing with it the ark of God. And Ahio was walking in front of the ark.
2SA	6	5	다윗과 이스라엘 온 족속이 잣나무로 만든 여러 가지 악기와 수금과 비파와 소고와 양금과 제금으로 여호와 앞에서 주악하더라	And David and all the house of Israel played before the Lord on all manner of instruments made of fir wood, even on harps, and on psalteries, and on timbrels, and on cornets, and on cymbals.	David and all the house of Israel were celebrating before the LORD with all kinds of wood instruments, harps, stringed instruments, tambourines, sistrums, and cymbals.
2SA	6	6	저희가 나곤의 타작 마당에 이르러서는 소들이 뛰므로 웃사가 손을 들어 하나님의 궤를 붙들었더니	And when they came to Nachon’s threshingfloor, Uzzah put forth his hand to the ark of God, and took hold of it; for the oxen shook it.	When they came to the threshing floor of Nacon, Uzzah reached out and took hold of the ark of God, because the oxen had stumbled.
2SA	6	7	여호와 하나님이 웃사의 잘못함을 인하여 진노하사 저를 그곳에서 치시니 저가 거기 하나님의 궤 곁에서 죽으니라	And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Uzzah; and God smote him there for his error; and there he died by the ark of God.	And the anger of the LORD burned against Uzzah, and God struck him down on the spot for his irreverence, and he died there beside the ark of God.
2SA	6	8	여호와께서 웃사를 충돌하시므로 다윗이 분하여 그곳을 베레스웃사라 칭하니 그 이름이 오늘까지 이르니라	And David was displeased, because the Lord had made a breach upon Uzzah: and he called the name of the place Perez–uzzah to this day.	Then David became angry because the LORD had burst forth against Uzzah; so he named that place Perez-uzzah, as it is called to this day.
2SA	6	9	다윗이 그 날에 여호와를 두려워하여 가로되 여호와의 궤가 어찌 내게로 오리요 하고	And David was afraid of the Lord that day, and said, How shall the ark of the Lord come to me?	That day David feared the LORD and asked, “How can the ark of the LORD ever come to me?”
2SA	6	10	여호와의 궤를 옮겨 다윗 성 자기에게로 메어 가기를 즐겨하지 아니하고 치우쳐 가드 사람 오벧에돔의 집으로 메어 간지라	So David would not remove the ark of the Lord unto him into the city of David: but David carried it aside into the house of Obed–edom the Gittite.	So he was unwilling to move the ark of the LORD to the City of David; instead, he took it aside to the house of Obed-edom the Gittite.
2SA	6	11	여호와의 궤가 가드 사람 오벧에돔의 집에 석 달을 있었는데 그 온 집에 복을 주시니라	And the ark of the Lord continued in the house of Obed–edom the Gittite three months: and the Lord blessed Obed–edom, and all his household.	Thus the ark of the LORD remained in the house of Obed-edom the Gittite for three months, and the LORD blessed him and all his household.
2SA	6	12	혹이 다윗 왕에게 고하여 가로되 여호와께서 하나님의 궤를 인하여 오벧에돔의 집과 그 모든 소유에 복을 주셨다 한지라 다윗이 가서 하나님의 궤를 기쁨으로 메고 오벧에돔의 집에서 다윗 성으로 올라갈새	And it was told king David, saying, The Lord hath blessed the house of Obed–edom, and all that pertaineth unto him, because of the ark of God. So David went and brought up the ark of God from the house of Obed–edom into the city of David with gladness.	Now it was reported to King David, “The LORD has blessed the house of Obed-edom and all that belongs to him, because of the ark of God.” So David went and had the ark of God brought up from the house of Obed-edom into the City of David with rejoicing.
2SA	6	13	여호와의 궤를 멘 사람들이 여섯 걸음을 행하매 다윗이 소와 살진 것으로 제사를 드리고	And it was so, that when they that bare the ark of the Lord had gone six paces, he sacrificed oxen and fatlings.	When those carrying the ark of the LORD had advanced six paces, he sacrificed an ox and a fattened calf.
2SA	6	14	여호와 앞에서 힘을 다하여 춤을 추는데 때에 베 에봇을 입었더라	And David danced before the Lord with all his might; and David was girded with a linen ephod.	And David, wearing a linen ephod, danced with all his might before the LORD,
2SA	6	15	다윗과 온 이스라엘 족속이 즐거이 부르며 나팔을 불고 여호와의 궤를 메어 오니라	So David and all the house of Israel brought up the ark of the Lord with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet.	while he and all the house of Israel brought up the ark of the LORD with shouting and the sounding of the ram’s horn.
2SA	6	16	여호와의 궤가 다윗 성으로 들어올 때에 사울의 딸 미갈이 창으로 내다보다가 다윗 왕이 여호와 앞에서 뛰놀며 춤추는 것을 보고 심중에 저를 업신여기니라	And as the ark of the Lord came into the city of David, Michal Saul’s daughter looked through a window, and saw king David leaping and dancing before the Lord; and she despised him in her heart.	As the ark of the LORD was entering the City of David, Saul’s daughter Michal looked down from a window and saw King David leaping and dancing before the LORD, and she despised him in her heart.
2SA	6	17	여호와의 궤를 메고 들어가서 다윗이 위하여 친 장막 가운데 그 예비한 자리에 두매 다윗이 번제와 화목제를 여호와 앞에 드리니라	And they brought in the ark of the Lord, and set it in his place, in the midst of the tabernacle that David had pitched for it: and David offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before the Lord.	So they brought the ark of the LORD and set it in its place inside the tent that David had pitched for it. Then David offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before the LORD.
2SA	6	18	다윗이 번제와 화목제 드리기를 마치고 만군의 여호와의 이름으로 백성에게 축복하고	And as soon as David had made an end of offering burnt offerings and peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the Lord of hosts.	When David had finished sacrificing the burnt offerings and peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the LORD of Hosts.
2SA	6	19	모든 백성 곧 온 이스라엘 무리의 무론 남녀하고 떡 한 개와 고기 한 조각과 건포도떡 한 덩이씩 나눠주매 모든 백성이 각기 집으로 돌아가니라	And he dealt among all the people, even among the whole multitude of Israel, as well to the women as men, to every one a cake of bread, and a good piece of flesh, and a flagon of wine. So all the people departed every one to his house.	Then he distributed to every man and woman among the multitude of Israel a loaf of bread, a date cake, and a raisin cake. And all the people departed, each for his own home.
2SA	6	20	다윗이 자기의 가족에게 축복하러 돌아오매 사울의 딸 미갈이 나와서 다윗을 맞으며 가로되 이스라엘 왕이 오늘날 어떻게 영화로우신지 방탕한 자가 염치 없이 자기의 몸을 드러내는 것처럼 오늘날 그 신복의 계집종의 눈 앞에서 몸을 드러내셨도다	Then David returned to bless his household. And Michal the daughter of Saul came out to meet David, and said, How glorious was the king of Israel to day, who uncovered himself to day in the eyes of the handmaids of his servants, as one of the vain fellows shamelessly uncovereth himself!	As soon as David returned home to bless his own household, Saul’s daughter Michal came out to meet him. “How the king of Israel has distinguished himself today!” she said. “He has uncovered himself today in the sight of the maidservants of his subjects, like a vulgar person would do.”
2SA	6	21	다윗이 미갈에게 이르되 이는 여호와 앞에서 한 것이니라 저가 네 아비와 그 온 집을 버리시고 나를 택하사 나로 여호와의 백성 이스라엘의 주권자를 삼으셨으니 내가 여호와 앞에서 뛰놀리라	And David said unto Michal, It was before the Lord, which chose me before thy father, and before all his house, to appoint me ruler over the people of the Lord, over Israel: therefore will I play before the Lord.	But David said to Michal, “I was dancing before the LORD, who chose me over your father and all his house when He appointed me ruler over the LORD’s people Israel. I will celebrate before the LORD,
2SA	6	22	내가 이보다 더 낮아져서 스스로 천하게 보일지라도 네가 말한바 계집종에게는 내가 높임을 받으리라 한지라	And I will yet be more vile than thus, and will be base in mine own sight: and of the maidservants which thou hast spoken of, of them shall I be had in honour.	and I will humiliate and humble myself even more than this. Yet I will be honored by the maidservants of whom you have spoken.”
2SA	6	23	그러므로 사울의 딸 미갈이 죽는 날까지 자식이 없으니라	Therefore Michal the daughter of Saul had no child unto the day of her death.	And Michal the daughter of Saul had no children to the day of her death.
2SA	7	1	여호와께서 사방의 모든 대적을 파하사 왕으로 궁에 평안히 거하게 하신 때에	And it came to pass, when the king sat in his house, and the Lord had given him rest round about from all his enemies;	After the king had settled into his palace and the LORD had given him rest from all his enemies around him,
2SA	7	2	왕이 선지자 나단에게 이르되 볼지어다 나는 백향목 궁에 거하거늘 하나님의 궤는 휘장 가운데 있도다	That the king said unto Nathan the prophet, See now, I dwell in an house of cedar, but the ark of God dwelleth within curtains.	he said to Nathan the prophet, “Here I am, living in a house of cedar, while the ark of God remains in a tent.”
2SA	7	3	나단이 왕께 고하되 여호와께서 왕과 함께 계시니 무릇 마음에 있는 바를 행하소서	And Nathan said to the king, Go, do all that is in thine heart; for the Lord is with thee.	And Nathan replied to the king, “Go and do all that is in your heart, for the LORD is with you.”
2SA	7	4	그 밤에 여호와의 말씀이 나단에게 임하여 가라사대	And it came to pass that night, that the word of the Lord came unto Nathan, saying,	But that night the word of the LORD came to Nathan, saying,
2SA	7	5	가서 내 종 다윗에게 말하기를 여호와의 말씀이 네가 나를 위하여 나의 거할 집을 건축하겠느냐	Go and tell my servant David, Thus saith the Lord, Shalt thou build me an house for me to dwell in?	“Go and tell My servant David that this is what the LORD says: Are you the one to build for Me a house to dwell in?
2SA	7	6	내가 이스라엘 자손을 애굽에서 인도하여 내던 날부터 오늘날까지 집에 거하지 아니하고 장막과 회막에 거하며 행하였나니	Whereas I have not dwelt in any house since the time that I brought up the children of Israel out of Egypt, even to this day, but have walked in a tent and in a tabernacle.	For I have not dwelt in a house from the day I brought the Israelites up out of Egypt until this day, but I have moved about with a tent as My dwelling.
2SA	7	7	무릇 이르라엘 자손으로 더불어 행하는 곳에서 내가 내 백성 이스라엘을 먹이라고 명한 이스라엘 어느 지파에게 내가 말하기를 너희가 어찌하여 나를 위하어 백향목 집을 건축하지 아니하였느냐고 말하였느냐	In all the places wherein I have walked with all the children of Israel spake I a word with any of the tribes of Israel, whom I commanded to feed my people Israel, saying, Why build ye not me an house of cedar?	In all My journeys with all the Israelites, have I ever asked any of the leaders I appointed to shepherd My people Israel, ‘Why haven’t you built Me a house of cedar?’
2SA	7	8	그러므로 이제 내 종 다윗에게 이처럼 말하라 만군의 여호와께서 이처럼 말씀하시기를 내가 너를 목장 곧 양을 따르는데서 취하여 내 백성 이스라엘의 주권자를 삼고	Now therefore so shalt thou say unto my servant David, Thus saith the Lord of hosts, I took thee from the sheepcote, from following the sheep, to be ruler over my people, over Israel:	Now then, you are to tell My servant David that this is what the LORD of Hosts says: I took you from the pasture, from following the flock, to be the ruler over My people Israel.
2SA	7	9	네가 어디를 가든지 내가 너와 함께 있어 네 모든 대적을 네 앞에서 멸하였은즉 세상에서 존귀한 자의 이름 같이 네 이름을 존귀케 만들어 주리라	And I was with thee whithersoever thou wentest, and have cut off all thine enemies out of thy sight, and have made thee a great name, like unto the name of the great men that are in the earth.	I have been with you wherever you have gone, and I have cut off all your enemies from before you. Now I will make for you a name like the greatest in the land.
2SA	7	10	내가 또 내 백성 이스라엘을 위하여 한 곳을 정하여 저희를 심고 저희로 자기 곳에 거하여 다시 옮기지 않게 하며 악한 유로 전과 같이 저희를 해하지 못하게 하여	Moreover I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and will plant them, that they may dwell in a place of their own, and move no more; neither shall the children of wickedness afflict them any more, as beforetime,	And I will provide a place for My people Israel and will plant them so that they may dwell in a place of their own and be disturbed no more. No longer will the sons of wickedness oppress them as they did at the beginning
2SA	7	11	전에 내가 사사를 명하여 내 백성 이스라엘을 다스리던 때와 같지 않게 하고 너를 모든 대적에게서 벗어나 평안케 하리라 여호와가 또 네게 이르노니 여호와가 너를 위하여 집을 이루고	And as since the time that I commanded judges to be over my people Israel, and have caused thee to rest from all thine enemies. Also the Lord telleth thee that he will make thee an house.	and have done since the day I appointed judges over My people Israel. I will give you rest from all your enemies. The LORD declares to you that He Himself will establish a house for you.
2SA	7	12	네 수한이 차서 네 조상들과 함께 잘 때에 내가 네 몸에서 날 자식을 네 뒤에 세워 그 나라를 견고케 하리라	And when thy days be fulfilled, and thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy bowels, and I will establish his kingdom.	And when your days are fulfilled and you rest with your fathers, I will raise up your descendant after you, who will come from your own body, and I will establish his kingdom.
2SA	7	13	저는 내 이름을 위하여 집을 건축할 것이요 나는 그 나라 위를 영원히 견고케 하리라	He shall build an house for my name, and I will stablish the throne of his kingdom for ever.	He will build a house for My Name, and I will establish the throne of his kingdom forever.
2SA	7	14	나는 그 아비가 되고 그는 내 아들이 되리니 저가 만일 죄를 범하면 내가 사람 막대기와 인생 채찍으로 징계하려니와	I will be his father, and he shall be my son. If he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the children of men:	I will be his Father, and he will be My son. When he does wrong, I will discipline him with the rod of men and with the blows of the sons of men.
2SA	7	15	내가 네 앞에서 폐한 사울에게서 내 은총을 빼앗은 것 같이 그에게서는 빼앗지 아니하리라	But my mercy shall not depart away from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put away before thee.	But My loving devotion will never be removed from him as I removed it from Saul, whom I moved out of your way.
2SA	7	16	네 집과 네 나라가 네 앞에서 영원히 보전되고 네 위가 영원히 견고하리라 하셨다 하라	And thine house and thy kingdom shall be established for ever before thee: thy throne shall be established for ever.	Your house and kingdom will endure forever before Me, and your throne will be established forever.”
2SA	7	17	나단이 이 모든 말씀과 이 모든 묵시대로 다윗에게 고하니라	According to all these words, and according to all this vision, so did Nathan speak unto David.	So Nathan relayed to David all the words of this entire vision.
2SA	7	18	다윗 왕이 여호와 앞에 들어가 앉아서 가로되 주 여호와여 나는 누구오며 내 집은 무엇이관대 나로 이에 이르게 하셨나이까	Then went king David in, and sat before the Lord, and he said, Who am I, O Lord God? and what is my house, that thou hast brought me hitherto?	Then King David went in, sat before the LORD, and said, “Who am I, O Lord GOD, and what is my house, that You have brought me this far?
2SA	7	19	주 여호와여 주께서 이것을 오히려 적게 여기시고 또 종의 집에 영구히 이를 일을 말씀하실 뿐 아니라 주 여호와여 인간의 규례대로 하셨나이다	And this was yet a small thing in thy sight, O Lord God; but thou hast spoken also of thy servant’s house for a great while to come. And is this the manner of man, O Lord God?	And as if this was a small thing in Your eyes, O Lord GOD, You have also spoken about the future of the house of Your servant. Is this Your custom with man, O Lord GOD?
2SA	7	20	주 여호와는 종을 아시오니 다윗이 다시 주께 무슨 말씀을 하오리이까	And what can David say more unto thee? for thou, Lord God, knowest thy servant.	What more can David say to You? For You know Your servant, O Lord GOD.
2SA	7	21	주의 말씀을 인하여 주의 뜻대로 이 모든 큰 일을 행하사 주의 종에게 알게 하셨나이다	For thy word’s sake, and according to thine own heart, hast thou done all these great things, to make thy servant know them.	For the sake of Your word and according to Your own heart, You have accomplished this great thing and revealed it to Your servant.
2SA	7	22	여호와 하나님이여 이러므로 주는 광대하시니 이는 우리 귀로 들은 대로는 주와 같은 이가 없고 주 외에는 참 신이 없음이니이다	Wherefore thou art great, O Lord God: for there is none like thee, neither is there any God beside thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears.	How great You are, O Lord GOD! For there is none like You, and there is no God but You, according to everything we have heard with our own ears.
2SA	7	23	땅의 어느 한 나라가 주의 백성 이스라엘과 같으리이까 하나님이 가서 구속하사 자기 백성을 삼아 주의 명성을 내시며 저희를 위하여 큰 일을, 주의 땅을 위하여 두려운 일을 애굽과 열국과 그 신들에게서 구속하신 백성 앞에서 행하셨사오며	And what one nation in the earth is like thy people, even like Israel, whom God went to redeem for a people to himself, and to make him a name, and to do for you great things and terrible, for thy land, before thy people, which thou redeemedst to thee from Egypt, from the nations and their gods?	And who is like Your people Israel—the one nation on earth whom God went out to redeem as a people for Himself and to make a name for Himself? You performed great and awesome wonders by driving out nations and their gods from before Your people, whom You redeemed for Yourself from Egypt.
2SA	7	24	주께서 주의 백성 이스라엘을 세우사 영원히 주의 백성을 삼으셨사오니 여호와여 주께서 저희 하나님이 되셨나이다	For thou hast confirmed to thyself thy people Israel to be a people unto thee for ever: and thou, Lord, art become their God.	For You have established Your people Israel as Your very own forever, and You, O LORD, have become their God.
2SA	7	25	여호와 하나님이여 이제 주의 종과 종의 집에 대하여 말씀하신 것을 영원히 확실케 하옵시며 말씀하신 대로 행하사	And now, O Lord God, the word that thou hast spoken concerning thy servant, and concerning his house, establish it for ever, and do as thou hast said.	And now, O LORD God, confirm forever the word You have spoken concerning Your servant and his house. Do as You have promised,
2SA	7	26	사람으로 영원히 주의 이름을 높여 이르기를 만군의 여호와는 이스라엘의 하나님이라 하게 하옵시며 주의 종 다윗의 집으로 주 앞에 견고하게 하옵소서	And let thy name be magnified for ever, saying, The Lord of hosts is the God over Israel: and let the house of thy servant David be established before thee.	so that Your name will be magnified forever when it is said, ‘The LORD of Hosts is God over Israel.’ And the house of Your servant David will be established before You.
2SA	7	27	만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이여 주의 종에게 알게 하여 이르시기를 내가 너를 위하여 집을 세우리라 하신고로 주의 종이 이 기도로 구할 마음이 생겼나이다	For thou, O Lord of hosts, God of Israel, hast revealed to thy servant, saying, I will build thee an house: therefore hath thy servant found in his heart to pray this prayer unto thee.	For You, O LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, have revealed this to Your servant when You said, ‘I will build a house for you.’ Therefore Your servant has found the courage to offer this prayer to You.
2SA	7	28	주 여호와여 오직 주는 하나님이시며 말씀이 참되시니이다 주께서 이 좋은 것으로 종에게 허락하셨사오니	And now, O Lord God, thou art that God, and thy words be true, and thou hast promised this goodness unto thy servant:	And now, O Lord GOD, You are God! Your words are true, and You have promised this goodness to Your servant.
2SA	7	29	이제 청컨대 종의 집에 복을 주사 주 앞에 영원히 있게 하옵소서 주 여호와께서 말씀하셨사오니 주의 은혜로 종의 집이 영원히 복을 받게 하옵소서 하니라	Therefore now let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant, that it may continue for ever before thee: for thou, O Lord God, hast spoken it: and with thy blessing let the house of thy servant be blessed for ever.	Now therefore, may it please You to bless the house of Your servant, that it may continue forever before You. For You, O Lord GOD, have spoken, and with Your blessing the house of Your servant will be blessed forever.”
2SA	8	1	이 후에 다윗이 블레셋 사람을 쳐서 항복 받고 블레셋 사람의 손에서 메덱암마를 빼앗으니라	And after this it came to pass, that David smote the Philistines, and subdued them: and David took Metheg–ammah out of the hand of the Philistines.	Some time later, David defeated the Philistines, subdued them, and took Metheg-ammah from the hand of the Philistines.
2SA	8	2	다윗이 또 모압을 쳐서 저희로 땅에 엎드리게 하고 줄로 재어 그 두 줄 길이의 사람은 죽이고 한 줄 길이의 사람은 살리니 모압 사람이 다윗의 종이 되어 조공을 바치니라	And he smote Moab, and measured them with a line, casting them down to the ground; even with two lines measured he to put to death, and with one full line to keep alive. And so the Moabites became David’s servants, and brought gifts.	David also defeated the Moabites, made them lie down on the ground, and measured them off with a cord. He measured off with two lengths those to be put to death, and with one length those to be spared. So the Moabites became subject to David and brought him tribute.
2SA	8	3	르흡의 아들 소바 왕 하닷에셀이 자기 권세를 회복하려고 유브라데 강으로 갈 때에 다윗이 저를 쳐서	David smote also Hadadezer, the son of Rehob, king of Zobah, as he went to recover his border at the river Euphrates.	David also defeated Hadadezer son of Rehob, king of Zobah, who had marched out to restore his dominion along the Euphrates River.
2SA	8	4	그 마병 일천칠백과 보병 이만을 사로잡고 병거 일백 승의 말만 남기고 그 외의 병거의 말은 다 발의 힘줄을 끊었더니	And David took from him a thousand chariots, and seven hundred horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen: and David houghed all the chariot horses, but reserved of them for an hundred chariots.	David captured from him a thousand chariots, seven thousand charioteers, and twenty thousand foot soldiers, and he hamstrung all the horses except a hundred he kept for the chariots.
2SA	8	5	다메섹 아람 사람들이 소바 왕 하닷에셀을 도우러 온지라 다윗이 아람 사람 이만 이천을 죽이고	And when the Syrians of Damascus came to succour Hadadezer king of Zobah, David slew of the Syrians two and twenty thousand men.	When the Arameans of Damascus came to help King Hadadezer of Zobah, David struck down twenty-two thousand men.
2SA	8	6	다메섹 아람에 수비대를 두매 아람 사람이 다윗의 종이 되어 조공을 바치니라 다윗이 어디를 가든지 여호와께서 이기게 하시니라	Then David put garrisons in Syria of Damascus: and the Syrians became servants to David, and brought gifts. And the Lord preserved David whithersoever he went.	Then he placed garrisons in Aram of Damascus, and the Arameans became subject to David and brought him tribute. So the LORD made David victorious wherever he went.
2SA	8	7	다윗이 하닷에셀의 신복들의 가진 금방패를 빼앗아 예루살렘으로 가져오고	And David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of Hadadezer, and brought them to Jerusalem.	And David took the gold shields that belonged to the officers of Hadadezer and brought them to Jerusalem.
2SA	8	8	또 하닷에셀의 고을 베다와 베로대에서 매우 많은 놋을 빼앗으니라	And from Betah, and from Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, king David took exceeding much brass.	And from Betah and Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, King David took a large amount of bronze.
2SA	8	9	하맛 왕 도이가 다윗이 하닷에셀의 온 군대를 쳐서 파하였다 함을 듣고	When Toi king of Hamath heard that David had smitten all the host of Hadadezer,	When King Toi of Hamath heard that David had defeated the entire army of Hadadezer,
2SA	8	10	그 아들 요람을 보내어 다윗 왕에게 문안하고 축복하게 하니 이는 하닷에셀이 도이로 더불어 전쟁이 있던 터에 다윗이 하닷에셀을 쳐서 파함이라 요람이 은 그릇과 금 그릇과 놋 그릇을 가지고 온지라	Then Toi sent Joram his son unto king David, to salute him, and to bless him, because he had fought against Hadadezer, and smitten him: for Hadadezer had wars with Toi. And Joram brought with him vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and vessels of brass:	he sent his son Joram to greet King David and bless him for fighting and defeating Hadadezer, who had been at war with Toi. Joram brought with him articles of silver and gold and bronze,
2SA	8	11	다윗 왕이 그것도 여호와께 드리되 저가 정복한 모든 나라에서 얻은 은금	Which also king David did dedicate unto the Lord, with the silver and gold that he had dedicated of all nations which he subdued;	and King David dedicated these to the LORD, along with the silver and gold he had dedicated from all the nations he had subdued—
2SA	8	12	곧 아람과 모압과 암몬 자손과 블레셋 사람과 아말렉에게서 얻은 것들과 소바 왕 르홉의 아들 하닷에셀에게서 노략한 것과 같이 드리니라	Of Syria, and of Moab, and of the children of Ammon, and of the Philistines, and of Amalek, and of the spoil of Hadadezer, son of Rehob, king of Zobah.	from Edom and Moab, from the Ammonites and Philistines and Amalekites, and from the spoil of Hadadezer son of Rehob, king of Zobah.
2SA	8	13	다윗이 염곡에서 에돔 사람 일만 팔천을 쳐 죽이고 돌아와서 명예를 얻으니라	And David gat him a name when he returned from smiting of the Syrians in the valley of salt, being eighteen thousand men.	And David made a name for himself when he returned from striking down eighteen thousand Edomites in the Valley of Salt.
2SA	8	14	다윗이 에돔에 수비대를 두되 온 에돔에 수비대를 두니 에돔 사람이 다 다윗의 종이 되니라 다윗이 어디를 가든지 여호와께서 이기게 하셨더라	And he put garrisons in Edom; throughout all Edom put he garrisons, and all they of Edom became David’s servants. And the Lord preserved David whithersoever he went.	He placed garrisons throughout Edom, and all the Edomites were subject to David. So the LORD made David victorious wherever he went.
2SA	8	15	다윗이 온 이스라엘을 다스려 모든 백성에게 공과 의를 행할새	And David reigned over all Israel; and David executed judgment and justice unto all his people.	Thus David reigned over all Israel and administered justice and righteousness for all his people:
2SA	8	16	스루야의 아들 요압은 군대장관이 되고 아힐룻의 아들 여호사밧은 사관이 되고	And Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the host; and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder;	Joab son of Zeruiah was over the army; Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud was the recorder;
2SA	8	17	아히둡의 아들 사독과 아비아달의 아들 아히멜렉은 제사장이 되고 스라야는 서기관이 되고	And Zadok the son of Ahitub, and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, were the priests; and Seraiah was the scribe;	Zadok son of Ahitub and Ahimelech son of Abiathar were priests; Seraiah was the scribe;
2SA	8	18	여호야다의 아들 브나야는 그렛 사람과 블렛 사람을 관할하고 다윗의 아들들은 대신이 되니라	And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over both the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and David’s sons were chief rulers.	Benaiah son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and Pelethites; and David’s sons were priestly leaders.
2SA	9	1	다윗이 가로되 사울의 집에 오히려 남은 사람이 있느냐 내가 요나단을 인하여 그 사람에게 은총을 베풀리라 하니라	And David said, Is there yet any that is left of the house of Saul, that I may shew him kindness for Jonathan’s sake?	Then David asked, “Is there anyone left from the house of Saul to whom I can show kindness for the sake of Jonathan?”
2SA	9	2	사울의 종 하나가 있으니 그 이름은 시바라 저를 다윗의 앞으로 부르매 왕이 저에게 묻되 네가 시바냐 가로되 종이 그로소이다	And there was of the house of Saul a servant whose name was Ziba. And when they had called him unto David, the king said unto him, Art thou Ziba? And he said, Thy servant is he.	And there was a servant of Saul’s family named Ziba. They summoned him to David, and the king inquired, “Are you Ziba?” “I am your servant,” he replied.
2SA	9	3	왕이 가로되 사울의 집에 남은 사람이 없느냐 내가 그 사람에게 하나님의 은총을 베풀고자 하노라 시바가 왕께 고하되 요나단의 아들 하나가 있는데 절뚝발이니이다	And the king said, Is there not yet any of the house of Saul, that I may shew the kindness of God unto him? And Ziba said unto the king, Jonathan hath yet a son, which is lame on his feet.	So the king asked, “Is there anyone left of Saul’s family to whom I can show the kindness of God?” Ziba answered, “There is still Jonathan’s son, who is lame in both feet.”
2SA	9	4	왕이 저에게 묻되 그가 어디 있느냐 시바가 왕에게 고하되 로드발 암미엘의 아들 마길의 집에 있나이다	And the king said unto him, Where is he? And Ziba said unto the king, Behold, he is in the house of Machir, the son of Ammiel, in Lo–debar.	“Where is he?” replied the king. And Ziba said, “Indeed, he is in Lo-debar at the house of Machir son of Ammiel.”
2SA	9	5	다윗 왕이 사람을 보내어 로드발 암미엘의 아들 마길의 집에서 저를 데려오니	Then king David sent, and fetched him out of the house of Machir, the son of Ammiel, from Lo–debar.	So King David had him brought from the house of Machir son of Ammiel in Lo-debar.
2SA	9	6	사울의 손자 요나단의 아들 므비보셋이 다윗에게 나아와서 엎드려 절하매 다윗이 가로되 므비보셋이여 하니 대답하되 주의 종이 여기 있나이다	Now when Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, was come unto David, he fell on his face, and did reverence. And David said, Mephibosheth. And he answered, Behold thy servant!	And when Mephibosheth son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, came to David, he fell facedown in reverence. Then David said, “Mephibosheth!” “I am your servant,” he replied.
2SA	9	7	다윗이 가로되 무서워 말라 내가 반드시 네 아비 요나단을 인하여 네게 은총을 베풀리라 내가 네 조부 사울의 밭을 다 네게 도로 주겠고 또 너는 항상 내 상에서 먹을지니라	And David said unto him, Fear not: for I will surely shew thee kindness for Jonathan thy father’s sake, and will restore thee all the land of Saul thy father; and thou shalt eat bread at my table continually.	“Do not be afraid,” said David, “for surely I will show you kindness for the sake of your father Jonathan. I will restore to you all the land of your grandfather Saul, and you will always eat at my table.”
2SA	9	8	저가 절하여 가로되 이 종이 무엇이관대 왕께서 죽은 개 같은 나를 돌아보시나이까	And he bowed himself, and said, What is thy servant, that thou shouldest look upon such a dead dog as I am?	Mephibosheth bowed down and said, “What is your servant, that you should show regard for a dead dog like me?”
2SA	9	9	왕이 사울의 사환 시바를 불러서 이르되 사울과 그 온 집에 속한 것은 내가 다 네 주인의 아들에게 주었노니	Then the king called to Ziba, Saul’s servant, and said unto him, I have given unto thy master’s son all that pertained to Saul and to all his house.	Then the king summoned Saul’s servant Ziba and said to him, “I have given to your master’s grandson all that belonged to Saul and to all his house.
2SA	9	10	너와 네 아들들과 네 종들은 저를 위하여 밭을 갈고 거두어 네 주인의 아들을 공궤하라 그러나 네 주인의 아들 므비보셋은 항상 내 상에서 먹으리라 하니라 시바는 아들이 열다섯이요 종이 스물이라	Thou therefore, and thy sons, and thy servants, shall till the land for him, and thou shalt bring in the fruits, that thy master’s son may have food to eat: but Mephibosheth thy master’s son shall eat bread alway at my table. Now Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty servants.	You and your sons and servants are to work the ground for him and bring in the harvest, so that your master’s grandson may have food to eat. But Mephibosheth, your master’s grandson, is always to eat at my table.” Now Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty servants.
2SA	9	11	시바가 왕께 고하되 내 주 왕께서 온갖 일을 종에게 명하신 대로 종이 준행하겠나이다 하니라 므비보셋은 왕자 중 하나처럼 왕의 상에서 먹으니라	Then said Ziba unto the king, According to all that my lord the king hath commanded his servant, so shall thy servant do. As for Mephibosheth, said the king, he shall eat at my table, as one of the king’s sons.	And Ziba said to the king, “Your servant will do all that my lord the king has commanded.” So Mephibosheth ate at David’s table like one of the king’s own sons.
2SA	9	12	므비보셋에게 젊은 아들 하나가 있으니 이름은 미가더라 무릇 시바의 집에 거하는 자들은 므비보셋의 종이 되니라	And Mephibosheth had a young son, whose name was Micha. And all that dwelt in the house of Ziba were servants unto Mephibosheth.	And Mephibosheth had a young son named Mica, and all who dwelt in the house of Ziba were servants of Mephibosheth.
2SA	9	13	므비보셋이 항상 왕의 상에서 먹으므로 예루살렘에 거하니라 그는 두 발이 다 절뚝이더라	So Mephibosheth dwelt in Jerusalem: for he did eat continually at the king’s table; and was lame on both his feet.	So Mephibosheth lived in Jerusalem, because he always ate at the king’s table, and he was lame in both feet.
2SA	10	1	그 후에 암몬 자손의 왕이 죽고 그 아들 하눈이 대신하여 왕이 되니	And it came to pass after this, that the king of the children of Ammon died, and Hanun his son reigned in his stead.	Some time later, the king of the Ammonites died and was succeeded by his son Hanun.
2SA	10	2	다윗이 가로되 내가 나하스의 아들 하눈에게 은총을 베풀되 그 아비가 내게 은총을 베푼 것 같이 하리라 하고 그 신복들을 명하여 그 아비 죽은 것을 조상하라 하니라 다윗의 신복들이 암몬 자손의 땅에 이르매	Then said David, I will shew kindness unto Hanun the son of Nahash, as his father shewed kindness unto me. And David sent to comfort him by the hand of his servants for his father. And David’s servants came into the land of the children of Ammon.	And David said, “I will show kindness to Hanun son of Nahash, just as his father showed kindness to me.” So David sent some of his servants to console Hanun concerning his father. But when they arrived in the land of the Ammonites,
2SA	10	3	암몬 자손의 방백들이 그 주 하눈에게 고하되 왕은 다윗이 조객을 보낸 것이 왕의 부친을 공경함인 줄로 여기시나이까 다윗이 그 신복을 보내어 이 성을 엿보고 탐지하여 함락시키고자 함이 아니니이까	And the princes of the children of Ammon said unto Hanun their lord, Thinkest thou that David doth honour thy father, that he hath sent comforters unto thee? hath not David rather sent his servants unto thee, to search the city, and to spy it out, and to overthrow it?	the princes of the Ammonites said to Hanun their lord, “Just because David has sent you comforters, do you really believe he is showing respect for your father? Has not David instead sent his servants to explore the city, spy it out, and overthrow it?”
2SA	10	4	이에 하눈이 다윗의 신복들을 잡아 그 수염 절반을 깎고 그 의복의 중동볼기까지 자르고 돌려보내매	Wherefore Hanun took David’s servants, and shaved off the one half of their beards, and cut off their garments in the middle, even to their buttocks, and sent them away.	So Hanun took David’s servants, shaved off half of each man’s beard, cut off their garments at the hips, and sent them away.
2SA	10	5	혹이 이 일을 다윗에게 고하니라 그 사람들이 크게 부끄러워하므로 왕이 저희를 맞으러 보내어 이르기를 너희는 수염이 자라기까지 여리고에서 머물다가 돌아오라 하니라	When they told it unto David, he sent to meet them, because the men were greatly ashamed: and the king said, Tarry at Jericho until your beards be grown, and then return.	When this was reported to David, he sent messengers to meet the men, since they had been thoroughly humiliated. The king told them, “Stay in Jericho until your beards have grown back, and then return.”
2SA	10	6	암몬 자손이 자기가 다윗에게 미움이 된줄 알고 사람을 보내어 벧르홉 아람 사람과 소바 아람 사람의 보병 이만과 마아가 왕과 그 사람 일천과 돕 사람 일만 이천을 고용한지라	And when the children of Ammon saw that they stank before David, the children of Ammon sent and hired the Syrians of Beth–rehob, and the Syrians of Zoba, twenty thousand footmen, and of king Maacah a thousand men, and of Ish–tob twelve thousand men.	When the Ammonites realized that they had become a stench to David, they hired twenty thousand Aramean foot soldiers from Beth-rehob and Zoba, as well as a thousand men from the king of Maacah and twelve thousand men from Tob.
2SA	10	7	다윗이 듣고 요압과 용사의 온 무리를 보내매	And when David heard of it, he sent Joab, and all the host of the mighty men.	On hearing this, David sent Joab and the entire army of mighty men.
2SA	10	8	암몬 자손은 나와서 성문 어귀에 진을 쳤고 소바와 르홉 아람 사람과 돕과 마아가 사람들은 따로 들에 있더라	And the children of Ammon came out, and put the battle in array at the entering in of the gate: and the Syrians of Zoba, and of Rehob, and Ish–tob, and Maacah, were by themselves in the field.	The Ammonites marched out and arrayed themselves for battle at the entrance of the city gate, while the Arameans of Zobah and Rehob and the men of Tob and Maacah were by themselves in the open country.
2SA	10	9	요압이 앞뒤에 친 적진을 보고 이스라엘의 뺀 자 중에서 또 빼서 아람 사람을 대하여 진치고	When Joab saw that the front of the battle was against him before and behind, he chose of all the choice men of Israel, and put them in array against the Syrians:	When Joab saw the battle lines before him and behind him, he selected some of the best men of Israel and arrayed them against the Arameans.
2SA	10	10	그 남은 무리는 그 아우 아비새의 수하에 붙여 암몬 자손을 대하여 진치게 하고	And the rest of the people he delivered into the hand of Abishai his brother, that he might put them in array against the children of Ammon.	And he placed the rest of the forces under the command of his brother Abishai, who arrayed them against the Ammonites.
2SA	10	11	가로되 만일 아람 사람이 나보다 강하면 네가 나를 돕고 만일 암몬 자손이 너보다 강하면 내가 가서 너를 도우리라	And he said, If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shalt help me: but if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I will come and help thee.	“If the Arameans are too strong for me,” said Joab, “then you will come to my rescue. And if the Ammonites are too strong for you, then I will come to your rescue.
2SA	10	12	너는 담대하라 우리가 우리 백성과 우리 하나님의 성읍들을 위하여 담대히 하자 여호와께서 선히 여기시는 대로 행하시기를 원하노라 하고	Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and for the cities of our God: and the Lord do that which seemeth him good.	Be strong and let us fight bravely for our people and for the cities of our God. May the LORD do what is good in His sight.”
2SA	10	13	요압과 그 종자가 아람 사람을 향하여 싸우려고 나아가니 저희가 그 앞에서 도망하고	And Joab drew nigh, and the people that were with him, unto the battle against the Syrians: and they fled before him.	So Joab and his troops advanced to fight the Arameans, who fled before him.
2SA	10	14	암몬 자손은 아람 사람의 도망함을 보고 저희도 아비새 앞에서 도망하여 성으로 들어간지라 요압이 암몬 자손을 떠나 예루살렘으로 돌아오니라	And when the children of Ammon saw that the Syrians were fled, then fled they also before Abishai, and entered into the city. So Joab returned from the children of Ammon, and came to Jerusalem.	When the Ammonites saw that the Arameans had fled, they too fled before Abishai, and they entered the city. So Joab returned from fighting against the Ammonites and came to Jerusalem.
2SA	10	15	아람 사람이 자기가 이스라엘 앞에서 패하였음을 보고 다 모이매	And when the Syrians saw that they were smitten before Israel, they gathered themselves together.	When the Arameans saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they regrouped.
2SA	10	16	하닷에셀이 사람을 보내어 강 건너편에 있는 아람 사람을 불러 내매 저희가 헬람에 이르니 하닷에셀의 군대 장관 소박이 저희를 거느린지라	And Hadarezer sent, and brought out the Syrians that were beyond the river: and they came to Helam; and Shobach the captain of the host of Hadarezer went before them.	Hadadezer sent messengers to bring more Arameans from beyond the Euphrates, and they came to Helam with Shobach the commander of Hadadezer’s army leading them.
2SA	10	17	혹이 다윗에게 고하매 저가 온 이스라엘을 모으고 요단을 건너 헬람에 이르매 아람 사람들이 다윗을 향하여 진을 치고 더불어 싸우더니	And when it was told David, he gathered all Israel together, and passed over Jordan, and came to Helam. And the Syrians set themselves in array against David, and fought with him.	When this was reported to David, he gathered all Israel, crossed the Jordan, and went to Helam. Then the Arameans arrayed themselves against David and fought against him.
2SA	10	18	아람 사람이 이스라엘 앞에서 도망한지라 다윗이 아람 병거 칠백 승의 사람과 마병 사만을 죽이고 또 그 군대 장관 소박을 치매 거기서 죽으니라	And the Syrians fled before Israel; and David slew the men of seven hundred chariots of the Syrians, and forty thousand horsemen, and smote Shobach the captain of their host, who died there.	But the Arameans fled before Israel, and David killed seven hundred charioteers and forty thousand foot soldiers. He also struck down Shobach the commander of their army, who died there.
2SA	10	19	하닷에셀에게 속한 왕들이 자기가 이스라엘 앞에서 패함을 보고 이스라엘과 화친하고 섬기니 이러므로 아람 사람들이 두려워하여 다시는 암몬 자손을 돕지 아니하니라	And when all the kings that were servants to Hadarezer saw that they were smitten before Israel, they made peace with Israel, and served them. So the Syrians feared to help the children of Ammon any more.	When all the kings who were subject to Hadadezer saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they made peace with Israel and became subject to them. So the Arameans were afraid to help the Ammonites anymore.
2SA	11	1	해가 돌아와서 왕들의 출전할 때가 되매 다윗이 요압과 그 신복과 온 이스라엘 군대를 보내니 저희가 암몬 자손을 멸하고 랍바를 에워쌌고 다윗은 예루살렘에 그대로 있으니라	And it came to pass, after the year was expired, at the time when kings go forth to battle, that David sent Joab, and his servants with him, and all Israel; and they destroyed the children of Ammon, and besieged Rabbah. But David tarried still at Jerusalem.	In the spring, at the time when kings march out to war, David sent out Joab and his servants with the whole army of Israel. They destroyed the Ammonites and besieged Rabbah, but David remained in Jerusalem.
2SA	11	2	저녁 때에 다윗이 그 침상에서 일어나 왕궁 지붕 위에서 거닐다가 그곳에서 보니 한 여인이 목욕을 하는데 심히 아름다워 보이는지라	And it came to pass in an eveningtide, that David arose from off his bed, and walked upon the roof of the king’s house: and from the roof he saw a woman washing herself; and the woman was very beautiful to look upon.	One evening David got up from his bed and strolled around on the roof of the palace. And from the roof he saw a woman bathing—a very beautiful woman.
2SA	11	3	다윗이 보내어 그 여인을 알아보게 하였더니 고하되 그는 엘리암의 딸이요 헷 사람 우리아의 아내 밧세바가 아니니이까	And David sent and enquired after the woman. And one said, Is not this Bath–sheba, the daughter of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hittite?	So David sent and inquired about the woman, and he was told, “This is Bathsheba, the daughter of Eliam and the wife of Uriah the Hittite.”
2SA	11	4	다윗이 사자를 보내어 저를 자기에게로 데려 오게 하고 저가 그 부정함을 깨끗케 하였으므로 더불어 동침하매 저가 자기 집으로 돌아가니라	And David sent messengers, and took her; and she came in unto him, and he lay with her; for she was purified from her uncleanness: and she returned unto her house.	Then David sent messengers to get her, and when she came to him, he slept with her. (Now she had just purified herself from her uncleanness.) Then she returned home.
2SA	11	5	여인이 잉태하매 보내어 다윗에게 고하여 가로되 내가 잉태하였나이다 하니라	And the woman conceived, and sent and told David, and said, I am with child.	And the woman conceived and sent word to David, saying, “I am pregnant.”
2SA	11	6	다윗이 요압에게 기별하여 헷 사람 우리아를 내게 보내라 하매 요압이 우리아를 다윗에게로 보내니	And David sent to Joab, saying, Send me Uriah the Hittite. And Joab sent Uriah to David.	At this, David sent orders to Joab: “Send me Uriah the Hittite.” So Joab sent him to David.
2SA	11	7	우리아가 다윗에게 이르매 다윗이 요압의 안부와 군사의 안부와 싸움의 어떠한 것을 묻고	And when Uriah was come unto him, David demanded of him how Joab did, and how the people did, and how the war prospered.	When Uriah came to him, David asked how Joab and the troops were doing with the war.
2SA	11	8	저가 또 우리아에게 이르되 네 집으로 내려가서 발을 씻으라 하니 우리아가 왕궁에서 나가매 왕의 식물이 뒤따라 가니라	And David said to Uriah, Go down to thy house, and wash thy feet. And Uriah departed out of the king’s house, and there followed him a mess of meat from the king.	Then he said to Uriah, “Go down to your house and wash your feet.” So Uriah left the palace, and a gift from the king followed him.
2SA	11	9	그러나 우리아는 집으로 내려가지 아니하고 왕궁 문에서 그 주의 신복들로 더불어 잔지라	But Uriah slept at the door of the king’s house with all the servants of his lord, and went not down to his house.	But Uriah slept at the door of the palace with all his master’s servants; he did not go down to his house.
2SA	11	10	혹이 다윗에게 고하여 가로되 우리아가 그 집으로 내려가지 아니하였나이다 다윗이 우리아에게 이르되 네가 길 갔다가 돌아온 것이 아니냐 어찌하여 네 집으로 내려가지 아니하였느냐	And when they had told David, saying, Uriah went not down unto his house, David said unto Uriah, Camest thou not from thy journey? why then didst thou not go down unto thine house?	And David was told, “Uriah did not go home.” “Haven’t you just arrived from a journey?” David asked Uriah. “Why didn’t you go home?”
2SA	11	11	우리아가 다윗에게 고하되 언약궤와 이스라엘과 유다가 영채 가운데 유하고 내 주 요압과 내 왕의 신복들이 바깥 들에 유진하였거늘 내가 어찌 내 집으로 가서 먹고 마시고 내 처와 같이 자리이까 내가 이 일을 행치 아니하기로 왕의 사심과 왕의 혼의 사심을 가리켜 맹세하나이다	And Uriah said unto David, The ark, and Israel, and Judah, abide in tents; and my lord Joab, and the servants of my lord, are encamped in the open fields; shall I then go into mine house, to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife? as thou livest, and as thy soul liveth, I will not do this thing.	Uriah answered, “The ark and Israel and Judah are dwelling in tents, and my master Joab and his soldiers are camped in the open field. How can I go to my house to eat and drink and sleep with my wife? As surely as you live, and as your soul lives, I will not do such a thing!”
2SA	11	12	다윗이 우리아에게 이르되 오늘도 여기 있으라 내일은 내가 너를 보내리라 우리아가 그 날에 예루살렘에 유하니라 이튿날	And David said to Uriah, Tarry here to day also, and to morrow I will let thee depart. So Uriah abode in Jerusalem that day, and the morrow.	“Stay here one more day,” David said to Uriah, “and tomorrow I will send you back.” So Uriah stayed in Jerusalem that day and the next.
2SA	11	13	다윗이 저를 불러서 저로 그 앞에서 먹고 마시고 취하게 하니 저녁 때에 저가 나가서 그 주의 신복으로 더불어 침상에 눕고 그 집으로 내려가지 아니하니라	And when David had called him, he did eat and drink before him; and he made him drunk: and at even he went out to lie on his bed with the servants of his lord, but went not down to his house.	Then David invited Uriah to eat and drink with him, and he got Uriah drunk. And in the evening Uriah went out to lie down on his cot with his master’s servants, but he did not go home.
2SA	11	14	아침이 되매 다윗이 편지를 써서 우리아의 손에 부쳐 요압에게 보내니	And it came to pass in the morning, that David wrote a letter to Joab, and sent it by the hand of Uriah.	The next morning David wrote a letter to Joab and sent it with Uriah.
2SA	11	15	그 편지에 써서 이르기를 너희가 우리아를 맹렬한 싸움에 앞세워 두고 너희는 뒤로 물러가서 저로 맞아 죽게 하라 하였더라	And he wrote in the letter, saying, Set ye Uriah in the forefront of the hottest battle, and retire ye from him, that he may be smitten, and die.	In the letter he wrote: “Put Uriah at the front of the fiercest battle; then withdraw from him, so that he may be struck down and killed.”
2SA	11	16	요압이 그 성을 살펴 용사들의 있는 줄을 아는 그곳에 우리아를 두니	And it came to pass, when Joab observed the city, that he assigned Uriah unto a place where he knew that valiant men were.	So as Joab besieged the city, he assigned Uriah to a place where he saw the strongest enemy soldiers.
2SA	11	17	성 사람들이 나와서 요압으로 더불어 싸울 때에 다윗의 신복 중 몇 사람이 엎드러지고 헷 사람 우리아도 죽으니라	And the men of the city went out, and fought with Joab: and there fell some of the people of the servants of David; and Uriah the Hittite died also.	And when the men of the city came out and fought against Joab, some of David’s servants fell, and Uriah the Hittite also died.
2SA	11	18	요압이 보내어 전쟁의 모든 일을 다윗에게 고할새	Then Joab sent and told David all the things concerning the war;	Joab sent to David a full account of the battle
2SA	11	19	그 사자에게 명하여 가로되 전쟁의 모든 일을 네가 왕께 고하기를 마친 후에	And charged the messenger, saying, When thou hast made an end of telling the matters of the war unto the king,	and instructed the messenger, “When you have finished giving the king all the details of the battle,
2SA	11	20	혹시 왕이 노하여 네게 말씀하기를 너희가 어찌하여 성에 그처럼 가까이 가서 싸웠느냐 저희가 성 위에서 쏠 줄을 알지 못하였느냐	And if so be that the king’s wrath arise, and he say unto thee, Wherefore approached ye so nigh unto the city when ye did fight? knew ye not that they would shoot from the wall?	if the king’s anger flares, he may ask you, ‘Why did you get so close to the city to fight? Did you not realize they would shoot from atop the wall?
2SA	11	21	여룹베셋의 아들 아비멜렉을 쳐 죽인 자가 누구냐 여인 하나가 성에서 맷돌 윗짝을 그 위에 던지매 저가 데벳스에서 죽지 아니하였느냐 어찌하여 성에 가까이 갔더냐 하시거든 네가 말하기를 왕의 종 헷 사람 우리아도 죽었나이다 하라	Who smote Abimelech the son of Jerubbesheth? did not a woman cast a piece of a millstone upon him from the wall, that he died in Thebez? why went ye nigh the wall? then say thou, Thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.	Who was the one to strike Abimelech son of Jerubbesheth? Was it not a woman who dropped an upper millstone on him from the wall, so that he died in Thebez? Why did you get so close to the wall?’ If so, then you are to say, ‘Your servant Uriah the Hittite is dead as well.’”
2SA	11	22	사자가 가서 다윗에게 이르러 요압의 모든 보낸 일을 고하여	So the messenger went, and came and shewed David all that Joab had sent him for.	So the messenger set out and reported to David all that Joab had sent him to say.
2SA	11	23	가로되 그 사람들이 우리보다 승하여 우리를 향하여 들로 나온고로 우리가 저희를 쳐서 성문 어귀까지 미쳤더니	And the messenger said unto David, Surely the men prevailed against us, and came out unto us into the field, and we were upon them even unto the entering of the gate.	The messenger said to David, “The men overpowered us and came out against us in the field, but we drove them back to the entrance of the gate.
2SA	11	24	활 쏘는 자들이 성 위에서 왕의 신복들을 향하여 쏘매 왕의 신복 중 몇사람이 죽고 왕의 종 헷 사람 우리아도 죽었나이다	And the shooters shot from off the wall upon thy servants; and some of the king’s servants be dead, and thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.	Then the archers shot at your servants from the wall, and some of the king’s servants were killed. And your servant Uriah the Hittite is dead as well.”
2SA	11	25	다윗이 사자에게 이르되 너는 요압에게 이같이 말하기를 이 일로 걱정하지 말라 칼은 이 사람이나 저 사람이나 죽이느니라 그 성을 향하어 더욱 힘써 싸워 함락시키라 하여 너는 저를 담대케 하라 하니라	Then David said unto the messenger, Thus shalt thou say unto Joab, Let not this thing displease thee, for the sword devoureth one as well as another: make thy battle more strong against the city, and overthrow it: and encourage thou him.	Then David told the messenger, “Say this to Joab: ‘Do not let this matter upset you, for the sword devours one as well as another. Strengthen your attack against the city and demolish it.’ Encourage him with these words.”
2SA	11	26	우리아의 처가 그 남편 우리아의 죽었음을 듣고 호곡하니라	And when the wife of Uriah heard that Uriah her husband was dead, she mourned for her husband.	When Uriah’s wife heard that her husband was dead, she mourned for him.
2SA	11	27	그 장사를 마치매 다윗이 보내어 저를 궁으로 데려 오니 저가 그 처가 되어 아들을 낳으니라 다윗의 소위가 여호와 보시기에 악하였더라	And when the mourning was past, David sent and fetched her to his house, and she became his wife, and bare him a son. But the thing that David had done displeased the Lord.	And when the time of mourning was over, David had her brought to his house, and she became his wife and bore him a son. But the thing that David had done was evil in the sight of the LORD.
2SA	12	1	여호와께서 나단을 다윗에게 보내시니 와서 저에게 이르되 한 성에 두 사람이 있는데 하나는 부하고 하나는 가난하니	And the Lord sent Nathan unto David. And he came unto him, and said unto him, There were two men in one city; the one rich, and the other poor.	Then the LORD sent Nathan to David, and when he arrived, he said, “There were two men in a certain city, one rich and the other poor.
2SA	12	2	그 부한 자는 양과 소가 심히 많으나	The rich man had exceeding many flocks and herds:	The rich man had a great number of sheep and cattle,
2SA	12	3	가난한 자는 아무 것도 없고 자기가 사서 기르는 작은 암양 새끼 하나뿐이라 그 암양 새끼는 저와 저의 자식과 함께 있어 자라며 저의 먹는 것을 먹으며 저의 잔에서 마시며 저의 품에 누우므로 저에게는 딸처럼 되었거늘	But the poor man had nothing, save one little ewe lamb, which he had bought and nourished up: and it grew up together with him, and with his children; it did eat of his own meat, and drank of his own cup, and lay in his bosom, and was unto him as a daughter.	but the poor man had nothing except one small ewe lamb that he had bought. He raised it, and it grew up with him and his children. It shared his food and drank from his cup; it slept in his arms and was like a daughter to him.
2SA	12	4	어떤 행인이 그 부자에게 오매 부자가 자기의 양과 소를 아껴 자기에게 온 행인을 위하여 잡지 아니하고 가난한 사람의 양 새끼를 빼앗아다가 자기에게 온 사람을 위하여 잡았나이다	And there came a traveller unto the rich man, and he spared to take of his own flock and of his own herd, to dress for the wayfaring man that was come unto him; but took the poor man’s lamb, and dressed it for the man that was come to him.	Now a traveler came to the rich man, who refrained from taking one of his own sheep or cattle to prepare for the traveler who had come to him. Instead, he took the poor man’s lamb and prepared it for his guest.”
2SA	12	5	다윗이 그 사람을 크게 노하여 나단에게 이르되 여호와의 사심을 가리켜 맹세하노니 이 일을 행한 사람은 마땅히 죽을 자라	And David’s anger was greatly kindled against the man; and he said to Nathan, As the Lord liveth, the man that hath done this thing shall surely die:	David burned with anger against the man and said to Nathan: “As surely as the LORD lives, the man who did this deserves to die!
2SA	12	6	저가 불쌍히 여기지 않고 이 일을 행하였으니 그 양 새끼를 사 배나 갚아 주어야 하리라	And he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because he did this thing, and because he had no pity.	Because he has done this thing and has shown no pity, he must pay for the lamb four times over.”
2SA	12	7	나단이 다윗에게 이르되 당신이 그 사람이라 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께서 이처럼 이르시기를 내가 너로 이스라엘 왕을 삼기 위하여 네게 기름을 붓고 너를 사울의 손에서 구원하고	And Nathan said to David, Thou art the man. Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, I anointed thee king over Israel, and I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul;	Then Nathan said to David, “You are that man! This is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: ‘I anointed you king over Israel, and I delivered you from the hand of Saul.
2SA	12	8	네 주인의 집을 네게 주고 네 주인의 처들을 네 품에 두고 이스라엘과 유다 족속을 네게 맡겼느니라 만일 그것이 부족하였을 것 같으면 내가 네게 이것 저것을 더 주었으리라	And I gave thee thy master’s house, and thy master’s wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and of Judah; and if that had been too little, I would moreover have given unto thee such and such things.	I gave your master’s house to you and your master’s wives into your arms. I gave you the house of Israel and Judah, and if that was not enough, I would have given you even more.
2SA	12	9	그러한데 어찌하여 네가 여호와의 말씀을 업신여기고 나 보기에 악을 행하였느뇨 네가 칼로 헷 사람 우리아를 죽이되 암몬 자손의 칼로 죽이고 그 처를 빼앗아 네 처를 삼았도다	Wherefore hast thou despised the commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his sight? thou hast killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword, and hast taken his wife to be thy wife, and hast slain him with the sword of the children of Ammon.	Why then have you despised the command of the LORD by doing evil in His sight? You put Uriah the Hittite to the sword and took his wife as your own, for you have slain him with the sword of the Ammonites.
2SA	12	10	이제 네가 나를 업신여기고 헷 사람 우리아의 처를 빼앗아 네 처를 삼았은즉 칼이 네 집에 영영히 떠나지 아니하리라 하셨고	Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thine house; because thou hast despised me, and hast taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be thy wife.	Now, therefore, the sword will never depart from your house, because you have despised Me and have taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be your own.’
2SA	12	11	여호와께서 또 이처럼 이르시기를 내가 네 집에 재화를 일으키고 내가 네 처들을 가져 네 눈 앞에서 다른 사람에게 주리니 그 사람이 네 처들로 더불어 백주에 동침하리라	Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house, and I will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbour, and he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of this sun.	This is what the LORD says: ‘I will raise up adversity against you from your own house. Before your very eyes I will take your wives and give them to another, and he will lie with them in broad daylight.
2SA	12	12	너는 은밀히 행하였으나 나는 이스라엘 무리 앞 백주에 이 일을 행하리라 하셨나이다	For thou didst it secretly: but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the sun.	You have acted in secret, but I will do this thing in broad daylight before all Israel.’”
2SA	12	13	다윗이 나단에게 이르되 내가 여호와께 죄를 범하였노라 하매 나단이 다윗에게 대답하되 여호와께서도 당신의 죄를 사하셨나니 당신이 죽지 아니하려니와	And David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord. And Nathan said unto David, The Lord also hath put away thy sin; thou shalt not die.	Then David said to Nathan, “I have sinned against the LORD.” “The LORD has taken away your sin,” Nathan replied. “You will not die.
2SA	12	14	이 일로 인하여 여호와의 원수로 크게 훼방할 거리를 얻게 하였으니 당신의 낳은 아이가 정녕 죽으리이다 하고	Howbeit, because by this deed thou hast given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child also that is born unto thee shall surely die.	Nevertheless, because by this deed you have shown utter contempt for the word of the LORD, the son born to you will surely die.”
2SA	12	15	나단이 자기 집으로 돌아가니라 우리아의 처가 다윗에게 낳은 아이를 여호와께서 치시매 심히 앓는지라	And Nathan departed unto his house. And the Lord struck the child that Uriah’s wife bare unto David, and it was very sick.	After Nathan had gone home, the LORD struck the child that Uriah’s wife had borne to David, and he became ill.
2SA	12	16	다윗이 그 아이를 위하여 하나님께 간구하되 금식하고 안에 들어가서 밤새도록 땅에 엎드렸으니	David therefore besought God for the child; and David fasted, and went in, and lay all night upon the earth.	David pleaded with God for the boy. He fasted and went into his house and spent the night lying in sackcloth on the ground.
2SA	12	17	그 집의 늙은 자들이 곁에 이르러 다윗을 일으키려 하되 왕이 듣지 아니하고 저희로 더불어 먹지도 아니하더라	And the elders of his house arose, and went to him, to raise him up from the earth: but he would not, neither did he eat bread with them.	The elders of his household stood beside him to help him up from the ground, but he was unwilling and would not eat anything with them.
2SA	12	18	이레만에 그 아이가 죽으니라 그러나 다윗의 신복들이 아이의 죽은 것을 왕에게 고하기를 두려워하니 이는 저희가 말하기를 아이가 살았을 때에 우리가 말하여도 왕이 그 말을 듣지 아니하셨나니 어떻게 그 아이의 죽은 것을 고할 수 있으랴 왕이 훼상하시리로다	And it came to pass on the seventh day, that the child died. And the servants of David feared to tell him that the child was dead: for they said, Behold, while the child was yet alive, we spake unto him, and he would not hearken unto our voice: how will he then vex himself, if we tell him that the child is dead?	On the seventh day the child died. But David’s servants were afraid to tell him that the child was dead, for they said, “Look, while the child was alive, we spoke to him, and he would not listen to us. So how can we tell him the child is dead? He may even harm himself.”
2SA	12	19	다윗이 그 신복들의 서로 수군거리는 것을 보고 그 아이가 죽은 줄을 깨닫고 그 신복들에게 묻되 아이가 죽었느냐 대답하되 죽었나이다	But when David saw that his servants whispered, David perceived that the child was dead: therefore David said unto his servants, Is the child dead? And they said, He is dead.	When David saw that his servants were whispering to one another, he perceived that the child was dead. So he asked his servants, “Is the child dead?” “He is dead,” they replied.
2SA	12	20	다윗이 땅에서 일어나 몸을 씻고 기름을 바르고 의복을 갈아 입고 여호와의 전에 들어가서 경배하고 궁으로 돌아와서 명하여 음식을 그 앞에 베풀게 하고 먹은지라	Then David arose from the earth, and washed, and anointed himself, and changed his apparel, and came into the house of the Lord, and worshipped: then he came to his own house; and when he required, they set bread before him, and he did eat.	Then David got up from the ground, washed and anointed himself, changed his clothes, and went into the house of the LORD and worshiped. Then he went to his own house, and at his request they set food before him, and he ate.
2SA	12	21	신복들이 왕께 묻되 아이가 살았을 때에는 위하여 금식하고 우시더니 죽은 후에는 일어나서 잡수시니 어찜이니이까	Then said his servants unto him, What thing is this that thou hast done? thou didst fast and weep for the child, while it was alive; but when the child was dead, thou didst rise and eat bread.	“What is this you have done?” his servants asked. “While the child was alive, you fasted and wept, but when he died, you got up and ate.”
2SA	12	22	가로되 아이가 살았을 때에 내가 금식하고 운 것은 혹시 여호와께서 나를 불쌍히 여기사 아이를 살려주실는지 누가 알까 생각함이어니와	And he said, While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept: for I said, Who can tell whether God will be gracious to me, that the child may live?	David answered, “While the child was alive, I fasted and wept, for I said, ‘Who knows? The LORD may be gracious to me and let him live.’
2SA	12	23	시방은 죽었으니 어찌 금식하랴 내가 다시 돌아오게 할 수 있느냐 나는 저에게로 가려니와 저는 내게로 돌아오지 아니하리라	But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.	But now that he is dead, why should I fast? Can I bring him back again? I will go to him, but he will not return to me.”
2SA	12	24	다윗이 그 처 밧세바를 위로하고 저에게 들어가 동침하였더니 저가 아들을 낳으매 그 이름을 솔로몬이라 하니라 여호와께서 그를 사랑하사	And David comforted Bath–sheba his wife, and went in unto her, and lay with her: and she bare a son, and he called his name Solomon: and the Lord loved him.	Then David comforted his wife Bathsheba, and he went to her and lay with her. So she gave birth to a son, and they named him Solomon. Now the LORD loved the child
2SA	12	25	선지자 나단을 보내사 그 이름을 여디디야라 하시니 이는 여호와께서 사랑하심을 인함이더라	And he sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet; and he called his name Jedidiah, because of the Lord.	and sent word through Nathan the prophet to name him Jedidiah because the LORD loved him.
2SA	12	26	요압이 암몬 자손의 왕성 랍바를 쳐서 취하게 되매	And Joab fought against Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and took the royal city.	Meanwhile, Joab fought against Rabbah of the Ammonites and captured the royal fortress.
2SA	12	27	사자를 다윗에게 보내어 가로되 내가 랍바 곧 물들의 성을 쳐서 취하게 되었으니	And Joab sent messengers to David, and said, I have fought against Rabbah, and have taken the city of waters.	Then Joab sent messengers to David to say, “I have fought against Rabbah and have captured the water supply of the city.
2SA	12	28	이제 왕은 남은 군사를 모아 진치고 이 성을 쳐서 취하소서 내가 이 성을 취하면 이 성이 내 이름으로 일컬음을 받을까 두려워하나이다	Now therefore gather the rest of the people together, and encamp against the city, and take it: lest I take the city, and it be called after my name.	Now, therefore, assemble the rest of the troops, lay siege to the city, and capture it. Otherwise I will capture the city, and it will be named after me.”
2SA	12	29	다윗이 모든 군사를 모아 랍바로 가서 쳐서 취하고	And David gathered all the people together, and went to Rabbah, and fought against it, and took it.	So David assembled all the troops and went to Rabbah; and he fought against it and captured it.
2SA	12	30	그 왕의 머리에서 보석 있는 면류관을 취하니 그 중량이 한 금 달란트라 다윗이 머리에 쓰니라 다윗이 또 그 성에서 노략한 물건을 무수히 내어오고	And he took their king’s crown from off his head, the weight whereof was a talent of gold with the precious stones: and it was set on David’s head. And he brought forth the spoil of the city in great abundance.	Then he took the crown from the head of their king. It weighed a talent of gold and was set with precious stones, and it was placed on David’s head. And David took a great amount of plunder from the city.
2SA	12	31	그 가운데 백성들을 끌어내어 톱질과 써레질과 도끼질과 벽돌구이를 하게 하니라 암몬 자손의 모든 성을 이같이 하고 다윗과 모든 백성이 예루살렘으로 돌아오니라	And he brought forth the people that were therein, and put them under saws, and under harrows of iron, and under axes of iron, and made them pass through the brickkiln: and thus did he unto all the cities of the children of Ammon. So David and all the people returned unto Jerusalem.	David brought out the people who were there and put them to work with saws, iron picks, and axes, and he made them work at the brick kilns. He did the same to all the Ammonite cities. Then David and all his troops returned to Jerusalem.
2SA	13	1	그 후에 이 일이 있으니라 다윗의 아들 압살롬에게 아름다운 누이가 있으니 이름은 다말이라 다윗의 아들 암논이 저를 연애하나	And it came to pass after this, that Absalom the son of David had a fair sister, whose name was Tamar; and Amnon the son of David loved her.	After some time, David’s son Amnon fell in love with Tamar, the beautiful sister of David’s son Absalom.
2SA	13	2	저는 처녀이므로 어찌할 수 없는 줄을 알고 암논이 그 누이 다말을 인하여 심화로 병이 되니라	And Amnon was so vexed, that he fell sick for his sister Tamar; for she was a virgin; and Amnon thought it hard for him to do any thing to her.	Amnon was sick with frustration over his sister Tamar, for she was a virgin, and it seemed implausible for him to do anything to her.
2SA	13	3	암논에게 요나답이라 하는 친구가 있으니 저는 다윗의 형 시므아의 아들이요 심히 간교한자라	But Amnon had a friend, whose name was Jonadab, the son of Shimeah David’s brother: and Jonadab was a very subtil man.	Now Amnon had a friend named Jonadab, the son of David’s brother Shimeah. Jonadab was a very shrewd man,
2SA	13	4	저가 암논에게 이르되 왕자여 어찌하여 나날이 이렇게 파리하여 가느뇨 내게 고하지 아니하겠느뇨 암논이 말하되 내가 아우 압살롬의 누이 다말을 연애함이니라	And he said unto him, Why art thou, being the king’s son, lean from day to day? wilt thou not tell me? And Amnon said unto him, I love Tamar, my brother Absalom’s sister.	so he asked Amnon, “Why are you, the son of the king, so depressed morning after morning? Won’t you tell me?” Amnon replied, “I am in love with Tamar, my brother Absalom’s sister.”
2SA	13	5	요나답이 저에게 이르되 침상에 누워 병든체하다가 네 부친이 너를 보러 오거든 너는 말하기를 청컨대 내 누이 다말로 와서 내게 식물을 먹이되 나 보는데서 식물을 차려 그 손으로 먹여주게 하옵소서 하라	And Jonadab said unto him, Lay thee down on thy bed, and make thyself sick: and when thy father cometh to see thee, say unto him, I pray thee, let my sister Tamar come, and give me meat, and dress the meat in my sight, that I may see it, and eat it at her hand.	Jonadab told him, “Lie down on your bed and pretend you are ill. When your father comes to see you, say to him, ‘Please let my sister Tamar come and give me something to eat. Let her prepare it in my sight so I may watch her and eat it from her hand.’”
2SA	13	6	암논이 곧 누워 병든체하다가 왕이 와서 저를 볼 때에 왕께 고하되 청컨대 내 누이 다말로 와서 내가 보는데서 과자 두어 개를 만들어 그 손으로 내게 먹여주게 하옵소서	So Amnon lay down, and made himself sick: and when the king was come to see him, Amnon said unto the king, I pray thee, let Tamar my sister come, and make me a couple of cakes in my sight, that I may eat at her hand.	So Amnon lay down and feigned illness. When the king came to see him, Amnon said, “Please let my sister Tamar come and make a couple of cakes in my sight, so that I may eat from her hand.”
2SA	13	7	다윗이 사람을 그 집으로 보내어 다말에게 이르되 네 오라비 암논의 집으로 가서 저를 위하여 음식을 차리라 한지라	Then David sent home to Tamar, saying, Go now to thy brother Amnon’s house, and dress him meat.	Then David sent word to Tamar at the palace: “Please go to the house of Amnon your brother and prepare a meal for him.”
2SA	13	8	다말이 그 오라비 암논의 집에 이르매 암논이 누었더라 다말이 밀가루를 가지고 반죽하여 그 보는데서 과자를 만들고 그 과자를 굽고	So Tamar went to her brother Amnon’s house; and he was laid down. And she took flour, and kneaded it, and made cakes in his sight, and did bake the cakes.	So Tamar went to the house of her brother Amnon, who was lying down. She took some dough, kneaded it, made cakes in his sight, and baked them.
2SA	13	9	그 남비를 가져다가 그 앞에 쏟아 놓아도 암논이 먹기를 싫어하고 가로되 모든 사람을 나가게 하라 하니 다 저를 떠나 나가니라	And she took a pan, and poured them out before him; but he refused to eat. And Amnon said, Have out all men from me. And they went out every man from him.	Then she brought the pan and set it down before him, but he refused to eat. “Send everyone away!” said Amnon. And everyone went out.
2SA	13	10	암논이 다말에게 이르되 식물을 가지고 침실로 들어오라 내가 네 손에서 먹으리라 다말이 자기의 만든 과자를 가지고 침실에 들어가 그 오라비 암논에게 이르러	And Amnon said unto Tamar, Bring the meat into the chamber, that I may eat of thine hand. And Tamar took the cakes which she had made, and brought them into the chamber to Amnon her brother.	Then Amnon said to Tamar, “Bring the food into the bedroom, so that I may eat it from your hand.” Tamar took the cakes she had made and went to her brother Amnon’s bedroom.
2SA	13	11	저에게 먹이려고 가까이 가지고 갈 때에 암논이 그를 붙잡고 이르되 누이야 와서 나와 동침하자	And when she had brought them unto him to eat, he took hold of her, and said unto her, Come lie with me, my sister.	And when she had brought them to him to eat, he took hold of her and said, “Come lie with me, my sister!”
2SA	13	12	저가 대답하되 아니라 내 오라비여 나를 욕되게 말라 이런 일은 이스라엘에서 마땅히 행치 못할 것이니 이 괴악한 일을 행치 말라	And she answered him, Nay, my brother, do not force me; for no such thing ought to be done in Israel: do not thou this folly.	“No, my brother!” she cried. “Do not humiliate me, for such a thing should never be done in Israel. Do not do this disgraceful thing!
2SA	13	13	내가 이 수치를 무릅쓰고 어디로 가겠느냐 너도 이스라엘에서 괴악한 자 중 하나가 되리라 청컨대 왕께 말하라 저가 나를 네게 주기를 거절치 아니하시리라 하되	And I, whither shall I cause my shame to go? and as for thee, thou shalt be as one of the fools in Israel. Now therefore, I pray thee, speak unto the king; for he will not withhold me from thee.	Where could I ever take my shame? And you would be like one of the fools in Israel! Please speak to the king, for he will not withhold me from you.”
2SA	13	14	암논이 그 말을 듣지 아니하고 다말보다 힘이 세므로 억지로 동침하니라	Howbeit he would not hearken unto her voice: but, being stronger than she, forced her, and lay with her.	But Amnon refused to listen to her, and being stronger, he violated her and lay with her.
2SA	13	15	그리하고 암논이 저를 심히 미워하니 이제 미워하는 미움이 이왕 연애하던 연애보다 더한지라 곧 저에게 이르되 일어나 가라	Then Amnon hated her exceedingly; so that the hatred wherewith he hated her was greater than the love wherewith he had loved her. And Amnon said unto her, Arise, be gone.	Then Amnon hated Tamar with such intensity that his hatred was greater than the love he previously had. “Get up!” he said to her. “Be gone!”
2SA	13	16	다말이 가로되 가치 아니하다 나를 쫓아 보내는 이 큰 악은 아까 내게 행한 그 악보다 더하다 하되 암논이 듣지 아니하고	And she said unto him, There is no cause: this evil in sending me away is greater than the other that thou didst unto me. But he would not hearken unto her.	“No,” she replied, “sending me away is worse than this great wrong you have already done to me!” But he refused to listen to her.
2SA	13	17	그 부리는 종을 불러 이르되 이 계집을 내어보내고 곧 문빗장을 지르라 하니	Then he called his servant that ministered unto him, and said, Put now this woman out from me, and bolt the door after her.	Instead, he called to his attendant and said, “Throw this woman out and bolt the door behind her!”
2SA	13	18	암논의 하인이 저를 끌어내고 곧 문빗장을 지르니라 다말이 채색옷을 입었으니 출가하지 아니한 공주는 이런 옷으로 단장하는 법이라	And she had a garment of divers colours upon her: for with such robes were the king’s daughters that were virgins apparelled. Then his servant brought her out, and bolted the door after her.	So Amnon’s attendant threw her out and bolted the door behind her. Now Tamar was wearing a robe of many colors, because this is what the king’s virgin daughters wore.
2SA	13	19	다말이 재를 그 머리에 무릅쓰고 그 채색옷을 찢고 손을 머리 위에 얹고 크게 울며 가니라	And Tamar put ashes on her head, and rent her garment of divers colours that was on her, and laid her hand on her head, and went on crying.	And Tamar put ashes on her head and tore her robe. And putting her hand on her head, she went away crying bitterly.
2SA	13	20	그 오라비 압살롬이 저에게 이르되 네 오라비 암논이 너와 함께 있었느냐 그러나 저는 네 오라비니 누이야 시방은 잠잠히 있고 이것으로 인하여 근심하지 말라 이에 다말이 그 오라비 압살롬의 집에 있어 처량하게 지내니라	And Absalom her brother said unto her, Hath Amnon thy brother been with thee? but hold now thy peace, my sister: he is thy brother; regard not this thing. So Tamar remained desolate in her brother Absalom’s house.	Her brother Absalom said to her, “Has your brother Amnon been with you? Be quiet for now, my sister. He is your brother. Do not take this thing to heart.” So Tamar lived as a desolate woman in the house of her brother Absalom.
2SA	13	21	다윗 왕이 이 모든 일을 듣고 심히 노하니라	But when king David heard of all these things, he was very wroth.	When King David heard all this, he was furious.
2SA	13	22	압살롬이 그 누이 다말을 암논이 욕되게 하였으므로 저를 미워하여 시비간에 말하지 아니하니라	And Absalom spake unto his brother Amnon neither good nor bad: for Absalom hated Amnon, because he had forced his sister Tamar.	And Absalom never said a word to Amnon, either good or bad, because he hated Amnon for disgracing his sister Tamar.
2SA	13	23	이 주년 후에 에브라임 곁 바알하솔에서 압살롬의 양털을 깎는 일이 있으매 압살롬이 왕의 모든 아들을 청하고	And it came to pass after two full years, that Absalom had sheepshearers in Baal–hazor, which is beside Ephraim: and Absalom invited all the king’s sons.	Two years later, when Absalom’s sheepshearers were at Baal-hazor near Ephraim, he invited all the sons of the king.
2SA	13	24	왕께 나아와 말하되 이제 종에게 양털 깎는 일이 있사오니 청컨대 왕은 신복들을 데리시고 이 종과 함께 가사이다	And Absalom came to the king, and said, Behold now, thy servant hath sheepshearers; let the king, I beseech thee, and his servants go with thy servant.	And he went to the king and said, “Your servant has just hired shearers. Will the king and his servants please come with me?”
2SA	13	25	왕이 압살롬에게 이르되 아니라 내 아들아 우리가 다 갈 것이 없다 네게 누를 끼칠까 하노라 압살롬이 간청하되 저가 가지 아니하고 위하여 복을 비는지라	And the king said to Absalom, Nay, my son, let us not all now go, lest we be chargeable unto thee. And he pressed him: howbeit he would not go, but blessed him.	“No, my son,” the king replied, “we should not all go, or we would be a burden to you.” Although Absalom urged him, he was not willing to go, but gave him his blessing.
2SA	13	26	압살롬이 가로되 그렇게 아니하시려거든 청컨대 내 형 암논으로 우리와 함께 가게 하옵소서 왕이 저에게 이르되 그가 너와 함께 갈 것이 무엇이냐 하되	Then said Absalom, If not, I pray thee, let my brother Amnon go with us. And the king said unto him, Why should he go with thee?	“If not,” said Absalom, “please let my brother Amnon go with us.” “Why should he go with you?” the king asked.
2SA	13	27	압살롬이 간청하매 왕이 암논과 왕의 모든 아들을 저와 함께 보내니라	But Absalom pressed him, that he let Amnon and all the king’s sons go with him.	But Absalom urged him, so the king sent Amnon and the rest of his sons.
2SA	13	28	압살롬이 이미 그 사환들에게 분부하여 이르기를 너희는 암논의 마음이 술로 즐거워할 때를 자세히 보다가 내가 너희에게 암논을 치라 하거든 저를 죽이라 두려워 말라 내가 너희에게 명한 것이 아니냐 너희는 담대히 용맹을 내라 한지라	Now Absalom had commanded his servants, saying, Mark ye now when Amnon’s heart is merry with wine, and when I say unto you, Smite Amnon; then kill him, fear not: have not I commanded you? be courageous, and be valiant.	Now Absalom had ordered his young men, “Watch Amnon until his heart is merry with wine, and when I order you to strike Amnon down, you are to kill him. Do not be afraid. Have I not commanded you? Be courageous and valiant!”
2SA	13	29	압살롬의 사환들이 그 분부대로 암논에게 행하매 왕의 모든 아들이 일어나 각기 노새를 타고 도망하니라	And the servants of Absalom did unto Amnon as Absalom had commanded. Then all the king’s sons arose, and every man gat him up upon his mule, and fled.	So Absalom’s young men did to Amnon just as Absalom had ordered. Then all the other sons of the king got up, and each one fled on his mule.
2SA	13	30	저희가 길에 있을 때에 압살롬이 왕의 모든 아들을 죽이고 하나도 남기지 아니하였다는 소문이 다윗에게 이르매	And it came to pass, while they were in the way, that tidings came to David, saying, Absalom hath slain all the king’s sons, and there is not one of them left.	While they were on the way, a report reached David: “Absalom has struck down all the sons of the king; not one of them is left!”
2SA	13	31	왕이 곧 일어나서 그 옷을 찢고 땅에 엎드러지고 그 신복들도 다 옷을 찢고 모셔 선지라	Then the king arose, and tare his garments, and lay on the earth; and all his servants stood by with their clothes rent.	Then the king stood up, tore his clothes, and lay down on the ground; and all his servants stood by with their clothes torn.
2SA	13	32	다윗의 형 시므아의 아들 요나답이 고하여 가로되 내 주여 소년 왕자들이 다 죽임을 당한 줄로 생각지 마옵소서 오직 암논만 죽었으리이다 저가 압살롬의 누이 다말을 욕되게 한 날부터 압살롬이 결심한 것이니이다	And Jonadab, the son of Shimeah David’s brother, answered and said, Let not my lord suppose that they have slain all the young men the king’s sons; for Amnon only is dead: for by the appointment of Absalom this hath been determined from the day that he forced his sister Tamar.	But Jonadab, the son of David’s brother Shimeah, spoke up: “My lord must not think they have killed all the sons of the king, for only Amnon is dead. In fact, Absalom has planned this since the day Amnon violated his sister Tamar.
2SA	13	33	그러하온즉 내 주 왕이여 왕자들이 다 죽은줄로 생각하여 괘념하지 마옵소서 암논만 죽었으리이다	Now therefore let not my lord the king take the thing to his heart, to think that all the king’s sons are dead: for Amnon only is dead.	So now, my lord the king, do not take to heart the report that all the sons of the king are dead. Only Amnon is dead.”
2SA	13	34	이에 압살롬은 도망하니라 파수하는 소년이 눈을 들어 보니 뒷산 언덕길로 여러 사람이 오더라	But Absalom fled. And the young man that kept the watch lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came much people by the way of the hill side behind him.	Meanwhile, Absalom had fled. When the young man standing watch looked up, he saw many people coming down the road west of him, along the side of the hill. And the watchman went and reported to the king, “I see men coming from the direction of Horonaim, along the side of the hill.”
2SA	13	35	요나답이 왕께 고하되 왕자들이 오나이다 종의 말한 대로 되었나이다	And Jonadab said unto the king, Behold, the king’s sons come: as thy servant said, so it is.	So Jonadab said to the king, “Look, the sons of the king have arrived! It is just as your servant said.”
2SA	13	36	말을 마치자 왕자들이 이르러 대성통곡하니 왕과 그 모든 신복도 심히 통곡하니라	And it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of speaking, that, behold, the king’s sons came, and lifted up their voice and wept: and the king also and all his servants wept very sore.	And as he finished speaking, the sons of the king came in, wailing loudly. Then the king and all his servants also wept very bitterly.
2SA	13	37	압살롬은 도망하여 그술 왕 암미훌의 아들 달매에게로 갔고 다윗은 날마다 그 아들을 인하여 슬퍼하니라	But Absalom fled, and went to Talmai, the son of Ammihud, king of Geshur. And David mourned for his son every day.	Now Absalom fled and went to Talmai son of Ammihud, the king of Geshur. But David mourned for his son every day.
2SA	13	38	압살롬이 도망하여 그술로 가서 거한지 삼 년이라	So Absalom fled, and went to Geshur, and was there three years.	After Absalom had fled and gone to Geshur, he stayed there three years.
2SA	13	39	다윗 왕의 마음이 압살롬에게 향하여 간절하니 암논은 이미 죽었으므로 왕이 위로를 받았음이더라	And the soul of king David longed to go forth unto Absalom: for he was comforted concerning Amnon, seeing he was dead.	And King David longed to go to Absalom, for he had been consoled over Amnon’s death.
2SA	14	1	스루야의 아들 요압이 왕의 마음이 압살롬에게로 향하는줄 알고	Now Joab the son of Zeruiah perceived that the king’s heart was toward Absalom.	Now Joab son of Zeruiah perceived that the king’s heart longed for Absalom.
2SA	14	2	드고아에 보내어 거기서 슬기있는 여인 하나를 데려다가 이르되 청컨대 너는 상제 된 것처럼 상복을 입고 기름을 바르지 말고 죽은 사람을 위하여 오래 슬퍼하는 여인 같이 하고	And Joab sent to Tekoah, and fetched thence a wise woman, and said unto her, I pray thee, feign thyself to be a mourner, and put on now mourning apparel, and anoint not thyself with oil, but be as a woman that had a long time mourned for the dead:	So Joab sent to Tekoa to bring a wise woman from there. He told her, “Please pretend to be a mourner; put on clothes for mourning and do not anoint yourself with oil. Act like a woman who has mourned for the dead a long time.
2SA	14	3	왕께 들어가서 여차여차히 말하라고 할 말을 그 입에 넣어주니라	And come to the king, and speak on this manner unto him. So Joab put the words in her mouth.	Then go to the king and speak these words to him.” And Joab put the words in her mouth.
2SA	14	4	드고아 여인이 왕께 고할 때에 얼굴을 땅에 대고 엎드려 가로되 왕이여 도우소서	And when the woman of Tekoah spake to the king, she fell on her face to the ground, and did obeisance, and said, Help, O king.	When the woman from Tekoa went to the king, she fell facedown in homage and said, “Help me, O king!”
2SA	14	5	왕이 저에게 이르되 무슨 일이냐 대답하되 나는 참 과부니이다 남편은 죽고	And the king said unto her, What aileth thee? And she answered, I am indeed a widow woman, and mine husband is dead.	“What troubles you?” the king asked her. “Indeed,” she said, “I am a widow, for my husband is dead.
2SA	14	6	아들 둘이 있더니 저희가 들에서 싸우나 말려 줄 사람이 아무도 없으므로 저가 이를 쳐 죽인지라	And thy handmaid had two sons, and they two strove together in the field, and there was none to part them, but the one smote the other, and slew him.	And your maidservant had two sons who were fighting in the field with no one to separate them, and one struck the other and killed him.
2SA	14	7	온 족속이 일어나서 왕의 계집종 나를 핍박하여 말하기를 그 동생을 죽인 자를 내어 놓으라 우리가 그 동생 죽인 죄를 갚아 저를 죽여 사자 될 것까지 끊겠노라 하오니 그러한즉 저희가 내게 남아 있는 숯불을 꺼서 내 남편의 이름과 씨를 세상에 끼쳐두지 아니하겠나이다	And, behold, the whole family is risen against thine handmaid, and they said, Deliver him that smote his brother, that we may kill him, for the life of his brother whom he slew; and we will destroy the heir also: and so they shall quench my coal which is left, and shall not leave to my husband neither name nor remainder upon the earth.	Now the whole clan has risen up against your maidservant and said, ‘Hand over the one who struck down his brother, that we may put him to death for the life of the brother whom he killed. Then we will cut off the heir as well!’ So they would extinguish my one remaining ember by not preserving my husband’s name or posterity on the earth.”
2SA	14	8	왕이 여인에게 이르되 네 집으로 가라 내가 너를 위하여 명령을 내리리라	And the king said unto the woman, Go to thine house, and I will give charge concerning thee.	“Go home,” the king said to the woman, “and I will give orders on your behalf.”
2SA	14	9	드고아 여인이 왕께 고하되 내 주 왕이여 그 죄는 나와 내 아비의 집으로 돌릴 것이니 왕과 왕위는 허물이 없으리이다	And the woman of Tekoah said unto the king, My lord, O king, the iniquity be on me, and on my father’s house: and the king and his throne be guiltless.	But the woman of Tekoa said to the king, “My lord the king, may any blame be on me and on my father’s house, and may the king and his throne be guiltless.”
2SA	14	10	왕이 가로되 누구든지 네게 말하는 자를 내게로 데려 오라 저가 다시는 너를 건드리지도 못하리라	And the king said, Whosoever saith ought unto thee, bring him to me, and he shall not touch thee any more.	“If anyone speaks to you,” said the king, “bring him to me, and he will not trouble you again!”
2SA	14	11	여인이 가로되 청컨대 왕은 왕의 하나님 여호와를 생각하사 원수 갚는 자로 더 죽이지 못하게 하옵소서 내 아들을 죽일까 두려워 하나이다 왕이 가로되 여호와의 사심을 가리켜 맹세하노니 네 아들의 머리카락 하나라도 땅에 떨어지지 아니하리라	Then said she, I pray thee, let the king remember the Lord thy God, that thou wouldest not suffer the revengers of blood to destroy any more, lest they destroy my son. And he said, As the Lord liveth, there shall not one hair of thy son fall to the earth.	“Please,” she replied, “may the king invoke the LORD your God to prevent the avenger of blood from increasing the devastation, so that my son may not be destroyed!” “As surely as the LORD lives,” he vowed, “not a hair of your son’s head will fall to the ground.”
2SA	14	12	여인이 가로되 청컨대 계집종을 용납하여 한 말씀으로 내 주 왕께 여쭙게 하옵소서 가로되 말하라	Then the woman said, Let thine handmaid, I pray thee, speak one word unto my lord the king. And he said, Say on.	Then the woman said, “Please, may your servant speak a word to my lord the king?” “Speak,” he replied.
2SA	14	13	여인이 가로되 그러면 어찌하여 왕께서 하나님의 백성에게 대하여 이같은 도모를 하셨나이까 이 말씀을 하셨으니 왕께서 죄 있는 사람 같이 되심은 그 내어쫓긴 자를 집으로 돌아오게 아니하심이니이다	And the woman said, Wherefore then hast thou thought such a thing against the people of God? for the king doth speak this thing as one which is faulty, in that the king doth not fetch home again his banished.	The woman asked, “Why have you devised a thing like this against the people of God? When the king says this, does he not convict himself, since he has not brought back his own banished son?
2SA	14	14	우리는 필경 죽으리니 땅에 쏟아진 물을 다시 모으지 못함 같을 것이오나 하나님은 생명을 빼앗지 아니하시고 방책을 베푸사 내어쫓긴 자로 하나님께 버린 자가 되지 않게 하시나이다	For we must needs die, and are as water spilt on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again; neither doth God respect any person: yet doth he devise means, that his banished be not expelled from him.	For surely we will die and be like water poured out on the ground, which cannot be recovered. Yet God does not take away a life; but He devises ways that the banished one may not be cast out from Him.
2SA	14	15	이제 내가 와서 내 주 왕께 이 말씀을 여쭙는 것은 백성들이 나를 두렵게 하므로 계집종이 스스로 말하기를 내가 왕께 여쭈면 혹시 종의 청하는 것을 시행하실 것이라	Now therefore that I am come to speak of this thing unto my lord the king, it is because the people have made me afraid: and thy handmaid said, I will now speak unto the king; it may be that the king will perform the request of his handmaid.	Now therefore, I have come to present this matter to my lord the king because the people have made me afraid. Your servant thought, ‘I will speak to the king. Perhaps he will grant the request of his maidservant.
2SA	14	16	왕께서 들으시고 나와 내 아들을 함께 하나님의 산업에서 끊을 자의 손에서 종을 구원하시리라 함이니이다	For the king will hear, to deliver his handmaid out of the hand of the man that would destroy me and my son together out of the inheritance of God.	For the king will hear and deliver his maidservant from the hand of the man who would cut off both me and my son from God’s inheritance.’
2SA	14	17	계집종이 또 스스로 말하기를 내 주 왕의 말씀이 나의 위로가 되기를 원한다 하였사오니 이는 내 주 왕께서 하나님의 사자 같이 선과 악을 분간하심이니이다 원컨대 왕의 하나님 여호와께서 왕과 같이 계시옵소서	Then thine handmaid said, The word of my lord the king shall now be comfortable: for as an angel of God, so is my lord the king to discern good and bad: therefore the Lord thy God will be with thee.	And now your servant says, ‘May the word of my lord the king bring me rest, for my lord the king is able to discern good and evil, just like the angel of God. May the LORD your God be with you.’”
2SA	14	18	왕이 그 여인에게 대답하여 이르되 내가 네게 묻는 것을 숨기지 말라 여인이 가로되 내 주 왕은 말씀하옵소서	Then the king answered and said unto the woman, Hide not from me, I pray thee, the thing that I shall ask thee. And the woman said, Let my lord the king now speak.	Then the king said to the woman, “I am going to ask you something; do not conceal it from me!” “Let my lord the king speak,” she replied.
2SA	14	19	왕이 가로되 이 모든 일에 요압이 너와 함께 하였느냐 여인이 대답하여 가로되 내 주 왕의 사심을 가리켜 맹세하옵나니 무릇 내 주 왕의 말씀을 좌로나 우로나 옮길 자가 없으리이다 왕의 종 요압이 내게 명하였고 저가 이 모든 말을 왕의 계집종의 입에 넣어주었사오니	And the king said, Is not the hand of Joab with thee in all this? And the woman answered and said, As thy soul liveth, my lord the king, none can turn to the right hand or to the left from ought that my lord the king hath spoken: for thy servant Joab, he bade me, and he put all these words in the mouth of thine handmaid:	So the king asked, “Is the hand of Joab behind all this?” The woman answered, “As surely as you live, my lord the king, no one can turn to the right or to the left from anything that my lord the king says. Yes, your servant Joab is the one who gave me orders; he told your maidservant exactly what to say.
2SA	14	20	이는 왕의 종 요압이 이 일의 형편을 변하려 하여 이렇게 함이니이다 내 주 왕의 지혜는 하나님의 사자의 지혜와 같아서 땅에 있는 일을 다 아시나이다 하니라	To fetch about this form of speech hath thy servant Joab done this thing: and my lord is wise, according to the wisdom of an angel of God, to know all things that are in the earth.	Joab your servant has done this to bring about this change of affairs, but my lord has wisdom like the wisdom of the angel of God, to know everything that happens in the land.”
2SA	14	21	왕이 요압에게 이르되 내가 이 일을 허락하였으니 가서 소년 압살롬을 데려오라	And the king said unto Joab, Behold now, I have done this thing: go therefore, bring the young man Absalom again.	Then the king said to Joab, “I hereby grant this request. Go, bring back the young man Absalom.”
2SA	14	22	요압이 땅에 엎드려 절하고 왕을 위하여 복을 빌고 가로되 내 주 왕이여 종의 구함을 허락하시니 종이 왕 앞에서 은혜 받은 줄을 오늘날 아나이다 하고	And Joab fell to the ground on his face, and bowed himself, and thanked the king: and Joab said, To day thy servant knoweth that I have found grace in thy sight, my lord, O king, in that the king hath fulfilled the request of his servant.	Joab fell facedown in homage and blessed the king. “Today,” said Joab, “your servant knows that he has found favor with you, my lord the king, because the king has granted his request.”
2SA	14	23	일어나 그술로 가서 압살롬을 데리고 예루살렘으로 오니	So Joab arose and went to Geshur, and brought Absalom to Jerusalem.	So Joab got up, went to Geshur, and brought Absalom to Jerusalem.
2SA	14	24	왕이 가로되 저를 그 집으로 물러가게 하고 내 얼굴을 보지 말게 하라 하매 압살롬이 자기 집으로 가고 왕의 얼굴을 보지 못하니라	And the king said, Let him turn to his own house, and let him not see my face. So Absalom returned to his own house, and saw not the king’s face.	But the king added, “He may return to his house, but he must not see my face.” So Absalom returned to his own house, but he did not see the king.
2SA	14	25	온 이스라엘 가운데 압살롬 같이 아름다움으로 크게 칭찬 받는 자가 없었으니 저는 발바닥부터 정수리까지 흠이 없음이라	But in all Israel there was none to be so much praised as Absalom for his beauty: from the sole of his foot even to the crown of his head there was no blemish in him.	Now there was not a man in all Israel as handsome and highly praised as Absalom. From the sole of his foot to the top of his head, he did not have a single flaw.
2SA	14	26	그 머리털이 무거우므로 년말마다 깎았으며 그 머리털을 깎을 때에 달아본즉 왕의 저울로 이백 세겔이었더라	And when he polled his head, (for it was at every year’s end that he polled it: because the hair was heavy on him, therefore he polled it:) he weighed the hair of his head at two hundred shekels after the king’s weight.	And when he cut the hair of his head—he shaved it every year because his hair got so heavy—he would weigh it out to be two hundred shekels, according to the royal standard.
2SA	14	27	압살롬이 아들 셋과 딸 하나를 낳았는데 딸의 이름은 다말이라 얼굴이 아름다운 여자더라	And unto Absalom there were born three sons, and one daughter, whose name was Tamar: she was a woman of a fair countenance.	Three sons were born to Absalom, and a daughter named Tamar, who was a beautiful woman.
2SA	14	28	압살롬이 이태 동안을 예루살렘에 있으되 왕의 얼굴을 보지 못하였으므로	So Absalom dwelt two full years in Jerusalem, and saw not the king’s face.	Now Absalom lived in Jerusalem two years without seeing the face of the king.
2SA	14	29	요압을 왕께 보내려 하여 사람을 보내어 부르되 오지 아니하고 또 다시 보내되 오지 아니하는지라	Therefore Absalom sent for Joab, to have sent him to the king; but he would not come to him: and when he sent again the second time, he would not come.	Then he sent for Joab to send him to the king, but Joab refused to come to him. So Absalom sent a second time, but Joab still would not come.
2SA	14	30	압살롬이 그 종에게 이르되 보라 요압의 밭이 내 밭 근처에 있고 거기 보리가 있으니 가서 불을 놓으라 압살롬의 종들이 그 밭에 불을 놓았더니	Therefore he said unto his servants, See, Joab’s field is near mine, and he hath barley there; go and set it on fire. And Absalom’s servants set the field on fire.	Then Absalom said to his servants, “Look, Joab’s field is next to mine, and he has barley there. Go and set it on fire!” And Absalom’s servants set the field on fire.
2SA	14	31	요압이 일어나 압살롬의 집으로 와서 압살롬에게 이르되 어찌하여 네 종들이 내 밭에 불을 놓았느냐	Then Joab arose, and came to Absalom unto his house, and said unto him, Wherefore have thy servants set my field on fire?	Then Joab came to Absalom’s house and demanded, “Why did your servants set my field on fire?”
2SA	14	32	압살롬이 요압에게 대답하되 내가 일찍 사람을 보내어 너를 이리로 청한 것은 내가 너를 왕께 보내어 고하게 하기를 어찌하여 내가 그술에서 돌아오게 되었나이까 이때까지 거기 있는 것이 내게 나았으리이다 하려함이로다 이제는 네가 나로 왕의 얼굴을 보게 하라 내가 만일 죄가 있으면 왕이 나를 죽이시는 것이 가하니라	And Absalom answered Joab, Behold, I sent unto thee, saying, Come hither, that I may send thee to the king, to say, Wherefore am I come from Geshur? it had been good for me to have been there still: now therefore let me see the king’s face; and if there be any iniquity in me, let him kill me.	“Look,” said Absalom, “I sent for you and said, ‘Come here. I want to send you to the king to ask: Why have I come back from Geshur? It would be better for me if I were still there.’ So now, let me see the king’s face, and if there is iniquity in me, let him kill me.”
2SA	14	33	요압이 왕께 나아가서 그 말을 고하매 왕이 압살롬을 부르니 저가 왕께 나아가 그 앞에서 얼굴을 땅에 대어 절하매 왕이 압살롬과 입을 맞추니라	So Joab came to the king, and told him: and when he had called for Absalom, he came to the king, and bowed himself on his face to the ground before the king: and the king kissed Absalom.	So Joab went and told the king, and David summoned Absalom, who came to him and bowed facedown before him. Then the king kissed Absalom.
2SA	15	1	이 후에 압살롬이 자기를 위하여 병거와 말들을 준비하고 전배 오십 명을 세우니라	And it came to pass after this, that Absalom prepared him chariots and horses, and fifty men to run before him.	Some time later, Absalom provided for himself a chariot with horses and fifty men to run ahead of him.
2SA	15	2	압살롬이 일찍이 일어나 성문길 곁에 서서 어떤 사람이든지 송사가 있어 왕에게 재판을 청하러 올 때에 그 사람을 불러서 이르되 너는 어느 성 사람이냐 그 사람의 대답이 종은 이스라엘 아무 지파에 속하였나이다 하면	And Absalom rose up early, and stood beside the way of the gate: and it was so, that when any man that had a controversy came to the king for judgment, then Absalom called unto him, and said, Of what city art thou? And he said, Thy servant is of one of the tribes of Israel.	He would get up early and stand beside the road leading to the city gate. Whenever anyone had a grievance to bring before the king for a decision, Absalom would call out and ask, “What city are you from?” And if he replied, “Your servant is from one of the tribes of Israel,”
2SA	15	3	압살롬이 저에게 이르기를 네 일이 옳고 바르다마는 네 송사 들을 사람을 왕께서 세우지 아니하셨다 하고	And Absalom said unto him, See, thy matters are good and right; but there is no man deputed of the king to hear thee.	Absalom would say, “Look, your claims are good and right, but the king has no deputy to hear you.”
2SA	15	4	또 이르기를 내가 이 땅에서 재판관이 되고 누구든지 송사나 재판할 일이 있어 내게로 오는 자에게 내가 공의 베풀기를 원하노라 하고	Absalom said moreover, Oh that I were made judge in the land, that every man which hath any suit or cause might come unto me, and I would do him justice!	And he would add, “If only someone would appoint me judge in the land, then everyone with a grievance or dispute could come to me, and I would give him justice.”
2SA	15	5	사람이 가까이 와서 절하려 하면 압살롬이 손을 펴서 그 사람을 붙들고 입을 맞추니	And it was so, that when any man came nigh to him to do him obeisance, he put forth his hand, and took him, and kissed him.	Also, when anyone approached to bow down to him, Absalom would reach out his hand, take hold of him, and kiss him.
2SA	15	6	무릇 이스라엘 무리 중에 왕께 재판을 청하러 오는 자들에게 압살롬의 행함이 이 같아서 이스라엘 사람의 마음을 도적하니라	And on this manner did Absalom to all Israel that came to the king for judgment: so Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel.	Absalom did this to all the Israelites who came to the king for justice. In this way he stole the hearts of the men of Israel.
2SA	15	7	사 년만에 압살롬이 왕께 고하되 내가 여호와께 서원한 것이 있사오니 청컨대 나로 헤브론에 가서 그 서원을 이루게 하소서	And it came to pass after forty years, that Absalom said unto the king, I pray thee, let me go and pay my vow, which I have vowed unto the Lord, in Hebron.	After four years had passed, Absalom said to the king, “Please let me go to Hebron to fulfill a vow I have made to the LORD.
2SA	15	8	종이 아람 그술에 있을 때에 서원하기를 만일 여호와께서 나를 예루살렘으로 돌아가게 하시면 내가 여호와를 섬기리이다 하였나이다	For thy servant vowed a vow while I abode at Geshur in Syria, saying, If the Lord shall bring me again indeed to Jerusalem, then I will serve the Lord.	For your servant made a vow while dwelling in Geshur of Aram, saying: ‘If indeed the LORD brings me back to Jerusalem, I will worship the LORD in Hebron.’”
2SA	15	9	왕이 저에게 이르되 평안히 가라 하니 저가 일어나 헤브론으로 가니라	And the king said unto him, Go in peace. So he arose, and went to Hebron.	“Go in peace,” said the king. So Absalom got up and went to Hebron.
2SA	15	10	이에 압살롬이 정탐을 이스라엘 모든 지파 가운데 두루 보내어 이르기를 너희는 나팔소리를 듣거든 곧 부르기를 압살롬이 헤브론에서 왕이 되었다 하라 하니라	But Absalom sent spies throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying, As soon as ye hear the sound of the trumpet, then ye shall say, Absalom reigneth in Hebron.	Then Absalom sent spies throughout the tribes of Israel with this message: “When you hear the sound of the horn, you are to say, ‘Absalom reigns in Hebron!’”
2SA	15	11	그 때에 압살롬에게 청함을 받은 이백 명이 그 사기를 알지 못하고 아무 뜻 없이 예루살렘에서 저와 함께 갔으며	And with Absalom went two hundred men out of Jerusalem, that were called; and they went in their simplicity, and they knew not any thing.	Two hundred men from Jerusalem accompanied Absalom. They had been invited as guests and they went along innocently, for they knew nothing about the matter.
2SA	15	12	제사 드릴 때에 압살롬이 사람을 보내어 다윗의 모사 길로 사람 아히도벨을 그 성읍 길로에서 청하여 온지라 반역하는 일이 커가매 압살롬에게로 돌아오는 백성이 많아지니라	And Absalom sent for Ahithophel the Gilonite, David’s counsellor, from his city, even from Giloh, while he offered sacrifices. And the conspiracy was strong; for the people increased continually with Absalom.	While Absalom was offering the sacrifices, he sent for Ahithophel the Gilonite, David’s counselor, to come from his hometown of Giloh. So the conspiracy gained strength, and Absalom’s following kept increasing.
2SA	15	13	사자가 다윗에게 와서 고하되 이스라엘의 인심이 다 압살롬에게로 돌아갔나이다 한지라	And there came a messenger to David, saying, The hearts of the men of Israel are after Absalom.	Then a messenger came to David and reported, “The hearts of the men of Israel are with Absalom.”
2SA	15	14	다윗이 예루살렘에 함께 있는 모든 신복에게 이르되 일어나 도망하자 그렇지 아니하면 우리 한 사람도 압살롬에게서 피하지 못하리라 빨리 가자 두렵건대 저가 우리를 급히 따라와서 해하고 칼로 성을 칠까 하노라	And David said unto all his servants that were with him at Jerusalem, Arise, and let us flee; for we shall not else escape from Absalom: make speed to depart, lest he overtake us suddenly, and bring evil upon us, and smite the city with the edge of the sword.	And David said to all the servants with him in Jerusalem, “Arise and let us flee, or we will not escape from Absalom! We must leave quickly, or he will soon overtake us, heap disaster on us, and put the city to the sword.”
2SA	15	15	왕의 신복들이 왕께 고하되 우리 주 왕의 하고자 하시는 대로 우리가 행하리이다 하더라	And the king’s servants said unto the king, Behold, thy servants are ready to do whatsoever my lord the king shall appoint.	The king’s servants replied, “Whatever our lord the king decides, we are your servants.”
2SA	15	16	왕이 나갈 때에 권속을 다 따르게 하고 후궁 열 명을 남겨 두어 궁을 지키게 하니라	And the king went forth, and all his household after him. And the king left ten women, which were concubines, to keep the house.	Then the king set out, and his entire household followed him. But he left behind ten concubines to take care of the palace.
2SA	15	17	왕이 나가매 모든 백성이 다 따라서 벧메르학에 이르러 머무니	And the king went forth, and all the people after him, and tarried in a place that was far off.	So the king set out with all the people following him. He stopped at the last house,
2SA	15	18	모든 신복이 그 곁으로 지나가고 모든 그렛 사람과 모든 블렛 사람과 및 왕을 따라 가드에서 온 육백 인이 왕의 앞으로 진행하니라	And all his servants passed on beside him; and all the Cherethites, and all the Pelethites, and all the Gittites, six hundred men which came after him from Gath, passed on before the king.	and all his servants marched past him—all the Cherethites and Pelethites, and six hundred Gittites who had followed him from Gath.
2SA	15	19	그 때에 왕이 가드 사람 잇대에게 이르되 어찌하여 너도 우리와 함께 가느냐 너는 쫓겨난 나그네니 돌아가서 왕과 함께 네 곳에 있으라	Then said the king to Ittai the Gittite, Wherefore goest thou also with us? return to thy place, and abide with the king: for thou art a stranger, and also an exile.	Then the king said to Ittai the Gittite, “Why should you also go with us? Go back and stay with the new king, since you are both a foreigner and an exile from your homeland.
2SA	15	20	너는 어제 왔고 나는 정처없이 가니 오늘날 어찌 너로 우리와 함께 유리하게 하리요 너도 돌아가고 네 동포들도 데려가라 은혜와 진리가 너와 함께 있기를 원하노라	Whereas thou camest but yesterday, should I this day make thee go up and down with us? seeing I go whither I may, return thou, and take back thy brethren: mercy and truth be with thee.	In fact, you arrived only yesterday; should I make you wander around with us today while I do not know where I am going? Go back and take your brothers with you. May the LORD show you loving devotion and faithfulness.”
2SA	15	21	잇대가 왕께 대답하여 가로되 여호와의 사심과 우리 주 왕의 사심으로 맹세하옵나니 진실로 내 주 왕께서 어느 곳에 계시든지 무론 사생하고 종도 그곳에 있겠나이다	And Ittai answered the king, and said, As the Lord liveth, and as my lord the king liveth, surely in what place my lord the king shall be, whether in death or life, even there also will thy servant be.	But Ittai answered the king, “As surely as the LORD lives, and as my lord the king lives, wherever my lord the king may be, whether it means life or death, there will your servant be!”
2SA	15	22	다윗이 잇대에게 이르되 앞서 건너가라 하매 가드 사람 잇대와 그 종자들과 그와 함께 한 아이들이 다 건너가고	And David said to Ittai, Go and pass over. And Ittai the Gittite passed over, and all his men, and all the little ones that were with him.	“March on then,” said David to Ittai. So Ittai the Gittite marched past with all his men and all the little ones who were with him.
2SA	15	23	온 땅 사람이 대성통곡하며 모든 인민이 앞서 건너가매 왕도 기드론 시내를 건너가니 건너간 모든 백성이 광야 길로 향하니라	And all the country wept with a loud voice, and all the people passed over: the king also himself passed over the brook Kidron, and all the people passed over, toward the way of the wilderness.	Everyone in the countryside was weeping loudly as all the people passed by. And as the king crossed the Kidron Valley, all the people also passed toward the way of the wilderness.
2SA	15	24	사독과 그와 함께 한 모든 레위 사람이 하나님의 언약궤를 메어다가 내려놓고 아비아달도 올라와서 모든 백성이 성에서 나오기를 기다리더니	And lo Zadok also, and all the Levites were with him, bearing the ark of the covenant of God: and they set down the ark of God; and Abiathar went up, until all the people had done passing out of the city.	Zadok was also there, and all the Levites with him were carrying the ark of the covenant of God. And they set down the ark of God, and Abiathar offered sacrifices until the people had passed out of the city.
2SA	15	25	왕이 사독에게 이르되 하나님의 궤를 성으로 도로 메어 가라 만일 내가 여호와 앞에서 은혜를 얻으면 도로 나를 인도하사 내게 그 궤와 그 계신 데를 보이시리라	And the king said unto Zadok, Carry back the ark of God into the city: if I shall find favour in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and shew me both it, and his habitation:	Then the king said to Zadok, “Return the ark of God to the city. If I find favor in the eyes of the LORD, He will bring me back and let me see both it and His dwelling place again.
2SA	15	26	그러나 저가 말씀하시기를 내가 너를 기뻐하지 아니한다 하시면 종이 여기 있사오니 선히 여기시는 대로 내게 행하시옵소서 하리라	But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee; behold, here am I, let him do to me as seemeth good unto him.	But if He should say, ‘I do not delight in you,’ then here I am; let Him do to me whatever seems good to Him.”
2SA	15	27	왕이 또 제사장 사독에게 이르되 네가 선견자가 아니냐 너는 너희의 두 아들 곧 네 아들 아히마아스와 아비아달의 아들 요나단을 데리고 평안히 성으로 돌아가라	The king said also unto Zadok the priest, Art not thou a seer? return into the city in peace, and your two sons with you, Ahimaaz thy son, and Jonathan the son of Abiathar.	The king also said to Zadok the priest, “Are you not a seer? Return to the city in peace—you with your son Ahimaaz, and Abiathar with his son Jonathan.
2SA	15	28	너희에게서 내게 고하는 기별이 올 때까지 내가 광야 나룻터에서 기다리리라	See, I will tarry in the plain of the wilderness, until there come word from you to certify me.	See, I will wait at the fords of the wilderness until word comes from you to inform me.”
2SA	15	29	사독과 아비아달이 하나님의 궤를 예루살렘으로 도로 메어다 놓고 거기 유하니라	Zadok therefore and Abiathar carried the ark of God again to Jerusalem: and they tarried there.	So Zadok and Abiathar returned the ark of God to Jerusalem and stayed there.
2SA	15	30	다윗이 감람산 길로 올라갈 때에 머리를 가리우고 맨발로 울며 행하고 저와 함께 가는 백성들도 각각 그 머리를 가리우고 울며 올라가니라	And David went up by the ascent of mount Olivet, and wept as he went up, and had his head covered, and he went barefoot: and all the people that was with him covered every man his head, and they went up, weeping as they went up.	But David continued up the Mount of Olives, weeping as he went up. His head was covered, and he was walking barefoot. And all the people with him covered their heads and went up, weeping as they went.
2SA	15	31	혹이 다윗에게 고하되 압살롬과 함께 모반한 자들 가운데 아히도벨이 있나이다 하니 다윗이 가로되 여호와여 원컨대 아히도벨의 모략을 어리석게 하옵소서 하니라	And one told David, saying, Ahithophel is among the conspirators with Absalom. And David said, O Lord, I pray thee, turn the counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness.	Now someone told David: “Ahithophel is among the conspirators with Absalom.” So David pleaded, “O LORD, please turn the counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness!”
2SA	15	32	다윗이 하나님을 경배하는 마루턱에 이를 때에 아렉 사람 후새가 옷을 찢고 흙을 머리에 무릅쓰고 다윗을 맞으러 온지라	And it came to pass, that when David was come to the top of the mount, where he worshipped God, behold, Hushai the Archite came to meet him with his coat rent, and earth upon his head:	When David came to the summit, where he used to worship God, Hushai the Archite was there to meet him with his robe torn and dust on his head.
2SA	15	33	다윗이 저에게 이르되 네가 만일 나와 함께 나아가면 내게 누를 끼치리라	Unto whom David said, If thou passest on with me, then thou shalt be a burden unto me:	David said to him, “If you go on with me, you will be a burden to me.
2SA	15	34	그러나 네가 만일 성으로 돌아가서 압살롬에게 말하기를 왕이여 내가 왕의 종이니이다 이왕에는 왕의 부친의 종이었더니 내가 이제는 왕의 종이니이다 하면 네가 나를 위하여 아히도벨의 모략을 패하게 하리라	But if thou return to the city, and say unto Absalom, I will be thy servant, O king; as I have been thy father’s servant hitherto, so will I now also be thy servant: then mayest thou for me defeat the counsel of Ahithophel.	But you can thwart the counsel of Ahithophel for me if you return to the city and say to Absalom: ‘I will be your servant, my king; in the past I was your father’s servant, but now I will be your servant.’
2SA	15	35	사독과 아비아달 두 제사장이 너와 함께 거기 있지 아니하냐 네가 궁중에서 무엇을 듣든지 사독과 아비아달 두 제사장에게 고하라	And hast thou not there with thee Zadok and Abiathar the priests? therefore it shall be, that what thing soever thou shalt hear out of the king’s house, thou shalt tell it to Zadok and Abiathar the priests.	Will not Zadok and Abiathar the priests be there with you? Report to them everything you hear from the king’s palace.
2SA	15	36	저희의 두 아들 곧 사독의 아히마아스와 아비아달의 요나단이 저희와 함께 거기 있나니 무릇 너희 듣는 것을 저희 편으로 내게 기별할지니라	Behold, they have there with them their two sons, Ahimaaz Zadok’s son, and Jonathan Abiathar’s son; and by them ye shall send unto me every thing that ye can hear.	Indeed, their two sons, Ahimaaz son of Zadok and Jonathan son of Abiathar, are there with them. Send them to me with everything you hear.”
2SA	15	37	다윗의 친구 후새가 곧 성으로 들어가고 압살롬도 예루살렘으로 들어갔더라	So Hushai David’s friend came into the city, and Absalom came into Jerusalem.	So David’s friend Hushai arrived in Jerusalem just as Absalom was entering the city.
2SA	16	1	다윗이 마루턱을 조금 지나니 므비보셋의 사환 시바가 안장 지운 두 나귀에 떡 이백과 건포도 일백 송이와 여름 실과 일백과 포도주 한 가죽부대를 싣고 다윗을 맞는지라	And when David was a little past the top of the hill, behold, Ziba the servant of Mephibosheth met him, with a couple of asses saddled, and upon them two hundred loaves of bread, and an hundred bunches of raisins, and an hundred of summer fruits, and a bottle of wine.	When David had gone a little beyond the summit, Ziba the servant of Mephibosheth was there to meet him. He had a pair of saddled donkeys loaded with two hundred loaves of bread, a hundred clusters of raisins, a hundred summer fruits, and a skin of wine.
2SA	16	2	왕이 시바에게 이르되 네가 무슨 뜻으로 이것을 가져왔느뇨 시바가 가로되 나귀는 왕의 권속들로 타게 하고 떡과 실과는 소년들로 먹게하고 포도주는 들에서 곤비한 자들로 마시게 하려 함이니이다	And the king said unto Ziba, What meanest thou by these? And Ziba said, The asses be for the king’s household to ride on; and the bread and summer fruit for the young men to eat; and the wine, that such as be faint in the wilderness may drink.	“Why do you have these?” asked the king. Ziba replied, “The donkeys are for the king’s household to ride, the bread and summer fruit are for the young men to eat, and the wine is to refresh those who become exhausted in the wilderness.”
2SA	16	3	왕이 가로되 네 주인의 아들이 어디 있느뇨 시바가 왕께 고하되 예루살렘에 있는데 저가 말하기를 이스라엘 족속이 오늘 내 아비의 나라를 내게 돌리리라 하나이다	And the king said, And where is thy master’s son? And Ziba said unto the king, Behold, he abideth at Jerusalem: for he said, To day shall the house of Israel restore me the kingdom of my father.	“Where is your master’s grandson?” asked the king. And Ziba answered, “Indeed, he is staying in Jerusalem, for he has said, ‘Today, the house of Israel will restore to me the kingdom of my grandfather.’”
2SA	16	4	왕이 시바더러 이르되 므비보셋에게 있는 것이 다 네 것이니라 시바가 가로되 내가 절하나이다 내 주 왕이여 나로 왕의 앞에서 은혜를 입게 하옵소서 하니라	Then said the king to Ziba, Behold, thine are all that pertained unto Mephibosheth. And Ziba said, I humbly beseech thee that I may find grace in thy sight, my lord, O king.	So the king said to Ziba, “All that belongs to Mephibosheth is now yours!” “I humbly bow before you,” said Ziba. “May I find favor in your eyes, my lord the king!”
2SA	16	5	다윗 왕이 바후림에 이르매 거기서 사울의 집 족속 하나가 나오니 게라의 아들이요 이름은 시므이라 저가 나오면서 연하여 저주하고	And when king David came to Bahurim, behold, thence came out a man of the family of the house of Saul, whose name was Shimei, the son of Gera: he came forth, and cursed still as he came.	As King David approached Bahurim, a man from the family of the house of Saul was just coming out. His name was Shimei son of Gera, and as he approached, he kept yelling out curses.
2SA	16	6	또 다윗과 다윗 왕의 모든 신복을 향하여 돌을 던지니 그 때에 모든 백성과 용사들은 다 왕의 좌우에 있었더라	And he cast stones at David, and at all the servants of king David: and all the people and all the mighty men were on his right hand and on his left.	He threw stones at David and at all the servants of the king, though the troops and all the mighty men were on David’s right and left.
2SA	16	7	시므이가 저주하는 가운데 이와 같이 말하니라 피를 흘린 자여 비루한 자여 가거라 가거라	And thus said Shimei when he cursed, Come out, come out, thou bloody man, and thou man of Belial:	And as he yelled curses, Shimei said, “Get out, get out, you worthless man of bloodshed!
2SA	16	8	사울의 족속의 모든 피를 여호와께서 네게로 돌리셨도다 그 대신에 네가 왕이 되었으나 여호와께서 나라를 네 아들 압살롬의 손에 붙이셨도다 보라 너는 피를 흘린 자인고로 화를 자취하였느니라	The Lord hath returned upon thee all the blood of the house of Saul, in whose stead thou hast reigned; and the Lord hath delivered the kingdom into the hand of Absalom thy son: and, behold, thou art taken in thy mischief, because thou art a bloody man.	The LORD has paid you back for all the blood of the house of Saul, in whose place you have reigned, and the LORD has delivered the kingdom into the hand of your son Absalom. See, you have come to ruin because you are a man of bloodshed!”
2SA	16	9	스루야의 아들 아비새가 왕께 여짜오되 이 죽은 개가 어찌 내 주 왕을 저주하리이까 청컨대 나로 건너가서 저의 머리를 베게 하소서	Then said Abishai the son of Zeruiah unto the king, Why should this dead dog curse my lord the king? let me go over, I pray thee, and take off his head.	Then Abishai son of Zeruiah said to the king, “Why should this dead dog curse my lord the king? Let me go over and cut off his head!”
2SA	16	10	왕이 가로되 스루야의 아들들아 내가 너희와 무슨 상관이 있느냐 저가 저주하는 것은 여호와께서 저에게 다윗을 저주하라 하심이니 네가 어찌 그리하였느냐 할 자가 누구겠느냐 하고	And the king said, What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah? so let him curse, because the Lord hath said unto him, Curse David. Who shall then say, Wherefore hast thou done so?	But the king replied, “What have I to do with you, O sons of Zeruiah? If he curses me because the LORD told him, ‘Curse David,’ who can ask, ‘Why did you do this?’”
2SA	16	11	또 아비새와 모든 신복에게 이르되 내 몸에서 난 아들도 내 생명을 해하려 하거든 하물며 이 베냐민 사람이랴 여호와께서 저에게 명하신 것이니 저로 저주하게 버려두라	And David said to Abishai, and to all his servants, Behold, my son, which came forth of my bowels, seeketh my life: how much more now may this Benjamite do it? let him alone, and let him curse; for the Lord hath bidden him.	Then David said to Abishai and to all his servants, “Behold, my own son, my own flesh and blood, seeks my life. How much more, then, this Benjamite! Leave him alone and let him curse me, for the LORD has told him so.
2SA	16	12	혹시 여호와께서 나의 원통함을 감찰하시리니 오늘날 그 저주 까닭에 선으로 내게 갚아 주시리라 하고	It may be that the Lord will look on mine affliction, and that the Lord will requite me good for his cursing this day.	Perhaps the LORD will see my affliction and repay me with good for the cursing I receive today.”
2SA	16	13	다윗과 그 종자들이 길을 갈 때에 시므이는 산비탈로 따라가면서 저주하고 저를 향하여 돌을 던지며 티끌을 날리더라	And as David and his men went by the way, Shimei went along on the hill’s side over against him, and cursed as he went, and threw stones at him, and cast dust.	So David and his men proceeded along the road as Shimei went along the ridge of the hill opposite him. As Shimei went, he yelled curses, threw stones, and flung dust at David.
2SA	16	14	왕과 그 함께 있는 백성들이 다 곤비하여 한 곳에 이르러 거기서 쉬니라	And the king, and all the people that were with him, came weary, and refreshed themselves there.	Finally, the king and all the people with him arrived, exhausted. And there he refreshed himself.
2SA	16	15	압살롬과 모든 이스라엘 백성들이 예루살렘에 이르고 아히도벨도 저와 함께 이른지라	And Absalom, and all the people the men of Israel, came to Jerusalem, and Ahithophel with him.	Then Absalom and all the men of Israel came to Jerusalem, and Ahithophel was with him.
2SA	16	16	다윗의 친구 아렉 사람 후새가 압살롬에게 나아올 때에 저에게 말하기를 왕이여 만세, 왕이여 만세 하니	And it came to pass, when Hushai the Archite, David’s friend, was come unto Absalom, that Hushai said unto Absalom, God save the king, God save the king.	And David’s friend Hushai the Archite went to Absalom and said to him, “Long live the king! Long live the king!”
2SA	16	17	압살롬이 후새에게 이르되 이것이 네가 친구를 후대하는 것이냐 네가 어찌하여 네 친구와 함께 가지 아니하였느냐	And Absalom said to Hushai, Is this thy kindness to thy friend? why wentest thou not with thy friend?	“Is this the loyalty you show your friend?” Absalom replied. “Why did you not go with your friend?”
2SA	16	18	후새가 압살롬에게 이르되 그렇지 아니하니이다 내가 여호와와 이 백성 모든 이스라엘의 택한 자에게 속하여 그와 함께 거할 것이니이다	And Hushai said unto Absalom, Nay; but whom the Lord, and this people, and all the men of Israel, choose, his will I be, and with him will I abide.	“Not at all,” Hushai answered. “For the one chosen by the LORD, by the people, and by all the men of Israel—his I will be, and with him I will remain.
2SA	16	19	또 내가 이제 누구를 섬기리이까 그 아들이 아니니이까 내가 전에 왕의 아버지를 섬긴 것 같이 왕을 섬기리이다 하니라	And again, whom should I serve? should I not serve in the presence of his son? as I have served in thy father’s presence, so will I be in thy presence.	Furthermore, whom should I serve if not the son? As I served in your father’s presence, so also I will serve in yours.”
2SA	16	20	압살롬이 아히도벨에게 이르되 너는 어떻게 행할 모략을 우리에게 가르치라	Then said Absalom to Ahithophel, Give counsel among you what we shall do.	Then Absalom said to Ahithophel, “Give me counsel. What should we do?”
2SA	16	21	아히도벨이 압살롬에게 이르되 왕의 아버지가 머물러 두어 궁을 지키게 한 후궁들로 더불어 동침하소서 그리하면 왕께서 왕의 부친의 미워하는바 됨을 온 이스라엘이 들으리니 왕과 함께 있는 모든 사람의 힘이 더욱 강하여지리이다	And Ahithophel said unto Absalom, Go in unto thy father’s concubines, which he hath left to keep the house; and all Israel shall hear that thou art abhorred of thy father: then shall the hands of all that are with thee be strong.	Ahithophel replied, “Sleep with your father’s concubines, whom he has left to keep the palace. When all Israel hears that you have become a stench to your father, then the hands of all who are with you will be strengthened.”
2SA	16	22	이에 사람들이 압살롬을 위하여 지붕에 장막을 치니 압살롬이 온 이스라엘 무리의 눈 앞에서 그 부친의 후궁들로 더불어 동침하니라	So they spread Absalom a tent upon the top of the house; and Absalom went in unto his father’s concubines in the sight of all Israel.	So they pitched a tent for Absalom on the roof, and he slept with his father’s concubines in the sight of all Israel.
2SA	16	23	그 때에 아히도벨의 베푸는 모략은 하나님께 물어 받은 말씀과 일반이라 저의 모든 모략은 다윗에게나 압살롬에게나 이와 같더라	And the counsel of Ahithophel, which he counselled in those days, was as if a man had enquired at the oracle of God: so was all the counsel of Ahithophel both with David and with Absalom.	Now in those days the advice of Ahithophel was like the consultation of the word of God. Such was the regard that both David and Absalom had for Ahithophel’s advice.
2SA	17	1	아히도벨이 또 압살롬에게 이르되 이제 나로 하여금 사람 일만 이천을 택하게 하소서 오늘 밤에 내가 일어나서 다윗의 뒤를 따라	Moreover Ahithophel said unto Absalom, Let me now choose out twelve thousand men, and I will arise and pursue after David this night:	Furthermore, Ahithophel said to Absalom, “Let me choose twelve thousand men and set out tonight in pursuit of David.
2SA	17	2	저가 곤하고 약할 때에 엄습하여 저를 무섭게 한즉 저와 함께 있는 모든 백성이 도망하리니 내가 다윗 왕만 쳐 죽이고	And I will come upon him while he is weary and weak handed, and will make him afraid: and all the people that are with him shall flee; and I will smite the king only:	I will attack him while he is weak and weary; I will throw him into a panic, and all the people with him will flee; I will strike down only the king
2SA	17	3	모든 백성으로 왕께 돌아오게 하리니 무리의 돌아오기는 왕의 찾는 이 사람에게 달렸음이라 그리하면 모든 백성이 평안하리이다	And I will bring back all the people unto thee: the man whom thou seekest is as if all returned: so all the people shall be in peace.	and bring all the people back to you as a bride returning to her husband. You seek the life of only one man; then all the people will be at peace.”
2SA	17	4	압살롬과 이스라엘 장로들이 다 그 말을 옳게 여기더라	And the saying pleased Absalom well, and all the elders of Israel.	This proposal seemed good to Absalom and all the elders of Israel.
2SA	17	5	압살롬이 이르되 아렉 사람 후새도 부르라 우리가 저의 말도 듣자 하니라	Then said Absalom, Call now Hushai the Archite also, and let us hear likewise what he saith.	Then Absalom said, “Summon Hushai the Archite as well, and let us hear what he too has to say.”
2SA	17	6	후새가 압살롬에게 이르매 압살롬이 저에게 말하여 가로되 아히도벨이 여차여차히 말하니 우리가 그 말대로 행하랴 그렇지 않거든 너는 말하라	And when Hushai was come to Absalom, Absalom spake unto him, saying, Ahithophel hath spoken after this manner: shall we do after his saying? if not; speak thou.	So Hushai came to Absalom, who told him, “Ahithophel has spoken this proposal. Should we carry it out? If not, what do you say?”
2SA	17	7	후새가 압살롭에게 이르되 이 때에는 아히도벨의 베푼 모략이 선치 아니하니이다 하고	And Hushai said unto Absalom, The counsel that Ahithophel hath given is not good at this time.	Hushai replied, “This time the advice of Ahithophel is not sound.”
2SA	17	8	또 말하되 왕도 아시거니와 왕의 부친과 그 종자들은 용사라 저희는 들에 있는 곰이 새끼를 빼앗긴 것 같이 격분하였고 왕의 부친은 병법에 익은 사람인즉 백성과 함께 자지 아니하고	For, said Hushai, thou knowest thy father and his men, that they be mighty men, and they be chafed in their minds, as a bear robbed of her whelps in the field: and thy father is a man of war, and will not lodge with the people.	He continued, “You know your father and his men. They are mighty men, and as fierce as a wild bear robbed of her cubs. Moreover, your father is a man of war who will not spend the night with the troops.
2SA	17	9	이제 어느 굴에나 어느 곳에 숨어 있으리니 혹 무리 중에 몇이 먼저 엎드러지면 그 소문을 듣는 자가 말하기를 압살롬을 좇는 자 가운데서 패함을 당하였다 할지라	Behold, he is hid now in some pit, or in some other place: and it will come to pass, when some of them be overthrown at the first, that whosoever heareth it will say, There is a slaughter among the people that follow Absalom.	Surely by now he is hiding in a cave or some other location. If some of your troops fall first, whoever hears of it will say, ‘There has been a slaughter among the troops who follow Absalom.’
2SA	17	10	비록 용감하여 사자 같은 자의 마음이라도 저상하리니 이는 이스라엘 무리가 왕의 부친은 영웅이요 그 종자들도 용사인 줄 앎이니이다	And he also that is valiant, whose heart is as the heart of a lion, shall utterly melt: for all Israel knoweth that thy father is a mighty man, and they which be with him are valiant men.	Then even the most valiant soldier with the heart of a lion will melt with fear, because all Israel knows that your father is a mighty man who has valiant men with him.
2SA	17	11	나의 모략은 이러하니이다 온 이스라엘을 단부터 브엘세바까지 바닷가의 많은 모래 같이 왕께로 모으고 친히 전장에 나가시고	Therefore I counsel that all Israel be generally gathered unto thee, from Dan even to Beer–sheba, as the sand that is by the sea for multitude; and that thou go to battle in thine own person.	Instead, I advise that all Israel from Dan to Beersheba—a multitude like the sand on the seashore—be gathered to you, and that you yourself lead them into battle.
2SA	17	12	우리가 그 만날만한 곳에서 저를 엄습하기를 이슬이 땅에 내림 같이 저의 위에 덮여 저와 그 함께 있는 모든 사람을 하나도 남겨두지 아니할 것이요	So shall we come upon him in some place where he shall be found, and we will light upon him as the dew falleth on the ground: and of him and of all the men that are with him there shall not be left so much as one.	Then we will attack David wherever we find him, and we will descend on him like dew on the ground. And of all the men with him, not even one will remain.
2SA	17	13	또 만일 저가 어느 성에 들었으면 온 이스라엘이 줄을 가져다가 그 성을 강으로 끌어들여서 그곳에 한 작은 돌도 보이지 않게 할 것이니이다 하매	Moreover, if he be gotten into a city, then shall all Israel bring ropes to that city, and we will draw it into the river, until there be not one small stone found there.	If he retreats to a city, all Israel will bring ropes to that city, and we will drag it down to the valley until not even a pebble can be found.”
2SA	17	14	압살롬과 온 이스라엘 사람들이 이르되 아렉 사람 후새의 모략은 아히도벨의 모략보다 낫다 하니 이는 여호와께서 압살롬에게 화를 내리려하사 아히도벨의 좋은 모략을 파하기로 작정하셨음이더라	And Absalom and all the men of Israel said, The counsel of Hushai the Archite is better than the counsel of Ahithophel. For the Lord had appointed to defeat the good counsel of Ahithophel, to the intent that the Lord might bring evil upon Absalom.	Then Absalom and all the men of Israel said, “The advice of Hushai the Archite is better than that of Ahithophel.” For the LORD had purposed to thwart the good counsel of Ahithophel in order to bring disaster on Absalom.
2SA	17	15	이에 후새가 사독과 아비아달 두 제사장에게 이르되 아히도벨이 압살롬과 이스라엘 장로들에게 여차여차히 모략을 베풀었고 나도 여차여차히 모략을 베풀었으니	Then said Hushai unto Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, Thus and thus did Ahithophel counsel Absalom and the elders of Israel; and thus and thus have I counselled.	So Hushai told Zadok and Abiathar, the priests, “This is what Ahithophel has advised Absalom and the elders of Israel, and this is what I have advised.
2SA	17	16	이제 너희는 빨리 사람을 보내어 다윗에게 고하기를 오늘 밤에 광야 나룻터에서 자지 마시고 아무쪼록 건너가소서 하라 혹시 왕과 그 좇는 자들이 몰사할까 하노라 하니라	Now therefore send quickly, and tell David, saying, Lodge not this night in the plains of the wilderness, but speedily pass over; lest the king be swallowed up, and all the people that are with him.	Now send quickly and tell David, ‘Do not spend the night at the fords of the wilderness, but be sure to cross over. Otherwise the king and all the people with him will be swallowed up.’”
2SA	17	17	그 때에 요나단과 아히마아스가 사람이 볼까 두려워하여 감히 성에 들어가지 못하고 에느로겔 가에 머물고 어떤 계집종은 저희에게 나와서 고하고 저희는 가서 다윗에게 고하더니	Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz stayed by En–rogel; for they might not be seen to come into the city: and a wench went and told them; and they went and told king David.	Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz were staying at En-rogel, where a servant girl would come and pass along information to them. They in turn would go and inform King David, for they dared not be seen entering the city.
2SA	17	18	한 소년이 저희를 보고 압살롬에게 고한지라 그 두 사람이 빨리 달려서 바후림 어떤 사람의 집으로 들어가서 그 뜰에 있는 우물속으로 내려가니	Nevertheless a lad saw them, and told Absalom: but they went both of them away quickly, and came to a man’s house in Bahurim, which had a well in his court; whither they went down.	But a young man did see them and told Absalom. So the two left quickly and came to the house of a man in Bahurim. He had a well in his courtyard, and they climbed down into it.
2SA	17	19	그 집 여인이 덮을 것을 가져다가 우물 아구를 덮고 찧은 곡식을 그 위에 널매 도무지 알지 못할러라	And the woman took and spread a covering over the well’s mouth, and spread ground corn thereon; and the thing was not known.	Then the man’s wife took a covering and spread it over the mouth of the well, scattering grain over it so nobody would know a thing.
2SA	17	20	압살롬의 종들이 그 집에 와서 여인에게 묻되 아히마하스와 요나단이 어디 있느냐 여인이 가로되 그들이 시내를 건너가더라 하니 저희가 찾아도 만나지 못하고 예루살렘으로 돌아가니라	And when Absalom’s servants came to the woman to the house, they said, Where is Ahimaaz and Jonathan? And the woman said unto them, They be gone over the brook of water. And when they had sought and could not find them, they returned to Jerusalem.	When Absalom’s servants came to the woman at the house, they asked, “Where are Ahimaaz and Jonathan?” “They have crossed over the brook,” she replied. The men searched but did not find them, so they returned to Jerusalem.
2SA	17	21	저희가 간 후에 두 사람이 우물에서 올라와서 다윗 왕에게 이르러 고하여 가로되 당신들은 일어나 빨리 물을 건너가소서 아히도벨이 당신들을 해하려고 여차여차히 모략을 베풀었나이다	And it came to pass, after they were departed, that they came up out of the well, and went and told king David, and said unto David, Arise, and pass quickly over the water: for thus hath Ahithophel counselled against you.	After the men had gone, Ahimaaz and Jonathan climbed up out of the well and went to inform King David, saying, “Get up and cross over the river at once, for Ahithophel has given this advice against you.”
2SA	17	22	다윗이 일어나 모든 백성과 함께 요단을 건널새 새벽에 미쳐서 한 사람도 요단을 건너지 못한 자가 없었더라	Then David arose, and all the people that were with him, and they passed over Jordan: by the morning light there lacked not one of them that was not gone over Jordan.	So David and all the people with him got up and crossed the Jordan. By daybreak, there was no one left who had not crossed the Jordan.
2SA	17	23	아히도벨이 자기 모략이 시행되지 못함을 보고 나귀에 안장을 지우고 떠나 고향으로 돌아가서 자기 집에 이르러 집을 정리하고 스스로 목매어 죽으매 그 아비 묘에 장사되니라	And when Ahithophel saw that his counsel was not followed, he saddled his ass, and arose, and gat him home to his house, to his city, and put his household in order, and hanged himself, and died, and was buried in the sepulchre of his father.	When Ahithophel saw that his advice had not been followed, he saddled his donkey and set out for his house in his hometown. He put his affairs in order and hanged himself. So he died and was buried in his father’s tomb.
2SA	17	24	이에 다윗은 마하나임에 이르고 압살롬은 모든 이스라엘 사람과 함께 요단을 건너니라	Then David came to Mahanaim. And Absalom passed over Jordan, he and all the men of Israel with him.	Then David went to Mahanaim, and Absalom crossed the Jordan with all the men of Israel.
2SA	17	25	압살롬이 아마사로 요압을 대신하여 군장을 삼으니라 아마사는 이스라엘 사람 이드라라 하는 자의 아들이라 이드라가 나하스의 딸 아비갈과 동침하여 저를 낳았으며 아비갈은 요압의 어미 스루야의 동생이더라	And Absalom made Amasa captain of the host instead of Joab: which Amasa was a man’s son, whose name was Ithra an Israelite, that went in to Abigail the daughter of Nahash, sister to Zeruiah Joab’s mother.	Absalom had appointed Amasa over the army in place of Joab. Amasa was the son of a man named Ithra, the Ishmaelite who had married Abigail, the daughter of Nahash and sister of Zeruiah the mother of Joab.
2SA	17	26	이에 이스라엘 무리와 압살롬이 길르앗 땅에 진 치니라	So Israel and Absalom pitched in the land of Gilead.	So the Israelites and Absalom camped in the land of Gilead.
2SA	17	27	다윗이 마하나임에 이르렀을 때에 암몬 족속에게 속한 랍바 사람 나하스의 아들 소비와 로데발 사람 암미엘의 아들 마길과 로글림 길르앗 사람 바실래가	And it came to pass, when David was come to Mahanaim, that Shobi the son of Nahash of Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and Machir the son of Ammiel of Lo–debar, and Barzillai the Gileadite of Rogelim,	When David came to Mahanaim, he was met by Shobi son of Nahash from Rabbah of the Ammonites, Machir son of Ammiel from Lo-debar, and Barzillai the Gileadite from Rogelim.
2SA	17	28	침상과 대야와 질그릇과 밀과 보리와 밀가루와 볶은 곡식과 콩과 팥과 볶은 녹두와	Brought beds, and basons, and earthen vessels, and wheat, and barley, and flour, and parched corn, and beans, and lentiles, and parched pulse,	They brought beds, basins, and earthen vessels, as well as wheat, barley, flour, roasted grain, beans, lentils,
2SA	17	29	꿀과 뻐더와 양과 치스를 가져다가 다윗과 그 함께 한 백성으로 먹게 하였으니 이는 저희 생각에 백성이 들에서 시장하고 곤하고 목마르겠다 함이더라	And honey, and butter, and sheep, and cheese of kine, for David, and for the people that were with him, to eat: for they said, The people is hungry, and weary, and thirsty, in the wilderness.	honey, curds, sheep, and cheese from the herd for David and his people to eat. For they said, “The people have become hungry, exhausted, and thirsty in the wilderness.”
2SA	18	1	이에 다윗이 그 함께한 백성을 계수하고 천부장과 백부장을 그 위에 세우고	And David numbered the people that were with him, and set captains of thousands and captains of hundreds over them.	Then David reviewed his troops and appointed over them commanders of hundreds and of thousands.
2SA	18	2	그 백성을 내어 보낼새 삼분지 일은 요압의 수하에 삼분지 일은 스루야의 아들 요압의 동생 아비새의 수하에 붙이고 삼분지 일은 가드 사람 잇대의 수하에 붙이고 백성에게 이르되 나도 반드시 너희와 함께 나가리라	And David sent forth a third part of the people under the hand of Joab, and a third part under the hand of Abishai the son of Zeruiah, Joab’s brother, and a third part under the hand of Ittai the Gittite. And the king said unto the people, I will surely go forth with you myself also.	He sent out the troops, a third under Joab, a third under Joab’s brother Abishai son of Zeruiah, and a third under Ittai the Gittite. And the king said to the troops, “I will surely march out with you as well.”
2SA	18	3	백성들이 가로되 왕은 나가지 마소서 우리가 도망할지라도 저희는 우리에게 주의하지 아니할 터이요 우리가 절반이나 죽을지라도 우리에게 주의하지 아니할 터이라 왕은 우리 만 명보다 중하시오니 왕은 성에 계시다가 우리를 도우심이 좋으니이다	But the people answered, Thou shalt not go forth: for if we flee away, they will not care for us; neither if half of us die, will they care for us: but now thou art worth ten thousand of us: therefore now it is better that thou succour us out of the city.	But the people pleaded, “You must not go out! For if we have to flee, they will pay no attention to us. Even if half of us die, they will not care; but you are worth ten thousand of us. It is better for now if you support us from the city.”
2SA	18	4	왕이 저희에게 이르되 너희가 선히 여기는 대로 내가 행하리라 하고 문 곁에 서매 모든 백성이 백 명씩 천 명씩 대를 지어 나가는지라	And the king said unto them, What seemeth you best I will do. And the king stood by the gate side, and all the people came out by hundreds and by thousands.	“I will do whatever seems best to you,” the king replied. So he stood beside the gate, while all the troops marched out by hundreds and by thousands.
2SA	18	5	왕이 요압과 아비새와 잇대에게 명하여 가로되 나를 위하여 소년 압살롬을 너그러이 대접하라 하니 왕이 압살롬을 위하여 모든 군장에게 명령할 때에 백성들이 다 들으니라	And the king commanded Joab and Abishai and Ittai, saying, Deal gently for my sake with the young man, even with Absalom. And all the people heard when the king gave all the captains charge concerning Absalom.	Now the king had commanded Joab, Abishai, and Ittai, “Treat the young man Absalom gently for my sake.” And all the people heard the king’s orders to each of the commanders regarding Absalom.
2SA	18	6	이에 백성이 이스라엘을 치러 들로 나가서 에브라임 수풀에서 싸우더니	So the people went out into the field against Israel: and the battle was in the wood of Ephraim;	So David’s army marched into the field to engage Israel in the battle, which took place in the forest of Ephraim.
2SA	18	7	거기서 이스라엘 무리가 다윗의 심복들에게 패하매 그 날 그곳에서 살륙이 커서 이만에 이르렀고	Where the people of Israel were slain before the servants of David, and there was there a great slaughter that day of twenty thousand men.	There the people of Israel were defeated by David’s servants, and the slaughter was great that day—twenty thousand men.
2SA	18	8	그 땅에서 사면으로 퍼져 싸웠으므로 그 날에 수풀에서 죽은 자가 칼에 죽은 자보다 많았더라	For the battle was there scattered over the face of all the country: and the wood devoured more people that day than the sword devoured.	The battle spread over the whole countryside, and that day the forest devoured more people than the sword.
2SA	18	9	압살롬이 다윗의 신복과 마주치니라 압살롬이 노새를 탔는데 그 노새가 큰 상수리나무 번성한 가지 아래로 지날 때에 압살롬의 머리털이 그 상수리나무에 걸리매 저가 공중에 달리고 그 탔던 노새는 그 아래로 빠져 나간지라	And Absalom met the servants of David. And Absalom rode upon a mule, and the mule went under the thick boughs of a great oak, and his head caught hold of the oak, and he was taken up between the heaven and the earth; and the mule that was under him went away.	Now Absalom was riding on his mule when he met the servants of David, and as the mule went under the thick branches of a large oak, Absalom’s head was caught fast in the tree. The mule under him kept going, so that he was suspended in midair.
2SA	18	10	한 사람이 보고 요압에게 고하여 가로되 내가 보니 압살롬이 상수리나무에 달렸더이다	And a certain man saw it, and told Joab, and said, Behold, I saw Absalom hanged in an oak.	When one of the men saw this, he told Joab, “I just saw Absalom hanging in an oak tree!”
2SA	18	11	요압이 그 고한 사람에게 이르되 네가 보고 어찌하여 당장에 쳐서 땅에 떨어뜨리지 아니하였느뇨 내가 네게 은 열 개와 띠 하나를 주었으리라	And Joab said unto the man that told him, And, behold, thou sawest him, and why didst thou not smite him there to the ground? and I would have given thee ten shekels of silver, and a girdle.	“You just saw him!” Joab exclaimed. “Why did you not strike him to the ground right there? I would have given you ten shekels of silver and a warrior’s belt!”
2SA	18	12	그 사람이 요압에게 대답하되 내가 내 손에 은 천 개를 받는다 할지라도 나는 왕의 아들에게 손을 대지 아니하겠나이다 우리가 들었거니와 왕이 당신과 아비새와 잇대에게 명하여 이르시기를 삼가 누구든지 소년 압살롬을 해하지 말라 하셨나이다	And the man said unto Joab, Though I should receive a thousand shekels of silver in mine hand, yet would I not put forth mine hand against the king’s son: for in our hearing the king charged thee and Abishai and Ittai, saying, Beware that none touch the young man Absalom.	The man replied, “Even if a thousand shekels of silver were weighed out into my hands, I would not raise my hand against the son of the king. For we heard the king command you and Abishai and Ittai, ‘Protect the young man Absalom for my sake.’
2SA	18	13	아무 일도 왕 앞에는 숨길 수 없나니 내가 만일 거역하여 그 생명을 해하였다면 당신도 나를 대적하였으리이다	Otherwise I should have wrought falsehood against mine own life: for there is no matter hid from the king, and thou thyself wouldest have set thyself against me.	If I had jeopardized my own life—and nothing is hidden from the king—you would have abandoned me.”
2SA	18	14	요압이 가로되 나는 너와 같이 지체할 수 없다 하고 손에 작은 창 셋을 가지고 가서 상수리나무 가운데서 아직 살아 있는 압살롬의 심장을 찌르니	Then said Joab, I may not tarry thus with thee. And he took three darts in his hand, and thrust them through the heart of Absalom, while he was yet alive in the midst of the oak.	But Joab declared, “I am not going to wait like this with you!” And he took three spears in his hand and thrust them through the heart of Absalom while he was still alive in the oak tree.
2SA	18	15	요압의 병기를 맡은 소년 열이 압살롬을 에워싸고 쳐 죽이니라	And ten young men that bare Joab’s armour compassed about and smote Absalom, and slew him.	And ten young men who carried Joab’s armor surrounded Absalom, struck him, and killed him.
2SA	18	16	요압이 나팔을 불어 백성들로 그치게 하니 저희가 이스라엘을 따르지 아니하고 돌아오니라	And Joab blew the trumpet, and the people returned from pursuing after Israel: for Joab held back the people.	Then Joab blew the ram’s horn, and the troops broke off their pursuit of Israel because Joab had restrained them.
2SA	18	17	무리가 압살롬을 옮겨다가 수풀 가운데 큰 구멍에 던지고 그 위에 심히 큰 돌무더기를 쌓으니라 온 이스라엘 무리가 각기 장막으로 도망하니라	And they took Absalom, and cast him into a great pit in the wood, and laid a very great heap of stones upon him: and all Israel fled every one to his tent.	They took Absalom, cast him into a large pit in the forest, and piled a huge mound of stones over him. Meanwhile, all the Israelites fled, each to his home.
2SA	18	18	압살롬이 살았을 때에 자기를 위하여 한 비석을 가져 세웠으니 이는 저가 자기 이름을 전할 아들이 없음을 한탄함이라 그러므로 자기 이름으로 그 비석을 이름하였으며 그 비석이 왕의 골짜기에 있고 이제까지 압살롬의 기념비라 일컫더라	Now Absalom in his lifetime had taken and reared up for himself a pillar, which is in the king’s dale: for he said, I have no son to keep my name in remembrance: and he called the pillar after his own name: and it is called unto this day, Absalom’s place.	During his lifetime, Absalom had set up for himself a pillar in the King’s Valley, for he had said, “I have no son to preserve the memory of my name.” So he gave the pillar his name, and to this day it is called Absalom’s Monument.
2SA	18	19	사독의 아들 아히마아스가 가로되 청컨대 나로 빨리 왕에게 가서 여호와께서 왕의 원수 갚아 주신 소식을 전하게 하소서	Then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok, Let me now run, and bear the king tidings, how that the Lord hath avenged him of his enemies.	Then Ahimaaz son of Zadok said, “Please let me run and tell the king the good news that the LORD has avenged him of his enemies.”
2SA	18	20	요압이 저에게 이르되 너는 오늘 소식을 전하는 자가 되지 말고 다른 날에 전할 것이니라 왕의 아들이 죽었나니 네가 오늘날 소식을 전하지 못하리라 하고	And Joab said unto him, Thou shalt not bear tidings this day, but thou shalt bear tidings another day: but this day thou shalt bear no tidings, because the king’s son is dead.	But Joab replied, “You are not the man to take good news today. You may do it another day, but you must not do so today, because the king’s son is dead.”
2SA	18	21	구스 사람에게 이르되 네가 가서 본 것을 왕께 고하라 하매 구스 사람이 요압에게 절하고 달음질하여 가니	Then said Joab to Cushi, Go tell the king what thou hast seen. And Cushi bowed himself unto Joab, and ran.	So Joab said to a Cushite, “Go, tell the king what you have seen.” The Cushite bowed to Joab and took off running.
2SA	18	22	사독의 아들 아히마아스가 다시 요압에게 이르되 청컨대 아무쪼록 나로 또한 구스 사람의 뒤를 따라 달음질하게 하소서 요압이 가로되 내 아들아 왜 달음질하려 하느냐 이 소식으로 인하여는 상을 받지 못하리라 하되	Then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok yet again to Joab, But howsoever, let me, I pray thee, also run after Cushi. And Joab said, Wherefore wilt thou run, my son, seeing that thou hast no tidings ready?	Ahimaaz son of Zadok, however, persisted and said to Joab, “Regardless of whatever may happen, please let me also run behind the Cushite!” “My son,” Joab replied, “why do you want to run, since you will not receive a reward?”
2SA	18	23	저가 아무쪼록 달음질하겠노라 하는지라 요압이 가로되 그리하라 하니 아히마아스가 들길로 달음질하여 구스 사람보다 앞서니라	But howsoever, said he, let me run. And he said unto him, Run. Then Ahimaaz ran by the way of the plain, and overran Cushi.	“No matter what, I want to run!” he replied. “Then run!” Joab told him. So Ahimaaz ran by way of the plain and outran the Cushite.
2SA	18	24	때에 다윗이 두 문 사이에 앉았더라 파수꾼이 성문루에 올라가서 눈을 들어 보니 어떤 사람이 홀로 달음질하는지라	And David sat between the two gates: and the watchman went up to the roof over the gate unto the wall, and lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold a man running alone.	Now David was sitting between the two gates when the watchman went up to the roof of the gateway by the wall, looked out, and saw a man running alone.
2SA	18	25	파수꾼이 외쳐 왕께 고하매 왕이 가로되 저가 만일 혼자면 그 입에 소식이 있으리라 할 때에 저가 차차 가까이 오니라	And the watchman cried, and told the king. And the king said, If he be alone, there is tidings in his mouth. And he came apace, and drew near.	So he called out and told the king. “If he is alone,” the king replied, “he bears good news.” As the first runner drew near,
2SA	18	26	파수꾼이 본즉 한 사람이 또 달음질하는지라 문지기에게 외쳐 이르되 보라 한 사람이 또 혼자 달음질한다 하니 왕이 가로되 저도 소식을 가져오느니라	And the watchman saw another man running: and the watchman called unto the porter, and said, Behold another man running alone. And the king said, He also bringeth tidings.	the watchman saw another man running, and he called out to the gatekeeper, “Look! Another man is running alone!” “This one also brings good news,” said the king.
2SA	18	27	파수꾼이 가로되 나 보기에는 앞선 사람의 달음질이 사독의 아들 아히마아스의 달음질과 같으니이다 왕이 가로되 저는 좋은 사람이니 좋은 소식을 가져 오느니라	And the watchman said, Me thinketh the running of the foremost is like the running of Ahimaaz the son of Zadok. And the king said, He is a good man, and cometh with good tidings.	The watchman said, “The first man appears to me to be running like Ahimaaz son of Zadok.” “This is a good man,” said the king. “He comes with good news.”
2SA	18	28	아히마아스가 외쳐 왕께 말씀하되 평안하옵소서 하고 왕의 앞에서 얼굴을 땅에 대고 절하여 가로되 왕의 하나님 여호와를 찬양하리로소이다 그 손을 들어 내 주 왕을 대적하는 자들을 붙여 주셨나이다	And Ahimaaz called, and said unto the king, All is well. And he fell down to the earth upon his face before the king, and said, Blessed be the Lord thy God, which hath delivered up the men that lifted up their hand against my lord the king.	Then Ahimaaz called out to the king, “All is well!” And he bowed facedown before the king. He continued, “Blessed be the LORD your God! He has delivered up the men who raised their hands against my lord the king.”
2SA	18	29	왕이 가로되 소년 압살롬이 잘 있느냐 아히마아스가 대답하되 요압이 왕의 종 나를 보낼 때에 크게 소동하는 것을 보았사오나 무슨 일인지 알지 못하였나이다	And the king said, Is the young man Absalom safe? And Ahimaaz answered, When Joab sent the king’s servant, and me thy servant, I saw a great tumult, but I knew not what it was.	The king asked, “Is the young man Absalom all right?” And Ahimaaz replied, “When Joab sent the king’s servant and your servant, I saw a great tumult, but I do not know what it was.”
2SA	18	30	왕이 가로되 물러나 곁에 서 있으라 하매 물러나서 섰더라	And the king said unto him, Turn aside, and stand here. And he turned aside, and stood still.	“Move aside,” said the king, “and stand here.” So he stepped aside.
2SA	18	31	구스 사람이 이르러 고하되 내 주 왕께 보할 소식이 있나이다 여호와께서 오늘날 왕을 대적하던 모든 원수를 갚으셨나이다	And, behold, Cushi came; and Cushi said, Tidings, my lord the king: for the Lord hath avenged thee this day of all them that rose up against thee.	Just then the Cushite came and said, “May my lord the king hear the good news: Today the LORD has avenged you of all who rose up against you!”
2SA	18	32	왕이 구스 사람에게 묻되 소년 압살롬이 잘 있느냐 구스 사람이 대답하되 내 주 왕의 원수와 일어나서 왕을 대적하는 자들은 다 그 소년과 같이 되기를 원하나이다	And the king said unto Cushi, Is the young man Absalom safe? And Cushi answered, The enemies of my lord the king, and all that rise against thee to do thee hurt, be as that young man is.	The king asked the Cushite, “Is the young man Absalom all right?” And the Cushite replied, “May what has become of the young man happen to the enemies of my lord the king and to all who rise up against you to harm you.”
2SA	18	33	왕의 마음이 심히 아파 문루로 올라가서 우니라 저가 올라갈 때에 말하기를 내 아들 압살롬아 내 아들 내 아들 압살롬아 내가 너를 대신하여 죽었더면, 압살롬 내 아들아 내 아들아 하였더라	And the king was much moved, and went up to the chamber over the gate, and wept: and as he went, thus he said, O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son!	The king was shaken and went up to the gate chamber and wept. And as he walked, he cried out, “O my son Absalom! My son, my son Absalom! If only I had died instead of you, O Absalom, my son, my son!”
2SA	19	1	혹이 요압에게 고하되 왕이 압살롬을 위하여 울며 슬퍼 하시나이다 하니	And it was told Joab, Behold, the king weepeth and mourneth for Absalom.	Then it was reported to Joab, “The king is weeping and mourning over Absalom.”
2SA	19	2	왕이 그 아들을 위하여 슬퍼한다 함이 그 날에 백성들에게 들리매 그 날의 이김이 모든 백성에게 슬픔이 된지라	And the victory that day was turned into mourning unto all the people: for the people heard say that day how the king was grieved for his son.	And that day’s victory was turned into mourning for all the people, because on that day they were told, “The king is grieving over his son.”
2SA	19	3	그 날에 백성들이 싸움에 쫓겨 부끄러워 도망함 같이 가만히 성으로 들어가니라	And the people gat them by stealth that day into the city, as people being ashamed steal away when they flee in battle.	So they returned to the city quietly that day, as people steal away in humiliation after fleeing a battle.
2SA	19	4	왕이 얼굴을 가리우고 큰 소리로 부르되 내 아들 압살롬아 압살롬아 내 아들아 내 아들아 하니	But the king covered his face, and the king cried with a loud voice, O my son Absalom, O Absalom, my son, my son!	But the king covered his face and cried out at the top of his voice, “O my son Absalom! O Absalom, my son, my son!”
2SA	19	5	요압이 집에 들어가서 왕께 말씀하되 왕께서 오늘 왕의 생명과 왕의 자녀의 생명과 처첩들의 생명을 구원한 모든 신복의 얼굴을 부끄럽게 하시니	And Joab came into the house to the king, and said, Thou hast shamed this day the faces of all thy servants, which this day have saved thy life, and the lives of thy sons and of thy daughters, and the lives of thy wives, and the lives of thy concubines;	Then Joab went into the house and said to the king, “Today you have disgraced all your servants who have saved your life and the lives of your sons and daughters, of your wives, and of your concubines.
2SA	19	6	이는 왕께서 미워하는 자는 사랑하시며 사랑하는 자는 미워하시고 오늘 장관들과 신복들을 멸시하심을 나타내심이라 오늘 내가 깨달으니 만일 압살롬이 살고 오늘 우리가 다 죽었더면 왕이 마땅히 여기실 뻔하였나이다	In that thou lovest thine enemies, and hatest thy friends. For thou hast declared this day, that thou regardest neither princes nor servants: for this day I perceive, that if Absalom had lived, and all we had died this day, then it had pleased thee well.	You love those who hate you and hate those who love you! For you have made it clear today that the commanders and soldiers mean nothing to you. I know today that if Absalom were alive and all of us were dead, it would have pleased you!
2SA	19	7	이제 곧 일어나 나가서 왕의 신복들의 마음을 위로하여 말씀하옵소서 내가 여호와를 가리켜 맹세하옵나니 왕이 만일 나가지 아니하시면 오늘 밤에 한 사람도 왕과 함께 머물지 아니할지라 그리하면 그 화가 왕이 젊었을 때부터 지금까지 당하신 모든 화보다 더욱 심하리이다	Now therefore arise, go forth, and speak comfortably unto thy servants: for I swear by the Lord, if thou go not forth, there will not tarry one with thee this night: and that will be worse unto thee than all the evil that befell thee from thy youth until now.	Now therefore get up! Go out and speak comfort to your servants, for I swear by the LORD that if you do not go out, not a man will remain with you tonight. This will be worse for you than all the adversity that has befallen you from your youth until now!”
2SA	19	8	왕이 일어나 성문에 앉으매 혹이 모든 백성에게 고하되 왕이 문에 앉아 계시다 하니 모든 백성이 왕의 앞으로 나아오니라 이스라엘은 이미 각기 장막으로 도망하였더라	Then the king arose, and sat in the gate. And they told unto all the people, saying, Behold, the king doth sit in the gate. And all the people came before the king: for Israel had fled every man to his tent.	So the king got up and sat in the gate, and all the people were told: “Behold, the king is sitting in the gate.” So they all came before the king. Meanwhile, the Israelites had fled, each man to his home.
2SA	19	9	이스라엘 모든 지파 백성들이 변론하여 가로되 왕이 우리를 원수의 손에서 구원하여 내셨고 또 우리를 블레셋 사람의 손에서 구원하셨으나 이제 압살롬을 피하여 나라에서 나가셨고	And all the people were at strife throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying, The king saved us out of the hand of our enemies, and he delivered us out of the hand of the Philistines; and now he is fled out of the land for Absalom.	And all the people throughout the tribes of Israel were arguing, “The king rescued us from the hand of our enemies and delivered us from the hand of the Philistines, but now he has fled the land because of Absalom.
2SA	19	10	우리가 기름을 부어 우리를 다스리게 한 압살롬은 싸움에 죽었거늘 이제 너희가 어찌하여 왕을 도로 모셔 올 일에 잠잠하고 있느냐 하니라	And Absalom, whom we anointed over us, is dead in battle. Now therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing the king back?	But Absalom, the man we anointed over us, has died in battle. So why do you say nothing about restoring the king?”
2SA	19	11	다윗 왕이 사독과 아비아달 두 제사장에게 기별하여 가로되 너희는 유다 장로들에게 고하여 이르기를 왕의 말씀이 온 이스라엘이 왕을 궁으로 도로 모셔오자 하는 말이 왕께 들렸거늘 너희는 어찌하여 궁으로 모시는 일에 나중이 되느냐	And king David sent to Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, saying, Speak unto the elders of Judah, saying, Why are ye the last to bring the king back to his house? seeing the speech of all Israel is come to the king, even to his house.	Then King David sent this message to Zadok and Abiathar, the priests: “Say to the elders of Judah, ‘Why should you be the last to restore the king to his palace, since the talk of all Israel has reached the king at his quarters?
2SA	19	12	너희는 내 형제요 내 골육이어늘 어찌하여 왕을 도로 모셔 오는 일에 나중이 되리요 하셨다 하고	Ye are my brethren, ye are my bones and my flesh: wherefore then are ye the last to bring back the king?	You are my brothers, my own flesh and blood. So why should you be the last to restore the king?’
2SA	19	13	너희는 또 아마사에게 이르기를 너는 내 골육이 아니냐 네가 요압을 대신하여 항상 내 앞에서 군장이 되지 아니하면 하나님이 내게 벌 위에 벌을 내리시기를 바라노라 하셨다 하라 하여	And say ye to Amasa, Art thou not of my bone, and of my flesh? God do so to me, and more also, if thou be not captain of the host before me continually in the room of Joab.	And say to Amasa, ‘Aren’t you my flesh and blood? May God punish me, and ever so severely, if from this time you are not the commander of my army in place of Joab!’”
2SA	19	14	모든 유다 사람들로 마음을 일제히 돌리게 하매 저희가 왕께 보내어 가로되 왕은 모든 신복으로 더불어 돌아오소서 한지라	And he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah, even as the heart of one man; so that they sent this word unto the king, Return thou, and all thy servants.	So he swayed the hearts of all the men of Judah as though they were one man, and they sent word to the king: “Return, you and all your servants.”
2SA	19	15	왕이 돌아와 요단에 이르매 유다 족속이 왕을 맞아 요단을 건네려 하여 길갈로 오니라	So the king returned, and came to Jordan. And Judah came to Gilgal, to go to meet the king, to conduct the king over Jordan.	So the king returned, and when he arrived at the Jordan, the men of Judah came to Gilgal to meet him and escort him across the Jordan.
2SA	19	16	바후림에 있는 베냐민 사람 게라의 아들 시므이가 급히 유다 사람과 함께 다윗 왕을 맞으려 내려올 때에	And Shimei the son of Gera, a Benjamite, which was of Bahurim, hasted and came down with the men of Judah to meet king David.	Then Shimei son of Gera, a Benjamite from Bahurim, hurried down with the men of Judah to meet King David,
2SA	19	17	베냐민 사람 일천 명이 저와 함께 하고 사울의 사환 시바도 그 아들 열다섯과 종 스무 명으로 더불어 저와 함께 하여 요단 강을 밟고 건너 왕의 앞으로 나아오니라	And there were a thousand men of Benjamin with him, and Ziba the servant of the house of Saul, and his fifteen sons and his twenty servants with him; and they went over Jordan before the king.	along with a thousand men of Benjamin, as well as Ziba the steward of the house of Saul and his fifteen sons and twenty servants. They rushed down to the Jordan before the king
2SA	19	18	왕의 가족을 건네려 하며 왕의 선히 여기는 대로 쓰게 하려하여 나룻배가 건너가니 왕이 요단을 건너려 할 때에 게라의 아들 시므이가 왕의 앞에 엎드려	And there went over a ferry boat to carry over the king’s household, and to do what he thought good. And Shimei the son of Gera fell down before the king, as he was come over Jordan;	and crossed at the ford to carry over the king’s household and to do what was good in his sight. When Shimei son of Gera crossed the Jordan, he fell down before the king
2SA	19	19	왕께 고하되 내 주여 원컨대 내게 죄 주지 마옵소서 내 주 왕께서 예루살렘에서 나오시던 날에 종의 패역한 일을 기억하지 마옵시며 마음에 두지 마옵소서	And said unto the king, Let not my lord impute iniquity unto me, neither do thou remember that which thy servant did perversely the day that my lord the king went out of Jerusalem, that the king should take it to his heart.	and said, “My lord, do not hold me guilty, and do not remember your servant’s wrongdoing on the day my lord the king left Jerusalem. May the king not take it to heart.
2SA	19	20	왕의 종 내가 범죄한 줄 아옵는고로 오늘 요셉의 온 족속 중 내가 먼저 내려와서 내 주 왕을 영접하나이다	For thy servant doth know that I have sinned: therefore, behold, I am come the first this day of all the house of Joseph to go down to meet my lord the king.	For your servant knows that I have sinned, so here I am today as the first of all the house of Joseph to come down to meet my lord the king.”
2SA	19	21	스루야의 아들 아비새가 대답하여 가로되 시므이가 여호와의 기름 부으신 자를 저주하였으니 그로 인하여 죽어야 마땅치 아니하니이까	But Abishai the son of Zeruiah answered and said, Shall not Shimei be put to death for this, because he cursed the Lord’s anointed?	But Abishai son of Zeruiah said, “Shouldn’t Shimei be put to death for this, because he cursed the LORD’s anointed?”
2SA	19	22	다윗이 가로되 스루야의 아들들아 내가 너희와 무슨 상관이 있기로 너희가 오늘 나의 대적이 되느냐 오늘 어찌하여 이스라엘 가운데서 사람을 죽이겠느냐 내가 오늘날 이스라엘의 왕이 된 것을 내가 알지 못하리요 하고	And David said, What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah, that ye should this day be adversaries unto me? shall there any man be put to death this day in Israel? for do not I know that I am this day king over Israel?	And David replied, “Sons of Zeruiah, what have I to do with you, that you should be my adversaries today? Should any man be put to death in Israel today? Am I not indeed aware that today I am king over Israel?”
2SA	19	23	시므이에게 이르되 네가 죽지 아니하리라 하고 저에게 맹세하니라	Therefore the king said unto Shimei, Thou shalt not die. And the king sware unto him.	So the king said to Shimei, “You shall not die.” And the king swore an oath to him.
2SA	19	24	사울의 손자 므비보셋이 내려와서 왕을 맞으니 저는 왕의 떠난 날부터 평안히 돌아오는 날까지 그 발을 맵시내지 아니하며 그 수염을 깎지 아니하며 옷을 빨지 아니하였더라	And Mephibosheth the son of Saul came down to meet the king, and had neither dressed his feet, nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his clothes, from the day the king departed until the day he came again in peace.	Then Mephibosheth, Saul’s grandson, went down to meet the king. He had not cared for his feet or trimmed his mustache or washed his clothes from the day the king had left until the day he returned safely.
2SA	19	25	예루살렘에서 와서 왕을 맞을 때에 왕이 저에게 물어 가로되 므비보셋이여 네가 어찌하여 나와 함께 가지 아니하였더뇨	And it came to pass, when he was come to Jerusalem to meet the king, that the king said unto him, Wherefore wentest not thou with me, Mephibosheth?	And he came from Jerusalem to meet the king, who asked him, “Mephibosheth, why did you not go with me?”
2SA	19	26	대답하되 내 주 왕이여 왕의 종 나는 절뚝발이이므로 내 나귀에 안장을 지워 타고 왕과 함께 가려하였더니 나의 종이 나를 속이고	And he answered, My lord, O king, my servant deceived me: for thy servant said, I will saddle me an ass, that I may ride thereon, and go to the king; because thy servant is lame.	“My lord the king,” he replied, “because I am lame, I said, ‘I will have my donkey saddled so that I may ride on it and go with the king.’ But my servant Ziba deceived me,
2SA	19	27	종 나를 내 주 왕께 참소하였나이다 내 주 왕께서는 하나님의 사자와 같으시니 왕의 처분대로 하옵소서	And he hath slandered thy servant unto my lord the king; but my lord the king is as an angel of God: do therefore what is good in thine eyes.	and he has slandered your servant to my lord the king. Yet my lord the king is like the angel of God, so do what is good in your eyes.
2SA	19	28	내 아비의 온 집이 내 주 왕 앞에서는 다만 죽을 사람이 되지 아니하였었나이까 그러나 종을 왕의 상에서 음식 먹는 자 가운데 두셨사오니 내게 오히려 무슨 옳음이 있어서 다시 왕께 부르짖을 수 있사오리이까	For all of my father’s house were but dead men before my lord the king: yet didst thou set thy servant among them that did eat at thine own table. What right therefore have I yet to cry any more unto the king?	For all the house of my grandfather deserves death from my lord the king, yet you have set your servant among those who eat at your table. What further right, then, do I have to keep appealing to the king?”
2SA	19	29	왕이 저에게 이르되 네가 어찌하여 또 네 일을 말하느냐 내가 이르노니 너는 시바와 밭을 나누라	And the king said unto him, Why speakest thou any more of thy matters? I have said, Thou and Ziba divide the land.	The king replied, “Why say any more? I hereby declare that you and Ziba are to divide the land.”
2SA	19	30	므비보셋이 왕께 고하되 내 주 왕께서 평안히 궁에 돌아오시게 되었으니 저로 그 전부를 차지하게 하옵소서 하니라	And Mephibosheth said unto the king, Yea, let him take all, forasmuch as my lord the king is come again in peace unto his own house.	And Mephibosheth said to the king, “Instead, since my lord the king has safely come to his own house, let Ziba take it all!”
2SA	19	31	길르앗 사람 바르실래가 왕을 보내어 요단을 건네려고 로글림에서 내려와서 함께 요단에 이르니	And Barzillai the Gileadite came down from Rogelim, and went over Jordan with the king, to conduct him over Jordan.	Now Barzillai the Gileadite had come down from Rogelim to cross the Jordan with the king and send him on his way from there.
2SA	19	32	바르실래는 매우 늙어 나이 팔십 세라 저는 거부인고로 왕이 마하나임에 유할 때에 왕을 공궤하였더라	Now Barzillai was a very aged man, even fourscore years old: and he had provided the king of sustenance while he lay at Mahanaim; for he was a very great man.	Barzillai was quite old, eighty years of age, and since he was a very wealthy man, he had provided for the king while he stayed in Mahanaim.
2SA	19	33	왕이 바르실래에게 이르되 너는 나와 함께 건너가자 예루살렘에서 내가 너를 공궤하리라	And the king said unto Barzillai, Come thou over with me, and I will feed thee with me in Jerusalem.	The king said to Barzillai, “Cross over with me, and I will provide for you at my side in Jerusalem.”
2SA	19	34	바르실래가 왕께 고하되 내 생명의 날이 얼마나 있삽관대 어찌 왕과 함께 예루살렘으로 올라가리이까	And Barzillai said unto the king, How long have I to live, that I should go up with the king unto Jerusalem?	But Barzillai replied, “How many years of my life remain, that I should go up to Jerusalem with the king?
2SA	19	35	내 나이 이제 팔십 세라 어떻게 좋고 흉한 것을 분간할 수 있사오며 음식의 맛을 알 수 있사오리이까 어떻게 다시 노래하는 남자나 여인의 소리를 알아 들을 수 있사오리이까 어찌하여 종이 내 주 왕께 오히려 누를 끼치리이까	I am this day fourscore years old: and can I discern between good and evil? can thy servant taste what I eat or what I drink? can I hear any more the voice of singing men and singing women? wherefore then should thy servant be yet a burden unto my lord the king?	I am now eighty years old. Can I discern what is good and what is not? Can your servant taste what he eats or drinks? Can I still hear the voice of singing men and women? Why should your servant be an added burden to my lord the king?
2SA	19	36	종은 왕을 모시고 요단을 건너려는 것뿐이어늘 왕께서 어찌하여 이같은 상으로 내게 갚으려 하시나이까	Thy servant will go a little way over Jordan with the king: and why should the king recompense it me with such a reward?	Your servant could go with the king only a short distance past the Jordan; why should the king repay me with such a reward?
2SA	19	37	청컨대 종을 돌려 보내옵소서 내가 내 본성 부모의 묘 곁에서 죽으려 하나이다 그러나 왕의 종 김함이 여기 있사오니 청컨대 저로 내 주 왕과 함께 건너가게 하옵시고 왕의 처분대로 저에게 베푸소서	Let thy servant, I pray thee, turn back again, that I may die in mine own city, and be buried by the grave of my father and of my mother. But behold thy servant Chimham; let him go over with my lord the king; and do to him what shall seem good unto thee.	Please let your servant return, that I may die in my own city near the tomb of my father and mother. But here is your servant Chimham. Let him cross over with my lord the king, and do for him what is good in your sight.”
2SA	19	38	왕이 대답하되 김함이 나와 함께 건너가리니 내가 너의 좋아하는 대로 저에게 베풀겠고 또 네가 내게 구하는 것은 다 너를 위하여 시행하리라 하니라	And the king answered, Chimham shall go over with me, and I will do to him that which shall seem good unto thee: and whatsoever thou shalt require of me, that will I do for thee.	The king replied, “Chimham will cross over with me, and I will do for him what seems good in your sight, and I will do for you whatever you desire of me.”
2SA	19	39	백성이 다 요단을 건너매 왕도 건너가서 바르실래의 입을 맞추고 위하여 복을 비니 저가 자기 곳으로 돌아가니라	And all the people went over Jordan. And when the king was come over, the king kissed Barzillai, and blessed him; and he returned unto his own place.	So all the people crossed the Jordan, and then the king crossed over. The king kissed Barzillai and blessed him, and Barzillai returned home.
2SA	19	40	왕이 길갈로 건너오고 김함도 함께 건너오니 온 유다 백성과 이스라엘 백성의 절반이나 왕을 호행하니라	Then the king went on to Gilgal, and Chimham went on with him: and all the people of Judah conducted the king, and also half the people of Israel.	Then the king went on to Gilgal, and Chimham crossed over with him. All the troops of Judah and half the troops of Israel escorted the king.
2SA	19	41	온 이스라엘 사람이 왕께 나아와서 고하되 우리 형제 유다 사람들이 어찌 왕을 도적하여 왕과 왕의 권속과 왕을 좇는 모든 사람을 인도하여 요단을 건네었나이까 하매	And, behold, all the men of Israel came to the king, and said unto the king, Why have our brethren the men of Judah stolen thee away, and have brought the king, and his household, and all David’s men with him, over Jordan?	Soon all the men of Israel came to the king and asked, “Why did our brothers, the men of Judah, take you away secretly and bring the king and his household across the Jordan, together with all of David’s men?”
2SA	19	42	유다 모든 사람이 이스라엘 사람에게 대답하되 왕은 우리의 지친인 까닭이라 너희가 어찌 이 일에 대하여 분내느냐 우리가 왕의 물건을 조금이라도 먹었느냐 왕께서 우리에게 선물 주신 것이 있느냐	And all the men of Judah answered the men of Israel, Because the king is near of kin to us: wherefore then be ye angry for this matter? have we eaten at all of the king’s cost? or hath he given us any gift?	And all the men of Judah replied to the men of Israel, “We did this because the king is our relative. Why does this anger you? Have we ever eaten at the king’s expense or received anything for ourselves?”
2SA	19	43	이스라엘 사람이 유다 사람에게 대답하여 이르되 우리는 왕에 대하여 십분을 가졌으니 다윗에게 대하여 너희보다 더욱 관계가 있거늘 너희가 어찌 우리를 멸시하여 우리 왕을 모셔 오는 일에 먼저 우리와 의논하지 아니하였느냐 하나 유다 사람의 말이 이스라엘 사람의 말보다 더 강경하였더라	And the men of Israel answered the men of Judah, and said, We have ten parts in the king, and we have also more right in David than ye: why then did ye despise us, that our advice should not be first had in bringing back our king? And the words of the men of Judah were fiercer than the words of the men of Israel.	“We have ten shares in the king,” answered the men of Israel, “so we have more claim to David than you. Why then do you despise us? Were we not the first to speak of restoring our king?” But the men of Judah pressed even harder than the men of Israel.
2SA	20	1	마침 거기 난류 하나가 있으니 베냐민 사람 비그리의 아들 세바라 하는 자라 저가 나팔을 불며 가로되 우리는 다윗과 함께할 분의가 없으며 이새의 아들과 함께 할 업이 없도다 이스라엘아 각각 장막으로 돌아가라 하매	And there happened to be there a man of Belial, whose name was Sheba, the son of Bichri, a Benjamite: and he blew a trumpet, and said, We have no part in David, neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse: every man to his tents, O Israel.	Now a worthless man named Sheba son of Bichri, a Benjamite, happened to be there, and he blew the ram’s horn and shouted: “We have no share in David, no inheritance in Jesse’s son. Every man to his tent, O Israel!”
2SA	20	2	이에 온 이스라엘 사람들이 다윗 좇기를 그치고 올라가 비그리의 아들 세바를 좇으나 유다 사람들은 왕에게 합하여 요단에서 예루살렘까지 좇으니라	So every man of Israel went up from after David, and followed Sheba the son of Bichri: but the men of Judah clave unto their king, from Jordan even to Jerusalem.	So all the men of Israel deserted David to follow Sheba son of Bichri. But the men of Judah stayed by their king all the way from the Jordan to Jerusalem.
2SA	20	3	다윗이 예루살렘 본궁에 이르러 전에 머물러 궁을 지키게 한 후궁 열 명을 잡아 별실에 가두고 먹을 것만 주고 더불어 동침치 아니하니 저희가 죽는 날까지 갇혀서 생과부로 지내니라	And David came to his house at Jerusalem; and the king took the ten women his concubines, whom he had left to keep the house, and put them in ward, and fed them, but went not in unto them. So they were shut up unto the day of their death, living in widowhood.	When David returned to his palace in Jerusalem, he took the ten concubines he had left to care for the palace, and he placed them in a house under guard. He provided for them, but he no longer slept with them. They were confined until the day of their death, living as widows.
2SA	20	4	왕이 아마사에게 이르되 너는 나를 위하여 삼 일 내로 유다 사람을 소집하고 너도 여기 있으라	Then said the king to Amasa, Assemble me the men of Judah within three days, and be thou here present.	Then the king said to Amasa, “Summon the men of Judah to come to me within three days, and be here yourself.”
2SA	20	5	아마사가 유다 사람을 소집하러 가더니 왕의 정한 기한에 지체된지라	So Amasa went to assemble the men of Judah: but he tarried longer than the set time which he had appointed him.	So Amasa went to summon Judah, but he took longer than the time allotted him.
2SA	20	6	다윗이 이에 아비새에게 이르되 이제 비그리의 아들 세바가 압살롬보다 우리를 더 해하리니 너는 네 왕의 신복들을 거느리고 쫓아가라 저가 견고한 성에 들어가서 우리들을 피할까 염려하노라 하매	And David said to Abishai, Now shall Sheba the son of Bichri do us more harm than did Absalom: take thou thy lord’s servants, and pursue after him, lest he get him fenced cities, and escape us.	And David said to Abishai, “Now Sheba the son of Bichri will do us more harm than Absalom. Take your lord’s servants and pursue him, or he will find fortified cities and elude us.”
2SA	20	7	요압을 좇는 자들과 그렛 사람들과 블렛 사람들과 모든 용사들이 다 아비새를 따라 비그리의 아들 세바를 쫓으려고 예루살렘에서 나와서	And there went out after him Joab’s men, and the Cherethites, and the Pelethites, and all the mighty men: and they went out of Jerusalem, to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri.	So Joab’s men, along with the Cherethites, the Pelethites, and all the mighty men, marched out of Jerusalem in pursuit of Sheba son of Bichri.
2SA	20	8	기브온 큰 바위 곁에 이르매 아마사가 맞으러 오니 때에 요압이 군복을 입고 띠를 띠고 집에 꽂은 칼을 허리에 매었는데 저가 행할 때에 칼이 빠져 떨어졌더라	When they were at the great stone which is in Gibeon, Amasa went before them. And Joab’s garment that he had put on was girded unto him, and upon it a girdle with a sword fastened upon his loins in the sheath thereof; and as he went forth it fell out.	And while they were at the great stone in Gibeon, Amasa joined them. Now Joab was dressed in military attire, with a dagger strapped to his belt. And as he stepped forward, he slipped the dagger from its sheath.
2SA	20	9	요압이 아마사에게 이르되 형은 평안하뇨 하며 오른손으로 아마사의 수염을 잡고 그 입을 맞추려는 체하매	And Joab said to Amasa, Art thou in health, my brother? And Joab took Amasa by the beard with the right hand to kiss him.	“Are you well, my brother?” Joab asked Amasa. And with his right hand Joab grabbed Amasa by the beard to kiss him.
2SA	20	10	아마사가 요압의 손에 있는 칼은 주의치 아니한지라 요압이 칼로 그 배를 찌르매 그 창자가 땅에 흐르니 다시 치지 아니하여도 죽으니라 요압과 그 동생 아비새가 비그리의 아들 세바를 쫓을새	But Amasa took no heed to the sword that was in Joab’s hand: so he smote him therewith in the fifth rib, and shed out his bowels to the ground, and struck him not again; and he died. So Joab and Abishai his brother pursued after Sheba the son of Bichri.	Amasa was not on guard against the dagger in Joab’s hand, and Joab stabbed him in the stomach and spilled out his intestines on the ground. And Joab did not need to strike him again, for Amasa was dead. Then Joab and his brother Abishai pursued Sheba son of Bichri.
2SA	20	11	요압의 소년 중 하나가 아마사의 곁에 서서 가로되 요압을 좋아하는 자와 다윗을 위하는 자는 요압을 따르라 할 때에	And one of Joab’s men stood by him, and said, He that favoureth Joab, and he that is for David, let him go after Joab.	One of Joab’s young men stood near Amasa and said, “Whoever favors Joab, and whoever is for David, let him follow Joab!”
2SA	20	12	아마사가 길 가운데 피 속에 굴어졌는지라 그 소년이 모든 백성의 섰는 것을 보고 아마사를 큰 길에서부터 밭으로 옮겼으나 거기 이르는 자도 다 멈추어 서는 것을 보고 옷을 그 위에 덮으니라	And Amasa wallowed in blood in the midst of the highway. And when the man saw that all the people stood still, he removed Amasa out of the highway into the field, and cast a cloth upon him, when he saw that every one that came by him stood still.	But Amasa wallowed in his blood in the middle of the road, and when the man saw that all the troops were stopping there, he dragged the body off the road into a field and threw a garment over it.
2SA	20	13	아마사를 큰 길에서 옮겨가매 사람들이 다 요압을 따라 비그리의 아들 세바를 쫓아가니라	When he was removed out of the highway, all the people went on after Joab, to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri.	As soon as Amasa’s body was removed from the road, all the men went on with Joab to pursue Sheba son of Bichri.
2SA	20	14	요압이 이스라엘 모든 지파 가운데 두루 행하여 아벨과 벧마아가와 베림 온 땅에 이르니 그 무리도 다 모여 저를 따르더라	And he went through all the tribes of Israel unto Abel, and to Beth–maachah, and all the Berites: and they were gathered together, and went also after him.	Sheba passed through all the tribes of Israel to Abel-beth-maacah and through the entire region of the Berites, who gathered together and followed him.
2SA	20	15	이에 저희가 벧마아가 아벨로 가서 세바를 에우고 그 성읍을 향하여 해자 언덕 위에 토성을 쌓고 요압과 함께한 모든 백성이 성벽을 쳐서 헐고자 하더니	And they came and besieged him in Abel of Beth–maachah, and they cast up a bank against the city, and it stood in the trench: and all the people that were with Joab battered the wall, to throw it down.	And Joab’s troops came and besieged Sheba in Abel-beth-maacah and built a siege ramp against the outer rampart of the city. As all the troops with Joab were battering the wall to topple it,
2SA	20	16	그 성에서 지혜로운 여인 하나가 외쳐 가로되 들을지어다 들을지어다 청컨대 너희는 요압에게 이르기를 이리로 가까이 오라 내가 네게 말하려 하노라 한다 하라	Then cried a wise woman out of the city, Hear, hear; say, I pray you, unto Joab, Come near hither, that I may speak with thee.	a wise woman called out from the city, “Listen! Listen! Please tell Joab to come here so that I may speak with him.”
2SA	20	17	요압이 그 여인에게 가까이 가니 여인이 가로되 당신이 요압이니이까 대답하되 그러하다 여인이 저에게 이르되 여종의 말을 들으소서 대답하되 내가 들으리라	And when he was come near unto her, the woman said, Art thou Joab? And he answered, I am he. Then she said unto him, Hear the words of thine handmaid. And he answered, I do hear.	When he had come near to her, the woman asked, “Are you Joab?” “I am,” he replied. “Listen to the words of your servant,” she said. “I am listening,” he answered.
2SA	20	18	여인이 말하여 가로되 옛 사람들이 흔히 말하기를 아벨에 가서 물을 것이라 하고 그 일을 끝내었나이다	Then she spake, saying, They were wont to speak in old time, saying, They shall surely ask counsel at Abel: and so they ended the matter.	Then the woman said, “Long ago they used to say, ‘Seek counsel at Abel,’ and that is how disputes were settled.
2SA	20	19	나는 이스라엘의 화평하고 충성된 자 중 하나이어늘 당신이 이스라엘 가운데 어미 같은 성을 멸하고자 하시는도다 어찌하여 당신이 여호와의 기업을 삼키고자 하시나이까	I am one of them that are peaceable and faithful in Israel: thou seekest to destroy a city and a mother in Israel: why wilt thou swallow up the inheritance of the Lord?	I am among the peaceable and faithful in Israel, but you are trying to destroy a city that is a mother in Israel. Why would you swallow up the LORD’s inheritance?”
2SA	20	20	요압이 대답하여 가로되 결단코 그렇지 아니하다 결단코 그렇지 아니하다 삼키거나 멸하거나 하려함이 아니니	And Joab answered and said, Far be it, far be it from me, that I should swallow up or destroy.	“Far be it!” Joab declared. “Far be it from me to swallow up or destroy!
2SA	20	21	그 일이 그러한 것이 아니니라 에브라임 산지 사람 비그리의 아들 세바라 하는 자가 손을 들어 왕 다윗을 대적하였나니 너희가 저만 내어 주면 내가 이 성읍에서 떠나가리라 여인이 요압에게 이르되 저의 머리를 성읍에서 당신에게 내어 던지리이다 하고	The matter is not so: but a man of mount Ephraim, Sheba the son of Bichri by name, hath lifted up his hand against the king, even against David: deliver him only, and I will depart from the city. And the woman said unto Joab, Behold, his head shall be thrown to thee over the wall.	That is not the case. But a man named Sheba son of Bichri, from the hill country of Ephraim, has lifted up his hand against the king, against David. Deliver him alone, and I will depart from the city.” “Look,” the woman replied, “his head will be thrown to you over the wall.”
2SA	20	22	이에 여인이 그 지혜로 모든 백성에게 말하매 저희가 비그리의 아들 세바의 머리를 베어 요압에게 던진지라 이에 요압이 나팔을 불매 무리가 흩어져 성읍에서 물러나서 각기 장막으로 돌아가고 요압은 예루살렘으로 돌아와서 왕에게 나아가니라	Then the woman went unto all the people in her wisdom. And they cut off the head of Sheba the son of Bichri, and cast it out to Joab. And he blew a trumpet, and they retired from the city, every man to his tent. And Joab returned to Jerusalem unto the king.	Then the woman went to all the people with her wise counsel, and they cut off the head of Sheba son of Bichri and threw it to Joab. So he blew the ram’s horn and his men dispersed from the city, each to his own home. And Joab returned to the king in Jerusalem.
2SA	20	23	요압은 이스라엘 온 군대의 장관이 되고 여호야다의 아들 브나야는 그렛 사람과 블렛 사람의 장관이 되고	Now Joab was over all the host of Israel: and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and over the Pelethites:	Now Joab was over the whole army of Israel; Benaiah son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and Pelethites;
2SA	20	24	아도니람은 감역관이 되고 아힐룻의 아들 여호사밧은 사관이 되고	And Adoram was over the tribute: and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder:	Adoram was in charge of the forced labor; Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud was the recorder;
2SA	20	25	스와는 서기관이 되고 사독과 아비아달은 제사장이 되고	And Sheva was scribe: and Zadok and Abiathar were the priests:	Sheva was the scribe; Zadok and Abiathar were priests;
2SA	20	26	야일 사람 이라는 다윗의 대신이 되니라	And Ira also the Jairite was a chief ruler about David.	and Ira the Jairite was David’s priest.
2SA	21	1	다윗의 시대에 년부년 삼 년 기근이 있으므로 다윗이 여호와 앞에 간구하매 여호와께서 가라사대 이는 사울과 피를 흘린 그 집을 인함이니 저가 기브온 사람을 죽였음이니라 하시니라	Then there was a famine in the days of David three years, year after year; and David enquired of the Lord. And the Lord answered, It is for Saul, and for his bloody house, because he slew the Gibeonites.	During the reign of David there was a famine for three successive years, and David sought the face of the LORD. And the LORD said, “It is because of the blood shed by Saul and his family, because he killed the Gibeonites.”
2SA	21	2	기브온 사람은 이스라엘 족속이 아니요 아모리 사람 중에서 남은 자라 이스라엘 족속들이 전에 저희에게 맹세하였거늘 사울이 이스라엘과 유다 족속을 위하여 열심이 있으므로 저희 죽이기를 꾀하였더라 이에 왕이 기브온 사람을 불러 물으니라	And the king called the Gibeonites, and said unto them; (now the Gibeonites were not of the children of Israel, but of the remnant of the Amorites; and the children of Israel had sworn unto them: and Saul sought to slay them in his zeal to the children of Israel and Judah.)	At this, David summoned the Gibeonites and spoke to them. (Now the Gibeonites were not Israelites, but a remnant of the Amorites. The Israelites had taken an oath concerning them, but in his zeal for Israel and Judah, Saul had sought to kill them.)
2SA	21	3	다윗이 저희에게 묻되 내가 너희를 위하여 어떻게 하랴 내가 어떻게 속죄하여야 너희가 여호와의 기업을 위하여 복을 빌겠느냐	Wherefore David said unto the Gibeonites, What shall I do for you? and wherewith shall I make the atonement, that ye may bless the inheritance of the Lord?	So David asked the Gibeonites, “What shall I do for you? How can I make amends so that you may bless the inheritance of the LORD?”
2SA	21	4	기브온 사람이 대답하되 사울과 그 집과 우리 사이의 일은 은금에 있지 아니하오나 이스라엘 가운데서 사람을 죽이는 일은 우리에게 있지 아니하니이다 왕이 가로되 너희의 말하는 대로 시행하리라	And the Gibeonites said unto him, We will have no silver nor gold of Saul, nor of his house; neither for us shalt thou kill any man in Israel. And he said, What ye shall say, that will I do for you.	The Gibeonites said to him, “We need no silver or gold from Saul or his house, nor should you put to death anyone in Israel for us.” “Whatever you ask, I will do for you,” he replied.
2SA	21	5	저희가 왕께 고하되 우리를 학살하였고 또 우리를 멸하여 이스라엘 경내에 머물지 못하게 하려고 모해한 사람의	And they answered the king, The man that consumed us, and that devised against us that we should be destroyed from remaining in any of the coasts of Israel,	And they answered the king, “As for the man who consumed us and plotted against us to exterminate us from existing within any border of Israel,
2SA	21	6	자손 일곱을 내어 주소서 여호와의 빼신 사울의 고을 기브아에서 우리가 저희를 여호와 앞에서 목매어 달겠나이다 왕이 가로되 내가 내어 주리라 하니라	Let seven men of his sons be delivered unto us, and we will hang them up unto the Lord in Gibeah of Saul, whom the Lord did choose. And the king said, I will give them.	let seven of his male descendants be delivered to us so that we may hang them before the LORD at Gibeah of Saul, the chosen of the LORD.” “I will give them to you,” said the king.
2SA	21	7	그러나 다윗과 사울의 아들 요나단 사이에 서로 여호와를 가리켜 맹세한 것이 있으므로 왕이 사울의 손자 요나단의 아들 므비보셋은 아끼고	But the king spared Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan the son of Saul, because of the Lord’s oath that was between them, between David and Jonathan the son of Saul.	Now the king spared Mephibosheth son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, because of the oath before the LORD between David and Jonathan son of Saul.
2SA	21	8	이에 아야의 딸 리스바에게서 난 자 곧 사울의 두 아들 알모니와 므비보셋과 사울의 딸 메랍에게서 난 자 곧 므흘랏 사람 바실래의 아들 아드리엘의 다섯 아들을 잡고	But the king took the two sons of Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, whom she bare unto Saul, Armoni and Mephibosheth; and the five sons of Michal the daughter of Saul, whom she brought up for Adriel the son of Barzillai the Meholathite:	But the king took Armoni and Mephibosheth, the two sons whom Rizpah daughter of Aiah had borne to Saul, as well as the five sons whom Merab daughter of Saul had borne to Adriel son of Barzillai the Meholathite.
2SA	21	9	저희를 기브온 사람의 손에 붙이니 기브온 사람이 저희를 산 위에서 여호와 앞에 목매어 달매 저희 일곱 사람이 함께 죽으니 죽은 때는 곡식 베는 처음날 곧 보리 베기 시작하는 때더라	And he delivered them into the hands of the Gibeonites, and they hanged them in the hill before the Lord: and they fell all seven together, and were put to death in the days of harvest, in the first days, in the beginning of barley harvest.	And he delivered them into the hands of the Gibeonites, and they hanged them on the hill before the LORD. So all seven of them fell together; they were put to death in the first days of the harvest, at the beginning of the barley harvest.
2SA	21	10	아야의 딸 리스바가 굵은 베를 가져다가 자기를 위하여 반석 위에 펴고 곡식 베기 시작할 때부터 하늘에서 비가 시체에 쏟아지기까지 그 시체에 낮에는 공중의 새가 앉지 못하게 하고 밤에는 들짐승이 범하지 못하게 한지라	And Rizpah the daughter of Aiah took sackcloth, and spread it for her upon the rock, from the beginning of harvest until water dropped upon them out of heaven, and suffered neither the birds of the air to rest on them by day, nor the beasts of the field by night.	And Rizpah the daughter of Aiah took sackcloth and spread it out for herself on a rock. From the beginning of the harvest until the rain from heaven poured down on the bodies, she did not allow the birds of the air to rest on them by day, nor the beasts of the field by night.
2SA	21	11	이에 아야의 딸 사울의 첩 리스바의 행한 일이 다윗에게 들리매	And it was told David what Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, the concubine of Saul, had done.	When David was told what Saul’s concubine Rizpah, daughter of Aiah, had done,
2SA	21	12	다윗이 가서 사울의 뼈와 그 아들 요나단의 뼈를 길르앗 야베스 사람에게서 취하니 이는 전에 블레셋 사람이 사울을 길보아에서 죽여 벳산 거리에 매어 단 것을 저희가 가만히 가져 온 것이라	And David went and took the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son from the men of Jabesh–gilead, which had stolen them from the street of Beth–shan, where the Philistines had hanged them, when the Philistines had slain Saul in Gilboa:	he went and took the bones of Saul and his son Jonathan from the men of Jabesh-gilead, who had stolen them from the public square of Beth-shan where the Philistines had hung the bodies after they had struck down Saul at Gilboa.
2SA	21	13	다윗이 그 곳에서 사울의 뼈와 그 아들 요나단의 뼈를 가지고 올라오매 사람들이 그 달려 죽은 자들의 뼈를 거두어다가	And he brought up from thence the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son; and they gathered the bones of them that were hanged.	So David had the bones of Saul and his son Jonathan brought from there, along with the bones of those who had been hanged.
2SA	21	14	사울과 그 아들 요나단의 뼈와 함께 베냐민 땅 셀라에서 그 아비 기스의 묘에 장사하되 모두 왕의 명대로 좇아 행하니라 그 후에야 하나님이 그 땅을 위하여 기도를 들으시니라	And the bones of Saul and Jonathan his son buried they in the country of Benjamin in Zelah, in the sepulchre of Kish his father: and they performed all that the king commanded. And after that God was intreated for the land.	And they buried the bones of Saul and his son Jonathan in Zela in the land of Benjamin, in the tomb of Saul’s father Kish. After they had done everything the king had commanded, God answered their prayers for the land.
2SA	21	15	블레셋 사람이 다시 이스라엘을 치거늘 다윗이 그 신복들과 함께 내려가서 블레셋 사람과 싸우더니 다윗이 피곤하매	Moreover the Philistines had yet war again with Israel; and David went down, and his servants with him, and fought against the Philistines: and David waxed faint.	Once again the Philistines waged war against Israel, and David and his servants went down and fought against the Philistines; but David became exhausted.
2SA	21	16	장대한 자의 아들 중에 삼백 세겔 중 되는 놋창을 들고 새 칼을 찬 이스비브놉이 다윗을 죽이려 하므로	And Ishbi–benob, which was of the sons of the giant, the weight of whose spear weighed three hundred shekels of brass in weight, he being girded with a new sword, thought to have slain David.	Then Ishbi-benob, a descendant of Rapha, whose bronze spear weighed three hundred shekels and who was bearing a new sword, resolved to kill David.
2SA	21	17	스루야의 아들 아비새가 다윗을 도와 그 블레셋 사람을 쳐 죽이니 다윗의 종자들이 다윗에게 맹세하여 가로되 왕은 다시 우리와 함께 전장에 나가지 마옵소서 이스라엘의 등불이 꺼지지 말게 하옵소서 하니라	But Abishai the son of Zeruiah succoured him, and smote the Philistine, and killed him. Then the men of David sware unto him, saying, Thou shalt go no more out with us to battle, that thou quench not the light of Israel.	But Abishai son of Zeruiah came to his aid, struck the Philistine, and killed him. Then David’s men swore to him, “You must never again go out with us to battle, so that the lamp of Israel may not be extinguished.”
2SA	21	18	그 후에 다시 블레셋 사람과 곱에서 전쟁할 때에 후사 사람 십브개가 장대한 자의 아들 중에 삽을 쳐 죽였고	And it came to pass after this, that there was again a battle with the Philistines at Gob: then Sibbechai the Hushathite slew Saph, which was of the sons of the giant.	Some time later at Gob, there was another battle with the Philistines. At that time Sibbecai the Hushathite killed Saph, one of the descendants of Rapha.
2SA	21	19	또 다시 블레셋 사람과 곱에서 전쟁할 때에 베들레헴 사람 야레오르김의 아들 엘하난이 가드 골리앗의 아우 라흐미를 죽였는데 그 자의 창 자루는 베틀채 같았더라	And there was again a battle in Gob with the Philistines, where Elhanan the son of Jaare–oregim, a Beth–lehemite, slew the brother of Goliath the Gittite, the staff of whose spear was like a weaver’s beam.	Once again there was a battle with the Philistines at Gob, and Elhanan son of Jair the Bethlehemite killed the brother of Goliath the Gittite, the shaft of whose spear was like a weaver’s beam.
2SA	21	20	또 가드에서 전쟁할 때에 그곳에 키 큰 자 하나는 매 손과 매 발에 가락이 여섯씩 모두 스물네 가락이 있는데 저도 장대한 자의 소생이라	And there was yet a battle in Gath, where was a man of great stature, that had on every hand six fingers, and on every foot six toes, four and twenty in number; and he also was born to the giant.	And there was still another battle at Gath, where there was a man of great stature with six fingers on each hand and six toes on each foot—twenty-four in all. He too was descended from Rapha,
2SA	21	21	저가 이스라엘 사람을 능욕하므로 다윗의 형 삼마의 아들 요나단이 저를 죽이니라	And when he defied Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimea the brother of David slew him.	and when he taunted Israel, Jonathan the son of David’s brother Shimei killed him.
2SA	21	22	이 네 사람 가드의 장대한 자의 소생이 다윗의 손과 그 신복의 손에 다 죽었더라	These four were born to the giant in Gath, and fell by the hand of David, and by the hand of his servants.	So these four descendants of Rapha in Gath fell at the hands of David and his servants.
2SA	22	1	여호와께서 다윗을 모든 대적의 손과 사울의 손에서 구원하신 그 날에 다윗이 이 노래의 말씀으로 여호와께 아뢰어	And David spake unto the Lord the words of this song in the day that the Lord had delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies, and out of the hand of Saul:	And David sang this song to the LORD on the day the LORD had delivered him from the hand of all his enemies and from the hand of Saul.
2SA	22	2	가로되 여호와는 나의 반석이시요 나의 요새시요 나를 건지시는 자시요	And he said, The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer;	He said: “The LORD is my rock, my fortress, and my deliverer.
2SA	22	3	나의 하나님이시요 나의 피할 바위시요 나의 방패시요 나의 구원의 뿔이시요 나의 높은 망대시요 나의 피난처시요 나의 구원자시라 나를 흉악에서 구원하셨도다	The God of my rock; in him will I trust: he is my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my high tower, and my refuge, my saviour; thou savest me from violence.	My God is my rock, in whom I take refuge, my shield, and the horn of my salvation. My stronghold, my refuge, and my Savior, You save me from violence.
2SA	22	4	내가 찬송 받으실 여호와께 아뢰리니 내 원수들에게서 구원을 얻으리로다	I will call on the Lord, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be saved from mine enemies.	I will call upon the LORD, who is worthy to be praised; so shall I be saved from my enemies.
2SA	22	5	사망의 물결이 나를 에우고 불의의 창수가 나를 두렵게 하였으며	When the waves of death compassed me, the floods of ungodly men made me afraid;	For the waves of death engulfed me; the torrents of chaos overwhelmed me.
2SA	22	6	음부의 줄이 나를 두르고 사망의 올무가 내게 이르렀도다	The sorrows of hell compassed me about; the snares of death prevented me;	The cords of Sheol entangled me; the snares of death confronted me.
2SA	22	7	내가 환난 중에서 여호와께 아뢰며 나의 하나님께 아뢰었더니 저가 그 전에서 내 소리를 들으심이여 나의 부르짖음이 그 귀에 들렸도다	In my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried to my God: and he did hear my voice out of his temple, and my cry did enter into his ears.	In my distress I called upon the LORD; I cried out to my God. And from His temple He heard my voice, and my cry for help reached His ears.
2SA	22	8	이에 땅이 진동하고 떨며 하늘 기초가 요동하고 흔들렸으니 그의 진노를 인함이로다	Then the earth shook and trembled; the foundations of heaven moved and shook, because he was wroth.	Then the earth shook and quaked; the foundations of the heavens trembled; they were shaken because He burned with anger.
2SA	22	9	그 코에서 연기가 오르고 입에서 불이 나와 사름이여 그 불에 숯이 피었도다	There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured: coals were kindled by it.	Smoke rose from His nostrils, and consuming fire came from His mouth; glowing coals blazed forth.
2SA	22	10	저가 또 하늘을 드리우고 강림하시니 그 발 아래는 어둑캄캄하도다	He bowed the heavens also, and came down; and darkness was under his feet.	He parted the heavens and came down with dark clouds beneath His feet.
2SA	22	11	그룹을 타고 날으심이여 바람 날개 위에 나타나셨도다	And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly: and he was seen upon the wings of the wind.	He mounted a cherub and flew; He soared on the wings of the wind.
2SA	22	12	저가 흑암 곧 모인 물과 공중의 빽빽한 구름으로 둘린 장막을 삼으심이여	And he made darkness pavilions round about him, dark waters, and thick clouds of the skies.	He made darkness a canopy around Him, a gathering of water and thick clouds.
2SA	22	13	그 앞에 있는 광채로 인하여 숯불이 피었도다	Through the brightness before him were coals of fire kindled.	From the brightness of His presence coals of fire blazed forth.
2SA	22	14	여호와께서 하늘에서 뇌성을 발하시며 지존하신 자가 음성을 내심이여	The Lord thundered from heaven, and the most High uttered his voice.	The LORD thundered from heaven; the voice of the Most High resounded.
2SA	22	15	살을 날려 저희를 흩으시며 번개로 파하셨도다	And he sent out arrows, and scattered them; lightning, and discomfited them.	He shot His arrows and scattered the foes; He hurled lightning and routed them.
2SA	22	16	이럴 때에 여호와의 꾸지람과 콧김을 인하여 물 밑이 드러나고 땅의 기초가 나타났도다	And the channels of the sea appeared, the foundations of the world were discovered, at the rebuking of the Lord, at the blast of the breath of his nostrils.	The channels of the sea appeared, and the foundations of the world were exposed at the rebuke of the LORD, at the blast of the breath of His nostrils.
2SA	22	17	저가 위에서 보내사 나를 취하심이여 많은 물에서 나를 건져내셨도다	He sent from above, he took me; he drew me out of many waters;	He reached down from on high and took hold of me; He drew me out of deep waters.
2SA	22	18	나를 강한 원수와 미워하는 자에게서 건지셨음이여 저희는 나보다 힘센 연고로다	He delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them that hated me: for they were too strong for me.	He rescued me from my powerful enemy, from foes too mighty for me.
2SA	22	19	저희가 나의 재앙의 날에 내게 이르렀으나 여호와께서 나의 의지가 되셨도다	They prevented me in the day of my calamity: but the Lord was my stay.	They confronted me in my day of calamity, but the LORD was my support.
2SA	22	20	나를 또 넓은 곳으로 인도하시고 나를 기뻐하시므로 구원하셨도다	He brought me forth also into a large place: he delivered me, because he delighted in me.	He brought me out into the open; He rescued me because He delighted in me.
2SA	22	21	여호와께서 내 의를 따라 상 주시며 내 손의 깨끗함을 좇아 갚으셨으니	The Lord rewarded me according to my righteousness: according to the cleanness of my hands hath he recompensed me.	The LORD has rewarded me according to my righteousness; He has repaid me according to the cleanness of my hands.
2SA	22	22	이는 내가 여호와의 도를 지키고 악을 행하여 내 하나님을 떠나지 아니하였으며	For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed from my God.	For I have kept the ways of the LORD and have not wickedly departed from my God.
2SA	22	23	그 모든 규례를 내 앞에 두고 그 율례를 버리지 아니하였음이로다	For all his judgments were before me: and as for his statutes, I did not depart from them.	For all His ordinances are before me; I have not disregarded His statutes.
2SA	22	24	내가 또 그 앞에 완전하여 스스로 지켜 죄악을 피하였나니	I was also upright before him, and have kept myself from mine iniquity.	And I have been blameless before Him and kept myself from iniquity.
2SA	22	25	그러므로 여호와께서 내 의대로, 그 목전에 내 깨끗한 대로 내게 갚으셨도다	Therefore the Lord hath recompensed me according to my righteousness; according to my cleanness in his eye sight.	So the LORD has repaid me according to my righteousness, according to my cleanness in His sight.
2SA	22	26	자비한 자에게는 주의 자비하심을 나타내시며 완전한 자에게는 주의 완전하심을 보이시며	With the merciful thou wilt shew thyself merciful, and with the upright man thou wilt shew thyself upright.	To the faithful You show Yourself faithful, to the blameless You show Yourself blameless;
2SA	22	27	깨끗한 자에게는 주의 깨끗하심을 보이시며 사특한 자에게는 주의 거스리심을 보이시리이다	With the pure thou wilt shew thyself pure; and with the froward thou wilt shew thyself unsavoury.	to the pure You show Yourself pure, but to the crooked You show Yourself shrewd.
2SA	22	28	주께서 곤고한 백성은 구원하시고 교만한 자를 살피사 낮추시리이다	And the afflicted people thou wilt save: but thine eyes are upon the haughty, that thou mayest bring them down.	You save an afflicted people, but Your eyes are on the haughty to bring them down.
2SA	22	29	여호와여 주는 나의 등불이시니 여호와께서 나의 흑암을 밝히시리이다	For thou art my lamp, O Lord: and the Lord will lighten my darkness.	For You, O LORD, are my lamp; the LORD lights up my darkness.
2SA	22	30	내가 주를 의뢰하고 적군에 달리며 내 하나님을 의지하고 성벽을 뛰어 넘나이다	For by thee I have run through a troop: by my God have I leaped over a wall.	For in You I can charge an army; with my God I can scale a wall.
2SA	22	31	하나님의 도는 완전하고 여호와의 말씀은 정미하니 저는 자기에게 피하는 모든 자에게 방패시로다	As for God, his way is perfect; the word of the Lord is tried: he is a buckler to all them that trust in him.	As for God, His way is perfect; the word of the LORD is flawless. He is a shield to all who take refuge in Him.
2SA	22	32	여호와 외에 누가 하나님이며 우리 하나님 외에 누가 바위뇨	For who is God, save the Lord? and who is a rock, save our God?	For who is God besides the LORD? And who is the Rock except our God?
2SA	22	33	하나님은 나의 견고한 요새시며 나를 온전한 곳으로 인도하시며	God is my strength and power: and he maketh my way perfect.	God is my strong fortress and He makes my way clear.
2SA	22	34	나의 발로 암사슴 발 같게 하시며 나를 나의 높은 곳에 세우시며	He maketh my feet like hinds’ feet: and setteth me upon my high places.	He makes my feet like those of a deer and stations me upon the heights.
2SA	22	35	내 손을 가르쳐 싸우게 하시니 내 팔이 놋활을 당기도다	He teacheth my hands to war; so that a bow of steel is broken by mine arms.	He trains my hands for battle; my arms can bend a bow of bronze.
2SA	22	36	주께서 또 주의 구원의 방패를 내게 주시며 주의 온유함이 나를 크게 하셨나이다	Thou hast also given me the shield of thy salvation: and thy gentleness hath made me great.	You have given me Your shield of salvation, and Your gentleness exalts me.
2SA	22	37	내 걸음을 넓게 하셨고 나로 실족지 않게 하셨나이다	Thou hast enlarged my steps under me; so that my feet did not slip.	You broaden the path beneath me so that my ankles do not give way.
2SA	22	38	내가 내 원수를 따라 멸하였사오며 저희를 무찌르기 전에는 돌이키지 아니하였나이다	I have pursued mine enemies, and destroyed them; and turned not again until I had consumed them.	I pursued my enemies and destroyed them; I did not turn back until they were consumed.
2SA	22	39	내가 저희를 무찔러 파하였더니 저희가 내 발 아래 엎드러지고 능히 일어나지 못하였나이다	And I have consumed them, and wounded them, that they could not arise: yea, they are fallen under my feet.	I devoured and crushed them so they could not rise; they have fallen under my feet.
2SA	22	40	이는 주께서 나로 전쟁케 하려고 능력으로 내게 띠 띠우사 일어나 나를 치는 자로 내게 굴복케 하셨사오며	For thou hast girded me with strength to battle: them that rose up against me hast thou subdued under me.	You have armed me with strength for battle; You have subdued my foes beneath me.
2SA	22	41	주께서 또 내 원수들로 등을 내게로 향하게 하시고 나로 나를 미워하는 자를 끊어 버리게 하셨음이니이다	Thou hast also given me the necks of mine enemies, that I might destroy them that hate me.	You have made my enemies retreat before me; I put an end to those who hated me.
2SA	22	42	저희가 둘러보아도 구원할 자가 없었고 여호와께 부르짖어도 대답지 아니하셨나이다	They looked, but there was none to save; even unto the Lord, but he answered them not.	They looked, but there was no one to save them— to the LORD, but He did not answer.
2SA	22	43	내가 저희를 땅의 티끌 같이 부스러뜨리고 거리의 진흙 같이 밟아 헤쳤나이다	Then did I beat them as small as the dust of the earth, I did stamp them as the mire of the street, and did spread them abroad.	I ground them as the dust of the earth; I crushed and trampled them like mud in the streets.
2SA	22	44	주께서 또 나를 내 백성의 다툼에서 건지시고 나를 보존하사 열방의 으뜸을 삼으셨으니 내가 알지 못하는 백성이 나를 섬기리이다	Thou also hast delivered me from the strivings of my people, thou hast kept me to be head of the heathen: a people which I knew not shall serve me.	You have delivered me from the strife of my people; You have preserved me as the head of nations; a people I had not known shall serve me.
2SA	22	45	이방인들이 내게 굴복함이여 저희가 내 풍성을 듣고 곧 순복하리로다	Strangers shall submit themselves unto me: as soon as they hear, they shall be obedient unto me.	Foreigners cower before me; when they hear me, they obey me.
2SA	22	46	이방인들이 쇠미하여 그 견고한 곳에서 떨며 나오리로다	Strangers shall fade away, and they shall be afraid out of their close places.	Foreigners lose heart and come trembling from their strongholds.
2SA	22	47	여호와는 생존하시니 나의 바위를 찬송하며 내 구원의 바위이신 하나님을 높일지로다	The Lord liveth; and blessed be my rock; and exalted be the God of the rock of my salvation.	The LORD lives, and blessed be my Rock! And may God, the Rock of my salvation, be exalted—
2SA	22	48	이 하나님이 나를 위하여 보수하시고 민족들로 내게 복종케 하시며	It is God that avengeth me, and that bringeth down the people under me,	the God who avenges me and brings down nations beneath me,
2SA	22	49	나를 원수들에게서 나오게 하시며 나를 대적하는 자 위에 나를 드시고 나를 강포한 자에게서 건지시는도다	And that bringeth me forth from mine enemies: thou also hast lifted me up on high above them that rose up against me: thou hast delivered me from the violent man.	who frees me from my enemies. You exalt me above my foes; You rescue me from violent men.
2SA	22	50	이러므로 여호와여 내가 열방 중에서 주께 감사하며 주의 이름을 찬양하리이다	Therefore I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the heathen, and I will sing praises unto thy name.	Therefore I will praise You, O LORD, among the nations; I will sing praises to Your name.
2SA	22	51	여호와께서 그 왕에게 큰 구원을 주시며 기름 부음 받은 자에게 인자를 베푸심이여 영원토록 다윗과 그 후손에게로다 하였더라	He is the tower of salvation for his king: and sheweth mercy to his anointed, unto David, and to his seed for evermore.	Great salvation He brings to His king. He shows loving devotion to His anointed, to David and his descendants forever.”
2SA	23	1	이는 다윗의 마지막 말이라 이새의 아들 다윗이 말함이여 높이 올리운 자, 야곱의 하나님에게 기름 부음 받은자 이스라엘의 노래 잘하는 자가 말하도다	Now these be the last words of David. David the son of Jesse said, and the man who was raised up on high, the anointed of the God of Jacob, and the sweet psalmist of Israel, said,	These are the last words of David: “The oracle of David son of Jesse, the oracle of the man raised on high, the one anointed by the God of Jacob, and the sweet psalmist of Israel:
2SA	23	2	여호와의 신이 나를 빙자하여 말씀하심이여 그 말씀이 내 혀에 있도다	The Spirit of the Lord spake by me, and his word was in my tongue.	The Spirit of the LORD spoke through me; His word was on my tongue.
2SA	23	3	이스라엘의 하나님이 말씀하시며 이스라엘의 바위가 내게 이르시기를 사람을 공의로 다스리는 자, 하나님을 경외함으로 다스리는 자여	The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spake to me, He that ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God.	The God of Israel spoke; the Rock of Israel said to me, ‘He who rules the people with justice, who rules in the fear of God,
2SA	23	4	저는 돋는 해 아침 빛 같고 구름 없는 아침 같고 비 후의 광선으로 땅에서 움이 돋는 새 풀 같으니라 하시도다	And he shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun riseth, even a morning without clouds; as the tender grass springing out of the earth by clear shining after rain.	is like the light of the morning at sunrise of a cloudless dawn, the glistening after the rain on the sprouting grass of the earth.’
2SA	23	5	내 집이 하나님 앞에 이 같지 아니하냐 하나님이 나로 더불어 영원한 언약을 세우사 만사에 구비하고 견고케 하셨으니 나의 모든 구원과 나의 모든 소원을 어찌 이루지 아니하시랴	Although my house be not so with God; yet he hath made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: for this is all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.	Is not my house right with God? For He has established with me an everlasting covenant, ordered and secured in every part. Will He not bring about my full salvation and my every desire?
2SA	23	6	그러나 사악한 자는 다 내어 버리울 가시나무 같으니 이는 손으로 잡을 수 없음이로다	But the sons of Belial shall be all of them as thorns thrust away, because they cannot be taken with hands:	But the worthless are all like thorns raked aside, for they can never be gathered by hand.
2SA	23	7	그것들을 만지는 자는 철과 창자루를 가져야 하리니 그것들이 당장에 불사르이리로다 하니라	But the man that shall touch them must be fenced with iron and the staff of a spear; and they shall be utterly burned with fire in the same place.	The man who touches them must be armed with iron or with the shaft of a spear. The fire burns them to ashes in the place where they lie.”
2SA	23	8	다윗의 용사들의 이름이 이러하니라 다그몬 사람 요셉밧세벳이라고도 하고 에센 사람 아디노라고도 하는 자는 군장의 두목이라 저가 한 때에 팔백 인을 쳐 죽였더라	These be the names of the mighty men whom David had: The Tachmonite that sat in the seat, chief among the captains; the same was Adino the Eznite: he lift up his spear against eight hundred, whom he slew at one time.	These are the names of David’s mighty men: Josheb-basshebeth the Tahchemonite was chief of the Three. He wielded his spear against eight hundred men, whom he killed at one time.
2SA	23	9	그 다음은 아호아 사람 도대의 아들 엘르아살이니 다윗과 함께 한 세 용사 중에 하나이라 블레셋 사람이 싸우려고 모이매 이스라엘 사람들이 물러간지라 세 용사가 싸움을 돋우고	And after him was Eleazar the son of Dodo the Ahohite, one of the three mighty men with David, when they defied the Philistines that were there gathered together to battle, and the men of Israel were gone away:	Next in command was Eleazar son of Dodo the Ahohite. As one of the three mighty men, he went with David to taunt the Philistines who had gathered for battle at Pas-dammim. The men of Israel retreated,
2SA	23	10	저가 나가서 손이 피곤하여 칼에 붙기까지 블레셋 사람을 치니라 그 날에 여호와께서 크게 이기게 하셨으므로 백성들은 돌아와서 저의 뒤를 따라가며 노략할 뿐이었더라	He arose, and smote the Philistines until his hand was weary, and his hand clave unto the sword: and the Lord wrought a great victory that day; and the people returned after him only to spoil.	but Eleazar stood his ground and struck the Philistines until his hand grew weary and stuck to his sword. The LORD brought about a great victory that day. Then the troops returned to him, but only to plunder the dead.
2SA	23	11	그 다음은 하랄 사람 아게의 아들 삼마라 블레셋 사람이 떼를 지어 녹두나무가 가득한 밭에 모이매 백성들은 블레셋 사람 앞에서 도망하되	And after him was Shammah the son of Agee the Hararite. And the Philistines were gathered together into a troop, where was a piece of ground full of lentiles: and the people fled from the Philistines.	And after him was Shammah son of Agee the Hararite. When the Philistines had banded together near a field full of lentils, Israel’s troops fled from them.
2SA	23	12	저는 그 밭 가운데 서서 막아 블레셋 사람을 친지라 여호와께서 큰 구원을 이루시니라	But he stood in the midst of the ground, and defended it, and slew the Philistines: and the Lord wrought a great victory.	But Shammah took his stand in the middle of the field, defended it, and struck down the Philistines. So the LORD brought about a great victory.
2SA	23	13	또 삼십 두목 중 세 사람이 곡식 벨 때에 아둘람 굴에 이르러 다윗에게 나아갔는데 때에 블레셋 사람의 떼가 르바임 골짜기에 진 쳤더라	And three of the thirty chief went down, and came to David in the harvest time unto the cave of Adullam: and the troop of the Philistines pitched in the valley of Rephaim.	At harvest time, three of the thirty chief men went down to David at the cave of Adullam, while a company of Philistines was encamped in the Valley of Rephaim.
2SA	23	14	그 때에 다윗은 산성에 있고 블레셋 사람의 영채는 베들레헴에 있는지라	And David was then in an hold, and the garrison of the Philistines was then in Beth–lehem.	At that time David was in the stronghold, and the garrison of the Philistines was at Bethlehem.
2SA	23	15	다윗이 사모하여 가로되 베들레헴 성문 곁 우물 물을 누가 나로 마시게 할꼬 하매	And David longed, and said, Oh that one would give me drink of the water of the well of Beth–lehem, which is by the gate!	David longed for water and said, “Oh, that someone would get me a drink of water from the well near the gate of Bethlehem!”
2SA	23	16	세 용사가 블레셋 사람의 군대를 충돌하고 지나가서 베들레헴 성문 곁 우물 물을 길어 가지고 다윗에게로 왔으나 다윗이 마시기를 기뻐 아니하고 그 물을 여호와께 부어 드리며	And the three mighty men brake through the host of the Philistines, and drew water out of the well of Beth–lehem, that was by the gate, and took it, and brought it to David: nevertheless he would not drink thereof, but poured it out unto the Lord.	So the three mighty men broke through the Philistine camp, drew water from the well near the gate of Bethlehem, and brought it back to David. But he refused to drink it; instead, he poured it out to the LORD,
2SA	23	17	가로되 여호와여 내가 결단코 이런 일을 하지 아니하리이다 이는 생명을 돌아보지 아니하고 갔던 사람들의 피니이다 하고 마시기를 즐겨 아니하니라 세 용사가 이런 일을 행하였더라	And he said, Be it far from me, O Lord, that I should do this: is not this the blood of the men that went in jeopardy of their lives? therefore he would not drink it. These things did these three mighty men.	saying, “Far be it from me, O LORD, to do this! Is this not the blood of the men who risked their lives?” So he refused to drink it. Such were the exploits of the three mighty men.
2SA	23	18	또 스루야의 아들 요압의 아우 아비새니 저는 그 삼 인의 두목이라 저가 창을 들어 삼백 인을 죽이고 그 삼 인 중에 이름을 얻었으	And Abishai, the brother of Joab, the son of Zeruiah, was chief among three. And he lifted up his spear against three hundred, and slew them, and had the name among three.	Now Abishai, the brother of Joab and son of Zeruiah, was chief of the Three, and he lifted his spear against three hundred men, killed them, and won a name along with the Three.
2SA	23	19	저는 삼 인 중에 가장 존귀한 자가 아니냐 저가 저희의 두목이 되었으나 그러나 첫 삼 인에게는 미치지 못하였더라	Was he not most honourable of three? therefore he was their captain: howbeit he attained not unto the first three.	Was he not more honored than the Three? And he became their commander, even though he was not included among the Three.
2SA	23	20	또 갑스엘 용사의 손자 여호야다의 아들 브나야니 저는 효용한 일을 행한 자라 일찍이 모압 아리엘의 아들 둘을 죽였고 또 눈 올 때에 함정에 내려가서 한 사자를 죽였으며	And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man, of Kabzeel, who had done many acts, he slew two lionlike men of Moab: he went down also and slew a lion in the midst of a pit in time of snow:	And Benaiah son of Jehoiada was a man of valor from Kabzeel, a man of many exploits. He struck down two champions of Moab, and on a snowy day he went down into a pit and killed a lion.
2SA	23	21	또 장대한 애굽 사람을 죽였는데 그의 손에 창이 있어도 저가 막대를 가지고 내려가서 그 애굽 사람의 손에서 창을 빼앗아 그 창으로 죽였더라	And he slew an Egyptian, a goodly man: and the Egyptian had a spear in his hand; but he went down to him with a staff, and plucked the spear out of the Egyptian’s hand, and slew him with his own spear.	He also killed an Egyptian, a huge man. Although the Egyptian had a spear in his hand, Benaiah went against him with a club, snatched the spear from his hand, and killed the Egyptian with his own spear.
2SA	23	22	여호야다의 아들 브나야가 이런 일을 행하였으므로 세 용사 중에 이름을 얻고	These things did Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and had the name among three mighty men.	These were the exploits of Benaiah son of Jehoiada, who won a name alongside the three mighty men.
2SA	23	23	삼십 인보다 존귀하나 그러나 첫 삼 인에게는 미치지 못하였더라 다윗이 저를 세워 시위대 장관을 삼았더라	He was more honourable than the thirty, but he attained not to the first three. And David set him over his guard.	He was most honored among the Thirty, but he did not become one of the Three. And David appointed him over his guard.
2SA	23	24	요압의 아우 아사헬은 삼십 인 중에 하나요 또 베들레헴 도도의 아들 엘하난과	Asahel the brother of Joab was one of the thirty; Elhanan the son of Dodo of Beth–lehem,	Now these were members of the Thirty: Asahel the brother of Joab, Elhanan son of Dodo of Bethlehem,
2SA	23	25	하롯 사람 삼훗과 하롯 사람 엘리가와	Shammah the Harodite, Elika the Harodite,	Shammah the Harodite, Elika the Harodite,
2SA	23	26	발디 사람 헬레스와 드고아사람 익게스의 아들 이라와	Helez the Paltite, Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite,	Helez the Paltite, Ira son of Ikkesh the Tekoite,
2SA	23	27	아나돗 사람 아비에셀과 후사 사람 므분내와	Abiezer the Anethothite, Mebunnai the Hushathite,	Abiezer the Anathothite, Mebunnai the Hushathite,
2SA	23	28	아호아 사람 살몬과 느도바 사람 마하래와	Zalmon the Ahohite, Maharai the Netophathite,	Zalmon the Ahohite, Maharai the Netophathite,
2SA	23	29	느도바 사람 바아나의 아들 헬렙과 베냐민 자손에 속한 기브아 사람 리배의 아들 잇대와	Heleb the son of Baanah, a Netophathite, Ittai the son of Ribai out of Gibeah of the children of Benjamin,	Heled son of Baanah the Netophathite, Ittai son of Ribai from Gibeah of the Benjamites,
2SA	23	30	비라돈 사람 브나야와 가아스 시냇가에 사는 힛대와	Benaiah the Pirathonite, Hiddai of the brooks of Gaash,	Benaiah the Pirathonite, Hiddai from the brooks of Gaash,
2SA	23	31	아르바 사람 아비알본과 바르훔 사람 아스마웻과	Abi–albon the Arbathite, Azmaveth the Barhumite,	Abi-albon the Arbathite, Azmaveth the Barhumite,
2SA	23	32	사알본 사람 엘리아바와 야센의 아들 요나단과	Eliahba the Shaalbonite, of the sons of Jashen, Jonathan,	Eliahba the Shaalbonite, the sons of Jashen,
2SA	23	33	하랄 사람 삼마와 아랄 사람 사랄의 아들 아히암과	Shammah the Hararite, Ahiam the son of Sharar the Hararite,	Jonathan son of Shammah the Hararite, Ahiam son of Sharar the Hararite,
2SA	23	34	마아가 사람의 손자 아하스배의 아들 엘리벨렛과 길로 사람 아히도벨의 아들 엘리암과	Eliphelet the son of Ahasbai, the son of the Maachathite, Eliam the son of Ahithophel the Gilonite,	Eliphelet son of Ahasbai the Maacathite, Eliam son of Ahithophel the Gilonite,
2SA	23	35	갈멜 사람 헤스래와 아랍 사람 바아래와	Hezrai the Carmelite, Paarai the Arbite,	Hezro the Carmelite, Paarai the Arbite,
2SA	23	36	소바 나단의 아들 이갈과 갓 사람 바니와	Igal the son of Nathan of Zobah, Bani the Gadite,	Igal son of Nathan of Zobah, Bani the Gadite,
2SA	23	37	암몬 사람 셀렉과 스루야의 아들 요압의 병기 잡은 자 브에롯 사람 나하래와	Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Beerothite, armourbearer to Joab the son of Zeruiah,	Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Beerothite, the armor-bearer of Joab son of Zeruiah,
2SA	23	38	이델 사람 이라와 이델 사람 가렙과	Ira an Ithrite, Gareb an Ithrite,	Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite,
2SA	23	39	헷 사람 우리아라 이상 도합이 삼십칠 인이었더라	Uriah the Hittite: thirty and seven in all.	and Uriah the Hittite. There were thirty-seven in all.
2SA	24	1	여호와께서 다시 이스라엘을 향하여 진노하사 저희를 치시려고 다윗을 감동시키사 가서 이스라엘과 유다의 인구를 조사하라 하신지라	And again the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved David against them to say, Go, number Israel and Judah.	Again the anger of the LORD burned against Israel, and He stirred up David against them, saying, “Go and take a census of Israel and Judah.”
2SA	24	2	왕이 이에 그 곁에 있는 군대 장관 요압에게 이르되 너는 이스라엘 모든 지파 가운데로 다니며 단에서부터 브엘세바까지 인구를 조사하여 그 도수를 내게 알게 하라	For the king said to Joab the captain of the host, which was with him, Go now through all the tribes of Israel, from Dan even to Beer–sheba, and number ye the people, that I may know the number of the people.	So the king said to Joab the commander of his army, who was with him, “Go now throughout the tribes of Israel from Dan to Beersheba and register the troops, so that I may know their number.”
2SA	24	3	요압이 왕께 고하되 이 백성은 얼마든지 왕의 하나님 여호와께서 백 배나 더하게 하사 내 주 왕의 눈으로 보게 하시기를 원하나이다 그런데 내 주 왕은 어찌하여 이런 일을 기뻐하시나이까 하되	And Joab said unto the king, Now the Lord thy God add unto the people, how many soever they be, an hundredfold, and that the eyes of my lord the king may see it: but why doth my lord the king delight in this thing?	But Joab replied to the king, “May the LORD your God multiply the troops a hundred times over, and may the eyes of my lord the king see it. But why does my lord the king want to do such a thing?”
2SA	24	4	왕의 명령이 요압과 군대 장관들을 재촉한지라 요압과 장관들이 이스라엘 인구를 조사하려고 왕의 앞에서 물러나서	Notwithstanding the king’s word prevailed against Joab, and against the captains of the host. And Joab and the captains of the host went out from the presence of the king, to number the people of Israel.	Nevertheless, the king’s word prevailed against Joab and against the commanders of the army. So Joab and the commanders of the army departed from the presence of the king to count the troops of Israel.
2SA	24	5	요단을 건너 갓 골짜기 가운데 성읍 아로엘 우편 곧 야셀 맞은편에 이르러 장막을 치고	And they passed over Jordan, and pitched in Aroer, on the right side of the city that lieth in the midst of the river of Gad, and toward Jazer:	They crossed the Jordan and camped near Aroer, south of the town in the middle of the valley, and proceeded toward Gad and Jazer.
2SA	24	6	길르앗에 이르고 닷딤홋시 땅에 이르고 또 다냐안에 이르러서는 시돈으로 돌아서	Then they came to Gilead, and to the land of Tahtim–hodshi; and they came to Dan–jaan, and about to Zidon,	Then they went to Gilead and the land of Tahtim-hodshi, and on to Dan-jaan and around to Sidon.
2SA	24	7	두로 견고한 성에 이르고 히위 사람과 가나안 사람의 모든 성읍에 이르고 유다 남편으로 나와서 브엘세바에 이르니라	And came to the strong hold of Tyre, and to all the cities of the Hivites, and of the Canaanites: and they went out to the south of Judah, even to Beer–sheba.	They went toward the fortress of Tyre and all the cities of the Hivites and Canaanites. Finally, they went on to the Negev of Judah, to Beersheba.
2SA	24	8	저희 무리가 국중을 두루 돌아 아홉 달 스무 날만에 예루살렘에 이르러	So when they had gone through all the land, they came to Jerusalem at the end of nine months and twenty days.	At the end of nine months and twenty days, having gone through the whole land, they returned to Jerusalem.
2SA	24	9	요압이 인구 도수를 왕께 고하니 곧 이스라엘에서 칼을 빼는 담대한 자가 팔십만이요 유다 사람이 오십만이었더라	And Joab gave up the sum of the number of the people unto the king: and there were in Israel eight hundred thousand valiant men that drew the sword; and the men of Judah were five hundred thousand men.	And Joab reported to the king the total number of the troops. In Israel there were 800,000 men of valor who drew the sword, and in Judah there were 500,000.
2SA	24	10	다윗이 인구 수를 조사한 후에 그 마음에 자책하고 여호와께 아뢰되 내가 이 일을 행함으로 큰 죄를 범하였나이다 여호와여 이제 간구하옵나니 종의 죄를 사하여 주옵소서 내가 심히 미련하게 행하였나이다 하니라	And David’s heart smote him after that he had numbered the people. And David said unto the Lord, I have sinned greatly in that I have done: and now, I beseech thee, O Lord, take away the iniquity of thy servant; for I have done very foolishly.	After David had numbered the troops, his conscience was stricken and he said to the LORD, “I have sinned greatly in what I have done. Now, O LORD, I beg You to take away the iniquity of Your servant, for I have acted very foolishly.”
2SA	24	11	다윗이 아침에 일어날 때에 여호와의 말씀이 다윗의 선견자 된 선지자 갓에게 임하여 가라사대	For when David was up in the morning, the word of the Lord came unto the prophet Gad, David’s seer, saying,	When David got up in the morning, a revelation from the LORD had come to Gad the prophet, David’s seer:
2SA	24	12	가서 다윗에게 말하기를 여호와의 말씀에 내가 네게 세 가지를 보이노니 너는 그 중에서 하나를 택하라 내가 그것을 네게 행하리라 하셨다 하라	Go and say unto David, Thus saith the Lord, I offer thee three things; choose thee one of them, that I may do it unto thee.	“Go and tell David that this is what the LORD says: ‘I am offering you three options. Choose one of them, and I will carry it out against you.’”
2SA	24	13	갓이 다윗에게 이르러 고하여 가로되 왕의 땅에 칠 년 기근이 있을 것이니이까 혹시 왕이 왕의 대적에게 쫓겨 석 달을 그 앞에서 도망하실 것이니이까 혹시 왕의 땅에 삼 일 동안 온역이 있을 것이니이까 왕은 생각하여 보고 나를 보내신 이에게 대답하게 하소서	So Gad came to David, and told him, and said unto him, Shall seven years of famine come unto thee in thy land? or wilt thou flee three months before thine enemies, while they pursue thee? or that there be three days’ pestilence in thy land? now advise, and see what answer I shall return to him that sent me.	So Gad went and said to David, “Do you choose to endure three years of famine in your land, three months of fleeing the pursuit of your enemies, or three days of plague upon your land? Now then, think it over and decide how I should reply to Him who sent me.”
2SA	24	14	다윗이 갓에게 이르되 내가 곤경에 있도다 여호와께서는 긍휼이 크시니 우리가 여호와의 손에 빠지고 내가 사람의 손에 빠지지 않기를 원하노라	And David said unto Gad, I am in a great strait: let us fall now into the hand of the Lord; for his mercies are great: and let me not fall into the hand of man.	David answered Gad, “I am deeply distressed. Please, let us fall into the hand of the LORD, for His mercies are great; but do not let me fall into the hands of men.”
2SA	24	15	이에 여호와께서 그 아침부터 정하신 때까지 온역을 이스라엘에게 내리시니 단부터 브엘세바까지 백성의 죽은 자가 칠만 인이라	So the Lord sent a pestilence upon Israel from the morning even to the time appointed: and there died of the people from Dan even to Beer–sheba seventy thousand men.	So the LORD sent a plague upon Israel from that morning until the appointed time, and seventy thousand of the people from Dan to Beersheba died.
2SA	24	16	천사가 예루살렘을 향하여 그 손을 들어 멸하려 하더니 여호와께서 이 재앙 내림을 뉘우치사 백성을 멸하는 천사에게 이르시되 족하다 이제는 네 손을 거두라 하시니 때에 여호와의 사자가 여부스 사람 아라우나의 타작 마당 곁에 있는지라	And when the angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem to destroy it, the Lord repented him of the evil, and said to the angel that destroyed the people, It is enough: stay now thine hand. And the angel of the Lord was by the threshingplace of Araunah the Jebusite.	But when the angel stretched out his hand to destroy Jerusalem, the LORD relented from the calamity and said to the angel who was destroying the people, “Enough! Withdraw your hand now!” At that time the angel of the LORD was by the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite.
2SA	24	17	다윗이 백성을 치는 천사를 보고 곧 여호와께 아뢰어 가로되 나는 범죄하였고 악을 행하였삽거니와 이 양무리는 무엇을 행하였나이까 청컨대 주의 손으로 나와 내 아비의 집을 치소서 하니라	And David spake unto the Lord when he saw the angel that smote the people, and said, Lo, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly: but these sheep, what have they done? let thine hand, I pray thee, be against me, and against my father’s house.	When David saw the angel striking down the people, he said to the LORD, “Surely I, the shepherd, have sinned and acted wickedly. But these sheep, what have they done? Please, let Your hand fall upon me and my father’s house.”
2SA	24	18	이 날에 갓이 다윗에게 이르러 고하되 올라가서 여부스 사람 아라우나의 타작마당에서 여호와를 위하여 단을 쌓으소서 하매	And Gad came that day to David, and said unto him, Go up, rear an altar unto the Lord in the threshingfloor of Araunah the Jebusite.	And that day Gad came to David and said to him, “Go up and build an altar to the LORD on the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite.”
2SA	24	19	다윗이 여호와의 명하신 바 갓의 말대로 올라가니라	And David, according to the saying of Gad, went up as the Lord commanded.	So David went up at the word of Gad, just as the LORD had commanded.
2SA	24	20	아라우나가 바라보다가 왕과 그 신복들이 자기를 향하여 옴을 보고 나가서 왕의 앞에서 얼굴을 땅에 대고 절하며	And Araunah looked, and saw the king and his servants coming on toward him: and Araunah went out, and bowed himself before the king on his face upon the ground.	When Araunah looked out and saw the king and his servants coming toward him, he went out and bowed facedown before the king.
2SA	24	21	가로되 어찌하여 내 주 왕께서 종에게 임하시나이까 다윗이 가로되 네게서 타작마당을 사서 여호와께 단을 쌓아 백성에게 내리는 재앙을 그치게 하려 함이로라	And Araunah said, Wherefore is my lord the king come to his servant? And David said, To buy the threshingfloor of thee, to build an altar unto the Lord, that the plague may be stayed from the people.	“Why has my lord the king come to his servant?” Araunah said. “To buy your threshing floor,” David replied, “that I may build an altar to the LORD, so that the plague upon the people may be halted.”
2SA	24	22	아라우나가 다윗에게 고하되 원컨대 내 주 왕은 좋게 여기시는 대로 취하여 드리소서 번제에 대하여는 소가 있고 땔 나무에 대하여는 마당질하는 제구와 소의 멍에가 있나이다	And Araunah said unto David, Let my lord the king take and offer up what seemeth good unto him: behold, here be oxen for burnt sacrifice, and threshing instruments and other instruments of the oxen for wood.	Araunah said to David, “My lord the king may take whatever seems good and offer it up. Here are the oxen for a burnt offering and the threshing sledges and ox yokes for the wood.
2SA	24	23	왕이여 아라우나가 이것을 다 왕께 드리나이다 하고 또 왕께 고하되 왕의 하나님 여호와께서 왕을 기쁘게 받으시기를 원하나이다	All these things did Araunah, as a king, give unto the king. And Araunah said unto the king, The Lord thy God accept thee.	O king, Araunah gives all these to the king.” He also said to the king, “May the LORD your God accept you.”
2SA	24	24	왕이 아라우나에게 이르되 그렇지 아니하다 내가 값을 주고 네게서 사리라 값 없이는 내 하나님 여호와께 번제를 드리지 아니하리라 하고 은 오십 세겔로 타작마당과 소를 사고	And the king said unto Araunah, Nay; but I will surely buy it of thee at a price: neither will I offer burnt offerings unto the Lord my God of that which doth cost me nothing. So David bought the threshingfloor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver.	“No,” replied the king, “I insist on paying a price, for I will not offer to the LORD my God burnt offerings that cost me nothing.” So David bought the threshing floor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver.
2SA	24	25	그곳에서 여호와를 위하여 단을 쌓고 번제와 화목제를 드렸더니 이에 여호와께서 그 땅을 위하여 기도를 들으시매 이스라엘에게 내리는 재앙이 그쳤더라	And David built there an altar unto the Lord, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings. So the Lord was intreated for the land, and the plague was stayed from Israel.	And there he built an altar to the LORD and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings. Then the LORD answered the prayers on behalf of the land, and the plague upon Israel was halted.
1KI	1	1	다윗 왕이 나이 많아 늙으니 이불을 덮어도 따뜻하지 아니한지라	Now king David was old and stricken in years; and they covered him with clothes, but he gat no heat.	Now King David was old and well along in years, and though they covered him with blankets, he could not keep warm.
1KI	1	2	그 신복들이 왕께 고하되 우리 주 왕을 위하여 젊은 처녀 하나를 구하여 저로 왕을 모셔 봉양하고 왕의 품에 누워 우리 주 왕으로 따뜻하시게 하리이다 하고	Wherefore his servants said unto him, Let there be sought for my lord the king a young virgin: and let her stand before the king, and let her cherish him, and let her lie in thy bosom, that my lord the king may get heat.	So his servants said to him, “Let us search for a young virgin for our lord the king, to attend to him and care for him and lie by his side to keep him warm.”
1KI	1	3	이스라엘 사방 경내에 아리따운 동녀를 구하다가 수넴 여자 아비삭을 얻어 왕께 데려왔으니	So they sought for a fair damsel throughout all the coasts of Israel, and found Abishag a Shunammite, and brought her to the king.	Then they searched throughout Israel for a beautiful girl, and they found Abishag the Shunammite and brought her to the king.
1KI	1	4	이 동녀는 심히 아리따운 자라 저가 왕을 봉양하며 수종하였으나 왕이 더불어 동침하지 아니하였더라	And the damsel was very fair, and cherished the king, and ministered to him: but the king knew her not.	The girl was unsurpassed in beauty; she cared for the king and served him, but he had no relations with her.
1KI	1	5	때에 학깃의 아들 아도니야가 스스로 높여서 이르기를 내가 왕이 되리라 하고 자기를 위하여 병거와 기병과 전배 오십 인을 예비하니	Then Adonijah the son of Haggith exalted himself, saying, I will be king: and he prepared him chariots and horsemen, and fifty men to run before him.	At that time Adonijah, David’s son by Haggith, began to exalt himself, saying, “I will be king!” And he acquired chariots and horsemen and fifty men to run ahead of him.
1KI	1	6	저는 압살롬의 다음에 난 자요 체용이 심히 준수한 자라 그 부친이 네가 어찌하여 그리하였느냐 하는 말로 한번도 저를 섭섭하게 한 일이 없었더라	And his father had not displeased him at any time in saying, Why hast thou done so? and he also was a very goodly man; and his mother bare him after Absalom.	(His father had never once reprimanded him by saying, “Why do you act this way?” Adonijah was also very handsome, born next after Absalom.)
1KI	1	7	아도니야가 스루야의 아들 요압과 제사장 아비아달과 모의하니 저희가 좇아 도우나	And he conferred with Joab the son of Zeruiah, and with Abiathar the priest: and they following Adonijah helped him.	So Adonijah conferred with Joab son of Zeruiah and with Abiathar the priest, who supported him.
1KI	1	8	제사장 사독과 여호야다의 아들 브나야와 선지자 나단과 시므이와 레이와 다윗에게 속한 용사들은 아도니야와 같이 하지 아니하였더라	But Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and Nathan the prophet, and Shimei, and Rei, and the mighty men which belonged to David, were not with Adonijah.	But Zadok the priest, Benaiah son of Jehoiada, Nathan the prophet, Shimei, Rei, and David’s mighty men would not join Adonijah.
1KI	1	9	아도니야가 에느로겔 근방 소헬렛 돌 곁에서 양과 소와 살찐 송아지를 잡고 왕자 곧 자기의 모든 동생과 왕의 신복 유다 모든 사람을 다 청하였으나	And Adonijah slew sheep and oxen and fat cattle by the stone of Zoheleth, which is by En–rogel, and called all his brethren the king’s sons, and all the men of Judah the king’s servants:	And Adonijah sacrificed sheep, oxen, and fattened calves near the stone of Zoheleth, which is next to En-rogel. He invited all his royal brothers and all the men of Judah who were servants of the king.
1KI	1	10	선지자 나단과 브나야와 용사들과 자기 동생 솔로몬은 청하지 아니하였더라	But Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah, and the mighty men, and Solomon his brother, he called not.	But he did not invite Nathan the prophet, Benaiah, the mighty men, or his brother Solomon.
1KI	1	11	나단이 솔로몬의 모친 밧세바에게 고하여 가로되 학깃의 아들 아도니야가 왕이 됨을 듣지 못하였나이까 우리 주 다윗은 알지 못하시나이다	Wherefore Nathan spake unto Bath–sheba the mother of Solomon, saying, Hast thou not heard that Adonijah the son of Haggith doth reign, and David our lord knoweth it not?	Then Nathan said to Bathsheba the mother of Solomon, “Have you not heard that Adonijah son of Haggith has become king, and our lord David does not know it?
1KI	1	12	이제 나로 당신의 생명과 당신의 아들 솔로몬의 생명 구원할 계교 베풀기를 허락하소서	Now therefore come, let me, I pray thee, give thee counsel, that thou mayest save thine own life, and the life of thy son Solomon.	Now please, come and let me advise you. Save your own life and the life of your son Solomon.
1KI	1	13	당신은 다윗 왕 앞에 들어가서 고하기를 내 주 왕이여 전에 왕이 계집종에게 맹세하여 이르시기를 네 아들 솔로몬이 정녕 나를 이어 왕이 되어 내 위에 앉으리라 하지 아니하셨나이까 그런데 아도니야가 무슨 연고로 왕이 되었나이까 하소서	Go and get thee in unto king David, and say unto him, Didst not thou, my lord, O king, swear unto thine handmaid, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne? why then doth Adonijah reign?	Go at once to King David and say, ‘My lord the king, did you not swear to your maidservant, “Surely your son Solomon will reign after me, and he will sit on my throne”? Why then has Adonijah become king?’
1KI	1	14	당신이 거기서 왕과 말씀할 때에 나도 이어 들어가서 당신의 말씀을 증거하리이다	Behold, while thou yet talkest there with the king, I also will come in after thee, and confirm thy words.	Then, while you are still there speaking with the king, I will come in after you and confirm your words.”
1KI	1	15	밧세바가 이에 침실에 들어가 왕에게 이르니 왕이 심히 늙었으므로 수넴 여자 아비삭이 시종하였더라	And Bath–sheba went in unto the king into the chamber: and the king was very old; and Abishag the Shunammite ministered unto the king.	So Bathsheba went to see the king in his bedroom. Since the king was very old, Abishag the Shunammite was serving him.
1KI	1	16	밧세바가 몸을 굽혀 왕께 절하니 왕이 이르되 어찜이냐	And Bath–sheba bowed, and did obeisance unto the king. And the king said, What wouldest thou?	And Bathsheba bowed down in homage to the king, who asked, “What is your desire?”
1KI	1	17	저가 왕께 대답하되 내 주여 왕이 전에 왕의 하나님 여호와를 가리켜 계집종에게 맹세하시기를 네 아들 솔로몬이 정녕 나를 이어 왕이 되어 내 위에 앉으리라 하셨거늘	And she said unto him, My lord, thou swarest by the Lord thy God unto thine handmaid, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne.	“My lord,” she replied, “you yourself swore to your maidservant by the LORD your God: ‘Surely your son Solomon will reign after me, and he will sit on my throne.’
1KI	1	18	이제 아도니야가 왕이 되었어도 내 주 왕은 알지 못하시나이다	And now, behold, Adonijah reigneth; and now, my lord the king, thou knowest it not:	But now, behold, Adonijah has become king, and you, my lord the king, did not know it.
1KI	1	19	저가 수소와 살진 송아지와 양을 많이 잡고 왕의 모든 아들과 제사장 아비아달과 군대장관 요압을 청하였으나 왕의 종 솔로몬은 청치 아니하였나이다	And he hath slain oxen and fat cattle and sheep in abundance, and hath called all the sons of the king, and Abiathar the priest, and Joab the captain of the host: but Solomon thy servant hath he not called.	And he has sacrificed an abundance of oxen, fattened calves, and sheep, and has invited all the other sons of the king, as well as Abiathar the priest and Joab the commander of the army. But he did not invite your servant Solomon.
1KI	1	20	내 주 왕이여 온 이스라엘이 왕에게 다 주목하고 누가 내 주 왕을 이어 그 위에 앉을 것을 반포하시기를 기다리나이다	And thou, my lord, O king, the eyes of all Israel are upon thee, that thou shouldest tell them who shall sit on the throne of my lord the king after him.	And as for you, my lord the king, the eyes of all Israel are upon you to tell them who will sit on the throne of my lord the king after him.
1KI	1	21	그렇지 아니하면 내 주 왕께서 그 열조와 함께 잘 때에 나와 내 아들 솔로몬은 죄인이 되리이다	Otherwise it shall come to pass, when my lord the king shall sleep with his fathers, that I and my son Solomon shall be counted offenders.	Otherwise, when my lord the king rests with his fathers, I and my son Solomon will be counted as criminals.”
1KI	1	22	밧세바가 왕과 말씀할 때에 선지자 나단이 들어온지라	And, lo, while she yet talked with the king, Nathan the prophet also came in.	And just then, while Bathsheba was still speaking with the king, Nathan the prophet arrived.
1KI	1	23	혹이 왕께 고하여 가로되 선지자 나단이 여기 있나이다 하니 저가 왕 앞에 들어와서 얼굴을 땅에 대어 왕께 절하고	And they told the king, saying, Behold Nathan the prophet. And when he was come in before the king, he bowed himself before the king with his face to the ground.	So the king was told, “Nathan the prophet is here.” And Nathan went in and bowed facedown before the king.
1KI	1	24	가로되 내 주 왕께서 이르시기를 아도니야가 나를 이어 왕이 되어 내 위에 앉으리라 하셨나이까	And Nathan said, My lord, O king, hast thou said, Adonijah shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne?	“My lord the king,” said Nathan, “did you say, ‘Adonijah will reign after me, and he will sit on my throne’?
1KI	1	25	저가 오늘 내려가서 수소와 살진 송아지와 양을 많이 잡고 왕의 모든 아들과 군대장관들과 제사장 아비아달을 청하였는데 저희가 아도니야 앞에서 먹고 마시며 아도니야 왕 만세를 불렀나이다	For he is gone down this day, and hath slain oxen and fat cattle and sheep in abundance, and hath called all the king’s sons, and the captains of the host, and Abiathar the priest; and, behold, they eat and drink before him, and say, God save king Adonijah.	For today he has gone down and sacrificed an abundance of oxen, fattened calves, and sheep, and has invited all the sons of the king, the commanders of the army, and Abiathar the priest. And behold, they are eating and drinking before him, saying, ‘Long live King Adonijah!’
1KI	1	26	그러나 왕의 종 나와 제사장 사독과 여호야다의 아들 브나야와 왕의 종 솔로몬은 청치 아니하였사오니	But me, even me thy servant, and Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and thy servant Solomon, hath he not called.	But me your servant he did not invite, nor Zadok the priest, nor Benaiah son of Jehoiada, nor your servant Solomon.
1KI	1	27	이것이 내 주 왕의 하신 일이니이까 그런데 왕께서 내 주 왕을 이어 그 위에 앉을 자를 종에게 알게 하지 아니하셨나이다	Is this thing done by my lord the king, and thou hast not shewed it unto thy servant, who should sit on the throne of my lord the king after him?	Has my lord the king let this happen without informing your servant who should sit on the throne after my lord the king?”
1KI	1	28	다윗 왕이 명하여 가로되 밧세바를 내 앞으로 부르라 하매 저가 왕의 앞으로 들어와 그 앞에 서는지라	Then king David answered and said, Call me Bath–sheba. And she came into the king’s presence, and stood before the king.	Then King David said, “Call in Bathsheba for me.” So she came into the king’s presence and stood before him.
1KI	1	29	왕이 가로되 내 생명을 모든 환난에서 구원하신 여호와의 사심을 가리켜 맹세하노라	And the king sware, and said, As the Lord liveth, that hath redeemed my soul out of all distress,	And the king swore an oath, saying, “As surely as the LORD lives, who has redeemed my life from all distress,
1KI	1	30	내가 이전에 이스라엘 하나님 여호와를 가리켜 네게 맹세하여 이르기를 네 아들 솔로몬이 정녕 나를 이어 왕이 되고 나를 대신하여 내 위에 앉으리라 하였으니 내가 오늘날 그대로 행하리라	Even as I sware unto thee by the Lord God of Israel, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne in my stead; even so will I certainly do this day.	I will carry out this very day exactly what I swore to you by the LORD, the God of Israel: Surely your son Solomon will reign after me, and he will sit on my throne in my place.”
1KI	1	31	밧세바가 얼굴을 땅에 대어 절하며 내 주 다윗 왕은 만세수를 하옵소서 하니라	Then Bath–sheba bowed with her face to the earth, and did reverence to the king, and said, Let my lord king David live for ever.	Bathsheba bowed facedown in homage to the king and said, “May my lord King David live forever!”
1KI	1	32	다윗 왕이 가로되 제사장 사독과 선지자 나단과 여호야다의 아들 브나야를 내 앞으로 부르라 하니 저희가 왕 앞에 이른지라	And king David said, Call me Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada. And they came before the king.	Then King David said, “Call in for me Zadok the priest, Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah son of Jehoiada.” So they came before the king.
1KI	1	33	왕이 저희에게 이르되 너희는 너희 주의 신복들을 데리고 내 아들 솔로몬을 나의 노새에 태우고 기혼으로 인도하여 내려가고	The king also said unto them, Take with you the servants of your lord, and cause Solomon my son to ride upon mine own mule, and bring him down to Gihon:	“Take my servants with you,” said the king. “Set my son Solomon on my own mule and take him down to Gihon.
1KI	1	34	거기서 제사장 사독과 선지자 나단은 저에게 기름을 부어 이스라엘 왕을 삼고 너희는 양각을 불며 솔로몬 왕 만세를 부르고	And let Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet anoint him there king over Israel: and blow ye with the trumpet, and say, God save king Solomon.	There Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet are to anoint him king over Israel. You are to blow the ram’s horn and declare, ‘Long live King Solomon!’
1KI	1	35	저를 따라 올라오라 저가 와서 내 위에 앉아 나를 대신하여 왕이 되리라 내가 저를 세워 이스라엘과 유다의 주권자가 되게 하기로 작정하였느니라	Then ye shall come up after him, that he may come and sit upon my throne; for he shall be king in my stead: and I have appointed him to be ruler over Israel and over Judah.	Then you shall go up with him, and he is to come and sit on my throne and reign in my place. For I have appointed him ruler over Israel and Judah.”
1KI	1	36	여호야다의 아들 브나야가 왕께 대답하여 가로되 아멘 내 주 왕의 하나님 여호와께서도 이렇게 말씀하시기를 원하오며	And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada answered the king, and said, Amen: the Lord God of my lord the king say so too.	“Amen,” replied Benaiah son of Jehoiada. “May the LORD, the God of my lord the king, so declare it.
1KI	1	37	또 여호와께서 내 주 왕과 함께 계심 같이 솔로몬과 함께 계셔서 그 위를 내 주 다윗 왕의 위보다 더 크게 하시기를 원하나이다 하니라	As the Lord hath been with my lord the king, even so be he with Solomon, and make his throne greater than the throne of my lord king David.	Just as the LORD was with my lord the king, so may He be with Solomon and make his throne even greater than that of my lord King David.”
1KI	1	38	제사장 사독과 선지자 나단과 여호야다의 아들 브나야와 그렛 사람과 블렛 사람이 내려가서 솔로몬을 다윗 왕의 노새에 태우고 인도하여 기혼으로 가서	So Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites, and the Pelethites, went down, and caused Solomon to ride upon king David’s mule, and brought him to Gihon.	Then Zadok the priest, Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah son of Jehoiada, along with the Cherethites and Pelethites, went down and set Solomon on King David’s mule, and they escorted him to Gihon.
1KI	1	39	제사장 사독이 성막 가운데서 기름 뿔을 가져다가 솔로몬에게 기름을 부으니 이에 양각을 불고 모든 백성이 솔로몬 왕 만세를 부르니라	And Zadok the priest took an horn of oil out of the tabernacle, and anointed Solomon. And they blew the trumpet; and all the people said, God save king Solomon.	Zadok the priest took the horn of oil from the tabernacle and anointed Solomon. Then they blew the ram’s horn, and all the people proclaimed, “Long live King Solomon!”
1KI	1	40	모든 백성이 왕을 따라 올라와서 피리를 불며 크게 즐거워하므로 땅이 저희 소리로 인하여 갈라질 듯하니	And all the people came up after him, and the people piped with pipes, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rent with the sound of them.	All the people followed him, playing flutes and rejoicing with such a great joy that the earth was split by the sound.
1KI	1	41	아도니야와 저와 함께 한 손들이 먹기를 마칠 때에 다 들은지라 요압이 양각 소리를 듣고 가로되 성중에서 소리가 어찌하여 요란하뇨	And Adonijah and all the guests that were with him heard it as they had made an end of eating. And when Joab heard the sound of the trumpet, he said, Wherefore is this noise of the city being in an uproar?	Now Adonijah and all his guests were finishing their feast when they heard the sound of the ram’s horn. “Why is the city in such a loud uproar?” asked Joab.
1KI	1	42	말할 때에 제사장 아비아달의 아들 요나단이 오는지라 아도니야가 가로되 들어오라 너는 용사라 아름다운 소식을 가져오는도다	And while he yet spake, behold, Jonathan the son of Abiathar the priest came: and Adonijah said unto him, Come in; for thou art a valiant man, and bringest good tidings.	As he was speaking, suddenly Jonathan the son of Abiathar the priest arrived. “Come in,” said Adonijah, “for you are a man of valor. You must be bringing good news.”
1KI	1	43	요나단이 아도니야에게 대답하여 가로되 과연 우리 주 다윗 왕이 솔로몬으로 왕을 삼으셨나이다	And Jonathan answered and said to Adonijah, Verily our lord king David hath made Solomon king.	“Not at all,” Jonathan replied. “Our lord King David has made Solomon king.
1KI	1	44	왕께서 제사장 사독과 선지자 나단과 여호야다의 아들 브나야와 그렛 사람과 블렛 사람을 솔로몬과 함께 보내셨는데 저희 무리가 왕의 노새에 솔로몬을 태워다가	And the king hath sent with him Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites, and the Pelethites, and they have caused him to ride upon the king’s mule:	And with Solomon, the king has sent Zadok the priest, Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah son of Jehoiada, along with the Cherethites and Pelethites, and they have set him on the king’s mule.
1KI	1	45	제사장 사독과 선지자 나단이 기혼에서 기름을 부어 왕을 삼고 무리가 그곳에서 올라오며 즐거워하므로 성중이 진동하였나니 당신들에게 들린 소리가 이것이라	And Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet have anointed him king in Gihon: and they are come up from thence rejoicing, so that the city rang again. This is the noise that ye have heard.	Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet have anointed him king at Gihon, and they have gone up from there with rejoicing that rings out in the city. That is the noise you hear.
1KI	1	46	솔로몬이 나라 위에 앉았고	And also Solomon sitteth on the throne of the kingdom.	Moreover, Solomon has taken his seat on the royal throne.
1KI	1	47	또 왕의 신복들이 와서 우리 주 다윗 왕에게 축복하여 이르기를 왕의 하나님이 솔로몬의 이름을 왕의 이름보다 아름답게 하시고 그 위를 왕의 위보다 크게 하시기를 원하나이다 하매 왕이 침상에서 몸을 굽히고	And moreover the king’s servants came to bless our lord king David, saying, God make the name of Solomon better than thy name, and make his throne greater than thy throne. And the king bowed himself upon the bed.	The king’s servants have also gone to congratulate our lord King David, saying, ‘May your God make the name of Solomon more famous than your own name, and may He make his throne greater than your throne.’ And the king has bowed in worship on his bed,
1KI	1	48	이르시기를 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와를 찬송하리로다 여호와께서 오늘날 내 위에 앉을 자를 주사 나로 목도하게 하셨도다 하셨나이다 하니	And also thus said the king, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which hath given one to sit on my throne this day, mine eyes even seeing it.	saying, ‘Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel! Today He has provided one to sit on my throne, and my eyes have seen it.’”
1KI	1	49	아도니야와 함께 한 손들이 다 놀라 일어나 각기 갈 길로 간지라	And all the guests that were with Adonijah were afraid, and rose up, and went every man his way.	At this, all the guests of Adonijah arose in terror and scattered.
1KI	1	50	아도니야도 솔로몬을 두려워하여 일어나 가서 제단 뿔을 잡으니	And Adonijah feared because of Solomon, and arose, and went, and caught hold on the horns of the altar.	But Adonijah, in fear of Solomon, got up and went to take hold of the horns of the altar.
1KI	1	51	혹이 솔로몬에게 고하여 가로되 아도니야가 솔로몬 왕을 두려워하여 지금 제단 뿔을 잡고 말하기를 솔로몬 왕이 오늘날 칼로 자기 종을 죽이지 않겠다고 내게 맹세하기를 원한다 하나이다	And it was told Solomon, saying, Behold, Adonijah feareth king Solomon: for, lo, he hath caught hold on the horns of the altar, saying, Let king Solomon swear unto me to day that he will not slay his servant with the sword.	It was reported to Solomon: “Behold, Adonijah fears King Solomon, and he has taken hold of the horns of the altar, saying, ‘Let King Solomon first swear to me not to put his servant to the sword.’”
1KI	1	52	솔로몬이 가로되 저가 만일 선한 사람이 될진대 그 머리카락 하나라도 땅에 떨어지지 아니하려니와 저의 가운데 악한 것이 보이면 죽으리라 하고	And Solomon said, If he will shew himself a worthy man, there shall not an hair of him fall to the earth: but if wickedness shall be found in him, he shall die.	And Solomon replied, “If he is a man of character, not a single hair of his will fall to the ground. But if evil is found in him, he will die.”
1KI	1	53	사람을 보내어 저를 제단에서 이끌어 내리니 저가 와서 솔로몬 왕께 절하매 솔로몬이 이르기를 네 집으로 가라 하였더라	So king Solomon sent, and they brought him down from the altar. And he came and bowed himself to king Solomon: and Solomon said unto him, Go to thine house.	So King Solomon summoned Adonijah down from the altar, and he came and bowed down before King Solomon, who said to him, “Go to your home.”
1KI	2	1	다윗이 죽을 날이 임박하매 그 아들 솔로몬에게 명하여 가로되	Now the days of David drew nigh that he should die; and he charged Solomon his son, saying,	As the time drew near for David to die, he charged his son Solomon,
1KI	2	2	내가 이제 세상 모든 사람의 가는 길로 가게 되었노니 너는 힘써 대장부가 되고	I go the way of all the earth: be thou strong therefore, and shew thyself a man;	“I am about to go the way of all the earth. So be strong and prove yourself a man.
1KI	2	3	네 하나님 여호와의 명을 지켜 그 길로 행하여 그 법률과 계명과 율례와 증거를 모세의 율법에 기록된대로 지키라 그리하면 네가 무릇 무엇을 하든지 어디로 가든지 형통할지라	And keep the charge of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his judgments, and his testimonies, as it is written in the law of Moses, that thou mayest prosper in all that thou doest, and whithersoever thou turnest thyself:	And keep the charge of the LORD your God to walk in His ways and to keep His statutes, commandments, ordinances, and decrees, as is written in the Law of Moses, so that you may prosper in all you do and wherever you turn,
1KI	2	4	여호와께서 내 일에 대하여 말씀하시기를 만일 네 자손이 그 길을 삼가 마음을 다하고 성품을 다하여 진실히 내 앞에서 행하면 이스라엘 왕위에 오를 사람이 네게서 끊어지지 아니하리라 하신 말씀을 확실히 이루게 하시리라	That the Lord may continue his word which he spake concerning me, saying, If thy children take heed to their way, to walk before me in truth with all their heart and with all their soul, there shall not fail thee (said he) a man on the throne of Israel.	and so that the LORD may fulfill His promise to me: ‘If your descendants take heed to walk faithfully before Me with all their heart and soul, you will never fail to have a man on the throne of Israel.’
1KI	2	5	스루야의 아들 요압이 내게 행한 일 곧 이스라엘 군대의 두 장관 넬의 아들 아브넬과 예델의 아들 아마사에게 행한 일을 네가 알거니와 저가 저희를 죽여 태평시대에 전쟁의 피를 흘리고 전쟁의 피로 자기의 허리에 띤 띠와 발에 신은 신에 묻혔으니	Moreover thou knowest also what Joab the son of Zeruiah did to me, and what he did to the two captains of the hosts of Israel, unto Abner the son of Ner, and unto Amasa the son of Jether, whom he slew, and shed the blood of war in peace, and put the blood of war upon his girdle that was about his loins, and in his shoes that were on his feet.	Moreover, you know what Joab son of Zeruiah did to me—what he did to Abner son of Ner and Amasa son of Jether, the two commanders of the armies of Israel. He killed them in peacetime to avenge the blood of war. He stained with the blood of war the belt around his waist and the sandals on his feet.
1KI	2	6	네 지혜대로 행하여 그 백발로 평안히 음부에 내려가지 못하게 하라	Do therefore according to thy wisdom, and let not his hoar head go down to the grave in peace.	So act according to your wisdom, and do not let his gray head go down to Sheol in peace.
1KI	2	7	마땅히 길르앗 바실래의 아들들에게 은총을 베풀어 저희로 네 상에서 먹는 자 중에 참예하게 하라 내가 네 형 압살롬의 낯을 피하여 도망할 때에 저희가 내게 나아왔었느니라	But shew kindness unto the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite, and let them be of those that eat at thy table: for so they came to me when I fled because of Absalom thy brother.	But show loving devotion to the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite, and let them be among those who eat at your table, because they stood by me when I fled from your brother Absalom.
1KI	2	8	바후림 베냐민 사람 게라의 아들 시므이가 너와 함께 있나니 저는 내가 마하나임으로 갈 때에 독한 말로 나를 저주하였느니라 그러나 저가 요단에 내려와서 나를 영접하기로 내가 여호와를 가리켜 맹세하여 이르기를 내가 칼로 너를 죽이지 아니하리라 하였노라	And, behold, thou hast with thee Shimei the son of Gera, a Benjamite of Bahurim, which cursed me with a grievous curse in the day when I went to Mahanaim: but he came down to meet me at Jordan, and I sware to him by the Lord, saying, I will not put thee to death with the sword.	Keep an eye on Shimei the son of Gera, the Benjamite from Bahurim who is with you. He called down bitter curses against me on the day I went to Mahanaim, but when he came down to meet me at the Jordan, I swore to him by the LORD: ‘I will never put you to the sword.’
1KI	2	9	그러나 저를 무죄한 자로 여기지 말지어다 너는 지혜있는 사람인즉 저에게 행할 일을 알지니 그 백발의 피를 흘려 저로 음부에 내려가게 하라	Now therefore hold him not guiltless: for thou art a wise man, and knowest what thou oughtest to do unto him; but his hoar head bring thou down to the grave with blood.	Now therefore, do not hold him guiltless, for you are a wise man. You know what you ought to do to him to bring his gray head down to Sheol in blood.”
1KI	2	10	다윗이 그 열조와 함께 누워 자서 다윗 성에 장사되니	So David slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David.	Then David rested with his fathers and was buried in the City of David.
1KI	2	11	다윗이 이스라엘 왕이 된지 사십 년이라 헤브론에서 칠 년을 치리하였고 예루살렘에서 삼십삼 년을 치리하였더라	And the days that David reigned over Israel were forty years: seven years reigned he in Hebron, and thirty and three years reigned he in Jerusalem.	The length of David’s reign over Israel was forty years—seven years in Hebron and thirty-three years in Jerusalem.
1KI	2	12	솔로몬이 그 아비 다윗의 위에 앉으니 그 나라가 심히 견고하니라	Then sat Solomon upon the throne of David his father; and his kingdom was established greatly.	So Solomon sat on the throne of his father David, and his kingdom was firmly established.
1KI	2	13	학깃의 아들 아도니야가 솔로몬의 모친 밧세바에게 나아온지라 밧세바가 이르되 네가 화평한 목적으로 왔느뇨 대답하되 화평한 목적이니이다	And Adonijah the son of Haggith came to Bath–sheba the mother of Solomon. And she said, Comest thou peaceably? And he said, Peaceably.	Now Adonijah son of Haggith went to Bathsheba the mother of Solomon, and she asked, “Do you come in peace?” “Yes, in peace,” he replied.
1KI	2	14	또 가로되 내가 말씀할 일이 있나이다 밧세바가 가로되 말하라	He said moreover, I have somewhat to say unto thee. And she said, Say on.	Then he said, “I have something to tell you.” “Say it,” she answered.
1KI	2	15	저가 가로되 당신도 아시는바여니와 이 왕위는 내 것이었고 온 이스라엘은 다 얼굴을 내게로 향하여 왕을 삼으려 하였는데 그 왕위가 돌이켜 내 아우의 것이 되었음은 여호와께로 말미암음이니이다	And he said, Thou knowest that the kingdom was mine, and that all Israel set their faces on me, that I should reign: howbeit the kingdom is turned about, and is become my brother’s: for it was his from the Lord.	“You know that the kingship was mine,” he said. “All Israel expected that I should reign, but the kingship has turned to my brother, for it has come to him from the LORD.
1KI	2	16	이제 내가 한가지 소원을 당신에게 구하오니 내 얼굴을 괄시하지 마옵소서 밧세바가 가로되 말하라	And now I ask one petition of thee, deny me not. And she said unto him, Say on.	So now I have just one request of you; do not deny me.” “State your request,” she told him.
1KI	2	17	가로되 청컨대 솔로몬 왕에게 말씀하여 저로 수넴 여자 아비삭을 내게 주어 아내를 삼게 하소서 왕이 당신의 얼굴을 괄시치 아니하리이다	And he said, Speak, I pray thee, unto Solomon the king, (for he will not say thee nay,) that he give me Abishag the Shunammite to wife.	Adonijah replied, “Please speak to King Solomon, since he will not turn you down. Let him give me Abishag the Shunammite as my wife.”
1KI	2	18	밧세바가 가로되 좋다 내가 너를 위하여 왕께 말하리라	And Bath–sheba said, Well; I will speak for thee unto the king.	“Very well,” Bathsheba replied. “I will speak to the king for you.”
1KI	2	19	밧세바가 이에 아도니야를 위하여 말하려고 솔로몬 왕에게 이르니 왕이 일어나 영접하여 절한 후에 다시 위에 앉고 그 모친을 위하여 자리를 베풀게 하고 그 우편에 앉게 하는지라	Bath–sheba therefore went unto king Solomon, to speak unto him for Adonijah. And the king rose up to meet her, and bowed himself unto her, and sat down on his throne, and caused a seat to be set for the king’s mother; and she sat on his right hand.	So Bathsheba went to King Solomon to speak to him for Adonijah. The king stood up to greet her, bowed to her, and sat down on his throne. Then the king had a throne brought for his mother, who sat down at his right hand.
1KI	2	20	밧세바가 이르되 내가 한가지 작은 일로 왕께 구하오니 내 얼굴을 괄시하지 마소서 왕이 대답하되 내 어머니여 구하시옵소서 내가 어머니의 얼굴을 괄시하지 아니하리이다	Then she said, I desire one small petition of thee; I pray thee, say me not nay. And the king said unto her, Ask on, my mother: for I will not say thee nay.	“I have just one small request of you,” she said. “Do not deny me.” “Make your request, my mother,” the king replied, “for I will not deny you.”
1KI	2	21	가로되 청컨대 수넴 여자 아비삭을 아도니야에게 주어 아내를 삼게 하소서	And she said, Let Abishag the Shunammite be given to Adonijah thy brother to wife.	So Bathsheba said, “Let Abishag the Shunammite be given to your brother Adonijah as his wife.”
1KI	2	22	솔로몬 왕이 그 모친에게 대답하여 가로되 어찌하여 아도니야를 위하여 수넴 여자 아비삭을 구하시나이까 저는 나의 형이오니 저를 위하여 왕위도 구하옵소서 저뿐 아니라 제사장 아비아달과 스루야의 아들 요압도 위하여 구하옵소서 하고	And king Solomon answered and said unto his mother, And why dost thou ask Abishag the Shunammite for Adonijah? ask for him the kingdom also; for he is mine elder brother; even for him, and for Abiathar the priest, and for Joab the son of Zeruiah.	King Solomon answered his mother, “Why do you request Abishag the Shunammite for Adonijah? Since he is my older brother, you might as well request the kingdom for him and for Abiathar the priest and for Joab son of Zeruiah!”
1KI	2	23	여호와를 가리켜 맹세하여 가로되 아도니야가 이런 말을 하였은즉 그 생명을 잃지 아니하면 하나님은 내게 벌 위에 벌을 내리심이 마땅하니이다	Then king Solomon sware by the Lord, saying, God do so to me, and more also, if Adonijah have not spoken this word against his own life.	Then King Solomon swore by the LORD: “May God punish me, and ever so severely, if Adonijah has not made this request at the expense of his life.
1KI	2	24	나를 세워 내 부친 다윗의 위에 오르게 하시고 허락하신 말씀대로 나를 위하여 집을 세우신 여호와의 사심을 가리켜 맹세하노니 아도니야는 오늘날 죽임을 당하리라 하고	Now therefore, as the Lord liveth, which hath established me, and set me on the throne of David my father, and who hath made me an house, as he promised, Adonijah shall be put to death this day.	And now, as surely as the LORD lives—the One who established me, who set me on the throne of my father David, and who founded for me a dynasty as He promised—surely Adonijah shall be put to death today!”
1KI	2	25	여호야다의 아들 브나야를 보내매 저가 아도니야를 쳐서 죽였더라	And king Solomon sent by the hand of Benaiah the son of Jehoiada; and he fell upon him that he died.	So King Solomon sent the order to Benaiah son of Jehoiada, who struck down Adonijah, and he died.
1KI	2	26	왕이 제사장 아비아달에게 이르되 네 고향 아나돗으로 가라 너는 마땅히 죽을 자로되 네가 내 부친 다윗 앞에서 주 여호와의 궤를 메었고 또 내 부친이 모든 환난을 받을 때에 너도 환난을 받았은즉 내가 오늘날 너를 죽이지 아니하노라 하고	And unto Abiathar the priest said the king, Get thee to Anathoth, unto thine own fields; for thou art worthy of death: but I will not at this time put thee to death, because thou barest the ark of the Lord God before David my father, and because thou hast been afflicted in all wherein my father was afflicted.	Then the king said to Abiathar the priest, “Go back to your fields in Anathoth. Even though you deserve to die, I will not put you to death at this time, since you carried the ark of the Lord GOD before my father David, and you suffered through all that my father suffered.”
1KI	2	27	아비아달을 쫓아내어 여호와의 제사장 직분을 파면하니 여호와께서 실로에서 엘리의 집에 대하여 하신 말씀을 응하게 함이더라	So Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being priest unto the Lord; that he might fulfil the word of the Lord, which he spake concerning the house of Eli in Shiloh.	So Solomon banished Abiathar from the priesthood of the LORD and thus fulfilled the word that the LORD had spoken at Shiloh against the house of Eli.
1KI	2	28	그 소문이 요압에게 들리매 저가 여호와의 장막으로 도망하여 단 뿔을 잡으니 이는 저가 다윗을 떠나 압살롬을 좇지 아니하였으나 아도니야를 좇았음이더라	Then tidings came to Joab: for Joab had turned after Adonijah, though he turned not after Absalom. And Joab fled unto the tabernacle of the Lord, and caught hold on the horns of the altar.	When the news reached Joab, who had conspired with Adonijah but not with Absalom, he fled to the tent of the LORD and took hold of the horns of the altar.
1KI	2	29	혹이 솔로몬 왕에게 고하되 요압이 여호와의 장막으로 도망하여 단 곁에 있나이다 솔로몬이 여호야다의 아들 브나야를 보내며 가로되 너는 가서 저를 치라	And it was told king Solomon that Joab was fled unto the tabernacle of the Lord; and, behold, he is by the altar. Then Solomon sent Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, saying, Go, fall upon him.	It was reported to King Solomon: “Joab has fled to the tent of the LORD and is now beside the altar.” So Solomon sent Benaiah son of Jehoiada, saying, “Go, strike him down!”
1KI	2	30	브나야가 여호와의 장막에 이르러 저에게 이르되 왕께서 나오라 하시느니라 저가 대답하되 아니라 내가 여기서 죽겠노라 브나야가 돌아가서 왕께 고하여 가로되 요압이 이리이리 내게 대답하더이다	And Benaiah came to the tabernacle of the Lord, and said unto him, Thus saith the king, Come forth. And he said, Nay; but I will die here. And Benaiah brought the king word again, saying, Thus said Joab, and thus he answered me.	And Benaiah entered the tent of the LORD and said to Joab, “The king says, ‘Come out!’” But Joab replied, “No, I will die here.” So Benaiah relayed the message to the king, saying, “This is how Joab answered me.”
1KI	2	31	왕이 이르되 저의 말과 같이 하여 저를 죽여 묻으라 요압이 까닭없이 흘린 피를 나와 내 부친의 집에서 네가 제하리라	And the king said unto him, Do as he hath said, and fall upon him, and bury him; that thou mayest take away the innocent blood, which Joab shed, from me, and from the house of my father.	And the king replied, “Do just as he says. Strike him down and bury him, and so remove from me and from the house of my father the innocent blood that Joab shed.
1KI	2	32	여호와께서 요압의 피를 그 머리로 돌려 보내실 것은 저가 자기보다 의롭고 선한 두 사람을 쳤음이니 곧 이스라엘 군대 장관 넬의 아들 아브넬과 유다 군대장관 예델의 아들 아마사를 칼로 죽였음이라 이 일을 내 부친 다윗은 알지 못하셨나니	And the Lord shall return his blood upon his own head, who fell upon two men more righteous and better than he, and slew them with the sword, my father David not knowing thereof, to wit, Abner the son of Ner, captain of the host of Israel, and Amasa the son of Jether, captain of the host of Judah.	The LORD will bring his bloodshed back upon his own head, for without the knowledge of my father David he struck down two men more righteous and better than he when he put to the sword Abner son of Ner, commander of Israel’s army, and Amasa son of Jether, commander of Judah’s army.
1KI	2	33	저희의 피는 영영히 요압의 머리와 그 자손의 머리로 돌아갈지라도 다윗과 그 자손과 그 집과 그 위에는 여호와께로 말미암은 평강이 영원히 있으리라	Their blood shall therefore return upon the head of Joab, and upon the head of his seed for ever: but upon David, and upon his seed, and upon his house, and upon his throne, shall there be peace for ever from the Lord.	Their blood will come back upon the heads of Joab and his descendants forever; but for David, his descendants, his house, and his throne, there shall be peace from the LORD forever.”
1KI	2	34	여호야다의 아들 브나야가 곧 올라가서 저를 쳐 죽이매 저가 거친 땅에 있는 자기의 집에 매장되니라	So Benaiah the son of Jehoiada went up, and fell upon him, and slew him: and he was buried in his own house in the wilderness.	So Benaiah son of Jehoiada went up, struck down Joab, and killed him. He was buried at his own home in the wilderness.
1KI	2	35	왕이 이에 여호야다의 아들 브나야로 요압을 대신하여 군대장관을 삼고 또 제사장 사독으로 아비아달을 대신하게 하니라	And the king put Benaiah the son of Jehoiada in his room over the host: and Zadok the priest did the king put in the room of Abiathar.	And the king appointed Benaiah son of Jehoiada in Joab’s place over the army, and he appointed Zadok the priest in Abiathar’s place.
1KI	2	36	왕이 보내어 시므이를 불러서 이르되 너는 예루살렘에서 너를 위하여 집을 짓고 거기서 살고 어디든지 나가지 말라	And the king sent and called for Shimei, and said unto him, Build thee an house in Jerusalem, and dwell there, and go not forth thence any whither.	Then the king summoned Shimei and said to him, “Build a house for yourself in Jerusalem and live there, but do not go anywhere else.
1KI	2	37	너는 분명히 알라 네가 나가서 기드론 시내를 건너는 날에는 정녕 죽임을 당하리니 네 피가 네 머리로 돌아가리라	For it shall be, that on the day thou goest out, and passest over the brook Kidron, thou shalt know for certain that thou shalt surely die: thy blood shall be upon thine own head.	On the day you go out and cross the Kidron Valley, know for sure that you will die; your blood will be on your own head.”
1KI	2	38	시므이가 왕께 대답하되 이 말씀이 좋사오니 내 주 왕의 말씀대로 종이 그리하겠나이다 하고 이에 날이 오래도록 예루살렘에 머무니라	And Shimei said unto the king, The saying is good: as my lord the king hath said, so will thy servant do. And Shimei dwelt in Jerusalem many days.	“The sentence is fair,” Shimei replied. “Your servant will do as my lord the king has spoken.” And Shimei lived in Jerusalem for a long time.
1KI	2	39	삼 년 후에 시므이의 두 종이 가드 왕 마아가의 아들 아기스에게로 도망하여 간지라 혹이 시므이에게 고하여 가로되 당신의 종이 가드에 있나이다	And it came to pass at the end of three years, that two of the servants of Shimei ran away unto Achish son of Maachah king of Gath. And they told Shimei, saying, Behold, thy servants be in Gath.	After three years, however, two of Shimei’s slaves ran away to Achish son of Maacah, king of Gath. And Shimei was told, “Look, your slaves are in Gath.”
1KI	2	40	시므이가 그 종을 찾으려고 일어나 그 나귀에 안장을 지우고 가드로 가서 아기스에게 나아가 그 종을 가드에서 데려왔더니	And Shimei arose, and saddled his ass, and went to Gath to Achish to seek his servants: and Shimei went, and brought his servants from Gath.	So Shimei saddled his donkey and set out to Achish at Gath in search of his slaves, and he brought them back from Gath.
1KI	2	41	시므이가 예루살렘에서부터 가드에 갔다가 돌아온 일을 혹이 솔로몬에게 고한지라	And it was told Solomon that Shimei had gone from Jerusalem to Gath, and was come again.	When Solomon was told that Shimei had gone from Jerusalem to Gath and had returned,
1KI	2	42	왕이 사람을 보내어 시므이를 불러서 이르되 내가 너로 여호와를 가리켜 맹세하게 하고 경계하여 이르기를 너는 분명히 알라 네가 밖으로 나가서 어디든지 가는 날에는 죽임을 당하리라 하지 아니하였느냐 너도 내게 말하기를 내가 들은 말씀이 좋으니이다 하였거늘	And the king sent and called for Shimei, and said unto him, Did I not make thee to swear by the Lord, and protested unto thee, saying, Know for a certain, on the day thou goest out, and walkest abroad any whither, that thou shalt surely die? and thou saidst unto me, The word that I have heard is good.	the king summoned Shimei and said to him, “Did I not make you swear by the LORD and warn you, ‘On the day you leave and go elsewhere, know for sure that you will die’? And you told me, ‘The sentence is fair; I will comply.’
1KI	2	43	네가 어찌하여 여호와를 가리켜 한 맹세와 내가 네게 이른 명령을 지키지 아니하였느냐	Why then hast thou not kept the oath of the Lord, and the commandment that I have charged thee with?	So why have you not kept your oath to the LORD and the command that I gave you?”
1KI	2	44	왕이 또 시므이에게 이르되 네가 무릇 네 마음의 아는 모든 악 곧 내 부친에게 행한바를 네가 스스로 아나니 여호와께서 네 악을 네 머리로 돌려 보내시리라	The king said moreover to Shimei, Thou knowest all the wickedness which thine heart is privy to, that thou didst to David my father: therefore the Lord shall return thy wickedness upon thine own head;	The king also said, “You know in your heart all the evil that you did to my father David. Therefore the LORD will bring your evil back upon your head.
1KI	2	45	그러나 솔로몬 왕은 복을 받고 다윗의 위는 영원히 여호와 앞에서 견고히 서리라 하고	And king Solomon shall be blessed, and the throne of David shall be established before the Lord for ever.	But King Solomon will be blessed and David’s throne will remain secure before the LORD forever.”
1KI	2	46	여호야다의 아들 브나야에게 명하매 저가 나가서 시므이를 쳐서 죽게 한지라 이에 나라가 솔로몬의 손에 견고하여지니라	So the king commanded Benaiah the son of Jehoiada; which went out, and fell upon him, that he died. And the kingdom was established in the hand of Solomon.	Then the king commanded Benaiah son of Jehoiada, and he went out and struck Shimei down, and he died. Thus the kingdom was firmly established in the hand of Solomon.
1KI	3	1	솔로몬이 애굽 왕 바로로 더불어 인연을 맺어 그 딸을 취하고 데려다가 다윗 성에 두고 자기의 궁과 여호와의 전과 예루살렘 주위의 성이 필역되기를 기다리니라	And Solomon made affinity with Pharaoh king of Egypt, and took Pharaoh’s daughter, and brought her into the city of David, until he had made an end of building his own house, and the house of the Lord, and the wall of Jerusalem round about.	Later, Solomon formed an alliance with Pharaoh king of Egypt by marrying his daughter. Solomon brought her to the City of David until he had finished building his palace and the house of the LORD, as well as the wall around Jerusalem.
1KI	3	2	그 때까지 여호와의 이름을 위하여 전을 아직 건축하지 아니하였으므로 백성들이 산당에서 제사하며	Only the people sacrificed in high places, because there was no house built unto the name of the Lord, until those days.	The people, however, were still sacrificing on the high places because a house for the Name of the LORD had not yet been built.
1KI	3	3	솔로몬이 여호와를 사랑하고 그 부친 다윗의 법도를 행하되 오히려 산당에서 제사하며 분향하더라	And Solomon loved the Lord, walking in the statutes of David his father: only he sacrificed and burnt incense in high places.	And Solomon loved the LORD and walked in the statutes of his father David, except that he sacrificed and burned incense on the high places.
1KI	3	4	이에 왕이 제사하러 기브온으로 가니 거기는 산당이 큼이라 솔로몬이 그 단에 일천 번제를 드렸더니	And the king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there; for that was the great high place: a thousand burnt offerings did Solomon offer upon that altar.	Now the king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there, for it was the great high place. Solomon offered a thousand burnt offerings on the altar there.
1KI	3	5	기브온에서 밤에 여호와께서 솔로몬의 꿈에 나타나시니라 하나님이 이르시되 내가 네게 무엇을 줄꼬 너는 구하라	In Gibeon the Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream by night: and God said, Ask what I shall give thee.	One night at Gibeon the LORD appeared to Solomon in a dream, and God said, “Ask, and I will give it to you!”
1KI	3	6	솔로몬이 가로되 주의 종 내 아비 다윗이 성실과 공의와 정직한 마음으로 주와 함께 주의 앞에서 행하므로 주께서 저에게 큰 은혜를 베푸셨고 주께서 또 저를 위하여 이 큰 은혜를 예비하시고 오늘날과 같이 저의 위에 앉을 아들을 저에게 주셨나이다	And Solomon said, Thou hast shewed unto thy servant David my father great mercy, according as he walked before thee in truth, and in righteousness, and in uprightness of heart with thee; and thou hast kept for him this great kindness, that thou hast given him a son to sit on his throne, as it is this day.	Solomon replied, “You have shown much loving devotion to Your servant, my father David, because he walked before You in faithfulness, righteousness, and uprightness of heart. And You have maintained this loving devotion by giving him a son to sit on his throne this very day.
1KI	3	7	나의 하나님 여호와여 주께서 종으로 종의 아비 다윗을 대신하여 왕이 되게 하셨사오나 종은 작은 아이라 출입할 줄을 알지 못하고	And now, O Lord my God, thou hast made thy servant king instead of David my father: and I am but a little child: I know not how to go out or come in.	And now, O LORD my God, You have made Your servant king in my father David’s place. But I am only a little child, not knowing how to go out or come in.
1KI	3	8	주의 빼신 백성 가운데 있나이다 저희는 큰 백성이라 수효가 많아서 셀 수도 없고 기록할 수도 없사오니	And thy servant is in the midst of thy people which thou hast chosen, a great people, that cannot be numbered nor counted for multitude.	Your servant is here among the people You have chosen, a people too numerous to count or number.
1KI	3	9	누가 주의 이 많은 백성을 재판할 수 있사오리이까 지혜로운 마음을 종에게 주사 주의 백성을 재판하여 선악을 분별하게 하옵소서	Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may discern between good and bad: for who is able to judge this thy so great a people?	Therefore give Your servant an understanding heart to judge Your people and to discern between good and evil. For who is able to govern this great people of Yours?”
1KI	3	10	솔로몬이 이것을 구하매 그 말씀이 주의 마음에 맞은지라	And the speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked this thing.	Now it pleased the Lord that Solomon had made this request.
1KI	3	11	이에 하나님이 저에게 이르시되 네가 이것을 구하도다 자기를 위하여 수도 구하지 아니하며 부도 구하지 아니하며 자기의 원수의 생명 멸하기도 구하지 아니하고 오직 송사를 듣고 분별하는 지혜를 구하였은즉	And God said unto him, Because thou hast asked this thing, and hast not asked for thyself long life; neither hast asked riches for thyself, nor hast asked the life of thine enemies; but hast asked for thyself understanding to discern judgment;	So God said to him, “Since you have asked for this instead of requesting long life or wealth for yourself or death for your enemies—but you have asked for discernment to administer justice—
1KI	3	12	내가 네 말대로 하여 네게 지혜롭고 총명한 마음을 주노니 너의 전에도 너와 같은 자가 없었거니와 너의 후에도 너와 같은 자가 일어남이 없으리라	Behold, I have done according to thy words: lo, I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart; so that there was none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee.	behold, I will do what you have asked. I will give you a wise and discerning heart, so that there has never been nor will ever be another like you.
1KI	3	13	내가 또 너의 구하지 아니한 부와 영광도 네게 주노니 네 평생에 열왕 중에 너와 같은 자가 없을 것이라	And I have also given thee that which thou hast not asked, both riches, and honour: so that there shall not be any among the kings like unto thee all thy days.	Moreover, I will give you what you did not request—both riches and honor—so that during all your days no man in any kingdom will be your equal.
1KI	3	14	네가 만일 네 아비 다윗의 행함 같이 내 길로 행하며 내 법도와 명령을 지키면 내가 또 네 날을 길게 하리라	And if thou wilt walk in my ways, to keep my statutes and my commandments, as thy father David did walk, then I will lengthen thy days.	So if you walk in My ways and keep My statutes and commandments, just as your father David did, I will prolong your days.”
1KI	3	15	솔로몬이 깨어보니 꿈이더라 이에 예루살렘에 이르러 여호와의 언약궤 앞에 서서 번제와 수은제를 드리고 모든 신복을 위하여 잔치하였더라	And Solomon awoke; and, behold, it was a dream. And he came to Jerusalem, and stood before the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and offered up burnt offerings, and offered peace offerings, and made a feast to all his servants.	Then Solomon awoke, and indeed it had been a dream. So he returned to Jerusalem, stood before the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings. Then he held a feast for all his servants.
1KI	3	16	때에 창기 두 계집이 왕에게 와서 그 앞에 서며	Then came there two women, that were harlots, unto the king, and stood before him.	At that time two prostitutes came to the king and stood before him.
1KI	3	17	한 계집은 말하되 내 주여 나와 이 계집이 한 집에서 사는데 내가 저와 함께 집에 있으며 아이를 낳았더니	And the one woman said, O my lord, I and this woman dwell in one house; and I was delivered of a child with her in the house.	One woman said, “Please, my lord, this woman and I live in the same house, and I gave birth while she was in the house.
1KI	3	18	나의 해산한 지 삼일에 이 계집도 해산하고 우리가 함께 있었고 우리 둘 외에는 집에 다른 사람이 없었나이다	And it came to pass the third day after that I was delivered, that this woman was delivered also: and we were together; there was no stranger with us in the house, save we two in the house.	On the third day after I gave birth, this woman also had a baby. We were alone, with no one in the house but the two of us.
1KI	3	19	그런데 밤에 저 계집이 그 아들 위에 누우므로 그 아들이 죽으니	And this woman’s child died in the night; because she overlaid it.	During the night this woman’s son died because she rolled over on him.
1KI	3	20	저가 밤중에 일어나서 계집종 나의 잠든 사이에 내 아들을 내 곁에서 가져다가 자기의 품에 누이고 자기의 죽은 아들을 내 품에 뉘었나이다	And she arose at midnight, and took my son from beside me, while thine handmaid slept, and laid it in her bosom, and laid her dead child in my bosom.	So she got up in the middle of the night and took my son from my side while I was asleep. She laid him in her bosom and put her dead son at my bosom.
1KI	3	21	미명에 내가 내 아들을 젖 먹이려고 일어나 본즉 죽었기로 내가 아침에 자세히 보니 내가 낳은 아들이 아니더이다 하매	And when I rose in the morning to give my child suck, behold, it was dead: but when I had considered it in the morning, behold, it was not my son, which I did bear.	The next morning, when I got up to nurse my son, I discovered he was dead. But when I examined him, I realized that he was not the son I had borne.”
1KI	3	22	다른 계집은 이르되 아니라 산 것은 내 아들이요 죽은 것은 네 아들이라 하고 이 계집은 이르되 아니라 죽은 것이 네 아들이요 산 것이 내 아들이라 하매 왕 앞에서 그와 같이 쟁론하는지라	And the other woman said, Nay; but the living is my son, and the dead is thy son. And this said, No; but the dead is thy son, and the living is my son. Thus they spake before the king.	“No,” said the other woman, “the living one is my son and the dead one is your son.” But the first woman insisted, “No, the dead one is yours and the living one is mine.” So they argued before the king.
1KI	3	23	왕이 가로되 이는 말하기를 산 것은 내 아들이요 죽은 것은 네 아들이라 하고 저는 말하기를 아니라 죽은 것이 네 아들이요 산 것이 내 아들이라 하는도다 하고	Then said the king, The one saith, This is my son that liveth, and thy son is the dead: and the other saith, Nay; but thy son is the dead, and my son is the living.	Then the king replied, “This woman says, ‘My son is alive and yours is dead,’ but that woman says, ‘No, your son is dead and mine is alive.’”
1KI	3	24	또 가로되 칼을 내게로 가져오라 하니 칼을 왕의 앞으로 가져온지라	And the king said, Bring me a sword. And they brought a sword before the king.	The king continued, “Bring me a sword.” So they brought him a sword,
1KI	3	25	왕이 이르되 산 아들을 둘에 나눠 반은 이에게 주고 반은 저에게 주라	And the king said, Divide the living child in two, and give half to the one, and half to the other.	and the king declared, “Cut the living child in two and give half to one and half to the other.”
1KI	3	26	그 산 아들의 어미되는 계집이 그 아들을 위하여 마음이 불붙는 것 같아서 왕께 아뢰어 가로되 청컨대 내 주여 산 아들을 저에게 주시고 아무쪼록 죽이지 마옵소서 하되 한 계집은 말하기를 내 것도 되게 말고 네 것도 되게 말고 나누게 하라 하는지라	Then spake the woman whose the living child was unto the king, for her bowels yearned upon her son, and she said, O my lord, give her the living child, and in no wise slay it. But the other said, Let it be neither mine nor thine, but divide it.	Then the woman whose son was alive spoke to the king because she yearned with compassion for her son. “Please, my lord,” she said, “give her the living baby. Do not kill him!” But the other woman said, “He will be neither mine nor yours. Cut him in two!”
1KI	3	27	왕이 대답하여 가로되 산 아들을 저 계집에게 주고 결코 죽이지 말라 저가 그 어미니라 하매	Then the king answered and said, Give her the living child, and in no wise slay it: she is the mother thereof.	Then the king gave his ruling: “Give the living baby to the first woman. By no means should you kill him; she is his mother.”
1KI	3	28	온 이스라엘이 왕의 심리하여 판결함을 듣고 왕을 두려워하였으니 이는 하나님의 지혜가 저의 속에 있어 판결함을 봄이더라	And all Israel heard of the judgment which the king had judged; and they feared the king: for they saw that the wisdom of God was in him, to do judgment.	When all Israel heard of the judgment the king had given, they stood in awe of him, for they saw that the wisdom of God was in him to administer justice.
1KI	4	1	솔로몬 왕이 온 이스라엘의 왕이 되었고	So king Solomon was king over all Israel.	So King Solomon ruled over Israel,
1KI	4	2	그의 신하들은 이러하니라 사독의 아들 아사리아는 제사장이요	And these were the princes which he had; Azariah the son of Zadok the priest,	and these were his chief officials: Azariah son of Zadok was the priest;
1KI	4	3	시사의 아들 엘리호렙과 아히야는 서기관이요 아힐룻의 아들 여호사밧은 사관이요	Elihoreph and Ahiah, the sons of Shisha, scribes; Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud, the recorder.	Elihoreph and Ahijah, the sons of Shisha, were secretaries; Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud was the recorder;
1KI	4	4	여호야다의 아들 브나야는 군대장관이요 사독과 아비아달은 제사장이요	And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the host: and Zadok and Abiathar were the priests:	Benaiah son of Jehoiada was in charge of the army; Zadok and Abiathar were priests;
1KI	4	5	나단의 아들 아사리아는 관리장이요 나단의 아들 사붓은 대신이니 왕의 벗이요	And Azariah the son of Nathan was over the officers: and Zabud the son of Nathan was principal officer, and the king’s friend:	Azariah son of Nathan was in charge of the governors; Zabud son of Nathan was a priest and adviser to the king;
1KI	4	6	아히살은 궁내대신이요 압다의 아들 아도니람은 감역관이더라	And Ahishar was over the household: and Adoniram the son of Abda was over the tribute.	Ahishar was in charge of the palace; and Adoniram son of Abda was in charge of the forced labor.
1KI	4	7	솔로몬이 또 온 이스라엘 위에 열두 관장을 두매 그 사람들이 왕과 왕실을 위하여 식물을 예비하되 각기 일 년에 한 달씩 식물을 예비하였으니	And Solomon had twelve officers over all Israel, which provided victuals for the king and his household: each man his month in a year made provision.	Solomon had twelve governors over all Israel to provide food for the king and his household. Each one would arrange provisions for one month of the year,
1KI	4	8	그 이름은 이러하니라 에브라임 산지에는 벤훌이요	And these are their names: The son of Hur, in mount Ephraim:	and these were their names: Ben-hur in the hill country of Ephraim;
1KI	4	9	마가스와 사알빔과 벧세메스와 엘론벧하난에는 벤데겔이요	The son of Dekar, in Makaz, and in Shaalbim, and Beth–shemesh, and Elon–beth–hanan:	Ben-deker in Makaz, in Shaalbim, in Beth-shemesh, and in Elon-beth-hanan;
1KI	4	10	아룹봇에는 벤헤셋이니 소고와 헤벨 온 땅을 저가 주관하였으며	The son of Hesed, in Aruboth; to him pertained Sochoh, and all the land of Hepher:	Ben-hesed in Arubboth (Socoh and all the land of Hepher belonged to him);
1KI	4	11	돌 높은 땅 온 지방에는 벤아비나답이니 저는 솔로몬의 딸 다밧으로 아내를 삼았으며	The son of Abinadab, in all the region of Dor; which had Taphath the daughter of Solomon to wife:	Ben-abinadab in Naphath-dor (Taphath, a daughter of Solomon, was his wife);
1KI	4	12	다아낙과 므깃도와 이스르엘 아래 사르단 가에 있는 벧소안 온 땅은 아힐룻의 아들 바아나가 맡았으니 벧소안에서부터 아벨므홀라에 이르고 욕느암 바깥까지 미쳤으며	Baana the son of Ahilud; to him pertained Taanach and Megiddo, and all Beth–shean, which is by Zartanah beneath Jezreel, from Beth–shean to Abel–meholah, even unto the place that is beyond Jokneam:	Baana son of Ahilud in Taanach, in Megiddo, and in all of Beth-shean next to Zarethan below Jezreel, from Beth-shean to Abel-meholah and on past Jokmeam;
1KI	4	13	길르앗 라못에는 벤게벨이니 저는 길르앗에 있는 므낫세의 아들 야일의 모든 촌을 주관하였고 또 바산 아르곱 땅의 성벽과 놋빗장 있는 큰 성읍 육십을 주관하였으며	The son of Geber, in Ramoth–gilead; to him pertained the towns of Jair the son of Manasseh, which are in Gilead; to him also pertained the region of Argob, which is in Bashan, threescore great cities with walls and brasen bars:	Ben-geber in Ramoth-gilead (the villages of Jair son of Manasseh in Gilead belonged to him, as well as the region of Argob in Bashan with its sixty great cities with walls and bronze bars);
1KI	4	14	마하나임에는 잇도의 아들 아히나답이요	Ahinadab the son of Iddo had Mahanaim:	Ahinadab son of Iddo in Mahanaim;
1KI	4	15	납달리에는 아히마아스니 저는 솔로몬의 딸 바스맛으로 아내를 삼았으며	Ahimaaz was in Naphtali; he also took Basmath the daughter of Solomon to wife:	Ahimaaz in Naphtali (he had married Basemath, a daughter of Solomon);
1KI	4	16	아셀과 아롯에는 후새의 아들 바아나요	Baanah the son of Hushai was in Asher and in Aloth:	Baana son of Hushai in Asher and in Aloth;
1KI	4	17	잇사갈에는 바루아의 아들 여호사밧이요	Jehoshaphat the son of Paruah, in Issachar:	Jehoshaphat son of Paruah in Issachar;
1KI	4	18	베냐민에는 엘라의 아들 시므이요	Shimei the son of Elah, in Benjamin:	Shimei son of Ela in Benjamin;
1KI	4	19	아모리 사람의 왕 시혼과 바산 왕 옥의 나라 길르앗 땅에는 우리의 아들 게벨이니 그 땅에서는 저 한 사람만 관장이 되었더라	Geber the son of Uri was in the country of Gilead, in the country of Sihon king of the Amorites, and of Og king of Bashan; and he was the only officer which was in the land.	Geber son of Uri in the land of Gilead, including the territories of Sihon king of the Amorites and of Og king of Bashan. There was also one governor in the land of Judah.
1KI	4	20	유다와 이스라엘의 인구가 바닷가의 모래 같이 많게 되매 먹고 마시며 즐거워하였으며	Judah and Israel were many, as the sand which is by the sea in multitude, eating and drinking, and making merry.	The people of Judah and Israel were as numerous as the sand on the seashore, and they were eating and drinking and rejoicing.
1KI	4	21	솔로몬이 하수에서부터 블레셋 사람의 땅에 이르기까지와 애굽 지경에 미치기까지의 모든 나라를 다스리므로 그 나라들이 공을 바쳐 솔로몬의 사는 동안에 섬겼더라	And Solomon reigned over all kingdoms from the river unto the land of the Philistines, and unto the border of Egypt: they brought presents, and served Solomon all the days of his life.	And Solomon reigned over all the kingdoms from the Euphrates to the land of the Philistines, as far as the border of Egypt. These kingdoms offered tribute and served Solomon all the days of his life.
1KI	4	22	솔로몬의 일 일분 식물은 가는 밀가루가 삼십 석이요 굵은 밀가루가 육십 석이요	And Solomon’s provision for one day was thirty measures of fine flour, and threescore measures of meal,	Solomon’s provisions for a single day were thirty cors of fine flour, sixty cors of meal,
1KI	4	23	살진 소가 열이요 초장의 소가 스물이요 양이 일백이며 그 외에 수사슴과 노루와 암사슴과 살진 새들이었더라	Ten fat oxen, and twenty oxen out of the pastures, and an hundred sheep, beside harts, and roebucks, and fallowdeer, and fatted fowl.	ten fat oxen, twenty range oxen, and a hundred sheep, as well as deer, gazelles, roebucks, and fattened poultry.
1KI	4	24	솔로몬이 하수 이편을 딥사에서부터 가사까지 모두 다스리므로 하수 이편의 모든 왕이 다 관할한바 되매 저가 사방에 둘린 민족과 평화가 있었으니	For he had dominion over all the region on this side the river, from Tiphsah even to Azzah, over all the kings on this side the river: and he had peace on all sides round about him.	For Solomon had dominion over everything west of the Euphrates—over all the kingdoms from Tiphsah to Gaza—and he had peace on all sides.
1KI	4	25	솔로몬의 사는 동안에 유다와 이스라엘이 단에서부터 브엘세바에 이르기까지 각기 포도나무 아래와 무화과나무 아래서 안연히 살았더라	And Judah and Israel dwelt safely, every man under his vine and under his fig tree, from Dan even to Beer–sheba, all the days of Solomon.	Throughout the days of Solomon, Judah and Israel dwelt securely from Dan to Beersheba, each man under his own vine and his own fig tree.
1KI	4	26	솔로몬의 병거의 말의 외양간이 사만이요 마병이 일만 이천이며	And Solomon had forty thousand stalls of horses for his chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen.	Solomon had 4,000 stalls for his chariot horses and 12,000 horses.
1KI	4	27	그 관장들은 각각 자기 달에 솔로몬 왕과 왕의 상에 참여하는 모든 자를 위하여 먹을 것을 예비하여 부족함이 없게 하였으며	And those officers provided victual for king Solomon, and for all that came unto king Solomon’s table, every man in his month: they lacked nothing.	Each month the governors in turn provided food for King Solomon and all who came to his table. They saw to it that nothing was lacking.
1KI	4	28	또 저희가 각기 직무를 따라 말과 준마에게 먹일 보리와 꼴을 그 말의 있는 곳으로 가져왔더라	Barley also and straw for the horses and dromedaries brought they unto the place where the officers were, every man according to his charge.	Each one also brought to the required place their quotas of barley and straw for the chariot horses and other horses.
1KI	4	29	하나님이 솔로몬에게 지혜와 총명을 심히 많이 주시고 또 넓은 마음을 주시되 바닷가의 모래 같이 하시니	And God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the sea shore.	And God gave Solomon wisdom, exceedingly deep insight, and understanding beyond measure, like the sand on the seashore.
1KI	4	30	솔로몬의 지혜가 동양 모든 사람의 지혜와 애굽의 모든 지혜보다 뛰어난지라	And Solomon’s wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the children of the east country, and all the wisdom of Egypt.	Solomon’s wisdom was greater than that of all the men of the East, greater than all the wisdom of Egypt.
1KI	4	31	저는 모든 사람보다 지혜로워서 예스라 사람 에단과 마홀의 아들 헤만과 갈골과 다르다보다 나으므로 그 이름이 사방 모든 나라에 들렸더라	For he was wiser than all men; than Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman, and Chalcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol: and his fame was in all nations round about.	He was wiser than all men—wiser than Ethan the Ezrahite, and wiser than Heman, Calcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol. And his fame spread throughout the surrounding nations.
1KI	4	32	저가 잠언 삼천을 말하였고 그 노래는 일천다섯이며	And he spake three thousand proverbs: and his songs were a thousand and five.	Solomon composed three thousand proverbs, and his songs numbered a thousand and five.
1KI	4	33	저가 또 초목을 논하되 레바논 백향목으로부터 담에 나는 우슬초까지 하고 저가 또 짐승과 새와 기어 다니는 것과 물고기를 논한지라	And he spake of trees, from the cedar tree that is in Lebanon even unto the hyssop that springeth out of the wall: he spake also of beasts, and of fowl, and of creeping things, and of fishes.	He spoke of trees, from the cedar in Lebanon to the hyssop growing in the wall, and he taught about animals, birds, reptiles, and fish.
1KI	4	34	모든 민족 중에서 솔로몬의 지혜의 소문을 들은 천하 모든 왕 중에서 그 지혜를 들으러 왔더라	And there came of all people to hear the wisdom of Solomon, from all kings of the earth, which had heard of his wisdom.	So men of all nations came to listen to Solomon’s wisdom, sent by all the kings of the earth, who had heard of his wisdom.
1KI	5	1	솔로몬이 기름 부음을 받고 그 부친을 이어 왕이 되었다 함을 두로 왕 히람이 듣고 그 신복을 솔로몬에게 보내었으니 이는 히람이 평일에 다윗을 사랑하였음이라	And Hiram king of Tyre sent his servants unto Solomon; for he had heard that they had anointed him king in the room of his father: for Hiram was ever a lover of David.	Now when Hiram king of Tyre heard that Solomon had been anointed king in his father’s place, he sent envoys to Solomon; for Hiram had always been a friend of David.
1KI	5	2	이에 솔로몬이 히람에게 기별하여 가로되	And Solomon sent to Hiram, saying,	And Solomon relayed this message to Hiram:
1KI	5	3	당신도 알거니와 내 부친 다윗이 사방의 전쟁으로 인하여 전을 건축하지 못하고 여호와께서 그 원수들을 그 발바닥 밑에 두시기를 기다렸나이다	Thou knowest how that David my father could not build an house unto the name of the Lord his God for the wars which were about him on every side, until the Lord put them under the soles of his feet.	“As you are well aware, due to the wars waged on all sides against my father David, he could not build a house for the Name of the LORD his God until the LORD had put his enemies under his feet.
1KI	5	4	이제 내 하나님 여호와께서 내게 사방의 태평을 주시매 대적도 없고 재앙도 없도다	But now the Lord my God hath given me rest on every side, so that there is neither adversary nor evil occurrent.	But now the LORD my God has given me rest on every side, and there is no adversary or crisis.
1KI	5	5	여호와께서 내 부친 다윗에게 하신 말씀에 내가 너를 이어 네 위에 오르게 할 네 아들 그가 내 이름을 위하여 전을 건축하리라 하신 대로 내가 내 하나님 여호와의 이름을 위하여 전을 건축하려 하오니	And, behold, I purpose to build an house unto the name of the Lord my God, as the Lord spake unto David my father, saying, Thy son, whom I will set upon thy throne in thy room, he shall build an house unto my name.	So behold, I plan to build a house for the Name of the LORD my God, according to what the LORD said to my father David: ‘I will put your son on your throne in your place, and he will build the house for My Name.’
1KI	5	6	당신은 영을 내려 나를 위하여 레바논에서 백향목을 베어내게 하소서 나의 종과 당신의 종이 함께할 것이요 또 내가 당신의 모든 말씀대로 당신의 종의 삯을 당신에게 붙이리이다 당신도 알거니와 우리 중에는 시돈 사람처럼 벌목을 잘하는 자가 없나이다	Now therefore command thou that they hew me cedar trees out of Lebanon; and my servants shall be with thy servants: and unto thee will I give hire for thy servants according to all that thou shalt appoint: for thou knowest that there is not among us any that can skill to hew timber like unto the Sidonians.	Now therefore, order that cedars of Lebanon be cut down for me. My servants will be with your servants, and I will pay your servants whatever wages you set, for you know that there are none among us as skilled in logging as the Sidonians.”
1KI	5	7	히람이 솔로몬의 말을 듣고 크게 기뻐하여 가로되 오늘날 여호와를 찬양할지로다 저가 다윗에게 지혜로운 아들을 주사 그 많은 백성을 다스리게 하셨도다 하고	And it came to pass, when Hiram heard the words of Solomon, that he rejoiced greatly, and said, Blessed be the Lord this day, which hath given unto David a wise son over this great people.	When Hiram received Solomon’s message, he rejoiced greatly and said, “Blessed be the LORD this day! He has given David a wise son over this great people!”
1KI	5	8	이에 솔로몬에게 기별하여 가로되 당신의 기별하신 말씀을 내가 듣고 내 백향목 재목과 잣나무 재목에 대하여는 당신의 바라시는 대로 할지라	And Hiram sent to Solomon, saying, I have considered the things which thou sentest to me for: and I will do all thy desire concerning timber of cedar, and concerning timber of fir.	Then Hiram sent a reply to Solomon, saying: “I have received your message; I will do all you desire regarding the cedar and cypress timber.
1KI	5	9	내 종이 레바논에서 바다로 수운하겠고 내가 그것을 바다에서 떼로 엮어 당신이 지정하는 곳으로 보내고 거기서 그것을 풀리니 당신은 받으시고 나의 원을 이루어서 나의 궁정을 위하여 식물을 주소서 하고	My servants shall bring them down from Lebanon unto the sea: and I will convey them by sea in floats unto the place that thou shalt appoint me, and will cause them to be discharged there, and thou shalt receive them: and thou shalt accomplish my desire, in giving food for my household.	My servants will haul the logs from Lebanon to the Sea, and I will float them as rafts by sea to the place you specify. There I will separate the logs, and you can take them away. And in exchange, you can meet my needs by providing my household with food.”
1KI	5	10	솔로몬의 모든 원대로 백향목 재목과 잣나무 재목을 주매	So Hiram gave Solomon cedar trees and fir trees according to all his desire.	So Hiram provided Solomon with all the cedar and cypress timber he wanted,
1KI	5	11	솔로몬이 히람에게 그 궁정의 식물로 밀 이만 석과 맑은 기름 이십 석을 주고 해마다 그와 같이 주었더라	And Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand measures of wheat for food to his household, and twenty measures of pure oil: thus gave Solomon to Hiram year by year.	and year after year Solomon would provide Hiram with 20,000 cors of wheat as food for his household, as well as 20,000 baths of pure olive oil.
1KI	5	12	여호와께서 그 말씀대로 솔로몬에게 지혜를 주시므로 히람과 솔로몬이 친목하여 두 사람이 함께 약조를 맺었더라	And the Lord gave Solomon wisdom, as he promised him: and there was peace between Hiram and Solomon; and they two made a league together.	And the LORD gave Solomon wisdom, as He had promised him. There was peace between Hiram and Solomon, and the two of them made a treaty.
1KI	5	13	이에 솔로몬 왕이 온 이스라엘에서 역군을 불러 일으키니 그 역군의 수가 삼만이라	And king Solomon raised a levy out of all Israel; and the levy was thirty thousand men.	Then King Solomon conscripted a labor force of 30,000 men from all Israel.
1KI	5	14	솔로몬이 저희들을 한 달에 일만 인씩 번갈아 레바논으로 보내매 저희들이 한 달은 레바논에 있고 두 달은 집에 있으며 아도니람은 감독이 되었고	And he sent them to Lebanon, ten thousand a month by courses: a month they were in Lebanon, and two months at home: and Adoniram was over the levy.	He sent them to Lebanon in monthly shifts of 10,000 men, so that they would spend one month in Lebanon and two months at home. And Adoniram was in charge of the forced labor.
1KI	5	15	솔로몬에게 또 담군이 칠만 인이요 산에서 돌을 뜨는 자가 팔만 인이며	And Solomon had threescore and ten thousand that bare burdens, and fourscore thousand hewers in the mountains;	Solomon had 70,000 porters and 80,000 stonecutters in the mountains,
1KI	5	16	이 외에 그 역사를 동독하는 관리가 삼천삼백 인이라 저희가 일하는 백성을 거느렸더라	Beside the chief of Solomon’s officers which were over the work, three thousand and three hundred, which ruled over the people that wrought in the work.	not including his 3,300 foremen who supervised the workers.
1KI	5	17	이에 왕이 영을 내려 크고 귀한 돌을 떠다가 다듬어서 전의 기초석으로 놓게 하매	And the king commanded, and they brought great stones, costly stones, and hewed stones, to lay the foundation of the house.	And the king commanded them to quarry large, costly stones to lay the foundation of the temple with dressed stones.
1KI	5	18	솔로몬의 건축자와 히람의 건축자와 그발 사람이 그 돌을 다듬고 전을 건축하기 위하여 재목과 돌들을 갖추니라	And Solomon’s builders and Hiram’s builders did hew them, and the stonesquarers: so they prepared timber and stones to build the house.	So Solomon’s and Hiram’s builders, along with the Gebalites, quarried the stone and prepared the timber and stone for the construction of the temple.
1KI	6	1	이스라엘 자손이 애굽 땅에서 나온지 사백팔십 년이요 솔로몬이 이스라엘 왕이 된지 사년 시브월 곧 이월에 솔로몬이 여호와를 위하여 전 건축하기를 시작하였더라	And it came to pass in the four hundred and eightieth year after the children of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the fourth year of Solomon’s reign over Israel, in the month Zif, which is the second month, that he began to build the house of the Lord.	In the four hundred and eightieth year after the Israelites had come out of the land of Egypt, in the month of Ziv, the second month of the fourth year of Solomon’s reign over Israel, he began to build the house of the LORD.
1KI	6	2	솔로몬 왕이 여호와를 위하여 건축한 전은 장이 육십 규빗이요 광이 이십 규빗이요 고가 삼십 규빗이며	And the house which king Solomon built for the Lord, the length thereof was threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof twenty cubits, and the height thereof thirty cubits.	The house that King Solomon built for the LORD was sixty cubits long, twenty cubits wide, and thirty cubits high.
1KI	6	3	전의 성소 앞 낭실의 장은 전의 광과 같이 이십 규빗이요 그 광은 전 앞에서부터 십 규빗이며	And the porch before the temple of the house, twenty cubits was the length thereof, according to the breadth of the house; and ten cubits was the breadth thereof before the house.	The portico at the front of the main hall of the temple was twenty cubits long, extending across the width of the temple and projecting out ten cubits in front of the temple.
1KI	6	4	전을 위하여 붙박이 교창을 내고	And for the house he made windows of narrow lights.	He also had narrow windows framed high in the temple.
1KI	6	5	또 전의 벽 곧 성소와 지성소의 벽에 연접하여 돌아가며 다락들을 건축하되 다락마다 돌아가며 골방들을 만들었으니	And against the wall of the house he built chambers round about, against the walls of the house round about, both of the temple and of the oracle: and he made chambers round about:	Against the walls of the temple and the inner sanctuary, Solomon built a chambered structure around the temple, in which he constructed the side rooms.
1KI	6	6	하층 다락의 광은 다섯 규빗이요 중층 다락의 광은 여섯 규빗이요 제삼층 다락의 광은 일곱 규빗이라 전의 벽 바깥으로 돌아가며 턱을 내어 골방 들보들로 전의 벽에 박히지 않게 하였으며	The nethermost chamber was five cubits broad, and the middle was six cubits broad, and the third was seven cubits broad: for without in the wall of the house he made narrowed rests round about, that the beams should not be fastened in the walls of the house.	The bottom floor was five cubits wide, the middle floor six cubits, and the third floor seven cubits. He also placed offset ledges around the outside of the temple, so that nothing would be inserted into its walls.
1KI	6	7	이 전은 건축할 때에 돌을 뜨는 곳에서 치석하고 가져다가 건축하였으므로 건축하는 동안에 전 속에서는 방망이나 도끼나 모든 철 연장 소리가 들리지 아니하였으며	And the house, when it was in building, was built of stone made ready before it was brought thither: so that there was neither hammer nor axe nor any tool of iron heard in the house, while it was in building.	The temple was constructed using finished stones cut at the quarry, so that no hammer or chisel or any other iron tool was heard in the temple while it was being built.
1KI	6	8	중층 골방의 문은 전 오른편에 있는데 나사모양 사닥다리로 말미암아 하층에서 중층에 오르고 중층에서 제삼층에 오르게 하였더라	The door for the middle chamber was in the right side of the house: and they went up with winding stairs into the middle chamber, and out of the middle into the third.	The entrance to the bottom floor was on the south side of the temple. A stairway led up to the middle level, and from there to the third floor.
1KI	6	9	전의 건축이 마치니라 그 전은 백향목 서까래와 널판으로 덮었고	So he built the house, and finished it; and covered the house with beams and boards of cedar.	So Solomon built the temple and finished it, roofing it with beams and planks of cedar.
1KI	6	10	또 온 전으로 돌아가며 고가 다섯 규빗 되는 다락방을 건축하되 백향목 들보로 전에 연접하게 하였더라	And then he built chambers against all the house, five cubits high: and they rested on the house with timber of cedar.	He built chambers all along the temple, each five cubits high and attached to the temple with beams of cedar.
1KI	6	11	여호와의 말씀이 솔로몬에게 임하여 가라사대	And the word of the Lord came to Solomon, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to Solomon, saying:
1KI	6	12	네가 이제 이 전을 건축하니 네가 만일 내 법도를 따르며 내 율례를 행하며 나의 모든 계명을 지켜 그대로 행하면 내가 네 아비 다윗에게 한 말을 네게 확실히 이룰 것이요	Concerning this house which thou art in building, if thou wilt walk in my statutes, and execute my judgments, and keep all my commandments to walk in them; then will I perform my word with thee, which I spake unto David thy father:	“As for this temple you are building, if you walk in My statutes, carry out My ordinances, and keep all My commandments by walking in them, I will fulfill through you the promise I made to your father David.
1KI	6	13	내가 또한 이스라엘 자손 가운데 거하며 내 백성 이스라엘을 버리지 아니하리라 하셨더라	And I will dwell among the children of Israel, and will not forsake my people Israel.	And I will dwell among the Israelites and will not abandon My people Israel.”
1KI	6	14	솔로몬이 전 건축하기를 마치고	So Solomon built the house, and finished it.	So Solomon built the temple and finished it.
1KI	6	15	백향목 널판으로 전의 안 벽 곧 전 마루에서 천장까지의 벽에 입히고 또 잣나무 널판으로 전 마루를 놓고	And he built the walls of the house within with boards of cedar, both the floor of the house, and the walls of the cieling: and he covered them on the inside with wood, and covered the floor of the house with planks of fir.	He lined the interior walls with cedar paneling from the floor of the temple to the ceiling, and he covered the floor with cypress boards.
1KI	6	16	또 전 뒤편에서부터 이십 규빗 되는 곳에 마루에서 천장까지 백향목 널판으로 가로막아 전의 내소 곧 지성소를 만들었으며	And he built twenty cubits on the sides of the house, both the floor and the walls with boards of cedar: he even built them for it within, even for the oracle, even for the most holy place.	He partitioned off the twenty cubits at the rear of the temple with cedar boards from floor to ceiling to form within the temple an inner sanctuary, the Most Holy Place.
1KI	6	17	내소 앞에 있는 외소 곧 성소의 장이 사십 규빗이며	And the house, that is, the temple before it, was forty cubits long.	And the main hall in front of this room was forty cubits long.
1KI	6	18	전 안에 입힌 백향목에는 박과 핀 꽃을 아로새겼고 모두 백향목이라 돌이 보이지 아니하며	And the cedar of the house within was carved with knops and open flowers: all was cedar; there was no stone seen.	The cedar paneling inside the temple was carved with gourds and open flowers. Everything was cedar; not a stone could be seen.
1KI	6	19	여호와의 언약궤를 두기 위하여 전 안에 내소를 예비하였는데	And the oracle he prepared in the house within, to set there the ark of the covenant of the Lord.	Solomon also prepared the inner sanctuary within the temple to set the ark of the covenant of the LORD there.
1KI	6	20	그 내소의 속이 장이 이십 규빗이요 광이 이십 규빗이요 고가 이십 규빗이라 정금으로 입혔고 백향목 단에도 입혔더라	And the oracle in the forepart was twenty cubits in length, and twenty cubits in breadth, and twenty cubits in the height thereof: and he overlaid it with pure gold; and so covered the altar which was of cedar.	The inner sanctuary was twenty cubits long, twenty cubits wide, and twenty cubits high. He overlaid the inside with pure gold, and he also overlaid the altar of cedar.
1KI	6	21	솔로몬이 정금으로 외소 안에 입히고 내소 앞에 금사슬로 건너지르고 내소를 금으로 입히고	So Solomon overlaid the house within with pure gold: and he made a partition by the chains of gold before the oracle; and he overlaid it with gold.	So Solomon overlaid the inside of the temple with pure gold, and he extended gold chains across the front of the inner sanctuary, which was overlaid with gold.
1KI	6	22	온 전을 금으로 입히기를 마치고 내소에 속한 단의 전부를 금으로 입혔더라	And the whole house he overlaid with gold, until he had finished all the house: also the whole altar that was by the oracle he overlaid with gold.	So he overlaid with gold the whole interior of the temple, until everything was completely finished. He also overlaid with gold the entire altar that belonged to the inner sanctuary.
1KI	6	23	내소 안에 감람목으로 두 그룹을 만들었는데 그 고가 각각 십 규빗이라	And within the oracle he made two cherubims of olive tree, each ten cubits high.	In the inner sanctuary he made two cherubim, each ten cubits high, out of olive wood.
1KI	6	24	한 그룹의 이 날개는 다섯 규빗이요 저 날개도 다섯 규빗이니 이 날개 끝으로부터 저 날개 끝까지 십 규빗이며	And five cubits was the one wing of the cherub, and five cubits the other wing of the cherub: from the uttermost part of the one wing unto the uttermost part of the other were ten cubits.	One wing of the first cherub was five cubits long, and the other wing was five cubits long as well. So the full wingspan was ten cubits.
1KI	6	25	다른 그룹도 십 규빗이니 그 두 그룹은 한 척수, 한 모양이요	And the other cherub was ten cubits: both the cherubims were of one measure and one size.	The second cherub also measured ten cubits; both cherubim had the same size and shape,
1KI	6	26	이 그룹의 고가 십 규빗이요 저 그룹도 일반이라	The height of the one cherub was ten cubits, and so was it of the other cherub.	and the height of each cherub was ten cubits.
1KI	6	27	솔로몬이 내소 가운데 그룹을 두었으니 그룹들의 날개가 폐었는데 이 그룹의 날개는 이 벽에 닿았고 저 그룹의 날개는 저 벽에 닿았으며 두 날개는 전의 중앙에서 서로 닿았더라	And he set the cherubims within the inner house: and they stretched forth the wings of the cherubims, so that the wing of the one touched the one wall, and the wing of the other cherub touched the other wall; and their wings touched one another in the midst of the house.	And he placed the cherubim inside the innermost room of the temple. Since their wings were spread out, the wing of the first cherub touched one wall, while the wing of the second cherub touched the other wall, and in the middle of the room their wingtips touched.
1KI	6	28	저가 금으로 그룹에 입혔더라	And he overlaid the cherubims with gold.	He also overlaid the cherubim with gold.
1KI	6	29	내외소 사면 벽에는 모두 그룹들과 종려와 핀 꽃 형상을 아로새겼고	And he carved all the walls of the house round about with carved figures of cherubims and palm trees and open flowers, within and without.	Then he carved the walls all around the temple, in both the inner and outer sanctuaries, with carved engravings of cherubim, palm trees, and open flowers.
1KI	6	30	내외 전 마루에는 금으로 입혔으며	And the floor of the house he overlaid with gold, within and without.	And he overlaid the temple floor with gold in both the inner and outer sanctuaries.
1KI	6	31	내소에 들어가는 곳에는 감람목으로 문을 만들었는데 그 문 인방과 문설주는 벽의 오분지 일이요	And for the entering of the oracle he made doors of olive tree: the lintel and side posts were a fifth part of the wall.	For the entrance to the inner sanctuary, Solomon constructed doors of olive wood with five-sided doorposts.
1KI	6	32	감람목으로 만든 그 두 문짝에 그룹과 종려와 핀 꽃을 아로새기고 금으로 입히되 곧 그룹들과 종려에 금으로 입혔더라	The two doors also were of olive tree; and he carved upon them carvings of cherubims and palm trees and open flowers, and overlaid them with gold, and spread gold upon the cherubims, and upon the palm trees.	The double doors were made of olive wood, and he carved into them cherubim, palm trees, and open flowers and overlaid the cherubim and palm trees with hammered gold.
1KI	6	33	또 외소의 문을 위하여 감람목으로 문설주를 만들었으니 곧 벽의 사분지 일이며	So also made he for the door of the temple posts of olive tree, a fourth part of the wall.	In the same way he made four-sided doorposts of olive wood for the sanctuary entrance.
1KI	6	34	그 두 문짝은 잣나무라 이 문짝도 두 짝으로 접게 되었고 저 문짝도 두 짝으로 접게 되었으며	And the two doors were of fir tree: the two leaves of the one door were folding, and the two leaves of the other door were folding.	The two doors were made of cypress wood, and each had two folding panels.
1KI	6	35	그 문짝에 그룹들과 종려와 핀 꽃을 아로새기고 금으로 입히되 그 새긴데 맞게 하였고	And he carved thereon cherubims and palm trees and open flowers: and covered them with gold fitted upon the carved work.	He carved into them cherubim, palm trees, and open flowers; and he overlaid them with gold, hammered evenly over the carvings.
1KI	6	36	또 다듬은 돌 세 켜와 백향목 두꺼운 판자 한 켜로 둘러 안뜰을 만들었더라	And he built the inner court with three rows of hewed stone, and a row of cedar beams.	Solomon built the inner courtyard with three rows of dressed stone and one row of trimmed cedar beams.
1KI	6	37	제사년 시브월에 여호와의 전 기초를 쌓았고	In the fourth year was the foundation of the house of the Lord laid, in the month Zif:	The foundation of the house of the LORD was laid in the fourth year of Solomon’s reign, in the month of Ziv.
1KI	6	38	제십일년 불월 곧 팔월에 그 설계와 식양대로 전이 다 필역되었으니 솔로몬이 전을 건축한 동안이 칠 년이었더라	And in the eleventh year, in the month Bul, which is the eighth month, was the house finished throughout all the parts thereof, and according to all the fashion of it. So was he seven years in building it.	In his eleventh year and eighth month, the month of Bul, the temple was finished in every detail and according to every specification. So he built the temple in seven years.
1KI	7	1	솔로몬이 자기의 궁을 십삼 년 동안 건축하여 그 전부를 준공하니라	But Solomon was building his own house thirteen years, and he finished all his house.	Solomon, however, took thirteen years to complete the construction of his entire palace.
1KI	7	2	저가 레바논 나무로 궁을 지었으니 장이 일백 규빗이요 광이 오십 규빗이요 고가 삼십 규빗이라 백향목 기둥이 네 줄이요 기둥 위에 백향목 들보가 있으며	He built also the house of the forest of Lebanon; the length thereof was an hundred cubits, and the breadth thereof fifty cubits, and the height thereof thirty cubits, upon four rows of cedar pillars, with cedar beams upon the pillars.	He built the House of the Forest of Lebanon a hundred cubits long, fifty cubits wide, and thirty cubits high, with four rows of cedar pillars supporting the cedar beams.
1KI	7	3	기둥 위에 있는 사십오 개 들보를 백향목으로 덮었는데 들보는 한 줄에 열다섯이요	And it was covered with cedar above upon the beams, that lay on forty five pillars, fifteen in a row.	The house was roofed with cedar above the beams that rested on the pillars—forty-five beams, fifteen per row.
1KI	7	4	또 창틀이 세 줄로 있는데 창과 창이 세 층으로 서로 대하였고	And there were windows in three rows, and light was against light in three ranks.	There were three rows of high windows facing one another in three tiers.
1KI	7	5	모든 문과 문설주를 다 큰 나무로 네모지게 만들었는데 창과 창이 세 층으로 서로 대하였으며	And all the doors and posts were square, with the windows: and light was against light in three ranks.	All the doorways had rectangular frames, with the openings facing one another in three tiers.
1KI	7	6	또 기둥을 세워 낭실을 지었으니 장이 오십 규빗이요 광이 삼십 규빗이며 또 기둥 앞에 한 낭실이 있고 또 그 앞에 기둥과 섬돌이 있으며	And he made a porch of pillars; the length thereof was fifty cubits, and the breadth thereof thirty cubits: and the porch was before them: and the other pillars and the thick beam were before them.	Solomon made his colonnade fifty cubits long and thirty cubits wide, with a portico in front of it and a canopy with pillars in front of the portico.
1KI	7	7	또 심판하기 위하여 보좌의 낭실 곧 재판하는 낭실을 짓고 온 마루를 백향목으로 덮었고	Then he made a porch for the throne where he might judge, even the porch of judgment: and it was covered with cedar from one side of the floor to the other.	In addition, he built a hall for the throne, the Hall of Justice, where he was to judge. It was paneled with cedar from floor to ceiling.
1KI	7	8	솔로몬의 거처할 궁은 그 낭실 뒤 다른 뜰에 있으니 그 공작이 일반이며 솔로몬이 또 그 장가 든 바로의 딸을 위하여 집을 지었는데 이 낭실과 같더라	And his house where he dwelt had another court within the porch, which was of the like work. Solomon made also an house for Pharaoh’s daughter, whom he had taken to wife, like unto this porch.	And the palace where Solomon would live, set further back, was of similar construction. He also made a palace like this hall for Pharaoh’s daughter, whom he had married.
1KI	7	9	이 집들은 안팎을 모두 귀하고 다듬은 돌로 지었으니 척수대로 톱으로 켠 것이라 그 기초석에서 처마까지와 외면에서 큰 뜰에 이르기까지 다 그러하니	All these were of costly stones, according to the measures of hewed stones, sawed with saws, within and without, even from the foundation unto the coping, and so on the outside toward the great court.	All these buildings were constructed with costly stones, cut to size and trimmed with saws inside and out from the foundation to the eaves, and from the outside to the great courtyard.
1KI	7	10	그 기초석은 귀하고 큰 돌 곧 십 규빗 되는 돌과 여덟 규빗 되는 돌이라	And the foundation was of costly stones, even great stones, stones of ten cubits, and stones of eight cubits.	The foundations were laid with large, costly stones, some ten cubits long and some eight cubits long.
1KI	7	11	그 위에는 척수대로 다듬은 귀한 돌도 있고 백향목도 있으며	And above were costly stones, after the measures of hewed stones, and cedars.	Above these were high-grade stones, cut to size, and cedar beams.
1KI	7	12	또 큰 뜰 주위에는 다듬은 돌 세 켜와 백향목 두꺼운 판자 한 켜를 놓았으니 마치 여호와의 전 안뜰과 낭실에 놓은 것 같더라	And the great court round about was with three rows of hewed stones, and a row of cedar beams, both for the inner court of the house of the Lord, and for the porch of the house.	The great courtyard was surrounded by three rows of dressed stone and a row of trimmed cedar beams, as were the inner courtyard and portico of the house of the LORD.
1KI	7	13	솔로몬 왕이 보내어 히람을 두로에서 데려오니	And king Solomon sent and fetched Hiram out of Tyre.	Now King Solomon sent to bring Huram from Tyre.
1KI	7	14	저는 납달리 지파 과부의 아들이요 그 아비는 두로 사람이니 놋점장이라 이 히람은 모든 놋 일에 지혜와 총명과 재능이 구비한 자더니 솔로몬 왕에게 와서 그 모든 공작을 하니라	He was a widow’s son of the tribe of Naphtali, and his father was a man of Tyre, a worker in brass: and he was filled with wisdom, and understanding, and cunning to work all works in brass. And he came to king Solomon, and wrought all his work.	He was the son of a widow from the tribe of Naphtali, and his father was a man of Tyre, a craftsman in bronze. Huram had great skill, understanding, and knowledge for every kind of bronze work. So he came to King Solomon and carried out all his work.
1KI	7	15	저가 놋기둥 둘을 만들었으니 그 고는 각각 십팔 규빗이라 각각 십이 규빗되는 줄을 두를 만하며	For he cast two pillars of brass, of eighteen cubits high apiece: and a line of twelve cubits did compass either of them about.	He cast two pillars of bronze, each eighteen cubits high and twelve cubits in circumference.
1KI	7	16	또 놋을 녹여 부어서 기둥 머리를 만들어 기둥 꼭대기에 두었으니 이 머리의 고도 다섯 규빗이요 저 머리의 고도 다섯 규빗이며	And he made two chapiters of molten brass, to set upon the tops of the pillars: the height of the one chapiter was five cubits, and the height of the other chapiter was five cubits:	He also made two capitals of cast bronze to set on top of the pillars, each capital five cubits high.
1KI	7	17	기둥 꼭대기에 있는 머리를 위하여 바둑판 모양으로 얽은 그물과 사슬 모양의 땋은 것을 만들었으니 이 머리에 일곱이요 저 머리에 일곱이라	And nets of checker work, and wreaths of chain work, for the chapiters which were upon the top of the pillars; seven for the one chapiter, and seven for the other chapiter.	For the capitals on top of the pillars he made a network of lattice, with wreaths of chainwork, seven for each capital.
1KI	7	18	기둥을 이렇게 만들었고 또 두 줄 석류를 한 그물 위에 둘러 만들어서 기둥 꼭대기에 있는 머리에 두르게 하였고 다른 기둥 머리에도 그렇게 하였으며	And he made the pillars, and two rows round about upon the one network, to cover the chapiters that were upon the top, with pomegranates: and so did he for the other chapiter.	Likewise, he made the pillars with two rows of pomegranates around each grating to cover each capital atop the pillars.
1KI	7	19	낭실 기둥 꼭대기에 있는 머리의 네 규빗은 백합화 모양으로 만들었으며	And the chapiters that were upon the top of the pillars were of lily work in the porch, four cubits.	And the capitals atop the pillars in the portico were shaped like lilies, four cubits high.
1KI	7	20	이 두 기둥 머리에 있는 그물 곁 곧 그 머리의 공 같이 둥근 곳으로 돌아가며 각기 석류 이백이 줄을 지었더라	And the chapiters upon the two pillars had pomegranates also above, over against the belly which was by the network: and the pomegranates were two hundred in rows round about upon the other chapiter.	On the capitals of both pillars, just above the rounded projection next to the network, were the two hundred pomegranates in rows encircling each capital.
1KI	7	21	이 두 기둥을 전의 낭실 앞에 세우되 우편의 기둥을 세우고 그 이름을 야긴이라 하고 좌편의 기둥을 세우고 그 이름을 보아스라 하였으며	And he set up the pillars in the porch of the temple: and he set up the right pillar, and called the name thereof Jachin: and he set up the left pillar, and called the name thereof Boaz.	Thus he set up the pillars at the portico of the temple. The pillar to the south he named Jachin, and the pillar to the north he named Boaz.
1KI	7	22	그 두 기둥 꼭대기에 백합화 형상이 있더라 두 기둥의 공역이 마치니라	And upon the top of the pillars was lily work: so was the work of the pillars finished.	And the tops of the pillars were shaped like lilies. So the work of the pillars was completed.
1KI	7	23	또 바다를 부어 만들었으니 그 직경이 십 규빗이요 그 모양이 둥글며 그 고는 다섯 규빗이요 주위는 삼십 규빗 줄을 두를만하며	And he made a molten sea, ten cubits from the one brim to the other: it was round all about, and his height was five cubits: and a line of thirty cubits did compass it round about.	He also made the Sea of cast metal. It was circular in shape, measuring ten cubits from rim to rim, five cubits in height, and thirty cubits in circumference.
1KI	7	24	그 가장자리 아래에는 돌아가며 박이 있는데 매 규빗에 열 개씩 있어서 바다 주위에 둘렸으니 그 박은 바다를 부어 만들 때에 두 줄로 부어 만들었으며	And under the brim of it round about there were knops compassing it, ten in a cubit, compassing the sea round about: the knops were cast in two rows, when it was cast.	Below the rim, ornamental buds encircled it, ten per cubit all the way around the Sea, cast in two rows as a part of the Sea.
1KI	7	25	그 바다를 열두 소가 받쳤으니 셋은 북을 향하였고 셋은 서를 향하였고 셋은 남을 향하였고 셋은 동을 향하였으며 바다를 그 위에 놓았고 소의 뒤는 다 안으로 두었으며	It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three looking toward the south, and three looking toward the east: and the sea was set above upon them, and all their hinder parts were inward.	The Sea stood on twelve oxen, three facing north, three facing west, three facing south, and three facing east. The Sea rested on them, with all their hindquarters toward the center.
1KI	7	26	바다의 두께는 한 손 넓이만하고 그 가는 백합화의 식양으로 잔가와 같이 만들었으니 그 바다에는 이천 밧을 담겠더라	And it was an hand breadth thick, and the brim thereof was wrought like the brim of a cup, with flowers of lilies: it contained two thousand baths.	It was a handbreadth thick, and its rim was fashioned like the brim of a cup, like a lily blossom. It could hold two thousand baths.
1KI	7	27	또 놋으로 받침 열을 만들었으니 매 받침의 장이 네 규빗이요 광이 네 규빗이요 고가 세 규빗이라	And he made ten bases of brass; four cubits was the length of one base, and four cubits the breadth thereof, and three cubits the height of it.	In addition, he made ten movable stands of bronze, each four cubits long, four cubits wide, and three cubits high.
1KI	7	28	그 받침의 제도는 이러하니 사면 옆 변죽 가운데 판이 있고	And the work of the bases was on this manner: they had borders, and the borders were between the ledges:	This was the design of the stands: They had side panels attached to uprights,
1KI	7	29	변죽 가운데 판에는 사자와 소와 그룹들이 있고 또 변죽 위에는 놓는 자리가 있고 사자와 소 아래에는 화환 모양이 있으며	And on the borders that were between the ledges were lions, oxen, and cherubims: and upon the ledges there was a base above: and beneath the lions and oxen were certain additions made of thin work.	and on the panels between the uprights were lions, oxen, and cherubim. On the uprights was a pedestal above, and below the lions and oxen were wreaths of beveled work.
1KI	7	30	그 받침에 각각 네 놋바퀴와 놋축이 있고 받침 네 발 밑에는 어깨 같은 것이 있으며 그 어깨 같은 것은 물두멍 밑편에 부어 만들었고 화환은 각각 그 옆에 있으며	And every base had four brasen wheels, and plates of brass: and the four corners thereof had undersetters: under the laver were undersetters molten, at the side of every addition.	Each stand had four bronze wheels with bronze axles and a basin resting on four supports, with wreaths at each side.
1KI	7	31	그 받침 위로 들이켜 고가 한 규빗 되게 내민 것이 있고 그 면은 직경 한 규빗 반 되게 반원형으로 우묵하며 그 나머지 면에는 아로새긴 것이 있으며 그 내민 판들은 네모지고 둥글지 아니하며	And the mouth of it within the chapiter and above was a cubit: but the mouth thereof was round after the work of the base, a cubit and an half: and also upon the mouth of it were gravings with their borders, foursquare, not round.	The opening to each stand inside the crown at the top was one cubit deep, with a round opening like the design of a pedestal, a cubit and a half wide. And around its opening were engravings, but the panels of the stands were square, not round.
1KI	7	32	네 바퀴는 옆판 밑에 있고 바퀴 축은 받침에 연하였는데 바퀴의 고는 각각 한 규빗 반이며	And under the borders were four wheels; and the axletrees of the wheels were joined to the base: and the height of a wheel was a cubit and half a cubit.	There were four wheels under the panels, and the axles of the wheels were attached to the stand; each wheel was a cubit and a half in diameter.
1KI	7	33	그 바퀴의 제도는 병거 바퀴의 제도 같은데 그 축과 테와 살과 통이 다 부어 만든 것이며	And the work of the wheels was like the work of a chariot wheel: their axletrees, and their naves, and their felloes, and their spokes, were all molten.	The wheels were made like chariot wheels; their axles, rims, spokes, and hubs were all of cast metal.
1KI	7	34	받침 네 모퉁이에 어깨 같은 것 넷이 있는데 그 어깨는 받침과 연하였고	And there were four undersetters to the four corners of one base: and the undersetters were of the very base itself.	Each stand had four handles, one for each corner, projecting from the stand.
1KI	7	35	받침 위에 둥근 테두리가 있는데 고가 반 규빗이요 또 받침 위의 버팀대와 옆판들이 받침과 연하였고	And in the top of the base was there a round compass of half a cubit high: and on the top of the base the ledges thereof and the borders thereof were of the same.	At the top of each stand was a circular band half a cubit high. The supports and panels were cast as a unit with the top of the stand.
1KI	7	36	버팀대 판과 옆판에는 각각 빈 곳을 따라 그룹들과 사자와 종려나무를 아로새겼고 또 그 사면으로 화환 모양이 있더라	For on the plates of the ledges thereof, and on the borders thereof, he graved cherubims, lions, and palm trees, according to the proportion of every one, and additions round about.	He engraved cherubim, lions, and palm trees on the surfaces of the supports and panels, wherever each had space, with wreaths all around.
1KI	7	37	이와 같이 받침 열을 만들었는데 그 부어 만든 법과 척수와 식양을 다 동일하게 하였더라	After this manner he made the ten bases: all of them had one casting, one measure, and one size.	In this way he made the ten stands, each with the same casting, dimensions, and shape.
1KI	7	38	또 물두멍 열을 놋으로 만들었는데 물두멍마다 각각 사십 밧을 담게 하였으며 매 물두멍의 직경이 네 규빗이라 열 받침 위에 각각 물두멍이 하나씩이더라	Then made he ten lavers of brass: one laver contained forty baths: and every laver was four cubits: and upon every one of the ten bases one laver.	He also made ten bronze basins, each holding forty baths and measuring four cubits across, one basin for each of the ten stands.
1KI	7	39	그 받침 다섯은 전 우편에 두었고 다섯은 전 좌편에 두었고 전 우편 동남에는 그 바다를 두었더라	And he put five bases on the right side of the house, and five on the left side of the house: and he set the sea on the right side of the house eastward over against the south.	He set five stands on the south side of the temple and five on the north, and he put the Sea on the south side, at the southeast corner of the temple.
1KI	7	40	히람이 또 물두멍과 부삽과 대접들을 만들었더라 이와 같이 히람이 솔로몬 왕을 위하여 여호와의 전의 모든 일을 마쳤으니	And Hiram made the lavers, and the shovels, and the basons. So Hiram made an end of doing all the work that he made king Solomon for the house of the Lord:	Additionally, Huram made the pots, shovels, and sprinkling bowls. So Huram finished all the work that he had undertaken for King Solomon in the house of the LORD:
1KI	7	41	곧 기둥 둘과 그 기둥 꼭대기의 공 같은 머리 둘과 또 기둥 꼭대기의 공 같은 머리를 가리우는 그물 둘과	The two pillars, and the two bowls of the chapiters that were on the top of the two pillars; and the two networks, to cover the two bowls of the chapiters which were upon the top of the pillars;	the two pillars; the two bowl-shaped capitals atop the pillars; the two sets of network covering both bowls of the capitals atop the pillars;
1KI	7	42	또 그 그물들을 위하여 만든바 매 그물에 두 줄씩으로 기둥 위의 공 같은 두 머리를 가리우게 한 사백 석류와	And four hundred pomegranates for the two networks, even two rows of pomegranates for one network, to cover the two bowls of the chapiters that were upon the pillars;	the four hundred pomegranates for the two sets of network (two rows of pomegranates for each network covering both the bowl-shaped capitals atop the pillars);
1KI	7	43	또 열 받침과 받침 위의 열 물두멍과	And the ten bases, and ten lavers on the bases;	the ten stands; the ten basins on the stands;
1KI	7	44	한 바다와 그 바다 아래 열두 소와	And one sea, and twelve oxen under the sea;	the Sea; the twelve oxen underneath the Sea;
1KI	7	45	솥과 부삽과 대접들이라 히람이 솔로몬 왕을 위하여 여호와의 전에 이 모든 그릇을 빛난 놋으로 만드니라	And the pots, and the shovels, and the basons: and all these vessels, which Hiram made to king Solomon for the house of the Lord, were of bright brass.	and the pots, shovels, and sprinkling bowls. All the articles that Huram made for King Solomon in the house of the LORD were made of burnished bronze.
1KI	7	46	왕이 요단 평지에서 숙곳과 사르단 사이의 차진 흙에 그것들을 부어 내었더라	In the plain of Jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zarthan.	The king had them cast in clay molds in the plain of the Jordan between Succoth and Zarethan.
1KI	7	47	기구가 심히 많으므로 솔로몬이 다 달지 아니하고 두었으니 그 놋 중수를 능히 측량할 수 없었더라	And Solomon left all the vessels unweighed, because they were exceeding many: neither was the weight of the brass found out.	Solomon left all these articles unweighed, because there were so many. The weight of the bronze could not be determined.
1KI	7	48	솔로몬이 또 여호와의 전의 모든 기구를 만들었으니 곧 금단과 진설병의 금상과	And Solomon made all the vessels that pertained unto the house of the Lord: the altar of gold, and the table of gold, whereupon the shewbread was,	Solomon also made all the furnishings for the house of the LORD: the golden altar; the golden table on which was placed the Bread of the Presence;
1KI	7	49	내소 앞에 좌우로 다섯씩 둘 정금 등대며 또 금꽃과 등잔과 불집게며	And the candlesticks of pure gold, five on the right side, and five on the left, before the oracle, with the flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs of gold,	the lampstands of pure gold in front of the inner sanctuary, five on the right side and five on the left; the gold flowers, lamps, and tongs;
1KI	7	50	또 정금 대접과 불집게와 주발과 숟가락과 불을 옮기는 그릇이며 또 내소 곧 지성소 문의 금돌쩌귀와 전 곧 외소 문의 금돌쩌귀더라	And the bowls, and the snuffers, and the basons, and the spoons, and the censers of pure gold; and the hinges of gold, both for the doors of the inner house, the most holy place, and for the doors of the house, to wit, of the temple.	the pure gold basins, wick trimmers, sprinkling bowls, ladles, and censers; and the gold hinges for the doors of the inner temple (that is, the Most Holy Place) as well as for the doors of the main hall of the temple.
1KI	7	51	솔로몬 왕이 여호와의 전을 위하여 만드는 모든 것을 마친지라 이에 솔로몬이 그 부친 다윗의 드린 물건 곧 은과 금과 기구들을 가져다가 여호와의 전 곳간에 두었더라	So was ended all the work that king Solomon made for the house of the Lord. And Solomon brought in the things which David his father had dedicated; even the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, did he put among the treasures of the house of the Lord.	So all the work that King Solomon had performed for the house of the LORD was completed. Then Solomon brought in the items his father David had dedicated—the silver, the gold, and the furnishings—and he placed them in the treasuries of the house of the LORD.
1KI	8	1	이에 솔로몬이 여호와의 언약궤를 다윗 성 곧 시온에서 메어 올리고자 하여 이스라엘 장로와 모든 지파의 두목 곧 이스라엘 자손의 족장들을 예루살렘 자기에게로 소집하니	Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, the chief of the fathers of the children of Israel, unto king Solomon in Jerusalem, that they might bring up the ark of the covenant of the Lord out of the city of David, which is Zion.	At that time Solomon assembled before him in Jerusalem the elders of Israel—all the tribal heads and family leaders of the Israelites—to bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD from Zion, the City of David.
1KI	8	2	이스라엘 모든 사람이 다 에다님월 곧 칠월 절기에 솔로몬 왕에게 모이고	And all the men of Israel assembled themselves unto king Solomon at the feast in the month Ethanim, which is the seventh month.	And all the men of Israel came together to King Solomon at the feast in the seventh month, the month of Ethanim.
1KI	8	3	이스라엘 장로들이 다 이르매 제사장들이 궤를 메니라	And all the elders of Israel came, and the priests took up the ark.	When all the elders of Israel had arrived, the priests took up the ark,
1KI	8	4	여호와의 궤와 회막과 성막 안의 모든 거룩한 기구들을 메고 올라가되 제사장과 레위 사람이 그것들을 메고 올라가매	And they brought up the ark of the Lord, and the tabernacle of the congregation, and all the holy vessels that were in the tabernacle, even those did the priests and the Levites bring up.	and they brought up the ark of the LORD and the Tent of Meeting with all its sacred furnishings. So the priests and Levites carried them up.
1KI	8	5	솔로몬 왕과 그 앞에 모인 이스라엘 회중이 저와 함께 궤 앞에 있어 양과 소로 제사를 드렸으니 그 수가 많아 기록할 수도 없고 셀 수도 없었더라	And king Solomon, and all the congregation of Israel, that were assembled unto him, were with him before the ark, sacrificing sheep and oxen, that could not be told nor numbered for multitude.	There, before the ark, King Solomon and the whole congregation of Israel who had assembled with him sacrificed so many sheep and oxen that they could not be counted or numbered.
1KI	8	6	제사장들이 여호와의 언약궤를 그 처소로 메어 들였으니 곧 내전 지성소 그룹들의 날개 아래라	And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the Lord unto his place, into the oracle of the house, to the most holy place, even under the wings of the cherubims.	Then the priests brought the ark of the covenant of the LORD to its place in the inner sanctuary of the temple, the Most Holy Place, beneath the wings of the cherubim.
1KI	8	7	그룹들이 궤 처소 위에서 날개를 펴서 궤와 그 채를 덮었는데	For the cherubims spread forth their two wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubims covered the ark and the staves thereof above.	For the cherubim spread their wings over the place of the ark and overshadowed the ark and its poles.
1KI	8	8	채가 긴 고로 채 끝이 내전 앞 성소에서 보이나 밖에서는 보이지 아니하며 그 채는 오늘까지 그곳에 있으며	And they drew out the staves, that the ends of the staves were seen out in the holy place before the oracle, and they were not seen without: and there they are unto this day.	The poles extended far enough that their ends were visible from the Holy Place in front of the inner sanctuary, but not from outside the Holy Place; and they are there to this day.
1KI	8	9	궤 안에는 두 돌판 외에 아무 것도 없으니 이것은 이스라엘 자손이 애굽 땅에서 나온 후 여호와께서 저희와 언약을 세우실 때에 모세가 호렙에서 그 안에 넣은 것이더라	There was nothing in the ark save the two tables of stone, which Moses put there at Horeb, when the Lord made a covenant with the children of Israel, when they came out of the land of Egypt.	There was nothing in the ark except the two stone tablets that Moses had placed in it at Horeb, where the LORD had made a covenant with the Israelites after they had come out of the land of Egypt.
1KI	8	10	제사장이 성소에서 나올 때에 구름이 여호와의 전에 가득하매	And it came to pass, when the priests were come out of the holy place, that the cloud filled the house of the Lord,	And when the priests came out of the Holy Place, the cloud filled the house of the LORD
1KI	8	11	제사장이 그 구름으로 인하여 능히 서서 섬기지 못하였으니 이는 여호와의 영광이 여호와의 전에 가득함이었더라	So that the priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud: for the glory of the Lord had filled the house of the Lord.	so that the priests could not stand there to minister because of the cloud; for the glory of the LORD filled the house of the LORD.
1KI	8	12	그때에 솔로몬이 가로되 여호와께서 캄캄한데 계시겠다 말씀하셨사오나	Then spake Solomon, The Lord said that he would dwell in the thick darkness.	Then Solomon declared: “The LORD has said that He would dwell in the thick cloud.
1KI	8	13	내가 참으로 주를 위하여 계실 전을 건축하였사오니 주께서 영원히 거하실 처소로소이다 하고	I have surely built thee an house to dwell in, a settled place for thee to abide in for ever.	I have indeed built You an exalted house, a place for You to dwell forever.”
1KI	8	14	얼굴을 돌이켜 이스라엘의 온 회중을 위하여 축복하니 때에 이스라엘의 온 회중이 섰더라	And the king turned his face about, and blessed all the congregation of Israel: (and all the congregation of Israel stood;)	And as the whole assembly of Israel stood there, the king turned around and blessed them all
1KI	8	15	왕이 가로되 이스라엘 하나님 여호와를 송축할지로다 여호와께서 그 입으로 나의 부친 다윗에게 말씀하신 것을 이제 그 손으로 이루셨도다 이르시기를	And he said, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which spake with his mouth unto David my father, and hath with his hand fulfilled it, saying,	and said: “Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, who has fulfilled with His own hand what He spoke with His mouth to my father David, saying,
1KI	8	16	내가 내 백성 이스라엘을 애굽에서 인도하여 낸 날부터 내 이름을 둘만한 집을 건축하기 위하여 이스라엘 모든 지파 가운데서 아무 성읍도 택하지 아니하고 다만 다윗을 택하여 내 백성 이스라엘을 다스리게 하였노라 하신지라	Since the day that I brought forth my people Israel out of Egypt, I chose no city out of all the tribes of Israel to build an house, that my name might be therein; but I chose David to be over my people Israel.	‘Since the day I brought My people Israel out of Egypt, I have not chosen a city from any tribe of Israel in which to build a house so that My Name would be there. But I have chosen David to be over My people Israel.’
1KI	8	17	내 부친 다윗이 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 이름을 위하여 전을 건축할 마음이 있었더니	And it was in the heart of David my father to build an house for the name of the Lord God of Israel.	Now it was in the heart of my father David to build a house for the Name of the LORD, the God of Israel.
1KI	8	18	여호와께서 내 부친 다윗에게 이르시되 네가 내 이름을 위하여 전을 건축할 마음이 있으니 이 마음이 네게 있는 것이 좋도다	And the Lord said unto David my father, Whereas it was in thine heart to build an house unto my name, thou didst well that it was in thine heart.	But the LORD said to my father David, ‘Since it was in your heart to build a house for My Name, you have done well to have this in your heart.
1KI	8	19	그러나 너는 그 전을 건축하지 못할 것이요 네 몸에서 낳을 네 아들 그가 내 이름을 위하여 전을 건축하리라 하시더니	Nevertheless thou shalt not build the house; but thy son that shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the house unto my name.	Nevertheless, you are not the one to build it; but your son, your own offspring, will build the house for My Name.’
1KI	8	20	이제 여호와께서 말씀하신 대로 이루시도다 내가 여호와의 허하신 대로 내 부친 다윗을 대신하여 일어나서 이스라엘 위에 앉고 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 이름을 위하여 전을 건축하고	And the Lord hath performed his word that he spake, and I am risen up in the room of David my father, and sit on the throne of Israel, as the Lord promised, and have built an house for the name of the Lord God of Israel.	Now the LORD has fulfilled the word that He spoke. I have succeeded my father David, and I sit on the throne of Israel, as the LORD promised. I have built the house for the Name of the LORD, the God of Israel.
1KI	8	21	내가 또 그곳에 우리 열조를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내실 때에 저희와 세우신바 여호와의 언약 넣은 궤를 위하여 한 처소를 설치하였노라	And I have set there a place for the ark, wherein is the covenant of the Lord, which he made with our fathers, when he brought them out of the land of Egypt.	And there I have provided a place for the ark, which contains the covenant of the LORD that He made with our fathers when He brought them out of the land of Egypt.”
1KI	8	22	솔로몬이 여호와의 단 앞에서 이스라엘의 온 회중을 마주서서 하늘을 향하여 손을 펴고	And Solomon stood before the altar of the Lord in the presence of all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands toward heaven:	Then Solomon stood before the altar of the LORD in front of the whole assembly of Israel, spread out his hands toward heaven,
1KI	8	23	가로되 이스라엘 하나님 여호와여 상천하지에 주와 같은 신이 없나이다 주께서는 온 마음으로 주의 앞에서 행하는 종들에게 언약을 지키시고 은혜를 베푸시나이다	And he said, Lord God of Israel, there is no God like thee, in heaven above, or on earth beneath, who keepest covenant and mercy with thy servants that walk before thee with all their heart:	and said: “O LORD, God of Israel, there is no God like You in heaven above or on earth below, keeping Your covenant of loving devotion with Your servants who walk before You with all their hearts.
1KI	8	24	주께서 주의 종 내 아비 다윗에게 허하신 말씀을 지키사 주의 입으로 말씀하신 것을 손으로 이루심이 오늘날과 같으니이다	Who hast kept with thy servant David my father that thou promisedst him: thou spakest also with thy mouth, and hast fulfilled it with thine hand, as it is this day.	You have kept Your promise to Your servant, my father David. What You spoke with Your mouth You have fulfilled with Your hand this day.
1KI	8	25	이스라엘 하나님 여호와여 주께서 주의 종 내 아비 다윗에게 말씀하시기를 네 자손이 자기 길을 삼가서 네가 내 앞에서 행한 것 같이 내 앞에서 행하기만 하면 네게로 좇아나서 이스라엘 위에 앉을 사람이 내 앞에서 끊어지지 아니하리라 하셨사오니 이제 다윗을 위하여 그 허하신 말씀을 지키시옵소서	Therefore now, Lord God of Israel, keep with thy servant David my father that thou promisedst him, saying, There shall not fail thee a man in my sight to sit on the throne of Israel; so that thy children take heed to their way, that they walk before me as thou hast walked before me.	Therefore now, O LORD, God of Israel, keep for Your servant, my father David, what You promised when You said: ‘You will never fail to have a man to sit before Me on the throne of Israel, if only your descendants guard their way to walk before Me as you have done.’
1KI	8	26	그런즉 이스라엘 하나님이여 원컨대 주는 주의 종 내 아비 다윗에게 하신 말씀이 확실하게 하옵소서	And now, O God of Israel, let thy word, I pray thee, be verified, which thou spakest unto thy servant David my father.	And now, O God of Israel, please confirm what You promised to Your servant, my father David.
1KI	8	27	하나님이 참으로 땅에 거하시리이까 하늘과 하늘들의 하늘이라도 주를 용납지 못하겠거든 하물며 내가 건축한 이 전이오리이까	But will God indeed dwell on the earth? behold, the heaven and heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house that I have builded?	But will God indeed dwell upon the earth? Even heaven, the highest heaven, cannot contain You, much less this temple I have built.
1KI	8	28	그러나 나의 하나님 여호와여 종의 기도와 간구를 돌아보시며 종이 오늘날 주의 앞에서 부르짖음과 비는 기도를 들으시옵소서	Yet have thou respect unto the prayer of thy servant, and to his supplication, O Lord my God, to hearken unto the cry and to the prayer, which thy servant prayeth before thee to day:	Yet regard the prayer and plea of Your servant, O LORD my God, so that You may hear the cry and the prayer that Your servant is praying before You today.
1KI	8	29	주께서 전에 말씀하시기를 내 이름이 거기 있으리라 하신 곳 이 전을 향하여 주의 눈이 주야로 보옵시며 종이 이곳을 향하여 비는 기도를 들으시옵소서	That thine eyes may be open toward this house night and day, even toward the place of which thou hast said, My name shall be there: that thou mayest hearken unto the prayer which thy servant shall make toward this place.	May Your eyes be open toward this temple night and day, toward the place of which You said, ‘My Name shall be there,’ so that You may hear the prayer that Your servant prays toward this place.
1KI	8	30	종과 주의 백성 이스라엘이 이곳을 향하여 기도할 때에 주는 그 간구함을 들으시되 주의 계신 곳 하늘에서 들으시고 들으시사 사하여 주옵소서	And hearken thou to the supplication of thy servant, and of thy people Israel, when they shall pray toward this place: and hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place: and when thou hearest, forgive.	Hear the plea of Your servant and of Your people Israel when they pray toward this place. May You hear from heaven, Your dwelling place. May You hear and forgive.
1KI	8	31	만일 어떤 사람이 그 이웃에게 범죄함으로 맹세시킴을 받고 저가 와서 이 전에 있는 주의 단 앞에서 맹세하거든	If any man trespass against his neighbour, and an oath be laid upon him to cause him to swear, and the oath come before thine altar in this house:	When a man sins against his neighbor and is required to take an oath, and he comes to take an oath before Your altar in this temple,
1KI	8	32	주는 하늘에서 들으시고 행하시되 주의 종들을 국문하사 악한 자의 죄를 정하여 그 행위대로 그 머리에 돌리시고 의로운 자를 의롭다 하사 그 의로운 대로 갚으시옵소서	Then hear thou in heaven, and do, and judge thy servants, condemning the wicked, to bring his way upon his head; and justifying the righteous, to give him according to his righteousness.	then may You hear from heaven and act. May You judge Your servants, condemning the wicked man by bringing down on his own head what he has done, and justifying the righteous man by rewarding him according to his righteousness.
1KI	8	33	만일 주의 백성 이스라엘이 주께 범죄하여 적국 앞에 패하게 되므로 주께로 돌아와서 주의 이름을 인정하고 이 전에서 주께 빌며 간구하거든	When thy people Israel be smitten down before the enemy, because they have sinned against thee, and shall turn again to thee, and confess thy name, and pray, and make supplication unto thee in this house:	When Your people Israel are defeated before an enemy because they have sinned against You, and they return to You and confess Your name, praying and pleading with You in this temple,
1KI	8	34	주는 하늘에서 들으시고 주의 백성 이스라엘의 죄를 사하시고 그 열조에게 주신 땅으로 돌아오게 하옵소서	Then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy people Israel, and bring them again unto the land which thou gavest unto their fathers.	then may You hear from heaven and forgive the sin of Your people Israel. May You restore them to the land You gave to their fathers.
1KI	8	35	만일 저희가 주께 범죄함을 인하여 하늘이 닫히고 비가 없어서 주의 벌을 받을 때에 이곳을 향하여 빌며 주의 이름을 인정하고 그 죄에서 떠나거든	When heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, because they have sinned against thee; if they pray toward this place, and confess thy name, and turn from their sin, when thou afflictest them:	When the skies are shut and there is no rain because Your people have sinned against You, and they pray toward this place and confess Your name, and they turn from their sins because You have afflicted them,
1KI	8	36	주는 하늘에서 들으사 주의 종들과 주의 백성 이스라엘의 죄를 사하시고 그 마땅히 행할 선한 길을 가르쳐 주옵시며 주의 백성에게 기업으로 주신 주의 땅에 비를 내리시옵소서	Then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy servants, and of thy people Israel, that thou teach them the good way wherein they should walk, and give rain upon thy land, which thou hast given to thy people for an inheritance.	then may You hear from heaven and forgive the sin of Your servants, Your people Israel, so that You may teach them the good way in which they should walk. May You send rain on the land that You gave Your people as an inheritance.
1KI	8	37	만일 이 땅에 기근이나 온역이 있거나 곡식이 시들거나 깜부기가 나거나 메뚜기나 황충이 나거나 적국이 와서 성읍을 에워싸거나 무슨 재앙이나 무슨 질병이 있든지 무론하고	If there be in the land famine, if there be pestilence, blasting, mildew, locust, or if there be caterpiller; if their enemy besiege them in the land of their cities; whatsoever plague, whatsoever sickness there be;	When famine or plague comes upon the land, or blight or mildew or locusts or grasshoppers, or when their enemy besieges them in their cities, whatever plague or sickness may come,
1KI	8	38	한 사람이나 혹 주의 온 백성 이스라엘이 다 각각 자기의 마음에 재앙을 깨닫고 이 전을 향하여 손을 펴고 무슨 기도나 무슨 간구를 하거든	What prayer and supplication soever be made by any man, or by all thy people Israel, which shall know every man the plague of his own heart, and spread forth his hands toward this house:	then may whatever prayer or petition Your people Israel make—each knowing his own afflictions and spreading out his hands toward this temple—
1KI	8	39	주는 계신 곳 하늘에서 들으시고 사유하시며 각 사람의 마음을 아시오니 그 모든 행위대로 행하사 갚으시옵소서 주만 홀로 인생의 마음을 다 아심이니이다	Then hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive, and do, and give to every man according to his ways, whose heart thou knowest; (for thou, even thou only, knowest the hearts of all the children of men;)	be heard by You from heaven, Your dwelling place. And may You forgive and act, and repay each man according to all his ways, since You know his heart—for You alone know the hearts of all men—
1KI	8	40	그리하시면 저희가 주께서 우리 열조에게 주신 땅에서 사는 동안에 항상 주를 경외하리이다	That they may fear thee all the days that they live in the land which thou gavest unto our fathers.	so that they may fear You all the days they live in the land that You gave to our fathers.
1KI	8	41	또 주의 백성 이스라엘에 속하지 아니한 자 곧 주의 이름을 위하여 먼 지방에서 온 이방인이라도	Moreover concerning a stranger, that is not of thy people Israel, but cometh out of a far country for thy name’s sake;	And as for the foreigner who is not of Your people Israel but has come from a distant land because of Your name—
1KI	8	42	저희가 주의 광대한 이름과 주의 능한 손과 주의 펴신 팔의 소문을 듣고 와서 이 전을 향하여 기도하거든	(For they shall hear of thy great name, and of thy strong hand, and of thy stretched out arm;) when he shall come and pray toward this house;	for they will hear of Your great name and mighty hand and outstretched arm—when he comes and prays toward this temple,
1KI	8	43	주는 계신 곳 하늘에서 들으시고 무릇 이방인이 주께 부르짖는 대로 이루사 땅의 만민으로 주의 이름을 알고 주의 백성 이스라엘 처럼 경외하게 하옵시며 또 내가 건축한 이 전을 주의 이름으로 일컫는 줄을 알게 하옵소서	Hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place, and do according to all that the stranger calleth to thee for: that all people of the earth may know thy name, to fear thee, as do thy people Israel; and that they may know that this house, which I have builded, is called by thy name.	then may You hear from heaven, Your dwelling place, and do according to all for which the foreigner calls to You. Then all the peoples of the earth will know Your name and fear You, as do Your people Israel, and they will know that this house I have built is called by Your Name.
1KI	8	44	주의 백성이 그 적국으로 더불어 싸우고자 하여 주의 보내신 길로 나갈 때에 저희가 주의 빼신 성과 내가 주의 이름을 위하여 건축한 전 있는 편을 향하여 여호와께 기도하거든	If thy people go out to battle against their enemy, whithersoever thou shalt send them, and shall pray unto the Lord toward the city which thou hast chosen, and toward the house that I have built for thy name:	When Your people go to war against their enemies, wherever You send them, and when they pray to the LORD in the direction of the city You have chosen and the house I have built for Your Name,
1KI	8	45	주는 하늘에서 저희의 기도와 간구를 들으시고 그 일을 돌아보옵소서	Then hear thou in heaven their prayer and their supplication, and maintain their cause.	then may You hear from heaven their prayer and their plea, and may You uphold their cause.
1KI	8	46	범죄치 아니하는 사람이 없사오니 저희가 주께 범죄함으로 주께서 저희에게 진노하사 저희를 적국에게 붙이시매 적국이 저희를 사로잡아 원근을 물론하고 적국의 땅으로 끌어간 후에	If they sin against thee, (for there is no man that sinneth not,) and thou be angry with them, and deliver them to the enemy, so that they carry them away captives unto the land of the enemy, far or near;	When they sin against You—for there is no one who does not sin—and You become angry with them and deliver them to an enemy who takes them as captives to his own land, whether far or near,
1KI	8	47	저희가 사로잡혀 간 땅에서 스스로 깨닫고 그 사로잡은 자의 땅에서 돌이켜 주께 간구하기를 우리가 범죄하여 패역을 행하며 악을 지었나이다 하며	Yet if they shall bethink themselves in the land whither they were carried captives, and repent, and make supplication unto thee in the land of them that carried them captives, saying, We have sinned, and have done perversely, we have committed wickedness;	and when they come to their senses in the land to which they were taken, and they repent and plead with You in the land of their captors, saying, ‘We have sinned and done wrong; we have acted wickedly,’
1KI	8	48	자기를 사로잡아 간 적국의 땅에서 온 마음과 온 뜻으로 주께 돌아와서 주께서 그 열조에게 주신 땅 곧 주의 빼신 성과 내가 주의 이름을 위하여 건축한 전 있는 편을 향하여 주께 기도하거든	And so return unto thee with all their heart, and with all their soul, in the land of their enemies, which led them away captive, and pray unto thee toward their land, which thou gavest unto their fathers, the city which thou hast chosen, and the house which I have built for thy name:	and when they return to You with all their heart and soul in the land of the enemies who took them captive, and when they pray to You in the direction of the land that You gave to their fathers, the city You have chosen, and the house I have built for Your Name,
1KI	8	49	주는 계신 곳 하늘에서 저희 기도와 간구를 들으시고 저희의 일을 돌아보옵시며	Then hear thou their prayer and their supplication in heaven thy dwelling place, and maintain their cause,	then may You hear from heaven, Your dwelling place, their prayer and petition, and may You uphold their cause.
1KI	8	50	주께 범죄한 백성을 용서하시며 주께 범한 그 모든 허물을 사하시고 저희를 사로잡아 간 자의 앞에서 저희로 불쌍히 여김을 얻게 하사 그 사람들로 저희를 불쌍히 여기게 하옵소서	And forgive thy people that have sinned against thee, and all their transgressions wherein they have transgressed against thee, and give them compassion before them who carried them captive, that they may have compassion on them:	May You forgive Your people who have sinned against You and all the transgressions they have committed against You, and may You grant them compassion in the eyes of their captors to show them mercy.
1KI	8	51	저희는 주께서 철 풀무 같은 애굽에서 인도하여 내신 주의 백성, 주의 산업이 됨이니이다	For they be thy people, and thine inheritance, which thou broughtest forth out of Egypt, from the midst of the furnace of iron:	For they are Your people and Your inheritance; You brought them out of Egypt, out of the furnace for iron.
1KI	8	52	원컨대 주는 눈을 들어 종의 간구함과 주의 백성 이스라엘의 간구함을 보시고 무릇 주께 부르짖는 대로 들으시옵소서	That thine eyes may be open unto the supplication of thy servant, and unto the supplication of thy people Israel, to hearken unto them in all that they call for unto thee.	May Your eyes be open to the pleas of Your servant and of Your people Israel, and may You listen to them whenever they call to You.
1KI	8	53	주 여호와여 주께서 우리 조상을 애굽에서 인도하여 내실 때에 주의 종 모세로 말씀하심 같이 주께서 세상 만민 가운데서 저희를 구별하여 주의 산업을 삼으셨나이다	For thou didst separate them from among all the people of the earth, to be thine inheritance, as thou spakest by the hand of Moses thy servant, when thou broughtest our fathers out of Egypt, O Lord God.	For You, O Lord GOD, as Your inheritance, have set them apart from all the peoples of the earth, as You spoke through Your servant Moses when You brought our fathers out of Egypt.”
1KI	8	54	솔로몬이 무릎을 꿇고 손을 펴서 하늘을 향하여 이 기도와 간구로 여호와께 아뢰기를 마치고 여호와의 단 앞에서 일어나	And it was so, that when Solomon had made an end of praying all this prayer and supplication unto the Lord, he arose from before the altar of the Lord, from kneeling on his knees with his hands spread up to heaven.	Now when Solomon had finished praying this entire prayer and petition to the LORD, he got up before the altar of the LORD, where he had been kneeling with his hands spread out toward heaven.
1KI	8	55	서서 큰 소리로 이스라엘의 온 회중을 위하여 축복하며 가로되	And he stood, and blessed all the congregation of Israel with a loud voice, saying,	And he stood and blessed the whole assembly of Israel in a loud voice, saying:
1KI	8	56	여호와를 찬송할지로다 저가 무릇 허하신 대로 그 백성 이스라엘에게 태평을 주셨으니 그 종 모세를 빙자하여 무릇 허하신 그 선한 말씀이 하나도 이루지 않음이 없도다	Blessed be the Lord, that hath given rest unto his people Israel, according to all that he promised: there hath not failed one word of all his good promise, which he promised by the hand of Moses his servant.	“Blessed be the LORD, who has given rest to His people Israel according to all that He promised. Not one word has failed of all the good promises He made through His servant Moses.
1KI	8	57	우리 하나님 여호와께서 우리 열조와 함께 계시던 것 같이 우리와 함께 계시옵고 우리를 떠나지 마옵시며 버리지 마옵시고	The Lord our God be with us, as he was with our fathers: let him not leave us, nor forsake us:	May the LORD our God be with us, as He was with our fathers. May He never leave us nor forsake us.
1KI	8	58	우리의 마음을 자기에게로 향하여 그 모든 길로 행하게 하옵시며 우리 열조에게 명하신 계명과 법도와 율례를 지키게 하시기를 원하오며	That he may incline our hearts unto him, to walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and his statutes, and his judgments, which he commanded our fathers.	May He incline our hearts to Himself, to walk in all His ways and to keep the commandments and statutes and ordinances He commanded our fathers.
1KI	8	59	여호와의 앞에서 나의 간구한 이 말씀을 주야로 우리 하나님 여호와께 가까이 있게 하옵시고 또 주의 종의 일과 주의 백성 이스라엘의 일을 날마다 당하는 대로 돌아보사	And let these my words, wherewith I have made supplication before the Lord, be nigh unto the Lord our God day and night, that he maintain the cause of his servant, and the cause of his people Israel at all times, as the matter shall require:	And may these words with which I have made my petition before the LORD be near to the LORD our God day and night, so that He may uphold the cause of His servant and of His people Israel as each day requires,
1KI	8	60	이에 세상 만민에게 여호와께서만 하나님이시고 그 외에는 없는 줄을 알게 하시기를 원하노라	That all the people of the earth may know that the Lord is God, and that there is none else.	so that all the peoples of the earth may know that the LORD is God. There is no other!
1KI	8	61	그런즉 너희 마음을 우리 하나님 여호와와 화합하여 완전케 하여 오늘날과 같이 그 법도를 행하며 그 계명을 지킬지어다	Let your heart therefore be perfect with the Lord our God, to walk in his statutes, and to keep his commandments, as at this day.	So let your heart be fully devoted to the LORD our God, as it is this day, to walk in His statutes and to keep His commandments.”
1KI	8	62	이에 왕과 왕과 함께 한 이스라엘이 다 여호와 앞에 희생을 드리니라	And the king, and all Israel with him, offered sacrifice before the Lord.	Then the king and all Israel with him offered sacrifices before the LORD.
1KI	8	63	솔로몬이 화목제의 희생을 드렸으니 곧 여호와께 드린 소가 이만 이천이요 양이 십이만이라 이와 같이 왕과 모든 이스라엘 자손이 여호와의 전의 낙성식을 행하였는데	And Solomon offered a sacrifice of peace offerings, which he offered unto the Lord, two and twenty thousand oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep. So the king and all the children of Israel dedicated the house of the Lord.	And Solomon offered as peace offerings to the LORD 22,000 oxen and 120,000 sheep. So the king and all the Israelites dedicated the house of the LORD.
1KI	8	64	그 날에 왕이 여호와의 전 앞뜰 가운데를 거룩히 구별하고 거기서 번제와 소제와 감사제의 기름을 드렸으니 이는 여호와의 앞 놋단이 작으므로 번제물과 소제물과 화목제의 기름을 다 용납할 수 없음이라	The same day did the king hallow the middle of the court that was before the house of the Lord: for there he offered burnt offerings, and meat offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings: because the brasen altar that was before the Lord was too little to receive the burnt offerings, and meat offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings.	On that same day the king consecrated the middle of the courtyard in front of the house of the LORD, and there he offered the burnt offerings, the grain offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings, since the bronze altar before the LORD was too small to contain all these offerings.
1KI	8	65	그 때에 솔로몬이 칠 일 칠 일 합 십사 일을 우리 하나님 여호와 앞에서 절기로 지켰는데 하맛 어귀에서부터 애굽 하수까지의 온 이스라엘의 큰 회중이 모여 저와 함께 하였더니	And at that time Solomon held a feast, and all Israel with him, a great congregation, from the entering in of Hamath unto the river of Egypt, before the Lord our God, seven days and seven days, even fourteen days.	So at that time Solomon and all Israel with him—a great assembly of people from Lebo-hamath to the Brook of Egypt—kept the feast before the LORD our God for seven days and seven more days—fourteen days in all.
1KI	8	66	제팔일에 솔로몬이 백성을 돌려 보내매 백성이 왕을 위하어 축복하고 자기 장막으로 돌아가는데 여호와께서 그 종 다윗과 그 백성 이스라엘에게 베푸신 모든 은혜를 인하여 기뻐하며 마음에 즐거워하였더라	On the eighth day he sent the people away: and they blessed the king, and went unto their tents joyful and glad of heart for all the goodness that the Lord had done for David his servant, and for Israel his people.	On the fifteenth day Solomon sent the people away. So they blessed the king and went home, joyful and glad in heart for all the good things that the LORD had done for His servant David and for His people Israel.
1KI	9	1	솔로몬이 여호와의 전과 왕궁 건축하기를 마치며 자기의 무릇 이루기를 원하던 일이 마친 때에	And it came to pass, when Solomon had finished the building of the house of the Lord, and the king’s house, and all Solomon’s desire which he was pleased to do,	Now when Solomon had finished building the house of the LORD and the royal palace, and had achieved all that he had desired to do,
1KI	9	2	여호와께서 전에 기브온에서 나타나심 같이 다시 솔로몬에게 나타나사	That the Lord appeared to Solomon the second time, as he had appeared unto him at Gibeon.	the LORD appeared to him a second time, as He had appeared to him at Gibeon.
1KI	9	3	저에게 이르시되 네가 내 앞에서 기도하며 간구함을 내가 들었은즉 내가 너의 건축한 이 전을 거룩하게 구별하여 나의 이름을 영영히 그곳에 두며 나의 눈과 나의 마음이 항상 거기 있으리니	And the Lord said unto him, I have heard thy prayer and thy supplication, that thou hast made before me: I have hallowed this house, which thou hast built, to put my name there for ever; and mine eyes and mine heart shall be there perpetually.	And the LORD said to him: “I have heard your prayer and petition before Me. I have consecrated this temple you have built by putting My Name there forever; My eyes and My heart will be there for all time.
1KI	9	4	네가 만일 네 아비 다윗의 행함 같이 마음을 온전히 하고 바르게 하여 내 앞에서 행하며 내가 네게 명한 대로 온갖 것을 순종하여 나의 법도와 율례를 지키면	And if thou wilt walk before me, as David thy father walked, in integrity of heart, and in uprightness, to do according to all that I have commanded thee, and wilt keep my statutes and my judgments:	And as for you, if you walk before Me as your father David walked, with a heart of integrity and uprightness, doing all I have commanded you, and if you keep My statutes and ordinances,
1KI	9	5	내가 네 아비 다윗에게 허하여 이르기를 이스라엘 위에 오를 사람이 네게서 끊어지지 아니하리라 한 대로 너의 이스라엘의 왕위를 영원히 견고하게 하려니와	Then I will establish the throne of thy kingdom upon Israel for ever, as I promised to David thy father, saying, There shall not fail thee a man upon the throne of Israel.	then I will establish your royal throne over Israel forever, as I promised your father David when I said, ‘You will never fail to have a man on the throne of Israel.’
1KI	9	6	만일 너희나 너희 자손이 아주 돌이켜 나를 좇지 아니하며 내가 너희 앞에 둔 나의 계명과 법도를 지키지 아니하고 가서 다른 신을 섬겨 그것을 숭배하면	But if ye shall at all turn from following me, ye or your children, and will not keep my commandments and my statutes which I have set before you, but go and serve other gods, and worship them:	But if indeed you or your sons turn away from following Me and do not keep the commandments and statutes I have set before you, and if you go off to serve and worship other gods,
1KI	9	7	내가 이스라엘을 나의 준 땅에서 끊어 버릴 것이요 내 이름을 위하여 내가 거룩하게 구별한 이 전이라도 내 앞에서 던져 버리리니 이스라엘은 모든 민족 가운데 속담거리와 이야기거리가 될 것이며	Then will I cut off Israel out of the land which I have given them; and this house, which I have hallowed for my name, will I cast out of my sight; and Israel shall be a proverb and a byword among all people:	then I will cut off Israel from the land that I have given them, and I will banish from My presence this temple I have sanctified for My Name. Then Israel will become an object of scorn and ridicule among all peoples.
1KI	9	8	이 전이 높을지라도 무릇 그리로 지나가는 자가 놀라며 비웃어 가로되 여호와께서 무슨 까닭으로 이 땅과 이 전에 이같이 행하셨는고 하면	And at this house, which is high, every one that passeth by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss; and they shall say, Why hath the Lord done thus unto this land, and to this house?	And when this temple has become a heap of rubble, all who pass by it will be appalled and will hiss and say, ‘Why has the LORD done such a thing to this land and to this temple?’
1KI	9	9	대답하기를 저희가 자기 열조를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내신 자기 하나님 여호와를 버리고 다른 신에게 부종하여 그를 숭배하여 섬기므로 여호와께서 이 모든 재앙을 저희에게 내리심이라 하리라 하셨더라	And they shall answer, Because they forsook the Lord their God, who brought forth their fathers out of the land of Egypt, and have taken hold upon other gods, and have worshipped them, and served them: therefore hath the Lord brought upon them all this evil.	And others will answer, ‘Because they have forsaken the LORD their God who brought their fathers out of the land of Egypt, and have embraced other gods, worshiping and serving them—because of this, the LORD has brought all this disaster upon them.’”
1KI	9	10	솔로몬이 두 집 곧 여호와의 전과 왕궁을 이십 년 만에 건축하기를 마치고	And it came to pass at the end of twenty years, when Solomon had built the two houses, the house of the Lord, and the king’s house,	Now at the end of the twenty years during which Solomon built these two houses, the house of the LORD and the royal palace,
1KI	9	11	갈릴리 땅의 성읍 이십을 히람에게 주었으니 이는 두로 왕 히람이 솔로몬에게 그 온갖 소원대로 백향목과 잣나무와 금을 지공하였음이라	(Now Hiram the king of Tyre had furnished Solomon with cedar trees and fir trees, and with gold, according to all his desire,) that then king Solomon gave Hiram twenty cities in the land of Galilee.	King Solomon gave twenty towns in the land of Galilee to Hiram king of Tyre, who had supplied him with cedar and cypress logs and gold for his every desire.
1KI	9	12	히람이 두로에서 와서 솔로몬이 자기에게 준 성읍들을 보고 눈에 들지 아니하여	And Hiram came out from Tyre to see the cities which Solomon had given him; and they pleased him not.	So Hiram went out from Tyre to inspect the towns that Solomon had given him, but he was not pleased with them.
1KI	9	13	이르기를 나의 형이여 내게 준 이 성읍들이 이러하뇨 하고 이름하여 가불 땅이라 하였더니 그 이름이 오늘까지 있으니라	And he said, What cities are these which thou hast given me, my brother? And he called them the land of Cabul unto this day.	“What are these towns you have given me, my brother?” asked Hiram, and he called them the Land of Cabul, as they are called to this day.
1KI	9	14	히람이 금 일백이십 달란트를 왕에게 보내었더라	And Hiram sent to the king sixscore talents of gold.	And Hiram had sent the king 120 talents of gold.
1KI	9	15	솔로몬 왕이 역군을 일으킨 까닭은 여호와의 전과 자기 궁과 밀로와 예루살렘 성과 하솔과 므깃도와 게셀을 건축하려 하였음이라	And this is the reason of the levy which king Solomon raised; for to build the house of the Lord, and his own house, and Millo, and the wall of Jerusalem, and Hazor, and Megiddo, and Gezer.	This is the account of the forced labor that King Solomon imposed to build the house of the LORD, his own palace, the supporting terraces, and the wall of Jerusalem, as well as Hazor, Megiddo, and Gezer.
1KI	9	16	전에 애굽 왕 바로가 올라와서 게셀을 탈취하여 불사르고 그 성에 사는 가나안 사람을 죽이고 그 성읍을 자기 딸 솔로몬의 아내에게 예물로 주었더니	For Pharaoh king of Egypt had gone up, and taken Gezer, and burnt it with fire, and slain the Canaanites that dwelt in the city, and given it for a present unto his daughter, Solomon’s wife.	Pharaoh king of Egypt had attacked and captured Gezer. He had set it on fire, killed the Canaanites who lived in the city, and given it as a dowry to his daughter, Solomon’s wife.
1KI	9	17	솔로몬이 게셀과 아래 벧호론을 건축하고	And Solomon built Gezer, and Beth–horon the nether,	So Solomon rebuilt Gezer, Lower Beth-horon,
1KI	9	18	또 바알랏과 그 땅의 들에 있는 다드몰과	And Baalath, and Tadmor in the wilderness, in the land,	Baalath, and Tamar in the Wilderness of Judah,
1KI	9	19	자기에게 있는 모든 국고성과 병거성들과 마병의 성들을 건축하고 솔로몬이 또 예루살렘과 레바논과 그 다스리는 온 땅에 건축하고자 하던 것을 다 건축하였는데	And all the cities of store that Solomon had, and cities for his chariots, and cities for his horsemen, and that which Solomon desired to build in Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and in all the land of his dominion.	as well as all the store cities that Solomon had for his chariots and horses—whatever he desired to build in Jerusalem, Lebanon, and throughout the land of his dominion.
1KI	9	20	무릇 이스라엘 자손이 아닌 아모리 사람과 헷 사람과 브리스 사람과 히위 사람과 여부스 사람의 남아있는 자	And all the people that were left of the Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites, which were not of the children of Israel,	As for all the people who remained of the Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites (the people who were not Israelites)—
1KI	9	21	곧 이스라엘 자손이 다 멸하지 못하므로 그 땅에 남아 있는 그 자손들을 솔로몬이 노예로 역군을 삼아 오늘까지 이르렀으되	Their children that were left after them in the land, whom the children of Israel also were not able utterly to destroy, upon those did Solomon levy a tribute of bondservice unto this day.	their descendants who remained in the land, those whom the Israelites were unable to devote to destruction—Solomon conscripted these people to be forced laborers, as they are to this day.
1KI	9	22	오직 이스라엘 자손은 솔로몬이 노예를 삼지 아니하였으니 저희는 군사와 그 신복과 방백과 대장이며 병거와 마병의 장관이 됨이었더라	But of the children of Israel did Solomon make no bondmen: but they were men of war, and his servants, and his princes, and his captains, and rulers of his chariots, and his horsemen.	But Solomon did not consign any of the Israelites to slavery, because they were his men of war, his servants, his officers, his captains, and the commanders of his chariots and cavalry.
1KI	9	23	솔로몬에게 역사를 감독하는 두목 오백오십 인이 있어 역사하는 백성을 다스렸더라	These were the chief of the officers that were over Solomon’s work, five hundred and fifty, which bare rule over the people that wrought in the work.	They were also the chief officers over Solomon’s projects: 550 supervisors over the people who did the work.
1KI	9	24	바로의 딸이 다윗 성에서부터 올라와 솔로몬이 저를 위하여 건축한 궁에 이를 때에 솔로몬이 밀로를 건축하였더라	But Pharaoh’s daughter came up out of the city of David unto her house which Solomon had built for her: then did he build Millo.	As soon as Pharaoh’s daughter had come up from the City of David to the palace that Solomon had built for her, he built the supporting terraces.
1KI	9	25	솔로몬이 여호와를 위하여 쌓은 단 위에 해마다 세 번씩 번제와 감사제를 드리고 또 여호와 앞에 있는 단에 분향하니라 이에 전 역사가 마치니라	And three times in a year did Solomon offer burnt offerings and peace offerings upon the altar which he built unto the Lord, and he burnt incense upon the altar that was before the Lord. So he finished the house.	Three times a year Solomon offered burnt offerings and peace offerings on the altar he had built for the LORD, burning incense with them before the LORD. So he completed the temple.
1KI	9	26	솔로몬 왕이 에돔 땅 홍해 물가 엘롯 근처 에시온게벨에서 배들을 지은지라	And king Solomon made a navy of ships in Ezion–geber, which is beside Eloth, on the shore of the Red sea, in the land of Edom.	King Solomon also assembled a fleet of ships at Ezion-geber, which is near Eloth in Edom, on the shore of the Red Sea.
1KI	9	27	히람이 자기 종 곧 바다에 익숙한 사공들을 솔로몬의 종과 함께 그 배로 보내매	And Hiram sent in the navy his servants, shipmen that had knowledge of the sea, with the servants of Solomon.	And Hiram sent his servants, men who knew the sea, to serve in the fleet with Solomon’s servants.
1KI	9	28	저희가 오빌에 이르러 거기서 금 사백이십 달란트를 얻고 솔로몬 왕에게로 가져왔더라	And they came to Ophir, and fetched from thence gold, four hundred and twenty talents, and brought it to king Solomon.	They sailed to Ophir and imported gold from there—420 talents—and delivered it to Solomon.
1KI	10	1	스바 여왕이 여호와의 이름으로 말미암은 솔로몬의 명예를 듣고 와서 어려운 문제로 저를 시험코자 하여	And when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon concerning the name of the Lord, she came to prove him with hard questions.	Now when the queen of Sheba heard about the fame of Solomon concerning the name of the LORD, she came to test him with difficult questions.
1KI	10	2	예루살렘에 이르니 수원이 심히 많고 향품과 심히 많은 금과 보석을 약대에 실었더라 저가 솔로몬에게 나아와 자기 마음에 있는 것을 다 말하매	And she came to Jerusalem with a very great train, with camels that bare spices, and very much gold, and precious stones: and when she was come to Solomon, she communed with him of all that was in her heart.	She arrived in Jerusalem with a very large caravan—with camels bearing spices, gold in great abundance, and precious stones. So she came to Solomon and spoke to him all that was on her mind.
1KI	10	3	솔로몬이 그 묻는 말을 다 대답하였으니 왕이 은미하여 대답지 못한 것이 없었더라	And Solomon told her all her questions: there was not any thing hid from the king, which he told her not.	And Solomon answered all her questions; nothing was too difficult for the king to explain.
1KI	10	4	스바 여왕이 솔로몬의 모든 지혜와 그 건축한 궁과	And when the queen of Sheba had seen all Solomon’s wisdom, and the house that he had built,	When the queen of Sheba saw all the wisdom of Solomon, the palace he had built,
1KI	10	5	그 상의 식물과 그 신복들의 좌석과 그 신하들의 시립한 것과 그들의 공복과 술 관원들과 여호와의 전에 올라가는 층계를 보고 정신이 현황하여	And the meat of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and their apparel, and his cupbearers, and his ascent by which he went up unto the house of the Lord; there was no more spirit in her.	the food at his table, the seating of his servants, the service and attire of his attendants and cupbearers, and the burnt offerings he presented at the house of the LORD, it took her breath away.
1KI	10	6	왕께 고하되 내가 내 나라에서 당신의 행위와 당신의 지혜에 대하여 들은 소문이 진실하도다	And she said to the king, It was a true report that I heard in mine own land of thy acts and of thy wisdom.	She said to the king, “The report I heard in my own country about your words and wisdom is true.
1KI	10	7	내가 그 말들을 믿지 아니하였더니 이제 와서 목도한즉 내게 말한 것은 절반도 못되니 당신의 지혜와 복이 나의 들은 소문에 지나도다	Howbeit I believed not the words, until I came, and mine eyes had seen it: and, behold, the half was not told me: thy wisdom and prosperity exceedeth the fame which I heard.	But I did not believe these things until I came and saw with my own eyes. Indeed, not even half was told to me. Your wisdom and prosperity have far exceeded the report I heard.
1KI	10	8	복되도다 당신의 사람들이여 복되도다 당신의 이 신복들이여 항상 당신의 앞에 서서 당신의 지혜를 들음이로다	Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants, which stand continually before thee, and that hear thy wisdom.	How blessed are your men! How blessed are these servants of yours who stand continually before you and hear your wisdom!
1KI	10	9	당신의 하나님 여호와를 송축할지로다 여호와께서 당신을 기뻐하사 이스라엘 위에 올리셨고 여호와께서 영영히 이스라엘을 사랑하시므로 당신을 세워 왕을 삼아 공과 의를 행하게 하셨도다 하고	Blessed be the Lord thy God, which delighted in thee, to set thee on the throne of Israel: because the Lord loved Israel for ever, therefore made he thee king, to do judgment and justice.	Blessed be the LORD your God, who has delighted in you to set you on the throne of Israel. Because of the LORD’s eternal love for Israel, He has made you king to carry out justice and righteousness.”
1KI	10	10	이에 저가 금 일백이십 달란트와 심히 많은 향품과 보석을 왕께 드렸으니 스바 여왕이 솔로몬 왕께 드린 것처럼 많은 향품이 다시 오지 아니하였더라	And she gave the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold, and of spices very great store, and precious stones: there came no more such abundance of spices as these which the queen of Sheba gave to king Solomon.	Then she gave the king 120 talents of gold, a great quantity of spices, and precious stones. Never again was such an abundance of spices brought in as those the queen of Sheba gave to King Solomon.
1KI	10	11	(오빌에서부터 금을 실어 온 히람의 배들이 오빌에서 많은 백단목과 보석을 운반하여 오매	And the navy also of Hiram, that brought gold from Ophir, brought in from Ophir great plenty of almug trees, and precious stones.	(The fleet of Hiram that brought gold from Ophir also brought from Ophir a great cargo of almug wood and precious stones.
1KI	10	12	왕이 백단목으로 여호와의 전과 왕궁의 난간을 만들고 또 노래하는 자를 위하여 수금과 비파를 만들었으니 이 같은 백단목은 전에도 온 일이 없었고 오늘까지도 보지 못하였더라)	And the king made of the almug trees pillars for the house of the Lord, and for the king’s house, harps also and psalteries for singers: there came no such almug trees, nor were seen unto this day.	The king made the almug wood into steps for the house of the LORD and for the king’s palace, and into lyres and harps for the singers. Never before had such almug wood been brought in, nor has such been seen to this day.)
1KI	10	13	솔로몬 왕이 왕의 규례대로 스바 여왕에게 물건을 준 외에 또 저의 소원대로 무릇 구하는 것을 주니 이에 저가 그 신복들로 더불어 본국으로 돌아갔더라	And king Solomon gave unto the queen of Sheba all her desire, whatsoever she asked, beside that which Solomon gave her of his royal bounty. So she turned and went to her own country, she and her servants.	King Solomon gave the queen of Sheba all she desired—whatever she asked—besides what he had given her out of his royal bounty. Then she left and returned to her own country, along with her servants.
1KI	10	14	솔로몬의 세입금의 중수가 육백육십육 금 달란트요	Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six hundred threescore and six talents of gold,	The weight of gold that came to Solomon each year was 666 talents,
1KI	10	15	그 외에 또 상고와 무역하는 객상과 아라비아 왕들과 나라의 방백들에게서도 가져온지라	Beside that he had of the merchantmen, and of the traffick of the spice merchants, and of all the kings of Arabia, and of the governors of the country.	not including the revenue from the merchants, traders, and all the Arabian kings and governors of the land.
1KI	10	16	솔로몬 왕이 쳐서 늘인 금으로 큰 방패 이백을 만들었으니 매 방패에 든 금이 육백 세겔이며	And king Solomon made two hundred targets of beaten gold: six hundred shekels of gold went to one target.	King Solomon made two hundred large shields of hammered gold; six hundred shekels of gold went into each shield.
1KI	10	17	또 쳐서 늘인 금으로 작은 방패 삼백을 만들었으니 매 방패에 든 금이 삼 마네라 왕이 이것들을 레바논 나무 궁에 두었더라	And he made three hundred shields of beaten gold; three pound of gold went to one shield: and the king put them in the house of the forest of Lebanon.	He also made three hundred small shields of hammered gold; three minas of gold went into each shield. And the king put them in the House of the Forest of Lebanon.
1KI	10	18	왕이 또 상아로 큰 보좌를 만들고 정금으로 입혔으니	Moreover the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it with the best gold.	Additionally, the king made a great throne of ivory and overlaid it with pure gold.
1KI	10	19	그 보좌에는 여섯 층계가 있고 보좌 뒤에 둥근 머리가 있고 앉는 자리 양편에는 팔걸이가 있고 팔걸이 곁에는 사자가 하나씩 섰으며	The throne had six steps, and the top of the throne was round behind: and there were stays on either side on the place of the seat, and two lions stood beside the stays.	The throne had six steps, and its back had a rounded top. There were armrests on both sides of the seat, with a lion standing beside each armrest.
1KI	10	20	또 열두 사자가 있어 그 여섯 층계 좌우편에 섰으니 아무 나라에도 이같이 만든 것이 없었더라	And twelve lions stood there on the one side and on the other upon the six steps: there was not the like made in any kingdom.	Twelve lions stood on the six steps, one at either end of each step. Nothing like this had ever been made for any kingdom.
1KI	10	21	솔로몬 왕의 마시는 그릇은 다 금이요 레바논 나무 궁의 그릇들도 다 정금이라 은 기물이 없으니 솔로몬의 시대에 은을 귀히 여기지 아니함은	And all king Solomon’s drinking vessels were of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were of pure gold; none were of silver: it was nothing accounted of in the days of Solomon.	All King Solomon’s drinking cups were gold, and all the utensils of the House of the Forest of Lebanon were pure gold. There was no silver, because it was accounted as nothing in the days of Solomon.
1KI	10	22	왕이 바다에 다시스 배들을 두어 히람의 배와 함께 있게 하고 그 다시스 배로 삼 년에 일차씩 금과 은과 상아와 잔나비와 공작을 실어왔음이더라	For the king had at sea a navy of Tharshish with the navy of Hiram: once in three years came the navy of Tharshish, bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.	For the king had the ships of Tarshish at sea with Hiram’s fleet, and once every three years the ships of Tarshish would arrive bearing gold, silver, ivory, apes, and peacocks.
1KI	10	23	솔로몬 왕의 재산과 지혜가 천하 열왕보다 큰지라	So king Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth for riches and for wisdom.	So King Solomon surpassed all the kings of the earth in riches and wisdom.
1KI	10	24	천하가 다 하나님께서 솔로몬의 마음에 주신 지혜를 들으며 그 얼굴을 보기 원하여	And all the earth sought to Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which God had put in his heart.	The whole world sought an audience with Solomon to hear the wisdom that God had put in his heart.
1KI	10	25	각기 예물을 가지고 왔으니 곧 은 그릇과 금 그릇과 의복과 갑옷과 향품과 말과 노새라 해마다 정한 수가 있었더라	And they brought every man his present, vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and garments, and armour, and spices, horses, and mules, a rate year by year.	Year after year, each visitor would bring his tribute: articles of silver and gold, clothing, weapons, spices, horses, and mules.
1KI	10	26	솔로몬이 병거와 마병을 모으매 병거가 일천사백이요 마병이 일만 이천이라 병거성에도 두고 예루살렘 왕에게도 두었으며	And Solomon gathered together chariots and horsemen: and he had a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, whom he bestowed in the cities for chariots, and with the king at Jerusalem.	Solomon accumulated 1,400 chariots and 12,000 horses, which he stationed in the chariot cities and also with him in Jerusalem.
1KI	10	27	왕이 예루살렘에서 은을 돌 같이 흔하게 하고 백향목을 평지의 뽕나무 같이 많게 하였더라	And the king made silver to be in Jerusalem as stones, and cedars made he to be as the sycomore trees that are in the vale, for abundance.	The king made silver as common in Jerusalem as stones, and cedar as abundant as sycamore in the foothills.
1KI	10	28	솔로몬의 말들은 애굽에서 내어왔으니 왕의 상고들이 떼로 정가하여 산 것이며	And Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt, and linen yarn: the king’s merchants received the linen yarn at a price.	Solomon’s horses were imported from Egypt and Kue; the royal merchants purchased them from Kue.
1KI	10	29	애굽에서 내어 올린 병거는 하나에 은 육백 세겔이요 말은 일백오십 세겔이라 이와 같이 헷 사람의 모든 왕과 아람 왕들을 위하여도 그 손으로 내어왔더라	And a chariot came up and went out of Egypt for six hundred shekels of silver, and an horse for an hundred and fifty: and so for all the kings of the Hittites, and for the kings of Syria, did they bring them out by their means.	A chariot could be imported from Egypt for six hundred shekels of silver, and a horse for a hundred and fifty. Likewise, they exported them to all the kings of the Hittites and to the kings of Aram.
1KI	11	1	솔로몬 왕이 바로의 딸 외에 이방의 많은 여인을 사랑하였으니 곧 모압과 암몬과 에돔과 시돈과 헷 여인이라	But king Solomon loved many strange women, together with the daughter of Pharaoh, women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Zidonians, and Hittites;	King Solomon, however, loved many foreign women along with the daughter of Pharaoh—women of Moab, Ammon, Edom, and Sidon, as well as Hittite women.
1KI	11	2	여호와께서 일찍이 이 여러 국민에게 대하여 이스라엘 자손에게 말씀하시기를 너희는 저희와 서로 통하지 말며 저희도 너희와 서로 통하게 말라 저희가 정녕코 너희의 마음을 돌이켜 저희의 신들을 좇게 하리라 하셨으나 솔로몬이 저희를 연애하였더라	Of the nations concerning which the Lord said unto the children of Israel, Ye shall not go in to them, neither shall they come in unto you: for surely they will turn away your heart after their gods: Solomon clave unto these in love.	These women were from the nations about which the LORD had told the Israelites, “You must not intermarry with them, for surely they will turn your hearts after their gods.” Yet Solomon clung to these women in love.
1KI	11	3	왕은 후비가 칠백 인이요 빈장이 삼백 인이라 왕비들이 왕의 마음을 돌이켰더라	And he had seven hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred concubines: and his wives turned away his heart.	He had seven hundred wives of royal birth and three hundred concubines—and his wives turned his heart away.
1KI	11	4	솔로몬의 나이 늙을 때에 왕비들이 그 마음을 돌이켜 다른 신들을 좇게 하였으므로 왕의 마음이 그 부친 다윗의 마음과 같지 아니하여 그 하나님 여호와 앞에 온전치 못하였으니	For it came to pass, when Solomon was old, that his wives turned away his heart after other gods: and his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, as was the heart of David his father.	For when Solomon grew old, his wives turned his heart after other gods, and he was not wholeheartedly devoted to the LORD his God, as his father David had been.
1KI	11	5	이는 시돈 사람의 여신 아스다롯을 좇고 암몬 사람의 가증한 밀곰을 좇음이라	For Solomon went after Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians, and after Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites.	Solomon followed Ashtoreth the goddess of the Sidonians and Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites.
1KI	11	6	솔로몬이 여호와의 눈앞에서 악을 행하여 그 부친 다윗이 여호와를 온전히 좇음 같이 좇지 아니하고	And Solomon did evil in the sight of the Lord, and went not fully after the Lord, as did David his father.	So Solomon did evil in the sight of the LORD; unlike his father David, he did not follow the LORD completely.
1KI	11	7	모압의 가증한 그모스를 위하여 예루살렘 앞 산에 산당을 지었고 또 암몬 자손의 가증한 몰록을 위하여 그와 같이 하였으며	Then did Solomon build an high place for Chemosh, the abomination of Moab, in the hill that is before Jerusalem, and for Molech, the abomination of the children of Ammon.	At that time on a hill east of Jerusalem, Solomon built a high place for Chemosh the abomination of Moab and for Molech the abomination of the Ammonites.
1KI	11	8	저가 또 이족 후비들을 위하여 다 그와 같이 한지라 저희가 자기의 신들에게 분향하며 제사하였더라	And likewise did he for all his strange wives, which burnt incense and sacrificed unto their gods.	He did the same for all his foreign wives, who burned incense and sacrificed to their gods.
1KI	11	9	솔로몬이 마음을 돌이켜 이스라엘 하나님 여호와를 떠나므로 여호와께서 저에게 진노하시니라 여호와께서 일찍이 두 번이나 저에게 나타나시고	And the Lord was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel, which had appeared unto him twice,	Now the LORD grew angry with Solomon, because his heart had turned away from the LORD, the God of Israel, who had appeared to him twice.
1KI	11	10	이 일에 대하여 명하사 다른 신을 좇지 말라 하셨으나 저가 여호와의 명령을 지키지 않았으므로	And had commanded him concerning this thing, that he should not go after other gods: but he kept not that which the Lord commanded.	Although He had warned Solomon explicitly not to follow other gods, Solomon did not keep the LORD’s command.
1KI	11	11	여호와께서 솔로몬에게 말씀하시되 네게 이러한 일이 있었고 또 네가 나의 언약과 내가 네게 명한 법도를 지키지 아니하였으니 내가 결단코 이 나라를 네게서 빼앗아 네 신복에게 주리라	Wherefore the Lord said unto Solomon, Forasmuch as this is done of thee, and thou hast not kept my covenant and my statutes, which I have commanded thee, I will surely rend the kingdom from thee, and will give it to thy servant.	Then the LORD said to Solomon, “Because you have done this and have not kept My covenant and My statutes, which I have commanded you, I will tear the kingdom away from you and give it to your servant.
1KI	11	12	그러나 네 아비 다윗을 위하여 네 세대에는 이 일을 행치 아니하고 네 아들의 손에서 빼앗으려니와	Notwithstanding in thy days I will not do it for David thy father’s sake: but I will rend it out of the hand of thy son.	Nevertheless, for the sake of your father David, I will not do it during your lifetime; I will tear it out of the hand of your son.
1KI	11	13	오직 내가 이 나라를 다 빼앗지 아니하고 나의 종 다윗과 나의 뺀 예루살렘을 위하여 한 지파를 네 아들에게 주리라 하셨더라	Howbeit I will not rend away all the kingdom; but will give one tribe to thy son for David my servant’s sake, and for Jerusalem’s sake which I have chosen.	Yet I will not tear the whole kingdom away from him. I will give one tribe to your son for the sake of My servant David and for the sake of Jerusalem, which I have chosen.”
1KI	11	14	여호와께서 에돔 사람 하닷을 일으켜 솔로몬의 대적이 되게 하시니 저는 왕의 자손으로서 에돔에 거하였더라	And the Lord stirred up an adversary unto Solomon, Hadad the Edomite: he was of the king’s seed in Edom.	Then the LORD raised up against Solomon an adversary, Hadad the Edomite, from the royal line of Edom.
1KI	11	15	전에 다윗이 에돔에 있을 때에 군대 장관 요압이 가서 죽임을 당한 자들을 장사하고 에돔의 남자를 다 쳐서 죽였는데	For it came to pass, when David was in Edom, and Joab the captain of the host was gone up to bury the slain, after he had smitten every male in Edom;	Earlier, when David was in Edom, Joab the commander of the army had gone to bury the dead and had struck down every male in Edom.
1KI	11	16	요압은 에돔의 남자를 다 없이 하기까지 이스라엘 무리와 함께 여섯 달을 그곳에 유하였었더라	(For six months did Joab remain there with all Israel, until he had cut off every male in Edom:)	Joab and all Israel had stayed there six months, until he had killed every male in Edom.
1KI	11	17	그 때에 하닷은 작은 아이라 그 아비의 신복 중 두어 에돔 사람과 함께 도망하여 애굽으로 가려하여	That Hadad fled, he and certain Edomites of his father’s servants with him, to go into Egypt; Hadad being yet a little child.	But Hadad, still just a young boy, had fled to Egypt, along with some Edomites who were servants of his father.
1KI	11	18	미디안에서 발행하여 바란에 이르고 거기서 사람을 데리고 애굽으로 가서 애굽 왕 바로에게 나아가매 바로가 저에게 집을 주고 먹을 양식을 정하며 또 토지를 주었더라	And they arose out of Midian, and came to Paran: and they took men with them out of Paran, and they came to Egypt, unto Pharaoh king of Egypt; which gave him an house, and appointed him victuals, and gave him land.	Hadad and his men set out from Midian and went to Paran. They took men from Paran with them and went to Egypt, to Pharaoh king of Egypt, who gave Hadad a house and land and provided him with food.
1KI	11	19	하닷이 바로의 눈 앞에 크게 은총을 얻었으므로 바로가 자기의 처제 곧 왕비 다브네스의 아우로 저의 아내를 삼으매	And Hadad found great favour in the sight of Pharaoh, so that he gave him to wife the sister of his own wife, the sister of Tahpenes the queen.	There Hadad found such great favor in the sight of Pharaoh that he gave to him in marriage the sister of Queen Tahpenes, his own wife.
1KI	11	20	다브네스의 아우가 그로 말미암아 아들 그누밧을 낳았더니 다브네스가 그 아이를 바로의 궁중에서 젖을 떼게 하매 그누밧이 바로의 궁에서 바로의 아들 가운데 있었더라	And the sister of Tahpenes bare him Genubath his son, whom Tahpenes weaned in Pharaoh’s house: and Genubath was in Pharaoh’s household among the sons of Pharaoh.	And the sister of Tahpenes bore Hadad a son named Genubath. Tahpenes herself weaned him in Pharaoh’s palace, and Genubath lived there among the sons of Pharaoh.
1KI	11	21	하닷이 애굽에 있어서 다윗이 그 열조와 함께 잔 것과 군대장관 요압의 죽은 것을 듣고 바로에게 고하되 나를 보내어 내 고국으로 가게 하옵소서	And when Hadad heard in Egypt that David slept with his fathers, and that Joab the captain of the host was dead, Hadad said to Pharaoh, Let me depart, that I may go to mine own country.	When Hadad heard in Egypt that David had rested with his fathers and that Joab, the commander of the army, was dead, he said to Pharaoh, “Let me go, that I may return to my own country.”
1KI	11	22	바로가 저에게 이르되 네가 나와 함께 있어 무슨 부족함이 있기에 네 고국으로 가기를 구하느뇨 대답하되 없나이다 그러나 아무쪼록 나를 보내옵소서 하였더라	Then Pharaoh said unto him, But what hast thou lacked with me, that, behold, thou seekest to go to thine own country? And he answered, Nothing: howbeit let me go in any wise.	But Pharaoh asked him, “What have you lacked here with me that you suddenly want to go back to your own country?” “Nothing,” Hadad replied, “but please let me go.”
1KI	11	23	하나님이 또 엘리아다의 아들 르손을 일으켜 솔로몬의 대적이 되게 하시니 저는 그 주인 소바 왕 하닷에셀에게서 도망한 자라	And God stirred him up another adversary, Rezon the son of Eliadah, which fled from his lord Hadadezer king of Zobah:	And God raised up against Solomon another adversary, Rezon the son of Eliada, who had fled from his master, Hadadezer king of Zobah,
1KI	11	24	다윗이 소바 사람을 죽일 때에 르손이 사람들을 모으고 그 떼의 괴수가 되며 다메섹으로 가서 웅거하고 거기서 왕이 되었더라	And he gathered men unto him, and became captain over a band, when David slew them of Zobah: and they went to Damascus, and dwelt therein, and reigned in Damascus.	and had gathered men to himself. When David killed the Zobaites, Rezon captained a band of raiders and went to Damascus, where they settled and gained control.
1KI	11	25	솔로몬의 일평생에 하닷의 끼친 환난 외에 르손이 수리아 왕이 되어 이스라엘을 대적하고 미워하였더라	And he was an adversary to Israel all the days of Solomon, beside the mischief that Hadad did: and he abhorred Israel, and reigned over Syria.	Rezon was Israel’s enemy throughout the days of Solomon, adding to the trouble caused by Hadad. So Rezon ruled over Aram with hostility toward Israel.
1KI	11	26	솔로몬의 신복 느밧의 아들 여로보암이 또한 손을 들어 왕을 대적하였으니 저는 에브라임 족속인 스레다 사람이요 그 어미의 이름은 스루아니 과부더라	And Jeroboam the son of Nebat, an Ephrathite of Zereda, Solomon’s servant, whose mother’s name was Zeruah, a widow woman, even he lifted up his hand against the king.	Now Jeroboam son of Nebat was an Ephraimite from Zeredah whose mother was a widow named Zeruah. Jeroboam was a servant of Solomon, but he rebelled against the king,
1KI	11	27	저가 손을 들어 왕을 대적하는 까닭은 이러하니라 솔로몬이 밀로를 건축하고 그 부친 다윗의 성의 무너진 것을 수축하였는데	And this was the cause that he lifted up his hand against the king: Solomon built Millo, and repaired the breaches of the city of David his father.	and this is the account of his rebellion against the king. Solomon had built the supporting terraces and repaired the gap in the wall of the city of his father David.
1KI	11	28	이 사람 여로보암은 큰 용사라 솔로몬이 이 소년의 부지런함을 보고 세워 요셉 족속의 역사를 감독하게 하였더니	And the man Jeroboam was a mighty man of valour: and Solomon seeing the young man that he was industrious, he made him ruler over all the charge of the house of Joseph.	Now Jeroboam was a mighty man of valor. So when Solomon noticed that the young man was industrious, he put him in charge of the whole labor force of the house of Joseph.
1KI	11	29	그 즈음에 여로보암이 예루살렘에서 나갈 때에 실로 사람 선지자 아히야가 길에서 저를 만나니 아히야가 새 의복을 입었고 그 두 사람만 들에 있었더라	And it came to pass at that time when Jeroboam went out of Jerusalem, that the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite found him in the way; and he had clad himself with a new garment; and they two were alone in the field:	During that time, the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite met Jeroboam on the road as he was going out of Jerusalem. Now Ahijah had wrapped himself in a new cloak, and the two of them were alone in the open field.
1KI	11	30	아히야가 그 입은 새 옷을 잡아 열두 조각에 찢고	And Ahijah caught the new garment that was on him, and rent it in twelve pieces:	And Ahijah took hold of the new cloak he was wearing, tore it into twelve pieces,
1KI	11	31	여로보암에게 이르되 너는 열 조각을 취하라 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 말씀이 내가 이 나라를 솔로몬의 손에서 찢어 빼앗아 열 지파를 네게 주고	And he said to Jeroboam, Take thee ten pieces: for thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, Behold, I will rend the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will give ten tribes to thee:	and said to Jeroboam, “Take ten pieces for yourself, for this is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: ‘Behold, I will tear the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and I will give you ten tribes.
1KI	11	32	오직 내 종 다윗을 위하고 이스라엘 모든 지파 중에서 뺀 성 예루살렘을 위하여 한 지파를 솔로몬에게 주리니	(But he shall have one tribe for my servant David’s sake, and for Jerusalem’s sake, the city which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel:)	But one tribe will remain for the sake of My servant David and for the sake of Jerusalem, the city I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel.
1KI	11	33	이는 저희가 나를 버리고 시돈 사람의 여신 아스다롯과 모압의 신 그모스와 암몬 자손의 신 밀곰을 숭배하며 그 아비 다윗의 행함같지 아니하여 내 길로 행치 아니하며 나 보기에 정직한 일과 나의 법도와 나의 율례를 행치 아니함이니라	Because that they have forsaken me, and have worshipped Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians, Chemosh the god of the Moabites, and Milcom the god of the children of Ammon, and have not walked in my ways, to do that which is right in mine eyes, and to keep my statutes and my judgments, as did David his father.	For they have forsaken Me to worship Ashtoreth the goddess of the Sidonians, Chemosh the god of the Moabites, and Milcom the god of the Ammonites. They have not walked in My ways, nor done what is right in My eyes, nor kept My statutes and judgments, as Solomon’s father David did.
1KI	11	34	그러나 내가 뺀 내 종 다윗이 내 명령과 내 법도를 지켰으므로 내가 저를 위하여 솔로몬의 생전에는 온 나라를 그 손에서 빼앗지 아니하고 주관하게 하려니와	Howbeit I will not take the whole kingdom out of his hand: but I will make him prince all the days of his life for David my servant’s sake, whom I chose, because he kept my commandments and my statutes:	Nevertheless, I will not take the whole kingdom out of Solomon’s hand, because I have made him ruler all the days of his life for the sake of David My servant, whom I chose because he kept My commandments and statutes.
1KI	11	35	내가 그 아들의 손에서 나라를 빼앗아 그 열 지파를 네게 줄 것이요	But I will take the kingdom out of his son’s hand, and will give it unto thee, even ten tribes.	But I will take ten tribes of the kingdom from the hand of his son and give them to you.
1KI	11	36	그 아들에게는 내가 한 지파를 주어서 내가 내 이름을 두고자 하여 택한 성 예루살렘에서 내 종 다윗에게 한 등불이 항상 내 앞에 있게 하리라	And unto his son will I give one tribe, that David my servant may have a light alway before me in Jerusalem, the city which I have chosen me to put my name there.	I will give one tribe to his son, so that My servant David will always have a lamp before Me in Jerusalem, the city where I chose to put My Name.
1KI	11	37	내가 너를 취하리니 너는 무릇 네 마음에 원하는 대로 다스려 이스라엘 위에 왕이 되되	And I will take thee, and thou shalt reign according to all that thy soul desireth, and shalt be king over Israel.	But as for you, I will take you, and you shall reign over all that your heart desires, and you will be king over Israel.
1KI	11	38	네가 만일 내가 명한 모든 일에 순종하고 내 길로 행하며 내 눈에 합당한 일을 하며 내 종 다윗의 행함 같이 내 율례와 명령을 지키면 내가 너와 함께 있어 내가 다윗을 위하여 세운 것 같이 너를 위하여 견고한 집을 세우고 이스라엘을 네게 주리라	And it shall be, if thou wilt hearken unto all that I command thee, and wilt walk in my ways, and do that is right in my sight, to keep my statutes and my commandments, as David my servant did; that I will be with thee, and build thee a sure house, as I built for David, and will give Israel unto thee.	If you listen to all that I command you, walk in My ways, and do what is right in My sight in order to keep My statutes and commandments as My servant David did, then I will be with you. I will build you a lasting dynasty just as I built for David, and I will give Israel to you.
1KI	11	39	내가 이로 인하여 다윗의 자손을 괴롭게 할 터이나 영원히 하지는 아니하리라 하셨느니라 한지라	And I will for this afflict the seed of David, but not for ever.	Because of this, I will humble David’s descendants—but not forever.’”
1KI	11	40	이러므로 솔로몬이 여로보암을 죽이려 하매 여로보암이 일어나 애굽으로 도망하여 애굽 왕 시삭에게 이르러 솔로몬의 죽기까지 애굽에 있으니라	Solomon sought therefore to kill Jeroboam. And Jeroboam arose, and fled into Egypt, unto Shishak king of Egypt, and was in Egypt until the death of Solomon.	Solomon therefore sought to kill Jeroboam. But Jeroboam arose and fled to Egypt, to Shishak king of Egypt, where he remained until the death of Solomon.
1KI	11	41	솔로몬의 남은 사적과 무릇 저의 행한 일과 그 지혜는 솔로몬의 행장에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	And the rest of the acts of Solomon, and all that he did, and his wisdom, are they not written in the book of the acts of Solomon?	As for the rest of the acts of Solomon—all that he did, as well as his wisdom—are they not written in the Book of the Acts of Solomon?
1KI	11	42	솔로몬이 예루살렘에서 온 이스라엘을 다스린 날 수가 사십 년이라	And the time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel was forty years.	Thus the time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel was forty years.
1KI	11	43	솔로몬이 그 열조와 함께 자매 그 부친 다윗의 성에 장사되고 그 아들 르호보암이 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And Solomon slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David his father: and Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead.	And Solomon rested with his fathers and was buried in the city of his father David. And his son Rehoboam reigned in his place.
1KI	12	1	르호보암이 세겜으로 갔으니 이는 온 이스라엘이 저로 왕을 삼고자 하여 세겜에 이르렀음이더라	And Rehoboam went to Shechem: for all Israel were come to Shechem to make him king.	Then Rehoboam went to Shechem, for all Israel had gone there to make him king.
1KI	12	2	느밧의 아들 여로보암이 전에 솔로몬 왕의 얼굴을 피하여 애굽으로 도망하여 있었더니 이제 그 소문을 듣고 오히려 애굽에 있는 중에	And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who was yet in Egypt, heard of it, (for he was fled from the presence of king Solomon, and Jeroboam dwelt in Egypt;)	When Jeroboam son of Nebat heard about this, he was still in Egypt where he had fled from King Solomon and had been living ever since.
1KI	12	3	무리가 보내어 저를 불렀더라 여로보암과 이스라엘의 온 회중이 와서 르호보암에게 고하여 가로되	That they sent and called him. And Jeroboam and all the congregation of Israel came, and spake unto Rehoboam, saying,	So they sent for Jeroboam, and he and the whole assembly of Israel came to Rehoboam and said,
1KI	12	4	왕의 부친이 우리의 멍에를 무겁게 하였으나 왕은 이제 왕의 부친이 우리에게 시킨 고역과 메운 무거운 멍에를 가볍게 하소서 그리하시면 우리가 왕을 섬기겠나이다	Thy father made our yoke grievous: now therefore make thou the grievous service of thy father, and his heavy yoke which he put upon us, lighter, and we will serve thee.	“Your father put a heavy yoke on us. But now you should lighten the burden of your father’s service and the heavy yoke he put on us, and we will serve you.”
1KI	12	5	르호보암이 대답하되 갔다가 삼 일 후에 다시 내게로 오라 하매 백성이 가니라	And he said unto them, Depart yet for three days, then come again to me. And the people departed.	Rehoboam answered, “Go away for three days and then return to me.” So the people departed.
1KI	12	6	르호보암 왕이 그 부친 솔로몬의 생전에 그 앞에 모셨던 노인들과 의논하여 가로되 너희는 어떻게 교도하여 이 백성에게 대답하게 하겠느뇨	And king Rehoboam consulted with the old men, that stood before Solomon his father while he yet lived, and said, How do ye advise that I may answer this people?	Then King Rehoboam consulted with the elders who had served his father Solomon during his lifetime. “How do you advise me to respond to these people?” he asked.
1KI	12	7	대답하여 가로되 왕이 만일 오늘날 이 백성의 종이 되어 저희를 섬기고 좋은 말로 대답하여 이르시면 저희가 영영히 왕의 종이 되리이다 하나	And they spake unto him, saying, If thou wilt be a servant unto this people this day, and wilt serve them, and answer them, and speak good words to them, then they will be thy servants for ever.	They replied, “If you will be a servant to these people and serve them this day, and if you will respond by speaking kind words to them, they will be your servants forever.”
1KI	12	8	왕이 노인의 교도하는 것을 버리고 그 앞에 모셔 있는 자기와 함께 자라난 소년들과 의논하여	But he forsook the counsel of the old men, which they had given him, and consulted with the young men that were grown up with him, and which stood before him:	But Rehoboam rejected the advice of the elders; instead, he consulted the young men who had grown up with him and served him.
1KI	12	9	가로되 너희는 어떻게 교도하여 이 백성에게 대답하게 하겠느뇨 백성이 내게 말하기를 왕의 부친이 우리에게 메운 멍에를 가볍게 하라 하였느니라	And he said unto them, What counsel give ye that we may answer this people, who have spoken to me, saying, Make the yoke which thy father did put upon us lighter?	He asked them, “What message do you advise that we send back to these people who have spoken to me, saying, ‘Lighten the yoke your father put on us’?”
1KI	12	10	함께 자라난 소년들이 왕께 고하여 가로되 이 백성들이 왕께 고하기를 왕의 부친이 우리의 멍에를 무겁게 하였으나 왕은 우리를 위하여 가볍게 하라 하였은즉 왕은 대답하기를 나의 새끼손가락이 내 부친의 허리보다 굵으니	And the young men that were grown up with him spake unto him, saying, Thus shalt thou speak unto this people that spake unto thee, saying, Thy father made our yoke heavy, but make thou it lighter unto us; thus shalt thou say unto them, My little finger shall be thicker than my father’s loins.	The young men who had grown up with him replied, “This is how you should answer these people who said to you, ‘Your father made our yoke heavy, but you should make it lighter.’ This is what you should tell them: ‘My little finger is thicker than my father’s waist!
1KI	12	11	내 부친이 너희로 무거운 멍에를 메게 하였으나 이제 나는 너희의 멍에를 더욱 무겁게 할지라 내 부친은 채찍으로 너희를 징치하였으나 나는 전갈로 너희를 징치하리라 하소서	And now whereas my father did lade you with a heavy yoke, I will add to your yoke: my father hath chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions.	Whereas my father burdened you with a heavy yoke, I will add to your yoke. Whereas my father scourged you with whips, I will scourge you with scorpions.’”
1KI	12	12	삼 일만에 여로보암과 모든 백성이 르호보암에게 나아왔으니 이는 왕이 명하여 이르기를 삼 일만에 내게로 다시 오라 하였음이라	So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam the third day, as the king had appointed, saying, Come to me again the third day.	After three days, Jeroboam and all the people returned to Rehoboam, since the king had said, “Come back to me on the third day.”
1KI	12	13	왕이 포악한 말로 백성에게 대답할새 노인의 교도를 버리고	And the king answered the people roughly, and forsook the old men’s counsel that they gave him;	And the king answered the people harshly. He rejected the advice of the elders
1KI	12	14	소년의 가르침을 좇아 저희에게 고하여 가로되 내 부친은 너희의 멍에를 무겁게 하였으나 나는 너희의 멍에를 더욱 무겁게 할지라 내 부친은 채찍으로 너희를 징치하였으나 나는 전갈로 너희를 징치하리라 하니라	And spake to them after the counsel of the young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy, and I will add to your yoke: my father also chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions.	and spoke to them as the young men had advised, saying, “Whereas my father made your yoke heavy, I will add to your yoke. Whereas my father scourged you with whips, I will scourge you with scorpions.”
1KI	12	15	왕이 이같이 백성의 말을 듣지 아니하였으니 이 일은 여호와께로 말미암아 난 것이라 여호와께서 전에 실로 사람 아히야로 느밧의 아들 여로보암에게 고한 말씀을 응하게 하심이더라	Wherefore the king hearkened not unto the people; for the cause was from the Lord, that he might perform his saying, which the Lord spake by Ahijah the Shilonite unto Jeroboam the son of Nebat.	So the king did not listen to the people, and indeed this turn of events was from the LORD, to fulfill the word He had spoken to Jeroboam son of Nebat through Ahijah the Shilonite.
1KI	12	16	온 이스라엘이 자기들의 말을 왕이 듣지 아니함을 보고 왕에게 대답하여 가로되 우리가 다윗과 무슨 관계가 있느뇨 이새의 아들에게서 업이 없도다 이스라엘아 너희의 장막으로 돌아가라 다윗이여 이제 너는 네 집이나 돌아보라 하고 이스라엘이 그 장막으로 돌아가니라	So when all Israel saw that the king hearkened not unto them, the people answered the king, saying, What portion have we in David? neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse: to your tents, O Israel: now see to thine own house, David. So Israel departed unto their tents.	When all Israel saw that the king had refused to listen to them, they answered the king: “What portion do we have in David, and what inheritance in the son of Jesse? To your tents, O Israel! Look now to your own house, O David!” So the Israelites went home,
1KI	12	17	그러나 유다 성읍들에 사는 이스라엘 자손에게는 르호보암이 그 왕이 되었더라	But as for the children of Israel which dwelt in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.	but Rehoboam still reigned over the Israelites living in the cities of Judah.
1KI	12	18	르호보암 왕이 역군의 감독 아도니람을 보내었더니 온 이스라엘이 저를 돌로 쳐 죽인지라 르호보암 왕이 급히 수레에 올라 예루살렘으로 도망하였더라	Then king Rehoboam sent Adoram, who was over the tribute; and all Israel stoned him with stones, that he died. Therefore king Rehoboam made speed to get him up to his chariot, to flee to Jerusalem.	Then King Rehoboam sent out Adoram, who was in charge of the forced labor, but all Israel stoned him to death. And King Rehoboam mounted his chariot in haste and escaped to Jerusalem.
1KI	12	19	이에 이스라엘이 다윗의 집을 배반하여 오늘날까지 이르렀더라	So Israel rebelled against the house of David unto this day.	So to this day Israel has been in rebellion against the house of David.
1KI	12	20	온 이스라엘이 여로보암의 돌아왔다 함을 듣고 보내어 저를 공회로 청하여다가 온 이스라엘의 왕을 삼았으니 유다 지파 외에는 다윗의 집을 좇는 자가 없으니라	And it came to pass, when all Israel heard that Jeroboam was come again, that they sent and called him unto the congregation, and made him king over all Israel: there was none that followed the house of David, but the tribe of Judah only.	When all Israel heard that Jeroboam had returned, they summoned him to the assembly and made him king over all Israel. Only the tribe of Judah followed the house of David.
1KI	12	21	르호보암이 예루살렘에 이르러 유다 온 족속과 베냐민 지파를 모으니 택한 용사가 십 팔만이라 이스라엘 족속과 싸워 나라를 회복하여 솔로몬의 아들 르호보암에게 돌리려 하더니	And when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, he assembled all the house of Judah, with the tribe of Benjamin, an hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men, which were warriors, to fight against the house of Israel, to bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam the son of Solomon.	And when Rehoboam arrived in Jerusalem, he mobilized the whole house of Judah and the tribe of Benjamin—180,000 chosen warriors—to fight against the house of Israel and restore the kingdom to Rehoboam son of Solomon.
1KI	12	22	하나님의 말씀이 하나님의 사람 스마야에게 임하여 가라사대	But the word of God came unto Shemaiah the man of God, saying,	But the word of God came to Shemaiah the man of God:
1KI	12	23	솔로몬의 아들 유다 왕 르호보암과 유다와 베냐민 온 족속과 또 그 남은 백성에게 고하여 이르기를	Speak unto Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and unto all the house of Judah and Benjamin, and to the remnant of the people, saying,	“Tell Rehoboam son of Solomon king of Judah, all the house of Judah and Benjamin, and the rest of the people
1KI	12	24	여호와의 말씀이 너희는 올라가지 말라 너희 형제 이스라엘 자손과 싸우지 말고 각기 집으로 돌아가라 이 일이 내게로 말미암아 난 것이라 하셨다 하라 하신지라 저희가 여호와의 말씀을 듣고 그 말씀을 좇아 돌아갔더라	Thus saith the Lord, Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren the children of Israel: return every man to his house; for this thing is from me. They hearkened therefore to the word of the Lord, and returned to depart, according to the word of the Lord.	that this is what the LORD says: ‘You are not to go up and fight against your brothers, the Israelites. Each of you must return home, for this word is from Me.’” So they listened to the word of the LORD and turned back according to the word of the LORD.
1KI	12	25	여로보암이 에브라임 산지에 세겜을 건축하고 거기서 살며 또 거기서 나가서 부느엘을 건축하고	Then Jeroboam built Shechem in mount Ephraim, and dwelt therein; and went out from thence, and built Penuel.	Then Jeroboam built Shechem in the hill country of Ephraim and lived there. And from there he went out and built Penuel.
1KI	12	26	그 마음에 스스로 이르기를 나라가 이제 다윗의 집으로 돌아가리로다	And Jeroboam said in his heart, Now shall the kingdom return to the house of David:	Jeroboam said in his heart, “Now the kingdom might revert to the house of David.
1KI	12	27	만일 이 백성이 예루살렘에 있는 여호와의 전에 제사를 드리고자 하여 올라가면 이 백성의 마음이 유다 왕 된 그 주 르호보암에게로 돌아가서 나를 죽이고 유다 왕 르호보암에게로 돌아가리로다 하고	If this people go up to do sacrifice in the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, then shall the heart of this people turn again unto their lord, even unto Rehoboam king of Judah, and they shall kill me, and go again to Rehoboam king of Judah.	If these people go up to offer sacrifices in the house of the LORD at Jerusalem, their hearts will return to their lord, Rehoboam king of Judah; then they will kill me and return to Rehoboam king of Judah.”
1KI	12	28	이에 계획하고 두 금송아지를 만들고 무리에게 말하기를 너희가 다시는 예루살렘에 올라갈 것이 없도다 이스라엘아 이는 너희를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 올린 너희 신이라 하고	Whereupon the king took counsel, and made two calves of gold, and said unto them, It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem: behold thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.	After seeking advice, the king made two golden calves and said to the people, “Going up to Jerusalem is too much for you. Here, O Israel, are your gods, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt.”
1KI	12	29	하나는 벧엘에 두고 하나는 단에 둔지라	And he set the one in Beth–el, and the other put he in Dan.	One calf he set up in Bethel, and the other in Dan.
1KI	12	30	이 일이 죄가 되었으니 이는 백성들이 단까지 가서 그 하나에게 숭배함이더라	And this thing became a sin: for the people went to worship before the one, even unto Dan.	And this thing became a sin; the people walked as far as Dan to worship before one of the calves.
1KI	12	31	저가 또 산당들을 짓고 레위 자손 아닌 보통 백성으로 제사장을 삼고	And he made an house of high places, and made priests of the lowest of the people, which were not of the sons of Levi.	Jeroboam also built shrines on the high places and appointed from every class of people priests who were not Levites.
1KI	12	32	팔월 곧 그 달 십오일로 절기를 정하여 유다의 절기와 비슷하게 하고 단에 올라가되 벧엘에서 그와 같이 행하여 그 만든 송아지에게 제사를 드렸으며 그 지은 산당의 제사장은 벧엘에서 세웠더라	And Jeroboam ordained a feast in the eighth month, on the fifteenth day of the month, like unto the feast that is in Judah, and he offered upon the altar. So did he in Beth–el, sacrificing unto the calves that he had made: and he placed in Beth–el the priests of the high places which he had made.	And Jeroboam ordained a feast on the fifteenth day of the eighth month, like the feast that was in Judah, and he offered sacrifices on the altar; he made this offering in Bethel to sacrifice to the calves he had set up, and he installed priests in Bethel for the high places he had set up.
1KI	12	33	저가 자기 마음대로 정한 달 곧 팔월 십오일로 이스라엘 자손을 위하여 절기로 정하고 벧엘에 쌓은 단에 올라가서 분향하였더라	So he offered upon the altar which he had made in Beth–el the fifteenth day of the eighth month, even in the month which he had devised of his own heart; and ordained a feast unto the children of Israel: and he offered upon the altar, and burnt incense.	On the fifteenth day of the eighth month, a month of his own choosing, Jeroboam offered sacrifices on the altar he had set up in Bethel. So he ordained a feast for the Israelites, offered sacrifices on the altar, and burned incense.
1KI	13	1	때에 하나님의 사람이 여호와의 말씀으로 인하여 유다에서부터 벧엘에 이르니 마침 여로보암이 단 곁에 서서 분향하는지라	And, behold, there came a man of God out of Judah by the word of the Lord unto Beth–el: and Jeroboam stood by the altar to burn incense.	Suddenly, as Jeroboam was standing beside the altar to burn incense, there came a man of God from Judah to Bethel by the word of the LORD.
1KI	13	2	하나님의 사람이 단을 향하여 여호와의 말씀으로 외쳐 가로되 단아 단아 여호와께서 말씀하시기를 다윗의 집에 요시야라 이름하는 아들을 낳으리니 저가 네 위에 분향하는 산당 제사장을 네 위에 제사할 것이요 또 사람의 뼈를 네 위에 사르리라 하셨느니라 하고	And he cried against the altar in the word of the Lord, and said, O altar, altar, thus saith the Lord; Behold, a child shall be born unto the house of David, Josiah by name; and upon thee shall he offer the priests of the high places that burn incense upon thee, and men’s bones shall be burnt upon thee.	And he cried out against the altar by the word of the LORD, “O altar, O altar, this is what the LORD says: ‘A son named Josiah will be born to the house of David, and upon you he will sacrifice the priests of the high places who burn incense upon you, and human bones will be burned upon you.’”
1KI	13	3	그 날에 저가 예조를 들어 가로되 이는 여호와의 말씀하신 예조라 단이 갈라지며 그 위에 있는 재가 쏟아지리라 하매	And he gave a sign the same day, saying, This is the sign which the Lord hath spoken; Behold, the altar shall be rent, and the ashes that are upon it shall be poured out.	That day the man of God gave a sign, saying, “The LORD has spoken this sign: ‘Surely the altar will be split apart, and the ashes upon it will be poured out.’”
1KI	13	4	여로보암 왕이 하나님의 사람의 벧엘에 있는 단을 향하여 외쳐 말함을 들을 때에 단에서 손을 펴며 저를 잡으라 하더라 저를 향하여 편 손이 말라 다시 거두지 못하며	And it came to pass, when king Jeroboam heard the saying of the man of God, which had cried against the altar in Beth–el, that he put forth his hand from the altar, saying, Lay hold on him. And his hand, which he put forth against him, dried up, so that he could not pull it in again to him.	Now when King Jeroboam, who was at the altar in Bethel, heard the word that the man of God had cried out against it, he stretched out his hand and said, “Seize him!” But the hand he stretched out toward him withered, so that he could not pull it back.
1KI	13	5	하나님의 사람의 여호와의 말씀으로 보인 예조대로 단이 갈라지며 재가 단에서 쏟아진지라	The altar also was rent, and the ashes poured out from the altar, according to the sign which the man of God had given by the word of the Lord.	And the altar was split apart, and the ashes poured out, according to the sign that the man of God had given by the word of the LORD.
1KI	13	6	왕이 하나님의 사람에게 말하여 가로되 청컨대 너는 나를 위하여 네 하나님 여호와께 은혜를 구하여 내 손으로 다시 성하게 기도하라 하나님의 사람이 여호와께 은혜를 구하니 왕의 손이 다시 성하여 전과 같이 되니라	And the king answered and said unto the man of God, Intreat now the face of the Lord thy God, and pray for me, that my hand may be restored me again. And the man of God besought the Lord, and the king’s hand was restored him again, and became as it was before.	Then the king responded to the man of God, “Intercede with the LORD your God and pray that my hand may be restored.” So the man of God interceded with the LORD, and the king’s hand was restored to him as it was before.
1KI	13	7	왕이 하나님의 사람에게 이르되 나와 함께 집에 가서 몸을 쉬라 내가 네게 예물을 주리라	And the king said unto the man of God, Come home with me, and refresh thyself, and I will give thee a reward.	Then the king said to the man of God, “Come home with me and refresh yourself, and I will give you a reward.”
1KI	13	8	하나님의 사람이 왕께 대답하되 왕께서 왕의 집 절반으로 내게 준다 할지라도 나는 왕과 함께 들어가지도 아니하고 이곳에서는 떡도 먹지 아니하고 물도 마시지 아니하리니	And the man of God said unto the king, If thou wilt give me half thine house, I will not go in with thee, neither will I eat bread nor drink water in this place:	But the man of God replied, “If you were to give me half your possessions, I still would not go with you, nor would I eat bread or drink water in this place.
1KI	13	9	이는 곧 여호와의 말씀이 내게 명하여 이르시기를 떡도 먹지 말며 물도 마시지 말고 왔던 길로 도로 가지도 말라 하셨음이니이다 하고	For so was it charged me by the word of the Lord, saying, Eat no bread, nor drink water, nor turn again by the same way that thou camest.	For this is what I was commanded by the word of the LORD: ‘You must not eat bread or drink water or return by the way you came.’”
1KI	13	10	이에 다른 길로 가고 자기가 벧엘에 오던 길로 좇아 돌아가지 아니하니라	So he went another way, and returned not by the way that he came to Beth–el.	So the man of God went another way and did not return by the way he had come to Bethel.
1KI	13	11	벧엘에 한 늙은 선지자가 살더니 그 아들들이 와서 이 날에 하나님의 사람이 벧엘에서 행한 모든 일을 저에게 고하고 또 그가 왕에게 고한 말씀도 저희가 그 아비에게 고한지라	Now there dwelt an old prophet in Beth–el; and his sons came and told him all the works that the man of God had done that day in Beth–el: the words which he had spoken unto the king, them they told also to their father.	Now a certain old prophet was living in Bethel, and his sons came and told him all the deeds that the man of God had done that day in Bethel. They also told their father the words that the man had spoken to the king.
1KI	13	12	그 아비가 저희에게 이르되 그가 어느 길로 가더냐 하니 그 아들들이 유다에서부터 온 하나님의 사람의 간 길을 보았음이라	And their father said unto them, What way went he? For his sons had seen what way the man of God went, which came from Judah.	“Which way did he go?” their father asked. And his sons showed him the way taken by the man of God, who had come from Judah.
1KI	13	13	저가 그 아들들에게 이르되 나를 위하여 나귀에 안장을 지우라 저희가 나귀에 안장을 지우니 저가 타고	And he said unto his sons, Saddle me the ass. So they saddled him the ass: and he rode thereon,	So the prophet said to his sons, “Saddle the donkey for me.” Then they saddled the donkey for him, and he mounted it
1KI	13	14	하나님의 사람의 뒤를 좇아 가서 상수리나무 아래 앉은 것을 보고 이르되 그대가 유다에서 온 하나님의 사람이뇨 대답하되 그러하다	And went after the man of God, and found him sitting under an oak: and he said unto him, Art thou the man of God that camest from Judah? And he said, I am.	and went after the man of God. He found him sitting under an oak tree and asked, “Are you the man of God who came from Judah?” “I am,” he replied.
1KI	13	15	저가 그 사람에게 이르되 나와 함께 집으로 가서 떡을 먹으라	Then he said unto him, Come home with me, and eat bread.	So the prophet said to the man of God, “Come home with me and eat some bread.”
1KI	13	16	대답하되 나는 그대와 함께 돌아가지도 못하겠고 그대와 함께 들어가지도 못하겠으며 내가 이 곳에서 그대와 함께 떡도 먹지 아니하고 물도 마시지 아니하리니	And he said, I may not return with thee, nor go in with thee: neither will I eat bread nor drink water with thee in this place:	But the man replied, “I cannot return with you or eat bread or drink water with you in this place.
1KI	13	17	이는 여호와의 말씀이 내게 이르시기를 네가 거기서 떡도 먹지 말고 물도 마시지 말며 또 네가 오던 길로 돌아가지도 말라 하셨음이로라	For it was said to me by the word of the Lord, Thou shalt eat no bread nor drink water there, nor turn again to go by the way that thou camest.	For I have been told by the word of the LORD: ‘You must not eat bread or drink water there or return by the way you came.’”
1KI	13	18	저가 그 사람에게 이르되 나도 그대와 같은 선지자라 천사가 여호와의 말씀으로 내게 이르기를 그를 네 집으로 데리고 돌아가서 그에게 떡을 먹이고 물을 마시우라 하였느니라 하니 이는 그 사람을 속임이라	He said unto him, I am a prophet also as thou art; and an angel spake unto me by the word of the Lord, saying, Bring him back with thee into thine house, that he may eat bread and drink water. But he lied unto him.	Then the prophet replied, “I too am a prophet like you, and an angel spoke to me by the word of the LORD, saying, ‘Bring him back with you to your house, so that he may eat bread and drink water.’” The old prophet was lying to him,
1KI	13	19	이에 그 사람이 저와 함께 돌아가서 그 집에서 떡을 먹으며 물을 마시니라	So he went back with him, and did eat bread in his house, and drank water.	but the man of God went back with him, ate bread in his house, and drank water.
1KI	13	20	저희가 상 앞에 앉았을 때에 여호와의 말씀이 그 사람을 데려온 선지자에게 임하니	And it came to pass, as they sat at the table, that the word of the Lord came unto the prophet that brought him back:	While they were sitting at the table, the word of the LORD came to the prophet who had brought him back,
1KI	13	21	저가 유다에서부터 온 하나님의 사람을 향하여 외쳐 가로되 여호와의 말씀에 네가 여호와의 말씀을 어기며 네 하나님 여호와가 네게 명한 명령을 지키지 아니하고	And he cried unto the man of God that came from Judah, saying, Thus saith the Lord, Forasmuch as thou hast disobeyed the mouth of the Lord, and hast not kept the commandment which the Lord thy God commanded thee,	and the prophet cried out to the man of God who had come from Judah, “This is what the LORD says: ‘Because you have defied the word of the LORD and have not kept the commandment that the LORD your God gave you,
1KI	13	22	돌아와서 여호와가 너더러 떡도 먹지 말고 물도 마시지 말라 한 곳에서 떡을 먹고 물을 마셨으니 네 시체가 네 열조의 묘실에 들어가지 못하리라 하셨느니라 하니라	But camest back, and hast eaten bread and drunk water in the place, of the which the Lord did say to thee, Eat no bread, and drink no water; thy carcase shall not come unto the sepulchre of thy fathers.	but you went back and ate bread and drank water in the place where He told you not to do so, your body shall never reach the tomb of your fathers.’”
1KI	13	23	자기가 데리고 온 선지자가 떡을 먹고 물을 마신 후에 그를 위하여 나귀에 안장을 지우니라	And it came to pass, after he had eaten bread, and after he had drunk, that he saddled for him the ass, to wit, for the prophet whom he had brought back.	And after the man of God had finished eating and drinking, the old prophet who had brought him back saddled the donkey for him.
1KI	13	24	이에 그 사람이 가더니 사자가 길에서 저를 만나 죽이매 그 시체가 길에 버린 바 되니 나귀는 그 곁에 섰고 사자도 그 시체 곁에 섰더라	And when he was gone, a lion met him by the way, and slew him: and his carcase was cast in the way, and the ass stood by it, the lion also stood by the carcase.	As he went on his way, a lion met him on the road and killed him, and his body was left lying in the road, with the donkey and the lion standing beside it.
1KI	13	25	지나가는 사람들이 길에 버린 시체와 그 시체 곁에 선 사자를 보고 그 늙은 선지자가 사는 성읍에 와서 말한지라	And, behold, men passed by, and saw the carcase cast in the way, and the lion standing by the carcase: and they came and told it in the city where the old prophet dwelt.	And there were men passing by who saw the body lying in the road with the lion standing beside it, and they went and reported this in the city where the old prophet lived.
1KI	13	26	그 사람을 길에서 데리고 돌아간 선지자가 듣고 말하되 이는 여호와의 말씀을 어긴 하나님의 사람이로다 여호와께서 그에게 하신 말씀과 같이 여호와께서 그를 사자에게 붙이시매 사자가 그를 찢어 죽였도다 하고	And when the prophet that brought him back from the way heard thereof, he said, It is the man of God, who was disobedient unto the word of the Lord: therefore the Lord hath delivered him unto the lion, which hath torn him, and slain him, according to the word of the Lord, which he spake unto him.	When the prophet who had brought him back from his journey heard this, he said, “It is the man of God who disobeyed the command of the LORD. Therefore the LORD has delivered him to the lion, and it has mauled him and killed him, according to the word that the LORD had spoken to him.”
1KI	13	27	이에 그 아들들에게 말하여 가로되 나를 위하여 나귀에 안장을 지우라 저희가 안장을 지우매	And he spake to his sons, saying, Saddle me the ass. And they saddled him.	Then the old prophet instructed his sons, “Saddle the donkey for me.” So they saddled it,
1KI	13	28	저가 가서 본즉 그 시체가 길에 버린 바 되었고 나귀와 사자는 그 시체 곁에 섰는데 사자가 시체를 먹지도 아니하였고 나귀를 찢지도 아니하였더라	And he went and found his carcase cast in the way, and the ass and the lion standing by the carcase: the lion had not eaten the carcase, nor torn the ass.	and he went and found the body lying in the road, with the donkey and the lion standing beside it. The lion had not eaten the body or mauled the donkey.
1KI	13	29	늙은 선지자가 하나님의 사람의 시체를 떠들어 나귀에 실어가지고 돌아와 자기 성읍으로 들어가서 슬피 울며 장사하되	And the prophet took up the carcase of the man of God, and laid it upon the ass, and brought it back: and the old prophet came to the city, to mourn and to bury him.	So the old prophet lifted up the body of the man of God, laid it on the donkey, and brought it back to his own city to mourn for him and bury him.
1KI	13	30	곧 그 시체를 자기의 묘실에 두고 그를 위하여 슬피 울며 가로되 오호라 나의 형제여 하니라	And he laid his carcase in his own grave; and they mourned over him, saying, Alas, my brother!	Then he laid the body in his own tomb, and they lamented over him, “Oh, my brother!”
1KI	13	31	그 사람을 장사한 후에 저가 그 아들들에게 말하여 가로되 내가 죽거든 하나님의 사람을 장사한 묘실에 나를 장사하되 내 뼈를 그의 뼈 곁에 두라	And it came to pass, after he had buried him, that he spake to his sons, saying, When I am dead, then bury me in the sepulchre wherein the man of God is buried; lay my bones beside his bones:	After he had buried him, the prophet said to his sons, “When I die, you must bury me in the tomb where the man of God is buried. Lay my bones beside his bones,
1KI	13	32	그가 여호와의 말씀으로 벧엘에 있는 단을 향하고 또 사마리아 성읍들에 있는 모든 산당을 향하여 외쳐 말한 것이 반드시 이룰 것임이니라	For the saying which he cried by the word of the Lord against the altar in Beth–el, and against all the houses of the high places which are in the cities of Samaria, shall surely come to pass.	for the message that he cried out by the word of the LORD against the altar in Bethel and against all the shrines on the high places in the cities of Samaria will surely come to pass.”
1KI	13	33	여로보암이 이 일 후에도 그 악한 길에서 떠나 돌이키지 아니하고 다시 보통 백성으로 산당의 제사장을 삼되 누구든지 자원하면 그 사람으로 산당의 제사장을 삼았으므로	After this thing Jeroboam returned not from his evil way, but made again of the lowest of the people priests of the high places: whosoever would, he consecrated him, and he became one of the priests of the high places.	Even after these events, Jeroboam did not repent of his evil ways, but again he appointed priests for the high places from every class of people. He ordained anyone who desired to be a priest of the high places.
1KI	13	34	이 일이 여로보암 집에 죄가 되어 그 집이 지면에서 끊어져 멸망케 되니라	And this thing became sin unto the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and to destroy it from off the face of the earth.	And this was the sin of the house of Jeroboam that led to its extermination and destruction from the face of the earth.
1KI	14	1	그 때에 여로보암의 아들 아비야가 병든지라	At that time Abijah the son of Jeroboam fell sick.	At that time Abijah son of Jeroboam became ill,
1KI	14	2	여로보암이 그 아내에게 이르되 청컨대 일어나 변장하여 사람으로 그대가 여로보암의 아내임을 알지 못하게 하고 실로로 가라 거기 선지자 아히야가 있나니 저는 이전에 내가 이 백성의 왕이 될 것을 내게 고한 사람이니라	And Jeroboam said to his wife, Arise, I pray thee, and disguise thyself, that thou be not known to be the wife of Jeroboam; and get thee to Shiloh: behold, there is Ahijah the prophet, which told me that I should be king over this people.	and Jeroboam said to his wife, “Now get up, disguise yourself so they will not recognize you as my wife, and go to Shiloh. For Ahijah the prophet is there; it was he who spoke about my kingship over this people.
1KI	14	3	그대의 손에 떡 열과 과자와 꿀 한병을 가지고 그에게로 가라 저가 그대에게 이 아이의 어떻게 될 것을 알게 하리라	And take with thee ten loaves, and cracknels, and a cruse of honey, and go to him: he shall tell thee what shall become of the child.	Take with you ten loaves of bread, some cakes, and a jar of honey, and go to him. He will tell you what will become of the boy.”
1KI	14	4	여로보암의 아내가 그대로 하여 일어나 실로로 가서 아히야의 집에 이르니 아히야는 나이로 인하여 눈이 어두워 보지 못하더라	And Jeroboam’s wife did so, and arose, and went to Shiloh, and came to the house of Ahijah. But Ahijah could not see; for his eyes were set by reason of his age.	Jeroboam’s wife did as instructed; she arose and went to Shiloh and arrived at Ahijah’s house. Now Ahijah could not see, for his eyes were dim because of his age.
1KI	14	5	여호와께서 아히야에게 이르시되 여로보암의 아내가 그 아들이 병듦을 인하여 네게 물으러 오나니 너는 이리이리 대답하라 저가 들어올 때에 다른 사람인 체 함이니라	And the Lord said unto Ahijah, Behold, the wife of Jeroboam cometh to ask a thing of thee for her son; for he is sick: thus and thus shalt thou say unto her: for it shall be, when she cometh in, that she shall feign herself to be another woman.	But the LORD had said to Ahijah, “Behold, the wife of Jeroboam is coming to ask you about her son, for he is ill. You are to say such and such to her, because when she arrives, she will be disguised.”
1KI	14	6	저가 문으로 들어올 때에 아히야가 그 발소리를 듣고 말하되 여로보암의 처여 들어오라 네가 어찌하여 다른 사람인 체 하느뇨 내가 명령을 받아 흉한 일로 네게 고하리니	And it was so, when Ahijah heard the sound of her feet, as she came in at the door, that he said, Come in, thou wife of Jeroboam; why feignest thou thyself to be another? for I am sent to thee with heavy tidings.	So when Ahijah heard the sound of her feet entering the door, he said, “Come in, wife of Jeroboam! Why are you disguised? For I have been sent to you with bad news.
1KI	14	7	가서 여로보암에게 고하라 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 말씀이 내가 너를 백성 중에서 들어 내 백성 이스라엘의 주권자가 되게 하고	Go, tell Jeroboam, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Forasmuch as I exalted thee from among the people, and made thee prince over my people Israel,	Go, tell Jeroboam that this is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: ‘I raised you up from among the people and appointed you ruler over My people Israel.
1KI	14	8	나라를 다윗의 집에서 찢어 내어 네게 주었거늘 너는 내 종 다윗이 나의 명령을 지켜 전심으로 나를 좇으며 나 보기에 정직한 일만 행하였음과 같지 아니하고	And rent the kingdom away from the house of David, and gave it thee: and yet thou hast not been as my servant David, who kept my commandments, and who followed me with all his heart, to do that only which was right in mine eyes;	I tore the kingdom away from the house of David and gave it to you. But you were not like My servant David, who kept My commandments and followed Me with all his heart, doing only what was right in My eyes.
1KI	14	9	너의 이전 사람들보다도 악을 행하고 가서 너를 위하여 다른 신을 만들며 우상을 부어 만들어 나의 노를 격발하고 나를 네 등 뒤에 버렸도다	But hast done evil above all that were before thee: for thou hast gone and made thee other gods, and molten images, to provoke me to anger, and hast cast me behind thy back:	You have done more evil than all who came before you. You have proceeded to make for yourself other gods and molten images to provoke Me, and you have flung Me behind your back.
1KI	14	10	그러므로 내가 여로보암의 집에 재앙을 내려 여로보암에게 속한 사내는 이스라엘 가운데 매인 자나 놓인 자나 다 끊어 버리되 거름을 쓸어 버림 같이 여로보암의 집을 말갛게 쓸어 버릴지라	Therefore, behold, I will bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam, and will cut off from Jeroboam him that pisseth against the wall, and him that is shut up and left in Israel, and will take away the remnant of the house of Jeroboam, as a man taketh away dung, till it be all gone.	Because of all this, behold, I am bringing disaster on the house of Jeroboam: I will cut off from Jeroboam every male, both slave and free, in Israel; I will burn up the house of Jeroboam as one burns up dung until it is gone!
1KI	14	11	여로보암에게 속한 자가 성에서 죽은즉 개가 먹고 들에서 죽은즉 공중의 새가 먹으리니 이는 여호와가 말하였음이니라 하셨나니	Him that dieth of Jeroboam in the city shall the dogs eat; and him that dieth in the field shall the fowls of the air eat: for the Lord hath spoken it.	Anyone belonging to Jeroboam who dies in the city will be eaten by dogs, and anyone who dies in the field will be eaten by the birds of the air.’ For the LORD has spoken.
1KI	14	12	너는 일어나 네 집으로 가라 네 발이 성에 들어갈 때에 그 아이가 죽을지라	Arise thou therefore, get thee to thine own house: and when thy feet enter into the city, the child shall die.	As for you, get up and go home. When your feet enter the city, the child will die.
1KI	14	13	온 이스라엘이 저를 위하여 슬퍼하며 장사하려니와 여로보암에게 속한 자는 오직 이 아이만 묘실에 들어가리니 이는 여로보암의 집 가운데서 저가 이스라엘 하나님 여호와를 향하여 선한 뜻을 품었음이니라	And all Israel shall mourn for him, and bury him: for he only of Jeroboam shall come to the grave, because in him there is found some good thing toward the Lord God of Israel in the house of Jeroboam.	All Israel will mourn for him and bury him. For this is the only one belonging to Jeroboam who will receive a proper burial, because only in him has the LORD, the God of Israel, found any good in the house of Jeroboam.
1KI	14	14	여호와께서 이스라엘의 위에 한 왕을 일으키신즉 저가 그 날에 여로보암의 집을 끊어 버리리라 어느 때냐 곧 이제라	Moreover the Lord shall raise him up a king over Israel, who shall cut off the house of Jeroboam that day: but what? even now.	Moreover, the LORD will raise up for Himself a king over Israel who will cut off the house of Jeroboam. This is the day—yes, even today!
1KI	14	15	여호와께서 이스라엘을 쳐서 물에서 흔들리는 갈대 같이 되게 하시고 이스라엘을 그 열조에게 주신 이 좋은 땅에서 뽑아 저희를 하수 밖으로 흩으시리니 저희가 아세라 목상을 만들어 여호와를 진노케 하였음이니라	For the Lord shall smite Israel, as a reed is shaken in the water, and he shall root up Israel out of this good land, which he gave to their fathers, and shall scatter them beyond the river, because they have made their groves, provoking the Lord to anger.	For the LORD will strike Israel as a reed is shaken in the water. He will uproot Israel from this good land that He gave their fathers, and He will scatter them beyond the Euphrates, because they have made their Asherah poles, provoking the LORD to anger.
1KI	14	16	여호와께서 여로보암의 죄로 인하여 이스라엘을 버리시리니 이는 저도 범죄하고 이스라엘로 범죄케 하였음이니라 하니라	And he shall give Israel up because of the sins of Jeroboam, who did sin, and who made Israel to sin.	So He will give Israel over on account of the sins Jeroboam has committed and has caused Israel to commit.”
1KI	14	17	여로보암의 처가 일어나 디르사로 돌아가서 집 문지방에 이를 때에 아이가 죽은지라	And Jeroboam’s wife arose, and departed, and came to Tirzah: and when she came to the threshold of the door, the child died;	Then Jeroboam’s wife got up and departed for Tirzah, and as soon as she stepped over the threshold of the house, the boy died.
1KI	14	18	온 이스라엘이 저를 장사하고 저를 위하여 슬퍼하니 여호와께서 그 종 선지자 아히야로 하신 말씀과 같이 되었더라	And they buried him; and all Israel mourned for him, according to the word of the Lord, which he spake by the hand of his servant Ahijah the prophet.	And they buried him, and all Israel mourned for him, according to the word that the LORD had spoken through His servant Ahijah the prophet.
1KI	14	19	여로보암의 그 남은 행적 곧 저가 어떻게 싸운 것과 어떻게 다스린 것은 이스라엘 왕 역대지략에 기록되니라	And the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, how he warred, and how he reigned, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.	As for the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, how he waged war and how he reigned, they are indeed written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel.
1KI	14	20	여로보암이 왕이 된지 이십이 년이라 저가 그 열조와 함께 자매 그 아들 나답이 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And the days which Jeroboam reigned were two and twenty years: and he slept with his fathers, and Nadab his son reigned in his stead.	And the length of Jeroboam’s reign was twenty-two years, and he rested with his fathers, and his son Nadab reigned in his place.
1KI	14	21	솔로몬의 아들 르호보암은 유다 왕이 되었으니 르호보암이 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 사십일 세라 여호와께서 자기 이름을 두시려고 이스라엘 모든 지파 가운데서 빼신 성 예루살렘에서 십칠 년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 나아마라 암몬 사람이더라	And Rehoboam the son of Solomon reigned in Judah. Rehoboam was forty and one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which the Lord did choose out of all the tribes of Israel, to put his name there. And his mother’s name was Naamah an Ammonitess.	Meanwhile, Rehoboam son of Solomon reigned in Judah. He was forty-one years old when he became king, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city the LORD had chosen from all the tribes of Israel in which to put His Name. His mother’s name was Naamah the Ammonite.
1KI	14	22	유다가 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하되 그 열조의 행한 모든 일보다 뛰어나게 하여 그 범한 죄로 여호와의 노를 격발하였으니	And Judah did evil in the sight of the Lord, and they provoked him to jealousy with their sins which they had committed, above all that their fathers had done.	And Judah did evil in the sight of the LORD, and by the sins they committed they provoked Him to jealous anger more than all their fathers had done.
1KI	14	23	이는 저희도 산 위에와 모든 푸른 나무 아래 산당과 우상과 아세라 목상을 세웠음이라	For they also built them high places, and images, and groves, on every high hill, and under every green tree.	They also built for themselves high places, sacred pillars, and Asherah poles on every high hill and under every green tree.
1KI	14	24	그 땅에 또 남색하는 자가 있었고 여호와께서 이스라엘 자손 앞에서 쫓아내신 국민의 모든 가증한 일을 무리가 본받아 행하였더라	And there were also sodomites in the land: and they did according to all the abominations of the nations which the Lord cast out before the children of Israel.	There were even male shrine prostitutes in the land. They imitated all the abominations of the nations the LORD had driven out before the Israelites.
1KI	14	25	르호보암 왕 제오년에 애굽 왕 시삭이 올라와서 예루살렘을 치고	And it came to pass in the fifth year of king Rehoboam, that Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem:	In the fifth year of Rehoboam’s reign, Shishak king of Egypt came up and attacked Jerusalem.
1KI	14	26	여호와의 전의 보물과 왕궁의 보물을 몰수히 빼앗고 또 솔로몬의 만든 금방패를 다 빼앗은지라	And he took away the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the king’s house; he even took away all: and he took away all the shields of gold which Solomon had made.	He seized the treasures of the house of the LORD and of the royal palace. He took everything, including all the gold shields that Solomon had made.
1KI	14	27	르호보암 왕이 그 대신 놋으로 방패를 만들어 왕궁 문을 지키는 시위대 장관의 손에 맡기매	And king Rehoboam made in their stead brasen shields, and committed them unto the hands of the chief of the guard, which kept the door of the king’s house.	Then King Rehoboam made bronze shields in their place and committed them to the care of the captains of the guard on duty at the entrance to the royal palace.
1KI	14	28	왕이 여호와의 전에 들어갈 때마다 시위하는 자가 그 방패를 들고 갔다가 시위소로 도로 가져갔더라	And it was so, when the king went into the house of the Lord, that the guard bare them, and brought them back into the guard chamber.	And whenever the king entered the house of the LORD, the guards would bear the shields, and later they would return them to the guardroom.
1KI	14	29	르호보암의 남은 사적과 무릇 그 행한 일이 유다 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	Now the rest of the acts of Rehoboam, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?	As for the rest of the acts of Rehoboam, along with all that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
1KI	14	30	르호보암과 여로보암 사이에 항상 전쟁이 있으니라	And there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all their days.	There was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam throughout their days.
1KI	14	31	르호보암이 그 열조와 함께 자니 그 열조와 함께 다윗 성에 장사되니라 그 모친의 이름은 나아마라 암몬 사람이더라 그 아들 아비얌이 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David. And his mother’s name was Naamah an Ammonitess. And Abijam his son reigned in his stead.	And Rehoboam rested with his fathers and was buried with them in the City of David; his mother’s name was Naamah the Ammonite. And his son Abijam reigned in his place.
1KI	15	1	느밧의 아들 여로보암 왕 제십팔년에 아비얌이 유다 왕이 되고	Now in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam the son of Nebat reigned Abijam over Judah.	In the eighteenth year of the reign of Jeroboam son of Nebat, Abijam became king of Judah,
1KI	15	2	예루살렘에서 삼 년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 마아가라 아비살롬의 딸이더라	Three years reigned he in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Maachah, the daughter of Abishalom.	and he reigned in Jerusalem three years. His mother’s name was Maacah daughter of Abishalom.
1KI	15	3	아비얌이 그 부친의 이미 행한 모든 죄를 행하고 그 마음이 그 조상 다윗의 마음 같지 아니하여 그 하나님 여호와 앞에 온전치 못하였으나	And he walked in all the sins of his father, which he had done before him: and his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, as the heart of David his father.	And Abijam walked in all the sins that his father before him had committed, and his heart was not as fully devoted to the LORD his God as the heart of David his forefather had been.
1KI	15	4	그 하나님 여호와께서 다윗을 위하여 예루살렘에서 저에게 등불을 주시되 그 아들을 세워 후사가 되게 하사 예루살렘을 견고케 하셨으니	Nevertheless for David’s sake did the Lord his God give him a lamp in Jerusalem, to set up his son after him, and to establish Jerusalem:	Nevertheless, for the sake of David, the LORD his God gave him a lamp in Jerusalem by raising up a son to succeed him and to make Jerusalem strong.
1KI	15	5	이는 다윗이 헷 사람 우리아의 일 외에는 평생에 여호와 보시기에 정직히 행하고 자기에게 명하신 모든 일을 어기지 아니하였음이라	Because David did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, and turned not aside from any thing that he commanded him all the days of his life, save only in the matter of Uriah the Hittite.	For David had done what was right in the eyes of the LORD and had not turned aside from anything the LORD commanded all the days of his life, except in the matter of Uriah the Hittite.
1KI	15	6	르호보암과 여로보암 사이에 사는 날 동안 전쟁이 있었더니	And there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all the days of his life.	And there was war between the houses of Rehoboam and Jeroboam all the days of Abijam’s life.
1KI	15	7	아비얌과 여로보암 사이에도 전쟁이 있으니라 아비얌의 남은 사적과 무릇 행한 일이 유다 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	Now the rest of the acts of Abijam, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? And there was war between Abijam and Jeroboam.	As for the rest of the acts of Abijam, along with all his accomplishments, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? And there was war between Abijam and Jeroboam.
1KI	15	8	아비얌이 그 열조와 함께 자니 다윗 성에 장사되고 그 아들 아사가 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And Abijam slept with his fathers; and they buried him in the city of David: and Asa his son reigned in his stead.	And Abijam rested with his fathers and was buried in the City of David, and his son Asa reigned in his place.
1KI	15	9	이스라엘 왕 여로보암 제이십년에 아사가 유다 왕이 되어	And in the twentieth year of Jeroboam king of Israel reigned Asa over Judah.	In the twentieth year of Jeroboam’s reign over Israel, Asa became king of Judah,
1KI	15	10	예루살렘에서 사십일 년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 마아가라 아비살롬의 딸이더라	And forty and one years reigned he in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Maachah, the daughter of Abishalom.	and he reigned in Jerusalem forty-one years. His grandmother’s name was Maacah daughter of Abishalom.
1KI	15	11	아사가 그 조상 다윗 같이 여호와 보시기에 정직하게 행하여	And Asa did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, as did David his father.	And Asa did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, as his father David had done.
1KI	15	12	남색하는 자를 그 땅에서 쫓아내고 그 열조의 지은 모든 우상을 없이 하고	And he took away the sodomites out of the land, and removed all the idols that his fathers had made.	He banished the male shrine prostitutes from the land and removed all the idols that his fathers had made.
1KI	15	13	또 그 모친 마아가가 아세라의 가증한 우상을 만들었으므로 태후의 위를 폐하고 그 우상을 찍어서 기드론 시냇가에서 불살랐으나	And also Maachah his mother, even her he removed from being queen, because she had made an idol in a grove; and Asa destroyed her idol, and burnt it by the brook Kidron.	He also removed his grandmother Maacah from her position as queen mother because she had made a detestable Asherah pole. Asa chopped down the pole and burned it in the Kidron Valley.
1KI	15	14	오직 산당은 없이하지 아니하니라 그러나 아사의 마음이 일평생 여호와 앞에 온전하였으며	But the high places were not removed: nevertheless Asa’s heart was perfect with the Lord all his days.	The high places were not removed, but Asa’s heart was fully devoted to the LORD all his days.
1KI	15	15	저가 그 부친의 구별한 것과 자기의 구별한 것을 여호와의 전에 받들어 드렸으니 곧 은과 금과 기명들이더라	And he brought in the things which his father had dedicated, and the things which himself had dedicated, into the house of the Lord, silver, and gold, and vessels.	And he brought into the house of the LORD the silver and gold and other articles that he and his father had dedicated.
1KI	15	16	아사와 이스라엘 왕 바아사 사이에 일생 전쟁이 있으니라	And there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all their days.	Now there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel throughout their days.
1KI	15	17	이스라엘 왕 바아사가 유다를 치러 올라와서 라마를 건축하여 사람을 유다 왕 아사에게 왕래하지 못하게 하려한지라	And Baasha king of Israel went up against Judah, and built Ramah, that he might not suffer any to go out or come in to Asa king of Judah.	Baasha king of Israel went to war against Judah and fortified Ramah to prevent anyone from leaving or entering the territory of Asa king of Judah.
1KI	15	18	아사가 여호와의 전 곳간과 왕궁 곳간에 남은 은금을 몰수히 취하여 그 신복의 손에 붙여 다메섹에 거한 아람 왕 헤시온의 손자 다브림몬의 아들 벤하닷에게 보내며 가로되	Then Asa took all the silver and the gold that were left in the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the king’s house, and delivered them into the hand of his servants: and king Asa sent them to Ben–hadad, the son of Tabrimon, the son of Hezion, king of Syria, that dwelt at Damascus, saying,	So Asa withdrew all the silver and gold that remained in the treasuries of the house of the LORD and the royal palace. He entrusted it to his servants and sent them with this message to Ben-hadad son of Tabrimmon, the son of Hezion king of Aram, who was ruling in Damascus:
1KI	15	19	나와 당신 사이에 약조가 있고 내 부친과 당신의 부친 사이에도 있었느니라 내가 당신에게 은금 예물을 보내었으니 와서 이스라엘 왕 바아사와 세운 약조를 깨뜨려서 저로 나를 떠나게 하라 하매	There is a league between me and thee, and between my father and thy father: behold, I have sent unto thee a present of silver and gold; come and break thy league with Baasha king of Israel, that he may depart from me.	“Let there be a treaty between me and you, between my father and your father. See, I have sent you a gift of silver and gold. Now go and break your treaty with Baasha king of Israel, so that he will withdraw from me.”
1KI	15	20	벤하닷이 아사 왕의 말을 듣고 그 군대장관들을 보내어 이스라엘 성들을 치되 이욘과 단과 아벨벧마아가와 긴네렛 온 땅과 납달리 온 땅을 쳤더니	So Ben–hadad hearkened unto king Asa, and sent the captains of the hosts which he had against the cities of Israel, and smote Ijon, and Dan, and Abel–beth–maachah, and all Cinneroth, with all the land of Naphtali.	And Ben-hadad listened to King Asa and sent the commanders of his armies against the cities of Israel, conquering Ijon, Dan, Abel-beth-maacah, and the whole land of Naphtali, including the region of Chinnereth.
1KI	15	21	바아사가 듣고 라마 건축하는 일을 그치고 디르사에 거하니라	And it came to pass, when Baasha heard thereof, that he left off building of Ramah, and dwelt in Tirzah.	When Baasha learned of this, he stopped fortifying Ramah and withdrew to Tirzah.
1KI	15	22	이에 아사 왕이 온 유다에 영을 내려 한 사람도 모면하지 못하게 하여 바아사가 라마를 건축하던 돌과 재목을 가져오게 하고 그것으로 베냐민의 게바와 미스바를 건축하였더라	Then king Asa made a proclamation throughout all Judah; none was exempted: and they took away the stones of Ramah, and the timber thereof, wherewith Baasha had builded; and king Asa built with them Geba of Benjamin, and Mizpah.	Then King Asa summoned all the men of Judah, with no exceptions, and they carried away the stones of Ramah and the timbers Baasha had used for building. And with these materials King Asa built up Geba of Benjamin, as well as Mizpah.
1KI	15	23	아사의 남은 사적과 모든 권세와 무릇 그 행한 일과 성읍을 건축한 것이 유다 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐 그러나 저가 늙을 때에 발에 병이 있었더라	The rest of all the acts of Asa, and all his might, and all that he did, and the cities which he built, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? Nevertheless in the time of his old age he was diseased in his feet.	Now the rest of the acts of Asa, along with all his might, all his accomplishments, and the cities he built, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah? In his old age, however, he became diseased in his feet.
1KI	15	24	아사가 그 열조와 함께 자매 그 열조와 함께 그 조상 다윗의 성에 장사되고 그 아들 여호사밧이 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And Asa slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father: and Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead.	And Asa rested with his fathers and was buried with them in the city of his father David, and his son Jehoshaphat reigned in his place.
1KI	15	25	유다 왕 아사 제이년에 여로보암의 아들 나답이 이스라엘 왕이 되어 이 년을 이스라엘을 다스리니라	And Nadab the son of Jeroboam began to reign over Israel in the second year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned over Israel two years.	In the second year of Asa’s reign over Judah, Nadab son of Jeroboam became king of Israel, and he reigned two years.
1KI	15	26	저가 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하되 그 아비의 길로 행하며 그가 이스라엘로 범하게 한 그 죄 중에 행한지라	And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the way of his father, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin.	And he did evil in the sight of the LORD and walked in the way of his father and in his sin, which he had caused Israel to commit.
1KI	15	27	이에 잇사갈 족속 아히야의 아들 바아사가 저를 모반하여 블레셋 사람에게 속한 깁브돈에서 저를 죽였으니 이는 나답과 온 이스라엘이 깁브돈을 에워싸고 있었음이더라	And Baasha the son of Ahijah, of the house of Issachar, conspired against him; and Baasha smote him at Gibbethon, which belonged to the Philistines; for Nadab and all Israel laid siege to Gibbethon.	Then Baasha son of Ahijah of the house of Issachar conspired against Nadab, and Baasha struck him down at Gibbethon of the Philistines while Nadab and all Israel were besieging the city.
1KI	15	28	유다 왕 아사 제삼년에 바아사가 나답을 죽이고 대신하여 왕이 되고	Even in the third year of Asa king of Judah did Baasha slay him, and reigned in his stead.	In the third year of Asa’s reign over Judah, Baasha killed Nadab and reigned in his place.
1KI	15	29	왕이 될 때에 여로보암의 온 집을 쳐서 생명 있는 자를 하나도 남기지 아니하고 다 멸하였는데 여호와께서 그 종 실로 사람 아히야로 하신 말씀과 같이 되었으니	And it came to pass, when he reigned, that he smote all the house of Jeroboam; he left not to Jeroboam any that breathed, until he had destroyed him, according unto the saying of the Lord, which he spake by his servant Ahijah the Shilonite:	As soon as Baasha became king, he struck down the entire household of Jeroboam. He did not leave to Jeroboam anyone that breathed, but destroyed them all according to the word that the LORD had spoken through His servant Ahijah the Shilonite,
1KI	15	30	이는 여로보암이 범죄하고 또 이스라엘로 범하게 한 죄로 인함이며 또 저가 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 노를 격동시킨 일을 인함이었더라	Because of the sins of Jeroboam which he sinned, and which he made Israel sin, by his provocation wherewith he provoked the Lord God of Israel to anger.	because of the sins Jeroboam had committed and had caused Israel to commit, and because he had provoked the LORD, the God of Israel, to anger.
1KI	15	31	나답의 남은 사적과 무릇 행한 일이 이스라엘 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	Now the rest of the acts of Nadab, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?	As for the rest of the acts of Nadab, along with all his accomplishments, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?
1KI	15	32	아사와 이스라엘 왕 바아사 사이에 일생 전쟁이 있으니라	And there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all their days.	And there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel throughout their days.
1KI	15	33	유다 왕 아사 제삼년에 아히야의 아들 바아사가 디르사에서 온 이스라엘의 왕이 되어 이십사 년을 치리하니라	In the third year of Asa king of Judah began Baasha the son of Ahijah to reign over all Israel in Tirzah, twenty and four years.	In the third year of Asa’s reign over Judah, Baasha son of Ahijah became king of all Israel, and he reigned in Tirzah twenty-four years.
1KI	15	34	바아사가 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하되 여로보암의 길로 행하며 그가 이스라엘로 범하게 한 그 죄 중에 행하였더라	And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin.	And Baasha did evil in the sight of the LORD and walked in the way of Jeroboam and in his sin, which he had caused Israel to commit.
1KI	16	1	여호와의 말씀이 하나니의 아들 예후에게 임하여 바아사를 꾸짖어 가라사대	Then the word of the Lord came to Jehu the son of Hanani against Baasha, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to Jehu son of Hanani against Baasha, saying:
1KI	16	2	내가 너를 진토에서 들어 나의 백성 이스라엘 위에 주권자가 되게 하였거늘 네가 여로보암의 길로 행하며 내 백성 이스라엘로 범죄케 하여 저희 죄로 나의 노를 격동하였은즉	Forasmuch as I exalted thee out of the dust, and made thee prince over my people Israel; and thou hast walked in the way of Jeroboam, and hast made my people Israel to sin, to provoke me to anger with their sins;	“Even though I lifted you out of the dust and made you ruler over My people Israel, you have walked in the way of Jeroboam and have caused My people Israel to sin and to provoke Me to anger by their sins.
1KI	16	3	내가 너 바아사와 네 집을 쓸어버려 네 집으로 느밧의 아들 여로보암의 집 같이 되게 하리니	Behold, I will take away the posterity of Baasha, and the posterity of his house; and will make thy house like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat.	So now I will consume Baasha and his house, and I will make your house like that of Jeroboam son of Nebat:
1KI	16	4	바아사에게 속한 자가 성읍에서 죽은즉 개가 먹고 들에서 죽은즉 공중의 새가 먹으리라 하셨더라	Him that dieth of Baasha in the city shall the dogs eat; and him that dieth of his in the fields shall the fowls of the air eat.	Anyone belonging to Baasha who dies in the city will be eaten by dogs, and anyone who dies in the field will be eaten by the birds of the air.”
1KI	16	5	바아사의 남은 사적과 무릇 행한 일과 권세는 이스라엘 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	Now the rest of the acts of Baasha, and what he did, and his might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?	As for the rest of the acts of Baasha, along with his accomplishments and might, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?
1KI	16	6	바아사가 그 열조와 함께 자매 디르사에 장사되고 그 아들 엘라가 대신하여 왕이 되니라	So Baasha slept with his fathers, and was buried in Tirzah: and Elah his son reigned in his stead.	And Baasha rested with his fathers and was buried in Tirzah, and his son Elah reigned in his place.
1KI	16	7	여호와의 말씀이 하나니의 아들 선지자 예후에게 임하사 바아사와 그 집을 꾸짖으심은 저가 여로보암의 집을 본받아 여호와 보시기에 모든 악을 행하며 그 손의 소위로 여호와의 노를 격동하였음이며 또 그 집을 쳤음이더라	And also by the hand of the prophet Jehu the son of Hanani came the word of the Lord against Baasha, and against his house, even for all the evil that he did in the sight of the Lord, in provoking him to anger with the work of his hands, in being like the house of Jeroboam; and because he killed him.	Moreover, the word of the LORD came through the prophet Jehu son of Hanani against Baasha and his house, because of all the evil he had done in the sight of the LORD, provoking Him to anger with the work of his hands and becoming like the house of Jeroboam, and also because Baasha had struck down the house of Jeroboam.
1KI	16	8	유다 왕 아사 제이십륙년에 바아사의 아들 엘라가 디르사에서 이스라엘 왕이 되어 이 년을 위에 있으니라	In the twenty and sixth year of Asa king of Judah began Elah the son of Baasha to reign over Israel in Tirzah, two years.	In the twenty-sixth year of Asa’s reign over Judah, Elah son of Baasha became king of Israel, and he reigned in Tirzah two years.
1KI	16	9	엘라가 디르사에 있어 궁내 대신 아르사의 집에서 마시고 취할 때에 그 신복 곧 병거 절반을 통솔한 장관 시므리가 왕을 모반하여	And his servant Zimri, captain of half his chariots, conspired against him, as he was in Tirzah, drinking himself drunk in the house of Arza steward of his house in Tirzah.	However, while Elah was in Tirzah getting drunk in the house of Arza the steward of his household there, Elah’s servant Zimri, the commander of half his chariots, conspired against him.
1KI	16	10	들어가서 저를 쳐 죽이고 대신하여 왕이 되니 곧 유다 왕 아사 제이십칠년이라	And Zimri went in and smote him, and killed him, in the twenty and seventh year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned in his stead.	So in the twenty-seventh year of Asa’s reign over Judah, Zimri went in, struck Elah down, and killed him. And Zimri reigned in his place.
1KI	16	11	시므리가 왕이 되어 그 위에 오를 때에 바아사의 온 집을 죽이되 남자는 그 족속이든지 그 친구든지 하나도 남기지 아니하고	And it came to pass, when he began to reign, as soon as he sat on his throne, that he slew all the house of Baasha: he left him not one that pisseth against a wall, neither of his kinsfolks, nor of his friends.	As soon as Zimri began to reign and was seated on the throne, he struck down the entire household of Baasha. He did not leave a single male, whether a kinsman or friend.
1KI	16	12	바아사의 온 집을 멸하였는데 여호와께서 선지자 예후로 바아사를 꾸짖어 하신 말씀 같이 되었으니	Thus did Zimri destroy all the house of Baasha, according to the word of the Lord, which he spake against Baasha by Jehu the prophet,	So Zimri destroyed the entire household of Baasha, according to the word that the LORD had spoken against Baasha through Jehu the prophet.
1KI	16	13	이는 바아사의 모든 죄와 그 아들 엘라의 죄를 인함이라 저희가 범죄하고 또 이스라엘로 범죄케 하여 그 헛된 것으로 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 노를 격발하였더라	For all the sins of Baasha, and the sins of Elah his son, by which they sinned, and by which they made Israel to sin, in provoking the Lord God of Israel to anger with their vanities.	This happened because of all the sins Baasha and his son Elah had committed and had caused Israel to commit, provoking the LORD, the God of Israel, to anger with their worthless idols.
1KI	16	14	엘라의 남은 사적과 무릇 행한 일이 이스라엘 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	Now the rest of the acts of Elah, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?	As for the rest of the acts of Elah, along with all his accomplishments, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?
1KI	16	15	유다 왕 아사 제이십칠년에 시므리가 디르사에서 칠 일 동안 왕이 되니라 때에 백성들이 블레셋 사람에게 속한 깁브돈을 향하여 진을 치고 있더니	In the twenty and seventh year of Asa king of Judah did Zimri reign seven days in Tirzah. And the people were encamped against Gibbethon, which belonged to the Philistines.	In the twenty-seventh year of Asa’s reign over Judah, Zimri reigned in Tirzah for seven days. Now the troops were encamped against Gibbethon of the Philistines,
1KI	16	16	진중 백성들이 시므리가 모반하여 왕을 죽였다는 말을 들은지라 그 날에 이스라엘의 무리가 진에서 군대장관 오므리로 이스라엘 왕을 삼으매	And the people that were encamped heard say, Zimri hath conspired, and hath also slain the king: wherefore all Israel made Omri, the captain of the host, king over Israel that day in the camp.	and the people in the camp heard that Zimri had not only conspired but had also struck down the king. So there in the camp that very day, all Israel proclaimed Omri, the commander of the army, king over Israel.
1KI	16	17	오므리가 이에 이스라엘 무리를 거느리고 깁브돈에서부터 올라와서 디르사를 에워쌌더라	And Omri went up from Gibbethon, and all Israel with him, and they besieged Tirzah.	Then Omri and all the Israelites marched up from Gibbethon and besieged Tirzah.
1KI	16	18	시므리가 성이 함락됨을 보고 왕궁 위소에 들어가서 왕궁에 불을 놓고 그 가운데서 죽었으니	And it came to pass, when Zimri saw that the city was taken, that he went into the palace of the king’s house, and burnt the king’s house over him with fire, and died,	When Zimri saw that the city was captured, he entered the citadel of the royal palace and burned it down upon himself. So he died
1KI	16	19	이는 저가 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하여 범죄함을 인함이라 저가 여로보암의 길로 행하며 그가 이스라엘로 죄를 범하게 한 그 죄 중에 행하였더라	For his sins which he sinned in doing evil in the sight of the Lord, in walking in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin which he did, to make Israel to sin.	because of the sins he had committed, doing evil in the sight of the LORD and following the example of Jeroboam and the sin he had committed and had caused Israel to commit.
1KI	16	20	시므리의 남은 행위와 그 모반한 일이 이스라엘 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	Now the rest of the acts of Zimri, and his treason that he wrought, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?	As for the rest of the acts of Zimri and the treason he committed, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?
1KI	16	21	그 때에 이스라엘 백성이 둘에 나뉘어 그 절반은 기낫의 아들 디브니를 좇아 저로 왕을 삼으려 하고 그 절반은 오므리를 좇았더니	Then were the people of Israel divided into two parts: half of the people followed Tibni the son of Ginath, to make him king; and half followed Omri.	At that time the people of Israel were divided: Half of the people supported Tibni son of Ginath as king, and half supported Omri.
1KI	16	22	오므리를 좇은 백성이 기낫의 아들 디브니를 좇은 백성을 이긴지라 디브니가 죽으매 오므리가 왕이 되니라	But the people that followed Omri prevailed against the people that followed Tibni the son of Ginath: so Tibni died, and Omri reigned.	But the followers of Omri proved stronger than those of Tibni son of Ginath. So Tibni died and Omri became king.
1KI	16	23	유다 왕 아사 제삼십일년에 오므리가 이스라엘 왕이 되어 십이 년을 위에 있으며 디르사에서 육 년 동안 치리하니라	In the thirty and first year of Asa king of Judah began Omri to reign over Israel, twelve years: six years reigned he in Tirzah.	In the thirty-first year of Asa’s reign over Judah, Omri became king of Israel, and he reigned twelve years, six of them in Tirzah.
1KI	16	24	저가 은 두 달란트로 세멜에게서 사마리아 산을 사고 그 산 위에 성을 건축하고 그 건축한 성 이름을 그 산 주인이 되었던 세멜의 이름을 좇아 사마리아라 일컬었더라	And he bought the hill Samaria of Shemer for two talents of silver, and built on the hill, and called the name of the city which he built, after the name of Shemer, owner of the hill, Samaria.	He bought the hill of Samaria from Shemer for two talents of silver and built a city there, calling it Samaria after the name of Shemer, who had owned the hill.
1KI	16	25	오므리가 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하되 그 전의 모든 사람보다 더욱 악하게 행하여	But Omri wrought evil in the eyes of the Lord, and did worse than all that were before him.	But Omri did evil in the sight of the LORD and acted more wickedly than all who were before him.
1KI	16	26	느밧의 아들 여로보암의 모든 길로 행하며 그가 이스라엘로 죄를 범하게 한 그 죄 중에 행하여 그 헛된 것으로 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 노를 격발케 하였더라	For he walked in all the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin, to provoke the Lord God of Israel to anger with their vanities.	For he walked in all the ways of Jeroboam son of Nebat and in his sins, which he caused Israel to commit, provoking the LORD, the God of Israel, to anger with their worthless idols.
1KI	16	27	오므리의 행한 그 남은 사적과 그 베푼 권세가 이스라엘 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	Now the rest of the acts of Omri which he did, and his might that he shewed, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?	As for the rest of the acts of Omri, along with his accomplishments and the might he exercised, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?
1KI	16	28	오므리가 그 열조와 함께 자매 사마리아에 장사되고 그 아들 아합이 대신하여 왕이 되니라	So Omri slept with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria: and Ahab his son reigned in his stead.	And Omri rested with his fathers and was buried in Samaria, and his son Ahab reigned in his place.
1KI	16	29	유다 왕 아사 제삼십팔년에 오므리의 아들 아합이 이스라엘 왕이 되니라 오므리의 아들 아합이 사마리아에서 이십이 년을 이스라엘을 다스리니라	And in the thirty and eighth year of Asa king of Judah began Ahab the son of Omri to reign over Israel: and Ahab the son of Omri reigned over Israel in Samaria twenty and two years.	In the thirty-eighth year of Asa’s reign over Judah, Ahab son of Omri became king of Israel, and he reigned in Samaria twenty-two years.
1KI	16	30	오므리의 아들 아합이 그 전의 모든 사람보다 여호와 보시기에 악을 더욱 행하여	And Ahab the son of Omri did evil in the sight of the Lord above all that were before him.	However, Ahab son of Omri did evil in the sight of the LORD, more than all who were before him.
1KI	16	31	느밧의 아들 여로보암의 죄를 따라 행하는 것을 오히려 가볍게 여기며 시돈 사람의 왕 엣바알의 딸 이세벨로 아내를 삼고 가서 바알을 섬겨 숭배하고	And it came to pass, as if it had been a light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that he took to wife Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the Zidonians, and went and served Baal, and worshipped him.	And as if it were not enough for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat, he even married Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the Sidonians, and he then proceeded to serve and worship Baal.
1KI	16	32	사마리아에 건축한 바알의 사당 속에 바알을 위하여 단을 쌓으며	And he reared up an altar for Baal in the house of Baal, which he had built in Samaria.	First, Ahab set up an altar for Baal in the temple of Baal that he had built in Samaria.
1KI	16	33	또 아세라 목상을 만들었으니 저는 그 전의 모든 이스라엘 왕보다 심히 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 노를 격발하였더라	And Ahab made a grove; and Ahab did more to provoke the Lord God of Israel to anger than all the kings of Israel that were before him.	Then he set up an Asherah pole. Thus Ahab did more to provoke the LORD, the God of Israel, to anger than all the kings of Israel before him.
1KI	16	34	그 시대에 벧엘 사람 히엘이 여리고를 건축하였는데 저가 그 터를 쌓을 때에 맏아들 아비람을 잃었고 그 문을 세울 때에 말째 아들 스굽을 잃었으니 여호와께서 눈의 아들 여호수아로 하신 말씀과 같이 되었더라	In his days did Hiel the Beth–elite build Jericho: he laid the foundation thereof in Abiram his firstborn, and set up the gates thereof in his youngest son Segub, according to the word of the Lord, which he spake by Joshua the son of Nun.	In Ahab’s days, Hiel the Bethelite rebuilt Jericho. At the cost of Abiram his firstborn he laid its foundation, and at the cost of Segub his youngest he set up its gates, according to the word that the LORD had spoken through Joshua son of Nun.
1KI	17	1	길르앗에 우거하는 자 중에 디셉 사람 엘리야가 아합에게 고하되 나의 섬기는 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 사심을 가리켜 맹세하노니 내 말이 없으면 수 년 동안 우로가 있지 아니하리라 하니라	And Elijah the Tishbite, who was of the inhabitants of Gilead, said unto Ahab, As the Lord God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word.	Now Elijah the Tishbite, who was among the settlers of Gilead, said to Ahab, “As surely as the LORD lives—the God of Israel before whom I stand—there will be neither dew nor rain in these years except at my word!”
1KI	17	2	여호와의 말씀이 엘리야에게 임하여 가라사대	And the word of the Lord came unto him, saying,	Then a revelation from the LORD came to Elijah:
1KI	17	3	너는 여기서 떠나 동으로 가서 요단 앞 그릿 시냇가에 숨고	Get thee hence, and turn thee eastward, and hide thyself by the brook Cherith, that is before Jordan.	“Leave here, turn eastward, and hide yourself by the Brook of Cherith, east of the Jordan.
1KI	17	4	그 시냇물을 마시라 내가 까마귀들을 명하여 거기서 너를 먹이게 하리라	And it shall be, that thou shalt drink of the brook; and I have commanded the ravens to feed thee there.	And you are to drink from the brook, and I have commanded the ravens to feed you there.”
1KI	17	5	저가 여호와의 말씀과 같이 하여 곧 가서 요단 앞 그릿 시냇가에 머물매	So he went and did according unto the word of the Lord: for he went and dwelt by the brook Cherith, that is before Jordan.	So Elijah did what the LORD had told him, and he went and lived by the Brook of Cherith, east of the Jordan.
1KI	17	6	까마귀들이 아침에도 떡과 고기를, 저녁에도 떡과 고기를 가져왔고 저가 시내를 마셨더니	And the ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the evening; and he drank of the brook.	The ravens would bring him bread and meat in the morning and evening, and he would drink from the brook.
1KI	17	7	땅에 비가 내리지 아니하므로 얼마 후에 그 시내가 마르니라	And it came to pass after a while, that the brook dried up, because there had been no rain in the land.	Some time later, however, the brook dried up because there had been no rain in the land.
1KI	17	8	여호와의 말씀이 엘리야에게 임하여 가라사대	And the word of the Lord came unto him, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to Elijah:
1KI	17	9	너는 일어나 시돈에 속한 사르밧으로 가서 거기 유하라 내가 그곳 과부에게 명하여 너를 공궤하게 하였느니라	Arise, get thee to Zarephath, which belongeth to Zidon, and dwell there: behold, I have commanded a widow woman there to sustain thee.	“Get up and go to Zarephath of Sidon, and stay there. Behold, I have commanded a widow there to provide for you.”
1KI	17	10	저가 일어나 사르밧으로 가서 성문에 이를 때에 한 과부가 그곳에서 나무가지를 줍는지라 이에 불러 가로되 청컨대 그릇에 물을 조금 가져다가 나로 마시게 하라	So he arose and went to Zarephath. And when he came to the gate of the city, behold, the widow woman was there gathering of sticks: and he called to her, and said, Fetch me, I pray thee, a little water in a vessel, that I may drink.	So Elijah got up and went to Zarephath. When he arrived at the city gate, there was a widow gathering sticks. Elijah called to her and said, “Please bring me a little water in a cup, so that I may drink.”
1KI	17	11	저가 가지러 갈 때에 엘리야가 저를 불러 가로되 청컨대 네 손에 떡 한 조각을 내게로 가져오라	And as she was going to fetch it, he called to her, and said, Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thine hand.	And as she was going to get it, he called to her and said, “Please bring me a piece of bread.”
1KI	17	12	저가 가로되 당신의 하나님 여호와의 사심을 가리켜 맹세하노니 나는 떡이 없고 다만 통에 가루 한 움큼과 병에 기름 조금뿐이라 내가 나무가지 두엇을 주워다가 나와 내 아들을 위하여 음식을 만들어 먹고 그 후에는 죽으리라	And she said, As the Lord thy God liveth, I have not a cake, but an handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse: and, behold, I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for me and my son, that we may eat it, and die.	But she replied, “As surely as the LORD your God lives, I have no bread—only a handful of flour in a jar and a little oil in a jug. Look, I am gathering a couple of sticks to take home and prepare a meal for myself and my son, so that we may eat it and die.”
1KI	17	13	엘리야가 저에게 이르되 두려워 말고 가서 네 말대로 하려니와 먼저 그것으로 나를 위하여 작은 떡 하나를 만들어 내게로 가져오고 그 후에 너와 네 아들을 위하여 만들라	And Elijah said unto her, Fear not; go and do as thou hast said: but make me thereof a little cake first, and bring it unto me, and after make for thee and for thy son.	“Do not be afraid,” Elijah said to her. “Go and do as you have said. But first make me a small cake of bread from what you have, and bring it out to me. Afterward, make some for yourself and your son,
1KI	17	14	이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 말씀이 나 여호와가 비를 지면에 내리는 날까지 그 통의 가루는 다하지 아니하고 그 병의 기름은 없어지지 아니하리라 하셨느니라	For thus saith the Lord God of Israel, The barrel of meal shall not waste, neither shall the cruse of oil fail, until the day that the Lord sendeth rain upon the earth.	for this is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: ‘The jar of flour will not be exhausted and the jug of oil will not run dry until the day the LORD sends rain upon the face of the earth.’”
1KI	17	15	저가 가서 엘리야의 말대로 하였더니 저와 엘리야와 식구가 여러날 먹었으나	And she went and did according to the saying of Elijah: and she, and he, and her house, did eat many days.	So she went and did according to the word of Elijah, and there was food every day for Elijah and the woman and her household.
1KI	17	16	여호와께서 엘리야로 하신 말씀 같이 통의 가루가 다하지 아니하고 병의 기름이 없어지지 아니하니라	And the barrel of meal wasted not, neither did the cruse of oil fail, according to the word of the Lord, which he spake by Elijah.	The jar of flour was not exhausted and the jug of oil did not run dry, according to the word that the LORD had spoken through Elijah.
1KI	17	17	이 일 후에 그 집 주모 되는 여인의 아들이 병들어 증세가 심히 위중하다가 숨이 끊어진지라	And it came to pass after these things, that the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick; and his sickness was so sore, that there was no breath left in him.	Later, the son of the woman who owned the house became ill, and his sickness grew worse and worse, until no breath remained in him.
1KI	17	18	여인이 엘리야에게 이르되 하나님의 사람이여 당신이 나로 더불어 무슨 상관이 있기로 내 죄를 생각나게 하고 또 내 아들을 죽게 하려고 내게 오셨나이까	And she said unto Elijah, What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my son?	“O man of God,” said the woman to Elijah, “what have you done to me? Have you come to remind me of my iniquity and cause the death of my son?”
1KI	17	19	엘리야가 저에게 그 아들을 달라 하여 그를 그 여인의 품에서 취하여 안고 자기의 거처하는 다락에 올라가서 자기 침상에 누이고	And he said unto her, Give me thy son. And he took him out of her bosom, and carried him up into a loft, where he abode, and laid him upon his own bed.	But Elijah said to her, “Give me your son.” So he took him from her arms, carried him to the upper room where he was staying, and laid him on his own bed.
1KI	17	20	여호와께 부르짖어 가로되 나의 하나님 여호와여 주께서 또 내가 우거하는 집 과부에게 재앙을 내리사 그 아들로 죽게 하셨나이까 하고	And he cried unto the Lord, and said, O Lord my God, hast thou also brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by slaying her son?	Then he cried out to the LORD, “O LORD my God, have You also brought tragedy on this widow who has opened her home to me, by causing her son to die?”
1KI	17	21	그 아이 위에 몸을 세 번 펴서 엎드리고 여호와께 부르짖어 가로되 나의 하나님 여호와여 원컨대 이 아이의 혼으로 그 몸에 돌아오게 하옵소서 하니	And he stretched himself upon the child three times, and cried unto the Lord, and said, O Lord my God, I pray thee, let this child’s soul come into him again.	Then he stretched himself out over the child three times and cried out to the LORD, “O LORD my God, please let this boy’s life return to him!”
1KI	17	22	여호와께서 엘리야의 소리를 들으시므로 그 아이의 혼이 몸으로 돌아오고 살아난지라	And the Lord heard the voice of Elijah; and the soul of the child came into him again, and he revived.	And the LORD listened to the voice of Elijah, and the child’s life returned to him, and he lived.
1KI	17	23	엘리야가 그 아이를 안고 다락에서 방으로 내려가서 그 어미에게 주며 이르되 보라 네 아들이 살았느니라	And Elijah took the child, and brought him down out of the chamber into the house, and delivered him unto his mother: and Elijah said, See, thy son liveth.	Then Elijah took the child, brought him down from the upper room into the house, and gave him to his mother. “Look, your son is alive,” Elijah declared.
1KI	17	24	여인이 엘리야에게 이르되 내가 이제야 당신은 하나님의 사람이시요 당신의 입에 있는 여호와의 말씀이 진실한줄 아노라 하니라	And the woman said to Elijah, Now by this I know that thou art a man of God, and that the word of the Lord in thy mouth is truth.	Then the woman said to Elijah, “Now I know that you are a man of God and that the word of the LORD from your mouth is truth.”
1KI	18	1	많은 날을 지내고 제삼년에 여호와의 말씀이 엘리야에게 임하여 가라사대 너는 가서 아합에게 보이라 내가 비를 지면에 내리리라	And it came to pass after many days, that the word of the Lord came to Elijah in the third year, saying, Go, shew thyself unto Ahab; and I will send rain upon the earth.	After a long time, in the third year of the drought, the word of the LORD came to Elijah: “Go and present yourself to Ahab, and I will send rain upon the face of the earth.”
1KI	18	2	엘리야가 아합에게 보이려고 가니 그 때에 사마리아에 기근이 심하였더라	And Elijah went to shew himself unto Ahab. And there was a sore famine in Samaria.	So Elijah went to present himself to Ahab. The famine was severe in Samaria,
1KI	18	3	아합이 궁내 대신 오바댜를 불렀으니 이 오바댜는 크게 여호와를 경외하는 자라	And Ahab called Obadiah, which was the governor of his house. (Now Obadiah feared the Lord greatly:	and Ahab summoned Obadiah, who was in charge of the palace. (Now Obadiah greatly feared the LORD,
1KI	18	4	이세벨이 여호와의 선지자들을 멸할 때에 오바댜가 선지자 일백 인을 가져 오십 인씩 굴에 숨기고 떡과 물을 먹였었더라	For it was so, when Jezebel cut off the prophets of the Lord, that Obadiah took an hundred prophets, and hid them by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water.)	for when Jezebel had slaughtered the prophets of the LORD, Obadiah had taken a hundred prophets and hidden them, fifty men per cave, providing them with food and water.)
1KI	18	5	아합이 오바댜에게 이르되 이 땅의 모든 물 근원과 모든 내로 가자 혹시 꼴을 얻으리라 그러면 말과 노새를 살리리니 짐승을 다 잃지 않게 되리라 하고	And Ahab said unto Obadiah, Go into the land, unto all fountains of water, and unto all brooks: peradventure we may find grass to save the horses and mules alive, that we lose not all the beasts.	Then Ahab said to Obadiah, “Go throughout the land to every spring and every valley. Perhaps we will find grass to keep the horses and mules alive so that we will not have to destroy any livestock.”
1KI	18	6	두 사람이 두루 다닐 땅을 나누어 아합은 홀로 이 길로 가고 오바댜는 홀로 저 길로 가니라	So they divided the land between them to pass throughout it: Ahab went one way by himself, and Obadiah went another way by himself.	So they divided the land to explore. Ahab went one way by himself, and Obadiah went the other way by himself.
1KI	18	7	오바댜가 길에 있을 때에 엘리야가 저를 만난지라 저가 알아보고 엎드려 말하되 내 주 엘리야여 당신이시니이까	And as Obadiah was in the way, behold, Elijah met him: and he knew him, and fell on his face, and said, Art thou that my lord Elijah?	Now as Obadiah went on his way, Elijah suddenly met him. When Obadiah recognized him, he fell facedown and said, “Is it you, my lord Elijah?”
1KI	18	8	대답하되 그러하다 가서 네 주에게 고하기를 엘리야가 여기 있다 하라	And he answered him, I am: go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here.	“It is I,” he answered. “Go tell your master, ‘Elijah is here!’”
1KI	18	9	가로되 내가 무슨 죄를 범하였기에 당신이 당신의 종을 아합의 손에 붙여 죽이게 하려 하시나이까	And he said, What have I sinned, that thou wouldest deliver thy servant into the hand of Ahab, to slay me?	But Obadiah replied, “How have I sinned, that you are handing your servant over to Ahab to put me to death?
1KI	18	10	당신의 하나님 여호와의 사심을 가리켜 맹세하노니 내 주께서 사람을 보내어 당신을 찾지 아니한 족속이나 나라가 없었는데 저희가 말하기를 엘리야가 없다 하면 그 나라와 그 족속으로 당신을 보지 못하였다는 맹세를 하게 하였거늘	As the Lord thy God liveth, there is no nation or kingdom, whither my lord hath not sent to seek thee: and when they said, He is not there; he took an oath of the kingdom and nation, that they found thee not.	As surely as the LORD your God lives, there is no nation or kingdom where my lord has not sent someone to search for you. When they said, ‘He is not here,’ he made that kingdom or nation swear that they had not found you.
1KI	18	11	이제 당신의 말씀이 가서 네 주에게 고하기를 엘리야가 여기 있다 하라 하시니	And now thou sayest, Go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here.	And now you say, ‘Go tell your master that Elijah is here!’
1KI	18	12	내가 당신을 떠나간 후에 여호와의 신이 나의 알지 못하는 곳으로 당신을 이끌어 가시리니 내가 가서 아합에게 고하였다가 저가 당신을 찾지 못하면 내가 죽임을 당하리이다 당신의 종은 어려서부터 여호와를 경외하는 자라	And it shall come to pass, as soon as I am gone from thee, that the Spirit of the Lord shall carry thee whither I know not; and so when I come and tell Ahab, and he cannot find thee, he shall slay me: but I thy servant fear the Lord from my youth.	I do not know where the Spirit of the LORD may carry you off when I leave you. Then when I go and tell Ahab and he does not find you, he will kill me. But I, your servant, have feared the LORD from my youth.
1KI	18	13	이세벨이 여호와의 선지자들을 죽일 때에 내가 여호와의 선지자 중에 일백 인을 오십 인씩 굴에 숨기고 떡과 물로 먹인 일이 내 주께 들리지 아니하였나이까	Was it not told my lord what I did when Jezebel slew the prophets of the Lord, how I hid an hundred men of the Lord’s prophets by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water?	Was it not reported to my lord what I did when Jezebel slaughtered the prophets of the LORD? I hid a hundred prophets of the LORD, fifty men per cave, and I provided them with food and water.
1KI	18	14	이제 당신의 말씀이 가서 네 주에게 고하기를 엘리야가 여기 있다 하라 하시니 그리하면 저가 나를 죽이리이다	And now thou sayest, Go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here: and he shall slay me.	And now you say, ‘Go tell your lord that Elijah is here!’ He will kill me!”
1KI	18	15	엘리야가 이르되 내가 모시는 만군의 여호와의 사심을 가리켜 맹세하노니 내가 오늘날 아합에게 보이리라	And Elijah said, As the Lord of hosts liveth, before whom I stand, I will surely shew myself unto him to day.	Then Elijah said, “As surely as the LORD of Hosts lives, before whom I stand, I will present myself to Ahab today.”
1KI	18	16	오바댜가 가서 아합을 만나 고하매 아합이 엘리야를 만나려 하여 가다가	So Obadiah went to meet Ahab, and told him: and Ahab went to meet Elijah.	So Obadiah went to inform Ahab, who went to meet Elijah.
1KI	18	17	엘리야를 볼 때에 저에게 이르되 이스라엘을 괴롭게 하는 자여 네냐	And it came to pass, when Ahab saw Elijah, that Ahab said unto him, Art thou he that troubleth Israel?	When Ahab saw Elijah, he said to him, “Is that you, O troubler of Israel?”
1KI	18	18	저가 대답하되 내가 이스라엘을 괴롭게 한 것이 아니라 당신과 당신의 아비의 집이 괴롭게 하였으니 이는 여호와의 명령을 버렸고 당신이 바알들을 좇았음이라	And he answered, I have not troubled Israel; but thou, and thy father’s house, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of the Lord, and thou hast followed Baalim.	“I have not troubled Israel,” Elijah replied, “but you and your father’s house have, for you have forsaken the commandments of the LORD and have followed the Baals.
1KI	18	19	그런즉 보내어 온 이스라엘과 이세벨의 상에서 먹는 바알의 선지자 사백오십 인과 아세라의 선지자 사백 인을 갈멜 산으로 모아 내게로 나오게 하소서	Now therefore send, and gather to me all Israel unto mount Carmel, and the prophets of Baal four hundred and fifty, and the prophets of the groves four hundred, which eat at Jezebel’s table.	Now summon all Israel to meet me on Mount Carmel, along with the four hundred and fifty prophets of Baal and the four hundred prophets of Asherah who eat at Jezebel’s table.”
1KI	18	20	아합이 이에 이스라엘 모든 자손에게로 보내어 선지자들을 갈멜 산으로 모으니라	So Ahab sent unto all the children of Israel, and gathered the prophets together unto mount Carmel.	So Ahab summoned all the Israelites and assembled the prophets on Mount Carmel.
1KI	18	21	엘리야가 모든 백성에게 가까이 나아가 이르되 너희가 어느 때까지 두 사이에서 머뭇머뭇 하려느냐 여호와가 만일 하나님이면 그를 좇고 바알이 만일 하나님이면 그를 좇을지니라 하니 백성이 한 말도 대답지 아니하는지라	And Elijah came unto all the people, and said, How long halt ye between two opinions? if the Lord be God, follow him: but if Baal, then follow him. And the people answered him not a word.	Then Elijah approached all the people and said, “How long will you waver between two opinions? If the LORD is God, follow Him. But if Baal is God, follow him.” But the people did not answer a word.
1KI	18	22	엘리야가 백성에게 이르되 여호와의 선지자는 나만 홀로 남았으나 바알의 선지자는 사백오십 인이로다	Then said Elijah unto the people, I, even I only, remain a prophet of the Lord; but Baal’s prophets are four hundred and fifty men.	Then Elijah said to the people, “I am the only remaining prophet of the LORD, but Baal has four hundred and fifty prophets.
1KI	18	23	그런즉 두 송아지를 우리에게 가져오게 하고 저희는 한 송아지를 택하여 각을 떠서 나무 위에 놓고 불은 놓지 말며 나도 한 송아지를 잡아 나무 위에 놓고 불은 놓지 말고	Let them therefore give us two bullocks; and let them choose one bullock for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay it on wood, and put no fire under: and I will dress the other bullock, and lay it on wood, and put no fire under:	Get two bulls for us. Let the prophets of Baal choose one bull for themselves, cut it into pieces, and place it on the wood but not light the fire. And I will prepare the other bull and place it on the wood but not light the fire.
1KI	18	24	너희는 너희 신의 이름을 부르라 나는 여호와의 이름을 부르리니 이에 불로 응답하는 신 그가 하나님이니라 백성이 다 대답하되 그 말이 옳도다	And call ye on the name of your gods, and I will call on the name of the Lord: and the God that answereth by fire, let him be God. And all the people answered and said, It is well spoken.	Then you may call on the name of your god, and I will call on the name of the LORD. The God who answers by fire, He is God.” And all the people answered, “What you say is good.”
1KI	18	25	엘리야가 바알의 선지자들에게 이르되 너희는 많으니 먼저 한 송아지를 택하여 잡고 너희 신의 이름을 부르라 그러나 불을 놓지 말라	And Elijah said unto the prophets of Baal, Choose you one bullock for yourselves, and dress it first; for ye are many; and call on the name of your gods, but put no fire under.	Then Elijah said to the prophets of Baal, “Since you are so numerous, choose for yourselves one bull and prepare it first. Then call on the name of your god, but do not light the fire.”
1KI	18	26	저희가 그 받은 송아지를 취하여 잡고 아침부터 낮까지 바알의 이름을 불러 가로되 바알이여 우리에게 응답하소서 하나 아무 소리도 없으므로 저희가 그 쌓은 단 주위에서 뛰놀더라	And they took the bullock which was given them, and they dressed it, and called on the name of Baal from morning even until noon, saying, O Baal, hear us. But there was no voice, nor any that answered. And they leaped upon the altar which was made.	And they took the bull that was given them, prepared it, and called on the name of Baal from morning until noon, shouting, “O Baal, answer us!” But there was no sound, and no one answered as they leaped around the altar they had made.
1KI	18	27	오정에 이르러는 엘리야가 저희를 조롱하여 가로되 큰 소리로 부르라 저는 신인즉 묵상하고 있는지 혹 잠간 나갔는지 혹 길을 행하는지 혹 잠이 들어서 깨워야 할 것인지... 하매	And it came to pass at noon, that Elijah mocked them, and said, Cry aloud: for he is a god; either he is talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or peradventure he sleepeth, and must be awaked.	At noon Elijah began to taunt them, saying, “Shout louder, for he is a god! Perhaps he is deep in thought, or occupied, or on a journey. Perhaps he is sleeping and must be awakened!”
1KI	18	28	이에 저희가 큰 소리로 부르고 그 규례를 따라 피가 흐르기까지 칼과 창으로 그 몸을 상하게 하더라	And they cried aloud, and cut themselves after their manner with knives and lancets, till the blood gushed out upon them.	So they shouted louder and cut themselves with knives and lances, as was their custom, until the blood gushed over them.
1KI	18	29	이같이 하여 오정이 지났으나 저희가 오히려 진언을 하여 저녁 소제 드릴 때까지 이를지라도 아무 소리도 없고 아무 응답하는 자도 없고 아무 돌아보는 자도 없더라	And it came to pass, when midday was past, and they prophesied until the time of the offering of the evening sacrifice, that there was neither voice, nor any to answer, nor any that regarded.	Midday passed, and they kept on raving until the time of the evening sacrifice. But there was no response; no one answered, no one paid attention.
1KI	18	30	엘리야가 모든 백성을 향하여 이르되 내게로 가까이 오라 백성이 다 저에게 가까이 오매 저가 무너진 여호와의 단을 수축하되	And Elijah said unto all the people, Come near unto me. And all the people came near unto him. And he repaired the altar of the Lord that was broken down.	Then Elijah said to all the people, “Come near to me.” So all the people approached him, and he repaired the altar of the LORD that had been torn down.
1KI	18	31	야곱의 아들들의 지파의 수효를 따라 열두 돌을 취하니 이 야곱은 여호와께서 옛적에 저에게 임하여 이르시기를 네 이름을 이스라엘이라 하리라 하신 자더라	And Elijah took twelve stones, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, unto whom the word of the Lord came, saying, Israel shall be thy name:	And Elijah took twelve stones, one for each tribe of the sons of Jacob, to whom the word of the LORD had come and said, “Israel shall be your name.”
1KI	18	32	저가 여호와의 이름을 의지하여 그 돌로 단을 쌓고 단으로 돌아가며 곡식 종자 두 세아를 용납할만한 도랑을 만들고	And with the stones he built an altar in the name of the Lord: and he made a trench about the altar, as great as would contain two measures of seed.	And with the stones, Elijah built an altar in the name of the LORD. Then he dug a trench around the altar large enough to hold two seahs of seed.
1KI	18	33	또 나무를 벌이고 송아지의 각을 떠서 나무 위에 놓고 이르되 통 넷에 물을 채워다가 번제물과 나무 위에 부으라 하고	And he put the wood in order, and cut the bullock in pieces, and laid him on the wood, and said, Fill four barrels with water, and pour it on the burnt sacrifice, and on the wood.	Next, he arranged the wood, cut up the bull, placed it on the wood,
1KI	18	34	또 이르되 다시 그리하라 하여 다시 그리하니 또 이르되 세 번 그리하라 하여 세 번 그리하니	And he said, Do it the second time. And they did it the second time. And he said, Do it the third time. And they did it the third time.	and said, “Fill four waterpots and pour the water on the offering and on the wood.” “Do it a second time,” he said, and they did it a second time. “Do it a third time,” he said, and they did it a third time.
1KI	18	35	물이 단으로 두루 흐르고 도랑에도 물이 가득하게 되었더라	And the water ran round about the altar; and he filled the trench also with water.	So the water ran down around the altar and even filled the trench.
1KI	18	36	저녁 소제 드릴 때에 이르러 선지자 엘리야가 나아가서 말하되 아브라함과 이삭과 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와여 주께서 이스라엘 중에서 하나님이 되심과 내가 주의 종이 됨과 내가 주의 말씀대로 이 모든 일을 행하는 것을 오늘날 알게 하옵소서	And it came to pass at the time of the offering of the evening sacrifice, that Elijah the prophet came near, and said, Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel, let it be known this day that thou art God in Israel, and that I am thy servant, and that I have done all these things at thy word.	At the time of the evening sacrifice, Elijah the prophet approached the altar and said, “O LORD, God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, let it be known this day that You are God in Israel and that I am Your servant and have done all these things at Your command.
1KI	18	37	여호와여 내게 응답하옵소서 내게 응답하옵소서 이 백성으로 주 여호와는 하나님이신 것과 주는 저희의 마음으로 돌이키게 하시는 것을 알게 하옵소서 하매	Hear me, O Lord, hear me, that this people may know that thou art the Lord God, and that thou hast turned their heart back again.	Answer me, O LORD! Answer me, so that this people will know that You, the LORD, are God, and that You have turned their hearts back again.”
1KI	18	38	이에 여호와의 불이 내려서 번제물과 나무와 돌과 흙을 태우고 또 도랑의 물을 핥은지라	Then the fire of the Lord fell, and consumed the burnt sacrifice, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that was in the trench.	Then the fire of the LORD fell and consumed the sacrifice, the wood, the stones, and the dust, and it licked up the water in the trench.
1KI	18	39	모든 백성이 보고 엎드려 말하되 여호와 그는 하나님이시로다 여호와 그는 하나님이시로다 하니	And when all the people saw it, they fell on their faces: and they said, The Lord, he is the God; the Lord, he is the God.	When all the people saw this, they fell facedown and said, “The LORD, He is God! The LORD, He is God!”
1KI	18	40	엘리야가 저희에게 이르되 바알의 선지자를 잡되 하나도 도망하지 못하게 하라 하매 곧 잡은지라 엘리야가 저희를 기손 시내로 내려다가 거기서 죽이니라	And Elijah said unto them, Take the prophets of Baal; let not one of them escape. And they took them: and Elijah brought them down to the brook Kishon, and slew them there.	Then Elijah ordered them, “Seize the prophets of Baal! Do not let a single one escape.” So they seized them, and Elijah brought them down to the Kishon Valley and slaughtered them there.
1KI	18	41	엘리야가 아합에게 이르되 올라가서 먹고 마시소서 큰 비의 소리가 있나이다	And Elijah said unto Ahab, Get thee up, eat and drink; for there is a sound of abundance of rain.	And Elijah said to Ahab, “Go up, eat and drink, for there is the sound of a heavy rain.”
1KI	18	42	아합이 먹고 마시러 올라가니라 엘리야가 갈멜 산 꼭대기로 올라가서 땅에 꿇어 엎드려 그 얼굴을 무릎 사이에 넣고	So Ahab went up to eat and to drink. And Elijah went up to the top of Carmel; and he cast himself down upon the earth, and put his face between his knees,	So Ahab went up to eat and drink. But Elijah climbed to the summit of Carmel, bent down on the ground, and put his face between his knees.
1KI	18	43	그 사환에게 이르되 올라가 바다 편을 바라보라 저가 올라가 바라보고 고하되 아무 것도 없나이다 가로되 일곱번까지 다시 가라	And said to his servant, Go up now, look toward the sea. And he went up, and looked, and said, There is nothing. And he said, Go again seven times.	“Go and look toward the sea,” he said to his servant. So the servant went and looked, and he said, “There is nothing there.” Seven times Elijah said, “Go back.”
1KI	18	44	일곱번째 이르러서는 저가 고하되 바다에서 사람의 손만한 작은 구름이 일어나나이다 가로되 올라가 아합에게 고하기를 비에 막히지 아니하도록 마차를 갖추고 내려가소서 하라 하니라	And it came to pass at the seventh time, that he said, Behold, there ariseth a little cloud out of the sea, like a man’s hand. And he said, Go up, say unto Ahab, Prepare thy chariot, and get thee down, that the rain stop thee not.	On the seventh time the servant reported, “There is a cloud as small as a man’s hand rising from the sea.” And Elijah replied, “Go and tell Ahab, ‘Prepare your chariot and go down before the rain stops you.’”
1KI	18	45	조금 후에 구름과 바람이 일어나서 하늘이 캄캄하여지며 큰 비가 내리는지라 아합이 마차를 타고 이스르엘로 가니	And it came to pass in the mean while, that the heaven was black with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain. And Ahab rode, and went to Jezreel.	Meanwhile, the sky grew dark with clouds and wind, and a heavy rain began to fall. So Ahab rode away and went to Jezreel.
1KI	18	46	여호와의 능력이 엘리야에게 임하매 저가 허리를 동이고 이스르엘로 들어가는 곳까지 아합 앞에서 달려갔더라	And the hand of the Lord was on Elijah; and he girded up his loins, and ran before Ahab to the entrance of Jezreel.	And the hand of the LORD came upon Elijah, and he tucked his cloak into his belt and ran ahead of Ahab all the way to Jezreel.
1KI	19	1	아합이 엘리야의 무릇 행한 일과 그가 어떻게 모든 선지자를 칼로 죽인 것을 이세벨에게 고하니	And Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done, and withal how he had slain all the prophets with the sword.	Now Ahab told Jezebel everything that Elijah had done and how he had killed all the prophets with the sword.
1KI	19	2	이세벨이 사자를 엘리야에게 보내어 이르되 내가 내일 이맘때에는 정녕 네 생명으로 저 사람들 중 한 사람의 생명 같게 하리라 아니하면 신들이 내게 벌 위에 벌을 내림이 마땅하니라 한지라	Then Jezebel sent a messenger unto Elijah, saying, So let the gods do to me, and more also, if I make not thy life as the life of one of them by to morrow about this time.	So Jezebel sent a messenger to Elijah, saying, “May the gods deal with me, and ever so severely, if by this time tomorrow I do not make your life like the lives of those you killed!”
1KI	19	3	저가 이 형편을 보고 일어나 그 생명을 위하여 도망하여 유다에 속한 브엘세바에 이르러 자기의 사환을 그곳에 머물게 하고	And when he saw that, he arose, and went for his life, and came to Beer–sheba, which belongeth to Judah, and left his servant there.	And Elijah was afraid and ran for his life. When he came to Beersheba in Judah, he left his servant there,
1KI	19	4	스스로 광야로 들어가 하룻 길쯤 행하고 한 로뎀나무 아래 앉아서 죽기를 구하여 가로되 여호와여 넉넉하오니 지금 내 생명을 취하옵소서 나는 내 열조보다 낫지 못하니이다 하고	But he himself went a day’s journey into the wilderness, and came and sat down under a juniper tree: and he requested for himself that he might die; and said, It is enough; now, O Lord, take away my life; for I am not better than my fathers.	while he himself traveled on a day’s journey into the wilderness. He sat down under a broom tree and prayed that he might die. “I have had enough, LORD,” he said. “Take my life, for I am no better than my fathers.”
1KI	19	5	로뎀나무 아래 누워 자더니 천사가 어루만지며 이르되 일어나서 먹으라 하는지라	And as he lay and slept under a juniper tree, behold, then an angel touched him, and said unto him, Arise and eat.	Then he lay down under the broom tree and fell asleep. Suddenly an angel touched him and said, “Get up and eat.”
1KI	19	6	본즉 머리맡에 숯불에 구운 떡과 한 병 물이 있더라 이에 먹고 마시고 다시 누웠더니	And he looked, and, behold, there was a cake baken on the coals, and a cruse of water at his head. And he did eat and drink, and laid him down again.	And he looked around, and there by his head was a cake of bread baked over hot coals, and a jar of water. So he ate and drank and lay down again.
1KI	19	7	여호와의 사자가 또 다시 와서 어루만지며 이르되 일어나서 먹으라 네가 길을 이기지 못할까 하노라 하는지라	And the angel of the Lord came again the second time, and touched him, and said, Arise and eat; because the journey is too great for thee.	A second time the angel of the LORD returned and touched him, saying, “Get up and eat, or the journey will be too much for you.”
1KI	19	8	이에 일어나 먹고 마시고 그 식물의 힘을 의지하여 사십 주 사십 야를 행하여 하나님의 산 호렙에 이르니라	And he arose, and did eat and drink, and went in the strength of that meat forty days and forty nights unto Horeb the mount of God.	So he got up and ate and drank. And strengthened by that food, he walked forty days and forty nights until he reached Horeb, the mountain of God.
1KI	19	9	엘리야가 그곳 굴에 들어가 거기서 유하더니 여호와의 말씀이 저에게 임하여 이르시되 엘리야야 네가 어찌하여 여기 있느냐	And he came thither unto a cave, and lodged there; and, behold, the word of the Lord came to him, and he said unto him, What doest thou here, Elijah?	There Elijah entered a cave and spent the night. And the word of the LORD came to him, saying, “What are you doing here, Elijah?”
1KI	19	10	저가 대답하되 내가 만군의 하나님 여호와를 위하여 열심이 특심하오니 이는 이스라엘 자손이 주의 언약을 버리고 주의 단을 헐며 칼로 주의 선지자들을 죽였음이오며 오직 나만 남았거늘 저희가 내 생명을 찾아 취하려 하나이다	And he said, I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts: for the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away.	“I have been very zealous for the LORD, the God of Hosts,” he replied, “but the Israelites have forsaken Your covenant, torn down Your altars, and killed Your prophets with the sword. I am the only one left, and they are seeking my life as well.”
1KI	19	11	여호와께서 가라사대 너는 나가서 여호와의 앞에서 산에 섰으라 하시더니 여호와께서 지나가시는데 여호와의 앞에 크고 강한 바람이 산을 가르고 바위를 부수나 바람 가운데 여호와께서 계시지 아니하며 바람 후에 지진이 있으나 지진 가운데도 여호와께서 계시지 아니하며	And he said, Go forth, and stand upon the mount before the Lord. And, behold, the Lord passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the Lord; but the Lord was not in the wind: and after the wind an earthquake; but the Lord was not in the earthquake:	Then the LORD said, “Go out and stand on the mountain before the LORD. Behold, the LORD is about to pass by.” And a great and mighty wind tore into the mountains and shattered the rocks before the LORD, but the LORD was not in the wind. After the wind there was an earthquake, but the LORD was not in the earthquake.
1KI	19	12	또 지진 후에 불이 있으나 불 가운데도 여호와께서 계시지 아니하더니 불 후에 세미한 소리가 있는지라	And after the earthquake a fire; but the Lord was not in the fire: and after the fire a still small voice.	After the earthquake there was a fire, but the LORD was not in the fire. And after the fire came a still, small voice.
1KI	19	13	엘리야가 듣고 겉옷으로 얼굴을 가리우고 나가 굴 어귀에 서매 소리가 있어 저에게 임하여 가라사대 엘리야야 네가 어찌하여 여기 있느냐	And it was so, when Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his face in his mantle, and went out, and stood in the entering in of the cave. And, behold, there came a voice unto him, and said, What doest thou here, Elijah?	When Elijah heard it, he wrapped his face in his cloak and went out and stood at the mouth of the cave. Suddenly a voice came to him and said, “What are you doing here, Elijah?”
1KI	19	14	저가 대답하되 내가 만군의 하나님 여호와를 위하여 열심이 특심하오니 이는 이스라엘 자손이 주의 언약을 버리고 주의 단을 헐며 칼로 주의 선지자들을 죽였음이오며 오직 나만 남았거늘 저희가 내 생명을 찾아 취하려 하나이다	And he said, I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts: because the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away.	“I have been very zealous for the LORD, the God of Hosts,” he replied, “but the Israelites have forsaken Your covenant, torn down Your altars, and killed Your prophets with the sword. I am the only one left, and they are seeking my life as well.”
1KI	19	15	여호와께서 저에게 이르시되 너는 네 길을 돌이켜 광야로 말미암아 다메섹에 가서 이르거든 하사엘에게 기름을 부어 아람 왕이 되게 하고	And the Lord said unto him, Go, return on thy way to the wilderness of Damascus: and when thou comest, anoint Hazael to be king over Syria:	Then the LORD said to him, “Go back by the way you came, and go to the Desert of Damascus. When you arrive, you are to anoint Hazael as king over Aram.
1KI	19	16	너는 또 님시의 아들 예후에게 기름을 부어 이스라엘 왕이 되게 하고 또 아벨므홀라 사밧의 아들 엘리사에게 기름을 부어 너를 대신하여 선지자가 되게 하라	And Jehu the son of Nimshi shalt thou anoint to be king over Israel: and Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abel–meholah shalt thou anoint to be prophet in thy room.	You are also to anoint Jehu son of Nimshi as king over Israel and Elisha son of Shaphat from Abel-meholah to succeed you as prophet.
1KI	19	17	하사엘의 칼을 피하는 자를 예후가 죽일 것이요 예후의 칼을 피하는 자를 엘리사가 죽이리라	And it shall come to pass, that him that escapeth the sword of Hazael shall Jehu slay: and him that escapeth from the sword of Jehu shall Elisha slay.	Then Jehu will put to death whoever escapes the sword of Hazael, and Elisha will put to death whoever escapes the sword of Jehu.
1KI	19	18	그러나 내가 이스라엘 가운데 칠천 인을 남기리니 다 무릎을 바알에게 꿇지 아니하고 다 그 입을 바알에게 맞추지 아니한 자니라	Yet I have left me seven thousand in Israel, all the knees which have not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth which hath not kissed him.	Nevertheless, I have reserved seven thousand in Israel—all whose knees have not bowed to Baal and whose mouths have not kissed him.”
1KI	19	19	엘리야가 거기서 떠나 사밧의 아들 엘리사를 만나니 저가 열두 겨리 소를 앞세우고 밭을 가는데 자기는 열둘째 겨리와 함께 있더라 엘리야가 그리로 건너가서 겉옷을 그의 위에 던졌더니	So he departed thence, and found Elisha the son of Shaphat, who was plowing with twelve yoke of oxen before him, and he with the twelfth: and Elijah passed by him, and cast his mantle upon him.	So Elijah departed and found Elisha son of Shaphat. He was plowing with twelve teams of oxen, and he was with the twelfth team. Elijah passed by him and threw his cloak around him.
1KI	19	20	저가 소를 버리고 엘리야에게로 달려가서 이르되 청컨대 나로 내 부모와 입맞추게 하소서 그리한 후에 내가 당신을 따르리이다 엘리야가 저에게 이르되 돌아가라 내가 네게 어떻게 행하였느냐 하니라	And he left the oxen, and ran after Elijah, and said, Let me, I pray thee, kiss my father and my mother, and then I will follow thee. And he said unto him, Go back again: for what have I done to thee?	So Elisha left the oxen, ran after Elijah, and said, “Please let me kiss my father and mother goodbye, and then I will follow you.” “Go on back,” Elijah replied, “for what have I done to you?”
1KI	19	21	엘리사가 저를 떠나 돌아가서 소 한 겨리를 취하여 잡고 소의 기구를 불살라 그 고기를 삶아 백성에게 주어 먹게 하고 일어나 가서 엘리야를 좇으며 수종들었더라	And he returned back from him, and took a yoke of oxen, and slew them, and boiled their flesh with the instruments of the oxen, and gave unto the people, and they did eat. Then he arose, and went after Elijah, and ministered unto him.	So Elisha turned back from him, took his pair of oxen, and slaughtered them. With the oxen’s equipment, he cooked the meat and gave it to the people, and they ate. Then he set out to follow and serve Elijah.
1KI	20	1	아람 왕 벤하닷이 그 군대를 다 모으니 왕 삼십이 인이 저와 함께 있고 또 말과 병거들이 있더라 이에 올라가서 사마리아를 에워싸고 치며	And Ben–hadad the king of Syria gathered all his host together: and there were thirty and two kings with him, and horses, and chariots: and he went up and besieged Samaria, and warred against it.	Now Ben-hadad king of Aram assembled his entire army. Accompanied by thirty-two kings with their horses and chariots, he marched up, besieged Samaria, and waged war against it.
1KI	20	2	사자들을 성 중 이스라엘 왕 아합에게 보내어 이르기를 벤하닷은 이르노니	And he sent messengers to Ahab king of Israel into the city, and said unto him, Thus saith Ben–hadad,	Then he sent messengers into the city to Ahab king of Israel,
1KI	20	3	네 은금은 내 것이요 네 처들과 네 자녀들의 아름다운 자도 내 것이니라 하매	Thy silver and thy gold is mine; thy wives also and thy children, even the goodliest, are mine.	saying, “This is what Ben-hadad says: ‘Your silver and gold are mine, and your best wives and children are mine!’”
1KI	20	4	이스라엘 왕이 대답하여 말하기를 내 주 왕이여 왕의 말씀 같이 나와 나의 것은 다 왕의 것이니이다 하였더니	And the king of Israel answered and said, My lord, O king, according to thy saying, I am thine, and all that I have.	And the king of Israel replied, “Just as you say, my lord the king: I am yours, along with all that I have.”
1KI	20	5	사자가 다시 와서 이르기를 벤하닷은 이르노라 내가 이미 네게 보내어 말하기를 너는 네 은금과 처들과 자녀들을 내게 붙이라 하였거니와	And the messengers came again, and said, Thus speaketh Ben–hadad, saying, Although I have sent unto thee, saying, Thou shalt deliver me thy silver, and thy gold, and thy wives, and thy children;	The messengers came back and said, “This is what Ben-hadad says: ‘I have sent to you to demand your silver, your gold, your wives, and your children.
1KI	20	6	내일 이맘때에 내가 내 신복을 네게 보내리니 저희가 네 집과 네 신복의 집을 수탐하여 무릇 네 눈이 기뻐하는 것을 그 손으로 잡아 가져가리라 한지라	Yet I will send my servants unto thee to morrow about this time, and they shall search thine house, and the houses of thy servants; and it shall be, that whatsoever is pleasant in thine eyes, they shall put it in their hand, and take it away.	But about this time tomorrow I will send my servants to search your palace and the houses of your servants. They will seize and carry away all that is precious to you.’”
1KI	20	7	이에 이스라엘 왕이 나라의 장로를 다 불러 이르되 너희는 이 사람이 잔해하려고 구하는 줄을 자세히 알라 저가 나의 처들과 자녀들과 은금을 취하려고 사람을 내게 보내었으나 내가 거절치 못하였노라	Then the king of Israel called all the elders of the land, and said, Mark, I pray you, and see how this man seeketh mischief: for he sent unto me for my wives, and for my children, and for my silver, and for my gold; and I denied him not.	Then the king of Israel summoned all the elders of the land and said, “Please take note and see that this man is looking for trouble, for when he demanded my wives, my children, my silver, and my gold, I did not deny him.”
1KI	20	8	모든 장로와 백성들이 다 왕께 고하되 왕은 듣지도 말고 허락지도 마옵소서 한지라	And all the elders and all the people said unto him, Hearken not unto him, nor consent.	And the elders and the people all said, “Do not listen to him or consent to his terms.”
1KI	20	9	그러므로 왕이 벤하닷의 사자에게 이르되 너희는 내 주 왕께 고하기를 왕이 처음에 보내어 종에게 구하신 것은 내가 다 그대로 하려니와 이것은 내가 할 수 없나이다 하라 사자들이 돌아가서 고하니라	Wherefore he said unto the messengers of Ben–hadad, Tell my lord the king, All that thou didst send for to thy servant at the first I will do: but this thing I may not do. And the messengers departed, and brought him word again.	So Ahab answered the messengers of Ben-hadad, “Tell my lord the king, ‘All that you demanded of your servant the first time I will do, but this thing I cannot do.’” So the messengers departed and relayed the message to Ben-hadad.
1KI	20	10	벤하닷이 다시 저에게 보내어 이르되 사마리아의 부스러진 것이 나를 좇는 백성의 무리의 손에 채우기에 족할 것 같으면 신들이 내게 벌 위에 벌을 내림이 마땅하니라 하매	And Ben–hadad sent unto him, and said, The gods do so unto me, and more also, if the dust of Samaria shall suffice for handfuls for all the people that follow me.	Then Ben-hadad sent another message to Ahab: “May the gods deal with me, and ever so severely, if enough dust remains of Samaria for each of my men to have a handful.”
1KI	20	11	이스라엘 왕이 대답하여 가로되 갑옷 입은 자가 갑옷 벗는 자 같이 자랑치 못할 것이라 하라 하니라	And the king of Israel answered and said, Tell him, Let not him that girdeth on his harness boast himself as he that putteth it off.	And the king of Israel replied, “Tell him: ‘The one putting on his armor should not boast like one taking it off.’”
1KI	20	12	벤하닷이 왕들과 장막에서 마시다가 이 말을 듣고 그 신복에게 이르되 너희는 진을 베풀라 하매 곧 성을 향하여 진을 베푸니라	And it came to pass, when Ben–hadad heard this message, as he was drinking, he and the kings in the pavilions, that he said unto his servants, Set yourselves in array. And they set themselves in array against the city.	Ben-hadad received this message while he and the kings were drinking in their tents, and he said to his servants, “Take your positions.” So they stationed themselves against the city.
1KI	20	13	한 선지자가 이스라엘 왕 아합에게 나아가서 가로되 여호와의 말씀이 네가 이 큰 무리를 보느냐 내가 오늘 저희를 네 손에 붙이리니 너는 내가 여호와인줄 알리라 하셨나이다	And, behold, there came a prophet unto Ahab king of Israel, saying, Thus saith the Lord, Hast thou seen all this great multitude? behold, I will deliver it into thine hand this day; and thou shalt know that I am the Lord.	Meanwhile a prophet approached Ahab king of Israel and declared, “This is what the LORD says: ‘Do you see this entire great army? Behold, I will deliver it into your hand this very day, and you will know that I am the LORD.’”
1KI	20	14	아합이 가로되 누구로 하시리이까 대답하되 여호와의 말씀이 각도의 방백의 소년들로 하리라 하셨나이다 아합이 가로되 누가 싸움을 시작하리이까 대답하되 왕이니이다	And Ahab said, By whom? And he said, Thus saith the Lord, Even by the young men of the princes of the provinces. Then he said, Who shall order the battle? And he answered, Thou.	“By whom?” Ahab asked. And the prophet replied, “This is what the LORD says: ‘By the young officers of the district governors.’” “Who will start the battle?” asked Ahab. “You will,” answered the prophet.
1KI	20	15	아합이 이에 각 도의 방백의 소년들을 계수하니 이백삼십이 인이요 그 외에 모든 백성 곧 이스라엘의 모든 자손을 계수하니 칠천 인이더라	Then he numbered the young men of the princes of the provinces, and they were two hundred and thirty two: and after them he numbered all the people, even all the children of Israel, being seven thousand.	So Ahab assembled the young officers of the district governors, and there were 232 men. And after them, he assembled the rest of the Israelite troops, 7,000 in all.
1KI	20	16	저희가 오정에 나가니 벤하닷은 장막에서 돕는 왕 삼십이 인으로 더불어 마시고 취한 중이라	And they went out at noon. But Ben–hadad was drinking himself drunk in the pavilions, he and the kings, the thirty and two kings that helped him.	They marched out at noon while Ben-hadad and the 32 kings allied with him were in their tents getting drunk.
1KI	20	17	각 도의 방백의 소년들이 먼저 나갔더라 벤하닷이 탐지꾼을 보내었더니 저희가 회보하여 가로되 사마리아에서 사람들이 나오더이다 하매	And the young men of the princes of the provinces went out first; and Ben–hadad sent out, and they told him, saying, There are men come out of Samaria.	And the young officers of the district governors marched out first. Now Ben-hadad had sent out scouts, who reported to him, “Men are marching out of Samaria.”
1KI	20	18	저가 이르되 화친하러 나올지라도 사로잡고 싸우러 나올지라도 사로잡으라 하니라	And he said, Whether they be come out for peace, take them alive; or whether they be come out for war, take them alive.	“If they have marched out in peace,” he said, “take them alive. Even if they have marched out for war, take them alive.”
1KI	20	19	각 도의 방백의 소년들과 저희를 좇는 군대들이 성에서 나가서	So these young men of the princes of the provinces came out of the city, and the army which followed them.	Meanwhile, these young officers of the district governors marched out of the city, with the army behind them,
1KI	20	20	각각 적군을 쳐 죽이매 아람 사람이 도망하는지라 이스라엘이 쫓으니 아람 왕 벤하닷이 말을 타고 마병으로 더불어 도망하여 면하니라	And they slew every one his man: and the Syrians fled; and Israel pursued them: and Ben–hadad the king of Syria escaped on an horse with the horsemen.	and each one struck down his opponent. So the Arameans fled, with the Israelites in pursuit. But Ben-hadad king of Aram escaped on horseback with the cavalry.
1KI	20	21	이스라엘 왕이 나가서 말과 병거를 치고 또 아람 사람을 쳐서 크게 도륙하였더라	And the king of Israel went out, and smote the horses and chariots, and slew the Syrians with a great slaughter.	Then the king of Israel marched out and attacked the horses and chariots, inflicting a great slaughter on the Arameans.
1KI	20	22	그 선지자가 이스라엘 왕에게 나아와 가로되 왕은 가서 힘을 기르고 왕의 행할 일을 알고 준비하소서 해가 돌아오면 아람 왕이 왕을 치러 오리이다 하니라	And the prophet came to the king of Israel, and said unto him, Go, strengthen thyself, and mark, and see what thou doest: for at the return of the year the king of Syria will come up against thee.	Afterward, the prophet approached the king of Israel and said, “Go and strengthen your position, and take note what you must do, for in the spring the king of Aram will come up against you.”
1KI	20	23	아람 왕의 신복들이 왕께 고하되 저희의 신은 산의 신이므로 저희가 우리보다 강하였거니와 우리가 만일 평지에서 저희와 싸우면 정녕 저희보다 강할지라	And the servants of the king of Syria said unto him, Their gods are gods of the hills; therefore they were stronger than we; but let us fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger than they.	Meanwhile, the servants of the king of Aram said to him, “Their gods are gods of the hills. That is why they prevailed over us. Instead, we should fight them on the plains; surely then we will prevail.
1KI	20	24	왕은 이 일을 행하실지니 곧 왕들을 제하여 각각 그곳에서 떠나게 하고 저희 대신에 장관들을 두시고	And do this thing, Take the kings away, every man out of his place, and put captains in their rooms:	So do this: Dismiss all the kings from their positions and replace them with other officers.
1KI	20	25	또 왕의 잃어버린 군대와 같은 군대를 왕을 위하여 충수하고 말도 말대로, 병거도 병거대로 충수하고 우리가 평지에서 저희와 싸우면 정녕 저희보다 강하리이다 왕이 그 말을 듣고 그리하니라	And number thee an army, like the army that thou hast lost, horse for horse, and chariot for chariot: and we will fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger than they. And he hearkened unto their voice, and did so.	And you must raise an army like the one you have lost—horse for horse and chariot for chariot—so we can fight the Israelites on the plain, where we will surely prevail.” And the king approved their plan and acted accordingly.
1KI	20	26	해가 돌아오매 벤하닷이 아람 사람을 점고하고 아벡으로 올라와서 이스라엘과 싸우려 하매	And it came to pass at the return of the year, that Ben–hadad numbered the Syrians, and went up to Aphek, to fight against Israel.	In the spring, Ben-hadad mobilized the Arameans and went up to Aphek to fight against Israel.
1KI	20	27	이스라엘 자손도 점고함을 입고 군량을 받고 마주 나가서 저희 앞에 진을 치니 이스라엘은 염소 새끼의 두 적은 떼와 같고 아람 사람은 그 땅에 가득하였더라	And the children of Israel were numbered, and were all present, and went against them: and the children of Israel pitched before them like two little flocks of kids; but the Syrians filled the country.	The Israelites also mobilized, gathered supplies, and marched out to meet them. The Israelites camped before them like two small flocks of goats, while the Arameans covered the countryside.
1KI	20	28	때에 하나님의 사람이 이스라엘 왕에게 나아와 고하여 가로되 여호와의 말씀이 아람 사람이 말하기를 여호와는 산의 신이요 골짜기의 신은 아니라 하도다 그러므로 내가 이 큰 군대를 다 네 손에 붙이리니 너희는 내가 여호와인줄 알리라 하셨나이다 하니라	And there came a man of God, and spake unto the king of Israel, and said, Thus saith the Lord, Because the Syrians have said, The Lord is God of the hills, but he is not God of the valleys, therefore will I deliver all this great multitude into thine hand, and ye shall know that I am the Lord.	Then the man of God approached the king of Israel and said, “This is what the LORD says: ‘Because the Arameans think the LORD is a god of the hills and not of the valleys, I will deliver all this great army into your hand. Then you will know that I am the LORD.’”
1KI	20	29	진이 서로 대한지 칠 일이라 제칠일에 접전하여 이스라엘 자손이 하루에 아람 보병 십만을 죽이매	And they pitched one over against the other seven days. And so it was, that in the seventh day the battle was joined: and the children of Israel slew of the Syrians an hundred thousand footmen in one day.	For seven days the armies camped opposite each other, and on the seventh day the battle ensued, and the Israelites struck down the Arameans—a hundred thousand foot soldiers in one day.
1KI	20	30	그 남은 자는 아벡으로 도망하여 성읍으로 들어갔더니 그 성이 그 남은 자 이만 칠천 위에 무너지고 벤하닷은 도망하여 성읍에 이르러 골방으로 들어가니라	But the rest fled to Aphek, into the city; and there a wall fell upon twenty and seven thousand of the men that were left. And Ben–hadad fled, and came into the city, into an inner chamber.	The rest of them fled into the city of Aphek, where the wall fell on twenty-seven thousand of the remaining men. Ben-hadad also fled to the city and hid in an inner room.
1KI	20	31	그 신복들이 저에게 고하되 우리가 들은즉 이스라엘 집의 왕들은 인자한 왕이라 하니 만일 우리가 굵은 베로 허리를 묶고 테두리를 머리에 이고 이스라엘 왕에게로 나아가면 저가 혹시 왕의 생명을 살리리이다 하고	And his servants said unto him, Behold now, we have heard that the kings of the house of Israel are merciful kings: let us, I pray thee, put sackcloth on our loins, and ropes upon our heads, and go out to the king of Israel: peradventure he will save thy life.	Then the servants of Ben-hadad said to him, “Look now, we have heard that the kings of the house of Israel are merciful. Let us go out to the king of Israel with sackcloth around our waists and ropes around our heads. Perhaps he will spare your life.”
1KI	20	32	저희가 굵은 베로 허리를 묶고 테두리를 머리에 이고 이스라엘 왕에게 이르러 가로되 왕의 종 벤하닷이 청하기를 나의 생명을 살려주옵소서 하더이다 아합이 가로되 저가 오히려 살았느냐 저는 나의 형제니라	So they girded sackcloth on their loins, and put ropes on their heads, and came to the king of Israel, and said, Thy servant Ben–hadad saith, I pray thee, let me live. And he said, Is he yet alive? he is my brother.	So with sackcloth around their waists and ropes around their heads, they went to the king of Israel and said, “Your servant Ben-hadad says, ‘Please spare my life.’” And the king answered, “Is he still alive? He is my brother.”
1KI	20	33	그 사람들이 징조로 여기고 그 말을 얼른 받아 대답하여 가로되 벤하닷은 왕의 형제니이다 왕이 가로되 너희는 가서 저를 인도하여 오라 벤하닷이 이에 왕에게 나아오니 왕이 저를 병거에 올린지라	Now the men did diligently observe whether any thing would come from him, and did hastily catch it: and they said, Thy brother Ben–hadad. Then he said, Go ye, bring him. Then Ben–hadad came forth to him; and he caused him to come up into the chariot.	Now the men were looking for a sign of hope, and they quickly grasped at this word and replied, “Yes, your brother Ben-hadad.” “Go and get him!” said the king. Then Ben-hadad came out, and Ahab had him come up into his chariot.
1KI	20	34	벤하닷이 왕께 고하되 내 부친이 당신의 부친에게서 빼앗은 모든 성읍을 내가 돌려 보내리이다 또 나의 부친이 사마리아에서 만든 것 같이 당신도 다메섹에서 당신을 위하여 거리를 만드소서 아합이 가로되 내가 이 약조로 당신을 놓으리라 하고 이에 더불어 약조하고 저를 놓았더라	And Ben–hadad said unto him, The cities, which my father took from thy father, I will restore; and thou shalt make streets for thee in Damascus, as my father made in Samaria. Then said Ahab, I will send thee away with this covenant. So he made a covenant with him, and sent him away.	Ben-hadad said to him, “I will restore the cities my father took from your father; you may set up your own marketplaces in Damascus, as my father did in Samaria.” “By this treaty I release you,” Ahab replied. So he made a treaty with him and sent him away.
1KI	20	35	선지자의 무리 중 한 사람이 여호와의 말씀으로 그 동무에게 이르되 너는 나를 치라 하였더니 그 사람이 치기를 싫어하는지라	And a certain man of the sons of the prophets said unto his neighbour in the word of the Lord, Smite me, I pray thee. And the man refused to smite him.	Meanwhile, by the word of the LORD, one of the sons of the prophets said to his companion, “Strike me, please!” But the man refused to strike him.
1KI	20	36	저가 그 사람에게 이르되 네가 여호와의 말씀을 듣지 아니하였으니 네가 나를 떠나갈 때에 사자가 너를 죽이리라 그 사람이 저의 곁을 떠나가더니 사자가 그를 만나 죽였더라	Then said he unto him, Because thou hast not obeyed the voice of the Lord, behold, as soon as thou art departed from me, a lion shall slay thee. And as soon as he was departed from him, a lion found him, and slew him.	Then the prophet said to him, “Because you have not obeyed the voice of the LORD, as soon as you depart from me a lion will kill you.” And when he left, a lion found him and killed him.
1KI	20	37	저가 또 다른 사람을 만나 가로되 너는 나를 치라 하매 그 사람이 저를 치되 상하도록 친지라	Then he found another man, and said, Smite me, I pray thee. And the man smote him, so that in smiting he wounded him.	Then the prophet found another man and said, “Strike me, please!” So the man struck him and wounded him,
1KI	20	38	선지자가 가서 수건으로 그 눈을 가리워 변형하고 길 가에서 왕을 기다리다가	So the prophet departed, and waited for the king by the way, and disguised himself with ashes upon his face.	and the prophet went and waited on the road for the king, disguising himself with a bandage over his eyes.
1KI	20	39	왕이 지나갈 때에 소리질러 왕을 불러 가로되 종이 전장 가운데 나갔더니 한 사람이 돌이켜 어떤 사람을 끌고 내게로 와서 말하기를 이 사람을 지키라 만일 저를 잃어버리면 네 생명으로 저의 생명을 대신하거나 그렇지 아니하면 네가 은 한 달란트를 내어야 하리라 하였거늘	And as the king passed by, he cried unto the king: and he said, Thy servant went out into the midst of the battle; and, behold, a man turned aside, and brought a man unto me, and said, Keep this man: if by any means he be missing, then shall thy life be for his life, or else thou shalt pay a talent of silver.	As the king passed by, he cried out to the king: “Your servant had marched out into the middle of the battle, when suddenly a man came over with a captive and told me, ‘Guard this man! If he goes missing for any reason, your life will be exchanged for his life, or you will weigh out a talent of silver.’
1KI	20	40	종이 이리 저리 일 볼 동안에 저가 없어졌나이다 이스라엘 왕이 저에게 이르되 네가 스스로 결정하였으니 그대로 당하여야 하리라	And as thy servant was busy here and there, he was gone. And the king of Israel said unto him, So shall thy judgment be; thyself hast decided it.	But while your servant was busy here and there, the man disappeared.” And the king of Israel said to him, “So shall your judgment be; you have pronounced it on yourself.”
1KI	20	41	저가 급히 그 눈에 가리운 수건을 벗으니 이스라엘 왕이 저는 선지자 중 한 사람인 줄 알아 본지라	And he hasted, and took the ashes away from his face; and the king of Israel discerned him that he was of the prophets.	Then the prophet quickly removed the bandage from his eyes, and the king of Israel recognized him as one of the prophets.
1KI	20	42	저가 왕께 고하되 여호와의 말씀이 내가 멸하기로 작정한 사람을 네 손으로 놓았은즉 네 목숨은 저의 목숨을 대신하고 네 백성은 저의 백성을 대신하리라 하셨나이다	And he said unto him, Thus saith the Lord, Because thou hast let go out of thy hand a man whom I appointed to utter destruction, therefore thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for his people.	And the prophet said to the king, “This is what the LORD says: ‘Because you have let slip from your hand the man I had devoted to destruction, your life will be exchanged for his life, and your people for his people.’”
1KI	20	43	이스라엘 왕이 근심하고 답답하여 그 궁으로 돌아가려고 사마리아에 이르니라	And the king of Israel went to his house heavy and displeased, and came to Samaria.	Sullen and angry, the king of Israel went home to Samaria.
1KI	21	1	그 후에 이 일이 있으니라 이스르엘 사람 나봇이 이스르엘에 포도원이 있어 사마리아 왕 아합의 궁에서 가깝더니	And it came to pass after these things, that Naboth the Jezreelite had a vineyard, which was in Jezreel, hard by the palace of Ahab king of Samaria.	Some time later, Naboth the Jezreelite happened to own a vineyard in Jezreel next to the palace of Ahab king of Samaria.
1KI	21	2	아합이 나봇에게 일러 가로되 네 포도원이 내 궁 곁에 가까이 있으니 내게 주어 나물 밭을 삼게 하라 내가 그 대신에 그보다 더 아름다운 포도원을 네게 줄 것이요 만일 합의하면 그 값을 돈으로 네게 주리라	And Ahab spake unto Naboth, saying, Give me thy vineyard, that I may have it for a garden of herbs, because it is near unto my house: and I will give thee for it a better vineyard than it; or, if it seem good to thee, I will give thee the worth of it in money.	So Ahab said to Naboth, “Give me your vineyard to use as a vegetable garden, since it is next to my palace. I will give you a better vineyard in its place—or if you prefer, I will give you its value in silver.”
1KI	21	3	나봇이 아합에게 말하되 내 열조의 유업을 왕에게 주기를 여호와께서 금하실지로다 하니	And Naboth said to Ahab, The Lord forbid it me, that I should give the inheritance of my fathers unto thee.	But Naboth replied, “The LORD forbid that I should give you the inheritance of my fathers.”
1KI	21	4	이스르엘 사람 나봇이 아합에게 대답하여 이르기를 내 조상의 유업을 왕께 줄 수 없다 함을 인하여 아합이 근심하고 답답하여 궁으로 돌아와서 침상에 누워 얼굴을 돌이키고 식사를 아니하니	And Ahab came into his house heavy and displeased because of the word which Naboth the Jezreelite had spoken to him: for he had said, I will not give thee the inheritance of my fathers. And he laid him down upon his bed, and turned away his face, and would eat no bread.	So Ahab went to his palace, sullen and angry because Naboth the Jezreelite had told him, “I will not give you the inheritance of my fathers.” He lay down on his bed, turned his face away, and refused to eat.
1KI	21	5	그 아내 이세벨이 저에게 나아와 가로되 왕의 마음에 무엇을 근심하여 식사를 아니하나이까	But Jezebel his wife came to him, and said unto him, Why is thy spirit so sad, that thou eatest no bread?	Soon his wife Jezebel came in and asked, “Why are you so sullen that you refuse to eat?”
1KI	21	6	왕이 이르되 내가 이스르엘 사람 나봇에게 말하여 이르기를 네 포도원을 내게 주되 돈으로 바꾸거나 만일 네가 좋아하면 내가 그 대신에 포도원을 네게 주리라 한즉 저가 대답하기를 내가 내 포도원을 네게 주지 않겠노라 함을 인함이로라	And he said unto her, Because I spake unto Naboth the Jezreelite, and said unto him, Give me thy vineyard for money; or else, if it please thee, I will give thee another vineyard for it: and he answered, I will not give thee my vineyard.	Ahab answered, “Because I spoke to Naboth the Jezreelite and told him, ‘Give me your vineyard for silver, or if you wish, I will give you another vineyard in its place.’ And he replied, ‘I will not give you my vineyard!’”
1KI	21	7	그 아내 이세벨이 저에게 이르되 왕이 이제 이스라엘 나라를 다스리시나이까 일어나 식사를 하시고 마음을 즐겁게 하소서 내가 이스르엘 사람 나봇의 포도원을 왕께 드리리이다 하고	And Jezebel his wife said unto him, Dost thou now govern the kingdom of Israel? arise, and eat bread, and let thine heart be merry: I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite.	But his wife Jezebel said to him, “Do you not reign over Israel? Get up, eat some food, and be cheerful, for I will get you the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite.”
1KI	21	8	아합의 이름으로 편지들을 쓰고 그 인을 쳐서 그 성에서 나봇과 함께 사는 장로와 귀인들에게 보내니	So she wrote letters in Ahab’s name, and sealed them with his seal, and sent the letters unto the elders and to the nobles that were in his city, dwelling with Naboth.	Then Jezebel wrote letters in Ahab’s name, sealed them with his seal, and sent them to the elders and nobles who lived with Naboth in his city.
1KI	21	9	그 편지 사연에 이르기를 금식을 선포하고 나봇을 백성 가운데 높이 앉힌 후에	And she wrote in the letters, saying, Proclaim a fast, and set Naboth on high among the people:	In the letters she wrote: “Proclaim a fast and give Naboth a seat of honor among the people.
1KI	21	10	비류 두 사람을 그 앞에 마주 앉히고 저에게 대하여 증거하기를 네가 하나님과 왕을 저주하였다 하게 하고 곧 저를 끌고 나가서 돌로 쳐 죽이라 하였더라	And set two men, sons of Belial, before him, to bear witness against him, saying, Thou didst blaspheme God and the king. And then carry him out, and stone him, that he may die.	But seat two scoundrels opposite him and have them testify, ‘You have cursed both God and the king!’ Then take him out and stone him to death.”
1KI	21	11	그 성 사람 곧 그 성에 사는 장로와 귀인들이 이세벨의 분부 곧 저가 자기들에게 보낸 편지에 쓴 대로 하여	And the men of his city, even the elders and the nobles who were the inhabitants in his city, did as Jezebel had sent unto them, and as it was written in the letters which she had sent unto them.	So the elders and nobles who lived in Naboth’s city did as Jezebel had instructed in the letters she had written to them.
1KI	21	12	금식을 선포하고 나봇을 백성 가운데 높이 앉히매	They proclaimed a fast, and set Naboth on high among the people.	They proclaimed a fast and gave Naboth a seat of honor among the people.
1KI	21	13	때에 비류 두 사람이 들어와서 그 앞에 앉고 백성 앞에서 나봇에게 대하여 증거를 지어 이르기를 나봇이 하나님과 왕을 저주하였다 하매 무리가 저를 성 밖으로 끌고 나가서 돌로 쳐 죽이고	And there came in two men, children of Belial, and sat before him: and the men of Belial witnessed against him, even against Naboth, in the presence of the people, saying, Naboth did blaspheme God and the king. Then they carried him forth out of the city, and stoned him with stones, that he died.	And the two scoundrels came in and sat opposite Naboth, and these men testified against him before the people, saying, “Naboth has cursed both God and the king!” So they took him outside the city and stoned him to death.
1KI	21	14	이세벨에게 통보하기를 나봇이 돌에 맞아 죽었나이다 하니	Then they sent to Jezebel, saying, Naboth is stoned, and is dead.	Then they sent word to Jezebel: “Naboth has been stoned to death.”
1KI	21	15	이세벨이 나봇이 돌에 맞아 죽었다 함을 듣고 아합에게 이르되 일어나서 그 이스르엘 사람 나봇이 돈으로 바꾸어 주기를 싫어하던 포도원을 취하소서 나봇이 살아 있지 아니하고 죽었나이다	And it came to pass, when Jezebel heard that Naboth was stoned, and was dead, that Jezebel said to Ahab, Arise, take possession of the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, which he refused to give thee for money: for Naboth is not alive, but dead.	When Jezebel heard that Naboth had been stoned to death, she said to Ahab, “Get up and take possession of the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, who refused to give it to you for silver. For Naboth is no longer alive, but dead.”
1KI	21	16	아합이 나봇의 죽었다 함을 듣고 곧 일어나 이스르엘 사람 나봇의 포도원을 취하러 그리로 내려 갔더라	And it came to pass, when Ahab heard that Naboth was dead, that Ahab rose up to go down to the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, to take possession of it.	And when Ahab heard that Naboth was dead, he got up and went down to take possession of the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite.
1KI	21	17	여호와의 말씀이 디셉 사람 엘리야에게 임하여 가라사대	And the word of the Lord came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying,
1KI	21	18	너는 일어나 내려가서 사마리아에 거하는 이스라엘 왕 아합을 만나라 저가 나봇의 포도원을 취하러 그리로 내려갔나니	Arise, go down to meet Ahab king of Israel, which is in Samaria: behold, he is in the vineyard of Naboth, whither he is gone down to possess it.	“Get up and go down to meet Ahab king of Israel, who is in Samaria. See, he is in the vineyard of Naboth, of which he has gone to take possession.
1KI	21	19	너는 저에게 말하여 이르기를 여호와의 말씀이 네가 죽이고 또 빼앗았느냐 하셨다 하고 또 저에게 이르기를 여호와의 말씀이 개들이 나봇의 피를 핥은 곳에서 개들이 네 피 곧 네 몸의 피도 핥으리라 하셨다 하라	And thou shalt speak unto him, saying, Thus saith the Lord, Hast thou killed, and also taken possession? And thou shalt speak unto him, saying, Thus saith the Lord, In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine.	Tell him that this is what the LORD says: ‘Have you not murdered a man and seized his land?’ Then tell him that this is also what the LORD says: ‘In the place where the dogs licked up the blood of Naboth, there also the dogs will lick up your blood—yes, yours!’”
1KI	21	20	아합이 엘리야에게 이르되 나의 대적이여 네가 나를 찾았느냐 대답하되 내가 찾았노라 네가 스스로 팔려 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하였으므로	And Ahab said to Elijah, Hast thou found me, O mine enemy? And he answered, I have found thee: because thou hast sold thyself to work evil in the sight of the Lord.	When Elijah arrived, Ahab said to him, “So you have found me out, my enemy.” He replied, “I have found you out because you have sold yourself to do evil in the sight of the LORD.
1KI	21	21	여호와의 말씀이 내가 재앙을 네게 내려 너를 쓸어 버리되 네게 속한 남자는 이스라엘 가운데 매인 자나 놓인 자를 다 멸할 것이요	Behold, I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy posterity, and will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the wall, and him that is shut up and left in Israel,	This is what the LORD says: ‘I will bring calamity on you and consume your descendants; I will cut off from Ahab every male in Israel, both slave and free.
1KI	21	22	또 네 집으로 느밧의 아들 여로보암의 집처럼 되게 하고 아히야의 아들 바아사의 집처럼 되게 하리니 이는 네가 나의 노를 격동하고 이스라엘로 범죄케 한 까닭이니라 하셨고	And will make thine house like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son of Ahijah, for the provocation wherewith thou hast provoked me to anger, and made Israel to sin.	I will make your house like that of Jeroboam son of Nebat and like that of Baasha son of Ahijah, because you have provoked My anger and caused Israel to sin.’
1KI	21	23	이세벨에게 대하여도 여호와께서 말씀하여 가라사대 개들이 이스르엘 성 곁에서 이세벨을 먹을지라	And of Jezebel also spake the Lord, saying, The dogs shall eat Jezebel by the wall of Jezreel.	And the LORD also speaks concerning Jezebel: ‘The dogs will devour Jezebel by the wall of Jezreel.’
1KI	21	24	아합에게 속한 자로서 성읍에서 죽은 자는 개들이 먹고 들에서 죽은 자는 공중의 새가 먹으리라 하셨느니라 하니	Him that dieth of Ahab in the city the dogs shall eat; and him that dieth in the field shall the fowls of the air eat.	Anyone belonging to Ahab who dies in the city will be eaten by dogs, and anyone who dies in the field will be eaten by the birds of the air.”
1KI	21	25	예로부터 아합과 같이 스스로 팔려 여호와 보시기에 악을 행한 자가 없음은 저가 그 아내 이세벨에게 충동되었음이라	But there was none like unto Ahab, which did sell himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord, whom Jezebel his wife stirred up.	(Surely there was never one like Ahab, who sold himself to do evil in the sight of the LORD, incited by his wife Jezebel.
1KI	21	26	저가 여호와께서 이스라엘 자손 앞에서 쫓아내신 아모리 사람의 모든 행한 것 같이 우상에게 복종하여 심히 가증하게 행하였더라	And he did very abominably in following idols, according to all things as did the Amorites, whom the Lord cast out before the children of Israel.	He committed the most detestable acts by going after idols, just like the Amorites whom the LORD had driven out before the Israelites.)
1KI	21	27	아합이 이 모든 말씀을 들을 때에 그 옷을 찢고 굵은 베로 몸을 동이고 금식하고 굵은 베에 누우며 행보도 천천히 한지라	And it came to pass, when Ahab heard those words, that he rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went softly.	When Ahab heard these words, he tore his clothes, put on sackcloth, and fasted. He lay down in sackcloth and walked around meekly.
1KI	21	28	여호와의 말씀이 디셉 사람 엘리야에게 임하여 가라사대	And the word of the Lord came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying:
1KI	21	29	아합이 내 앞에서 겸비함을 네가 보느냐 저가 내 앞에서 겸비함을 인하여 내가 재앙을 저의 시대에 내리지 아니하고 그 아들의 시대에야 그 집에 재앙을 내리리라 하셨더라	Seest thou how Ahab humbleth himself before me? because he humbleth himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his days: but in his son’s days will I bring the evil upon his house.	“Have you seen how Ahab has humbled himself before Me? Because he has humbled himself before Me, I will not bring the calamity during his days, but I will bring it upon his house in the days of his son.”
1KI	22	1	아람과 이스라엘 사이에 전쟁이 없이 삼 년을 지내었더라	And they continued three years without war between Syria and Israel.	Then three years passed without war between Aram and Israel.
1KI	22	2	제삼년에 유다 왕 여호사밧이 이스라엘 왕에게 내려가매	And it came to pass in the third year, that Jehoshaphat the king of Judah came down to the king of Israel.	However, in the third year, Jehoshaphat king of Judah went down to visit the king of Israel,
1KI	22	3	이스라엘 왕이 그 신복에게 이르되 길르앗 라못은 본래 우리의 것인 줄을 너희가 알지 못하느냐 우리가 어찌 아람 왕의 손에서 취하지 아니하고 잠잠히 있으리요 하고	And the king of Israel said unto his servants, Know ye that Ramoth in Gilead is ours, and we be still, and take it not out of the hand of the king of Syria?	who said to his servants, “Do you not know that Ramoth-gilead is ours, but we have failed to take it from the hand of the king of Aram?”
1KI	22	4	여호사밧에게 이르되 당신은 나와 함께 길르앗 라못으로 가서 싸우시겠느뇨 여호사밧이 이스라엘 왕에게 이르되 나는 당신과 일반이요 내 백성은 당신의 백성과 일반이요 내 말들도 당신의 말들과 일반이니이다	And he said unto Jehoshaphat, Wilt thou go with me to battle to Ramoth–gilead? And Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, I am as thou art, my people as thy people, my horses as thy horses.	So he asked Jehoshaphat, “Will you go with me to fight against Ramoth-gilead?” Jehoshaphat answered the king of Israel, “I am like you, my people are your people, and my horses are your horses.”
1KI	22	5	여호사밧이 또 이스라엘 왕에게 이르되 청컨대 먼저 여호와의 말씀이 어떠하신지 물어 보소서	And Jehoshaphat said unto the king of Israel, Enquire, I pray thee, at the word of the Lord to day.	But Jehoshaphat also said to the king of Israel, “Please inquire first for the word of the LORD.”
1KI	22	6	이스라엘 왕이 이에 선지자 사백 인쯤 모으고 저희에게 이르되 내가 길르앗 라못에 가서 싸우랴 말랴 저희가 가로되 올라가소서 주께서 그 성을 왕의 손에 붙이시리이다	Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, about four hundred men, and said unto them, Shall I go against Ramoth–gilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up; for the Lord shall deliver it into the hand of the king.	So the king of Israel assembled the prophets, about four hundred men, and asked them, “Should I go to war against Ramoth-gilead, or should I refrain?” “Go up,” they replied, “and the Lord will deliver it into the hand of the king.”
1KI	22	7	여호사밧이 가로되 이 외에 우리가 물을만한 여호와의 선지자가 여기 있지 아니하니이까	And Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the Lord besides, that we might enquire of him?	But Jehoshaphat asked, “Is there not still a prophet of the LORD here of whom we can inquire?”
1KI	22	8	이스라엘 왕이 여호사밧에게 이르되 오히려 이믈라의 아들 미가야 한 사람이 있으니 저로 말미암아 여호와께 물을 수 있으나 저는 내게 대하여 길한 일은 예언하지 아니하고 흉한 일만 예언하기로 내가 저를 미워하나이다 여호사밧이 가로되 왕은 그런 말씀을 마소서	And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, There is yet one man, Micaiah the son of Imlah, by whom we may enquire of the Lord: but I hate him; for he doth not prophesy good concerning me, but evil. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king say so.	The king of Israel answered, “There is still one man who can ask the LORD, but I hate him because he never prophesies anything good for me, but only bad. He is Micaiah son of Imlah.” “The king should not say that!” Jehoshaphat replied.
1KI	22	9	이스라엘 왕이 한 내시를 불러 이르되 이믈라의 아들 미가야로 속히 오게 하라 하니라	Then the king of Israel called an officer, and said, Hasten hither Micaiah the son of Imlah.	So the king of Israel called one of his officials and said, “Bring Micaiah son of Imlah at once.”
1KI	22	10	이스라엘 왕과 유다 왕 여호사밧이 왕복을 입고 사마리아 문어귀 광장에서 각기 보좌에 앉았고 모든 선지자가 그 앞에서 예언을 하는데	And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah sat each on his throne, having put on their robes, in a void place in the entrance of the gate of Samaria; and all the prophets prophesied before them.	Dressed in royal attire, the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah were sitting on their thrones at the threshing floor by the entrance of the gate of Samaria, with all the prophets prophesying before them.
1KI	22	11	그나아나의 아들 시드기야는 철로 뿔들을 만들어 가지고 말하되 여호와의 말씀이 왕이 이것들로 아람 사람을 찔러 진멸하리라 하셨다 하고	And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made him horns of iron: and he said, Thus saith the Lord, With these shalt thou push the Syrians, until thou have consumed them.	Now Zedekiah son of Chenaanah had made for himself iron horns and declared, “This is what the LORD says: ‘With these you shall gore the Arameans until they are finished off.’”
1KI	22	12	모든 선지자도 그와 같이 예언하여 이르기를 길르앗 라못으로 올라가 승리를 얻으소서 여호와께서 그 성을 왕의 손에 붙이시리이다 하더라	And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to Ramoth–gilead, and prosper: for the Lord shall deliver it into the king’s hand.	And all the prophets were prophesying the same, saying, “Go up to Ramoth-gilead and prosper, for the LORD will deliver it into the hand of the king.”
1KI	22	13	미가야를 부르러 간 사자가 일러 가로되 선지자들의 말이 여출 일구하여 왕에게 길하게 하니 청컨대 당신의 말도 저희 중 한 사람의 말처럼 길하게 하소서	And the messenger that was gone to call Micaiah spake unto him, saying, Behold now, the words of the prophets declare good unto the king with one mouth: let thy word, I pray thee, be like the word of one of them, and speak that which is good.	Then the messenger who had gone to call Micaiah instructed him, “Behold now, with one accord the words of the prophets are favorable to the king. So please let your words be like theirs, and speak favorably.”
1KI	22	14	미가야가 가로되 여호와의 사심을 가리켜 맹세하노니 여호와께서 내게 말씀하시는 것 곧 그것을 내가 말하리라 하고	And Micaiah said, As the Lord liveth, what the Lord saith unto me, that will I speak.	But Micaiah said, “As surely as the LORD lives, I will speak whatever the LORD tells me.”
1KI	22	15	이에 왕에게 이르니 왕이 저에게 이르되 미가야야 우리가 길르앗 라못으로 싸우러 가랴 말랴 저가 왕께 이르되 올라가서 승리를 얻으소서 여호와께서 그 성을 왕의 손에 붙이시리이다	So he came to the king. And the king said unto him, Micaiah, shall we go against Ramoth–gilead to battle, or shall we forbear? And he answered him, Go, and prosper: for the Lord shall deliver it into the hand of the king.	When Micaiah arrived, the king asked him, “Micaiah, should we go to war against Ramoth-gilead, or should we refrain?” “Go up and triumph,” Micaiah replied, “for the LORD will give it into the hand of the king.”
1KI	22	16	왕이 저에게 이르되 내가 몇번이나 너로 맹세케 하여야 네가 여호와의 이름으로 진실한 것으로만 내게 고하겠느냐	And the king said unto him, How many times shall I adjure thee that thou tell me nothing but that which is true in the name of the Lord?	But the king said to him, “How many times must I make you swear not to tell me anything but the truth in the name of the LORD?”
1KI	22	17	저가 가로되 내가 보니 온 이스라엘이 목자 없는 양 같이 산에 흩어졌는데 여호와의 말씀이 이 무리가 주인이 없으니 각각 평안히 그 집으로 돌아갈 것이니라 하셨나이다	And he said, I saw all Israel scattered upon the hills, as sheep that have not a shepherd: and the Lord said, These have no master: let them return every man to his house in peace.	So Micaiah declared: “I saw all Israel scattered on the hills like sheep without a shepherd. And the LORD said, ‘These people have no master; let each one return home in peace.’”
1KI	22	18	이스라엘 왕이 여호사밧에게 이르되 저 사람이 내게 대하여 길한 것을 예언하지 아니하고 흉한 것을 예언하겠다고 당신에게 말씀하지 아니하였나이까	And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee that he would prophesy no good concerning me, but evil?	Then the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “Did I not tell you that he never prophesies good for me, but only bad?”
1KI	22	19	미가야가 가로되 그런즉 왕은 여호와의 말씀을 들으소서 내가 보니 여호와께서 그 보좌에 앉으셨고 하늘의 만군이 그 좌우편에 모시고 서 있는데	And he said, Hear thou therefore the word of the Lord: I saw the Lord sitting on his throne, and all the host of heaven standing by him on his right hand and on his left.	Micaiah continued, “Therefore hear the word of the LORD: I saw the LORD sitting on His throne, and all the host of heaven standing by Him on His right and on His left.
1KI	22	20	여호와께서 말씀하시기를 누가 아합을 꾀어 저로 길르앗 라못에 올라가서 죽게 할꼬 하시니 하나는 이렇게 하겠다 하고 하나는 저렇게 하겠다 하였는데	And the Lord said, Who shall persuade Ahab, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth–gilead? And one said on this manner, and another said on that manner.	And the LORD said, ‘Who will entice Ahab to march up and fall at Ramoth-gilead?’ And one suggested this, and another that.
1KI	22	21	한 영이 나아와 여호와 앞에 서서 말하되 내가 저를 꾀이겠나이다	And there came forth a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said, I will persuade him.	Then a spirit came forward, stood before the LORD, and said, ‘I will entice him.’ ‘By what means?’ asked the LORD.
1KI	22	22	여호와께서 저에게 이르시되 어떻게 하겠느냐 가로되 내가 나가서 거짓말하는 영이 되어 그 모든 선지자의 입에 있겠나이다 여호와께서 가라사대 너는 꾀이겠고 또 이루리라 나가서 그리하라 하셨은즉	And the Lord said unto him, Wherewith? And he said, I will go forth, and I will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And he said, Thou shalt persuade him, and prevail also: go forth, and do so.	And he replied, ‘I will go out and be a lying spirit in the mouths of all his prophets.’ ‘You will surely entice him and prevail,’ said the LORD. ‘Go and do it.’
1KI	22	23	이제 여호와께서 거짓말하는 영을 왕의 이 모든 선지자의 입에 넣으셨고 또 여호와께서 왕에게 대하여 화를 말씀하셨나이다	Now therefore, behold, the Lord hath put a lying spirit in the mouth of all these thy prophets, and the Lord hath spoken evil concerning thee.	So you see, the LORD has put a lying spirit in the mouths of all these prophets of yours, and the LORD has pronounced disaster against you.”
1KI	22	24	그나아나의 아들 시드기야가 가까이 와서 미가야의 뺨을 치며 이르되 여호와의 영이 나를 떠나 어디로 말미암아 가서 네게 말씀하더냐	But Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah went near, and smote Micaiah on the cheek, and said, Which way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to speak unto thee?	Then Zedekiah son of Chenaanah went up, struck Micaiah in the face, and demanded, “Which way did the Spirit of the LORD go when He departed from me to speak with you?”
1KI	22	25	미가야가 가로되 네가 골방에 들어가서 숨는 그 날에 보리라	And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shalt see in that day, when thou shalt go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.	Micaiah replied, “You will soon see, on that day when you go and hide in an inner room.”
1KI	22	26	이스라엘 왕이 가로되 미가야를 잡아 부윤 아몬과 왕자 요아스에게로 끌고 돌아가서	And the king of Israel said, Take Micaiah, and carry him back unto Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the king’s son;	And the king of Israel declared, “Take Micaiah and return him to Amon the governor of the city and to Joash the king’s son,
1KI	22	27	말하기를 왕의 말씀이 이 놈을 옥에 가두고 내가 평안히 돌아올 때까지 고생의 떡과 고생의 물로 먹이라 하라	And say, Thus saith the king, Put this fellow in the prison, and feed him with bread of affliction and with water of affliction, until I come in peace.	and tell them that this is what the king says: ‘Put this man in prison and feed him only bread and water until I return safely.’”
1KI	22	28	미가야가 가로되 왕이 참으로 평안히 돌아오시게 될진대 여호와께서 나로 말씀하지 아니하셨으리이다 또 가로되 너희 백성들아 다 들을지어다 하니라	And Micaiah said, If thou return at all in peace, the Lord hath not spoken by me. And he said, Hearken, O people, every one of you.	But Micaiah replied, “If you ever return safely, the LORD has not spoken through me.” Then he added, “Take heed, all you people!”
1KI	22	29	이스라엘 왕과 유다 왕 여호사밧이 길르앗 라못으로 올라가니라	So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up to Ramoth–gilead.	So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah went up to Ramoth-gilead.
1KI	22	30	이스라엘 왕이 여호사밧에게 이르되 나는 변장하고 군중으로 들어가려 하노니 당신은 왕복을 입으소서 하고 이스라엘 왕이 변장하고 군중으로 들어가니라	And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, I will disguise myself, and enter into the battle; but put thou on thy robes. And the king of Israel disguised himself, and went into the battle.	And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “I will disguise myself and go into battle, but you wear your royal robes.” So the king of Israel disguised himself and went into battle.
1KI	22	31	아람 왕이 그 병거의 장관 삼십이 인에게 명하여 이르기를 너희는 작은 자나 큰 자나 더불어 싸우지 말고 오직 이스라엘 왕과 싸우라 한지라	But the king of Syria commanded his thirty and two captains that had rule over his chariots, saying, Fight neither with small nor great, save only with the king of Israel.	Now the king of Aram had ordered his thirty-two chariot commanders, “Do not fight with anyone, small or great, except the king of Israel.”
1KI	22	32	병거의 장관들이 여호사밧을 보고 이르되 이가 필연 이스라엘 왕이라 하고 돌이켜 저와 싸우려 한즉 여호사밧이 소리지르는지라	And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, that they said, Surely it is the king of Israel. And they turned aside to fight against him: and Jehoshaphat cried out.	When the chariot commanders saw Jehoshaphat, they said, “Surely this is the king of Israel!” So they turned to fight against him, but Jehoshaphat cried out.
1KI	22	33	병거의 장관들이 저가 이스라엘 왕이 아님을 보고 쫓기를 그치고 돌이켰더라	And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots perceived that it was not the king of Israel, that they turned back from pursuing him.	And when the chariot commanders saw that he was not the king of Israel, they turned back from pursuing him.
1KI	22	34	한 사람이 우연히 활을 당기어 이스라엘 왕의 갑옷 솔기를 쏜지라 왕이 그 병거 모는 자에게 이르되 내가 부상하였으니 네 손을 돌이켜 나로 군중에서 나가게 하라 하였으나	And a certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king of Israel between the joints of the harness: wherefore he said unto the driver of his chariot, Turn thine hand, and carry me out of the host; for I am wounded.	However, a certain man drew his bow without taking special aim, and he struck the king of Israel between the joints of his armor. So the king said to his charioteer, “Turn around and take me out of the battle, for I am badly wounded!”
1KI	22	35	이 날에 전쟁이 맹렬하였으므로 왕이 병거 가운데 붙들려 서서 아람 사람을 막다가 저녁에 이르러 죽었는데 상처의 피가 흘러 병거 바닥에 고였더라	And the battle increased that day: and the king was stayed up in his chariot against the Syrians, and died at even: and the blood ran out of the wound into the midst of the chariot.	The battle raged throughout that day, and the king was propped up in his chariot facing the Arameans. And the blood from his wound ran out onto the floor of the chariot, and that evening he died.
1KI	22	36	해가 질 즈음에 군중에서 외치는 소리 있어 가로되 각기 성읍으로, 각기 본향으로 하더라	And there went a proclamation throughout the host about the going down of the sun, saying, Every man to his city, and every man to his own country.	As the sun was setting, the cry rang out in the army: “Every man to his own city, and every man to his own land!”
1KI	22	37	왕이 이미 죽으매 그 시체를 메어 사마리아에 이르러 거기 장사하니라	So the king died, and was brought to Samaria; and they buried the king in Samaria.	So the king died and was brought to Samaria, where they buried him.
1KI	22	38	그 병거를 사마리아 못에 씻으매 개들이 그 피를 핥았으니 여호와의 하신 말씀과 같이 되었더라 거기는 창기들의 목욕하는 곳이었더라	And one washed the chariot in the pool of Samaria; and the dogs licked up his blood; and they washed his armour; according unto the word of the Lord which he spake.	And the chariot was washed at the pool of Samaria where the prostitutes bathed, and the dogs licked up Ahab’s blood, according to the word that the LORD had spoken.
1KI	22	39	아합의 남은 행적과 무룻 그 행한 일과 그 건축한 상아궁과 그 건축한 모든 성은 이스라엘 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	Now the rest of the acts of Ahab, and all that he did, and the ivory house which he made, and all the cities that he built, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?	As for the rest of the acts of Ahab, along with all his accomplishments and the ivory palace and all the cities he built, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?
1KI	22	40	아합이 그 열조와 함께 자매 그 아들 아하시야가 대신하여 왕이 되니라	So Ahab slept with his fathers; and Ahaziah his son reigned in his stead.	And Ahab rested with his fathers, and his son Ahaziah reigned in his place.
1KI	22	41	이스라엘 왕 아합 제사년에 아사의 아들 여호사밧이 유다 왕이 되니	And Jehoshaphat the son of Asa began to reign over Judah in the fourth year of Ahab king of Israel.	In the fourth year of Ahab’s reign over Israel, Jehoshaphat son of Asa became king of Judah.
1KI	22	42	여호사밧이 왕이 될 때에 나이 삼십오 세라 예루살렘에서 이십오 년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 아수바라 실히의 딸이더라	Jehoshaphat was thirty and five years old when he began to reign; and he reigned twenty and five years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.	Jehoshaphat was thirty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem twenty-five years. His mother’s name was Azubah daughter of Shilhi.
1KI	22	43	여호사밧이 그 부친 아사의 모든 길로 행하며 돌이켜 떠나지 아니하고 여호와 보시기에 정직히 행하였으나 산당은 폐하지 아니하였으므로 백성이 오히려 산당에서 제사를 드리며 분향하였더라	And he walked in all the ways of Asa his father; he turned not aside from it, doing that which was right in the eyes of the Lord: nevertheless the high places were not taken away; for the people offered and burnt incense yet in the high places.	And Jehoshaphat walked in all the ways of his father Asa; he did not turn away from them, but did what was right in the eyes of the LORD. The high places, however, were not removed; the people still sacrificed and burned incense on the high places.
1KI	22	44	여호사밧이 이스라엘 왕으로 더불어 평화하니라	And Jehoshaphat made peace with the king of Israel.	Jehoshaphat also made peace with the king of Israel.
1KI	22	45	여호사밧의 남은 사적과 그 베푼 권세와 그 어떻게 전쟁한 것은 다 유다 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, and his might that he shewed, and how he warred, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?	As for the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, along with the might he exercised and how he waged war, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
1KI	22	46	저가 그 부친 아사의 시대에 남아 있던 남색하는 자를 그 땅에서 쫓아내었더라	And the remnant of the sodomites, which remained in the days of his father Asa, he took out of the land.	He banished from the land the male shrine prostitutes who remained from the days of his father Asa.
1KI	22	47	그 때에 에돔에는 왕이 없고 섭정 왕이 있었더라	There was then no king in Edom: a deputy was king.	And there was no king in Edom; a deputy served as king.
1KI	22	48	여호사밧이 다시스의 선척을 제조하고 오빌로 금을 취하러 보내려 하였더니 그 배가 에시온게벨에게 파선하였으므로 가지 못하게 되매	Jehoshaphat made ships of Tharshish to go to Ophir for gold: but they went not; for the ships were broken at Ezion–geber.	Jehoshaphat built ships of Tarshish to go to Ophir for gold, but they never set sail, because they were wrecked at Ezion-geber.
1KI	22	49	아합의 아들 아하시야가 여호사밧에게 이르되 나의 종으로 당신의 종과 함께 배에 가게 하라 하나 여호사밧이 허락지 아니하였더라	Then said Ahaziah the son of Ahab unto Jehoshaphat, Let my servants go with thy servants in the ships. But Jehoshaphat would not.	At that time Ahaziah son of Ahab said to Jehoshaphat, “Let my servants sail with your servants,” but Jehoshaphat refused.
1KI	22	50	여호사밧이 그 열조와 함께 자매 그 조상 다윗 성에 그 열조와 함께 장사되고 그 아들 여호람이 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father: and Jehoram his son reigned in his stead.	And Jehoshaphat rested with his fathers and was buried with them in the city of his father David. And his son Jehoram reigned in his place.
1KI	22	51	유다 왕 여호사밧 제십칠년에 아합의 아들 아하시야가 사마리아에서 이스라엘 왕이 되어 이 년을 이스라엘을 다스리니라	Ahaziah the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and reigned two years over Israel.	In the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat’s reign over Judah, Ahaziah son of Ahab became king of Israel, and he reigned in Samaria two years.
1KI	22	52	저가 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하여 그 아비의 길과 그 어미의 길과 이스라엘로 범죄케 한 느밧의 아들 여로보암의 길로 행하며	And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the way of his father, and in the way of his mother, and in the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin:	And he did evil in the sight of the LORD and walked in the ways of his father and mother and of Jeroboam son of Nebat, who had caused Israel to sin.
1KI	22	53	바알을 섬겨 숭배하여 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 노를 격동하기를 그 아비의 온갖 행위 같이 하였더라	For he served Baal, and worshipped him, and provoked to anger the Lord God of Israel, according to all that his father had done.	Ahaziah served and worshiped Baal, provoking the LORD, the God of Israel, to anger, just as his father had done.
2KI	1	1	아합이 죽은 후에 모압이 이스라엘을 배반하였더라	Then Moab rebelled against Israel after the death of Ahab.	After the death of Ahab, Moab rebelled against Israel.
2KI	1	2	아하시야가 사마리아에 있는 그 다락 난간에서 떨어져 병들매 사자를 보내며 저희더러 이르되 가서 에그론의 신 바알세붑에게 이 병이 낫겠나 물어 보라 하니라	And Ahaziah fell down through a lattice in his upper chamber that was in Samaria, and was sick: and he sent messengers, and said unto them, Go, enquire of Baal–zebub the god of Ekron whether I shall recover of this disease.	Now Ahaziah had fallen through the lattice of his upper room in Samaria and injured himself. So he sent messengers and instructed them: “Go inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron, whether I will recover from this injury.”
2KI	1	3	여호와의 사자가 디셉 사람 엘리야에게 이르시되 너는 일어나 올라가서 사마리아 왕의 사자를 만나서 저에게 이르기를 이스라엘에 하나님이 없어서 너희가 에그론의 신 바알세붑에게 물으러 가느냐	But the angel of the Lord said to Elijah the Tishbite, Arise, go up to meet the messengers of the king of Samaria, and say unto them, Is it not because there is not a God in Israel, that ye go to enquire of Baal–zebub the god of Ekron?	But the angel of the LORD said to Elijah the Tishbite, “Go up to meet the messengers of the king of Samaria and ask them, ‘Is it because there is no God in Israel that you are on your way to inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron?’
2KI	1	4	그러므로 여호와의 말씀이 네가 올라간 침상에서 내려오지 못할지라 네가 반드시 죽으리라 하셨다 하라 엘리야가 이에 가니라	Now therefore thus saith the Lord, Thou shalt not come down from that bed on which thou art gone up, but shalt surely die. And Elijah departed.	Therefore this is what the LORD says: ‘You will not get up from the bed on which you are lying. You will surely die.’” So Elijah departed.
2KI	1	5	사자들이 왕에게 돌아오니 왕이 이르되 너희는 어찌하여 돌아왔느냐	And when the messengers turned back unto him, he said unto them, Why are ye now turned back?	When the messengers returned to the king, he asked them, “Why have you returned?”
2KI	1	6	저희가 고하되 한 사람이 올라와서 우리를 만나 이르되 너희는 너희를 보낸 왕에게로 돌아가서 저에게 고하기를 여호와의 말씀이 이스라엘에 하나님이 없어서 네가 에그론의 신 바알세붑에게 물으려고 보내느냐 그러므로 네가 올라간 침상에서 내려오지 못할지라 네가 반드시 죽으리라 하셨다 하라 하더이다	And they said unto him, There came a man up to meet us, and said unto us, Go, turn again unto the king that sent you, and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord, Is it not because there is not a God in Israel, that thou sendest to enquire of Baal–zebub the god of Ekron? therefore thou shalt not come down from that bed on which thou art gone up, but shalt surely die.	They replied, “A man came up to meet us and said, ‘Go back to the king who sent you and tell him that this is what the LORD says: Is it because there is no God in Israel that you are sending these men to inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron? Therefore you will not get up from the bed on which you are lying. You will surely die.’”
2KI	1	7	왕이 저희에게 이르되 올라와서 너희를 만나 이 말을 너희에게 고한 그 사람의 모양이 어떠하더냐	And he said unto them, What manner of man was he which came up to meet you, and told you these words?	The king asked them, “What sort of man came up to meet you and spoke these words to you?”
2KI	1	8	저희가 대답하되 그는 털이 많은 사람인데 허리에 가죽 띠를 띠었더이다 왕이 가로되 그는 디셉 사람 엘리야로다	And they answered him, He was an hairy man, and girt with a girdle of leather about his loins. And he said, It is Elijah the Tishbite.	“He was a hairy man,” they answered, “with a leather belt around his waist.” “It was Elijah the Tishbite,” said the king.
2KI	1	9	이에 오십부장과 그 오십 인을 엘리야에게로 보내매 저가 엘리야에게로 올라가서 본즉 산 꼭대기에 앉았는지라 저가 엘리야에게 이르되 하나님의 사람이여 왕의 말씀이 내려오라 하셨나이다	Then the king sent unto him a captain of fifty with his fifty. And he went up to him: and, behold, he sat on the top of an hill. And he spake unto him, Thou man of God, the king hath said, Come down.	Then King Ahaziah sent to Elijah a captain with his company of fifty men. So the captain went up to Elijah, who was sitting on top of a hill, and said to him, “Man of God, the king declares, ‘Come down!’”
2KI	1	10	엘리야가 오십부장에게 대답하여 가로되 내가 만일 하나님의 사람이면 불이 하늘에서 내려와서 너와 너의 오십 인을 사를지로다 하매 불이 곧 하늘에서 내려와서 저와 그 오십 인을 살랐더라	And Elijah answered and said to the captain of fifty, If I be a man of God, then let fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and thy fifty. And there came down fire from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty.	Elijah answered the captain, “If I am a man of God, may fire come down from heaven and consume you and your fifty men.” And fire came down from heaven and consumed the captain and his fifty men.
2KI	1	11	왕이 다시 다른 오십부장과 그 오십 인을 엘리야에게로 보내니 저가 엘리야에게 일러 가로되 하나님의 사람이여 왕의 말씀이 속히 내려 오라 하셨나이다	Again also he sent unto him another captain of fifty with his fifty. And he answered and said unto him, O man of God, thus hath the king said, Come down quickly.	So the king sent to Elijah another captain with his fifty men. And the captain said to Elijah, “Man of God, the king declares, ‘Come down at once!’”
2KI	1	12	엘리야가 저희에게 대답하여 가로되 내가 만일 하나님의 사람이면 불이 하늘에서 내려와서 너와 너의 오십 인을 사를지로다 하매 하나님의 불이 곧 하늘에서 내려와서 저와 그 오십 인을 살랐더라	And Elijah answered and said unto them, If I be a man of God, let fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and thy fifty. And the fire of God came down from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty.	Again Elijah replied, “If I am a man of God, may fire come down from heaven and consume you and your fifty men.” And the fire of God came down from heaven and consumed the captain and his fifty men.
2KI	1	13	왕이 세번째 오십부장과 그 오십 인을 보낸지라 셋째 오십부장이 올라가서 엘리야의 앞에 이르러 꿇어 엎드려 간구하여 가로되 하나님의 사람이여 원컨대 나의 생명과 당신의 종인 이 오십 인의 생명을 당신은 귀히 보소서	And he sent again a captain of the third fifty with his fifty. And the third captain of fifty went up, and came and fell on his knees before Elijah, and besought him, and said unto him, O man of God, I pray thee, let my life, and the life of these fifty thy servants, be precious in thy sight.	So the king sent a third captain with his fifty men. And the third captain went up, fell on his knees before Elijah, and begged him, “Man of God, may my life and the lives of these fifty servants please be precious in your sight.
2KI	1	14	불이 하늘에서 내려와서 전번의 오십부장 둘과 그 오십 인들을 살랐거니와 나의 생명을 당신은 귀히 보소서 하매	Behold, there came fire down from heaven, and burnt up the two captains of the former fifties with their fifties: therefore let my life now be precious in thy sight.	Behold, fire has come down from heaven and consumed the first two captains of fifty, with all their men. But now may my life be precious in your sight.”
2KI	1	15	여호와의 사자가 엘리야에게 이르되 너는 저를 두려워 말고 함께 내려가라 하신지라 엘리야가 곧 일어나 저와 함께 내려와서 왕에게 이르러	And the angel of the Lord said unto Elijah, Go down with him: be not afraid of him. And he arose, and went down with him unto the king.	Then the angel of the LORD said to Elijah, “Go down with him. Do not be afraid of him.” So Elijah got up and went down with him to the king.
2KI	1	16	고하되 여호와의 말씀이 네가 사자를 보내어 에그론의 신 바알세붑에게 물으려 하니 이스라엘에 그 말을 물을만한 하나님이 없음이냐 그러므로 네가 그 올라간 침상에서 내려오지 못할지라 네가 반드시 죽으리라 하셨다 하니라	And he said unto him, Thus saith the Lord, Forasmuch as thou hast sent messengers to enquire of Baal–zebub the god of Ekron, is it not because there is no God in Israel to enquire of his word? therefore thou shalt not come down off that bed on which thou art gone up, but shalt surely die.	And Elijah said to King Ahaziah, “This is what the LORD says: Is there really no God in Israel for you to inquire of His word? Is that why you have sent messengers to inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron? Therefore you will not get up from the bed on which you are lying. You will surely die.”
2KI	1	17	왕이 엘리야의 전한 여호와의 말씀대로 죽고 저가 아들이 없으므로 여호람이 대신하여 왕이 되니 유다 왕 여호사밧의 아들 여호람의 제이년이었더라	So he died according to the word of the Lord which Elijah had spoken. And Jehoram reigned in his stead in the second year of Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah; because he had no son.	So Ahaziah died according to the word of the LORD that Elijah had spoken. And since he had no son, Jehoram succeeded him in the second year of the reign of Jehoram son of Jehoshaphat over Judah.
2KI	1	18	아하시야의 남은 사적은 모두 이스라엘 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	Now the rest of the acts of Ahaziah which he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?	As for the rest of the acts of Ahaziah, along with his accomplishments, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?
2KI	2	1	여호와께서 회리바람으로 엘리야를 하늘에 올리고자 하실 때에 엘리야가 엘리사로 더불어 길갈에서 나가더니	And it came to pass, when the Lord would take up Elijah into heaven by a whirlwind, that Elijah went with Elisha from Gilgal.	Shortly before the LORD took Elijah up to heaven in a whirlwind, Elijah and Elisha were on their way from Gilgal,
2KI	2	2	엘리야가 엘리사에게 이르되 청컨대 너는 여기 머물라 여호와께서 나를 벧엘로 보내시느니라 엘리사가 가로되 여호와의 사심과 당신의 혼의 삶을 가리켜 맹세하노니 내가 당신을 떠나지 아니하겠나이다 이에 두 사람이 벧엘로 내려가니	And Elijah said unto Elisha, Tarry here, I pray thee; for the Lord hath sent me to Beth–el. And Elisha said unto him, As the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee. So they went down to Beth–el.	and Elijah said to Elisha, “Please stay here, for the LORD has sent me on to Bethel.” But Elisha replied, “As surely as the LORD lives and as you yourself live, I will not leave you.” So they went down to Bethel.
2KI	2	3	벧엘에 있는 선지자의 생도들이 엘리사에게로 나아와 이르되 여호와께서 오늘날 당신의 선생을 당신의 머리 위로 취하실 줄을 아나이까 가로되 나도 아노니 너희는 잠잠하라	And the sons of the prophets that were at Beth–el came forth to Elisha, and said unto him, Knowest thou that the Lord will take away thy master from thy head to day? And he said, Yea, I know it; hold ye your peace.	Then the sons of the prophets at Bethel came out to Elisha and said, “Do you know that the LORD will take your master away from you today?” “Yes, I know,” he replied. “Do not speak of it.”
2KI	2	4	엘리야가 저에게 이르되 엘리사야 청컨대 너는 여기 머물라 여호와께서 나를 여리고로 보내시느니라 엘리사가 가로되 여호와의 사심과 당신의 혼의 삶을 가리켜 맹세하노니 내가 당신을 떠나지 아니하겠나이다 하니라 저희가 여리고에 이르매	And Elijah said unto him, Elisha, tarry here, I pray thee; for the Lord hath sent me to Jericho. And he said, As the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee. So they came to Jericho.	And Elijah said to Elisha, “Please stay here, for the LORD has sent me on to Jericho.” But Elisha replied, “As surely as the LORD lives and as you yourself live, I will not leave you.” So they went to Jericho.
2KI	2	5	여리고에 있는 선지자의 생도들이 엘리사에게 나아와 이르되 여호와께서 오늘날 당신의 선생을 당신의 머리 위로 취하실 줄을 아나이까 엘리사가 가로되 나도 아노니 너희는 잠잠하라	And the sons of the prophets that were at Jericho came to Elisha, and said unto him, Knowest thou that the Lord will take away thy master from thy head to day? And he answered, Yea, I know it; hold ye your peace.	Then the sons of the prophets at Jericho came up to Elisha and said, “Do you know that the LORD will take your master away from you today?” “Yes, I know,” he replied. “Do not speak of it.”
2KI	2	6	엘리야가 또 엘리사에게 이르되 청컨대 너는 여기 머물라 여호와께서 나를 요단으로 보내시느니라 저가 가로되 여호와의 사심과 당신의 혼의 삶을 가리켜 맹세하노니 내가 당신을 떠나지 아니하겠나이다 이에 두 사람이 행하니라	And Elijah said unto him, Tarry, I pray thee, here; for the Lord hath sent me to Jordan. And he said, As the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee. And they two went on.	And Elijah said to Elisha, “Please stay here, for the LORD has sent me on to the Jordan.” But Elisha replied, “As surely as the LORD lives and as you yourself live, I will not leave you.” So the two of them went on.
2KI	2	7	선지자의 생도 오십 인이 가서 멀리 서서 바라보매 그 두 사람이 요단가에 섰더니	And fifty men of the sons of the prophets went, and stood to view afar off: and they two stood by Jordan.	Then a company of fifty of the sons of the prophets went and stood at a distance, facing Elijah and Elisha as the two of them stood by the Jordan.
2KI	2	8	엘리야가 겉옷을 취하여 말아 물을 치매 물이 이리 저리 갈라지고 두 사람이 육지 위로 건너더라	And Elijah took his mantle, and wrapped it together, and smote the waters, and they were divided hither and thither, so that they two went over on dry ground.	And Elijah took his cloak, rolled it up, and struck the waters, which parted to the right and to the left, so that the two of them crossed over on dry ground.
2KI	2	9	건너매 엘리야가 엘리사에게 이르되 나를 네게서 취하시기 전에 내가 네게 어떻게 할 것을 구하라 엘리사가 가로되 당신의 영감이 갑절이나 내게 있기를 구하나이다	And it came to pass, when they were gone over, that Elijah said unto Elisha, Ask what I shall do for thee, before I be taken away from thee. And Elisha said, I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit be upon me.	After they had crossed over, Elijah said to Elisha, “Tell me, what can I do for you before I am taken away from you?” “Please, let me inherit a double portion of your spirit,” Elisha replied.
2KI	2	10	가로되 네가 어려운 일을 구하는도다 그러나 나를 네게서 취하시는 것을 네가 보면 그 일이 네게 이루려니와 그렇지 않으면 이루지 아니하리라 하고	And he said, Thou hast asked a hard thing: nevertheless, if thou see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto thee; but if not, it shall not be so.	“You have requested a difficult thing,” said Elijah. “Nevertheless, if you see me as I am taken from you, it will be yours. But if not, then it will not be so.”
2KI	2	11	두 사람이 행하며 말하더니 홀연히 불수레와 불말들이 두 사람을 격하고 엘리야가 회리바람을 타고 승천하더라	And it came to pass, as they still went on, and talked, that, behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and parted them both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven.	As they were walking along and talking together, suddenly a chariot of fire with horses of fire appeared and separated the two of them, and Elijah went up into heaven in a whirlwind.
2KI	2	12	엘리사가 보고 소리 지르되 내 아버지여 내 아버지여 이스라엘의 병거와 그 마병이여 하더니 다시 보이지 아니하는지라 이에 엘리사가 자기의 옷을 잡아 둘에 찢고	And Elisha saw it, and he cried, My father, my father, the chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. And he saw him no more: and he took hold of his own clothes, and rent them in two pieces.	As Elisha watched, he cried out, “My father, my father, the chariots and horsemen of Israel!” And he saw Elijah no more. So taking hold of his own clothes, he tore them in two.
2KI	2	13	엘리야의 몸에서 떨어진 겉옷을 주워가지고 돌아와서 요단 언덕에 서서	He took up also the mantle of Elijah that fell from him, and went back, and stood by the bank of Jordan;	Elisha also picked up the cloak that had fallen from Elijah, and he went back and stood on the bank of the Jordan.
2KI	2	14	엘리야의 몸에서 떨어진 그 겉옷을 가지고 물을 치며 가로되 엘리야의 하나님 여호와는 어디 계시니이까 하고 저도 물을 치매 물이 이리 저리 갈라지고 엘리사가 건너니라	And he took the mantle of Elijah that fell from him, and smote the waters, and said, Where is the Lord God of Elijah? and when he also had smitten the waters, they parted hither and thither: and Elisha went over.	Then he took the cloak of Elijah that had fallen from him and struck the waters. “Where now is the LORD, the God of Elijah?” he asked. And when he had struck the waters, they parted to the right and to the left, and Elisha crossed over.
2KI	2	15	맞은편 여리고에 있는 선지자의 생도들이 저를 보며 말하기를 엘리야의 영감이 엘리사의 위에 머물렀다 하고 가서 저를 영접하여 그 앞에서 땅에 엎드리고	And when the sons of the prophets which were to view at Jericho saw him, they said, The spirit of Elijah doth rest on Elisha. And they came to meet him, and bowed themselves to the ground before him.	When the sons of the prophets who were facing him from Jericho saw what had happened, they said, “The spirit of Elijah rests on Elisha.” And they went to meet him and bowed down to the ground before him.
2KI	2	16	가로되 당신의 종들에게 용사 오십 인이 있으니 청컨대 저희로 가서 당신의 주를 찾게 하소서 염려컨대 여호와의 신이 저를 들어 가다가 어느 산에나 어느 골짜기에 던지셨을까 하나이다 엘리사가 가로되 보내지 말라 하나	And they said unto him, Behold now, there be with thy servants fifty strong men; let them go, we pray thee, and seek thy master: lest peradventure the Spirit of the Lord hath taken him up, and cast him upon some mountain, or into some valley. And he said, Ye shall not send.	“Look now,” they said to Elisha, “we your servants have fifty valiant men. Please let them go and search for your master. Perhaps the Spirit of the LORD has taken him up and put him on one of the mountains or in one of the valleys.” “Do not send them,” Elisha replied.
2KI	2	17	무리가 저로 부끄러워 하도록 강청하매 보내라 한지라 저희가 오십 인을 보내었더니 사흘을 찾되 발견하지 못하고	And when they urged him till he was ashamed, he said, Send. They sent therefore fifty men; and they sought three days, but found him not.	But when they pressed him to the point of embarrassment, he said, “Send them.” And they sent fifty men, who searched for three days but did not find Elijah.
2KI	2	18	엘리사가 여리고에 머무는 중에 무리가 저에게 돌아오니 엘리사가 저희에게 이르되 내가 가지 말라고 너희에게 이르지 아니하였느냐 하였더라	And when they came again to him, (for he tarried at Jericho,) he said unto them, Did I not say unto you, Go not?	When they returned to Elisha, who was staying in Jericho, he said to them, “Didn’t I tell you not to go?”
2KI	2	19	그 성 사람들이 엘리사에게 고하되 우리 주께서 보시는 바와 같이 이 성읍의 터는 아름다우나 물이 좋지 못하므로 토산이 익지 못하고 떨어지나이다	And the men of the city said unto Elisha, Behold, I pray thee, the situation of this city is pleasant, as my lord seeth: but the water is naught, and the ground barren.	Then the men of the city said to Elisha, “Please note, our lord, that the city’s location is good, as you can see. But the water is bad and the land is unfruitful.”
2KI	2	20	엘리사가 가로되 새 그릇에 소금을 담아 내게로 가져오라 하매 곧 가져온지라	And he said, Bring me a new cruse, and put salt therein. And they brought it to him.	“Bring me a new bowl,” he replied, “and put some salt in it.” So they brought it to him,
2KI	2	21	엘리사가 물 근원으로 나아가서 소금을 그 가운데 던지며 가로되 여호와의 말씀이 내가 이 물을 고쳤으니 이로 좇아 다시는 죽음이나 토산이 익지 못하고 떨어짐이 없을지니라 하셨느니라 하니	And he went forth unto the spring of the waters, and cast the salt in there, and said, Thus saith the Lord, I have healed these waters; there shall not be from thence any more death or barren land.	and Elisha went out to the spring, cast the salt into it, and said, “This is what the LORD says: ‘I have healed this water. No longer will it cause death or unfruitfulness.’”
2KI	2	22	그 물이 엘리사의 말과 같이 고쳐져서 오늘날에 이르렀더라	So the waters were healed unto this day, according to the saying of Elisha which he spake.	And the waters there have been healthy to this day, according to the word spoken by Elisha.
2KI	2	23	엘리사가 거기서 벧엘로 올라가더니 길에 행할 때에 젊은 아이들이 성에서 나와서 저를 조롱하여 가로되 대머리여 올라가라 대머리여 올라가라 하는지라	And he went up from thence unto Beth–el: and as he was going up by the way, there came forth little children out of the city, and mocked him, and said unto him, Go up, thou bald head; go up, thou bald head.	From there, Elisha went up to Bethel, and as he was walking up the road, a group of boys came out of the city and jeered at him, chanting, “Go up, you baldhead! Go up, you baldhead!”
2KI	2	24	엘리사가 돌이켜 저희를 보고 여호와의 이름으로 저주하매 곧 수풀에서 암콤 둘이 나와서 아이들 중에 사십이 명을 찢었더라	And he turned back, and looked on them, and cursed them in the name of the Lord. And there came forth two she bears out of the wood, and tare forty and two children of them.	Then he turned around, looked at them, and called down a curse on them in the name of the LORD. Suddenly two female bears came out of the woods and mauled forty-two of the boys.
2KI	2	25	엘리사가 거기서부터 갈멜 산으로 가고 거기서 사마리아로 돌아왔더라	And he went from thence to mount Carmel, and from thence he returned to Samaria.	And Elisha went on to Mount Carmel, and from there he returned to Samaria.
2KI	3	1	유다 왕 여호사밧의 십팔년에 아합의 아들 여호람이 사마리아에서 이스라엘 왕이 되어 십이 년을 치리하니라	Now Jehoram the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and reigned twelve years.	In the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat’s reign over Judah, Jehoram son of Ahab became king of Israel, and he reigned in Samaria twelve years.
2KI	3	2	저가 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하였으나 그 부모와 같이 하지는 아니하였으니 이는 저가 그 아비의 만든 바알의 주상을 제하였음이라	And he wrought evil in the sight of the Lord; but not like his father, and like his mother: for he put away the image of Baal that his father had made.	And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, but not as his father and mother had done. He removed the sacred pillar of Baal that his father had made.
2KI	3	3	그러나 저가 느밧의 아들 여로보암이 이스라엘로 범하게 한 그 죄를 따라 행하고 떠나지 아니하였더라	Nevertheless he cleaved unto the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which made Israel to sin; he departed not therefrom.	Nevertheless, he clung to the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had caused Israel to commit; he did not turn away from them.
2KI	3	4	모압 왕 메사는 양을 치는 자라 새끼 양 십만의 털과 수양 십만의 털을 이스라엘 왕에게 바치더니	And Mesha king of Moab was a sheepmaster, and rendered unto the king of Israel an hundred thousand lambs, and an hundred thousand rams, with the wool.	Now Mesha king of Moab was a sheep breeder, and he would render to the king of Israel a hundred thousand lambs and the wool of a hundred thousand rams.
2KI	3	5	아합이 죽은 후에 모압 왕이 이스라엘 왕을 배반한지라	But it came to pass, when Ahab was dead, that the king of Moab rebelled against the king of Israel.	But after the death of Ahab, the king of Moab rebelled against the king of Israel.
2KI	3	6	그 때에 여호람 왕이 사마리아에서 나가서 온 이스라엘을 점고하고	And king Jehoram went out of Samaria the same time, and numbered all Israel.	So at that time King Jehoram set out from Samaria and mobilized all Israel.
2KI	3	7	또 가서 유다 왕 여호사밧에게 보내어 이르되 모압 왕이 나를 배반하였으니 당신은 나와 함께 가서 모압을 치시겠느뇨 저가 가로되 내가 올라가리이다 나는 당신과 일반이요 내 백성은 당신의 백성과 일반이요 내 말들도 당신의 말들과 일반이니이다	And he went and sent to Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, saying, The king of Moab hath rebelled against me: wilt thou go with me against Moab to battle? And he said, I will go up: I am as thou art, my people as thy people, and my horses as thy horses.	And he sent a message to Jehoshaphat king of Judah: “The king of Moab has rebelled against me. Will you go with me to fight against Moab?” “I will go,” replied Jehoshaphat. “I am like you, my people are your people, and my horses are your horses.”
2KI	3	8	여호람이 가로되 우리가 어느 길로 올라가리이까 저가 대답하되 에돔 광야 길로니이다	And he said, Which way shall we go up? And he answered, The way through the wilderness of Edom.	Then he asked, “Which way shall we go up?” “By way of the Desert of Edom,” replied Joram.
2KI	3	9	이스라엘 왕이 유다 왕과 에돔 왕으로 더불어 행하더니 길을 둘러 행한지 칠일에 군사와 따라가는 생축을 먹일 물이 없는지라	So the king of Israel went, and the king of Judah, and the king of Edom: and they fetched a compass of seven days’ journey: and there was no water for the host, and for the cattle that followed them.	So the king of Israel, the king of Judah, and the king of Edom set out, and after they had traveled a roundabout route for seven days, they had no water for their army or for their animals.
2KI	3	10	이스라엘 왕이 가로되 슬프다 여호와께서 이 세 왕을 불러 모아 모압의 손에 붙이려 하시는도다	And the king of Israel said, Alas! that the Lord hath called these three kings together, to deliver them into the hand of Moab!	“Alas,” said the king of Israel, “for the LORD has summoned these three kings to deliver them into the hand of Moab!”
2KI	3	11	여호사밧이 가로되 우리가 여호와께 물을만한 여호와의 선지자가 여기 없느냐 이스라엘 왕의 신복 중에 한 사람이 대답하여 가로되 전에 엘리야의 손에 물을 붓던 사밧의 아들 엘리사가 여기 있나이다	But Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the Lord, that we may enquire of the Lord by him? And one of the king of Israel’s servants answered and said, Here is Elisha the son of Shaphat, which poured water on the hands of Elijah.	But Jehoshaphat asked, “Is there no prophet of the LORD here? Let us inquire of the LORD through him.” And one of the servants of the king of Israel answered, “Elisha son of Shaphat is here. He used to pour water on the hands of Elijah.”
2KI	3	12	여호사밧이 가로되 여호와의 말씀이 저에게 있도다 이에 이스라엘 왕이 여호사밧과 에돔 왕으로 더불어 그에게로 내려가니라	And Jehoshaphat said, The word of the Lord is with him. So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat and the king of Edom went down to him.	Jehoshaphat affirmed, “The word of the LORD is with him.” So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat and the king of Edom went down to him.
2KI	3	13	엘리사가 이스라엘 왕에게 이르되 내가 당신과 무슨 상관이 있나이까 당신의 부친의 선지자들과 당신의 모친의 선지자들에게로 가소서 이스라엘 왕이 저에게 이르되 그렇지 아니하니이다 여호와께서 이 세 왕을 불러 모아 모압의 손에 붙이려 하시나이다	And Elisha said unto the king of Israel, What have I to do with thee? get thee to the prophets of thy father, and to the prophets of thy mother. And the king of Israel said unto him, Nay: for the Lord hath called these three kings together, to deliver them into the hand of Moab.	Elisha, however, said to the king of Israel, “What have we to do with each other? Go to the prophets of your father and of your mother!” “No,” replied the king of Israel, “for it is the LORD who has summoned these three kings to deliver them into the hand of Moab.”
2KI	3	14	엘리사가 가로되 내가 섬기는 만군의 여호와의 사심을 가리켜 맹세하노니 내가 만일 유다 왕 여호사밧의 낯을 봄이 아니면 당신을 향하지도 아니하고 보지도 아니하였으리이다	And Elisha said, As the Lord of hosts liveth, before whom I stand, surely, were it not that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee.	Then Elisha said, “As surely as the LORD of Hosts lives, before whom I stand, were it not for my regard for the presence of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, I would not look at you or acknowledge you.
2KI	3	15	이제 내게로 거문고 탈 자를 불러 오소서 하니라 거문고 타는 자가 거문고를 탈 때에 여호와께서 엘리사를 감동하시니	But now bring me a minstrel. And it came to pass, when the minstrel played, that the hand of the Lord came upon him.	But now, bring me a harpist.” And while the harpist played, the hand of the LORD came upon Elisha
2KI	3	16	저가 가로되 여호와의 말씀이 이 골짜기에 개천을 많이 파라 하셨나이다	And he said, Thus saith the Lord, Make this valley full of ditches.	and he said, “This is what the LORD says: ‘Dig this valley full of ditches.’
2KI	3	17	여호와께서 이르시기를 너희가 바람도 보지 못하고 비도 보지 못하되 이 골짜기에 물이 가득하여 너희와 너희 육축과 짐승이 마시리라 하셨나이다	For thus saith the Lord, Ye shall not see wind, neither shall ye see rain; yet that valley shall be filled with water, that ye may drink, both ye, and your cattle, and your beasts.	For the LORD says, ‘You will not see wind or rain, but the valley will be filled with water, and you will drink—you and your cattle and your animals.’
2KI	3	18	이것은 여호와 보시기에 오히려 작은 일이라 여호와께서 모압 사람도 당신의 손에 붙이시리니	And this is but a light thing in the sight of the Lord: he will deliver the Moabites also into your hand.	This is a simple matter in the sight of the LORD, and He will also deliver the Moabites into your hand.
2KI	3	19	당신들이 모든 견고한 성과 모든 아름다운 성을 치고 모든 좋은 나무를 베고 모든 샘을 메우고 돌로 모든 좋은 밭을 헐리이다 하더니	And ye shall smite every fenced city, and every choice city, and shall fell every good tree, and stop all wells of water, and mar every good piece of land with stones.	And you shall attack every fortified city and every city of importance. You shall cut down every good tree, stop up every spring, and ruin every good field with stones.”
2KI	3	20	아침에 미쳐 소제 드릴 때에 물이 에돔 편에서부터 흘러와서 그 땅에 가득하였더라	And it came to pass in the morning, when the meat offering was offered, that, behold, there came water by the way of Edom, and the country was filled with water.	The next morning, at the time of the morning sacrifice, water suddenly flowed from the direction of Edom and filled the land.
2KI	3	21	모압 모든 사람이 왕들이 올라와서 자기를 치려한다 함을 듣고 갑옷 입을 만한 자로부터 그 이상이 다 모여 그 경계에 섰더라	And when all the Moabites heard that the kings were come up to fight against them, they gathered all that were able to put on armour, and upward, and stood in the border.	Now all the Moabites had heard that the kings had come up to fight against them. So all who could bear arms, young and old, were summoned and stationed at the border.
2KI	3	22	아침에 모압 사람이 일찍이 일어나서 해가 물에 비취므로 맞은편 물이 붉어 피와 같음을 보고	And they rose up early in the morning, and the sun shone upon the water, and the Moabites saw the water on the other side as red as blood:	When they got up early in the morning, the sun was shining on the water, and it looked as red as blood to the Moabites across the way.
2KI	3	23	가로되 이는 피라 필연 저 왕들이 싸워 서로 죽인 것이로다 모압 사람들아 이제 노략하러 가자 하고	And they said, This is blood: the kings are surely slain, and they have smitten one another: now therefore, Moab, to the spoil.	“This is blood!” they exclaimed. “The kings have clashed swords and slaughtered one another. Now to the plunder, Moab!”
2KI	3	24	이스라엘 진에 이르니 이스라엘 사람이 일어나 모압 사람을 쳐서 그 앞에서 도망하게 하고 그 지경에 들어가며 모압 사람을 치고	And when they came to the camp of Israel, the Israelites rose up and smote the Moabites, so that they fled before them: but they went forward smiting the Moabites, even in their country.	But when the Moabites came to the camp of Israel, the Israelites rose up and attacked them, and they fled before them. So the Israelites invaded their land and struck down the Moabites.
2KI	3	25	그 성읍을 쳐서 헐고 각기 돌을 던져 모든 좋은 밭에 가득하게 하고 모든 샘을 메우고 모든 좋은 나무를 베고 길하라셋의 돌들은 남기고 물맷군이 두루 다니며 치니라	And they beat down the cities, and on every good piece of land cast every man his stone, and filled it; and they stopped all the wells of water, and felled all the good trees: only in Kir–haraseth left they the stones thereof; howbeit the slingers went about it, and smote it.	They destroyed the cities, and each man threw stones on every good field until it was covered. They stopped up every spring and cut down every good tree. Only Kir-haraseth was left with stones in place, but men with slings surrounded it and attacked it as well.
2KI	3	26	모압 왕이 전세가 극렬하여 당하기 어려움을 보고 칼 찬 군사 칠백을 거느리고 충돌하여 지나서 에돔 왕에게로 가고자 하되 능히 못하고	And when the king of Moab saw that the battle was too sore for him, he took with him seven hundred men that drew swords, to break through even unto the king of Edom: but they could not.	When the king of Moab saw that the battle was too fierce for him, he took with him seven hundred swordsmen to break through to the king of Edom, but they could not prevail.
2KI	3	27	이에 자기 위를 이어 왕이 될 맏아들을 취하여 성 위에서 번제를 드린지라 이스라엘에게 크게 통분함이 임하매 저희가 떠나 각기 고국으로 돌아갔더라	Then he took his eldest son that should have reigned in his stead, and offered him for a burnt offering upon the wall. And there was great indignation against Israel: and they departed from him, and returned to their own land.	So he took his firstborn son, who was to succeed him, and offered him as a burnt offering on the city wall. And there was great fury against the Israelites, so they withdrew and returned to their own land.
2KI	4	1	선지자의 생도의 아내 중에 한 여인이 엘리사에게 부르짖어 가로되 당신의 종 나의 남편이 이미 죽었는데 당신의 종이 여호와를 경외한 줄은 당신이 아시는 바니이다 이제 채주가 이르러 나의 두 아이를 취하여 그 종을 삼고자 하나이다	Now there cried a certain woman of the wives of the sons of the prophets unto Elisha, saying, Thy servant my husband is dead; and thou knowest that thy servant did fear the Lord: and the creditor is come to take unto him my two sons to be bondmen.	Now the wife of one of the sons of the prophets cried out to Elisha, “Your servant, my husband, is dead, and you know that your servant feared the LORD. And now his creditor is coming to take my two children as his slaves!”
2KI	4	2	엘리사가 저에게 이르되 내가 너를 위하여 어떻게 하랴 네 집에 무엇이 있는지 내게 고하라 저가 가로되 계집종의 집에 한 병 기름 외에는 아무 것도 없나이다	And Elisha said unto her, What shall I do for thee? tell me, what hast thou in the house? And she said, Thine handmaid hath not any thing in the house, save a pot of oil.	“How can I help you?” asked Elisha. “Tell me, what do you have in the house?” She answered, “Your servant has nothing in the house but a jar of oil.”
2KI	4	3	가로되 너는 밖에 나가서 모든 이웃에게 그릇을 빌라 빈 그릇을 빌되 조금 빌지 말고	Then he said, Go, borrow thee vessels abroad of all thy neighbours, even empty vessels; borrow not a few.	“Go,” said Elisha, “borrow jars, even empty ones, from all your neighbors. Do not gather just a few.
2KI	4	4	너는 네 두 아들과 함께 들어가서 문을 닫고 그 모든 그릇에 기름을 부어서 차는 대로 옮겨 놓으라	And when thou art come in, thou shalt shut the door upon thee and upon thy sons, and shalt pour out into all those vessels, and thou shalt set aside that which is full.	Then go inside, shut the door behind you and your sons, and pour oil into all these jars, setting the full ones aside.”
2KI	4	5	여인이 물러가서 그 두 아들과 함께 문을 닫은 후에 저희는 그릇을 그에게로 가져 오고 그는 부었더니	So she went from him, and shut the door upon her and upon her sons, who brought the vessels to her; and she poured out.	So she left him, and after she had shut the door behind her and her sons, they kept bringing jars to her, and she kept pouring.
2KI	4	6	그릇에 다 찬지라 여인이 아들에게 이르되 또 그릇을 내게로 가져오라 아들이 가로되 다른 그릇이 없나이다 하니 기름이 곧 그쳤더라	And it came to pass, when the vessels were full, that she said unto her son, Bring me yet a vessel. And he said unto her, There is not a vessel more. And the oil stayed.	When all the jars were full, she said to her son, “Bring me another.” But he replied, “There are no more jars.” Then the oil stopped flowing.
2KI	4	7	그 여인이 하나님의 사람에게 나아가서 고한대 저가 가로되 너는 가서 기름을 팔아 빚을 갚고 남은 것으로 너와 네 두 아들이 생활하라 하였더라	Then she came and told the man of God. And he said, Go, sell the oil, and pay thy debt, and live thou and thy children of the rest.	She went and told the man of God, and he said, “Go, sell the oil, and pay your debt. Then you and your sons can live on the remainder.”
2KI	4	8	하루는 엘리사가 수넴에 이르렀더니 거기 한 귀한 여인이 저를 간권하여 음식을 먹게 한고로 엘리사가 그곳을 지날 때마다 음식을 먹으러 그리로 들어갔더라	And it fell on a day, that Elisha passed to Shunem, where was a great woman; and she constrained him to eat bread. And so it was, that as oft as he passed by, he turned in thither to eat bread.	One day Elisha went to Shunem, and a prominent woman who lived there persuaded him to have a meal. So whenever he would pass by, he would stop there to eat.
2KI	4	9	여인이 그 남편에게 이르되 항상 우리에게로 지나는 이 사람은 하나님의 거룩한 사람인 줄을 내가 아노니	And she said unto her husband, Behold now, I perceive that this is an holy man of God, which passeth by us continually.	Then the woman said to her husband, “Behold, now I know that the one who often comes our way is a holy man of God.
2KI	4	10	우리가 저를 위하여 작은 방을 담 위에 짓고 침상과 책상과 의자와 촛대를 진설하사이다 저가 우리에게 이르면 거기 유하리이다 하였더라	Let us make a little chamber, I pray thee, on the wall; and let us set for him there a bed, and a table, and a stool, and a candlestick: and it shall be, when he cometh to us, that he shall turn in thither.	Please let us make a small room upstairs and put in it a bed, a table, a chair, and a lamp for him. Then when he comes to us, he can stay there.”
2KI	4	11	하루는 엘리사가 거기 이르러 그 방에 들어가서 누웠더니	And it fell on a day, that he came thither, and he turned into the chamber, and lay there.	One day Elisha came to visit and went to his upper room to lie down.
2KI	4	12	자기 사환 게하시에게 이르되 이 수넴 여인을 불러오라 곧 부르매 여인이 그 앞에 선지라	And he said to Gehazi his servant, Call this Shunammite. And when he had called her, she stood before him.	And he said to Gehazi his servant, “Call the Shunammite woman.” And when he had called her, she stood before him,
2KI	4	13	엘리사가 자기 사환에게 이르되 너는 저에게 이르라 네가 이같이 우리를 위하여 생각이 주밀하도다 내가 너를 위하여 어떻게 하랴 왕에게나 군대장관에게 무슨 구할 것이 있느냐 여인이 가로되 나는 내 백성 중에 거하나이다 하니라	And he said unto him, Say now unto her, Behold, thou hast been careful for us with all this care; what is to be done for thee? wouldest thou be spoken for to the king, or to the captain of the host? And she answered, I dwell among mine own people.	and Elisha said to Gehazi, “Now tell her, ‘Look, you have gone to all this trouble for us. What can we do for you? Can we speak on your behalf to the king or the commander of the army?’” “I have a home among my own people,” she replied.
2KI	4	14	엘리사가 가로되 그러면 저를 위하여 무엇을 하여야 할꼬 게하시가 대답하되 참으로 이 여인은 아들이 없고 그 남편은 늙었나이다	And he said, What then is to be done for her? And Gehazi answered, Verily she hath no child, and her husband is old.	So he asked, “Then what should be done for her?” “Well, she has no son,” Gehazi replied, “and her husband is old.”
2KI	4	15	가로되 다시 부르라 부르매 여인이 문에 서니라	And he said, Call her. And when he had called her, she stood in the door.	“Call her,” said Elisha. So Gehazi called her, and she stood in the doorway.
2KI	4	16	엘리사가 가로되 돌이 되면 네가 아들을 안으리라 여인이 가로되 아니로소이다 내 주 하나님의 사람이여 당신의 계집종을 속이지 마옵소서 하니라	And he said, About this season, according to the time of life, thou shalt embrace a son. And she said, Nay, my lord, thou man of God, do not lie unto thine handmaid.	And Elisha declared, “At this time next year, you will hold a son in your arms.” “No, my lord,” she said. “Do not lie to your maidservant, O man of God.”
2KI	4	17	여인이 과연 잉태하여 돌이 돌아오매 엘리사의 말한 대로 아들을 낳았더라	And the woman conceived, and bare a son at that season that Elisha had said unto her, according to the time of life.	But the woman did conceive, and at that time the next year she gave birth to a son, just as Elisha had told her.
2KI	4	18	그 아이가 저으기 자라매 하루는 곡식 베는 자에게 나가서 그 아비에게 이르렀더니	And when the child was grown, it fell on a day, that he went out to his father to the reapers.	And the child grew, and one day he went out to his father, who was with the harvesters.
2KI	4	19	그 아비에게 이르되 내 머리야 내 머리야 하는지라 그 아비가 사환에게 명하여 그 어미에게로 데려가라 하매	And he said unto his father, My head, my head. And he said to a lad, Carry him to his mother.	“My head! My head!” he complained to his father. So his father told a servant, “Carry him to his mother.”
2KI	4	20	곧 어미에게로 데려갔더니 낮까지 어미의 무릎에 앉았다가 죽은지라	And when he had taken him, and brought him to his mother, he sat on her knees till noon, and then died.	After the servant had picked him up and carried him to his mother, the boy sat on her lap until noon, and then he died.
2KI	4	21	그 어미가 올라가서 아들을 하나님의 사람의 침상 위에 두고 문을 닫고 나와서	And she went up, and laid him on the bed of the man of God, and shut the door upon him, and went out.	And she went up and laid him on the bed of the man of God. Then she shut the door and went out.
2KI	4	22	그 남편을 불러 이르되 청컨대 한 사환과 한 나귀를 내게로 보내소서 내가 하나님의 사람에게 달려갔다가 돌아오리이다	And she called unto her husband, and said, Send me, I pray thee, one of the young men, and one of the asses, that I may run to the man of God, and come again.	And the woman called her husband and said, “Please send me one of the servants and one of the donkeys, that I may go quickly to the man of God and return.”
2KI	4	23	그 남편이 가로되 초하루도 아니요 안식일도 아니어늘 그대가 오늘날 어찌하여 저에게 나아가고자 하느뇨 여인이 가로되 평안이니이다	And he said, Wherefore wilt thou go to him to day? it is neither new moon, nor sabbath. And she said, It shall be well.	“Why would you go to him today?” he replied. “It is not a New Moon or a Sabbath.” “Everything is all right,” she said.
2KI	4	24	이에 나귀에 안장을 지우고 자기 사환에게 이르되 몰아 앞으로 나아가라 내가 말하지 아니하거든 나의 달려가기를 천천하게 하지 말라 하고	Then she saddled an ass, and said to her servant, Drive, and go forward; slack not thy riding for me, except I bid thee.	Then she saddled the donkey and told her servant, “Drive onward; do not slow the pace for me unless I tell you.”
2KI	4	25	드디어 갈멜 산으로 가서 하나님의 사람에게로 나아가니라 하나님의 사람이 멀리서 저를 보고 자기 사환 게하시에게 이르되 저기 수넴 여인이 있도다	So she went and came unto the man of God to mount Carmel. And it came to pass, when the man of God saw her afar off, that he said to Gehazi his servant, Behold, yonder is that Shunammite:	So she set out and went to the man of God at Mount Carmel. When the man of God saw her at a distance, he said to his servant Gehazi, “Look, there is the Shunammite woman.
2KI	4	26	너는 달려가서 저를 맞아 이르기를 너는 평안하냐 네 남편이 평안하냐 아이가 평안하냐 하라 하였더니 여인이 대답하되 평안하다 하고	Run now, I pray thee, to meet her, and say unto her, Is it well with thee? is it well with thy husband? is it well with the child? And she answered, It is well.	Please run out now to meet her and ask, ‘Are you all right? Is your husband all right? Is your child all right?’” And she answered, “Everything is all right.”
2KI	4	27	산에 이르러 하나님의 사람에게 나아가서 그 발을 안은지라 게하시가 가까이 와서 저를 물리치고자 하매 하나님의 사람이 가로되 가만 두라 그 중심에 괴로움이 있다마는 여호와께서 내게 숨기시고 이르지 아니하셨도다	And when she came to the man of God to the hill, she caught him by the feet: but Gehazi came near to thrust her away. And the man of God said, Let her alone; for her soul is vexed within her: and the Lord hath hid it from me, and hath not told me.	When she reached the man of God at the mountain, she clung to his feet. Gehazi came over to push her away, but the man of God said, “Leave her alone, for her soul is in deep distress, and the LORD has hidden it from me and has not told me.”
2KI	4	28	여인이 가로되 내가 내 주께 아들을 구하더이까 나를 속이지 말라고 내가 말하지 아니하더이까	Then she said, Did I desire a son of my lord? did I not say, Do not deceive me?	Then she said, “Did I ask you for a son, my lord? Didn’t I say, ‘Do not deceive me?’”
2KI	4	29	엘리사가 게하시에게 이르되 네 허리를 묶고 내 지팡이를 손에 들고 가라 사람을 만나거든 인사하지 말며 사람이 네게 인사할지라도 대답하지 말고 내 지팡이를 그 아이 얼굴에 놓으라	Then he said to Gehazi, Gird up thy loins, and take my staff in thine hand, and go thy way: if thou meet any man, salute him not; and if any salute thee, answer him not again: and lay my staff upon the face of the child.	So Elisha said to Gehazi, “Tie up your garment, take my staff in your hand, and go! If you meet anyone, do not greet him, and if anyone greets you, do not answer him. Then lay my staff on the boy’s face.”
2KI	4	30	아이의 어미가 가로되 여호와의 사심과 당신의 혼의 사심을 가리켜 맹세하노니 내가 당신을 떠나지 아니하리이다 엘리사가 이에 일어나 여인을 좇아가니라	And the mother of the child said, As the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee. And he arose, and followed her.	And the mother of the boy said, “As surely as the LORD lives and as you yourself live, I will not leave you.” So he got up and followed her.
2KI	4	31	게하시가 저희의 앞서 가서 지팡이를 그 아이의 얼굴에 놓았으나 소리도 없고 듣는 모양도 없는지라 돌아와서 엘리사를 맞아 가로되 아이가 깨지 아니하였나이다	And Gehazi passed on before them, and laid the staff upon the face of the child; but there was neither voice, nor hearing. Wherefore he went again to meet him, and told him, saying, The child is not awaked.	Gehazi went on ahead of them and laid the staff on the boy’s face, but there was no sound or response. So he went back to meet Elisha and told him, “The boy has not awakened.”
2KI	4	32	엘리사가 집에 들어가 보니 아이가 죽었는데 자기의 침상에 눕혔는지라	And when Elisha was come into the house, behold, the child was dead, and laid upon his bed.	When Elisha reached the house, there was the boy lying dead on his bed.
2KI	4	33	들어가서는 문을 닫으니 두 사람뿐이라 엘리사가 여호와께 기도하고	He went in therefore, and shut the door upon them twain, and prayed unto the Lord.	So he went in, closed the door behind the two of them, and prayed to the LORD.
2KI	4	34	아이의 위에 올라 엎드려 자기 입을 그 입에, 자기 눈을 그 눈에, 자기 손을 그 손에 대고 그 몸에 엎드리니 아이의 살이 차차 따뜻하더라	And he went up, and lay upon the child, and put his mouth upon his mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, and his hands upon his hands: and he stretched himself upon the child; and the flesh of the child waxed warm.	Then Elisha got on the bed and lay on the boy, mouth to mouth, eye to eye, and hand to hand. As he stretched himself out over him, the boy’s body became warm.
2KI	4	35	엘리사가 내려서 집 안에서 한번 이리 저리 다니고 다시 아이 위에 올라 엎드리니 아이가 일곱 번 재채기하고 눈을 뜨는지라	Then he returned, and walked in the house to and fro; and went up, and stretched himself upon him: and the child sneezed seven times, and the child opened his eyes.	Elisha turned away and paced back and forth across the room. Then he got on the bed and stretched himself out over the boy again, and the boy sneezed seven times and opened his eyes.
2KI	4	36	엘리사가 게하시를 불러서 저 수넴 여인을 불러오라 하니 곧 부르매 여인이 들어가니 엘리사가 가로되 네 아들을 취하라	And he called Gehazi, and said, Call this Shunammite. So he called her. And when she was come in unto him, he said, Take up thy son.	Elisha summoned Gehazi and said, “Call the Shunammite woman.” So he called her and she came. Then Elisha said, “Pick up your son.”
2KI	4	37	여인이 들어가서 엘리사의 발 앞에서 땅에 엎드려 절하고 아들을 안고 나가니라	Then she went in, and fell at his feet, and bowed herself to the ground, and took up her son, and went out.	She came in, fell at his feet, and bowed to the ground. Then she picked up her son and went out.
2KI	4	38	엘리사가 다시 길갈에 이르니 그 땅에 흉년이 들었는데 선지자의 생도가 엘리사의 앞에 앉은지라 엘리사가 자기 사환에게 이르되 큰 솥을 걸고 선지자의 생도들을 위하여 국을 끓이라 하매	And Elisha came again to Gilgal: and there was a dearth in the land; and the sons of the prophets were sitting before him: and he said unto his servant, Set on the great pot, and seethe pottage for the sons of the prophets.	When Elisha returned to Gilgal, there was a famine in the land. As the sons of the prophets were sitting at his feet, he said to his attendant, “Put on the large pot and boil some stew for the sons of the prophets.”
2KI	4	39	한 사람이 채소를 캐러 들에 나가서 야등덩굴을 만나 그것에서 들외를 따서 옷자락에 채워가지고 돌아와서 썰어 국 끓이는 솥에 넣되 저희는 무엇인지 알지 못한지라	And one went out into the field to gather herbs, and found a wild vine, and gathered thereof wild gourds his lap full, and came and shred them into the pot of pottage: for they knew them not.	One of them went out to the field to gather herbs, and he found a wild vine from which he gathered as many wild gourds as his garment could hold. Then he came back and cut them up into the pot of stew, though no one knew what they were.
2KI	4	40	이에 퍼다가 무리에게 주어 먹게 하였더니 무리가 국을 먹다가 외쳐 가로되 하나님의 사람이여 솥에 사망의 독이 있나이다 하고 능히 먹지 못하는지라	So they poured out for the men to eat. And it came to pass, as they were eating of the pottage, that they cried out, and said, O thou man of God, there is death in the pot. And they could not eat thereof.	And they poured it out for the men to eat, but when they tasted the stew they cried out, “There is death in the pot, O man of God!” And they could not eat it.
2KI	4	41	엘리사가 가로되 그러면 가루를 가져오라 하여 솥에 던지고 가로되 퍼다가 무리에게 주어 먹게 하라 하매 이에 솥 가운데 해독이 없어지니라	But he said, Then bring meal. And he cast it into the pot; and he said, Pour out for the people, that they may eat. And there was no harm in the pot.	Then Elisha said, “Get some flour.” He threw it into the pot and said, “Pour it out for the people to eat.” And there was nothing harmful in the pot.
2KI	4	42	한 사람이 바알살리사에서부터 와서 처음 익은 식물 곧 보리떡 이십과 또 자루에 담은 채소를 하나님의 사람에게 드린지라 저가 가로되 무리에게 주어 먹게 하라	And there came a man from Baal–shalisha, and brought the man of God bread of the firstfruits, twenty loaves of barley, and full ears of corn in the husk thereof. And he said, Give unto the people, that they may eat.	Now a man from Baal-shalishah came to the man of God with a sack of twenty loaves of barley bread from the first ripe grain. “Give it to the people to eat,” said Elisha.
2KI	4	43	그 사환이 가로되 어찜이니이까 이것을 일백 명에게 베풀겠나이까 하나 엘리사는 또 가로되 무리에게 주어 먹게 하라 여호와의 말씀이 무리가 먹고 남으리라 하셨느니라	And his servitor said, What, should I set this before an hundred men? He said again, Give the people, that they may eat: for thus saith the Lord, They shall eat, and shall leave thereof.	But his servant asked, “How am I to set twenty loaves before a hundred men?” “Give it to the people to eat,” said Elisha, “for this is what the LORD says: ‘They will eat and have some left over.’”
2KI	4	44	저가 드디어 무리 앞에 베풀었더니 여호와의 말씀과 같이 다 먹고 남았더라	So he set it before them, and they did eat, and left thereof, according to the word of the Lord.	So he set it before them, and they ate and had some left over, according to the word of the LORD.
2KI	5	1	아람 왕의 군대장관 나아만은 그 주인 앞에서 크고 존귀한 자니 이는 여호와께서 전에 저로 아람을 구원하게 하셨음이라 저는 큰 용사나 문둥병자더라	Now Naaman, captain of the host of the king of Syria, was a great man with his master, and honourable, because by him the Lord had given deliverance unto Syria: he was also a mighty man in valour, but he was a leper.	Now Naaman, the commander of the army of the king of Aram, was a great man in his master’s sight and highly regarded, for through him the LORD had given victory to Aram. And he was a mighty man of valor, but he was a leper.
2KI	5	2	전에 아람 사람이 떼를 지어 나가서 이스라엘 땅에서 작은 계집아이 하나를 사로잡으매 저가 나아만의 아내에게 수종들더니	And the Syrians had gone out by companies, and had brought away captive out of the land of Israel a little maid; and she waited on Naaman’s wife.	At this time the Arameans had gone out in bands and had taken a young girl from the land of Israel, and she was serving Naaman’s wife.
2KI	5	3	그 주모에게 이르되 우리 주인이 사마리아에 계신 선지자 앞에 계셨으면 좋겠나이다 저가 그 문둥병을 고치리이다	And she said unto her mistress, Would God my lord were with the prophet that is in Samaria! for he would recover him of his leprosy.	She said to her mistress, “If only my master would go to the prophet who is in Samaria, he would cure him of his leprosy.”
2KI	5	4	나아만이 들어가서 그 주인에게 고하여 가로되 이스라엘 땅에서 온 계집아이의 말이 이러이러하더이다	And one went in, and told his lord, saying, Thus and thus said the maid that is of the land of Israel.	And Naaman went and told his master what the girl from the land of Israel had said.
2KI	5	5	아람 왕이 가로되 갈지어다 이제 내가 이스라엘 왕에게 글을 보내리라 나아만이 곧 떠날새 은 십 달란트와 금 육천 개와 의복 열 벌을 가지고 가서	And the king of Syria said, Go to, go, and I will send a letter unto the king of Israel. And he departed, and took with him ten talents of silver, and six thousand pieces of gold, and ten changes of raiment.	“Go now,” said the king of Aram, “and I will send you with a letter to the king of Israel.” So Naaman departed, taking with him ten talents of silver, six thousand shekels of gold, and ten sets of clothing.
2KI	5	6	이스라엘 왕에게 그 글을 전하니 일렀으되 내가 내 신하 나아만을 당신에게 보내오니 이 글이 당신에게 이르거든 당신은 그 문둥병을 고쳐주소서 하였더라	And he brought the letter to the king of Israel, saying, Now when this letter is come unto thee, behold, I have therewith sent Naaman my servant to thee, that thou mayest recover him of his leprosy.	And the letter that he took to the king of Israel stated: “With this letter I am sending my servant Naaman, so that you may cure him of his leprosy.”
2KI	5	7	이스라엘 왕이 그 글을 읽고 자기 옷을 찢으며 가로되 내가 어찌 하나님이관대 능히 사람을 죽이며 살릴 수 있으랴 저가 어찌하여 사람을 내게 보내어 그 문둥병을 고치라 하느냐 너희는 깊이 생각하고 저 왕이 틈을 타서 나로 더불어 시비하려 함인줄 알라 하니라	And it came to pass, when the king of Israel had read the letter, that he rent his clothes, and said, Am I God, to kill and to make alive, that this man doth send unto me to recover a man of his leprosy? wherefore consider, I pray you, and see how he seeketh a quarrel against me.	When the king of Israel read the letter, he tore his clothes and asked, “Am I God, killing and giving life, that this man expects me to cure a leper? Surely you can see that he is seeking a quarrel with me!”
2KI	5	8	하나님의 사람 엘리사가 이스라엘 왕이 자기 옷을 찢었다 함을 듣고 왕에게 보내어 가로되 왕이 어찌하여 옷을 찢었나이까 그 사람을 내게로 오게 하소서 저가 이스라엘 중에 선지자가 있는 줄을 알리이다	And it was so, when Elisha the man of God had heard that the king of Israel had rent his clothes, that he sent to the king, saying, Wherefore hast thou rent thy clothes? let him come now to me, and he shall know that there is a prophet in Israel.	Now when Elisha the man of God heard that the king of Israel had torn his clothes, he sent a message to the king: “Why have you torn your clothes? Please let the man come to me, and he will know that there is a prophet in Israel.”
2KI	5	9	나아만이 이에 말들과 병거들을 거느리고 이르러 엘리사의 집 문에 서니	So Naaman came with his horses and with his chariot, and stood at the door of the house of Elisha.	So Naaman came with his horses and chariots and stood at the door of Elisha’s house.
2KI	5	10	엘리사가 사자를 저에게 보내어 가로되 너는 가서 요단 강에 몸을 일곱 번 씻으라 네 살이 여전하여 깨끗하리라	And Elisha sent a messenger unto him, saying, Go and wash in Jordan seven times, and thy flesh shall come again to thee, and thou shalt be clean.	Then Elisha sent him a messenger, who said, “Go and wash yourself seven times in the Jordan, and your flesh will be restored, and you will be clean.”
2KI	5	11	나아만이 노하여 물러가며 가로되 내 생각에는 저가 내게로 나아와 서서 그 하나님 여호와의 이름을 부르고 당처 위에 손을 흔들어 문둥병을 고칠까 하였도다	But Naaman was wroth, and went away, and said, Behold, I thought, He will surely come out to me, and stand, and call on the name of the Lord his God, and strike his hand over the place, and recover the leper.	But Naaman went away angry, saying, “I thought that he would surely come out, stand and call on the name of the LORD his God, and wave his hand over the spot to cure my leprosy.
2KI	5	12	다메섹 강 아마나와 바르발은 이스라엘 모든 강물보다 낫지 아니하냐 내가 거기서 몸을 씻으면 깨끗하게 되지 아니하랴 하고 몸을 돌이켜 분한 모양으로 떠나니	Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? may I not wash in them, and be clean? So he turned and went away in a rage.	Are not the Abanah and Pharpar, the rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? Could I not have washed in them and been cleansed?” So he turned and went away in a rage.
2KI	5	13	그 종들이 나아와서 말하여 가로되 내 아버지여 선지자가 당신을 명하여 큰 일을 행하라 하였더면 행치 아니하였으리이까 하물며 당신에게 이르기를 씻어 깨끗하게 하라 함이리이까	And his servants came near, and spake unto him, and said, My father, if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, wouldest thou not have done it? how much rather then, when he saith to thee, Wash, and be clean?	Naaman’s servants, however, approached him and said, “My father, if the prophet had told you to do some great thing, would you not have done it? How much more, then, when he tells you, ‘Wash and be cleansed’?”
2KI	5	14	나아만이 이에 내려가서 하나님의 사람의 말씀대로 요단 강에 일곱 번 몸을 잠그니 그 살이 여전하여 어린아이의 살 같아서 깨끗하게 되었더라	Then went he down, and dipped himself seven times in Jordan, according to the saying of the man of God: and his flesh came again like unto the flesh of a little child, and he was clean.	So Naaman went down and dipped himself in the Jordan seven times, according to the word of the man of God, and his flesh was restored and became like that of a little child, and he was clean.
2KI	5	15	나아만이 모든 종자와 함께 하나님의 사람에게로 도로 와서 그 앞에 서서 가로되 내가 이제 이스라엘 외에는 온 천하에 신이 없는 줄을 아나이다 청컨대 당신의 종에게서 예물을 받으소서	And he returned to the man of God, he and all his company, and came, and stood before him: and he said, Behold, now I know that there is no God in all the earth, but in Israel: now therefore, I pray thee, take a blessing of thy servant.	Then Naaman and all his attendants went back to the man of God, stood before him, and declared, “Now I know for sure that there is no God in all the earth except in Israel. So please accept a gift from your servant.”
2KI	5	16	가로되 나의 섬기는 여호와의 사심을 가리켜 맹세하노니 내가 받지 아니하리라 나아만이 받으라 강권하되 저가 고사한지라	But he said, As the Lord liveth, before whom I stand, I will receive none. And he urged him to take it; but he refused.	But Elisha replied, “As surely as the LORD lives, before whom I stand, I will not accept it.” And although Naaman urged him to accept it, he refused.
2KI	5	17	나아만이 가로되 그러면 청컨대 노새 두 바리에 실을 흙을 당신의 종에게 주소서 이제부터는 종이 번제든지 다른 제든지 다른 신에게는 드리지 아니하고 다만 여호와께 드리겠나이다	And Naaman said, Shall there not then, I pray thee, be given to thy servant two mules’ burden of earth? for thy servant will henceforth offer neither burnt offering nor sacrifice unto other gods, but unto the Lord.	“If you will not,” said Naaman, “please let me, your servant, be given as much soil as a pair of mules can carry. For your servant will never again make a burnt offering or a sacrifice to any other god but the LORD.
2KI	5	18	오직 한가지 일이 있사오니 여호와께서 당신의 종을 사유하시기를 원하나이다 곧 내 주인께서 림몬의 당에 들어가 거기서 숭배하며 내 손을 의지하시매 내가 림몬의 당에서 몸을 굽히오니 내가 림몬의 당에서 몸을 굽힐 때에 여호와께서 이 일에 대하여 당신의 종을 사유하시기를 원하나이다	In this thing the Lord pardon thy servant, that when my master goeth into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and he leaneth on my hand, and I bow myself in the house of Rimmon: when I bow down myself in the house of Rimmon, the Lord pardon thy servant in this thing.	Yet may the LORD forgive your servant this one thing: When my master goes into the temple of Rimmon to worship there, and he leans on my arm, and I bow down in the temple of Rimmon, may the LORD forgive your servant in this matter.”
2KI	5	19	엘리사가 가로되 너는 평안히 가라 저가 엘리사를 떠나 조금 진행하니라	And he said unto him, Go in peace. So he departed from him a little way.	“Go in peace,” said Elisha. But after Naaman had traveled a short distance,
2KI	5	20	하나님의 사람 엘리사의 사환 게하시가 스스로 이르되 내 주인이 이 아람 사람 나아만에게 면하여 주고 그 가지고 온 것을 그 손에서 받지 아니하였도다 여호와의 사심을 가리켜 맹세하노니 내가 저를 쫓아가서 무엇이든지 그에게서 취하리라 하고	But Gehazi, the servant of Elisha the man of God, said, Behold, my master hath spared Naaman this Syrian, in not receiving at his hands that which he brought: but, as the Lord liveth, I will run after him, and take somewhat of him.	Gehazi, the servant of Elisha the man of God, said, “Look, my master has spared this Aramean, Naaman, while not accepting what he brought. As surely as the LORD lives, I will run after him and get something from him.”
2KI	5	21	나아만의 뒤를 쫓아가니 나아만이 자기 뒤에 달려옴을 보고 수레에 내려서 맞아 가로되 평안이냐	So Gehazi followed after Naaman. And when Naaman saw him running after him, he lighted down from the chariot to meet him, and said, Is all well?	So Gehazi pursued Naaman. And when Naaman saw him running toward him, he got down from the chariot to meet him and asked, “Is everything all right?”
2KI	5	22	저가 가로되 평안이니이다 우리 주인께서 나를 보내시며 말씀하시기를 지금 선지자의 생도 중에 두 소년이 에브라임 산지에서부터 내게 왔으니 청컨대 당신은 저희에게 은 한 달란트와 옷 두 벌을 주라 하시더이다	And he said, All is well. My master hath sent me, saying, Behold, even now there be come to me from mount Ephraim two young men of the sons of the prophets: give them, I pray thee, a talent of silver, and two changes of garments.	“Everything is all right,” Gehazi replied. “My master has sent me to say, ‘I have just now discovered that two young men from the sons of the prophets have come to me from the hill country of Ephraim. Please give them a talent of silver and two sets of clothing.’”
2KI	5	23	나아만이 가로되 바라건대 두 달란트를 받으라 하고 저를 억제하여 은 두 달란트를 두 전대에 넣어 매고 옷 두 벌을 아울러 두 사환에게 지우매 저희가 게하시 앞에서 지고 가니라	And Naaman said, Be content, take two talents. And he urged him, and bound two talents of silver in two bags, with two changes of garments, and laid them upon two of his servants; and they bare them before him.	But Naaman insisted, “Please, take two talents.” And he urged Gehazi to accept them. Then he tied up two talents of silver in two bags along with two sets of clothing and gave them to two of his servants, who carried them ahead of Gehazi.
2KI	5	24	언덕에 이르러는 게하시가 그 물건을 두 사환의 손에서 취하여 집에 감추고 저희를 보내어 가게 한 후	And when he came to the tower, he took them from their hand, and bestowed them in the house: and he let the men go, and they departed.	When Gehazi came to the hill, he took the gifts from the servants and stored them in the house. Then he dismissed the men, and they departed.
2KI	5	25	들어가서 그 주인 앞에 서니 엘리사가 이르되 게하시야 네가 어디서 오느냐 대답하되 종이 아무데도 가지 아니하였나이다	But he went in, and stood before his master. And Elisha said unto him, Whence comest thou, Gehazi? And he said, Thy servant went no whither.	When Gehazi went in and stood before his master, Elisha asked him, “Gehazi, where have you been?” “Your servant did not go anywhere,” he replied.
2KI	5	26	엘리사가 이르되 그 사람이 수레에서 내려 너를 맞을 때에 내 심령이 감각되지 아니하였느냐 지금이 어찌 은을 받으며 옷을 받으며 감람원이나 포도원이나 양이나 소나 남종이나 여종을 받을 때냐	And he said unto him, Went not mine heart with thee, when the man turned again from his chariot to meet thee? Is it a time to receive money, and to receive garments, and oliveyards, and vineyards, and sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and maidservants?	But Elisha questioned him, “Did not my spirit go with you when the man got down from his chariot to meet you? Is this the time to accept money and clothing, olive groves and vineyards, sheep and oxen, menservants and maidservants?
2KI	5	27	그러므로 나아만의 문둥병이 네게 들어 네 자손에게 미쳐 영원토록 이르리라 게하시가 그 앞에서 물러 나오매 문둥병이 발하여 눈 같이 되었더라	The leprosy therefore of Naaman shall cleave unto thee, and unto thy seed for ever. And he went out from his presence a leper as white as snow.	Therefore, the leprosy of Naaman will cling to you and your descendants forever!” And as Gehazi left his presence, he was leprous—as white as snow.
2KI	6	1	선지자의 생도가 엘리사에게 이르되 보소서 우리가 당신과 함께 거한 곳이 우리에게는 좁으니	And the sons of the prophets said unto Elisha, Behold now, the place where we dwell with thee is too strait for us.	Now the sons of the prophets said to Elisha, “Please take note that the place where we meet with you is too small for us.
2KI	6	2	우리가 요단으로 가서 거기서 각각 한 재목을 취하여 그곳에 우리의 거할 처소를 세우사이다 엘리사가 가로되 가라	Let us go, we pray thee, unto Jordan, and take thence every man a beam, and let us make us a place there, where we may dwell. And he answered, Go ye.	Please let us go to the Jordan, where each of us can get a log so we can build ourselves a place to live there.” “Go,” said Elisha.
2KI	6	3	그 하나가 가로되 청컨대 당신도 종들과 함께 하소서 엘리사가 가로되 내가 가리라 하고	And one said, Be content, I pray thee, and go with thy servants. And he answered, I will go.	Then one of them said, “Please come with your servants.” “I will come,” he replied.
2KI	6	4	드디어 저희와 함께 가니라 무리가 요단에 이르러 나무를 베더니	So he went with them. And when they came to Jordan, they cut down wood.	So Elisha went with them, and when they came to the Jordan, they began to cut down some trees.
2KI	6	5	한 사람이 나무를 벨 때에 도끼가 자루에서 빠져 물에 떨어진지라 이에 외쳐 가로되 아아 내 주여 이는 빌어온 것이니이다	But as one was felling a beam, the axe head fell into the water: and he cried, and said, Alas, master! for it was borrowed.	As one of them was cutting down a tree, the iron axe head fell into the water. “Oh, my master,” he cried out, “it was borrowed!”
2KI	6	6	하나님의 사람이 가로되 어디 빠졌느냐 하매 그곳을 보이는지라 엘리사가 나무가지를 베어 물에 던져서 도끼로 떠오르게 하고	And the man of God said, Where fell it? And he shewed him the place. And he cut down a stick, and cast it in thither; and the iron did swim.	“Where did it fall?” asked the man of God. And when he showed him the place, the man of God cut a stick, threw it there, and made the iron float.
2KI	6	7	가로되 너는 취하라 그 사람이 손을 내밀어 취하니라	Therefore said he, Take it up to thee. And he put out his hand, and took it.	“Lift it out,” he said, and the man reached out his hand and took it.
2KI	6	8	때에 아람 왕이 이스라엘로 더불어 싸우며 그 신복들과 의논하여 이르기를 우리가 아무데 아무데 진을 치리라 하였더니	Then the king of Syria warred against Israel, and took counsel with his servants, saying, In such and such a place shall be my camp.	Now the king of Aram was at war against Israel. After consulting with his servants, he said, “My camp will be in such and such a place.”
2KI	6	9	하나님의 사람이 이스라엘 왕에게 기별하여 가로되 왕은 삼가 아무 곳으로 지나가지 마소서 아람 사람이 그곳으로 나오나이다	And the man of God sent unto the king of Israel, saying, Beware that thou pass not such a place; for thither the Syrians are come down.	Then the man of God sent word to the king of Israel: “Be careful passing by this place, for the Arameans are going down there.”
2KI	6	10	이스라엘 왕이 하나님의 사람의 자기에게 고하여 경계한 곳으로 사람을 보내어 방비하기가 한두 번이 아닌지라	And the king of Israel sent to the place which the man of God told him and warned him of, and saved himself there, not once nor twice.	So the king of Israel sent word to the place the man of God had pointed out. Time and again Elisha warned the king, so that he was on his guard in such places.
2KI	6	11	이러므로 아람 왕의 마음이 번뇌하여 그 신복들을 불러 이르되 우리 중에 누가 이스라엘 왕의 내응이 된 것을 내게 고하지 아니하느냐	Therefore the heart of the king of Syria was sore troubled for this thing; and he called his servants, and said unto them, Will ye not shew me which of us is for the king of Israel?	For this reason the king of Aram became enraged and called his servants to demand of them, “Tell me, which one of us is on the side of the king of Israel?”
2KI	6	12	그 신복 중에 하나가 가로되 우리 주 왕이여 아니로소이다 오직 이스라엘 선지자 엘리사가 왕이 침실에서 하신 말씀이라도 이스라엘 왕에게 고하나이다	And one of his servants said, None, my lord, O king: but Elisha, the prophet that is in Israel, telleth the king of Israel the words that thou speakest in thy bedchamber.	But one of his servants replied, “No one, my lord the king. For Elisha, the prophet in Israel, tells the king of Israel the very words you speak in your bedroom.”
2KI	6	13	왕이 가로되 너희는 가서 엘리사가 어디 있나 보라 내가 보내어 잡으리라 혹이 왕에게 고하여 가로되 엘리사가 도단에 있나이다	And he said, Go and spy where he is, that I may send and fetch him. And it was told him, saying, Behold, he is in Dothan.	So the king said, “Go and see where he is, that I may send men to capture him.” On receiving the report, “Elisha is in Dothan,”
2KI	6	14	왕이 이에 말과 병거와 많은 군사를 보내매 저희가 밤에 가서 그 성을 에워쌌더라	Therefore sent he thither horses, and chariots, and a great host: and they came by night, and compassed the city about.	the king of Aram sent horses, chariots, and a great army. They went there by night and surrounded the city.
2KI	6	15	하나님의 사람의 수종드는 자가 일찍이 일어나서 나가보니 군사와 말과 병거가 성을 에워쌌는지라 그 사환이 엘리사에게 고하되 아아 내 주여 우리가 어찌하리이까	And when the servant of the man of God was risen early, and gone forth, behold, an host compassed the city both with horses and chariots. And his servant said unto him, Alas, my master! how shall we do?	When the servant of the man of God got up and went out early in the morning, an army with horses and chariots had surrounded the city. So he asked Elisha, “Oh, my master, what are we to do?”
2KI	6	16	대답하되 두려워하지 말라 우리와 함께한 자가 저와 함께한 자보다 많으니라 하고	And he answered, Fear not: for they that be with us are more than they that be with them.	“Do not be afraid,” Elisha answered, “for those who are with us are more than those who are with them.”
2KI	6	17	기도하여 가로되 여호와여 원컨대 저의 눈을 열어서 보게 하옵소서 하니 여호와께서 그 사환의 눈을 여시매 저가 보니 불말과 불병거가 산에 가득하여 엘리사를 둘렀더라	And Elisha prayed, and said, Lord, I pray thee, open his eyes, that he may see. And the Lord opened the eyes of the young man; and he saw: and, behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha.	Then Elisha prayed, “O LORD, please open his eyes that he may see.” And the LORD opened the eyes of the young man, and he saw that the hills were full of horses and chariots of fire all around Elisha.
2KI	6	18	아람 사람이 엘리사에게 내려오매 엘리사가 여호와께 기도하여 가로되 원컨대 저 무리의 눈을 어둡게 하옵소서 하매 엘리사의 말대로 그 눈을 어둡게 하신지라	And when they came down to him, Elisha prayed unto the Lord, and said, Smite this people, I pray thee, with blindness. And he smote them with blindness according to the word of Elisha.	As the Arameans came down against him, Elisha prayed to the LORD, “Please strike these people with blindness.” So He struck them with blindness, according to the word of Elisha.
2KI	6	19	엘리사가 저희에게 이르되 이는 그 길이 아니요 이는 그 성도 아니니 나를 따라 오라 내가 너희를 인도하여 너희의 찾는 사람에게로 나아가리라 하고 저희를 인도하여 사마리아에 이르니라	And Elisha said unto them, This is not the way, neither is this the city: follow me, and I will bring you to the man whom ye seek. But he led them to Samaria.	And Elisha told them, “This is not the way, and this is not the city. Follow me, and I will take you to the man you are seeking.” And he led them to Samaria.
2KI	6	20	사마리아에 들어갈 때에 엘리사가 가로되 여호와여 이 무리의 눈을 열어서 보게 하옵소서 하니 여호와께서 저희의 눈을 여시매 저희가 보니 자기가 사마리아 가운데 있더라	And it came to pass, when they were come into Samaria, that Elisha said, Lord, open the eyes of these men, that they may see. And the Lord opened their eyes, and they saw; and, behold, they were in the midst of Samaria.	When they had entered Samaria, Elisha said, “O LORD, open the eyes of these men that they may see.” Then the LORD opened their eyes, and they looked around and discovered that they were in Samaria.
2KI	6	21	이스라엘 왕이 저희를 보고 엘리사에게 이르되 내 아버지여 내가 치리이까 내가 치리이까	And the king of Israel said unto Elisha, when he saw them, My father, shall I smite them? shall I smite them?	And when the king of Israel saw them, he asked Elisha, “My father, shall I kill them? Shall I kill them?”
2KI	6	22	대답하되 치지 마소서 칼과 활로 사로잡은 자인들 어찌 치리이까 떡과 물을 그 앞에 두어 먹고 마시게 하고 그 주인에게로 돌려 보내소서	And he answered, Thou shalt not smite them: wouldest thou smite those whom thou hast taken captive with thy sword and with thy bow? set bread and water before them, that they may eat and drink, and go to their master.	“Do not kill them,” he replied. “Would you kill those you have captured with your own sword or bow? Set food and water before them, that they may eat and drink and then return to their master.”
2KI	6	23	왕이 위하여 식물을 많이 베풀고 저희가 먹고 마시매 놓아보내니 저희가 그 주인에게로 돌아가니라 이로부터 아람 군사의 부대가 다시는 이스라엘 땅에 들어오지 못하니라	And he prepared great provision for them: and when they had eaten and drunk, he sent them away, and they went to their master. So the bands of Syria came no more into the land of Israel.	So the king prepared a great feast for them, and after they had finished eating and drinking, he sent them away, and they returned to their master. And the Aramean raiders did not come into the land of Israel again.
2KI	6	24	이후에 아람 왕 벤하닷이 그 온 군대를 모아 올라와서 사마리아를 에워싸니	And it came to pass after this, that Ben–hadad king of Syria gathered all his host, and went up, and besieged Samaria.	Some time later, Ben-hadad king of Aram assembled his entire army and marched up to besiege Samaria.
2KI	6	25	아람 사람이 사마리아를 에워싸므로 성중이 크게 주려서 나귀 머리 하나에 은 팔십 세겔이요 합분태 사분 일 갑에 은 다섯 세겔이라	And there was a great famine in Samaria: and, behold, they besieged it, until an ass’s head was sold for fourscore pieces of silver, and the fourth part of a cab of dove’s dung for five pieces of silver.	So there was a great famine in Samaria. Indeed, they besieged the city so long that a donkey’s head sold for eighty shekels of silver, and a quarter cab of dove’s dung sold for five shekels of silver.
2KI	6	26	이스라엘 왕이 성 위로 통과할 때에 한 여인이 외쳐 가로되 나의 주 왕이여 도우소서	And as the king of Israel was passing by upon the wall, there cried a woman unto him, saying, Help, my lord, O king.	As the king of Israel was passing by on the wall, a woman cried out to him, “Help me, my lord the king!”
2KI	6	27	왕이 가로되 여호와께서 너를 돕지 아니하시면 내가 무엇으로 너를 도우랴 타작마당으로 말미암아 하겠느냐 포도주 틀로 말미암아 하겠느냐	And he said, If the Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help thee? out of the barnfloor, or out of the winepress?	He answered, “If the LORD does not help you, where can I find help for you? From the threshing floor or the winepress?”
2KI	6	28	또 가로되 무슨 일이냐 여인이 대답하되 이 여인이 내게 이르기를 네 아들을 내라 우리가 오늘날 먹고 내일은 내 아들을 먹자 하매	And the king said unto her, What aileth thee? And she answered, This woman said unto me, Give thy son, that we may eat him to day, and we will eat my son to morrow.	Then the king asked her, “What is the matter?” And she answered, “This woman said to me, ‘Give up your son, that we may eat him, and tomorrow we will eat my son.’
2KI	6	29	우리가 드디어 내 아들을 삶아 먹었더니 이튿날에 내가 이르되 네 아들을 내라 우리가 먹으리라 하나 저가 그 아들을 숨겼나이다	So we boiled my son, and did eat him: and I said unto her on the next day, Give thy son, that we may eat him: and she hath hid her son.	So we boiled my son and ate him, and the next day I said to her, ‘Give up your son, that we may eat him.’ But she had hidden her son.”
2KI	6	30	왕이 그 여인의 말을 듣고 자기 옷을 찢으니라 저가 성 위로 지나갈 때에 백성이 본즉 그 속살에 굵은 베를 입었더라	And it came to pass, when the king heard the words of the woman, that he rent his clothes; and he passed by upon the wall, and the people looked, and, behold, he had sackcloth within upon his flesh.	When the king heard the words of the woman, he tore his clothes. And as he passed by on the wall, the people saw the sackcloth under his clothes next to his skin.
2KI	6	31	왕이 가로되 사밧의 아들 엘리사의 머리가 오늘날 그 몸에 붙어 있으면 하나님이 내게 벌 위에 벌을 내리실지로다 하니라	Then he said, God do so and more also to me, if the head of Elisha the son of Shaphat shall stand on him this day.	He announced, “May God punish me, and ever so severely, if the head of Elisha son of Shaphat remains on his shoulders through this day!”
2KI	6	32	그 때에 엘리사가 그 집에 앉았고 장로들이 저와 함께 앉았는데 왕이 자기 처소에서 사람을 보내었더니 그 사자가 이르기 전에 엘리사가 장로들에게 이르되 너희는 이 살인한 자의 자식이 내 머리를 취하려고 사람을 보내는 것을 보느냐 너희는 보다가 사자가 오거든 문을 닫고 문 안에 들이지 말라 그 주인의 발소리가 그 뒤에서 나지 아니하느냐 하고	But Elisha sat in his house, and the elders sat with him; and the king sent a man from before him: but ere the messenger came to him, he said to the elders, See ye how this son of a murderer hath sent to take away mine head? look, when the messenger cometh, shut the door, and hold him fast at the door: is not the sound of his master’s feet behind him?	Now Elisha was sitting in his house, and the elders were sitting with him. The king sent a messenger ahead, but before he arrived, Elisha said to the elders, “Do you see how this murderer has sent someone to cut off my head? Look, when the messenger comes, shut the door to keep him out. Is not the sound of his master’s footsteps behind him?”
2KI	6	33	무리와 말씀할 때에 그 사자가 이르니라 왕이 가로되 이 재앙이 여호와께로부터 나왔으니 어찌 더 여호와를 기다리리요	And while he yet talked with them, behold, the messenger came down unto him: and he said, Behold, this evil is of the Lord; what should I wait for the Lord any longer?	While Elisha was still speaking with them, the messenger came down to him. And the king said, “This calamity is from the LORD. Why should I wait for the LORD any longer?”
2KI	7	1	엘리사가 가로되 여호와의 말씀을 들을지어다 여호와께서 가라사대 내일 이맘때에 사마리아 성문에서 고운 가루 한 스아에 한 세겔을 하고 보리 두 스아에 한 세겔을 하리라 하셨느니라	Then Elisha said, Hear ye the word of the Lord; Thus saith the Lord, To morrow about this time shall a measure of fine flour be sold for a shekel, and two measures of barley for a shekel, in the gate of Samaria.	Then Elisha said, “Hear the word of the LORD! This is what the LORD says: ‘About this time tomorrow at the gate of Samaria, a seah of fine flour will sell for a shekel, and two seahs of barley will sell for a shekel.’”
2KI	7	2	그 때에 한 장관 곧 왕이 그 손에 의지하는 자가 하나님의 사람에게 대답하여 가로되 여호와께서 하늘에 창을 내신들 어찌 이런 일이 있으리요 엘리사가 가로되 네가 네 눈으로 보리라 그러나 그것을 먹지는 못하리라 하니라	Then a lord on whose hand the king leaned answered the man of God, and said, Behold, if the Lord would make windows in heaven, might this thing be? And he said, Behold, thou shalt see it with thine eyes, but shalt not eat thereof.	But the officer on whose arm the king leaned answered the man of God, “Look, even if the LORD were to make windows in heaven, could this really happen?” “You will see it with your own eyes,” replied Elisha, “but you will not eat any of it.”
2KI	7	3	성문 어귀에 문둥이 네 사람이 있더니 서로 말하되 우리가 어찌하여 여기 앉아서 죽기를 기다리랴	And there were four leprous men at the entering in of the gate: and they said one to another, Why sit we here until we die?	Now there were four men with leprosy at the entrance of the city gate, and they said to one another, “Why just sit here until we die?
2KI	7	4	우리가 성에 들어가자고 할지라도 성중은 주리니 우리가 거기서 죽을 것이요 여기 앉아 있어도 죽을지라 그런즉 우리가 가서 아람 군대에게 항복하자 저희가 우리를 살려두면 살려니와 우리를 죽이면 죽을 따름이라 하고	If we say, We will enter into the city, then the famine is in the city, and we shall die there: and if we sit still here, we die also. Now therefore come, and let us fall unto the host of the Syrians: if they save us alive, we shall live; and if they kill us, we shall but die.	If we say, ‘Let us go into the city,’ we will die there from the famine in the city; but if we sit here, we will also die. So come now, let us go over to the camp of the Arameans. If they let us live, we will live; if they kill us, we will die.”
2KI	7	5	아람 진으로 가려하여 황혼에 일어나서 아람 진 가에 이르러 본즉 그 곳에 한 사람도 없으니	And they rose up in the twilight, to go unto the camp of the Syrians: and when they were come to the uttermost part of the camp of Syria, behold, there was no man there.	So they arose at twilight and went to the camp of the Arameans. But when they came to the outskirts of the camp, there was not a man to be found.
2KI	7	6	이는 주께서 아람 군대로 병거 소리와 말 소리와 큰 군대의 소리를 듣게 하셨으므로 아람 사람이 서로 말하기를 이스라엘 왕이 우리를 치려하여 헷 사람의 왕들과 애굽 왕들에게 값을 주고 저희로 우리에게 오게 하였다 하고	For the Lord had made the host of the Syrians to hear a noise of chariots, and a noise of horses, even the noise of a great host: and they said one to another, Lo, the king of Israel hath hired against us the kings of the Hittites, and the kings of the Egyptians, to come upon us.	For the Lord had caused the Arameans to hear the sound of chariots, horses, and a great army, so that they said to one another, “Look, the king of Israel must have hired the kings of the Hittites and Egyptians to attack us.”
2KI	7	7	황혼에 일어나서 도망하되 그 장막과 말과 나귀를 버리고 진을 그대로 두고 목숨을 위하여 도망하였음이라	Wherefore they arose and fled in the twilight, and left their tents, and their horses, and their asses, even the camp as it was, and fled for their life.	Thus the Arameans had arisen and fled at twilight, abandoning their tents and horses and donkeys. The camp was intact, and they had run for their lives.
2KI	7	8	그 문둥이들이 진 가에 이르자 한 장막에 들어가서 먹고 마시고 거기서 은과 금과 의복을 가지고 가서 감추고 다시 와서 다른 장막에 들어가서 거기서도 가지고 가서 감추니라	And when these lepers came to the uttermost part of the camp, they went into one tent, and did eat and drink, and carried thence silver, and gold, and raiment, and went and hid it; and came again, and entered into another tent, and carried thence also, and went and hid it.	When the lepers reached the edge of the camp, they went into a tent to eat and drink. Then they carried off the silver, gold, and clothing, and went and hid them. On returning, they entered another tent, carried off some items from there, and hid them.
2KI	7	9	문둥이가 서로 말하되 우리의 소위가 선치 못하도다 오늘날은 아름다운 소식이 있는 날이어늘 우리가 잠잠하고 있도다 만일 밝은 아침까지 기다리면 벌이 우리에게 미칠지니 이제 떠나 왕궁에 가서 고하자 하고	Then they said one to another, We do not well: this day is a day of good tidings, and we hold our peace: if we tarry till the morning light, some mischief will come upon us: now therefore come, that we may go and tell the king’s household.	Finally, they said to one another, “We are not doing what is right. Today is a day of good news. If we are silent and wait until morning light, our sin will overtake us. Now, therefore, let us go and tell the king’s household.”
2KI	7	10	드디어 가서 성 문지기를 불러 고하여 가로되 우리가 아람 진에 이르러 보니 거기 한 사람도 없고 사람의 소리도 없고 오직 말과 나귀만 매여 있고 장막들이 그대로 있더이다	So they came and called unto the porter of the city: and they told them, saying, We came to the camp of the Syrians, and, behold, there was no man there, neither voice of man, but horses tied, and asses tied, and the tents as they were.	So they went and called out to the gatekeepers of the city, saying, “We went to the Aramean camp and no one was there—not a trace—only tethered horses and donkeys, and the tents were intact.”
2KI	7	11	저가 문지기들을 부르매 저희가 왕궁에 있는 자에게 고하니	And he called the porters; and they told it to the king’s house within.	The gatekeepers shouted the news, and it was reported to the king’s household.
2KI	7	12	왕이 밤에 일어나 그 신복들에게 이르되 아람 사람이 우리에게 행한 것을 내가 너희에게 알게 하노니 저희가 우리의 주린 것을 아는고로 그 진을 떠나서 들에 매복하고 스스로 이르기를 저희들이 성에서 나오거든 우리가 사로잡고 성에 들어가겠다 한 것이니라	And the king arose in the night, and said unto his servants, I will now shew you what the Syrians have done to us. They know that we be hungry; therefore are they gone out of the camp to hide themselves in the field, saying, When they come out of the city, we shall catch them alive, and get into the city.	So the king got up in the night and said to his servants, “Let me tell you what the Arameans have done to us. They know we are starving, so they have left the camp to hide in the field, thinking, ‘When they come out of the city, we will take them alive and enter the city.’”
2KI	7	13	그 신복 중 하나가 대답하여 가로되 청컨대 아직 성중에 남아 있는 말 다섯 필을 취하고 사람을 보내어 정탐하게 하소서 이 말들이 성중에 남아있는 이스라엘 온 무리 곧 멸망한 이스라엘 온 무리와 같으니이다 하고	And one of his servants answered and said, Let some take, I pray thee, five of the horses that remain, which are left in the city, (behold, they are as all the multitude of Israel that are left in it: behold, I say, they are even as all the multitude of the Israelites that are consumed:) and let us send and see.	But one of his servants replied, “Please, have scouts take five of the horses that remain in the city. Their plight will be no worse than all the Israelites who are left here. You can see that all the Israelites here are doomed. So let us send them and find out.”
2KI	7	14	저희가 병거 둘과 그 말을 취한지라 왕이 아람 군대 뒤로 보내며 가서 정탐하라 하였더니	They took therefore two chariot horses; and the king sent after the host of the Syrians, saying, Go and see.	Then the scouts took two chariots with horses, and the king sent them after the Aramean army, saying, “Go and see.”
2KI	7	15	저희가 그 뒤를 따라 요단에 이른즉 아람 사람이 급히 도망하느라고 버린 의복과 군물이 길에 가득하였더라 사자가 돌아와서 왕에게 고하매	And they went after them unto Jordan: and, lo, all the way was full of garments and vessels, which the Syrians had cast away in their haste. And the messengers returned, and told the king.	And they tracked them as far as the Jordan, and indeed, the whole way was littered with the clothing and equipment the Arameans had thrown off in haste. So the scouts returned and told the king.
2KI	7	16	백성들이 나가서 아람 사람의 진을 노략한지라 이에 고운 가루 한 스아에 한 세겔이 되고 보리 두 스아에 한 세겔이 되니 여호와의 말씀과 같이 되었고	And the people went out, and spoiled the tents of the Syrians. So a measure of fine flour was sold for a shekel, and two measures of barley for a shekel, according to the word of the Lord.	Then the people went out and plundered the camp of the Arameans. It was then that a seah of fine flour sold for a shekel, and two seahs of barley sold for a shekel, according to the word of the LORD.
2KI	7	17	왕이 그 손에 의지하였던 그 장관을 세워 성문을 지키게 하였더니 백성이 성문에서 저를 밟으매 하나님의 사람의 말대로 죽었으니 곧 왕이 내려왔을 때에 그의 한 말대로라	And the king appointed the lord on whose hand he leaned to have the charge of the gate: and the people trode upon him in the gate, and he died, as the man of God had said, who spake when the king came down to him.	Now the king had appointed the officer on whose arm he leaned to be in charge of the gate, but the people trampled him in the gateway, and he died, just as the man of God had foretold when the king had come to him.
2KI	7	18	일찍이 하나님의 사람이 왕에게 고하여 이르기를 내일 이맘때에 사마리아 성문에서 보리 두 스아에 한 세겔을 하고 고운 가루 한 스아에 한 세겔을 하리라 한즉	And it came to pass as the man of God had spoken to the king, saying, Two measures of barley for a shekel, and a measure of fine flour for a shekel, shall be to morrow about this time in the gate of Samaria:	It happened just as the man of God had told the king: “About this time tomorrow at the gate of Samaria, two seahs of barley will sell for a shekel, and a seah of fine flour will sell for a shekel.”
2KI	7	19	그 때에 이 장관이 하나님의 사람에게 대답하여 가로되 여호와께서 하늘에 창을 내신들 어찌 이 일이 있으랴 하매 대답하기를 네가 네 눈으로 보리라 그러나 그것을 먹지는 못하리라 하였더니	And that lord answered the man of God, and said, Now, behold, if the Lord should make windows in heaven, might such a thing be? And he said, Behold, thou shalt see it with thine eyes, but shalt not eat thereof.	And the officer had answered the man of God, “Look, even if the LORD were to make windows in heaven, could this really happen?” So Elisha had replied, “You will see it with your own eyes, but you will not eat any of it!”
2KI	7	20	그 장관에게 그대로 이루었으되 곧 백성이 성문에서 저를 밟으매 죽었더라	And so it fell out unto him: for the people trode upon him in the gate, and he died.	And that is just what happened to him. The people trampled him in the gateway, and he died.
2KI	8	1	엘리사가 이전에 아들을 다시 살려준 여인에게 이르되 너는 일어나서 네 권속과 함께 거할만한 곳으로 가서 거하라 여호와께서 기근을 명하셨으니 그대로 이 땅에 칠 년 동안 임하리라	Then spake Elisha unto the woman, whose son he had restored to life, saying, Arise, and go thou and thine household, and sojourn wheresoever thou canst sojourn: for the Lord hath called for a famine; and it shall also come upon the land seven years.	Now Elisha had said to the woman whose son he had restored to life, “Arise, you and your household; go and live as a foreigner wherever you can. For the LORD has decreed a seven-year famine, and it has already come to the land.”
2KI	8	2	여인이 일어나서 하나님의 사람의 말대로 행하여 그 권속과 함께 가서 블레셋 사람의 땅에 칠 년을 우거하다가	And the woman arose, and did after the saying of the man of God: and she went with her household, and sojourned in the land of the Philistines seven years.	So the woman had proceeded to do as the man of God had instructed. And she and her household lived as foreigners for seven years in the land of the Philistines.
2KI	8	3	칠 년이 다하매 여인이 블레셋 사람의 땅에서 돌아와서 자기 집과 전토를 위하여 호소하려 하여 왕에게 나아갔더라	And it came to pass at the seven years’ end, that the woman returned out of the land of the Philistines: and she went forth to cry unto the king for her house and for her land.	At the end of seven years, when the woman returned from the land of the Philistines, she went to the king to appeal for her house and her land.
2KI	8	4	때에 왕이 하나님의 사람의 사환 게하시와 서로 말씀하며 가로되 너는 엘리사의 행한 모든 큰 일을 내게 고하라 하니	And the king talked with Gehazi the servant of the man of God, saying, Tell me, I pray thee, all the great things that Elisha hath done.	Now the king had been speaking to Gehazi, the servant of the man of God, saying, “Please relate to me all the great things Elisha has done.”
2KI	8	5	게하시가 곧 엘리사가 죽은 자를 다시 살린 일을 왕에게 이야기할 때에 그 다시 살린 아이의 어미가 자기 집과 전토를 위하여 왕에게 호소하는지라 게하시가 가로되 내 주 왕이여 이는 그 여인이요 저는 그 아들이니 곧 엘리사가 다시 살린 자니이다	And it came to pass, as he was telling the king how he had restored a dead body to life, that, behold, the woman, whose son he had restored to life, cried to the king for her house and for her land. And Gehazi said, My lord, O king, this is the woman, and this is her son, whom Elisha restored to life.	And Gehazi was telling the king how Elisha had brought the dead back to life. Just then the woman whose son Elisha had revived came to appeal to the king for her house and her land. So Gehazi said, “My lord the king, this is the woman, and this is the son Elisha restored to life.”
2KI	8	6	왕이 그 여인에게 물으매 여인이 고한지라 왕이 저를 위하여 한 관리를 임명하여 가로되 무릇 이 여인에게 속한 것과 이 땅에서 떠날 때부터 이제까지 그 밭의 소출을 다 돌려주라 하였더라	And when the king asked the woman, she told him. So the king appointed unto her a certain officer, saying, Restore all that was hers, and all the fruits of the field since the day that she left the land, even until now.	When the king asked the woman, she confirmed it. So the king appointed for her an officer, saying, “Restore all that was hers, along with all the proceeds of the field from the day that she left the country until now.”
2KI	8	7	엘리사가 다메섹에 갔을 때에 아람 왕 벤하닷이 병들었더니 혹이 왕에게 고하여 가로되 하나님의 사람이 여기 이르렀나이다	And Elisha came to Damascus; and Ben–hadad the king of Syria was sick; and it was told him, saying, The man of God is come hither.	Then Elisha came to Damascus while Ben-hadad king of Aram was sick, and the king was told, “The man of God has come here.”
2KI	8	8	왕이 하사엘에게 이르되 너는 손에 예물을 가지고 가서 하나님의 사람을 맞고 저로 말미암아 여호와께 나의 이 병이 낫겠나 물으라	And the king said unto Hazael, Take a present in thine hand, and go, meet the man of God, and enquire of the Lord by him, saying, Shall I recover of this disease?	So the king said to Hazael, “Take a gift in your hand, go to meet the man of God, and inquire of the LORD through him, ‘Will I recover from this illness?’”
2KI	8	9	하사엘이 드디어 맞으러 갈새 다메섹 모든 아름다운 물품으로 예물을 삼아가지고 약대 사십에 싣고 나아가서 저의 앞에 서서 가로되 당신의 아들 아람 왕 벤하닷이 나를 당신에게 보내어 가로되 나의 이 병이 낫겠나이까 하더이다	So Hazael went to meet him, and took a present with him, even of every good thing of Damascus, forty camels’ burden, and came and stood before him, and said, Thy son Ben–hadad king of Syria hath sent me to thee, saying, Shall I recover of this disease?	So Hazael went to meet Elisha, taking with him a gift of forty camel loads of every good thing from Damascus. And he went in and stood before him and said, “Your son Ben-hadad king of Aram has sent me to ask, ‘Will I recover from this illness?’”
2KI	8	10	엘리사가 가로되 너는 가서 저에게 고하기를 왕이 정녕 나으리라 하라 그러나 여호와께서 저가 정녕 죽으리라고 내게 알게 하셨느니라 하고	And Elisha said unto him, Go, say unto him, Thou mayest certainly recover: howbeit the Lord hath shewed me that he shall surely die.	Elisha answered, “Go and tell him, ‘You will surely recover.’ But the LORD has shown me that in fact he will die.”
2KI	8	11	하나님의 사람이 저가 부끄러워하기까지 쏘아보다가 우니	And he settled his countenance stedfastly, until he was ashamed: and the man of God wept.	Elisha fixed his gaze steadily on him until Hazael became uncomfortable. Then the man of God began to weep.
2KI	8	12	하사엘이 가로되 내 주여 어찌하여 우시나이까 대답하되 네가 이스라엘 자손에게 행할 모든 악을 내가 앎이라 네가 저희 성에 불을 놓으며 장정을 칼로 죽이며 어린 아이를 메어치며 아이 밴 부녀를 가르리라	And Hazael said, Why weepeth my lord? And he answered, Because I know the evil that thou wilt do unto the children of Israel: their strong holds wilt thou set on fire, and their young men wilt thou slay with the sword, and wilt dash their children, and rip up their women with child.	“Why is my lord weeping?” asked Hazael. “Because I know the evil you will do to the Israelites,” Elisha replied. “You will set fire to their fortresses, kill their young men with the sword, dash their little ones to pieces, and rip open their pregnant women.”
2KI	8	13	하사엘이 가로되 당신의 개 같은 종이 무엇이관대 이런 큰 일을 행하오리이까 엘리사가 대답하되 여호와께서 네가 아람 왕이 될 것을 내게 알게 하셨느니라	And Hazael said, But what, is thy servant a dog, that he should do this great thing? And Elisha answered, The Lord hath shewed me that thou shalt be king over Syria.	“But how could your servant, a mere dog, do such a monstrous thing?” said Hazael. And Elisha answered, “The LORD has shown me that you will be king over Aram.”
2KI	8	14	저가 엘리사를 떠나가서 그 주인에게 나아가니 왕이 묻되 엘리사가 네게 무슨 말을 하더냐 대답하되 저가 내게 이르기를 왕이 정녕 나으시리라 하더이다	So he departed from Elisha, and came to his master; who said to him, What said Elisha to thee? And he answered, He told me that thou shouldest surely recover.	So Hazael left Elisha and went to his master, who asked him, “What did Elisha say to you?” And he replied, “He told me that you would surely recover.”
2KI	8	15	그 이튿날에 하사엘이 이불을 물에 적시어 왕의 얼굴에 덮으매 왕이 죽은지라 저가 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And it came to pass on the morrow, that he took a thick cloth, and dipped it in water, and spread it on his face, so that he died: and Hazael reigned in his stead.	But the next day Hazael took a thick cloth, dipped it in water, and spread it over the king’s face. So Ben-hadad died, and Hazael reigned in his place.
2KI	8	16	이스라엘 왕 아합의 아들 요람 제오년에 유다 왕 여호사밧이 오히려 위에 있을 때에 그 아들 여호람이 왕이 되니라	And in the fifth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel, Jehoshaphat being then king of Judah, Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah began to reign.	In the fifth year of the reign of Joram son of Ahab over Israel, Jehoram son of Jehoshaphat succeeded his father as king of Judah.
2KI	8	17	여호람이 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 삼십이 세라 예루살렘에서 팔 년을 치리하니라	Thirty and two years old was he when he began to reign; and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem.	Jehoram was thirty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years.
2KI	8	18	저가 이스라엘 왕들의 길로 행하여 아합의 집과 같이 하였으니 이는 아합의 딸이 그 아내가 되었음이라 저가 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하였으나	And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, as did the house of Ahab: for the daughter of Ahab was his wife: and he did evil in the sight of the Lord.	And Jehoram walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, just as the house of Ahab had done. For he married a daughter of Ahab and did evil in the sight of the LORD.
2KI	8	19	여호와께서 그 종 다윗을 위하여 유다 멸하기를 즐겨하지 아니하셨으니 이는 저와 그 자손에게 항상 등불을 주겠다고 허하셨음이더라	Yet the Lord would not destroy Judah for David his servant’s sake, as he promised him to give him alway a light, and to his children.	Yet for the sake of His servant David, the LORD was unwilling to destroy Judah, since He had promised to maintain a lamp for David and his descendants forever.
2KI	8	20	여호람 때에 에돔이 배반하여 유다의 수하에서 벗어나 자기 위에 왕을 세운고로	In his days Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah, and made a king over themselves.	In the days of Jehoram, Edom rebelled against the hand of Judah and appointed their own king.
2KI	8	21	여호람이 모든 병거를 거느리고 사일로 갔더니 밤에 일어나 자기를 에워싼 에돔 사람과 그 병거의 장관들을 치니 이에 백성이 도망하여 각각 그 장막으로 돌아갔더라	So Joram went over to Zair, and all the chariots with him: and he rose by night, and smote the Edomites which compassed him about, and the captains of the chariots: and the people fled into their tents.	So Jehoram crossed over to Zair with all his chariots. When the Edomites surrounded him and his chariot commanders, he rose up and attacked by night. His troops, however, fled to their homes.
2KI	8	22	이와 같이 에돔이 배반하여 유다의 수하에서 벗어났더니 오늘날까지 그러하였으며 그 때에 립나도 배반하였더라	Yet Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah unto this day. Then Libnah revolted at the same time.	So to this day Edom has been in rebellion against the hand of Judah. Likewise, Libnah rebelled at the same time.
2KI	8	23	여호람의 남은 사적과 그 행한 모든 일은 유다 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	And the rest of the acts of Joram, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?	As for the rest of the acts of Jehoram, along with all his accomplishments, are they not written in the book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
2KI	8	24	여호람이 그 열조와 함께 자매 그 열조들과 함께 다윗 성에 장사되고 그 아들 아하시야가 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And Joram slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David: and Ahaziah his son reigned in his stead.	And Jehoram rested with his fathers and was buried with them in the City of David. And his son Ahaziah reigned in his place.
2KI	8	25	이스라엘 왕 아합의 아들 요람 제십이년에 유다 왕 여호람의 아들 아하시야가 왕이 되니	In the twelfth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel did Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah begin to reign.	In the twelfth year of the reign of Joram son of Ahab over Israel, Ahaziah son of Jehoram became king of Judah.
2KI	8	26	아하시야가 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 이십이 세라 예루살렘에서 일 년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 아달랴라 이스라엘 왕 오므리의 손녀더라	Two and twenty years old was Ahaziah when he began to reign; and he reigned one year in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Athaliah, the daughter of Omri king of Israel.	Ahaziah was twenty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem one year. His mother’s name was Athaliah, the granddaughter of Omri king of Israel.
2KI	8	27	아하시야가 아합의 집 길로 행하여 아합의 집과 같이 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하였으니 저는 아합의 집의 사위가 되었음이러라	And he walked in the way of the house of Ahab, and did evil in the sight of the Lord, as did the house of Ahab: for he was the son in law of the house of Ahab.	And Ahaziah walked in the ways of the house of Ahab and did evil in the sight of the LORD like the house of Ahab, for he was a son-in-law of the house of Ahab.
2KI	8	28	저가 아합의 아들 요람과 함께 길르앗 라못으로 가서 아람 왕 하사엘로 더불어 싸우더니 아람 사람들이 요람을 상하게 한지라	And he went with Joram the son of Ahab to the war against Hazael king of Syria in Ramoth–gilead; and the Syrians wounded Joram.	Then Ahaziah went with Joram son of Ahab to fight against Hazael king of Aram at Ramoth-gilead, and the Arameans wounded Joram.
2KI	8	29	요람 왕이 아람 왕 하사엘과 싸울 때에 라마에서 아람 사람에게 맞아 상한 것을 치료하려 하여 이스르엘로 돌아왔더라 아합의 아들 요람이 병이 있으므로 유다 왕 여호람의 아들 아하시야가 이스르엘에 내려가서 방문하였더라	And king Joram went back to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds which the Syrians had given him at Ramah, when he fought against Hazael king of Syria. And Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah went down to see Joram the son of Ahab in Jezreel, because he was sick.	So King Joram returned to Jezreel to recover from the wounds that the Arameans had inflicted on him at Ramah when he fought against Hazael king of Aram. Then Ahaziah son of Jehoram king of Judah went down to Jezreel to visit Joram son of Ahab, because Joram had been wounded.
2KI	9	1	선지자 엘리사가 선지자의 생도 중 하나를 불러 이르되 너는 허리를 동이고 이 기름병을 손에 가지고 길르앗 라못으로 가라	And Elisha the prophet called one of the children of the prophets, and said unto him, Gird up thy loins, and take this box of oil in thine hand, and go to Ramoth–gilead:	Now Elisha the prophet summoned one of the sons of the prophets and said to him, “Tuck your cloak under your belt, take this flask of oil, and go to Ramoth-gilead.
2KI	9	2	거기 이르거든 님시의 손자 여호사밧의 아들 예후를 찾아 들어가서 그 형제 중에서 일어나게 하고 데리고 골방으로 들어가서	And when thou comest thither, look out there Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi, and go in, and make him arise up from among his brethren, and carry him to an inner chamber;	When you arrive, look for Jehu son of Jehoshaphat, the son of Nimshi. Go in, get him away from his companions, and take him to an inner room.
2KI	9	3	기름병을 가지고 그 머리에 부으며 이르기를 여호와의 말씀이 내가 네게 기름을 부어 이스라엘 왕을 삼노라 하셨느니라 하고 곧 문을 열고 도망하되 지체치 말지니라	Then take the box of oil, and pour it on his head, and say, Thus saith the Lord, I have anointed thee king over Israel. Then open the door, and flee, and tarry not.	Then take the flask of oil, pour it on his head, and declare, ‘This is what the LORD says: I anoint you king over Israel.’ Then open the door and run. Do not delay!”
2KI	9	4	그 소년 곧 소년 선지자가 드디어 길르앗 라못으로 가니라	So the young man, even the young man the prophet, went to Ramoth–gilead.	So the young prophet went to Ramoth-gilead,
2KI	9	5	저가 이르러 보니 군대 장관들이 앉았는지라 소년이 가로되 장관이여 내가 당신에게 할 말씀이 있나이다 예후가 가로되 우리 모든 사람 중에 뉘게 하려느냐 가로되 장관이여 당신에게니이다	And when he came, behold, the captains of the host were sitting; and he said, I have an errand to thee, O captain. And Jehu said, Unto which of all us? And he said, To thee, O captain.	and when he arrived, the army commanders were sitting there. “I have a message for you, commander,” he said. “For which of us?” asked Jehu. “For you, commander,” he replied.
2KI	9	6	예후가 일어나 집으로 들어가니 소년이 그 머리에 기름을 부으며 이르되 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 말씀이 내가 네게 기름을 부어 여호와의 백성 곧 이스라엘의 왕을 삼노니	And he arose, and went into the house; and he poured the oil on his head, and said unto him, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, I have anointed thee king over the people of the Lord, even over Israel.	So Jehu got up and went into the house, where the young prophet poured the oil on his head and declared, “This is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: ‘I anoint you king over the LORD’s people Israel.
2KI	9	7	너는 네 주 아합의 집을 치라 내가 나의 종 곧 선지자들의 피와 여호와의 종들의 피를 이세벨에게 갚아주리라	And thou shalt smite the house of Ahab thy master, that I may avenge the blood of my servants the prophets, and the blood of all the servants of the Lord, at the hand of Jezebel.	And you are to strike down the house of your master Ahab, so that I may avenge the blood of My servants the prophets and the blood of all the servants of the LORD shed by the hand of Jezebel.
2KI	9	8	아합의 온 집이 멸망하리니 이스라엘 중에 매인 자나 놓인 자나 아합에게 속한 모든 남자는 내가 다 멸절하되	For the whole house of Ahab shall perish: and I will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the wall, and him that is shut up and left in Israel:	The whole house of Ahab will perish, and I will cut off from Ahab every male, both slave and free, in Israel.
2KI	9	9	아합의 집을 느밧의 아들 여로보암의 집과 같게 하며 또 아히야의 아들 바아사의 집과 같게 할지라	And I will make the house of Ahab like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son of Ahijah:	I will make the house of Ahab like the houses of Jeroboam son of Nebat and Baasha son of Ahijah.
2KI	9	10	이스르엘 지방에서 개들이 이세벨을 먹으리니 저를 장사할 사람이 없으리라 하셨느니라 하고 곧 문을 열고 도망하니라	And the dogs shall eat Jezebel in the portion of Jezreel, and there shall be none to bury her. And he opened the door, and fled.	And on the plot of ground at Jezreel the dogs will devour Jezebel, and there will be no one to bury her.’” Then the young prophet opened the door and ran.
2KI	9	11	예후가 나와서 그 주의 신복들에게 이르니 한 사람이 묻되 평안이뇨 그 미친 자가 무슨 까닭으로 그대에게 왔더뇨 대답하되 그대들이 그 사람과 그 말한 것을 알리라	Then Jehu came forth to the servants of his lord: and one said unto him, Is all well? wherefore came this mad fellow to thee? And he said unto them, Ye know the man, and his communication.	When Jehu went out to the servants of his master, they asked, “Is everything all right? Why did this madman come to you?” “You know his kind and their babble,” he replied.
2KI	9	12	무리가 가로되 당치 않은 말이라 그대는 우리에게 이르라 대답하되 저가 이리 이리 내게 말하여 이르기를 여호와의 말씀이 내가 네게 기름을 부어 이스라엘 왕을 삼는다 하셨다 하더라	And they said, It is false; tell us now. And he said, Thus and thus spake he to me, saying, Thus saith the Lord, I have anointed thee king over Israel.	“That is a lie!” they said. “Tell us now!” So Jehu answered, “He talked to me about this and that, and he said, ‘This is what the LORD says: I anoint you king over Israel.’”
2KI	9	13	무리가 각각 자기의 옷을 급히 취하여 섬돌 위 곧 예후의 밑에 깔고 나팔을 불며 가로되 예후는 왕이라 하니라	Then they hasted, and took every man his garment, and put it under him on the top of the stairs, and blew with trumpets, saying, Jehu is king.	Quickly, each man took his garment and put it under Jehu on the bare steps. Then they blew the ram’s horn and proclaimed, “Jehu is king!”
2KI	9	14	이에 님시의 손자 여호사밧의 아들 예후가 요람을 배반하였으니 곧 요람이 온 이스라엘로 더불어 아람 왕 하사엘을 인하여 길르앗 라못을 지키다가	So Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi conspired against Joram. (Now Joram had kept Ramoth–gilead, he and all Israel, because of Hazael king of Syria.	Thus Jehu son of Jehoshaphat, the son of Nimshi, conspired against Joram. (Now Joram and all Israel had been defending Ramoth-gilead against Hazael king of Aram,
2KI	9	15	아람 왕 하사엘로 더불어 싸울 때에 아람 사람에게 상한 것을 치료하려 하여 이스르엘로 돌아왔던 때라 예후가 이르되 너희 뜻에 합당하거든 한 사람이라도 이 성에서 도망하여 이스르엘에 전하러 가지 못하게 하라 하니라	But king Joram was returned to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds which the Syrians had given him, when he fought with Hazael king of Syria.) And Jehu said, If it be your minds, then let none go forth nor escape out of the city to go to tell it in Jezreel.	but King Joram had returned to Jezreel to recover from the wounds he had suffered at the hands of the Arameans in the battle against Hazael their king.) So Jehu said, “If you commanders wish to make me king, then do not let anyone escape from the city to go and tell it in Jezreel.”
2KI	9	16	예후가 병거를 타고 이스르엘로 가니 요람이 거기 누웠음이라 유다 왕 아하시야는 요람을 보러 내려왔더라	So Jehu rode in a chariot, and went to Jezreel; for Joram lay there. And Ahaziah king of Judah was come down to see Joram.	Then Jehu got into his chariot and went to Jezreel, because Joram was laid up there and Ahaziah king of Judah had gone down to see him.
2KI	9	17	이스르엘 망대에 파수꾼 하나가 섰더니 예후의 무리의 오는 것을 보고 가로되 내가 한 무리를 보나이다 요람이 가로되 한 사람을 말을 태워 보내어 맞아 평안이냐 묻게 하라	And there stood a watchman on the tower in Jezreel, and he spied the company of Jehu as he came, and said, I see a company. And Joram said, Take an horseman, and send to meet them, and let him say, Is it peace?	Now the watchman standing on the tower in Jezreel saw Jehu’s troops approaching, and he called out, “I see a company of troops!” “Choose a rider,” Joram commanded. “Send him out to meet them and ask, ‘Have you come in peace?’”
2KI	9	18	한 사람이 말을 타고 가서 만나 가로되 왕의 말씀이 평안이냐 하시더이다 하매 예후가 가로되 평안이 네게 상관이 있느냐 내 뒤로 돌이키라 하니라 파수꾼이 고하여 가로되 사자가 저희에게 갔으나 돌아오지 아니하나이다 하는지라	So there went one on horseback to meet him, and said, Thus saith the king, Is it peace? And Jehu said, What hast thou to do with peace? turn thee behind me. And the watchman told, saying, The messenger came to them, but he cometh not again.	So a horseman rode off to meet Jehu and said, “This is what the king asks: ‘Have you come in peace?’” “What do you know about peace?” Jehu replied. “Fall in behind me.” And the watchman reported, “The messenger reached them, but he is not coming back.”
2KI	9	19	다시 한 사람을 말을 태워 보내었더니 저희에게 가서 가로되 왕의 말씀이 평안이냐 하시더이다 하매 예후가 가로되 평안이 네게 상관이 있느냐 내 뒤로 돌이키라 하니라	Then he sent out a second on horseback, which came to them, and said, Thus saith the king, Is it peace? And Jehu answered, What hast thou to do with peace? turn thee behind me.	So the king sent out a second horseman, who went to them and said, “This is what the king asks: ‘Have you come in peace?’” “What do you know about peace?” Jehu replied. “Fall in behind me.”
2KI	9	20	파수꾼이 또 고하여 가로되 저도 저희에게까지 갔으나 돌아오지 아니하고 그 병거 모는 것이 님시의 손자 예후의 모는 것 같이 미치게 모나이다	And the watchman told, saying, He came even unto them, and cometh not again: and the driving is like the driving of Jehu the son of Nimshi; for he driveth furiously.	Again the watchman reported, “He reached them, but he is not coming back. And the charioteer is driving like Jehu son of Nimshi—he is driving like a madman!”
2KI	9	21	요람이 가로되 메우라 하매 그 병거를 메운지라 이스라엘 왕 요람과 유다 왕 아하시야가 각각 그 병거를 타고 가서 예후를 맞을새 이스르엘 사람 나봇의 토지에서 만나매	And Joram said, Make ready. And his chariot was made ready. And Joram king of Israel and Ahaziah king of Judah went out, each in his chariot, and they went out against Jehu, and met him in the portion of Naboth the Jezreelite.	“Harness!” Joram shouted, and they harnessed his chariot. Then Joram king of Israel and Ahaziah king of Judah set out, each in his own chariot, and met Jehu on the property of Naboth the Jezreelite.
2KI	9	22	요람이 예후를 보고 가로되 예후야 평안이냐 대답하되 네 어미 이세벨의 음행과 술수가 이렇게 많으니 어찌 평안이 있으랴	And it came to pass, when Joram saw Jehu, that he said, Is it peace, Jehu? And he answered, What peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Jezebel and her witchcrafts are so many?	When Joram saw Jehu, he asked, “Have you come in peace, Jehu?” “How can there be peace,” he replied, “as long as the idolatry and witchcraft of your mother Jezebel abound?”
2KI	9	23	요람이 곧 손을 돌이켜 도망하며 아하시야에게 이르되 아하시야여 반역이로다	And Joram turned his hands, and fled, and said to Ahaziah, There is treachery, O Ahaziah.	Joram turned around and fled, calling out to Ahaziah, “Treachery, Ahaziah!”
2KI	9	24	예후가 힘을 다하여 활을 당기어 요람의 두 팔 사이를 쏘니 살이 그 염통을 꿰뚫고 나오매 저가 병거 가운데 엎드러진지라	And Jehu drew a bow with his full strength, and smote Jehoram between his arms, and the arrow went out at his heart, and he sunk down in his chariot.	Then Jehu drew his bow and shot Joram between the shoulders. The arrow pierced his heart, and he slumped down in his chariot.
2KI	9	25	예후가 그 장관 빗갈에게 이르되 그 시체를 취하여 이스르엘 사람 나봇의 밭에 던지라 네가 기억하려니와 이전에 너와 내가 함께 타고 그 아비 아합을 좇았을 때에 여호와께서 이 아래 같이 저의 일을 예언하셨느니라	Then said Jehu to Bidkar his captain, Take up, and cast him in the portion of the field of Naboth the Jezreelite: for remember how that, when I and thou rode together after Ahab his father, the Lord laid this burden upon him;	And Jehu said to Bidkar his officer, “Pick him up and throw him into the field of Naboth the Jezreelite. For remember that when you and I were riding together behind his father Ahab, the LORD lifted up this burden against him:
2KI	9	26	여호와께서 말씀하시기를 내가 어젯날에 나봇의 피와 그 아들들의 피를 분명히 보았노라 또 말씀하시기를 이 토지에서 네게 갚으리라 하셨으니 그런즉 여호와의 말씀대로 그 시체를 취하여 이 밭에 던질지니라	Surely I have seen yesterday the blood of Naboth, and the blood of his sons, saith the Lord; and I will requite thee in this plat, saith the Lord. Now therefore take and cast him into the plat of ground, according to the word of the Lord.	‘As surely as I saw the blood of Naboth and the blood of his sons yesterday, declares the LORD, so will I repay you on this plot of ground, declares the LORD.’ Now then, according to the word of the LORD, pick him up and throw him on the plot of ground.”
2KI	9	27	유다 왕 아하시야가 이를 보고 동산 정자 길로 도망하니 예후가 쫓아가며 이르되 저도 병거 가운데서 죽이라 하매 이블르암 가까운 구르 비탈에서 치니 저가 므깃도까지 도망하여 거기서 죽은지라	But when Ahaziah the king of Judah saw this, he fled by the way of the garden house. And Jehu followed after him, and said, Smite him also in the chariot. And they did so at the going up to Gur, which is by Ibleam. And he fled to Megiddo, and died there.	When King Ahaziah of Judah saw this, he fled up the road toward Beth-haggan. And Jehu pursued him, shouting, “Shoot him too!” So they shot Ahaziah in his chariot on the Ascent of Gur, near Ibleam, and he fled to Megiddo and died there.
2KI	9	28	그 신복들이 저를 병거에 싣고 예루살렘에 이르러 다윗 성에서 그 열조와 함께 그 묘실에 장사하니라	And his servants carried him in a chariot to Jerusalem, and buried him in his sepulchre with his fathers in the city of David.	Then his servants carried him by chariot to Jerusalem and buried him with his fathers in his tomb in the City of David.
2KI	9	29	아합의 아들 요람의 십일년에 아하시야가 유다 왕이 되었었더라	And in the eleventh year of Joram the son of Ahab began Ahaziah to reign over Judah.	(In the eleventh year of Joram son of Ahab, Ahaziah had become king over Judah.)
2KI	9	30	예후가 이스르엘에 이르니 이세벨이 듣고 눈을 그리고 머리를 꾸미고 창에서 바라보다가	And when Jehu was come to Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it; and she painted her face, and tired her head, and looked out at a window.	Now when Jehu arrived in Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it. So she painted her eyes, adorned her head, and looked down from a window.
2KI	9	31	예후가 문에 들어오매 가로되 주인을 죽인 너 시므리여 평안하냐	And as Jehu entered in at the gate, she said, Had Zimri peace, who slew his master?	And as Jehu entered the gate, she asked, “Have you come in peace, O Zimri, murderer of your master?”
2KI	9	32	예후가 얼굴을 들어 창을 향하고 가로되 내 편이 될 자가 누구냐 누구냐 하니 두어 내시가 예후를 내다보는지라	And he lifted up his face to the window, and said, Who is on my side? who? And there looked out to him two or three eunuchs.	He looked up at the window and called out, “Who is on my side? Who?” And two or three eunuchs looked down at him.
2KI	9	33	가로되 저를 내려던지라 하니 내려던지매 그 피가 담과 말에게 뛰더라 예후가 그 시체를 밟으니라	And he said, Throw her down. So they threw her down: and some of her blood was sprinkled on the wall, and on the horses: and he trode her under foot.	“Throw her down!” yelled Jehu. So they threw her down, and her blood splattered on the wall and on the horses as they trampled her underfoot.
2KI	9	34	예후가 들어가서 먹고 마시고 가로되 가서 이 저주 받은 계집을 찾아 장사하라 저는 왕의 딸이니라 하매	And when he was come in, he did eat and drink, and said, Go, see now this cursed woman, and bury her: for she is a king’s daughter.	Then Jehu went in and ate and drank. “Take care of this cursed woman,” he said, “and bury her, for she was the daughter of a king.”
2KI	9	35	가서 장사하려 한즉 그 두골과 발과 손바닥 외에는 찾지 못한지라	And they went to bury her: but they found no more of her than the skull, and the feet, and the palms of her hands.	But when they went out to bury her, they found nothing but her skull, her feet, and the palms of her hands.
2KI	9	36	돌아와서 고한대 예후가 가로되 이는 여호와께서 그 종 디셉 사람 엘리야로 말씀하신바라 이르시기를 이스르엘 토지에서 개들이 이세벨의 고기를 먹을지라	Wherefore they came again, and told him. And he said, This is the word of the Lord, which he spake by his servant Elijah the Tishbite, saying, In the portion of Jezreel shall dogs eat the flesh of Jezebel:	So they went back and told Jehu, who replied, “This is the word of the LORD, which He spoke through His servant Elijah the Tishbite: ‘On the plot of ground at Jezreel the dogs will devour the flesh of Jezebel.
2KI	9	37	그 시체가 이스르엘 토지에서 거름 같이 밭 면에 있으리니 이것이 이세벨이라고 가리켜 말하지 못하게 되리라 하셨느니라	And the carcase of Jezebel shall be as dung upon the face of the field in the portion of Jezreel; so that they shall not say, This is Jezebel.	And Jezebel’s body will lie like dung in the field on the plot of ground at Jezreel, so that no one can say: This is Jezebel.’”
2KI	10	1	아합의 아들 칠십 인이 사마리아에 있는지라 예후가 편지들을 써서 사마리아에 보내어 이스르엘 방백 곧 장로들과 아합의 여러 아들을 교육하는 자들에게 전하니 일렀으되	And Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria. And Jehu wrote letters, and sent to Samaria, unto the rulers of Jezreel, to the elders, and to them that brought up Ahab’s children, saying,	Now Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria. So Jehu wrote letters and sent them to Samaria to the officials of Jezreel, to the elders, and to the guardians of the sons of Ahab, saying:
2KI	10	2	너희 주의 아들들이 너희와 함께 있고 또 병거와 말과 견고한 성과 병기가 너희에게 있으니 이 편지가 너희에게 이르거든	Now as soon as this letter cometh to you, seeing your master’s sons are with you, and there are with you chariots and horses, a fenced city also, and armour;	“When this letter arrives, since your master’s sons are with you and you have chariots and horses, a fortified city and weaponry,
2KI	10	3	너희 주의 아들들 중에서 가장 어질고 정직한 자를 택하여 그 아비의 위에 두고 너희 주의 집을 위하여 싸우라 하였더라	Look even out the best and meetest of your master’s sons, and set him on his father’s throne, and fight for your master’s house.	select the best and most worthy son of your master, set him on his father’s throne, and fight for your master’s house.”
2KI	10	4	저희가 심히 두려워하여 가로되 두 왕이 저를 당치 못하였거든 우리가 어찌 당하리요 하고	But they were exceedingly afraid, and said, Behold, two kings stood not before him: how then shall we stand?	But they were terrified and reasoned, “If two kings could not stand against him, how can we?”
2KI	10	5	궁내 대신과 부윤과 장로들과 왕자를 교육하는 자들이 예후에게 말을 전하여 가로되 우리는 당신의 종이라 무릇 명하는 것을 우리가 행하고 아무 사람이든지 왕으로 세우지 아니하리니 당신의 소견에 좋은 대로 행하라 한지라	And he that was over the house, and he that was over the city, the elders also, and the bringers up of the children, sent to Jehu, saying, We are thy servants, and will do all that thou shalt bid us; we will not make any king: do thou that which is good in thine eyes.	So the palace administrator, the overseer of the city, the elders, and the guardians sent a message to Jehu: “We are your servants, and we will do whatever you say. We will not make anyone king. Do whatever is good in your sight.”
2KI	10	6	예후가 다시 저희에게 편지를 부치니 일렀으되 만일 너희가 내 편이 되어 내 말을 들으려거든 너희 주의 아들 된 사람들의 머리를 취하고 내일 이맘때에 이스르엘에 이르러 내게 나아오라 하였더라 왕자 칠십 인이 성중에서 그 교육하는 존귀한 자들과 함께 있는 중에	Then he wrote a letter the second time to them, saying, If ye be mine, and if ye will hearken unto my voice, take ye the heads of the men your master’s sons, and come to me to Jezreel by to morrow this time. Now the king’s sons, being seventy persons, were with the great men of the city, which brought them up.	Then Jehu wrote them a second letter and said: “If you are on my side, and if you will obey me, then bring the heads of your master’s sons to me at Jezreel by this time tomorrow.” Now the sons of the king, seventy in all, were being brought up by the leading men of the city.
2KI	10	7	편지가 이르매 저희가 왕자 칠십 인을 잡아 몰수히 죽이고 그 머리를 광주리에 담아 이스르엘 예후에게로 보내니라	And it came to pass, when the letter came to them, that they took the king’s sons, and slew seventy persons, and put their heads in baskets, and sent him them to Jezreel.	And when the letter arrived, they took the sons of the king and slaughtered all seventy of them. They put their heads in baskets and sent them to Jehu at Jezreel.
2KI	10	8	사자가 와서 예후에게 고하여 가로되 무리가 왕자들의 머리를 가지고 왔나이다 가로되 두 무더기로 쌓아 내일 아침까지 문 어귀에 두라 하고	And there came a messenger, and told him, saying, They have brought the heads of the king’s sons. And he said, Lay ye them in two heaps at the entering in of the gate until the morning.	When the messenger arrived, he told Jehu, “They have brought the heads of the sons of the king.” And Jehu ordered, “Pile them in two heaps at the entrance of the gate until morning.”
2KI	10	9	이튿날 아침에 저가 나가 서서 뭇백성에게 이르되 너희는 의롭도다 나는 내 주를 배반하여 죽였거니와 이 여러 사람을 죽인 자는 누구냐	And it came to pass in the morning, that he went out, and stood, and said to all the people, Ye be righteous: behold, I conspired against my master, and slew him: but who slew all these?	The next morning, Jehu went out and stood before all the people and said, “You are innocent. It was I who conspired against my master and killed him. But who killed all these?
2KI	10	10	그런즉 너희는 알라 곧 여호와께서 아합의 집에 대하여 하신 말씀은 하나도 땅에 떨어지지 아니하리라 여호와께서 그 종 엘리야로 하신 말씀을 이제 이루셨도다 하니라	Know now that there shall fall unto the earth nothing of the word of the Lord, which the Lord spake concerning the house of Ahab: for the Lord hath done that which he spake by his servant Elijah.	Know, then, that not a word the LORD has spoken against the house of Ahab will fail, for the LORD has done what He promised through His servant Elijah.”
2KI	10	11	예후가 무릇 아합의 집에 속한 이스르엘에 남아 있는 자를 다 죽이고 또 그 존귀한 자와 가까운 친구와 제사장들을 죽이되 저에게 속한 자를 하나도 남기지 아니하였더라	So Jehu slew all that remained of the house of Ahab in Jezreel, and all his great men, and his kinsfolks, and his priests, until he left him none remaining.	So Jehu killed everyone in Jezreel who remained of the house of Ahab, as well as all his great men and close friends and priests, leaving him without a single survivor.
2KI	10	12	예후가 일어나서 사마리아로 가더니 노중에 목자가 양털 깎는 집에 이르러	And he arose and departed, and came to Samaria. And as he was at the shearing house in the way,	Then Jehu set out toward Samaria. At Beth-eked of the Shepherds,
2KI	10	13	유다 왕 아하시야의 형제들을 만나 묻되 너희는 누구냐 대답하되 우리는 아하시야의 형제라 이제 왕자들과 태후의 아들들에게 문안하러 내려가노라	Jehu met with the brethren of Ahaziah king of Judah, and said, Who are ye? And they answered, We are the brethren of Ahaziah; and we go down to salute the children of the king and the children of the queen.	Jehu met some relatives of Ahaziah king of Judah and asked, “Who are you?” “We are relatives of Ahaziah,” they answered, “and we have come down to greet the sons of the king and of the queen mother.”
2KI	10	14	가로되 사로잡으라 하매 곧 사로잡아 목자가 양털 깎는 집 웅덩이 곁에서 죽이니 사십이 인이 하나도 남지 아니하였더라	And he said, Take them alive. And they took them alive, and slew them at the pit of the shearing house, even two and forty men; neither left he any of them.	Then Jehu ordered, “Take them alive.” So his men took them alive, then slaughtered them at the well of Beth-eked—forty-two men. He spared none of them.
2KI	10	15	예후가 거기서 떠나가다가 레갑의 아들 여호나답이 맞으러 오는 것을 만난지라 그 안부를 묻고 가로되 내 마음이 네 마음을 향하여 진실함과 같이 네 마음도 진실하냐 여호나답이 대답하되 그러하니이다 가로되 그러면 나와 손을 잡자 손을 잡으니 예후가 끌어 병거에 올리며	And when he was departed thence, he lighted on Jehonadab the son of Rechab coming to meet him: and he saluted him, and said to him, Is thine heart right, as my heart is with thy heart? And Jehonadab answered, It is. If it be, give me thine hand. And he gave him his hand; and he took him up to him into the chariot.	When he left there, he found Jehonadab son of Rechab, who was coming to meet him. Jehu greeted him and asked, “Is your heart as true to mine as my heart is to yours?” “It is!” Jehonadab replied. “If it is,” said Jehu, “give me your hand.” So he gave him his hand, and Jehu helped him into his chariot,
2KI	10	16	가로되 나와 함께 가서 여호와를 위한 나의 열심을 보라 하고 이에 자기 병거에 태우고	And he said, Come with me, and see my zeal for the Lord. So they made him ride in his chariot.	saying, “Come with me and see my zeal for the LORD!” So he had him ride in his chariot.
2KI	10	17	사마리아에 이르러 거기 남아있는바 아합에게 속한 자를 죽여 진멸하였으니 여호와께서 엘리야에게 이르신 말씀과 같이 되었더라	And when he came to Samaria, he slew all that remained unto Ahab in Samaria, till he had destroyed him, according to the saying of the Lord, which he spake to Elijah.	When Jehu came to Samaria, he struck down everyone belonging to Ahab who remained there, until he had destroyed them, according to the word that the LORD had spoken to Elijah.
2KI	10	18	예후가 뭇백성을 모으고 이르되 아합은 바알을 조금 섬겼으나 예후는 많이 섬기리라	And Jehu gathered all the people together, and said unto them, Ahab served Baal a little; but Jehu shall serve him much.	Then Jehu brought all the people together and said, “Ahab served Baal a little, but Jehu will serve him a lot.
2KI	10	19	그러므로 내가 이제 큰 제사를 바알에게 드리고자 하노니 바알의 모든 선지자와 모든 섬기는 자와 모든 제사장들을 한 사람도 빠치지 말고 불러 내게로 나오게 하라 무릇 오지 아니하는 자는 살리지 아니하리라 하니 이는 예후가 바알 섬기는 자를 멸하려 하여 궤계를 씀이라	Now therefore call unto me all the prophets of Baal, all his servants, and all his priests; let none be wanting: for I have a great sacrifice to do to Baal; whosoever shall be wanting, he shall not live. But Jehu did it in subtilty, to the intent that he might destroy the worshippers of Baal.	Now, therefore, summon to me all the prophets of Baal, all his servants, and all his priests. See that no one is missing, for I have a great sacrifice for Baal. Whoever is missing will not live.” But Jehu was acting deceptively in order to destroy the servants of Baal.
2KI	10	20	예후가 바알을 위하는 대회를 거룩히 열라 하매 드디어 공포하였더라	And Jehu said, Proclaim a solemn assembly for Baal. And they proclaimed it.	And Jehu commanded, “Proclaim a solemn assembly for Baal.” So they announced it.
2KI	10	21	예후가 온 이스라엘에 두루 보내었더니 무릇 바알을 섬기는 사람이 하나도 빠진 자가 없이 다 이르렀고 무리가 바알의 당에 들어가매 이편부터 저편까지 가득하였더라	And Jehu sent through all Israel: and all the worshippers of Baal came, so that there was not a man left that came not. And they came into the house of Baal; and the house of Baal was full from one end to another.	Then Jehu sent word throughout Israel, and all the servants of Baal came; there was not a man who failed to show. They entered the temple of Baal, and it was filled from end to end.
2KI	10	22	예후가 예복 맡은 자에게 이르되 예복을 내어다가 무릇 바알 섬기는 자에게 주라 하매 저희에게로 예복을 가져온지라	And he said unto him that was over the vestry, Bring forth vestments for all the worshippers of Baal. And he brought them forth vestments.	And Jehu said to the keeper of the wardrobe, “Bring out garments for all the servants of Baal.” So he brought out garments for them.
2KI	10	23	예후가 레갑의 아들 여호나답으로 더불어 바알의 당에 들어가서 바알을 섬기는 자에게 이르되 너희는 살펴보아 바알을 섬기는 자만 여기 있게 하고 여호와의 종은 하나도 너희 중에 있지 못하게 하라 하고	And Jehu went, and Jehonadab the son of Rechab, into the house of Baal, and said unto the worshippers of Baal, Search, and look that there be here with you none of the servants of the Lord, but the worshippers of Baal only.	Next, Jehu and Jehonadab son of Rechab entered the temple of Baal, and Jehu said to the servants of Baal, “Look around to see that there are no servants of the LORD here among you—only servants of Baal.”
2KI	10	24	무리가 번제와 다른 제사를 드리려고 들어간 때에 예후가 팔십 인을 밖에 두며 이르되 내가 너희 손에 붙이는 사람을 한 사람이라도 도망하게 하는 자는 자기의 생명으로 그 사람의 생명을 대신하리라 하니라	And when they went in to offer sacrifices and burnt offerings, Jehu appointed fourscore men without, and said, If any of the men whom I have brought into your hands escape, he that letteth him go, his life shall be for the life of him.	And they went in to offer sacrifices and burnt offerings. Now Jehu had stationed eighty men outside and warned them, “If anyone allows one of the men I am delivering into your hands to escape, he will forfeit his life for theirs.”
2KI	10	25	번제 드리기를 다하매 예후가 호위병과 장관들에게 이르되 들어가서 한 사람도 나가지 못하게 하고 죽이라 하매 호위병과 장관들이 칼로 저희를 죽여 밖에 던지고	And it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of offering the burnt offering, that Jehu said to the guard and to the captains, Go in, and slay them; let none come forth. And they smote them with the edge of the sword; and the guard and the captains cast them out, and went to the city of the house of Baal.	When he had finished making the burnt offering, Jehu said to the guards and officers, “Go in and kill them. Do not let anyone out.” So the guards and officers put them to the sword, threw the bodies out, and went into the inner room of the temple of Baal.
2KI	10	26	바알의 당 있는 성으로 가서 바알의 당에서 목상들을 가져다가 불사르고	And they brought forth the images out of the house of Baal, and burned them.	They brought out the sacred pillar of the temple of Baal and burned it.
2KI	10	27	바알의 목상을 헐며 바알의 당을 훼파하여 변소를 만들었더니 오늘날까지 이르니라	And they brake down the image of Baal, and brake down the house of Baal, and made it a draught house unto this day.	They also demolished the sacred pillar of Baal. Then they tore down the temple of Baal and made it into a latrine, which it is to this day.
2KI	10	28	예후가 이와 같이 이스라엘 중에서 바알을 멸하였으나	Thus Jehu destroyed Baal out of Israel.	Thus Jehu eradicated Baal from Israel,
2KI	10	29	이스라엘로 범죄케 한 느밧의 아들 여로보암의 죄 곧 벧엘과 단에 있는 금송아지를 섬기는 죄에서는 떠나지 아니하였더라	Howbeit from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin, Jehu departed not from after them, to wit, the golden calves that were in Beth–el, and that were in Dan.	but he did not turn away from the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had caused Israel to commit—the worship of the golden calves at Bethel and Dan.
2KI	10	30	여호와께서 예후에게 이르시되 네가 나 보기에 정직한 일을 행하되 잘 행하여 내 마음에 있는 대로 아합 집에 다 행하였은즉 네 자손이 이스라엘 왕위를 이어 사 대를 지나리라 하시니라	And the Lord said unto Jehu, Because thou hast done well in executing that which is right in mine eyes, and hast done unto the house of Ahab according to all that was in mine heart, thy children of the fourth generation shall sit on the throne of Israel.	Nevertheless, the LORD said to Jehu, “Because you have done well in carrying out what is right in My sight and have done to the house of Ahab all that was in My heart, four generations of your sons will sit on the throne of Israel.”
2KI	10	31	그러나 예후가 전심으로 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 율법을 지켜 행하지 아니하며 여로보암이 이스라엘로 범하게 한 그 죄에서 떠나지 아니하였더라	But Jehu took no heed to walk in the law of the Lord God of Israel with all his heart: for he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, which made Israel to sin.	Yet Jehu was not careful to follow the instruction of the LORD, the God of Israel, with all his heart. He did not turn away from the sins that Jeroboam had caused Israel to commit.
2KI	10	32	이 때에 여호와께서 비로소 이스라엘을 찢으시매 하사엘이 그 사방을 치되	In those days the Lord began to cut Israel short: and Hazael smote them in all the coasts of Israel;	In those days the LORD began to reduce the size of Israel. Hazael defeated the Israelites throughout their territory
2KI	10	33	요단 동편 길르앗 온 땅 곧 갓 사람과 르우벤 사람과 므낫세 사람의 땅 아르논 골짜기에 있는 아로엘에서부터 길르앗과 바산까지 하였더라	From Jordan eastward, all the land of Gilead, the Gadites, and the Reubenites, and the Manassites, from Aroer, which is by the river Arnon, even Gilead and Bashan.	from the Jordan eastward through all the land of Gilead (the region of Gad, Reuben, and Manasseh), and from Aroer by the Arnon Valley through Gilead to Bashan.
2KI	10	34	예후의 남은 사적과 무릇 행한 일과 모든 권세는 이스라엘 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	Now the rest of the acts of Jehu, and all that he did, and all his might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?	As for the rest of the acts of Jehu, along with all his accomplishments and all his might, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?
2KI	10	35	예후가 그 열조와 함께 자매 사마리아에 장사되고 그 아들 여호아하스가 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And Jehu slept with his fathers: and they buried him in Samaria. And Jehoahaz his son reigned in his stead.	And Jehu rested with his fathers and was buried in Samaria, and his son Jehoahaz reigned in his place.
2KI	10	36	예후가 사마리아에서 이스라엘을 다스린 햇수는 이십팔 년이더라	And the time that Jehu reigned over Israel in Samaria was twenty and eight years.	So the duration of Jehu’s reign over Israel in Samaria was twenty-eight years.
2KI	11	1	아하시야의 모친 아달랴가 그 아들의 죽은 것을 보고 일어나 왕의 씨를 진멸하였으나	And when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she arose and destroyed all the seed royal.	When Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she proceeded to annihilate all the royal heirs.
2KI	11	2	요람 왕의 딸 아하시야의 누이 여호세바가 아하시야의 아들 요아스를 왕자들의 죽임을 당하는 중에서 도적하여 내고 저와 그 유모를 침실에 숨겨 아달랴를 피하여 죽임을 당치 않게 한지라	But Jehosheba, the daughter of king Joram, sister of Ahaziah, took Joash the son of Ahaziah, and stole him from among the king’s sons which were slain; and they hid him, even him and his nurse, in the bedchamber from Athaliah, so that he was not slain.	But Jehosheba daughter of King Joram, the sister of Ahaziah, took Joash son of Ahaziah and stole him away from among the sons of the king who were being murdered. She put him and his nurse in a bedroom to hide him from Athaliah, and he was not killed.
2KI	11	3	요아스가 저와 함께 여호와의 전에 육 년을 숨어 있는 동안에 아달랴가 나라를 다스렸더라	And he was with her hid in the house of the Lord six years. And Athaliah did reign over the land.	And Joash remained hidden with his nurse in the house of the LORD for six years while Athaliah ruled the land.
2KI	11	4	제칠년에 여호야다가 보내어 가리 사람의 백부장들과 호위병의 백부장들을 불러 데리고 여호와의 전으로 들어가서 저희와 언약을 세우고 저희로 여호와의 전에서 맹세케 한 후에 왕자를 보이고	And the seventh year Jehoiada sent and fetched the rulers over hundreds, with the captains and the guard, and brought them to him into the house of the Lord, and made a covenant with them, and took an oath of them in the house of the Lord, and shewed them the king’s son.	Then in the seventh year, Jehoiada sent for the commanders of hundreds, the Carites, and the guards, and had them brought into the house of the LORD. There he made a covenant with them and put them under oath. He showed them the king’s son
2KI	11	5	명하여 가로되 너희의 행할 것이 이러하니 안식일에 입번한 너희 중 삼분 일은 왕궁을 주의하여 지키고	And he commanded them, saying, This is the thing that ye shall do; A third part of you that enter in on the sabbath shall even be keepers of the watch of the king’s house;	and commanded them, “This is what you are to do: A third of you who come on duty on the Sabbath shall guard the royal palace,
2KI	11	6	삼분 일은 수르문에 있고 삼분 일은 호위대 뒤에 있는 문에 있어서 이와 같이 왕궁을 주의하여 지켜 방어하고	And a third part shall be at the gate of Sur; and a third part at the gate behind the guard: so shall ye keep the watch of the house, that it be not broken down.	a third shall be at the gate of Sur, and a third at the gate behind the guards. You are to take turns guarding the temple—
2KI	11	7	안식일에 출번하는 너희 중 두 대는 여호와의 전을 주의하여 지켜 왕을 호위하되	And two parts of all you that go forth on the sabbath, even they shall keep the watch of the house of the Lord about the king.	the two divisions that would go off duty on the Sabbath are to guard the house of the LORD for the king.
2KI	11	8	너희는 각각 손에 병기를 잡고 왕을 호위하며 무릇 너희 반열을 침범하는 자는 죽이고 왕의 출입할 때에 시위할지니라	And ye shall compass the king round about, every man with his weapons in his hand: and he that cometh within the ranges, let him be slain: and be ye with the king as he goeth out and as he cometh in.	You must surround the king with weapons in hand, and anyone who approaches the ranks must be put to death. You must stay close to the king wherever he goes.”
2KI	11	9	백부장들이 이에 제사장 여호야다의 모든 명대로 행하여 각기 관할하는바 안식일에 입번할 자와 출번할 자를 거느리고 제사장 여호야다에게 나아오매	And the captains over the hundreds did according to all things that Jehoiada the priest commanded: and they took every man his men that were to come in on the sabbath, with them that should go out on the sabbath, and came to Jehoiada the priest.	So the commanders of hundreds did everything that Jehoiada the priest had ordered. Each of them took his men—those coming on duty on the Sabbath and those going off duty—and came to Jehoiada the priest.
2KI	11	10	제사장이 여호와의 전에 있는 다윗 왕의 창과 방패를 백부장들에게 주니	And to the captains over hundreds did the priest give king David’s spears and shields, that were in the temple of the Lord.	Then the priest gave to the commanders of hundreds the spears and shields of King David from the house of the LORD.
2KI	11	11	호위병이 각각 손에 병기를 잡고 왕을 호위하되 전 우편에서부터 전 좌편까지 단과 전 곁에 서고	And the guard stood, every man with his weapons in his hand, round about the king, from the right corner of the temple to the left corner of the temple, along by the altar and the temple.	And the guards stood with weapons in hand surrounding the king by the altar and the temple, from the south side to the north side of the temple.
2KI	11	12	여호야다가 왕자를 인도하여 내어 면류관을 씌우며 율법 책을 주고 기름을 부어 왕을 삼으매 무리가 박수하며 왕의 만세를 부르니라	And he brought forth the king’s son, and put the crown upon him, and gave him the testimony; and they made him king, and anointed him; and they clapped their hands, and said, God save the king.	Then Jehoiada brought out the king’s son, put the crown on him, presented him with the Testimony, and proclaimed him king. They anointed him, and the people clapped their hands and declared, “Long live the king!”
2KI	11	13	아달랴가 호위병과 백성의 소리를 듣고 여호와의 전에 들어가서 백성에게 이르러	And when Athaliah heard the noise of the guard and of the people, she came to the people into the temple of the Lord.	When Athaliah heard the noise from the guards and the people, she went out to the people in the house of the LORD.
2KI	11	14	보매 왕이 규례대로 대 위에 섰고 장관들과 나팔수가 왕의 곁에 모셨으며 온 국민이 즐거워하여 나팔을 부는지라 아달랴가 옷을 찢으며 외치되 반역이로다 반역이로다 하매	And when she looked, behold, the king stood by a pillar, as the manner was, and the princes and the trumpeters by the king, and all the people of the land rejoiced, and blew with trumpets: and Athaliah rent her clothes, and cried, Treason, Treason.	And she looked out and saw the king standing by the pillar, according to the custom. The officers and trumpeters were beside the king, and all the people of the land were rejoicing and blowing trumpets. Then Athaliah tore her clothes and screamed, “Treason! Treason!”
2KI	11	15	제사장 여호야다가 군대를 거느린 백부장들에게 명하여 가로되 반열 밖으로 몰아내라 무릇 저를 따르는 자는 칼로 죽이라 하니 제사장의 이 말은 여호와의 전에서는 저를 죽이지 말라 함이라	But Jehoiada the priest commanded the captains of the hundreds, the officers of the host, and said unto them, Have her forth without the ranges: and him that followeth her kill with the sword. For the priest had said, Let her not be slain in the house of the Lord.	And Jehoiada the priest ordered the commanders of hundreds in charge of the army, “Bring her out between the ranks, and put to the sword anyone who follows her.” For the priest had said, “She must not be put to death in the house of the LORD.”
2KI	11	16	이에 저의 길을 열어주매 저가 왕궁 말 다니는 길로 통과하다가 거기서 죽임을 당하였더라	And they laid hands on her; and she went by the way by the which the horses came into the king’s house: and there was she slain.	So they seized Athaliah as she reached the horses’ entrance to the palace grounds, and there she was put to death.
2KI	11	17	여호야다가 왕과 백성으로 여호와와 언약을 세워 여호와의 백성이 되게 하고 왕과 백성 사이에도 언약을 세우게 하매	And Jehoiada made a covenant between the Lord and the king and the people, that they should be the Lord’s people; between the king also and the people.	Then Jehoiada made a covenant between the LORD and the king and the people that they would be the LORD’s people. He also made a covenant between the king and the people.
2KI	11	18	온 국민이 바알의 당으로 가서 그 당을 훼파하고 그 단들과 우상들을 깨뜨리고 그 단 앞에서 바알의 제사장 맛단을 죽이니라 제사장이 관리들을 세워 여호와의 전을 수직하게 하고	And all the people of the land went into the house of Baal, and brake it down; his altars and his images brake they in pieces thoroughly, and slew Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars. And the priest appointed officers over the house of the Lord.	So all the people of the land went to the temple of Baal and tore it down. They smashed the altars and idols to pieces, and they killed Mattan the priest of Baal in front of the altars. And Jehoiada the priest posted guards for the house of the LORD.
2KI	11	19	또 백부장들과 가리 사람과 호위병과 온 국민을 거느리고 왕을 인도하여 여호와의 전에서 내려와서 호위병의 문 길로 말미암아 왕궁에 이르매 저가 왕의 보좌에 앉으니	And he took the rulers over hundreds, and the captains, and the guard, and all the people of the land; and they brought down the king from the house of the Lord, and came by the way of the gate of the guard to the king’s house. And he sat on the throne of the kings.	He took with him the commanders of hundreds, the Carites, the guards, and all the people of the land, and they brought the king down from the house of the LORD and entered the royal palace by way of the Gate of the Guards. Then Joash took his seat on the royal throne,
2KI	11	20	온 국민이 즐거워하고 성중이 평온하더라 아달랴를 무리가 왕궁에서 칼로 죽였었더라	And all the people of the land rejoiced, and the city was in quiet: and they slew Athaliah with the sword beside the king’s house.	and all the people of the land rejoiced. And the city was quiet, because Athaliah had been put to the sword at the royal palace.
2KI	11	21	요아스가 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 칠 세였더라	Seven years old was Jehoash when he began to reign.	Joash was seven years old when he became king.
2KI	12	1	예후의 칠년에 요아스가 위에 올라 예루살렘에서 사십 년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 시비아라 브엘세바 사람이더라	In the seventh year of Jehu Jehoash began to reign; and forty years reigned he in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Zibiah of Beer–sheba.	In the seventh year of Jehu, Joash became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem forty years. His mother’s name was Zibiah; she was from Beersheba.
2KI	12	2	요아스가 제사장 여호야다의 교훈을 받을 동안에 여호와 보시기에 정직히 행하였으되	And Jehoash did that which was right in the sight of the Lord all his days wherein Jehoiada the priest instructed him.	And Joash did what was right in the eyes of the LORD all the days he was instructed by Jehoiada the priest.
2KI	12	3	오직 산당을 제하지 아니하였으므로 백성이 오히려 산당에서 제사하며 분향하였더라	But the high places were not taken away: the people still sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places.	Nevertheless, the high places were not removed; the people continued sacrificing and burning incense there.
2KI	12	4	요아스가 제사장들에게 이르되 무릇 여호와의 전에 거룩하게 하여 드리는 은 곧 사람의 통용하는 은이나 각 사람의 몸값으로 드리는 은이나 자원하여 여호와의 전에 드리는 모든 은을	And Jehoash said to the priests, All the money of the dedicated things that is brought into the house of the Lord, even the money of every one that passeth the account, the money that every man is set at, and all the money that cometh into any man’s heart to bring into the house of the Lord,	Then Joash said to the priests, “Collect all the money brought as sacred gifts into the house of the LORD—the census money, the money from vows, and the money brought voluntarily into the house of the LORD.
2KI	12	5	제사장들이 각각 아는 자에게서 받아 들여서 전의 어느 곳이든지 퇴락한 것을 보거든 그것으로 수리하라 하였더니	Let the priests take it to them, every man of his acquaintance: and let them repair the breaches of the house, wheresoever any breach shall be found.	Let every priest receive it from his constituency, and let it be used to repair any damage found in the temple.”
2KI	12	6	요아스 왕 이십삼년에 이르도록 제사장들이 오히려 전의 퇴락한 데를 수리하지 아니하였는지라	But it was so, that in the three and twentieth year of king Jehoash the priests had not repaired the breaches of the house.	By the twenty-third year of the reign of Joash, however, the priests had not yet repaired the damage to the temple.
2KI	12	7	요아스 왕이 대제사장 여호야다와 제사장들을 불러서 이르되 너희가 어찌하여 전의 퇴락한 데를 수리하지 아니하였느냐 이제부터는 너희 아는 사람에게서 은을 받지 말고 저희로 전 퇴락한 데를 위하여 드리게 하라	Then king Jehoash called for Jehoiada the priest, and the other priests, and said unto them, Why repair ye not the breaches of the house? now therefore receive no more money of your acquaintance, but deliver it for the breaches of the house.	So King Joash called Jehoiada and the other priests and said, “Why have you not repaired the damage to the temple? Now, therefore, take no more money from your constituency, but hand it over for the repair of the temple.”
2KI	12	8	제사장들이 다시는 백성에게 은을 받지도 아니하고 전 퇴락한 것을 수리하지도 아니하기로 응락하니라	And the priests consented to receive no more money of the people, neither to repair the breaches of the house.	So the priests agreed that they would not receive money from the people and that they would not repair the temple themselves.
2KI	12	9	제사장 여호야다가 한 궤를 취하여 그 뚜껑에 구멍을 뚫어 여호와의 전문 어귀 우편 곧 단 옆에 두매 무릇 여호와의 전에 가져 오는 은을 다 문을 지키는 제사장들이 그 궤에 넣더라	But Jehoiada the priest took a chest, and bored a hole in the lid of it, and set it beside the altar, on the right side as one cometh into the house of the Lord: and the priests that kept the door put therein all the money that was brought into the house of the Lord.	Then Jehoiada the priest took a chest, bored a hole in its lid, and set it beside the altar on the right side as one enters the house of the LORD. There the priests who guarded the threshold put all the money brought into the house of the LORD.
2KI	12	10	이에 그 궤 가운데 은이 많은 것을 보면 왕의 서기와 대제사장이 올라와서 여호와의 전에 있는 대로 그 은을 계수하여 봉하고	And it was so, when they saw that there was much money in the chest, that the king’s scribe and the high priest came up, and they put up in bags, and told the money that was found in the house of the Lord.	Whenever they saw that there was a large amount of money in the chest, the royal scribe and the high priest would go up, count the money brought into the house of the LORD, and tie it up in bags.
2KI	12	11	그 달아본 은을 일하는 자 곧 여호와의 전을 맡은 자의 손에 붙이면 저희는 또 여호와의 전을 수리하는 목수와 건축하는 자들에게 주고	And they gave the money, being told, into the hands of them that did the work, that had the oversight of the house of the Lord: and they laid it out to the carpenters and builders, that wrought upon the house of the Lord,	Then they would put the counted money into the hands of those who supervised the work on the house of the LORD, who in turn would pay those doing the work—the carpenters, builders,
2KI	12	12	또 미장이와 석수에게 주고 또 여호와의 전 퇴락한 데를 수리할 재목과 다듬은 돌을 사게 하며 그 전을 수리할 모든 물건을 위하여 쓰게 하였으되	And to masons, and hewers of stone, and to buy timber and hewed stone to repair the breaches of the house of the Lord, and for all that was laid out for the house to repair it.	masons, and stonecutters. They also purchased timber and dressed stone to repair the damage to the house of the LORD, and they paid the other expenses of the temple repairs.
2KI	12	13	여호와의 전에 드린 그 은으로 그 전의 은대접이나 불집게나 주발이나 나팔이나 아무 금그릇이나 은그릇을 만들지 아니하고	Howbeit there were not made for the house of the Lord bowls of silver, snuffers, basons, trumpets, any vessels of gold, or vessels of silver, of the money that was brought into the house of the Lord:	However, the money brought into the house of the LORD was not used for making silver basins, wick trimmers, sprinkling bowls, trumpets, or any articles of gold or silver for the house of the LORD.
2KI	12	14	오직 그 은을 일하는 자에게 주어 그것으로 여호와의 전을 수리하게 하였으며	But they gave that to the workmen, and repaired therewith the house of the Lord.	Instead, it was paid to those doing the work, and with it they repaired the house of the LORD.
2KI	12	15	또 그 은을 받아 일꾼에게 주는 사람들과 회계하지 아니하였으니 이는 성실히 일을 하였음이라	Moreover they reckoned not with the men, into whose hand they delivered the money to be bestowed on workmen: for they dealt faithfully.	No accounting was required from the men who received the money to pay the workmen, because they acted with integrity.
2KI	12	16	속건제의 은과 속죄제의 은은 여호와의 전에 드리지 아니하고 제사장에게 돌렸더라	The trespass money and sin money was not brought into the house of the Lord: it was the priests’.	The money from the guilt offerings and sin offerings was not brought into the house of the LORD; it belonged to the priests.
2KI	12	17	때에 아람 왕 하사엘이 올라와서 가드를 쳐서 취하고 예루살렘을 향하여 올라오고자 한고로	Then Hazael king of Syria went up, and fought against Gath, and took it: and Hazael set his face to go up to Jerusalem.	At that time Hazael king of Aram marched up and fought against Gath and captured it. Then he decided to attack Jerusalem.
2KI	12	18	유다 왕 요아스가 그 열조 유다 왕 여호사밧과 여호람과 아하시야가 구별하여 드린 모든 성물과 자기가 구별하여 드린 성물과 여호와의 전 곳간과 왕궁에 있는 금을 다 취하여 아람 왕 하사엘에게 보내었더니 하사엘이 예루살렘에서 떠나갔더라	And Jehoash king of Judah took all the hallowed things that Jehoshaphat, and Jehoram, and Ahaziah, his fathers, kings of Judah, had dedicated, and his own hallowed things, and all the gold that was found in the treasures of the house of the Lord, and in the king’s house, and sent it to Hazael king of Syria: and he went away from Jerusalem.	So King Joash of Judah took all the sacred objects dedicated by his fathers—Jehoshaphat, Jehoram, and Ahaziah, the kings of Judah—along with his own consecrated items and all the gold found in the treasuries of the house of the LORD and the royal palace, and he sent them to Hazael king of Aram. So Hazael withdrew from Jerusalem.
2KI	12	19	요아스의 남은 사적과 그 모든 행한 것은 유다 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	And the rest of the acts of Joash, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?	As for the rest of the acts of Joash, along with all his accomplishments, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
2KI	12	20	요아스의 신복들이 일어나서 모반하여 실라로 내려가는 길 가의 밀로 궁에서 저를 죽였고	And his servants arose, and made a conspiracy, and slew Joash in the house of Millo, which goeth down to Silla.	And the servants of Joash rose up and formed a conspiracy and killed him at Beth-millo, on the road down to Silla.
2KI	12	21	저를 쳐서 죽인 신복은 시므앗의 아들 요사갈과 소멜의 아들 여호사바드이었더라 저는 다윗 성에 그 열조와 함께 장사되고 그 아들 아마샤가 대신하여 왕이 되니라	For Jozachar the son of Shimeath, and Jehozabad the son of Shomer, his servants, smote him, and he died; and they buried him with his fathers in the city of David: and Amaziah his son reigned in his stead.	His servants Jozabad son of Shimeath and Jehozabad son of Shomer struck him down, and he died. And they buried him with his fathers in the City of David, and his son Amaziah reigned in his place.
2KI	13	1	유다 왕 아하시야의 아들 요아스의 이십삼 년에 예후의 아들 여호아하스가 사마리아에서 이스라엘 왕이 되어 십칠 년을 치리하며	In the three and twentieth year of Joash the son of Ahaziah king of Judah Jehoahaz the son of Jehu began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned seventeen years.	In the twenty-third year of the reign of Joash son of Ahaziah over Judah, Jehoahaz son of Jehu became king of Israel, and he reigned in Samaria seventeen years.
2KI	13	2	여호와 보시기에 악을 행하여 이스라엘로 범죄케 한 느밧의 아들 여로보암의 죄를 좇고 떠나지 아니하였으므로	And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, and followed the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which made Israel to sin; he departed not therefrom.	And he did evil in the sight of the LORD and followed the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had caused Israel to commit; he did not turn away from them.
2KI	13	3	여호와께서 이스라엘을 향하여 노를 발하사 늘 아람 왕 하사엘의 손과 그 아들 벤하닷의 손에 붙이셨더니	And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he delivered them into the hand of Hazael king of Syria, and into the hand of Ben–hadad the son of Hazael, all their days.	So the anger of the LORD burned against Israel, and He delivered them continually into the hands of Hazael king of Aram and his son Ben-hadad.
2KI	13	4	아람 왕이 이스라엘을 학대하므로 여호아하스가 여호와께 간구하매 여호와께서 들으셨으니 이는 저희의 학대 받음을 보셨음이라	And Jehoahaz besought the Lord, and the Lord hearkened unto him: for he saw the oppression of Israel, because the king of Syria oppressed them.	Then Jehoahaz sought the favor of the LORD, and the LORD listened to him because He saw the oppression that the king of Aram had inflicted on Israel.
2KI	13	5	여호와께서 이에 구원자를 이스라엘에게 주시매 이스라엘 자손이 아람 사람의 손에서 벗어나 전과 같이 자기 장막에 거하였으나	(And the Lord gave Israel a saviour, so that they went out from under the hand of the Syrians: and the children of Israel dwelt in their tents, as beforetime.	So the LORD gave Israel a deliverer, and they escaped the power of the Arameans. Then the people of Israel lived in their own homes as they had before.
2KI	13	6	저희가 이스라엘로 범죄케 한 여로보암 집의 죄에서 떠나지 아니하고 좇아 행하며 또 사마리아에 아세라 목상을 그저 두었더라	Nevertheless they departed not from the sins of the house of Jeroboam, who made Israel sin, but walked therein: and there remained the grove also in Samaria.)	Nevertheless, they did not turn away from the sins that the house of Jeroboam had caused Israel to commit, but they continued to walk in them. The Asherah pole even remained standing in Samaria.
2KI	13	7	아람 왕이 여호아하스의 백성을 진멸하여 타작마당의 티끌 같이 되게 하고 마병 오십과 병거 십 승과 보병 일만 외에는 여호아하스에게 남겨두지 아니하였더라	Neither did he leave of the people to Jehoahaz but fifty horsemen, and ten chariots, and ten thousand footmen; for the king of Syria had destroyed them, and had made them like the dust by threshing.	Jehoahaz had no army left, except fifty horsemen, ten chariots, and ten thousand foot soldiers, because the king of Aram had destroyed them and made them like the dust at threshing.
2KI	13	8	여호아하스의 남은 사적과 모든 행한 것과 그 권력은 이스라엘 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	Now the rest of the acts of Jehoahaz, and all that he did, and his might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?	As for the rest of the acts of Jehoahaz, along with all his accomplishments and his might, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?
2KI	13	9	여호아하스가 그 열조와 함께 자매 사마리아에 장사되고 그 아들 요아스가 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And Jehoahaz slept with his fathers; and they buried him in Samaria: and Joash his son reigned in his stead.	And Jehoahaz rested with his fathers and was buried in Samaria. And his son Jehoash reigned in his place.
2KI	13	10	유다 왕 요아스의 삼십칠 년에 여호아하스의 아들 요아스가 사마리아에서 이스라엘 왕이 되어 십육 년을 치리하며	In the thirty and seventh year of Joash king of Judah began Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned sixteen years.	In the thirty-seventh year of the reign of Joash over Judah, Jehoash son of Jehoahaz became king of Israel in Samaria, and he reigned sixteen years.
2KI	13	11	여호와 보시기에 악을 행하여 이스라엘로 범죄케 한 느밧의 아들 여로보암의 모든 죄에서 떠나지 아니하고 좇아 행하였더라	And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord; he departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel sin: but he walked therein.	And he did evil in the sight of the LORD and did not turn away from all the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had caused Israel to commit, but he walked in them.
2KI	13	12	요아스의 남은 사적과 무릇 행한 일과 유다 왕 아마샤와 싸운 권력은 이스라엘 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	And the rest of the acts of Joash, and all that he did, and his might wherewith he fought against Amaziah king of Judah, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?	As for the rest of the acts of Jehoash, along with all his accomplishments and his might, including his war against Amaziah king of Judah, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?
2KI	13	13	요아스가 그 열조와 함께 자매 이스라엘 왕들과 함께 사마리아에 장사되고 여로보암이 그 위에 앉으니라	And Joash slept with his fathers; and Jeroboam sat upon his throne: and Joash was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel.	And Jehoash rested with his fathers, and Jeroboam succeeded him on the throne. Jehoash was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel.
2KI	13	14	엘리사가 죽을 병이 들매 이스라엘 왕 요아스가 저에게로 내려가서 그 얼굴에 눈물을 흘리며 가로되 내 아버지여 내 아버지여 이스라엘의 병거와 마병이여 하매	Now Elisha was fallen sick of his sickness whereof he died. And Joash the king of Israel came down unto him, and wept over his face, and said, O my father, my father, the chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof.	When Elisha had fallen sick with the illness from which he would die, Jehoash king of Israel came down to him and wept over him, saying, “My father, my father, the chariots and horsemen of Israel!”
2KI	13	15	엘리사가 저에게 이르되 활과 살들을 취하소서 활과 살들을 취하매	And Elisha said unto him, Take bow and arrows. And he took unto him bow and arrows.	Elisha told him, “Take a bow and some arrows.” So Jehoash took a bow and some arrows.
2KI	13	16	또 이스라엘 왕에게 이르되 왕의 손으로 활을 잡으소서 곧 손으로 잡으매 엘리사가 자기 손으로 왕의 손을 안찰하고	And he said to the king of Israel, Put thine hand upon the bow. And he put his hand upon it: and Elisha put his hands upon the king’s hands.	Then Elisha said to the king of Israel, “Put your hand on the bow.” So the king put his hand on the bow, and Elisha put his hands on the king’s hands.
2KI	13	17	가로되 동편 창을 여소서 곧 열매 엘리사가 가로되 쏘소서 곧 쏘매 엘리사가 가로되 이는 여호와의 구원의 살 곧 아람에 대한 구원의 살이니 왕이 아람 사람을 진멸하도록 아벡에서 치리이다	And he said, Open the window eastward. And he opened it. Then Elisha said, Shoot. And he shot. And he said, The arrow of the Lord’s deliverance, and the arrow of deliverance from Syria: for thou shalt smite the Syrians in Aphek, till thou have consumed them.	“Open the east window,” said Elisha. So he opened it and Elisha said, “Shoot!” So he shot. And Elisha declared: “This is the LORD’s arrow of victory, the arrow of victory over Aram, for you shall strike the Arameans in Aphek until you have put an end to them.”
2KI	13	18	또 가로되 살들을 취하소서 곧 취하매 엘리사가 또 이스라엘 왕에게 이르되 땅을 치소서 이에 세 번 치고 그친지라	And he said, Take the arrows. And he took them. And he said unto the king of Israel, Smite upon the ground. And he smote thrice, and stayed.	Then Elisha said, “Take the arrows!” So he took them, and Elisha said to the king of Israel, “Strike the ground!” So he struck the ground three times and stopped.
2KI	13	19	하나님의 사람이 노하여 가로되 왕이 오륙 번을 칠 것이니이다 그리하였더면 왕이 아람을 진멸하도록 쳤으리이다 그런즉 이제는 왕이 아람을 세 번만 치리이다 하니라	And the man of God was wroth with him, and said, Thou shouldest have smitten five or six times; then hadst thou smitten Syria till thou hadst consumed it: whereas now thou shalt smite Syria but thrice.	But the man of God was angry with him and said, “You should have struck the ground five or six times. Then you would have struck down Aram until you had put an end to it. But now you will strike down Aram only three times.”
2KI	13	20	엘리사가 죽으매 장사하였더니 해가 바뀌매 모압 적당이 지경을 범한지라	And Elisha died, and they buried him. And the bands of the Moabites invaded the land at the coming in of the year.	And Elisha died and was buried. Now the Moabite raiders used to come into the land every spring.
2KI	13	21	마침 사람을 장사하는 자들이 그 적당을 보고 그 시체를 엘리사의 묘실에 들이던지매 시체가 엘리사의 뼈에 닿자 곧 회생하여 일어섰더라	And it came to pass, as they were burying a man, that, behold, they spied a band of men; and they cast the man into the sepulchre of Elisha: and when the man was let down, and touched the bones of Elisha, he revived, and stood up on his feet.	Once, as the Israelites were burying a man, suddenly they saw a band of raiders, so they threw the man’s body into Elisha’s tomb. And as soon as his body touched the bones of Elisha, the man was revived and stood up on his feet.
2KI	13	22	여호아하스 왕의 시대에 아람 왕 하사엘이 항상 이스라엘을 학대하였으나	But Hazael king of Syria oppressed Israel all the days of Jehoahaz.	And Hazael king of Aram oppressed Israel throughout the reign of Jehoahaz.
2KI	13	23	여호와께서 아브라함과 이삭과 야곱으로 더불어 세우신 언약을 인하여 이스라엘에게 은혜를 베풀어 긍휼히 여기시며 권고하사 멸하기를 즐겨 아니하시고 이때까지 자기 앞에서 쫓아내지 아니하셨더라	And the Lord was gracious unto them, and had compassion on them, and had respect unto them, because of his covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and would not destroy them, neither cast he them from his presence as yet.	But the LORD was gracious to Israel and had compassion on them, and He turned toward them because of His covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And to this day, the LORD has been unwilling to destroy them or cast them from His presence.
2KI	13	24	아람 왕 하사엘이 죽고 그 아들 벤하닷이 대신하여 왕이 되매	So Hazael king of Syria died; and Ben–hadad his son reigned in his stead.	When Hazael king of Aram died, his son Ben-hadad reigned in his place.
2KI	13	25	여호아하스의 아들 요아스가 하사엘의 아들 벤하닷의 손에서 두어 성읍을 회복하였으니 이 성읍들은 자기 부친 여호아하스가 전쟁 중에 빼앗겼던 것이라 요아스가 벤하닷을 세 번 쳐서 파하고 이스라엘 성읍들을 회복하였더라	And Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz took again out of the hand of Ben–hadad the son of Hazael the cities, which he had taken out of the hand of Jehoahaz his father by war. Three times did Joash beat him, and recovered the cities of Israel.	Then Jehoash son of Jehoahaz took back from Ben-hadad son of Hazael the cities that Hazael had taken in battle from his father Jehoahaz. Jehoash defeated Ben-hadad three times, and so recovered the cities of Israel.
2KI	14	1	이스라엘 왕 여호아하스의 아들 요아스 이년에 유다 왕 요아스의 아들 아마샤가 왕이 되니	In the second year of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel reigned Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah.	In the second year of the reign of Jehoash son of Jehoahaz over Israel, Amaziah son of Joash became king of Judah.
2KI	14	2	위에 나아갈 때에 나이 이십오 세라 예루살렘에서 이십구 년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 여호앗단이라 예루살렘 사람이더라	He was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Jehoaddan of Jerusalem.	He was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem twenty-nine years. His mother’s name was Jehoaddan; she was from Jerusalem.
2KI	14	3	아마샤가 여호와 보시기에 정직히 행하였으나 그 조상 다윗과는 같지 아니하였으며 그 부친 요아스의 행한 대로 다 행하였어도	And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, yet not like David his father: he did according to all things as Joash his father did.	And he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, but not as his father David had done. He did everything as his father Joash had done.
2KI	14	4	산당을 제하지 아니하였으므로 백성이 오히려 산당에서 제사를 드리며 분향하였더라	Howbeit the high places were not taken away: as yet the people did sacrifice and burnt incense on the high places.	Nevertheless, the high places were not taken away, and the people continued sacrificing and burning incense on the high places.
2KI	14	5	나라가 그 손에 굳게 서매 그 부왕을 죽인 신복들을 죽였으나	And it came to pass, as soon as the kingdom was confirmed in his hand, that he slew his servants which had slain the king his father.	As soon as the kingdom was firmly in his grasp, Amaziah executed the servants who had murdered his father the king.
2KI	14	6	왕을 죽인 자의 자녀들은 죽이지 아니하였으니 이는 모세의 율법책에 기록된 대로 함이라 곧 여호와께서 명하여 이르시기를 자녀로 인하여 아비를 죽이지 말 것이요 아비로 인하여 자녀를 죽이지 말 것이라 오직 사람마다 자기의 죄로 인하여 죽을 것이니라 하셨더라	But the children of the murderers he slew not: according unto that which is written in the book of the law of Moses, wherein the Lord commanded, saying, The fathers shall not be put to death for the children, nor the children be put to death for the fathers; but every man shall be put to death for his own sin.	Yet he did not put the sons of the murderers to death, but acted according to what is written in the Book of the Law of Moses, where the LORD commanded: “Fathers must not be put to death for their children, and children must not be put to death for their fathers; each is to die for his own sin.”
2KI	14	7	아마샤가 염곡에서 에돔 사람 일만을 죽이고 또 셀라를 쳐서 취하고 이름을 욕드엘이라 하였더니 오늘까지 그러하니라	He slew of Edom in the valley of salt ten thousand, and took Selah by war, and called the name of it Joktheel unto this day.	Amaziah struck down 10,000 Edomites in the Valley of Salt. He took Sela in battle and called it Joktheel, which is its name to this very day.
2KI	14	8	아마샤가 예후의 손자 여호아하스의 아들 이스라엘 왕 요아스에게 사자를 보내어 이르되 오라 우리가 서로 대면하자 한지라	Then Amaziah sent messengers to Jehoash, the son of Jehoahaz son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, Come, let us look one another in the face.	Then Amaziah sent messengers to the king of Israel Jehoash son of Jehoahaz, the son of Jehu. “Come, let us meet face to face,” he said.
2KI	14	9	이스라엘 왕 요아스가 유다 왕 아마샤에게 보내어 이르되 레바논 가시나무가 레바논 백향목에게 보내어 이르기를 네 딸을 내 아들들에게 주어 아내를 삼게 하라 하였더니 레바논 들짐승이 지나가다가 그 가시나무를 짓밟았느니라	And Jehoash the king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying, The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter to my son to wife: and there passed by a wild beast that was in Lebanon, and trode down the thistle.	But Jehoash king of Israel replied to Amaziah king of Judah: “A thistle in Lebanon sent a message to a cedar in Lebanon, saying, ‘Give your daughter to my son in marriage.’ Then a wild beast in Lebanon came along and trampled the thistle.
2KI	14	10	네가 에돔을 쳐서 파하였으므로 마음이 교만하였으니 스스로 영광을 삼아 궁에나 거하라 어찌하여 화를 자취하여 너와 유다가 함께 망하고자 하느냐 하나	Thou hast indeed smitten Edom, and thine heart hath lifted thee up: glory of this, and tarry at home: for why shouldest thou meddle to thy hurt, that thou shouldest fall, even thou, and Judah with thee?	You have indeed defeated Edom, and your heart has become proud. Glory in that and stay at home. Why should you stir up trouble so that you fall—you and Judah with you?”
2KI	14	11	아마샤가 듣지 아니하므로 이스라엘 왕 요아스가 올라와서 유다 왕 아마샤로 더불어 유다의 벧세메스에서 대면하였더니	But Amaziah would not hear. Therefore Jehoash king of Israel went up; and he and Amaziah king of Judah looked one another in the face at Beth–shemesh, which belongeth to Judah.	But Amaziah would not listen, and Jehoash king of Israel advanced. He and King Amaziah of Judah faced each other at Beth-shemesh in Judah.
2KI	14	12	유다가 이스라엘 앞에서 패하여 각기 장막으로 도망한지라	And Judah was put to the worse before Israel; and they fled every man to their tents.	And Judah was routed before Israel, and every man fled to his home.
2KI	14	13	이스라엘 왕 요아스가 벧세메스에서 아하시야의 손자 요아스의 아들 유다 왕 아마샤를 사로잡고 예루살렘에 이르러 예루살렘 성벽을 에브라임 문에서부터 성 모퉁이 문까지 사백 규빗을 헐고	And Jehoash king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Jehoash the son of Ahaziah, at Beth–shemesh, and came to Jerusalem, and brake down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim unto the corner gate, four hundred cubits.	There at Beth-shemesh, Jehoash king of Israel captured Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Joash, the son of Ahaziah. Then Jehoash went to Jerusalem and broke down the wall of Jerusalem from the Ephraim Gate to the Corner Gate—a section of four hundred cubits.
2KI	14	14	또 여호와의 전과 왕궁 곳간에 있는 금은과 모든 기명을 취하고 또 사람을 볼모로 잡아가지고 사마리아로 돌아갔더라	And he took all the gold and silver, and all the vessels that were found in the house of the Lord, and in the treasures of the king’s house, and hostages, and returned to Samaria.	He took all the gold and silver and all the articles found in the house of the LORD and in the treasuries of the royal palace, as well as some hostages. Then he returned to Samaria.
2KI	14	15	요아스의 남은 사적과 그 권력과 또 유다 왕 아마샤와 서로 싸운 일은 이스라엘 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	Now the rest of the acts of Jehoash which he did, and his might, and how he fought with Amaziah king of Judah, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?	As for the rest of the acts of Jehoash, along with his accomplishments, his might, and how he waged war against Amaziah king of Judah, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?
2KI	14	16	요아스가 그 열조와 함께 자매 이스라엘 왕들과 사마리아에 함께 장사되고 그 아들 여로보암이 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And Jehoash slept with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel; and Jeroboam his son reigned in his stead.	And Jehoash rested with his fathers and was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel. And his son Jeroboam reigned in his place.
2KI	14	17	이스라엘 왕 여호아하스의 아들 요아스가 죽은 후에도 유다 왕 요아스의 아들 아마샤가 십오 년을 생존하였더라	And Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived after the death of Jehoash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel fifteen years.	Amaziah son of Joash king of Judah lived for fifteen years after the death of Jehoash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel.
2KI	14	18	아마샤의 남은 행적은 유다 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	And the rest of the acts of Amaziah, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?	As for the rest of the acts of Amaziah, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
2KI	14	19	예루살렘에서 무리가 저를 모반한고로 저가 라기스로 도망하였더니 모반한 무리가 사람을 라기스로 따라 보내어 저를 거기서 죽이게 하고	Now they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem: and he fled to Lachish; but they sent after him to Lachish, and slew him there.	And conspirators plotted against Amaziah in Jerusalem, and he fled to Lachish. But men were sent after him to Lachish, and they killed him there.
2KI	14	20	그 시체를 말에 실어다가 예루살렘에서 그 열조와 함께 다윗 성에 장사하니라	And they brought him on horses: and he was buried at Jerusalem with his fathers in the city of David.	They carried him back on horses and buried him in Jerusalem with his fathers in the City of David.
2KI	14	21	유다 온 백성이 아사랴로 그 부친 아마샤를 대신하여 왕을 삼으니 때에 나이 십육 세라	And all the people of Judah took Azariah, which was sixteen years old, and made him king instead of his father Amaziah.	Then all the people of Judah took Azariah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in place of his father Amaziah.
2KI	14	22	아마샤가 그 열조와 함께 잔 후에 아사랴가 엘랏을 건축하여 유다에 돌렸더라	He built Elath, and restored it to Judah, after that the king slept with his fathers.	Azariah was the one who rebuilt Elath and restored it to Judah after King Amaziah rested with his fathers.
2KI	14	23	유다 왕 요아스의 아들 아마샤 십오년에 이스라엘 왕 요아스의 아들 여로보암이 사마리아에서 왕이 되어 사십일 년을 위에 있으며	In the fifteenth year of Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel began to reign in Samaria, and reigned forty and one years.	In the fifteenth year of the reign of Amaziah son of Joash over Judah, Jeroboam son of Jehoash became king of Israel, and he reigned in Samaria forty-one years.
2KI	14	24	여호와 보시기에 악을 행하여 이스라엘로 범죄케 한 느밧의 아들 여로보암의 모든 죄에서 떠나지 아니하였더라	And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord: he departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin.	And he did evil in the sight of the LORD and did not turn away from all the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had caused Israel to commit.
2KI	14	25	이스라엘 하나님 여호와께서 그 종 가드헤벨 아밋대의 아들 선지자 요나로 하신 말씀과 같이 여로보암이 이스라엘 지경을 회복하되 하맛 어귀에서부터 아라바 바다까지 하였으니	He restored the coast of Israel from the entering of Hamath unto the sea of the plain, according to the word of the Lord God of Israel, which he spake by the hand of his servant Jonah, the son of Amittai, the prophet, which was of Gath–hepher.	This Jeroboam restored the boundary of Israel from Lebo-hamath to the Sea of the Arabah, according to the word that the LORD, the God of Israel, had spoken through His servant Jonah son of Amittai, the prophet from Gath-hepher.
2KI	14	26	이는 여호와께서 이스라엘의 고난이 심하여 매인 자도 없고 놓인 자도 없고 이스라엘을 도울 자도 없음을 보셨고	For the Lord saw the affliction of Israel, that it was very bitter: for there was not any shut up, nor any left, nor any helper for Israel.	For the LORD saw that the affliction of the Israelites, both slave and free, was very bitter. There was no one to help Israel,
2KI	14	27	여호와께서 또 이스라엘의 이름을 도말하여 천하에 없이 하겠다고도 아니하셨으므로 요아스의 아들 여로보암의 손으로 구원하심이었더라	And the Lord said not that he would blot out the name of Israel from under heaven: but he saved them by the hand of Jeroboam the son of Joash.	and since the LORD had said that He would not blot out the name of Israel from under heaven, He saved them by the hand of Jeroboam son of Jehoash.
2KI	14	28	여로보암의 남은 사적과 모든 행한 일과 그 권력으로 싸운 일과 다메섹을 회복한 일과 이전에 유다에 속하였던 하맛을 이스라엘에 돌린 일은 이스라엘 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	Now the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, and all that he did, and his might, how he warred, and how he recovered Damascus, and Hamath, which belonged to Judah, for Israel, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?	As for the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, along with all his accomplishments and might, and how he waged war and recovered both Damascus and Hamath for Israel from Judah, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?
2KI	14	29	여로보암이 그 열조 이스라엘 왕들과 함께 자고 그 아들 스가랴가 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And Jeroboam slept with his fathers, even with the kings of Israel; and Zachariah his son reigned in his stead.	And Jeroboam rested with his fathers, the kings of Israel. And his son Zechariah reigned in his place.
2KI	15	1	이스라엘 왕 여로보암 이십칠년에 유다 왕 아마샤의 아들 아사랴가 왕이 되니	In the twenty and seventh year of Jeroboam king of Israel began Azariah son of Amaziah king of Judah to reign.	In the twenty-seventh year of Jeroboam’s reign over Israel, Azariah son of Amaziah became king of Judah.
2KI	15	2	위에 나아갈 때에 나이 십육 세라 예루살렘에서 오십이 년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 여골리야라 예루살렘 사람이더라	Sixteen years old was he when he began to reign, and he reigned two and fifty years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Jecholiah of Jerusalem.	He was sixteen years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem fifty-two years. His mother’s name was Jecoliah; she was from Jerusalem.
2KI	15	3	아사랴가 그 부친 아마샤의 모든 행위대로 여호와 보시기에 정직히 행하였으나	And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his father Amaziah had done;	And he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, just as his father Amaziah had done.
2KI	15	4	오직 산당은 제하지 아니하였으므로 백성이 오히려 그 산당에서 제사를 드리며 분향하였고	Save that the high places were not removed: the people sacrificed and burnt incense still on the high places.	Nevertheless, the high places were not taken away; the people continued sacrificing and burning incense there.
2KI	15	5	여호와께서 왕을 치셨으므로 그 죽는 날까지 문둥이가 되어 별궁에 거하고 왕자 요담이 궁중 일을 다스리며 국민을 치리하였더라	And the Lord smote the king, so that he was a leper unto the day of his death, and dwelt in a several house. And Jotham the king’s son was over the house, judging the people of the land.	And the LORD afflicted the king with leprosy until the day he died, so that he lived in a separate house while his son Jotham had charge of the palace and governed the people of the land.
2KI	15	6	아사랴의 남은 사적과 모든 행한 일은 유다 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	And the rest of the acts of Azariah, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?	As for the rest of the acts of Azariah, along with all his accomplishments, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
2KI	15	7	아사랴가 그 열조와 함께 자매 다윗 성에 그 열조와 함께 장사되고 그 아들 요담이 대신하여 왕이 되니라	So Azariah slept with his fathers; and they buried him with his fathers in the city of David: and Jotham his son reigned in his stead.	And Azariah rested with his fathers and was buried near them in the City of David. And his son Jotham reigned in his place.
2KI	15	8	유다 왕 아사랴의 삼십팔년에 여로보암의 아들 스가랴가 사마리아에서 이스라엘 왕이 되어 여섯 달을 치리하며	In the thirty and eighth year of Azariah king of Judah did Zachariah the son of Jeroboam reign over Israel in Samaria six months.	In the thirty-eighth year of Azariah’s reign over Judah, Zechariah son of Jeroboam became king of Israel, and he reigned in Samaria six months.
2KI	15	9	그 열조의 행위대로 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하여 이스라엘로 범죄케 한 느밧의 아들 여로보암의 죄에서 떠나지 아니한지라	And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, as his fathers had done: he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin.	And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, as his fathers had done. He did not turn away from the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had caused Israel to commit.
2KI	15	10	야베스의 아들 살룸이 저를 모반하여 백성 앞에서 쳐 죽이고 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And Shallum the son of Jabesh conspired against him, and smote him before the people, and slew him, and reigned in his stead.	Then Shallum son of Jabesh conspired against Zechariah, struck him down and killed him in front of the people, and reigned in his place.
2KI	15	11	스가랴의 남은 사적은 이스라엘 왕 역대지략에 기록되니라	And the rest of the acts of Zachariah, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.	As for the rest of the acts of Zechariah, they are indeed written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel.
2KI	15	12	여호와께서 예후에게 말씀하여 이르시기를 네 자손이 이스라엘 위를 이어 사 대까지 이르리라 하신 그 말씀대로 과연 그렇게 되니라	This was the word of the Lord which he spake unto Jehu, saying, Thy sons shall sit on the throne of Israel unto the fourth generation. And so it came to pass.	So the word of the LORD spoken to Jehu was fulfilled: “Four generations of your sons will sit on the throne of Israel.”
2KI	15	13	유다 왕 웃시야 삼십구 년에 야베스의 아들 살룸이 사마리아에서 왕이 되어 한 달을 치리하니라	Shallum the son of Jabesh began to reign in the nine and thirtieth year of Uzziah king of Judah; and he reigned a full month in Samaria.	In the thirty-ninth year of Uzziah’s reign over Judah, Shallum son of Jabesh became king, and he reigned in Samaria one full month.
2KI	15	14	가디의 아들 므나헴이 디르사에서부터 사마리아로 올라가서 야베스의 아들 살룸을 거기서 죽이고 대신하여 왕이 되니라	For Menahem the son of Gadi went up from Tirzah, and came to Samaria, and smote Shallum the son of Jabesh in Samaria, and slew him, and reigned in his stead.	Then Menahem son of Gadi went up from Tirzah to Samaria, struck down and killed Shallum son of Jabesh, and reigned in his place.
2KI	15	15	살룸의 남은 사적과 그 모반한 일은 이스라엘 왕 역대지략에 기록되니라	And the rest of the acts of Shallum, and his conspiracy which he made, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.	As for the rest of the acts of Shallum, along with the conspiracy he led, they are indeed written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel.
2KI	15	16	그 때에 므나헴이 디르사에서 와서 딥사와 그 가운데 있는 모든 사람과 그 사방을 쳤으니 이는 저희가 성문을 열지 아니하였음이라 그러므로 치고 그 가운데 아이 밴 부녀를 갈랐더라	Then Menahem smote Tiphsah, and all that were therein, and the coasts thereof from Tirzah: because they opened not to him, therefore he smote it; and all the women therein that were with child he ripped up.	At that time Menahem, starting from Tirzah, attacked Tiphsah and everyone in its vicinity, because they would not open their gates. So he attacked Tiphsah and ripped open all the pregnant women.
2KI	15	17	유다 왕 아사랴 삼십구 년에 가디의 아들 므나헴이 이스라엘 왕이 되어 사마리아에서 십 년을 치리하며	In the nine and thirtieth year of Azariah king of Judah began Menahem the son of Gadi to reign over Israel, and reigned ten years in Samaria.	In the thirty-ninth year of Azariah’s reign over Judah, Menahem son of Gadi became king of Israel, and he reigned in Samaria ten years.
2KI	15	18	여호와 보시기에 악을 행하여 이스라엘로 범죄케 한 느밧의 아들 여로보암의 죄에서 평생 떠나지 아니하였더라	And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord: he departed not all his days from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin.	And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, and throughout his reign he did not turn away from the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had caused Israel to commit.
2KI	15	19	앗수르 왕 불이 와서 그 땅을 치려 하매 므나헴이 은 일천 달란트를 불에게 주어서 저로 자기를 도와주게 함으로 나라를 자기 손에 굳게 세우고자 하여	And Pul the king of Assyria came against the land: and Menahem gave Pul a thousand talents of silver, that his hand might be with him to confirm the kingdom in his hand.	Then Pul king of Assyria invaded the land, and Menahem gave Pul a thousand talents of silver in order to gain his support and strengthen his own grip on the kingdom.
2KI	15	20	그 은을 이스라엘 모든 큰 부자에게서 토색하여 각 사람에게 은 오십 세겔씩 내게 하여 앗수르 왕에게 주었더니 이에 앗수르 왕이 돌이키고 그 땅에 머물지 아니하였더라	And Menahem exacted the money of Israel, even of all the mighty men of wealth, of each man fifty shekels of silver, to give to the king of Assyria. So the king of Assyria turned back, and stayed not there in the land.	Menahem exacted this money from each of the wealthy men of Israel—fifty shekels of silver from each man—to give to the king of Assyria. So the king of Assyria withdrew and did not remain in the land.
2KI	15	21	므나헴의 남은 사적과 그 모든 행한 일은 이스라엘 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	And the rest of the acts of Menahem, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?	As for the rest of the acts of Menahem, along with all his accomplishments, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?
2KI	15	22	므나헴이 그 열조와 함께 자고 그 아들 브가히야가 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And Menahem slept with his fathers; and Pekahiah his son reigned in his stead.	And Menahem rested with his fathers, and his son Pekahiah reigned in his place.
2KI	15	23	유다 왕 아사랴 오십년에 므나헴의 아들 브가히야가 사마리아에서 이스라엘 왕이 되어 이 년을 치리하며	In the fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah Pekahiah the son of Menahem began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned two years.	In the fiftieth year of Azariah’s reign over Judah, Pekahiah son of Menahem became king of Israel and reigned in Samaria two years.
2KI	15	24	여호와 보시기에 악을 행하여 이스라엘로 범죄케 한 느밧의 아들 여로보암의 죄에서 떠나지 아니한지라	And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord: he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin.	And he did evil in the sight of the LORD and did not turn away from the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had caused Israel to commit.
2KI	15	25	그 장관 르말랴의 아들 베가가 반역하여 사마리아 왕궁 호위소에서 왕과 아르곱과 아리에를 죽이되 길르앗 사람 오십 명으로 더불어 죽이고 대신하여 왕이 되었더라	But Pekah the son of Remaliah, a captain of his, conspired against him, and smote him in Samaria, in the palace of the king’s house, with Argob and Arieh, and with him fifty men of the Gileadites: and he killed him, and reigned in his room.	Then his officer, Pekah son of Remaliah, conspired against him along with Argob, Arieh, and fifty men of Gilead. And at the citadel of the king’s palace in Samaria, Pekah struck down and killed Pekahiah and reigned in his place.
2KI	15	26	브가히야의 남은 사적과 그 모든 행한 일은 이스라엘 왕 역대지략에 기록되니라	And the rest of the acts of Pekahiah, and all that he did, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.	As for the rest of the acts of Pekahiah, along with all his accomplishments, they are indeed written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel.
2KI	15	27	유다 왕 아사랴 오십이 년에 르말랴의 아들 베가가 이스라엘 왕이 되어 사마리아에서 이십 년을 치리하며	In the two and fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah Pekah the son of Remaliah began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned twenty years.	In the fifty-second year of Azariah’s reign over Judah, Pekah son of Remaliah became king of Israel, and he reigned in Samaria twenty years.
2KI	15	28	여호와 보시기에 악을 행하여 이스라엘로 범죄케 한 느밧의 아들 여로보암의 죄에서 떠나지 아니하였더라	And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord: he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin.	And he did evil in the sight of the LORD and did not turn away from the sins that Jeroboam son of Nebat had caused Israel to commit.
2KI	15	29	이스라엘 왕 베가 때에 앗수르 왕 디글랏 빌레셀이 와서 이욘과 아벨벳 마아가와 야노아와 게데스와 하솔과 길르앗과 갈릴리와 납달리 온 땅을 취하고 그 백성을 사로잡아 앗수르로 옮겼더라	In the days of Pekah king of Israel came Tiglath–pileser king of Assyria, and took Ijon, and Abel–beth–maachah, and Janoah, and Kedesh, and Hazor, and Gilead, and Galilee, all the land of Naphtali, and carried them captive to Assyria.	In the days of Pekah king of Israel, Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria came and captured Ijon, Abel-beth-maacah, Janoah, Kedesh, Hazor, Gilead, and Galilee, including all the land of Naphtali, and he took the people as captives to Assyria.
2KI	15	30	웃시야의 아들 요담 이십 년에 엘라의 아들 호세아가 반역하여 르말랴의 아들 베가를 쳐서 죽이고 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And Hoshea the son of Elah made a conspiracy against Pekah the son of Remaliah, and smote him, and slew him, and reigned in his stead, in the twentieth year of Jotham the son of Uzziah.	Then Hoshea son of Elah led a conspiracy against Pekah son of Remaliah. In the twentieth year of Jotham son of Uzziah, Hoshea attacked Pekah, killed him, and reigned in his place.
2KI	15	31	베가의 남은 사적과 그 모든 행한 일은 이스라엘 왕 역대지략에 기록되니라	And the rest of the acts of Pekah, and all that he did, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.	As for the rest of the acts of Pekah, along with all his accomplishments, they are indeed written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel.
2KI	15	32	이스라엘 왕 르말랴의 아들 베가 이년에 유다 왕 웃시야의 아들 요담이 왕이 되니	In the second year of Pekah the son of Remaliah king of Israel began Jotham the son of Uzziah king of Judah to reign.	In the second year of the reign of Pekah son of Remaliah over Israel, Jotham son of Uzziah became king of Judah.
2KI	15	33	위에 나아갈 때에 나이 이십오 세라 예루살렘에서 십육 년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 여루사라 사독의 딸이더라	Five and twenty years old was he when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Jerusha, the daughter of Zadok.	He was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years. His mother’s name was Jerusha daughter of Zadok.
2KI	15	34	요담이 그 부친 웃시야의 모든 행위대로 여호와 보시기에 정직히 행하였으나	And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord: he did according to all that his father Uzziah had done.	And he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, just as his father Uzziah had done.
2KI	15	35	오직 산당을 제하지 아니하였으므로 백성이 오히려 그 산당에서 제사를 드리며 분향하였더라 요담이 여호와의 전의 윗문을 건축하니라	Howbeit the high places were not removed: the people sacrificed and burned incense still in the high places. He built the higher gate of the house of the Lord.	Nevertheless, the high places were not taken away; the people continued sacrificing and burning incense there. Jotham rebuilt the Upper Gate of the house of the LORD.
2KI	15	36	요담의 남은 사적과 그 모든 행한 일은 유다 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?	As for the rest of the acts of Jotham, along with his accomplishments, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
2KI	15	37	그 때에 여호와께서 비로소 아람 왕 르신과 르말랴의 아들 베가를 보내어 유다를 치게 하셨더라	In those days the Lord began to send against Judah Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah.	(In those days the LORD began to send Rezin king of Aram and Pekah son of Remaliah against Judah.)
2KI	15	38	요담이 그 열조와 함께 자매 그 조상 다윗 성에 열조와 함께 장사되고 그 아들 아하스가 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And Jotham slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father: and Ahaz his son reigned in his stead.	And Jotham rested with his fathers and was buried with them in the City of David his father. And his son Ahaz reigned in his place.
2KI	16	1	르말랴의 아들 베가 십칠년에 유다 왕 요담의 아들 아하스가 왕이 되니	In the seventeenth year of Pekah the son of Remaliah Ahaz the son of Jotham king of Judah began to reign.	In the seventeenth year of Pekah son of Remaliah, Ahaz son of Jotham became king of Judah.
2KI	16	2	아하스가 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 이십 세라 예루살렘에서 십육 년을 치리하였으나 그 조상 다윗과 같지 아니하여 그 하나님 여호와 보시기에 정직히 행치 아니하고	Twenty years old was Ahaz when he began to reign, and reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem, and did not that which was right in the sight of the Lord his God, like David his father.	Ahaz was twenty years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years. And unlike David his father, he did not do what was right in the eyes of the LORD his God.
2KI	16	3	이스라엘 열왕의 길로 행하며 또 여호와께서 이스라엘 자손 앞에서 쫓아내신 이방 사람의 가증한 일을 본받아 자기 아들을 불 가운데로 지나가게 하며	But he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, yea, and made his son to pass through the fire, according to the abominations of the heathen, whom the Lord cast out from before the children of Israel.	Instead, he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel and even sacrificed his son in the fire, according to the abominations of the nations that the LORD had driven out before the Israelites.
2KI	16	4	또 산당과 작은 산 위와 모든 푸른 나무 아래서 제사를 드리며 분향하였더라	And he sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places, and on the hills, and under every green tree.	And he sacrificed and burned incense on the high places, on the hills, and under every green tree.
2KI	16	5	이 때에 아람 왕 르신과 이스라엘 왕 르말랴의 아들 베가가 예루살렘에 올라와서 싸우려 하여 아하스를 에워쌌으나 이기지 못하니라	Then Rezin king of Syria and Pekah son of Remaliah king of Israel came up to Jerusalem to war: and they besieged Ahaz, but could not overcome him.	Then Rezin king of Aram and Pekah son of Remaliah king of Israel came up to wage war against Jerusalem. They besieged Ahaz but could not overcome him.
2KI	16	6	당시에 아람 왕 르신이 엘랏을 회복하여 아람에 돌리고 유다 사람을 엘랏에서 쫓아내었고 아람 사람이 엘랏에 이르러 거하여 오늘날까지 이르렀더라	At that time Rezin king of Syria recovered Elath to Syria, and drave the Jews from Elath: and the Syrians came to Elath, and dwelt there unto this day.	At that time Rezin king of Aram recovered Elath for Aram, drove out the men of Judah, and sent the Edomites into Elath, where they live to this day.
2KI	16	7	아하스가 앗수르 왕 디글랏 빌레셀에게 사자를 보내어 이르되 나는 왕의 신복이요 왕의 아들이라 이제 아람 왕과 이스라엘 왕이 나를 치니 청컨대 올라와서 나를 그 손에서 구원하소서 하고	So Ahaz sent messengers to Tiglath–pileser king of Assyria, saying, I am thy servant and thy son: come up, and save me out of the hand of the king of Syria, and out of the hand of the king of Israel, which rise up against me.	So Ahaz sent messengers to Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, saying, “I am your servant and your son. Come up and save me from the hands of the kings of Aram and Israel, who are rising up against me.”
2KI	16	8	여호와의 전과 왕궁 곳간에 있는 은금을 취하여 앗수르 왕에게 예물로 보내었더니	And Ahaz took the silver and gold that was found in the house of the Lord, and in the treasures of the king’s house, and sent it for a present to the king of Assyria.	Ahaz also took the silver and gold found in the house of the LORD and in the treasuries of the king’s palace, and he sent it as a gift to the king of Assyria.
2KI	16	9	앗수르 왕이 그 청을 듣고 곧 올라와서 다메섹을 쳐서 취하여 그 백성을 사로잡아 길로 옮기고 또 르신을 죽였더라	And the king of Assyria hearkened unto him: for the king of Assyria went up against Damascus, and took it, and carried the people of it captive to Kir, and slew Rezin.	So the king of Assyria responded to him, marched up to Damascus, and captured it. He took its people to Kir as captives and put Rezin to death.
2KI	16	10	아하스 왕이 앗수르 왕 디글랏 빌레셀을 만나러 다메섹에 갔다가 거기 있는 단을 보고 드디어 그 구조와 제도의 식양을 그려 제사장 우리야에게 보내었더니	And king Ahaz went to Damascus to meet Tiglath–pileser king of Assyria, and saw an altar that was at Damascus: and king Ahaz sent to Urijah the priest the fashion of the altar, and the pattern of it, according to all the workmanship thereof.	Then King Ahaz went to Damascus to meet Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria. On seeing the altar in Damascus, King Ahaz sent Uriah the priest a model of the altar and complete plans for its construction.
2KI	16	11	아하스 왕이 다메섹에서 돌아오기 전에 제사장 우리야가 아하스 왕이 다메섹에서 보낸 모든 것대로 단을 만든지라	And Urijah the priest built an altar according to all that king Ahaz had sent from Damascus: so Urijah the priest made it against king Ahaz came from Damascus.	And Uriah the priest built the altar according to all the instructions King Ahaz had sent from Damascus, and he completed it by the time King Ahaz had returned.
2KI	16	12	왕이 다메섹에서 돌아와서 단을 보고 단 앞에 나아가 그 위에 제사를 드리되	And when the king was come from Damascus, the king saw the altar: and the king approached to the altar, and offered thereon.	When the king came back from Damascus and saw the altar, he approached it and presented offerings on it.
2KI	16	13	자기의 번제와 소제를 불사르고 또 전제를 붓고 수은제 짐승의 피를 단에 뿌리고	And he burnt his burnt offering and his meat offering, and poured his drink offering, and sprinkled the blood of his peace offerings, upon the altar.	He offered his burnt offering and his grain offering, poured out his drink offering, and sprinkled the blood of his peace offerings on the altar.
2KI	16	14	또 여호와의 앞 곧 전 앞에 있던 놋단을 옮기되 새 단과 여호와의 전 사이에서 옮겨다가 그 단 북편에 두니라	And he brought also the brasen altar, which was before the Lord, from the forefront of the house, from between the altar and the house of the Lord, and put it on the north side of the altar.	He also took the bronze altar that stood before the LORD from the front of the temple (between the new altar and the house of the LORD) and he put it on the north side of the new altar.
2KI	16	15	아하스 왕이 제사장 우리야에게 명하여 가로되 아침 번제와 저녁 소제와 왕의 번제와 그 소제와 모든 국민의 번제와 그 소제와 전제를 다 이 큰 단 위에 불사르고 또 번제물의 피와 다른 제물의 피를 다 그 위에 뿌리고 오직 놋단은 나의 물을 일에 쓰게 하라 하매	And king Ahaz commanded Urijah the priest, saying, Upon the great altar burn the morning burnt offering, and the evening meat offering, and the king’s burnt sacrifice, and his meat offering, with the burnt offering of all the people of the land, and their meat offering, and their drink offerings; and sprinkle upon it all the blood of the burnt offering, and all the blood of the sacrifice: and the brasen altar shall be for me to enquire by.	Then King Ahaz commanded Uriah the priest, “Offer on the great altar the morning burnt offering, the evening grain offering, and the king’s burnt offering and grain offering, as well as the burnt offerings, grain offerings, and drink offerings of all the people of the land. Sprinkle on the altar all the blood of the burnt offerings and sacrifices. But I will use the bronze altar to seek guidance.”
2KI	16	16	제사장 우리야가 아하스 왕의 모든 명대로 행하였더라	Thus did Urijah the priest, according to all that king Ahaz commanded.	So Uriah the priest did just as King Ahaz had commanded.
2KI	16	17	아하스 왕이 물두멍 받침의 옆판을 떼어내고 물두멍을 그 자리에서 옮기고 또 놋바다를 놋소 위에서 내려다가 돌판 위에 두며	And king Ahaz cut off the borders of the bases, and removed the laver from off them; and took down the sea from off the brasen oxen that were under it, and put it upon a pavement of stones.	King Ahaz also cut off the frames of the movable stands and removed the bronze basin from each of them. He took down the Sea from the bronze oxen that were under it and put it on a stone base.
2KI	16	18	또 안식일에 쓰기 위하여 성전에 건축한 낭실과 왕이 밖에서 들어가는 낭실을 앗수르 왕을 인하여 여호와의 전에 옮겨 세웠더라	And the covert for the sabbath that they had built in the house, and the king’s entry without, turned he from the house of the Lord for the king of Assyria.	And on account of the king of Assyria, he removed the Sabbath canopy they had built in the temple and closed the royal entryway outside the house of the LORD.
2KI	16	19	아하스의 그 남은 사적은 유다 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	Now the rest of the acts of Ahaz which he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?	As for the rest of the acts of Ahaz, along with his accomplishments, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
2KI	16	20	아하스가 그 열조와 함께 자매 다윗 성에 그 열조와 함께 장사되고 그 아들 히스기야가 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David: and Hezekiah his son reigned in his stead.	And Ahaz rested with his fathers and was buried with them in the City of David, and his son Hezekiah reigned in his place.
2KI	17	1	유다 왕 아하스 십이 년에 엘라의 아들 호세아가 사마리아에서 이스라엘 왕이 되어 구 년을 치리하며	In the twelfth year of Ahaz king of Judah began Hoshea the son of Elah to reign in Samaria over Israel nine years.	In the twelfth year of the reign of Ahaz over Judah, Hoshea son of Elah became king of Israel, and he reigned in Samaria nine years.
2KI	17	2	여호와 보시기에 악을 행하였으나 그 전 이스라엘 여러 왕들과 같이 하지는 아니하였더라	And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, but not as the kings of Israel that were before him.	And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, but not like the kings of Israel who preceded him.
2KI	17	3	앗수르 왕 살만에셀이 올라와서 호세아를 친고로 호세아가 신복하여 조공을 드리더니	Against him came up Shalmaneser king of Assyria; and Hoshea became his servant, and gave him presents.	Shalmaneser king of Assyria attacked him, and Hoshea became his vassal and paid him tribute.
2KI	17	4	저가 애굽 왕 소에게 사자들을 보내고 해마다 하던 대로 앗수르 왕에게 조공을 드리지 아니하매 앗수르 왕이 호세아의 배반함을 보고 저를 옥에 금고하여 두고	And the king of Assyria found conspiracy in Hoshea: for he had sent messengers to So king of Egypt, and brought no present to the king of Assyria, as he had done year by year: therefore the king of Assyria shut him up, and bound him in prison.	But the king of Assyria discovered that Hoshea had conspired to send envoys to King So of Egypt, and that he had not paid tribute to the king of Assyria as in previous years. Therefore the king of Assyria arrested Hoshea and put him in prison.
2KI	17	5	올라와서 그 온 땅에 두루 다니고 사마리아로 올라와서 삼 년을 에워쌌더라	Then the king of Assyria came up throughout all the land, and went up to Samaria, and besieged it three years.	Then the king of Assyria invaded the whole land, marched up to Samaria, and besieged it for three years.
2KI	17	6	호세아 구년에 앗수르 왕이 사마리아를 취하고 이스라엘 사람을 사로잡아 앗수르로 끌어다가 할라와 고산 하볼 하숫가와 메대 사람의 여러 고을에 두었더라	In the ninth year of Hoshea the king of Assyria took Samaria, and carried Israel away into Assyria, and placed them in Halah and in Habor by the river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes.	In the ninth year of Hoshea, the king of Assyria captured Samaria and carried away the Israelites to Assyria, where he settled them in Halah, in Gozan by the Habor River, and in the cities of the Medes.
2KI	17	7	이 일은 이스라엘 자손이 자기를 애굽에서 인도하여 내사 애굽 왕 바로의 손에서 벗어나게 하신 그 하나님 여호와께 죄를 범하고 또 다른 신들을 경외하며	For so it was, that the children of Israel had sinned against the Lord their God, which had brought them up out of the land of Egypt, from under the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and had feared other gods,	All this happened because the people of Israel had sinned against the LORD their God, who had brought them out of the land of Egypt from under the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt. They had worshiped other gods
2KI	17	8	여호와께서 이스라엘 자손 앞에서 쫓아내신 이방 사람의 규례와 이스라엘 여러 왕의 세운 율례를 행하였음이라	And walked in the statutes of the heathen, whom the Lord cast out from before the children of Israel, and of the kings of Israel, which they had made.	and walked in the customs of the nations that the LORD had driven out before the Israelites, as well as in the practices introduced by the kings of Israel.
2KI	17	9	이스라엘 자손이 가만히 불의를 행하여 그 하나님 여호와를 배역하여 모든 성읍에 망대로부터 견고한 성에 이르도록 산당을 세우고	And the children of Israel did secretly those things that were not right against the Lord their God, and they built them high places in all their cities, from the tower of the watchmen to the fenced city.	The Israelites secretly did things against the LORD their God that were not right. From watchtower to fortified city, they built high places in all their cities.
2KI	17	10	모든 산 위에와 모든 푸른 나무 아래에 목상과 아세라상을 세우고	And they set them up images and groves in every high hill, and under every green tree:	They set up for themselves sacred pillars and Asherah poles on every high hill and under every green tree.
2KI	17	11	또 여호와께서 저희 앞에서 물리치신 이방 사람 같이 그곳 모든 산당에서 분향하며 또 악을 행하여 여호와를 격노케 하였으며	And there they burnt incense in all the high places, as did the heathen whom the Lord carried away before them; and wrought wicked things to provoke the Lord to anger:	They burned incense on all the high places like the nations that the LORD had driven out before them. They did wicked things, provoking the LORD to anger.
2KI	17	12	또 우상을 섬겼으니 이는 여호와께서 행치 말라 명하신 일이라	For they served idols, whereof the Lord had said unto them, Ye shall not do this thing.	They served idols, although the LORD had told them, “You shall not do this thing.”
2KI	17	13	여호와께서 각 선지자와 각 선견자로 이스라엘과 유다를 경계하여 이르시기를 너희는 돌이켜 너희 악한 길에서 떠나 나의 명령과 율례를 지키되 내가 너희 열조에게 명하고 또 나의 종 선지자들로 너희에게 전한 모든 율법대로 행하라 하셨으나	Yet the Lord testified against Israel, and against Judah, by all the prophets, and by all the seers, saying, Turn ye from your evil ways, and keep my commandments and my statutes, according to all the law which I commanded your fathers, and which I sent to you by my servants the prophets.	Yet through all His prophets and seers, the LORD warned Israel and Judah, saying, “Turn from your wicked ways and keep My commandments and statutes, according to the entire Law that I commanded your fathers and delivered to you through My servants the prophets.”
2KI	17	14	저희가 듣지 아니하고 그 목을 굳게 하기를 그 하나님 여호와를 믿지 아니하던 저희 열조의 목 같이 하여	Notwithstanding they would not hear, but hardened their necks, like to the neck of their fathers, that did not believe in the Lord their God.	But they would not listen, and they stiffened their necks like their fathers, who did not believe the LORD their God.
2KI	17	15	여호와의 율례와 여호와께서 그 열조로 더불어 세우신 언약과 경계하신 말씀을 버리고 허무한 것을 좇아 허망하며 또 여호와께서 명하사 본받지 말라 하신 사면 이방 사람을 본받아	And they rejected his statutes, and his covenant that he made with their fathers, and his testimonies which he testified against them; and they followed vanity, and became vain, and went after the heathen that were round about them, concerning whom the Lord had charged them, that they should not do like them.	They rejected His statutes and the covenant He had made with their fathers, as well as the decrees He had given them. They pursued worthless idols and themselves became worthless, going after the surrounding nations that the LORD had commanded them not to imitate.
2KI	17	16	그 하나님 여호와의 모든 명령을 버리고 자기를 위하여 두 송아지 형상을 부어 만들고 또 아세라 목상을 만들고 하늘의 일월성신을 숭배하며 또 바알을 섬기고	And they left all the commandments of the Lord their God, and made them molten images, even two calves, and made a grove, and worshipped all the host of heaven, and served Baal.	They abandoned all the commandments of the LORD their God and made for themselves two cast idols of calves and an Asherah pole. They bowed down to all the host of heaven and served Baal.
2KI	17	17	또 자기 자녀를 불 가운데로 지나가게 하며 복술과 사술을 행하고 스스로 팔려 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하여 그 노를 격발케 하였으므로	And they caused their sons and their daughters to pass through the fire, and used divination and enchantments, and sold themselves to do evil in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger.	They sacrificed their sons and daughters in the fire and practiced divination and soothsaying. They devoted themselves to doing evil in the sight of the LORD, provoking Him to anger.
2KI	17	18	여호와께서 이스라엘을 심히 노하사 그 앞에서 제하시니 유다 지파 외에는 남은 자가 없으니라	Therefore the Lord was very angry with Israel, and removed them out of his sight: there was none left but the tribe of Judah only.	So the LORD was very angry with Israel, and He removed them from His presence. Only the tribe of Judah remained,
2KI	17	19	유다도 그 하나님 여호와의 명령을 지키지 아니하고 이스라엘 사람의 세운 율례를 행하였으므로	Also Judah kept not the commandments of the Lord their God, but walked in the statutes of Israel which they made.	and even Judah did not keep the commandments of the LORD their God, but lived according to the customs Israel had introduced.
2KI	17	20	여호와께서 이스라엘의 온 족속을 버리사 괴롭게 하시며 노략꾼의 손에 붙이시고 심지어 그 앞에서 쫓아내시니라	And the Lord rejected all the seed of Israel, and afflicted them, and delivered them into the hand of spoilers, until he had cast them out of his sight.	So the LORD rejected all the descendants of Israel. He afflicted them and delivered them into the hands of plunderers, until He had banished them from His presence.
2KI	17	21	이스라엘을 다윗의 집에서 찢어 나누시매 저희가 느밧의 아들 여로보암으로 왕을 삼았더니 여로보암이 이스라엘을 몰아 여호와를 떠나고 큰 죄를 범하게 하매	For he rent Israel from the house of David; and they made Jeroboam the son of Nebat king: and Jeroboam drave Israel from following the Lord, and made them sin a great sin.	When the LORD had torn Israel away from the house of David, they made Jeroboam son of Nebat king, and Jeroboam led Israel away from following the LORD and caused them to commit a great sin.
2KI	17	22	이스라엘 자손이 여로보암의 행한 모든 죄를 따라 행하여 떠나지 아니하므로	For the children of Israel walked in all the sins of Jeroboam which he did; they departed not from them;	The Israelites persisted in all the sins that Jeroboam had committed and did not turn away from them.
2KI	17	23	여호와께서 그 종 모든 선지자로 하신 말씀대로 심지어 이스라엘을 그 앞에서 제하신지라 이스라엘이 고향에서 앗수르에 사로잡혀 가서 오늘까지 미쳤더라	Until the Lord removed Israel out of his sight, as he had said by all his servants the prophets. So was Israel carried away out of their own land to Assyria unto this day.	Finally, the LORD removed Israel from His presence, as He had declared through all His servants the prophets. So Israel was exiled from their homeland into Assyria, where they are to this day.
2KI	17	24	앗수르 왕이 바벨론과 구다와 아와와 하맛과 스발와임에서 사람을 옮겨다가 이스라엘 자손을 대신하여 사마리아 여러 성읍에 두매 저희가 사마리아를 차지하여 그 여러 성읍에 거하니라	And the king of Assyria brought men from Babylon, and from Cuthah, and from Ava, and from Hamath, and from Sepharvaim, and placed them in the cities of Samaria instead of the children of Israel: and they possessed Samaria, and dwelt in the cities thereof.	Then the king of Assyria brought people from Babylon, Cuthah, Avva, Hamath, and Sepharvaim and settled them in the towns of Samaria to replace the Israelites. They took possession of Samaria and lived in its towns.
2KI	17	25	저희가 처음으로 거기 거할 때에 여호와를 경외치 아니한고로 여호와께서 사자들을 그 가운데 보내시매 몇 사람을 죽인지라	And so it was at the beginning of their dwelling there, that they feared not the Lord: therefore the Lord sent lions among them, which slew some of them.	Now when the settlers first lived there, they did not worship the LORD, so He sent lions among them, which killed some of them.
2KI	17	26	그러므로 혹이 앗수르 왕에게 고하여 가로되 왕께서 사마리아 여러 성읍에 옮겨 거하게 하신 열방 사람이 그 땅 신의 법을 알지 못하므로 그 신이 사자들을 저희 가운데 보내매 저희를 죽였사오니 이는 저희가 그 땅 신의 법을 알지 못함이니이다	Wherefore they spake to the king of Assyria, saying, The nations which thou hast removed, and placed in the cities of Samaria, know not the manner of the God of the land: therefore he hath sent lions among them, and, behold, they slay them, because they know not the manner of the God of the land.	So they spoke to the king of Assyria, saying, “The peoples that you have removed and placed in the cities of Samaria do not know the requirements of the God of the land. Because of this, He has sent lions among them, which are indeed killing them off.”
2KI	17	27	앗수르 왕이 명하여 가로되 너희는 그곳에서 사로잡아 온 제사장 하나를 그곳으로 데려가되 저로 그곳에 가서 거하며 그 땅 신의 법으로 무리에게 가르치게 하라	Then the king of Assyria commanded, saying, Carry thither one of the priests whom ye brought from thence; and let them go and dwell there, and let him teach them the manner of the God of the land.	Then the king of Assyria commanded: “Send back one of the priests you carried off from Samaria, and have him go back to live there and teach the requirements of the God of the land.”
2KI	17	28	이에 사마리아에서 사로잡혀 간 제사장 중 하나가 와서 벧엘에 거하며 백성에게 어떻게 여호와 경외할 것을 가르쳤더라	Then one of the priests whom they had carried away from Samaria came and dwelt in Beth–el, and taught them how they should fear the Lord.	Thus one of the priests they had carried away came and lived in Bethel, and he began to teach them how they should worship the LORD.
2KI	17	29	그러나 각 민족이 각기 자기의 신상들을 만들어 사마리아 사람의 지은 여러 산당에 두되 각 민족이 자기의 거한 성읍에서 그렇게 하여	Howbeit every nation made gods of their own, and put them in the houses of the high places which the Samaritans had made, every nation in their cities wherein they dwelt.	Nevertheless, the people of each nation continued to make their own gods in the cities where they had settled, and they set them up in the shrines that the people of Samaria had made on the high places.
2KI	17	30	바벨론 사람들은 숙곳브놋을 만들었고 굿 사람들은 네르갈을 만들었고 하맛 사람들은 아시마를 만들었고	And the men of Babylon made Succoth–benoth, and the men of Cuth made Nergal, and the men of Hamath made Ashima,	The men of Babylon made Succoth-benoth, the men of Cuth made Nergal, the men of Hamath made Ashima,
2KI	17	31	아와 사람들은 닙하스와 다르닥을 만들었고 스발와임 사람들은 그 자녀를 불살라 그 신 아드람멜렉과 아남멜렉에게 드렸으며	And the Avites made Nibhaz and Tartak, and the Sepharvites burnt their children in fire to Adrammelech and Anammelech, the gods of Sepharvaim.	the Avvites made Nibhaz and Tartak, and the Sepharvites burned their children in the fire to Adrammelech and Anammelech the gods of Sepharvaim.
2KI	17	32	저희가 또 여호와를 경외하여 자기 중에서 사람을 산당의 제사장으로 택하여 그 산당에서 자기를 위하여 제사를 드리게 하니라	So they feared the Lord, and made unto themselves of the lowest of them priests of the high places, which sacrificed for them in the houses of the high places.	So the new residents worshiped the LORD, but they also appointed for themselves priests of all sorts to serve in the shrines of the high places.
2KI	17	33	이와 같이 저희가 여호와도 경외하고 또한 어디서부터 옮겨왔든지 그 민족의 풍속대로 자기의 신들도 섬겼더라	They feared the Lord, and served their own gods, after the manner of the nations whom they carried away from thence.	They worshiped the LORD, but they also served their own gods according to the customs of the nations from which they had been carried away.
2KI	17	34	저희가 오늘까지 이전 풍속대로 행하여 여호와를 경외치 아니하며 또 여호와께서 이스라엘이라 이름을 주신 야곱의 자손에게 명하신 율례와 법도와 율법과 계명을 준행치 아니하는도다	Unto this day they do after the former manners: they fear not the Lord, neither do they after their statutes, or after their ordinances, or after the law and commandment which the Lord commanded the children of Jacob, whom he named Israel;	To this day they are still practicing their former customs. None of them worship the LORD or observe the statutes, ordinances, laws, and commandments that the LORD gave the descendants of Jacob, whom He named Israel.
2KI	17	35	옛적에 여호와께서 야곱의 자손에게 언약을 세우시고 저희에게 명하여 가라사대 너희는 다른 신을 경외하지 말며 그를 숭배하지 말며 그를 섬기지 말며 그에게 제사하지 말고	With whom the Lord had made a covenant, and charged them, saying, Ye shall not fear other gods, nor bow yourselves to them, nor serve them, nor sacrifice to them:	For the LORD had made a covenant with the Israelites and commanded them, “Do not worship other gods or bow down to them; do not serve them or sacrifice to them.
2KI	17	36	오직 큰 능력과 편 팔로 너희를 애굽에서 인도하여 낸 여호와만 너희가 경외하여 그를 숭배하며 그에게 제사를 드릴 것이며	But the Lord, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt with great power and a stretched out arm, him shall ye fear, and him shall ye worship, and to him shall ye do sacrifice.	Instead, worship the LORD, who brought you out of the land of Egypt with great power and an outstretched arm. You are to bow down to Him and offer sacrifices to Him.
2KI	17	37	또 여호와가 너희를 위하여 기록한 율례와 법도와 율법과 계명을 너희가 지켜 영원히 행하고 다른 신들을 경외치 말며	And the statutes, and the ordinances, and the law, and the commandment, which he wrote for you, ye shall observe to do for evermore; and ye shall not fear other gods.	And you must always be careful to observe the statutes, ordinances, laws, and commandments He wrote for you. Do not worship other gods.
2KI	17	38	또 내가 너희와 세운 언약을 잊지 말며 다른 신들을 경외치 말고	And the covenant that I have made with you ye shall not forget; neither shall ye fear other gods.	Do not forget the covenant I have made with you. Do not worship other gods,
2KI	17	39	오직 너희 하나님 여호와를 경외하라 그가 너희를 모든 원수의 손에서 건져내리라 하셨으나	But the Lord your God ye shall fear; and he shall deliver you out of the hand of all your enemies.	but worship the LORD your God, and He will deliver you from the hands of all your enemies.”
2KI	17	40	그러나 저희가 듣지 아니하고 오히려 이전 풍속대로 행하였느니라	Howbeit they did not hearken, but they did after their former manner.	But they would not listen, and they persisted in their former customs.
2KI	17	41	그 여러 민족이 여호와를 경외하고 또 그 아로새긴 우상을 섬기더니 그 자자 손손이 그 열조의 행한 것을 좇아 오늘까지 그대로 하니라	So these nations feared the Lord, and served their graven images, both their children, and their children’s children: as did their fathers, so do they unto this day.	So these nations worshiped the LORD but also served their idols, and to this day their children and grandchildren continue to do as their fathers did.
2KI	18	1	이스라엘 왕 엘라의 아들 호세아 삼년에 유다 왕 아하스의 아들 히스기야가 왕이 되니	Now it came to pass in the third year of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel, that Hezekiah the son of Ahaz king of Judah began to reign.	In the third year of the reign of Hoshea son of Elah over Israel, Hezekiah son of Ahaz became king of Judah.
2KI	18	2	위에 나아갈 때에 나이 이십오 세라 예루살렘에서 이십구 년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 아비라 스가리야의 딸이더라	Twenty and five years old was he when he began to reign; and he reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name also was Abi, the daughter of Zachariah.	He was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem twenty-nine years. His mother’s name was Abi, the daughter of Zechariah.
2KI	18	3	히스기야가 그 조상 다윗의 모든 행위와 같이 여호와 보시기에 정직히 행하여	And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that David his father did.	And he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, just as his father David had done.
2KI	18	4	여러 산당을 제하며 주상을 깨뜨리며 아세라 목상을 찍으며 모세가 만들었던 놋뱀을 이스라엘 자손이 이때까지 향하여 분향하므로 그것을 부수고 느후스단이라 일컬었더라	He removed the high places, and brake the images, and cut down the groves, and brake in pieces the brasen serpent that Moses had made: for unto those days the children of Israel did burn incense to it: and he called it Nehushtan.	He removed the high places, shattered the sacred pillars, and cut down the Asherah poles. He also demolished the bronze snake called Nehushtan that Moses had made, for up to that time the Israelites had burned incense to it.
2KI	18	5	히스기야가 이스라엘 하나님 여호와를 의지하였는데 그의 전후 유다 여러 왕 중에 그러한 자가 없었으니	He trusted in the Lord God of Israel; so that after him was none like him among all the kings of Judah, nor any that were before him.	Hezekiah trusted in the LORD, the God of Israel. No king of Judah was like him, either before him or after him.
2KI	18	6	곧 저가 여호와께 연합하여 떠나지 아니하고 여호와께서 모세에게 명하신 계명을 지켰더라	For he clave to the Lord, and departed not from following him, but kept his commandments, which the Lord commanded Moses.	He remained faithful to the LORD and did not turn from following Him; he kept the commandments that the LORD had given Moses.
2KI	18	7	여호와께서 저와 함께 하시매 저가 어디로 가든지 형통하였더라 저가 앗수르 왕을 배척하고 섬기지 아니하였고	And the Lord was with him; and he prospered whithersoever he went forth: and he rebelled against the king of Assyria, and served him not.	And the LORD was with Hezekiah, and he prospered wherever he went. He rebelled against the king of Assyria and refused to serve him.
2KI	18	8	블레셋 사람을 쳐서 가사와 그 사방에 이르고 망대에서부터 견고한 성까지 이르렀더라	He smote the Philistines, even unto Gaza, and the borders thereof, from the tower of the watchmen to the fenced city.	He defeated the Philistines as far as Gaza and its borders, from watchtower to fortified city.
2KI	18	9	히스기야 왕 사년 곧 이스라엘 왕 엘라의 아들 호세아 칠년에 앗수르 왕 살만에셀이 사마리아로 올라와서 에워쌌더라	And it came to pass in the fourth year of king Hezekiah, which was the seventh year of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel, that Shalmaneser king of Assyria came up against Samaria, and besieged it.	In the fourth year of Hezekiah’s reign, which was the seventh year of the reign of Hoshea son of Elah over Israel, Shalmaneser king of Assyria marched against Samaria and besieged it.
2KI	18	10	삼 년 후에 그 성이 함락되니 곧 히스기야의 육년이요 이스라엘 왕 호세아의 구년이라 사마리아가 함락되매	And at the end of three years they took it: even in the sixth year of Hezekiah, that is the ninth year of Hoshea king of Israel, Samaria was taken.	And at the end of three years, the Assyrians captured it. So Samaria was captured in the sixth year of Hezekiah, which was the ninth year of Hoshea king of Israel.
2KI	18	11	앗수르 왕이 이스라엘을 사로잡아 앗수르에 이르러 할라와 고산 하볼 하숫가와 메대 사람의 여러 성읍에 두었으니	And the king of Assyria did carry away Israel unto Assyria, and put them in Halah and in Habor by the river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes:	The king of Assyria exiled the Israelites to Assyria and settled them in Halah, in Gozan by the Habor River, and in the cities of the Medes.
2KI	18	12	이는 저희가 그 하나님 여호와의 말씀을 준행치 아니하고 그 언약을 배반하고 여호와의 종 모세의 모든 명한 것을 거스려 듣지도 아니하며 행치도 아니하였음이더라	Because they obeyed not the voice of the Lord their God, but transgressed his covenant, and all that Moses the servant of the Lord commanded, and would not hear them, nor do them.	This happened because they did not listen to the voice of the LORD their God, but violated His covenant—all that Moses the servant of the LORD had commanded—and would neither listen nor obey.
2KI	18	13	히스기야 왕 십사년에 앗수르 왕 산헤립이 올라와서 유다 모든 견고한 성읍들을 쳐서 취하매	Now in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah did Sennacherib king of Assyria come up against all the fenced cities of Judah, and took them.	In the fourteenth year of Hezekiah’s reign, Sennacherib king of Assyria attacked and captured all the fortified cities of Judah.
2KI	18	14	유다 왕 히스기야가 라기스로 보내어 앗수르 왕에게 이르되 내가 범죄하였나이다 나를 떠나 돌아가소서 왕이 내게 지우시는 것을 내가 당하리이다 하였더니 앗수르 왕이 곧 은 삼백 달란트와 금 삼십 달란트를 정하여 유다 왕 히스기야로 내게 한지라	And Hezekiah king of Judah sent to the king of Assyria to Lachish, saying, I have offended; return from me: that which thou puttest on me will I bear. And the king of Assyria appointed unto Hezekiah king of Judah three hundred talents of silver and thirty talents of gold.	So Hezekiah king of Judah sent word to the king of Assyria at Lachish, saying, “I have done wrong; withdraw from me, and I will pay whatever you demand from me.” And the king of Assyria exacted from Hezekiah king of Judah three hundred talents of silver and thirty talents of gold.
2KI	18	15	히스기야가 이에 여호와의 전과 왕궁 곳간에 있는 은을 다 주었고	And Hezekiah gave him all the silver that was found in the house of the Lord, and in the treasures of the king’s house.	Hezekiah gave him all the silver that was found in the house of the LORD and in the treasuries of the royal palace.
2KI	18	16	또 그 때에 유다 왕 히스기야가 여호와의 전 문의 금과 자기가 모든 기둥에 입힌 금을 벗겨 모두 앗수르 왕에게 주었더라	At that time did Hezekiah cut off the gold from the doors of the temple of the Lord, and from the pillars which Hezekiah king of Judah had overlaid, and gave it to the king of Assyria.	At that time Hezekiah stripped the gold with which he had plated the doors and doorposts of the temple of the LORD, and he gave it to the king of Assyria.
2KI	18	17	앗수르 왕이 다르단과 랍사리스와 랍사게로 대군을 거느리고 라기스에서부터 예루살렘으로 가서 히스기야 왕을 치게 하매 저희가 예루살렘으로 올라가니라 저희가 올라가서 윗못 수도 곁 곧 세탁자의 밭에 있는 큰 길에 이르러 서니라	And the king of Assyria sent Tartan and Rabsaris and Rab–shakeh from Lachish to king Hezekiah with a great host against Jerusalem. And they went up and came to Jerusalem. And when they were come up, they came and stood by the conduit of the upper pool, which is in the highway of the fuller’s field.	Nevertheless, the king of Assyria sent the Tartan, the Rabsaris, and the Rabshakeh, along with a great army, from Lachish to King Hezekiah at Jerusalem. They advanced up to Jerusalem and stationed themselves by the aqueduct of the upper pool, on the road to the Launderer’s Field.
2KI	18	18	저희가 왕을 부르매 힐기야의 아들 궁내대신 엘리야김과 서기관 셉나와 아삽의 아들 사관 요아가 저에게 나가니	And when they had called to the king, there came out to them Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, which was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph the recorder.	Then they called for the king; and Eliakim son of Hilkiah the palace administrator, Shebnah the scribe, and Joah son of Asaph the recorder, went out to them.
2KI	18	19	랍사게가 저희에게 이르되 너희는 히스기야에게 고하라 대왕 앗수르 왕의 말씀이 너의 의뢰하는 이 의뢰가 무엇이냐	And Rab–shakeh said unto them, Speak ye now to Hezekiah, Thus saith the great king, the king of Assyria, What confidence is this wherein thou trustest?	The Rabshakeh said to them, “Tell Hezekiah that this is what the great king, the king of Assyria, says: What is the basis of this confidence of yours?
2KI	18	20	네가 싸울만한 계교와 용력이 있다고 한다마는 이는 입에 붙은 말뿐이라 네가 이제 누구를 의뢰하고 나를 반역하였느냐	Thou sayest, (but they are but vain words,) I have counsel and strength for the war. Now on whom dost thou trust, that thou rebellest against me?	You claim to have a strategy and strength for war, but these are empty words. In whom are you now trusting, that you have rebelled against me?
2KI	18	21	이제 네가 저 상한 갈대 지팡이 애굽을 의뢰하도다 사람이 그것을 의지하면 그 손에 찔려 들어갈지라 애굽 왕 바로는 무릇 의뢰하는 자에게 이와 같으니라	Now, behold, thou trustest upon the staff of this bruised reed, even upon Egypt, on which if a man lean, it will go into his hand, and pierce it: so is Pharaoh king of Egypt unto all that trust on him.	Look now, you are trusting in Egypt, that splintered reed of a staff that will pierce the hand of anyone who leans on it. Such is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all who trust in him.
2KI	18	22	너희가 혹시 내게 이르기를 우리는 우리 하나님 여호와를 의뢰하노라 하리라마는 히스기야가 여호와의 산당과 제단을 제하고 유다와 예루살렘 사람에게 명하기를 예루살렘 이 단 앞에서만 숭배하라 하지 아니하였느냐 하셨나니	But if ye say unto me, We trust in the Lord our God: is not that he, whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath taken away, and hath said to Judah and Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this altar in Jerusalem?	But if you say to me, ‘We trust in the LORD our God,’ is He not the One whose high places and altars Hezekiah has removed, saying to Judah and Jerusalem: ‘You must worship before this altar in Jerusalem’?
2KI	18	23	이제 너는 내 주 앗수르 왕과 내기하라 네가 만일 그 말 탈 사람을 낼 수 있다면 나는 네게 말 이천 필을 주리라	Now therefore, I pray thee, give pledges to my lord the king of Assyria, and I will deliver thee two thousand horses, if thou be able on thy part to set riders upon them.	Now, therefore, make a bargain with my master, the king of Assyria. I will give you two thousand horses—if you can put riders on them!
2KI	18	24	네가 어찌 내 주의 신복 중 지극히 작은 장관 하나인들 물리치며 애굽을 의뢰하고 그 병거와 기병을 얻을듯하냐	How then wilt thou turn away the face of one captain of the least of my master’s servants, and put thy trust on Egypt for chariots and for horsemen?	For how can you repel a single officer among the least of my master’s servants when you depend on Egypt for chariots and horsemen?
2KI	18	25	내가 어찌 여호와의 뜻이 아니고야 이제 이곳을 멸하러 올라왔겠느냐 여호와께서 전에 내게 이르시기를 이 땅으로 올라와서 쳐서 멸하라 하셨느니라	Am I now come up without the Lord against this place to destroy it? The Lord said to me, Go up against this land, and destroy it.	So now, was it apart from the LORD that I have come up against this place to destroy it? The LORD Himself said to me, ‘Go up against this land and destroy it.’”
2KI	18	26	힐기야의 아들 엘리야김과 셉나와 요아가 랍사게에게 이르되 우리가 알아듣겠사오니 청컨대 아람 방언으로 당신의 종들에게 말씀하시고 성 위에 있는 백성의 듣는데 유다 방언으로 우리에게 말씀하지 마옵소서	Then said Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, and Shebna, and Joah, unto Rab–shakeh, Speak, I pray thee, to thy servants in the Syrian language; for we understand it: and talk not with us in the Jews’ language in the ears of the people that are on the wall.	Then Eliakim son of Hilkiah, along with Shebnah and Joah, said to the Rabshakeh, “Please speak to your servants in Aramaic, since we understand it. Do not speak with us in Hebrew in the hearing of the people on the wall.”
2KI	18	27	랍사게가 저에게 이르되 내 주께서 네 주와 네게만 이 말을 하라고 나를 보내신 것이냐 성 위에 앉은 사람들로도 너희와 함께 자기의 대변을 먹게 하고 자기의 소변을 마시게 하신 것이 아니냐 하고	But Rab–shakeh said unto them, Hath my master sent me to thy master, and to thee, to speak these words? hath he not sent me to the men which sit on the wall, that they may eat their own dung, and drink their own piss with you?	But the Rabshakeh replied, “Has my master sent me to speak these words only to you and your master, and not to the men sitting on the wall, who are destined with you to eat their own dung and drink their own urine?”
2KI	18	28	랍사게가 드디어 일어서서 유다 방언으로 크게 소리질러 불러 가로되 너희는 대왕 앗수르 왕의 말씀을 들으라	Then Rab–shakeh stood and cried with a loud voice in the Jews’ language, and spake, saying, Hear the word of the great king, the king of Assyria:	Then the Rabshakeh stood and called out loudly in Hebrew: “Hear the word of the great king, the king of Assyria!
2KI	18	29	왕의 말씀이 너희는 히스기야에게 속지 말라 저가 너희를 내 손에서 건져내지 못하리라	Thus saith the king, Let not Hezekiah deceive you: for he shall not be able to deliver you out of his hand:	This is what the king says: Do not let Hezekiah deceive you; he cannot deliver you from my hand.
2KI	18	30	또한 히스기야가 너희로 여호와를 의뢰하라 함을 듣지 말라 저가 이르기를 여호와께서 정녕 우리를 건지실지라 이 성이 앗수르 왕의 손에 함락되지 않게 하시리라 할지라도	Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the Lord, saying, The Lord will surely deliver us, and this city shall not be delivered into the hand of the king of Assyria.	Do not let Hezekiah persuade you to trust in the LORD when he says, ‘The LORD will surely deliver us; this city will not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.’
2KI	18	31	너희는 히스기야의 말을 듣지 말라 앗수르 왕의 말씀이 너희는 내게 항복하고 내게로 나아오라 그리하고 너희는 각각 그 포도와 무화과를 먹고 또한 각각 자기의 우물의 물을 마시라	Hearken not to Hezekiah: for thus saith the king of Assyria, Make an agreement with me by a present, and come out to me, and then eat ye every man of his own vine, and every one of his fig tree, and drink ye every one the waters of his cistern:	Do not listen to Hezekiah, for this is what the king of Assyria says: Make peace with me and come out to me. Then every one of you will eat from his own vine and his own fig tree, and drink water from his own cistern,
2KI	18	32	내가 장차 와서 너희를 한 지방으로 옮기리니 그곳은 너희 본토와 같은 지방 곧 곡식과 포도주가 있는 지방이요 떡과 포도원이 있는 지방이요 기름 나는 감람과 꿀이 있는 지방이라 너희가 살고 죽지 아니하리라 히스기야가 너희를 면려하여 이르기를 여호와께서 우리를 건지시리라 하여도 듣지 말라	Until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a land of bread and vineyards, a land of oil olive and of honey, that ye may live, and not die: and hearken not unto Hezekiah, when he persuadeth you, saying, The Lord will deliver us.	until I come and take you away to a land like your own—a land of grain and new wine, a land of bread and vineyards, a land of olive trees and honey—so that you may live and not die. But do not listen to Hezekiah, for he misleads you when he says, ‘The LORD will deliver us.’
2KI	18	33	열국의 신들 중에 그 땅을 앗수르 왕의 손에서 건진 자가 있느냐	Hath any of the gods of the nations delivered at all his land out of the hand of the king of Assyria?	Has the god of any nation ever delivered his land from the hand of the king of Assyria?
2KI	18	34	하맛과 아르밧의 신들이 어디 있으며 스발와임과 헤나와 아와의 신들이 어디 있느냐 그들이 사마리아를 내 손에서 건졌느냐	Where are the gods of Hamath, and of Arpad? where are the gods of Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivah? have they delivered Samaria out of mine hand?	Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivvah? Have they delivered Samaria from my hand?
2KI	18	35	열국의 모든 신 중에 누가 그 땅을 내 손에서 건졌기에 여호와가 예루살렘을 내 손에서 능히 건지겠느냐 하셨느니라	Who are they among all the gods of the countries, that have delivered their country out of mine hand, that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem out of mine hand?	Who among all the gods of these lands has delivered his land from my hand? How then can the LORD deliver Jerusalem from my hand?”
2KI	18	36	그러나 백성이 잠잠하고 한 말도 대답지 아니하니 이는 왕이 명하여 대답하지 말라 하였음이라	But the people held their peace, and answered him not a word: for the king’s commandment was, saying, Answer him not.	But the people remained silent and did not answer a word, for Hezekiah had commanded, “Do not answer him.”
2KI	18	37	이에 힐기야의 아들 궁내대신 엘리야김과 서기관 셉나와 아삽의 아들 사관 요아가 그 옷을 찢고 히스기야에게 나아가서 랍사게의 말을 고하니라	Then came Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, which was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph the recorder, to Hezekiah with their clothes rent, and told him the words of Rab–shakeh.	Then Hilkiah’s son Eliakim the palace administrator, Shebna the scribe, and Asaph’s son Joah the recorder came to Hezekiah with their clothes torn, and they relayed to him the words of the Rabshakeh.
2KI	19	1	히스기야 왕이 듣고 그 옷을 찢고 굵은 베를 입고 여호와의 전에 들어가서	And it came to pass, when king Hezekiah heard it, that he rent his clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the house of the Lord.	On hearing this report, King Hezekiah tore his clothes, put on sackcloth, and entered the house of the LORD.
2KI	19	2	궁내대신 엘리야김과 서기관 셉나와 제사장 중 장로들에게 굵은 베를 입혀서 아모스의 아들 선지자 이사야에게로 보내매	And he sent Eliakim, which was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, to Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz.	And he sent Eliakim the palace administrator, Shebna the scribe, and the leading priests, all wearing sackcloth, to the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz
2KI	19	3	저희가 이사야에게 이르되 히스기야의 말씀이 오늘은 곤란과 책벌과 능욕의 날이라 아이가 임산하였으나 해산할 힘이 없도다	And they said unto him, Thus saith Hezekiah, This day is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and blasphemy: for the children are come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.	to tell him, “This is what Hezekiah says: Today is a day of distress, rebuke, and disgrace; for children have come to the point of birth, but there is no strength to deliver them.
2KI	19	4	랍사게가 그 주 앗수르 왕의 보냄을 받고 와서 사신 하나님을 훼방하였으니 당신의 하나님 여호와께서 혹시 저의 말을 들으셨을지라 당신의 하나님 여호와께서 그 들으신 말을 인하여 꾸짖으실듯하니 당신은 이 남아 있는 자를 위하여 기도하소서 하더이다	It may be the Lord thy God will hear all the words of Rab–shakeh, whom the king of Assyria his master hath sent to reproach the living God; and will reprove the words which the Lord thy God hath heard: wherefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that are left.	Perhaps the LORD your God will hear all the words of the Rabshakeh, whom his master the king of Assyria has sent to defy the living God, and He will rebuke him for the words that the LORD your God has heard. Therefore lift up a prayer for the remnant that still survives.”
2KI	19	5	이와 같이 히스기야 왕의 신복이 이사야에게 나아가니	So the servants of king Hezekiah came to Isaiah.	So the servants of King Hezekiah went to Isaiah,
2KI	19	6	이사야가 저희에게 이르되 너희는 너희 주에게 이렇게 고하라 여호와의 말씀이 너는 앗수르 왕의 신복에게 들은바 나를 능욕하는 말을 인하여 두려워하지 말라	And Isaiah said unto them, Thus shall ye say to your master, Thus saith the Lord, Be not afraid of the words which thou hast heard, with which the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me.	who replied, “Tell your master that this is what the LORD says: ‘Do not be afraid of the words you have heard, with which the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed Me.
2KI	19	7	내가 한 영을 저의 속에 두어 저로 풍문을 듣고 그 본국으로 돌아가게 하고 또 그 본국에서 저로 칼에 죽게 하리라 하셨느니라	Behold, I will send a blast upon him, and he shall hear a rumour, and shall return to his own land; and I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land.	Behold, I will put a spirit in him so that he will hear a rumor and return to his own land, where I will cause him to fall by the sword.’”
2KI	19	8	랍사게가 돌아가다가 앗수르 왕이 이미 라기스에서 떠났다 함을 듣고 립나로 가서 왕을 만났으니 왕이 거기서 싸우는 중이더라	So Rab–shakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria warring against Libnah: for he had heard that he was departed from Lachish.	When the Rabshakeh heard that the king of Assyria had left Lachish, he withdrew and found the king fighting against Libnah.
2KI	19	9	앗수르 왕이 구스 왕 디르하가가 나와서 더불어 싸우고자 한다 함을 듣고 다시 히스기야에게 사자를 보내며 가로되	And when he heard say of Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, Behold, he is come out to fight against thee: he sent messengers again unto Hezekiah, saying,	Now Sennacherib had been warned about Tirhakah king of Cush: “Look, he has set out to fight against you.” So Sennacherib again sent messengers to Hezekiah, saying,
2KI	19	10	너희는 유다 왕 히스기야에게 이같이 말하여 이르기를 너의 의뢰하는 네 하나님이 예루살렘을 앗수르 왕의 손에 붙이지 않겠다 하는 말에 속지 말라	Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of Judah, saying, Let not thy God in whom thou trustest deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem shall not be delivered into the hand of the king of Assyria.	“Give this message to Hezekiah king of Judah: ‘Do not let your God, in whom you trust, deceive you by saying that Jerusalem will not be delivered into the hand of the king of Assyria.
2KI	19	11	앗수르의 열왕이 열방에 행한바 진멸한 일을 네가 들었나니 네가 어찌 구원을 얻겠느냐	Behold, thou hast heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands, by destroying them utterly: and shalt thou be delivered?	Surely you have heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all the other countries, devoting them to destruction. Will you then be spared?
2KI	19	12	내 열조가 멸하신 열방 곧 고산과 하란과 레셉과 들라살에 있는 에덴 족속을 그 나라의 신들이 건졌느냐	Have the gods of the nations delivered them which my fathers have destroyed; as Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children of Eden which were in Thelasar?	Did the gods of the nations destroyed by my fathers rescue those nations—the gods of Gozan, Haran, and Rezeph, and of the people of Eden in Telassar?
2KI	19	13	하맛 왕과 아르밧 왕과 스발와임 성의 왕과 헤나와 아와의 왕들이다 어디 있느냐 하라 하니라	Where is the king of Hamath, and the king of Arpad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, of Hena, and Ivah?	Where are the kings of Hamath, Arpad, Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivvah?’”
2KI	19	14	히스기야가 사자의 손에서 편지를 받아보고 여호와의 전에 올라가서 그 편지를 여호와 앞에 펴놓고	And Hezekiah received the letter of the hand of the messengers, and read it: and Hezekiah went up into the house of the Lord, and spread it before the Lord.	So Hezekiah received the letter from the messengers, read it, and went up to the house of the LORD and spread it out before the LORD.
2KI	19	15	그 앞에서 기도하여 가로되 그룹들의 위에 계신 이스라엘 하나님 여호와여 주는 천하 만국에 홀로 하나님이시라 주께서 천지를 조성하셨나이다	And Hezekiah prayed before the Lord, and said, O Lord God of Israel, which dwellest between the cherubims, thou art the God, even thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth; thou hast made heaven and earth.	And Hezekiah prayed before the LORD: “O LORD, God of Israel, enthroned between the cherubim, You alone are God over all the kingdoms of the earth. You made the heavens and the earth.
2KI	19	16	여호와여 귀를 기울여 들으소서 여호와여 눈을 떠서 보시옵소서 산헤립이 사신 하나님을 훼방하러 보낸 말을 들으시옵소서	Lord, bow down thine ear, and hear: open, Lord, thine eyes, and see: and hear the words of Sennacherib, which hath sent him to reproach the living God.	Incline Your ear, O LORD, and hear; open Your eyes, O LORD, and see. Listen to the words that Sennacherib has sent to defy the living God.
2KI	19	17	여호와여 앗수르 열왕이 과연 열방과 그 땅을 황폐케 하고	Of a truth, Lord, the kings of Assyria have destroyed the nations and their lands,	Truly, O LORD, the kings of Assyria have laid waste these nations and their lands.
2KI	19	18	또 그 신들을 불에 던졌사오니 이는 저희가 신이 아니요 사람의 손으로 지은 것 곧 나무와 돌뿐이므로 멸하였나이다	And have cast their gods into the fire: for they were no gods, but the work of men’s hands, wood and stone: therefore they have destroyed them.	They have cast their gods into the fire and destroyed them, for they were not gods, but only wood and stone—the work of human hands.
2KI	19	19	우리 하나님 여호와여 원컨대 이제 우리를 그 손에서 구원하옵소서 그리하시면 천하 만국이 주 여호와는 홀로 하나님이신줄 알리이다 하니라	Now therefore, O Lord our God, I beseech thee, save thou us out of his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou art the Lord God, even thou only.	And now, O LORD our God, please save us from his hand, so that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that You alone, O LORD, are God.”
2KI	19	20	아모스의 아들 이사야가 히스기야에게 기별하여 가로되 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 말씀이 네가 앗수르 왕 산헤립 까닭에 내게 기도하는 것을 내가 들었노라 하셨나이다	Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent to Hezekiah, saying, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, That which thou hast prayed to me against Sennacherib king of Assyria I have heard.	Then Isaiah son of Amoz sent a message to Hezekiah: “This is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: I have heard your prayer concerning Sennacherib king of Assyria.
2KI	19	21	여호와께서 앗수르 왕에게 대하여 이같이 말씀하시기를 처녀 딸 시온이 너를 멸시하며 너를 비웃었으며 딸 예루살렘이 너를 향하여 머리를 흔들었느니라	This is the word that the Lord hath spoken concerning him; The virgin the daughter of Zion hath despised thee, and laughed thee to scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head at thee.	This is the word that the LORD has spoken against him: ‘The Virgin Daughter of Zion despises you and mocks you; the Daughter of Jerusalem shakes her head behind you.
2KI	19	22	네가 누구를 꾸짖었으며 훼방하였느냐 누구를 향하여 소리를 높였으며 눈을 높이 떴느냐 이스라엘의 거룩한 자에게 그리하였도다	Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom hast thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against the Holy One of Israel.	Whom have you taunted and blasphemed? Against whom have you raised your voice and lifted your eyes in pride? Against the Holy One of Israel!
2KI	19	23	네가 사자로 주를 훼방하여 이르기를 내가 많은 병거를 거느리고 여러 산꼭대기에 올라가며 레바논 깊은 곳에 이르러 높은 백향목과 아름다운 잣나무를 베고 내가 그 지경 끝에 들어가며 그 동산의 무성한 수풀에 이르리라	By thy messengers thou hast reproached the Lord, and hast said, With the multitude of my chariots I am come up to the height of the mountains, to the sides of Lebanon, and will cut down the tall cedar trees thereof, and the choice fir trees thereof: and I will enter into the lodgings of his borders, and into the forest of his Carmel.	Through your servants you have taunted the Lord, and you have said: “With my many chariots I have ascended to the heights of the mountains, to the remote peaks of Lebanon. I have cut down its tallest cedars, the finest of its cypresses. I have reached its farthest outposts, the densest of its forests.
2KI	19	24	내가 땅을 파서 이방의 물을 마셨고 나의 발바닥으로 애굽의 모든 하수를 말렸노라 하였도다	I have digged and drunk strange waters, and with the sole of my feet have I dried up all the rivers of besieged places.	I have dug wells and drunk foreign waters. With the soles of my feet I have dried up all the streams of Egypt.”
2KI	19	25	네가 듣지 못하였느냐 이 일은 내가 태초부터 행하였고 상고부터 정한 바라 이제 내가 이루어 너로 견고한 성들을 멸하여 돌무더기가 되게 함이니라	Hast thou not heard long ago how I have done it, and of ancient times that I have formed it? now have I brought it to pass, that thou shouldest be to lay waste fenced cities into ruinous heaps.	Have you not heard? Long ago I ordained it; in days of old I planned it. Now I have brought it to pass, that you should crush fortified cities into piles of rubble.
2KI	19	26	그러므로 그 거한 백성의 힘이 약하여 두려워하며 놀랐나니 저희는 마치 들의 풀 같고 나물 같고 지붕의 풀 같고 자라기 전에 마른 곡초 같으니라	Therefore their inhabitants were of small power, they were dismayed and confounded; they were as the grass of the field, and as the green herb, as the grass on the housetops, and as corn blasted before it be grown up.	Therefore their inhabitants, devoid of power, are dismayed and ashamed. They are like plants in the field, tender green shoots, grass on the rooftops, scorched before it is grown.
2KI	19	27	네 거처와 네 출입과 네가 내게 향한 분노를 내가 다 아노니	But I know thy abode, and thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy rage against me.	But I know your sitting down, your going out and coming in, and your raging against Me.
2KI	19	28	네가 내게 향한 분노와 네 교만한 말이 내 귀에 들렸도다 그러므로 내가 갈고리로 네 코에 꿰고 자갈을 네 입에 먹여 너를 오던 길로 끌어 돌이키리라 하셨나이다	Because thy rage against me and thy tumult is come up into mine ears, therefore I will put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest.	Because your rage and arrogance against Me have reached My ears, I will put My hook in your nose and My bit in your mouth; I will send you back the way you came.’
2KI	19	29	또 네게 보일 징조가 이러하니 너희가 금년에는 스스로 자라난 것을 먹고 명년에는 그것에서 난 것을 먹되 제삼년에는 심고 거두며 포도원을 심고 그 열매를 먹으리라	And this shall be a sign unto thee, Ye shall eat this year such things as grow of themselves, and in the second year that which springeth of the same; and in the third year sow ye, and reap, and plant vineyards, and eat the fruits thereof.	And this will be a sign to you, O Hezekiah: This year you will eat what grows on its own, and in the second year what springs from the same. But in the third year you will sow and reap; you will plant vineyards and eat their fruit.
2KI	19	30	유다 족속의 피하고 남은 자는 다시 아래로 뿌리가 서리고 위로 열매를 맺을지라	And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah shall yet again take root downward, and bear fruit upward.	And the surviving remnant of the house of Judah will again take root below and bear fruit above.
2KI	19	31	남은 자는 예루살렘에서부터 나올 것이요 피하는 자는 시온 산에서부터 나오리니 여호와의 열심이 이 일을 이루리라 하셨나이다	For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and they that escape out of mount Zion: the zeal of the Lord of hosts shall do this.	For a remnant will go forth from Jerusalem, and survivors from Mount Zion. The zeal of the LORD of Hosts will accomplish this.
2KI	19	32	그러므로 여호와께서 앗수르 왕을 가리켜 이르시기를 저가 이 성에 이르지 못하며 이리로 살을 쏘지 못하며 방패를 성을 향하여 세우지 못하며 치려고 토성을 쌓지도 못하고	Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning the king of Assyria, He shall not come into this city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with shield, nor cast a bank against it.	So this is what the LORD says about the king of Assyria: ‘He will not enter this city or shoot an arrow into it. He will not come before it with a shield or build up a siege ramp against it.
2KI	19	33	오던 길로 돌아가고 이 성에 이르지 못하리라 하셨으니 이는 여호와의 말씀이시라	By the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and shall not come into this city, saith the Lord.	He will go back the way he came, and he will not enter this city,’ declares the LORD.
2KI	19	34	내가 나와 나의 종 다윗을 위하여 이 성을 보호하여 구원하리라 하셨나이다 하였더라	For I will defend this city, to save it, for mine own sake, and for my servant David’s sake.	‘I will defend this city and save it for My own sake and for the sake of My servant David.’”
2KI	19	35	이 밤에 여호와의 사자가 나와서 앗수르 진에서 군사 십팔만 오천을 친지라 아침에 일찍이 일어나 보니 다 송장이 되었더라	And it came to pass that night, that the angel of the Lord went out, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five thousand: and when they arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses.	And that very night the angel of the LORD went out and struck down 185,000 men in the camp of the Assyrians. When the people got up the next morning, there were all the dead bodies!
2KI	19	36	앗수르 왕 산헤립이 떠나 돌아가서 니느웨에 거하더니	So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went and returned, and dwelt at Nineveh.	So Sennacherib king of Assyria broke camp and withdrew. He returned to Nineveh and stayed there.
2KI	19	37	그 신 니스록의 묘에 경배할 때에 아드람멜렉과 사레셀이 저를 칼로 쳐죽이고 아라랏 땅으로 도망하매 그 아들 에살핫돈이 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And it came to pass, as he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote him with the sword: and they escaped into the land of Armenia. And Esarhaddon his son reigned in his stead.	One day, while he was worshiping in the temple of his god Nisroch, his sons Adrammelech and Sharezer put him to the sword and escaped to the land of Ararat. And his son Esar-haddon reigned in his place.
2KI	20	1	그 때에 히스기야가 병들어 죽게 되매 아모스의 아들 선지자 이사야가 저에게 나아와서 이르되 여호와의 말씀이 너는 집을 처치하라 네가 죽고 살지 못하리라 하셨나이다	In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death. And the prophet Isaiah the son of Amoz came to him, and said unto him, Thus saith the Lord, Set thine house in order; for thou shalt die, and not live.	In those days Hezekiah became mortally ill. The prophet Isaiah son of Amoz came to him and said, “This is what the LORD says: ‘Put your house in order, for you are about to die; you will not recover.’”
2KI	20	2	히스기야가 낯을 벽으로 향하고 여호와께 기도하여 가로되	Then he turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto the Lord, saying,	Then Hezekiah turned his face to the wall and prayed to the LORD, saying,
2KI	20	3	여호와여 구하오니 내가 진실과 전심으로 주 앞에 행하며 주의 보시기에 선하게 행한 것을 기억하옵소서 하고 심히 통곡하더라	I beseech thee, O Lord, remember now how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. And Hezekiah wept sore.	“Please, O LORD, remember how I have walked before You faithfully and with wholehearted devotion; I have done what was good in Your sight.” And Hezekiah wept bitterly.
2KI	20	4	이사야가 성읍 가운데까지도 이르기 전에 여호와의 말씀이 저에게 임하여 가라사대	And it came to pass, afore Isaiah was gone out into the middle court, that the word of the Lord came to him, saying,	Before Isaiah had left the middle courtyard, the word of the LORD came to him, saying,
2KI	20	5	너는 돌아가서 내 백성의 주권자 히스기야에게 이르기를 왕의 조상 다윗의 하나님 여호와의 말씀이 내가 네 기도를 들었고 네 눈물을 보았노라 내가 너를 낫게 하리니 네가 삼 일만에 여호와의 전에 올라가겠고	Turn again, and tell Hezekiah the captain of my people, Thus saith the Lord, the God of David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears: behold, I will heal thee: on the third day thou shalt go up unto the house of the Lord.	“Go back and tell Hezekiah the leader of My people that this is what the LORD, the God of your father David, says: ‘I have heard your prayer; I have seen your tears. I will surely heal you. On the third day from now you will go up to the house of the LORD.
2KI	20	6	내가 네 날을 십오 년을 더할 것이며 내가 너와 이 성을 앗수르 왕의 손에서 구원하고 내가 나를 위하고 또 내 종 다윗을 위하므로 이 성을 보호하리라 하셨다 하라 하셨더라	And I will add unto thy days fifteen years; and I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria; and I will defend this city for mine own sake, and for my servant David’s sake.	I will add fifteen years to your life. And I will deliver you and this city from the hand of the king of Assyria. I will defend this city for My sake and for the sake of My servant David.’”
2KI	20	7	이사야가 가로되 무화과 반죽을 가져오라 하매 무리가 가져다가 그 종처에 놓으니 나으니라	And Isaiah said, Take a lump of figs. And they took and laid it on the boil, and he recovered.	Then Isaiah said, “Prepare a poultice of figs.” So they brought it and applied it to the boil, and Hezekiah recovered.
2KI	20	8	히스기야가 이사야에게 이르되 여호와께서 나를 낫게 하시고 삼 일만에 여호와의 전에 올라가게 하실 무슨 징조가 있나이까	And Hezekiah said unto Isaiah, What shall be the sign that the Lord will heal me, and that I shall go up into the house of the Lord the third day?	Now Hezekiah had asked Isaiah, “What will be the sign that the LORD will heal me and that I will go up to the house of the LORD on the third day?”
2KI	20	9	이사야가 가로되 여호와의 하신 말씀을 응하게 하실 일에 대하여 여호와께로서 왕에게 한 징조가 임하리이다 해 그림자가 십 도를 나아갈 것이니이까 혹 십 도를 물러갈 것이니이까	And Isaiah said, This sign shalt thou have of the Lord, that the Lord will do the thing that he hath spoken: shall the shadow go forward ten degrees, or go back ten degrees?	And Isaiah had replied, “This will be a sign to you from the LORD that He will do what He has promised: Would you like the shadow to go forward ten steps, or back ten steps?”
2KI	20	10	히스기야가 대답하되 그림자가 십 도를 나아가기는 쉬우니 그리할 것이 아니라 십 도가 물러갈 것이니이다	And Hezekiah answered, It is a light thing for the shadow to go down ten degrees: nay, but let the shadow return backward ten degrees.	“It is easy for the shadow to lengthen ten steps,” answered Hezekiah, “but not for it to go back ten steps.”
2KI	20	11	선지자 이사야가 여호와께 간구하매 아하스의 일영표 위에 나아갔던 해 그림자로 십 도를 물러가게 하셨더라	And Isaiah the prophet cried unto the Lord: and he brought the shadow ten degrees backward, by which it had gone down in the dial of Ahaz.	So Isaiah the prophet called out to the LORD, and He brought the shadow back the ten steps it had descended on the stairway of Ahaz.
2KI	20	12	그 때에 발라단의 아들 바벨론 왕 부로닥발라단이 히스기야가 병들었다 함을 듣고 편지와 예물을 저에게 보낸지라	At that time Berodach–baladan, the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a present unto Hezekiah: for he had heard that Hezekiah had been sick.	At that time Merodach-baladan son of Baladan king of Babylon sent letters and a gift to Hezekiah, for he had heard about Hezekiah’s illness.
2KI	20	13	히스기야가 사자의 말을 듣고 자기 보물고의 금은과 향품과 보배로운 기름과 그 군기고와 내탕고의 모든 것을 다 사자에게 보였는데 무릇 왕궁과 그 나라 안에 있는 것을 저에게 보이지 아니한 것이 없으니라	And Hezekiah hearkened unto them, and shewed them all the house of his precious things, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and the precious ointment, and all the house of his armour, and all that was found in his treasures: there was nothing in his house, nor in all his dominion, that Hezekiah shewed them not.	And Hezekiah received the envoys and showed them all that was in his treasure house—the silver, the gold, the spices, and the precious oil, as well as his armory—all that was found in his storehouses. There was nothing in his palace or in all his dominion that Hezekiah did not show them.
2KI	20	14	선지자 이사야가 히스기야 왕에게 나아와서 이르되 이 사람들이 무슨 말을 하였으며 어디서부터 왕에게 왔나이까 히스기야가 가로되 먼 지방 바벨론에서 왔나이다	Then came Isaiah the prophet unto king Hezekiah, and said unto him, What said these men? and from whence came they unto thee? And Hezekiah said, They are come from a far country, even from Babylon.	Then the prophet Isaiah went to King Hezekiah and asked, “Where did those men come from, and what did they say to you?” “They came from a distant land,” Hezekiah replied, “from Babylon.”
2KI	20	15	이사야가 가로되 저희가 왕궁에서 무엇을 보았나이까 히스기야가 대답하되 내 궁에 있는 것을 저희가 다 보았나니 나의 내탕고에서 하나도 보이지 아니한 것이 없나이다	And he said, What have they seen in thine house? And Hezekiah answered, All the things that are in mine house have they seen: there is nothing among my treasures that I have not shewed them.	“What have they seen in your palace?” Isaiah asked. “They have seen everything in my palace,” answered Hezekiah. “There is nothing among my treasures that I did not show them.”
2KI	20	16	이사야가 히스기야에게 이르되 여호와의 말씀을 들으소서	And Isaiah said unto Hezekiah, Hear the word of the Lord.	Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah, “Hear the word of the LORD:
2KI	20	17	여호와의 말씀이 날이 이르리니 무릇 왕궁의 모든 것과 왕의 열조가 오늘까지 쌓아 두었던 것을 바벨론으로 옮긴바 되고 하나도 남지 아니할 것이요	Behold, the days come, that all that is in thine house, and that which thy fathers have laid up in store unto this day, shall be carried into Babylon: nothing shall be left, saith the Lord.	The time will surely come when everything in your palace and all that your fathers have stored up until this day will be carried off to Babylon. Nothing will be left, says the LORD.
2KI	20	18	또 왕의 몸에서 날 아들 중에서 사로잡혀 바벨론 왕궁의 환관이 되리라 하셨나이다	And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, which thou shalt beget, shall they take away; and they shall be eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.	And some of your descendants, your own flesh and blood, will be taken away to be eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.”
2KI	20	19	히스기야가 이사야에게 이르되 당신의 전한바 여호와의 말씀이 선하니이다 하고 또 가로되 만일 나의 사는 날에 태평과 진실이 있을진대 어찌 선하지 아니하리요 하니라	Then said Hezekiah unto Isaiah, Good is the word of the Lord which thou hast spoken. And he said, Is it not good, if peace and truth be in my days?	But Hezekiah said to Isaiah, “The word of the LORD that you have spoken is good.” For he thought, “Will there not at least be peace and security in my lifetime?”
2KI	20	20	히스기야의 남은 사적과 그 모든 권력과 못과 수도를 만들어 물을 성중으로 인도하여 들인 일은 유다 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	And the rest of the acts of Hezekiah, and all his might, and how he made a pool, and a conduit, and brought water into the city, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?	As for the rest of the acts of Hezekiah, along with all his might and how he constructed the pool and the tunnel to bring water into the city, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
2KI	20	21	히스기야가 그 열조와 함께 자고 그 아들 므낫세가 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And Hezekiah slept with his fathers: and Manasseh his son reigned in his stead.	And Hezekiah rested with his fathers, and his son Manasseh reigned in his place.
2KI	21	1	므낫세가 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 십이 세라 예루살렘에서 오십오 년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 헵시바더라	Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign, and reigned fifty and five years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Hephzi–bah.	Manasseh was twelve years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem fifty-five years. His mother’s name was Hephzibah.
2KI	21	2	므낫세가 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하여 여호와께서 이스라엘 자손 앞에서 쫓아내신 이방 사람의 가증한 일을 본받아서	And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, after the abominations of the heathen, whom the Lord cast out before the children of Israel.	And he did evil in the sight of the LORD by following the abominations of the nations that the LORD had driven out before the Israelites.
2KI	21	3	그 부친 히스기야의 헐어버린 산당을 다시 세우며 이스라엘 왕 아합의 소위를 본받아 바알을 위하여 단을 쌓으며 아세라 목상을 만들며 하늘의 일월성신을 숭배하여 섬기며	For he built up again the high places which Hezekiah his father had destroyed; and he reared up altars for Baal, and made a grove, as did Ahab king of Israel; and worshipped all the host of heaven, and served them.	For he rebuilt the high places that his father Hezekiah had destroyed, and he raised up altars for Baal. He made an Asherah pole, as King Ahab of Israel had done, and he worshiped and served all the host of heaven.
2KI	21	4	여호와께서 전에 이르시기를 내가 내 이름을 예루살렘에 두리라 하신 여호와의 전의 단들을 쌓고	And he built altars in the house of the Lord, of which the Lord said, In Jerusalem will I put my name.	Manasseh also built altars in the house of the LORD, of which the LORD had said, “In Jerusalem I will put My Name.”
2KI	21	5	또 여호와의 전 두 마당에 하늘의 일월성신을 위하여 단들을 쌓고	And he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts of the house of the Lord.	In both courtyards of the house of the LORD, he built altars to all the host of heaven.
2KI	21	6	또 그 아들을 불 가운데로 지나게 하며 점치며 사술을 행하며 신접한 자와 박수를 신임하여 여호와 보시기에 악을 많이 행하여 그 진노를 격발하였으며	And he made his son pass through the fire, and observed times, and used enchantments, and dealt with familiar spirits and wizards: he wrought much wickedness in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger.	He sacrificed his own son in the fire, practiced sorcery and divination, and consulted mediums and spiritists. He did great evil in the sight of the LORD, provoking Him to anger.
2KI	21	7	또 자기가 만든 아로새긴 아세라 목상을 전에 세웠더라 옛적에 여호와께서 이 전에 대하여 다윗과 그 아들 솔로몬에게 이르시기를 내가 이스라엘 모든 지파 중에서 택한 이 전과 예루살렘에 내 이름을 영원히 둘지라	And he set a graven image of the grove that he had made in the house, of which the Lord said to David, and to Solomon his son, In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all tribes of Israel, will I put my name for ever:	Manasseh even took the carved Asherah pole he had made and set it up in the temple, of which the LORD had said to David and his son Solomon, “In this temple and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, I will establish My Name forever.
2KI	21	8	만일 이스라엘이 나의 모든 명령과 나의 종 모세의 명한 모든 율법을 지켜 행하면 내가 그들의 발로 다시는 그 열조에게 준 땅에서 떠나 유리하지 않게 하리라 하셨으나	Neither will I make the feet of Israel move any more out of the land which I gave their fathers; only if they will observe to do according to all that I have commanded them, and according to all the law that my servant Moses commanded them.	I will never again cause the feet of the Israelites to wander from the land that I gave to their fathers, if only they are careful to do all I have commanded them—the whole Law that My servant Moses commanded them.”
2KI	21	9	이 백성이 듣지 아니하였고 므낫세의 꾀임을 받고 악을 행한 것이 여호와께서 이스라엘 자손 앞에서 멸하신 열방보다 더욱 심하였더라	But they hearkened not: and Manasseh seduced them to do more evil than did the nations whom the Lord destroyed before the children of Israel.	But the people did not listen and Manasseh led them astray, so that they did greater evil than the nations that the LORD had destroyed before the Israelites.
2KI	21	10	여호와께서 그 종 모든 선지자들로 말씀하여 가라사대	And the Lord spake by his servants the prophets, saying,	And the LORD spoke through His servants the prophets, saying,
2KI	21	11	유다 왕 므낫세가 이 가증한 일과 악을 행함이 그 전에 있던 아모리 사람의 행위보다 더욱 심하였고 또 그 우상으로 유다를 범죄케 하였도다	Because Manasseh king of Judah hath done these abominations, and hath done wickedly above all that the Amorites did, which were before him, and hath made Judah also to sin with his idols:	“Since Manasseh king of Judah has committed all these abominations, acting more wickedly than the Amorites who preceded him, and with his idols has caused Judah to sin,
2KI	21	12	그러므로 이스라엘 하나님 여호와가 말하노니 내가 이제 예루살렘과 유다에 재앙을 내리리니 듣는 자마다 두 귀가 울리리라	Therefore thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Behold, I am bringing such evil upon Jerusalem and Judah, that whosoever heareth of it, both his ears shall tingle.	this is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: ‘Behold, I am bringing such calamity upon Jerusalem and Judah that the news will reverberate in the ears of all who hear it.
2KI	21	13	내가 사마리아를 잰 줄과 아합의 집을 다림보던 추로 예루살렘에 베풀고 또 사람이 그릇을 씻어 엎음 같이 예루살렘을 씻어 버릴지라	And I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab: and I will wipe Jerusalem as a man wipeth a dish, wiping it, and turning it upside down.	I will stretch out over Jerusalem the measuring line used against Samaria and the plumb line used against the house of Ahab, and I will wipe out Jerusalem as one wipes out a bowl—wiping it and turning it upside down.
2KI	21	14	내가 나의 기업에서 남은 자를 버려 그 대적의 손에 붙인즉 저희가 모든 대적에게 노략과 겁탈이 되리니	And I will forsake the remnant of mine inheritance, and deliver them into the hand of their enemies; and they shall become a prey and a spoil to all their enemies;	So I will forsake the remnant of My inheritance and deliver them into the hands of their enemies. And they will become plunder and spoil to all their enemies,
2KI	21	15	이는 애굽에서 나온 그 열조 때부터 오늘까지 나의 보기에 악을 행하여 나의 노를 격발하였음이니라 하셨더라	Because they have done that which was evil in my sight, and have provoked me to anger, since the day their fathers came forth out of Egypt, even unto this day.	because they have done evil in My sight and have provoked Me to anger from the day their fathers came out of Egypt until this day.’”
2KI	21	16	므낫세가 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하여 유다로 범하게한 그 죄 외에 또 무죄한 자의 피를 심히 많이 흘려 예루살렘 이 가에서 저 가까지 가득하게 하였더라	Moreover Manasseh shed innocent blood very much, till he had filled Jerusalem from one end to another; beside his sin wherewith he made Judah to sin, in doing that which was evil in the sight of the Lord.	Moreover, Manasseh shed so much innocent blood that he filled Jerusalem from end to end, in addition to the sin that he had caused Judah to commit, doing evil in the sight of the LORD.
2KI	21	17	므낫세의 남은 사적과 무릇 그 행한바와 범한 죄는 유다 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, and all that he did, and his sin that he sinned, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?	As for the rest of the acts of Manasseh, along with all his accomplishments and the sin that he committed, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
2KI	21	18	므낫세가 그 열조와 함께 자매 그 궁궐 동산 곧 웃사의 동산에 장사되고 그 아들 아몬이 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And Manasseh slept with his fathers, and was buried in the garden of his own house, in the garden of Uzza: and Amon his son reigned in his stead.	And Manasseh rested with his fathers and was buried in his palace garden, the garden of Uzza. And his son Amon reigned in his place.
2KI	21	19	아몬이 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 이십이 세라 예루살렘에서 이 년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 므술레멧이라 욧바 하루스의 딸이더라	Amon was twenty and two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned two years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Meshullemeth, the daughter of Haruz of Jotbah.	Amon was twenty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem two years. His mother’s name was Meshullemeth daughter of Haruz; she was from Jotbah.
2KI	21	20	아몬이 그 부친 므낫세의 행함 같이 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하되	And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, as his father Manasseh did.	And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, as his father Manasseh had done.
2KI	21	21	그 부친의 행한 모든 길로 행하여 그 부친의 섬기던 우상을 섬겨 경배하고	And he walked in all the way that his father walked in, and served the idols that his father served, and worshipped them:	He walked in all the ways of his father, and he served and worshiped the idols his father had served.
2KI	21	22	그 열조의 하나님 여호와를 버리고 그 길로 행치 아니하더니	And he forsook the Lord God of his fathers, and walked not in the way of the Lord.	He abandoned the LORD, the God of his fathers, and did not walk in the way of the LORD.
2KI	21	23	그 신복들이 반역하여 왕을 궁중에서 죽이매	And the servants of Amon conspired against him, and slew the king in his own house.	Then the servants of Amon conspired against him and killed the king in his palace.
2KI	21	24	그 국민이 아몬 왕을 반역한 사람들을 다 죽이고 그 아들 요시야로 대신하여 왕을 삼았더라	And the people of the land slew all them that had conspired against king Amon; and the people of the land made Josiah his son king in his stead.	But the people of the land killed all those who had conspired against King Amon, and they made his son Josiah king in his place.
2KI	21	25	아몬의 행한바 남은 사적은 유다 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	Now the rest of the acts of Amon which he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?	As for the rest of the acts of Amon, along with his accomplishments, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
2KI	21	26	아몬이 웃시야의 동산 자기 묘실에 장사되고 그 아들 요시야가 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And he was buried in his sepulchre in the garden of Uzza: and Josiah his son reigned in his stead.	And he was buried in his tomb in the garden of Uzza, and his son Josiah reigned in his place.
2KI	22	1	요시야가 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 팔 세라 예루살렘에서 삼십일 년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 여디다라 보스갓 아다야의 딸이더라	Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned thirty and one years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Jedidah, the daughter of Adaiah of Boscath.	Josiah was eight years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem thirty-one years. His mother’s name was Jedidah daughter of Adaiah; she was from Bozkath.
2KI	22	2	요시야가 여호와 보시기에 정직히 행하여 그 조상 다윗의 모든 길로 행하고 좌우로 치우치지 아니하였더라	And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and walked in all the way of David his father, and turned not aside to the right hand or to the left.	And he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD and walked in all the ways of his father David; he did not turn aside to the right or to the left.
2KI	22	3	요시야 왕 십팔 년에 왕이 므술람의 손자 아살리야의 아들 서기관 사반을 여호와의 전에 보내며 가로되	And it came to pass in the eighteenth year of king Josiah, that the king sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, the son of Meshullam, the scribe, to the house of the Lord, saying,	Now in the eighteenth year of his reign, King Josiah sent the scribe, Shaphan son of Azaliah, the son of Meshullam, to the house of the LORD, saying,
2KI	22	4	너는 대제사장 힐기야에게 올라가서 백성이 여호와의 전에 드린 은 곧 문 지킨 자가 수납한 은을 계수하여	Go up to Hilkiah the high priest, that he may sum the silver which is brought into the house of the Lord, which the keepers of the door have gathered of the people:	“Go up to Hilkiah the high priest and have him count the money that has been brought into the house of the LORD, which the doorkeepers have collected from the people.
2KI	22	5	여호와의 전 역사 감독자의 손에 붙여 저희로 여호와의 전에 있는 공장에게 주어 전의 퇴락한 것을 수리하게 하되	And let them deliver it into the hand of the doers of the work, that have the oversight of the house of the Lord: and let them give it to the doers of the work which is in the house of the Lord, to repair the breaches of the house,	And let them deliver it into the hands of the supervisors of those doing the work on the house of the LORD, who in turn are to give it to the workmen repairing the damages to the house of the LORD—
2KI	22	6	곧 목수와 건축자와 미장이에게 주게 하고 또 재목과 다듬은 돌을 사서 그 전을 수리하게 하라 하니라	Unto carpenters, and builders, and masons, and to buy timber and hewn stone to repair the house.	to the carpenters, builders, and masons—to buy timber and dressed stone to repair the temple.
2KI	22	7	그러나 저희 손에 붙인 은을 회계하지 아니하였으니 이는 그 행하는 것이 진실함이었더라	Howbeit there was no reckoning made with them of the money that was delivered into their hand, because they dealt faithfully.	But they need not account for the money put into their hands, since they work with integrity.”
2KI	22	8	대제사장 힐기야가 서기관 사반에게 이르되 내가 여호와의 전에서 율법책을 발견하였노라 하고 그 책을 사반에게 주니 사반이 읽으니라	And Hilkiah the high priest said unto Shaphan the scribe, I have found the book of the law in the house of the Lord. And Hilkiah gave the book to Shaphan, and he read it.	Then Hilkiah the high priest said to Shaphan the scribe, “I have found the Book of the Law in the house of the LORD!” And he gave it to Shaphan, who read it.
2KI	22	9	서기관 사반이 왕에게 돌아가서 복명하여 가로되 왕의 신복들이 전에 있던 돈을 쏟아 여호와의 전 역사 감독자의 손에 붙였나이다 하고	And Shaphan the scribe came to the king, and brought the king word again, and said, Thy servants have gathered the money that was found in the house, and have delivered it into the hand of them that do the work, that have the oversight of the house of the Lord.	And Shaphan the scribe went to the king and reported, “Your servants have paid out the money that was found in the temple and have put it into the hands of the workers and supervisors of the house of the LORD.”
2KI	22	10	또 왕에게 고하여 가로되 제사장 힐기야가 내게 책을 주더이다 하고 왕의 앞에서 읽으매	And Shaphan the scribe shewed the king, saying, Hilkiah the priest hath delivered me a book. And Shaphan read it before the king.	Moreover, Shaphan the scribe told the king, “Hilkiah the priest has given me a book.” And Shaphan read it in the presence of the king.
2KI	22	11	왕이 율법책의 말을 듣자 곧 그 옷을 찢으니라	And it came to pass, when the king had heard the words of the book of the law, that he rent his clothes.	When the king heard the words of the Book of the Law, he tore his clothes
2KI	22	12	왕이 제사장 힐기야와 사반의 아들 아히감과 미가야의 아들 악볼과 서기관 사반과 왕의 시신 아사야에게 명하여 가로되	And the king commanded Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and Achbor the son of Michaiah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asahiah a servant of the king’s, saying,	and commanded Hilkiah the priest, Ahikam son of Shaphan, Achbor son of Micaiah, Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah the servant of the king:
2KI	22	13	너희는 가서 나와 백성과 온 유다를 위하여 이 발견한 책의 말씀에 대하여 여호와께 물으라 우리 열조가 이 책의 말씀을 듣지 아니하며 이 책에 우리를 위하여 기록된 모든 것을 준행치 아니하였으므로 여호와께서 우리에게 발하신 진노가 크도다	Go ye, enquire of the Lord for me, and for the people, and for all Judah, concerning the words of this book that is found: for great is the wrath of the Lord that is kindled against us, because our fathers have not hearkened unto the words of this book, to do according unto all that which is written concerning us.	“Go and inquire of the LORD for me, for the people, and for all Judah concerning the words in this book that has been found. For great is the wrath of the LORD that burns against us because our fathers have not obeyed the words of this book by doing all that is written about us.”
2KI	22	14	이에 제사장 힐기야와 또 아히감과 악볼과 사반과 아사야가 여선지 훌다에게로 나아가니 저는 할하스의 손자 디과의 아들 예복을 주관하는 살룸의 아내라 예루살렘 둘째 구역에 거하였더라 저희가 더불어 말하매	So Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam, and Achbor, and Shaphan, and Asahiah, went unto Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tikvah, the son of Harhas, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the college;) and they communed with her.	So Hilkiah the priest, Ahikam, Achbor, Shaphan, and Asaiah went and spoke to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum son of Tikvah, the son of Harhas, the keeper of the wardrobe. She lived in Jerusalem, in the Second District.
2KI	22	15	훌다가 저희에게 이르되 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 말씀이 너희는 너희를 내게 보낸 사람에게 고하기를	And she said unto them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Tell the man that sent you to me,	And Huldah said to them, “This is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: ‘Tell the man who sent you
2KI	22	16	여호와의 말씀이 내가 이곳과 그 거민에게 재앙을 내리되 곧 유다 왕의 읽은 책의 모든 말대로 하리니	Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, and upon the inhabitants thereof, even all the words of the book which the king of Judah hath read:	that this is what the LORD says: I am about to bring calamity on this place and on its people, according to all the words of the book that the king of Judah has read,
2KI	22	17	이는 이 백성이 나를 버리고 다른 신에게 분향하며 그 손의 모든 소위로 나의 노를 격발하였음이라 그러므로 나의 이곳을 향하여 발한 진노가 꺼지지 아니하리라 하라 하셨느니라	Because they have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, that they might provoke me to anger with all the works of their hands; therefore my wrath shall be kindled against this place, and shall not be quenched.	because they have forsaken Me and burned incense to other gods, that they might provoke Me to anger with all the works of their hands. My wrath will be kindled against this place and will not be quenched.’
2KI	22	18	너희를 보내어 여호와께 묻게 한 유다 왕에게는 너희가 이렇게 고하라 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 말씀이 네가 들은 말을 의논컨대	But to the king of Judah which sent you to enquire of the Lord, thus shall ye say to him, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, As touching the words which thou hast heard;	But as for the king of Judah, who sent you to inquire of the LORD, tell him that this is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: ‘As for the words that you heard,
2KI	22	19	내가 이곳과 그 거민에게 대하여 빈 터가 되고 저주가 되리라 한 말을 네가 듣고 마음이 연하여 여호와 앞 곧 내 앞에서 겸비하여 옷을 찢고 통곡하였으므로 나도 네 말을 들었노라 여호와가 말하였느니라	Because thine heart was tender, and thou hast humbled thyself before the Lord, when thou heardest what I spake against this place, and against the inhabitants thereof, that they should become a desolation and a curse, and hast rent thy clothes, and wept before me; I also have heard thee, saith the Lord.	because your heart was tender and you humbled yourself before the LORD when you heard what I spoke against this place and against its people, that they would become a desolation and a curse, and because you have torn your clothes and wept before Me, I have heard you,’ declares the LORD.
2KI	22	20	그러므로 내가 너로 너의 열조에게 돌아가서 평안히 묘실로 들어가게 하리니 내가 이곳에 내리는 모든 재앙을 네가 눈으로 보지 못하리라 하셨느니라 사자들이 왕에게 복명하니라	Behold therefore, I will gather thee unto thy fathers, and thou shalt be gathered into thy grave in peace; and thine eyes shall not see all the evil which I will bring upon this place. And they brought the king word again.	‘Therefore I will indeed gather you to your fathers, and you will be gathered to your grave in peace. Your eyes will not see all the calamity that I will bring on this place.’” So they brought her answer back to the king.
2KI	23	1	왕이 보내어 유다와 예루살렘의 모든 장로를 자기에게로 모으고	And the king sent, and they gathered unto him all the elders of Judah and of Jerusalem.	Then the king summoned all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem.
2KI	23	2	이에 여호와의 전에 올라가매 유다 모든 사람과 예루살렘 거민과 제사장들과 선지자들과 모든 백성이 무론 노소하고 다 왕과 함께한지라 왕이 여호와의 전 안에서 발견한 언약책의 모든 말씀을 읽어 무리의 귀에 들리고	And the king went up into the house of the Lord, and all the men of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem with him, and the priests, and the prophets, and all the people, both small and great: and he read in their ears all the words of the book of the covenant which was found in the house of the Lord.	And he went up to the house of the LORD with all the people of Judah and Jerusalem, as well as the priests and the prophets—all the people small and great—and in their hearing he read all the words of the Book of the Covenant that had been found in the house of the LORD.
2KI	23	3	왕이 대 위에 서서 여호와 앞에서 언약을 세우되 마음을 다하고 성품을 다하여 여호와를 순종하고 그 계명과 법도와 율례를 지켜 이 책에 기록된 이 언약의 말씀을 이루게 하리라 하매 백성이 다 그 언약을 좇기로 하니라	And the king stood by a pillar, and made a covenant before the Lord, to walk after the Lord, and to keep his commandments and his testimonies and his statutes with all their heart and all their soul, to perform the words of this covenant that were written in this book. And all the people stood to the covenant.	So the king stood by the pillar and made a covenant before the LORD to follow the LORD and to keep His commandments, decrees, and statutes with all his heart and all his soul, and to carry out the words of this covenant that were written in this book. And all the people entered into the covenant.
2KI	23	4	왕이 대제사장 힐기야와 모든 버금 제사장들과 문을 지킨 자들에게 명하여 바알과 아세라와 하늘의 일월성신을 위하여 만든 모든 기명을 여호와의 전에서 내어다가 예루살렘 바깥 기드론 밭에서 불사르고 그 재를 벧엘로 가져가게 하고	And the king commanded Hilkiah the high priest, and the priests of the second order, and the keepers of the door, to bring forth out of the temple of the Lord all the vessels that were made for Baal, and for the grove, and for all the host of heaven: and he burned them without Jerusalem in the fields of Kidron, and carried the ashes of them unto Beth–el.	Then the king commanded Hilkiah the high priest, the priests second in rank, and the doorkeepers to remove from the temple of the LORD all the articles made for Baal, Asherah, and all the host of heaven. And he burned them outside Jerusalem in the fields of Kidron and carried their ashes to Bethel.
2KI	23	5	옛적에 유다 왕들이 세워서 유다 모든 고을과 예루살렘 사면 산당에서 분향하며 우상을 섬기게 한 제사장들을 폐하며 또 바알과 해와 달과 열두 궁성과 하늘의 모든 별에게 분향하는 자들을 폐하고	And he put down the idolatrous priests, whom the kings of Judah had ordained to burn incense in the high places in the cities of Judah, and in the places round about Jerusalem; them also that burned incense unto Baal, to the sun, and to the moon, and to the planets, and to all the host of heaven.	Josiah also did away with the idolatrous priests ordained by the kings of Judah to burn incense on the high places of the cities of Judah and in the places all around Jerusalem—those who had burned incense to Baal, to the sun and moon, to the constellations, and to all the host of heaven.
2KI	23	6	또 여호와의 전에서 아세라 상을 내어 예루살렘 바깥 기드론 시내로 가져다가 거기서 불사르고 빻아서 가루를 만들어 그 가루를 평민의 묘지에 뿌리고	And he brought out the grove from the house of the Lord, without Jerusalem, unto the brook Kidron, and burned it at the brook Kidron, and stamped it small to powder, and cast the powder thereof upon the graves of the children of the people.	He brought the Asherah pole from the house of the LORD to the Kidron Valley outside Jerusalem, and there he burned it, ground it to powder, and threw its dust on the graves of the common people.
2KI	23	7	또 여호와의 전 가운데 미동의 집을 헐었으니 그곳은 여인이 아세라를 위하여 휘장을 짜는 처소이었더라	And he brake down the houses of the sodomites, that were by the house of the Lord, where the women wove hangings for the grove.	He also tore down the quarters of the male shrine prostitutes that were in the house of the LORD, where the women had woven tapestries for Asherah.
2KI	23	8	유다 각 성읍에서 모든 제사장을 불러오고 또 제사장이 분향하던 산당을 게바에서부터 브엘세바까지 더럽게 하고 또 성문의 산당들을 헐어 버렸으니 이 산당들은 부윤 여호수아의 대문 어귀 곧 성문 왼편에 있었더라	And he brought all the priests out of the cities of Judah, and defiled the high places where the priests had burned incense, from Geba to Beer–sheba, and brake down the high places of the gates that were in the entering in of the gate of Joshua the governor of the city, which were on a man’s left hand at the gate of the city.	Then Josiah brought all the priests from the cities of Judah and desecrated the high places, from Geba to Beersheba, where the priests had burned incense. He tore down the high places of the gates at the entrance of the gate of Joshua the governor of the city, which was to the left of the city gate.
2KI	23	9	산당의 제사장들은 예루살렘 여호와의 단에 올라가지 못하고 다만 그 형제 중에서 무교병을 먹을 뿐이었더라	Nevertheless the priests of the high places came not up to the altar of the Lord in Jerusalem, but they did eat of the unleavened bread among their brethren.	Although the priests of the high places did not come up to the altar of the LORD in Jerusalem, they ate unleavened bread with their fellow priests.
2KI	23	10	왕이 또 힌놈의 아들 골짜기의 도벳을 더럽게 하여 사람으로 몰록에게 드리기 위하여 그 자녀를 불로 지나가게 하지 못하게 하고	And he defiled Topheth, which is in the valley of the children of Hinnom, that no man might make his son or his daughter to pass through the fire to Molech.	He also desecrated Topheth in the Valley of Ben-hinnom so that no one could sacrifice his son or daughter in the fire to Molech.
2KI	23	11	또 유다 열왕이 태양을 위하여 드린 말들을 제하여 버렸으니 이 말들은 여호와의 전으로 들어가는 곳의 근처 시종 나단멜렉의 집 곁에 있던 것이며 또 태양 수레를 불사르고	And he took away the horses that the kings of Judah had given to the sun, at the entering in of the house of the Lord, by the chamber of Nathan–melech the chamberlain, which was in the suburbs, and burned the chariots of the sun with fire.	And he removed from the entrance to the house of the LORD the horses that the kings of Judah had dedicated to the sun. They were in the court near the chamber of an official named Nathan-melech. And Josiah burned up the chariots of the sun.
2KI	23	12	유다 열왕이 아하스의 다락지붕에 세운 단들과 므낫세가 여호와의 전 두 마당에 세운 단들을 왕이 다 헐고 거기서 빻아내려서 그 가루를 기드론 시내에 쏟아버리고	And the altars that were on the top of the upper chamber of Ahaz, which the kings of Judah had made, and the altars which Manasseh had made in the two courts of the house of the Lord, did the king beat down, and brake them down from thence, and cast the dust of them into the brook Kidron.	He pulled down the altars that the kings of Judah had set up on the roof near the upper chamber of Ahaz, and the altars that Manasseh had set up in the two courtyards of the house of the LORD. The king pulverized them there and threw their dust into the Kidron Valley.
2KI	23	13	또 예루살렘 앞 멸망 산 우편에 세운 산당을 더럽게 하였으니 이는 옛적에 이스라엘 왕 솔로몬이 시돈 사람의 가증한 아스다롯과 모압 사람의 가증한 그모스와 암몬 자손의 가증한 밀곰을 위하여 세웠던 것이며	And the high places that were before Jerusalem, which were on the right hand of the mount of corruption, which Solomon the king of Israel had builded for Ashtoreth the abomination of the Zidonians, and for Chemosh the abomination of the Moabites, and for Milcom the abomination of the children of Ammon, did the king defile.	The king also desecrated the high places east of Jerusalem, to the south of the Mount of Corruption, which King Solomon of Israel had built for Ashtoreth the abomination of the Sidonians, for Chemosh the abomination of the Moabites, and for Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites.
2KI	23	14	왕이 또 석상들을 깨뜨리며 아세라 목상들을 찍고 사람의 해골로 그곳에 채웠더라	And he brake in pieces the images, and cut down the groves, and filled their places with the bones of men.	He smashed the sacred pillars to pieces, cut down the Asherah poles, and covered the sites with human bones.
2KI	23	15	이스라엘로 범죄케 한 느밧의 아들 여로보암이 벧엘에 세운 단과 산당을 왕이 헐고 또 그 산당을 불사르고 빻아서 가루를 만들며 또 아세라 목상을 불살랐더라	Moreover the altar that was at Beth–el, and the high place which Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin, had made, both that altar and the high place he brake down, and burned the high place, and stamped it small to powder, and burned the grove.	He even pulled down the altar at Bethel, the high place set up by Jeroboam son of Nebat, who had caused Israel to sin. Then he burned the high place, ground it to powder, and burned the Asherah pole.
2KI	23	16	요시야가 몸을 돌이켜 산에 있는 묘실들을 보고 보내어 그 묘실에서 해골을 취하여다가 단 위에 불살라 그 단을 더럽게 하니라 이 일을 하나님의 사람이 전하였더니 그 전한 여호와의 말씀대로 되었더라	And as Josiah turned himself, he spied the sepulchres that were there in the mount, and sent, and took the bones out of the sepulchres, and burned them upon the altar, and polluted it, according to the word of the Lord which the man of God proclaimed, who proclaimed these words.	And as Josiah turned, he saw the tombs there on the hillside, and he sent someone to take the bones out of the tombs, and he burned them on the altar to defile it, according to the word of the LORD proclaimed by the man of God who had foretold these things.
2KI	23	17	요시야가 이르되 내게 보이는 저것은 무슨 비석이냐 성읍 사람들이 고하되 왕께서 벧엘의 단에 향하여 행하신 이 일을 전하러 유다에서 왔던 하나님의 사람의 묘실이니이다	Then he said, What title is that that I see? And the men of the city told him, It is the sepulchre of the man of God, which came from Judah, and proclaimed these things that thou hast done against the altar of Beth–el.	Then the king asked, “What is this monument I see?” And the men of the city replied, “It is the tomb of the man of God who came from Judah and pronounced these things that you have done to the altar of Bethel.”
2KI	23	18	가로되 그대로 두고 그 뼈를 옮기지 말라 하매 무리가 그 뼈와 사마리아에서 온 선지자의 뼈는 그대로 두었더라	And he said, Let him alone; let no man move his bones. So they let his bones alone, with the bones of the prophet that came out of Samaria.	“Let him rest,” said Josiah. “Do not let anyone disturb his bones.” So they left his bones undisturbed, along with those of the prophet who had come from Samaria.
2KI	23	19	전에 이스라엘 열왕이 사마리아 각 성읍에 지어서 여호와의 노를 격발한 산당을 요시야가 다 제하되 벧엘에서 행한 모든 일대로 행하고	And all the houses also of the high places that were in the cities of Samaria, which the kings of Israel had made to provoke the Lord to anger, Josiah took away, and did to them according to all the acts that he had done in Beth–el.	Just as Josiah had done at Bethel, so also in the cities of Samaria he removed all the shrines of the high places set up by the kings of Israel who had provoked the LORD to anger.
2KI	23	20	또 거기 있는 산당의 제사장들을 다 단 위에서 죽이고 사람의 해골을 단 위에 불사르고 예루살렘으로 돌아왔더라	And he slew all the priests of the high places that were there upon the altars, and burned men’s bones upon them, and returned to Jerusalem.	On the altars he slaughtered all the priests of the high places, and he burned human bones on them. Then he returned to Jerusalem.
2KI	23	21	왕이 뭇백성에게 명하여 가로되 이 언약책에 기록된 대로 너희의 하나님 여호와를 위하여 유월절을 지키라 하매	And the king commanded all the people, saying, Keep the passover unto the Lord your God, as it is written in the book of this covenant.	The king commanded all the people, “Keep the Passover of the LORD your God, as it is written in this Book of the Covenant.”
2KI	23	22	사사가 이스라엘을 다스리던 시대부터 이스라엘 열왕의 시대에든지 유다 열왕의 시대에든지 이렇게 유월절을 지킨 일이 없었더니	Surely there was not holden such a passover from the days of the judges that judged Israel, nor in all the days of the kings of Israel, nor of the kings of Judah;	No such Passover had been observed from the days of the judges who had governed Israel through all the days of the kings of Israel and Judah.
2KI	23	23	요시야 왕 십팔 년에 예루살렘에서 여호와 앞에 이 유월절을 지켰더라	But in the eighteenth year of king Josiah, wherein this passover was holden to the Lord in Jerusalem.	But in the eighteenth year of Josiah’s reign, this Passover was observed to the LORD in Jerusalem.
2KI	23	24	요시야가 또 유다 땅과 예루살렘에 보이는 신접한 자와 박수와 드라빔과 우상과 모든 가증한 것을 다 제하였으니 이는 대제사장 힐기야가 여호와의 전에서 발견한 책에 기록된 율법 말씀을 이루려 함이라	Moreover the workers with familiar spirits, and the wizards, and the images, and the idols, and all the abominations that were spied in the land of Judah and in Jerusalem, did Josiah put away, that he might perform the words of the law which were written in the book that Hilkiah the priest found in the house of the Lord.	Furthermore, Josiah removed the mediums and spiritists, the household gods and idols, and all the abominations that were seen in the land of Judah and in Jerusalem. He did this to carry out the words of the law written in the book that Hilkiah the priest had found in the house of the LORD.
2KI	23	25	요시야와 같이 마음을 다하며 성품을 다하며 힘을 다하여 어호와를 향하여 모세의 모든 율법을 온전히 준행한 임금은 요시야 전에도 없었고 후에도 그와 같은 자가 없었더라	And like unto him was there no king before him, that turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, according to all the law of Moses; neither after him arose there any like him.	Neither before nor after Josiah was there any king like him, who turned to the LORD with all his heart and with all his soul and with all his strength, according to all the Law of Moses.
2KI	23	26	그러나 여호와께서 유다를 향하여 진노하신 그 크게 타오르는 진노를 돌이키지 아니하셨으니 이는 므낫세가 여호와를 격노케 한 그 모든 격노를 인함이라	Notwithstanding the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his great wrath, wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the provocations that Manasseh had provoked him withal.	Nevertheless, the LORD did not turn away from the fury of His burning anger, which was kindled against Judah because of all that Manasseh had done to provoke Him to anger.
2KI	23	27	여호와께서 가라사대 내가 이스라엘을 물리친 것 같이 유다도 내 앞에서 물리치며 내가 뺀 이 성 예루살렘과 내 이름을 거기 두리라 한 이 전을 버리리라 하셨더라	And the Lord said, I will remove Judah also out of my sight, as I have removed Israel, and will cast off this city Jerusalem which I have chosen, and the house of which I said, My name shall be there.	For the LORD had said, “I will remove Judah from My sight, just as I removed Israel. I will reject this city Jerusalem, which I chose, and the temple of which I said, ‘My Name shall be there.’”
2KI	23	28	요시야의 남은 사적과 모든 행한 일은 유다 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?	As for the rest of the acts of Josiah, along with all his accomplishments, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
2KI	23	29	요시야 당시에 애굽 왕 바로느고가 앗수르 왕을 치고자하여 유브라데 하수로 올라가므로 요시야 왕이 나가서 방비하더니 애굽 왕이 요시야를 므깃도에서 만나본 후에 죽인지라	In his days Pharaoh–nechoh king of Egypt went up against the king of Assyria to the river Euphrates: and king Josiah went against him; and he slew him at Megiddo, when he had seen him.	At the end of Josiah’s reign, Pharaoh Neco king of Egypt marched up to help the king of Assyria at the Euphrates River. King Josiah went out to confront him, but Neco faced him and killed him at Megiddo.
2KI	23	30	신복들이 그 시체를 병거에 싣고 므깃도에서 예루살렘으로 돌아와서 그 묘실에 장사하니 국민이 요시야의 아들 여호아하스를 데려다가 저에게 기름을 붓고 그 부친을 대신하여 왕을 삼았더라	And his servants carried him in a chariot dead from Megiddo, and brought him to Jerusalem, and buried him in his own sepulchre. And the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and anointed him, and made him king in his father’s stead.	From Megiddo his servants carried his body in a chariot, brought him to Jerusalem, and buried him in his own tomb. Then the people of the land took Jehoahaz son of Josiah, anointed him, and made him king in place of his father.
2KI	23	31	여호아하스가 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 이십삼 세라 예루살렘에서 석 달을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 하무달이라 립나 예레미야의 딸이더라	Jehoahaz was twenty and three years old when he began to reign; and he reigned three months in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Hamutal, the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.	Jehoahaz was twenty-three years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem three months. His mother’s name was Hamutal daughter of Jeremiah; she was from Libnah.
2KI	23	32	여호아하스가 그 열조의 모든 행위대로 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하였더니	And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his fathers had done.	And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, just as his fathers had done.
2KI	23	33	바로느고가 저를 하맛 땅 립나에 가두어 예루살렘에서 왕이 되지 못하게 하고 또 그 나라로 은 일백 달란트와 금 한 달란트를 벌금으로 내게 하고	And Pharaoh–nechoh put him in bands at Riblah in the land of Hamath, that he might not reign in Jerusalem; and put the land to a tribute of an hundred talents of silver, and a talent of gold.	And Pharaoh Neco imprisoned Jehoahaz at Riblah in the land of Hamath so that he could not reign in Jerusalem, and he imposed on Judah a levy of a hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold.
2KI	23	34	바로느고가 요시야의 아들 엘리아김으로 그 아비 요시야를 대신하여 왕을 삼고 그 이름을 고쳐 여호야김이라 하고 여호아하스는 애굽으로 잡아갔더니 저가 거기서 죽으니라	And Pharaoh–nechoh made Eliakim the son of Josiah king in the room of Josiah his father, and turned his name to Jehoiakim, and took Jehoahaz away: and he came to Egypt, and died there.	Then Pharaoh Neco made Eliakim son of Josiah king in place of his father Josiah, and he changed Eliakim’s name to Jehoiakim. But Neco took Jehoahaz and carried him off to Egypt, where he died.
2KI	23	35	여호야김이 은과 금을 바로에게 주니라 저가 바로느고의 명령대로 그에게 그 돈을 주기 위하여 나라에 부과하되 국민 각 사람의 힘대로 액수를 정하고 은금을 늑봉하였더라	And Jehoiakim gave the silver and the gold to Pharaoh; but he taxed the land to give the money according to the commandment of Pharaoh: he exacted the silver and the gold of the people of the land, of every one according to his taxation, to give it unto Pharaoh–nechoh.	So Jehoiakim paid the silver and gold to Pharaoh Neco, but to meet Pharaoh’s demand he taxed the land and exacted the silver and the gold from the people, each according to his wealth.
2KI	23	36	여호야김이 왕이 될 때에 나이 이십오 세라 예루살렘에서 십일 년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 스비다라 루마 브다야의 딸이더라	Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when he began to reign; and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Zebudah, the daughter of Pedaiah of Rumah.	Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem eleven years. His mother’s name was Zebidah daughter of Pedaiah; she was from Rumah.
2KI	23	37	여호야김이 그 열조의 모든 행한 일을 본받아 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하였더라	And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his fathers had done.	And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, just as his fathers had done.
2KI	24	1	여호야김 시대에 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살이 올라오매 여호야김이 삼 년을 섬기다가 돌이켜 저를 배반하였더니	In his days Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up, and Jehoiakim became his servant three years: then he turned and rebelled against him.	During Jehoiakim’s reign, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon invaded. So Jehoiakim became his vassal for three years, until he turned and rebelled against Nebuchadnezzar.
2KI	24	2	여호와께서 그 종 선지자들로 하신 말씀과 같이 갈대아의 부대와 아람의 부대와 모압의 부대와 암몬자손의 부대를 여호야김에게로 보내어 유다를 쳐 멸하려 하시니	And the Lord sent against him bands of the Chaldees, and bands of the Syrians, and bands of the Moabites, and bands of the children of Ammon, and sent them against Judah to destroy it, according to the word of the Lord, which he spake by his servants the prophets.	And the LORD sent Chaldean, Aramean, Moabite, and Ammonite raiders against Jehoiakim in order to destroy Judah, according to the word that the LORD had spoken through His servants the prophets.
2KI	24	3	이 일이 유다에 임함은 곧 여호와의 명하신바로 저희를 자기 앞에서 물리치고자 하심이니 이는 므낫세의 지은 모든 죄로 인함이며	Surely at the commandment of the Lord came this upon Judah, to remove them out of his sight, for the sins of Manasseh, according to all that he did;	Surely this happened to Judah at the LORD’s command, to remove them from His presence because of the sins of Manasseh and all that he had done,
2KI	24	4	또 저가 무죄한 자의 피를 흘려 그 피로 예루살렘에 가득하게 하였음이라 여호와께서 사하시기를 즐겨하지 아니하시니라	And also for the innocent blood that he shed: for he filled Jerusalem with innocent blood; which the Lord would not pardon.	and also for the innocent blood he had shed. For he had filled Jerusalem with innocent blood, and the LORD was unwilling to forgive.
2KI	24	5	여호야김의 남은 사적과 모든 행한 일은 유다 왕 역대지략에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?	As for the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim, along with all his accomplishments, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
2KI	24	6	여호야김이 그 열조와 함께 자매 그 아들 여호야긴이 대신하여 왕이 되니라	So Jehoiakim slept with his fathers: and Jehoiachin his son reigned in his stead.	And Jehoiakim rested with his fathers, and his son Jehoiachin reigned in his place.
2KI	24	7	애굽 왕이 다시는 그 나라에서 나오지 못하였으니 이는 바벨론 왕이 애굽 하수에서부터 유브라데 하수까지 애굽 왕에게 속한 땅을 다 취하였음이더라	And the king of Egypt came not again any more out of his land: for the king of Babylon had taken from the river of Egypt unto the river Euphrates all that pertained to the king of Egypt.	Now the king of Egypt did not march out of his land again, because the king of Babylon had taken all his territory, from the Brook of Egypt to the Euphrates River.
2KI	24	8	여호야긴이 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 십팔 세라 예루살렘에서 석 달을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 느후스다라 예루살렘 엘라단의 딸이더라	Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem three months. And his mother’s name was Nehushta, the daughter of Elnathan of Jerusalem.	Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem three months. His mother’s name was Nehushta daughter of Elnathan; she was from Jerusalem.
2KI	24	9	여호야긴이 그 부친의 모든 행위를 본받아 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하였더라	And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his father had done.	And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, just as his father had done.
2KI	24	10	그 때에 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살의 신복들이 예루살렘에 올라와서 그 성을 에워싸니라	At that time the servants of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up against Jerusalem, and the city was besieged.	At that time the servants of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon marched up to Jerusalem, and the city came under siege.
2KI	24	11	그 신복들이 에워쌀 때에 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살도 그 성에 이르니	And Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came against the city, and his servants did besiege it.	And Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came to the city while his servants were besieging it.
2KI	24	12	유다 왕 여호야긴이 그 모친과 신복과 방백들과 내시들과 함께 바벨론 왕에게 나아가매 왕이 잡으니 때는 바벨론 왕 팔년이라	And Jehoiachin the king of Judah went out to the king of Babylon, he, and his mother, and his servants, and his princes, and his officers: and the king of Babylon took him in the eighth year of his reign.	Jehoiachin king of Judah, his mother, his servants, his commanders, and his officials all surrendered to the king of Babylon. So in the eighth year of his reign, the king of Babylon took him captive.
2KI	24	13	저가 여호와의 전의 모든 보물과 왕궁 보물을 집어내고 또 이스라엘 왕 솔로몬이 만든 것 곧 여호와의 전의 금 기명을 다 훼파하였으니 여호와의 말씀과 같이 되었더라	And he carried out thence all the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the king’s house, and cut in pieces all the vessels of gold which Solomon king of Israel had made in the temple of the Lord, as the Lord had said.	As the LORD had declared, Nebuchadnezzar also carried off all the treasures from the house of the LORD and the royal palace, and he cut into pieces all the gold articles that Solomon king of Israel had made in the temple of the LORD.
2KI	24	14	저가 또 예루살렘의 모든 백성과 모든 방백과 모든 용사 합 일만 명과 모든 공장과 대장장이를 사로잡아 가매 빈천한 자 외에는 그 땅에 남은 자가 없었더라	And he carried away all Jerusalem, and all the princes, and all the mighty men of valour, even ten thousand captives, and all the craftsmen and smiths: none remained, save the poorest sort of the people of the land.	He carried into exile all Jerusalem—all the commanders and mighty men of valor, all the craftsmen and metalsmiths—ten thousand captives in all. Only the poorest people of the land remained.
2KI	24	15	저가 여호야긴을 바벨론으로 사로잡아 가고 왕의 모친과 왕의 아내들과 내시와 나라에 권세있는 자도 예루살렘에서 바벨론으로 사로잡아 가고	And he carried away Jehoiachin to Babylon, and the king’s mother, and the king’s wives, and his officers, and the mighty of the land, those carried he into captivity from Jerusalem to Babylon.	Nebuchadnezzar carried away Jehoiachin to Babylon, as well as the king’s mother, his wives, his officials, and the leading men of the land. He took them into exile from Jerusalem to Babylon.
2KI	24	16	또 용사 칠천과 공장과 대장장이 일천 곧 다 강장하여 싸움에 능한 자들을 바벨론으로 사로잡아 가고	And all the men of might, even seven thousand, and craftsmen and smiths a thousand, all that were strong and apt for war, even them the king of Babylon brought captive to Babylon.	The king of Babylon also brought into exile to Babylon all seven thousand men of valor and a thousand craftsmen and metalsmiths—all strong and fit for battle.
2KI	24	17	바벨론 왕이 또 여호야긴의 아자비 맛다니야로 대신하여 왕을 삼고 그 이름을 고쳐 시드기야라 하였더라	And the king of Babylon made Mattaniah his father’s brother king in his stead, and changed his name to Zedekiah.	Then the king of Babylon made Mattaniah, Jehoiachin’s uncle, king in his place and changed his name to Zedekiah.
2KI	24	18	시드기야가 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 이십일 세라 예루살렘에서 십일 년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 하무달이라 립나 예레미야의 딸이더라	Zedekiah was twenty and one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Hamutal, the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.	Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem eleven years. His mother’s name was Hamutal daughter of Jeremiah; she was from Libnah.
2KI	24	19	시드기야가 여호야김의 모든 행위를 본받아 여호와 보시기에 악을 행한지라	And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, according to all that Jehoiakim had done.	And Zedekiah did evil in the sight of the LORD, just as Jehoiakim had done.
2KI	24	20	여호와께서 예루살렘과 유다를 진노하심이 저희를 그 앞에서 쫓아내실 때까지 이르렀더라 시드기야가 바벨론 왕을 배반하니라	For through the anger of the Lord it came to pass in Jerusalem and Judah, until he had cast them out from his presence, that Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.	For because of the anger of the LORD, all this happened in Jerusalem and Judah, until He finally banished them from His presence. And Zedekiah also rebelled against the king of Babylon.
2KI	25	1	시드기야 구년 시월 십일에 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살이 그 모든 군대를 거느리고 예루살렘을 치러 올라와서 진을 치고 사면으로 토성을 쌓으매	And it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came, he, and all his host, against Jerusalem, and pitched against it; and they built forts against it round about.	So in the ninth year of Zedekiah’s reign, on the tenth day of the tenth month, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon marched against Jerusalem with his entire army. They encamped outside the city and built a siege wall all around it.
2KI	25	2	성이 시드기야왕 십일년까지 에워싸였더니	And the city was besieged unto the eleventh year of king Zedekiah.	And the city was kept under siege until King Zedekiah’s eleventh year.
2KI	25	3	그 사월 구일에 성중에 기근이 심하여 그 땅 백성의 양식이 진하였고	And on the ninth day of the fourth month the famine prevailed in the city, and there was no bread for the people of the land.	By the ninth day of the fourth month, the famine in the city was so severe that the people of the land had no food.
2KI	25	4	갈대아 사람이 그 성읍을 에워쌌으므로 성벽에 구멍을 뚫은지라 모든 군사가 밤중에 두 성벽 사이 왕의 동산 곁문 길로 도망하여 아라바 길로 가더니	And the city was broken up, and all the men of war fled by night by the way of the gate between two walls, which is by the king’s garden: (now the Chaldees were against the city round about:) and the king went the way toward the plain.	Then the city was breached; and though the Chaldeans had surrounded the city, all the men of war fled by night by way of the gate between the two walls near the king’s garden. They headed toward the Arabah,
2KI	25	5	갈대아 군사가 왕을 쫓아가서 여리고 평지에 미치매 왕의 모든 군사가 저를 떠나 흩어진지라	And the army of the Chaldees pursued after the king, and overtook him in the plains of Jericho: and all his army were scattered from him.	but the army of the Chaldeans pursued the king and overtook him in the plains of Jericho, and all his army was separated from him.
2KI	25	6	갈대아 군사가 왕을 잡아 립나 바벨론 왕에게로 끌고 가매 저에게 신문하고	So they took the king, and brought him up to the king of Babylon to Riblah; and they gave judgment upon him.	The Chaldeans seized the king and brought him up to the king of Babylon at Riblah, where they pronounced judgment on him.
2KI	25	7	시드기야의 아들들을 저의 목전에서 죽이고 시드기야의 두 눈을 빼고 사슬로 결박하여 바벨론으로 끌어갔더라	And they slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes, and put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him with fetters of brass, and carried him to Babylon.	And they slaughtered the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes. Then they put out his eyes, bound him with bronze shackles, and took him to Babylon.
2KI	25	8	바벨론 왕 느부갓네살의 십구년 오월 칠일에 바벨론 왕의 신하 시위대 장관 느부사라단이 예루살렘에 이르러	And in the fifth month, on the seventh day of the month, which is the nineteenth year of king Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, came Nebuzar–adan, captain of the guard, a servant of the king of Babylon, unto Jerusalem:	On the seventh day of the fifth month, in the nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar’s reign over Babylon, Nebuzaradan captain of the guard, a servant of the king of Babylon, entered Jerusalem.
2KI	25	9	여호와의 전과 왕궁을 사르고 예루살렘의 모든 집을 귀인의 집까지 불살랐으며	And he burnt the house of the Lord, and the king’s house, and all the houses of Jerusalem, and every great man’s house burnt he with fire.	He burned down the house of the LORD, the royal palace, and all the houses of Jerusalem—every significant building.
2KI	25	10	시위대 장관을 좇는 갈대아 온 군대가 예루살렘 사면 성벽을 헐었으며	And all the army of the Chaldees, that were with the captain of the guard, brake down the walls of Jerusalem round about.	And the whole army of the Chaldeans under the captain of the guard broke down the walls around Jerusalem.
2KI	25	11	성중에 남아 있는 백성과 바벨론 왕에게 항복한 자와 무리의 남은 자는 시위대 장관 느부사라단이 다 사로잡아 가고	Now the rest of the people that were left in the city, and the fugitives that fell away to the king of Babylon, with the remnant of the multitude, did Nebuzar–adan the captain of the guard carry away.	Then Nebuzaradan captain of the guard carried into exile the people who remained in the city, along with the deserters who had defected to the king of Babylon and the rest of the population.
2KI	25	12	빈천한 국민을 그 땅에 남겨두어 포도원을 다스리는 자와 농부가 되게 하였더라	But the captain of the guard left of the poor of the land to be vinedressers and husbandmen.	But the captain of the guard left behind some of the poorest of the land to tend the vineyards and fields.
2KI	25	13	갈대아 사람이 또 여호와의 전의 두 놋기둥과 받침들과 여호와의 전의 놋바다를 깨뜨려 그 놋을 바벨론으로 가져가고	And the pillars of brass that were in the house of the Lord, and the bases, and the brasen sea that was in the house of the Lord, did the Chaldees break in pieces, and carried the brass of them to Babylon.	Moreover, the Chaldeans broke up the bronze pillars and stands and the bronze Sea in the house of the LORD, and they carried the bronze to Babylon.
2KI	25	14	또 가마들과 부삽들과 불집게들과 숟가락들과 섬길 때에 쓰는 모든 놋그릇을 다 가져갔으며	And the pots, and the shovels, and the snuffers, and the spoons, and all the vessels of brass wherewith they ministered, took they away.	They also took away the pots, shovels, wick trimmers, dishes, and all the articles of bronze used in the temple service.
2KI	25	15	시위대 장관이 또 불 옮기는 그릇들과 주발들 곧 금물의 금과 은물의 은을 가져갔으며	And the firepans, and the bowls, and such things as were of gold, in gold, and of silver, in silver, the captain of the guard took away.	The captain of the guard also took away the censers and sprinkling bowls—anything made of pure gold or fine silver.
2KI	25	16	또 솔로몬이 여호와의 전을 위하여 만든 두 기둥과 한 바다와 받침들을 취하였는데 이 모든 기구의 놋 중수를 헤아릴 수 없었으니	The two pillars, one sea, and the bases which Solomon had made for the house of the Lord; the brass of all these vessels was without weight.	As for the two pillars, the Sea, and the movable stands that Solomon had made for the house of the LORD, the weight of the bronze from all these articles was beyond measure.
2KI	25	17	그 한 기둥은 고가 십팔 규빗이요 그 꼭대기에 놋머리가 있어 고가 삼 규빗이요 그 머리에 둘린 그물과 석류가 다 놋이라 다른 기둥의 장식과 그물도 이와 같았더라	The height of the one pillar was eighteen cubits, and the chapiter upon it was brass: and the height of the chapiter three cubits; and the wreathen work, and pomegranates upon the chapiter round about, all of brass: and like unto these had the second pillar with wreathen work.	Each pillar was eighteen cubits tall. The bronze capital atop one pillar was three cubits high, with a network of bronze pomegranates all around. The second pillar, with its network, was similar.
2KI	25	18	시위대 장관이 대제사장 스라야와 부제사장 스바냐와 전 문지기 세 사람을 잡고	And the captain of the guard took Seraiah the chief priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the three keepers of the door:	The captain of the guard also took away Seraiah the chief priest, Zephaniah the priest of second rank, and the three doorkeepers.
2KI	25	19	또 성중에서 사람을 잡았으니 곧 군사를 거느린 내시 하나와 또 성중에서 만난바 왕의 시종 다섯 사람과 국민을 초모하는 장관의 서기관 하나와 성중에서 만난바 국민 육십 명이라	And out of the city he took an officer that was set over the men of war, and five men of them that were in the king’s presence, which were found in the city, and the principal scribe of the host, which mustered the people of the land, and threescore men of the people of the land that were found in the city:	Of those still in the city, he took a court official who had been appointed over the men of war, as well as five royal advisors. He also took the scribe of the captain of the army, who had enlisted the people of the land, and sixty men who were found in the city.
2KI	25	20	시위대 장관 느부사라단이 저희를 잡아가지고 립나 바벨론 왕에게 나아가매	And Nebuzar–adan captain of the guard took these, and brought them to the king of Babylon to Riblah:	Nebuzaradan captain of the guard took them and brought them to the king of Babylon at Riblah.
2KI	25	21	바벨론 왕이 하맛 땅 립나에서 다 쳐 죽였더라 이와 같이 유다가 사로잡혀 본토에서 떠났더라	And the king of Babylon smote them, and slew them at Riblah in the land of Hamath. So Judah was carried away out of their land.	There at Riblah in the land of Hamath, the king of Babylon struck them down and put them to death. So Judah was taken into exile, away from its own land.
2KI	25	22	유다 땅에 머물러 있는 백성은 곧 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살이 남긴 자라 왕이 사반의 손자 아히감의 아들 그달리야로 관할하게 하였더라	And as for the people that remained in the land of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had left, even over them he made Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, ruler.	Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon appointed Gedaliah son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, over the people he had left behind in the land of Judah.
2KI	25	23	모든 군대 장관과 그 좇는 자가 바벨론 왕이 그달리야로 방백을 삼았다 함을 듣고 이에 느다니야의 아들 이스마엘과 가레아의 아들 요하난과 느도바 사람 단후멧의 아들 스라야와 마아가 사람의 아들 야아사니야와 그 좇는 사람이 모두 미스바로 가서 그달리야에게 나아가매	And when all the captains of the armies, they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah governor, there came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, even Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan the son of Careah, and Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite, and Jaazaniah the son of a Maachathite, they and their men.	When all the commanders of the armies and their men heard that the king of Babylon had appointed Gedaliah as governor, they came to Gedaliah at Mizpah—Ishmael son of Nethaniah, Johanan son of Kareah, Seraiah son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite, and Jaazaniah son of the Maacathite, as well as their men.
2KI	25	24	그달리야가 저희와 그 좇는 자들에게 맹세하여 이르되 너희는 갈대아 신복을 인하여 두려워 말고 이 땅에 거하여 바벨론 왕을 섬기라 그리하면 너희가 평안하리라 하니라	And Gedaliah sware to them, and to their men, and said unto them, Fear not to be the servants of the Chaldees: dwell in the land, and serve the king of Babylon; and it shall be well with you.	And Gedaliah took an oath before them and their men, assuring them, “Do not be afraid of the servants of the Chaldeans. Live in the land and serve the king of Babylon, and it will be well with you.”
2KI	25	25	칠월에 왕족 엘리사마의 손자 느다니야의 아들 이스마엘이 십 인을 거느리고 와서 그달리야를 쳐서 죽이고 또 저와 함께 미스바에 있는 유다 사람과 갈대아 사람을 죽인지라	But it came to pass in the seventh month, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of the seed royal, came, and ten men with him, and smote Gedaliah, that he died, and the Jews and the Chaldees that were with him at Mizpah.	In the seventh month, however, Ishmael son of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, who was a member of the royal family, came with ten men and struck down and killed Gedaliah, along with the Judeans and Chaldeans who were with him at Mizpah.
2KI	25	26	대소 백성과 군대 장관들이 다 일어나서 애굽으로 갔으니 이는 갈대아 사람을 두려워함이었더라	And all the people, both small and great, and the captains of the armies, arose, and came to Egypt: for they were afraid of the Chaldees.	Then all the people small and great, together with the commanders of the army, arose and fled to Egypt for fear of the Chaldeans.
2KI	25	27	유다 왕 여호야긴이 사로잡혀 간지 삼십칠년 곧 바벨론 왕 에윌므로닥의 즉위한 원년 십이월 이십칠일에 유다 왕 여호야긴을 옥에서 내어놓아 그 머리를 들게 하고	And it came to pass in the seven and thirtieth year of the captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, on the seven and twentieth day of the month, that Evil–merodach king of Babylon in the year that he began to reign did lift up the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah out of prison;	On the twenty-seventh day of the twelfth month of the thirty-seventh year of the exile of Judah’s King Jehoiachin, in the year Evil-merodach became king of Babylon, he released King Jehoiachin of Judah from prison.
2KI	25	28	선히 말하고 그 위를 바벨론에 저와 함께 있는 모든 왕의 위보다 높이고	And he spake kindly to him, and set his throne above the throne of the kings that were with him in Babylon;	And he spoke kindly to Jehoiachin and set his throne above the thrones of the other kings who were with him in Babylon.
2KI	25	29	그 죄수의 의복을 바꾸게 하고 그 일평생에 항상 왕의 앞에서 먹게 하였고	And changed his prison garments: and he did eat bread continually before him all the days of his life.	So Jehoiachin changed out of his prison clothes, and he dined regularly at the king’s table for the rest of his life.
2KI	25	30	저의 쓸 것은 날마다 왕에게서 받는 정수가 있어서 종신토록 끊이지 아니하였더라	And his allowance was a continual allowance given him of the king, a daily rate for every day, all the days of his life.	And the king provided Jehoiachin a daily portion for the rest of his life.
1CH	1	1	아담, 셋, 에노스,	Adam, Sheth, Enosh,	Adam, Seth, Enosh,
1CH	1	2	게난, 마할랄렐, 야렛,	Kenan, Mahalaleel, Jered,	Kenan, Mahalalel, Jared,
1CH	1	3	에녹, 므두셀라,	Henoch, Methuselah, Lamech,	Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech.
1CH	1	4	라멕, 노아, 셈, 함과 야벳,	Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.	The sons of Noah: Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
1CH	1	5	야벳의 아들은 고멜과 마곡과 마대와 야완과 두발과 메섹과 디라스요	The sons of Japheth; Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras.	The sons of Japheth: Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Meshech, and Tiras.
1CH	1	6	고멜의 아들은 아스그나스와 디밧과 도갈마요	And the sons of Gomer; Ashchenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah.	The sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz, Riphath, and Togarmah.
1CH	1	7	야완의 아들은 엘리사와 다시스와 깃딤과 도다님이더라	And the sons of Javan; Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim.	And the sons of Javan: Elishah, Tarshish, the Kittites, and the Rodanites.
1CH	1	8	함의 아들은 구스와 미스라임과 붓과 가나안이요	The sons of Ham; Cush, and Mizraim, Put, and Canaan.	The sons of Ham: Cush, Mizraim, Put, and Canaan.
1CH	1	9	구스의 아들은 스바와 하윌라와 삽다와 라아마와 삽드가요 라아마의 아들은 스바와 드단이요	And the sons of Cush; Seba, and Havilah, and Sabta, and Raamah, and Sabtecha. And the sons of Raamah; Sheba, and Dedan.	The sons of Cush: Seba, Havilah, Sabta, Raamah, and Sabteca. The sons of Raamah: Sheba and Dedan.
1CH	1	10	구스가 또 니므롯을 낳았으니 세상에 처음 영걸한 자며	And Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be mighty upon the earth.	Cush was the father of Nimrod, who began to be a mighty one on the earth.
1CH	1	11	미스라임은 루딤과 아나밈과 르하빔과 납두힘과	And Mizraim begat Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim,	Mizraim was the father of the Ludites, the Anamites, the Lehabites, the Naphtuhites,
1CH	1	12	바드루심과 가슬루힘과 갑도림을 낳았으니 블레셋 족속은 가슬루힘에게서 나왔으며	And Pathrusim, and Casluhim, (of whom came the Philistines,) and Caphthorim.	the Pathrusites, the Casluhites (from whom the Philistines came), and the Caphtorites.
1CH	1	13	가나안은 맏아들 시돈과 헷을 낳고	And Canaan begat Zidon his firstborn, and Heth,	And Canaan was the father of Sidon his firstborn, and of the Hittites,
1CH	1	14	또 여부스 족속과 아모리 족속과 기르가스 족속과	The Jebusite also, and the Amorite, and the Girgashite,	the Jebusites, the Amorites, the Girgashites,
1CH	1	15	히위 족속과 알가 족속과 신 족속과	And the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite,	the Hivites, the Arkites, the Sinites,
1CH	1	16	아르왓 족속과 스말 족속과 하맛 족속을 낳았더라	And the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite.	the Arvadites, the Zemarites, and the Hamathites.
1CH	1	17	셈의 아들은 엘람과 앗수르와 아르박삿과 룻과 아람과 우스와 훌과 게델과 메섹이라	The sons of Shem; Elam, and Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram, and Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Meshech.	The sons of Shem: Elam, Asshur, Arphaxad, Lud, and Aram. The sons of Aram: Uz, Hul, Gether, and Meshech.
1CH	1	18	아르박삿은 셀라를 낳고 셀라는 에벨을 낳고	And Arphaxad begat Shelah, and Shelah begat Eber.	Arphaxad was the father of Shelah, and Shelah was the father of Eber.
1CH	1	19	에벨은 두 아들을 낳아 하나의 이름을 벨렉이라 하였으니 이는 그 때에 땅이 나뉘었음이요 그 아우의 이름은 욕단이며	And unto Eber were born two sons: the name of the one was Peleg; because in his days the earth was divided: and his brother’s name was Joktan.	Two sons were born to Eber: One was named Peleg, because in his days the earth was divided, and his brother was named Joktan.
1CH	1	20	욕단이 알모닷과 셀렙과 하살마웹과 예라와	And Joktan begat Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah,	And Joktan was the father of Almodad, Sheleph, Hazarmaveth, Jerah,
1CH	1	21	하도람과 우살과 디글라와	Hadoram also, and Uzal, and Diklah,	Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah,
1CH	1	22	에발과 아비마엘과 스바와	And Ebal, and Abimael, and Sheba,	Obal, Abimael, Sheba,
1CH	1	23	오빌과 하윌라와 요밥을 낳았으니 욕단의 아들들은 이러하니라	And Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab. All these were the sons of Joktan.	Ophir, Havilah, and Jobab. All these were sons of Joktan.
1CH	1	24	셈, 아르박삿, 셀라,	Shem, Arphaxad, Shelah,	So from Shem came Arphaxad, Shelah,
1CH	1	25	에벨, 벨렉, 르우,	Eber, Peleg, Reu,	Eber, Peleg, Reu,
1CH	1	26	스룩, 나홀, 데라,	Serug, Nahor, Terah,	Serug, Nahor, Terah,
1CH	1	27	아브람 곧 아브라함,	Abram; the same is Abraham.	and Abram (that is, Abraham).
1CH	1	28	아브라함의 아들은 이삭과 이스마엘이라	The sons of Abraham; Isaac, and Ishmael.	The sons of Abraham were Isaac and Ishmael.
1CH	1	29	이스마엘의 세계는 이러하니 그 맏아들은 느바욧이요 다음은 게달과 앗브엘과 밉삼과	These are their generations: The firstborn of Ishmael, Nebaioth; then Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam,	These are their genealogies:
1CH	1	30	미스마와 두마와 맛사와 하닷과 데마와	Mishma, and Dumah, Massa, Hadad, and Tema,	Nebaioth the firstborn of Ishmael, then Kedar, Adbeel, Mibsam, Mishma, Dumah, Massa, Hadad, Tema,
1CH	1	31	여둘과 나비스와 게드마라 이스마엘의 아들들은 이러하니라	Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah. These are the sons of Ishmael.	Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah. These were the sons of Ishmael.
1CH	1	32	아브라함의 첩 그두라의 낳은 아들은 시므란과 욕산과 므단과 미디안과 이스박과 수아요 욕산의 아들은 스바와 드단이요	Now the sons of Keturah, Abraham’s concubine: she bare Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah. And the sons of Jokshan; Sheba, and Dedan.	The sons born to Keturah, Abraham’s concubine: Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak, and Shuah. The sons of Jokshan: Sheba and Dedan.
1CH	1	33	미디안의 아들은 에바와 에벨과 하녹과 아비다와 엘다아니 그두라의 아들들은 이러하니라	And the sons of Midian; Ephah, and Epher, and Henoch, and Abida, and Eldaah. All these are the sons of Keturah.	The sons of Midian: Ephah, Epher, Hanoch, Abida, and Eldaah. All of these were Keturah’s sons.
1CH	1	34	아브라함이 이삭을 낳았으니 이삭의 아들은 에서와 이스라엘이더라	And Abraham begat Isaac. The sons of Isaac; Esau and Israel.	Abraham was the father of Isaac. The sons of Isaac: Esau and Israel.
1CH	1	35	에서의 아들은 엘리바스와 르우엘과 여우스와 얄람과 고라요	The sons of Esau; Eliphaz, Reuel, and Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah.	The sons of Esau: Eliphaz, Reuel, Jeush, Jalam, and Korah.
1CH	1	36	엘리바스의 아들은 데만과 오말과 스비와 가담과 그나스와 딤나와 아말렉이요	The sons of Eliphaz; Teman, and Omar, Zephi, and Gatam, Kenaz, and Timna, and Amalek.	The sons of Eliphaz: Teman, Omar, Zepho, Gatam, and Kenaz; and by Timna, Amalek.
1CH	1	37	르우엘의 아들은 나핫과 세라와 삼마와 밋사요	The sons of Reuel; Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah.	The sons of Reuel: Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah.
1CH	1	38	세일의 아들은 로단과 소발과 시브온과 아나와 디손과 에셀과 디산이요	And the sons of Seir; Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah, and Dishon, and Ezer, and Dishan.	The sons of Seir: Lotan, Shobal, Zibeon, Anah, Dishon, Ezer, and Dishan.
1CH	1	39	로단의 아들은 호리와 호맘이요 로단의 누이는 딤나요	And the sons of Lotan; Hori, and Homam: and Timna was Lotan’s sister.	The sons of Lotan: Hori and Homam. Timna was Lotan’s sister.
1CH	1	40	소발의 아들은 알랸과 마나핫과 에발과 스비와 오남이요 시브온의 아들은 아야와 아나요	The sons of Shobal; Alian, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shephi, and Onam. And the sons of Zibeon; Aiah, and Anah.	The sons of Shobal: Alvan, Manahath, Ebal, Shepho, and Onam. The sons of Zibeon: Aiah and Anah.
1CH	1	41	아나의 아들은 디손이요 디손의 아들은 하므란과 에스반과 이드란과 그란이요	The sons of Anah; Dishon. And the sons of Dishon; Amram, and Eshban, and Ithran, and Cheran.	The son of Anah: Dishon. The sons of Dishon: Hemdan, Eshban, Ithran, and Cheran.
1CH	1	42	에셀의 아들은 빌한과 사아완과 야아간이요 디산의 아들은 우스와 아란이더라	The sons of Ezer; Bilhan, and Zavan, and Jakan. The sons of Dishan; Uz, and Aran.	The sons of Ezer: Bilhan, Zaavan, and Akan. The sons of Dishan: Uz and Aran.
1CH	1	43	이스라엘 자손을 치리하는 왕이 있기 전에 에돔 땅을 다스린 왕이 이러하니라 브올의 아들 벨라니 그 도성 이름은 딘하바며	Now these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom before any king reigned over the children of Israel; Bela the son of Beor: and the name of his city was Dinhabah.	These are the kings who reigned in the land of Edom before any king reigned over the Israelites: Bela son of Beor. His city was named Dinhabah.
1CH	1	44	벨라가 죽으매 보스라 세라의 아들 요밥이 대신하여 왕이 되었고	And when Bela was dead, Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his stead.	When Bela died, Jobab son of Zerah from Bozrah reigned in his place.
1CH	1	45	요밥이 죽으매 데만 족속의 땅 사람 후삼이 대신하여 왕이 되었고	And when Jobab was dead, Husham of the land of the Temanites reigned in his stead.	When Jobab died, Husham from the land of the Temanites reigned in his place.
1CH	1	46	후삼이 죽으매 브닷의 아들 하닷이 대신하여 왕이 되었으니 하닷은 모압 들에서 미디안을 친 자요 그 도성 이름은 아윗이며	And when Husham was dead, Hadad the son of Bedad, which smote Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was Avith.	When Husham died, Hadad son of Bedad, who defeated Midian in the country of Moab, reigned in his place. And the name of his city was Avith.
1CH	1	47	하닷이 죽으매 마스레가 사믈라가 대신하여 왕이 되었고	And when Hadad was dead, Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead.	When Hadad died, Samlah from Masrekah reigned in his place.
1CH	1	48	사믈라가 죽으매 하숫가의 드호봇 사울이 대신하여 왕이 되었고	And when Samlah was dead, Shaul of Rehoboth by the river reigned in his stead.	When Samlah died, Shaul from Rehoboth on the Euphrates reigned in his place.
1CH	1	49	사울이 죽으매 악볼의 아들 바알하난이 대신하여 왕이 되었고	And when Shaul was dead, Baal–hanan the son of Achbor reigned in his stead.	When Shaul died, Baal-hanan son of Achbor reigned in his place.
1CH	1	50	바알하난이 죽으매 하닷이 대신하여 왕이 되었으니 그 도성 이름은 바이요 그 아내의 이름은 므헤다벨이라 메사합의 손녀요 마드렛의 딸이었더라	And when Baal–hanan was dead, Hadad reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was Pai; and his wife’s name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab.	When Baal-hanan died, Hadad reigned in his place. His city was named Pau, and his wife’s name was Mehetabel daughter of Matred, the daughter of Me-zahab.
1CH	1	51	하닷이 죽은 후에 에돔의 족장이 이러하니 딤나 족장과 알랴 족장과 여뎃 족장과	Hadad died also. And the dukes of Edom were; duke Timnah, duke Aliah, duke Jetheth,	Then Hadad died. Now the chiefs of Edom were Timna, Alvah, Jetheth,
1CH	1	52	오홀리바마 족장과 엘라 족장과 비논 족장과	Duke Aholibamah, duke Elah, duke Pinon,	Oholibamah, Elah, Pinon,
1CH	1	53	그나스 족장과 데만 족장과 밉살 족장과	Duke Kenaz, duke Teman, duke Mibzar,	Kenaz, Teman, Mibzar,
1CH	1	54	막디엘 족장과 이람 족장이라 에돔 족장이 이러하였더라	Duke Magdiel, duke Iram. These are the dukes of Edom.	Magdiel, and Iram. These were the chiefs of Edom.
1CH	2	1	이스라엘의 아들은 이러하니 르우벤과 시므온과 레위와 유다와 잇사갈과 스불론과	These are the sons of Israel; Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun,	These were the sons of Israel:
1CH	2	2	단과 요셉과 베냐민과 납달리와 갓과 아셀이더라	Dan, Joseph, and Benjamin, Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.	Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Zebulun, Dan, Joseph, Benjamin, Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.
1CH	2	3	유다의 아들은 에르와 오난과 셀라니 이 세 사람은 가나안 사람 수아의 딸이 유다로 말미암아 낳은 자요 유다의 맏아들 에르는 여호와 보시기에 악하였으므로 여호와께서 죽이셨고	The sons of Judah; Er, and Onan, and Shelah: which three were born unto him of the daughter of Shua the Canaanitess. And Er, the firstborn of Judah, was evil in the sight of the Lord; and he slew him.	The sons of Judah: Er, Onan, and Shelah. These three were born to him by Bath-shua the Canaanite. Er, Judah’s firstborn, was wicked in the sight of the LORD, who put him to death.
1CH	2	4	유다의 며느리 다말이 유다로 말미암아 베레스와 세라를 낳았으니 유다의 아들이 모두 다섯이더라	And Tamar his daughter in law bare him Pharez and Zerah. All the sons of Judah were five.	Tamar, Judah’s daughter-in-law, bore to him Perez and Zerah. Judah had five sons in all.
1CH	2	5	베레스의 아들은 헤스론과 하물이요	The sons of Pharez; Hezron, and Hamul.	The sons of Perez: Hezron and Hamul.
1CH	2	6	세라의 아들은 시므리와 에단과 헤만과 갈골과 다라니 모두 다섯 사람이요	And the sons of Zerah; Zimri, and Ethan, and Heman, and Calcol, and Dara: five of them in all.	The sons of Zerah: Zimri, Ethan, Heman, Calcol, and Dara—five in all.
1CH	2	7	가르미의 아들은 아갈이니 저는 마땅히 멸할 물건으로 인하여 이스라엘을 괴롭게 한 자며	And the sons of Carmi; Achar, the troubler of Israel, who transgressed in the thing accursed.	The son of Carmi: Achar, who brought trouble upon Israel by violating the ban on devoted things.
1CH	2	8	에단의 아들은 아사랴더라	And the sons of Ethan; Azariah.	The son of Ethan: Azariah.
1CH	2	9	헤스론의 낳은 아들은 여라므엘과 람과 글루배라	The sons also of Hezron, that were born unto him; Jerahmeel, and Ram, and Chelubai.	The sons who were born to Hezron: Jerahmeel, Ram, and Caleb.
1CH	2	10	람은 암미나답을 낳았고 암미나답은 나손을 낳았으니 나손은 유다 자손의 방백이며	And Ram begat Amminadab; and Amminadab begat Nahshon, prince of the children of Judah;	Ram was the father of Amminadab, and Amminadab was the father of Nahshon, a leader of the descendants of Judah.
1CH	2	11	나손은 살마를 낳았고 살마는 보아스를 낳았고	And Nahshon begat Salma, and Salma begat Boaz,	Nahshon was the father of Salmon, and Salmon was the father of Boaz.
1CH	2	12	보아스는 오벳을 낳았고 오벳은 이새를 낳았고	And Boaz begat Obed, and Obed begat Jesse,	Boaz was the father of Obed, and Obed was the father of Jesse.
1CH	2	13	이새는 맏아들 엘리압과 둘째로 아비나답과 세째로 시므아와	And Jesse begat his firstborn Eliab, and Abinadab the second, and Shimma the third,	Jesse was the father of Eliab his firstborn; Abinadab was born second, Shimea third,
1CH	2	14	네째로 느다넬과 다섯째로 랏대와	Nethaneel the fourth, Raddai the fifth,	Nethanel fourth, Raddai fifth,
1CH	2	15	여섯째로 오셈과 일곱째로 다윗을 낳았으며	Ozem the sixth, David the seventh:	Ozem sixth, and David seventh.
1CH	2	16	저희의 자매는 스루야와 아비가일이라 스루야의 아들은 아비새와 요압과 아사헬 삼 형제요	Whose sisters were Zeruiah, and Abigail. And the sons of Zeruiah; Abishai, and Joab, and Asahel, three.	Their sisters were Zeruiah and Abigail. And the three sons of Zeruiah were Abishai, Joab, and Asahel.
1CH	2	17	아비가일은 아마사를 낳았으니 아마사의 아비는 이스마엘 사람 예델이었더라	And Abigail bare Amasa: and the father of Amasa was Jether the Ishmeelite.	Abigail was the mother of Amasa, whose father was Jether the Ishmaelite.
1CH	2	18	헤스론의 아들 갈렙이 그 아내 아수바와 여리옷에게서 아들을 낳았으니 그 낳은 아들은 예셀과 소밥과 아르돈이며	And Caleb the son of Hezron begat children of Azubah his wife, and of Jerioth: her sons are these; Jesher, and Shobab, and Ardon.	Caleb son of Hezron had children by his wife Azubah and by Jerioth. These were the sons of Azubah: Jesher, Shobab, and Ardon.
1CH	2	19	아수바가 죽은 후에 갈렙이 또 에브랏에게 장가 들었더니 에브랏이 그로 말미암아 훌을 낳았고	And when Azubah was dead, Caleb took unto him Ephrath, which bare him Hur.	When Azubah died, Caleb married Ephrath, who bore to him Hur.
1CH	2	20	훌은 우리를 낳았고 우리는 브사렐을 낳았더라	And Hur begat Uri, and Uri begat Bezaleel.	Hur was the father of Uri, and Uri was the father of Bezalel.
1CH	2	21	그 후에 헤스론이 육십 세에 길르앗의 아비 마길의 딸에게 장가들어 동침하였더니 저가 헤스론으로 말미암아 스굽을 낳았으며	And afterward Hezron went in to the daughter of Machir the father of Gilead, whom he married when he was threescore years old; and she bare him Segub.	Later, Hezron slept with the daughter of Machir the father of Gilead. He had married her when he was sixty years old, and she bore to him Segub.
1CH	2	22	스굽은 야일을 낳았고 야일은 길르앗 땅에서 스물세 성읍을 가졌더니	And Segub begat Jair, who had three and twenty cities in the land of Gilead.	Segub was the father of Jair, who had twenty-three cities in the land of Gilead.
1CH	2	23	그술과 아람이 야일의 성읍들과 그낫과 그 성들 모두 육십을 그들에게서 빼앗았으며 저희는 다 길르앗의 아비 마길의 자손이었더라	And he took Geshur, and Aram, with the towns of Jair, from them, with Kenath, and the towns thereof, even threescore cities. All these belonged to the sons of Machir the father of Gilead.	But Geshur and Aram captured Havvoth-jair, along with Kenath and its sixty surrounding villages. All these were descendants of Machir the father of Gilead.
1CH	2	24	헤스론이 갈렙 에브라다에서 죽은 후에 그 아내 아비야가 그로 말미암아 아스훌을 낳았으니 아스훌은 드고아의 아비더라	And after that Hezron was dead in Caleb–ephratah, then Abiah Hezron’s wife bare him Ashur the father of Tekoa.	After Hezron died in Caleb-ephrathah, his wife Abijah bore to him Ashhur the father of Tekoa.
1CH	2	25	헤스론의 맏아들 여라므엘의 아들은 맏아들 람과 그 다음 브나와 오렌과 오셈과 아히야며	And the sons of Jerahmeel the firstborn of Hezron were, Ram the firstborn, and Bunah, and Oren, and Ozem, and Ahijah.	The sons of Jerahmeel the firstborn of Hezron:
1CH	2	26	여라므엘이 다른 아내가 있었으니 이름은 아다라라 저는 오남의 어미더라	Jerahmeel had also another wife, whose name was Atarah; she was the mother of Onam.	Ram his firstborn, Bunah, Oren, Ozem, and Ahijah. Jerahmeel had another wife named Atarah, who was the mother of Onam.
1CH	2	27	여라므엘의 맏아들 람의 아들은 마아스와 야민과 에겔이요	And the sons of Ram the firstborn of Jerahmeel were, Maaz, and Jamin, and Eker.	The sons of Ram the firstborn of Jerahmeel: Maaz, Jamin, and Eker.
1CH	2	28	오남의 아들들은 삼매와 야다요 삼매의 아들은 나답과 아비술이며	And the sons of Onam were, Shammai, and Jada. And the sons of Shammai; Nadab, and Abishur.	The sons of Onam: Shammai and Jada. The sons of Shammai:
1CH	2	29	아비술의 아내의 이름은 아비하일이라 저가 그로 말미암아 아반과 몰릿을 낳았으며	And the name of the wife of Abishur was Abihail, and she bare him Ahban, and Molid.	Nadab and Abishur. Abishur’s wife was named Abihail, and she bore to him Ahban and Molid.
1CH	2	30	나답의 아들은 셀렛과 압바임이라 셀렛은 아들이 없이 죽었고	And the sons of Nadab; Seled, and Appaim: but Seled died without children.	The sons of Nadab: Seled and Appaim. Seled died without children.
1CH	2	31	압바임의 아들은 이시요 이시의 아들은 세산이요 세산의 아들은 알래요	And the sons of Appaim; Ishi. And the sons of Ishi; Sheshan. And the children of Sheshan; Ahlai.	The son of Appaim: Ishi. The son of Ishi: Sheshan. The son of Sheshan: Ahlai.
1CH	2	32	삼매의 아우 야다의 아들은 예델과 요나단이라 예델은 아들이 없이 죽었고	And the sons of Jada the brother of Shammai; Jether, and Jonathan: and Jether died without children.	The sons of Jada the brother of Shammai: Jether and Jonathan. Jether died without children.
1CH	2	33	요나단의 아들은 벨렛과 사사라 여라므엘의 자손은 이러하며	And the sons of Jonathan; Peleth, and Zaza. These were the sons of Jerahmeel.	The sons of Jonathan: Peleth and Zaza. These were the descendants of Jerahmeel.
1CH	2	34	세산은 아들이 없고 딸뿐이라 그에게 야르하라 하는 애굽 종이 있는고로	Now Sheshan had no sons, but daughters. And Sheshan had a servant, an Egyptian, whose name was Jarha.	Sheshan had no sons, but only daughters; but he did have an Egyptian servant named Jarha.
1CH	2	35	딸을 그 종 야르하에게 주어 아내를 삼게 하였더니 저가 그로 말미암아 앗대를 낳았고	And Sheshan gave his daughter to Jarha his servant to wife; and she bare him Attai.	Sheshan gave his daughter in marriage to his servant Jarha, and she bore to him Attai.
1CH	2	36	앗대는 나단을 낳았고 나단은 사밧을 낳았고	And Attai begat Nathan, and Nathan begat Zabad,	Attai was the father of Nathan, Nathan was the father of Zabad,
1CH	2	37	사밧은 에블랄을 낳았고 에블랄은 오벳을 낳았고	And Zabad begat Ephlal, and Ephlal begat Obed,	Zabad was the father of Ephlal, Ephlal was the father of Obed,
1CH	2	38	오벳은 예후를 낳았고 예후는 아사랴를 낳았고	And Obed begat Jehu, and Jehu begat Azariah,	Obed was the father of Jehu, Jehu was the father of Azariah,
1CH	2	39	아사랴는 헬레스를 낳았고 헬레스는 엘르아사를 낳았고	And Azariah begat Helez, and Helez begat Eleasah,	Azariah was the father of Helez, Helez was the father of Elasah,
1CH	2	40	엘르아사는 시스매를 낳았고 시스매는 살룸을 낳았고	And Eleasah begat Sisamai, and Sisamai begat Shallum,	Elasah was the father of Sismai, Sismai was the father of Shallum,
1CH	2	41	살룸은 여가먀를 낳았고 여가먀는 엘리사마를 낳았더라	And Shallum begat Jekamiah, and Jekamiah begat Elishama.	Shallum was the father of Jekamiah, and Jekamiah was the father of Elishama.
1CH	2	42	여라므엘의 아우 갈렙의 아들 곧 맏아들은 메사니 십의 아비요 그 아들은 마레사니 헤브론의 아비며	Now the sons of Caleb the brother of Jerahmeel were, Mesha his firstborn, which was the father of Ziph; and the sons of Mareshah the father of Hebron.	The sons of Caleb the brother of Jerahmeel: Mesha his firstborn, who was the father of Ziph, and Mareshah his second son, who was the father of Hebron.
1CH	2	43	헤브론의 아들은 고라와 답부아와 레겜과 세마라	And the sons of Hebron; Korah, and Tappuah, and Rekem, and Shema.	The sons of Hebron:
1CH	2	44	세마는 라함을 낳았으니 라함은 요르그암의 아비며 레겜은 삼매를 낳았고	And Shema begat Raham, the father of Jorkoam: and Rekem begat Shammai.	Korah, Tappuah, Rekem, and Shema. Shema was the father of Raham the father of Jorkeam, and Rekem was the father of Shammai.
1CH	2	45	삼매의 아들은 마온이라 마온은 벳술의 아비며	And the son of Shammai was Maon: and Maon was the father of Beth–zur.	The son of Shammai was Maon, and Maon was the father of Beth-zur.
1CH	2	46	갈렙의 첩 에바는 하란과 모사와 가세스를 낳았고 하란은 가세스를 낳았으며	And Ephah, Caleb’s concubine, bare Haran, and Moza, and Gazez: and Haran begat Gazez.	Caleb’s concubine Ephah was the mother of Haran, Moza, and Gazez. Haran was the father of Gazez.
1CH	2	47	야대의 아들은 레겜과 요단과 게산과 벨렛과 에바와 사압이며	And the sons of Jahdai; Regem, and Jotham, and Geshan, and Pelet, and Ephah, and Shaaph.	The sons of Jahdai: Regem, Jotham, Geshan, Pelet, Ephah, and Shaaph.
1CH	2	48	갈렙의 첩 마아가는 세벨과 디르하나를 낳았고	Maachah, Caleb’s concubine, bare Sheber, and Tirhanah.	Caleb’s concubine Maacah was the mother of Sheber and Tirhanah.
1CH	2	49	또 맛만나의 아비 사압을 낳았고 또 막베나와 기브아의 아비 스와를 낳았으며 갈렙의 딸은 악사더라	She bare also Shaaph the father of Madmannah, Sheva the father of Machbenah, and the father of Gibea: and the daughter of Caleb was Achsah.	She was also the mother of Shaaph father of Madmannah, and of Sheva father of Machbenah and Gibea. Caleb’s daughter was Acsah.
1CH	2	50	갈렙의 자손 곧 에브라다의 맏아들 훌의 아들은 이러하니 기럇여아림의 아비 소발과	These were the sons of Caleb the son of Hur, the firstborn of Ephratah; Shobal the father of Kirjath–jearim,	These were the descendants of Caleb. The sons of Hur the firstborn of Ephrathah:
1CH	2	51	베들레헴의 아비 살마와 벧가델의 아비 하렙이라	Salma the father of Beth–lehem, Hareph the father of Beth–gader.	Shobal the father of Kiriath-jearim, Salma the father of Bethlehem, and Hareph the father of Beth-gader.
1CH	2	52	기럇여아림의 아비 소발의 자손은 하로에와 므누홋 사람의 절반이니	And Shobal the father of Kirjath–jearim had sons; Haroeh, and half of the Manahethites.	These were the descendants of Shobal the father of Kiriath-jearim:
1CH	2	53	기럇여아림 족속들은 이델 족속과 붓 족속과 수맛 족속과 미스라 족속이라 이로 말미암아 소라와 에스다올 두 족속이 나왔으며	And the families of Kirjath–jearim; the Ithrites, and the Puhites, and the Shumathites, and the Mishraites; of them came the Zareathites, and the Eshtaulites.	Haroeh, half the Manahathites, and the clans of Kiriath-jearim—the Ithrites, Puthites, Shumathites, and Mishraites. From these descended the Zorathites and Eshtaolites.
1CH	2	54	살마의 자손들은 베들레헴과 느도바 족속과 아다롯벳요압과 마하낫 족속의 절반과 소라 족속과	The sons of Salma; Beth–lehem, and the Netophathites, Ataroth, the house of Joab, and half of the Manahethites, the Zorites.	The descendants of Salma:
1CH	2	55	야베스에 거한 서기관 족속 곧 디랏 족속과 시므앗 족속과 수갓 족속이니 이는 다 레갑의 집 조상 함맛에게서 나온 겐 족속이더라	And the families of the scribes which dwelt at Jabez; the Tirathites, the Shimeathites, and Suchathites. These are the Kenites that came of Hemath, the father of the house of Rechab.	Bethlehem, the Netophathites, Atroth-beth-joab, half the Manahathites, the Zorites, and the clans of the scribes who lived at Jabez—the Tirathites, Shimeathites, and Sucathites. These are the Kenites who came from Hammath, the father of the house of Rechab.
1CH	3	1	다윗이 헤브론에서 낳은 아들들이 이러하니 맏아들은 압논이라 이스르엘 여인 아히노암의 소생이요 둘째는 다니엘이라 갈멜 여인 아비가일의 소생이요	Now these were the sons of David, which were born unto him in Hebron; the firstborn Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess; the second Daniel, of Abigail the Carmelitess:	These were the sons of David who were born to him in Hebron: The firstborn was Amnon by Ahinoam of Jezreel; the second was Daniel by Abigail of Carmel;
1CH	3	2	셋째는 압살롬이라 그술 왕 달매의 딸 마아가의 아들이요 넷째는 아도니야라 학깃의 아들이요	The third, Absalom the son of Maachah the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur: the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith:	the third was Absalom the son of Maacah daughter of King Talmai of Geshur; the fourth was Adonijah the son of Haggith;
1CH	3	3	다섯째는 스바댜라 아비달의 소생이요 여섯째는 이드르암이라 다윗의 아내 에글라의 소생이니	The fifth, Shephatiah of Abital: the sixth, Ithream by Eglah his wife.	the fifth was Shephatiah by Abital; and the sixth was Ithream by his wife Eglah.
1CH	3	4	이 여섯은 다윗이 헤브론에서 낳은 자라 다윗이 거기서 칠 년 육 개월을 치리하였고 또 예루살렘에서 삼십삼 년을 치리하였으며	These six were born unto him in Hebron; and there he reigned seven years and six months: and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and three years.	These six sons were born to David in Hebron, where he reigned seven years and six months. And David reigned in Jerusalem thirty-three years,
1CH	3	5	예루살렘에서 낳은 아들들은 이러하니 시므아와 소밥과 나단과 솔로몬 네 사람은 다 암미엘의 딸 밧수아의 소생이요	And these were born unto him in Jerusalem; Shimea, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon, four, of Bath–shua the daughter of Ammiel:	and these sons were born to him in Jerusalem: Shimea, Shobab, Nathan, and Solomon. These four were born to him by Bathsheba daughter of Ammiel.
1CH	3	6	또 입할과 엘리사마와 엘리벨렛과	Ibhar also, and Elishama, and Eliphelet,	David’s other sons were Ibhar, Elishua, Eliphelet,
1CH	3	7	노가와 네벡과 야비야와	And Nogah, and Nepheg, and Japhia,	Nogah, Nepheg, Japhia,
1CH	3	8	엘리사마와 엘랴다와 엘리벨렛 아홉 사람은	And Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphelet, nine.	Elishama, Eliada, and Eliphelet—nine in all.
1CH	3	9	다 다윗의 아들이요 저희의 누이는 다말이며 이 외에 또 첩의 아들이 있었더라	These were all the sons of David, beside the sons of the concubines, and Tamar their sister.	These were all the sons of David, besides the sons by his concubines. And Tamar was their sister.
1CH	3	10	솔로몬의 아들은 르호보암이요 그 아들은 아비야요 그 아들은 아사요 그 아들은 여호사밧이요	And Solomon’s son was Rehoboam, Abia his son, Asa his son, Jehoshaphat his son,	Solomon’s son was Rehoboam:
1CH	3	11	그 아들은 요람이요 그 아들은 아하시야요 그 아들은 요아스요	Joram his son, Ahaziah his son, Joash his son,	Abijah was his son, Asa his son, Jehoshaphat his son, Joram his son, Ahaziah his son, Joash his son,
1CH	3	12	그 아들은 아마샤요 그 아들은 아사랴요 그 아들은 요담이요	Amaziah his son, Azariah his son, Jotham his son,	Amaziah his son, Azariah his son, Jotham his son,
1CH	3	13	그 아들은 아하스요 그 아들은 히스기야요 그 아들은 므낫세요	Ahaz his son, Hezekiah his son, Manasseh his son,	Ahaz his son, Hezekiah his son, Manasseh his son,
1CH	3	14	그 아들은 아몬이요 그 아들은 요시야며	Amon his son, Josiah his son.	Amon his son, and Josiah his son.
1CH	3	15	요시야의 아들들은 맏아들 요하난과 둘째 여호야김과 셋째 시드기야와 넷째 살룸이요	And the sons of Josiah were, the firstborn Johanan, the second Jehoiakim, the third Zedekiah, the fourth Shallum.	The sons of Josiah: Johanan was the firstborn, Jehoiakim the second, Zedekiah the third, and Shallum the fourth.
1CH	3	16	여호야김의 아들들은 그 아들 여고냐, 그 아들 시드기야요	And the sons of Jehoiakim: Jeconiah his son, Zedekiah his son.	The successors of Jehoiakim: Jeconiah his son, and Zedekiah.
1CH	3	17	사로잡혀 간 여고냐의 아들들은 그 아들 스알디엘과	And the sons of Jeconiah; Assir, Salathiel his son,	The descendants of Jeconiah the captive:
1CH	3	18	말기람과 브다야와 세낫살과 여가먀와 호사마와 느다뱌요	Malchiram also, and Pedaiah, and Shenazar, Jecamiah, Hoshama, and Nedabiah.	Shealtiel his son, Malchiram, Pedaiah, Shenazzar, Jekamiah, Hoshama, and Nedabiah.
1CH	3	19	브다야의 아들들은 스룹바벨과 시므이요 스룹바벨의 아들은 므술람과 하나냐와 그 매제 슬로밋과	And the sons of Pedaiah were, Zerubbabel, and Shimei: and the sons of Zerubbabel; Meshullam, and Hananiah, and Shelomith their sister:	The sons of Pedaiah: Zerubbabel and Shimei. The children of Zerubbabel:
1CH	3	20	또 하수바와 오헬과 베레갸와 하사댜와 유삽헤셋 다섯 사람이요	And Hashubah, and Ohel, and Berechiah, and Hasadiah, Jushab–hesed, five.	Meshullam and Hananiah, their sister Shelomith, and five others: Hashubah, Ohel, Berechiah, Hasadiah, and Jushab-hesed.
1CH	3	21	하나냐의 아들은 블라댜와 여사야요 또 르바야의 아들 아르난의 아들들, 오바댜의 아들들, 스가냐의 아들들이니	And the sons of Hananiah; Pelatiah, and Jesaiah: the sons of Rephaiah, the sons of Arnan, the sons of Obadiah, the sons of Shechaniah.	The descendants of Hananiah: Pelatiah, Jeshaiah, and the sons of Rephaiah, of Arnan, of Obadiah, and of Shecaniah.
1CH	3	22	스가냐의 아들은 스마야요 스마야의 아들들은 핫두스와 이갈과 바리야와 느아랴와 사밧 여섯 사람이요	And the sons of Shechaniah; Shemaiah: and the sons of Shemaiah; Hattush, and Igeal, and Bariah, and Neariah, and Shaphat, six.	The six descendants of Shecaniah were Shemaiah and his sons: Hattush, Igal, Bariah, Neariah, and Shaphat.
1CH	3	23	느아랴의 아들은 엘료에내와 히스기야와 아스리감 세 사람이요	And the sons of Neariah; Elioenai, and Hezekiah, and Azrikam, three.	The sons of Neariah: Elioenai, Hizkiah, and Azrikam—three in all.
1CH	3	24	엘료에내의 아들들은 호다위야와 엘리아십과 블라야와 악굽과 요하난과 들라야와 아나니 일곱 사람이더라	And the sons of Elioenai were, Hodaiah, and Eliashib, and Pelaiah, and Akkub, and Johanan, and Dalaiah, and Anani, seven.	The sons of Elioenai: Hodaviah, Eliashib, Pelaiah, Akkub, Johanan, Delaiah, and Anani—seven in all.
1CH	4	1	유다의 아들들은 베레스와 헤스론과 갈미와 훌과 소발이라	The sons of Judah; Pharez, Hezron, and Carmi, and Hur, and Shobal.	The descendants of Judah: Perez, Hezron, Carmi, Hur, and Shobal.
1CH	4	2	소발의 아들 르아야는 야핫을 낳았고 야핫은 아후매와 라핫을 낳았으니 이는 소라 사람의 족속이며	And Reaiah the son of Shobal begat Jahath; and Jahath begat Ahumai, and Lahad. These are the families of the Zorathites.	Reaiah son of Shobal was the father of Jahath, and Jahath was the father of Ahumai and Lahad. These were the clans of the Zorathites.
1CH	4	3	에담 조상의 자손들은 이스르엘과 이스마와 잇바스와 저희의 매제 하술렐보니와	And these were of the father of Etam; Jezreel, and Ishma, and Idbash: and the name of their sister was Hazelelponi:	These were the sons of Etam: Jezreel, Ishma, and Idbash. And their sister was named Hazzelelponi.
1CH	4	4	그들의 아비 브누엘과 후사의 아비 에셀이니 이는 다 베들레헴의 아비 에브라다의 맏아들 훌의 소생이며	And Penuel the father of Gedor, and Ezer the father of Hushah. These are the sons of Hur, the firstborn of Ephratah, the father of Beth–lehem.	Penuel was the father of Gedor, and Ezer was the father of Hushah. These were the descendants of Hur, the firstborn of Ephrathah and the father of Bethlehem.
1CH	4	5	드고아의 아비 아스훌의 두 아내는 헬라와 나아라라	And Ashur the father of Tekoa had two wives, Helah and Naarah.	Ashhur the father of Tekoa had two wives, Helah and Naarah.
1CH	4	6	나아라는 그로 말미암아 아훗삼과 헤벨과 데므니와 하아하스다리를 낳았으니 이는 나아라의 소생이요	And Naarah bare him Ahuzam, and Hepher, and Temeni, and Haahashtari. These were the sons of Naarah.	Naarah bore to him Ahuzzam, Hepher, Temeni, and Haahashtari. These were the descendants of Naarah.
1CH	4	7	헬라의 아들들은 세렛과 이소할과 에드난이며	And the sons of Helah were, Zereth, and Jezoar, and Ethnan.	The sons of Helah were Zereth, Zohar, Ethnan,
1CH	4	8	고스는 아눕과 소베바와 하룸의 아들 아하헬 족속들을 낳았으며	And Coz begat Anub, and Zobebah, and the families of Aharhel the son of Harum.	and Koz, who was the father of Anub and Zobebah and of the clans of Aharhel son of Harum.
1CH	4	9	야베스는 그 형제보다 존귀한 자라 그 어미가 이름하여 야베스라 하였으니 이는 내가 수고로이 낳았다 함이었더라	And Jabez was more honourable than his brethren: and his mother called his name Jabez, saying, Because I bare him with sorrow.	Now Jabez was more honorable than his brothers. His mother had named him Jabez, saying, “Because I bore him in pain.”
1CH	4	10	야베스가 이스라엘 하나님께 아뢰어 가로되 원컨대 주께서 내게 복에 복을 더하사 나의 지경을 넓히시고 주의 손으로 나를 도우사 나로 환난을 벗어나 근심이 없게 하옵소서 하였더니 하나님이 그 구하는 것을 허락하셨더라	And Jabez called on the God of Israel, saying, Oh that thou wouldest bless me indeed, and enlarge my coast, and that thine hand might be with me, and that thou wouldest keep me from evil, that it may not grieve me! And God granted him that which he requested.	And Jabez called out to the God of Israel, “If only You would bless me and enlarge my territory! May Your hand be with me and keep me from harm, so that I will be free from pain.” And God granted the request of Jabez.
1CH	4	11	수하의 형 글룹이 므힐을 낳았으니 므힐은 에스돈의 아비요	And Chelub the brother of Shuah begat Mehir, which was the father of Eshton.	Chelub the brother of Shuhah was the father of Mehir, who was the father of Eshton.
1CH	4	12	에스돈은 베드라바와 바세아와 이르나하스의 아비 드힌나를 낳았으니 이는 다 레가 사람이며	And Eshton begat Beth–rapha, and Paseah, and Tehinnah the father of Ir–nahash. These are the men of Rechah.	Eshton was the father of Beth-rapha, of Paseah, and of Tehinnah the father of Ir-nahash. These were the men of Recah.
1CH	4	13	그나스의 아들들은 옷니엘과 스라야요 옷니엘의 아들은 하닷이며	And the sons of Kenaz; Othniel, and Seraiah: and the sons of Othniel; Hathath.	The sons of Kenaz: Othniel and Seraiah. The sons of Othniel: Hathath and Meonothai.
1CH	4	14	므오노대는 오브라를 낳았고 스라야는 요압을 낳았으니 요압은 게하라심의 조상이라 저희들은 공장이었더라	And Meonothai begat Ophrah: and Seraiah begat Joab, the father of the valley of Charashim; for they were craftsmen.	Meonothai was the father of Ophrah, and Seraiah was the father of Joab, the father of those living in Ge-harashim, which was given this name because its people were craftsmen.
1CH	4	15	여분네의 아들 갈렙의 자손은 이루와 엘라와 나암과 엘라의 자손과 그나스요	And the sons of Caleb the son of Jephunneh; Iru, Elah, and Naam: and the sons of Elah, even Kenaz.	The sons of Caleb son of Jephunneh: Iru, Elah, and Naam. The son of Elah: Kenaz.
1CH	4	16	여할렐렐의 아들은 십과 시바와 디리아와 아사렐이요	And the sons of Jehaleleel; Ziph, and Ziphah, Tiria, and Asareel.	The sons of Jehallelel: Ziph, Ziphah, Tiria, and Asarel.
1CH	4	17	에스라의 아들들은 예델과 메렛과 에벨과 얄론이며 메렛은 미리암과 삼매와 에스도모아의 조상 이스바를 낳았으니	And the sons of Ezra were, Jether, and Mered, and Epher, and Jalon: and she bare Miriam, and Shammai, and Ishbah the father of Eshtemoa.	The sons of Ezrah: Jether, Mered, Epher, and Jalon.
1CH	4	18	이는 메렛의 취한 바로의 딸 비디아의 아들들이며 또 그 아내 여후디야는 그돌의 조상 예렛과 소고의 조상 헤벨과 사노아의 조상 여구디엘을 낳았으며	And his wife Jehudijah bare Jered the father of Gedor, and Heber the father of Socho, and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah. And these are the sons of Bithiah the daughter of Pharaoh, which Mered took.	And Mered’s wife Bithiah gave birth to Miriam, Shammai, and Ishbah the father of Eshtemoa. These were the children of Pharaoh’s daughter Bithiah. Mered also took a Judean wife, who gave birth to Jered the father of Gedor, Heber the father of Soco, and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah.
1CH	4	19	나함의 누이인 호디야의 아내의 아들들은 가미 사람 그일라의 아비와 마아가 사람 에스드모아며	And the sons of his wife Hodiah the sister of Naham, the father of Keilah the Garmite, and Eshtemoa the Maachathite.	The sons of Hodiah’s wife, the sister of Naham, were the fathers of Keilah the Garmite and of Eshtemoa the Maacathite.
1CH	4	20	시몬의 아들들은 암논과 린나와 벤하난과 딜론이요 이시의 아들들은 소헷과 벤소헷이더라	And the sons of Shimon were, Amnon, and Rinnah, Ben–hanan, and Tilon. And the sons of Ishi were, Zoheth, and Ben–zoheth.	The sons of Shimon: Amnon, Rinnah, Ben-hanan, and Tilon. The descendants of Ishi: Zoheth and Ben-zoheth.
1CH	4	21	유다의 아들 셀라의 자손은 레가의 아비 에르와 마레사의 아비 라아다와 세마포 짜는 자의 집 곧 아스베야의 집 족속과	The sons of Shelah the son of Judah were, Er the father of Lecah, and Laadah the father of Mareshah, and the families of the house of them that wrought fine linen, of the house of Ashbea,	The sons of Shelah son of Judah:
1CH	4	22	또 요김과 고세바 사람들과 요아스와 모압을 다스리던 사람과 야수비네헴이니 이는 다 옛 기록에 의지한 것이라	And Jokim, and the men of Chozeba, and Joash, and Saraph, who had the dominion in Moab, and Jashubi–lehem. And these are ancient things.	Er the father of Lecah, Laadah the father of Mareshah and the clans of the linen workers at Beth-ashbea, Jokim, the men of Cozeba, and Joash and Saraph, who ruled in Moab and Jashubi-lehem. (These names are from ancient records.)
1CH	4	23	이 모든 사람은 옹기장이가 되어 수풀과 산울 가운데 거하는 자로서 거기서 왕과 함께 거하여 왕의 일을 하였더라	These were the potters, and those that dwelt among plants and hedges: there they dwelt with the king for his work.	These were the potters who lived at Netaim and Gederah. They lived there in the service of the king.
1CH	4	24	시므온의 아들들은 느무엘과 야민과 야립과 세라와 사울이요	The sons of Simeon were, Nemuel, and Jamin, Jarib, Zerah, and Shaul:	The descendants of Simeon: Nemuel, Jamin, Jarib, Zerah, and Shaul.
1CH	4	25	사울의 아들은 살룸이요 그 아들은 밉삼이요 그 아들은 미스마요	Shallum his son, Mibsam his son, Mishma his son.	The sons of Shaul: Shallum, Mibsam, and Mishma.
1CH	4	26	미스마의 아들은 함무엘이요 그 아들은 삭굴이요 그 아들은 시므이라	And the sons of Mishma; Hamuel his son, Zacchur his son, Shimei his son.	The sons of Mishma: Hammuel, Zaccur, and Shimei.
1CH	4	27	시므이는 아들 열여섯과 딸 여섯이 있으나 그 형제에게는 자녀가 몇이 못되니 그 온 족속이 유다 자손처럼 번성하지 못하였더라	And Shimei had sixteen sons and six daughters; but his brethren had not many children, neither did all their family multiply, like to the children of Judah.	Shimei had sixteen sons and six daughters, but his brothers did not have many children, so their whole clan did not become as numerous as the sons of Judah.
1CH	4	28	시므온 자손의 거한 곳은 브엘세바와 몰라다와 하살수알과	And they dwelt at Beer–sheba, and Moladah, and Hazar–shual,	They lived in Beersheba, Moladah, Hazar-shual,
1CH	4	29	빌하와 에셈과 돌랏과	And at Bilhah, and at Ezem, and at Tolad,	Bilhah, Ezem, Tolad,
1CH	4	30	브두엘과 호르마와 시글락과	And at Bethuel, and at Hormah, and at Ziklag,	Bethuel, Hormah, Ziklag,
1CH	4	31	벧말가봇과 하살수심과 벧비리와 사아라임이니 다윗 왕 때까지 이 모든 성읍이 저희에게 속하였으며	And at Beth–marcaboth, and Hazar–susim, and at Beth–birei, and at Shaaraim. These were their cities unto the reign of David.	Beth-marcaboth, Hazar-susim, Beth-biri, and Shaaraim. These were their cities until the reign of David.
1CH	4	32	그 향촌은 에담과 아인과 림몬과 도겐과 아산 다섯 성읍이요	And their villages were, Etam, and Ain, Rimmon, and Tochen, and Ashan, five cities:	And their villages were Etam, Ain, Rimmon, Tochen, and Ashan—five towns—
1CH	4	33	또 그 각 성읍 사면에 촌이 있어 바알까지 미쳤으니 시므온 자손의 주소가 이러하고 각기 보계가 있더라	And all their villages that were round about the same cities, unto Baal. These were their habitations, and their genealogy.	and all their surrounding villages as far as Baal. These were their settlements, and they kept a genealogical record:
1CH	4	34	또 메소밥과 야믈렉과 아마시야의 아들 요사와	And Meshobab, and Jamlech, and Joshah the son of Amaziah,	Meshobab, Jamlech, Joshah son of Amaziah,
1CH	4	35	요엘과 아시엘의 증손 스라야의 손자 요시비야의 아들 예후와	And Joel, and Jehu the son of Josibiah, the son of Seraiah, the son of Asiel,	Joel, Jehu son of Joshibiah (son of Seraiah, son of Asiel),
1CH	4	36	또 엘료에내와 야아고바와 여소하야와 아사야와 아디엘과 여시미엘과 브나야와	And Elioenai, and Jaakobah, and Jeshohaiah, and Asaiah, and Adiel, and Jesimiel, and Benaiah,	Elioenai, Jaakobah, Jeshohaiah, Asaiah, Adiel, Jesimiel, Benaiah,
1CH	4	37	또 스마야의 오대손 시므리의 현손 여다야의 증손 알론의 손자 시비의 아들 시사니	And Ziza the son of Shiphi, the son of Allon, the son of Jedaiah, the son of Shimri, the son of Shemaiah;	and Ziza son of Shiphi (son of Allon, son of Jedaiah, son of Shimri, son of Shemaiah).
1CH	4	38	이 위에 녹명된 자는 다 그 본족의 족장이라 그 종족이 더욱 번성한지라	These mentioned by their names were princes in their families: and the house of their fathers increased greatly.	These men listed by name were the leaders of their clans. Their families increased greatly,
1CH	4	39	저희가 그 양떼를 위하여 목장을 구하고자 하여 골짜기 동편 그돌 지경에 이르러	And they went to the entrance of Gedor, even unto the east side of the valley, to seek pasture for their flocks.	and they journeyed to the entrance of Gedor, to the east side of the valley, in search of pasture for their flocks.
1CH	4	40	아름답고 기름진 목장을 발견하였는데 그 땅이 광활하고 안정하니 이는 옛적부터 거기 거한 사람은 함의 자손인 까닭이라	And they found fat pasture and good, and the land was wide, and quiet, and peaceable; for they of Ham had dwelt there of old.	There they found rich, good pasture, and the land was spacious, peaceful, and quiet; for some Hamites had lived there formerly.
1CH	4	41	이 위에 녹명된 자가 유다 왕 히스기야 때에 가서 저희의 장막을 쳐서 파하고 거기 있는 모우님 사람을 쳐서 진멸하고 대신하여 오늘까지 거기 거하였으니 이는 그 양떼를 먹일 목장이 거기 있음이며	And these written by name came in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and smote their tents, and the habitations that were found there, and destroyed them utterly unto this day, and dwelt in their rooms: because there was pasture there for their flocks.	These who were noted by name came in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah. They attacked the Hamites and Meunites there in their dwellings, devoting them to destruction even to this day. Then they settled in their place, because there was pasture for their flocks.
1CH	4	42	또 시므온 자손 중에 오백 명이 이시의 아들 블라댜와 느아랴와 르바야와 웃시엘로 두목을 삼고 세일 산으로 가서	And some of them, even of the sons of Simeon, five hundred men, went to mount Seir, having for their captains Pelatiah, and Neariah, and Rephaiah, and Uzziel, the sons of Ishi.	And five hundred of these Simeonites led by Pelatiah, Neariah, Rephaiah, and Uzziel, the sons of Ishi, went to Mount Seir
1CH	4	43	피하여 남아 있는 아말렉 사람을 치고 오늘까지 거기 거하였더라	And they smote the rest of the Amalekites that were escaped, and dwelt there unto this day.	and struck down the remnant of the Amalekites who had escaped. And they have lived there to this day.
1CH	5	1	이스라엘의 장자 르우벤의 아들들은 이러하니라 (르우벤은 장자라도 그 아비의 침상을 더럽게 하였으므로 장자의 명분이 이스라엘의 아들 요셉의 자손에게로 돌아갔으나 족보에는 장자의 명분대로 기록할 것이 아니니라	Now the sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel, (for he was the firstborn; but, forasmuch as he defiled his father’s bed, his birthright was given unto the sons of Joseph the son of Israel: and the genealogy is not to be reckoned after the birthright.	These were the sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel. Though he was the firstborn, his birthright was given to the sons of Joseph son of Israel, because Reuben defiled his father’s bed. So he is not reckoned according to birthright.
1CH	5	2	유다는 형제보다 뛰어나고 주권자가 유다로 말미암아 났을지라도 장자의 명분은 요셉에게 있으니라)	For Judah prevailed above his brethren, and of him came the chief ruler; but the birthright was Joseph’s:)	And though Judah prevailed over his brothers and a ruler came from him, the birthright belonged to Joseph.
1CH	5	3	이스라엘의 장자 르우벤의 아들들은 하녹과 발루와 헤스론과 갈미요	The sons, I say, of Reuben the firstborn of Israel were, Hanoch, and Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi.	The sons of Reuben, the firstborn of Israel: Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi.
1CH	5	4	요엘의 아들은 스마야요 그 아들은 곡이요 그 아들은 시므이요	The sons of Joel; Shemaiah his son, Gog his son, Shimei his son,	The descendants of Joel:
1CH	5	5	그 아들은 미가요 그 아들은 르아야요 그 아들은 바알이요	Micah his son, Reaia his son, Baal his son,	Shemaiah his son, Gog his son, Shimei his son, Micah his son, Reaiah his son, Baal his son,
1CH	5	6	그 아들은 브에라니 저는 르우벤 자손의 두목으로서 앗수르 왕 디글랏빌레셀에게 사로잡힌 자라	Beerah his son, whom Tilgath–pilneser king of Assyria carried away captive: he was prince of the Reubenites.	and Beerah his son, whom Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria carried into exile.
1CH	5	7	저의 형제가 종족과 보계대로 족장 된 자는 여이엘과 스가랴와	And his brethren by their families, when the genealogy of their generations was reckoned, were the chief, Jeiel, and Zechariah,	Beerah was a leader of the Reubenites. His relatives by their clans are recorded in their genealogy:
1CH	5	8	벨라니 벨라는 아사스의 아들이요 세마의 손자요 요엘의 증손이라 저가 아로엘에 거하여 느보와 바알므온까지 미쳤고	And Bela the son of Azaz, the son of Shema, the son of Joel, who dwelt in Aroer, even unto Nebo and Baal–meon:	Jeiel the chief, Zechariah, and Bela son of Azaz, the son of Shema, the son of Joel. They settled in Aroer and as far as Nebo and Baal-meon.
1CH	5	9	또 동으로 가서 거하여 유브라데 강에서부터 광야 지경까지 미쳤으니 이는 길르앗 땅에서 그 생축이 번식함이라	And eastward he inhabited unto the entering in of the wilderness from the river Euphrates: because their cattle were multiplied in the land of Gilead.	They also settled in the east as far as the edge of the desert that extends to the Euphrates River, because their livestock had increased in the land of Gilead.
1CH	5	10	사울 왕 때에 저희가 하갈 사람으로 더불어 싸워 쳐 죽이고 길르앗 동편 온 땅에서 장막에 거하였더라	And in the days of Saul they made war with the Hagarites, who fell by their hand: and they dwelt in their tents throughout all the east land of Gilead.	During the days of Saul they waged war against the Hagrites, who were defeated at their hands, and they occupied the homes of the Hagrites throughout the region east of Gilead.
1CH	5	11	갓 자손은 르우벤 사람을 마주 대하여 바산 땅에 거하여 살르가까지 미쳤으니	And the children of Gad dwelt over against them, in the land of Bashan unto Salchah:	The descendants of Gad lived next to the Reubenites in the land of Bashan, as far as Salecah:
1CH	5	12	족장은 요엘이요 다음은 사밤이요 또 야내와 바산에 거한 사밧이요	Joel the chief, and Shapham the next, and Jaanai, and Shaphat in Bashan.	Joel was the chief, Shapham the second, then Jaanai and Shaphat, who lived in Bashan.
1CH	5	13	그 족속 형제에는 미가엘과 므술람과 세바와 요래와 야간과 시아와 에벨 일곱 명이니	And their brethren of the house of their fathers were, Michael, and Meshullam, and Sheba, and Jorai, and Jachan, and Zia, and Heber, seven.	Their kinsmen by families were Michael, Meshullam, Sheba, Jorai, Jacan, Zia, and Eber—seven in all.
1CH	5	14	이는 다 아비하일의 아들이라 아비하일은 후리의 아들이요 야로의 손자요 길르앗의 증손이요 미가엘의 현손이요 여시새의 오대 손이요 야도의 육대손이요 부스의 칠대손이며	These are the children of Abihail the son of Huri, the son of Jaroah, the son of Gilead, the son of Michael, the son of Jeshishai, the son of Jahdo, the son of Buz;	These were the sons of Abihail son of Huri, the son of Jaroah, the son of Gilead, the son of Michael, the son of Jeshishai, the son of Jahdo, the son of Buz.
1CH	5	15	또 구니의 손자 압디엘의 아들 아히가 족장이 되었고	Ahi the son of Abdiel, the son of Guni, chief of the house of their fathers.	Ahi son of Abdiel, the son of Guni, was head of their family.
1CH	5	16	저희가 바산 길르앗과 그 향촌과 사론의 모든 들에 거하여 그 사방 변경에 미쳤더라	And they dwelt in Gilead in Bashan, and in her towns, and in all the suburbs of Sharon, upon their borders.	They lived in Gilead, in Bashan and its towns, and throughout the pasturelands of Sharon.
1CH	5	17	이상은 유다 왕 요담과 이스라엘 왕 여로보암 때에 족보에 기록되었더라	All these were reckoned by genealogies in the days of Jotham king of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam king of Israel.	All of them were reckoned in the genealogies during the reigns of Jotham king of Judah and Jeroboam king of Israel.
1CH	5	18	르우벤 자손과 갓 사람과 므낫세 반 지파의 나가 싸울만한 용사 곧 능히 방패와 칼을 들며 활을 당기어 싸움에 익숙한 자가 사만 사천칠백육십 인이라	The sons of Reuben, and the Gadites, and half the tribe of Manasseh, of valiant men, men able to bear buckler and sword, and to shoot with bow, and skilful in war, were four and forty thousand seven hundred and threescore, that went out to the war.	The Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh had 44,760 warriors—valiant men who carried the shield and sword, drew the bow, and were trained for battle.
1CH	5	19	저희가 하갈 사람과 여두르와 나비스와 노답과 싸우는 중에	And they made war with the Hagarites, with Jetur, and Nephish, and Nodab.	They waged war against the Hagrites, as well as Jetur, Naphish, and Nodab.
1CH	5	20	도우심을 입었으므로 하갈 사람과 그 함께한 자들이 다 저희 손에 패하였으니 이는 저희가 싸울 때에 하나님께 의뢰하고 부르짖음을 하나님이 들으셨음이라	And they were helped against them, and the Hagarites were delivered into their hand, and all that were with them: for they cried to God in the battle, and he was intreated of them; because they put their trust in him.	And because they cried out to God in battle, they were helped against their enemies, and the Hagrites and all their allies were delivered into their hands. Because they put their trust in God, He answered their prayers.
1CH	5	21	저희가 대적의 짐승 곧 약대 오만과 양 이십오만과 나귀 이천을 빼앗으며 사람 십만을 사로잡았고	And they took away their cattle; of their camels fifty thousand, and of sheep two hundred and fifty thousand, and of asses two thousand, and of men an hundred thousand.	They seized the livestock of the Hagrites—50,000 camels, 250,000 sheep, and 2,000 donkeys. They also took 100,000 captives,
1CH	5	22	죽임을 당한 자가 많았으니 이 싸움이 하나님께로 말미암았음이라 저희가 그 땅에 거하여 사로잡힐 때까지 이르렀더라	For there fell down many slain, because the war was of God. And they dwelt in their steads until the captivity.	and many others fell slain, because the battle belonged to God. And they occupied the land until the exile.
1CH	5	23	므낫세 반 지파 자손들이 그 땅에 거하여 번성하여 바산에서부터 바알헤르몬과 스닐과 헤르몬 산까지 미쳤으며	And the children of the half tribe of Manasseh dwelt in the land: they increased from Bashan unto Baal–hermon and Senir, and unto mount Hermon.	Now the people of the half-tribe of Manasseh were numerous. They settled in the land from Bashan to Baal-hermon (that is, Senir, also known as Mount Hermon).
1CH	5	24	그 족장은 에벨과 이시와 엘리엘과 아스리엘과 예레미야와 호다위야와 야디엘이라 다 용력이 유명한 족장이었더라	And these were the heads of the house of their fathers, even Epher, and Ishi, and Eliel, and Azriel, and Jeremiah, and Hodaviah, and Jahdiel, mighty men of valour, famous men, and heads of the house of their fathers.	These were the heads of their families: Epher, Ishi, Eliel, Azriel, Jeremiah, Hodaviah, and Jahdiel.
1CH	5	25	저희가 그 열조의 하나님께 범죄하여 하나님이 저희 앞에서 멸하신 그 땅 백성의 신들을 간음하듯 섬긴지라	And they transgressed against the God of their fathers, and went a whoring after the gods of the people of the land, whom God destroyed before them.	They were mighty men of valor, famous men, and heads of their families. But they were unfaithful to the God of their fathers, and they prostituted themselves with the gods of the peoples of the land, whom God had destroyed before them.
1CH	5	26	그러므로 이스라엘 하나님이 앗수르 왕 불의 마음을 일으키시며 앗수르 왕 디글랏 빌레셀의 마음을 일으키시매 곧 르우벤과 갓과 므낫세 반 지파를 사로잡아 할라와 하볼과 하라와 고산 하숫가에 옮긴지라 저희가 오늘날까지 거기 있으니라	And the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Pul king of Assyria, and the spirit of Tilgath–pilneser king of Assyria, and he carried them away, even the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh, and brought them unto Halah, and Habor, and Hara, and to the river Gozan, unto this day.	So the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Pul king of Assyria (that is, Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria) to take the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh into exile. And he brought them to Halah, Habor, Hara, and the river of Gozan, where they remain to this day.
1CH	6	1	레위의 아들들은 게르손과 그핫과 므라리요	The sons of Levi; Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.	The sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
1CH	6	2	그핫의 아들들은 아므람과 이스할과 헤브론과 웃시엘이요	And the sons of Kohath; Amram, Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel.	The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel.
1CH	6	3	아므람의 자녀는 아론과 모세와 미리암이요 아론의 아들들은 나답과 아비후와 엘르아살과 이다말이며	And the children of Amram; Aaron, and Moses, and Miriam. The sons also of Aaron; Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.	The children of Amram: Aaron, Moses, and Miriam. The sons of Aaron: Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
1CH	6	4	엘르아살은 비느하스를 낳았고 비느하스는 아비수아를 낳았고	Eleazar begat Phinehas, Phinehas begat Abishua,	Eleazar was the father of Phinehas, Phinehas was the father of Abishua,
1CH	6	5	아비수아는 북기를 낳았고 북기는 웃시를 낳았고	And Abishua begat Bukki, and Bukki begat Uzzi,	Abishua was the father of Bukki, Bukki was the father of Uzzi,
1CH	6	6	웃시는 스라히야를 낳았고 스라히야는 므라욧을 낳았고	And Uzzi begat Zerahiah, and Zerahiah begat Meraioth,	Uzzi was the father of Zerahiah, Zerahiah was the father of Meraioth,
1CH	6	7	므라욧은 아마랴를 낳았고 아마랴는 아히둡을 낳았고	Meraioth begat Amariah, and Amariah begat Ahitub,	Meraioth was the father of Amariah, Amariah was the father of Ahitub,
1CH	6	8	아히둡은 사독을 낳았고 사독은 아히마아스를 낳았고	And Ahitub begat Zadok, and Zadok begat Ahimaaz,	Ahitub was the father of Zadok, Zadok was the father of Ahimaaz,
1CH	6	9	아히마아스는 아사랴를 낳았고 아사랴는 요하난을 낳았고	And Ahimaaz begat Azariah, and Azariah begat Johanan,	Ahimaaz was the father of Azariah, Azariah was the father of Johanan,
1CH	6	10	요하난은 아사랴를 낳았으니 이 아사랴는 솔로몬이 예루살렘에 세운 전에서 제사장의 직분을 행한 자며	And Johanan begat Azariah, (he it is that executed the priest’s office in the temple that Solomon built in Jerusalem:)	Johanan was the father of Azariah, who served as priest in the temple that Solomon built in Jerusalem,
1CH	6	11	아사랴는 아마랴를 낳았고 아마랴는 아히둡을 낳았고	And Azariah begat Amariah, and Amariah begat Ahitub,	Azariah was the father of Amariah, Amariah was the father of Ahitub,
1CH	6	12	아히둡은 사독을 낳았고 사독은 살룸을 낳았고	And Ahitub begat Zadok, and Zadok begat Shallum,	Ahitub was the father of Zadok, Zadok was the father of Shallum,
1CH	6	13	살룸은 힐기야를 낳았고 힐기야는 아사랴를 낳았고	And Shallum begat Hilkiah, and Hilkiah begat Azariah,	Shallum was the father of Hilkiah, Hilkiah was the father of Azariah,
1CH	6	14	아사랴는 스라야를 낳았고 스라야는 여호사닥을 낳았으며	And Azariah begat Seraiah, and Seraiah begat Jehozadak,	Azariah was the father of Seraiah, and Seraiah was the father of Jehozadak.
1CH	6	15	여호와께서 느부갓네살의 손으로 유다와 예루살렘 백성을 옮기실 때에 여호사닥도 갔었더라	And Jehozadak went into captivity, when the Lord carried away Judah and Jerusalem by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar.	Jehozadak went into captivity when the LORD sent Judah and Jerusalem into exile by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar.
1CH	6	16	레위의 아들들은 게르손과 그핫과 므라리며	The sons of Levi; Gershom, Kohath, and Merari.	The sons of Levi: Gershom, Kohath, and Merari.
1CH	6	17	게르손의 아들의 이름은 립니와 시므이요	And these be the names of the sons of Gershom; Libni, and Shimei.	These are the names of the sons of Gershom: Libni and Shimei.
1CH	6	18	그핫의 아들들은 아므람과 이스할과 헤브론과 웃시엘이요	And the sons of Kohath were, Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel.	The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel.
1CH	6	19	므라리의 아들들은 말리와 무시라 이 레위 사람의 집들이 그 종족을 따라 이러하니	The sons of Merari; Mahli, and Mushi. And these are the families of the Levites according to their fathers.	The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. These are the clans of the Levites listed according to their fathers:
1CH	6	20	게르손에게서 난 자는 곧 그 아들 립니요 그 아들은 야핫이요 그 아들은 심마요	Of Gershom; Libni his son, Jahath his son, Zimmah his son,	Of Gershom:
1CH	6	21	그 아들은 요아요 그 아들은 잇도요 그 아들은 세라요 그 아들은 여아드래며	Joah his son, Iddo his son, Zerah his son, Jeaterai his son.	Libni his son, Jahath his son, Zimmah his son, Joah his son, Iddo his son, Zerah his son, and Jeatherai his son.
1CH	6	22	그핫에게서 난 자는 곧 그 아들 암미나답이요 그 아들은 고라요 그 아들은 앗실이요	The sons of Kohath; Amminadab his son, Korah his son, Assir his son,	The descendants of Kohath:
1CH	6	23	그 아들은 엘가나요 그 아들은 에비아삽이요 그 아들은 앗실이요	Elkanah his son, and Ebiasaph his son, and Assir his son,	Amminadab his son, Korah his son, Assir his son, Elkanah his son, Ebiasaph his son, Assir his son,
1CH	6	24	그 아들은 다핫이요 그 아들은 우리엘이요 그 아들은 웃시야요 그 아들은 사울이며	Tahath his son, Uriel his son, Uzziah his son, and Shaul his son.	Tahath his son, Uriel his son, Uzziah his son, and Shaul his son.
1CH	6	25	엘가나의 아들들은 아마새와 아히못이라	And the sons of Elkanah; Amasai, and Ahimoth.	The descendants of Elkanah:
1CH	6	26	엘가나로 말하면 그 자손은 이러하니 그 아들은 소배요 그 아들은 나핫이요	As for Elkanah: the sons of Elkanah; Zophai his son, and Nahath his son,	Amasai, Ahimoth, Elkanah his son, Zophai his son, Nahath his son,
1CH	6	27	그 아들은 엘리압이요 그 아들은 여로함이요 그 아들은 엘가나며	Eliab his son, Jeroham his son, Elkanah his son.	Eliab his son, Jeroham his son, and Elkanah his son.
1CH	6	28	사무엘의 아들들은 맏아들 요엘이요 다음은 아비야며	And the sons of Samuel; the firstborn Vashni, and Abiah.	The sons of Samuel: Joel his firstborn and Abijah his second son.
1CH	6	29	므라리에게서 난 자는 말리요 그 아들은 립니요 그 아들은 시므이요 그 아들은 웃사요	The sons of Merari; Mahli, Libni his son, Shimei his son, Uzza his son,	The descendants of Merari:
1CH	6	30	그 아들은 시므아요 그 아들은 학기야요 그 아들은 아사야더라	Shimea his son, Haggiah his son, Asaiah his son.	Mahli, Libni his son, Shimei his son, Uzzah his son, Shimea his son, Haggiah his son, and Asaiah his son.
1CH	6	31	언약궤가 평안한 곳을 얻은 후에 다윗이 이 아래의 무리를 세워 여호와의 집에서 찬송하는 일을 맡게 하매	And these are they whom David set over the service of song in the house of the Lord, after that the ark had rest.	These are the men David put in charge of the music in the house of the LORD after the ark rested there.
1CH	6	32	솔로몬이 예루살렘에서 여호와의 전을 세울 때까지 저희가 회막 앞에서 찬송하는 일을 행하되 그 반열대로 직무를 행하였더라	And they ministered before the dwelling place of the tabernacle of the congregation with singing, until Solomon had built the house of the Lord in Jerusalem: and then they waited on their office according to their order.	They ministered with song before the tabernacle, the Tent of Meeting, until Solomon built the house of the LORD in Jerusalem. And they performed their duties according to the regulations given them.
1CH	6	33	직무를 행하는 자와 그 아들들이 이러하니 그핫의 자손 중에 헤만은 찬송하는 자라 저는 요엘의 아들이요 요엘은 사무엘의 아들이요	And these are they that waited with their children. Of the sons of the Kohathites: Heman a singer, the son of Joel, the son of Shemuel,	These are the men who served, together with their sons. From the Kohathites:
1CH	6	34	사무엘은 엘가나의 아들이요 엘가나는 여로함의 아들이요 여로함은 엘리엘의 아들이요 엘리엘은 도아의 아들이요	The son of Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Eliel, the son of Toah,	Heman the singer, the son of Joel, the son of Samuel, the son of Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Eliel, the son of Toah,
1CH	6	35	도아는 숩의 아들이요 숩은 엘가나의 아들이요 엘가나는 마핫의 아들이요 마핫은 아마새의 아들이요	The son of Zuph, the son of Elkanah, the son of Mahath, the son of Amasai,	the son of Zuph, the son of Elkanah, the son of Mahath, the son of Amasai,
1CH	6	36	아마새는 엘가나의 아들이요 엘가나는 요엘의 아들이요 요엘은 아사랴의 아들이요 아사랴는 스바냐의 아들이요	The son of Elkanah, the son of Joel, the son of Azariah, the son of Zephaniah,	the son of Elkanah, the son of Joel, the son of Azariah, the son of Zephaniah,
1CH	6	37	스바냐는 다핫의 아들이요 다핫은 앗실의 아들이요 앗실은 에비아삽의 아들이요 에비아삽은 고라의 아들이요	The son of Tahath, the son of Assir, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah,	the son of Tahath, the son of Assir, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah,
1CH	6	38	고라는 이스할의 아들이요 이스할은 그핫의 아들이요 그핫은 레위의 아들이요 레위는 이스라엘의 아들이며	The son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, the son of Israel.	the son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, the son of Israel.
1CH	6	39	헤만의 형제 아삽은 헤만의 우편에서 직무를 행하였으니 저는 베레갸의 아들이요 베레갸는 시므아의 아들이요	And his brother Asaph, who stood on his right hand, even Asaph the son of Berachiah, the son of Shimea,	Heman’s kinsman was Asaph, who served at his right hand:
1CH	6	40	시므아는 미가엘의 아들이요 미가엘은 바아세야의 아들이요 바아세야는 말기야의 아들이요	The son of Michael, the son of Baaseiah, the son of Malchiah,	Asaph the son of Berechiah, the son of Shimea, the son of Michael, the son of Baaseiah, the son of Malchijah,
1CH	6	41	말기야는 에드니의 아들이요 에드니는 세라의 아들이요	The son of Ethni, the son of Zerah, the son of Adaiah,	the son of Ethni, the son of Zerah, the son of Adaiah,
1CH	6	42	아다야는 에단의 아들이요 에단은 심마의 아들이요 심마는 시므이의 아들이요	The son of Ethan, the son of Zimmah, the son of Shimei,	the son of Ethan, the son of Zimmah, the son of Shimei,
1CH	6	43	시므이는 야핫의 아들이요 야핫은 게르손의 아들이요 게르손은 레위의 아들이며	The son of Jahath, the son of Gershom, the son of Levi.	the son of Jahath, the son of Gershom, the son of Levi.
1CH	6	44	저희의 형제 므라리의 자손 중 그 좌편에서 직무를 행하는 자는 에단이라 에단은 기시의 아들이요 기시는 압디의 아들이요 압디는 말룩의 아들이요	And their brethren the sons of Merari stood on the left hand: Ethan the son of Kishi, the son of Abdi, the son of Malluch,	On the left were their kinsmen, the sons of Merari:
1CH	6	45	말룩은 하사뱌의 아들이요 하사뱌는 아마시야의 아들이요 아마시야는 힐기야의 아들이요	The son of Hashabiah, the son of Amaziah, the son of Hilkiah,	Ethan the son of Kishi, the son of Abdi, the son of Malluch, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Amaziah, the son of Hilkiah,
1CH	6	46	힐기야는 암시의 아들이요 암시는 바니의 아들이요 바니는 세멜의 아들이요	The son of Amzi, the son of Bani, the son of Shamer,	the son of Amzi, the son of Bani, the son of Shemer,
1CH	6	47	세멜은 말리의 아들이요 말리는 무시의 아들이요 무시는 므라리의 아들이요 므라리는 레위의 아들이며	The son of Mahli, the son of Mushi, the son of Merari, the son of Levi.	the son of Mahli, the son of Mushi, the son of Merari, the son of Levi.
1CH	6	48	저희의 형제 레위 사람들은 하나님의 집 장막의 모든 일을 맡았더라	Their brethren also the Levites were appointed unto all manner of service of the tabernacle of the house of God.	Their fellow Levites were assigned to every kind of service of the tabernacle, the house of God.
1CH	6	49	아론과 그 자손들은 번제단과 향단 위에 분향하며 제사를 드리며 지성소의 모든 일을 하여 하나님의 종 모세의 모든 명대로 이스라엘을 위하여 속죄하니	But Aaron and his sons offered upon the altar of the burnt offering, and on the altar of incense, and were appointed for all the work of the place most holy, and to make an atonement for Israel, according to all that Moses the servant of God had commanded.	But Aaron and his sons did all the work of the Most Holy Place. They presented the offerings on the altar of burnt offering and on the altar of incense to make atonement for Israel, according to all that Moses the servant of God had commanded.
1CH	6	50	아론의 자손들은 이러하니라 그 아들은 엘르아살이요 그 아들은 비느하스요 그 아들은 아비수아요	And these are the sons of Aaron; Eleazar his son, Phinehas his son, Abishua his son,	These were the descendants of Aaron:
1CH	6	51	그 아들은 북기요 그 아들은 웃시요 그 아들은 스라히야요	Bukki his son, Uzzi his son, Zerahiah his son,	Eleazar his son, Phinehas his son, Abishua his son, Bukki his son, Uzzi his son, Zerahiah his son,
1CH	6	52	그 아들은 므라욧이요 그 아들은 아마랴요 그 아들은 아히둡이요	Meraioth his son, Amariah his son, Ahitub his son,	Meraioth his son, Amariah his son, Ahitub his son,
1CH	6	53	그 아들은 사독이요 그 아들은 아히마아스더라	Zadok his son, Ahimaaz his son.	Zadok his son, and Ahimaaz his son.
1CH	6	54	저희의 거한 곳은 사방 지경 안에 있으니 그 향리는 아래와 같으니라 아론 자손 곧 그핫 족속이 먼저 제비 뽑았으므로	Now these are their dwelling places throughout their castles in their coasts, of the sons of Aaron, of the families of the Kohathites: for theirs was the lot.	Now these were the territories assigned to the descendants of Aaron from the Kohathite clan for their settlements, because the first lot fell to them:
1CH	6	55	저희에게 유다 땅의 헤브론과 그 사방 들을 주었고	And they gave them Hebron in the land of Judah, and the suburbs thereof round about it.	They were given Hebron in the land of Judah and its surrounding pasturelands.
1CH	6	56	그 성의 밭과 향리는 여분네의 아들 갈렙에게 주었으며	But the fields of the city, and the villages thereof, they gave to Caleb the son of Jephunneh.	But the fields and villages around the city were given to Caleb son of Jephunneh.
1CH	6	57	아론 자손에게 도피성을 주었으니 헤브론과 립나와 그 들과 얏딜과 에스드모아와 그 들과	And to the sons of Aaron they gave the cities of Judah, namely, Hebron, the city of refuge, and Libnah with her suburbs, and Jattir, and Eshtemoa, with their suburbs,	So the descendants of Aaron were given Hebron (a city of refuge), Libnah, Jattir, Eshtemoa,
1CH	6	58	힐렌과 그 들과 드빌과 그 들과	And Hilen with her suburbs, Debir with her suburbs,	Hilen, Debir,
1CH	6	59	아산과 그 들과 벧세메스와 그 들이며	And Ashan with her suburbs, and Beth–shemesh with her suburbs:	Ashan, Juttah, and Beth-shemesh, together with their pasturelands.
1CH	6	60	또 베냐민 지파 중에서는 게바와 그 들과 알레멧과 그 들과 아나돗과 그 들을 주었으니 그핫 족속의 얻은 성이 모두 열셋이었더라	And out of the tribe of Benjamin; Geba with her suburbs, and Alemeth with her suburbs, and Anathoth with her suburbs. All their cities throughout their families were thirteen cities.	And from the tribe of Benjamin they were given Gibeon, Geba, Alemeth, and Anathoth, together with their pasturelands. So they had thirteen cities in all among their families.
1CH	6	61	그핫 자손의 남은 자에게는 므낫세 반 지파 족속 중에서 제비뽑아 열 성을 주었고	And unto the sons of Kohath, which were left of the family of that tribe, were cities given out of the half tribe, namely, out of the half tribe of Manasseh, by lot, ten cities.	To the rest of the Kohathites, ten cities were allotted from the half-tribe of Manasseh.
1CH	6	62	게르손 자손에게는 그 족속대로 잇사갈 지파와 아셀 지파와 납달리 지파와 바산에 있는 므낫세 지파 중에서 열세 성을 주었고	And to the sons of Gershom throughout their families out of the tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of the tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen cities.	The Gershomites, according to their clans, were allotted thirteen cities from the tribes of Issachar, Asher, Naphtali, and Manasseh in Bashan.
1CH	6	63	므라리 자손에게는 그 족속대로 르우벤 지파와 갓 지파와 스불론 지파 중에서 제비 뽑아 열두 성을 주었더라	Unto the sons of Merari were given by lot, throughout their families, out of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities.	The Merarites, according to their families, were allotted twelve cities from the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and Zebulun.
1CH	6	64	이스라엘 자손이 이 모든 성과 그 들을 레위 자손에게 주되	And the children of Israel gave to the Levites these cities with their suburbs.	So the Israelites gave to the Levites these cities and their pasturelands.
1CH	6	65	유다 자손의 지파와 시므온 자손의 지파와 베냐민 자손의 지파 중에서 이 위에 기록한 여러 성을 제비 뽑아 주었더라	And they gave by lot out of the tribe of the children of Judah, and out of the tribe of the children of Simeon, and out of the tribe of the children of Benjamin, these cities, which are called by their names.	They assigned by lot the cities named above from the tribes of Judah, Simeon, and Benjamin.
1CH	6	66	그핫 자손의 몇 족속은 에브라임 지파 중에서 성을 얻어 영지를 삼았으며	And the residue of the families of the sons of Kohath had cities of their coasts out of the tribe of Ephraim.	And some of the clans of the Kohathites were given cities from the tribe of Ephraim for their territory:
1CH	6	67	또 저희에게 도피성을 주었으니 에브라임 산중 세겜과 그 들과 게셀과 그 들과	And they gave unto them, of the cities of refuge, Shechem in mount Ephraim with her suburbs; they gave also Gezer with her suburbs,	They were given Shechem (a city of refuge) with its pasturelands in the hill country of Ephraim, and Gezer,
1CH	6	68	욕므암과 그 들과 벧호론과 그 들과	And Jokmeam with her suburbs, and Beth–horon with her suburbs,	Jokmeam, Beth-horon,
1CH	6	69	아얄론과 그 들과 가드림몬과 그 들이며	And Aijalon with her suburbs, and Gath–rimmon with her suburbs:	Aijalon, and Gath-rimmon, together with their pasturelands.
1CH	6	70	또 그핫 자손의 남은 족속에게는 므낫세 반 지파 중에서 아넬과 그 들과 빌르암과 그 들을 주었더라	And out of the half tribe of Manasseh; Aner with her suburbs, and Bileam with her suburbs, for the family of the remnant of the sons of Kohath.	And from the half-tribe of Manasseh the remaining clans of the Kohathites were given Aner and Bileam, together with their pasturelands.
1CH	6	71	게르손 자손에게는 므낫세 반 지파 족속 중에서 바산의 골란과 그 들과 아스다롯과 그 들을 주었고	Unto the sons of Gershom were given out of the family of the half tribe of Manasseh, Golan in Bashan with her suburbs, and Ashtaroth with her suburbs:	The Gershomites received the following: From the clan of the half-tribe of Manasseh they were given Golan in Bashan and also Ashtaroth, together with their pasturelands.
1CH	6	72	또 잇사갈 지파 중에서 게데스와 그 들과 다브랏과 그 들과	And out of the tribe of Issachar; Kedesh with her suburbs, Daberath with her suburbs,	From the tribe of Issachar they were given Kedesh, Daberath,
1CH	6	73	라못과 그 들과 아넴과 그 들을 주었고	And Ramoth with her suburbs, and Anem with her suburbs:	Ramoth, and Anem, together with their pasturelands.
1CH	6	74	아셀 지파 중에서 마살과 그 들과 압돈과 그 들과	And out of the tribe of Asher; Mashal with her suburbs, and Abdon with her suburbs,	From the tribe of Asher they were given Mashal, Abdon,
1CH	6	75	후곡과 그 들과 르홉과 그 들을 주었고	And Hukok with her suburbs, and Rehob with her suburbs:	Hukok, and Rehob, together with their pasturelands.
1CH	6	76	납달리 지파 중에서 갈릴리의 게데스와 그 들과 함몬과 그 들과 기랴다임과 그 들을 주었더라	And out of the tribe of Naphtali; Kedesh in Galilee with her suburbs, and Hammon with her suburbs, and Kirjathaim with her suburbs.	And from the tribe of Naphtali they were given Kedesh in Galilee, Hammon, and Kiriathaim, together with their pasturelands.
1CH	6	77	므라리 자손의 남은 자에게는 스불론 지파 중에서 림모노와 그 들과 다볼과 그 들을 주었고	Unto the rest of the children of Merari were given out of the tribe of Zebulun, Rimmon with her suburbs, Tabor with her suburbs:	The Merarites (the rest of the Levites) received the following: From the tribe of Zebulun they were given Rimmono and Tabor, together with their pasturelands.
1CH	6	78	또 요단 건너 동편 곧 여리고 맞은편 르우벤 지파 중에서 광야의 베셀과 그 들과 야사와 그 들과	And on the other side Jordan by Jericho, on the east side of Jordan, were given them out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer in the wilderness with her suburbs, and Jahzah with her suburbs,	From the tribe of Reuben east of the Jordan opposite Jericho they were given Bezer in the wilderness, Jahzah,
1CH	6	79	그데못과 그 들과 메바앗과 그 들을 주었고	Kedemoth also with her suburbs, and Mephaath with her suburbs:	Kedemoth, and Mephaath, together with their pasturelands.
1CH	6	80	또 갓 지파 중에서 길르앗의 라못과 그 들과 마하나임과 그 들과	And out of the tribe of Gad; Ramoth in Gilead with her suburbs, and Mahanaim with her suburbs,	And from the tribe of Gad they were given Ramoth in Gilead, Mahanaim,
1CH	6	81	헤스본과 그 들과 야셀과 그 들을 주었더라	And Heshbon with her suburbs, and Jazer with her suburbs.	Heshbon, and Jazer, together with their pasturelands.
1CH	7	1	잇사갈의 아들들은 돌라와 부아와 야숩과 시므론 네 사람이며	Now the sons of Issachar were, Tola, and Puah, Jashub, and Shimron, four.	The sons of Issachar: Tola, Puah, Jashub, and Shimron—four in all.
1CH	7	2	돌라의 아들들은 웃시와 르바야와 여리엘과 야매와 입삼과 스므엘이니 다 그 아비 돌라의 집 족장이라 대대로 용사더니 다윗 때에 이르러는 그 수효가 이만 이천육백 명이었더라	And the sons of Tola; Uzzi, and Rephaiah, and Jeriel, and Jahmai, and Jibsam, and Shemuel, heads of their father’s house, to wit, of Tola: they were valiant men of might in their generations; whose number was in the days of David two and twenty thousand and six hundred.	The sons of Tola: Uzzi, Rephaiah, Jeriel, Jahmai, Ibsam, and Shemuel, the heads of their families. In the days of David, 22,600 descendants of Tola were numbered in their genealogies as mighty men of valor.
1CH	7	3	웃시의 아들은 이스라히야요 이스라히야의 아들들은 미가엘과 오바댜와 요엘과 잇시야 다섯 사람이 모두 족장이며	And the sons of Uzzi; Izrahiah: and the sons of Izrahiah; Michael, and Obadiah, and Joel, Ishiah, five: all of them chief men.	The son of Uzzi: Izrahiah. The sons of Izrahiah:
1CH	7	4	저희와 함께한 자는 그 보계와 종족대로 능히 출전할만한 군대가 삼만 육천 인이니 이는 그 처자가 많은 연고며	And with them, by their generations, after the house of their fathers, were bands of soldiers for war, six and thirty thousand men: for they had many wives and sons.	Michael, Obadiah, Joel, and Isshiah. All five of them were chiefs. In addition to them, according to their genealogy, they had 36,000 troops for battle, for they had many wives and children.
1CH	7	5	그 형제 잇사갈의 모든 종족은 다 큰 용사라 그 보계대로 계수하면 팔만 칠천 인이었더라	And their brethren among all the families of Issachar were valiant men of might, reckoned in all by their genealogies fourscore and seven thousand.	Their kinsmen belonging to all the families of Issachar who were mighty men of valor totaled 87,000, as listed in their genealogies.
1CH	7	6	베냐민의 아들들은 벨라와 베겔과 여디아엘 세 사람이며	The sons of Benjamin; Bela, and Becher, and Jediael, three.	The three sons of Benjamin: Bela, Becher, and Jediael.
1CH	7	7	벨라의 아들들은 에스본과 우시와 웃시엘과 여리못과 이리 다섯 사람이니 다 그 집의 족장이요 큰 용사라 그 보계대로 계수하면 이만 이천삼십사 인이며	And the sons of Bela; Ezbon, and Uzzi, and Uzziel, and Jerimoth, and Iri, five; heads of the house of their fathers, mighty men of valour; and were reckoned by their genealogies twenty and two thousand and thirty and four.	The sons of Bela: Ezbon, Uzzi, Uzziel, Jerimoth, and Iri, heads of their families—five in all. There were 22,034 mighty men of valor listed in their genealogies.
1CH	7	8	베겔의 아들들은 스미라와 요아스와 엘리에셀과 엘료에내와 오므리와 여레못과 아비야와 아나돗과 알레멧이니 베겔의 아들들은 이러하며	And the sons of Becher; Zemira, and Joash, and Eliezer, and Elioenai, and Omri, and Jerimoth, and Abiah, and Anathoth, and Alameth. All these are the sons of Becher.	The sons of Becher:
1CH	7	9	저희는 다 그 집의 족장이요 큰 용사라 그 자손을 보계대로 계수하면 이만 이백 인이며	And the number of them, after their genealogy by their generations, heads of the house of their fathers, mighty men of valour, was twenty thousand and two hundred.	Zemirah, Joash, Eliezer, Elioenai, Omri, Jeremoth, Abijah, Anathoth, and Alemeth; all these were Becher’s sons. Their genealogies were recorded according to the heads of their families—20,200 mighty men of valor.
1CH	7	10	여디아엘의 아들은 빌한이요 빌한의 아들들은 여우스와 베냐민과 에훗과 그나아나와 세단과 다시스와 아히사할이니	The sons also of Jediael; Bilhan: and the sons of Bilhan; Jeush, and Benjamin, and Ehud, and Chenaanah, and Zethan, and Tharshish, and Ahishahar.	The son of Jediael: Bilhan. The sons of Bilhan:
1CH	7	11	이 여디아엘의 아들들은 그 집의 족장이요 큰 용사라 그 자손 중에 능히 출전할만한 자가 일만 칠천이백 인이며	All these the sons of Jediael, by the heads of their fathers, mighty men of valour, were seventeen thousand and two hundred soldiers, fit to go out for war and battle.	Jeush, Benjamin, Ehud, Chenaanah, Zethan, Tarshish, and Ahishahar. All these sons of Jediael were heads of their families, mighty men of valor; there were 17,200 fit for battle.
1CH	7	12	일의 아들은 숩빔과 훕빔이요 아헬의 아들은 후심이더라	Shuppim also, and Huppim, the children of Ir, and Hushim, the sons of Aher.	The Shuppites and Huppites were descendants of Ir, and the Hushites were descendants of Aher.
1CH	7	13	납달리의 아들들은 야시엘과 구니와 예셀과 살룸이니 이는 빌하의 손자더라	The sons of Naphtali; Jahziel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shallum, the sons of Bilhah.	The sons of Naphtali: Jahziel, Guni, Jezer, and Shallum—the descendants of Bilhah.
1CH	7	14	므낫세의 아들들 그 처의 소생은 아스리엘이요 그 첩 아람 여인의 소생은 길르앗의 아비 마길이니	The sons of Manasseh; Ashriel, whom she bare: (but his concubine the Aramitess bare Machir the father of Gilead:	The descendants of Manasseh: Through his Aramean concubine, Asriel, as well as Machir the father of Gilead.
1CH	7	15	마길은 훕빔과 숩빔의 누이 마아가라 하는 이에게 장가들었더라 므낫세의 둘째 아들의 이름은 슬로브핫이니 슬로브핫은 딸들만 낳았으며	And Machir took to wife the sister of Huppim and Shuppim, whose sister’s name was Maachah;) and the name of the second was Zelophehad: and Zelophehad had daughters.	Machir took a wife from among the Huppites and Shuppites. The name of his sister was Maacah. Another descendant was named Zelophehad, who had only daughters.
1CH	7	16	마길의 아내 마아가는 아들을 낳아 그 이름을 베레스라 하였으며 그 아우는 이름이 세레스며 세레스의 아들은 울람과 라겜이요	And Maachah the wife of Machir bare a son, and she called his name Peresh; and the name of his brother was Sheresh; and his sons were Ulam and Rakem.	Machir’s wife Maacah gave birth to a son, and she named him Peresh. His brother was named Sheresh, and his sons were Ulam and Rekem.
1CH	7	17	울람의 아들은 브단이니 이는 다 길르앗의 자손이라 길르앗은 마길의 아들이요 므낫세의 손자며	And the sons of Ulam; Bedan. These were the sons of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh.	The son of Ulam: Bedan.
1CH	7	18	그 누이 함몰레겟은 이스훗과 아비에셀과 말라를 낳았고	And his sister Hammoleketh bare Ishod, and Abiezer, and Mahalah.	These were the sons of Gilead son of Machir, the son of Manasseh. His sister Hammolecheth gave birth to Ishhod, Abiezer, and Mahlah.
1CH	7	19	스미다의 아들은 아히안과 세겜과 릭히와 아니암이더라	And the sons of Shemida were, Ahian, and Shechem, and Likhi, and Aniam.	And these were the sons of Shemida: Ahian, Shechem, Likhi, and Aniam.
1CH	7	20	에브라임의 아들은 수델라요 그 아들은 베렛이요 그 아들은 다핫이요 그 아들은 엘르아다요 그 아들은 다핫이요	And the sons of Ephraim; Shuthelah, and Bered his son, and Tahath his son, and Eladah his son, and Tahath his son,	The descendants of Ephraim:
1CH	7	21	그 아들은 사밧이요 그 아들은 수델라며 저가 또 에셀과 엘르앗을 낳았더니 저희가 가드 토인에게 죽임을 당하였으니 이는 저희가 내려가서 가드 사람의 짐승을 빼앗고자 하였음이라	And Zabad his son, and Shuthelah his son, and Ezer, and Elead, whom the men of Gath that were born in that land slew, because they came down to take away their cattle.	Shuthelah, Bered his son, Tahath his son, Eleadah his son, Tahath his son, Zabad his son, and Shuthelah his son. Ezer and Elead were killed by the natives of Gath, because they went down to steal their livestock.
1CH	7	22	그 아비 에브라임이 위하여 여러 날 슬퍼하므로 그 형제가 와서 위로하였더라	And Ephraim their father mourned many days, and his brethren came to comfort him.	Their father Ephraim mourned for many days, and his relatives came to comfort him.
1CH	7	23	그 후에 에브라임이 그 아내와 동침하였더니 아내가 잉태하여 아들을 낳으니 그 집이 재앙을 받았으므로 그 이름을 브리아라 하였더라	And when he went in to his wife, she conceived, and bare a son, and he called his name Beriah, because it went evil with his house.	And again he slept with his wife, and she conceived and gave birth to a son. So he named him Beriah, because tragedy had come upon his house.
1CH	7	24	에브라임의 딸은 세에라니 저가 아래 윗 벧호론과 우센세에라를 세웠더라	(And his daughter was Sherah, who built Beth–horon the nether, and the upper, and Uzzen–sherah.)	His daughter was Sheerah, who built Lower and Upper Beth-horon, as well as Uzzen-sheerah.
1CH	7	25	브리아의 아들들은 레바와 레셉이요 레셉의 아들은 델라요 그 아들은 다한이요	And Rephah was his son, also Resheph, and Telah his son, and Tahan his son,	Additionally, Rephah was his son, Resheph his son, Telah his son, Tahan his son,
1CH	7	26	그 아들은 라단이요 그 아들은 암미훗이요 그 아들은 엘리사마요	Laadan his son, Ammihud his son, Elishama his son,	Ladan his son, Ammihud his son, Elishama his son,
1CH	7	27	그 아들은 눈이요 그 아들은 여호수아더라	Non his son, Jehoshua his son.	Nun his son, and Joshua his son.
1CH	7	28	에브라임 자손의 산업과 거처는 벧엘과 그 향리요 동에는 나아란이요 서에는 게셀과 그 향리며 또 세겜과 그 향리니 아사와 그 향리까지며	And their possessions and habitations were, Beth–el and the towns thereof, and eastward Naaran, and westward Gezer, with the towns thereof; Shechem also and the towns thereof, unto Gaza and the towns thereof:	Their holdings and settlements included Bethel and its villages, Naaran to the east, Gezer and its villages to the west, and Shechem and its villages as far as Ayyah and its villages.
1CH	7	29	또 므낫세 자손의 지경에 가까운 벧스안과 그 향리와 다아낙과 그 향리와 므깃도와 그 향리와 돌과 그 향리라 이스라엘의 아들 요셉의 자손이 이 여러 곳에 거하였더라	And by the borders of the children of Manasseh, Beth–shean and her towns, Taanach and her towns, Megiddo and her towns, Dor and her towns. In these dwelt the children of Joseph the son of Israel.	And along the borders of Manasseh were Beth-shean, Taanach, Megiddo, and Dor, together with their villages. The descendants of Joseph son of Israel lived in these towns.
1CH	7	30	아셀의 아들들은 임나와 이스와와 이스위와 브리아요 저희의 매제는 세라며	The sons of Asher; Imnah, and Isuah, and Ishuai, and Beriah, and Serah their sister.	The children of Asher: Imnah, Ishvah, Ishvi, Beriah, and their sister Serah.
1CH	7	31	브리아의 아들들은 헤벨과 말기엘이니 말기엘은 비르사잇의 아비며	And the sons of Beriah; Heber, and Malchiel, who is the father of Birzavith.	The sons of Beriah: Heber, as well as Malchiel, who was the father of Birzaith.
1CH	7	32	헤벨은 야블렛과 소멜과 호담과 저희의 매제 수아를 낳았으며	And Heber begat Japhlet, and Shomer, and Hotham, and Shua their sister.	Heber was the father of Japhlet, Shomer, and Hotham, and of their sister Shua.
1CH	7	33	야블렛의 아들들은 바삭과 빔할과 아스왓이니 야블렛의 아들은 이러하며	And the sons of Japhlet; Pasach, and Bimhal, and Ashvath. These are the children of Japhlet.	The sons of Japhlet: Pasach, Bimhal, and Ashvath. These were Japhlet’s sons.
1CH	7	34	소멜의 아들들은 아히와 로가와 호바와 아람이요	And the sons of Shamer; Ahi, and Rohgah, Jehubbah, and Aram.	The sons of Shemer: Ahi, Rohgah, Hubbah, and Aram.
1CH	7	35	그 아우 헬렘의 아들들은 소바와 임나와 셀레스와 아말이요	And the sons of his brother Helem; Zophah, and Imna, and Shelesh, and Amal.	The sons of his brother Helem: Zophah, Imna, Shelesh, and Amal.
1CH	7	36	소바의 아들들은 수아와 하르네벨과 수알과 베리와 이므라와	The sons of Zophah; Suah, and Harnepher, and Shual, and Beri, and Imrah,	The sons of Zophah:
1CH	7	37	베셀과 훗과 사마와 실사와 이드란과 브에라요	Bezer, and Hod, and Shamma, and Shilshah, and Ithran, and Beera.	Suah, Harnepher, Shual, Beri, Imrah, Bezer, Hod, Shamma, Shilshah, Ithran, and Beera.
1CH	7	38	예델의 아들들은 여분네와 비스바와 아라요	And the sons of Jether; Jephunneh, and Pispah, and Ara.	The sons of Jether: Jephunneh, Pispa, and Ara.
1CH	7	39	울라의 아들들은 아라와 한니엘과 리시아니	And the sons of Ulla; Arah, and Haniel, and Rezia.	The sons of Ulla: Arah, Hanniel, and Rizia.
1CH	7	40	이는 다 아셀의 자손으로 족장이요 뽑힌 큰 용사요 방백의 두목이라 출전할만한 자를 그 보계대로 계수하면 이만 육천 인이었더라	All these were the children of Asher, heads of their father’s house, choice and mighty men of valour, chief of the princes. And the number throughout the genealogy of them that were apt to the war and to battle was twenty and six thousand men.	All these were the descendants of Asher—heads of their families, choice and mighty men of valor, and chiefs among the leaders. The number of men fit for battle, recorded in their genealogies, was 26,000.
1CH	8	1	베냐민의 낳은 자는 맏아들 벨라와 둘째 아스벨과 셋째 아하라와	Now Benjamin begat Bela his firstborn, Ashbel the second, and Aharah the third,	Benjamin was the father of Bela, his firstborn; Ashbel was the second born, Aharah the third,
1CH	8	2	넷째 노하와 다섯째 라바며	Nohah the fourth, and Rapha the fifth.	Nohah the fourth, and Rapha the fifth.
1CH	8	3	벨라에게 아들들이 있으니 곧 앗달과 게라와 아비훗과	And the sons of Bela were, Addar, and Gera, and Abihud,	The sons of Bela:
1CH	8	4	아비수아와 나아만과 아호아와	And Abishua, and Naaman, and Ahoah,	Addar, Gera, Abihud, Abishua, Naaman, Ahoah,
1CH	8	5	게라와 스부반과 후람이며	And Gera, and Shephuphan, and Huram.	Gera, Shephuphan, and Huram.
1CH	8	6	에훗의 아들들은 이러하니라 저희는 게바 거민의 족장으로서 사로잡아 마나핫으로 가되	And these are the sons of Ehud: these are the heads of the fathers of the inhabitants of Geba, and they removed them to Manahath:	These were the descendants of Ehud who were the heads of the families living in Geba and were exiled to Manahath:
1CH	8	7	곧 나아만과 아히야와 게라를 사로잡아 갔고 그가 또 웃사와 아히훗을 낳았으며	And Naaman, and Ahiah, and Gera, he removed them, and begat Uzza, and Ahihud.	Naaman, Ahijah, and Gera, who carried them into exile and who was the father of Uzza and Ahihud.
1CH	8	8	사하라임은 두 아내 후심과 바아라를 내어보낸 후에 모압 땅에서 자녀를 낳았으니	And Shaharaim begat children in the country of Moab, after he had sent them away; Hushim and Baara were his wives.	Shaharaim had sons in the country of Moab after he had divorced his wives Hushim and Baara.
1CH	8	9	그 아내 호데스에게서 낳은 자는 요밥과 시비야와 메사와 말감과	And he begat of Hodesh his wife, Jobab, and Zibia, and Mesha, and Malcham,	His sons by his wife Hodesh:
1CH	8	10	여우스와 사갸와 미르마라 이 아들들은 족장이며	And Jeuz, and Shachia, and Mirma. These were his sons, heads of the fathers.	Jobab, Zibia, Mesha, Malcam, Jeuz, Sachia, and Mirmah. These were his sons, heads of families.
1CH	8	11	또 그 아내 후심에게서 아비둡과 엘바알을 낳았으며	And of Hushim he begat Abitub, and Elpaal.	He also had sons by Hushim: Abitub and Elpaal.
1CH	8	12	엘바알의 아들들은 에벨과 미삼과 세멧이니 저는 오노와 롯과 그 향리를 세웠고	The sons of Elpaal; Eber, and Misham, and Shamed, who built Ono, and Lod, with the towns thereof:	The sons of Elpaal:
1CH	8	13	또 브리아와 세마니 저희는 아얄론 거민의 족장이 되어 가드 거민을 쫓아내었더라	Beriah also, and Shema, who were heads of the fathers of the inhabitants of Aijalon, who drove away the inhabitants of Gath:	Eber, Misham, Shemed (who built Ono and Lod with its villages), and Beriah and Shema (who were the heads of families of the inhabitants of Aijalon and who drove out the inhabitants of Gath).
1CH	8	14	아히요와 사삭과 여레못과	And Ahio, Shashak, and Jeremoth,	Ahio, Shashak, Jeremoth,
1CH	8	15	스바댜와 아랏과 에델과	And Zebadiah, and Arad, and Ader,	Zebadiah, Arad, Eder,
1CH	8	16	미가엘과 이스바와 요하는 다 브리아의 아들들이요	And Michael, and Ispah, and Joha, the sons of Beriah;	Michael, Ishpah, and Joha were the sons of Beriah.
1CH	8	17	스바댜와 므술람과 히스기와 헤벨과	And Zebadiah, and Meshullam, and Hezeki, and Heber,	Zebadiah, Meshullam, Hizki, Heber,
1CH	8	18	이스므래와 이슬리아와 요밥은 다 엘바알의 아들들이요	Ishmerai also, and Jezliah, and Jobab, the sons of Elpaal;	Ishmerai, Izliah, and Jobab were the sons of Elpaal.
1CH	8	19	야김과 시그리와 삽디와	And Jakim, and Zichri, and Zabdi,	Jakim, Zichri, Zabdi,
1CH	8	20	엘리에내와 실르대와 엘리엘과	And Elienai, and Zilthai, and Eliel,	Elienai, Zillethai, Eliel,
1CH	8	21	아다야와 브라야와 시므랏은 다 시므이의 아들들이요	And Adaiah, and Beraiah, and Shimrath, the sons of Shimhi;	Adaiah, Beraiah, and Shimrath were the sons of Shimei.
1CH	8	22	이스반과 에벨과 엘리엘과	And Ishpan, and Heber, and Eliel,	Ishpan, Eber, Eliel,
1CH	8	23	압돈과 시그리와 하난과	And Abdon, and Zichri, and Hanan,	Abdon, Zichri, Hanan,
1CH	8	24	하나냐와 엘람과 안도디야와	And Hananiah, and Elam, and Antothijah,	Hananiah, Elam, Anthothijah,
1CH	8	25	이브드야와 브누엘은 다 사삭의 아들들이요	And Iphedeiah, and Penuel, the sons of Shashak;	Iphdeiah, and Penuel were the sons of Shashak.
1CH	8	26	삼스래와 스하랴와 아달랴와	And Shamsherai, and Shehariah, and Athaliah,	Shamsherai, Shehariah, Athaliah,
1CH	8	27	야아레시야와 엘리야와 시그리는 다 여로함의 아들들이니	And Jaresiah, and Eliah, and Zichri, the sons of Jeroham.	Jaareshiah, Elijah, and Zichri were the sons of Jeroham.
1CH	8	28	이는 다 족장이요 대대로 두목이라 예루살렘에 거하였더라	These were heads of the fathers, by their generations, chief men. These dwelt in Jerusalem.	All these were heads of families, the chiefs according to their genealogies, and they lived in Jerusalem.
1CH	8	29	기브온의 조상 여이엘은 기브온에 거하였으니 그 아내의 이름은 마아가며	And at Gibeon dwelt the father of Gibeon; whose wife’s name was Maachah:	Jeiel the father of Gibeon lived in Gibeon. His wife’s name was Maacah,
1CH	8	30	장자는 압돈이요 다음은 술과 기스와 바알과 나답과	And his firstborn son Abdon, and Zur, and Kish, and Baal, and Nadab,	and Abdon was his firstborn son, then Zur, Kish, Baal, Nadab,
1CH	8	31	그돌과 아히오와 세겔이며	And Gedor, and Ahio, and Zacher.	Gedor, Ahio, Zecher,
1CH	8	32	미글롯은 시므아를 낳았으며 이 무리가 그 형제로 더불어 서로 대하여 예루살렘에 거하였더라	And Mikloth begat Shimeah. And these also dwelt with their brethren in Jerusalem, over against them.	and Mikloth, who was the father of Shimeah. These also lived alongside their relatives in Jerusalem.
1CH	8	33	넬은 기스를 낳았고 기스는 사울을 낳았고 사울은 요나단과 말기수아와 아비나답과 에스바알을 낳았으며	And Ner begat Kish, and Kish begat Saul, and Saul begat Jonathan, and Malchi–shua, and Abinadab, and Esh–baal.	Ner was the father of Kish, Kish was the father of Saul, and Saul was the father of Jonathan, Malchishua, Abinadab, and Esh-baal.
1CH	8	34	요나단의 아들은 므립바알이라 므립바알이 미가를 낳았고	And the son of Jonathan was Merib–baal; and Merib–baal begat Micah.	The son of Jonathan: Merib-baal, and Merib-baal was the father of Micah.
1CH	8	35	미가의 아들들은 비돈과 멜렉과 다레아와 아하스며	And the sons of Micah were, Pithon, and Melech, and Tarea, and Ahaz.	The sons of Micah: Pithon, Melech, Tarea, and Ahaz.
1CH	8	36	아하스는 여호앗다를 낳았고 여호앗다는 알레멧과 아스마웹과 시므리를 낳았고 시므리는 모사를 낳았고	And Ahaz begat Jehoadah; and Jehoadah begat Alemeth, and Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri begat Moza,	Ahaz was the father of Jehoaddah, Jehoaddah was the father of Alemeth, Azmaveth, and Zimri, and Zimri was the father of Moza.
1CH	8	37	모사는 비느아를 낳았으며 비느아의 아들은 라바요 그 아들은 엘르아사요 그 아들은 아셀이며	And Moza begat Binea: Rapha was his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son:	Moza was the father of Binea. Raphah was his son, Eleasah his son, and Azel his son.
1CH	8	38	아셀에게 여섯 아들이 있어 그 이름이 이러하니 아스리감과 보그루와 이스마엘과 스아랴와 오바댜와 하난이라 아셀의 모든 아들이 이러하며	And Azel had six sons, whose names are these, Azrikam, Bocheru, and Ishmael, and Sheariah, and Obadiah, and Hanan. All these were the sons of Azel.	Azel had six sons, and these were their names: Azrikam, Bocheru, Ishmael, Sheariah, Obadiah, and Hanan. All these were the sons of Azel.
1CH	8	39	그 아우 에섹의 아들은 이러하니 그 장자는 울람이요 둘째는 여우스요 셋째는 엘리벨렛이며	And the sons of Eshek his brother were, Ulam his firstborn, Jehush the second, and Eliphelet the third.	The sons of his brother Eshek:
1CH	8	40	울람의 아들은 다 큰 용사요 활을 잘 쏘는 자라 아들과 손자가 많아 모두 일백오십 인이었더라 베냐민의 자손들은 이러하였더라	And the sons of Ulam were mighty men of valour, archers, and had many sons, and sons’ sons, an hundred and fifty. All these are of the sons of Benjamin.	Ulam was his firstborn, Jeush second, and Eliphelet third. The sons of Ulam were mighty men of valor, archers, and they had many sons and grandsons—150 in all. All these were the descendants of Benjamin.
1CH	9	1	온 이스라엘이 그 보계대로 계수되고 이스라엘 열왕기에 기록되니라 유다가 범죄함을 인하여 바벨론으로 사로잡혀 갔더니	So all Israel were reckoned by genealogies; and, behold, they were written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah, who were carried away to Babylon for their transgression.	So all Israel was recorded in the genealogies written in the Book of the Kings of Israel. But Judah was exiled to Babylon because of their unfaithfulness.
1CH	9	2	먼저 그 본성으로 돌아와서 그 기업에 거한 자는 이스라엘 제사장들과 레위 사람과 느디님 사람들이라	Now the first inhabitants that dwelt in their possessions in their cities were, the Israelites, the priests, Levites, and the Nethinims.	Now the first to resettle their own property in their cities were Israelites, priests, Levites, and temple servants.
1CH	9	3	유다 자손과 베냐민 자손과 에브라임과 므낫세 자손 중에서 예루살렘에 거한 자는	And in Jerusalem dwelt of the children of Judah, and of the children of Benjamin, and of the children of Ephraim, and Manasseh;	These were some of the descendants of Judah, Benjamin, Ephraim, and Manasseh who lived in Jerusalem:
1CH	9	4	유다의 아들 베레스 자손 중에 우대니 저는 암미훗의 아들이요 오므리의 손자요 이므리의 증손이요 바니의 현손이며	Uthai the son of Ammihud, the son of Omri, the son of Imri, the son of Bani, of the children of Pharez the son of Judah.	Uthai son of Ammihud, the son of Omri, the son of Imri, the son of Bani, a descendant of Perez son of Judah.
1CH	9	5	실로 사람 중에서는 장자 아사야와 그 아들들이요	And of the Shilonites; Asaiah the firstborn, and his sons.	From the Shilonites: Asaiah the firstborn and his sons.
1CH	9	6	세라 자손 중에서는 여우엘과 그 형제 육백구십 인이요	And of the sons of Zerah; Jeuel, and their brethren, six hundred and ninety.	From the Zerahites: Jeuel and 690 relatives.
1CH	9	7	베냐민 자손 중에서는 핫스누아의 증손 호다위아의 손자 므술람의 아들 살루요	And of the sons of Benjamin; Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son of Hodaviah, the son of Hasenuah,	From the Benjamites: Sallu son of Meshullam, the son of Hodaviah, the son of Hassenuah;
1CH	9	8	여로함의 아들 이브느야와 미그리의 손자 웃시의 아들 엘라요 이브니야의 증손 르우엘의 손자 스바댜의 아들 무술람이요	And Ibneiah the son of Jeroham, and Elah the son of Uzzi, the son of Michri, and Meshullam the son of Shephathiah, the son of Reuel, the son of Ibnijah;	Ibneiah son of Jeroham; Elah son of Uzzi, the son of Michri; Meshullam son of Shephatiah, the son of Reuel, the son of Ibnijah;
1CH	9	9	또 저의 형제들이라 그 보계대로 계수하면 구백오십육 인이니라 그 집의 족장된 자들이더라	And their brethren, according to their generations, nine hundred and fifty and six. All these men were chief of the fathers in the house of their fathers.	and 956 of their relatives according to their genealogy. All these men were heads of their families.
1CH	9	10	제사장 중에서는 여다야와 여호야립과 야긴과	And of the priests; Jedaiah, and Jehoiarib, and Jachin,	From the priests: Jedaiah, Jehoiarib, and Jachin;
1CH	9	11	하나님의 전을 맡은 자 아사랴니 저는 힐기야의 아들이요 므술람의 손자요 사독의 증손이요 므라욧의 현손이요 아히둡의 오대손이며	And Azariah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the ruler of the house of God;	Azariah son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the chief official of God’s temple;
1CH	9	12	또 아다야니 저는 여로함의 아들이요 바스훌의 손자요 말기야의 증손이며 또 마아새니 저는 아디엘의 아들이요 야세라의 손자요 므술람의 증손이요 므실레밋의 현손이요 임멜의 오대손이며	And Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pashur, the son of Malchijah, and Maasiai the son of Adiel, the son of Jahzerah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Meshillemith, the son of Immer;	Adaiah son of Jeroham, the son of Pashhur, the son of Malchijah; Maasai son of Adiel, the son of Jahzerah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Meshillemith, the son of Immer;
1CH	9	13	또 그 형제들이니 그 집의 족장이라 하나님의 전의 일에 수종들 재능이 있는 자가 모두 일천칠백육십 인이더라	And their brethren, heads of the house of their fathers, a thousand and seven hundred and threescore; very able men for the work of the service of the house of God.	and 1,760 of their relatives, the heads of their families, able men for the work of the service of the house of God.
1CH	9	14	레위 사람 중에서는 므라리 자손 스마야니 저는 핫숩의 아들이요 아스리감의 손자요 하사뱌의 증손이며	And of the Levites; Shemaiah the son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, of the sons of Merari;	From the Levites: Shemaiah son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, a descendant of Merari;
1CH	9	15	또 박박갈과 헤레스와 갈랄과 맛다냐니 저는 미가의 아들이요 시그리의 손자요 아삽의 증손이며	And Bakbakkar, Heresh, and Galal, and Mattaniah the son of Micah, the son of Zichri, the son of Asaph;	Bakbakkar, Heresh, Galal, and Mattaniah son of Mica, the son of Zichri, the son of Asaph;
1CH	9	16	또 오바댜니 저는 스마야의 아들이요 갈랄의 손자요 여두둔의 증손이며 또 베레갸니 저는 아사의 아들이요 엘가나의 손자라 느도바 사람의 향리에 거하였더라	And Obadiah the son of Shemaiah, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun, and Berechiah the son of Asa, the son of Elkanah, that dwelt in the villages of the Netophathites.	Obadiah son of Shemaiah, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun; and Berechiah son of Asa, the son of Elkanah, who lived in the villages of the Netophathites.
1CH	9	17	문지기는 살룸과 악굽과 달몬과 아히만과 그 형제들이니 살룸은 그 두목이라	And the porters were, Shallum, and Akkub, and Talmon, and Ahiman, and their brethren: Shallum was the chief;	These were the gatekeepers: Shallum, Akkub, Talmon, Ahiman, and their relatives.
1CH	9	18	이 사람들은 전에 왕의 문 동편 곧 레위 자손의 영의 문지기며	Who hitherto waited in the king’s gate eastward: they were porters in the companies of the children of Levi.	Shallum was their chief; he was previously stationed at the King’s Gate on the east side. These were the gatekeepers from the camp of the Levites.
1CH	9	19	고라의 증손 에비아삽의 손자 고레의 아들 살룸과 그 종족 형제 곧 고라의 자손이 수종드는 일을 맡아 성막 문들을 지켰으니 그 열조도 여호와의 영을 맡고 그 들어가는 곳을 지켰으며	And Shallum the son of Kore, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah, and his brethren, of the house of his father, the Korahites, were over the work of the service, keepers of the gates of the tabernacle: and their fathers, being over the host of the Lord, were keepers of the entry.	Shallum son of Kore, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah, and his relatives from the Korahites were assigned to guard the thresholds of the Tent, just as their fathers had been assigned to guard the entrance to the dwelling of the LORD.
1CH	9	20	여호와께서 함께하신 엘르아살의 아들 비느하스가 옛적에 그 무리를 거느렸고	And Phinehas the son of Eleazar was the ruler over them in time past, and the Lord was with him.	In earlier times Phinehas son of Eleazar had been in charge of the gatekeepers, and the LORD was with him.
1CH	9	21	므셀레먀의 아들 스가랴는 회막 문지기가 되었더라	And Zechariah the son of Meshelemiah was porter of the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.	Zechariah son of Meshelemiah was the gatekeeper at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting.
1CH	9	22	택함을 입어 문지기 된 자가 모두 이백열둘이니 이는 그 향리에서 그 보계대로 계수된 자요 다윗과 선견자 사무엘이 전에 세워서 이 직분을 맡긴 자라	All these which were chosen to be porters in the gates were two hundred and twelve. These were reckoned by their genealogy in their villages, whom David and Samuel the seer did ordain in their set office.	The number of those chosen to be gatekeepers at the thresholds was 212. They were registered by genealogy in their villages. David and Samuel the seer had appointed them to their positions of trust.
1CH	9	23	저희와 그 자손이 그 반열을 좇아 여호와의 전 곧 성막문을 지켰는데	So they and their children had the oversight of the gates of the house of the Lord, namely, the house of the tabernacle, by wards.	So they and their descendants were assigned to guard the gates of the house of the LORD—the house called the Tent.
1CH	9	24	이 문지기가 동서남북 사방에 섰고	In four quarters were the porters, toward the east, west, north, and south.	The gatekeepers were stationed on the four sides: east, west, north, and south.
1CH	9	25	그 향리에 있는 형제들은 이레마다 와서 함께하니	And their brethren, which were in their villages, were to come after seven days from time to time with them.	Their relatives came from their villages at fixed times to serve with them for seven-day periods.
1CH	9	26	이는 문지기의 두목 된 레위 사람 넷이 긴요한 직분을 맡아 하나님의 전 모든 방과 곳간을 지켰음이라	For these Levites, the four chief porters, were in their set office, and were over the chambers and treasuries of the house of God.	But the four chief gatekeepers, who were Levites, were entrusted with the rooms and the treasuries of the house of God.
1CH	9	27	저희는 하나님의 전을 맡은 직분이 있으므로 전 사면에 유하며 아침마다 문을 여는 책임이 있었더라	And they lodged round about the house of God, because the charge was upon them, and the opening thereof every morning pertained to them.	They would spend the night stationed around the house of God, because they were responsible for guarding it and opening it every morning.
1CH	9	28	그 중에 어떤 자는 섬기는데 쓰는 기명을 맡아서 그 수효대로 들여가고 수효대로 내어오며	And certain of them had the charge of the ministering vessels, that they should bring them in and out by tale.	Some of them were in charge of the articles used in worship, to count them whenever they were brought in or taken out.
1CH	9	29	또 어떤 자는 성소의 기구와 모든 기명과 고운 가루와 포도주와 기름과 유향과 향품을 맡았으며	Some of them also were appointed to oversee the vessels, and all the instruments of the sanctuary, and the fine flour, and the wine, and the oil, and the frankincense, and the spices.	Others were put in charge of the furnishings and other articles of the sanctuary, as well as the fine flour, wine, oil, frankincense, and spices.
1CH	9	30	또 제사장의 아들 중에 어떤 자는 향품으로 향기름을 만들었으며	And some of the sons of the priests made the ointment of the spices.	And some of the sons of the priests mixed the spices.
1CH	9	31	고라 자손 살룸의 장자 맛디댜라 하는 레위 사람은 남비에 지지는 것을 맡았으며	And Mattithiah, one of the Levites, who was the firstborn of Shallum the Korahite, had the set office over the things that were made in the pans.	A Levite named Mattithiah, the firstborn son of Shallum the Korahite, was entrusted with baking the bread.
1CH	9	32	또 그 형제 그핫 자손 중에 어떤 자는 진설하는 떡을 맡아 안식일마다 준비하였더라	And other of their brethren, of the sons of the Kohathites, were over the shewbread, to prepare it every sabbath.	Some of their Kohathite brothers were responsible for preparing the rows of the showbread every Sabbath.
1CH	9	33	또 찬송하는 자가 있으니 곧 레위 족장이라 저희가 골방에 거하여 주야로 자기 직분에 골몰하므로 다른 일은 하지 아니하였더라	And these are the singers, chief of the fathers of the Levites, who remaining in the chambers were free: for they were employed in that work day and night.	Those who were musicians, the heads of Levite families, stayed in the temple chambers and were exempt from other duties because they were on duty day and night.
1CH	9	34	이상은 대대로 레위의 족장이요 으뜸이라 예루살렘에 거하였더라	These chief fathers of the Levites were chief throughout their generations; these dwelt at Jerusalem.	All these were heads of Levite families, chiefs according to their genealogies, and they lived in Jerusalem.
1CH	9	35	기브온의 조상 여이엘은 기브온에 거하였으니 그 아내의 이름은 마아가라	And in Gibeon dwelt the father of Gibeon, Jehiel, whose wife’s name was Maachah:	Jeiel the father of Gibeon lived in Gibeon. His wife’s name was Maacah.
1CH	9	36	그 장자는 압돈이요 다음은 술과 기스와 바알과 넬과 나답과	And his firstborn son Abdon, then Zur, and Kish, and Baal, and Ner, and Nadab,	Abdon was his firstborn son, then Zur, Kish, Baal, Ner, Nadab,
1CH	9	37	그돌과 아히오와 스가랴와 미글롯이며	And Gedor, and Ahio, and Zechariah, and Mikloth.	Gedor, Ahio, Zechariah, and Mikloth.
1CH	9	38	미글롯은 시므암을 낳았으니 이 무리도 그 형제로 더불어 서로 대하여 예루살렘에 거하였더라	And Mikloth begat Shimeam. And they also dwelt with their brethren at Jerusalem, over against their brethren.	Mikloth was the father of Shimeam. They too lived alongside their relatives in Jerusalem.
1CH	9	39	넬은 기스를 낳았고 기스는 사울을 낳았고 사울은 요나단과 말기수아와 아비나답과 에스바알을 낳았으며	And Ner begat Kish; and Kish begat Saul; and Saul begat Jonathan, and Malchi–shua, and Abinadab, and Esh–baal.	Ner was the father of Kish, Kish was the father of Saul, and Saul was the father of Jonathan, Malchishua, Abinadab, and Esh-baal.
1CH	9	40	요나단의 아들은 므립바알이라 므립바알이 미가를 낳았고	And the son of Jonathan was Merib–baal: and Merib–baal begat Micah.	The son of Jonathan: Merib-baal, who was the father of Micah.
1CH	9	41	미가의 아들들은 비돈과 멜렉과 다레아와 아하스며	And the sons of Micah were, Pithon, and Melech, and Tahrea, and Ahaz.	The sons of Micah: Pithon, Melech, Tahrea, and Ahaz.
1CH	9	42	아하스는 야라를 낳았고 야라는 알레멧과 아스마웹과 시므리를 낳았고 시므리는 모사를 낳았고	And Ahaz begat Jarah; and Jarah begat Alemeth, and Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri begat Moza;	Ahaz was the father of Jarah; Jarah was the father of Alemeth, Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri was the father of Moza.
1CH	9	43	모사는 비느아를 낳았으며 비느아의 아들은 르바야요 그 아들은 엘르아사요 그 아들은 아셀이며	And Moza begat Binea; and Rephaiah his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son.	Moza was the father of Binea. Rephaiah was his son, Elasah his son, and Azel his son.
1CH	9	44	아셀이 여섯 아들이 있으니 그 이름은 아스리감과 보그루와 이스마엘과 스아랴와 오바댜와 하난이라 아셀의 아들들이 이러하였더라	And Azel had six sons, whose names are these, Azrikam, Bocheru, and Ishmael, and Sheariah, and Obadiah, and Hanan: these were the sons of Azel.	And Azel had six sons, and these were their names: Azrikam, Bocheru, Ishmael, Sheariah, Obadiah, and Hanan. These were the sons of Azel.
1CH	10	1	블레셋 사람과 이스라엘이 싸우더니 이스라엘 사람들이 블레셋 사람 앞에서 도망하다가 길보아 산에서 죽임을 받고 엎드러지니라	Now the Philistines fought against Israel; and the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines, and fell down slain in mount Gilboa.	Now the Philistines fought against Israel, and the men of Israel fled before them, and many fell slain on Mount Gilboa.
1CH	10	2	블레셋 사람이 사울과 그 아들들을 추격하여 사울의 아들 요나단과 아비나답과 말기수아를 죽이고	And the Philistines followed hard after Saul, and after his sons; and the Philistines slew Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Malchi–shua, the sons of Saul.	The Philistines followed hard after Saul and his sons, and they killed Saul’s sons Jonathan, Abinadab, and Malchishua.
1CH	10	3	사울을 맹렬히 치며 활 쏘는 자가 사울에게 따라 미치매 사울이 그 쏘는 자를 인하여 심히 군급하여	And the battle went sore against Saul, and the archers hit him, and he was wounded of the archers.	When the battle intensified against Saul, the archers overtook him and wounded him.
1CH	10	4	자기의 병기 가진 자에게 이르되 너는 칼을 빼어 나를 찌르라 저 할례 없는 자가 와서 나를 욕되게 할까 두려워하노라 그러나 그 병기 가진 자가 심히 두려워하여 즐겨 행치 아니하매 사울이 자기 칼을 취하고 그 위에 엎드러지니	Then said Saul to his armourbearer, Draw thy sword, and thrust me through therewith; lest these uncircumcised come and abuse me. But his armourbearer would not; for he was sore afraid. So Saul took a sword, and fell upon it.	Then Saul said to his armor-bearer, “Draw your sword and run it through me, or these uncircumcised men will come and torture me!” But his armor-bearer was terrified and refused to do it. So Saul took his own sword and fell on it.
1CH	10	5	병기 가진 자가 사울의 죽음을 보고 자기도 칼에 엎드러져 죽으니라	And when his armourbearer saw that Saul was dead, he fell likewise on the sword, and died.	When his armor-bearer saw that Saul was dead, he too fell on his own sword and died.
1CH	10	6	이와 같이 사울과 그 세 아들과 그 온 집이 함께 죽으니라	So Saul died, and his three sons, and all his house died together.	So Saul died together with his three sons and all his house.
1CH	10	7	골짜기에 있는 모든 이스라엘 사람이 저희의 도망한 것과 사울과 그 아들들의 다 죽은 것을 보고 그 성읍들을 버리고 도망하매 블레셋 사람이 와서 거기 거하니라	And when all the men of Israel that were in the valley saw that they fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, then they forsook their cities, and fled: and the Philistines came and dwelt in them.	When all the Israelites in the valley saw that the army had fled and that Saul and his sons had died, they abandoned their cities and ran away. So the Philistines came and occupied their cities.
1CH	10	8	이튿날에 블레셋 사람이 와서 죽임을 당한 자를 벗기다가 사울과 그 아들들이 길보아 산에 엎드러졌음을 보고	And it came to pass on the morrow, when the Philistines came to strip the slain, that they found Saul and his sons fallen in mount Gilboa.	The next day, when the Philistines came to strip the dead, they found Saul and his sons fallen on Mount Gilboa.
1CH	10	9	곧 사울을 벗기고 그 머리와 갑옷을 취하고 사람을 블레셋 땅 사방에 보내어 모든 우상과 뭇 백성에게 광포하게 하고	And when they had stripped him, they took his head, and his armour, and sent into the land of the Philistines round about, to carry tidings unto their idols, and to the people.	They stripped Saul, cut off his head, took his armor, and sent messengers throughout the land of the Philistines to proclaim the news in the temple of their idols and among their people.
1CH	10	10	사울의 갑옷을 그 신의 묘에 두고 그 머리를 다곤의 묘에 단지라	And they put his armour in the house of their gods, and fastened his head in the temple of Dagon.	They put his armor in the temple of their gods and hung his head in the temple of Dagon.
1CH	10	11	길르앗야베스 모든 사람이 블레셋 사람의 사울에게 행한 모든 일을 듣고	And when all Jabesh–gilead heard all that the Philistines had done to Saul,	When the people of Jabesh-gilead heard about everything the Philistines had done to Saul,
1CH	10	12	용사들이 다 일어나서 사울의 시체와 그 아들들의 시체를 취하여 야베스로 가져다가 그곳 상수리나무 아래 그 해골을 장사하고 칠 일을 금식하였더라	They arose, all the valiant men, and took away the body of Saul, and the bodies of his sons, and brought them to Jabesh, and buried their bones under the oak in Jabesh, and fasted seven days.	all their men of valor set out and retrieved the bodies of Saul and his sons and brought them to Jabesh. And they buried their bones under the oak in Jabesh and fasted seven days.
1CH	10	13	사울의 죽은 것은 여호와께 범죄하였음이라 저가 여호와의 말씀을 지키지 아니하고 또 신접한 자에게 가르치기를 청하고	So Saul died for his transgression which he committed against the Lord, even against the word of the Lord, which he kept not, and also for asking counsel of one that had a familiar spirit, to enquire of it;	So Saul died for his unfaithfulness to the LORD, because he did not keep the word of the LORD and even consulted a medium for guidance,
1CH	10	14	여호와께 묻지 아니하였으므로 여호와께서 저를 죽이시고 그 나라를 이새의 아들 다윗에게 돌리셨더라	And enquired not of the Lord: therefore he slew him, and turned the kingdom unto David the son of Jesse.	and he failed to inquire of the LORD. So the LORD put him to death and turned the kingdom over to David son of Jesse.
1CH	11	1	온 이스라엘이 헤브론에 모여 다윗을 보고 가로되 우리는 왕의 골육이니이다	Then all Israel gathered themselves to David unto Hebron, saying, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.	Then all Israel came together to David at Hebron and said, “Here we are, your own flesh and blood.
1CH	11	2	전일 곧 사울이 왕이 되었을 때에도 이스라엘을 거느려 출입하게 한 자가 왕이시었고 왕의 하나님 여호와께서도 왕에게 말씀하시기를 네가 내 백성 이스라엘의 목자가 되며 내 백성 이스라엘의 주권자가 되리라 하셨나이다 하니라	And moreover in time past, even when Saul was king, thou wast he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel: and the Lord thy God said unto thee, Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be ruler over my people Israel.	Even in times past, while Saul was king, you were the one who led Israel out and brought them back. And the LORD your God said, ‘You will shepherd My people Israel, and you will be ruler over them.’”
1CH	11	3	이에 이스라엘 모든 장로가 헤브론에 이르러 왕에게 나아오니 다윗이 헤브론에서 여호와 앞에서 저희와 언약을 세우매 저희가 다윗에게 기름을 부어 이스라엘 왕을 삼으니 여호와께서 사무엘로 전하신 말씀대로 되었더라	Therefore came all the elders of Israel to the king to Hebron; and David made a covenant with them in Hebron before the Lord; and they anointed David king over Israel, according to the word of the Lord by Samuel.	So all the elders of Israel came to the king at Hebron, where David made a covenant with them before the LORD. And they anointed him king over Israel, according to the word of the LORD through Samuel.
1CH	11	4	다윗이 온 이스라엘로 더불어 예루살렘 곧 여부스에 이르니 여부스 토인이 거기 거하였더라	And David and all Israel went to Jerusalem, which is Jebus; where the Jebusites were, the inhabitants of the land.	Then David and all the Israelites marched to Jerusalem (that is, Jebus), where the Jebusites inhabited the land.
1CH	11	5	여부스 토인이 다윗에게 이르기를 네가 이리로 들어오지 못하리라 하나 다윗이 시온 산성을 빼앗았으니 이는 다윗 성이더라	And the inhabitants of Jebus said to David, Thou shalt not come hither. Nevertheless David took the castle of Zion, which is the city of David.	The people of Jebus said to David, “You will never get in here.” Nevertheless, David captured the fortress of Zion (that is, the City of David).
1CH	11	6	다윗이 가로되 먼저 여부스 사람을 치는 자는 두목과 장관을 삼으리라 하였더니 스루야의 아들 요압이 먼저 올라갔으므로 두목이 되었고	And David said, Whosoever smiteth the Jebusites first shall be chief and captain. So Joab the son of Zeruiah went first up, and was chief.	Now David had said, “Whoever is the first to strike down a Jebusite will become chief commander.” And Joab son of Zeruiah went up first, and he became the chief.
1CH	11	7	다윗이 그 산성에 거한고로 무리가 다윗 성이라 일컬었으며	And David dwelt in the castle; therefore they called it the city of David.	So David took up residence in the fortress; that is why it was called the City of David.
1CH	11	8	다윗이 밀로에서부터 두루 성을 쌓았고 그 남은 성은 요압이 중수하였더라	And he built the city round about, even from Millo round about: and Joab repaired the rest of the city.	He built up the city around it, from the supporting terraces to the surrounding wall, while Joab restored the rest of the city.
1CH	11	9	만군의 여호와께서 함께 계시니 다윗이 점점 강성하여 가니라	So David waxed greater and greater: for the Lord of hosts was with him.	And David became greater and greater, for the LORD of Hosts was with him.
1CH	11	10	다윗에게 있는 용사의 두목은 이러하니라 이 사람들이 온 이스라엘로 더불어 다윗의 힘을 도와 나라를 얻게 하고 세워 왕을 삼았으니 이는 여호와께서 이스라엘에 대하여 이르신 말씀대로 함이었더라	These also are the chief of the mighty men whom David had, who strengthened themselves with him in his kingdom, and with all Israel, to make him king, according to the word of the Lord concerning Israel.	Now these were the chiefs of David’s mighty men, who, together with all Israel, bolstered and strengthened his kingdom, according to the word of the LORD concerning Israel.
1CH	11	11	다윗에게 있는 용사의 수효가 이러하니라 학몬 사람의 아들 야소브암은 삼십 인의 두목이라 저가 창을 들어 한 때에 삼백 인을 죽였고	And this is the number of the mighty men whom David had; Jashobeam, an Hachmonite, the chief of the captains: he lifted up his spear against three hundred slain by him at one time.	This is the list of David’s mighty men: Jashobeam son of Hachmoni was chief of the officers; he wielded his spear against three hundred men, whom he killed at one time.
1CH	11	12	그 다음은 아호아 사람 도도의 아들 엘르아살이니 세 용사 중 하나이라	And after him was Eleazar the son of Dodo, the Ahohite, who was one of the three mighties.	Next in command was Eleazar son of Dodo the Ahohite, one of the three mighty men.
1CH	11	13	저가 바스담밈에서 다윗과 함께하였더니 블레셋 사람이 그곳에 모여와서 치니 거기 보리가 많이 난 밭이 있더라 백성들이 블레셋 사람 앞에서 도망하되	He was with David at Pas–dammim, and there the Philistines were gathered together to battle, where was a parcel of ground full of barley; and the people fled from before the Philistines.	He was with David at Pas-dammim when the Philistines gathered there for battle. At the place with a field full of barley, the troops fled from the Philistines.
1CH	11	14	저희가 그 밭 가운데 서서 그 밭을 보호하여 블레셋 사람을 죽였으니 여호와께서 큰 구원으로 구원하심이었더라	And they set themselves in the midst of that parcel, and delivered it, and slew the Philistines; and the Lord saved them by a great deliverance.	But Eleazar and David stationed themselves in the middle of the field and defended it. They struck down the Philistines, and the LORD brought about a great victory.
1CH	11	15	삼십 두목 중 세 사람이 바위로 내려가서 아둘람 굴 다윗에게 이를 때에 블레셋 군대가 르바임 골짜기에 진쳤더라	Now three of the thirty captains went down to the rock to David, into the cave of Adullam; and the host of the Philistines encamped in the valley of Rephaim.	Three of the thirty chief men went down to David, to the rock at the cave of Adullam, while a company of Philistines was encamped in the Valley of Rephaim.
1CH	11	16	그 때에 다윗은 산성에 있고 블레셋 사람의 영채는 베들레헴에 있는지라	And David was then in the hold, and the Philistines’ garrison was then at Beth–lehem.	At that time David was in the stronghold, and the garrison of the Philistines was at Bethlehem.
1CH	11	17	다윗이 사모하여 가로되 베들레헴 성문 곁 우물물을 누가 나로 마시게 할꼬 하매	And David longed, and said, Oh that one would give me drink of the water of the well of Beth–lehem, that is at the gate!	David longed for water and said, “Oh, that someone would get me a drink of water from the well near the gate of Bethlehem!”
1CH	11	18	이 세 사람이 블레셋 사람의 군대를 충돌하고 지나가서 베들레헴 성문 곁 우물물을 길어 가지고 다윗에게로 왔으나 다윗이 마시기를 기뻐 아니하고 그 물을 여호와께 부어드리고	And the three brake through the host of the Philistines, and drew water out of the well of Beth–lehem, that was by the gate, and took it, and brought it to David: but David would not drink of it, but poured it out to the Lord,	So the Three broke through the Philistine camp, drew water from the well at the gate of Bethlehem, and brought it back to David. But he refused to drink it; instead, he poured it out to the LORD,
1CH	11	19	가로되 내 하나님이여 내가 결단코 이런 일을 하지 아니하리이다 생명을 돌아보지 아니하고 갔던 사람들의 피를 어찌 마시리이까 하고 마시기를 즐겨 아니하니라 세 용사가 이런 일을 행하였더라	And said, My God forbid it me, that I should do this thing: shall I drink the blood of these men that have put their lives in jeopardy? for with the jeopardy of their lives they brought it. Therefore he would not drink it. These things did these three mightiest.	saying, “Far be it from me, my God, to do this! How can I drink the blood of these men who risked their lives?” Because they had brought it at the risk of their lives, David refused to drink it. Such were the exploits of the three mighty men.
1CH	11	20	요압의 아우 아비새는 그 삼 인의 두목이라 저가 창을 들어 삼백 인을 죽이고 그 삼 인 중에 이름을 얻었으니	And Abishai the brother of Joab, he was chief of the three: for lifting up his spear against three hundred, he slew them, and had a name among the three.	Now Abishai, the brother of Joab, was chief of the Three, and he lifted his spear against three hundred men, killed them, and won a name along with the Three.
1CH	11	21	저는 둘째 삼 인 중에 가장 존귀하여 저희의 두목이 되었으나 그러나 첫째 삼 인에게는 미치지 못하니라	Of the three, he was more honourable than the two; for he was their captain: howbeit he attained not to the first three.	He was doubly honored above the Three, and he became their commander, even though he was not included among the Three.
1CH	11	22	갑스엘 용사의 손자 여호야다의 아들 브나야는 효용한 일을 행한자라 저가 모압 아리엘의 아들 둘을 죽였고 또 눈 올 때에 함정에 내려가서 한 사자를 죽였으며	Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man of Kabzeel, who had done many acts; he slew two lionlike men of Moab: also he went down and slew a lion in a pit in a snowy day.	And Benaiah son of Jehoiada was a man of valor from Kabzeel, a man of many exploits. He struck down two champions of Moab, and on a snowy day he went down into a pit and killed a lion.
1CH	11	23	또 장대한 애굽 사람을 죽였는데 그 사람의 키가 다섯 규빗이요 그 손에 든 창이 베틀채 같으나 저가 막대기를 가지고 내려가서 그 애굽 사람의 손에서 창을 빼앗아 그 창으로 죽였더라	And he slew an Egyptian, a man of great stature, five cubits high; and in the Egyptian’s hand was a spear like a weaver’s beam; and he went down to him with a staff, and plucked the spear out of the Egyptian’s hand, and slew him with his own spear.	He also killed an Egyptian, a huge man five cubits tall. Although the Egyptian had a spear like a weaver’s beam in his hand, Benaiah went against him with a club, snatched the spear from his hand, and killed the Egyptian with his own spear.
1CH	11	24	여호야다의 아들 브나야가 이런 일을 행하였으므로 세 용사 중에 이름을 얻고	These things did Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and had the name among the three mighties.	These were the exploits of Benaiah son of Jehoiada, who won a name alongside the three mighty men.
1CH	11	25	삼십 인보다 존귀하나 그러나 첫 삼 인에게는 미치지 못하니라 다윗이 저를 세워 시위대 장관을 삼았더라	Behold, he was honourable among the thirty, but attained not to the first three: and David set him over his guard.	He was most honored among the Thirty, but he did not become one of the Three. And David appointed him over his guard.
1CH	11	26	또 군중의 큰 용사는 요압의 아우 아사헬과 베들레헴 사람 도도의 아들 엘하난과	Also the valiant men of the armies were, Asahel the brother of Joab, Elhanan the son of Dodo of Beth–lehem,	Now these were the mighty men: Asahel the brother of Joab, Elhanan son of Dodo of Bethlehem,
1CH	11	27	하롤 사람 삼훗과 블론 사람 헬레스와	Shammoth the Harorite, Helez the Pelonite,	Shammoth the Harorite, Helez the Pelonite,
1CH	11	28	드고아 사람 익게스의 아들 이라와 아나돗 사람 아비에셀과	Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite, Abi–ezer the Antothite,	Ira son of Ikkesh the Tekoite, Abiezer the Anathothite,
1CH	11	29	후삿 사람 십브개와 아호아 사람 일래와	Sibbecai the Hushathite, Ilai the Ahohite,	Sibbecai the Hushathite, Ilai the Ahohite,
1CH	11	30	느도바 사람 마하래와 느도바 사람 바아나의 아들 헬렛과	Maharai the Netophathite, Heled the son of Baanah the Netophathite,	Maharai the Netophathite, Heled son of Baanah the Netophathite,
1CH	11	31	베냐민 자손에 속한 기브아 사람 리배의 아들 이대와 비라돈 사람 브나야와	Ithai the son of Ribai of Gibeah, that pertained to the children of Benjamin, Benaiah the Pirathonite,	Ithai son of Ribai from Gibeah of the Benjamites, Benaiah the Pirathonite,
1CH	11	32	가아스 시냇가에 사는 후래와 아르바 사람 아비엘과	Hurai of the brooks of Gaash, Abiel the Arbathite,	Hurai from the brooks of Gaash, Abiel the Arbathite,
1CH	11	33	바하룸 사람 아스마웹과 사알본 사람 엘리아바와	Azmaveth the Baharumite, Eliahba the Shaalbonite,	Azmaveth the Baharumite, Eliahba the Shaalbonite,
1CH	11	34	기손 사람 하셈의 아들들과 하랄 사람 사게의 아들 요나단과	The sons of Hashem the Gizonite, Jonathan the son of Shage the Hararite,	the sons of Hashem the Gizonite, Jonathan son of Shagee the Hararite,
1CH	11	35	하랄 사람 사갈의 아들 아히암과 울의 아들 엘리발과	Ahiam the son of Sacar the Hararite, Eliphal the son of Ur,	Ahiam son of Sachar the Hararite, Eliphal son of Ur,
1CH	11	36	므게랏 사람 헤벨과 블론 사람 아히야와	Hepher the Mecherathite, Ahijah the Pelonite,	Hepher the Mecherathite, Ahijah the Pelonite,
1CH	11	37	갈멜 사람 헤스로와 에스배의 아들 나아래와	Hezro the Carmelite, Naarai the son of Ezbai,	Hezro the Carmelite, Naarai son of Ezbai,
1CH	11	38	나단의 아우 요엘과 하그리의 아들 밉할과	Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibhar the son of Haggeri,	Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibhar son of Hagri,
1CH	11	39	암몬 사람 셀렉과 스루야의 아들 요압의 병기 잡은 자 베롯 사람 나하래와	Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Berothite, the armourbearer of Joab the son of Zeruiah,	Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Beerothite, the armor-bearer of Joab son of Zeruiah,
1CH	11	40	이델 사람 이라와 이델 사람 가렙과	Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite,	Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite,
1CH	11	41	헷 사람 우리아와 알래의 아들 사밧과	Uriah the Hittite, Zabad the son of Ahlai,	Uriah the Hittite, Zabad son of Ahlai,
1CH	11	42	르우벤 자손 시사의 아들 곧 르우벤 자손의 두목 아디나와 그 종자 삼십 인과	Adina the son of Shiza the Reubenite, a captain of the Reubenites, and thirty with him,	Adina son of Shiza the Reubenite, chief of the Reubenites, and the thirty with him,
1CH	11	43	마아가의 아들 하난과 미덴 사람 요사밧과	Hanan the son of Maachah, and Joshaphat the Mithnite,	Hanan son of Maacah, Joshaphat the Mithnite,
1CH	11	44	아스드랏 사람 웃시야와 아로엘 사람 호담의 아들 사마와 여이엘과	Uzzia the Ashterathite, Shama and Jehiel the sons of Hothan the Aroerite,	Uzzia the Ashterathite, Shama and Jeiel the sons of Hotham the Aroerite,
1CH	11	45	시므리의 아들 여디아엘과 그 아우 디스 사람 요하와	Jediael the son of Shimri, and Joha his brother, the Tizite,	Jediael son of Shimri and his brother Joha the Tizite,
1CH	11	46	마하위 사람 엘리엘과 엘라암의 아들 여리배와 요사위야와 모압 사람 이드마와	Eliel the Mahavite, and Jeribai, and Joshaviah, the sons of Elnaam, and Ithmah the Moabite,	Eliel the Mahavite, Jeribai and Joshaviah, the sons of Elnaam, Ithmah the Moabite,
1CH	11	47	엘리엘과 오벳과 므소바 사람 야아시엘이더라	Eliel, and Obed, and Jasiel the Mesobaite.	Eliel, Obed, and Jaasiel the Mezobaite.
1CH	12	1	다윗이 기스의 아들 사울을 인하여 시글락에 숨어 있을 때에 그에게 와서 싸움을 돕는 용사 중에 든 자가 있었으니	Now these are they that came to David to Ziklag, while he yet kept himself close because of Saul the son of Kish: and they were among the mighty men, helpers of the war.	Now these were the men who came to David at Ziklag, while he was still banished from the presence of Saul son of Kish (they were among the mighty men who helped him in battle;
1CH	12	2	저희는 활을 가지며 좌우 손을 놀려 물매도 던지며 살도 발하는 자요 베냐민 지파 사울의 동족인데 그 이름은 이러하니라	They were armed with bows, and could use both the right hand and the left in hurling stones and shooting arrows out of a bow, even of Saul’s brethren of Benjamin.	they were archers using both the right and left hands to sling stones and shoot arrows; and they were Saul’s kinsmen from Benjamin):
1CH	12	3	그 두목은 아히에셀이요 다음은 요아스니 기브아 사람 스마아의 두 아들이요 또 아스마웹의 아들 여시엘과 벨렛과 또 브라가와 아나돗 사람 예후와	The chief was Ahiezer, then Joash, the sons of Shemaah the Gibeathite; and Jeziel, and Pelet, the sons of Azmaveth; and Berachah, and Jehu the Antothite,	Ahiezer their chief and Joash, who were the sons of Shemaah the Gibeathite; Jeziel and Pelet, the sons of Azmaveth; Beracah; Jehu the Anathothite;
1CH	12	4	기브온 사람 곧 삼십 인 중에 용사요 삼십 인의 두목된 이스마야며 또 예레미야와 야하시엘과 요하난과 그데라 사람 요사밧과	And Ismaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty man among the thirty, and over the thirty; and Jeremiah, and Jahaziel, and Johanan, and Josabad the Gederathite,	Ishmaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty man among the Thirty and a leader over the Thirty; Jeremiah, Jahaziel, Johanan, and Jozabad the Gederathite;
1CH	12	5	엘루새와 여리못과 브아랴와 스마랴와 하룹 사람 스바댜와	Eluzai, and Jerimoth, and Bealiah, and Shemariah, and Shephatiah the Haruphite,	Eluzai, Jerimoth, Bealiah, Shemariah, and Shephatiah the Haruphite;
1CH	12	6	고라 사람들 엘가나와 잇시야와 아사렐과 요에셀과 야소브암이며	Elkanah, and Jesiah, and Azareel, and Joezer, and Jashobeam, the Korhites,	Elkanah, Isshiah, Azarel, Joezer, and Jashobeam, who were Korahites;
1CH	12	7	그돌 사람 여로함의 아들 요엘라와 스바댜더라	And Joelah, and Zebadiah, the sons of Jeroham of Gedor.	and Joelah and Zebadiah, the sons of Jeroham from Gedor.
1CH	12	8	갓 사람 중에서 거친 땅 견고한 곳에 이르러 다윗에게 돌아온 자가 있었으니 다 용사요 싸움에 익숙하여 방패와 창을 능히 쓰는 자라 그 얼굴은 사자 같고 빠르기는 산의 사슴 같으니	And of the Gadites there separated themselves unto David into the hold to the wilderness men of might, and men of war fit for the battle, that could handle shield and buckler, whose faces were like the faces of lions, and were as swift as the roes upon the mountains;	Some Gadites defected to David at his stronghold in the desert. They were mighty men of valor, trained for battle, experts with the shield and spear, whose faces were like the faces of lions and who were as swift as gazelles on the mountains:
1CH	12	9	그 두목은 에셀이요 둘째는 오바댜요 셋째는 엘리압이요	Ezer the first, Obadiah the second, Eliab the third,	Ezer the chief, Obadiah the second in command, Eliab the third,
1CH	12	10	넷째는 미스만나요 다섯째는 예레미야요	Mishmannah the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth,	Mishmannah the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth,
1CH	12	11	여섯째는 앗대요 일곱째는 엘리엘이요	Attai the sixth, Eliel the seventh,	Attai the sixth, Eliel the seventh,
1CH	12	12	여덟째는 요하난이요 아홉째는 엘사밧이요	Johanan the eighth, Elzabad the ninth,	Johanan the eighth, Elzabad the ninth,
1CH	12	13	열째는 예레미야요 열한째는 막반내라	Jeremiah the tenth, Machbanai the eleventh.	Jeremiah the tenth, and Machbanai the eleventh.
1CH	12	14	이 갓 자손이 군대 장관이 되어 그 작은 자는 일백 인을 관할하고 그 큰 자는 일천 인을 관할하더니	These were of the sons of Gad, captains of the host: one of the least was over an hundred, and the greatest over a thousand.	These Gadites were army commanders, the least of whom was a match for a hundred, and the greatest for a thousand.
1CH	12	15	정월에 요단 강 물이 모든 언덕에 넘칠 때에 이 무리가 강물을 건너서 골짜기에 있는 모든 자로 동서로 도망하게 하였더라	These are they that went over Jordan in the first month, when it had overflown all his banks; and they put to flight all them of the valleys, both toward the east, and toward the west.	These are the ones who crossed the Jordan in the first month when it was overflowing all its banks, and they put to flight all those in the valleys, both to the east and to the west.
1CH	12	16	베냐민과 유다 자손 중에서 견고한 곳에 이르러 다윗에게 나오매	And there came of the children of Benjamin and Judah to the hold unto David.	Other Benjamites and some men from Judah also came to David in his stronghold.
1CH	12	17	다윗이 나가서 맞아 저희에게 일러 가로되 만일 너희가 평화로이 와서 나를 돕고자 하면 내 마음이 너희와 연합하려니와 만일 너희가 나를 속여 내 대적에게 붙이고자 하면 내 손에 불의함이 없으니 우리 열조의 하나님이 감찰하시고 책망하시기를 원하노라 하매	And David went out to meet them, and answered and said unto them, If ye be come peaceably unto me to help me, mine heart shall be knit unto you: but if ye be come to betray me to mine enemies, seeing there is no wrong in mine hands, the God of our fathers look thereon, and rebuke it.	And David went out to meet them, saying, “If you have come to me in peace to help me, my heart will be united with you; but if you have come to betray me to my enemies when my hands are free of violence, may the God of our fathers see it and judge you.”
1CH	12	18	때에 성신이 삼십 인의 두목 아마새에게 감동하시니 가로되 다윗이여 우리가 당신에게 속하겠고 이새의 아들이여 우리가 당신과 함께 하리니 원컨대 평강하소서 당신도 평강하고 당신을 돕는 자에게도 평강이 있을지니 이는 당신의 하나님이 당신을 도우심이니이다 한지라 다윗이 드디어 접대하여 세워 군대장관을 삼았더라	Then the spirit came upon Amasai, who was chief of the captains, and he said, Thine are we, David, and on thy side, thou son of Jesse: peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be to thine helpers; for thy God helpeth thee. Then David received them, and made them captains of the band.	Then the Spirit came upon Amasai, the chief of the Thirty, and he said: “We are yours, O David! We are with you, O son of Jesse! Peace, peace to you, and peace to your helpers, for your God helps you.” So David received them and made them leaders of his troops.
1CH	12	19	다윗이 전에 블레셋 사람과 함께 가서 사울을 치려할 때에 므낫세 지파에서 두어 사람이 다윗에게 돌아왔으나 다윗 등이 블레셋 사람을 돕지 못하였음은 블레셋 사람의 방백이 서로 의논하고 보내며 이르기를 저가 그 주 사울에게로 돌아가리니 우리 머리가 위태할까 하노라 함이라	And there fell some of Manasseh to David, when he came with the Philistines against Saul to battle: but they helped them not: for the lords of the Philistines upon advisement sent him away, saying, He will fall to his master Saul to the jeopardy of our heads.	Some from Manasseh defected to David when he went with the Philistines to fight against Saul. (They did not help the Philistines because the Philistine rulers consulted and sent David away, saying, “It will cost us our heads if he defects to his master Saul.”)
1CH	12	20	다윗이 시글락으로 갈 때에 므낫세 지파에서 그에게로 돌아온 자는 아드나와 요사밧과 여디아엘과 미가엘과 요사밧과 엘리후와 실르대니 다 므낫세의 천부장이라	As he went to Ziklag, there fell to him of Manasseh, Adnah, and Jozabad, and Jediael, and Michael, and Jozabad, and Elihu, and Zilthai, captains of the thousands that were of Manasseh.	When David went to Ziklag, these men of Manasseh defected to him: Adnah, Jozabad, Jediael, Michael, Jozabad, Elihu, and Zillethai, chiefs of thousands in Manasseh.
1CH	12	21	이 무리가 다윗을 도와 적당을 쳤으니 저희는 다 큰 용사요 군대장관이 됨이었더라	And they helped David against the band of the rovers: for they were all mighty men of valour, and were captains in the host.	They helped David against the raiders, for they were all mighty men of valor and commanders in the army.
1CH	12	22	그 때에 사람이 날마다 다윗에게로 돌아와서 돕고자 하매 큰 군대를 이루어 하나님의 군대와 같았더라	For at that time day by day there came to David to help him, until it was a great host, like the host of God.	For at that time men came to David day after day to help him, until he had a great army, like the army of God.
1CH	12	23	싸움을 예비한 군대장관들이 헤브론에 이르러 다윗에게로 나아와서 여호와의 말씀대로 사울의 나라를 저에게 돌리고자 하였으니 그 수효가 이러하였더라	And these are the numbers of the bands that were ready armed to the war, and came to David to Hebron, to turn the kingdom of Saul to him, according to the word of the Lord.	Now these are the numbers of men armed for battle who came to David at Hebron to turn Saul’s kingdom over to him, in accordance with the word of the LORD:
1CH	12	24	유다 자손 중에서 방패와 창을 들고 싸움을 예비한 자가 육천팔백 명이요	The children of Judah that bare shield and spear were six thousand and eight hundred, ready armed to the war.	From Judah: 6,800 armed troops bearing shields and spears.
1CH	12	25	시므온 자손 중에서 싸움하는 큰 용사가 칠천일백 명이요	Of the children of Simeon, mighty men of valour for the war, seven thousand and one hundred.	From Simeon: 7,100 mighty men of valor, ready for battle.
1CH	12	26	레위 자손 중에서 사천육백 명이요	Of the children of Levi four thousand and six hundred.	From Levi: 4,600,
1CH	12	27	아론의 집 족장 여호야다와 그와 함께한 자가 삼천칠백 명이요	And Jehoiada was the leader of the Aaronites, and with him were three thousand and seven hundred;	including Jehoiada, leader of the house of Aaron, with 3,700 men,
1CH	12	28	또 젊은 용사 사독과 그 족속의 장관이 이십이 명이요	And Zadok, a young man mighty of valour, and of his father’s house twenty and two captains.	and Zadok, a mighty young man of valor, with 22 commanders from his own family.
1CH	12	29	베냐민 자손 곧 사울의 동족은 아직도 태반이나 사울의 집을 좇으나 그 중에서 나아온 자가 삼천 명이요	And of the children of Benjamin, the kindred of Saul, three thousand: for hitherto the greatest part of them had kept the ward of the house of Saul.	From Benjamin, the kinsmen of Saul: 3,000, most of whom had remained loyal to the house of Saul up to that time.
1CH	12	30	에브라임 자손 중에서 본 족속의 유명한 큰 용사가 이만 팔백 명이요	And of the children of Ephraim twenty thousand and eight hundred, mighty men of valour, famous throughout the house of their fathers.	From Ephraim: 20,800 mighty men of valor, famous among their own clans.
1CH	12	31	므낫세 반 지파 중에 녹명된 자로서 와서 다윗을 세워 왕을 삼으려 하는 자가 일만 팔천 명이요	And of the half tribe of Manasseh eighteen thousand, which were expressed by name, to come and make David king.	From the half-tribe of Manasseh: 18,000 designated by name to come and make David king.
1CH	12	32	잇사갈 자손 중에서 시세를 알고 이스라엘이 마땅히 행할 것을 아는 두목이 이백 명이니 저희는 그 모든 형제를 관할하는 자며	And of the children of Issachar, which were men that had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do; the heads of them were two hundred; and all their brethren were at their commandment.	From Issachar, men who understood the times and knew what Israel should do: 200 chiefs with all their kinsmen at their command.
1CH	12	33	스불론 중에서 모든 군기를 가지고 항오를 정제히 하고 두 마음을 품지 아니하고 능히 진에 나아가서 싸움을 잘하는 자가 오만 명이요	Of Zebulun, such as went forth to battle, expert in war, with all instruments of war, fifty thousand, which could keep rank: they were not of double heart.	From Zebulun: 50,000 fit for service, trained for battle with all kinds of weapons of war, who with one purpose were devoted to David.
1CH	12	34	납달리 중에서 장관 일천 명과 방패와 창을 가지고 함께한 자가 삼만 칠천 명이요	And of Naphtali a thousand captains, and with them with shield and spear thirty and seven thousand.	From Naphtali: 1,000 commanders, accompanied by 37,000 men with shield and spear.
1CH	12	35	단 자손 중에서 싸움을 잘하는 자가 이만 팔천육백 명이요	And of the Danites expert in war twenty and eight thousand and six hundred.	From Dan: 28,600 prepared for battle.
1CH	12	36	아셀 중에서 능히 진에 나가서 싸움을 잘하는 자가 사만 명이요	And of Asher, such as went forth to battle, expert in war, forty thousand.	From Asher: 40,000 fit for service, prepared for battle.
1CH	12	37	요단 저 편 르우벤 자손과 갓 자손과 므낫세 반 지파 중에서 모든 군기를 가지고 능히 싸우는 자가 십이만 명이었더라	And on the other side of Jordan, of the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and of the half tribe of Manasseh, with all manner of instruments of war for the battle, an hundred and twenty thousand.	And from east of the Jordan, from Reuben, Gad, and the half-tribe of Manasseh there: 120,000 armed with every kind of weapon of war.
1CH	12	38	이 모든 군사가 항오를 정제히 하고 다 성심으로 헤브론에 이르러 다윗으로 온 이스라엘 왕을 삼고자 하고 또 이스라엘의 남은 자도 다 일심으로 다윗으로 왕을 삼고자 하여	All these men of war, that could keep rank, came with a perfect heart to Hebron, to make David king over all Israel: and all the rest also of Israel were of one heart to make David king.	All these men of war, arrayed for battle, came to Hebron fully determined to make David king over all Israel. And all the rest of the Israelites were of one mind to make David king.
1CH	12	39	무리가 거기서 다윗과 함께 사흘을 지내며 먹고 마셨으니 이는 그 형제가 이미 식물을 예비하였음이며	And there they were with David three days, eating and drinking: for their brethren had prepared for them.	They spent three days there eating and drinking with David, for their relatives had provided for them.
1CH	12	40	또 근처에 있는 자로부터 잇사갈과 스불론과 납달리까지도 식물을 나귀와 약대와 노새와 소에 무수히 실어왔으니 곧 과자와 무화과병과 건포도와 포도주와 기름이요 소와 양도 많이 가져왔으니 이스라엘 가운데 희락이 있음이었더라	Moreover they that were nigh them, even unto Issachar and Zebulun and Naphtali, brought bread on asses, and on camels, and on mules, and on oxen, and meat, meal, cakes of figs, and bunches of raisins, and wine, and oil, and oxen, and sheep abundantly: for there was joy in Israel.	And their neighbors from as far away as Issachar, Zebulun, and Naphtali came bringing food on donkeys, camels, mules, and oxen—abundant supplies of flour, fig cakes and raisin cakes, wine and oil, oxen and sheep. Indeed, there was joy in Israel.
1CH	13	1	다윗이 천부장과 백부장 곧 모든 장수로 더불어 의논하고	And David consulted with the captains of thousands and hundreds, and with every leader.	Then David conferred with all his leaders, the commanders of hundreds and of thousands.
1CH	13	2	이스라엘의 온 회중에게 이르되 만일 너희가 선히 여기고 또 우리의 하나님 여호와께로 말미암았으면 우리가 이스라엘 온 땅에 남아있는 우리 형제와 또 저희와 함께 들어있는 성읍에 거하는 제사장과 레위 사람에게 보내어 저희를 우리에게로 모이게 하고	And David said unto all the congregation of Israel, If it seem good unto you, and that it be of the Lord our God, let us send abroad unto our brethren every where, that are left in all the land of Israel, and with them also to the priests and Levites which are in their cities and suburbs, that they may gather themselves unto us:	And he said to the whole assembly of Israel, “If it seems good to you, and if this is of the LORD our God, let us send word far and wide to the rest of our brothers in all the land of Israel, and also to the priests and Levites in their cities and pasturelands, so that they may join us.
1CH	13	3	우리가 우리 하나님의 궤를 옮겨 오자 사울 때에는 우리가 궤 앞에서 묻지 아니하였느니라 하매	And let us bring again the ark of our God to us: for we enquired not at it in the days of Saul.	Then let us bring back the ark of our God, for we did not inquire of Him in the days of Saul.”
1CH	13	4	뭇 백성이 이 일을 선히 여기므로 온 회중이 그대로 행하겠다 한지라	And all the congregation said that they would do so: for the thing was right in the eyes of all the people.	And because this proposal seemed right to all the people, the whole assembly agreed to it.
1CH	13	5	이에 다윗이 애굽의 시홀 시내에서부터 하맛 어귀까지 온 이스라엘을 불러 모으고 기럇여아림에서부터 하나님의 궤를 메어 오고자 할새	So David gathered all Israel together, from Shihor of Egypt even unto the entering of Hemath, to bring the ark of God from Kirjath–jearim.	So David assembled all Israel, from the River Shihor in Egypt to Lebo-hamath, to bring the ark of God from Kiriath-jearim.
1CH	13	6	다윗이 온 이스라엘을 거느리고 바알라 곧 유다에 속한 기럇여아림에 올라가서 여호와 하나님의 궤를 메어오려 하니 이는 여호와께서 두 그룹 사이에 계시므로 그 이름으로 일컫는 궤라	And David went up, and all Israel, to Baalah, that is, to Kirjath–jearim, which belonged to Judah, to bring up thence the ark of God the Lord, that dwelleth between the cherubims, whose name is called on it.	David and all Israel went up to Baalah of Judah (that is, Kiriath-jearim) to bring up from there the ark of God the LORD, who is enthroned between the cherubim—the ark that is called by the Name.
1CH	13	7	하나님의 궤를 새 수레에 싣고 아비나답의 집에서 나오는데 웃사와 아히오는 수레를 몰며	And they carried the ark of God in a new cart out of the house of Abinadab: and Uzza and Ahio drave the cart.	So they carried the ark of God from the house of Abinadab on a new cart, with Uzzah and Ahio guiding the cart.
1CH	13	8	다윗과 이스라엘 온 무리는 하나님 앞에서 힘을 다하여 뛰놀며 노래하며 수금과 비파와 소고와 제금과 나팔로 주악하니라	And David and all Israel played before God with all their might, and with singing, and with harps, and with psalteries, and with timbrels, and with cymbals, and with trumpets.	David and all the Israelites were celebrating before God with all their might, with songs and on harps and lyres, with tambourines, cymbals, and trumpets.
1CH	13	9	기돈의 타작 마당에 이르러서는 소들이 뛰므로 웃사가 손을 펴서 궤를 붙들었더니	And when they came unto the threshingfloor of Chidon, Uzza put forth his hand to hold the ark; for the oxen stumbled.	When they came to the threshing floor of Chidon, Uzzah reached out and took hold of the ark, because the oxen had stumbled.
1CH	13	10	웃사가 손을 펴서 궤를 붙듦을 인하여 여호와께서 진노하사 치시매 웃사가 거기 하나님 앞에서 죽으니라	And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Uzza, and he smote him, because he put his hand to the ark: and there he died before God.	And the anger of the LORD burned against Uzzah, and He struck him down because he had put his hand on the ark. So he died there before God.
1CH	13	11	여호와께서 웃사를 충돌하시므로 다윗이 분하여 그곳을 베레스 웃사라 칭하니 그 이름이 오늘날까지 이르니라	And David was displeased, because the Lord had made a breach upon Uzza: wherefore that place is called Perez–uzza to this day.	Then David became angry because the LORD had burst forth against Uzzah; so he named that place Perez-uzzah, as it is called to this day.
1CH	13	12	그 날에 다윗이 하나님을 두려워하여 가로되 내가 어찌 하나님의 궤를 내 곳으로 오게 하리요 하고	And David was afraid of God that day, saying, How shall I bring the ark of God home to me?	That day David feared God and asked, “How can I ever bring the ark of God to me?”
1CH	13	13	궤를 옮겨 다윗 성 자기에게 메어들이지 못하고 치우쳐 가드 사람 오벧에돔의 집으로 메어가니라	So David brought not the ark home to himself to the city of David, but carried it aside into the house of Obed–edom the Gittite.	So he did not move the ark with him to the City of David; instead, he took it aside to the house of Obed-edom the Gittite.
1CH	13	14	하나님의 궤가 오벧에돔의 집에서 그 권속과 함께 석 달을 있으니라 여호와께서 오벧에돔의 집과 그 모든 소유에 복을 내리셨더라	And the ark of God remained with the family of Obed–edom in his house three months. And the Lord blessed the house of Obed–edom, and all that he had.	Thus the ark of God remained with the family of Obed-edom in his house for three months, and the LORD blessed his household and everything he owned.
1CH	14	1	두로 왕 히람이 다윗에게 사자들과 백향목과 석수와 목수를 보내어 그 궁궐을 건축하게 하였더라	Now Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and timber of cedars, with masons and carpenters, to build him an house.	Now Hiram king of Tyre sent envoys to David, along with cedar logs, stonemasons, and carpenters, to build a palace for him.
1CH	14	2	다윗이 여호와께서 자기로 이스라엘 왕을 삼으신 줄을 깨달았으니 이는 그 백성 이스라엘을 위하여 나라를 진흥하게 하셨음이더라	And David perceived that the Lord had confirmed him king over Israel, for his kingdom was lifted up on high, because of his people Israel.	And David realized that the LORD had established him as king over Israel and had highly exalted his kingdom for the sake of His people Israel.
1CH	14	3	다윗이 예루살렘에서 또 아내들을 취하여 또 자녀를 낳았으니	And David took more wives at Jerusalem: and David begat more sons and daughters.	And David took more wives in Jerusalem and became the father of more sons and daughters.
1CH	14	4	예루살렘에서 낳은 아들들의 이름은 삼무아와 소밥과 나단과 솔로몬과	Now these are the names of his children which he had in Jerusalem; Shammua, and Shobab, Nathan, and Solomon,	These are the names of the children born to him in Jerusalem: Shammua, Shobab, Nathan, Solomon,
1CH	14	5	입할과 엘리수아와 엘벨렛과	And Ibhar, and Elishua, and Elpalet,	Ibhar, Elishua, Elpelet,
1CH	14	6	노가와 네벡과 야비아와	And Nogah, and Nepheg, and Japhia,	Nogah, Nepheg, Japhia,
1CH	14	7	엘리사마와 브엘랴다와 엘리벨렛이었더라	And Elishama, and Beeliada, and Eliphalet.	Elishama, Beeliada, and Eliphelet.
1CH	14	8	다윗이 기름 부음을 받아 온 이스라엘의 왕이 되었다 함을 블레셋 사람이 듣고 다윗을 찾으러 다 올라오매 다윗이 듣고 방비하러 나갔으나	And when the Philistines heard that David was anointed king over all Israel, all the Philistines went up to seek David. And David heard of it, and went out against them.	When the Philistines heard that David had been anointed king over all Israel, they all went in search of him; but David learned of this and went out to face them.
1CH	14	9	블레셋 사람이 이미 이르러 르바임 골짜기를 침범하였는지라	And the Philistines came and spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim.	Now the Philistines had come and raided the Valley of Rephaim.
1CH	14	10	다윗이 하나님께 물어 가로되 내가 블레셋 사람을 치러 올라가리이까 주께서 저희를 내 손에 붙이시겠나이까 여호와께서 이르시되 올라가라 내가 저희를 네 손에 붙이리라 하신지라	And David enquired of God, saying, Shall I go up against the Philistines? and wilt thou deliver them into mine hand? And the Lord said unto him, Go up; for I will deliver them into thine hand.	So David inquired of God, “Should I go up against the Philistines? Will You deliver them into my hand?” “Go,” replied the LORD, “for I will deliver them into your hand.”
1CH	14	11	이에 무리가 바알부라심으로 올라갔더니 다윗이 거기서 저희를 치고 가로되 하나님이 물을 흩음 같이 내 손으로 내 대적을 흩으셨다 함으로 그곳 이름을 바알브라심이라 칭하니라	So they came up to Baal–perazim; and David smote them there. Then David said, God hath broken in upon mine enemies by mine hand like the breaking forth of waters: therefore they called the name of that place Baal–perazim.	So David and his men went up to Baal-perazim, where he defeated the Philistines and said, “Like a bursting flood, God has burst out against my enemies by my hand.” So they called that place Baal-perazim.
1CH	14	12	블레셋 사람이 그 우상을 그곳에 버렸으므로 다윗이 명하여 불에 사르니라	And when they had left their gods there, David gave a commandment, and they were burned with fire.	There the Philistines abandoned their gods, and David ordered that they be burned in the fire.
1CH	14	13	블레셋 사람이 다시 골짜기를 침범한지라	And the Philistines yet again spread themselves abroad in the valley.	Once again the Philistines raided the valley.
1CH	14	14	다윗이 또 하나님께 묻자온대 하나님이 이르시되 마주 올라가지 말고 저희 뒤로 돌아 뽕나무 수풀 맞은편에서 저희를 엄습하되	Therefore David enquired again of God; and God said unto him, Go not up after them; turn away from them, and come upon them over against the mulberry trees.	So David again inquired of God, who answered him, “Do not march up after them, but circle around them and attack them in front of the balsam trees.
1CH	14	15	뽕나무 꼭대기에서 걸음 걷는 소리가 들리거든 곧 나가서 싸우라 하나님이 네 앞서 나아가서 블레셋 사람의 군대를 치리라 하신지라	And it shall be, when thou shalt hear a sound of going in the tops of the mulberry trees, that then thou shalt go out to battle: for God is gone forth before thee to smite the host of the Philistines.	As soon as you hear the sound of marching in the tops of the balsam trees, move out to battle, because this will mean that God has marched out before you to strike the camp of the Philistines.”
1CH	14	16	이에 다윗이 하나님의 명대로 행하여 블레셋 사람의 군대를 쳐서 기브온에서부터 게셀까지 이르렀더니	David therefore did as God commanded him: and they smote the host of the Philistines from Gibeon even to Gazer.	So David did as God had commanded him, and they struck down the army of the Philistines all the way from Gibeon to Gezer.
1CH	14	17	다윗의 명성이 열국에 퍼졌고 여호와께서 열국으로 저를 두려워하게 하셨더라	And the fame of David went out into all lands; and the Lord brought the fear of him upon all nations.	And David’s fame went out into every land, and the LORD caused all nations to fear him.
1CH	15	1	다윗이 다윗 성에서 자기를 위하여 궁궐을 세우고 또 하나님의 궤를 위하여 처소를 예비하고 위하여 장막을 치고	And David made him houses in the city of David, and prepared a place for the ark of God, and pitched for it a tent.	David constructed buildings for himself in the City of David, and he prepared a place for the ark of God and pitched a tent for it.
1CH	15	2	가로되 레위 사람 외에는 하나님의 궤를 멜 수 없나니 이는 여호와께서 저희를 택하사 하나님의 궤를 메고 영원히 저를 섬기게 하셨음이니라 하고	Then David said, None ought to carry the ark of God but the Levites: for them hath the Lord chosen to carry the ark of God, and to minister unto him for ever.	Then David said, “No one but the Levites may carry the ark of God, because the LORD has chosen them to carry the ark of the LORD and to minister before Him forever.”
1CH	15	3	이스라엘 온 무리를 예루살렘으로 모으고 여호와의 궤를 그 예비한 곳으로 메어 올리고자 하여	And David gathered all Israel together to Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the Lord unto his place, which he had prepared for it.	And David assembled all Israel in Jerusalem to bring up the ark of the LORD to the place he had prepared for it.
1CH	15	4	아론 자손과 레위 사람을 모으니	And David assembled the children of Aaron, and the Levites:	Then he gathered together the descendants of Aaron and the Levites:
1CH	15	5	그핫 자손 중에 족장 우리엘과 그 형제 일백이십 인이요	Of the sons of Kohath; Uriel the chief, and his brethren an hundred and twenty:	From the Kohathites, Uriel the chief and 120 of his relatives;
1CH	15	6	므라리 자손 중에 족장 아사야와 그 형제 이백이십 인이요	Of the sons of Merari; Asaiah the chief, and his brethren two hundred and twenty:	from the Merarites, Asaiah the chief and 220 of his relatives;
1CH	15	7	게르솜 자손 중에 족장 요엘과 그 형제 일백삼십 인이요	Of the sons of Gershom; Joel the chief, and his brethren an hundred and thirty:	from the Gershomites, Joel the chief and 130 of his relatives;
1CH	15	8	엘리사반 자손 중에 족장 스마야와 그 형제 이백 인이요	Of the sons of Elizaphan; Shemaiah the chief, and his brethren two hundred:	from the Elizaphanites, Shemaiah the chief and 200 of his relatives;
1CH	15	9	헤브론 자손 중에 족장 엘리엘과 그 형제 팔십 인이요	Of the sons of Hebron; Eliel the chief, and his brethren fourscore:	from the Hebronites, Eliel the chief and 80 of his relatives;
1CH	15	10	웃시엘 자손 중에 족장 암미나답과 그 형제 일백십이 인이라	Of the sons of Uzziel; Amminadab the chief, and his brethren an hundred and twelve.	and from the Uzzielites, Amminadab the chief and 112 of his relatives.
1CH	15	11	다윗이 제사장 사독과 아비아달을 부르고 또 레위 사람 우리엘과 아사야와 요엘과 스마야와 엘리엘과 암미나답을 불러	And David called for Zadok and Abiathar the priests, and for the Levites, for Uriel, Asaiah, and Joel, Shemaiah, and Eliel, and Amminadab,	David summoned the priests Zadok and Abiathar and the Levites Uriel, Asaiah, Joel, Shemaiah, Eliel, and Amminadab.
1CH	15	12	저희에게 이르되 너희는 레위 사람의 족장이니 너희와 너희 형제는 몸을 성결케 하고 내가 예비한 곳으로 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 궤를 메어 올리라	And said unto them, Ye are the chief of the fathers of the Levites: sanctify yourselves, both ye and your brethren, that ye may bring up the ark of the Lord God of Israel unto the place that I have prepared for it.	And he said to them, “You are the heads of the Levitical families. You and your relatives must consecrate yourselves so that you may bring the ark of the LORD, the God of Israel, to the place I have prepared for it.
1CH	15	13	전에는 너희가 메지 아니하였으므로 우리 하나님 여호와께서 우리를 충돌하셨나니 이는 우리가 규례대로 저에게 구하지 아니하였음이니라	For because ye did it not at the first, the Lord our God made a breach upon us, for that we sought him not after the due order.	It was because you Levites were not with us the first time that the LORD our God burst forth in anger against us. For we did not consult Him about the proper order.”
1CH	15	14	이에 제사장들과 레위 사람들이 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 궤를 메고 올라가려 하여 몸을 성결케 하고	So the priests and the Levites sanctified themselves to bring up the ark of the Lord God of Israel.	So the priests and Levites consecrated themselves to bring up the ark of the LORD, the God of Israel.
1CH	15	15	모세가 여호와의 말씀을 따라 명한 대로 레위 자손이 채로 하나님의 궤를 꿰어 어깨에 메니라	And the children of the Levites bare the ark of God upon their shoulders with the staves thereon, as Moses commanded according to the word of the Lord.	And the Levites carried the ark of God on their shoulders with the poles, as Moses had commanded in accordance with the word of the LORD.
1CH	15	16	다윗이 레위 사람의 어른들에게 명하여 그 형제 노래하는 자를 세우고 비파와 수금과 제금 등의 악기를 울려서 즐거운 소리를 크게 내라 하매	And David spake to the chief of the Levites to appoint their brethren to be the singers with instruments of musick, psalteries and harps and cymbals, sounding, by lifting up the voice with joy.	David also told the leaders of the Levites to appoint their relatives as singers to lift up their voices with joy, accompanied by musical instruments—harps, lyres, and cymbals.
1CH	15	17	레위 사람이 요엘의 아들 헤만과 그 형제 중 베레야의 아들 아삽과 그 동종 므라리 자손 중에 구사야의 아들 에단을 세우고	So the Levites appointed Heman the son of Joel; and of his brethren, Asaph the son of Berechiah; and of the sons of Merari their brethren, Ethan the son of Kushaiah;	So the Levites appointed Heman son of Joel; from his brothers, Asaph son of Berechiah; from their brothers the Merarites, Ethan son of Kushaiah;
1CH	15	18	그 다음으로 형제 스가랴와 벤과 야아시엘과 스미라못과 여히엘과 운니와 엘리압과 브나야와 마아세야와 맛디디야와 엘리블레후와 믹네야와 문지기 오벧에돔과 여이엘을 세우니	And with them their brethren of the second degree, Zechariah, Ben, and Jaaziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Unni, Eliab, and Benaiah, and Maaseiah, and Mattithiah, and Elipheleh, and Mikneiah, and Obed–edom, and Jeiel, the porters.	and with them their brothers next in rank: Zechariah, Jaaziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Unni, Eliab, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattithiah, Eliphelehu, Mikneiah, and the gatekeepers Obed-edom and Jeiel.
1CH	15	19	노래하는 자 헤만과 아삽과 에단은 놋제금을 크게 치는 자요	So the singers, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan, were appointed to sound with cymbals of brass;	The musicians Heman, Asaph, and Ethan were to sound the bronze cymbals.
1CH	15	20	스가랴와 아시엘과 스미라못과 여히엘과 운니와 엘리압과 마아세야와 브나야는 비파를 타서 여창에 맞추는 자요	And Zechariah, and Aziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Unni, and Eliab, and Maaseiah, and Benaiah, with psalteries on Alamoth;	Zechariah, Aziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Unni, Eliab, Maaseiah, and Benaiah were to play the harps according to Alamoth.
1CH	15	21	맛디디야와 엘리블레후와 믹네야와 오벧에돔과 여이엘과 아사시야는 수금을 타서 여덟째 음에 맞추어 인도하는 자요	And Mattithiah, and Elipheleh, and Mikneiah, and Obed–edom, and Jeiel, and Azaziah, with harps on the Sheminith to excel.	And Mattithiah, Eliphelehu, Mikneiah, Obed-edom, Jeiel, and Azaziah were to lead the music with lyres according to Sheminith.
1CH	15	22	레위 사람의 족장 그나냐는 노래에 익숙하므로 노래를 주장하여 사람에게 가르치는 자요	And Chenaniah, chief of the Levites, was for song: he instructed about the song, because he was skilful.	Chenaniah the head Levite was the director of the music because he was highly skilled.
1CH	15	23	베레갸와 엘가나는 궤 앞에서 문을 지키는 자요	And Berechiah and Elkanah were doorkeepers for the ark.	Berechiah and Elkanah were to be guardians of the ark.
1CH	15	24	제사장 스바냐와 요사밧과 느다넬과 아미새와 스가랴와 브나야와 엘리에셀은 하나님의 궤 앞에서 나팔을 부는 자요 오벧에돔과 여히야는 궤 앞에서 문을 지키는 자더라	And Shebaniah, and Jehoshaphat, and Nethaneel, and Amasai, and Zechariah, and Benaiah, and Eliezer, the priests, did blow with the trumpets before the ark of God: and Obed–edom and Jehiah were doorkeepers for the ark.	Shebaniah, Joshaphat, Nethanel, Amasai, Zechariah, Benaiah, and Eliezer—the priests—were to blow the trumpets before the ark of God. Obed-edom and Jehiah were also to be guardians of the ark.
1CH	15	25	이에 다윗과 이스라엘 장로들과 천부장들이 가서 여호와의 언약궤를 즐거이 메고 오벧에돔의 집에서 올라왔는데	So David, and the elders of Israel, and the captains over thousands, went to bring up the ark of the covenant of the Lord out of the house of Obed–edom with joy.	So David, the elders of Israel, and the commanders of thousands went with rejoicing to bring the ark of the covenant of the LORD from the house of Obed-edom.
1CH	15	26	하나님이 여호와의 언약궤를 멘 레위 사람을 도우셨으므로 무리가 수송아지 일곱과 수양 일곱으로 제사를 드렸더라	And it came to pass, when God helped the Levites that bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord, that they offered seven bullocks and seven rams.	And because God helped the Levites who were carrying the ark of the covenant of the LORD, they sacrificed seven bulls and seven rams.
1CH	15	27	다윗과 궤를 멘 레위 사람과 노래하는 자와 그 두목 그나냐와 모든 노래하는 자도 다 세마포 겉옷을 입었으며 다윗은 또 베 에봇을 입었고	And David was clothed with a robe of fine linen, and all the Levites that bare the ark, and the singers, and Chenaniah the master of the song with the singers: David also had upon him an ephod of linen.	Now David was dressed in a robe of fine linen, as were all the Levites who were carrying the ark, as well as the singers and Chenaniah, the director of music for the singers. David also wore a linen ephod.
1CH	15	28	이스라엘 무리는 크게 부르며 각과 나팔을 불며 제금을 치며 비파와 수금을 힘있게 타며 여호와의 언약궤를 메어 올렸더라	Thus all Israel brought up the ark of the covenant of the Lord with shouting, and with sound of the cornet, and with trumpets, and with cymbals, making a noise with psalteries and harps.	So all Israel brought up the ark of the covenant of the LORD with shouting, with the sounding of rams’ horns and trumpets, and with cymbals and the music of harps and lyres.
1CH	15	29	여호와의 언약궤가 다윗 성으로 들어올 때에 사울의 딸 미갈이 창으로 내어다보다가 다윗 왕의 춤추며 뛰노는 것을 보고 심중에 업신여겼더라	And it came to pass, as the ark of the covenant of the Lord came to the city of David, that Michal the daughter of Saul looking out at a window saw king David dancing and playing: and she despised him in her heart.	As the ark of the covenant of the LORD was entering the City of David, Saul’s daughter Michal looked down from a window and saw King David dancing and celebrating, and she despised him in her heart.
1CH	16	1	하나님의 궤를 메고 들어가서 다윗이 위하여 친 장막 가운데 두고 번제와 화목제를 하나님 앞에 드리니라	So they brought the ark of God, and set it in the midst of the tent that David had pitched for it: and they offered burnt sacrifices and peace offerings before God.	So they brought the ark of God and placed it inside the tent that David had pitched for it. And they presented burnt offerings and peace offerings before God.
1CH	16	2	다윗이 번제와 화목제 드리기를 마치고 여호와의 이름으로 백성에게 축복하고	And when David had made an end of offering the burnt offerings and the peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the Lord.	When David had finished sacrificing the burnt offerings and peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the LORD.
1CH	16	3	또 이스라엘 무리의 무론 남녀하고 매 명에 떡 한 덩이와 고기 한 조각과 건포도병 하나씩 나누어 주었더라	And he dealt to every one of Israel, both man and woman, to every one a loaf of bread, and a good piece of flesh, and a flagon of wine.	Then he distributed to every man and woman of Israel a loaf of bread, a date cake, and a raisin cake.
1CH	16	4	또 레위 사람을 세워 여호와의 궤 앞에서 섬기며 이스라엘 하나님 여호와를 칭송하며 감사하며 찬양하게 하였으니	And he appointed certain of the Levites to minister before the ark of the Lord, and to record, and to thank and praise the Lord God of Israel:	David appointed some of the Levites to minister before the ark of the LORD, to celebrate, to give thanks, and to praise the LORD, the God of Israel.
1CH	16	5	그 두목은 아삽이요 다음은 스가랴와 여이엘과 스미라못과 여히엘과 맛디디아와 엘리압과 브나야와 오벧에돔과 여이엘이라 비파와 수금을 타고 아삽은 제금을 힘있게 치고	Asaph the chief, and next to him Zechariah, Jeiel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Mattithiah, and Eliab, and Benaiah, and Obed–edom: and Jeiel with psalteries and with harps; but Asaph made a sound with cymbals;	Asaph was the chief, Zechariah was second, then Jeiel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Mattithiah, Eliab, Benaiah, Obed-edom, and Jeiel. They were to play the harps and lyres, while Asaph sounded the cymbals
1CH	16	6	제사장 브나야와 야하시엘은 항상 하나님의 언약궤 앞에서 나팔을 부니라	Benaiah also and Jahaziel the priests with trumpets continually before the ark of the covenant of God.	and the priests Benaiah and Jahaziel blew the trumpets regularly before the ark of the covenant of God.
1CH	16	7	그 날에 다윗이 아삽과 그 형제를 세워 위선 여호와께 감사하게 하여 이르기를	Then on that day David delivered first this psalm to thank the Lord into the hand of Asaph and his brethren.	On that day David first committed to Asaph and his brothers this song of thanksgiving to the LORD:
1CH	16	8	너희는 여호와께 감사하며 그 이름을 불러 아뢰며 그 행사를 만민 중에 알게 할지어다	Give thanks unto the Lord, call upon his name, make known his deeds among the people.	“Give thanks to the LORD; call upon His name; make known His deeds among the nations.
1CH	16	9	그에게 노래하며 그를 찬양하며 그 모든 기사를 말할지어다	Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him, talk ye of all his wondrous works.	Sing to Him, sing praises to Him; tell of all His wonders.
1CH	16	10	그 성호를 자랑하라 무릇 여호와를 구하는 자는 마음이 즐거울지로다	Glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord.	Glory in His holy name; let the hearts of those who seek the LORD rejoice.
1CH	16	11	여호와와 그 능력을 구할지어다 그 얼굴을 항상 구할지어다	Seek the Lord and his strength, seek his face continually.	Seek out the LORD and His strength; seek His face always.
1CH	16	12	그 종 이스라엘의 후손 곧 택하신 야곱의 자손 너희는 그 행하신 기사와 그 이적과 그 입의 판단을 기억할지어다	Remember his marvellous works that he hath done, his wonders, and the judgments of his mouth;	Remember the wonders He has done, His marvels, and the judgments He has pronounced,
1CH	16	13	상동	O ye seed of Israel his servant, ye children of Jacob, his chosen ones.	O offspring of His servant Israel, O sons of Jacob, His chosen ones.
1CH	16	14	그는 여호와 우리 하나님이시라 그의 판단이 온 땅에 있도다	He is the Lord our God; his judgments are in all the earth.	He is the LORD our God; His judgments carry throughout the earth.
1CH	16	15	너희는 그 언약 곧 천대에 명하신 말씀을 영원히 기억할지어다	Be ye mindful always of his covenant; the word which he commanded to a thousand generations;	Remember His covenant forever, the word He ordained for a thousand generations—
1CH	16	16	이것은 아브라함에게 하신 언약이며 이삭에게 하신 맹세며	Even of the covenant which he made with Abraham, and of his oath unto Isaac;	the covenant He made with Abraham, and the oath He swore to Isaac.
1CH	16	17	이는 야곱에게 세우신 율례 곧 이스라엘에게 하신 영원한 언약이라	And hath confirmed the same to Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an everlasting covenant,	He confirmed it to Jacob as a decree, to Israel as an everlasting covenant:
1CH	16	18	이르시기를 내가 가나안 땅을 네게 주어 너희 기업의 지경이 되게 하리라 하셨도다	Saying, Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan, the lot of your inheritance;	‘I will give you the land of Canaan as the portion of your inheritance.’
1CH	16	19	때에 너희 인수가 적어서 매우 영성하며 그 땅에 객이 되어	When ye were but few, even a few, and strangers in it.	When they were few in number, few indeed, and strangers in the land,
1CH	16	20	이 족속에게서 저 족속에게로, 이 나라에서 다른 민족에게로 유리하였도다	And when they went from nation to nation, and from one kingdom to another people;	they wandered from nation to nation, from one kingdom to another.
1CH	16	21	사람이 그들을 해하기를 용납지 아니하시고 그들의 연고로 열왕을 꾸짖어	He suffered no man to do them wrong: yea, he reproved kings for their sakes,	He let no man oppress them; He rebuked kings on their behalf:
1CH	16	22	이르기를 나의 기름 부은 자를 만지지 말며 나의 선지자를 상하지 말라 하셨도다	Saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm.	‘Do not touch My anointed ones! Do no harm to My prophets!’
1CH	16	23	온 땅이여 여호와께 노래하며 구원을 날마다 선포할지어다	Sing unto the Lord, all the earth; shew forth from day to day his salvation.	Sing to the LORD, all the earth. Proclaim His salvation day after day.
1CH	16	24	그 영광을 열방 중에, 그 기이한 행적을 만민 중에 선포할지어다	Declare his glory among the heathen; his marvellous works among all nations.	Declare His glory among the nations, His wonderful deeds among all peoples.
1CH	16	25	여호와는 광대하시니 극진히 찬양할 것이요 모든 신보다 경외할 것임이여	For great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised: he also is to be feared above all gods.	For great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised; He is to be feared above all gods.
1CH	16	26	만방의 모든 신은 헛것이요 여호와께서는 하늘을 지으셨음이로다	For all the gods of the people are idols: but the Lord made the heavens.	For all the gods of the nations are idols, but it is the LORD who made the heavens.
1CH	16	27	존귀와 위엄이 그 앞에 있으며 능력과 즐거움이 그 처소에 있도다	Glory and honour are in his presence; strength and gladness are in his place.	Splendor and majesty are before Him; strength and joy fill His dwelling.
1CH	16	28	만방의 족속들아 영광과 권능을 여호와께 돌릴지어다 여호와께 돌릴지어다	Give unto the Lord, ye kindreds of the people, give unto the Lord glory and strength.	Ascribe to the LORD, O families of the nations, ascribe to the LORD glory and strength.
1CH	16	29	여호와의 이름에 합당한 영광을 그에게 돌릴지어다 예물을 가지고 그 앞에 들어갈지어다 아름답고 거룩한 것으로 여호와께 경배할지어다	Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name: bring an offering, and come before him: worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness.	Ascribe to the LORD the glory due His name; bring an offering and come before Him. Worship the LORD in the splendor of His holiness;
1CH	16	30	온 땅이여 그 앞에서 떨지어다 세계가 굳게 서고 흔들리지 못하는도다	Fear before him, all the earth: the world also shall be stable, that it be not moved.	tremble before Him, all the earth. The world is firmly established; it cannot be moved.
1CH	16	31	하늘은 기뻐하고 땅은 즐거워하며 열방 중에서는 이르기를 여호와께서 통치하신다 할지로다	Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoice: and let men say among the nations, The Lord reigneth.	Let the heavens be glad, and the earth rejoice. Let them say among the nations, ‘The LORD reigns!’
1CH	16	32	바다와 거기 충만한 것이 외치며 밭과 그 가운데 모든 것은 즐거워할지로다	Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof: let the fields rejoice, and all that is therein.	Let the sea resound, and all that fills it; let the fields exult, and all that is in them.
1CH	16	33	그리 할 때에 삼림의 나무들이 여호와 앞에서 즐거이 노래하리니 주께서 땅을 심판하러 오실 것임이로다	Then shall the trees of the wood sing out at the presence of the Lord, because he cometh to judge the earth.	Then the trees of the forest will sing for joy before the LORD, for He is coming to judge the earth.
1CH	16	34	여호와께 감사하라 그는 선하시며 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good; for his mercy endureth for ever.	Give thanks to the LORD, for He is good; His loving devotion endures forever.
1CH	16	35	너희는 이르기를 우리의 구원의 하나님이여 우리를 구원하여 만국 가운데서 건져 내시고 모으시사 우리로 주의 성호를 감사하며 주의 영예를 찬양하게 하소서 할지어다	And say ye, Save us, O God of our salvation, and gather us together, and deliver us from the heathen, that we may give thanks to thy holy name, and glory in thy praise.	Then cry out: ‘Save us, O God of our salvation; gather and deliver us from the nations, that we may give thanks to Your holy name, that we may glory in Your praise.’
1CH	16	36	여호와 이스라엘의 하나님을 영원부터 영원까지 송축할지로다 하매 모든 백성이 아멘하고 여호와를 찬양하였더라	Blessed be the Lord God of Israel for ever and ever. And all the people said, Amen, and praised the Lord.	Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, from everlasting to everlasting.” Then all the people said, “Amen!” and “Praise the LORD!”
1CH	16	37	다윗이 아삽과 그 형제를 여호와의 언약궤 앞에 머물러 항상 그 궤 앞에서 섬기게 하되 날마다 그 일대로 하게 하였고	So he left there before the ark of the covenant of the Lord Asaph and his brethren, to minister before the ark continually, as every day’s work required:	So David left Asaph and his brothers there before the ark of the covenant of the LORD, to minister there regularly according to the daily requirements,
1CH	16	38	오벧에돔과 그 형제 육십팔 인과 여두둔의 아들 오벧에돔과 호사로 문지기를 삼았고	And Obed–edom with their brethren, threescore and eight; Obed–edom also the son of Jeduthun and Hosah to be porters:	along with Obed-edom and his sixty-eight relatives. Obed-edom son of Jeduthun, and also Hosah, were to be gatekeepers.
1CH	16	39	제사장 사독과 그 형제 제사장들로 기브온 산당에서 여호와의 성막 앞에 모시게 하여	And Zadok the priest, and his brethren the priests, before the tabernacle of the Lord in the high place that was at Gibeon,	And David left Zadok the priest and his fellow priests before the tabernacle of the LORD at the high place in Gibeon
1CH	16	40	항상 조석으로 번제단 위에 여호와께 번제를 드리되 여호와의 율법에 기록하여 이스라엘에게 명하신 대로 다 준행하게 하였고	To offer burnt offerings unto the Lord upon the altar of the burnt offering continually morning and evening, and to do according to all that is written in the law of the Lord, which he commanded Israel;	to regularly present burnt offerings to the LORD on the altar of burnt offerings, morning and evening, according to all that was written in the Law of the LORD, which He had commanded Israel to keep.
1CH	16	41	또 저희와 함께 헤만과 여두둔과 그 남아 택함을 받고 녹명된 자를 세워 여호와의 자비하심이 영원함을 인하여 감사하게 하였고	And with them Heman and Jeduthun, and the rest that were chosen, who were expressed by name, to give thanks to the Lord, because his mercy endureth for ever;	With them were Heman, Jeduthun, and the rest of those chosen and designated by name to give thanks to the LORD, for “His loving devotion endures forever.”
1CH	16	42	또 저희와 함께 헤만과 여두둔을 세워 나팔과 제금들과 하나님을 찬송하는 악기로 소리를 크게 내게 하였고 또 여두둔의 아들로 문을 지키게 하였더라	And with them Heman and Jeduthun with trumpets and cymbals for those that should make a sound, and with musical instruments of God. And the sons of Jeduthun were porters.	Heman and Jeduthun had with them trumpets and cymbals for the music and instruments for the songs of God. And the sons of Jeduthun were stationed at the gate.
1CH	16	43	이에 뭇 백성은 각각 그 집으로 돌아가고 다윗도 자기 집을 위하여 축복하려고 돌아갔더라	And all the people departed every man to his house: and David returned to bless his house.	Then all the people departed for their homes, and David returned home to bless his household.
1CH	17	1	다윗이 그 궁실에 거할 때에 선지자 나단에게 이르되 나는 백향목 궁에 거하거늘 여호와의 언악궤는 휘장 밑에 있도다	Now it came to pass, as David sat in his house, that David said to Nathan the prophet, Lo, I dwell in an house of cedars, but the ark of the covenant of the Lord remaineth under curtains.	After David had settled into his palace, he said to Nathan the prophet, “Here I am, living in a house of cedar, while the ark of the covenant of the LORD is under a tent.”
1CH	17	2	나단이 다윗에게 고하되 하나님이 왕과 함께 계시니 무릇 마음에 있는 바를 행하소서	Then Nathan said unto David, Do all that is in thine heart; for God is with thee.	And Nathan replied to David, “Do all that is in your heart, for God is with you.”
1CH	17	3	그 밤에 하나님의 말씀이 나단에게 임하여 가라사대	And it came to pass the same night, that the word of God came to Nathan, saying,	But that night the word of God came to Nathan, saying,
1CH	17	4	가서 내 종 다윗에게 말하기를 여호와의 말씀이 너는 나의 거할 집을 건축하지 말라	Go and tell David my servant, Thus saith the Lord, Thou shalt not build me an house to dwell in:	“Go and tell My servant David that this is what the LORD says: You are not the one to build Me a house in which to dwell.
1CH	17	5	내가 이스라엘을 올라오게 한 날부터 오늘날까지 집에 거하지 아니하고 오직 이 장막과 저 장막에 있으며 이 성막과 저 성막에 있었나니	For I have not dwelt in an house since the day that I brought up Israel unto this day; but have gone from tent to tent, and from one tabernacle to another.	For I have not dwelt in a house from the day I brought Israel up out of Egypt until this day, but I have moved from tent to tent and dwelling to dwelling.
1CH	17	6	무릇 이스라엘 무리로 더불어 행하는 곳에서 내가 내 백성을 먹이라고 명한 이스라엘 어느 사사에게 내가 말하기를 너희가 어찌하여 나를 위하여 백향목 집을 건축하지 아니하였느냐고 말하였느냐 하고	Wheresoever I have walked with all Israel, spake I a word to any of the judges of Israel, whom I commanded to feed my people, saying, Why have ye not built me an house of cedars?	In all My journeys with all the Israelites, have I ever asked any of the leaders I appointed to shepherd My people, ‘Why haven’t you built Me a house of cedar?’
1CH	17	7	연하여 내 종 다윗에게 이처럼 말하라 만군의 여호와께서 이처럼 말씀하시기를 내가 너를 목장 곧 양을 따르는데서 취하여 내 백성 이스라엘의 주권자를 삼고	Now therefore thus shalt thou say unto my servant David, Thus saith the Lord of hosts, I took thee from the sheepcote, even from following the sheep, that thou shouldest be ruler over my people Israel:	Now then, you are to tell My servant David that this is what the LORD of Hosts says: I took you from the pasture, from following the flock, to be the ruler over My people Israel.
1CH	17	8	네가 어디를 가든지 내가 너와 함께 있어 네 모든 대적을 네 앞에서 멸하였은즉 세상에서 존귀한 자의 이름 같은 이름을 네게 만들어 주리라	And I have been with thee whithersoever thou hast walked, and have cut off all thine enemies from before thee, and have made thee a name like the name of the great men that are in the earth.	I have been with you wherever you have gone, and I have cut off all your enemies from before you. Now I will make for you a name like the greatest in the land.
1CH	17	9	내가 또 내 백성 이스라엘을 위하여 한 곳을 정하여 저희를 심고 저희로 자기 곳에 거하여 다시는 옮기지 않게 하며 악한 유로 전과 같이 저희를 해하지 못하게 하여	Also I will ordain a place for my people Israel, and will plant them, and they shall dwell in their place, and shall be moved no more; neither shall the children of wickedness waste them any more, as at the beginning,	And I will provide a place for My people Israel and will plant them so that they may dwell in a place of their own and be disturbed no more. No longer will the sons of wickedness oppress them as they did at the beginning
1CH	17	10	전에 내가 사사를 명하여 내 백성 이스라엘을 다스리던 때와 같지 않게 하고 또 모든 대적으로 네게 복종하게 하리라 또 네게 이르노니 여호와가 너를 위하여 집을 세울지라	And since the time that I commanded judges to be over my people Israel. Moreover I will subdue all thine enemies. Furthermore I tell thee that the Lord will build thee an house.	and have done since the day I appointed judges over My people Israel. And I will subdue all your enemies. Moreover, I declare to you that the LORD will build a house for you.
1CH	17	11	네 수한이 차서 네가 열조에게로 돌아가면 내가 네 뒤에 네 씨 곧 네 아들 중 하나를 세우고 그 나라를 견고하게 하리니	And it shall come to pass, when thy days be expired that thou must go to be with thy fathers, that I will raise up thy seed after thee, which shall be of thy sons; and I will establish his kingdom.	And when your days are fulfilled and you go to be with your fathers, I will raise up your descendant after you, one of your own sons, and I will establish his kingdom.
1CH	17	12	저는 나를 위하여 집을 건축할 것이요 나는 그 위를 영원히 견고하게 하리라	He shall build me an house, and I will stablish his throne for ever.	He will build a house for Me, and I will establish his throne forever.
1CH	17	13	나는 그 아비가 되고 그는 나의 아들이 되리니 나의 자비를 그에게서 빼앗지 아니하기를 내가 네 전에 있던 자에게서 빼앗음과 같이 하지 않을 것이며	I will be his father, and he shall be my son: and I will not take my mercy away from him, as I took it from him that was before thee:	I will be his Father, and he will be My son. And I will never remove My loving devotion from him as I removed it from your predecessor.
1CH	17	14	내가 영영히 그를 내 집과 내 나라에 세우리니 그 위가 영원히 견고하리라 하셨다 하라	But I will settle him in mine house and in my kingdom for ever: and his throne shall be established for evermore.	But I will set him over My house and My kingdom forever, and his throne will be established forever.”
1CH	17	15	나단이 이 모든 말씀과 이 모든 묵시대로 다윗에게 고하니라	According to all these words, and according to all this vision, so did Nathan speak unto David.	So Nathan relayed to David all the words of this entire vision.
1CH	17	16	다윗 왕이 여호와 앞에 들어가 앉아서 가로되 여호와 하나님이여 나는 누구오며 내 집은 무엇이관대 나로 이에 이르게 하셨나이까	And David the king came and sat before the Lord, and said, Who am I, O Lord God, and what is mine house, that thou hast brought me hitherto?	Then King David went in, sat before the LORD, and said, “Who am I, O LORD God, and what is my house, that You have brought me this far?
1CH	17	17	하나님이여 주께서 이것을 오히려 작게 여기시고 또 종의 집에 대하여 먼 장래까지 말씀하셨사오니 여호와 하나님이여 나를 존귀한 자 같이 여기셨나이다	And yet this was a small thing in thine eyes, O God; for thou hast also spoken of thy servant’s house for a great while to come, and hast regarded me according to the estate of a man of high degree, O Lord God.	And as if this was a small thing in Your eyes, O God, You have spoken about the future of the house of Your servant and have regarded me as a man of great distinction, O LORD God.
1CH	17	18	주께서 주의 종에게 베푸신 존귀에 대하여 다윗이 다시 무슨 말씀을 하오리이까 주께서는 주의 종을 아시나이다	What can David speak more to thee for the honour of thy servant? for thou knowest thy servant.	What more can David say to You for so honoring Your servant? For You know Your servant,
1CH	17	19	여호와여 주께서 주의 종을 위하여 주의 뜻대로 이 모든 큰 일을 행하사 이 모든 큰 일을 알게 하셨나이다	O Lord, for thy servant’s sake, and according to thine own heart, hast thou done all this greatness, in making known all these great things.	O LORD. For the sake of Your servant and according to Your own heart, You have accomplished this great thing and revealed all Your greatness.
1CH	17	20	여호와여 우리 귀로 들은 대로는 주와 같은 이가 없고 주 외에는 참 신이 없나이다	O Lord, there is none like thee, neither is there any God beside thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears.	O LORD, there is none like You, and there is no God but You, according to everything we have heard with our own ears.
1CH	17	21	땅의 어느 한 나라가 주의 백성 이스라엘과 같으리이까 하나님이 가서 구속하사 자기 백성을 삼으시고 크고 두려운 일로 인하여 이름을 얻으시고 애굽에서 구속하신 자기 백성 앞에서 열국을 쫓아내셨사오며	And what one nation in the earth is like thy people Israel, whom God went to redeem to be his own people, to make thee a name of greatness and terribleness, by driving out nations from before thy people, whom thou hast redeemed out of Egypt?	And who is like Your people Israel—the one nation on earth whom God went out to redeem as a people for Himself? You made a name for Yourself through great and awesome wonders by driving out nations from before Your people, whom You redeemed from Egypt.
1CH	17	22	주께서 주의 백성 이스라엘로 영원히 주의 백성을 삼으셨사오니 여호와여 주께서 저희 하나님이 되셨나이다	For thy people Israel didst thou make thine own people for ever; and thou, Lord, becamest their God.	For You have made Your people Israel Your very own forever, and You, O LORD, have become their God.
1CH	17	23	여호와여 이제 주의 종과 그 집에 대하여 말씀하신 것을 영원히 견고케 하시며 말씀하신 대로 행하사	Therefore now, Lord, let the thing that thou hast spoken concerning thy servant and concerning his house be established for ever, and do as thou hast said.	And now, O LORD, let the word You have spoken concerning Your servant and his house be established forever. Do as You have promised,
1CH	17	24	견고케 하시고 사람으로 영원히 주의 이름을 높여 이르기를 만군의 여호와는 이스라엘의 하나님 곧 이스라엘에게 하나님이시라 하게 하시며 주의 종 다윗의 집이 주 앞에서 견고히 서게 하옵소서	Let it even be established, that thy name may be magnified for ever, saying, The Lord of hosts is the God of Israel, even a God to Israel: and let the house of David thy servant be established before thee.	so that Your name will be established and magnified forever when it is said, ‘The LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, is God over Israel.’ And may the house of Your servant David be established before You.
1CH	17	25	나의 하나님이여 주께서 종을 위하여 집을 세우실 것을 이미 듣게 하셨으므로 주의 종이 주 앞에서 이 기도로 구할 마음이 생겼나이다	For thou, O my God, hast told thy servant that thou wilt build him an house: therefore thy servant hath found in his heart to pray before thee.	For You, my God, have revealed to Your servant that You will build a house for him. Therefore Your servant has found the courage to pray before You.
1CH	17	26	여호와여 오직 주는 하나님이시라 주께서 이 좋은 것으로 주의 종에게 허락하시고	And now, Lord, thou art God, and hast promised this goodness unto thy servant:	And now, O LORD, You are God! And You have promised this goodness to Your servant.
1CH	17	27	이제 주께서 종의 집에 복을 주사 주 앞에 영원히 두시기를 기뻐하시나이다 여호와여 주께서 복을 주셨사오니 이 복을 영원히 누리리이다 하니라	Now therefore let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant, that it may be before thee for ever: for thou blessest, O Lord, and it shall be blessed for ever.	So now You have been pleased to bless the house of Your servant, that it may continue forever before You. For You, O LORD, have blessed it, and it will be blessed forever.”
1CH	18	1	이 후에 다윗이 블레셋 사람을 쳐서 항복받고 블레셋 사람의 손에서 가드와 그 동네를 빼앗고	Now after this it came to pass, that David smote the Philistines, and subdued them, and took Gath and her towns out of the hand of the Philistines.	Some time later, David defeated the Philistines, subdued them, and took Gath and its villages from the hand of the Philistines.
1CH	18	2	또 모압을 치매 모압 사람이 다윗의 종이 되어 조공을 바치니라	And he smote Moab; and the Moabites became David’s servants, and brought gifts.	David also defeated the Moabites, and they became subject to David and brought him tribute.
1CH	18	3	소바 왕 하닷에셀이 유브라데 강 가에서 자기 권세를 펴고자 하매 다윗이 저를 쳐서 하막까지 이르고	And David smote Hadarezer king of Zobah unto Hamath, as he went to stablish his dominion by the river Euphrates.	As far as Hamath, David also defeated King Hadadezer of Zobah, who had marched out to establish his dominion along the Euphrates River.
1CH	18	4	그 병거 일천 승과 기병 칠천과 보병 이만을 빼앗고 그 병거 일백 승의 말만 남기고 그 외의 병거의 말은 다 발의 힘줄을 끊었더니	And David took from him a thousand chariots, and seven thousand horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen: David also houghed all the chariot horses, but reserved of them an hundred chariots.	David captured from him a thousand chariots, seven thousand charioteers, and twenty thousand foot soldiers, and he hamstrung all the horses except a hundred he kept for the chariots.
1CH	18	5	다메섹 아람 사람이 소바 왕 하닷에셀을 도우러 온지라 다윗이 아람 사람 이만 이천을 죽이고	And when the Syrians of Damascus came to help Hadarezer king of Zobah, David slew of the Syrians two and twenty thousand men.	When the Arameans of Damascus came to help King Hadadezer of Zobah, David struck down twenty-two thousand men.
1CH	18	6	다메섹 아람에 수비대를 두매 아람 사람이 다윗의 종이 되어 조공을 바치니라 다윗이 어디로 가든지 여호와께서 이기게 하시니라	Then David put garrisons in Syria–damascus; and the Syrians became David’s servants, and brought gifts. Thus the Lord preserved David whithersoever he went.	Then he placed garrisons in Aram of Damascus, and the Arameans became subject to David and brought him tribute. So the LORD made David victorious wherever he went.
1CH	18	7	다윗이 하닷에셀의 신복들의 가진 금방패를 빼앗아 예루살렘으로 가져오고	And David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of Hadarezer, and brought them to Jerusalem.	And David took the gold shields that belonged to the officers of Hadadezer and brought them to Jerusalem.
1CH	18	8	또 하닷에셀의 성읍 디브핫과 군에서 심히 많은 곳을 취하였더니 솔로몬이 그것으로 놋바다와 기둥과 놋그릇들을 만들었더라	Likewise from Tibhath, and from Chun, cities of Hadarezer, brought David very much brass, wherewith Solomon made the brasen sea, and the pillars, and the vessels of brass.	And from Tibhath and Cun, cities of Hadadezer, David took a large amount of bronze, with which Solomon made the bronze Sea, the pillars, and various bronze articles.
1CH	18	9	하맛 왕 도우가 다윗이 소바 왕 하닷에셀의 온 군대를 쳐서 파하였다 함을 듣고	Now when Tou king of Hamath heard how David had smitten all the host of Hadarezer king of Zobah;	When King Tou of Hamath heard that David had defeated the entire army of Hadadezer king of Zobah,
1CH	18	10	그 아들 하도람을 보내어 다윗 왕에게 문안하고 축복하게 하니 이는 하닷에셀이 이왕에 도우로 더불어 여러번 전쟁이 있던 터에 다윗이 하닷에셀을 쳐서 파하였음이라 하도람이 금과 은과 놋의 여러가지 그릇을 가져온지라	He sent Hadoram his son to king David, to enquire of his welfare, and to congratulate him, because he had fought against Hadarezer, and smitten him; (for Hadarezer had war with Tou;) and with him all manner of vessels of gold and silver and brass.	he sent his son Hadoram to greet King David and bless him for fighting and defeating Hadadezer, who had been at war with Tou. Hadoram brought all kinds of articles of gold and silver and bronze,
1CH	18	11	다윗 왕이 그것도 여호와께 드리되 에돔과 모압과 암몬 자손과 블레셋 사람과 아말렉 등 여러 족속에게서 취하여 온 은금과 함께 하여 드리니라	Them also king David dedicated unto the Lord, with the silver and the gold that he brought from all these nations; from Edom, and from Moab, and from the children of Ammon, and from the Philistines, and from Amalek.	and King David dedicated these to the LORD, along with the silver and gold he had carried off from all these nations—from Edom and Moab, and from the Ammonites, Philistines, and Amalekites.
1CH	18	12	스루야의 아들 아비새가 염곡에서 에돔 사람 일만 팔천을 쳐 죽인지라	Moreover Abishai the son of Zeruiah slew of the Edomites in the valley of salt eighteen thousand.	Moreover, Abishai son of Zeruiah struck down eighteen thousand Edomites in the Valley of Salt.
1CH	18	13	다윗이 에돔에 수비대를 두매 에돔 사람이 다 다윗의 종이 되니라 다윗이 어디로 가든지 여호와께서 이기게 하셨더라	And he put garrisons in Edom; and all the Edomites became David’s servants. Thus the Lord preserved David whithersoever he went.	He placed garrisons in Edom, and all the Edomites were subject to David. So the LORD made David victorious wherever he went.
1CH	18	14	다윗이 온 이스라엘을 다스려 모든 백성에게 공과 의를 행할새	So David reigned over all Israel, and executed judgment and justice among all his people.	Thus David reigned over all Israel and administered justice and righteousness for all his people:
1CH	18	15	스루야의 아들 요압은 군대 장관이 되고 아힐룻의 아들 여호사밧은 사관이 되고	And Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the host; and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud, recorder.	Joab son of Zeruiah was over the army; Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud was the recorder;
1CH	18	16	아히둡의 아들 사독과 아비아달의 아들 아비멜렉은 제사장이 되고 사워사는 서기관이 되고	And Zadok the son of Ahitub, and Abimelech the son of Abiathar, were the priests; and Shavsha was scribe;	Zadok son of Ahitub and Ahimelech son of Abiathar were priests; Shavsha was the scribe;
1CH	18	17	여호야다의 아들 브나야는 그렛 사람과 블렛 사람을 관할하고 다윗의 아들들은 왕을 모셔 대신이 되니라	And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and the sons of David were chief about the king.	Benaiah son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and Pelethites; and David’s sons were chief officials at the king’s side.
1CH	19	1	그 후에 암몬 자손의 왕 나하스가 죽고 그 아들이 대신하여 왕이 되니	Now it came to pass after this, that Nahash the king of the children of Ammon died, and his son reigned in his stead.	Some time later, Nahash king of the Ammonites died and was succeeded by his son.
1CH	19	2	다윗이 가로되 하눈의 아비 나하스가 전에 내게 은혜를 베풀었으니 이제 내가 그 아들 하눈에게 은혜를 베풀리라 하고 사자를 보내어 그 아비 죽은 것을 조상하게 하니라 다윗의 신복들이 암몬 자손의 땅에 이르러 하눈에게 나아가 조상하매	And David said, I will shew kindness unto Hanun the son of Nahash, because his father shewed kindness to me. And David sent messengers to comfort him concerning his father. So the servants of David came into the land of the children of Ammon to Hanun, to comfort him.	And David said, “I will show kindness to Hanun son of Nahash, because his father showed kindness to me.” So David sent messengers to console Hanun concerning his father. But when David’s servants arrived in the land of the Ammonites to console him,
1CH	19	3	암몬 자손의 방백들이 하눈에게 고하되 왕은 다윗이 조문사를 보낸 것이 왕의 부친을 공경함인 줄로 여기시나이까 그 신복이 왕에게 나아온 것이 이 땅을 엿보고 탐지하여 함락시키고자 함이 아니니이까	But the princes of the children of Ammon said to Hanun, Thinkest thou that David doth honour thy father, that he hath sent comforters unto thee? are not his servants come unto thee for to search, and to overthrow, and to spy out the land?	the princes of the Ammonites said to Hanun, “Just because David has sent you comforters, do you really believe he is showing respect for your father? Have not his servants come to you to explore the land, spy it out, and overthrow it?”
1CH	19	4	하눈이 이에 다윗의 신복들을 잡아 그 수염을 깍고 그 의복의 중동 볼기까지 자르고 돌려 보내매	Wherefore Hanun took David’s servants, and shaved them, and cut off their garments in the midst hard by their buttocks, and sent them away.	So Hanun took David’s servants, shaved their beards, cut off their garments at the hips, and sent them away.
1CH	19	5	혹이 다윗에게 가서 그 사람들의 당한 일을 고하니라 그 사람들이 심히 부끄러워하므로 다윗이 저희를 맞으러 보내어 이르기를 너희는 수염이 자라기까지 여리고에 머물다가 돌아오라 하니라	Then there went certain, and told David how the men were served. And he sent to meet them: for the men were greatly ashamed. And the king said, Tarry at Jericho until your beards be grown, and then return.	When someone came and told David about his men, he sent messengers to meet them, since the men had been thoroughly humiliated. The king told them, “Stay in Jericho until your beards have grown back, and then return.”
1CH	19	6	암몬 자손이 자기가 다윗에게 밉게 한 줄 안지라 하눈이 암몬 자손으로 더불어 은 일천 달란트를 아람 나하라임과 아람마아가와 소바에 보내어 병거와 마병을 삯 내되	And when the children of Ammon saw that they had made themselves odious to David, Hanun and the children of Ammon sent a thousand talents of silver to hire them chariots and horsemen out of Mesopotamia, and out of Syria–maachah, and out of Zobah.	When the Ammonites realized that they had become a stench to David, Hanun and the Ammonites sent a thousand talents of silver to hire for themselves chariots and horsemen from Aram-naharaim, Aram-maacah, and Zobah.
1CH	19	7	곧 병거 삼만 이천 승과 마아가 왕과 그 백성을 삯 내었더니 저희가 와서 메드바 앞에 진 치매 암몬 자손이 그 모든 성읍으로 좇아 모여와서 싸우려 한지라	So they hired thirty and two thousand chariots, and the king of Maachah and his people; who came and pitched before Medeba. And the children of Ammon gathered themselves together from their cities, and came to battle.	So they hired for themselves thirty-two thousand chariots, as well as the king of Maacah with his troops, who came and camped near Medeba while the Ammonites came from their cities and marched out for battle.
1CH	19	8	다윗이 듣고 요압과 용사의 온 무리를 보내었더니	And when David heard of it, he sent Joab, and all the host of the mighty men.	On hearing this, David sent Joab and the entire army of mighty men.
1CH	19	9	암몬 자손은 나와서 성문 앞에 진 치고 도우러 온 여러 왕은 따로 들에 있더라	And the children of Ammon came out, and put the battle in array before the gate of the city: and the kings that were come were by themselves in the field.	The Ammonites marched out and arrayed themselves for battle at the entrance to the city, while the kings who had come stayed by themselves in the open country.
1CH	19	10	요압이 앞 뒤에 친 적진을 보고 이스라엘 뺀 자 중에서 또 빼서 아람 사람을 대하여 진 치고	Now when Joab saw that the battle was set against him before and behind, he chose out of all the choice of Israel, and put them in array against the Syrians.	When Joab saw the battle lines before him and behind him, he selected some of the best men of Israel and arrayed them against the Arameans.
1CH	19	11	그 남은 무리는 그 아우 아비새의 수하에 붙여 암몬 자손을 대하여 진 치게 하고	And the rest of the people he delivered unto the hand of Abishai his brother, and they set themselves in array against the children of Ammon.	And he placed the rest of the forces under the command of his brother Abishai, who arrayed them against the Ammonites.
1CH	19	12	가로되 만일 아람 사람이 나보다 강하면 네가 나를 돕고 만일 암몬 자손이 너보다 강하면 내가 너를 도우리라	And he said, If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shalt help me: but if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I will help thee.	“If the Arameans are too strong for me,” said Joab, “then you will come to my rescue. And if the Ammonites are too strong for you, then I will come to your rescue.
1CH	19	13	너는 담대하라 우리가 우리 백성과 우리 하나님의 성읍들을 위하여 담대히 하자 여호와께서 선히 여기시는 대로 행하시기를 원하노라 하고	Be of good courage, and let us behave ourselves valiantly for our people, and for the cities of our God: and let the Lord do that which is good in his sight.	Be strong and let us fight bravely for our people and for the cities of our God. May the LORD do what is good in His sight.”
1CH	19	14	요압과 그 종자가 싸우려고 아람 사람 앞에 나아가니 저희가 그 앞에서 도망하고	So Joab and the people that were with him drew nigh before the Syrians unto the battle; and they fled before him.	So Joab and his troops advanced to fight the Arameans, who fled before him.
1CH	19	15	암몬 자손은 아람 사람의 도망함을 보고 저희도 요압의 아우 아비새 앞에서 도망하여 성으로 들어간지라 이에 요압이 예루살렘으로 돌아오니라	And when the children of Ammon saw that the Syrians were fled, they likewise fled before Abishai his brother, and entered into the city. Then Joab came to Jerusalem.	When the Ammonites saw that the Arameans had fled, they too fled before Joab’s brother Abishai, and they entered the city. So Joab went back to Jerusalem.
1CH	19	16	아람 사람이 자기가 이스라엘 앞에서 패하였음을 보고 사자를 보내어 강 건너편에 있는 아람 사람을 불러내니 하닷에셀의 군대 장관 소박이 저희를 거느린지라	And when the Syrians saw that they were put to the worse before Israel, they sent messengers, and drew forth the Syrians that were beyond the river: and Shophach the captain of the host of Hadarezer went before them.	When the Arameans saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they sent messengers to bring more Arameans from beyond the Euphrates, with Shophach the commander of Hadadezer’s army leading them.
1CH	19	17	혹이 다윗에게 고하매 다윗이 온 이스라엘을 모으고 요단을 건너 아람 사람에게 이르러 저희를 향하여 진을 치니라 다윗이 아람 사람을 향하여 진을 치매 저희가 다윗으로 더불어 싸우더니	And it was told David; and he gathered all Israel, and passed over Jordan, and came upon them, and set the battle in array against them. So when David had put the battle in array against the Syrians, they fought with him.	When this was reported to David, he gathered all Israel, crossed the Jordan, advanced toward the Arameans, and arrayed for battle against them. When David lined up to engage them in battle, they fought against him.
1CH	19	18	아람 사람이 이스라엘 앞에서 도망한지라 다윗이 아람 병거 칠천 승의 군사와 보병 사만을 죽이고 또 군대 장관 소박을 죽이매	But the Syrians fled before Israel; and David slew of the Syrians seven thousand men which fought in chariots, and forty thousand footmen, and killed Shophach the captain of the host.	But the Arameans fled before Israel, and David killed seven thousand of their charioteers and forty thousand foot soldiers. He also killed Shophach the commander of their army.
1CH	19	19	하닷에셀의 신복이 자기가 이스라엘 앞에서 패하였음을 보고 다윗으로 더불어 화친하여 섬기고 이후로는 아람 사람이 암몬 자손 돕기를 싫어하니라	And when the servants of Hadarezer saw that they were put to the worse before Israel, they made peace with David, and became his servants: neither would the Syrians help the children of Ammon any more.	When Hadadezer’s subjects saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they made peace with David and became subject to him. So the Arameans were unwilling to help the Ammonites anymore.
1CH	20	1	해가 돌아와서 왕들의 출전할 때가 되매 요압이 그 군대를 거느리고 나가서 암몬 자손의 땅을 훼파하고 가서 랍바를 에워싸고 다윗은 예루살렘에 그대로 있더니 요압이 랍바를 쳐서 함락시키매	And it came to pass, that after the year was expired, at the time that kings go out to battle, Joab led forth the power of the army, and wasted the country of the children of Ammon, and came and besieged Rabbah. But David tarried at Jerusalem. And Joab smote Rabbah, and destroyed it.	In the spring, at the time when kings march out to war, Joab led out the army and ravaged the land of the Ammonites. He came to Rabbah and besieged it, but David remained in Jerusalem. And Joab attacked Rabbah and demolished it.
1CH	20	2	다윗이 그 왕의 머리에서 보석있는 면류관을 취하여 달아보니 중량이 금 한 달란트라 그 면류관을 자기 머리에 쓰니라 다윗이 또 그 성에서 노략한 물건을 무수히 내어오고	And David took the crown of their king from off his head, and found it to weigh a talent of gold, and there were precious stones in it; and it was set upon David’s head: and he brought also exceeding much spoil out of the city.	Then David took the crown from the head of their king. It was found to weigh a talent of gold and was set with precious stones, and it was placed on David’s head. And David took a great amount of plunder from the city.
1CH	20	3	그 가운데 백성을 끌어 내어 톱질과 써레질과 도끼질을 하게 하니라 다윗이 암몬 자손의 모든 성읍을 이같이 하고 모든 백성과 함께 예루살렘으로 돌아오니라	And he brought out the people that were in it, and cut them with saws, and with harrows of iron, and with axes. Even so dealt David with all the cities of the children of Ammon. And David and all the people returned to Jerusalem.	David brought out the people who were there and put them to work with saws, iron picks, and axes. And he did the same to all the Ammonite cities. Then David and all his troops returned to Jerusalem.
1CH	20	4	이 후에 블레셋 사람과 게셀에서 전쟁할 때에 후사 사람 십브개가 장대한 자의 아들 중에 십배를 쳐 죽이매 저희가 항복하였더라	And it came to pass after this, that there arose war at Gezer with the Philistines; at which time Sibbechai the Hushathite slew Sippai, that was of the children of the giant: and they were subdued.	Some time later, war broke out with the Philistines at Gezer. At that time Sibbecai the Hushathite killed Sippai, a descendant of the Rephaim, and the Philistines were subdued.
1CH	20	5	다시 블레셋 사람과 전쟁할 때에 야일의 아들 엘하난이 가드 사람 골리앗의 아우 라흐미를 죽였는데 이 사람의 창자루는 베틀채 같았더라	And there was war again with the Philistines; and Elhanan the son of Jair slew Lahmi the brother of Goliath the Gittite, whose spear staff was like a weaver’s beam.	Once again there was a battle with the Philistines, and Elhanan son of Jair killed Lahmi the brother of Goliath the Gittite, the shaft of whose spear was like a weaver’s beam.
1CH	20	6	또 가드에서 전쟁할 때에 그곳에 키 큰 자 하나는 매 손과 매 발에 가락이 여섯씩 모두 스물넷이 있는데 저도 장대한 자의 소생이라	And yet again there was war at Gath, where was a man of great stature, whose fingers and toes were four and twenty, six on each hand, and six on each foot: and he also was the son of the giant.	And there was still another battle at Gath, where there was a man of great stature with six fingers on each hand and six toes on each foot—twenty-four in all. He too was descended from Rapha,
1CH	20	7	저가 이스라엘을 능욕하는고로 다윗의 형 시므아의 아들 요나단이 저를 죽이니라	But when he defied Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimea David’s brother slew him.	and when he taunted Israel, Jonathan the son of David’s brother Shimei killed him.
1CH	20	8	가드 장대한 자의 소생이라도 다윗의 손과 그 신복의 손에 다 죽었더라	These were born unto the giant in Gath; and they fell by the hand of David, and by the hand of his servants.	So these descendants of Rapha in Gath fell at the hands of David and his servants.
1CH	21	1	사단이 일어나 이스라엘을 대적하고 다윗을 격동하여 이스라엘을 계수하게 하니라	And Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked David to number Israel.	Then Satan rose up against Israel and incited David to take a census of Israel.
1CH	21	2	다윗이 요압과 백성의 두목에게 이르되 너희는 가서 브엘세바에서부터 단까지 이스라엘을 계수하고 돌아와서 내게 고하여 그 수효를 알게 하라	And David said to Joab and to the rulers of the people, Go, number Israel from Beer–sheba even to Dan; and bring the number of them to me, that I may know it.	So David said to Joab and the commanders of the troops, “Go and count the Israelites from Beersheba to Dan and bring me a report, so that I may know their number.”
1CH	21	3	요압이 가로되 여호와께서 그 백성을 지금보다 백 배나 더하시기를 원하나이다 내 주 왕이여 이 백성이 다 내 주의 종이 아니니이까 내 주께서 어찌하여 이 일을 명하시나이까 어찌하여 이스라엘로 죄가 있게 하시나이까 하나	And Joab answered, The Lord make his people an hundred times so many more as they be: but, my lord the king, are they not all my lord’s servants? why then doth my lord require this thing? why will he be a cause of trespass to Israel?	But Joab replied, “May the LORD multiply His troops a hundred times over. My lord the king, are they not all servants of my lord? Why does my lord want to do this? Why should he bring guilt on Israel?”
1CH	21	4	왕의 명령이 요압을 재촉한지라 드디어 떠나서 이스라엘 땅에 두루 다닌 후에 예루살렘으로 돌아와서	Nevertheless the king’s word prevailed against Joab. Wherefore Joab departed, and went throughout all Israel, and came to Jerusalem.	Nevertheless, the king’s word prevailed against Joab. So Joab departed and traveled throughout Israel, and then he returned to Jerusalem.
1CH	21	5	백성의 수효를 다윗에게 고하니 이스라엘 중에 칼을 뺄만한 자가 일백십만이요 유다 중에 칼을 뺄 만한 자가 사십칠만이라	And Joab gave the sum of the number of the people unto David. And all they of Israel were a thousand thousand and an hundred thousand men that drew sword: and Judah was four hundred threescore and ten thousand men that drew sword.	And Joab reported to David the total number of the troops. In all Israel there were 1,100,000 men who drew the sword, including 470,000 in Judah.
1CH	21	6	요압이 왕의 명령을 밉게 여겨 레위와 베냐민 사람은 계수하지 아니하였더라	But Levi and Benjamin counted he not among them: for the king’s word was abominable to Joab.	But Joab did not include Levi and Benjamin in the count, because the king’s command was detestable to him.
1CH	21	7	하나님이 이 일을 괘씸히 여기사 이스라엘을 치시매	And God was displeased with this thing; therefore he smote Israel.	This command was also evil in the sight of God; so He struck Israel.
1CH	21	8	다윗이 하나님께 아뢰되 내가 이 일을 행함으로 큰 죄를 범하였나이다 이제 간구하옵나니 종의 죄를 사하여 주옵소서 내가 심히 미련하게 행하였나이다 하니라	And David said unto God, I have sinned greatly, because I have done this thing: but now, I beseech thee, do away the iniquity of thy servant; for I have done very foolishly.	Then David said to God, “I have sinned greatly because I have done this thing. Now I beg You to take away the iniquity of Your servant, for I have acted very foolishly.”
1CH	21	9	여호와께서 다윗의 선견자 갓에게 이르시되	And the Lord spake unto Gad, David’s seer, saying,	And the LORD instructed Gad, David’s seer,
1CH	21	10	가서 다윗에게 말하여 이르기를 여호와의 말씀이 내가 네게 세 가지를 보이노니 그 중에서 하나를 택하라 내가 그것을 네게 행하리라 하셨다 하라	Go and tell David, saying, Thus saith the Lord, I offer thee three things: choose thee one of them, that I may do it unto thee.	“Go and tell David that this is what the LORD says: ‘I am offering you three options. Choose one of them, and I will carry it out against you.’”
1CH	21	11	갓이 다윗에게 나아가 고하되 여호와의 말씀이 너는 마음대로 택하라	So Gad came to David, and said unto him, Thus saith the Lord, Choose thee	So Gad went and said to David, “This is what the LORD says: ‘You must choose
1CH	21	12	혹 삼 년 기근일지, 혹 네가 석 달을 대적에게 패하여 대적의 칼에 쫓길 일일지, 혹 여호와의 칼 곧 온역이 사흘동안 이 땅에 유행하며 여호와의 사자가 이스라엘 온 지경을 멸할 일일지 하셨나니 내가 무슨 말로 나를 보내신 이에게 대답할 것을 결정하소서	Either three years’ famine; or three months to be destroyed before thy foes, while that the sword of thine enemies overtaketh thee; or else three days the sword of the Lord, even the pestilence, in the land, and the angel of the Lord destroying throughout all the coasts of Israel. Now therefore advise thyself what word I shall bring again to him that sent me.	between three years of famine, three months of being swept away before your enemies and overtaken by their swords, or three days of the sword of the LORD—days of plague upon the land, with the angel of the LORD ravaging every part of Israel.’ Now then, decide how I should reply to Him who sent me.”
1CH	21	13	다윗이 갓에게 이르되 내가 곤경에 있도다 여호와께서는 긍휼이 심히 크시니 내가 그의 손에 빠지고 사람의 손에 빠지지 않기를 원하나이다	And David said unto Gad, I am in a great strait: let me fall now into the hand of the Lord; for very great are his mercies: but let me not fall into the hand of man.	David answered Gad, “I am deeply distressed. Please, let me fall into the hand of the LORD, for His mercies are very great; but do not let me fall into the hands of men.”
1CH	21	14	이에 여호와께서 이스라엘 백성에게 온역을 내리시매 이스라엘 백성의 죽은 자가 칠만이었더라	So the Lord sent pestilence upon Israel: and there fell of Israel seventy thousand men.	So the LORD sent a plague upon Israel, and seventy thousand men of Israel fell dead.
1CH	21	15	하나님이 예루살렘을 멸하러 사자를 보내셨더니 사자가 멸하려 할 때에 여호와께서 보시고 이 재앙 내림을 뉘우치사 멸하는 사자에게 이르시되 족하다 이제는 네 손을 거두라 하시니 때에 여호와의 사자가 여부스 사람 오르난의 타작 마당 곁에 선지라	And God sent an angel unto Jerusalem to destroy it: and as he was destroying, the Lord beheld, and he repented him of the evil, and said to the angel that destroyed, It is enough, stay now thine hand. And the angel of the Lord stood by the threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite.	Then God sent an angel to destroy Jerusalem, but as the angel was doing so, the LORD saw it and relented from the calamity, and He said to the angel who was destroying the people, “Enough! Withdraw your hand now!” At that time the angel of the LORD was standing by the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite.
1CH	21	16	다윗이 눈을 들어보매 여호와의 사자가 천지 사이에 섰고 칼을 빼어 손에 들고 예루살렘 편을 가리켰는지라 다윗이 장로들로 더불어 굵은 베를 입고 얼굴을 땅에 대고 엎드려	And David lifted up his eyes, and saw the angel of the Lord stand between the earth and the heaven, having a drawn sword in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem. Then David and the elders of Israel, who were clothed in sackcloth, fell upon their faces.	When David lifted up his eyes and saw the angel of the LORD standing between heaven and earth, with a drawn sword in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem, David and the elders, clothed in sackcloth, fell facedown.
1CH	21	17	하나님께 아뢰되 명하여 백성을 계수하게 한 자가 내가 아니니이까 범죄하고 악을 행한 자는 곧 내니이다 이 양무리는 무엇을 행하였나이까 청컨대 나의 하나님 여호와여 주의 손으로 나와 내 아비의 집을 치시고 주의 백성에게 재앙을 내리지 마옵소서	And David said unto God, Is it not I that commanded the people to be numbered? even I it is that have sinned and done evil indeed; but as for these sheep, what have they done? let thine hand, I pray thee, O Lord my God, be on me, and on my father’s house; but not on thy people, that they should be plagued.	And David said to God, “Was it not I who gave the order to count the people? I am the one who has sinned and acted wickedly. But these sheep, what have they done? O LORD my God, please let Your hand fall upon me and my father’s house, but do not let this plague remain upon Your people.”
1CH	21	18	여호와의 사자가 갓을 명하여 다윗에게 이르시기를 올라가서 여부스 사람 오르난의 타작 마당에서 여호와를 위하여 단을 쌓으라 하신지라	Then the angel of the Lord commanded Gad to say to David, that David should go up, and set up an altar unto the Lord in the threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite.	Then the angel of the LORD ordered Gad to tell David to go up and build an altar to the LORD on the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite.
1CH	21	19	다윗이 이에 갓이 여호와의 이름으로 이른 말씀대로 올라가니라	And David went up at the saying of Gad, which he spake in the name of the Lord.	So David went up at the word that Gad had spoken in the name of the LORD.
1CH	21	20	때에 오르난이 밀을 타작하다가 돌이켜 천사를 보고 네 아들과 함께 숨었더니	And Ornan turned back, and saw the angel; and his four sons with him hid themselves. Now Ornan was threshing wheat.	Now Ornan was threshing wheat when he turned and saw the angel; and his four sons who were with him hid themselves.
1CH	21	21	다윗이 오르난에게 나아가매 오르난이 내어다보다가 다윗을 보고 타작 마당에서 나와서 얼굴을 땅에 대고 절하매	And as David came to Ornan, Ornan looked and saw David, and went out of the threshingfloor, and bowed himself to David with his face to the ground.	David came to Ornan, and when Ornan looked out and saw David, he left the threshing floor and bowed facedown before David.
1CH	21	22	다윗이 오르난에게 이르되 이 타작하는 곳을 내게 붙이라 너는 상당한 값으로 붙이라 내가 여호와를 위하여 여기 한 단을 쌓으리니 그리하면 온역이 백성 중에서 그치리라	Then David said to Ornan, Grant me the place of this threshingfloor, that I may build an altar therein unto the Lord: thou shalt grant it me for the full price: that the plague may be stayed from the people.	Then David said to Ornan, “Grant me the site of this threshing floor, that I may build an altar to the LORD. Sell it to me for the full price, so that the plague upon the people may be halted.”
1CH	21	23	오르난이 다윗에게 고하되 왕은 취하소서 내 주 왕의 좋게 여기시는 대로 행하소서 보소서 내가 이것들을 드리나이다 소들은 번제물로, 곡식 떠는 기계는 화목으로, 밀은 소제물로 삼으시기 위하여 다 드리나이다	And Ornan said unto David, Take it to thee, and let my lord the king do that which is good in his eyes: lo, I give thee the oxen also for burnt offerings, and the threshing instruments for wood, and the wheat for the meat offering; I give it all.	Ornan said to David, “My lord the king may take whatever seems good. Look, I will give the oxen for the burnt offerings, the threshing sledges for the wood, and the wheat for the grain offering—I will give it all.”
1CH	21	24	다윗 왕이 오르난에게 이르되 그렇지 아니하다 내가 결단코 상당한 값으로 사리라 내가 여호와께 드리려고 네 물건을 취하지 아니하겠고 값 없이는 번제를 드리지도 아니하리라 하고	And king David said to Ornan, Nay; but I will verily buy it for the full price: for I will not take that which is thine for the Lord, nor offer burnt offerings without cost.	“No,” replied King David, “I insist on paying the full price, for I will not take for the LORD what belongs to you, nor will I offer burnt offerings that cost me nothing.”
1CH	21	25	그 기지 값으로 금 육백 세겔을 달아 오르난에게 주고	So David gave to Ornan for the place six hundred shekels of gold by weight.	So David paid Ornan six hundred shekels of gold for the site.
1CH	21	26	다윗이 거기서 여호와를 위하여 단을 쌓고 번제와 화목제를 드려 여호와께 아뢰었더니 여호와께서 하늘에서부터 번제단 위에 불을 내려 응답하시고	And David built there an altar unto the Lord, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings, and called upon the Lord; and he answered him from heaven by fire upon the altar of burnt offering.	And there he built an altar to the LORD and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings. He called upon the LORD, who answered him with fire from heaven on the altar of burnt offering.
1CH	21	27	사자를 명하시매 저가 칼을 집에 꽂았더라	And the Lord commanded the angel; and he put up his sword again into the sheath thereof.	Then the LORD spoke to the angel, who put his sword back into its sheath.
1CH	21	28	이 때에 다윗이 여호와께서 여부스 사람 오르난의 타작 마당에서 응답하심을 보고 거기서 제사를 드렸으니	At that time when David saw that the Lord had answered him in the threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite, then he sacrificed there.	At that time, when David saw that the LORD had answered him at the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite, he offered sacrifices there.
1CH	21	29	옛적에 모세가 광야에서 지은 여호와의 장막과 번제단이 그 때에 기브온 산당에 있으나	For the tabernacle of the Lord, which Moses made in the wilderness, and the altar of the burnt offering, were at that season in the high place at Gibeon.	For the tabernacle of the LORD that Moses had made in the wilderness and the altar of burnt offering were presently at the high place in Gibeon,
1CH	21	30	다윗이 여호와의 사자의 칼을 두려워하여 감히 그 앞에 가서 하나님께 묻지 못함이라	But David could not go before it to enquire of God: for he was afraid because of the sword of the angel of the Lord.	but David could not go before it to inquire of God, because he was afraid of the sword of the angel of the LORD.
1CH	22	1	다윗이 가로되 이는 여호와 하나님의 전이요 이는 이스라엘의 번제단이라 하였더라	Then David said, This is the house of the Lord God, and this is the altar of the burnt offering for Israel.	Then David said, “Here shall be the house of the LORD God, as well as the altar of burnt offering for Israel.”
1CH	22	2	다윗이 명하여 이스라엘 땅에 우거하는 이방 사람을 모으고 석수를 시켜 하나님의 전을 건축할 돌을 다듬게 하고	And David commanded to gather together the strangers that were in the land of Israel; and he set masons to hew wrought stones to build the house of God.	So David gave orders to gather the foreigners in the land of Israel, from whom he appointed stonecutters to prepare finished stones for building the house of God.
1CH	22	3	다윗이 또 문짝못과 거멀못에 쓸 철을 한 없이 준비하고 또 심히 많아서 중수를 셀 수 없는 놋을 준비하고	And David prepared iron in abundance for the nails for the doors of the gates, and for the joinings; and brass in abundance without weight;	David provided a large quantity of iron to make the nails for the doors of the gateways and for the fittings, together with more bronze than could be weighed
1CH	22	4	또 백향목을 무수히 준비하였으니 이는 시돈 사람과 두로 사람이 백향목을 다윗에게로 많이 수운하여 왔음이라	Also cedar trees in abundance: for the Zidonians and they of Tyre brought much cedar wood to David.	and more cedar logs than could be counted; for the Sidonians and Tyrians had brought a large quantity of cedar logs to David.
1CH	22	5	다윗이 가로되 내 아들 솔로몬이 어리고 연약하고 여호와를 위하여 건축할 전은 극히 장려하여 만국에 명성과 영광이 있게 하여야 할지라 그러므로 내가 이제 위하여 준비하리라 하고 죽기 전에 많이 준비하였더라	And David said, Solomon my son is young and tender, and the house that is to be builded for the Lord must be exceeding magnifical, of fame and of glory throughout all countries: I will therefore now make preparation for it. So David prepared abundantly before his death.	And David said, “My son Solomon is young and inexperienced, and the house to be built for the LORD must be exceedingly magnificent—famous and glorious throughout all lands. Therefore I must make preparations for it.” So David made lavish preparations before his death.
1CH	22	6	다윗이 그 아들 솔로몬을 불러 이스라엘 하나님 여호와를 위하여 전을 건축하기를 부탁하여	Then he called for Solomon his son, and charged him to build an house for the Lord God of Israel.	Then David called for his son Solomon and instructed him to build a house for the LORD, the God of Israel.
1CH	22	7	이르되 내 아들아 나는 내 하나님 여호와의 이름을 위하여 전을 건축할 마음이 있었으나	And David said to Solomon, My son, as for me, it was in my mind to build an house unto the name of the Lord my God:	“My son,” said David to Solomon, “it was in my heart to build a house for the Name of the LORD my God,
1CH	22	8	여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 이르시되 너는 피를 심히 많이 흘렸고 크게 전쟁하였느니라 네가 내 앞에서 땅에 피를 많이 흘렸은즉 내 이름을 위하여 전을 건축하지 못하리라	But the word of the Lord came to me, saying, Thou hast shed blood abundantly, and hast made great wars: thou shalt not build an house unto my name, because thou hast shed much blood upon the earth in my sight.	but this word of the LORD came to me: ‘You have shed much blood and waged great wars. You are not to build a house for My Name because you have shed so much blood on the ground before Me.
1CH	22	9	한 아들이 네게서 나리니 저는 평강의 사람이라 내가 저로 사면 모든 대적에게서 평강하게 하리라 그 이름을 솔로몬이라 하리니 이는 내가 저의 생전에 평안과 안정을 이스라엘에게 줄 것임이니라	Behold, a son shall be born to thee, who shall be a man of rest; and I will give him rest from all his enemies round about: for his name shall be Solomon, and I will give peace and quietness unto Israel in his days.	But a son will be born to you who will be a man of rest. I will give him rest from all his enemies on every side; for his name will be Solomon, and I will grant to Israel peace and quiet during his reign.
1CH	22	10	저가 내 이름을 위하여 전을 건축할지라 저는 내 아들이 되고 나는 저의 아비가 되어 그 나라 위를 이스라엘 위에 굳게 세워 영원까지 이르게 하리라 하셨나니	He shall build an house for my name; and he shall be my son, and I will be his father; and I will establish the throne of his kingdom over Israel for ever.	He is the one who will build a house for My Name. He will be My son, and I will be his Father. And I will establish the throne of his kingdom over Israel forever.’
1CH	22	11	내 아들아 여호와께서 너와 함께 하시기를 원하며 네가 형통하여 여호와께서 네게 대하여 말씀하신 대로 여호와의 전을 건축하며	Now, my son, the Lord be with thee; and prosper thou, and build the house of the Lord thy God, as he hath said of thee.	Now, my son, may the LORD be with you, and may you succeed in building the house of the LORD your God, as He said you would.
1CH	22	12	여호와께서 네게 지혜와 총명을 주사 너로 이스라엘을 다스리게 하시고 너의 하나님 여호와의 율법을 지키게 하시기를 더욱 원하노라	Only the Lord give thee wisdom and understanding, and give thee charge concerning Israel, that thou mayest keep the law of the Lord thy God.	Above all, may the LORD give you insight and understanding when He puts you in command over Israel, so that you may keep the Law of the LORD your God.
1CH	22	13	네가 만일 여호와께서 모세로 이스라엘에게 명하신 모든 율례와 규례를 삼가 행하면 형통하리니 강하고 담대하여 두려워 말고 놀라지 말지어다	Then shalt thou prosper, if thou takest heed to fulfil the statutes and judgments which the Lord charged Moses with concerning Israel: be strong, and of good courage; dread not, nor be dismayed.	Then you will succeed, if you carefully follow the statutes and ordinances that the LORD commanded Moses for Israel. Be strong and courageous. Do not be afraid or discouraged.
1CH	22	14	내가 환난 중에 여호와의 전을 위하여 금 십만 달란트와 은 일백만 달란트와 놋과 철을 그 중수를 셀 수 없을만큼 심히 많이 예비하였고 또 재목과 돌을 예비하였으나 너는 더할 것이며	Now, behold, in my trouble I have prepared for the house of the Lord an hundred thousand talents of gold, and a thousand thousand talents of silver; and of brass and iron without weight; for it is in abundance: timber also and stone have I prepared; and thou mayest add thereto.	Now behold, I have taken great pains to provide for the house of the LORD—100,000 talents of gold, 1,000,000 talents of silver, and bronze and iron too great to be weighed. I have also provided timber and stone, and you may add to them.
1CH	22	15	또 공장이 네게 많이 있나니 곧 석수와 목수와 온갖 일에 익숙한 모든 사람이니라	Moreover there are workmen with thee in abundance, hewers and workers of stone and timber, and all manner of cunning men for every manner of work.	You also have many workers: stonecutters, masons, carpenters, and men skilled in every kind of work—
1CH	22	16	금과 은과 놋과 철이 무수하니 너는 일어나 일하라 여호와께서 너와 함께 계실지로다	Of the gold, the silver, and the brass, and the iron, there is no number. Arise therefore, and be doing, and the Lord be with thee.	in gold and silver, bronze and iron—craftsmen beyond number. Now begin the work, and may the LORD be with you.”
1CH	22	17	다윗이 또 이스라엘 모든 방백에게 명하여 그 아들 솔로몬을 도우라 하여 가로되	David also commanded all the princes of Israel to help Solomon his son, saying,	Then David ordered all the leaders of Israel to help his son Solomon:
1CH	22	18	너희 하나님 여호와께서 너희와 함께하지 아니하시느냐 사면으로 너희에게 평강을 주지 아니하셨느냐 이 땅 거민을 내 손에 붙이사 이 땅으로 여호와와 그 백성 앞에 복종하게 하셨나니	Is not the Lord your God with you? and hath he not given you rest on every side? for he hath given the inhabitants of the land into mine hand; and the land is subdued before the Lord, and before his people.	“Is not the LORD your God with you, and has He not granted you rest on every side? For He has given the inhabitants of the land into my hand, and the land has been subdued before the LORD and His people.
1CH	22	19	이제 너희는 마음과 정신을 진정하여 너희 하나님 여호와를 구하고 일어나서 여호와 하나님의 성소를 건축하고 여호와의 언약궤와 하나님의 거룩한 기구를 가져다가 여호와의 이름을 위하여 건축한 전에 드리게 하라 하였더라	Now set your heart and your soul to seek the Lord your God; arise therefore, and build ye the sanctuary of the Lord God, to bring the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and the holy vessels of God, into the house that is to be built to the name of the Lord.	Now set your heart and soul to seek the LORD your God. Get started building the sanctuary of the LORD God, so that you may bring the ark of the covenant of the LORD and the holy articles of God into the temple that will be built for the Name of the LORD.”
1CH	23	1	다윗이 나이 많아 늙으매 아들 솔로몬으로 이스라엘 왕을 삼고	So when David was old and full of days, he made Solomon his son king over Israel.	When David was old and full of years, he installed his son Solomon as king over Israel.
1CH	23	2	이스라엘 모든 방백과 제사장과 레위 사람을 모았더라	And he gathered together all the princes of Israel, with the priests and the Levites.	Then he gathered all the leaders of Israel, as well as the priests and Levites.
1CH	23	3	레위 사람은 삼십 세 이상으로 계수하였으니 모든 남자의 명수가 삼만 팔천인데	Now the Levites were numbered from the age of thirty years and upward: and their number by their polls, man by man, was thirty and eight thousand.	The Levites thirty years of age or older were counted, and the total number of men was 38,000.
1CH	23	4	그 중에 이만 사천은 여호와의 전 사무를 보살피는 자요 육천은 유사와 재판관이요	Of which, twenty and four thousand were to set forward the work of the house of the Lord; and six thousand were officers and judges:	“Of these,” said David, “24,000 are to oversee the work of the house of the LORD, 6,000 are to be officers and judges,
1CH	23	5	사천은 문지기요 사천은 다윗의 찬송하기 위하여 지은 악기로 여호와를 찬송하는 자라	Moreover four thousand were porters; and four thousand praised the Lord with the instruments which I made, said David, to praise therewith.	4,000 are to be gatekeepers, and 4,000 are to praise the LORD with the instruments I have made for giving praise.”
1CH	23	6	다윗이 레위의 아들 게르손과 그핫과 므라리의 각 족속을 따라 그 반열을 나누었더라	And David divided them into courses among the sons of Levi, namely, Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.	Then David divided the Levites into divisions according to the sons of Levi: Gershom, Kohath, and Merari.
1CH	23	7	게르손 자손은 라단과 시므이라	Of the Gershonites were, Laadan, and Shimei.	The Gershonites: Ladan and Shimei.
1CH	23	8	라단의 아들들은 족장 여히엘과 또 세담과 요엘 세 사람이요	The sons of Laadan; the chief was Jehiel, and Zetham, and Joel, three.	The sons of Ladan: Jehiel the first, Zetham, and Joel—three in all.
1CH	23	9	시므이의 아들들은 슬로밋과 하시엘과 하란 세 사람이니 이는 라단의 족장들이며	The sons of Shimei; Shelomith, and Haziel, and Haran, three. These were the chief of the fathers of Laadan.	The sons of Shimei: Shelomoth, Haziel, and Haran—three in all. These were the heads of the families of Ladan.
1CH	23	10	또 시므이의 아들들은 야핫과 시나와 여우스와 브리아니 이 네 사람도 시므이의 아들이라	And the sons of Shimei were, Jahath, Zina, and Jeush, and Beriah. These four were the sons of Shimei.	And the sons of Shimei: Jahath, Zina, Jeush, and Beriah. These were the sons of Shimei—four in all.
1CH	23	11	그 족장은 야핫이요 그 다음은 시사며 여우스와 브리아는 아들이 많지 아니하므로 저희와 한 족속으로 계수되었더라	And Jahath was the chief, and Zizah the second: but Jeush and Beriah had not many sons; therefore they were in one reckoning, according to their father’s house.	Jahath was the first and Zizah was the second; but Jeush and Beriah did not have many sons, so they were counted as one family and received a single assignment.
1CH	23	12	그핫의 아들들은 아므람과 이스할과 헤브론과 웃시엘 네 사람이라	The sons of Kohath; Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel, four.	The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel—four in all.
1CH	23	13	아므람의 아들들은 아론과 모세니 아론은 그 자손들과 함께 구별되어 몸을 성결케 하여 영원토록 지극히 거룩한 자가 되어 여호와 앞에 분향하며 섬기며 영원토록 그 이름을 받들어 축복하게 되었으며	The sons of Amram; Aaron and Moses: and Aaron was separated, that he should sanctify the most holy things, he and his sons for ever, to burn incense before the Lord, to minister unto him, and to bless in his name for ever.	The sons of Amram: Aaron and Moses. Aaron and his descendants were set apart forever to consecrate the most holy things, to burn incense before the LORD, to minister before Him, and to pronounce blessings in His name forever.
1CH	23	14	하나님의 사람 모세의 아들들은 레위 지파 중에 기록되었으니	Now concerning Moses the man of God, his sons were named of the tribe of Levi.	As for Moses the man of God, his sons were named among the tribe of Levi.
1CH	23	15	모세의 아들은 게르솜과 엘리에셀이라	The sons of Moses were, Gershom, and Eliezer.	The sons of Moses: Gershom and Eliezer.
1CH	23	16	게르솜의 아들 중에 스브엘이 족장이 되었고	Of the sons of Gershom, Shebuel was the chief.	The descendants of Gershom: Shebuel was the first.
1CH	23	17	엘리에셀의 아들은 족장 르하뱌라 엘리에셀이 이 외에는 다른 아들이 없고 르하뱌의 아들은 심히 많았으며	And the sons of Eliezer were, Rehabiah the chief. And Eliezer had none other sons; but the sons of Rehabiah were very many.	The descendants of Eliezer: Rehabiah was the first. Eliezer did not have any other sons, but the sons of Rehabiah were very numerous.
1CH	23	18	이스할의 아들은 족장 슬로밋이요	Of the sons of Izhar; Shelomith the chief.	The sons of Izhar: Shelomith was the first.
1CH	23	19	헤브론의 아들들은 족장 여리야와 둘째 아마랴와 셋째 야하시엘과 넷째 여가므암이며	Of the sons of Hebron; Jeriah the first, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, and Jekameam the fourth.	The sons of Hebron: Jeriah was the first, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, and Jekameam the fourth.
1CH	23	20	웃시엘의 아들은 족장 미가와 그 다음 잇시야더라	Of the sons of Uzziel; Michah the first, and Jesiah the second.	The sons of Uzziel: Micah was the first and Isshiah the second.
1CH	23	21	므라리의 아들들은 마흘리와 무시요 마흘리의 아들들은 엘르아살과 기스라	The sons of Merari; Mahli, and Mushi. The sons of Mahli; Eleazar, and Kish.	The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi.
1CH	23	22	엘르아살이 아들이 없이 죽고 딸만 있더니 그 형제 기스의 아들이 저에게 장가 들었으며	And Eleazar died, and had no sons, but daughters: and their brethren the sons of Kish took them.	The sons of Mahli: Eleazar and Kish. Eleazar died without having any sons; he had only daughters. Their cousins, the sons of Kish, married them.
1CH	23	23	무시의 아들들은 마흘리와 에델과 여레못 세 사람이더라	The sons of Mushi; Mahli, and Eder, and Jeremoth, three.	The sons of Mushi: Mahli, Eder, and Jeremoth—three in all.
1CH	23	24	이는 다 레위 자손이니 그 종가를 따라 계수함을 입어 이름이 기록되고 여호와의 전에서 섬기는 일을 하는 이십 세 이상 된 족장들이라	These were the sons of Levi after the house of their fathers; even the chief of the fathers, as they were counted by number of names by their polls, that did the work for the service of the house of the Lord, from the age of twenty years and upward.	These were the descendants of Levi by their families—the heads of families, registered individually by name—those twenty years of age or older who worked in the service of the house of the LORD.
1CH	23	25	다윗이 이르기를 이스라엘 하나님 여호와께서 평강을 그 백성에게 주시고 예루살렘에 영원히 거하시나니	For David said, The Lord God of Israel hath given rest unto his people, that they may dwell in Jerusalem for ever:	For David had said, “The LORD, the God of Israel, has given rest to His people and has come to dwell in Jerusalem forever.
1CH	23	26	레위 사람이 다시는 성막과 그 가운데서 쓰는 모든 기구를 멜 것이 없다 한지라	And also unto the Levites; they shall no more carry the tabernacle, nor any vessels of it for the service thereof.	So now the Levites no longer need to carry the tabernacle or any of the articles for its service.”
1CH	23	27	다윗의 유언대로 레위 자손이 이십 세 이상으로 계수되었으니	For by the last words of David the Levites were numbered from twenty years old and above:	For according to the final instructions of David, the Levites twenty years of age or older were counted,
1CH	23	28	그 직분은 아론의 자손에게 수종들어 여호와의 전과 뜰과 골방에서 섬기고 또 모든 성물을 정결케 하는 일 곧 하나님의 전에서 섬기는 일과	Because their office was to wait on the sons of Aaron for the service of the house of the Lord, in the courts, and in the chambers, and in the purifying of all holy things, and the work of the service of the house of God;	but their duty was to assist the descendants of Aaron with the service of the house of the LORD, being responsible for the courts and chambers, the purification of all the holy things, and the work of the service of the house of God,
1CH	23	29	또 진설병과 고운 가루의 소제물 곧 무교전병이나 남비에 지지는 것이나 반죽하는 것이나 또 모든 저울과 자를 맡고	Both for the shewbread, and for the fine flour for meat offering, and for the unleavened cakes, and for that which is baked in the pan, and for that which is fried, and for all manner of measure and size;	as well as for the rows of the showbread, the fine flour for the grain offering, the wafers of unleavened bread, the baking, the mixing, and all measurements of quantity and size.
1CH	23	30	새벽과 저녁마다 서서 여호와께 축사하며 찬송하며	And to stand every morning to thank and praise the Lord, and likewise at even;	They were also to stand every morning to give thanks and praise to the LORD, and likewise in the evening.
1CH	23	31	또 안식일과 초하루와 절기에 모든 번제를 여호와께 드리되 그 명하신 규례의 정한 수효대로 항상 여호와 앞에 드리며	And to offer all burnt sacrifices unto the Lord in the sabbaths, in the new moons, and on the set feasts, by number, according to the order commanded unto them, continually before the Lord:	Whenever burnt offerings were presented to the LORD on the Sabbaths, New Moons, and appointed feasts, they were to serve regularly before the LORD in the numbers prescribed for them.
1CH	23	32	또 회막의 직무와 성소의 직무와 그 형제 아론 자손의 직무를 지켜 여호와의 전에서 수종드는 것이더라	And that they should keep the charge of the tabernacle of the congregation, and the charge of the holy place, and the charge of the sons of Aaron their brethren, in the service of the house of the Lord.	So the Levites were to carry out the responsibilities for the Tent of Meeting and the Holy Place, and, under their brothers the descendants of Aaron, the service of the house of the LORD.
1CH	24	1	아론 자손의 반차가 이러하니라 아론의 아들들은 나답과 아비후와 엘르아살과 이다말이라	Now these are the divisions of the sons of Aaron. The sons of Aaron; Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.	These were the divisions of the descendants of Aaron. The sons of Aaron were Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
1CH	24	2	나답과 아비후가 그 아비보다 먼저 죽고 아들이 없으므로 엘르아살과 이다말이 제사장의 직분을 행하였더라	But Nadab and Abihu died before their father, and had no children: therefore Eleazar and Ithamar executed the priest’s office.	But Nadab and Abihu died before their father did, and they had no sons; so Eleazar and Ithamar served as priests.
1CH	24	3	다윗이 엘르아살의 자손 사독과 이다말의 자손 아히멜렉으로 더불어 저희를 나누어 각각 그 섬기는 직무를 맡겼는데	And David distributed them, both Zadok of the sons of Eleazar, and Ahimelech of the sons of Ithamar, according to their offices in their service.	With the help of Eleazar’s descendant Zadok and Ithamar’s descendant Ahimelech, David divided them according to the offices of their service.
1CH	24	4	엘르아살의 자손 중에 족장이 이다말의 자손보다 많으므로 나눈 것이 이러하니 엘르아살 자손의 족장이 십육이요 이다말 자손은 그 열조의 집을 따라 여덟이라	And there were more chief men found of the sons of Eleazar than of the sons of Ithamar; and thus were they divided. Among the sons of Eleazar there were sixteen chief men of the house of their fathers, and eight among the sons of Ithamar according to the house of their fathers.	Since more leaders were found among Eleazar’s descendants than those of Ithamar, they were divided accordingly. There were sixteen heads of families from the descendants of Eleazar and eight from the descendants of Ithamar.
1CH	24	5	이에 제비 뽑아 피차에 차등이 없이 나누었으니 이는 성소의 일을 다스리는 자가 엘르아살의 자손 중에도 있고 이다말의 자손 중에도 있음이라	Thus were they divided by lot, one sort with another; for the governors of the sanctuary, and governors of the house of God, were of the sons of Eleazar, and of the sons of Ithamar.	Thus they were divided by lot, for there were officers of the sanctuary and officers of God among both Eleazar’s and Ithamar’s descendants.
1CH	24	6	레위 사람 느다넬의 아들 서기관 스마야가 왕과 방백과 제사장 사독과 아비아달의 아들 아히멜렉과 및 제사장과 레위 사람의 족장 앞에서 그 이름을 기록하여 엘르아살의 자손 중에서 한 집을 취하고 이다말의 자손 중에서 한 집을 취하였으니	And Shemaiah the son of Nethaneel the scribe, one of the Levites, wrote them before the king, and the princes, and Zadok the priest, and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, and before the chief of the fathers of the priests and Levites: one principal household being taken for Eleazar, and one taken for Ithamar.	The scribe, Shemaiah son of Nethanel, a Levite, recorded their names in the presence of the king and of the officers: Zadok the priest, Ahimelech son of Abiathar, and the heads of families of the priests and the Levites—one family being taken from Eleazar, and then one from Ithamar.
1CH	24	7	첫째로 제비뽑힌 자는 여호야립이요 둘째는 여다야요	Now the first lot came forth to Jehoiarib, the second to Jedaiah,	The first lot fell to Jehoiarib, the second to Jedaiah,
1CH	24	8	셋째는 하림이요 넷째는 스오림이요	The third to Harim, the fourth to Seorim,	the third to Harim, the fourth to Seorim,
1CH	24	9	다섯째는 말기야요 여섯째는 미야민이요	The fifth to Malchijah, the sixth to Mijamin,	the fifth to Malchijah, the sixth to Mijamin,
1CH	24	10	일곱째는 학고스요 여덟째는 아비야요	The seventh to Hakkoz, the eighth to Abijah,	the seventh to Hakkoz, the eighth to Abijah,
1CH	24	11	아홉째는 예수아요 열째는 스가냐요	The ninth to Jeshua, the tenth to Shecaniah,	the ninth to Jeshua, the tenth to Shecaniah,
1CH	24	12	열한째는 엘리아십이요 열둘째는 야김이요	The eleventh to Eliashib, the twelfth to Jakim,	the eleventh to Eliashib, the twelfth to Jakim,
1CH	24	13	열셋째는 훔바요 열넷째는 예세브압이요	The thirteenth to Huppah, the fourteenth to Jeshebeab,	the thirteenth to Huppah, the fourteenth to Jeshebeab,
1CH	24	14	열다섯째는 빌가요 열여섯째는 임멜이요	The fifteenth to Bilgah, the sixteenth to Immer,	the fifteenth to Bilgah, the sixteenth to Immer,
1CH	24	15	열일곱째는 헤실이요 열여덟째는 합비세스요	The seventeenth to Hezir, the eighteenth to Aphses,	the seventeenth to Hezir, the eighteenth to Happizzez,
1CH	24	16	열아홉째는 브다히야요 스무째는 여헤스겔이요	The nineteenth to Pethahiah, the twentieth to Jehezekel,	the nineteenth to Pethahiah, the twentieth to Jehezkel,
1CH	24	17	스물한째는 야긴이요 스물둘째는 가물이요	The one and twentieth to Jachin, the two and twentieth to Gamul,	the twenty-first to Jachin, the twenty-second to Gamul,
1CH	24	18	스물셋째는 들라야요 스물넷째는 마아시야라	The three and twentieth to Delaiah, the four and twentieth to Maaziah.	the twenty-third to Delaiah, and the twenty-fourth to Maaziah.
1CH	24	19	이와 같은 반차로 여호와의 전에 들어가서 이스라엘 하나님 여호와께서 저희 조상 아론에게 명하신 규례대로 수종들었더라	These were the orderings of them in their service to come into the house of the Lord, according to their manner, under Aaron their father, as the Lord God of Israel had commanded him.	This was their appointed order for service when they entered the house of the LORD, according to the regulations prescribed for them by their forefather Aaron, as the LORD, the God of Israel, had commanded him.
1CH	24	20	레위 자손 중에 남은 자는 이러하니 아므람의 아들 중에는 수바엘이요 수바엘의 아들 중에는 예드야며	And the rest of the sons of Levi were these: Of the sons of Amram; Shubael: of the sons of Shubael; Jehdeiah.	Now these were the remaining descendants of Levi: From the sons of Amram: Shubael; from the sons of Shubael: Jehdeiah.
1CH	24	21	르하뱌에게 이르러는 그 아들 중에 족장 잇시야요	Concerning Rehabiah: of the sons of Rehabiah, the first was Isshiah.	As for Rehabiah, from his sons: The first was Isshiah.
1CH	24	22	이스할의 아들 중에는 슬로못이요 슬로못의 아들 중에는 야핫이요	Of the Izharites; Shelomoth: of the sons of Shelomoth; Jahath.	From the Izharites: Shelomoth; from the sons of Shelomoth: Jahath.
1CH	24	23	헤브론의 아들들은 장자 여리야와 둘째 아마랴와 셋째 야하시엘과 넷째 여가므암이요	And the sons of Hebron; Jeriah the first, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, Jekameam the fourth.	From the sons of Hebron: Jeriah was the first, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, and Jekameam the fourth.
1CH	24	24	웃시엘의 아들은 미가요 미가의 아들 중에는 사밀이요	Of the sons of Uzziel; Michah: of the sons of Michah; Shamir.	From the sons of Uzziel: Micah; from the sons of Micah: Shamir.
1CH	24	25	미가의 아우는 잇시야라 잇시야의 아들 중에는 스가랴며	The brother of Michah was Isshiah: of the sons of Isshiah; Zechariah.	The brother of Micah: Isshiah; from the sons of Isshiah: Zechariah.
1CH	24	26	므라리의 아들은 마흘리와 무시요 야아시야의 아들은 브노니	The sons of Merari were Mahli and Mushi: the sons of Jaaziah; Beno.	The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. The son of Jaaziah: Beno.
1CH	24	27	므라리의 자손 야아시야에게서 난 자는 브노와 소함과 삭굴과 이브리요	The sons of Merari by Jaaziah; Beno, and Shoham, and Zaccur, and Ibri.	The descendants of Merari from Jaaziah: Beno, Shoham, Zaccur, and Ibri.
1CH	24	28	마흘리의 아들 중에는 엘르아살이니 엘르아살은 무자하며	Of Mahli came Eleazar, who had no sons.	From Mahli: Eleazar, who had no sons.
1CH	24	29	기스에게 이르러는 그 아들 여라므엘이요	Concerning Kish: the son of Kish was Jerahmeel.	From Kish: Jerahmeel the son of Kish.
1CH	24	30	무시의 아들은 마흘리와 에델과 여리못이니 이는 다 그 족속대로 기록한 레위 자손이라	The sons also of Mushi; Mahli, and Eder, and Jerimoth. These were the sons of the Levites after the house of their fathers.	And the sons of Mushi: Mahli, Eder, and Jerimoth. These were the sons of the Levites, according to their families.
1CH	24	31	이 여러 사람도 다윗 왕과 사독과 아히멜렉과 및 제사장과 레위 족장 앞에서 그 형제 아론 자손처럼 제비 뽑혔으니 장자의 종가와 그 아우의 종가가 다름이 없더라	These likewise cast lots over against their brethren the sons of Aaron in the presence of David the king, and Zadok, and Ahimelech, and the chief of the fathers of the priests and Levites, even the principal fathers over against their younger brethren.	As their brothers the descendants of Aaron did, they also cast lots in the presence of King David and of Zadok, Ahimelech, and the heads of the families of the priests and Levites—the family heads and their younger brothers alike.
1CH	25	1	다윗이 군대 장관들로 더불어 아삽과 헤만과 여두둔의 자손 중에서 구별하여 섬기게 하되 수금과 비파와 제금을 잡아 신령한 노래를 하게 하였으니 그 직무대로 일하는 자의 수효가 이러하니라	Moreover David and the captains of the host separated to the service of the sons of Asaph, and of Heman, and of Jeduthun, who should prophesy with harps, with psalteries, and with cymbals: and the number of the workmen according to their service was:	Additionally, David and the commanders of the army set apart some of the sons of Asaph, Heman, and Jeduthun to prophesy with the accompaniment of lyres, harps, and cymbals. The following is the list of the men who performed this service:
1CH	25	2	아삽의 아들 중 삭굴과 요셉과 느다냐와 아사렐라니 이 아삽의 아들들이 아삽의 수하에 속하여 왕의 명령을 좇아 신령한 노래를 하며	Of the sons of Asaph; Zaccur, and Joseph, and Nethaniah, and Asarelah, the sons of Asaph under the hands of Asaph, which prophesied according to the order of the king.	From the sons of Asaph: Zaccur, Joseph, Nethaniah, and Asarelah. These sons of Asaph were under the direction of Asaph, who prophesied under the direction of the king.
1CH	25	3	여두둔에게 이르러는 그 아들 그달리야와 스리와 여사야와 하사뱌와 맛디디야 여섯 사람이니 그 아비 여두둔의 수하에 속하여 수금을 잡아 신령한 노래를 하며 여호와께 감사하며 찬양하며	Of Jeduthun: the sons of Jeduthun; Gedaliah, and Zeri, and Jeshaiah, Hashabiah, and Mattithiah, six, under the hands of their father Jeduthun, who prophesied with a harp, to give thanks and to praise the Lord.	From the sons of Jeduthun: Gedaliah, Zeri, Jeshaiah, Shimei, Hashabiah, and Mattithiah—six in all—under the direction of their father Jeduthun, who prophesied with the harp, giving thanks and praise to the LORD.
1CH	25	4	헤만에게 이르러는 그 아들 북기야와 맛다냐와 웃시엘과 스브엘과 여리못과 하나냐와 하나니와 엘리아다와 깃달디와 로암디에셀과 요스브가사와 말로디와 호딜과 마하시옷이라	Of Heman: the sons of Heman; Bukkiah, Mattaniah, Uzziel, Shebuel, and Jerimoth, Hananiah, Hanani, Eliathah, Giddalti, and Romamti–ezer, Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir, and Mahazioth:	From the sons of Heman: Bukkiah, Mattaniah, Uzziel, Shebuel, Jerimoth, Hananiah, Hanani, Eliathah, Giddalti, Romamti-ezer, Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir, and Mahazioth.
1CH	25	5	이는 다 헤만의 아들들이니 나팔을 부는 자며 헤만은 하나님의 말씀을 받드는 왕의 선견자라 하나님이 헤만에게 열네 아들과 세 딸을 주셨더라	All these were the sons of Heman the king’s seer in the words of God, to lift up the horn. And God gave to Heman fourteen sons and three daughters.	All these sons of Heman the king’s seer were given him through the promises of God to exalt him, for God had given Heman fourteen sons and three daughters.
1CH	25	6	이들이 다 그 아비의 수하에 속하여 제금과 비파와 수금을 잡아 여호와 하나님의 전에서 노래하여 섬겼으며 아삽과 여두둔과 헤만은 왕의 수하에 속하였으니	All these were under the hands of their father for song in the house of the Lord, with cymbals, psalteries, and harps, for the service of the house of God, according to the king’s order to Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman.	All these were under the direction of their fathers for the music of the house of the LORD with cymbals, harps, and lyres, for the service of the house of God. Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman were under the direction of the king.
1CH	25	7	저희와 모든 형제 곧 여호와 찬송하기를 배워 익숙한 자의 수효가 이백팔십팔 인이라	So the number of them, with their brethren that were instructed in the songs of the Lord, even all that were cunning, was two hundred fourscore and eight.	Together with their relatives, who were all trained and skillful in the songs of the LORD, they numbered 288.
1CH	25	8	이 무리의 큰 자나 작은 자나 스승이나 제자를 무론하고 일례로 제비뽑아 직임을 얻었으니	And they cast lots, ward against ward, as well the small as the great, the teacher as the scholar.	They cast lots for their duties, young and old alike, teacher as well as pupil.
1CH	25	9	첫째로 제비 뽑힌 자는 아삽의 아들 중 요셉이요 둘째는 그달리야니 저와 그 형제와 아들 십이 인이요	Now the first lot came forth for Asaph to Joseph: the second to Gedaliah, who with his brethren and sons were twelve:	The first lot, which was for Asaph, fell to Joseph, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all; the second to Gedaliah, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all;
1CH	25	10	셋째는 삭굴이니 그 아들과 형제와 십이 인이요	The third to Zaccur, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:	the third to Zaccur, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all;
1CH	25	11	넷째는 이스리니 그 아들과 형제와 십이 인이요	The fourth to Izri, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:	the fourth to Izri, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all;
1CH	25	12	다섯째는 느다냐니 그 아들과 형제와 십이 인이요	The fifth to Nethaniah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:	the fifth to Nethaniah, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all;
1CH	25	13	여섯째는 북기야니 그 아들과 형제와 십이 인이요	The sixth to Bukkiah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:	the sixth to Bukkiah, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all;
1CH	25	14	일곱째는 여사렐라니 그 아들과 형제와 십이 인이요	The seventh to Jesharelah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:	the seventh to Jesarelah, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all;
1CH	25	15	여덟째는 여사야니 그 아들과 형제와 십이 인이요	The eighth to Jeshaiah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:	the eighth to Jeshaiah, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all;
1CH	25	16	아홉째는 맛다냐니 그 아들과 형제와 십이 인이요	The ninth to Mattaniah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:	the ninth to Mattaniah, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all;
1CH	25	17	열째는 시므이니 그 아들과 형제와 십이 인이요	The tenth to Shimei, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:	the tenth to Shimei, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all;
1CH	25	18	열한째는 아사렐이니 그 아들과 형제와 십이 인이요	The eleventh to Azareel, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:	the eleventh to Azarel, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all;
1CH	25	19	열둘째는 하사뱌니 그 아들과 형제와 십이 인이요	The twelfth to Hashabiah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:	the twelfth to Hashabiah, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all;
1CH	25	20	열셋째는 수바엘이니 그 아들과 형제와 십이 인이요	The thirteenth to Shubael, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:	the thirteenth to Shubael, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all;
1CH	25	21	열넷째는 맛디디야니 그 아들과 형제와 십이 인이요	The fourteenth to Mattithiah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:	the fourteenth to Mattithiah, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all;
1CH	25	22	열다섯째는 여레못이니 그 아들과 형제와 십이 인이요	The fifteenth to Jeremoth, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:	the fifteenth to Jeremoth, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all;
1CH	25	23	열여섯째는 하나냐니 그 아들과 형제와 십이 인이요	The sixteenth to Hananiah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:	the sixteenth to Hananiah, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all;
1CH	25	24	열일곱째는 요스브가사니 그 아들과 형제와 십이 인이요	The seventeenth to Joshbekashah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:	the seventeenth to Joshbekashah, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all;
1CH	25	25	열여덟째는 하나니니 그 아들과 형제와 십이 인이요	The eighteenth to Hanani, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:	the eighteenth to Hanani, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all;
1CH	25	26	열아홉째는 말로디니 그 아들과 형제와 십이 인이요	The nineteenth to Mallothi, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:	the nineteenth to Mallothi, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all;
1CH	25	27	스무째는 엘리아다니 그 아들과 형제와 십이 인이요	The twentieth to Eliathah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:	the twentieth to Eliathah, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all;
1CH	25	28	스물한째는 호딜이니 그 아들과 형제와 십이 인이요	The one and twentieth to Hothir, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:	the twenty-first to Hothir, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all;
1CH	25	29	스물둘째는 깃달디니 그 아들과 형제와 십이 인이요	The two and twentieth to Giddalti, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:	the twenty-second to Giddalti, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all;
1CH	25	30	스물셋째는 마하시옷이니 그 아들과 형제와 십이 인이요	The three and twentieth to Mahazioth, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve:	the twenty-third to Mahazioth, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all;
1CH	25	31	스물넷째는 로암디에셀이니 그 아들과 형제와 십이 인이었더라	The four and twentieth to Romamti–ezer, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve.	and the twenty-fourth to Romamti-ezer, his sons, and his brothers—12 in all.
1CH	26	1	문지기의 반차가 이러하니라 고라 족속 아삽의 자손 중에 고레의 아들 므셀레먀와	Concerning the divisions of the porters: Of the Korhites was Meshelemiah the son of Kore, of the sons of Asaph.	These were the divisions of the gatekeepers: From the Korahites: Meshelemiah son of Kore, one of the sons of Asaph.
1CH	26	2	므셀레먀의 아들들 맏아들 스가랴와 둘째 여디야엘과 셋째 스바댜와 넷째 야드니엘과	And the sons of Meshelemiah were, Zechariah the firstborn, Jediael the second, Zebadiah the third, Jathniel the fourth,	Meshelemiah had sons: Zechariah the firstborn, Jediael the second, Zebadiah the third, Jathniel the fourth,
1CH	26	3	다섯째 엘람과 여섯째 여호하난과 일곱째 엘여호에내며	Elam the fifth, Jehohanan the sixth, Elioenai the seventh.	Elam the fifth, Jehohanan the sixth, and Eliehoenai the seventh.
1CH	26	4	오벧에돔의 아들들 맏아들 스마야와 둘째 여호사밧과 셋째 요아와 넷째 사갈과 다섯째 느다넬과	Moreover the sons of Obed–edom were, Shemaiah the firstborn, Jehozabad the second, Joah the third, and Sacar the fourth, and Nethaneel the fifth,	And Obed-edom also had sons: Shemaiah the firstborn, Jehozabad the second, Joah the third, Sachar the fourth, Nethanel the fifth,
1CH	26	5	여섯째 암미엘과 일곱째 잇사갈과 여덟째 브울래대니 이는 하나님이 오벧에돔에게 복을 주셨음이며	Ammiel the sixth, Issachar the seventh, Peulthai the eighth: for God blessed him.	Ammiel the sixth, Issachar the seventh, and Peullethai the eighth. For God had blessed Obed-edom.
1CH	26	6	그 아들 스마야도 두어 아들을 낳았으니 저희의 족속을 다스리는 자요 큰 용사라	Also unto Shemaiah his son were sons born, that ruled throughout the house of their father: for they were mighty men of valour.	Also to his son Shemaiah were born sons who ruled over their families because they were strong, capable men.
1CH	26	7	스마야의 아들들은 오드니와 르바엘과 오벳과 엘사밧이며 엘사밧의 형제 엘리후와 스마갸는 능력이 있는 자니	The sons of Shemaiah; Othni, and Rephael, and Obed, Elzabad, whose brethren were strong men, Elihu, and Semachiah.	Shemaiah’s sons were Othni, Rephael, Obed, and Elzabad; his brothers were Elihu and Semachiah, also capable men.
1CH	26	8	이는 다 오벧에돔의 자손이라 저희와 그 아들들과 그 형제들은 다 능력이 있어 그 직무를 잘하는 자니 오벧에돔에게서 난 자가 육십이 명이며	All these of the sons of Obed–edom: they and their sons and their brethren, able men for strength for the service, were threescore and two of Obed–edom.	All these were descendants of Obed-edom; they and their sons and brothers were capable men with strength to do the work—62 in all from Obed-edom.
1CH	26	9	또 므셀레먀의 아들과 형제 십팔 인은 능력이 있는 자며	And Meshelemiah had sons and brethren, strong men, eighteen.	Meshelemiah also had sons and brothers who were capable men—18 in all.
1CH	26	10	므라리 자손 중 호사가 아들들이 있으니 그 장자는 시므리라 시므리는 본래 맏아들이 아니나 그 아비가 장자를 삼았고	Also Hosah, of the children of Merari, had sons; Simri the chief, (for though he was not the firstborn, yet his father made him the chief;)	Hosah the Merarite also had sons: Shimri the first (although he was not the firstborn, his father had appointed him as the first),
1CH	26	11	둘째는 힐기야요 셋째는 드발리야요 넷째는 스가랴니 호사의 아들과 형제가 십삼 인이더라	Hilkiah the second, Tebaliah the third, Zechariah the fourth: all the sons and brethren of Hosah were thirteen.	Hilkiah the second, Tebaliah the third, and Zechariah the fourth. The sons and brothers of Hosah numbered 13 in all.
1CH	26	12	이상은 다 문지기의 반장으로서 그 형제처럼 직임을 얻어 여호와의 전에서 섬기는 자라	Among these were the divisions of the porters, even among the chief men, having wards one against another, to minister in the house of the Lord.	These divisions of the gatekeepers, through their chief men, had duties for ministering in the house of the LORD, just as their brothers did.
1CH	26	13	각 문을 지키기 위하여 그 종족을 따라 무론대소하고 다 제비 뽑혔으니	And they cast lots, as well the small as the great, according to the house of their fathers, for every gate.	They cast lots for each gate, according to their families, young and old alike.
1CH	26	14	셀레먀는 동방에 당첨되었고 그 아들 스가랴는 명철한 의사라 저를 위하여 제비 뽑으니 북방에 당첨되었고	And the lot eastward fell to Shelemiah. Then for Zechariah his son, a wise counsellor, they cast lots; and his lot came out northward.	The lot for the East Gate fell to Shelemiah. Then lots were cast for his son Zechariah, a wise counselor, and the lot for the North Gate fell to him.
1CH	26	15	오벧에돔은 남방에 당첨되었고 그 아들들은 곳간에 당첨되었으며	To Obed–edom southward; and to his sons the house of Asuppim.	The lot for the South Gate fell to Obed-edom, and the lot for the storehouses to his sons.
1CH	26	16	숩빔과 호사는 서방에 당첨되어 큰 길로 통한 살래겟 문 곁에 있어 서로 대하여 파수하였으니	To Shuppim and Hosah the lot came forth westward, with the gate Shallecheth, by the causeway of the going up, ward against ward.	The lots for the West Gate and the Shallecheth Gate on the ascending highway fell to Shuppim and Hosah. There were guards stationed at every watch.
1CH	26	17	동방에 레위 사람이 여섯이요 북방에 매일 네 사람이요 남방에 매일 네 사람이요 곳간에는 둘씩이며	Eastward were six Levites, northward four a day, southward four a day, and toward Asuppim two and two.	Each day there were six Levites on the east, four on the north, four on the south, and two pairs at the storehouse.
1CH	26	18	낭실 서편 큰 길에 네 사람이요 낭실에 두 사람이니	At Parbar westward, four at the causeway, and two at Parbar.	As for the court on the west, there were four at the highway and two at the court.
1CH	26	19	고라와 므라리 자손의 문지기의 반차가 이러하였더라	These are the divisions of the porters among the sons of Kore, and among the sons of Merari.	These were the divisions of the gatekeepers who were descendants of Korah and Merari.
1CH	26	20	레위 사람 중에 아히야는 하나님의 전 곳간과 성물 곳간을 맡았으며	And of the Levites, Ahijah was over the treasures of the house of God, and over the treasures of the dedicated things.	Now their fellow Levites were in charge of the treasuries of the house of God and the treasuries of the dedicated things.
1CH	26	21	라단의 자손은 곧 라단에게 속한 게르손 사람의 자손이니 게르손 사람 라단에게 속한 족장은 여히엘리라	As concerning the sons of Laadan; the sons of the Gershonite Laadan, chief fathers, even of Laadan the Gershonite, were Jehieli.	From the descendants of Ladan, who were Gershonites through Ladan and heads of the families of Ladan the Gershonite, were Jehieli,
1CH	26	22	여히엘리의 아들은 스담과 그 아우 요엘이니 여호와의 전 곳간을 맡았고	The sons of Jehieli; Zetham, and Joel his brother, which were over the treasures of the house of the Lord.	the sons of Jehieli, Zetham, and his brother Joel. They were in charge of the treasuries of the house of the LORD.
1CH	26	23	아므람 자손과 이스할 자손과 헤브론 자손과 웃시엘 자손 중에	Of the Amramites, and the Izharites, the Hebronites, and the Uzzielites:	From the Amramites, the Izharites, the Hebronites, and the Uzzielites:
1CH	26	24	모세의 아들 게르솜의 자손 스브엘은 곳간을 맡았고	And Shebuel the son of Gershom, the son of Moses, was ruler of the treasures.	Shebuel, a descendant of Gershom son of Moses, was the officer in charge of the treasuries.
1CH	26	25	그 형제 곧 엘리에셀에게서 난 자는 그 아들 르하뱌와 그 아들 여사야와 그 아들 요람과 그 아들 시그리와 그 아들 슬로못이라	And his brethren by Eliezer; Rehabiah his son, and Jeshaiah his son, and Joram his son, and Zichri his son, and Shelomith his son.	His relatives through Eliezer included Rehabiah his son, Jeshaiah his son, Joram his son, Zichri his son, and Shelomith his son.
1CH	26	26	이 슬로못과 그 형제는 성물의 모든 곳간을 맡았으니 곧 다윗 왕과 족장과 천부장과 백부장과 군대의 모든 장관이 구별하여 드린 성물이라	Which Shelomith and his brethren were over all the treasures of the dedicated things, which David the king, and the chief fathers, the captains over thousands and hundreds, and the captains of the host, had dedicated.	This Shelomith and his brothers were in charge of all the treasuries for the things dedicated by King David, by the heads of families who were the commanders of thousands and of hundreds, and by the army commanders.
1CH	26	27	저희가 싸울 때에 노략하여 얻은 물건 중에서 구별하여 드려 여호와의 전을 중수하게 한 것이며	Out of the spoils won in battles did they dedicate to maintain the house of the Lord.	They had dedicated some of the plunder from their battles to the repair of the house of the LORD.
1CH	26	28	선견자 사무엘과 기스의 아들 사울과 넬의 아들 아브넬과 스루야의 아들 요압이 무론 무엇이든지 구별하여 드린 성물은 다 슬로못과 그 형제의 수하에 있었더라	And all that Samuel the seer, and Saul the son of Kish, and Abner the son of Ner, and Joab the son of Zeruiah, had dedicated; and whosoever had dedicated any thing, it was under the hand of Shelomith, and of his brethren.	Everything that had been dedicated by Samuel the seer, Saul son of Kish, Abner son of Ner, and Joab son of Zeruiah, along with everything else that was dedicated, was under the care of Shelomith and his brothers.
1CH	26	29	이스할 자손 중에 그나냐와 그 아들들은 이스라엘 바깥 일을 다스리는 유사와 재판관이 되었고	Of the Izharites, Chenaniah and his sons were for the outward business over Israel, for officers and judges.	From the Izharites, Chenaniah and his sons had the outside duties as officers and judges over Israel.
1CH	26	30	헤브론 자손 중에 하사뱌와 그 동족 용사 일천칠백 인은 요단 서편에서 이스라엘을 주관하여 여호와의 모든 일과 왕을 섬기는 직임을 맡았으며	And of the Hebronites, Hashabiah and his brethren, men of valour, a thousand and seven hundred, were officers among them of Israel on this side Jordan westward in all the business of the Lord, and in the service of the king.	From the Hebronites, Hashabiah and his relatives, 1,700 capable men, had charge of the affairs of Israel west of the Jordan for all the work of the LORD and for the service of the king.
1CH	26	31	헤브론 자손 중에 여리야가 그 세계와 종족대로 헤브론 자손의 족장이 되었더라 다윗이 위에 있은지 사십 년에 길르앗 야셀에서 그 족속 중에 구하여 큰 용사를 얻었으니	Among the Hebronites was Jerijah the chief, even among the Hebronites, according to the generations of his fathers. In the fortieth year of the reign of David they were sought for, and there were found among them mighty men of valour at Jazer of Gilead.	As for the Hebronites, Jerijah was the chief of the Hebronites, according to the genealogies of his ancestors. In the fortieth year of David’s reign the records were searched, and strong, capable men were found among the Hebronites at Jazer in Gilead.
1CH	26	32	그 형제 중 이천칠백 명이 다 용사요 족장이라 다윗 왕이 저희로 르우벤과 갓과 므낫세 반 지파를 주관하여 하나님의 모든 일과 왕의 일을 다스리게 하였더라	And his brethren, men of valour, were two thousand and seven hundred chief fathers, whom king David made rulers over the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh, for every matter pertaining to God, and affairs of the king.	Among Jerijah’s relatives there were 2,700 capable men who were heads of families. King David appointed them over the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh for every matter pertaining to God and to the affairs of the king.
1CH	27	1	이스라엘 자손의 모든 족장과 천부장과 백부장과 왕을 섬기는 유사들이 그 인수대로 반차가 나누이니 각 반열이 이만 사천 명씩이라 일 년 동안 달마다 체번하여 들어가며 나왔으니	Now the children of Israel after their number, to wit, the chief fathers and captains of thousands and hundreds, and their officers that served the king in any matter of the courses, which came in and went out month by month throughout all the months of the year, of every course were twenty and four thousand.	This is the list of the Israelites—the heads of families, the commanders of thousands and of hundreds, and their officers who served the king in every matter concerning the divisions on rotating military duty each month throughout the year. There were 24,000 men in each division:
1CH	27	2	정월 첫반의 반당은 삽디엘의 아들 야소브암이요 그 반열에 이만 사천 명이라	Over the first course for the first month was Jashobeam the son of Zabdiel: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.	Jashobeam son of Zabdiel was in charge of the first division, which was assigned the first month. There were 24,000 men in his division.
1CH	27	3	저는 베레스의 자손으로서 정월반의 모든 장관의 두목이 되었고	Of the children of Perez was the chief of all the captains of the host for the first month.	He was a descendant of Perez and chief of all the army commanders for the first month.
1CH	27	4	이월반의 반장은 아호아 사람 도대요 또 마글롯이 그 반의 주장이 되었으니 그 반열에 이만 사천 명이요	And over the course of the second month was Dodai an Ahohite, and of his course was Mikloth also the ruler: in his course likewise were twenty and four thousand.	Dodai the Ahohite was in charge of the division for the second month, and Mikloth was the leader. There were 24,000 men in his division.
1CH	27	5	삼월 군대의 셋째 장관은 대제사장 여호야다의 아들 브나야요 그 반열에 이만 사천 명이라	The third captain of the host for the third month was Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, a chief priest: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.	The third army commander, as chief for the third month, was Benaiah son of Jehoiada the priest. There were 24,000 men in his division.
1CH	27	6	이 브나야는 삼십 인 중에 용사요 삼십 인 위에 있으며 그 반열 중에 그 아들 암미사밧이 있으며	This is that Benaiah, who was mighty among the thirty, and above the thirty: and in his course was Ammizabad his son.	This Benaiah was mighty among the Thirty and was over the Thirty, and his son Ammizabad was in charge of his division.
1CH	27	7	사월 넷째 장관은 요압의 아우 아사헬이요 그 다음은 그 아들 스바댜니 그 반열에 이만 사천 명이요	The fourth captain for the fourth month was Asahel the brother of Joab, and Zebadiah his son after him: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.	The fourth, for the fourth month, was Joab’s brother Asahel, and his son Zebadiah was commander after him. There were 24,000 men in his division.
1CH	27	8	오월 다섯째 장관은 이스라 사람 삼훗이니 그 반열에 이만 사천 명이요	The fifth captain for the fifth month was Shamhuth the Izrahite: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.	The fifth, for the fifth month, was the commander Shamhuth the Izrahite. There were 24,000 men in his division.
1CH	27	9	유월 여섯째 장관은 드고아 사람 익게스의 아들 이라니 그 반열에 이만 사천 명이요	The sixth captain for the sixth month was Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.	The sixth, for the sixth month, was Ira son of Ikkesh the Tekoite. There were 24,000 men in his division.
1CH	27	10	칠월 일곱째 장관은 에브라임 자손에 속한 발론 사람 헬레스니 그 반열에 이만 사천 명이요	The seventh captain for the seventh month was Helez the Pelonite, of the children of Ephraim: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.	The seventh, for the seventh month, was Helez the Pelonite, an Ephraimite. There were 24,000 men in his division.
1CH	27	11	팔월 여덟째 장관은 세라 족속 후사 사람 십브개니 그 반열에 이만 사천 명이요	The eighth captain for the eighth month was Sibbecai the Hushathite, of the Zarhites: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.	The eighth, for the eighth month, was Sibbecai the Hushathite, a Zerahite. There were 24,000 men in his division.
1CH	27	12	구월 아홉째 장관은 베냐민 자손 아나돗 사람 아비에셀이니 그 반열에 이만 사천 명이요	The ninth captain for the ninth month was Abiezer the Anetothite, of the Benjamites: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.	The ninth, for the ninth month, was Abiezer the Anathothite, a Benjamite. There were 24,000 men in his division.
1CH	27	13	시월 열째 장관은 세라 족속 느도바 사람 마하래니 그 반열에 이만 사천 명이요	The tenth captain for the tenth month was Maharai the Netophathite, of the Zarhites: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.	The tenth, for the tenth month, was Maharai the Netophathite, a Zerahite. There were 24,000 men in his division.
1CH	27	14	십일월 열한째 장관은 에브라임 자손에 속한 비라돈 사람 브나야니 그 반열에 이만 사천 명이요	The eleventh captain for the eleventh month was Benaiah the Pirathonite, of the children of Ephraim: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.	The eleventh, for the eleventh month, was Benaiah the Pirathonite, an Ephraimite. There were 24,000 men in his division.
1CH	27	15	십이월 열둘째 장관은 옷니엘 자손에 속한 느도바 사람 헬대니 그 반열에 이만 사천 명이었더라	The twelfth captain for the twelfth month was Heldai the Netophathite, of Othniel: and in his course were twenty and four thousand.	The twelfth, for the twelfth month, was Heldai the Netophathite, from the family of Othniel. There were 24,000 men in his division.
1CH	27	16	이스라엘 지파를 관할하는 자는 이러하니라 르우벤 사람의 관장은 시그리의 아들 엘리에셀이요 시므온 사람의 관장은 마아가의 아들 스바댜요	Furthermore over the tribes of Israel: the ruler of the Reubenites was Eliezer the son of Zichri: of the Simeonites, Shephatiah the son of Maachah:	These officers were in charge of the tribes of Israel: Over the Reubenites was Eliezer son of Zichri; over the Simeonites was Shephatiah son of Maacah;
1CH	27	17	레위 사람의 관장은 그무엘의 아들 하사뱌요 아론 자손의 관장은 사독이요	Of the Levites, Hashabiah the son of Kemuel: of the Aaronites, Zadok:	over Levi was Hashabiah son of Kemuel; over Aaron was Zadok;
1CH	27	18	유다의 관장은 다윗의 형 엘리후요 잇사갈의 관장은 미가엘의 아들 오므리요	Of Judah, Elihu, one of the brethren of David: of Issachar, Omri the son of Michael:	over Judah was Elihu, one of David’s brothers; over Issachar was Omri son of Michael;
1CH	27	19	스불론의 관장은 오바댜의 아들 이스마야요 납달리의 관장은 아스리엘의 아들 여레못이요	Of Zebulun, Ishmaiah the son of Obadiah: of Naphtali, Jerimoth the son of Azriel:	over Zebulun was Ishmaiah son of Obadiah; over Naphtali was Jerimoth son of Azriel;
1CH	27	20	에브라임 자손의 관장은 아사시야의 아들 호세아요 므낫세 반 지파의 관장은 브다야의 아들 요엘이요	Of the children of Ephraim, Hoshea the son of Azaziah: of the half tribe of Manasseh, Joel the son of Pedaiah:	over the Ephraimites was Hoshea son of Azaziah; over one of the half-tribes of Manasseh was Joel son of Pedaiah;
1CH	27	21	길르앗에 있는 므낫세 반 지파의 관장은 스가랴의 아들 잇도요 베냐민의 관장은 아브넬의 아들 야아시엘이요	Of the half tribe of Manasseh in Gilead, Iddo the son of Zechariah: of Benjamin, Jaasiel the son of Abner:	over the half-tribe of Manasseh in Gilead was Iddo son of Zechariah; over Benjamin was Jaasiel son of Abner;
1CH	27	22	단의 관장은 여로함의 아들 아사렐이니 이스라엘 지파의 관장이 이러하며	Of Dan, Azareel the son of Jeroham. These were the princes of the tribes of Israel.	and over Dan was Azarel son of Jeroham. These were the leaders of the tribes of Israel.
1CH	27	23	이스라엘 사람의 이십 세 이하의 수효는 다윗이 조사하지 아니하였으니 이는 여호와께서 전에 말씀하시기를 이스라엘 사람을 하늘의 별 같이 많게 하리라 하셨음이라	But David took not the number of them from twenty years old and under: because the Lord had said he would increase Israel like to the stars of the heavens.	David did not count the men aged twenty or under, because the LORD had said that He would make Israel as numerous as the stars of the sky.
1CH	27	24	스루야의 아들 요압이 조사하기를 시작하고 끝내지 못하여서 그 일로 인하여 진노가 이스라엘에게 임한지라 그 수효를 다윗 왕의 역대지략에 기록하지 아니하였더라	Joab the son of Zeruiah began to number, but he finished not, because there fell wrath for it against Israel; neither was the number put in the account of the chronicles of king David.	Joab son of Zeruiah began to count the men but did not finish. For because of this census wrath came upon Israel, and the number was not entered in the Book of the Chronicles of King David.
1CH	27	25	아디엘의 아들 아스마웹은 왕의 곳간을 맡았고 웃시야의 아들 요나단은 밭과 성읍과 촌과 산성의 곳간을 맡았고	And over the king’s treasures was Azmaveth the son of Adiel: and over the storehouses in the fields, in the cities, and in the villages, and in the castles, was Jehonathan the son of Uzziah:	Azmaveth son of Adiel was in charge of the royal storehouses. Jonathan son of Uzziah was in charge of the storehouses in the country, in the cities, in the villages, and in the fortresses.
1CH	27	26	글룹의 아들 에스리는 밭 가는 농부를 거느렸고	And over them that did the work of the field for tillage of the ground was Ezri the son of Chelub:	Ezri son of Chelub was in charge of the workers in the fields who tilled the soil.
1CH	27	27	라마 사람 시므이는 포도원을 맡았고 스밤 사람 삽디는 포도원의 소산 포도주 곳간을 맡았고	And over the vineyards was Shimei the Ramathite: over the increase of the vineyards for the wine cellars was Zabdi the Shiphmite:	Shimei the Ramathite was in charge of the vineyards. Zabdi the Shiphmite was in charge of the produce of the vineyards for the wine vats.
1CH	27	28	게델 사람 바알하난은 평야의 감람나무와 뽕나무를 맡았고 요아스는 기름 곳간을 맡았고	And over the olive trees and the sycomore trees that were in the low plains was Baal–hanan the Gederite: and over the cellars of oil was Joash:	Baal-hanan the Gederite was in charge of the olive and sycamore trees in the foothills. Joash was in charge of the stores of olive oil.
1CH	27	29	사론 사람 시드래는 사론에서 먹이는 소떼를 맡았고 아들래의 아들 사밧은 골짜기에 있는 소떼를 맡았고	And over the herds that fed in Sharon was Shitrai the Sharonite: and over the herds that were in the valleys was Shaphat the son of Adlai:	Shitrai the Sharonite was in charge of the herds grazing in Sharon. Shaphat son of Adlai was in charge of the herds in the valleys.
1CH	27	30	이스마엘 사람 오빌은 약대를 맡았고 메로놋 사람 예드야는 나귀를 맡았고 하갈 사람 야시스는 양떼를 맡았으니	Over the camels also was Obil the Ishmaelite: and over the asses was Jehdeiah the Meronothite:	Obil the Ishmaelite was in charge of the camels. Jehdeiah the Meronothite was in charge of the donkeys.
1CH	27	31	다윗 왕의 재산을 맡은 자들이 이러하였더라	And over the flocks was Jaziz the Hagerite. All these were the rulers of the substance which was king David’s.	Jaziz the Hagrite was in charge of the flocks. All these officials were in charge of King David’s property.
1CH	27	32	다윗의 아자비 요나단은 지혜가 있어서 모사가 되며 서기관도 되었고 학모니의 아들 여히엘은 왕의 아들들의 배종이 되었고	Also Jonathan David’s uncle was a counsellor, a wise man, and a scribe: and Jehiel the son of Hachmoni was with the king’s sons:	David’s uncle Jonathan was a counselor; he was a man of insight and a scribe. Jehiel son of Hachmoni attended to the sons of the king.
1CH	27	33	아히도벨은 왕의 모사가 되었고 아렉 사람 후새는 왕의 벗이 되었고	And Ahithophel was the king’s counsellor: and Hushai the Archite was the king’s companion:	Ahithophel was the king’s counselor. Hushai the Archite was the king’s friend.
1CH	27	34	브나야의 아들 여호야다와 아비아달은 아히도벨의 다음이 되었고 요압은 왕의 군대 장관이 되었더라	And after Ahithophel was Jehoiada the son of Benaiah, and Abiathar: and the general of the king’s army was Joab.	Ahithophel was succeeded by Jehoiada son of Benaiah, then by Abiathar. Joab was the commander of the king’s army.
1CH	28	1	다윗이 이스라엘 모든 방백 곧 각 지파의 어른과 체번하어 왕을 섬기는 반장들과 천부장들과 백부장들과 및 왕과 왕자의 산업과 생축의 감독과 환관과 장사와 용사를 예루살렘으로 소집하고	And David assembled all the princes of Israel, the princes of the tribes, and the captains of the companies that ministered to the king by course, and the captains over the thousands, and captains over the hundreds, and the stewards over all the substance and possession of the king, and of his sons, with the officers, and with the mighty men, and with all the valiant men, unto Jerusalem.	Now David summoned all the leaders of Israel to Jerusalem: the leaders of the tribes, the leaders of the divisions in the king’s service, the commanders of thousands and of hundreds, and the officials in charge of all the property and cattle of the king and his sons, along with the court officials and mighty men—every mighty man of valor.
1CH	28	2	이에 다윗 왕이 일어서서 가로되 나의 형제들 나의 백성들아 내 말을 들으라 나는 여호와의 언약궤 곧 우리 하나님의 발등상을 봉안할 전 건축할 마음이 있어서 건축할 재료를 준비하였으나	Then David the king stood up upon his feet, and said, Hear me, my brethren, and my people: As for me, I had in mine heart to build an house of rest for the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and for the footstool of our God, and had made ready for the building:	Then King David rose to his feet and said, “Listen to me, my brothers and my people. It was in my heart to build a house as a resting place for the ark of the covenant of the LORD and as a footstool for our God. I had made preparations to build it,
1CH	28	3	오직 하나님이 내게 이르시되 너는 군인이라 피를 흘렸으니 내 이름을 위하여 전을 건축하지 못하리라 하셨느니라	But God said unto me, Thou shalt not build an house for my name, because thou hast been a man of war, and hast shed blood.	but God said to me, ‘You are not to build a house for My Name, because you are a man of war who has spilled blood.’
1CH	28	4	그러나 이스라엘 하나님 여호와께서 전에 나를 내 부친의 온 집에서 택하여 영원히 이스라엘 왕이 되게 하셨나니 곧 하나님이 유다 지파를 택하사 머리를 삼으시고 유다의 족속에서 내 부친의 집을 택하시고 내 부친의 아들들 중에서 나를 기뻐하사 온 이스라엘의 왕을 삼으셨느니라	Howbeit the Lord God of Israel chose me before all the house of my father to be king over Israel for ever: for he hath chosen Judah to be the ruler; and of the house of Judah, the house of my father; and among the sons of my father he liked me to make me king over all Israel:	Yet the LORD, the God of Israel, chose me out of all my father’s house to be king over Israel forever. For He chose Judah as leader, and from the house of Judah He chose my father’s household, and from my father’s sons He was pleased to make me king over all Israel.
1CH	28	5	여호와께서 내게 여러 아들을 주시고 그 모든 아들 중에서 내 아들 솔로몬을 택하사 여호와의 나라 위에 앉혀 이스라엘을 다스리게 하려 하실새	And of all my sons, (for the Lord hath given me many sons,) he hath chosen Solomon my son to sit upon the throne of the kingdom of the Lord over Israel.	And of all my sons—for the LORD has given me many sons—He has chosen Solomon my son to sit on the throne of the kingdom of the LORD over Israel.
1CH	28	6	내게 이르시기를 네 아들 솔로몬 그가 내전을 건축하고 내 여러 뜰을 만들리니 이는 내가 저를 택하여 내 아들을 삼고 나는 그 아비가 될 것임이라	And he said unto me, Solomon thy son, he shall build my house and my courts: for I have chosen him to be my son, and I will be his father.	And He said to me, ‘Solomon your son is the one who will build My house and My courts, for I have chosen him as My son, and I will be his Father.
1CH	28	7	저가 만일 나의 계명과 규례를 힘써 준행하기를 오늘날과 같이 하면 내가 그 나라를 영원히 견고케 하리라 하셨느니라	Moreover I will establish his kingdom for ever, if he be constant to do my commandments and my judgments, as at this day.	I will establish his kingdom forever, if he resolutely carries out My commandments and ordinances, as is being done this day.’
1CH	28	8	이제 너희는 온 이스라엘 곧 여호와의 회중의 보는데와 우리 하나님의 들으시는데서 너희 하나님 여호와의 모든 계명을 구하여 지키기로 하라 그리하면 너희가 이 아름다운 땅을 누리고 너희 후손에게 끼쳐 영원한 기업이 되게 하리라	Now therefore in the sight of all Israel the congregation of the Lord, and in the audience of our God, keep and seek for all the commandments of the Lord your God: that ye may possess this good land, and leave it for an inheritance for your children after you for ever.	So now in the sight of all Israel, the assembly of the LORD, and in the hearing of our God, keep and seek out all the commandments of the LORD your God, so that you may possess this good land and leave it as an inheritance to your descendants forever.
1CH	28	9	내 아들 솔로몬아 너는 네 아비의 하나님을 알고 온전한 마음과 기쁜 뜻으로 섬길지어다 여호와께서는 뭇 마음을 감찰하사 모든 사상을 아시나니 네가 저를 찾으면 만날 것이요 버리면 저가 너를 영원히 버리시리라	And thou, Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind: for the Lord searcheth all hearts, and understandeth all the imaginations of the thoughts: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.	As for you, Solomon my son, know the God of your father and serve Him wholeheartedly and with a willing mind, for the LORD searches every heart and understands the intent of every thought. If you seek Him, He will be found by you; but if you forsake Him, He will reject you forever.
1CH	28	10	그런즉 너는 삼갈지어다 여호와께서 너를 택하여 성소의 전을 건축하게 하셨으니 힘써 행할지니라	Take heed now; for the Lord hath chosen thee to build an house for the sanctuary: be strong, and do it.	Consider now that the LORD has chosen you to build a house for the sanctuary. Be strong and do it.”
1CH	28	11	다윗이 전의 낭실과 그 집들과 그 곳간과 다락과 골방과 속죄소의 식양을 그 아들 솔로몬에게 주고	Then David gave to Solomon his son the pattern of the porch, and of the houses thereof, and of the treasuries thereof, and of the upper chambers thereof, and of the inner parlours thereof, and of the place of the mercy seat,	Then David gave his son Solomon the plans for the portico of the temple, its buildings, storehouses, upper rooms, inner rooms, and the room for the mercy seat.
1CH	28	12	또 성신의 가르치신 모든 식양 곧 여호와의 전의 뜰과 사면의 모든 방과 하나님의 전 곳간과 성물 곳간의 식양을 주고	And the pattern of all that he had by the spirit, of the courts of the house of the Lord, and of all the chambers round about, of the treasuries of the house of God, and of the treasuries of the dedicated things:	The plans contained everything David had in mind for the courts of the house of the LORD, for all the surrounding rooms, for the treasuries of the house of God and of the dedicated things,
1CH	28	13	또 제사장과 레위 사람의 반열과 여호와의 전에 섬기는 모든 일과 섬기는 데 쓰는 모든 그릇의 식양을 설명하고	Also for the courses of the priests and the Levites, and for all the work of the service of the house of the Lord, and for all the vessels of service in the house of the Lord.	for the divisions of the priests and Levites, for all the work of service in the house of the LORD, and for all the articles of service in the house of the LORD:
1CH	28	14	또 모든 섬기는 데 쓰는 금기명을 만들 금의 중량과 모든 섬기는 데 쓰는 은기명을 만들 은의 중량을 정하고	He gave of gold by weight for things of gold, for all instruments of all manner of service; silver also for all instruments of silver by weight, for all instruments of every kind of service:	the weight of all the gold articles for every kind of service; the weight of all the silver articles for every kind of service;
1CH	28	15	또 금등대들과 그 등잔 곧 각등대와 그 등잔을 만들 금의 중량과 은등대와 그 등잔을 만들 은의 중량을 각기 적당하게 하고	Even the weight for the candlesticks of gold, and for their lamps of gold, by weight for every candlestick, and for the lamps thereof: and for the candlesticks of silver by weight, both for the candlestick, and also for the lamps thereof, according to the use of every candlestick.	the weight of the gold lampstands and their lamps, including the weight of each lampstand and its lamps; the weight of each silver lampstand and its lamps, according to the use of each lampstand;
1CH	28	16	또 진설병의 각 상을 만들 금의 중량을 정하고 은상을 만들 은도 그렇게 하고	And by weight he gave gold for the tables of shewbread, for every table; and likewise silver for the tables of silver:	the weight of gold for each table of showbread, and of silver for the silver tables;
1CH	28	17	고기 갈고리와 대접과 종자를 만들 정금과 금잔 곧 각 잔을 만들 금의 중량과 또 은잔 곧 각 잔을 만들 은의 중량을 정하고	Also pure gold for the fleshhooks, and the bowls, and the cups: and for the golden basons he gave gold by weight for every bason; and likewise silver by weight for every bason of silver:	the weight of the pure gold for the forks, sprinkling bowls, and pitchers; the weight of each gold dish; the weight of each silver bowl;
1CH	28	18	또 향단에 쓸 정금과 또 타시는 처소된 그룹들의 식양대로 만들 금의 중량을 정하여 주니 이 그룹들은 날개를 펴서 여호와의 언약궤를 덮는 것이더라	And for the altar of incense refined gold by weight; and gold for the pattern of the chariot of the cherubims, that spread out their wings, and covered the ark of the covenant of the Lord.	the weight of the refined gold for the altar of incense; and the plans for the chariot of the gold cherubim that spread their wings and overshadowed the ark of the covenant of the LORD.
1CH	28	19	다윗이 가로되 이 위의 모든 것의 식양을 여호와의 손이 내게 임하여 그려 나로 알게 하셨느니라	All this, said David, the Lord made me understand in writing by his hand upon me, even all the works of this pattern.	“All this,” said David, “all the details of this plan, the LORD has made clear to me in writing by His hand upon me.”
1CH	28	20	또 그 아들 솔로몬에게 이르되 너는 강하고 담대하게 이 일을 행하고 두려워 말며 놀라지 말라 네가 여호와의 전 역사의 모든 일을 마칠 동안에 여호와 하나님 나의 하나님이 너와 함께하사 네게서 떠나지 아니하시고 너를 버리지 아니하시리라	And David said to Solomon his son, Be strong and of good courage, and do it: fear not, nor be dismayed: for the Lord God, even my God, will be with thee; he will not fail thee, nor forsake thee, until thou hast finished all the work for the service of the house of the Lord.	David also said to Solomon his son, “Be strong and courageous, and do it. Do not be afraid or discouraged, for the LORD God, my God, is with you. He will neither fail you nor forsake you before all the work for the service of the house of the LORD is finished.
1CH	28	21	제사장과 레위 사람의 반열이 있으니 여호와의 전의 모든 역사를 도울 것이요 또 모든 공역에 공교한 공장이 기쁜 마음으로 너와 함께 할 것이요 또 모든 장관과 백성이 온전히 네 명령 아래 있으리라	And, behold, the courses of the priests and the Levites, even they shall be with thee for all the service of the house of God: and there shall be with thee for all manner of workmanship every willing skilful man, for any manner of service: also the princes and all the people will be wholly at thy commandment.	The divisions of the priests and Levites are ready for all the service of the house of God, and every willing man of every skill will be at your disposal for the work. The officials and all the people are fully at your command.”
1CH	29	1	다윗 왕이 온 회중에게 이르되 내 아들 솔로몬이 홀로 하나님의 택하신 바 되었으나 오히려 어리고 연약하고 이 역사는 크도다 이 전은 사람을 위한 것이 아니요 여호와 하나님을 위한 것이라	Furthermore David the king said unto all the congregation, Solomon my son, whom alone God hath chosen, is yet young and tender, and the work is great: for the palace is not for man, but for the Lord God.	Then King David said to the whole assembly, “My son Solomon, the one whom God has chosen, is young and inexperienced. The task is great because this palace is not for man, but for the LORD God.
1CH	29	2	내가 이미 내 하나님의 전을 위하여 힘을 다하여 예비하였나니 곧 기구를 만들 금과 은과 놋과 철과 나무며 또 마노와 박을 보석과 꾸밀 보석과 채석과 다른 보석들과 화반석이 매우 많으며	Now I have prepared with all my might for the house of my God the gold for things to be made of gold, and the silver for things of silver, and the brass for things of brass, the iron for things of iron, and wood for things of wood; onyx stones, and stones to be set, glistering stones, and of divers colours, and all manner of precious stones, and marble stones in abundance.	Now with all my ability I have made provision for the house of my God—gold for the gold articles, silver for the silver, bronze for the bronze, iron for the iron, and wood for the wood, as well as onyx for the settings, turquoise, stones of various colors, all kinds of precious stones, and slabs of marble—all in abundance.
1CH	29	3	성전을 위하여 예비한 이 모든 것 외에도 내 마음에 내 하나님의 전을 사모하므로 나의 사유의 금, 은으로 내 하나님의 전을 위하여 드렸노니	Moreover, because I have set my affection to the house of my God, I have of mine own proper good, of gold and silver, which I have given to the house of my God, over and above all that I have prepared for the holy house,	Moreover, because of my delight in the house of my God, I now give for it my personal treasures of gold and silver, over and above all that I have provided for this holy temple:
1CH	29	4	곧 오빌의 금 삼천 달란트와 천은 칠천 달란트라 모든 전 벽에 입히며	Even three thousand talents of gold, of the gold of Ophir, and seven thousand talents of refined silver, to overlay the walls of the houses withal:	three thousand talents of gold (the gold of Ophir) and seven thousand talents of refined silver, to overlay the walls of the buildings,
1CH	29	5	금, 은 그릇을 만들며 공장의 손으로 하는 모든 일에 쓰게 하였노니 오늘날 누가 즐거이 손에 채워 여호와께 드리겠느냐	The gold for things of gold, and the silver for things of silver, and for all manner of work to be made by the hands of artificers. And who then is willing to consecrate his service this day unto the Lord?	for the gold work and the silver work, and for all the work to be done by the craftsmen. Now who will volunteer to consecrate himself to the LORD today?”
1CH	29	6	이에 모든 족장과 이스라엘 모든 지파 어른과 천부장과 백부장과 왕의 사무 감독이 다 즐거이 드리되	Then the chief of the fathers and princes of the tribes of Israel, and the captains of thousands and of hundreds, with the rulers of the king’s work, offered willingly,	Then the leaders of the households, the officers of the tribes of Israel, the commanders of thousands and of hundreds, and the officials in charge of the king’s work gave willingly.
1CH	29	7	하나님의 전 역사를 위하여 금 오천 달란트와 금 다릭 일만과 은 일만 달란트와 놋 일만 팔천 달란트와 철 십만 달란트를 드리고	And gave for the service of the house of God of gold five thousand talents and ten thousand drams, and of silver ten thousand talents, and of brass eighteen thousand talents, and one hundred thousand talents of iron.	Toward the service of God’s house they gave 5,000 talents and 10,000 darics of gold, 10,000 talents of silver, 18,000 talents of bronze, and 100,000 talents of iron.
1CH	29	8	무릇 보석이 있는 자는 게르손 사람 여히엘의 손에 부쳐 여호와의 전 곳간에 드렸더라	And they with whom precious stones were found gave them to the treasure of the house of the Lord, by the hand of Jehiel the Gershonite.	Whoever had precious stones gave them to the treasury of the house of the LORD, under the care of Jehiel the Gershonite.
1CH	29	9	백성이 자기의 즐거이 드림으로 기뻐하였으니 곧 저희가 성심으로 여호와께 즐거이 드림이며 다윗 왕도 기쁨을 이기지 못하여 하니라	Then the people rejoiced, for that they offered willingly, because with perfect heart they offered willingly to the Lord: and David the king also rejoiced with great joy.	And the people rejoiced at the willing response of their leaders, for they had given to the LORD freely and wholeheartedly. And King David also rejoiced greatly.
1CH	29	10	다윗이 온 회중 앞에서 여호와를 송축하여 가로되 우리 조상 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와여 주는 영원히 송축을 받으시옵소서	Wherefore David blessed the Lord before all the congregation: and David said, Blessed be thou, Lord God of Israel our father, for ever and ever.	Then David blessed the LORD in the sight of all the assembly and said: “May You be blessed, O LORD, God of our father Israel, from everlasting to everlasting.
1CH	29	11	여호와여 광대하심과 권능과 영광과 이김과 위엄이 다 주께 속하였사오니 천지에 있는 것이 다 주의 것이로소이다 여호와여 주권도 주께 속하였사오니 주는 높으사 만유의 머리심이니이다	Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty: for all that is in the heaven and in the earth is thine; thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all.	Yours, O LORD, is the greatness and the power and the glory and the splendor and the majesty, for everything in heaven and on earth belongs to You. Yours, O LORD, is the kingdom, and You are exalted as head over all.
1CH	29	12	부와 귀가 주께로 말미암고 또 주는 만유의 주재가 되사 손에 권세와 능력이 있사오니 모든 자를 크게 하심과 강하게 하심이 주의 손에 있나이다	Both riches and honour come of thee, and thou reignest over all; and in thine hand is power and might; and in thine hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto all.	Both riches and honor come from You, and You are the ruler over all. In Your hands are power and might to exalt and give strength to all.
1CH	29	13	우리 하나님이여 이제 우리가 주께 감사하오며 주의 영화로운 이름을 찬양하나이다	Now therefore, our God, we thank thee, and praise thy glorious name.	Now therefore, our God, we give You thanks, and we praise Your glorious name.
1CH	29	14	나와 나의 백성이 무엇이관대 이처럼 즐거운 마음으로 드릴 힘이 있었나이까 모든 것이 주께로 말미암았사오니 우리가 주의 손에서 받은 것으로 주께 드렸을 뿐이니이다	But who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? for all things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee.	But who am I, and who are my people, that we should be able to give as generously as this? For everything comes from You, and from Your own hand we have given to You.
1CH	29	15	주 앞에서는 우리가 우리 열조와 다름이 없이 나그네와 우거한 자라 세상에 있는 날이 그림자 같아서 머무름이 없나이다	For we are strangers before thee, and sojourners, as were all our fathers: our days on the earth are as a shadow, and there is none abiding.	For we are foreigners and strangers in Your presence, as were all our forefathers. Our days on earth are like a shadow, without hope.
1CH	29	16	우리 하나님 여호와여 우리가 주의 거룩한 이름을 위하여 전을 건축하려고 미리 저축한 이 모든 물건이 다 주의 손에서 왔사오니 다 주의 것이니이다	O Lord our God, all this store that we have prepared to build thee an house for thine holy name cometh of thine hand, and is all thine own.	O LORD our God, from Your hand comes all this abundance that we have provided to build You a house for Your holy Name, and all of it belongs to You.
1CH	29	17	나의 하나님이여 주께서 마음을 감찰하시고 정직을 기뻐하시는 줄 내가 아나이다 내가 정직한 마음으로 이 모든 것을 즐거이 드렸사오며 이제 내가 또 여기 있는 주의 백성이 주께 즐거이 드리는 것을 보오니 심히 기쁘도소이다	I know also, my God, that thou triest the heart, and hast pleasure in uprightness. As for me, in the uprightness of mine heart I have willingly offered all these things: and now have I seen with joy thy people, which are present here, to offer willingly unto thee.	I know, my God, that You test the heart and delight in uprightness. All these things I have given willingly and with an upright heart, and now I have seen Your people who are present here giving joyfully and willingly to You.
1CH	29	18	우리 열조 아브라함과 이삭과 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와여 주께서 이것을 주의 백성의 심중에 영원히 두어 생각하게 하시고 그 마음을 예비하여 주께로 돌아오게 하옵시며	O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel, our fathers, keep this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people, and prepare their heart unto thee:	O LORD, God of our fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, keep this desire forever in the intentions of the hearts of Your people, and direct their hearts toward You.
1CH	29	19	또 내 아들 솔로몬에게 정성된 마음을 주사 주의 계명과 법도와 율례를 지켜 이 모든 일을 행하게 하시고 내가 위하여 예비한 것으로 전을 건축하게 하옵소서	And give unto Solomon my son a perfect heart, to keep thy commandments, thy testimonies, and thy statutes, and to do all these things, and to build the palace, for the which I have made provision.	And give my son Solomon a whole heart to keep and carry out all Your commandments, decrees, and statutes, and to build Your palace for which I have made provision.”
1CH	29	20	다윗이 온 회중에게 이르되 너희는 너희 하나님 여호와를 송축하라 하매 회중이 그 열조의 하나님 여호와를 송축하고 머리를 숙여 여호와와 왕에게 절하고	And David said to all the congregation, Now bless the Lord your God. And all the congregation blessed the Lord God of their fathers, and bowed down their heads, and worshipped the Lord, and the king.	Then David said to the whole assembly, “Blessed be the LORD your God.” So the whole assembly blessed the LORD, the God of their fathers. They bowed down and paid homage to the LORD and to the king.
1CH	29	21	이튿날 여호와께 제사를 드리고 또 번제를 드리니 수송아지가 일천이요 수양이 일천이요 어린 양이 일천이요 또 그 전제라 온 이스라엘을 위하여 풍성한 제물을 드리고	And they sacrificed sacrifices unto the Lord, and offered burnt offerings unto the Lord, on the morrow after that day, even a thousand bullocks, a thousand rams, and a thousand lambs, with their drink offerings, and sacrifices in abundance for all Israel:	The next day they offered sacrifices and presented burnt offerings to the LORD: a thousand bulls, a thousand rams, and a thousand lambs, along with their drink offerings, and other sacrifices in abundance for all Israel.
1CH	29	22	이 날에 무리가 크게 기뻐하여 여호와 앞에서 먹으며 마셨더라 무리가 다윗의 아들 솔로몬으로 다시 왕을 삼아 기름을 부어 여호와께 돌려 주권자가 되게 하고 사독에게도 기름을 부어 제사장이 되게 하니라	And did eat and drink before the Lord on that day with great gladness. And they made Solomon the son of David king the second time, and anointed him unto the Lord to be the chief governor, and Zadok to be priest.	That day they ate and drank with great joy in the presence of the LORD. Then, for a second time, they designated David’s son Solomon as king, anointing him before the LORD as ruler, and Zadok as the priest.
1CH	29	23	솔로몬이 여호와께서 주신 위에 앉아 부친 다윗을 이어 왕이 되어 형통하니 온 이스라엘이 그 명령을 순종하며	Then Solomon sat on the throne of the Lord as king instead of David his father, and prospered; and all Israel obeyed him.	So Solomon sat on the throne of the LORD as king in place of his father David. He prospered, and all Israel obeyed him.
1CH	29	24	모든 방백과 용사와 다윗 왕의 여러 아들이 솔로몬 왕에게 복종하니	And all the princes, and the mighty men, and all the sons likewise of king David, submitted themselves unto Solomon the king.	All the officials and mighty men, as well as all of King David’s sons, pledged their allegiance to King Solomon.
1CH	29	25	여호와께서 솔로몬으로 이스라엘 무리의 목전에 심히 존대케 하시고 또 왕의 위엄을 주사 그 전 이스라엘 모든 왕보다 뛰어나게 하셨더라	And the Lord magnified Solomon exceedingly in the sight of all Israel, and bestowed upon him such royal majesty as had not been on any king before him in Israel.	The LORD highly exalted Solomon in the sight of all Israel and bestowed on him royal majesty such as had not been bestowed on any king in Israel before him.
1CH	29	26	이새의 아들 다윗이 온 이스라엘의 왕이 되어	Thus David the son of Jesse reigned over all Israel.	David son of Jesse was king over all Israel.
1CH	29	27	이스라엘을 치리한 날짜는 사십 년이라 헤브론에서 칠 년을 치리하였고 예루살렘에서 삼십삼 년을 치리하였더라	And the time that he reigned over Israel was forty years; seven years reigned he in Hebron, and thirty and three years reigned he in Jerusalem.	The length of David’s reign over Israel was forty years—seven years in Hebron and thirty-three years in Jerusalem.
1CH	29	28	저가 나이 많아 늙도록 부하고 존귀하다가 죽으매 그 아들 솔로몬이 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And he died in a good old age, full of days, riches, and honour: and Solomon his son reigned in his stead.	He died at a ripe old age, full of years, riches, and honor, and his son Solomon reigned in his place.
1CH	29	29	다윗 왕의 시종 행적이 선견자 사무엘의 글과 선지자 나단의 글과 선견자 갓의 글에 다 기록되고	Now the acts of David the king, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of Samuel the seer, and in the book of Nathan the prophet, and in the book of Gad the seer,	Now the acts of King David, from first to last, are indeed written in the Chronicles of Samuel the Seer, the Chronicles of Nathan the Prophet, and the Chronicles of Gad the Seer,
1CH	29	30	또 저의 왕 된 일과 그 권세와 저와 이스라엘과 온 세상 열국의 지난 시사가 다 기록되니라	With all his reign and his might, and the times that went over him, and over Israel, and over all the kingdoms of the countries.	together with all the details of his reign, his might, and the circumstances that came upon him and Israel and all the kingdoms of the lands.
2CH	1	1	다윗의 아들 솔로몬의 왕위가 견고하여 가며 그 하나님 여호와께서 저와 함께 하사 심히 창대케 하시니라	And Solomon the son of David was strengthened in his kingdom, and the Lord his God was with him, and magnified him exceedingly.	Now Solomon son of David established himself securely over his kingdom, and the LORD his God was with him and highly exalted him.
2CH	1	2	솔로몬이 온 이스라엘의 천부장과 백부장과 재판관과 온 이스라엘의 각 방백과 족장들을 명하고	Then Solomon spake unto all Israel, to the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and to the judges, and to every governor in all Israel, the chief of the fathers.	Then Solomon spoke to all Israel, to the commanders of thousands and of hundreds, to the judges, and to every leader in all Israel—the heads of the families.
2CH	1	3	온 회중과 함께 기브온 산당으로 갔으니 하나님의 회막 곧 여호와의 종 모세가 광야에서 지은 것이 거기 있음이라	So Solomon, and all the congregation with him, went to the high place that was at Gibeon; for there was the tabernacle of the congregation of God, which Moses the servant of the Lord had made in the wilderness.	And Solomon and the whole assembly went to the high place at Gibeon because it was the location of God’s Tent of Meeting, which Moses the servant of the LORD had made in the wilderness.
2CH	1	4	다윗이 전에 예루살렘에서 하나님의 궤를 위하여 장막을 쳤었으므로 그 궤는 다윗이 이미 기럇여아림에서부터 위하여 예비한 곳으로 메어 올렸고	But the ark of God had David brought up from Kirjath–jearim to the place which David had prepared for it: for he had pitched a tent for it at Jerusalem.	Now David had brought the ark of God from Kiriath-jearim to the place he had prepared for it, because he had pitched a tent for it in Jerusalem.
2CH	1	5	옛적에 훌의 손자 우리의 아들 브사렐의 지은 놋단은 여호와의 장막 앞에 있더라 솔로몬이 회중으로 더불어 나아가서	Moreover the brasen altar, that Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, had made, he put before the tabernacle of the Lord: and Solomon and the congregation sought unto it.	But the bronze altar made by Bezalel son of Uri, the son of Hur, was in Gibeon before the tabernacle of the LORD. So Solomon and the assembly inquired of Him there.
2CH	1	6	여호와 앞 곧 회막 앞에 있는 놋단에 이르러 그 위에 일천 희생으로 번제를 드렸더라	And Solomon went up thither to the brasen altar before the Lord, which was at the tabernacle of the congregation, and offered a thousand burnt offerings upon it.	Solomon offered sacrifices there before the LORD on the bronze altar in the Tent of Meeting, where he offered a thousand burnt offerings.
2CH	1	7	이 밤에 하나님이 솔로몬에게 나타나사 이르시되 내가 네게 무엇을 줄꼬 너는 구하라	In that night did God appear unto Solomon, and said unto him, Ask what I shall give thee.	That night God appeared to Solomon and said, “Ask, and I will give it to you!”
2CH	1	8	솔로몬이 하나님께 여짜오되 주께서 전에 큰 은혜를 나의 아비 다윗에게 베푸시고 나로 대신하여 왕이 되게 하셨사오니	And Solomon said unto God, Thou hast shewed great mercy unto David my father, and hast made me to reign in his stead.	Solomon replied to God: “You have shown much loving devotion to my father David, and You have made me king in his place.
2CH	1	9	여호와 하나님이여 원컨대 주는 내 아비 다윗에게 하신 것을 이제 굳게 하옵소서 주께서 나로 땅의 티끌 같이 많은 백성의 왕을 삼으셨사오니	Now, O Lord God, let thy promise unto David my father be established: for thou hast made me king over a people like the dust of the earth in multitude.	Now, O LORD God, let Your promise to my father David be fulfilled. For You have made me king over a people as numerous as the dust of the earth.
2CH	1	10	주는 이제 내게 지혜와 지식을 주사 이 백성 앞에서 출입하게 하옵소서 이렇게 많은 주의 백성을 누가 능히 재판하리이까	Give me now wisdom and knowledge, that I may go out and come in before this people: for who can judge this thy people, that is so great?	Now grant me wisdom and knowledge, so that I may lead this people. For who is able to govern this great people of Yours?”
2CH	1	11	하나님이 솔로몬에게 이르시되 이런 마음이 네게 있어서 부나 재물이나 존영이나 원수의 생명 멸하기를 구하지 아니하며 장수도 구하지 아니하고 오직 내가 너로 치리하게 한 내 백성을 재판하기 위하여 지혜와 지식을 구하였으니	And God said to Solomon, Because this was in thine heart, and thou hast not asked riches, wealth, or honour, nor the life of thine enemies, neither yet hast asked long life; but hast asked wisdom and knowledge for thyself, that thou mayest judge my people, over whom I have made thee king:	God said to Solomon, “Since this was in your heart instead of requesting riches or wealth or glory for yourself or death for your enemies—and since you have not even requested long life but have asked for wisdom and knowledge to govern My people over whom I have made you king—
2CH	1	12	그러므로 내가 네게 지혜와 지식을 주고 부와 재물과 존영도 주리니 너의 전의 왕들이 이 같음이 없었거니와 너의 후에도 이 같음이 없으리라	Wisdom and knowledge is granted unto thee; and I will give thee riches, and wealth, and honour, such as none of the kings have had that have been before thee, neither shall there any after thee have the like.	therefore wisdom and knowledge have been granted to you. And I will also give you riches and wealth and honor unlike anything given to the kings before you or after you.”
2CH	1	13	이에 솔로몬이 기브온 산당 회막 앞에서부터 예루살렘으로 돌아와서 이스라엘을 치리하였더라	Then Solomon came from his journey to the high place that was at Gibeon to Jerusalem, from before the tabernacle of the congregation, and reigned over Israel.	So Solomon went to Jerusalem from the high place in Gibeon before the Tent of Meeting, and he reigned over Israel.
2CH	1	14	솔로몬이 병거와 마병을 모으매 병거가 일천 사백이요 마병이 일만 이천이라 병거성에도 두고 예루살렘 왕에게도 두었으며	And Solomon gathered chariots and horsemen: and he had a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, which he placed in the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem.	Solomon accumulated 1,400 chariots and 12,000 horses, which he stationed in the chariot cities and also with him in Jerusalem.
2CH	1	15	왕이 예루살렘에서 은금을 돌 같이 흔하게 하고 백향목을 평지의 뽕나무 같이 많게 하였더라	And the king made silver and gold at Jerusalem as plenteous as stones, and cedar trees made he as the sycomore trees that are in the vale for abundance.	The king made silver and gold as common in Jerusalem as stones, and cedar as abundant as sycamore in the foothills.
2CH	1	16	솔로몬의 말들은 애굽에서 내어왔으니 왕의 상고들이 떼로 정가하여 산 것이며	And Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt, and linen yarn: the king’s merchants received the linen yarn at a price.	Solomon’s horses were imported from Egypt and Kue; the royal merchants purchased them from Kue.
2CH	1	17	애굽에서 내어 올린 병거는 하나에 은 육백 세겔이요 말은 일백오십 세겔이라 이와 같이 헷 사람의 모든 왕과 아람 왕들을 위하여도 그 손으로 내어왔었더라	And they fetched up, and brought forth out of Egypt a chariot for six hundred shekels of silver, and an horse for an hundred and fifty: and so brought they out horses for all the kings of the Hittites, and for the kings of Syria, by their means.	A chariot could be imported from Egypt for six hundred shekels of silver, and a horse for a hundred and fifty. Likewise, they exported them to all the kings of the Hittites and to the kings of Aram.
2CH	2	1	솔로몬이 여호와의 이름을 위하여 전을 건축하고 자기 권영을 위하여 궁궐 건축하기를 결심하니라	And Solomon determined to build an house for the name of the Lord, and an house for his kingdom.	Now Solomon purposed to build a house for the Name of the LORD and a royal palace for himself.
2CH	2	2	솔로몬이 이에 담군 칠만과 산에 올라 작벌할 자 팔만과 일을 감독할 자 삼천육백을 뽑고	And Solomon told out threescore and ten thousand men to bear burdens, and fourscore thousand to hew in the mountain, and three thousand and six hundred to oversee them.	So he conscripted 70,000 porters, 80,000 stonecutters in the mountains, and 3,600 supervisors.
2CH	2	3	사자를 두로 왕 후람에게 보내어 이르되 당신이 전에 내 부친 다윗에게 백향목을 보내어 그 거할 궁궐을 건축하게 한 것 같이 내게도 그리하소서	And Solomon sent to Huram the king of Tyre, saying, As thou didst deal with David my father, and didst send him cedars to build him an house to dwell therein, even so deal with me.	Then Solomon sent word to Hiram king of Tyre: “Do for me as you did for my father David when you sent him cedars to build himself a house to live in.
2CH	2	4	이제 내가 나의 하나님 여호와의 이름을 위하여 전을 건축하여 구별하여 드리고 주 앞에서 향재료를 사르며 항상 떡을 진설하며 안식일과 초하루와 우리 하나님 여호와의 절기에 조석으로 번제를 드리려 하니 이는 이스라엘의 영원한 규례니이다	Behold, I build an house to the name of the Lord my God, to dedicate it to him, and to burn before him sweet incense, and for the continual shewbread, and for the burnt offerings morning and evening, on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the solemn feasts of the Lord our God. This is an ordinance for ever to Israel.	Behold, I am about to build a house for the Name of the LORD my God to dedicate to Him for burning fragrant incense before Him, for displaying the showbread continuously, and for making burnt offerings every morning and evening as well as on the Sabbaths, New Moons, and appointed feasts of the LORD our God. This is ordained for Israel forever.
2CH	2	5	내가 건축하고자 하는 전은 크니 우리 하나님은 모든 신보다 크심이라	And the house which I build is great: for great is our God above all gods.	The house that I am building will be great, for our God is greater than all gods.
2CH	2	6	누가 능히 하나님을 위하여 전을 건축하리요 하늘과 하늘들의 하늘이라도 주를 용납지 못하겠거든 내가 누구관대 어찌 능히 위하여 전을 건축하리요 그 앞에 분향하려 할 따름이니이다	But who is able to build him an house, seeing the heaven and heaven of heavens cannot contain him? who am I then, that I should build him an house, save only to burn sacrifice before him?	But who is able to build a house for Him, since the heavens, even the highest heavens, cannot contain Him? Who then am I, that I should build a house for Him, except as a place to burn sacrifices before Him?
2CH	2	7	이제 청컨대 당신은 금, 은, 동, 철로 제조하며 자색 홍색 청색실로 직조하며 또 아로새길 줄 아는 공교한 공장 하나를 내게 보내어 내 부친 다윗이 유다와 예루살렘에서 예비한 나의 공교한 공장과 함께 일하게 하고	Send me now therefore a man cunning to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass, and in iron, and in purple, and crimson, and blue, and that can skill to grave with the cunning men that are with me in Judah and in Jerusalem, whom David my father did provide.	Send me, therefore, a craftsman skilled in engraving to work with gold and silver, with bronze and iron, and with purple, crimson, and blue yarn. He will work with my craftsmen in Judah and Jerusalem, whom my father David provided.
2CH	2	8	또 레바논에서 백향목과 잣나무와 백단목을 내게로 보내소서 내가 알거니와 당신의 종은 레바논에서 벌목을 잘하나니 내 종이 당신의 종을 도울지라	Send me also cedar trees, fir trees, and algum trees, out of Lebanon: for I know that thy servants can skill to cut timber in Lebanon; and, behold, my servants shall be with thy servants,	Send me also cedar, cypress, and algum logs from Lebanon, for I know that your servants have skill to cut timber there. And indeed, my servants will work with yours
2CH	2	9	이와 같이 나를 위하여 재목을 많이 예비하게 하소서 내가 건축하려 하는 전은 크고 화려할 것이니이다	Even to prepare me timber in abundance: for the house which I am about to build shall be wonderful great.	to prepare for me timber in abundance, because the temple I am building will be great and wonderful.
2CH	2	10	내가 당신의 벌목하는 종에게 용정한 밀 이만 석과 보리 이만 석과 포도주 이만 말과 기름 이만 말을 주리이다 하였더라	And, behold, I will give to thy servants, the hewers that cut timber, twenty thousand measures of beaten wheat, and twenty thousand measures of barley, and twenty thousand baths of wine, and twenty thousand baths of oil.	I will pay your servants, the woodcutters, 20,000 cors of ground wheat, 20,000 cors of barley, 20,000 baths of wine, and 20,000 baths of olive oil.”
2CH	2	11	두로 왕 후람이 솔로몬에게 답장하여 가로되 여호와께서 그 백성을 사랑하시므로 당신을 세워 그 왕을 삼으셨도다	Then Huram the king of Tyre answered in writing, which he sent to Solomon, Because the Lord hath loved his people, he hath made thee king over them.	Then Hiram king of Tyre wrote a letter in reply to Solomon: “Because the LORD loves His people, He has set you over them as king.”
2CH	2	12	또 가로되 천지를 지으신 이스라엘 하나님 여호와는 송축을 받으실지로다 다윗 왕에게 지혜로운 아들을 주시고 명철과 총명을 품부하시사 능히 여호와를 위하여 전을 건축하고 자기 권영을 위하여 궁궐을 건축하게 하시도다	Huram said moreover, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, that made heaven and earth, who hath given to David the king a wise son, endued with prudence and understanding, that might build an house for the Lord, and an house for his kingdom.	And Hiram added: “Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, who made the heavens and the earth! He has given King David a wise son with insight and understanding, who will build a temple for the LORD and a royal palace for himself.
2CH	2	13	내가 이제 공교하고 총명한 사람을 보내오니 전에 내 부친 후람에게 속하였던 자라	And now I have sent a cunning man, endued with understanding, of Huram my father’s,	So now I am sending you Huram-abi, a skillful man endowed with creativity.
2CH	2	14	이 사람은 단의 여자 중 한 여인의 아들이요 그 아비는 두로 사람이라 능히 금, 은, 동, 철과 돌과 나무와 자색 청색 홍색실과 가는 베로 일을 잘하며 또 모든 아로새기는 일에 익숙하고 모든 기묘한 식양에 능한 자니 당신의 공교한 공장과 당신의 부친 내 주 다윗의 공교한 공장과 함께 일하게 하소서	The son of a woman of the daughters of Dan, and his father was a man of Tyre, skilful to work in gold, and in silver, in brass, in iron, in stone, and in timber, in purple, in blue, and in fine linen, and in crimson; also to grave any manner of graving, and to find out every device which shall be put to him, with thy cunning men, and with the cunning men of my lord David thy father.	He is the son of a woman from the daughters of Dan, and his father is a man of Tyre. He is skilled in work with gold and silver, bronze and iron, stone and wood, purple, blue, and crimson yarn, and fine linen. He is experienced in every kind of engraving and can execute any design that is given him. He will work with your craftsmen and with those of my lord, your father David.
2CH	2	15	내 주의 말씀하신 밀과 보리와 기름과 포도주는 주의 종들에게 보내소서	Now therefore the wheat, and the barley, the oil, and the wine, which my lord hath spoken of, let him send unto his servants:	Now let my lord send to his servants the wheat, barley, olive oil, and wine he promised.
2CH	2	16	우리가 레바논에서 당신의 쓰실만큼 벌목하여 떼를 엮어 바다에 띄워 욥바로 보내리니 당신은 수운하여 예루살렘으로 올리소서 하였더라	And we will cut wood out of Lebanon, as much as thou shalt need: and we will bring it to thee in floats by sea to Joppa; and thou shalt carry it up to Jerusalem.	We will cut logs from Lebanon, as many as you need, and we will float them to you as rafts by sea down to Joppa. Then you can take them up to Jerusalem.”
2CH	2	17	전에 솔로몬의 부친 다윗이 이스라엘 땅에 거한 이방 사람을 조사하였더니 이제 솔로몬이 다시 조사하매 모두 십오만 삼천육백 인이라	And Solomon numbered all the strangers that were in the land of Israel, after the numbering wherewith David his father had numbered them; and they were found an hundred and fifty thousand and three thousand and six hundred.	Solomon numbered all the foreign men in the land of Israel following the census his father David had conducted, and there were found to be 153,600 in all.
2CH	2	18	그 중에 칠만 인은 담꾼이 되게 하였고 팔만 인은 산에서 벌목하게 하였고 삼천육백 인은 감독을 삼아 백성들에게 일을 시키게 하였더라	And he set threescore and ten thousand of them to be bearers of burdens, and fourscore thousand to be hewers in the mountain, and three thousand and six hundred overseers to set the people a work.	Solomon made 70,000 of them porters, 80,000 stonecutters in the mountains, and 3,600 supervisors.
2CH	3	1	솔로몬이 예루살렘 모리아 산에 여호와의 전 건축하기를 시작하니 그곳은 전에 여호와께서 그 아비 다윗에게 나타나신 곳이요 여부스 사람 오르난의 타작마당에 다윗이 정한 곳이라	Then Solomon began to build the house of the Lord at Jerusalem in mount Moriah, where the Lord appeared unto David his father, in the place that David had prepared in the threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite.	Then Solomon began to build the house of the LORD in Jerusalem on Mount Moriah, where the LORD had appeared to his father David. This was the place that David had prepared on the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite.
2CH	3	2	솔로몬이 왕위에 나아간지 사년 이월 초이일에 건축하기를 시작하였더라	And he began to build in the second day of the second month, in the fourth year of his reign.	Solomon began construction on the second day of the second month in the fourth year of his reign.
2CH	3	3	솔로몬이 하나님의 전을 위하여 놓은 지대는 이러하니 옛적 재는 법대로 장이 육십 규빗이요 광이 이십 규빗이며	Now these are the things wherein Solomon was instructed for the building of the house of God. The length by cubits after the first measure was threescore cubits, and the breadth twenty cubits.	The foundation that Solomon laid for the house of God was sixty cubits long and twenty cubits wide, according to the old standard.
2CH	3	4	그 전 앞 낭실의 장이 전의 광과 같이 이십 규빗이요 고가 일백이십 규빗이니 안에는 정금으로 입혔으며	And the porch that was in the front of the house, the length of it was according to the breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and the height was an hundred and twenty: and he overlaid it within with pure gold.	The portico at the front, extending across the width of the temple, was twenty cubits long and twenty cubits high. He overlaid the inside with pure gold.
2CH	3	5	그 대전 천장은 잣나무로 만들고 또 정금으로 입히고 그 위에 종려나무와 사슬 형상을 새겼고	And the greater house he cieled with fir tree, which he overlaid with fine gold, and set thereon palm trees and chains.	He paneled the main room with cypress, which he overlaid with fine gold and decorated with palm trees and chains.
2CH	3	6	또 보석으로 전을 꾸며 화려하게 하였으니 그 금은 바르와임 금이며	And he garnished the house with precious stones for beauty: and the gold was gold of Parvaim.	He adorned the temple with precious stones for beauty, and its gold was from Parvaim.
2CH	3	7	또 금으로 전과 그 들보와 문지방과 벽과 문짝에 입히고 벽에 그룹들을 아로새겼더라	He overlaid also the house, the beams, the posts, and the walls thereof, and the doors thereof, with gold; and graved cherubims on the walls.	He overlaid its beams, thresholds, walls, and doors with gold, and he carved cherubim on the walls.
2CH	3	8	또 지성소를 지었으니 전 넓이대로 장이 이십 규빗이요 광도 이십 규빗이라 정금 육백 달란트로 입혔으니	And he made the most holy house, the length whereof was according to the breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof twenty cubits: and he overlaid it with fine gold, amounting to six hundred talents.	Then he made the Most Holy Place; its length corresponded to the width of the temple—twenty cubits long and twenty cubits wide. And he overlaid the inside with six hundred talents of fine gold.
2CH	3	9	못 중수가 오십 금 세겔이요 다락들도 금으로 입혔더라	And the weight of the nails was fifty shekels of gold. And he overlaid the upper chambers with gold.	The weight of the nails was fifty shekels of gold. He also overlaid the upper area with gold.
2CH	3	10	지성소 안에 두 그룹의 형상을 새겨 만들어 금으로 입혔으니	And in the most holy house he made two cherubims of image work, and overlaid them with gold.	In the Most Holy Place he made two cherubim of sculptured work, and he overlaid them with gold.
2CH	3	11	두 그룹의 날개 길이가 모두 이십 규빗이라 좌편 그룹의 한 날개는 다섯 규빗이니 전 벽에 닿았고 그 한 날개도 다섯 규빗이니 우편 그룹의 날개에 닿았으며	And the wings of the cherubims were twenty cubits long: one wing of the one cherub was five cubits, reaching to the wall of the house: and the other wing was likewise five cubits, reaching to the wing of the other cherub.	The total wingspan of the cherubim was twenty cubits. One wing of the first cherub was five cubits long and touched the wall of the temple, and its other wing was five cubits long and touched the wing of the other cherub.
2CH	3	12	우편 그룹의 한 날개도 다섯 규빗이니 전 벽에 닿았고 그 한 날개도 다섯 규빗이니 좌편 그룹의 날개에 닿았으며	And one wing of the other cherub was five cubits, reaching to the wall of the house: and the other wing was five cubits also, joining to the wing of the other cherub.	The wing of the second cherub also measured five cubits and touched the wall of the temple, while its other wing measured five cubits and touched the wing of the first cherub.
2CH	3	13	이 두 그룹의 편 날개가 모두 이십 규빗이라 그 얼굴을 외소로 향하고 서 있으며	The wings of these cherubims spread themselves forth twenty cubits: and they stood on their feet, and their faces were inward.	So the total wingspan of these cherubim was twenty cubits. They stood on their feet, facing the main room.
2CH	3	14	청색 자색 홍색실과 고운 베로 문장을 짓고 그 위에 그룹의 형상을 수놓았더라	And he made the vail of blue, and purple, and crimson, and fine linen, and wrought cherubims thereon.	He made the veil of blue, purple, and crimson yarn and fine linen, with cherubim woven into it.
2CH	3	15	전 앞에 기둥 둘을 만들었으니 고가 삼십오 규빗이요 각 기둥 꼭대기의 머리가 다섯 규빗이라	Also he made before the house two pillars of thirty and five cubits high, and the chapiter that was on the top of each of them was five cubits.	In front of the temple he made two pillars, which together were thirty-five cubits high, each with a capital on top measuring five cubits.
2CH	3	16	성소 같이 사슬을 만들어 그 기둥 머리에 두르고 석류 일백 개를 만들어 사슬에 달았으며	And he made chains, as in the oracle, and put them on the heads of the pillars; and made an hundred pomegranates, and put them on the chains.	He made interwoven chains and put them on top of the pillars. He made a hundred pomegranates and fastened them into the chainwork.
2CH	3	17	그 두 기둥을 외소 앞에 세웠으니 좌편에 하나요 우편에 하나라 우편 것은 야긴이라 칭하고 좌편 것은 보아스라 칭하였더라	And he reared up the pillars before the temple, one on the right hand, and the other on the left; and called the name of that on the right hand Jachin, and the name of that on the left Boaz.	Then he set up the pillars in front of the temple, one on the south and one on the north. The pillar on the south he named Jachin, and the pillar on the north he named Boaz.
2CH	4	1	솔로몬이 또 놋으로 단을 만들었으니 장이 이십 규빗이요 광이 이십 규빗이요 고가 십 규빗이며	Moreover he made an altar of brass, twenty cubits the length thereof, and twenty cubits the breadth thereof, and ten cubits the height thereof.	He made a bronze altar twenty cubits long, twenty cubits wide, and ten cubits high.
2CH	4	2	또 바다를 부어 만들었으니 직경이 십 규빗이요 그 모양이 둥글며 그 고는 다섯 규빗이요 주위는 삼십 규빗 줄을 두를 만하며	Also he made a molten sea of ten cubits from brim to brim, round in compass, and five cubits the height thereof; and a line of thirty cubits did compass it round about.	He also made the Sea of cast metal. It was circular in shape, measuring ten cubits from rim to rim, five cubits in height, and thirty cubits in circumference.
2CH	4	3	그 가장자리 아래에는 돌아가며 소 형상이 있는데 매 규빗에 소가 열씩 있어서 바다 주위에 둘렸으니 그 소는 바다를 부어 만들 때에 두 줄로 부어 만들었으며	And under it was the similitude of oxen, which did compass it round about: ten in a cubit, compassing the sea round about. Two rows of oxen were cast, when it was cast.	Below the rim, figures of oxen encircled it, ten per cubit all the way around the Sea, cast in two rows as a part of the Sea.
2CH	4	4	그 바다를 열두 소가 받쳤으니 셋은 북을 향하였고 셋은 서를 향하였고 셋은 남을 향하였고 셋은 동을 향하였으며 바다를 그 위에 놓았고 소의 뒤는 다 안으로 두었으며	It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three looking toward the south, and three looking toward the east: and the sea was set above upon them, and all their hinder parts were inward.	The Sea stood on twelve oxen, three facing north, three facing west, three facing south, and three facing east. The Sea rested on them, with all their hindquarters toward the center.
2CH	4	5	바다의 두께는 한 손 넓이만 하고 그 가는 백합화의 식양으로 잔 가와 같이 만들었으니 그 바다에는 삼천 밧을 담겠으며	And the thickness of it was an handbreadth, and the brim of it like the work of the brim of a cup, with flowers of lilies; and it received and held three thousand baths.	It was a handbreadth thick, and its rim was fashioned like the brim of a cup, like a lily blossom. It could hold three thousand baths.
2CH	4	6	또 물두멍 열을 만들어 다섯은 우편에 두고 다섯은 좌편에 두어 씻게 하였으며 그 바다는 제사장들의 씻기를 위한 것이더라	He made also ten lavers, and put five on the right hand, and five on the left, to wash in them: such things as they offered for the burnt offering they washed in them; but the sea was for the priests to wash in.	He also made ten basins for washing and placed five on the south side and five on the north. The parts of the burnt offering were rinsed in them, but the priests used the Sea for washing.
2CH	4	7	또 정식을 따라 금으로 등대 열을 만들어 외소 안에 두었으니 좌편에 다섯이요 우편에 다섯이며	And he made ten candlesticks of gold according to their form, and set them in the temple, five on the right hand, and five on the left.	He made ten gold lampstands according to their specifications and placed them in the temple, five on the south side and five on the north.
2CH	4	8	또 상 열을 만들어 외소 안에 두었으니 좌편에 다섯이요 우편에 다섯이며 또 금으로 대접 일백을 만들었고	He made also ten tables, and placed them in the temple, five on the right side, and five on the left. And he made an hundred basons of gold.	Additionally, he made ten tables and placed them in the temple, five on the south side and five on the north. He also made a hundred gold bowls.
2CH	4	9	또 제사장의 뜰과 큰 뜰과 뜰문을 만들고 놋으로 그 문짝에 입혔고	Furthermore he made the court of the priests, and the great court, and doors for the court, and overlaid the doors of them with brass.	He made the courtyard of the priests and the large court with its doors, and he overlaid the doors with bronze.
2CH	4	10	그 바다는 전 우편 동남방에 두었더라	And he set the sea on the right side of the east end, over against the south.	He put the Sea on the south side, at the southeast corner.
2CH	4	11	후람이 또 솥과 부삽과 대접을 만들었더라 이와 같이 후람이 솔로몬 왕을 위하여 하나님의 전에서 하는 일을 마쳤으니	And Huram made the pots, and the shovels, and the basons. And Huram finished the work that he was to make for king Solomon for the house of God;	Additionally, Huram made the pots, shovels, and sprinkling bowls. So Huram finished the work that he had undertaken for King Solomon in the house of God:
2CH	4	12	곧 기둥 둘과 그 기둥 꼭대기의 공 같은 머리 둘과 또 기둥 꼭대기의 공 같은 기둥 머리를 가리우는 그물 둘과	To wit, the two pillars, and the pommels, and the chapiters which were on the top of the two pillars, and the two wreaths to cover the two pommels of the chapiters which were on the top of the pillars;	the two pillars; the two bowl-shaped capitals atop the pillars; the two sets of network covering both bowls of the capitals atop the pillars;
2CH	4	13	또 그 그물들을 위하여 만든바 매 그물에 두 줄씩으로 기둥 위의 공 같은 두 머리를 가리우게 한 사백 석류와	And four hundred pomegranates on the two wreaths; two rows of pomegranates on each wreath, to cover the two pommels of the chapiters which were upon the pillars.	the four hundred pomegranates for the two sets of network (two rows of pomegranates for each network covering both the bowl-shaped capitals atop the pillars);
2CH	4	14	또 받침과 받침 위의 물두멍과	He made also bases, and lavers made he upon the bases;	the stands; the basins on the stands;
2CH	4	15	한 바다와 그 바다 아래 열두 소와	One sea, and twelve oxen under it.	the Sea; the twelve oxen underneath the Sea;
2CH	4	16	솥과 부삽과 고기 갈고리와 여호와의 전의 모든 그릇들이라 후람의 아비가 솔로몬 왕을 위하여 빛난 놋으로 만들 때에	The pots also, and the shovels, and the fleshhooks, and all their instruments, did Huram his father make to king Solomon for the house of the Lord of bright brass.	and the pots, shovels, meat forks, and all the other articles. All these objects that Huram-abi made for King Solomon for the house of the LORD were of polished bronze.
2CH	4	17	왕이 요단 평지에서 숙곳과 스레다 사이의 차진 흙에 그것들을 부어 내었더라	In the plain of Jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zeredathah.	The king had them cast in clay molds in the plain of the Jordan between Succoth and Zeredah.
2CH	4	18	이와 같이 솔로몬이 이 모든 기구를 심히 많이 만들었으므로 그 놋 중수를 능히 측량할 수 없었더라	Thus Solomon made all these vessels in great abundance: for the weight of the brass could not be found out.	Solomon made all these articles in such great abundance that the weight of the bronze could not be determined.
2CH	4	19	솔로몬이 또 하나님의 전의 모든 기구를 만들었으니 곧 금단과 진설병 상들과	And Solomon made all the vessels that were for the house of God, the golden altar also, and the tables whereon the shewbread was set;	Solomon also made all the furnishings for the house of God: the golden altar; the tables on which was placed the Bread of the Presence;
2CH	4	20	내소 앞에서 규례대로 불을 켤 정금 등대와 그 등잔이며	Moreover the candlesticks with their lamps, that they should burn after the manner before the oracle, of pure gold;	the lampstands of pure gold and their lamps, to burn in front of the inner sanctuary as prescribed;
2CH	4	21	또 순정한 금으로 만든 꽃과 등잔과 화젓가락이며	And the flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs, made he of gold, and that perfect gold;	the flowers, lamps, and tongs of gold—of purest gold;
2CH	4	22	또 정금으로 만든 불집게와 주발과 숟가락과 불 옮기는 그릇이며 또 전 문 곧 지성소의 문과 외소의 문을 금으로 입혔더라	And the snuffers, and the basons, and the spoons, and the censers, of pure gold: and the entry of the house, the inner doors thereof for the most holy place, and the doors of the house of the temple, were of gold.	the wick trimmers, sprinkling bowls, ladles, and censers of purest gold; and the gold doors of the temple: the inner doors to the Most Holy Place as well as the doors of the main hall.
2CH	5	1	솔로몬이 여호와의 전을 위하여 만드는 모든 것을 마친지라 이에 그 부친 다윗이 드린 은과 금과 모든 기구를 가져다가 하나님의 전 곳간에 두었더라	Thus all the work that Solomon made for the house of the Lord was finished: and Solomon brought in all the things that David his father had dedicated; and the silver, and the gold, and all the instruments, put he among the treasures of the house of God.	So all the work that Solomon had performed for the house of the LORD was completed. Then Solomon brought in the items his father David had dedicated—the silver, the gold, and all the furnishings—and he placed them in the treasuries of the house of God.
2CH	5	2	이에 솔로몬이 여호와의 언약궤를 다윗 성 곧 시온에서 메어 올리고자 하여 이스라엘 장로들과 모든 지파의 두목 곧 이스라엘 자손의 족장들을 다 예루살렘으로 소집하니	Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, the chief of the fathers of the children of Israel, unto Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of the Lord out of the city of David, which is Zion.	At that time Solomon assembled in Jerusalem the elders of Israel—all the tribal heads and family leaders of the Israelites—to bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD from Zion, the City of David.
2CH	5	3	칠월 절기에 이스라엘 모든 사람이 다 왕에게로 모이고	Wherefore all the men of Israel assembled themselves unto the king in the feast which was in the seventh month.	So all the men of Israel came together to the king at the feast in the seventh month.
2CH	5	4	이스라엘 장로들이 다 이르매 레위 사람이 궤를 메니라	And all the elders of Israel came; and the Levites took up the ark.	When all the elders of Israel had arrived, the Levites took up the ark,
2CH	5	5	궤와 회막과 장막 안에 모든 거룩한 기구를 메고 올라가되 제사장과 레위 사람이 그것들을 메고 올라가매	And they brought up the ark, and the tabernacle of the congregation, and all the holy vessels that were in the tabernacle, these did the priests and the Levites bring up.	and they brought up the ark and the Tent of Meeting with all its sacred furnishings. The Levitical priests carried them up.
2CH	5	6	솔로몬 왕과 그 앞에 모인 이스라엘 회중이 궤 앞에 있어 양과 소로 제사를 드렸으니 그 수가 많아 기록할 수도 없고 셀 수도 없었더라	Also king Solomon, and all the congregation of Israel that were assembled unto him before the ark, sacrificed sheep and oxen, which could not be told nor numbered for multitude.	There, before the ark, King Solomon and the whole congregation of Israel who had assembled with him sacrificed so many sheep and oxen that they could not be counted or numbered.
2CH	5	7	제사장들이 여호와의 언약궤를 그 처소로 메어 들였으니 곧 내전 지성소 그룹들의 날개 아래라	And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the Lord unto his place, to the oracle of the house, into the most holy place, even under the wings of the cherubims:	Then the priests brought the ark of the covenant of the LORD to its place in the inner sanctuary of the temple, the Most Holy Place, beneath the wings of the cherubim.
2CH	5	8	그룹들이 궤 처소 위에서 날개를 펴서 궤와 그 채를 덮었는데	For the cherubims spread forth their wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubims covered the ark and the staves thereof above.	For the cherubim spread their wings over the place of the ark and overshadowed the ark and its poles.
2CH	5	9	그 채가 길어서 궤에서 나오므로 그 끝이 내전 앞에서 보이나 밖에서는 보이지 아니하며 그 궤가 오늘까지 그곳에 있으며	And they drew out the staves of the ark, that the ends of the staves were seen from the ark before the oracle; but they were not seen without. And there it is unto this day.	The poles of the ark extended far enough that their ends were visible from in front of the inner sanctuary, but not from outside the Holy Place; and they are there to this day.
2CH	5	10	궤 안에는 두 돌판 외에 아무 것도 없으니 이것은 이스라엘 자손이 애굽에서 나온 후 여호와께서 저희와 언약을 세우실 때에 모세가 호렙에서 그 안에 넣은 것이더라	There was nothing in the ark save the two tables which Moses put therein at Horeb, when the Lord made a covenant with the children of Israel, when they came out of Egypt.	There was nothing in the ark except the two tablets that Moses had placed in it at Horeb, where the LORD had made a covenant with the Israelites after they had come out of Egypt.
2CH	5	11	이 때에는 제사장들이 그 반차대로 하지 아니하고 스스로 정결케하고 성소에 있다가 나오매	And it came to pass, when the priests were come out of the holy place: (for all the priests that were present were sanctified, and did not then wait by course:	Now all the priests who were present had consecrated themselves regardless of their divisions. And when the priests came out of the Holy Place,
2CH	5	12	노래하는 레위 사람 아삽과 헤만과 여두둔과 그 아들들과 형제들이 다 세마포를 입고 단 동편에 서서 제금과 비파와 수금을 잡고 또 나팔 부는 제사장 일백이십 인이 함께 서 있다가	Also the Levites which were the singers, all of them of Asaph, of Heman, of Jeduthun, with their sons and their brethren, being arrayed in white linen, having cymbals and psalteries and harps, stood at the east end of the altar, and with them an hundred and twenty priests sounding with trumpets:)	all the Levitical singers—Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun, and their sons and relatives—stood on the east side of the altar, dressed in fine linen and playing cymbals, harps, and lyres, accompanied by 120 priests sounding trumpets.
2CH	5	13	나팔 부는 자와 노래하는 자가 일제히 소리를 발하여 여호와를 찬송하며 감사하는데 나팔 불고 제금치고 모든 악기를 울리며 소리를 높여 여호와를 찬송하여 가로되 선하시도다 그 자비하심이 영원히 있도다 하매 그 때에 여호와의 전에 구름이 가득한지라	It came even to pass, as the trumpeters and singers were as one, to make one sound to be heard in praising and thanking the Lord; and when they lifted up their voice with the trumpets and cymbals and instruments of musick, and praised the Lord, saying, For he is good; for his mercy endureth for ever: that then the house was filled with a cloud, even the house of the Lord;	The trumpeters and singers joined together to praise and thank the LORD with one voice. They lifted up their voices, accompanied by trumpets, cymbals, and musical instruments, in praise to the LORD: “For He is good; His loving devotion endures forever.” And the temple, the house of the LORD, was filled with a cloud
2CH	5	14	제사장이 그 구름으로 인하여 능히 서서 섬기지 못하였으니 이는 여호와의 영광이 하나님의 전에 가득함이었더라	So that the priests could not stand to minister by reason of the cloud: for the glory of the Lord had filled the house of God.	so that the priests could not stand there to minister because of the cloud; for the glory of the LORD filled the house of God.
2CH	6	1	그 때에 솔로몬이 가로되 여호와께서 캄캄한데 계시겠다 말씀하셨사오나	Then said Solomon, The Lord hath said that he would dwell in the thick darkness.	Then Solomon declared: “The LORD has said that He would dwell in the thick cloud;
2CH	6	2	내가 주를 위하여 거할실 전을 건축하였사오니 주께서 영원히 거하실 처소로소이다 하고	But I have built an house of habitation for thee, and a place for thy dwelling for ever.	and I have built You an exalted house, a place for You to dwell forever.”
2CH	6	3	얼굴을 돌이켜 이스라엘의 온 회중을 위하여 축복하니 때에 이스라엘의 온 회중이 서 있더라	And the king turned his face, and blessed the whole congregation of Israel: and all the congregation of Israel stood.	And as the whole assembly of Israel stood there, the king turned around and blessed them all
2CH	6	4	왕이 가로되 이스라엘 하나님 여호와를 송축할지로다 여호와께서 그 입으로 나의 부친 다윗에게 말씀하신 것을 이제 그 손으로 이루셨도다 이르시기를	And he said, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who hath with his hands fulfilled that which he spake with his mouth to my father David, saying,	and said: “Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, who has fulfilled with His own hand what He spoke with His mouth to my father David, saying,
2CH	6	5	내가 내 백성을 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 낸 날부터 내 이름을 둘 만한 집을 건축하기 위하여 이스라엘 모든 지파 가운데서 아무 성읍도 택하지 아니하였으며 내 백성 이스라엘의 주권자를 삼기 위하여 아무 사람도 택하지 아니하였더니	Since the day that I brought forth my people out of the land of Egypt I chose no city among all the tribes of Israel to build an house in, that my name might be there; neither chose I any man to be a ruler over my people Israel:	‘Since the day I brought My people out of the land of Egypt, I have not chosen a city from any tribe of Israel in which to build a house so that My Name would be there, nor have I chosen anyone to be ruler over My people Israel.
2CH	6	6	예루살렘을 택하여 내 이름을 거기 두고 또 다윗을 택하여 내 백성 이스라엘을 다스리게 하였노라 하신지라	But I have chosen Jerusalem, that my name might be there; and have chosen David to be over my people Israel.	But now I have chosen Jerusalem for My Name to be there, and I have chosen David to be over My people Israel.’
2CH	6	7	내 부친 다윗이 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 이름을 위하여 전을 건축할 마음이 있었더니	Now it was in the heart of David my father to build an house for the name of the Lord God of Israel.	Now it was in the heart of my father David to build a house for the Name of the LORD, the God of Israel.
2CH	6	8	여호와께서 내 부친 다윗에게 이르시되 네가 내 이름을 위하여 전을 건축할 마음이 있으니 이 마음이 네게 있는 것이 좋도다	But the Lord said to David my father, Forasmuch as it was in thine heart to build an house for my name, thou didst well in that it was in thine heart:	But the LORD said to my father David, ‘Since it was in your heart to build a house for My Name, you have done well to have this in your heart.
2CH	6	9	그러나 너는 그 전을 건축하지 못할 것이요 네 몸에서 낳을 네 아들 그가 내 이름을 위하여 전을 건축하리라 하시더니	Notwithstanding thou shalt not build the house; but thy son which shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the house for my name.	Nevertheless, you are not the one to build it; but your son, your own offspring, will build the house for My Name.’
2CH	6	10	이제 여호와께서 말씀하신 대로 이루시도다 내가 여호와의 허하신 대로 내 부친 다윗을 대신하여 일어나서 이스라엘 위에 앉고 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 이름을 위하여 전을 건축하고	The Lord therefore hath performed his word that he hath spoken: for I am risen up in the room of David my father, and am set on the throne of Israel, as the Lord promised, and have built the house for the name of the Lord God of Israel.	Now the LORD has fulfilled the word that He spoke. I have succeeded my father David, and I sit on the throne of Israel, as the LORD promised. I have built the house for the Name of the LORD, the God of Israel.
2CH	6	11	내가 또 그곳에 여호와께서 이스라엘 자손으로 더불어 세우신 언약 넣은 궤를 두었노라	And in it have I put the ark, wherein is the covenant of the Lord, that he made with the children of Israel.	And there I have provided a place for the ark, which contains the covenant of the LORD that He made with the children of Israel.”
2CH	6	12	솔로몬이 여호와의 단 앞에서 이스라엘의 회중을 마주 서서 그 손을 펴니라	And he stood before the altar of the Lord in the presence of all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands:	Then Solomon stood before the altar of the LORD in front of the whole assembly of Israel and spread out his hands.
2CH	6	13	솔로몬이 이왕에 놋으로 대를 만들었으니 장이 다섯 규빗이요 광이 다섯 규빗이요 고가 세 규빗이라 뜰 가운데 두었더니 저가 그 위에 서서 이스라엘의 회중 앞에서 무릎을 꿇고 하늘을 향하여 손을 펴고	For Solomon had made a brasen scaffold, of five cubits long, and five cubits broad, and three cubits high, and had set it in the midst of the court: and upon it he stood, and kneeled down upon his knees before all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands toward heaven,	Now Solomon had made a bronze platform five cubits long, five cubits wide, and three cubits high, and had placed it in the middle of the courtyard. He stood on it, knelt down before the whole assembly of Israel, spread out his hands toward heaven,
2CH	6	14	가로되 이스라엘 하나님 여호와여 천지에 주와 같은 신이 없나이다 주께서는 온 마음으로 주의 앞에서 행하는 주의 종들에게 언약을 지키시고 은혜를 베푸시나이다	And said, O Lord God of Israel, there is no God like thee in the heaven, nor in the earth; which keepest covenant, and shewest mercy unto thy servants, that walk before thee with all their hearts:	and said: “O LORD, God of Israel, there is no God like You in heaven or on earth, keeping Your covenant of loving devotion with Your servants who walk before You with all their hearts.
2CH	6	15	주께서 주의 종 내 아비 다윗에게 허하신 말씀을 지키시되 주의 입으로 말씀하신 것을 손으로 이루심이 오늘날과 같으니이다	Thou which hast kept with thy servant David my father that which thou hast promised him; and spakest with thy mouth, and hast fulfilled it with thine hand, as it is this day.	You have kept Your promise to Your servant, my father David. What You spoke with Your mouth You have fulfilled with Your hand this day.
2CH	6	16	이스라엘 하나님 여호와여 주께서 주의 종 내 아비 다윗에게 말씀하시기를 네 자손이 자기 길을 삼가서 네가 내 앞에서 행한 것 같이 내 율법대로 행하기만 하면 네게로 좇아 나서 이스라엘 위에 앉을 사람이 내 앞에서 끊어지지 아니하리라 하셨사오니 이제 다윗을 위하여 그 허하신 말씀을 지키시옵소서	Now therefore, O Lord God of Israel, keep with thy servant David my father that which thou hast promised him, saying, There shall not fail thee a man in my sight to sit upon the throne of Israel; yet so that thy children take heed to their way to walk in my law, as thou hast walked before me.	Therefore now, O LORD, God of Israel, keep for Your servant, my father David, what You promised when You said: ‘You will never fail to have a man to sit before Me on the throne of Israel, if only your descendants guard their way to walk in My law as you have walked before Me.’
2CH	6	17	그런즉 이스라엘 하나님 여호와여 원컨대 주는 주의 종 다윗에게 하신 말씀이 확실하게 하옵소서	Now then, O Lord God of Israel, let thy word be verified, which thou hast spoken unto thy servant David.	And now, O LORD, God of Israel, please confirm what You promised to Your servant David.
2CH	6	18	하나님이 참으로 사람과 함께 땅에 거하시리이까 하늘과 하늘들의 하늘이라도 주를 용납지 못하겠거든 하물며 내가 건축한 이 전이오리이까	But will God in very deed dwell with men on the earth? behold, heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house which I have built!	But will God indeed dwell with man upon the earth? Even heaven, the highest heaven, cannot contain You, much less this temple I have built.
2CH	6	19	그러나 나의 하나님 여호와여 종의 기도와 간구를 돌아보시며 종이 주의 앞에서 부르짖음과 비는 기도를 들으시옵소서	Have respect therefore to the prayer of thy servant, and to his supplication, O Lord my God, to hearken unto the cry and the prayer which thy servant prayeth before thee:	Yet regard the prayer and plea of Your servant, O LORD my God, so that You may hear the cry and the prayer that Your servant is praying before You.
2CH	6	20	주께서 전에 말씀하시기를 내 이름을 거기 두리라 하신 곳 이 전을 향하여 주의 눈이 주야로 보옵시며 종이 이곳을 향하여 비는 기도를 들으시옵소서	That thine eyes may be open upon this house day and night, upon the place whereof thou hast said that thou wouldest put thy name there; to hearken unto the prayer which thy servant prayeth toward this place.	May Your eyes be open toward this temple day and night, toward the place where You said You would put Your Name, so that You may hear the prayer that Your servant prays toward this place.
2CH	6	21	종과 주의 백성 이스라엘이 이곳을 향하여 기도할 때에 주는 그 간구함을 들으시되 주의 계신 곳 하늘에서 들으시고 들으시사 사하여 주옵소서	Hearken therefore unto the supplications of thy servant, and of thy people Israel, which they shall make toward this place: hear thou from thy dwelling place, even from heaven; and when thou hearest, forgive.	Hear the plea of Your servant and of Your people Israel when they pray toward this place. May You hear from heaven, Your dwelling place. May You hear and forgive.
2CH	6	22	만일 어떤 사람이 그 이웃에게 범죄하므로 맹세시킴을 받고 저가 와서 이 전에 있는 주의 단 앞에서 맹세하거든	If a man sin against his neighbour, and an oath be laid upon him to make him swear, and the oath come before thine altar in this house;	When a man sins against his neighbor and is required to take an oath, and he comes to take an oath before Your altar in this temple,
2CH	6	23	주는 하늘에서 들으시고 행하시되 주의 종들을 국문하사 악한 자의 죄를 정하여 그 행위대로 그 머리에 돌리시고 의로운 자를 의롭다 하사 그 의로운 대로 갚으시옵소서	Then hear thou from heaven, and do, and judge thy servants, by requiting the wicked, by recompensing his way upon his own head; and by justifying the righteous, by giving him according to his righteousness.	then may You hear from heaven and act. May You judge Your servants, condemning the wicked man by bringing down on his own head what he has done, and justifying the righteous man by rewarding him according to his righteousness.
2CH	6	24	만일 주의 백성 이스라엘이 주께 범죄하여 적국 앞에 패하게 되므로 주께로 돌아와서 주의 이름을 인정하고 이 전에서 주께 빌며 간구하거든	And if thy people Israel be put to the worse before the enemy, because they have sinned against thee; and shall return and confess thy name, and pray and make supplication before thee in this house;	When Your people Israel are defeated before an enemy because they have sinned against You, and they return to You and confess Your name, praying and pleading before You in this temple,
2CH	6	25	주는 하늘에서 들으시고 주의 백성 이스라엘의 죄를 사하시고 그와 그 열조에게 주신 땅으로 돌아오게 하옵소서	Then hear thou from the heavens, and forgive the sin of thy people Israel, and bring them again unto the land which thou gavest to them and to their fathers.	then may You hear from heaven and forgive the sin of Your people Israel. May You restore them to the land You gave to them and their fathers.
2CH	6	26	만일 저희가 주께 범죄함을 인하여 하늘이 닫히고 비가 없어서 주의 벌을 받을 때에 이곳을 향하여 빌며 주의 이름을 인정하고 그 죄에서 떠나거든	When the heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, because they have sinned against thee; yet if they pray toward this place, and confess thy name, and turn from their sin, when thou dost afflict them;	When the skies are shut and there is no rain because Your people have sinned against You, and they pray toward this place and confess Your name, and they turn from their sins because You have afflicted them,
2CH	6	27	주는 하늘에서 들으사 주의 종들과 주의 백성 이스라엘의 죄를 사하시고 그 마땅히 행할 선한 길을 가르쳐 주옵시며 주의 백성에게 기업으로 주신 주의 땅에 비를 내리시옵소서	Then hear thou from heaven, and forgive the sin of thy servants, and of thy people Israel, when thou hast taught them the good way, wherein they should walk; and send rain upon thy land, which thou hast given unto thy people for an inheritance.	then may You hear from heaven and forgive the sin of Your servants, Your people Israel, so that You may teach them the good way in which they should walk. May You send rain on the land that You gave Your people as an inheritance.
2CH	6	28	만일 이 땅에 기근이나 온역이 있거나 곡식이 시들거나 깜부기가 나거나 메뚜기나 황충이 나거나 적국이 와서 성읍을 에워 싸거나 무슨 재앙이나 무슨 질병이 있든지 무론하고	If there be dearth in the land, if there be pestilence, if there be blasting, or mildew, locusts, or caterpillers; if their enemies besiege them in the cities of their land; whatsoever sore or whatsoever sickness there be:	When famine or plague comes upon the land, or blight or mildew or locusts or grasshoppers, or when their enemies besiege them in their cities, whatever plague or sickness may come,
2CH	6	29	한 사람이나 혹 주의 온 백성 이스라엘이 다 각각 자기의 마음에 재앙과 고통을 깨닫고 이 전을 향하여 손을 펴고 무슨 기도나 무슨 간구를 하거든	Then what prayer or what supplication soever shall be made of any man, or of all thy people Israel, when every one shall know his own sore and his own grief, and shall spread forth his hands in this house:	then may whatever prayer or petition Your people Israel make—each knowing his own afflictions and spreading out his hands toward this temple—
2CH	6	30	주는 계신 곳 하늘에서 들으시며 사유하시되 각 사람의 마음을 아시오니 그 모든 행위대로 갚으시옵소서 주만 홀로 인생의 마음을 아심이니이다	Then hear thou from heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive, and render unto every man according unto all his ways, whose heart thou knowest; (for thou only knowest the hearts of the children of men:)	be heard by You from heaven, Your dwelling place. And may You forgive and repay each man according to all his ways, since You know his heart—for You alone know the hearts of men—
2CH	6	31	그리하시면 저희가 주께서 우리 열조에게 주신 땅에서 사는 동안에 항상 주를 경외하며 주의 길로 행하리이다	That they may fear thee, to walk in thy ways, so long as they live in the land which thou gavest unto our fathers.	so that they may fear You and walk in Your ways all the days they live in the land that You gave to our fathers.
2CH	6	32	주의 백성 이스라엘에 속하지 않은 이방인에게 대하여도 저희가 주의 큰 이름과 능한 손과 펴신 팔을 위하여 먼 지방에서 와서 이 전을 향하여 기도하거든	Moreover concerning the stranger, which is not of thy people Israel, but is come from a far country for thy great name’s sake, and thy mighty hand, and thy stretched out arm; if they come and pray in this house;	And as for the foreigner who is not of Your people Israel but has come from a distant land because of Your great name and Your mighty hand and outstretched arm—when he comes and prays toward this temple,
2CH	6	33	주는 계신 곳 하늘에서 들으시고 무릇 이방인이 주께 부르짖는 대로 이루사 땅의 만민으로 주의 이름을 알고 주의 백성 이스라엘처럼 경외하게 하옵시며 또 내가 건축한 이 전을 주의 이름으로 일컫는 줄을 알게 하옵소서	Then hear thou from the heavens, even from thy dwelling place, and do according to all that the stranger calleth to thee for; that all people of the earth may know thy name, and fear thee, as doth thy people Israel, and may know that this house which I have built is called by thy name.	then may You hear from heaven, Your dwelling place, and do according to all for which the foreigner calls to You. Then all the peoples of the earth will know Your name and fear You, as do Your people Israel, and they will know that this house I have built is called by Your Name.
2CH	6	34	주의 백성이 그 적국으로 더불어 싸우고자 하여 주의 보내신 길로 나갈 때에 저희가 주의 빼신 이 성과 내가 주의 이름을 위하여 건축한 전 있는 편을 향하여 여호와께 기도하거든	If thy people go out to war against their enemies by the way that thou shalt send them, and they pray unto thee toward this city which thou hast chosen, and the house which I have built for thy name;	When Your people go to war against their enemies, wherever You send them, and when they pray to You in the direction of the city You have chosen and the house I have built for Your Name,
2CH	6	35	주는 하늘에서 저희의 기도와 간구를 들으시고 그 일을 돌아 보옵소서	Then hear thou from the heavens their prayer and their supplication, and maintain their cause.	then may You hear from heaven their prayer and their plea, and may You uphold their cause.
2CH	6	36	범죄치 아니하는 사람이 없사오니 저희가 주께 범죄하므로 주께서 저희에게 진노하사 저희를 적국에게 붙이시매 적국이 저희를 사로잡아 땅의 원근을 물론하고 끌어간 후에	If they sin against thee, (for there is no man which sinneth not,) and thou be angry with them, and deliver them over before their enemies, and they carry them away captives unto a land far off or near;	When they sin against You—for there is no one who does not sin—and You become angry with them and deliver them to an enemy who takes them as captives to a land far or near,
2CH	6	37	저희가 사로잡혀 간 땅에서 스스로 깨닫고 그 사로잡은 자의 땅에서 돌이켜 주께 간구하기를 우리가 범죄하여 패역을 행하며 악을 지었나이다 하며	Yet if they bethink themselves in the land whither they are carried captive, and turn and pray unto thee in the land of their captivity, saying, We have sinned, we have done amiss, and have dealt wickedly;	and when they come to their senses in the land to which they were taken, and they repent and plead with You in the land of their captors, saying, ‘We have sinned and done wrong; we have acted wickedly,’
2CH	6	38	자기를 사로잡아 간 적국의 땅에서 온 마음과 온 뜻으로 주께 돌아와서 주께서 그 열조에게 주신 땅과 주의 빼신 성과 내가 주의 이름을 위하여 건축한 전 있는 편을 향하여 기도하거든	If they return to thee with all their heart and with all their soul in the land of their captivity, whither they have carried them captives, and pray toward their land, which thou gavest unto their fathers, and toward the city which thou hast chosen, and toward the house which I have built for thy name:	and when they return to You with all their heart and soul in the land of the enemies who took them captive, and when they pray in the direction of the land that You gave to their fathers, the city You have chosen, and the house I have built for Your Name,
2CH	6	39	주는 계신 곳 하늘에서 저희의 기도와 간구를 들으시고 저희의 일을 돌아 보옵시며 주께 득죄한 주의 백성을 용서하옵소서	Then hear thou from the heavens, even from thy dwelling place, their prayer and their supplications, and maintain their cause, and forgive thy people which have sinned against thee.	then may You hear from heaven, Your dwelling place, their prayer and petition, and may You uphold their cause. May You forgive Your people who sinned against You.
2CH	6	40	나의 하나님이여 이제 이곳에서 하는 기도에 눈을 드시고 귀를 기울이소서	Now, my God, let, I beseech thee, thine eyes be open, and let thine ears be attent unto the prayer that is made in this place.	Now, my God, may Your eyes be open and Your ears attentive to the prayer offered in this place.
2CH	6	41	여호와 하나님이여 일어나 들어가사 주의 능력의 궤와 함께 주의 평안한 처소에 계시옵소서 여호와 하나님이여 원컨대 주의 제사장으로 구원을 입게 하시고 또 주의 성도로 은혜를 기뻐하게 하옵소서	Now therefore arise, O Lord God, into thy resting place, thou, and the ark of thy strength: let thy priests, O Lord God, be clothed with salvation, and let thy saints rejoice in goodness.	Now therefore, arise, O LORD God, and enter Your resting place, You and the ark of Your might. May Your priests, O LORD God, be clothed with salvation, and may Your godly ones rejoice in goodness.
2CH	6	42	여호와 하나님이여 주의 기름 부음 받은 자에게서 얼굴을 돌이키지 마옵시고 주의 종 다윗에게 베푸신 은총을 기억하옵소서	O Lord God, turn not away the face of thine anointed: remember the mercies of David thy servant.	O LORD God, do not reject Your anointed one. Remember Your loving devotion to Your servant David.”
2CH	7	1	솔로몬이 기도를 마치매 불이 하늘에서부터 내려와서 그 번제물과 제물들을 사르고 여호와의 영광이 그 전에 가득하니	Now when Solomon had made an end of praying, the fire came down from heaven, and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices; and the glory of the Lord filled the house.	When Solomon had finished praying, fire came down from heaven and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices, and the glory of the LORD filled the temple.
2CH	7	2	여호와의 영광이 여호와의 전에 가득하므로 제사장이 그 전에 능히 들어가지 못하였고	And the priests could not enter into the house of the Lord, because the glory of the Lord had filled the Lord’s house.	The priests were unable to enter the house of the LORD, because the glory of the LORD had filled it.
2CH	7	3	이스라엘 모든 자손은 불이 내리는 것과 여호와의 영광이 전에 있는 것을 보고 박석 깐 땅에 엎드려 경배하며 여호와께 감사하여 가로되 선하시도다 그 인자하심이 영원하도다 하니라	And when all the children of Israel saw how the fire came down, and the glory of the Lord upon the house, they bowed themselves with their faces to the ground upon the pavement, and worshipped, and praised the Lord, saying, For he is good; for his mercy endureth for ever.	When all the Israelites saw the fire coming down and the glory of the LORD above the temple, they bowed down on the pavement with their faces to the ground, and they worshiped and gave thanks to the LORD: “For He is good; His loving devotion endures forever.”
2CH	7	4	이에 왕과 모든 백성이 여호와 앞에 제사를 드리니	Then the king and all the people offered sacrifices before the Lord.	Then the king and all the people offered sacrifices before the LORD.
2CH	7	5	솔로몬 왕의 드린 제물이 소가 이만 이천이요 양이 십이만이라 이와 같이 왕과 모든 백성이 하나님의 전의 낙성식을 행하니라	And king Solomon offered a sacrifice of twenty and two thousand oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep: so the king and all the people dedicated the house of God.	And King Solomon offered a sacrifice of 22,000 oxen and 120,000 sheep. So the king and all the people dedicated the house of God.
2CH	7	6	때에 제사장들은 직분대로 모셔 서고 레위 사람도 여호와의 악기를 가지고 섰으니 이 악기는 전에 다윗 왕이 레위 사람으로 여호와를 찬송하려고 만들어서 여호와의 인자하심이 영원함을 감사케 하던 것이라 제사장은 무리 앞에서 나팔을 불고 온 이스라엘은 섰더라	And the priests waited on their offices: the Levites also with instruments of musick of the Lord, which David the king had made to praise the Lord, because his mercy endureth for ever, when David praised by their ministry; and the priests sounded trumpets before them, and all Israel stood.	The priests stood at their posts, as did the Levites with the musical instruments of the LORD, which King David had made for giving thanks to the LORD and with which David had offered praise, saying, “For His loving devotion endures forever.” Across from the Levites, the priests sounded trumpets, and all the Israelites were standing.
2CH	7	7	솔로몬이 또 여호와의 전 앞뜰 가운데를 거룩히 구별하고 거기서 번제물과 화목제의 기름을 드렸으니 이는 솔로몬의 지은 놋단이 능히 그 번제물과 소제물과 기름을 용납할 수 없음이더라	Moreover Solomon hallowed the middle of the court that was before the house of the Lord: for there he offered burnt offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings, because the brasen altar which Solomon had made was not able to receive the burnt offerings, and the meat offerings, and the fat.	Then Solomon consecrated the middle of the courtyard in front of the house of the LORD, and there he offered the burnt offerings and the fat of the peace offerings, since the bronze altar he had made could not contain all these offerings.
2CH	7	8	그 때에 솔로몬이 칠 일 동안 절기를 지켰는데 하맛 어귀에서부터 애굽 하수까지의 온 이스라엘의 심히 큰 회중이 모여 저와 함께 하였더니	Also at the same time Solomon kept the feast seven days, and all Israel with him, a very great congregation, from the entering in of Hamath unto the river of Egypt.	So at that time Solomon and all Israel with him—a very great assembly of people from Lebo-hamath to the Brook of Egypt—kept the feast for seven days.
2CH	7	9	제팔일에 무리가 한 성회를 여니라 단의 낙성식을 칠 일 동안 행한 후 이 절기를 칠 일 동안 지키니라	And in the eighth day they made a solemn assembly: for they kept the dedication of the altar seven days, and the feast seven days.	On the eighth day they held a solemn assembly, for the dedication of the altar had lasted seven days, and the feast seven days more.
2CH	7	10	칠월 이십삼일에 왕이 백성을 그 장막으로 돌려 보내매 백성이 여호와께서 다윗과 솔로몬과 그 백성 이스라엘에게 베푸신 은혜를 인하여 기뻐하며 마음에 즐거워하였더라	And on the three and twentieth day of the seventh month he sent the people away into their tents, glad and merry in heart for the goodness that the Lord had shewed unto David, and to Solomon, and to Israel his people.	On the twenty-third day of the seventh month, Solomon sent the people away to their homes, joyful and glad of heart for the good things that the LORD had done for David, for Solomon, and for His people Israel.
2CH	7	11	솔로몬이 여호와의 전과 왕궁을 필역하고 무릇 그 심중에 여호와의 전과 자기의 궁궐에 어떻게 만들고자 한 것을 다 형통하게 이루니라	Thus Solomon finished the house of the Lord, and the king’s house: and all that came into Solomon’s heart to make in the house of the Lord, and in his own house, he prosperously effected.	When Solomon had finished the house of the LORD and the royal palace, successfully carrying out all that was in his heart to do for the house of the LORD and for his own palace,
2CH	7	12	밤에 여호와께서 솔로몬에게 나타나사 이르시되 내가 이미 네 기도를 듣고 이 곳을 택하여 내게 제사하는 전을 삼았으니	And the Lord appeared to Solomon by night, and said unto him, I have heard thy prayer, and have chosen this place to myself for an house of sacrifice.	the LORD appeared to him at night and said to him: “I have heard your prayer and have chosen this place for Myself as a house of sacrifice.
2CH	7	13	혹 내가 하늘을 닫고 비를 내리지 아니하거나 혹 메뚜기로 토산을 먹게 하거나 혹 염병으로 내 백성 가운데 유행하게 할 때에	If I shut up heaven that there be no rain, or if I command the locusts to devour the land, or if I send pestilence among my people;	If I close the sky so there is no rain, or if I command the locust to devour the land, or if I send a plague among My people,
2CH	7	14	내 이름으로 일컫는 내 백성이 그 악한 길에서 떠나 스스로 겸비하고 기도하여 내 얼굴을 구하면 내가 하늘에서 듣고 그 죄를 사하고 그 땅을 고칠지라	If my people, which are called by my name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways; then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land.	and if My people who are called by My name humble themselves and pray and seek My face and turn from their wicked ways, then I will hear from heaven, forgive their sin, and heal their land.
2CH	7	15	이 곳에서 하는 기도에 내가 눈을 들고 귀를 기울이리니	Now mine eyes shall be open, and mine ears attent unto the prayer that is made in this place.	Now My eyes will be open and My ears attentive to the prayers offered in this place.
2CH	7	16	이는 내가 이미 이 전을 택하고 거룩하게 하여 내 이름으로 여기 영영히 있게 하였음이라 내 눈과 내 마음이 항상 여기 있으리라	For now have I chosen and sanctified this house, that my name may be there for ever: and mine eyes and mine heart shall be there perpetually.	For I have now chosen and consecrated this temple so that My Name may be there forever. My eyes and My heart will be there for all time.
2CH	7	17	네가 만일 내 앞에서 행하기를 네 아비 다윗 같이 하여 내가 네게 명한 모든 것을 행하여 내 율례와 규례를 지키면	And as for thee, if thou wilt walk before me, as David thy father walked, and do according to all that I have commanded thee, and shalt observe my statutes and my judgments;	And as for you, if you walk before Me as your father David walked, doing all I have commanded you, and if you keep My statutes and ordinances,
2CH	7	18	내가 네 나라 위를 견고케 하되 전에 내가 네 아비 다윗과 언약하기를 이스라엘을 다스릴 자가 네게서 끊어지지 아니하리라 한 대로 하리라	Then will I stablish the throne of thy kingdom, according as I have covenanted with David thy father, saying, There shall not fail thee a man to be ruler in Israel.	then I will establish your royal throne, as I covenanted with your father David when I said, ‘You will never fail to have a man to rule over Israel.’
2CH	7	19	그러나 너희가 만일 돌이켜 내가 너희 앞에 둔 내 율례와 명령을 버리고 가서 다른 신을 섬겨 숭배하면	But if ye turn away, and forsake my statutes and my commandments, which I have set before you, and shall go and serve other gods, and worship them;	But if you turn away and forsake the statutes and commandments I have set before you, and if you go off to serve and worship other gods,
2CH	7	20	내가 저희에게 준 땅에서 그 뿌리를 뽑아내고 내 이름을 위하여 거룩하게 한 이 전을 내 앞에서 버려 모든 민족 중에 속담거리와 이야기거리가 되게 하리니	Then will I pluck them up by the roots out of my land which I have given them; and this house, which I have sanctified for my name, will I cast out of my sight, and will make it to be a proverb and a byword among all nations.	then I will uproot Israel from the soil I have given them, and I will banish from My presence this temple I have sanctified for My Name. I will make it an object of scorn and ridicule among all the peoples.
2CH	7	21	이 전이 비록 높을지라도 무릇 그리로 지나가는 자가 놀라 가로되 여호와께서 무슨 까닭으로 이 땅과 이 전에 이같이 행하셨는고 하면	And this house, which is high, shall be an astonishment to every one that passeth by it; so that he shall say, Why hath the Lord done thus unto this land, and unto this house?	And when this temple has become a heap of rubble, all who pass by it will be appalled and say, ‘Why has the LORD done such a thing to this land and to this temple?’
2CH	7	22	대답하기를 저희가 자기 열조를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내신 자기 하나님 여호와를 버리고 다른 신에게 부종하여 그를 숭배하여 섬기므로 여호와께서 이 모든 재앙을 저희에게 내리셨다 하리라 하셨더라	And it shall be answered, Because they forsook the Lord God of their fathers, which brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, and laid hold on other gods, and worshipped them, and served them: therefore hath he brought all this evil upon them.	And others will answer, ‘Because they have forsaken the LORD, the God of their fathers, who brought them out of the land of Egypt, and have embraced other gods, worshiping and serving them—because of this, He has brought all this disaster upon them.’”
2CH	8	1	솔로몬이 여호와의 전과 자기의 궁궐을 이십 년 동안에 건축하기를 마치고	And it came to pass at the end of twenty years, wherein Solomon had built the house of the Lord, and his own house,	Now at the end of the twenty years during which Solomon had built the house of the LORD and his own palace,
2CH	8	2	후람이 자기에게 준 성읍들을 다시 건축하여 이스라엘 자손으로 거기 거하게 하니라	That the cities which Huram had restored to Solomon, Solomon built them, and caused the children of Israel to dwell there.	Solomon rebuilt the cities Hiram had given him and settled Israelites there.
2CH	8	3	솔로몬이 가서 하맛소바를 쳐서 취하고	And Solomon went to Hamath–zobah, and prevailed against it.	Then Solomon went to Hamath-zobah and captured it.
2CH	8	4	또 광야에서 다드몰을 건축하고 하맛에서 모든 국고성을 건축하고	And he built Tadmor in the wilderness, and all the store cities, which he built in Hamath.	He built Tadmor in the wilderness, in addition to all the store cities that he had built in Hamath.
2CH	8	5	또 윗 벧호론과 아래 벧호론을 건축하되 성과 문과 문빗장이 있게 하여 견고한 성읍을 삼고	Also he built Beth–horon the upper, and Beth–horon the nether, fenced cities, with walls, gates, and bars;	He rebuilt Upper and Lower Beth-horon as fortified cities with walls, gates, and bars,
2CH	8	6	또 바알랏과 자기에게 있는 모든 국고성과 모든 병거성과 마병의 성들을 건축하고 솔로몬이 또 예루살렘과 레바논과 그 다스리는 온 땅에 건축하고자 하던 것을 다 건축하니라	And Baalath, and all the store cities that Solomon had, and all the chariot cities, and the cities of the horsemen, and all that Solomon desired to build in Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and throughout all the land of his dominion.	as well as Baalath, all the store cities that belonged to Solomon, and all the cities for his chariots and horses—whatever he desired to build in Jerusalem, Lebanon, and throughout the land of his dominion.
2CH	8	7	무릇 이스라엘이 아닌 헷 족속과 아모리 족속과 브리스 족속과 히위 족속과 여부스 족속의 남아 있는 자	As for all the people that were left of the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, which were not of Israel,	As for all the people who remained of the Hittites, Amorites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites (the people who were not Israelites)—
2CH	8	8	곧 이스라엘 자손이 다 멸하지 못하였으므로 그 땅에 남아 있는 그 자손들을 솔로몬이 역군을 삼아 오늘날까지 이르렀으되	But of their children, who were left after them in the land, whom the children of Israel consumed not, them did Solomon make to pay tribute until this day.	their descendants who remained in the land, those whom the Israelites were unable to destroy—Solomon conscripted these people to be forced laborers, as they are to this day.
2CH	8	9	오직 이스라엘 자손은 솔로몬이 노예를 삼아 일을 시키지 아니하였으니 저희는 군사와 장관의 두목과 그 병거와 마병의 장관이 됨이라	But of the children of Israel did Solomon make no servants for his work; but they were men of war, and chief of his captains, and captains of his chariots and horsemen.	But Solomon did not consign any of the Israelites to slave labor, because they were his men of war, his officers and captains, and the commanders of his chariots and cavalry.
2CH	8	10	솔로몬 왕의 공장을 감독하는 자가 이백오십 인이라 저희가 백성을 다스렸더라	And these were the chief of king Solomon’s officers, even two hundred and fifty, that bare rule over the people.	They were also the chief officers for King Solomon: 250 supervisors.
2CH	8	11	솔로몬이 바로의 딸을 데리고 다윗 성에서부터 저를 위하여 건축한 궁에 이르러 가로되 내 아내가 이스라엘 왕 다윗의 궁에 거하지 못하리니 이는 여호와의 궤가 이른 곳은 다 거룩함이니라 하였더라	And Solomon brought up the daughter of Pharaoh out of the city of David unto the house that he had built for her: for he said, My wife shall not dwell in the house of David king of Israel, because the places are holy, whereunto the ark of the Lord hath come.	Solomon brought the daughter of Pharaoh up from the City of David to the palace he had built for her. For he said, “My wife must not live in the house of David king of Israel, because the places the ark of the LORD has entered are holy.”
2CH	8	12	솔로몬이 낭실 앞에 쌓은 여호와의 단 위에 여호와께 번제를 드리되	Then Solomon offered burnt offerings unto the Lord on the altar of the Lord, which he had built before the porch,	At that time Solomon offered burnt offerings to the LORD on the altar of the LORD he had built in front of the portico.
2CH	8	13	모세의 명을 좇아 매일에 합의한 대로 안식일과 월삭과 정한 절기 곧 일 년의 세 절기 무교절과 칠칠절과 초막절에 드렸더라	Even after a certain rate every day, offering according to the commandment of Moses, on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the solemn feasts, three times in the year, even in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles.	He observed the daily requirement for offerings according to the commandment of Moses for Sabbaths, New Moons, and the three annual appointed feasts—the Feast of Unleavened Bread, the Feast of Weeks, and the Feast of Tabernacles.
2CH	8	14	솔로몬이 또 그 부친 다윗의 정규를 좇아 제사장들의 반차를 정하여 섬기게 하고 레위 사람에게도 그 직분을 맡겨 매일에 합의한 대로 찬송하며 제사장들 앞에서 수종들게 하며 또 문지기로 그 반차를 좇아 각 문을 지키게 하였으니 이는 하나님의 사람 다윗이 전에 이렇게 명하였음이라	And he appointed, according to the order of David his father, the courses of the priests to their service, and the Levites to their charges, to praise and minister before the priests, as the duty of every day required: the porters also by their courses at every gate: for so had David the man of God commanded.	In keeping with the ordinances of his father David, Solomon appointed the divisions of the priests over their service, and the Levites for their duties to offer praise and to minister before the priests according to the daily requirement. He also appointed gatekeepers by their divisions at each gate, for this had been the command of David, the man of God.
2CH	8	15	제사장과 레위 사람이 국고일에든지 무슨 일에든지 왕의 명한 바를 다 어기지 아니하였더라	And they departed not from the commandment of the king unto the priests and Levites concerning any matter, or concerning the treasures.	They did not turn aside from the king’s command regarding the priests or the Levites or any matter concerning the treasuries.
2CH	8	16	솔로몬이 여호와의 전의 기지를 쌓던 날부터 준공하기까지 범백을 완비하였으므로 여호와의 전이 결점이 없이 필역하니라	Now all the work of Solomon was prepared unto the day of the foundation of the house of the Lord, and until it was finished. So the house of the Lord was perfected.	Thus all the work of Solomon was carried out, from the day the foundation was laid for the house of the LORD until it was finished. So the house of the LORD was completed.
2CH	8	17	때에 솔로몬이 에돔 땅의 바닷가 에시온게벨과 엘롯에 이르렀더니	Then went Solomon to Ezion–geber, and to Eloth, at the sea side in the land of Edom.	Then Solomon went to Ezion-geber and to Eloth on the coast of Edom.
2CH	8	18	후람이 그 신복에게 부탁하여 배와 바닷길을 아는 종들을 보내매 저희가 솔로몬의 종과 함께 오빌에 이르러 거기서 금 사백오십 달란트를 얻고 솔로몬 왕에게로 가져왔더라	And Huram sent him by the hands of his servants ships, and servants that had knowledge of the sea; and they went with the servants of Solomon to Ophir, and took thence four hundred and fifty talents of gold, and brought them to king Solomon.	So Hiram sent him ships captained by his servants, along with crews of experienced sailors. They went with Solomon’s servants to Ophir and acquired from there 450 talents of gold, which they delivered to King Solomon.
2CH	9	1	스바 여왕이 솔로몬의 명예를 듣고 와서 어려운 문제로 솔로몬을 시험코자하여 예루살렘에 이르니 수원이 심히 많고 향품과 많은 금과 보석을 약대에 실었더라 저가 솔로몬에게 나아와 자기 마음에 있는 것을 다 말하매	And when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon, she came to prove Solomon with hard questions at Jerusalem, with a very great company, and camels that bare spices, and gold in abundance, and precious stones: and when she was come to Solomon, she communed with him of all that was in her heart.	Now when the queen of Sheba heard about the fame of Solomon, she came to test him with difficult questions. She arrived in Jerusalem with a very large caravan—with camels bearing spices, gold in abundance, and precious stones. So she came to Solomon and spoke with him about all that was on her mind.
2CH	9	2	솔로몬이 그 묻는 말을 다 대답하였으니 솔로몬이 은미하여 대답지 못한 것이 없었더라	And Solomon told her all her questions: and there was nothing hid from Solomon which he told her not.	And Solomon answered all her questions; nothing was too difficult for him to explain.
2CH	9	3	스바 여왕이 솔로몬의 지혜와 그 건축한 궁과	And when the queen of Sheba had seen the wisdom of Solomon, and the house that he had built,	When the queen of Sheba saw the wisdom of Solomon, the palace he had built,
2CH	9	4	그 상의 식물과 그 신복들의 좌석과 그 신하들의 시립한 것과 그들의 공복과 술 관원들과 그들의 공복과 여호와의 전에 올라가는 층계를 보고 정신이 현황하여	And the meat of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and their apparel; his cupbearers also, and their apparel; and his ascent by which he went up into the house of the Lord; there was no more spirit in her.	the food at his table, the seating of his servants, the service and attire of his attendants and cupbearers, and the burnt offerings he presented at the house of the LORD, it took her breath away.
2CH	9	5	왕께 고하되 내가 내 나라에서 당신의 행위와 당신의 지혜에 대하여 들은 소문이 진실하도다	And she said to the king, It was a true report which I heard in mine own land of thine acts, and of thy wisdom:	She said to the king, “The report I heard in my own country about your words and wisdom is true.
2CH	9	6	내가 그 말들을 믿지 아니하였더니 이제 와서 목도한즉 당신의 지혜가 크다 한 말이 그 절반도 못되니 당신은 내가 들은 소문보다 지나도다	Howbeit I believed not their words, until I came, and mine eyes had seen it: and, behold, the one half of the greatness of thy wisdom was not told me: for thou exceedest the fame that I heard.	But I did not believe the reports until I came and saw with my own eyes. Indeed, not half of the greatness of your wisdom was told to me. You have far exceeded the report I heard.
2CH	9	7	복되도다 당신의 사람들이여 복되도다 당신의 이 신복들이여 항상 당신의 앞에 서서 당신의 지혜를 들음이로다	Happy are thy men, and happy are these thy servants, which stand continually before thee, and hear thy wisdom.	How blessed are your men! How blessed are these servants of yours who stand continually before you and hear your wisdom!
2CH	9	8	당신의 하나님 여호와를 송축할지로다 하나님이 당신을 기뻐하시고 그 위에 올리사 당신의 하나님 여호와를 위하여 왕이 되게 하셨도다 당신의 하나님이 이스라엘을 사랑하사 영원히 견고하게 하시려고 당신을 세워 저희 왕을 삼아 공과 의를 행하게 하셨도다 하고	Blessed be the Lord thy God, which delighted in thee to set thee on his throne, to be king for the Lord thy God: because thy God loved Israel, to establish them for ever, therefore made he thee king over them, to do judgment and justice.	Blessed be the LORD your God, who has delighted in you to set you on His throne to be king for the LORD your God. Because your God loved Israel enough to establish them forever, He has made you king over them to carry out justice and righteousness.”
2CH	9	9	이에 저가 금 일백이십 달란트와 심히 많은 향품과 보석을 왕께 드렸으니 스바 여왕이 솔로몬 왕께 드린 향품 같은 것이 전에는 없었더라	And she gave the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold, and of spices great abundance, and precious stones: neither was there any such spice as the queen of Sheba gave king Solomon.	Then she gave the king 120 talents of gold, a great quantity of spices, and precious stones. There had never been such spices as those the queen of Sheba gave to King Solomon.
2CH	9	10	(후람의 신복들과 솔로몬의 신복들도 도빌에서 금을 실어 올 때에 백단목과 보석을 가져온지라	And the servants also of Huram, and the servants of Solomon, which brought gold from Ophir, brought algum trees and precious stones.	(The servants of Hiram and of Solomon who brought gold from Ophir also brought algum wood and precious stones.
2CH	9	11	왕이 백단목으로 여호와의 전과 왕궁의 층대를 만들고 또 노래하는 자를 위하여 수금과 비파를 만들었으니 이 같은 것들은 유다 땅에서 전에는 보지 못하였더라)	And the king made of the algum trees terraces to the house of the Lord, and to the king’s palace, and harps and psalteries for singers: and there were none such seen before in the land of Judah.	The king made the algum wood into steps for the house of the LORD and for the king’s palace, and into lyres and harps for the singers. Never before had anything like them been seen in the land of Judah.)
2CH	9	12	솔로몬 왕이 스바 여왕의 가져온 대로 답례하고 그외에 또 저의 소원대로 무릇 구하는 것을 주니 이에 저가 그 신복들로 더불어 본국으로 돌아갔더라	And king Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all her desire, whatsoever she asked, beside that which she had brought unto the king. So she turned, and went away to her own land, she and her servants.	King Solomon gave the queen of Sheba all she desired—whatever she asked—far more than she had brought the king. Then she left and returned to her own country, along with her servants.
2CH	9	13	솔로몬의 세입금의 중수가 육백육십육 금 달란트요	Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six hundred and threescore and six talents of gold;	The weight of gold that came to Solomon each year was 666 talents,
2CH	9	14	그외에 또 상고와 객상들의 가져온 것이 있고 아라비아 왕들과 그 나라 방백들도 금과 은을 솔로몬에게 가져온지라	Beside that which chapmen and merchants brought. And all the kings of Arabia and governors of the country brought gold and silver to Solomon.	not including the revenue from the merchants and traders. And all the Arabian kings and governors of the land also brought gold and silver to Solomon.
2CH	9	15	솔로몬 왕이 쳐서 늘인 금으로 큰 방패 이백을 만들었으니 매 방패에 든 금이 육백 세겔이며	And king Solomon made two hundred targets of beaten gold: six hundred shekels of beaten gold went to one target.	King Solomon made two hundred large shields of hammered gold; six hundred shekels of hammered gold went into each shield.
2CH	9	16	또 쳐서 늘인 금으로 작은 방패 삼백을 만들었으니 매 방패에 든 금이 삼백 세겔이라 왕이 이것들을 레바논 나무 궁에 두었더라	And three hundred shields made he of beaten gold: three hundred shekels of gold went to one shield. And the king put them in the house of the forest of Lebanon.	He also made three hundred small shields of hammered gold; three hundred shekels of gold went into each shield. And the king put them in the House of the Forest of Lebanon.
2CH	9	17	왕이 또 상아로 큰 보좌를 만들고 정금으로 입혔으니	Moreover the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it with pure gold.	Additionally, the king made a great throne of ivory and overlaid it with pure gold.
2CH	9	18	그 보좌에는 여섯 층계와 금 족대가 있어 보좌와 연하였고 앉는 자리 양편에는 팔걸이가 있고 팔걸이 곁에는 사자가 하나씩 섰으며	And there were six steps to the throne, with a footstool of gold, which were fastened to the throne, and stays on each side of the sitting place, and two lions standing by the stays:	The throne had six steps, and a footstool of gold was attached to it. There were armrests on both sides of the seat, with a lion standing beside each armrest.
2CH	9	19	또 열두 사자가 있어 그 여섯 층계 좌우편에 섰으니 아무 나라에도 이같이 만든 것이 없었더라	And twelve lions stood there on the one side and on the other upon the six steps. There was not the like made in any kingdom.	Twelve lions stood on the six steps, one at either end of each step. Nothing like this had ever been made for any kingdom.
2CH	9	20	솔로몬 왕의 마시는 그릇은 다 금이요 레바논 나무 궁의 그릇들도 다 정금이라 솔로몬의 시대에 은을 귀히 여기지 아니함은	And all the drinking vessels of king Solomon were of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were of pure gold: none were of silver; it was not any thing accounted of in the days of Solomon.	All King Solomon’s drinking cups were gold, and all the utensils of the House of the Forest of Lebanon were pure gold. There was no silver, because it was accounted as nothing in the days of Solomon.
2CH	9	21	왕의 배들이 후람의 종들과 함께 다시스로 다니며 그 배가 삼 년에 일차씩 금과 은과 상아와 잔나비와 공작을 실어옴이더라	For the king’s ships went to Tarshish with the servants of Huram: every three years once came the ships of Tarshish bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.	For the king had the ships of Tarshish that went with Hiram’s servants, and once every three years the ships of Tarshish would arrive bearing gold, silver, ivory, apes, and peacocks.
2CH	9	22	솔로몬 왕의 재산과 지혜가 천하 열왕보다 큰지라	And king Solomon passed all the kings of the earth in riches and wisdom.	So King Solomon surpassed all the kings of the earth in riches and wisdom.
2CH	9	23	천하 얼왕이 하나님께서 솔로몬의 마음에 주신 지혜를 들으며 그 얼굴을 보기 원하여	And all the kings of the earth sought the presence of Solomon, to hear his wisdom, that God had put in his heart.	All the kings of the earth sought an audience with Solomon to hear the wisdom that God had put in his heart.
2CH	9	24	각기 예물을 가지고 왔으니 곧 은그릇과 금그릇과 의복과 갑옷과 향품과 말과 노새라 해마다 정한 수가 있었더라	And they brought every man his present, vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and raiment, harness, and spices, horses, and mules, a rate year by year.	Year after year, each visitor would bring his tribute: articles of silver and gold, clothing, weapons, spices, horses, and mules.
2CH	9	25	솔로몬의 병거 메는 말의 외양간이 사천이요 마병이 일만 이천이라 병거성에도 두고 예루살렘 왕에게도 두었으며	And Solomon had four thousand stalls for horses and chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen; whom he bestowed in the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem.	Solomon had 4,000 stalls for horses and chariots, and 12,000 horses, which he stationed in the chariot cities and also with him in Jerusalem.
2CH	9	26	솔로몬이 유브라데 강에서부터 블레셋 땅과 애굽 지경까지의 열왕을 관할하였으며	And he reigned over all the kings from the river even unto the land of the Philistines, and to the border of Egypt.	He reigned over all the kings from the Euphrates to the land of the Philistines, as far as the border of Egypt.
2CH	9	27	왕이 예루살렘에서 은을 돌 같이 흔하게 하고 백향목을 평지의 뽕나무 같이 많게 하였더라	And the king made silver in Jerusalem as stones, and cedar trees made he as the sycomore trees that are in the low plains in abundance.	The king made silver as common in Jerusalem as stones, and cedar as abundant as sycamore in the foothills.
2CH	9	28	솔로몬을 위하여 애굽과 각국에서 말들을 내어왔더라	And they brought unto Solomon horses out of Egypt, and out of all lands.	Solomon’s horses were imported from Egypt and from all the lands.
2CH	9	29	이 외에 솔로몬의 시종 행적은 선지자 나단의 글과 실로 사람 아히야의 예언과 선견자 잇도의 묵시책 곧 잇도가 느밧의 아들 여로보암에게 대하여 쓴 책에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, first and last, are they not written in the book of Nathan the prophet, and in the prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite, and in the visions of Iddo the seer against Jeroboam the son of Nebat?	As for the rest of the acts of Solomon, from beginning to end, are they not written in the Records of Nathan the Prophet, in the Prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite, and in the Visions of Iddo the Seer concerning Jeroboam son of Nebat?
2CH	9	30	솔로몬이 예루살렘에서 온 이스라엘을 다스린 지 사십 년이라	And Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel forty years.	Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel forty years.
2CH	9	31	솔로몬이 그 열조와 함께 자매 그 부친 다윗의 성에 장사되고 그 아들 르호보암이 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And Solomon slept with his fathers, and he was buried in the city of David his father: and Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead.	And Solomon rested with his fathers and was buried in the city of his father David. And his son Rehoboam reigned in his place.
2CH	10	1	르호보암이 세겜으로 갔으니 이는 온 이스라엘이 저로 왕을 삼고자 하여 세겜에 이르렀음이더라	And Rehoboam went to Shechem: for to Shechem were all Israel come to make him king.	Then Rehoboam went to Shechem, for all Israel had gone there to make him king.
2CH	10	2	느밧의 아들 여로보암이 전에 솔로몬 왕의 얼굴을 피하여 애굽으로 도망하여 있었더니 이 일을 듣고 애굽에서부터 돌아오매	And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who was in Egypt, whither he had fled from the presence of Solomon the king, heard it, that Jeroboam returned out of Egypt.	When Jeroboam son of Nebat heard about this, he returned from Egypt, where he had fled from King Solomon.
2CH	10	3	무리가 보내어 저를 불렀더라 여로보암과 온 이스라엘이 와서 르호보암에게 고하여 가로되	And they sent and called him. So Jeroboam and all Israel came and spake to Rehoboam, saying,	So they sent for Jeroboam, and he and all Israel came to Rehoboam and said,
2CH	10	4	왕의 부친이 우리의 멍에를 무겁게 하였으나 왕은 이제 왕의 부친이 우리에게 시킨 고역과 메운 무거운 멍에를 가볍게 하소서 그리하시면 우리가 왕을 섬기겠나이다	Thy father made our yoke grievous: now therefore ease thou somewhat the grievous servitude of thy father, and his heavy yoke that he put upon us, and we will serve thee.	“Your father put a heavy yoke on us. But now you should lighten the burden of your father’s service and the heavy yoke he put on us, and we will serve you.”
2CH	10	5	르호보암이 대답하되 삼 일 후에 다시 내게로 오라 하매 백성이 가니라	And he said unto them, Come again unto me after three days. And the people departed.	Rehoboam answered, “Come back to me in three days.” So the people departed.
2CH	10	6	르호보암 왕이 그 부친 솔로몬의 생전에 그 앞에 모셨던 노인들과 의논하여 가로되 너희는 어떻게 교도하여 이 백성에게 대답하게 하겠느뇨	And king Rehoboam took counsel with the old men that had stood before Solomon his father while he yet lived, saying, What counsel give ye me to return answer to this people?	Then King Rehoboam consulted with the elders who had served his father Solomon during his lifetime. “How do you advise me to respond to these people?” he asked.
2CH	10	7	대답하여 가로되 왕이 만일 이 백성을 후대하여 기쁘게 하고 선한 말을 하시면 저희가 영영히 왕의 종이 되리이다 하나	And they spake unto him, saying, If thou be kind to this people, and please them, and speak good words to them, they will be thy servants for ever.	They replied, “If you will be kind to these people and please them by speaking kind words to them, they will be your servants forever.”
2CH	10	8	왕이 노인의 교도하는 것을 버리고 그 앞에 모셔 있는 자기와 함께 자라난 소년들과 의논하여	But he forsook the counsel which the old men gave him, and took counsel with the young men that were brought up with him, that stood before him.	But Rehoboam rejected the advice of the elders; instead, he consulted the young men who had grown up with him and served him.
2CH	10	9	가로되 너희는 어떻게 교도하여 이 백성에게 대답하게 하겠느뇨 백성이 내게 말하기를 왕의 부친이 우리에게 메운 멍에를 가볍게 하라 하였느니라	And he said unto them, What advice give ye that we may return answer to this people, which have spoken to me, saying, Ease somewhat the yoke that thy father did put upon us?	He asked them, “What message do you advise that we send back to these people who have spoken to me, saying, ‘Lighten the yoke your father put on us’?”
2CH	10	10	함께 자라난 소년들이 왕께 고하여 가로되 이 백성들이 왕께 고하기를 왕의 부친이 우리의 멍에를 무겁게 하였으나 왕은 우리를 위하여 가볍게 하라 하였은즉 왕은 대답하시기를 나의 새끼손가락이 내 부친의 허리보다 굵으니	And the young men that were brought up with him spake unto him, saying, Thus shalt thou answer the people that spake unto thee, saying, Thy father made our yoke heavy, but make thou it somewhat lighter for us; thus shalt thou say unto them, My little finger shall be thicker than my father’s loins.	The young men who had grown up with him replied, “This is how you should answer these people who said to you, ‘Your father made our yoke heavy, but you should make it lighter.’ This is what you should tell them: ‘My little finger is thicker than my father’s waist!
2CH	10	11	내 부친이 너희로 무거운 멍에를 메게 하였으나 이제 나는 너희의 멍에를 더욱 무겁게 할지라 내 부친은 채찍으로 너희를 징치하였으나 나는 전갈로 하리라 하소서	For whereas my father put a heavy yoke upon you, I will put more to your yoke: my father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions.	Whereas my father burdened you with a heavy yoke, I will add to your yoke. Whereas my father scourged you with whips, I will scourge you with scorpions.’”
2CH	10	12	삼 일만에 여로보암과 모든 백성이 르호보암에게 나아왔으니 이는 왕이 명하여 이르기를 삼 일만에 내게로 다시 오라 하였음이라	So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam on the third day, as the king bade, saying, Come again to me on the third day.	After three days, Jeroboam and all the people returned to Rehoboam, since the king had said, “Come back to me on the third day.”
2CH	10	13	왕이 포학한 말로 대답할새 노인의 교도를 버리고	And the king answered them roughly; and king Rehoboam forsook the counsel of the old men,	And the king answered them harshly. King Rehoboam rejected the advice of the elders
2CH	10	14	소년의 가르침을 좇아 저희에게 고하여 가로되 내 부친은 너희의 멍에를 무겁게 하였으나 나는 더할지라 내 부친은 채찍으로 너희를 징치하였으나 나는 전갈로 하리라 하니라	And answered them after the advice of the young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add thereto: my father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions.	and spoke to them as the young men had advised, saying, “Whereas my father made your yoke heavy, I will add to your yoke. Whereas my father scourged you with whips, I will scourge you with scorpions.”
2CH	10	15	왕이 이같이 백성의 말을 듣지 아니하였으니 이 일은 하나님께로 말미암아 난 것이라 여호와께서 전에 실로 사람 아히야로 느밧의 아들 여로보암에게 고한 말씀을 응하게 하심이더라	So the king hearkened not unto the people: for the cause was of God, that the Lord might perform his word, which he spake by the hand of Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat.	So the king did not listen to the people, and indeed this turn of events was from God, in order that the LORD might fulfill the word that He had spoken through Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam son of Nebat.
2CH	10	16	온 이스라엘이 자기들의 말을 왕이 듣지 아니함을 보고 왕에게 대답하여 가로되 우리가 다윗과 무슨 관계가 있느뇨 이새의 아들에게서 업이 없도다 이스라엘아 각각 너희 장막으로 돌아가라 다윗이여 이제 너는 네 집이나 돌아보라 하고 온 이스라엘이 그 장막으로 돌아가니라	And when all Israel saw that the king would not hearken unto them, the people answered the king, saying, What portion have we in David? and we have none inheritance in the son of Jesse: every man to your tents, O Israel: and now, David, see to thine own house. So all Israel went to their tents.	When all Israel saw that the king had refused to listen to them, they answered the king: “What portion do we have in David, and what inheritance in the son of Jesse? To your tents, O Israel! Look now to your own house, O David!” So all the Israelites went home,
2CH	10	17	그러나 유다 성읍들에 사는 이스라엘 자손에게는 르호보암이 그 왕이 되었더라	But as for the children of Israel that dwelt in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.	but Rehoboam still reigned over the Israelites living in the cities of Judah.
2CH	10	18	르호보암 왕이 역군의 감독 하도람을 보내었더니 이스라엘 자손이 저를 돌로 쳐 죽인지라 르호보암 왕이 급히 수레에 올라 예루살렘으로 도망하였더라	Then king Rehoboam sent Hadoram that was over the tribute; and the children of Israel stoned him with stones, that he died. But king Rehoboam made speed to get him up to his chariot, to flee to Jerusalem.	Then King Rehoboam sent out Hadoram, who was in charge of the forced labor, but the Israelites stoned him to death. And King Rehoboam mounted his chariot in haste and escaped to Jerusalem.
2CH	10	19	이에 이스라엘이 다윗의 집을 배반하여 오늘날까지 이르니라	And Israel rebelled against the house of David unto this day.	So to this day Israel has been in rebellion against the house of David.
2CH	11	1	르호보암이 예루살렘에 이르러 유다와 베냐민 족속을 모으니 택한 용사가 십팔만이라 이스라엘과 싸워 나라를 회복하여 르호보암에게 돌리려 하더니	And when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, he gathered of the house of Judah and Benjamin an hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men, which were warriors, to fight against Israel, that he might bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam.	When Rehoboam arrived in Jerusalem, he mobilized the house of Judah and Benjamin—180,000 chosen warriors—to fight against Israel and restore the kingdom to Rehoboam.
2CH	11	2	여호와의 말씀이 하나님의 사람 스마야에게 임하여 가라사대	But the word of the Lord came to Shemaiah the man of God, saying,	But the word of the LORD came to Shemaiah the man of God:
2CH	11	3	솔로몬의 아들 유다 왕 르호보암과 유다와 베냐민의 이스라엘 무리에게 고하여 이르기를	Speak unto Rehoboam the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and to all Israel in Judah and Benjamin, saying,	“Tell Rehoboam son of Solomon king of Judah and all the Israelites in Judah and Benjamin
2CH	11	4	여호와의 말씀이 너희는 올라가지 말라 너희 형제와 싸우지 말고 각기 집으로 돌아가라 이 일이 내게로 말미암아 난 것이라 하셨다 하라 하신지라 저희가 여호와의 말씀을 듣고 돌아가고 여로보암을 치러 가지 아니하였더라	Thus saith the Lord, Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren: return every man to his house: for this thing is done of me. And they obeyed the words of the Lord, and returned from going against Jeroboam.	that this is what the LORD says: ‘You are not to go up and fight against your brothers. Each of you must return home, for this word is from Me.’” So they listened to the words of the LORD and turned back from going against Jeroboam.
2CH	11	5	르호보암이 예루살렘에 거하여 유다 땅에 방비하는 성읍들을 건축하였으니	And Rehoboam dwelt in Jerusalem, and built cities for defence in Judah.	Rehoboam continued to live in Jerusalem, and he built up cities for defense in Judah.
2CH	11	6	곧 베들레헴과 에담과 드고아와	He built even Beth–lehem, and Etam, and Tekoa,	He built up Bethlehem, Etam, Tekoa,
2CH	11	7	벧술과 소고와 아둘람과	And Beth–zur, and Shoco, and Adullam,	Beth-zur, Soco, Adullam,
2CH	11	8	가드와 마레사와 십과	And Gath, and Mareshah, and Ziph,	Gath, Mareshah, Ziph,
2CH	11	9	아도라임과 라기스와 아세가와	And Adoraim, and Lachish, and Azekah,	Adoraim, Lachish, Azekah,
2CH	11	10	소라와 아얄론과 헤브론이니 다 유다와 베냐민 땅에 있어 견고한 성읍이라	And Zorah, and Aijalon, and Hebron, which are in Judah and in Benjamin fenced cities.	Zorah, Aijalon, and Hebron, the fortified cities in Judah and Benjamin.
2CH	11	11	르호보암이 이 모든 성읍을 더욱 견고케 하고 장관을 그 가운데 두고 양식과 기름과 포도주를 저축하고	And he fortified the strong holds, and put captains in them, and store of victual, and of oil and wine.	He strengthened their fortresses and put officers in them, with supplies of food, oil, and wine.
2CH	11	12	각 성읍에 방패와 창을 두어 심히 강하게 하니라 유다와 베냐민이 르호보암에게 속하였더라	And in every several city he put shields and spears, and made them exceeding strong, having Judah and Benjamin on his side.	He also put shields and spears in all the cities and strengthened them greatly. So Judah and Benjamin belonged to him.
2CH	11	13	온 이스라엘의 제사장과 레위 사람이 그 모든 지방에서부터 르호보암에게 돌아오되	And the priests and the Levites that were in all Israel resorted to him out of all their coasts.	Moreover, the priests and Levites from all their districts throughout Israel stood with Rehoboam.
2CH	11	14	레위 사람이 그 향리와 산업을 떠나 유다와 예루살렘에 이르렀으니 이는 여로보암과 그 아들들이 저희를 폐하여 여호와께 제사장의 직분을 행치 못하게 하고	For the Levites left their suburbs and their possession, and came to Judah and Jerusalem: for Jeroboam and his sons had cast them off from executing the priest’s office unto the Lord:	For the Levites left their pasturelands and their possessions and went to Judah and Jerusalem, because Jeroboam and his sons had rejected them as priests of the LORD.
2CH	11	15	여로보암이 여러 산당과 수염소 우상과 자기가 만든 송아지 우상을 위하여 스스로 제사장들을 세움이라	And he ordained him priests for the high places, and for the devils, and for the calves which he had made.	And Jeroboam appointed his own priests for the high places and for the goat demons and calf idols he had made.
2CH	11	16	이스라엘 모든 지파 중에 마음을 오로지하여 이스라엘 하나님 여호와를 구하는 자들이 레위 사람을 따라 예루살렘에 이르러 그 열조의 하나님 여호와께 제사하고자 한지라	And after them out of all the tribes of Israel such as set their hearts to seek the Lord God of Israel came to Jerusalem, to sacrifice unto the Lord God of their fathers.	Those from every tribe of Israel who had set their hearts to seek the LORD their God followed the Levites to Jerusalem to sacrifice to the LORD, the God of their fathers.
2CH	11	17	그러므로 삼 년 동안 유다 나라를 도와 솔로몬의 아들 르호보암을 강성하게 하였으니 이는 무리가 삼 년을 다윗과 솔로몬의 길로 행하였음이더라	So they strengthened the kingdom of Judah, and made Rehoboam the son of Solomon strong, three years: for three years they walked in the way of David and Solomon.	So they strengthened the kingdom of Judah and supported Rehoboam son of Solomon for three years, because they walked for three years in the way of David and Solomon.
2CH	11	18	르호보암이 다윗의 아들 여리못의 딸 마할랏으로 아내를 삼았으니 마할랏은 이새의 아들 엘리압의 딸 아비하일의 소생이라	And Rehoboam took him Mahalath the daughter of Jerimoth the son of David to wife, and Abihail the daughter of Eliab the son of Jesse;	And Rehoboam married Mahalath, who was the daughter of David’s son Jerimoth and of Abihail, the daughter of Jesse’s son Eliab.
2CH	11	19	그가 아들들 곧 여우스와 스마랴와 사함을 낳았으며	Which bare him children; Jeush, and Shamariah, and Zaham.	She bore sons to him: Jeush, Shemariah, and Zaham.
2CH	11	20	그 후에 압살롬의 딸 마아가에게 장가들었더니 저가 아비야와 앗대와 시사와 슬로밋을 낳았더라	And after her he took Maachah the daughter of Absalom; which bare him Abijah, and Attai, and Ziza, and Shelomith.	After her, he married Maacah daughter of Absalom, and she bore to him Abijah, Attai, Ziza, and Shelomith.
2CH	11	21	르호보암이 아내 십팔과 첩 육십을 취하여 아들 이십팔과 딸 육십을 낳았으나 압살롬의 딸 마아가를 모든 처첩보다 더 사랑하여	And Rehoboam loved Maachah the daughter of Absalom above all his wives and his concubines: (for he took eighteen wives, and threescore concubines; and begat twenty and eight sons, and threescore daughters.)	Rehoboam loved Maacah daughter of Absalom more than all his wives and concubines. In all, he had eighteen wives and sixty concubines, and he was the father of twenty-eight sons and sixty daughters.
2CH	11	22	마아가의 아들 아비야를 세워 장자를 삼아 형제 중에 머리가 되게 하였으니 이는 저로 왕이 되게 하고자 함이라	And Rehoboam made Abijah the son of Maachah the chief, to be ruler among his brethren: for he thought to make him king.	Rehoboam appointed Abijah son of Maacah as chief prince among his brothers, intending to make him king.
2CH	11	23	르호보암이 지혜롭게 행하여 그 모든 아들을 유다와 베냐민의 온 땅 모든 견고한 성읍에 흩어 살게 하고 양식을 후히 주고 아내를 많이 구하여 주었더라	And he dealt wisely, and dispersed of all his children throughout all the countries of Judah and Benjamin, unto every fenced city: and he gave them victual in abundance. And he desired many wives.	Rehoboam also acted wisely by dispersing some of his sons throughout the districts of Judah and Benjamin, and to all the fortified cities. He gave them abundant provisions and sought many wives for them.
2CH	12	1	르호보암이 나라가 견고하고 세력이 강하매 여호와의 율법을 버리니 온 이스라엘이 본받은지라	And it came to pass, when Rehoboam had established the kingdom, and had strengthened himself, he forsook the law of the Lord, and all Israel with him.	After Rehoboam had established his sovereignty and royal power, he and all Israel with him forsook the Law of the LORD.
2CH	12	2	저희가 여호와께 범죄하였으므로 르호보암 왕 오년에 애굽 왕 시삭이 예루살렘을 치러 올라오니	And it came to pass, that in the fifth year of king Rehoboam Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, because they had transgressed against the Lord,	In the fifth year of Rehoboam’s reign, because they had been unfaithful to the LORD, Shishak king of Egypt came up and attacked Jerusalem
2CH	12	3	저에게 병거가 일천이백 승이요 마병이 육만이며 애굽에서 좇아 나온 무리 곧 훕과 숩과 구스 사람이 불가승수라	With twelve hundred chariots, and threescore thousand horsemen: and the people were without number that came with him out of Egypt; the Lubims, the Sukkiims, and the Ethiopians.	with 1,200 chariots, 60,000 horsemen, and countless troops who came with him out of Egypt—Libyans, Sukkites, and Cushites.
2CH	12	4	시삭이 유다의 견고한 성읍을 취하고 예루살렘에 이르니	And he took the fenced cities which pertained to Judah, and came to Jerusalem.	He captured the fortified cities of Judah and came as far as Jerusalem.
2CH	12	5	때에 유다 방백들이 시삭을 인하여 예루살렘에 모였는지라 선지자 스마야가 르호보암과 방백들에게 나아와 가로되 여호와의 말씀이 너희가 나를 버렸으므로 나도 너희를 버려 시삭의 손에 붙였노라 하셨다 한지라	Then came Shemaiah the prophet to Rehoboam, and to the princes of Judah, that were gathered together to Jerusalem because of Shishak, and said unto them, Thus saith the Lord, Ye have forsaken me, and therefore have I also left you in the hand of Shishak.	Then Shemaiah the prophet came to Rehoboam and the leaders of Judah who had gathered at Jerusalem because of Shishak, and he said to them, “This is what the LORD says: ‘You have forsaken Me; therefore, I have forsaken you into the hand of Shishak.’”
2CH	12	6	이에 이스라엘 방백들과 왕이 스스로 겸비하여 가로되 여호와는 의로우시다 하매	Whereupon the princes of Israel and the king humbled themselves; and they said, The Lord is righteous.	So the leaders of Israel and the king humbled themselves and said, “The LORD is righteous.”
2CH	12	7	여호와께서 저희의 스스로 겸비함을 보신지라 여호와의 말씀이 스마야에게 임하여 가라사대 저희가 스스로 겸비하였으니 내가 멸하지 아니하고 대강 구원하여 나의 노를 시삭의 손으로 예루살렘에 쏟지 아니하리라	And when the Lord saw that they humbled themselves, the word of the Lord came to Shemaiah, saying, They have humbled themselves; therefore I will not destroy them, but I will grant them some deliverance; and my wrath shall not be poured out upon Jerusalem by the hand of Shishak.	When the LORD saw that they had humbled themselves, the word of the LORD came to Shemaiah, saying, “They have humbled themselves; I will not destroy them, but will soon grant them deliverance. My wrath will not be poured out on Jerusalem through Shishak.
2CH	12	8	그러나 저희가 시삭의 종이 되어 나를 섬기는 것과 열국을 섬기는 것이 어떠한지 알게 되리라 하셨더라	Nevertheless they shall be his servants; that they may know my service, and the service of the kingdoms of the countries.	Nevertheless, they will become his servants, so that they may learn the difference between serving Me and serving the kings of other lands.”
2CH	12	9	애굽 왕 시삭이 올라와서 예루살렘을 치고 여호와의 전 보물과 왕궁의 보물을 몰수히 빼앗고 솔로몬의 만든 금방패도 빼앗은지라	So Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, and took away the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the king’s house; he took all: he carried away also the shields of gold which Solomon had made.	So King Shishak of Egypt attacked Jerusalem and seized the treasures of the house of the LORD and of the royal palace. He took everything, including the gold shields that Solomon had made.
2CH	12	10	르호보암 왕이 그 대신에 놋으로 방패를 만들어 궁문을 지키는 시위대 장관들의 손에 맡기매	Instead of which king Rehoboam made shields of brass, and committed them to the hands of the chief of the guard, that kept the entrance of the king’s house.	Then King Rehoboam made bronze shields in their place and committed them to the care of the captains of the guard on duty at the entrance to the royal palace.
2CH	12	11	왕이 여호와의 전에 들어갈 때마다 시위하는 자가 그 방패를 들고 갔다가 시위소로 도로 가져갔더라	And when the king entered into the house of the Lord, the guard came and fetched them, and brought them again into the guard chamber.	And whenever the king entered the house of the LORD, the guards would go with him, bearing the shields, and later they would return them to the guardroom.
2CH	12	12	르호보암이 스스로 겸비하였고 유다에 선한 일도 있으므로 여호와께서 노를 돌이키사 다 멸하지 아니하셨더라	And when he humbled himself, the wrath of the Lord turned from him, that he would not destroy him altogether: and also in Judah things went well.	Because Rehoboam humbled himself, the anger of the LORD turned away from him, and He did not destroy him completely. Indeed, conditions were good in Judah.
2CH	12	13	르호보암 왕이 예루살렘에서 스스로 강하게 하여 치리하니라 르호보암이 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 사십일 세라 예루살렘 곧 여호와께서 이스라엘 모든 지파 중에서 택하여 그 이름을 두신 성에서 십칠 년을 치리하니라 르호보암의 모친의 이름은 나아마라 암몬 여인이더라	So king Rehoboam strengthened himself in Jerusalem, and reigned: for Rehoboam was one and forty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which the Lord had chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, to put his name there. And his mother’s name was Naamah an Ammonitess.	Thus King Rehoboam established himself in Jerusalem. He was forty-one years old when he became king, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city the LORD had chosen from all the tribes of Israel in which to put His Name. His mother’s name was Naamah the Ammonite.
2CH	12	14	르호보암이 마음을 오로지하여 여호와를 구하지 아니함으로 악을 행하였더라	And he did evil, because he prepared not his heart to seek the Lord.	And Rehoboam did evil because he did not set his heart to seek the LORD.
2CH	12	15	르호보암의 시종 행적은 선지자 스마야와 선견자 잇도의 족보책에 기록되지 아니하였느냐 르호보암과 여로보암 사이에 항상 전쟁이 있으니라	Now the acts of Rehoboam, first and last, are they not written in the book of Shemaiah the prophet, and of Iddo the seer concerning genealogies? And there were wars between Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually.	Now the acts of Rehoboam, from first to last, are they not written in the records of Shemaiah the Prophet and of Iddo the Seer concerning the genealogies? There was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam throughout their days.
2CH	12	16	르호보암이 그 열조와 함께 자매 다윗 성에 장사되고 그 아들 아비야가 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David: and Abijah his son reigned in his stead.	And Rehoboam rested with his fathers and was buried in the City of David. And his son Abijah reigned in his place.
2CH	13	1	여로보암 왕 제십팔년에 아비야가 유다 왕이 되고	Now in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam began Abijah to reign over Judah.	In the eighteenth year of Jeroboam’s reign, Abijah became king of Judah,
2CH	13	2	예루살렘에서 삼 년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 미가야라 기브아 사람 우리엘의 딸이더라 아비야가 여로보암으로 더불어 싸울새	He reigned three years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name also was Michaiah the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. And there was war between Abijah and Jeroboam.	and he reigned in Jerusalem three years. His mother’s name was Micaiah daughter of Uriel; she was from Gibeah. And there was war between Abijah and Jeroboam.
2CH	13	3	아비야는 택한바 싸움에 용맹한 군사 사십만으로 싸움을 예비하였고 여로보암은 택한바 큰 용사 팔십만으로 대진한지라	And Abijah set the battle in array with an army of valiant men of war, even four hundred thousand chosen men: Jeroboam also set the battle in array against him with eight hundred thousand chosen men, being mighty men of valour.	Abijah went into battle with an army of 400,000 chosen men, while Jeroboam drew up in formation against him with 800,000 chosen and mighty men of valor.
2CH	13	4	아비야가 에브라임 산 중 스마라임 산 위에 서서 가로되 여로보암과 이스라엘 무리들아 다 들으라	And Abijah stood up upon mount Zemaraim, which is in mount Ephraim, and said, Hear me, thou Jeroboam, and all Israel;	Then Abijah stood on Mount Zemaraim in the hill country of Ephraim and said, “Hear me, O Jeroboam and all Israel!
2CH	13	5	이스라엘 하나님 여호와께서 소금 언약으로 이스라엘 나라를 영원히 다윗과 그 자손에게 주신 것을 너희가 알 것이 아니냐	Ought ye not to know that the Lord God of Israel gave the kingdom over Israel to David for ever, even to him and to his sons by a covenant of salt?	Do you not know that the LORD, the God of Israel, has given the kingship of Israel to David and his descendants forever by a covenant of salt?
2CH	13	6	다윗의 아들 솔로몬의 신복 느밧의 아들 여로보암이 일어나 그 주를 배반하고	Yet Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the servant of Solomon the son of David, is risen up, and hath rebelled against his lord.	Yet Jeroboam son of Nebat, a servant of Solomon son of David, rose up and rebelled against his master.
2CH	13	7	난봉과 비류가 모여 좇으므로 스스로 강하게 하여 솔로몬의 아들 르호보암을 대적하나 그 때에 르호보암이 어리고 마음이 연약하여 능히 막지 못하였었느니라	And there are gathered unto him vain men, the children of Belial, and have strengthened themselves against Rehoboam the son of Solomon, when Rehoboam was young and tenderhearted, and could not withstand them.	Then worthless and wicked men gathered around him to resist Rehoboam son of Solomon when he was young, inexperienced, and unable to resist them.
2CH	13	8	이제 너희가 또 다윗 자손의 손으로 다스리는 여호와의 나라를 대적하려 하는도다 너희는 큰 무리요 또 여로보암이 너희를 위하여 신으로 만든 금송아지가 너희와 함께 있도다	And now ye think to withstand the kingdom of the Lord in the hand of the sons of David; and ye be a great multitude, and there are with you golden calves, which Jeroboam made you for gods.	And now you think you can resist the kingdom of the LORD, which is in the hands of David’s descendants. You are indeed a vast army, and you have with you the golden calves that Jeroboam made for you as gods.
2CH	13	9	너희가 아론 자손된 여호와의 제사장과 레위 사람을 쫓아내고 이방 백성의 풍속을 좇아 제사장을 삼지 아니하였느냐 무론 누구든지 수송아지 하나와 수양 일곱을 끌고 와서 장립을 받고자 하는 자마다 허무한 신의 제사장이 될 수 있도다	Have ye not cast out the priests of the Lord, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and have made you priests after the manner of the nations of other lands? so that whosoever cometh to consecrate himself with a young bullock and seven rams, the same may be a priest of them that are no gods.	But did you not drive out the priests of the LORD, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites? And did you not make priests for yourselves as do the peoples of other lands? Now whoever comes to consecrate himself with a young bull and seven rams can become a priest of things that are not gods.
2CH	13	10	우리에게는 여호와께서 우리 하나님이 되시니 그를 우리가 배반치 아니하였고 여호와를 섬기는 제사장들이 있으니 아론의 자손이요 또 레위 사람이 수종을 들어	But as for us, the Lord is our God, and we have not forsaken him; and the priests, which minister unto the Lord, are the sons of Aaron, and the Levites wait upon their business:	But as for us, the LORD is our God. We have not forsaken Him; the priests who minister to the LORD are sons of Aaron, and the Levites attend to their duties.
2CH	13	11	조석으로 여호와 앞에 번제를 드리며 분향하며 또 깨끗한 상에 진설병을 놓고 또 금등대가 있어 그 등에 저녁마다 불을 켜나니 우리는 우리 하나님 여호와의 계명을 지키나 너희는 그를 배반하였느니라	And they burn unto the Lord every morning and every evening burnt sacrifices and sweet incense: the shewbread also set they in order upon the pure table; and the candlestick of gold with the lamps thereof, to burn every evening: for we keep the charge of the Lord our God; but ye have forsaken him.	Every morning and every evening they present burnt offerings and fragrant incense to the LORD. They set out the rows of showbread on the ceremonially clean table, and every evening they light the lamps of the gold lampstand. We are carrying out the requirements of the LORD our God, while you have forsaken Him.
2CH	13	12	하나님이 우리와 함께 하사 우리의 머리가 되시고 그 제사장들도 우리와 함께하여 경고의 나팔을 불어 너희를 공격하느니라 이스라엘 자손들아 너희 열조의 하나님 여호와와 싸우지 말라 너희가 형통치 못하리라	And, behold, God himself is with us for our captain, and his priests with sounding trumpets to cry alarm against you. O children of Israel, fight ye not against the Lord God of your fathers; for ye shall not prosper.	Now behold, God Himself is with us as our head, and His priests with their trumpets sound the battle call against you. O children of Israel, do not fight against the LORD, the God of your fathers, for you will not succeed.”
2CH	13	13	여로보암이 유다의 뒤를 둘러 복병하였으므로 그 앞에는 이스라엘 사람이 있고 그 뒤에는 복병이 있는지라	But Jeroboam caused an ambushment to come about behind them: so they were before Judah, and the ambushment was behind them.	Now Jeroboam had sent troops around to ambush from the rear, so that while he was in front of Judah, the ambush was behind them.
2CH	13	14	유다 사람이 돌이켜 보고 자기 앞뒤의 적병을 인하여 여호와께 부르짖고 제사장은 나팔을 부니라	And when Judah looked back, behold, the battle was before and behind: and they cried unto the Lord, and the priests sounded with the trumpets.	When Judah turned and discovered that the battle was both before and behind them, they cried out to the LORD. Then the priests blew the trumpets,
2CH	13	15	유다 사람이 소리지르매 유다 사람의 소리지를 때에 하나님이 여로보암과 온 이스라엘을 아비야와 유다 앞에서 쳐서 패하게 하시니라	Then the men of Judah gave a shout: and as the men of Judah shouted, it came to pass, that God smote Jeroboam and all Israel before Abijah and Judah.	and the men of Judah raised the battle cry. And when they raised the cry, God routed Jeroboam and all Israel before Abijah and Judah.
2CH	13	16	이스라엘 자손이 유다 앞에서 도망하는지라 하나님이 그 손에 붙이신고로	And the children of Israel fled before Judah: and God delivered them into their hand.	So the Israelites fled before Judah, and God delivered them into their hands.
2CH	13	17	아비야와 그 백성이 크게 도륙하니 이스라엘의 택한 병정이 죽임을 입고 엎드러진 자가 오십만이었더라	And Abijah and his people slew them with a great slaughter: so there fell down slain of Israel five hundred thousand chosen men.	Then Abijah and his people struck them with a mighty blow, and 500,000 chosen men of Israel fell slain.
2CH	13	18	그 때에 이스라엘 자손이 항복하고 유다 자손이 이기었으니 이는 저희가 그 열조의 하나님 여호와를 의지하였음이라	Thus the children of Israel were brought under at that time, and the children of Judah prevailed, because they relied upon the Lord God of their fathers.	Thus the Israelites were subdued at that time, and the men of Judah prevailed because they relied on the LORD, the God of their fathers.
2CH	13	19	아비야가 여로보암을 쫓아가서 그 성읍들을 빼앗았으니 곧 벧엘과 그 동네와 여사나와 그 동네와 에브론과 그 동네라	And Abijah pursued after Jeroboam, and took cities from him, Beth–el with the towns thereof, and Jeshanah with the towns thereof, and Ephrain with the towns thereof.	Abijah pursued Jeroboam and captured some cities from him: Bethel, Jeshanah, and Ephron, along with their villages.
2CH	13	20	아비야 때에 여로보암이 다시 강성하지 못하고 여호와의 치심을 입어 죽었고	Neither did Jeroboam recover strength again in the days of Abijah: and the Lord struck him, and he died.	Jeroboam did not again recover his power during the days of Abijah, and the LORD struck him down and he died.
2CH	13	21	아비야는 점점 강성하며 아내 열넷을 취하여 아들 스물둘과 딸 열여섯을 낳았더라	But Abijah waxed mighty, and married fourteen wives, and begat twenty and two sons, and sixteen daughters.	But Abijah grew strong, married fourteen wives, and became the father of twenty-two sons and sixteen daughters.
2CH	13	22	아비야의 남은 사적과 그 행위와 그 말은 선지자 잇도의 주석책에 기록되니라	And the rest of the acts of Abijah, and his ways, and his sayings, are written in the story of the prophet Iddo.	Now the rest of the acts of Abijah, along with his ways and his words, are written in the Treatise of the Prophet Iddo.
2CH	14	1	아비야가 그 열조와 함께 자매 다윗 성에 장사되고 그 아들 아사가 대신하여 왕이 되니 그 시대에 그 땅이 십 년을 평안하니라	So Abijah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of David: and Asa his son reigned in his stead. In his days the land was quiet ten years.	Then Abijah rested with his fathers and was buried in the City of David. And his son Asa reigned in his place, and in his days the land was at peace for ten years.
2CH	14	2	아사가 그 하나님 여호와 보시기에 선과 정의를 행하여	And Asa did that which was good and right in the eyes of the Lord his God:	And Asa did what was good and right in the eyes of the LORD his God.
2CH	14	3	이방 제단과 산당을 없이하고 주상을 훼파하며 아세라 상을 찍고	For he took away the altars of the strange gods, and the high places, and brake down the images, and cut down the groves:	He removed the foreign altars and high places, shattered the sacred pillars, and chopped down the Asherah poles.
2CH	14	4	유다 사람을 명하여 그 열조의 하나님 여호와를 구하게 하며 그 율법과 명령을 행하게 하고	And commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their fathers, and to do the law and the commandment.	He commanded the people of Judah to seek the LORD, the God of their fathers, and to observe the law and the commandments.
2CH	14	5	또 유다 모든 성읍에서 산당과 태양상을 없이하매 나라가 그 앞에서 평안함을 얻으니라	Also he took away out of all the cities of Judah the high places and the images: and the kingdom was quiet before him.	He also removed the high places and incense altars from all the cities of Judah, and under him the kingdom was at peace.
2CH	14	6	여호와께서 아사에게 평안을 주셨으므로 그 땅이 평안하여 여러해 싸움이 없은지라 저가 견고한 성읍들을 유다에 건축하니라	And he built fenced cities in Judah: for the land had rest, and he had no war in those years; because the Lord had given him rest.	Because the land was at peace, Asa built fortified cities in Judah. In those days no one made war with him, because the LORD had given him rest.
2CH	14	7	아사가 일찍이 유다 사람에게 이르되 우리가 우리 하나님 여호와를 찾았으므로 이 땅이 아직 우리 앞에 있나니 우리가 이 성읍들을 건축하고 그 주위에 성곽과 망대와 문과 빗장을 만들자 우리가 주를 찾았으므로 주께서 우리에게 사방의 평안을 주셨느니라 하고 이에 저희가 성읍을 형통하게 건축하였더라	Therefore he said unto Judah, Let us build these cities, and make about them walls, and towers, gates, and bars, while the land is yet before us; because we have sought the Lord our God, we have sought him, and he hath given us rest on every side. So they built and prospered.	So he said to the people of Judah, “Let us build these cities and surround them with walls and towers, with doors and bars. The land is still ours because we have sought the LORD our God. We have sought Him and He has given us rest on every side.” So they built and prospered.
2CH	14	8	아사의 군대는 유다 중에서 큰 방패와 창을 잡는 자가 삼십만이요 베냐민 중에서 작은 방패를 잡으며 활을 당기는 자가 이십팔만이라 다 큰 용사더라	And Asa had an army of men that bare targets and spears, out of Judah three hundred thousand; and out of Benjamin, that bare shields and drew bows, two hundred and fourscore thousand: all these were mighty men of valour.	Asa had an army of 300,000 men from Judah bearing large shields and spears, and 280,000 men from Benjamin bearing small shields and drawing the bow. All these were mighty men of valor.
2CH	14	9	구스 사람 세라가 저희를 치려하여 군사 백만과 병거 삼백 승을 거느리고 마레사에 이르매	And there came out against them Zerah the Ethiopian with an host of a thousand thousand, and three hundred chariots; and came unto Mareshah.	Then Zerah the Cushite came against them with an army of 1,000,000 men and 300 chariots, and they advanced as far as Mareshah.
2CH	14	10	아사가 마주 나아가서 마레사의 스바다 골짜기에 진치고	Then Asa went out against him, and they set the battle in array in the valley of Zephathah at Mareshah.	So Asa marched out against him and lined up in battle formation in the Valley of Zephathah near Mareshah.
2CH	14	11	그 하나님 여호와께 부르짖어 가로되 여호와여 강한 자와 약한 자 사이에는 주 밖에 도와 줄 이가 없사오니 우리 하나님 여호와여 우리를 도우소서 우리가 주를 의지하오며 주의 이름을 의탁하옵고 이 많은 무리를 치러 왔나이다 여호와여 주는 우리 하나님이시오니 원컨대 사람으로 주를 이기지 못하게 하옵소서 하였더니	And Asa cried unto the Lord his God, and said, Lord, it is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that have no power: help us, O Lord our God; for we rest on thee, and in thy name we go against this multitude. O Lord, thou art our God; let not man prevail against thee.	Then Asa cried out to the LORD his God: “O LORD, there is no one besides You to help the powerless against the mighty. Help us, O LORD our God, for we rely on You, and in Your name we have come against this multitude. O LORD, You are our God. Do not let a mere mortal prevail against You.”
2CH	14	12	여호와께서 구스 사람을 아사와 유다 사람 앞에서 쳐서 패하게 하시니 구스 사람이 도망하는지라	So the Lord smote the Ethiopians before Asa, and before Judah; and the Ethiopians fled.	So the LORD struck down the Cushites before Asa and Judah, and the Cushites fled.
2CH	14	13	아사와 그 좇는 자가 구스 사람을 쫓아 그랄까지 이르매 이에 구스 사람이 엎드러지고 살아 남은 자가 없었으니 이는 여호와 앞에서와 그 군대 앞에서 패망하였음이라 노략한 물건이 심히 많았더라	And Asa and the people that were with him pursued them unto Gerar: and the Ethiopians were overthrown, that they could not recover themselves; for they were destroyed before the Lord, and before his host; and they carried away very much spoil.	Then Asa and his army pursued them as far as Gerar. The Cushites fell and could not recover, for they were crushed before the LORD and His army. So the people of Judah carried off a great amount of plunder
2CH	14	14	여호와께서 그랄 사면 모든 성읍 백성을 두렵게 하시니 무리가 그 모든 성읍을 치고 그 가운데 있는 많은 물건을 노략하고	And they smote all the cities round about Gerar; for the fear of the Lord came upon them: and they spoiled all the cities; for there was exceeding much spoil in them.	and attacked all the cities around Gerar, because the terror of the LORD had fallen upon them. They plundered all the cities, since there was much plunder there.
2CH	14	15	또 짐승 지키는 천막을 치고 양과 약대를 많이 이끌고 예루살렘으로 돌아왔더라	They smote also the tents of cattle, and carried away sheep and camels in abundance, and returned to Jerusalem.	They also attacked the tents of the herdsmen and carried off many sheep and camels. Then they returned to Jerusalem.
2CH	15	1	하나님의 신이 오뎃의 아들 아사랴에게 임하시매	And the Spirit of God came upon Azariah the son of Oded:	Now the Spirit of God came upon Azariah son of Oded.
2CH	15	2	저가 나가서 아사를 맞아 이르되 아사와 및 유다와 베냐민의 무리들아 내 말을 들으라 너희가 여호와와 함께하면 여호와께서 너희와 함께하실지라 너희가 만일 저를 찾으면 저가 너희의 만난바 되시려니와 너희가 만일 저를 버리면 저도 너희를 버리시리라	And he went out to meet Asa, and said unto him, Hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin; The Lord is with you, while ye be with him; and if ye seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you.	So he went out to meet Asa and said to him, “Listen to me, Asa and all Judah and Benjamin. The LORD is with you when you are with Him. If you seek Him, He will be found by you, but if you forsake Him, He will forsake you.
2CH	15	3	이스라엘에는 참 신이 없고 가르치는 제사장도 없고 율법도 없은 지가 이제 오래였으나	Now for a long season Israel hath been without the true God, and without a teaching priest, and without law.	For many years Israel has been without the true God, without a priest to instruct them, and without the law.
2CH	15	4	그 환난 때에 이스라엘 하나님 여호와께 돌아가서 찾으매 저가 그들의 만난바가 되셨나니	But when they in their trouble did turn unto the Lord God of Israel, and sought him, he was found of them.	But in their distress they turned to the LORD, the God of Israel, and sought Him, and He was found by them.
2CH	15	5	그 때에 열국에 거한 모든 백성이 크게 요란하여 사람의 출입이 평안치 못하며	And in those times there was no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the inhabitants of the countries.	In those days there was no safety for travelers, because the residents of the lands had many conflicts.
2CH	15	6	이 나라가 저 나라와 서로 치고 이 성읍이 저 성읍과 또한 그러하여 피차 상한바 되었나니 이는 하나님이 모든 고난으로 요란케 하셨음이니라	And nation was destroyed of nation, and city of city: for God did vex them with all adversity.	Nation was crushed by nation, and city by city, for God afflicted them with all kinds of adversity.
2CH	15	7	그런즉 너희는 강하게 하라 손이 약하지 않게 하라 너희 행위에는 상급이 있음이니라	Be ye strong therefore, and let not your hands be weak: for your work shall be rewarded.	But as for you, be strong; do not be discouraged, for your work will be rewarded.”
2CH	15	8	아사가 이 말 곧 선지자 오뎃의 예언을 듣고 마음을 강하게 하여 가증한 물건을 유다와 베냐민 온 땅에서 제하고 또 에브라임 산지에서 빼앗은 성읍들에서 제하고 또 여호와의 낭실 앞 여호와의 단을 중수하고	And when Asa heard these words, and the prophecy of Oded the prophet, he took courage, and put away the abominable idols out of all the land of Judah and Benjamin, and out of the cities which he had taken from mount Ephraim, and renewed the altar of the Lord, that was before the porch of the Lord.	When Asa heard these words and the prophecy of Azariah son of Oded the prophet, he took courage and removed the detestable idols from the whole land of Judah and Benjamin and from the cities he had captured in the hill country of Ephraim. He then restored the altar of the LORD that was in front of the portico of the LORD’s temple.
2CH	15	9	또 유다와 베냐민의 무리를 모으고 에브라임과 므낫세와 시므온 가운데서 나와서 저희 중에 우거하는 자를 모았으니 이는 이스라엘 사람들이 아사의 하나님 여호와께서 그와 함께하심을 보고 아사에게로 돌아오는 자가 많았음이더라	And he gathered all Judah and Benjamin, and the strangers with them out of Ephraim and Manasseh, and out of Simeon: for they fell to him out of Israel in abundance, when they saw that the Lord his God was with him.	And he assembled all Judah and Benjamin, along with those from the tribes of Ephraim, Manasseh, and Simeon who had settled among them, for great numbers had come over to him from Israel when they saw that the LORD his God was with him.
2CH	15	10	아사 왕 십오년 삼월에 저희가 예루살렘에 모이고	So they gathered themselves together at Jerusalem in the third month, in the fifteenth year of the reign of Asa.	So they gathered together in Jerusalem in the third month of the fifteenth year of Asa’s reign.
2CH	15	11	그 날에 노략하여 온 물건 중에서 소 칠백과 양 칠천으로 여호와께 제사를 드리고	And they offered unto the Lord the same time, of the spoil which they had brought, seven hundred oxen and seven thousand sheep.	At that time they sacrificed to the LORD seven hundred oxen and seven thousand sheep from all the plunder they had brought back.
2CH	15	12	또 마음을 다하고 성품을 다하여 열조의 하나님 여호와를 찾기로 언약하고	And they entered into a covenant to seek the Lord God of their fathers with all their heart and with all their soul;	Then they entered into a covenant to seek the LORD, the God of their fathers, with all their heart and soul.
2CH	15	13	무릇 이스라엘 하나님 여호와를 찾지 아니하는 자는 대소 남녀를 무론하고 죽이는 것이 마땅하다 하고	That whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel should be put to death, whether small or great, whether man or woman.	And whoever would not seek the LORD, the God of Israel, would be put to death, whether young or old, man or woman.
2CH	15	14	무리가 큰 소리로 부르며 피리와 나팔을 불어 여호와께 맹세하매	And they sware unto the Lord with a loud voice, and with shouting, and with trumpets, and with cornets.	They took an oath to the LORD with a loud voice, with shouting, trumpets, and rams’ horns.
2CH	15	15	온 유다가 이 맹세를 기뻐한지라 무리가 마음을 다하여 맹세하고 뜻을 다하여 여호와를 찾았으므로 여호와께서도 저희의 만난바가 되시고 그 사방에 평안을 주셨더라	And all Judah rejoiced at the oath: for they had sworn with all their heart, and sought him with their whole desire; and he was found of them: and the Lord gave them rest round about.	And all Judah rejoiced over the oath, for they had sworn it with all their heart. They had sought Him earnestly, and He was found by them. So the LORD gave them rest on every side.
2CH	15	16	아사 왕의 모친 마아가가 아세라의 가증한 목상을 만들었으므로 아사가 그 태후의 위를 폐하고 그 우상을 찍고 빻아 기드론 시냇가에서 불살랐으니	And also concerning Maachah the mother of Asa the king, he removed her from being queen, because she had made an idol in a grove: and Asa cut down her idol, and stamped it, and burnt it at the brook Kidron.	King Asa also removed his grandmother Maacah from her position as queen mother because she had made a detestable Asherah pole. Asa chopped down the pole, crushed it, and burned it in the Kidron Valley.
2CH	15	17	산당은 이스라엘 중에서 제하지 아니하였으나 아사의 마음이 일평생 온전하였더라	But the high places were not taken away out of Israel: nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect all his days.	The high places were not removed from Israel, but Asa’s heart was fully devoted all his days.
2CH	15	18	저가 또 그 부친의 구별한 물건과 자기의 구별한 물건 곧 은과 금과 기명들을 하나님의 전에 드렸더니	And he brought into the house of God the things that his father had dedicated, and that he himself had dedicated, silver, and gold, and vessels.	And he brought into the house of God the silver and gold articles that he and his father had dedicated.
2CH	15	19	이 때부터 아사 왕 삼십오년까지 다시는 전쟁이 없으니라	And there was no more war unto the five and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa.	And there was no war until the thirty-fifth year of Asa’s reign.
2CH	16	1	아사 왕 삼십육년에 이스라엘 왕 바아사가 유다를 치러 올라와서 라마를 건축하여 사람을 유다 왕 아사에게 왕래하지 못하게 하려한지라	In the six and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa Baasha king of Israel came up against Judah, and built Ramah, to the intent that he might let none go out or come in to Asa king of Judah.	In the thirty-sixth year of Asa’s reign, Baasha king of Israel went up against Judah and fortified Ramah to prevent anyone from leaving or entering the territory of Asa king of Judah.
2CH	16	2	아사가 여호와의 전 곳간과 왕궁 곳간의 은금을 취하여 다메섹에 거한 아람 왕 벤하닷에게 보내며 가로되	Then Asa brought out silver and gold out of the treasures of the house of the Lord and of the king’s house, and sent to Ben–hadad king of Syria, that dwelt at Damascus, saying,	So Asa withdrew the silver and gold from the treasuries of the house of the LORD and the royal palace, and he sent it with this message to Ben-hadad king of Aram, who was ruling in Damascus:
2CH	16	3	내 부친과 당신의 부친 사이에와 같이 나와 당신 사이에 약조하자 내가 당신에게 은금을 보내노니 와서 이스라엘 왕 바아사와 세운 약조를 깨뜨려서 저로 나를 떠나게 하라 하매	There is a league between me and thee, as there was between my father and thy father: behold, I have sent thee silver and gold; go, break thy league with Baasha king of Israel, that he may depart from me.	“Let there be a treaty between me and you, between my father and your father. See, I have sent you silver and gold. Now go and break your treaty with Baasha king of Israel, so that he will withdraw from me.”
2CH	16	4	벤하닷이 아사 왕의 말을 듣고 그 군대 장관들을 보내어 이스라엘 두어 성읍을 치되 이욘과 단과 아벨마임과 납달리의 모든 국고성을 쳤더니	And Ben–hadad hearkened unto king Asa, and sent the captains of his armies against the cities of Israel; and they smote Ijon, and Dan, and Abel–maim, and all the store cities of Naphtali.	And Ben-hadad listened to King Asa and sent the commanders of his armies against the cities of Israel, conquering Ijon, Dan, Abel-maim, and all the store cities of Naphtali.
2CH	16	5	바아사가 듣고 라마 건축하는 일을 파하여 그 공역을 그친지라	And it came to pass, when Baasha heard it, that he left off building of Ramah, and let his work cease.	When Baasha learned of this, he stopped fortifying Ramah and abandoned his work.
2CH	16	6	아사 왕이 온 유다 무리를 거느리고 바아사가 라마를 건축하던 돌과 재목을 수운하여다가 게바와 미스바를 건축하였더라	Then Asa the king took all Judah; and they carried away the stones of Ramah, and the timber thereof, wherewith Baasha was building; and he built therewith Geba and Mizpah.	Then King Asa brought all the men of Judah, and they carried away the stones of Ramah and the timbers Baasha had used for building. And with these materials he built up Geba and Mizpah.
2CH	16	7	때에 선견자 하나니가 유다 왕 아사에게 나아와서 이르되 왕이 아람 왕을 의지하고 왕의 하나님 여호와를 의지하지 아니한고로 아람 왕의 군대가 왕의 손에서 벗어났나이다	And at that time Hanani the seer came to Asa king of Judah, and said unto him, Because thou hast relied on the king of Syria, and not relied on the Lord thy God, therefore is the host of the king of Syria escaped out of thine hand.	At that time Hanani the seer came to King Asa of Judah and told him, “Because you have relied on the king of Aram and not on the LORD your God, the army of the king of Aram has escaped from your hand.
2CH	16	8	구스 사람과 룹 사람의 군대가 크지 아니하며 말과 병거가 심히 많지 아니하더이까 그러나 왕이 여호와를 의지한고로 여호와께서 왕의 손에 붙이셨나이다	Were not the Ethiopians and the Lubims a huge host, with very many chariots and horsemen? yet, because thou didst rely on the Lord, he delivered them into thine hand.	Were not the Cushites and Libyans a vast army with many chariots and horsemen? Yet because you relied on the LORD, He delivered them into your hand.
2CH	16	9	여호와의 눈은 온 땅을 두루 감찰하사 전심으로 자기에게 향하는 자를 위하여 능력을 베푸시나니 이 일은 왕이 망령되이 행하였은즉 이후부터는 왕에게 전쟁이 있으리이다 하매	For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to shew himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him. Herein thou hast done foolishly: therefore from henceforth thou shalt have wars.	For the eyes of the LORD roam to and fro over all the earth, to show Himself strong on behalf of those whose hearts are fully devoted to Him. You have acted foolishly in this matter. From now on, therefore, you will be at war.”
2CH	16	10	아사가 노하여 선견자를 옥에 가두었으니 이는 그 말에 크게 노하였음이며 그 때에 아사가 또 몇 백성을 학대하였더라	Then Asa was wroth with the seer, and put him in a prison house; for he was in a rage with him because of this thing. And Asa oppressed some of the people the same time.	Asa was angry with the seer and became so enraged over this matter that he put the man in prison. And at the same time Asa oppressed some of the people.
2CH	16	11	아사의 시종 행적은 유다와 이스라엘 열왕기에 기록되니라	And, behold, the acts of Asa, first and last, lo, they are written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.	Now the rest of the acts of Asa, from beginning to end, are indeed written in the Book of the Kings of Judah and Israel.
2CH	16	12	아사가 왕이 된지 삼십구년에 그 발이 병들어 심히 중하나 병이 있을 때에 저가 여호와께 구하지 아니하고 의원들에게 구하였더라	And Asa in the thirty and ninth year of his reign was diseased in his feet, until his disease was exceeding great: yet in his disease he sought not to the Lord, but to the physicians.	In the thirty-ninth year of his reign, Asa became diseased in his feet, and his malady became increasingly severe. Yet even in his illness he did not seek the LORD, but only the physicians.
2CH	16	13	아사가 위에 있은지 사십일년에 죽어 그 열조와 함께 자매	And Asa slept with his fathers, and died in the one and fortieth year of his reign.	So in the forty-first year of his reign, Asa died and rested with his fathers.
2CH	16	14	다윗 성에 자기를 위하여 파 두었던 묘실에 무리가 장사하되 그 시체를 법대로 만든 각양 향재료를 가득히 채운 상에 두고 또 위하여 많이 분향하였더라	And they buried him in his own sepulchres, which he had made for himself in the city of David, and laid him in the bed which was filled with sweet odours and divers kinds of spices prepared by the apothecaries’ art: and they made a very great burning for him.	And he was buried in the tomb that he had cut out for himself in the City of David. They laid him on a bier that was full of spices and various blended perfumes; then they made a great fire in his honor.
2CH	17	1	아사의 아들 여호사밧이 대신하여 왕이 되어 스스로 강하게 하여 이스라엘을 방비하되	And Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead, and strengthened himself against Israel.	Asa’s son Jehoshaphat reigned in his place, and he strengthened himself against Israel.
2CH	17	2	유다 모든 견고한 성읍에 군대를 주둔하고 또 유다 땅과 그 아비 아사의 취한바 에브라임 성읍들에 영문을 두었더라	And he placed forces in all the fenced cities of Judah, and set garrisons in the land of Judah, and in the cities of Ephraim, which Asa his father had taken.	He stationed troops in every fortified city of Judah and put garrisons in the land of Judah and in the cities of Ephraim that his father Asa had captured.
2CH	17	3	여호와께서 여호사밧과 함께 하셨으니 이는 저가 그 조상 다윗의 처음 길로 행하여 바알들에게 구하지 아니하고	And the Lord was with Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the first ways of his father David, and sought not unto Baalim;	Now the LORD was with Jehoshaphat because he walked in the earlier ways of his father David. He did not seek out the Baals,
2CH	17	4	오직 그 부친의 하나님께 구하며 그 계명을 행하고 이스라엘의 행위를 좇지 아니하였음이라	But sought to the Lord God of his father, and walked in his commandments, and not after the doings of Israel.	but he sought the God of his father and walked by His commandments rather than the practices of Israel.
2CH	17	5	그러므로 여호와께서 나라를 그 손에서 견고하게 하시매 유다 무리가 여호사밧에게 예물을 드렸으므로 저가 부귀와 영광이 극하였더라	Therefore the Lord stablished the kingdom in his hand; and all Judah brought to Jehoshaphat presents; and he had riches and honour in abundance.	So the LORD established the kingdom in his hand, and all Judah brought him tribute, so that he had an abundance of riches and honor.
2CH	17	6	저가 전심으로 여호와의 도를 행하여 산당과 아세라 목상들도 유다에서 제하였더라	And his heart was lifted up in the ways of the Lord: moreover he took away the high places and groves out of Judah.	And his heart took delight in the ways of the LORD; furthermore, he removed the high places and Asherah poles from Judah.
2CH	17	7	저가 위에 있은지 삼년에 그 방백 벤하일과 오바댜와 스가랴와 느다넬과 미가야를 보내어 유다 여러 성읍에 가서 가르치게 하고	Also in the third year of his reign he sent to his princes, even to Ben–hail, and to Obadiah, and to Zechariah, and to Nethaneel, and to Michaiah, to teach in the cities of Judah.	In the third year of his reign, Jehoshaphat sent his officials Ben-hail, Obadiah, Zechariah, Nethanel, and Micaiah to teach in the cities of Judah,
2CH	17	8	또 저희와 함께 레위 사람 스마야와 느다냐와 스바댜와 아사헬과 스미라못과 여호나단과 아도니야와 도비야와 도바도니야 등 레위 사람을 보내고 또 저희와 함께 제사장 엘리사마와 여호람을 보내었더니	And with them he sent Levites, even Shemaiah, and Nethaniah, and Zebadiah, and Asahel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehonathan, and Adonijah, and Tobijah, and Tob–adonijah, Levites; and with them Elishama and Jehoram, priests.	accompanied by certain Levites—Shemaiah, Nethaniah, Zebadiah, Asahel, Shemiramoth, Jehonathan, Adonijah, Tobijah, and Tob-adonijah—along with the priests Elishama and Jehoram.
2CH	17	9	저희가 여호와의 율법 책을 가지고 유다에서 가르치되 그 모든 성읍으로 순행하며 인민을 가르쳤더라	And they taught in Judah, and had the book of the law of the Lord with them, and went about throughout all the cities of Judah, and taught the people.	They taught throughout Judah, taking with them the Book of the Law of the LORD. They went throughout the towns of Judah and taught the people.
2CH	17	10	여호와께서 유다 사면 열국에 두려움을 주사 여호사밧과 싸우지 못하게 하시매	And the fear of the Lord fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands that were round about Judah, so that they made no war against Jehoshaphat.	And the dread of the LORD fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands that surrounded Judah, so that they did not make war against Jehoshaphat.
2CH	17	11	블레셋 중에서는 여호사밧에게 예물을 드리며 은으로 공을 바쳤고 아라비아 사람도 짐승떼 곧 수양 칠천칠백과 수염소 칠천칠백을 드렸더라	Also some of the Philistines brought Jehoshaphat presents, and tribute silver; and the Arabians brought him flocks, seven thousand and seven hundred rams, and seven thousand and seven hundred he goats.	Some Philistines also brought gifts and silver as tribute to Jehoshaphat, and the Arabs brought him 7,700 rams and 7,700 goats from their flocks.
2CH	17	12	여호사밧이 점점 강대하여 유다에 견고한 채와 국고성을 건축하고	And Jehoshaphat waxed great exceedingly; and he built in Judah castles, and cities of store.	Jehoshaphat grew stronger and stronger, and he built fortresses and store cities in Judah
2CH	17	13	유다 각 성에 역사를 많이 하고 또 예루살렘에 크게 용맹한 군사를 두었으니	And he had much business in the cities of Judah: and the men of war, mighty men of valour, were in Jerusalem.	and kept vast supplies in the cities of Judah. He also had warriors in Jerusalem who were mighty men of valor.
2CH	17	14	군사의 수효가 그 족속대로 이러하니라 유다에 속한 천부장 중에는 아드나가 으뜸이 되어 큰 용사 삼십만을 거느렸고	And these are the numbers of them according to the house of their fathers: Of Judah, the captains of thousands; Adnah the chief, and with him mighty men of valour three hundred thousand.	These are their numbers according to the houses of their fathers: From Judah, the commanders of thousands: Adnah the commander, and with him 300,000 mighty men of valor;
2CH	17	15	그 다음은 장관 여호하난이니 이십팔만을 거느렸고	And next to him was Jehohanan the captain, and with him two hundred and fourscore thousand.	next to him, Jehohanan the commander, and with him 280,000;
2CH	17	16	그 다음은 시그리의 아들 아마시야니 저는 자기를 여호와께 즐거이 드린 자라 큰 용사 이십만을 거느렸고	And next him was Amasiah the son of Zichri, who willingly offered himself unto the Lord; and with him two hundred thousand mighty men of valour.	and next to him, Amasiah son of Zichri, the volunteer for the LORD, and with him 200,000 mighty men of valor.
2CH	17	17	베냐민에 속한 자 중에 큰 용사 엘리아다는 활과 방패를 잡은 자 이십만을 거느렸고	And of Benjamin; Eliada a mighty man of valour, and with him armed men with bow and shield two hundred thousand.	From Benjamin: Eliada, a mighty man of valor, and with him 200,000 armed with bows and shields;
2CH	17	18	그 다음은 여호사밧이라 싸움을 예비한 자 십팔만을 거느렸으니	And next him was Jehozabad, and with him an hundred and fourscore thousand ready prepared for the war.	and next to him, Jehozabad, and with him 180,000 armed for battle.
2CH	17	19	이는 다 왕을 섬기는 자요 이 외에 또 온 유다 견고한 성에 왕이 군사를 두었더라	These waited on the king, beside those whom the king put in the fenced cities throughout all Judah.	These were the men who served the king, besides those he stationed in the fortified cities throughout Judah.
2CH	18	1	여호사밧이 부귀와 영광이 극하였고 아합으로 더불어 연혼하였더라	Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honour in abundance, and joined affinity with Ahab.	Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honor in abundance, and he allied himself with Ahab by marriage.
2CH	18	2	두어 해 후에 저가 사마리아에 내려가서 아합에게 나아갔더니 아합이 저와 종자를 위하여 우양을 많이 잡고 함께 가서 길르앗 라못 치기를 권하더라	And after certain years he went down to Ahab to Samaria. And Ahab killed sheep and oxen for him in abundance, and for the people that he had with him, and persuaded him to go up with him to Ramoth–gilead.	And some years later he went down to visit Ahab in Samaria, where Ahab sacrificed many sheep and cattle for him and the people with him, and urged him to march up to Ramoth-gilead.
2CH	18	3	이스라엘 왕 아합이 유다 왕 여호사밧에게 이르되 당신은 나와 함께 길르앗 라못으로 가시겠느뇨 대답하되 나는 당신과 일반이요 내 백성은 당신의 백성과 일반이니 당신과 함께 싸우리이다	And Ahab king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat king of Judah, Wilt thou go with me to Ramoth–gilead? And he answered him, I am as thou art, and my people as thy people; and we will be with thee in the war.	Ahab king of Israel asked Jehoshaphat king of Judah, “Will you go with me against Ramoth-gilead?” And Jehoshaphat replied, “I am like you, and my people are your people; we will join you in the war.”
2CH	18	4	여호사밧이 또 이스라엘 왕에게 이르되 청컨대 먼저 여호와의 말씀이 어떠하신지 물어 보소서	And Jehoshaphat said unto the king of Israel, Enquire, I pray thee, at the word of the Lord to day.	But Jehoshaphat also said to the king of Israel, “Please inquire first for the word of the LORD.”
2CH	18	5	이스라엘 왕이 이에 선지자 사백 인을 모으고 저희에게 이르되 우리가 길르앗 라못에 가서 싸우랴 말랴 저희가 가로되 올라가소서 하나님이 그 성을 왕의 손에 붙이시리이다	Therefore the king of Israel gathered together of prophets four hundred men, and said unto them, Shall we go to Ramoth–gilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up; for God will deliver it into the king’s hand.	So the king of Israel assembled the prophets, four hundred men, and asked them, “Should we go to war against Ramoth-gilead, or should we refrain?” “Go up,” they replied, “and God will deliver it into the hand of the king.”
2CH	18	6	여호사밧이 가로되 이 외에 우리가 물을 만한 여호와의 선지자가 여기 있지 아니하니이까	But Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the Lord besides, that we might enquire of him?	But Jehoshaphat asked, “Is there not still a prophet of the LORD here of whom we can inquire?”
2CH	18	7	이스라엘 왕이 여호사밧에게 이르되 오히려 이믈라의 아들 미가야 한 사람이 있으니 저로 말미암아 여호와께 물을 수 있으나 저는 내게 대하여 길한 일은 예언하지 아니하고 항상 흉한 일만 예언하기로 내가 저를 미워하나이다 여호사밧이 가로되 왕은 그런 말씀을 마소서	And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, There is yet one man, by whom we may enquire of the Lord: but I hate him; for he never prophesied good unto me, but always evil: the same is Micaiah the son of Imla. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king say so.	The king of Israel answered, “There is still one man who can ask the LORD, but I hate him because he never prophesies anything good for me, but only bad. He is Micaiah son of Imlah.” “The king should not say that!” Jehoshaphat replied.
2CH	18	8	이스라엘 왕이 한 내시를 불러 이르되 이믈라의 아들 미가야로 속히 오게 하라 하니라	And the king of Israel called for one of his officers, and said, Fetch quickly Micaiah the son of Imla.	So the king of Israel called one of his officials and said, “Bring Micaiah son of Imlah at once.”
2CH	18	9	이스라엘 왕과 유다 왕 여호사밧이 왕복을 입고 사마리아 성문 어귀 광장에서 각기 보좌에 앉았고 모든 선지자가 그 앞에서 예언을 하는데	And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah sat either of them on his throne, clothed in their robes, and they sat in a void place at the entering in of the gate of Samaria; and all the prophets prophesied before them.	Dressed in royal attire, the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah were sitting on their thrones at the threshing floor by the entrance of the gate of Samaria, with all the prophets prophesying before them.
2CH	18	10	그나아나의 아들 시드기야는 철로 뿔들을 만들어 가지고 말하되 여호와의 말씀이 왕이 이것들로 아람 사람을 찔러 진멸하리라 하셨다 하고	And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah had made him horns of iron, and said, Thus saith the Lord, With these thou shalt push Syria until they be consumed.	Now Zedekiah son of Chenaanah had made for himself iron horns and declared, “This is what the LORD says: ‘With these you shall gore the Arameans until they are finished off.’”
2CH	18	11	모든 선지자도 그와 같이 예언하여 이르기를 길르앗 라못으로 올라가서 승리를 얻으소서 여호와께서 그 성을 왕의 손에 붙이시리이다 하더라	And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to Ramoth–gilead, and prosper: for the Lord shall deliver it into the hand of the king.	And all the prophets were prophesying the same, saying, “Go up to Ramoth-gilead and prosper, for the LORD will deliver it into the hand of the king.”
2CH	18	12	미가야를 부르러 간 사자가 일러 가로되 선지자들의 말이 여출일구하여 왕에게 길하게 하니 청컨대 당신의 말도 저희 중 한 사람처럼 길하게 하소서	And the messenger that went to call Micaiah spake to him, saying, Behold, the words of the prophets declare good to the king with one assent; let thy word therefore, I pray thee, be like one of theirs, and speak thou good.	Then the messenger who had gone to call Micaiah instructed him, “Behold, with one accord the words of the prophets are favorable to the king. So please let your words be like theirs, and speak favorably.”
2CH	18	13	미가야가 가로되 여호와의 사심을 가리켜 맹세하노니 내 하나님의 말씀하시는 것 곧 그것을 내가 말하리라 하고	And Micaiah said, As the Lord liveth, even what my God saith, that will I speak.	But Micaiah said, “As surely as the LORD lives, I will speak whatever my God tells me.”
2CH	18	14	이에 왕에게 이르니 왕이 저에게 이르되 미가야야 우리가 길르앗 라못으로 싸우러 가랴 가로되 올라가서 승리를 얻으소서 저희가 왕의 손에 붙인바 되리이다	And when he was come to the king, the king said unto him, Micaiah, shall we go to Ramoth–gilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And he said, Go ye up, and prosper, and they shall be delivered into your hand.	When Micaiah arrived, the king asked him, “Micaiah, should we go to war against Ramoth-gilead, or should we refrain?” “Go up and triumph,” Micaiah replied, “for they will be given into your hand.”
2CH	18	15	왕이 저에게 이르되 여호와의 이름으로 진실한 것만 말하라고 내가 몇 번이나 너로 맹세케 하여야 하겠느냐	And the king said to him, How many times shall I adjure thee that thou say nothing but the truth to me in the name of the Lord?	But the king said to him, “How many times must I make you swear not to tell me anything but the truth in the name of the LORD?”
2CH	18	16	저가 가로되 내가 보니 온 이스라엘이 목자 없는 양 같이 산에 흩어졌는데 여호와의 말씀이 이 무리가 주인이 없으니 각각 평안히 그 집으로 돌아갈 것이니라 하셨나이다	Then he said, I did see all Israel scattered upon the mountains, as sheep that have no shepherd: and the Lord said, These have no master; let them return therefore every man to his house in peace.	So Micaiah declared: “I saw all Israel scattered on the hills like sheep without a shepherd. And the LORD said, ‘These people have no master; let each one return home in peace.’”
2CH	18	17	이스라엘 왕이 여호사밧에게 이르되 저 사람이 내게 대하여 길한 것을 예언하지 아니하고 흉한 것만 예언하겠다고 당신에게 말씀하지 아니하였나이까	And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee that he would not prophesy good unto me, but evil?	Then the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “Did I not tell you that he never prophesies good for me, but only bad?”
2CH	18	18	미가야가 가로되 그런즉 왕은 여호와의 말씀을 들으소서 내가 보니 여호와께서 그 보좌에 앉으셨고 하늘의 만군이 그 좌우편에 모시고 섰는데	Again he said, Therefore hear the word of the Lord; I saw the Lord sitting upon his throne, and all the host of heaven standing on his right hand and on his left.	Micaiah continued, “Therefore hear the word of the LORD: I saw the LORD sitting on His throne, and all the host of heaven standing on His right and on His left.
2CH	18	19	여호와께서 말씀하시기를 누가 이스라엘 왕 아합을 꾀어 저로 길르앗 라못에 올라가서 죽게 할꼬 하시니 하나는 이렇게 하겠다 하고 하나는 저렇게 하겠다 하였는데	And the Lord said, Who shall entice Ahab king of Israel, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth–gilead? And one spake saying after this manner, and another saying after that manner.	And the LORD said, ‘Who will entice Ahab king of Israel to march up and fall at Ramoth-gilead?’ And one suggested this, and another that.
2CH	18	20	한 영이 나아와 여호와 앞에 서서 말하되 내가 저를 꾀이겠나이다 여호와께서 저에게 이르시되 어떻게 하겠느냐	Then there came out a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said, I will entice him. And the Lord said unto him, Wherewith?	Then a spirit came forward, stood before the LORD, and said, ‘I will entice him.’ ‘By what means?’ asked the LORD.
2CH	18	21	가로되 내가 나가서 거짓말하는 영이 되어 그 모든 선지자의 입에 있겠나이다 여호와께서 가라사대 너는 꾀이겠고 또 이루리라 나가서 그리하라 하셨은즉	And he said, I will go out, and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And the Lord said, Thou shalt entice him, and thou shalt also prevail: go out, and do even so.	And he replied, ‘I will go out and be a lying spirit in the mouths of all his prophets.’ ‘You will surely entice him and prevail,’ said the LORD. ‘Go and do it.’
2CH	18	22	이제 여호와께서 거짓말하는 영을 왕의 이 모든 선지자의 입에 넣으셨고 또 여호와께서 왕에게 대하여 화를 말씀하셨나이다	Now therefore, behold, the Lord hath put a lying spirit in the mouth of these thy prophets, and the Lord hath spoken evil against thee.	So you see, the LORD has put a lying spirit in the mouths of these prophets of yours, and the LORD has pronounced disaster against you.”
2CH	18	23	그나아나의 아들 시드기야가 가까이 와서 미가야의 뺨을 치며 이르되 여호와의 영이 나를 떠나 어디로 말미암아 가서 네게 말씀하더냐	Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came near, and smote Micaiah upon the cheek, and said, Which way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to speak unto thee?	Then Zedekiah son of Chenaanah went up, struck Micaiah in the face, and demanded, “Which way did the Spirit of the LORD go when He departed from me to speak with you?”
2CH	18	24	미가야가 가로되 네가 골방에 들어가서 숨는 그 날에 보리라	And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shalt see on that day when thou shalt go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.	Micaiah replied, “You will soon see, on that day when you go and hide in an inner room.”
2CH	18	25	이스라엘 왕이 가로되 미가야를 잡아 부윤 아몬과 왕자 요아스에게로 끌고 돌아가서	Then the king of Israel said, Take ye Micaiah, and carry him back to Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the king’s son;	And the king of Israel declared, “Take Micaiah and return him to Amon the governor of the city and to Joash the king’s son,
2CH	18	26	말하기를 왕의 말씀이 이 놈을 옥에 가두고 내가 평안히 돌아올 때까지 고생의 떡과 고생의 물로 먹이라 하라	And say, Thus saith the king, Put this fellow in the prison, and feed him with bread of affliction and with water of affliction, until I return in peace.	and tell them that this is what the king says: ‘Put this man in prison and feed him only bread and water until I return safely.’”
2CH	18	27	미가야가 가로되 왕이 참으로 평안히 돌아오시게 될진대 여호와께서 나로 말씀하지 아니하셨으리이다 또 가로되 너희 백성들아 다 들을지어다 하니라	And Micaiah said, If thou certainly return in peace, then hath not the Lord spoken by me. And he said, Hearken, all ye people.	But Micaiah replied, “If you ever return safely, the LORD has not spoken through me.” Then he added, “Take heed, all you people!”
2CH	18	28	이스라엘 왕과 유다 왕 여호사밧이 길르앗 라못으로 올라가니라	So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up to Ramoth–gilead.	So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah went up to Ramoth-gilead.
2CH	18	29	이스라엘 왕이 여호사밧에게 이르되 나는 변장하고 군중으로 들어가려 하노니 당신은 왕복을 입으소서 하고 이스라엘 왕이 변장하고 둘이 군중으로 들어가니라	And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, I will disguise myself, and will go to the battle; but put thou on thy robes. So the king of Israel disguised himself; and they went to the battle.	And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “I will disguise myself and go into battle, but you wear your royal robes.” So the king of Israel disguised himself and went into battle.
2CH	18	30	아람 왕이 그 병거 장관들에게 이미 명하여 이르기를 너희는 작은 자나 큰 자나 더불어 싸우지 말고 오직 이스라엘 왕과 싸우라 한지라	Now the king of Syria had commanded the captains of the chariots that were with him, saying, Fight ye not with small or great, save only with the king of Israel.	Now the king of Aram had ordered his chariot commanders, “Do not fight with anyone, small or great, except the king of Israel.”
2CH	18	31	병거의 장관들이 여호사밧을 보고 이르되 이가 이스라엘 왕이라 하고 돌이켜 저와 싸우려 한즉 여호사밧이 소리를 지르매 여호와께서 저를 도우시며 하나님이 저희를 감동시키사 저를 떠나가게 하신지라	And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, that they said, It is the king of Israel. Therefore they compassed about him to fight: but Jehoshaphat cried out, and the Lord helped him; and God moved them to depart from him.	When the chariot commanders saw Jehoshaphat, they said, “This is the king of Israel!” So they turned to fight against him, but Jehoshaphat cried out, and the LORD helped him. God drew them away from him.
2CH	18	32	병거의 장관들이 저가 이스라엘 왕이 아님을 보고 쫓기를 그치고 돌이켰더라	For it came to pass, that, when the captains of the chariots perceived that it was not the king of Israel, they turned back again from pursuing him.	And when the chariot commanders saw that he was not the king of Israel, they turned back from pursuing him.
2CH	18	33	한 사람이 우연히 활을 당기어 이스라엘 왕의 갑옷 솔기를 쏜지라 왕이 그 병거 모는 자에게 이르되 내가 부상하였으니 네 손을 돌이켜 나로 군중에서 나가게 하라 하였으나	And a certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king of Israel between the joints of the harness: therefore he said to his chariot man, Turn thine hand, that thou mayest carry me out of the host; for I am wounded.	However, a certain man drew his bow without taking special aim, and he struck the king of Israel between the joints of his armor. So the king said to his charioteer, “Turn around and take me out of the battle, for I am badly wounded!”
2CH	18	34	이 날의 전쟁이 맹렬하였으므로 이스라엘 왕이 병거에서 스스로 부지하며 저녁때까지 아람 사람을 막다가 해가 질 즈음에 죽었더라	And the battle increased that day: howbeit the king of Israel stayed himself up in his chariot against the Syrians until the even: and about the time of the sun going down he died.	The battle raged throughout that day, and the king of Israel propped himself up in his chariot facing the Arameans until evening. And at sunset he died.
2CH	19	1	유다 왕 여호사밧이 평안히 예루살렘에 돌아와서 그 궁으로 들어가니라	And Jehoshaphat the king of Judah returned to his house in peace to Jerusalem.	When Jehoshaphat king of Judah had returned safely to his home in Jerusalem,
2CH	19	2	하나니의 아들 선견자 예후가 나가서 여호사밧 왕을 맞아 가로되 왕이 악한 자를 돕고 여호와를 미워하는 자를 사랑하는 것이 가하니이까 그러므로 여호와께로서 진노하심이 왕에게 임하리이다	And Jehu the son of Hanani the seer went out to meet him, and said to king Jehoshaphat, Shouldest thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord.	Jehu son of Hanani the seer went out to confront him and said to King Jehoshaphat, “Should you help the wicked and love those who hate the LORD? Because of this, the wrath of the LORD is upon you.
2CH	19	3	그러나 왕에게 선한 일도 있으니 이는 왕이 아세라 목상들을 이 땅에서 없이하고 마음을 오로지하여 하나님을 찾음이니이다 하였더라	Nevertheless there are good things found in thee, in that thou hast taken away the groves out of the land, and hast prepared thine heart to seek God.	However, some good is found in you, for you have removed the Asherah poles from the land and have set your heart on seeking God.”
2CH	19	4	여호사밧이 예루살렘에 거하더니 나가서 브엘세바에서부터 에브라임 산지까지 민간에 순행하며 저희를 그 열조의 하나님 여호와께로 돌아오게 하고	And Jehoshaphat dwelt at Jerusalem: and he went out again through the people from Beer–sheba to mount Ephraim, and brought them back unto the Lord God of their fathers.	Jehoshaphat lived in Jerusalem, and once again he went out among the people from Beersheba to the hill country of Ephraim and turned them back to the LORD, the God of their fathers.
2CH	19	5	또 유다 온 나라 견고한 성에 재판관을 세우되 성마다 있게 하고	And he set judges in the land throughout all the fenced cities of Judah, city by city,	He appointed judges in the land, in each of the fortified cities of Judah.
2CH	19	6	재판관에게 이르되 너희는 행하는 바를 삼가하라 너희의 재판하는 것이 사람을 위함이 아니요 여호와를 위함이니 너희가 재판할 때에 여호와께서 너희와 함께 하실지라	And said to the judges, Take heed what ye do: for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment.	Then he said to the judges, “Consider carefully what you do, for you are not judging for man, but for the LORD, who is with you when you render judgment.
2CH	19	7	그런즉 너희는 여호와를 두려워하는 마음으로 삼가 행하라 우리의 하나님 여호와께서는 불의함도 없으시고 편벽됨도 없으시고 뇌물을 받으심도 없으시니라	Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you; take heed and do it: for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts.	And now, may the fear of the LORD be upon you. Be careful what you do, for with the LORD our God there is no injustice or partiality or bribery.”
2CH	19	8	여호사밧이 또 예루살렘에서 레위 사람과 제사장과 이스라엘 족장 중에서 사람을 세워 여호와께 속한 일과 예루살렘 거민의 모든 송사를 재판하게 하고	Moreover in Jerusalem did Jehoshaphat set of the Levites, and of the priests, and of the chief of the fathers of Israel, for the judgment of the Lord, and for controversies, when they returned to Jerusalem.	Moreover, Jehoshaphat appointed in Jerusalem some of the Levites, priests, and heads of the Israelite families to judge on behalf of the LORD and to settle disputes. And they lived in Jerusalem.
2CH	19	9	저희에게 명하여 가로되 너희는 여호와를 경외하고 충의와 성심으로 이 일을 행하라	And he charged them, saying, Thus shall ye do in the fear of the Lord, faithfully, and with a perfect heart.	He commanded them, saying, “You must serve faithfully and wholeheartedly in the fear of the LORD.
2CH	19	10	무릇 어느 성읍에 거한 너희 형제가 혹 피를 흘림이나 혹 율법이나 계명이나 율례나 규례를 인하여 너희에게 와서 송사하거든 저희를 경계하여 여호와께 죄를 얻지 않게 하여 너희와 너희 형제에게 진노하심이 임하지 말게 하라 너희가 이렇게 행하면 죄가 없으리라	And what cause soever shall come to you of your brethren that dwell in their cities, between blood and blood, between law and commandment, statutes and judgments, ye shall even warn them that they trespass not against the Lord, and so wrath come upon you, and upon your brethren: this do, and ye shall not trespass.	For every dispute that comes before you from your brothers who dwell in their cities—whether it regards bloodshed or some other violation of law, commandments, statutes, or ordinances—you are to warn them, so that they will not incur guilt before the LORD and wrath will not come upon you and your brothers. Do this, and you will not incur guilt.
2CH	19	11	여호와께 속한 모든 일에는 대제사장 아마랴가 너희를 다스리고 왕에게 속한 모든 일은 유다 지파의 어른 이스마엘의 아들 스바댜가 다스리고 레위 사람들은 너희 앞에 관리가 되리라 너희는 힘써 행하라 여호와께서 선한 자와 함께 하실지로다 하니라	And, behold, Amariah the chief priest is over you in all matters of the Lord; and Zebadiah the son of Ishmael, the ruler of the house of Judah, for all the king’s matters: also the Levites shall be officers before you. Deal courageously, and the Lord shall be with the good.	Note that Amariah, the chief priest, will be over you in all that pertains to the LORD, and Zebadiah son of Ishmael, the ruler of the house of Judah, in all that pertains to the king. And the Levites will serve as officers before you. Act resolutely; may the LORD be with the upright!”
2CH	20	1	그 후에 모압 자손과 암몬 자손이 몇 마온 사람과 함께 와서 여호사밧을 치고자 한지라	It came to pass after this also, that the children of Moab, and the children of Ammon, and with them other beside the Ammonites, came against Jehoshaphat to battle.	After this, the Moabites and Ammonites, together with some of the Meunites, came to make war against Jehoshaphat.
2CH	20	2	혹이 와서 여호사밧에게 고하여 가로되 큰 무리가 바다 저편 아람에서 왕을 치러 오는데 이제 하사손다말 곧 엔게디에 있나이다	Then there came some that told Jehoshaphat, saying, There cometh a great multitude against thee from beyond the sea on this side Syria; and, behold, they be in Hazazon–tamar, which is En–gedi.	Then some men came and told Jehoshaphat, “A vast army is coming against you from Edom, from beyond the Sea; they are already in Hazazon-tamar” (that is, En-gedi).
2CH	20	3	여호사밧이 두려워하여 여호와께로 낯을 향하여 간구하고 온 유다 백성에게 금식하라 공포하매	And Jehoshaphat feared, and set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah.	Jehoshaphat was alarmed and set his face to seek the LORD. And he proclaimed a fast throughout Judah.
2CH	20	4	유다 사람이 여호와께 도우심을 구하려 하여 유다 모든 성읍에서 모여와서 여호와께 간구하더라	And Judah gathered themselves together, to ask help of the Lord: even out of all the cities of Judah they came to seek the Lord.	So the people of Judah gathered to seek the LORD, and indeed, they came from all the cities of Judah to seek Him.
2CH	20	5	여호사밧이 여호와의 전 새 뜰 앞에서 유다와 예루살렘의 회중 가운데 서서	And Jehoshaphat stood in the congregation of Judah and Jerusalem, in the house of the Lord, before the new court,	Then Jehoshaphat stood in the assembly of Judah and Jerusalem in the house of the LORD in front of the new courtyard
2CH	20	6	가로되 우리 열조의 하나님 여호와여 주는 하늘에서 하나님이 아니시니이까 이방 사람의 모든 나라를 다스리지 아니하시나이까 주의 손에 권세와 능력이 있사오니 능히 막을 사람이 없나이다	And said, O Lord God of our fathers, art not thou God in heaven? and rulest not thou over all the kingdoms of the heathen? and in thine hand is there not power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee?	and said, “O LORD, God of our fathers, are You not the God who is in heaven, and do You not rule over all the kingdoms of the nations? Power and might are in Your hand, and no one can stand against You.
2CH	20	7	우리 하나님이시여 전에 이 땅 거민을 주의 백성 이스라엘 앞에서 쫓아내시고 그 땅으로 주의 벗 아브라함의 자손에게 영영히 주지 아니하셨나이까	Art not thou our God, who didst drive out the inhabitants of this land before thy people Israel, and gavest it to the seed of Abraham thy friend for ever?	Our God, did You not drive out the inhabitants of this land before Your people Israel and give it forever to the descendants of Abraham Your friend?
2CH	20	8	저희가 이 땅에 거하여 주의 이름을 위하여 한 성소를 건축하고 이르기를	And they dwelt therein, and have built thee a sanctuary therein for thy name, saying,	They have lived in the land and have built in it a sanctuary for Your Name, saying,
2CH	20	9	만일 재앙이나 난리나 견책이나 온역이나 기근이 우리에게 임하면 주의 이름이 이 전에 있으니 우리가 이 전 앞과 주의 앞에 서서 이 환난 가운데서 주께 부르짖은즉 들으시고 구원하시리라 하였나이다	If, when evil cometh upon us, as the sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we stand before this house, and in thy presence, (for thy name is in this house,) and cry unto thee in our affliction, then thou wilt hear and help.	‘If disaster comes upon us—whether sword or judgment, plague or famine—we will stand before this temple and before You, for Your Name is in this temple. We will cry out to You in our distress, and You will hear us and save us.’
2CH	20	10	옛적에 이스라엘이 애굽 땅에서 나올 때에 암몬 자손과 모압 자손과 세일 산 사람을 침노하기를 주께서 용납하지 아니하시므로 이에 치우쳐 저희를 떠나고 멸하지 아니하였거늘	And now, behold, the children of Ammon and Moab and mount Seir, whom thou wouldest not let Israel invade, when they came out of the land of Egypt, but they turned from them, and destroyed them not;	And now, here are the men of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, whom You did not let Israel invade when they came out of the land of Egypt; but Israel turned away from them and did not destroy them.
2CH	20	11	이제 저희가 우리에게 갚는 것을 보옵소서 저희가 와서 주께서 우리에게 주신 주의 기업에서 우리를 쫓아내고자 하나이다	Behold, I say, how they reward us, to come to cast us out of thy possession, which thou hast given us to inherit.	See how they are repaying us by coming to drive us out of the possession that You gave us as an inheritance.
2CH	20	12	우리 하나님이여 저희를 징벌하지 아니하시나이까 우리를 치러 오는 이 큰 무리를 우리가 대적할 능력이 없고 어떻게 할 줄도 알지 못하옵고 오직 주만 바라보나이다 하고	O our God, wilt thou not judge them? for we have no might against this great company that cometh against us; neither know we what to do: but our eyes are upon thee.	Our God, will You not judge them? For we are powerless before this vast army that comes against us. We do not know what to do, but our eyes are upon You.”
2CH	20	13	유다 모든 사람은 그 아내와 자녀와 어린 자로 더불어 여호와 앞에 섰더라	And all Judah stood before the Lord, with their little ones, their wives, and their children.	Meanwhile all the men of Judah, with their wives and children and little ones, were standing before the LORD.
2CH	20	14	여호와의 신이 회중 가운데서 레위 사람 야하시엘에게 임하셨으니 저는 아삽 자손 맛다냐의 현손이요 여이엘의 증손이요 브나야의 손자요 스가랴의 아들이더라	Then upon Jahaziel the son of Zechariah, the son of Benaiah, the son of Jeiel, the son of Mattaniah, a Levite of the sons of Asaph, came the Spirit of the Lord in the midst of the congregation;	Then the Spirit of the LORD came upon Jahaziel son of Zechariah, the son of Benaiah, the son of Jeiel, the son of Mattaniah, a Levite from Asaph’s descendants, as he stood in the midst of the assembly.
2CH	20	15	야하시엘이 가로되 온 유다와 예루살렘 거민과 여호사밧 왕이여 들을지어다 여호와께서 너희에게 말씀하시기를 이 큰 무리로 인하여 두려워하거나 놀라지 말라 이 전쟁이 너희에게 속한 것이 아니요 하나님께 속한 것이니라	And he said, Hearken ye, all Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, and thou king Jehoshaphat, Thus saith the Lord unto you, Be not afraid nor dismayed by reason of this great multitude; for the battle is not yours, but God’s.	And he said, “Listen, all you people of Judah and Jerusalem! Listen, King Jehoshaphat! This is what the LORD says: ‘Do not be afraid or discouraged because of this vast army, for the battle does not belong to you, but to God.
2CH	20	16	내일 너희는 마주 내려가라 저희가 시스 고개로 말미암아 올라오리니 너희가 골짜기 어귀 여루엘 들 앞에서 만나려니와	To morrow go ye down against them: behold, they come up by the cliff of Ziz; and ye shall find them at the end of the brook, before the wilderness of Jeruel.	Tomorrow you are to march down against them. You will see them coming up the Ascent of Ziz, and you will find them at the end of the valley facing the Wilderness of Jeruel.
2CH	20	17	이 전쟁에는 너희가 싸울 것이 없나니 항오를 이루고 서서 너희와 함께한 여호와가 구원하는 것을 보라 유다와 예루살렘아 너희는 두려워하며 놀라지 말고 내일 저희를 마주 나가라 여호와가 너희와 함께 하리라 하셨느니라 하매	Ye shall not need to fight in this battle: set yourselves, stand ye still, and see the salvation of the Lord with you, O Judah and Jerusalem: fear not, nor be dismayed; to morrow go out against them: for the Lord will be with you.	You need not fight this battle. Take up your positions, stand firm, and see the salvation of the LORD on your behalf, O Judah and Jerusalem. Do not be afraid or discouraged. Go out and face them tomorrow, for the LORD is with you.’”
2CH	20	18	여호사밧이 몸을 굽혀 얼굴을 땅에 대니 온 유다와 예루살렘 거민들도 여호와 앞에 엎드려 경배하고	And Jehoshaphat bowed his head with his face to the ground: and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell before the Lord, worshipping the Lord.	Then Jehoshaphat bowed facedown, and all the people of Judah and Jerusalem fell down before the LORD to worship Him.
2CH	20	19	그핫 자손과 고라 자손에게 속한 레위 사람들은 서서 심히 큰 소리로 이스라엘 하나님 여호와를 찬송하니라	And the Levites, of the children of the Kohathites, and of the children of the Korhites, stood up to praise the Lord God of Israel with a loud voice on high.	And the Levites from the Kohathites and Korahites stood up to praise the LORD, the God of Israel, shouting in a very loud voice.
2CH	20	20	이에 백성들이 일찍이 일어나서 드고아 들로 나가니라 나갈 때에 여호사밧이 서서 가로되 유다와 예루살렘 거민들아 내 말을 들을지어다 너희는 너희 하나님 여호와를 신뢰하라 그리하면 견고히 서리라 그 선지자를 신뢰하라 그리하면 형통하리라 하고	And they rose early in the morning, and went forth into the wilderness of Tekoa: and as they went forth, Jehoshaphat stood and said, Hear me, O Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem; Believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye be established; believe his prophets, so shall ye prosper.	Early in the morning they got up and left for the Wilderness of Tekoa. As they set out, Jehoshaphat stood up and said, “Hear me, O people of Judah and Jerusalem. Believe in the LORD your God, and you will be upheld; believe in His prophets, and you will succeed.”
2CH	20	21	백성으로 더불어 의논하고 노래하는 자를 택하여 거룩한 예복을 입히고 군대 앞에서 행하며 여호와를 찬송하여 이르기를 여호와께 감사하세 그 자비하심이 영원하도다 하게 하였더니	And when he had consulted with the people, he appointed singers unto the Lord, and that should praise the beauty of holiness, as they went out before the army, and to say, Praise the Lord; for his mercy endureth for ever.	Then Jehoshaphat consulted with the people and appointed those who would sing to the LORD and praise the splendor of His holiness. As they went out before the army, they were singing: “Give thanks to the LORD, for His loving devotion endures forever.”
2CH	20	22	그 노래와 찬송이 시작될 때에 여호와께서 복병을 두어 유다를 치러 온 암몬 자손과 모압과 세일 산 사람을 치게 하시므로 저희가 패하였으니	And when they began to sing and to praise, the Lord set ambushments against the children of Ammon, Moab, and mount Seir, which were come against Judah; and they were smitten.	The moment they began their shouts and praises, the LORD set ambushes against the men of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir who had come against Judah, and they were defeated.
2CH	20	23	곧 암몬과 모압 자손이 일어나 세일 산 거민을 쳐서 진멸하고 세일 거민을 멸한 후에는 저희가 피차에 살륙하였더라	For the children of Ammon and Moab stood up against the inhabitants of mount Seir, utterly to slay and destroy them: and when they had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to destroy another.	The Ammonites and Moabites rose up against the inhabitants of Mount Seir, devoting them to destruction. And when they had made an end to the inhabitants of Seir, they helped to destroy one another.
2CH	20	24	유다 사람이 들 망대에 이르러 그 무리를 본즉 땅에 엎드러진 시체뿐이요 하나도 피한 자가 없는지라	And when Judah came toward the watch tower in the wilderness, they looked unto the multitude, and, behold, they were dead bodies fallen to the earth, and none escaped.	When the men of Judah came to a place overlooking the wilderness, they looked for the vast army, but there were only corpses lying on the ground; no one had escaped.
2CH	20	25	여호사밧과 그 백성이 가서 적군의 물건을 취할새 본즉 그 가운데에 재물과 의복과 보물이 많이 있는고로 각기 취하는데 그 물건이 너무 많아 능히 가져갈 수 없을만큼 많으므로 사흘 동안에 취하고	And when Jehoshaphat and his people came to take away the spoil of them, they found among them in abundance both riches with the dead bodies, and precious jewels, which they stripped off for themselves, more than they could carry away: and they were three days in gathering of the spoil, it was so much.	Then Jehoshaphat and his people went to carry off the plunder, and they found on the bodies an abundance of goods and valuables—more than they could carry away. They were gathering the plunder for three days because there was so much.
2CH	20	26	제사일에 무리가 브라가 골짜기에 모여서 거기서 여호와를 송축한지라 그러므로 오늘날까지 그곳을 브라가 골짜기라 일컫더라	And on the fourth day they assembled themselves in the valley of Berachah; for there they blessed the Lord: therefore the name of the same place was called, The valley of Berachah, unto this day.	On the fourth day they assembled in the Valley of Beracah, where they blessed the LORD. Therefore that place is called the Valley of Beracah to this day.
2CH	20	27	유다와 예루살렘 모든 사람이 여호사밧을 선두로 즐거이 예루살렘으로 돌아왔으니 이는 여호와께서 저희로 그 적군을 이김을 인하여 즐거워하게 하셨음이라	Then they returned, every man of Judah and Jerusalem, and Jehoshaphat in the forefront of them, to go again to Jerusalem with joy; for the Lord had made them to rejoice over their enemies.	Then all the men of Judah and Jerusalem, with Jehoshaphat at their head, returned joyfully to Jerusalem, for the LORD had made them rejoice over their enemies.
2CH	20	28	무리가 비파와 수금과 나팔을 합주하고 예루살렘에 이르러 여호와의 전에 나아가니라	And they came to Jerusalem with psalteries and harps and trumpets unto the house of the Lord.	So they entered Jerusalem and went into the house of the LORD with harps, lyres, and trumpets.
2CH	20	29	이방 모든 나라가 여호와께서 이스라엘의 적군을 치셨다 함을 듣고 하나님을 두려워한고로	And the fear of God was on all the kingdoms of those countries, when they had heard that the Lord fought against the enemies of Israel.	And the fear of God came upon all the kingdoms of the lands when they heard that the LORD had fought against the enemies of Israel.
2CH	20	30	여호사밧의 나라가 태평하였으니 이는 그 하나님이 사방에서 저희에게 평강을 주셨음이더라	So the realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet: for his God gave him rest round about.	Then Jehoshaphat’s kingdom was at peace, for his God had given him rest on every side.
2CH	20	31	여호사밧이 유다 왕이 되어 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 삼십오 세라 예루살렘에서 이십오 년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 아수바라 실히의 딸이더라	And Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah: he was thirty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty and five years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.	So Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah. He was thirty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem twenty-five years. His mother’s name was Azubah daughter of Shilhi.
2CH	20	32	여호사밧이 그 부친 아사의 길로 행하여 돌이켜 떠나지 아니하고 여호와 보시기에 정직히 행하였으나	And he walked in the way of Asa his father, and departed not from it, doing that which was right in the sight of the Lord.	And Jehoshaphat walked in the way of his father Asa and did not turn away from it; he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD.
2CH	20	33	산당은 폐하지 아니하였으므로 백성이 오히려 마음을 정하여 그 열조의 하나님께로 돌아오지 아니하였더라	Howbeit the high places were not taken away: for as yet the people had not prepared their hearts unto the God of their fathers.	The high places, however, were not removed; the people had not yet set their hearts on the God of their fathers.
2CH	20	34	이 외에 여호사밧의 시종 행적이 하나니의 아들 예후의 글에 다 기록되었고 그 글은 이스라엘 열왕기에 올랐더라	Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of Jehu the son of Hanani, who is mentioned in the book of the kings of Israel.	As for the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, from beginning to end, they are indeed written in the Chronicles of Jehu son of Hanani, which are recorded in the Book of the Kings of Israel.
2CH	20	35	유다 왕 여호사밧이 나중에 이스라엘 왕 아하시야와 교제하였는데 아하시야는 심히 악을 행하는 자이었더라	And after this did Jehoshaphat king of Judah join himself with Ahaziah king of Israel, who did very wickedly:	Later, Jehoshaphat king of Judah made an alliance with Ahaziah king of Israel, who acted wickedly.
2CH	20	36	두 왕이 서로 결합하고 배를 지어 다시스로 보내고자 하여 에시온게벨에서 배를 지었더니	And he joined himself with him to make ships to go to Tarshish: and they made the ships in Ezion–geber.	They agreed to make ships to go to Tarshish, and these were built in Ezion-geber.
2CH	20	37	마레사 사람 도다와후의 아들 엘리에셀이 여호사밧을 향하여 예언하여 가로되 왕이 아하시야와 교제하는고로 여호와께서 왕의 지은 것을 파하시리라 하더니 이에 그 배가 파상하여 다시스로 가지 못하였더라	Then Eliezer the son of Dodavah of Mareshah prophesied against Jehoshaphat, saying, Because thou hast joined thyself with Ahaziah, the Lord hath broken thy works. And the ships were broken, that they were not able to go to Tarshish.	Then Eliezer son of Dodavahu of Mareshah prophesied against Jehoshaphat, saying, “Because you have allied yourself with Ahaziah, the LORD has destroyed your works.” So the ships were wrecked and were unable to sail to Tarshish.
2CH	21	1	여호사밧이 그 열조와 함께 자매 그 열조와 함께 다윗 성에 장사되고 그 아들 여호람이 대신하여 왕이 되니라	Now Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David. And Jehoram his son reigned in his stead.	And Jehoshaphat rested with his fathers and was buried with them in the City of David. And his son Jehoram reigned in his place.
2CH	21	2	여호사밧의 아들 여호람의 아우 아사랴와 여히엘과 스가랴와 아사랴와 미가엘과 스바댜는 다 유다 왕 여호사밧의 아들이라	And he had brethren the sons of Jehoshaphat, Azariah, and Jehiel, and Zechariah, and Azariah, and Michael, and Shephatiah: all these were the sons of Jehoshaphat king of Israel.	Jehoram’s brothers, the sons of Jehoshaphat, were Azariah, Jehiel, Zechariah, Azariah, Michael, and Shephatiah; these were all sons of Jehoshaphat king of Israel.
2CH	21	3	그 부친이 저희에게는 은금과 보물과 유다 견고한 성읍들을 선물로 후히 주었고 여호람은 장자인고로 왕위를 주었더니	And their father gave them great gifts of silver, and of gold, and of precious things, with fenced cities in Judah: but the kingdom gave he to Jehoram; because he was the firstborn.	Their father had given them many gifts of silver and gold and precious things, as well as the fortified cities in Judah; but he gave the kingdom to Jehoram because he was the firstborn.
2CH	21	4	여호람이 그 부친의 위에 올라 세력을 얻은 후에 그 모든 아우와 이스라엘 방백 중 몇 사람을 칼로 죽였더라	Now when Jehoram was risen up to the kingdom of his father, he strengthened himself, and slew all his brethren with the sword, and divers also of the princes of Israel.	When Jehoram had established himself over his father’s kingdom, he strengthened himself by putting to the sword all his brothers along with some of the princes of Israel.
2CH	21	5	여호람이 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 삼십이 세라 예루살렘에서 팔 년을 치리하니라	Jehoram was thirty and two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem.	Jehoram was thirty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years.
2CH	21	6	저가 이스라엘 왕들의 길로 행하여 아합의 집과 같이 하였으니 이는 아합의 딸이 그 아내가 되었음이라 저가 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하였으나	And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, like as did the house of Ahab: for he had the daughter of Ahab to wife: and he wrought that which was evil in the eyes of the Lord.	And Jehoram walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, just as the house of Ahab had done. For he married a daughter of Ahab and did evil in the sight of the LORD.
2CH	21	7	여호와께서 다윗의 집을 멸하기를 즐겨하지 아니하셨음은 이전에 다윗으로 더불어 언약을 세우시고 또 다윗과 그 자손에게 항상 등불을 주겠다고 허하셨음이더라	Howbeit the Lord would not destroy the house of David, because of the covenant that he had made with David, and as he promised to give a light to him and to his sons for ever.	Yet the LORD was unwilling to destroy the house of David, because of the covenant He had made with David, and since He had promised to maintain a lamp for David and his descendants forever.
2CH	21	8	여호람 때에 에돔이 배반하여 유다의 수하에서 벗어나 자기 위에 왕을 세운고로	In his days the Edomites revolted from under the dominion of Judah, and made themselves a king.	In the days of Jehoram, Edom rebelled against the hand of Judah and appointed their own king.
2CH	21	9	여호람이 장관들과 모든 병거를 거느리고 출정하였더니 밤에 일어나서 자기를 에워싼 에돔 사람과 그 병거의 장관들을 쳤더라	Then Jehoram went forth with his princes, and all his chariots with him: and he rose up by night, and smote the Edomites which compassed him in, and the captains of the chariots.	So Jehoram crossed into Edom with his officers and all his chariots. When the Edomites surrounded him and his chariot commanders, he rose up and attacked by night.
2CH	21	10	이와 같이 에돔이 배반하여 유다의 수하에서 벗어났더니 오늘날까지 그러하였으며 그 때에 립나도 배반하여 여호람의 수하에서 벗어났으니 이는 저가 그 열조의 하나님 여호와를 버렸음이더라	So the Edomites revolted from under the hand of Judah unto this day. The same time also did Libnah revolt from under his hand; because he had forsaken the Lord God of his fathers.	So to this day Edom has been in rebellion against the hand of Judah. Likewise, Libnah rebelled against his rule at the same time, because Jehoram had forsaken the LORD, the God of his fathers.
2CH	21	11	여호람이 또 유다 여러 산에 산당을 세워 예루살렘 거민으로 음란하듯 우상을 섬기게 하고 또 유다를 미혹케 하였으므로	Moreover he made high places in the mountains of Judah, and caused the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit fornication, and compelled Judah thereto.	Jehoram had also built high places on the hills of Judah; he had caused the people of Jerusalem to prostitute themselves and had led Judah astray.
2CH	21	12	선지자 엘리야가 여호람에게 글을 보내어 가로되 왕의 조상 다윗의 하나님 여호와의 말씀이 네가 네 아비 여호사밧의 길과 유다 왕 아사의 길로 행치 아니하고	And there came a writing to him from Elijah the prophet, saying, Thus saith the Lord God of David thy father, Because thou hast not walked in the ways of Jehoshaphat thy father, nor in the ways of Asa king of Judah,	Then a letter came to Jehoram from Elijah the prophet, which stated: “This is what the LORD, the God of your father David, says: ‘You have not walked in the ways of your father Jehoshaphat or of Asa king of Judah,
2CH	21	13	오직 이스라엘 열왕의 길로 행하여 유다와 예루살렘 거민으로 음란하듯 우상을 섬기게 하기를 아합의 집과 같이 하며 또 너의 아비 집에서 너보다 선한 아우들을 죽였으니	But hast walked in the way of the kings of Israel, and hast made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to go a whoring, like to the whoredoms of the house of Ahab, and also hast slain thy brethren of thy father’s house, which were better than thyself:	but you have walked in the ways of the kings of Israel and have caused Judah and the people of Jerusalem to prostitute themselves, just as the house of Ahab prostituted itself. You have also killed your brothers, your father’s family, who were better than you.
2CH	21	14	여호와가 네 백성과 네 자녀와 네 아내들과 네 모든 재물을 큰 재앙으로 치리라	Behold, with a great plague will the Lord smite thy people, and thy children, and thy wives, and all thy goods:	So behold, the LORD is about to strike your people, your sons, your wives, and all your possessions with a serious blow.
2CH	21	15	또 너는 창자에 중병이 들고 그 병이 날로 중하여 창자가 빠져나오리라 하셨다 하였더라	And thou shalt have great sickness by disease of thy bowels, until thy bowels fall out by reason of the sickness day by day.	And day after day you yourself will suffer from a severe illness, a disease of your bowels, until it causes your bowels to come out.’”
2CH	21	16	여호와께서 블레셋 사람과 구스에서 가까운 아라비아 사람의 마음을 격동시키사 여호람을 치게 하셨으므로	Moreover the Lord stirred up against Jehoram the spirit of the Philistines, and of the Arabians, that were near the Ethiopians:	Then the LORD stirred against Jehoram the spirit of the Philistines and Arabs who lived near the Cushites.
2CH	21	17	그 무리가 올라와서 유다를 침노하여 왕궁의 모든 재물과 그 아들들과 아내들을 탈취하였으므로 말째 아들 여호아하스 외에는 한 아들도 남지 아니하였더라	And they came up into Judah, and brake into it, and carried away all the substance that was found in the king’s house, and his sons also, and his wives; so that there was never a son left him, save Jehoahaz, the youngest of his sons.	So they went to war against Judah, invaded it, and carried off all the possessions found in the king’s palace, along with his sons and wives; not a son was left to him except Jehoahaz, his youngest.
2CH	21	18	이 모든 일 후에 여호와께서 여호람을 치사 능히 고치지 못할 병이 그 창자에 들게 하셨으므로	And after all this the Lord smote him in his bowels with an incurable disease.	After all this, the LORD afflicted Jehoram with an incurable disease of the bowels.
2CH	21	19	여러 날 후 이 년만에 그 창자가 그 병으로 인하여 빠져나오매 저가 그 심한 병으로 죽으니 백성이 그 열조에게 분향하던 것 같이 저에게 분향하지 아니하였으며	And it came to pass, that in process of time, after the end of two years, his bowels fell out by reason of his sickness: so he died of sore diseases. And his people made no burning for him, like the burning of his fathers.	This continued day after day until two full years had passed. Finally, his intestines came out because of his disease, and he died in severe pain. And his people did not make a fire in his honor as they had done for his fathers.
2CH	21	20	여호람이 삼십이 세에 즉위하고 예루살렘에서 팔 년을 치리하다가 아끼는 자 없이 세상을 떠났으며 무리가 저를 다윗 성에 장사하였었으나 열왕의 묘실에는 두지 아니하였더라	Thirty and two years old was he when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years, and departed without being desired. Howbeit they buried him in the city of David, but not in the sepulchres of the kings.	Jehoram was thirty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years. He died, to no one’s regret, and was buried in the City of David, but not in the tombs of the kings.
2CH	22	1	예루살렘 거민이 여호람의 말째 아들 아하시야로 위를 이어 왕을 삼았으니 이는 전에 아라비아 사람과 함께 와서 영을 치던 부대가 그의 모든 형을 죽였음이라 그러므로 유다 왕 여호람의 아들 아하시야가 왕이 되었더라	And the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ahaziah his youngest son king in his stead: for the band of men that came with the Arabians to the camp had slain all the eldest. So Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah reigned.	Then the people of Jerusalem made Ahaziah, the youngest son of Jehoram, king in his place, since the raiders who had come into the camp with the Arabs had killed all the older sons. So Ahaziah son of Jehoram became king of Judah.
2CH	22	2	아하시야가 왕이 될 때에 나이 사십이 세라 예루살렘에서 일 년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 아달랴라 오므리의 손녀더라	Forty and two years old was Ahaziah when he began to reign, and he reigned one year in Jerusalem. His mother’s name also was Athaliah the daughter of Omri.	Ahaziah was twenty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem one year. His mother’s name was Athaliah, the granddaughter of Omri.
2CH	22	3	아하시야도 아합의 집 길로 행하였으니 이는 그 모친이 꾀어 악을 행하게 하였음이라	He also walked in the ways of the house of Ahab: for his mother was his counsellor to do wickedly.	Ahaziah also walked in the ways of the house of Ahab, for his mother was his counselor in wickedness.
2CH	22	4	그 부친이 죽은 후에 저가 패망케 하는 아합의 집 교도를 좇아 여호와 보시기에 아합의 집 같이 악을 행하였더라	Wherefore he did evil in the sight of the Lord like the house of Ahab: for they were his counsellors after the death of his father to his destruction.	And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, as the house of Ahab had done, for to his destruction they were his counselors after the death of his father.
2CH	22	5	아하시야가 아합의 집 교도를 좇고 이스라엘 왕 아합의 아들 요람과 함께 길르앗 라못으로 가서 아람 왕 하사엘로 더불어 싸우더니 아람 사람들이 요람을 상하게 한지라	He walked also after their counsel, and went with Jehoram the son of Ahab king of Israel to war against Hazael king of Syria at Ramoth–gilead: and the Syrians smote Joram.	Ahaziah also followed their counsel and went with Joram son of Ahab king of Israel to fight against Hazael king of Aram at Ramoth-gilead. But the Arameans wounded Joram;
2CH	22	6	요람이 아람 왕 하사엘과 싸울 때에 라마에서 맞아 상한 것을 치료하려 하여 이스르엘로 돌아왔더라 아합의 아들 요람이 병이 있으므로 유다 왕 여호람의 아들 아사랴가 이스르엘에 내려가서 방문하였더라	And he returned to be healed in Jezreel because of the wounds which were given him at Ramah, when he fought with Hazael king of Syria. And Azariah the son of Jehoram king of Judah went down to see Jehoram the son of Ahab at Jezreel, because he was sick.	so he returned to Jezreel to recover from the wounds they had inflicted on him at Ramah when he fought against Hazael king of Aram. Then Ahaziah son of Jehoram king of Judah went down to Jezreel to visit Joram son of Ahab, because Joram had been wounded.
2CH	22	7	아하시야가 요람에게 가므로 해를 받았으니 이는 하나님께로 말미암은 것이라 아하시야가 갔다가 요람과 함께 나가서 임시의 아들 예후를 맞았으니 그는 여호와께서 기름을 부으시고 아합의 집을 멸하게 하신 자더라	And the destruction of Ahaziah was of God by coming to Joram: for when he was come, he went out with Jehoram against Jehu the son of Nimshi, whom the Lord had anointed to cut off the house of Ahab.	Ahaziah’s downfall came from God when he went to visit Joram. When Ahaziah arrived, he went out with Joram to meet Jehu son of Nimshi, whom the LORD had anointed to destroy the house of Ahab.
2CH	22	8	예후가 아합의 집을 징벌할 때에 유다 방백들과 아하시야의 형제의 아들들 곧 아하시야를 섬기는 자들을 만나서 죽였고	And it came to pass, that, when Jehu was executing judgment upon the house of Ahab, and found the princes of Judah, and the sons of the brethren of Ahaziah, that ministered to Ahaziah, he slew them.	So while Jehu was executing judgment on the house of Ahab, he found the rulers of Judah and the sons of Ahaziah’s brothers who were serving Ahaziah, and he killed them.
2CH	22	9	아하시야는 사마리아에 숨었더니 예후가 찾으매 무리가 예후에게로 잡아다가 죽이고 이르기를 저는 전심으로 여호와를 구하던 여호사밧의 아들이라 하고 장사하였더라 이에 아하시야의 집이 약하여 왕위를 지키지 못하게 되니라	And he sought Ahaziah: and they caught him, (for he was hid in Samaria,) and brought him to Jehu: and when they had slain him, they buried him: Because, said they, he is the son of Jehoshaphat, who sought the Lord with all his heart. So the house of Ahaziah had no power to keep still the kingdom.	Then Jehu looked for Ahaziah, and Jehu’s soldiers captured him while he was hiding in Samaria. So Ahaziah was brought to Jehu and put to death. They buried him, for they said, “He is the grandson of Jehoshaphat, who sought the LORD with all his heart.” So no one was left from the house of Ahaziah with the strength to rule the kingdom.
2CH	22	10	아하시야의 모친 아달랴가 그 아들의 죽은 것을 보고 일어나 유다 집의 왕의 씨를 진멸하였으나	But when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she arose and destroyed all the seed royal of the house of Judah.	When Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she proceeded to annihilate all the royal heirs of the house of Judah.
2CH	22	11	왕의 딸 여호사브앗이 아하시야의 아들 요아스를 왕자들의 죽임을 당하는 중에서 도적하여 내고 저와 그 유모를 침실에 숨겨 아달랴를 피하게 한고로 아달랴가 저를 죽이지 못하였더라 여호사브앗은 여호람 왕의 딸이요 아하시야의 누이요 제사장 여호야다의 아내더라	But Jehoshabeath, the daughter of the king, took Joash the son of Ahaziah, and stole him from among the king’s sons that were slain, and put him and his nurse in a bedchamber. So Jehoshabeath, the daughter of king Jehoram, the wife of Jehoiada the priest, (for she was the sister of Ahaziah,) hid him from Athaliah, so that she slew him not.	But Jehoshabeath daughter of King Jehoram took Joash son of Ahaziah and stole him away from among the sons of the king who were being murdered, and she put him and his nurse in a bedroom. Because Jehoshabeath, the daughter of King Jehoram and the wife of Jehoiada the priest, was Ahaziah’s sister, she hid Joash from Athaliah so that she could not kill him.
2CH	22	12	요아스가 저희와 함께 하나님의 전에 육 년을 숨어 있는 동안에 아달랴가 나라를 다스렸더라	And he was with them hid in the house of God six years: and Athaliah reigned over the land.	And Joash remained hidden with them in the house of God for six years while Athaliah ruled the land.
2CH	23	1	제칠년에 여호야다가 세력을 내어 백부장 곧 여로함의 아들 아사랴와 여호하난의 아들 이스마엘과 오벳의 아들 아사랴와 아다야의 아들 마아세야와 시그리의 아들 엘리사밧 등으로 더불어 언약을 세우매	And in the seventh year Jehoiada strengthened himself, and took the captains of hundreds, Azariah the son of Jeroham, and Ishmael the son of Jehohanan, and Azariah the son of Obed, and Maaseiah the son of Adaiah, and Elishaphat the son of Zichri, into covenant with him.	Then in the seventh year, Jehoiada strengthened himself and made a covenant with the commanders of hundreds—with Azariah son of Jeroham, Ishmael son of Jehohanan, Azariah son of Obed, Maaseiah son of Adaiah, and Elishaphat son of Zichri.
2CH	23	2	저희가 유다로 두루 다니며 유다 모든 고을로서 레위 사람과 이스라엘 족장들을 모아 예루살렘에 이른지라	And they went about in Judah, and gathered the Levites out of all the cities of Judah, and the chief of the fathers of Israel, and they came to Jerusalem.	So they went throughout Judah and gathered the Levites from all the cities of Judah and the heads of the families of Israel. And when they came to Jerusalem,
2CH	23	3	온 회중이 하나님의 전에서 왕과 언약을 세우매 여호야다가 무리에게 이르되 여호와께서 다윗의 자손에게 대하여 말씀하신 대로 왕자가 즉위하여야 할지니	And all the congregation made a covenant with the king in the house of God. And he said unto them, Behold, the king’s son shall reign, as the Lord hath said of the sons of David.	the whole assembly made a covenant with the king in the house of God. “Behold, the king’s son!” said Jehoiada. “He must reign, just as the LORD promised concerning the descendants of David.
2CH	23	4	이제 너희는 이와 같이 행하라 너희 제사장과 레위 사람 곧 안식일에 입번한 자의 삼분 일은 문을 지키고	This is the thing that ye shall do; A third part of you entering on the sabbath, of the priests and of the Levites, shall be porters of the doors;	This is what you are to do: A third of you priests and Levites who come on duty on the Sabbath shall keep watch at the doors,
2CH	23	5	삼분 일은 왕궁에 있고 삼분 일은 기초문에 있고 백성들은 여호와의 전 뜰에 있을지라	And a third part shall be at the king’s house; and a third part at the gate of the foundation: and all the people shall be in the courts of the house of the Lord.	a third shall be at the royal palace, and a third at the Foundation Gate, while all the others are in the courtyards of the house of the LORD.
2CH	23	6	제사장과 수종드는 레위 사람은 거룩한즉 여호와의 전에 들어오려니와 그 외의 다른 사람은 들어오지 못할 것이니 모든 백성은 여호와의 명하신 바를 지킬지며	But let none come into the house of the Lord, save the priests, and they that minister of the Levites; they shall go in, for they are holy: but all the people shall keep the watch of the Lord.	No one is to enter the house of the LORD except the priests and those Levites who serve; they may enter because they are consecrated, but all the people are to obey the requirement of the LORD.
2CH	23	7	레위 사람은 각각 손에 병기를 잡고 왕을 호위하며 다른 사람이 전에 들어오거든 죽이고 왕의 출입할 때에 시위할지니라	And the Levites shall compass the king round about, every man with his weapons in his hand; and whosoever else cometh into the house, he shall be put to death: but be ye with the king when he cometh in, and when he goeth out.	The Levites must surround the king with weapons in hand, and anyone who enters the temple must be put to death. You must stay close to the king wherever he goes.”
2CH	23	8	레위 사람과 유다 무리가 제사장 여호야다의 모든 명한 바를 준행하여 각기 수하의 안식일에 입번할 자와 안식일에 출번할 자를 거느리고 있으니 이는 제사장 여호야다가 출번하는 자를 보내지 아니함이더라	So the Levites and all Judah did according to all things that Jehoiada the priest had commanded, and took every man his men that were to come in on the sabbath, with them that were to go out on the sabbath: for Jehoiada the priest dismissed not the courses.	So the Levites and all Judah did everything that Jehoiada the priest had ordered. Each of them took his men—those coming on duty on the Sabbath and those going off duty—for Jehoiada the priest had not released any of the divisions.
2CH	23	9	제사장 여호야다가 하나님의 전 안에 있는 다윗 왕의 창과 큰 방패와 작은 방패를 백부장들에게 주고	Moreover Jehoiada the priest delivered to the captains of hundreds spears, and bucklers, and shields, that had been king David’s, which were in the house of God.	Then Jehoiada the priest gave to the commanders of hundreds the spears and the large and small shields of King David that were in the house of God.
2CH	23	10	또 백성들로 각각 손에 병기를 잡고 왕을 호위하되 전 우편에서 부터 전 좌편까지 단과 전 곁에 서게 하고	And he set all the people, every man having his weapon in his hand, from the right side of the temple to the left side of the temple, along by the altar and the temple, by the king round about.	He stationed all the troops, with their weapons in hand, surrounding the king by the altar and the temple, from the south side to the north side of the temple.
2CH	23	11	무리가 왕자를 인도하여 내어 면류관을 씌우며 율법 책을 주고 세워 왕을 삼을새 여호야댜와 그 아들들이 저에게 기름을 붓고 모두 왕의 만세를 부르니라	Then they brought out the king’s son, and put upon him the crown, and gave him the testimony, and made him king. And Jehoiada and his sons anointed him, and said, God save the king.	Then Jehoiada and his sons brought out the king’s son, put the crown on him, presented him with the Testimony, and proclaimed him king. They anointed him and shouted, “Long live the king!”
2CH	23	12	아달랴가 백성들이 분주하며 왕을 찬송하는 소리를 듣고 여호와의 전에 들어가서 백성에게 이르러	Now when Athaliah heard the noise of the people running and praising the king, she came to the people into the house of the Lord:	When Athaliah heard the noise of the people running and cheering the king, she went out to them in the house of the LORD.
2CH	23	13	보매 왕이 전 문 기둥 곁에 섰고 장관들과 나팔수가 왕의 곁에 모셨으며 국민들이 즐거워하여 나팔을 불며 노래하는 자는 주악하며 찬송을 인도하는지라 이에 아달랴가 옷을 찢으며 외치되 반역이로다 반역이로다 하매	And she looked, and, behold, the king stood at his pillar at the entering in, and the princes and the trumpets by the king: and all the people of the land rejoiced, and sounded with trumpets, also the singers with instruments of musick, and such as taught to sing praise. Then Athaliah rent her clothes, and said, Treason, Treason.	And she looked out and saw the king standing by his pillar at the entrance. The officers and trumpeters were beside the king, and all the people of the land were rejoicing and blowing trumpets, while the singers with musical instruments were leading the praises. Then Athaliah tore her clothes and screamed, “Treason, treason!”
2CH	23	14	제사장 여호야다가 군대를 거느린 백부장들을 불러내어 명하여 가로되 반렬 밖으로 몰아내라 무릇 저를 따르는 자는 칼로 죽이라 하니 제사장의 이 말은 여호와의 전에서는 저를 죽이지 말라 함이라	Then Jehoiada the priest brought out the captains of hundreds that were set over the host, and said unto them, Have her forth of the ranges: and whoso followeth her, let him be slain with the sword. For the priest said, Slay her not in the house of the Lord.	And Jehoiada the priest sent out the commanders of hundreds in charge of the army, saying, “Bring her out between the ranks, and put to the sword anyone who follows her.” For the priest had said, “She must not be put to death in the house of the LORD.”
2CH	23	15	이에 무리가 길을 열어 주고 저가 왕궁 마문 어귀에 이를 때에 거기서 죽였더라	So they laid hands on her; and when she was come to the entering of the horse gate by the king’s house, they slew her there.	So they seized Athaliah as she reached the entrance of the Horse Gate to the palace grounds, and there they put her to death.
2CH	23	16	여호야다가 자기와 뭇 백성과 왕의 사이에 언약을 세워 여호와의 백성이 되리라 한지라	And Jehoiada made a covenant between him, and between all the people, and between the king, that they should be the Lord’s people.	Then Jehoiada made a covenant between himself and the king and the people that they would be the LORD’s people.
2CH	23	17	온 국민이 바알의 당으로 가서 그 당을 훼파하고 그 단들과 우상들을 깨뜨리고 그 단 앞에서 바알의 제사장 맛단을 죽이니라	Then all the people went to the house of Baal, and brake it down, and brake his altars and his images in pieces, and slew Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars.	So all the people went to the temple of Baal and tore it down. They smashed the altars and idols to pieces and killed Mattan the priest of Baal in front of the altars.
2CH	23	18	여호야다가 여호와의 전의 직원을 세워 제사장 레위 사람의 수하에 맡기니 이들은 다윗이 전에 그 반차를 나누어서 여호와의 전에서 모세의 율법에 기록한 대로 여호와께 번제를 드리며 자기의 정한 규례대로 즐거이 부르고 노래하게 하였던 자더라	Also Jehoiada appointed the offices of the house of the Lord by the hand of the priests the Levites, whom David had distributed in the house of the Lord, to offer the burnt offerings of the Lord, as it is written in the law of Moses, with rejoicing and with singing, as it was ordained by David.	Moreover, Jehoiada put the oversight of the house of the LORD into the hands of the Levitical priests, whom David had appointed over the house of the LORD, to offer burnt offerings to the LORD as is written in the Law of Moses, with rejoicing and song, as ordained by David.
2CH	23	19	또 문지기를 여호와의 전 여러 문에 두어 무릇 아무 일에든지 부정한 자는 들어오지 못하게 하고	And he set the porters at the gates of the house of the Lord, that none which was unclean in any thing should enter in.	He stationed gatekeepers at the gates of the house of the LORD, so that nothing unclean could enter for any reason.
2CH	23	20	백부장들과 존귀한 자들과 백성의 방백들과 온 국민을 거느리고 왕을 인도하여 여호와의 전에서 내려와서 윗문으로 좇아 왕궁에 이르러 왕을 나라 보좌에 앉히매	And he took the captains of hundreds, and the nobles, and the governors of the people, and all the people of the land, and brought down the king from the house of the Lord: and they came through the high gate into the king’s house, and set the king upon the throne of the kingdom.	He also took with him the commanders of hundreds, the nobles, the rulers of the people, and all the people of the land, and they brought the king down from the house of the LORD and entered the royal palace through the Upper Gate. They seated King Joash on the royal throne,
2CH	23	21	온 국민이 즐거워하고 성중이 평온하더라 아달랴를 무리가 칼로 죽였었더라	And all the people of the land rejoiced: and the city was quiet, after that they had slain Athaliah with the sword.	and all the people of the land rejoiced. And the city was quiet, because Athaliah had been put to the sword.
2CH	24	1	요아스가 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 칠 세라 예루살렘에서 사십 년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 시비아라 브엘세바 사람이더라	Joash was seven years old when he began to reign, and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name also was Zibiah of Beer–sheba.	Joash was seven years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem forty years. His mother’s name was Zibiah; she was from Beersheba.
2CH	24	2	제사장 여호야다가 세상에 사는 모든 날에 요아스가 여호와 보시기에 정직히 행하였으며	And Joash did that which was right in the sight of the Lord all the days of Jehoiada the priest.	And Joash did what was right in the eyes of the LORD all the days of Jehoiada the priest.
2CH	24	3	여호야다가 왕으로 두 아내에게 장가들게 하였더니 자녀를 낳았더라	And Jehoiada took for him two wives; and he begat sons and daughters.	Jehoiada took for him two wives, and he had sons and daughters.
2CH	24	4	그 후에 요아스가 여호와의 전을 중수할 뜻을 두고	And it came to pass after this, that Joash was minded to repair the house of the Lord.	Some time later, Joash set his heart on repairing the house of the LORD.
2CH	24	5	제사장과 레위 사람을 모으고 저희에게 이르되 너희는 유다 여러 성읍에 가서 이스라엘 무리에게 해마다 너희 하나님의 전을 수리할 돈을 거두되 그 일을 빨리 하라 하였으나 레위 사람이 빨리 하지 아니한지라	And he gathered together the priests and the Levites, and said to them, Go out unto the cities of Judah, and gather of all Israel money to repair the house of your God from year to year, and see that ye hasten the matter. Howbeit the Levites hastened it not.	So he gathered the priests and Levites and said, “Go out to the cities of Judah and collect the money due annually from all Israel, to repair the house of your God. Do it quickly.” The Levites, however, did not make haste.
2CH	24	6	왕이 대제사장 여호야다를 불러 이르되 네가 어찌하여 레위 사람을 시켜서 여호와의 종 모세와 이스라엘의 회중이 법막을 위하여 정한 세를 유다와 예루살렘에서 거두게 하지 아니하였느냐 하니	And the king called for Jehoiada the chief, and said unto him, Why hast thou not required of the Levites to bring in out of Judah and out of Jerusalem the collection, according to the commandment of Moses the servant of the Lord, and of the congregation of Israel, for the tabernacle of witness?	So the king called Jehoiada the high priest and said, “Why have you not required the Levites to bring from Judah and Jerusalem the tax imposed by Moses the servant of the LORD and by the assembly of Israel for the Tent of the Testimony?”
2CH	24	7	이는 그 악한 여인 아달랴의 아들들이 하나님의 전을 깨뜨리고 또 여호와의 전의 모든 성물을 바알들에게 드렸음이었더라	For the sons of Athaliah, that wicked woman, had broken up the house of God; and also all the dedicated things of the house of the Lord did they bestow upon Baalim.	For the sons of that wicked woman Athaliah had broken into the house of God and had even used the sacred objects of the house of the LORD for the Baals.
2CH	24	8	이에 왕이 명하여 한 궤를 만들어 여호와의 전 문밖에 두게 하고	And at the king’s commandment they made a chest, and set it without at the gate of the house of the Lord.	At the king’s command a chest was made and placed outside, at the gate of the house of the LORD.
2CH	24	9	유다와 예루살렘에 반포하여 하나님의 종 모세가 광야에서 이스라엘에게 정한 세를 여호와께 드리라 하였더니	And they made a proclamation through Judah and Jerusalem, to bring in to the Lord the collection that Moses the servant of God laid upon Israel in the wilderness.	And a proclamation was issued in Judah and Jerusalem that they were to bring to the LORD the tax imposed by Moses the servant of God on Israel in the wilderness.
2CH	24	10	모든 방백과 백성들이 기뻐하며 마치기까지 돈을 가져다가 궤에 던진지라	And all the princes and all the people rejoiced, and brought in, and cast into the chest, until they had made an end.	All the officers and all the people rejoiced and brought their contributions, and they dropped them in the chest until it was full.
2CH	24	11	언제든지 레위 사람들이 궤를 메고 왕의 유사에게 가서 돈이 많은 것을 보면 왕의 서기관과 대제사장에게 속한 아전이 와서 그 궤를 쏟고 다시 그 처소에 갖다 두었더라 때때로 이렇게 하여 돈을 많이 거두매	Now it came to pass, that at what time the chest was brought unto the king’s office by the hand of the Levites, and when they saw that there was much money, the king’s scribe and the high priest’s officer came and emptied the chest, and took it, and carried it to his place again. Thus they did day by day, and gathered money in abundance.	Whenever the chest was brought by the Levites to the king’s overseers and they saw that there was a large amount of money, the royal scribe and the officer of the high priest would come and empty the chest and carry it back to its place. They did this daily and gathered the money in abundance.
2CH	24	12	왕과 여호야다가 그 돈을 여호와의 전 간역자에게 주어 석수와 목수를 고용하여 여호와의 전을 중수하며 또 철공장과 놋공장을 고용하여 여호와의 전을 수리하게 하였더니	And the king and Jehoiada gave it to such as did the work of the service of the house of the Lord, and hired masons and carpenters to repair the house of the Lord, and also such as wrought iron and brass to mend the house of the Lord.	Then the king and Jehoiada would give the money to those who supervised the labor on the house of the LORD to hire stonecutters and carpenters to restore the house of the LORD, as well as workers in iron and bronze to repair the house of the LORD.
2CH	24	13	공장들이 맡아서 수리하는 역사가 점점 진취되므로 하나님의 전을 이전 모양대로 견고케 하니라	So the workmen wrought, and the work was perfected by them, and they set the house of God in his state, and strengthened it.	So the workmen labored, and in their hands the repair work progressed. They restored the house of God according to its specifications, and they reinforced it.
2CH	24	14	필역한 후에 그 남은 돈을 왕과 여호야다의 앞으로 가져온고로 그것으로 여호와의 전에 쓸 그릇을 만들었으니 곧 섬겨 제사 드리는 그릇이며 또 숟가락과 금, 은 그릇들이라 여호야다가 세상에 사는 모든 날에 여호와의 전에 항상 번제를 드렸더라	And when they had finished it, they brought the rest of the money before the king and Jehoiada, whereof were made vessels for the house of the Lord, even vessels to minister, and to offer withal, and spoons, and vessels of gold and silver. And they offered burnt offerings in the house of the Lord continually all the days of Jehoiada.	When they were finished, they brought the rest of the money to the king and Jehoiada to make with it the articles for the house of the LORD—utensils for the service and for the burnt offerings, dishes, and other objects of gold and silver. Throughout the days of Jehoiada, burnt offerings were presented regularly in the house of the LORD.
2CH	24	15	여호야다가 나이 많고 늙어서 죽으니 죽을 때에 일백삼십 세라	But Jehoiada waxed old, and was full of days when he died; an hundred and thirty years old was he when he died.	When Jehoiada was old and full of years, he died at the age of 130.
2CH	24	16	무리가 다윗 성 열왕의 묘실 중에 장사하였으니 이는 저가 이스라엘과 하나님과 그 전에 대하여 선을 행하였음이더라	And they buried him in the city of David among the kings, because he had done good in Israel, both toward God, and toward his house.	And Jehoiada was buried with the kings in the City of David, because he had done what was good in Israel for God and His temple.
2CH	24	17	여호야다가 죽은 후에 유다 방백들이 와서 왕에게 절하매 왕이 그의 말을 듣고	Now after the death of Jehoiada came the princes of Judah, and made obeisance to the king. Then the king hearkened unto them.	After the death of Jehoiada, however, the officials of Judah came and paid homage to the king, and he listened to them.
2CH	24	18	그 열조의 하나님 여호와의 전을 버리고 아세라 목상과 우상을 섬긴고로 이 죄로 인하여 진노가 유다와 예루살렘에 임하니라	And they left the house of the Lord God of their fathers, and served groves and idols: and wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem for this their trespass.	They abandoned the house of the LORD, the God of their fathers, and served the Asherah poles and idols. So wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem for this guilt of theirs.
2CH	24	19	그러나 여호와께서 선지자를 저에게 보내사 다시 자기에게로 돌아오게 하려 하시매 선지자들이 저에게 경계하나 듣지 아니하니라	Yet he sent prophets to them, to bring them again unto the Lord; and they testified against them: but they would not give ear.	Nevertheless, the LORD sent prophets to bring the people back to Him and to testify against them; but they would not listen.
2CH	24	20	이에 하나님의 신이 제사장 여호야다의 아들 스가랴를 감동시키시매 저가 백성 앞에 높이 서서 저희에게 이르되 여호와께서 말씀하시기를 너희가 어찌하여 여호와의 명령을 거역하여 스스로 형통치 못하게 하느냐 하셨나니 너희가 여호와를 버린고로 여호와께서도 너희를 버리셨느니라 하나	And the Spirit of God came upon Zechariah the son of Jehoiada the priest, which stood above the people, and said unto them, Thus saith God, Why transgress ye the commandments of the Lord, that ye cannot prosper? because ye have forsaken the Lord, he hath also forsaken you.	Then the Spirit of God came upon Zechariah son of Jehoiada the priest, who stood up before the people and said to them, “This is what God says: ‘Why do you transgress the commandments of the LORD so that you cannot prosper? Because you have forsaken the LORD, He has forsaken you.’”
2CH	24	21	무리가 함께 꾀하고 왕의 명을 좇아 여호와의 전 뜰 안에서 돌로 쳐 죽였더라	And they conspired against him, and stoned him with stones at the commandment of the king in the court of the house of the Lord.	But they conspired against Zechariah, and by order of the king, they stoned him in the courtyard of the house of the LORD.
2CH	24	22	요아스 왕이 이와 같이 스가랴의 아비 여호야다의 베푼 은혜를 생각지 아니하고 그 아들을 죽이니 저가 죽을 때에 이르되 여호와는 감찰하시고 신원하여 주옵소서 하니라	Thus Joash the king remembered not the kindness which Jehoiada his father had done to him, but slew his son. And when he died, he said, The Lord look upon it, and require it.	Thus King Joash failed to remember the kindness that Zechariah’s father Jehoiada had extended to him. Instead, Joash killed Jehoiada’s son. As he lay dying, Zechariah said, “May the LORD see this and call you to account.”
2CH	24	23	일주년 후에 아람 군대가 요아스를 치려 하여 올라와서 유다와 예루살렘에 이르러 백성 중에서 그 모든 방백을 멸절하고 노략한 물건을 다메섹 왕에게로 보내니라	And it came to pass at the end of the year, that the host of Syria came up against him: and they came to Judah and Jerusalem, and destroyed all the princes of the people from among the people, and sent all the spoil of them unto the king of Damascus.	In the spring, the army of Aram went to war against Joash. They entered Judah and Jerusalem and destroyed all the leaders of the people, and they sent all the plunder to their king in Damascus.
2CH	24	24	아람 군대가 적은 무리로 왔으나 여호와께서 심히 큰 군대를 그 손에 붙이셨으니 이는 유다 사람이 그 열조의 하나님 여호와를 버렸음이라 이와 같이 아람 사람이 요아스를 징벌하였더라	For the army of the Syrians came with a small company of men, and the Lord delivered a very great host into their hand, because they had forsaken the Lord God of their fathers. So they executed judgment against Joash.	Although the Aramean army had come with only a few men, the LORD delivered into their hand a very great army. Because Judah had forsaken the LORD, the God of their fathers, judgment was executed on Joash.
2CH	24	25	요아스가 크게 상하매 적군이 버리고 간 후에 그 신복들이 제사장 여호야다의 아들들의 피로 인하여 모반하여 그 침상에서 쳐 죽인지라 다윗 성에 장사하였으나 열왕의 묘실에는 장사하지 아니하였더라	And when they were departed from him, (for they left him in great diseases,) his own servants conspired against him for the blood of the sons of Jehoiada the priest, and slew him on his bed, and he died: and they buried him in the city of David, but they buried him not in the sepulchres of the kings.	And when the Arameans had withdrawn, they left Joash severely wounded. His own servants conspired against him for shedding the blood of the son of Jehoiada the priest, and they killed him on his bed. So he died and was buried in the City of David, but not in the tombs of the kings.
2CH	24	26	모반한 자는 암몬 여인 시므앗의 아들 시밧과 모압 여인 시므릿의 아들 여호사밧이더라	And these are they that conspired against him; Zabad the son of Shimeath an Ammonitess, and Jehozabad the son of Shimrith a Moabitess.	Those who conspired against Joash were Zabad son of Shimeath the Ammonitess and Jehozabad son of Shimrith the Moabitess.
2CH	24	27	요아스의 아들들의 사적과 요아스의 중대한 경책을 받은 것과 하나님의 전 중수한 사적은 다 열왕기 주석에 기록되니라 그 아들 아마샤가 대신하여 왕이 되니라	Now concerning his sons, and the greatness of the burdens laid upon him, and the repairing of the house of God, behold, they are written in the story of the book of the kings. And Amaziah his son reigned in his stead.	The accounts of the sons of Joash, as well as the many pronouncements about him and about the restoration of the house of God, are indeed written in the Treatise of the Book of the Kings. And his son Amaziah reigned in his place.
2CH	25	1	아마샤가 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 이십오 세라 예루살렘에서 이십구 년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 여호앗단이라 예루살렘 사람이더라	Amaziah was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Jehoaddan of Jerusalem.	Amaziah was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem twenty-nine years. His mother’s name was Jehoaddan; she was from Jerusalem.
2CH	25	2	아마샤가 여호와 보시기에 정직히 행하기는 하였으나 온전한 마음으로 행치 아니하였더라	And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart.	And he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, but not wholeheartedly.
2CH	25	3	그 나라가 굳게 서매 그 부왕을 죽인 신복들을 죽였으나	Now it came to pass, when the kingdom was established to him, that he slew his servants that had killed the king his father.	As soon as the kingdom was firmly in his grasp, Amaziah executed the servants who had murdered his father the king.
2CH	25	4	저희 자녀는 죽이지 아니하였으니 이는 모세 율법 책에 기록한 대로 함이라 곧 여호와께서 명하여 이르시기를 자녀로 인하여 아비를 죽이지 말 것이요 아비로 인하여 자녀를 죽이지 말 것이라 오직 각 사람은 자기의 죄로 인하여 죽을 것이니라 하셨더라	But he slew not their children, but did as it is written in the law in the book of Moses, where the Lord commanded, saying, The fathers shall not die for the children, neither shall the children die for the fathers, but every man shall die for his own sin.	Yet he did not put their sons to death, but acted according to what is written in the Law, in the Book of Moses, where the LORD commanded: “Fathers must not be put to death for their children, and children must not be put to death for their fathers; each is to die for his own sin.”
2CH	25	5	아마샤가 유다 사람을 모으고 그 여러 족속을 따라 천부장과 백부장을 세우되 유다와 베냐민을 함께 그리하고 이십 세 이상으로 계수하여 창과 방패를 잡고 능히 전장에 나갈만한 자 삼십만을 얻고	Moreover Amaziah gathered Judah together, and made them captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, according to the houses of their fathers, throughout all Judah and Benjamin: and he numbered them from twenty years old and above, and found them three hundred thousand choice men, able to go forth to war, that could handle spear and shield.	Then Amaziah gathered the people of Judah and assigned them according to their families to commanders of thousands and of hundreds. And he numbered those twenty years of age or older throughout Judah and Benjamin and found 300,000 chosen men able to serve in the army, bearing the spear and shield.
2CH	25	6	또 은 일백 달란트로 이스라엘 나라에서 큰 용사 십만을 삯내었더니	He hired also an hundred thousand mighty men of valour out of Israel for an hundred talents of silver.	He also hired 100,000 mighty warriors from Israel for a hundred talents of silver.
2CH	25	7	어떤 하나님의 사람이 아마샤에게 나아와서 이르되 왕이여 이스라엘 군대로 왕과 함께 가게 마옵소서 여호와께서는 이스라엘 곧 온 에브라임 자손과 함께 하지 아니하시나니	But there came a man of God to him, saying, O king, let not the army of Israel go with thee; for the Lord is not with Israel, to wit, with all the children of Ephraim.	But a man of God came to him and said, “O king, do not let the army of Israel go with you, for the LORD is not with Israel—not with any of the Ephraimites.
2CH	25	8	왕이 만일 가시거든 힘써 싸우소서 하나님이 왕을 대적 앞에 엎드러지게 하시리이다 하나님은 능히 돕기도 하시고 능히 패하게도 하시나이다	But if thou wilt go, do it, be strong for the battle: God shall make thee fall before the enemy: for God hath power to help, and to cast down.	Even if you go and fight bravely in battle, God will make you stumble before the enemy, for God has power to help and power to overthrow.”
2CH	25	9	아마샤가 하나님의 사람에게 이르되 내가 일백 달란트를 이스라엘 군대에게 주었으니 어찌할꼬 하나님의 사람이 대답하되 여호와께서 능히 이보다 많은 것으로 왕에게 주실 수 있나이다	And Amaziah said to the man of God, But what shall we do for the hundred talents which I have given to the army of Israel? And the man of God answered, The Lord is able to give thee much more than this.	Amaziah asked the man of God, “What should I do about the hundred talents I have given to the army of Israel?” And the man of God replied, “The LORD is able to give you much more than this.”
2CH	25	10	아마샤가 이에 에브라임에서 자기에게 나아온 군대를 구별하여 본곳으로 돌아가게 하였더니 저희 무리가 유다 사람을 심히 노하여 분연히 본곳으로 돌아갔더라	Then Amaziah separated them, to wit, the army that was come to him out of Ephraim, to go home again: wherefore their anger was greatly kindled against Judah, and they returned home in great anger.	So Amaziah dismissed the troops who had come to him from Ephraim and sent them home. And they were furious with Judah and returned home in great anger.
2CH	25	11	아마샤가 담력을 내어 그 백성을 거느리고 염곡에 이르러 세일 자손 일만을 죽이고	And Amaziah strengthened himself, and led forth his people, and went to the valley of salt, and smote of the children of Seir ten thousand.	Amaziah, however, summoned his strength and led his troops to the Valley of Salt, where he struck down 10,000 men of Seir,
2CH	25	12	유다 자손이 또 일만을 사로잡아 가지고 바위 꼭대기에 올라가서 거기서 밀쳐 내려뜨려서 그 몸이 부숴지게 하였더라	And other ten thousand left alive did the children of Judah carry away captive, and brought them unto the top of the rock, and cast them down from the top of the rock, that they all were broken in pieces.	and the army of Judah also captured 10,000 men alive. They took them to the top of a cliff and threw them down so that all were dashed to pieces.
2CH	25	13	아마샤가 자기와 함께 전장에 나가지 못하게 하고 돌려 보낸 군사들이 사마리아에서부터 벧호론까지 유다 성읍을 엄습하고 사람 삼천을 죽이고 물건을 많이 노략하였더라	But the soldiers of the army which Amaziah sent back, that they should not go with him to battle, fell upon the cities of Judah, from Samaria even unto Beth–horon, and smote three thousand of them, and took much spoil.	Meanwhile the troops that Amaziah had dismissed from battle raided the cities of Judah, from Samaria to Beth-horon. They struck down 3,000 people and carried off a great deal of plunder.
2CH	25	14	아마샤가 에돔 사람을 도륙하고 돌아올 때에 세일 자손의 우상들을 가져다가 자기의 신으로 세우고 그 앞에 경배하며 분향한지라	Now it came to pass, after that Amaziah was come from the slaughter of the Edomites, that he brought the gods of the children of Seir, and set them up to be his gods, and bowed down himself before them, and burned incense unto them.	When Amaziah returned from the slaughter of the Edomites, he brought back the gods of the Seirites, set them up as his own gods, bowed before them, and burned sacrifices to them.
2CH	25	15	그러므로 여호와께서 아마샤에게 진노하사 한 선지자를 보내시니 나아가 가로되 저 백성의 신들이 자기 백성을 왕의 손에서 능히 구원하지 못하였거늘 왕은 어찌하여 그 신들에게 구하나이까 하며	Wherefore the anger of the Lord was kindled against Amaziah, and he sent unto him a prophet, which said unto him, Why hast thou sought after the gods of the people, which could not deliver their own people out of thine hand?	Therefore the anger of the LORD burned against Amaziah, and He sent him a prophet, who said, “Why have you sought this people’s gods, which could not deliver them from your hand?”
2CH	25	16	선지자가 오히려 말할 때에 왕이 이르되 우리가 너로 왕의 모사를 삼았느냐 그치라 어찌하여 맞으려 하느냐 선지자가 그치며 가로되 왕이 이 일을 행하고 나의 경고를 듣지 아니하니 하나님이 왕을 멸하시기로 결정하신줄 아노라 하였더라	And it came to pass, as he talked with him, that the king said unto him, Art thou made of the king’s counsel? forbear; why shouldest thou be smitten? Then the prophet forbare, and said, I know that God hath determined to destroy thee, because thou hast done this, and hast not hearkened unto my counsel.	While he was still speaking, the king asked, “Have we made you the counselor to the king? Stop! Why be struck down?” So the prophet stopped, but he said, “I know that God has determined to destroy you, because you have done this and have not heeded my advice.”
2CH	25	17	유다 왕 아마샤가 상의하고 예후의 손자 여호아하스의 아들 이스라엘 왕 요아스에게 사자를 보내어 이르되 오라 서로 대면하자 한지라	Then Amaziah king of Judah took advice, and sent to Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, the son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, Come, let us see one another in the face.	Then Amaziah king of Judah took counsel and sent word to the king of Israel Jehoash son of Jehoahaz, the son of Jehu. “Come, let us meet face to face,” he said.
2CH	25	18	이스라엘 왕 요아스가 유다 왕 아마샤에게 보내어 이르되 레바논 가시나무가 레바논 백향목에게 보내어 이르기를 네 딸을 내 아들에게 주어 아내를 삼게하라 하였더니 레바논 짐승이 지나가다가 그 가시나무를 짓밟았으니라	And Joash king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying, The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter to my son to wife: and there passed by a wild beast that was in Lebanon, and trode down the thistle.	But Jehoash king of Israel replied to Amaziah king of Judah: “A thistle in Lebanon sent a message to a cedar in Lebanon, saying, ‘Give your daughter to my son in marriage.’ Then a wild beast in Lebanon came along and trampled the thistle.
2CH	25	19	네가 에돔 사람을 쳤다 하고 네 마음이 교만하여 자긍하는도다 네 궁에나 편히 거하라 어찌하여 화를 자취하여 너와 유다가 함께 망하고자 하느냐 하나	Thou sayest, Lo, thou hast smitten the Edomites; and thine heart lifteth thee up to boast: abide now at home; why shouldest thou meddle to thine hurt, that thou shouldest fall, even thou, and Judah with thee?	You have said, ‘Look, I have defeated Edom,’ and your heart has become proud and boastful. Now stay at home. Why should you stir up trouble so that you fall—you and Judah with you?”
2CH	25	20	아마샤가 듣지 아니하였으니 이는 하나님께로 말미암은 것이라 저희가 에돔 신들에게 구하였으므로 그 대적의 손에 붙이려 하심이더라	But Amaziah would not hear; for it came of God, that he might deliver them into the hand of their enemies, because they sought after the gods of Edom.	But Amaziah would not listen, for this had come from God in order to deliver them into the hand of Jehoash, because they had sought the gods of Edom.
2CH	25	21	이스라엘 왕 요아스가 올라와서 유다 왕 아마샤로 더불어 유다의 벧세메스에서 대면하였더니	So Joash the king of Israel went up; and they saw one another in the face, both he and Amaziah king of Judah, at Beth–shemesh, which belongeth to Judah.	So Jehoash king of Israel advanced, and he and Amaziah king of Judah faced each other at Beth-shemesh in Judah.
2CH	25	22	유다가 이스라엘 앞에서 패하여 각기 장막으로 도망한지라	And Judah was put to the worse before Israel, and they fled every man to his tent.	And Judah was routed before Israel, and every man fled to his own home.
2CH	25	23	이스라엘 왕 요아스가 벧세메스에서 여호아하스의 손자 요아스의 아들 유다 왕 아마샤를 사로잡고 예루살렘에 이르러 예루살렘 성벽을 에브라임 문에서부터 성 모퉁이 문까지 사백 규빗을 헐고	And Joash the king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, at Beth–shemesh, and brought him to Jerusalem, and brake down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim to the corner gate, four hundred cubits.	There at Beth-shemesh, Jehoash king of Israel captured Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Joash, the son of Jehoahaz. Then Jehoash brought him to Jerusalem and broke down the wall of Jerusalem from the Ephraim Gate to the Corner Gate—a section of four hundred cubits.
2CH	25	24	또 하나님의 전 안에 오벧에돔의 지키는 모든 금은과 기명과 왕궁의 재물을 취하고 또 사람을 볼모로 잡아가지고 사마리아로 돌아갔더라	And he took all the gold and the silver, and all the vessels that were found in the house of God with Obed–edom, and the treasures of the king’s house, the hostages also, and returned to Samaria.	He took all the gold and silver and all the articles found in the house of God with Obed-edom and in the treasuries of the royal palace, as well as some hostages. Then he returned to Samaria.
2CH	25	25	이스라엘 왕 요아하스의 아들 요아스가 죽은 후에도 유다 왕 요아스의 아들 아마샤가 십오 년을 생존하였더라	And Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived after the death of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel fifteen years.	Amaziah son of Joash king of Judah lived for fifteen years after the death of Jehoash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel.
2CH	25	26	아마샤의 이 외의 시종 행적은 유다와 이스라엘 열왕기에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	Now the rest of the acts of Amaziah, first and last, behold, are they not written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel?	As for the rest of the acts of Amaziah, from beginning to end, are they not written in the Book of the Kings of Judah and Israel?
2CH	25	27	아마샤가 돌이켜 여호와를 버린 후로부터 예루살렘에서 무리가 저를 모반한고로 저가 라기스로 도망하였더니 모반한 무리가 사람을 라기스로 따라 보내어 저를 거기서 죽이게 하고	Now after the time that Amaziah did turn away from following the Lord they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem; and he fled to Lachish: but they sent to Lachish after him, and slew him there.	From the time that Amaziah turned from following the LORD, a conspiracy was formed against him in Jerusalem, and he fled to Lachish. But men were sent after him to Lachish, and they killed him there.
2CH	25	28	그 시체를 말에 실어다가 그 열조와 함께 유다 성읍에 장사하였더라	And they brought him upon horses, and buried him with his fathers in the city of Judah.	They carried him back on horses and buried him with his fathers in the City of Judah.
2CH	26	1	유다 온 백성이 웃시야로 그 부친 아마샤를 대신하여 왕을 삼으니 때에 나이 십육 세라	Then all the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in the room of his father Amaziah.	All the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in place of his father Amaziah.
2CH	26	2	왕이 그 열조와 함께 잔 후에 웃시야가 엘롯을 건축하여 유다에 돌렸더라	He built Eloth, and restored it to Judah, after that the king slept with his fathers.	Uzziah was the one who rebuilt Eloth and restored it to Judah after King Amaziah rested with his fathers.
2CH	26	3	웃시야가 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 십육 세라 예루살렘에서 오십이 년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 여골리아라 예루살렘 사람이더라	Sixteen years old was Uzziah when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty and two years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name also was Jecoliah of Jerusalem.	Uzziah was sixteen years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem fifty-two years. His mother’s name was Jecoliah; she was from Jerusalem.
2CH	26	4	웃시야가 그 부친 아마샤의 모든 행위대로 여호와 보시기에 정직히 행하며	And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his father Amaziah did.	And he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, just as his father Amaziah had done.
2CH	26	5	하나님의 묵시를 밝히 아는 스가랴의 사는 날에 하나님을 구하였고 저가 여호와를 구할 동안에는 하나님이 형통케 하셨더라	And he sought God in the days of Zechariah, who had understanding in the visions of God: and as long as he sought the Lord, God made him to prosper.	He sought God throughout the days of Zechariah, who instructed him in the fear of God. And as long as he sought the LORD, God gave him success.
2CH	26	6	웃시야가 나가서 블레셋 사람과 싸우고 가드 성과 야브네 성과 아스돗 성을 헐고 아스돗 땅과 블레셋 사람 가운데 성읍들을 건축하매	And he went forth and warred against the Philistines, and brake down the wall of Gath, and the wall of Jabneh, and the wall of Ashdod, and built cities about Ashdod, and among the Philistines.	Uzziah went out to wage war against the Philistines, and he tore down the walls of Gath, Jabneh, and Ashdod. Then he built cities near Ashdod and among the Philistines.
2CH	26	7	하나님이 도우사 블레셋 사람과 구르바알에 거한 아라비아 사람과 마온 사람을 치게 하신지라	And God helped him against the Philistines, and against the Arabians that dwelt in Gur–baal, and the Mehunims.	God helped him against the Philistines, against the Arabs living in Gur-baal, and against the Meunites.
2CH	26	8	암몬 사람이 웃시야에게 조공을 바치매 웃시야가 심히 강성하여 이름이 애굽 변방까지 퍼졌더라	And the Ammonites gave gifts to Uzziah: and his name spread abroad even to the entering in of Egypt; for he strengthened himself exceedingly.	The Ammonites brought tribute to Uzziah, and his fame spread as far as the border of Egypt, for he had become exceedingly powerful.
2CH	26	9	웃시야가 예루살렘에서 성 모퉁이 문과 골짜기 문과 성굽이에 망대를 세워 견고하게 하고	Moreover Uzziah built towers in Jerusalem at the corner gate, and at the valley gate, and at the turning of the wall, and fortified them.	Uzziah built towers in Jerusalem at the Corner Gate, the Valley Gate, and the angle in the wall, and he fortified them.
2CH	26	10	또 거친 땅에 망대를 세우고 물웅덩이를 많이 팠으니 평야와 평지에 욱축을 많이 기름이며 또 여러 산과 좋은 밭에 농부와 포도원을 다스리는 자를 두었으니 농사를 좋아함이더라	Also he built towers in the desert, and digged many wells: for he had much cattle, both in the low country, and in the plains: husbandmen also, and vine dressers in the mountains, and in Carmel: for he loved husbandry.	Since he had much livestock in the foothills and in the plain, he built towers in the desert and dug many cisterns. And since he was a lover of the soil, he had farmers and vinedressers in the hill country and in the fertile fields.
2CH	26	11	웃시야에게 또 싸우는 군사가 있으니 서기관 여이엘과 영장 마아세야의 조사한 수효대로 왕의 장관 하나냐의 수하에 속하여 떼를 지어 나가서 싸우는 자라	Moreover Uzziah had an host of fighting men, that went out to war by bands, according to the number of their account by the hand of Jeiel the scribe and Maaseiah the ruler, under the hand of Hananiah, one of the king’s captains.	Uzziah had an army ready for battle that went out to war by assigned divisions, as recorded by Jeiel the scribe and Maaseiah the officer under the direction of Hananiah, one of the royal officers.
2CH	26	12	족장의 총수가 이천육백 명이니 모두 큰 용사요	The whole number of the chief of the fathers of the mighty men of valour were two thousand and six hundred.	The total number of family leaders of the mighty men of valor was 2,600.
2CH	26	13	그 수하의 군대가 삼십만 칠천오백 명이라 건장하고 싸움에 능하여 왕을 도와 대적을 치는 자며	And under their hand was an army, three hundred thousand and seven thousand and five hundred, that made war with mighty power, to help the king against the enemy.	Under their authority was an army of 307,500 trained for war, a powerful force to support the king against his enemies.
2CH	26	14	웃시야가 그 온 군대를 위하여 방패와 창과 투구와 갑옷과 활과 물매 돌을 예비하고	And Uzziah prepared for them throughout all the host shields, and spears, and helmets, and habergeons, and bows, and slings to cast stones.	Uzziah supplied the entire army with shields, spears, helmets, armor, bows, and slingstones.
2CH	26	15	또 예루살렘에서 공교한 공장으로 기계를 창작하여 망대와 성곽 위에 두어 살과 큰 돌을 발하게 하였으니 그 이름이 원방에 퍼짐은 기이한 도우심을 얻어 강성하여짐이더라	And he made in Jerusalem engines, invented by cunning men, to be on the towers and upon the bulwarks, to shoot arrows and great stones withal. And his name spread far abroad; for he was marvellously helped, till he was strong.	And in Jerusalem he made skillfully designed devices to shoot arrows and catapult large stones from the towers and corners. So his fame spread far and wide, for he was helped tremendously so that he became powerful.
2CH	26	16	저가 강성하여지매 그 마음이 교만하여 악을 행하여 그 하나님 여호와께 범죄하되 곧 여호와의 전에 들어가서 향단에 분향하려 한지라	But when he was strong, his heart was lifted up to his destruction: for he transgressed against the Lord his God, and went into the temple of the Lord to burn incense upon the altar of incense.	But when Uzziah grew powerful, his arrogance led to his own destruction. He was unfaithful to the LORD his God, for he entered the temple of the LORD to burn incense on the altar of incense.
2CH	26	17	제사장 아사랴가 여호와의 제사장 용맹한 자 팔십 인을 데리고 그 뒤를 따라 들어가서	And Azariah the priest went in after him, and with him fourscore priests of the Lord, that were valiant men:	Then Azariah the priest, along with eighty brave priests of the LORD, went in after him.
2CH	26	18	웃시야 왕을 막아 가로되 웃시야여 여호와께 분향하는 일이 왕의 할 바가 아니요 오직 분향하기 위하여 구별함을 받은 아론의 자손 제사장의 할 바니 성소에서 나가소서 왕이 범죄하였으니 하나님 여호와께 영광을 얻지 못하리이다	And they withstood Uzziah the king, and said unto him, It appertaineth not unto thee, Uzziah, to burn incense unto the Lord, but to the priests the sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense: go out of the sanctuary; for thou hast trespassed; neither shall it be for thine honour from the Lord God.	They took their stand against King Uzziah and said, “Uzziah, you have no right to offer incense to the LORD. Only the priests, the descendants of Aaron, are consecrated to burn incense. Leave the sanctuary, for you have acted unfaithfully; you will not receive honor from the LORD God.”
2CH	26	19	웃시야가 손으로 향로를 잡고 분향하려 하다가 노를 발하니 저가 제사장에게 노할 때에 여호와의 전 안 향단 곁 제사장 앞에서 그 이마에 문둥병이 발한지라	Then Uzziah was wroth, and had a censer in his hand to burn incense: and while he was wroth with the priests, the leprosy even rose up in his forehead before the priests in the house of the Lord, from beside the incense altar.	Uzziah, with a censer in his hand to offer incense, was enraged. But while he raged against the priests in their presence in the house of the LORD before the altar of incense, leprosy broke out on his forehead.
2CH	26	20	대제사장 아사랴와 모든 제사장이 왕의 이마에 문둥병이 발하였음을 보고 전에서 급히 쫓아내고 여호와께서 치시므로 왕도 속히 나가니라	And Azariah the chief priest, and all the priests, looked upon him, and, behold, he was leprous in his forehead, and they thrust him out from thence; yea, himself hasted also to go out, because the Lord had smitten him.	When Azariah the chief priest and all the priests turned to him and saw his leprous forehead, they rushed him out. Indeed, he himself hurried to get out, because the LORD had afflicted him.
2CH	26	21	웃시야 왕이 죽는 날까지 문둥이가 되었고 문둥이가 되매 여호와의 전에서 끊어졌고 별궁에 홀로 거하였으므로 그 아들 요담이 왕궁을 관리하며 국민을 치리하였더라	And Uzziah the king was a leper unto the day of his death, and dwelt in a several house, being a leper; for he was cut off from the house of the Lord: and Jotham his son was over the king’s house, judging the people of the land.	So King Uzziah was a leper until the day of his death. He lived in isolation, leprous and cut off from the house of the LORD, while his son Jotham had charge of the royal palace to govern the people of the land.
2CH	26	22	이 외에 웃시야의 시종 행적은 아모스의 아들 선지자 이사야가 기록하였더라	Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah, first and last, did Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, write.	As for the rest of the acts of Uzziah, from beginning to end, they are recorded by the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz.
2CH	26	23	웃시야가 그 열조와 함께 자매 저는 문둥이라 하여 열왕의 묘실 접한 땅 곧 그 열조의 곁에 장사하니라 그 아들 요담이 대신하여 왕이 되니라	So Uzziah slept with his fathers, and they buried him with his fathers in the field of the burial which belonged to the kings; for they said, He is a leper: and Jotham his son reigned in his stead.	And Uzziah rested with his fathers and was buried near them in a field of burial that belonged to the kings; for the people said, “He was a leper.” And his son Jotham reigned in his place.
2CH	27	1	요담이 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 이십오 세라 예루살렘에서 십육 년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 여루사라 사독의 딸이더라	Jotham was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name also was Jerushah, the daughter of Zadok.	Jotham was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years. His mother’s name was Jerushah daughter of Zadok.
2CH	27	2	요담이 그 부친 웃시야의 모든 행위대로 여호와 보시기에 정직히 행하였으나 여호와의 전에는 들어가지 아니하였고 백성은 오히려 사악을 행하였더라	And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his father Uzziah did: howbeit he entered not into the temple of the Lord. And the people did yet corruptly.	And he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, just as his father Uzziah had done. In addition, he did not enter the temple of the LORD. But the people still behaved corruptly.
2CH	27	3	저가 여호와의 전 윗문을 건축하고 또 오벨 성을 많이 증축하고	He built the high gate of the house of the Lord, and on the wall of Ophel he built much.	Jotham rebuilt the Upper Gate of the house of the LORD, and he worked extensively on the wall at the hill of Ophel.
2CH	27	4	유다 산중에 성읍을 건축하며 수풀 가운데 견고한 영채와 망대를 건축하고	Moreover he built cities in the mountains of Judah, and in the forests he built castles and towers.	He also built cities in the hill country of Judah and fortresses and towers in the forests.
2CH	27	5	암몬 자손의 왕으로 더불어 싸워 이기었더니 그 해에 암몬 자손이 은 일백 달란트와 밀 일만 석과 보리 일만 석을 드렸고 제이년과 제삼년에도 암몬 자손이 그와 같이 드렸더라	He fought also with the king of the Ammonites, and prevailed against them. And the children of Ammon gave him the same year an hundred talents of silver, and ten thousand measures of wheat, and ten thousand of barley. So much did the children of Ammon pay unto him, both the second year, and the third.	Jotham waged war against the king of the Ammonites and defeated them, and that year they gave him a hundred talents of silver, ten thousand cors of wheat, and ten thousand cors of barley. They paid him the same in the second and third years.
2CH	27	6	요담이 그 하나님 여호와 앞에서 정도를 행하였으므로 점점 강하여졌더라	So Jotham became mighty, because he prepared his ways before the Lord his God.	So Jotham grew powerful because he ordered his ways before the LORD his God.
2CH	27	7	요담의 남은 사적과 그 모든 전쟁과 행위는 이스라엘과 유다 열왕기에 기록되니라	Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and all his wars, and his ways, lo, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.	As for the rest of the acts of Jotham, along with all his wars and his ways, they are indeed written in the Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah.
2CH	27	8	요담이 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 이십오 세요 예루살렘에서 치리한지 십육년이라	He was five and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem.	He was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years.
2CH	27	9	저가 그 열조와 함께 자매 다윗 성에 장사되고 그 아들 아하스가 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And Jotham slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of David: and Ahaz his son reigned in his stead.	And Jotham rested with his fathers and was buried in the City of David. And his son Ahaz reigned in his place.
2CH	28	1	아하스가 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 이십 세라 예루살렘에서 십육 년을 치리하였으나 그 조상 다윗과 같지 아니하여 여호와 보시기에 정직히 행치 아니하고	Ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem: but he did not that which was right in the sight of the Lord, like David his father:	Ahaz was twenty years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem sixteen years. And unlike David his father, he did not do what was right in the eyes of the LORD.
2CH	28	2	이스라엘 열왕의 길로 행하여 바알들의 우상을 부어 만들고	For he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, and made also molten images for Baalim.	Instead, he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel and even made cast images of the Baals.
2CH	28	3	또 힌놈의 아들 골짜기에서 분향하고 여호와께서 이스라엘 자손 앞에서 쫓아내신 이방 사람의 가증한 일을 본받아 그 자녀를 불사르고	Moreover he burnt incense in the valley of the son of Hinnom, and burnt his children in the fire, after the abominations of the heathen whom the Lord had cast out before the children of Israel.	Moreover, Ahaz burned incense in the Valley of Hinnom and sacrificed his sons in the fire, according to the abominations of the nations that the LORD had driven out before the Israelites.
2CH	28	4	또 산당과 작은 산 위와 모든 푸른 나무 아래에서 제사를 드리며 분향한지라	He sacrificed also and burnt incense in the high places, and on the hills, and under every green tree.	And he sacrificed and burned incense on the high places, on the hills, and under every green tree.
2CH	28	5	그러므로 그 하나님 여호와께서 아람 왕의 손에 붙이시매 저희가 쳐서 심히 많은 무리를 사로잡아 가지고 다메섹으로 갔으며 또 이스라엘 왕의 손에 붙이시매 저가 쳐서 크게 살륙하였으니	Wherefore the Lord his God delivered him into the hand of the king of Syria; and they smote him, and carried away a great multitude of them captives, and brought them to Damascus. And he was also delivered into the hand of the king of Israel, who smote him with a great slaughter.	So the LORD his God delivered Ahaz into the hand of the king of Aram, who attacked him and took many captives to Damascus. Ahaz was also delivered into the hand of the king of Israel, who struck him with great force.
2CH	28	6	이는 그 열조의 하나님 여호와를 버렸음이라 르말랴의 아들 베가가 유다에서 하루 동안에 용사 십이만 명을 죽였으며	For Pekah the son of Remaliah slew in Judah an hundred and twenty thousand in one day, which were all valiant men; because they had forsaken the Lord God of their fathers.	For in one day Pekah son of Remaliah killed 120,000 valiant men in Judah. This happened because they had forsaken the LORD, the God of their fathers.
2CH	28	7	에브라임의 용사 시그리는 왕의 아들 마아세야와 궁내대신 아스리감과 총리대신 엘가나를 죽였더라	And Zichri, a mighty man of Ephraim, slew Maaseiah the king’s son, and Azrikam the governor of the house, and Elkanah that was next to the king.	Zichri, a mighty man of Ephraim, killed Maaseiah the son of the king, Azrikam the governor of the palace, and Elkanah the second to the king.
2CH	28	8	이스라엘 자손이 그 형제 중에서 그 아내와 자녀 합하여 이십만 명을 사로잡고 그 재물을 많이 노략하여 사마리아로 가져가니	And the children of Israel carried away captive of their brethren two hundred thousand, women, sons, and daughters, and took also away much spoil from them, and brought the spoil to Samaria.	Then the Israelites took 200,000 captives from their kinsmen—women, sons, and daughters. They also carried off a great deal of plunder and brought it to Samaria.
2CH	28	9	그곳에 여호와의 선지자가 있는데 이름은 오뎃이라 저가 사마리아로 돌아오는 군대를 영접하고 저희에게 이르되 너희 열조의 하나님 여호와께서 유다를 진노하신고로 너희 손에 붙이셨거늘 너희 노기가 충천하여 살륙하고	But a prophet of the Lord was there, whose name was Oded: and he went out before the host that came to Samaria, and said unto them, Behold, because the Lord God of your fathers was wroth with Judah, he hath delivered them into your hand, and ye have slain them in a rage that reacheth up unto heaven.	But a prophet of the LORD named Oded was there, and he went out to meet the army that returned to Samaria. “Look,” he said to them, “because of His wrath against Judah, the LORD, the God of your fathers, has delivered them into your hand. But you have slaughtered them in a rage that reaches up to heaven.
2CH	28	10	이제 너희가 또 유다와 예루살렘 백성들을 압제하여 노예를 삼고자 생각하는도다 너희는 너희 하나님 여호와께 범죄함이 없느냐	And now ye purpose to keep under the children of Judah and Jerusalem for bondmen and bondwomen unto you: but are there not with you, even with you, sins against the Lord your God?	And now you intend to reduce to slavery the men and women of Judah and Jerusalem. But are you not also guilty before the LORD your God?
2CH	28	11	그런즉 너희는 내 말을 듣고 너희가 형제 중에서 사로잡아 온 포로를 놓아 돌아가게 하라 여호와의 진노가 너희에게 임박하였느니라 한지라	Now hear me therefore, and deliver the captives again, which ye have taken captive of your brethren: for the fierce wrath of the Lord is upon you.	Now therefore, listen to me and return the captives you took from your kinsmen, for the fierce anger of the LORD is upon you.”
2CH	28	12	에브라임 자손의 두목 몇 사람 요하난의 아들 아사랴와 무실레못의 아들 베레갸와 살룸의 아들 여히스기야와 하들래의 아들 아마사가 일어나서 전장에서 돌아오는 자를 막으며	Then certain of the heads of the children of Ephraim, Azariah the son of Johanan, Berechiah the son of Meshillemoth, and Jehizkiah the son of Shallum, and Amasa the son of Hadlai, stood up against them that came from the war,	Then some of the leaders of the Ephraimites—Azariah son of Jehohanan, Berechiah son of Meshillemoth, Jehizkiah son of Shallum, and Amasa son of Hadlai—stood in opposition to those arriving from the war.
2CH	28	13	저희에게 이르되 너희는 이 포로를 이리로 끌어들이지 못하리라 너희의 경영하는 일이 우리로 여호와께 허물이 있게 함이니 우리의 죄와 허물을 더하게 함이로다 우리의 허물이 이미 커서 진노하심이 이스라엘에게 임박하였느니라 하매	And said unto them, Ye shall not bring in the captives hither: for whereas we have offended against the Lord already, ye intend to add more to our sins and to our trespass: for our trespass is great, and there is fierce wrath against Israel.	“You must not bring the captives here,” they said, “for you are proposing to bring guilt upon us from the LORD and to add to our sins and our guilt. For our guilt is great, and fierce anger is upon Israel.”
2CH	28	14	이에 병기를 가진 사람이 포로와 노략한 물건을 방백들과 온 회중 앞에 둔지라	So the armed men left the captives and the spoil before the princes and all the congregation.	So the armed men left the captives and the plunder before the leaders and all the assembly.
2CH	28	15	이 위에 이름이 기록된 자들이 일어나서 포로를 맞고 노략하여 온 중에서 옷을 취하여 벗은 자에게 입히며 신을 신기며 먹이고 마시우며 기름을 바르고 그 약한 자는 나귀에 태워 데리고 종려나무 성 여리고에 이르러 그 형제에게 돌린 후에 사마리아로 돌아갔더라	And the men which were expressed by name rose up, and took the captives, and with the spoil clothed all that were naked among them, and arrayed them, and shod them, and gave them to eat and to drink, and anointed them, and carried all the feeble of them upon asses, and brought them to Jericho, the city of palm trees, to their brethren: then they returned to Samaria.	Then the men who were designated by name arose, took charge of the captives, and provided from the plunder clothing for the naked. They clothed them, gave them sandals and food and drink, anointed their wounds, and put all the feeble on donkeys. So they brought them to Jericho, the City of Palms, to their brothers. Then they returned to Samaria.
2CH	28	16	그 때에 아하스 왕이 앗수르 왕에게 보내어 도와주기를 구하였으니	At that time did king Ahaz send unto the kings of Assyria to help him.	At that time King Ahaz sent for help from the king of Assyria.
2CH	28	17	이는 에돔 사람이 다시 와서 유다를 치고 그 백성을 사로잡았음이며	For again the Edomites had come and smitten Judah, and carried away captives.	The Edomites had again come and attacked Judah and carried away captives.
2CH	28	18	블레셋 사람도 유다의 평지와 남방 성읍들을 침노하여 벧세메스와 아얄론과 그데롯과 소고와 그 동네와 딤나와 그 동네와 김소와 그 동네를 취하고 거기 거하였으니	The Philistines also had invaded the cities of the low country, and of the south of Judah, and had taken Beth–shemesh, and Ajalon, and Gederoth, and Shocho with the villages thereof, and Timnah with the villages thereof, Gimzo also and the villages thereof: and they dwelt there.	The Philistines had also raided the cities of the foothills and the Negev of Judah, capturing and occupying Beth-shemesh, Aijalon, and Gederoth, as well as Soco, Timnah, and Gimzo with their villages.
2CH	28	19	이는 이스라엘 왕 아하스가 유다에서 망령되이 행하여 여호와께 크게 범죄하였으므로 여호와께서 유다를 낮추심이라	For the Lord brought Judah low because of Ahaz king of Israel; for he made Judah naked, and transgressed sore against the Lord.	For the LORD humbled Judah because Ahaz king of Israel had thrown off restraint in Judah and had been most unfaithful to the LORD.
2CH	28	20	앗수르 왕 디글랏빌레셀이 이르렀으나 돕지 아니하고 도리어 군박하였더라	And Tilgath–pilneser king of Assyria came unto him, and distressed him, but strengthened him not.	Then Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria came to Ahaz but afflicted him rather than strengthening him.
2CH	28	21	아하스가 여호와의 전과 왕궁과 방백들의 집에서 재물을 취하여 앗수르 왕에게 주었으나 유익이 없었더라	For Ahaz took away a portion out of the house of the Lord, and out of the house of the king, and of the princes, and gave it unto the king of Assyria: but he helped him not.	Although Ahaz had taken a portion from the house of the LORD, from the royal palace, and from the princes and had presented it to the king of Assyria, it did not help him.
2CH	28	22	이 아하스 왕이 곤고할 때에 더욱 여호와께 범죄하여	And in the time of his distress did he trespass yet more against the Lord: this is that king Ahaz.	In the time of his distress, King Ahaz became even more unfaithful to the LORD.
2CH	28	23	자기를 친 다메섹 신들에게 제사하여 가로되 아람 열왕의 신들이 저희를 도왔으니 나도 그 신에게 제사하여 나를 돕게 하리라 하였으나 그 신이 아하스와 온 이스라엘을 망케 하였더라	For he sacrificed unto the gods of Damascus, which smote him: and he said, Because the gods of the kings of Syria help them, therefore will I sacrifice to them, that they may help me. But they were the ruin of him, and of all Israel.	Since Damascus had defeated him, he sacrificed to their gods and said, “Because the gods of the kings of Aram have helped them, I will sacrifice to them that they may help me.” But these gods were the downfall of Ahaz and of all Israel.
2CH	28	24	아하스가 하나님의 전의 기구들을 모아 훼파하고 또 여호와의 전 문들을 닫고 예루살렘 구석마다 단을 쌓고	And Ahaz gathered together the vessels of the house of God, and cut in pieces the vessels of the house of God, and shut up the doors of the house of the Lord, and he made him altars in every corner of Jerusalem.	Then Ahaz gathered up the articles of the house of God, cut them into pieces, shut the doors of the house of the LORD, and set up altars of his own on every street corner in Jerusalem.
2CH	28	25	유다 각 성읍에 산당을 세워 다른 신에게 분향하여 그 열조의 하나님 여호와의 노를 격발케 하였더라	And in every several city of Judah he made high places to burn incense unto other gods, and provoked to anger the Lord God of his fathers.	In every city of Judah he built high places to offer incense to other gods, and so he provoked the LORD, the God of his fathers.
2CH	28	26	아하스의 이 외의 시종 사적과 모든 행위는 유다와 이스라엘 열왕기에 기록되니라	Now the rest of his acts and of all his ways, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.	As for the rest of the acts of Ahaz and all his ways, from beginning to end, they are indeed written in the Book of the Kings of Judah and Israel.
2CH	28	27	아하스가 그 열조와 함께 자매 이스라엘 열왕의 묘실에 들이지 아니하고 예루살렘 성에 장사하였더라 그 아들 히스기야가 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city, even in Jerusalem: but they brought him not into the sepulchres of the kings of Israel: and Hezekiah his son reigned in his stead.	And Ahaz rested with his fathers and was buried in the city of Jerusalem, but he was not placed in the tombs of the kings of Israel. And his son Hezekiah reigned in his place.
2CH	29	1	히스기야가 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 이십오 세라 예루살렘에서 이십구 년을 치리하니라 그 모친의 이름은 아비야라 스가랴의 딸이더라	Hezekiah began to reign when he was five and twenty years old, and he reigned nine and twenty years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Abijah, the daughter of Zechariah.	Hezekiah was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem twenty-nine years. His mother’s name was Abijah, the daughter of Zechariah.
2CH	29	2	히스기야가 그 조상 다윗의 모든 행위와 같이 여호와 보시기에 정직히 행하여	And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that David his father had done.	And he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, just as his father David had done.
2CH	29	3	원년 정월에 여호와의 전 문들을 열고 수리하고	He in the first year of his reign, in the first month, opened the doors of the house of the Lord, and repaired them.	In the first month of the first year of his reign, Hezekiah opened and repaired the doors of the house of the LORD.
2CH	29	4	제사장들과 레위 사람들을 동편 광장에 모으고	And he brought in the priests and the Levites, and gathered them together into the east street,	Then he brought in the priests and Levites and gathered them in the square on the east side.
2CH	29	5	저희에게 이르되 레위 사람들아 내 말을 들으라 이제 너희는 성결케 하고 또 너희 열조의 하나님 여호와의 전을 성결케 하여 그 더러운 것을 성소에서 없이하라	And said unto them, Hear me, ye Levites, sanctify now yourselves, and sanctify the house of the Lord God of your fathers, and carry forth the filthiness out of the holy place.	“Listen to me, O Levites,” he said. “Consecrate yourselves now and consecrate the house of the LORD, the God of your fathers. Remove from the Holy Place every impurity.
2CH	29	6	우리 열조가 범죄하여 우리 하나님 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하여 하나님을 버리고 얼굴을 돌이켜 여호와의 성소를 등지고	For our fathers have trespassed, and done that which was evil in the eyes of the Lord our God, and have forsaken him, and have turned away their faces from the habitation of the Lord, and turned their backs.	For our fathers were unfaithful and did evil in the sight of the LORD our God. They abandoned Him, turned their faces away from the dwelling place of the LORD, and turned their backs on Him.
2CH	29	7	또 낭실 문을 닫으며 등불을 끄고 성소에서 분향하지 아니하며 이스라엘 하나님께 번제를 드리지 아니한고로	Also they have shut up the doors of the porch, and put out the lamps, and have not burned incense nor offered burnt offerings in the holy place unto the God of Israel.	They also shut the doors of the portico and extinguished the lamps. They did not burn incense or present burnt offerings in the Holy Place of the God of Israel.
2CH	29	8	여호와께서 유다와 예루살렘을 진노하시고 내어버리사 두려움과 놀람과 비웃음거리가 되게 하신 것을 너희가 목도하는 바라	Wherefore the wrath of the Lord was upon Judah and Jerusalem, and he hath delivered them to trouble, to astonishment, and to hissing, as ye see with your eyes.	Therefore, the wrath of the LORD has fallen upon Judah and Jerusalem, and He has made them an object of terror, horror, and mockery, as you can see with your own eyes.
2CH	29	9	이로 인하여 우리의 열조가 칼에 엎드러지며 우리의 자녀와 아내가 사로잡혔느니라	For, lo, our fathers have fallen by the sword, and our sons and our daughters and our wives are in captivity for this.	For behold, this is why our fathers have fallen by the sword, and our sons and daughters and wives are in captivity.
2CH	29	10	이제 이스라엘 하나님 여호와로 더불어 언약을 세워 그 맹렬한 노로 우리에게서 떠나게 할 마음이 내게 있노니	Now it is in mine heart to make a covenant with the Lord God of Israel, that his fierce wrath may turn away from us.	Now it is in my heart to make a covenant with the LORD, the God of Israel, so that His fierce anger will turn away from us.
2CH	29	11	내 아들들아 이제는 게으르지 말라 여호와께서 이미 너희를 택하사 그 앞에 서서 수종들어 섬기며 분향하게 하셨느니라	My sons, be not now negligent: for the Lord hath chosen you to stand before him, to serve him, and that ye should minister unto him, and burn incense.	Now, my sons, do not be negligent, for the LORD has chosen you to stand before Him, to serve Him, to minister before Him, and to burn incense.”
2CH	29	12	이에 레위 사람들이 일어나니 곧 그핫의 자손 중 아마새의 아들 마핫과 아사랴의 아들 요엘과 므라리의 자손 중 압디의 아들 기스와 여할렐렐의 아들 아사랴와 게르손 사람 중 심마의 아들 요아와 요아의 아들 에덴과	Then the Levites arose, Mahath the son of Amasai, and Joel the son of Azariah, of the sons of the Kohathites: and of the sons of Merari, Kish the son of Abdi, and Azariah the son of Jehalelel: and of the Gershonites; Joah the son of Zimmah, and Eden the son of Joah:	Then the Levites set to work: Mahath son of Amasai and Joel son of Azariah from the Kohathites; Kish son of Abdi and Azariah son of Jehallelel from the Merarites; Joah son of Zimmah and Eden son of Joah from the Gershonites;
2CH	29	13	엘리사반의 자손 중 시므리와 여우엘과 아삽의 자손 중 스가랴와 맛다냐와	And of the sons of Elizaphan; Shimri, and Jeiel: and of the sons of Asaph; Zechariah, and Mattaniah:	Shimri and Jeuel from the Elizaphanites; Zechariah and Mattaniah from the Asaphites;
2CH	29	14	헤만의 자손 중 여후엘과 시므이와 여두둔의 자손 중 스마야와 웃시엘이라	And of the sons of Heman; Jehiel, and Shimei: and of the sons of Jeduthun; Shemaiah, and Uzziel.	Jehiel and Shimei from the Hemanites; and Shemaiah and Uzziel from the Jeduthunites.
2CH	29	15	저희가 그 형제를 모아 성결케 하고 들어가서 왕이 여호와의 말씀대로 명한 것을 좇아 여호와의 전을 깨끗케 할새	And they gathered their brethren, and sanctified themselves, and came, according to the commandment of the king, by the words of the Lord, to cleanse the house of the Lord.	When they had assembled their brothers and consecrated themselves, they went in to cleanse the house of the LORD, according to the command of the king by the words of the LORD.
2CH	29	16	제사장들도 여호와의 전 안에 들어가서 깨끗케 하여 여호와의 전에 있는 모든 더러운 것을 끌어 내어 여호와의 전 뜰에 이르매 레위 사람들이 취하여 바깥 기드론 시내로 가져갔더라	And the priests went into the inner part of the house of the Lord, to cleanse it, and brought out all the uncleanness that they found in the temple of the Lord into the court of the house of the Lord. And the Levites took it, to carry it out abroad into the brook Kidron.	So the priests went inside the house of the LORD to cleanse it, and they brought out to the courtyard all the unclean things that they found in the temple of the LORD. Then the Levites took these things and carried them out to the Kidron Valley.
2CH	29	17	정월 초하루에 성결케하기를 시작하여 그 달 초팔일에 여호와의 낭실에 이르고 또 팔 일 동안 여호와의 전을 성결케 하여 정월 십육일에 이르러 마치고	Now they began on the first day of the first month to sanctify, and on the eighth day of the month came they to the porch of the Lord: so they sanctified the house of the Lord in eight days; and in the sixteenth day of the first month they made an end.	They began the consecration on the first day of the first month, and on the eighth day of the month they reached the portico of the LORD. For eight more days they consecrated the house of the LORD itself, finishing on the sixteenth day of the first month.
2CH	29	18	안으로 들어가서 히스기야 왕을 보고 가로되 우리가 여호와의 온 전과 번제단과 그 모든 기구와 떡을 진설하는 상과 그 모든 기구를 깨끗케 하였고	Then they went in to Hezekiah the king, and said, We have cleansed all the house of the Lord, and the altar of burnt offering, with all the vessels thereof, and the shewbread table, with all the vessels thereof.	Then they went in to King Hezekiah and reported, “We have cleansed the entire house of the LORD, the altar of burnt offering with all its utensils, and the table of the showbread with all its utensils.
2CH	29	19	또 아하스 왕이 위에 있어 범죄할 때에 버린 모든 기구도 우리가 정돈하고 성결케 하여 여호와의 단 앞에 두었나이다 하니라	Moreover all the vessels, which king Ahaz in his reign did cast away in his transgression, have we prepared and sanctified, and, behold, they are before the altar of the Lord.	Moreover, we have prepared and consecrated all the articles that King Ahaz in his unfaithfulness cast aside during his reign. They are now in front of the altar of the LORD.”
2CH	29	20	히스기야 왕이 일찍이 일어나 성읍의 귀인들을 모아 여호와의 전에 올라가서	Then Hezekiah the king rose early, and gathered the rulers of the city, and went up to the house of the Lord.	Early the next morning King Hezekiah gathered the city officials and went up to the house of the LORD.
2CH	29	21	수송아지 일곱과 수양 일곱과 어린 양 일곱과 수염소 일곱을 끌어다가 나라와 성소와 유다를 위하여 속죄 제물을 삼고 아론의 자손 제사장들을 명하여 여호와의 단에 드리게 하니	And they brought seven bullocks, and seven rams, and seven lambs, and seven he goats, for a sin offering for the kingdom, and for the sanctuary, and for Judah. And he commanded the priests the sons of Aaron to offer them on the altar of the Lord.	They brought seven bulls, seven rams, seven lambs, and seven male goats as a sin offering for the kingdom, for the sanctuary, and for Judah. And the king commanded the priests, the descendants of Aaron, to offer them on the altar of the LORD.
2CH	29	22	이에 수소를 잡으매 제사장이 그 피를 받아 단에 뿌리고 또 수양을 잡으매 그 피를 단에 뿌리고 또 어린 양을 잡으매 그 피를 단에 뿌리고	So they killed the bullocks, and the priests received the blood, and sprinkled it on the altar: likewise, when they had killed the rams, they sprinkled the blood upon the altar: they killed also the lambs, and they sprinkled the blood upon the altar.	So they slaughtered the bulls, and the priests took the blood and sprinkled it on the altar. They slaughtered the rams and sprinkled the blood on the altar. And they slaughtered the lambs and sprinkled the blood on the altar.
2CH	29	23	이에 속죄 제물로 드릴 수염소를 왕과 회중의 앞으로 끌어 오매 저희가 그 위에 안수하고	And they brought forth the he goats for the sin offering before the king and the congregation; and they laid their hands upon them:	Then they brought the goats for the sin offering before the king and the assembly, who laid their hands on them.
2CH	29	24	제사장이 잡아 그 피로 속죄제를 삼아 단에 드려 온 이스라엘을 위하여 속죄하니 이는 왕이 명하여 온 이스라엘을 위하여 번제와 속죄제를 드리게 하였음이더라	And the priests killed them, and they made reconciliation with their blood upon the altar, to make an atonement for all Israel: for the king commanded that the burnt offering and the sin offering should be made for all Israel.	And the priests slaughtered the goats and put their blood on the altar for a sin offering, to make atonement for all Israel, because the king had ordered the burnt offering and the sin offering for all Israel.
2CH	29	25	왕이 레위 사람을 여호와의 전에 두어서 다윗과 왕의 선견자 갓과 선지자 나단의 명한대로 제금과 비파와 수금을 잡게 하니 이는 여호와께서 그 선지자들로 이렇게 명하셨음이라	And he set the Levites in the house of the Lord with cymbals, with psalteries, and with harps, according to the commandment of David, and of Gad the king’s seer, and Nathan the prophet: for so was the commandment of the Lord by his prophets.	Hezekiah stationed the Levites in the house of the LORD with cymbals, harps, and lyres according to the command of David, of Gad the king’s seer, and of Nathan the prophet. For the command had come from the LORD through His prophets.
2CH	29	26	레위 사람은 다윗의 악기를 잡고 제사장은 나팔을 잡고 서매	And the Levites stood with the instruments of David, and the priests with the trumpets.	The Levites stood with the instruments of David, and the priests with the trumpets.
2CH	29	27	히스기야가 명하여 번제를 단에 드릴새 번제 드리기를 시작하는 동시에 여호와의 시로 노래하고 나팔을 불며 이스라엘 왕 다윗의 악기를 울리고	And Hezekiah commanded to offer the burnt offering upon the altar. And when the burnt offering began, the song of the Lord began also with the trumpets, and with the instruments ordained by David king of Israel.	And Hezekiah ordered that the burnt offering be sacrificed on the altar. When the burnt offering began, the song of the LORD and the trumpets began as well, accompanied by the instruments of David king of Israel.
2CH	29	28	온 회중이 경배하며 노래하는 자들은 노래하고 나팔 부는 자들은 나팔을 불어 번제를 마치기까지 이르니라	And all the congregation worshipped, and the singers sang, and the trumpeters sounded: and all this continued until the burnt offering was finished.	The whole assembly was worshiping, the singers were singing, and the trumpeters were playing. All this continued until the burnt offering was completed.
2CH	29	29	제사 드리기를 마치매 왕과 그 함께 있는 자가 다 엎드려 경배하니라	And when they had made an end of offering, the king and all that were present with him bowed themselves, and worshipped.	When the offerings were completed, the king and all those present with him bowed down and worshiped.
2CH	29	30	히스기야 왕이 귀인들로 더불어 레위 사람을 명하여 다윗과 선견자 아삽의 시로 여호와를 찬송하게 하매 저희가 즐거움으로 찬송하고 몸을 굽혀 경배하니라	Moreover Hezekiah the king and the princes commanded the Levites to sing praise unto the Lord with the words of David, and of Asaph the seer. And they sang praises with gladness, and they bowed their heads and worshipped.	Then King Hezekiah and his officials ordered the Levites to sing praises to the LORD in the words of David and of Asaph the seer. So they sang praises with gladness and bowed their heads and worshiped.
2CH	29	31	이에 히스기야가 일러 가로되 너희가 이제 몸을 깨끗케하여 여호와께 드렸으니 마땅히 나아와 제물과 감사제물을 여호와의 전으로 가져오라 회중이 드디어 제물과 감사제물을 가져 오되 무릇 마음에 원하는 자는 또한 번제물을 가져오니	Then Hezekiah answered and said, Now ye have consecrated yourselves unto the Lord, come near and bring sacrifices and thank offerings into the house of the Lord. And the congregation brought in sacrifices and thank offerings; and as many as were of a free heart burnt offerings.	Then Hezekiah said, “Now that you have consecrated yourselves to the LORD, come near and bring sacrifices and thank offerings to the house of the LORD.” So the assembly brought sacrifices and thank offerings, and all whose hearts were willing brought burnt offerings.
2CH	29	32	회중의 가져온 번제물의 수효는 수소가 칠십이요 수양이 일백이요 어린 양이 이백이니 이는 다 여호와께 번제물로 드리는 것이며	And the number of the burnt offerings, which the congregation brought, was threescore and ten bullocks, an hundred rams, and two hundred lambs: all these were for a burnt offering to the Lord.	The number of burnt offerings the assembly brought was seventy bulls, a hundred rams, and two hundred lambs; all these were for a burnt offering to the LORD.
2CH	29	33	또 구별하여 드린 소가 육백이요 양이 삼천이라	And the consecrated things were six hundred oxen and three thousand sheep.	And the consecrated offerings were six hundred bulls and three thousand sheep.
2CH	29	34	그런데 제사장이 부족하여 그 모든 번제 짐승의 가죽을 능히 벗기지 못하는고로 그 형제 레위 사람이 그 일을 마치기까지 돕고 다른 제사장의 성결케 하기까지 기다렸으니 이는 레위 사람의 성결케함이 제사장들보다 성심이 있었음이라	But the priests were too few, so that they could not flay all the burnt offerings: wherefore their brethren the Levites did help them, till the work was ended, and until the other priests had sanctified themselves: for the Levites were more upright in heart to sanctify themselves than the priests.	However, since there were not enough priests to skin all the burnt offerings, their Levite brothers helped them until the work was finished and until the priests had been consecrated. For the Levites had been more diligent in consecrating themselves than the priests had been.
2CH	29	35	번제와 화목제의 기름과 각 번제에 속한 전제가 많더라 이와 같이 여호와의 전에서 섬기는 일이 순서대로 갖추어지니라	And also the burnt offerings were in abundance, with the fat of the peace offerings, and the drink offerings for every burnt offering. So the service of the house of the Lord was set in order.	Furthermore, the burnt offerings were abundant, along with the fat of the peace offerings and the drink offerings for the burnt offerings. So the service of the house of the LORD was established.
2CH	29	36	이 일이 갑자기 되었을지라도 하나님이 백성을 위하여 예비하셨음을 인하여 히스기야가 백성으로 더불어 기뻐하였더라	And Hezekiah rejoiced, and all the people, that God had prepared the people: for the thing was done suddenly.	Then Hezekiah and all the people rejoiced at what God had prepared for the people, because everything had been accomplished so quickly.
2CH	30	1	히스기야가 온 이스라엘과 유다에 보내고 또 에브라임과 므낫세에 편지를 보내어 예루살렘 여호와의 전에 와서 이스라엘 하나님 여호와를 위하여 유월절을 지키라 하니라	And Hezekiah sent to all Israel and Judah, and wrote letters also to Ephraim and Manasseh, that they should come to the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, to keep the passover unto the Lord God of Israel.	Then Hezekiah sent word throughout all Israel and Judah, and he also wrote letters to Ephraim and Manasseh inviting them to come to the house of the LORD in Jerusalem to keep the Passover of the LORD, the God of Israel.
2CH	30	2	왕이 방백들과 예루살렘 온 회중으로 더불어 의논하고 이월에 유월절을 지키려 하였으며	For the king had taken counsel, and his princes, and all the congregation in Jerusalem, to keep the passover in the second month.	For the king and his officials and the whole assembly in Jerusalem had decided to keep the Passover in the second month,
2CH	30	3	이는 성결케 한 제사장이 부족하고 백성도 예루살렘에 모이지 못한고로 그 정한 때에 지킬 수 없었음이라	For they could not keep it at that time, because the priests had not sanctified themselves sufficiently, neither had the people gathered themselves together to Jerusalem.	since they had been unable to observe it at the regular time, because not enough priests had consecrated themselves and the people had not been gathered in Jerusalem.
2CH	30	4	왕과 온 회중이 이 일을 선히 여기고	And the thing pleased the king and all the congregation.	This proposal pleased the king and the whole assembly.
2CH	30	5	드디어 명을 발하여 브엘세바에서부터 단까지 온 이스라엘에 반포하여 일제히 예루살렘으로 와서 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 유월절을 지키라 하니 이는 기록한 규례대로 오래동안 지키지 못하였음이더라	So they established a decree to make proclamation throughout all Israel, from Beer–sheba even to Dan, that they should come to keep the passover unto the Lord God of Israel at Jerusalem: for they had not done it of a long time in such sort as it was written.	So they established a decree to circulate a proclamation throughout Israel, from Beersheba to Dan, that the people should come to keep the Passover of the LORD, the God of Israel, in Jerusalem. For they had not observed it as a nation as prescribed.
2CH	30	6	보발꾼들이 왕과 방백들의 편지를 받아가지고 왕의 명을 좇아 온 이스라엘과 유다에 두루 다니며 전하니 일렀으되 이스라엘 자손들아 너희는 아브라함과 이삭과 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께로 돌아오라 그리하면 저가 너희 남은 자 곧 앗수르 왕의 손에서 벗어난 자에게로 돌아오시리라	So the posts went with the letters from the king and his princes throughout all Israel and Judah, and according to the commandment of the king, saying, Ye children of Israel, turn again unto the Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, and he will return to the remnant of you, that are escaped out of the hand of the kings of Assyria.	So the couriers went throughout Israel and Judah with letters from the king and his officials, which read: “Children of Israel, return to the LORD, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, so that He may return to those of you who remain, who have escaped the grasp of the kings of Assyria.
2CH	30	7	너희 열조와 너희 형제 같이 하지 말라 저희가 그 열조의 하나님 여호와께 범죄한고로 여호와께서 멸망에 붙이신 것을 너희가 목도하는 바니라	And be not ye like your fathers, and like your brethren, which trespassed against the Lord God of their fathers, who therefore gave them up to desolation, as ye see.	Do not be like your fathers and brothers who were unfaithful to the LORD, the God of their fathers, so that He made them an object of horror, as you can see.
2CH	30	8	그런즉 너희 열조 같이 목을 곧게 하지 말고 여호와께 귀순하여 영원히 거룩케 하신 전에 들어가서 너희 하나님 여호와를 섬겨 그 진노가 너희에게서 떠나게 하라	Now be ye not stiffnecked, as your fathers were, but yield yourselves unto the Lord, and enter into his sanctuary, which he hath sanctified for ever: and serve the Lord your God, that the fierceness of his wrath may turn away from you.	Now do not stiffen your necks as your fathers did. Submit to the LORD and come to His sanctuary, which He has consecrated forever. Serve the LORD your God, so that His fierce anger will turn away from you.
2CH	30	9	너희가 만일 여호와께 돌아오면 너희 형제와 너희 자녀가 사로잡은 자에게서 자비를 입어 다시 이 땅으로 돌아오리라 너희 하나님 여호와는 은혜로우시고 자비하신지라 너희가 그에게로 돌아오면 그 얼굴을 너희에게서 돌이키지 아니하시리라 하였더라	For if ye turn again unto the Lord, your brethren and your children shall find compassion before them that lead them captive, so that they shall come again into this land: for the Lord your God is gracious and merciful, and will not turn away his face from you, if ye return unto him.	For if you return to the LORD, your brothers and sons will receive mercy in the presence of their captors and will return to this land. For the LORD your God is gracious and merciful; He will not turn His face away from you if you return to Him.”
2CH	30	10	보발꾼이 에브라임과 므낫세 지방 각 성에 두루 다녀 스불론까지 이르렀으나 사람들이 저희를 조롱하며 비웃었더라	So the posts passed from city to city through the country of Ephraim and Manasseh even unto Zebulun: but they laughed them to scorn, and mocked them.	And the couriers traveled from city to city through the land of Ephraim and Manasseh as far as Zebulun; but the people scorned and mocked them.
2CH	30	11	그러나 아셀과 므낫세와 스불론 중에서 몇 사람이 스스로 겸비하여 예루살렘에 이르렀고	Nevertheless divers of Asher and Manasseh and of Zebulun humbled themselves, and came to Jerusalem.	Nevertheless, some from Asher, Manasseh, and Zebulun humbled themselves and came to Jerusalem.
2CH	30	12	하나님이 또한 유다 사람들을 감동시키사 저희로 왕과 방백들이 여호와의 말씀대로 전한 명령을 일심으로 준행하게 하셨더라	Also in Judah the hand of God was to give them one heart to do the commandment of the king and of the princes, by the word of the Lord.	Moreover, the power of God was on the people in Judah to give them one heart to obey the command of the king and his officials according to the word of the LORD.
2CH	30	13	이월에 백성이 무교절을 지키려 하여 예루살렘에 많이 모이니 심히 큰 회라	And there assembled at Jerusalem much people to keep the feast of unleavened bread in the second month, a very great congregation.	In the second month, a very great assembly gathered in Jerusalem to celebrate the Feast of Unleavened Bread.
2CH	30	14	무리가 일어나 예루살렘에 있는 제단과 향단들을 모두 제하여 기드론 시내에 던지고	And they arose and took away the altars that were in Jerusalem, and all the altars for incense took they away, and cast them into the brook Kidron.	They proceeded to remove the altars in Jerusalem and to take away the incense altars and throw them into the Kidron Valley.
2CH	30	15	이월 십사일에 유월절 양을 잡으니 제사장과 레위 사람이 부끄러워하여 성결케 하고 번제물을 가지고 여호와의 전에 이르러	Then they killed the passover on the fourteenth day of the second month: and the priests and the Levites were ashamed, and sanctified themselves, and brought in the burnt offerings into the house of the Lord.	And on the fourteenth day of the second month they slaughtered the Passover lamb. The priests and Levites were ashamed, and they consecrated themselves and brought burnt offerings to the house of the LORD.
2CH	30	16	규례대로 각각 자기 처소에 서고 하나님의 사람 모세의 율법을 좇아 제사장이 레위 사람의 손에서 피를 받아 뿌리니라	And they stood in their place after their manner, according to the law of Moses the man of God: the priests sprinkled the blood, which they received of the hand of the Levites.	They stood at their prescribed posts, according to the Law of Moses the man of God. The priests sprinkled the blood, which they received from the hand of the Levites.
2CH	30	17	회중에 많은 사람이 성결케 하지 못한고로 레위 사람들이 모든 부정한 사람을 위하여 유월절 양을 잡아 저희로 여호와 앞에서 성결케 하였으나	For there were many in the congregation that were not sanctified: therefore the Levites had the charge of the killing of the passovers for every one that was not clean, to sanctify them unto the Lord.	Since there were many in the assembly who had not consecrated themselves, the Levites were in charge of slaughtering the Passover lambs for every unclean person to consecrate the lambs to the LORD.
2CH	30	18	에브라임과 므낫세와 잇사갈과 스불론의 많은 무리는 자기를 깨끗케 하지 아니하고 유월절 양을 먹어 기록한 규례에 어긴지라 히스기야가 위하여 기도하여 가로되 선하신 여호와여 사하옵소서	For a multitude of the people, even many of Ephraim, and Manasseh, Issachar, and Zebulun, had not cleansed themselves, yet did they eat the passover otherwise than it was written. But Hezekiah prayed for them, saying, The good Lord pardon every one	A large number of the people—many from Ephraim, Manasseh, Issachar, and Zebulun—had not purified themselves, yet they ate the Passover, contrary to what was written. But Hezekiah interceded for them, saying, “May the LORD, who is good, provide atonement for everyone
2CH	30	19	결심하고 하나님 곧 그 열조의 하나님 여호와를 구하는 아무 사람이든지 비록 성소의 결례대로 스스로 깨끗케 못하였을지라도 사하옵소서 하였더니	That prepareth his heart to seek God, the Lord God of his fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the sanctuary.	who sets his heart on seeking God—the LORD, the God of his fathers—even if he is not cleansed according to the purification rules of the sanctuary.”
2CH	30	20	여호와께서 히스기야의 기도를 들으시고 백성을 고치셨더라	And the Lord hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people.	And the LORD heard Hezekiah and healed the people.
2CH	30	21	예루살렘에 모인 이스라엘 자손이 크게 즐거워하며 칠 일 동안 무교절을 지켰고 레위 사람들과 제사장들은 날마다 여호와를 칭송하며 큰 소리나는 악기를 울려 여호와를 찬양하였으며	And the children of Israel that were present at Jerusalem kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with great gladness: and the Levites and the priests praised the Lord day by day, singing with loud instruments unto the Lord.	The Israelites who were present in Jerusalem celebrated the Feast of Unleavened Bread for seven days with great joy, and the Levites and priests praised the LORD day after day, accompanied by loud instruments of praise to the LORD.
2CH	30	22	히스기야는 여호와를 섬기는 일에 통달한 모든 레위 사람에게 위로하였더라 이와 같이 절기 칠 일 동안에 무리가 먹으며 화목제를 드리고 그 열조의 하나님 여호와께 감사하였더라	And Hezekiah spake comfortably unto all the Levites that taught the good knowledge of the Lord: and they did eat throughout the feast seven days, offering peace offerings, and making confession to the Lord God of their fathers.	And Hezekiah encouraged all the Levites who performed skillfully before the LORD. For seven days they ate their assigned portion, sacrificing fellowship offerings and giving thanks to the LORD, the God of their fathers.
2CH	30	23	온 회가 다시 칠 일을 지키기로 결의하고 이에 또 칠 일을 즐거이 지켰더라	And the whole assembly took counsel to keep other seven days: and they kept other seven days with gladness.	The whole assembly agreed to observe seven more days, so they observed seven days with joy.
2CH	30	24	유다 왕 히스기야가 수송아지 일천과 양 칠천을 회중에게 주었고 방백들은 수송아지 일천과 양 일만을 회중에게 주었으며 성결케 한 제사장도 많았는지라	For Hezekiah king of Judah did give to the congregation a thousand bullocks and seven thousand sheep; and the princes gave to the congregation a thousand bullocks and ten thousand sheep: and a great number of priests sanctified themselves.	For Hezekiah king of Judah contributed a thousand bulls and seven thousand sheep for the assembly, and the officials contributed a thousand bulls and ten thousand sheep for the assembly, and a great number of priests consecrated themselves.
2CH	30	25	유다 온 회중과 제사장들과 레위 사람들과 이스라엘에서 온 온 회중과 이스라엘 땅에서 나온 나그네와 유다에 거한 나그네가 다 즐거워 하였으므로	And all the congregation of Judah, with the priests and the Levites, and all the congregation that came out of Israel, and the strangers that came out of the land of Israel, and that dwelt in Judah, rejoiced.	Then the whole assembly of Judah rejoiced along with the priests and Levites and the whole assembly that had come from Israel, including the foreigners who had come from Israel and those who lived in Judah.
2CH	30	26	예루살렘에 큰 희락이 있었으니 이스라엘 왕 다윗의 아들 솔로몬 때로부터 이러한 희락이 예루살렘에 없었더라	So there was great joy in Jerusalem: for since the time of Solomon the son of David king of Israel there was not the like in Jerusalem.	So there was great rejoicing in Jerusalem, for nothing like this had happened there since the days of Solomon son of David king of Israel.
2CH	30	27	그 때에 제사장들과 레위 사람들이 일어나서 백성을 위하여 축복하였으니 그 소리가 들으신바 되고 그 기도가 여호와의 거룩한 처소 하늘에 상달하였더라	Then the priests the Levites arose and blessed the people: and their voice was heard, and their prayer came up to his holy dwelling place, even unto heaven.	Then the priests and the Levites stood to bless the people, and God heard their voice, and their prayer came into His holy dwelling place in heaven.
2CH	31	1	이 모든 일이 마치매 거기 있는 이스라엘 무리가 나가서 유다 여러 성읍에 이르러 주상을 깨뜨리며 아세라 목상을 찍으며 유다와 베냐민과 에브라임과 므낫세 온 땅에서 산당과 단을 제하여 멸하고 이스라엘 모든 자손이 각각 그 본성 기업으로 돌아갔더라	Now when all this was finished, all Israel that were present went out to the cities of Judah, and brake the images in pieces, and cut down the groves, and threw down the high places and the altars out of all Judah and Benjamin, in Ephraim also and Manasseh, until they had utterly destroyed them all. Then all the children of Israel returned, every man to his possession, into their own cities.	When all this had ended, the Israelites in attendance went out to the cities of Judah and broke up the sacred pillars, chopped down the Asherah poles, and tore down the high places and altars throughout Judah and Benjamin, as well as in Ephraim and Manasseh, until they had utterly destroyed them all. Then all the Israelites returned to their cities, each to his own property.
2CH	31	2	히스기야가 제사장들과 레위 사람들의 반차를 정하고 각각 그 직임을 행하게 하되 곧 제사장들과 레위 사람들로 번제와 화목제를 드리며 여호와의 영문에서 섬기며 감사하며 찬송하게 하고	And Hezekiah appointed the courses of the priests and the Levites after their courses, every man according to his service, the priests and Levites for burnt offerings and for peace offerings, to minister, and to give thanks, and to praise in the gates of the tents of the Lord.	Hezekiah reestablished the divisions of the priests and Levites—each of them according to their duties as priests or Levites—for the burnt offerings and peace offerings, for ministry, for giving thanks, and for singing praises at the gates of the LORD’s dwelling.
2CH	31	3	또 자기 재산 중에서 얼마를 정하여 여호와의 율법에 기록된 대로 번제 곧 조석 번제와 안식일과 초하루와 절기의 번제에 쓰게 하고	He appointed also the king’s portion of his substance for the burnt offerings, to wit, for the morning and evening burnt offerings, and the burnt offerings for the sabbaths, and for the new moons, and for the set feasts, as it is written in the law of the Lord.	The king contributed from his own possessions for the regular morning and evening burnt offerings and for the burnt offerings on the Sabbaths, New Moons, and appointed feasts, as written in the Law of the LORD.
2CH	31	4	또 예루살렘에 거한 백성을 명하여 제사장들과 레위 사람들의 응식을 주어 저희로 여호와의 율법을 힘쓰게 하라 한지라	Moreover he commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem to give the portion of the priests and the Levites, that they might be encouraged in the law of the Lord.	Moreover, he commanded the people living in Jerusalem to make a contribution for the priests and Levites so that they could devote themselves to the Law of the LORD.
2CH	31	5	왕의 명령이 내리자 곧 이스라엘 자손이 곡식과 포도주와 기름과 꿀과 밭의 모든 소산의 처음 것을 풍성히 드렸고 또 모든 것의 십일조를 많이 가져왔으며	And as soon as the commandment came abroad, the children of Israel brought in abundance the firstfruits of corn, wine, and oil, and honey, and of all the increase of the field; and the tithe of all things brought they in abundantly.	As soon as the order went out, the Israelites generously provided the firstfruits of the grain, new wine, oil, and honey, and of all the produce of the field, and they brought in an abundance—a tithe of everything.
2CH	31	6	유다 여러 성읍에 거한 이스라엘과 유다 자손도 소와 양의 십일조를 가져왔고 또 그 하나님 여호와께 구별하여 드릴 성물의 십일조를 가져왔으며 그것을 쌓아 더미를 이루었는데	And concerning the children of Israel and Judah, that dwelt in the cities of Judah, they also brought in the tithe of oxen and sheep, and the tithe of holy things which were consecrated unto the Lord their God, and laid them by heaps.	And the Israelites and Judahites who lived in the cities of Judah also brought a tithe of their herds and flocks and a tithe of the holy things consecrated to the LORD their God, and they laid them in large heaps.
2CH	31	7	삼월에 쌓기를 시작하여 칠월에 마친지라	In the third month they began to lay the foundation of the heaps, and finished them in the seventh month.	In the third month they began building up the heaps, and they finished in the seventh month.
2CH	31	8	히스기야와 방백들이 와서 더미를 보고 여호와를 송축하고 그 백성 이스라엘을 위하여 축복하니라	And when Hezekiah and the princes came and saw the heaps, they blessed the Lord, and his people Israel.	When Hezekiah and his officials came and viewed the heaps, they blessed the LORD and His people Israel.
2CH	31	9	히스기야가 그 더미에 대하여 제사장들과 레위 사람들에게 물으니	Then Hezekiah questioned with the priests and the Levites concerning the heaps.	Then Hezekiah questioned the priests and Levites about the heaps,
2CH	31	10	사독의 족속 대제사장 아사랴가 대답하여 가로되 백성이 예물을 여호와의 전에 드리기 시작함으로부터 우리가 족하게 먹었으나 남은 것이 많으니 이는 여호와께서 그 백성에게 복을 주셨음이라 그 남은 것이 이렇게 많이 쌓였나이다	And Azariah the chief priest of the house of Zadok answered him, and said, Since the people began to bring the offerings into the house of the Lord, we have had enough to eat, and have left plenty: for the Lord hath blessed his people; and that which is left is this great store.	and Azariah, the chief priest of the household of Zadok, answered him, “Since the people began to bring their contributions into the house of the LORD, we have had enough to eat and there is plenty left over, because the LORD has blessed His people; this great abundance is what is left over.”
2CH	31	11	그 때에 히스기야가 명하여 여호와의 전 안에 방을 예비하라 한고로 드디어 예비하고	Then Hezekiah commanded to prepare chambers in the house of the Lord; and they prepared them,	Then Hezekiah commanded them to prepare storerooms in the house of the LORD, and they did so.
2CH	31	12	성심으로 그 예물과 십일조와 구별한 물건을 갖다 두고 레위 사람 고나냐는 그 일을 주관하고 그 아우 시므이는 버금이 되며	And brought in the offerings and the tithes and the dedicated things faithfully: over which Cononiah the Levite was ruler, and Shimei his brother was the next.	And they faithfully brought in the contributions, tithes, and dedicated gifts. Conaniah the Levite was the officer in charge of them, and his brother Shimei was second.
2CH	31	13	여히엘과 아사시야와 나핫과 아사헬과 여리못과 요사밧과 엘리엘과 이스마가와 마핫과 브나야는 고나냐와 그 아우 시므이의 수하에서 보살피는 자가 되니 이는 히스기야 왕과 하나님의 전을 관리하는 아사랴의 명한 바며	And Jehiel, and Azaziah, and Nahath, and Asahel, and Jerimoth, and Jozabad, and Eliel, and Ismachiah, and Mahath, and Benaiah, were overseers under the hand of Cononiah and Shimei his brother, at the commandment of Hezekiah the king, and Azariah the ruler of the house of God.	Jehiel, Azaziah, Nahath, Asahel, Jerimoth, Jozabad, Eliel, Ismachiah, Mahath, and Benaiah were overseers under the authority of Conaniah and his brother Shimei, by appointment of King Hezekiah and of Azariah the chief official of the house of God.
2CH	31	14	동문지기 레위 사람 임나의 아들 고레는 즐거이 하나님께 드리는 예물을 맡아 여호와께 드리는 것과 모든 지성물을 나눠 주며	And Kore the son of Imnah the Levite, the porter toward the east, was over the freewill offerings of God, to distribute the oblations of the Lord, and the most holy things.	Kore son of Imnah the Levite, the keeper of the East Gate, was in charge of the freewill offerings given to God, distributing the contributions to the LORD and the consecrated gifts.
2CH	31	15	그 수하의 에덴과 미냐민과 예수아와 스마야와 아마랴와 스가냐는 제사장의 성읍들에 있어서 직임을 맡아 그 형제에게 반차대로 무론대소하고 나눠 주되	And next him were Eden, and Miniamin, and Jeshua, and Shemaiah, Amariah, and Shecaniah, in the cities of the priests, in their set office, to give to their brethren by courses, as well to the great as to the small:	Under his authority, Eden, Miniamin, Jeshua, Shemaiah, Amariah, and Shecaniah faithfully distributed portions to their fellow priests in their cities, according to their divisions, old and young alike.
2CH	31	16	삼 세 이상으로 족보에 기록된 남자 외에 날마다 여호와의 전에 들어가서 그 반차대로 직임에 수종드는 자들에게 다 나눠 주며	Beside their genealogy of males, from three years old and upward, even unto every one that entereth into the house of the Lord, his daily portion for their service in their charges according to their courses;	In addition, they distributed portions to the males registered by genealogy who were three years of age or older—to all who would enter the house of the LORD for their daily duties for service in the responsibilities of their divisions—
2CH	31	17	또 그 족속대로 족보에 기록된 제사장들에게 나눠 주며 이십 세 이상부터 그 반차대로 직임을 맡은 레위 사람들에게 나눠 주며	Both to the genealogy of the priests by the house of their fathers, and the Levites from twenty years old and upward, in their charges by their courses;	and to the priests enrolled according to their families in the genealogy, as well as to the Levites twenty years of age or older, according to their duties and divisions.
2CH	31	18	또 그 족보에 기록된 온 회중의 어린 아이와 아내와 자녀들에게 나눠 주었으니 이 회중은 성결하고 충실히 그 직분을 다하는 자며	And to the genealogy of all their little ones, their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, through all the congregation: for in their set office they sanctified themselves in holiness:	The genealogy included all the little ones, wives, sons, and daughters in the whole assembly. For they had faithfully consecrated themselves as holy.
2CH	31	19	각 성읍에서 녹명된 사람이 있어 성읍 가까운 들에 거한 아론 자손 제사장들에게도 나눠 주되 제사장들의 모든 남자와 족보에 기록된 레위 사람들에게 나눠 주었더라	Also of the sons of Aaron the priests, which were in the fields of the suburbs of their cities, in every several city, the men that were expressed by name, to give portions to all the males among the priests, and to all that were reckoned by genealogies among the Levites.	As for the priests, the descendants of Aaron, who lived on the farmlands around each of their cities or in any other city, men were designated by name to distribute a portion to every male among the priests and to every Levite listed by the genealogies.
2CH	31	20	히스기야가 온 유다에 이같이 행하되 그 하나님 여호와 보시기에 선과 정의와 진실함으로 행하였으니	And thus did Hezekiah throughout all Judah, and wrought that which was good and right and truth before the Lord his God.	So this is what Hezekiah did throughout Judah. He did what was good and upright and true before the LORD his God.
2CH	31	21	무릇 그 행하는 모든 일 곧 하나님의 전에 수종드는 일에나 율법에나 계명에나 그 하나님을 구하고 일심으로 행하여 형통하였더라	And in every work that he began in the service of the house of God, and in the law, and in the commandments, to seek his God, he did it with all his heart, and prospered.	He was diligent in every work that he began in the service of the house of God, and in the law and the commandments, in order to seek his God. And so he prospered.
2CH	32	1	이 모든 충성된 일 후에 앗수르 왕 산헤립이 유다에 들어와서 견고한 성읍들을 향하여 진을 치고 쳐서 취하고자 한지라	After these things, and the establishment thereof, Sennacherib king of Assyria came, and entered into Judah, and encamped against the fenced cities, and thought to win them for himself.	After all these acts of faithfulness, Sennacherib king of Assyria came and invaded Judah. He laid siege to the fortified cities, intending to conquer them for himself.
2CH	32	2	히스기야가 산헤립이 예루살렘을 치러 온 것을 보고	And when Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib was come, and that he was purposed to fight against Jerusalem,	When Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib had come to make war against Jerusalem,
2CH	32	3	그 방백들과 용사들로 더불어 의논하고 성 밖에 모든 물 근원을 막고자 하매 저희가 돕더라	He took counsel with his princes and his mighty men to stop the waters of the fountains which were without the city: and they did help him.	he consulted with his leaders and commanders about stopping up the waters of the springs outside the city, and they helped him carry it out.
2CH	32	4	이에 백성이 많이 모여 모든 물 근원과 땅으로 흘러가는 시내를 막고 이르되 어찌 앗수르 왕들로 와서 많은 물을 얻게 하리요 하고	So there was gathered much people together, who stopped all the fountains, and the brook that ran through the midst of the land, saying, Why should the kings of Assyria come, and find much water?	Many people assembled and stopped up all the springs and the stream that flowed through the land. “Why should the kings of Assyria come and find plenty of water?” they said.
2CH	32	5	히스기야가 세력을 내어 퇴락한 성을 중수하되 망대까지 높이 쌓고 또 외성을 쌓고 다윗 성의 밀로를 견고케하고 병기와 방패를 많이 만들고	Also he strengthened himself, and built up all the wall that was broken, and raised it up to the towers, and another wall without, and repaired Millo in the city of David, and made darts and shields in abundance.	Then Hezekiah worked resolutely to rebuild all the broken sections of the wall and to raise up towers on it. He also built an outer wall and reinforced the supporting terraces of the City of David, and he produced an abundance of weapons and shields.
2CH	32	6	군대 장관들을 세워 백성을 거느리게 하고 성문 광장 자기에게로 무리를 모으고 말로 위로하여 가로되	And he set captains of war over the people, and gathered them together to him in the street of the gate of the city, and spake comfortably to them, saying,	Hezekiah appointed military commanders over the people and gathered the people in the square of the city gate. Then he encouraged them, saying,
2CH	32	7	너희는 마음을 강하게 하며 담대히 하고 앗수르 왕과 그 좇는 온 무리로 인하여 두려워 말며 놀라지 말라 우리와 함께하는 자가 저와 함께하는 자보다 크니	Be strong and courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for the king of Assyria, nor for all the multitude that is with him: for there be more with us than with him:	“Be strong and courageous! Do not be afraid or discouraged before the king of Assyria and the vast army with him, for there is a greater One with us than with him.
2CH	32	8	저와 함께하는 자는 육신의 팔이요 우리와 함께하는 자는 우리의 하나님 여호와시라 반드시 우리를 도우시고 우리를 대신하여 싸우시리라 하매 백성이 유다 왕 히스기야의 말로 인하여 안심하니라	With him is an arm of flesh; but with us is the Lord our God to help us, and to fight our battles. And the people rested themselves upon the words of Hezekiah king of Judah.	With him is only the arm of flesh, but with us is the LORD our God to help us and to fight our battles.” So the people were strengthened by the words of Hezekiah king of Judah.
2CH	32	9	그 후에 앗수르 왕 산헤립이 그 온 군대를 거느리고 라기스를 치며 그 신복을 예루살렘에 보내어 유다 왕 히스기야와 예루살렘에 있는 유다 무리에게 고하여 이르기를	After this did Sennacherib king of Assyria send his servants to Jerusalem, (but he himself laid siege against Lachish, and all his power with him,) unto Hezekiah king of Judah, and unto all Judah that were at Jerusalem, saying,	Later, as Sennacherib king of Assyria and all his forces besieged Lachish, he sent his servants to Jerusalem with a message for King Hezekiah of Judah and all the people of Judah who were in Jerusalem:
2CH	32	10	앗수르 왕 산헤립은 이같이 말하노라 너희가 예루살렘에 에워싸여 있으면서 무엇을 의뢰하느냐	Thus saith Sennacherib king of Assyria, Whereon do ye trust, that ye abide in the siege in Jerusalem?	“This is what Sennacherib king of Assyria says: What is the basis of your confidence, that you remain in Jerusalem under siege?
2CH	32	11	히스기야가 너희를 꾀어 이르기를 우리 하나님 여호와께서 우리를 앗수르 왕의 손에서 건져내시리라 하거니와 이 어찌 너희로 주림과 목마름으로 죽게 함이 아니냐	Doth not Hezekiah persuade you to give over yourselves to die by famine and by thirst, saying, The Lord our God shall deliver us out of the hand of the king of Assyria?	Is not Hezekiah misleading you to give you over to death by famine and thirst when he says, ‘The LORD our God will deliver us from the hand of the king of Assyria?’
2CH	32	12	이 히스기야가 여호와의 산당들과 단들을 제하여 버리고 유다와 예루살렘에 명하여 이르기를 너희는 다만 한 단 앞에서 경배하고 그 위에 분향하라 하지 아니하였느냐	Hath not the same Hezekiah taken away his high places and his altars, and commanded Judah and Jerusalem, saying, Ye shall worship before one altar, and burn incense upon it?	Did not Hezekiah himself remove His high places and His altars and say to Judah and Jerusalem, ‘You must worship before one altar, and on it you shall burn sacrifices’?
2CH	32	13	나와 내 열조가 이방 모든 백성에게 행한 것을 너희가 알지 못하느냐 열방의 신들이 능히 그 땅을 나의 손에서 건져낼 수 있었느냐	Know ye not what I and my fathers have done unto all the people of other lands? were the gods of the nations of those lands any ways able to deliver their lands out of mine hand?	Do you not know what I and my fathers have done to all the peoples of the lands? Have the gods of these nations ever been able to deliver their land from my hand?
2CH	32	14	나의 열조가 진멸한 열국의 그 모든 신 중에 누가 능히 그 백성을 내 손에서 건져 내었기에 너희 하나님이 능히 너희를 내 손에서 건지겠느냐	Who was there among all the gods of those nations that my fathers utterly destroyed, that could deliver his people out of mine hand, that your God should be able to deliver you out of mine hand?	Who among all the gods of these nations that my fathers devoted to destruction has been able to deliver his people from my hand? How then can your God deliver you from my hand?
2CH	32	15	그런즉 이와 같이 히스기야에게 속지 말라 꾀임을 받지 말라 저를 믿지도 말라 아무 백성이나 아무 나라의 신도 능히 그 백성을 나의 손과 나의 열조의 손에서 건져내지 못하였나니 하물며 너희 하나님이 너희를 내 손에서 건져 내겠느냐 하였더라	Now therefore let not Hezekiah deceive you, nor persuade you on this manner, neither yet believe him: for no god of any nation or kingdom was able to deliver his people out of mine hand, and out of the hand of my fathers: how much less shall your God deliver you out of mine hand?	So now, do not let Hezekiah deceive you, and do not let him mislead you like this. Do not believe him, for no god of any nation or kingdom has been able to deliver his people from my hand or from the hand of my fathers. How much less will your God deliver you from my hand!”
2CH	32	16	산헤립의 신복들도 더욱 여호와 하나님과 그 종 히스기야를 비방하였으며	And his servants spake yet more against the Lord God, and against his servant Hezekiah.	And the servants of Sennacherib spoke further against the LORD God and against His servant Hezekiah.
2CH	32	17	산헤립이 또 편지를 써서 보내어 이스라엘 하나님 여호와를 욕하고 비방하여 이르기를 열방의 신들이 그 백성을 내 손에서 구원하여 내지 못한 것 같이 히스기야의 신들도 그 백성을 내 손에서 구원하여 내지 못하리라 하고	He wrote also letters to rail on the Lord God of Israel, and to speak against him, saying, As the gods of the nations of other lands have not delivered their people out of mine hand, so shall not the God of Hezekiah deliver his people out of mine hand.	He also wrote letters mocking the LORD, the God of Israel, and saying against Him: “Just as the gods of the nations did not deliver their people from my hand, so the God of Hezekiah will not deliver His people from my hand.”
2CH	32	18	산헤립의 신하가 유다 방언으로 크게 소리질러 예루살렘 성 위에 있는 백성을 놀라게 하고 괴롭게 하여 그 성을 취하려 하였는데	Then they cried with a loud voice in the Jews’ speech unto the people of Jerusalem that were on the wall, to affright them, and to trouble them; that they might take the city.	Then the Assyrians called out loudly in Hebrew to the people of Jerusalem who were on the wall, to frighten and terrify them in order to capture the city.
2CH	32	19	저희가 예루살렘의 하나님을 훼방하기를 사람의 손으로 지은 세상 백성의 신들을 훼방하듯 하였더라	And they spake against the God of Jerusalem, as against the gods of the people of the earth, which were the work of the hands of man.	They spoke against the God of Jerusalem as they had spoken against the gods of the peoples of the earth—the work of human hands.
2CH	32	20	이러므로 히스기야 왕이 아모스의 아들 선지자 이사야로 더불어 하늘을 향하여 부르짖어 기도하였더니	And for this cause Hezekiah the king, and the prophet Isaiah the son of Amoz, prayed and cried to heaven.	In response, King Hezekiah and the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz cried out to heaven in prayer,
2CH	32	21	여호와께서 한 천사를 보내어 앗수르 왕의 영에서 모든 큰 용사와 대장과 장관들을 멸하신지라 앗수르 왕이 얼굴이 뜨뜻하여 그 고국으로 돌아갔더니 그 신의 전에 들어갔을 때에 그 몸에서 난 자들이 거기서 칼로 죽였더라	And the Lord sent an angel, which cut off all the mighty men of valour, and the leaders and captains in the camp of the king of Assyria. So he returned with shame of face to his own land. And when he was come into the house of his god, they that came forth of his own bowels slew him there with the sword.	and the LORD sent an angel who annihilated every mighty man of valor and every leader and commander in the camp of the king of Assyria. So he withdrew to his own land in disgrace. And when he entered the temple of his god, some of his own sons struck him down with the sword.
2CH	32	22	이와 같이 여호와께서 히스기야와 예루살렘 거민을 앗수르 왕 산헤립의 손과 모든 적국의 손에서 구원하여내사 사면으로 보호하시매	Thus the Lord saved Hezekiah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem from the hand of Sennacherib the king of Assyria, and from the hand of all other, and guided them on every side.	So the LORD saved Hezekiah and the people of Jerusalem from the hands of King Sennacherib of Assyria and all the others, and He gave them rest on every side.
2CH	32	23	여러 사람이 예물을 가지고 예루살렘에 와서 여호와께 드리고 또 보물로 유다 왕 히스기야에게 드린지라 이 후부터 히스기야가 열국의 눈에 존대하게 되었더라	And many brought gifts unto the Lord to Jerusalem, and presents to Hezekiah king of Judah: so that he was magnified in the sight of all nations from thenceforth.	Many brought offerings to Jerusalem for the LORD and valuable gifts for Hezekiah king of Judah, and from then on he was exalted in the eyes of all nations.
2CH	32	24	그 때에 히스기야가 병들어 죽게 된고로 여호와께 기도하매 여호와께서 그에게 대답하시고 또 이적으로 보이셨으나	In those days Hezekiah was sick to the death, and prayed unto the Lord: and he spake unto him, and he gave him a sign.	In those days Hezekiah became mortally ill. So he prayed to the LORD, who spoke to him and gave him a sign.
2CH	32	25	히스기야가 마음이 교만하여 그 받은 은혜를 보답지 아니하므로 진노가 저와 유다와 예루살렘에 임하게 되었더니	But Hezekiah rendered not again according to the benefit done unto him; for his heart was lifted up: therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem.	But because his heart was proud, Hezekiah did not repay the favor shown to him. Therefore wrath came upon him and upon Judah and Jerusalem.
2CH	32	26	히스기야가 마음의 교만함을 뉘우치고 예루살렘 거민들도 그와 같이 하였으므로 여호와의 노가 히스기야의 생전에는 저희에게 임하지 아니하니라	Notwithstanding Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart, both he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the wrath of the Lord came not upon them in the days of Hezekiah.	Then Hezekiah humbled the pride of his heart—he and the people of Jerusalem—so that the wrath of the LORD did not come upon them during the days of Hezekiah.
2CH	32	27	히스기야가 부와 영광이 극한지라 이에 은금과 보석과 향품과 방패와 온갖 보배로운 그릇들을 위하여 국고를 세우매	And Hezekiah had exceeding much riches and honour: and he made himself treasuries for silver, and for gold, and for precious stones, and for spices, and for shields, and for all manner of pleasant jewels;	Hezekiah had very great riches and honor, and he made treasuries for his silver, gold, precious stones, spices, shields, and all kinds of valuable articles.
2CH	32	28	곡식과 새 포도주와 기름의 산물을 위하여 창고를 세우며 온갖 짐승의 외양간을 세우며 양떼의 우리를 갖추며	Storehouses also for the increase of corn, and wine, and oil; and stalls for all manner of beasts, and cotes for flocks.	He also made storehouses for the harvest of grain and new wine and oil, stalls for all kinds of livestock, and pens for the flocks.
2CH	32	29	양떼와 많은 소떼를 위하여 성읍들을 세웠으니 이는 하나님이 저에게 재산을 심히 많이 주셨음이며	Moreover he provided him cities, and possessions of flocks and herds in abundance: for God had given him substance very much.	He made cities for himself, and he acquired herds of sheep and cattle in abundance, for God gave him very great wealth.
2CH	32	30	이 히스기야가 또 기혼의 윗 샘물을 막아 그 아래로 좇아 다윗 성 서편으로 곧게 인도하였으니 저의 모든 일이 형통하였더라	This same Hezekiah also stopped the upper watercourse of Gihon, and brought it straight down to the west side of the city of David. And Hezekiah prospered in all his works.	It was Hezekiah who blocked the upper outlet of the Spring of Gihon and channeled it down to the west side of the City of David. And Hezekiah prospered in all that he did.
2CH	32	31	그러나 바벨론 방백들이 히스기야에게 사자를 보내어 그 땅에서 나타난 이적을 물을 때에 하나님이 히스기야를 떠나시고 그 심중에 있는 것을 다 알고자 하사 시험하셨더라	Howbeit in the business of the ambassadors of the princes of Babylon, who sent unto him to enquire of the wonder that was done in the land, God left him, to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart.	And so when ambassadors of the rulers of Babylon were sent to him to inquire about the wonder that had happened in the land, God left him alone to test him, that He might know all that was in Hezekiah’s heart.
2CH	32	32	히스기야의 남은 행적과 그 모든 선한 일이 아모스의 아들 선지자 이사야의 묵시책과 유다와 이스라엘 열왕기에 기록되니라	Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah, and his goodness, behold, they are written in the vision of Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, and in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.	As for the rest of the acts of Hezekiah and his deeds of loving devotion, they are indeed written in the vision of the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz in the Book of the Kings of Judah and Israel.
2CH	32	33	히스기야가 그 열조와 함께 자매 온 유다와 예루살렘 거민이 저를 다윗 자손의 묘실 중 높은 곳에 장사하여 저의 죽음에 존경함을 표하였더라 그 아들 므낫세가 대신하여 왕이 되니라	And Hezekiah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the chiefest of the sepulchres of the sons of David: and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem did him honour at his death. And Manasseh his son reigned in his stead.	And Hezekiah rested with his fathers and was buried in the upper tombs of David’s descendants. All Judah and the people of Jerusalem paid him honor at his death. And his son Manasseh reigned in his place.
2CH	33	1	므낫세가 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 십이 세라 예루살렘에서 오십오 년을 치리하며	Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty and five years in Jerusalem:	Manasseh was twelve years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem fifty-five years.
2CH	33	2	여호와 보시기에 악을 행하여 여호와께서 이스라엘 자손 앞에서 쫓아내신 이방 사람의 가증한 일을 본받아	But did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, like unto the abominations of the heathen, whom the Lord had cast out before the children of Israel.	And he did evil in the sight of the LORD by following the abominations of the nations that the LORD had driven out before the Israelites.
2CH	33	3	그 부친 히스기야의 헐어버린 산당을 다시 세우며 바알들을 위하여 단을 쌓으며 아세라 목상을 만들며 하늘의 일월 성신을 숭배하여 섬기며	For he built again the high places which Hezekiah his father had broken down, and he reared up altars for Baalim, and made groves, and worshipped all the host of heaven, and served them.	For he rebuilt the high places that his father Hezekiah had torn down, and he raised up altars for the Baals and made Asherah poles. And he worshiped and served all the host of heaven.
2CH	33	4	여호와께서 전에 이르시기를 내가 내 이름을 예루살렘에 영영히 두리라 하신 여호와의 전에 단들을 쌓고	Also he built altars in the house of the Lord, whereof the Lord had said, In Jerusalem shall my name be for ever.	Manasseh also built altars in the house of the LORD, of which the LORD had said, “My Name will remain in Jerusalem forever.”
2CH	33	5	또 여호와의 전 두 마당에 하늘의 일월 성신을 위하여 단들을 쌓고	And he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts of the house of the Lord.	In both courtyards of the house of the LORD, he built altars to all the host of heaven.
2CH	33	6	또 힌놈의 아들 골짜기에서 그 아들들을 불 가운데로 지나게 하며 또 점치며 사술과 요술을 행하며 신접한 자와 박수를 신임하여 여호와 보시기에 악을 많이 행하여 그 진노를 격발하였으며	And he caused his children to pass through the fire in the valley of the son of Hinnom: also he observed times, and used enchantments, and used witchcraft, and dealt with a familiar spirit, and with wizards: he wrought much evil in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger.	He sacrificed his sons in the fire in the Valley of Hinnom. He practiced sorcery, divination, and witchcraft, and consulted mediums and spiritists. He did great evil in the sight of the LORD, provoking Him to anger.
2CH	33	7	또 자기가 만든 아로새긴 목상을 하나님의 전에 세웠더라 옛적에 하나님이 이 전에 대하여 다윗과 그 아들 솔로몬에게 이르시기를 내가 이스라엘 모든 지파 중에서 택한 이 전과 예루살렘에 내 이름을 영원히 둘지라	And he set a carved image, the idol which he had made, in the house of God, of which God had said to David and to Solomon his son, In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen before all the tribes of Israel, will I put my name for ever:	Manasseh even took the carved image he had made and set it up in the house of God, of which God had said to David and his son Solomon, “In this temple and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, I will establish My Name forever.
2CH	33	8	만일 이스라엘 사람이 내가 명한 일 곧 모세로 전한 모든 율법과 율례와 규례를 지켜 행하면 내가 그들의 발로 다시는 그 열조에게 정하여 준 땅에서 옮기지 않게 하리라 하셨으나	Neither will I any more remove the foot of Israel from out of the land which I have appointed for your fathers; so that they will take heed to do all that I have commanded them, according to the whole law and the statutes and the ordinances by the hand of Moses.	I will never again cause the feet of the Israelites to leave the land that I assigned to your fathers, if only they are careful to do all that I have commanded them through Moses—all the laws, statutes, and judgments.”
2CH	33	9	유다와 예루살렘 거민이 므낫세의 꾀임을 받고 악을 행한 것이 여호와께서 이스라엘 자손 앞에서 멸하신 열방보다 더욱 심하였더라	So Manasseh made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to err, and to do worse than the heathen, whom the Lord had destroyed before the children of Israel.	So Manasseh led the people of Judah and Jerusalem astray, so that they did greater evil than the nations that the LORD had destroyed before the Israelites.
2CH	33	10	여호와께서 므낫세와 그 백성에게 이르셨으나 저희가 듣지 아니한고로	And the Lord spake to Manasseh, and to his people: but they would not hearken.	And the LORD spoke to Manasseh and his people, but they did not listen.
2CH	33	11	여호와께서 앗수르 왕의 군대 장관들로 와서 치게 하시매 저희가 므낫세를 사로잡고 쇠사슬로 결박하여 바벨론으로 끌어간지라	Wherefore the Lord brought upon them the captains of the host of the king of Assyria, which took Manasseh among the thorns, and bound him with fetters, and carried him to Babylon.	So the LORD brought against them the military commanders of the king of Assyria, who captured Manasseh, put a hook in his nose, bound him with bronze shackles, and took him to Babylon.
2CH	33	12	저가 환난을 당하여 그 하나님 여호와께 간구하고 그 열조의 하나님 앞에 크게 겸비하여	And when he was in affliction, he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers,	And in his distress, Manasseh sought the favor of the LORD his God and earnestly humbled himself before the God of his fathers.
2CH	33	13	기도한고로 하나님이 그 기도를 받으시며 그 간구를 들으시사 저로 예루살렘에 돌아와서 다시 왕위에 거하게 하시매 므낫세가 그제야 여호와께서 하나님이신 줄을 알았더라	And prayed unto him: and he was intreated of him, and heard his supplication, and brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that the Lord he was God.	And when he prayed to Him, the LORD received his plea and heard his petition; so He brought him back to Jerusalem and to his kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that the LORD is God.
2CH	33	14	그 후에 다윗 성 밖 기혼 서편 골짜기 안에 외성을 쌓되 생선문 어귀까지 이르러 오벨을 둘러 심히 높이 쌓고 또 유다 모든 견고한 성읍에 군대 장관을 두며	Now after this he built a wall without the city of David, on the west side of Gihon, in the valley, even to the entering in at the fish gate, and compassed about Ophel, and raised it up a very great height, and put captains of war in all the fenced cities of Judah.	After this, Manasseh rebuilt the outer wall of the City of David from west of Gihon in the valley to the entrance of the Fish Gate, and he brought it around the hill of Ophel and heightened it considerably. He also stationed military commanders in all the fortified cities of Judah.
2CH	33	15	이방 신들과 여호와의 전의 우상을 제하며 여호와의 전을 건축한 산에와 예루살렘에 쌓은 모든 단을 다 성 밖에 던지고	And he took away the strange gods, and the idol out of the house of the Lord, and all the altars that he had built in the mount of the house of the Lord, and in Jerusalem, and cast them out of the city.	He removed the foreign gods and the idol from the house of the LORD, along with all the altars he had built on the temple mount and in Jerusalem, and he dumped them outside the city.
2CH	33	16	여호와의 단을 중수하고 화목제와 감사제를 그 단 위에 드리고 유다를 명하여 이스라엘 하나님 여호와를 섬기라 하매	And he repaired the altar of the Lord, and sacrificed thereon peace offerings and thank offerings, and commanded Judah to serve the Lord God of Israel.	Then he restored the altar of the LORD and sacrificed peace offerings and thank offerings on it, and he told Judah to serve the LORD, the God of Israel.
2CH	33	17	백성이 그 하나님 여호와께만 제사를 드렸으나 오히려 산당에서 제사를 드렸더라	Nevertheless the people did sacrifice still in the high places, yet unto the Lord their God only.	Nevertheless, the people still sacrificed at the high places, but only to the LORD their God.
2CH	33	18	므낫세의 남은 사적과 그 하나님께 기도한 말씀과 선견자가 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 이름을 받들고 권한 말씀이 모두 이스라엘 열왕의 행장에 기록되었고	Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, and his prayer unto his God, and the words of the seers that spake to him in the name of the Lord God of Israel, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel.	As for the rest of the acts of Manasseh, along with his prayer to his God and the words of the seers who spoke to him in the name of the LORD, the God of Israel, they are indeed written in the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel.
2CH	33	19	또 그 기도와 그 기도를 들으신 것과 그 모든 죄와 건과와 겸비하기 전에 산당을 세운 곳과 아세라 목상과 우상을 세운 곳들이 다 호새의 사기에 기록되니라	His prayer also, and how God was intreated of him, and all his sin, and his trespass, and the places wherein he built high places, and set up groves and graven images, before he was humbled: behold, they are written among the sayings of the seers.	His prayer and how God received his plea, as well as all his sin and unfaithfulness, and the sites where he built high places and set up Asherah poles and idols before he humbled himself, they are indeed written in the Records of the Seers.
2CH	33	20	므낫세가 그 열조와 함께 자매 그 궁에 장사하고 그 아들 아몬이 대신하여 왕이 되니라	So Manasseh slept with his fathers, and they buried him in his own house: and Amon his son reigned in his stead.	And Manasseh rested with his fathers and was buried at his palace. And his son Amon reigned in his place.
2CH	33	21	아몬이 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 이십이 세라 예루살렘에서 이 년을 치리하며	Amon was two and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned two years in Jerusalem.	Amon was twenty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem two years.
2CH	33	22	그 부친 므낫세의 행함 같이 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하여 그 부친 므낫세가 만든 아로새긴 모든 우상에게 제사하여 섬겼으며	But he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, as did Manasseh his father: for Amon sacrificed unto all the carved images which Manasseh his father had made, and served them;	And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, as his father Manasseh had done. Amon served and sacrificed to all the idols that his father Manasseh had made,
2CH	33	23	이 아몬이 그 부친 므낫세의 스스로 겸비함 같이 여호와 앞에서 스스로 겸비치 아니하고 더욱 범죄하더니	And humbled not himself before the Lord, as Manasseh his father had humbled himself; but Amon trespassed more and more.	but he did not humble himself before the LORD as his father Manasseh had done; instead, Amon increased his guilt.
2CH	33	24	그 신복이 반역하여 왕을 궁중에서 죽이매	And his servants conspired against him, and slew him in his own house.	Then the servants of Amon conspired against him and killed him in his palace.
2CH	33	25	국민이 아몬 왕을 반역한 사람들을 다 죽이고 그 아들 요시야로 대신하여 왕을 삼으니라	But the people of the land slew all them that had conspired against king Amon; and the people of the land made Josiah his son king in his stead.	But the people of the land killed all those who had conspired against King Amon, and they made his son Josiah king in his place.
2CH	34	1	요시야가 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 팔 세라 예루살렘에서 삼십일 년을 치리하며	Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem one and thirty years.	Josiah was eight years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem thirty-one years.
2CH	34	2	여호와 보시기에 정직히 행하여 그 조상 다윗의 길로 행하여 좌우로 치우치지 아니하고	And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the ways of David his father, and declined neither to the right hand, nor to the left.	And he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD and walked in the ways of his father David; he did not turn aside to the right or to the left.
2CH	34	3	오히려 어렸을 때 곧 위에 있은지 팔 년에 그 조상 다윗의 하나님을 비로소 구하고 그 십이년에 유다와 예루살렘을 비로소 정결케하여 그 산당과 아세라 목상들과 아로새긴 우상들과 부어 만든 우상들을 제하여 버리매	For in the eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of David his father: and in the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the high places, and the groves, and the carved images, and the molten images.	In the eighth year of his reign, while he was still young, Josiah began to seek the God of his father David, and in the twelfth year he began to cleanse Judah and Jerusalem of the high places, the Asherah poles, the carved idols, and the cast images.
2CH	34	4	무리가 왕의 앞에서 바알들의 단을 훼파하였으며 왕이 또 그 단 위에 높이 달린 태양상들을 찍고 또 아세라 목상들과 아로새긴 우상들과 부어 만든 우상들을 빻아 가루를 만들어 거기 제사하던 자들의 무덤에 뿌리고	And they brake down the altars of Baalim in his presence; and the images, that were on high above them, he cut down; and the groves, and the carved images, and the molten images, he brake in pieces, and made dust of them, and strowed it upon the graves of them that had sacrificed unto them.	Then in his presence the altars of the Baals were torn down, and he cut to pieces the incense altars that were above them. He shattered the Asherah poles, the carved idols, and the cast images, crushed them to dust, and scattered them over the graves of those who had sacrificed to them.
2CH	34	5	제사장들의 뼈를 단 위에서 불살라 유다와 예루살렘을 정결케 하였으며	And he burnt the bones of the priests upon their altars, and cleansed Judah and Jerusalem.	Then he burned the bones of the priests on their altars. So he cleansed Judah and Jerusalem.
2CH	34	6	또 므낫세와 에브라임과 시므온과 납달리까지 사면 황폐한 성읍들에도 그렇게 행하여	And so did he in the cities of Manasseh, and Ephraim, and Simeon, even unto Naphtali, with their mattocks round about.	Josiah did the same in the cities of Manasseh, Ephraim, and Simeon, as far as Naphtali, and in the ruins around them.
2CH	34	7	단들을 훼파하며 아세라 목상들과 아로새긴 우상들을 빻아 가루를 만들며 온 이스라엘 땅에 있는 모든 태양상을 찍고 예루살렘으로 돌아왔더라	And when he had broken down the altars and the groves, and had beaten the graven images into powder, and cut down all the idols throughout all the land of Israel, he returned to Jerusalem.	He tore down the altars and Asherah poles, crushed the idols to powder, and cut to pieces all the incense altars throughout the land of Israel. Then he returned to Jerusalem.
2CH	34	8	요시야가 위에 있은지 십팔 년에 그 땅과 전을 정결케 하기를 마치고 그 하나님 여호와의 전을 수리하려 하여 아살랴의 아들 사반과 부윤 마아세야와 서기관 요아하스의 아들 요아를 보낸지라	Now in the eighteenth year of his reign, when he had purged the land, and the house, he sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, and Maaseiah the governor of the city, and Joah the son of Joahaz the recorder, to repair the house of the Lord his God.	Now in the eighteenth year of his reign, in order to cleanse the land and the temple, Josiah sent Shaphan son of Azaliah, Maaseiah the governor of the city, and Joah son of Joahaz, the recorder, to repair the house of the LORD his God.
2CH	34	9	저희가 대제사장 힐기야에게 나아가 전에 하나님의 전에 연보한 돈을 저에게 붙이니 이 돈은 문을 지키는 레위 사람이 므낫세와 에브라임과 남아있는 이스라엘 사람과 온 유다와 베냐민과 예루살렘 거민들에게서 거둔 것이라	And when they came to Hilkiah the high priest, they delivered the money that was brought into the house of God, which the Levites that kept the doors had gathered of the hand of Manasseh and Ephraim, and of all the remnant of Israel, and of all Judah and Benjamin; and they returned to Jerusalem.	So they went to Hilkiah the high priest and gave him the money that had been brought into the house of God, which the Levites at the doors had collected from the people of Manasseh and Ephraim, from all the remnant of Israel, Judah, and Benjamin, and from the people of Jerusalem.
2CH	34	10	그 돈을 여호와의 전 역사를 감독하는 자의 손에 붙이니 저희가 여호와의 전에 있는 공장에게 주어 그 전을 수리하게 하되	And they put it in the hand of the workmen that had the oversight of the house of the Lord, and they gave it to the workmen that wrought in the house of the Lord, to repair and amend the house:	They put it into the hands of the supervisors of those doing the work of the house of the LORD, who in turn gave it to the workmen restoring and repairing the house of the LORD.
2CH	34	11	곧 목수와 건축하는 자에게 붙여 다듬은 돌과 연접하는 나무를 사며 유다 왕들이 헐어버린 전들을 위하여 들보를 만들게 하매	Even to the artificers and builders gave they it, to buy hewn stone, and timber for couplings, and to floor the houses which the kings of Judah had destroyed.	They also gave money to the carpenters and builders to buy dressed stone, as well as timbers for couplings and beams for the buildings that the kings of Judah had allowed to deteriorate.
2CH	34	12	그 사람들이 진실히 그 일을 하니라 그 감독은 레위 사람 곧 므라리 자손 중 야핫과 오바댜요 그핫 자손 중 스가랴와 무술람이라 다 그 일을 주장하고 또 음악에 익숙한 레위 사람이 함께 하였으며	And the men did the work faithfully: and the overseers of them were Jahath and Obadiah, the Levites, of the sons of Merari; and Zechariah and Meshullam, of the sons of the Kohathites, to set it forward; and other of the Levites, all that could skill of instruments of musick.	And the men did the work faithfully. The Levites overseeing them were Jahath and Obadiah, descendants of Merari, and Zechariah and Meshullam, descendants of Kohath. Other Levites, all skilled with musical instruments,
2CH	34	13	저희가 또 담부하는 자를 관할하며 범백 공장을 동독하고 어떤 레위 사람은 서기와 관리와 문지기가 되었더라	Also they were over the bearers of burdens, and were overseers of all that wrought the work in any manner of service: and of the Levites there were scribes, and officers, and porters.	were over the laborers and supervised all who did the work, task by task. Some of the Levites were secretaries, officers, and gatekeepers.
2CH	34	14	무리가 여호와의 전에 연보한 돈을 꺼낼 때에 제사장 힐기야가 모세의 전한 여호와의 율법책을 발견하고	And when they brought out the money that was brought into the house of the Lord, Hilkiah the priest found a book of the law of the Lord given by Moses.	While they were bringing out the money that had been taken into the house of the LORD, Hilkiah the priest found the Book of the Law of the LORD written by Moses.
2CH	34	15	서기관 사반에게 일러 가로되 내가 여호와의 전에서 율법책을 발견하였노라 하고 그 책을 사반에게 주매	And Hilkiah answered and said to Shaphan the scribe, I have found the book of the law in the house of the Lord. And Hilkiah delivered the book to Shaphan.	And Hilkiah said to Shaphan the scribe, “I have found the Book of the Law in the house of the LORD!” And he gave it to Shaphan.
2CH	34	16	사반이 책을 가지고 왕에게 나아가서 복명하여 가로되 왕께서 종들에게 명하신 것을 종들이 다 준행하였나이다	And Shaphan carried the book to the king, and brought the king word back again, saying, All that was committed to thy servants, they do it.	Then Shaphan brought the book to the king and reported, “Your servants are doing all that has been placed in their hands.
2CH	34	17	또 여호와의 전에 있던 돈을 쏟아서 감독자와 공장의 손에 붙였나이다 하고	And they have gathered together the money that was found in the house of the Lord, and have delivered it into the hand of the overseers, and to the hand of the workmen.	They have paid out the money that was found in the house of the LORD and have put it into the hands of the supervisors and workers.”
2CH	34	18	서기관 사반이 또 왕에게 고하여 가로되 제사장 힐기야가 내게 책을 주더이다 하고 사반이 왕의 앞에서 읽으매	Then Shaphan the scribe told the king, saying, Hilkiah the priest hath given me a book. And Shaphan read it before the king.	Moreover, Shaphan the scribe told the king, “Hilkiah the priest has given me a book.” And Shaphan read it in the presence of the king.
2CH	34	19	왕이 율법의 말씀을 듣자 곧 자기 옷을 찢더라	And it came to pass, when the king had heard the words of the law, that he rent his clothes.	When the king heard the words of the Law, he tore his clothes
2CH	34	20	왕이 힐기야와 사반의 아들 아히감과 미가의 아들 압돈과 서기관 사반과 왕의 시신 아사야에게 명하여 가로되	And the king commanded Hilkiah, and Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and Abdon the son of Micah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah a servant of the king’s, saying,	and commanded Hilkiah, Ahikam son of Shaphan, Abdon son of Micah, Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah the servant of the king:
2CH	34	21	너희는 가서 나와 및 이스라엘과 유다의 남은 자를 위하여 이 발견한 책의 말씀에 대하여 여호와께 물으라 우리 열조가 여호와의 말씀을 지키지 아니하고 이 책에 기록된 모든 것을 준행치 아니하였으므로 여호와께서 우리에게 쏟으신 진노가 크도다	Go, enquire of the Lord for me, and for them that are left in Israel and in Judah, concerning the words of the book that is found: for great is the wrath of the Lord that is poured out upon us, because our fathers have not kept the word of the Lord, to do after all that is written in this book.	“Go and inquire of the LORD for me and for those remaining in Israel and Judah concerning the words in the book that has been found. For great is the wrath of the LORD that has been poured out on us because our fathers have not kept the word of the LORD by doing all that is written in this book.”
2CH	34	22	이에 힐기야와 왕의 보낸 사람들이 여선지자 훌다에게로 나아가니 저는 하스라의 손자 독핫의 아들 예복을 주관하는 살룸의 아내라 예루살렘 둘째 구역에 거하였더라 저희가 그에게 이 뜻으로 고하매	And Hilkiah, and they that the king had appointed, went to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tikvath, the son of Hasrah, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the college:) and they spake to her to that effect.	So Hilkiah and those the king had designated went and spoke to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum son of Tokhath, the son of Hasrah, the keeper of the wardrobe. She lived in Jerusalem, in the Second District.
2CH	34	23	훌다가 저희에게 이르되 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 말씀으로 너희는 너희를 내게 보낸 사람에게 고하기를	And she answered them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Tell ye the man that sent you to me,	And Huldah said to them, “This is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: ‘Tell the man who sent you
2CH	34	24	여호와의 말씀이 내가 이곳과 그 거민에게 재앙을 내리되 곧 유다 왕 앞에서 읽은 책에 기록된 모든 저주대로 하리니	Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, and upon the inhabitants thereof, even all the curses that are written in the book which they have read before the king of Judah:	that this is what the LORD says: I am about to bring calamity on this place and on its people, according to all the curses written in the book that has been read in the presence of the king of Judah,
2CH	34	25	이는 이 백성이 나를 버리고 다른 신에게 분향하며 그 손의 모든 소위로 나의 노를 격발하였음이라 그러므로 나의 노를 이곳에 쏟으매 꺼지지 아니하리라 하라 하셨느니라	Because they have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, that they might provoke me to anger with all the works of their hands; therefore my wrath shall be poured out upon this place, and shall not be quenched.	because they have forsaken Me and burned incense to other gods, that they might provoke Me to anger with all the works of their hands. My wrath will be poured out upon this place and will not be quenched.’
2CH	34	26	너희를 보내어 여호와께 묻게 한 유다 왕에게는 너희가 이렇게 고하라 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 말씀이 네가 들은 말을 의논컨대	And as for the king of Judah, who sent you to enquire of the Lord, so shall ye say unto him, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel concerning the words which thou hast heard;	But as for the king of Judah, who sent you to inquire of the LORD, tell him that this is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: ‘As for the words that you heard,
2CH	34	27	내가 이곳과 그 거민을 가리켜 말한 것을 네가 듣고 마음이 연하여 하나님 앞 곧 내 앞에서 겸비하여 옷을 찢고 통곡하였으므로 나도 네 말을 들었노라 여호와가 말하였느니라	Because thine heart was tender, and thou didst humble thyself before God, when thou heardest his words against this place, and against the inhabitants thereof, and humbledst thyself before me, and didst rend thy clothes, and weep before me; I have even heard thee also, saith the Lord.	because your heart was tender and you humbled yourself before God when you heard His words against this place and against its people, and because you have humbled yourself before Me and you have torn your clothes and wept before Me, I have heard you,’ declares the LORD.
2CH	34	28	그러므로 내가 너로 너의 열조에게 돌아가서 평안히 묘실로 들어가게 하리니 내가 이곳과 그 거민에게 내리는 모든 재앙을 네가 눈으로 보지 못하리라 하셨느니라 사자들이 왕에게 복명하니라	Behold, I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shalt be gathered to thy grave in peace, neither shall thine eyes see all the evil that I will bring upon this place, and upon the inhabitants of the same. So they brought the king word again.	‘Now I will indeed gather you to your fathers, and you will be gathered to your grave in peace. Your eyes will not see all the calamity that I will bring on this place and on its inhabitants.’” So they brought her answer back to the king.
2CH	34	29	왕이 보내어 유다와 예루살렘의 모든 장로를 불러 모으고	Then the king sent and gathered together all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem.	Then the king summoned all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem.
2CH	34	30	이에 여호와의 전에 올라가매 유다 모든 사람과 예루살렘 거민과 제사장들과 레위 사람들과 모든 백성이 무론노소하고 다 함께한지라 왕이 여호와의 전 안에서 발견한 연약책의 모든 말씀을 읽어 무리의 귀에 들리고	And the king went up into the house of the Lord, and all the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the priests, and the Levites, and all the people, great and small: and he read in their ears all the words of the book of the covenant that was found in the house of the Lord.	And he went up to the house of the LORD with all the people of Judah and Jerusalem, as well as the priests and the Levites—all the people small and great—and in their hearing he read all the words of the Book of the Covenant that had been found in the house of the LORD.
2CH	34	31	왕이 자기 처소에 서서 여호와 앞에서 언약을 세우되 마음을 다하고 성품을 다하여 여호와를 순종하고 그 계명과 법도와 율례를 지켜 이 책에 기록된 언약의 말씀을 이루리라 하고	And the king stood in his place, and made a covenant before the Lord, to walk after the Lord, and to keep his commandments, and his testimonies, and his statutes, with all his heart, and with all his soul, to perform the words of the covenant which are written in this book.	So the king stood by the pillar and made a covenant before the LORD to follow the LORD and to keep His commandments, decrees, and statutes with all his heart and all his soul, and to carry out the words of this covenant that were written in this book.
2CH	34	32	예루살렘과 베냐민에 있는 자들로 다 이에 참가하게 하매 예루살렘 거민이 하나님 곧 그 열조의 하나님의 언약을 좇으니라	And he caused all that were present in Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to it. And the inhabitants of Jerusalem did according to the covenant of God, the God of their fathers.	Then he had everyone in Jerusalem and Benjamin take a stand in agreement to it. So all the people of Jerusalem carried out the covenant of God, the God of their fathers.
2CH	34	33	이와 같이 요시야가 이스라엘 자손에게 속한 모든 땅에서 가증한 것을 다 제하여 버리고 이스라엘의 모든 사람으로 그 하나님 여호와를 섬기게 하였으므로 요시야가 사는 날에 백성이 그 열조의 하나님 여호와께 복종하고 떠나지 아니하였더라	And Josiah took away all the abominations out of all the countries that pertained to the children of Israel, and made all that were present in Israel to serve, even to serve the Lord their God. And all his days they departed not from following the Lord, the God of their fathers.	And Josiah removed all the abominations from all the lands belonging to the Israelites, and he required everyone in Israel to serve the LORD their God. Throughout his reign they did not turn aside from following the LORD, the God of their fathers.
2CH	35	1	요시야가 예루살렘 여호와 앞에서 유월절을 지켜 정월 십사일에 유월절 어린 양을 잡으니라	Moreover Josiah kept a passover unto the Lord in Jerusalem: and they killed the passover on the fourteenth day of the first month.	Then Josiah celebrated the Passover to the LORD in Jerusalem, and the Passover lamb was slaughtered on the fourteenth day of the first month.
2CH	35	2	왕이 제사장들에게 그 직분을 맡기고 면려하여 여호와의 전에서 사무를 행하게 하고	And he set the priests in their charges, and encouraged them to the service of the house of the Lord,	He appointed the priests to their duties and encouraged them in the service of the house of the LORD.
2CH	35	3	또 여호와 앞에 구별되어서 온 이스라엘을 가르치는 레위 사람에게 이르되 거룩한 궤를 이스라엘 왕 다윗의 아들 솔로몬의 건축한 전 가운데 두고 다시는 너희 어깨에 메지 말고 마땅히 너희 하나님 여호와와 그 백성 이스라엘을 섬길 것이라	And said unto the Levites that taught all Israel, which were holy unto the Lord, Put the holy ark in the house which Solomon the son of David king of Israel did build; it shall not be a burden upon your shoulders: serve now the Lord your God, and his people Israel,	To the Levites who taught all Israel and were holy to the LORD, Josiah said: “Put the holy ark in the temple built by Solomon son of David king of Israel. It is not to be carried around on your shoulders. Now serve the LORD your God and His people Israel.
2CH	35	4	너희는 이스라엘 왕 다윗의 글과 다윗의 아들 솔로몬의 글을 준행하여 너희 족속대로 반열을 따라 스스로 예비하고	And prepare yourselves by the houses of your fathers, after your courses, according to the writing of David king of Israel, and according to the writing of Solomon his son.	Prepare yourselves by families in your divisions, according to the instructions written by David king of Israel and Solomon his son.
2CH	35	5	너희 형제 모든 백성의 족속의 차서대로 또는 레위 족속의 차서대로 성소에 서서	And stand in the holy place according to the divisions of the families of the fathers of your brethren the people, and after the division of the families of the Levites.	Moreover, stand in the Holy Place by the divisions of the families of your kinsmen the lay people, and by the divisions of the families of the Levites.
2CH	35	6	스스로 성결케하고 유월절 어린 양을 잡아 너희 형제를 위하여 예비하되 여호와께서 모세로 전하신 말씀을 좇아 행할지니라	So kill the passover, and sanctify yourselves, and prepare your brethren, that they may do according to the word of the Lord by the hand of Moses.	Slaughter the Passover lambs, consecrate yourselves, and make preparations for your fellow countrymen to carry out the word of the LORD given by Moses.”
2CH	35	7	요시야가 그 모인 백성들에게 자기의 소유 양떼 중에서 어린 양과 어린 염소 삼만과 수소 삼천을 내어 유월절 제물로 주매	And Josiah gave to the people, of the flock, lambs and kids, all for the passover offerings, for all that were present, to the number of thirty thousand, and three thousand bullocks: these were of the king’s substance.	From his own flocks and herds Josiah contributed 30,000 lambs and goats plus 3,000 bulls for the Passover offerings for all the people who were present.
2CH	35	8	방백들도 즐거이 희생을 드려 백성과 제사장들과 레위 사람들에게 주었고 하나님의 전을 주장하는 자 힐기야와 스가랴와 여히엘은 제사장들에게 양 이천육백과 수소 삼백을 유월절 제물로 주었고	And his princes gave willingly unto the people, to the priests, and to the Levites: Hilkiah and Zechariah and Jehiel, rulers of the house of God, gave unto the priests for the passover offerings two thousand and six hundred small cattle, and three hundred oxen.	His officials also contributed willingly to the people and priests and Levites. Hilkiah, Zechariah, and Jehiel, the administrators of the house of God, gave the priests 2,600 Passover offerings and 300 bulls.
2CH	35	9	또 레위 사람의 두목들 곧 고나냐와 그 형제 스마야와 느다넬과 또 하사뱌와 여이엘과 요사밧은 양 오천과 수소 오백을 레위 사람들에게 유월절 제물로 주었더라	Conaniah also, and Shemaiah and Nethaneel, his brethren, and Hashabiah and Jeiel and Jozabad, chief of the Levites, gave unto the Levites for passover offerings five thousand small cattle, and five hundred oxen.	Additionally, Conaniah and his brothers Shemaiah and Nethanel, as well as Hashabiah, Jeiel, and Jozabad, officers of the Levites, donated to the Levites 5,000 Passover offerings and 500 bulls.
2CH	35	10	이와 같이 섬길 일이 구비하매 왕의 명을 좇아 제사장들은 자기 처소에 서고 레위 사람들은 그 반열대로 서고	So the service was prepared, and the priests stood in their place, and the Levites in their courses, according to the king’s commandment.	So the service was prepared; the priests stood in their places and the Levites in their divisions according to the king’s command.
2CH	35	11	유월절 양을 잡으니 제사장들은 저희 손에서 피를 받아 뿌리고 또 레위 사람들은 잡은 짐승의 가죽을 벗기고	And they killed the passover, and the priests sprinkled the blood from their hands, and the Levites flayed them.	And they slaughtered the Passover lambs, while the priests sprinkled the blood handed to them and the Levites skinned the animals.
2CH	35	12	그 번제물을 옮겨 족속의 차서대로 모든 백성에게 나누어 모세의 책에 기록된 대로 여호와께 드리게 하고 소도 그와 같이 하고	And they removed the burnt offerings, that they might give according to the divisions of the families of the people, to offer unto the Lord, as it is written in the book of Moses. And so did they with the oxen.	They set aside the burnt offerings to be given to the divisions of the families of the people to offer to the LORD, as is written in the Book of Moses; and they did the same with the bulls.
2CH	35	13	이에 규례대로 유월절 양을 불에 굽고 그 나머지 성물은 솥과 가마와 남비에 삶아 모든 백성에게 속히 분배하고	And they roasted the passover with fire according to the ordinance: but the other holy offerings sod they in pots, and in caldrons, and in pans, and divided them speedily among all the people.	They roasted the Passover animals on the fire according to the regulation, and they boiled the other holy offerings in pots, kettles, and bowls and quickly brought them to all the people.
2CH	35	14	그 후에 자기와 제사장들을 위하여 준비하니 이는 아론의 자손 제사장들이 번제와 기름을 저녁까지 드리는고로 레위 사람들이 자기와 아론의 자손 제사장들을 위하여 준비함이더라	And afterward they made ready for themselves, and for the priests: because the priests the sons of Aaron were busied in offering of burnt offerings and the fat until night; therefore the Levites prepared for themselves, and for the priests the sons of Aaron.	Afterward, they made preparations for themselves and for the priests, since the priests, the descendants of Aaron, were offering up burnt offerings and fat until nightfall. So the Levites made preparations for themselves and for the priests, the descendants of Aaron.
2CH	35	15	아삽의 자손 노래하는 자들은 다윗과 아삽과 헤만과 왕의 선견자 여두둔의 명한 대로 자기 처소에 있고 문지기들은 각 문에 있고 그 직임에서 떠날 것이 없었으니 이는 그 형제 레위 사람들이 저희를 위하여 예비하였음이더라	And the singers the sons of Asaph were in their place, according to the commandment of David, and Asaph, and Heman, and Jeduthun the king’s seer; and the porters waited at every gate; they might not depart from their service; for their brethren the Levites prepared for them.	The singers, the descendants of Asaph, were at their stations according to the command of David, Asaph, Heman, and Jeduthun the king’s seer. And the gatekeepers at each gate did not need to leave their position, because their fellow Levites made preparations for them.
2CH	35	16	이와 같이 당일에 여호와를 섬길 일이 다 준비되매 요시야 왕의 명대로 유월절을 지키며 번제를 여호와의 단에 드렸으며	So all the service of the Lord was prepared the same day, to keep the passover, and to offer burnt offerings upon the altar of the Lord, according to the commandment of king Josiah.	So on that day the entire service of the LORD was carried out for celebrating the Passover and offering burnt offerings on the altar of the LORD, according to the command of King Josiah.
2CH	35	17	그 때에 모인 이스라엘 자손이 유월절을 지키고 연하여 무교절을 칠 일 동안 지켰으니	And the children of Israel that were present kept the passover at that time, and the feast of unleavened bread seven days.	The Israelites who were present also observed the Passover at that time, as well as the Feast of Unleavened Bread for seven days.
2CH	35	18	선지자 사무엘 이후로 이스라엘 가운데서 유월절을 이같이 지키지 못하였고 이스라엘 열왕도 요시야가 제사장들과 레위 사람들과 모인 온 유다와 이스라엘 무리와 예루살렘 거민과 함께 지킨 것처럼은 유월절을 지키지 못하였더라	And there was no passover like to that kept in Israel from the days of Samuel the prophet; neither did all the kings of Israel keep such a passover as Josiah kept, and the priests, and the Levites, and all Judah and Israel that were present, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.	No such Passover had been observed in Israel since the days of Samuel the prophet. None of the kings of Israel ever observed a Passover like the one that Josiah observed with the priests, the Levites, all Judah, the Israelites who were present, and the people of Jerusalem.
2CH	35	19	요시야의 위에 있은지 십팔년에 이 유월절을 지켰더라	In the eighteenth year of the reign of Josiah was this passover kept.	In the eighteenth year of Josiah’s reign, this Passover was observed.
2CH	35	20	이 모든 일 후 곧 요시야가 전을 정돈하기를 마친 후에 애굽 왕 느고가 유브라데 강가의 갈그미스를 치러 올라온고로 요시야가 나가서 방비하였더니	After all this, when Josiah had prepared the temple, Necho king of Egypt came up to fight against Carchemish by Euphrates: and Josiah went out against him.	After all this, when Josiah had set the temple in order, Neco king of Egypt marched up to fight at Carchemish by the Euphrates, and Josiah went out to confront him.
2CH	35	21	느고가 요시야에게 사자를 보내어 가로되 유다 왕이여 내가 그대와 무슨 관계가 있느뇨 내가 오늘날 그대를 치려는 것이 아니요 나로 더불어 싸우는 족속을 치려는 것이라 하나님이 나를 명하사 속히 하라 하셨은즉 하나님이 나와 함께 계시니 그대는 하나님을 거스리지 말라 그대를 멸하실까 하노라 하나	But he sent ambassadors to him, saying, What have I to do with thee, thou king of Judah? I come not against thee this day, but against the house wherewith I have war: for God commanded me to make haste: forbear thee from meddling with God, who is with me, that he destroy thee not.	But Neco sent messengers to him, saying, “What is the issue between you and me, O king of Judah? I have not come against you today, but I am fighting another dynasty. God told me to hurry; so stop opposing God, who is with me, or He will destroy you!”
2CH	35	22	요시야가 몸을 돌이켜 떠나기를 싫어하고 변장하고 싸우고자 하여 하나님의 입에서 나온 느고의 말을 듣지 아니하고 므깃도 골짜기에 이르러 싸울 때에	Nevertheless Josiah would not turn his face from him, but disguised himself, that he might fight with him, and hearkened not unto the words of Necho from the mouth of God, and came to fight in the valley of Megiddo.	Josiah, however, did not turn away from him; instead, in order to engage him in battle, he disguised himself. He did not listen to Neco’s words from the mouth of God, but went to fight him on the Plain of Megiddo.
2CH	35	23	활 쏘는 자가 요시야 왕을 쏜지라 왕이 그 신복에게 이르되 내가 중상하였으니 나를 도와 나가게 하라	And the archers shot at king Josiah; and the king said to his servants, Have me away; for I am sore wounded.	There the archers shot King Josiah, who said to his servants, “Take me away, for I am badly wounded!”
2CH	35	24	그 신복이 저를 병거에서 내리게 하고 저의 버금 병거에 태워 예루살렘에 이른 후에 저가 죽으니 그 열조의 묘실에 장사하니라 온 유다와 예루살렘 사람들이 요시야를 슬퍼하고	His servants therefore took him out of that chariot, and put him in the second chariot that he had; and they brought him to Jerusalem, and he died, and was buried in one of the sepulchres of his fathers. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.	So his servants took him out of his chariot, put him in his second chariot, and brought him to Jerusalem, where he died. And Josiah was buried in the tomb of his fathers, and all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for him.
2CH	35	25	예레미야는 저를 위하여 애가를 지었으며 노래하는 남자와 여자는 요시야를 슬피 노래하니 이스라엘에 규례가 되어 오늘날까지 이르렀으며 그 가사는 애가 중에 기록되었더라	And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah: and all the singing men and the singing women spake of Josiah in their lamentations to this day, and made them an ordinance in Israel: and, behold, they are written in the lamentations.	Then Jeremiah lamented over Josiah, and to this day all the choirs of men and women sing laments over Josiah. They established them as a statute for Israel, and indeed they are written in the Book of Laments.
2CH	35	26	요시야의 남은 사적과 여호와의 율법에 기록된 대로 행한 모든 선한 일과	Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and his goodness, according to that which was written in the law of the Lord,	As for the rest of the acts of Josiah, along with his deeds of loving devotion according to what is written in the Law of the LORD—
2CH	35	27	그 시종 행적이 이스라엘과 유다 열왕기에 기록되니라	And his deeds, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.	his acts from beginning to end—they are indeed written in the Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah.
2CH	36	1	국민이 요시야의 아들 여호아하스를 세워 그 부친을 대신하여 예루살렘에서 왕을 삼으니	Then the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and made him king in his father’s stead in Jerusalem.	Then the people of the land took Jehoahaz son of Josiah and made him king in Jerusalem in place of his father.
2CH	36	2	여호아하스가 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 이십삼 세더라 저가 예루살렘에서 치리한지 석 달에	Jehoahaz was twenty and three years old when he began to reign, and he reigned three months in Jerusalem.	Jehoahaz was twenty-three years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem three months.
2CH	36	3	애굽 왕이 예루살렘에서 그 위를 폐하고 또 그 나라로 은 일백 달란트와 금 한 달란트를 벌금으로 내게 하며	And the king of Egypt put him down at Jerusalem, and condemned the land in an hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold.	And the king of Egypt dethroned him in Jerusalem and imposed on Judah a levy of a hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold.
2CH	36	4	애굽 왕 느고가 또 그 형제 엘리아김을 세워 유다와 예루살렘 왕을 삼고 그 이름을 고쳐 여호야김이라 하고 그 형제 여호아하스를 애굽으로 잡아갔더라	And the king of Egypt made Eliakim his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem, and turned his name to Jehoiakim. And Necho took Jehoahaz his brother, and carried him to Egypt.	Then Neco king of Egypt made Eliakim brother of Jehoahaz king over Judah and Jerusalem, and he changed Eliakim’s name to Jehoiakim. But Neco took Eliakim’s brother Jehoahaz and carried him off to Egypt.
2CH	36	5	여호야김이 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 이십오 세라 예루살렘에서 십일 년을 치리하며 그 하나님 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하였더라	Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem: and he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord his God.	Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem eleven years. And he did evil in the sight of the LORD his God.
2CH	36	6	바벨론 왕 느브갓네살이 올라와서 치고 저를 쇠사슬로 결박하여 바벨론으로 잡아가고	Against him came up Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and bound him in fetters, to carry him to Babylon.	Then Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up against Jehoiakim and bound him with bronze shackles to take him to Babylon.
2CH	36	7	느브갓네살이 또 여호와의 전 기구들을 바벨론으로 가져다가 바벨론에 있는 자기 신당에 두었더라	Nebuchadnezzar also carried of the vessels of the house of the Lord to Babylon, and put them in his temple at Babylon.	Nebuchadnezzar also took to Babylon some of the articles from the house of the LORD, and he put them in his temple in Babylon.
2CH	36	8	여호야김의 남은 사적과 그 행한 모든 가증한 일과 그 심술이 이스라엘과 유다 열왕기에 기록되니라 그 아들 여호야긴이 대신하여 왕이 되니라	Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim, and his abominations which he did, and that which was found in him, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah: and Jehoiachin his son reigned in his stead.	As for the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim, the abominations he committed, and all that was found against him, they are indeed written in the Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah. And his son Jehoiachin reigned in his place.
2CH	36	9	여호야긴이 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 팔 세라 예루살렘에서 석 달 열흘을 치리하며 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하였더라	Jehoiachin was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned three months and ten days in Jerusalem: and he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord.	Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem three months and ten days. And he did evil in the sight of the LORD.
2CH	36	10	세초에 느브갓네살이 보내어 여호야긴을 바벨론으로 잡아가고 여호와의 전의 귀한 기구도 함께 가져가고 그 아자비 시드기야를 세워 유다와 예루살렘 왕을 삼았더라	And when the year was expired, king Nebuchadnezzar sent, and brought him to Babylon, with the goodly vessels of the house of the Lord, and made Zedekiah his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem.	In the spring, King Nebuchadnezzar summoned Jehoiachin and brought him to Babylon, along with the articles of value from the house of the LORD. And he made Jehoiachin’s relative Zedekiah king over Judah and Jerusalem.
2CH	36	11	시드기야가 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 이십일 세라 예루살렘에서 십일 년을 치리하며	Zedekiah was one and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned eleven years in Jerusalem.	Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem eleven years.
2CH	36	12	그 하나님 여호와 보시기에 악을 행하고 선지자 예레미야가 여호와의 말씀으로 일러도 그의 앞에서 겸비치 아니하였으며	And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord his God, and humbled not himself before Jeremiah the prophet speaking from the mouth of the Lord.	And he did evil in the sight of the LORD his God and did not humble himself before Jeremiah the prophet, who spoke for the LORD.
2CH	36	13	느브갓네살 왕이 저로 그 하나님을 가리켜 맹세케 하였으나 저가 배반하고 목을 곧게 하며 마음을 강퍅케하여 이스라엘 하나님 여호와께로 돌아오지 아니하였고	And he also rebelled against king Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God: but he stiffened his neck, and hardened his heart from turning unto the Lord God of Israel.	He also rebelled against King Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God. But Zedekiah stiffened his neck and hardened his heart against turning to the LORD, the God of Israel.
2CH	36	14	제사장의 어른들과 백성도 크게 범죄하여 이방 모든 가증한 일을 본받아서 여호와께서 예루살렘에 거룩하게 두신 그 전을 더럽게 하였으며	Moreover all the chief of the priests, and the people, transgressed very much after all the abominations of the heathen; and polluted the house of the Lord which he had hallowed in Jerusalem.	Furthermore, all the leaders of the priests and the people multiplied their unfaithful deeds, following all the abominations of the nations, and they defiled the house of the LORD, which He had consecrated in Jerusalem.
2CH	36	15	그 열조의 하나님 여호와께서 그 백성과 그 거하시는 곳을 아끼사 부지런히 그 사자들을 그 백성에게 보내어 이르셨으나	And the Lord God of their fathers sent to them by his messengers, rising up betimes, and sending; because he had compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place:	Again and again the LORD, the God of their fathers, sent word to His people through His messengers because He had compassion on them and on His dwelling place.
2CH	36	16	그 백성이 하나님의 사자를 비웃고 말씀을 멸시하며 그 선지자를 욕하여 여호와의 진노로 그 백성에게 미쳐서 만회할 수 없게 하였으므로	But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no remedy.	But they mocked the messengers of God, despising His words and scoffing at His prophets, until the wrath of the LORD against His people was stirred up beyond remedy.
2CH	36	17	하나님이 갈대아 왕의 손에 저희를 다 붙이시매 저가 와서 그 성전에서 칼로 청년을 죽이며 청년 남녀와 노인과 백발노옹을 긍휼히 여기지 아니하였으며	Therefore he brought upon them the king of the Chaldees, who slew their young men with the sword in the house of their sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young man or maiden, old man, or him that stooped for age: he gave them all into his hand.	So He brought up against them the king of the Chaldeans, who put their young men to the sword in the sanctuary, sparing neither young men nor young women, neither elderly nor infirm. God gave them all into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar,
2CH	36	18	또 하나님의 전의 대소 기명들과 여호와의 전의 보물과 왕과 방백들의 보물을 다 바벨론으로 가져가고	And all the vessels of the house of God, great and small, and the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the king, and of his princes; all these he brought to Babylon.	who carried off everything to Babylon—all the articles of the house of God, both large and small, and the treasures of the house of the LORD and of the king and his officials.
2CH	36	19	또 하나님의 전을 불사르며 예루살렘 성을 헐며 그 모든 궁실을 불사르며 그 모든 귀한 기명을 훼파하고	And they burnt the house of God, and brake down the wall of Jerusalem, and burnt all the palaces thereof with fire, and destroyed all the goodly vessels thereof.	Then the Chaldeans set fire to the house of God and broke down the wall of Jerusalem. They burned down all the palaces and destroyed every article of value.
2CH	36	20	무릇 칼에서 벗어난 자를 저가 바벨론으로 사로잡아 가매 무리가 거기서 갈대아 왕과 그 자손의 노예가 되어 바사국이 주재할 때까지 이르니라	And them that had escaped from the sword carried he away to Babylon; where they were servants to him and his sons until the reign of the kingdom of Persia:	Those who escaped the sword were carried by Nebuchadnezzar into exile in Babylon, and they became servants to him and his sons until the kingdom of Persia came to power.
2CH	36	21	이에 토지가 황무하여 안식년을 누림 같이 안식하여 칠십 년을 지내었으니 여호와께서 예레미야의 입으로 하신 말씀이 응하였더라	To fulfil the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah, until the land had enjoyed her sabbaths: for as long as she lay desolate she kept sabbath, to fulfil threescore and ten years.	So the land enjoyed its Sabbath rest all the days of the desolation, until seventy years were completed, in fulfillment of the word of the LORD through Jeremiah.
2CH	36	22	바사 왕 고레스 원년에 여호와께서 예레미야의 입으로 하신 말씀을 응하게 하시려고 바사 왕 고레스의 마음을 감동시키시매 저가 온 나라에 공포도 하고 조서도 내려 가로되	Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the Lord spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished, the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying,	In the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, to fulfill the word of the LORD spoken through Jeremiah, the LORD stirred the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia to send a proclamation throughout his kingdom and to put it in writing as follows:
2CH	36	23	바사 왕 고레스는 말하노니 하늘의 신 여호와께서 세상 만국으로 내게 주셨고 나를 명하여 유다 예루살렘에 전을 건축하라 하셨나니 너희 중에 무릇 그 백성 된 자는 다 올라갈지어다 너희 하나님 여호와께서 함께하시기를 원하노라 하였더라	Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, All the kingdoms of the earth hath the Lord God of heaven given me; and he hath charged me to build him an house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Who is there among you of all his people? The Lord his God be with him, and let him go up.	“This is what Cyrus king of Persia says: ‘The LORD, the God of heaven, who has given me all the kingdoms of the earth, has appointed me to build a house for Him at Jerusalem in Judah. Whoever among you belongs to His people, may the LORD his God be with him, and may he go up.’”
EZR	1	1	바사 왕 고레스 원년에 여호와께서 예레미야의 입으로 하신 말씀을 응하게 하시려고 바사 왕 고레스의 마음을 감동시키시매 저가 온 나라에 공포도 하고 조서도 내려 가로되	Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled, the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying,	In the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, to fulfill the word of the LORD spoken through Jeremiah, the LORD stirred the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia to send a proclamation throughout his kingdom and to put it in writing as follows:
EZR	1	2	바사 왕 고레스는 말하노니 하늘의 신 여호와께서 세상 만국으로 내게 주셨고 나를 명하사 유다 예루살렘에 전을 건축하라 하셨나니	Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, The Lord God of heaven hath given me all the kingdoms of the earth; and he hath charged me to build him an house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah.	“This is what Cyrus king of Persia says: ‘The LORD, the God of heaven, who has given me all the kingdoms of the earth, has appointed me to build a house for Him at Jerusalem in Judah.
EZR	1	3	이스라엘의 하나님은 참 신이시라 너희 중에 무릇 그 백성 된 자는 다 유다 예루살렘으로 올라가서 거기 있는 여호와의 전을 건축하라 너희 하나님이 함께 하시기를 원하노라	Who is there among you of all his people? his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and build the house of the Lord God of Israel, (he is the God,) which is in Jerusalem.	Whoever among you belongs to His people, may his God be with him, and may he go to Jerusalem in Judah and build the house of the LORD, the God of Israel; He is the God who is in Jerusalem.
EZR	1	4	무릇 그 남아 있는 백성이 어느곳에 우거하였든지 그곳 사람들이 마땅히 은과 금과 기타 물건과 짐승으로 도와주고 그 외에도 예루살렘 하나님의 전을 위하여 예물을 즐거이 드릴지니라 하였더라	And whosoever remaineth in any place where he sojourneth, let the men of his place help him with silver, and with gold, and with goods, and with beasts, beside the freewill offering for the house of God that is in Jerusalem.	And let every survivor, wherever he lives, be assisted by the men of that region with silver, gold, goods, and livestock, along with a freewill offering for the house of God in Jerusalem.’”
EZR	1	5	이에 유다와 베냐민 족장들과 제사장들과 레위 사람들과 무릇 그 마음이 하나님께 감동을 받고 올라가서 예루살렘 여호와의 전을 건축코자 하는 자가 다 일어나니	Then rose up the chief of the fathers of Judah and Benjamin, and the priests, and the Levites, with all them whose spirit God had raised, to go up to build the house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem.	So the family heads of Judah and Benjamin, along with the priests and Levites—everyone whose spirit God had stirred—prepared to go up and rebuild the house of the LORD in Jerusalem.
EZR	1	6	그 사면 사람들이 은그릇과 황금과 기타 물건과 짐승과 보물로 돕고 그 외에도 예물을 즐거이 들렸더라	And all they that were about them strengthened their hands with vessels of silver, with gold, with goods, and with beasts, and with precious things, beside all that was willingly offered.	And all their neighbors supported them with articles of silver and gold, with goods and livestock, and with valuables, in addition to all their freewill offerings.
EZR	1	7	고레스 왕이 또 여호와의 전 기명을 꺼내니 옛적에 느부갓네살이 예루살렘에서 옮겨다가 자기 신들의 당에 두었던 것이라	Also Cyrus the king brought forth the vessels of the house of the Lord, which Nebuchadnezzar had brought forth out of Jerusalem, and had put them in the house of his gods;	King Cyrus also brought out the articles belonging to the house of the LORD that Nebuchadnezzar had carried away from Jerusalem and placed in the temple of his gods.
EZR	1	8	바사 왕 고레스가 고지기 미드르닷을 명하여 그 그릇을 꺼내어 계수하여 유다 목백 세스바살에게 붙이니	Even those did Cyrus king of Persia bring forth by the hand of Mithredath the treasurer, and numbered them unto Sheshbazzar, the prince of Judah.	Cyrus king of Persia had them brought out by the hand of Mithredath the treasurer, who counted them out to Sheshbazzar the prince of Judah.
EZR	1	9	그 수효는 금반이 삼십이요 은반이 일천이요 칼이 이십구요	And this is the number of them: thirty chargers of gold, a thousand chargers of silver, nine and twenty knives,	This was the inventory: 30 gold dishes, 1,000 silver dishes, 29 silver utensils,
EZR	1	10	금대접이 삼십이요 그보다 차한 은대접이 사백열이요 기타 기명이 일천이니	Thirty basons of gold, silver basons of a second sort four hundred and ten, and other vessels a thousand.	30 gold bowls, 410 matching silver bowls, and 1,000 other articles.
EZR	1	11	금, 은 기명의 도합이 오천사백이라 사로잡힌 자를 바벨론에서 예루살렘으로 데리고 올 때에 세스바살이 그 기명들을 다 가지고 왔더라	All the vessels of gold and of silver were five thousand and four hundred. All these did Sheshbazzar bring up with them of the captivity that were brought up from Babylon unto Jerusalem.	In all, there were 5,400 gold and silver articles. Sheshbazzar brought all these along when the exiles went up from Babylon to Jerusalem.
EZR	2	1	옛적에 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살에게 사로잡혀 바벨론으로 갔던 자의 자손 중에서 놓임을 받고 예루살렘과 유다 도로 돌아와 각기 본성에 이른 자	Now these are the children of the province that went up out of the captivity, of those which had been carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away unto Babylon, and came again unto Jerusalem and Judah, every one unto his city;	Now these are the people of the province who came up from the captivity of the exiles carried away to Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar its king. They returned to Jerusalem and Judah, each to his own town,
EZR	2	2	곧 스룹바벨과 예수아와 느헤미야와 스라야와 르엘라야와 모르드개와 빌산과 미스발과 비그왜와 르훔과 바아나 등과 함께 나온 이스라엘 백성의 명수가 이러하니	Which came with Zerubbabel: Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah, Reelaiah, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispar, Bigvai, Rehum, Baanah. The number of the men of the people of Israel:	accompanied by Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah, Reelaiah, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispar, Bigvai, Rehum, and Baanah. This is the count of the men of Israel:
EZR	2	3	바로스 자손이 이천일백칠십이 명이요	The children of Parosh, two thousand an hundred seventy and two.	the descendants of Parosh, 2,172;
EZR	2	4	스바댜 자손이 삼백칠십이 명이요	The children of Shephatiah, three hundred seventy and two.	the descendants of Shephatiah, 372;
EZR	2	5	아라 자손이 칠백칠십오 명이요	The children of Arah, seven hundred seventy and five.	the descendants of Arah, 775;
EZR	2	6	바핫모압 자손 곧 예수아와 요압 자손이 이천팔백십이 명이요	The children of Pahath–moab, of the children of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand eight hundred and twelve.	the descendants of Pahath-moab (through the line of Jeshua and Joab), 2,812;
EZR	2	7	엘람 자손이 일천이백오십사 명이요	The children of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four.	the descendants of Elam, 1,254;
EZR	2	8	삿두 자손이 구백사십오 명이요	The children of Zattu, nine hundred forty and five.	the descendants of Zattu, 945;
EZR	2	9	삭개 자손이 칠백육십 명이요	The children of Zaccai, seven hundred and threescore.	the descendants of Zaccai, 760;
EZR	2	10	바니 자손이 육백사십이 명이요	The children of Bani, six hundred forty and two.	the descendants of Bani, 642;
EZR	2	11	브배 자손이 육백이십삼 명이요	The children of Bebai, six hundred twenty and three.	the descendants of Bebai, 623;
EZR	2	12	아스갓 자손이 일천이백이십이 명이요	The children of Azgad, a thousand two hundred twenty and two.	the descendants of Azgad, 1,222;
EZR	2	13	아도니감 자손이 육백육십육 명이요	The children of Adonikam, six hundred sixty and six.	the descendants of Adonikam, 666;
EZR	2	14	비그왜 자손이 이천오십육 명이요	The children of Bigvai, two thousand fifty and six.	the descendants of Bigvai, 2,056;
EZR	2	15	아딘 자손이 사백오십사 명이요	The children of Adin, four hundred fifty and four.	the descendants of Adin, 454;
EZR	2	16	아델 자손 곧 히스기야 자손이 구십팔 명이요	The children of Ater of Hezekiah, ninety and eight.	the descendants of Ater (through Hezekiah), 98;
EZR	2	17	베새 자손이 삼백이십삼 명이요	The children of Bezai, three hundred twenty and three.	the descendants of Bezai, 323;
EZR	2	18	요라 자손이 일백십이 명이요	The children of Jorah, an hundred and twelve.	the descendants of Jorah, 112;
EZR	2	19	하숨 자손이 이백이십삼 명이요	The children of Hashum, two hundred twenty and three.	the descendants of Hashum, 223;
EZR	2	20	깁발 자손이 구십오 명이요	The children of Gibbar, ninety and five.	the descendants of Gibbar, 95;
EZR	2	21	베들레헴 사람이 일백이십삼 명이요	The children of Beth–lehem, an hundred twenty and three.	the men of Bethlehem, 123;
EZR	2	22	느도바 사람이 오십육 명이요	The men of Netophah, fifty and six.	the men of Netophah, 56;
EZR	2	23	아나돗 사람이 일백 이십팔 명이요	The men of Anathoth, an hundred twenty and eight.	the men of Anathoth, 128;
EZR	2	24	아스마웹 자손이 사십이 명이요	The children of Azmaveth, forty and two.	the descendants of Azmaveth, 42;
EZR	2	25	기랴다림과 그비라와 브에롯 자손이 칠백사십삼 명이요	The children of Kirjath–arim, Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven hundred and forty and three.	the men of Kiriath-jearim, Chephirah, and Beeroth, 743;
EZR	2	26	라마와 게바 자손이 육백이십일 명이요	The children of Ramah and Gaba, six hundred twenty and one.	the men of Ramah and Geba, 621;
EZR	2	27	믹마스 사람이 일백이십이 명이요	The men of Michmas, an hundred twenty and two.	the men of Michmash, 122;
EZR	2	28	벧엘과 아이 사람이 이백이십삼 명이요	The men of Beth–el and Ai, two hundred twenty and three.	the men of Bethel and Ai, 223;
EZR	2	29	느보 자손이 오십이 명이요	The children of Nebo, fifty and two.	the descendants of Nebo, 52;
EZR	2	30	막비스 자손이 일백오십육 명이요	The children of Magbish, an hundred fifty and six.	the descendants of Magbish, 156;
EZR	2	31	다른 엘람 자손이 일천이백오십사 명이요	The children of the other Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four.	the descendants of the other Elam, 1,254;
EZR	2	32	하림 자손이 삼백이십 명이요	The children of Harim, three hundred and twenty.	the descendants of Harim, 320;
EZR	2	33	로드와 하딧과 오노 자손이 칠백이십오 명이요	The children of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, seven hundred twenty and five.	the men of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, 725;
EZR	2	34	여리고 자손이 삼백사십오 명이요	The children of Jericho, three hundred forty and five.	the men of Jericho, 345;
EZR	2	35	스나아 자손이 삼천육백삼십 명이었더라	The children of Senaah, three thousand and six hundred and thirty.	and the descendants of Senaah, 3,630.
EZR	2	36	제사장들은 예수아의 집 여다야 자손이 구백칠십삼 명이요	The priests: the children of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua, nine hundred seventy and three.	The priests: The descendants of Jedaiah (through the house of Jeshua), 973;
EZR	2	37	임멜 자손이 일천오십이 명이요	The children of Immer, a thousand fifty and two.	the descendants of Immer, 1,052;
EZR	2	38	바스훌 자손이 일천이백사십칠 명이요	The children of Pashur, a thousand two hundred forty and seven.	the descendants of Pashhur, 1,247;
EZR	2	39	하림 자손이 일천십칠 명이었더라	The children of Harim, a thousand and seventeen.	and the descendants of Harim, 1,017.
EZR	2	40	레위 사람은 호다위야 자손 곧 예수아와 갓미엘 자손이 칠십사 명이요	The Levites: the children of Jeshua and Kadmiel, of the children of Hodaviah, seventy and four.	The Levites: the descendants of Jeshua and Kadmiel (through the line of Hodaviah), 74.
EZR	2	41	노래하는 자들은 아삽 자손이 일백이십팔 명이요	The singers: the children of Asaph, an hundred twenty and eight.	The singers: the descendants of Asaph, 128.
EZR	2	42	문지기의 자손들은 살룸과 아델과 달문과 악굽과 하디다와 소배 자손이 모두 일백삼십구 명이였더라	The children of the porters: the children of Shallum, the children of Ater, the children of Talmon, the children of Akkub, the children of Hatita, the children of Shobai, in all an hundred thirty and nine.	The gatekeepers: the descendants of Shallum, the descendants of Ater, the descendants of Talmon, the descendants of Akkub, the descendants of Hatita, and the descendants of Shobai, 139 in all.
EZR	2	43	느디님 사람들은 시하 자손과 하수바 자손과 답바옷 자손과	The Nethinims: the children of Ziha, the children of Hasupha, the children of Tabbaoth,	The temple servants: the descendants of Ziha, the descendants of Hasupha, the descendants of Tabbaoth,
EZR	2	44	게로스 자손과 시아하 자손과 바돈 자손과	The children of Keros, the children of Siaha, the children of Padon,	the descendants of Keros, the descendants of Siaha, the descendants of Padon,
EZR	2	45	르바나 자손과 하가바 자손과 악굽 자손과	The children of Lebanah, the children of Hagabah, the children of Akkub,	the descendants of Lebanah, the descendants of Hagabah, the descendants of Akkub,
EZR	2	46	하갑 자손과 사믈래 자손과 하난 자손과	The children of Hagab, the children of Shalmai, the children of Hanan,	the descendants of Hagab, the descendants of Shalmai, the descendants of Hanan,
EZR	2	47	깃델 자손과 가할 자손과 르아야 자손과	The children of Giddel, the children of Gahar, the children of Reaiah,	the descendants of Giddel, the descendants of Gahar, the descendants of Reaiah,
EZR	2	48	르신 자손과 느고다 자손과 갓삼 자손과	The children of Rezin, the children of Nekoda, the children of Gazzam,	the descendants of Rezin, the descendants of Nekoda, the descendants of Gazzam,
EZR	2	49	웃사 자손과 바세아 자손과 베새 자손과	The children of Uzza, the children of Paseah, the children of Besai,	the descendants of Uzza, the descendants of Paseah, the descendants of Besai,
EZR	2	50	아스나 자손과 므우님 자손과 느부심 자손과	The children of Asnah, the children of Mehunim, the children of Nephusim,	the descendants of Asnah, the descendants of Meunim, the descendants of Nephusim,
EZR	2	51	박북 자손과 하그바 자손과 할훌 자손과	The children of Bakbuk, the children of Hakupha, the children of Harhur,	the descendants of Bakbuk, the descendants of Hakupha, the descendants of Harhur,
EZR	2	52	바슬룻 자손과 므히다 자손과 하르사 자손과	The children of Bazluth, the children of Mehida, the children of Harsha,	the descendants of Bazluth, the descendants of Mehida, the descendants of Harsha,
EZR	2	53	바르고스 자손과 시스라 자손과 데마 자손과	The children of Barkos, the children of Sisera, the children of Thamah,	the descendants of Barkos, the descendants of Sisera, the descendants of Temah,
EZR	2	54	느시야 자손과 하디바 자손이었더라	The children of Neziah, the children of Hatipha.	the descendants of Neziah, and the descendants of Hatipha.
EZR	2	55	솔로몬의 신복의 자손은 소대 자손과 하소베렛 자손과 브루다 자손과	The children of Solomon’s servants: the children of Sotai, the children of Sophereth, the children of Peruda,	The descendants of the servants of Solomon: the descendants of Sotai, the descendants of Sophereth, the descendants of Peruda,
EZR	2	56	야알라 자손과 다르곤 자손과 깃델 자손과	The children of Jaalah, the children of Darkon, the children of Giddel,	the descendants of Jaala, the descendants of Darkon, the descendants of Giddel,
EZR	2	57	스바댜 자손과 하딜 자손과 보게렛하스바임 자손과 아미 자손이니	The children of Shephatiah, the children of Hattil, the children of Pochereth of Zebaim, the children of Ami.	the descendants of Shephatiah, the descendants of Hattil, the descendants of Pochereth-hazzebaim, and the descendants of Ami.
EZR	2	58	모든 느디님 사람과 솔로몬의 신복의 자손이 삼백구십이 명이었더라	All the Nethinims, and the children of Solomon’s servants, were three hundred ninety and two.	The temple servants and descendants of the servants of Solomon numbered 392 in all.
EZR	2	59	델멜라와 델하르사와 그룹과 앗단과 임멜에서 올라온 자가 있으나 그 종족과 보계가 이스라엘에 속하였는지는 증거할 수 없으니	And these were they which went up from Tel–melah, Tel–harsa, Cherub, Addan, and Immer: but they could not shew their father’s house, and their seed, whether they were of Israel:	The following came up from Tel-melah, Tel-harsha, Cherub, Addan, and Immer, but could not prove that their families were descended from Israel:
EZR	2	60	저희는 들라야 자손과 도비야 자손과 느고다 자손이라 도합이 육백오십이 명이요	The children of Delaiah, the children of Tobiah, the children of Nekoda, six hundred fifty and two.	the descendants of Delaiah, the descendants of Tobiah, and the descendants of Nekoda, 652 in all.
EZR	2	61	제사장 중에는 하바야 자손과 학고스 자손과 바르실래 자손이니 바르실래는 길르앗 사람 바르실래의 딸 중에 하나로 아내를 삼고 바르실래의 이름으로 이름한 자라	And of the children of the priests: the children of Habaiah, the children of Koz, the children of Barzillai; which took a wife of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and was called after their name:	And from among the priests: the descendants of Hobaiah, the descendants of Hakkoz, and the descendants of Barzillai (who had married a daughter of Barzillai the Gileadite and was called by their name).
EZR	2	62	이 사람들이 보계 중에서 자기 이름을 찾아도 얻지 못한고로 저희를 부정하게 여겨 제사장의 직분을 행치 못하게 하고	These sought their register among those that were reckoned by genealogy, but they were not found: therefore were they, as polluted, put from the priesthood.	These men searched for their family records, but they could not find them and so were excluded from the priesthood as unclean.
EZR	2	63	방백이 저희에게 명하여 우림과 둠밈을 가진 제사장이 일어나기 전에는 지성물을 먹지 말라 하였느니라	And the Tirshatha said unto them, that they should not eat of the most holy things, till there stood up a priest with Urim and with Thummim.	The governor ordered them not to eat the most holy things until there was a priest to consult the Urim and Thummim.
EZR	2	64	온 회중의 합계가 사만 이천삼백육십 명이요	The whole congregation together was forty and two thousand three hundred and threescore,	The whole assembly numbered 42,360,
EZR	2	65	그 외에 노비가 칠천삼백삼십칠 명이요 노래하는 남녀가 이백 명이요	Beside their servants and their maids, of whom there were seven thousand three hundred thirty and seven: and there were among them two hundred singing men and singing women.	in addition to their 7,337 menservants and maidservants, as well as their 200 male and female singers.
EZR	2	66	말이 칠백삼십육이요 노새가 이백사십오요	Their horses were seven hundred thirty and six; their mules, two hundred forty and five;	They had 736 horses, 245 mules,
EZR	2	67	약대가 사백삼십오요 나귀가 육천칠백이십이었더라	Their camels, four hundred thirty and five; their asses, six thousand seven hundred and twenty.	435 camels, and 6,720 donkeys.
EZR	2	68	어떤 족장들이 예루살렘 여호와의 전 터에 이르러 하나님의 전을 그곳에 다시 건축하려고 예물을 즐거이 드리되	And some of the chief of the fathers, when they came to the house of the Lord which is at Jerusalem, offered freely for the house of God to set it up in his place:	When they arrived at the house of the LORD in Jerusalem, some of the heads of the families gave freewill offerings to rebuild the house of God on its original site.
EZR	2	69	역량대로 역사하는 곳간에 드리니 금이 육만 일천 다릭이요 은이 오천 마네요 제사장의 옷이 일백 벌이었더라	They gave after their ability unto the treasure of the work threescore and one thousand drams of gold, and five thousand pound of silver, and one hundred priests’ garments.	According to their ability, they gave to the treasury for this work 61,000 darics of gold, 5,000 minas of silver, and 100 priestly garments.
EZR	2	70	이에 제사장들과 레위 사람들과 백성 몇과 노래하는 자들과 문지기들과 느디님 사람들이 그 본성들에 거하고 이스라엘 무리도 그 본성들에 거하였느니라	So the priests, and the Levites, and some of the people, and the singers, and the porters, and the Nethinims, dwelt in their cities, and all Israel in their cities.	So the priests, the Levites, the singers, the gatekeepers, and the temple servants, along with some of the people, settled in their own towns; and the rest of the Israelites settled in their towns.
EZR	3	1	이스라엘 자손이 그 본성에 거하였더니 칠월에 이르러 일제히 예루살렘에 모인지라	And when the seventh month was come, and the children of Israel were in the cities, the people gathered themselves together as one man to Jerusalem.	By the seventh month, the Israelites had settled in their towns, and the people assembled as one man in Jerusalem.
EZR	3	2	요사닥의 아들 예수아와 그 형제 제사장들과 스알디엘의 아들 스룹바벨과 그 형제들이 다 일어나 이스라엘 하나님의 단을 만들고 하나님의 사람 모세의 율법에 기록한 대로 번제를 그 위에 드리려 할새	Then stood up Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and his brethren the priests, and Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and his brethren, and builded the altar of the God of Israel, to offer burnt offerings thereon, as it is written in the law of Moses the man of God.	Then Jeshua son of Jozadak and his fellow priests, along with Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel and his associates, began to build the altar of the God of Israel to sacrifice burnt offerings on it, as it is written in the Law of Moses the man of God.
EZR	3	3	무리가 열국 백성을 두려워하여 단을 그 터에 세우고 그 위에 조석으로 여호와께 번제를 드리며	And they set the altar upon his bases; for fear was upon them because of the people of those countries: and they offered burnt offerings thereon unto the Lord, even burnt offerings morning and evening.	They set up the altar on its foundation and sacrificed burnt offerings on it to the LORD—both the morning and evening burnt offerings—even though they feared the people of the land.
EZR	3	4	기록된 규례대로 초막절을 지켜 번제를 매일 정수대로 날마다 드리고	They kept also the feast of tabernacles, as it is written, and offered the daily burnt offerings by number, according to the custom, as the duty of every day required;	They also celebrated the Feast of Tabernacles in accordance with what is written, and they offered burnt offerings daily based on the number prescribed for each day.
EZR	3	5	그 후에는 항상 드리는 번제와 초하루와 여호와의 모든 거룩한 절기의 번제와 사람이 여호와께 즐거이 드리는 예물을 드리되	And afterward offered the continual burnt offering, both of the new moons, and of all the set feasts of the Lord that were consecrated, and of every one that willingly offered a freewill offering unto the Lord.	After that, they presented the regular burnt offerings and those for New Moons and for all the appointed sacred feasts of the LORD, as well as all the freewill offerings brought to the LORD.
EZR	3	6	칠월 초하루부터 비로소 여호와께 번제를 드렸으나 그 때에 여호와의 전 지대는 오히려 놓지 못한지라	From the first day of the seventh month began they to offer burnt offerings unto the Lord. But the foundation of the temple of the Lord was not yet laid.	On the first day of the seventh month, the Israelites began to offer burnt offerings to the LORD, although the foundation of the temple of the LORD had not been laid.
EZR	3	7	이에 석수와 목수에게 돈을 주고 또 시돈 사람과 두로 사람에게 먹을 것과 마실 것과 기름을 주고 바사 왕 고레스의 조서대로 백향목을 레바논에서 욥바 해변까지 수운하게 하였더라	They gave money also unto the masons, and to the carpenters; and meat, and drink, and oil, unto them of Zidon, and to them of Tyre, to bring cedar trees from Lebanon to the sea of Joppa, according to the grant that they had of Cyrus king of Persia.	They gave money to the masons and carpenters, and food and drink and oil to the people of Sidon and Tyre to bring cedar logs from Lebanon to Joppa by sea, as authorized by Cyrus king of Persia.
EZR	3	8	예루살렘 하나님의 전에 이른지 이년 이월에 스알디엘의 아들 스룹바벨과 요사닥의 아들 예수아와 다른 형제 제사장들과 레위 시람들과 무릇 사로잡혔다가 예루살렘에 돌아온 자들이 역사를 시작하고 이십 세 이상의 레위 사람들을 세워 여호와의 전 역사를 감독하게 하매	Now in the second year of their coming unto the house of God at Jerusalem, in the second month, began Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and the remnant of their brethren the priests and the Levites, and all they that were come out of the captivity unto Jerusalem; and appointed the Levites, from twenty years old and upward, to set forward the work of the house of the Lord.	In the second month of the second year after they had arrived at the house of God in Jerusalem, Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, Jeshua son of Jozadak, and the rest of their associates including the priests, the Levites, and all who had returned to Jerusalem from the captivity, began the work. They appointed Levites twenty years of age or older to supervise the construction of the house of the LORD.
EZR	3	9	이에 예수아와 그 아들들과 그 형제들과 갓미엘과 그 아들들과 유다 자손과 헤나닷 자손과 그 형제 레위 사람들이 일제히 일어나 하나님의 전 공장을 감독하니라	Then stood Jeshua with his sons and his brethren, Kadmiel and his sons, the sons of Judah, together, to set forward the workmen in the house of God: the sons of Henadad, with their sons and their brethren the Levites.	So Jeshua and his sons and brothers, Kadmiel and his sons (descendants of Yehudah), and the sons of Henadad and their sons and brothers—all Levites—joined together to supervise those working on the house of God.
EZR	3	10	건축자가 여호와의 전 지대를 놓을 때에 제사장들은 예복을 입고 나팔을 들고 아삽 자손 레위 사람들은 제금을 들고 서서 이스라엘 왕 다윗의 규례대로 여호와를 찬송하되	And when the builders laid the foundation of the temple of the Lord, they set the priests in their apparel with trumpets, and the Levites the sons of Asaph with cymbals, to praise the Lord, after the ordinance of David king of Israel.	When the builders had laid the foundation of the temple of the LORD, the priests in their apparel with trumpets, and the Levites (the sons of Asaph) with cymbals, took their positions to praise the LORD, as David king of Israel had prescribed.
EZR	3	11	서로 찬송가를 화답하며 여호와께 감사하여 가로되 주는 지선하시므로 그 인자하심이 이스라엘에게 영원하시도다 하니 모든 백성이 여호와의 전 지대가 놓임을 보고 여호와를 찬송하며 큰 소리로 즐거이 부르며	And they sang together by course in praising and giving thanks unto the Lord; because he is good, for his mercy endureth for ever toward Israel. And all the people shouted with a great shout, when they praised the Lord, because the foundation of the house of the Lord was laid.	And they sang responsively with praise and thanksgiving to the LORD: “For He is good; for His loving devotion to Israel endures forever.” Then all the people gave a great shout of praise to the LORD, because the foundation of the house of the LORD had been laid.
EZR	3	12	제사장들과 레위 사람들과 족장들 중에 여러 노인은 첫 성전을 보았던고로 이제 이 전 지대 놓임을 보고 대성통곡하며 여러 사람은 기뻐하여 즐거이 부르니	But many of the priests and Levites and chief of the fathers, who were ancient men, that had seen the first house, when the foundation of this house was laid before their eyes, wept with a loud voice; and many shouted aloud for joy:	But many of the older priests, Levites, and family heads who had seen the first temple wept loudly when they saw the foundation of this temple. Still, many others shouted joyfully.
EZR	3	13	백성의 크게 외치는 소리가 멀리 들리므로 즐거이 부르는 소리와 통곡하는 소리를 백성들이 분변치 못하였느니라	So that the people could not discern the noise of the shout of joy from the noise of the weeping of the people: for the people shouted with a loud shout, and the noise was heard afar off.	The people could not distinguish the shouts of joy from the sound of weeping, because the people were making so much noise. And the sound was heard from afar.
EZR	4	1	유다와 베냐민의 대적이 사로잡혔던 자의 자손이 이스라엘 하나님 여호와를 위하여 전을 건축한다 함을 듣고	Now when the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin heard that the children of the captivity builded the temple unto the Lord God of Israel;	When the enemies of Judah and Benjamin heard that the exiles were building a temple for the LORD, the God of Israel,
EZR	4	2	스룹바벨과 족장들에게 나아와 이르되 우리로 너희와 함께 건축하게 하라 우리도 너희 같이 너희 하나님을 구하노라 앗수르 왕 에살핫돈이 우리를 이리로 오게한 날부터 우리가 하나님께 제사를 드리노라	Then they came to Zerubbabel, and to the chief of the fathers, and said unto them, Let us build with you: for we seek your God, as ye do; and we do sacrifice unto him since the days of Esar–haddon king of Assur, which brought us up hither.	they approached Zerubbabel and the heads of the families, saying, “Let us build with you because, like you, we seek your God and have been sacrificing to Him since the time of King Esar-haddon of Assyria, who brought us here.”
EZR	4	3	스룹바벨과 예수아와 기타 이스라엘 족장들이 이르되 우리 하나님의 전을 건축하는데 너희는 우리와 상관이 없느니라 바사 왕 고레스가 우리에게 명하신 대로 우리가 이스라엘 하나님 여호와를 위하여 홀로 건축하리라 하였더니	But Zerubbabel, and Jeshua, and the rest of the chief of the fathers of Israel, said unto them, Ye have nothing to do with us to build an house unto our God; but we ourselves together will build unto the Lord God of Israel, as king Cyrus the king of Persia hath commanded us.	But Zerubbabel, Jeshua, and the other heads of the families of Israel replied, “You have no part with us in building a house for our God, since we alone must build it for the LORD, the God of Israel, as Cyrus king of Persia has commanded us.”
EZR	4	4	이로부터 그 땅 백성이 유다 백성의 손을 약하게 하여 그 건축을 방해하되	Then the people of the land weakened the hands of the people of Judah, and troubled them in building,	Then the people of the land set out to discourage the people of Judah and make them afraid to build.
EZR	4	5	바사 왕 고레스의 시대부터 바사 왕 다리오가 즉위할 때까지 의사들에게 뇌물을 주어 그 경영을 저희하였으며	And hired counsellors against them, to frustrate their purpose, all the days of Cyrus king of Persia, even until the reign of Darius king of Persia.	They hired counselors against them to frustrate their plans throughout the reign of Cyrus king of Persia and down to the reign of Darius king of Persia.
EZR	4	6	또 아하수에로가 즉위할 때에 저희가 글을 올려 유다와 예루살렘 거민을 고소하니라	And in the reign of Ahasuerus, in the beginning of his reign, wrote they unto him an accusation against the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem.	At the beginning of the reign of Xerxes, an accusation was lodged against the people of Judah and Jerusalem.
EZR	4	7	아닥사스다 때에 비슬람과 미드르닷과 다브엘과 그 동료들이 바사 왕 아닥사스다에게 글을 올렸으니 그 글은 아람 문자와 아람 방언으로 써서 진술하였더라	And in the days of Artaxerxes wrote Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel, and the rest of their companions, unto Artaxerxes king of Persia; and the writing of the letter was written in the Syrian tongue, and interpreted in the Syrian tongue.	And in the days of Artaxerxes king of Persia, Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel, and the rest of his associates wrote a letter to Artaxerxes. It was written in Aramaic and then translated.
EZR	4	8	방백 르훔과 서기관 심새가 아닥사스다 왕에게 올려 예루살렘 백성을 고소한 그 글에	Rehum the chancellor and Shimshai the scribe wrote a letter against Jerusalem to Artaxerxes the king in this sort:	Rehum the commander and Shimshai the scribe wrote the letter against Jerusalem to King Artaxerxes as follows:
EZR	4	9	방백 르훔과 서기관 심새와 그 동료 디나 사람과 아바삿 사람과 다블래 사람과 아바새 사람과 아렉 사람과 바벨론 사람과 수산 사람과 데해 사람과 엘람 사람과	Then wrote Rehum the chancellor, and Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their companions; the Dinaites, the Apharsathchites, the Tarpelites, the Apharsites, the Archevites, the Babylonians, the Susanchites, the Dehavites, and the Elamites,	From Rehum the commander, Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their associates—the judges and officials over Tripolis, Persia, Erech and Babylon, the Elamites of Susa,
EZR	4	10	기타 백성 곧 존귀한 오스납발이 사마리아 성과 강 서편 다른 땅에 옮겨 둔 자들과 함께 고한다 하였더라	And the rest of the nations whom the great and noble Asnappar brought over, and set in the cities of Samaria, and the rest that are on this side the river, and at such a time.	and the rest of the peoples whom the great and honorable Ashurbanipal deported and settled in the cities of Samaria and elsewhere west of the Euphrates.
EZR	4	11	아닥사스다 왕에게 올린 그 글의 초본은 이러하니 강 서편에 있는 신복들은	This is the copy of the letter that they sent unto him, even unto Artaxerxes the king; Thy servants the men on this side the river, and at such a time.	(This is the text of the letter they sent to him.) To King Artaxerxes, From your servants, the men west of the Euphrates:
EZR	4	12	왕에게 고하나이다 왕에게서 올라온 유다 사람들이 우리의 곳 예루살렘에 이르러 이 패역하고 악한 성읍을 건축하는데 이미 그 지대를 수축하고 성곽을 건축하오니	Be it known unto the king, that the Jews which came up from thee to us are come unto Jerusalem, building the rebellious and the bad city, and have set up the walls thereof, and joined the foundations.	Let it be known to the king that the Jews who came from you to us have returned to Jerusalem. And they are rebuilding that rebellious and wicked city, restoring its walls, and repairing its foundations.
EZR	4	13	이제 왕은 아시옵소서 만일 이 성읍을 건축하며 그 성곽을 마치면 저 무리가 다시는 조공과 잡세와 부세를 바치지 아니하리니 필경 왕들에게 손해가 되리이다	Be it known now unto the king, that, if this city be builded, and the walls set up again, then will they not pay toll, tribute, and custom, and so thou shalt endamage the revenue of the kings.	Let it now be known to the king that if that city is rebuilt and its walls are restored, they will not pay tribute, duty, or toll, and the royal treasury will suffer.
EZR	4	14	우리가 이제 궁의 소금을 먹는고로 왕의 수치당함을 참아 보지 못하여 보내어 왕에게 고하오니	Now because we have maintenance from the king’s palace, and it was not meet for us to see the king’s dishonour, therefore have we sent and certified the king;	Now because we are in the service of the palace and it is not fitting for us to allow the king to be dishonored, we have sent to inform the king
EZR	4	15	왕은 열조의 사기를 살피시면 그 사기에서 이 성읍은 패역한 성읍이라 예로부터 그 중에서 항상 반역하는 일을 행하여 열왕과 각 도에 손해가 된 것을 보시고 아실지라 이 성읍이 훼파됨도 이 까닭이니이다	That search may be made in the book of the records of thy fathers: so shalt thou find in the book of the records, and know that this city is a rebellious city, and hurtful unto kings and provinces, and that they have moved sedition within the same of old time: for which cause was this city destroyed.	that a search should be made of the record books of your fathers. In these books you will discover and verify that the city is a rebellious city, harmful to kings and provinces, inciting sedition from ancient times. That is why this city was destroyed.
EZR	4	16	이제 감히 왕에게 고하오니 이 성읍이 중건되어 성곽을 필역하면 이로 말미암아 왕의 강 서편 영지가 없어지리이다 하였더라	We certify the king that, if this city be builded again, and the walls thereof set up, by this means thou shalt have no portion on this side the river.	We advise the king that if this city is rebuilt and its walls are restored, you will have no dominion west of the Euphrates.
EZR	4	17	왕이 방백 르훔과 서기관 심새와 사마리아에 거한 저희 동료와 강 서편 다른 땅 백성에게 조서를 내리니 일렀으되 너희는 평안할지어다	Then sent the king an answer unto Rehum the chancellor, and to Shimshai the scribe, and to the rest of their companions that dwell in Samaria, and unto the rest beyond the river, Peace, and at such a time.	Then the king sent this reply: To Rehum the commander, Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of your associates living in Samaria and elsewhere in the region west of the Euphrates: Greetings.
EZR	4	18	너희의 올린 글을 내 앞에서 낭독시키고	The letter which ye sent unto us hath been plainly read before me.	The letter you sent us has been translated and read in my presence.
EZR	4	19	명하여 살펴보니 과연 이 성읍이 예로부터 열왕을 거역하며 그 중에서 항상 패역하고 모반하는 일을 행하였으며	And I commanded, and search hath been made, and it is found that this city of old time hath made insurrection against kings, and that rebellion and sedition have been made therein.	I issued a decree, and a search was conducted. It was discovered that this city has revolted against kings from ancient times, engaging in rebellion and sedition.
EZR	4	20	옛적에는 예루살렘을 주재하는 큰 군왕이 있어서 강 서편 모든 땅도 주재하매 조공과 잡세와 부세를 저에게 다 바쳤도다	There have been mighty kings also over Jerusalem, which have ruled over all countries beyond the river; and toll, tribute, and custom, was paid unto them.	And mighty kings have ruled over Jerusalem and exercised authority over the whole region west of the Euphrates; and tribute, duty, and toll were paid to them.
EZR	4	21	이제 너희는 명을 전하여 그 사람들로 역사를 그치게 하여 그 성을 건축지 못하게 하고 내가 다시 조서 내리기를 기다리라	Give ye now commandment to cause these men to cease, and that this city be not builded, until another commandment shall be given from me.	Now, therefore, issue an order for these men to stop, so that this city will not be rebuilt until I so order.
EZR	4	22	너희는 삼가서 이 일에 게으르지 말라 어찌하여 화를 더하여 왕들에게 손해가 되게 하랴 하였더라	Take heed now that ye fail not to do this: why should damage grow to the hurt of the kings?	See that you do not neglect this matter. Why allow this threat to increase and the royal interests to suffer?
EZR	4	23	아닥사스다 왕의 조서 초본이 르훔과 서기관 심새와 그 동료 앞에서 낭독되매 저희가 예루살렘으로 급히 가서 유다 사람들을 보고 권력으로 억제하여 그 역사를 그치게 하니	Now when the copy of king Artaxerxes’ letter was read before Rehum, and Shimshai the scribe, and their companions, they went up in haste to Jerusalem unto the Jews, and made them to cease by force and power.	When the text of the letter from King Artaxerxes was read to Rehum, Shimshai the scribe, and their associates, they went immediately to the Jews in Jerusalem and forcibly stopped them.
EZR	4	24	이에 예루살렘에서 하나님의 전 역사가 그쳐서 바사 왕 다리오 제이년까지 이르니라	Then ceased the work of the house of God which is at Jerusalem. So it ceased unto the second year of the reign of Darius king of Persia.	Thus the construction of the house of God in Jerusalem ceased, and it remained at a standstill until the second year of the reign of Darius king of Persia.
EZR	5	1	선지자들 곧 선지자 학개와 잇도의 손자 스가랴가 이스라엘 하나님의 이름을 받들어 유다와 예루살렘에 거하는 유다 사람들에게 예언하였더니	Then the prophets, Haggai the prophet, and Zechariah the son of Iddo, prophesied unto the Jews that were in Judah and Jerusalem in the name of the God of Israel, even unto them.	Later, the prophets Haggai and Zechariah son of Iddo prophesied to the Jews in Judah and Jerusalem in the name of the God of Israel, who was over them.
EZR	5	2	이에 스알디엘의 아들 스룹바벨과 요사닥의 아들 예수아가 일어나 예루살렘 하나님의 전 건축하기를 시작하매 하나님의 선지자들이 함께 하여 돕더니	Then rose up Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and began to build the house of God which is at Jerusalem: and with them were the prophets of God helping them.	Then Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel and Jeshua son of Jozadak rose up and began to rebuild the house of God in Jerusalem. And the prophets of God were with them, helping them.
EZR	5	3	그 때에 강 서편 총독 닷드내와 스달보스내와 그 동료가 다 나아와 저희에게 이르되 누가 너희를 명하여 이 전을 건축하고 이 성곽을 마치게 하였느냐 하기로	At the same time came to them Tatnai, governor on this side the river, and Shethar–boznai, and their companions, and said thus unto them, Who hath commanded you to build this house, and to make up this wall?	At that time Tattenai the governor of the region west of the Euphrates, Shethar-bozenai, and their associates went to the Jews and asked, “Who authorized you to rebuild this temple and restore this structure?”
EZR	5	4	우리가 이 건축하는 자의 이름을 고하였으나	Then said we unto them after this manner, What are the names of the men that make this building?	They also asked, “What are the names of the men who are constructing this building?”
EZR	5	5	하나님이 유다 장로들을 돌아보셨으므로 저희가 능히 역사를 폐하게 못하고 이 일을 다리오에게 고하고 그 답조가 오기를 기다렸더라	But the eye of their God was upon the elders of the Jews, that they could not cause them to cease, till the matter came to Darius: and then they returned answer by letter concerning this matter.	But the eye of their God was on the elders of the Jews, so that they were not stopped until a report was sent to Darius and written instructions about this matter were returned.
EZR	5	6	강 서편 총독 닷드내와 스달보스내와 그 동료 강 서편 아바삭 사람이 다리오 왕에게 올린 글의 초본이 이러하니라	The copy of the letter that Tatnai, governor on this side the river, and Shethar–boznai, and his companions the Apharsachites, which were on this side the river, sent unto Darius the king:	This is the text of the letter that Tattenai the governor of the region west of the Euphrates, Shethar-bozenai, and their associates, the officials in the region, sent to King Darius.
EZR	5	7	그 글에 일렀으되 다리오 왕은 만안하옵소서	They sent a letter unto him, wherein was written thus; Unto Darius the king, all peace.	The report they sent him read as follows: To King Darius: All peace.
EZR	5	8	왕께 아시게 하나이다 우리가 유다 도에 가서 지극히 크신 하나님의 전에 나아가 보온즉 전을 큰 돌로 세우며 벽에 나무를 얹고 부지런히 하므로 역사가 그 손에서 형통하옵기로	Be it known unto the king, that we went into the province of Judea, to the house of the great God, which is builded with great stones, and timber is laid in the walls, and this work goeth fast on, and prospereth in their hands.	Let it be known to the king that we went into the province of Judah, to the house of the great God. The people are rebuilding it with large stones, and placing timbers in the walls. This work is being carried out diligently and is prospering in their hands.
EZR	5	9	우리가 그 장로들에게 물어보기를 누가 너희를 명하여 이 전을 건축하고 이 성곽을 마치게 하였느냐 하고	Then asked we those elders, and said unto them thus, Who commanded you to build this house, and to make up these walls?	So we questioned the elders and asked, “Who authorized you to rebuild this temple and restore this structure?”
EZR	5	10	우리가 또 그 두목의 이름을 적어 왕에게 고하고자 하여 그 이름을 물은즉	We asked their names also, to certify thee, that we might write the names of the men that were the chief of them.	We also asked for their names, so that we could write down the names of their leaders for your information.
EZR	5	11	저희가 우리에게 대답하여 이르기를 우리는 천지의 하나님의 종이라 오랜 옛적에 건축되었던 전을 우리가 다시 건축하노라 이는 본래 이스라엘의 큰 왕이 완전히 건축한 것이더니	And thus they returned us answer, saying, We are the servants of the God of heaven and earth, and build the house that was builded these many years ago, which a great king of Israel builded and set up.	And this is the answer they returned: “We are servants of the God of heaven and earth, and we are rebuilding the temple that was built many years ago, which a great king of Israel built and completed.
EZR	5	12	우리 열조가 하늘에 계신 하나님을 격노케 하였으므로 하나님이 저희를 갈대아 사람 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살의 손에 붙이시매 저가 이 전을 헐며 이 백성을 사로잡아 바벨론으로 옮겼더니	But after that our fathers had provoked the God of heaven unto wrath, he gave them into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, the Chaldean, who destroyed this house, and carried the people away into Babylon.	But since our fathers angered the God of heaven, He delivered them into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, the Chaldean who destroyed this temple and carried away the people to Babylon.
EZR	5	13	바벨론 왕 고레스 원년에 고레스 왕이 조서를 내려 하나님의 이 전을 건축하게 하고	But in the first year of Cyrus the king of Babylon the same king Cyrus made a decree to build this house of God.	In his first year, however, Cyrus king of Babylon issued a decree to rebuild this house of God.
EZR	5	14	또 느부갓네살의 예루살렘 하나님의 전 속에서 금, 은 기명을 옮겨다가 바벨론 신당에 두었던 것을 고레스 왕이 그 신당에서 취하여 그 세운 총독 세스바살이라 이름한 자에게 내어주고	And the vessels also of gold and silver of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took out of the temple that was in Jerusalem, and brought them into the temple of Babylon, those did Cyrus the king take out of the temple of Babylon, and they were delivered unto one, whose name was Sheshbazzar, whom he had made governor;	He also removed from the temple of Babylon the gold and silver articles belonging to the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar had taken and carried there from the temple in Jerusalem. King Cyrus gave these articles to a man named Sheshbazzar, whom he appointed governor
EZR	5	15	일러 가로되 너는 이 기명들을 가지고 가서 예루살렘 전에 두고 하나님의 전을 그 본처에 건축하라 하매	And said unto him, Take these vessels, go, carry them into the temple that is in Jerusalem, and let the house of God be builded in his place.	and instructed, ‘Take these articles, put them in the temple in Jerusalem, and let the house of God be rebuilt on its original site.’
EZR	5	16	이에 이 세스바살이 이르러 예루살렘 하나님의 전 지대를 놓았고 그 때로부터 지금까지 건축하여 오나 오히려 필역하지 못하였다 하였사오니	Then came the same Sheshbazzar, and laid the foundation of the house of God which is in Jerusalem: and since that time even until now hath it been in building, and yet it is not finished.	So this Sheshbazzar came and laid the foundation of the house of God in Jerusalem, and from that time until now it has been under construction, but it has not yet been completed.”
EZR	5	17	이제 왕이 선히 여기시거든 바벨론에서 왕의 국고에 조사하사 과연 고레스 왕이 조서를 내려 하나님의 이 전을 예루살렘에 건축하라 하셨는지 보시고 왕은 이 일에 대하여 왕의 기쁘신 뜻을 우리에게 보이소서 하였더라	Now therefore, if it seem good to the king, let there be search made in the king’s treasure house, which is there at Babylon, whether it be so, that a decree was made of Cyrus the king to build this house of God at Jerusalem, and let the king send his pleasure to us concerning this matter.	Now, therefore, if it pleases the king, let a search be made of the royal archives in Babylon to see if King Cyrus did indeed issue a decree to rebuild the house of God in Jerusalem. Then let the king send us his decision in this matter.
EZR	6	1	이에 다리오 왕이 조서를 내려 서적 곳간 곧 바벨론에서 보물을 쌓아 둔 곳에서 조사하게 하였더니	Then Darius the king made a decree, and search was made in the house of the rolls, where the treasures were laid up in Babylon.	Thus King Darius ordered a search of the archives stored in the treasury of Babylon.
EZR	6	2	메대도 악메다 궁에서 한 두루마리를 얻으니 거기 기록하였으되	And there was found at Achmetha, in the palace that is in the province of the Medes, a roll, and therein was a record thus written:	And a scroll was found in the fortress of Ecbatana, in the province of Media, with the following written on it: Memorandum:
EZR	6	3	고레스 왕 원년에 조서를 내려 이르기를 예루살렘 하나님의 전에 대하여 이르노니 이 전 곧 제사드리는 처소를 건축하되 지대를 견고히 쌓고 그 전의 고는 육십 규빗으로, 광도 육십 규빗으로 하고	In the first year of Cyrus the king the same Cyrus the king made a decree concerning the house of God at Jerusalem, Let the house be builded, the place where they offered sacrifices, and let the foundations thereof be strongly laid; the height thereof threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof threescore cubits;	In the first year of King Cyrus, he issued a decree concerning the house of God in Jerusalem: Let the house be rebuilt as a place for offering sacrifices, and let its foundations be firmly laid. It is to be sixty cubits high and sixty cubits wide,
EZR	6	4	큰 돌 세 켜에 새 나무 한 켜를 놓으라 그 경비는 다 왕실에서 내리라	With three rows of great stones, and a row of new timber: and let the expenses be given out of the king’s house:	with three layers of cut stones and one of timbers. The costs are to be paid from the royal treasury.
EZR	6	5	또 느부갓네살이 예루살렘 전에서 취하여 바벨론으로 옮겼던 하나님의 전 금, 은 기명을 돌려 보내어 예루살렘 전에 가져다가 하나님의 전 안 각기 본처에 둘지니라 하였더라	And also let the golden and silver vessels of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took forth out of the temple which is at Jerusalem, and brought unto Babylon, be restored, and brought again unto the temple which is at Jerusalem, every one to his place, and place them in the house of God.	Furthermore, the gold and silver articles of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took from the temple in Jerusalem and carried to Babylon, must also be returned to the temple in Jerusalem and deposited in the house of God.
EZR	6	6	이제 강 서편 총독 닷드내와 스달보스내와 너희 동료 강 서편 아바삭 사람들은 그곳을 멀리하여	Now therefore, Tatnai, governor beyond the river, Shethar–boznai, and your companions the Apharsachites, which are beyond the river, be ye far from thence:	Therefore Darius decreed: To Tattenai governor of the region west of the Euphrates, Shethar-bozenai, and your associates and officials in the region: You must stay away from that place!
EZR	6	7	하나님의 전 역사를 막지 말고 유다 총독과 장로들로 하나님의 이 전을 본처에 건축하게 하라	Let the work of this house of God alone; let the governor of the Jews and the elders of the Jews build this house of God in his place.	Leave this work on the house of God alone. Let the governor and elders of the Jews rebuild this house of God on its original site.
EZR	6	8	내가 또 조서를 내려서 하나님의 이 전을 건축함에 대하여 너희가 유다 사람의 장로들에게 행할 것을 알게 하노니 왕의 재산 곧 강 서편 세금 중에서 그 경비를 이 사람들에게 신속히 주어 저희로 지체치 않게 하라	Moreover I make a decree what ye shall do to the elders of these Jews for the building of this house of God: that of the king’s goods, even of the tribute beyond the river, forthwith expenses be given unto these men, that they be not hindered.	I hereby decree what you must do for these elders of the Jews who are rebuilding this house of God: The cost is to be paid in full to these men from the royal treasury out of the taxes of the provinces west of the Euphrates, so that the work will not be hindered.
EZR	6	9	또 그 수용물 곧 하늘의 하나님께 드릴 번제의 수송아지와 수양과 어린 양과 또 밀과 소금과 포도주와 기름을 예루살렘 제사장의 소청대로 영락없이 날마다 주어	And that which they have need of, both young bullocks, and rams, and lambs, for the burnt offerings of the God of heaven, wheat, salt, wine, and oil, according to the appointment of the priests which are at Jerusalem, let it be given them day by day without fail:	Whatever is needed—young bulls, rams, and lambs for burnt offerings to the God of heaven, as well as wheat, salt, wine, and oil, as requested by the priests in Jerusalem—must be given to them daily without fail.
EZR	6	10	저희로 하늘의 하나님께 향기로운 제물을 드려 왕과 왕자들의 생명을 위하여 기도하게 하라	That they may offer sacrifices of sweet savours unto the God of heaven, and pray for the life of the king, and of his sons.	Then they will be able to offer sacrifices of a sweet aroma to the God of heaven and to pray for the lives of the king and his sons.
EZR	6	11	내가 또 조서를 내리노니 무론 누구든지 이 명령을 변개하면 그 집에서 들보를 빼어내고 저를 그 위에 매어달게 하고 그 집은 이로 인하여 거름더미가 되게 하라	Also I have made a decree, that whosoever shall alter this word, let timber be pulled down from his house, and being set up, let him be hanged thereon; and let his house be made a dunghill for this.	I also decree that if any man interferes with this directive, a beam is to be torn from his house and raised up, and he is to be impaled on it. And his own house shall be made a pile of rubble for this offense.
EZR	6	12	만일 열왕이나 백성이 이 조서를 변개하고 손을 들어 예루살렘 하나님의 전을 헐진대 그곳에 이름을 두신 하나님이 저희를 멸하시기를 원하노라 나 다리오가 조서를 내렸노니 신속히 행할지어다 하였더라	And the God that hath caused his name to dwell there destroy all kings and people, that shall put to their hand to alter and to destroy this house of God which is at Jerusalem. I Darius have made a decree; let it be done with speed.	May God, who has caused His Name to dwell there, overthrow any king or people who lifts a hand to alter this decree or to destroy this house of God in Jerusalem. I, Darius, have issued the decree. Let it be carried out with diligence.
EZR	6	13	다리오 왕의 조서가 내리매 강 서편 총독 닷드내와 스달보스내와 그 동료들이 신속히 준행한지라	Then Tatnai, governor on this side the river, Shethar–boznai, and their companions, according to that which Darius the king had sent, so they did speedily.	In response, Tattenai the governor of the region west of the Euphrates, Shethar-bozenai, and their associates diligently carried out what King Darius had decreed.
EZR	6	14	유다 사람의 장로들이 선지자 학개와 잇도의 손자 스가랴의 권면함으로 인하여 전 건축할 일이 형통한지라 이스라엘 하나님의 명령과 바사 왕 고레스와 다리오와 아닥사스다의 조서를 좇아 전을 건축하며 필역하되	And the elders of the Jews builded, and they prospered through the prophesying of Haggai the prophet and Zechariah the son of Iddo. And they builded, and finished it, according to the commandment of the God of Israel, and according to the commandment of Cyrus, and Darius, and Artaxerxes king of Persia.	So the Jewish elders built and prospered through the prophesying of Haggai the prophet and Zechariah son of Iddo. They finished building according to the command of the God of Israel and the decrees of Cyrus, Darius, and Artaxerxes, kings of Persia.
EZR	6	15	다리오 왕 육년 아달월 삼일에 전을 필역하니라	And this house was finished on the third day of the month Adar, which was in the sixth year of the reign of Darius the king.	And this temple was completed on the third day of the month of Adar, in the sixth year of the reign of King Darius.
EZR	6	16	이스라엘 자손과 제사장들과 레위 사람들과 기타 사로잡혔던 자의 자손이 즐거이 하나님의 전 봉헌식을 행하니	And the children of Israel, the priests, and the Levites, and the rest of the children of the captivity, kept the dedication of this house of God with joy,	Then the people of Israel—the priests, the Levites, and the rest of the exiles—celebrated the dedication of the house of God with joy.
EZR	6	17	하나님의 전 봉헌식을 행할 때에 수소 일백과 수양 이백과 어린 양 사백을 드리고 또 이스라엘 지파의 수를 따라 수염소 열둘로 이스라엘 전체를 위하여 속죄제를 드리고	And offered at the dedication of this house of God an hundred bullocks, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs; and for a sin offering for all Israel, twelve he goats, according to the number of the tribes of Israel.	For the dedication of the house of God they offered a hundred bulls, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs, and a sin offering for all Israel of twelve male goats, one for each tribe of Israel.
EZR	6	18	제사장을 그 분반대로, 레위 사람을 그 반차대로 세워 예루살렘에서 하나님을 섬기게 하되 모세의 책에 기록된 대로 하게 하니라	And they set the priests in their divisions, and the Levites in their courses, for the service of God, which is at Jerusalem; as it is written in the book of Moses.	They also appointed the priests by their divisions and the Levites by their groups to the service of God in Jerusalem, according to what is written in the Book of Moses.
EZR	6	19	사로잡혔던 자의 자손이 정월 십사일에 유월절을 지키되	And the children of the captivity kept the passover upon the fourteenth day of the first month.	On the fourteenth day of the first month, the exiles kept the Passover.
EZR	6	20	제사장들과 레위 사람들이 일제히 몸을 정결케 하여 다 정결하매 사로잡혔던 자의 모든 자손과 자기 형제 제사장들과 자기를 위하여 유월절 양을 잡으니	For the priests and the Levites were purified together, all of them were pure, and killed the passover for all the children of the captivity, and for their brethren the priests, and for themselves.	All the priests and Levites had purified themselves and were ceremonially clean. And the Levites slaughtered the Passover lamb for all the exiles, for their priestly brothers, and for themselves.
EZR	6	21	사로잡혔다가 돌아온 이스라엘 자손과 무릇 스스로 구별하여 자기 땅 이방 사람의 더러운 것을 버리고 이스라엘 무리에게 속하여 이스라엘 하나님 여호와를 구하는 자가 다 먹고	And the children of Israel, which were come again out of captivity, and all such as had separated themselves unto them from the filthiness of the heathen of the land, to seek the Lord God of Israel, did eat,	The Israelites who had returned from exile ate it, together with all who had separated themselves from the uncleanness of the peoples of the land to seek the LORD, the God of Israel.
EZR	6	22	즐거우므로 칠 일 동안 무교절을 지켰으니 이는 여호와께서 저희로 즐겁게 하시고 또 앗수르 왕의 마음을 저희에게로 돌이켜 이스라엘의 하나님이신 하나님의 전 역사하는 손을 힘있게 하도록 하셨음이었느니라	And kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with joy: for the Lord had made them joyful, and turned the heart of the king of Assyria unto them, to strengthen their hands in the work of the house of God, the God of Israel.	For seven days they kept the Feast of Unleavened Bread with joy, because the LORD had made them joyful and turned the heart of the king of Assyria toward them to strengthen their hands in the work on the house of the God of Israel.
EZR	7	1	이 일 후 바사 왕 아닥사스다가 위에 있을 때에 에스라라 하는 자가 있으니라 저는 스라야의 아들이요 아사랴의 손자요 힐기야의 증손이요	Now after these things, in the reign of Artaxerxes king of Persia, Ezra the son of Seraiah, the son of Azariah, the son of Hilkiah,	Many years later, during the reign of Artaxerxes king of Persia, Ezra son of Seraiah, the son of Azariah, the son of Hilkiah,
EZR	7	2	살룸의 현손이요 사독의 오대손이요 아히둡의 육대손이요	The son of Shallum, the son of Zadok, the son of Ahitub,	the son of Shallum, the son of Zadok, the son of Ahitub,
EZR	7	3	아마랴의 칠대손이요 아사랴의 팔대손이요 므라욧의 구대손이요	The son of Amariah, the son of Azariah, the son of Meraioth,	the son of Amariah, the son of Azariah, the son of Meraioth,
EZR	7	4	스라히야의 십대손이요 웃시엘의 십일대손이요 북기의 십이대손이요	The son of Zerahiah, the son of Uzzi, the son of Bukki,	the son of Zerahiah, the son of Uzzi, the son of Bukki,
EZR	7	5	아비수아의 십삼대손이요 비느하스의 십사대손이요 엘르아살의 십오대손이요 대제사장 아론의 십륙대손이라	The son of Abishua, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the chief priest:	the son of Abishua, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the chief priest—
EZR	7	6	이 에스라가 바벨론에서 올라왔으니 저는 이스라엘 하나님 여호와께서 주신 바 모세의 율법에 익숙한 학사로서 그 하나님 여호와의 도우심을 입으므로 왕에게 구하는 것은 다 받는 자더니	This Ezra went up from Babylon; and he was a ready scribe in the law of Moses, which the Lord God of Israel had given: and the king granted him all his request, according to the hand of the Lord his God upon him.	this Ezra came up from Babylon. He was a scribe skilled in the Law of Moses, which the LORD, the God of Israel, had given. The king had granted Ezra all his requests, for the hand of the LORD his God was upon him.
EZR	7	7	아닥사스다 왕 칠년에 이스라엘 자손과 제사장들과 레위 사람들과 노래하는 자들과 문지기들과 느디님 사람들 중에 몇 사람이 예루살렘으로 올라올 때에	And there went up some of the children of Israel, and of the priests, and the Levites, and the singers, and the porters, and the Nethinims, unto Jerusalem, in the seventh year of Artaxerxes the king.	So in the seventh year of King Artaxerxes, he went up to Jerusalem with some of the Israelites, including priests, Levites, singers, gatekeepers, and temple servants.
EZR	7	8	이 에스라가 올라왔으니 왕의 칠년 오월이라	And he came to Jerusalem in the fifth month, which was in the seventh year of the king.	Ezra arrived in Jerusalem in the fifth month of the seventh year of the king.
EZR	7	9	정월 초하루에 바벨론에서 길을 떠났고 하나님의 선한 손의 도우심을 입어 오월 초하루에 예루살렘에 이르니라	For upon the first day of the first month began he to go up from Babylon, and on the first day of the fifth month came he to Jerusalem, according to the good hand of his God upon him.	He had begun the journey from Babylon on the first day of the first month, and he arrived in Jerusalem on the first day of the fifth month, for the gracious hand of his God was upon him.
EZR	7	10	에스라가 여호와의 율법을 연구하여 준행하며 율례와 규례를 이스라엘에게 가르치기로 결심하였었더라	For Ezra had prepared his heart to seek the law of the Lord, and to do it, and to teach in Israel statutes and judgments.	For Ezra had set his heart to study the Law of the LORD, to practice it, and to teach its statutes and ordinances in Israel.
EZR	7	11	여호와의 계명의 말씀과 이스라엘에게 주신 율례의 학사인 학사겸 제사장 에스라에게 아닥사스다 왕이 내린 조서 초본은 아래와 같으니라	Now this is the copy of the letter that the king Artaxerxes gave unto Ezra the priest, the scribe, even a scribe of the words of the commandments of the Lord, and of his statutes to Israel.	This is the text of the letter King Artaxerxes had given to Ezra the priest and scribe, an expert in the commandments and statutes of the LORD to Israel:
EZR	7	12	모든 왕의 왕 아닥사스다는 하늘의 하나님의 율법에 완전한 학사 겸 제사장 에스라에게	Artaxerxes, king of kings, unto Ezra the priest, a scribe of the law of the God of heaven, perfect peace, and at such a time.	Artaxerxes, king of kings. To Ezra the priest, the scribe of the Law of the God of heaven: Greetings.
EZR	7	13	조서하노니 우리 나라에 있는 이스라엘 백성과 저희 제사장들과 레위 사람들 중에 예루살렘으로 올라갈 뜻이 있는 자는 누구든지 너와 함께 갈지어다	I make a decree, that all they of the people of Israel, and of his priests and Levites, in my realm, which are minded of their own freewill to go up to Jerusalem, go with thee.	I hereby decree that any volunteers among the Israelites in my kingdom, including the priests and Levites, may go up with you to Jerusalem.
EZR	7	14	너는 네 손에 있는 네 하나님의 율법을 좇아 유다와 예루살렘의 정형을 살피기 위하여 왕과 일곱 모사의 보냄을 받았으니	Forasmuch as thou art sent of the king, and of his seven counsellors, to enquire concerning Judah and Jerusalem, according to the law of thy God which is in thine hand;	You are sent by the king and his seven counselors to evaluate Judah and Jerusalem according to the Law of your God, which is in your hand.
EZR	7	15	왕과 모사들이 예루살렘에 거하신 이스라엘 하나님께 성심으로 드리는 은금을 가져가고	And to carry the silver and gold, which the king and his counsellors have freely offered unto the God of Israel, whose habitation is in Jerusalem,	Moreover, you are to take with you the silver and gold that the king and his counselors have freely offered to the God of Israel, whose dwelling is in Jerusalem,
EZR	7	16	또 네가 바벨론 온 도에서 얻을 모든 은금과 및 백성과 제사장들이 예루살렘 그 하나님의 전을 위하여 즐거이 드릴 예물을 가져다가	And all the silver and gold that thou canst find in all the province of Babylon, with the freewill offering of the people, and of the priests, offering willingly for the house of their God which is in Jerusalem:	together with all the silver and gold you may find in all the province of Babylon, as well as the freewill offerings of the people and priests to the house of their God in Jerusalem.
EZR	7	17	그 돈으로 수송아지와 수양과 어린 양과 그 소제와 그 전제의 물품을 신속히 사서 예루살렘 네 하나님의 전 단 위에 드리고	That thou mayest buy speedily with this money bullocks, rams, lambs, with their meat offerings and their drink offerings, and offer them upon the altar of the house of your God which is in Jerusalem.	With this money, therefore, you are to buy as many bulls, rams, and lambs as needed, together with their grain offerings and drink offerings, and offer them on the altar at the house of your God in Jerusalem.
EZR	7	18	그 나머지 은금은 너와 너의 형제가 선히 여기는 일에 너희 하나님의 뜻을 좇아 쓸지며	And whatsoever shall seem good to thee, and to thy brethren, to do with the rest of the silver and the gold, that do after the will of your God.	You and your brothers may do whatever seems best with the rest of the silver and gold, according to the will of your God.
EZR	7	19	네 하나님의 전에서 섬기는 일을 위하여 네게 준 기명은 예루살렘 하나님 앞에 드리고	The vessels also that are given thee for the service of the house of thy God, those deliver thou before the God of Jerusalem.	You must deliver to the God of Jerusalem all the articles given to you for the service of the house of your God.
EZR	7	20	그 외에도 네 하나님의 전에 쓰일 것이 있어서 네가 드리고자 하거든 무엇이든지 왕의 내탕고에서 취하여 드릴지니라	And whatsoever more shall be needful for the house of thy God, which thou shalt have occasion to bestow, bestow it out of the king’s treasure house.	And if anything else is needed for the house of your God that you may have occasion to supply, you may pay for it from the royal treasury.
EZR	7	21	나 곧 나 아닥사스다 왕이 강 서편 모든 고지기에게 조서를 내려 이르기를 하늘의 하나님의 율법의 학사 겸 제사장 에스라가 무릇 너희에게 구하는 것은 신속히 시행하되	And I, even I Artaxerxes the king, do make a decree to all the treasurers which are beyond the river, that whatsoever Ezra the priest, the scribe of the law of the God of heaven, shall require of you, it be done speedily,	I, King Artaxerxes, decree to all the treasurers west of the Euphrates: Whatever Ezra the priest, the scribe of the Law of the God of heaven, may require of you, it must be provided promptly,
EZR	7	22	은은 일백 달란트까지, 밀은 일백 고르까지, 포도주는 일백 밧까지, 기름도 일백 밧까지 하고 소금은 정수없이 하라	Unto an hundred talents of silver, and to an hundred measures of wheat, and to an hundred baths of wine, and to an hundred baths of oil, and salt without prescribing how much.	up to a hundred talents of silver, a hundred cors of wheat, a hundred baths of wine, a hundred baths of olive oil, and salt without limit.
EZR	7	23	무릇 하늘의 하나님의 전을 위하여 하늘의 하나님의 명하신 것은 삼가 행하라 어찌하여 진노가 왕과 왕자의 나라에 임하게 하랴	Whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven, let it be diligently done for the house of the God of heaven: for why should there be wrath against the realm of the king and his sons?	Whatever is commanded by the God of heaven must be done diligently for His house. For why should wrath fall on the realm of the king and his sons?
EZR	7	24	내가 너희에게 이르노니 제사장들이나 레위 사람들이나 노래하는 자들이나 문지기들이나 느디님 사람들이나 혹 하나님의 전에서 일하는 자들에게 조공과 잡세와 부세를 받는 것이 불가하니라 하였노라	Also we certify you, that touching any of the priests and Levites, singers, porters, Nethinims, or ministers of this house of God, it shall not be lawful to impose toll, tribute, or custom, upon them.	And be advised that you have no authority to impose tribute, duty, or toll on any of the priests, Levites, singers, doorkeepers, temple servants, or other servants of this house of God.
EZR	7	25	에스라여 너는 네 손에 있는 네 하나님의 지혜를 따라 네 하나님의 율법을 아는 자로 유사와 재판관을 삼아 강 서편 모든 백성을 재판하게 하고 그 알지 못하는 자는 너희가 가르치라	And thou, Ezra, after the wisdom of thy God, that is in thine hand, set magistrates and judges, which may judge all the people that are beyond the river, all such as know the laws of thy God; and teach ye them that know them not.	And you, Ezra, according to the wisdom of your God which you possess, are to appoint magistrates and judges to judge all the people west of the Euphrates—all who know the laws of your God. And you are to teach these laws to anyone who does not know them.
EZR	7	26	무릇 네 하나님의 명령과 왕의 명령을 준행치 아니하는 자는 속히 그 죄를 정하여 혹 죽이거나 정배하거나 가산을 적몰하거나 옥에 가둘지니라 하였더라	And whosoever will not do the law of thy God, and the law of the king, let judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto death, or to banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment.	If anyone does not keep the law of your God and the law of the king, let a strict judgment be executed against him, whether death, banishment, confiscation of property, or imprisonment.
EZR	7	27	우리 열조의 하나님 여호와를 송축할지로다 그가 왕의 마음에 예루살렘 여호와의 전을 아름답게 할 뜻을 두시고	Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers, which hath put such a thing as this in the king’s heart, to beautify the house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem:	Blessed be the LORD, the God of our fathers, who has put into the heart of the king to so honor the house of the LORD in Jerusalem,
EZR	7	28	또 나로 왕과 그 모사들의 앞과 왕의 권세 있는 모든 방백의 앞에서 은혜를 얻게 하셨도다 나의 하나님 여호와의 손이 나의 위에 있으므로 내가 힘을 얻어 이스라엘 중에 두목을 모아 나와 함께 올라오게 하였노라	And hath extended mercy unto me before the king, and his counsellors, and before all the king’s mighty princes. And I was strengthened as the hand of the Lord my God was upon me, and I gathered together out of Israel chief men to go up with me.	and who has shown me favor before the king, his counselors, and all his powerful officials. And because the hand of the LORD my God was upon me, I took courage and gathered the leaders of Israel to return with me.
EZR	8	1	아닥사스다 왕이 위에 있을 때에 나와 함께 바벨론에서 올라온 족장들과 그들의 보계가 이러하니라	These are now the chief of their fathers, and this is the genealogy of them that went up with me from Babylon, in the reign of Artaxerxes the king.	These are the family heads and genealogical records of those who returned with me from Babylon during the reign of King Artaxerxes:
EZR	8	2	비느하스 자손 중에서는 게르솜이요 이다말 자손 중에서는 다니엘이요 다윗 자손 중에서는 핫두스요	Of the sons of Phinehas; Gershom: of the sons of Ithamar; Daniel: of the sons of David; Hattush.	from the descendants of Phinehas, Gershom; from the descendants of Ithamar, Daniel;
EZR	8	3	스가냐 자손 곧 바로스 자손 중에서는 스가랴니 그와 함께 족보에 기록된 남자가 일백오십 명이요	Of the sons of Shechaniah, of the sons of Pharosh; Zechariah: and with him were reckoned by genealogy of the males an hundred and fifty.	from the descendants of David, Hattush of the descendants of Shecaniah; from the descendants of Parosh, Zechariah, and with him were registered 150 men;
EZR	8	4	바핫모압 자손 중에서는 스라히야의 아들 엘여호에내니 그와 함께한 남자가 이백 명이요	Of the sons of Pahath–moab; Elihoenai the son of Zerahiah, and with him two hundred males.	from the descendants of Pahath-Moab, Eliehoenai son of Zerahiah, and with him 200 men;
EZR	8	5	스가냐 자손 중에서는 야하시엘의 아들이니 그와 함께한 남자가 삼백 명이요	Of the sons of Shechaniah; the son of Jahaziel, and with him three hundred males.	from the descendants of Zattu, Shecaniah son of Jahaziel, and with him 300 men;
EZR	8	6	아딘 자손 중에서는 요나단의 아들 에벳이니 그와 함께한 남자가 오십 명이요	Of the sons also of Adin; Ebed the son of Jonathan, and with him fifty males.	from the descendants of Adin, Ebed son of Jonathan, and with him 50 men;
EZR	8	7	엘람 자손 중에서는 아달리야의 아들 여사야니 그와 함께한 남자가 칠십 명이요	And of the sons of Elam; Jeshaiah the son of Athaliah, and with him seventy males.	from the descendants of Elam, Jeshaiah son of Athaliah, and with him 70 men;
EZR	8	8	스바댜 자손 중에서는 미가엘의 아들 스바댜니 그와 함께한 남자가 팔십 명이요	And of the sons of Shephatiah; Zebadiah the son of Michael, and with him fourscore males.	from the descendants of Shephatiah, Zebadiah son of Michael, and with him 80 men;
EZR	8	9	요압 자손 중에서는 여히엘의 아들 오바댜니 그와 함께한 남자가 이백십팔 명이요	Of the sons of Joab; Obadiah the son of Jehiel, and with him two hundred and eighteen males.	from the descendants of Joab, Obadiah son of Jehiel, and with him 218 men;
EZR	8	10	슬로밋 자손 중에서는 요시뱌의 아들이니 그와 함께한 남자가 일백육십 명이요	And of the sons of Shelomith; the son of Josiphiah, and with him an hundred and threescore males.	from the descendants of Bani, Shelomith son of Josiphiah, and with him 160 men;
EZR	8	11	베배 자손 중에서는 베배의 아들 스가랴니 그와 함께한 남자가 이십팔 명이요	And of the sons of Bebai; Zechariah the son of Bebai, and with him twenty and eight males.	from the descendants of Bebai, Zechariah son of Bebai, and with him 28 men;
EZR	8	12	아스갓 자손 중에서는 학가단의 아들 요하난이니 그와 함께한 남자가 일백십 명이요	And of the sons of Azgad; Johanan the son of Hakkatan, and with him an hundred and ten males.	from the descendants of Azgad, Johanan son of Hakkatan, and with him 110 men;
EZR	8	13	아도니감 자손 중에 나중된 자의 이름은 엘리벨렛과 여우엘과 스마야니 그와 함께한 남자가 육십 명이요	And of the last sons of Adonikam, whose names are these, Eliphelet, Jeiel, and Shemaiah, and with them threescore males.	from the later descendants of Adonikam, these were their names: Eliphelet, Jeiel, and Shemaiah, and with them 60 men;
EZR	8	14	비그왜 자손 중에서는 우대와 사붓이니 그와 함께한 남자가 칠십 명이었느니라	Of the sons also of Bigvai; Uthai, and Zabbud, and with them seventy males.	and from the descendants of Bigvai, both Uthai and Zaccur, and with them 70 men.
EZR	8	15	내가 무리를 아하와로 흐르는 강가에 모으고 거기서 삼 일 동안 장막에 유하며 백성과 제사장들을 살핀즉 그 중에 레위 자손이 하나도 없는지라	And I gathered them together to the river that runneth to Ahava; and there abode we in tents three days: and I viewed the people, and the priests, and found there none of the sons of Levi.	Now I assembled these exiles at the canal that flows to Ahava, and we camped there three days. And when I searched among the people and priests, I found no Levites there.
EZR	8	16	이에 모든 족장 곧 엘리에셀과 아리엘과 스마야와 엘라단과 야립과 엘라단과 나단과 스가랴와 므술람을 부르고 또 명철한 사람 요야립과 엘라단을 불러	Then sent I for Eliezer, for Ariel, for Shemaiah, and for Elnathan, and for Jarib, and for Elnathan, and for Nathan, and for Zechariah, and for Meshullam, chief men; also for Joiarib, and for Elnathan, men of understanding.	Then I summoned the leaders: Eliezer, Ariel, Shemaiah, Elnathan, Jarib, Elnathan, Nathan, Zechariah, and Meshullam, as well as the teachers Joiarib and Elnathan.
EZR	8	17	가시뱌 지방으로 보내어 그곳 족장 잇도에게 나아가게 하고 잇도와 그 형제 곧 가시뱌 지방에 거한 느디님 사람들에게 할 말을 일러주고 우리 하나님의 전을 위하여 수종들 자를 데리고 오라 하였더니	And I sent them with commandment unto Iddo the chief at the place Casiphia, and I told them what they should say unto Iddo, and to his brethren the Nethinims, at the place Casiphia, that they should bring unto us ministers for the house of our God.	And I sent them to Iddo, the leader at Casiphia, with a message for him and his kinsmen, the temple servants at Casiphia, that they should bring to us ministers for the house of our God.
EZR	8	18	우리 하나님의 선한 손의 도우심을 입고 저희가 이스라엘의 손자 레위의 아들 말리의 자손 중에서 한 명철한 사람을 데려오고 또 세레뱌와 그 아들들과 형제 십팔 명과	And by the good hand of our God upon us they brought us a man of understanding, of the sons of Mahli, the son of Levi, the son of Israel; and Sherebiah, with his sons and his brethren, eighteen;	And since the gracious hand of our God was upon us, they brought us Sherebiah—a man of insight from the descendants of Mahli son of Levi, the son of Israel—along with his sons and brothers, 18 men;
EZR	8	19	하사뱌와 므라리 자손 중 여사야와 그 형제와 저의 아들들 이십 명을 데려오고	And Hashabiah, and with him Jeshaiah of the sons of Merari, his brethren and their sons, twenty;	also Hashabiah, together with Jeshaiah, from the descendants of Merari, and his brothers and their sons, 20 men.
EZR	8	20	또 느디님 사람 곧 다윗과 방백들이 주어 레위 사람에게 수종들게 한 그 느디님 사람 중 이백이십 명을 데려왔으니 그 이름이 다 기록되었느니라	Also of the Nethinims, whom David and the princes had appointed for the service of the Levites, two hundred and twenty Nethinims: all of them were expressed by name.	They also brought 220 of the temple servants, all designated by name. David and the officials had appointed them to assist the Levites.
EZR	8	21	때에 내가 아하와 강 가에서 금식을 선포하고 우리 하나님 앞에서 스스로 겸비하여 우리와 우리 어린 것과 모든 소유를 위하여 평탄한 길을 그에게 간구하였으니	Then I proclaimed a fast there, at the river of Ahava, that we might afflict ourselves before our God, to seek of him a right way for us, and for our little ones, and for all our substance.	And there by the Ahava Canal I proclaimed a fast, so that we might humble ourselves before our God and ask Him for a safe journey for us and our children, with all our possessions.
EZR	8	22	이는 우리가 전에 왕에게 고하기를 우리 하나님의 손은 자기를 찾는 모든 자에게 선을 베푸시고 자기를 배반하는 모든 자에게는 권능과 진노를 베푸신다 하였으므로 길에서 적군을 막고 우리를 도울 보병과 마병을 왕에게 구하기를 부끄러워 하였음이라	For I was ashamed to require of the king a band of soldiers and horsemen to help us against the enemy in the way: because we had spoken unto the king, saying, The hand of our God is upon all them for good that seek him; but his power and his wrath is against all them that forsake him.	For I was ashamed to ask the king for an escort of soldiers and horsemen to protect us from our enemies on the road, since we had told him, “The hand of our God is gracious to all who seek Him, but His great anger is against all who forsake Him.”
EZR	8	23	그러므로 우리가 이를 위하여 금식하며 우리 하나님께 간구하였더니 그 응낙하심을 입었느니라	So we fasted and besought our God for this: and he was intreated of us.	So we fasted and petitioned our God about this, and He granted our request.
EZR	8	24	그 때에 내가 제사장의 두목 중 십이 인 곧 세레뱌와 하사뱌와 그 형제 십 인을 따로 세우고	Then I separated twelve of the chief of the priests, Sherebiah, Hashabiah, and ten of their brethren with them,	Then I set apart twelve of the leading priests, together with Sherebiah, Hashabiah, and ten of their brothers,
EZR	8	25	저희에게 왕과 모사들과 방백들과 또 그곳에 있는 이스라엘 무리가 우리 하나님의 전을 위하여 드린 은과 금과 기명들을 달아서 주었으니	And weighed unto them the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, even the offering of the house of our God, which the king, and his counsellors, and his lords, and all Israel there present, had offered:	and I weighed out to them the contribution of silver and gold and the articles that the king, his counselors, his leaders, and all the Israelites there had offered for the house of our God.
EZR	8	26	내가 달아서 저희 손에 준 것은 은이 육백오십 달란트요 은 기명이 일백 달란트요 금이 일백 달란트며	I even weighed unto their hand six hundred and fifty talents of silver, and silver vessels an hundred talents, and of gold an hundred talents;	I weighed out into their hands 650 talents of silver, articles of silver weighing 100 talents, 100 talents of gold,
EZR	8	27	또 금잔이 이십 개라 중수는 일천 다릭이요 또 아름답고 빛나 금 같이 보배로운 놋그릇이 두 개라	Also twenty basons of gold, of a thousand drams; and two vessels of fine copper, precious as gold.	20 gold bowls valued at 1,000 darics, and two articles of fine polished bronze, as precious as gold.
EZR	8	28	내가 저희에게 이르되 너희는 여호와께 거룩한 자요 이 기명들도 거룩하고 그 은과 금은 너희 열조의 하나님 여호와께 즐거이 드린 예물이니	And I said unto them, Ye are holy unto the Lord; the vessels are holy also; and the silver and the gold are a freewill offering unto the Lord God of your fathers.	Then I told them, “You are holy to the LORD, and these articles are holy. The silver and gold are a freewill offering to the LORD, the God of your fathers.
EZR	8	29	너희는 예루살렘 여호와의 전 골방에 이르러 제사장의 두목들과 레위 사람의 두목들과 이스라엘 족장 앞에서 이 기명을 달기까지 삼가 지키라	Watch ye, and keep them, until ye weigh them before the chief of the priests and the Levites, and chief of the fathers of Israel, at Jerusalem, in the chambers of the house of the Lord.	Guard them carefully until you weigh them out in the chambers of the house of the LORD in Jerusalem before the leading priests, Levites, and heads of the Israelite families.”
EZR	8	30	이에 제사장들과 레위 사람들이 은과 금과 기명을 예루살렘 우리 하나님의 전으로 가져가려 하여 그 중수대로 받으니라	So took the priests and the Levites the weight of the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, to bring them to Jerusalem unto the house of our God.	So the priests and Levites took charge of the silver and gold and sacred articles that had been weighed out to be taken to the house of our God in Jerusalem.
EZR	8	31	정월 십이일에 우리가 아하와 강을 떠나 예루살렘으로 갈새 우리 하나님의 손이 우리를 도우사 대적과 길에 매복한 자의 손에서 건지신지라	Then we departed from the river of Ahava on the twelfth day of the first month, to go unto Jerusalem: and the hand of our God was upon us, and he delivered us from the hand of the enemy, and of such as lay in wait by the way.	On the twelfth day of the first month we set out from the Ahava Canal to go to Jerusalem, and the hand of our God was upon us to protect us from the hands of the enemies and bandits along the way.
EZR	8	32	이에 예루살렘에 이르러 거기서 삼 일을 유하고	And we came to Jerusalem, and abode there three days.	So we arrived at Jerusalem and rested there for three days.
EZR	8	33	제사일에 우리 하나님의 전에서 은과 금과 기명을 달아서 제사장 우리아의 아들 므레못의 손에 붙이니 비느하스의 아들 엘르아살과 레위 사람 예수아의 아들 요사밧과 빈누이의 아들 노아댜가 함께 있어	Now on the fourth day was the silver and the gold and the vessels weighed in the house of our God by the hand of Meremoth the son of Uriah the priest; and with him was Eleazar the son of Phinehas; and with them was Jozabad the son of Jeshua, and Noadiah the son of Binnui, Levites;	On the fourth day, in the house of our God, we weighed out the silver and gold and sacred articles into the hand of Meremoth son of Uriah, the priest. Eleazar son of Phinehas was with him, along with the Levites Jozabad son of Jeshua and Noadiah son of Binnui.
EZR	8	34	모든 것을 다 계수하고 달아보고 그 중수를 당장에 책에 기록하였느니라	By number and by weight of every one: and all the weight was written at that time.	Everything was verified by number and weight, and the total weight was recorded at that time.
EZR	8	35	사로잡혔던 자의 자손 곧 이방에서 돌아온 자들이 이스라엘 하나님께 번제를 드렸는데 이스라엘 전체를 위한 수송아지가 열둘이요 또 수양이 아흔여섯이요 어린 양이 일흔일곱이요 또 속죄제의 수염소가 열둘이니 모두 여호와께 드린 번제물이라	Also the children of those that had been carried away, which were come out of the captivity, offered burnt offerings unto the God of Israel, twelve bullocks for all Israel, ninety and six rams, seventy and seven lambs, twelve he goats for a sin offering: all this was a burnt offering unto the Lord.	Then the exiles who had returned from captivity sacrificed burnt offerings to the God of Israel: 12 bulls for all Israel, 96 rams, 77 lambs, and a sin offering of 12 male goats. All this was a burnt offering to the LORD.
EZR	8	36	무리가 또 왕의 조서를 왕의 관원과 강 서편 총독들에게 부치매 저희가 백성과 하나님의 전을 도왔느니라	And they delivered the king’s commissions unto the king’s lieutenants, and to the governors on this side the river: and they furthered the people, and the house of God.	They also delivered the king’s edicts to the royal satraps and governors of the region west of the Euphrates, who proceeded to assist the people and the house of God.
EZR	9	1	이 일 후에 방백들이 내게 나아와 가로되 이스라엘 백성과 제사장들과 레위 사람들이 이 땅 백성과 떠나지 아니하고 가나안 사람과 헷 사람과 브리스 사람과 여부스 사람과 암몬 사람과 모압 사람과 애굽 사람과 아모리 사람의 가증한 일을 행하여	Now when these things were done, the princes came to me, saying, The people of Israel, and the priests, and the Levites, have not separated themselves from the people of the lands, doing according to their abominations, even of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Jebusites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, the Egyptians, and the Amorites.	After these things had been accomplished, the leaders approached me and said, “The people of Israel, including the priests and Levites, have not kept themselves separate from the surrounding peoples whose abominations are like those of the Canaanites, Hittites, Perizzites, Jebusites, Ammonites, Moabites, Egyptians, and Amorites.
EZR	9	2	그들의 딸을 취하여 아내와 며느리를 삼아 거룩한 자손으로 이방 족속과 서로 섞이게 하는데 방백들과 두목들이 이 죄에 더욱 으뜸이 되었다 하는지라	For they have taken of their daughters for themselves, and for their sons: so that the holy seed have mingled themselves with the people of those lands: yea, the hand of the princes and rulers hath been chief in this trespass.	Indeed, the Israelites have taken some of their daughters as wives for themselves and their sons, so that the holy seed has been mixed with the people of the land. And the leaders and officials have taken the lead in this unfaithfulness!”
EZR	9	3	내가 이 일을 듣고 속옷과 겉옷을 찢고 머리털과 수염을 뜯으며 기가 막혀 앉으니	And when I heard this thing, I rent my garment and my mantle, and plucked off the hair of my head and of my beard, and sat down astonied.	When I heard this report, I tore my tunic and cloak, pulled out some hair from my head and beard, and sat down in horror.
EZR	9	4	이에 이스라엘 하나님의 말씀을 인하여 떠는 자가 이 사로잡혔던 자의 죄를 인하여 다 내게로 모여 오더라 내가 저녁 제사 드릴 때까지 기가 막혀 앉았더니	Then were assembled unto me every one that trembled at the words of the God of Israel, because of the transgression of those that had been carried away; and I sat astonied until the evening sacrifice.	Then everyone who trembled at the words of the God of Israel gathered around me because of the unfaithfulness of the exiles, while I sat there in horror until the evening offering.
EZR	9	5	저녁 제사를 드릴 때에 내가 근심 중에 일어나서 속옷과 겉옷을 찢은 대로 무릎을 꿇고 나의 하나님 여호와를 향하여 손을 들고	And at the evening sacrifice I arose up from my heaviness; and having rent my garment and my mantle, I fell upon my knees, and spread out my hands unto the Lord my God,	At the evening offering, I got up from my humiliation with my tunic and cloak torn, and I fell on my knees, spread out my hands to the LORD my God,
EZR	9	6	말하기를 나의 하나님이여 내가 부끄러워 낯이 뜨뜻하여 감히 나의 하나님을 향하여 얼굴을 들지 못하오니 이는 우리 죄악이 많아 정수리에 넘치고 우리 허물이 커서 하늘에 미침이니이다	And said, O my God, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God: for our iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespass is grown up unto the heavens.	and said: “O my God, I am ashamed and embarrassed to lift up my face to You, my God, because our iniquities are higher than our heads, and our guilt has reached the heavens.
EZR	9	7	우리의 열조 때로부터 오늘까지 우리 죄가 심하매 우리의 죄악으로 인하여 우리와 우리 왕들과 우리 제사장들을 열방 왕들의 손에 붙이사 칼에 죽으며 사로잡히며 노략을 당하며 얼굴을 부끄럽게 하심이 오늘날 같으니이다	Since the days of our fathers have we been in a great trespass unto this day; and for our iniquities have we, our kings, and our priests, been delivered into the hand of the kings of the lands, to the sword, to captivity, and to a spoil, and to confusion of face, as it is this day.	From the days of our fathers to this day, our guilt has been great. Because of our iniquities, we and our kings and priests have been delivered into the hands of the kings of the earth and put to the sword and captivity, to pillage and humiliation, as we are this day.
EZR	9	8	이제 우리 하나님 여호와께서 우리에게 잠간 은혜를 베푸사 얼마를 남겨두어 피하게 하신 우리를 그 거룩한 처소에 박힌 못과 같게 하시고 우리 눈을 밝히사 우리로 종노릇 하는 중에서 조금 소성하게 하셨나이다	And now for a little space grace hath been shewed from the Lord our God, to leave us a remnant to escape, and to give us a nail in his holy place, that our God may lighten our eyes, and give us a little reviving in our bondage.	But now, for a brief moment, grace has come from the LORD our God to preserve for us a remnant and to give us a stake in His holy place. Even in our bondage, our God has given us new life and light to our eyes.
EZR	9	9	우리가 비록 노예가 되었사오나 우리 하나님이 우리를 그 복역하는 중에 버리지 아니하시고 바사 열왕 앞에서 우리로 긍휼히 여김을 입고 소성하여 우리 하나님의 전을 세우게 하시며 그 퇴락한 것을 수리하게 하시며 유다와 예루살렘에서 우리에게 울을 주셨나이다	For we were bondmen; yet our God hath not forsaken us in our bondage, but hath extended mercy unto us in the sight of the kings of Persia, to give us a reviving, to set up the house of our God, and to repair the desolations thereof, and to give us a wall in Judah and in Jerusalem.	Though we are slaves, our God has not forsaken us in our bondage, but He has extended to us grace in the sight of the kings of Persia, giving us new life to rebuild the house of our God and repair its ruins, and giving us a wall of protection in Judah and Jerusalem.
EZR	9	10	우리 하나님이여 이렇게 하신 후에도 우리가 주의 계명을 배반하였사오니 이제 무슨 말씀을 하오리이까	And now, O our God, what shall we say after this? for we have forsaken thy commandments,	And now, our God, what can we say after this? For we have forsaken the commandments
EZR	9	11	전에 주께서 주의 종 선지자들로 명하여 이르시되 너희가 가서 얻으려 하는 땅은 더러운 땅이니 이는 이방 백성들이 더럽고 가증한 일을 행하여 이 가에서 저 가까지 그 더러움으로 채웠음이라	Which thou hast commanded by thy servants the prophets, saying, The land, unto which ye go to possess it, is an unclean land with the filthiness of the people of the lands, with their abominations, which have filled it from one end to another with their uncleanness.	that You gave through Your servants the prophets, saying: ‘The land that you are entering to possess is a land polluted by the impurity of its peoples and the abominations with which they have filled it from end to end.
EZR	9	12	그런즉 너희 여자들을 저희 아들들에게 주지 말고 저희 딸을 너희 아들을 위하여 데려오지 말며 그들을 위하여 평강과 형통을 영영히 구하지 말라 그리하면 너희가 왕성하여 그 땅의 아름다운 것을 먹으며 그 땅을 자손에게 유전하여 영원한 기업을 삼게 되리라 하셨나이다	Now therefore give not your daughters unto their sons, neither take their daughters unto your sons, nor seek their peace or their wealth for ever: that ye may be strong, and eat the good of the land, and leave it for an inheritance to your children for ever.	Now, therefore, do not give your daughters in marriage to their sons or take their daughters for your sons. Never seek their peace or prosperity, so that you may be strong and may eat the good things of the land, leaving it as an inheritance to your sons forever.’
EZR	9	13	우리의 악한 행실과 큰 죄로 인하여 이 모든 일을 당하였사오나 우리 하나님이 우리 죄악보다 형벌을 경하게 하시고 이만큼 백성을 남겨 주셨사오니	And after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great trespass, seeing that thou our God hast punished us less than our iniquities deserve, and hast given us such deliverance as this;	After all that has come upon us because of our evil deeds and our great guilt (though You, our God, have punished us less than our iniquities deserve and have given us such a remnant as this),
EZR	9	14	우리가 어찌 다시 주의 계명을 거역하고 이 가증한 일을 행하는 족속들과 연혼하오리이까 그리하오면 주께서 어찌 진노하사 우리를 멸하시고 남아 피할 자가 없도록 하시지 아니하시리이까	Should we again break thy commandments, and join in affinity with the people of these abominations? wouldest not thou be angry with us till thou hadst consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor escaping?	shall we again break Your commandments and intermarry with the peoples who commit these abominations? Would You not become so angry with us as to wipe us out, leaving no remnant or survivor?
EZR	9	15	이스라엘 하나님 여호와여 주는 의롭도소이다 우리가 남아 피한 것이 오늘날과 같사옵거늘 도리어 주께 범죄하였사오니 이로 인하여 주 앞에 한 사람도 감히 서지 못하겠나이다	O Lord God of Israel, thou art righteous: for we remain yet escaped, as it is this day: behold, we are before thee in our trespasses: for we cannot stand before thee because of this.	O LORD, God of Israel, You are righteous! For we remain this day as a remnant. Here we are before You in our guilt, though because of it no one can stand before You.”
EZR	10	1	에스라가 하나님의 전 앞에 엎드려 울며 기도하여 죄를 자복할 때에 많은 백성이 심히 통곡하매 이스라엘 중에서 백성의 남녀와 어린 아이의 큰 무리가 그 앞에 모인지라	Now when Ezra had prayed, and when he had confessed, weeping and casting himself down before the house of God, there assembled unto him out of Israel a very great congregation of men and women and children: for the people wept very sore.	While Ezra prayed and made this confession, weeping and falling facedown before the house of God, a very large assembly of Israelites—men, women, and children—gathered around him, and the people wept bitterly as well.
EZR	10	2	엘람 자손 중 여히엘의 아들 스가냐가 에스라에게 이르되 우리가 우리 하나님께 범죄하여 이 땅 이방 여자를 취하여 아내를 삼았으나 이스라엘에게 오히려 소망이 있나니	And Shechaniah the son of Jehiel, one of the sons of Elam, answered and said unto Ezra, We have trespassed against our God, and have taken strange wives of the people of the land: yet now there is hope in Israel concerning this thing.	Then Shecaniah son of Jehiel, an Elamite, said to Ezra: “We have been unfaithful to our God by marrying foreign women from the people of the land, yet in spite of this, there is hope for Israel.
EZR	10	3	곧 내 주의 교훈을 좇으며 우리 하나님의 명령을 떨며 준행하는 자의 의논을 좇아 이 모든 아내와 그 소생을 다 내어 보내기로 우리 하나님과 언약을 세우고 율법대로 행할 것이라	Now therefore let us make a covenant with our God to put away all the wives, and such as are born of them, according to the counsel of my lord, and of those that tremble at the commandment of our God; and let it be done according to the law.	So now let us make a covenant before our God to send away all the foreign wives and their children, according to the counsel of my lord and of those who tremble at the command of our God. Let it be done according to the Law.
EZR	10	4	이는 당신의 주장할 일이니 일어나소서 우리가 도우리니 힘써 행하소서	Arise; for this matter belongeth unto thee: we also will be with thee: be of good courage, and do it.	Get up, for this matter is your responsibility, and we will support you. Be strong and take action!”
EZR	10	5	이에 에스라가 일어나 제사장들과 레위 사람들과 온 이스라엘에게 이 말대로 행하기를 맹세하게 하매 무리가 맹세하는지라	Then arose Ezra, and made the chief priests, the Levites, and all Israel, to swear that they should do according to this word. And they sware.	So Ezra got up and made the leading priests, Levites, and all Israel take an oath to do what had been said. And they took the oath.
EZR	10	6	이에 에스라가 하나님의 전 앞에서 일어나 엘리아십의 아들 여호하난의 방으로 들어가니라 저가 들어가서 사로잡혔던 자의 죄를 근심하여 떡도 먹지 아니하며 물도 마시지 아니하더니	Then Ezra rose up from before the house of God, and went into the chamber of Johanan the son of Eliashib: and when he came thither, he did eat no bread, nor drink water: for he mourned because of the transgression of them that had been carried away.	Then Ezra withdrew from before the house of God and walked to the chamber of Jehohanan son of Eliashib. And while he stayed there, he ate no food and drank no water, because he was mourning over the unfaithfulness of the exiles.
EZR	10	7	유다와 예루살렘의 사로잡혔던 자의 자손들에게 공포하기를 너희는 예루살렘으로 모이라	And they made proclamation throughout Judah and Jerusalem unto all the children of the captivity, that they should gather themselves together unto Jerusalem;	And a proclamation was issued throughout Judah and Jerusalem that all the exiles should gather at Jerusalem.
EZR	10	8	누구든지 방백들과 장로들의 훈시를 좇아 삼 일 내에 오지 아니하면 그 재산을 적몰하고 사로잡혔던 자의 회에서 쫓아내리라 하매	And that whosoever would not come within three days, according to the counsel of the princes and the elders, all his substance should be forfeited, and himself separated from the congregation of those that had been carried away.	Whoever failed to appear within three days would forfeit all his property, according to the counsel of the leaders and elders, and would himself be expelled from the assembly of the exiles.
EZR	10	9	유다와 베냐민 모든 사람이 삼 일 내에 예루살렘에 모이니 때는 구월 이십일이라 무리가 하나님의 전 앞 광장에 앉아서 이 일과 비를 인하여 떨더니	Then all the men of Judah and Benjamin gathered themselves together unto Jerusalem within three days. It was the ninth month, on the twentieth day of the month; and all the people sat in the street of the house of God, trembling because of this matter, and for the great rain.	So within the three days, all the men of Judah and Benjamin assembled in Jerusalem, and on the twentieth day of the ninth month, all the people sat in the square at the house of God, trembling regarding this matter and because of the heavy rain.
EZR	10	10	제사장 에스라가 일어서서 저희에게 이르되 너희가 범죄하여 이방 여자로 아내를 삼아 이스라엘의 죄를 더하게 하였으니	And Ezra the priest stood up, and said unto them, Ye have transgressed, and have taken strange wives, to increase the trespass of Israel.	Then Ezra the priest stood up and said to them, “You have been unfaithful by marrying foreign women, adding to the guilt of Israel.
EZR	10	11	이제 너희 열조의 하나님 앞에서 죄를 자복하고 그 뜻대로 행하여 이 땅 족속들과 이방 여인을 끊어 버리라	Now therefore make confession unto the Lord God of your fathers, and do his pleasure: and separate yourselves from the people of the land, and from the strange wives.	Now, therefore, make a confession to the LORD, the God of your fathers, and do His will. Separate yourselves from the people of the land and from your foreign wives.”
EZR	10	12	회 무리가 큰 소리로 대답하여 가로되 당신의 말씀대로 우리가 마땅히 행할 것이니이다	Then all the congregation answered and said with a loud voice, As thou hast said, so must we do.	And the whole assembly responded in a loud voice: “Truly we must do as you say!
EZR	10	13	그러나 백성이 많고 또 큰 비가 내리는 때니 능히 밖에 서지 못할 것이요 우리가 이 일로 크게 범죄하였은즉 하루 이틀에 할 일이 아니오니	But the people are many, and it is a time of much rain, and we are not able to stand without, neither is this a work of one day or two: for we are many that have transgressed in this thing.	But there are many people here, and it is the rainy season. We are not able to stay out in the open. Nor is this the work of one or two days, for we have transgressed greatly in this matter.
EZR	10	14	이제 온 회중을 위하여 우리 방백들을 세우고 우리 모든 성읍에 이방 여자에게 장가든 자는 다 기한에 본성 장로들과 재판장과 함께 오게하여 우리 하나님의 이 일로 인하신 진노가 우리에게서 떠나게 하소서 하나	Let now our rulers of all the congregation stand, and let all them which have taken strange wives in our cities come at appointed times, and with them the elders of every city, and the judges thereof, until the fierce wrath of our God for this matter be turned from us.	Let our leaders represent the whole assembly. Then let everyone in our towns who has married a foreign woman come at an appointed time, together with the elders and judges of each town, until the fierce anger of our God in this matter is turned away from us.”
EZR	10	15	오직 아사헬의 아들 요나단과 디과의 아들 야스야가 일어나 그 일을 반대하고 므술람과 레위 사람 삽브대가 저희를 돕더라	Only Jonathan the son of Asahel and Jahaziah the son of Tikvah were employed about this matter: and Meshullam and Shabbethai the Levite helped them.	(Only Jonathan son of Asahel and Jahzeiah son of Tikvah, supported by Meshullam and Shabbethai the Levite, opposed this plan.)
EZR	10	16	사로잡혔던 자의 자손이 그대로 한지라 제사장 에스라가 그 종족을 따라 각기 지명된 족장 몇 사람을 위임하고 시월 초하루에 앉아 그 일을 조사하여	And the children of the captivity did so. And Ezra the priest, with certain chief of the fathers, after the house of their fathers, and all of them by their names, were separated, and sat down in the first day of the tenth month to examine the matter.	So the exiles did as proposed. Ezra the priest selected men who were family heads, each of them identified by name, to represent their families. On the first day of the tenth month they launched the investigation,
EZR	10	17	정월 초하루에 이르러 이방 여인을 취한 자의 일 조사하기를 마치니라	And they made an end with all the men that had taken strange wives by the first day of the first month.	and by the first day of the first month they had dealt with all the men who had married foreign women.
EZR	10	18	제사장의 무리 중에 이방 여인을 취한 자는 예수아 자손 중 요사닥의 아들과 그 형제 마아세야와 엘리에셀과 야립과 그달랴라	And among the sons of the priests there were found that had taken strange wives: namely, of the sons of Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and his brethren; Maaseiah, and Eliezer, and Jarib, and Gedaliah.	Among the descendants of the priests who had married foreign women were found these descendants of Jeshua son of Jozadak and his brothers:
EZR	10	19	저희가 다 손을 잡아 맹세하여 그 아내를 보내기로 하고 또 그 죄를 인하여 수양 하나를 속건제로 드렸으며	And they gave their hands that they would put away their wives; and being guilty, they offered a ram of the flock for their trespass.	Maaseiah, Eliezer, Jarib, and Gedaliah. They pledged to send their wives away, and for their guilt they presented a ram from the flock as a guilt offering.
EZR	10	20	또 임멜 자손 중에는 하나니와 스바댜요	And of the sons of Immer; Hanani, and Zebadiah.	From the descendants of Immer: Hanani and Zebadiah.
EZR	10	21	하림 자손 중에는 마아세야와 엘리야와 스마야와 여히엘과 웃시야요	And of the sons of Harim; Maaseiah, and Elijah, and Shemaiah, and Jehiel, and Uzziah.	From the descendants of Harim: Maaseiah, Elijah, Shemaiah, Jehiel, and Uzziah.
EZR	10	22	바스훌 자손 중에는 엘료에내와 마아세야와 이스마엘과 느다넬과 요사밧과 엘라사였더라	And of the sons of Pashur; Elioenai, Maaseiah, Ishmael, Nethaneel, Jozabad, and Elasah.	From the descendants of Pashhur: Elioenai, Maaseiah, Ishmael, Nethanel, Jozabad, and Elasah.
EZR	10	23	레위 사람 중에는 요사밧과 시므이와 글라야라 하는 글리다와 브다히야와 유다와 엘리에셀이었더라	Also of the Levites; Jozabad, and Shimei, and Kelaiah, (the same is Kelita,) Pethahiah, Judah, and Eliezer.	Among the Levites: Jozabad, Shimei, Kelaiah (that is, Kelita), Pethahiah, Judah, and Eliezer.
EZR	10	24	노래하는 자 중에는 엘리아십이요 문지기 중에는 살룸과 델렘과 우리였더라	Of the singers also; Eliashib: and of the porters; Shallum, and Telem, and Uri.	From the singers: Eliashib. From the gatekeepers: Shallum, Telem, and Uri.
EZR	10	25	이스라엘 중에는 바로스 자손 중 라먀와 잇시야와 말기야와 미야민과 엘르아살과 말기야와 브나야요	Moreover of Israel: of the sons of Parosh; Ramiah, and Jeziah, and Malchiah, and Miamin, and Eleazar, and Malchijah, and Benaiah.	And among the other Israelites, from the descendants of Parosh: Ramiah, Izziah, Malchijah, Mijamin, Eleazar, Malchijah, and Benaiah.
EZR	10	26	엘람 자손 중 맛다냐와 스가랴와 여히엘과 압디와 여레못과 엘리야요	And of the sons of Elam; Mattaniah, Zechariah, and Jehiel, and Abdi, and Jeremoth, and Eliah.	From the descendants of Elam: Mattaniah, Zechariah, Jehiel, Abdi, Jeremoth, and Elijah.
EZR	10	27	삿두 자손 중 엘료에내와 엘리아십과 맛다냐와 여레못과 사밧과 아시사요	And of the sons of Zattu; Elioenai, Eliashib, Mattaniah, and Jeremoth, and Zabad, and Aziza.	From the descendants of Zattu: Elioenai, Eliashib, Mattaniah, Jeremoth, Zabad, and Aziza.
EZR	10	28	베배 자손 중 여호하난과 하나냐와 삽배와 아들래요	Of the sons also of Bebai; Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, and Athlai.	From the descendants of Bebai: Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, and Athlai.
EZR	10	29	바니 자손 중 므술람과 말룩과 아다야와 야숩과 스알과 여레못이요	And of the sons of Bani; Meshullam, Malluch, and Adaiah, Jashub, and Sheal, and Ramoth.	From the descendants of Bani: Meshullam, Malluch, Adaiah, Jashub, Sheal, and Jeremoth.
EZR	10	30	바핫모압 자손 중 앗나와 글랄과 브나야와 마아세야와 맛다냐와 브사렐과 빈누이와 므낫세요	And of the sons of Pahath–moab; Adna, and Chelal, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattaniah, Bezaleel, and Binnui, and Manasseh.	From the descendants of Pahath-moab: Adna, Chelal, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattaniah, Bezalel, Binnui, and Manasseh.
EZR	10	31	하림 자손 중 엘리에셀과 잇시야와 말기야와 스마야와 시므온과	And of the sons of Harim; Eliezer, Ishijah, Malchiah, Shemaiah, Shimeon,	From the descendants of Harim:
EZR	10	32	베냐민과 말룩과 스마랴요	Benjamin, Malluch, and Shemariah.	Eliezer, Isshijah, Malchijah, Shemaiah, Shimeon, Benjamin, Malluch, and Shemariah.
EZR	10	33	하숨 자손 중 맛드내와 맛닷다와 사밧과 엘리벨렛과 여레매와 므낫세와 시므이요	Of the sons of Hashum; Mattenai, Mattathah, Zabad, Eliphelet, Jeremai, Manasseh, and Shimei.	From the descendants of Hashum: Mattenai, Mattattah, Zabad, Eliphelet, Jeremai, Manasseh, and Shimei.
EZR	10	34	바니 자손 중 마아대와 아므람과 우엘과	Of the sons of Bani; Maadai, Amram, and Uel,	From the descendants of Bani:
EZR	10	35	브나야와 베드야와 글루히와	Benaiah, Bedeiah, Chelluh,	Maadai, Amram, Uel, Benaiah, Bedeiah, Cheluhi,
EZR	10	36	와냐와 므레못과 에랴십과	Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib,	Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib,
EZR	10	37	맛다냐와 맛드내와 야아수와	Mattaniah, Mattenai, and Jaasau,	Mattaniah, Mattenai, and Jaasu.
EZR	10	38	바니와 빈누이와 시므이와	And Bani, and Binnui, Shimei,	From the descendants of Binnui:
EZR	10	39	셀레먀와 나단과 아다야와	And Shelemiah, and Nathan, and Adaiah,	Shimei, Shelemiah, Nathan, Adaiah,
EZR	10	40	막나드배와 사새와 사래와	Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai,	Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai,
EZR	10	41	아사렐과 셀레먀와 스마랴와	Azareel, and Shelemiah, Shemariah,	Azarel, Shelemiah, Shemariah,
EZR	10	42	살룸과 아마랴와 요셉이요	Shallum, Amariah, and Joseph.	Shallum, Amariah, and Joseph.
EZR	10	43	느보 자손 중 여이엘과 맛디디야와 사밧과 스비내와 잇도와 요엘과 브나야였더라	Of the sons of Nebo; Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Jadau, and Joel, Benaiah.	And from the descendants of Nebo: Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Jaddai, Joel, and Benaiah.
EZR	10	44	이상은 모두 이방 여인을 취한 자라 그 중에 자녀를 낳은 여인도 있었더라	All these had taken strange wives: and some of them had wives by whom they had children.	All these men had married foreign women, and some of them had children by these wives.
NEH	1	1	하가랴의 아들 느헤미야의 말이라 아닥사스다 왕 제이십년 기슬르월에 내가 수산 궁에 있더니	The words of Nehemiah the son of Hachaliah. And it came to pass in the month Chisleu, in the twentieth year, as I was in Shushan the palace,	These are the words of Nehemiah son of Hacaliah: In the month of Chislev, in the twentieth year, while I was in the citadel of Susa,
NEH	1	2	나의 한 형제 중 하나니가 두어 사람과 함께 유다에서 이르렀기로 내가 그 사로잡힘을 면하고 남아있는 유다 사람과 예루살렘 형편을 물은즉	That Hanani, one of my brethren, came, he and certain men of Judah; and I asked them concerning the Jews that had escaped, which were left of the captivity, and concerning Jerusalem.	Hanani, one of my brothers, arrived with men from Judah. So I questioned them about the remnant of the Jews who had survived the exile, and also about Jerusalem.
NEH	1	3	저희가 내게 이르되 사로잡힘을 면하고 남은 자가 그 도에서 큰 환난을 만나고 능욕을 받으며 예루살렘 성은 훼파되고 성문들은 소화되었다 하는지라	And they said unto me, The remnant that are left of the captivity there in the province are in great affliction and reproach: the wall of Jerusalem also is broken down, and the gates thereof are burned with fire.	And they told me, “The remnant who survived the exile are there in the province, in great trouble and disgrace. The wall of Jerusalem is broken down, and its gates are burned with fire.”
NEH	1	4	내가 이 말을 듣고 앉아서 울고 수 일 동안 슬퍼하며 하늘의 하나님 앞에 금식하며 기도하여	And it came to pass, when I heard these words, that I sat down and wept, and mourned certain days, and fasted, and prayed before the God of heaven,	When I heard these words, I sat down and wept. I mourned for days, fasting and praying before the God of heaven.
NEH	1	5	가로되 하늘의 하나님 여호와 크고 두려우신 하나님이여 주를 사랑하고 주의 계명을 지키는 자에게 언약을 지키시며 긍휼을 베푸시는 주여 간구하나이다	And said, I beseech thee, O Lord God of heaven, the great and terrible God, that keepeth covenant and mercy for them that love him and observe his commandments:	Then I said: “O LORD, God of heaven, the great and awesome God who keeps His covenant of loving devotion with those who love Him and keep His commandments,
NEH	1	6	이제 종이 주의 종 이스라엘 자손을 위하여 주야로 기도하오며 이스라엘 자손의 주 앞에 범죄함을 자복하오니 주는 귀를 기울이시며 눈을 여시사 종의 기도를 들으시옵소서 나와 나의 아비 집이 범죄하여	Let thine ear now be attentive, and thine eyes open, that thou mayest hear the prayer of thy servant, which I pray before thee now, day and night, for the children of Israel thy servants, and confess the sins of the children of Israel, which we have sinned against thee: both I and my father’s house have sinned.	let Your eyes be open and Your ears attentive to hear the prayer that I, Your servant, now pray before You day and night for Your servants, the Israelites. I confess the sins that we Israelites have committed against You. Both I and my father’s house have sinned.
NEH	1	7	주를 향하여 심히 악을 행하여 주의 종 모세에게 주께서 명하신 계명과 율례와 규례를 지키지 아니하였나이다	We have dealt very corruptly against thee, and have not kept the commandments, nor the statutes, nor the judgments, which thou commandedst thy servant Moses.	We have behaved corruptly against You and have not kept the commandments, statutes, and ordinances that You gave Your servant Moses.
NEH	1	8	옛적에 주께서 주의 종 모세에게 명하여 가라사대 만일 너희가 범죄하면 내가 너희를 열국 중에 흩을 것이요	Remember, I beseech thee, the word that thou commandedst thy servant Moses, saying, If ye transgress, I will scatter you abroad among the nations:	Remember, I pray, the word that You commanded Your servant Moses when You said, ‘If you are unfaithful, I will scatter you among the nations,
NEH	1	9	만일 내게로 돌아와서 내 계명을 지켜 행하면 너희 쫓긴 자가 하늘 끝에 있을지라도 내가 거기서부터 모아 내 이름을 두려고 택한 곳에 돌아오게 하리라 하신 말씀을 이제 청컨대 기억하옵소서	But if ye turn unto me, and keep my commandments, and do them; though there were of you cast out unto the uttermost part of the heaven, yet will I gather them from thence, and will bring them unto the place that I have chosen to set my name there.	but if you return to Me and keep and practice My commandments, then even if your exiles have been banished to the farthest horizon, I will gather them from there and bring them to the place I have chosen as a dwelling for My Name.’
NEH	1	10	이들은 주께서 일찍 큰 권능과 강한 손으로 구속하신 주의 종이요 주의 백성이니이다	Now these are thy servants and thy people, whom thou hast redeemed by thy great power, and by thy strong hand.	They are Your servants and Your people. You redeemed them by Your great power and mighty hand.
NEH	1	11	주여 구하오니 귀를 기울이사 종의 기도와 주의 이름을 경외하기를 기뻐하는 종들의 기도를 들으시고 오늘날 종으로 형통하여 이 사람 앞에서 은혜를 입게 하옵소서 하였나니 그 때에 내가 왕의 술관원이 되었었느니라	O Lord, I beseech thee, let now thine ear be attentive to the prayer of thy servant, and to the prayer of thy servants, who desire to fear thy name: and prosper, I pray thee, thy servant this day, and grant him mercy in the sight of this man. For I was the king’s cupbearer.	O Lord, may Your ear be attentive to my prayer and to the prayers of Your servants who delight to revere Your name. Give Your servant success this day, I pray, and grant him mercy in the sight of this man.” (At that time I was the cupbearer to the king.)
NEH	2	1	아닥사스다 왕 이십년 니산월에 왕의 앞에 술이 있기로 내가 들어 왕에게 드렸는데 이 전에는 내가 왕의 앞에서 수색이 없었더니	And it came to pass in the month Nisan, in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes the king, that wine was before him: and I took up the wine, and gave it unto the king. Now I had not been beforetime sad in his presence.	Now in the month of Nisan, in the twentieth year of King Artaxerxes, when wine was set before him, I took the wine and gave it to the king. I had never been sad in his presence,
NEH	2	2	왕이 내게 이르시되 네가 병이 없거늘 어찌하여 얼굴에 수색이 있느냐 이는 필연 네 마음에 근심이 있음이로다 그 때에 내가 크게 두려워하여	Wherefore the king said unto me, Why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou art not sick? this is nothing else but sorrow of heart. Then I was very sore afraid,	so the king said to me, “Why is your face sad, though you are not ill? This could only be sadness of the heart.” I was overwhelmed with fear
NEH	2	3	왕께 대답하되 왕은 만세수를 하옵소서 나의 열조의 묘실 있는 성읍이 이제까지 황무하고 성문이 소화되었사오니 내가 어찌 얼굴에 수색이 없사오리이까	And said unto the king, Let the king live for ever: why should not my countenance be sad, when the city, the place of my fathers’ sepulchres, lieth waste, and the gates thereof are consumed with fire?	and replied to the king, “May the king live forever! Why should I not be sad when the city where my fathers are buried lies in ruins, and its gates have been destroyed by fire?”
NEH	2	4	왕이 내게 이르시되 그러면 네가 무엇을 원하느냐 하시기로 내가 곧 하늘의 하나님께 묵도하고	Then the king said unto me, For what dost thou make request? So I prayed to the God of heaven.	“What is your request?” replied the king. So I prayed to the God of heaven
NEH	2	5	왕에게 고하되 왕이 만일 즐겨하시고 종이 왕의 목전에서 은혜를 얻었사오면 나를 유다 땅 나의 열조의 묘실 있는 성읍에 보내어 그 성을 중건하게 하옵소서 하였는데	And I said unto the king, If it please the king, and if thy servant have found favour in thy sight, that thou wouldest send me unto Judah, unto the city of my fathers’ sepulchres, that I may build it.	and answered the king, “If it pleases the king, and if your servant has found favor in your sight, I ask that you send me to Judah, to the city where my fathers are buried, so that I may rebuild it.”
NEH	2	6	그 때에 왕후도 왕의 곁에 앉았더라 왕이 내게 이르시되 네가 몇날에 행할 길이며 어느 때에 돌아오겠느냐 하고 왕이 나를 보내기를 즐겨하시기로 내가 기한을 정하고	And the king said unto me, (the queen also sitting by him,) For how long shall thy journey be? and when wilt thou return? So it pleased the king to send me; and I set him a time.	Then the king, with the queen seated beside him, asked me, “How long will your journey take, and when will you return?” So it pleased the king to send me, and I set a time.
NEH	2	7	내가 또 왕에게 아뢰되 왕이 만일 즐겨하시거든 강 서편 총독들에게 내리시는 조서를 내게 주사 저희로 나를 용납하여 유다까지 통과하게 하시고	Moreover I said unto the king, If it please the king, let letters be given me to the governors beyond the river, that they may convey me over till I come into Judah;	I also said to him, “If it pleases the king, may letters be given to me for the governors west of the Euphrates, so that they will grant me safe passage until I reach Judah.
NEH	2	8	또 왕의 삼림 감독 아삽에게 조서를 내리사 저로 전에 속한 영문의 문과 성곽과 나의 거할 집을 위하여 들보 재목을 주게 하옵소서 하매 내 하나님의 선한 손이 나를 도우심으로 왕이 허락하고	And a letter unto Asaph the keeper of the king’s forest, that he may give me timber to make beams for the gates of the palace which appertained to the house, and for the wall of the city, and for the house that I shall enter into. And the king granted me, according to the good hand of my God upon me.	And may I have a letter to Asaph, keeper of the king’s forest, so that he will give me timber to make beams for the gates of the citadel to the temple, for the city wall, and for the house I will occupy.” And because the gracious hand of my God was upon me, the king granted my requests.
NEH	2	9	군대 장관과 마병을 보내어 나와 함께 하시기로 내가 강 서편에 있는 총독들에게 이르러 왕의 조서를 전하였더니	Then I came to the governors beyond the river, and gave them the king’s letters. Now the king had sent captains of the army and horsemen with me.	Then I went to the governors west of the Euphrates and gave them the king’s letters. The king had also sent army officers and cavalry with me.
NEH	2	10	호론 사람 산발랏과 종 되었던 암몬 사람 도비야가 이스라엘 자손을 흥왕케 하려는 사람이 왔다 함을 듣고 심히 근심하더라	When Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite, heard of it, it grieved them exceedingly that there was come a man to seek the welfare of the children of Israel.	But when Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah the Ammonite official heard about this, they were deeply disturbed that someone had come to seek the well-being of the Israelites.
NEH	2	11	내가 예루살렘에 이르러 거한지 삼일에	So I came to Jerusalem, and was there three days.	After I had arrived in Jerusalem and had been there three days,
NEH	2	12	내 하나님이 내 마음을 감화하사 예루살렘을 위하여 행하게 하신 일을 내가 아무 사람에게도 말하지 아니하고 밤에 일어나 두어 사람과 함께 나갈새 내가 탄 짐승 외에는 다른 짐승이 없더라	And I arose in the night, I and some few men with me; neither told I any man what my God had put in my heart to do at Jerusalem: neither was there any beast with me, save the beast that I rode upon.	I set out at night with a few men. I did not tell anyone what my God had laid on my heart to do for Jerusalem. The only animal with me was the one on which I was riding.
NEH	2	13	그 밤에 골짜기 문으로 나가서 용정으로 분문에 이르는 동안에 보니 예루살렘 성벽이 다 무너졌고 성문은 소화되었더라	And I went out by night by the gate of the valley, even before the dragon well, and to the dung port, and viewed the walls of Jerusalem, which were broken down, and the gates thereof were consumed with fire.	So I went out at night through the Valley Gate toward the Well of the Serpent and the Dung Gate, and I inspected the walls of Jerusalem that had been broken down and the gates that had been destroyed by fire.
NEH	2	14	앞으로 행하여 샘문과 왕의 못에 이르러는 탄 짐승이 지나갈 곳이 없는지라	Then I went on to the gate of the fountain, and to the king’s pool: but there was no place for the beast that was under me to pass.	Then I went on to the Fountain Gate and the King’s Pool, but there was no room for the animal under me to get through;
NEH	2	15	그 밤에 시내를 좇아 올라가서 성벽을 살펴본 후에 돌이켜 골짜기 문으로 들어와서 돌아왔으나	Then went I up in the night by the brook, and viewed the wall, and turned back, and entered by the gate of the valley, and so returned.	so I went up the valley by night and inspected the wall. Then I headed back and reentered through the Valley Gate.
NEH	2	16	방백들은 내가 어디 갔었으며 무엇을 하였는지 알지 못하였고 나도 그 일을 유다 사람들에게나 제사장들에게나 귀인들에게나 방백들에게나 그 외에 일하는 자들에게 고하지 아니하다가	And the rulers knew not whither I went, or what I did; neither had I as yet told it to the Jews, nor to the priests, nor to the nobles, nor to the rulers, nor to the rest that did the work.	The officials did not know where I had gone or what I was doing, for I had not yet told the Jews or priests or nobles or officials or any other workers.
NEH	2	17	후에 저희에게 이르기를 우리의 당한 곤경은 너희도 목도하는 바라 예루살렘이 황무하고 성문이 소화되었으니 자, 예루살렘 성을 중건하여 다시 수치를 받지 말자 하고	Then said I unto them, Ye see the distress that we are in, how Jerusalem lieth waste, and the gates thereof are burned with fire: come, and let us build up the wall of Jerusalem, that we be no more a reproach.	Then I said to them, “You see the trouble we are in. Jerusalem lies in ruins, and its gates have been burned down. Come, let us rebuild the wall of Jerusalem, so that we will no longer be a disgrace.”
NEH	2	18	또 저희에게 하나님의 선한 손이 나를 도우신 일과 왕이 내게 이른 말씀을 고하였더니 저희의 말이 일어나 건축하자 하고 모두 힘을 내어 이 선한 일을 하려 하매	Then I told them of the hand of my God which was good upon me; as also the king’s words that he had spoken unto me. And they said, Let us rise up and build. So they strengthened their hands for this good work.	I also told them about the gracious hand of my God upon me, and what the king had said to me. “Let us start rebuilding,” they replied, and they set their hands to this good work.
NEH	2	19	호론 사람 산발랏과 종이 되었던 암몬 사람 도비야와 아라비아 사람 게셈이 이 말을 듣고 우리를 업신여기고 비웃어 가로되 너희의 하는 일이 무엇이냐 왕을 배반코자 하느냐 하기로	But when Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite, and Geshem the Arabian, heard it, they laughed us to scorn, and despised us, and said, What is this thing that ye do? will ye rebel against the king?	But when Sanballat the Horonite, Tobiah the Ammonite official, and Geshem the Arab heard about this, they mocked us and ridiculed us, saying, “What is this you are doing? Are you rebelling against the king?”
NEH	2	20	내가 대답하여 가로되 하늘의 하나님이 우리로 형통케 하시리니 그의 종 우리가 일어나 건축하려니와 오직 너희는 예루살렘에서 아무 기업도 없고 권리도 없고 명록도 없다 하였느니라	Then answered I them, and said unto them, The God of heaven, he will prosper us; therefore we his servants will arise and build: but ye have no portion, nor right, nor memorial, in Jerusalem.	So I answered them and said, “The God of heaven is the One who will grant us success. We, His servants, will start rebuilding, but you have no portion, right, or claim in Jerusalem.”
NEH	3	1	때에 대제사장 엘리아십이 그 형제 제사장들과 함께 일어나 양문을 건축하여 성별하고 문짝을 달고 또 성벽을 건축하여 함메아 망대에서부터 하나넬 망대까지 성별하였고	Then Eliashib the high priest rose up with his brethren the priests, and they builded the sheep gate; they sanctified it, and set up the doors of it; even unto the tower of Meah they sanctified it, unto the tower of Hananeel.	At the Sheep Gate, Eliashib the high priest and his fellow priests began rebuilding. They dedicated it and installed its doors. After building as far as the Tower of the Hundred and the Tower of Hananel, they dedicated the wall.
NEH	3	2	그 다음은 여리고 사람들이 건축하였고 또 그 다음은 이므리의 아들 삭굴이 건축하였으며	And next unto him builded the men of Jericho. And next to them builded Zaccur the son of Imri.	The men of Jericho built next to Eliashib, and Zaccur son of Imri built next to them.
NEH	3	3	어문은 하스나아의 자손들이 건축하여 그 들보를 얹고 문짝을 달고 자물쇠와 빗장을 갖추었고	But the fish gate did the sons of Hassenaah build, who also laid the beams thereof, and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof.	The Fish Gate was rebuilt by the sons of Hassenaah. They laid its beams and installed its doors, bolts, and bars.
NEH	3	4	그 다음은 학고스의 손자 우아의 아들 므레못이 중수하였고 그 다음은 므세사벨의 손자 베레갸의 아들 므술람이 중수하였고 그 다음은 바아나의 아들 사독이 중수하였고	And next unto them repaired Meremoth the son of Urijah, the son of Koz. And next unto them repaired Meshullam the son of Berechiah, the son of Meshezabeel. And next unto them repaired Zadok the son of Baana.	Next to them, Meremoth son of Uriah, the son of Hakkoz, made repairs. Next to him, Meshullam son of Berechiah, the son of Meshezabel, made repairs; and next to him, Zadok son of Baana made repairs as well.
NEH	3	5	그 다음은 드고아 사람들이 중수하였으나 그 귀족들은 그 주의 역사에 담부치 아니하였으며	And next unto them the Tekoites repaired; but their nobles put not their necks to the work of their Lord.	Next to him, the Tekoites made repairs, but their nobles did not put their shoulders to the work under their supervisors.
NEH	3	6	옛 문은 바세아의 아들 요야다와 브소드야의 아들 므술람이 중수하여 그 들보를 얹고 문짝을 달고 자물쇠와 빗장을 갖추었고	Moreover the old gate repaired Jehoiada the son of Paseah, and Meshullam the son of Besodeiah; they laid the beams thereof, and set up the doors thereof, and the locks thereof, and the bars thereof.	The Jeshanah Gate was repaired by Joiada son of Paseah and Meshullam son of Besodeiah. They laid its beams and installed its doors, bolts, and bars.
NEH	3	7	그 다음은 기브온 사람 믈라야와 메로놋 사람 야돈이 강 서편 총독의 관할에 속한 기브온 사람들과 미스바 사람들로 더불어 중수하였고	And next unto them repaired Melatiah the Gibeonite, and Jadon the Meronothite, the men of Gibeon, and of Mizpah, unto the throne of the governor on this side the river.	Next to them, repairs were made by Melatiah the Gibeonite, Jadon the Meronothite, and the men of Gibeon and Mizpah, who were under the authority of the governor of the region west of the Euphrates.
NEH	3	8	그 다음은 금장색 할해야의 아들 웃시엘 등이 중수하였고 그 다음은 향품 장사 하나냐 등이 중수하되 저희가 예루살렘 넓은 성벽까지 하였고	Next unto him repaired Uzziel the son of Harhaiah, of the goldsmiths. Next unto him also repaired Hananiah the son of one of the apothecaries, and they fortified Jerusalem unto the broad wall.	Next to them, Uzziel son of Harhaiah, one of the goldsmiths, made repairs, and next to him, Hananiah son of the perfumer made repairs. They fortified Jerusalem as far as the Broad Wall.
NEH	3	9	그 다음은 예루살렘 지방 절반을 다스리는 자 후르의 아들 르바야가 중수하였고	And next unto them repaired Rephaiah the son of Hur, the ruler of the half part of Jerusalem.	Next to them, Rephaiah son of Hur, ruler of a half-district of Jerusalem, made repairs;
NEH	3	10	하루맙의 아들 여다야는 자기 집과 마주 대한 곳을 중수하였고 그 다음은 하삽느야의 아들 핫두스가 중수하였고	And next unto them repaired Jedaiah the son of Harumaph, even over against his house. And next unto him repaired Hattush the son of Hashabniah.	next to him, Jedaiah son of Harumaph made repairs across from his house; and next to him, Hattush son of Hashabneiah made repairs.
NEH	3	11	하림의 아들 말기야와 바핫모압의 아들 핫숩이 한 부분과 풀무 망대를 중수하였고	Malchijah the son of Harim, and Hashub the son of Pahath–moab, repaired the other piece, and the tower of the furnaces.	Malchijah son of Harim and Hasshub son of Pahath-moab repaired another section, as well as the Tower of the Ovens.
NEH	3	12	그 다음은 예루살렘 지방 절반을 다스리는 자 할로헤스의 아들 살룸과 그 딸들이 중수하였고	And next unto him repaired Shallum the son of Halohesh, the ruler of the half part of Jerusalem, he and his daughters.	And next to them, Shallum son of Hallohesh, ruler of the other half-district of Jerusalem, made repairs, with the help of his daughters.
NEH	3	13	골짜기 문은 하눈과 사노아 거민이 중수하여 문을 세우며 문짝을 달고 자물쇠와 빗장을 갖추고 또 분문까지 성벽 일천 규빗을 중수하였고	The valley gate repaired Hanun, and the inhabitants of Zanoah; they built it, and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof, and a thousand cubits on the wall unto the dung gate.	The Valley Gate was repaired by Hanun and the residents of Zanoah. They rebuilt it, installed its doors, bolts, and bars, and repaired a thousand cubits of the wall as far as the Dung Gate.
NEH	3	14	분문은 벧학게렘 지방을 다스리는 레갑의 아들 말기야가 중수하여 문을 세우며 문짝을 달고 자물쇠와 빗장을 갖추었고	But the dung gate repaired Malchiah the son of Rechab, the ruler of part of Beth–haccerem; he built it, and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof.	The Dung Gate was repaired by Malchijah son of Rechab, ruler of the district of Beth-haccherem. He rebuilt it and installed its doors, bolts, and bars.
NEH	3	15	샘문은 미스바 지방을 다스리는 골호세의 아들 살룬이 중수하여 문을 세우고 덮으며 문짝을 달며 자물쇠와 빗장을 갖추고 또 왕의 동산 근처 셀라 못가의 성벽을 중수하여 다윗 성에서 내려오는 층계까지 이르렀고	But the gate of the fountain repaired Shallun the son of Col–hozeh, the ruler of part of Mizpah; he built it, and covered it, and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof, and the wall of the pool of Siloah by the king’s garden, and unto the stairs that go down from the city of David.	The Fountain Gate was repaired by Shallun son of Col-hozeh, ruler of the district of Mizpah. He rebuilt it, roofed it, and installed its doors, bolts, and bars. He also repaired the wall of the Pool of Shelah near the king’s garden, as far as the stairs that descend from the City of David.
NEH	3	16	그 다음은 벧술 지방 절반을 다스리는 자 아스북의 아들 느헤미야가 중수하여 다윗의 묘실과 마주 대한 곳에 이르고 또 파서 만든 못을 지나 용사의 집까지 이르렀고	After him repaired Nehemiah the son of Azbuk, the ruler of the half part of Beth–zur, unto the place over against the sepulchres of David, and to the pool that was made, and unto the house of the mighty.	Beyond him, Nehemiah son of Azbuk, ruler of a half-district of Beth-zur, made repairs up to a point opposite the tombs of David, as far as the artificial pool and the House of the Mighty.
NEH	3	17	그 다음은 레위 사람 바니의 아들 르훔이 중수하였고 그 다음은 그일라 지방 절반을 다스리는 자 하사뱌가 그 지방을 대표하여 중수하였고	After him repaired the Levites, Rehum the son of Bani. Next unto him repaired Hashabiah, the ruler of the half part of Keilah, in his part.	Next to him, the Levites made repairs under Rehum son of Bani, and next to him, Hashabiah, ruler of a half-district of Keilah, made repairs for his district.
NEH	3	18	그 다음은 그 형제 그일라 지방 절반을 다스리는 자 헤나닷의 아들 바왜가 중수하였고	After him repaired their brethren, Bavai the son of Henadad, the ruler of the half part of Keilah.	Next to him, their countrymen made repairs under Binnui son of Henadad, ruler of the other half-district of Keilah.
NEH	3	19	그 다음은 미스바를 다스리는 자 예수아의 아들 에셀이 한 부분을 중수하여 성 굽이에 있는 군기고 맞은편까지 이르렀고	And next to him repaired Ezer the son of Jeshua, the ruler of Mizpah, another piece over against the going up to the armoury at the turning of the wall.	And next to him, Ezer son of Jeshua, ruler of Mizpah, repaired another section opposite the Ascent to the Armory, near the angle in the wall.
NEH	3	20	그 다음은 삽배의 아들 바룩이 한 부분을 힘써 중수하여 성 굽이에서부터 대제사장 엘리아십의 집 문에 이르렀고	After him Baruch the son of Zabbai earnestly repaired the other piece, from the turning of the wall unto the door of the house of Eliashib the high priest.	Next to him, Baruch son of Zabbai diligently repaired another section, from the angle to the doorway of the house of Eliashib the high priest.
NEH	3	21	그 다음은 학고스의 손자 우리야의 아들 므레못이 한 부분을 중수하여 엘리아십의 집 문에서부터 엘리아십의 집 모퉁이에 이르렀고	After him repaired Meremoth the son of Urijah the son of Koz another piece, from the door of the house of Eliashib even to the end of the house of Eliashib.	Next to him, Meremoth son of Uriah, the son of Hakkoz, repaired another section, from the doorway of the house of Eliashib to the end of the house.
NEH	3	22	그 다음은 평지에 사는 제사장들이 중수하였고	And after him repaired the priests, the men of the plain.	And next to him, the priests from the surrounding area made repairs.
NEH	3	23	그 다음은 베냐민과 핫숩이 자기 집 맞은편 부분을 중수하였고 그 다음은 아나냐의 손자 마아세야의 아들 아사랴가 자기 집에서 가까운 부분을 중수하였고	After him repaired Benjamin and Hashub over against their house. After him repaired Azariah the son of Maaseiah the son of Ananiah by his house.	Beyond them, Benjamin and Hasshub made repairs in front of their house, and next to them, Azariah son of Maaseiah, the son of Ananiah, made repairs beside his house.
NEH	3	24	그 다음은 헤나닷의 아들 빈누이가 한 부분을 중수하되 아사랴의 집에서 부터 성 굽이를 지나 성 모퉁이에 이르렀고	After him repaired Binnui the son of Henadad another piece, from the house of Azariah unto the turning of the wall, even unto the corner.	After him, Binnui son of Henadad repaired another section, from the house of Azariah to the angle and the corner,
NEH	3	25	우새의 아들 발랄은 성 굽이 맞은편과 왕의 윗 궁에서 내어민 망대 맞은편 곧 시위청에서 가까운 부분을 중수하였고 그 다음은 바로스의 아들 브다야가 중수하였고	Palal the son of Uzai, over against the turning of the wall, and the tower which lieth out from the king’s high house, that was by the court of the prison. After him Pedaiah the son of Parosh.	and Palal son of Uzai made repairs opposite the angle and the tower that juts out from the upper palace of the king near the courtyard of the guard. Next to him, Pedaiah son of Parosh
NEH	3	26	(때에 느디님 사람은 오벨에 거하여 동편 수문과 마주 대한 곳에서부터 내어민 망대까지 미쳤느니라)	Moreover the Nethinims dwelt in Ophel, unto the place over against the water gate toward the east, and the tower that lieth out.	and the temple servants living on the hill of Ophel made repairs opposite the Water Gate toward the east and the tower that juts out.
NEH	3	27	그 다음은 드고아 사람들이 한 부분을 중수하여 내어민 큰 망대와 마주 대한 곳에서부터 오벨 성벽까지 이르렀느니라	After them the Tekoites repaired another piece, over against the great tower that lieth out, even unto the wall of Ophel.	And next to them, the Tekoites repaired another section, from a point opposite the great tower that juts out to the wall of Ophel.
NEH	3	28	마문 위로부터는 제사장들이 각각 자기 집과 마주 대한 부분을 중수하였고	From above the horse gate repaired the priests, every one over against his house.	Above the Horse Gate, each of the priests made repairs in front of his own house.
NEH	3	29	그 다음은 임멜의 아들 사독이 자기 집과 마주 대한 부분을 중수하였고 그 다음은 동문지기 스가냐의 아들 스마야가 중수하였고	After them repaired Zadok the son of Immer over against his house. After him repaired also Shemaiah the son of Shechaniah, the keeper of the east gate.	Next to them, Zadok son of Immer made repairs opposite his house, and next to him, Shemaiah son of Shecaniah, the guard of the East Gate, made repairs.
NEH	3	30	그 다음은 셀레먀의 아들 하나냐와 살랍의 여섯째 아들 하눈이 한 부분을 중수하였고 그 다음은 베레갸의 아들 므술람이 자기 침방과 마주 대한 부분을 중수하였고	After him repaired Hananiah the son of Shelemiah, and Hanun the sixth son of Zalaph, another piece. After him repaired Meshullam the son of Berechiah over against his chamber.	Next to him, Hananiah son of Shelemiah, as well as Hanun the sixth son of Zalaph, repaired another section. Next to them, Meshullam son of Berechiah made repairs opposite his own quarters.
NEH	3	31	그 다음은 금장색 말기야가 함밉갓 문과 마주 대한 부분을 중수하여 느디님 사람과 상고들의 집에서부터 성 모퉁이 누에 이르렀고	After him repaired Malchiah the goldsmith’s son unto the place of the Nethinims, and of the merchants, over against the gate Miphkad, and to the going up of the corner.	Next to him, Malchijah, one of the goldsmiths, made repairs as far as the house of the temple servants and the merchants, opposite the Inspection Gate, and as far as the upper room above the corner.
NEH	3	32	성 모퉁이 누에서 양문까지는 금장색과 상고들이 중수하였느니라	And between the going up of the corner unto the sheep gate repaired the goldsmiths and the merchants.	And between the upper room above the corner and the Sheep Gate, the goldsmiths and merchants made repairs.
NEH	4	1	산발랏이 우리가 성을 건축한다 함을 듣고 크게 분노하여 유다 사람을 비웃으며	But it came to pass, that when Sanballat heard that we builded the wall, he was wroth, and took great indignation, and mocked the Jews.	Now when Sanballat heard that we were rebuilding the wall, he was furious and filled with indignation. He ridiculed the Jews
NEH	4	2	자기 형제들과 사마리아 군대 앞에서 말하여 가로되 이 미약한 유다 사람들의 하는 일이 무엇인가, 스스로 견고케 하려는가, 제사를 드리려는가, 하루에 필역하려는가, 소화된 돌을 흙 무더기에서 다시 일으키려는가 하고	And he spake before his brethren and the army of Samaria, and said, What do these feeble Jews? will they fortify themselves? will they sacrifice? will they make an end in a day? will they revive the stones out of the heaps of the rubbish which are burned?	before his associates and the army of Samaria, saying, “What are these feeble Jews doing? Can they restore the wall by themselves? Will they offer sacrifices? Will they complete it in a day? Can they bring these burnt stones back to life from the mounds of rubble?”
NEH	4	3	암몬 사람 도비야는 곁에 섰다가 가로되 저들의 건축하는 성벽은 여우가 올라가도 곧 무너지리라 하더라	Now Tobiah the Ammonite was by him, and he said, Even that which they build, if a fox go up, he shall even break down their stone wall.	Then Tobiah the Ammonite, who was beside him, said, “If even a fox were to climb up on what they are building, it would break down their wall of stones!”
NEH	4	4	우리 하나님이여 들으시옵소서 우리가 업신여김을 당하나이다 원컨대 저희의 욕하는 것으로 자기의 머리에 돌리사 노략거리가 되어 이방에 사로잡히게 하시고	Hear, O our God; for we are despised: and turn their reproach upon their own head, and give them for a prey in the land of captivity:	Hear us, O God, for we are despised. Turn their scorn back upon their own heads, and let them be taken as plunder to a land of captivity.
NEH	4	5	주의 앞에서 그 악을 덮어 두지 마옵시며 그 죄를 도말하지 마옵소서 저희가 건축하는 자 앞에서 주의 노를 격동하였음이니이다 하고	And cover not their iniquity, and let not their sin be blotted out from before thee: for they have provoked thee to anger before the builders.	Do not cover up their iniquity or let their sin be blotted out from Your sight, for they have provoked the builders.
NEH	4	6	이에 우리가 성을 건축하여 전부가 연락되고 고가 절반에 미쳤으니 이는 백성이 마음들여 역사하였음이니라	So built we the wall; and all the wall was joined together unto the half thereof: for the people had a mind to work.	So we rebuilt the wall until all of it was joined together up to half its height, for the people had a mind to work.
NEH	4	7	산발랏과 도비야와 아라비아 사람들과 암몬 사람들과 아스돗 사람들이 예루살렘 성이 중수되어 그 퇴락한 곳이 수보되어 간다 함을 듣고 심히 분하여	But it came to pass, that when Sanballat, and Tobiah, and the Arabians, and the Ammonites, and the Ashdodites, heard that the walls of Jerusalem were made up, and that the breaches began to be stopped, then they were very wroth,	When Sanballat and Tobiah, together with the Arabs, Ammonites, and Ashdodites, heard that the repair to the walls of Jerusalem was progressing and that the gaps were being closed, they were furious,
NEH	4	8	다 함께 꾀하기를 예루살렘으로 가서 쳐서 요란하게 하자 하기로	And conspired all of them together to come and to fight against Jerusalem, and to hinder it.	and all of them conspired to come and fight against Jerusalem and create a hindrance.
NEH	4	9	우리가 우리 하나님께 기도하며 저희를 인하여 파수꾼을 두어 주야로 방비하는데	Nevertheless we made our prayer unto our God, and set a watch against them day and night, because of them.	So we prayed to our God and posted a guard against them day and night.
NEH	4	10	유다 사람들은 이르기를 흙 무더기가 아직도 많거늘 담부하는 자의 힘이 쇠하였으니 우리가 성을 건축하지 못하리라 하고	And Judah said, The strength of the bearers of burdens is decayed, and there is much rubbish; so that we are not able to build the wall.	Meanwhile, the people of Judah said: “The strength of the laborer fails, and there is so much rubble that we will never be able to rebuild the wall.”
NEH	4	11	우리의 대적은 이르기를 저희가 알지 못하고 보지 못하는 사이에 우리가 저희 중에 달려 들어가서 살륙하여 역사를 그치게 하리라 하고	And our adversaries said, They shall not know, neither see, till we come in the midst among them, and slay them, and cause the work to cease.	And our enemies said, “Before they know or see a thing, we will come into their midst, kill them, and put an end to the work.”
NEH	4	12	그 대적의 근처에 거하는 유다 사람들도 그 각처에서 와서 열 번이나 우리에게 고하기를 너희가 우리에게로 와야 하리라 하기로	And it came to pass, that when the Jews which dwelt by them came, they said unto us ten times, From all places whence ye shall return unto us they will be upon you.	At that time the Jews who lived nearby came and told us ten times over, “Wherever you turn, they will attack us.”
NEH	4	13	내가 성 뒤 낮고 넓은 곳에 백성으로 그 종족을 따라 칼과 창과 활을 가지고 서게 하고	Therefore set I in the lower places behind the wall, and on the higher places, I even set the people after their families with their swords, their spears, and their bows.	So I stationed men behind the lowest sections of the wall, at the vulnerable areas. I stationed them by families with their swords, spears, and bows.
NEH	4	14	내가 돌아본 후에 일어나서 귀인들과 민장과 남은 백성에게 고하기 너희는 저희를 두려워 말고 지극히 크시고 두려우신 주를 기억하고 너희 형제와 자녀와 아내와 집을 위하여 싸우라 하였었느니라	And I looked, and rose up, and said unto the nobles, and to the rulers, and to the rest of the people, Be not ye afraid of them: remember the Lord, which is great and terrible, and fight for your brethren, your sons, and your daughters, your wives, and your houses.	After I had made an inspection, I stood up and said to the nobles, the officials, and the rest of the people, “Do not be afraid of them. Remember the Lord, who is great and awesome, and fight for your brothers, your sons and your daughters, your wives and your homes.”
NEH	4	15	우리의 대적이 자기의 뜻을 우리가 알았다 함을 들으니라 하나님이 저희의 꾀를 폐하셨으므로 우리가 다 성에 돌아와서 각각 역사하였는데	And it came to pass, when our enemies heard that it was known unto us, and God had brought their counsel to nought, that we returned all of us to the wall, every one unto his work.	When our enemies heard that we were aware of their scheme and that God had frustrated it, each of us returned to his own work on the wall.
NEH	4	16	그 때로부터 내 종자의 절반은 역사하고 절반은 갑옷을 입고 창과 방패와 활을 가졌고 민장은 유다 온 족속의 뒤에 있었으며	And it came to pass from that time forth, that the half of my servants wrought in the work, and the other half of them held both the spears, the shields, and the bows, and the habergeons; and the rulers were behind all the house of Judah.	And from that day on, half of my servants did the work while the other half held spears, shields, bows, and armor. The officers stationed themselves behind all the people of Judah
NEH	4	17	성을 건축하는 자와 담부하는 자는 다 각각 한 손으로 일을 하며 한 손에는 병기를 잡았는데	They which builded on the wall, and they that bare burdens, with those that laded, every one with one of his hands wrought in the work, and with the other hand held a weapon.	who were rebuilding the wall. The laborers who carried materials worked with one hand and held a weapon with the other.
NEH	4	18	건축하는 자는 각각 칼을 차고 건축하며 나팔 부는 자는 내 곁에 섰었느니라	For the builders, every one had his sword girded by his side, and so builded. And he that sounded the trumpet was by me.	And each of the builders worked with his sword strapped at his side. But the trumpeter stayed beside me.
NEH	4	19	내가 귀인들과 민장들과 남은 백성에게 이르기를 이 역사는 크고 넓으므로 우리가 성에서 나뉘어 상거가 먼즉	And I said unto the nobles, and to the rulers, and to the rest of the people, The work is great and large, and we are separated upon the wall, one far from another.	Then I said to the nobles, the officials, and the rest of the people: “The work is great and extensive, and we are spread out far from one another along the wall.
NEH	4	20	너희가 무론 어디서든지 나팔 소리를 듣거든 그리로 모여서 우리에게로 나아오라 우리 하나님이 우리를 위하여 싸우시리라 하였느니라	In what place therefore ye hear the sound of the trumpet, resort ye thither unto us: our God shall fight for us.	Wherever you hear the sound of the horn, rally to us there. Our God will fight for us!”
NEH	4	21	우리가 이같이 역사하는데 무리의 절반은 동틀 때부터 별이 나기까지 창을 잡았었으며	So we laboured in the work: and half of them held the spears from the rising of the morning till the stars appeared.	So we continued the work, while half of the men held spears from the break of dawn until the stars came out.
NEH	4	22	그 때에 내가 또 백성에게 고하기를 사람마다 그 종자와 함께 예루살렘 안에서 잘지니 밤에는 우리를 위하여 파수하겠고 낮에는 역사하리라 하고	Likewise at the same time said I unto the people, Let every one with his servant lodge within Jerusalem, that in the night they may be a guard to us, and labour on the day.	At that time I also said to the people, “Let every man and his servant spend the night inside Jerusalem, so that they can stand guard by night and work by day.”
NEH	4	23	내나 내 형제들이나 종자들이나 나를 좇아 파수하는 사람들이나 다 그 옷을 벗지 아니하였으며 물을 길으러 갈 때에도 기계를 잡았었느니라	So neither I, nor my brethren, nor my servants, nor the men of the guard which followed me, none of us put off our clothes, saving that every one put them off for washing.	So neither I nor my brothers nor my servants nor the guards with me changed out of our clothes; each carried his weapon, even to go for water.
NEH	5	1	때에 백성이 그 아내와 함께 크게 부르짖어 그 형제 유다 사람을 원망하는데	And there was a great cry of the people and of their wives against their brethren the Jews.	About that time there was a great outcry from the people and their wives against their fellow Jews.
NEH	5	2	혹은 말하기를 우리와 우리 자녀가 많으니 곡식을 얻어 먹고 살아야 하겠다 하고	For there were that said, We, our sons, and our daughters, are many: therefore we take up corn for them, that we may eat, and live.	Some were saying, “We and our sons and daughters are numerous. We must get grain in order to eat and stay alive.”
NEH	5	3	혹은 말하기를 우리의 밭과 포도원과 집이라도 전당 잡히고 이 흉년을 위하여 곡식을 얻자 하고	Some also there were that said, We have mortgaged our lands, vineyards, and houses, that we might buy corn, because of the dearth.	Others were saying, “We are mortgaging our fields, our vineyards, and our homes to get grain during the famine.”
NEH	5	4	혹은 말하기를 우리는 밭과 포도원으로 돈을 빚내어 세금을 바쳤도다	There were also that said, We have borrowed money for the king’s tribute, and that upon our lands and vineyards.	Still others were saying, “We have borrowed money to pay the king’s tax on our fields and vineyards.
NEH	5	5	우리 육체도 우리 형제의 육체와 같고 우리 자녀도 저희 자녀 같거늘 이제 우리 자녀를 종으로 파는도다 우리 딸 중에 벌써 종된 자가 있으나 우리의 밭과 포도원이 이미 남의 것이 되었으니 속량할 힘이 없도다	Yet now our flesh is as the flesh of our brethren, our children as their children: and, lo, we bring into bondage our sons and our daughters to be servants, and some of our daughters are brought unto bondage already: neither is it in our power to redeem them; for other men have our lands and vineyards.	We and our children are just like our countrymen and their children, yet we are subjecting our sons and daughters to slavery. Some of our daughters are already enslaved, but we are powerless to redeem them because our fields and vineyards belong to others.”
NEH	5	6	내가 백성의 부르짖음과 이런 말을 듣고 크게 노하여	And I was very angry when I heard their cry and these words.	When I heard their outcry and these complaints, I became extremely angry,
NEH	5	7	중심에 계획하고 귀인과 민장을 꾸짖어 이르기를 너희가 각기 형제에게 취리를 하는도다 하고 대회를 열고 저희를 쳐서	Then I consulted with myself, and I rebuked the nobles, and the rulers, and said unto them, Ye exact usury, every one of his brother. And I set a great assembly against them.	and after serious thought I rebuked the nobles and officials, saying, “You are exacting usury from your own brothers!” So I called a large assembly against them
NEH	5	8	이르기를 우리는 이방인의 손에 팔린 우리 형제 유다 사람들을 우리의 힘을 다하여 속량하였거늘 너희는 너희 형제를 팔고자 하느냐 더구나 우리의 손에 팔리게 하겠느냐 하매 저희가 잠잠하여 말이 없기로	And I said unto them, We after our ability have redeemed our brethren the Jews, which were sold unto the heathen; and will ye even sell your brethren? or shall they be sold unto us? Then held they their peace, and found nothing to answer.	and said, “We have done our best to buy back our Jewish brothers who were sold to foreigners, but now you are selling your own brothers, that they may be sold back to us!” But they remained silent, for they could find nothing to say.
NEH	5	9	내가 또 이르기를 너희의 소위가 좋지 못하도다 우리 대적 이방 사람의 비방을 생각하고 우리 하나님을 경외함에 행할 것이 아니냐	Also I said, It is not good that ye do: ought ye not to walk in the fear of our God because of the reproach of the heathen our enemies?	So I continued, “What you are doing is not right. Shouldn’t you walk in the fear of our God to avoid the reproach of our foreign enemies?
NEH	5	10	나와 내 형제와 종자들도 역시 돈과 곡식을 백성에게 취하여 주나니 우리가 그 이식 받기를 그치자	I likewise, and my brethren, and my servants, might exact of them money and corn: I pray you, let us leave off this usury.	I, as well as my brothers and my servants, have been lending the people money and grain. Please, let us stop this usury.
NEH	5	11	그런즉 너희는 오늘이라도 그 밭과 포도원과 감람원과 집이며 취한 바 돈이나 곡식이나 새 포도주나 기름의 백분지 일을 돌려 보내라 하였더니	Restore, I pray you, to them, even this day, their lands, their vineyards, their oliveyards, and their houses, also the hundredth part of the money, and of the corn, the wine, and the oil, that ye exact of them.	Please restore to them immediately their fields, vineyards, olive groves, and houses, along with the percentage of the money, grain, new wine, and oil that you have been assessing them.”
NEH	5	12	저희가 말하기를 우리가 당신의 말씀대로 행하여 돌려 보내고 아무 것도 요구하지 아니하리이다 하기로 내가 제사장들을 불러 저희에게 그 말대로 행하리라는 맹세를 시키게 하고	Then said they, We will restore them, and will require nothing of them; so will we do as thou sayest. Then I called the priests, and took an oath of them, that they should do according to this promise.	“We will restore it,” they replied, “and will require nothing more from them. We will do as you say.” So I summoned the priests and required of the nobles and officials an oath that they would do what they had promised.
NEH	5	13	내가 옷자락을 떨치며 이르기를 이 말대로 행치 아니하는 자는 하나님이 또한 이와 같이 그 집과 산업에서 떨치실지니 저는 곧 이렇게 떨쳐져 빌지로다 하매 회중이 다 아멘 하고 여호와를 찬송하고 백성들이 그 말한 대로 행하였느니라	Also I shook my lap, and said, So God shake out every man from his house, and from his labour, that performeth not this promise, even thus be he shaken out, and emptied. And all the congregation said, Amen, and praised the Lord. And the people did according to this promise.	I also shook out the folds of my robe and said, “May God likewise shake out of His house and possession every man who does not keep this promise. May such a man be shaken out and have nothing!” The whole assembly said, “Amen,” and they praised the LORD. And the people did as they had promised.
NEH	5	14	내가 유다 땅 총독으로 세움을 받을 때 곧 아닥사스다 왕 이십 년부터 삼십이 년까지 십이 년 동안은 나와 내 형제가 총독의 녹을 먹지 아니하였느니라	Moreover from the time that I was appointed to be their governor in the land of Judah, from the twentieth year even unto the two and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes the king, that is, twelve years, I and my brethren have not eaten the bread of the governor.	Furthermore, from the day King Artaxerxes appointed me to be their governor in the land of Judah, from his twentieth year until his thirty-second year (twelve years total), neither I nor my brothers ate the food allotted to the governor.
NEH	5	15	이전 총독들은 백성에게 토색하여 양식과 포도주와 또 은 사십 세겔을 취하였고 그 종자들도 백성을 압제하였으나 나는 하나님을 경외하므로 이같이 행치 아니하고	But the former governors that had been before me were chargeable unto the people, and had taken of them bread and wine, beside forty shekels of silver; yea, even their servants bare rule over the people: but so did not I, because of the fear of God.	The governors before me had heavily burdened the people, taking from them bread and wine plus forty shekels of silver. Their servants also oppressed the people, but I did not do this because of my fear of God.
NEH	5	16	도리어 이 성 역사에 힘을 다하며 땅을 사지 아니하였고 나의 모든 종자도 모여서 역사를 하였으며	Yea, also I continued in the work of this wall, neither bought we any land: and all my servants were gathered thither unto the work.	Instead, I devoted myself to the construction of the wall, and all my servants were gathered there for the work; we did not acquire any land.
NEH	5	17	또 내 상에는 유다 사람들과 민장들 일백오십 인이 있고 그 외에도 우리 사면 이방인 중에서 우리에게 나아온 자들이 있었는데	Moreover there were at my table an hundred and fifty of the Jews and rulers, beside those that came unto us from among the heathen that are about us.	There were 150 Jews and officials at my table, besides the guests from the surrounding nations.
NEH	5	18	매일 나를 위하여 소 하나와 살진 양 여섯을 준비하며 닭도 많이 준비하고 열흘에 한 번씩은 각종 포도주를 갖추었나니 비록 이같이 하였을지라도 내가 총독의 녹을 요구하지 아니하였음은 백성의 부역이 중함이니라	Now that which was prepared for me daily was one ox and six choice sheep; also fowls were prepared for me, and once in ten days store of all sorts of wine: yet for all this required not I the bread of the governor, because the bondage was heavy upon this people.	Each day one ox, six choice sheep, and some fowl were prepared for me, and once every ten days an abundance of all kinds of wine was provided. But I did not demand the food allotted to the governor, because the burden on the people was so heavy.
NEH	5	19	내 하나님이여 내가 이 백성을 위하여 행한 모든 일을 생각하시고 내게 은혜를 베푸시옵소서	Think upon me, my God, for good, according to all that I have done for this people.	Remember me favorably, O my God, for all that I have done for this people.
NEH	6	1	산발랏과 도비야와 아라비아 사람 게셈과 그 나머지 우리의 대적이 내가 성을 건축하여 그 퇴락한 곳을 남기지 아니하였다 함을 들었는데 내가 아직 성문에 문짝을 달지 못한 때라	Now it came to pass, when Sanballat, and Tobiah, and Geshem the Arabian, and the rest of our enemies, heard that I had builded the wall, and that there was no breach left therein; (though at that time I had not set up the doors upon the gates;)	When Sanballat, Tobiah, Geshem the Arab, and the rest of our enemies heard that I had rebuilt the wall and not a gap was left—though to that time I had not yet installed the doors in the gates—
NEH	6	2	산발랏과 게셈이 내게 보내어 이르기를 오라 우리가 오노 평지 한 촌에서 서로 만나자 하니 실상은 나를 해코자 함이라	That Sanballat and Geshem sent unto me, saying, Come, let us meet together in some one of the villages in the plain of Ono. But they thought to do me mischief.	Sanballat and Geshem sent me this message: “Come, let us meet together in one of the villages on the plain of Ono.” But they were planning to harm me.
NEH	6	3	내가 곧 저희에게 사자들을 보내어 이르기를 내가 이제 큰 역사를 하니 내려가지 못하겠노라 어찌하여 역사를 떠나 정지하게 하고 너희에게로 내려가겠느냐 하매	And I sent messengers unto them, saying, I am doing a great work, so that I cannot come down: why should the work cease, whilst I leave it, and come down to you?	So I sent messengers to them, saying, “I am doing a great work and cannot come down. Why should the work stop while I leave it to go down to you?”
NEH	6	4	저희가 네 번이나 이같이 내게 보내되 나는 여전히 대답하였더니	Yet they sent unto me four times after this sort; and I answered them after the same manner.	Four times they sent me the same message, and each time I gave the same reply.
NEH	6	5	산발랏이 다섯 번째는 그 종자의 손에 봉하지 않은 편지를 들려 내게 보내었는데	Then sent Sanballat his servant unto me in like manner the fifth time with an open letter in his hand;	The fifth time, Sanballat sent me this same message by his young servant, who had in his hand an unsealed letter
NEH	6	6	그 글에 이르기를 이방 중에도 소문이 있고 가스무도 말하기를 네가 유다 사람들로 더불어 모반하려 하여 성을 건축한다 하나니 네가 그 말과 같이 왕이 되려 하는도다	Wherein was written, It is reported among the heathen, and Gashmu saith it, that thou and the Jews think to rebel: for which cause thou buildest the wall, that thou mayest be their king, according to these words.	that read: “It is reported among the nations—and Geshem agrees—that you and the Jews are plotting to revolt, and this is why you are building the wall. According to these reports, you are to become their king,
NEH	6	7	또 네가 선지자를 세워 예루살렘에서 너를 들어 선전하기를 유다에 왕이 있다 하게 하였으니 이 말이 왕에게 들릴지라 그런즉 너는 이제 오라 함께 의논하자 하였기로	And thou hast also appointed prophets to preach of thee at Jerusalem, saying, There is a king in Judah: and now shall it be reported to the king according to these words. Come now therefore, and let us take counsel together.	and you have even appointed prophets in Jerusalem to proclaim on your behalf: ‘There is a king in Judah.’ Soon these rumors will reach the ears of the king. So come, let us confer together.”
NEH	6	8	내가 보내어 저에게 이르기를 너의 말한바 이런 일은 없는 일이요 네 마음에서 지어낸 것이라 하였나니	Then I sent unto him, saying, There are no such things done as thou sayest, but thou feignest them out of thine own heart.	Then I sent him this reply: “There is nothing to these rumors you are spreading; you are inventing them in your own mind.”
NEH	6	9	이는 저희가 다 우리를 두렵게 하고자 하여 말하기를 저희 손이 피곤하여 역사를 정지하고 이루지 못하리라 함이라 이제 내 손을 힘있게 하옵소서 하였노라	For they all made us afraid, saying, Their hands shall be weakened from the work, that it be not done. Now therefore, O God, strengthen my hands.	For they were all trying to frighten us, saying, “Their hands will be weakened in the work, and it will never be finished.” But now, my God, strengthen my hands.
NEH	6	10	이 후에 므헤다벨의 손자 들라야의 아들 스마야가 두문불출하기로 내가 그 집에 가니 저가 이르기를 저희가 너를 죽이러 올 터이니 우리가 하나님의 전으로 가서 외소 안에 있고 그 문을 닫자 저희가 필연 밤에 와서 너를 죽이리라 하기로	Afterward I came unto the house of Shemaiah the son of Delaiah the son of Mehetabeel, who was shut up; and he said, Let us meet together in the house of God, within the temple, and let us shut the doors of the temple: for they will come to slay thee; yea, in the night will they come to slay thee.	Later, I went to the house of Shemaiah son of Delaiah, the son of Mehetabel, who was confined to his house. He said: “Let us meet at the house of God inside the temple. Let us shut the temple doors because they are coming to kill you— by night they are coming to kill you!”
NEH	6	11	내가 이르기를 나 같은 자가 어찌 도망하며 나 같은 몸이면 누가 외소에 들어가서 생명을 보존하겠느냐 나는 들어가지 않겠노라 하고	And I said, Should such a man as I flee? and who is there, that, being as I am, would go into the temple to save his life? I will not go in.	But I replied, “Should a man like me run away? Should one like me go into the temple to save his own life? I will not go!”
NEH	6	12	깨달은즉 저는 하나님의 보내신 바가 아니라 도비야와 산발랏에게 뇌물을 받고 내게 이런 예언을 함이라	And, lo, I perceived that God had not sent him; but that he pronounced this prophecy against me: for Tobiah and Sanballat had hired him.	I realized that God had not sent him, but that he had uttered this prophecy against me because Tobiah and Sanballat had hired him.
NEH	6	13	저희가 뇌물을 준 까닭은 나를 두렵게 하고 이렇게 함으로 범죄하게 하고 악한 말을 지어 나를 비방하려 함이었느니라	Therefore was he hired, that I should be afraid, and do so, and sin, and that they might have matter for an evil report, that they might reproach me.	He had been hired to intimidate me so that I would sin by doing as he suggested, so they could give me a bad name in order to discredit me.
NEH	6	14	내 하나님이여 도비야와 산발랏과 여선지 노아댜와 그 남은 선지자들 무릇 나를 두렵게 하고자 한 자의 소위를 기억하옵소서 하였노라	My God, think thou upon Tobiah and Sanballat according to these their works, and on the prophetess Noadiah, and the rest of the prophets, that would have put me in fear.	O my God, remember Tobiah and Sanballat for what they have done, and also Noadiah the prophetess and the other prophets who tried to intimidate me.
NEH	6	15	성 역사가 오십이 일만에 엘룰월 이십 오일에 끝나매	So the wall was finished in the twenty and fifth day of the month Elul, in fifty and two days.	So the wall was completed in fifty-two days, on the twenty-fifth of Elul.
NEH	6	16	우리 모든 대적과 사면 이방 사람들이 이를 듣고 다 두려워하여 스스로 낙담하였으니 이는 이 역사를 우리 하나님이 이루신 것을 앎이니라	And it came to pass, that when all our enemies heard thereof, and all the heathen that were about us saw these things, they were much cast down in their own eyes: for they perceived that this work was wrought of our God.	When all our enemies heard about this, all the surrounding nations were afraid and disheartened, for they realized that this task had been accomplished by our God.
NEH	6	17	그 때에 유다의 귀인들이 여러번 도비야에게 편지하였고 도비야의 편지도 저희에게 이르렀으니	Moreover in those days the nobles of Judah sent many letters unto Tobiah, and the letters of Tobiah came unto them.	Also in those days, the nobles of Judah sent many letters to Tobiah, and Tobiah’s letters came back to them.
NEH	6	18	도비야는 아라의 아들 스가냐의 사위가 되었고 도비야의 아들 여호하난도 베레갸의 아들 므술람의 딸을 취하였으므로 유다에서 저와 동맹한 자가 많음이라	For there were many in Judah sworn unto him, because he was the son in law of Shechaniah the son of Arah; and his son Johanan had taken the daughter of Meshullam the son of Berechiah.	For many in Judah were bound by oath to him, since he was a son-in-law of Shecaniah son of Arah, and his son Jehohanan had married the daughter of Meshullam son of Berechiah.
NEH	6	19	저희들이 도비야의 선행을 내 앞에 말하고 또 나의 말도 저에게 전하매 도비야가 항상 내게 편지하여 나를 두렵게 하고자 하였느니라	Also they reported his good deeds before me, and uttered my words to him. And Tobiah sent letters to put me in fear.	Moreover, these nobles kept reporting to me Tobiah’s good deeds, and they relayed my words to him. And Tobiah sent letters to intimidate me.
NEH	7	1	성이 건축되매 문짝을 달고 문지기와 노래하는 자들과 레위 사람들을 세운 후에	Now it came to pass, when the wall was built, and I had set up the doors, and the porters and the singers and the Levites were appointed,	When the wall had been rebuilt and I had set the doors in place, the gatekeepers, singers, and Levites were appointed.
NEH	7	2	내 아우 하나니와 영문의 관원 하나냐로 함께 예루살렘을 다스리게 하였는데 하나냐는 위인이 충성되어 하나님을 경외함이 무리에서 뛰어난 자라	That I gave my brother Hanani, and Hananiah the ruler of the palace, charge over Jerusalem: for he was a faithful man, and feared God above many.	Then I put my brother Hanani in charge of Jerusalem, along with Hananiah the commander of the fortress, because he was a faithful man who feared God more than most.
NEH	7	3	내가 저희에게 이르기를 해가 높이 뜨기 전에는 예루살렘 성문을 열지 말고 아직 파수할 때에 곧 문을 닫고 빗장을 지르며 또 예루살렘 거민으로 각각 반차를 따라 파수하되 자기 집 맞은편을 지키게 하라 하였노니	And I said unto them, Let not the gates of Jerusalem be opened until the sun be hot; and while they stand by, let them shut the doors, and bar them: and appoint watches of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, every one in his watch, and every one to be over against his house.	And I told them, “Do not open the gates of Jerusalem until the sun is hot. While the guards are on duty, keep the doors shut and securely fastened. And appoint the residents of Jerusalem as guards, some at their posts and some at their own homes.”
NEH	7	4	그 성은 광대하고 거민은 희소하여 가옥을 오히려 건축하지 못하였음이니라	Now the city was large and great: but the people were few therein, and the houses were not builded.	Now the city was large and spacious, but there were few people in it, and the houses had not yet been rebuilt.
NEH	7	5	내 하나님이 내 마음을 감동하사 귀인들과 민장과 백성을 모아 보계대로 계수하게 하신고로 내가 처음으로 돌아온 자의 보계를 얻었는데 거기 기록한 것을 보면	And my God put into mine heart to gather together the nobles, and the rulers, and the people, that they might be reckoned by genealogy. And I found a register of the genealogy of them which came up at the first, and found written therein,	Then my God put it into my heart to assemble the nobles, the officials, and the people to be enrolled by genealogy. I found the genealogical register of those who had first returned, and I found the following written in it:
NEH	7	6	옛적에 바발론 왕 느부갓네살에게 사로잡혀 갔던 자 중에서 놓임을 받고 예루살렘과 유다로 돌아와 각기 본성에 이른 자 곧	These are the children of the province, that went up out of the captivity, of those that had been carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away, and came again to Jerusalem and to Judah, every one unto his city;	These are the people of the province who came up from the captivity of the exiles carried away to Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar its king. They returned to Jerusalem and Judah, each to his own town,
NEH	7	7	스룹바벨과 예수아와 느헤미야와 아사랴와 라아마와 나하마니와 모르드개와 빌산과 미스베렛과 비그왜와 느훔과 바아나 등과 함께 나온 이스라엘 백성의 명수가 이러하니라	Who came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum, Baanah. The number, I say, of the men of the people of Israel was this;	accompanied by Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum, and Baanah. This is the count of the men of Israel:
NEH	7	8	바로스 자손이 이천일백칠십이 명이요	The children of Parosh, two thousand an hundred seventy and two.	the descendants of Parosh, 2,172;
NEH	7	9	스바댜 자손이 삼백칠십이 명이요	The children of Shephatiah, three hundred seventy and two.	the descendants of Shephatiah, 372;
NEH	7	10	아라 자손이 육백오십이 명이요	The children of Arah, six hundred fifty and two.	the descendants of Arah, 652;
NEH	7	11	바핫모압 자손 곧 예수아와 요압 자손이 이천팔백십팔 명이요	The children of Pahath–moab, of the children of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand and eight hundred and eighteen.	the descendants of Pahath-moab (through the line of Jeshua and Joab), 2,818;
NEH	7	12	엘람 자손이 일천이백오십사 명이요	The children of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four.	the descendants of Elam, 1,254;
NEH	7	13	삿두 자손이 팔백사십오 명이요	The children of Zattu, eight hundred forty and five.	the descendants of Zattu, 845;
NEH	7	14	삭개 자손이 칠백육십 명이요	The children of Zaccai, seven hundred and threescore.	the descendants of Zaccai, 760;
NEH	7	15	빈누이 자손이 육백사십팔 명이요	The children of Binnui, six hundred forty and eight.	the descendants of Binnui, 648;
NEH	7	16	브배 자손이 육백이십팔 명이요	The children of Bebai, six hundred twenty and eight.	the descendants of Bebai, 628;
NEH	7	17	아스갓 자손이 이천삼백이십이 명이요	The children of Azgad, two thousand three hundred twenty and two.	the descendants of Azgad, 2,322;
NEH	7	18	아도니감 자손이 육백육십칠 명이요	The children of Adonikam, six hundred threescore and seven.	the descendants of Adonikam, 667;
NEH	7	19	비그왜 자손이 이천육십칠 명이요	The children of Bigvai, two thousand threescore and seven.	the descendants of Bigvai, 2,067;
NEH	7	20	아딘 자손이 육백오십오 명이요	The children of Adin, six hundred fifty and five.	the descendants of Adin, 655;
NEH	7	21	아델 자손 곧 히스기야 자손이 구십팔 명이요	The children of Ater of Hezekiah, ninety and eight.	the descendants of Ater (through Hezekiah), 98;
NEH	7	22	하숨 자손이 삼백이십팔 명이요	The children of Hashum, three hundred twenty and eight.	the descendants of Hashum, 328;
NEH	7	23	베새 자손이 삼백이십사 명이요	The children of Bezai, three hundred twenty and four.	the descendants of Bezai, 324;
NEH	7	24	하립 자손이 일백십이 명이요	The children of Hariph, an hundred and twelve.	the descendants of Hariph, 112;
NEH	7	25	기브온 사람이 구십오 명이요	The children of Gibeon, ninety and five.	the descendants of Gibeon, 95;
NEH	7	26	베들레헴과 느도바 사람이 일백팔십팔 명이요	The men of Beth–lehem and Netophah, an hundred fourscore and eight.	the men of Bethlehem and Netophah, 188;
NEH	7	27	아나돗 사람이 일백이십팔 명이요	The men of Anathoth, an hundred twenty and eight.	the men of Anathoth, 128;
NEH	7	28	벧아스마웹 사람이 사십이 명이요	The men of Beth–azmaveth, forty and two.	the men of Beth-azmaveth, 42;
NEH	7	29	기럇여아림과 그비라와 브에롯 사람이 칠백사십삼 명이요	The men of Kirjath–jearim, Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven hundred forty and three.	the men of Kiriath-jearim, Chephirah, and Beeroth, 743;
NEH	7	30	라마와 게바 사람이 육백이십일 명이요	The men of Ramah and Geba, six hundred twenty and one.	the men of Ramah and Geba, 621;
NEH	7	31	믹마스 사람이 일백이십이 명이요	The men of Michmas, an hundred and twenty and two.	the men of Michmash, 122;
NEH	7	32	벧엘과 아이 사람이 일백이십삼 명이요	The men of Beth–el and Ai, an hundred twenty and three.	the men of Bethel and Ai, 123;
NEH	7	33	기타 느보 사람이 오십이 명이요	The men of the other Nebo, fifty and two.	the men of the other Nebo, 52;
NEH	7	34	기타 엘람 자손이 일천이백오십사 명이요	The children of the other Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four.	the descendants of the other Elam, 1,254;
NEH	7	35	하림 자손이 삼백이십 명이요	The children of Harim, three hundred and twenty.	the descendants of Harim, 320;
NEH	7	36	여리고 자손이 삼백사십오 명이요	The children of Jericho, three hundred forty and five.	the men of Jericho, 345;
NEH	7	37	로드와 하딧과 오노 자손이 칠백이십일 명이요	The children of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, seven hundred twenty and one.	the men of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, 721;
NEH	7	38	스나아 자손이 삼천구백삼십 명이었느니라	The children of Senaah, three thousand nine hundred and thirty.	and the descendants of Senaah, 3,930.
NEH	7	39	제사장들은 예수아의 집 여다야 자손이 구백칠십삼 명이요	The priests: the children of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua, nine hundred seventy and three.	The priests: the descendants of Jedaiah (through the house of Jeshua), 973;
NEH	7	40	임멜 자손이 일천오십이 명이요	The children of Immer, a thousand fifty and two.	the descendants of Immer, 1,052;
NEH	7	41	바수훌 자손이 일천이백사십칠 명이요	The children of Pashur, a thousand two hundred forty and seven.	the descendants of Pashhur, 1,247;
NEH	7	42	하림 자손이 일천십칠 명이었느니라	The children of Harim, a thousand and seventeen.	and the descendants of Harim, 1,017.
NEH	7	43	레위 사람들은 호드야 자손 곧 예수아와 갓미엘 자손이 칠십사 명이요	The Levites: the children of Jeshua, of Kadmiel, and of the children of Hodevah, seventy and four.	The Levites: the descendants of Jeshua (through Kadmiel, through the line of Hodevah), 74.
NEH	7	44	노래하는 자들은 아삽 자손이 일백사십팔 명이요	The singers: the children of Asaph, an hundred forty and eight.	The singers: the descendants of Asaph, 148.
NEH	7	45	문지기들은 살룸 자손과 아델 자손과 달문 자손과 악굽 자손과 하디다 자손과 소배 자손이 모두 일백삼십팔 명이었느니라	The porters: the children of Shallum, the children of Ater, the children of Talmon, the children of Akkub, the children of Hatita, the children of Shobai, an hundred thirty and eight.	The gatekeepers: the descendants of Shallum, the descendants of Ater, the descendants of Talmon, the descendants of Akkub, the descendants of Hatita, and the descendants of Shobai, 138 in all.
NEH	7	46	느디님 사람들은 시하 자손과 하수바 자손과 답바옷 자손과	The Nethinims: the children of Ziha, the children of Hashupha, the children of Tabbaoth,	The temple servants: the descendants of Ziha, the descendants of Hasupha, the descendants of Tabbaoth,
NEH	7	47	게로스 자손과 시아 자손과 바돈 자손과 르바나 자손과	The children of Keros, the children of Sia, the children of Padon,	the descendants of Keros, the descendants of Sia, the descendants of Padon,
NEH	7	48	하가바 자손과 살매 자손과	The children of Lebana, the children of Hagaba, the children of Shalmai,	the descendants of Lebanah, the descendants of Hagabah, the descendants of Shalmai,
NEH	7	49	하난 자손과 깃델 자손과 가할 자손과	The children of Hanan, the children of Giddel, the children of Gahar,	the descendants of Hanan, the descendants of Giddel, the descendants of Gahar,
NEH	7	50	르아야 자손과 르신 자손과 느고다 자손과	The children of Reaiah, the children of Rezin, the children of Nekoda,	the descendants of Reaiah, the descendants of Rezin, the descendants of Nekoda,
NEH	7	51	갓삼 자손과 웃사 자손과 바세아 자손과	The children of Gazzam, the children of Uzza, the children of Phaseah,	the descendants of Gazzam, the descendants of Uzza, the descendants of Paseah,
NEH	7	52	베새 자손과 므우님 자손과 느비스심 자손과	The children of Besai, the children of Meunim, the children of Nephishesim,	the descendants of Besai, the descendants of Meunim, the descendants of Nephushesim,
NEH	7	53	박북 자손과 하그바 자손과 할훌 자손과	The children of Bakbuk, the children of Hakupha, the children of Harhur,	the descendants of Bakbuk, the descendants of Hakupha, the descendants of Harhur,
NEH	7	54	바슬릿 자손과 므히다 자손과 하르사 자손과	The children of Bazlith, the children of Mehida, the children of Harsha,	the descendants of Bazlith, the descendants of Mehida, the descendants of Harsha,
NEH	7	55	바르고스 자손과 시스라 자손과 데마 자손과	The children of Barkos, the children of Sisera, the children of Tamah,	the descendants of Barkos, the descendants of Sisera, the descendants of Temah,
NEH	7	56	느시야 자손과 하디바 자손이었느니라	The children of Neziah, the children of Hatipha.	the descendants of Neziah, and the descendants of Hatipha.
NEH	7	57	솔로몬의 신복의 자손은 소대 자손과 소베렛 자손과 브리다 자손과	The children of Solomon’s servants: the children of Sotai, the children of Sophereth, the children of Perida,	The descendants of the servants of Solomon: the descendants of Sotai, the descendants of Sophereth, the descendants of Perida,
NEH	7	58	야알라 자손과 다르곤 자손과 깃델 자손과	The children of Jaala, the children of Darkon, the children of Giddel,	the descendants of Jaala, the descendants of Darkon, the descendants of Giddel,
NEH	7	59	스바댜 자손과 핫딜 자손과 보게렛하스바임 자손과 아몬 자손이니	The children of Shephatiah, the children of Hattil, the children of Pochereth of Zebaim, the children of Amon.	the descendants of Shephatiah, the descendants of Hattil, the descendants of Pochereth-hazzebaim, and the descendants of Amon.
NEH	7	60	모든 느디님 사람과 솔로몬의 신복의 자손이 삼백구십이 명이었느니라	All the Nethinims, and the children of Solomon’s servants, were three hundred ninety and two.	The temple servants and descendants of the servants of Solomon numbered 392 in all.
NEH	7	61	델멜라와 델하르사와 그룹과 앗돈과 임멜로부터 올라온 자가 있으나 그 종족과 보계가 이스라엘에 속하였는지는 증거할 수 없으니	And these were they which went up also from Tel–melah, Tel–haresha, Cherub, Addon, and Immer: but they could not shew their father’s house, nor their seed, whether they were of Israel.	The following came up from Tel-melah, Tel-harsha, Cherub, Addon, and Immer, but could not prove that their families were descended from Israel:
NEH	7	62	저희는 들라야 자손과 도비야 자손과 느고다 자손이라 도합이 육백사십이 명이요	The children of Delaiah, the children of Tobiah, the children of Nekoda, six hundred forty and two.	the descendants of Delaiah, the descendants of Tobiah, and the descendants of Nekoda, 642 in all.
NEH	7	63	제사장 중에는 호바야 자손과 학고스 자손과 바르실래 자손이니 바르실래는 길르앗 사람 바르실래의 딸 중에 하나로 아내를 삼고 바르실래의 이름으로 이름한 자라	And of the priests: the children of Habaiah, the children of Koz, the children of Barzillai, which took one of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite to wife, and was called after their name.	And from among the priests: the descendants of Hobaiah, the descendants of Hakkoz, and the descendants of Barzillai (who had married a daughter of Barzillai the Gileadite and was called by their name).
NEH	7	64	이 사람들이 보계 중에서 자기 이름을 찾아도 얻지 못한고로 저희를 부정하게 여겨 제사자의 직분을 행치 못하게 하고	These sought their register among those that were reckoned by genealogy, but it was not found: therefore were they, as polluted, put from the priesthood.	These men searched for their family records, but they could not find them and so were excluded from the priesthood as unclean.
NEH	7	65	방백이 저희에게 명하여 우림과 둠밈을 가진 제사장이 일어나기 전에는 지성물을 먹지 말라 하였느니라	And the Tirshatha said unto them, that they should not eat of the most holy things, till there stood up a priest with Urim and Thummim.	The governor ordered them not to eat the most holy things until there was a priest to consult the Urim and Thummim.
NEH	7	66	온 회중의 합계가 사만 이천삼백육십 명이요	The whole congregation together was forty and two thousand three hundred and threescore,	The whole assembly numbered 42,360,
NEH	7	67	그 외에 노비가 칠천삼백삼십칠 명이요 노래하는 남녀가 이백사십오 명이요	Beside their manservants and their maidservants, of whom there were seven thousand three hundred thirty and seven: and they had two hundred forty and five singing men and singing women.	in addition to their 7,337 menservants and maidservants, as well as their 245 male and female singers.
NEH	7	68	말이 칠백삼십육이요 노새가 이백사십오요	Their horses, seven hundred thirty and six: their mules, two hundred forty and five:	They had 736 horses, 245 mules,
NEH	7	69	약대가 사백삼십오요 나귀가 육천칠백이십이었느니라	Their camels, four hundred thirty and five: six thousand seven hundred and twenty asses.	435 camels, and 6,720 donkeys.
NEH	7	70	어떤 족장들은 역사를 위하여 보조하였고 방백은 금 일천 다릭과 대접 오십과 제사장의 의복 오백삼십 벌을 보물 곳간에 드렸고	And some of the chief of the fathers gave unto the work. The Tirshatha gave to the treasure a thousand drams of gold, fifty basons, five hundred and thirty priests’ garments.	Some of the heads of the families contributed to the project. The governor gave to the treasury 1,000 darics of gold, 50 bowls, and 530 priestly garments.
NEH	7	71	또 어떤 족장들은 금 이만 다릭과 은 이천이백 마네를 역사 곳간에 드렸고	And some of the chief of the fathers gave to the treasure of the work twenty thousand drams of gold, and two thousand and two hundred pound of silver.	And some of the heads of the families gave to the treasury for the project 20,000 darics of gold and 2,200 minas of silver.
NEH	7	72	그 나머지 백성은 금 이만 다릭과 은 이천 마네와 제사장의 의복 육십칠 벌을 드렸느니라	And that which the rest of the people gave was twenty thousand drams of gold, and two thousand pound of silver, and threescore and seven priests’ garments.	The rest of the people gave a total of 20,000 darics of gold, 2,000 minas of silver, and 67 priestly garments.
NEH	7	73	이와 같이 제사장들과 레위 사람들과 문지기들과 노래하는 자들과 백성 몇명과 느디님 사람들과 온 이스라엘이 다 그 본성에 거하였느니라	So the priests, and the Levites, and the porters, and the singers, and some of the people, and the Nethinims, and all Israel, dwelt in their cities; and when the seventh month came, the children of Israel were in their cities.	So the priests, Levites, gatekeepers, singers, and temple servants, along with some of the people and the rest of the Israelites, settled in their own towns. And by the seventh month the Israelites had settled in their towns.
NEH	8	1	이스라엘 자손이 그 본성에 거하였더니 칠월에 이르러는 모든 백성이 일제히 수문 앞 광장에 모여 학사 에스라에게 여호와께서 이스라엘에게 명하신 모세의 율법책을 가지고 오기를 청하매	And all the people gathered themselves together as one man into the street that was before the water gate; and they spake unto Ezra the scribe to bring the book of the law of Moses, which the Lord had commanded to Israel.	At that time all the people gathered together in the square before the Water Gate, and they asked Ezra the scribe to bring out the Book of the Law of Moses, which the LORD had commanded for Israel.
NEH	8	2	칠월 일일에 제사장 에스라가 율법책을 가지고 남자, 여자 무릇 알아 들을만한 회중 앞에 이르러	And Ezra the priest brought the law before the congregation both of men and women, and all that could hear with understanding, upon the first day of the seventh month.	On the first day of the seventh month, Ezra the priest brought the Law before the assembly of men and women and all who could listen and understand.
NEH	8	3	수문 앞 광장에서 새벽부터 오정까지 남자, 여자 무릇 알아 들을만한 자의 앞에서 읽으매 뭇백성이 그 율법책에 귀를 기울였는데	And he read therein before the street that was before the water gate from the morning until midday, before the men and the women, and those that could understand; and the ears of all the people were attentive unto the book of the law.	So Ezra read it aloud from daybreak until noon as he faced the square before the Water Gate, in front of the men and women and those who could understand. And all the people listened attentively to the Book of the Law.
NEH	8	4	때에 학사 에스라가 특별히 지은 나무 강단에 서매 그 우편에 선 자는 맛디댜와 스마와 아나야와 우리야와 힐기야와 마아세야요 그 좌편에 선 자는 브다야와 미사엘과 말기야와 하숨과 하스밧다나와 스가랴와 므술람이라	And Ezra the scribe stood upon a pulpit of wood, which they had made for the purpose; and beside him stood Mattithiah, and Shema, and Anaiah, and Urijah, and Hilkiah, and Maaseiah, on his right hand; and on his left hand, Pedaiah, and Mishael, and Malchiah, and Hashum, and Hashbadana, Zechariah, and Meshullam.	Ezra the scribe stood on a high wooden platform built for this occasion. At his right side stood Mattithiah, Shema, Anaiah, Uriah, Hilkiah, and Maaseiah, and at his left were Pedaiah, Mishael, Malchijah, Hashum, Hash-baddanah, Zechariah, and Meshullam.
NEH	8	5	학사 에스라가 모든 백성 위에 서서 저희 목전에 책을 펴니 책을 펼 때에 모든 백성이 일어서니라	And Ezra opened the book in the sight of all the people; (for he was above all the people;) and when he opened it, all the people stood up:	Ezra opened the book in full view of all the people, since he was standing above them all, and as he opened it, all the people stood up.
NEH	8	6	에스라가 광대하신 하나님 여호와를 송축하매 모든 백성이 손을 들고 아멘 아멘 응답하고 몸을 굽혀 얼굴을 땅에 대고 여호와께 경배하였느니라	And Ezra blessed the Lord, the great God. And all the people answered, Amen, Amen, with lifting up their hands: and they bowed their heads, and worshipped the Lord with their faces to the ground.	Then Ezra blessed the LORD, the great God, and with their hands uplifted, all the people said, “Amen, Amen!” Then they bowed down and worshiped the LORD with their faces to the ground.
NEH	8	7	예수아와 바니와 세레뱌와 야민과 악굽과 사브대와 호디야와 마아세야와 그리다와 아사랴와 요사밧과 하난과 블라야와 레위 사람들이 다 그 처소에 섰는 백성에게 율법을 깨닫게 하는데	Also Jeshua, and Bani, and Sherebiah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodijah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad, Hanan, Pelaiah, and the Levites, caused the people to understand the law: and the people stood in their place.	The Levites—Jeshua, Bani, Sherebiah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodiah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad, Hanan, and Pelaiah—instructed the people in the Law as they stood in their places.
NEH	8	8	하나님의 율법책을 낭독하고 그 뜻을 해석하여 백성으로 그 낭독하는 것을 다 깨닫게 하매	So they read in the book in the law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the reading.	So they read from the Book of the Law of God, explaining it and giving insight, so that the people could understand what was being read.
NEH	8	9	백성이 율법의 말씀을 듣고 다 우는지라 총독 느헤미야와 제사장 겸 학사 에스라와 백성을 가르치는 레위 사람들이 모든 백성에게 이르기를 오늘은 너희 하나님 여호와의 성일이니 슬퍼하지 말며 울지 말라 하고	And Nehemiah, which is the Tirshatha, and Ezra the priest the scribe, and the Levites that taught the people, said unto all the people, This day is holy unto the Lord your God; mourn not, nor weep. For all the people wept, when they heard the words of the law.	Nehemiah the governor, Ezra the priest and scribe, and the Levites who were instructing the people said to all of them, “This day is holy to the LORD your God. Do not mourn or weep.” For all the people were weeping as they heard the words of the Law.
NEH	8	10	느헤미야가 또 이르기를 너희는 가서 살찐 것을 먹고 단 것을 마시되 예비치 못한 자에게는 너희가 나누어 주라 이 날은 우리 주의 성일이니 근심하지 말라 여호와를 기뻐하는 것이 너희의 힘이니라 하고	Then he said unto them, Go your way, eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and send portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared: for this day is holy unto our Lord: neither be ye sorry; for the joy of the Lord is your strength.	Then Nehemiah told them, “Go and eat what is rich, drink what is sweet, and send out portions to those who have nothing prepared, since today is holy to our Lord. Do not grieve, for the joy of the LORD is your strength.”
NEH	8	11	레위 사람들도 모든 백성을 정숙케하여 이르기를 오늘은 성일이니 마땅히 종용하고 근심하지 말라 하매	So the Levites stilled all the people, saying, Hold your peace, for the day is holy; neither be ye grieved.	And the Levites calmed all the people, saying, “Be still, since today is holy. Do not grieve.”
NEH	8	12	모든 백성이 곧 가서 먹고 마시며 나누어 주고 크게 즐거워하였으니 이는 그 읽어 들린 말을 밝히 앎이니라	And all the people went their way to eat, and to drink, and to send portions, and to make great mirth, because they had understood the words that were declared unto them.	Then all the people began to eat and drink, to send out portions, and to rejoice greatly, because they understood the words that had been made known to them.
NEH	8	13	그 이튿날 뭇백성의 족장들과 제사장들과 레위 사람들이 율법의 말씀을 밝히 알고자 하여 학사 에스라의 곳에 모여서	And on the second day were gathered together the chief of the fathers of all the people, the priests, and the Levites, unto Ezra the scribe, even to understand the words of the law.	On the second day of the month, the heads of all the families, along with the priests and Levites, gathered around Ezra the scribe to study the words of the Law.
NEH	8	14	율법책을 본즉 여호와께서 모세로 명하시기를 이스라엘 자손은 칠월 절기에 초막에 거할지니라 하였고	And they found written in the law which the Lord had commanded by Moses, that the children of Israel should dwell in booths in the feast of the seventh month:	And they found written in the Law, which the LORD had commanded through Moses, that the Israelites were to dwell in booths during the feast of the seventh month.
NEH	8	15	또 일렀으되 모든 성읍과 예루살렘에 공포하여 이르기를 너희는 산에 가서 감람나무 가지와 들 감람나무 가지와 화석류나무 가지와 종려나무 가지와 기타 무성한 나무 가지를 취하여 기록한 바를 따라 초막을 지으라 하라 하였는지라	And that they should publish and proclaim in all their cities, and in Jerusalem, saying, Go forth unto the mount, and fetch olive branches, and pine branches, and myrtle branches, and palm branches, and branches of thick trees, to make booths, as it is written.	So they proclaimed this message and spread it throughout their towns and in Jerusalem, saying, “Go out to the hill country and bring back branches of olive, wild olive, myrtle, palm, and other leafy trees, to make booths, as it is written.”
NEH	8	16	백성이 이에 나가서 나무 가지를 취하여 혹은 지붕 위에, 혹은 뜰안에, 혹은 하나님의 전 뜰에, 혹은 수문 광장에, 혹은 에브라임 문 광장에 초막을 짓되	So the people went forth, and brought them, and made themselves booths, every one upon the roof of his house, and in their courts, and in the courts of the house of God, and in the street of the water gate, and in the street of the gate of Ephraim.	And the people went out, brought back branches, and made booths on their own rooftops, in their courtyards, in the court of the house of God, and in the squares by the Water Gate and by the Gate of Ephraim.
NEH	8	17	사로잡혔다가 돌아온 회 무리가 다 초막을 짓고 그 안에 거하니 눈의 아들 여호수아 때로부터 그 날까지 이스라엘 자손이 이같이 행함이 없었으므로 이에 크게 즐거워하며	And all the congregation of them that were come again out of the captivity made booths, and sat under the booths: for since the days of Jeshua the son of Nun unto that day had not the children of Israel done so. And there was very great gladness.	The whole assembly who had returned from exile made booths and lived in them. From the days of Joshua son of Nun until that day, the Israelites had not celebrated like this. And there was great rejoicing.
NEH	8	18	에스라는 첫날부터 끝날까지 날마다 하나님의 율법책을 낭독하고 무리가 칠 일 동안 절기를 지키고 제팔일에 규례를 따라 성회를 열었느니라	Also day by day, from the first day unto the last day, he read in the book of the law of God. And they kept the feast seven days; and on the eighth day was a solemn assembly, according unto the manner.	Day after day, from the first day to the last, Ezra read from the Book of the Law of God. The Israelites kept the feast for seven days, and on the eighth day they held an assembly, according to the ordinance.
NEH	9	1	그 달 이십사일에 이스라엘 자손이 다 모여 금식하며 굵은 베를 입고 티끌을 무릅쓰며	Now in the twenty and fourth day of this month the children of Israel were assembled with fasting, and with sackclothes, and earth upon them.	On the twenty-fourth day of the same month, the Israelites gathered together, fasting and wearing sackcloth, with dust on their heads.
NEH	9	2	모든 이방 사람과 절교하고 서서 자기의 죄와 열조의 허물을 자복하고	And the seed of Israel separated themselves from all strangers, and stood and confessed their sins, and the iniquities of their fathers.	Those of Israelite descent separated themselves from all the foreigners, and they stood and confessed their sins and the iniquities of their fathers.
NEH	9	3	이 날에 낮 사분지 일은 그 처소에 서서 그 하나님 여호와의 율법책을 낭독하며 그 하나님 여호와께 경배하는데	And they stood up in their place, and read in the book of the law of the Lord their God one fourth part of the day; and another fourth part they confessed, and worshipped the Lord their God.	While they stood in their places, they read from the Book of the Law of the LORD their God for a quarter of the day, and they spent another quarter of the day in confession and worship of the LORD their God.
NEH	9	4	레위 사람 예수아와 바니와 갓미엘과 스바냐와 분니와 세레뱌와 바니와 그나니는 대에 올라서서 큰 소리로 그 하나님 여호와께 부르짖고	Then stood up upon the stairs, of the Levites, Jeshua, and Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani, and Chenani, and cried with a loud voice unto the Lord their God.	And the Levites—Jeshua, Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani, and Chenani—stood on the raised platform and cried out in a loud voice to the LORD their God.
NEH	9	5	또 레위 사람 예수아와 갓미엘과 바니와 하삽느야와 세레뱌와 호다야와 스바냐와 브다히야는 이르기를 너희 무리는 마땅히 일어나 영원부터 영원까지 계신 너희 하나님 여호와를 송축할지어다 주여 주의 영화로운 이름을 송축하올 것은 주의 이름이 존귀하여 모든 송축이나 찬양에서 뛰어남이니이다	Then the Levites, Jeshua, and Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabniah, Sherebiah, Hodijah, Shebaniah, and Pethahiah, said, Stand up and bless the Lord your God for ever and ever: and blessed be thy glorious name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise.	Then the Levites—Jeshua, Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabneiah, Sherebiah, Hodiah, Shebaniah, and Pethahiah—said, “Stand up and bless the LORD your God from everlasting to everlasting: Blessed be Your glorious name, and may it be exalted above all blessing and praise.
NEH	9	6	오직 주는 여호와시라 하늘과 하늘들의 하늘과 일월 성신과 땅과 땅 위의 만물과 바다와 그 가운데 모든 것을 지으시고 다 보존하시오니 모든 천군이 주께 경배하나이다	Thou, even thou, art Lord alone; thou hast made heaven, the heaven of heavens, with all their host, the earth, and all things that are therein, the seas, and all that is therein, and thou preservest them all; and the host of heaven worshippeth thee.	You alone are the LORD. You created the heavens, the highest heavens with all their host, the earth and all that is on it, the seas and all that is in them. You give life to all things, and the host of heaven worships You.
NEH	9	7	주는 하나님 여호와시라 옛적에 아브람을 택하시고 갈대아 우르에서 인도하여 내시고 아브라함이라는 이름을 주시고	Thou art the Lord the God, who didst choose Abram, and broughtest him forth out of Ur of the Chaldees, and gavest him the name of Abraham;	You are the LORD, the God who chose Abram, who brought him out of Ur of the Chaldeans and gave him the name Abraham.
NEH	9	8	그 마음이 주 앞에서 충성됨을 보시고 더불어 언약을 세우사 가나안 족속과 헷 족속과 아모리 족속과 브리스 족속과 여부스 족속과 기르가스 족속의 땅을 그 씨에게 주리라 하시더니 그 말씀대로 이루셨사오니 주는 의로우심이로소이다	And foundest his heart faithful before thee, and madest a covenant with him to give the land of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Jebusites, and the Girgashites, to give it, I say, to his seed, and hast performed thy words; for thou art righteous:	You found his heart faithful before You, and made a covenant with him to give the land of the Canaanites and Hittites, of the Amorites and Perizzites, of the Jebusites and Girgashites— to give it to his descendants. You have kept Your promise, because You are righteous.
NEH	9	9	주께서 우리 열조가 애굽에서 고난 받는 것을 감찰하시며 홍해에서 부르짖음을 들으시고	And didst see the affliction of our fathers in Egypt, and heardest their cry by the Red sea;	You saw the affliction of our fathers in Egypt; You heard their cry at the Red Sea.
NEH	9	10	이적과 기사를 베푸사 바로와 그 모든 신하와 그 나라 온 백성을 치셨사오니 이는 저희가 우리의 열조에게 교만히 행함을 아셨음이라 오늘날과 같이 명예를 얻으셨나이다	And shewedst signs and wonders upon Pharaoh, and on all his servants, and on all the people of his land: for thou knewest that they dealt proudly against them. So didst thou get thee a name, as it is this day.	You performed signs and wonders against Pharaoh, all his officials, and all the people of his land, for You knew they had acted with arrogance against our fathers. You made a name for Yourself that endures to this day.
NEH	9	11	주께서 또 우리 열조 앞에서 바다를 갈라지게 하시사 저희로 바다 가운데를 육지 같이 통과하게 하시고 쫓아오는 자를 돌을 큰 물에 던짐 같이 깊은 물에 던지시고	And thou didst divide the sea before them, so that they went through the midst of the sea on the dry land; and their persecutors thou threwest into the deeps, as a stone into the mighty waters.	You divided the sea before them, and they crossed through it on dry ground. You hurled their pursuers into the depths like a stone into raging waters.
NEH	9	12	낮에는 구름 기둥으로 인도하시고 밤에는 불 기둥으로 그 행할 길을 비취셨사오며	Moreover thou leddest them in the day by a cloudy pillar; and in the night by a pillar of fire, to give them light in the way wherein they should go.	You led them with a pillar of cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night, to light for them the way in which they should travel.
NEH	9	13	또 시내 산에 강림하시고 하늘에서부터 저희와 말씀하사 정직한 규례와 진정한 율법과 선한 율례와 계명을 저희에게 주시고	Thou camest down also upon mount Sinai, and spakest with them from heaven, and gavest them right judgments, and true laws, good statutes and commandments:	You came down on Mount Sinai and spoke with them from heaven. You gave them just ordinances, true laws, and good statutes and commandments.
NEH	9	14	거룩한 안식일을 저희에게 알리시며 주의 종 모세로 계명과 율례와 율법을 저희에게 명하시고	And madest known unto them thy holy sabbath, and commandedst them precepts, statutes, and laws, by the hand of Moses thy servant:	You revealed to them Your holy Sabbath and gave them commandments and statutes and laws through Your servant Moses.
NEH	9	15	저희의 주림을 인하여 하늘에서 양식을 주시며 저희의 목마름을 인하여 반석에서 물을 내시고 또 주께서 옛적에 손을 들어 맹세하시고 주마 하신 땅을 들어가서 차지하라 명하셨사오나	And gavest them bread from heaven for their hunger, and broughtest forth water for them out of the rock for their thirst, and promisedst them that they should go in to possess the land which thou hadst sworn to give them.	In their hunger You gave them bread from heaven; in their thirst You brought them water from the rock. You told them to go in and possess the land which You had sworn to give them.
NEH	9	16	저희와 우리 열조가 교만히 하고 목을 굳게 하여 주의 명령을 듣지 아니하고	But they and our fathers dealt proudly, and hardened their necks, and hearkened not to thy commandments,	But they and our fathers became arrogant and stiff-necked and did not obey Your commandments.
NEH	9	17	거역하며 주께서 저희 가운데 행하신 기사를 생각지 아니하고 목을 굳게하며 패역하여 스스로 한 두목을 세우고 종 되었던 땅으로 돌아가고자 하였사오나 오직 주는 사유하시는 하나님이시라 은혜로우시며 긍휼히 여기시며 더디 노하시며 인자가 풍부하시므로 저희를 버리지 아니하셨나이다	And refused to obey, neither were mindful of thy wonders that thou didst among them; but hardened their necks, and in their rebellion appointed a captain to return to their bondage: but thou art a God ready to pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and forsookest them not.	They refused to listen and failed to remember the wonders You performed among them. They stiffened their necks and appointed a leader to return them to their bondage in Egypt. But You are a forgiving God, gracious and compassionate, slow to anger and rich in loving devotion, and You did not forsake them.
NEH	9	18	또 저희가 송아지를 부어 만들고 이르기를 이는 곧 너희를 인도하여 애굽에서 나오게 하신 하나님이라 하여 크게 설만하게 하였사오나	Yea, when they had made them a molten calf, and said, This is thy God that brought thee up out of Egypt, and had wrought great provocations;	Even when they cast for themselves an image of a calf and said, ‘This is your God who brought you up out of Egypt,’ and when they committed terrible blasphemies,
NEH	9	19	주께서는 연하여 긍휼을 베푸사 저희를 광야에 버리지 아니하시고 낮에는 구름 기둥으로 길을 인도하시며 밤에는 불 기둥으로 그 행할 길을 비취사 떠나게 아니하셨사오며	Yet thou in thy manifold mercies forsookest them not in the wilderness: the pillar of the cloud departed not from them by day, to lead them in the way; neither the pillar of fire by night, to shew them light, and the way wherein they should go.	You in Your great compassion did not forsake them in the wilderness. By day the pillar of cloud never turned away from guiding them on their path; and by the night the pillar of fire illuminated the way they should go.
NEH	9	20	또 주의 선한 신을 주사 저희를 가르치시며 주의 만나로 저희 입에 끊어지지 않게 하시고 저희의 목마름을 인하여 물을 주시사	Thou gavest also thy good spirit to instruct them, and withheldest not thy manna from their mouth, and gavest them water for their thirst.	You gave Your good Spirit to instruct them. You did not withhold Your manna from their mouths, and You gave them water for their thirst.
NEH	9	21	사십 년 동안을 들에서 기르시되 결핍함이 없게 하시므로 그 옷이 해어지지 아니하였고 발이 부릍지 아니하였사오며	Yea, forty years didst thou sustain them in the wilderness, so that they lacked nothing; their clothes waxed not old, and their feet swelled not.	For forty years You sustained them in the wilderness, so that they lacked nothing. Their clothes did not wear out and their feet did not swell.
NEH	9	22	또 나라들과 족속들을 저희에게 각각 나누어 주시매 저희가 시혼의 땅 곧 헤스본 왕의 땅과 바산 왕 옥의 땅을 차지하였나이다	Moreover thou gavest them kingdoms and nations, and didst divide them into corners: so they possessed the land of Sihon, and the land of the king of Heshbon, and the land of Og king of Bashan.	You gave them kingdoms and peoples and allotted to them every corner of the land. So they took the land of Sihon king of Heshbon and of Og king of Bashan.
NEH	9	23	주께서 그 자손을 하늘의 별 같이 많게 하시고 전에 그 열조에게 명하사 들어가서 차지하라고 하신 땅으로 인도하여 이르게 하셨으므로	Their children also multipliedst thou as the stars of heaven, and broughtest them into the land, concerning which thou hadst promised to their fathers, that they should go in to possess it.	You multiplied their descendants like the stars of heaven and brought them to the land You had told their fathers to enter and possess.
NEH	9	24	그 자손이 들어가서 땅을 차지하되 주께서 그 땅 가나안 거민으로 저희 앞에 복종케 하실 때에 가나안 사람과 그 왕들과 본토 여러 족속을 저희 손에 붙여 임의로 행하게 하시매	So the children went in and possessed the land, and thou subduedst before them the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, and gavest them into their hands, with their kings, and the people of the land, that they might do with them as they would.	So their descendants went in and possessed the land; You subdued before them the Canaanites dwelling in the land. You delivered into their hands the kings and peoples of the land, to do with them as they wished.
NEH	9	25	저희가 견고한 성들과 기름진 땅을 취하고 모든 아름다운 물건을 채운 집과 파서 만든 우물과 포도원과 감람원과 허다한 과목을 차지하여 배불리 먹어 살찌고 주의 큰 복을 즐겼사오나	And they took strong cities, and a fat land, and possessed houses full of all goods, wells digged, vineyards, and oliveyards, and fruit trees in abundance: so they did eat, and were filled, and became fat, and delighted themselves in thy great goodness.	They captured fortified cities and fertile land and took houses full of all goods, wells already dug, vineyards, olive groves, and fruit trees in abundance. So they ate and were filled; they grew fat and delighted in Your great goodness.
NEH	9	26	저희가 오히려 순종치 아니하고 주를 거역하며 주의 율법을 등 뒤에 두고 주께로 돌아오기를 권면하는 선지자들을 죽여 크게 설만하게 행하였나이다	Nevertheless they were disobedient, and rebelled against thee, and cast thy law behind their backs, and slew thy prophets which testified against them to turn them to thee, and they wrought great provocations.	But they were disobedient and rebelled against You; they flung Your law behind their backs. They killed Your prophets, who had admonished them to return to You. They committed terrible blasphemies.
NEH	9	27	그러므로 주께서 그 대적의 손에 붙이사 곤고를 당하게 하시매 저희가 환난을 당하여 주께 부르짖을 때에 주께서 하늘에서 들으시고 크게 긍휼을 발하사 구원자들을 주어 대적의 손에서 구원하셨거늘	Therefore thou deliveredst them into the hand of their enemies, who vexed them: and in the time of their trouble, when they cried unto thee, thou heardest them from heaven; and according to thy manifold mercies thou gavest them saviours, who saved them out of the hand of their enemies.	So You delivered them into the hands of enemies who oppressed them, and in their time of distress they cried out to You. From heaven You heard them, and in Your great compassion You gave them deliverers who saved them from the hands of their enemies.
NEH	9	28	저희가 평강을 얻은 후에 다시 주 앞에서 악을 행하므로 주께서 그 대적의 손에 버려 두사 대적에게 제어를 받게 하시다가 저희가 돌이켜서 주께 부르짖으매 주께서 하늘에서 들으시고 여러번 긍휼을 발하사 건져내시고	But after they had rest, they did evil again before thee: therefore leftest thou them in the hand of their enemies, so that they had the dominion over them: yet when they returned, and cried unto thee, thou heardest them from heaven; and many times didst thou deliver them according to thy mercies;	But as soon as they had rest, they again did evil in Your sight. So You abandoned them to the hands of their enemies, who had dominion over them. When they cried out to You again, You heard from heaven, and You delivered them many times in Your compassion.
NEH	9	29	다시 주의 율법을 복종하게 하시려고 경계하셨으나 저희가 교만히 행하여 사람이 준행하면 그 가운데서 삶을 얻는 주의 계명을 듣지 아니하며 주의 규례를 범하여 고집하는 어깨를 내어밀며 목을 굳게 하여 듣지 아니하였나이다	And testifiedst against them, that thou mightest bring them again unto thy law: yet they dealt proudly, and hearkened not unto thy commandments, but sinned against thy judgments, (which if a man do, he shall live in them;) and withdrew the shoulder, and hardened their neck, and would not hear.	You admonished them to turn back to Your law, but they were arrogant and disobeyed Your commandments. They sinned against Your ordinances, by which a man will live if he practices them. They stubbornly shrugged their shoulders; they stiffened their necks and would not obey.
NEH	9	30	그러나 주께서 여러 해 동안 용서하시고 또 선지자로 말미암아 주의 신으로 저희를 경계하시되 저희가 듣지 아니하므로 열방 사람의 손에 붙이시고도	Yet many years didst thou forbear them, and testifiedst against them by thy spirit in thy prophets: yet would they not give ear: therefore gavest thou them into the hand of the people of the lands.	You were patient with them for many years, and Your Spirit admonished them through Your prophets. Yet they would not listen, so You gave them into the hands of the neighboring peoples.
NEH	9	31	주의 긍휼이 크시므로 저희를 아주 멸하지 아니하시며 버리지도 아니하셨사오니 주는 은혜로우시고 긍휼히 여기시는 하나님이심이니이다	Nevertheless for thy great mercies’ sake thou didst not utterly consume them, nor forsake them; for thou art a gracious and merciful God.	But in Your great compassion, You did not put an end to them; nor did You forsake them, for You are a gracious and compassionate God.
NEH	9	32	우리 하나님이여 광대하시고 능하시고 두려우시며 언약과 인자를 지키시는 하나님이여 우리와 우리 열왕과 방백들과 제사장들과 선지자들과 열조와 주의 모든 백성이 앗수르 열왕의 때로부터 오늘날까지 당한바 환난을 이제 작게 여기시지 마옵소서	Now therefore, our God, the great, the mighty, and the terrible God, who keepest covenant and mercy, let not all the trouble seem little before thee, that hath come upon us, on our kings, on our princes, and on our priests, and on our prophets, and on our fathers, and on all thy people, since the time of the kings of Assyria unto this day.	So now, our God, the great and mighty and awesome God who keeps His gracious covenant, do not view lightly all the hardship that has come upon us, and upon our kings and leaders, our priests and prophets, our ancestors and all Your people, from the days of the kings of Assyria until today.
NEH	9	33	그러나 우리의 당한 모든 일에 주는 공의로우시니 우리는 악을 행하였사오나 주는 진실히 행하셨음이니이다	Howbeit thou art just in all that is brought upon us; for thou hast done right, but we have done wickedly:	You are just in all that has befallen us, because You have acted faithfully, while we have acted wickedly.
NEH	9	34	우리 열왕과 방백들과 제사장들과 열조가 주의 율법을 지키지 아니하며 주의 명령과 주의 경계하신 말씀을 순종치 아니하고	Neither have our kings, our princes, our priests, nor our fathers, kept thy law, nor hearkened unto thy commandments and thy testimonies, wherewith thou didst testify against them.	Our kings and leaders and priests and fathers did not obey Your law or listen to Your commandments and warnings that You gave them.
NEH	9	35	저희가 그 나라와 주의 베푸신 큰 복과 자기 앞에 주신 넓고 기름진 땅을 누리면서도 주를 섬기지 아니하며 악행을 그치지 아니한고로	For they have not served thee in their kingdom, and in thy great goodness that thou gavest them, and in the large and fat land which thou gavest before them, neither turned they from their wicked works.	For even while they were in their kingdom, with the abundant goodness that You had given them, and in the spacious and fertile land that You had set before them, they would not serve You or turn from their wicked ways.
NEH	9	36	우리가 오늘날 종이 되었삽는데 곧 주께서 우리 열조에게 주사 그 실과를 먹고 그 아름다운 소산을 누리게 하신 땅에서 종이 되었나이다	Behold, we are servants this day, and for the land that thou gavest unto our fathers to eat the fruit thereof and the good thereof, behold, we are servants in it:	So here we are today as slaves in the land You gave our fathers to enjoy its fruit and goodness— here we are as slaves!
NEH	9	37	우리의 죄로 인하여 주께서 우리 위에 세우신 이방 열왕이 이 땅의 많은 소산을 얻고 저희가 우리의 몸과 육축을 임의로 관할하오니 우리의 곤난이 심하오며	And it yieldeth much increase unto the kings whom thou hast set over us because of our sins: also they have dominion over our bodies, and over our cattle, at their pleasure, and we are in great distress.	Its abundant harvest goes to the kings You have set over us because of our sins. And they rule over our bodies and our livestock as they please. We are in great distress.
NEH	9	38	우리가 이 모든 일을 인하여 이제 견고한 언약을 세워 기록하고 우리의 방백들과 레위 사람들과 제사장들이 다 인을 치나이다 하였느니라	And because of all this we make a sure covenant, and write it; and our princes, Levites, and priests, seal unto it.	In view of all this, we make a binding agreement, putting it in writing and sealing it with the names of our leaders, Levites, and priests.”
NEH	10	1	그 인친 자는 하가랴의 아들 방백 느헤미야와 시드기야,	Now those that sealed were, Nehemiah, the Tirshatha, the son of Hachaliah, and Zidkijah,	Now these were the ones who sealed the document: Nehemiah the governor, son of Hacaliah, and also Zedekiah,
NEH	10	2	스라야, 아사랴, 예레미야,	Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah,	Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah,
NEH	10	3	바스훌, 아마랴, 말기야,	Pashur, Amariah, Malchijah,	Pashhur, Amariah, Malchijah,
NEH	10	4	핫두스, 스바냐, 말룩,	Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch,	Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch,
NEH	10	5	하림, 므레못, 오바댜,	Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah,	Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah,
NEH	10	6	다니엘, 긴느돈, 바룩,	Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch,	Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch,
NEH	10	7	므술람, 아비야, 미야민,	Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin,	Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin,
NEH	10	8	마아시야, 빌개, 스마야니 이는 다 제사장이요	Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemaiah: these were the priests.	Maaziah, Bilgai, and Shemaiah. These were the priests.
NEH	10	9	또 레위 사람 곧 아사냐의 아들 예수아, 헤나닷의 자손 중 빈누이, 갓미엘과	And the Levites: both Jeshua the son of Azaniah, Binnui of the sons of Henadad, Kadmiel;	The Levites: Jeshua son of Azaniah, Binnui of the sons of Henadad, Kadmiel,
NEH	10	10	그 형제 스바냐, 호디야, 그리다, 블라야, 하난,	And their brethren, Shebaniah, Hodijah, Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan,	and their associates: Shebaniah, Hodiah, Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan,
NEH	10	11	미가, 르홉, 하사뱌,	Micha, Rehob, Hashabiah,	Mica, Rehob, Hashabiah,
NEH	10	12	삭굴, 세레뱌,스바냐,	Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah,	Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah,
NEH	10	13	호디야, 바니, 브니누요	Hodijah, Bani, Beninu.	Hodiah, Bani, and Beninu.
NEH	10	14	또 백성의 두목들 곧 바로스, 바핫모압, 엘람, 삿두, 바니,	The chief of the people; Parosh, Pahath–moab, Elam, Zatthu, Bani,	And the leaders of the people: Parosh, Pahath-moab, Elam, Zattu, Bani,
NEH	10	15	분니, 아스갓, 베배,	Bunni, Azgad, Bebai,	Bunni, Azgad, Bebai,
NEH	10	16	아도니야, 비그왜, 아딘,	Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin,	Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin,
NEH	10	17	아델, 히스기야, 앗술,	Ater, Hizkijah, Azzur,	Ater, Hezekiah, Azzur,
NEH	10	18	호디야, 하숨, 베새,	Hodijah, Hashum, Bezai,	Hodiah, Hashum, Bezai,
NEH	10	19	하립, 아나돗, 노배,	Hariph, Anathoth, Nebai,	Hariph, Anathoth, Nebai,
NEH	10	20	막비아스, 므술람, 헤실,	Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir,	Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir,
NEH	10	21	므세사벨, 사독, 얏두아,	Meshezabeel, Zadok, Jaddua,	Meshezabel, Zadok, Jaddua,
NEH	10	22	블라댜, 하난, 아나야,	Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah,	Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah,
NEH	10	23	호세아, 하나냐, 핫숩,	Hoshea, Hananiah, Hashub,	Hoshea, Hananiah, Hasshub,
NEH	10	24	할르헤스, 빌하, 소벡,	Hallohesh, Pileha, Shobek,	Hallohesh, Pilha, Shobek,
NEH	10	25	르훔, 하삼나, 마아세야,	Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah,	Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah,
NEH	10	26	아히야, 하난, 아난,	And Ahijah, Hanan, Anan,	Ahijah, Hanan, Anan,
NEH	10	27	말룩, 하림, 바아나이었느니라	Malluch, Harim, Baanah.	Malluch, Harim, and Baanah.
NEH	10	28	그 남은 백성과 제사장들과 레위 사람들과 문지기들과 노래하는 자들과 느디님 사람들과 및 이방 사람과 절교하고 하나님의 율법을 준행하는 모든 자와 그 아내와 그 자녀들 무릇 지식과 총명이 있는 자가	And the rest of the people, the priests, the Levites, the porters, the singers, the Nethinims, and all they that had separated themselves from the people of the lands unto the law of God, their wives, their sons, and their daughters, every one having knowledge, and having understanding;	“The rest of the people—the priests, Levites, gatekeepers, singers, temple servants, and all who had separated themselves from the people of the land to obey the Law of God—along with their wives and all their sons and daughters who are able to understand,
NEH	10	29	다 그 형제 귀인들을 좇아 저주로 맹세하기를 우리가 하나님의 종 모세로 주신 하나님의 율법을 좇아 우리 주 여호와의 모든 계명과 규례와 율례를 지켜	They clave to their brethren, their nobles, and entered into a curse, and into an oath, to walk in God’s law, which was given by Moses the servant of God, and to observe and do all the commandments of the Lord our Lord, and his judgments and his statutes;	hereby join with their noble brothers and commit themselves with a sworn oath to follow the Law of God given through His servant Moses and to carefully obey all the commandments, ordinances, and statutes of the LORD our Lord.
NEH	10	30	우리 딸은 이 땅 백성에게 주지 아니하고 우리 아들을 위하여 저희 딸을 데려오지 아니하며	And that we would not give our daughters unto the people of the land, nor take their daughters for our sons:	We will not give our daughters in marriage to the people of the land, and we will not take their daughters for our sons.
NEH	10	31	혹시 이 땅 백성이 안식일에 물화나 식물을 가져다가 팔려 할지라도 우리가 안식일이나 성일에는 사지 않겠고 제칠년마다 땅을 쉬게 하고 모든 빚을 탕감하리라 하였고	And if the people of the land bring ware or any victuals on the sabbath day to sell, that we would not buy it of them on the sabbath, or on the holy day: and that we would leave the seventh year, and the exaction of every debt.	When the people of the land bring merchandise or any kind of grain to sell on the Sabbath day, we will not buy from them on a Sabbath or holy day. Every seventh year we will let the fields lie fallow, and will cancel every debt.
NEH	10	32	우리가 또 스스로 규례를 정하기를 해마다 각기 세겔의 삼분 일을 수납하여 하나님의 전을 위하여 쓰게 하되	Also we made ordinances for us, to charge ourselves yearly with the third part of a shekel for the service of the house of our God;	We also place ourselves under the obligation to contribute a third of a shekel yearly for the service of the house of our God:
NEH	10	33	곧 진설병과 항상 드리는 소제와 항상 드리는 번제와 안식일과 초하루와 정한 절기에 쓸 것과 성물과 이스라엘을 위하는 속죄제와 우리 하나님의 전의 모든 일을 위하여 쓰게 하였고	For the shewbread, and for the continual meat offering, and for the continual burnt offering, of the sabbaths, of the new moons, for the set feasts, and for the holy things, and for the sin offerings to make an atonement for Israel, and for all the work of the house of our God.	for the showbread, for the regular grain offerings and burnt offerings, for the Sabbath offerings, for the New Moons and appointed feasts, for the holy offerings, for the sin offerings to make atonement for Israel, and for all the duties of the house of our God.
NEH	10	34	또 우리 제사장들과 레위 사람들과 백성들이 제비 뽑아 각기 종족대로 해마다 정한 기한에 나무를 우리 하나님의 전에 드려서 율법에 기록한 대로 우리 하나님 여호와의 단에 사르게 하였고	And we cast the lots among the priests, the Levites, and the people, for the wood offering, to bring it into the house of our God, after the houses of our fathers, at times appointed year by year, to burn upon the altar of the Lord our God, as it is written in the law:	We have cast lots among the priests, Levites, and people for the donation of wood by our families at the appointed times each year. They are to bring it to the house of our God to burn on the altar of the LORD our God, as it is written in the Law.
NEH	10	35	해마다 우리 토지 소산의 맏물과 각종 과목의 첫 열매를 여호와의 전에 드리기로 하였고	And to bring the firstfruits of our ground, and the firstfruits of all fruit of all trees, year by year, unto the house of the Lord:	We will also bring the firstfruits of our land and of every fruit tree to the house of the LORD year by year.
NEH	10	36	또 우리의 맏아들들과 생축의 처음 난 것과 우양의 처음 난 것을 율법에 기록된 대로 우리 하나님의 전으로 가져다가 우리 하나님의 전에서 섬기는 제사장들에게 주고	Also the firstborn of our sons, and of our cattle, as it is written in the law, and the firstlings of our herds and of our flocks, to bring to the house of our God, unto the priests that minister in the house of our God:	And we will bring the firstborn of our sons and our livestock, as it is written in the Law, and will bring the firstborn of our herds and flocks to the house of our God, to the priests who minister in the house of our God.
NEH	10	37	또 처음 익은 밀의 가루와 거제물과 각종 과목의 열매와 새 포도주와 기름을 제사장들에게로 가져다가 우리 하나님의 전 골방에 두고 또 우리 물산의 십일조를 레위 사람들에게 주리라 하였나니 이 레위 사람들은 우리의 모든 성읍에서 물산의 십일조를 받는 자임이며	And that we should bring the firstfruits of our dough, and our offerings, and the fruit of all manner of trees, of wine and of oil, unto the priests, to the chambers of the house of our God; and the tithes of our ground unto the Levites, that the same Levites might have the tithes in all the cities of our tillage.	Moreover, we will bring to the priests at the storerooms of the house of our God the firstfruits of our dough, of our grain offerings, of the fruit of all our trees, and of our new wine and oil. A tenth of our produce belongs to the Levites, so that they shall receive tithes in all the towns where we labor.
NEH	10	38	레위 사람들이 십일조를 받을 때에는 아론의 자손 제사장 하나가 함께 있을 것이요 레위 사람들은 그 십일조의 십분 일을 가져다가 우리 하나님의 전 골방 곧 곳간에 두되	And the priest the son of Aaron shall be with the Levites, when the Levites take tithes: and the Levites shall bring up the tithe of the tithes unto the house of our God, to the chambers, into the treasure house.	A priest of Aaron’s line is to accompany the Levites when they collect the tenth, and the Levites are to bring a tenth of these tithes to the storerooms of the treasury in the house of our God.
NEH	10	39	곧 이스라엘 자손과 레위 자손이 거제로 드린바 곡식과 새 포도주와 기름을 가져다가 성소의 기명을 두는 골방 곧 섬기는 제사장들과 및 문지기들과 노래하는 자들이 있는 골방에 둘 것이라 그리하여 우리가 우리 하나님의 전을 버리지 아니하리라	For the children of Israel and the children of Levi shall bring the offering of the corn, of the new wine, and the oil, unto the chambers, where are the vessels of the sanctuary, and the priests that minister, and the porters, and the singers: and we will not forsake the house of our God.	For the Israelites and the Levites are to bring the contributions of grain, new wine, and oil to the storerooms where the articles of the sanctuary are kept and where the ministering priests, the gatekeepers, and the singers stay. Thus we will not neglect the house of our God.”
NEH	11	1	백성의 두목들은 예루살렘에 머물렀고 그 남은 백성은 제비 뽑아 십분의 일은 거룩한 성 예루살렘에 와서 거하게 하고 그 구분은 다른 성읍에 거하게 하였으며	And the rulers of the people dwelt at Jerusalem: the rest of the people also cast lots, to bring one of ten to dwell in Jerusalem the holy city, and nine parts to dwell in other cities.	Now the leaders of the people settled in Jerusalem, and the rest of the people cast lots to bring one out of ten to live in the holy city of Jerusalem, while the remaining nine were to dwell in their own towns.
NEH	11	2	무릇 예루살렘에 거하기를 자원하는 자는 백성들이 위하여 복을 빌었느니라	And the people blessed all the men, that willingly offered themselves to dwell at Jerusalem.	And the people blessed all the men who volunteered to live in Jerusalem.
NEH	11	3	이스라엘과 제사장들과 레위 사람들과 느디님 사람들과 솔로몬의 신복의 자손은 유다 여러 성읍에서 각각 그 본성 본 기업에 거하였고 예루살렘에 거한 그 도의 두목들은 이러하니	Now these are the chief of the province that dwelt in Jerusalem: but in the cities of Judah dwelt every one in his possession in their cities, to wit, Israel, the priests, and the Levites, and the Nethinims, and the children of Solomon’s servants.	These are the heads of the provinces who settled in Jerusalem. (In the villages of Judah, however, each lived on his own property in their towns—the Israelites, priests, Levites, temple servants, and descendants of Solomon’s servants—
NEH	11	4	예루살렘에 거한 자는 유다 자손과 베냐민 자손 몇명이라 유다 자손 중에는 베레스 자손 아다야니 저는 웃시야의 아들이요 스가랴의 손자요 아마랴의 증손이요 스바댜의 현손이요 마할랄렐의 오대손이며	And at Jerusalem dwelt certain of the children of Judah, and of the children of Benjamin. Of the children of Judah; Athaiah the son of Uzziah, the son of Zechariah, the son of Amariah, the son of Shephatiah, the son of Mahalaleel, of the children of Perez;	while some of the descendants of Judah and Benjamin settled in Jerusalem.) From the descendants of Judah: Athaiah son of Uzziah, the son of Zechariah, the son of Amariah, the son of Shephatiah, the son of Mahalalel, a descendant of Perez;
NEH	11	5	또 마아세야니 저는 바룩의 아들이요 골호세의 손자요 하사야의 증손이요 아다야의 현손이요 요야립의 오대손이요 스가랴의 육대손이요 실로 사람의 칠대손이라	And Maaseiah the son of Baruch, the son of Col–hozeh, the son of Hazaiah, the son of Adaiah, the son of Joiarib, the son of Zechariah, the son of Shiloni.	and Maaseiah son of Baruch, the son of Col-hozeh, the son of Hazaiah, the son of Adaiah, the son of Joiarib, the son of Zechariah, a descendant of Shelah.
NEH	11	6	예루살렘에 거한 베레스 자손의 도합이 사백육십팔 명이니 다 용사이었느니라	All the sons of Perez that dwelt at Jerusalem were four hundred threescore and eight valiant men.	The descendants of Perez who settled in Jerusalem totaled 468 men of valor.
NEH	11	7	베냐민 자손은 살루니 저는 므술람의 아들이요 요엣의 손자요 브다야의 증손이요 골라야의 현손이요 마아세야의 오대손이요 이디엘의 육대손이요 여사야의 칠대손이며	And these are the sons of Benjamin; Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son of Joed, the son of Pedaiah, the son of Kolaiah, the son of Maaseiah, the son of Ithiel, the son of Jesaiah.	From the descendants of Benjamin: Sallu son of Meshullam, the son of Joed, the son of Pedaiah, the son of Kolaiah, the son of Maaseiah, the son of Ithiel, the son of Jeshaiah;
NEH	11	8	그 다음은 갑배와 살래 등이니 도합이 구백이십팔 명이라	And after him Gabbai, Sallai, nine hundred twenty and eight.	and his followers Gabbai and Sallai—928 men.
NEH	11	9	시그리의 아들 요엘이 그 감독이 되었고 핫스누아의 아들 유다는 버금이 되어 성읍을 다스렸느니라	And Joel the son of Zichri was their overseer: and Judah the son of Senuah was second over the city.	Joel son of Zichri was the officer over them, and Judah son of Hassenuah was over the Second District of the city.
NEH	11	10	제사장 중에는 요야립의 아들 여다야와 야긴이며	Of the priests: Jedaiah the son of Joiarib, Jachin.	From the priests:
NEH	11	11	또 하나님의 전을 맡은 자 스라야니 저는 힐기야의 아들이요 므술람의 손자요 사독의 증손이요 므라욧의 현손이요 아히둡의 오대손이며	Seraiah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, was the ruler of the house of God.	Jedaiah son of Joiarib; Jachin; Seraiah son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the chief official of the house of God;
NEH	11	12	또 전에서 일하는 그 형제니 도합이 팔백이십이 명이요 또 아다야니 저는 여로함의 아들이요 블라야의 손자요 암시의 증손이요 스가랴의 현손이요 바스훌의 오대손이요 말기야의 육대손이며	And their brethren that did the work of the house were eight hundred twenty and two: and Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pelaliah, the son of Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son of Pashur, the son of Malchiah,	and their associates who did the work at the temple—822 men;
NEH	11	13	또 그 형제의 족장 된 자니 도합이 이백사십이 명이요 또 아맛새니 저는 아사렐의 아들이요 아흐새의 손자요 므실레못의 증손이요 임멜의 현손이며	And his brethren, chief of the fathers, two hundred forty and two: and Amashai the son of Azareel, the son of Ahasai, the son of Meshillemoth, the son of Immer,	Adaiah son of Jeroham, the son of Pelaliah, the son of Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son of Pashhur, the son of Malchijah; and his associates, the leaders of families—242 men;
NEH	11	14	또 그 형제의 큰 용사니 도합이 일백이십팔 명이라 하그돌림의 아들 삽디엘이 그 감독이 되었느니라	And their brethren, mighty men of valour, an hundred twenty and eight: and their overseer was Zabdiel, the son of one of the great men.	Amashai son of Azarel, the son of Ahzai, the son of Meshillemoth, the son of Immer; and his associates—128 mighty men of valor. Zabdiel son of Haggedolim was their overseer.
NEH	11	15	레위 사람 중에는 스마야니 저는 핫숩의 아들이요 아스리감의 손자요 하사뱌의 증손이요 분니의 현손이며	Also of the Levites: Shemaiah the son of Hashub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Bunni;	From the Levites: Shemaiah son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Bunni;
NEH	11	16	또 레위 사람의 족장 삽브대와 요사밧이니 저희는 하나님의 전 바깥 일을 맡았고	And Shabbethai and Jozabad, of the chief of the Levites, had the oversight of the outward business of the house of God.	Shabbethai and Jozabad, two leaders of the Levites, who supervised the work outside the house of God;
NEH	11	17	또 아삽의 증손 삽디의 손자 미가의 아들 맛다냐니 저는 기도할 때에 감사하는 말씀을 인도하는 어른이 되었고 형제 중에 박부갸가 버금이 되었으며 또 여두둔의 증손 갈랄의 손자 삼무아의 아들 압다니	And Mattaniah the son of Micha, the son of Zabdi, the son of Asaph, was the principal to begin the thanksgiving in prayer: and Bakbukiah the second among his brethren, and Abda the son of Shammua, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun.	Mattaniah son of Mica, the son of Zabdi, the son of Asaph, who led in thanksgiving and prayer; Bakbukiah, second among his associates; and Abda son of Shammua, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun.
NEH	11	18	거룩한 성에 레위 사람의 도합이 이백팔십사 명이었느니라	All the Levites in the holy city were two hundred fourscore and four.	The Levites in the holy city totaled 284.
NEH	11	19	성 문지기는 악굽과 달몬과 그 형제니 도합이 일백칠십이 명이며	Moreover the porters, Akkub, Talmon, and their brethren that kept the gates, were an hundred seventy and two.	And the gatekeepers: Akkub, Talmon, and their associates, who kept watch at the gates—172 men.
NEH	11	20	그 나머지 이스라엘 백성과 제사장과 레위 사람은 유다 모든 성읍에 흩어져 각각 자기 기업에 거하였고	And the residue of Israel, of the priests, and the Levites, were in all the cities of Judah, every one in his inheritance.	The rest of the Israelites, with the priests and Levites, were in all the villages of Judah, each on his own inheritance.
NEH	11	21	느디님 사람은 오벨에 거하니 시하와 기스바가 그 두목이 되었느니라	But the Nethinims dwelt in Ophel: and Ziha and Gispa were over the Nethinims.	The temple servants lived on the hill of Ophel, with Ziha and Gishpa over them.
NEH	11	22	노래하는 자 아삽 자손 곧 미가의 현손 맛다냐의 증손 하사뱌의 손자 바니의 아들 웃시는 예루살렘에 거하는 레위 사람의 감독이 되어 하나님의 전 일을 맡아 다스렸으니	The overseer also of the Levites at Jerusalem was Uzzi the son of Bani, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Micha. Of the sons of Asaph, the singers were over the business of the house of God.	Now the overseer of the Levites in Jerusalem was Uzzi son of Bani, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Mica. He was one of Asaph’s descendants, who were the singers in charge of the service of the house of God.
NEH	11	23	이는 왕의 명대로 노래하는 자에게 날마다 양식을 정하여 주는 것이 있음이며	For it was the king’s commandment concerning them, that a certain portion should be for the singers, due for every day.	For there was a command from the king concerning the singers, an ordinance regulating their daily activities.
NEH	11	24	유다의 아들 세라의 자손 곧 므세사벨의 아들 브다히야는 왕의 수하에서 백성의 일을 다스렸느니라	And Pethahiah the son of Meshezabeel, of the children of Zerah the son of Judah, was at the king’s hand in all matters concerning the people.	Pethahiah son of Meshezabel, a descendant of Zerah son of Judah, was the king’s agent in every matter concerning the people.
NEH	11	25	향리와 들로 말하면 유다 자손의 더러는 기럇 아바와 그 촌과 디본과 그 촌과 여갑스엘과 그 동네에 거하며	And for the villages, with their fields, some of the children of Judah dwelt at Kirjath–arba, and in the villages thereof, and at Dibon, and in the villages thereof, and at Jekabzeel, and in the villages thereof,	As for the villages with their fields, some of the people of Judah lived in Kiriath-arba, Dibon, Jekabzeel, and their villages;
NEH	11	26	또 예수아와 몰라다와 벧벨렛과	And at Jeshua, and at Moladah, and at Beth–phelet,	in Jeshua, Moladah, and Beth-pelet;
NEH	11	27	하살수알과 브엘세바와 그 촌에 거하며	And at Hazar–shual, and at Beer–sheba, and in the villages thereof,	in Hazar-shual; in Beersheba and its villages;
NEH	11	28	또 시글락과 므고나와 그 촌에 거하며	And at Ziklag, and at Mekonah, and in the villages thereof,	in Ziklag; in Meconah and its villages;
NEH	11	29	또 에느림몬과 소라와 야르뭇에 거하며	And at En–rimmon, and at Zareah, and at Jarmuth,	in En-rimmon, Zorah, Jarmuth,
NEH	11	30	또 사노아와 아둘람과 그 동네와 라기스와 그 들과 아세가와 그 촌에 거하였으니 저희는 브엘세바에서부터 힌놈의 골짜기까지 장막을 쳤으며	Zanoah, Adullam, and in their villages, at Lachish, and the fields thereof, at Azekah, and in the villages thereof. And they dwelt from Beer–sheba unto the valley of Hinnom.	Zanoah, Adullam, and their villages; in Lachish and its fields; and in Azekah and its villages. So they settled from Beersheba all the way to the Valley of Hinnom.
NEH	11	31	또 베냐민 자손은 게바에서부터 믹마스와 아야와 벧엘과 그 촌에 거하며	The children also of Benjamin from Geba dwelt at Michmash, and Aija, and Beth–el, and in their villages,	The descendants of Benjamin from Geba lived in Michmash, Aija, and Bethel with its villages;
NEH	11	32	아나돗과 놉과 아나냐와	And at Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah,	in Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah,
NEH	11	33	하솔과 라마와 깃다임과	Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim,	Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim,
NEH	11	34	하딧과 스보임과 느발랏과	Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat,	Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat,
NEH	11	35	로드와 오노와 공장 골짜기에 거하였으며	Lod, and Ono, the valley of craftsmen.	Lod, and Ono; and in the Valley of the Craftsmen.
NEH	11	36	유다에 있던 레위 사람의 어떤 반열은 베냐민과 합하였느니라	And of the Levites were divisions in Judah, and in Benjamin.	And some divisions of the Levites of Judah settled in Benjamin.
NEH	12	1	스알디엘의 아들 스룹바벨과 및 예수아를 좇아 돌아온 제사장과 레위 사람은 이러하니라 제사장은 스라야와 예레미야와 에스라와	Now these are the priests and the Levites that went up with Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua: Seraiah, Jeremiah, Ezra,	Now these are the priests and Levites who went up with Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel and with Jeshua: Seraiah, Jeremiah, Ezra,
NEH	12	2	아마랴와 말룩과 핫두스와	Amariah, Malluch, Hattush,	Amariah, Malluch, Hattush,
NEH	12	3	스가냐와 르훔과 므레못과	Shechaniah, Rehum, Meremoth,	Shecaniah, Rehum, Meremoth,
NEH	12	4	잇도와 긴느도이와 아비야와	Iddo, Ginnetho, Abijah,	Iddo, Ginnethon, Abijah,
NEH	12	5	미야민과 마아댜와 빌가와	Miamin, Maadiah, Bilgah,	Mijamin, Maadiah, Bilgah,
NEH	12	6	스마야와 요야립과 여다야와	Shemaiah, and Joiarib, Jedaiah,	Shemaiah, Joiarib, Jedaiah,
NEH	12	7	살루와 아목과 힐기야와 여다야니 이상은 예수아 때에 제사장과 그 형제의 어른이었느니라	Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, Jedaiah. These were the chief of the priests and of their brethren in the days of Jeshua.	Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, and Jedaiah. These were the leaders of the priests and their associates in the days of Jeshua.
NEH	12	8	레위 사람은 예수아와 빈누이와 갓미엘과 세레뱌와 유다와 맛다냐니 이 맛다냐는 그 형제와 함께 찬송하는 일을 맡았고	Moreover the Levites: Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, and Mattaniah, which was over the thanksgiving, he and his brethren.	The Levites were Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, and Mattaniah, who, with his associates, led the songs of thanksgiving.
NEH	12	9	또 그 형제 박부갸와 운노는 직무를 따라 저의 맞은편에 있으며	Also Bakbukiah and Unni, their brethren, were over against them in the watches.	Bakbukiah and Unni, their associates, stood across from them in the services.
NEH	12	10	예수아는 요야김을 낳았고 요야김은 엘리아십을 낳았고 엘리아십은 요야다를 낳았고	And Jeshua begat Joiakim, Joiakim also begat Eliashib, and Eliashib begat Joiada,	Jeshua was the father of Joiakim, Joiakim was the father of Eliashib, Eliashib was the father of Joiada,
NEH	12	11	요야다는 요나단을 낳았고 요나단은 얏두아를 낳았느니라	And Joiada begat Jonathan, and Jonathan begat Jaddua.	Joiada was the father of Jonathan, and Jonathan was the father of Jaddua.
NEH	12	12	요야김 때에 제사장의 족장된 자는 스라야 족속에는 므라야요 예레미야 족속에는 하나냐요	And in the days of Joiakim were priests, the chief of the fathers: of Seraiah, Meraiah; of Jeremiah, Hananiah;	In the days of Joiakim, these were the heads of the priestly families: of the family of Seraiah, Meraiah; of Jeremiah, Hananiah;
NEH	12	13	에스라 족속에는 므술람이요 아마랴 족속에는 여호하난이요	Of Ezra, Meshullam; of Amariah, Jehohanan;	of Ezra, Meshullam; of Amariah, Jehohanan;
NEH	12	14	말루기 족속에는 요나단이요 스바냐 족속에는 요셉이요	Of Melicu, Jonathan; of Shebaniah, Joseph;	of Malluchi, Jonathan; of Shebaniah, Joseph;
NEH	12	15	하림 족속에는 아드나요 므라욧 족속에는 헬개요	Of Harim, Adna; of Meraioth, Helkai;	of Harim, Adna; of Meraioth, Helkai;
NEH	12	16	잇도 족속에는 스가랴요 긴느돈 족속에는 므술람이요	Of Iddo, Zechariah; of Ginnethon, Meshullam;	of Iddo, Zechariah; of Ginnethon, Meshullam;
NEH	12	17	아비야 족속에는 시그리요 미냐민 곧 모아댜 족속에는 빌대요	Of Abijah, Zichri; of Miniamin, of Moadiah, Piltai;	of Abijah, Zichri; of Miniamin and of Moadiah, Piltai;
NEH	12	18	빌가 족속에는 삼무아요 스마야 족속에는 여호나단이요	Of Bilgah, Shammua; of Shemaiah, Jehonathan;	of Bilgah, Shammua; of Shemaiah, Jonathan;
NEH	12	19	요야립 족속에는 맛드내요 여다야 족속에는 웃시요	And of Joiarib, Mattenai; of Jedaiah, Uzzi;	of Joiarib, Mattenai; of Jedaiah, Uzzi;
NEH	12	20	살래 족속에는 갈래요 아목 족속에는 에벨이요	Of Sallai, Kallai; of Amok, Eber;	of Sallai, Kallai; of Amok, Eber;
NEH	12	21	힐기야 족속에는 하사뱌요 여다야 족속에는 느다넬이었느니라	Of Hilkiah, Hashabiah; of Jedaiah, Nethaneel.	of Hilkiah, Hashabiah; and of Jedaiah, Nethanel.
NEH	12	22	엘리아십과 요야다와 요하난과 얏두아 때에 레위 사람의 족장이 모두 책에 기록되었고 바사 왕 다리오 때에 제사장도 책에 기록되었고	The Levites in the days of Eliashib, Joiada, and Johanan, and Jaddua, were recorded chief of the fathers: also the priests, to the reign of Darius the Persian.	In the days of Eliashib, Joiada, Johanan, and Jaddua, during the reign of Darius the Persian, the heads of the families of the Levites and priests were recorded.
NEH	12	23	레위 자손의 족장들은 엘리아십의 아들 요하난 때까지 역대지략에 기록되었으며	The sons of Levi, the chief of the fathers, were written in the book of the chronicles, even until the days of Johanan the son of Eliashib.	As for the descendants of Levi, the family heads up to the days of Johanan son of Eliashib were recorded in the Book of the Chronicles.
NEH	12	24	레위 사람의 어른은 하사뱌와 세레뱌와 갓미엘의 아들 예수아라 저희가 그 형제의 맞은편에 있어 하나님의 사람 다윗의 명한 대로 반차를 따라 주를 찬양하며 감사하고	And the chief of the Levites: Hashabiah, Sherebiah, and Jeshua the son of Kadmiel, with their brethren over against them, to praise and to give thanks, according to the commandment of David the man of God, ward over against ward.	The leaders of the Levites were Hashabiah, Sherebiah, and Jeshua son of Kadmiel, along with their associates, who stood across from them to give praise and thanksgiving as one section alternated with the other, as prescribed by David the man of God.
NEH	12	25	맛다냐와 박부갸와 오바댜와 므술람과 달몬과 악굽은 다 문지기로서 반차대로 문 안의 곳간을 파수하였나니	Mattaniah, and Bakbukiah, Obadiah, Meshullam, Talmon, Akkub, were porters keeping the ward at the thresholds of the gates.	Mattaniah, Bakbukiah, Obadiah, Meshullam, Talmon, and Akkub were gatekeepers who guarded the storerooms at the gates.
NEH	12	26	이상 모든 사람은 요사닥의 손자 예수아의 아들 요야김과 방백 느헤미야와 제사장 겸 서기관 에스라 때에 있었느니라	These were in the days of Joiakim the son of Jeshua, the son of Jozadak, and in the days of Nehemiah the governor, and of Ezra the priest, the scribe.	They served in the days of Joiakim son of Jeshua, the son of Jozadak, and in the days of Nehemiah the governor and Ezra the priest and scribe.
NEH	12	27	예루살렘 성곽이 낙성되니 각처에서 레위 사람들을 찾아 예루살렘으로 데려다가 감사하며 노래하며 제금 치며 비파와 수금을 타며 즐거이 봉헌식을 행하려 하매	And at the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem they sought the Levites out of all their places, to bring them to Jerusalem, to keep the dedication with gladness, both with thanksgivings, and with singing, with cymbals, psalteries, and with harps.	At the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem, the Levites were sought out from all their homes and brought to Jerusalem to celebrate the joyous dedication with thanksgiving and singing, accompanied by cymbals, harps, and lyres.
NEH	12	28	이에 노래하는 자들이 예루살렘 사방 들과 느도바 사람의 동네에서 모여오고	And the sons of the singers gathered themselves together, both out of the plain country round about Jerusalem, and from the villages of Netophathi;	The singers were also assembled from the region around Jerusalem, from the villages of the Netophathites,
NEH	12	29	또 벧길갈과 게바와 아스마웹 들에서 모여왔으니 이 노래하는 자들은 자기를 위하여 예루살렘 사방에 동네를 세웠음이라	Also from the house of Gilgal, and out of the fields of Geba and Azmaveth: for the singers had builded them villages round about Jerusalem.	from Beth-gilgal, and from the fields of Geba and Azmaveth, for they had built villages for themselves around Jerusalem.
NEH	12	30	제사장들과 레위 사람들이 몸을 정결케 하고 또 백성과 성문과 성을 정결케 하니라	And the priests and the Levites purified themselves, and purified the people, and the gates, and the wall.	After the priests and Levites had purified themselves, they purified the people, the gates, and the wall.
NEH	12	31	이에 내가 유다의 방백들로 성 위에 오르게 하고 또 감사 찬송하는 자의 큰 무리를 두 떼로 나누어 성 위로 항렬을 지어가게 하는데 한 떼는 우편으로 분문을 향하여 가게 하니	Then I brought up the princes of Judah upon the wall, and appointed two great companies of them that gave thanks, whereof one went on the right hand upon the wall toward the dung gate:	Then I brought the leaders of Judah up on the wall, and I appointed two great thanksgiving choirs. One was to proceed along the top of the wall to the right, toward the Dung Gate.
NEH	12	32	따르는 자는 호세야와 유다 방백의 절반이요	And after them went Hoshaiah, and half of the princes of Judah,	Hoshaiah and half the leaders of Judah followed,
NEH	12	33	또 아사랴와 에스라와 므술람과	And Azariah, Ezra, and Meshullam,	along with Azariah, Ezra, Meshullam,
NEH	12	34	유다와 베냐민과 스마야와 예레미야며	Judah, and Benjamin, and Shemaiah, and Jeremiah,	Judah, Benjamin, Shemaiah, Jeremiah,
NEH	12	35	또 제사장의 자손 몇이 나팔을 잡았으니 요나단의 아들 스마야의 손자 맛다냐의 증손 미가야의 현손 삭굴의 오대손 아삽의 육대손 스가랴와	And certain of the priests’ sons with trumpets; namely, Zechariah the son of Jonathan, the son of Shemaiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Michaiah, the son of Zaccur, the son of Asaph:	and some of the priests with trumpets, and also Zechariah son of Jonathan, the son of Shemaiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Micaiah, the son of Zaccur, the son of Asaph,
NEH	12	36	그 형제 스마야와 아사렐과 밀랄래와 길랄래와 마애와 느다넬과 유다와 하나니라 다 하나님의 사람 다윗의 악기를 잡았고 학사 에스라가 앞서서	And his brethren, Shemaiah, and Azarael, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nethaneel, and Judah, Hanani, with the musical instruments of David the man of God, and Ezra the scribe before them.	and his associates—Shemaiah, Azarel, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nethanel, Judah, and Hanani—with the musical instruments prescribed by David the man of God. Ezra the scribe led the procession.
NEH	12	37	샘문으로 말미암아 전진하여 성으로 올라 가는 곳에 이르러 다윗 성의 층계로 올라가서 다윗의 궁 윗 길에서 동향하여 수문에 이르렀고	And at the fountain gate, which was over against them, they went up by the stairs of the city of David, at the going up of the wall, above the house of David, even unto the water gate eastward.	At the Fountain Gate they climbed the steps of the City of David on the ascent to the wall and passed above the house of David to the Water Gate on the east.
NEH	12	38	감사 찬송하는 다른 떼는 저희를 마주 진행하는데 내가 백성의 절반으로 더불어 그 뒤를 따라 성 위로 행하여 풀무 망대 윗 길로 성 넓은 곳에 이르고	And the other company of them that gave thanks went over against them, and I after them, and the half of the people upon the wall, from beyond the tower of the furnaces even unto the broad wall;	The second thanksgiving choir proceeded to the left, and I followed it with half the people along the top of the wall, past the Tower of the Ovens to the Broad Wall,
NEH	12	39	에브라임 문 위로 말미암아 옛문과 어문과 하나넬 망대와 함메아 망대를 지나 양문에 이르러 감옥 문에 그치매	And from above the gate of Ephraim, and above the old gate, and above the fish gate, and the tower of Hananeel, and the tower of Meah, even unto the sheep gate: and they stood still in the prison gate.	over the Gate of Ephraim, the Jeshanah Gate, the Fish Gate, the Tower of Hananel, and the Tower of the Hundred, as far as the Sheep Gate. And they stopped at the Gate of the Guard.
NEH	12	40	이에 감사 찬송하는 두 떼와 나와 민장의 절반은 하나님의 전에 섰고	So stood the two companies of them that gave thanks in the house of God, and I, and the half of the rulers with me:	The two thanksgiving choirs then stood in the house of God, as did I, along with the half of the officials accompanying me,
NEH	12	41	제사장 엘리아김과 마아세야와 미냐민과 미가야와 엘료에내와 스가랴와 하나냐는 다 나팔을 잡았고	And the priests; Eliakim, Maaseiah, Miniamin, Michaiah, Elioenai, Zechariah, and Hananiah, with trumpets;	as well as the priests with their trumpets—Eliakim, Maaseiah, Miniamin, Micaiah, Elioenai, Zechariah, and Hananiah—
NEH	12	42	또 마아세야와 스마야와 엘르아살과 웃시와 여호하난과 말기야와 엘람과 에셀이 함께 있으며 노래하는 자는 크게 찬송하였는데 그 감독은 예스라히야라	And Maaseiah, and Shemaiah, and Eleazar, and Uzzi, and Jehohanan, and Malchijah, and Elam, and Ezer. And the singers sang loud, with Jezrahiah their overseer.	and also Maaseiah, Shemaiah, Eleazar, Uzzi, Jehohanan, Malchijah, Elam, and Ezer. Then the choirs sang out under the direction of Jezrahiah.
NEH	12	43	이 날에 무리가 크게 제사를 드리고 심히 즐거워하였으니 이는 하나님이 크게 즐거워하게 하셨음이라 부녀와 어린 아이도 즐거워 하였으므로 예루살렘의 즐거워하는 소리가 멀리 들렸느니라	Also that day they offered great sacrifices, and rejoiced: for God had made them rejoice with great joy: the wives also and the children rejoiced: so that the joy of Jerusalem was heard even afar off.	On that day they offered great sacrifices, rejoicing because God had given them great joy. The women and children also rejoiced, so that the joy of Jerusalem was heard from afar.
NEH	12	44	그 날에 사람을 세워 곳간을 맡기고 제사장들과 레위 사람들에게 돌릴 것 곧 율법에 정한 대로 거제물과 처음 익은 것과 십일조를 모든 성읍 밭에서 거두어 이 곳간을 쌓게 하였노니 이는 유다 사람이 섬기는 제사장들과 레위 사람들을 인하여 즐거워함을 인함이라	And at that time were some appointed over the chambers for the treasures, for the offerings, for the firstfruits, and for the tithes, to gather into them out of the fields of the cities the portions of the law for the priests and Levites: for Judah rejoiced for the priests and for the Levites that waited.	And on that same day men were appointed over the rooms that housed the supplies, contributions, firstfruits, and tithes. The portions specified by the Law for the priests and Levites were gathered into these storerooms from the fields of the villages, because Judah rejoiced over the priests and Levites who were serving.
NEH	12	45	저희는 하나님을 섬기는 일과 결례의 일을 힘썼으며 노래하는 자들과 문지기들도 그러하여 모두 다윗과 그 아들 솔로몬의 명을 좇아 행하였으니	And both the singers and the porters kept the ward of their God, and the ward of the purification, according to the commandment of David, and of Solomon his son.	They performed the service of their God and the service of purification, along with the singers and gatekeepers, as David and his son Solomon had prescribed.
NEH	12	46	옛적 다윗과 아삽의 때에는 노래하는 자의 두목이 있어서 하나님께 찬송하는 노래와 감사하는 노래를 하였음이며	For in the days of David and Asaph of old there were chief of the singers, and songs of praise and thanksgiving unto God.	For long ago, in the days of David and Asaph, there were directors for the singers and for the songs of praise and thanksgiving to God.
NEH	12	47	스룹바벨과 느헤미야 때에는 온 이스라엘이 노래하는 자들과 문지기들에게 날마다 쓸 것을 주되 그 구별한 것을 레위 사람들에게 주고 레위 사람들은 그것을 또 구별하여 아론 자손에게 주었느니라	And all Israel in the days of Zerubbabel, and in the days of Nehemiah, gave the portions of the singers and the porters, every day his portion: and they sanctified holy things unto the Levites; and the Levites sanctified them unto the children of Aaron.	So in the days of Zerubbabel and Nehemiah, all Israel contributed the daily portions for the singers and gatekeepers. They also set aside daily portions for the Levites, and the Levites set aside daily portions for the descendants of Aaron.
NEH	13	1	그 날에 모세의 책을 낭독하여 기록하기를 암몬 사람과 모압 사람은 영영히 하나님의 회에 들어오지 못하리니	On that day they read in the book of Moses in the audience of the people; and therein was found written, that the Ammonite and the Moabite should not come into the congregation of God for ever;	At that time the Book of Moses was read aloud in the hearing of the people, and in it they found the passage stating that no Ammonite or Moabite should ever enter the assembly of God,
NEH	13	2	이는 저희가 양식과 물로 이스라엘 자손을 영접지 아니하고 도리어 발람에게 뇌물을 주어 저주하게 하였음이라 그러나 우리 하나님이 그 저주를 돌이켜 복이 되게 하였는지라	Because they met not the children of Israel with bread and with water, but hired Balaam against them, that he should curse them: howbeit our God turned the curse into a blessing.	because they had not met the Israelites with food and water, but had hired Balaam to call down a curse against them (although our God had turned the curse into a blessing).
NEH	13	3	백성이 이 율법을 듣고 곧 섞인 무리를 이스라엘 가운데서 몰수히 분리케 하였느니라	Now it came to pass, when they had heard the law, that they separated from Israel all the mixed multitude.	As soon as the people heard this law, they excluded from Israel all of foreign descent.
NEH	13	4	이전에 우리 하나님의 전 골방을 맡은 제사장 엘리아십이 도비야와 연락이 있었으므로	And before this, Eliashib the priest, having the oversight of the chamber of the house of our God, was allied unto Tobiah:	Now before this, Eliashib the priest, a relative of Tobiah, had been put in charge of the storerooms of the house of our God
NEH	13	5	도비야를 위하여 한 큰 방을 갖추었으니 그 방은 원래 소제물과 유향과 또 기명과 레위 사람들과 노래하는 자들과 문지기들에게 십일조로 주는 곡물과 새 포도주와 기름과 또 제사장들에게 주는 거제물을 두는 곳이라	And he had prepared for him a great chamber, where aforetime they laid the meat offerings, the frankincense, and the vessels, and the tithes of the corn, the new wine, and the oil, which was commanded to be given to the Levites, and the singers, and the porters; and the offerings of the priests.	and had prepared for Tobiah a large room where they had previously stored the grain offerings, the frankincense, the temple articles, and the tithes of grain, new wine, and oil prescribed for the Levites, singers, and gatekeepers, along with the contributions for the priests.
NEH	13	6	그 때에는 내가 예루살렘에 있지 아니하였었느니라 바벨론 왕 아닥사스다 삼십이년에 내가 왕에게 나아갔다가 며칠 후에 왕에게 말미를 청하고	But in all this time was not I at Jerusalem: for in the two and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes king of Babylon came I unto the king, and after certain days obtained I leave of the king:	While all this was happening, I was not in Jerusalem, because I had returned to Artaxerxes king of Babylon in the thirty-second year of his reign. Some time later I obtained leave from the king
NEH	13	7	예루살렘에 이르러서야 엘리아십이 도비야를 위하여 하나님의 전 뜰에 방을 갖춘 악한 일을 안지라	And I came to Jerusalem, and understood of the evil that Eliashib did for Tobiah, in preparing him a chamber in the courts of the house of God.	to return to Jerusalem. Then I discovered the evil that Eliashib had done on behalf of Tobiah by providing him a room in the courts of the house of God.
NEH	13	8	내가 심히 근심하여 도비야의 세간을 그 방 밖으로 다 내어 던지고	And it grieved me sore: therefore I cast forth all the household stuff of Tobiah out of the chamber.	And I was greatly displeased and threw all of Tobiah’s household goods out of the room.
NEH	13	9	명하여 그 방을 정결케 하고 하나님의 전의 기명과 소제물과 유향을 다시 그리로 들여 놓았느니라	Then I commanded, and they cleansed the chambers: and thither brought I again the vessels of the house of God, with the meat offering and the frankincense.	Then I ordered that the rooms be purified, and I had the articles of the house of God restored to them, along with the grain offerings and frankincense.
NEH	13	10	내가 또 알아본즉 레위 사람들의 받을 것을 주지 아니하였으므로 그 직무를 행하는 레위 사람들과 노래하는 자들이 각각 그 전리로 도망하였기로	And I perceived that the portions of the Levites had not been given them: for the Levites and the singers, that did the work, were fled every one to his field.	I also learned that because the portions for the Levites had not been given to them, all the Levites and singers responsible for performing the service had gone back to their own fields.
NEH	13	11	내가 모든 민장을 꾸짖어 이르기를 하나님의 전이 어찌하여 버린바 되었느냐 하고 곧 레위 사람을 불러 모아 다시 그 처소에 세웠더니	Then contended I with the rulers, and said, Why is the house of God forsaken? And I gathered them together, and set them in their place.	So I rebuked the officials and asked, “Why has the house of God been neglected?” Then I gathered the Levites and singers together and stationed them at their posts,
NEH	13	12	이에 온 유다가 곡식과 새 포도주와 기름의 십일조를 가져다가 곳간에 들이므로	Then brought all Judah the tithe of the corn and the new wine and the oil unto the treasuries.	and all Judah brought a tenth of the grain, new wine, and oil into the storerooms.
NEH	13	13	내가 제사장 셀레먀와 서기관 사독과 레위 사람 브다야로 고지기를 삼고 맛다냐의 손자 삭굴의 아들 하난으로 버금을 삼았나니 이는 저희가 충직한 자로 인정됨이라 그 직분은 형제들에게 분배하는 일이었느니라	And I made treasurers over the treasuries, Shelemiah the priest, and Zadok the scribe, and of the Levites, Pedaiah: and next to them was Hanan the son of Zaccur, the son of Mattaniah: for they were counted faithful, and their office was to distribute unto their brethren.	I appointed as treasurers over the storerooms Shelemiah the priest, Zadok the scribe, and Pedaiah of the Levites, with Hanan son of Zaccur, the son of Mattaniah, to assist them, because they were considered trustworthy. They were responsible for distributing the supplies to their fellow Levites.
NEH	13	14	내 하나님이여 이 일을 인하여 나를 기억하옵소서 내 하나님의 전과 그 모든 직무를 위하여 나의 행한 선한 일을 도말하지 마옵소서	Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and wipe not out my good deeds that I have done for the house of my God, and for the offices thereof.	Remember me for this, O my God, and do not blot out my deeds of loving devotion for the house of my God and for its services.
NEH	13	15	그 때에 내가 본즉 유다에서 어떤 사람이 안식일에 술틀을 밟고 곡식단을 나귀에 실어 운반하며 포도주와 포도와 무화과와 여러 가지 짐을 지고 안식일에 예루살렘에 들어와서 식물을 팔기로 그 날에 내가 경계하였고	In those days saw I in Judah some treading wine presses on the sabbath, and bringing in sheaves, and lading asses; as also wine, grapes, and figs, and all manner of burdens, which they brought into Jerusalem on the sabbath day: and I testified against them in the day wherein they sold victuals.	In those days I saw people in Judah treading winepresses on the Sabbath and bringing in grain and loading it on donkeys, along with wine, grapes, and figs. All kinds of goods were being brought into Jerusalem on the Sabbath day. So I warned them against selling food on that day.
NEH	13	16	또 두로 사람이 예루살렘에 거하며 물고기와 각양 물건을 가져다가 안식일에 유다 자손에게 예루살렘에서도 팔기로	There dwelt men of Tyre also therein, which brought fish, and all manner of ware, and sold on the sabbath unto the children of Judah, and in Jerusalem.	Additionally, men of Tyre who lived there were importing fish and all kinds of merchandise and selling them on the Sabbath to the people of Judah in Jerusalem.
NEH	13	17	내가 유다 모든 귀인을 꾸짖어 이르기를 너희가 어찌 이 악을 행하여 안식일을 범하느냐	Then I contended with the nobles of Judah, and said unto them, What evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the sabbath day?	Then I rebuked the nobles of Judah and asked, “What is this evil you are doing—profaning the Sabbath day?
NEH	13	18	너희 열조가 이같이 행하지 아니하였느냐 그러므로 우리 하나님이 이 모든 재앙으로 우리와 이 성읍에 내리신 것이 아니냐 이제 너희가 오히려 안식일을 범하여 진노가 이스라엘에게 임함이 더욱 심하게 하는도다 하고	Did not your fathers thus, and did not our God bring all this evil upon us, and upon this city? yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel by profaning the sabbath.	Did not your forefathers do the same things, so that our God brought all this disaster on us and on this city? And now you are rekindling His wrath against Israel by profaning the Sabbath!”
NEH	13	19	안식일 전 예루살렘 성문이 어두워 갈 때에 내가 명하여 성문을 닫고 안식일이 지나기 전에는 열지 말라 하고 내 종자 두어 사람을 성문마다 세워서 안식일에 아무 짐도 들어오지 못하게 하매	And it came to pass, that when the gates of Jerusalem began to be dark before the sabbath, I commanded that the gates should be shut, and charged that they should not be opened till after the sabbath: and some of my servants set I at the gates, that there should no burden be brought in on the sabbath day.	When the evening shadows began to fall on the gates of Jerusalem, just before the Sabbath, I ordered that the gates be shut and not opened until after the Sabbath. I posted some of my servants at the gates so that no load could enter on the Sabbath day.
NEH	13	20	장사들과 각양 물건 파는 자들이 한두 번 예루살렘 성 밖에서 자므로	So the merchants and sellers of all kind of ware lodged without Jerusalem once or twice.	Once or twice, the merchants and those who sell all kinds of goods camped outside Jerusalem,
NEH	13	21	내가 경계하여 이르기를 너희가 어찌하여 성 밑에서 자느냐 다시 이같이 하면 내가 잡으리라 하였더니 그 후부터는 안식일에 저희가 다시 오지 아니하였느니라	Then I testified against them, and said unto them, Why lodge ye about the wall? if ye do so again, I will lay hands on you. From that time forth came they no more on the sabbath.	but I warned them, “Why are you camping in front of the wall? If you do it again, I will lay hands on you.” From that time on, they did not return on the Sabbath.
NEH	13	22	내가 또 레위 사람들을 명하여 몸을 정결케 하고 와서 성문을 지켜서 안식일로 거룩하게 하라 하였느니라 나의 하나님이여 나를 위하여 이 일도 기억하옵시고 주의 큰 은혜대로 나를 아끼시옵소서	And I commanded the Levites that they should cleanse themselves, and that they should come and keep the gates, to sanctify the sabbath day. Remember me, O my God, concerning this also, and spare me according to the greatness of thy mercy.	Then I instructed the Levites to purify themselves and guard the gates in order to keep the Sabbath day holy. Remember me for this as well, O my God, and show me mercy according to Your abundant loving devotion.
NEH	13	23	그 때에 내가 또 본즉 유다 사람이 아스돗과 암몬과 모압 여인을 취하여 아내를 삼았는데	In those days also saw I Jews that had married wives of Ashdod, of Ammon, and of Moab:	In those days I also saw Jews who had married women from Ashdod, Ammon, and Moab.
NEH	13	24	그 자녀가 아스돗 방언을 절반쯤은 하여도 유다 방언은 못하니 그 하는 말이 각 족속의 방언이므로	And their children spake half in the speech of Ashdod, and could not speak in the Jews’ language, but according to the language of each people.	Half of their children spoke the language of Ashdod or of the other peoples, but could not speak the language of Judah.
NEH	13	25	내가 책망하고 저주하며 두어 사람을 때리고 그 머리털을 뽑고 이르되 너희는 너희 딸들로 저희 아들들에게 주지 말고 너희 아들들이나 너희를 위하여 저희 딸을 데려오지 않겠다고 하나님을 가리켜 맹세하라 하고	And I contended with them, and cursed them, and smote certain of them, and plucked off their hair, and made them swear by God, saying, Ye shall not give your daughters unto their sons, nor take their daughters unto your sons, or for yourselves.	I rebuked them and called down curses on them. I beat some of these men and pulled out their hair. Then I made them take an oath before God and said, “You must not give your daughters in marriage to their sons or take their daughters as wives for your sons or for yourselves!
NEH	13	26	또 이르기를 옛적에 이스라엘 왕 솔로몬이 이 일로 범죄하지 아니하였느냐 저는 열국 중에 비길 왕이 없이 하나님의 사랑을 입은 자라 하나님이 저로 왕을 삼아 온 이스라엘을 다스리게 하셨으나 이방 여인이 저로 범죄케 하였나니	Did not Solomon king of Israel sin by these things? yet among many nations was there no king like him, who was beloved of his God, and God made him king over all Israel: nevertheless even him did outlandish women cause to sin.	Did not King Solomon of Israel sin in matters like this? There was not a king like him among many nations, and he was loved by his God, who made him king over all Israel—yet foreign women drew him into sin.
NEH	13	27	너희가 이방 여인을 취하여 크게 악을 행하여 우리 하나님께 범죄하는 것을 우리가 어찌 용납하겠느냐	Shall we then hearken unto you to do all this great evil, to transgress against our God in marrying strange wives?	Must we now hear that you too are doing all this terrible evil and acting unfaithfully against our God by marrying foreign women?”
NEH	13	28	대제사장 엘리아십의 손자 요야다의 아들 하나가 호론 사람 산발랏의 사위가 되었으므로 내가 쫓아내어 나를 떠나게 하였느니라	And one of the sons of Joiada, the son of Eliashib the high priest, was son in law to Sanballat the Horonite: therefore I chased him from me.	Even one of the sons of Jehoiada son of Eliashib the high priest had become a son-in-law to Sanballat the Horonite. Therefore I drove him away from me.
NEH	13	29	내 하나님이여 저희가 제사장의 직분을 더럽히고 제사장의 직분과 레위 사람에 대한 언약을 어기었사오니 저희를 기억하옵소서	Remember them, O my God, because they have defiled the priesthood, and the covenant of the priesthood, and of the Levites.	Remember them, O my God, because they have defiled the priesthood and the covenant of the priesthood and of the Levites.
NEH	13	30	이와 같이 저희로 이방 사람을 떠나게 하여 깨끗하게 하고 또 제사장과 레위 사람의 반열을 세워 각각 그 일을 맡게 하고	Thus cleansed I them from all strangers, and appointed the wards of the priests and the Levites, every one in his business;	Thus I purified the priests and Levites from everything foreign, and I assigned specific duties to each of the priests and Levites.
NEH	13	31	또 정한 기한에 나무와 처음 익은 것을 드리게 하였사오니 내 하나님이여 나를 기억하사 복을 주옵소서	And for the wood offering, at times appointed, and for the firstfruits. Remember me, O my God, for good.	I also arranged for contributions of wood at the appointed times, and for the firstfruits. Remember me, O my God, with favor.
EST	1	1	이 일은 아하수에로 왕 때에 된 것이니 아하수에로는 인도로 구스까지 일백이십칠 도를 치리하는 왕이라	Now it came to pass in the days of Ahasuerus, (this is Ahasuerus which reigned, from India even unto Ethiopia, over an hundred and seven and twenty provinces:)	This is what happened in the days of Xerxes, who reigned over 127 provinces from India to Cush.
EST	1	2	당시에 아하수에로 왕이 수산 궁에서 즉위하고	That in those days, when the king Ahasuerus sat on the throne of his kingdom, which was in Shushan the palace,	In those days King Xerxes sat on his royal throne in the citadel of Susa.
EST	1	3	위에 있은지 삼년에 그 모든 방백과 신복을 위하여 잔치를 베푸니 바사와 메대의 장수와 각 도의 귀족과 방백들이 다 왕 앞에 있는지라	In the third year of his reign, he made a feast unto all his princes and his servants; the power of Persia and Media, the nobles and princes of the provinces, being before him:	In the third year of his reign, Xerxes held a feast for all his officials and servants. The military leaders of Persia and Media were there, along with the nobles and princes of the provinces.
EST	1	4	왕이 여러 날 곧 일백팔십 일 동안에 그 영화로운 나라의 부함과 위엄의 혁혁함을 나타내니라	When he shewed the riches of his glorious kingdom and the honour of his excellent majesty many days, even an hundred and fourscore days.	And for a full 180 days he displayed the glorious riches of his kingdom and the magnificent splendor of his greatness.
EST	1	5	이 날이 다하매 왕이 또 도성 수산 대소 인민을 위하여 왕궁 후원 뜰에서 칠 일 동안 잔치를 베풀새	And when these days were expired, the king made a feast unto all the people that were present in Shushan the palace, both unto great and small, seven days, in the court of the garden of the king’s palace;	At the end of this time, in the garden court of the royal palace, the king held a seven-day feast for all the people in the citadel of Susa, from the least to the greatest.
EST	1	6	백색, 녹색, 청색 휘장을 자색 가는 베줄로 대리석 기둥 은고리에 매고 금과 은으로 만든 걸상을 화반석, 백석, 운모석, 흑석을 깐 땅에 진설하고	Where were white, green, and blue, hangings, fastened with cords of fine linen and purple to silver rings and pillars of marble: the beds were of gold and silver, upon a pavement of red, and blue, and white, and black, marble.	Hangings of white and blue linen were fastened with cords of fine white and purple material to silver rings on the marble pillars. Gold and silver couches were arranged on a mosaic pavement of porphyry, marble, mother-of-pearl, and other costly stones.
EST	1	7	금잔으로 마시게 하니 잔의 식양이 각기 다르고 왕의 풍부한 대로 어주가 한이 없으며	And they gave them drink in vessels of gold, (the vessels being diverse one from another,) and royal wine in abundance, according to the state of the king.	Beverages were served in an array of goblets of gold, each with a different design, and the royal wine flowed freely, according to the king’s bounty.
EST	1	8	마시는 것도 규모가 있어 사람으로 억지로 하지 않게 하니 이는 왕이 모든 궁내 관리에게 명하여 각 사람으로 마음대로 하게 함이더라	And the drinking was according to the law; none did compel: for so the king had appointed to all the officers of his house, that they should do according to every man’s pleasure.	By order of the king, no limit was placed on the drinking, and every official of his household was to serve each man whatever he desired.
EST	1	9	왕후 와스디도 아하수에로 왕궁에서 부녀들을 위하여 잔치를 베푸니라	Also Vashti the queen made a feast for the women in the royal house which belonged to king Ahasuerus.	Queen Vashti also gave a banquet for the women in the royal palace of King Xerxes.
EST	1	10	제칠일에 왕이 주흥이 일어나서 어전 내시 므후만과 비스다와 하르보나와 빅다와 아박다와 세달과 가르가스 일곱 사람을 명하여	On the seventh day, when the heart of the king was merry with wine, he commanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, and Abagtha, Zethar, and Carcas, the seven chamberlains that served in the presence of Ahasuerus the king,	On the seventh day, when the king’s heart was merry with wine, he ordered the seven eunuchs who served him—Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, Abagtha, Zethar, and Carkas—
EST	1	11	왕후 와스디를 청하여 왕후의 면류관을 정제하고 왕의 앞으로 나아오게 하여 그 아리따움을 뭇 백성과 방백들에게 보이게 하라 하니 이는 왕후의 용모가 보기에 좋음이라	To bring Vashti the queen before the king with the crown royal, to shew the people and the princes her beauty: for she was fair to look on.	to bring Queen Vashti before him, wearing her royal crown, to display her beauty to the people and officials. For she was beautiful to behold.
EST	1	12	그러나 왕후 와스디가 내시의 전하는 왕명을 좇아 오기를 싫어하니 왕이 진노하여 중심이 불 붙는듯 하더라	But the queen Vashti refused to come at the king’s commandment by his chamberlains: therefore was the king very wroth, and his anger burned in him.	Queen Vashti, however, refused to come at the king’s command brought by his eunuchs. And the king became furious, and his anger burned within him.
EST	1	13	왕이 사례를 아는 박사들에게 묻되 (왕이 규례와 법률을 아는 자에게 묻는 전례가 있는데	Then the king said to the wise men, which knew the times, (for so was the king’s manner toward all that knew law and judgment:	Then the king consulted the wise men who knew the times, for it was customary for him to confer with the experts in law and justice.
EST	1	14	때에 왕에게 가까이 하여 왕의 기색을 살피며 나라 첫 자리에 앉은 자는 바사와 메대의 일곱 방백 곧 가르스나와 세달과 아드마다와 다시스와 메레스와 마르스나와 므무간이라)	And the next unto him was Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena, and Memucan, the seven princes of Persia and Media, which saw the king’s face, and which sat the first in the kingdom;)	His closest advisors were Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena, and Memucan, the seven princes of Persia and Media who had personal access to the king and ranked highest in the kingdom.
EST	1	15	왕후 와스디가 내시의 전하는 아하수에로 왕명을 좇지 아니하니 규례대로 하면 어떻게 처치할꼬	What shall we do unto the queen Vashti according to law, because she hath not performed the commandment of the king Ahasuerus by the chamberlains?	“According to law,” he asked, “what should be done with Queen Vashti, since she refused to obey the command of King Xerxes delivered by the eunuchs?”
EST	1	16	므무간이 왕과 방백 앞에서 대답하여 가로되 왕후 와스디가 왕에게만 잘못할 뿐 아니라 아하수에로 왕의 각 도 방백과 뭇 백성에게도 잘못하였나이다	And Memucan answered before the king and the princes, Vashti the queen hath not done wrong to the king only, but also to all the princes, and to all the people that are in all the provinces of the king Ahasuerus.	And in the presence of the king and his princes, Memucan replied, “Queen Vashti has wronged not only the king, but all the princes and the peoples in all the provinces of King Xerxes.
EST	1	17	아하수에로 왕이 명하여 왕후 와스디를 청하여도 오지 아니하였다 하는 왕후의 행위의 소문이 모든 부녀에게 전파되면 저희도 그 남편을 멸시할 것인즉	For this deed of the queen shall come abroad unto all women, so that they shall despise their husbands in their eyes, when it shall be reported, The king Ahasuerus commanded Vashti the queen to be brought in before him, but she came not.	For the conduct of the queen will become known to all women, causing them to despise their husbands and say, ‘King Xerxes ordered Queen Vashti to be brought before him, but she did not come.’
EST	1	18	오늘이라도 바사와 메대의 귀부인들이 왕후의 행위를 듣고 왕의 모든 방백에게 그렇게 말하리니 멸시와 분노가 많이 일어나리이다	Likewise shall the ladies of Persia and Media say this day unto all the king’s princes, which have heard of the deed of the queen. Thus shall there arise too much contempt and wrath.	This very day the noble women of Persia and Media who have heard about the queen’s conduct will say the same thing to all the king’s officials, resulting in much contempt and wrath.
EST	1	19	왕이 만일 선히 여기실진대 와스디로 다시는 왕 앞에 오지 못하게 하는 조서를 내리되 바사와 메대의 법률 중에 기록하여 변역함이 없게 하고 그 왕후의 위를 저보다 나은 사람에게 주소서	If it please the king, let there go a royal commandment from him, and let it be written among the laws of the Persians and the Medes, that it be not altered, That Vashti come no more before king Ahasuerus; and let the king give her royal estate unto another that is better than she.	So if it pleases the king, let him issue a royal decree, and let it be recorded in the laws of Persia and Media so that it cannot be repealed, that Vashti shall never again enter the presence of King Xerxes, and that her royal position shall be given to a woman better than she.
EST	1	20	왕의 조서가 이 광대한 전국에 반포되면 귀천을 무론하고 모든 부녀가 그 남편을 존경하리이다	And when the king’s decree which he shall make shall be published throughout all his empire, (for it is great,) all the wives shall give to their husbands honour, both to great and small.	The edict the king issues will be heard throughout his vast kingdom—and so all women, from the least to the greatest, will honor their husbands.”
EST	1	21	왕과 방백들이 그 말을 선히 여긴지라 왕이 므무간의 말대로 행하여	And the saying pleased the king and the princes; and the king did according to the word of Memucan:	The king and his princes were pleased with this counsel; so the king did as Memucan had advised.
EST	1	22	각 도 각 백성의 문자와 방언대로 모든 도에 조서를 내려 이르기를 남편으로 그 집을 주관하게 하고 자기 민족의 방언대로 말하게 하라 하였더라	For he sent letters into all the king’s provinces, into every province according to the writing thereof, and to every people after their language, that every man should bear rule in his own house, and that it should be published according to the language of every people.	He sent letters to all the provinces of the kingdom, to each province in its own script and to each people in their own language, proclaiming that every man should be master of his own household.
EST	2	1	그 후에 아하수에로 왕의 노가 그치매 와스디와 그의 행한 일과 그에 대하여 내린 조서를 생각하거늘	After these things, when the wrath of king Ahasuerus was appeased, he remembered Vashti, and what she had done, and what was decreed against her.	Some time later, when the anger of King Xerxes had subsided, he remembered Vashti and what she had done, and what had been decreed against her.
EST	2	2	왕의 시신이 아뢰되 왕은 왕을 위하어 아리따운 처녀들을 구하게 하시되	Then said the king’s servants that ministered unto him, Let there be fair young virgins sought for the king:	Then the king’s attendants proposed, “Let a search be made for beautiful young virgins for the king,
EST	2	3	전국 각 도에 관리를 명령하여 아리따운 처녀를 다 도성 수산으로 모아 후궁으로 들여 궁녀를 주관하는 내시 헤개의 손에 붙여 그 몸을 정결케 하는 물품을 주게 하시고	And let the king appoint officers in all the provinces of his kingdom, that they may gather together all the fair young virgins unto Shushan the palace, to the house of the women, unto the custody of Hege the king’s chamberlain, keeper of the women; and let their things for purification be given them:	and let the king appoint commissioners in each province of his kingdom to assemble all the beautiful young women into the harem at the citadel of Susa. Let them be placed under the care of Hegai, the king’s eunuch in charge of the women, and let them be given beauty treatments.
EST	2	4	왕의 눈에 아름다운 처녀로 와스디를 대신하여 왕후를 삼으소서 왕이 그 말을 선히 여겨 그대로 행하니라	And let the maiden which pleaseth the king be queen instead of Vashti. And the thing pleased the king; and he did so.	Then let the young woman who pleases the king become queen in place of Vashti.” This suggestion pleased the king, and he acted accordingly.
EST	2	5	도성 수산에 한 유다인이 있으니 이름은 모르드개라 저는 베냐민 자손이니 기스의 증손이요 시므이의 소자요 야일의 아들이라	Now in Shushan the palace there was a certain Jew, whose name was Mordecai, the son of Jair, the son of Shimei, the son of Kish, a Benjamite;	Now there was at the citadel of Susa a Jewish man from the tribe of Benjamin named Mordecai son of Jair, the son of Shimei, the son of Kish.
EST	2	6	전에 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살이 예루살렘에서 유다 왕 여고냐와 백성을 사로잡아 갈 때에 모르드개도 함께 사로잡혔더라	Who had been carried away from Jerusalem with the captivity which had been carried away with Jeconiah king of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away.	He had been carried into exile from Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon among those taken captive with Jeconiah king of Judah.
EST	2	7	저의 삼촌의 딸 하닷사 곧 에스더는 부모가 없고 용모가 곱고 아리따운 처녀라 그 부모가 죽은 후에 모르드개가 자기 딸 같이 양육하더라	And he brought up Hadassah, that is, Esther, his uncle’s daughter: for she had neither father nor mother, and the maid was fair and beautiful; whom Mordecai, when her father and mother were dead, took for his own daughter.	And Mordecai had brought up Hadassah (that is, Esther), the daughter of his uncle, because she did not have a father or mother. The young woman was lovely in form and appearance, and when her father and mother had died, Mordecai had taken her in as his own daughter.
EST	2	8	왕의 조명이 반포되매 처녀들이 도성 수산에 많이 모여 헤개의 수하에 나아갈 때에 에스더도 왕궁으로 이끌려 가서 궁녀를 주관하는 헤개의 수하에 속하니	So it came to pass, when the king’s commandment and his decree was heard, and when many maidens were gathered together unto Shushan the palace, to the custody of Hegai, that Esther was brought also unto the king’s house, to the custody of Hegai, keeper of the women.	When the king’s command and edict had been proclaimed, many young women gathered at the citadel of Susa under the care of Hegai. Esther was also taken to the palace and placed under the care of Hegai, the custodian of the women.
EST	2	9	헤개가 이 처녀를 기뻐하여 은혜를 베풀어 몸을 정결케 할 물품과 일용품을 곧 주며 또 왕궁에서 의례히 주는 일곱 궁녀를 주고 에스더와 그 궁녀들을 후궁 아름다운 처소로 옮기더라	And the maiden pleased him, and she obtained kindness of him; and he speedily gave her her things for purification, with such things as belonged to her, and seven maidens, which were meet to be given her, out of the king’s house: and he preferred her and her maids unto the best place of the house of the women.	And the young woman pleased him and obtained his favor, so he quickly provided her with beauty treatments and the special diet. He assigned to her seven select maidservants from the palace and transferred her with them to the best place in the harem.
EST	2	10	에스더가 자기의 민족과 종족을 고하지 아니하니 이는 모르드개가 명하여 고하지 말라 하였음이라	Esther had not shewed her people nor her kindred: for Mordecai had charged her that she should not shew it.	Esther did not reveal her people or her lineage, because Mordecai had instructed her not to do so.
EST	2	11	모르드개가 날마다 후궁 뜰 앞으로 왕래하며 에스더의 안부와 어떻게 될 것을 알고자 하더라	And Mordecai walked every day before the court of the women’s house, to know how Esther did, and what should become of her.	And every day Mordecai would walk back and forth in front of the court of the harem to learn about Esther’s welfare and what was happening to her.
EST	2	12	처녀마다 차례대로 아하수에로 왕에게 나아가기 전에 여자에 대하여 정한 규례대로 열두 달 동안을 행하되 여섯 달은 몰약 기름을 쓰고 여섯 달은 향품과 여자에게 쓰는 다른 물품을 써서 몸을 정결케 하는 기한을 마치며	Now when every maid’s turn was come to go in to king Ahasuerus, after that she had been twelve months, according to the manner of the women, (for so were the days of their purifications accomplished, to wit, six months with oil of myrrh, and six months with sweet odours, and with other things for the purifying of the women;)	In the twelve months before her turn to go to King Xerxes, the harem regulation required each young woman to receive beauty treatments with oil of myrrh for six months, and then with perfumes and cosmetics for another six months.
EST	2	13	처녀가 왕에게 나아갈 때에는 그 구하는 것을 다 주어 후궁에서 왕궁으로 가지고 가게 하고	Then thus came every maiden unto the king; whatsoever she desired was given her to go with her out of the house of the women unto the king’s house.	When the young woman would go to the king, she was given whatever she requested to take with her from the harem to the king’s palace.
EST	2	14	저녁이면 갔다가 아침에는 둘째 후궁으로 돌아와서 비빈을 주관하는 내시 사아스가스의 수하에 속하고 왕이 저를 기뻐하여 그 이름을 부르지 아니하면 다시 왕에게 나아가지 못하더라	In the evening she went, and on the morrow she returned into the second house of the women, to the custody of Shaashgaz, the king’s chamberlain, which kept the concubines: she came in unto the king no more, except the king delighted in her, and that she were called by name.	She would go there in the evening, and in the morning she would return to a second harem under the care of Shaashgaz, the king’s eunuch in charge of the concubines. She would not return to the king unless he delighted in her and summoned her by name.
EST	2	15	모르드개의 삼촌 아비하일의 딸 곧 모르드개가 자기의 딸 같이 양육하는 에스더가 차례대로 왕에게 나아갈 때에 궁녀를 주관하는 내시 헤개의 정한 것 외에는 다른 것을 구하지 아니하였으나 모든 보는 자에게 굄을 얻더라	Now when the turn of Esther, the daughter of Abihail the uncle of Mordecai, who had taken her for his daughter, was come to go in unto the king, she required nothing but what Hegai the king’s chamberlain, the keeper of the women, appointed. And Esther obtained favour in the sight of all them that looked upon her.	Now Esther was the daughter of Abihail, the uncle from whom Mordecai had adopted her as his own daughter. And when it was her turn to go to the king, she did not ask for anything except what Hegai, the king’s trusted official in charge of the harem, had advised. And Esther found favor in the eyes of everyone who saw her.
EST	2	16	아하수에로 왕의 칠년 시월 곧 데벳월에 에스더가 이끌려 왕궁에 들어가서 왕의 앞에 나아가니	So Esther was taken unto king Ahasuerus into his house royal in the tenth month, which is the month Tebeth, in the seventh year of his reign.	She was taken to King Xerxes in the royal palace in the tenth month, the month of Tebeth, in the seventh year of his reign.
EST	2	17	왕이 모든 여자보다 에스더를 더욱 사랑하므로 저가 모든 처녀보다 왕의 앞에 더욱 은총을 얻은지라 왕이 그 머리에 면류관을 씌우고 와스디를 대신하여 왕후를 삼은 후에	And the king loved Esther above all the women, and she obtained grace and favour in his sight more than all the virgins; so that he set the royal crown upon her head, and made her queen instead of Vashti.	And the king loved Esther more than all the other women, and she found grace and favor in his sight more than all of the other virgins. So he placed the royal crown upon her head and made her queen in place of Vashti.
EST	2	18	왕이 크게 잔치를 베푸니 이는 에스더를 위한 잔치라 모든 방백과 신복을 향응하고 또 각 도의 세금을 면제하고 왕의 풍부함을 따라 크게 상 주니라	Then the king made a great feast unto all his princes and his servants, even Esther’s feast; and he made a release to the provinces, and gave gifts, according to the state of the king.	Then the king held a great banquet, Esther’s banquet, for all his officials and servants. He proclaimed a tax holiday in the provinces and gave gifts worthy of the king’s bounty.
EST	2	19	처녀들을 다시 모을 때에는 모르드개가 대궐 문에 앉았더라	And when the virgins were gathered together the second time, then Mordecai sat in the king’s gate.	When the virgins were assembled a second time, Mordecai was sitting at the king’s gate.
EST	2	20	에스더가 모르드개의 명한 대로 그 종족과 민족을 고하지 아니하니 저가 모르드개의 명을 양육 받을 때와 같이 좇음이더라	Esther had not yet shewed her kindred nor her people; as Mordecai had charged her: for Esther did the commandment of Mordecai, like as when she was brought up with him.	Esther still had not revealed her lineage or her people, just as Mordecai had instructed. She obeyed Mordecai’s command, as she had done under his care.
EST	2	21	모르드개가 대궐 문에 앉았을 때에 문 지킨 왕의 내시 빅단과 데레스 두 사람이 아하수에로 왕을 원한하여 모살하려 하거늘	In those days, while Mordecai sat in the king’s gate, two of the king’s chamberlains, Bigthan and Teresh, of those which kept the door, were wroth, and sought to lay hand on the king Ahasuerus.	In those days, while Mordecai was sitting at the king’s gate, Bigthan and Teresh, two of the king’s eunuchs who guarded the entrance, grew angry and conspired to assassinate King Xerxes.
EST	2	22	모르드개가 알고 왕후 에스더에게 고하니 에스더가 모르드개의 이름으로 왕에게 고한지라	And the thing was known to Mordecai, who told it unto Esther the queen; and Esther certified the king thereof in Mordecai’s name.	When Mordecai learned of the plot, he reported it to Queen Esther, and she informed the king on Mordecai’s behalf.
EST	2	23	사실하여 실정을 얻었으므로 두 사람을 나무에 달고 그 일을 왕의 앞에서 궁중 일기에 기록하니라	And when inquisition was made of the matter, it was found out; therefore they were both hanged on a tree: and it was written in the book of the chronicles before the king.	After the report had been investigated and verified, both officials were hanged on the gallows. And all this was recorded in the Book of the Chronicles in the presence of the king.
EST	3	1	그 후에 아하수에로 왕이 아각 사람 함므다다의 아들 하만의 지위를 높이 올려 모든 함께 있는 대신 위에 두니	After these things did king Ahasuerus promote Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, and advanced him, and set his seat above all the princes that were with him.	After these events, King Xerxes honored Haman son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, elevating him to a position above all the princes who were with him.
EST	3	2	대궐 문에 있는 왕의 모든 신복이 다 왕의 명대로 하만에게 꿇어 절하되 모르드개는 꿇지도 아니하고 절하지도 아니하니	And all the king’s servants, that were in the king’s gate, bowed, and reverenced Haman: for the king had so commanded concerning him. But Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence.	All the royal servants at the king’s gate bowed down and paid homage to Haman, because the king had commanded that this be done for him. But Mordecai would not bow down or pay homage.
EST	3	3	대궐 문에 있는 왕의 신복이 모르드개에게 이르되 너는 어찌하여 왕의 명령을 거역하느냐 하고	Then the king’s servants, which were in the king’s gate, said unto Mordecai, Why transgressest thou the king’s commandment?	Then the royal servants at the king’s gate asked Mordecai, “Why do you disobey the command of the king?”
EST	3	4	날마다 권하되 모르드개가 듣지 아니하고 자기는 유다인임을 고하였더니 저희가 모르드개의 일이 어찌되나 보고자 하여 하만에게 고하였더라	Now it came to pass, when they spake daily unto him, and he hearkened not unto them, that they told Haman, to see whether Mordecai’s matters would stand: for he had told them that he was a Jew.	Day after day they warned him, but he would not comply. So they reported it to Haman to see whether Mordecai’s behavior would be tolerated, since he had told them he was a Jew.
EST	3	5	하만이 모르드개가 꿇지도 아니하고 절하지도 아니함을 보고 심히 노하더니	And when Haman saw that Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence, then was Haman full of wrath.	When Haman saw that Mordecai would not bow down or pay him homage, he was filled with rage.
EST	3	6	저희가 모르드개의 민족을 하만에게 고한고로 하만이 모르드개만 죽이는 것이 경하다 하고 아하수에로의 온 나라에 있는 유다인 곧 모르드개의 민족을 다 멸하고자 하더라	And he thought scorn to lay hands on Mordecai alone; for they had shewed him the people of Mordecai: wherefore Haman sought to destroy all the Jews that were throughout the whole kingdom of Ahasuerus, even the people of Mordecai.	And when he learned the identity of Mordecai’s people, he scorned the notion of laying hands on Mordecai alone. Instead, he sought to destroy all of Mordecai’s people, the Jews, throughout the kingdom of Xerxes.
EST	3	7	아하수에로 왕 십이년 정월 곧 니산월에 무리가 하만 앞에서 날과 달에 대하여 부르 곧 제비를 뽑아 십이월 곧 아달월을 얻은지라	In the first month, that is, the month Nisan, in the twelfth year of king Ahasuerus, they cast Pur, that is, the lot, before Haman from day to day, and from month to month, to the twelfth month, that is, the month Adar.	In the twelfth year of King Xerxes, in the first month, the month of Nisan, the Pur (that is, the lot) was cast before Haman to determine a day and month. And the lot fell on the twelfth month, the month of Adar.
EST	3	8	하만이 아하수에로 왕에게 아뢰되 한 민족이 왕의 나라 각 도 백성 중에 흩어져 거하는데 그 법률이 만민보다 달라서 왕의 법률을 지키지 아니하오니 용납하는 것이 왕에게 무익하나이다	And Haman said unto king Ahasuerus, There is a certain people scattered abroad and dispersed among the people in all the provinces of thy kingdom; and their laws are diverse from all people; neither keep they the king’s laws: therefore it is not for the king’s profit to suffer them.	Then Haman informed King Xerxes, “There is a certain people scattered and dispersed among the peoples of every province of your kingdom. Their laws are different from everyone else’s, and they do not obey the king’s laws. So it is not in the king’s best interest to tolerate them.
EST	3	9	왕이 옳게 여기시거든 조서를 내려 저희를 진멸하소서 내가 은 일만 달란트를 왕의 일을 맡은 자의 손에 붙여 왕의 부고에 드리리이다	If it please the king, let it be written that they may be destroyed: and I will pay ten thousand talents of silver to the hands of those that have the charge of the business, to bring it into the king’s treasuries.	If it pleases the king, let a decree be issued to destroy them, and I will deposit ten thousand talents of silver into the royal treasury to pay those who carry it out.”
EST	3	10	왕이 반지를 손에서 빼어 유다인의 대적 곧 아각 사람 함므다다의 아들 하만에게 주며	And the king took his ring from his hand, and gave it unto Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the Jews’ enemy.	So the king removed the signet ring from his finger and gave it to Haman son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, the enemy of the Jews.
EST	3	11	이르되 그 은을 네게 주고 그 백성도 그리하노니 너는 소견에 좋을대로 행하라 하더라	And the king said unto Haman, The silver is given to thee, the people also, to do with them as it seemeth good to thee.	“Keep your money,” said the king to Haman. “These people are given to you to do with them as you please.”
EST	3	12	정월 십삼일에 왕의 서기관이 소집되어 하만의 명을 따라 왕의 대신과 각 도 방백과 각 민족의 관원에게 아하수에로 왕의 이름으로 조서를 쓰되 곧 각 도의 문자와 각 민족의 방언대로 쓰고 왕의 반지로 인치니라	Then were the king’s scribes called on the thirteenth day of the first month, and there was written according to all that Haman had commanded unto the king’s lieutenants, and to the governors that were over every province, and to the rulers of every people of every province according to the writing thereof, and to every people after their language; in the name of king Ahasuerus was it written, and sealed with the king’s ring.	On the thirteenth day of the first month, the royal scribes were summoned and the order was written exactly as Haman commanded the royal satraps, the governors of each province, and the officials of each people, in the script of each province and the language of every people. It was written in the name of King Xerxes and sealed with the royal signet ring.
EST	3	13	이에 그 조서를 역졸에게 부쳐 왕의 각 도에 보내니 십이월 곧 아달월 십삼일 하루 동안에 모든 유다인을 노소나 어린 아이나 부녀를 무론하고 죽이고 도륙하고 진멸하고 또 그 재산을 탈취하라 하였고	And the letters were sent by posts into all the king’s provinces, to destroy, to kill, and to cause to perish, all Jews, both young and old, little children and women, in one day, even upon the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is the month Adar, and to take the spoil of them for a prey.	And the letters were sent by couriers to each of the royal provinces with the order to destroy, kill, and annihilate all the Jews—young and old, women and children—and to plunder their possessions on a single day, the thirteenth day of Adar, the twelfth month.
EST	3	14	이 명령을 각 도에 전하기 위하여 조서의 초본을 모든 민족에게 선포하여 그 날을 위하여 준비하게 하라 하였더라	The copy of the writing for a commandment to be given in every province was published unto all people, that they should be ready against that day.	A copy of the text of the edict was to be issued in every province and published to all the people, so that they would be ready on that day.
EST	3	15	역졸이 왕의 명을 받들어 급히 나가매 그 조서가 도성 수산에도 반포되니 왕은 하만과 함께 앉아 마시되 수산 성은 어지럽더라	The posts went out, being hastened by the king’s commandment, and the decree was given in Shushan the palace. And the king and Haman sat down to drink; but the city Shushan was perplexed.	The couriers left, spurred on by the king’s command, and the edict was issued in the citadel of Susa. Then the king and Haman sat down to drink, but the city of Susa was in confusion.
EST	4	1	모르드개가 이 모든 일을 알고 그 옷을 찢고 굵은 베를 입으며 재를 무릅쓰고 성중에 나가서 대성 통곡하며	When Mordecai perceived all that was done, Mordecai rent his clothes, and put on sackcloth with ashes, and went out into the midst of the city, and cried with a loud and a bitter cry;	When Mordecai learned of all that had happened, he tore his clothes, put on sackcloth and ashes, and went out into the middle of the city, wailing loudly and bitterly.
EST	4	2	대궐 문 앞까지 이르렀으니 굵은 베를 입은 자는 대궐 문에 들어가지 못함이라	And came even before the king’s gate: for none might enter into the king’s gate clothed with sackcloth.	But he went only as far as the king’s gate, because the law prohibited anyone wearing sackcloth from entering that gate.
EST	4	3	왕의 조명이 각 도에 이르매 유다인이 크게 애통하여 금식하며 곡읍하며 부르짖고 굵은 베를 입고 재에 누운 자가 무수하더라	And in every province, whithersoever the king’s commandment and his decree came, there was great mourning among the Jews, and fasting, and weeping, and wailing; and many lay in sackcloth and ashes.	In every province to which the king’s command and edict came, there was great mourning among the Jews. They fasted, wept, and lamented, and many lay in sackcloth and ashes.
EST	4	4	에스더의 시녀와 내시가 나아와 고하니 왕후가 심히 근심하여 입을 의복을 모르드개에게 보내어 그 굵은 베를 벗기고자 하나 모르드개가 받지 아니하는지라	So Esther’s maids and her chamberlains came and told it her. Then was the queen exceedingly grieved; and she sent raiment to clothe Mordecai, and to take away his sackcloth from him: but he received it not.	When Esther’s maidens and eunuchs came and told her about Mordecai, the queen was overcome with distress. She sent clothes for Mordecai to wear instead of his sackcloth, but he would not accept them.
EST	4	5	에스더가 왕의 명으로 자기에게 근시하는 내시 하닥을 불러 명하여 모르드개에게 가서 이것이 무슨 일이며 무슨 연고인가 알아보라 하매	Then called Esther for Hatach, one of the king’s chamberlains, whom he had appointed to attend upon her, and gave him a commandment to Mordecai, to know what it was, and why it was.	Then Esther summoned Hathach, one of the king’s eunuchs appointed to her, and she dispatched him to Mordecai to learn what was troubling him and why.
EST	4	6	하닥이 대궐 문 앞 성중 광장에 있는 모르드개에게 이르니	So Hatach went forth to Mordecai unto the street of the city, which was before the king’s gate.	So Hathach went out to Mordecai in the city square in front of the king’s gate,
EST	4	7	모르드개가 자기의 당한 모든 일과 하만이 유다인을 멸하려고 왕의 부고에 바치기로 한 은의 정확한 수효를 하닥에게 말하고	And Mordecai told him of all that had happened unto him, and of the sum of the money that Haman had promised to pay to the king’s treasuries for the Jews, to destroy them.	and Mordecai told him all that had happened to him, including the exact amount of money that Haman had promised to pay into the royal treasury in order to destroy the Jews.
EST	4	8	또 유다인을 진멸하라고 수산 궁에서 내린 조서 초본을 하닥에게 주어 에스더에게 뵈어 알게 하고 또 저에게 부탁하여 왕에게 나아가서 그 앞에서 자기의 민족을 위하여 간절히 구하라 하니	Also he gave him the copy of the writing of the decree that was given at Shushan to destroy them, to shew it unto Esther, and to declare it unto her, and to charge her that she should go in unto the king, to make supplication unto him, and to make request before him for her people.	Mordecai also gave Hathach a copy of the written decree issued in Susa for the destruction of the Jews, to show and explain to Esther, urging her to approach the king, implore his favor, and plead before him for her people.
EST	4	9	하닥이 돌아와 모드드개의 말을 에스더에게 고하매	And Hatach came and told Esther the words of Mordecai.	So Hathach went back and relayed Mordecai’s response to Esther.
EST	4	10	에스더가 하닥에게 이르되 너는 모르드개에게 고하기를	Again Esther spake unto Hatach, and gave him commandment unto Mordecai;	Then Esther spoke to Hathach and instructed him to tell Mordecai,
EST	4	11	왕의 신복과 왕의 각 도 백성이 다 알거니와 무론 남녀하고 부름을 받지 아니하고 안뜰에 들어가서 왕에게 나아가면 오직 죽이는 법이요 왕이 그 자에게 금홀을 내어 밀어야 살 것이라 이제 내가 부름을 입어 왕에게 나아가지 못한지가 이미 삼십 일이라 하라	All the king’s servants, and the people of the king’s provinces, do know, that whosoever, whether man or woman, shall come unto the king into the inner court, who is not called, there is one law of his to put him to death, except such to whom the king shall hold out the golden sceptre, that he may live: but I have not been called to come in unto the king these thirty days.	“All the royal officials and the people of the king’s provinces know that one law applies to every man or woman who approaches the king in the inner court without being summoned—that he be put to death. Only if the king extends the gold scepter may that person live. But I have not been summoned to appear before the king for the past thirty days.”
EST	4	12	그가 에스더의 말로 모르드개에게 고하매	And they told to Mordecai Esther’s words.	When Esther’s words were relayed to Mordecai,
EST	4	13	모르드개가 그를 시켜 에스더에게 회답하되 너는 왕궁에 있으니 모든 유다인 중에 홀로 면하리라 생각지 말라	Then Mordecai commanded to answer Esther, Think not with thyself that thou shalt escape in the king’s house, more than all the Jews.	he sent back to her this reply: “Do not imagine that because you are in the king’s palace you alone will escape the fate of all the Jews.
EST	4	14	이 때에 네가 만일 잠잠하여 말이 없으면 유다인은 다른 데로 말미암아 놓임과 구원을 얻으려니와 너와 네 아비 집은 멸망하리라 네가 왕후의 위를 얻은 것이 이 때를 위함이 아닌지 누가 아느냐	For if thou altogether holdest thy peace at this time, then shall there enlargement and deliverance arise to the Jews from another place; but thou and thy father’s house shall be destroyed: and who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this?	For if you remain silent at this time, relief and deliverance for the Jews will arise from another place, but you and your father’s house will perish. And who knows if perhaps you have come to the kingdom for such a time as this?”
EST	4	15	에스더가 명하여 모르드개에게 회답하되	Then Esther bade them return Mordecai this answer,	Then Esther sent this reply to Mordecai:
EST	4	16	당신은 가서 수산에 있는 유다인을 다 모으고 나를 위하여 금식하되 밤낮 삼 일을 먹지도 말고 마시지도 마소서 나도 나의 시녀로 더불어 이렇게 금식한 후에 규례를 어기고 왕에게 나아가리니 죽으면 죽으리이다	Go, gather together all the Jews that are present in Shushan, and fast ye for me, and neither eat nor drink three days, night or day: I also and my maidens will fast likewise; and so will I go in unto the king, which is not according to the law: and if I perish, I perish.	“Go and assemble all the Jews who can be found in Susa, and fast for me. Do not eat or drink for three days, night or day, and I and my maidens will fast as you do. After that, I will go to the king, even though it is against the law. And if I perish, I perish!”
EST	4	17	모르드개가 가서 에스더의 명한 대로 다 행하니라	So Mordecai went his way, and did according to all that Esther had commanded him.	So Mordecai went and did all that Esther had instructed him.
EST	5	1	제삼일에 에스더가 왕후의 예복을 입고 왕궁 안뜰 곧 어전 맞은편에 서니 왕이 어전에서 전 문을 대하여 보좌에 앉았다가	Now it came to pass on the third day, that Esther put on her royal apparel, and stood in the inner court of the king’s house, over against the king’s house: and the king sat upon his royal throne in the royal house, over against the gate of the house.	On the third day, Esther put on her royal attire and stood in the inner court of the palace across from the king’s quarters. The king was sitting on his royal throne in the royal courtroom, facing the entrance.
EST	5	2	왕후 에스더가 뜰에 선 것을 본즉 심히 사랑스러우므로 손에 잡았던 금홀을 그에게 내어미니 에스더가 가까이 가서 금홀 끝을 만진지라	And it was so, when the king saw Esther the queen standing in the court, that she obtained favour in his sight: and the king held out to Esther the golden sceptre that was in his hand. So Esther drew near, and touched the top of the sceptre.	As soon as the king saw Queen Esther standing in the court, she found favor in his sight. The king extended the gold scepter in his hand toward Esther, and she approached and touched the tip of the scepter.
EST	5	3	왕이 이르되 왕후 에스더여 그대의 소원이 무엇이며 요구가 무엇이뇨 나라의 절반이라도 그대에게 주겠노라	Then said the king unto her, What wilt thou, queen Esther? and what is thy request? it shall be even given thee to the half of the kingdom.	“What is it, Queen Esther?” the king inquired. “What is your request? Even up to half the kingdom, it will be given to you.”
EST	5	4	에스더가 가로되 오늘 내가 왕을 위하여 잔치를 베풀었사오니 왕이 선히 여기시거든 하만과 함께 임하소서	And Esther answered, If it seem good unto the king, let the king and Haman come this day unto the banquet that I have prepared for him.	“If it pleases the king,” Esther replied, “may the king and Haman come today to the banquet I have prepared for the king.”
EST	5	5	왕이 가로되 에스더의 말한 대로 하도록 하만을 급히 부르라 하고 이에 왕이 하만과 함께 에스더의 베푼 잔치에 나아가니라	Then the king said, Cause Haman to make haste, that he may do as Esther hath said. So the king and Haman came to the banquet that Esther had prepared.	“Hurry,” commanded the king, “and bring Haman, so we can do as Esther has requested.” So the king and Haman went to the banquet that Esther had prepared.
EST	5	6	잔치의 술을 마실 때에 왕이 에스더에게 이르되 그대의 소청이 무엇이뇨 곧 허락하겠노라 그대의 요구가 무엇이뇨 나라의 절반이라 할지라도 시행하겠노라	And the king said unto Esther at the banquet of wine, What is thy petition? and it shall be granted thee: and what is thy request? even to the half of the kingdom it shall be performed.	And as they drank their wine, the king said to Esther, “What is your petition? It will be given to you. What is your request? Even up to half the kingdom, it will be fulfilled.”
EST	5	7	에스더가 대답하여 가로되 나의 소청, 나의 요구가 이러하니이다	Then answered Esther, and said, My petition and my request is;	Esther replied, “This is my petition and my request:
EST	5	8	내가 만일 왕의 목전에서 은혜를 입었고 왕이 내 소청을 허락하시며 내 요구를 시행하시기를 선히 여기시거든 내가 왕과 하만을 위하여 베푸는 잔치에 또 나아오소서 내일은 왕의 말씀대로 하리이다	If I have found favour in the sight of the king, and if it please the king to grant my petition, and to perform my request, let the king and Haman come to the banquet that I shall prepare for them, and I will do to morrow as the king hath said.	If I have found favor in the sight of the king, and if it pleases the king to grant my petition and fulfill my request, may the king and Haman come tomorrow to the banquet I will prepare for them. Then I will answer the king’s question.”
EST	5	9	이 날에 하만이 마음이 기뻐 즐거이 나오더니 모르드개가 대궐 문에 있어 일어나지도 아니하고 몸을 움직이지도 아니하는 것을 보고 심히 노하나	Then went Haman forth that day joyful and with a glad heart: but when Haman saw Mordecai in the king’s gate, that he stood not up, nor moved for him, he was full of indignation against Mordecai.	That day Haman went out full of joy and glad of heart. At the king’s gate, however, he saw Mordecai, who did not rise or tremble in fear at his presence. And Haman was filled with rage toward Mordecai.
EST	5	10	참고 집에 돌아와서 사람을 보내어 그 친구들과 그 아내 세레스를 청하여	Nevertheless Haman refrained himself: and when he came home, he sent and called for his friends, and Zeresh his wife.	Nevertheless, Haman restrained himself and went home. And calling for his friends and his wife Zeresh,
EST	5	11	자기의 부성한 영광과 자녀가 많은 것과 왕이 자기를 들어 왕의 모든 방백이나 신복들보다 높인 것을 다 말하고	And Haman told them of the glory of his riches, and the multitude of his children, and all the things wherein the king had promoted him, and how he had advanced him above the princes and servants of the king.	Haman recounted to them his glorious wealth, his many sons, and all the ways the king had honored and promoted him over the other officials and servants.
EST	5	12	또 가로되 왕후 에스더가 그 베푼 잔치에 왕과 함께 오기를 허락 받은 자는 나 밖에 없었고 내일도 왕과 함께 청함을 받았느니라	Haman said moreover, Yea, Esther the queen did let no man come in with the king unto the banquet that she had prepared but myself; and to morrow am I invited unto her also with the king.	“What is more,” Haman added, “Queen Esther invited no one but me to join the king at the banquet she prepared, and I am invited back tomorrow along with the king.
EST	5	13	그러나 유다 사람 모르드개가 대궐 문에 앉은 것을 보는 동안에는 이 모든 일이 만족하지 아니하도다	Yet all this availeth me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the king’s gate.	Yet none of this satisfies me as long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the king’s gate.”
EST	5	14	그 아내 세레스와 모든 친구가 이르되 오십 규빗이나 높은 나무를 세우고 내일 왕에게 모르드개를 그 나무에 달기를 구하고 왕과 함께 즐거이 잔치에 나아가소서 하만이 그 말을 선히 여기고 명하여 나무를 세우니라	Then said Zeresh his wife and all his friends unto him, Let a gallows be made of fifty cubits high, and to morrow speak thou unto the king that Mordecai may be hanged thereon: then go thou in merrily with the king unto the banquet. And the thing pleased Haman; and he caused the gallows to be made.	His wife Zeresh and all his friends told him, “Have them build a gallows fifty cubits high, and ask the king in the morning to have Mordecai hanged on it. Then go to the banquet with the king and enjoy yourself.” The advice pleased Haman, and he had the gallows constructed.
EST	6	1	이 밤에 왕이 잠이 오지 아니하므로 명하여 역대 일기를 가져다가 자기 앞에서 읽히더니	On that night could not the king sleep, and he commanded to bring the book of records of the chronicles; and they were read before the king.	That night sleep escaped the king; so he ordered the Book of Records, the Chronicles, to be brought in and read to him.
EST	6	2	그 속에 기록하기를 문 지킨 왕의 두 내시 빅다나와 데레스가 아하수에로 왕을 모살하려 하는 것을 모르드개가 고발하였다 하였는지라	And it was found written, that Mordecai had told of Bigthana and Teresh, two of the king’s chamberlains, the keepers of the door, who sought to lay hand on the king Ahasuerus.	And there it was found recorded that Mordecai had exposed Bigthana and Teresh, two of the eunuchs who guarded the king’s entrance, when they had conspired to assassinate King Xerxes.
EST	6	3	왕이 가로되 이 일을 인하여 무슨 존귀와 관작을 모르드개에게 베풀었느냐 시신이 대답하되 아무 것도 베풀지 아니하였나이다	And the king said, What honour and dignity hath been done to Mordecai for this? Then said the king’s servants that ministered unto him, There is nothing done for him.	The king inquired, “What honor or dignity has been bestowed on Mordecai for this act?” “Nothing has been done for him,” replied the king’s attendants.
EST	6	4	왕이 가로되 누가 뜰에 있느냐 마침 하만이 자기가 세운 나무에 모르드개 달기를 왕께 구하고자 하여 왕궁 바깥 뜰에 이른지라	And the king said, Who is in the court? Now Haman was come into the outward court of the king’s house, to speak unto the king to hang Mordecai on the gallows that he had prepared for him.	“Who is in the court?” the king asked. Now Haman had just entered the outer court of the palace to ask the king to hang Mordecai on the gallows he had prepared for him.
EST	6	5	시신이 고하되 하만이 뜰에 섰나이다 왕이 가로되 들어오게 하라 하니	And the king’s servants said unto him, Behold, Haman standeth in the court. And the king said, Let him come in.	So the king’s attendants answered him, “Haman is there, standing in the court.” “Bring him in,” ordered the king.
EST	6	6	하만이 들어오거늘 왕이 묻되 왕이 존귀케 하기를 기뻐하는 사람에게 어떻게 하여야 하겠느뇨 하만이 심중에 이르되 왕이 존귀케 하기를 기뻐하시는 자는 나 외에 누구리요 하고	So Haman came in. And the king said unto him, What shall be done unto the man whom the king delighteth to honour? Now Haman thought in his heart, To whom would the king delight to do honour more than to myself?	Haman entered, and the king asked him, “What should be done for the man whom the king is delighted to honor?” Now Haman thought to himself, “Whom would the king be delighted to honor more than me?”
EST	6	7	왕께 아뢰되 왕께서 사람을 존귀케 하시려면	And Haman answered the king, For the man whom the king delighteth to honour,	And Haman told the king, “For the man whom the king is delighted to honor,
EST	6	8	왕의 입으시는 왕복과 왕의 타시는 말과 머리에 쓰시는 왕관을 취하고	Let the royal apparel be brought which the king useth to wear, and the horse that the king rideth upon, and the crown royal which is set upon his head:	have them bring a royal robe that the king himself has worn and a horse on which the king himself has ridden—one with a royal crest placed on its head.
EST	6	9	그 왕복과 말을 왕의 방백 중 가장 존귀한 자의 손에 붙여서 왕이 존귀케 하시기를 기뻐하시는 사람에게 옷을 입히고 말을 태워서 성중 거리로 다니며 그 앞에서 반포하여 이르기를 왕이 존귀케 하기를 기뻐하시는 사람에게는 이같이 할 것이라 하게 하소서	And let this apparel and horse be delivered to the hand of one of the king’s most noble princes, that they may array the man withal whom the king delighteth to honour, and bring him on horseback through the street of the city, and proclaim before him, Thus shall it be done to the man whom the king delighteth to honour.	Let the robe and the horse be entrusted to one of the king’s most noble princes. Let them array the man the king wants to honor and parade him on the horse through the city square, proclaiming before him, ‘This is what is done for the man whom the king is delighted to honor!’”
EST	6	10	이에 왕이 하만에게 이르되 너는 네 말대로 속히 왕복과 말을 취하여 대궐 문에 앉은 유다 사람 모르드개에게 행하되 무릇 네가 말한 것에서 조금도 빠짐이 없이 하라	Then the king said to Haman, Make haste, and take the apparel and the horse, as thou hast said, and do even so to Mordecai the Jew, that sitteth at the king’s gate: let nothing fail of all that thou hast spoken.	“Hurry,” said the king to Haman, “and do just as you proposed. Take the robe and the horse to Mordecai the Jew, who is sitting at the king’s gate. Do not neglect anything that you have suggested.”
EST	6	11	하만이 왕복과 말을 취하여 모르드개에게 옷을 입히고 말을 태워 성중 거리로 다니며 그 앞에서 반포하되 왕이 존귀케 하시기를 기뻐하시는 사람에게는 이같이 할 것이라 하니라	Then took Haman the apparel and the horse, and arrayed Mordecai, and brought him on horseback through the street of the city, and proclaimed before him, Thus shall it be done unto the man whom the king delighteth to honour.	So Haman took the robe and the horse, arrayed Mordecai, and paraded him through the city square, crying out before him, “This is what is done for the man whom the king is delighted to honor!”
EST	6	12	모르드개는 다시 대궐 문으로 돌아오고 하만은 번뇌하여 머리를 싸고 급히 집으로 돌아와서	And Mordecai came again to the king’s gate. But Haman hasted to his house mourning, and having his head covered.	Then Mordecai returned to the king’s gate. But Haman rushed home, with his head covered in grief.
EST	6	13	자기의 당한 모든 일을 그 아내 세레스와 모든 친구에게 고하매 그 중 지혜로운 자와 그 아내 세레스가 가로되 모르드개가 과연 유다 족속이면 당신이 그 앞에서 굴욕을 당하기 시작하였으니 능히 저를 이기지 못하고 분명히 그 앞에 엎드러지리이다	And Haman told Zeresh his wife and all his friends every thing that had befallen him. Then said his wise men and Zeresh his wife unto him, If Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, before whom thou hast begun to fall, thou shalt not prevail against him, but shalt surely fall before him.	Haman told his wife Zeresh and all his friends everything that had happened. His advisers and his wife Zeresh said to him, “Since Mordecai, before whom your downfall has begun, is Jewish, you will not prevail against him—for surely you will fall before him.”
EST	6	14	아직 말이 그치지 아니하여서 왕의 내시들이 이르러 하만을 데리고 에스더의 베푼 잔치에 빨리 나아가니라	And while they were yet talking with him, came the king’s chamberlains, and hasted to bring Haman unto the banquet that Esther had prepared.	While they were still speaking with Haman, the king’s eunuchs arrived and rushed him to the banquet that Esther had prepared.
EST	7	1	왕이 하만과 함께 또 왕후 에스더의 잔치에 나아가니라	So the king and Haman came to banquet with Esther the queen.	So the king and Haman went to dine with Esther the queen,
EST	7	2	왕이 이 둘째 날 잔치에 술을 마실 때에 다시 에스더에게 물어 가로되 왕후 에스더여 그대의 소청이 무엇이뇨 곧 허락하겠노라 그대의 요구가 무엇이뇨 곧 나라의 절반이라 할지라도 시행하겠노라	And the king said again unto Esther on the second day at the banquet of wine, What is thy petition, queen Esther? and it shall be granted thee: and what is thy request? and it shall be performed, even to the half of the kingdom.	and as they drank their wine on that second day, the king asked once more, “Queen Esther, what is your petition? It will be given to you. What is your request? Even up to half the kingdom, it will be fulfilled.”
EST	7	3	왕후 에스더가 대답하여 가로되 왕이여 내가 만일 왕의 목전에서 은혜를 입었으며 왕이 선히 여기시거든 내 소청대로 내 생명을 내게 주시고 내 요구대로 내 민족을 내게 주소서	Then Esther the queen answered and said, If I have found favour in thy sight, O king, and if it please the king, let my life be given me at my petition, and my people at my request:	Queen Esther replied, “If I have found favor in your sight, O king, and if it pleases the king, grant me my life as my petition, and the lives of my people as my request.
EST	7	4	나와 내 민족이 팔려서 죽임과 도륙함과 진멸함을 당하게 되었나이다 만일 우리가 노비로 팔렸더면 내가 잠잠하였으리이다 그래도 대적이 왕의 손해를 보충하지 못하였으리이다	For we are sold, I and my people, to be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish. But if we had been sold for bondmen and bondwomen, I had held my tongue, although the enemy could not countervail the king’s damage.	For my people and I have been sold out to destruction, death, and annihilation. If we had merely been sold as menservants and maidservants, I would have remained silent, because no such distress would justify burdening the king.”
EST	7	5	아하수에로 왕이 왕후 에스더에게 일러 가로되 감히 이런 일을 심중에 품은 자가 누구며 그가 어디 있느뇨	Then the king Ahasuerus answered and said unto Esther the queen, Who is he, and where is he, that durst presume in his heart to do so?	Then King Xerxes spoke up and asked Queen Esther, “Who is this, and where is the one who would devise such a scheme?”
EST	7	6	에스더가 가로되 대적과 원수는 이 악한 하만이니이다 하니 하만이 왕과 왕후 앞에서 두려워하거늘	And Esther said, The adversary and enemy is this wicked Haman. Then Haman was afraid before the king and the queen.	Esther replied, “The adversary and enemy is this wicked man—Haman!” And Haman stood in terror before the king and queen.
EST	7	7	왕이 노하여 일어나서 잔치 자리를 떠나 왕궁 후원으로 들어가니라 하만이 일어서서 왕후 에스더에게 생명을 구하니 이는 왕이 자기에게 화를 내리기로 결심한 줄 앎이더라	And the king arising from the banquet of wine in his wrath went into the palace garden: and Haman stood up to make request for his life to Esther the queen; for he saw that there was evil determined against him by the king.	In his fury, the king arose from drinking his wine and went to the palace garden, while Haman stayed behind to beg Queen Esther for his life, for he realized that the king was planning a terrible fate for him.
EST	7	8	왕이 후원으로부터 잔치 자리에 돌아오니 하만이 에스더의 앉은 걸상 위에 엎드렸거늘 왕이 가로되 저가 궁중 내 앞에서 왕후를 강간까지 하고자 하는가 이 말이 왕의 입에서 나오매 무리가 하만의 얼굴을 싸더라	Then the king returned out of the palace garden into the place of the banquet of wine; and Haman was fallen upon the bed whereon Esther was. Then said the king, Will he force the queen also before me in the house? As the word went out of the king’s mouth, they covered Haman’s face.	Just as the king returned from the palace garden to the banquet hall, Haman was falling on the couch where Esther was reclining. The king exclaimed, “Would he actually assault the queen while I am in the palace?” As soon as the words had left the king’s mouth, they covered Haman’s face.
EST	7	9	왕을 모신 내시 중에 하르보나가 왕에게 아뢰되 왕을 위하여 충성된 말로 고발한 모르드개를 달고자 하여 하만이 고가 오십 규빗 되는 나무를 준비하였는데 이제 그 나무가 하만의 집에 섰나이다 왕이 가로되 하만을 그 나무에 달라 하매	And Harbonah, one of the chamberlains, said before the king, Behold also, the gallows fifty cubits high, which Haman had made for Mordecai, who had spoken good for the king, standeth in the house of Haman. Then the king said, Hang him thereon.	Then Harbonah, one of the eunuchs attending the king, said: “There is a gallows fifty cubits high at Haman’s house. He had it built for Mordecai, who gave the report that saved the king.” “Hang him on it!” declared the king.
EST	7	10	모르드개를 달고자 한 나무에 하만을 다니 왕의 노가 그치니라	So they hanged Haman on the gallows that he had prepared for Mordecai. Then was the king’s wrath pacified.	So they hanged Haman on the gallows he had prepared for Mordecai. Then the fury of the king subsided.
EST	8	1	당일에 아하수에로 왕이 유다인의 대적 하만의 집을 왕후 에스더에게 주니라 에스더가 모르드개는 자기에게 어떻게 관계됨을 왕께 고한고로 모르드개가 왕의 앞에 나아오니	On that day did the king Ahasuerus give the house of Haman the Jews’ enemy unto Esther the queen. And Mordecai came before the king; for Esther had told what he was unto her.	That same day King Xerxes awarded Queen Esther the estate of Haman, the enemy of the Jews. And Mordecai entered the king’s presence because Esther had revealed his relation to her.
EST	8	2	왕이 하만에게 거둔 반지를 빼어 모르드개에게 준지라 에스더가 모르드개로 하만의 집을 주관하게 하니라	And the king took off his ring, which he had taken from Haman, and gave it unto Mordecai. And Esther set Mordecai over the house of Haman.	The king removed the signet ring he had recovered from Haman and presented it to Mordecai. And Esther appointed Mordecai over the estate of Haman.
EST	8	3	에스더가 다시 왕의 앞에서 말씀하며 왕의 발 아래 엎드려 아각 사람 하만이 유다인을 해하려 한 악한 꾀를 제하기를 울며 구하니	And Esther spake yet again before the king, and fell down at his feet, and besought him with tears to put away the mischief of Haman the Agagite, and his device that he had devised against the Jews.	And once again, Esther addressed the king. She fell at his feet weeping and begged him to revoke the evil scheme of Haman the Agagite, which he had devised against the Jews.
EST	8	4	왕이 에스더를 향하여 금홀을 내어미는지라 에스더가 일어나 왕의 앞에 서서	Then the king held out the golden sceptre toward Esther. So Esther arose, and stood before the king,	The king extended the gold scepter toward Esther, and she arose and stood before the king.
EST	8	5	가로되 왕이 만일 즐겨하시며 내가 왕의 목전에 은혜를 입었고 또 왕이 이 일을 선히 여기시며 나를 기쁘게 보실진대 조서를 내리사 아각 사람 함므다다의 아들 하만이 왕의 각 도에 있는 유다인을 멸하려고 꾀하고 쓴 조서를 취소하소서	And said, If it please the king, and if I have found favour in his sight, and the thing seem right before the king, and I be pleasing in his eyes, let it be written to reverse the letters devised by Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, which he wrote to destroy the Jews which are in all the king’s provinces:	“If it pleases the king,” she said, “and if I have found favor in his sight, and the matter seems proper to the king, and I am pleasing in his sight, may an order be written to revoke the letters that the scheming Haman son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, wrote to destroy the Jews in all the king’s provinces.
EST	8	6	내가 어찌 내 민족의 화 당함을 참아 보며 내 친척의 멸망함을 참아 보리이까	For how can I endure to see the evil that shall come unto my people? or how can I endure to see the destruction of my kindred?	For how could I bear to see the disaster that would befall my people? How could I bear to see the destruction of my kindred?”
EST	8	7	아하수에로 왕이 왕후 에스더와 유다인 모르드개에게 이르되 하만이 유다인을 살해하려 하므로 나무에 달렸고 내가 그 집으로 에스더에게 주었으니	Then the king Ahasuerus said unto Esther the queen and to Mordecai the Jew, Behold, I have given Esther the house of Haman, and him they have hanged upon the gallows, because he laid his hand upon the Jews.	So King Xerxes said to Esther the Queen and Mordecai the Jew, “Behold, I have given Haman’s estate to Esther, and he was hanged on the gallows because he attacked the Jews.
EST	8	8	너희는 왕의 명의로 유다인에게 조서를 뜻대로 쓰고 왕의 반지로 인을 칠지어다 왕의 이름을 쓰고 왕의 반지로 인친 조서는 누구든지 취소할 수 없음이니라	Write ye also for the Jews, as it liketh you, in the king’s name, and seal it with the king’s ring: for the writing which is written in the king’s name, and sealed with the king’s ring, may no man reverse.	Now you may write in the king’s name as you please regarding the Jews, and seal it with the royal signet ring. For a decree that is written in the name of the king and sealed with the royal signet ring cannot be revoked.”
EST	8	9	그때 시완월 곧 삼월 이십삼일에 왕의 서기관이 소집되고 무릇 모르드개의 시키는 대로 조서를 써서 인도로부터 구스까지의 일백이십칠 도 유다인과 대신과 방백과 관원에게 전할새 각 도의 문자와 각 민족의 방언과 유다인의 문자와 방언대로 쓰되	Then were the king’s scribes called at that time in the third month, that is, the month Sivan, on the three and twentieth day thereof; and it was written according to all that Mordecai commanded unto the Jews, and to the lieutenants, and the deputies and rulers of the provinces which are from India unto Ethiopia, an hundred twenty and seven provinces, unto every province according to the writing thereof, and unto every people after their language, and to the Jews according to their writing, and according to their language.	At once the royal scribes were summoned, and on the twenty-third day of the third month (the month of Sivan), they recorded all of Mordecai’s orders to the Jews and to the satraps, governors, and princes of the 127 provinces from India to Cush—writing to each province in its own script, to every people in their own language, and to the Jews in their own script and language.
EST	8	10	아하수에로 왕의 명의로 쓰고 왕의 반지로 인을 치고 그 조서를 역졸들에게 부쳐 전하게 하니 저희는 왕궁에서 길러서 왕의 일에 쓰는 준마를 타는 자들이라	And he wrote in the king Ahasuerus’ name, and sealed it with the king’s ring, and sent letters by posts on horseback, and riders on mules, camels, and young dromedaries:	Mordecai wrote in the name of King Xerxes and sealed it with the royal signet ring. He sent the documents by mounted couriers riding on swift horses bred from the royal mares.
EST	8	11	조서에는 왕이 여러 고을에 있는 유다인에게 허락하여 저희로 함께 모여 스스로 생명을 보호하여 각 도의 백성 중 세력을 가지고 저희를 치려하는 자와 그 처자를 죽이고 도륙하고 진멸하고 그 재산을 탈취하게 하되	Wherein the king granted the Jews which were in every city to gather themselves together, and to stand for their life, to destroy, to slay, and to cause to perish, all the power of the people and province that would assault them, both little ones and women, and to take the spoil of them for a prey,	By these letters the king permitted the Jews in each and every city the right to assemble and defend themselves, to destroy, kill, and annihilate all the forces of any people or province hostile to them, including women and children, and to plunder their possessions.
EST	8	12	아하수에로 왕의 각 도에서 아달월 곧 십이월 십삼일 하루 동안에 하게 하였고	Upon one day in all the provinces of king Ahasuerus, namely, upon the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is the month Adar.	The single day appointed throughout all the provinces of King Xerxes was the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, the month of Adar.
EST	8	13	이 조서 초본을 각 도에 전하고 각 민족에게 반포하고 유다인으로 예비하였다가 그 날에 대적에게 원수를 갚게 한지라	The copy of the writing for a commandment to be given in every province was published unto all people, and that the Jews should be ready against that day to avenge themselves on their enemies.	A copy of the text of the edict was to be issued in every province and published to all the people, so that the Jews would be ready on that day to avenge themselves on their enemies.
EST	8	14	왕의 명이 심히 급하매 역졸이 왕의 일에 쓰는 준마를 타고 빨리 나가고 그 조서가 도성 수산에도 반포되니라	So the posts that rode upon mules and camels went out, being hastened and pressed on by the king’s commandment. And the decree was given at Shushan the palace.	The couriers rode out in haste on their royal horses, pressed on by the command of the king. And the edict was also issued in the citadel of Susa.
EST	8	15	모르드개가 푸르고 흰 조복을 입고 큰 금면류관을 쓰고 자색 가는 베 겉옷을 입고 왕의 앞에서 나오니 수산 성이 즐거이 부르며 기뻐하고	And Mordecai went out from the presence of the king in royal apparel of blue and white, and with a great crown of gold, and with a garment of fine linen and purple: and the city of Shushan rejoiced and was glad.	Mordecai went out from the presence of the king in royal garments of blue and white, with a large gold crown and a purple robe of fine linen. And the city of Susa shouted and rejoiced.
EST	8	16	유다인에게는 영광과 즐거움과 기쁨과 존귀함이 있는지라	The Jews had light, and gladness, and joy, and honour.	For the Jews it was a time of light and gladness, of joy and honor.
EST	8	17	왕의 조명이 이르는 각 도, 각 읍에서 유다인이 즐기고 기뻐하여 잔치를 베풀고 그 날로 경절을 삼으니 본토 백성이 유다인을 두려워하여 유다인 되는 자가 많더라	And in every province, and in every city, whithersoever the king’s commandment and his decree came, the Jews had joy and gladness, a feast and a good day. And many of the people of the land became Jews; for the fear of the Jews fell upon them.	In every province and every city, wherever the king’s edict and decree reached, there was joy and gladness among the Jews, with feasting and celebrating. And many of the people of the land themselves became Jews, because the fear of the Jews had fallen upon them.
EST	9	1	아달월 곧 십이월 십삼일은 왕의 조명을 행하게 된 날이라 유다인의 대적이 저희를 제어하기를 바랐더니 유다인이 도리어 자기를 미워하는 자를 제어하게 된 그 날에	Now in the twelfth month, that is, the month Adar, on the thirteenth day of the same, when the king’s commandment and his decree drew near to be put in execution, in the day that the enemies of the Jews hoped to have power over them, (though it was turned to the contrary, that the Jews had rule over them that hated them;)	On the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, the month of Adar, the king’s command and edict were to be executed. On this day the enemies of the Jews had hoped to overpower them, but their plan was overturned and the Jews overpowered those who hated them.
EST	9	2	유다인들이 아하수에로 왕의 각 도, 각 읍에 모여 자기를 해하고자 하는 자를 죽이려 하니 모든 민족이 저희를 두려워하여 능히 막을 자가 없고	The Jews gathered themselves together in their cities throughout all the provinces of the king Ahasuerus, to lay hand on such as sought their hurt: and no man could withstand them; for the fear of them fell upon all people.	In each of the provinces of King Xerxes, the Jews assembled in their cities to attack those who sought to harm them. No man could withstand them, because the fear of them had fallen upon all peoples.
EST	9	3	각 도 모든 관원과 대신과 방백과 왕의 사무를 보는 자들이 모르드개를 두려워하므로 다 유다인을 도우니	And all the rulers of the provinces, and the lieutenants, and the deputies, and officers of the king, helped the Jews; because the fear of Mordecai fell upon them.	And all the officials of the provinces, the satraps, the governors, and the king’s administrators helped the Jews, because the fear of Mordecai had fallen upon them.
EST	9	4	모르드개가 왕궁에서 존귀하여 점점 창대하매 이 사람 모르드개의 명성이 각 도에 퍼지더라	For Mordecai was great in the king’s house, and his fame went out throughout all the provinces: for this man Mordecai waxed greater and greater.	For Mordecai exercised great power in the palace, and his fame spread throughout the provinces as he became more and more powerful.
EST	9	5	유다인이 칼로 그 모든 대적을 쳐서 도륙하고 진멸하고 자기를 미워하는 자에게 마음대로 행하고	Thus the Jews smote all their enemies with the stroke of the sword, and slaughter, and destruction, and did what they would unto those that hated them.	The Jews put all their enemies to the sword, killing and destroying them, and they did as they pleased to those who hated them.
EST	9	6	유다인이 또 도성 수산에서 오백 인을 죽이고 멸하고	And in Shushan the palace the Jews slew and destroyed five hundred men.	In the citadel of Susa, the Jews killed and destroyed five hundred men,
EST	9	7	또 바산다다와 달본과 아스바다와	And Parshandatha, and Dalphon, and Aspatha,	including Parshandatha, Dalphon, Aspatha,
EST	9	8	보라다와 아달리야와 아리다다와	And Poratha, and Adalia, and Aridatha,	Poratha, Adalia, Aridatha,
EST	9	9	바마스다와 아리새와 아리대와 왜사다	And Parmashta, and Arisai, and Aridai, and Vajezatha,	Parmashta, Arisai, Aridai, and Vaizatha.
EST	9	10	곧 함므다다의 손자요 유다인의 대적 하만의 열 아들을 죽였으나 그 재산에는 손을 대지 아니하였더라	The ten sons of Haman the son of Hammedatha, the enemy of the Jews, slew they; but on the spoil laid they not their hand.	They killed these ten sons of Haman son of Hammedatha, the enemy of the Jews, but they did not lay a hand on the plunder.
EST	9	11	그 날에 도성 수산에서 도륙한 자의 수효를 왕께 고하니	On that day the number of those that were slain in Shushan the palace was brought before the king.	On that day the number of those killed in the citadel of Susa was reported to the king,
EST	9	12	왕이 왕후 에스더에게 이르되 유다인이 도성 수산에서 이미 오백 인을 죽이고 멸하고 또 하만의 열 아들을 죽였으니 왕의 다른 도에서는 어떠하였겠느뇨 이제 그대의 소청이 무엇이뇨 곧 허락하겠노라 그대의 요구가 무엇이뇨 또한 시행하겠노라	And the king said unto Esther the queen, The Jews have slain and destroyed five hundred men in Shushan the palace, and the ten sons of Haman; what have they done in the rest of the king’s provinces? now what is thy petition? and it shall be granted thee: or what is thy request further? and it shall be done.	who said to Queen Esther, “In the citadel of Susa the Jews have killed and destroyed five hundred men, including Haman’s ten sons. What have they done in the rest of the royal provinces? Now what is your petition? It will be given to you. And what further do you request? It will be fulfilled.”
EST	9	13	에스더가 가로되 왕이 만일 선히 여기시거든 수산에 거하는 유다인으로 내일도 오늘날 조서대로 행하게 하시고 하만의 열 아들의 시체를 나무에 달게 하소서	Then said Esther, If it please the king, let it be granted to the Jews which are in Shushan to do to morrow also according unto this day’s decree, and let Haman’s ten sons be hanged upon the gallows.	Esther replied, “If it pleases the king, may the Jews in Susa also have tomorrow to carry out today’s edict, and may the bodies of Haman’s ten sons be hanged on the gallows.”
EST	9	14	왕이 그대로 행하기를 허락하고 조서를 내리니 하만의 열 아들의 시체가 달리니라	And the king commanded it so to be done: and the decree was given at Shushan; and they hanged Haman’s ten sons.	So the king commanded that this be done. An edict was issued in Susa, and they hanged the ten sons of Haman.
EST	9	15	아달월 십사일에도 수산에 있는 유다인이 모여 또 삼백 인을 수산에서 도륙하되 그 재산에는 손을 대지 아니하였고	For the Jews that were in Shushan gathered themselves together on the fourteenth day also of the month Adar, and slew three hundred men at Shushan; but on the prey they laid not their hand.	On the fourteenth day of the month of Adar, the Jews in Susa came together again and put to death three hundred men there, but they did not lay a hand on the plunder.
EST	9	16	왕의 각 도에 있는 다른 유다인들이 모여 스스로 생명을 보호하여 대적들에게서 벗어나며 자기를 미워하는 자 칠만 오천 인을 도륙하되 그 재산에는 손을 대지 아니하였더라	But the other Jews that were in the king’s provinces gathered themselves together, and stood for their lives, and had rest from their enemies, and slew of their foes seventy and five thousand, but they laid not their hands on the prey,	The rest of the Jews in the royal provinces also assembled to defend themselves and rid themselves of their enemies. They killed 75,000 who hated them, but they did not lay a hand on the plunder.
EST	9	17	아달월 십삼일에 그 일을 행하였고 십사일에 쉬며 그 날에 잔치를 베풀어 즐겼고	On the thirteenth day of the month Adar; and on the fourteenth day of the same rested they, and made it a day of feasting and gladness.	This was done on the thirteenth day of the month of Adar, and on the fourteenth day they rested, making it a day of feasting and joy.
EST	9	18	수산에 거한 유다인은 십삼일과 십사일에 모였고 십오일에 쉬며 이 날에 잔치를 베풀어 즐긴지라	But the Jews that were at Shushan assembled together on the thirteenth day thereof, and on the fourteenth thereof; and on the fifteenth day of the same they rested, and made it a day of feasting and gladness.	The Jews in Susa, however, had assembled on the thirteenth and the fourteenth days of the month. So they rested on the fifteenth day, making it a day of feasting and joy.
EST	9	19	그러므로 촌촌의 유다인 곧 성이 없는 고을 고을에 거하는 자들이 아달월 십사일로 경절을 삼아 잔치를 베풀고 즐기며 서로 예물을 주더라	Therefore the Jews of the villages, that dwelt in the unwalled towns, made the fourteenth day of the month Adar a day of gladness and feasting, and a good day, and of sending portions one to another.	This is why the rural Jews, who live in the villages, observe the fourteenth day of the month of Adar as a day of joy and feasting. It is a holiday for sending gifts to one another.
EST	9	20	모르드개가 이 일을 기록하고 아하수에로 왕의 각 도에 있는 모든 유다인에게 무론 원근하고 글을 보내어 이르기를	And Mordecai wrote these things, and sent letters unto all the Jews that were in all the provinces of the king Ahasuerus, both nigh and far,	Mordecai recorded these events and sent letters to all the Jews in all the provinces of King Xerxes, both near and far,
EST	9	21	한 규례를 세워 해마다 아달월 십사일과 십오일을 지키라	To stablish this among them, that they should keep the fourteenth day of the month Adar, and the fifteenth day of the same, yearly,	to establish among them an annual celebration on the fourteenth and fifteenth days of the month of Adar
EST	9	22	이 달 이 날에 유다인이 대적에게서 벗어나서 평안함을 얻어 슬픔이 변하여 기쁨이 되고 애통이 변하여 길한 날이 되었으니 이 두 날을 지켜 잔치를 베풀고 즐기며 서로 예물을 주며 가난한 자를 구제하라 하매	As the days wherein the Jews rested from their enemies, and the month which was turned unto them from sorrow to joy, and from mourning into a good day: that they should make them days of feasting and joy, and of sending portions one to another, and gifts to the poor.	as the days on which the Jews gained rest from their enemies and the month in which their sorrow turned to joy and their mourning into a holiday. He wrote that these were to be days of feasting and joy, of sending gifts to one another and to the poor.
EST	9	23	유다인이 자기들의 이미 시작한 대로 또는 모르드개의 보낸 글대로 계속하여 행하였으니	And the Jews undertook to do as they had begun, and as Mordecai had written unto them;	So the Jews agreed to continue the custom they had started, as Mordecai had written to them.
EST	9	24	곧 아각 사람 함므다다의 아들 모든 유다인의 대적 하만이 유다인을 진멸하기를 꾀하고 부르 곧 제비를 뽑아 저희를 죽이고 멸하려 하였으나	Because Haman the son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, the enemy of all the Jews, had devised against the Jews to destroy them, and had cast Pur, that is, the lot, to consume them, and to destroy them;	For Haman son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, the enemy of all the Jews, had plotted against the Jews to destroy them and had cast the Pur (that is, the lot) to crush and destroy them.
EST	9	25	에스더가 왕의 앞에 나아감을 인하여 왕이 조서를 내려 하만이 유다인을 해하려던 악한 꾀를 그 머리에 돌려 보내어 하만과 그 여러 아들을 나무에 달게 하였으므로	But when Esther came before the king, he commanded by letters that his wicked device, which he devised against the Jews, should return upon his own head, and that he and his sons should be hanged on the gallows.	But when it came before the king, he commanded by letter that the wicked scheme which Haman had devised against the Jews should come back upon his own head, and that he and his sons should be hanged on the gallows.
EST	9	26	무리가 부르의 이름을 좇아 이 두 날을 부림이라 하고 유다인이 이 글의 모든 말과 이 일에 보고 당한 것을 인하여	Wherefore they called these days Purim after the name of Pur. Therefore for all the words of this letter, and of that which they had seen concerning this matter, and which had come unto them,	Therefore these days are called Purim, from the word Pur. Because of all the instructions in this letter, and because of all they had seen and experienced,
EST	9	27	뜻을 정하고 자기와 자손과 자기와 화합한 자들이 해마다 그 기록한 정기에 이 두 날을 연하여 지켜 폐하지 아니하기로 작정하고	The Jews ordained, and took upon them, and upon their seed, and upon all such as joined themselves unto them, so as it should not fail, that they would keep these two days according to their writing, and according to their appointed time every year;	the Jews bound themselves to establish the custom that they and their descendants and all who join them should not fail to celebrate these two days at the appointed time each and every year, according to their regulation.
EST	9	28	각 도, 각 읍, 각 집에서 대대로 이 두 날을 기념하여 지키되 이 부림일을 유다인 중에서 폐하지 않게 하고 그 자손 중에서도 기념함이 폐하지 않게 하였더라	And that these days should be remembered and kept throughout every generation, every family, every province, and every city; and that these days of Purim should not fail from among the Jews, nor the memorial of them perish from their seed.	These days should be remembered and celebrated by every generation, family, province, and city, so that these days of Purim should not fail to be observed among the Jews, nor should the memory of them fade from their descendants.
EST	9	29	아비하일의 딸 왕후 에스더와 유다인 모르드개가 전권으로 글을 쓰고 부림에 대한 이 둘째 편지를 굳이 지키게 하되	Then Esther the queen, the daughter of Abihail, and Mordecai the Jew, wrote with all authority, to confirm this second letter of Purim.	So Queen Esther daughter of Abihail, along with Mordecai the Jew, wrote with full authority to confirm this second letter concerning Purim.
EST	9	30	화평하고 진실한 말로 편지를 써서 아하수에로의 나라 일백이십칠 도에 있는 유다 모든 사람에게 보내어	And he sent the letters unto all the Jews, to the hundred twenty and seven provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, with words of peace and truth,	And Mordecai sent letters with words of peace and truth to all the Jews in the 127 provinces of the kingdom of Xerxes,
EST	9	31	정한 기한에 이 부림일을 지키게 하였으니 이는 유다인 모르드개와 왕후 에스더의 명한 바와 유다인이 금식하며 부르짖은 것을 인하여 자기와 자기 자손을 위하여 정한 바가 있음이더라	To confirm these days of Purim in their times appointed, according as Mordecai the Jew and Esther the queen had enjoined them, and as they had decreed for themselves and for their seed, the matters of the fastings and their cry.	in order to confirm these days of Purim at their appointed time, just as Mordecai the Jew and Queen Esther had established them and had committed themselves and their descendants to the times of fasting and lamentation.
EST	9	32	에스더의 명령이 이 부림에 대한 일을 견고히 하였고 그 일이 책에 기록되었더라	And the decree of Esther confirmed these matters of Purim; and it was written in the book.	So Esther’s decree confirmed these regulations about Purim, which were written into the record.
EST	10	1	아하수에로 왕이 그 본토와 바다 섬들로 공을 바치게 하였더라	And the king Ahasuerus laid a tribute upon the land, and upon the isles of the sea.	Now King Xerxes imposed tribute throughout the land, even to its farthest shores.
EST	10	2	왕의 능력의 모든 행적과 모르드개를 높여 존귀케 한 사적이 메대와 바사 열왕의 일기에 기록되지 아니하였느냐	And all the acts of his power and of his might, and the declaration of the greatness of Mordecai, whereunto the king advanced him, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Media and Persia?	And all of Mordecai’s powerful and magnificent accomplishments, together with the full account of the greatness to which the king had raised him, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Media and Persia?
EST	10	3	유다인 모르드개가 아하수에로 왕의 다음이 되고 유다인 중에 존대하여 그 허다한 형제에게 굄을 받고 그 백성의 이익을 도모하며 그 모든 종족을 안위하였더라	For Mordecai the Jew was next unto king Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, and accepted of the multitude of his brethren, seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace to all his seed.	For Mordecai the Jew was second only to King Xerxes, preeminent among the Jews and highly favored by his many kinsmen, seeking the good of his people and speaking peace to all his countrymen.
JOB	1	1	우스 땅에 욥이라 이름하는 사람이 있었는데 그 사람은 순전하고 정직하여 하나님을 경외하며 악에서 떠난 자더라	There was a man in the land of Uz, whose name was Job; and that man was perfect and upright, and one that feared God, and eschewed evil.	There was a man in the land of Uz whose name was Job. And this man was blameless and upright, fearing God and shunning evil.
JOB	1	2	그 소생은 남자가 일곱이요 여자가 셋이며	And there were born unto him seven sons and three daughters.	He had seven sons and three daughters,
JOB	1	3	그 소유물은 양이 칠천이요 약대가 삼천이요 소가 오백 겨리요 암나귀가 오백이며 종도 많이 있었으니 이 사람은 동방 사람 중에 가장 큰 자라	His substance also was seven thousand sheep, and three thousand camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and five hundred she asses, and a very great household; so that this man was the greatest of all the men of the east.	and he owned 7,000 sheep, 3,000 camels, 500 yoke of oxen, 500 female donkeys, and a very large number of servants. Job was the greatest man of all the people of the East.
JOB	1	4	그 아들들이 자기 생일이면 각각 자기의 집에서 잔치를 베풀고 그 누이 셋도 청하여 함께 먹고 마시므로	And his sons went and feasted in their houses, every one his day; and sent and called for their three sisters to eat and to drink with them.	Job’s sons would take turns holding feasts in their homes, and they would invite their three sisters to eat and drink with them.
JOB	1	5	그 잔치 날이 지나면 욥이 그들을 불러다가 성결케 하되 아침에 일어나서 그들의 명수대로 번제를 드렸으니 이는 욥이 말하기를 혹시 내 아들들이 죄를 범하여 마음으로 하나님을 배반하였을까 함이라 욥의 행사가 항상 이러하였더라	And it was so, when the days of their feasting were gone about, that Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning, and offered burnt offerings according to the number of them all: for Job said, It may be that my sons have sinned, and cursed God in their hearts. Thus did Job continually.	And when the days of feasting were over, Job would send for his children to purify them, rising early in the morning to offer burnt offerings for all of them. For Job thought, “Perhaps my children have sinned and cursed God in their hearts.” This was Job’s regular practice.
JOB	1	6	하루는 하나님의 아들들이 와서 여호와 앞에 섰고 사단도 그들 가운데 왔는지라	Now there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came also among them.	One day the sons of God came to present themselves before the LORD, and Satan also came with them.
JOB	1	7	여호와께서 사단에게 이르시되 네가 어디서 왔느냐 사단이 여호와께 대답하여 가로되 땅에 두루 돌아 여기 저기 다녀왔나이다	And the Lord said unto Satan, Whence comest thou? Then Satan answered the Lord, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it.	“Where have you come from?” said the LORD to Satan. “From roaming through the earth,” he replied, “and walking back and forth in it.”
JOB	1	8	여호와께서 사단에게 이르시되 네가 내 종 욥을 유의하여 보았느냐 그와 같이 순전하고 정직하여 하나님을 경외하며 악에서 떠난 자가 세상에 없느니라	And the Lord said unto Satan, Hast thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil?	Then the LORD said to Satan, “Have you considered My servant Job? For there is no one on earth like him, a man who is blameless and upright, who fears God and shuns evil.”
JOB	1	9	사단이 여호와께 대답하여 가로되 욥이 어찌 까닭없이 하나님을 경외하리이까	Then Satan answered the Lord, and said, Doth Job fear God for nought?	Satan answered the LORD, “Does Job fear God for nothing?
JOB	1	10	그와 그 집과 그 모든 소유물을 산울로 두르심이 아니니이까 주께서 그 손으로 하는 바를 복되게 하사 그 소유물로 땅에 널리게 하셨음이니이다	Hast not thou made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he hath on every side? thou hast blessed the work of his hands, and his substance is increased in the land.	Have You not placed a hedge on every side around him and his household and all that he owns? You have blessed the work of his hands, and his possessions have increased in the land.
JOB	1	11	이제 주의 손을 펴서 그의 모든 소유물을 치소서 그리하시면 정녕 대면하여 주를 욕하리이다	But put forth thine hand now, and touch all that he hath, and he will curse thee to thy face.	But stretch out Your hand and strike all that he has, and he will surely curse You to Your face.”
JOB	1	12	여호와께서 사단에게 이르시되 내가 그의 소유물을 다 네 손에 붙이노라 오직 그의 몸에는 네 손을 대지 말지니라 사단이 곧 여호와 앞에서 물러가니라	And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold, all that he hath is in thy power; only upon himself put not forth thine hand. So Satan went forth from the presence of the Lord.	“Very well,” said the LORD to Satan. “Everything he has is in your hands, but you must not lay a hand on the man himself.” Then Satan went out from the presence of the LORD.
JOB	1	13	하루는 욥의 자녀들이 그 맏형의 집에서 식물을 먹으며 포도주를 마실 때에	And there was a day when his sons and his daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother’s house:	One day, while Job’s sons and daughters were eating and drinking wine in their oldest brother’s house,
JOB	1	14	사자가 욥에게 와서 고하되 소는 밭을 갈고 나귀는 그 곁에서 풀을 먹는데	And there came a messenger unto Job, and said, The oxen were plowing, and the asses feeding beside them:	a messenger came and reported to Job: “While the oxen were plowing and the donkeys were grazing nearby,
JOB	1	15	스바 사람이 갑자기 이르러 그것들을 빼앗고 칼로 종을 죽였나이다 나만 홀로 피한고로 주인께 고하러 왔나이다	And the Sabeans fell upon them, and took them away; yea, they have slain the servants with the edge of the sword; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.	the Sabeans swooped down and took them away. They put the servants to the sword, and I alone have escaped to tell you!”
JOB	1	16	그가 아직 말할 때에 또 한 사람이 와서 고하되 하나님의 불이 하늘에서 내려와서 양과 종을 살라 버렸나이다 나만 홀로 피한고로 주인께 고하러 왔나이다	While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, The fire of God is fallen from heaven, and hath burned up the sheep, and the servants, and consumed them; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.	While he was still speaking, another messenger came and reported: “The fire of God fell from heaven. It burned and consumed the sheep and the servants, and I alone have escaped to tell you!”
JOB	1	17	그가 아직 말할 때에 또 한 사람이 와서 고하되 갈대아 사람이 세 떼를 지어 갑자기 약대에게 달려들어 그것을 빼앗으며 칼로 종을 죽였나이다 나만 홀로 피한고로 주인께 고하러 왔나이다	While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, The Chaldeans made out three bands, and fell upon the camels, and have carried them away, yea, and slain the servants with the edge of the sword; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.	While he was still speaking, another messenger came and reported: “The Chaldeans formed three bands, raided the camels, and took them away. They put the servants to the sword, and I alone have escaped to tell you!”
JOB	1	18	그가 아직 말할 때에 또 한 사람이 와서 고하되 주인의 자녀들이 그 맏형의 집에서 식물을 먹으며 포도주를 마시더니	While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, Thy sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother’s house:	While he was still speaking, another messenger came and reported: “Your sons and daughters were eating and drinking wine in their oldest brother’s house,
JOB	1	19	거친 들에서 대풍이 와서 집 네 모퉁이를 치매 그 소년들 위에 무너지므로 그들이 죽었나이다 나만 홀로 피한고로 주인께 고하러 왔나이다 한지라	And, behold, there came a great wind from the wilderness, and smote the four corners of the house, and it fell upon the young men, and they are dead; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.	when suddenly a mighty wind swept in from the desert and struck the four corners of the house. It collapsed on the young people and they are dead, and I alone have escaped to tell you!”
JOB	1	20	욥이 일어나 겉옷을 찢고 머리털을 밀고 땅에 엎드려 경배하며	Then Job arose, and rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and fell down upon the ground, and worshipped,	Then Job stood up, tore his robe, and shaved his head. He fell to the ground and worshiped,
JOB	1	21	가로되 내가 모태에서 적신이 나왔사온즉 또한 적신이 그리로 돌아가올지라 주신 자도 여호와시요 취하신 자도 여호와시오니 여호와의 이름이 찬송을 받으실지니이다 하고	And said, Naked came I out of my mother’s womb, and naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord.	saying: “Naked I came from my mother’s womb, and naked I will return. The LORD gave, and the LORD has taken away. Blessed be the name of the LORD.”
JOB	1	22	이 모든 일에 욥이 범죄하지 아니하고 하나님을 향하여 어리석게 원망하지 아니하니라	In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly.	In all this, Job did not sin or charge God with wrongdoing.
JOB	2	1	또 하루는 하나님의 아들들이 와서 여호와 앞에 서고 사단도 그들 가운데 와서 여호와 앞에 서니	Again there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came also among them to present himself before the Lord.	On another day the sons of God came to present themselves before the LORD, and Satan also came with them to present himself before Him.
JOB	2	2	여호와께서 사단에게 이르시되 네가 어디서 왔느냐 사단이 여호와께 대답하여 가로되 땅에 두루 돌아 여기 저기 다녀왔나이다	And the Lord said unto Satan, From whence comest thou? And Satan answered the Lord, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it.	“Where have you come from?” said the LORD to Satan. “From roaming through the earth,” he replied, “and walking back and forth in it.”
JOB	2	3	여호와께서 사단에게 이르시되 네가 내 종 욥을 유의하여 보았느냐 그와 같이 순전하고 정직하여 하나님을 경외하며 악에서 떠난 자가 세상에 없느니라 네가 나를 격동하여 까닭없이 그를 치게 하였어도 그가 오히려 자기의 순전을 굳게 지켰느니라	And the Lord said unto Satan, Hast thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil? and still he holdeth fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against him, to destroy him without cause.	Then the LORD said to Satan, “Have you considered My servant Job? For there is no one on earth like him, a man who is blameless and upright, who fears God and shuns evil. He still retains his integrity, even though you incited Me against him to ruin him without cause.”
JOB	2	4	사단이 여호와께 대답하여 가로되 가죽으로 가죽을 바꾸오니 사람이 그 모든 소유물로 자기의 생명을 바꾸올지라	And Satan answered the Lord, and said, Skin for skin, yea, all that a man hath will he give for his life.	“Skin for skin!” Satan replied. “A man will give up all he owns in exchange for his life.
JOB	2	5	이제 주의 손을 펴서 그의 뼈와 살을 치소서 그리하시면 정녕 대면하여 주를 욕하리이다	But put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face.	But stretch out Your hand and strike his flesh and bones, and he will surely curse You to Your face.”
JOB	2	6	여호와께서 사단에게 이르시되 내가 그를 네 손에 붙이노라 오직 그의 생명은 해하지 말지니라	And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold, he is in thine hand; but save his life.	“Very well,” said the LORD to Satan. “He is in your hands, but you must spare his life.”
JOB	2	7	사단이 이에 여호와 앞에서 물러가서 욥을 쳐서 그 발바닥에서 정수리까지 악창이 나게 한지라	So went Satan forth from the presence of the Lord, and smote Job with sore boils from the sole of his foot unto his crown.	So Satan went out from the presence of the LORD and infected Job with terrible boils from the soles of his feet to the crown of his head.
JOB	2	8	욥이 재 가운데 앉아서 기와 조각을 가져다가 몸을 긁고 있더니	And he took him a potsherd to scrape himself withal; and he sat down among the ashes.	And Job took a piece of broken pottery to scrape himself as he sat among the ashes.
JOB	2	9	그 아내가 그에게 이르되 당신이 그래도 자기의 순전을 굳게 지키느뇨 하나님을 욕하고 죽으라	Then said his wife unto him, Dost thou still retain thine integrity? curse God, and die.	Then Job’s wife said to him, “Do you still retain your integrity? Curse God and die!”
JOB	2	10	그가 이르되 그대의 말이 어리석은 여자 중 하나의 말 같도다 우리가 하나님께 복을 받았은즉 재앙도 받지 아니하겠느뇨 하고 이 모든 일에 욥이 입술로 범죄치 아니하니라	But he said unto her, Thou speakest as one of the foolish women speaketh. What? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? In all this did not Job sin with his lips.	“You speak as a foolish woman speaks,” he told her. “Should we accept from God only good and not adversity?” In all this, Job did not sin in what he said.
JOB	2	11	때에 욥의 친구 세 사람이 그에게 이 모든 재앙이 임하였다 함을 듣고 각각 자기 처소에서부터 이르렀으니 곧 데만 사람 엘리바스와 수아 사람 빌닷과 나아마 사람 소발이라 그들이 욥을 조문하고 위로하려 하여 상약하고 오더니	Now when Job’s three friends heard of all this evil that was come upon him, they came every one from his own place; Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite: for they had made an appointment together to come to mourn with him and to comfort him.	Now when Job’s three friends—Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite—heard about all this adversity that had come upon him, each of them came from his home, and they met together to go and sympathize with Job and comfort him.
JOB	2	12	눈을 들어 멀리 보매 그 욥인줄 알기 어렵게 되었으므로 그들이 일제히 소리질러 울며 각각 자기의 겉옷을 찢고 하늘을 향하여 티끌을 날려 자기 머리에 뿌리고	And when they lifted up their eyes afar off, and knew him not, they lifted up their voice, and wept; and they rent every one his mantle, and sprinkled dust upon their heads toward heaven.	When they lifted up their eyes from afar, they could barely recognize Job. They began to weep aloud, and each man tore his robe and threw dust in the air over his head.
JOB	2	13	칠 일 칠 야를 그와 함께 땅에 앉았으나 욥의 곤고함이 심함을 보는고로 그에게 한 말도 하는 자가 없었더라	So they sat down with him upon the ground seven days and seven nights, and none spake a word unto him: for they saw that his grief was very great.	Then they sat on the ground with him for seven days and seven nights, but no one spoke a word to him because they saw how intense his suffering was.
JOB	3	1	그 후에 욥이 입을 열어 자기의 생일을 저주하니라	After this opened Job his mouth, and cursed his day.	After this, Job opened his mouth and cursed the day of his birth.
JOB	3	2	욥이 말을 내어 가로되	And Job spake, and said,	And this is what he said:
JOB	3	3	나의 난 날이 멸망하였었더라면, 남아를 배었다 하던 그 밤도 그러하였었더라면,	Let the day perish wherein I was born, and the night in which it was said, There is a man child conceived.	“May the day of my birth perish, and the night it was said, ‘A boy is conceived.’
JOB	3	4	그 날이 캄캄하였었더라면, 하나님이 위에서 돌아보지 마셨더라면, 빛도 그 날을 비취지 말았었더라면,	Let that day be darkness; let not God regard it from above, neither let the light shine upon it.	If only that day had turned to darkness! May God above disregard it; may no light shine upon it.
JOB	3	5	유암과 사망의 그늘이 그 날을 자기 것이라 주장하였었더라면, 구름이 그 위에 덮였었더라면, 낮을 캄캄하게 하는 것이 그 날을 두렵게 하였었더라면,	Let darkness and the shadow of death stain it; let a cloud dwell upon it; let the blackness of the day terrify it.	May darkness and gloom reclaim it, and a cloud settle over it; may the blackness of the day overwhelm it.
JOB	3	6	그 밤이 심한 어두움에 잡혔었더라면, 해의 날 수 가운데 기쁨이 되지 말았었더라면, 달의 수에 들지 말았었더라면,	As for that night, let darkness seize upon it; let it not be joined unto the days of the year, let it not come into the number of the months.	If only darkness had taken that night away! May it not appear among the days of the year; may it never be entered in any of the months.
JOB	3	7	그 밤이 적막하였었더라면, 그 가운데서 즐거운 소리가 일어나지 말았었더라면,	Lo, let that night be solitary, let no joyful voice come therein.	Behold, may that night be barren; may no joyful voice come into it.
JOB	3	8	날을 저주하는 자 곧 큰 악어를 격동시키기에 익숙한 자가 그 밤을 저주하였었더라면,	Let them curse it that curse the day, who are ready to raise up their mourning.	May it be cursed by those who curse the day— those prepared to rouse Leviathan.
JOB	3	9	그 밤에 새벽별들이 어두웠었더라면, 그 밤이 광명을 바랄지라도 얻지 못하며 동틈을 보지 못하였었더라면 좋았을 것을,	Let the stars of the twilight thereof be dark; let it look for light, but have none; neither let it see the dawning of the day:	May its morning stars grow dark; may it wait in vain for daylight; may it not see the breaking of dawn.
JOB	3	10	이는 내 모태의 문을 닫지 아니하였고 내 눈으로 환난을 보지 않도록 하지 아니하였음이로구나	Because it shut not up the doors of my mother’s womb, nor hid sorrow from mine eyes.	For that night did not shut the doors of the womb to hide the sorrow from my eyes.
JOB	3	11	어찌하여 내가 태에서 죽어 나오지 아니하였었던가 어찌하여 내 어미가 낳을 때에 내가 숨지지 아니하였던가	Why died I not from the womb? why did I not give up the ghost when I came out of the belly?	Why did I not perish at birth; why did I not die as I came from the womb?
JOB	3	12	어찌하여 무릎이 나를 받았던가 어찌하여 유방이 나로 빨게 하였던가	Why did the knees prevent me? or why the breasts that I should suck?	Why were there knees to receive me, and breasts that I should be nursed?
JOB	3	13	그렇지 아니하였던들 이제는 내가 평안히 누워서 자고 쉬었을 것이니	For now should I have lain still and been quiet, I should have slept: then had I been at rest,	For now I would be lying down in peace; I would be asleep and at rest
JOB	3	14	자기를 위하여 거친 터를 수축한 세상 임금들과 의사들과 함께 있었을 것이요	With kings and counsellors of the earth, which built desolate places for themselves;	with kings and counselors of the earth, who built for themselves cities now in ruins,
JOB	3	15	혹시 금을 가지며 은으로 집에 채운 목백들과 함께 있었을 것이며	Or with princes that had gold, who filled their houses with silver:	or with princes who had gold, who filled their houses with silver.
JOB	3	16	또 부지 중에 낙태한 아이 같아서 세상에 있지 않았겠고 빛을 보지 못한 아이들 같았었을 것이라	Or as an hidden untimely birth I had not been; as infants which never saw light.	Or why was I not hidden like a stillborn child, like an infant who never sees daylight?
JOB	3	17	거기서는 악한 자가 소요를 그치며 거기서는 곤비한 자가 평강을 얻으며	There the wicked cease from troubling; and there the weary be at rest.	There the wicked cease from raging, and there the weary find rest.
JOB	3	18	거기서는 갇힌 자가 다 함께 평안히 있어 감독자의 소리를 듣지 아니하며	There the prisoners rest together; they hear not the voice of the oppressor.	The captives enjoy their ease; they do not hear the voice of the oppressor.
JOB	3	19	거기서는 작은 자나 큰 자나 일반으로 있고 종이 상전에게서 놓이느니라	The small and great are there; and the servant is free from his master.	Both small and great are there, and the slave is freed from his master.
JOB	3	20	어찌하여 곤고한 자에게 빛을 주셨으며 마음이 번뇌한 자에게 생명을 주셨는고	Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life unto the bitter in soul;	Why is light given to the miserable, and life to the bitter of soul,
JOB	3	21	이러한 자는 죽기를 바라도 오지 아니하니 그것을 구하기를 땅을 파고 숨긴 보배를 찾음보다 더하다가	Which long for death, but it cometh not; and dig for it more than for hid treasures;	who long for death that does not come, and search for it like hidden treasure,
JOB	3	22	무덤을 찾아 얻으면 심히 기뻐하고 즐거워하나니	Which rejoice exceedingly, and are glad, when they can find the grave?	who rejoice and greatly exult when they can find the grave?
JOB	3	23	하나님에게 둘러싸여 길이 아득한 사람에게 어찌하여 빛을 주셨는고	Why is light given to a man whose way is hid, and whom God hath hedged in?	Why is life given to a man whose way is hidden, whom God has hedged in?
JOB	3	24	나는 먹기 전에 탄식이 나며 나의 앓는 소리는 물이 쏟아지는 것 같구나	For my sighing cometh before I eat, and my roarings are poured out like the waters.	I sigh when food is put before me, and my groans pour out like water.
JOB	3	25	나의 두려워하는 그것이 내게 임하고 나의 무서워하는 그것이 내 몸에 미쳤구나	For the thing which I greatly feared is come upon me, and that which I was afraid of is come unto me.	For the thing I feared has overtaken me, and what I dreaded has befallen me.
JOB	3	26	평강도 없고 안온도 없고 안식도 없고 고난만 임하였구나	I was not in safety, neither had I rest, neither was I quiet; yet trouble came.	I am not at ease or quiet; I have no rest, for trouble has come.”
JOB	4	1	데만 사람 엘리바스가 대답하여 가로되	Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said,	Then Eliphaz the Temanite replied:
JOB	4	2	누가 네게 말하면 네가 염증이 나겠느냐 날지라도 누가 참고 말하지 아니하겠느냐	If we assay to commune with thee, wilt thou be grieved? but who can withhold himself from speaking?	“If one ventures a word with you, will you be wearied? Yet who can keep from speaking?
JOB	4	3	전에 네가 여러 사람을 교훈하였고 손이 늘어진 자면 강하게 하였고	Behold, thou hast instructed many, and thou hast strengthened the weak hands.	Surely you have instructed many, and have strengthened their feeble hands.
JOB	4	4	넘어져 가는 자를 말로 붙들어 주었고 무릎이 약한 자를 강하게 하였거늘	Thy words have upholden him that was falling, and thou hast strengthened the feeble knees.	Your words have steadied those who stumbled; you have braced the knees that were buckling.
JOB	4	5	이제 이 일이 네게 임하매 네가 답답하여 하고 이 일이 네게 당하매 네가 놀라는구나	But now it is come upon thee, and thou faintest; it toucheth thee, and thou art troubled.	But now trouble has come upon you, and you are weary. It strikes you, and you are dismayed.
JOB	4	6	네 의뢰가 경외함에 있지 아니하냐 네 소망이 네 행위를 완전히 함에 있지 아니하냐	Is not this thy fear, thy confidence, thy hope, and the uprightness of thy ways?	Is your reverence not your confidence, and the uprightness of your ways your hope?
JOB	4	7	생각하여 보라 죄없이 망한 자가 누구인가 정직한 자의 끊어짐이 어디 있는가	Remember, I pray thee, who ever perished, being innocent? or where were the righteous cut off?	Consider now, I plead: Who, being innocent, has ever perished? Or where have the upright been destroyed?
JOB	4	8	내가 보건대 악을 밭갈고 독을 뿌리는 자는 그대로 거두나니	Even as I have seen, they that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the same.	As I have observed, those who plow iniquity and those who sow trouble reap the same.
JOB	4	9	다 하나님의 입기운에 멸망하고 그 콧김에 사라지느니라	By the blast of God they perish, and by the breath of his nostrils are they consumed.	By the breath of God they perish, and by the blast of His anger they are consumed.
JOB	4	10	사자의 우는 소리와 사나운 사자의 목소리가 그치고 젊은 사자의 이가 부러지며	The roaring of the lion, and the voice of the fierce lion, and the teeth of the young lions, are broken.	The lion may roar, and the fierce lion may growl, yet the teeth of the young lions are broken.
JOB	4	11	늙은 사자는 움킨 것이 없어 죽고 암사자의 새끼는 흩어지느니라	The old lion perisheth for lack of prey, and the stout lion’s whelps are scattered abroad.	The old lion perishes for lack of prey, and the cubs of the lioness are scattered.
JOB	4	12	무슨 말씀이 내게 가만히 임하고 그 가는 소리가 내 귀에 들렸었나니	Now a thing was secretly brought to me, and mine ear received a little thereof.	Now a word came to me secretly; my ears caught a whisper of it.
JOB	4	13	곧 사람이 깊이 잠들 때쯤 하여서니라 내가 그 밤의 이상으로 하여 생각이 번거로울 때에	In thoughts from the visions of the night, when deep sleep falleth on men,	In disquieting visions in the night, when deep sleep falls on men,
JOB	4	14	두려움과 떨림이 내게 이르러서 모든 골절이 흔들렸었느니라	Fear came upon me, and trembling, which made all my bones to shake.	fear and trembling came over me and made all my bones shudder.
JOB	4	15	그 때에 영이 내 앞으로 지나매 내 몸에 털이 주뼛하였었느니라	Then a spirit passed before my face; the hair of my flesh stood up:	Then a spirit glided past my face, and the hair on my body bristled.
JOB	4	16	그 영이 서는데 그 형상을 분변치는 못하여도 오직 한 형상이 내 눈 앞에 있었느니라 그 때 내가 종용한 중에 목소리를 들으니 이르기를	It stood still, but I could not discern the form thereof: an image was before mine eyes, there was silence, and I heard a voice, saying,	It stood still, but I could not discern its appearance; a form loomed before my eyes, and I heard a whispering voice:
JOB	4	17	인생이 어찌 하나님보다 의롭겠느냐 사람이 어찌 그 창조하신 이보다 성결하겠느냐	Shall mortal man be more just than God? shall a man be more pure than his maker?	‘Can a mortal be more righteous than God, or a man more pure than his Maker?
JOB	4	18	하나님은 그 종이라도 오히려 믿지 아니하시며 그 사자라도 미련하다 하시나니	Behold, he put no trust in his servants; and his angels he charged with folly:	If God puts no trust in His servants, and He charges His angels with error,
JOB	4	19	하물며 흙 집에 살며 티끌로 터를 삼고 하루살이에게라도 눌려 죽을 자이겠느냐	How much less in them that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, which are crushed before the moth?	how much more those who dwell in houses of clay, whose foundations are in the dust, who can be crushed like a moth!
JOB	4	20	조석 사이에 멸한 바 되며 영원히 망하되 생각하는 자가 없으리라	They are destroyed from morning to evening: they perish for ever without any regarding it.	They are smashed to pieces from dawn to dusk; unnoticed, they perish forever.
JOB	4	21	장막 줄을 그들에게서 뽑지 아니하겠느냐 그들이 죽나니 지혜가 없느니라	Doth not their excellency which is in them go away? they die, even without wisdom.	Are not their tent cords pulled up, so that they die without wisdom?’
JOB	5	1	부르짖어 보아라 네게 응답할 자가 있겠느냐 거룩한 자 중에 네가 누구에게로 향하겠느냐	Call now, if there be any that will answer thee; and to which of the saints wilt thou turn?	“Call out if you please, but who will answer? To which of the holy ones will you turn?
JOB	5	2	분노가 미련한 자를 죽이고 시기가 어리석은 자를 멸하느니라	For wrath killeth the foolish man, and envy slayeth the silly one.	For resentment kills a fool, and envy slays the simple.
JOB	5	3	내가 미련한 자의 뿌리 박는 것을 보고 그 집을 당장에 저주하였노라	I have seen the foolish taking root: but suddenly I cursed his habitation.	I have seen a fool taking root, but suddenly his house was cursed.
JOB	5	4	그 자식들은 평안한 데서 멀리 떠나고 성문에서 눌리나 구하는 자가 없으며	His children are far from safety, and they are crushed in the gate, neither is there any to deliver them.	His sons are far from safety, crushed in court without a defender.
JOB	5	5	그 추수한 것은 주린 자가 먹되 가시나무 가운데 있는 것도 빼앗으며 올무가 그의 재산을 향하여 입을 벌리느니라	Whose harvest the hungry eateth up, and taketh it even out of the thorns, and the robber swalloweth up their substance.	The hungry consume his harvest, taking it even from the thorns, and the thirsty pant after his wealth.
JOB	5	6	재앙은 티끌에서 일어나는 것이 아니요 고난은 흙에서 나는 것이 아니라	Although affliction cometh not forth of the dust, neither doth trouble spring out of the ground;	For distress does not spring from the dust, and trouble does not sprout from the ground.
JOB	5	7	인생은 고난을 위하여 났나니 불티가 위로 날음 같으니라	Yet man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward.	Yet man is born to trouble as surely as sparks fly upward.
JOB	5	8	나 같으면 하나님께 구하고 내 일을 하나님께 의탁하리라	I would seek unto God, and unto God would I commit my cause:	However, if I were you, I would appeal to God and lay my cause before Him—
JOB	5	9	하나님은 크고 측량할 수 없는 일을 행하시며 기이한 일을 셀 수 없이 행하시나니	Which doeth great things and unsearchable; marvellous things without number:	the One who does great and unsearchable things, wonders without number.
JOB	5	10	비를 땅에 내리시고 물을 밭에 보내시며	Who giveth rain upon the earth, and sendeth waters upon the fields:	He gives rain to the earth and sends water upon the fields.
JOB	5	11	낮은 자를 높이 드시고 슬퍼하는 자를 흥기시켜 안전한 곳에 있게 하시느니라	To set up on high those that be low; that those which mourn may be exalted to safety.	He sets the lowly on high, so that mourners are lifted to safety.
JOB	5	12	하나님은 궤휼한 자의 계교를 파하사 그 손으로 하는 일을 이루지 못하게 하시며	He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise.	He thwarts the schemes of the crafty, so that their hands find no success.
JOB	5	13	간교한 자로 자기 궤휼에 빠지게 하시며 사특한 자의 계교를 패하게 하시며	He taketh the wise in their own craftiness: and the counsel of the froward is carried headlong.	He catches the wise in their craftiness, and sweeps away the plans of the cunning.
JOB	5	14	그들은 낮에도 캄캄함을 만나고 대낮에도 더듬기를 밤과 같이 하느니라	They meet with darkness in the daytime, and grope in the noonday as in the night.	They encounter darkness by day and grope at noon as in the night.
JOB	5	15	하나님은 곤비한 자를 그들의 입의 칼에서, 강한 자의 손에서 면하게 하시나니	But he saveth the poor from the sword, from their mouth, and from the hand of the mighty.	He saves the needy from the sword in their mouth and from the clutches of the powerful.
JOB	5	16	그러므로 가난한 자가 소망이 있고 불의가 스스로 입을 막느니라	So the poor hath hope, and iniquity stoppeth her mouth.	So the poor have hope, and injustice shuts its mouth.
JOB	5	17	볼지어다 하나님께 징계받는 자에게는 복이 있나니 그런즉 너는 전능자의 경책을 업신여기지 말지니라	Behold, happy is the man whom God correcteth: therefore despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty:	Blessed indeed is the man whom God corrects; so do not despise the discipline of the Almighty.
JOB	5	18	하나님은 아프게 하시다가 싸매시며 상하게 하시다가 그 손으로 고치시나니	For he maketh sore, and bindeth up: he woundeth, and his hands make whole.	For He wounds, but He also binds; He strikes, but His hands also heal.
JOB	5	19	여섯 가지 환난에서 너를 구원하시며 일곱 가지 환난이라도 그 재앙이 네게 미치지 않게 하시며	He shall deliver thee in six troubles: yea, in seven there shall no evil touch thee.	He will rescue you from six calamities; no harm will touch you in seven.
JOB	5	20	기근 때에 죽음에서, 전쟁 때에 칼 권세에서 너를 구속하실 터인즉	In famine he shall redeem thee from death: and in war from the power of the sword.	In famine He will redeem you from death, and in battle from the stroke of the sword.
JOB	5	21	네가 혀의 채찍을 피하여 숨을 수가 있고 멸망이 올 때에도 두려워 아니할 것이라	Thou shalt be hid from the scourge of the tongue: neither shalt thou be afraid of destruction when it cometh.	You will be hidden from the scourge of the tongue, and will not fear havoc when it comes.
JOB	5	22	네가 멸망과 기근을 비웃으며 들짐승을 두려워 아니할 것은	At destruction and famine thou shalt laugh: neither shalt thou be afraid of the beasts of the earth.	You will laugh at destruction and famine, and need not fear the beasts of the earth.
JOB	5	23	밭에 돌이 너와 언약을 맺겠고 들짐승이 너와 화친할 것임이라	For thou shalt be in league with the stones of the field: and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee.	For you will have a covenant with the stones of the field, and the wild animals will be at peace with you.
JOB	5	24	네가 네 장막의 평안함을 알고 네 우리를 살펴도 잃은 것이 없을 것이며	And thou shalt know that thy tabernacle shall be in peace; and thou shalt visit thy habitation, and shalt not sin.	You will know that your tent is secure, and find nothing amiss when inspecting your home.
JOB	5	25	네 자손이 많아지며 네 후예가 땅에 풀 같을 줄을 네가 알 것이라	Thou shalt know also that thy seed shall be great, and thine offspring as the grass of the earth.	You will know that your offspring will be many, your descendants like the grass of the earth.
JOB	5	26	네가 장수하다가 무덤에 이르리니 곡식단이 그 기한에 운반되어 올리움 같으리라	Thou shalt come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn cometh in in his season.	You will come to the grave in full vigor, like a sheaf of grain gathered in season.
JOB	5	27	볼지어다 우리의 연구한 바가 이 같으니 너는 듣고 네게 유익된 줄 알지니라	Lo this, we have searched it, so it is; hear it, and know thou it for thy good.	Indeed, we have investigated, and it is true! So hear it and know for yourself.”
JOB	6	1	욥이 대답하여 가로되	But Job answered and said,	Then Job replied:
JOB	6	2	나의 분한을 달아 보며 나의 모든 재앙을 저울에 둘 수 있으면	Oh that my grief were throughly weighed, and my calamity laid in the balances together!	“If only my grief could be weighed and placed with my calamity on the scales.
JOB	6	3	바다 모래보다도 무거울 것이라 그럼으로하여 나의 말이 경솔하였구나	For now it would be heavier than the sand of the sea: therefore my words are swallowed up.	For then it would outweigh the sand of the seas— no wonder my words have been rash.
JOB	6	4	전능자의 살이 내 몸에 박히매 나의 영이 그 독을 마셨나니 하나님의 두려움이 나를 엄습하여 치는구나	For the arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinketh up my spirit: the terrors of God do set themselves in array against me.	For the arrows of the Almighty have pierced me; my spirit drinks in their poison; the terrors of God are arrayed against me.
JOB	6	5	들 나귀가 풀이 있으면 어찌 울겠으며 소가 꼴이 있으면 어찌 울겠느냐	Doth the wild ass bray when he hath grass? or loweth the ox over his fodder?	Does a wild donkey bray over fresh grass, or an ox low over its fodder?
JOB	6	6	싱거운 것이 소금 없이 먹히겠느냐 닭의 알 흰자위가 맛이 있겠느냐	Can that which is unsavoury be eaten without salt? or is there any taste in the white of an egg?	Is tasteless food eaten without salt, or is there flavor in the white of an egg?
JOB	6	7	이런 것을 만지기도 내 마음이 싫어하나니 못된 식물 같이 여김이니라	The things that my soul refused to touch are as my sorrowful meat.	My soul refuses to touch them; they are loathsome food to me.
JOB	6	8	하나님이 나의 구하는 것을 얻게 하시며 나의 사모하는 것 주시기를 내가 원하나니	Oh that I might have my request; and that God would grant me the thing that I long for!	If only my request were granted and God would fulfill my hope:
JOB	6	9	이는 곧 나를 멸하시기를 기뻐하사 그 손을 들어 나를 끊으실 것이라	Even that it would please God to destroy me; that he would let loose his hand, and cut me off!	that God would be willing to crush me, to unleash His hand and cut me off!
JOB	6	10	그러할지라도 내가 오히려 위로를 받고 무정한 고통 가운데서도 기뻐할 것은 내가 거룩하신 이의 말씀을 거역지 아니하였음이니라	Then should I yet have comfort; yea, I would harden myself in sorrow: let him not spare; for I have not concealed the words of the Holy One.	It still brings me comfort, and joy through unrelenting pain, that I have not denied the words of the Holy One.
JOB	6	11	내가 무슨 기력이 있관대 기다리겠느냐 내 마지막이 어떠하겠관대 오히려 참겠느냐	What is my strength, that I should hope? and what is mine end, that I should prolong my life?	What strength do I have, that I should still hope? What is my future, that I should be patient?
JOB	6	12	나의 기력이 어찌 돌의 기력이겠느냐 나의 살이 어찌 놋쇠겠느냐	Is my strength the strength of stones? or is my flesh of brass?	Is my strength like that of stone, or my flesh made of bronze?
JOB	6	13	나의 도움이 내 속에 없지 아니하냐 나의 지혜가 내게서 쫓겨나지 아니하였느냐	Is not my help in me? and is wisdom driven quite from me?	Is there any help within me now that success is driven from me?
JOB	6	14	피곤한 자 곧 전능자 경외하는 일을 폐한 자를 그 벗이 불쌍히 여길 것이어늘	To him that is afflicted pity should be shewed from his friend; but he forsaketh the fear of the Almighty.	A despairing man should have the kindness of his friend, even if he forsakes the fear of the Almighty.
JOB	6	15	나의 형제는 내게 성실치 아니함이 시냇물의 마름 같고 개울의 잦음 같구나	My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, and as the stream of brooks they pass away;	But my brothers are as faithless as wadis, as seasonal streams that overflow,
JOB	6	16	얼음이 녹으면 물이 검어지며 눈이 그 속에 감취었을지라도	Which are blackish by reason of the ice, and wherein the snow is hid:	darkened because of the ice and the inflow of melting snow,
JOB	6	17	따뜻하면 마르고 더우면 그 자리에서 아주 없어지나니	What time they wax warm, they vanish: when it is hot, they are consumed out of their place.	but ceasing in the dry season and vanishing from their channels in the heat.
JOB	6	18	떼를 지은 객들이 시냇가로 다니다가 돌이켜 광야로 가서 죽고	The paths of their way are turned aside; they go to nothing, and perish.	Caravans turn aside from their routes; they go into the wasteland and perish.
JOB	6	19	데마의 떼들이 그것을 바라보고 스바의 행인들도 그것을 사모하다가	The troops of Tema looked, the companies of Sheba waited for them.	The caravans of Tema look for water; the travelers of Sheba hope to find it.
JOB	6	20	거기 와서는 바라던 것을 부끄리고 낙심하느니라	They were confounded because they had hoped; they came thither, and were ashamed.	They are confounded because they had hoped; their arrival brings disappointment.
JOB	6	21	너희도 허망한 자라 너희가 두려운 일을 본즉 겁내는구나	For now ye are nothing; ye see my casting down, and are afraid.	For now you are of no help; you see terror, and you are afraid.
JOB	6	22	내가 언제 너희에게 나를 공급하라 하더냐 언제 나를 위하여 너희 재물로 예물을 달라더냐	Did I say, Bring unto me? or, Give a reward for me of your substance?	Have I ever said, ‘Give me something; offer me a bribe from your wealth;
JOB	6	23	내가 언제 말하기를 대적의 손에서 나를 구원하라 하더냐 포악한 자의 손에서 나를 구속하라 하더냐	Or, Deliver me from the enemy’s hand? or, Redeem me from the hand of the mighty?	deliver me from the hand of the enemy; redeem me from the grasp of the ruthless’?
JOB	6	24	내게 가르쳐서 나의 허물된 것을 깨닫게 하라 내가 잠잠하리라	Teach me, and I will hold my tongue: and cause me to understand wherein I have erred.	Teach me, and I will be silent. Help me understand how I have erred.
JOB	6	25	옳은 말은 어찌 그리 유력한지, 그렇지만 너희의 책망은 무엇을 책망함이뇨	How forcible are right words! but what doth your arguing reprove?	How painful are honest words! But what does your argument prove?
JOB	6	26	너희가 말을 책망하려느냐 소망이 끊어진 자의 말은 바람 같으니라	Do ye imagine to reprove words, and the speeches of one that is desperate, which are as wind?	Do you intend to correct my words, and treat as wind my cry of despair?
JOB	6	27	너희는 고아를 제비 뽑으며 너희 벗을 매매할 자로구나	Yea, ye overwhelm the fatherless, and ye dig a pit for your friend.	You would even cast lots for an orphan and barter away your friend.
JOB	6	28	이제 너희가 나를 향하여 보기를 원하노라 내가 너희를 대면하여 결코 거짓말하지 아니하리라	Now therefore be content, look upon me; for it is evident unto you if I lie.	But now, please look at me. Would I lie to your face?
JOB	6	29	너희는 돌이켜 불의한 것이 없게 하기를 원하노라 너희는 돌이키라 내 일이 의로우니라	Return, I pray you, let it not be iniquity; yea, return again, my righteousness is in it.	Reconsider; do not be unjust. Reconsider, for my righteousness is at stake.
JOB	6	30	내 혀에 어찌 불의한 것이 있으랴 내 미각이 어찌 궤휼을 분변치 못하랴	Is there iniquity in my tongue? cannot my taste discern perverse things?	Is there iniquity on my tongue? Can my mouth not discern malice?
JOB	7	1	세상에 있는 인생에게 전쟁이 있지 아니하냐 그 날이 품꾼의 날과 같지 아니하냐	Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth? are not his days also like the days of an hireling?	“Is not man consigned to labor on earth? Are not his days like those of a hired hand?
JOB	7	2	종은 저물기를 심히 기다리고 품꾼은 그 삯을 바라나니	As a servant earnestly desireth the shadow, and as an hireling looketh for the reward of his work:	Like a slave he longs for shade; like a hireling he waits for his wages.
JOB	7	3	이와 같이 내가 여러 달째 곤고를 받으니 수고로운 밤이 내게 작정되었구나	So am I made to possess months of vanity, and wearisome nights are appointed to me.	So I am allotted months of futility, and nights of misery are appointed me.
JOB	7	4	내가 누울 때면 말하기를 언제나 일어날꼬 언제나 밤이 갈꼬 하며 새벽까지 이리 뒤척, 저리 뒤척 하는구나	When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise, and the night be gone? and I am full of tossings to and fro unto the dawning of the day.	When I lie down I think: ‘When will I get up?’ But the night drags on, and I toss and turn until dawn.
JOB	7	5	내 살에는 구더기와 흙 조각이 의복처럼 입혔고 내 가죽은 합창되었다가 터지는구나	My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of dust; my skin is broken, and become loathsome.	My flesh is clothed with worms and encrusted with dirt; my skin is cracked and festering.
JOB	7	6	나의 날은 베틀의 북보다 빠르니 소망 없이 보내는구나	My days are swifter than a weaver’s shuttle, and are spent without hope.	My days are swifter than a weaver’s shuttle; they come to an end without hope.
JOB	7	7	내 생명이 한 호흡 같음을 생각하옵소서 나의 눈이 다시 복된 것을 보지 못하리이다	O remember that my life is wind: mine eye shall no more see good.	Remember that my life is but a breath. My eyes will never again see happiness.
JOB	7	8	나를 본 자의 눈이 다시는 나를 보지 못할 것이고 주의 눈이 나를 향하실지라도 내가 있지 아니하리이다	The eye of him that hath seen me shall see me no more: thine eyes are upon me, and I am not.	The eye that beholds me will no longer see me. You will look for me, but I will be no more.
JOB	7	9	구름이 사라져 없어짐 같이 음부로 내려가는 자는 다시 올라오지 못할 것이오니	As the cloud is consumed and vanisheth away: so he that goeth down to the grave shall come up no more.	As a cloud vanishes and is gone, so he who goes down to Sheol does not come back up.
JOB	7	10	그는 다시 자기 집으로 돌아가지 못하겠고 자기 처소도 다시 그를 알지 못하리이다	He shall return no more to his house, neither shall his place know him any more.	He never returns to his house; his place remembers him no more.
JOB	7	11	그런즉 내가 내 입을 금하지 아니하고 내 마음의 아픔을 인하여 말하며 내 영혼의 괴로움을 인하여 원망하리이다	Therefore I will not refrain my mouth; I will speak in the anguish of my spirit; I will complain in the bitterness of my soul.	Therefore I will not restrain my mouth; I will speak in the anguish of my spirit; I will complain in the bitterness of my soul.
JOB	7	12	내가 바다니이까 용이니이까 주께서 어찌하여 나를 지키시나이까	Am I a sea, or a whale, that thou settest a watch over me?	Am I the sea, or the monster of the deep, that You must keep me under guard?
JOB	7	13	혹시 내가 말하기를 내 자리가 나를 위로하고 내 침상이 내 수심을 풀리라 할 때에	When I say, My bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint;	When I think my bed will comfort me and my couch will ease my complaint,
JOB	7	14	주께서 꿈으로 나를 놀래시고 이상으로 나를 두렵게 하시나이다	Then thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me through visions:	then You frighten me with dreams and terrify me with visions,
JOB	7	15	이러므로 내 마음에 숨이 막히기를 원하오니 뼈보다도 죽는 것이 나으니이다	So that my soul chooseth strangling, and death rather than my life.	so that I would prefer strangling and death over my life in this body.
JOB	7	16	내가 생명을 싫어하고 항상 살기를 원치 아니하오니 나를 놓으소서 내 날은 헛것이니이다	I loathe it; I would not live alway: let me alone; for my days are vanity.	I loathe my life! I would not live forever. Leave me alone, for my days are but a breath.
JOB	7	17	사람이 무엇이관대 주께서 크게 여기사 그에게 마음을 두시고	What is man, that thou shouldest magnify him? and that thou shouldest set thine heart upon him?	What is man that You should exalt him, that You should set Your heart upon him,
JOB	7	18	아침마다 권징하시며 분초마다 시험하시나이까	And that thou shouldest visit him every morning, and try him every moment?	that You attend to him every morning, and test him every moment?
JOB	7	19	주께서 내게서 눈을 돌이키지 아니하시며 나의 침 삼킬 동안도 나를 놓지 아니하시기를 어느 때까지 하시리이까	How long wilt thou not depart from me, nor let me alone till I swallow down my spittle?	Will You never look away from me, or leave me alone to swallow my spittle?
JOB	7	20	사람을 감찰하시는 자여 내가 범죄하였은들 주께 무슨 해가 되오리이까 어찌하여 나로 과녁을 삼으셔서 스스로 무거운 짐이 되게 하셨나이까	I have sinned; what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? why hast thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden to myself?	If I have sinned, what have I done to You, O watcher of mankind? Why have You made me Your target, so that I am a burden to You?
JOB	7	21	주께서 어찌하여 내 허물을 사하여 주지 아니하시며 내 죄악을 제하여 버리지 아니하시나이까 내가 이제 흙에 누우리니 주께서 나를 부지런히 찾으실지라도 내가 있지 아니하리이다	And why dost thou not pardon my transgression, and take away mine iniquity? for now shall I sleep in the dust; and thou shalt seek me in the morning, but I shall not be.	Why do You not pardon my transgression and take away my iniquity? For soon I will lie down in the dust; You will seek me, but I will be no more.”
JOB	8	1	수아 사람 빌닷이 대답하여 가로되	Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said,	Then Bildad the Shuhite replied:
JOB	8	2	네가 어느 때까지 이런 말을 하겠으며 어느 때까지 네 입의 말이 광풍과 같겠는가	How long wilt thou speak these things? and how long shall the words of thy mouth be like a strong wind?	“How long will you go on saying such things? The words of your mouth are a blustering wind.
JOB	8	3	하나님이 어찌 심판을 굽게 하시겠으며 전능하신 이가 어찌 공의를 굽게 하시겠는가	Doth God pervert judgment? or doth the Almighty pervert justice?	Does God pervert justice? Does the Almighty pervert what is right?
JOB	8	4	네 자녀들이 주께 득죄하였으므로 주께서 그들을 그 죄에 붙이셨나니	If thy children have sinned against him, and he have cast them away for their transgression;	When your children sinned against Him, He gave them over to their rebellion.
JOB	8	5	네가 만일 하나님을 부지런히 구하며 전능하신 이에게 빌고	If thou wouldest seek unto God betimes, and make thy supplication to the Almighty;	But if you would earnestly seek God and ask the Almighty for mercy,
JOB	8	6	또 청결하고 정직하면 정녕 너를 돌아보시고 네 의로운 집으로 형통하게 하실 것이라	If thou wert pure and upright; surely now he would awake for thee, and make the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous.	if you are pure and upright, even now He will rouse Himself on your behalf and restore your righteous estate.
JOB	8	7	네 시작은 미약하였으나 네 나중은 심히 창대하리라	Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end should greatly increase.	Though your beginnings were modest, your latter days will flourish.
JOB	8	8	청컨대 너는 옛시대 사람에게 물으며 열조의 터득한 일을 배울지어다	For enquire, I pray thee, of the former age, and prepare thyself to the search of their fathers:	Please inquire of past generations and consider the discoveries of their fathers.
JOB	8	9	(우리는 어제부터 있었을 뿐이라 지식이 망매하니 세상에 있는 날이 그림자와 같으니라)	(For we are but of yesterday, and know nothing, because our days upon earth are a shadow:)	For we were born yesterday and know nothing; our days on earth are but a shadow.
JOB	8	10	그들이 네게 가르쳐 이르지 아니하겠느냐 그 마음에서 나는 말을 발하지 아니하겠느냐	Shall not they teach thee, and tell thee, and utter words out of their heart?	Will they not teach you and tell you, and speak from their understanding?
JOB	8	11	왕골이 진펄이 아니고 나겠으며 갈대가 물 없이 자라겠느냐	Can the rush grow up without mire? can the flag grow without water?	Does papyrus grow where there is no marsh? Do reeds flourish without water?
JOB	8	12	이런 것은 푸르러도 아직 벨 때 되기 전에 다른 풀보다 일찍이 마르느니라	Whilst it is yet in his greenness, and not cut down, it withereth before any other herb.	While the shoots are still uncut, they dry up quicker than grass.
JOB	8	13	하나님을 잊어버리는 자의 길은 다 이와 같고 사곡한 자의 소망은 없어지리니	So are the paths of all that forget God; and the hypocrite’s hope shall perish:	Such is the destiny of all who forget God; so the hope of the godless will perish.
JOB	8	14	그 믿는 것이 끊어지고 그 의지하는 것이 거미줄 같은즉	Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a spider’s web.	His confidence is fragile; his security is in a spider’s web.
JOB	8	15	그 집을 의지할지라도 집이 서지 못하고 굳게 잡아도 집이 보존되지 못하리라	He shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand: he shall hold it fast, but it shall not endure.	He leans on his web, but it gives way; he holds fast, but it does not endure.
JOB	8	16	식물이 일광을 받고 푸르러서 그 가지가 동산에 뻗어가며	He is green before the sun, and his branch shooteth forth in his garden.	He is a well-watered plant in the sunshine, spreading its shoots over the garden.
JOB	8	17	그 뿌리가 돌 무더기에 서리어서 돌 가운데로 들어갔을지라도	His roots are wrapped about the heap, and seeth the place of stones.	His roots wrap around the rock heap; he looks for a home among the stones.
JOB	8	18	그곳에서 뽑히면 그 자리도 모르는 체하고 이르기를 내가 너를 보지 못하였다 하리니	If he destroy him from his place, then it shall deny him, saying, I have not seen thee.	If he is uprooted from his place, it will disown him, saying, ‘I never saw you.’
JOB	8	19	그 길의 희락은 이와 같고 그 후에 다른 것이 흙에서 나리라	Behold, this is the joy of his way, and out of the earth shall others grow.	Surely this is the joy of his way; yet others will spring from the dust.
JOB	8	20	하나님은 순전한 사람을 버리지 아니하시고 악한 자를 붙들어 주지 아니하신즉	Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man, neither will he help the evil doers:	Behold, God does not reject the blameless, nor will He strengthen the hand of evildoers.
JOB	8	21	웃음으로 네 입에, 즐거운 소리로 네 입술에 채우시리니	Till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and thy lips with rejoicing.	He will yet fill your mouth with laughter, and your lips with a shout of joy.
JOB	8	22	너를 미워하는 자는 부끄러움을 입을 것이라 악인의 장막은 없어지리라	They that hate thee shall be clothed with shame; and the dwelling place of the wicked shall come to nought.	Your enemies will be clothed in shame, and the tent of the wicked will be no more.”
JOB	9	1	욥이 대답하여 가로되	Then Job answered and said,	Then Job answered:
JOB	9	2	내가 진실로 그 일이 그런 줄을 알거니와 인생이 어찌 하나님 앞에 의로우랴	I know it is so of a truth: but how should man be just with God?	“Yes, I know that it is so, but how can a mortal be righteous before God?
JOB	9	3	사람이 하나님과 쟁변하려 할지라도 천 마디에 한 마디도 대답하지 못하리라	If he will contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand.	If one wished to contend with God, he could not answer Him one time out of a thousand.
JOB	9	4	하나님은 마음이 지혜로우시고 힘이 강하시니 스스로 강퍅히 하여 그를 거역하고 형통한 자가 누구이랴	He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who hath hardened himself against him, and hath prospered?	God is wise in heart and mighty in strength. Who has resisted Him and prospered?
JOB	9	5	그가 진노하심으로 산을 무너뜨리시며 옮기실지라도 산이 깨닫지 못하며	Which removeth the mountains, and they know not: which overturneth them in his anger.	He moves mountains without their knowledge and overturns them in His anger.
JOB	9	6	그가 땅을 움직여 그 자리에서 미신즉 그 기둥이 흔들리며	Which shaketh the earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof tremble.	He shakes the earth from its place, so that its foundations tremble.
JOB	9	7	그가 해를 명하여 뜨지 못하게 하시며 별들을 봉하시며	Which commandeth the sun, and it riseth not; and sealeth up the stars.	He commands the sun not to shine; He seals off the stars.
JOB	9	8	그가 홀로 하늘을 펴시며 바다 물결을 밟으시며	Which alone spreadeth out the heavens, and treadeth upon the waves of the sea.	He alone stretches out the heavens and treads on the waves of the sea.
JOB	9	9	북두성과 삼성과 묘성과 남방의 밀실을 만드셨으며	Which maketh Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades, and the chambers of the south.	He is the Maker of the Bear and Orion, of the Pleiades and the constellations of the south.
JOB	9	10	측량할 수 없는 큰 일을, 셀 수 없는 기이한 일을 행하시느니라	Which doeth great things past finding out; yea, and wonders without number.	He does great things beyond searching out, and wonders without number.
JOB	9	11	그가 내 앞으로 지나시나 내가 보지 못하며 그가 내 앞에서 나아가시나 내가 깨닫지 못하느니라	Lo, he goeth by me, and I see him not: he passeth on also, but I perceive him not.	Were He to pass by me, I would not see Him; were He to move, I would not recognize Him.
JOB	9	12	하나님이 빼앗으시면 누가 막을 수 있으며 무엇을 하시나이까 누가 물을 수 있으랴	Behold, he taketh away, who can hinder him? who will say unto him, What doest thou?	If He takes away, who can stop Him? Who dares to ask Him, ‘What are You doing?’
JOB	9	13	하나님이 진노를 돌이키지 아니하시나니 라합을 돕는 자들이 그 아래 굴복하겠거든	If God will not withdraw his anger, the proud helpers do stoop under him.	God does not restrain His anger; the helpers of Rahab cower beneath Him.
JOB	9	14	하물며 내가 감히 대답하겠으며 무슨 말을 택하여 더불어 변론하랴	How much less shall I answer him, and choose out my words to reason with him?	How then can I answer Him or choose my arguments against Him?
JOB	9	15	가령 내가 의로울지라도 감히 대답하지 못하고 나를 심판하실 그에게 간구하였을 뿐이며	Whom, though I were righteous, yet would I not answer, but I would make supplication to my judge.	For even if I were right, I could not answer. I could only beg my Judge for mercy.
JOB	9	16	가령 내가 그를 부르므로 그가 내게 대답하셨을지라도 내 음성을 들으셨다고는 내가 믿지 아니하리라	If I had called, and he had answered me; yet would I not believe that he had hearkened unto my voice.	If I summoned Him and He answered me, I do not believe He would listen to my voice.
JOB	9	17	그가 폭풍으로 나를 꺾으시고 까닭 없이 내 상처를 많게 하시며	For he breaketh me with a tempest, and multiplieth my wounds without cause.	For He would crush me with a tempest and multiply my wounds without cause.
JOB	9	18	나로 숨을 쉬지 못하게 하시며 괴로움으로 내게 채우시는구나	He will not suffer me to take my breath, but filleth me with bitterness.	He does not let me catch my breath, but overwhelms me with bitterness.
JOB	9	19	힘으로 말하면 그가 강하시고 심판으로 말하면 누가 그를 호출하겠느냐	If I speak of strength, lo, he is strong: and if of judgment, who shall set me a time to plead?	If it is a matter of strength, He is indeed mighty! If it is a matter of justice, who can summon Him?
JOB	9	20	가령 내가 의로울지라도 내 입이 나를 정죄하리니 가령 내가 순전할지라도 나의 패괴함을 증거하리라	If I justify myself, mine own mouth shall condemn me: if I say, I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse.	Even if I were righteous, my mouth would condemn me; if I were blameless, it would declare me guilty.
JOB	9	21	나는 순전하다마는 내가 나를 돌아보지 아니하고 내 생명을 천히 여기는구나	Though I were perfect, yet would I not know my soul: I would despise my life.	Though I am blameless, I have no concern for myself; I despise my own life.
JOB	9	22	일이 다 일반이라 그러므로 나는 말하기를 하나님이 순전한 자나 악한 자나 멸망시키신다 하나니	This is one thing, therefore I said it, He destroyeth the perfect and the wicked.	It is all the same, and so I say, ‘He destroys both the blameless and the wicked.’
JOB	9	23	홀연히 재앙이 내려 도륙될 때에 무죄한 자의 고난을 그가 비웃으시리라	If the scourge slay suddenly, he will laugh at the trial of the innocent.	When the scourge brings sudden death, He mocks the despair of the innocent.
JOB	9	24	세상이 악인의 손에 붙이웠고 재판관의 얼굴도 가리워졌나니 그렇게 되게 한 이가 그가 아니시면 누구이뇨	The earth is given into the hand of the wicked: he covereth the faces of the judges thereof; if not, where, and who is he?	The earth is given into the hand of the wicked; He blindfolds its judges. If it is not He, then who is it?
JOB	9	25	나의 날이 체부보다 빠르니 달려가므로 복을 볼 수 없구나	Now my days are swifter than a post: they flee away, they see no good.	My days are swifter than a runner; they flee without seeing good.
JOB	9	26	그 지나가는 것이 빠른 배 같고 움킬 것에 날아내리는 독수리와도 같구나	They are passed away as the swift ships: as the eagle that hasteth to the prey.	They sweep by like boats of papyrus, like an eagle swooping down on its prey.
JOB	9	27	가령 내가 말하기를 내 원통함을 잊고 얼굴 빛을 고쳐 즐거운 모양을 하자 할지라도	If I say, I will forget my complaint, I will leave off my heaviness, and comfort myself:	If I were to say, ‘I will forget my complaint and change my expression and smile,’
JOB	9	28	오히려 내 모든 고통을 두려워하오니 주께서 나를 무죄히 여기지 않으실 줄을 아나이다	I am afraid of all my sorrows, I know that thou wilt not hold me innocent.	I would still dread all my sufferings; I know that You will not acquit me.
JOB	9	29	내가 정죄하심을 입을진대 어찌 헛되이 수고하리이까	If I be wicked, why then labour I in vain?	Since I am already found guilty, why should I labor in vain?
JOB	9	30	내가 눈 녹은 물로 몸을 씻고 잿물로 손을 깨끗이 할지라도	If I wash myself with snow water, and make my hands never so clean;	If I should wash myself with snow and cleanse my hands with lye,
JOB	9	31	주께서 나를 개천에 빠지게 하시리니 내 옷이라도 나를 싫어하리이다	Yet shalt thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor me.	then You would plunge me into the pit, and even my own clothes would despise me.
JOB	9	32	하나님은 나처럼 사람이 아니신즉 내가 그에게 대답함도 불가하고 대질하여 재판할 수도 없고	For he is not a man, as I am, that I should answer him, and we should come together in judgment.	For He is not a man like me, that I can answer Him, that we can take each other to court.
JOB	9	33	양척 사이에 손을 얹을 판결자도 없구나	Neither is there any daysman betwixt us, that might lay his hand upon us both.	Nor is there a mediator between us, to lay his hand upon us both.
JOB	9	34	주께서 그 막대기를 내게서 떠나게 하시고 그 위엄으로 나를 두렵게 하지 아니하시기를 원하노라	Let him take his rod away from me, and let not his fear terrify me:	Let Him remove His rod from me, so that His terror will no longer frighten me.
JOB	9	35	그리하시면 내가 두려움 없이 말하리라 나는 본래 그런 자가 아니니라	Then would I speak, and not fear him; but it is not so with me.	Then I would speak without fear of Him. But as it is, I am on my own.
JOB	10	1	내 영혼이 살기에 곤비하니 내 원통함을 발설하고 내 마음의 괴로운 대로 말하리라	My soul is weary of my life; I will leave my complaint upon myself; I will speak in the bitterness of my soul.	“I loathe my own life; I will express my complaint and speak in the bitterness of my soul.
JOB	10	2	내가 하나님께 아뢰오리니 나를 정죄하지 마옵시고 무슨 연고로 나로 더불어 쟁변하시는지 나로 알게 하옵소서	I will say unto God, Do not condemn me; shew me wherefore thou contendest with me.	I will say to God: Do not condemn me! Let me know why You prosecute me.
JOB	10	3	주께서 주의 손으로 지으신 것을 학대하시며 멸시하시고 악인의 꾀에 빛을 비취시기를 선히 여기시나이까	Is it good unto thee that thou shouldest oppress, that thou shouldest despise the work of thine hands, and shine upon the counsel of the wicked?	Does it please You to oppress me, to reject the work of Your hands and favor the schemes of the wicked?
JOB	10	4	주의 눈이 육신의 눈이니이까 주께서 사람의 보는 것처럼 보시리이까	Hast thou eyes of flesh? or seest thou as man seeth?	Do You have eyes of flesh? Do You see as man sees?
JOB	10	5	주의 날이 어찌 인생의 날과 같으며 주의 해가 어찌 인생의 날과 같기로	Are thy days as the days of man? are thy years as man’s days,	Are Your days like those of a mortal, or Your years like those of a man,
JOB	10	6	나의 허물을 찾으시며 나의 죄를 사실하시나이까	That thou enquirest after mine iniquity, and searchest after my sin?	that You should seek my iniquity and search out my sin—
JOB	10	7	주께서는 내가 악하지 않은 줄을 아시나이다 주의 손에서 나를 벗어나게 할 자도 없나이다	Thou knowest that I am not wicked; and there is none that can deliver out of thine hand.	though You know that I am not guilty, and there is no deliverance from Your hand?
JOB	10	8	주의 손으로 나를 만드사 백체를 이루셨거늘 이제 나를 멸하시나이다	Thine hands have made me and fashioned me together round about; yet thou dost destroy me.	Your hands shaped me and altogether formed me. Would You now turn and destroy me?
JOB	10	9	기억하옵소서 주께서 내 몸 지으시기를 흙을 뭉치듯 하셨거늘 다시 나를 티끌로 돌려 보내려 하시나이까	Remember, I beseech thee, that thou hast made me as the clay; and wilt thou bring me into dust again?	Please remember that You molded me like clay. Would You now return me to dust?
JOB	10	10	주께서 나를 젖과 같이 쏟으셨으며 엉긴 것처럼 엉기게 하지 아니하셨나이까	Hast thou not poured me out as milk, and curdled me like cheese?	Did You not pour me out like milk, and curdle me like cheese?
JOB	10	11	가죽과 살로 내게 입히시며 뼈와 힘줄로 나를 뭉치시고	Thou hast clothed me with skin and flesh, and hast fenced me with bones and sinews.	You clothed me with skin and flesh, and knit me together with bones and sinews.
JOB	10	12	생명과 은혜를 내게 주시고 권고하심으로 내 영을 지키셨나이다	Thou hast granted me life and favour, and thy visitation hath preserved my spirit.	You have granted me life and loving devotion, and Your care has preserved my spirit.
JOB	10	13	그러한데 주께서 이것들을 마음에 품으셨나이다 이 뜻이 주께 있은 줄을 내가 아나이다	And these things hast thou hid in thine heart: I know that this is with thee.	Yet You concealed these things in Your heart, and I know that this was in Your mind:
JOB	10	14	내가 범죄하면 주께서 나를 죄인으로 인정하시고 내 죄악을 사유치 아니하시나이다	If I sin, then thou markest me, and thou wilt not acquit me from mine iniquity.	If I sinned, You would take note, and would not acquit me of my iniquity.
JOB	10	15	내가 악하면 화가 있을 것이오며 내가 의로울지라도 머리를 들지 못하올 것은 내 속에 부끄러움이 가득하고 내 환난을 묵도함이니이다	If I be wicked, woe unto me; and if I be righteous, yet will I not lift up my head. I am full of confusion; therefore see thou mine affliction;	If I am guilty, woe to me! And even if I am righteous, I cannot lift my head. I am full of shame and aware of my affliction.
JOB	10	16	내가 머리를 높이 들면 주께서 사자처럼 나를 사랑하시며 내게 주의 기이한 능력을 다시 나타내시나이다	For it increaseth. Thou huntest me as a fierce lion: and again thou shewest thyself marvellous upon me.	Should I hold my head high, You would hunt me like a lion, and again display Your power against me.
JOB	10	17	주께서 자주자주 증거하는 자를 갈마들여 나를 치시며 나를 향하여 진노를 더하시니 군대가 갈마들어 치는 것 같으니이다	Thou renewest thy witnesses against me, and increasest thine indignation upon me; changes and war are against me.	You produce new witnesses against me and multiply Your anger toward me. Hardships assault me in wave after wave.
JOB	10	18	주께서 나를 태에서 나오게 하셨음은 어찜이니이까 그렇지 아니하였더면, 내가 기운이 끊어져 아무 눈에도 보이지 아니하였을 것이라	Wherefore then hast thou brought me forth out of the womb? Oh that I had given up the ghost, and no eye had seen me!	Why then did You bring me from the womb? Oh, that I had died, and no eye had seen me!
JOB	10	19	있어도 없던 것 같이 되어서 태에서 바로 무덤으로 옮겼으리이다	I should have been as though I had not been; I should have been carried from the womb to the grave.	If only I had never come to be, but had been carried from the womb to the grave.
JOB	10	20	내 날은 적지 아니하니이까 그런즉 그치시고 나를 버려두사 저으기 평안하게 하옵시되	Are not my days few? cease then, and let me alone, that I may take comfort a little,	Are my days not few? Withdraw from me, that I may have a little comfort,
JOB	10	21	내가 돌아오지 못할 땅 곧 어둡고 죽음의 그늘진 땅으로 가기 전에 그리하옵소서	Before I go whence I shall not return, even to the land of darkness and the shadow of death;	before I go—never to return— to a land of darkness and gloom,
JOB	10	22	이 땅은 어두워서 흑암 같고 죽음의 그늘이 져서 아무 구별이 없고 광명도 흑암 같으니이다	A land of darkness, as darkness itself; and of the shadow of death, without any order, and where the light is as darkness.	to a land of utter darkness, of deep shadow and disorder, where even the light is like darkness.”
JOB	11	1	나아마 사람 소발이 대답하여 가로되	Then answered Zophar the Naamathite, and said,	Then Zophar the Naamathite replied:
JOB	11	2	말이 많으니 어찌 대답이 없으랴 입이 부푼 사람이 어찌 의롭다 함을 얻겠느냐	Should not the multitude of words be answered? and should a man full of talk be justified?	“Should this stream of words go unanswered and such a speaker be vindicated?
JOB	11	3	네 자랑하는 말이 어떻게 사람으로 잠잠하게 하겠으며 네가 비웃으면 어찌 너를 부끄럽게 할 사람이 없겠느냐	Should thy lies make men hold their peace? and when thou mockest, shall no man make thee ashamed?	Should your babbling put others to silence? Will you scoff without rebuke?
JOB	11	4	네 말이 내 도는 정결하고 나는 주의 목전에 깨끗하다 하는구나	For thou hast said, My doctrine is pure, and I am clean in thine eyes.	You have said, ‘My doctrine is sound, and I am pure in Your sight.’
JOB	11	5	하나님은 말씀을 내시며 너를 향하여 입을 여시고	But oh that God would speak, and open his lips against thee;	But if only God would speak and open His lips against you,
JOB	11	6	지혜의 오묘로 네게 보이시기를 원하노니 이는 그의 지식이 광대하심이라 너는 알라 하나님의 벌하심이 네 죄보다 경하니라	And that he would shew thee the secrets of wisdom, that they are double to that which is! Know therefore that God exacteth of thee less than thine iniquity deserveth.	and disclose to you the secrets of wisdom, for true wisdom has two sides. Know then that God exacts from you less than your iniquity deserves.
JOB	11	7	네가 하나님의 오묘를 어찌 능히 측량하며 전능자를 어찌 능히 온전히 알겠느냐	Canst thou by searching find out God? canst thou find out the Almighty unto perfection?	Can you fathom the deep things of God or discover the limits of the Almighty?
JOB	11	8	하늘보다 높으시니 네가 어찌 하겠으며 음부보다 깊으시니 네가 어찌 알겠느냐	It is as high as heaven; what canst thou do? deeper than hell; what canst thou know?	They are higher than the heavens—what can you do? They are deeper than Sheol—what can you know?
JOB	11	9	그 도량은 땅보다 크고 바다보다 넓으니라	The measure thereof is longer than the earth, and broader than the sea.	Their measure is longer than the earth and wider than the sea.
JOB	11	10	하나님이 두루 다니시며 사람을 잡아 가두시고 개정하시면 누가 능히 막을소냐	If he cut off, and shut up, or gather together, then who can hinder him?	If He comes along to imprison you, or convenes a court, who can stop Him?
JOB	11	11	하나님은 허망한 사람을 아시나니 악한 일은 상관치 않으시는 듯하나 다 보시느니라	For he knoweth vain men: he seeth wickedness also; will he not then consider it?	Surely He knows the deceit of men. If He sees iniquity, does He not take note?
JOB	11	12	허망한 사람은 지각이 없나니 그 출생함이 들나귀 새끼 같으니라	For vain man would be wise, though man be born like a wild ass’s colt.	But a witless man can no more become wise than the colt of a wild donkey can be born a man!
JOB	11	13	만일 네가 마음을 바로 정하고 주를 향하여 손을 들 때에	If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hands toward him;	As for you, if you direct your heart and lift up your hands to Him,
JOB	11	14	네 손에 죄악이 있거든 멀리 버리라 불의로 네 장막에 거하지 못하게 하라	If iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away, and let not wickedness dwell in thy tabernacles.	if you put away the iniquity in your hand, and allow no injustice to dwell in your tents,
JOB	11	15	그리하면 네가 정녕 흠 없는 얼굴을 들게 되고 굳게 서서 두려움이 없으리니	For then shalt thou lift up thy face without spot; yea, thou shalt be stedfast, and shalt not fear:	then indeed you will lift up your face without shame; you will stand firm and unafraid.
JOB	11	16	곧 네 환난을 잊을 것이라 네가 추억할지라도 물이 흘러감 같을 것이며	Because thou shalt forget thy misery, and remember it as waters that pass away:	For you will forget your misery, recalling it only as waters gone by.
JOB	11	17	네 생명의 날이 대낮보다 밝으리니 어두움이 있다 할지라도 아침과 같이 될 것이요	And thine age shall be clearer than the noonday; thou shalt shine forth, thou shalt be as the morning.	Your life will be brighter than noonday; its darkness will be like the morning.
JOB	11	18	네가 소망이 있으므로 든든할지며 두루 살펴보고 안전히 쉬리니	And thou shalt be secure, because there is hope; yea, thou shalt dig about thee, and thou shalt take thy rest in safety.	You will be secure, because there is hope, and you will look around and lie down in safety.
JOB	11	19	네가 누워도 두렵게 할 자가 없겠고 많은 사람이 네게 첨을 드리리라	Also thou shalt lie down, and none shall make thee afraid; yea, many shall make suit unto thee.	You will lie down without fear, and many will court your favor.
JOB	11	20	그러나 악한 자는 눈이 어두워서 도망할 곳을 찾지 못하리니 그의 소망은 기운이 끊침이리라	But the eyes of the wicked shall fail, and they shall not escape, and their hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost.	But the eyes of the wicked will fail, and escape will elude them; they will hope for their last breath.”
JOB	12	1	욥이 대답하여 가로되	And Job answered and said,	Then Job answered:
JOB	12	2	너희만 참으로 사람이로구나 너희가 죽으면 지혜도 죽겠구나	No doubt but ye are the people, and wisdom shall die with you.	“Truly then you are the people with whom wisdom itself will die!
JOB	12	3	나도 너희 같이 총명이 있어 너희만 못하지 아니하니 그 같은 일을 누가 알지 못하겠느냐	But I have understanding as well as you; I am not inferior to you: yea, who knoweth not such things as these?	But I also have a mind; I am not inferior to you. Who does not know such things as these?
JOB	12	4	하나님께 불러 아뢰어 들으심을 입은 내가 이웃에게 웃음 받는 자가 되었으니 의롭고 순전한 자가 조롱거리가 되었구나	I am as one mocked of his neighbour, who calleth upon God, and he answereth him: the just upright man is laughed to scorn.	I am a laughingstock to my friends, though I called on God, and He answered. The righteous and upright man is a laughingstock.
JOB	12	5	평안한 자의 마음은 재앙을 멸시하나 재앙이 실족하는 자를 기다리는구나	He that is ready to slip with his feet is as a lamp despised in the thought of him that is at ease.	The one at ease scorns misfortune as the fate of those whose feet are slipping.
JOB	12	6	강도의 장막은 형통하고 하나님을 진노케 하는 자가 평안하니 하나님이 그 손에 후히 주심이니라	The tabernacles of robbers prosper, and they that provoke God are secure; into whose hand God bringeth abundantly.	The tents of robbers are safe, and those who provoke God are secure— those who carry their god in their hands.
JOB	12	7	이제 모든 짐승에게 물어 보라 그것들이 네게 가르치리라 공중의 새에게 물어 보라 그것들이 또한 네게 고하리라	But ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the fowls of the air, and they shall tell thee:	But ask the animals, and they will instruct you; ask the birds of the air, and they will tell you.
JOB	12	8	땅에게 말하라 네게 가르치리라 바다의 고기도 네게 설명하리라	Or speak to the earth, and it shall teach thee: and the fishes of the sea shall declare unto thee.	Or speak to the earth, and it will teach you; let the fish of the sea inform you.
JOB	12	9	이것들 중에 어느 것이 여호와의 손이 이를 행하신 줄을 알지 못하랴	Who knoweth not in all these that the hand of the Lord hath wrought this?	Which of all these does not know that the hand of the LORD has done this?
JOB	12	10	생물들의 혼과 인생들의 영이 다 그의 손에 있느니라	In whose hand is the soul of every living thing, and the breath of all mankind.	The life of every living thing is in His hand, as well as the breath of all mankind.
JOB	12	11	입이 식물의 맛을 변별함 같이 귀가 말을 분변하지 아니하느냐	Doth not the ear try words? and the mouth taste his meat?	Does not the ear test words as the tongue tastes its food?
JOB	12	12	늙은 자에게는 지혜가 있고 장수하는 자에게는 명철이 있느니라	With the ancient is wisdom; and in length of days understanding.	Wisdom is found with the elderly, and understanding comes with long life.
JOB	12	13	지혜와 권능이 하나님께 있고 모략과 명철도 그에게 속하였나니	With him is wisdom and strength, he hath counsel and understanding.	Wisdom and strength belong to God; counsel and understanding are His.
JOB	12	14	그가 헐으신즉 다시 세울 수 없고 사람을 가두신즉 놓지 못하느니라	Behold, he breaketh down, and it cannot be built again: he shutteth up a man, and there can be no opening.	What He tears down cannot be rebuilt; the man He imprisons cannot be released.
JOB	12	15	그가 물을 그치게 하신즉 곧 마르고 물을 내신즉 곧 땅을 뒤집나니	Behold, he withholdeth the waters, and they dry up: also he sendeth them out, and they overturn the earth.	If He holds back the waters, they dry up, and if He releases them, they overwhelm the land.
JOB	12	16	능력과 지혜가 그에게 있고 속은 자와 속이는 자가 다 그에게 속하였으므로	With him is strength and wisdom: the deceived and the deceiver are his.	True wisdom and power belong to Him. The deceived and the deceiver are His.
JOB	12	17	모사를 벌거벗겨 끌어가시며 재판장으로 어리석은 자가 되게 하시며	He leadeth counsellors away spoiled, and maketh the judges fools.	He leads counselors away barefoot and makes fools of judges.
JOB	12	18	열왕의 맨 것을 풀어 그들의 허리를 동이시며	He looseth the bond of kings, and girdeth their loins with a girdle.	He loosens the bonds placed by kings and fastens a belt around their waists.
JOB	12	19	제사장들을 벌거벗겨 끌어 가시고 권력이 있는 자를 넘어뜨리시며	He leadeth princes away spoiled, and overthroweth the mighty.	He leads priests away barefoot and overthrows the established.
JOB	12	20	충성된 자의 말을 없이 하시며 늙은 자의 지식을 빼앗으시며	He removeth away the speech of the trusty, and taketh away the understanding of the aged.	He deprives the trusted of speech and takes away the discernment of elders.
JOB	12	21	방백들에게 멸시를 쏟으시며 강한 자의 띠를 푸시며	He poureth contempt upon princes, and weakeneth the strength of the mighty.	He pours out contempt on nobles and disarms the mighty.
JOB	12	22	어두운 가운데서 은밀한 것을 드러내시며 죽음의 그늘을 광명한데로 나오게 하시며	He discovereth deep things out of darkness, and bringeth out to light the shadow of death.	He reveals the deep things of darkness and brings deep shadows into light.
JOB	12	23	만국을 커지게도 하시고 다시 멸하기도 하시며 열국으로 광대하게도 하시고 다시 사로잡히게도 하시며	He increaseth the nations, and destroyeth them: he enlargeth the nations, and straiteneth them again.	He makes nations great and destroys them; He enlarges nations, then disperses them.
JOB	12	24	만민의 두목들의 총명을 빼앗으시고 그들을 길 없는 거친 들로 유리하게 하시며	He taketh away the heart of the chief of the people of the earth, and causeth them to wander in a wilderness where there is no way.	He deprives the earth’s leaders of reason and makes them wander in a trackless wasteland.
JOB	12	25	빛 없이 캄캄한 데를 더듬게 하시며 취한 사람 같이 비틀거리게 하시느니라	They grope in the dark without light, and he maketh them to stagger like a drunken man.	They grope in the darkness without light; He makes them stagger like drunkards.
JOB	13	1	나의 눈이 이것을 다 보았고 나의 귀가 이것을 듣고 통달하였느니라	Lo, mine eye hath seen all this, mine ear hath heard and understood it.	“Indeed, my eyes have seen all this; my ears have heard and understood.
JOB	13	2	너희 아는 것을 나도 아노니 너희만 못한 내가 아니니라	What ye know, the same do I know also: I am not inferior unto you.	What you know, I also know; I am not inferior to you.
JOB	13	3	참으로 나는 전능자에게 말씀하려 하며 하나님과 변론하려 하노라	Surely I would speak to the Almighty, and I desire to reason with God.	Yet I desire to speak to the Almighty and argue my case before God.
JOB	13	4	너희는 거짓말을 지어내는 자요 다 쓸데 없는 의원이니라	But ye are forgers of lies, ye are all physicians of no value.	You, however, smear with lies; you are all worthless physicians.
JOB	13	5	너희가 잠잠하고 잠잠하기를 원하노라 이것이 너희의 지혜일 것이니라	O that ye would altogether hold your peace! and it should be your wisdom.	If only you would remain silent; for that would be your wisdom!
JOB	13	6	너희는 나의 변론을 들으며 내 입술의 변명을 들어 보라	Hear now my reasoning, and hearken to the pleadings of my lips.	Hear now my argument, and listen to the plea of my lips.
JOB	13	7	너희가 하나님을 위하여 불의를 말하려느냐 그를 위하어 궤휼을 말하려느냐	Will ye speak wickedly for God? and talk deceitfully for him?	Will you speak wickedly on God’s behalf or speak deceitfully for Him?
JOB	13	8	너희가 하나님의 낯을 좇으려느냐 그를 위하여 쟁론하려느냐	Will ye accept his person? will ye contend for God?	Would you show Him partiality or argue in His defense?
JOB	13	9	하나님이 너희를 감찰하시면 좋겠느냐 너희가 사람을 속임 같이 그를 속이려느냐	Is it good that he should search you out? or as one man mocketh another, do ye so mock him?	Would it be well when He examined you? Could you deceive Him like a man?
JOB	13	10	만일 가만히 낯을 좇을진대 그가 정녕 너희를 책망하시리니	He will surely reprove you, if ye do secretly accept persons.	Surely He would rebuke you if you secretly showed partiality.
JOB	13	11	그 존귀가 너희를 두렵게 하지 않겠으며 그 위엄이 너희에게 임하지 않겠느냐	Shall not his excellency make you afraid? and his dread fall upon you?	Would His majesty not terrify you? Would the dread of Him not fall upon you?
JOB	13	12	너희 격언은 재 같은 속담이요 너희의 방어하는 것은 토성이니라	Your remembrances are like unto ashes, your bodies to bodies of clay.	Your maxims are proverbs of ashes; your defenses are defenses of clay.
JOB	13	13	너희는 잠잠하고 나를 버려두어 말하게 하라 무슨 일이 임하든지 내가 당하리라	Hold your peace, let me alone, that I may speak, and let come on me what will.	Be silent, and I will speak. Then let come to me what may.
JOB	13	14	내가 어찌하여 내 살을 내 이로 물고 내 생명을 내 손에 두겠느냐	Wherefore do I take my flesh in my teeth, and put my life in mine hand?	Why do I put myself at risk and take my life in my own hands?
JOB	13	15	그가 나를 죽이시리니 내가 소망이 없노라 그러나 그의 앞에서 내 행위를 변백하리라	Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him: but I will maintain mine own ways before him.	Though He slay me, I will hope in Him. I will still defend my ways to His face.
JOB	13	16	사곡한 자는 그의 앞에 이르지 못하나니 이것이 나의 구원이 되리라	He also shall be my salvation: for an hypocrite shall not come before him.	Moreover, this will be my salvation, for no godless man can appear before Him.
JOB	13	17	너희는 들으라 내 말을 들으라 나의 설명을 너희 귀에 담을지니라	Hear diligently my speech, and my declaration with your ears.	Listen carefully to my words; let my declaration ring in your ears.
JOB	13	18	보라 내가 내 사정을 진술하였거니와 내가 스스로 의로운 줄 아노라	Behold now, I have ordered my cause; I know that I shall be justified.	Behold, now that I have prepared my case, I know that I will be vindicated.
JOB	13	19	나와 변론할 자가 누구이랴 그러면 내가 잠잠하고 기운이 끊어지리라	Who is he that will plead with me? for now, if I hold my tongue, I shall give up the ghost.	Can anyone indict me? If so, I will be silent and die.
JOB	13	20	오직 내게 이 두 가지 일을 행하지 마옵소서 그리하시면 내가 주의 얼굴을 피하여 숨지 아니하오리니	Only do not two things unto me: then will I not hide myself from thee.	Only grant these two things to me, so that I need not hide from You:
JOB	13	21	곧 주의 손을 내게 대지 마옵시며 주의 위엄으로 나를 두렵게 마옵실 것이니이다	Withdraw thine hand far from me: and let not thy dread make me afraid.	Withdraw Your hand from me, and do not let Your terror frighten me.
JOB	13	22	그리하시고 주는 나를 부르소서 내가 대답하리이다 혹 나로 말씀하게 하옵시고 주는 내게 대답하옵소서	Then call thou, and I will answer: or let me speak, and answer thou me.	Then call me, and I will answer, or let me speak, and You can reply.
JOB	13	23	나의 불법과 죄가 얼마나 많으니이까 나의 허물과 죄를 내게 알게 하옵소서	How many are mine iniquities and sins? make me to know my transgression and my sin.	How many are my iniquities and sins? Reveal to me my transgression and sin.
JOB	13	24	주께서 어찌하여 얼굴을 가리우시고 나를 주의 대적으로 여기시나이까	Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and holdest me for thine enemy?	Why do You hide Your face and consider me as Your enemy?
JOB	13	25	주께서 어찌하여 날리는 낙엽을 놀래시며 마른 검불을 따르시나이까	Wilt thou break a leaf driven to and fro? and wilt thou pursue the dry stubble?	Would You frighten a windblown leaf? Would You chase after dry chaff?
JOB	13	26	주께서 나를 대적하사 괴로운 일들을 기록하시며 나로 나의 어렸을 때에 지은 죄를 받게 하시오며	For thou writest bitter things against me, and makest me to possess the iniquities of my youth.	For You record bitter accusations against me and bequeath to me the iniquities of my youth.
JOB	13	27	내 발을 착고에 채우시며 나의 모든 길을 살피사 내 발자취를 한정하시나이다	Thou puttest my feet also in the stocks, and lookest narrowly unto all my paths; thou settest a print upon the heels of my feet.	You put my feet in the stocks and stand watch over all my paths; You set a limit for the soles of my feet.
JOB	13	28	나는 썩은 물건의 후패함 같으며 좀먹은 의복 같으니이다	And he, as a rotten thing, consumeth, as a garment that is moth eaten.	So man wastes away like something rotten, like a moth-eaten garment.
JOB	14	1	여인에게서 난 사람은 사는 날이 적고 괴로움이 가득하며	Man that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble.	“Man, who is born of woman, is short of days and full of trouble.
JOB	14	2	그 발생함이 꽃과 같아서 쇠하여지고 그림자 같이 신속하여서 머물지 아니하거늘	He cometh forth like a flower, and is cut down: he fleeth also as a shadow, and continueth not.	Like a flower, he comes forth, then withers away; like a fleeting shadow, he does not endure.
JOB	14	3	이와 같은 자를 주께서 눈을 들어 살피시나이까 나를 주의 앞으로 이끌어서 심문하시나이까	And dost thou open thine eyes upon such an one, and bringest me into judgment with thee?	Do You open Your eyes to one like this? Will You bring him into judgment before You?
JOB	14	4	누가 깨끗한 것을 더러운 것 가운데서 낼 수 있으리이까 하나도 없나이다	Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one.	Who can bring out clean from unclean? No one!
JOB	14	5	그 날을 정하셨고 그 달 수도 주께 있으므로 그 제한을 정하여 넘어가지 못하게 하셨사온즉	Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months are with thee, thou hast appointed his bounds that he cannot pass;	Since his days are determined and the number of his months is with You, and since You have set limits that he cannot exceed,
JOB	14	6	그에게서 눈을 돌이켜 그로 쉬게 하사 품꾼 같이 그 날을 마치게 하옵소서	Turn from him, that he may rest, till he shall accomplish, as an hireling, his day.	look away from him and let him rest, so he can enjoy his day as a hired hand.
JOB	14	7	나무는 소망이 있나니 찍힐지라도 다시 움이 나서 연한 가지가 끊이지 아니하며	For there is hope of a tree, if it be cut down, that it will sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof will not cease.	For there is hope for a tree: If it is cut down, it will sprout again, and its tender shoots will not fail.
JOB	14	8	그 뿌리가 땅에서 늙고 줄기가 흙에서 죽을지라도	Though the root thereof wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof die in the ground;	If its roots grow old in the ground and its stump dies in the soil,
JOB	14	9	물 기운에 움이 돋고 가지가 발하여 새로 심은 것과 같거니와	Yet through the scent of water it will bud, and bring forth boughs like a plant.	at the scent of water it will bud and put forth twigs like a sapling.
JOB	14	10	사람은 죽으면 소멸되나니 그 기운이 끊어진즉 그가 어디 있느뇨	But man dieth, and wasteth away: yea, man giveth up the ghost, and where is he?	But a man dies and is laid low; he breathes his last, and where is he?
JOB	14	11	물이 바다에서 줄어지고 하수가 잦아서 마름 같이	As the waters fail from the sea, and the flood decayeth and drieth up:	As water disappears from the sea and a river becomes parched and dry,
JOB	14	12	사람이 누우면 다시 일어나지 못하고 하늘이 없어지기까지 눈을 뜨지 못하며 잠을 깨지 못하느니라	So man lieth down, and riseth not: till the heavens be no more, they shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep.	so a man lies down and does not rise. Until the heavens are no more, he will not be awakened or roused from sleep.
JOB	14	13	주는 나를 음부에 감추시며 주의 진노가 쉴 때까지 나를 숨기시고 나를 위하여 기한을 정하시고 나를 기억하옵소서	O that thou wouldest hide me in the grave, that thou wouldest keep me secret, until thy wrath be past, that thou wouldest appoint me a set time, and remember me!	If only You would hide me in Sheol and conceal me until Your anger has passed! If only You would appoint a time for me and then remember me!
JOB	14	14	사람이 죽으면 어찌 다시 살리이까 나는 나의 싸우는 모든 날 동안을 참고 놓이기를 기다렸겠나이다	If a man die, shall he live again? all the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change come.	When a man dies, will he live again? All the days of my hard service I will wait, until my renewal comes.
JOB	14	15	주께서는 나를 부르셨겠고 나는 대답하였겠나이다 주께서는 주의 손으로 지으신 것을 아껴 보셨겠나이다	Thou shalt call, and I will answer thee: thou wilt have a desire to the work of thine hands.	You will call, and I will answer; You will desire the work of Your hands.
JOB	14	16	그러하온데 이제 주께서 나의 걸음을 세시오니 나의 죄를 살피지 아니하시나이까	For now thou numberest my steps: dost thou not watch over my sin?	For then You would count my steps, but would not keep track of my sin.
JOB	14	17	내 허물을 주머니에 봉하시고 내 죄악을 싸매시나이다	My transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sewest up mine iniquity.	My transgression would be sealed in a bag, and You would cover over my iniquity.
JOB	14	18	무너지는 산은 정녕 흩어지고 바위는 그 자리에서 옮겨가고	And surely the mountain falling cometh to nought, and the rock is removed out of his place.	But as a mountain erodes and crumbles and a rock is dislodged from its place,
JOB	14	19	물은 돌을 닳게 하고 넘치는 물은 땅의 티끌을 씻어 버리나이다 이와 같이 주께서는 사람의 소망을 끊으시나이다	The waters wear the stones: thou washest away the things which grow out of the dust of the earth; and thou destroyest the hope of man.	as water wears away the stones and torrents wash away the soil, so You destroy a man’s hope.
JOB	14	20	주께서 사람을 영영히 이기셔서 떠나게 하시며 그의 얼굴 빛을 변하게 하시고 쫓아 보내시오니	Thou prevailest for ever against him, and he passeth: thou changest his countenance, and sendest him away.	You forever overpower him, and he passes on; You change his countenance and send him away.
JOB	14	21	그 아들이 존귀하나 그가 알지 못하며 비천하나 그가 깨닫지 못하나이다	His sons come to honour, and he knoweth it not; and they are brought low, but he perceiveth it not of them.	If his sons receive honor, he does not know it; if they are brought low, he is unaware.
JOB	14	22	오직 자기의 살이 아프고 자기의 마음이 슬플 뿐이니이다	But his flesh upon him shall have pain, and his soul within him shall mourn.	He feels only the pain of his own body and mourns only for himself.”
JOB	15	1	데만 사람 엘리바스가 대답하여 가로되	Then answered Eliphaz the Temanite, and said,	Then Eliphaz the Temanite replied:
JOB	15	2	지혜로운 자가 어찌 헛된 지식으로 대답하겠느냐 어찌 동풍으로 그 품에 채우겠느냐	Should a wise man utter vain knowledge, and fill his belly with the east wind?	“Does a wise man answer with empty counsel or fill his belly with the hot east wind?
JOB	15	3	어찌 유조치 아니한 이야기, 무익한 말로 변론하겠느냐	Should he reason with unprofitable talk? or with speeches wherewith he can do no good?	Should he argue with useless words or speeches that serve no purpose?
JOB	15	4	참으로 네가 하나님 경외하는 일을 폐하여 하나님 앞에 묵도하기를 그치게 하는구나	Yea, thou castest off fear, and restrainest prayer before God.	But you even undermine the fear of God and hinder meditation before Him.
JOB	15	5	네 죄악이 네 입을 가르치나니 네가 간사한 자의 혀를 택하였구나	For thy mouth uttereth thine iniquity, and thou choosest the tongue of the crafty.	For your iniquity instructs your mouth, and you choose the language of the crafty.
JOB	15	6	너를 정죄한 것은 내가 아니요 네 입이라 네 입술이 너를 쳐서 증거하느니라	Thine own mouth condemneth thee, and not I: yea, thine own lips testify against thee.	Your own mouth, not mine, condemns you; your own lips testify against you.
JOB	15	7	네가 제일 처음 난 사람이냐 산들이 있기 전에 네가 출생하였느냐	Art thou the first man that was born? or wast thou made before the hills?	Were you the first man ever born? Were you brought forth before the hills?
JOB	15	8	하나님의 모의를 네가 들었느냐 지혜를 홀로 가졌느냐	Hast thou heard the secret of God? and dost thou restrain wisdom to thyself?	Do you listen in on the council of God or limit wisdom to yourself?
JOB	15	9	너의 아는 것이 무엇이기로 우리가 알지 못하겠느냐 너의 깨달은 것이 무엇이기로 우리에게는 없겠느냐	What knowest thou, that we know not? what understandest thou, which is not in us?	What do you know that we do not? What do you understand that is not clear to us?
JOB	15	10	우리 중에는 머리가 세기도 하고 연로하기도 하여 네 부친보다 나이 많은 자가 있느니라	With us are both the grayheaded and very aged men, much elder than thy father.	Both the gray-haired and the aged are on our side— men much older than your father.
JOB	15	11	하나님의 위로와 네게 온유하게 하시는 말씀을 네가 어찌 작다 하느냐	Are the consolations of God small with thee? is there any secret thing with thee?	Are the consolations of God not enough for you, even words spoken gently to you?
JOB	15	12	어찌하여 네가 마음에 끌리며 네 눈을 번쩍여	Why doth thine heart carry thee away? and what do thy eyes wink at,	Why has your heart carried you away, and why do your eyes flash,
JOB	15	13	네 영으로 하나님을 반대하고 네 입으로 말들을 내느냐	That thou turnest thy spirit against God, and lettest such words go out of thy mouth?	as you turn your spirit against God and pour such words from your mouth?
JOB	15	14	사람이 무엇이관대 깨끗하겠느냐 여인에게서 난 자가 무엇이관대 의롭겠느냐	What is man, that he should be clean? and he which is born of a woman, that he should be righteous?	What is man, that he should be pure, or one born of woman, that he should be righteous?
JOB	15	15	하나님은 그 거룩한 자들을 믿지 아니하시나니 하늘이라도 그의 보시기에 부정하거든	Behold, he putteth no trust in his saints; yea, the heavens are not clean in his sight.	If God puts no trust in His holy ones, if even the heavens are not pure in His eyes,
JOB	15	16	하물며 악을 짓기를 물 마심 같이 하는 가증하고 부패한 사람이겠느냐	How much more abominable and filthy is man, which drinketh iniquity like water?	how much less man, who is vile and corrupt, who drinks injustice like water?
JOB	15	17	내가 네게 보이리니 나를 들으라 내가 본 것을 설명하리라	I will shew thee, hear me; and that which I have seen I will declare;	Listen to me and I will inform you. I will describe what I have seen,
JOB	15	18	이는 곧 지혜로운 자들이 그 열조에게서 받아 숨기지 아니하고 전하여 온 것이라	Which wise men have told from their fathers, and have not hid it:	what was declared by wise men and was not concealed from their fathers,
JOB	15	19	이 땅은 그들에게만 주셨으므로 외인은 그들 중에 왕래하지 못하였었느니라	Unto whom alone the earth was given, and no stranger passed among them.	to whom alone the land was given when no foreigner passed among them.
JOB	15	20	그 말에 이르기를 악인은 그 일평생에 고통을 당하며 강포자의 햇수는 작정되었으므로	The wicked man travaileth with pain all his days, and the number of years is hidden to the oppressor.	A wicked man writhes in pain all his days; only a few years are reserved for the ruthless.
JOB	15	21	그 귀에는 놀라운 소리가 들리고 그 형통할 때에 멸망시키는 자가 그에게 임하리니	A dreadful sound is in his ears: in prosperity the destroyer shall come upon him.	Sounds of terror fill his ears; in his prosperity the destroyer attacks him.
JOB	15	22	그가 어두운 데서 나오기를 바라지 못하고 칼날의 기다림이 되느니라	He believeth not that he shall return out of darkness, and he is waited for of the sword.	He despairs of his return from darkness; he is marked for the sword.
JOB	15	23	그는 유리하며 식물을 구하여 이르기를 어디 있느냐 하며 흑암한 날이 가까운 줄을 스스로 아느니라	He wandereth abroad for bread, saying, Where is it? he knoweth that the day of darkness is ready at his hand.	He wanders about as food for vultures; he knows the day of darkness is at hand.
JOB	15	24	환난과 고통이 그를 두렵게 하며 싸움을 준비한 왕처럼 그를 쳐서 이기리니	Trouble and anguish shall make him afraid; they shall prevail against him, as a king ready to the battle.	Distress and anguish terrify him, overwhelming him like a king poised to attack.
JOB	15	25	이는 그 손을 들어 하나님을 대적하며 교만하여 전능자를 배반함이니라	For he stretcheth out his hand against God, and strengtheneth himself against the Almighty.	For he has stretched out his hand against God and has vaunted himself against the Almighty,
JOB	15	26	그는 목을 굳게 하고 두터운 방패로 하나님을 치려고 달려가나니	He runneth upon him, even on his neck, upon the thick bosses of his bucklers:	rushing headlong at Him with a thick, studded shield.
JOB	15	27	그 얼굴에는 살이 찌고 허리에는 기름이 엉기었고	Because he covereth his face with his fatness, and maketh collops of fat on his flanks.	Though his face is covered with fat and his waistline bulges with flesh,
JOB	15	28	그는 황무한 성읍, 사람이 살지 아니하는 집, 돌 무더기가 될 곳에 거하였음이니라	And he dwelleth in desolate cities, and in houses which no man inhabiteth, which are ready to become heaps.	he will dwell in ruined cities, in abandoned houses destined to become rubble.
JOB	15	29	그는 부요하지 못하고 재산이 항상 있지 못하며 그 산업이 땅에서 증식하지 못할 것이며	He shall not be rich, neither shall his substance continue, neither shall he prolong the perfection thereof upon the earth.	He will no longer be rich; his wealth will not endure. His possessions will not overspread the land.
JOB	15	30	흑암한 데를 떠나지 못하리니 불꽃이 그 가지를 말릴 것이라 하나님의 입김에 그가 떠나리라	He shall not depart out of darkness; the flame shall dry up his branches, and by the breath of his mouth shall he go away.	He will not escape from the darkness; the flame will wither his shoots, and the breath of God’s mouth will carry him away.
JOB	15	31	그는 스스로 속아 허망한 것을 믿지 말 것은 허망한 것이 그의 보응이 될 것임이라	Let not him that is deceived trust in vanity: for vanity shall be his recompence.	Let him not deceive himself with trust in emptiness, for emptiness will be his reward.
JOB	15	32	그의 날이 이르기 전에 그 일이 이룰 것인즉 그 가지가 푸르지 못하리니	It shall be accomplished before his time, and his branch shall not be green.	It will be paid in full before his time, and his branch will not flourish.
JOB	15	33	포도열매가 익기 전에 떨어짐 같고 감람 꽃이 곧 떨어짐 같으리라	He shall shake off his unripe grape as the vine, and shall cast off his flower as the olive.	He will be like a vine stripped of its unripe grapes, like an olive tree that sheds its blossoms.
JOB	15	34	사곡한 무리는 결실이 없고 뇌물을 받는 자의 장막은 불탈 것이라	For the congregation of hypocrites shall be desolate, and fire shall consume the tabernacles of bribery.	For the company of the godless will be barren, and fire will consume the tents of bribery.
JOB	15	35	그들은 악한 생각을 배고 불의를 낳으며 마음에 궤휼을 예비한다 하였느니라	They conceive mischief, and bring forth vanity, and their belly prepareth deceit.	They conceive trouble and give birth to evil; their womb is pregnant with deceit.”
JOB	16	1	욥이 대답하여 가로되	Then Job answered and said,	Then Job answered:
JOB	16	2	이런 말은 내가 많이 들었나니 너희는 다 번뇌케 하는 안위자로구나	I have heard many such things: miserable comforters are ye all.	“I have heard many things like these; miserable comforters are you all.
JOB	16	3	허망한 말이 어찌 끝이 있으랴 네가 무엇에 격동되어 이같이 대답하는고	Shall vain words have an end? or what emboldeneth thee that thou answerest?	Is there no end to your long-winded speeches? What provokes you to continue testifying?
JOB	16	4	나도 너희처럼 말할 수 있나니 가령 너희 마음이 내 마음 자리에 있다 하자 나도 말을 지어 너희를 치며 너희를 향하여 머리를 흔들 수 있느니라	I also could speak as ye do: if your soul were in my soul’s stead, I could heap up words against you, and shake mine head at you.	I could also speak like you if you were in my place; I could heap up words against you and shake my head at you.
JOB	16	5	그래도 입으로 너희를 강하게 하며 입술의 위로로 너희의 근심을 풀었으리라	But I would strengthen you with my mouth, and the moving of my lips should asswage your grief.	But I would encourage you with my mouth, and the consolation of my lips would bring relief.
JOB	16	6	내가 말하여도 내 근심이 풀리지 아니하나니 잠잠한들 어찌 평안하랴	Though I speak, my grief is not asswaged: and though I forbear, what am I eased?	Even if I speak, my pain is not relieved, and if I hold back, how will it go away?
JOB	16	7	이제 주께서 나를 곤고케 하시고 나의 무리를 패괴케 하셨나이다	But now he hath made me weary: thou hast made desolate all my company.	Surely He has now exhausted me; You have devastated all my family.
JOB	16	8	주께서 나를 시들게 하셨으니 이는 나를 향하여 증거를 삼으심이라 나의 파리한 모양이 일어나서 대면하여 나의 죄를 증거하나이다	And thou hast filled me with wrinkles, which is a witness against me: and my leanness rising up in me beareth witness to my face.	You have bound me, and it has become a witness; my frailty rises up and testifies against me.
JOB	16	9	그는 진노하사 나를 찢고 군박하시며 나를 향하여 이를 갈고 대적이 되어 뾰족한 눈으로 나를 보시고	He teareth me in his wrath, who hateth me: he gnasheth upon me with his teeth; mine enemy sharpeneth his eyes upon me.	His anger has torn me and opposed me; He gnashes His teeth at me. My adversary pierces me with His eyes.
JOB	16	10	무리들은 나를 향하여 입을 벌리며 나를 천대하여 뺨을 치며 함께 모여 나를 대적하는구나	They have gaped upon me with their mouth; they have smitten me upon the cheek reproachfully; they have gathered themselves together against me.	They open their mouths against me and strike my cheeks with contempt; they join together against me.
JOB	16	11	하나님이 나를 경건치 않은 자에게 붙이시며 악인의 손에 던지셨구나	God hath delivered me to the ungodly, and turned me over into the hands of the wicked.	God has delivered me to unjust men; He has thrown me to the clutches of the wicked.
JOB	16	12	내가 평안하더니 그가 나를 꺾으시며 내 목을 잡아던져 나를 부숴뜨리시며 나를 세워 과녁을 삼으시고	I was at ease, but he hath broken me asunder: he hath also taken me by my neck, and shaken me to pieces, and set me up for his mark.	I was at ease, but He shattered me; He seized me by the neck and crushed me. He has set me up as His target;
JOB	16	13	그 살로 나를 사방으로 쏘아 인정 없이 내 허리를 뚫고 내 쓸개로 땅에 흘러나오게 하시는구나	His archers compass me round about, he cleaveth my reins asunder, and doth not spare; he poureth out my gall upon the ground.	His archers surround me. He pierces my kidneys without mercy and spills my gall on the ground.
JOB	16	14	그가 나를 꺾고 다시 꺾고 용사 같이 내게 달려드시니	He breaketh me with breach upon breach, he runneth upon me like a giant.	He breaks me with wound upon wound; He rushes me like a mighty warrior.
JOB	16	15	내가 굵은 베를 꿰어매어 내 피부에 덮고 내 뿔을 티끌에 더럽혔구나	I have sewed sackcloth upon my skin, and defiled my horn in the dust.	I have sewn sackcloth over my skin; I have buried my horn in the dust.
JOB	16	16	내 얼굴은 울음으로 붉었고 내 눈꺼풀에는 죽음의 그늘이 있구나	My face is foul with weeping, and on my eyelids is the shadow of death;	My face is red with weeping, and deep shadows ring my eyes;
JOB	16	17	그러나 내 손에는 포학이 없고 나의 기도는 정결하니라	Not for any injustice in mine hands: also my prayer is pure.	yet my hands are free of violence and my prayer is pure.
JOB	16	18	땅아 내 피를 가리우지 말라 나의 부르짖음으로 쉴 곳이 없게 되기를 원하노라	O earth, cover not thou my blood, and let my cry have no place.	O earth, do not cover my blood; may my cry for help never be laid to rest.
JOB	16	19	지금 나의 증인이 하늘에 계시고 나의 보인이 높은 데 계시니라	Also now, behold, my witness is in heaven, and my record is on high.	Even now my witness is in heaven, and my advocate is on high.
JOB	16	20	나의 친구는 나를 조롱하나 내 눈은 하나님을 향하여 눈물을 흘리고	My friends scorn me: but mine eye poureth out tears unto God.	My friends are my scoffers as my eyes pour out tears to God.
JOB	16	21	사람과 하나님 사이에와 인자와 그 이웃 사이에 변백하시기를 원하노니	O that one might plead for a man with God, as a man pleadeth for his neighbour!	Oh, that a man might plead with God as he pleads with his neighbor!
JOB	16	22	수 년이 지나면 나는 돌아오지 못할 길로 갈 것임이니라	When a few years are come, then I shall go the way whence I shall not return.	For when only a few years are past I will go the way of no return.
JOB	17	1	나의 기운이 쇠하였으며 나의 날이 다하였고 무덤이 나를 위하여 예비되었구나	My breath is corrupt, my days are extinct, the graves are ready for me.	“My spirit is broken; my days are extinguished; the grave awaits me.
JOB	17	2	나를 조롱하는 자들이 오히려 나와 함께 있으므로 내 눈이 그들의 격동함을 항상 보는구나	Are there not mockers with me? and doth not mine eye continue in their provocation?	Surely mockers surround me, and my eyes must gaze at their rebellion.
JOB	17	3	청컨대 보증물을 주시고 친히 나의 보주가 되옵소서 주 외에 나로 더불어 손을 칠 자가 누구리이까	Lay down now, put me in a surety with thee; who is he that will strike hands with me?	Give me, I pray, the pledge You demand. Who else will be my guarantor?
JOB	17	4	주께서 그들의 마음을 가리워 깨닫지 못하게 하셨사오니 그들을 높이지 아니하시리이다	For thou hast hid their heart from understanding: therefore shalt thou not exalt them.	You have closed their minds to understanding; therefore You will not exalt them.
JOB	17	5	친구를 지적하여 해를 받게 한 자의 자식들은 눈이 멀지니라	He that speaketh flattery to his friends, even the eyes of his children shall fail.	If a man denounces his friends for a price, the eyes of his children will fail.
JOB	17	6	하나님이 나로 백성의 이야기거리가 되게 하시니 그들이 내 얼굴에 침을 뱉는구나	He hath made me also a byword of the people; and aforetime I was as a tabret.	He has made me a byword among the people, a man in whose face they spit.
JOB	17	7	내 눈은 근심으로 하여 어두워지고 나의 온 지체는 그림자 같구나	Mine eye also is dim by reason of sorrow, and all my members are as a shadow.	My eyes have grown dim with grief, and my whole body is but a shadow.
JOB	17	8	정직자는 이를 인하여 놀라고 무죄자는 사곡한 자를 인하여 분을 내나니	Upright men shall be astonied at this, and the innocent shall stir up himself against the hypocrite.	The upright are appalled at this, and the innocent are stirred against the godless.
JOB	17	9	그러므로 의인은 그 길을 독실히 행하고 손이 깨끗한 자는 점점 힘을 얻느니라	The righteous also shall hold on his way, and he that hath clean hands shall be stronger and stronger.	Yet a righteous one holds to his way, and the one with clean hands grows stronger.
JOB	17	10	너희는 다 다시 올지니라 내가 너희 중에서 지혜자를 찾을 수 없느니라	But as for you all, do ye return, and come now: for I cannot find one wise man among you.	But come back and try again, all of you. For I will not find a wise man among you.
JOB	17	11	나의 날이 지나갔고 내 경영, 내 마음의 사모하는 바가 다 끊어졌구나	My days are past, my purposes are broken off, even the thoughts of my heart.	My days have passed; my plans are broken off— even the desires of my heart.
JOB	17	12	그들은 밤으로 낮을 삼고 빛이 어두운데 가깝다 하는구나	They change the night into day: the light is short because of darkness.	They have turned night into day, making light seem near in the face of darkness.
JOB	17	13	내 소망이 음부로 내 집을 삼음에 있어서 침상을 흑암에 베풀고	If I wait, the grave is mine house: I have made my bed in the darkness.	If I look for Sheol as my home, if I spread out my bed in darkness,
JOB	17	14	무덤더러 너는 내 아비라, 구더기더러 너는 내 어미, 내 자매라 할진대	I have said to corruption, Thou art my father: to the worm, Thou art my mother, and my sister.	and say to corruption, ‘You are my father,’ and to the worm, ‘My mother,’ or ‘My sister,’
JOB	17	15	나의 소망이 어디 있으며 나의 소망을 누가 보겠느냐	And where is now my hope? as for my hope, who shall see it?	where then is my hope? Who can see any hope for me?
JOB	17	16	흙 속에서 쉴 때에는 소망이 음부 문으로 내려갈 뿐이니라	They shall go down to the bars of the pit, when our rest together is in the dust.	Will it go down to the gates of Sheol? Will we go down together into the dust?”
JOB	18	1	수아 사람 빌닷이 대답하여 가로되	Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said,	Then Bildad the Shuhite replied:
JOB	18	2	너희가 어느 때까지 말을 찾겠느냐 깨달으라 그 후에야 우리가 말하리라	How long will it be ere ye make an end of words? mark, and afterwards we will speak.	“How long until you end these speeches? Show some sense, and then we can talk.
JOB	18	3	어찌하여 우리를 짐승으로 여기며 부정하게 보느냐	Wherefore are we counted as beasts, and reputed vile in your sight?	Why are we regarded as cattle, as stupid in your sight?
JOB	18	4	너 분하여 스스로 찢는 자야 너를 위하여 땅이 버림을 당하겠느냐 바위가 그 자리에서 옮기겠느냐	He teareth himself in his anger: shall the earth be forsaken for thee? and shall the rock be removed out of his place?	You who tear yourself in anger— should the earth be forsaken on your account, or the rocks be moved from their place?
JOB	18	5	악인의 빛은 꺼지고 그 불꽃은 빛나지 않을 것이요	Yea, the light of the wicked shall be put out, and the spark of his fire shall not shine.	Indeed, the lamp of the wicked is extinguished; the flame of his fire does not glow.
JOB	18	6	그 장막 안의 빛은 어두워지고 그 위의 등불은 꺼질 것이요	The light shall be dark in his tabernacle, and his candle shall be put out with him.	The light in his tent grows dark, and the lamp beside him goes out.
JOB	18	7	그 강한 걸음이 곤하여지고 그 베푼 꾀에 스스로 빠질 것이니	The steps of his strength shall be straitened, and his own counsel shall cast him down.	His vigorous stride is shortened, and his own schemes trip him up.
JOB	18	8	이는 그 발이 스스로 그물에 들어가고 얽는 줄을 밟음이며	For he is cast into a net by his own feet, and he walketh upon a snare.	For his own feet lead him into a net, and he wanders into its mesh.
JOB	18	9	그 발뒤꿈치는 창애에 치이고 그 몸은 올무에 얽힐 것이며	The gin shall take him by the heel, and the robber shall prevail against him.	A trap seizes his heel; a snare grips him.
JOB	18	10	그를 동일 줄이 땅에 숨겼고 그를 빠뜨릴 함정이 길에 베풀렸으며	The snare is laid for him in the ground, and a trap for him in the way.	A noose is hidden in the ground, and a trap lies in his path.
JOB	18	11	무서운 것이 사방에서 그를 놀래고 그 뒤를 쫓아 올 것이며	Terrors shall make him afraid on every side, and shall drive him to his feet.	Terrors frighten him on every side and harass his every step.
JOB	18	12	그 힘은 기근을 인하여 쇠하고 그 곁에는 재앙이 기다릴 것이며	His strength shall be hungerbitten, and destruction shall be ready at his side.	His strength is depleted, and calamity is ready at his side.
JOB	18	13	그의 백체가 먹히리니 곧 사망의 장자가 그 지체를 먹을 것이며	It shall devour the strength of his skin: even the firstborn of death shall devour his strength.	It devours patches of his skin; the firstborn of death devours his limbs.
JOB	18	14	그가 그 의뢰하던 장막에서 뽑혀서 무서움의 왕에게로 잡혀가고	His confidence shall be rooted out of his tabernacle, and it shall bring him to the king of terrors.	He is torn from the shelter of his tent and is marched off to the king of terrors.
JOB	18	15	그에게 속하지 않은 자가 그 장막에 거하리니 유황이 그 처소에 뿌려질 것이며	It shall dwell in his tabernacle, because it is none of his: brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation.	Fire resides in his tent; burning sulfur rains down on his dwelling.
JOB	18	16	아래서는 그 뿌리가 마르고 위에서는 그 가지가 찍힐 것이며	His roots shall be dried up beneath, and above shall his branch be cut off.	The roots beneath him dry up, and the branches above him wither away.
JOB	18	17	그의 기념이 땅에서 없어지고 그의 이름이 거리에서 전함이 없을 것이며	His remembrance shall perish from the earth, and he shall have no name in the street.	The memory of him perishes from the earth, and he has no name in the land.
JOB	18	18	그는 광명 중에서 흑암으로 몰려 들어가며 세상에서 쫓겨날 것이며	He shall be driven from light into darkness, and chased out of the world.	He is driven from light into darkness and is chased from the inhabited world.
JOB	18	19	그는 그 백성 가운데서 아들도 없고 손자도 없을 것이며 그의 거하던 곳에는 한 사람도 남은 자가 없을 것이라	He shall neither have son nor nephew among his people, nor any remaining in his dwellings.	He has no offspring or posterity among his people, no survivor where he once lived.
JOB	18	20	그의 날을 인하여 뒤에 오는 자가 앞선 자의 두려워 하던 것 같이 놀라리라	They that come after him shall be astonied at his day, as they that went before were affrighted.	Those in the west are appalled at his fate, while those in the east tremble in horror.
JOB	18	21	불의한 자의 집이 이러하고 하나님을 알지 못하는 자의 처소도 그러하니라	Surely such are the dwellings of the wicked, and this is the place of him that knoweth not God.	Surely such is the dwelling of the wicked and the place of one who does not know God.”
JOB	19	1	욥이 대답하여 가로되	Then Job answered and said,	Then Job answered:
JOB	19	2	너희가 내 마음을 번뇌케 하며 말로 꺾기를 어느 때까지 하겠느냐	How long will ye vex my soul, and break me in pieces with words?	“How long will you torment me and crush me with your words?
JOB	19	3	너희가 열 번이나 나를 꾸짖고 나를 학대하고도 부끄러워 아니하는구나	These ten times have ye reproached me: ye are not ashamed that ye make yourselves strange to me.	Ten times now you have reproached me; you shamelessly mistreat me.
JOB	19	4	내가 과연 허물이 있었다 할지라도 그 허물이 내게만 있는 것이니	And be it indeed that I have erred, mine error remaineth with myself.	Even if I have truly gone astray, my error concerns me alone.
JOB	19	5	너희가 참으로 나를 향하여 자긍하며 내게 수치될 행위가 있다고 증명하려면 하려니와	If indeed ye will magnify yourselves against me, and plead against me my reproach:	If indeed you would exalt yourselves above me and use my disgrace against me,
JOB	19	6	하나님이 나를 굴하게 하시고 자기 그물로 나를 에워싸신 줄은 알아야 할지니라	Know now that God hath overthrown me, and hath compassed me with his net.	then understand that it is God who has wronged me and drawn His net around me.
JOB	19	7	내가 포학을 당한다고 부르짖으나 응답이 없고 간구할지라도 신원함이 없구나	Behold, I cry out of wrong, but I am not heard: I cry aloud, but there is no judgment.	Though I cry out, ‘Violence!’ I get no response; though I call for help, there is no justice.
JOB	19	8	그가 내 길을 막아 지나지 못하게 하시고 내 첩경에 흑암을 두셨으며	He hath fenced up my way that I cannot pass, and he hath set darkness in my paths.	He has blocked my way so I cannot pass; He has veiled my paths with darkness.
JOB	19	9	나의 영광을 벗기시며 나의 면류관을 머리에서 취하시고	He hath stripped me of my glory, and taken the crown from my head.	He has stripped me of my honor and removed the crown from my head.
JOB	19	10	사면으로 나를 헐으시니 나는 죽었구나 내 소망을 나무 뽑듯 뽑으시고	He hath destroyed me on every side, and I am gone: and mine hope hath he removed like a tree.	He tears me down on every side until I am gone; He uproots my hope like a tree.
JOB	19	11	나를 향하여 진노하시고 원수 같이 보시는구나	He hath also kindled his wrath against me, and he counteth me unto him as one of his enemies.	His anger burns against me, and He counts me among His enemies.
JOB	19	12	그 군대가 일제히 나아와서 길을 수축하고 나를 치며 내 장막을 둘러 진 쳤구나	His troops come together, and raise up their way against me, and encamp round about my tabernacle.	His troops advance together; they construct a ramp against me and encamp around my tent.
JOB	19	13	나의 형제들로 나를 멀리 떠나게 하시니 나를 아는 모든 사람이 내게 외인이 되었구나	He hath put my brethren far from me, and mine acquaintance are verily estranged from me.	He has removed my brothers from me; my acquaintances have abandoned me.
JOB	19	14	내 친척은 나를 버리며 가까운 친구는 나를 잊었구나	My kinsfolk have failed, and my familiar friends have forgotten me.	My kinsmen have failed me, and my friends have forgotten me.
JOB	19	15	내 집에 우거한 자와 내 계집종들은 나를 외인으로 여기니 내가 그들 앞에서 타국 사람이 되었구나	They that dwell in mine house, and my maids, count me for a stranger: I am an alien in their sight.	My guests and maidservants count me as a stranger; I am a foreigner in their sight.
JOB	19	16	내가 내 종을 불러도 대답지 아니하니 내 입으로 그에게 청하여야 하겠구나	I called my servant, and he gave me no answer; I intreated him with my mouth.	I call for my servant, but he does not answer, though I implore him with my own mouth.
JOB	19	17	내 숨을 내 아내가 싫어하며 내 동포들도 혐의하는구나	My breath is strange to my wife, though I intreated for the children’s sake of mine own body.	My breath is repulsive to my wife, and I am loathsome to my own family.
JOB	19	18	어린 아이들이라도 나를 업신여기고 내가 일어나면 나를 조롱하는구나	Yea, young children despised me; I arose, and they spake against me.	Even little boys scorn me; when I appear, they deride me.
JOB	19	19	나의 가까운 친구들이 나를 미워하며 나의 사랑하는 사람들이 돌이켜 나의 대적이 되었구나	All my inward friends abhorred me: and they whom I loved are turned against me.	All my best friends despise me, and those I love have turned against me.
JOB	19	20	내 피부와 살이 뼈에 붙었고 남은 것은 겨우 잇꺼풀뿐이로구나	My bone cleaveth to my skin and to my flesh, and I am escaped with the skin of my teeth.	My skin and flesh cling to my bones; I have escaped by the skin of my teeth.
JOB	19	21	나의 친구야 너희는 나를 불쌍히 여기라 나를 불쌍히 여기라 하나님의 손이 나를 치셨구나	Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends; for the hand of God hath touched me.	Have pity on me, my friends, have pity, for the hand of God has struck me.
JOB	19	22	너희가 어찌하여 하나님처럼 나를 핍박하느냐 내 살을 먹고도 부족하냐	Why do ye persecute me as God, and are not satisfied with my flesh?	Why do you persecute me as God does? Will you never get enough of my flesh?
JOB	19	23	나의 말이 곧 기록되었으면, 책에 씌어졌으면,	Oh that my words were now written! oh that they were printed in a book!	I wish that my words were recorded and inscribed in a book,
JOB	19	24	철필과 연으로 영영히 돌에 새겨졌으면 좋겠노라	That they were graven with an iron pen and lead in the rock for ever!	by an iron stylus on lead, or chiseled in stone forever.
JOB	19	25	내가 알기에는 나의 구속자가 살아 계시니 후일에 그가 땅 위에 서실 것이라	For I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth:	But I know that my Redeemer lives, and in the end He will stand upon the earth.
JOB	19	26	나의 이 가죽, 이것이 썩은 후에 내가 육체 밖에서 하나님을 보리라	And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God:	Even after my skin has been destroyed, yet in my flesh I will see God.
JOB	19	27	내가 친히 그를 보리니 내 눈으로 그를 보기를 외인처럼 하지 않을 것이라 내 마음이 초급하구나	Whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another; though my reins be consumed within me.	I will see Him for myself; my eyes will behold Him, and not as a stranger. How my heart yearns within me!
JOB	19	28	너희가 만일 이르기를 우리가 그를 어떻게 칠꼬 하며 또 이르기를 일의 뿌리가 그에게 있다 할진대	But ye should say, Why persecute we him, seeing the root of the matter is found in me?	If you say, ‘Let us persecute him, since the root of the matter lies with him,’
JOB	19	29	너희는 칼을 두려워할지니라 분노는 칼의 형벌을 부르나니 너희가 심판이 있는 줄을 알게 되리라	Be ye afraid of the sword: for wrath bringeth the punishments of the sword, that ye may know there is a judgment.	then you should fear the sword yourselves, because wrath brings punishment by the sword, so that you may know there is a judgment.”
JOB	20	1	나아마 사람 소발이 대답하여 가로되	Then answered Zophar the Naamathite, and said,	Then Zophar the Naamathite replied:
JOB	20	2	그러므로 내 생각이 내게 대답하나니 이는 내 중심이 초급함이니라	Therefore do my thoughts cause me to answer, and for this I make haste.	“So my anxious thoughts compel me to answer, because of the turmoil within me.
JOB	20	3	내가 나를 부끄럽게 하는 책망을 들었으므로 나의 슬기로운 마음이 내게 대답하는구나	I have heard the check of my reproach, and the spirit of my understanding causeth me to answer.	I have heard a rebuke that insults me, and my understanding prompts a reply.
JOB	20	4	네가 알지 못하느냐 예로부터 사람이 이 세상에 있어 옴으로	Knowest thou not this of old, since man was placed upon earth,	Do you not know that from antiquity, since man was placed on the earth,
JOB	20	5	악인의 이기는 자랑도 잠시요 사곡한 자의 즐거움도 잠간이니라	That the triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the hypocrite but for a moment?	the triumph of the wicked has been brief and the joy of the godless momentary?
JOB	20	6	그 높기가 하늘에 닿고 그 머리가 구름에 미칠지라도	Though his excellency mount up to the heavens, and his head reach unto the clouds;	Though his arrogance reaches the heavens, and his head touches the clouds,
JOB	20	7	자기의 똥처럼 영원히 망할 것이라 그를 본 자가 이르기를 그가 어디 있느냐 하리라	Yet he shall perish for ever like his own dung: they which have seen him shall say, Where is he?	he will perish forever, like his own dung; those who had seen him will ask, ‘Where is he?’
JOB	20	8	그는 꿈 같이 지나가니 다시 찾을 수 없을 것이요 밤에 보이던 환상처럼 쫓겨가리니	He shall fly away as a dream, and shall not be found: yea, he shall be chased away as a vision of the night.	He will fly away like a dream, never to be found; he will be chased away like a vision in the night.
JOB	20	9	그를 본 눈이 다시 그를 보지 못할 것이요 그의 처소도 다시 그를 보지 못할 것이며	The eye also which saw him shall see him no more; neither shall his place any more behold him.	The eye that saw him will see him no more, and his place will no longer behold him.
JOB	20	10	그의 자녀들이 가난한 자에게 은혜를 구하겠고 그도 얻은 재물을 자기 손으로 도로 줄 것이며	His children shall seek to please the poor, and his hands shall restore their goods.	His sons will seek the favor of the poor, for his own hands must return his wealth.
JOB	20	11	그 기골이 청년 같이 강장하나 그 기세가 그와 함께 흙에 누우리라	His bones are full of the sin of his youth, which shall lie down with him in the dust.	The youthful vigor that fills his bones will lie down with him in the dust.
JOB	20	12	그는 비록 악을 달게 여겨 혀 밑에 감추며	Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide it under his tongue;	Though evil is sweet in his mouth and he conceals it under his tongue,
JOB	20	13	아껴서 버리지 아니하고 입에 물고 있을지라도	Though he spare it, and forsake it not; but keep it still within his mouth:	though he cannot bear to let it go and keeps it in his mouth,
JOB	20	14	그 식물이 창자 속에서 변하며 뱃속에서 독사의 쓸개가 되느니라	Yet his meat in his bowels is turned, it is the gall of asps within him.	yet in his stomach his food sours into the venom of cobras within him.
JOB	20	15	그가 재물을 삼켰을지라도 다시 토할 것은 하나님이 그 배에서 도로 나오게 하심이니	He hath swallowed down riches, and he shall vomit them up again: God shall cast them out of his belly.	He swallows wealth but vomits it out; God will force it from his stomach.
JOB	20	16	그가 독사의 독을 빨며 뱀의 혀에 죽을 것이라	He shall suck the poison of asps: the viper’s tongue shall slay him.	He will suck the poison of cobras; the fangs of a viper will kill him.
JOB	20	17	그는 강 곧 꿀과 엉긴 젖이 흐르는 강을 보지 못할 것이요	He shall not see the rivers, the floods, the brooks of honey and butter.	He will not enjoy the streams, the rivers flowing with honey and cream.
JOB	20	18	수고하여 얻은 것을 도로 주고 삼키지 못할 것이며 매매하여 얻은 재물로 즐거워하지 못하리니	That which he laboured for shall he restore, and shall not swallow it down: according to his substance shall the restitution be, and he shall not rejoice therein.	He must return the fruit of his labor without consuming it; he cannot enjoy the profits of his trading.
JOB	20	19	이는 그가 가난한 자를 학대하고 버림이요 자기가 세우지 않은 집을 빼앗음이니라	Because he hath oppressed and hath forsaken the poor; because he hath violently taken away an house which he builded not;	For he has oppressed and forsaken the poor; he has seized houses he did not build.
JOB	20	20	그는 마음에 족한 줄을 알지 못하니 그 기뻐하는 것을 하나도 보존치 못하겠고	Surely he shall not feel quietness in his belly, he shall not save of that which he desired.	Because his appetite is never satisfied, he cannot escape with his treasure.
JOB	20	21	남긴 것이 없이 몰수히 먹으니 그런즉 그 형통함이 오래지 못할 것이라	There shall none of his meat be left; therefore shall no man look for his goods.	Nothing is left for him to consume; thus his prosperity will not endure.
JOB	20	22	풍족할 때에도 곤액이 이르리니 모든 고통하는 자의 손이 그에게 닿으리라	In the fulness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits: every hand of the wicked shall come upon him.	In the midst of his plenty, he will be distressed; the full force of misery will come upon him.
JOB	20	23	그가 배를 불리려 할 때에 하나님이 맹렬한 진노를 내리시리니 밥 먹을 때에 그의 위에 비 같이 쏟으시리라	When he is about to fill his belly, God shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain it upon him while he is eating.	When he has filled his stomach, God will vent His fury upon him, raining it down on him as he eats.
JOB	20	24	그가 철병기를 피할 때에는 놋활이 쏘아 꿸 것이요	He shall flee from the iron weapon, and the bow of steel shall strike him through.	Though he flees from an iron weapon, a bronze-tipped arrow will pierce him.
JOB	20	25	몸에서 그 살을 빼어 낸즉 번쩍번쩍하는 촉이 그 쓸개에서 나오고 큰 두려움이 그에게 임하느니라	It is drawn, and cometh out of the body; yea, the glittering sword cometh out of his gall: terrors are upon him.	It is drawn out of his back, the gleaming point from his liver. Terrors come over him.
JOB	20	26	모든 캄캄한 것이 그의 보물을 위하여 쌓이고 사람이 피우지 않은 불이 그를 멸하며 그 장막에 남은 것을 사르리라	All darkness shall be hid in his secret places: a fire not blown shall consume him; it shall go ill with him that is left in his tabernacle.	Total darkness is reserved for his treasures. A fire unfanned will consume him and devour what is left in his tent.
JOB	20	27	하늘이 그의 죄악을 드러낼 것이요 땅이 일어나 그를 칠 것인즉	The heaven shall reveal his iniquity; and the earth shall rise up against him.	The heavens will expose his iniquity, and the earth will rise up against him.
JOB	20	28	그 가산이 패하여 하나님의 진노하시는 날에 흘러가리니	The increase of his house shall depart, and his goods shall flow away in the day of his wrath.	The possessions of his house will be removed, flowing away on the day of God’s wrath.
JOB	20	29	이는 악인이 하나님께 받을 분깃이요 하나님이 그에게 정하신 산업이니라	This is the portion of a wicked man from God, and the heritage appointed unto him by God.	This is the wicked man’s portion from God, the inheritance God has appointed him.”
JOB	21	1	욥이 대답하여 가로되	But Job answered and said,	Then Job answered:
JOB	21	2	너희는 내 말을 자세히 들으라 이것이 너희의 위로가 될 것이니라	Hear diligently my speech, and let this be your consolations.	“Listen carefully to my words; let this be your consolation to me.
JOB	21	3	나를 용납하여 말하게 하라 내가 말한 후에 또 조롱할지니라	Suffer me that I may speak; and after that I have spoken, mock on.	Bear with me while I speak; then, after I have spoken, you may go on mocking.
JOB	21	4	나의 원망이 사람을 향하여 하는 것이냐 내가 어찌 초급하지 아니하겠느냐	As for me, is my complaint to man? and if it were so, why should not my spirit be troubled?	Is my complaint against a man? Then why should I not be impatient?
JOB	21	5	너희는 나를 보아라, 놀라라, 손으로 입을 가리우라	Mark me, and be astonished, and lay your hand upon your mouth.	Look at me and be appalled; put your hand over your mouth.
JOB	21	6	내가 추억하기만 하여도 답답하고 두려움이 내 몸을 잡는구나	Even when I remember I am afraid, and trembling taketh hold on my flesh.	When I remember, terror takes hold, and my body trembles in horror.
JOB	21	7	어찌하여 악인이 살고 수를 누리고 세력이 강하냐	Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea, are mighty in power?	Why do the wicked live on, growing old and increasing in power?
JOB	21	8	씨가 그들의 앞에서 그들과 함께 굳게 서고 자손이 그들의 목전에서 그러하구나	Their seed is established in their sight with them, and their offspring before their eyes.	Their descendants are established around them, and their offspring before their eyes.
JOB	21	9	그 집이 평안하여 두려움이 없고 하나님의 매가 그 위에 임하지 아니하며	Their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon them.	Their homes are safe from fear; no rod of punishment from God is upon them.
JOB	21	10	그 수소는 영락없이 새끼를 배게 하고 그 암소는 새끼를 낳고 낙태하지 않는구나	Their bull gendereth, and faileth not; their cow calveth, and casteth not her calf.	Their bulls breed without fail; their cows bear calves and do not miscarry.
JOB	21	11	그들은 아이들을 내어보냄이 양떼 같고 그 자녀들은 춤추는구나	They send forth their little ones like a flock, and their children dance.	They send forth their little ones like a flock; their children skip about,
JOB	21	12	그들이 소고와 수금으로 노래하고 피리 불어 즐기며	They take the timbrel and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the organ.	singing to the tambourine and lyre and making merry at the sound of the flute.
JOB	21	13	그 날을 형통하게 지내다가 경각간에 음부에 내려가느니라	They spend their days in wealth, and in a moment go down to the grave.	They spend their days in prosperity and go down to Sheol in peace.
JOB	21	14	그러할지라도 그들은 하나님께 말하기를 우리를 떠나소서 우리가 주의 도리 알기를 즐겨하지 아니하나이다	Therefore they say unto God, Depart from us; for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.	Yet they say to God: ‘Leave us alone! For we have no desire to know Your ways.
JOB	21	15	전능자가 누구기에 우리가 섬기며 우리가 그에게 기도한들 무슨 이익을 얻으랴 하는구나	What is the Almighty, that we should serve him? and what profit should we have, if we pray unto him?	Who is the Almighty, that we should serve Him, and what would we gain if we pray to Him?’
JOB	21	16	그들의 복록이 그들의 손으로 말미암은 것이 아니니라 악인의 계획은 나와 판이하니라	Lo, their good is not in their hand: the counsel of the wicked is far from me.	Still, their prosperity is not in their own hands, so I stay far from the counsel of the wicked.
JOB	21	17	악인의 등불이 꺼짐이나 재앙이 그들에게 임함이나 하나님이 진노하사 그들을 곤고케 하심이나	How oft is the candle of the wicked put out! and how oft cometh their destruction upon them! God distributeth sorrows in his anger.	How often is the lamp of the wicked put out? Does disaster come upon them? Does God, in His anger, apportion destruction?
JOB	21	18	그들이 바람 앞에 검불 같이, 폭풍에 불려가는 겨 같이 되는 일이 몇 번이나 있었느냐	They are as stubble before the wind, and as chaff that the storm carrieth away.	Are they like straw before the wind, like chaff swept away by a storm?
JOB	21	19	하나님이 그의 죄악을 쌓아 두셨다가 그 자손에게 갚으신다 하거니와 그 몸에 갚으셔서 그로 깨닫게 하셔야 할 것이라	God layeth up his iniquity for his children: he rewardeth him, and he shall know it.	It is said that God lays up one’s punishment for his children. Let God repay the man himself, so he will know it.
JOB	21	20	자기의 멸망을 자기의 눈으로 보게 하시며 전능자의 진노를 마시게 하셔야 할 것이니라	His eyes shall see his destruction, and he shall drink of the wrath of the Almighty.	Let his eyes see his own destruction; let him drink for himself the wrath of the Almighty.
JOB	21	21	그의 달 수가 진하면 자기 집에 대하여 무슨 관계가 있겠느냐	For what pleasure hath he in his house after him, when the number of his months is cut off in the midst?	For what does he care about his household after him, when the number of his months has run out?
JOB	21	22	그러나 하나님은 높은 자들을 심판하시나니 누가 능히 하나님께 지식을 가르치겠느냐	Shall any teach God knowledge? seeing he judgeth those that are high.	Can anyone teach knowledge to God, since He judges those on high?
JOB	21	23	어떤 사람은 죽도록 기운이 충실하여 평강하며 안일하고	One dieth in his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet.	One man dies full of vigor, completely secure and at ease.
JOB	21	24	그 그릇에는 젖이 가득하며 그 골수는 윤택하였고	His breasts are full of milk, and his bones are moistened with marrow.	His body is well nourished, and his bones are rich with marrow.
JOB	21	25	어떤 사람은 죽도록 마음에 고통하고 복을 맛보지 못하였어도	And another dieth in the bitterness of his soul, and never eateth with pleasure.	Yet another man dies in the bitterness of his soul, having never tasted prosperity.
JOB	21	26	이 둘이 일반으로 흙 속에 눕고 그 위에 구더기가 덮이는구나	They shall lie down alike in the dust, and the worms shall cover them.	But together they lie down in the dust, and worms cover them both.
JOB	21	27	내가 너희의 생각을 알고 너희가 나를 해하려는 궤휼도 아노라	Behold, I know your thoughts, and the devices which ye wrongfully imagine against me.	Behold, I know your thoughts full well, the schemes by which you would wrong me.
JOB	21	28	너희의 말이 왕후의 집이 어디 있으며 악인의 거하던 장막이 어디 있느뇨 하는구나	For ye say, Where is the house of the prince? and where are the dwelling places of the wicked?	For you say, ‘Where now is the nobleman’s house, and where are the tents in which the wicked dwell?’
JOB	21	29	너희가 길 가는 사람들에게 묻지 아니하였느냐 그들의 증거를 알지 못하느냐	Have ye not asked them that go by the way? and do ye not know their tokens,	Have you never asked those who travel the roads? Do you not accept their reports?
JOB	21	30	악인은 남기워서 멸망의 날을 기다리움이 되고 멸망의 날을 맞으러 끌려 나감이 된다 하느니라	That the wicked is reserved to the day of destruction? they shall be brought forth to the day of wrath.	Indeed, the evil man is spared from the day of calamity, delivered from the day of wrath.
JOB	21	31	누가 능히 그의 행위를 면박하며 누가 능히 그의 소위를 보응하랴마는	Who shall declare his way to his face? and who shall repay him what he hath done?	Who denounces his behavior to his face? Who repays him for what he has done?
JOB	21	32	그를 무덤으로 메어 가고 사람이 그 무덤을 지키리라	Yet shall he be brought to the grave, and shall remain in the tomb.	He is carried to the grave, and watch is kept over his tomb.
JOB	21	33	그는 골짜기의 흙덩이를 달게 여기고 그 앞선 자가 무수함 같이 모든 사람이 그 뒤를 좇으리라	The clods of the valley shall be sweet unto him, and every man shall draw after him, as there are innumerable before him.	The clods of the valley are sweet to him; everyone follows behind him, and those before him are without number.
JOB	21	34	이러한즉 너희의 위로가 헛되지 아니하냐 너희의 대답은 거짓뿐이니라	How then comfort ye me in vain, seeing in your answers there remaineth falsehood?	So how can you comfort me with empty words? For your answers remain full of falsehood.”
JOB	22	1	데만 사람 엘리바스가 대답하여 가로되	Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said,	Then Eliphaz the Temanite replied:
JOB	22	2	사람이 어찌 하나님께 유익하게 하겠느냐 지혜로운 자도 스스로 유익할 따름이니라	Can a man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable unto himself?	“Can a man be of use to God? Can even a wise man benefit Him?
JOB	22	3	네가 의로운들 전능자에게 무슨 기쁨이 있겠으며 네 행위가 온전한들 그에게 무슨 이익이 있겠느냐	Is it any pleasure to the Almighty, that thou art righteous? or is it gain to him, that thou makest thy ways perfect?	Does it delight the Almighty that you are righteous? Does He profit if your ways are blameless?
JOB	22	4	하나님이 너를 책망하시며 너를 심문하심이 너의 경외함을 인함이냐	Will he reprove thee for fear of thee? will he enter with thee into judgment?	Is it for your reverence that He rebukes you and enters into judgment against you?
JOB	22	5	네 악이 크지 아니하냐 네 죄악이 극하니라	Is not thy wickedness great? and thine iniquities infinite?	Is not your wickedness great? Are not your iniquities endless?
JOB	22	6	까닭 없이 형제의 물건을 볼모 잡으며 헐벗은 자의 의복을 벗기며	For thou hast taken a pledge from thy brother for nought, and stripped the naked of their clothing.	For you needlessly demanded security from your brothers and deprived the naked of their clothing.
JOB	22	7	갈한 자에게 물을 마시우지 아니하며 주린 자에게 식물을 주지 아니하였구나	Thou hast not given water to the weary to drink, and thou hast withholden bread from the hungry.	You gave no water to the weary and withheld food from the famished,
JOB	22	8	권세 있는 자가 토지를 얻고 존귀한 자가 거기서 사는구나	But as for the mighty man, he had the earth; and the honourable man dwelt in it.	while the land belonged to a mighty man, and a man of honor lived on it.
JOB	22	9	네가 과부를 공수로 돌아가게 하며 고아의 팔을 꺾는구나	Thou hast sent widows away empty, and the arms of the fatherless have been broken.	You sent widows away empty-handed, and the strength of the fatherless was crushed.
JOB	22	10	이러므로 올무들이 너를 둘러 있고 두려움이 홀연히 너를 침범하며	Therefore snares are round about thee, and sudden fear troubleth thee;	Therefore snares surround you, and sudden peril terrifies you;
JOB	22	11	어두움이 너로 보지 못하게 하고 창수가 너를 덮느니라	Or darkness, that thou canst not see; and abundance of waters cover thee.	it is so dark you cannot see, and a flood of water covers you.
JOB	22	12	하나님이 높은 하늘에 계시지 아니하냐 보라 별의 높음이 얼마나 높은가	Is not God in the height of heaven? and behold the height of the stars, how high they are!	Is not God as high as the heavens? Look at the highest stars, how lofty they are!
JOB	22	13	그러나 네 말은 하나님이 무엇을 아시며 흑암 중에서 어찌 심판하실 수 있으랴	And thou sayest, How doth God know? can he judge through the dark cloud?	Yet you say: ‘What does God know? Does He judge through thick darkness?
JOB	22	14	빽빽한 구름이 그를 가리운즉 그가 보지 못하시고 궁창으로 걸어다니실 뿐이라 하는구나	Thick clouds are a covering to him, that he seeth not; and he walketh in the circuit of heaven.	Thick clouds veil Him so He does not see us as He traverses the vault of heaven.’
JOB	22	15	네가 악인의 밟던 옛적 길을 지키려느냐	Hast thou marked the old way which wicked men have trodden?	Will you stay on the ancient path that wicked men have trod?
JOB	22	16	그들은 때가 이르기 전에 끊어버리웠고 그 터는 하수로 인하여 함몰되었느니라	Which were cut down out of time, whose foundation was overflown with a flood:	They were snatched away before their time, and their foundations were swept away by a flood.
JOB	22	17	그들이 하나님께 말하기를 우리를 떠나소서 하며 또 말하기를 전능자가 우리를 위하여 무엇을 하실 수 있으랴 하였으나	Which said unto God, Depart from us: and what can the Almighty do for them?	They said to God, ‘Depart from us. What can the Almighty do to us?’
JOB	22	18	하나님이 좋은 것으로 그 집에 채우셨느니라 악인의 계획은 나와 판이하니라	Yet he filled their houses with good things: but the counsel of the wicked is far from me.	But it was He who filled their houses with good things; so I stay far from the counsel of the wicked.
JOB	22	19	의인은 보고 기뻐하고 무죄자는 그들을 비웃기를	The righteous see it, and are glad: and the innocent laugh them to scorn.	The righteous see it and are glad; the innocent mock them:
JOB	22	20	우리의 대적이 끊어졌고 그 남은 것이 불사른 바 되었다 하느니라	Whereas our substance is not cut down, but the remnant of them the fire consumeth.	‘Surely our foes are destroyed, and fire has consumed their excess.’
JOB	22	21	너는 하나님과 화목하고 평안하라 그리하면 복이 네게 임하리라	Acquaint now thyself with him, and be at peace: thereby good shall come unto thee.	Reconcile now and be at peace with Him; thereby good will come to you.
JOB	22	22	청컨대 너는 그 입에서 교훈을 받고 그 말씀을 네 마음에 두라	Receive, I pray thee, the law from his mouth, and lay up his words in thine heart.	Receive instruction from His mouth, and lay up His words in your heart.
JOB	22	23	네가 만일 전능자에게로 돌아가고 또 네 장막에서 불의를 멀리 버리면 다시 흥하리라	If thou return to the Almighty, thou shalt be built up, thou shalt put away iniquity far from thy tabernacles.	If you return to the Almighty, you will be restored. If you remove injustice from your tents
JOB	22	24	네 보배를 진토에 버리고 오빌의 금을 강 가의 돌에 버리라	Then shalt thou lay up gold as dust, and the gold of Ophir as the stones of the brooks.	and consign your gold to the dust and the gold of Ophir to the stones of the ravines,
JOB	22	25	그리하면 전능자가 네 보배가 되시며 네게 귀한 은이 되시리니	Yea, the Almighty shall be thy defence, and thou shalt have plenty of silver.	then the Almighty will be your gold and the finest silver for you.
JOB	22	26	이에 네가 전능자를 기뻐하여 하나님께로 얼굴을 들 것이라	For then shalt thou have thy delight in the Almighty, and shalt lift up thy face unto God.	Surely then you will delight in the Almighty and lift up your face to God.
JOB	22	27	너는 그에게 기도하겠고 그는 들으실 것이며 너의 서원한 것을 네가 갚으리라	Thou shalt make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee, and thou shalt pay thy vows.	You will pray to Him, and He will hear you, and you will fulfill your vows.
JOB	22	28	네가 무엇을 경영하면 이루어질 것이요 네 길에 빛이 비취리라	Thou shalt also decree a thing, and it shall be established unto thee: and the light shall shine upon thy ways.	Your decisions will be carried out, and light will shine on your ways.
JOB	22	29	네가 낮춤을 받거든 높아지리라고 말하라 하나님은 겸손한 자를 구원하시느니라	When men are cast down, then thou shalt say, There is lifting up; and he shall save the humble person.	When men are brought low and you say, ‘Lift them up!’ then He will save the lowly.
JOB	22	30	무죄한 자가 아니라도 건지시리니 네 손이 깨끗함을 인하여 그런 자가 건지심을 입으리라	He shall deliver the island of the innocent: and it is delivered by the pureness of thine hands.	He will deliver even one who is not innocent, rescuing him through the cleanness of your hands.”
JOB	23	1	욥이 대답하여 가로되	Then Job answered and said,	Then Job answered:
JOB	23	2	내가 오늘도 혹독히 원망하니 받는 재앙이 탄식보다 중함이니라	Even to day is my complaint bitter: my stroke is heavier than my groaning.	“Even today my complaint is bitter. His hand is heavy despite my groaning.
JOB	23	3	내가 어찌하면 하나님 발견할 곳을 알꼬 그리하면 그 보좌 앞에 나아가서	Oh that I knew where I might find him! that I might come even to his seat!	If only I knew where to find Him, so that I could go to His seat.
JOB	23	4	그 앞에서 호소하며 변백할 말을 입에 채우고	I would order my cause before him, and fill my mouth with arguments.	I would plead my case before Him and fill my mouth with arguments.
JOB	23	5	내게 대답하시는 말씀을 내가 알고 내게 이르시는 것을 내가 깨달으리라	I would know the words which he would answer me, and understand what he would say unto me.	I would learn how He would answer, and consider what He would say.
JOB	23	6	그가 큰 권능을 가지시고 나로 더불어 다투실까 아니라 도리어 내 말을 들으시리라	Will he plead against me with his great power? No; but he would put strength in me.	Would He contend with me in His great power? No, He would certainly take note of me.
JOB	23	7	거기서는 정직자가 그와 변론할 수 있은즉 내가 심판자에게서 영영히 벗어나리라	There the righteous might dispute with him; so should I be delivered for ever from my judge.	Then an upright man could reason with Him, and I would be delivered forever from my Judge.
JOB	23	8	그런데 내가 앞으로 가도 그가 아니 계시고 뒤로 가도 보이지 아니하며	Behold, I go forward, but he is not there; and backward, but I cannot perceive him:	If I go east, He is not there, and if I go west, I cannot find Him.
JOB	23	9	그가 왼편에서 일하시나 내가 만날 수 없고 그가 오른편으로 돌이키시나 뵈올 수 없구나	On the left hand, where he doth work, but I cannot behold him: he hideth himself on the right hand, that I cannot see him:	When He is at work in the north, I cannot behold Him; when He turns to the south, I cannot see Him.
JOB	23	10	나의 가는 길을 오직 그가 아시나니 그가 나를 단련하신 후에는 내가 정금 같이 나오리라	But he knoweth the way that I take: when he hath tried me, I shall come forth as gold.	Yet He knows the way I have taken; when He has tested me, I will come forth as gold.
JOB	23	11	내 발이 그의 걸음을 바로 따랐으며 내가 그의 길을 지켜 치우치지 아니하였고	My foot hath held his steps, his way have I kept, and not declined.	My feet have followed in His tracks; I have kept His way without turning aside.
JOB	23	12	내가 그의 입술의 명령을 어기지 아니하고 일정한 음식보다 그 입의 말씀을 귀히 여겼구나	Neither have I gone back from the commandment of his lips; I have esteemed the words of his mouth more than my necessary food.	I have not departed from the command of His lips; I have treasured the words of His mouth more than my daily bread.
JOB	23	13	그는 뜻이 일정하시니 누가 능히 돌이킬까 그 마음에 하고자 하시는 것이면 그것을 행하시나니	But he is in one mind, and who can turn him? and what his soul desireth, even that he doeth.	But He is unchangeable, and who can oppose Him? He does what He desires.
JOB	23	14	그런즉 내게 작정하신 것을 이루실 것이라 이런 일이 그에게 많이 있느니라	For he performeth the thing that is appointed for me: and many such things are with him.	For He carries out His decree against me, and He has many such plans.
JOB	23	15	그러므로 내가 그의 앞에서 떨며 이를 생각하고 그를 두려워하는구나	Therefore am I troubled at his presence: when I consider, I am afraid of him.	Therefore I am terrified in His presence; when I consider this, I fear Him.
JOB	23	16	하나님이 나로 낙심케 하시며 전능자가 나로 두렵게 하시나니	For God maketh my heart soft, and the Almighty troubleth me:	God has made my heart faint; the Almighty has terrified me.
JOB	23	17	이는 어두움으로 나를 끊지 아니하셨고 흑암으로 내 얼굴을 가리우지 아니하셨음이니라	Because I was not cut off before the darkness, neither hath he covered the darkness from my face.	Yet I am not silenced by the darkness, by the thick darkness that covers my face.
JOB	24	1	어찌하여 전능자가 시기를 정하지 아니하셨는고 어찌하여 그를 아는 자들이 그의 날을 보지 못하는고	Why, seeing times are not hidden from the Almighty, do they that know him not see his days?	“Why does the Almighty not reserve times for judgment? Why may those who know Him never see His days?
JOB	24	2	어떤 사람은 지계표를 옮기며 양떼를 빼앗아 기르며	Some remove the landmarks; they violently take away flocks, and feed thereof.	Men move boundary stones; they pasture stolen flocks.
JOB	24	3	고아의 나귀를 몰아 가며 과부의 소를 볼모 잡으며	They drive away the ass of the fatherless, they take the widow’s ox for a pledge.	They drive away the donkey of the fatherless and take the widow’s ox in pledge.
JOB	24	4	빈궁한 자를 길에서 몰아 내나니 세상에 가난한 자가 다 스스로 숨는구나	They turn the needy out of the way: the poor of the earth hide themselves together.	They push the needy off the road and force all the poor of the land into hiding.
JOB	24	5	그들은 거친 땅의 들나귀 같아서 나가서 일하며 먹을 것을 부지런히 구하니 광야가 그 자식을 위하여 그에게 식물을 내는구나	Behold, as wild asses in the desert, go they forth to their work; rising betimes for a prey: the wilderness yieldeth food for them and for their children.	Indeed, like wild donkeys in the desert, the poor go to work foraging for food; the wasteland is food for their children.
JOB	24	6	밭에서 남의 곡식을 베며 악인의 남겨 둔 포도를 따며	They reap every one his corn in the field: and they gather the vintage of the wicked.	They gather fodder in the fields and glean the vineyards of the wicked.
JOB	24	7	의복이 없어 벗은 몸으로 밤을 지내며 추위에 덮을 것이 없으며	They cause the naked to lodge without clothing, that they have no covering in the cold.	Without clothing, they spend the night naked; they have no covering against the cold.
JOB	24	8	산 중 소나기에 젖으며 가리울 것이 없어 바위를 안고 있느니라	They are wet with the showers of the mountains, and embrace the rock for want of a shelter.	Drenched by mountain rains, they huddle against the rocks for want of shelter.
JOB	24	9	어떤 사람은 고아를 어미 품에서 빼앗으며 가난한 자의 옷을 볼모 잡으므로	They pluck the fatherless from the breast, and take a pledge of the poor.	The fatherless infant is snatched from the breast; the nursing child of the poor is seized for a debt.
JOB	24	10	그들이 옷이 없어 벌거벗고 다니며 주리면서 곡식 단을 메며	They cause him to go naked without clothing, and they take away the sheaf from the hungry;	Without clothing, they wander about naked. They carry the sheaves, but still go hungry.
JOB	24	11	그 사람의 담 안에서 기름을 짜며 목말라하면서 술 틀을 밟느니라	Which make oil within their walls, and tread their winepresses, and suffer thirst.	They crush olives within their walls; they tread the winepresses, but go thirsty.
JOB	24	12	인구 많은 성 중에서 사람들이 신음하며 상한 자가 부르짖으나 하나님이 그 불의를 보지 아니하시느니라	Men groan from out of the city, and the soul of the wounded crieth out: yet God layeth not folly to them.	From the city, men groan, and the souls of the wounded cry out, yet God charges no one with wrongdoing.
JOB	24	13	또 광명을 배반하는 사람들은 이러하니 그들은 광명의 길을 알지 못하며 그 첩경에 머물지 아니하는 자라	They are of those that rebel against the light; they know not the ways thereof, nor abide in the paths thereof.	Then there are those who rebel against the light, not knowing its ways or staying on its paths.
JOB	24	14	사람을 죽이는 자는 새벽에 일어나서 가난한 자나 빈궁한 자를 죽이고 밤에는 도적 같이 되며	The murderer rising with the light killeth the poor and needy, and in the night is as a thief.	When daylight is gone, the murderer rises to kill the poor and needy; in the night he is like a thief.
JOB	24	15	간음하는 자의 눈은 저물기를 바라며 아무 눈도 나를 보지 못하리라 하고 얼굴을 변장하며	The eye also of the adulterer waiteth for the twilight, saying, No eye shall see me: and disguiseth his face.	The eye of the adulterer watches for twilight. Thinking, ‘No eye will see me,’ he covers his face.
JOB	24	16	밤에 집을 뚫는 자는 낮에는 문을 닫고 있은즉 광명을 알지 못하나니	In the dark they dig through houses, which they had marked for themselves in the daytime: they know not the light.	In the dark they dig through houses; by day they shut themselves in, never to experience the light.
JOB	24	17	그들은 다 아침을 흑암 같이 여기니 흑암의 두려움을 앎이니라	For the morning is to them even as the shadow of death: if one know them, they are in the terrors of the shadow of death.	For to them, deep darkness is their morning; surely they are friends with the terrors of darkness!
JOB	24	18	그들은 물 위에 빨리 흘러가고 그 산업은 세상에서 저주를 받나니 그들이 다시는 포도원 길로 행치 못할 것이라	He is swift as the waters; their portion is cursed in the earth: he beholdeth not the way of the vineyards.	They are but foam on the surface of the water; their portion of the land is cursed, so that no one turns toward their vineyards.
JOB	24	19	가뭄과 더위가 눈 녹은 물을 곧 말리나니 음부가 범죄자에게도 그와 같은 것인즉	Drought and heat consume the snow waters: so doth the grave those which have sinned.	As drought and heat consume the melting snow, so Sheol steals those who have sinned.
JOB	24	20	태가 그를 잊어버리고 구더기가 그를 달게 먹을 것이라 그는 기억함을 다시 얻지 못하나니 불의가 나무처럼 꺾이리라	The womb shall forget him; the worm shall feed sweetly on him; he shall be no more remembered; and wickedness shall be broken as a tree.	The womb forgets them; the worm feeds on them; they are remembered no more. So injustice is like a broken tree.
JOB	24	21	그는 잉태치 못하므로 해산치 못한 여인을 학대하며 과부를 선대치 아니하는 자니라	He evil entreateth the barren that beareth not: and doeth not good to the widow.	They prey on the barren and childless, and show no kindness to the widow.
JOB	24	22	그러나 하나님이 그 권능으로 강한 자들을 보존시키시니 살기를 바라지 못할 자도 일어나는구나	He draweth also the mighty with his power: he riseth up, and no man is sure of life.	Yet by His power, God drags away the mighty; though rising up, they have no assurance of life.
JOB	24	23	하나님이 그들을 호위하사 평안케 하시나 그 눈은 그들의 길에 있구나	Though it be given him to be in safety, whereon he resteth; yet his eyes are upon their ways.	He gives them a sense of security, but His eyes are on their ways.
JOB	24	24	그들은 높아져도 잠시간에 없어지나니 낮아져서 범인처럼 제함을 당하고 곡식 이삭 같이 베임을 입느니라	They are exalted for a little while, but are gone and brought low; they are taken out of the way as all other, and cut off as the tops of the ears of corn.	They are exalted for a moment, then they are gone; they are brought low and gathered up like all others; they are cut off like heads of grain.
JOB	24	25	가령 그렇지 않을지라도 능히 내 말을 거짓되다 지적하거나 내 말이 헛되다 변박할 자 누구랴	And if it be not so now, who will make me a liar, and make my speech nothing worth?	If this is not so, then who can prove me a liar and reduce my words to nothing?”
JOB	25	1	수아 사람 빌닷이 대답하여 가로되	Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said,	Then Bildad the Shuhite replied:
JOB	25	2	하나님은 권능과 위엄을 가지셨고 지극히 높은 곳에서 화평을 베푸시느니라	Dominion and fear are with him, he maketh peace in his high places.	“Dominion and awe belong to God; He establishes harmony in the heights of heaven.
JOB	25	3	그 군대를 어찌 계수할 수 있으랴 그 광명의 비췸을 입지 않은 자가 누구냐	Is there any number of his armies? and upon whom doth not his light arise?	Can His troops be numbered? On whom does His light not rise?
JOB	25	4	그런즉 하나님 앞에서 사람이 어찌 의롭다 하며 부녀에게서 난 자가 어찌 깨끗하다 하랴	How then can man be justified with God? or how can he be clean that is born of a woman?	How then can a man be just before God? How can one born of woman be pure?
JOB	25	5	하나님의 눈에는 달이라도 명랑치 못하고 별도 깨끗지 못하거든	Behold even to the moon, and it shineth not; yea, the stars are not pure in his sight.	If even the moon does not shine, and the stars are not pure in His sight,
JOB	25	6	하물며 벌레인 사람, 구더기인 인생이랴	How much less man, that is a worm? and the son of man, which is a worm?	how much less man, who is but a maggot, and the son of man, who is but a worm!”
JOB	26	1	욥이 대답하여 가로되	But Job answered and said,	Then Job answered:
JOB	26	2	네가 힘 없는 자를 참 잘 도왔구나 기력 없는 팔을 참 잘 구원하였구나	How hast thou helped him that is without power? how savest thou the arm that hath no strength?	“How you have helped the powerless and saved the arm that is feeble!
JOB	26	3	지혜 없는 자를 참 잘 가르쳤구나 큰 지식을 참 잘 나타내었구나	How hast thou counselled him that hath no wisdom? and how hast thou plentifully declared the thing as it is?	How you have counseled the unwise and provided fully sound insight!
JOB	26	4	네가 누구를 향하여 말을 내었느냐 뉘 신이 네게서 나왔느냐	To whom hast thou uttered words? and whose spirit came from thee?	To whom have you uttered these words? And whose spirit spoke through you?
JOB	26	5	음령들이 큰 물과 수족 밑에서 떠나니	Dead things are formed from under the waters, and the inhabitants thereof.	The dead tremble— those beneath the waters and those who dwell in them.
JOB	26	6	하나님 앞에는 음부도 드러나며 멸망의 웅덩이도 가리움이 없음이니라	Hell is naked before him, and destruction hath no covering.	Sheol is naked before God, and Abaddon has no covering.
JOB	26	7	그는 북편 하늘을 허공에 펴시며 땅을 공간에 다시며	He stretcheth out the north over the empty place, and hangeth the earth upon nothing.	He stretches out the north over empty space; He hangs the earth upon nothing.
JOB	26	8	물을 빽빽한 구름에 싸시나 그 밑의 구름이 찢어지지 아니하느니라	He bindeth up the waters in his thick clouds; and the cloud is not rent under them.	He wraps up the waters in His clouds, yet the clouds do not burst under their own weight.
JOB	26	9	그는 자기의 보좌 앞을 가리우시고 자기 구름으로 그 위에 펴시며	He holdeth back the face of his throne, and spreadeth his cloud upon it.	He covers the face of the full moon, spreading over it His cloud.
JOB	26	10	수면에 경계를 그으셨으되 빛과 어두움의 지경까지 한정을 세우셨느니라	He hath compassed the waters with bounds, until the day and night come to an end.	He has inscribed a horizon on the face of the waters at the boundary between light and darkness.
JOB	26	11	그가 꾸짖으신즉 하늘 기둥이 떨며 놀라느니라	The pillars of heaven tremble and are astonished at his reproof.	The foundations of heaven quake, astounded at His rebuke.
JOB	26	12	그는 권능으로 바다를 흉용케 하시며 지혜로 라합을 쳐서 파하시며	He divideth the sea with his power, and by his understanding he smiteth through the proud.	By His power He stirred the sea; by His understanding He shattered Rahab.
JOB	26	13	그 신으로 하늘을 단장하시고 손으로 날랜 뱀을 찌르시나니	By his spirit he hath garnished the heavens; his hand hath formed the crooked serpent.	By His breath the skies were cleared; His hand pierced the fleeing serpent.
JOB	26	14	이런 것은 그 행사의 시작점이요 우리가 그에게 대하여 들은 것도 심히 세미한 소리뿐이니라 그 큰 능력의 우뢰야 누가 능히 측량하랴	Lo, these are parts of his ways: but how little a portion is heard of him? but the thunder of his power who can understand?	Indeed, these are but the fringes of His ways; how faint is the whisper we hear of Him! Who then can understand the thunder of His power?”
JOB	27	1	욥이 또 비사를 들어 가로되	Moreover Job continued his parable, and said,	Job continued his discourse:
JOB	27	2	나의 의를 빼앗으신 하나님 나의 영혼을 괴롭게 하신 전능자의 사심을 가리켜 맹세하노니	As God liveth, who hath taken away my judgment; and the Almighty, who hath vexed my soul;	“As surely as God lives, who has deprived me of justice— the Almighty, who has embittered my soul—
JOB	27	3	(나의 생명이 아직 내 속에 완전히 있고 하나님의 기운이 오히려 내 코에 있느니라)	All the while my breath is in me, and the spirit of God is in my nostrils;	as long as my breath is still within me and the breath of God remains in my nostrils,
JOB	27	4	결코 내 입술이 불의를 말하지 아니하며 내 혀가 궤휼을 발하지 아니하리라	My lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my tongue utter deceit.	my lips will not speak wickedness, and my tongue will not utter deceit.
JOB	27	5	나는 단정코 너희를 옳다 하지 아니하겠고 죽기 전에는 나의 순전함을 버리지 않을 것이라	God forbid that I should justify you: till I die I will not remove mine integrity from me.	I will never say that you are right; I will maintain my integrity until I die.
JOB	27	6	내가 내 의를 굳게 잡고 놓지 아니하리니 일평생 내 마음이 나를 책망치 아니하리라	My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.	I will cling to my righteousness and never let go. As long as I live, my conscience will not accuse me.
JOB	27	7	나의 대적은 악인 같이 되고 일어나 나를 치는 자는 불의한 자 같이 되기를 원하노라	Let mine enemy be as the wicked, and he that riseth up against me as the unrighteous.	May my enemy be like the wicked and my opponent like the unjust.
JOB	27	8	사곡한 자가 이익을 얻었으나 하나님이 그 영혼을 취하실 때에는 무슨 소망이 있으랴	For what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he hath gained, when God taketh away his soul?	For what is the hope of the godless when he is cut off, when God takes away his life?
JOB	27	9	환난이 그에게 임할 때에 하나님이 어찌 그 부르짖음을 들으시랴	Will God hear his cry when trouble cometh upon him?	Will God hear his cry when distress comes upon him?
JOB	27	10	그가 어찌 전능자를 기뻐하겠느냐 항상 하나님께 불러 아뢰겠느냐	Will he delight himself in the Almighty? will he always call upon God?	Will he delight in the Almighty? Will he call upon God at all times?
JOB	27	11	하나님의 하시는 일을 내가 너희에게 가르칠 것이요 전능자의 뜻을 내가 숨기지 아니하리라	I will teach you by the hand of God: that which is with the Almighty will I not conceal.	I will instruct you in the power of God. I will not conceal the ways of the Almighty.
JOB	27	12	너희가 다 이것을 보았거늘 어찌하여 아주 허탄한 사람이 되었는고	Behold, all ye yourselves have seen it; why then are ye thus altogether vain?	Surely all of you have seen it for yourselves. Why then do you keep up this empty talk?
JOB	27	13	악인이 하나님께 얻을 분깃, 강포자가 전능자에게 받을 산업은 이것이라	This is the portion of a wicked man with God, and the heritage of oppressors, which they shall receive of the Almighty.	This is the wicked man’s portion from God— the heritage the ruthless receive from the Almighty.
JOB	27	14	그 자손이 번성하여도 칼을 위함이요 그 후예는 식물에 배부르지 못할 것이며	If his children be multiplied, it is for the sword: and his offspring shall not be satisfied with bread.	Though his sons are many, they are destined for the sword; and his offspring will never have enough food.
JOB	27	15	그 남은 자는 염병으로 묻히리니 그의 과부들이 울지 못할 것이며	Those that remain of him shall be buried in death: and his widows shall not weep.	His survivors will be buried by the plague, and their widows will not weep for them.
JOB	27	16	그가 비록 은을 티끌 같이 쌓고 의복을 진흙 같이 예비할지라도	Though he heap up silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay;	Though he heaps up silver like dust and piles up a wardrobe like clay,
JOB	27	17	그 예비한 것을 의인이 입을 것이요 그 은은 무죄자가 나눌 것이며	He may prepare it, but the just shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide the silver.	what he lays up, the righteous will wear, and his silver will be divided by the innocent.
JOB	27	18	그 지은 집은 좀의 집 같고 상직군의 초막 같을 것이며	He buildeth his house as a moth, and as a booth that the keeper maketh.	The house he built is like a moth’s cocoon, like a hut set up by a watchman.
JOB	27	19	부자로 누우나 그 조상에게로 돌아가지 못할 것이요 눈을 뜬즉 없어졌으리라	The rich man shall lie down, but he shall not be gathered: he openeth his eyes, and he is not.	He lies down wealthy, but will do so no more; when he opens his eyes, all is gone.
JOB	27	20	두려움이 물 같이 그를 따라 미칠 것이요 폭풍이 밤에 그를 빼앗아갈 것이며	Terrors take hold on him as waters, a tempest stealeth him away in the night.	Terrors overtake him like a flood; a tempest sweeps him away in the night.
JOB	27	21	동풍이 그를 날려 보내며 그 처소에서 몰아 내리라	The east wind carrieth him away, and he departeth: and as a storm hurleth him out of his place.	The east wind carries him away, and he is gone; it sweeps him out of his place.
JOB	27	22	하나님이 그를 아끼지 아니하시고 쏘시나니 그가 그 손에서 피하려 하여도 못할 것이라	For God shall cast upon him, and not spare: he would fain flee out of his hand.	It hurls itself against him without mercy as he flees headlong from its power.
JOB	27	23	사람들이 박장하며 비소하고 그 처소에서 몰아내리라	Men shall clap their hands at him, and shall hiss him out of his place.	It claps its hands at him and hisses him out of his place.
JOB	28	1	은은 나는 광이 있고 연단하는 금은 나는 곳이 있으며	Surely there is a vein for the silver, and a place for gold where they fine it.	“Surely there is a mine for silver and a place where gold is refined.
JOB	28	2	철은 흙에서 취하고 동은 돌에서 녹여 얻느니라	Iron is taken out of the earth, and brass is molten out of the stone.	Iron is taken from the earth, and copper is smelted from ore.
JOB	28	3	사람이 흑암을 파하고 끝까지 궁구하여 음예와 유암 중의 광석을 구하되	He setteth an end to darkness, and searcheth out all perfection: the stones of darkness, and the shadow of death.	Man puts an end to the darkness; he probes the farthest recesses for ore in deepest darkness.
JOB	28	4	사람 사는 곳에서 멀리 떠나 구멍을 깊이 뚫고 발이 땅에 닿지 않게 달려 내리니 멀리 사람과 격절되고 흔들흔들 하느니라	The flood breaketh out from the inhabitant; even the waters forgotten of the foot: they are dried up, they are gone away from men.	Far from human habitation he cuts a shaft in places forgotten by the foot of man. Far from men he dangles and sways.
JOB	28	5	지면은 식물을 내나 지하는 불로 뒤집는 것 같고	As for the earth, out of it cometh bread: and under it is turned up as it were fire.	Food may come from the earth, but from below it is transformed as by fire.
JOB	28	6	그 돌 가운데에는 남보석이 있고 사금도 있으며	The stones of it are the place of sapphires: and it hath dust of gold.	Its rocks are the source of sapphires, containing flecks of gold.
JOB	28	7	그 길은 솔개도 알지 못하고 매의 눈도 보지 못하며	There is a path which no fowl knoweth, and which the vulture’s eye hath not seen:	No bird of prey knows that path; no falcon’s eye has seen it.
JOB	28	8	위엄스러운 짐승도 밟지 못하였고 사나운 사자도 그리로 지나가지 못하였느니라	The lion’s whelps have not trodden it, nor the fierce lion passed by it.	Proud beasts have never trodden it; no lion has ever prowled over it.
JOB	28	9	사람이 굳은 바위에 손을 대고 산을 뿌리까지 무너뜨리며	He putteth forth his hand upon the rock; he overturneth the mountains by the roots.	The miner strikes the flint; he overturns mountains at their base.
JOB	28	10	돌 가운데로 도랑을 파서 각종 보물을 눈으로 발견하고	He cutteth out rivers among the rocks; and his eye seeth every precious thing.	He hews out channels in the rocks, and his eyes spot every treasure.
JOB	28	11	시냇물을 막아 스미지 않게 하고 감취었던 것을 밝은 데로 내느니라	He bindeth the floods from overflowing; and the thing that is hid bringeth he forth to light.	He stops up the sources of the streams to bring what is hidden to light.
JOB	28	12	그러나 지혜는 어디서 얻으며 명철의 곳은 어디인고	But where shall wisdom be found? and where is the place of understanding?	But where can wisdom be found, and where does understanding dwell?
JOB	28	13	그 값을 사람이 알지 못하나니 사람 사는 땅에서 찾을 수 없구나	Man knoweth not the price thereof; neither is it found in the land of the living.	No man can know its value, nor is it found in the land of the living.
JOB	28	14	깊은 물이 이르기를 내 속에 있지 아니하다 하며 바다가 이르기를 나와 함께 있지 아니하다 하느니라	The depth saith, It is not in me: and the sea saith, It is not with me.	The ocean depths say, ‘It is not in me,’ while the sea declares, ‘It is not with me.’
JOB	28	15	정금으로도 바꿀 수 없고 은을 달아도 그 값을 당치 못하리니	It cannot be gotten for gold, neither shall silver be weighed for the price thereof.	It cannot be bought with gold, nor can its price be weighed out in silver.
JOB	28	16	오빌의 금이나 귀한 수마노나 남보석으로도 그 값을 당치 못하겠고	It cannot be valued with the gold of Ophir, with the precious onyx, or the sapphire.	It cannot be valued in the gold of Ophir, in precious onyx or sapphire.
JOB	28	17	황금이나 유리라도 비교할 수 없고 정금 장식으로도 바꿀 수 없으며	The gold and the crystal cannot equal it: and the exchange of it shall not be for jewels of fine gold.	Neither gold nor crystal can compare to it, nor jewels of fine gold be exchanged for it.
JOB	28	18	산호나 수정으로도 말할 수 없나니 지혜의 값은 홍보석보다 귀하구나	No mention shall be made of coral, or of pearls: for the price of wisdom is above rubies.	Coral and quartz are unworthy of mention; the price of wisdom is beyond rubies.
JOB	28	19	구스의 황옥으로도 비교할 수 없고 순금으로도 그 값을 측량하지 못하리니	The topaz of Ethiopia shall not equal it, neither shall it be valued with pure gold.	Topaz from Cush cannot compare to it, nor can it be valued in pure gold.
JOB	28	20	그런즉 지혜는 어디서 오며 명철의 곳은 어디인고	Whence then cometh wisdom? and where is the place of understanding?	From where then does wisdom come, and where does understanding dwell?
JOB	28	21	모든 생물의 눈에 숨겨졌고 공중의 새에게 가리워졌으며	Seeing it is hid from the eyes of all living, and kept close from the fowls of the air.	It is hidden from the eyes of every living thing and concealed from the birds of the air.
JOB	28	22	멸망과 사망도 이르기를 우리가 귀로 그 소문은 들었다 하느니라	Destruction and death say, We have heard the fame thereof with our ears.	Abaddon and Death say, ‘We have heard a rumor about it.’
JOB	28	23	하나님이 그 길을 깨달으시며 있는 곳을 아시나니	God understandeth the way thereof, and he knoweth the place thereof.	But God understands its way, and He knows its place.
JOB	28	24	이는 그가 땅 끝까지 감찰하시며 온 천하를 두루 보시며	For he looketh to the ends of the earth, and seeth under the whole heaven;	For He looks to the ends of the earth and sees everything under the heavens.
JOB	28	25	바람의 경중을 정하시며 물을 되어 그 분량을 정하시며	To make the weight for the winds; and he weigheth the waters by measure.	When God fixed the weight of the wind and measured out the waters,
JOB	28	26	비를 위하여 명령하시고 우뢰의 번개를 위하여 길을 정하셨음이라	When he made a decree for the rain, and a way for the lightning of the thunder:	when He set a limit for the rain and a path for the thunderbolt,
JOB	28	27	그 때에 지혜를 보시고 선포하시며 굳게 세우시며 궁구하셨고	Then did he see it, and declare it; he prepared it, yea, and searched it out.	then He looked at wisdom and appraised it; He established it and searched it out.
JOB	28	28	또 사람에게 이르시기를 주를 경외함이 곧 지혜요 악을 떠남이 명철이라 하셨느니라	And unto man he said, Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom; and to depart from evil is understanding.	And He said to man, ‘Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to turn away from evil is understanding.’”
JOB	29	1	욥이 또 비사를 들어 가로되	Moreover Job continued his parable, and said,	And Job continued his discourse:
JOB	29	2	내가 이전 달과 하나님이 나를 보호하시던 날에 지내던 것 같이 되었으면	Oh that I were as in months past, as in the days when God preserved me;	“How I long for the months gone by, for the days when God watched over me,
JOB	29	3	그 때는 그의 등불이 내 머리에 비취었고 내가 그 광명을 힘입어 흑암에 행하였었느니라	When his candle shined upon my head, and when by his light I walked through darkness;	when His lamp shone above my head, and by His light I walked through the darkness,
JOB	29	4	나의 강장하던 날과 같이 지내었으면 그 때는 하나님의 우정이 내 장막 위에 있었으며	As I was in the days of my youth, when the secret of God was upon my tabernacle;	when I was in my prime, when the friendship of God rested on my tent,
JOB	29	5	그 때는 전능자가 오히려 나와 함께 계셨으며 나의 자녀들이 나를 둘러 있었으며	When the Almighty was yet with me, when my children were about me;	when the Almighty was still with me and my children were around me,
JOB	29	6	뻐터가 내 발자취를 씻기며 반석이 나를 위하여 기름 시내를 흘러 내었으며	When I washed my steps with butter, and the rock poured me out rivers of oil;	when my steps were bathed in cream and the rock poured out for me streams of oil!
JOB	29	7	그 때는 내가 나가서 성문에 이르기도 하며 내 자리를 거리에 베풀기도 하였었느니라	When I went out to the gate through the city, when I prepared my seat in the street!	When I went out to the city gate and took my seat in the public square,
JOB	29	8	나를 보고 소년들은 숨으며 노인들은 일어나서 서며	The young men saw me, and hid themselves: and the aged arose, and stood up.	the young men saw me and withdrew, and the old men rose to their feet.
JOB	29	9	방백들은 말을 참고 손으로 입을 가리우며	The princes refrained talking, and laid their hand on their mouth.	The princes refrained from speaking and covered their mouths with their hands.
JOB	29	10	귀인들은 소리를 금하니 그 혀가 입 천장에 붙었었느니라	The nobles held their peace, and their tongue cleaved to the roof of their mouth.	The voices of the nobles were hushed, and their tongues stuck to the roofs of their mouths.
JOB	29	11	귀가 들은즉 나를 위하여 축복하고 눈이 본즉 나를 위하여 증거하였었나니	When the ear heard me, then it blessed me; and when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me:	For those who heard me called me blessed, and those who saw me commended me,
JOB	29	12	이는 내가 부르짖는 빈민과 도와줄 자 없는 고아를 건졌음이라	Because I delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to help him.	because I rescued the poor who cried out and the fatherless who had no helper.
JOB	29	13	망하게 된 자도 나를 위하여 복을 빌었으며 과부의 마음이 나로 인하여 기뻐 노래하였었느니라	The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me: and I caused the widow’s heart to sing for joy.	The dying man blessed me, and I made the widow’s heart sing for joy.
JOB	29	14	내가 의로 옷을 삼아 입었으며 나의 공의는 도포와 면류관 같았었느니라	I put on righteousness, and it clothed me: my judgment was as a robe and a diadem.	I put on righteousness, and it clothed me; justice was my robe and my turban.
JOB	29	15	나는 소경의 눈도 되고 절뚝발이의 발도 되고	I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame.	I served as eyes to the blind and as feet to the lame.
JOB	29	16	빈궁한 자의 아비도 되며 생소한 자의 일을 사실하여 주었으며	I was a father to the poor: and the cause which I knew not I searched out.	I was a father to the needy, and I took up the case of the stranger.
JOB	29	17	불의한 자의 어금니를 꺽고 그 잇사이에서 겁탈한 물건을 빼어 내었었느니라	And I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his teeth.	I shattered the fangs of the unjust and snatched the prey from his teeth.
JOB	29	18	내가 스스로 말하기를 나는 내 보금자리에서 선종하리라 나의 날은 모래 같이 많을 것이라	Then I said, I shall die in my nest, and I shall multiply my days as the sand.	So I thought: ‘I will die in my nest and multiply my days as the sand.
JOB	29	19	내 뿌리는 물로 뻗어나가고 내 가지는 밤이 맞도록 이슬에 젖으며	My root was spread out by the waters, and the dew lay all night upon my branch.	My roots will spread out to the waters, and the dew will rest nightly on my branches.
JOB	29	20	내 영광은 내게 새로워지고 내 활은 내 손에서 날로 강하여지느니라 하였었노라	My glory was fresh in me, and my bow was renewed in my hand.	My glory is ever new within me, and my bow is renewed in my hand.’
JOB	29	21	무리는 내 말을 들으며 나의 가르치기를 잠잠히 기다리다가	Unto me men gave ear, and waited, and kept silence at my counsel.	Men listened to me with expectation, waiting silently for my counsel.
JOB	29	22	내가 말한 후에 그들이 말을 내지 못하였었나니 나의 말이 그들에게 이슬 같이 됨이니라	After my words they spake not again; and my speech dropped upon them.	After my words, they spoke no more; my speech settled on them like dew.
JOB	29	23	그들이 나 바라기를 비 같이 하였으며 입을 벌리기를 늦은 비 기다리듯 하였으므로	And they waited for me as for the rain; and they opened their mouth wide as for the latter rain.	They waited for me as for rain and drank in my words like spring showers.
JOB	29	24	그들이 의지 없을 때에 내가 함소하여 동정하면 그들이 나의 얼굴 빛을 무색하게 아니하였었느니라	If I laughed on them, they believed it not; and the light of my countenance they cast not down.	If I smiled at them, they did not believe it; the light of my countenance was precious.
JOB	29	25	내가 그들의 길을 택하고 으뜸으로 앉았었나니 왕이 군중에 거함도 같았고 애곡하는 자를 위로하는 사람도 같았었느니라	I chose out their way, and sat chief, and dwelt as a king in the army, as one that comforteth the mourners.	I chose their course and presided as chief. So I dwelt as a king among his troops, as a comforter of the mourners.
JOB	30	1	그러나 이제는 나보다 젊은 자들이 나를 기롱하는구나 그들의 아비들은 나의 보기에 나의 양떼 지키는 개 중에도 둘만하지 못한 자니라	But now they that are younger than I have me in derision, whose fathers I would have disdained to have set with the dogs of my flock.	“But now they mock me, men younger than I am, whose fathers I would have refused to entrust with my sheep dogs.
JOB	30	2	그들은 장년의 기력이 쇠한 자니 그 손의 힘이 내게 무엇이 유익하랴	Yea, whereto might the strength of their hands profit me, in whom old age was perished?	What use to me was the strength of their hands, since their vigor had left them?
JOB	30	3	그들은 곧 궁핍과 기근으로 파리하매 캄캄하고 거친 들에서 마른 흙을 씹으며	For want and famine they were solitary; fleeing into the wilderness in former time desolate and waste.	Gaunt from poverty and hunger, they gnawed the dry land, and the desolate wasteland by night.
JOB	30	4	떨기나무 가운데서 짠 나물도 꺾으며 대싸리 뿌리로 식물을 삼느니라	Who cut up mallows by the bushes, and juniper roots for their meat.	They plucked mallow among the shrubs, and the roots of the broom tree were their food.
JOB	30	5	무리는 도적을 외침 같이 그들에게 소리지름으로 그들은 사람 가운데서 쫓겨나서	They were driven forth from among men, (they cried after them as after a thief;)	They were banished from among men, shouted down like thieves,
JOB	30	6	침침한 골짜기와 구덩이와 바위 구멍에서 살며	To dwell in the clifts of the valleys, in caves of the earth, and in the rocks.	so that they lived on the slopes of the wadis, among the rocks and in holes in the ground.
JOB	30	7	떨기나무 가운데서 나귀처럼 부르짖으며 가시나무 아래 모여 있느니라	Among the bushes they brayed; under the nettles they were gathered together.	They cried out among the shrubs and huddled beneath the nettles.
JOB	30	8	그들은 본래 미련한 자의 자식이요 비천한 자의 자식으로서 고토에서 쫓겨난 자니라	They were children of fools, yea, children of base men: they were viler than the earth.	A senseless and nameless brood, they were driven off the land.
JOB	30	9	이제는 내가 그들의 노래가 되며 그들의 조롱거리가 되었고	And now am I their song, yea, I am their byword.	And now they mock me in song; I have become a byword among them.
JOB	30	10	그들은 나를 미워하여 멀리하고 내 얼굴에 침 뱉기를 주저하지 아니하나니	They abhor me, they flee far from me, and spare not to spit in my face.	They abhor me and keep far from me; they do not hesitate to spit in my face.
JOB	30	11	이는 하나님이 내 줄을 늘어지게 하시고 나를 곤고케 하시매 무리가 내 앞에서 굴레를 벗었음이니라	Because he hath loosed my cord, and afflicted me, they have also let loose the bridle before me.	Because God has unstrung my bow and afflicted me, they have cast off restraint in my presence.
JOB	30	12	그 낮은 무리가 내 우편에서 일어나 내 발을 밀뜨리고 나를 대적하여 멸망시킬 길을 쌓으며	Upon my right hand rise the youth; they push away my feet, and they raise up against me the ways of their destruction.	The rabble arises at my right; they lay snares for my feet and build siege ramps against me.
JOB	30	13	도울 자 없는 그들이 내 길을 헐고 내 재앙을 재촉하는구나	They mar my path, they set forward my calamity, they have no helper.	They tear up my path; they profit from my destruction, with no one to restrain them.
JOB	30	14	성을 크게 파괴하고 그 파괴한 가운데로 몰려 들어오는 것 같이 그들이 내게로 달려드니	They came upon me as a wide breaking in of waters: in the desolation they rolled themselves upon me.	They advance as through a wide breach; through the ruins they keep rolling in.
JOB	30	15	놀람이 내게 임하는구나 그들이 내 영광을 바람 같이 모니 내 복록이 구름 같이 지나갔구나	Terrors are turned upon me: they pursue my soul as the wind: and my welfare passeth away as a cloud.	Terrors are turned loose against me; they drive away my dignity as by the wind, and my prosperity has passed like a cloud.
JOB	30	16	이제는 내 마음이 내 속에서 녹으니 환난날이 나를 잡음이라	And now my soul is poured out upon me; the days of affliction have taken hold upon me.	And now my soul is poured out within me; days of affliction grip me.
JOB	30	17	밤이 되면 내 뼈가 쑤시니 나의 몸에 아픔이 쉬지 아니하는구나	My bones are pierced in me in the night season: and my sinews take no rest.	Night pierces my bones, and my gnawing pains never rest.
JOB	30	18	하나님의 큰 능력으로 하여 옷이 추하여져서 옷깃처럼 내몸에 붙었구나	By the great force of my disease is my garment changed: it bindeth me about as the collar of my coat.	With great force He grasps my garment; He seizes me by the collar of my tunic.
JOB	30	19	하나님이 나를 진흙 가운데 던지셨고 나로 티끌과 재 같게 하셨구나	He hath cast me into the mire, and I am become like dust and ashes.	He throws me into the mud, and I have become like dust and ashes.
JOB	30	20	내가 주께 부르짖으오나 주께서 대답지 아니하시오며 내가 섰사오나 주께서 굽어보시기만 하시나이다	I cry unto thee, and thou dost not hear me: I stand up, and thou regardest me not.	I cry out to You for help, but You do not answer; when I stand up, You merely look at me.
JOB	30	21	주께서 돌이켜 내게 잔혹히 하시고 완력으로 나를 핍박하시오며	Thou art become cruel to me: with thy strong hand thou opposest thyself against me.	You have ruthlessly turned on me; You oppose me with Your strong hand.
JOB	30	22	나를 바람 위에 들어 얹어 불려가게 하시며 대풍 중에 소멸케 하시나이다	Thou liftest me up to the wind; thou causest me to ride upon it, and dissolvest my substance.	You snatch me up into the wind and drive me before it; You toss me about in the storm.
JOB	30	23	내가 아나이다 주께서 나를 죽게 하사 모든 생물을 위하여 정한 집으로 끌어 가시리이다	For I know that thou wilt bring me to death, and to the house appointed for all living.	Yes, I know that You will bring me down to death, to the place appointed for all the living.
JOB	30	24	그러나 사람이 넘어질 때에 어찌 손을 펴지 아니하며 재앙을 당할 때에 어찌 도움을 부르짖지 아니하겠는가	Howbeit he will not stretch out his hand to the grave, though they cry in his destruction.	Yet no one stretches out his hand to a ruined man when he cries for help in his distress.
JOB	30	25	고생의 날 보내는 자를 위하여 내가 울지 아니하였는가 빈궁한 자를 위하여 내 마음에 근심하지 아니하였는가	Did not I weep for him that was in trouble? was not my soul grieved for the poor?	Have I not wept for those in trouble? Has my soul not grieved for the needy?
JOB	30	26	내가 복을 바랐더니 화가 왔고 광명을 기다렸더니 흑암이 왔구나	When I looked for good, then evil came unto me: and when I waited for light, there came darkness.	But when I hoped for good, evil came; when I looked for light, darkness fell.
JOB	30	27	내 마음이 어지러워서 쉬지 못하는구나 환난 날이 내게 임하였구나	My bowels boiled, and rested not: the days of affliction prevented me.	I am churning within and cannot rest; days of affliction confront me.
JOB	30	28	나는 햇볕에 쬐지 않고 검어진 살을 가지고 걸으며 공회 중에 서서 도움을 부르짖고 있느니라	I went mourning without the sun: I stood up, and I cried in the congregation.	I go about blackened, but not by the sun. I stand up in the assembly and cry for help.
JOB	30	29	나는 이리의 형제요 타조의 벗이로구나	I am a brother to dragons, and a companion to owls.	I have become a brother of jackals, a companion of ostriches.
JOB	30	30	내 가죽은 검어져서 떨어졌고 내 뼈는 열기로 하여 탔구나	My skin is black upon me, and my bones are burned with heat.	My skin grows black and peels, and my bones burn with fever.
JOB	30	31	내 수금은 애곡성이 되고 내 피리는 애통성이 되었구나	My harp also is turned to mourning, and my organ into the voice of them that weep.	My harp is tuned to mourning and my flute to the sound of weeping.
JOB	31	1	내가 내 눈과 언약을 세웠나니 어찌 처녀에게 주목하랴	I made a covenant with mine eyes; why then should I think upon a maid?	“I have made a covenant with my eyes. How then could I gaze with desire at a virgin?
JOB	31	2	그리하면 위에 계신 하나님의 내리시는 분깃이 무엇이겠으며 높은 곳에서 전능자의 주시는 산업이 무엇이겠느냐	For what portion of God is there from above? and what inheritance of the Almighty from on high?	For what is the allotment of God from above, or the heritage from the Almighty on high?
JOB	31	3	불의자에게는 환난이 아니겠느냐 행악자에게는 재앙이 아니겠느냐	Is not destruction to the wicked? and a strange punishment to the workers of iniquity?	Does not disaster come to the unjust and calamity to the workers of iniquity?
JOB	31	4	그가 내 길을 감찰하지 아니하시느냐 내 걸음을 다 세지 아니하시느냐	Doth not he see my ways, and count all my steps?	Does He not see my ways and count my every step?
JOB	31	5	언제 나의 행위가 허탄하였으며 내 발이 궤휼에 빨랐던가	If I have walked with vanity, or if my foot hath hasted to deceit;	If I have walked in falsehood or my foot has rushed to deceit,
JOB	31	6	그리하였으면 내가 공평한 저울에 달려서 하나님이 나의 정직함을 아시게 되기를 원하노라	Let me be weighed in an even balance, that God may know mine integrity.	let God weigh me with honest scales, that He may know my integrity.
JOB	31	7	언제 내 걸음이 길에서 떠났던가 내 마음이 내 눈을 따라갔던가 내 손에 더러운 것이 묻었던가	If my step hath turned out of the way, and mine heart walked after mine eyes, and if any blot hath cleaved to mine hands;	If my steps have turned from the path, if my heart has followed my eyes, or if impurity has stuck to my hands,
JOB	31	8	그리하였으면 나의 심은 것을 타인이 먹으며 나의 소산이 뿌리까지 뽑히는 것이 마땅하니라	Then let me sow, and let another eat; yea, let my offspring be rooted out.	then may another eat what I have sown, and may my crops be uprooted.
JOB	31	9	언제 내 마음이 여인에게 유혹되어 이웃의 문을 엿보아 기다렸던가	If mine heart have been deceived by a woman, or if I have laid wait at my neighbour’s door;	If my heart has been enticed by my neighbor’s wife, or I have lurked at his door,
JOB	31	10	그리하였으면 내 처가 타인의 매를 돌리며 타인이 더불어 동침하는 것이 마땅하니라	Then let my wife grind unto another, and let others bow down upon her.	then may my own wife grind grain for another, and may other men sleep with her.
JOB	31	11	이는 중죄라 재판장에게 벌 받을 악이요	For this is an heinous crime; yea, it is an iniquity to be punished by the judges.	For that would be a heinous crime, an iniquity to be judged.
JOB	31	12	멸망하도록 사르는 불이라 나의 모든 소산을 뿌리까지 없이할 것이니라	For it is a fire that consumeth to destruction, and would root out all mine increase.	For it is a fire that burns down to Abaddon; it would root out my entire harvest.
JOB	31	13	남종이나 여종이 나로 더불어 쟁변할 때에 내가 언제 그의 사정을 멸시하였던가	If I did despise the cause of my manservant or of my maidservant, when they contended with me;	If I have rejected the cause of my manservant or maidservant when they made a complaint against me,
JOB	31	14	그리하였으면 하나님이 일어나실 때에는 내가 어떻게 하겠느냐 하나님이 국문하실 때에는 내가 무엇이라 대답하겠느냐	What then shall I do when God riseth up? and when he visiteth, what shall I answer him?	what will I do when God rises to judge? How will I answer when called to account?
JOB	31	15	나를 태 속에 만드신 자가 그도 만들지 아니하셨느냐 우리를 뱃속에 지으신 자가 하나가 아니시냐	Did not he that made me in the womb make him? and did not one fashion us in the womb?	Did not He who made me in the womb also make them? Did not the same One form us in the womb?
JOB	31	16	내가 언제 가난한 자의 소원을 막았던가 과부의 눈으로 실망케 하였던가	If I have withheld the poor from their desire, or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail;	If I have denied the desires of the poor or allowed the widow’s eyes to fail,
JOB	31	17	나만 홀로 식물을 먹고 고아에게 먹이지 아니하였던가	Or have eaten my morsel myself alone, and the fatherless hath not eaten thereof;	if I have eaten my morsel alone, not sharing it with the fatherless—
JOB	31	18	실상은 내가 젊었을 때부터 고아를 기르기를 그의 아비처럼 하였으며 내가 모태에서 나온 후로 과부를 인도하였었노라	(For from my youth he was brought up with me, as with a father, and I have guided her from my mother’s womb;)	though from my youth I reared him as would a father, and from my mother’s womb I guided the widow—
JOB	31	19	내가 언제 사람이 의복이 없이 죽게 된 것이나 빈궁한 자가 덮을 것이 없는 것을 보고도	If I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or any poor without covering;	if I have seen one perish for lack of clothing, or a needy man without a cloak,
JOB	31	20	나의 양털로 그 몸을 더웁게 입혀서 그로 나를 위하여 복을 빌게 하지 아니하였던가	If his loins have not blessed me, and if he were not warmed with the fleece of my sheep;	if his heart has not blessed me for warming him with the fleece of my sheep,
JOB	31	21	나를 도와주는 자가 성문에 있음을 보고 내가 손을 들어 고아를 쳤던가	If I have lifted up my hand against the fatherless, when I saw my help in the gate:	if I have lifted up my hand against the fatherless because I saw that I had support in the gate,
JOB	31	22	그리하였으면 내 어깨가 어깨뼈에서 떨어지고 내 팔뼈가 부러짐이 마땅하니라	Then let mine arm fall from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be broken from the bone.	then may my arm fall from my shoulder and be torn from its socket.
JOB	31	23	나는 하나님의 재앙을 심히 두려워하고 그 위엄을 인하여 아무 것도 할 수 없느니라	For destruction from God was a terror to me, and by reason of his highness I could not endure.	For calamity from God terrifies me, and His splendor I cannot overpower.
JOB	31	24	내가 언제 금으로 내 소망을 삼고 정금더러 너는 내 의뢰하는 바라 하였던가	If I have made gold my hope, or have said to the fine gold, Thou art my confidence;	If I have put my trust in gold or called pure gold my security,
JOB	31	25	언제 재물의 풍부함과 손으로 얻은 것이 많음으로 기뻐하였던가	If I rejoiced because my wealth was great, and because mine hand had gotten much;	if I have rejoiced in my great wealth because my hand had gained so much,
JOB	31	26	언제 태양의 빛남과 달의 명랑하게 운행되는 것을 보고	If I beheld the sun when it shined, or the moon walking in brightness;	if I have beheld the sun in its radiance or the moon moving in splendor,
JOB	31	27	내 마음이 가만히 유혹되어 손에 입맞추었던가	And my heart hath been secretly enticed, or my mouth hath kissed my hand:	so that my heart was secretly enticed and my hand threw a kiss from my mouth,
JOB	31	28	이 역시 재판장에게 벌 받을 죄악이니 내가 그리하였으면 위에 계신 하나님을 배반한 것이니라	This also were an iniquity to be punished by the judge: for I should have denied the God that is above.	this would also be an iniquity to be judged, for I would have denied God on high.
JOB	31	29	내가 언제 나를 미워하는 자의 멸망을 기뻐하였으며 그의 재앙 만남을 인하여 기운을 뽐내었던가	If I rejoiced at the destruction of him that hated me, or lifted up myself when evil found him:	If I have rejoiced in my enemy’s ruin, or exulted when evil befell him—
JOB	31	30	실상은 내가 그의 죽기를 구하는 말로 저주하여 내 입으로 범죄케 아니하였느니라	Neither have I suffered my mouth to sin by wishing a curse to his soul.	I have not allowed my mouth to sin by asking for his life with a curse—
JOB	31	31	내 장막 사람의 말이 주인의 고기에 배부르지 않은 자가 어디 있느뇨 하지 아니하였었는가	If the men of my tabernacle said not, Oh that we had of his flesh! we cannot be satisfied.	if the men of my house have not said, ‘Who is there who has not had his fill?’—
JOB	31	32	나그네로 거리에서 자게 하지 아니하고 내가 행인에게 내 문을 열어 주었었노라	The stranger did not lodge in the street: but I opened my doors to the traveller.	but no stranger had to lodge on the street, for my door has been open to the traveler—
JOB	31	33	내가 언제 큰 무리를 두려워하며 족속의 멸시를 무서워함으로 잠잠하고 문에 나가지 아니하여 타인처럼 내 죄악을 품에 숨겨 허물을 가리었었던가	If I covered my transgressions as Adam, by hiding mine iniquity in my bosom:	if I have covered my transgressions like Adam by hiding my guilt in my heart,
JOB	31	34	상동	Did I fear a great multitude, or did the contempt of families terrify me, that I kept silence, and went not out of the door?	because I greatly feared the crowds and the contempt of the clans terrified me, so that I kept silent and would not go outside—
JOB	31	35	누구든지 나의 변백을 들을지니라 나의 서명이 여기 있으니 전능자가 내게 대답하시기를 원하노라 내 대적의 기록한 소송장이 내게 있으면	Oh that one would hear me! behold, my desire is, that the Almighty would answer me, and that mine adversary had written a book.	(Oh, that I had one to hear me! Here is my signature. Let the Almighty answer me; let my accuser compose an indictment.
JOB	31	36	내가 어깨에 메기도 하고 면류관처럼 머리에 쓰기도 하며	Surely I would take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a crown to me.	Surely I would carry it on my shoulder and wear it like a crown.
JOB	31	37	내 걸음의 수효를 그에게 고하고 왕족처럼 그를 가까이 하였으리라	I would declare unto him the number of my steps; as a prince would I go near unto him.	I would give account of all my steps; I would approach Him like a prince.)—
JOB	31	38	언제 내 토지가 부르짖어 나를 책망하며 그 이랑이 일시에 울었던가	If my land cry against me, or that the furrows likewise thereof complain;	if my land cries out against me and its furrows weep together,
JOB	31	39	언제 내가 값을 내지 않고 그 소산물을 먹고 그 소유주로 생명을 잃게 하였던가	If I have eaten the fruits thereof without money, or have caused the owners thereof to lose their life:	if I have devoured its produce without payment or broken the spirit of its tenants,
JOB	31	40	그리하였으면 말 대신에 찔레가 나고 보리 대신에 잡풀이 나는 것이 마땅하니라 하고 욥의 말이 그치니라	Let thistles grow instead of wheat, and cockle instead of barley. The words of Job are ended.	then let briers grow instead of wheat and stinkweed instead of barley.” Thus conclude the words of Job.
JOB	32	1	욥이 스스로 의롭게 여기므로 그 세 사람의 대답이 그치매	So these three men ceased to answer Job, because he was righteous in his own eyes.	So these three men stopped answering Job, because he was righteous in his own eyes.
JOB	32	2	람 족속 부스 사람 바라겔의 아들 엘리후가 노를 발하니 그가 욥에게 노를 발함은 욥이 하나님보다 자기가 의롭다 함이요	Then was kindled the wrath of Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite, of the kindred of Ram: against Job was his wrath kindled, because he justified himself rather than God.	This kindled the anger of Elihu son of Barachel the Buzite, of the family of Ram. He burned with anger against Job for justifying himself rather than God,
JOB	32	3	또 세 친구에게 노를 발함은 그들이 능히 대답지는 못하여도 욥을 정죄함이라	Also against his three friends was his wrath kindled, because they had found no answer, and yet had condemned Job.	and he burned with anger against Job’s three friends because they had failed to refute Job, and yet had condemned him.
JOB	32	4	엘리후가 그들의 나이 자기보다 많으므로 욥에게 말하기를 참고 있다가	Now Elihu had waited till Job had spoken, because they were elder than he.	Now Elihu had waited to speak to Job because the others were older than he.
JOB	32	5	세 사람의 입에 대답이 없음을 보고 노를 발하니라	When Elihu saw that there was no answer in the mouth of these three men, then his wrath was kindled.	But when he saw that the three men had no further reply, his anger was kindled.
JOB	32	6	부스 사람 바라겔의 아들 엘리후가 발언하여 가로되 나는 연소하고 당신들은 연로하므로 참고 나의 의견을 감히 진술치 못하였노라	And Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite answered and said, I am young, and ye are very old; wherefore I was afraid, and durst not shew you mine opinion.	So Elihu son of Barachel the Buzite declared: “I am young in years, while you are old; that is why I was timid and afraid to tell you what I know.
JOB	32	7	내가 말하기를 날이 많은 자가 말을 낼 것이요 해가 오랜 자가 지혜를 가르칠 것이라 하였으나	I said, Days should speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdom.	I thought that age should speak, and many years should teach wisdom.
JOB	32	8	사람의 속에는 심령이 있고 전능자의 기운이 사람에게 총명을 주시나니	But there is a spirit in man: and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding.	But there is a spirit in a man, the breath of the Almighty, that gives him understanding.
JOB	32	9	대인이라고 지혜로운 것이 아니요 노인이라고 공의를 깨닫는 것이 아니라	Great men are not always wise: neither do the aged understand judgment.	It is not only the old who are wise, or the elderly who understand justice.
JOB	32	10	그러므로 내가 말하노니 내 말을 들으라 나도 내 의견을 보이리라	Therefore I said, Hearken to me; I also will shew mine opinion.	Therefore I say, ‘Listen to me; I too will declare what I know.’
JOB	32	11	내가 당신들의 말을 기다렸고 당신들이 할 말을 합당하도록 하여 보는 동안에 그 변론에 내 귀를 기울였더니	Behold, I waited for your words; I gave ear to your reasons, whilst ye searched out what to say.	Indeed, I waited while you spoke; I listened to your reasoning; as you searched for words,
JOB	32	12	자세히 들은즉 당신들 가운데 욥을 꺾어 그 말을 대답하는 자가 없도다	Yea, I attended unto you, and, behold, there was none of you that convinced Job, or that answered his words:	I paid you full attention. But no one proved Job wrong; not one of you rebutted his arguments.
JOB	32	13	당신들이 혹시라도 말하기를 우리가 지혜를 깨달았었구나 그를 이길 자는 하나님이시요 사람이 아니라 하지 말지니라	Lest ye should say, We have found out wisdom: God thrusteth him down, not man.	So do not claim, ‘We have found wisdom; let God, not man, refute him.’
JOB	32	14	그가 내게 말을 내지 아니하였으니 나도 당신들의 말처럼 그에게 대답지 아니하리라	Now he hath not directed his words against me: neither will I answer him with your speeches.	But Job has not directed his words against me, and I will not answer him with your arguments.
JOB	32	15	그들이 놀라서 다시 대답하지 못하니 할 말이 없음이로구나	They were amazed, they answered no more: they left off speaking.	Job’s friends are dismayed, with no more to say; words have escaped them.
JOB	32	16	그들이 말이 없이 가만히 서서 다시 대답지 아니한즉 내가 어찌 더 기다리랴	When I had waited, (for they spake not, but stood still, and answered no more;)	Must I wait, now that they are silent, now that they stand and no longer reply?
JOB	32	17	나도 내 본분대로 대답하고 나도 내 의향을 보이리니	I said, I will answer also my part, I also will shew mine opinion.	I too will answer; yes, I will declare what I know.
JOB	32	18	내게 말이 가득하고 내 심령이 나를 강박함이니라	For I am full of matter, the spirit within me constraineth me.	For I am full of words, and my spirit within me compels me.
JOB	32	19	보라 내 가슴은 봉한 포도주 같고 새 가죽 부대가 터지게 됨 같구나	Behold, my belly is as wine which hath no vent; it is ready to burst like new bottles.	Behold, my belly is like unvented wine; it is about to burst like a new wineskin.
JOB	32	20	내가 말을 발하여야 시원할 것이라 내 입을 열어 대답하리라	I will speak, that I may be refreshed: I will open my lips and answer.	I must speak and find relief; I must open my lips and respond.
JOB	32	21	나는 결코 사람의 낯을 보지 아니하며 사람에게 아첨하지 아니하나니	Let me not, I pray you, accept any man’s person, neither let me give flattering titles unto man.	I will be partial to no one, nor will I flatter any man.
JOB	32	22	이는 아첨할 줄을 알지 못함이라 만일 그리하면 나를 지으신 자가 속히 나를 취하시리로다	For I know not to give flattering titles; in so doing my maker would soon take me away.	For I do not know how to flatter, or my Maker would remove me in an instant.
JOB	33	1	그런즉 욥이여 내 말을 들으며 나의 모든 말에 귀를 기울이기를 원하노라	Wherefore, Job, I pray thee, hear my speeches, and hearken to all my words.	“But now, O Job, hear my speech, and listen to all my words.
JOB	33	2	내가 입을 여니 내 혀가 입에서 동하는구나	Behold, now I have opened my mouth, my tongue hath spoken in my mouth.	Behold, I will open my mouth; my address is on the tip of my tongue.
JOB	33	3	내 말이 내 마음의 정직함을 나타내고 내 입술이 아는 바를 진실히 말하리라	My words shall be of the uprightness of my heart: and my lips shall utter knowledge clearly.	My words are from an upright heart, and my lips speak sincerely what I know.
JOB	33	4	하나님의 신이 나를 지으셨고 전능자의 기운이 나를 살리시느니라	The Spirit of God hath made me, and the breath of the Almighty hath given me life.	The Spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the Almighty gives me life.
JOB	33	5	네가 할 수 있거든 일어서서 내게 대답하고 내 앞에 진술하라	If thou canst answer me, set thy words in order before me, stand up.	Refute me if you can; prepare your case and confront me.
JOB	33	6	나와 네가 하나님 앞에서 일반이니 나도 흙으로 지으심을 입었은즉	Behold, I am according to thy wish in God’s stead: I also am formed out of the clay.	I am just like you before God; I was also formed from clay.
JOB	33	7	내 위엄으로는 너를 두렵게 하지 못하고 내 권세로는 너를 누르지 못하느니라	Behold, my terror shall not make thee afraid, neither shall my hand be heavy upon thee.	Surely no fear of me should terrify you; nor will my hand be heavy upon you.
JOB	33	8	네가 실로 나의 듣는데 말하였고 나는 네 말소리를 들었느니라 이르기를	Surely thou hast spoken in mine hearing, and I have heard the voice of thy words, saying,	Surely you have spoken in my hearing, and I have heard these very words:
JOB	33	9	나는 깨끗하여 죄가 없고 허물이 없으며 불의도 없거늘	I am clean without transgression, I am innocent; neither is there iniquity in me.	‘I am pure, without transgression; I am clean, with no iniquity in me.
JOB	33	10	하나님이 나를 칠 틈을 찾으시며 나를 대적으로 여기사	Behold, he findeth occasions against me, he counteth me for his enemy,	Yet God finds occasions against me; He counts me as His enemy.
JOB	33	11	내 발을 착고에 채우시고 나의 모든 길을 감시하신다 하였느니라	He putteth my feet in the stocks, he marketh all my paths.	He puts my feet in the stocks; He watches over all my paths.’
JOB	33	12	내가 네게 대답하리라 이 말에 네가 의롭지 못하니 하나님은 사람보다 크심이니라	Behold, in this thou art not just: I will answer thee, that God is greater than man.	Behold, you are not right in this matter. I will answer you, for God is greater than man.
JOB	33	13	하나님은 모든 행하시는 것을 스스로 진술치 아니하시나니 네가 하나님과 변쟁함은 어찜이뇨	Why dost thou strive against him? for he giveth not account of any of his matters.	Why do you complain to Him that He answers nothing a man asks?
JOB	33	14	사람은 무관히 여겨도 하나님은 한번 말씀하시고 다시 말씀하시되	For God speaketh once, yea twice, yet man perceiveth it not.	For God speaks in one way and in another, yet no one notices.
JOB	33	15	사람이 침상에서 졸며 깊이 잠들 때에나 꿈에나 밤의 이상 중에	In a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falleth upon men, in slumberings upon the bed;	In a dream, in a vision in the night, when deep sleep falls upon men as they slumber on their beds,
JOB	33	16	사람의 귀를 여시고 인치듯 교훈하시나니	Then he openeth the ears of men, and sealeth their instruction,	He opens their ears and terrifies them with warnings
JOB	33	17	이는 사람으로 그 꾀를 버리게 하려 하심이며 사람에게 교만을 막으려 하심이라	That he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride from man.	to turn a man from wrongdoing and keep him from pride,
JOB	33	18	그는 사람의 혼으로 구덩이에 빠지지 않게 하시며 그 생명으로 칼에 멸망치 않게 하시느니라	He keepeth back his soul from the pit, and his life from perishing by the sword.	to preserve his soul from the Pit and his life from perishing by the sword.
JOB	33	19	혹시는 사람이 병상의 고통과 뼈가 늘 쑤심의 징계를 받나니	He is chastened also with pain upon his bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain:	A man is also chastened on his bed with pain and constant distress in his bones,
JOB	33	20	그의 마음은 식물을 싫어하고 그의 혼은 별미를 싫어하며	So that his life abhorreth bread, and his soul dainty meat.	so that he detests his bread, and his soul loathes his favorite food.
JOB	33	21	그의 살은 파리하여 보이지 아니하고 보이지 않던 뼈가 드러나서	His flesh is consumed away, that it cannot be seen; and his bones that were not seen stick out.	His flesh wastes away from sight, and his hidden bones protrude.
JOB	33	22	그의 혼이 구덩이에, 그의 생명이 멸하는 자에게 가까워지느니라	Yea, his soul draweth near unto the grave, and his life to the destroyers.	He draws near to the Pit, and his life to the messengers of death.
JOB	33	23	그럴 때에 만일 일천 천사 가운데 하나가 그 사람의 해석자로 함께 있어서 그 정당히 행할 것을 보일진대	If there be a messenger with him, an interpreter, one among a thousand, to shew unto man his uprightness:	Yet if there is a messenger on his side, one mediator in a thousand, to tell a man what is right for him,
JOB	33	24	하나님이 그 사람을 긍휼히 여기사 이르시기를 그를 건져서 구덩이에 내려가지 않게 하라 내가 대속물을 얻었다 하시리라	Then he is gracious unto him, and saith, Deliver him from going down to the pit: I have found a ransom.	to be gracious to him and say, ‘Spare him from going down to the Pit; I have found his ransom,’
JOB	33	25	그런즉 그 살이 어린 아이보다 연하여져서 소년 때를 회복할 것이요	His flesh shall be fresher than a child’s: he shall return to the days of his youth:	then his flesh is refreshed like a child’s; he returns to the days of his youth.
JOB	33	26	그는 하나님께 기도하므로 하나님이 은혜를 베푸사 그로 자기의 얼굴을 즐거이 보게 하시고 사람에게 그 의를 회복시키시느니라	He shall pray unto God, and he will be favourable unto him: and he shall see his face with joy: for he will render unto man his righteousness.	He prays to God and finds favor; he sees God’s face and shouts for joy, and God restores His righteousness to that man.
JOB	33	27	그가 사람 앞에서 노래하여 이르기를 내가 전에 범죄하여 시비를 바꾸었으나 내게 무익하였었구나	He looketh upon men, and if any say, I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not;	Then he sings before men with these words: ‘I have sinned and perverted what was right; yet I did not get what I deserved.
JOB	33	28	하나님이 내 영혼을 건지사 구덩이에 내려가지 않게 하셨으니 내 생명이 빛을 보겠구나 하리라	He will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the light.	He redeemed my soul from going down to the Pit, and I will live to see the light.’
JOB	33	29	하나님이 사람에게 이 모든 일을 재삼 행하심은	Lo, all these things worketh God oftentimes with man,	Behold, all these things God does to a man, two or even three times,
JOB	33	30	그 영혼을 구덩이에서 끌어 돌이키고 생명의 빛으로 그에게 비취려 하심이니라	To bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the light of the living.	to bring back his soul from the Pit, that he may be enlightened with the light of life.
JOB	33	31	욥이여 귀를 기울여 내게 들으라 잠잠하라 내가 말하리라	Mark well, O Job, hearken unto me: hold thy peace, and I will speak.	Pay attention, Job, and listen to me; be silent, and I will speak.
JOB	33	32	만일 할 말이 있거든 대답하라 내가 너를 의롭게 하려 하노니 말하라	If thou hast any thing to say, answer me: speak, for I desire to justify thee.	But if you have something to say, answer me; speak up, for I would like to vindicate you.
JOB	33	33	만일 없으면 내 말을 들으라 잠잠하라 내가 지혜로 너를 가르치리라	If not, hearken unto me: hold thy peace, and I shall teach thee wisdom.	But if not, then listen to me; be quiet, and I will teach you wisdom.”
JOB	34	1	엘리후가 말을 이어 가로되	Furthermore Elihu answered and said,	Then Elihu continued:
JOB	34	2	지혜 있는 자들아 내 말을 들으며 지식 있는 자들아 내게 귀를 기울이라	Hear my words, O ye wise men; and give ear unto me, ye that have knowledge.	“Hear my words, O wise men; give ear to me, O men of learning.
JOB	34	3	입이 식물의 맛을 변별함 같이 귀가 말을 분별하나니	For the ear trieth words, as the mouth tasteth meat.	For the ear tests words as the mouth tastes food.
JOB	34	4	우리가 스스로 옳은 것은 택하고 무엇이 선한가 우리끼리 알아보자	Let us choose to us judgment: let us know among ourselves what is good.	Let us choose for ourselves what is right; let us learn together what is good.
JOB	34	5	욥이 말하기를 내가 의로우나 하나님이 내 의를 제하셨고	For Job hath said, I am righteous: and God hath taken away my judgment.	For Job has declared, ‘I am righteous, yet God has deprived me of justice.
JOB	34	6	내가 정직하나 거짓말장이가 되었고 나는 허물이 없으나 내 상처가 낫지 못하게 되었노라 하니	Should I lie against my right? my wound is incurable without transgression.	Would I lie about my case? My wound is incurable, though I am without transgression.’
JOB	34	7	어느 사람이 욥과 같으랴 욥이 훼방하기를 물마시듯 하며	What man is like Job, who drinketh up scorning like water?	What man is like Job, who drinks up derision like water?
JOB	34	8	악한 일을 하는 자들과 사귀며 악인과 함께 다니면서	Which goeth in company with the workers of iniquity, and walketh with wicked men.	He keeps company with evildoers and walks with wicked men.
JOB	34	9	이르기를 사람이 하나님을 기뻐하나 무익하다 하는구나	For he hath said, It profiteth a man nothing that he should delight himself with God.	For he has said, ‘It profits a man nothing that he should delight in God.’
JOB	34	10	그러므로 너희 총명한 자들아 내 말을 들으라 하나님은 단정코 악을 행치 아니하시며 전능자는 단정코 불의를 행치 아니하시고	Therefore hearken unto me, ye men of understanding: far be it from God, that he should do wickedness; and from the Almighty, that he should commit iniquity.	Therefore listen to me, O men of understanding. Far be it from God to do wrong, and from the Almighty to act unjustly.
JOB	34	11	사람의 일을 따라 보응하사 각각 그 행위대로 얻게 하시나니	For the work of a man shall he render unto him, and cause every man to find according to his ways.	For according to a man’s deeds He repays him; according to a man’s ways He brings consequences.
JOB	34	12	진실로 하나님은 악을 행치 아니하시며 전능자는 공의를 굽히지 아니하시느니라	Yea, surely God will not do wickedly, neither will the Almighty pervert judgment.	Indeed, it is true that God does not act wickedly, and the Almighty does not pervert justice.
JOB	34	13	누가 땅을 그에게 맡겼느냐 누가 온 세계를 정하였느냐	Who hath given him a charge over the earth? or who hath disposed the whole world?	Who gave Him charge over the earth? Who appointed Him over the whole world?
JOB	34	14	그가 만일 자기만 생각하시고 그 신과 기운을 거두실진대	If he set his heart upon man, if he gather unto himself his spirit and his breath;	If He were to set His heart to it and withdraw His Spirit and breath,
JOB	34	15	모든 혈기 있는 자가 일체로 망하고 사람도 진토로 돌아가리라	All flesh shall perish together, and man shall turn again unto dust.	all flesh would perish together and mankind would return to the dust.
JOB	34	16	만일 총명이 있거든 이것을 들으며 내 말소리에 귀를 기울이라	If now thou hast understanding, hear this: hearken to the voice of my words.	If you have understanding, hear this; listen to my words.
JOB	34	17	공의를 미워하는 자시면 어찌 치리하시겠느냐 의롭고 전능하신 자를 네가 정죄하겠느냐	Shall even he that hateth right govern? and wilt thou condemn him that is most just?	Could one who hates justice govern? Will you condemn the just and mighty One,
JOB	34	18	그는 왕에게라도 비루하다 하시며 귀인들에게라도 악하다 하시며	Is it fit to say to a king, Thou art wicked? and to princes, Ye are ungodly?	who says to kings, ‘You are worthless!’ and to nobles, ‘You are wicked,’
JOB	34	19	왕족을 외모로 취치 아니하시며 부자를 가난한 자보다 더 생각하지 아니하시나니 이는 그들이 다 그의 손으로 지으신 바가 됨이니라	How much less to him that accepteth not the persons of princes, nor regardeth the rich more than the poor? for they all are the work of his hands.	who is not partial to princes and does not favor rich over poor? For they are all the work of His hands.
JOB	34	20	그들은 밤중 순식간에 죽나니 백성은 떨며 없어지고 세력 있는 자도 사람의 손을 대지 않고 제함을 당하느니라	In a moment shall they die, and the people shall be troubled at midnight, and pass away: and the mighty shall be taken away without hand.	They die in an instant, in the middle of the night. The people convulse and pass away; the mighty are removed without human hand.
JOB	34	21	하나님은 사람의 길을 주목하시며 사람의 모든 걸음을 감찰하시나니	For his eyes are upon the ways of man, and he seeth all his goings.	For His eyes are on the ways of a man, and He sees his every step.
JOB	34	22	악을 행한 자는 숨을 만한 흑암이나 어두운 그늘이 없느니라	There is no darkness, nor shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves.	There is no darkness or deep shadow where the workers of iniquity can hide.
JOB	34	23	하나님은 사람을 심판하시기에 오래 생각하실 것이 없으시니	For he will not lay upon man more than right; that he should enter into judgment with God.	For God need not examine a man further or have him approach for judgment.
JOB	34	24	세력 있는 자를 조사할 것 없이 꺾으시고 다른 사람을 세워 그를 대신하게 하시느니라	He shall break in pieces mighty men without number, and set others in their stead.	He shatters the mighty without inquiry and sets up others in their place.
JOB	34	25	이와 같이 그들의 행위를 아시고 그들을 밤 사이에 엎으신즉 멸망하나니	Therefore he knoweth their works, and he overturneth them in the night, so that they are destroyed.	Therefore, He recognizes their deeds; He overthrows them in the night and they are crushed.
JOB	34	26	그들을 악한 자로 여겨 사람의 목전에서 치심은	He striketh them as wicked men in the open sight of others;	He strikes them for their wickedness in full view,
JOB	34	27	그들이 그를 떠나고 그의 모든 길을 무관히 여김이라	Because they turned back from him, and would not consider any of his ways:	because they turned aside from Him and had no regard for any of His ways.
JOB	34	28	그들이 이와 같이 하여 가난한 자의 부르짖음이 그에게 상달케하며 환난 받는 자의 부르짖음이 그에게 들리게 하느니라	So that they cause the cry of the poor to come unto him, and he heareth the cry of the afflicted.	They caused the cry of the poor to come before Him, and He heard the outcry of the afflicted.
JOB	34	29	주께서 사람에게 평강을 주실 때에 누가 감히 잘못하신다 하겠느냐 주께서 자기 얼굴을 가리우실 때에 누가 감히 뵈올 수 있으랴 나라에게나 사람에게나 일반이시니	When he giveth quietness, who then can make trouble? and when he hideth his face, who then can behold him? whether it be done against a nation, or against a man only:	But when He remains silent, who can condemn Him? When He hides His face, who can see Him? Yet He watches over both man and nation,
JOB	34	30	이는 사특한 자로 권세를 잡아 백성을 함해하지 못하게 하려 하심이니라	That the hypocrite reign not, lest the people be ensnared.	that godless men should not rule or lay snares for the people.
JOB	34	31	누가 하나님께 아뢰기를 내가 징계를 받았사오니 다시는 범죄치 아니하겠나이다	Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have borne chastisement, I will not offend any more:	Suppose someone says to God, ‘I have endured my punishment; I will offend no more.
JOB	34	32	나의 깨닫지 못하는 것을 내게 가르치소서 내가 악을 행하였으면 다시는 아니하겠나이다 한 자가 있느냐	That which I see not teach thou me: if I have done iniquity, I will do no more.	Teach me what I cannot see; if I have done wrong, I will not do it again.’
JOB	34	33	하나님이 네 뜻대로 갚으셔야 하겠다고 네가 그것을 싫어하느냐 그러면 네가 스스로 택할 것이요 내가 할 것이 아니니 너는 아는 대로 말하라	Should it be according to thy mind? he will recompense it, whether thou refuse, or whether thou choose; and not I: therefore speak what thou knowest.	Should God repay you on your own terms when you have disavowed His? You must choose, not I; so tell me what you know.
JOB	34	34	총명한 자와 내 말을 듣는 모든 지혜 있는 자가 필연 내게 이르기를	Let men of understanding tell me, and let a wise man hearken unto me.	Men of understanding will declare to me, and the wise men who hear me will say:
JOB	34	35	욥이 무식하게 말하니 그 말이 지혜 없다 하리라	Job hath spoken without knowledge, and his words were without wisdom.	‘Job speaks without knowledge; his words lack insight.’
JOB	34	36	욥이 끝까지 시험받기를 내가 원하노니 이는 그 대답이 악인과 같음이라	My desire is that Job may be tried unto the end because of his answers for wicked men.	If only Job were tried to the utmost for answering like a wicked man.
JOB	34	37	그가 그 죄 위에 패역을 더하며 우리 중에서 손뼉을 치며 하나님을 거역하는 말을 많이 하는구나	For he addeth rebellion unto his sin, he clappeth his hands among us, and multiplieth his words against God.	For he adds rebellion to his sin; he claps his hands among us and multiplies his words against God.”
JOB	35	1	엘리후가 말을 이어 가로되	Elihu spake moreover, and said,	And Elihu went on to say:
JOB	35	2	네가 이것을 합리하게 여기느냐 네 생각에 네가 하나님보다 의롭다 하여	Thinkest thou this to be right, that thou saidst, My righteousness is more than God’s?	“Do you think this is just? You say, ‘I am more righteous than God.’
JOB	35	3	이르기를 유익이 무엇인고 범죄한 것보다 내게 이익이 무엇인고 하는구나	For thou saidst, What advantage will it be unto thee? and, What profit shall I have, if I be cleansed from my sin?	For you ask, ‘What does it profit me, and what benefit do I gain apart from sin?’
JOB	35	4	내가 너와 및 너와 함께 있는 네 동무들에게 대답하리라	I will answer thee, and thy companions with thee.	I will reply to you and to your friends as well.
JOB	35	5	너는 하늘을 우러러 보라 네 위의 높은 궁창을 바라보라	Look unto the heavens, and see; and behold the clouds which are higher than thou.	Look to the heavens and see; gaze at the clouds high above you.
JOB	35	6	네가 범죄한들 하나님께 무슨 영향이 있겠으며 네 죄악이 관영한들 하나님께 무슨 관계가 있겠으며	If thou sinnest, what doest thou against him? or if thy transgressions be multiplied, what doest thou unto him?	If you sin, what do you accomplish against Him? If you multiply your transgressions, what do you do to Him?
JOB	35	7	네가 의로운들 하나님께 무엇을 드리겠으며 그가 네 손에서 무엇을 받으시겠느냐	If thou be righteous, what givest thou him? or what receiveth he of thine hand?	If you are righteous, what do you give Him, or what does He receive from your hand?
JOB	35	8	네 악은 너와 같은 사람이나 해할 따름이요 네 의는 인생이나 유익하게 할 뿐이니라	Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art; and thy righteousness may profit the son of man.	Your wickedness affects only a man like yourself, and your righteousness only a son of man.
JOB	35	9	사람은 학대가 많으므로 부르짖으며 세력 있는 자의 팔에 눌리므로 도움을 부르짖으나	By reason of the multitude of oppressions they make the oppressed to cry: they cry out by reason of the arm of the mighty.	Men cry out under great oppression; they plead for relief from the arm of the mighty.
JOB	35	10	나를 지으신 하나님 곧 사람으로 밤중에 노래하게 하시며 우리를 교육하시기를 땅의 짐승에게 하심보다 더하게 하시며 우리에게 지혜 주시기를 공중의 새에게 주심보다 더하시는 이가 어디 계신가 말하는 자가 한 사람도 없구나	But none saith, Where is God my maker, who giveth songs in the night;	But no one asks, ‘Where is God my Maker, who gives us songs in the night,
JOB	35	11	상동	Who teacheth us more than the beasts of the earth, and maketh us wiser than the fowls of heaven?	who teaches us more than the beasts of the earth and makes us wiser than the birds of the air?’
JOB	35	12	그들이 악인의 교만을 인하여 거기서 부르짖으나 응락하는 자가 없음은	There they cry, but none giveth answer, because of the pride of evil men.	There they cry out, but He does not answer, because of the pride of evil men.
JOB	35	13	헛된 부르짖음은 하나님이 결코 듣지 아니하시며 전능자가 돌아보지 아니 하심이라	Surely God will not hear vanity, neither will the Almighty regard it.	Surely God does not listen to empty pleas, and the Almighty does not take note of it.
JOB	35	14	하물며 말하기를 하나님은 뵈올 수 없고 일의 시비는 그 앞에 있으니 나는 그를 기다릴 뿐이라 하는 너랴	Although thou sayest thou shalt not see him, yet judgment is before him; therefore trust thou in him.	How much less, then, when you say that you do not see Him, that your case is before Him and you must wait for Him,
JOB	35	15	하나님이 진노하심으로 벌을 주지 아니하셨고 횡포를 심히 살피지 아니하셨으므로	But now, because it is not so, he hath visited in his anger; yet he knoweth it not in great extremity:	and further, that in His anger He has not punished or taken much notice of folly!
JOB	35	16	이제 너 욥이 헛되이 입을 열어 지식 없는 말을 많이 하는구나	Therefore doth Job open his mouth in vain; he multiplieth words without knowledge.	So Job opens his mouth in vain and multiplies words without knowledge.”
JOB	36	1	엘리후가 말을 이어 가로되	Elihu also proceeded, and said,	And Elihu continued:
JOB	36	2	나를 잠간 용납하라 내가 네게 보이리니 이는 내가 하나님을 위하여 오히려 할 말이 있음이라	Suffer me a little, and I will shew thee that I have yet to speak on God’s behalf.	“Bear with me a little longer, and I will show you that there is more to be said on God’s behalf.
JOB	36	3	내가 먼 데서 지식을 취하고 나를 지으신 자에게 의를 돌려 보내리라	I will fetch my knowledge from afar, and will ascribe righteousness to my Maker.	I get my knowledge from afar, and I will ascribe justice to my Maker.
JOB	36	4	진실로 내 말이 거짓이 아니라 지식이 구비한 자가 너와 함께 있느니라	For truly my words shall not be false: he that is perfect in knowledge is with thee.	For truly my words are free of falsehood; one perfect in knowledge is with you.
JOB	36	5	하나님은 전능하시나 아무도 멸시치 아니하시며 그 지능이 무궁하사	Behold, God is mighty, and despiseth not any: he is mighty in strength and wisdom.	Indeed, God is mighty, but He despises no one; He is mighty in strength of understanding.
JOB	36	6	악인을 살려 두지 않으시며 고난 받는 자를 위하여 신원하시며	He preserveth not the life of the wicked: but giveth right to the poor.	He does not keep the wicked alive, but He grants justice to the afflicted.
JOB	36	7	그 눈을 의인에게서 돌이키지 아니하시고 그를 왕과 함께 영원히 위에 앉히사 존귀하게 하시며	He withdraweth not his eyes from the righteous: but with kings are they on the throne; yea, he doth establish them for ever, and they are exalted.	He does not take His eyes off the righteous, but He enthrones them with kings and exalts them forever.
JOB	36	8	혹시 그들이 누설에 매이거나 환난의 줄에 얽혔으면	And if they be bound in fetters, and be holden in cords of affliction;	And if men are bound with chains, caught in cords of affliction,
JOB	36	9	그들의 소행과 허물을 보이사 그 교만한 행위를 알게 하시고	Then he sheweth them their work, and their transgressions that they have exceeded.	then He tells them their deeds and how arrogantly they have transgressed.
JOB	36	10	그들의 귀를 열어 교훈을 듣게 하시며 명하여 죄악에서 돌아오게 하시나니	He openeth also their ear to discipline, and commandeth that they return from iniquity.	He opens their ears to correction and commands that they turn from iniquity.
JOB	36	11	만일 그들이 청종하여 섬기면 형통히 날을 보내며 즐거이 해를 지낼 것이요	If they obey and serve him, they shall spend their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasures.	If they obey and serve Him, then they end their days in prosperity and their years in happiness.
JOB	36	12	만일 그들이 청종치 아니하면 칼에 망하며 지식 없이 죽을 것이니라	But if they obey not, they shall perish by the sword, and they shall die without knowledge.	But if they do not obey, then they perish by the sword and die without knowledge.
JOB	36	13	마음이 사곡한 자들은 분노를 쌓으며 하나님께 속박을 받을지라도 도우심을 구하지 아니하나니	But the hypocrites in heart heap up wrath: they cry not when he bindeth them.	The godless in heart harbor resentment; even when He binds them, they do not cry for help.
JOB	36	14	그들은 젊어서 죽으며 그 생명이 남창과 함께 망하려니와	They die in youth, and their life is among the unclean.	They die in their youth, among the male shrine prostitutes.
JOB	36	15	하나님은 곤고한 자를 그 곤고할 즈음에 구원하시며 학대 당할 즈음에 그 귀를 여시나니	He delivereth the poor in his affliction, and openeth their ears in oppression.	God rescues the afflicted by their affliction and opens their ears in oppression.
JOB	36	16	그러므로 하나님이 너를 곤고함에서 이끌어 내사 좁지 않고 넓은 곳으로 옮기려 하셨은즉 무릇 네 상에 차린 것은 살진 것이 되었으리라	Even so would he have removed thee out of the strait into a broad place, where there is no straitness; and that which should be set on thy table should be full of fatness.	Indeed, He drew you from the jaws of distress to a spacious and broad place, to a table full of richness.
JOB	36	17	이제는 악인의 받을 벌이 네게 가득하였고 심판과 공의가 너를 잡았나니	But thou hast fulfilled the judgment of the wicked: judgment and justice take hold on thee.	But now you are laden with the judgment due the wicked; judgment and justice have seized you.
JOB	36	18	너는 분격함을 인하여 징책을 대적하지 말라 대속함을 얻을 일이 큰즉 스스로 그릇되게 말지니라	Because there is wrath, beware lest he take thee away with his stroke: then a great ransom cannot deliver thee.	Be careful that no one lures you with riches; do not let a large bribe lead you astray.
JOB	36	19	너의 부르짖음이나 너의 세력이 어찌 능히 너의 곤고한 가운데서 너로 유익하게 하겠느냐	Will he esteem thy riches? no, not gold, nor all the forces of strength.	Can your wealth or all your mighty effort keep you from distress?
JOB	36	20	너는 밤 곧 인생이 자기 곳에서 제함을 받는 때를 사모하지 말것이니라	Desire not the night, when people are cut off in their place.	Do not long for the night, when people vanish from their homes.
JOB	36	21	삼가 악으로 치우치지 말라 네가 환난보다 이것을 택하였느니라	Take heed, regard not iniquity: for this hast thou chosen rather than affliction.	Be careful not to turn to iniquity, for this you have preferred to affliction.
JOB	36	22	하나님은 그 권능으로 큰 일을 행하시나니 누가 그 같이 교훈을 베풀겠느냐	Behold, God exalteth by his power: who teacheth like him?	Behold, God is exalted in His power. Who is a teacher like Him?
JOB	36	23	누가 그를 위하여 그의 길을 정하였느냐 누가 말하기를 주께서 불의를 행하셨나이다 할 수 있으랴	Who hath enjoined him his way? or who can say, Thou hast wrought iniquity?	Who has appointed His way for Him, or told Him, ‘You have done wrong’?
JOB	36	24	너는 하나님의 하신 일 찬송하기를 잊지 말지니라 인생이 그 일을 노래하였느니라	Remember that thou magnify his work, which men behold.	Remember to magnify His work, which men have praised in song.
JOB	36	25	그 일을 모든 사람이 우러러 보나니 먼 데서도 보느니라	Every man may see it; man may behold it afar off.	All mankind has seen it; men behold it from afar.
JOB	36	26	하나님은 크시니 우리가 그를 알 수 없고 그 연수를 계산할 수 없느니라	Behold, God is great, and we know him not, neither can the number of his years be searched out.	Indeed, God is great—beyond our knowledge; the number of His years is unsearchable.
JOB	36	27	그가 물을 가늘게 이끌어 올리신즉 그것이 안개 되어 비를 이루고	For he maketh small the drops of water: they pour down rain according to the vapour thereof:	For He draws up drops of water which distill the rain from the mist,
JOB	36	28	그것이 공중에서 내려 사람 위에 쏟아지느니라	Which the clouds do drop and distil upon man abundantly.	which the clouds pour out and shower abundantly on mankind.
JOB	36	29	구름의 폐임과 그의 장막의 울리는 소리를 누가 능히 깨달으랴	Also can any understand the spreadings of the clouds, or the noise of his tabernacle?	Furthermore, who can understand how the clouds spread out, how the thunder roars from His pavilion?
JOB	36	30	그가 번개 빛으로 자기의 사면에 두르시며 바다 밑도 가리우시며	Behold, he spreadeth his light upon it, and covereth the bottom of the sea.	See how He scatters His lightning around Him and covers the depths of the sea.
JOB	36	31	이런 것들로 만민을 징벌하시며 이런 것들로 식물을 풍비히 주시느니라	For by them judgeth he the people; he giveth meat in abundance.	For by these He judges the nations and provides food in abundance.
JOB	36	32	그는 번개 빛으로 그 두 손을 싸시고 그것을 명하사 푯대를 맞추게 하시나니	With clouds he covereth the light; and commandeth it not to shine by the cloud that cometh betwixt.	He fills His hands with lightning and commands it to strike its mark.
JOB	36	33	그 울리는 소리가 풍우를 표시하고 육축에게까지 그 올라 오는 것을 표시하느니라	The noise thereof sheweth concerning it, the cattle also concerning the vapour.	The thunder declares His presence; even the cattle regard the rising storm.
JOB	37	1	이로 인하여 내 마음이 떨며 자기 처소에서 떠나느니라	At this also my heart trembleth, and is moved out of his place.	“At this my heart also pounds and leaps from its place.
JOB	37	2	하나님의 음성 곧 그 입에서 나오는 소리를 들으라 들으라	Hear attentively the noise of his voice, and the sound that goeth out of his mouth.	Listen closely to the thunder of His voice and the rumbling that comes from His mouth.
JOB	37	3	그 소리를 천하에 퍼치시며 번개 빛으로 땅끝까지 이르게 하시고	He directeth it under the whole heaven, and his lightning unto the ends of the earth.	He unleashes His lightning beneath the whole sky and sends it to the ends of the earth.
JOB	37	4	그 후에 음성을 발하시며 위엄의 울리는 음성을 내시고는 그 음성이 들릴 때에 번개 빛을 금치 아니하시느니라	After it a voice roareth: he thundereth with the voice of his excellency; and he will not stay them when his voice is heard.	Then there comes a roaring sound; He thunders with His majestic voice. He does not restrain the lightning when His voice resounds.
JOB	37	5	하나님이 기이하게 음성을 울리시며 우리의 헤아릴 수 없는 큰 일을 행하시느니라	God thundereth marvellously with his voice; great things doeth he, which we cannot comprehend.	God thunders wondrously with His voice; He does great things we cannot comprehend.
JOB	37	6	눈을 명하여 땅에 내리라 하시며 적은 비와 큰 비도 그같이 내리게 하시느니라	For he saith to the snow, Be thou on the earth; likewise to the small rain, and to the great rain of his strength.	For He says to the snow, ‘Fall on the earth,’ and to the gentle rain, ‘Pour out a mighty downpour.’
JOB	37	7	그가 각 사람의 손을 봉하시나니 이는 그 지으신 모든 사람으로 그것을 알게 하려 하심이니라	He sealeth up the hand of every man; that all men may know his work.	He seals up the hand of every man, so that all men may know His work.
JOB	37	8	짐승들은 숨는 곳으로 들어가서 그 굴에 머물며	Then the beasts go into dens, and remain in their places.	The wild animals enter their lairs; they settle down in their dens.
JOB	37	9	남방 밀실에서는 광풍이 이르고 북방에서는 찬 기운이 이르며	Out of the south cometh the whirlwind: and cold out of the north.	The tempest comes from its chamber, and the cold from the driving north winds.
JOB	37	10	하나님의 부시는 기운에 얼음이 얼고 물의 넓이가 줄어지느니라	By the breath of God frost is given: and the breadth of the waters is straitened.	By the breath of God the ice is formed and the watery expanses are frozen.
JOB	37	11	그가 습기로 빽빽한 구름 위에 실으시고 번개 빛의 구름을 널리 펴신즉	Also by watering he wearieth the thick cloud: he scattereth his bright cloud:	He loads the clouds with moisture; He scatters His lightning through them.
JOB	37	12	구름이 인도하시는 대로 두루 행하나니 이는 무릇 그의 명하시는 것을 세계상에 이루려 함이라	And it is turned round about by his counsels: that they may do whatsoever he commandeth them upon the face of the world in the earth.	They swirl about, whirling at His direction, accomplishing all that He commands over the face of all the earth.
JOB	37	13	혹 징벌을 위하며 혹 토지를 위하며 혹 긍휼 베푸심을 위하여 구름으로 오게 하시느니라	He causeth it to come, whether for correction, or for his land, or for mercy.	Whether for punishment or for His land, He accomplishes this in His loving devotion.
JOB	37	14	욥이여 이것을 듣고 가만히 서서 하나님의 기묘하신 일을 궁구하라	Hearken unto this, O Job: stand still, and consider the wondrous works of God.	Listen to this, O Job; stand still and consider the wonders of God.
JOB	37	15	하나님이 어떻게 이런 것들에게 명령하셔서 그 구름의 번개 빛으로 번쩍번쩍하게 하시는지 네가 아느냐	Dost thou know when God disposed them, and caused the light of his cloud to shine?	Do you know how God dispatches the clouds or makes the lightning flash?
JOB	37	16	구름의 평평하게 뜬 것과 지혜가 온전하신 자의 기묘한 일을 네가 아느냐	Dost thou know the balancings of the clouds, the wondrous works of him which is perfect in knowledge?	Do you understand how the clouds float, those wonders of Him who is perfect in knowledge?
JOB	37	17	남풍으로 하여 땅이 고요할 때에 네 의복이 따뜻한 까닭을 네가 아느냐	How thy garments are warm, when he quieteth the earth by the south wind?	You whose clothes get hot when the land lies hushed under the south wind,
JOB	37	18	네가 능히 그와 함께 하여 부은 거울 같은 견고한 궁창을 펼 수 있느냐	Hast thou with him spread out the sky, which is strong, and as a molten looking glass?	can you, like Him, spread out the skies to reflect the heat like a mirror of bronze?
JOB	37	19	우리가 그에게 할 말을 너는 우리에게 가르치라 우리는 어두워서 진술하지 못하겠노라	Teach us what we shall say unto him; for we cannot order our speech by reason of darkness.	Teach us what we should say to Him; we cannot draw up our case when our faces are in darkness.
JOB	37	20	내가 말하고 싶은 것을 어찌 그에게 고할 수 있으랴 어찌 삼키우기를 바랄 자가 있으랴	Shall it be told him that I speak? if a man speak, surely he shall be swallowed up.	Should He be told that I want to speak? Would a man ask to be swallowed up?
JOB	37	21	사람이 어떤 때는 궁창의 광명을 볼 수 없어도 바람이 지나가면 맑아지느니라	And now men see not the bright light which is in the clouds: but the wind passeth, and cleanseth them.	Now no one can gaze at the sun when it is bright in the skies after the wind has swept them clean.
JOB	37	22	북방에서는 금 빛이 나오나니 하나님께는 두려운 위엄이 있느니라	Fair weather cometh out of the north: with God is terrible majesty.	Out of the north He comes in golden splendor; awesome majesty surrounds Him.
JOB	37	23	전능자를 우리가 측량할 수 없나니 그는 권능이 지극히 크사 심판이나 무한한 공의를 굽히지 아니 하심이라	Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him out: he is excellent in power, and in judgment, and in plenty of justice: he will not afflict.	The Almighty is beyond our reach; He is exalted in power! In His justice and great righteousness He does not oppress.
JOB	37	24	그러므로 사람들은 그를 경외하고 그는 마음에 지혜롭다 하는 자를 돌아보지 아니하시느니라	Men do therefore fear him: he respecteth not any that are wise of heart.	Therefore, men fear Him, for He is not partial to the wise in heart.”
JOB	38	1	때에 여호와께서 폭풍 가운데로서 욥에게 말씀하여 가라사대	Then the Lord answered Job out of the whirlwind, and said,	Then the LORD answered Job out of the whirlwind and said:
JOB	38	2	무지한 말로 이치를 어둡게 하는 자가 누구냐	Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?	“Who is this who obscures My counsel by words without knowledge?
JOB	38	3	너는 대장부처럼 허리를 묶고 내가 네게 묻는 것을 대답할지니라	Gird up now thy loins like a man; for I will demand of thee, and answer thou me.	Now brace yourself like a man; I will question you, and you shall inform Me.
JOB	38	4	내가 땅의 기초를 놓을 때에 네가 어디 있었느냐 네가 깨달아 알았거든 말할지니라	Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? declare, if thou hast understanding.	Where were you when I laid the foundations of the earth? Tell Me, if you have understanding.
JOB	38	5	누가 그 도량을 정하였었는지 누가 그 준승을 그 위에 띄웠었는지 네가 아느냐	Who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest? or who hath stretched the line upon it?	Who fixed its measurements? Surely you know! Or who stretched a measuring line across it?
JOB	38	6	그 주초는 무엇 위에 세웠으며 그 모퉁이 돌은 누가 놓았었느냐	Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the corner stone thereof;	On what were its foundations set, or who laid its cornerstone,
JOB	38	7	그 때에 새벽 별들이 함께 노래하며 하나님의 아들들이 다 기쁘게 소리하였었느니라	When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?	while the morning stars sang together and all the sons of God shouted for joy?
JOB	38	8	바닷물이 태에서 나옴 같이 넘쳐 흐를 때에 문으로 그것을 막은 자가 누구냐	Or who shut up the sea with doors, when it brake forth, as if it had issued out of the womb?	Who enclosed the sea behind doors when it burst forth from the womb,
JOB	38	9	그 때에 내가 구름으로 그 의복을 만들고 흑암으로 그 강보를 만들고	When I made the cloud the garment thereof, and thick darkness a swaddlingband for it,	when I made the clouds its garment and thick darkness its blanket,
JOB	38	10	계한을 정하여 문과 빗장을 베풀고	And brake up for it my decreed place, and set bars and doors,	when I fixed its boundaries and set in place its bars and doors,
JOB	38	11	이르기를 네가 여기까지 오고 넘어가지 못하리니 네 교만한 물결이 여기 그칠지니라 하였었노라	And said, Hitherto shalt thou come, but no further: and here shall thy proud waves be stayed?	and I declared: ‘You may come this far, but no farther; here your proud waves must stop’?
JOB	38	12	네가 나던 날부터 아침을 명하였었느냐 새벽으로 그 처소를 알게 하여	Hast thou commanded the morning since thy days; and caused the dayspring to know his place;	In your days, have you commanded the morning or assigned the dawn its place,
JOB	38	13	그것으로 땅끝에 비취게 하고 악인을 그 가운데서 구축한 일이 있었느냐	That it might take hold of the ends of the earth, that the wicked might be shaken out of it?	that it might spread to the ends of the earth and shake the wicked out of it?
JOB	38	14	땅이 변화하여 진흙에 인친 것 같고 만물이 옷 같이 나타나되	It is turned as clay to the seal; and they stand as a garment.	The earth takes shape like clay under a seal; its hills stand out like the folds of a garment.
JOB	38	15	악인에게는 그 빛이 금한바 되고 그들의 높이 든 팔이 꺽이느니라	And from the wicked their light is withholden, and the high arm shall be broken.	Light is withheld from the wicked, and their upraised arm is broken.
JOB	38	16	네가 바다 근원에 들어갔었느냐 깊은 물밑으로 걸어 다녔었느냐	Hast thou entered into the springs of the sea? or hast thou walked in the search of the depth?	Have you journeyed to the vents of the sea or walked in the trenches of the deep?
JOB	38	17	사망의 문이 네게 나타났었느냐 사망의 그늘진 문을 네가 보았었느냐	Have the gates of death been opened unto thee? or hast thou seen the doors of the shadow of death?	Have the gates of death been revealed to you? Have you seen the gates of the shadow of death?
JOB	38	18	땅의 넓이를 네가 측량하였었느냐 다 알거든 말할지니라	Hast thou perceived the breadth of the earth? declare if thou knowest it all.	Have you surveyed the extent of the earth? Tell Me, if you know all this.
JOB	38	19	광명의 처소는 어느 길로 가며 흑암의 처소는 어디냐	Where is the way where light dwelleth? and as for darkness, where is the place thereof,	Where is the way to the home of light? Do you know where darkness resides,
JOB	38	20	네가 능히 그 지경으로 인도할 수 있느냐 그 집의 길을 아느냐	That thou shouldest take it to the bound thereof, and that thou shouldest know the paths to the house thereof?	so you can lead it back to its border? Do you know the paths to its home?
JOB	38	21	네가 아마 알리라 네가 그 때에 났었나니 너의 연수가 많음이니라	Knowest thou it, because thou wast then born? or because the number of thy days is great?	Surely you know, for you were already born! And the number of your days is great!
JOB	38	22	네가 눈 곳간에 들어갔었느냐 우박 창고를 보았느냐	Hast thou entered into the treasures of the snow? or hast thou seen the treasures of the hail,	Have you entered the storehouses of snow or observed the storehouses of hail,
JOB	38	23	내가 환난 때와 전쟁과 격투의 날을 위하여 이것을 저축하였노라	Which I have reserved against the time of trouble, against the day of battle and war?	which I hold in reserve for times of trouble, for the day of war and battle?
JOB	38	24	광명이 어느 길로 말미암아 뻗치며 동풍이 어느 길로 말미암아 땅에 흩어지느냐	By what way is the light parted, which scattereth the east wind upon the earth?	In which direction is the lightning dispersed, or the east wind scattered over the earth?
JOB	38	25	누가 폭우를 위하여 길을 내었으며 우뢰의 번개 길을 내었으며	Who hath divided a watercourse for the overflowing of waters, or a way for the lightning of thunder;	Who cuts a channel for the flood or clears a path for the thunderbolt,
JOB	38	26	사람 없는 땅에, 사람 없는 광야에 비를 내리고	To cause it to rain on the earth, where no man is; on the wilderness, wherein there is no man;	to bring rain on a barren land, on a desert where no man lives,
JOB	38	27	황무하고 공허한 토지를 축축하게 하고 연한 풀이 나게 하였느냐	To satisfy the desolate and waste ground; and to cause the bud of the tender herb to spring forth?	to satisfy the parched wasteland and make it sprout with tender grass?
JOB	38	28	비가 아비가 있느냐 이슬 방울은 누가 낳았느냐	Hath the rain a father? or who hath begotten the drops of dew?	Does the rain have a father? Who has begotten the drops of dew?
JOB	38	29	얼음은 뉘 태에서 났느냐 공중의 서리는 누가 낳았느냐	Out of whose womb came the ice? and the hoary frost of heaven, who hath gendered it?	From whose womb does the ice emerge? Who gives birth to the frost from heaven,
JOB	38	30	물이 돌 같이 굳어지고 해면이 어느니라	The waters are hid as with a stone, and the face of the deep is frozen.	when the waters become hard as stone and the surface of the deep is frozen?
JOB	38	31	네가 묘성을 매어 떨기 되게 하겠느냐 삼성의 띠를 풀겠느냐	Canst thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion?	Can you bind the chains of the Pleiades or loosen the belt of Orion?
JOB	38	32	네가 열두 궁성을 때를 따라 이끌어 내겠느냐 북두성과 그 속한 별들을 인도하겠느냐	Canst thou bring forth Mazzaroth in his season? or canst thou guide Arcturus with his sons?	Can you bring forth the constellations in their seasons or lead out the Bear and her cubs?
JOB	38	33	네가 하늘의 법도를 아느냐 하늘로 그 권능을 땅에 베풀게 하겠느냐	Knowest thou the ordinances of heaven? canst thou set the dominion thereof in the earth?	Do you know the laws of the heavens? Can you set their dominion over the earth?
JOB	38	34	네 소리를 구름에 올려 큰 물로 네게 덮이게 하겠느냐	Canst thou lift up thy voice to the clouds, that abundance of waters may cover thee?	Can you command the clouds so that a flood of water covers you?
JOB	38	35	네가 번개를 보내어 가게 하되 그것으로 네게 우리가 여기 있나이다 하게 하겠느냐	Canst thou send lightnings, that they may go, and say unto thee, Here we are?	Can you send the lightning bolts on their way? Do they report to you, ‘Here we are’?
JOB	38	36	가슴 속의 지혜는 누가 준 것이냐 마음 속의 총명은 누가 준 것이냐	Who hath put wisdom in the inward parts? or who hath given understanding to the heart?	Who has put wisdom in the heart or given understanding to the mind?
JOB	38	37	누가 지혜로 구름을 계수하겠느냐 누가 하늘의 병을 쏟아	Who can number the clouds in wisdom? or who can stay the bottles of heaven,	Who has the wisdom to count the clouds? Or who can tilt the water jars of the heavens
JOB	38	38	티끌로 진흙을 이루며 흙덩이로 서로 붙게 하겠느냐	When the dust groweth into hardness, and the clods cleave fast together?	when the dust hardens into a mass and the clods of earth stick together?
JOB	38	39	네가 암사자를 위하여 식물을 사냥하겠느냐 젊은 사자의 식량을 채우겠느냐	Wilt thou hunt the prey for the lion? or fill the appetite of the young lions,	Can you hunt the prey for a lioness or satisfy the hunger of young lions
JOB	38	40	그것들이 굴에 엎드리며 삼림에 누워서 기다리는 때에니라	When they couch in their dens, and abide in the covert to lie in wait?	when they crouch in their dens and lie in wait in the thicket?
JOB	38	41	까마귀 새끼가 하나님을 향하여 부르짖으며 먹을 것이 없어서 오락가락 할 때에 그것을 위하여 먹을 것을 예비하는 자가 누구냐	Who provideth for the raven his food? when his young ones cry unto God, they wander for lack of meat.	Who provides food for the raven when its young cry out to God as they wander about for lack of food?
JOB	39	1	산 염소가 새끼 치는 때를 네가 아느냐 암사슴의 새끼 낳을 기한을 네가 알 수 있느냐	Knowest thou the time when the wild goats of the rock bring forth? or canst thou mark when the hinds do calve?	“Do you know when mountain goats give birth? Have you watched the doe bear her fawn?
JOB	39	2	그것이 몇 달만에 만삭되는지 아느냐 그 낳을 때를 아느냐	Canst thou number the months that they fulfil? or knowest thou the time when they bring forth?	Can you count the months they are pregnant? Do you know the time they give birth?
JOB	39	3	그것들은 몸을 구푸리고 새끼를 낳아 그 괴로움을 지내어 버리며	They bow themselves, they bring forth their young ones, they cast out their sorrows.	They crouch down and bring forth their young; they deliver their newborn.
JOB	39	4	그 새끼는 강하여져서 빈 들에서 길리우다가 나가고는 다시 돌아오지 아니하느니라	Their young ones are in good liking, they grow up with corn; they go forth, and return not unto them.	Their young ones thrive and grow up in the open field; they leave and do not return.
JOB	39	5	누가 들나귀를 놓아 자유하게 하였느냐 누가 빠른 나귀의 매인 것을 풀었느냐	Who hath sent out the wild ass free? or who hath loosed the bands of the wild ass?	Who set the wild donkey free? Who released the swift donkey from the harness?
JOB	39	6	내가 들로 그 집을, 짠 땅으로 그 사는 처소를 삼았느니라	Whose house I have made the wilderness, and the barren land his dwellings.	I made the wilderness his home and the salt flats his dwelling.
JOB	39	7	들나귀는 성읍의 지꺼리는 것을 업신여기니 어거하는 자의 지르는 소리가 그것에게 들리지 아니하며	He scorneth the multitude of the city, neither regardeth he the crying of the driver.	He scorns the tumult of the city and never hears the shouts of a driver.
JOB	39	8	초장이 된 산으로 두루 다니며 여러 가지 푸른 것을 찾느니라	The range of the mountains is his pasture, and he searcheth after every green thing.	He roams the mountains for pasture, searching for any green thing.
JOB	39	9	들소가 어찌 즐겨 네게 복종하며 네 외양간에 머물겠느냐	Will the unicorn be willing to serve thee, or abide by thy crib?	Will the wild ox consent to serve you? Will he stay by your manger at night?
JOB	39	10	네가 능히 줄로 들소를 매어 이랑을 갈게 하겠느냐 그것이 어찌 골짜기에서 너를 따라 쓰레를 끌겠느냐	Canst thou bind the unicorn with his band in the furrow? or will he harrow the valleys after thee?	Can you hold him to the furrow with a harness? Will he plow the valleys behind you?
JOB	39	11	그것의 힘이 많다고 네가 그것을 의지하겠느냐 네 수고하는 일을 그것에게 맡기겠느냐	Wilt thou trust him, because his strength is great? or wilt thou leave thy labour to him?	Can you rely on his great strength? Will you leave your hard work to him?
JOB	39	12	그것이 네 곡식을 집으로 실어오며 네 타작 마당에 곡식 모으기를 그것에게 의탁하겠느냐	Wilt thou believe him, that he will bring home thy seed, and gather it into thy barn?	Can you trust him to bring in your grain and gather it to your threshing floor?
JOB	39	13	타조는 즐거이 그 날개를 친다마는 그 깃과 털이 인자를 베푸느냐	Gavest thou the goodly wings unto the peacocks? or wings and feathers unto the ostrich?	The wings of the ostrich flap joyfully, but cannot match the pinions and feathers of the stork.
JOB	39	14	그것이 알을 땅에 버려두어 모래에서 더워지게 하고	Which leaveth her eggs in the earth, and warmeth them in dust,	For she leaves her eggs on the ground and lets them warm in the sand.
JOB	39	15	발에 깨어질 것이나 들짐승에게 밟힐 것을 생각지 아니하고	And forgetteth that the foot may crush them, or that the wild beast may break them.	She forgets that a foot may crush them, or a wild animal may trample them.
JOB	39	16	그 새끼에게 무정함이 제 새끼가 아닌 것처럼 하며 그 구로한 것이 헛되게 될지라도 괘념치 아니하나니	She is hardened against her young ones, as though they were not hers: her labour is in vain without fear;	She treats her young harshly, as if not her own, with no concern that her labor was in vain.
JOB	39	17	이는 하나님 내가 지혜를 품부하지 아니하고 총명을 주지 아니함이니라	Because God hath deprived her of wisdom, neither hath he imparted to her understanding.	For God has deprived her of wisdom; He has not endowed her with understanding.
JOB	39	18	그러나 그 몸을 떨쳐 뛰어갈 때에는 말과 그 탄 자를 경히 여기느니라	What time she lifteth up herself on high, she scorneth the horse and his rider.	Yet when she proudly spreads her wings, she laughs at the horse and its rider.
JOB	39	19	말의 힘을 네가 주었느냐 그 목에 흩날리는 갈기를 네가 입혔느냐	Hast thou given the horse strength? hast thou clothed his neck with thunder?	Do you give strength to the horse or adorn his neck with a mane?
JOB	39	20	네가 그것으로 메뚜기처럼 뛰게 하였느냐 그 위엄스러운 콧소리가 두려우니라	Canst thou make him afraid as a grasshopper? the glory of his nostrils is terrible.	Do you make him leap like a locust, striking terror with his proud snorting?
JOB	39	21	그것이 골짜기에서 허위고 힘 있음을 기뻐하며 앞으로 나아가서 군사들을 맞되	He paweth in the valley, and rejoiceth in his strength: he goeth on to meet the armed men.	He paws in the valley and rejoices in his strength; he charges into battle.
JOB	39	22	두려움을 비웃고 놀라지 아니하며 칼을 당할지라도 물러나지 아니하니	He mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted; neither turneth he back from the sword.	He laughs at fear, frightened of nothing; he does not turn back from the sword.
JOB	39	23	그 위에서는 전동과 빛난 작은 창과 큰 창이 쟁쟁하며	The quiver rattleth against him, the glittering spear and the shield.	A quiver rattles at his side, along with a flashing spear and lance.
JOB	39	24	땅을 삼킬듯이 맹렬히 성내며 나팔 소리를 들으면 머물러 서지 아니하고	He swalloweth the ground with fierceness and rage: neither believeth he that it is the sound of the trumpet.	Trembling with excitement, he devours the distance; he cannot stand still when the ram’s horn sounds.
JOB	39	25	나팔 소리 나는 대로 소소히 울며 멀리서 싸움 냄새를 맡고 장관의 호령과 떠드는 소리를 듣느니라	He saith among the trumpets, Ha, ha; and he smelleth the battle afar off, the thunder of the captains, and the shouting.	At the blast of the horn, he snorts with fervor. He catches the scent of battle from afar— the shouts of captains and the cry of war.
JOB	39	26	매가 떠올라서 날개를 펼쳐 남방으로 향하는 것이 어찌 네 지혜로 말미암음이냐	Doth the hawk fly by thy wisdom, and stretch her wings toward the south?	Does the hawk take flight by your understanding and spread his wings toward the south?
JOB	39	27	독수리가 공중에 떠서 높은 곳에 보금자리를 만드는 것이 어찌 네 명령을 의지함이냐	Doth the eagle mount up at thy command, and make her nest on high?	Does the eagle soar at your command and make his nest on high?
JOB	39	28	그것이 낭떠러지에 집을 지으며 뾰족한 바위 끝이나 험준한 데 거하며	She dwelleth and abideth on the rock, upon the crag of the rock, and the strong place.	He dwells on a cliff and lodges there; his stronghold is on a rocky crag.
JOB	39	29	거기서 움킬만한 것을 살피나니 그 눈이 멀리 봄이며	From thence she seeketh the prey, and her eyes behold afar off.	From there he spies out food; his eyes see it from afar.
JOB	39	30	그 새끼들도 피를 빠나니 살륙 당한 자 있는 곳에는 그것도 거기 있느니라	Her young ones also suck up blood: and where the slain are, there is she.	His young ones feast on blood; and where the slain are, there he is.”
JOB	40	1	여호와께서 또 욥에게 말씀하여 가라사대	Moreover the Lord answered Job, and said,	And the LORD said to Job:
JOB	40	2	변박하는 자가 전능자와 다투겠느냐 하나님과 변론하는 자는 대답할지니라	Shall he that contendeth with the Almighty instruct him? he that reproveth God, let him answer it.	“Will the faultfinder contend with the Almighty? Let him who argues with God give an answer.”
JOB	40	3	욥이 여호와께 대답하여 가로되	Then Job answered the Lord, and said,	Then Job answered the LORD:
JOB	40	4	나는 미천하오니 무엇이라 주께 대답하리이까 손으로 내 입을 가릴뿐이로소이다	Behold, I am vile; what shall I answer thee? I will lay mine hand upon my mouth.	“Behold, I am insignificant. How can I reply to You? I place my hand over my mouth.
JOB	40	5	내가 한두 번 말하였사온즉 다시는 더하지도 아니하겠고 대답지도 아니하겠나이다	Once have I spoken; but I will not answer: yea, twice; but I will proceed no further.	I have spoken once, but I have no answer— twice, but I have nothing to add.”
JOB	40	6	여호와께서 푹풍 가운데서 욥에게 말씀하여 가라사대	Then answered the Lord unto Job out of the whirlwind, and said,	Then the LORD answered Job out of the whirlwind and said:
JOB	40	7	너는 대장부처럼 허리를 묶고 내가 네게 묻는 것을 대답할지니라	Gird up thy loins now like a man: I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto me.	“Now brace yourself like a man; I will question you, and you shall inform Me.
JOB	40	8	네가 내 심판을 폐하려느냐 스스로 의롭다 하려 하여 나를 불의하다 하느냐	Wilt thou also disannul my judgment? wilt thou condemn me, that thou mayest be righteous?	Would you really annul My justice? Would you condemn Me to justify yourself?
JOB	40	9	네가 하나님처럼 팔이 있느냐 하나님처럼 우렁차게 울리는 소리를 내겠느냐	Hast thou an arm like God? or canst thou thunder with a voice like him?	Do you have an arm like God’s? Can you thunder with a voice like His?
JOB	40	10	너는 위엄과 존귀로 스스로 꾸미며 영광과 화미를 스스로 입을지니라	Deck thyself now with majesty and excellency; and array thyself with glory and beauty.	Then adorn yourself with majesty and splendor, and clothe yourself with honor and glory.
JOB	40	11	너의 넘치는 노를 쏟아서 교만한 자를 발견하여 낱낱이 낮추되	Cast abroad the rage of thy wrath: and behold every one that is proud, and abase him.	Unleash the fury of your wrath; look on every proud man and bring him low.
JOB	40	12	곧 모든 교만한 자를 발견하여 낮추며 악인을 그 처소에서 밟아서	Look on every one that is proud, and bring him low; and tread down the wicked in their place.	Look on every proud man and humble him; trample the wicked where they stand.
JOB	40	13	그들을 함께 진토에 묻고 그 얼굴을 싸서 어둑한 곳에 둘지니라	Hide them in the dust together; and bind their faces in secret.	Bury them together in the dust; imprison them in the grave.
JOB	40	14	그리하면 네 오른손이 너를 구원할 수 있다고 내가 인정하리라	Then will I also confess unto thee that thine own right hand can save thee.	Then I will confess to you that your own right hand can save you.
JOB	40	15	이제 소 같이 풀을 먹는 하마를 볼지어다 내가 너를 지은 것 같이 그것도 지었느니라	Behold now behemoth, which I made with thee; he eateth grass as an ox.	Look at Behemoth, which I made along with you. He feeds on grass like an ox.
JOB	40	16	그 힘은 허리에 있고 그 세력은 배의 힘줄에 있고	Lo now, his strength is in his loins, and his force is in the navel of his belly.	See the strength of his loins and the power in the muscles of his belly.
JOB	40	17	그 꼬리치는 것은 백향목이 흔들리는 것 같고 그 넓적다리 힘줄은 서로 연락되었으며	He moveth his tail like a cedar: the sinews of his stones are wrapped together.	His tail sways like a cedar; the sinews of his thighs are tightly knit.
JOB	40	18	그 뼈는 놋관 같고 그 가릿대는 철장 같으니	His bones are as strong pieces of brass; his bones are like bars of iron.	His bones are tubes of bronze; his limbs are rods of iron.
JOB	40	19	그것은 하나님의 창조물 중에 으뜸이라 그것을 지은 자가 칼을 주었고	He is the chief of the ways of God: he that made him can make his sword to approach unto him.	He is the foremost of God’s works; only his Maker can draw the sword against him.
JOB	40	20	모든 들 짐승의 노는 산은 그것을 위하여 식물을 내느니라	Surely the mountains bring him forth food, where all the beasts of the field play.	The hills yield him their produce, while all the beasts of the field play nearby.
JOB	40	21	그것이 연 줄기 아래나 갈 밭 가운데나 못속에 엎드리니	He lieth under the shady trees, in the covert of the reed, and fens.	He lies under the lotus plants, hidden among the reeds of the marsh.
JOB	40	22	연 그늘이 덮으며 시내 버들이 둘렀구나	The shady trees cover him with their shadow; the willows of the brook compass him about.	The lotus plants conceal him in their shade; the willows of the brook surround him.
JOB	40	23	하수가 창일한다 할지라도 그것이 놀라지 않고 요단 강이 불어 그 입에 미칠지라도 자약하니	Behold, he drinketh up a river, and hasteth not: he trusteth that he can draw up Jordan into his mouth.	Though the river rages, Behemoth is unafraid; he remains secure, though the Jordan surges to his mouth.
JOB	40	24	그것이 정신차리고 있을 때에 누가 능히 잡을 수 있겠으며 갈고리로 그 코를 꿸 수 있겠느냐	He taketh it with his eyes: his nose pierceth through snares.	Can anyone capture him as he looks on, or pierce his nose with a snare?
JOB	41	1	네가 능히 낚시로 악어를 낚을 수 있겠느냐 노끈으로 그 혀를 맬수 있겠느냐	Canst thou draw out leviathan with an hook? or his tongue with a cord which thou lettest down?	“Can you pull in Leviathan with a hook or tie down his tongue with a rope?
JOB	41	2	줄로 그 코를 꿸 수 있겠느냐 갈고리로 그 아가미를 꿸 수 있겠느냐	Canst thou put an hook into his nose? or bore his jaw through with a thorn?	Can you put a cord through his nose or pierce his jaw with a hook?
JOB	41	3	그것이 어찌 네게 연속 간구하겠느냐 유순한 말로 네게 이야기하겠느냐	Will he make many supplications unto thee? will he speak soft words unto thee?	Will he beg you for mercy or speak to you softly?
JOB	41	4	어찌 너와 계약하고 영영히 네 종이 되겠느냐	Will he make a covenant with thee? wilt thou take him for a servant for ever?	Will he make a covenant with you to take him as a slave for life?
JOB	41	5	네가 어찌 새를 놀리는 것 같이 그것을 놀리겠으며 네 소녀들을 위하여 그것을 매어 두겠느냐	Wilt thou play with him as with a bird? or wilt thou bind him for thy maidens?	Can you pet him like a bird or put him on a leash for your maidens?
JOB	41	6	어찌 어부의 떼가 그것으로 상품을 삼아 상고들 가운데 나눌 수 있겠느냐	Shall the companions make a banquet of him? shall they part him among the merchants?	Will traders barter for him or divide him among the merchants?
JOB	41	7	네가 능히 창으로 그 가죽을 찌르거나 작살로 그 머리를 찌를 수 있겠느냐	Canst thou fill his skin with barbed irons? or his head with fish spears?	Can you fill his hide with harpoons or his head with fishing spears?
JOB	41	8	손을 그것에게 좀 대어 보라 싸울 일이 생각나서 다시는 아니하리라	Lay thine hand upon him, remember the battle, do no more.	If you lay a hand on him, you will remember the battle and never repeat it!
JOB	41	9	잡으려는 소망은 헛것이라 그것을 보기만 하여도 낙담하지 않겠느냐	Behold, the hope of him is in vain: shall not one be cast down even at the sight of him?	Surely hope of overcoming him is false. Is not the sight of him overwhelming?
JOB	41	10	아무도 그것을 격동시킬 용맹이 없거든 능히 나를 당할 자가 누구냐	None is so fierce that dare stir him up: who then is able to stand before me?	No one is so fierce as to rouse Leviathan. Then who is able to stand against Me?
JOB	41	11	누가 먼저 내게 주고 나로 갚게 하였느냐 온 천하에 있는 것이 다 내 것이니라	Who hath prevented me, that I should repay him? whatsoever is under the whole heaven is mine.	Who has given to Me that I should repay him? Everything under heaven is Mine.
JOB	41	12	내가 악어의 지체와 큰 힘과 훌륭한 구조에 대하여 잠잠치 아니하리라	I will not conceal his parts, nor his power, nor his comely proportion.	I cannot keep silent about his limbs, his power and graceful form.
JOB	41	13	누가 그 가죽을 벗기겠으며 그 아가미 사이로 들어가겠는고	Who can discover the face of his garment? or who can come to him with his double bridle?	Who can strip off his outer coat? Who can approach him with a bridle?
JOB	41	14	누가 그 얼굴의 문을 열 수 있을까 그 두루 있는 이가 두렵구나	Who can open the doors of his face? his teeth are terrible round about.	Who can open his jaws, ringed by his fearsome teeth?
JOB	41	15	견고한 비늘은 그의 자랑이라 서로 연함이 봉한 것 같구나	His scales are his pride, shut up together as with a close seal.	His rows of scales are his pride, tightly sealed together.
JOB	41	16	이것 저것이 한데 붙었으니 바람도 그 사이로 들어가지 못하겠고	One is so near to another, that no air can come between them.	One scale is so near to another that no air can pass between them.
JOB	41	17	서로 연하여 붙었으니 능히 나눌 수도 없구나	They are joined one to another, they stick together, that they cannot be sundered.	They are joined to one another; they clasp and cannot be separated.
JOB	41	18	그것이 재채기를 한즉 광채가 발하고 그 눈은 새벽 눈꺼풀이 열림 같으며	By his neesings a light doth shine, and his eyes are like the eyelids of the morning.	His snorting flashes with light, and his eyes are like the rays of dawn.
JOB	41	19	그 입에서는 횃불이 나오고 불똥이 뛰어나며	Out of his mouth go burning lamps, and sparks of fire leap out.	Firebrands stream from his mouth; fiery sparks shoot forth!
JOB	41	20	그 콧구멍에서는 연기가 나오니 마치 솥이 끓는 것과 갈대의 타는 것 같구나	Out of his nostrils goeth smoke, as out of a seething pot or caldron.	Smoke billows from his nostrils as from a boiling pot over burning reeds.
JOB	41	21	그 숨이 능히 숯불을 피우니 불꽃이 그 입에서 나오며	His breath kindleth coals, and a flame goeth out of his mouth.	His breath sets coals ablaze, and flames pour from his mouth.
JOB	41	22	힘이 그 목에 뭉키었고 두려움이 그 앞에서 뛰는구나	In his neck remaineth strength, and sorrow is turned into joy before him.	Strength resides in his neck, and dismay leaps before him.
JOB	41	23	그 살의 조각들이 서로 연하고 그 몸에 견고하여 움직이지 아니하며	The flakes of his flesh are joined together: they are firm in themselves; they cannot be moved.	The folds of his flesh are tightly joined; they are firm and immovable.
JOB	41	24	그 마음이 돌 같이 단단하니 그 단단함이 맷돌 아랫짝 같구나	His heart is as firm as a stone; yea, as hard as a piece of the nether millstone.	His chest is as hard as a rock, as hard as a lower millstone!
JOB	41	25	그것이 일어나면 용사라도 두려워하며 경겁하여 창황하며	When he raiseth up himself, the mighty are afraid: by reason of breakings they purify themselves.	When Leviathan rises up, the mighty are terrified; they withdraw before his thrashing.
JOB	41	26	칼로 칠지라도 쓸데없고 창이나 살이나 작살도 소용이 없구나	The sword of him that layeth at him cannot hold: the spear, the dart, nor the habergeon.	The sword that reaches him has no effect, nor does the spear or dart or arrow.
JOB	41	27	그것이 철을 초개 같이, 놋을 썩은 나무 같이 여기니	He esteemeth iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood.	He regards iron as straw and bronze as rotten wood.
JOB	41	28	살이라도 그것으로 도망하게 못하겠고 물매돌도 그것에게는 겨 같이 여기우는구나	The arrow cannot make him flee: slingstones are turned with him into stubble.	No arrow can make him flee; slingstones become like chaff to him.
JOB	41	29	몽둥이도 검불 같이 보고 창을 던짐을 우습게 여기며	Darts are counted as stubble: he laugheth at the shaking of a spear.	A club is regarded as straw, and he laughs at the sound of the lance.
JOB	41	30	그 배 아래는 날카로운 와륵 같으니 진흙 위에 타작 기계 같이 자취를 내는구나	Sharp stones are under him: he spreadeth sharp pointed things upon the mire.	His undersides are jagged potsherds, spreading out the mud like a threshing sledge.
JOB	41	31	깊은 물로 솥의 물이 끓음 같게 하며 바다로 젖는 향기름 같게 하고	He maketh the deep to boil like a pot: he maketh the sea like a pot of ointment.	He makes the depths seethe like a cauldron; he makes the sea like a jar of ointment.
JOB	41	32	자기 뒤에 광채나는 길을 내니 사람의 보기에 바닷물이 백발 같구나	He maketh a path to shine after him; one would think the deep to be hoary.	He leaves a glistening wake behind him; one would think the deep had white hair!
JOB	41	33	땅 위에는 그것 같은 것이 없나니 두려움 없게 지음을 받았음이라	Upon earth there is not his like, who is made without fear.	Nothing on earth is his equal— a creature devoid of fear!
JOB	41	34	모든 높은 것을 낮게 보고 모든 교만한 것의 왕이 되느니라	He beholdeth all high things: he is a king over all the children of pride.	He looks down on all the haughty; he is king over all the proud.”
JOB	42	1	욥이 여호와께 대답하여 가로되	Then Job answered the Lord, and said,	Then Job replied to the LORD:
JOB	42	2	주께서는 무소불능하시오며 무슨 경영이든지 못 이루실 것이 없는 줄 아오니	I know that thou canst do every thing, and that no thought can be withholden from thee.	“I know that You can do all things and that no plan of Yours can be thwarted.
JOB	42	3	무지한 말로 이치를 가리우는 자가 누구니이까 내가 스스로 깨달을 수 없는 일을 말하였고 스스로 알 수 없고 헤아리기 어려운 일을 말하였나이다	Who is he that hideth counsel without knowledge? therefore have I uttered that I understood not; things too wonderful for me, which I knew not.	You asked, ‘Who is this who conceals My counsel without knowledge?’ Surely I spoke of things I did not understand, things too wonderful for me to know.
JOB	42	4	내가 말하겠사오니 주여 들으시고 내가 주께 묻겠사오니 주여 내게 알게 하옵소서	Hear, I beseech thee, and I will speak: I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto me.	You said, ‘Listen now, and I will speak. I will question you, and you shall inform Me.’
JOB	42	5	내가 주께 대하여 귀로 듣기만 하였삽더니 이제는 눈으로 주를 뵈옵나이다	I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear: but now mine eye seeth thee.	My ears had heard of You, but now my eyes have seen You.
JOB	42	6	그러므로 내가 스스로 한하고 티끌과 재 가운데서 회개하나이다	Wherefore I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes.	Therefore I retract my words, and I repent in dust and ashes.”
JOB	42	7	여호와께서 욥에게 이 말씀을 하신 후에 데만 사람 엘리바스에게 이르시되 내가 너와 네 두 친구에게 노하나니 이는 너희가 나를 가리켜 말한 것이 내 종 욥의 말 같이 정당하지 못함이니라	And it was so, that after the Lord had spoken these words unto Job, the Lord said to Eliphaz the Temanite, My wrath is kindled against thee, and against thy two friends: for ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job hath.	After the LORD had spoken these words to Job, He said to Eliphaz the Temanite, “My wrath is kindled against you and your two friends. For you have not spoken about Me accurately, as My servant Job has.
JOB	42	8	그런즉 너희는 수송아지 일곱과 수양 일곱을 취하여 내 종 욥에게 가서 너희를 위하여 번제를 드리라 내 종 욥이 너희를 위하여 기도할 것인즉 내가 그를 기쁘게 받으리니 너희의 우매한 대로 너희에게 갚지 아니하리라 이는 너희가 나를 가리켜 말한 것이 내 종 욥의 말 같이 정당하지 못함이니라	Therefore take unto you now seven bullocks and seven rams, and go to my servant Job, and offer up for yourselves a burnt offering; and my servant Job shall pray for you: for him will I accept: lest I deal with you after your folly, in that ye have not spoken of me the thing which is right, like my servant Job.	So now, take seven bulls and seven rams, go to My servant Job, and sacrifice a burnt offering for yourselves. Then My servant Job will pray for you, for I will accept his prayer and not deal with you according to your folly. For you have not spoken accurately about Me, as My servant Job has.”
JOB	42	9	이에 데만 사람 엘리바스와 수아 사람 빌닷과 나아마 사람 소발이 가서 여호와께서 자기들에게 명하신 대로 행하니라 여호와께서 욥을 기쁘게 받으셨더라	So Eliphaz the Temanite and Bildad the Shuhite and Zophar the Naamathite went, and did according as the Lord commanded them: the Lord also accepted Job.	So Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite went and did as the LORD had told them; and the LORD accepted Job’s request.
JOB	42	10	욥이 그 벗들을 위하여 빌매 여호와께서 욥의 곤경을 돌이키시고 욥에게 그전 소유보다 갑절이나 주신지라	And the Lord turned the captivity of Job, when he prayed for his friends: also the Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before.	After Job had prayed for his friends, the LORD restored his prosperity and doubled his former possessions.
JOB	42	11	이에 그의 모든 형제와 자매와 및 전에 알던 자들이 다 와서 그 집에서 그와 함께 식물을 먹고 여호와께서 그에게 내리신 모든 재앙에 대하여 그를 위하여 슬퍼하며 위로하고 각각 금 한 조각과 금고리 하나씩 주었더라	Then came there unto him all his brethren, and all his sisters, and all they that had been of his acquaintance before, and did eat bread with him in his house: and they bemoaned him, and comforted him over all the evil that the Lord had brought upon him: every man also gave him a piece of money, and every one an earring of gold.	All his brothers and sisters and prior acquaintances came and dined with him in his house. They consoled him and comforted him over all the adversity that the LORD had brought upon him. And each one gave him a piece of silver and a gold ring.
JOB	42	12	여호와께서 욥의 모년에 복을 주사 처음 복보다 더하게 하시니 그가 양 일만 사천과 약대 육천과 소 일천 겨리와 암나귀 일천을 두었고	So the Lord blessed the latter end of Job more than his beginning: for he had fourteen thousand sheep, and six thousand camels, and a thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand she asses.	So the LORD blessed Job’s latter days more than his first. He owned 14,000 sheep, 6,000 camels, 1,000 yoke of oxen, and 1,000 female donkeys.
JOB	42	13	또 아들 일곱과 딸 셋을 낳았으며	He had also seven sons and three daughters.	And he also had seven sons and three daughters.
JOB	42	14	그가 첫째 딸은 여미마라 이름하였고 둘째 딸은 긋시아라 이름하였고 셋째 딸은 게렌합북이라 이름하였으며	And he called the name of the first, Jemima; and the name of the second, Kezia; and the name of the third, Keren–happuch.	He named his first daughter Jemimah, his second Keziah, and his third Keren-happuch.
JOB	42	15	전국 중에 욥의 딸들처럼 아리따운 여자가 없었더라 그 아비가 그들에게 그 오라비처럼 산업을 주었더라	And in all the land were no women found so fair as the daughters of Job: and their father gave them inheritance among their brethren.	No women as beautiful as Job’s daughters could be found in all the land, and their father granted them an inheritance among their brothers.
JOB	42	16	그 후에 욥이 일백사십 년을 살며 아들과 손자 사대를 보았고	After this lived Job an hundred and forty years, and saw his sons, and his sons’ sons, even four generations.	After this, Job lived 140 years and saw his children and their children to the fourth generation.
JOB	42	17	나이 늙고 기한이 차서 죽었더라	So Job died, being old and full of days.	And so Job died, old and full of years.
PSA	1	1	복 있는 사람은 악인의 꾀를 좇지 아니하며 죄인의 길에 서지 아니하며 오만한 자의 자리에 앉지 아니하고	Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful.	Blessed is the man who does not walk in the counsel of the wicked, or set foot on the path of sinners, or sit in the seat of mockers.
PSA	1	2	오직 여호와의 율법을 즐거워하여 그 율법을 주야로 묵상하는 자로다	But his delight is in the law of the Lord; and in his law doth he meditate day and night.	But his delight is in the Law of the LORD, and on His law he meditates day and night.
PSA	1	3	저는 시냇가에 심은 나무가 시절을 좇아 과실을 맺으며 그 잎사귀가 마르지 아니함 같으니 그 행사가 다 형통하리로다	And he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not wither; and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper.	He is like a tree planted by streams of water, yielding its fruit in season, whose leaf does not wither, and who prospers in all he does.
PSA	1	4	악인은 그렇지 않음이여 오직 바람에 나는 겨와 같도다	The ungodly are not so: but are like the chaff which the wind driveth away.	Not so the wicked! For they are like chaff driven off by the wind.
PSA	1	5	그러므로 악인이 심판을 견디지 못하며 죄인이 의인의 회중에 들지 못하리로다	Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous.	Therefore the wicked will not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous.
PSA	1	6	대저 의인의 길은 여호와께서 인정하시나 악인의 길은 망하리로다	For the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous: but the way of the ungodly shall perish.	For the LORD guards the path of the righteous, but the way of the wicked will perish.
PSA	2	1	어찌하여 열방이 분노하며 민족들이 허사를 경영하는고	Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing?	Why do the nations rage and the peoples plot in vain?
PSA	2	2	세상의 군왕들이 나서며 관원들이 서로 꾀하여 여호와와 그 기름 받은 자를 대적하며	The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against his anointed, saying,	The kings of the earth take their stand and the rulers gather together, against the LORD and against His Anointed One:
PSA	2	3	우리가 그 맨 것을 끊고 그 결박을 벗어 버리자 하도다	Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us.	“Let us break Their chains and cast away Their cords.”
PSA	2	4	하늘에 계신 자가 웃으심이여 주께서 저희를 비웃으시리로다	He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them in derision.	The One enthroned in heaven laughs; the Lord taunts them.
PSA	2	5	그 때에 분을 발하며 진노하사 저희를 놀래어 이르시기를	Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure.	Then He rebukes them in His anger, and terrifies them in His fury:
PSA	2	6	내가 나의 왕을 내 거룩한 산 시온에 세웠다 하시리로다	Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion.	“I have installed My King on Zion, upon My holy mountain.”
PSA	2	7	내가 영을 전하노라 여호와께서 내게 이르시되 너는 내 아들이라 오늘날 내가 너를 낳았도다	I will declare the decree: the Lord hath said unto me, Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee.	I will proclaim the decree spoken to Me by the LORD: “You are My Son; today I have become Your Father.
PSA	2	8	내게 구하라 내가 열방을 유업으로 주리니 네 소유가 땅 끝까지 이르리로다	Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.	Ask Me, and I will make the nations Your inheritance, the ends of the earth Your possession.
PSA	2	9	네가 철장으로 저희를 깨뜨림이여 질그릇 같이 부수리라 하시도다	Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel.	You will break them with an iron scepter; You will shatter them like pottery.”
PSA	2	10	그런즉 군왕들아 너희는 지혜를 얻으며 세상의 관원들아 교훈을 받을지어다	Be wise now therefore, O ye kings: be instructed, ye judges of the earth.	Therefore be wise, O kings; be admonished, O judges of the earth.
PSA	2	11	여호와를 경외함으로 섬기고 떨며 즐거워할지어다	Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.	Serve the LORD with fear, and rejoice with trembling.
PSA	2	12	그 아들에게 입맞추라 그렇지 아니하면 진노하심으로 너희가 길에서 망하리니 그 진노가 급하심이라 여호와를 의지하는 자는 다 복이 있도다	Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.	Kiss the Son, lest He be angry and you perish in your rebellion, when His wrath ignites in an instant. Blessed are all who take refuge in Him.
PSA	3	1	다윗이 그 아들 압살롬을 피할 때에 지은 시 여호와여 나의 대적이 어찌 그리 많은지요 일어나 나를 치는 자가 많소이다	A Psalm of David, when he fled from Absalom his son. Lord, how are they increased that trouble me! many are they that rise up against me.	A Psalm of David, when he fled from his son Absalom. O LORD, how my foes have increased! How many rise up against me!
PSA	3	2	많은 사람이 있어 나를 가리켜 말하기를 저는 하나님께 도움을 얻지 못한다 하나이다(셀라)	Many there be which say of my soul, There is no help for him in God. Selah.	Many say of me, “God will not deliver him.” Selah
PSA	3	3	여호와여 주는 나의 방패시요 나의 영광이시요 나의 머리를 드시는 자니이다	But thou, O Lord, art a shield for me; my glory, and the lifter up of mine head.	But You, O LORD, are a shield around me, my glory, and the One who lifts my head.
PSA	3	4	내가 나의 목소리로 여호와께 부르짖으니 그 성산에서 응답하시는도다(셀라)	I cried unto the Lord with my voice, and he heard me out of his holy hill. Selah.	To the LORD I cry aloud, and He answers me from His holy mountain. Selah
PSA	3	5	내가 누워 자고 깨었으니 여호와께서 나를 붙드심이로다	I laid me down and slept; I awaked; for the Lord sustained me.	I lie down and sleep; I wake again, for the LORD sustains me.
PSA	3	6	천만 인이 나를 둘러치려 하여도 나는 두려워 아니하리이다	I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people, that have set themselves against me round about.	I will not fear the myriads set against me on every side.
PSA	3	7	여호와여 일어나소서 나의 하나님이여 나를 구원하소서 주께서 나의 모든 원수의 뺨을 치시며 악인의 이를 꺽으셨나이다	Arise, O Lord; save me, O my God: for thou hast smitten all mine enemies upon the cheek bone; thou hast broken the teeth of the ungodly.	Arise, O LORD! Save me, O my God! Strike all my enemies on the jaw; break the teeth of the wicked.
PSA	3	8	구원은 여호와께 있사오니 주의 복을 주의 백성에게 내리소서(셀라)	Salvation belongeth unto the Lord: thy blessing is upon thy people. Selah.	Salvation belongs to the LORD; may Your blessing be on Your people. Selah
PSA	4	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 현악에 맞춘 노래 내 의의 하나님이여 내가 부를 때에 응답하소서 곤란 중에 나를 너그럽게 하셨사오니 나를 긍휼히 여기사 나의 기도를 들으소서	To the chief Musician on Neginoth, A Psalm of David. Hear me when I call, O God of my righteousness: thou hast enlarged me when I was in distress; have mercy upon me, and hear my prayer.	For the choirmaster. With stringed instruments. A Psalm of David. Answer me when I call, O God of my righteousness! You have relieved my distress; show me grace and hear my prayer.
PSA	4	2	인생들아 어느 때까지 나의 영광을 변하여 욕되게 하며 허사를 좋아하고 궤휼을 구하겠는고(셀라)	O ye sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame? how long will ye love vanity, and seek after leasing? Selah.	How long, O men, will my honor be maligned? How long will you love vanity and seek after lies? Selah
PSA	4	3	여호와께서 자기를 위하여 경건한 자를 택하신 줄 너희가 알지어다 내가 부를 때에 여호와께서 들으시리로다	But know that the Lord hath set apart him that is godly for himself: the Lord will hear when I call unto him.	Know that the LORD has set apart the godly for Himself; the LORD hears when I call to Him.
PSA	4	4	너희는 떨며 범죄치 말지어다 자리에 누워 심중에 말하고 잠잠할지어다(셀라)	Stand in awe, and sin not: commune with your own heart upon your bed, and be still. Selah.	Be angry, yet do not sin; on your bed, search your heart and be still. Selah
PSA	4	5	의의 제사를 드리고 여호와를 의뢰할지어다	Offer the sacrifices of righteousness, and put your trust in the Lord.	Offer the sacrifices of the righteous and trust in the LORD.
PSA	4	6	여러 사람의 말이 우리에게 선을 보일 자 누구뇨 하오니 여호와여 주의 얼굴을 들어 우리에게 비취소서	There be many that say, Who will shew us any good? Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.	Many ask, “Who can show us the good?” Shine the light of Your face upon us, O LORD.
PSA	4	7	주께서 내 마음에 두신 기쁨은 저희의 곡식과 새 포도주의 풍성할 때보다 더하니이다	Thou hast put gladness in my heart, more than in the time that their corn and their wine increased.	You have filled my heart with more joy than when grain and new wine abound.
PSA	4	8	내가 평안히 눕고 자기도 하리니 나를 안전히 거하게 하시는 이는 오직 여호와시니이다	I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep: for thou, Lord, only makest me dwell in safety.	I will lie down and sleep in peace, for You alone, O LORD, make me dwell in safety.
PSA	5	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 관악에 맞춘 노래 여호와여 나의 말에 귀를 기울이사 나의 심사를 통촉하소서	To the chief Musician upon Nehiloth, A Psalm of David. Give ear to my words, O Lord, consider my meditation.	For the choirmaster, to be accompanied by flutes. A Psalm of David. Give ear to my words, O LORD; consider my groaning.
PSA	5	2	나의 왕 나의 하나님이여 나의 부르짖는 소리를 들으소서 내가 주께 기도하나이다	Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my King, and my God: for unto thee will I pray.	Attend to the sound of my cry, my King and my God, for to You I pray.
PSA	5	3	여호와여 아침에 주께서 나의 소리를 들으시리니 아침에 내가 주께 기도하고 바라리이다	My voice shalt thou hear in the morning, O Lord; in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up.	In the morning, O LORD, You hear my voice; at daybreak I lay my plea before You and wait in expectation.
PSA	5	4	주는 죄악을 기뻐하는 신이 아니시니 악이 주와 함께 유하지 못하며	For thou art not a God that hath pleasure in wickedness: neither shall evil dwell with thee.	For You are not a God who delights in wickedness; no evil can dwell with You.
PSA	5	5	오만한 자가 주의 목전에 서지 못하리이다 주는 모든 행악자를 미워하시며	The foolish shall not stand in thy sight: thou hatest all workers of iniquity.	The boastful cannot stand in Your presence; You hate all workers of iniquity.
PSA	5	6	거짓말하는 자를 멸하시리이다 여호와께서는 피 흘리기를 즐기고 속이는 자를 싫어하시나이다	Thou shalt destroy them that speak leasing: the Lord will abhor the bloody and deceitful man.	You destroy those who tell lies; the LORD abhors the man of bloodshed and deceit.
PSA	5	7	오직 나는 주의 풍성한 인자를 힘입어 주의 집에 들어가 주를 경외함으로 성전을 향하여 경배하리이다	But as for me, I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercy: and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple.	But I will enter Your house by the abundance of Your loving devotion; in reverence I will bow down toward Your holy temple.
PSA	5	8	여호와여 나의 원수들을 인하여 주의 의로 나를 인도하시고 주의 길을 내 목전에 곧게 하소서	Lead me, O Lord, in thy righteousness because of mine enemies; make thy way straight before my face.	Lead me, O LORD, in Your righteousness because of my enemies; make straight Your way before me.
PSA	5	9	저희 입에 신실함이 없고 저희 심중이 심히 악하며 저희 목구멍은 열린 무덤 같고 저희 혀로는 아첨하나이다	For there is no faithfulness in their mouth; their inward part is very wickedness; their throat is an open sepulchre; they flatter with their tongue.	For not a word they speak can be trusted; destruction lies within them. Their throats are open graves; their tongues practice deceit.
PSA	5	10	하나님이여 저희를 정죄하사 자기 꾀에 빠지게 하시고 그 많은 허물로 인하여 저희를 쫓아 내소서 저희가 주를 배역함이니이다	Destroy thou them, O God; let them fall by their own counsels; cast them out in the multitude of their transgressions; for they have rebelled against thee.	Declare them guilty, O God; let them fall by their own devices. Drive them out for their many transgressions, for they have rebelled against You.
PSA	5	11	오직 주에게 피하는 자는 다 기뻐하며 주의 보호로 인하여 영영히 기뻐 외치며 주의 이름을 사랑하는 자들은 주를 즐거워하리이다	But let all those that put their trust in thee rejoice: let them ever shout for joy, because thou defendest them: let them also that love thy name be joyful in thee.	But let all who take refuge in You rejoice; let them ever shout for joy. May You shelter them, that those who love Your name may rejoice in You.
PSA	5	12	여호와여 주는 의인에게 복을 주시고 방패로 함 같이 은혜로 저를 호위하시리이다	For thou, Lord, wilt bless the righteous; with favour wilt thou compass him as with a shield.	For surely You, O LORD, bless the righteous; You surround them with the shield of Your favor.
PSA	6	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 현악 스미닛에 맞춘 노래 여호와여 주의 분으로 나를 견책하지 마옵시며 주의 진노로 나를 징계하지 마옵소서	To the chief Musician on Neginoth upon Sheminith, A Psalm of David. O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure.	For the choirmaster. With stringed instruments, according to Sheminith. A Psalm of David. O LORD, do not rebuke me in Your anger or discipline me in Your wrath.
PSA	6	2	여호와여 내가 수척하였사오니 긍휼히 여기소서 여호와여 나의 뼈가 떨리오니 나를 고치소서	Have mercy upon me, O Lord; for I am weak: O Lord, heal me; for my bones are vexed.	Be merciful to me, O LORD, for I am frail; heal me, O LORD, for my bones are in agony.
PSA	6	3	나의 영혼도 심히 떨리나이다 여호와여 어느 때까지니이까	My soul is also sore vexed: but thou, O Lord, how long?	My soul is deeply distressed. How long, O LORD, how long?
PSA	6	4	여호와여 돌아와 나의 영혼을 건지시며 주의 인자하심을 인하여 나을 구원하소서	Return, O Lord, deliver my soul: oh save me for thy mercies’ sake.	Turn, O LORD, and deliver my soul; save me because of Your loving devotion.
PSA	6	5	사망 중에서는 주를 기억함이 없사오니 음부에서 주께 감사할 자 누구리이까	For in death there is no remembrance of thee: in the grave who shall give thee thanks?	For there is no mention of You in death; who can praise You from Sheol?
PSA	6	6	내가 탄식함으로 곤핍하여 밤마다 눈물로 내 침상을 띄우며 내 요를 적시나이다	I am weary with my groaning; all the night make I my bed to swim; I water my couch with my tears.	I am weary from groaning; all night I flood my bed with weeping and drench my couch with tears.
PSA	6	7	내 눈이 근심을 인하여 쇠하며 내 모든 대적을 인하여 어두웠나이다	Mine eye is consumed because of grief; it waxeth old because of all mine enemies.	My eyes fail from grief; they grow dim because of all my foes.
PSA	6	8	행악하는 너희는 다 나를 떠나라 여호와께서 내 곡성을 들으셨도다	Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity; for the Lord hath heard the voice of my weeping.	Depart from me, all you workers of iniquity, for the LORD has heard my weeping.
PSA	6	9	여호와께서 내 간구를 들으셨음이여 여호와께서 내 기도를 받으시리로다	The Lord hath heard my supplication; the Lord will receive my prayer.	The LORD has heard my cry for mercy; the LORD accepts my prayer.
PSA	6	10	내 모든 원수가 부끄러움을 당하고 심히 떪이여 홀연히 부끄러워 물러가리로다	Let all mine enemies be ashamed and sore vexed: let them return and be ashamed suddenly.	All my enemies will be ashamed and dismayed; they will turn back in sudden disgrace.
PSA	7	1	다윗의 식가욘, 베냐민인 구시의 말에 대하여 여호와께 한 노래 여호와 내 하나님이여 주께 피하오니 나를 쫓는 모든 자에게서 나를 구하여 건지소서	Shiggaion of David, which he sang unto the Lord, concerning the words of Cush the Benjamite. O Lord my God, in thee do I put my trust: save me from all them that persecute me, and deliver me:	A Shiggaion of David, which he sang to the LORD concerning the words of Cush, a Benjamite. O LORD my God, I take refuge in You; save me and deliver me from all my pursuers,
PSA	7	2	건져낼 자 없으면 저희가 사자 같이 나를 찢고 뜯을까 하나이다	Lest he tear my soul like a lion, rending it in pieces, while there is none to deliver.	or they will shred my soul like a lion and tear me to pieces with no one to rescue me.
PSA	7	3	여호와 내 하나님이여 내가 이것을 행하였거나 내 손에 죄악이 있거나	O Lord my God, if I have done this; if there be iniquity in my hands;	O LORD my God, if I have done this, if injustice is on my hands,
PSA	7	4	화친한 자를 악으로 갚았거나 내 대적에게 무고히 빼앗았거든	If I have rewarded evil unto him that was at peace with me; (yea, I have delivered him that without cause is mine enemy:)	if I have rewarded my ally with evil, if I have plundered my foe without cause,
PSA	7	5	원수로 나의 영혼을 쫓아 잡아 내 생명을 땅에 짓밟고 내 영광을 진토에 떨어뜨리게 하소서(셀라)	Let the enemy persecute my soul, and take it; yea, let him tread down my life upon the earth, and lay mine honour in the dust. Selah.	then may my enemy pursue me and overtake me; may he trample me to the ground and leave my honor in the dust. Selah
PSA	7	6	여호와여 진노로 일어나사 내 대적들의 노를 막으시며 나를 위하여 깨소서 주께서 심판을 명하셨나이다	Arise, O Lord, in thine anger, lift up thyself because of the rage of mine enemies: and awake for me to the judgment that thou hast commanded.	Arise, O LORD, in Your anger; rise up against the fury of my enemies. Awake, my God, and ordain judgment.
PSA	7	7	민족들의 집회로 주를 두르게 하시고 그 위 높은 자리에 돌아오소서	So shall the congregation of the people compass thee about: for their sakes therefore return thou on high.	Let the assembled peoples gather around You; take Your seat over them on high.
PSA	7	8	여호와께서 만민에게 심판을 행하시오니 여호와여 나의 의와 내게 있는 성실함을 따라 나를 판단하소서	The Lord shall judge the people: judge me, O Lord, according to my righteousness, and according to mine integrity that is in me.	The LORD judges the peoples; vindicate me, O LORD, according to my righteousness and integrity.
PSA	7	9	악인의 악을 끊고 의인을 세우소서 의로우신 하나님이 사람의 심장을 감찰하시나이다	Oh let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end; but establish the just: for the righteous God trieth the hearts and reins.	Put an end to the evil of the wicked, but establish the righteous, O righteous God who searches hearts and minds.
PSA	7	10	나의 방패는 마음이 정직한 자를 구원하시는 하나님께 있도다	My defence is of God, which saveth the upright in heart.	My shield is with God, who saves the upright in heart.
PSA	7	11	하나님은 의로우신 재판장이심이여 매일 분노하시는 하나님이시로다	God judgeth the righteous, and God is angry with the wicked every day.	God is a righteous judge and a God who feels indignation each day.
PSA	7	12	사람이 회개치 아니하면 저가 그 칼을 갈으심이여 그 활을 이미 당기어 예비하셨도다	If he turn not, he will whet his sword; he hath bent his bow, and made it ready.	If one does not repent, God will sharpen His sword; He has bent and strung His bow.
PSA	7	13	죽일 기계를 또한 예비하심이여 그 만든 살은 화전이로다	He hath also prepared for him the instruments of death; he ordaineth his arrows against the persecutors.	He has prepared His deadly weapons; He ordains His arrows with fire.
PSA	7	14	악인이 죄악을 해산함이여 잔해를 잉태하며 궤휼을 낳았도다	Behold, he travaileth with iniquity, and hath conceived mischief, and brought forth falsehood.	Behold, the wicked man travails with evil; he conceives trouble and births falsehood.
PSA	7	15	저가 웅덩이를 파 만듦이여 제가 만든 함정에 빠졌도다	He made a pit, and digged it, and is fallen into the ditch which he made.	He has dug a hole and hollowed it out; he has fallen into a pit of his own making.
PSA	7	16	그 잔해는 자기 머리로 돌아오고 그 포학은 자기 정수리에 내리리로다	His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall come down upon his own pate.	His trouble recoils on himself, and his violence falls on his own head.
PSA	7	17	내가 여호와의 의를 따라 감사함이여 지극히 높으신 여호와의 이름을 찬양하리로다	I will praise the Lord according to his righteousness: and will sing praise to the name of the Lord most high.	I will thank the LORD for His righteousness and sing praise to the name of the LORD Most High.
PSA	8	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 깃딧에 맞춘 노래 여호와 우리 주여 주의 이름이 온 땅에 어찌 그리 아름다운지요 주의 영광을 하늘 위에 두셨나이다	To the chief Musician upon Gittith, A Psalm of David. O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! who hast set thy glory above the heavens.	For the choirmaster. According to Gittith. A Psalm of David. O LORD, our Lord, how majestic is Your name in all the earth! You have set Your glory above the heavens.
PSA	8	2	주의 대적을 인하여 어린 아이와 젖먹이의 입으로 말미암아 권능을 세우심이여 이는 원수와 보수자로 잠잠케 하려 하심이니이다	Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou ordained strength because of thine enemies, that thou mightest still the enemy and the avenger.	From the mouths of children and infants You have ordained praise on account of Your adversaries, to silence the enemy and avenger.
PSA	8	3	주의 손가락으로 만드신 주의 하늘과 주의 베풀어 두신 달과 별들을 내가 보오니	When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars, which thou hast ordained;	When I behold Your heavens, the work of Your fingers, the moon and the stars, which You have set in place—
PSA	8	4	사람이 무엇이관대 주께서 저를 권고하시나이까	What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?	what is man that You are mindful of him, or the son of man that You care for him?
PSA	8	5	저를 천사보다 조금 못하게 하시고 영화와 존귀로 관을 씌우셨나이다	For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour.	You made him a little lower than the angels; You crowned him with glory and honor.
PSA	8	6	주의 손으로 만드신 것을 다스리게 하시고 만물을 그 발 아래 두셨으니	Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou hast put all things under his feet:	You made him ruler of the works of Your hands; You have placed everything under his feet:
PSA	8	7	곧 모든 우양과 들짐승이며	All sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field;	all sheep and oxen, and even the beasts of the field,
PSA	8	8	공중의 새와 바다의 어족과 해로에 다니는 것이니이다	The fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea, and whatsoever passeth through the paths of the seas.	the birds of the air and the fish of the sea, all that swim the paths of the seas.
PSA	8	9	여호와 우리 주여 주의 이름이 온 땅에 어찌 그리 아름다운지요	O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth!	O LORD, our Lord, how majestic is Your name in all the earth!
PSA	9	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 뭇랍벤에 맞춘 노래 내가 전심으로 여호와께 감사하오며 주의 모든 기사를 전하리이다	To the chief Musician upon Muth–labben, A Psalm of David. I will praise thee, O Lord, with my whole heart; I will shew forth all thy marvellous works.	For the choirmaster. To the tune of “The Death of the Son.” A Psalm of David. I will give thanks to the LORD with all my heart; I will recount all Your wonders.
PSA	9	2	내가 주를 기뻐하고 즐거워하며 지극히 높으신 주의 이름을 찬송하리니	I will be glad and rejoice in thee: I will sing praise to thy name, O thou most High.	I will be glad and rejoice in You; I will sing praise to Your name, O Most High.
PSA	9	3	내 원수들이 물러갈 때에 주의 앞에서 넘어져 망함이니이다	When mine enemies are turned back, they shall fall and perish at thy presence.	When my enemies retreat, they stumble and perish before You.
PSA	9	4	주께서 나의 의와 송사를 변호하셨으며 보좌에 앉으사 의롭게 심판하셨나이다	For thou hast maintained my right and my cause; thou satest in the throne judging right.	For You have upheld my just cause; You sit on Your throne judging righteously.
PSA	9	5	열방을 책하시고 악인을 멸하시며 저희 이름을 영영히 도말하셨나이다	Thou hast rebuked the heathen, thou hast destroyed the wicked, thou hast put out their name for ever and ever.	You have rebuked the nations; You have destroyed the wicked; You have erased their name forever and ever.
PSA	9	6	원수가 끊어져 영영히 멸망하셨사오니 주께서 무너뜨린 성읍들을 기억할 수 없나이다	O thou enemy, destructions are come to a perpetual end: and thou hast destroyed cities; their memorial is perished with them.	The enemy has come to eternal ruin, and You have uprooted their cities; the very memory of them has vanished.
PSA	9	7	여호와께서 영영히 앉으심이여 심판을 위하여 보좌를 예비하셨도다	But the Lord shall endure for ever: he hath prepared his throne for judgment.	But the LORD abides forever; He has established His throne for judgment.
PSA	9	8	공의로 세계를 심판하심이여 정직으로 만민에게 판단을 행하시리로다	And he shall judge the world in righteousness, he shall minister judgment to the people in uprightness.	He judges the world with justice; He governs the people with equity.
PSA	9	9	여호와는 또 압제를 당하는 자의 산성이시요 환난 때의 산성이시로다	The Lord also will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of trouble.	The LORD is a refuge for the oppressed, a stronghold in times of trouble.
PSA	9	10	여호와여 주의 이름을 아는 자는 주를 의지하오리니 이는 주를 찾는 자들을 버리지 아니하심이니이다	And they that know thy name will put their trust in thee: for thou, Lord, hast not forsaken them that seek thee.	Those who know Your name trust in You, for You, O LORD, have not forsaken those who seek You.
PSA	9	11	너희는 시온에 거하신 여호와를 찬송하며 그 행사를 백성 중에 선포할지어다	Sing praises to the Lord, which dwelleth in Zion: declare among the people his doings.	Sing praises to the LORD, who dwells in Zion; proclaim His deeds among the nations.
PSA	9	12	피 흘림을 심문하시는 이가 저희를 기억하심이여 가난한 자의 부르짖음을 잊지 아니하시도다	When he maketh inquisition for blood, he remembereth them: he forgetteth not the cry of the humble.	For the Avenger of bloodshed remembers; He does not ignore the cry of the afflicted.
PSA	9	13	여호와여 나를 긍휼히 여기소서 나를 사망의 문에서 일으키시는 주여 미워하는 자에게 받는 나의 곤고를 보소서	Have mercy upon me, O Lord; consider my trouble which I suffer of them that hate me, thou that liftest me up from the gates of death:	Be merciful to me, O LORD; see how my enemies afflict me! Lift me up from the gates of death,
PSA	9	14	그리하시면 내가 주의 찬송을 다 전할 것이요 딸 같은 시온의 문에서 주의 구원을 기뻐하리이다	That I may shew forth all thy praise in the gates of the daughter of Zion: I will rejoice in thy salvation.	that I may declare all Your praises— that within the gates of Daughter Zion I may rejoice in Your salvation.
PSA	9	15	열방은 자기가 판 웅덩이에 빠짐이여 그 숨긴 그물에 자기 발이 걸렸도다	The heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made: in the net which they hid is their own foot taken.	The nations have fallen into a pit of their making; their feet are caught in the net they have hidden.
PSA	9	16	여호와께서 자기를 알게 하사 심판을 행하셨음이여 악인은 그 손으로 행한 일에 스스로 얽혔도다(힉가욘, 셀라)	The Lord is known by the judgment which he executeth: the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion. Selah.	The LORD is known by the justice He brings; the wicked are ensnared by the work of their hands. Higgaion Selah
PSA	9	17	악인이 음부로 돌아감이여 하나님을 잊어버린 모든 열방이 그리 하리로다	The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God.	The wicked will return to Sheol— all the nations who forget God.
PSA	9	18	궁핍한 자가 항상 잊어 버림을 보지 아니함이여 가난한 자가 영영히 실망치 아니하리로다	For the needy shall not alway be forgotten: the expectation of the poor shall not perish for ever.	For the needy will not always be forgotten; nor the hope of the oppressed forever dashed.
PSA	9	19	여호와여 일어나사 인생으로 승리를 얻지 못하게 하시며 열방으로 주의 목전에 심판을 받게 하소서	Arise, O Lord; let not man prevail: let the heathen be judged in thy sight.	Rise up, O LORD, do not let man prevail; let the nations be judged in Your presence.
PSA	9	20	여호와여 저희로 두렵게 하시며 열방으로 자기는 인생뿐인줄 알게 하소서(셀라)	Put them in fear, O Lord: that the nations may know themselves to be but men. Selah.	Lay terror upon them, O LORD; let the nations know they are but men. Selah
PSA	10	1	여호와여 어찌하여 멀리 서시며 어찌하여 환난 때에 숨으시나이까	Why standest thou afar off, O Lord? why hidest thou thyself in times of trouble?	Why, O LORD, do You stand far off? Why do You hide in times of trouble?
PSA	10	2	악한 자가 교만하여 가련한 자를 심히 군박하오니 저희로 자기의 베푼 꾀에 빠지게 하소서	The wicked in his pride doth persecute the poor: let them be taken in the devices that they have imagined.	In pride the wicked pursue the needy; let them be caught in the schemes they devise.
PSA	10	3	악인은 그 마음의 소욕을 자랑하며 탐리하는 자는 여호와를 배반하여 멸시하나이다	For the wicked boasteth of his heart’s desire, and blesseth the covetous, whom the Lord abhorreth.	For the wicked man boasts in the cravings of his heart; he blesses the greedy and reviles the LORD.
PSA	10	4	악인은 그 교만한 얼굴로 말하기를 여호와께서 이를 감찰치 아니하신다 하며 그 모든 사상에 하나님이 없다 하나이다	The wicked, through the pride of his countenance, will not seek after God: God is not in all his thoughts.	In his pride the wicked man does not seek Him; in all his schemes there is no God.
PSA	10	5	저의 길은 언제든지 견고하고 주의 심판은 높아서 저의 안력이 미치지 못하오며 저는 그 모든 대적을 멸시하며	His ways are always grievous; thy judgments are far above out of his sight: as for all his enemies, he puffeth at them.	He is secure in his ways at all times; Your lofty judgments are far from him; he sneers at all his foes.
PSA	10	6	그 마음에 이르기를 나는 요동치 아니하며 대대로 환난을 당치 아니하리라 하나이다	He hath said in his heart, I shall not be moved: for I shall never be in adversity.	He says to himself, “I will not be moved; from age to age I am free of distress.”
PSA	10	7	그 입에는 저주와 궤휼과 포학이 충만하며 혀 밑에는 잔해와 죄악이 있나이다	His mouth is full of cursing and deceit and fraud: under his tongue is mischief and vanity.	His mouth is full of cursing, deceit, and violence; trouble and malice are under his tongue.
PSA	10	8	저가 향촌 유벽한 곳에 앉으며 그 은밀한 곳에서 무죄한 자를 죽이며 그 눈은 외로운 자를 엿보나이다	He sitteth in the lurking places of the villages: in the secret places doth he murder the innocent: his eyes are privily set against the poor.	He lies in wait near the villages; in ambush he slays the innocent; his eyes watch in stealth for the helpless.
PSA	10	9	사자가 그 굴혈에 엎드림 같이 저가 은밀한 곳에 엎드려 가련한 자를 잡으려고 기다리며 자기 그물을 끌어 가련한 자를 잡나이다	He lieth in wait secretly as a lion in his den: he lieth in wait to catch the poor: he doth catch the poor, when he draweth him into his net.	He lies in wait like a lion in a thicket; he lurks to seize the oppressed; he catches the lowly in his net.
PSA	10	10	저가 구푸려 엎드리니 그 강포로 인하여 외로운 자가 넘어지나이다	He croucheth, and humbleth himself, that the poor may fall by his strong ones.	They are crushed and beaten down; the hapless fall prey to his strength.
PSA	10	11	저의 마음에 이르기를 하나님이 잊으셨고 그 얼굴을 가리우셨으니 영원히 보지 아니하시리라 하나이다	He hath said in his heart, God hath forgotten: he hideth his face; he will never see it.	He says to himself, “God has forgotten; He hides His face and never sees.”
PSA	10	12	여호와여 일어나옵소서 하나님이여 손을 드옵소서 가난한 자를 잊지 마옵소서	Arise, O Lord; O God, lift up thine hand: forget not the humble.	Arise, O LORD! Lift up Your hand, O God! Do not forget the helpless.
PSA	10	13	어찌하여 악인이 하나님을 멸시하여 그 마음에 이르기를 주는 감찰치 아니하리라 하나이까	Wherefore doth the wicked contemn God? he hath said in his heart, Thou wilt not require it.	Why has the wicked man renounced God? He says to himself, “You will never call me to account.”
PSA	10	14	주께서는 보셨나이다 잔해와 원한을 감찰하시고 주의 손으로 갚으려 하시오니 외로운 자가 주를 의지하나이다 주는 벌써부터 고아를 도우시는 자니이다	Thou hast seen it; for thou beholdest mischief and spite, to requite it with thy hand: the poor committeth himself unto thee; thou art the helper of the fatherless.	But You have regarded trouble and grief; You see to repay it by Your hand. The victim entrusts himself to You; You are the helper of the fatherless.
PSA	10	15	악인의 팔을 꺽으소서 악한 자의 악을 없기까지 찾으소서	Break thou the arm of the wicked and the evil man: seek out his wickedness till thou find none.	Break the arm of the wicked and evildoer; call him to account for his wickedness until none is left to be found.
PSA	10	16	여호와께서는 영원무궁토록 왕이시니 열방이 주의 땅에서 멸망하였나이다	The Lord is King for ever and ever: the heathen are perished out of his land.	The LORD is King forever and ever; the nations perish from His land.
PSA	10	17	여호와여 주는 겸손한 자의 소원을 들으셨으니 저희 마음을 예비하시며 귀를 기울여 들으시고	Lord, thou hast heard the desire of the humble: thou wilt prepare their heart, thou wilt cause thine ear to hear:	You have heard, O LORD, the desire of the humble; You will strengthen their hearts. You will incline Your ear,
PSA	10	18	고아와 압박당하는 자를 위하여 심판하사 세상에 속한 자로 다시는 위협지 못하게 하시리이다	To judge the fatherless and the oppressed, that the man of the earth may no more oppress.	to vindicate the fatherless and oppressed, that the men of the earth may strike terror no more.
PSA	11	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 한 노래 내가 여호와께 피하였거늘 너희가 내 영혼더러 새 같이 네 산으로 도망하라 함은 어찜인고	To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. In the Lord put I my trust: how say ye to my soul, Flee as a bird to your mountain?	For the choirmaster. Of David. In the LORD I take refuge. How then can you say to me: “Flee like a bird to your mountain!
PSA	11	2	악인이 활을 당기고 살을 시위에 먹임이여 마음이 바른 자를 어두운 데서 쏘려 하는도다	For, lo, the wicked bend their bow, they make ready their arrow upon the string, that they may privily shoot at the upright in heart.	For behold, the wicked bend their bows. They set their arrow on the string to shoot from the shadows at the upright in heart.
PSA	11	3	터가 무너지면 의인이 무엇을 할꼬	If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do?	If the foundations are destroyed, what can the righteous do?”
PSA	11	4	여호와께서 그 성전에 계시니 여호와의 보좌는 하늘에 있음이여 그 눈이 인생을 통촉하시고 그 안목이 저희를 감찰하시도다	The Lord is in his holy temple, the Lord’s throne is in heaven: his eyes behold, his eyelids try, the children of men.	The LORD is in His holy temple; the LORD is on His heavenly throne. His eyes are watching closely; they examine the sons of men.
PSA	11	5	여호와는 의인을 감찰하시고 악인과 강포함을 좋아하는 자를 마음에 미워하시도다	The Lord trieth the righteous: but the wicked and him that loveth violence his soul hateth.	The LORD tests the righteous and the wicked; His soul hates the lover of violence.
PSA	11	6	악인에게 그물을 내려 치시리니 불과 유황과 태우는 바람이 저희 잔의 소득이 되리로다	Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest: this shall be the portion of their cup.	On the wicked He will rain down fiery coals and sulfur; a scorching wind will be their portion.
PSA	11	7	여호와는 의로우사 의로운 일을 좋아하시나니 정직한 자는 그 얼굴을 뵈오리로다	For the righteous Lord loveth righteousness; his countenance doth behold the upright.	For the LORD is righteous; He loves justice. The upright will see His face.
PSA	12	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 스미닛에 맞춘 노래 여호와여 도우소서 경건한 자가 끊어지며 충실한 자가 인생 중에 없어지도소이다	To the chief Musician upon Sheminith, A Psalm of David. Help, Lord; for the godly man ceaseth; for the faithful fail from among the children of men.	For the choirmaster. According to Sheminith. A Psalm of David. Help, O LORD, for the godly are no more; the faithful have vanished from among men.
PSA	12	2	저희가 이웃에게 각기 거짓말을 말함이여 아첨하는 입술과 두 마음으로 말하는도다	They speak vanity every one with his neighbour: with flattering lips and with a double heart do they speak.	They lie to one another; they speak with flattering lips and a double heart.
PSA	12	3	여호와께서 모든 아첨하는 입술과 자랑하는 혀를 끊으시리니	The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaketh proud things:	May the LORD cut off all flattering lips and every boastful tongue.
PSA	12	4	저희가 말하기를 우리의 혀로 이길지라 우리 입술은 우리 것이니 우리를 주관할 자 누구리요 함이로다	Who have said, With our tongue will we prevail; our lips are our own: who is lord over us?	They say, “With our tongues we will prevail. We own our lips—who can be our master?”
PSA	12	5	여호와의 말씀에 가련한 자의 눌림과 궁핍한 자의 탄식을 인하여 내가 이제 일어나 저를 그 원하는 안전 지대에 두리라 하시도다	For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise, saith the Lord; I will set him in safety from him that puffeth at him.	“For the cause of the oppressed and for the groaning of the needy, I will now arise,” says the LORD. “I will bring safety to him who yearns.”
PSA	12	6	여호와의 말씀은 순결함이여 흙 도가니에 일곱 번 단련한 은 같도다	The words of the Lord are pure words: as silver tried in a furnace of earth, purified seven times.	The words of the LORD are flawless, like silver refined in a furnace, like gold purified sevenfold.
PSA	12	7	여호와여 저희를 지키사 이 세대로부터 영영토록 보존하시리이다	Thou shalt keep them, O Lord, thou shalt preserve them from this generation for ever.	You, O LORD, will keep us; You will forever guard us from this generation.
PSA	12	8	비루함이 인생 중에 높아지는 때에 악인이 처처에 횡행하는도다	The wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men are exalted.	The wicked wander freely, and vileness is exalted among men.
PSA	13	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 한 노래 여호와여 어느 때까지니이까 나를 영영히 잊으시나이까 주의 얼굴을 나에게서 언제까지 숨기시겠나이까	To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. How long wilt thou forget me, O Lord? for ever? how long wilt thou hide thy face from me?	For the choirmaster. A Psalm of David. How long, O LORD? Will You forget me forever? How long will You hide Your face from me?
PSA	13	2	내가 나의 영혼에 경영하고 종일토록 마음에 근심하기를 어느 때까지 하오며 내 원수가 나를 쳐서 자긍하기를 어느 때까지 하리이까	How long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart daily? how long shall mine enemy be exalted over me?	How long must I wrestle in my soul, with sorrow in my heart each day? How long will my enemy dominate me?
PSA	13	3	여호와 내 하나님이여 나를 생각하사 응답하시고 나의 눈을 밝히소서 두렵건대 내가 사망의 잠을 잘까 하오며	Consider and hear me, O Lord my God: lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death;	Consider me and respond, O LORD my God. Give light to my eyes, lest I sleep in death,
PSA	13	4	두렵건대 나의 원수가 이르기를 내가 저를 이기었다 할까 하오며 내가 요동될 때에 나의 대적들이 기뻐할까 하나이다	Lest mine enemy say, I have prevailed against him; and those that trouble me rejoice when I am moved.	lest my enemy say, “I have overcome him,” and my foes rejoice when I fall.
PSA	13	5	나는 오직 주의 인자하심을 의뢰하였사오니 내 마음은 주의 구원을 기뻐하리이다	But I have trusted in thy mercy; my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.	But I have trusted in Your loving devotion; my heart will rejoice in Your salvation.
PSA	13	6	내가 여호와를 찬송하리니 이는 나를 후대하심이로다	I will sing unto the Lord, because he hath dealt bountifully with me.	I will sing to the LORD, for He has been good to me.
PSA	14	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 한 노래 어리석은 자는 그 마음에 이르기를 하나님이 없다 하도다 저희는 부패하고 소행이 가증하여 선을 행하는 자가 없도다	To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God. They are corrupt, they have done abominable works, there is none that doeth good.	For the choirmaster. Of David. The fool says in his heart, “There is no God.” They are corrupt; their acts are vile. There is no one who does good.
PSA	14	2	여호와께서 하늘에서 인생을 굽어 살피사 지각이 있어 하나님을 찾는 자가 있는가 보려 하신즉	The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did understand, and seek God.	The LORD looks down from heaven upon the sons of men to see if any understand, if any seek God.
PSA	14	3	다 치우쳤으며 함께 더러운 자가 되고 선을 행하는 자가 없으니 하나도 없도다	They are all gone aside, they are all together become filthy: there is none that doeth good, no, not one.	All have turned away, they have together become corrupt; there is no one who does good, not even one.
PSA	14	4	죄악을 행하는 자는 다 무지하뇨 저희가 떡 먹듯이 내 백성을 먹으면서 여호와를 부르지 아니하는도다	Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people as they eat bread, and call not upon the Lord.	Will the workers of iniquity never learn? They devour my people like bread; they refuse to call upon the LORD.
PSA	14	5	저희가 거기서 두려워하고 두려워하였으니 하나님이 의인의 세대에 계심이로다	There were they in great fear: for God is in the generation of the righteous.	There they are, overwhelmed with dread, for God is in the company of the righteous.
PSA	14	6	너희가 가난한 자의 경영을 부끄럽게 하나 오직 여호와는 그 피난처가 되시도다	Ye have shamed the counsel of the poor, because the Lord is his refuge.	You sinners frustrate the plans of the oppressed, yet the LORD is their shelter.
PSA	14	7	이스라엘의 구원이 시온에서 나오기를 원하도다 여호와께서 그 백성의 포로된 것을 돌이키실 때에 야곱이 즐거워하고 이스라엘이 기뻐하리로다	Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion! when the Lord bringeth back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.	Oh, that the salvation of Israel would come from Zion! When the LORD restores His captive people, let Jacob rejoice, let Israel be glad!
PSA	15	1	다윗의 시 여호와여 주의 장막에 유할 자 누구오며 주의 성산에 거할 자 누구오니이까	A Psalm of David. Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy hill?	A Psalm of David. O LORD, who may abide in Your tent? Who may dwell on Your holy mountain?
PSA	15	2	정직하게 행하며 공의를 일삼으며 그 마음에 진실을 말하며	He that walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousness, and speaketh the truth in his heart.	He who walks with integrity and practices righteousness, who speaks the truth from his heart,
PSA	15	3	그 혀로 참소치 아니하고 그 벗에게 행악지 아니하며 그 이웃을 훼방치 아니하며	He that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor doeth evil to his neighbour, nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbour.	who has no slander on his tongue, who does no harm to his neighbor, who casts no scorn on his friend,
PSA	15	4	그 눈은 망령된 자를 멸시하며 여호와를 두려워하는 자를 존대하며 그 마음에 서원한 것은 해로울지라도 변치 아니하며	In whose eyes a vile person is contemned; but he honoureth them that fear the Lord. He that sweareth to his own hurt, and changeth not.	who despises the vile but honors those who fear the LORD, who does not revise a costly oath,
PSA	15	5	변리로 대금치 아니하며 뇌물을 받고 무죄한 자를 해치 아니하는 자니 이런 일을 행하는 자는 영영히 요동치 아니하리이다	He that putteth not out his money to usury, nor taketh reward against the innocent. He that doeth these things shall never be moved.	who lends his money without interest and refuses a bribe against the innocent. He who does these things will never be shaken.
PSA	16	1	다윗의 믹담 하나님이여 나를 보호하소서 내가 주께 피하나이다	Michtam of David. Preserve me, O God: for in thee do I put my trust.	A Miktam of David. Preserve me, O God, for in You I take refuge.
PSA	16	2	내가 여호와께 아뢰되 주는 나의 주시오니 주 밖에는 나의 복이 없다 하였나이다	O my soul, thou hast said unto the Lord, Thou art my Lord: my goodness extendeth not to thee;	I said to the LORD, “You are my Lord; apart from You I have no good thing.”
PSA	16	3	땅에 있는 성도는 존귀한 자니 나의 모든 즐거움이 저희에게 있도다	But to the saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all my delight.	As for the saints in the land, they are the excellence in whom all my delight resides.
PSA	16	4	다른 신에게 예물을 드리는 자는 괴로움이 더할 것이라 나는 저희가 드리는 피의 전제를 드리지 아니하며 내 입술로 그 이름도 부르지 아니하리로다	Their sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after another god: their drink offerings of blood will I not offer, nor take up their names into my lips.	Sorrows will multiply to those who chase other gods. I will not pour out their libations of blood, or speak their names with my lips.
PSA	16	5	여호와는 나의 산업과 나의 잔의 소득이시니 나의 분깃을 지키시나이다	The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup: thou maintainest my lot.	The LORD is my chosen portion and my cup; You have made my lot secure.
PSA	16	6	내게 줄로 재어 준 구역은 아름다운 곳에 있음이여 나의 기업이 실로 아름답도다	The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly heritage.	The lines of my boundary have fallen in pleasant places; surely my inheritance is delightful.
PSA	16	7	나를 훈계하신 여호와를 송축할지라 밤마다 내 심장이 나를 교훈하도다	I will bless the Lord, who hath given me counsel: my reins also instruct me in the night seasons.	I will bless the LORD who counsels me; even at night my conscience instructs me.
PSA	16	8	내가 여호와를 항상 내 앞에 모심이여 그가 내 우편에 계시므로 내가 요동치 아니하리로다	I have set the Lord always before me: because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved.	I have set the LORD always before me. Because He is at my right hand, I will not be shaken.
PSA	16	9	이러므로 내 마음이 기쁘고 내 영광도 즐거워하며 내 육체도 안전히 거하리니	Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoiceth: my flesh also shall rest in hope.	Therefore my heart is glad and my tongue rejoices; my body also will dwell securely.
PSA	16	10	이는 내 영혼을 음부에 버리지 아니하시며 주의 거룩한 자로 썩지 않게 하실 것임이니이다	For thou wilt not leave my soul in hell; neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.	For You will not abandon my soul to Sheol, nor will You let Your Holy One see decay.
PSA	16	11	주께서 생명의 길로 내게 보이시리니 주의 우편에는 영원한 즐거움이 있나이다	Thou wilt shew me the path of life: in thy presence is fulness of joy; at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.	You have made known to me the path of life; You will fill me with joy in Your presence, with eternal pleasures at Your right hand.
PSA	17	1	다윗의 기도 여호와여 정직함을 들으소서 나의 부르짖음에 주의하소서 거짓되지 않은 입술에서 나오는 내 기도에 귀를 기울이소서	A Prayer of David. Hear the right, O Lord, attend unto my cry, give ear unto my prayer, that goeth not out of feigned lips.	A prayer of David. Hear, O LORD, my righteous plea; listen to my cry. Give ear to my prayer— it comes from lips free of deceit.
PSA	17	2	나의 판단을 주 앞에서 내시며 주의 눈은 공평함을 살피소서	Let my sentence come forth from thy presence; let thine eyes behold the things that are equal.	May my vindication come from Your presence; may Your eyes see what is right.
PSA	17	3	주께서 내 마음을 시험하시고 밤에 나를 권고하시며 나를 감찰하셨으나 흠을 찾지 못하셨으니 내가 결심하고 입으로 범죄치 아니하리이다	Thou hast proved mine heart; thou hast visited me in the night; thou hast tried me, and shalt find nothing; I am purposed that my mouth shall not transgress.	You have tried my heart; You have visited me in the night. You have tested me and found no evil; I have resolved not to sin with my mouth.
PSA	17	4	사람의 행사로 논하면 나는 주의 입술의 말씀을 좇아 스스로 삼가서 강포한 자의 길에 행치 아니하였사오며	Concerning the works of men, by the word of thy lips I have kept me from the paths of the destroyer.	As for the deeds of men— by the word of Your lips I have avoided the ways of the violent.
PSA	17	5	나의 걸음이 주의 길을 굳게 지키고 실족지 아니하였나이다	Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.	My steps have held to Your paths; my feet have not slipped.
PSA	17	6	하나님이여 내게 응답하시겠는고로 내가 불렀사오니 귀를 기울여 내 말을 들으소서	I have called upon thee, for thou wilt hear me, O God: incline thine ear unto me, and hear my speech.	I call on You, O God, for You will answer me. Incline Your ear to me; hear my words.
PSA	17	7	주께 피하는 자를 그 일어나 치는 자에게서 오른손으로 구원하시는 주여 주의 기이한 인자를 나타내소서	Shew thy marvellous lovingkindness, O thou that savest by thy right hand them which put their trust in thee from those that rise up against them.	Show the wonders of Your loving devotion, You who save by Your right hand those who seek refuge from their foes.
PSA	17	8	나를 눈동자 같이 지키시고 주의 날개 그늘 아래 감추사	Keep me as the apple of the eye, hide me under the shadow of thy wings,	Keep me as the apple of Your eye; hide me in the shadow of Your wings
PSA	17	9	나를 압제하는 악인과 나를 에워싼 극한 원수에게서 벗어나게 하소서	From the wicked that oppress me, from my deadly enemies, who compass me about.	from the wicked who assail me, from my mortal enemies who surround me.
PSA	17	10	저희가 자기 기름에 잠겼으며 그 입으로 교만히 말하나이다	They are inclosed in their own fat: with their mouth they speak proudly.	They have closed their callous hearts; their mouths speak with arrogance.
PSA	17	11	이제 우리의 걸어가는 것을 저희가 에워싸며 주목하고 땅에 넘어뜨리려 하나이다	They have now compassed us in our steps: they have set their eyes bowing down to the earth;	They have tracked us down, and now surround us; their eyes are set to cast us to the ground,
PSA	17	12	저는 그 움킨 것을 찢으려 하는 사자 같으며 은밀한 곳에 엎드린 젊은 사자 같으니이다	Like as a lion that is greedy of his prey, and as it were a young lion lurking in secret places.	like a lion greedy for prey, like a young lion lurking in ambush.
PSA	17	13	여호와여 일어나 저를 대항하여 넘어뜨리시고 주의 칼로 악인에게서 나의 영혼을 구원하소서	Arise, O Lord, disappoint him, cast him down: deliver my soul from the wicked, which is thy sword:	Arise, O LORD, confront them! Bring them to their knees; deliver me from the wicked by Your sword,
PSA	17	14	여호와여 금생에서 저희 분깃을 받은 세상 사람에게서 나를 주의 손으로 구하소서 그는 주의 재물로 배를 채우심을 입고 자녀로 만족하고 그 남은 산업을 그 어린 아이들에게 유전하는 자니이다	From men which are thy hand, O Lord, from men of the world, which have their portion in this life, and whose belly thou fillest with thy hid treasure: they are full of children, and leave the rest of their substance to their babes.	from such men, O LORD, by Your hand— from men of the world whose portion is in this life. May You fill the bellies of Your treasured ones and satisfy their sons, so they leave their abundance to their children.
PSA	17	15	나는 의로운 중에 주의 얼굴을 보리니 깰 때에 주의 형상으로 만족하리이다	As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness: I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness.	As for me, I will behold Your face in righteousness; when I awake, I will be satisfied in Your presence.
PSA	18	1	여호와의 종 다윗의 시, 영장으로 한 노래, 여호와께서 다윗을 그 모든 원수와 사울의 손에서 구원하신 날에 다윗이 이 노래의 말로 여호와께 아뢰어 가로되 나의 힘이 되신 여호와여 내가 주를 사랑하나이다	To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David, the servant of the Lord, who spake unto the Lord the words of this song in the day that the Lord delivered him from the hand of all his enemies, and from the hand of Saul: And he said, I will love thee, O Lord, my strength.	For the choirmaster. Of David the servant of the LORD, who sang this song to the LORD on the day the LORD had delivered him from the hand of all his enemies and from the hand of Saul. He said: I love You, O LORD, my strength.
PSA	18	2	여호와는 나의 반석이시요 나의 요새시요 나를 건지시는 자시요 나의 하나님이시요 나의 피할 바위시요 나의 방패시요 나의 구원의 뿔이시요 나의 산성이시로다	The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer; my God, my strength, in whom I will trust; my buckler, and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower.	The LORD is my rock, my fortress, and my deliverer. My God is my rock, in whom I take refuge, my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my stronghold.
PSA	18	3	내가 찬송 받으실 여호와께 아뢰리니 내 원수들에게서 구원을 얻으리로다	I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be saved from mine enemies.	I will call upon the LORD, who is worthy to be praised; so shall I be saved from my enemies.
PSA	18	4	사망의 줄이 나를 얽고 불의의 창수가 나를 두렵게 하였으며	The sorrows of death compassed me, and the floods of ungodly men made me afraid.	The cords of death encompassed me; the torrents of chaos overwhelmed me.
PSA	18	5	음부의 줄이 나를 두르고 사망의 올무가 내게 이르렀도다	The sorrows of hell compassed me about: the snares of death prevented me.	The cords of Sheol entangled me; the snares of death confronted me.
PSA	18	6	내가 환난에서 여호와께 아뢰며 나의 하나님께 부르짖었더니 저가 그 전에서 내 소리를 들으심이여 그 앞에서 나의 부르짖음이 그 귀에 들렸도다	In my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God: he heard my voice out of his temple, and my cry came before him, even into his ears.	In my distress I called upon the LORD; I cried to my God for help. From His temple He heard my voice, and my cry for His help reached His ears.
PSA	18	7	이에 땅이 진동하고 산의 터도 요동하였으니 그의 진노를 인함이로다	Then the earth shook and trembled; the foundations also of the hills moved and were shaken, because he was wroth.	Then the earth shook and quaked, and the foundations of the mountains trembled; they were shaken because He burned with anger.
PSA	18	8	그 코에서 연기가 오르고 입에서 불이 나와 사름이여 그 불에 숯이 피었도다	There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured: coals were kindled by it.	Smoke rose from His nostrils, and consuming fire came from His mouth; glowing coals blazed forth.
PSA	18	9	저가 또 하늘을 드리우시고 강림하시니 그 발 아래는 어둑캄캄하도다	He bowed the heavens also, and came down: and darkness was under his feet.	He parted the heavens and came down with dark clouds beneath His feet.
PSA	18	10	그룹을 타고 날으심이여 바람날개로 높이 뜨셨도다	And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly: yea, he did fly upon the wings of the wind.	He mounted a cherub and flew; He soared on the wings of the wind.
PSA	18	11	저가 흑암으로 그 숨는 곳을 삼으사 장막 같이 자기를 두르게 하심이여 곧 물의 흑암과 공중의 빽빽한 구름으로 그리하시도다	He made darkness his secret place; his pavilion round about him were dark waters and thick clouds of the skies.	He made darkness His hiding place, and storm clouds a canopy around Him.
PSA	18	12	그 앞에 광채로 인하여 빽빽한 구름이 지나며 우박과 숯불이 내리도다	At the brightness that was before him his thick clouds passed, hail stones and coals of fire.	From the brightness of His presence His clouds advanced— hailstones and coals of fire.
PSA	18	13	여호와께서 하늘에서 뇌성을 발하시고 지존하신 자가 음성을 내시며 우박과 숯불이 내리도다	The Lord also thundered in the heavens, and the Highest gave his voice; hail stones and coals of fire.	The LORD thundered from heaven; the voice of the Most High resounded— hailstones and coals of fire.
PSA	18	14	그 살을 날려 저희를 흩으심이여 많은 번개로 파하셨도다	Yea, he sent out his arrows, and scattered them; and he shot out lightnings, and discomfited them.	He shot His arrows and scattered the foes; He hurled lightning and routed them.
PSA	18	15	이럴 때에 여호와의 꾸지람과 콧김을 인하여 물밑이 드러나고 세상의 터가 나타났도다	Then the channels of waters were seen, and the foundations of the world were discovered at thy rebuke, O Lord, at the blast of the breath of thy nostrils.	The channels of the sea appeared, and the foundations of the world were exposed, at Your rebuke, O LORD, at the blast of the breath of Your nostrils.
PSA	18	16	저가 위에서 보내사 나를 취하심이여 많은 물에서 나를 건져 내셨도다	He sent from above, he took me, he drew me out of many waters.	He reached down from on high and took hold of me; He drew me out of deep waters.
PSA	18	17	나를 강한 원수와 미워하는 자에게서 건지셨음이여 저희는 나보다 힘센 연고로다	He delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them which hated me: for they were too strong for me.	He rescued me from my powerful enemy, from foes too mighty for me.
PSA	18	18	저희가 나의 재앙의 날에 내게 이르렀으나 여호와께서 나의 의지가 되셨도다	They prevented me in the day of my calamity: but the Lord was my stay.	They confronted me in my day of calamity, but the LORD was my support.
PSA	18	19	나를 또 넓은 곳으로 인도하시고 나를 기뻐하심으로 구원하셨도다	He brought me forth also into a large place; he delivered me, because he delighted in me.	He brought me out into the open; He rescued me because He delighted in me.
PSA	18	20	여호와께서 내 의를 따라 상 주시며 내 손의 깨끗함을 좇아 갚으셨으니	The Lord rewarded me according to my righteousness; according to the cleanness of my hands hath he recompensed me.	The LORD has rewarded me according to my righteousness; He has repaid me according to the cleanness of my hands.
PSA	18	21	이는 내가 여호와의 도를 지키고 악하게 내 하나님을 떠나지 아니하였으며	For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed from my God.	For I have kept the ways of the LORD and have not wickedly departed from my God.
PSA	18	22	그 모든 규례가 내 앞에 있고 내게서 그 율례를 버리지 아니하였음이로다	For all his judgments were before me, and I did not put away his statutes from me.	For all His ordinances are before me; I have not disregarded His statutes.
PSA	18	23	내가 또한 그 앞에 완전하여 나의 죄악에서 스스로 지켰나니	I was also upright before him, and I kept myself from mine iniquity.	And I have been blameless before Him and kept myself from iniquity.
PSA	18	24	그러므로 여호와께서 내 의를 따라 갚으시되 그 목전에 내 손의 깨끗한대로 내게 갚으셨도다	Therefore hath the Lord recompensed me according to my righteousness, according to the cleanness of my hands in his eyesight.	So the LORD has repaid me according to my righteousness, according to the cleanness of my hands in His sight.
PSA	18	25	자비한 자에게는 주의 자비하심을 나타내시며 완전한 자에게는 주의 완전하심을 보이시며	With the merciful thou wilt shew thyself merciful; with an upright man thou wilt shew thyself upright;	To the faithful You show Yourself faithful, to the blameless You show Yourself blameless;
PSA	18	26	깨끗한 자에게는 주의 깨끗하심을 보이시며 사특한 자에게는 주의 거스리심을 보이시리니	With the pure thou wilt shew thyself pure; and with the froward thou wilt shew thyself froward.	to the pure You show Yourself pure, but to the crooked You show Yourself shrewd.
PSA	18	27	주께서 곤고한 백성은 구원하시고 교만한 눈은 낮추시리이다	For thou wilt save the afflicted people; but wilt bring down high looks.	For You save an afflicted people, but You humble those with haughty eyes.
PSA	18	28	주께서 나의 등불을 켜심이여 여호와 내 하나님이 내 흑암을 밝히시리이다	For thou wilt light my candle: the Lord my God will enlighten my darkness.	For You, O LORD, light my lamp; my God lights up my darkness.
PSA	18	29	내가 주를 의뢰하고 적군에 달리며 내 하나님을 의지하고 담을 뛰어 넘나이다	For by thee I have run through a troop; and by my God have I leaped over a wall.	For in You I can charge an army, and with my God I can scale a wall.
PSA	18	30	하나님의 도는 완전하고 여호와의 말씀은 정미하니 저는 자기에게 피하는 모든 자의 방패시로다	As for God, his way is perfect: the word of the Lord is tried: he is a buckler to all those that trust in him.	As for God, His way is perfect; the word of the LORD is flawless. He is a shield to all who take refuge in Him.
PSA	18	31	여호와 외에 누가 하나님이며 우리 하나님 외에 누가 반석이뇨	For who is God save the Lord? or who is a rock save our God?	For who is God besides the LORD? And who is the Rock except our God?
PSA	18	32	이 하나님이 힘으로 내게 띠 띠우시며 내 길을 완전케 하시며	It is God that girdeth me with strength, and maketh my way perfect.	It is God who arms me with strength and makes my way clear.
PSA	18	33	나의 발로 암사슴 발 같게 하시며 나를 나의 높은 곳에 세우시며	He maketh my feet like hinds’ feet, and setteth me upon my high places.	He makes my feet like those of a deer and stations me upon the heights.
PSA	18	34	내 손을 가르쳐 싸우게 하시니 내 팔이 놋 활을 당기도다	He teacheth my hands to war, so that a bow of steel is broken by mine arms.	He trains my hands for battle; my arms can bend a bow of bronze.
PSA	18	35	주께서 또 주의 구원하는 방패를 내게 주시며 주의 오른손이 나를 붙들고 주의 온유함이 나를 크게 하셨나이다	Thou hast also given me the shield of thy salvation: and thy right hand hath holden me up, and thy gentleness hath made me great.	You have given me Your shield of salvation; Your right hand upholds me, and Your gentleness exalts me.
PSA	18	36	내 걸음을 넓게 하셨고 나로 실족지 않게 하셨나이다	Thou hast enlarged my steps under me, that my feet did not slip.	You broaden the path beneath me so that my ankles do not give way.
PSA	18	37	내가 내 원수를 따라 미치리니 저희가 망하기 전에는 돌이키지 아니하리이다	I have pursued mine enemies, and overtaken them: neither did I turn again till they were consumed.	I pursued my enemies and overtook them; I did not turn back until they were consumed.
PSA	18	38	내가 저희를 쳐서 능히 일어나지 못하게 하리니 저희가 내 발 아래 엎드러지리이다	I have wounded them that they were not able to rise: they are fallen under my feet.	I crushed them so they could not rise; they have fallen under my feet.
PSA	18	39	대저 주께서 나로 전쟁케 하려고 능력으로 내게 띠 띠우사 일어나 나를 치는 자로 내게 굴복케 하셨나이다	For thou hast girded me with strength unto the battle: thou hast subdued under me those that rose up against me.	You have armed me with strength for battle; You have subdued my foes beneath me.
PSA	18	40	주께서 또 내 원수들로 등을 내게로 향하게 하시고 나로 나를 미워 하는 자를 끊어버리게 하셨나이다	Thou hast also given me the necks of mine enemies; that I might destroy them that hate me.	You have made my enemies retreat before me; I put an end to those who hated me.
PSA	18	41	저희가 부르짖으나 구원할 자가 없었고 여호와께 부르짖어도 대답지 아니하셨나이다	They cried, but there was none to save them: even unto the Lord, but he answered them not.	They cried for help, but there was no one to save them— to the LORD, but He did not answer.
PSA	18	42	내가 저희를 바람 앞에 티끌 같이 부숴뜨리고 거리의 진흙 같이 쏟아 버렸나이다	Then did I beat them small as the dust before the wind: I did cast them out as the dirt in the streets.	I ground them as dust in the face of the wind; I trampled them like mud in the streets.
PSA	18	43	주께서 나를 백성의 다툼에서 건지시고 열방의 으뜸을 삼으셨으니 내가 알지 못하는 백성이 나를 섬기리이다	Thou hast delivered me from the strivings of the people; and thou hast made me the head of the heathen: a people whom I have not known shall serve me.	You have delivered me from the strife of the people; You have made me the head of nations; a people I had not known shall serve me.
PSA	18	44	저희가 내 풍성을 들은 즉시로 내게 순복함이여 이방인들이 내게 복종하리로다	As soon as they hear of me, they shall obey me: the strangers shall submit themselves unto me.	When they hear me, they obey me; foreigners cower before me.
PSA	18	45	이방인들이 쇠미하여 그 견고한 곳에서 떨며 나오리로다	The strangers shall fade away, and be afraid out of their close places.	Foreigners lose heart and come trembling from their strongholds.
PSA	18	46	여호와는 생존하시니 나의 반석을 찬송하며 내 구원의 하나님을 높일지로다	The Lord liveth; and blessed be my rock; and let the God of my salvation be exalted.	The LORD lives, and blessed be my Rock! And may the God of my salvation be exalted—
PSA	18	47	이 하나님이 나를 위하여 보수하시고 민족들로 내게 복종케 하시도다	It is God that avengeth me, and subdueth the people under me.	the God who avenges me and subdues nations beneath me,
PSA	18	48	주께서 나를 내 원수들에게서 구조하시니 주께서 실로 나를 대적하는 자의 위에 나를 드시고 나를 강포한 자에게서 건지시나이다	He delivereth me from mine enemies: yea, thou liftest me up above those that rise up against me: thou hast delivered me from the violent man.	who delivers me from my enemies. You exalt me above my foes; You rescue me from violent men.
PSA	18	49	여호와여 이러므로 내가 열방 중에서 주께 감사하며 주의 이름을 찬송하리이다	Therefore will I give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the heathen, and sing praises unto thy name.	Therefore I will praise You, O LORD, among the nations; I will sing praises to Your name.
PSA	18	50	여호와께서 그 왕에게 큰 구원을 주시며 기름 부음 받은 자에게 인자를 베푸심이여 영영토록 다윗과 그 후손에게로다	Great deliverance giveth he to his king; and sheweth mercy to his anointed, to David, and to his seed for evermore.	Great salvation He brings to His king. He shows loving devotion to His anointed, to David and his descendants forever.
PSA	19	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 한 노래 하늘이 하나님의 영광을 선포하고 궁창이 그 손으로 하신 일을 나타내는도다	To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth his handywork.	For the choirmaster. A Psalm of David. The heavens declare the glory of God; the skies proclaim the work of His hands.
PSA	19	2	날은 날에게 말하고 밤은 밤에게 지식을 전하니	Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night sheweth knowledge.	Day after day they pour forth speech; night after night they reveal knowledge.
PSA	19	3	언어가 없고 들리는 소리도 없으나	There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard.	Without speech or language, without a sound to be heard,
PSA	19	4	그 소리가 온 땅에 통하고 그 말씀이 세계 끝까지 이르도다 하나님이 해를 위하여 하늘에 장막을 베푸셨도다	Their line is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the world. In them hath he set a tabernacle for the sun,	their voice has gone out into all the earth, their words to the ends of the world. In the heavens He has pitched a tent for the sun.
PSA	19	5	해는 그 방에서 나오는 신랑과 같고 그 길을 달리기 기뻐하는 장사 같아서	Which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to run a race.	Like a bridegroom emerging from his chamber, like a champion rejoicing to run his course,
PSA	19	6	하늘 이 끝에서 나와서 하늘 저 끝까지 운행함이여 그 온기에서 피하여 숨은 자 없도다	His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it: and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.	it rises at one end of the heavens and runs its circuit to the other; nothing is deprived of its warmth.
PSA	19	7	여호와의 율법은 완전하여 영혼을 소성케 하고 여호와의 증거는 확실하여 우둔한 자로 지혜롭게 하며	The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple.	The Law of the LORD is perfect, reviving the soul; the testimony of the LORD is trustworthy, making wise the simple.
PSA	19	8	여호와의 교훈은 정직하여 마음을 기쁘게 하고 여호와의 계명은 순결하여 눈을 밝게 하도다	The statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes.	The precepts of the LORD are right, bringing joy to the heart; the commandments of the LORD are radiant, giving light to the eyes.
PSA	19	9	여호와를 경외하는 도는 정결하여 영원까지 이르고 여호와의 규례는 확실하여 다 의로우니	The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever: the judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether.	The fear of the LORD is pure, enduring forever; the judgments of the LORD are true, being altogether righteous.
PSA	19	10	금 곧 많은 정금보다 더 사모할 것이며 꿀과 송이꿀보다 더 달도다	More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold: sweeter also than honey and the honeycomb.	They are more precious than gold, than much pure gold; they are sweeter than honey, than honey from the comb.
PSA	19	11	또 주의 종이 이로 경계를 받고 이를 지킴으로 상이 크니이다	Moreover by them is thy servant warned: and in keeping of them there is great reward.	By them indeed Your servant is warned; in keeping them is great reward.
PSA	19	12	자기 허물을 능히 깨달을 자 누구리요 나를 숨은 허물에서 벗어나게 하소서	Who can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret faults.	Who can discern his own errors? Cleanse me from my hidden faults.
PSA	19	13	또 주의 종으로 고범죄를 짓지 말게 하사 그 죄가 나를 주장치 못하게 하소서 그리하시면 내가 정직하여 큰 죄과에서 벗어나겠나이다	Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins; let them not have dominion over me: then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the great transgression.	Keep Your servant also from willful sins; may they not rule over me. Then I will be blameless and cleansed of great transgression.
PSA	19	14	나의 반석이시요 나의 구속자이신 여호와여 내 입의 말과 마음의 묵상이 주의 앞에 열납되기를 원하나이다	Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength, and my redeemer.	May the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be pleasing in Your sight, O LORD, my Rock and my Redeemer.
PSA	20	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 한 노래 환난 날에 여호와께서 네게 응답하시고 야곱의 하나님의 이름이 너를 높이 드시며	To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble; the name of the God of Jacob defend thee;	For the choirmaster. A Psalm of David. May the LORD answer you in the day of trouble; may the name of the God of Jacob protect you.
PSA	20	2	성소에서 너를 도와주시고 시온에서 너를 붙드시며	Send thee help from the sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of Zion;	May He send you help from the sanctuary and sustain you from Zion.
PSA	20	3	네 모든 소제를 기억하시며 네 번제를 받으시기를 원하노라(셀라)	Remember all thy offerings, and accept thy burnt sacrifice; Selah.	May He remember all your gifts and look favorably on your burnt offerings. Selah
PSA	20	4	네 마음의 소원대로 허락하시고 네 모든 도모를 이루시기를 원하노라	Grant thee according to thine own heart, and fulfil all thy counsel.	May He give you the desires of your heart and make all your plans succeed.
PSA	20	5	우리가 너의 승리로 인하여 개가를 부르며 우리 하나님의 이름으로 우리 기를 세우리니 여호와께서 네 모든 기도를 이루시기를 원하노라	We will rejoice in thy salvation, and in the name of our God we will set up our banners: the Lord fulfil all thy petitions.	May we shout for joy at your victory and raise a banner in the name of our God. May the LORD grant all your petitions.
PSA	20	6	여호와께서 자기에게 속한 바 기름부음 받은 자를 구원하시는 줄 이제 내가 아노니 그 오른손에 구원하는 힘으로 그 거룩한 하늘에서 저에게 응락하시리로다	Now know I that the Lord saveth his anointed; he will hear him from his holy heaven with the saving strength of his right hand.	Now I know that the LORD saves His anointed; He answers him from His holy heaven with the saving power of His right hand.
PSA	20	7	혹은 병거, 혹은 말을 의지하나 우리는 여호와 우리 하나님의 이름을 자랑하리로다	Some trust in chariots, and some in horses: but we will remember the name of the Lord our God.	Some trust in chariots and others in horses, but we trust in the name of the LORD our God.
PSA	20	8	저희는 굽어 엎드러지고 우리는 일어나 바로 서도다	They are brought down and fallen: but we are risen, and stand upright.	They collapse and fall, but we rise up and stand firm.
PSA	20	9	여호와여 구원하소서 우리가 부를 때에 왕은 응락하소서	Save, Lord: let the king hear us when we call.	O LORD, save the king. Answer us on the day we call.
PSA	21	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 한 노래 여호와여 왕이 주의 힘을 인하여 기뻐하며 주의 구원을 인하여 크게 즐거워하리이다	To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. The king shall joy in thy strength, O Lord; and in thy salvation how greatly shall he rejoice!	For the choirmaster. A Psalm of David. O LORD, the king rejoices in Your strength. How greatly he exults in Your salvation!
PSA	21	2	그 마음의 소원을 주셨으며 그 입술의 구함을 거절치 아니하셨나이다(셀라)	Thou hast given him his heart’s desire, and hast not withholden the request of his lips. Selah.	You have granted his heart’s desire and have not withheld the request of his lips. Selah
PSA	21	3	주의 아름다운 복으로 저를 영접하시고 정금 면류관을 그 머리에 씌우셨나이다	For thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness: thou settest a crown of pure gold on his head.	For You welcomed him with rich blessings; You placed on his head a crown of pure gold.
PSA	21	4	저가 생명을 구하매 주께서 주셨으니 곧 영영한 장수로소이다	He asked life of thee, and thou gavest it him, even length of days for ever and ever.	He asked You for life, and You granted it— length of days, forever and ever.
PSA	21	5	주의 구원으로 그 영광을 크게 하시고 존귀와 위엄으로 저에게 입히시나이다	His glory is great in thy salvation: honour and majesty hast thou laid upon him.	Great is his glory in Your salvation; You bestow on him splendor and majesty.
PSA	21	6	저로 영영토록 지극한 복을 받게 하시며 주의 앞에서 기쁘고 즐겁게 하시나이다	For thou hast made him most blessed for ever: thou hast made him exceeding glad with thy countenance.	For You grant him blessings forever; You cheer him with joy in Your presence.
PSA	21	7	왕이 여호와를 의지하오니 지극히 높으신 자의 인자함으로 요동치 아니하리이다	For the king trusteth in the Lord, and through the mercy of the most High he shall not be moved.	For the king trusts in the LORD; through the loving devotion of the Most High, he will not be shaken.
PSA	21	8	네 손이 네 모든 원수를 발견함이여 네 오른손이 너를 미워하는 자를 발견하리로다	Thine hand shall find out all thine enemies: thy right hand shall find out those that hate thee.	Your hand will apprehend all Your enemies; Your right hand will seize those who hate You.
PSA	21	9	네가 노할 때에 저희로 풀무 같게 할 것이라 어호와께서 진노로 저희를 삼키시리니 불이 저희를 소멸하리로다	Thou shalt make them as a fiery oven in the time of thine anger: the Lord shall swallow them up in his wrath, and the fire shall devour them.	You will place them in a fiery furnace at the time of Your appearing. In His wrath the LORD will engulf them, and the fire will consume them.
PSA	21	10	네가 저희 후손을 땅에서 멸함이여 저희 자손을 인생 중에서 끊으리로다	Their fruit shalt thou destroy from the earth, and their seed from among the children of men.	You will wipe their descendants from the earth, and their offspring from the sons of men.
PSA	21	11	대저 저희는 너를 해하려 하여 계교를 품었으나 이루지 못하도다	For they intended evil against thee: they imagined a mischievous device, which they are not able to perform.	Though they intend You harm, the schemes they devise will not prevail.
PSA	21	12	네가 저희로 돌아서게 함이여 그 얼굴을 향하여 활시위를 당기리로다	Therefore shalt thou make them turn their back, when thou shalt make ready thine arrows upon thy strings against the face of them.	For You will put them to flight when Your bow is trained upon them.
PSA	21	13	여호와여 주의 능력으로 높임을 받으소서 우리가 주의 권능을 노래하고 칭송하겠나이다	Be thou exalted, Lord, in thine own strength: so will we sing and praise thy power.	Be exalted, O LORD, in Your strength; we will sing and praise Your power.
PSA	22	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 아얠롓사할에 맞춘 노래 내 하나님이여 내 하나님이여 어찌 나를 버리셨나이까 어찌 나를 멀리하여 돕지 아니하옵시며 내 신음하는 소리를 듣지 아니하시나이까	To the chief Musician upon Aijeleth Shahar, A Psalm of David. My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? why art thou so far from helping me, and from the words of my roaring?	For the choirmaster. To the tune of “The Doe of the Dawn.” A Psalm of David. My God, my God, why have You forsaken me? Why are You so far from saving me, so far from my words of groaning?
PSA	22	2	내 하나님이여 내가 낮에도 부르짖고 밤에도 잠잠치 아니하오나 응답지 아니하시나이다	O my God, I cry in the daytime, but thou hearest not; and in the night season, and am not silent.	I cry out by day, O my God, but You do not answer, and by night, but I have no rest.
PSA	22	3	이스라엘의 찬송 중에 거하시는 주여 주는 거룩하시니이다	But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel.	Yet You are holy, enthroned on the praises of Israel.
PSA	22	4	우리 열조가 주께 의뢰하였고 의뢰하였으므로 저희를 건지셨나이다	Our fathers trusted in thee: they trusted, and thou didst deliver them.	In You our fathers trusted; they trusted and You delivered them.
PSA	22	5	저희가 주께 부르짖어 구원을 얻고 주께 의뢰하여 수치를 당치 아니하였나이다	They cried unto thee, and were delivered: they trusted in thee, and were not confounded.	They cried out to You and were set free; they trusted in You and were not disappointed.
PSA	22	6	나는 벌레요 사람이 아니라 사람의 훼방거리요 백성의 조롱거리니이다	But I am a worm, and no man; a reproach of men, and despised of the people.	But I am a worm and not a man, scorned by men and despised by the people.
PSA	22	7	나를 보는 자는 다 비웃으며 입술을 비쭉이고 머리를 흔들며 말하되	All they that see me laugh me to scorn: they shoot out the lip, they shake the head, saying,	All who see me mock me; they sneer and shake their heads:
PSA	22	8	저가 여호와께 의탁하니 구원하실걸, 저를 기뻐하시니 건지실걸 하나이다	He trusted on the Lord that he would deliver him: let him deliver him, seeing he delighted in him.	“He trusts in the LORD, let the LORD deliver him; let the LORD rescue him, since He delights in him.”
PSA	22	9	오직 주께서 나를 모태에서 나오게 하시고 내 모친의 젖을 먹을 때에 의지하게 하셨나이다	But thou art he that took me out of the womb: thou didst make me hope when I was upon my mother’s breasts.	Yet You brought me forth from the womb; You made me secure at my mother’s breast.
PSA	22	10	내가 날 때부터 주께 맡긴바 되었고 모태에서 나올 때부터 주는 내 하나님이 되셨사오니	I was cast upon thee from the womb: thou art my God from my mother’s belly.	From birth I was cast upon You; from my mother’s womb You have been my God.
PSA	22	11	나를 멀리하지 마옵소서 환난이 가깝고 도울 자 없나이다	Be not far from me; for trouble is near; for there is none to help.	Be not far from me, for trouble is near and there is no one to help.
PSA	22	12	많은 황소가 나를 에워싸며 바산의 힘센 소들이 나를 둘렀으며	Many bulls have compassed me: strong bulls of Bashan have beset me round.	Many bulls surround me; strong bulls of Bashan encircle me.
PSA	22	13	내게 그 입을 벌림이 찢고 부르짖는 사자 같으니이다	They gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and a roaring lion.	They open their jaws against me like lions that roar and maul.
PSA	22	14	나는 물 같이 쏟아졌으며 내 모든 뼈는 어그러졌으며 내 마음은 촛밀 같아서 내 속에서 녹았으며	I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint: my heart is like wax; it is melted in the midst of my bowels.	I am poured out like water, and all my bones are disjointed. My heart is like wax; it melts away within me.
PSA	22	15	내 힘이 말라 질그릇 조각 같고 내 혀가 잇틀에 붙었나이다 주께서 또 나를 사망의 진토에 두셨나이다	My strength is dried up like a potsherd; and my tongue cleaveth to my jaws; and thou hast brought me into the dust of death.	My strength is dried up like a potsherd, and my tongue sticks to the roof of my mouth. You lay me in the dust of death.
PSA	22	16	개들이 나를 에워쌌으며 악한 무리가 나를 둘러 내 수족을 찔렀나이다	For dogs have compassed me: the assembly of the wicked have inclosed me: they pierced my hands and my feet.	For dogs surround me; a band of evil men encircles me; they have pierced my hands and feet.
PSA	22	17	내가 내 모든 뼈를 셀 수 있나이다 저희가 나를 주목하여 보고	I may tell all my bones: they look and stare upon me.	I can count all my bones; they stare and gloat over me.
PSA	22	18	내 겉옷을 나누며 속옷을 제비뽑나이다	They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture.	They divide my garments among them and cast lots for my clothing.
PSA	22	19	여호와여 멀리하지 마옵소서 나의 힘이시여 속히 나를 도우소서	But be not thou far from me, O Lord: O my strength, haste thee to help me.	But You, O LORD, be not far off; O my Strength, come quickly to help me.
PSA	22	20	내 영혼을 칼에서 건지시며 내 유일한 것을 개의 세력에서 구하소서	Deliver my soul from the sword; my darling from the power of the dog.	Deliver my soul from the sword, my precious life from the power of wild dogs.
PSA	22	21	나를 사자 입에서 구하소서 주께서 내게 응락하시고 들소 뿔에서 구원하셨나이다	Save me from the lion’s mouth: for thou hast heard me from the horns of the unicorns.	Save me from the mouth of the lion; at the horns of the wild oxen You have answered me!
PSA	22	22	내가 주의 이름을 형제에게 선포하고 회중에서 주를 찬송하리이다	I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee.	I will proclaim Your name to my brothers; I will praise You in the assembly.
PSA	22	23	여호와를 두려워하는 너희여 그를 찬송할지어다 야곱의 모든 자손이여 그에게 영광을 돌릴지어다 너희 이스라엘 모든 자손이여 그를 경외할지어다	Ye that fear the Lord, praise him; all ye the seed of Jacob, glorify him; and fear him, all ye the seed of Israel.	You who fear the LORD, praise Him! All descendants of Jacob, honor Him! All offspring of Israel, revere Him!
PSA	22	24	그는 곤고한 자의 곤고를 멸시하거나 싫어하지 아니하시며 그 얼굴을 저에게서 숨기지 아니하시고 부르짖을 때에 들으셨도다	For he hath not despised nor abhorred the affliction of the afflicted; neither hath he hid his face from him; but when he cried unto him, he heard.	For He has not despised or detested the torment of the afflicted. He has not hidden His face from him, but has attended to his cry for help.
PSA	22	25	대회 중에 나의 찬송은 주께로서 온 것이니 주를 경외하는 자 앞에서 나의 서원을 갚으리이다	My praise shall be of thee in the great congregation: I will pay my vows before them that fear him.	My praise for You resounds in the great assembly; I will fulfill my vows before those who fear You.
PSA	22	26	겸손한 자는 먹고 배부를 것이며 여호와를 찾는 자는 그를 찬송할 것이라 너희 마음은 영원히 살지어다	The meek shall eat and be satisfied: they shall praise the Lord that seek him: your heart shall live for ever.	The poor will eat and be satisfied; those who seek the LORD will praise Him. May your hearts live forever!
PSA	22	27	땅의 모든 끝이 여호와를 기억하고 돌아오며 열방의 모든 족속이 주의 앞에 경배하리니	All the ends of the world shall remember and turn unto the Lord: and all the kindreds of the nations shall worship before thee.	All the ends of the earth will remember and turn to the LORD. All the families of the nations will bow down before Him.
PSA	22	28	나라는 여호와의 것이요 여호와는 열방의 주재심이로다	For the kingdom is the Lord’s: and he is the governor among the nations.	For dominion belongs to the LORD and He rules over the nations.
PSA	22	29	세상의 모든 풍비한 자가 먹고 경배할 것이요 진토에 내려가는 자 곧 자기 영혼을 살리지 못할 자도 다 그 앞에 절하리로다	All they that be fat upon earth shall eat and worship: all they that go down to the dust shall bow before him: and none can keep alive his own soul.	All the rich of the earth will feast and worship; all who go down to the dust will kneel before Him— even those unable to preserve their lives.
PSA	22	30	후손이 그를 봉사할 것이요 대대에 주를 전할 것이며	A seed shall serve him; it shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation.	Posterity will serve Him; they will declare the Lord to a new generation.
PSA	22	31	와서 그 공의를 장차 날 백성에게 전함이여 주께서 이를 행하셨다 할 것이로다	They shall come, and shall declare his righteousness unto a people that shall be born, that he hath done this.	They will come and proclaim His righteousness to a people yet unborn— all that He has done.
PSA	23	1	다윗의 시 여호와는 나의 목자시니 내가 부족함이 없으리로다	A Psalm of David. The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want.	A Psalm of David. The LORD is my shepherd; I shall not want.
PSA	23	2	그가 나를 푸른 초장에 누이시며 쉴만한 물 가으로 인도하시는도다	He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: he leadeth me beside the still waters.	He makes me lie down in green pastures; He leads me beside quiet waters.
PSA	23	3	내 영혼을 소생시키시고 자기 이름을 위하여 의의 길로 인도하시는도다	He restoreth my soul: he leadeth me in the paths of righteousness for his name’s sake.	He restores my soul; He guides me in the paths of righteousness for the sake of His name.
PSA	23	4	내가 사망의 음침한 골짜기로 다닐지라도 해를 두려워하지 않을 것은 주께서 나와 함께 하심이라 주의 지팡이와 막대기가 나를 안위하시나이다	Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.	Even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for You are with me; Your rod and Your staff, they comfort me.
PSA	23	5	주께서 내 원수의 목전에서 내게 상을 베푸시고 기름으로 내 머리에 바르셨으니 내 잔이 넘치나이다	Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies: thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over.	You prepare a table before me in the presence of my enemies. You anoint my head with oil; my cup overflows.
PSA	23	6	나의 평생에 선하심과 인자하심이 정녕 나를 따르리니 내가 여호와의 집에 영원히 거하리로다	Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life: and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.	Surely goodness and mercy will follow me all the days of my life, and I will dwell in the house of the LORD forever.
PSA	24	1	다윗의 시 땅과 거기 충만한 것과 세계와 그 중에 거하는 자가 다 여호와의 것이로다	A Psalm of David. The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein.	A Psalm of David. The earth is the LORD’s, and the fullness thereof, the world and all who dwell therein.
PSA	24	2	여호와께서 그 터를 바다 위에 세우심이여 강들 위에 건설하셨도다	For he hath founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the floods.	For He has founded it upon the seas and established it upon the waters.
PSA	24	3	여호와의 산에 오를 자 누구며 그 거룩한 곳에 설 자가 누군고	Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? or who shall stand in his holy place?	Who may ascend the hill of the LORD? Who may stand in His holy place?
PSA	24	4	곧 손이 깨끗하며 마음이 청결하며 뜻을 허탄한 데 두지 아니하며 거짓 맹세치 아니하는 자로다	He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully.	He who has clean hands and a pure heart, who does not lift up his soul to an idol or swear deceitfully.
PSA	24	5	저는 여호와께 복을 받고 구원의 하나님께 의를 얻으리니	He shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation.	He will receive blessing from the LORD and vindication from the God of his salvation.
PSA	24	6	이는 여호와를 찾는 족속이요 야곱의 하나님의 얼굴을 구하는 자로다(셀라)	This is the generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face, O Jacob. Selah.	Such is the generation of those who seek Him, who seek Your face, O God of Jacob. Selah
PSA	24	7	문들아 너희 머리를 들지어다 영원한 문들아 들릴지어다 영광의 왕이 들어가시리로다	Lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors; and the King of glory shall come in.	Lift up your heads, O gates! Be lifted up, O ancient doors, that the King of Glory may enter!
PSA	24	8	영광의 왕이 뉘시뇨 강하고 능한 여호와시요 전쟁에 능한 여호와시로다	Who is this King of glory? The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle.	Who is this King of Glory? The LORD strong and mighty, the LORD mighty in battle.
PSA	24	9	문들아 너희 머리를 들지어다 영원한 문들아 들릴지어다 영광의 왕이 들어가시리로다	Lift up your heads, O ye gates; even lift them up, ye everlasting doors; and the King of glory shall come in.	Lift up your heads, O gates! Be lifted up, O ancient doors, that the King of Glory may enter!
PSA	24	10	영광의 왕이 뉘시뇨 만군의 여호와께서 곧 영광의 왕이시로다(셀라)	Who is this King of glory? The Lord of hosts, he is the King of glory. Selah.	Who is He, this King of Glory? The LORD of Hosts— He is the King of Glory. Selah
PSA	25	1	다윗의 시 여호와여 나의 영혼이 주를 우러러 보나이다	A Psalm of David. Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.	Of David. To You, O LORD, I lift up my soul;
PSA	25	2	나의 하나님이여 내가 주께 의지하였사오니 나로 부끄럽지 않게 하시고 나의 원수로 나를 이기어 개가를 부르지 못하게 하소서	O my God, I trust in thee: let me not be ashamed, let not mine enemies triumph over me.	in You, my God, I trust. Do not let me be put to shame; do not let my enemies exult over me.
PSA	25	3	주를 바라는 자는 수치를 당하지 아니하려니와 무고히 속이는 자는 수치를 당하리이다	Yea, let none that wait on thee be ashamed: let them be ashamed which transgress without cause.	Surely none who wait for You will be put to shame; but those who are faithless without cause will be disgraced.
PSA	25	4	여호와여 주의 도를 내게 보이시고 주의 길을 내게 가르치소서	Shew me thy ways, O Lord; teach me thy paths.	Show me Your ways, O LORD; teach me Your paths.
PSA	25	5	주의 진리로 나를 지도하시고 교훈하소서 주는 내 구원의 하나님이시니 내가 종일 주를 바라나이다	Lead me in thy truth, and teach me: for thou art the God of my salvation; on thee do I wait all the day.	Guide me in Your truth and teach me, for You are the God of my salvation; all day long I wait for You.
PSA	25	6	여호와여 주의 긍휼하심과 인자하심이 영원부터 있었사오니 주여 이것을 기억하옵소서	Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies and thy lovingkindnesses; for they have been ever of old.	Remember, O LORD, Your compassion and loving devotion, for they are from age to age.
PSA	25	7	여호와여 내 소시의 죄와 허물을 기억지 마시고 주의 인자하심을 따라 나를 기억하시되 주의 선하심을 인하여 하옵소서	Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions: according to thy mercy remember thou me for thy goodness’ sake, O Lord.	Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my rebellious acts; remember me according to Your loving devotion, because of Your goodness, O LORD.
PSA	25	8	여호와는 선하시고 정직하시니 그러므로 그 도로 죄인을 교훈하시리로다	Good and upright is the Lord: therefore will he teach sinners in the way.	Good and upright is the LORD; therefore He shows sinners the way.
PSA	25	9	온유한 자를 공의로 지도하심이여 온유한 자에게 그 도를 가르치시리로다	The meek will he guide in judgment: and the meek will he teach his way.	He guides the humble in what is right and teaches them His way.
PSA	25	10	여호와의 모든 길은 그 언약과 증거를 지키는 자에게 인자와 진리로다	All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as keep his covenant and his testimonies.	All the LORD’s ways are loving and faithful to those who keep His covenant and His decrees.
PSA	25	11	여호와여 나의 죄악이 중대하오니 주의 이름을 인하여 사하소서	For thy name’s sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity; for it is great.	For the sake of Your name, O LORD, forgive my iniquity, for it is great.
PSA	25	12	여호와를 경외하는 자 누구뇨 그 택할 길을 저에게 가르치시리로다	What man is he that feareth the Lord? him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose.	Who is the man who fears the LORD? He will instruct him in the path chosen for him.
PSA	25	13	저의 영혼은 평안히 거하고 그 자손은 땅을 상속하리로다	His soul shall dwell at ease; and his seed shall inherit the earth.	His soul will dwell in prosperity, and his descendants will inherit the land.
PSA	25	14	여호와의 친밀함이 경외하는 자에게 있음이여 그 언약을 저희에게 보이시리로다	The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him; and he will shew them his covenant.	The LORD confides in those who fear Him, and reveals His covenant to them.
PSA	25	15	내 눈이 항상 여호와를 앙망함은 내 발을 그물에서 벗어나게 하실 것임이로다	Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord; for he shall pluck my feet out of the net.	My eyes are always on the LORD, for He will free my feet from the mesh.
PSA	25	16	주여 나는 외롭고 괴롭사오니 내게 돌이키사 나를 긍휼히 여기소서	Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me; for I am desolate and afflicted.	Turn to me and be gracious, for I am lonely and afflicted.
PSA	25	17	내 마음의 근심이 많사오니 나를 곤난에서 끌어 내소서	The troubles of my heart are enlarged: O bring thou me out of my distresses.	The troubles of my heart increase; free me from my distress.
PSA	25	18	나의 곤고와 환난을 보시고 내 모든 죄를 사하소서	Look upon mine affliction and my pain; and forgive all my sins.	Consider my affliction and trouble, and take away all my sins.
PSA	25	19	내 원수를 보소서 저희가 많고 나를 심히 미워함이니이다	Consider mine enemies; for they are many; and they hate me with cruel hatred.	Consider my enemies, for they are many, and they hate me with vicious hatred.
PSA	25	20	내 영혼을 지켜 나를 구원하소서 내가 주께 피하오니 수치를 당치 말게 하소서	O keep my soul, and deliver me: let me not be ashamed; for I put my trust in thee.	Guard my soul and deliver me; let me not be put to shame, for I take refuge in You.
PSA	25	21	내가 주를 바라오니 성실과 정직으로 나를 보호하소서	Let integrity and uprightness preserve me; for I wait on thee.	May integrity and uprightness preserve me, because I wait for You.
PSA	25	22	하나님이여 이스라엘을 그 모든 환난에서 구속하소서	Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his troubles.	Redeem Israel, O God, from all its distress.
PSA	26	1	다윗의 시 내가 나의 완전함에 행하였사오며 요동치 아니하고 여호와를 의지하였사오니 여호와여 나를 판단하소서	A Psalm of David. Judge me, O Lord; for I have walked in mine integrity: I have trusted also in the Lord; therefore I shall not slide.	Of David. Vindicate me, O LORD! For I have walked with integrity; I have trusted in the LORD without wavering.
PSA	26	2	여호와여 나를 살피시고 시험하사 내 뜻과 내 마음을 단련하소서	Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my reins and my heart.	Test me, O LORD, and try me; examine my heart and mind.
PSA	26	3	주의 인자하심이 내 목전에 있나이다 내가 주의 진리 중에 행하여	For thy lovingkindness is before mine eyes: and I have walked in thy truth.	For Your loving devotion is before my eyes, and I have walked in Your truth.
PSA	26	4	허망한 사람과 같이 앉지 아니하였사오니 간사한 자와 동행치도 아니하리이다	I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with dissemblers.	I do not sit with deceitful men, nor keep company with hypocrites.
PSA	26	5	내가 행악자의 집회를 미워하오니 악한 자와 같이 앉지 아니하리이다	I have hated the congregation of evil doers; and will not sit with the wicked.	I hate the mob of evildoers, and refuse to sit with the wicked.
PSA	26	6	여호와여 내가 무죄하므로 손을 씻고 주의 단에 두루 다니며	I will wash mine hands in innocency: so will I compass thine altar, O Lord:	I wash my hands in innocence that I may go about Your altar, O LORD,
PSA	26	7	감사의 소리를 들리고 주의 기이한 모든 일을 이르리이다	That I may publish with the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all thy wondrous works.	to raise my voice in thanksgiving and declare all Your wonderful works.
PSA	26	8	여호와여 내가 주의 계신 집과 주의 영광이 거하는 곳을 사랑하오니	Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honour dwelleth.	O LORD, I love the house where You dwell, the place where Your glory resides.
PSA	26	9	내 영혼을 죄인과 함께 내 생명을 살인자와 함께 거두지 마소서	Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody men:	Do not take my soul away with sinners, or my life with men of bloodshed,
PSA	26	10	저희 손에 악특함이 있고 그 오른손에 뇌물이 가득하오나	In whose hands is mischief, and their right hand is full of bribes.	in whose hands are wicked schemes, whose right hands are full of bribes.
PSA	26	11	나는 나의 완전함에 행하오리니 나를 구속하시고 긍휼히 여기소서	But as for me, I will walk in mine integrity: redeem me, and be merciful unto me.	But I will walk with integrity; redeem me and be merciful to me.
PSA	26	12	내 발이 평탄한 데 섰사오니 회중에서 여호와를 송축하리이다	My foot standeth in an even place: in the congregations will I bless the Lord.	My feet stand on level ground; in the congregations I will bless the LORD.
PSA	27	1	다윗의 시 여호와는 나의 빛이요 나의 구원이시니 내가 누구를 두려워하리요 여호와는 내 생명의 능력이시니 내가 누구를 무서워하리요	A Psalm of David. The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid?	Of David. The LORD is my light and my salvation— whom shall I fear? The LORD is the stronghold of my life— whom shall I dread?
PSA	27	2	나의 대적, 나의 원수된 행악자가 내 살을 먹으려고 내게로 왔다가 실족하여 넘어졌도다	When the wicked, even mine enemies and my foes, came upon me to eat up my flesh, they stumbled and fell.	When the wicked came upon me to devour my flesh, my enemies and foes stumbled and fell.
PSA	27	3	군대가 나를 대적하여 진 칠지라도 내 마음이 두렵지 아니하며 전쟁이 일어나 나를 치려 할지라도 내가 오히려 안연하리로다	Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear: though war should rise against me, in this will I be confident.	Though an army encamps around me, my heart will not fear; though a war breaks out against me, I will keep my trust.
PSA	27	4	내가 여호와께 청하였던 한 가지 일 곧 그것을 구하리니 곧 나로 내 생전에 여호와의 집에 거하여 여호와의 아름다움을 앙망하며 그 전에서 사모하게 하실 것이라	One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his temple.	One thing I have asked of the LORD; this is what I desire: to dwell in the house of the LORD all the days of my life, to gaze on the beauty of the LORD and seek Him in His temple.
PSA	27	5	여호와께서 환난 날에 나를 그 초막 속에 비밀히 지키시고 그 장막 은밀한 곳에 나를 숨기시며 바위 위에 높이 두시리로다	For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion: in the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me; he shall set me up upon a rock.	For in the day of trouble He will hide me in His shelter; He will conceal me under the cover of His tent; He will set me high upon a rock.
PSA	27	6	이제 내 머리가 나를 두른 내 원수 위에 들리리니 내가 그 장막에서 즐거운 제사를 드리겠고 노래하여 여호와를 찬송하리로다	And now shall mine head be lifted up above mine enemies round about me: therefore will I offer in his tabernacle sacrifices of joy; I will sing, yea, I will sing praises unto the Lord.	Then my head will be held high above my enemies around me. At His tabernacle I will offer sacrifices with shouts of joy; I will sing and make music to the LORD.
PSA	27	7	여호와여 내가 소리로 부르짖을 때에 들으시고 또한 나를 긍휼히 여기사 응답하소서	Hear, O Lord, when I cry with my voice: have mercy also upon me, and answer me.	Hear, O LORD, my voice when I call; be merciful and answer me.
PSA	27	8	너희는 내 얼굴을 찾으라 하실 때에 내 마음이 주께 말하되 여호와여 내가 주의 얼굴을 찾으리이다 하였나이다	When thou saidst, Seek ye my face; my heart said unto thee, Thy face, Lord, will I seek.	My heart said, “Seek His face.” Your face, O LORD, I will seek.
PSA	27	9	주의 얼굴을 내게서 숨기지 마시고 주의 종을 노하여 버리지 마소서 주는 나의 도움이 되셨나이다 나의 구원의 하나님이시여 나를 버리지 말고 떠나지 마옵소서	Hide not thy face far from me; put not thy servant away in anger: thou hast been my help; leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my salvation.	Hide not Your face from me, nor turn away Your servant in anger. You have been my helper; do not leave me or forsake me, O God of my salvation.
PSA	27	10	내 부모는 나를 버렸으나 여호와는 나를 영접하시리이다	When my father and my mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up.	Though my father and mother forsake me, the LORD will receive me.
PSA	27	11	여호와여 주의 길로 나를 가르치시고 내 원수를 인하여 평탄한 길로 인도하소서	Teach me thy way, O Lord, and lead me in a plain path, because of mine enemies.	Teach me Your way, O LORD, and lead me on a level path, because of my oppressors.
PSA	27	12	내 생명을 내 대적의 뜻에 맡기지 마소서 위증자와 악을 토하는 자가 일어나 나를 치려 함이니이다	Deliver me not over unto the will of mine enemies: for false witnesses are risen up against me, and such as breathe out cruelty.	Do not hand me over to the will of my foes, for false witnesses rise up against me, breathing out violence.
PSA	27	13	내가 산 자의 땅에 있음이여 여호와의 은혜 볼 것을 믿었도다	I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living.	Still I am certain to see the goodness of the LORD in the land of the living.
PSA	27	14	너는 여호와를 바랄지어다 강하고 담대하며 여호와를 바랄지어다	Wait on the Lord: be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart: wait, I say, on the Lord.	Wait patiently for the LORD; be strong and courageous. Wait patiently for the LORD!
PSA	28	1	다윗의 시 여호와여 내가 주께 부르짖으오니 나의 반석이여 내게 귀를 막지 마소서 주께서 내게 잠잠하시면 내가 무덤에 내려가는 자와 같을까 하나이다	A Psalm of David. Unto thee will I cry, O Lord my rock; be not silent to me: lest, if thou be silent to me, I become like them that go down into the pit.	Of David. To You, O LORD, I call; be not deaf to me, O my Rock. For if You remain silent, I will be like those descending to the Pit.
PSA	28	2	내가 주의 성소를 향하여 나의 손을 들고 주께 부르짖을 때에 나의 간구하는 소리를 들으소서	Hear the voice of my supplications, when I cry unto thee, when I lift up my hands toward thy holy oracle.	Hear my cry for mercy when I call to You for help, when I lift up my hands toward Your holy sanctuary.
PSA	28	3	악인과 행악하는 자와 함께 나를 끌지 마옵소서 저희는 그 이웃에게 화평을 말하나 그 마음에는 악독이 있나이다	Draw me not away with the wicked, and with the workers of iniquity, which speak peace to their neighbours, but mischief is in their hearts.	Do not drag me away with the wicked, and with the workers of iniquity, who speak peace to their neighbors while malice is in their hearts.
PSA	28	4	저희의 행사와 그 행위의 악한 대로 갚으시며 저희 손의 지은 대로 갚아 그 마땅히 받을 것으로 보응하소서	Give them according to their deeds, and according to the wickedness of their endeavours: give them after the work of their hands; render to them their desert.	Repay them according to their deeds and for their works of evil. Repay them for what their hands have done; bring back on them what they deserve.
PSA	28	5	저희는 여호와의 행하신 일과 손으로 지으신 것을 생각지 아니하므로 여호와께서 저희를 파괴하고 건설치 아니하시리로다	Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands, he shall destroy them, and not build them up.	Since they show no regard for the works of the LORD or what His hands have done, He will tear them down and never rebuild them.
PSA	28	6	여호와를 찬송함이여 내 간구하는 소리를 들으심이로다	Blessed be the Lord, because he hath heard the voice of my supplications.	Blessed be the LORD, for He has heard my cry for mercy.
PSA	28	7	여호와는 나의 힘과 나의 방패시니 내 마음이 저를 의지하여 도움을 얻었도다 그러므로 내 마음이 크게 기뻐하며 내 노래로 저를 찬송하리로다	The Lord is my strength and my shield; my heart trusted in him, and I am helped: therefore my heart greatly rejoiceth; and with my song will I praise him.	The LORD is my strength and my shield; my heart trusts in Him, and I am helped. Therefore my heart rejoices, and I give thanks to Him with my song.
PSA	28	8	여호와는 저희의 힘이시요 그 기름 부음 받은 자의 구원의 산성이시로다	The Lord is their strength, and he is the saving strength of his anointed.	The LORD is the strength of His people, a stronghold of salvation for His anointed.
PSA	28	9	주의 백성을 구원하시며 주의 산업에 복을 주시고 또 저희의 목자가 되사 영원토록 드십소서	Save thy people, and bless thine inheritance: feed them also, and lift them up for ever.	Save Your people and bless Your inheritance; shepherd them and carry them forever.
PSA	29	1	다윗의 시 너희 권능 있는 자들아 영광과 능력을 여호와께 돌리고 돌릴지어다	A Psalm of David. Give unto the Lord, O ye mighty, give unto the Lord glory and strength.	A Psalm of David. Ascribe to the LORD, O heavenly beings, ascribe to the LORD glory and strength.
PSA	29	2	여호와의 이름에 합당한 영광을 돌리며 거룩한 옷을 입고 여호와께 경배할지어다	Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name; worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness.	Ascribe to the LORD the glory due His name; worship the LORD in the splendor of His holiness.
PSA	29	3	여호와의 소리가 물 위에 있도다 영광의 하나님이 뇌성을 발하시니 여호와는 많은 물 위에 계시도다	The voice of the Lord is upon the waters: the God of glory thundereth: the Lord is upon many waters.	The voice of the LORD is over the waters; the God of glory thunders; the LORD is heard over many waters.
PSA	29	4	여호와의 소리가 힘 있음이여 여호와의 소리가 위엄차도다	The voice of the Lord is powerful; the voice of the Lord is full of majesty.	The voice of the LORD is powerful; the voice of the LORD is majestic.
PSA	29	5	여호와의 소리가 백향목을 꺽으심이여 여호와께서 레바논 백향목을 꺽어 부수시도다	The voice of the Lord breaketh the cedars; yea, the Lord breaketh the cedars of Lebanon.	The voice of the LORD breaks the cedars; the LORD shatters the cedars of Lebanon.
PSA	29	6	그 나무를 송아지 같이 뛰게 하심이여 레바논과 시룐으로 들송아지 같이 뛰게 하시도다	He maketh them also to skip like a calf; Lebanon and Sirion like a young unicorn.	He makes Lebanon skip like a calf, and Sirion like a young wild ox.
PSA	29	7	여호와의 소리가 화염을 가르시도다	The voice of the Lord divideth the flames of fire.	The voice of the LORD strikes with flames of fire.
PSA	29	8	여호와의 소리가 광야를 진동하심이여 여호와께서 가데스 광야를 진동하시도다	The voice of the Lord shaketh the wilderness; the Lord shaketh the wilderness of Kadesh.	The voice of the LORD shakes the wilderness; the LORD shakes the Wilderness of Kadesh.
PSA	29	9	여호와의 소리가 암사슴으로 낙태케 하시고 삼림을 말갛게 벗기시니 그 전에서 모든 것이 말하기를 영광이라 하도다	The voice of the Lord maketh the hinds to calve, and discovereth the forests: and in his temple doth every one speak of his glory.	The voice of the LORD twists the oaks and strips the forests bare. And in His temple all cry, “Glory!”
PSA	29	10	여호와께서 홍수 때에 좌정하셨음이여 여호와께서 영영토록 왕으로 좌정하시도다	The Lord sitteth upon the flood; yea, the Lord sitteth King for ever.	The LORD sits enthroned over the flood; the LORD is enthroned as King forever.
PSA	29	11	여호와께서 자기 백성에게 힘을 주심이여 여호와께서 자기 백성에게 평강의 복을 주시리로다	The Lord will give strength unto his people; the Lord will bless his people with peace.	The LORD gives His people strength; the LORD blesses His people with peace.
PSA	30	1	다윗의 시, 곧 성전 낙성가 여호와여 내가 주를 높일 것은 주께서 나를 끌어내사 내 대적으로 나를 인하여 기뻐하지 못하게 하심이니이다	A Psalm and Song at the dedication of the house of David. I will extol thee, O Lord; for thou hast lifted me up, and hast not made my foes to rejoice over me.	A Psalm. A song for the dedication of the temple. Of David. I will exalt You, O LORD, for You have lifted me up and have not allowed my foes to rejoice over me.
PSA	30	2	여호와 내 하나님이여 내가 주께 부르짖으매 나를 고치셨나이다	O Lord my God, I cried unto thee, and thou hast healed me.	O LORD my God, I cried to You for help, and You healed me.
PSA	30	3	여호와여 주께서 내 영혼을 음부에서 끌어내어 나를 살리사 무덤으로 내려가지 않게 하셨나이다	O Lord, thou hast brought up my soul from the grave: thou hast kept me alive, that I should not go down to the pit.	O LORD, You pulled me up from Sheol; You spared me from descending into the Pit.
PSA	30	4	주의 성도들아 여호와를 찬송하며 그 거룩한 이름에 감사할지어다	Sing unto the Lord, O ye saints of his, and give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness.	Sing to the LORD, O you His saints, and praise His holy name.
PSA	30	5	그 노염은 잠간이요 그 은총은 평생이로다 저녁에는 울음이 기숙할지라도 아침에는 기쁨이 오리로다	For his anger endureth but a moment; in his favour is life: weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning.	For His anger is fleeting, but His favor lasts a lifetime. Weeping may stay the night, but joy comes in the morning.
PSA	30	6	내가 형통할 때에 말하기를 영영히 요동치 아니하리라 하였도다	And in my prosperity I said, I shall never be moved.	In prosperity I said, “I will never be shaken.”
PSA	30	7	여호와께서 주의 은혜로 내 산을 굳게 세우셨더니 주의 얼굴을 가리우시매 내가 근심하였나이다	Lord, by thy favour thou hast made my mountain to stand strong: thou didst hide thy face, and I was troubled.	O LORD, You favored me; You made my mountain stand strong. When You hid Your face, I was dismayed.
PSA	30	8	여호와여 내가 주께 부르짖고 여호와께 간구하기를	I cried to thee, O Lord; and unto the Lord I made supplication.	To You, O LORD, I called, and I begged my Lord for mercy:
PSA	30	9	내가 무덤에 내려갈 때에 나의 피가 무슨 유익이 있으리요 어찌 진토가 주를 찬송하며 주의 진리를 선포하리이까	What profit is there in my blood, when I go down to the pit? Shall the dust praise thee? shall it declare thy truth?	“What gain is there in my bloodshed, in my descent to the Pit? Will the dust praise You? Will it proclaim Your faithfulness?
PSA	30	10	여호와여 들으시고 나를 긍휼히 여기소서 여호와여 나의 돕는 자가 되소서 하였나이다	Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me: Lord, be thou my helper.	Hear me, O LORD, and have mercy; O LORD, be my helper.”
PSA	30	11	주께서 나의 슬픔을 변하여 춤이 되게 하시며 나의 베옷을 벗기고 기쁨으로 띠 띠우셨나이다	Thou hast turned for me my mourning into dancing: thou hast put off my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness;	You turned my mourning into dancing; You peeled off my sackcloth and clothed me with joy,
PSA	30	12	이는 잠잠치 아니하고 내 영광으로 주를 찬송케 하심이니 여호와 나의 하나님이여 내가 주께 영영히 감사하리이다	To the end that my glory may sing praise to thee, and not be silent. O Lord my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever.	that my heart may sing Your praises and not be silent. O LORD my God, I will give thanks forever.
PSA	31	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 한 노래 여호와여 내가 주께 피하오니 나로 영원히 부끄럽게 마시고 주의 의로 나를 건지소서	To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. In thee, O Lord, do I put my trust; let me never be ashamed: deliver me in thy righteousness.	For the choirmaster. A Psalm of David. In You, O LORD, I have taken refuge; let me never be put to shame; save me by Your righteousness.
PSA	31	2	내게 귀를 기울여 속히 건지시고 내게 견고한 바위와 구원하는 보장이 되소서	Bow down thine ear to me; deliver me speedily: be thou my strong rock, for an house of defence to save me.	Incline Your ear to me; come quickly to my rescue. Be my rock of refuge, the stronghold of my deliverance.
PSA	31	3	주는 나의 반석과 산성이시니 그러므로 주의 이름을 인하여 나를 인도하시고 지도하소서	For thou art my rock and my fortress; therefore for thy name’s sake lead me, and guide me.	For You are my rock and my fortress; lead me and guide me for the sake of Your name.
PSA	31	4	저희가 나를 위하여 비밀히 친 그물에서 빼어내소서 주는 나의 산성이시니이다	Pull me out of the net that they have laid privily for me: for thou art my strength.	You free me from the net laid out for me, for You are my refuge.
PSA	31	5	내가 나의 영을 주의 손에 부탁하나이다 진리의 하나님 여호와여 나를 구속하셨나이다	Into thine hand I commit my spirit: thou hast redeemed me, O Lord God of truth.	Into Your hands I commit my spirit; You have redeemed me, O LORD, God of truth.
PSA	31	6	내가 허탄한 거짓을 숭상하는 자를 미워하고 여호와를 의지하나이다	I have hated them that regard lying vanities: but I trust in the Lord.	I hate those who cling to worthless idols, but in the LORD I trust.
PSA	31	7	내가 주의 인자하심을 기뻐하며 즐거워할 것은 주께서 나의 곤란을 감찰하사 환난 중에 있는 내 영혼을 아셨고	I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy: for thou hast considered my trouble; thou hast known my soul in adversities;	I will be glad and rejoice in Your loving devotion, for You have seen my affliction; You have known the anguish of my soul.
PSA	31	8	나를 대적의 수중에 금고치 아니하셨고 내 발을 넓은 곳에 세우셨음이니이다	And hast not shut me up into the hand of the enemy: thou hast set my feet in a large room.	You have not delivered me to the enemy; You have set my feet in the open.
PSA	31	9	여호와여 내 고통을 인하여 나를 긍휼히 여기소서 내가 근심으로 눈과 혼과 몸이 쇠하였나이다	Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am in trouble: mine eye is consumed with grief, yea, my soul and my belly.	Be merciful to me, O LORD, for I am in distress; my eyes fail from sorrow, my soul and body as well.
PSA	31	10	내 생명은 슬픔으로 보내며 나의 해는 탄식으로 보냄이여 내 기력이 나의 죄악으로 약하며 나의 뼈가 쇠하도소이다	For my life is spent with grief, and my years with sighing: my strength faileth because of mine iniquity, and my bones are consumed.	For my life is consumed with grief and my years with groaning; my iniquity has drained my strength, and my bones are wasting away.
PSA	31	11	내가 모든 대적으로 말미암아 욕을 당하고 내 이웃에게서는 심히 당하니 내 친구가 놀라고 길에서 보는 자가 나를 피하였나이다	I was a reproach among all mine enemies, but especially among my neighbours, and a fear to mine acquaintance: they that did see me without fled from me.	Among all my enemies I am a disgrace, and among my neighbors even more. I am dreaded by my friends— they flee when they see me on the street.
PSA	31	12	내가 잊어버린바 됨이 사망한 자를 마음에 두지 아니함 같고 파기와 같으니이다	I am forgotten as a dead man out of mind: I am like a broken vessel.	I am forgotten like a dead man, out of mind. I am like a broken vessel.
PSA	31	13	내가 무리의 비방을 들으오며 사방에 두려움이 있나이다 저희가 나를 치려 의논할 때에 내 생명을 빼앗기로 꾀하였나이다	For I have heard the slander of many: fear was on every side: while they took counsel together against me, they devised to take away my life.	For I hear the slander of many; there is terror on every side. They conspire against me and plot to take my life.
PSA	31	14	여호와여 그러하여도 나는 주께 의지하고 말하기를 주는 내 하나님이시라 하였나이다	But I trusted in thee, O Lord: I said, Thou art my God.	But I trust in You, O LORD; I say, “You are my God.”
PSA	31	15	내 시대가 주의 손에 있사오니 내 원수와 핍박하는 자의 손에서 나를 건지소서	My times are in thy hand: deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and from them that persecute me.	My times are in Your hands; deliver me from my enemies and from those who pursue me.
PSA	31	16	주의 얼굴을 주의 종에게 비취시고 주의 인자하심으로 나를 구원하소서	Make thy face to shine upon thy servant: save me for thy mercies’ sake.	Make Your face shine on Your servant; save me by Your loving devotion.
PSA	31	17	여호와여 내가 주를 불렀사오니 나로 부끄럽게 마시고 악인을 부끄럽게 하사 음부에서 잠잠케 하소서	Let me not be ashamed, O Lord; for I have called upon thee: let the wicked be ashamed, and let them be silent in the grave.	O LORD, let me not be ashamed, for I have called on You. Let the wicked be put to shame; let them lie silent in Sheol.
PSA	31	18	교만하고 완악한 말로 무례히 의인을 치는 거짓 입술로 벙어리 되게 하소서	Let the lying lips be put to silence; which speak grievous things proudly and contemptuously against the righteous.	May lying lips be silenced— lips that speak with arrogance against the righteous, full of pride and contempt.
PSA	31	19	주를 두려워하는 자를 위하여 쌓아 두신 은혜 곧 인생 앞에서 주께 피하는 자를 위하여 베푸신 은혜가 어찌 그리 큰지요	Oh how great is thy goodness, which thou hast laid up for them that fear thee; which thou hast wrought for them that trust in thee before the sons of men!	How great is Your goodness which You have laid up for those who fear You, which You have bestowed before the sons of men on those who take refuge in You!
PSA	31	20	주께서 저희를 주의 은밀한 곳에 숨기사 사람의 꾀에서 벗어나게 하시고 비밀히 장막에 감추사 구설의 다툼에서 면하게 하시리이다	Thou shalt hide them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of man: thou shalt keep them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of tongues.	You hide them in the secret place of Your presence from the schemes of men. You conceal them in Your shelter from accusing tongues.
PSA	31	21	여호와를 찬송할지어다 견고한 성에서 그 기이한 인자를 내게 보이셨음이로다	Blessed be the Lord: for he hath shewed me his marvellous kindness in a strong city.	Blessed be the LORD, for He has shown me His loving devotion in a city under siege.
PSA	31	22	내가 경겁한 중에 말하기를 주의 목전에서 끊어졌다 하였사오나 내가 주께 부르짖을 때에 주께서 나의 간구하는 소리를 들으셨나이다	For I said in my haste, I am cut off from before thine eyes: nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my supplications when I cried unto thee.	In my alarm I said, “I am cut off from Your sight!” But You heard my plea for mercy when I called to You for help.
PSA	31	23	너희 모든 성도들아 여호와를 사랑하라 여호와께서 성실한 자를 보호하시고 교만히 행하는 자에게 엄중히 갚으시느니라	O love the Lord, all ye his saints: for the Lord preserveth the faithful, and plentifully rewardeth the proud doer.	Love the LORD, all His saints. The LORD preserves the faithful, but fully repays the arrogant.
PSA	31	24	강하고 담대하라 여호와를 바라는 너희들아	Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord.	Be strong and courageous, all you who hope in the LORD.
PSA	32	1	다윗의 마스길 허물의 사함을 얻고 그 죄의 가리움을 받은 자는 복이 있도다	A Psalm of David, Maschil. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered.	Of David. A Maskil. Blessed is he whose transgressions are forgiven, whose sins are covered.
PSA	32	2	마음에 간사가 없고 여호와께 정죄를 당치 않은 자는 복이 있도다	Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputeth not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile.	Blessed is the man whose iniquity the LORD does not count against him, in whose spirit there is no deceit.
PSA	32	3	내가 토설치 아니할 때에 종일 신음하므로 내 뼈가 쇠하였도다	When I kept silence, my bones waxed old through my roaring all the day long.	When I kept silent, my bones became brittle from my groaning all day long.
PSA	32	4	주의 손이 주야로 나를 누르시오니 내 진액이 화하여 여름 가물에 마름 같이 되었나이다(셀라)	For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me: my moisture is turned into the drought of summer. Selah.	For day and night Your hand was heavy upon me; my strength was drained as in the summer heat. Selah
PSA	32	5	내가 이르기를 내 허물을 여호와께 자복하리라 하고 주께 내 죄를 아뢰고 내 죄악을 숨기지 아니하였더니 곧 주께서 내 죄의 악을 사하셨나이다(셀라)	I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid. I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord; and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Selah.	Then I acknowledged my sin to You and did not hide my iniquity. I said, “I will confess my transgressions to the LORD,” and You forgave the guilt of my sin. Selah
PSA	32	6	이로 인하여 무릇 경건한 자는 주를 만날 기회를 타서 주께 기도할지라 진실로 홍수가 범람할지라도 저에게 미치지 못하리이다	For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee in a time when thou mayest be found: surely in the floods of great waters they shall not come nigh unto him.	Therefore let all the godly pray to You while You may be found. Surely when great waters rise, they will not come near.
PSA	32	7	주는 나의 은신처이오니 환난에서 나를 보호하시고 구원의 노래로 나를 에우시리이다(셀라)	Thou art my hiding place; thou shalt preserve me from trouble; thou shalt compass me about with songs of deliverance. Selah.	You are my hiding place. You protect me from trouble; You surround me with songs of deliverance. Selah
PSA	32	8	내가 너의 갈 길을 가르쳐 보이고 너를 주목하여 훈계하리로다	I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way which thou shalt go: I will guide thee with mine eye.	I will instruct you and teach you the way you should go; I will give you counsel and watch over you.
PSA	32	9	너희는 무지한 말이나 노새 같이 되지 말지어다 그것들은 자갈과 굴레로 단속하지 아니하면 너희에게 가까이 오지 아니하리로다	Be ye not as the horse, or as the mule, which have no understanding: whose mouth must be held in with bit and bridle, lest they come near unto thee.	Do not be like the horse or mule, which have no understanding; they must be controlled with bit and bridle to make them come to you.
PSA	32	10	악인에게는 많은 슬픔이 있으나 여호와를 신뢰하는 자에게는 인자하심이 두르리로다	Many sorrows shall be to the wicked: but he that trusteth in the Lord, mercy shall compass him about.	Many are the sorrows of the wicked, but loving devotion surrounds him who trusts in the LORD.
PSA	32	11	너희 의인들아 여호와를 기뻐하며 즐거워 할지어다 마음이 정직한 너희들아 다 즐거이 외칠지어다	Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye righteous: and shout for joy, all ye that are upright in heart.	Be glad in the LORD and rejoice, O righteous ones; shout for joy, all you upright in heart.
PSA	33	1	너희 의인들아 어호와를 즐거워하라 찬송은 정직한 자의 마땅히 할 바로다	Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous: for praise is comely for the upright.	Rejoice in the LORD, O righteous ones; it is fitting for the upright to praise Him.
PSA	33	2	수금으로 여호와께 감사하고 열 줄 비파로 찬송할지어다	Praise the Lord with harp: sing unto him with the psaltery and an instrument of ten strings.	Praise the LORD with the harp; make music to Him with ten strings.
PSA	33	3	새 노래로 그를 노래하며 즐거운 소리로 공교히 연주할지어다	Sing unto him a new song; play skilfully with a loud noise.	Sing to Him a new song; play skillfully with a shout of joy.
PSA	33	4	여호와의 말씀은 정직하며 그 행사는 다 진실하시도다	For the word of the Lord is right; and all his works are done in truth.	For the word of the LORD is upright, and all His work is trustworthy.
PSA	33	5	저는 정의와 공의를 사랑하심이여 세상에 여호와의 인자하심이 충만하도다	He loveth righteousness and judgment: the earth is full of the goodness of the Lord.	The LORD loves righteousness and justice; the earth is full of His loving devotion.
PSA	33	6	여호와의 말씀으로 하늘이 지음이 되었으며 그 만상이 그 입기운으로 이루었도다	By the word of the Lord were the heavens made; and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth.	By the word of the LORD the heavens were made, and all the stars by the breath of His mouth.
PSA	33	7	저가 바닷물을 모아 무더기 같이 쌓으시며 깊은 물을 곳간에 두시도다	He gathereth the waters of the sea together as an heap: he layeth up the depth in storehouses.	He piles up the waters of the sea; He puts the depths into storehouses.
PSA	33	8	온 땅은 여호와를 두려워하며 세계의 모든 거민은 그를 경외할지어다	Let all the earth fear the Lord: let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him.	Let all the earth fear the LORD; let all the people of the world revere Him.
PSA	33	9	저가 말씀하시매 이루었으며 명하시매 견고히 섰도다	For he spake, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast.	For He spoke, and it came to be; He commanded, and it stood firm.
PSA	33	10	여호와께서 열방의 도모를 폐하시며 민족들의 사상을 무효케 하시도다	The Lord bringeth the counsel of the heathen to nought: he maketh the devices of the people of none effect.	The LORD frustrates the plans of the nations; He thwarts the devices of the peoples.
PSA	33	11	여호와의 도모는 영영히 서고 그 심사는 대대에 이르리로다	The counsel of the Lord standeth for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all generations.	The counsel of the LORD stands forever, the purposes of His heart to all generations.
PSA	33	12	여호와로 자기 하나님을 삼은 나라 곧 하나님의 기업으로 빼신 바 된 백성은 복이 있도다	Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord; and the people whom he hath chosen for his own inheritance.	Blessed is the nation whose God is the LORD, the people He has chosen as His inheritance!
PSA	33	13	여호와께서 하늘에서 감찰하사 모든 인생을 보심이여	The Lord looketh from heaven; he beholdeth all the sons of men.	The LORD looks down from heaven; He sees all the sons of men.
PSA	33	14	곧 그 거하신 곳에서 세상의 모든 거민을 하감하시도다	From the place of his habitation he looketh upon all the inhabitants of the earth.	From His dwelling place He gazes on all who inhabit the earth.
PSA	33	15	저는 일반의 마음을 지으시며 저희 모든 행사를 감찰하시는 자로다	He fashioneth their hearts alike; he considereth all their works.	He shapes the hearts of each; He considers all their works.
PSA	33	16	많은 군대로 구원 얻은 왕이 없으며 용사가 힘이 커도 스스로 구하지 못하는도다	There is no king saved by the multitude of an host: a mighty man is not delivered by much strength.	No king is saved by his vast army; no warrior is delivered by his great strength.
PSA	33	17	구원함에 말은 헛것임이여 그 큰 힘으로 구하지 못하는도다	An horse is a vain thing for safety: neither shall he deliver any by his great strength.	A horse is a vain hope for salvation; even its great strength cannot save.
PSA	33	18	여호와는 그 경외하는 자 곧 그 인자하심을 바라는 자를 살피사	Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy;	Surely the eyes of the LORD are on those who fear Him, on those whose hope is in His loving devotion
PSA	33	19	저희 영혼을 사망에서 건지시며 저희를 기근시에 살게 하시는도다	To deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine.	to deliver them from death and keep them alive in famine.
PSA	33	20	우리 영혼이 여호와를 바람이여 저는 우리의 도움과 방패시로다	Our soul waiteth for the Lord: he is our help and our shield.	Our soul waits for the LORD; He is our help and our shield.
PSA	33	21	우리 마음이 저를 즐거워함이여 우리가 그 성호를 의지한 연고로다	For our heart shall rejoice in him, because we have trusted in his holy name.	For our hearts rejoice in Him, since we trust in His holy name.
PSA	33	22	여호와여 우리가 주께 바라는 대로 주의 인자하심을 우리에게 베푸소서	Let thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us, according as we hope in thee.	May Your loving devotion rest on us, O LORD, as we put our hope in You.
PSA	34	1	다윗이 아비멜렉 앞에서 미친체하다가 쫓겨나서 지은 시 내가 여호와를 항상 송축함이여 그를 송축함이 내 입에 계속하리로다	A Psalm of David, when he changed his behaviour before Abimelech; who drove him away, and he departed. I will bless the Lord at all times: his praise shall continually be in my mouth.	Of David, when he pretended to be insane before Abimelech, so that the king drove him away. I will bless the LORD at all times; His praise will always be on my lips.
PSA	34	2	내 영혼이 여호와로 자랑하리니 곤고한 자가 이를 듣고 기뻐하리로다	My soul shall make her boast in the Lord: the humble shall hear thereof, and be glad.	My soul boasts in the LORD; let the oppressed hear and rejoice.
PSA	34	3	나와 함께 여호와를 광대하시다 하며 함께 그 이름을 높이세	O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together.	Magnify the LORD with me; let us exalt His name together.
PSA	34	4	내가 여호와께 구하매 내게 응답하시고 내 모든 두려움에서 나를 건지셨도다	I sought the Lord, and he heard me, and delivered me from all my fears.	I sought the LORD, and He answered me; He delivered me from all my fears.
PSA	34	5	저희가 주를 앙망하고 광채를 입었으니 그 얼굴이 영영히 부끄럽지 아니하리로다	They looked unto him, and were lightened: and their faces were not ashamed.	Those who look to Him are radiant with joy; their faces shall never be ashamed.
PSA	34	6	이 곤고한 자가 부르짖으매 여호와께서 들으시고 그 모든 환난에서 구원하셨도다	This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles.	This poor man called out, and the LORD heard him; He saved him from all his troubles.
PSA	34	7	여호와의 사자가 주를 경외하는 자를 둘러 진치고 저희를 건지시는도다	The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivereth them.	The angel of the LORD encamps around those who fear Him, and he delivers them.
PSA	34	8	너희는 여호와의 선하심을 맛보아 알지어다 그에게 피하는 자는 복이 있도다	O taste and see that the Lord is good: blessed is the man that trusteth in him.	Taste and see that the LORD is good; blessed is the man who takes refuge in Him!
PSA	34	9	너희 성도들아 여호와를 경외하라 저를 경외하는 자에게는 부족함이 없도다	O fear the Lord, ye his saints: for there is no want to them that fear him.	Fear the LORD, you His saints, for those who fear Him lack nothing.
PSA	34	10	젊은 사자는 궁핍하여 주릴지라도 여호와를 찾는 자는 모든 좋은 것에 부족함이 없으리로다	The young lions do lack, and suffer hunger: but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing.	Young lions go lacking and hungry, but those who seek the LORD lack no good thing.
PSA	34	11	너희 소자들아 와서 내게 들으라 내가 여호와를 경외함을 너희에게 가르치리로다	Come, ye children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord.	Come, children, listen to me; I will teach you the fear of the LORD.
PSA	34	12	생명을 사모하고 장수하여 복 받기를 원하는 사람이 누구뇨	What man is he that desireth life, and loveth many days, that he may see good?	Who is the man who delights in life, who desires to see good days?
PSA	34	13	네 혀를 악에서 금하며 네 입술을 궤사한 말에서 금할지어다	Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile.	Keep your tongue from evil and your lips from deceitful speech.
PSA	34	14	악을 버리고 선을 행하며 화평을 찾아 따를지어다	Depart from evil, and do good; seek peace, and pursue it.	Turn away from evil and do good; seek peace and pursue it.
PSA	34	15	여호와의 눈은 의인을 향하시고 그 귀는 저희 부르짖음에 기울이시는도다	The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their cry.	The eyes of the LORD are on the righteous, and His ears are inclined to their cry.
PSA	34	16	여호와의 얼굴은 행악하는 자를 대하사 저희의 자취를 땅에서 끊으려 하시는도다	The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth.	But the face of the LORD is against those who do evil, to wipe out all memory of them from the earth.
PSA	34	17	의인이 외치매 여호와께서 들으시고 저희의 모든 환난에서 건지셨도다	The righteous cry, and the Lord heareth, and delivereth them out of all their troubles.	The righteous cry out, and the LORD hears; He delivers them from all their troubles.
PSA	34	18	여호와는 마음이 상한 자에게 가까이 하시고 중심에 통회하는 자를 구원하시는도다	The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart; and saveth such as be of a contrite spirit.	The LORD is near to the brokenhearted; He saves the contrite in spirit.
PSA	34	19	의인은 고난이 많으나 여호와께서 그 모든 고난에서 건지시는도다	Many are the afflictions of the righteous: but the Lord delivereth him out of them all.	Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the LORD delivers him from them all.
PSA	34	20	그 모든 뼈를 보호하심이여 그 중에 하나도 꺽이지 아니하도다	He keepeth all his bones: not one of them is broken.	He protects all his bones; not one of them will be broken.
PSA	34	21	악이 악인을 죽일 것이라 의인을 미워하는 자는 죄를 받으리로다	Evil shall slay the wicked: and they that hate the righteous shall be desolate.	Evil will slay the wicked, and the haters of the righteous will be condemned.
PSA	34	22	여호와께서 그 종들의 영혼을 구속하시나니 저에게 피하는 자는 다 죄를 받지 아니하리로다	The Lord redeemeth the soul of his servants: and none of them that trust in him shall be desolate.	The LORD redeems His servants, and none who take refuge in Him will be condemned.
PSA	35	1	다윗의 시 여호와여 나와 다투는 자와 다투시고 나와 싸우는 자와 싸우소서	A Psalm of David. Plead my cause, O Lord, with them that strive with me: fight against them that fight against me.	Of David. Contend with my opponents, O LORD; fight against those who fight against me.
PSA	35	2	방패와 손 방패를 잡으시고 일어나 나를 도우소서	Take hold of shield and buckler, and stand up for mine help.	Take up Your shield and buckler; arise and come to my aid.
PSA	35	3	창을 빼사 나를 쫓는 자의 길을 막으시고 또 내 영혼에게 나는 네 구원이라 이르소서	Draw out also the spear, and stop the way against them that persecute me: say unto my soul, I am thy salvation.	Draw the spear and javelin against my pursuers; say to my soul: “I am your salvation.”
PSA	35	4	내 생명을 찾는 자로 부끄러워 수치를 당케 하시며 나를 상해하려 하는 자로 물러가 낭패케 하소서	Let them be confounded and put to shame that seek after my soul: let them be turned back and brought to confusion that devise my hurt.	May those who seek my life be disgraced and put to shame; may those who plan to harm me be driven back and confounded.
PSA	35	5	저희로 바람 앞에 겨와 같게 하시고 여호와의 사자로 몰아내소서	Let them be as chaff before the wind: and let the angel of the Lord chase them.	May they be like chaff in the wind, as the angel of the LORD drives them away.
PSA	35	6	저희 길을 어둡고 미끄럽게 하시고 여호와의 사자로 저희를 따르게 하소서	Let their way be dark and slippery: and let the angel of the Lord persecute them.	May their path be dark and slick, as the angel of the LORD pursues.
PSA	35	7	저희가 무고히 나를 잡으려고 그 그물을 웅덩이에 숨기며 무고히 내 생명을 해하려고 함정을 팠사오니	For without cause have they hid for me their net in a pit, which without cause they have digged for my soul.	For without cause they laid their net for me; without reason they dug a pit for my soul.
PSA	35	8	멸망으로 졸지에 저에게 임하게 하시며 그 숨긴 그물에 스스로 잡히게 하시며 멸망 중에 떨어지게 하소서	Let destruction come upon him at unawares; and let his net that he hath hid catch himself: into that very destruction let him fall.	May ruin befall them by surprise; may the net they hid ensnare them; may they fall into the hazard they created.
PSA	35	9	내 영혼이 여호와를 즐거워함이여 그 구원을 기뻐하리로다	And my soul shall be joyful in the Lord: it shall rejoice in his salvation.	Then my soul will rejoice in the LORD and exult in His salvation.
PSA	35	10	내 모든 뼈가 이르기를 여호와와 같은 자 누구리요 그는 가난한 자를 그보다 강한 자에게서 건지시고 가난하고 궁핍한 자를 노략하는 자에게서 건지시는 이라 하리로다	All my bones shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee, which deliverest the poor from him that is too strong for him, yea, the poor and the needy from him that spoileth him?	All my bones will exclaim, “Who is like You, O LORD, who delivers the afflicted from the aggressor, the poor and needy from the robber?”
PSA	35	11	불의한 증인이 일어나서 내가 알지 못하는 일로 내게 힐문하며	False witnesses did rise up; they laid to my charge things that I knew not.	Hostile witnesses come forward; they make charges I know nothing about.
PSA	35	12	내게 선을 악으로 갚아 나의 영혼을 외롭게 하나	They rewarded me evil for good to the spoiling of my soul.	They repay me evil for good, to the bereavement of my soul.
PSA	35	13	나는 저희가 병 들었을 때에 굵은 베옷을 입으며 금식하여 내 영혼을 괴롭게 하였더니 내 기도가 내 품으로 돌아왔도다	But as for me, when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth: I humbled my soul with fasting; and my prayer returned into mine own bosom.	Yet when they were ill, I put on sackcloth; I humbled myself with fasting, but my prayers returned unanswered.
PSA	35	14	내가 나의 친구와 형제에게 행함 같이 저희에게 행하였으며 내가 굽히고 슬퍼하기를 모친을 곡함 같이 하였도다	I behaved myself as though he had been my friend or brother: I bowed down heavily, as one that mourneth for his mother.	I paced about as for my friend or brother; I was bowed down with grief, like one mourning for his mother.
PSA	35	15	오직 내가 환난을 당하매 저희가 기뻐하여 서로 모임이여 비류가 나의 알지 못하는 중에 모여 나를 치며 찢기를 마지 아니하도다	But in mine adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together: yea, the abjects gathered themselves together against me, and I knew it not; they did tear me, and ceased not:	But when I stumbled, they assembled in glee; they gathered together against me. Assailants I did not know slandered me without ceasing.
PSA	35	16	저희는 연회에서 망령되이 조롱하는 자 같이 나를 향하여 그 이를 갈도다	With hypocritical mockers in feasts, they gnashed upon me with their teeth.	Like godless jesters at a feast, they gnashed their teeth at me.
PSA	35	17	주여 어느 때까지 관망하시리이까 내 영혼을 저 멸망자에게서 구원하시며 내 유일한 것을 사자들에게서 건지소서	Lord, how long wilt thou look on? rescue my soul from their destructions, my darling from the lions.	How long, O Lord, will You look on? Rescue my soul from their ravages, my precious life from these lions.
PSA	35	18	내가 대회 중에서 주께 감사하며 많은 백성 중에서 주를 찬송하리이다	I will give thee thanks in the great congregation: I will praise thee among much people.	Then I will give You thanks in the great assembly; I will praise You among many people.
PSA	35	19	무리하게 나의 원수된 자로 나를 인하여 기뻐하지 못하게 하시며 무고히 나를 미워하는 자로 눈짓하지 못하게 하소서	Let not them that are mine enemies wrongfully rejoice over me: neither let them wink with the eye that hate me without a cause.	Let not my enemies gloat over me without cause, nor those who hate me without reason wink in malice.
PSA	35	20	대저 저희는 화평을 말하지 아니하고 평안히 땅에 거하는 자를 거짓말로 모해하며	For they speak not peace: but they devise deceitful matters against them that are quiet in the land.	For they do not speak peace, but they devise deceitful schemes against those who live quietly in the land.
PSA	35	21	또 저희가 나를 향하여 입을 크게 벌리고 하하 우리가 목도하였다 하나이다	Yea, they opened their mouth wide against me, and said, Aha, aha, our eye hath seen it.	They gape at me and say, “Aha, aha! Our eyes have seen!”
PSA	35	22	여호와여 주께서 이를 보셨사오니 잠잠하지 마옵소서 주여 나를 멀리하지 마옵소서	This thou hast seen, O Lord: keep not silence: O Lord, be not far from me.	O LORD, You have seen it; be not silent. O Lord, be not far from me.
PSA	35	23	나의 하나님 나의 주여 떨치고 깨셔서 나를 공판하시며 나의 송사를 다스리소서	Stir up thyself, and awake to my judgment, even unto my cause, my God and my Lord.	Awake and rise to my defense, to my cause, my God and my Lord!
PSA	35	24	여호와 나의 하나님이여 주의 공의대로 나를 판단하사 저희로 나를 인하여 기뻐하지 못하게 하소서	Judge me, O Lord my God, according to thy righteousness; and let them not rejoice over me.	Vindicate me by Your righteousness, O LORD my God, and do not let them gloat over me.
PSA	35	25	저희로 그 마음에 이르기를 아하 소원 성취하였다 하지 못하게 하시며 우리가 저를 삼켰다 하지 못하게 하소서	Let them not say in their hearts, Ah, so would we have it: let them not say, We have swallowed him up.	Let them not say in their hearts, “Aha, just what we wanted!” Let them not say, “We have swallowed him up!”
PSA	35	26	나의 해를 기뻐하는 자들로 부끄러워 낭패하게 하시며 나를 향하여 자긍하는 자로 수치와 욕을 당케 하소서	Let them be ashamed and brought to confusion together that rejoice at mine hurt: let them be clothed with shame and dishonour that magnify themselves against me.	May those who gloat in my distress be ashamed and confounded; may those who exalt themselves over me be clothed in shame and reproach.
PSA	35	27	나의 의를 즐거워하는 자로 기꺼이 부르고 즐겁게 하시며 그 종의 형통을 기뻐하시는 여호와는 광대하시다 하는 말을 저희로 항상 하게 하소서	Let them shout for joy, and be glad, that favour my righteous cause: yea, let them say continually, Let the Lord be magnified, which hath pleasure in the prosperity of his servant.	May those who favor my vindication shout for joy and gladness; may they always say, “Exalted be the LORD who delights in His servant’s well-being.”
PSA	35	28	나의 혀가 주의 의를 말하며 종일토록 주를 찬송하리이다	And my tongue shall speak of thy righteousness and of thy praise all the day long.	Then my tongue will proclaim Your righteousness and Your praises all day long.
PSA	36	1	여호와의 종 다윗의 시, 영장으로 한 노래 악인의 죄얼이 내 마음에 이르기를 그 목전에는 하나님을 두려워함이 없다 하니	To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David the servant of the Lord. The transgression of the wicked saith within my heart, that there is no fear of God before his eyes.	For the choirmaster. A Psalm of David, the servant of the LORD. An oracle is in my heart regarding the transgression of the wicked man: There is no fear of God before his eyes.
PSA	36	2	저가 스스로 자긍하기를 자기 죄악이 드러나지 아니하고 미워함을 받지도 아니하리라 함이로다	For he flattereth himself in his own eyes, until his iniquity be found to be hateful.	For his eyes are too full of conceit to detect or hate his own sin.
PSA	36	3	그 입의 말은 죄악과 궤휼이라 지혜와 선행을 그쳤도다	The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit: he hath left off to be wise, and to do good.	The words of his mouth are wicked and deceitful; he has ceased to be wise and well-doing.
PSA	36	4	저는 그 침상에서 죄악을 꾀하며 스스로 불선한 길에 서고 악을 싫어하지 아니하는도다	He deviseth mischief upon his bed; he setteth himself in a way that is not good; he abhorreth not evil.	Even on his bed he plots wickedness; he sets himself on a path that is not good; he fails to reject evil.
PSA	36	5	여호와여 주의 인자하심이 하늘에 있고 주의 성실하심이 공중에 사무쳤으며	Thy mercy, O Lord, is in the heavens; and thy faithfulness reacheth unto the clouds.	Your loving devotion, O LORD, reaches to the heavens, Your faithfulness to the clouds.
PSA	36	6	주의 의는 하나님의 산들과 같고 주의 판단은 큰 바다와 일반이라 여호와여 주는 사람과 짐승을 보호하시나이다	Thy righteousness is like the great mountains; thy judgments are a great deep: O Lord, thou preservest man and beast.	Your righteousness is like the highest mountains; Your judgments are like the deepest sea. O LORD, You preserve man and beast.
PSA	36	7	하나님이여 주의 인자하심이 어찌 그리 보배로우신지요 인생이 주의 날개 그늘 아래 피하나이다	How excellent is thy lovingkindness, O God! therefore the children of men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.	How precious is Your loving devotion, O God, that the children of men take refuge in the shadow of Your wings!
PSA	36	8	저희가 주의 집의 살찐 것으로 풍족할 것이라 주께서 주의 복락의 강수로 마시우시리이다	They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house; and thou shalt make them drink of the river of thy pleasures.	They feast on the abundance of Your house, and You give them drink from Your river of delights.
PSA	36	9	대저 생명의 원천이 주께 있사오니 주의 광명 중에 우리가 광명을 보리이다	For with thee is the fountain of life: in thy light shall we see light.	For with You is the fountain of life; in Your light we see light.
PSA	36	10	주를 아는 자에게 주의 인자하심을 계속하시며 마음이 정직한 자에게 주의 의를 베푸소서	O continue thy lovingkindness unto them that know thee; and thy righteousness to the upright in heart.	Extend Your loving devotion to those who know You, and Your righteousness to the upright in heart.
PSA	36	11	교만한 자의 발이 내게 미치지 못하게 하시며 악인의 손이 나를 쫓아내지 못하게 하소서	Let not the foot of pride come against me, and let not the hand of the wicked remove me.	Let not the foot of the proud come against me, nor the hand of the wicked drive me away.
PSA	36	12	죄악을 행하는 자가 거기 넘어졌으니 엎드러지고 다시 일어날 수 없으리이다	There are the workers of iniquity fallen: they are cast down, and shall not be able to rise.	There the evildoers lie fallen, thrown down and unable to rise.
PSA	37	1	다윗의 시 행악자를 인하여 불평하여 하지 말며 불의를 행하는 자를 투기하지 말지어다	A Psalm of David. Fret not thyself because of evildoers, neither be thou envious against the workers of iniquity.	Of David. Do not fret over those who do evil; do not envy those who do wrong.
PSA	37	2	저희는 풀과 같이 속히 베임을 볼 것이며 푸른 채소 같이 쇠잔할 것임이로다	For they shall soon be cut down like the grass, and wither as the green herb.	For they wither quickly like grass and wilt like tender plants.
PSA	37	3	여호와를 의뢰하여 선을 행하라 땅에 거하여 그의 성실로 식물을 삼을지어다	Trust in the Lord, and do good; so shalt thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shalt be fed.	Trust in the LORD and do good; dwell in the land and cultivate faithfulness.
PSA	37	4	또 여호와를 기뻐하라 저가 네 마음의 소원을 이루어 주시리로다	Delight thyself also in the Lord; and he shall give thee the desires of thine heart.	Delight yourself in the LORD, and He will give you the desires of your heart.
PSA	37	5	너의 길을 여호와께 맡기라 저를 의지하면 저가 이루시고	Commit thy way unto the Lord; trust also in him; and he shall bring it to pass.	Commit your way to the LORD; trust in Him, and He will do it.
PSA	37	6	네 의를 빛 같이 나타내시며 네 공의를 정오의 빛 같이 하시리로다	And he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as the noonday.	He will bring forth your righteousness like the dawn, your justice like the noonday sun.
PSA	37	7	여호와 앞에 잠잠하고 참아 기다리라 자기 길이 형통하며 악한 꾀를 이루는 자를 인하여 불평하여 말지어다	Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him: fret not thyself because of him who prospereth in his way, because of the man who bringeth wicked devices to pass.	Be still before the LORD and wait patiently for Him; do not fret when men prosper in their ways, when they carry out wicked schemes.
PSA	37	8	분을 그치고 노를 버리라 불평하여 말라 행악에 치우칠 뿐이라	Cease from anger, and forsake wrath: fret not thyself in any wise to do evil.	Refrain from anger and abandon wrath; do not fret—it can only bring harm.
PSA	37	9	대저 행악하는 자는 끊어질 것이나 여호와를 기대하는 자는 땅을 차지하리로다	For evildoers shall be cut off: but those that wait upon the Lord, they shall inherit the earth.	For the evildoers will be cut off, but those who hope in the LORD will inherit the land.
PSA	37	10	잠시 후에 악인이 없어지리니 네가 그곳을 자세히 살필지라도 없으리로다	For yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be: yea, thou shalt diligently consider his place, and it shall not be.	Yet a little while, and the wicked will be no more; though you look for them, they will not be found.
PSA	37	11	오직 온유한 자는 땅을 차지하며 풍부한 화평으로 즐기리로다	But the meek shall inherit the earth; and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace.	But the meek will inherit the land and delight in abundant prosperity.
PSA	37	12	악인이 의인 치기를 꾀하고 향하여 그 이를 가는도다	The wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth.	The wicked scheme against the righteous and gnash their teeth at them,
PSA	37	13	주께서 저를 웃으시리니 그 날의 이름을 보심이로다	The Lord shall laugh at him: for he seeth that his day is coming.	but the Lord laughs, seeing that their day is coming.
PSA	37	14	악인이 칼을 빼고 활을 당기어 가난하고 궁핍한 자를 엎드러뜨리며 행위가 정직한 자를 죽이고자 하나	The wicked have drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow, to cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such as be of upright conversation.	The wicked have drawn the sword and bent the bow to bring down the poor and needy, to slay those whose ways are upright.
PSA	37	15	그 칼은 자기의 마음을 찌르고 그 활은 부러지리로다	Their sword shall enter into their own heart, and their bows shall be broken.	But their swords will pierce their own hearts, and their bows will be broken.
PSA	37	16	의인의 적은 소유가 많은 악인의 풍부함보다 승하도다	A little that a righteous man hath is better than the riches of many wicked.	Better is the little of the righteous than the abundance of many who are wicked.
PSA	37	17	악인의 팔은 부러지나 의인은 여호와께서 붙드시는도다	For the arms of the wicked shall be broken: but the Lord upholdeth the righteous.	For the arms of the wicked will be broken, but the LORD upholds the righteous.
PSA	37	18	여호와께서 완전한 자의 날을 아시니 저희 기업은 영원하리로다	The Lord knoweth the days of the upright: and their inheritance shall be for ever.	The LORD knows the days of the blameless, and their inheritance will last forever.
PSA	37	19	저희는 환난 때에 부끄럽지 아니하며 기근의 날에도 풍족하려니와	They shall not be ashamed in the evil time: and in the days of famine they shall be satisfied.	In the time of evil they will not be ashamed, and in the days of famine they will be satisfied.
PSA	37	20	악인은 멸망하고 여호와의 원수는 어린 양의 기름 같이 타서 연기 되어 없어지리로다	But the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall be as the fat of lambs: they shall consume; into smoke shall they consume away.	But the wicked and enemies of the LORD will perish like the glory of the fields. They will vanish; like smoke they will fade away.
PSA	37	21	악인은 꾸고 갚지 아니하나 의인은 은혜를 베풀고 주는도다	The wicked borroweth, and payeth not again: but the righteous sheweth mercy, and giveth.	The wicked borrow and do not repay, but the righteous are gracious and giving.
PSA	37	22	주의 복을 받은 자는 땅을 차지하고 주의 저주를 받은 자는 끊어지리로다	For such as be blessed of him shall inherit the earth; and they that be cursed of him shall be cut off.	Surely those He blesses will inherit the land, but the cursed will be destroyed.
PSA	37	23	여호와께서 사람의 걸음을 정하시고 그 길을 기뻐하시나니	The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord: and he delighteth in his way.	The steps of a man are ordered by the LORD who takes delight in his journey.
PSA	37	24	저는 넘어지나 아주 엎드러지지 아니함은 여호와께서 손으로 붙드심이로다	Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down: for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand.	Though he falls, he will not be overwhelmed, for the LORD is holding his hand.
PSA	37	25	내가 어려서부터 늙기까지 의인이 버림을 당하거나 그 자손이 걸식함을 보지 못하였도다	I have been young, and now am old; yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.	I once was young and now am old, yet never have I seen the righteous abandoned or their children begging for bread.
PSA	37	26	저는 종일토록 은혜를 베풀고 꾸어 주니 그 자손이 복을 받는도다	He is ever merciful, and lendeth; and his seed is blessed.	They are ever generous and quick to lend, and their children are a blessing.
PSA	37	27	악에서 떠나 선을 행하라 그리하면 영영히 거하리니	Depart from evil, and do good; and dwell for evermore.	Turn away from evil and do good, so that you will abide forever.
PSA	37	28	여호와께서 공의를 사랑하시고 그 성도를 버리지 아니하심이로다 저희는 영영히 보호를 받으나 악인의 자손은 끊어지리로다	For the Lord loveth judgment, and forsaketh not his saints; they are preserved for ever: but the seed of the wicked shall be cut off.	For the LORD loves justice and will not forsake His saints. They are preserved forever, but the offspring of the wicked will be cut off.
PSA	37	29	의인이 땅을 차지함이여 거기 영영히 거하리로다	The righteous shall inherit the land, and dwell therein for ever.	The righteous will inherit the land and dwell in it forever.
PSA	37	30	의인의 입은 지혜를 말하고 그 혀는 공의를 이르며	The mouth of the righteous speaketh wisdom, and his tongue talketh of judgment.	The mouth of the righteous man utters wisdom, and his tongue speaks justice.
PSA	37	31	그 마음에는 하나님의 법이 있으니 그 걸음에 실족함이 없으리로다	The law of his God is in his heart; none of his steps shall slide.	The law of his God is in his heart; his steps do not falter.
PSA	37	32	악인이 의인을 엿보아 살해할 기회를 찾으나	The wicked watcheth the righteous, and seeketh to slay him.	Though the wicked lie in wait for the righteous, and seek to slay them,
PSA	37	33	여호와는 저를 그 손에 버려두지 아니하시고 재판 때에도 정죄치 아니하시리로다	The Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged.	the LORD will not leave them in their power or let them be condemned under judgment.
PSA	37	34	여호와를 바라고 그 도를 지키라 그리하면 너를 들어 땅을 차지하게 하실 것이라 악인이 끊어질 때에 네가 목도하리로다	Wait on the Lord, and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee to inherit the land: when the wicked are cut off, thou shalt see it.	Wait for the LORD and keep His way, and He will raise you up to inherit the land. When the wicked are cut off, you will see it.
PSA	37	35	내가 악인의 큰 세력을 본즉 그 본토에 선 푸른 나무의 무성함 같으나	I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a green bay tree.	I have seen a wicked, ruthless man flourishing like a well-rooted native tree,
PSA	37	36	사람이 지날 때에 저가 없어졌으니 내가 찾아도 발견치 못하였도다	Yet he passed away, and, lo, he was not: yea, I sought him, but he could not be found.	yet he passed away and was no more; though I searched, he could not be found.
PSA	37	37	완전한 사람을 살피고 정직한 자를 볼지어다 화평한 자의 결국은 평안이로다	Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that man is peace.	Consider the blameless and observe the upright, for posterity awaits the man of peace.
PSA	37	38	범죄자들은 함께 멸망하리니 악인의 결국은 끊어질 것이나	But the transgressors shall be destroyed together: the end of the wicked shall be cut off.	But the transgressors will all be destroyed; the future of the wicked will be cut off.
PSA	37	39	의인의 구원은 여호와께 있으니 그는 환난 때에 저희 산성이시로다	But the salvation of the righteous is of the Lord: he is their strength in the time of trouble.	The salvation of the righteous is from the LORD; He is their stronghold in time of trouble.
PSA	37	40	여호와께서 저희를 도와 건지시되 악인에게서 건져 구원하심은 그를 의지한 연고로다	And the Lord shall help them, and deliver them: he shall deliver them from the wicked, and save them, because they trust in him.	The LORD helps and delivers them; He rescues and saves them from the wicked, because they take refuge in Him.
PSA	38	1	다윗의 기념케 하는 시 여호와여 주의 노로 나를 책하지 마시고 분노로 나를 징계치 마소서	A Psalm of David, to bring to remembrance. O Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath: neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure.	A Psalm of David, for remembrance. O LORD, do not rebuke me in Your anger or discipline me in Your wrath.
PSA	38	2	주의 살이 나를 찌르고 주의 손이 나를 심히 누르시나이다	For thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presseth me sore.	For Your arrows have pierced me deeply, and Your hand has pressed down on me.
PSA	38	3	주의 진노로 인하여 내 살에 성한 곳이 없사오며 나의 죄로 인하여 내 뼈에 평안함이 없나이다	There is no soundness in my flesh because of thine anger; neither is there any rest in my bones because of my sin.	There is no soundness in my body because of Your anger; there is no rest in my bones because of my sin.
PSA	38	4	내 죄악이 내 머리에 넘쳐서 무거운 짐 같으니 감당할 수 없나이다	For mine iniquities are gone over mine head: as an heavy burden they are too heavy for me.	For my iniquities have overwhelmed me; they are a burden too heavy to bear.
PSA	38	5	내 상처가 썩어 악취가 나오니 나의 우매한 연고로소이다	My wounds stink and are corrupt because of my foolishness.	My wounds are foul and festering because of my sinful folly.
PSA	38	6	내가 아프고 심히 구부러졌으며 종일토록 슬픈 중에 다니나이다	I am troubled; I am bowed down greatly; I go mourning all the day long.	I am bent and brought low; all day long I go about mourning.
PSA	38	7	내 허리에 열기가 가득하고 내 살에 성한 곳이 없나이다	For my loins are filled with a loathsome disease: and there is no soundness in my flesh.	For my loins are full of burning pain, and no soundness remains in my body.
PSA	38	8	내가 피곤하고 심히 상하였으매 마음이 불안하여 신음하나이다	I am feeble and sore broken: I have roared by reason of the disquietness of my heart.	I am numb and badly crushed; I groan in anguish of heart.
PSA	38	9	주여 나의 모든 소원이 주의 앞에 있사오며 나의 탄식이 주의 앞에 감추이지 아니하나이다	Lord, all my desire is before thee; and my groaning is not hid from thee.	O Lord, my every desire is before You; my groaning is not hidden from You.
PSA	38	10	내 심장이 뛰고 내 기력이 쇠하여 내 눈의 빛도 나를 떠났나이다	My heart panteth, my strength faileth me: as for the light of mine eyes, it also is gone from me.	My heart pounds, my strength fails, and even the light of my eyes has faded.
PSA	38	11	나의 사랑하는 자와 나의 친구들이 나의 상처를 멀리하고 나의 친척들도 멀리 섰나이다	My lovers and my friends stand aloof from my sore; and my kinsmen stand afar off.	My beloved and friends shun my disease, and my kinsmen stand at a distance.
PSA	38	12	내 생명을 찾는 자가 올무를 놓고 나를 해하려는 자가 괴악한 일을 말하여 종일토록 궤계를 도모하오나	They also that seek after my life lay snares for me: and they that seek my hurt speak mischievous things, and imagine deceits all the day long.	Those who seek my life lay snares; those who wish me harm speak destruction, plotting deceit all day long.
PSA	38	13	나는 귀먹은 자 같이 듣지 아니하고 벙어리 같이 입을 열지 아니하오니	But I, as a deaf man, heard not; and I was as a dumb man that openeth not his mouth.	But like a deaf man, I do not hear; and like a mute man, I do not open my mouth.
PSA	38	14	나는 듣지 못하는 자 같아서 입에는 변박함이 없나이다	Thus I was as a man that heareth not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs.	I am like a man who cannot hear, whose mouth offers no reply.
PSA	38	15	여호와여 내가 주를 바랐사오니 내 주 하나님이 내게 응락하시리이다	For in thee, O Lord, do I hope: thou wilt hear, O Lord my God.	I wait for You, O LORD; You will answer, O Lord my God.
PSA	38	16	내가 말하기를 두렵건대 저희가 내게 대하여 기뻐하며 내가 실족할 때에 나를 향하여 망자존대할까 하였나이다	For I said, Hear me, lest otherwise they should rejoice over me: when my foot slippeth, they magnify themselves against me.	For I said, “Let them not gloat over me— those who taunt me when my foot slips.”
PSA	38	17	내가 넘어지게 되었고 나의 근심이 항상 내 앞에 있사오니	For I am ready to halt, and my sorrow is continually before me.	For I am ready to fall, and my pain is ever with me.
PSA	38	18	내 죄악을 고하고 내 죄를 슬퍼함이니이다	For I will declare mine iniquity; I will be sorry for my sin.	Yes, I confess my iniquity; I am troubled by my sin.
PSA	38	19	내 원수가 활발하며 강하고 무리하게 나를 미워하는 자가 무수하오며	But mine enemies are lively, and they are strong: and they that hate me wrongfully are multiplied.	Many are my enemies without cause, and many hate me without reason.
PSA	38	20	또 악으로 선을 갚는 자들이 내가 선을 좇는 연고로 나를 대적하나이다	They also that render evil for good are mine adversaries; because I follow the thing that good is.	Those who repay my good with evil attack me for pursuing the good.
PSA	38	21	여호와여 나를 버리지 마소서 나의 하나님이여 나를 멀리하지 마소서	Forsake me not, O Lord: O my God, be not far from me.	Do not forsake me, O LORD; be not far from me, O my God.
PSA	38	22	속히 나를 도우소서 주 나의 구원이시여	Make haste to help me, O Lord my salvation.	Come quickly to help me, O Lord my Savior.
PSA	39	1	다윗의 시, 영장 여두둔으로 한 노래 내가 말하기를 나의 행위를 조심하여 내 혀로 범죄치 아니하리니 악인이 내 앞에 있을 때에 내가 내 입에 자갈을 먹이리라 하였도다	To the chief Musician, even to Jeduthun, A Psalm of David. I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue: I will keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked is before me.	For the choirmaster. For Jeduthun. A Psalm of David. I said, “I will watch my ways so that I will not sin with my tongue; I will guard my mouth with a muzzle as long as the wicked are present.”
PSA	39	2	내가 잠잠하여 선한 말도 발하지 아니하니 나의 근심이 더 심하도다	I was dumb with silence, I held my peace, even from good; and my sorrow was stirred.	I was speechless and still; I remained silent, even from speaking good, and my sorrow was stirred.
PSA	39	3	내 마음이 내 속에서 뜨거워서 묵상할 때에 화가 발하니 나의 혀로 말하기를	My heart was hot within me, while I was musing the fire burned: then spake I with my tongue,	My heart grew hot within me; as I mused, the fire burned. Then I spoke with my tongue:
PSA	39	4	여호와여 나의 종말과 연한의 어떠함을 알게 하사 나로 나의 연약함을 알게 하소서	Lord, make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is; that I may know how frail I am.	“Show me, O LORD, my end and the measure of my days. Let me know how fleeting my life is.
PSA	39	5	주께서 나의 날을 손 넓이 만큼 되게 하시매 나의 일생이 주의 앞에는 없는 것 같사오니 사람마다 그 든든히 선 때도 진실로 허사뿐이니이다(셀라)	Behold, thou hast made my days as an handbreadth; and mine age is as nothing before thee: verily every man at his best state is altogether vanity. Selah.	You, indeed, have made my days as handbreadths, and my lifetime as nothing before You. Truly each man at his best exists as but a breath. Selah
PSA	39	6	진실로 각 사람은 그림자 같이 다니고 헛된 일에 분요하며 재물을 쌓으나 누가 취할는지 알지 못하나이다	Surely every man walketh in a vain shew: surely they are disquieted in vain: he heapeth up riches, and knoweth not who shall gather them.	Surely every man goes about like a phantom; surely he bustles in vain; he heaps up riches not knowing who will haul them away.
PSA	39	7	주여 내가 무엇을 바라리요 나의 소망은 주께 있나이다	And now, Lord, what wait I for? my hope is in thee.	And now, O Lord, for what do I wait? My hope is in You.
PSA	39	8	나를 모든 죄과에서 건지시며 우매한 자에게 욕을 보지 않게 하소서	Deliver me from all my transgressions: make me not the reproach of the foolish.	Deliver me from all my transgressions; do not make me the reproach of fools.
PSA	39	9	내가 잠잠하고 입을 열지 아니하옴은 주께서 이를 행하신 연고니이다	I was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou didst it.	I have become mute; I do not open my mouth because of what You have done.
PSA	39	10	주의 징책을 나에게서 옮기소서 주의 손이 치심으로 내가 쇠망하였나이다	Remove thy stroke away from me: I am consumed by the blow of thine hand.	Remove Your scourge from me; I am perishing by the force of Your hand.
PSA	39	11	주께서 죄악을 견책하사 사람을 징계하실 때에 그 영화를 좀 먹음 같이 소멸하게 하시니 참으로 각 사람은 허사뿐이니이다(셀라)	When thou with rebukes dost correct man for iniquity, thou makest his beauty to consume away like a moth: surely every man is vanity. Selah.	You discipline and correct a man for his iniquity, consuming like a moth what he holds dear; surely each man is but a vapor. Selah
PSA	39	12	여호와여 나의 기도를 들으시며 나의 부르짖음에 귀를 기울이소서 내가 눈물 흘릴 때에 잠잠하지 마옵소서 대저 나는 주께 객이 되고 거류자가 됨이 나의 모든 열조 같으니이다	Hear my prayer, O Lord, and give ear unto my cry; hold not thy peace at my tears: for I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as all my fathers were.	Hear my prayer, O LORD, and give ear to my cry for help; do not be deaf to my weeping. For I am a foreigner dwelling with You, a stranger like all my fathers.
PSA	39	13	주는 나를 용서하사 내가 떠나 없어지기 전에 나의 건강을 회복시키소서	O spare me, that I may recover strength, before I go hence, and be no more.	Turn Your gaze away from me, that I may again be cheered before I depart and am no more.”
PSA	40	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 한 노래 내가 여호와를 기다리고 기다렸더니 귀를 기울이사 나의 부르짖음을 들으셨도다	To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. I waited patiently for the Lord; and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry.	For the choirmaster. A Psalm of David. I waited patiently for the LORD; He inclined to me and heard my cry.
PSA	40	2	나를 기가 막힐 웅덩이와 수렁에서 끌어 올리시고 내 발을 반석 위에 두사 내 걸음을 견고케 하셨도다	He brought me up also out of an horrible pit, out of the miry clay, and set my feet upon a rock, and established my goings.	He lifted me up from the pit of despair, out of the miry clay; He set my feet upon a rock, and made my footsteps firm.
PSA	40	3	새 노래 곧 우리 하나님께 올릴 찬송을 내 입에 두셨으니 많은 사람이 보고 두려워하여 여호와를 의지하리로다	And he hath put a new song in my mouth, even praise unto our God: many shall see it, and fear, and shall trust in the Lord.	He put a new song in my mouth, a hymn of praise to our God. Many will see and fear and put their trust in the LORD.
PSA	40	4	여호와를 의지하고 교만한 자와 거짓에 치우치는 자를 돌아보지 아니하는 자는 복이 있도다	Blessed is that man that maketh the Lord his trust, and respecteth not the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies.	Blessed is the man who has made the LORD his trust, who has not turned to the proud, nor to those who lapse into falsehood.
PSA	40	5	여호와 나의 하나님이여 주의 행하신 기적이 많고 우리를 향하신 주의 생각도 많도소이다 내가 들어 말하고자 하나 주의 앞에 베풀 수도 없고 그 수를 셀 수도 없나이다	Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works which thou hast done, and thy thoughts which are to us-ward: they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee: if I would declare and speak of them, they are more than can be numbered.	Many, O LORD my God, are the wonders You have done, and the plans You have for us— none can compare to You— if I proclaim and declare them, they are more than I can count.
PSA	40	6	주께서 나의 귀를 통하여 들리시기를 제사와 예물을 기뻐 아니하시며 번제와 속죄제를 요구치 아니하신다 하신지라	Sacrifice and offering thou didst not desire; mine ears hast thou opened: burnt offering and sin offering hast thou not required.	Sacrifice and offering You did not desire, but my ears You have opened. Burnt offerings and sin offerings You did not require.
PSA	40	7	그 때에 내가 말하기를 내가 왔나이다 나를 가리켜 기록한 것이 두루마리 책에 있나이다	Then said I, Lo, I come: in the volume of the book it is written of me,	Then I said, “Here I am, I have come— it is written about me in the scroll:
PSA	40	8	나의 하나님이여 내가 주의 뜻 행하기를 즐기오니 주의 법이 나의 심중에 있나이다 하였나이다	I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea, thy law is within my heart.	I delight to do Your will, O my God; Your law is within my heart.”
PSA	40	9	내가 대회 중에서 의의 기쁜 소식을 전하였나이다 여호와여 내가 내 입술을 닫지 아니할 줄을 주께서 아시나이다	I have preached righteousness in the great congregation: lo, I have not refrained my lips, O Lord, thou knowest.	I proclaim righteousness in the great assembly; behold, I do not seal my lips, as You, O LORD, do know.
PSA	40	10	내가 주의 의를 내 심중에 숨기지 아니하고 주의 성실과 구원을 선포하였으며 내가 주의 인자와 진리를 대회 중에서 은휘치 아니하였나이다	I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart; I have declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation: I have not concealed thy lovingkindness and thy truth from the great congregation.	I have not covered up Your righteousness in my heart; I have declared Your faithfulness and salvation; I have not concealed Your loving devotion and faithfulness from the great assembly.
PSA	40	11	여호와여 주의 긍휼을 내게 그치지 마시고 주의 인자와 진리로 나를 항상 보호하소서	Withhold not thou thy tender mercies from me, O Lord: let thy lovingkindness and thy truth continually preserve me.	O LORD, do not withhold Your mercy from me; Your loving devotion and faithfulness will always guard me.
PSA	40	12	무수한 재앙이 나를 둘러 싸고 나의 죄악이 내게 미치므로 우러러 볼 수도 없으며 죄가 나의 머리털보다 많으므로 내 마음이 사라졌음이니이다	For innumerable evils have compassed me about: mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up; they are more than the hairs of mine head: therefore my heart faileth me.	For evils without number surround me; my sins have overtaken me, so that I cannot see. They are more than the hairs of my head, and my heart has failed within me.
PSA	40	13	여호와여 은총을 베푸사 나를 구원하소서 여호와여 속히 나를 도우소서	Be pleased, O Lord, to deliver me: O Lord, make haste to help me.	Be pleased, O LORD, to deliver me; hurry, O LORD, to help me.
PSA	40	14	나의 영혼을 찾아 멸하려 하는 자로 다 수치와 낭패를 당케 하시며 나의 해를 기뻐하는 자로 다 물러가 욕을 당케 하소서	Let them be ashamed and confounded together that seek after my soul to destroy it; let them be driven backward and put to shame that wish me evil.	May those who seek my life be ashamed and confounded; may those who wish me harm be repelled and humiliated.
PSA	40	15	나를 향하여 하하 하는 자로 자기 수치를 인하여 놀라게 하소서	Let them be desolate for a reward of their shame that say unto me, Aha, aha.	May those who say to me, “Aha, aha!” be appalled at their own shame.
PSA	40	16	무릇 주를 찾는 자는 다 주로 즐거워하고 기뻐하게 하시며 주의 구원을 사랑하는 자는 항상 말하기를 여호와는 광대하시다 하게 하소서	Let all those that seek thee rejoice and be glad in thee: let such as love thy salvation say continually, The Lord be magnified.	May all who seek You rejoice and be glad in You; may those who love Your salvation always say, “The LORD be magnified!”
PSA	40	17	나는 가난하고 궁핍하오나 주께서는 나를 생각하시오니 주는 나의 도움이시요 건지시는 자시라 나의 하나님이여 지체하지 마소서	But I am poor and needy; yet the Lord thinketh upon me: thou art my help and my deliverer; make no tarrying, O my God.	But I am poor and needy; may the Lord think of me. You are my helper and deliverer; O my God, do not delay.
PSA	41	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 한 노래 빈약한 자를 권고하는 자가 복이 있음이여 재앙의 날에 여호와께서 저를 건지시리로다	To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. Blessed is he that considereth the poor: the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble.	For the choirmaster. A Psalm of David. Blessed is the one who cares for the poor; the LORD will deliver him in the day of trouble.
PSA	41	2	여호와께서 저를 보호하사 살게 하시리니 저가 세상에서 복을 받을 것이라 주여 저를 그 원수의 뜻에 맡기지 마소서	The Lord will preserve him, and keep him alive; and he shall be blessed upon the earth: and thou wilt not deliver him unto the will of his enemies.	The LORD will protect and preserve him; He will bless him in the land and refuse to surrender him to the will of his foes.
PSA	41	3	여호와께서 쇠약한 병상에서 저를 붙드시고 저의 병중 그 자리를 다 고쳐 펴시나이다	The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing: thou wilt make all his bed in his sickness.	The LORD will sustain him on his bed of illness and restore him from his bed of sickness.
PSA	41	4	내가 말하기를 여호와여 나를 긍휼히 여기소서 내가 주께 범죄하였사오니 내 영혼을 고치소서 하였나이다	I said, Lord, be merciful unto me: heal my soul; for I have sinned against thee.	I said, “O LORD, be gracious to me; heal me, for I have sinned against You.”
PSA	41	5	나의 원수가 내게 대하여 악담하기를 저가 어느 때에나 죽고 그 이름이 언제나 멸망할꼬 하며	Mine enemies speak evil of me, When shall he die, and his name perish?	My enemies say with malice: “When will he die and be forgotten?”
PSA	41	6	나를 보러 와서는 거짓을 말하고 그 중심에 간악을 쌓았다가 나가서는 이를 광포하오며	And if he come to see me, he speaketh vanity: his heart gathereth iniquity to itself; when he goeth abroad, he telleth it.	My visitor speaks falsehood; he gathers slander in his heart; he goes out and spreads it abroad.
PSA	41	7	나를 미워하는 자가 다 내게 대하여 수군거리고 나를 해하려고 꾀하며	All that hate me whisper together against me: against me do they devise my hurt.	All who hate me whisper against me; they imagine the worst for me:
PSA	41	8	이르기를 악한 병이 저에게 들었으니 이제 저가 눕고 다시 일지 못하리라 하오며	An evil disease, say they, cleaveth fast unto him: and now that he lieth he shall rise up no more.	“A vile disease has been poured into him; he will never get up from where he lies!”
PSA	41	9	나의 신뢰하는바 내 떡을 먹던 나의 가까운 친구도 나를 대적하여 그 발꿈치를 들었나이다	Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, hath lifted up his heel against me.	Even my close friend whom I trusted, the one who shared my bread, has lifted up his heel against me.
PSA	41	10	그러하오나 주 여호와여 나를 긍휼히 여기시고 일으키사 나로 저희에게 보복하게 하소서	But thou, O Lord, be merciful unto me, and raise me up, that I may requite them.	But You, O LORD, be gracious to me and raise me up, that I may repay them.
PSA	41	11	나의 원수가 승리치 못하므로 주께서 나를 기뻐하시는 줄을 내가 아나이다	By this I know that thou favourest me, because mine enemy doth not triumph over me.	By this I know that You delight in me, for my enemy does not triumph over me.
PSA	41	12	주께서 나를 나의 완전한 중에 붙드시고 영영히 주의 앞에 세우시나이다	And as for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity, and settest me before thy face for ever.	In my integrity You uphold me and set me in Your presence forever.
PSA	41	13	여호와 이스라엘의 하나님을 영원부터 영원까지 찬송할지로다 아멘 아멘	Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting, and to everlasting. Amen, and Amen.	Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, from everlasting to everlasting. Amen and Amen.
PSA	42	1	고라 자손의 마스길, 영장으로 한 노래 하나님이여 사슴이 시냇물을 찾기에 갈급함 같이 내 영혼이 주를 찾기에 갈급하니이다	To the chief Musician, Maschil, for the sons of Korah. As the hart panteth after the water brooks, so panteth my soul after thee, O God.	For the choirmaster. A Maskil of the sons of Korah. As the deer pants for streams of water, so my soul longs after You, O God.
PSA	42	2	내 영혼이 하나님 곧 생존하시는 하나님을 갈망하나니 내가 어느 때에 나아가서 하나님 앞에 뵈올꼬	My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God: when shall I come and appear before God?	My soul thirsts for God, the living God. When shall I come and appear in God’s presence?
PSA	42	3	사람들이 종일 나더러 하는 말이 네 하나님이 어디 있느뇨 하니 내 눈물이 주야로 내 음식이 되었도다	My tears have been my meat day and night, while they continually say unto me, Where is thy God?	My tears have been my food both day and night, while men ask me all day long, “Where is your God?”
PSA	42	4	내가 전에 성일을 지키는 무리와 동행하여 기쁨과 찬송의 소리를 발하며 저희를 하나님의 집으로 인도하였더니 이제 이 일을 기억하고 내 마음이 상하는도다	When I remember these things, I pour out my soul in me: for I had gone with the multitude, I went with them to the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise, with a multitude that kept holyday.	These things come to mind as I pour out my soul: how I walked with the multitude, leading the procession to the house of God with shouts of joy and praise.
PSA	42	5	내 영혼아 네가 어찌하여 낙망하며 어찌하여 내 속에서 불안하여 하는고 너는 하나님을 바라라 그 얼굴의 도우심을 인하여 내가 오히려 찬송하리로다	Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted in me? hope thou in God: for I shall yet praise him for the help of his countenance.	Why are you downcast, O my soul? Why the unease within me? Put your hope in God, for I will yet praise Him for the salvation of His presence.
PSA	42	6	내 하나님이여 내 영혼이 내 속에서 낙망이 되므로 내가 요단 땅과 헤르몬과 미살 산에서 주를 기억하나이다	O my God, my soul is cast down within me: therefore will I remember thee from the land of Jordan, and of the Hermonites, from the hill Mizar.	O my God, my soul despairs within me. Therefore I remember You from the land of Jordan and the peaks of Hermon— even from Mount Mizar.
PSA	42	7	주의 폭포 소리에 깊은 바다가 서로 부르며 주의 파도와 물결이 나를 엄몰하도소이다	Deep calleth unto deep at the noise of thy waterspouts: all thy waves and thy billows are gone over me.	Deep calls to deep in the roar of Your waterfalls; all Your breakers and waves have rolled over me.
PSA	42	8	낮에는 여호와께서 그 인자함을 베푸시고 밤에는 그 찬송이 내게 있어 생명의 하나님께 기도하리로다	Yet the Lord will command his lovingkindness in the daytime, and in the night his song shall be with me, and my prayer unto the God of my life.	The LORD decrees His loving devotion by day, and at night His song is with me as a prayer to the God of my life.
PSA	42	9	내 반석이신 하나님께 말하기를 어찌하여 나를 잊으셨나이까 내가 어찌하여 원수의 압제로 인하여 슬프게 다니나이까 하리로다	I will say unto God my rock, Why hast thou forgotten me? why go I mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?	I say to God my Rock, “Why have You forgotten me? Why must I walk in sorrow because of the enemy’s oppression?”
PSA	42	10	내 뼈를 찌르는 칼 같이 내 대적이 나를 비방하여 늘 말하기를 네 하나님이 어디 있느냐 하도다	As with a sword in my bones, mine enemies reproach me; while they say daily unto me, Where is thy God?	Like the crushing of my bones, my enemies taunt me, while they say to me all day long, “Where is your God?”
PSA	42	11	내 영혼아 네가 어찌하여 낙망하며 어찌하여 내 속에서 불안하여 하는고 너는 하나님을 바라라 나는 내 얼굴을 도우시는 내 하나님을 오히려 찬송하리로다	Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in God: for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God.	Why are you downcast, O my soul? Why the unease within me? Put your hope in God, for I will yet praise Him, my Savior and my God.
PSA	43	1	하나님이여 나를 판단하시되 경건치 아니한 나라에 향하여 내 송사를 변호하시며 간사하고 불의한 자에게서 나를 건지소서	Judge me, O God, and plead my cause against an ungodly nation: O deliver me from the deceitful and unjust man.	Vindicate me, O God, and plead my case against an ungodly nation; deliver me from deceitful and unjust men.
PSA	43	2	주는 나의 힘이 되신 하나님이시어늘 어찌하여 나를 버리셨나이까 내가 어찌하여 원수의 압제로 인하여 슬프게 다니나이까	For thou art the God of my strength: why dost thou cast me off? why go I mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?	For You are the God of my refuge. Why have You rejected me? Why must I walk in sorrow because of the enemy’s oppression?
PSA	43	3	주의 빛과 주의 진리를 보내어 나를 인도하사 주의 성산과 장막에 이르게 하소서	O send out thy light and thy truth: let them lead me; let them bring me unto thy holy hill, and to thy tabernacles.	Send out Your light and Your truth; let them lead me. Let them bring me to Your holy mountain, and to the place where You dwell.
PSA	43	4	그런즉 내가 하나님의 단에 나아가 나의 극락의 하나님께 이르리이다 하나님이여 나의 하나님이여 내가 수금으로 주를 찬양하리이다	Then will I go unto the altar of God, unto God my exceeding joy: yea, upon the harp will I praise thee, O God my God.	Then I will go to the altar of God, to God, my greatest joy. I will praise You with the harp, O God, my God.
PSA	43	5	내 영혼아 네가 어찌하여 낙망하며 어찌하여 내 속에서 불안하여 하는고 너는 하나님을 바라라 나는 내 얼굴을 도우시는 내 하나님을 오히려 찬송하리로다	Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope in God: for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God.	Why are you downcast, O my soul? Why the unease within me? Put your hope in God, for I will yet praise Him, my Savior and my God.
PSA	44	1	고라 자손의 마스길, 영장으로 한 노래 하나님이여 주께서 우리 열조의 날 곧 옛날에 행하신 일을 저희가 우리에게 이르매 우리 귀로 들었나이다	To the chief Musician for the sons of Korah, Maschil. We have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us, what work thou didst in their days, in the times of old.	For the choirmaster. A Maskil of the sons of Korah. We have heard with our ears, O God; our fathers have told us the work You did in their days, in the days of old.
PSA	44	2	주께서 주의 손으로 열방을 쫓으시고 열조를 심으시며 주께서 민족들은 괴롭게 하시고 열조는 번성케 하셨나이다	How thou didst drive out the heathen with thy hand, and plantedst them; how thou didst afflict the people, and cast them out.	With Your hand You drove out the nations and planted our fathers there; You crushed the peoples and cast them out.
PSA	44	3	저희가 자기 칼로 땅을 얻어 차지함이 아니요 저희 팔이 저희를 구원함도 아니라 오직 주의 오른손과 팔과 얼굴의 빛으로 하셨으니 주께서 저희를 기뻐하신 연고니이다	For they got not the land in possession by their own sword, neither did their own arm save them: but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou hadst a favour unto them.	For it was not by their sword that they took the land; their arm did not bring them victory. It was by Your right hand, Your arm, and the light of Your face, because You favored them.
PSA	44	4	하나님이여 주는 나의 왕이시니 야곱에게 구원을 베푸소서	Thou art my King, O God: command deliverances for Jacob.	You are my King, O God, who ordains victories for Jacob.
PSA	44	5	우리가 주를 의지하여 우리 대적을 누르고 우리를 치려 일어나는 자를 주의 이름으로 밟으리이다	Through thee will we push down our enemies: through thy name will we tread them under that rise up against us.	Through You we repel our foes; through Your name we trample our enemies.
PSA	44	6	나는 내 활을 의지하지 아니할 것이라 내 칼도 나를 구원치 못하리이다	For I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me.	For I do not trust in my bow, nor does my sword save me.
PSA	44	7	오직 주께서 우리를 우리 대적에게서 구원하시고 우리를 미워하는 자로 수치를 당케 하셨나이다	But thou hast saved us from our enemies, and hast put them to shame that hated us.	For You save us from our enemies; You put those who hate us to shame.
PSA	44	8	우리가 종일 하나님으로 자랑하였나이다 우리가 하나님의 이름을 영영히 감사하리이다(셀라)	In God we boast all the day long, and praise thy name for ever. Selah.	In God we have boasted all day long, and Your name we will praise forever. Selah
PSA	44	9	그러나 이제는 주께서 우리를 버려 욕을 당케 하시고 우리 군대와 함께 나아가지 아니하시나이다	But thou hast cast off, and put us to shame; and goest not forth with our armies.	But You have rejected and humbled us; You no longer go forth with our armies.
PSA	44	10	주께서 우리를 대적에게서 돌아서게 하시니 우리를 미워하는 자가 자기를 위하여 탈취하였나이다	Thou makest us to turn back from the enemy: and they which hate us spoil for themselves.	You have made us retreat from the foe, and those who hate us have plundered us.
PSA	44	11	주께서 우리로 먹힐 양 같게 하시고 열방 중에 흩으셨나이다	Thou hast given us like sheep appointed for meat; and hast scattered us among the heathen.	You have given us up as sheep to be devoured; You have scattered us among the nations.
PSA	44	12	주께서 주의 백성을 무료로 파심이여 저희 값으로 이익을 얻지 못하셨나이다	Thou sellest thy people for nought, and dost not increase thy wealth by their price.	You sell Your people for nothing; no profit do You gain from their sale.
PSA	44	13	주께서 우리로 이웃에게 욕을 당케 하시니 둘러 있는 자가 조소하고 조롱하나이다	Thou makest us a reproach to our neighbours, a scorn and a derision to them that are round about us.	You have made us a reproach to our neighbors, a mockery and derision to those around us.
PSA	44	14	주께서 우리로 열방 중에 말거리가 되게 하시며 민족 중에서 머리 흔듦을 당케 하셨나이다	Thou makest us a byword among the heathen, a shaking of the head among the people.	You have made us a byword among the nations, a laughingstock among the peoples.
PSA	44	15	나의 능욕이 종일 내 앞에 있으며 수치가 내 얼굴을 덮었으니	My confusion is continually before me, and the shame of my face hath covered me,	All day long my disgrace is before me, and shame has covered my face,
PSA	44	16	나를 비방하고 후욕하는 소리를 인함이요 나의 원수와 보수자의 연고니이다	For the voice of him that reproacheth and blasphemeth; by reason of the enemy and avenger.	at the voice of the scorner and reviler, because of the enemy, bent on revenge.
PSA	44	17	이 모든 일이 우리에게 임하였으나 우리가 주를 잊지 아니하며 주의 언약을 어기지 아니하였나이다	All this is come upon us; yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant.	All this has come upon us, though we have not forgotten You or betrayed Your covenant.
PSA	44	18	우리 마음이 퇴축지 아니하고 우리 걸음도 주의 길을 떠나지 아니하였으나	Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy way;	Our hearts have not turned back; our steps have not strayed from Your path.
PSA	44	19	주께서 우리를 시랑의 처소에서 심히 상해하시고 우리를 사망의 그늘로 덮으셨나이다	Though thou hast sore broken us in the place of dragons, and covered us with the shadow of death.	But You have crushed us in the lair of jackals; You have covered us with deepest darkness.
PSA	44	20	우리가 우리 하나님의 이름을 잊어버렸거나 우리 손을 이방 신에게 향하여 폈더면	If we have forgotten the name of our God, or stretched out our hands to a strange god;	If we had forgotten the name of our God or spread out our hands to a foreign god,
PSA	44	21	하나님이 이를 더듬어 내지 아니하셨으리이까 대저 주는 마음의 비밀을 아시나이다	Shall not God search this out? for he knoweth the secrets of the heart.	would not God have discovered, since He knows the secrets of the heart?
PSA	44	22	우리가 종일 주를 위하여 죽임을 당케 되며 도살할 양 같이 여김을 받았나이다	Yea, for thy sake are we killed all the day long; we are counted as sheep for the slaughter.	Yet for Your sake we face death all day long; we are considered as sheep to be slaughtered.
PSA	44	23	주여 깨소서 어찌하여 주무시나이까 일어나시고 우리를 영영히 버리지 마소서	Awake, why sleepest thou, O Lord? arise, cast us not off for ever.	Wake up, O Lord! Why are You sleeping? Arise! Do not reject us forever.
PSA	44	24	어찌하여 주의 얼굴을 가리우시고 우리 고난과 압제를 잊으시나이까	Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our affliction and our oppression?	Why do You hide Your face and forget our affliction and oppression?
PSA	44	25	우리 영혼은 진토에 구푸리고 우리 몸은 땅에 붙었나이다	For our soul is bowed down to the dust: our belly cleaveth unto the earth.	For our soul has sunk to the dust; our bodies cling to the earth.
PSA	44	26	일어나 우리를 도우소서 주의 인자하심을 인하여 우리를 구속하소서	Arise for our help, and redeem us for thy mercies’ sake.	Rise up; be our help! Redeem us on account of Your loving devotion.
PSA	45	1	고라 자손의 마스길, 사랑의 노래, 영장으로 소산님에 맞춘 것 내 마음에서 좋은 말이 넘쳐 왕에 대하여 지은 것을 말하리니 내 혀는 필객의 붓과 같도다	To the chief Musician upon Shoshannim, for the sons of Korah, Maschil, A Song of loves. My heart is inditing a good matter: I speak of the things which I have made touching the king: my tongue is the pen of a ready writer.	For the choirmaster. To the tune of “The Lilies.” A Maskil of the sons of Korah. A love song. My heart is stirred by a noble theme as I recite my verses to the king; my tongue is the pen of a skillful writer.
PSA	45	2	왕은 인생보다 아름다워 은혜를 입술에 머금으니 그러므로 하나님이 왕에게 영영히 복을 주시도다	Thou art fairer than the children of men: grace is poured into thy lips: therefore God hath blessed thee for ever.	You are the most handsome of men; grace has anointed your lips, since God has blessed you forever.
PSA	45	3	능한 자여 칼을 허리에 차고 왕의 영화와 위엄을 입으소서	Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty, with thy glory and thy majesty.	Strap your sword at your side, O mighty warrior; appear in your majesty and splendor.
PSA	45	4	왕은 진리와 온유와 공의를 위하여 위엄있게 타고 승전하소서 왕의 오른손이 왕에게 두려운 일을 가르치리이다	And in thy majesty ride prosperously because of truth and meekness and righteousness; and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things.	In your splendor ride forth in victory on behalf of truth and humility and justice; may your right hand show your awesome deeds.
PSA	45	5	왕의 살이 날카로워 왕의 원수의 염통을 뚫으니 만민이 왕의 앞에 엎드러지는도다	Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the king’s enemies; whereby the people fall under thee.	Your arrows pierce the hearts of the king’s foes; the nations fall beneath your feet.
PSA	45	6	하나님이여 주의 보좌가 영영하며 주의 나라의 홀은 공평한 홀이니이다	Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever: the sceptre of thy kingdom is a right sceptre.	Your throne, O God, endures forever and ever, and justice is the scepter of Your kingdom.
PSA	45	7	왕이 정의를 사랑하고 악을 미워하시니 그러므로 하나님 곧 왕의 하나님이 즐거움의 기름으로 왕에게 부어 왕의 동류보다 승하게 하셨나이다	Thou lovest righteousness, and hatest wickedness: therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.	You have loved righteousness and hated wickedness; therefore God, your God, has anointed you above your companions with the oil of joy.
PSA	45	8	왕의 모든 옷은 몰약과 침향과 육계의 향기가 있으며 상아궁에서 나오는 현악은 왕을 즐겁게 하도다	All thy garments smell of myrrh, and aloes, and cassia, out of the ivory palaces, whereby they have made thee glad.	All your garments are fragrant with myrrh and aloes and cassia; from palaces of ivory the harps make you glad.
PSA	45	9	왕의 귀비 중에는 열왕의 딸이 있으며 왕후는 오빌의 금으로 꾸미고 왕의 우편에 서도다	Kings’ daughters were among thy honourable women: upon thy right hand did stand the queen in gold of Ophir.	The daughters of kings are among your honored women; the queen stands at your right hand, adorned with the gold of Ophir.
PSA	45	10	딸이여 듣고 생각하고 귀를 기울일지어다 네 백성과 아비 집을 잊어버릴지어다	Hearken, O daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear; forget also thine own people, and thy father’s house;	Listen, O daughter! Consider and incline your ear: Forget your people and your father’s house,
PSA	45	11	그러하면 왕이 너의 아름다움을 사모하실지라 저는 너의 주시니 너는 저를 경배할지어다	So shall the king greatly desire thy beauty: for he is thy Lord; and worship thou him.	and the king will desire your beauty; bow to him, for he is your lord.
PSA	45	12	두로의 딸이 예물을 드리고 백성 중 부한 자도 네 은혜를 구하리로다	And the daughter of Tyre shall be there with a gift; even the rich among the people shall intreat thy favour.	The Daughter of Tyre will come with a gift; men of wealth will seek your favor.
PSA	45	13	왕의 딸이 궁중에서 모든 영화를 누리니 그 옷은 금으로 수 놓았도다	The king’s daughter is all glorious within: her clothing is of wrought gold.	All glorious is the princess in her chamber; her gown is embroidered with gold.
PSA	45	14	수 놓은 옷을 입은 저가 왕께로 인도함을 받으며 시종하는 동무 처녀들도 왕께로 이끌려 갈 것이라	She shall be brought unto the king in raiment of needlework: the virgins her companions that follow her shall be brought unto thee.	In colorful garments she is led to the king; her virgin companions are brought before you.
PSA	45	15	저희가 기쁨과 즐거움으로 인도함을 받고 왕궁에 들어가리로다	With gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought: they shall enter into the king’s palace.	They are led in with joy and gladness; they enter the palace of the king.
PSA	45	16	왕의 아들들이 왕의 열조를 계승할 것이라 왕이 저희로 온 세계의 군왕을 삼으리로다	Instead of thy fathers shall be thy children, whom thou mayest make princes in all the earth.	Your sons will succeed your fathers; you will make them princes throughout the land.
PSA	45	17	내가 왕의 이름을 만세에 기억케 하리니 그러므로 만민이 왕을 영영히 찬송하리로다	I will make thy name to be remembered in all generations: therefore shall the people praise thee for ever and ever.	I will commemorate your name through all generations; therefore the nations will praise you forever and ever.
PSA	46	1	고라 자손의 시, 영장으로 알라못에 맞춘 노래 하나님은 우리의 피난처시요 힘이시니 환난 중에 만날 큰 도움이시라	To the chief Musician for the sons of Korah, A Song upon Alamoth. God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.	For the choirmaster. Of the sons of Korah. According to Alamoth. A song. God is our refuge and strength, an ever-present help in times of trouble.
PSA	46	2	그러므로 땅이 변하든지 산이 흔들려 바다 가운데 빠지든지	Therefore will not we fear, though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea;	Therefore we will not fear, though the earth is transformed and the mountains are toppled into the depths of the seas,
PSA	46	3	바닷물이 흉용하고 뛰놀든지 그것이 넘침으로 산이 요동할지라도 우리는 두려워 아니하리로다(셀라)	Though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof. Selah.	though their waters roar and foam and the mountains quake in the surge. Selah
PSA	46	4	한 시내가 있어 나뉘어 흘러 하나님의 성 곧 지극히 높으신 자의 장막의 성소를 기쁘게 하도다	There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the city of God, the holy place of the tabernacles of the most High.	There is a river whose streams delight the city of God, the holy place where the Most High dwells.
PSA	46	5	하나님이 그 성중에 거하시매 그 성이 요동치 아니할 것이라 새벽에 하나님이 도우시리로다	God is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved: God shall help her, and that right early.	God is within her; she will not be moved. God will help her when morning dawns.
PSA	46	6	이방이 훤화하며 왕국이 동하였더니 저가 소리를 발하시매 땅이 녹았도다	The heathen raged, the kingdoms were moved: he uttered his voice, the earth melted.	Nations rage, kingdoms crumble; the earth melts when He lifts His voice.
PSA	46	7	만군의 여호와께서 우리와 함께 하시니 야곱의 하나님은 우리의 피난처시로다	The Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.	The LORD of Hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our fortress. Selah
PSA	46	8	와서 여호와의 행적을 볼지어다 땅을 황무케 하셨도다	Come, behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he hath made in the earth.	Come, see the works of the LORD, who brings devastation upon the earth.
PSA	46	9	저가 땅끝까지 전쟁을 쉬게 하심이여 활을 꺾고 창을 끊으며 수레를 불사르시는도다	He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth; he breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder; he burneth the chariot in the fire.	He makes wars to cease throughout the earth; He breaks the bow and shatters the spear; He burns the shields in the fire.
PSA	46	10	이르시기를 너희는 가만히 있어 내가 하나님 됨을 알지어다 내가 열방과 세계 중에서 높임을 받으리라 하시도다	Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the heathen, I will be exalted in the earth.	“Be still and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted over the earth.”
PSA	46	11	만군의 여호와께서 우리와 함께 하시리니 야곱의 하나님은 우리의 피난처시로다	The Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.	The LORD of Hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our fortress. Selah
PSA	47	1	고라 자손의 시, 영장으로 한 노래 너희 만민들아 손바닥을 치고 즐거운 소리로 하나님께 외칠지어다	To the chief Musician, A Psalm for the sons of Korah. O clap your hands, all ye people; shout unto God with the voice of triumph.	For the choirmaster. A Psalm of the sons of Korah. Clap your hands, all you peoples; shout unto God with a voice of triumph.
PSA	47	2	지존하신 여호와는 엄위하시고 온 땅에 큰 임군이 되심이로다	For the Lord most high is terrible; he is a great King over all the earth.	How awesome is the LORD Most High, the great King over all the earth!
PSA	47	3	여호와께서 만민을 우리에게, 열방을 우리 발아래 복종케 하시며	He shall subdue the people under us, and the nations under our feet.	He subdues nations beneath us, and peoples under our feet.
PSA	47	4	우리를 위하여 기업을 택하시나니 곧 사랑하신 야곱의 영화로다	He shall choose our inheritance for us, the excellency of Jacob whom he loved. Selah.	He chooses our inheritance for us, the pride of Jacob, whom He loves. Selah
PSA	47	5	하나님이 즐거이 부르는 중에 올라가심이여 여호와께서 나팔소리 중에 올라가시도다	God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a trumpet.	God has ascended amid shouts of joy, the LORD with the sound of the horn.
PSA	47	6	찬양하라 하나님을 찬양하라 찬양하라 우리 왕을 찬양하라	Sing praises to God, sing praises: sing praises unto our King, sing praises.	Sing praises to God, sing praises; sing praises to our King, sing praises!
PSA	47	7	하나님은 온 땅의 왕이심이라 지혜의 시로 찬양할지어다	For God is the King of all the earth: sing ye praises with understanding.	For God is King of all the earth; sing profound praises to Him.
PSA	47	8	하나님이 열방을 치리하시며 하나님이 그 거룩한 보좌에 앉으셨도다	God reigneth over the heathen: God sitteth upon the throne of his holiness.	God reigns over the nations; God is seated on His holy throne.
PSA	47	9	열방의 방백들이 모임이여 아브라함의 하나님의 백성이 되도다 세상의 모든 방패는 여호와의 것임이여 저는 지존하시도다	The princes of the people are gathered together, even the people of the God of Abraham: for the shields of the earth belong unto God: he is greatly exalted.	The nobles of the nations have assembled as the people of the God of Abraham; for the shields of the earth belong to God; He is highly exalted.
PSA	48	1	고라 자손의 시 곧 노래 여호와는 광대하시니 우리 하나님의 성, 거룩한 산에서 극진히 찬송하리로다	A Song and Psalm for the sons of Korah. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised in the city of our God, in the mountain of his holiness.	A song. A Psalm of the sons of Korah. Great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised in the city of our God, His holy mountain.
PSA	48	2	터가 높고 아름다워 온 세계가 즐거워함이여 큰 왕의 성 곧 북방에 있는 시온 산이 그러하도다	Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion, on the sides of the north, the city of the great King.	Beautiful in loftiness, the joy of all the earth, like the peaks of Zaphon is Mount Zion, the city of the great King.
PSA	48	3	하나님이 그 여러 궁중에서 자기를 피난처로 알리셨도다	God is known in her palaces for a refuge.	God is in her citadels; He has shown Himself to be a fortress.
PSA	48	4	열왕이 모여 함께 지났음이여	For, lo, the kings were assembled, they passed by together.	For behold, the kings assembled; they all advanced together.
PSA	48	5	저희가 보고 놀라고 두려워 빨리 갔도다	They saw it, and so they marvelled; they were troubled, and hasted away.	They saw and were astounded; they fled in terror.
PSA	48	6	거기서 떨림이 저희를 잡으니 고통이 해산하는 여인 같도다	Fear took hold upon them there, and pain, as of a woman in travail.	Trembling seized them there, anguish like a woman in labor.
PSA	48	7	주께서 동풍으로 다시스의 배를 깨뜨리시도다	Thou breakest the ships of Tarshish with an east wind.	With a wind from the east You wrecked the ships of Tarshish.
PSA	48	8	우리가 들은 대로 만군의 여호와의 성, 우리 하나님의 성에서 보았나니 하나님이 이를 영영히 견고케 하시리로다(셀라)	As we have heard, so have we seen in the city of the Lord of hosts, in the city of our God: God will establish it for ever. Selah.	As we have heard, so we have seen in the city of the LORD of Hosts, in the city of our God: God will establish her forever. Selah
PSA	48	9	하나님이여 우리가 주의 전 가운데서 주의 인자하심을 생각하였나이다	We have thought of thy lovingkindness, O God, in the midst of thy temple.	Within Your temple, O God, we contemplate Your loving devotion.
PSA	48	10	하나님이여 주의 이름과 같이 찬송도 땅 끝까지 미쳤으며 주의 오른손에는 정의가 충만하나이다	According to thy name, O God, so is thy praise unto the ends of the earth: thy right hand is full of righteousness.	Your name, O God, like Your praise, reaches to the ends of the earth; Your right hand is full of righteousness.
PSA	48	11	주의 판단을 인하여 시온 산은 기뻐하고 유다의 딸들은 즐거워할지어다	Let mount Zion rejoice, let the daughters of Judah be glad, because of thy judgments.	Mount Zion is glad, the daughters of Judah rejoice, on account of Your judgments.
PSA	48	12	너희는 시온을 편답하고 그것을 순행하며 그 망대들을 계수하라	Walk about Zion, and go round about her: tell the towers thereof.	March around Zion, encircle her, count her towers,
PSA	48	13	그 성벽을 자세히 보고 그 궁전을 살펴서 후대에 전하라	Mark ye well her bulwarks, consider her palaces; that ye may tell it to the generation following.	consider her ramparts, tour her citadels, that you may tell the next generation.
PSA	48	14	이 하나님은 영영히 우리 하나님이시니 우리를 죽을 때까지 인도하시리로다	For this God is our God for ever and ever: he will be our guide even unto death.	For this God is our God forever and ever; He will be our guide even till death.
PSA	49	1	고라 자손의 시, 영장으로 한 노래 만민들아 이를 들어라 세상의 거민들아 귀를 기울이라	To the chief Musician, A Psalm for the sons of Korah. Hear this, all ye people; give ear, all ye inhabitants of the world:	For the choirmaster. A Psalm of the sons of Korah. Hear this, all you peoples; listen, all inhabitants of the world,
PSA	49	2	귀천 빈부를 물론하고 다 들을지어다	Both low and high, rich and poor, together.	both low and high, rich and poor alike.
PSA	49	3	내 입은 지혜를 말하겠고 내 마음은 명철을 묵상하리로다	My mouth shall speak of wisdom; and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.	My mouth will impart wisdom, and the meditation of my heart will bring understanding.
PSA	49	4	내가 비유에 내 귀를 기울이고 수금으로 나의 오묘한 말을 풀리로다	I will incline mine ear to a parable: I will open my dark saying upon the harp.	I will incline my ear to a proverb; I will express my riddle with the harp:
PSA	49	5	죄악이 나를 따라 에우는 환난의 날에 내가 어찌 두려워하랴	Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil, when the iniquity of my heels shall compass me about?	Why should I fear in times of trouble, when wicked usurpers surround me?
PSA	49	6	자기의 재물을 의지하고 풍부함으로 자긍하는 자는	They that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches;	They trust in their wealth and boast in their great riches.
PSA	49	7	아무도 결코 그 형제를 구속하지 못하며 저를 위하여 하나님께 속전을 바치지도 못할 것은	None of them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him:	No man can possibly redeem his brother or pay his ransom to God.
PSA	49	8	저희 생명의 구속이 너무 귀하며 영영히 못할 것임이라	(For the redemption of their soul is precious, and it ceaseth for ever:)	For the redemption of his soul is costly, and never can payment suffice,
PSA	49	9	저로 영존하여 썩음을 보지 않게 못하리니	That he should still live for ever, and not see corruption.	that he should live on forever and not see decay.
PSA	49	10	저가 보리로다 지혜있는 자도 죽고 우준하고 무지한 자도 같이 망하고 저희 재물을 타인에게 끼치는도다	For he seeth that wise men die, likewise the fool and the brutish person perish, and leave their wealth to others.	For it is clear that wise men die, and the foolish and the senseless both perish and leave their wealth to others.
PSA	49	11	저희의 속 생각에 그 집이 영영히 있고 그 거처가 대대에 미치리라 하여 그 전지를 자기 이름으로 칭하도다	Their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations; they call their lands after their own names.	Their graves are their eternal homes— their dwellings for endless generations— even though their lands were their namesakes.
PSA	49	12	사람은 존귀하나 장구치 못함이여 멸망하는 짐승 같도다	Nevertheless man being in honour abideth not: he is like the beasts that perish.	But a man, despite his wealth, cannot endure; he is like the beasts that perish.
PSA	49	13	저희의 이 행위는 저희의 우매함이나 후세 사람은 오히려 저희 말을 칭찬하리로다(셀라)	This their way is their folly: yet their posterity approve their sayings. Selah.	This is the fate of the self-confident and their followers who endorse their sayings. Selah
PSA	49	14	양 같이 저희를 음부에 두기로 작정되었으니 사망이 저희 목자일 것이라 정직한 자가 아침에 저희를 다스리리니 저희 아름다움이 음부에서 소멸하여 그 거처조차 없어지려니와	Like sheep they are laid in the grave; death shall feed on them; and the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning; and their beauty shall consume in the grave from their dwelling.	Like sheep they are destined for Sheol. Death will be their shepherd. The upright will rule them in the morning, and their form will decay in Sheol, far from their lofty abode.
PSA	49	15	하나님은 나를 영접하시리니 이러므로 내 영혼을 음부의 권세에서 구속하시리로다(셀라)	But God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave: for he shall receive me. Selah.	But God will redeem my life from Sheol, for He will surely take me to Himself. Selah
PSA	49	16	사람이 치부하여 그 집 영광이 더할 때에 너는 두려워 말지어다	Be not thou afraid when one is made rich, when the glory of his house is increased;	Do not be amazed when a man grows rich, when the splendor of his house increases.
PSA	49	17	저가 죽으매 가져가는 것이 없고 그 영광이 저를 따라 내려가지 못함이로다	For when he dieth he shall carry nothing away: his glory shall not descend after him.	For when he dies, he will carry nothing away; his abundance will not follow him down.
PSA	49	18	저가 비록 생시에 자기를 축하하며 스스로 좋게 함으로 사람들에게 칭찬을 받을지라도	Though while he lived he blessed his soul: and men will praise thee, when thou doest well to thyself.	Though in his lifetime he blesses his soul— and men praise you when you prosper—
PSA	49	19	그 역대의 열조에게로 돌아가리니 영영히 빛을 보지 못하리로다	He shall go to the generation of his fathers; they shall never see light.	he will join the generation of his fathers, who will never see the light of day.
PSA	49	20	존귀에 처하나 깨닫지 못하는 사람은 멸망하는 짐승 같도다	Man that is in honour, and understandeth not, is like the beasts that perish.	A man who has riches without understanding is like the beasts that perish.
PSA	50	1	아삽의 시 전능하신 자 하나님 여호와께서 말씀하사 해 돋는 데서부터 지는 데까지 세상을 부르셨도다	A Psalm of Asaph. The mighty God, even the Lord, hath spoken, and called the earth from the rising of the sun unto the going down thereof.	A Psalm of Asaph. The Mighty One, God the LORD, speaks and summons the earth from where the sun rises to where it sets.
PSA	50	2	온전히 아름다운 시온에서 하나님이 빛을 발하셨도다	Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God hath shined.	From Zion, perfect in beauty, God shines forth.
PSA	50	3	우리 하나님이 임하사 잠잠치 아니하시니 그 앞에는 불이 삼키고 그 사방에는 광풍이 불리로다	Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence: a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him.	Our God approaches and will not be silent! Consuming fire precedes Him, and a tempest rages around Him.
PSA	50	4	하나님이 그 백성을 판단하시려고 윗 하늘과 아래 땅에 반포하여	He shall call to the heavens from above, and to the earth, that he may judge his people.	He summons the heavens above, and the earth, that He may judge His people:
PSA	50	5	이르시되 나의 성도를 너의 앞에 모으라 곧 제사로 나와 언약한 자니라 하시도다	Gather my saints together unto me; those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice.	“Gather to Me My saints, who made a covenant with Me by sacrifice.”
PSA	50	6	하늘이 그 공의를 선포하리니 하나님 그는 심판장이심이로다(셀라)	And the heavens shall declare his righteousness: for God is judge himself. Selah.	And the heavens proclaim His righteousness, for God Himself is Judge. Selah
PSA	50	7	내 백성아 들을지어다 내가 말하리라 이스라엘아 내가 네게 증거하리라 나는 하나님 곧 네 하나님이로다	Hear, O my people, and I will speak; O Israel, and I will testify against thee: I am God, even thy God.	“Hear, O My people, and I will speak, O Israel, and I will testify against you: I am God, your God.
PSA	50	8	내가 너의 제물을 인하여는 너를 책망치 아니하리니 네 번제가 항상 내 앞에 있음이로다	I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices or thy burnt offerings, to have been continually before me.	I do not rebuke you for your sacrifices, and your burnt offerings are ever before Me.
PSA	50	9	내가 네 집에서 수소나 네 우리에서 수염소를 취치 아니하리니	I will take no bullock out of thy house, nor he goats out of thy folds.	I have no need for a bull from your stall or goats from your pens,
PSA	50	10	이는 삼림의 짐승들과 천산의 생축이 다 내 것이며	For every beast of the forest is mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills.	for every beast of the forest is Mine— the cattle on a thousand hills.
PSA	50	11	산의 새들도 나의 아는 것이며 들의 짐승도 내 것임이로다	I know all the fowls of the mountains: and the wild beasts of the field are mine.	I know every bird in the mountains, and the creatures of the field are Mine.
PSA	50	12	내가 가령 주려도 네게 이르지 않을 것은 세계와 거기 충만한 것이 내 것임이로다	If I were hungry, I would not tell thee: for the world is mine, and the fulness thereof.	If I were hungry, I would not tell you, for the world is Mine, and the fullness thereof.
PSA	50	13	내가 수소의 고기를 먹으며 염소의 피를 마시겠느냐	Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats?	Do I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats?
PSA	50	14	감사로 하나님께 제사를 드리며 지극히 높으신 자에게 네 서원을 갚으며	Offer unto God thanksgiving; and pay thy vows unto the most High:	Sacrifice a thank offering to God, and fulfill your vows to the Most High.
PSA	50	15	환난 날에 나를 부르라 내가 너를 건지리니 네가 나를 영화롭게 하리로다	And call upon me in the day of trouble: I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me.	Call upon Me in the day of trouble; I will deliver you, and you will honor Me.”
PSA	50	16	악인에게는 하나님이 이르시되 네가 어찌 내 율례를 전하며 내 언약을 네 입에 두느냐	But unto the wicked God saith, What hast thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou shouldest take my covenant in thy mouth?	To the wicked, however, God says, “What right have you to recite My statutes and to bear My covenant on your lips?
PSA	50	17	네가 교훈을 미워하고 내 말을 네 뒤로 던지며	Seeing thou hatest instruction, and castest my words behind thee.	For you hate My instruction and cast My words behind you.
PSA	50	18	도적을 본즉 연합하고 간음하는 자와 동류가 되며	When thou sawest a thief, then thou consentedst with him, and hast been partaker with adulterers.	When you see a thief, you befriend him, and throw in your lot with adulterers.
PSA	50	19	네 입을 악에게 주고 네 혀로 궤사를 지으며	Thou givest thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frameth deceit.	You unleash your mouth for evil and unharness your tongue for deceit.
PSA	50	20	앉아서 네 형제를 공박하며 네 어미의 아들을 비방하는도다	Thou sittest and speakest against thy brother; thou slanderest thine own mother’s son.	You sit and malign your brother; you slander your own mother’s son.
PSA	50	21	네가 이 일을 행하여도 내가 잠잠하였더니 네가 나를 너와 같은 줄로 생각하였도다 그러나 내가 너를 책망하여 네 죄를 네 목전에 차례로 베풀리라 하시는도다	These things hast thou done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thyself: but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes.	You have done these things, and I kept silent; you thought I was just like you. But now I rebuke you and accuse you to your face.
PSA	50	22	하나님을 잊어버린 너희여 이제 이를 생각하라 그렇지 않으면 내가 너희를 찢으리니 건질 자 없으리라	Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver.	Now consider this, you who forget God, lest I tear you to pieces, with no one to rescue you:
PSA	50	23	감사로 제사를 드리는 자가 나를 영화롭게 하나니 그 행위를 옳게 하는 자에게 내가 하나님의 구원을 보이리라	Whoso offereth praise glorifieth me: and to him that ordereth his conversation aright will I shew the salvation of God.	He who sacrifices a thank offering honors Me, and to him who rights his way, I will show the salvation of God.”
PSA	51	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 한 노래, 다윗이 밧세바와 동침한 후 선지자 나단이 저에게 온 때에 하나님이여 주의 인자를 좇아 나를 긍휼히 여기시며 주의 많은 자비를 좇아 내 죄과를 도말하소서	To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David, when Nathan the prophet came unto him, after he had gone in to Bath–sheba. Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy lovingkindness: according unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions.	For the choirmaster. A Psalm of David. When Nathan the prophet came to him after his adultery with Bathsheba. Have mercy on me, O God, according to Your loving devotion; according to Your great compassion, blot out my transgressions.
PSA	51	2	나의 죄악을 말갛게 씻기시며 나의 죄를 깨끗이 제하소서	Wash me throughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.	Wash me clean of my iniquity and cleanse me from my sin.
PSA	51	3	대저 나는 내 죄과를 아오니 내 죄가 항상 내 앞에 있나이다	For I acknowledge my transgressions: and my sin is ever before me.	For I know my transgressions, and my sin is always before me.
PSA	51	4	내가 주께만 범죄하여 주의 목전에 악을 행하였사오니 주께서 말씀하실 때에 의로우시다 하고 판단하실 때에 순전하시다 하리이다	Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that thou mightest be justified when thou speakest, and be clear when thou judgest.	Against You, You only, have I sinned and done what is evil in Your sight, so that You may be proved right when You speak and blameless when You judge.
PSA	51	5	내가 죄악 중에 출생하였음이여 모친이 죄 중에 나를 잉태하였나이다	Behold, I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my mother conceive me.	Surely I was brought forth in iniquity; I was sinful when my mother conceived me.
PSA	51	6	중심에 진실함을 주께서 원하시오니 내 속에 지혜를 알게 하시리이다	Behold, thou desirest truth in the inward parts: and in the hidden part thou shalt make me to know wisdom.	Surely You desire truth in the inmost being; You teach me wisdom in the inmost place.
PSA	51	7	우슬초로 나를 정결케 하소서 내가 정하리이다 나를 씻기소서 내가 눈보다 희리이다	Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.	Purify me with hyssop, and I will be clean; wash me, and I will be whiter than snow.
PSA	51	8	나로 즐겁고 기쁜 소리를 듣게 하사 주께서 꺾으신 뼈로 즐거워하게 하소서	Make me to hear joy and gladness; that the bones which thou hast broken may rejoice.	Let me hear joy and gladness; let the bones You have crushed rejoice.
PSA	51	9	주의 얼굴을 내 죄에서 돌이키시고 내 모든 죄악을 도말하소서	Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.	Hide Your face from my sins and blot out all my iniquities.
PSA	51	10	하나님이여 내 속에 정한 마음을 창조하시고 내 안에 정직한 영을 새롭게 하소서	Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me.	Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me.
PSA	51	11	나를 주 앞에서 쫓아내지 마시며 주의 성신을 내게서 거두지 마소서	Cast me not away from thy presence; and take not thy holy spirit from me.	Cast me not away from Your presence; take not Your Holy Spirit from me.
PSA	51	12	주의 구원의 즐거움을 내게 회복시키시고 자원하는 심령을 주사 나를 붙드소서	Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation; and uphold me with thy free spirit.	Restore to me the joy of Your salvation, and sustain me with a willing spirit.
PSA	51	13	그러하면 내가 범죄자에게 주의 도를 가르치리니 죄인들이 주께 돌아오리이다	Then will I teach transgressors thy ways; and sinners shall be converted unto thee.	Then I will teach transgressors Your ways, and sinners will return to You.
PSA	51	14	하나님이여 나의 구원의 하나님이여 피흘린 죄에서 나를 건지소서	Deliver me from bloodguiltiness, O God, thou God of my salvation: and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness.	Deliver me from bloodguilt, O God, the God of my salvation, and my tongue will sing of Your righteousness.
PSA	51	15	주여 내 입술을 열어 주소서 내 입이 주를 찬송하여 전파하리이다	O Lord, open thou my lips; and my mouth shall shew forth thy praise.	O Lord, open my lips, and my mouth will declare Your praise.
PSA	51	16	주는 제사를 즐겨 아니하시나니 그렇지 않으면 내가 드렸을 것이라 주는 번제를 기뻐 아니하시나이다	For thou desirest not sacrifice; else would I give it: thou delightest not in burnt offering.	For You do not delight in sacrifice, or I would bring it; You take no pleasure in burnt offerings.
PSA	51	17	하나님의 구하시는 제사는 상한 심령이라 하나님이여 상하고 통회하는 마음을 주께서 멸시치 아니하시리이다	The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.	The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; a broken and a contrite heart, O God, You will not despise.
PSA	51	18	주의 은택으로 시온에 선을 행하시고 예루살렘 성을 쌓으소서	Do good in thy good pleasure unto Zion: build thou the walls of Jerusalem.	In Your good pleasure, cause Zion to prosper; build up the walls of Jerusalem.
PSA	51	19	그 때에 주께서 의로운 제사와 번제와 온전한 번제를 기뻐하시리니 저희가 수소로 주의 단에 드리리이다	Then shalt thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righteousness, with burnt offering and whole burnt offering: then shall they offer bullocks upon thine altar.	Then You will delight in righteous sacrifices, in whole burnt offerings; then bulls will be offered on Your altar.
PSA	52	1	다윗의 마스길, 영장으로 한 노래, 에돔인 도엑이 사울에게 이르러 다윗이 아히멜렉의 집에 왔더라 말하던 때에 강포한 자여 네가 어찌하여 악한 계획을 스스로 자랑하는고 하나님의 인자하심은 항상 있도다	To the chief Musician, Maschil, A Psalm of David, when Doeg the Edomite came and told Saul, and said unto him, David is come to the house of Ahimelech. Why boastest thou thyself in mischief, O mighty man? the goodness of God endureth continually.	For the choirmaster. A Maskil of David. After Doeg the Edomite went to Saul and told him, “David has gone to the house of Ahimelech.” Why do you boast of evil, O mighty man? The loving devotion of God endures all day long.
PSA	52	2	네 혀가 심한 악을 꾀하여 날카로운 삭도 같이 간사를 행하는도다	Thy tongue deviseth mischiefs; like a sharp razor, working deceitfully.	Your tongue devises destruction like a sharpened razor, O worker of deceit.
PSA	52	3	네가 선보다 악을 사랑하며 의를 말함보다 거짓을 사랑하는도다(셀라)	Thou lovest evil more than good; and lying rather than to speak righteousness. Selah.	You love evil more than good, falsehood more than speaking truth. Selah
PSA	52	4	간사한 혀여 네가 잡아 먹는 모든 말을 좋아하는도다	Thou lovest all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue.	You love every word that devours, O deceitful tongue.
PSA	52	5	그런즉 하나님이 영영히 너를 멸하심이여 너를 취하여 네 장막에서 뽑아내며 생존하는 땅에서 네 뿌리를 빼시리로다(셀라)	God shall likewise destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee away, and pluck thee out of thy dwelling place, and root thee out of the land of the living. Selah.	Surely God will bring you down to everlasting ruin; He will snatch you up and tear you away from your tent; He will uproot you from the land of the living. Selah
PSA	52	6	의인이 보고 두려워하며 또 저를 비웃어 말하기를	The righteous also shall see, and fear, and shall laugh at him:	The righteous will see and fear; they will mock the evildoer, saying,
PSA	52	7	이 사람은 하나님으로 자기 힘을 삼지 아니하고 오직 그 재물이 풍부함을 의지하며 제 악으로 스스로 든든케 하던 자라 하리로다	Lo, this is the man that made not God his strength; but trusted in the abundance of his riches, and strengthened himself in his wickedness.	“Look at the man who did not make God his refuge, but trusted in the abundance of his wealth and strengthened himself by destruction.”
PSA	52	8	오직 나는 하나님의 집에 있는 푸른 감람나무 같음이여 하나님의 인자하심을 영영히 의지하리로다	But I am like a green olive tree in the house of God: I trust in the mercy of God for ever and ever.	But I am like an olive tree flourishing in the house of God; I trust in the loving devotion of God forever and ever.
PSA	52	9	주께서 이를 행하셨으므로 내가 영영히 주께 감사하고 주의 이름이 선함으로 주의 성도 앞에서 내가 주의 이름을 의지하리이다	I will praise thee for ever, because thou hast done it: and I will wait on thy name; for it is good before thy saints.	I will praise You forever, because You have done it. I will wait on Your name— for it is good— in the presence of Your saints.
PSA	53	1	다윗의 마스길, 영장으로 마할랏에 맞춘 노래 어리석은 자는 그 마음에 이르기를 하나님이 없다 하도다 저희는 부패하며 가증한 악을 행함이여 선을 행하는 자가 없도다	To the chief Musician upon Mahalath, Maschil, A Psalm of David. The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God. Corrupt are they, and have done abominable iniquity: there is none that doeth good.	For the choirmaster. According to Mahalath. A Maskil of David. The fool says in his heart, “There is no God.” They are corrupt; their ways are vile. There is no one who does good.
PSA	53	2	하나님이 하늘에서 인생을 굽어 살피사 지각이 있는 자와 하나님을 찾는 자가 있는가 보려 하신즉	God looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did understand, that did seek God.	God looks down from heaven upon the sons of men to see if any understand, if any seek God.
PSA	53	3	각기 물러나 함께 더러운 자가 되고 선을 행하는 자 없으니 하나도 없도다	Every one of them is gone back: they are altogether become filthy; there is none that doeth good, no, not one.	All have turned away, they have together become corrupt; there is no one who does good, not even one.
PSA	53	4	죄악을 행하는 자는 무지하뇨 저희가 떡 먹듯이 내 백성을 먹으면서 하나님을 부르지 아니하는도다	Have the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people as they eat bread: they have not called upon God.	Will the workers of iniquity never learn? They devour my people like bread; they refuse to call upon God.
PSA	53	5	저희가 두려움이 없는 곳에서 크게 두려워하였으니 너를 대하여 진 친 저희의 뼈를 하나님이 흩으심이라 하나님이 저희를 버리신고로 네가 저희로 수치를 당케 하였도다	There were they in great fear, where no fear was: for God hath scattered the bones of him that encampeth against thee: thou hast put them to shame, because God hath despised them.	There they are, overwhelmed with dread, where there was nothing to fear. For God has scattered the bones of those who besieged you. You put them to shame, for God has despised them.
PSA	53	6	시온에서 이스라엘을 구원하여 줄 자 누구인고 하나님이 그 백성의 포로된 것을 돌이키실 때에 야곱이 즐거워하며 이스라엘이 기뻐하리로다	Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion! When God bringeth back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.	Oh, that the salvation of Israel would come from Zion! When God restores His captive people, let Jacob rejoice, let Israel be glad!
PSA	54	1	다윗의 마스길, 영장으로 현악에 맞춘 노래, 십 인이 사울에게 이르러 말하기를 다윗이 우리 곳에 숨지 아니하였나이까 하던 때에 하나님이여 주의 이름으로 나를 구원하시고 주의 힘으로 나를 판단하소서	To the chief Musician on Neginoth, Maschil, A Psalm of David, when the Ziphims came and said to Saul, Doth not David hide himself with us? Save me, O God, by thy name, and judge me by thy strength.	For the choirmaster. With stringed instruments. A Maskil of David. When the Ziphites went to Saul and said, “Is David not hiding among us?” Save me, O God, by Your name, and vindicate me by Your might!
PSA	54	2	하나님이여 내 기도를 들으시며 내 입의 말에 귀를 기울이소서	Hear my prayer, O God; give ear to the words of my mouth.	Hear my prayer, O God; listen to the words of my mouth.
PSA	54	3	외인이 일어나 나를 치며 강포한 자가 내 생명을 수색하며 하나님을 자기 앞에 두지 아니하였음이니이다(셀라)	For strangers are risen up against me, and oppressors seek after my soul: they have not set God before them. Selah.	For strangers rise up against me, and ruthless men seek my life— men with no regard for God. Selah
PSA	54	4	하나님은 나의 돕는 자시라 주께서 내 생명을 붙드는 자와 함께 하시나이다	Behold, God is mine helper: the Lord is with them that uphold my soul.	Surely God is my helper; the Lord is the sustainer of my soul.
PSA	54	5	주께서 내 원수에게 악으로 갚으시리니 주의 성실하심으로 저희를 멸하소서	He shall reward evil unto mine enemies: cut them off in thy truth.	He will reward my enemies with evil. In Your faithfulness, destroy them.
PSA	54	6	내가 낙헌제로 주께 제사하리이다 여호와여 주의 이름에 감사하오리니 주의 이름이 선하심이니이다	I will freely sacrifice unto thee: I will praise thy name, O Lord; for it is good.	Freely I will sacrifice to You; I will praise Your name, O LORD, for it is good.
PSA	54	7	대저 주께서 모든 환난에서 나를 건지시고 내 원수가 보응받는 것을 나로 목도케 하셨나이다	For he hath delivered me out of all trouble: and mine eye hath seen his desire upon mine enemies.	For He has delivered me from every trouble, and my eyes have stared down my foes.
PSA	55	1	다윗의 마스길, 영장으로 현악에 맞춘 노래 하나님이여 내 기도에 귀를 기울이시고 내가 간구할 때에 숨지 마소서	To the chief Musician on Neginoth, Maschil, A Psalm of David. Give ear to my prayer, O God; and hide not thyself from my supplication.	For the choirmaster. With stringed instruments. A Maskil of David. Listen to my prayer, O God, and do not ignore my plea.
PSA	55	2	내게 굽히사 응답하소서 내가 근심으로 편치 못하여 탄식하오니	Attend unto me, and hear me: I mourn in my complaint, and make a noise;	Attend to me and answer me. I am restless in my complaint, and distraught
PSA	55	3	이는 원수의 소리와 악인의 압제의 연고라 저희가 죄악으로 내게 더하며 노하여 나를 핍박하나이다	Because of the voice of the enemy, because of the oppression of the wicked: for they cast iniquity upon me, and in wrath they hate me.	at the voice of the enemy, at the pressure of the wicked. For they release disaster upon me and revile me in their anger.
PSA	55	4	내 마음이 내 속에서 심히 아파하며 사망의 위험이 내게 미쳤도다	My heart is sore pained within me: and the terrors of death are fallen upon me.	My heart murmurs within me, and the terrors of death assail me.
PSA	55	5	두려움과 떨림이 내게 이르고 황공함이 나를 덮었도다	Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me, and horror hath overwhelmed me.	Fear and trembling grip me, and horror has overwhelmed me.
PSA	55	6	나의 말이 내가 비둘기 같이 날개가 있으면 날아가서 편히 쉬리로다	And I said, Oh that I had wings like a dove! for then would I fly away, and be at rest.	I said, “Oh, that I had wings like a dove! I would fly away and find rest.
PSA	55	7	내가 멀리 날아가서 광야에 거하리로다(셀라)	Lo, then would I wander far off, and remain in the wilderness. Selah.	How far away I would flee! In the wilderness I would remain. Selah
PSA	55	8	내가 피난처에 속히 가서 푹풍과 광품을 피하리라 하였도다	I would hasten my escape from the windy storm and tempest.	I would hurry to my shelter, far from this raging tempest.”
PSA	55	9	내가 성내에서 강포와 분쟁을 보았사오니 주여 저희를 멸하소서 저희 혀를 나누소서	Destroy, O Lord, and divide their tongues: for I have seen violence and strife in the city.	O Lord, confuse and confound their speech, for I see violence and strife in the city.
PSA	55	10	저희가 주야로 성벽 위에 두루 다니니 성중에는 죄악과 잔해함이 있으며	Day and night they go about it upon the walls thereof: mischief also and sorrow are in the midst of it.	Day and night they encircle the walls, while malice and trouble lie within.
PSA	55	11	악독이 그 중에 있고 압박과 궤사가 그 거리를 떠나지 않도다	Wickedness is in the midst thereof: deceit and guile depart not from her streets.	Destruction is within; oppression and deceit never leave the streets.
PSA	55	12	나를 책망한 자가 원수가 아니라 원수일진대 내가 참았으리라 나를 대하여 자기를 높이는 자가 나를 미워하는 자가 아니라 미워하는 자일진대 내가 그를 피하여 숨었으리라	For it was not an enemy that reproached me; then I could have borne it: neither was it he that hated me that did magnify himself against me; then I would have hid myself from him:	For it is not an enemy who insults me; that I could endure. It is not a foe who rises against me; from him I could hide.
PSA	55	13	그가 곧 너로다 나의 동류, 나의 동무요 나의 가까운 친우로다	But it was thou, a man mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance.	But it is you, a man like myself, my companion and close friend.
PSA	55	14	우리가 같이 재미롭게 의논하며 무리와 함께 하여 하나님의 집안에서 다녔도다	We took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the house of God in company.	We shared sweet fellowship together; we walked with the crowd into the house of God.
PSA	55	15	사망이 홀연히 저희에게 임하며 산 채로 음부에 내려갈지어다 이는 악독이 저희 거처에 있고 저희 가운데 있음이로다	Let death seize upon them, and let them go down quick into hell: for wickedness is in their dwellings, and among them.	Let death seize them by surprise; let them go down to Sheol alive, for evil is with them in their homes.
PSA	55	16	나는 하나님께 부르짖으리니 여호와께서 나를 구원하시리로다	As for me, I will call upon God; and the Lord shall save me.	But I call to God, and the LORD saves me.
PSA	55	17	저녁과 아침과 정오에 내가 근심하여 탄식하리니 여호와께서 내 소리를 들으시리로다	Evening, and morning, and at noon, will I pray, and cry aloud: and he shall hear my voice.	Morning, noon, and night, I cry out in distress, and He hears my voice.
PSA	55	18	나를 대적하는 자 많더니 나를 치는 전쟁에서 저가 내 생명을 구속하사 평안하게 하셨도다	He hath delivered my soul in peace from the battle that was against me: for there were many with me.	He redeems my soul in peace from the battle waged against me, even though many oppose me.
PSA	55	19	태고부터 계신 하나님이 들으시고(셀라) 변치 아니하며 하나님을 경외치 아니하는 자에게 보응하시리로다	God shall hear, and afflict them, even he that abideth of old. Selah. Because they have no changes, therefore they fear not God.	God will hear and humiliate them— the One enthroned for the ages— Selah because they do not change and they have no fear of God.
PSA	55	20	저는 손을 들어 자기와 화목한 자를 치고 그 언약을 배반하였도다	He hath put forth his hands against such as be at peace with him: he hath broken his covenant.	My companion attacks his friends; he violates his covenant.
PSA	55	21	그 입은 우유기름보다 미끄러워도 그 마음은 전쟁이요 그 말은 기름보다 유하여도 실상은 뽑힌 칼이로다	The words of his mouth were smoother than butter, but war was in his heart: his words were softer than oil, yet were they drawn swords.	His speech is smooth as butter, but war is in his heart. His words are softer than oil, yet they are swords unsheathed.
PSA	55	22	네 짐을 여호와께 맡겨 버리라 너를 붙드시고 의인의 요동함을 영영히 허락지 아니하시리로다	Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee: he shall never suffer the righteous to be moved.	Cast your burden upon the LORD and He will sustain you; He will never let the righteous be shaken.
PSA	55	23	하나님이여 주께서 저희로 파멸의 웅덩이에 빠지게 하시리이다 피를 흘리게 하며 속이는 자들은 저희 날의 반도 살지 못할 것이나 나는 주를 의지하리이다	But thou, O God, shalt bring them down into the pit of destruction: bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days; but I will trust in thee.	But You, O God, will bring them down to the Pit of destruction; men of bloodshed and deceit will not live out half their days. But I will trust in You.
PSA	56	1	다윗의 믹담 시, 영장으로 요낫 엘렘르호김에 맞춘 노래, 다윗이 가드에서 블레셋 인에게 잡인 때에 하나님이여 나를 긍휼히 여기소서 사람이 나를 삼키려고 종일 치며 압제하나이다	To the chief Musician upon Jonath–elem–rechokim, Michtam of David, when the Philistines took him in Gath. Be merciful unto me, O God: for man would swallow me up; he fighting daily oppresseth me.	For the choirmaster. To the tune of “A Dove on Distant Oaks.” A Miktam of David, when the Philistines seized him in Gath. Be merciful to me, O God, for men are hounding me; all day they press their attack.
PSA	56	2	나의 원수가 종일 나를 삼키려 하며 나를 교만히 치는 자 많사오니	Mine enemies would daily swallow me up: for they be many that fight against me, O thou most High.	My enemies pursue me all day long, for many proudly assail me.
PSA	56	3	내가 두려워하는 날에는 주를 의지하리이다	What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee.	When I am afraid, I put my trust in You.
PSA	56	4	내가 하나님을 의지하고 그 말씀을 찬송하올지라 내가 하나님을 의지하였은즉 두려워 아니하리니 혈육있는 사람이 내게 어찌하리이까	In God I will praise his word, in God I have put my trust; I will not fear what flesh can do unto me.	In God, whose word I praise— in God I trust. I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?
PSA	56	5	저희가 종일 내 말을 곡해하며 내게 대한 저희 모든 사상은 사악이라	Every day they wrest my words: all their thoughts are against me for evil.	All day long they twist my words; all their thoughts are on my demise.
PSA	56	6	저희가 내 생명을 엿보던 것과 같이 또 모여 숨어 내 종적을 살피나이다	They gather themselves together, they hide themselves, they mark my steps, when they wait for my soul.	They conspire, they lurk, they watch my steps while they wait to take my life.
PSA	56	7	저희가 죄악을 짓고야 피하오리이까 하나님이여 분노하사 뭇 백성을 낮추소서	Shall they escape by iniquity? in thine anger cast down the people, O God.	In spite of such sin, will they escape? In Your anger, O God, cast down the nations.
PSA	56	8	나의 유리함을 주께서 계수하셨으니 나의 눈물을 주의 병에 담으소서 이것이 주의 책에 기록되지 아니하였나이까	Thou tellest my wanderings: put thou my tears into thy bottle: are they not in thy book?	You have taken account of my wanderings. Put my tears in Your bottle— are they not in Your book?
PSA	56	9	내가 아뢰는 날에 내 원수가 물러가리니 하나님이 나를 도우심인 줄 아나이다	When I cry unto thee, then shall mine enemies turn back: this I know; for God is for me.	Then my enemies will retreat on the day I cry for help. By this I will know that God is on my side.
PSA	56	10	내가 하나님을 의지하여 그 말씀을 찬송하며 여호와를 의지하여 그 말씀을 찬송하리이다	In God will I praise his word: in the Lord will I praise his word.	In God, whose word I praise, in the LORD, whose word I praise,
PSA	56	11	내가 하나님을 의지하였은즉 두려워 아니하리니 사람이 내게 어찌 하리이까	In God have I put my trust: I will not be afraid what man can do unto me.	in God I trust; I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?
PSA	56	12	하나님이여 내가 주께 서원함이 있사온즉 내가 감사제를 주께 드리리니	Thy vows are upon me, O God: I will render praises unto thee.	Your vows are upon me, O God; I will render thank offerings to You.
PSA	56	13	주께서 내 생명을 사망에서 건지셨음이라 주께서 나로 하나님 앞 생명의 빛에 다니게 하시려고 실족지 않게 하지 아니하셨나이까	For thou hast delivered my soul from death: wilt not thou deliver my feet from falling, that I may walk before God in the light of the living?	For You have delivered my soul from death, and my feet from stumbling, that I may walk before God in the light of life.
PSA	57	1	다윗의 믹담 시, 영장으로 알다스헷에 맞춘 노래, 다윗이 사울을 피하여 굴에 있던 때에 하나님이여 나를 긍휼히 여기시고 나를 긍휼히 여기소서 내 영혼이 주께로 피하되 주의 날개 그늘 아래서 이 재앙이 지나기까지 피하리이다	To the chief Musician, Al–taschith, Michtam of David, when he fled from Saul in the cave. Be merciful unto me, O God, be merciful unto me: for my soul trusteth in thee: yea, in the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge, until these calamities be overpast.	For the choirmaster. To the tune of “Do Not Destroy.” A Miktam of David, when he fled from Saul into the cave. Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy, for in You my soul takes refuge. In the shadow of Your wings I will take shelter until the danger has passed.
PSA	57	2	내가 지극히 높으신 하나님께 부르짖음이여 곧 나를 위하여 모든 것을 이루시는 하나님께로다	I will cry unto God most high; unto God that performeth all things for me.	I cry out to God Most High, to God who fulfills His purpose for me.
PSA	57	3	저가 하늘에서 보내사 나를 삼키려는 자의 비방에서 나를 구원하실지라(셀라) 하나님이 그 인자와 진리를 보내시리로다	He shall send from heaven, and save me from the reproach of him that would swallow me up. Selah. God shall send forth his mercy and his truth.	He reaches down from heaven and saves me; He rebukes those who trample me. Selah God sends forth His loving devotion and His truth.
PSA	57	4	내 혼이 사자 중에 처하며 내가 불사르는 자 중에 누웠으니 곧 인생 중에라 저희 이는 창과 살이요 저희 혀는 날카로운 칼 같도다	My soul is among lions: and I lie even among them that are set on fire, even the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword.	My soul is among the lions; I lie down with ravenous beasts— with men whose teeth are spears and arrows, whose tongues are sharp swords.
PSA	57	5	하나님이여 주는 하늘 위에 높이 들리시며 주의 영광은 온 세계 위에 높아지기를 원하나이다	Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens; let thy glory be above all the earth.	Be exalted, O God, above the heavens; may Your glory cover all the earth.
PSA	57	6	저희가 내 걸음을 장애하려고 그물을 예비하였으니 내 영혼이 억울하도다 저희가 내 앞에 웅덩이를 팠으나 스스로 그 중에 빠졌도다(셀라)	They have prepared a net for my steps; my soul is bowed down: they have digged a pit before me, into the midst whereof they are fallen themselves. Selah.	They spread a net for my feet; my soul was despondent. They dug a pit before me, but they themselves have fallen into it! Selah
PSA	57	7	하나님이여 내 마음이 확정되었고 내 마음이 확정되었사오니 내가 노래하고 내가 찬송하리이다	My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed: I will sing and give praise.	My heart is steadfast, O God, my heart is steadfast. I will sing and make music.
PSA	57	8	내 영광아 깰지어다 비파야, 수금아, 깰지어다 내가 새벽을 깨우리로다	Awake up, my glory; awake, psaltery and harp: I myself will awake early.	Awake, my glory! Awake, O harp and lyre! I will awaken the dawn.
PSA	57	9	주여 내가 만민 중에서 주께 감사하오며 열방 중에서 주를 찬송하리이다	I will praise thee, O Lord, among the people: I will sing unto thee among the nations.	I will praise You, O Lord, among the nations; I will sing Your praises among the peoples.
PSA	57	10	대저 주의 인자는 커서 하늘에 미치고 주의 진리는 궁창에 이르나이다	For thy mercy is great unto the heavens, and thy truth unto the clouds.	For Your loving devotion reaches to the heavens, and Your faithfulness to the clouds.
PSA	57	11	하나님이여 주는 하늘 위에 높이 들리시며 주의 영광은 온 세계 위에 높아지기를 원하나이다	Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens: let thy glory be above all the earth.	Be exalted, O God, above the heavens; may Your glory cover all the earth.
PSA	58	1	다윗의 믹담 시, 영장으로 알다스헷에 맞춘 노래 인자들아 너희가 당연히 공의를 말하겠거늘 어찌 잠잠하느뇨 너희가 정직히 판단하느뇨	To the chief Musician, Al–taschith, Michtam of David. Do ye indeed speak righteousness, O congregation? do ye judge uprightly, O ye sons of men?	For the choirmaster. To the tune of “Do Not Destroy.” A Miktam of David. Do you indeed speak justly, O rulers? Do you judge uprightly, O sons of men?
PSA	58	2	오히려 너희가 중심에 악을 행하며 땅에서 너희 손의 강포를 달아주는도다	Yea, in heart ye work wickedness; ye weigh the violence of your hands in the earth.	No, in your hearts you devise injustice; with your hands you mete out violence on the earth.
PSA	58	3	악인은 모태에서부터 멀어졌음이여 나면서부터 곁길로 나아가 거짓을 말하는도다	The wicked are estranged from the womb: they go astray as soon as they be born, speaking lies.	The wicked are estranged from the womb; the liars go astray from birth.
PSA	58	4	저희의 독은 뱀의 독 같으며 저희는 귀를 막은 귀머거리 독사 같으니	Their poison is like the poison of a serpent: they are like the deaf adder that stoppeth her ear;	Their venom is like the venom of a snake, like a cobra that shuts its ears,
PSA	58	5	곧 술사가 아무리 공교한 방술을 행할지라도 그 소리를 듣지 아니하는 독사로다	Which will not hearken to the voice of charmers, charming never so wisely.	refusing to hear the tune of the charmer who skillfully weaves his spell.
PSA	58	6	하나님이여 저희 입에서 이를 꺾으소서 여호와여 젊은 사자의 어금니를 꺾어 내시며	Break their teeth, O God, in their mouth: break out the great teeth of the young lions, O Lord.	O God, shatter their teeth in their mouths; O LORD, tear out the fangs of the lions.
PSA	58	7	저희로 급히 흐르는 물 같이 사라지게 하시며 겨누는 살이 꺽임 같게 하시며	Let them melt away as waters which run continually: when he bendeth his bow to shoot his arrows, let them be as cut in pieces.	May they vanish like water that runs off; when they draw the bow, may their arrows be blunted.
PSA	58	8	소멸하여 가는 달팽이 같게 하시며 만기되지 못하여 출생한 자가 일광을 보지 못함 같게 하소서	As a snail which melteth, let every one of them pass away: like the untimely birth of a woman, that they may not see the sun.	Like a slug that dissolves in its slime, like a woman’s stillborn child, may they never see the sun.
PSA	58	9	가시나무 불이 가마를 더웁게 하기 전에 저가 생 것과 불붙는 것을 회리바람으로 제하여 버리시리로다	Before your pots can feel the thorns, he shall take them away as with a whirlwind, both living, and in his wrath.	Before your pots can feel the burning thorns— whether green or dry— He will sweep them away.
PSA	58	10	의인은 악인의 보복 당함을 보고 기뻐함이여 그 발을 악인의 피에 씻으리로다	The righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance: he shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked.	The righteous will rejoice when they see they are avenged; they will wash their feet in the blood of the wicked.
PSA	58	11	때에 사람의 말이 진실로 의인에게 갚음이 있고 진실로 땅에서 판단하시는 하나님이 계시다 하리로다	So that a man shall say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous: verily he is a God that judgeth in the earth.	Then men will say, “There is surely a reward for the righteous! There is surely a God who judges the earth!”
PSA	59	1	다윗의 믹담 시, 영장으로 알다스헷에 맞춘 노래, 사울이 사람을 보내어 다윗을 죽이려고 그 집을 지킨 때에 나의 하나님이여 내 원수에게서 나를 건지시고 일어나 치려는 자에게서 나를 높이 드소서	To the chief Musician, Al–taschith, Michtam of David; when Saul sent, and they watched the house to kill him. Deliver me from mine enemies, O my God: defend me from them that rise up against me.	For the choirmaster. To the tune of “Do Not Destroy.” A Miktam of David, when Saul sent men to watch David’s house in order to kill him. Deliver me from my enemies, O my God; protect me from those who rise against me.
PSA	59	2	사악을 행하는 자에게서 나를 건지시고 피흘리기를 즐기는 자에게서 나를 구원하소서	Deliver me from the workers of iniquity, and save me from bloody men.	Deliver me from workers of iniquity, and save me from men of bloodshed.
PSA	59	3	저희가 나의 생명을 해하려고 엎드려 기다리고 강한 자가 모여 나를 치려 하오니 여호와여 이는 나의 범과를 인함이 아니요 나의 죄를 인함도 아니로소이다	For, lo, they lie in wait for my soul: the mighty are gathered against me; not for my transgression, nor for my sin, O Lord.	See how they lie in wait for me. Fierce men conspire against me for no transgression or sin of my own, O LORD.
PSA	59	4	내가 허물이 없으나 저희가 달려와서 스스로 준비하오니 주여 나를 도우시기 위하여 깨사 감찰하소서	They run and prepare themselves without my fault: awake to help me, and behold.	For no fault of my own, they move swiftly to attack me. Arise to help me, and take notice.
PSA	59	5	만군의 하나님 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이여 일어나 열방을 벌하소서 무릇 간사한 악인을 긍휼히 여기지 마소서(셀라)	Thou therefore, O Lord God of hosts, the God of Israel, awake to visit all the heathen: be not merciful to any wicked transgressors. Selah.	O LORD God of Hosts, the God of Israel, rouse Yourself to punish all the nations; show no mercy to the wicked traitors. Selah
PSA	59	6	저희가 저물게 돌아와서 개처럼 울며 성으로 두루 다니고	They return at evening: they make a noise like a dog, and go round about the city.	They return in the evening, snarling like dogs and prowling around the city.
PSA	59	7	그 입으로 악을 토하며 그 입술에는 칼이 있어 이르기를 누가 들으리요 하나이다	Behold, they belch out with their mouth: swords are in their lips: for who, say they, doth hear?	See what they spew from their mouths— sharp words from their lips: “For who can hear us?”
PSA	59	8	여호와여 주께서 저희를 웃으시리니 모든 열방을 비웃으시리이다	But thou, O Lord, shalt laugh at them; thou shalt have all the heathen in derision.	But You, O LORD, laugh at them; You scoff at all the nations.
PSA	59	9	하나님은 나의 산성이시니 저의 힘을 인하여 내가 주를 바라리이다	Because of his strength will I wait upon thee: for God is my defence.	I will keep watch for You, O my strength, because You, O God, are my fortress.
PSA	59	10	나의 하나님이 그 인자하심으로 나를 영접하시며 내 원수의 보응받는 것을 나로 목도케 하시리이다	The God of my mercy shall prevent me: God shall let me see my desire upon mine enemies.	My God of loving devotion will come to meet me; God will let me stare down my foes.
PSA	59	11	저희를 죽이지 마옵소서 나의 백성이 잊을까 하나이다 우리 방패되신 주여 주의 능력으로 저희를 흩으시고 낮추소서	Slay them not, lest my people forget: scatter them by thy power; and bring them down, O Lord our shield.	Do not kill them, or my people will forget. Scatter them by Your power, and bring them down, O Lord, our shield.
PSA	59	12	저희 입술의 말은 곧 그 입의 죄라 저희의 저주와 거짓말을 인하여 저희로 그 교만한 중에서 사로잡히게 하소서	For the sin of their mouth and the words of their lips let them even be taken in their pride: and for cursing and lying which they speak.	By the sins of their mouths and the words of their lips, let them be trapped in their pride, in the curses and lies they utter.
PSA	59	13	진노하심으로 소멸하시되 없기까지 소멸하사 하나님이 야곱 중에 다스리심을 땅 끝까지 알게 하소서(셀라)	Consume them in wrath, consume them, that they may not be: and let them know that God ruleth in Jacob unto the ends of the earth. Selah.	Consume them in wrath; consume them till they are no more, so it may be known to the ends of the earth that God rules over Jacob. Selah
PSA	59	14	저희로 저물게 돌아와서 개처럼 울며 성으로 두루 다니게 하소서	And at evening let them return; and let them make a noise like a dog, and go round about the city.	They return in the evening, snarling like dogs and prowling around the city.
PSA	59	15	저희는 식물을 위하여 유리하다가 배부름을 얻지 못하면 밤을 새우려니와	Let them wander up and down for meat, and grudge if they be not satisfied.	They scavenge for food, and growl if they are not satisfied.
PSA	59	16	나는 주의 힘을 노래하며 아침에 주의 인자하심을 높이 부르오리니 주는 나의 산성이시며 나의 환난 날에 피난처심이니이다	But I will sing of thy power; yea, I will sing aloud of thy mercy in the morning: for thou hast been my defence and refuge in the day of my trouble.	But I will sing of Your strength and proclaim Your loving devotion in the morning. For You are my fortress, my refuge in times of trouble.
PSA	59	17	나의 힘이시여 내가 주께 찬송하오리니 하나님은 나의 산성이시며 나를 긍휼히 여기시는 하나님이심이니이다	Unto thee, O my strength, will I sing: for God is my defence, and the God of my mercy.	To You, O my strength, I sing praises, for You, O God, are my fortress, my God of loving devotion.
PSA	60	1	다윗이 교훈하기 위하여 지은 믹담, 영장으로 수산에둣에 맞춘 노래, 다윗이 아람 나하라임과 아람소바와 싸우는 중에 요압이 돌아와 에돔을 염곡에서 쳐서 일만 이천 인을 죽인 때에 하나님이여 주께서 우리를 버려 흩으셨고 분노하셨사오나 지금은 우리를 회복시키소서	To the chief Musician upon Shushan–eduth, Michtam of David, to teach; when he strove with Aram–naharaim and with Aram–zobah, when Joab returned, and smote of Edom in the valley of salt twelve thousand. O God, thou hast cast us off, thou hast scattered us, thou hast been displeased; O turn thyself to us again.	For the choirmaster. To the tune of “The Lily of the Covenant.” A Miktam of David for instruction. When he fought Aram-naharaim and Aram-zobah, and Joab returned and struck down 12,000 Edomites in the Valley of Salt. You have rejected us, O God; You have broken us; You have been angry; restore us!
PSA	60	2	주께서 땅을 진동시키사 갈라지게 하셨사오니 그 틈을 기우소서 땅이 요동함이니이다	Thou hast made the earth to tremble; thou hast broken it: heal the breaches thereof; for it shaketh.	You have shaken the land and torn it open. Heal its fractures, for it is quaking.
PSA	60	3	주께서 주의 백성에게 어려움을 보이시고 비척거리게 하는 포도주로 우리에게 마시우셨나이다	Thou hast shewed thy people hard things: thou hast made us to drink the wine of astonishment.	You have shown Your people hardship; we are staggered from the wine You made us drink.
PSA	60	4	주를 경외하는 자에게 기를 주시고 진리를 위하여 달게 하셨나이다(셀라)	Thou hast given a banner to them that fear thee, that it may be displayed because of the truth. Selah.	You have raised a banner for those who fear You, that they may flee the bow. Selah
PSA	60	5	주의 사랑하시는 자를 건지시기 위하여 우리에게 응답하사 오른손으로 구원하소서	That thy beloved may be delivered; save with thy right hand, and hear me.	Respond and save us with Your right hand, that Your beloved may be delivered.
PSA	60	6	하나님이 그 거룩하심으로 말씀하시되 내가 뛰놀리라 내가 세겜을 나누며 숙곳 골짜기를 척량하리라	God hath spoken in his holiness; I will rejoice, I will divide Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth.	God has spoken from His sanctuary: “I will triumph! I will parcel out Shechem and apportion the Valley of Succoth.
PSA	60	7	길르앗이 내 것이요 므낫세도 내 것이며 에브라임은 내 머리의 보호자요 유다는 나의 홀이며	Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine; Ephraim also is the strength of mine head; Judah is my lawgiver;	Gilead is Mine, and Manasseh is Mine; Ephraim is My helmet, Judah is My scepter.
PSA	60	8	모압은 내 목욕통이라 에돔에는 내 신을 던지리라 블레셋아 나를 인하여 외치라 하셨도다	Moab is my washpot; over Edom will I cast out my shoe: Philistia, triumph thou because of me.	Moab is My washbasin; upon Edom I toss My sandal; over Philistia I shout in triumph.”
PSA	60	9	누가 나를 이끌어 견고한 성에 들이며 누가 나를 에돔에 인도할꼬	Who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into Edom?	Who will bring me to the fortified city? Who will lead me to Edom?
PSA	60	10	하나님이여 주께서 우리를 버리지 아니하셨나이까 하나님이여 주께서 우리 군대와 함께 나아가지 아니하시나이다	Wilt not thou, O God, which hadst cast us off? and thou, O God, which didst not go out with our armies?	Have You not rejected us, O God? Will You no longer march out, O God, with our armies?
PSA	60	11	우리를 도와 대적을 치게 하소서 사람의 구원은 헛됨이니이다	Give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of man.	Give us aid against the enemy, for the help of man is worthless.
PSA	60	12	우리가 하나님을 의지하고 용감히 행하리니 저는 우리의 대적을 밟으실 자심이로다	Through God we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall tread down our enemies.	With God we will perform with valor, and He will trample our enemies.
PSA	61	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 현악에 맞춘 노래 하나님이여 나의 부르짖음을 들으시며 내 기도에 유의하소서	To the chief Musician upon Neginah, A Psalm of David. Hear my cry, O God; attend unto my prayer.	For the choirmaster. With stringed instruments. Of David. Hear my cry, O God; attend to my prayer.
PSA	61	2	내 마음이 눌릴 때에 땅 끝에서부터 주께 부르짖으오리니 나보다 높은 바위에 나를 인도하소서	From the end of the earth will I cry unto thee, when my heart is overwhelmed: lead me to the rock that is higher than I.	From the ends of the earth I call out to You whenever my heart is faint. Lead me to the rock that is higher than I.
PSA	61	3	주는 나의 피난처시요 원수를 피하는 견고한 망대심이니이다	For thou hast been a shelter for me, and a strong tower from the enemy.	For You have been my refuge, a tower of strength against the enemy.
PSA	61	4	내가 영원히 주의 장막에 거하며 내가 주의 날개 밑에 피하리이다(셀라)	I will abide in thy tabernacle for ever: I will trust in the covert of thy wings. Selah.	Let me dwell in Your tent forever and take refuge in the shelter of Your wings. Selah
PSA	61	5	하나님이여 내 서원을 들으시고 주의 이름을 경외하는 자의 얻을 기업을 내게 주셨나이다	For thou, O God, hast heard my vows: thou hast given me the heritage of those that fear thy name.	For You have heard my vows, O God; You have given me the inheritance reserved for those who fear Your name.
PSA	61	6	주께서 왕으로 장수케 하사 그 나이 여러 대에 미치게 하시리이다	Thou wilt prolong the king’s life: and his years as many generations.	Increase the days of the king’s life; may his years span many generations.
PSA	61	7	저가 영원히 하나님 앞에 거하리니 인자와 진리를 예비하사 저를 보호하소서	He shall abide before God for ever: O prepare mercy and truth, which may preserve him.	May he sit enthroned in God’s presence forever; appoint Your loving devotion and Your faithfulness to guard him.
PSA	61	8	그리하시면 내가 주의 이름을 영원히 찬양하며 매일 나의 서원을 이행하리이다	So will I sing praise unto thy name for ever, that I may daily perform my vows.	Then I will ever sing praise to Your name and fulfill my vows day by day.
PSA	62	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 여두둔의 법칙을 의지하여 한 노래 나의 영혼이 잠잠히 하나님만 바람이여 나의 구원이 그에게서 나는도다	To the chief Musician, to Jeduthun, A Psalm of David. Truly my soul waiteth upon God: from him cometh my salvation.	For the choirmaster. According to Jeduthun. A Psalm of David. In God alone my soul finds rest; my salvation comes from Him.
PSA	62	2	오직 저만 나의 반석이시요 나의 구원이시요 나의 산성이시니 내가 크게 요동치 아니하리로다	He only is my rock and my salvation; he is my defence; I shall not be greatly moved.	He alone is my rock and my salvation. He is my fortress; I will never be shaken.
PSA	62	3	넘어지는 담과 흔들리는 울타리 같은 사람을 죽이려고 너희가 일제히 박격하기를 언제까지 하려느냐	How long will ye imagine mischief against a man? ye shall be slain all of you: as a bowing wall shall ye be, and as a tottering fence.	How long will you threaten a man? Will all of you throw him down like a leaning wall or a tottering fence?
PSA	62	4	저희가 그를 그 높은 위에서 떨어뜨리기만 꾀하고 거짓을 즐겨하니 입으로는 축복이요 속으로는 저주로다(셀라)	They only consult to cast him down from his excellency: they delight in lies: they bless with their mouth, but they curse inwardly. Selah.	They fully intend to cast him down from his lofty perch; they delight in lies; with their mouths they bless, but inwardly they curse. Selah
PSA	62	5	나의 영혼아 잠잠히 하나님만 바라라 대저 나의 소망이 저로 좇아 나는도다	My soul, wait thou only upon God; for my expectation is from him.	Rest in God alone, O my soul, for my hope comes from Him.
PSA	62	6	오직 저만 나의 반석이시요 나의 구원이시요 나의 산성이시니 내가 요동치 아니하리로다	He only is my rock and my salvation: he is my defence; I shall not be moved.	He alone is my rock and my salvation; He is my fortress; I will not be shaken.
PSA	62	7	나의 구원과 영광이 하나님께 있음이여 내 힘의 반석과 피난처도 하나님께 있도다	In God is my salvation and my glory: the rock of my strength, and my refuge, is in God.	My salvation and my honor rest on God, my strong rock; my refuge is in God.
PSA	62	8	백성들아 시시로 저를 의지하고 그 앞에 마음을 토하라 하나님은 우리의 피난처시로다(셀라)	Trust in him at all times; ye people, pour out your heart before him: God is a refuge for us. Selah.	Trust in Him at all times, O people; pour out your hearts before Him. God is our refuge. Selah
PSA	62	9	진실로 천한 자도 헛되고 높은 자도 거짓되니 저울에 달면 들려 입김보다 경하리로다	Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: to be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter than vanity.	Lowborn men are but a vapor, the exalted but a lie. Weighed on the scale, they go up; together they are but a vapor.
PSA	62	10	포학을 의지하지 말며 탈취한 것으로 허망하여지지 말며 재물이 늘어도 거기 치심치 말지어다	Trust not in oppression, and become not vain in robbery: if riches increase, set not your heart upon them.	Place no trust in extortion, or false hope in stolen goods. If your riches increase, do not set your heart upon them.
PSA	62	11	하나님이 한두 번 하신 말씀을 내가 들었나니 권능은 하나님께 속하였다 하셨도다	God hath spoken once; twice have I heard this; that power belongeth unto God.	God has spoken once; I have heard this twice: that power belongs to God,
PSA	62	12	주여 인자함도 주께 속하였사오니 주께서 각 사람이 행한 대로 갚으심이니이다	Also unto thee, O Lord, belongeth mercy: for thou renderest to every man according to his work.	and loving devotion to You, O Lord. For You will repay each man according to his deeds.
PSA	63	1	다윗의 시, 유다 광야에 있을 때에 하나님이여 주는 나의 하나님이시라 내가 간절히 주를 찾되 물이 없어 마르고 곤핍한 땅에서 내 영혼이 주를 갈망하며 내 육체가 주를 앙모하나이다	A Psalm of David, when he was in the wilderness of Judah. O God, thou art my God; early will I seek thee: my soul thirsteth for thee, my flesh longeth for thee in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is;	A Psalm of David, when he was in the Wilderness of Judah. O God, You are my God. Earnestly I seek You; my soul thirsts for You. My body yearns for You in a dry and weary land without water.
PSA	63	2	내가 주의 권능과 영광을 보려하여 이와 같이 성소에서 주를 바라보았나이다	To see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the sanctuary.	So I have seen You in the sanctuary and beheld Your power and glory.
PSA	63	3	주의 인자가 생명보다 나으므로 내 입술이 주를 찬양할 것이라	Because thy lovingkindness is better than life, my lips shall praise thee.	Because Your loving devotion is better than life, my lips will glorify You.
PSA	63	4	이러므로 내 평생에 주를 송축하며 주의 이름으로 인하여 내 손을 들리이다	Thus will I bless thee while I live: I will lift up my hands in thy name.	So I will bless You as long as I live; in Your name I will lift my hands.
PSA	63	5	골수와 기름진 것을 먹음과 같이 내 영혼이 만족할 것이라 내 입이 기쁜 입술로 주를 찬송하되	My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness; and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips:	My soul is satisfied as with the richest of foods; with joyful lips my mouth will praise You.
PSA	63	6	내가 나의 침상에서 주를 기억하며 밤중에 주를 묵상할 때에 하오리니	When I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night watches.	When I remember You on my bed, I think of You through the watches of the night.
PSA	63	7	주는 나의 도움이 되셨음이라 내가 주의 날개 그늘에서 즐거이 부르리이다	Because thou hast been my help, therefore in the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice.	For You are my help; I will sing for joy in the shadow of Your wings.
PSA	63	8	나의 영혼이 주를 가까이 따르니 주의 오른손이 나를 붙드시거니와	My soul followeth hard after thee: thy right hand upholdeth me.	My soul clings to You; Your right hand upholds me.
PSA	63	9	나의 영혼을 찾아 멸하려 하는 저희는 땅 깊은 곳에 들어가며	But those that seek my soul, to destroy it, shall go into the lower parts of the earth.	But those who seek my life to destroy it will go into the depths of the earth.
PSA	63	10	칼의 세력에 붙인바 되어 시랑의 밥이 되리이다	They shall fall by the sword: they shall be a portion for foxes.	They will fall to the power of the sword; they will become a portion for foxes.
PSA	63	11	왕은 하나님을 즐거워하리니 주로 맹세한 자마다 자랑할 것이나 거짓말 하는 자의 입은 막히리로다	But the king shall rejoice in God; every one that sweareth by him shall glory: but the mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped.	But the king will rejoice in God; all who swear by Him will exult, for the mouths of liars will be shut.
PSA	64	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 한 노래 하나님이여 나의 근심하는 소리를 들으시고 원수의 두려움에서 나의 생명을 보존하소서	To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. Hear my voice, O God, in my prayer: preserve my life from fear of the enemy.	For the choirmaster. A Psalm of David. Hear, O God, my voice of complaint; preserve my life from dread of the enemy.
PSA	64	2	주는 나를 숨기사 행악자의 비밀한 꾀에서와 죄악을 짓는 자의 요란에서 벗어나게 하소서	Hide me from the secret counsel of the wicked; from the insurrection of the workers of iniquity:	Hide me from the scheming of the wicked, from the mob of workers of iniquity,
PSA	64	3	저희가 칼 같이 자기 혀를 연마하며 화살 같이 독한 말로 겨누고	Who whet their tongue like a sword, and bend their bows to shoot their arrows, even bitter words:	who sharpen their tongues like swords and aim their bitter words like arrows,
PSA	64	4	숨은 곳에서 완전한 자를 쏘려 하다가 갑자기 쏘고 두려워하지 않도다	That they may shoot in secret at the perfect: suddenly do they shoot at him, and fear not.	ambushing the innocent in seclusion, shooting suddenly, without fear.
PSA	64	5	저희는 악한 목적으로 서로 장려하며 비밀히 올무놓기를 함께 의논하고 하는 말이 누가 보리요 하며	They encourage themselves in an evil matter: they commune of laying snares privily; they say, Who shall see them?	They hold fast to their evil purpose; they speak of hiding their snares. “Who will see them?” they say.
PSA	64	6	저희는 죄악을 도모하며 이르기를 우리가 묘책을 찾았다 하나니 각 사람의 속 뜻과 마음이 깊도다	They search out iniquities; they accomplish a diligent search: both the inward thought of every one of them, and the heart, is deep.	They devise injustice and say, “We have perfected a secret plan.” For the inner man and the heart are mysterious.
PSA	64	7	그러나 하나님이 저희를 쏘시리니 저희가 홀연히 살에 상하리로다	But God shall shoot at them with an arrow; suddenly shall they be wounded.	But God will shoot them with arrows; suddenly they will be wounded.
PSA	64	8	이러므로 저희가 엎드러지리니 저희의 혀가 저희를 해함이라 저희를 보는 자가 다 머리를 흔들리로다	So they shall make their own tongue to fall upon themselves: all that see them shall flee away.	They will be made to stumble, their own tongues turned against them. All who see will shake their heads.
PSA	64	9	모든 사람이 두려워하여 하나님의 일을 선포하며 그 행하심을 깊이 생각하리로다	And all men shall fear, and shall declare the work of God; for they shall wisely consider of his doing.	Then all mankind will fear and proclaim the work of God; so they will ponder what He has done.
PSA	64	10	의인은 여호와를 인하여 즐거워하며 그에게 피하리니 마음이 정직한 자는 다 자랑하리로다	The righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him; and all the upright in heart shall glory.	Let the righteous rejoice in the LORD and take refuge in Him; let all the upright in heart exult.
PSA	65	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 한 노래 하나님이여 찬송이 시온에서 주를 기다리오며 사람이 서원을 주께 이행하리이다	To the chief Musician, A Psalm and Song of David. Praise waiteth for thee, O God, in Sion: and unto thee shall the vow be performed.	For the choirmaster. A Psalm of David. A song. Praise awaits You, O God, in Zion; to You our vows will be fulfilled.
PSA	65	2	기도를 들으시는 주여 모든 육체가 주께 나아오리이다	O thou that hearest prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.	O You who listen to prayer, all people will come to You.
PSA	65	3	죄악이 나를 이기었사오니 우리의 죄과를 주께서 사하시리이다	Iniquities prevail against me: as for our transgressions, thou shalt purge them away.	When iniquities prevail against me, You atone for our transgressions.
PSA	65	4	주께서 택하시고 가까이 오게 하사 주의 뜰에 거하게 하신 사람은 복이 있나이다 우리가 주의 집 곧 주의 성전의 아름다움으로 만족하리이다	Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy courts: we shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, even of thy holy temple.	Blessed is the one You choose and bring near to dwell in Your courts! We are filled with the goodness of Your house, the holiness of Your temple.
PSA	65	5	우리 구원의 하나님이시여 땅의 모든 끝과 먼 바다에 있는 자의 의지할 주께서 의를 좇아 엄위하신 일로 우리에게 응답하시리이다	By terrible things in righteousness wilt thou answer us, O God of our salvation; who art the confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of them that are afar off upon the sea:	With awesome deeds of righteousness You answer us, O God of our salvation, the hope of all the ends of the earth and of the farthest seas.
PSA	65	6	주는 주의 힘으로 산을 세우시며 권능으로 띠를 띠시며	Which by his strength setteth fast the mountains; being girded with power:	You formed the mountains by Your power, having girded Yourself with might.
PSA	65	7	바다의 흉용과 물결의 요동과 만민의 훤화까지 진정하시나이다	Which stilleth the noise of the seas, the noise of their waves, and the tumult of the people.	You stilled the roaring of the seas, the pounding of their waves, and the tumult of the nations.
PSA	65	8	땅 끝에 거하는 자가 주의 징조를 두려워하나이다 주께서 아침 되는 것과 저녁되는 것을 즐거워하게 하시며	They also that dwell in the uttermost parts are afraid at thy tokens: thou makest the outgoings of the morning and evening to rejoice.	Those who live far away fear Your wonders; You make the dawn and sunset shout for joy.
PSA	65	9	땅을 권고하사 물을 대어 심히 윤택케 하시며 하나님의 강에 물이 가득하게 하시고 이같이 땅을 예비하신 후에 저희에게 곡식을 주시나이다	Thou visitest the earth, and waterest it: thou greatly enrichest it with the river of God, which is full of water: thou preparest them corn, when thou hast so provided for it.	You attend to the earth and water it; with abundance You enrich it. The streams of God are full of water, for You prepare our grain by providing for the earth.
PSA	65	10	주께서 밭고랑에 물을 넉넉히 대사 그 이랑을 평평하게 하시며 또 단비로 부드럽게 하시고 그 싹에 복 주시나이다	Thou waterest the ridges thereof abundantly: thou settlest the furrows thereof: thou makest it soft with showers: thou blessest the springing thereof.	You soak its furrows and level its ridges; You soften it with showers and bless its growth.
PSA	65	11	주의 은택으로 연사에 관 씌우시니 주의 길에는 기름이 떨어지며	Thou crownest the year with thy goodness; and thy paths drop fatness.	You crown the year with Your bounty, and Your paths overflow with plenty.
PSA	65	12	들의 초장에도 떨어지니 작은 산들이 기쁨으로 띠를 띠었나이다	They drop upon the pastures of the wilderness: and the little hills rejoice on every side.	The pastures of the wilderness overflow; the hills are robed with joy.
PSA	65	13	초장에는 양떼가 입혔고 골짜기에는 곡식이 덮였으매 저희가 다 즐거이 외치고 또 노래하나이다	The pastures are clothed with flocks; the valleys also are covered over with corn; they shout for joy, they also sing.	The pastures are clothed with flocks, and the valleys are decked with grain. They shout in triumph; indeed, they sing.
PSA	66	1	시, 영장으로 한 노래 온 땅이여 하나님께 즐거운 소리를 발할지어다	To the chief Musician, A Song or Psalm. Make a joyful noise unto God, all ye lands:	For the choirmaster. A song. A Psalm. Make a joyful noise to God, all the earth!
PSA	66	2	그 이름의 영광을 찬양하고 영화롭게 찬송할지어다	Sing forth the honour of his name: make his praise glorious.	Sing the glory of His name; make His praise glorious.
PSA	66	3	하나님께 고하기를 주의 일이 어찌 그리 엄위하신지요 주의 큰 권능으로 인하여 주의 원수가 주께 복종할 것이며	Say unto God, How terrible art thou in thy works! through the greatness of thy power shall thine enemies submit themselves unto thee.	Say to God, “How awesome are Your deeds! So great is Your power that Your enemies cower before You.
PSA	66	4	온 땅이 주께 경배하고 주를 찬양하며 주의 이름을 찬양하리이다 할지어다(셀라)	All the earth shall worship thee, and shall sing unto thee; they shall sing to thy name. Selah.	All the earth bows down to You; they sing praise to You; they sing praise to Your name.” Selah
PSA	66	5	와서 하나님의 행하신 것을 보라 인생에게 행하심이 엄위하시도다	Come and see the works of God: he is terrible in his doing toward the children of men.	Come and see the works of God; how awesome are His deeds toward mankind.
PSA	66	6	하나님이 바다를 변하여 육지되게 하셨으므로 무리가 도보로 강을 통과하고 우리가 거기서 주로 인하여 기뻐하였도다	He turned the sea into dry land: they went through the flood on foot: there did we rejoice in him.	He turned the sea into dry land; they passed through the waters on foot; there we rejoiced in Him.
PSA	66	7	저가 그 능으로 영원히 치리하시며 눈으로 열방을 감찰하시나니 거역하는 자는 자고하지 말지어다(셀라)	He ruleth by his power for ever; his eyes behold the nations: let not the rebellious exalt themselves. Selah.	He rules forever by His power; His eyes watch the nations. Do not let the rebellious exalt themselves. Selah
PSA	66	8	만민들아 우리 하나님을 송축하며 그 송축 소리로 들리게 할지어다	O bless our God, ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be heard:	Bless our God, O peoples; let the sound of His praise be heard.
PSA	66	9	그는 우리 영혼을 살려 두시고 우리의 실족함을 허락지 아니하시는 주시로다	Which holdeth our soul in life, and suffereth not our feet to be moved.	He preserves our lives and keeps our feet from slipping.
PSA	66	10	하나님이여 주께서 우리를 시험하시되 우리를 단련하시기를 은을 단련함 같이 하셨으며	For thou, O God, hast proved us: thou hast tried us, as silver is tried.	For You, O God, have tested us; You have refined us like silver.
PSA	66	11	우리를 끌어 그물에 들게 하시며 어려운 짐을 우리 허리에 두셨으며	Thou broughtest us into the net; thou laidst affliction upon our loins.	You led us into the net; You laid burdens on our backs.
PSA	66	12	사람들로 우리 머리 위로 타고 가게 하셨나이다 우리가 불과 물을 통행하더니 주께서 우리를 끌어내사 풍부한 곳에 들이셨나이다	Thou hast caused men to ride over our heads; we went through fire and through water: but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place.	You let men ride over our heads; we went through fire and water, but You brought us into abundance.
PSA	66	13	내가 번제를 가지고 주의 집에 들어가서 나의 서원을 갚으리니	I will go into thy house with burnt offerings: I will pay thee my vows,	I will enter Your house with burnt offerings; I will fulfill my vows to You—
PSA	66	14	이는 내 입술이 발한 것이요 내 환난 때에 내 입이 말한 것이니이다	Which my lips have uttered, and my mouth hath spoken, when I was in trouble.	the vows that my lips promised and my mouth spoke in my distress.
PSA	66	15	내가 수양의 향기와 함께 살진 것으로 주께 번제를 드리며 수소와 염소를 드리리이다(셀라)	I will offer unto thee burnt sacrifices of fatlings, with the incense of rams; I will offer bullocks with goats. Selah.	I will offer You fatlings as burnt offerings, with the fragrant smoke of rams; I will offer bulls and goats. Selah
PSA	66	16	하나님을 두려워하는 너희들아 다 와서 들으라 하나님이 내 영혼을 위하여 행하신 일을 내가 선포하리로다	Come and hear, all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he hath done for my soul.	Come and listen, all you who fear God, and I will declare what He has done for me.
PSA	66	17	내가 내 입으로 그에게 부르짖으며 내 혀로 높이 찬송하였도다	I cried unto him with my mouth, and he was extolled with my tongue.	I cried out to Him with my mouth and praised Him with my tongue.
PSA	66	18	내가 내 마음에 죄악을 품으면 주께서 듣지 아니하시리라	If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me:	If I had cherished iniquity in my heart, the Lord would not have listened.
PSA	66	19	그러나 하나님이 실로 들으셨으며 내 기도 소리에 주의하셨도다	But verily God hath heard me; he hath attended to the voice of my prayer.	But God has surely heard; He has attended to the sound of my prayer.
PSA	66	20	하나님을 찬송하리로다 저가 내 기도를 물리치지 아니하시고 그 인자하심을 내게서 거두지도 아니하셨도다	Blessed be God, which hath not turned away my prayer, nor his mercy from me.	Blessed be God, who has not rejected my prayer or withheld from me His loving devotion!
PSA	67	1	시 곧 노래, 영장으로 현악에 맞춘 것 하나님은 우리를 긍휼히 여기사 복을 주시고 그 얼굴 빛으로 우리에게 비취사(셀라)	To the chief Musician on Neginoth, A Psalm or Song. God be merciful unto us, and bless us; and cause his face to shine upon us; Selah.	For the choirmaster. With stringed instruments. A Psalm. A song. May God be gracious to us and bless us, and cause His face to shine upon us, Selah
PSA	67	2	주의 도를 땅 위에, 주의 구원을 만방 중에 알리소서	That thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving health among all nations.	that Your ways may be known on earth, Your salvation among all nations.
PSA	67	3	하나님이여 민족들로 주를 찬송케 하시며 모든 민족으로 주를 찬송케 하소서	Let the people praise thee, O God; let all the people praise thee.	Let the peoples praise You, O God; let all the peoples praise You.
PSA	67	4	열방은 기쁘고 즐겁게 노래할지니 주는 민족들을 공평히 판단하시며 땅 위에 열방을 치리하실 것임이니이다(셀라)	O let the nations be glad and sing for joy: for thou shalt judge the people righteously, and govern the nations upon earth. Selah.	Let the nations be glad and sing for joy, for You judge the peoples justly and lead the nations of the earth. Selah
PSA	67	5	하나님이여 민족들로 주를 찬송케 하시며 모든 민족으로 주를 찬송케 하소서	Let the people praise thee, O God; let all the people praise thee.	Let the peoples praise You, O God; let all the peoples praise You.
PSA	67	6	땅이 그 소산을 내었도다 하나님 곧 우리 하나님이 우리에게 복을 주시리로다	Then shall the earth yield her increase; and God, even our own God, shall bless us.	The earth has yielded its harvest; God, our God, blesses us.
PSA	67	7	하나님이 우리에게 복을 주시리니 땅의 모든 끝이 하나님을 경외하리로다	God shall bless us; and all the ends of the earth shall fear him.	God blesses us, that all the ends of the earth shall fear Him.
PSA	68	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 한 노래 하나님은 일어나사 원수를 흩으시며 주를 미워하는 자로 주의 앞에서 도망하게 하소서	To the chief Musician, A Psalm or Song of David. Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered: let them also that hate him flee before him.	For the choirmaster. A Psalm of David. A song. God arises. His enemies are scattered, and those who hate Him flee His presence.
PSA	68	2	연기가 몰려감 같이 저희를 몰아내소서 불 앞에서 밀이 녹음 같이 악인이 하나님 앞에서 망하게 하소서	As smoke is driven away, so drive them away: as wax melteth before the fire, so let the wicked perish at the presence of God.	As smoke is blown away, You will drive them out; as wax melts before the fire, the wicked will perish in the presence of God.
PSA	68	3	의인은 기뻐하여 하나님 앞에서 뛰놀며 기뻐하고 즐거워할지어다	But let the righteous be glad; let them rejoice before God: yea, let them exceedingly rejoice.	But the righteous will be glad and rejoice before God; they will celebrate with joy.
PSA	68	4	하나님께 노래하며 그 이름을 찬양하라 타고 광야에 행하시던 자를 위하여 대로를 수축하라 그 이름은 여호와시니 그 앞에서 뛰놀지어다	Sing unto God, sing praises to his name: extol him that rideth upon the heavens by his name Jah, and rejoice before him.	Sing to God! Sing praises to His name. Exalt Him who rides on the clouds— His name is the LORD— and rejoice before Him.
PSA	68	5	그 거룩한 처소에 계신 하나님은 고아의 아버지시며 과부의 재판장이시라	A father of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows, is God in his holy habitation.	A father of the fatherless, and a defender of the widows, is God in His holy habitation.
PSA	68	6	하나님은 고독한 자로 가속 중에 처하게 하시며 수금된 자를 이끌어내사 형통케 하시느니라 오직 거역하는 자의 거처는 메마른 땅이로다	God setteth the solitary in families: he bringeth out those which are bound with chains: but the rebellious dwell in a dry land.	God settles the lonely in families; He leads the prisoners out to prosperity, but the rebellious dwell in a sun-scorched land.
PSA	68	7	하나님이여 주의 백성 앞에서 앞서 나가사 광야에 행진하셨을 때에(셀라)	O God, when thou wentest forth before thy people, when thou didst march through the wilderness; Selah:	O God, when You went out before Your people, when You marched through the wasteland, Selah
PSA	68	8	땅이 진동하며 하늘이 하나님 앞에서 떨어지며 저 시내 산도 하나님 곧 이스라엘의 하나님 앞에서 진동하였나이다	The earth shook, the heavens also dropped at the presence of God: even Sinai itself was moved at the presence of God, the God of Israel.	the earth shook and the heavens poured down rain before God, the One on Sinai, before God, the God of Israel.
PSA	68	9	하나님이여 흡족한 비를 보내사 주의 산업이 곤핍할 때에 견고케 하셨고	Thou, O God, didst send a plentiful rain, whereby thou didst confirm thine inheritance, when it was weary.	You sent abundant rain, O God; You refreshed Your weary inheritance.
PSA	68	10	주의 회중으로 그 가운데 거하게 하셨나이다 하나님이여 가난한 자를 위하여 주의 은택을 준비하셨나이다	Thy congregation hath dwelt therein: thou, O God, hast prepared of thy goodness for the poor.	Your flock settled therein; O God, from Your bounty You provided for the poor.
PSA	68	11	주께서 말씀을 주시니 소식을 공포하는 여자가 큰 무리라	The Lord gave the word: great was the company of those that published it.	The Lord gives the command; a great company of women proclaim it:
PSA	68	12	여러 군대의 왕들이 도망하고 도망하니 집에 거한 여자도 탈취물을 나누도다	Kings of armies did flee apace: and she that tarried at home divided the spoil.	“Kings and their armies flee in haste; she who waits at home divides the plunder.
PSA	68	13	너희가 양우리에 누울 때에는 그 날개를 은으로 입히고 그 깃을 황금으로 입힌 비둘기 같도다	Though ye have lien among the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold.	Though you lie down among the sheepfolds, the wings of the dove are covered with silver, and her feathers with shimmering gold.”
PSA	68	14	전능하신 자가 열왕을 그 중에서 흩으실 때에는 살몬에 눈이 날림 같도다	When the Almighty scattered kings in it, it was white as snow in Salmon.	When the Almighty scattered the kings in the land, it was like the snow falling on Zalmon.
PSA	68	15	바산의 산은 하나님의 산임이여 바산의 산은 높은 산이로다	The hill of God is as the hill of Bashan; an high hill as the hill of Bashan.	A mountain of God is Mount Bashan; a mountain of many peaks is Mount Bashan.
PSA	68	16	너희 높은 산들아 어찌하여 하나님이 거하시려 하는 산을 시기하여 보느뇨 진실로 여호와께서 이 산에 영영히 거하시리로다	Why leap ye, ye high hills? this is the hill which God desireth to dwell in; yea, the Lord will dwell in it for ever.	Why do you gaze in envy, O mountains of many peaks? This is the mountain God chose for His dwelling, where the LORD will surely dwell forever.
PSA	68	17	하나님의 병거가 천천이요 만만이라 주께서 그 중에 계심이 시내 산 성소에 계심 같도다	The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of angels: the Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in the holy place.	The chariots of God are tens of thousands— thousands of thousands are they; the Lord is in His sanctuary as He was at Sinai.
PSA	68	18	주께서 높은 곳으로 오르시며 사로잡은 자를 끌고 선물을 인간에게서, 또는 패역자 중에서 받으시니 여호와 하나님이 저희와 함께 거하려 하심이로다	Thou hast ascended on high, thou hast led captivity captive: thou hast received gifts for men; yea, for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among them.	You have ascended on high; You have led captives away. You have received gifts from men, even from the rebellious, that the LORD God may dwell there.
PSA	68	19	날마다 우리 짐을 지시는 주 곧 우리의 구원이신 하나님을 찬송할지로다	Blessed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with benefits, even the God of our salvation. Selah.	Blessed be the Lord, who daily bears our burden, the God of our salvation. Selah
PSA	68	20	하나님은 우리에게 구원의 하나님이시라 사망에서 피함이 주 여호와께로 말미암거니와	He that is our God is the God of salvation; and unto God the Lord belong the issues from death.	Our God is a God of deliverance; the Lord GOD is our rescuer from death.
PSA	68	21	그 원수의 머리 곧 그 죄과에 항상 행하는 자의 정수리는 하나님이 쳐서 깨치시리로다	But God shall wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such an one as goeth on still in his trespasses.	Surely God will crush the heads of His enemies, the hairy crowns of those who persist in guilty ways.
PSA	68	22	주께서 말씀하시기를 내가 저희를 바산에서 돌아오게 하며 바다 깊은 데서 도로 나오게 하고	The Lord said, I will bring again from Bashan, I will bring my people again from the depths of the sea:	The Lord said, “I will retrieve them from Bashan, I will bring them up from the depths of the sea,
PSA	68	23	너로 저희를 심히 치고 그 피에 네 발을 잠그게 하며 네 개의 혀로 네 원수에게서 제 분깃을 얻게 하리라 하시도다	That thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies, and the tongue of thy dogs in the same.	that your foot may be dipped in the blood of your foes— the tongues of your dogs in the same.”
PSA	68	24	하나님이여 저희가 주의 행차하심을 보았으니 곧 나의 하나님, 나의 왕이 성소에 행차하시는 것이라	They have seen thy goings, O God; even the goings of my God, my King, in the sanctuary.	They have seen Your procession, O God— the march of my God and King into the sanctuary.
PSA	68	25	소고 치는 동녀 중에 가객은 앞서고 악사는 뒤따르나이다	The singers went before, the players on instruments followed after; among them were the damsels playing with timbrels.	The singers lead the way, the musicians follow after, among the maidens playing tambourines.
PSA	68	26	이스라엘의 근원에서 나온 너희여 대회 중에서 하나님 곧 주를 송축할지어다	Bless ye God in the congregations, even the Lord, from the fountain of Israel.	Bless God in the great congregation; bless the LORD from the fountain of Israel.
PSA	68	27	거기는 저희 주관자 작은 베냐민과 유다의 방백과 그 무리와 스불론의 방백과 납달리의 방백이 있도다	There is little Benjamin with their ruler, the princes of Judah and their council, the princes of Zebulun, and the princes of Naphtali.	There is Benjamin, the youngest, ruling them, the princes of Judah in their company, the princes of Zebulun and of Naphtali.
PSA	68	28	네 하나님이 네 힘을 명하셨도다 하나님이여 우리를 위하여 행하신 것을 견고히 하소서	Thy God hath commanded thy strength: strengthen, O God, that which thou hast wrought for us.	Summon Your power, O God; show Your strength, O God, which You have exerted on our behalf.
PSA	68	29	예루살렘에 있는 주의 전을 위하여 왕들이 주께 예물을 드리리이다	Because of thy temple at Jerusalem shall kings bring presents unto thee.	Because of Your temple at Jerusalem kings will bring You gifts.
PSA	68	30	갈밭의 들짐승과 수소의 무리와 만민의 송아지를 꾸짖으시고 은 조각을 발 아래 밟으소서 저가 전쟁을 즐기는 백성을 흩으셨도다	Rebuke the company of spearmen, the multitude of the bulls, with the calves of the people, till every one submit himself with pieces of silver: scatter thou the people that delight in war.	Rebuke the beast in the reeds, the herd of bulls among the calves of the nations, until it submits, bringing bars of silver. Scatter the nations who delight in war.
PSA	68	31	방백들은 애굽에서 나오고 구스 인은 하나님을 향하여 그 손을 신속히 들리로다	Princes shall come out of Egypt; Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her hands unto God.	Envoys will arrive from Egypt; Cush will stretch out her hands to God.
PSA	68	32	땅의 열방들아 하나님께 노래하고 주께 찬송할지어다(셀라)	Sing unto God, ye kingdoms of the earth; O sing praises unto the Lord; Selah:	Sing to God, O kingdoms of the earth; sing praises to the Lord— Selah
PSA	68	33	옛적 하늘들의 하늘을 타신 자에게 찬송하라 주께서 그 소리를 발하시니 웅장한 소리로다	To him that rideth upon the heavens of heavens, which were of old; lo, he doth send out his voice, and that a mighty voice.	to Him who rides upon the highest heavens of old; behold, His mighty voice resounds.
PSA	68	34	너희는 하나님께 능력을 돌릴지어다 그 위엄이 이스라엘 위에 있고 그 능력이 하늘에 있도다	Ascribe ye strength unto God: his excellency is over Israel, and his strength is in the clouds.	Ascribe the power to God, whose majesty is over Israel, whose strength is in the skies.
PSA	68	35	하나님이여 위엄을 성소에서 나타내시나이다 이스라엘의 하나님은 그 백성에게 힘과 능을 주시나니 하나님을 찬송할지어다	O God, thou art terrible out of thy holy places: the God of Israel is he that giveth strength and power unto his people. Blessed be God.	O God, You are awesome in Your sanctuary; the God of Israel Himself gives strength and power to His people. Blessed be God!
PSA	69	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 소산님에 맞춘 노래 하나님이여 나를 구원하소서 물들이 내 영혼까지 흘러 들어왔나이다	To the chief Musician upon Shoshannim, A Psalm of David. Save me, O God; for the waters are come in unto my soul.	For the choirmaster. To the tune of “Lilies.” Of David. Save me, O God, for the waters are up to my neck.
PSA	69	2	내가 설 곳이 없는 깊은 수렁에 빠지며 깊은 물에 들어가니 큰 물이 내게 넘치나이다	I sink in deep mire, where there is no standing: I am come into deep waters, where the floods overflow me.	I have sunk into the miry depths, where there is no footing; I have drifted into deep waters, where the flood engulfs me.
PSA	69	3	내가 부르짖음으로 피곤하여 내 목이 마르며 내 하나님을 바람으로 내 눈이 쇠하였나이다	I am weary of my crying: my throat is dried: mine eyes fail while I wait for my God.	I am weary from my crying; my throat is parched. My eyes fail, looking for my God.
PSA	69	4	무고히 나를 미워하는 자가 내 머리털보다 많고 무리히 내 원수가 되어 나를 끊으려 하는 자가 강하였으니 내가 취치 아니한 것도 물어 주게 되었나이다	They that hate me without a cause are more than the hairs of mine head: they that would destroy me, being mine enemies wrongfully, are mighty: then I restored that which I took not away.	Those who hate me without cause outnumber the hairs of my head; many are those who would destroy me— my enemies for no reason. Though I did not steal, I must repay.
PSA	69	5	하나님이여 나의 우매함을 아시오니 내 죄가 주의 앞에서 숨김이 없나이다	O God, thou knowest my foolishness; and my sins are not hid from thee.	You know my folly, O God, and my guilt is not hidden from You.
PSA	69	6	만군의 주 여호와여 주를 바라는 자로 나를 인하여 수치를 당케 마옵소서 이스라엘의 하나님이여 주를 찾는 자로 나를 인하여 욕을 당케 마옵소서	Let not them that wait on thee, O Lord God of hosts, be ashamed for my sake: let not those that seek thee be confounded for my sake, O God of Israel.	May those who hope in You not be ashamed through me, O Lord GOD of Hosts; may those who seek You not be dishonored through me, O God of Israel.
PSA	69	7	내가 주를 위하여 훼방을 받았사오니 수치가 내 얼굴에 덮였나이다	Because for thy sake I have borne reproach; shame hath covered my face.	For I have endured scorn for Your sake, and shame has covered my face.
PSA	69	8	내가 내 형제에게는 객이 되고 내 모친의 자녀에게는 외인이 되었나이다	I am become a stranger unto my brethren, and an alien unto my mother’s children.	I have become a stranger to my brothers and a foreigner to my mother’s sons,
PSA	69	9	주의 집을 위하는 열성이 나를 삼키고 주를 훼방하는 훼방이 내게 미쳤나이다	For the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up; and the reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me.	because zeal for Your house has consumed me, and the insults of those who insult You have fallen on me.
PSA	69	10	내가 곡하고 금식함으로 내 영혼을 경계하였더니 그것이 도리어 나의 욕이 되었으며	When I wept, and chastened my soul with fasting, that was to my reproach.	I wept and fasted, but it brought me reproach.
PSA	69	11	내가 굵은 베로 내 옷을 삼았더니 내가 저희의 말거리가 되었나이다	I made sackcloth also my garment; and I became a proverb to them.	I made sackcloth my clothing, and I was sport to them.
PSA	69	12	성문에 앉은 자가 나를 말하며 취한 무리가 나를 가져 노래하나이다	They that sit in the gate speak against me; and I was the song of the drunkards.	Those who sit at the gate mock me, and I am the song of drunkards.
PSA	69	13	여호와여 열납하시는 때에 나는 주께 기도하오니 하나님이여 많은 인자와 구원의 진리로 내게 응답하소서	But as for me, my prayer is unto thee, O Lord, in an acceptable time: O God, in the multitude of thy mercy hear me, in the truth of thy salvation.	But my prayer to You, O LORD, is for a time of favor. In Your abundant loving devotion, O God, answer me with Your sure salvation.
PSA	69	14	나를 수렁에서 건지사 빠지지 말게 하시고 나를 미워하는 자에게서와 깊은 물에서 건지소서	Deliver me out of the mire, and let me not sink: let me be delivered from them that hate me, and out of the deep waters.	Rescue me from the mire and do not let me sink; deliver me from my foes and out of the deep waters.
PSA	69	15	큰 물이 나를 엄몰하거나 깊음이 나를 삼키지 못하게 하시며 웅덩이로 내 위에 그 입을 닫지 못하게 하소서	Let not the waterflood overflow me, neither let the deep swallow me up, and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.	Do not let the floods engulf me or the depths swallow me up; let not the Pit close its mouth over me.
PSA	69	16	여호와여 주의 인자하심이 선하시오니 내게 응답하시며 주의 많은 긍휼을 따라 내게로 돌이키소서	Hear me, O Lord; for thy lovingkindness is good: turn unto me according to the multitude of thy tender mercies.	Answer me, O LORD, for Your loving devotion is good; turn to me in keeping with Your great compassion.
PSA	69	17	주의 얼굴을 주의 종에게서 숨기지 마소서 내가 환난 중에 있사오니 속히 내게 응답하소서	And hide not thy face from thy servant; for I am in trouble: hear me speedily.	Hide not Your face from Your servant, for I am in distress. Answer me quickly!
PSA	69	18	내 영혼에게 가까이 하사 구속하시며 내 원수를 인하여 나를 속량 하소서	Draw nigh unto my soul, and redeem it: deliver me because of mine enemies.	Draw near to my soul and redeem me; ransom me because of my foes.
PSA	69	19	주께서 나의 훼방과 수치와 능욕을 아시나이다 내 대적이 다 주의 앞에 있나이다	Thou hast known my reproach, and my shame, and my dishonour: mine adversaries are all before thee.	You know my reproach, my shame and disgrace. All my adversaries are before You.
PSA	69	20	훼방이 내 마음을 상하여 근심이 충만하니 긍휼히 여길 자를 바라나 없고 안위할 자를 바라나 찾지 못하였나이다	Reproach hath broken my heart; and I am full of heaviness: and I looked for some to take pity, but there was none; and for comforters, but I found none.	Insults have broken my heart, and I am in despair. I looked for sympathy, but there was none, for comforters, but I found no one.
PSA	69	21	저희가 쓸개를 나의 식물로 주며 갈할 때에 초로 마시웠사오니	They gave me also gall for my meat; and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.	They poisoned my food with gall and gave me vinegar to quench my thirst.
PSA	69	22	저희 앞에 밥상이 올무가 되게 하시며 저희 평안이 덫이 되게 하소서	Let their table become a snare before them: and that which should have been for their welfare, let it become a trap.	May their table become a snare; may it be a retribution and a trap.
PSA	69	23	저희 눈이 어두워 보지 못하게 하시며 그 허리가 항상 떨리게 하소서	Let their eyes be darkened, that they see not; and make their loins continually to shake.	May their eyes be darkened so they cannot see, and their backs be bent forever.
PSA	69	24	주의 분노를 저희 위에 부으시며 주의 맹렬하신 노로 저희에게 미치게 하소서	Pour out thine indignation upon them, and let thy wrathful anger take hold of them.	Pour out Your wrath upon them, and let Your burning anger overtake them.
PSA	69	25	저희 거처로 황폐하게 하시며 그 장막에 거하는 자가 없게 하소서	Let their habitation be desolate; and let none dwell in their tents.	May their place be deserted; let there be no one to dwell in their tents.
PSA	69	26	대저 저희가 주의 치신 자를 핍박하며 주께서 상케 하신 자의 슬픔을 말하였사오니	For they persecute him whom thou hast smitten; and they talk to the grief of those whom thou hast wounded.	For they persecute the one You struck and recount the pain of those You wounded.
PSA	69	27	저희 죄악에 죄악을 더 정하사 주의 의에 들어오지 못하게 하소서	Add iniquity unto their iniquity: and let them not come into thy righteousness.	Add iniquity to their iniquity; let them not share in Your righteousness.
PSA	69	28	저희를 생명책에서 도말하사 의인과 함께 기록되게 마소서	Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be written with the righteous.	May they be blotted out of the Book of Life and not listed with the righteous.
PSA	69	29	오직 나는 가난하고 슬프오니 하나님이여 주의 구원으로 나를 높이소서	But I am poor and sorrowful: let thy salvation, O God, set me up on high.	But I am in pain and distress; let Your salvation protect me, O God.
PSA	69	30	내가 노래로 하나님의 이름을 찬송하며 감사함으로 하나님을 광대하시다 하리니	I will praise the name of God with a song, and will magnify him with thanksgiving.	I will praise God’s name in song and exalt Him with thanksgiving.
PSA	69	31	이것이 소 곧 뿔과 굽이 있는 황소를 드림보다 여호와를 더욱 기쁘시게 함이 될 것이라	This also shall please the Lord better than an ox or bullock that hath horns and hoofs.	And this will please the LORD more than an ox, more than a bull with horns and hooves.
PSA	69	32	온유한 자가 이를 보고 기뻐하나니 하나님을 찾는 너희들아 너희 마음을 소생케 할지어다	The humble shall see this, and be glad: and your heart shall live that seek God.	The humble will see and rejoice. You who seek God, let your hearts be revived!
PSA	69	33	여호와는 궁핍한 자를 들으시며 자기를 인하여 수금된 자를 멸시치 아니하시나니	For the Lord heareth the poor, and despiseth not his prisoners.	For the LORD listens to the needy and does not despise His captive people.
PSA	69	34	천지가 그를 찬송할 것이요 바다와 그 중의 모든 동물도 그리할지로다	Let the heaven and earth praise him, the seas, and every thing that moveth therein.	Let heaven and earth praise Him, the seas and everything that moves in them.
PSA	69	35	하나님이 시온을 구원하시고 유다 성읍들을 건설하시리니 무리가 거기 거하여 소유를 삼으리로다	For God will save Zion, and will build the cities of Judah: that they may dwell there, and have it in possession.	For God will save Zion and rebuild the cities of Judah, that they may dwell there and possess it.
PSA	69	36	그 종들의 후손이 또한 이를 상속하고 그 이름을 사랑하는 자가 그 중에 거하리로다	The seed also of his servants shall inherit it: and they that love his name shall dwell therein.	The descendants of His servants will inherit it, and those who love His name will settle in it.
PSA	70	1	다윗의 기념케 하는 시, 영장으로 한 노래 하나님이여 속히 나를 건지소서 여호와여 속히 나를 도우소서	To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David, to bring to remembrance. Make haste, O God, to deliver me; make haste to help me, O Lord.	For the choirmaster. Of David. To bring remembrance. Make haste, O God, to deliver me! Hurry, O LORD, to help me!
PSA	70	2	내 영혼을 찾는 자로 수치와 무안을 당케 하시며 나의 상함을 기뻐하는 자로 물러가 욕을 받게 하소서	Let them be ashamed and confounded that seek after my soul: let them be turned backward, and put to confusion, that desire my hurt.	May those who seek my life be ashamed and confounded; may those who wish me harm be repelled and humiliated.
PSA	70	3	아하, 아하 하는 자로 자기 수치를 인하여 물러가게 하소서	Let them be turned back for a reward of their shame that say, Aha, aha.	May those who say, “Aha, aha!” retreat because of their shame.
PSA	70	4	주를 찾는 모든 자로 주를 인하여 기뻐하고 즐거워하게 하시며 주의 구원을 사모하는 자로 항상 말하기를 하나님은 광대하시다 하게 하소서	Let all those that seek thee rejoice and be glad in thee: and let such as love thy salvation say continually, Let God be magnified.	May all who seek You rejoice and be glad in You; may those who love Your salvation always say, “Let God be magnified!”
PSA	70	5	나는 가난하고 궁핍하오니 하나님이여 속히 내게 임하소서 주는 나의 도움이시요 나를 건지시는 자시오니 여호와여 지체치 마소서	But I am poor and needy: make haste unto me, O God: thou art my help and my deliverer; O Lord, make no tarrying.	But I am poor and needy; hurry to me, O God. You are my help and my deliverer; O LORD, do not delay.
PSA	71	1	여호와여 내가 주께 피하오니 나로 영영히 수치를 당케 마소서	In thee, O Lord, do I put my trust: let me never be put to confusion.	In You, O LORD, I have taken refuge; let me never be put to shame.
PSA	71	2	주의 의로 나를 건지시며 나를 풀어주시며 주의 귀를 내게 기울이사 나를 구원하소서	Deliver me in thy righteousness, and cause me to escape: incline thine ear unto me, and save me.	In Your justice, rescue and deliver me; incline Your ear and save me.
PSA	71	3	주는 나의 무시로 피하여 거할 바위가 되소서 주께서 나를 구원하라 명하셨으니 이는 주께서 나의 반석이시요 나의 산성이심이니이다	Be thou my strong habitation, whereunto I may continually resort: thou hast given commandment to save me; for thou art my rock and my fortress.	Be my rock of refuge, where I can always go. Give the command to save me, for You are my rock and my fortress.
PSA	71	4	나의 하나님이여 나를 악인의 손 곧 불의한 자와 흉악한 자의 장중에서 피하게 하소서	Deliver me, O my God, out of the hand of the wicked, out of the hand of the unrighteous and cruel man.	Deliver me, O my God, from the hand of the wicked, from the grasp of the unjust and ruthless.
PSA	71	5	주 여호와여 주는 나의 소망이시요 나의 어릴 때부터 의지시라	For thou art my hope, O Lord God: thou art my trust from my youth.	For You are my hope, O Lord GOD, my confidence from my youth.
PSA	71	6	내가 모태에서부터 주의 붙드신 바 되었으며 내 어미 배에서 주의 취하여 내신 바 되었사오니 나는 항상 주를 찬송하리이다	By thee have I been holden up from the womb: thou art he that took me out of my mother’s bowels: my praise shall be continually of thee.	I have leaned on You since birth; You pulled me from my mother’s womb. My praise is always for You.
PSA	71	7	나는 무리에게 이상함이 되었사오나 주는 나의 견고한 피난처시오니	I am as a wonder unto many; but thou art my strong refuge.	I have become a portent to many, but You are my strong refuge.
PSA	71	8	주를 찬송함과 주를 존숭함이 종일토록 내 입에 가득하리이다	Let my mouth be filled with thy praise and with thy honour all the day.	My mouth is filled with Your praise and with Your splendor all day long.
PSA	71	9	나를 늙은 때에 버리지 마시며 내 힘이 쇠약한 때에 떠나지 마소서	Cast me not off in the time of old age; forsake me not when my strength faileth.	Do not discard me in my old age; do not forsake me when my strength fails.
PSA	71	10	나의 원수들이 내게 대하여 말하며 나의 영혼을 엿보는 자가 서로 꾀하여	For mine enemies speak against me; and they that lay wait for my soul take counsel together,	For my enemies speak against me, and those who lie in wait for my life conspire,
PSA	71	11	이르기를 하나님이 저를 버리셨은즉 따라 잡으라 건질 자가 없다 하오니	Saying, God hath forsaken him: persecute and take him; for there is none to deliver him.	saying, “God has forsaken him; pursue him and seize him, for there is no one to rescue him.”
PSA	71	12	하나님이여 나를 멀리 마소서 나의 하나님이여 속히 나를 도우소서	O God, be not far from me: O my God, make haste for my help.	Be not far from me, O God. Hurry, O my God, to help me.
PSA	71	13	내 영혼을 대적하는 자로 수치와 멸망을 당케 하시며 나를 모해하려 하는 자에게는 욕과 수욕이 덮이게 하소서	Let them be confounded and consumed that are adversaries to my soul; let them be covered with reproach and dishonour that seek my hurt.	May the accusers of my soul be ashamed and consumed; may those who seek my harm be covered with scorn and disgrace.
PSA	71	14	나는 항상 소망을 품고 주를 더욱 찬송하리이다	But I will hope continually, and will yet praise thee more and more.	But I will always hope and will praise You more and more.
PSA	71	15	내가 측량할 수 없는 주의 의와 구원을 내 입으로 종일 전하리이다	My mouth shall shew forth thy righteousness and thy salvation all the day; for I know not the numbers thereof.	My mouth will declare Your righteousness and Your salvation all day long, though I cannot know their full measure.
PSA	71	16	내가 주 여호와의 능하신 행적을 가지고 오겠사오며 주의 의 곧 주의 의만 진술하겠나이다	I will go in the strength of the Lord God: I will make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine only.	I will enter in the strength of the Lord GOD; I will proclaim Your righteousness—Yours alone.
PSA	71	17	하나님이여 나를 어려서부터 교훈하셨으므로 내가 지금까지 주의 기사를 전하였나이다	O God, thou hast taught me from my youth: and hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works.	O God, You have taught me from my youth, and to this day I proclaim Your marvelous deeds.
PSA	71	18	하나님이여 내가 늙어 백수가 될 때에도 나를 버리지 마시며 내가 주의 힘을 후대에 전하고 주의 능을 장래 모든 사람에게 전하기까지 나를 버리지 마소서	Now also when I am old and grayheaded, O God, forsake me not; until I have shewed thy strength unto this generation, and thy power to every one that is to come.	Even when I am old and gray, do not forsake me, O God, until I proclaim Your power to the next generation, Your might to all who are to come.
PSA	71	19	하나님이여 주의 의가 또한 지극히 높으시니이다 하나님이여 주께서 대사를 행하셨사오니 누가 주와 같으리이까	Thy righteousness also, O God, is very high, who hast done great things: O God, who is like unto thee!	Your righteousness reaches to the heavens, O God, You who have done great things. Who, O God, is like You?
PSA	71	20	우리에게 많고 심한 고난을 보이신 주께서 우리를 다시 살리시며 땅 깊은 곳에서 다시 이끌어 올리시리이다	Thou, which hast shewed me great and sore troubles, shalt quicken me again, and shalt bring me up again from the depths of the earth.	Though You have shown me many troubles and misfortunes, You will revive me once again. Even from the depths of the earth You will bring me back up.
PSA	71	21	나를 더욱 창대하게 하시고 돌이키사 나를 위로하소서	Thou shalt increase my greatness, and comfort me on every side.	You will increase my honor and comfort me once again.
PSA	71	22	나의 하나님이여 내가 또 비파로 주를 찬양하며 주의 성실을 찬양하리이다 이스라엘의 거룩하신 주여 내가 수금으로 주를 찬양하리이다	I will also praise thee with the psaltery, even thy truth, O my God: unto thee will I sing with the harp, O thou Holy One of Israel.	So I will praise You with the harp for Your faithfulness, O my God; I will sing praise to You with the lyre, O Holy One of Israel.
PSA	71	23	내가 주를 찬양할 때에 내 입술이 기뻐 외치며 주께서 구속하신 내 영혼이 즐거워하리이다	My lips shall greatly rejoice when I sing unto thee; and my soul, which thou hast redeemed.	When I sing praise to You my lips will shout for joy, along with my soul, which You have redeemed.
PSA	71	24	내 혀도 종일토록 주의 의를 말씀하오리니 나를 모해하려 하던 자가 수치와 무안을 당함이니이다	My tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the day long: for they are confounded, for they are brought unto shame, that seek my hurt.	My tongue will indeed proclaim Your righteousness all day long, for those who seek my harm are disgraced and confounded.
PSA	72	1	솔로몬의 시 하나님이여 주의 판단력을 왕에게 주시고 주의 의를 왕의 아들에게 주소서	A Psalm for Solomon. Give the king thy judgments, O God, and thy righteousness unto the king’s son.	Of Solomon. Endow the king with Your justice, O God, and the son of the king with Your righteousness.
PSA	72	2	저가 주의 백성을 의로 판단하며 주의 가난한 자를 공의로 판단하리니	He shall judge thy people with righteousness, and thy poor with judgment.	May he judge Your people with righteousness and Your afflicted with justice.
PSA	72	3	의로 인하여 산들이 백성에게 평강을 주며 작은 산들도 그리하리로다	The mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little hills, by righteousness.	May the mountains bring peace to the people, and the hills bring righteousness.
PSA	72	4	저가 백성의 가난한 자를 신원하며 궁핍한 자의 자손을 구원하며 압박하는 자를 꺾으리로다	He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the children of the needy, and shall break in pieces the oppressor.	May he vindicate the afflicted among the people; may he save the children of the needy and crush the oppressor.
PSA	72	5	저희가 해가 있을 동안에 주를 두려워하며 달이 있을 동안에 대대로 그리하리로다	They shall fear thee as long as the sun and moon endure, throughout all generations.	May they fear him as long as the sun shines, as long as the moon remains, through all generations.
PSA	72	6	저는 벤 풀에 내리는 비 같이 땅을 적시는 소낙비 같이 임하리니	He shall come down like rain upon the mown grass: as showers that water the earth.	May he be like rain that falls on freshly cut grass, like spring showers that water the earth.
PSA	72	7	저의 날에 의인이 흥왕하여 평강의 풍성함이 달이 다할 때까지 이르리로다	In his days shall the righteous flourish; and abundance of peace so long as the moon endureth.	May the righteous flourish in his days and prosperity abound, until the moon is no more.
PSA	72	8	저가 바다에서부터 바다까지와 강에서부터 땅 끝까지 다스리리니	He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth.	May he rule from sea to sea, and from the Euphrates to the ends of the earth.
PSA	72	9	광야에 거하는 자는 저의 앞에 굽히며 그 원수들은 티끌을 핥을 것이며	They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him; and his enemies shall lick the dust.	May the nomads bow before him, and his enemies lick the dust.
PSA	72	10	다시스와 섬의 왕들이 공세를 바치며 스바와 시바 왕들이 예물을 드리리로다	The kings of Tarshish and of the isles shall bring presents: the kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts.	May the kings of Tarshish and distant shores bring tribute; may the kings of Sheba and Seba offer gifts.
PSA	72	11	만왕이 그 앞에 부복하며 열방이 다 그를 섬기리로다	Yea, all kings shall fall down before him: all nations shall serve him.	May all kings bow down to him and all nations serve him.
PSA	72	12	저는 궁핍한 자의 부르짖을 때에 건지며 도움이 없는 가난한 자도 건지며	For he shall deliver the needy when he crieth; the poor also, and him that hath no helper.	For he will deliver the needy who cry out and the afflicted who have no helper.
PSA	72	13	저는 가난한 자와 궁핍한 자를 긍휼히 여기며 궁핍한 자의 생명을 구원하며	He shall spare the poor and needy, and shall save the souls of the needy.	He will take pity on the poor and needy and save the lives of the oppressed.
PSA	72	14	저희 생명을 압박과 강포에서 구속하리니 저희 피가 그 목전에 귀하리로다	He shall redeem their soul from deceit and violence: and precious shall their blood be in his sight.	He will redeem them from oppression and violence, for their blood is precious in his sight.
PSA	72	15	저희가 생존하여 스바의 금을 저에게 드리며 사람들이 저를 위하여 항상 기도하고 종일 찬송하리로다	And he shall live, and to him shall be given of the gold of Sheba: prayer also shall be made for him continually; and daily shall he be praised.	Long may he live! May gold from Sheba be given him. May people ever pray for him; may they bless him all day long.
PSA	72	16	산꼭대기의 땅에도 화곡이 풍성하고 그 열매가 레바논 같이 흔들리며 성에 있는 자가 땅의 풀 같이 왕성하리로다	There shall be an handful of corn in the earth upon the top of the mountains; the fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon: and they of the city shall flourish like grass of the earth.	May there be an abundance of grain in the land; may it sway atop the hills. May its fruit trees flourish like the forests of Lebanon, and its people like the grass of the field.
PSA	72	17	그 이름이 영구함이여 그 이름이 해와 같이 장구하리로다 사람들이 그로 인하여 복을 받으리니 열방이 다 그를 복되다 하리로다	His name shall endure for ever: his name shall be continued as long as the sun: and men shall be blessed in him: all nations shall call him blessed.	May his name endure forever; may his name continue as long as the sun shines. In him may all nations be blessed; may they call him blessed.
PSA	72	18	홀로 기사를 행하시는 여호와 하나님 곧 이스라엘의 하나님을 찬송하며	Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only doeth wondrous things.	Blessed be the LORD God, the God of Israel, who alone does marvelous deeds.
PSA	72	19	그 영화로운 이름을 영원히 찬송할지어다 온 땅에 그 영광이 충만할지어다 아멘 아멘 이새의 아들 다윗의 기도가 필하다	And blessed be his glorious name for ever: and let the whole earth be filled with his glory; Amen, and Amen.	And blessed be His glorious name forever; may all the earth be filled with His glory. Amen and amen.
PSA	72	20		The prayers of David the son of Jesse are ended.	Thus conclude the prayers of David son of Jesse.
PSA	73	1	아삽의 시 하나님이 참으로 이스라엘 중 마음이 정결한 자에게 선을 행하시나	A Psalm of Asaph. Truly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart.	A Psalm of Asaph. Surely God is good to Israel, to those who are pure in heart.
PSA	73	2	나는 거의 실족할뻔 하였고 내 걸음이 미끄러질뻔 하였으니	But as for me, my feet were almost gone; my steps had well nigh slipped.	But as for me, my feet had almost stumbled; my steps had nearly slipped.
PSA	73	3	이는 내가 악인의 형통함을 보고 오만한 자를 질시하였음이로다	For I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.	For I envied the arrogant when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.
PSA	73	4	저희는 죽는 때에도 고통이 없고 그 힘이 건강하며	For there are no bands in their death: but their strength is firm.	They have no struggle in their death; their bodies are well-fed.
PSA	73	5	타인과 같은 고난이 없고 타인과 같은 재앙도 없나니	They are not in trouble as other men; neither are they plagued like other men.	They are free of the burdens others carry; they are not afflicted like other men.
PSA	73	6	그러므로 교만이 저희 목걸이요 강포가 저희의 입는 옷이며	Therefore pride compasseth them about as a chain; violence covereth them as a garment.	Therefore pride is their necklace; a garment of violence covers them.
PSA	73	7	살찜으로 저희 눈이 솟아나며 저희 소득은 마음의 소원보다 지나며	Their eyes stand out with fatness: they have more than heart could wish.	From their prosperity proceeds iniquity; the imaginations of their hearts run wild.
PSA	73	8	저희는 능욕하며 악하게 압제하여 말하며 거만히 말하며	They are corrupt, and speak wickedly concerning oppression: they speak loftily.	They mock and speak with malice; with arrogance they threaten oppression.
PSA	73	9	저희 입은 하늘에 두고 저희 혀는 땅에 두루 다니도다	They set their mouth against the heavens, and their tongue walketh through the earth.	They set their mouths against the heavens, and their tongues strut across the earth.
PSA	73	10	그러므로 그 백성이 이리로 돌아와서 잔에 가득한 물을 다 마시며	Therefore his people return hither: and waters of a full cup are wrung out to them.	So their people return to this place and drink up waters in abundance.
PSA	73	11	말하기를 하나님이 어찌 알랴 지극히 높은 자에게 지식이 있으랴 하도다	And they say, How doth God know? and is there knowledge in the most High?	The wicked say, “How can God know? Does the Most High have knowledge?”
PSA	73	12	볼지어다 이들은 악인이라 항상 평안하고 재물은 더 하도다	Behold, these are the ungodly, who prosper in the world; they increase in riches.	Behold, these are the wicked— always carefree as they increase their wealth.
PSA	73	13	내가 내 마음을 정히 하며 내 손을 씻어 무죄하다 한 것이 실로 헛되도다	Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocency.	Surely in vain I have kept my heart pure; in innocence I have washed my hands.
PSA	73	14	나는 종일 재앙을 당하며 아침마다 징책을 보았도다	For all the day long have I been plagued, and chastened every morning.	For I am afflicted all day long and punished every morning.
PSA	73	15	내가 만일 스스로 이르기를 내가 이렇게 말하리라 하였더면 주의 아들들의 시대를 대하여 궤휼을 행하였으리이다	If I say, I will speak thus; behold, I should offend against the generation of thy children.	If I had said, “I will speak this way,” then I would have betrayed Your children.
PSA	73	16	내가 어찌면 이를 알까 하여 생각한즉 내게 심히 곤란하더니	When I thought to know this, it was too painful for me;	When I tried to understand all this, it was troublesome in my sight
PSA	73	17	하나님의 성소에 들어갈 때에야 저희 결국을 내가 깨달았나이다	Until I went into the sanctuary of God; then understood I their end.	until I entered God’s sanctuary; then I discerned their end.
PSA	73	18	주께서 참으로 저희를 미끄러운 곳에 두시며 파멸에 던지시니	Surely thou didst set them in slippery places: thou castedst them down into destruction.	Surely You set them on slick ground; You cast them down into ruin.
PSA	73	19	저희가 어찌 그리 졸지에 황폐되었는가 놀람으로 전멸하였나이다	How are they brought into desolation, as in a moment! they are utterly consumed with terrors.	How suddenly they are laid waste, completely swept away by terrors!
PSA	73	20	주여 사람이 깬 후에는 꿈을 무시함 같이 주께서 깨신 후에 저희 형상을 멸시하시리이다	As a dream when one awaketh; so, O Lord, when thou awakest, thou shalt despise their image.	Like one waking from a dream, so You, O Lord, awaken and despise their form.
PSA	73	21	내 마음이 산란하며 내 심장이 찔렸나이다	Thus my heart was grieved, and I was pricked in my reins.	When my heart was grieved and I was pierced within,
PSA	73	22	내가 이같이 우매 무지하니 주의 앞에 짐승이오나	So foolish was I, and ignorant: I was as a beast before thee.	I was senseless and ignorant; I was a brute beast before You.
PSA	73	23	내가 항상 주와 함께하니 주께서 내 오른손을 붙드셨나이다	Nevertheless I am continually with thee: thou hast holden me by my right hand.	Yet I am always with You; You hold my right hand.
PSA	73	24	주의 교훈으로 나를 인도하시고 후에는 영광으로 나를 영접하시리니	Thou shalt guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory.	You guide me with Your counsel, and later receive me in glory.
PSA	73	25	하늘에서는 주 외에 누가 내게 있으리요 땅에서는 주 밖에 나의 사모할 자 없나이다	Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire beside thee.	Whom have I in heaven but You? And on earth I desire no one besides You.
PSA	73	26	내 육체와 마음은 쇠잔하나 하나님은 내 마음의 반석이시요 영원한 분깃이시라	My flesh and my heart faileth: but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.	My flesh and my heart may fail, but God is the strength of my heart and my portion forever.
PSA	73	27	대저 주를 멀리하는 자는 망하리니 음녀 같이 주를 떠난 자를 주께서 다 멸하셨나이다	For, lo, they that are far from thee shall perish: thou hast destroyed all them that go a whoring from thee.	Those far from You will surely perish; You destroy all who are unfaithful to You.
PSA	73	28	하나님께 가까이 함이 내게 복이라 내가 주 여호와를 나의 피난처로 삼아 주의 모든 행사를 전파하리이다	But it is good for me to draw near to God: I have put my trust in the Lord God, that I may declare all thy works.	But as for me, it is good to draw near to God. I have made the Lord GOD my refuge, that I may proclaim all Your works.
PSA	74	1	아삽의 마스길 하나님이여 주께서 어찌하여 우리를 영원히 버리시나이까 어찌하여 주의 치시는 양을 향하여 진노의 연기를 발하시나이까	Maschil of Asaph. O God, why hast thou cast us off for ever? why doth thine anger smoke against the sheep of thy pasture?	A Maskil of Asaph. Why have You rejected us forever, O God? Why does Your anger smolder against the sheep of Your pasture?
PSA	74	2	옛적부터 얻으시고 구속하사 주의 기업의 지파로 삼으신 주의 회중을 기억하시며 주의 거하신 시온 산도 생각하소서	Remember thy congregation, which thou hast purchased of old; the rod of thine inheritance, which thou hast redeemed; this mount Zion, wherein thou hast dwelt.	Remember Your congregation, which You purchased long ago and redeemed as the tribe of Your inheritance— Mount Zion where You dwell.
PSA	74	3	영구히 파멸된 곳으로 주의 발을 드십소서 원수가 성소에서 모든 악을 행하였나이다	Lift up thy feet unto the perpetual desolations; even all that the enemy hath done wickedly in the sanctuary.	Turn Your steps to the everlasting ruins, to everything in the sanctuary the enemy has destroyed.
PSA	74	4	주의 대적이 주의 회중에서 훤화하며 자기 기를 세워 표적을 삼았으니	Thine enemies roar in the midst of thy congregations; they set up their ensigns for signs.	Your foes have roared within Your meeting place; they have unfurled their banners as signs,
PSA	74	5	저희는 마치 도끼를 들어 삼림을 베는 사람 같으니이다	A man was famous according as he had lifted up axes upon the thick trees.	like men wielding axes in a thicket of trees
PSA	74	6	이제 저희가 도끼와 철퇴로 성소의 모든 조각품을 쳐서 부수고	But now they break down the carved work thereof at once with axes and hammers.	and smashing all the carvings with hatchets and picks.
PSA	74	7	주의 성소를 불사르며 주의 이름이 계신 곳을 더럽혀 땅에 엎었나이다	They have cast fire into thy sanctuary, they have defiled by casting down the dwelling place of thy name to the ground.	They have burned Your sanctuary to the ground; they have defiled the dwelling place of Your Name.
PSA	74	8	저희의 마음에 이르기를 우리가 그것을 진멸하자 하고 이 땅에 있는 하나님의 모든 회당을 불살랐나이다	They said in their hearts, Let us destroy them together: they have burned up all the synagogues of God in the land.	They said in their hearts, “We will crush them completely.” They burned down every place where God met us in the land.
PSA	74	9	우리의 표적이 보이지 아니하며 선지자도 다시 없으며 이런 일이 얼마나 오랠는지 우리 중에 아는 자도 없나이다	We see not our signs: there is no more any prophet: neither is there among us any that knoweth how long.	There are no signs for us to see. There is no longer any prophet. And none of us knows how long this will last.
PSA	74	10	하나님이여 대적이 언제까지 훼방하겠으며 원수가 주의 이름을 영원히 능욕하리이까	O God, how long shall the adversary reproach? shall the enemy blaspheme thy name for ever?	How long, O God, will the enemy taunt You? Will the foe revile Your name forever?
PSA	74	11	주께서 어찌하여 주의 손 곧 오른손을 거두시나이까 주의 품에서 빼사 저희를 멸하소서	Why withdrawest thou thy hand, even thy right hand? pluck it out of thy bosom.	Why do You withdraw Your strong right hand? Stretch it out to destroy them!
PSA	74	12	하나님은 예로부터 나의 왕이시라 인간에 구원을 베푸셨나이다	For God is my King of old, working salvation in the midst of the earth.	Yet God is my King from ancient times, working salvation on the earth.
PSA	74	13	주께서 주의 능력으로 바다를 나누시고 물 가운데 용들의 머리를 깨뜨리셨으며	Thou didst divide the sea by thy strength: thou brakest the heads of the dragons in the waters.	You divided the sea by Your strength; You smashed the heads of the dragons of the sea;
PSA	74	14	악어의 머리를 파쇄하시고 그것을 사막에 거하는 자에게 식물로 주셨으며	Thou brakest the heads of leviathan in pieces, and gavest him to be meat to the people inhabiting the wilderness.	You crushed the heads of Leviathan; You fed him to the creatures of the desert.
PSA	74	15	바위를 쪼개사 큰 물을 내시며 길이 흐르는 강들을 말리우셨나이다	Thou didst cleave the fountain and the flood: thou driedst up mighty rivers.	You broke open the fountain and the flood; You dried up the ever-flowing rivers.
PSA	74	16	낮도 주의 것이요 밤도 주의 것이라 주께서 빛과 해를 예비하셨으며	The day is thine, the night also is thine: thou hast prepared the light and the sun.	The day is Yours, and also the night; You established the moon and the sun.
PSA	74	17	땅의 경계를 정하시며 여름과 겨울을 이루셨나이다	Thou hast set all the borders of the earth: thou hast made summer and winter.	You set all the boundaries of the earth; You made the summer and winter.
PSA	74	18	여호와여 이것을 기억하소서 원수가 주를 비방하며 우매한 백성이 주의 이름을 능욕하였나이다	Remember this, that the enemy hath reproached, O Lord, and that the foolish people have blasphemed thy name.	Remember how the enemy has mocked You, O LORD, how a foolish people has spurned Your name.
PSA	74	19	주의 멧비둘기의 생명을 들짐승에게 주지 마시며 주의 가난한 자의 목숨을 영영히 잊지 마소서	O deliver not the soul of thy turtledove unto the multitude of the wicked: forget not the congregation of thy poor for ever.	Do not deliver the soul of Your dove to beasts; do not forget the lives of Your afflicted forever.
PSA	74	20	언약을 돌아보소서 대저 땅 흑암한 곳에 강포한 자의 처소가 가득하였나이다	Have respect unto the covenant: for the dark places of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty.	Consider Your covenant, for haunts of violence fill the dark places of the land.
PSA	74	21	학대 받은 자로 부끄러이 돌아가게 마시고 가난한 자와 궁핍한 자로 주의 이름을 찬송케 하소서	O let not the oppressed return ashamed: let the poor and needy praise thy name.	Do not let the oppressed retreat in shame; may the poor and needy praise Your name.
PSA	74	22	하나님이여 일어나사 주의 원통을 푸시고 우매한 자가 종일 주를 비방하는 것을 기억하소서	Arise, O God, plead thine own cause: remember how the foolish man reproacheth thee daily.	Rise up, O God; defend Your cause! Remember how the fool mocks You all day long.
PSA	74	23	주의 대적의 소리를 잊지 마소서 일어나 주를 항거하는 자의 훤화가 항상 상달하나이다	Forget not the voice of thine enemies: the tumult of those that rise up against thee increaseth continually.	Do not disregard the clamor of Your adversaries, the uproar of Your enemies that ascends continually.
PSA	75	1	아삽의 시, 영장으로 알다스헷에 맞춘 노래 하나님이여 우리가 주께 감사하고 감사함은 주의 이름이 가까움이라 사람들이 주의 기사를 전파하나이다	To the chief Musician, Al–taschith, A Psalm or Song of Asaph. Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks, unto thee do we give thanks: for that thy name is near thy wondrous works declare.	For the choirmaster: To the tune of “Do Not Destroy.” A Psalm of Asaph. A song. We give thanks to You, O God; we give thanks, for Your Name is near. The people declare Your wondrous works.
PSA	75	2	주의 말씀이 내가 정한 기약을 당하면 정의로 판단하리니	When I shall receive the congregation I will judge uprightly.	“When I choose a time, I will judge fairly.
PSA	75	3	땅의 기둥은 내가 세웠거니와 땅과 그 모든 거민이 소멸되리라 하시도다(셀라)	The earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved: I bear up the pillars of it. Selah.	When the earth and all its dwellers quake, it is I who bear up its pillars. Selah
PSA	75	4	내가 오만한 자더러 오만히 행치말라 하며 행악자더러 뿔을 들지 말라 하였노니	I said unto the fools, Deal not foolishly: and to the wicked, Lift not up the horn:	I say to the proud, ‘Do not boast,’ and to the wicked, ‘Do not lift up your horn.
PSA	75	5	너희 뿔을 높이 들지 말며 교만한 목으로 말하지 말지어다	Lift not up your horn on high: speak not with a stiff neck.	Do not lift up your horn against heaven or speak with an outstretched neck.’”
PSA	75	6	대저 높이는 일이 동에서나 서에서 말미암지 아니하며 남에서도 말미암지 아니하고	For promotion cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the south.	For exaltation comes neither from east nor west, nor out of the desert,
PSA	75	7	오직 재판장이신 하나님이 이를 낮추시고 저를 높이시느니라	But God is the judge: he putteth down one, and setteth up another.	but it is God who judges; He brings down one and exalts another.
PSA	75	8	여호와의 손에 잔이 있어 술 거품이 일어나는도다 속에 섞은 것이 가득한 그 잔을 하나님이 쏟아 내시나니 실로 그 찌끼까지도 땅의 모든 악인이 기울여 마시리로다	For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the wine is red; it is full of mixture; and he poureth out of the same: but the dregs thereof, all the wicked of the earth shall wring them out, and drink them.	For a cup is in the hand of the LORD, full of foaming wine mixed with spices. He pours from His cup, and all the wicked of the earth drink it down to the dregs.
PSA	75	9	나는 야곱의 하나님을 영원히 선포하며 찬양하며	But I will declare for ever; I will sing praises to the God of Jacob.	But I will proclaim Him forever; I will sing praise to the God of Jacob.
PSA	75	10	또 악인의 뿔을 다 베고 의인의 뿔은 높이 들리로다	All the horns of the wicked also will I cut off; but the horns of the righteous shall be exalted.	“All the horns of the wicked I will cut off, but the horns of the righteous will be exalted.”
PSA	76	1	아삽의 시, 영장으로 현악에 맞춘 노래 하나님이 유다에 알린바 되셨으며 그 이름은 이스라엘에 크시도다	To the chief Musician on Neginoth, A Psalm or Song of Asaph. In Judah is God known: his name is great in Israel.	For the choirmaster. With stringed instruments. A Psalm of Asaph. A song. God is known in Judah; His name is great in Israel.
PSA	76	2	그 장막이 또한 살렘에 있음이여 그 처소는 시온에 있도다	In Salem also is his tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Zion.	His tent is in Salem, His dwelling place in Zion.
PSA	76	3	거기서 저가 화살과 방패와 칼과 전쟁을 깨치시도다(셀라)	There brake he the arrows of the bow, the shield, and the sword, and the battle. Selah.	There He shattered the flaming arrows, the shield and sword and weapons of war. Selah
PSA	76	4	주는 영화로우시며 약탈한 산에서 존귀하시도다	Thou art more glorious and excellent than the mountains of prey.	You are resplendent with light, more majestic than mountains filled with game.
PSA	76	5	마음이 강한 자는 탈취를 당하여 자기 잠을 자고 장사는 자기 손을 놀리지 못하도다	The stouthearted are spoiled, they have slept their sleep: and none of the men of might have found their hands.	The valiant lie plundered; they sleep their last sleep. No men of might could lift a hand.
PSA	76	6	야곱의 하나님이여 주께서 꾸짖으시매 병거와 말이 다 깊은 잠이 들었나이다	At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, both the chariot and horse are cast into a dead sleep.	At Your rebuke, O God of Jacob, both horse and rider lie stunned.
PSA	76	7	주 곧 주는 경외할 자시니 주께서 한 번 노하실 때에 누가 주의 목전에 서리이까	Thou, even thou, art to be feared: and who may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry?	You alone are to be feared. When You are angry, who can stand before You?
PSA	76	8	주께서 하늘에서 판결을 선포하시매 땅이 두려워 잠잠하였나니	Thou didst cause judgment to be heard from heaven; the earth feared, and was still,	From heaven You pronounced judgment, and the earth feared and was still
PSA	76	9	곧 하나님이 땅의 모든 온유한 자를 구원하시려고 판단하러 일어나신 때에로다(셀라)	When God arose to judgment, to save all the meek of the earth. Selah.	when God rose up to judge, to save all the lowly of the earth. Selah
PSA	76	10	진실로 사람의 노는 장차 주를 찬송하게 될 것이요 그 남은 노는 주께서 금하시리이다	Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee: the remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain.	Even the wrath of man shall praise You; with the survivors of wrath You will clothe Yourself.
PSA	76	11	너희는 여호와 너희 하나님께 서원하고 갚으라 사방에 있는 모든 자도 마땅히 경외할 이에게 예물을 드릴지로다	Vow, and pay unto the Lord your God: let all that be round about him bring presents unto him that ought to be feared.	Make and fulfill your vows to the LORD your God; let all the neighboring lands bring tribute to Him who is to be feared.
PSA	76	12	저가 방백들의 심령을 꺾으시리니 저는 세상의 왕들에게 두려움이시로다	He shall cut off the spirit of princes: he is terrible to the kings of the earth.	He breaks the spirits of princes; He is feared by the kings of the earth.
PSA	77	1	아삽의 시, 영장으로 여두둔의 법칙에 의지하여 한 노래 내가 내 음성으로 하나님께 부르짖으리니 하나님께 내 음성으로 부르짖으면 내게 귀를 기울이시리로다	To the chief Musician, to Jeduthun, A Psalm of Asaph. I cried unto God with my voice, even unto God with my voice; and he gave ear unto me.	For the choirmaster. According to Jeduthun. A Psalm of Asaph. I cried out to God; I cried aloud to God to hear me.
PSA	77	2	나의 환난날에 내가 주를 찾았으며 밤에는 내 손을 들고 거두지 아니하였으며 내 영혼이 위로 받기를 거절하였도다	In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord: my sore ran in the night, and ceased not: my soul refused to be comforted.	In the day of trouble I sought the Lord; through the night my outstretched hands did not grow weary; my soul refused to be comforted.
PSA	77	3	내가 하나님을 생각하고 불안하여 근심하니 내 심령이 상하도다(셀라)	I remembered God, and was troubled: I complained, and my spirit was overwhelmed. Selah.	I remembered You, O God, and I groaned; I mused and my spirit grew faint. Selah
PSA	77	4	주께서 나로 눈을 붙이지 못하게 하시니 내가 괴로워 말할 수 없나이다	Thou holdest mine eyes waking: I am so troubled that I cannot speak.	You have kept my eyes from closing; I am too troubled to speak.
PSA	77	5	내가 옛날 곧 이전 해를 생각하였사오며	I have considered the days of old, the years of ancient times.	I considered the days of old, the years long in the past.
PSA	77	6	밤에 한 나의 노래를 기억하여 마음에 묵상하며 심령이 궁구하기를	I call to remembrance my song in the night: I commune with mine own heart: and my spirit made diligent search.	At night I remembered my song; in my heart I mused, and my spirit pondered:
PSA	77	7	주께서 영원히 버리실까, 다시는 은혜를 베풀지 아니하실까,	Will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favourable no more?	“Will the Lord spurn us forever and never show His favor again?
PSA	77	8	그 인자하심이 길이 다하였는가, 그 허락을 영구히 폐하셨는가,	Is his mercy clean gone for ever? doth his promise fail for evermore?	Is His loving devotion gone forever? Has His promise failed for all time?
PSA	77	9	하나님이 은혜 베푸심을 잊으셨는가, 노하심으로 그 긍휼을 막으셨는가 하였나이다(셀라)	Hath God forgotten to be gracious? hath he in anger shut up his tender mercies? Selah.	Has God forgotten to be gracious? Has His anger shut off His compassion?” Selah
PSA	77	10	또 내가 말하기를 이는 나의 연약함이라 지존자의 오른손의 해	And I said, This is my infirmity: but I will remember the years of the right hand of the most High.	So I said, “I am grieved that the right hand of the Most High has changed.”
PSA	77	11	곧 여호와의 옛적 기사를 기억하여 그 행하신 일을 진술하리이다	I will remember the works of the Lord: surely I will remember thy wonders of old.	I will remember the works of the LORD; yes, I will remember Your wonders of old.
PSA	77	12	또 주의 모든 일을 묵상하며 주의 행사를 깊이 생각하리이다	I will meditate also of all thy work, and talk of thy doings.	I will reflect on all You have done and ponder Your mighty deeds.
PSA	77	13	하나님이여 주의 도는 극히 거룩하시오니 하나님과 같이 큰 신이 누구오니이까	Thy way, O God, is in the sanctuary: who is so great a God as our God?	Your way, O God, is holy. What god is so great as our God?
PSA	77	14	주는 기사를 행하신 하나님이시라 민족들 중에 주의 능력을 알으시고	Thou art the God that doest wonders: thou hast declared thy strength among the people.	You are the God who works wonders; You display Your strength among the peoples.
PSA	77	15	주의 팔로 주의 백성 곧 야곱과 요셉의 자손을 구속하셨나이다(셀라)	Thou hast with thine arm redeemed thy people, the sons of Jacob and Joseph. Selah.	With power You redeemed Your people, the sons of Jacob and Joseph. Selah
PSA	77	16	하나님이여 물들이 주를 보았나이다 물들이 주를 보고 두려워하며 깊음도 진동하였고	The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee; they were afraid: the depths also were troubled.	The waters saw You, O God; the waters saw You and swirled; even the depths were shaken.
PSA	77	17	구름이 물을 쏟고 궁창이 소리를 발하며 주의 살도 날아 나갔나이다	The clouds poured out water: the skies sent out a sound: thine arrows also went abroad.	The clouds poured down water; the skies resounded with thunder; Your arrows flashed back and forth.
PSA	77	18	회리바람 중에 주의 우뢰의 소리가 있으며 번개가 세계를 비취며 땅이 흔들리고 움직였나이다	The voice of thy thunder was in the heaven: the lightnings lightened the world: the earth trembled and shook.	Your thunder resounded in the whirlwind; the lightning lit up the world; the earth trembled and quaked.
PSA	77	19	주의 길이 바다에 있었고 주의 첩경이 큰 물에 있었으나 주의 종적을 알 수 없었나이다	Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great waters, and thy footsteps are not known.	Your path led through the sea, Your way through the mighty waters, but Your footprints were not to be found.
PSA	77	20	주의 백성을 무리양 같이 모세와 아론의 손으로 인도하셨나이다	Thou leddest thy people like a flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron.	You led Your people like a flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron.
PSA	78	1	아삽의 마스길 내 백성이여, 내 교훈을 들으며 내 입의 말에 귀를 기울일지어다	Maschil of Asaph. Give ear, O my people, to my law: incline your ears to the words of my mouth.	A Maskil of Asaph. Give ear, O my people, to my instruction; listen to the words of my mouth.
PSA	78	2	내가 입을 열고 비유를 베풀어서 옛 비밀한 말을 발표하리니	I will open my mouth in a parable: I will utter dark sayings of old:	I will open my mouth in parables; I will utter things hidden from the beginning,
PSA	78	3	이는 우리가 들은 바요 아는 바요 우리 열조가 우리에게 전한 바라	Which we have heard and known, and our fathers have told us.	that we have heard and known and our fathers have relayed to us.
PSA	78	4	우리가 이를 그 자손에게 숨기지 아니하고 여호와의 영예와 그 능력과 기이한 사적을 후대에 전하리로다	We will not hide them from their children, shewing to the generation to come the praises of the Lord, and his strength, and his wonderful works that he hath done.	We will not hide them from their children, but will declare to the next generation the praises of the LORD and His might, and the wonders He has performed.
PSA	78	5	여호와께서 증거를 야곱에게 세우시며 법도를 이스라엘에게 정하시고 우리 열조에게 명하사 저희 자손에게 알게 하라 하셨으니	For he established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel, which he commanded our fathers, that they should make them known to their children:	For He established a testimony in Jacob and appointed a law in Israel, which He commanded our fathers to teach to their children,
PSA	78	6	이는 저희로 후대 곧 후생 자손에게 이를 알게 하고 그들은 일어나 그 자손에게 일러서	That the generation to come might know them, even the children which should be born; who should arise and declare them to their children:	that the coming generation would know them— even children yet to be born— to arise and tell their own children
PSA	78	7	저희로 그 소망을 하나님께 두며 하나님의 행사를 잊지 아니하고 오직 그 계명을 지켜서	That they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God, but keep his commandments:	that they should put their confidence in God, not forgetting His works, but keeping His commandments.
PSA	78	8	그 열조 곧 완고하고 패역하여 그 마음이 정직하지 못하며 그 심령은 하나님께 충성치 아니한 세대와 같지 않게 하려 하심이로다	And might not be as their fathers, a stubborn and rebellious generation; a generation that set not their heart aright, and whose spirit was not stedfast with God.	Then they will not be like their fathers, a stubborn and rebellious generation, whose heart was not loyal, whose spirit was not faithful to God.
PSA	78	9	에브라임 자손은 병기를 갖추며 활을 가졌으나 전쟁의 날에 물러갔도다	The children of Ephraim, being armed, and carrying bows, turned back in the day of battle.	The archers of Ephraim turned back on the day of battle.
PSA	78	10	저희가 하나님의 언약을 지키지 아니하고 그 율법 준행하기를 거절하며	They kept not the covenant of God, and refused to walk in his law;	They failed to keep God’s covenant and refused to live by His law.
PSA	78	11	여호와의 행하신 것과 저희에게 보이신 기사를 잊었도다	And forgat his works, and his wonders that he had shewed them.	They forgot what He had done, the wonders He had shown them.
PSA	78	12	옛적에 하나님이 애굽 땅 소안 들에서 기이한 일을 저희 열조의 목전에서 행하셨으되	Marvellous things did he in the sight of their fathers, in the land of Egypt, in the field of Zoan.	He worked wonders before their fathers in the land of Egypt, in the region of Zoan.
PSA	78	13	저가 바다를 갈라 물을 무더기 같이 서게 하시고 저희로 지나게 하셨으며	He divided the sea, and caused them to pass through; and he made the waters to stand as an heap.	He split the sea and brought them through; He set the waters upright like a wall.
PSA	78	14	낮에는 구름으로, 온 밤에는 화광으로 인도하셨으며	In the daytime also he led them with a cloud, and all the night with a light of fire.	He led them with a cloud by day and with a light of fire all night.
PSA	78	15	광야에서 반석을 쪼개시고 깊은 수원에서 나는 것 같이 저희에게 물을 흡족히 마시우셨으며	He clave the rocks in the wilderness, and gave them drink as out of the great depths.	He split the rocks in the wilderness and gave them drink as abundant as the seas.
PSA	78	16	또 반석에서 시내를 내사 물이 강 같이 흐르게 하셨으나	He brought streams also out of the rock, and caused waters to run down like rivers.	He brought streams from the stone and made water flow down like rivers.
PSA	78	17	저희는 계속하여 하나님께 범죄하여 황야에서 지존자를 배반하였도다	And they sinned yet more against him by provoking the most High in the wilderness.	But they continued to sin against Him, rebelling in the desert against the Most High.
PSA	78	18	저희가 저희 탐욕대로 식물을 구하여 그 심중에 하나님을 시험하였으며	And they tempted God in their heart by asking meat for their lust.	They willfully tested God by demanding the food they craved.
PSA	78	19	그뿐 아니라 하나님을 대적하여 말하기를 하나님이 광야에서 능히 식탁을 준비하시랴	Yea, they spake against God; they said, Can God furnish a table in the wilderness?	They spoke against God, saying, “Can God really prepare a table in the wilderness?
PSA	78	20	저가 반석을 쳐서 물을 내시매 시내가 넘쳤거니와 또 능히 떡을 주시며 그 백성을 위하여 고기를 예비하시랴 하였도다	Behold, he smote the rock, that the waters gushed out, and the streams overflowed; can he give bread also? can he provide flesh for his people?	When He struck the rock, water gushed out and torrents raged. But can He also give bread or supply His people with meat?”
PSA	78	21	그러므로 여호와께서 듣고 노하심이여 야곱을 향하여 노가 맹렬하며 이스라엘을 향하여 노가 올랐으니	Therefore the Lord heard this, and was wroth: so a fire was kindled against Jacob, and anger also came up against Israel;	Therefore the LORD heard and was filled with wrath; so a fire was kindled against Jacob, and His anger flared against Israel,
PSA	78	22	이는 하나님을 믿지 아니하며 그 구원을 의지하지 아니한 연고로다	Because they believed not in God, and trusted not in his salvation:	because they did not believe God or rely on His salvation.
PSA	78	23	그러나 저가 오히려 위의 궁창을 명하시며 하늘 문을 여시고	Though he had commanded the clouds from above, and opened the doors of heaven,	Yet He commanded the clouds above and opened the doors of the heavens.
PSA	78	24	저희에게 만나를 비 같이 내려 먹이시며 하늘 양식으로 주셨나니	And had rained down manna upon them to eat, and had given them of the corn of heaven.	He rained down manna for them to eat; He gave them grain from heaven.
PSA	78	25	사람이 권세 있는 자의 떡을 먹음이여 하나님이 식물을 충족히 주셨도다	Man did eat angels’ food: he sent them meat to the full.	Man ate the bread of angels; He sent them food in abundance.
PSA	78	26	저가 동풍으로 하늘에서 일게 하시며 그 권능으로 남풍을 인도하시고	He caused an east wind to blow in the heaven: and by his power he brought in the south wind.	He stirred the east wind from the heavens and drove the south wind by His might.
PSA	78	27	저희에게 고기를 티끌 같이 내리시니 곧 바다 모래 같은 나는 새라	He rained flesh also upon them as dust, and feathered fowls like as the sand of the sea:	He rained meat on them like dust, and winged birds like the sand of the sea.
PSA	78	28	그 진 중에 떨어지게 하사 그 거처에 둘리셨도다	And he let it fall in the midst of their camp, round about their habitations.	He felled them in the midst of their camp, all around their dwellings.
PSA	78	29	저희가 먹고 배불렀나니 하나님이 저희 소욕대로 주셨도다	So they did eat, and were well filled: for he gave them their own desire;	So they ate and were well filled, for He gave them what they craved.
PSA	78	30	저희가 그 욕심에서 떠나지 아니하고 저희 식물이 아직 그 입에 있을 때에	They were not estranged from their lust. But while their meat was yet in their mouths,	Yet before they had filled their desire, with the food still in their mouths,
PSA	78	31	하나님이 저희를 대하여 노를 발하사 저희 중 살찐 자를 죽이시며 이스라엘의 청년을 쳐 엎드러뜨리셨도다	The wrath of God came upon them, and slew the fattest of them, and smote down the chosen men of Israel.	God’s anger flared against them, and He put to death their strongest and subdued the young men of Israel.
PSA	78	32	그럴지라도 저희가 오히려 범죄하여 그의 기사를 믿지 아니하였으므로	For all this they sinned still, and believed not for his wondrous works.	In spite of all this, they kept on sinning; despite His wonderful works, they did not believe.
PSA	78	33	하나님이 저희 날을 헛되이 보내게 하시며 저희 해를 두렵게 지내게 하셨도다	Therefore their days did he consume in vanity, and their years in trouble.	So He ended their days in futility, and their years in sudden terror.
PSA	78	34	하나님이 저희를 죽이실 때에 저희가 그에게 구하며 돌이켜 하나님을 간절히 찾았고	When he slew them, then they sought him: and they returned and enquired early after God.	When He slew them, they would seek Him; they repented and searched for God.
PSA	78	35	하나님이 저희의 반석이시요 지존하신 하나님이 저희 구속자이심을 기억하였도다	And they remembered that God was their rock, and the high God their redeemer.	And they remembered that God was their Rock, that God Most High was their Redeemer.
PSA	78	36	그러나 저희가 입으로 그에게 아첨하며 자기 혀로 그에게 거짓을 말하였으니	Nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongues.	But they deceived Him with their mouths, and lied to Him with their tongues.
PSA	78	37	이는 하나님께 향하는 저희 마음이 정함이 없으며 그의 언약에 성실치 아니하였음이로다	For their heart was not right with him, neither were they stedfast in his covenant.	Their hearts were disloyal to Him, and they were unfaithful to His covenant.
PSA	78	38	오직 하나님은 자비하심으로 죄악을 사하사 멸하지 아니하시고 그 진노를 여러번 돌이키시며 그 분을 다 발하지 아니하셨으니	But he, being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not: yea, many a time turned he his anger away, and did not stir up all his wrath.	And yet He was compassionate; He forgave their iniquity and did not destroy them. He often restrained His anger and did not unleash His full wrath.
PSA	78	39	저희는 육체뿐이라 가고 다시 오지 못하는 바람임을 기억하셨음이로다	For he remembered that they were but flesh; a wind that passeth away, and cometh not again.	He remembered that they were but flesh, a passing breeze that does not return.
PSA	78	40	저희가 광야에서 그를 반항하며 사막에서 그를 슬프시게 함이 몇 번인고	How oft did they provoke him in the wilderness, and grieve him in the desert!	How often they disobeyed Him in the wilderness and grieved Him in the desert!
PSA	78	41	저희가 돌이켜 하나님을 재삼 시험하며 이스라엘의 거룩한 자를 격동하였도다	Yea, they turned back and tempted God, and limited the Holy One of Israel.	Again and again they tested God and provoked the Holy One of Israel.
PSA	78	42	저희가 그의 권능을 기억지 아니하며 대적에게서 구속하신 날도 생각지 아니하였도다	They remembered not his hand, nor the day when he delivered them from the enemy.	They did not remember His power— the day He redeemed them from the adversary,
PSA	78	43	그 때에 하나님이 애굽에서 그 징조를, 소안 들에서 그 기사를 나타내사	How he had wrought his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the field of Zoan:	when He performed His signs in Egypt and His wonders in the fields of Zoan.
PSA	78	44	저희의 강과 시내를 피로 변하여 저희로 마실 수 없게 하시며	And had turned their rivers into blood; and their floods, that they could not drink.	He turned their rivers to blood, and from their streams they could not drink.
PSA	78	45	파리 떼를 저희 중에 보내어 물게 하시고 개구리를 보내어 해하게 하셨으며	He sent divers sorts of flies among them, which devoured them; and frogs, which destroyed them.	He sent swarms of flies that devoured them, and frogs that devastated them.
PSA	78	46	저희의 토산물을 황충에게 주시며 저희의 수고한 것을 메뚜기에게 주셨으며	He gave also their increase unto the caterpiller, and their labour unto the locust.	He gave their crops to the grasshopper, the fruit of their labor to the locust.
PSA	78	47	저희 포도나무를 우박으로, 저희 뽕나무를 서리로 죽이셨으며	He destroyed their vines with hail, and their sycomore trees with frost.	He killed their vines with hailstones and their sycamore-figs with sleet.
PSA	78	48	저희 가축을 우박에, 저희 양떼를 번갯불에 붙이셨으며	He gave up their cattle also to the hail, and their flocks to hot thunderbolts.	He abandoned their cattle to the hail and their livestock to bolts of lightning.
PSA	78	49	그 맹렬한 노와 분과 분노와 고난 곧 벌하는 사자들을 저희에게 내려 보내셨으며	He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, and indignation, and trouble, by sending evil angels among them.	He unleashed His fury against them, wrath, indignation, and calamity— a band of destroying angels.
PSA	78	50	그 노를 위하여 치도하사 저희 혼의 사망을 면케 아니하시고 저희 생명을 염병에 붙이셨으며	He made a way to his anger; he spared not their soul from death, but gave their life over to the pestilence;	He cleared a path for His anger; He did not spare them from death but delivered their lives to the plague.
PSA	78	51	애굽에서 모든 장자 곧 함의 장막에 있는 그 기력의 시작을 치셨으나	And smote all the firstborn in Egypt; the chief of their strength in the tabernacles of Ham:	He struck all the firstborn of Egypt, the virility in the tents of Ham.
PSA	78	52	자기 백성을 양 같이 인도하여 내시고 광야에서 양떼 같이 지도하셨도다	But made his own people to go forth like sheep, and guided them in the wilderness like a flock.	He led out His people like sheep and guided them like a flock in the wilderness.
PSA	78	53	저희를 안전히 인도하시니 저희는 두려움이 없었으나 저희 원수는 바다에 엄몰되었도다	And he led them on safely, so that they feared not: but the sea overwhelmed their enemies.	He led them safely, so they did not fear, but the sea engulfed their enemies.
PSA	78	54	저희를 그 성소의 지경 곧 그의 오른손이 취하신 산으로 인도하시고	And he brought them to the border of his sanctuary, even to this mountain, which his right hand had purchased.	He brought them to His holy land, to the mountain His right hand had acquired.
PSA	78	55	또 열방을 저희 앞에서 쫓아내시며 줄로 저희 기업을 분배하시고 이스라엘 지파로 그 장막에 거하게 하셨도다	He cast out the heathen also before them, and divided them an inheritance by line, and made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their tents.	He drove out nations before them and apportioned their inheritance; He settled the tribes of Israel in their tents.
PSA	78	56	그럴지라도 저희가 지존하신 하나님을 시험하며 반항하여 그 증거를 지키지 아니하며	Yet they tempted and provoked the most high God, and kept not his testimonies:	But they tested and disobeyed God Most High, for they did not keep His decrees.
PSA	78	57	저희 열조 같이 배반하고 궤사를 행하여 속이는 활 같이 빗가서	But turned back, and dealt unfaithfully like their fathers: they were turned aside like a deceitful bow.	They turned back and were faithless like their fathers, twisted like a faulty bow.
PSA	78	58	자기 산당으로 그 노를 격동하며 저희 조각한 우상으로 그를 진노케 하였으매	For they provoked him to anger with their high places, and moved him to jealousy with their graven images.	They enraged Him with their high places and provoked His jealousy with their idols.
PSA	78	59	하나님이 들으시고 분내어 이스라엘을 크게 미워하사	When God heard this, he was wroth, and greatly abhorred Israel:	On hearing it, God was furious and rejected Israel completely.
PSA	78	60	실로의 성막 곧 인간에 세우신 장막을 떠나시고	So that he forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh, the tent which he placed among men;	He abandoned the tabernacle of Shiloh, the tent He had pitched among men.
PSA	78	61	그 능력된 자를 포로에 붙이시며 자기 영광을 대적의 손에 붙이시고	And delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory into the enemy’s hand.	He delivered His strength to captivity, and His splendor to the hand of the adversary.
PSA	78	62	그 백성을 또 칼에 붙이사 그의 기업에게 분내셨으니	He gave his people over also unto the sword; and was wroth with his inheritance.	He surrendered His people to the sword because He was enraged by His heritage.
PSA	78	63	저희 청년은 불에 살라지고 저희 처녀에게는 혼인 노래가 없으며	The fire consumed their young men; and their maidens were not given to marriage.	Fire consumed His young men, and their maidens were left without wedding songs.
PSA	78	64	저희 제사장들은 칼에 엎드러지고 저희 과부들은 애곡하지 못하였도다	Their priests fell by the sword; and their widows made no lamentation.	His priests fell by the sword, but their widows could not lament.
PSA	78	65	때에 주께서 자다가 깬 자 같이, 포도주로 인하여 외치는 용사 같이 일어나사	Then the Lord awaked as one out of sleep, and like a mighty man that shouteth by reason of wine.	Then the Lord awoke as from sleep, like a mighty warrior overcome by wine.
PSA	78	66	그 대적들을 쳐 물리쳐서 길이 욕되게 하시고	And he smote his enemies in the hinder parts: he put them to a perpetual reproach.	He beat back His foes; He put them to everlasting shame.
PSA	78	67	또 요셉의 장막을 싫어 버리시며 에브라임 지파를 택하지 아니하시고	Moreover he refused the tabernacle of Joseph, and chose not the tribe of Ephraim:	He rejected the tent of Joseph and refused the tribe of Ephraim.
PSA	78	68	오직 유다 지파와 그 사랑하시는 시온 산을 택하시고	But chose the tribe of Judah, the mount Zion which he loved.	But He chose the tribe of Judah, Mount Zion, which He loved.
PSA	78	69	그 성소를 산의 높음 같이, 영원히 두신 땅 같이 지으셨으며	And he built his sanctuary like high palaces, like the earth which he hath established for ever.	He built His sanctuary like the heights, like the earth He has established forever.
PSA	78	70	또 그 종 다윗을 택하시되 양의 우리에서 취하시며	He chose David also his servant, and took him from the sheepfolds:	He chose David His servant and took him from the sheepfolds;
PSA	78	71	젖 양을 지키는 중에서 저희를 이끄사 그 백성인 야곱, 그 기업인 이스라엘을 기르게 하셨더니	From following the ewes great with young he brought him to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance.	from tending the ewes He brought him to be shepherd of His people Jacob, of Israel His inheritance.
PSA	78	72	이에 저가 그 마음의 성실함으로 기르고 그 손의 공교함으로 지도하였도다	So he fed them according to the integrity of his heart; and guided them by the skilfulness of his hands.	So David shepherded them with integrity of heart and guided them with skillful hands.
PSA	79	1	아삽의 시 하나님이여 열방이 주의 기업에 들어와서 주의 성전을 더럽히고 예루살렘으로 돌 무더기가 되게 하였나이다	A Psalm of Asaph. O God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance; thy holy temple have they defiled; they have laid Jerusalem on heaps.	A Psalm of Asaph. The nations, O God, have invaded Your inheritance; they have defiled Your holy temple and reduced Jerusalem to rubble.
PSA	79	2	저희가 주의 종들의 시체를 공중의 새에게 밥으로 주며 주의 성도들의 육체를 땅 짐승에게 주며	The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls of the heaven, the flesh of thy saints unto the beasts of the earth.	They have given the corpses of Your servants as food to the birds of the air, the flesh of Your saints to the beasts of the earth.
PSA	79	3	그들의 피를 예루살렘 사면에 물 같이 흘렸으며 그들을 매장하는 자가 없었나이다	Their blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem; and there was none to bury them.	They have poured out their blood like water all around Jerusalem, and there is no one to bury the dead.
PSA	79	4	우리는 우리 이웃에게 비방거리가 되며 우리를 에운 자에게 조소와 조롱거리가 되었나이다	We are become a reproach to our neighbours, a scorn and derision to them that are round about us.	We have become a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and derision to those around us.
PSA	79	5	여호와여 어느 때까지니이까 영원히 노하시리이까 주의 진노가 불붙듯 하시리이까	How long, Lord? wilt thou be angry for ever? shall thy jealousy burn like fire?	How long, O LORD? Will You be angry forever? Will Your jealousy burn like fire?
PSA	79	6	주를 알지 아니하는 열방과 주의 이름을 부르지 아니하는 열국에 주의 노를 쏟으소서	Pour out thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known thee, and upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy name.	Pour out Your wrath on the nations that do not acknowledge You, on the kingdoms that refuse to call on Your name,
PSA	79	7	저희가 야곱을 삼키고 그 거처를 황폐케 함이니이다	For they have devoured Jacob, and laid waste his dwelling place.	for they have devoured Jacob and devastated his homeland.
PSA	79	8	우리 열조의 죄악을 기억하여 우리에게 돌리지 마옵소서 우리가 심히 천하게 되었사오니 주의 긍휼하심으로 속히 우리를 영접하소서	O remember not against us former iniquities: let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us: for we are brought very low.	Do not hold past sins against us; let Your compassion come quickly, for we are brought low.
PSA	79	9	우리 구원의 하나님이여 주의 이름의 영광을 위하여 우리를 도우시며 주의 이름을 위하여 우리를 건지시며 우리 죄를 사하소서	Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: and deliver us, and purge away our sins, for thy name’s sake.	Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of Your name; deliver us and atone for our sins, for the sake of Your name.
PSA	79	10	어찌하여 열방으로 저희 하나님이 어디 있느냐 말하게 하리이까 주의 종들의 피 흘림 당한 보수를 우리 목전에 열방 중에 알리소서	Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is their God? let him be known among the heathen in our sight by the revenging of the blood of thy servants which is shed.	Why should the nations ask, “Where is their God?” Before our eyes, make known among the nations Your vengeance for the bloodshed of Your servants.
PSA	79	11	갇힌 자의 탄식으로 주의 앞에 이르게 하시며 죽이기로 정한 자를 주의 크신 능력을 따라 보존하소서	Let the sighing of the prisoner come before thee; according to the greatness of thy power preserve thou those that are appointed to die;	May the groans of the captives reach You; by the strength of Your arm preserve those condemned to death.
PSA	79	12	주여 우리 이웃이 주를 훼방한 그 훼방을 저희 품에 칠 배나 갚으소서	And render unto our neighbours sevenfold into their bosom their reproach, wherewith they have reproached thee, O Lord.	Pay back into the laps of our neighbors sevenfold the reproach they hurled at You, O Lord.
PSA	79	13	그러하면 주의 백성 곧 주의 기르시는 양 된 우리는 영원히 주께 감사하며 주의 영예를 대대로 전하리이다	So we thy people and sheep of thy pasture will give thee thanks for ever: we will shew forth thy praise to all generations.	Then we Your people, the sheep of Your pasture, will thank You forever; from generation to generation we will declare Your praise.
PSA	80	1	아삽의 시, 영장으로 소산님에둣에 맞춘 노래 요셉을 양떼 같이 인도하시는 이스라엘의 목자여 귀를 기울이소서 그룹 사이에 좌정하신 자여 빛을 비취소서	To the chief Musician upon Shoshannim–Eduth, A Psalm of Asaph. Give ear, O Shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a flock; thou that dwellest between the cherubims, shine forth.	For the choirmaster. To the tune of “The Lilies of the Covenant.” A Psalm of Asaph. Hear us, O Shepherd of Israel, who leads Joseph like a flock; You who sit enthroned between the cherubim, shine forth
PSA	80	2	에브라임과 베냐민과 므낫세 앞에서 주의 용력을 내사 우리를 구원하러 오소서	Before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh stir up thy strength, and come and save us.	before Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasseh. Rally Your mighty power and come to save us.
PSA	80	3	하나님이여 우리를 돌이키시고 주의 얼굴 빛을 비취사 우리로 구원을 얻게 하소서	Turn us again, O God, and cause thy face to shine; and we shall be saved.	Restore us, O God, and cause Your face to shine upon us, that we may be saved.
PSA	80	4	만군의 하나님 여호와여 주의 백성의 기도에 대하여 어느 때까지 노하시리이까	O Lord God of hosts, how long wilt thou be angry against the prayer of thy people?	O LORD God of Hosts, how long will Your anger smolder against the prayers of Your people?
PSA	80	5	주께서 저희를 눈물 양식으로 먹이시며 다량의 눈물을 마시게 하셨나이다	Thou feedest them with the bread of tears; and givest them tears to drink in great measure.	You fed them with the bread of tears and made them drink the full measure of their tears.
PSA	80	6	우리로 우리 이웃에게 다툼거리가 되게 하시니 우리 원수들이 서로 웃나이다	Thou makest us a strife unto our neighbours: and our enemies laugh among themselves.	You make us contend with our neighbors; our enemies mock us.
PSA	80	7	만군의 하나님이여 우리를 돌이키시고 주의 얼굴 빛을 비취사 우리로 구원을 얻게 하소서	Turn us again, O God of hosts, and cause thy face to shine; and we shall be saved.	Restore us, O God of Hosts, and cause Your face to shine upon us, that we may be saved.
PSA	80	8	주께서 한 포도나무를 애굽에서 가져다가 열방을 쫓아내시고 이를 심으셨나이다	Thou hast brought a vine out of Egypt: thou hast cast out the heathen, and planted it.	You uprooted a vine from Egypt; You drove out the nations and transplanted it.
PSA	80	9	주께서 그 앞서 준비하셨으므로 그 뿌리가 깊이 땅에 편만하며	Thou preparedst room before it, and didst cause it to take deep root, and it filled the land.	You cleared the ground for it, and it took root and filled the land.
PSA	80	10	그 그늘이 산들을 가리우고 그 가지는 하나님의 백향목 같으며	The hills were covered with the shadow of it, and the boughs thereof were like the goodly cedars.	The mountains were covered by its shade, and the mighty cedars with its branches.
PSA	80	11	그 가지가 바다까지 뻗고 넝쿨이 강까지 미쳤거늘	She sent out her boughs unto the sea, and her branches unto the river.	It sent out its branches to the Sea, and its shoots toward the River.
PSA	80	12	주께서 어찌하여 그 담을 헐으사 길에 지나는 모든 자로 따게 하셨나이까	Why hast thou then broken down her hedges, so that all they which pass by the way do pluck her?	Why have You broken down its walls, so that all who pass by pick its fruit?
PSA	80	13	수풀의 돼지가 상해하며 들짐승들이 먹나이다	The boar out of the wood doth waste it, and the wild beast of the field doth devour it.	The boar from the forest ravages it, and the creatures of the field feed upon it.
PSA	80	14	만군의 하나님이여 구하옵나니 돌이키사 하늘에서 굽어보시고 이 포도나무를 권고하소서	Return, we beseech thee, O God of hosts: look down from heaven, and behold, and visit this vine;	Return, O God of Hosts, we pray! Look down from heaven and see! Attend to this vine—
PSA	80	15	주의 오른손으로 심으신 줄기요 주를 위하여 힘있게 하신 가지니이다	And the vineyard which thy right hand hath planted, and the branch that thou madest strong for thyself.	the root Your right hand has planted, the son You have raised up for Yourself.
PSA	80	16	그것이 소화되고 작벌을 당하며 주의 면책을 인하여 망하오니	It is burned with fire, it is cut down: they perish at the rebuke of thy countenance.	Your vine has been cut down and burned; they perish at the rebuke of Your countenance.
PSA	80	17	주의 우편에 있는 자 곧 주를 위하여 힘있게 하신 인자의 위에 주의 손을 얹으소서	Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, upon the son of man whom thou madest strong for thyself.	Let Your hand be upon the man at Your right hand, on the son of man You have raised up for Yourself.
PSA	80	18	그러하면 우리가 주에게서 물러가지 아니하오리니 우리를 소생케 하소서 우리가 주의 이름을 부르리이다	So will not we go back from thee: quicken us, and we will call upon thy name.	Then we will not turn away from You; revive us, and we will call on Your name.
PSA	80	19	만군의 하나님 여호와여 우리를 돌이키시고 주의 얼굴 빛을 비취소서 우리가 구원을 얻으리이다	Turn us again, O Lord God of hosts, cause thy face to shine; and we shall be saved.	Restore us, O LORD God of Hosts; cause Your face to shine upon us, that we may be saved.
PSA	81	1	아삽의 시, 영장으로 깃딧에 맞춘 노래 우리 능력 되신 하나님께 높이 노래하며 야곱의 하나님께 즐거이 노래할지어다	To the chief Musician upon Gittith, A Psalm of Asaph. Sing aloud unto God our strength: make a joyful noise unto the God of Jacob.	For the choirmaster. According to Gittith. Of Asaph. Sing for joy to God our strength; make a joyful noise to the God of Jacob.
PSA	81	2	시를 읊으며 소고를 치고 아름다운 수금에 비파를 아우를지어다	Take a psalm, and bring hither the timbrel, the pleasant harp with the psaltery.	Lift up a song, strike the tambourine, play the sweet-sounding harp and lyre.
PSA	81	3	월삭과 월망과 우리의 절일에 나팔을 불지어다	Blow up the trumpet in the new moon, in the time appointed, on our solemn feast day.	Sound the ram’s horn at the New Moon, and at the full moon on the day of our Feast.
PSA	81	4	이는 이스라엘의 율례요 야곱의 하나님의 규례로다	For this was a statute for Israel, and a law of the God of Jacob.	For this is a statute for Israel, an ordinance of the God of Jacob.
PSA	81	5	하나님이 애굽 땅을 치러 나가시던 때에 요셉의 족속 중에 이를 증거로 세우셨도다 거기서 내가 알지 못하던 말씀을 들었나니	This he ordained in Joseph for a testimony, when he went out through the land of Egypt: where I heard a language that I understood not.	He ordained it as a testimony for Joseph when he went out over the land of Egypt, where I heard an unfamiliar language:
PSA	81	6	이르시되 내가 그 어깨에서 짐을 벗기고 그 손에서 광주리를 놓게 하였도다	I removed his shoulder from the burden: his hands were delivered from the pots.	“I relieved his shoulder of the burden; his hands were freed from the basket.
PSA	81	7	네가 고난 중에 부르짖으매 내가 너를 건졌고 뇌성의 은은한 곳에서 네게 응답하며 므리바 물가에서 너를 시험하였도다(셀라)	Thou calledst in trouble, and I delivered thee; I answered thee in the secret place of thunder: I proved thee at the waters of Meribah. Selah.	You called out in distress, and I rescued you; I answered you from the cloud of thunder; I tested you at the waters of Meribah. Selah
PSA	81	8	내 백성이여 들으라 내가 네게 증거하리라 이스라엘이여 내게 듣기를 원하노라	Hear, O my people, and I will testify unto thee: O Israel, if thou wilt hearken unto me;	Hear, O My people, and I will warn you: O Israel, if only you would listen to Me!
PSA	81	9	너희 중에 다른 신을 두지 말며 이방신에게 절하지 말지어다	There shall no strange god be in thee; neither shalt thou worship any strange god.	There must be no strange god among you, nor shall you bow to a foreign god.
PSA	81	10	나는 너를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 낸 여호와 네 하나님이니 네 입을 넓게 열라 내가 채우리라 하였으나	I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt: open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.	I am the LORD your God, who brought you up out of Egypt. Open wide your mouth, and I will fill it.
PSA	81	11	내 백성이 내 소리를 듣지 아니하며 이스라엘이 나를 원치 아니하였도다	But my people would not hearken to my voice; and Israel would none of me.	But My people would not listen to Me, and Israel would not obey Me.
PSA	81	12	그러므로 내가 그 마음의 강퍅한 대로 버려두어 그 임의대로 행케하였도다	So I gave them up unto their own hearts’ lust: and they walked in their own counsels.	So I gave them up to their stubborn hearts to follow their own devices.
PSA	81	13	내 백성이 나를 청종하며 이스라엘이 내 도 행하기를 원하노라	Oh that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways!	If only My people would listen to Me, if Israel would follow My ways,
PSA	81	14	그리하면 내가 속히 저희 원수를 제어하며 내 손을 돌려 저희 대적을 치리니	I should soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries.	how soon I would subdue their enemies and turn My hand against their foes!
PSA	81	15	여호와를 한하는 자는 저에게 복종하는 체 할지라도 저희 시대는 영원히 계속하리라	The haters of the Lord should have submitted themselves unto him: but their time should have endured for ever.	Those who hate the LORD would feign obedience, and their doom would last forever.
PSA	81	16	내가 또 밀의 아름다운 것으로 저희에게 먹이며 반석에서 나오는 꿀로 너를 만족케 하리라 하셨도다	He should have fed them also with the finest of the wheat: and with honey out of the rock should I have satisfied thee.	But I would feed you the finest wheat; with honey from the rock I would satisfy you.”
PSA	82	1	아삽의 시 하나님이 하나님의 회 가운데 서시며 재판장들 중에서 판단하시되	A Psalm of Asaph. God standeth in the congregation of the mighty; he judgeth among the gods.	A Psalm of Asaph. God presides in the divine assembly; He renders judgment among the gods:
PSA	82	2	너희가 불공평한 판단을 하며 악인의 낯 보기를 언제까지 하려느냐(셀라)	How long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked? Selah.	“How long will you judge unjustly and show partiality to the wicked? Selah
PSA	82	3	가난한 자와 고아를 위하여 판단하며 곤란한 자와 빈궁한 자에게 공의를 베풀지며	Defend the poor and fatherless: do justice to the afflicted and needy.	Defend the cause of the weak and fatherless; uphold the rights of the afflicted and oppressed.
PSA	82	4	가난한 자와 궁핍한 자를 구원하여 악인들의 손에서 건질찌니라 하시는도다	Deliver the poor and needy: rid them out of the hand of the wicked.	Rescue the weak and needy; save them from the hand of the wicked.
PSA	82	5	저희는 무지무각하여 흑암 중에 왕래하니 땅의 모든 터가 흔들리도다	They know not, neither will they understand; they walk on in darkness: all the foundations of the earth are out of course.	They do not know or understand; they wander in the darkness; all the foundations of the earth are shaken.
PSA	82	6	내가 말하기를 너희는 신들이며 다 지존자의 아들들이라 하였으나	I have said, Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the most High.	I have said, ‘You are gods; you are all sons of the Most High.’
PSA	82	7	너희는 범인 같이 죽으며 방백의 하나 같이 엎더지리로다	But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes.	But like mortals you will die, and like rulers you will fall.”
PSA	82	8	하나님이여 일어나사 세상을 판단하소서 모든 열방이 주의 기업이 되겠음이니이다	Arise, O God, judge the earth: for thou shalt inherit all nations.	Arise, O God, judge the earth, for all the nations are Your inheritance.
PSA	83	1	아삽의 시 곧 노래 하나님이여 침묵치 마소서 하나님이여 잠잠치 말고 고요치 마소서	A Song or Psalm of Asaph. Keep not thou silence, O God: hold not thy peace, and be not still, O God.	A song. A Psalm of Asaph. O God, be not silent; be not speechless; be not still, O God.
PSA	83	2	대저 주의 원수가 훤화하며 주를 한하는 자가 머리를 들었나이다	For, lo, thine enemies make a tumult: and they that hate thee have lifted up the head.	See how Your enemies rage, how Your foes have reared their heads.
PSA	83	3	저희가 주의 백성을 치려 하여 간계를 꾀하며 주의 숨긴 자를 치려고 서로 의논하여	They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden ones.	With cunning they scheme against Your people and conspire against those You cherish,
PSA	83	4	말하기를 가서 저희를 끊어 다시 나라가 되지 못하게 하여 이스라엘의 이름으로 다시는 기억되지 못하게 하자 하나이다	They have said, Come, and let us cut them off from being a nation; that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.	saying, “Come, let us erase them as a nation; may the name of Israel be remembered no more.”
PSA	83	5	저희가 일심으로 의논하고 주를 대적하여 서로 언약하니	For they have consulted together with one consent: they are confederate against thee:	For with one mind they plot together, they form an alliance against You—
PSA	83	6	곧 에돔의 장막과 이스라엘 인과 모압과 하갈 인이며	The tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites; of Moab, and the Hagarenes;	the tents of Edom and the Ishmaelites, of Moab and the Hagrites,
PSA	83	7	그발과 암몬과 아말렉이며 블레셋과 두로 거민이요	Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek; the Philistines with the inhabitants of Tyre;	of Gebal, Ammon, and Amalek, of Philistia with the people of Tyre.
PSA	83	8	앗수르도 저희와 연합하여 롯 자손의 도움이 되었나이다(셀라)	Assur also is joined with them: they have holpen the children of Lot. Selah.	Even Assyria has joined them, lending strength to the sons of Lot. Selah
PSA	83	9	주는 미디안 인에게 행하신 것 같이, 기손 시내에서 시스라와 야빈에게 행하신 것 같이 저희에게도 행하소서	Do unto them as unto the Midianites; as to Sisera, as to Jabin, at the brook of Kison:	Do to them as You did to Midian, as to Sisera and Jabin at the River Kishon,
PSA	83	10	그들은 엔돌에서 패망하여 땅에 거름이 되었나이다	Which perished at En–dor: they became as dung for the earth.	who perished at Endor and became like dung on the ground.
PSA	83	11	저희 귀인으로 오렙과 스엡 같게 하시며 저희 모든 방백으로 세바와 살문나와 같게 하소서	Make their nobles like Oreb, and like Zeeb: yea, all their princes as Zebah, and as Zalmunna:	Make their nobles like Oreb and Zeeb, and all their princes like Zebah and Zalmunna,
PSA	83	12	저희가 말하기를 우리가 하나님의 목장을 우리의 소유로 취하자 하였나이다	Who said, Let us take to ourselves the houses of God in possession.	who said, “Let us possess for ourselves the pastures of God.”
PSA	83	13	나의 하나님이여 저희로 굴러가는 검불 같게 하시며 바람에 날리는 초개 같게 하소서	O my God, make them like a wheel; as the stubble before the wind.	Make them like tumbleweed, O my God, like chaff before the wind.
PSA	83	14	삼림을 사르는 불과 산에 붙는 화염 같이	As the fire burneth a wood, and as the flame setteth the mountains on fire;	As fire consumes a forest, as a flame sets the mountains ablaze,
PSA	83	15	주의 광풍으로 저희를 쫓으시며 주의 폭풍으로 저희를 두렵게 하소서	So persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm.	so pursue them with Your tempest, and terrify them with Your storm.
PSA	83	16	여호와여 수치로 저희 얼굴에 가득케 하사 저희로 주의 이름을 찾게 하소서	Fill their faces with shame; that they may seek thy name, O Lord.	Cover their faces with shame, that they may seek Your name, O LORD.
PSA	83	17	저희로 수치를 당하여 영원히 놀라게 하시며 낭패와 멸망을 당케 하사	Let them be confounded and troubled for ever; yea, let them be put to shame, and perish:	May they be ever ashamed and terrified; may they perish in disgrace.
PSA	83	18	여호와라 이름하신 주만 온 세계의 지존자로 알게 하소서	That men may know that thou, whose name alone is Jehovah, art the most high over all the earth.	May they know that You alone, whose name is the LORD, are Most High over all the earth.
PSA	84	1	고라의 시, 영장으로 깃딧에 맞춘 노래 만군의 여호와여 주의 장막이 어찌 그리 사랑스러운지요	To the chief Musician upon Gittith, A Psalm for the sons of Korah. How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts!	For the choirmaster. According to Gittith. A Psalm of the sons of Korah. How lovely is Your dwelling place, O LORD of Hosts!
PSA	84	2	내 영혼이 여호와의 궁정을 사모하여 쇠약함이여 내 마음과 육체가 생존하시는 하나님께 부르짖나이다	My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the Lord: my heart and my flesh crieth out for the living God.	My soul longs, even faints, for the courts of the LORD; my heart and my flesh cry out for the living God.
PSA	84	3	나의 왕, 나의 하나님, 만군의 여호와여 주의 제단에서 참새도 제 집을 얻고 제비도 새끼 둘 보금자리를 얻었나이다	Yea, the sparrow hath found an house, and the swallow a nest for herself, where she may lay her young, even thine altars, O Lord of hosts, my King, and my God.	Even the sparrow has found a home, and the swallow a nest for herself, where she places her young near Your altars, O LORD of Hosts, my King and my God.
PSA	84	4	주의 집에 거하는 자가 복이 있나이다 저희가 항상 주를 찬송하리이다(셀라)	Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they will be still praising thee. Selah.	How blessed are those who dwell in Your house! They are ever praising You. Selah
PSA	84	5	주께 힘을 얻고 그 마음에 시온의 대로가 있는 자는 복이 있나이다	Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee; in whose heart are the ways of them.	Blessed are those whose strength is in You, whose hearts are set on pilgrimage.
PSA	84	6	저희는 눈물 골짜기로 통행할 때에 그곳으로 많은 샘의 곳이 되게 하며 이른 비도 은택을 입히나이다	Who passing through the valley of Baca make it a well; the rain also filleth the pools.	As they pass through the Valley of Baca, they make it a place of springs; even the autumn rain covers it with pools.
PSA	84	7	저희는 힘을 얻고 더 얻어 나아가 시온에서 하나님 앞에 각기 나타나리이다	They go from strength to strength, every one of them in Zion appeareth before God.	They go from strength to strength, until each appears before God in Zion.
PSA	84	8	만군의 하나님 여호와여 내 기도를 들으소서 야곱의 하나님이여 귀를 기울이소서(셀라)	O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer: give ear, O God of Jacob. Selah.	O LORD God of Hosts, hear my prayer; give ear, O God of Jacob. Selah
PSA	84	9	우리 방패이신 하나님이여 주의 기름 부으신 자의 얼굴을 살펴 보옵소서	Behold, O God our shield, and look upon the face of thine anointed.	Take notice of our shield, O God, and look with favor on the face of Your anointed.
PSA	84	10	주의 궁정에서 한 날이 다른 곳에서 천 날보다 나은즉 악인의 장막에 거함보다 내 하나님 문지기로 있는 것이 좋사오니	For a day in thy courts is better than a thousand. I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness.	For better is one day in Your courts than a thousand elsewhere. I would rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God than dwell in the tents of the wicked.
PSA	84	11	여호와 하나님은 해요 방패시라 여호와께서 은혜와 영화를 주시며 정직히 행하는 자에게 좋은 것을 아끼지 아니하실 것임이니이다	For the Lord God is a sun and shield: the Lord will give grace and glory: no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.	For the LORD God is a sun and a shield; the LORD gives grace and glory; He withholds no good thing from those who walk with integrity.
PSA	84	12	만군의 여호와여 주께 의지하는 자는 복이 있나이다	O Lord of hosts, blessed is the man that trusteth in thee.	O LORD of Hosts, how blessed is the man who trusts in You!
PSA	85	1	고라 자손의 시, 영장으로 한 노래 여호와여 주께서 주의 땅에 은혜를 베푸사 야곱의 포로 된 자로 돌아오게 하셨으며	To the chief Musician, A Psalm for the sons of Korah. Lord, thou hast been favourable unto thy land: thou hast brought back the captivity of Jacob.	For the choirmaster. A Psalm of the sons of Korah. You showed favor to Your land, O LORD; You restored Jacob from captivity.
PSA	85	2	주의 백성의 죄악을 사하시고 저희 모든 죄를 덮으셨나이다(셀라)	Thou hast forgiven the iniquity of thy people, thou hast covered all their sin. Selah.	You forgave the iniquity of Your people; You covered all their sin. Selah
PSA	85	3	주의 모든 분노를 거두시며 주의 진노를 돌이키셨나이다	Thou hast taken away all thy wrath: thou hast turned thyself from the fierceness of thine anger.	You withheld all Your fury; You turned from Your burning anger.
PSA	85	4	우리 구원의 하나님이여 우리를 돌이키시고 우리에게 향하신 주의 분노를 그치소서	Turn us, O God of our salvation, and cause thine anger toward us to cease.	Restore us, O God of our salvation, and put away Your displeasure toward us.
PSA	85	5	주께서 우리에게 영원히 노하시며 대대에 발분하시겠나이까	Wilt thou be angry with us for ever? wilt thou draw out thine anger to all generations?	Will You be angry with us forever? Will You draw out Your anger to all generations?
PSA	85	6	우리를 다시 살리사 주의 백성으로 주를 기뻐하게 아니하시겠나이까	Wilt thou not revive us again: that thy people may rejoice in thee?	Will You not revive us again, that Your people may rejoice in You?
PSA	85	7	여호와여 주의 인자하심을 우리에게 보이시며 주의 구원을 우리에게 주소서	Shew us thy mercy, O Lord, and grant us thy salvation.	Show us Your loving devotion, O LORD, and grant us Your salvation.
PSA	85	8	내가 하나님 여호와의 하실 말씀을 들으리니 대저 그 백성 그 성도에게 화평을 말씀하실 것이라 저희는 다시 망령된 데로 돌아가지 말지로다	I will hear what God the Lord will speak: for he will speak peace unto his people, and to his saints: but let them not turn again to folly.	I will listen to what God the LORD will say; for He will surely speak peace to His people and His saints; He will not let them return to folly.
PSA	85	9	진실로 그의 구원이 그를 경외하는 자에게 가까우니 이에 영광이 우리 땅에 거하리이다	Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him; that glory may dwell in our land.	Surely His salvation is near to those who fear Him, that His glory may dwell in our land.
PSA	85	10	긍휼과 진리가 같이 만나고 의와 화평이 서로 입맞추었으며	Mercy and truth are met together; righteousness and peace have kissed each other.	Loving devotion and faithfulness have joined together; righteousness and peace have kissed.
PSA	85	11	진리는 땅에서 솟아나고 의는 하늘에서 하감하였도다	Truth shall spring out of the earth; and righteousness shall look down from heaven.	Faithfulness sprouts from the earth, and righteousness looks down from heaven.
PSA	85	12	여호와께서 좋은 것을 주시리니 우리 땅이 그 산물을 내리로다	Yea, the Lord shall give that which is good; and our land shall yield her increase.	The LORD will indeed provide what is good, and our land will yield its increase.
PSA	85	13	의가 주의 앞에 앞서 행하며 주의 종적으로 길을 삼으리로다	Righteousness shall go before him; and shall set us in the way of his steps.	Righteousness will go before Him to prepare the way for His steps.
PSA	86	1	다윗의 기도 여호와여 나는 곤고하고 궁핍하오니 귀를 기울여 내게 응답하소서	A Prayer of David. Bow down thine ear, O Lord, hear me: for I am poor and needy.	A prayer of David. Incline Your ear, O LORD, and answer me, for I am poor and needy.
PSA	86	2	나는 경건하오니 내 영혼을 보존하소서 내 주 하나님이여 주를 의지하는 종을 구원하소서	Preserve my soul; for I am holy: O thou my God, save thy servant that trusteth in thee.	Preserve my soul, for I am godly. You are my God; save Your servant who trusts in You.
PSA	86	3	주여 나를 긍휼히 여기소서 내가 종일 주께 부르짖나이다	Be merciful unto me, O Lord: for I cry unto thee daily.	Be merciful to me, O Lord, for I call to You all day long.
PSA	86	4	주여 내 영혼이 주를 우러러 보오니 주여 내 영혼을 기쁘게 하소서	Rejoice the soul of thy servant: for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.	Bring joy to Your servant, for to You, O Lord, I lift up my soul.
PSA	86	5	주는 선하사 사유하기를 즐기시며 주께 부르짖는 자에게 인자함이 후하심이니이다	For thou, Lord, art good, and ready to forgive; and plenteous in mercy unto all them that call upon thee.	For You, O Lord, are kind and forgiving, rich in loving devotion to all who call on You.
PSA	86	6	여호와여 나의 기도에 귀를 기울이시고 나의 간구하는 소리를 들으소서	Give ear, O Lord, unto my prayer; and attend to the voice of my supplications.	Hear my prayer, O LORD, and attend to my plea for mercy.
PSA	86	7	나의 환난 날에 내가 주께 부르짖으리니 주께서 내게 응답하시리이다	In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee: for thou wilt answer me.	In the day of my distress I call on You, because You answer me.
PSA	86	8	주여 신들 중에 주와 같은 자 없사오며 주의 행사와 같음도 없나이다	Among the gods there is none like unto thee, O Lord; neither are there any works like unto thy works.	O Lord, there is none like You among the gods, nor any works like Yours.
PSA	86	9	주여 주의 지으신 모든 열방이 와서 주의 앞에 경배하며 주의 이름에 영화를 돌리리이다	All nations whom thou hast made shall come and worship before thee, O Lord; and shall glorify thy name.	All the nations You have made will come and bow before You, O Lord, and they will glorify Your name.
PSA	86	10	대저 주는 광대하사 기사를 행하시오니 주만 하나님이시니이다	For thou art great, and doest wondrous things: thou art God alone.	For You are great and perform wonders; You alone are God.
PSA	86	11	여호와여 주의 도로 내게 가르치소서 내가 주의 진리에 행하오리니 일심으로 주의 이름을 경외하게 하소서	Teach me thy way, O Lord; I will walk in thy truth: unite my heart to fear thy name.	Teach me Your way, O LORD, that I may walk in Your truth. Give me an undivided heart, that I may fear Your name.
PSA	86	12	주 나의 하나님이여 내가 전심으로 주를 찬송하고 영영토록 주의 이름에 영화를 돌리오리니	I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart: and I will glorify thy name for evermore.	I will praise You, O Lord my God, with all my heart; I will glorify Your name forever.
PSA	86	13	이는 내게 향하신 주의 인자가 크사 내 영혼을 깊은 음부에서 건지셨음이니이다	For great is thy mercy toward me: and thou hast delivered my soul from the lowest hell.	For great is Your loving devotion to me; You have delivered me from the depths of Sheol.
PSA	86	14	하나님이여 교만한 자가 일어나 나를 치고 강포한 자의 무리가 내 혼을 찾았사오며 자기 앞에 주를 두지 아니하였나이다	O God, the proud are risen against me, and the assemblies of violent men have sought after my soul; and have not set thee before them.	The arrogant rise against me, O God; a band of ruthless men seeks my life, with no regard for You.
PSA	86	15	그러나 주여 주는 긍휼히 여기시며 은혜를 베푸시며 노하기를 더디 하시며 인자와 진실이 풍성하신 하나님이시오니	But thou, O Lord, art a God full of compassion, and gracious, longsuffering, and plenteous in mercy and truth.	But You, O Lord, are a compassionate and gracious God, slow to anger, abounding in loving devotion and faithfulness.
PSA	86	16	내게로 돌이키사 나를 긍휼히 여기소서 주의 종에게 힘을 주시고 주의 여종의 아들을 구원하소서	O turn unto me, and have mercy upon me; give thy strength unto thy servant, and save the son of thine handmaid.	Turn to me and have mercy; grant Your strength to Your servant; save the son of Your maidservant.
PSA	86	17	은총의 표징을 내게 보이소서 그러면 나를 미워하는 저희가 보고 부끄러워하오리니 여호와여 주는 나를 돕고 위로하심이니이다	Shew me a token for good; that they which hate me may see it, and be ashamed: because thou, Lord, hast holpen me, and comforted me.	Show me a sign of Your goodness, that my enemies may see and be ashamed; for You, O LORD, have helped me and comforted me.
PSA	87	1	고라 자손의 시 곧 노래 그 기지가 성산에 있음이여	A Psalm or Song for the sons of Korah. His foundation is in the holy mountains.	A Psalm of the sons of Korah. A song. He has founded His city on the holy mountains.
PSA	87	2	여호와께서 야곱의 모든 거처보다 시온의 문들을 사랑하시는도다	The Lord loveth the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob.	The LORD loves the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob.
PSA	87	3	하나님의 성이여 너를 가리켜 영광스럽다 말하는도다(셀라)	Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. Selah.	Glorious things are ascribed to you, O city of God. Selah
PSA	87	4	내가 라합과 바벨론을 나를 아는 자 중에 있다 말하리라 보라 블레셋과 두로와 구스여 이도 거기서 났다 하리로다	I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon to them that know me: behold Philistia, and Tyre, with Ethiopia; this man was born there.	“I will mention Rahab and Babylon among those who know Me— along with Philistia, Tyre, and Cush— when I say, ‘This one was born in Zion.’”
PSA	87	5	시온에 대하여 말하기를 이 사람, 저 사람이 거기서 났나니 지존자가 친히 시온을 세우리라 하리로다	And of Zion it shall be said, This and that man was born in her: and the highest himself shall establish her.	And it will be said of Zion: “This one and that one were born in her, and the Most High Himself will establish her.”
PSA	87	6	여호와께서 민족들을 등록하실 때에는 그 수를 세시며 이 사람이 거기서 났다 하시리로다(셀라)	The Lord shall count, when he writeth up the people, that this man was born there. Selah.	The LORD will record in the register of the peoples: “This one was born in Zion.” Selah
PSA	87	7	노래하는 자와 춤추는 자는 말하기를 나의 모든 근원이 네게 있다 하리로다	As well the singers as the players on instruments shall be there: all my springs are in thee.	Singers and pipers will proclaim, “All my springs of joy are in You.”
PSA	88	1	고라 자손의 찬송 시 곧 에스라인 헤만의 마스길, 영장으로 마할랏르안놋레 맞춘 노래 여호와 내 구원의 하나님이여 내가 주야로 주의 앞에 부르짖었사오니	A Song or Psalm for the sons of Korah, to the chief Musician upon Mahalath Leannoth, Maschil of Heman the Ezrahite. O Lord God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before thee:	A song. A Psalm of the sons of Korah. For the choirmaster. According to Mahalath Leannoth. A Maskil of Heman the Ezrahite. O LORD, the God of my salvation, day and night I cry out before You.
PSA	88	2	나의 기도로 주의 앞에 달하게 하시며 주의 귀를 나의 부르짖음에 기울이소서	Let my prayer come before thee: incline thine ear unto my cry;	May my prayer come before You; incline Your ear to my cry.
PSA	88	3	대저 나의 영혼에 곤란이 가득하며 나의 생명은 음부에 가까웠사오니	For my soul is full of troubles: and my life draweth nigh unto the grave.	For my soul is full of troubles, and my life draws near to Sheol.
PSA	88	4	나는 무덤에 내려가는 자와 함께 인정되고 힘이 없는 사람과 같으며	I am counted with them that go down into the pit: I am as a man that hath no strength:	I am counted among those descending to the Pit. I am like a man without strength.
PSA	88	5	사망자 중에 던지운 바 되었으며 살륙을 당하여 무덤에 누운 자 같으니이다 주께서 저희를 다시 기억지 아니하시니 저희는 주의 손에서 끊어진 자니이다	Free among the dead, like the slain that lie in the grave, whom thou rememberest no more: and they are cut off from thy hand.	I am forsaken among the dead, like the slain who lie in the grave, whom You remember no more, who are cut off from Your care.
PSA	88	6	주께서 나를 깊은 웅덩이 어두운 곳 음침한 데 두셨사오며	Thou hast laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness, in the deeps.	You have laid me in the lowest Pit, in the darkest of the depths.
PSA	88	7	주의 노가 나를 심히 누르시고 주의 모든 파도로 나를 괴롭게 하셨나이다(셀라)	Thy wrath lieth hard upon me, and thou hast afflicted me with all thy waves. Selah.	Your wrath weighs heavily upon me; all Your waves have submerged me. Selah
PSA	88	8	주께서 나의 아는 자로 내게서 멀리 떠나게 하시고 나로 저희에 가증되게 하셨사오니 나는 갇혀서 나갈 수 없게 되었나이다	Thou hast put away mine acquaintance far from me; thou hast made me an abomination unto them: I am shut up, and I cannot come forth.	You have removed my friends from me; You have made me repulsive to them; I am confined and cannot escape.
PSA	88	9	곤란으로 인하여 내 눈이 쇠하였나이다 여호와여 내가 매일 주께 부르며 주를 향하여 나의 두손을 들었나이다.	Mine eye mourneth by reason of affliction: Lord, I have called daily upon thee, I have stretched out my hands unto thee.	My eyes grow dim with grief. I call to You daily, O LORD; I spread out my hands to You.
PSA	88	10	주께서 사망한 자에게 기사를 보이시겠나이까 유혼이 일어나 주를 찬송하리이까(셀라)	Wilt thou shew wonders to the dead? shall the dead arise and praise thee? Selah.	Do You work wonders for the dead? Do departed spirits rise up to praise You? Selah
PSA	88	11	주의 인자하심을 무덤에서, 주의 성실하심을 멸망 중에서 선포할 수 있으리이까	Shall thy lovingkindness be declared in the grave? or thy faithfulness in destruction?	Can Your loving devotion be proclaimed in the grave, Your faithfulness in Abaddon?
PSA	88	12	흑암 중에서 주의 기사와, 잊음의 땅에서 주의 의를 알 수 있으리이까	Shall thy wonders be known in the dark? and thy righteousness in the land of forgetfulness?	Will Your wonders be known in the darkness, or Your righteousness in the land of oblivion?
PSA	88	13	여호와여 오직 주께 내가 부르짖었사오니 아침에 나의 기도가 주의 앞에 달하리이다	But unto thee have I cried, O Lord; and in the morning shall my prayer prevent thee.	But to You, O LORD, I cry for help; in the morning my prayer comes before You.
PSA	88	14	여호와여 어찌하여 나의 영혼을 버리시며 어찌하여 주의 얼굴을 내게 숨기시나이까	Lord, why castest thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me?	Why, O LORD, do You reject me? Why do You hide Your face from me?
PSA	88	15	내가 소시부터 곤란을 당하여 죽게 되었사오며 주의 두렵게 하심을 당할 때에 황망하였나이다	I am afflicted and ready to die from my youth up: while I suffer thy terrors I am distracted.	From my youth I was afflicted and near death. I have borne Your terrors; I am in despair.
PSA	88	16	주의 진노가 내게 넘치고 주의 두렵게 하심이 나를 끊었나이다	Thy fierce wrath goeth over me; thy terrors have cut me off.	Your wrath has swept over me; Your terrors have destroyed me.
PSA	88	17	이런 일이 물 같이 종일 나를 에우며 함께 나를 둘렀나이다	They came round about me daily like water; they compassed me about together.	All day long they engulf me like water; they enclose me on every side.
PSA	88	18	주께서 나의 사랑하는 자와 친구를 내게서 멀리 떠나게 하시며 나의 아는 자를 흑암에 두셨나이다	Lover and friend hast thou put far from me, and mine acquaintance into darkness.	You have removed my beloved and my friend; darkness is my closest companion.
PSA	89	1	에스라인 에단의 마스길 내가 여호와의 인자하심을 영원히 노래하며 주의 성실하심을 내 입으로 대대에 알게 하리이다	Maschil of Ethan the Ezrahite. I will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever: with my mouth will I make known thy faithfulness to all generations.	A Maskil of Ethan the Ezrahite. I will sing of the loving devotion of the LORD forever; with my mouth I will proclaim Your faithfulness to all generations.
PSA	89	2	내가 말하기를 인자하심을 영원히 세우시며 주의 성실하심을 하늘에서 견고히 하시리라 하였나이다	For I have said, Mercy shall be built up for ever: thy faithfulness shalt thou establish in the very heavens.	For I have said, “Loving devotion is built up forever; in the heavens You establish Your faithfulness.”
PSA	89	3	주께서 이르시되 내가 나의 택한 자와 언약을 맺으며 내 종 다윗에게 맹세하기를	I have made a covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my servant,	You said, “I have made a covenant with My chosen one, I have sworn to David My servant:
PSA	89	4	내가 네 자손을 영원히 견고히 하며 네 위를 대대에 세우리라 하였다 하셨나이다(셀라)	Thy seed will I establish for ever, and build up thy throne to all generations. Selah.	‘I will establish your offspring forever and build up your throne for all generations.’” Selah
PSA	89	5	여호와여 주의 기사를 하늘이 찬양할 것이요 주의 성실도 거룩한 자의 회중에서 찬양하리이다	And the heavens shall praise thy wonders, O Lord: thy faithfulness also in the congregation of the saints.	The heavens praise Your wonders, O LORD— Your faithfulness as well— in the assembly of the holy ones.
PSA	89	6	대저 궁창에서 능히 여호와와 비교할 자 누구며 권능 있는 자 중에 여호와와 같은 자 누구리이까	For who in the heaven can be compared unto the Lord? who among the sons of the mighty can be likened unto the Lord?	For who in the skies can compare with the LORD? Who among the heavenly beings is like the LORD?
PSA	89	7	하나님은 거룩한 자의 회중에서 심히 엄위하시오며 둘러 있는 모든 자 위에 더욱 두려워할 자시니이다	God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints, and to be had in reverence of all them that are about him.	In the council of the holy ones, God is greatly feared, and awesome above all who surround Him.
PSA	89	8	여호와 만군의 하나님이여 주와 같이 능한 자 누구리이까 여호와여 주의 성실하심이 주를 둘렀나이다	O Lord God of hosts, who is a strong Lord like unto thee? or to thy faithfulness round about thee?	O LORD God of Hosts, who is like You? O mighty LORD, Your faithfulness surrounds You.
PSA	89	9	주께서 바다의 흉용함을 다스리시며 그 파도가 일어날 때에 평정케 하시나이다	Thou rulest the raging of the sea: when the waves thereof arise, thou stillest them.	You rule the raging sea; when its waves mount up, You still them.
PSA	89	10	주께서 라합을 살륙 당한 자 같이 파쇄하시고 주의 원수를 주의 능력의 팔로 흩으셨나이다	Thou hast broken Rahab in pieces, as one that is slain; thou hast scattered thine enemies with thy strong arm.	You crushed Rahab like a carcass; You scattered Your enemies with Your mighty arm.
PSA	89	11	하늘이 주의 것이요 땅도 주의 것이라 세계와 그 중에 충만한 것을 주께서 건설하셨나이다	The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine: as for the world and the fulness thereof, thou hast founded them.	The heavens are Yours, and also the earth. The earth and its fullness You founded.
PSA	89	12	남북을 주께서 창조하셨으니 다볼과 헤르몬이 주의 이름을 인하여 즐거워하나이다	The north and the south thou hast created them: Tabor and Hermon shall rejoice in thy name.	North and south You created; Tabor and Hermon shout for joy at Your name.
PSA	89	13	주의 팔에 능력이 있사오며 주의 손은 강하고 주의 오른손은 높으시니이다	Thou hast a mighty arm: strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand.	Mighty is Your arm; strong is Your hand. Your right hand is exalted.
PSA	89	14	의와 공의가 주의 보좌의 기초라 인자함과 진실함이 주를 앞서 행하나이다	Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne: mercy and truth shall go before thy face.	Righteousness and justice are the foundation of Your throne; loving devotion and faithfulness go before You.
PSA	89	15	즐거운 소리를 아는 백성은 유복한 자라 여호와여 저희가 주의 얼굴 빛에 다니며	Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound: they shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy countenance.	Blessed are those who know the joyful sound, who walk, O LORD, in the light of Your presence.
PSA	89	16	종일 주의 이름으로 기뻐하며 주의 의로 인하여 높아지오니	In thy name shall they rejoice all the day: and in thy righteousness shall they be exalted.	They rejoice in Your name all day long, and in Your righteousness they exult.
PSA	89	17	주는 저희 힘의 영광이심이라 우리 뿔이 주의 은총으로 높아지오리니	For thou art the glory of their strength: and in thy favour our horn shall be exalted.	For You are the glory of their strength, and by Your favor our horn is exalted.
PSA	89	18	우리 방패는 여호와께 속하였고 우리 왕은 이스라엘의 거룩한 자에게 속하였음이니이다	For the Lord is our defence; and the Holy One of Israel is our king.	Surely our shield belongs to the LORD, and our king to the Holy One of Israel.
PSA	89	19	주께서 이상 중에 주의 성도에게 말씀하시기를 내가 돕는 힘을 능력 있는 자에게 더하며 백성 중에서 택한 자를 높였으되	Then thou spakest in vision to thy holy one, and saidst, I have laid help upon one that is mighty; I have exalted one chosen out of the people.	You once spoke in a vision; to Your godly ones You said, “I have bestowed help on a warrior; I have exalted one chosen from the people.
PSA	89	20	내가 내 종 다윗을 찾아 나의 거룩한 기름으로 부었도다	I have found David my servant; with my holy oil have I anointed him:	I have found My servant David; with My sacred oil I have anointed him.
PSA	89	21	내 손이 저와 함께 하여 견고히 하고 내 팔이 그를 힘이 있게 하리이다	With whom my hand shall be established: mine arm also shall strengthen him.	My hand will sustain him; surely My arm will strengthen him.
PSA	89	22	원수가 저에게서 강탈치 못하며 악한 자가 저를 곤고케 못하리로다	The enemy shall not exact upon him; nor the son of wickedness afflict him.	No enemy will exact tribute; no wicked man will oppress him.
PSA	89	23	내가 저의 앞에서 그 대적을 박멸하며 저를 한하는 자를 치려니와	And I will beat down his foes before his face, and plague them that hate him.	I will crush his foes before him and strike down those who hate him.
PSA	89	24	나의 성실함과 인자함이 저와 함께 하리니 내 이름을 인하여 그 뿔이 높아지리로다	But my faithfulness and my mercy shall be with him: and in my name shall his horn be exalted.	My faithfulness and loving devotion will be with him, and through My name his horn will be exalted.
PSA	89	25	내가 또 그 손을 바다 위에 세우며 오른손을 강들 위에 세우리니	I will set his hand also in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers.	I will set his hand over the sea, and his right hand upon the rivers.
PSA	89	26	저가 내게 부르기를 주는 나의 아버지시요 나의 하나님이시요 나의 구원의 바위시라 하리로다	He shall cry unto me, Thou art my father, my God, and the rock of my salvation.	He will call to Me, ‘You are my Father, my God, the Rock of my salvation.’
PSA	89	27	내가 또 저로 장자를 삼고 세계 열왕의 으뜸이 되게 하며	Also I will make him my firstborn, higher than the kings of the earth.	I will indeed appoint him as My firstborn, the highest of the kings of the earth.
PSA	89	28	저를 위하여 나의 인자함을 영구히 지키고 저로 더불어 한 나의 언약을 굳게 세우며	My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall stand fast with him.	I will forever preserve My loving devotion for him, and My covenant with him will stand fast.
PSA	89	29	또 그 후손을 영구케 하여 그 위를 하늘의 날과 같게 하리로다	His seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven.	I will establish his line forever, his throne as long as the heavens endure.
PSA	89	30	만일 그 자손이 내 법을 버리며 내 규례대로 행치 아니하며	If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments;	If his sons forsake My law and do not walk in My judgments,
PSA	89	31	내 율례를 파하며 내 계명을 지키지 아니하면	If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments;	if they violate My statutes and fail to keep My commandments,
PSA	89	32	내가 지팡이로 저희 범과를 다스리며 채찍으로 저희 죄악을 징책하리로다	Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes.	I will attend to their transgression with the rod, and to their iniquity with stripes.
PSA	89	33	그러나 나의 인자함을 그에게서 다 거두지 아니하며 나의 성실함도 폐하지 아니하며	Nevertheless my lovingkindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail.	But I will not withdraw My loving devotion from him, nor ever betray My faithfulness.
PSA	89	34	내 언약을 파하지 아니하며 내 입술에서 낸 것도 변치 아니하리로다	My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips.	I will not violate My covenant or alter the utterance of My lips.
PSA	89	35	내가 나의 거룩함으로 한번 맹세하였은즉 다윗에게 거짓을 아니할 것이라	Once have I sworn by my holiness that I will not lie unto David.	Once and for all I have sworn by My holiness— I will not lie to David—
PSA	89	36	그 후손이 장구하고 그 위는 해 같이 내 앞에 항상 있으며	His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before me.	his offspring shall endure forever, and his throne before Me like the sun,
PSA	89	37	또 궁창의 확실한 증인 달 같이 영원히 견고케 되리라 하셨도다(셀라)	It shall be established for ever as the moon, and as a faithful witness in heaven. Selah.	like the moon, established forever, a faithful witness in the sky.” Selah
PSA	89	38	그러나 주께서 주의 기름 부음 받은 자를 노하사 물리쳐 버리셨으며	But thou hast cast off and abhorred, thou hast been wroth with thine anointed.	Now, however, You have spurned and rejected him; You are enraged by Your anointed one.
PSA	89	39	주의 종의 언약을 미워하사 그 관을 땅에 던져 욕되게 하셨으며	Thou hast made void the covenant of thy servant: thou hast profaned his crown by casting it to the ground.	You have renounced the covenant with Your servant and sullied his crown in the dust.
PSA	89	40	저의 모든 울타리를 파괴하시며 그 보장을 훼파하셨으므로	Thou hast broken down all his hedges; thou hast brought his strong holds to ruin.	You have broken down all his walls; You have reduced his strongholds to rubble.
PSA	89	41	길로 지나는 자들에게 다 탈취를 당하며 그 이웃에게 욕을 당하나이다	All that pass by the way spoil him: he is a reproach to his neighbours.	All who pass by plunder him; he has become a reproach to his neighbors.
PSA	89	42	주께서 저의 대적의 오른손을 높이시고 저희 모든 원수로 기쁘게 하셨으며	Thou hast set up the right hand of his adversaries; thou hast made all his enemies to rejoice.	You have exalted the right hand of his foes; You have made all his enemies rejoice.
PSA	89	43	저의 칼날을 둔하게 하사 저로 전장에 서지 못하게 하셨으며	Thou hast also turned the edge of his sword, and hast not made him to stand in the battle.	You have bent the edge of his sword and have not sustained him in battle.
PSA	89	44	저의 영광을 그치게 하시고 그 위를 땅에 엎으셨으며	Thou hast made his glory to cease, and cast his throne down to the ground.	You have ended his splendor and cast his throne to the ground.
PSA	89	45	그 소년의 날을 단촉케 하시고 저를 수치로 덮으셨나이다(셀라)	The days of his youth hast thou shortened: thou hast covered him with shame. Selah.	You have cut short the days of his youth; You have covered him with shame. Selah
PSA	89	46	여호와여 언제까지니이까 스스로 영원히 숨기시리이까 주의 노가 언제까지 불붙듯 하시겠나이까	How long, Lord? wilt thou hide thyself for ever? shall thy wrath burn like fire?	How long, O LORD? Will You hide Yourself forever? Will Your wrath keep burning like fire?
PSA	89	47	나의 때가 얼마나 단촉한지 기억하소서 주께서 모든 인생을 어찌 그리 허무하게 창조하셨는지요	Remember how short my time is: wherefore hast thou made all men in vain?	Remember the briefness of my lifespan! For what futility You have created all men!
PSA	89	48	누가 살아서 죽음을 보지 아니하고 그 영혼을 음부의 권세에서 건지리이까(셀라)	What man is he that liveth, and shall not see death? shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? Selah.	What man can live and never see death? Can he deliver his soul from the power of Sheol? Selah
PSA	89	49	주여 주의 성실하심으로 다윗에게 맹세하신 이전 인자하심이 어디 있나이까	Lord, where are thy former lovingkindnesses, which thou swarest unto David in thy truth?	Where, O Lord, is Your loving devotion of old, which You faithfully swore to David?
PSA	89	50	주는 주의 종들의 받은 훼방을 기억하소서 유력한 모든 민족의 훼방을 기억하소서	Remember, Lord, the reproach of thy servants; how I do bear in my bosom the reproach of all the mighty people;	Remember, O Lord, the reproach of Your servants, which I bear in my heart from so many people—
PSA	89	51	여호와여 이 훼방은 주의 원수가 주의 기름부음 받은 자의 행동을 훼방한 것이로소이다	Wherewith thine enemies have reproached, O Lord; wherewith they have reproached the footsteps of thine anointed.	how Your enemies have taunted, O LORD, and have mocked every step of Your anointed one!
PSA	89	52	여호와를 영원히 찬송할지어다 아멘 아멘	Blessed be the Lord for evermore. Amen, and Amen.	Blessed be the LORD forever! Amen and amen.
PSA	90	1	하나님의 사람 모세의 기도 주여 주는 대대에 우리의 거처가 되셨나이다	A Prayer of Moses the man of God. Lord, thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations.	A prayer of Moses the man of God. Lord, You have been our dwelling place through all generations.
PSA	90	2	산이 생기기 전, 땅과 세계도 주께서 조성하시기 전 곧 영원부터 영원까지 주는 하나님이시니이다	Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou hadst formed the earth and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God.	Before the mountains were born or You brought forth the earth and the world, from everlasting to everlasting You are God.
PSA	90	3	주께서 사람을 티끌로 돌아가게 하시고 말씀하시기를 너희 인생들은 돌아가라 하셨사오니	Thou turnest man to destruction; and sayest, Return, ye children of men.	You return man to dust, saying, “Return, O sons of mortals.”
PSA	90	4	주의 목전에는 천 년이 지나간 어제 같으며 밤의 한 경점 같을 뿐임이니이다	For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday when it is past, and as a watch in the night.	For in Your sight a thousand years are but a day that passes, or a watch of the night.
PSA	90	5	주께서 저희를 홍수처럼 쓸어 가시나이다 저희는 잠간 자는 것 같으며 아침에 돋는 풀 같으니이다	Thou carriest them away as with a flood; they are as a sleep: in the morning they are like grass which groweth up.	You whisk them away in their sleep; they are like the new grass of the morning—
PSA	90	6	풀은 아침에 꽃이 피어 자라다가 저녁에는 벤바 되어 마르나이다	In the morning it flourisheth, and groweth up; in the evening it is cut down, and withereth.	in the morning it springs up new, but by evening it fades and withers.
PSA	90	7	우리는 주의 노에 소멸되며 주의 분내심에 놀라나이다	For we are consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath are we troubled.	For we are consumed by Your anger and terrified by Your wrath.
PSA	90	8	주께서 우리의 죄악을 주의 앞에 놓으시며 우리의 은밀한 죄를 주의 얼굴 빛 가운데 두셨사오니	Thou hast set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy countenance.	You have set our iniquities before You, our secret sins in the light of Your presence.
PSA	90	9	우리의 모든 날이 주의 분노 중에 지나가며 우리의 평생이 일식간에 다하였나이다	For all our days are passed away in thy wrath: we spend our years as a tale that is told.	For all our days decline in Your fury; we finish our years with a sigh.
PSA	90	10	우리의 년수가 칠십이요 강건하면 팔십이라도 그 년수의 자랑은 수고와 슬픔뿐이요 신속히 가니 우리가 날아가나이다	The days of our years are threescore years and ten; and if by reason of strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength labour and sorrow; for it is soon cut off, and we fly away.	The length of our days is seventy years— or eighty if we are strong— yet their pride is but labor and sorrow, for they quickly pass, and we fly away.
PSA	90	11	누가 주의 노의 능력을 알며 누가 주를 두려워하여야 할대로 주의 진노를 알리이까	Who knoweth the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so is thy wrath.	Who knows the power of Your anger? Your wrath matches the fear You are due.
PSA	90	12	우리에게 우리 날 계수함을 가르치사 지혜의 마음을 얻게 하소서	So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.	So teach us to number our days, that we may present a heart of wisdom.
PSA	90	13	여호와여 돌아오소서 언제까지니이까 주의 종들을 긍휼히 여기소서	Return, O Lord, how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy servants.	Return, O LORD! How long will it be? Have compassion on Your servants.
PSA	90	14	아침에 주의 인자로 우리를 만족케 하사 우리 평생에 즐겁고 기쁘게 하소서	O satisfy us early with thy mercy; that we may rejoice and be glad all our days.	Satisfy us in the morning with Your loving devotion, that we may sing for joy and be glad all our days.
PSA	90	15	우리를 곤고케 하신 날수대로와 우리의 화를 당한 년수대로 기쁘게 하소서	Make us glad according to the days wherein thou hast afflicted us, and the years wherein we have seen evil.	Make us glad for as many days as You have afflicted us, for as many years as we have seen evil.
PSA	90	16	주의 행사를 주의 종들에게 나타내시며 주의 영광을 저희 자손에 나타내소서	Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy glory unto their children.	May Your work be shown to Your servants, and Your splendor to their children.
PSA	90	17	주 우리 하나님의 은총을 우리에게 임하게 하사 우리 손의 행사를 우리에게 견고케 하소서 우리 손의 행사를 견고케 하소서	And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us: and establish thou the work of our hands upon us; yea, the work of our hands establish thou it.	May the favor of the Lord our God rest upon us; establish for us the work of our hands— yes, establish the work of our hands!
PSA	91	1	지존자의 은밀한 곳에 거하는 자는 전능하신 자의 그늘 아래 거하리로다	He that dwelleth in the secret place of the most High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty.	He who dwells in the shelter of the Most High will abide in the shadow of the Almighty.
PSA	91	2	내가 여호와를 가리켜 말하기를 저는 나의 피난처요 나의 요새요 나의 의뢰하는 하나님이라 하리니	I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge and my fortress: my God; in him will I trust.	I will say to the LORD, “You are my refuge and my fortress, my God, in whom I trust.”
PSA	91	3	이는 저가 너를 새 사냥꾼의 올무에서와 극한 염병에서 건지실 것임이로다	Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome pestilence.	Surely He will deliver you from the snare of the fowler, and from the deadly plague.
PSA	91	4	저가 너를 그 깃으로 덮으시리니 네가 그 날개 아래 피하리로다 그의 진실함은 방패와 손 방패가 되나니	He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shalt thou trust: his truth shall be thy shield and buckler.	He will cover you with His feathers; under His wings you will find refuge; His faithfulness is a shield and rampart.
PSA	91	5	너는 밤에 놀램과 낮에 흐르는 살과	Thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by night; nor for the arrow that flieth by day;	You will not fear the terror of the night, nor the arrow that flies by day,
PSA	91	6	흑암 중에 행하는 염병과 백주에 황폐케 하는 파멸을 두려워 아니하리로다	Nor for the pestilence that walketh in darkness; nor for the destruction that wasteth at noonday.	nor the pestilence that stalks in the darkness, nor the calamity that destroys at noon.
PSA	91	7	천 인이 네 곁에서, 만 인이 네 우편에서 엎드러지나 이 재앙이 네게 가까이 못하리로다	A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand; but it shall not come nigh thee.	Though a thousand may fall at your side, and ten thousand at your right hand, no harm will come near you.
PSA	91	8	오직 너는 목도하리니 악인의 보응이 네게 보이리로다	Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold and see the reward of the wicked.	You will only see it with your eyes and witness the punishment of the wicked.
PSA	91	9	네가 말하기를 여호와는 나의 피난처시라 하고 지존자로 거처를 삼았으므로	Because thou hast made the Lord, which is my refuge, even the most High, thy habitation;	Because you have made the LORD your dwelling— my refuge, the Most High—
PSA	91	10	화가 네게 미치지 못하며 재앙이 네 장막에 가까이 오지 못하리니	There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling.	no evil will befall you, no plague will approach your tent.
PSA	91	11	저가 너를 위하여 그 사자들을 명하사 네 모든 길에 너를 지키게 하심이라	For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.	For He will command His angels concerning you to guard you in all your ways.
PSA	91	12	저희가 그 손으로 너를 붙들어 발이 돌에 부딪히지 않게 하리로다	They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.	They will lift you up in their hands, so that you will not strike your foot against a stone.
PSA	91	13	네가 사자와 독사를 밟으며 젊은 사자와 뱀을 발로 누르리로다	Thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder: the young lion and the dragon shalt thou trample under feet.	You will tread on the lion and cobra; you will trample the young lion and serpent.
PSA	91	14	하나님이 가라사대 저가 나를 사랑한즉 내가 저를 건지리라 저가 내 이름을 안즉 내가 저를 높이리라	Because he hath set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will set him on high, because he hath known my name.	“Because he loves Me, I will deliver him; because he knows My name, I will protect him.
PSA	91	15	저가 내게 간구하리니 내가 응답하리라 저희 환난 때에 내가 저와 함께 하여 저를 건지고 영화롭게 하리라	He shall call upon me, and I will answer him: I will be with him in trouble; I will deliver him, and honour him.	When he calls out to Me, I will answer him; I will be with him in trouble. I will deliver him and honor him.
PSA	91	16	내가 장수함으로 저를 만족케 하며 나의 구원으로 보이리라 하시도다	With long life will I satisfy him, and shew him my salvation.	With long life I will satisfy him and show him My salvation.”
PSA	92	1	안식일의 찬송 시 지존자여 십현금과 비파와 수금의 정숙한 소리로 여호와께 감사하며 주의 이름을 찬양하며 아침에 주의 인자하심을 나타내며 밤마다 주의 성실하심을 베풂이 좋으니이다	A Psalm or Song for the sabbath day. It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy name, O most High:	A Psalm. A song for the Sabbath day. It is good to praise the LORD, and to sing praises to Your name, O Most High,
PSA	92	2	(앞절과 동일)	To shew forth thy lovingkindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness every night,	to proclaim Your loving devotion in the morning and Your faithfulness at night
PSA	92	3	(앞절과 동일)	Upon an instrument of ten strings, and upon the psaltery; upon the harp with a solemn sound.	with the ten-stringed harp and the melody of the lyre.
PSA	92	4	여호와여 주의 행사로 나를 기쁘게 하셨으니 주의 손의 행사를 인하여 내가 높이 부르리이다	For thou, Lord, hast made me glad through thy work: I will triumph in the works of thy hands.	For You, O LORD, have made me glad by Your deeds; I sing for joy at the works of Your hands.
PSA	92	5	여호와여 주의 행사가 어찌 그리 크신지요 주의 생각이 심히 깊으시니이다	O Lord, how great are thy works! and thy thoughts are very deep.	How great are Your works, O LORD, how deep are Your thoughts!
PSA	92	6	우준한 자는 알지 못하며 무지한 자도 이를 깨닫지 못하나이다	A brutish man knoweth not; neither doth a fool understand this.	A senseless man does not know, and a fool does not understand,
PSA	92	7	악인은 풀 같이 생장하고 죄악을 행하는 자는 다 흥왕할지라도 영원히 멸망하리이다	When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do flourish; it is that they shall be destroyed for ever:	that though the wicked sprout like grass, and all evildoers flourish, they will be forever destroyed.
PSA	92	8	여호와여 주는 영원토록 지존하시니이다	But thou, Lord, art most high for evermore.	But You, O LORD, are exalted forever!
PSA	92	9	여호와여 주의 원수 곧 주의 원수가 패망하리니 죄악을 행하는 자는 다 흩어지리이다	For, lo, thine enemies, O Lord, for, lo, thine enemies shall perish; all the workers of iniquity shall be scattered.	For surely Your enemies, O LORD, surely Your enemies will perish; all evildoers will be scattered.
PSA	92	10	그러나 주께서 내 뿔을 들소의 뿔 같이 높이셨으며 내게 신선한 기름으로 부으셨나이다	But my horn shalt thou exalt like the horn of an unicorn: I shall be anointed with fresh oil.	But You have exalted my horn like that of a wild ox; with fine oil I have been anointed.
PSA	92	11	내 원수의 보응 받는 것을 내 눈으로 보며 일어나 나를 치는 행악자에게 보응하심을 내 귀로 들었도다	Mine eye also shall see my desire on mine enemies, and mine ears shall hear my desire of the wicked that rise up against me.	My eyes see the downfall of my enemies; my ears hear the wailing of my wicked foes.
PSA	92	12	의인은 종려나무 같이 번성하며 레바논의 백향목 같이 발육하리로다	The righteous shall flourish like the palm tree: he shall grow like a cedar in Lebanon.	The righteous will flourish like a palm tree, and grow like a cedar in Lebanon.
PSA	92	13	여호와의 집에 심겼음이여 우리 하나님의 궁정에서 흥왕하리로다	Those that be planted in the house of the Lord shall flourish in the courts of our God.	Planted in the house of the LORD, they will flourish in the courts of our God.
PSA	92	14	늙어도 결실하며 진액이 풍족하고 빛이 청청하여	They shall still bring forth fruit in old age; they shall be fat and flourishing;	In old age they will still bear fruit; healthy and green they will remain,
PSA	92	15	여호와의 정직하심을 나타내리로다 여호와는 나의 바위시라 그에게는 불의가 없도다	To shew that the Lord is upright: he is my rock, and there is no unrighteousness in him.	to proclaim, “The LORD is upright; He is my Rock, and in Him there is no unrighteousness.”
PSA	93	1	여호와께서 통치하시니 스스로 권위를 입으셨도다 여호와께서 능력을 입으시며 띠셨으므로 세계도 견고히 서서 요동치 아니하도다	The Lord reigneth, he is clothed with majesty; the Lord is clothed with strength, wherewith he hath girded himself: the world also is stablished, that it cannot be moved.	The LORD reigns! He is robed in majesty; the LORD has clothed and armed Himself with strength. The world indeed is firmly established; it cannot be moved.
PSA	93	2	주의 보좌는 예로부터 견고히 섰으며 주는 영원부터 계셨나이다	Thy throne is established of old: thou art from everlasting.	Your throne was established long ago; You are from all eternity.
PSA	93	3	여호와여 큰 물이 소리를 높였고 큰 물이 그 소리를 높였고 큰 물이 그 물결을 높이나이다	The floods have lifted up, O Lord, the floods have lifted up their voice; the floods lift up their waves.	The floodwaters have risen, O LORD; the rivers have raised their voice; the seas lift up their pounding waves.
PSA	93	4	높이 계신 여호와의 능력은 많은 물 소리와 바다의 큰 파도보다 위대하시니이다	The Lord on high is mightier than the noise of many waters, yea, than the mighty waves of the sea.	Above the roar of many waters— the mighty breakers of the sea— the LORD on high is majestic.
PSA	93	5	여호와여 주의 증거하심이 확실하고 거룩함이 주의 집에 합당하여 영구하리이다	Thy testimonies are very sure: holiness becometh thine house, O Lord, for ever.	Your testimonies are fully confirmed; holiness adorns Your house, O LORD, for all the days to come.
PSA	94	1	여호와여 보수하시는 하나님이여 보수하시는 하나님이여 빛을 비취소서	O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongeth; O God, to whom vengeance belongeth, shew thyself.	O LORD, God of vengeance, O God of vengeance, shine forth.
PSA	94	2	세계를 판단하시는 주여 일어나사 교만한 자에게 상당한 형벌을 주소서	Lift up thyself, thou judge of the earth: render a reward to the proud.	Rise up, O Judge of the earth; render a reward to the proud.
PSA	94	3	여호와여 악인이 언제까지, 악인이 언제까지 개가를 부르리이까	Lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph?	How long will the wicked, O LORD, how long will the wicked exult?
PSA	94	4	저희가 지껄이며 오만히 말을 하오며 죄악을 행하는 자가 다 자긍하나이다	How long shall they utter and speak hard things? and all the workers of iniquity boast themselves?	They pour out arrogant words; all workers of iniquity boast.
PSA	94	5	여호와여 저희가 주의 백성을 파쇄하며 주의 기업을 곤고케 하며	They break in pieces thy people, O Lord, and afflict thine heritage.	They crush Your people, O LORD; they oppress Your heritage.
PSA	94	6	과부와 나그네를 죽이며 고아를 살해하며	They slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless.	They kill the widow and the foreigner; they murder the fatherless.
PSA	94	7	말하기를 여호와가 보지 못하며 야곱의 하나님이 생각지 못하리라 하나이다	Yet they say, The Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it.	They say, “The LORD does not see; the God of Jacob pays no heed.”
PSA	94	8	백성 중 우준한 자들아 너희는 생각하라 무지한 자들아 너희가 언제나 지혜로울꼬	Understand, ye brutish among the people: and ye fools, when will ye be wise?	Take notice, O senseless among the people! O fools, when will you be wise?
PSA	94	9	귀를 지으신 자가 듣지 아니하시랴 눈을 만드신 자가 보지 아니하시랴	He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? he that formed the eye, shall he not see?	He who affixed the ear, can He not hear? He who formed the eye, can He not see?
PSA	94	10	열방을 징벌하시는 자 곧 지식으로 사람을 교훈하시는 자가 징치하지 아니하시랴	He that chastiseth the heathen, shall not he correct? he that teacheth man knowledge, shall not he know?	He who admonishes the nations, does He not discipline? He who teaches man, does He lack knowledge?
PSA	94	11	여호와께서 사람의 생각이 허무함을 아시느니라	The Lord knoweth the thoughts of man, that they are vanity.	The LORD knows the thoughts of man, that they are futile.
PSA	94	12	여호와여 주의 징벌을 당하며 주의 법으로 교훈하심을 받는 자가 복이 있나니	Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teachest him out of thy law;	Blessed is the man You discipline, O LORD, and teach from Your law,
PSA	94	13	이런 사람에게는 환난의 날에 벗어나게 하사 악인을 위하여 구덩이를 팔 때까지 평안을 주시리이다	That thou mayest give him rest from the days of adversity, until the pit be digged for the wicked.	to grant him relief from days of trouble, until a pit is dug for the wicked.
PSA	94	14	여호와께서는 그 백성을 버리지 아니하시며 그 기업을 떠나지 아니하시리로다	For the Lord will not cast off his people, neither will he forsake his inheritance.	For the LORD will not forsake His people; He will never abandon His heritage.
PSA	94	15	판단이 의로 돌아가리니 마음이 정직한 자가 다 좇으리로다	But judgment shall return unto righteousness: and all the upright in heart shall follow it.	Surely judgment will again be righteous, and all the upright in heart will follow it.
PSA	94	16	누가 나를 위하여 일어나서 행악자를 치며 누가 나를 위하여 일어서서 죄악 행하는 자를 칠꼬	Who will rise up for me against the evildoers? or who will stand up for me against the workers of iniquity?	Who will rise up for me against the wicked? Who will stand for me against the workers of iniquity?
PSA	94	17	여호와께서 내게 도움이 되지 아니하셨더면 내 혼이 벌써 적막 중에 처하였으리로다	Unless the Lord had been my help, my soul had almost dwelt in silence.	Unless the LORD had been my helper, I would soon have dwelt in the abode of silence.
PSA	94	18	여호와여 나의 발이 미끄러진다 말할 때에 주의 인자하심이 나를 붙드셨사오며	When I said, My foot slippeth; thy mercy, O Lord, held me up.	If I say, “My foot is slipping,” Your loving devotion, O LORD, supports me.
PSA	94	19	내 속에 생각이 많을 때에 주의 위안이 내 영혼을 즐겁게 하시나이다	In the multitude of my thoughts within me thy comforts delight my soul.	When anxiety overwhelms me, Your consolation delights my soul.
PSA	94	20	율례를 빙자하고 잔해를 도모하는 악한 재판장이 어찌 주와 교제하리이까	Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, which frameth mischief by a law?	Can a corrupt throne be Your ally— one devising mischief by decree?
PSA	94	21	저희가 모여 의인의 영혼을 치려 하며 무죄자를 정죄하여 피를 흘리려 하나	They gather themselves together against the soul of the righteous, and condemn the innocent blood.	They band together against the righteous and condemn the innocent to death.
PSA	94	22	여호와는 나의 산성이시요 나의 하나님은 나의 피할 반석이시라	But the Lord is my defence; and my God is the rock of my refuge.	But the LORD has been my stronghold, and my God is my rock of refuge.
PSA	94	23	저희 죄악을 저희에게 돌리시며 저희의 악을 인하여 저희를 끊으시리니 여호와 우리 하나님이 저희를 끊으시리로다	And he shall bring upon them their own iniquity, and shall cut them off in their own wickedness; yea, the Lord our God shall cut them off.	He will bring upon them their own iniquity and destroy them for their wickedness. The LORD our God will destroy them.
PSA	95	1	오라 우리가 여호와께 노래하며 우리 구원의 반석을 향하여 즐거이 부르자	O come, let us sing unto the Lord: let us make a joyful noise to the rock of our salvation.	Come, let us sing for joy to the LORD; let us shout to the Rock of our salvation!
PSA	95	2	우리가 감사함으로 그 앞에 나아가며 시로 그를 향하여 즐거이 부르자	Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving, and make a joyful noise unto him with psalms.	Let us enter His presence with thanksgiving; let us make a joyful noise to Him in song.
PSA	95	3	대저 여호와는 크신 하나님이시요 모든 신 위에 크신 왕이시로다	For the Lord is a great God, and a great King above all gods.	For the LORD is a great God, a great King above all gods.
PSA	95	4	땅의 깊은 곳이 그 위에 있으며 산들의 높은 것도 그의 것이로다	In his hand are the deep places of the earth: the strength of the hills is his also.	In His hand are the depths of the earth, and the mountain peaks belong to Him.
PSA	95	5	바다가 그의 것이라 그가 만드셨고 육지도 그의 손이 지으셨도다	The sea is his, and he made it: and his hands formed the dry land.	The sea is His, for He made it, and His hands formed the dry land.
PSA	95	6	오라 우리가 굽혀 경배하며 우리를 지으신 여호와 앞에 무릎을 꿇자	O come, let us worship and bow down: let us kneel before the Lord our maker.	O come, let us worship and bow down; let us kneel before the LORD our Maker.
PSA	95	7	대저 저는 우리 하나님이시요 우리는 그의 기르시는 백성이며 그 손의 양이라 너희가 오늘날 그 음성을 듣기를 원하노라	For he is our God; and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand. To day if ye will hear his voice,	For He is our God, and we are the people of His pasture, the sheep under His care. Today, if you hear His voice,
PSA	95	8	이르시기를 너희는 므리바에서와 같이 또 광야 맛사의 날과 같이 너희 마음을 강퍅하게 말지어다	Harden not your heart, as in the provocation, and as in the day of temptation in the wilderness:	do not harden your hearts as you did at Meribah, in the day at Massah in the wilderness,
PSA	95	9	그 때에 너희 열조가 나를 시험하며 나를 탐지하고 나의 행사를 보았도다	When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my work.	where your fathers tested and tried Me, though they had seen My work.
PSA	95	10	내가 사십 년을 그 세대로 인하여 근심하여 이르기를 저희는 마음이 미혹된 백성이라 내 도를 알지 못한다 하였도다	Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said, It is a people that do err in their heart, and they have not known my ways:	For forty years I was angry with that generation, and I said, “They are a people whose hearts go astray, and they have not known My ways.”
PSA	95	11	그러므로 내가 노하여 맹세하기를 저희는 내 안식에 들어오지 못하리라 하였도다	Unto whom I sware in my wrath that they should not enter into my rest.	So I swore on oath in My anger, “They shall never enter My rest.”
PSA	96	1	새 노래로 여호와께 노래하라 온 땅이여 여호와께 노래할지어다	O sing unto the Lord a new song: sing unto the Lord, all the earth.	Sing to the LORD a new song; sing to the LORD, all the earth.
PSA	96	2	여호와께 노래하여 그 이름을 송축하며 그 구원을 날마다 선파할지어다	Sing unto the Lord, bless his name; shew forth his salvation from day to day.	Sing to the LORD, bless His name; proclaim His salvation day after day.
PSA	96	3	그 영광을 열방 중에, 그 기이한 행적을 만민 중에 선포할지어다	Declare his glory among the heathen, his wonders among all people.	Declare His glory among the nations, His wonderful deeds among all peoples.
PSA	96	4	여호와는 광대하시니 극진히 찬양할 것이요 모든 신보다 경외할 것임이여	For the Lord is great, and greatly to be praised: he is to be feared above all gods.	For great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised; He is to be feared above all gods.
PSA	96	5	만방의 모든 신은 헛 것이요 여호와께서는 하늘을 지으셨음이로다	For all the gods of the nations are idols: but the Lord made the heavens.	For all the gods of the nations are idols, but it is the LORD who made the heavens.
PSA	96	6	존귀와 위엄이 그 앞에 있으며 능력과 아름다음이 그 성소에 있도다	Honour and majesty are before him: strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.	Splendor and majesty are before Him; strength and beauty fill His sanctuary.
PSA	96	7	만방의 족속들아 영광과 권능을 여호와께 돌릴지어다 여호와께 돌릴지어다	Give unto the Lord, O ye kindreds of the people, give unto the Lord glory and strength.	Ascribe to the LORD, O families of the nations, ascribe to the LORD glory and strength.
PSA	96	8	여호와의 이름에 합당한 영광을 그에게 돌릴지어다 예물을 가지고 그 궁정에 들어갈지어다	Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name: bring an offering, and come into his courts.	Ascribe to the LORD the glory due His name; bring an offering and enter His courts.
PSA	96	9	아름답고 거룩한 것으로 여호와께 경배할지어다 온 땅이여 그 앞에서 떨지어다	O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness: fear before him, all the earth.	Worship the LORD in the splendor of His holiness; tremble before Him, all the earth.
PSA	96	10	열방 중에서는 이르기를 여호와께서 통치하시니 세계가 굳게 서고 흔들리지 못할찌라 저가 만민을 공평히 판단하시리라 할지로다	Say among the heathen that the Lord reigneth: the world also shall be established that it shall not be moved: he shall judge the people righteously.	Declare among the nations: “The LORD reigns!” The world is firmly established; it cannot be moved; He will judge the peoples with equity.
PSA	96	11	하늘은 기뻐하고 땅은 즐거워하며 바다와 거기 충만한 것은 외치며	Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad; let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof.	Let the heavens be glad and the earth rejoice; let the sea resound, and all that fills it.
PSA	96	12	밭과 그 가운데 모든 것은 즐거워할지로다 그리할 때에 삼림의 나무들이 여호와 앞에서 즐거이 노래하리니	Let the field be joyful, and all that is therein: then shall all the trees of the wood rejoice	Let the fields exult, and all that is in them. Then all the trees of the forest will sing for joy
PSA	96	13	저가 임하시되 땅을 판단하려 임하실 것임이라 저가 의로 세계를 판단하시며 그의 진실하심으로 백성을 판단하시리로다	Before the Lord: for he cometh, for he cometh to judge the earth: he shall judge the world with righteousness, and the people with his truth.	before the LORD, for He is coming— He is coming to judge the earth. He will judge the world in righteousness and the peoples in His faithfulness.
PSA	97	1	여호와께서 통치하시나니 땅은 즐거워하며 허다한 섬은 기뻐할지어다	The Lord reigneth; let the earth rejoice; let the multitude of isles be glad thereof.	The LORD reigns, let the earth rejoice; let the distant shores be glad.
PSA	97	2	구름과 흑암이 그에게 둘렸고 의와 공평이 그 보좌의 기초로다	Clouds and darkness are round about him: righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his throne.	Clouds and darkness surround Him; righteousness and justice are His throne’s foundation.
PSA	97	3	불이 그 앞에서 발하여 사면의 대적을 사르는도다	A fire goeth before him, and burneth up his enemies round about.	Fire goes before Him and consumes His foes on every side.
PSA	97	4	그의 번개가 세계를 비추니 땅이 보고 떨었도다	His lightnings enlightened the world: the earth saw, and trembled.	His lightning illuminates the world; the earth sees and trembles.
PSA	97	5	산들이 여호와의 앞 곧 온 땅의 주 앞에서 밀 같이 녹았도다	The hills melted like wax at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the Lord of the whole earth.	The mountains melt like wax at the presence of the LORD, before the Lord of all the earth.
PSA	97	6	하늘이 그 의를 선포하니 모든 백성이 그 영광을 보았도다	The heavens declare his righteousness, and all the people see his glory.	The heavens proclaim His righteousness; all the peoples see His glory.
PSA	97	7	조각 신상을 섬기며 허무한 것으로 자긍하는 자는 다 수치를 당할 것이라 너희 신들아 여호와께 경배할지어다	Confounded be all they that serve graven images, that boast themselves of idols: worship him, all ye gods.	All worshipers of images are put to shame— those who boast in idols. Worship Him, all you gods!
PSA	97	8	여호와여 주의 판단을 시온이 듣고 기뻐하며 유다의 딸들이 인하여 즐거워하였나이다	Zion heard, and was glad; and the daughters of Judah rejoiced because of thy judgments, O Lord.	Zion hears and rejoices, and the towns of Judah exult because of Your judgments, O LORD.
PSA	97	9	여호와여 주는 온 땅 위에 지존하시고 모든 신 위에 초월하시니이다	For thou, Lord, art high above all the earth: thou art exalted far above all gods.	For You, O LORD, are Most High over all the earth; You are exalted far above all gods.
PSA	97	10	여호와를 사랑하는 너희여 악을 미워하라 저가 그 성도의 영혼을 보전하사 악인의 손에서 건지시느니라	Ye that love the Lord, hate evil: he preserveth the souls of his saints; he delivereth them out of the hand of the wicked.	Hate evil, O you who love the LORD! He preserves the souls of His saints; He delivers them from the hand of the wicked.
PSA	97	11	의인을 위하여 빛을 뿌리고 마음이 정직한 자를 위하여 기쁨을 뿌렸도다	Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart.	Light shines on the righteous, gladness on the upright in heart.
PSA	97	12	의인이여 너희는 여호와로 인하여 기뻐하며 그 거룩한 기념에 감사할지어다	Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous; and give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness.	Rejoice in the LORD, you righteous ones, and praise His holy name.
PSA	98	1	시 새 노래로 여호와께 찬송하라 대저 기이한 일을 행하사 그 오른손과 거룩한 팔로 자기를 위하여 구원을 베푸셨도다	A Psalm. O sing unto the Lord a new song; for he hath done marvellous things: his right hand, and his holy arm, hath gotten him the victory.	A Psalm. Sing to the LORD a new song, for He has done wonders; His right hand and holy arm have gained Him the victory.
PSA	98	2	여호와께서 그 구원을 알게 하시며 그 의를 열방의 목전에 명백히 나타내셨도다	The Lord hath made known his salvation: his righteousness hath he openly shewed in the sight of the heathen.	The LORD has proclaimed His salvation and revealed His righteousness to the nations.
PSA	98	3	저가 이스라엘 집에 향하신 인자와 성실을 기억하셨으므로 땅의 모든 끝이 우리 하나님의 구원을 보았도다	He hath remembered his mercy and his truth toward the house of Israel: all the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.	He has remembered His love and faithfulness to the house of Israel; all the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.
PSA	98	4	온 땅이여 여호와께 즐거이 소리할지어다 소리를 발하여 즐거이 노래하며 찬송할지어다	Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all the earth: make a loud noise, and rejoice, and sing praise.	Make a joyful noise to the LORD, all the earth; break forth—let your cry ring out, and sing praises!
PSA	98	5	수금으로 여호와를 찬양하라 수금과 음성으로 찬양할지어다	Sing unto the Lord with the harp; with the harp, and the voice of a psalm.	Sing praises to the LORD with the lyre, in melodious song with the harp.
PSA	98	6	나팔과 호각으로 왕 여호와 앞에 즐거이 소리할지어다	With trumpets and sound of cornet make a joyful noise before the Lord, the King.	With trumpets and the blast of the ram’s horn shout for joy before the LORD, the King.
PSA	98	7	바다와 거기 충만한 것과 그 중에 거하는 자는 다 외칠지어다	Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein.	Let the sea resound, and all that fills it, the world, and all who dwell in it.
PSA	98	8	여호와 앞에서 큰 물이 박수하며 산악이 함께 즐거이 노래할지어다	Let the floods clap their hands: let the hills be joyful together	Let the rivers clap their hands, let the mountains sing together for joy
PSA	98	9	저가 땅을 판단하려 임하실 것임이로다 저가 의로 세계를 판단하시며 공평으로 그 백성을 판단하시리로다	Before the Lord; for he cometh to judge the earth: with righteousness shall he judge the world, and the people with equity.	before the LORD, for He comes to judge the earth. He will judge the world with righteousness and the peoples with equity.
PSA	99	1	여호와께서 통치하시니 만민이 떨 것이요 여호와께서 그룹 사이에 좌정하시니 땅이 요동할 것이로다	The Lord reigneth; let the people tremble: he sitteth between the cherubims; let the earth be moved.	The LORD reigns; let the nations tremble! He is enthroned above the cherubim; let the earth quake!
PSA	99	2	여호와께서 시온에서 광대하시고 모든 민족 위에 높으시도다	The Lord is great in Zion; and he is high above all the people.	Great is the LORD in Zion; He is exalted above all the peoples.
PSA	99	3	주의 크고 두려운 이름을 찬송할지어다 그는 거룩하시도다	Let them praise thy great and terrible name; for it is holy.	Let them praise Your great and awesome name— He is holy!
PSA	99	4	왕의 능력은 공의를 사랑하는 것이라 주께서 공평을 견고히 세우시고 야곱 중에서 공과 의를 행하시나이다	The king’s strength also loveth judgment; thou dost establish equity, thou executest judgment and righteousness in Jacob.	The mighty King loves justice. You have established equity; You have exercised justice and righteousness in Jacob.
PSA	99	5	너희는 여호와 우리 하나님을 높여 그 발등상 앞에서 경배할지어다 그는 거룩하시도다	Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool; for he is holy.	Exalt the LORD our God, and worship at His footstool; He is holy!
PSA	99	6	그 제사장 중에는 모세와 아론이요 그 이름을 부르는 자 중에는 사무엘이라 저희가 여호와께 간구하매 응답하셨도다	Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among them that call upon his name; they called upon the Lord, and he answered them.	Moses and Aaron were among His priests; Samuel was among those who called on His name. They called to the LORD and He answered.
PSA	99	7	여호와께서 구름 기둥에서 저희에게 말씀하시니 저희가 그 주신 증거와 율례를 지켰도다	He spake unto them in the cloudy pillar: they kept his testimonies, and the ordinance that he gave them.	He spoke to them from the pillar of cloud; they kept His decrees and the statutes He gave them.
PSA	99	8	여호와 우리 하나님이여 주께서는 저희에게 응답하셨고 저희 행한 대로 갚기는 하셨으나 저희를 사하신 하나님이시니이다	Thou answeredst them, O Lord our God: thou wast a God that forgavest them, though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions.	O LORD our God, You answered them. You were a forgiving God to them, yet an avenger of their misdeeds.
PSA	99	9	너희는 여호와 우리 하나님을 높이고 그 성산에서 경배할지어다 대저 여호와 우리 하나님은 거룩하시도다	Exalt the Lord our God, and worship at his holy hill; for the Lord our God is holy.	Exalt the LORD our God and worship at His holy mountain, for the LORD our God is holy.
PSA	100	1	감사의 시 온 땅이여 어호와께 즐거이 부를지어다	A Psalm of praise. Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all ye lands.	A Psalm of thanksgiving. Make a joyful noise to the LORD, all the earth.
PSA	100	2	기쁨으로 여호와를 섬기며 노래하면서 그 앞에 나아갈지어다	Serve the Lord with gladness: come before his presence with singing.	Serve the LORD with gladness; come into His presence with joyful songs.
PSA	100	3	여호와가 우리 하나님이신 줄 너희는 알지어다 그는 우리를 지으신 자시요 우리는 그의 것이니 그의 백성이요 그의 기르시는 양이로다	Know ye that the Lord he is God: it is he that hath made us, and not we ourselves; we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.	Know that the LORD is God. It is He who made us, and we are His; we are His people, and the sheep of His pasture.
PSA	100	4	감사함으로 그 문에 들어가며 찬송함으로 그 궁정에 들어가서 그에게 감사하며 그 이름을 송축할지어다	Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with praise: be thankful unto him, and bless his name.	Enter His gates with thanksgiving and His courts with praise; give thanks to Him and bless His name.
PSA	100	5	대저 여호와는 선하시니 그 인자하심이 영원하고 그 성실하심이 대대로 미치리로다	For the Lord is good; his mercy is everlasting; and his truth endureth to all generations.	For the LORD is good, and His loving devotion endures forever; His faithfulness continues to all generations.
PSA	101	1	다윗의 시 내가 인자와 공의를 찬송하겠나이다 여호와여 내가 주께 찬양하리이다	A Psalm of David. I will sing of mercy and judgment: unto thee, O Lord, will I sing.	A Psalm of David. I will sing of Your loving devotion and justice; to You, O LORD, I will sing praises.
PSA	101	2	내가 완전한 길에 주의하오리니 주께서 언제나 내게 임하시겠나이까 내가 완전한 마음으로 내 집안에서 행하리이다	I will behave myself wisely in a perfect way. O when wilt thou come unto me? I will walk within my house with a perfect heart.	I will ponder the way that is blameless— when will You come to me? I will walk in my house with integrity of heart.
PSA	101	3	나는 비루한 것을 내 눈 앞에서 두지 아니할 것이요 배도자들의 행위를 미워하니 이것이 내게 붙접지 아니하리이다	I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes: I hate the work of them that turn aside; it shall not cleave to me.	I will set no worthless thing before my eyes. I hate the work of those who fall away; it shall not cling to me.
PSA	101	4	사특한 마음이 내게서 떠날 것이니 악한 일을 내가 알지 아니하리로다	A froward heart shall depart from me: I will not know a wicked person.	A perverse heart shall depart from me; I will know nothing of evil.
PSA	101	5	그 이웃을 그윽히 허는 자를 내가 멸할 것이요 눈이 높고 마음이 교만한 자를 내가 용납지 아니하리로다	Whoso privily slandereth his neighbour, him will I cut off: him that hath an high look and a proud heart will not I suffer.	Whoever slanders his neighbor in secret, I will put to silence; the one with haughty eyes and a proud heart, I will not endure.
PSA	101	6	내 눈이 이 땅의 충성된 자를 살펴 나와 함께 거하게 하리니 완전한 길에 행하는 자가 나를 수종하리로다	Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me: he that walketh in a perfect way, he shall serve me.	My eyes favor the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me; he who walks in the way of integrity shall minister to me.
PSA	101	7	거짓 행하는 자가 내 집안에 거하지 못하며 거짓말하는 자가 내 목전에 서지 못하리로다	He that worketh deceit shall not dwell within my house: he that telleth lies shall not tarry in my sight.	No one who practices deceit shall dwell in my house; no one who tells lies shall stand in my presence.
PSA	101	8	아침마다 내가 이 땅의 모든 악인을 멸하리니 죄악 행하는 자는 여호와의 성에서 다 끊어지리로다	I will early destroy all the wicked of the land; that I may cut off all wicked doers from the city of the Lord.	Every morning I will remove all the wicked of the land, that I may cut off every evildoer from the city of the LORD.
PSA	102	1	곤고한 자가 마음이 상하여 그 근심을 여호와 앞에 토하는 기도 여호와여 내 기도를 들으시고 나의 부르짖음을 주께 상달케 하소서	A Prayer of the afflicted, when he is overwhelmed, and poureth out his complaint before the Lord. Hear my prayer, O Lord, and let my cry come unto thee.	A prayer of one who is afflicted, when he grows faint and pours out his lament before the LORD. Hear my prayer, O LORD; let my cry for help come before You.
PSA	102	2	나의 괴로운 날에 주의 얼굴을 내게 숨기지 마소서 주의 귀를 기울이사 내가 부르짖는 날에 속히 내게 응답하소서	Hide not thy face from me in the day when I am in trouble; incline thine ear unto me: in the day when I call answer me speedily.	Do not hide Your face from me in my day of distress. Incline Your ear to me; answer me quickly when I call.
PSA	102	3	대저 내 날이 연기 같이 소멸하며 내 뼈가 냉과리 같이 탔나이다	For my days are consumed like smoke, and my bones are burned as an hearth.	For my days vanish like smoke, and my bones burn like glowing embers.
PSA	102	4	내가 음식 먹기도 잊었음으로 내 마음이 풀 같이 쇠잔하였사오며	My heart is smitten, and withered like grass; so that I forget to eat my bread.	My heart is afflicted, and withered like grass; I even forget to eat my bread.
PSA	102	5	나의 탄식 소리를 인하여 나의 살이 뼈에 붙었나이다	By reason of the voice of my groaning my bones cleave to my skin.	Through my loud groaning my flesh clings to my bones.
PSA	102	6	나는 광야의 당아새 같고 황폐한 곳의 부엉이 같이 되었사오며	I am like a pelican of the wilderness: I am like an owl of the desert.	I am like a desert owl, like an owl among the ruins.
PSA	102	7	내가 밤을 새우니 지붕 위에 외로운 참새 같으니이다	I watch, and am as a sparrow alone upon the house top.	I lie awake; I am like a lone bird on a housetop.
PSA	102	8	내 원수들이 종일 나를 훼방하며 나를 대하여 미칠듯이 날치는 자들이 나를 가리켜 맹세하나이다	Mine enemies reproach me all the day; and they that are mad against me are sworn against me.	All day long my enemies taunt me; they ridicule me and curse me.
PSA	102	9	나는 재를 양식 같이 먹으며 나의 마심에는 눈물을 섞었사오니	For I have eaten ashes like bread, and mingled my drink with weeping,	For I have eaten ashes like bread and mixed my drink with tears
PSA	102	10	이는 주의 분과 노를 인함이라 주께서 나를 드셨다가 던지셨나이다	Because of thine indignation and thy wrath: for thou hast lifted me up, and cast me down.	because of Your indignation and wrath, for You have picked me up and cast me aside.
PSA	102	11	내 날이 기울어지는 그림자 같고 내가 풀의 쇠잔함 같으니이다	My days are like a shadow that declineth; and I am withered like grass.	My days are like lengthening shadows, and I wither away like grass.
PSA	102	12	여호와여 주는 영원히 계시고 주의 기념 명칭은 대대에 이르리이다	But thou, O Lord, shalt endure for ever; and thy remembrance unto all generations.	But You, O LORD, sit enthroned forever; Your renown endures to all generations.
PSA	102	13	주께서 일어나사 시온을 긍휼히 여기시리니 지금은 그를 긍휼히 여기실 때라 정한 기한이 옴이니이다	Thou shalt arise, and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to favour her, yea, the set time, is come.	You will rise up and have compassion on Zion, for it is time to show her favor— the appointed time has come.
PSA	102	14	주의 종들이 시온의 돌들을 즐거워하며 그 티끌도 연휼히 여기나이다	For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favour the dust thereof.	For Your servants delight in her stones and take pity on her dust.
PSA	102	15	이에 열방이 여호와의 이름을 경외하며 세계 열왕이 주의 영광을 경외하리니	So the heathen shall fear the name of the Lord, and all the kings of the earth thy glory.	So the nations will fear the name of the LORD, and all the kings of the earth will fear Your glory.
PSA	102	16	대저 여호와께서 시온을 건설하시고 그 영광 중에 나타나셨음이라	When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory.	For the LORD will rebuild Zion; He has appeared in His glory.
PSA	102	17	여호와께서 빈궁한 자의 기도를 돌아보시며 저희 기도를 멸시치 아니하셨도다	He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer.	He will turn toward the prayer of the destitute; He will not despise their prayer.
PSA	102	18	이 일이 장래 세대를 위하여 기록되리니 창조함을 받을 백성이 여호와를 찬송하리로다	This shall be written for the generation to come: and the people which shall be created shall praise the Lord.	Let this be written for the generation to come, so that a people not yet created may praise the LORD.
PSA	102	19	여호와께서 그 높은 성소에서 하감하시며 하늘에서 땅을 감찰하셨으니	For he hath looked down from the height of his sanctuary; from heaven did the Lord behold the earth;	For He looked down from the heights of His sanctuary; the LORD gazed out from heaven to earth
PSA	102	20	이는 갇힌 자의 탄식을 들으시며 죽이기로 정한 자를 해방하사	To hear the groaning of the prisoner; to loose those that are appointed to death;	to hear a prisoner’s groaning, to release those condemned to death,
PSA	102	21	여호와의 이름을 시온에서, 그 영예를 예루살렘에서 선포케 하려 하심이라	To declare the name of the Lord in Zion, and his praise in Jerusalem;	that they may proclaim the name of the LORD in Zion and praise Him in Jerusalem,
PSA	102	22	때에 민족들과 나라들이 모여 여호와를 섬기리로다	When the people are gathered together, and the kingdoms, to serve the Lord.	when peoples and kingdoms assemble to serve the LORD.
PSA	102	23	저가 내 힘을 중도에 쇠약케 하시며 내 날을 단촉케 하셨도다	He weakened my strength in the way; he shortened my days.	He has broken my strength on the way; He has cut short my days.
PSA	102	24	나의 말이 나의 하나님이여 나의 중년에 나를 데려가지 마옵소서 주의 연대는 대대에 무궁하니이다	I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days: thy years are throughout all generations.	I say: “O my God, do not take me in the midst of my days! Your years go on through all generations.
PSA	102	25	주께서 옛적에 땅의 기초룰 두셨사오며 하늘도 주의 손으로 지으신 바니이다	Of old hast thou laid the foundation of the earth: and the heavens are the work of thy hands.	In the beginning You laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the work of Your hands.
PSA	102	26	천지는 없어지려니와 주는 영존하시겠고 그것들은 다 옷 같이 낡으리니 의복 같이 바꾸시면 바뀌려니와	They shall perish, but thou shalt endure: yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment; as a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be changed:	They will perish, but You remain; they will all wear out like a garment. Like clothing You will change them, and they will be passed on.
PSA	102	27	주는 여상하시고 주의 년대는 무궁하리이다	But thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end.	But You remain the same, and Your years will never end.
PSA	102	28	주의 종들의 자손이 항상 있고 그 후손이 주의 앞에 굳게 서리이다 하였도다	The children of thy servants shall continue, and their seed shall be established before thee.	The children of Your servants will dwell securely, and their descendants will be established before You.”
PSA	103	1	다윗의 시 내 영혼아 여호와를 송축하라 내 속에 있는 것들아 다 그 성호를 송축하라	A Psalm of David. Bless the Lord, O my soul: and all that is within me, bless his holy name.	Of David. Bless the LORD, O my soul; all that is within me, bless His holy name.
PSA	103	2	내 영혼아 여호와를 송축하며 그 모든 은택을 잊지 말지어다	Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits:	Bless the LORD, O my soul, and do not forget all His kind deeds—
PSA	103	3	저가 네 모든 죄악을 사하시며 네 모든 병을 고치시며	Who forgiveth all thine iniquities; who healeth all thy diseases;	He who forgives all your iniquities and heals all your diseases,
PSA	103	4	네 생명을 파멸에서 구속하시고 인자와 긍휼로 관을 씌우시며	Who redeemeth thy life from destruction; who crowneth thee with lovingkindness and tender mercies;	who redeems your life from the Pit and crowns you with loving devotion and compassion,
PSA	103	5	좋은 것으로 네 소원을 만족케 하사 네 청춘으로 독수리 같이 새롭게 하시는도다	Who satisfieth thy mouth with good things; so that thy youth is renewed like the eagle’s.	who satisfies you with good things, so that your youth is renewed like the eagle’s.
PSA	103	6	여호와께서 의로운 일을 행하시며 압박 당하는 모든 자를 위하여 판단하시는도다	The Lord executeth righteousness and judgment for all that are oppressed.	The LORD executes righteousness and justice for all the oppressed.
PSA	103	7	그 행위를 모세에게 그 행사를 이스라엘 자손에게 알리셨도다	He made known his ways unto Moses, his acts unto the children of Israel.	He made known His ways to Moses, His deeds to the people of Israel.
PSA	103	8	여호와는 자비로우시며 은혜로우시며 노하기를 더디하시며 인자하심이 풍부하시도다	The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy.	The LORD is compassionate and gracious, slow to anger, abounding in loving devotion.
PSA	103	9	항상 경책지 아니하시며 노를 영원히 품지 아니하시리로다	He will not always chide: neither will he keep his anger for ever.	He will not always accuse us, nor harbor His anger forever.
PSA	103	10	우리의 죄를 따라 처치하지 아니하시며 우리의 죄악을 따라 갚지 아니하셨으니	He hath not dealt with us after our sins; nor rewarded us according to our iniquities.	He has not dealt with us according to our sins or repaid us according to our iniquities.
PSA	103	11	이는 하늘이 땅에서 높음 같이 그를 경외하는 자에게 그 인자하심이 크심이로다	For as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him.	For as high as the heavens are above the earth, so great is His loving devotion for those who fear Him.
PSA	103	12	동이 서에서 먼 것 같이 우리 죄과를 우리에게서 멀리 옮기셨으며	As far as the east is from the west, so far hath he removed our transgressions from us.	As far as the east is from the west, so far has He removed our transgressions from us.
PSA	103	13	아비가 자식을 불쌍히 여김 같이 여호와께서 자기를 경외하는 자를 불쌍히 여기시나니	Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him.	As a father has compassion on his children, so the LORD has compassion on those who fear Him.
PSA	103	14	이는 저가 우리의 체질을 아시며 우리가 진토임을 기억하심이로다	For he knoweth our frame; he remembereth that we are dust.	For He knows our frame; He is mindful that we are dust.
PSA	103	15	인생은 그 날이 풀과 같으며 그 영화가 들의 꽃과 같도다	As for man, his days are as grass: as a flower of the field, so he flourisheth.	As for man, his days are like grass— he blooms like a flower of the field;
PSA	103	16	그것은 바람이 지나면 없어지나니 그곳이 다시 알지 못하거니와	For the wind passeth over it, and it is gone; and the place thereof shall know it no more.	when the wind passes over, it vanishes, and its place remembers it no more.
PSA	103	17	여호와의 인자하심은 자기를 경외하는 자에게 영원부터 영원까지 이르며 그의 의는 자손의 자손에게 미치리니	But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his righteousness unto children’s children;	But from everlasting to everlasting the loving devotion of the LORD extends to those who fear Him, and His righteousness to their children’s children—
PSA	103	18	곧 그 언약을 지키고 그 법도를 기억하여 행하는 자에게로다	To such as keep his covenant, and to those that remember his commandments to do them.	to those who keep His covenant and remember to obey His precepts.
PSA	103	19	여호와께서 그 보좌를 하늘에 세우시고 그 정권으로 만유를 통치하시도다	The Lord hath prepared his throne in the heavens; and his kingdom ruleth over all.	The LORD has established His throne in heaven, and His kingdom rules over all.
PSA	103	20	능력이 있어 여호와의 말씀을 이루며 그 말씀의 소리를 듣는 너희 천사여 여호와를 송축하라	Bless the Lord, ye his angels, that excel in strength, that do his commandments, hearkening unto the voice of his word.	Bless the LORD, all His angels mighty in strength who carry out His word, who hearken to the voice of His command.
PSA	103	21	여호와를 봉사하여 그 뜻을 행하는 너희 모든 천군이여 여호와를 송축하라	Bless ye the Lord, all ye his hosts; ye ministers of his, that do his pleasure.	Bless the LORD, all His hosts, you servants who do His will.
PSA	103	22	여호와의 지으심을 받고 그 다스리시는 모든 곳에 있는 너희여 여호와를 송축하라 내 영혼아 여호와를 송축하라	Bless the Lord, all his works in all places of his dominion: bless the Lord, O my soul.	Bless the LORD, all His works in all places of His dominion. Bless the LORD, O my soul!
PSA	104	1	내 영혼아 여호와를 송축하라 여호와 나의 하나님이여 주는 심히 광대하시며 존귀와 권위를 입으셨나이다	Bless the Lord, O my soul. O Lord my God, thou art very great; thou art clothed with honour and majesty.	Bless the LORD, O my soul! O LORD my God, You are very great; You are clothed with splendor and majesty.
PSA	104	2	주께서 옷을 입음 같이 빛을 입으시며 하늘을 휘장 같이 치시며	Who coverest thyself with light as with a garment: who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain:	He wraps Himself in light as with a garment; He stretches out the heavens like a tent,
PSA	104	3	물에 자기 누각의 들보를 얹으시며 구름으로 자기 수레를 삼으시고 바람 날개로 다니시며	Who layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters: who maketh the clouds his chariot: who walketh upon the wings of the wind:	laying the beams of His chambers in the waters above, making the clouds His chariot, walking on the wings of the wind.
PSA	104	4	바람으로 자기 사자를 삼으시며 화염으로 자기 사역자를 삼으시며	Who maketh his angels spirits; his ministers a flaming fire:	He makes the winds His messengers, flames of fire His servants.
PSA	104	5	땅의 기초를 두사 영원히 요동치 않게 하셨나이다	Who laid the foundations of the earth, that it should not be removed for ever.	He set the earth on its foundations, never to be moved.
PSA	104	6	옷으로 덮음 같이 땅을 바다로 덮으시매 물이 산들 위에 섰더니	Thou coveredst it with the deep as with a garment: the waters stood above the mountains.	You covered it with the deep like a garment; the waters stood above the mountains.
PSA	104	7	주의 견책을 인하여 도망하여 주의 우뢰 소리를 인하여 빨리 가서	At thy rebuke they fled; at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away.	At Your rebuke the waters fled; at the sound of Your thunder they hurried away—
PSA	104	8	주의 정하신 처소에 이르렀고 산은 오르고 골짜기는 내려갔나이다	They go up by the mountains; they go down by the valleys unto the place which thou hast founded for them.	the mountains rose and the valleys sank to the place You assigned for them—
PSA	104	9	주께서 물의 경계를 정하여 넘치지 못하게 하시며 다시 돌아와 땅을 덮지 못하게 하셨나이다	Thou hast set a bound that they may not pass over; that they turn not again to cover the earth.	You set a boundary they cannot cross, that they may never again cover the earth.
PSA	104	10	여호와께서 샘으로 골짜기에서 솟아나게 하시고 산 사이에 흐르게 하사	He sendeth the springs into the valleys, which run among the hills.	He sends forth springs in the valleys; they flow between the mountains.
PSA	104	11	들의 각 짐승에게 마시우시니 들나귀들도 해갈하며	They give drink to every beast of the field: the wild asses quench their thirst.	They give drink to every beast of the field; the wild donkeys quench their thirst.
PSA	104	12	공중의 새들이 그 가에서 깃들이며 나무가지 사이에서 소리를 발하는도다	By them shall the fowls of the heaven have their habitation, which sing among the branches.	The birds of the air nest beside the springs; they sing among the branches.
PSA	104	13	저가 그 누각에서 산에 물을 주시니 주의 행사의 결과가 땅에 풍족하도다	He watereth the hills from his chambers: the earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works.	He waters the mountains from His chambers; the earth is satisfied by the fruit of His works.
PSA	104	14	저가 가축을 위한 풀과 사람의 소용을 위한 채소를 자라게 하시며 땅에서 식물이 나게 하시고	He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of man: that he may bring forth food out of the earth;	He makes the grass grow for the livestock and provides crops for man to cultivate, bringing forth food from the earth:
PSA	104	15	사람의 마음을 기쁘게 하는 포도주와 사람의 얼굴을 윤택케 하는 기름과 사람의 마음을 힘있게 하는 양식을 주셨도다	And wine that maketh glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to shine, and bread which strengtheneth man’s heart.	wine that gladdens the heart of man, oil that makes his face to shine, and bread that sustains his heart.
PSA	104	16	여호와의 나무가 우택에 흡족함이여 곧 그의 심으신 레바논 백향목이로다	The trees of the Lord are full of sap; the cedars of Lebanon, which he hath planted;	The trees of the LORD have their fill, the cedars of Lebanon that He planted,
PSA	104	17	새들이 그 속에 깃을 들임이여 학은 잣나무로 집을 삼는도다	Where the birds make their nests: as for the stork, the fir trees are her house.	where the birds build their nests; the stork makes her home in the cypresses.
PSA	104	18	높은 산들은 산양을 위함이여 바위는 너구리의 피난처로다	The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats; and the rocks for the conies.	The high mountains are for the wild goats, the cliffs a refuge for the rock badgers.
PSA	104	19	여호와께서 달로 절기를 정하심이여 해는 그 지는 것을 알도다	He appointed the moon for seasons: the sun knoweth his going down.	He made the moon to mark the seasons; the sun knows when to set.
PSA	104	20	주께서 흑암을 지어 밤이 되게 하시니 삼림의 모든 짐승이 기어 나오나이다	Thou makest darkness, and it is night: wherein all the beasts of the forest do creep forth.	You bring darkness, and it becomes night, when all the beasts of the forest prowl.
PSA	104	21	젊은 사자가 그 잡을 것을 쫓아 부르짖으며 그 식물을 하나님께 구하다가	The young lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat from God.	The young lions roar for their prey and seek their food from God.
PSA	104	22	해가 돋으면 물러가서 그 굴혈에 눕고	The sun ariseth, they gather themselves together, and lay them down in their dens.	The sun rises, and they withdraw; they lie down in their dens.
PSA	104	23	사람은 나와서 노동하며 저녁까지 수고하는도다	Man goeth forth unto his work and to his labour until the evening.	Man goes forth to his work and to his labor until evening.
PSA	104	24	여호와여 주의 하신 일이 어찌 그리 많은지요 주께서 지혜로 저희를 다 지으셨으니 주의 부요가 땅에 가득하니이다	O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom hast thou made them all: the earth is full of thy riches.	How many are Your works, O LORD! In wisdom You have made them all; the earth is full of Your creatures.
PSA	104	25	저기 크고 넓은 바다가 있고 그 속에 동물 곧 대소 생물이 무수하니이다	So is this great and wide sea, wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts.	Here is the sea, vast and wide, teeming with creatures beyond number, living things both great and small.
PSA	104	26	선척이 거기 다니며 주의 지으신 악어가 그 속에서 노나이다	There go the ships: there is that leviathan, whom thou hast made to play therein.	There the ships pass, and Leviathan, which You formed to frolic there.
PSA	104	27	이것들이 다 주께서 때를 따라 식물 주시기를 바라나이다	These wait all upon thee; that thou mayest give them their meat in due season.	All creatures look to You to give them their food in due season.
PSA	104	28	주께서 주신즉 저희가 취하며 주께서 손을 펴신즉 저희가 좋은 것으로 만족하다가	That thou givest them they gather: thou openest thine hand, they are filled with good.	When You give it to them, they gather it up; when You open Your hand, they are satisfied with good things.
PSA	104	29	주께서 낯을 숨기신즉 저희가 떨고 주께서 저희 호흡을 취하신즉 저희가 죽어 본 흙으로 돌아가나이다	Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled: thou takest away their breath, they die, and return to their dust.	When You hide Your face, they are terrified; when You take away their breath, they die and return to dust.
PSA	104	30	주의 영을 보내어 저희를 창조하사 지면을 새롭게 하시나이다	Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created: and thou renewest the face of the earth.	When You send Your Spirit, they are created, and You renew the face of the earth.
PSA	104	31	여호와의 영광이 영원히 계속할지며 여호와는 자기 행사로 인하여 즐거워하실지로다	The glory of the Lord shall endure for ever: the Lord shall rejoice in his works.	May the glory of the LORD endure forever; may the LORD rejoice in His works.
PSA	104	32	저가 땅을 보신즉 땅이 진동하며 산들에 접촉하신즉 연기가 발하도다	He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth: he toucheth the hills, and they smoke.	He looks on the earth, and it trembles; He touches the mountains, and they smolder.
PSA	104	33	나의 평생에 여호와께 노래하며 나의 생존한 동안 내 하나님을 찬양하리로다	I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live: I will sing praise to my God while I have my being.	I will sing to the LORD all my life; I will sing praise to my God while I have my being.
PSA	104	34	나의 묵상을 가상히 여기시기를 바라나니 나는 여호와로 인하여 즐거워하리로다	My meditation of him shall be sweet: I will be glad in the Lord.	May my meditation be pleasing to Him, for I rejoice in the LORD.
PSA	104	35	죄인을 땅에서 소멸하시며 악인을 다시 있지 못하게 하실지로다 내 영혼아 여호와를 송축하라 할렐루야	Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, and let the wicked be no more. Bless thou the Lord, O my soul. Praise ye the Lord.	May sinners vanish from the earth and the wicked be no more. Bless the LORD, O my soul. Hallelujah!
PSA	105	1	여호와께 감사하며 그 이름을 불러 아뢰며 그 행사를 만민 중에 알게 할지어다	O give thanks unto the Lord; call upon his name: make known his deeds among the people.	Give thanks to the LORD, call upon His name; make known His deeds among the nations.
PSA	105	2	그에게 노래하며 그를 찬양하며 그의 모든 기사를 말할지어다	Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him: talk ye of all his wondrous works.	Sing to Him, sing praises to Him; tell of all His wonders.
PSA	105	3	그 성호를 자랑하라 무릇 여호와를 구하는 자는 마음이 즐거울지로다	Glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord.	Glory in His holy name; let the hearts of those who seek the LORD rejoice.
PSA	105	4	여호와와 그 능력을 구할지어다 그 얼굴을 항상 구할지어다	Seek the Lord, and his strength: seek his face evermore.	Seek out the LORD and His strength; seek His face always.
PSA	105	5	그 종 아브라함의 후손 곧 택하신 야곱의 자손 너희는 그의 행하신 기사와 그 이적과 그 입의 판단을 기억할지어다	Remember his marvellous works that he hath done; his wonders, and the judgments of his mouth;	Remember the wonders He has done, His marvels, and the judgments He has pronounced,
PSA	105	6	(앞절과 동일)	O ye seed of Abraham his servant, ye children of Jacob his chosen.	O offspring of His servant Abraham, O sons of Jacob, His chosen ones.
PSA	105	7	그는 여호와 우리 하나님이시라 그의 판단이 온 땅에 있도다	He is the Lord our God: his judgments are in all the earth.	He is the LORD our God; His judgments carry throughout the earth.
PSA	105	8	그는 그 언약 곧 천 대에 명하신 말씀을 영원히 기억하셨으니	He hath remembered his covenant for ever, the word which he commanded to a thousand generations.	He remembers His covenant forever, the word He ordained for a thousand generations—
PSA	105	9	이것은 아브라함에게 하신 언약이며 이삭에게 하신 맹세며	Which covenant he made with Abraham, and his oath unto Isaac;	the covenant He made with Abraham, and the oath He swore to Isaac.
PSA	105	10	야곱에게 세우신 율례 곧 이스라엘에게 하신 영영한 언약이라	And confirmed the same unto Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an everlasting covenant:	He confirmed it to Jacob as a decree, to Israel as an everlasting covenant:
PSA	105	11	이르시기를 내가 가나안 땅을 네게 주어 너희 기업의 지경이 되게 하리라 하셨도다	Saying, Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan, the lot of your inheritance:	“I will give you the land of Canaan as the portion of your inheritance.”
PSA	105	12	때에 저희 인수가 적어 매우 영성하며 그 땅에 객이 되어	When they were but a few men in number; yea, very few, and strangers in it.	When they were few in number, few indeed, and strangers in the land,
PSA	105	13	이 족속에게서 저 족속에게로, 이 나라에서 다른 민족에게로 유리하였도다	When they went from one nation to another, from one kingdom to another people;	they wandered from nation to nation, from one kingdom to another.
PSA	105	14	사람이 그들을 해하기를 용납지 아니하시고 그들의 연고로 열왕을 꾸짖어	He suffered no man to do them wrong: yea, he reproved kings for their sakes;	He let no man oppress them; He rebuked kings on their behalf:
PSA	105	15	이르시기를 나의 기름 부은 자를 만지지 말며 나의 선지자를 상하지 말라 하셨도다	Saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm.	“Do not touch My anointed ones! Do no harm to My prophets!”
PSA	105	16	그가 또 기근을 불러 그 땅에 임하게 하여 그 의뢰하는 양식을 다 끊으셨도다	Moreover he called for a famine upon the land: he brake the whole staff of bread.	He called down famine on the land and cut off all their supplies of food.
PSA	105	17	한 사람을 앞서 보내셨음이여 요셉이 종으로 팔렸도다	He sent a man before them, even Joseph, who was sold for a servant:	He sent a man before them— Joseph, sold as a slave.
PSA	105	18	그 발이 착고에 상하며 그 몸이 쇠사슬에 매였으니	Whose feet they hurt with fetters: he was laid in iron:	They bruised his feet with shackles and placed his neck in irons,
PSA	105	19	곧 여호와의 말씀이 응할 때까지라 그 말씀이 저를 단련하였도다	Until the time that his word came: the word of the Lord tried him.	until his prediction came true and the word of the LORD proved him right.
PSA	105	20	왕이 사람을 보내어 저를 방석함이여 열방의 통치자가 저로 자유케 하였도다	The king sent and loosed him; even the ruler of the people, and let him go free.	The king sent and released him; the ruler of peoples set him free.
PSA	105	21	저로 그 집의 주관자를 삼아 그 모든 소유를 관리케 하고	He made him lord of his house, and ruler of all his substance:	He made him master of his household, ruler over all his substance,
PSA	105	22	임의로 백관을 제어하며 지혜로 장로들을 교훈하게 하였도다	To bind his princes at his pleasure; and teach his senators wisdom.	to instruct his princes as he pleased and teach his elders wisdom.
PSA	105	23	이에 이스라엘이 애굽에 들어감이여 야곱이 함 땅에 객이 되었도다	Israel also came into Egypt; and Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham.	Then Israel entered Egypt; Jacob dwelt in the land of Ham.
PSA	105	24	여호와께서 그 백성을 크게 번성케 하사 그들의 대적보다 강하게 하셨으며	And he increased his people greatly; and made them stronger than their enemies.	And the LORD made His people very fruitful, more numerous than their foes,
PSA	105	25	또 저희 마음을 변하여 그 백성을 미워하게 하시며 그 종들에게 교활히 행하게 하셨도다	He turned their heart to hate his people, to deal subtilly with his servants.	whose hearts He turned to hate His people, to conspire against His servants.
PSA	105	26	또 그 종 모세와 그 택하신 아론을 보내시니	He sent Moses his servant; and Aaron whom he had chosen.	He sent Moses His servant, and Aaron, whom He had chosen.
PSA	105	27	저희가 그 백성 중에 여호와의 표징을 보이고 함 땅에서 기사를 행하였도다	They shewed his signs among them, and wonders in the land of Ham.	They performed His miraculous signs among them, and wonders in the land of Ham.
PSA	105	28	여호와께서 흑암을 보내사 어둡게 하시니 그 말씀을 어기지 아니하였도다	He sent darkness, and made it dark; and they rebelled not against his word.	He sent darkness, and it became dark— yet they defied His words.
PSA	105	29	저희 물을 변하여 피가 되게 하사 저희 물고기를 죽이셨도다	He turned their waters into blood, and slew their fish.	He turned their waters to blood and caused their fish to die.
PSA	105	30	그 땅에 개구리가 번성하여 왕의 궁실에도 있었도다	Their land brought forth frogs in abundance, in the chambers of their kings.	Their land teemed with frogs, even in their royal chambers.
PSA	105	31	여호와께서 말씀하신즉 파리떼가 오며 저희 사경에 이가 생겼도다	He spake, and there came divers sorts of flies, and lice in all their coasts.	He spoke, and insects swarmed— gnats throughout their country.
PSA	105	32	비 대신 우박을 내리시며 저희 땅에 화염을 내리셨도다	He gave them hail for rain, and flaming fire in their land.	He gave them hail for rain, with lightning throughout their land.
PSA	105	33	저희 포도나무와 무화과나무를 치시며 저희 사경의 나무를 찍으셨도다	He smote their vines also and their fig trees; and brake the trees of their coasts.	He struck their vines and fig trees and shattered the trees of their country.
PSA	105	34	여호와께서 말씀하신즉 황충과 무수한 메뚜기가 이르러	He spake, and the locusts came, and caterpillers, and that without number,	He spoke, and the locusts came— young locusts without number.
PSA	105	35	저희 땅에 모든 채소를 먹으며 그 밭에 열매를 먹었도다	And did eat up all the herbs in their land, and devoured the fruit of their ground.	They devoured every plant in their land and consumed the produce of their soil.
PSA	105	36	여호와께서 또 저희 땅의 모든 장자를 치시니 곧 저희 모든 기력의 시작이로다	He smote also all the firstborn in their land, the chief of all their strength.	Then He struck all the firstborn in their land, the firstfruits of all their vigor.
PSA	105	37	그들을 인도하여 은금을 가지고 나오게 하시니 그 지파 중에 약한 자가 하나도 없었도다	He brought them forth also with silver and gold: and there was not one feeble person among their tribes.	He brought Israel out with silver and gold, and none among His tribes stumbled.
PSA	105	38	그들의 떠날 때에 애굽이 기뻐하였으니 저희가 그들을 두려워함이로다	Egypt was glad when they departed: for the fear of them fell upon them.	Egypt was glad when they departed, for the dread of Israel had fallen on them.
PSA	105	39	여호와께서 구름을 펴사 덮개를 삼으시고 밤에 불로 밝히셨으며	He spread a cloud for a covering; and fire to give light in the night.	He spread a cloud as a covering and a fire to light up the night.
PSA	105	40	그들이 구한즉 메추라기로 오게 하시며 또 하늘 양식으로 그들을 만족케 하셨도다	The people asked, and he brought quails, and satisfied them with the bread of heaven.	They asked, and He brought quail and satisfied them with the bread of heaven.
PSA	105	41	반석을 가르신즉 물이 흘러나서 마른 땅에 강 같이 흘렀으니	He opened the rock, and the waters gushed out; they ran in the dry places like a river.	He opened a rock, and water gushed out; it flowed like a river in the desert.
PSA	105	42	이는 그 거룩한 말씀과 그 종 아브라함을 기억하셨음이로다	For he remembered his holy promise, and Abraham his servant.	For He remembered His holy promise to Abraham His servant.
PSA	105	43	그 백성으로 즐거이 나오게 하시며 그 택한 자로 노래하며 나오게 하시고	And he brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen with gladness:	He brought forth His people with rejoicing, His chosen with shouts of joy.
PSA	105	44	열방의 땅을 저희에게 주시며 민족들의 수고한 것을 소유로 취하게 하셨으니	And gave them the lands of the heathen: and they inherited the labour of the people;	He gave them the lands of the nations, that they might inherit the fruit of others’ labor,
PSA	105	45	이는 저희로 그 율례를 지키며 그 법을 좇게 하려 하심이로다 할렐루야	That they might observe his statutes, and keep his laws. Praise ye the Lord.	that they might keep His statutes and obey His laws. Hallelujah!
PSA	106	1	할렐루야 여호와께 감사하라 그는 선하시며 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	Praise ye the Lord. O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever.	Hallelujah! Give thanks to the LORD, for He is good; His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	106	2	뉘 능히 여호와의 능하신 사적을 전파하며 그 영예를 다 광포할꼬	Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord? who can shew forth all his praise?	Who can describe the mighty acts of the LORD or fully proclaim His praise?
PSA	106	3	공의를 지키는 자들과 항상 의를 행하는 자는 복이 있도다	Blessed are they that keep judgment, and he that doeth righteousness at all times.	Blessed are those who uphold justice, who practice righteousness at all times.
PSA	106	4	여호와여 주의 백성에게 베푸시는 은혜로 나를 기억하시며 주의 구원으로 나를 권고하사	Remember me, O Lord, with the favour that thou bearest unto thy people: O visit me with thy salvation;	Remember me, O LORD, in Your favor to Your people; visit me with Your salvation,
PSA	106	5	나로 주의 택하신 자의 형통함을 보고 주의 나라의 기업으로 즐거워하게 하시며 주의 기업과 함께 자랑하게 하소서	That I may see the good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the gladness of thy nation, that I may glory with thine inheritance.	that I may see the prosperity of Your chosen ones, and rejoice in the gladness of Your nation, and give glory with Your inheritance.
PSA	106	6	우리가 열조와 함께 범죄하여 사특을 행하며 악을 지었나이다	We have sinned with our fathers, we have committed iniquity, we have done wickedly.	We have sinned like our fathers; we have done wrong and acted wickedly.
PSA	106	7	우리 열조가 애굽에서 주의 기사를 깨닫지 못하며 주의 많은 인자를 기억지 아니하고 바다 곧 홍해에서 거역하였나이다	Our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt; they remembered not the multitude of thy mercies; but provoked him at the sea, even at the Red sea.	Our fathers in Egypt did not grasp Your wonders or remember Your abundant kindness; but they rebelled by the sea, there at the Red Sea.
PSA	106	8	그러나 여호와께서 자기 이름을 위하여 저희를 구원하셨으니 그 큰 권능을 알게 하려 하심이로다	Nevertheless he saved them for his name’s sake, that he might make his mighty power to be known.	Yet He saved them for the sake of His name, to make His power known.
PSA	106	9	이에 홍해를 꾸짖으시니 곧 마르매 저희를 인도하여 바다 지나기를 광야를 지남 같게 하사	He rebuked the Red sea also, and it was dried up: so he led them through the depths, as through the wilderness.	He rebuked the Red Sea, and it dried up; He led them through the depths as through a desert.
PSA	106	10	저희를 그 미워하는 자의 손에서 구원하시며 그 원수의 손에서 구속하셨고	And he saved them from the hand of him that hated them, and redeemed them from the hand of the enemy.	He saved them from the hand that hated them; He redeemed them from the hand of the enemy.
PSA	106	11	저희 대적은 물이 덮으매 하나도 남지 아니하였도다	And the waters covered their enemies: there was not one of them left.	The waters covered their foes; not one of them remained.
PSA	106	12	이에 저희가 그 말씀을 믿고 그 찬송을 불렀도다	Then believed they his words; they sang his praise.	Then they believed His promises and sang His praise.
PSA	106	13	저희가 미구에 그 행사를 잊어버리며 그 가르침을 기다리지 아니하고	They soon forgat his works; they waited not for his counsel:	Yet they soon forgot His works and failed to wait for His counsel.
PSA	106	14	광야에서 욕심을 크게 발하며 사막에서 하나님을 시험하였도다	But lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, and tempted God in the desert.	They craved intensely in the wilderness and tested God in the desert.
PSA	106	15	여호와께서 저희의 요구한 것을 주셨을지라도 그 영혼을 파리하게 하셨도다	And he gave them their request; but sent leanness into their soul.	So He granted their request, but sent a wasting disease upon them.
PSA	106	16	저희가 진에서 모세와 여호와의 성도 아론을 질투하매	They envied Moses also in the camp, and Aaron the saint of the Lord.	In the camp they envied Moses, as well as Aaron, the holy one of the LORD.
PSA	106	17	땅이 갈라져 다단을 삼키며 아비람의 당을 덮었으며	The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan, and covered the company of Abiram.	The earth opened up and swallowed Dathan; it covered the assembly of Abiram.
PSA	106	18	불이 그 당 중에 붙음이여 화염이 악인을 살랐도다	And a fire was kindled in their company; the flame burned up the wicked.	Then fire blazed through their company; flames consumed the wicked.
PSA	106	19	저희가 호렙에서 송아지를 만들고 부어 만든 우상을 숭배하여	They made a calf in Horeb, and worshipped the molten image.	At Horeb they made a calf and worshiped a molten image.
PSA	106	20	자기 영광을 풀 먹는 소의 형상으로 바꾸었도다	Thus they changed their glory into the similitude of an ox that eateth grass.	They exchanged their Glory for the image of a grass-eating ox.
PSA	106	21	애굽에서 큰 일을 행하신 그 구원자 하나님을 저희가 잊었나니	They forgat God their saviour, which had done great things in Egypt;	They forgot God their Savior, who did great things in Egypt,
PSA	106	22	그는 함 땅에서 기사와 홍해에서 놀랄 일을 행하신 자로다	Wondrous works in the land of Ham, and terrible things by the Red sea.	wondrous works in the land of Ham, and awesome deeds by the Red Sea.
PSA	106	23	그러므로 여호와께서 저희를 멸하리라 하셨으나 그 택하신 모세가 그 결렬된 중에서 그 앞에 서서 그 노를 돌이켜 멸하시지 않게 하였도다	Therefore he said that he would destroy them, had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy them.	So He said He would destroy them— had not Moses His chosen one stood before Him in the breach to divert His wrath from destroying them.
PSA	106	24	저희가 낙토를 멸시하며 그 말씀을 믿지 아니하고	Yea, they despised the pleasant land, they believed not his word:	They despised the pleasant land; they did not believe His promise.
PSA	106	25	저희 장막에서 원망하며 여호와의 말씀을 청종치 아니하였도다	But murmured in their tents, and hearkened not unto the voice of the Lord.	They grumbled in their tents and did not listen to the voice of the LORD.
PSA	106	26	이러므로 저가 맹세하시기를 저희로 광야에 엎더지게 하고	Therefore he lifted up his hand against them, to overthrow them in the wilderness:	So He raised His hand and swore to cast them down in the wilderness,
PSA	106	27	또 그 후손을 열방 중에 엎드러뜨리며 각지에 흩어지게 하리라 하셨도다	To overthrow their seed also among the nations, and to scatter them in the lands.	to disperse their offspring among the nations and scatter them throughout the lands.
PSA	106	28	저희가 또 바알브올과 연합하여 죽은 자에게 제사한 음식을 먹어서	They joined themselves also unto Baal–peor, and ate the sacrifices of the dead.	They yoked themselves to Baal of Peor and ate sacrifices offered to lifeless gods.
PSA	106	29	그 행위로 주를 격노케 함을 인하여 재앙이 그 중에 유행하였도다	Thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions: and the plague brake in upon them.	So they provoked the LORD to anger with their deeds, and a plague broke out among them.
PSA	106	30	때에 비느하스가 일어나 처벌하니 이에 재앙이 그쳤도다	Then stood up Phinehas, and executed judgment: and so the plague was stayed.	But Phinehas stood and intervened, and the plague was restrained.
PSA	106	31	이 일을 저에게 의로 정하였으니 대대로 무궁하리로다	And that was counted unto him for righteousness unto all generations for evermore.	It was credited to him as righteousness for endless generations to come.
PSA	106	32	저희가 또 므리바 물에서 여호와를 노하시게 하였으므로 저희로 인하여 얼이 모세에게 미쳤나니	They angered him also at the waters of strife, so that it went ill with Moses for their sakes:	At the waters of Meribah they angered the LORD, and trouble came to Moses because of them.
PSA	106	33	이는 저희가 그 심령을 거역함을 인하여 모세가 그 입술로 망령되이 말하였음이로다	Because they provoked his spirit, so that he spake unadvisedly with his lips.	For they rebelled against His Spirit, and Moses spoke rashly with his lips.
PSA	106	34	저희가 여호와의 명을 좇지 아니하여 이족들을 멸하지 아니하고	They did not destroy the nations, concerning whom the Lord commanded them:	They did not destroy the peoples as the LORD had commanded them,
PSA	106	35	열방과 섞여서 그 행위를 배우며	But were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works.	but they mingled with the nations and adopted their customs.
PSA	106	36	그 우상들을 섬기므로 그것이 저희에게 올무가 되었도다	And they served their idols: which were a snare unto them.	They worshiped their idols, which became a snare to them.
PSA	106	37	저희가 그 자녀로 사신에게 제사하였도다	Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto devils,	They sacrificed their sons and their daughters to demons.
PSA	106	38	무죄한 피 곧 저희 자녀의 피를 흘려 가나안 우상에게 제사하므로 그 땅이 피에 더러웠도다	And shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and of their daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan: and the land was polluted with blood.	They shed innocent blood— the blood of their sons and daughters, whom they sacrificed to the idols of Canaan, and the land was polluted with blood.
PSA	106	39	저희는 그 행위로 더러워지며 그 행동이 음탕하도다	Thus were they defiled with their own works, and went a whoring with their own inventions.	They defiled themselves by their actions and prostituted themselves by their deeds.
PSA	106	40	그러므로 여호와께서 자기 백성에게 맹렬히 노하시며 자기 기업을 미워하사	Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people, insomuch that he abhorred his own inheritance.	So the anger of the LORD burned against His people, and He abhorred His own inheritance.
PSA	106	41	저희를 열방의 손에 붙이시매 저희를 미워하는 자들이 저희를 치리하였도다	And he gave them into the hand of the heathen; and they that hated them ruled over them.	He delivered them into the hand of the nations, and those who hated them ruled over them.
PSA	106	42	저희가 원수들의 압박을 받고 그 수하에 복종케 되었도다	Their enemies also oppressed them, and they were brought into subjection under their hand.	Their enemies oppressed them, and subdued them under their hand.
PSA	106	43	여호와께서 여러 번 저희를 건지시나 저희가 꾀로 거역하며 자기 죄악으로 인하여 낮아짐을 당하였도다	Many times did he deliver them; but they provoked him with their counsel, and were brought low for their iniquity.	Many times He rescued them, but they were bent on rebellion and sank down in their iniquity.
PSA	106	44	그러나 여호와께서 저희의 부르짖음을 들으실 때에 그 고통을 권고하시며	Nevertheless he regarded their affliction, when he heard their cry:	Nevertheless He heard their cry; He took note of their distress.
PSA	106	45	저희를 위하여 그 언약을 기억하시고 그 많은 인자하심을 따라 뜻을 돌이키사	And he remembered for them his covenant, and repented according to the multitude of his mercies.	And He remembered His covenant with them, and relented by the abundance of His loving devotion.
PSA	106	46	저희로 사로잡은 모든 자에게서 긍휼히 여김을 받게 하셨도다	He made them also to be pitied of all those that carried them captives.	He made them objects of compassion to all who held them captive.
PSA	106	47	여호와 우리 하나님이여 우리를 구원하사 열방 중에서 모으시고 우리로 주의 성호를 감사하며 주의 영예를 찬양하게 하소서	Save us, O Lord our God, and gather us from among the heathen, to give thanks unto thy holy name, and to triumph in thy praise.	Save us, O LORD our God, and gather us from the nations, that we may give thanks to Your holy name, that we may glory in Your praise.
PSA	106	48	여호와 이스라엘의 하나님을 영원부터 영원까지 찬양할지어다 모든 백성들아 아멘 할지어다 할렐루야	Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting: and let all the people say, Amen. Praise ye the Lord.	Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, from everlasting to everlasting. Let all the people say, “Amen!” Hallelujah!
PSA	107	1	여호와께 감사하라 그는 선하시며 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever.	Give thanks to the LORD, for He is good; His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	107	2	여호와께 구속함을 받은 자는 이같이 말할지어다 여호와께서 대적의 손에서 저희를 구속하사	Let the redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he hath redeemed from the hand of the enemy;	Let the redeemed of the LORD say so, whom He has redeemed from the hand of the enemy
PSA	107	3	동서 남북 각 지방에서부터 모으셨도다	And gathered them out of the lands, from the east, and from the west, from the north, and from the south.	and gathered from the lands, from east and west, from north and south.
PSA	107	4	저희가 광야 사막 길에서 방황하며 거할 성을 찾지 못하고	They wandered in the wilderness in a solitary way; they found no city to dwell in.	Some wandered in desert wastelands, finding no path to a city in which to dwell.
PSA	107	5	주리고 목마름으로 그 영혼이 속에서 피곤하였도다	Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them.	They were hungry and thirsty; their soul fainted within them.
PSA	107	6	이에 저희가 그 근심 중에 여호와께 부르짖으매 그 고통에서 건지시고	Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them out of their distresses.	Then they cried out to the LORD in their trouble, and He delivered them from their distress.
PSA	107	7	또 바른 길로 인도하사 거할 성에 이르게 하셨도다	And he led them forth by the right way, that they might go to a city of habitation.	He led them on a straight path to reach a city where they could live.
PSA	107	8	여호와의 인자하심과 인생에게 행하신 기이한 일을 인하여 그를 찬송할지로다	Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men!	Let them give thanks to the LORD for His loving devotion and His wonders to the sons of men.
PSA	107	9	저가 사모하는 영혼을 만족케 하시며 주린 영혼에게 좋은 것으로 채워주심이로다	For he satisfieth the longing soul, and filleth the hungry soul with goodness.	For He satisfies the thirsty and fills the hungry with good things.
PSA	107	10	사람이 흑암과 사망의 그늘에 앉으며 곤고와 쇠사슬에 매임은	Such as sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, being bound in affliction and iron;	Some sat in darkness and in the shadow of death, prisoners in affliction and chains,
PSA	107	11	하나님의 말씀을 거역하며 지존자의 뜻을 멸시함이라	Because they rebelled against the words of God, and contemned the counsel of the most High:	because they rebelled against the words of God and despised the counsel of the Most High.
PSA	107	12	그러므로 수고로 저희 마음을 낮추셨으니 저희가 엎드러져도 돕는 자가 없었도다	Therefore he brought down their heart with labour; they fell down, and there was none to help.	He humbled their hearts with hard labor; they stumbled, and there was no one to help.
PSA	107	13	이에 저희가 그 근심 중에 여호와께 부르짖으매 그 고통에서 구원하시되	Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he saved them out of their distresses.	Then they cried out to the LORD in their trouble, and He saved them from their distress.
PSA	107	14	흑암과 사망의 그늘에서 인도하여 내시고 그 얽은 줄을 끊으셨도다	He brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death, and brake their bands in sunder.	He brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death and broke away their chains.
PSA	107	15	여호와의 인자하심과 인생에게 행하신 기이한 일을 인하여 그를 찬송할지로다	Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men!	Let them give thanks to the LORD for His loving devotion and His wonders to the sons of men.
PSA	107	16	저가 놋문을 깨뜨리시며 쇠빗장을 꺾으셨음이로다	For he hath broken the gates of brass, and cut the bars of iron in sunder.	For He has broken down the gates of bronze and cut through the bars of iron.
PSA	107	17	미련한 자는 저희 범과와 죄악의 연고로 곤난을 당하매	Fools because of their transgression, and because of their iniquities, are afflicted.	Fools, in their rebellious ways, and through their iniquities, suffered affliction.
PSA	107	18	저희 혼이 각종 식물을 싫어하여 사망의 문에 가깝도다	Their soul abhorreth all manner of meat; and they draw near unto the gates of death.	They loathed all food and drew near to the gates of death.
PSA	107	19	이에 저희가 그 근심 중에서 여호와께 부르짖으매 그 고통에서 구원하시되	Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he saveth them out of their distresses.	Then they cried out to the LORD in their trouble, and He saved them from their distress.
PSA	107	20	저가 그 말씀을 보내어 저희를 고치사 위경에서 건지시는도다	He sent his word, and healed them, and delivered them from their destructions.	He sent forth His word and healed them; He rescued them from the Pit.
PSA	107	21	여호와의 인자하심과 인생에게 행하신 기이한 일을 인하여 그를 찬송할지로다	Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men!	Let them give thanks to the LORD for His loving devotion and His wonders to the sons of men.
PSA	107	22	감사제를 드리며 노래하여 그 행사를 선포할지로다	And let them sacrifice the sacrifices of thanksgiving, and declare his works with rejoicing.	Let them offer sacrifices of thanksgiving and declare His works with rejoicing.
PSA	107	23	선척을 바다에 띄우며 큰 물에서 영업하는 자는	They that go down to the sea in ships, that do business in great waters;	Others went out to sea in ships, conducting trade on the mighty waters.
PSA	107	24	여호와의 행사와 그 기사를 바다에서 보나니	These see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep.	They saw the works of the LORD, and His wonders in the deep.
PSA	107	25	여호와께서 명하신즉 광풍이 일어나서 바다 물결을 일으키는도다	For he commandeth, and raiseth the stormy wind, which lifteth up the waves thereof.	For He spoke and raised a tempest that lifted the waves of the sea.
PSA	107	26	저희가 하늘에 올랐다가 깊은 곳에 내리니 그 위험을 인하여 그 영혼이 녹는도다	They mount up to the heaven, they go down again to the depths: their soul is melted because of trouble.	They mounted up to the heavens, then sunk to the depths; their courage melted in their anguish.
PSA	107	27	저희가 이리 저리 구르며 취한 자 같이 비틀거리니 지각이 혼돈하도다	They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wits’ end.	They reeled and staggered like drunkards, and all their skill was useless.
PSA	107	28	이에 저희가 그 근심 중에서 여호와께 부르짖으매 그 고통에서 인도하여 내시고	Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he bringeth them out of their distresses.	Then they cried out to the LORD in their trouble, and He brought them out of their distress.
PSA	107	29	광풍을 평정히 하사 물결로 잔잔케 하시는도다	He maketh the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still.	He calmed the storm to a whisper, and the waves of the sea were hushed.
PSA	107	30	저희가 평온함을 인하여 기뻐하는 중에 여호와께서 저희를 소원의 항구로 인도하시는도다	Then are they glad because they be quiet; so he bringeth them unto their desired haven.	They rejoiced in the silence, and He guided them to the harbor they desired.
PSA	107	31	여호와의 인자하심과 인생에게 행하신 기이한 일을 인하여 그를 찬송할지로다	Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men!	Let them give thanks to the LORD for His loving devotion and His wonders to the sons of men.
PSA	107	32	백성의 회에서 저를 높이며 장로들의 자리에서 저를 찬송할지로다	Let them exalt him also in the congregation of the people, and praise him in the assembly of the elders.	Let them exalt Him in the assembly of the people and praise Him in the council of the elders.
PSA	107	33	여호와께서는 강을 변하여 광야가 되게 하시며 샘으로 마른 땅이 되게 하시며	He turneth rivers into a wilderness, and the watersprings into dry ground;	He turns rivers into deserts, springs of water into thirsty ground,
PSA	107	34	그 거민의 악을 인하여 옥토로 염밭이 되게 하시며	A fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein.	and fruitful land into fields of salt, because of the wickedness of its dwellers.
PSA	107	35	또 광야를 변하여 못이 되게 하시며 마른 땅으로 샘물이 되게 하시고	He turneth the wilderness into a standing water, and dry ground into watersprings.	He turns a desert into pools of water and a dry land into flowing springs.
PSA	107	36	주린 자로 거기 거하게 하사 저희로 거할 성을 예비케 하시고	And there he maketh the hungry to dwell, that they may prepare a city for habitation;	He causes the hungry to settle there, that they may establish a city in which to dwell.
PSA	107	37	밭에 파종하며 포도원을 재배하여 소산을 취케 하시며	And sow the fields, and plant vineyards, which may yield fruits of increase.	They sow fields and plant vineyards that yield a fruitful harvest.
PSA	107	38	또 복을 주사 저희로 크게 번성케 하시고 그 가축이 감소치 않게 하실지라도	He blesseth them also, so that they are multiplied greatly; and suffereth not their cattle to decrease.	He blesses them, and they multiply greatly; He does not let their herds diminish.
PSA	107	39	다시 압박과 곤란과 우환을 인하여 저희로 감소하여 비굴하게 하시는도다	Again, they are minished and brought low through oppression, affliction, and sorrow.	When they are decreased and humbled by oppression, evil, and sorrow,
PSA	107	40	여호와께서는 방백들에게 능욕을 부으시고 길 없는 황야에서 유리케 하시나	He poureth contempt upon princes, and causeth them to wander in the wilderness, where there is no way.	He pours out contempt on the nobles and makes them wander in a trackless wasteland.
PSA	107	41	궁핍한 자는 곤란에서 높이 드시고 그 가족을 양무리 같게 하시나니	Yet setteth he the poor on high from affliction, and maketh him families like a flock.	But He lifts the needy from affliction and increases their families like flocks.
PSA	107	42	정직한 자는 보고 기뻐하며 모든 악인은 자기 입을 봉하리로다	The righteous shall see it, and rejoice: and all iniquity shall stop her mouth.	The upright see and rejoice, and all iniquity shuts its mouth.
PSA	107	43	지혜 있는 자들은 이 일에 주의하고 여호와의 인자하심을 깨달으리로다	Whoso is wise, and will observe these things, even they shall understand the lovingkindness of the Lord.	Let him who is wise pay heed to these things and consider the loving devotion of the LORD.
PSA	108	1	다윗의 찬송 시 하나님이여 내 마음을 정하였사오니 내가 노래하며 내 심령으로 찬양하리로다	A Song or Psalm of David. O God, my heart is fixed; I will sing and give praise, even with my glory.	A song. A Psalm of David. My heart is steadfast, O God; I will sing and make music with all my being.
PSA	108	2	비파야 수금아 깰지어다 내가 새벽을 깨우리로다	Awake, psaltery and harp: I myself will awake early.	Awake, O harp and lyre! I will awaken the dawn.
PSA	108	3	여호와여 내가 만민 중에서 주께 감사하고 열방 중에서 주를 찬양하오리니	I will praise thee, O Lord, among the people: and I will sing praises unto thee among the nations.	I will praise You, O LORD, among the nations; I will sing Your praises among the peoples.
PSA	108	4	대저 주의 인자하심이 하늘 위에 광대하시며 주의 진실은 궁창에 미치나이다	For thy mercy is great above the heavens: and thy truth reacheth unto the clouds.	For Your loving devotion extends beyond the heavens, and Your faithfulness reaches to the clouds.
PSA	108	5	하나님이여 주는 하늘 위에 높이 들리시며 주의 영광이 온 세계 위에 높으시기를 원하나이다	Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens: and thy glory above all the earth;	Be exalted, O God, above the heavens; may Your glory cover all the earth.
PSA	108	6	주의 사랑하는 자를 건지시기 위하여 우리에게 응답하사 오른손으로 구원하소서	That thy beloved may be delivered: save with thy right hand, and answer me.	Respond and save us with Your right hand, that Your beloved may be delivered.
PSA	108	7	하나님이 그 거룩하심으로 말씀하시되 내가 뛰놀리라 내가 세겜을 나누며 숙곳 골짜기를 척량하리라	God hath spoken in his holiness; I will rejoice, I will divide Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth.	God has spoken from His sanctuary: “I will triumph! I will parcel out Shechem and apportion the Valley of Succoth.
PSA	108	8	길르앗이 내 것이요 므낫세도 내 것이며 에브라임은 내 머리의 보호자요 유다는 나의 홀이며	Gilead is mine; Manasseh is mine; Ephraim also is the strength of mine head; Judah is my lawgiver;	Gilead is Mine, and Manasseh is Mine; Ephraim is My helmet, Judah is My scepter.
PSA	108	9	모압은 내 목욕통이라 에돔에는 내 신을 던질지며 블레셋 위에서 내가 외치리라 하셨도다	Moab is my washpot; over Edom will I cast out my shoe; over Philistia will I triumph.	Moab is My washbasin; upon Edom I toss My sandal; over Philistia I shout in triumph.”
PSA	108	10	누가 나를 이끌어 견고한 성에 들이며 누가 나를 에돔에 인도할꼬	Who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into Edom?	Who will bring me to the fortified city? Who will lead me to Edom?
PSA	108	11	하나님이여 주께서 우리를 버리지 아니하셨나이까 하나님이여 주께서 우리 군대와 함께 나아가지 아니하시나이다	Wilt not thou, O God, who hast cast us off? and wilt not thou, O God, go forth with our hosts?	Have You not rejected us, O God? Will You no longer march out, O God, with our armies?
PSA	108	12	우리를 도와 대적을 치게 하소서 사람의 구원은 헛됨이니이다	Give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of man.	Give us aid against the enemy, for the help of man is worthless.
PSA	108	13	우리가 하나님을 의지하고 용감히 행하리니 저는 우리의 대적을 밟으실 자이심이로다	Through God we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall tread down our enemies.	With God we will perform with valor, and He will trample our enemies.
PSA	109	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 한 노래 나의 찬송하는 하나님이여 잠잠하지 마옵소서	To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. Hold not thy peace, O God of my praise;	For the choirmaster. A Psalm of David. O God of my praise, be not silent.
PSA	109	2	대저 저희가 악한 입과 궤사한 입을 열어 나를 치며 거짓된 혀로 내게 말하며	For the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the deceitful are opened against me: they have spoken against me with a lying tongue.	For wicked and deceitful mouths open against me; they speak against me with lying tongues.
PSA	109	3	또 미워하는 말로 나를 두르고 무고히 나를 공격하였나이다	They compassed me about also with words of hatred; and fought against me without a cause.	They surround me with hateful words and attack me without cause.
PSA	109	4	나는 사랑하나 저희는 도리어 나를 대적하니 나는 기도할 뿐이라	For my love they are my adversaries: but I give myself unto prayer.	In return for my love they accuse me, but I am a man of prayer.
PSA	109	5	저희가 악으로 나의 선을 갚으며 미워함으로 나의 사랑을 갚았사오니	And they have rewarded me evil for good, and hatred for my love.	They repay me evil for good, and hatred for my love.
PSA	109	6	악인으로 저를 제어하게 하시며 대적으로 그 오른편에 서게 하소서	Set thou a wicked man over him: and let Satan stand at his right hand.	Set over him a wicked man; let an accuser stand at his right hand.
PSA	109	7	저가 판단을 받을 때에 죄를 지고 나오게 하시며 그 기도가 죄로 변케 하시며	When he shall be judged, let him be condemned: and let his prayer become sin.	When he is tried, let him be found guilty, and may his prayer be regarded as sin.
PSA	109	8	그 년수를 단촉케 하시며 그 직분을 타인이 취하게 하시며	Let his days be few; and let another take his office.	May his days be few; may another take his position.
PSA	109	9	그 자녀는 고아가 되고 그 아내는 과부가 되며	Let his children be fatherless, and his wife a widow.	May his children be fatherless and his wife a widow.
PSA	109	10	그 자녀가 유리 구걸하며 그 황폐한 집을 떠나 빌어먹게 하소서	Let his children be continually vagabonds, and beg: let them seek their bread also out of their desolate places.	May his children wander as beggars, seeking sustenance far from their ruined homes.
PSA	109	11	고리대금하는 자로 저의 소유를 다 취하게 하시며 저의 수고한 것을 외인이 탈취하게 하시며	Let the extortioner catch all that he hath; and let the strangers spoil his labour.	May the creditor seize all he owns, and strangers plunder the fruits of his labor.
PSA	109	12	저에게 은혜를 계속할 자가 없게 하시며 그 고아를 연휼할 자도 없게 하시며	Let there be none to extend mercy unto him: neither let there be any to favour his fatherless children.	May there be no one to extend kindness to him, and no one to favor his fatherless children.
PSA	109	13	그 후사가 끊어지게 하시며 후대에 저희 이름이 도말되게 하소서	Let his posterity be cut off; and in the generation following let their name be blotted out.	May his descendants be cut off; may their name be blotted out from the next generation.
PSA	109	14	여호와는 그 열조의 죄악을 기억하시며 그 어미의 죄를 도말하지 마시고	Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered with the Lord; and let not the sin of his mother be blotted out.	May the iniquity of his fathers be remembered before the LORD, and the sin of his mother never be blotted out.
PSA	109	15	그 죄악을 항상 여호와 앞에 있게 하사 저희 기념을 땅에서 끊으소서	Let them be before the Lord continually, that he may cut off the memory of them from the earth.	May their sins always remain before the LORD, that He may cut off their memory from the earth.
PSA	109	16	저가 긍휼히 여길 일을 생각지 아니하고 가난하고 궁핍한 자와 마음이 상한 자를 핍박하여 죽이려 한 연고니이다	Because that he remembered not to shew mercy, but persecuted the poor and needy man, that he might even slay the broken in heart.	For he never thought to show kindness, but pursued the poor and needy and brokenhearted, even to their death.
PSA	109	17	저가 저주하기를 좋아하더니 그것이 자기에게 임하고 축복하기를 기뻐 아니하더니 복이 저를 멀리 떠났으며	As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him: as he delighted not in blessing, so let it be far from him.	The cursing that he loved, may it fall on him; the blessing in which he refused to delight, may it be far from him.
PSA	109	18	또 저주하기를 옷 입듯하더니 저주가 물 같이 그 내부에 들어가며 기름 같이 그 뼈에 들어갔나이다	As he clothed himself with cursing like as with his garment, so let it come into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones.	The cursing that he wore like a coat, may it soak into his body like water, and into his bones like oil.
PSA	109	19	저주가 그 입는 옷 같고 항상 띠는 띠와 같게 하소서	Let it be unto him as the garment which covereth him, and for a girdle wherewith he is girded continually.	May it be like a robe wrapped about him, like a belt tied forever around him.
PSA	109	20	이는 대적 곧 내 영혼을 대적하여 악담하는 자가 여호와께 받는 보응이니이다	Let this be the reward of mine adversaries from the Lord, and of them that speak evil against my soul.	May this be the LORD’s reward to my accusers, to those who speak evil against me.
PSA	109	21	주 여호와여 주의 이름을 인하여 나를 선대하시며 주의 인자하심이 선함을 인하여 나를 건지소서	But do thou for me, O God the Lord, for thy name’s sake: because thy mercy is good, deliver thou me.	But You, O GOD, the Lord, deal kindly with me for the sake of Your name; deliver me by the goodness of Your loving devotion.
PSA	109	22	나는 가난하고 궁핍하여 중심이 상함이니이다	For I am poor and needy, and my heart is wounded within me.	For I am poor and needy; my heart is wounded within me.
PSA	109	23	나의 가는 것은 석양 그림자 같고 또 메뚜기 같이 불려가오며	I am gone like the shadow when it declineth: I am tossed up and down as the locust.	I am fading away like a lengthening shadow; I am shaken off like a locust.
PSA	109	24	금식함을 인하여 내 무릎은 약하고 내 육체는 수척하오며	My knees are weak through fasting; and my flesh faileth of fatness.	My knees are weak from fasting, and my body grows lean and gaunt.
PSA	109	25	나는 또 저희의 훼방거리라 저희가 나를 본즉 머리를 흔드나이다	I became also a reproach unto them: when they looked upon me they shaked their heads.	I am an object of scorn to my accusers; when they see me, they shake their heads.
PSA	109	26	여호와 나의 하나님이여 나를 도우시며 주의 인자하심을 좇아 나를 구원하소서	Help me, O Lord my God: O save me according to thy mercy:	Help me, O LORD my God; save me according to Your loving devotion.
PSA	109	27	이것이 주의 손인 줄을 저희로 알게 하소서 여호와께서 이를 행하셨나이다	That they may know that this is thy hand; that thou, Lord, hast done it.	Let them know that this is Your hand, that You, O LORD, have done it.
PSA	109	28	저희는 저주하여도 주는 내게 복을 주소서 저희는 일어날 때에 수치를 당할지라도 주의 종은 즐거워하리이다	Let them curse, but bless thou: when they arise, let them be ashamed; but let thy servant rejoice.	Though they curse, You will bless. When they rise up, they will be put to shame, but Your servant will rejoice.
PSA	109	29	나의 대적으로 욕을 옷입듯하게 하시며 자기 수치를 겉옷 같이 입게 하소서	Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame, and let them cover themselves with their own confusion, as with a mantle.	May my accusers be clothed with disgrace; may they wear their shame like a robe.
PSA	109	30	내가 입으로 여호와께 크게 감사하며 무리 중에서 찬송하리니	I will greatly praise the Lord with my mouth; yea, I will praise him among the multitude.	With my mouth I will thank the LORD profusely; I will praise Him in the presence of many.
PSA	109	31	저가 궁핍한 자의 우편에 서사 그 영혼을 판단하려 하는 자에게 구원하실 것임이로다	For he shall stand at the right hand of the poor, to save him from those that condemn his soul.	For He stands at the right hand of the needy one, to save him from the condemners of his soul.
PSA	110	1	다윗의 시 여호와께서 내 주에게 말씀하시기를 내가 네 원수로 네 발등상 되게 하기까지 너는 내 우편에 앉으라 하셨도다	A Psalm of David. The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool.	A Psalm of David. The LORD said to my Lord: “Sit at My right hand until I make Your enemies a footstool for Your feet.”
PSA	110	2	여호와께서 시온에서부터 주의 권능의 홀을 내어 보내시리니 주는 원수 중에서 다스리소서	The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion: rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.	The LORD extends Your mighty scepter from Zion: “Rule in the midst of Your enemies.”
PSA	110	3	주의 권능의 날에 주의 백성이 거룩한 옷을 입고 즐거이 헌신하니 새벽 이슬 같은 주의 청년들이 주께 나오는도다	Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness from the womb of the morning: thou hast the dew of thy youth.	Your people shall be willing on Your day of battle. Arrayed in holy splendor, from the womb of the dawn, to You belongs the dew of Your youth.
PSA	110	4	여호와는 맹세하고 변치 아니하시리라 이르시기를 너는 멜기세덱의 반차를 좇아 영원한 제사장이라 하셨도다	The Lord hath sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek.	The LORD has sworn and will not change His mind: “You are a priest forever in the order of Melchizedek.”
PSA	110	5	주의 우편에 계신 주께서 그 노하시는 날에 열왕을 쳐서 파하실 것이라	The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through kings in the day of his wrath.	The Lord is at Your right hand; He will crush kings in the day of His wrath.
PSA	110	6	열방 중에 판단하여 시체로 가득하게 하시고 여러 나라의 머리를 쳐서 파하시며	He shall judge among the heathen, he shall fill the places with the dead bodies; he shall wound the heads over many countries.	He will judge the nations, heaping up the dead; He will crush the leaders far and wide.
PSA	110	7	길가의 시냇물을 마시고 인하여 그 머리를 드시리로다	He shall drink of the brook in the way: therefore shall he lift up the head.	He will drink from the brook by the road; therefore He will lift up His head.
PSA	111	1	할렐루야 내가 정직한 자의 회와 공회 중에서 전심으로 여호와께 감사하리로다	Praise ye the Lord. I will praise the Lord with my whole heart, in the assembly of the upright, and in the congregation.	Hallelujah! I will give thanks to the LORD with all my heart in the council of the upright and in the assembly.
PSA	111	2	여호와의 행사가 크시니 이를 즐거워하는 자가 다 연구하는도다	The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein.	Great are the works of the LORD; they are pondered by all who delight in them.
PSA	111	3	그 행사가 존귀하고 엄위하며 그 의가 영원히 있도다	His work is honourable and glorious: and his righteousness endureth for ever.	Splendid and majestic is His work; His righteousness endures forever.
PSA	111	4	그 기이한 일을 사람으로 기억케 하셨으니 여호와는 은혜로우시고 자비하시도다	He hath made his wonderful works to be remembered: the Lord is gracious and full of compassion.	He has caused His wonders to be remembered; the LORD is gracious and compassionate.
PSA	111	5	여호와께서 자기를 경외하는 자에게 양식을 주시며 그 언약을 영원히 기억하시리로다	He hath given meat unto them that fear him: he will ever be mindful of his covenant.	He provides food for those who fear Him; He remembers His covenant forever.
PSA	111	6	저가 자기 백성에게 열방을 기업으로 주사 그 행사의 능을 저희에게 보이셨도다	He hath shewed his people the power of his works, that he may give them the heritage of the heathen.	He has shown His people the power of His works by giving them the inheritance of the nations.
PSA	111	7	그 손의 행사는 진실과 공의며 그 법도는 다 확실하니	The works of his hands are verity and judgment; all his commandments are sure.	The works of His hands are truth and justice; all His precepts are trustworthy.
PSA	111	8	영원 무궁히 정하신 바요 진실과 정의로 행하신 바로다	They stand fast for ever and ever, and are done in truth and uprightness.	They are upheld forever and ever, enacted in truth and uprightness.
PSA	111	9	여호와께서 그 백성에게 구속을 베푸시며 그 언약을 영원히 세우셨으니 그 이름이 거룩하고 지존하시도다	He sent redemption unto his people: he hath commanded his covenant for ever: holy and reverend is his name.	He has sent redemption to His people; He has ordained His covenant forever; holy and awesome is His name.
PSA	111	10	여호와를 경외함이 곧 지혜의 근본이라 그 계명을 지키는 자는 다 좋은 지각이 있나니 여호와를 찬송함이 영원히 있으리로다	The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: a good understanding have all they that do his commandments: his praise endureth for ever.	The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom; all who follow His precepts gain rich understanding. His praise endures forever!
PSA	112	1	할렐루야, 여호와를 경외하며 그 계명을 크게 즐거워하는 자는 복이 있도다	Praise ye the Lord. Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, that delighteth greatly in his commandments.	Hallelujah! Blessed is the man who fears the LORD, who greatly delights in His commandments.
PSA	112	2	그 후손이 땅에서 강성함이여 정직자의 후대가 복이 있으리로다	His seed shall be mighty upon earth: the generation of the upright shall be blessed.	His descendants will be mighty in the land; the generation of the upright will be blessed.
PSA	112	3	부요와 재물이 그 집에 있음이여 그 의가 영원히 있으리로다	Wealth and riches shall be in his house: and his righteousness endureth for ever.	Wealth and riches are in his house, and his righteousness endures forever.
PSA	112	4	정직한 자에게는 흑암 중에 빛이 일어나나니 그는 어질고 자비하고 의로운 자로다	Unto the upright there ariseth light in the darkness: he is gracious, and full of compassion, and righteous.	Light dawns in the darkness for the upright— for the gracious, compassionate, and righteous.
PSA	112	5	은혜를 베풀며 꾸이는 자는 잘 되나니 그 일을 공의로 하리로다	A good man sheweth favour, and lendeth: he will guide his affairs with discretion.	It is well with the man who is generous and lends freely, whose affairs are guided by justice.
PSA	112	6	저가 영영히 요동치 아니함이여 의인은 영원히 기념하게 되리로다	Surely he shall not be moved for ever: the righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance.	Surely he will never be shaken; the righteous man will be remembered forever.
PSA	112	7	그는 흉한 소식을 두려워 아니함이여 여호와를 의뢰하고 그 마음을 굳게 정하였도다	He shall not be afraid of evil tidings: his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord.	He does not fear bad news; his heart is steadfast, trusting in the LORD.
PSA	112	8	그 마음이 견고하여 두려워 아니할 것이라 그 대적의 받는 보응을 필경 보리로다	His heart is established, he shall not be afraid, until he see his desire upon his enemies.	His heart is assured; he does not fear, until he looks in triumph on his foes.
PSA	112	9	저가 재물을 흩어 빈궁한 자에게 주었으니 그 의가 영원히 있고 그 뿔이 영화로이 들리리로다	He hath dispersed, he hath given to the poor; his righteousness endureth for ever; his horn shall be exalted with honour.	He has scattered abroad his gifts to the poor; his righteousness endures forever; his horn will be lifted high in honor.
PSA	112	10	악인은 이를 보고 한하여 이를 갈면서 소멸하리니 악인의 소욕은 멸망하리로다	The wicked shall see it, and be grieved; he shall gnash with his teeth, and melt away: the desire of the wicked shall perish.	The wicked man will see and be grieved; he will gnash his teeth and waste away; the desires of the wicked will perish.
PSA	113	1	할렐루야, 여호와의 종들아 찬양하라 여호와의 이름을 찬양하라	Praise ye the Lord. Praise, O ye servants of the Lord, praise the name of the Lord.	Hallelujah! Give praise, O servants of the LORD; praise the name of the LORD.
PSA	113	2	이제부터 영원까지 여호와의 이름을 찬송할지로다	Blessed be the name of the Lord from this time forth and for evermore.	Blessed be the name of the LORD both now and forevermore.
PSA	113	3	해 돋는 데서부터 해 지는 데까지 여호와의 이름이 찬양을 받으시리로다	From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same the Lord’s name is to be praised.	From where the sun rises to where it sets, the name of the LORD is praised.
PSA	113	4	여호와는 모든 나라 위에 높으시며 그 영광은 하늘 위에 높으시도다	The Lord is high above all nations, and his glory above the heavens.	The LORD is exalted over all the nations, His glory above the heavens.
PSA	113	5	여호와 우리 하나님과 같은 자 누구리요 높은 위에 앉으셨으나	Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwelleth on high,	Who is like the LORD our God, the One enthroned on high?
PSA	113	6	스스로 낮추사 천지를 살피시고	Who humbleth himself to behold the things that are in heaven, and in the earth!	He humbles Himself to behold the heavens and the earth.
PSA	113	7	가난한 자를 진토에서 일으키시며 궁핍한 자를 거름 무더기에서 드셔서	He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth the needy out of the dunghill;	He raises the poor from the dust and lifts the needy from the dump
PSA	113	8	방백들 곧 그 백성의 방백들과 함께 세우시며	That he may set him with princes, even with the princes of his people.	to seat them with nobles, with the princes of His people.
PSA	113	9	또 잉태하지 못하던 여자로 집에 거하게 하사 자녀의 즐거운 어미가 되게 하시는도다 할렐루야	He maketh the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful mother of children. Praise ye the Lord.	He settles the barren woman in her home as a joyful mother to her children. Hallelujah!
PSA	114	1	이스라엘이 애굽에서 나오며 야곱의 집이 방언 다른 민족에게서 나올 때에	When Israel went out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of strange language;	When Israel departed from Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of foreign tongue,
PSA	114	2	유다는 여호와의 성소가 되고 이스라엘은 그의 영토가 되었도다	Judah was his sanctuary, and Israel his dominion.	Judah became God’s sanctuary, and Israel His dominion.
PSA	114	3	바다는 이를 보고 도망하며 요단은 물러갔으며	The sea saw it, and fled: Jordan was driven back.	The sea observed and fled; the Jordan turned back;
PSA	114	4	산들은 수양 같이 뛰놀며 작은 산들은 어린 양 같이 뛰었도다	The mountains skipped like rams, and the little hills like lambs.	the mountains skipped like rams, the hills like lambs.
PSA	114	5	바다야 네가 도망함은 어찜이며 요단아 네가 물러감은 어찜인고	What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back?	Why was it, O sea, that you fled, O Jordan, that you turned back,
PSA	114	6	너희 산들아 수양 같이 뛰놀며 작은 산들아 어린 양 같이 뛰놂은 어찜인고	Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams; and ye little hills, like lambs?	O mountains, that you skipped like rams, O hills, like lambs?
PSA	114	7	땅이여 너는 주 앞 곧 야곱의 하나님 앞에서 떨지어다	Tremble, thou earth, at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob;	Tremble, O earth, at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob,
PSA	114	8	저가 반석을 변하여 못이 되게 하시며 차돌로 샘물이 되게 하셨도다	Which turned the rock into a standing water, the flint into a fountain of waters.	who turned the rock into a pool, the flint into a fountain of water!
PSA	115	1	여호와여 영광을 우리에게 돌리지 마옵소서 우리에게 돌리지 마옵소서 오직 주의 인자하심과 진실하심을 인하여 주의 이름에 돌리옵소서	Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory, for thy mercy, and for thy truth’s sake.	Not to us, O LORD, not to us, but to Your name be the glory, because of Your loving devotion, because of Your faithfulness.
PSA	115	2	어찌하여 열방으로 저희 하나님이 이제 어디 있느냐 말하게 하리이까	Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is now their God?	Why should the nations say, “Where is their God?”
PSA	115	3	오직 우리 하나님은 하늘에 계셔서 원하시는 모든 것을 행하셨나이다	But our God is in the heavens: he hath done whatsoever he hath pleased.	Our God is in heaven; He does as He pleases.
PSA	115	4	저희 우상은 은과 금이요 사람의 수공물이라	Their idols are silver and gold, the work of men’s hands.	Their idols are silver and gold, made by the hands of men.
PSA	115	5	입이 있어도 말하지 못하며 눈이 있어도 보지 못하며	They have mouths, but they speak not: eyes have they, but they see not:	They have mouths, but cannot speak; they have eyes, but cannot see;
PSA	115	6	귀가 있어도 듣지 못하며 코가 있어도 맡지 못하며	They have ears, but they hear not: noses have they, but they smell not:	they have ears, but cannot hear; they have noses, but cannot smell;
PSA	115	7	손이 있어도 만지지 못하며 발이 있어도 걷지 못하며 목구멍으로 소리도 못하느니라	They have hands, but they handle not: feet have they, but they walk not: neither speak they through their throat.	they have hands, but cannot feel; they have feet, but cannot walk; they cannot even clear their throats.
PSA	115	8	우상을 만드는 자와 그것을 의지하는 자가 다 그와 같으리로다	They that make them are like unto them; so is every one that trusteth in them.	Those who make them become like them, as do all who trust in them.
PSA	115	9	이스라엘아 여호와를 의지하라 그는 너희 도움이시요 너희 방패시로다	O Israel, trust thou in the Lord: he is their help and their shield.	O Israel, trust in the LORD! He is their help and shield.
PSA	115	10	아론의 집이여 여호와를 의지하라 그는 너희 도움이시요 너희 방패시로다	O house of Aaron, trust in the Lord: he is their help and their shield.	O house of Aaron, trust in the LORD! He is their help and shield.
PSA	115	11	여호와를 경외하는 너희는 여호와를 의지하라 그는 너희 도움이시요 너희 방패시로다	Ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord: he is their help and their shield.	You who fear the LORD, trust in the LORD! He is their help and shield.
PSA	115	12	여호와께서 우리를 생각하사 복을 주시되 이스라엘 집에도 복을 주시고 아론의 집에도 복을 주시며	The Lord hath been mindful of us: he will bless us; he will bless the house of Israel; he will bless the house of Aaron.	The LORD is mindful of us; He will bless us. He will bless the house of Israel; He will bless the house of Aaron;
PSA	115	13	대소 무론하고 여호와를 경외하는 자에게 복을 주시리로다	He will bless them that fear the Lord, both small and great.	He will bless those who fear the LORD— small and great alike.
PSA	115	14	여호와께서 너희 곧 너희와 또 너희 자손을 더욱 번창케 하시기를 원하노라	The Lord shall increase you more and more, you and your children.	May the LORD give you increase, both you and your children.
PSA	115	15	너희는 천지를 지으신 여호와께 복을 받는 자로다	Ye are blessed of the Lord which made heaven and earth.	May you be blessed by the LORD, the Maker of heaven and earth.
PSA	115	16	하늘은 여호와의 하늘이라도 땅은 인생에게 주셨도다	The heaven, even the heavens, are the Lord’s: but the earth hath he given to the children of men.	The highest heavens belong to the LORD, but the earth He has given to mankind.
PSA	115	17	죽은 자가 여호와를 찬양하지 못하나니 적막한 데 내려가는 아무도 못하리로다	The dead praise not the Lord, neither any that go down into silence.	It is not the dead who praise the LORD, nor any who descend into silence.
PSA	115	18	우리는 이제부터 영원까지 여호와를 송축하리로다 할렐루야	But we will bless the Lord from this time forth and for evermore. Praise the Lord.	But it is we who will bless the LORD, both now and forevermore. Hallelujah!
PSA	116	1	여호와께서 내 음성과 내 간구를 들으시므로 내가 저를 사랑하는도다	I love the Lord, because he hath heard my voice and my supplications.	I love the LORD, for He has heard my voice— my appeal for mercy.
PSA	116	2	그 귀를 내게 기울이셨으므로 내가 평생에 기도하리로다	Because he hath inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live.	Because He has inclined His ear to me, I will call on Him as long as I live.
PSA	116	3	사망의 줄이 나를 두르고 음부의 고통이 내게 미치므로 내가 환난과 슬픔을 만났을 때에	The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell gat hold upon me: I found trouble and sorrow.	The ropes of death entangled me; the anguish of Sheol overcame me; I was confronted by trouble and sorrow.
PSA	116	4	내가 여호와의 이름으로 기도하기를 여호와여 주께 구하오니 내 영혼을 건지소서 하였도다	Then called I upon the name of the Lord; O Lord, I beseech thee, deliver my soul.	Then I called on the name of the LORD: “O LORD, deliver my soul!”
PSA	116	5	여호와는 은혜로우시며 의로우시며 우리 하나님은 자비하시도다	Gracious is the Lord, and righteous; yea, our God is merciful.	The LORD is gracious and righteous; our God is full of compassion.
PSA	116	6	여호와께서는 어리석은 자를 보존하시나니 내가 낮게 될 때에 나를 구원하셨도다	The Lord preserveth the simple: I was brought low, and he helped me.	The LORD preserves the simplehearted; I was helpless, and He saved me.
PSA	116	7	내 영혼아 네 평안함에 돌아갈지어다 여호와께서 너를 후대하심이로다	Return unto thy rest, O my soul; for the Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee.	Return to your rest, O my soul, for the LORD has been good to you.
PSA	116	8	주께서 내 영혼을 사망에서, 내 눈을 눈물에서, 내 발을 넘어짐에서 건지셨나이다	For thou hast delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling.	For You have delivered my soul from death, my eyes from tears, my feet from stumbling.
PSA	116	9	내가 생존 세계에서 여호와 앞에 행하리로다	I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living.	I will walk before the LORD in the land of the living.
PSA	116	10	내가 믿는고로 말하리라 내가 큰 곤란을 당하였도다	I believed, therefore have I spoken: I was greatly afflicted:	I believed, therefore I said, “I am greatly afflicted.”
PSA	116	11	내가 경겁 중에 이르기를 모든 사람은 거짓말장이라 하였도다	I said in my haste, All men are liars.	In my alarm I said, “All men are liars!”
PSA	116	12	여호와께서 내게 주신 모든 은혜를 무엇으로 보답할꼬	What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me?	How can I repay the LORD for all His goodness to me?
PSA	116	13	내가 구원의 잔을 들고 여호와의 이름을 부르며	I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord.	I will lift the cup of salvation and call on the name of the LORD.
PSA	116	14	여호와의 모든 백성 앞에서 나의 서원을 여호와께 갚으리로다	I will pay my vows unto the Lord now in the presence of all his people.	I will fulfill my vows to the LORD in the presence of all His people.
PSA	116	15	성도의 죽는 것을 여호와께서 귀중히 보시는도다	Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints.	Precious in the sight of the LORD is the death of His saints.
PSA	116	16	여호와여 나는 진실로 주의 종이요 주의 여종의 아들 곧 주의 종이라 주께서 나의 결박을 푸셨나이다	O Lord, truly I am thy servant; I am thy servant, and the son of thine handmaid: thou hast loosed my bonds.	Truly, O LORD, I am Your servant; I am Your servant, the son of Your maidservant; You have broken my bonds.
PSA	116	17	내가 주께 감사제를 드리고 여호와의 이름을 부르리이다	I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call upon the name of the Lord.	I will offer to You a sacrifice of thanksgiving and call on the name of the LORD.
PSA	116	18	내가 여호와의 모든 백성 앞에서 나의 서원을 여호와께 갚을지라	I will pay my vows unto the Lord now in the presence of all his people,	I will fulfill my vows to the LORD in the presence of all His people,
PSA	116	19	예루살렘아, 네 가운데서, 여호와의 전 정에서 내가 갚으리로다 할렐루야	In the courts of the Lord’s house, in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. Praise ye the Lord.	in the courts of the LORD’s house, in your midst, O Jerusalem. Hallelujah!
PSA	117	1	너희 모든 나라들아 여호와를 찬양하며 너희 모든 백성들아 저를 칭송할지어다	O praise the Lord, all ye nations: praise him, all ye people.	Praise the LORD, all you nations! Extol Him, all you peoples!
PSA	117	2	우리에게 향하신 여호와의 인자하심이 크고 진실하심이 영원함이로다 할렐루야	For his merciful kindness is great toward us: and the truth of the Lord endureth for ever. Praise ye the Lord.	For great is His loving devotion toward us, and the faithfulness of the LORD endures forever. Hallelujah!
PSA	118	1	여호와께 감사하라 저는 선하시며 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: because his mercy endureth for ever.	Give thanks to the LORD, for He is good; His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	118	2	이제 이스라엘은 말하기를 그 인자하심이 영원하다 할지로다	Let Israel now say, that his mercy endureth for ever.	Let Israel say, “His loving devotion endures forever.”
PSA	118	3	이제 아론의 집은 말하기를 그 인자하심이 영원하다 할지로다	Let the house of Aaron now say, that his mercy endureth for ever.	Let the house of Aaron say, “His loving devotion endures forever.”
PSA	118	4	이제 여호와를 경외하는 자는 말하기를 그 인자하심이 영원하다 할지로다	Let them now that fear the Lord say, that his mercy endureth for ever.	Let those who fear the LORD say, “His loving devotion endures forever.”
PSA	118	5	내가 고통 중에 여호와께 부르짖었더니 여호와께서 답하시고 나를 광활한 곳에 세우셨도다	I called upon the Lord in distress: the Lord answered me, and set me in a large place.	In my distress I called to the LORD, and He answered and set me free.
PSA	118	6	여호와는 내 편이시라 내게 두려움이 없나니 사람이 내게 어찌할꼬	The Lord is on my side; I will not fear: what can man do unto me?	The LORD is on my side; I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?
PSA	118	7	여호와께서 내 편이 되사 나를 돕는 자 중에 계시니 그러므로 나를 미워하는 자에게 보응하시는 것을 내가 보리로다	The Lord taketh my part with them that help me: therefore shall I see my desire upon them that hate me.	The LORD is on my side; He is my helper. Therefore I will look in triumph on those who hate me.
PSA	118	8	여호와께 피함이 사람을 신뢰함보다 나으며	It is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in man.	It is better to take refuge in the LORD than to trust in man.
PSA	118	9	여호와께 피함이 방백들을 신뢰함보다 낫도다	It is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in princes.	It is better to take refuge in the LORD than to trust in princes.
PSA	118	10	열방이 나를 에워쌌으니 내가 여호와의 이름으로 저희를 끊으리로다	All nations compassed me about: but in the name of the Lord will I destroy them.	All the nations surrounded me, but in the name of the LORD I cut them off.
PSA	118	11	저희가 나를 에워싸고 에워쌌으니 내가 여호와의 이름으로 저희를 끊으리로다	They compassed me about; yea, they compassed me about: but in the name of the Lord I will destroy them.	They surrounded me on every side, but in the name of the LORD I cut them off.
PSA	118	12	저희가 벌과 같이 나를 에워쌌으나 가시덤불의 불 같이 소멸되었나니 내가 여호와의 이름으로 저희를 끊으리로다	They compassed me about like bees; they are quenched as the fire of thorns: for in the name of the Lord I will destroy them.	They swarmed around me like bees, but they were extinguished like burning thorns; in the name of the LORD I cut them off.
PSA	118	13	네가 나를 밀쳐 넘어뜨리려 하였으나 여호와께서 나를 도우셨도다	Thou hast thrust sore at me that I might fall: but the Lord helped me.	I was pushed so hard I was falling, but the LORD helped me.
PSA	118	14	여호와는 나의 능력과 찬송이시요 또 나의 구원이 되셨도다	The Lord is my strength and song, and is become my salvation.	The LORD is my strength and my song, and He has become my salvation.
PSA	118	15	의인의 장막에 기쁜 소리, 구원의 소리가 있음이여 여호와의 오른손이 권능을 베푸시며	The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the tabernacles of the righteous: the right hand of the Lord doeth valiantly.	Shouts of joy and salvation resound in the tents of the righteous: “The right hand of the LORD performs with valor!
PSA	118	16	여호와의 오른손이 높이 들렸으며 여호와의 오른손이 권능을 베푸시는도다	The right hand of the Lord is exalted: the right hand of the Lord doeth valiantly.	The right hand of the LORD is exalted! The right hand of the LORD performs with valor!”
PSA	118	17	내가 죽지 않고 살아서 여호와의 행사를 선포하리로다	I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord.	I will not die, but I will live and proclaim what the LORD has done.
PSA	118	18	여호와께서 나를 심히 경책하셨어도 죽음에는 붙이지 아니하셨도다	The Lord hath chastened me sore: but he hath not given me over unto death.	The LORD disciplined me severely, but He has not given me over to death.
PSA	118	19	내게 의의 문을 열지어다 내가 들어가서 여호와께 감사하리로다	Open to me the gates of righteousness: I will go into them, and I will praise the Lord:	Open to me the gates of righteousness, that I may enter and give thanks to the LORD.
PSA	118	20	이는 여호와의 문이라 의인이 그리로 들어가리로다	This gate of the Lord, into which the righteous shall enter.	This is the gate of the LORD; the righteous shall enter through it.
PSA	118	21	주께서 내게 응답하시고 나의 구원이 되셨으니 내가 주께 감사하리이다	I will praise thee: for thou hast heard me, and art become my salvation.	I will give You thanks, for You have answered me, and You have become my salvation.
PSA	118	22	건축자의 버린 돌이 집 모퉁이의 머릿돌이 되었나니	The stone which the builders refused is become the head stone of the corner.	The stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone.
PSA	118	23	이는 여호와의 행하신 것이요 우리 눈에 기이한 바로다	This is the Lord’s doing; it is marvellous in our eyes.	This is from the LORD, and it is marvelous in our eyes.
PSA	118	24	이 날은 여호와의 정하신 것이라 이 날에 우리가 즐거워하고 기뻐하리로다	This is the day which the Lord hath made; we will rejoice and be glad in it.	This is the day that the LORD has made; we will rejoice and be glad in it.
PSA	118	25	여호와여 구하옵나니 이제 구원하소서 여호와여 우리가 구하옵나니 이제 형통케 하소서	Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee, send now prosperity.	O LORD, save us, we pray. We beseech You, O LORD, cause us to prosper!
PSA	118	26	여호와의 이름으로 오는 자가 복이 있음이여 우리가 여호와의 집에서 너희를 축복하였도다	Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the Lord: we have blessed you out of the house of the Lord.	Blessed is he who comes in the name of the LORD. From the house of the LORD we bless you.
PSA	118	27	여호와는 하나님이시라 우리에게 비취셨으니 줄로 희생을 제단 뿔에 맬지어다	God is the Lord, which hath shewed us light: bind the sacrifice with cords, even unto the horns of the altar.	The LORD is God; He has made His light to shine upon us. Bind the festal sacrifice with cords to the horns of the altar.
PSA	118	28	주는 나의 하나님이시라 내가 주께 감사하리이다 주는 나의 하나님이시라 내가 주를 높이리이다	Thou art my God, and I will praise thee: thou art my God, I will exalt thee.	You are my God, and I will give You thanks. You are my God, and I will exalt You.
PSA	118	29	여호와께 감사하라 그는 선하시며 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever.	Give thanks to the LORD, for He is good; His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	119	1	행위 완전하여 여호와의 법에 행하는 자가 복이 있음이여	א ALEPH. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of the Lord.	Blessed are those whose way is blameless, who walk in the Law of the LORD.
PSA	119	2	여호와의 증거를 지키고 전심으로 여호와를 구하는 자가 복이 있도다	Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and that seek him with the whole heart.	Blessed are those who keep His testimonies and seek Him with all their heart.
PSA	119	3	실로 저희는 불의를 행치 아니하고 주의 도를 행하는도다	They also do no iniquity: they walk in his ways.	They do no iniquity; they walk in His ways.
PSA	119	4	주께서 주의 법도로 명하사 우리로 근실히 지키게 하셨나이다	Thou hast commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently.	You have ordained Your precepts, that we should keep them diligently.
PSA	119	5	내 길을 굳이 정하사 주의 율례를 지키게 하소서	O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes!	Oh, that my ways were committed to keeping Your statutes!
PSA	119	6	내가 주의 모든 계명에 주의할 때에는 부끄럽지 아니하리이다	Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy commandments.	Then I would not be ashamed when I consider all Your commandments.
PSA	119	7	내가 주의 의로운 판단을 배울 때에는 정직한 마음으로 주께 감사하리이다	I will praise thee with uprightness of heart, when I shall have learned thy righteous judgments.	I will praise You with an upright heart when I learn Your righteous judgments.
PSA	119	8	내가 주의 율례를 지키오리니 나를 아주 버리지 마옵소서	I will keep thy statutes: O forsake me not utterly.	I will keep Your statutes; do not utterly forsake me.
PSA	119	9	청년이 무엇으로 그 행실을 깨끗케 하리이까 주의 말씀을 따라 삼갈 것이니이다	ב BETH. Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto according to thy word.	How can a young man keep his way pure? By guarding it according to Your word.
PSA	119	10	내가 전심으로 주를 찾았사오니 주의 계명에서 떠나지 말게 하소서	With my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not wander from thy commandments.	With all my heart I have sought You; do not let me stray from Your commandments.
PSA	119	11	내가 주께 범죄치 아니하려 하여 주의 말씀을 내 마음에 두었나이다	Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee.	I have hidden Your word in my heart that I might not sin against You.
PSA	119	12	찬송을 받으실 여호와여 주의 율례를 내게 가르치소서	Blessed art thou, O Lord: teach me thy statutes.	Blessed are You, O LORD; teach me Your statutes.
PSA	119	13	주의 입의 모든 규례를 나의 입술로 선포하였으며	With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth.	With my lips I proclaim all the judgments of Your mouth.
PSA	119	14	내가 모든 재물을 즐거워함 같이 주의 증거의 도를 즐거워하였나이다	I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as much as in all riches.	I rejoice in the way of Your testimonies as much as in all riches.
PSA	119	15	내가 주의 법도를 묵상하며 주의 도에 주의하며	I will meditate in thy precepts, and have respect unto thy ways.	I will meditate on Your precepts and regard Your ways.
PSA	119	16	주의 율례를 즐거워하며 주의 말씀을 잊지 아니하리이다	I will delight myself in thy statutes: I will not forget thy word.	I will delight in Your statutes; I will not forget Your word.
PSA	119	17	주의 종을 후대하여 살게 하소서 그리하시면 주의 말씀을 지키리이다	ג GIMEL. Deal bountifully with thy servant, that I may live, and keep thy word.	Deal bountifully with Your servant, that I may live and keep Your word.
PSA	119	18	내 눈을 열어서 주의 법의 기이한 것을 보게 하소서	Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law.	Open my eyes that I may see wondrous things from Your law.
PSA	119	19	나는 땅에서 객이 되었사오니 주의 계명을 내게 숨기지 마소서	I am a stranger in the earth: hide not thy commandments from me.	I am a stranger on the earth; do not hide Your commandments from me.
PSA	119	20	주의 규례를 항상 사모함으로 내 마음이 상하나이다	My soul breaketh for the longing that it hath unto thy judgments at all times.	My soul is consumed with longing for Your judgments at all times.
PSA	119	21	교만하여 저주를 받으며 주의 계명에서 떠나는 자를 주께서 꾸짖으셨나이다	Thou hast rebuked the proud that are cursed, which do err from thy commandments.	You rebuke the arrogant— the cursed who stray from Your commandments.
PSA	119	22	내가 주의 증거를 지켰사오니 훼방과 멸시를 내게서 떠나게 하소서	Remove from me reproach and contempt; for I have kept thy testimonies.	Remove my scorn and contempt, for I have kept Your testimonies.
PSA	119	23	방백들도 앉아 나를 훼방하였사오나 주의 종은 주의 율례를 묵상하였나이다	Princes also did sit and speak against me: but thy servant did meditate in thy statutes.	Though rulers sit and slander me, Your servant meditates on Your statutes.
PSA	119	24	주의 증거는 나의 즐거움이요 나의 모사니이다	Thy testimonies also are my delight and my counsellors.	Your testimonies are indeed my delight; they are my counselors.
PSA	119	25	내 영혼이 진토에 붙었사오니 주의 말씀대로 나를 소성케 하소서	ד DALETH. My soul cleaveth unto the dust: quicken thou me according to thy word.	My soul cleaves to the dust; revive me according to Your word.
PSA	119	26	내가 나의 행위를 고하매 주께서 내게 응답하셨으니 주의 율례를 내게 가르치소서	I have declared my ways, and thou heardest me: teach me thy statutes.	I recounted my ways, and You answered me; teach me Your statutes.
PSA	119	27	나로 주의 법도의 길을 깨닫게 하소서 그리하시면 내가 주의 기사를 묵상하리이다	Make me to understand the way of thy precepts: so shall I talk of thy wondrous works.	Make clear to me the way of Your precepts; then I will meditate on Your wonders.
PSA	119	28	나의 영혼이 눌림을 인하여 녹사오니 주의 말씀대로 나를 세우소서	My soul melteth for heaviness: strengthen thou me according unto thy word.	My soul melts with sorrow; strengthen me according to Your word.
PSA	119	29	거짓 행위를 내게서 떠나게 하시고 주의 법을 내게 은혜로이 베푸소서	Remove from me the way of lying: and grant me thy law graciously.	Remove me from the path of deceit and graciously grant me Your law.
PSA	119	30	내가 성실한 길을 택하고 주의 규례를 내 앞에 두었나이다	I have chosen the way of truth: thy judgments have I laid before me.	I have chosen the way of truth; I have set Your ordinances before me.
PSA	119	31	내가 주의 증거에 밀접하였사오니 여호와여 나로 수치를 당케 마소서	I have stuck unto thy testimonies: O Lord, put me not to shame.	I cling to Your testimonies, O LORD; let me not be put to shame.
PSA	119	32	주께서 내 마음을 넓히시오면 내가 주의 계명의 길로 달려 가리이다	I will run the way of thy commandments, when thou shalt enlarge my heart.	I run in the path of Your commandments, for You will enlarge my heart.
PSA	119	33	여호와여 주의 율례의 도를 내게 가르치소서 내가 끝까지 지키리이다	ה HE. Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes; and I shall keep it unto the end.	Teach me, O LORD, the way of Your statutes, and I will keep them to the end.
PSA	119	34	나로 깨닫게 하소서 내가 주의 법을 준행하며 전심으로 지키리이다	Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law; yea, I shall observe it with my whole heart.	Give me understanding that I may obey Your law, and follow it with all my heart.
PSA	119	35	나로 주의 계명의 첩경으로 행케 하소서 내가 이를 즐거워함이니이다	Make me to go in the path of thy commandments; for therein do I delight.	Direct me in the path of Your commandments, for there I find delight.
PSA	119	36	내 마음을 주의 증거로 향하게 하시고 탐욕으로 향치 말게 하소서	Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness.	Turn my heart to Your testimonies and not to covetous gain.
PSA	119	37	내 눈을 돌이켜 허탄한 것을 보지 말게 하시고 주의 도에 나를 소성케 하소서	Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity; and quicken thou me in thy way.	Turn my eyes away from worthless things; revive me with Your word.
PSA	119	38	주를 경외케 하는 주의 말씀을 주의 종에게 세우소서	Stablish thy word unto thy servant, who is devoted to thy fear.	Establish Your word to Your servant, to produce reverence for You.
PSA	119	39	나의 두려워하는 훼방을 내게서 떠나게 하소서 주의 규례는 선하심이니이다	Turn away my reproach which I fear: for thy judgments are good.	Turn away the disgrace I dread, for Your judgments are good.
PSA	119	40	내가 주의 법도를 사모하였사오니 주의 의에 나를 소성케 하소서	Behold, I have longed after thy precepts: quicken me in thy righteousness.	How I long for Your precepts! Revive me in Your righteousness.
PSA	119	41	여호와여 주의 말씀대로 주의 인자하심과 주의 구원을 내게 임하게 하소서	ו VAU. Let thy mercies come also unto me, O Lord, even thy salvation, according to thy word.	May Your loving devotion come to me, O LORD, Your salvation, according to Your promise.
PSA	119	42	그리하시면 내가 나를 훼방하는 자에게 대답할 말이 있사오리니 내가 주의 말씀을 의뢰함이니이다	So shall I have wherewith to answer him that reproacheth me: for I trust in thy word.	Then I can answer him who taunts, for I trust in Your word.
PSA	119	43	진리의 말씀이 내 입에서 조금도 떠나지 말게 하소서 내가 주의 규례를 바랐음이니이다	And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth; for I have hoped in thy judgments.	Never take Your word of truth from my mouth, for I hope in Your judgments.
PSA	119	44	내가 주의 율법을 항상 영영히 끝없이 지키리이다	So shall I keep thy law continually for ever and ever.	I will always obey Your law, forever and ever.
PSA	119	45	내가 주의 법도를 구하였사오니 자유롭게 행보할 것이오며	And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy precepts.	And I will walk in freedom, for I have sought Your precepts.
PSA	119	46	또 열왕 앞에 주의 증거를 말할 때에 수치를 당치 아니하겠사오며	I will speak of thy testimonies also before kings, and will not be ashamed.	I will speak of Your testimonies before kings, and I will not be ashamed.
PSA	119	47	나의 사랑하는 바 주의 계명을 스스로 즐거워하며	And I will delight myself in thy commandments, which I have loved.	I delight in Your commandments because I love them.
PSA	119	48	또 나의 사랑하는 바 주의 계명에 내 손을 들고 주의 율례를 묵상하리이다	My hands also will I lift up unto thy commandments, which I have loved; and I will meditate in thy statutes.	I lift up my hands to Your commandments, which I love, and I meditate on Your statutes.
PSA	119	49	주의 종에게 하신 말씀을 기억하소서 주께서 나로 소망이 있게 하셨나이다	ז ZAIN. Remember the word unto thy servant, upon which thou hast caused me to hope.	Remember Your word to Your servant, upon which You have given me hope.
PSA	119	50	이 말씀은 나의 곤란 중에 위로라 주의 말씀이 나를 살리셨음이니이다	This is my comfort in my affliction: for thy word hath quickened me.	This is my comfort in affliction, that Your promise has given me life.
PSA	119	51	교만한 자가 나를 심히 조롱하였어도 나는 주의 법을 떠나지 아니하였나이다	The proud have had me greatly in derision: yet have I not declined from thy law.	The arrogant utterly deride me, but I do not turn from Your law.
PSA	119	52	여호와여 주의 옛 규례를 내가 기억하고 스스로 위로하였나이다	I remembered thy judgments of old, O Lord; and have comforted myself.	I remember Your judgments of old, O LORD, and in them I find comfort.
PSA	119	53	주의 율법을 버린 악인들을 인하여 내가 맹렬한 노에 잡혔나이다	Horror hath taken hold upon me because of the wicked that forsake thy law.	Rage has taken hold of me because of the wicked who reject Your law.
PSA	119	54	나의 나그네 된 집에서 주의 율례가 나의 노래가 되었나이다	Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage.	Your statutes are songs to me in the house of my pilgrimage.
PSA	119	55	여호와여 내가 밤에 주의 이름을 기억하고 주의 법을 지켰나이다	I have remembered thy name, O Lord, in the night, and have kept thy law.	In the night, O LORD, I remember Your name, that I may keep Your law.
PSA	119	56	내 소유는 이것이니 곧 주의 법도를 지킨 것이니이다	This I had, because I kept thy precepts.	This is my practice, for I obey Your precepts.
PSA	119	57	여호와는 나의 분깃이시니 나는 주의 말씀을 지키리라 하였나이다	ח CHETH. Thou art my portion, O Lord: I have said that I would keep thy words.	The LORD is my portion; I have promised to keep Your words.
PSA	119	58	내가 전심으로 은혜를 구하였사오니 주의 말씀대로 나를 긍휼히 여기소서	I intreated thy favour with my whole heart: be merciful unto me according to thy word.	I have sought Your face with all my heart; be gracious to me according to Your promise.
PSA	119	59	내가 내 행위를 생각하고 주의 증거로 내 발을 돌이켰사오며	I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.	I considered my ways and turned my steps to Your testimonies.
PSA	119	60	주의 계명을 지키기에 신속히 하고 지체치 아니하였나이다	I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.	I hurried without hesitating to keep Your commandments.
PSA	119	61	악인의 줄이 내게 두루 얽혔을지라도 나는 주의 법을 잊지 아니하였나이다	The bands of the wicked have robbed me: but I have not forgotten thy law.	Though the ropes of the wicked bind me, I do not forget Your law.
PSA	119	62	내가 주의 의로운 규례를 인하여 밤중에 일어나 주께 감사하리이다	At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee because of thy righteous judgments.	At midnight I rise to give You thanks for Your righteous judgments.
PSA	119	63	나는 주를 경외하는 모든 자와 주의 법도를 지키는 자의 동무라	I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy precepts.	I am a friend to all who fear You, and to those who keep Your precepts.
PSA	119	64	여호와여 주의 인자하심이 땅에 충만하였사오니 주의 율례로 나를 가르치소서	The earth, O Lord, is full of thy mercy: teach me thy statutes.	The earth is filled with Your loving devotion, O LORD; teach me Your statutes.
PSA	119	65	여호와여 주의 말씀대로 주의 종을 선대하셨나이다	ט TETH. Thou hast dealt well with thy servant, O Lord, according unto thy word.	You are good to Your servant, O LORD, according to Your word.
PSA	119	66	내가 주의 계명을 믿었사오니 명철과 지식을 내게 가르치소서	Teach me good judgment and knowledge: for I have believed thy commandments.	Teach me good judgment and knowledge, for I believe in Your commandments.
PSA	119	67	고난 당하기 전에는 내가 그릇 행하였더니 이제는 주의 말씀을 지키나이다	Before I was afflicted I went astray: but now have I kept thy word.	Before I was afflicted, I went astray; but now I keep Your word.
PSA	119	68	주는 선하사 선을 행하시오니 주의 율례로 나를 가르치소서	Thou art good, and doest good; teach me thy statutes.	You are good, and You do what is good; teach me Your statutes.
PSA	119	69	교만한 자가 거짓을 지어 나를 치려 하였사오나 나는 전심으로 주의 법도를 지키리이다	The proud have forged a lie against me: but I will keep thy precepts with my whole heart.	Though the arrogant have smeared me with lies, I keep Your precepts with all my heart.
PSA	119	70	저희 마음은 살쪄 지방 같으나 나는 주의 법을 즐거워하나이다	Their heart is as fat as grease; but I delight in thy law.	Their hearts are hard and callous, but I delight in Your law.
PSA	119	71	고난 당한 것이 내게 유익이라 이로 인하여 내가 주의 율례를 배우게 되었나이다	It is good for me that I have been afflicted; that I might learn thy statutes.	It was good for me to be afflicted, that I might learn Your statutes.
PSA	119	72	주의 입의 법이 내게는 천천 금은보다 승하니이다	The law of thy mouth is better unto me than thousands of gold and silver.	The law from Your mouth is more precious to me than thousands of pieces of gold and silver.
PSA	119	73	주의 손이 나를 만들고 세우셨사오니 나로 깨닫게 하사 주의 계명을 배우게 하소서	י JOD. Thy hands have made me and fashioned me: give me understanding, that I may learn thy commandments.	Your hands have made me and fashioned me; give me understanding to learn Your commandments.
PSA	119	74	주를 경외하는 자가 나를 보고 기뻐할 것은 내가 주의 말씀을 바라는 연고니이다	They that fear thee will be glad when they see me; because I have hoped in thy word.	May those who fear You see me and rejoice, for I have hoped in Your word.
PSA	119	75	여호와여 내가 알거니와 주의 판단은 의로우시고 주께서 나를 괴롭게 하심은 성실하심으로 말미암음이니이다	I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness hast afflicted me.	I know, O LORD, that Your judgments are righteous, and that in faithfulness You have afflicted me.
PSA	119	76	구하오니 주의 종에게 하신 말씀대로 주의 인자하심이 나의 위안이 되게 하시며	Let, I pray thee, thy merciful kindness be for my comfort, according to thy word unto thy servant.	May Your loving devotion comfort me, I pray, according to Your promise to Your servant.
PSA	119	77	주의 긍휼히 여기심이 내게 임하사 나로 살게 하소서 주의 법은 나의 즐거움이니이다	Let thy tender mercies come unto me, that I may live: for thy law is my delight.	May Your compassion come to me, that I may live, for Your law is my delight.
PSA	119	78	교만한 자가 무고히 나를 엎드러뜨렸으니 저희로 수치를 당케 하소서 나는 주의 법도를 묵상하리이다	Let the proud be ashamed; for they dealt perversely with me without a cause: but I will meditate in thy precepts.	May the arrogant be put to shame for subverting me with a lie; I will meditate on Your precepts.
PSA	119	79	주를 경외하는 자로 내게 돌아오게 하소서 그리하시면 저희가 주의 증거를 알리이다	Let those that fear thee turn unto me, and those that have known thy testimonies.	May those who fear You turn to me, those who know Your testimonies.
PSA	119	80	내 마음으로 주의 율례에 완전케 하사 나로 수치를 당치 않게 하소서	Let my heart be sound in thy statutes; that I be not ashamed.	May my heart be blameless in Your statutes, that I may not be put to shame.
PSA	119	81	나의 영혼이 주의 구원을 사모하기에 피곤하오나 나는 오히려 주의 말씀을 바라나이다	כ CAPH. My soul fainteth for thy salvation: but I hope in thy word.	My soul faints for Your salvation; I wait for Your word.
PSA	119	82	나의 말이 주께서 언제나 나를 안위하시겠나이까 하면서 내 눈이 주의 말씀을 바라기에 피곤하니이다	Mine eyes fail for thy word, saying, When wilt thou comfort me?	My eyes fail, looking for Your promise; I ask, “When will You comfort me?”
PSA	119	83	내가 연기 중의 가죽병 같이 되었으나 오히려 주의 율례를 잊지 아니하나이다	For I am become like a bottle in the smoke; yet do I not forget thy statutes.	Though I am like a wineskin dried up by smoke, I do not forget Your statutes.
PSA	119	84	주의 종의 날이 얼마나 되나이까 나를 핍박하는 자를 주께서 언제나 국문하시리이까	How many are the days of thy servant? when wilt thou execute judgment on them that persecute me?	How many days must Your servant wait? When will You execute judgment on my persecutors?
PSA	119	85	주의 법을 좇지 아니하는 교만한 자가 나를 해하려고 웅덩이를 팠나이다	The proud have digged pits for me, which are not after thy law.	The arrogant have dug pits for me in violation of Your law.
PSA	119	86	주의 모든 계명은 신실하니이다 저희가 무고히 나를 핍박하오니 나를 도우소서	All thy commandments are faithful: they persecute me wrongfully; help thou me.	All Your commandments are faithful; I am persecuted without cause—help me!
PSA	119	87	저희가 나를 세상에서 거의 멸하였으나 나는 주의 법도를 버리지 아니하였사오니	They had almost consumed me upon earth; but I forsook not thy precepts.	They almost wiped me from the earth, but I have not forsaken Your precepts.
PSA	119	88	주의 인자하심을 따라 나로 소성케 하소서 그리하시면 주의 입의 증거를 내가 지키리이다	Quicken me after thy lovingkindness; so shall I keep the testimony of thy mouth.	Revive me according to Your loving devotion, that I may obey the testimony of Your mouth.
PSA	119	89	여호와여 주의 말씀이 영원히 하늘에 굳게 섰사오며	ל LAMED. For ever, O Lord, thy word is settled in heaven.	Your word, O LORD, is everlasting; it is firmly fixed in the heavens.
PSA	119	90	주의 성실하심은 대대에 이르나이다 주께서 땅을 세우셨으므로 땅이 항상 있사오니	Thy faithfulness is unto all generations: thou hast established the earth, and it abideth.	Your faithfulness continues through all generations; You established the earth, and it endures.
PSA	119	91	천지가 주의 규례대로 오늘까지 있음은 만물이 주의 종이 된 연고니이다	They continue this day according to thine ordinances: for all are thy servants.	Your ordinances stand to this day, for all things are servants to You.
PSA	119	92	주의 법이 나의 즐거움이 되지 아니하였더면 내가 내 고난 중에 멸망하였으리이다	Unless thy law had been my delights, I should then have perished in mine affliction.	If Your law had not been my delight, then I would have perished in my affliction.
PSA	119	93	내가 주의 법도를 영원히 잊지 아니하오니 주께서 이것들로 나를 살게 하심이니이다	I will never forget thy precepts: for with them thou hast quickened me.	I will never forget Your precepts, for by them You have revived me.
PSA	119	94	나는 주의 것이오니 나를 구원하소서 내가 주의 법도를 찾았나이다	I am thine, save me; for I have sought thy precepts.	I am Yours; save me, for I have sought Your precepts.
PSA	119	95	악인이 나를 멸하려고 엿보오나 나는 주의 증거를 생각하겠나이다	The wicked have waited for me to destroy me: but I will consider thy testimonies.	The wicked wait to destroy me, but I will ponder Your testimonies.
PSA	119	96	내가 보니 모든 완전한 것이 다 끝이 있어도 주의 계명은 심히 넓으니이다	I have seen an end of all perfection: but thy commandment is exceeding broad.	I have seen a limit to all perfection, but Your commandment is without limit.
PSA	119	97	내가 주의 법을 어찌 그리 사랑하는지요 내가 그것을 종일 묵상하나이다	מ MEM. O how love I thy law! it is my meditation all the day.	Oh, how I love Your law! All day long it is my meditation.
PSA	119	98	주의 계명이 항상 나와 함께 하므로 그것이 나로 원수보다 지혜롭게 하나이다	Thou through thy commandments hast made me wiser than mine enemies: for they are ever with me.	Your commandments make me wiser than my enemies, for they are always with me.
PSA	119	99	내가 주의 증거를 묵상하므로 나의 명철함이 나의 모든 스승보다 승하며	I have more understanding than all my teachers: for thy testimonies are my meditation.	I have more insight than all my teachers, for Your testimonies are my meditation.
PSA	119	100	주의 법도를 지키므로 나의 명철함이 노인보다 승하니이다	I understand more than the ancients, because I keep thy precepts.	I discern more than the elders, for I obey Your precepts.
PSA	119	101	내가 주의 말씀을 지키려고 발을 금하여 모든 악한 길로 가지 아니하였사오며	I have refrained my feet from every evil way, that I might keep thy word.	I have kept my feet from every evil path, that I may keep Your word.
PSA	119	102	주께서 나를 가르치셨으므로 내가 주의 규례에서 떠나지 아니하였나이다	I have not departed from thy judgments: for thou hast taught me.	I have not departed from Your ordinances, for You Yourself have taught me.
PSA	119	103	주의 말씀의 맛이 내게 어찌 그리 단지요 내 입에 꿀보다 더하니이다	How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth!	How sweet are Your words to my taste— sweeter than honey in my mouth!
PSA	119	104	주의 법도로 인하여 내가 명철케 되었으므로 모든 거짓 행위를 미워하나이다	Through thy precepts I get understanding: therefore I hate every false way.	I gain understanding from Your precepts; therefore I hate every false way.
PSA	119	105	주의 말씀은 내 발에 등이요 내 길에 빛이니이다	נ NUN. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.	Your word is a lamp to my feet and a light to my path.
PSA	119	106	주의 의로운 규례를 지키기로 맹세하고 굳게 정하였나이다	I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments.	I have sworn and confirmed that I will keep Your righteous judgments.
PSA	119	107	나의 고난이 막심하오니 여호와여 주의 말씀대로 나를 소성케 하소서	I am afflicted very much: quicken me, O Lord, according unto thy word.	I am severely afflicted, O LORD; revive me through Your word.
PSA	119	108	여호와여 구하오니 내 입의 낙헌제를 받으시고 주의 규례로 나를 가르치소서	Accept, I beseech thee, the freewill offerings of my mouth, O Lord, and teach me thy judgments.	Accept the freewill offerings of my mouth, O LORD, and teach me Your judgments.
PSA	119	109	나의 생명이 항상 위경에 있사오나 주의 법은 잊지 아니하나이다	My soul is continually in my hand: yet do I not forget thy law.	I constantly take my life in my hands, yet I do not forget Your law.
PSA	119	110	악인이 나를 해하려고 올무를 놓았사오나 나는 주의 법도에서 떠나지 아니하였나이다	The wicked have laid a snare for me: yet I erred not from thy precepts.	The wicked have set a snare for me, but I have not strayed from Your precepts.
PSA	119	111	주의 증거로 내가 영원히 기업을 삼았사오니 이는 내 마음의 즐거움이 됨이니이다	Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever: for they are the rejoicing of my heart.	Your testimonies are my heritage forever, for they are the joy of my heart.
PSA	119	112	내가 주의 율례를 길이 끝까지 행하려고 내 마음을 기울였나이다	I have inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes alway, even unto the end.	I have inclined my heart to perform Your statutes, even to the very end.
PSA	119	113	내가 두 마음 품는 자를 미워하고 주의 법을 사랑하나이다	ס SAMECH. I hate vain thoughts: but thy law do I love.	The double-minded I despise, but Your law I love.
PSA	119	114	주는 나의 은신처요 방패시라 내가 주의 말씀을 바라나이다	Thou art my hiding place and my shield: I hope in thy word.	You are my hiding place and my shield; I put my hope in Your word.
PSA	119	115	너희 행악자여 나를 떠날지어다 나는 내 하나님의 계명을 지키리로다	Depart from me, ye evildoers: for I will keep the commandments of my God.	Depart from me, you evildoers, that I may obey the commandments of my God.
PSA	119	116	주의 말씀대로 나를 붙들어 살게 하시고 내 소망이 부끄럽지 말게 하소서	Uphold me according unto thy word, that I may live: and let me not be ashamed of my hope.	Sustain me as You promised, that I may live; let me not be ashamed of my hope.
PSA	119	117	나를 붙드소서 그리하시면 내가 구원을 얻고 주의 율례에 항상 주의하리이다	Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe: and I will have respect unto thy statutes continually.	Uphold me, and I will be saved, that I may always regard Your statutes.
PSA	119	118	주의 율례에서 떠나는 자는 주께서 다 멸시하셨으니 저희 궤사는 허무함이니이다	Thou hast trodden down all them that err from thy statutes: for their deceit is falsehood.	You reject all who stray from Your statutes, for their deceitfulness is in vain.
PSA	119	119	주께서 세상의 모든 악인을 찌끼 같이 버리시니 그러므로 내가 주의 증거를 사랑하나이다	Thou puttest away all the wicked of the earth like dross: therefore I love thy testimonies.	All the wicked on earth You discard like dross; therefore I love Your testimonies.
PSA	119	120	내 육체가 주를 두려워함으로 떨며 내가 또 주의 판단을 두려워하나이다	My flesh trembleth for fear of thee; and I am afraid of thy judgments.	My flesh trembles in awe of You; I stand in fear of Your judgments.
PSA	119	121	내가 공과 의를 행하였사오니 나를 압박자에게 붙이지 마옵소서	ע AIN. I have done judgment and justice: leave me not to mine oppressors.	I have done what is just and right; do not leave me to my oppressors.
PSA	119	122	주의 종을 보증하사 복을 얻게 하시고 교만한 자가 나를 압박하지 못하게 하소서	Be surety for thy servant for good: let not the proud oppress me.	Ensure Your servant’s well-being; do not let the arrogant oppress me.
PSA	119	123	내 눈이 주의 구원과 주의 의로운 말씀을 사모하기에 피곤하니이다	Mine eyes fail for thy salvation, and for the word of thy righteousness.	My eyes fail, looking for Your salvation, and for Your righteous promise.
PSA	119	124	주의 인자하신 대로 주의 종에게 행하사 주의 율례로 내게 가르치소서	Deal with thy servant according unto thy mercy, and teach me thy statutes.	Deal with Your servant according to Your loving devotion, and teach me Your statutes.
PSA	119	125	나는 주의 종이오니 깨닫게 하사 주의 증거를 알게 하소서	I am thy servant; give me understanding, that I may know thy testimonies.	I am Your servant; give me understanding, that I may know Your testimonies.
PSA	119	126	저희가 주의 법을 폐하였사오니 지금은 여호와의 일하실 때니이다	It is time for thee, Lord, to work: for they have made void thy law.	It is time for the LORD to act, for they have broken Your law.
PSA	119	127	그러므로 내가 주의 계명을 금 곧 정금보다 더 사랑하나이다	Therefore I love thy commandments above gold; yea, above fine gold.	Therefore I love Your commandments more than gold, even the purest gold.
PSA	119	128	그러므로 내가 범사에 주의 법도를 바르게 여기고 모든 거짓 행위를 미워하나이다	Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right; and I hate every false way.	Therefore I admire all Your precepts and hate every false way.
PSA	119	129	주의 증거가 기이하므로 내 영혼이 이를 지키나이다	פ PE. Thy testimonies are wonderful: therefore doth my soul keep them.	Wonderful are Your testimonies; therefore I obey them.
PSA	119	130	주의 말씀을 열므로 우둔한 자에게 비취어 깨닫게 하나이다	The entrance of thy words giveth light; it giveth understanding unto the simple.	The unfolding of Your words gives light; it informs the simple.
PSA	119	131	내가 주의 계명을 사모하므로 입을 열고 헐떡였나이다	I opened my mouth, and panted: for I longed for thy commandments.	I open my mouth and pant, longing for Your commandments.
PSA	119	132	주의 이름을 사랑하는 자에게 베푸시던 대로 내게 돌이키사 나를 긍휼히 여기소서	Look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do unto those that love thy name.	Turn to me and show me mercy, as You do to those who love Your name.
PSA	119	133	나의 행보를 주의 말씀에 굳게 세우시고 아무 죄악이 나를 주장치 못하게 하소서	Order my steps in thy word: and let not any iniquity have dominion over me.	Order my steps in Your word; let no sin rule over me.
PSA	119	134	사람의 압박에서 나를 구속하소서 그리하시면 내가 주의 법도를 지키리이다	Deliver me from the oppression of man: so will I keep thy precepts.	Redeem me from the oppression of man, that I may keep Your precepts.
PSA	119	135	주의 얼굴로 주의 종에게 비취시고 주의 율례로 나를 가르치소서	Make thy face to shine upon thy servant; and teach me thy statutes.	Make Your face shine upon Your servant, and teach me Your statutes.
PSA	119	136	저희가 주의 법을 지키지 아니하므로 내 눈물이 시냇물 같이 흐르나이다	Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy law.	My eyes shed streams of tears because Your law is not obeyed.
PSA	119	137	여호와여 주는 의로우시고 주의 판단은 정직하시니이다	צ TZADDI. Righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright are thy judgments.	Righteous are You, O LORD, and upright are Your judgments.
PSA	119	138	주의 명하신 증거는 의롭고 지극히 성실하도소이다	Thy testimonies that thou hast commanded are righteous and very faithful.	The testimonies You have laid down are righteous and altogether faithful.
PSA	119	139	내 대적이 주의 말씀을 잊어버렸으므로 내 열성이 나를 소멸하였나이다	My zeal hath consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy words.	My zeal has consumed me because my foes forget Your words.
PSA	119	140	주의 말씀이 심히 정미하므로 주의 종이 이를 사랑하나이다	Thy word is very pure: therefore thy servant loveth it.	Your promise is completely pure; therefore Your servant loves it.
PSA	119	141	내가 미천하여 멸시를 당하나 주의 법도를 잊지 아니하였나이다	I am small and despised: yet do not I forget thy precepts.	I am lowly and despised, but I do not forget Your precepts.
PSA	119	142	주의 의는 영원한 의요 주의 법은 진리로소이다	Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and thy law is the truth.	Your righteousness is everlasting and Your law is true.
PSA	119	143	환난과 우환이 내게 미쳤으나 주의 계명은 나의 즐거움이니이다	Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me: yet thy commandments are my delights.	Trouble and distress have found me, but Your commandments are my delight.
PSA	119	144	주의 증거는 영원히 의로우시니 나로 깨닫게 하사 살게 하소서	The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting: give me understanding, and I shall live.	Your testimonies are righteous forever. Give me understanding, that I may live.
PSA	119	145	여호와여 내가 전심으로 부르짖었사오니 내게 응답하소서 내가 주의 율례를 지키리이다	ק KOPH. I cried with my whole heart; hear me, O Lord: I will keep thy statutes.	I call with all my heart; answer me, O LORD! I will obey Your statutes.
PSA	119	146	내가 주께 부르짖었사오니 나를 구원하소서 내가 주의 증거를 지키리이다	I cried unto thee; save me, and I shall keep thy testimonies.	I call to You; save me, that I may keep Your testimonies.
PSA	119	147	내가 새벽 전에 부르짖으며 주의 말씀을 바랐사오며	I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried: I hoped in thy word.	I rise before dawn and cry for help; in Your word I have put my hope.
PSA	119	148	주의 말씀을 묵상하려고 내 눈이 야경이 깊기 전에 깨었나이다	Mine eyes prevent the night watches, that I might meditate in thy word.	My eyes anticipate the watches of night, that I may meditate on Your word.
PSA	119	149	주의 인자하심을 따라 내 소리를 들으소서 여호와여 주의 규례를 따라 나를 살리소서	Hear my voice according unto thy lovingkindness: O Lord, quicken me according to thy judgment.	Hear my voice, O LORD, according to Your loving devotion; give me life according to Your justice.
PSA	119	150	악을 좇는 자가 가까이 왔사오니 저희는 주의 법에서 머니이다	They draw nigh that follow after mischief: they are far from thy law.	Those who follow after wickedness draw near; they are far from Your law.
PSA	119	151	여호와여 주께서 가까이 계시오니 주의 모든 계명은 진리니이다	Thou art near, O Lord; and all thy commandments are truth.	You are near, O LORD, and all Your commandments are true.
PSA	119	152	내가 전부터 주의 증거를 궁구하므로 주께서 영원히 세우신 것인줄을 알았나이다	Concerning thy testimonies, I have known of old that thou hast founded them for ever.	Long ago I learned from Your testimonies that You have established them forever.
PSA	119	153	나의 고난을 보시고 나를 건지소서 내가 주의 법을 잊지 아니함이니이다	ר RESH. Consider mine affliction, and deliver me: for I do not forget thy law.	Look upon my affliction and rescue me, for I have not forgotten Your law.
PSA	119	154	주는 나의 원한을 펴시고 나를 구속하사 주의 말씀대로 나를 소성케 하소서	Plead my cause, and deliver me: quicken me according to thy word.	Defend my cause and redeem me; revive me according to Your word.
PSA	119	155	구원이 악인에게서 멀어짐은 저희가 주의 율례를 구하지 아니함이니이다	Salvation is far from the wicked: for they seek not thy statutes.	Salvation is far from the wicked because they do not seek Your statutes.
PSA	119	156	여호와여 주의 긍휼이 크오니 주의 규례를 따라 나를 소성케 하소서	Great are thy tender mercies, O Lord: quicken me according to thy judgments.	Great are Your mercies, O LORD; revive me according to Your ordinances.
PSA	119	157	나를 핍박하는 자와 나의 대적이 많으나 나는 주의 증거에서 떠나지 아니하였나이다	Many are my persecutors and mine enemies; yet do I not decline from thy testimonies.	Though my persecutors and foes are many, I have not turned from Your testimonies.
PSA	119	158	주의 말씀을 지키지 아니하는 궤사한 자를 내가 보고 슬퍼하였나이다	I beheld the transgressors, and was grieved; because they kept not thy word.	I look on the faithless with loathing because they do not keep Your word.
PSA	119	159	내가 주의 법도 사랑함을 보옵소서 여호와여 주의 인자하신 대로 나를 소성케 하소서	Consider how I love thy precepts: quicken me, O Lord, according to thy lovingkindness.	Consider how I love Your precepts, O LORD; give me life according to Your loving devotion.
PSA	119	160	주의 말씀의 강령은 진리오니 주의 의로운 모든 규례가 영원하리이다	Thy word is true from the beginning: and every one of thy righteous judgments endureth for ever.	The entirety of Your word is truth, and all Your righteous judgments endure forever.
PSA	119	161	방백들이 무고히 나를 핍박하오나 나의 마음은 주의 말씀만 경외하나이다	ש SCHIN. Princes have persecuted me without a cause: but my heart standeth in awe of thy word.	Rulers persecute me without cause, but my heart fears only Your word.
PSA	119	162	사람이 많은 탈취물을 얻은 것처럼 나는 주의 말씀을 즐거워하나이다	I rejoice at thy word, as one that findeth great spoil.	I rejoice in Your promise like one who finds great spoil.
PSA	119	163	내가 거짓을 미워하며 싫어하고 주의 법을 사랑하나이다	I hate and abhor lying: but thy law do I love.	I hate and abhor falsehood, but Your law I love.
PSA	119	164	주의 의로운 규례를 인하여 내가 하루 일곱 번씩 주를 찬양하나이다	Seven times a day do I praise thee because of thy righteous judgments.	Seven times a day I praise You for Your righteous judgments.
PSA	119	165	주의 법을 사랑하는 자에게는 큰 평안이 있으니 저희에게 장애물이 없으리이다	Great peace have they which love thy law: and nothing shall offend them.	Abundant peace belongs to those who love Your law; nothing can make them stumble.
PSA	119	166	여호와여 내가 주의 구원을 바라며 주의 계명을 행하였나이다	Lord, I have hoped for thy salvation, and done thy commandments.	I wait for Your salvation, O LORD, and I carry out Your commandments.
PSA	119	167	내 심령이 주의 증거를 지켰사오며 내가 이를 지극히 사랑하나이다	My soul hath kept thy testimonies; and I love them exceedingly.	I obey Your testimonies and love them greatly.
PSA	119	168	내가 주의 법도와 증거를 지켰사오니 나의 모든 행위가 주의 앞에 있음이니이다	I have kept thy precepts and thy testimonies: for all my ways are before thee.	I obey Your precepts and Your testimonies, for all my ways are before You.
PSA	119	169	여호와여 나의 부르짖음이 주의 앞에 이르게 하시고 주의 말씀대로 나를 깨닫게 하소서	ת TAU. Let my cry come near before thee, O Lord: give me understanding according to thy word.	May my cry come before You, O LORD; give me understanding according to Your word.
PSA	119	170	나의 간구가 주의 앞에 달하게 하시고 주의 말씀대로 나를 건지소서	Let my supplication come before thee: deliver me according to thy word.	May my plea come before You; rescue me according to Your promise.
PSA	119	171	주께서 율례를 내게 가르치시므로 내 입술이 찬송을 발할지니이다	My lips shall utter praise, when thou hast taught me thy statutes.	My lips pour forth praise, for You teach me Your statutes.
PSA	119	172	주의 모든 계명이 의로우므로 내 혀가 주의 말씀을 노래할지니이다	My tongue shall speak of thy word: for all thy commandments are righteousness.	My tongue sings of Your word, for all Your commandments are righteous.
PSA	119	173	내가 주의 법도를 택하였사오니 주의 손이 항상 나의 도움이 되게 하소서	Let thine hand help me; for I have chosen thy precepts.	May Your hand be ready to help me, for I have chosen Your precepts.
PSA	119	174	여호와여 내가 주의 구원을 사모하였사오며 주의 법을 즐거워하나이다	I have longed for thy salvation, O Lord; and thy law is my delight.	I long for Your salvation, O LORD, and Your law is my delight.
PSA	119	175	내 혼을 살게 하소서 그리하시면 주를 찬송하리이다 주의 규례가 나를 돕게 하소서	Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee; and let thy judgments help me.	Let me live to praise You; may Your judgments sustain me.
PSA	119	176	잃은 양 같이 내가 유리하오니 주의 종을 찾으소서 내가 주의 계명을 잊지 아니함이니이다	I have gone astray like a lost sheep; seek thy servant; for I do not forget thy commandments.	I have strayed like a lost sheep; seek Your servant, for I have not forgotten Your commandments.
PSA	120	1	성전에 올라가는 노래 내가 환난 중에 여호와께 부르짖었더니 내게 응답하셨도다	A Song of degrees. In my distress I cried unto the Lord, and he heard me.	A song of ascents. In my distress I cried to the LORD, and He answered me.
PSA	120	2	여호와여 거짓된 입술과 궤사한 혀에서 내 생명을 건지소서	Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue.	Deliver my soul, O LORD, from lying lips and a deceitful tongue.
PSA	120	3	너 궤사한 혀여 무엇으로 네게 주며 무엇으로 네게 더할꼬	What shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done unto thee, thou false tongue?	What will He do to you, and what will be added to you, O deceitful tongue?
PSA	120	4	장사의 날카로운 살과 로뎀나무 숯불이리로다	Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of juniper.	Sharp arrows will come from the warrior, with burning coals of the broom tree!
PSA	120	5	메섹에 유하며 게달의 장막 중에 거하는 것이 내게 화로다	Woe is me, that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar!	Woe to me that I dwell in Meshech, that I live among the tents of Kedar!
PSA	120	6	내가 화평을 미워하는 자와 함께 오래 거하였도다	My soul hath long dwelt with him that hateth peace.	Too long have I dwelt among those who hate peace.
PSA	120	7	나는 화평을 원할지라도 내가 말할 때에 저희는 싸우려 하는도다	I am for peace: but when I speak, they are for war.	I am in favor of peace; but when I speak, they want war.
PSA	121	1	성전에 올라가는 노래 내가 산을 향하여 눈을 들리라 나의 도움이 어디서 올꼬	A Song of degrees. I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence cometh my help.	A song of ascents. I lift up my eyes to the hills. From where does my help come?
PSA	121	2	나의 도움이 천지를 지으신 여호와에게서로다	My help cometh from the Lord, which made heaven and earth.	My help comes from the LORD, the Maker of heaven and earth.
PSA	121	3	여호와께서 너로 실족지 않게 하시며 너를 지키시는 자가 졸지 아니하시리로다	He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: he that keepeth thee will not slumber.	He will not allow your foot to slip; your Protector will not slumber.
PSA	121	4	이스라엘을 지키시는 자는 졸지도 아니하고 주무시지도 아니하시리로다	Behold, he that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep.	Behold, the Protector of Israel will neither slumber nor sleep.
PSA	121	5	여호와는 너를 지키시는 자라 여호와께서 네 우편에서 네 그늘이 되시나니	The Lord is thy keeper: the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand.	The LORD is your keeper; the LORD is the shade on your right hand.
PSA	121	6	낮의 해가 너를 상치 아니하며 밤의 달도 너를 해치 아니하리로다	The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night.	The sun will not strike you by day, nor the moon by night.
PSA	121	7	여호와께 너를 지켜 모든 환난을 면케 하시며 또 네 영혼을 지키시리로다	The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil: he shall preserve thy soul.	The LORD will guard you from all evil; He will preserve your soul.
PSA	121	8	여호와께서 너의 출입을 지금부터 영원까지 지키시리로다	The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in from this time forth, and even for evermore.	The LORD will watch over your coming and going, both now and forevermore.
PSA	122	1	다윗의 시 곧 성전에 올라가는 노래 사람이 내게 말하기를 여호와의 집에 올라가자 할 때에 내가 기뻐하였도다	A Song of degrees of David. I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord.	A song of ascents. Of David. I was glad when they said to me, “Let us go to the house of the LORD.”
PSA	122	2	예루살렘아 우리 발이 네 성문 안에 섰도다	Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem.	Our feet are standing in your gates, O Jerusalem.
PSA	122	3	예루살렘아 너는 조밀한 성읍과 같이 건설되었도다	Jerusalem is builded as a city that is compact together:	Jerusalem is built up as a city united together,
PSA	122	4	지파들 곧 여호와의 이름에 감사하려고 이스라엘의 전례대로 그리로 올라가는도다	Whither the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord.	where the tribes go up, the tribes of the LORD, as a testimony for Israel, to give thanks to the name of the LORD.
PSA	122	5	거기 판단의 보좌를 두셨으니 곧 다윗 집의 보좌로다	For there are set thrones of judgment, the thrones of the house of David.	For there the thrones of judgment stand, the thrones of the house of David.
PSA	122	6	예루살렘을 위하여 평안을 구하라 예루살렘을 사랑하는 자는 형통하리로다	Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee.	Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: “May those who love you prosper.
PSA	122	7	네 성 안에는 평강이 있고 네 궁중에는 형통이 있을지어다	Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces.	May there be peace within your walls, and prosperity inside your fortresses.”
PSA	122	8	내가 내 형제와 붕우를 위하여 이제 말하리니 네 가운데 평강이 있을지어다	For my brethren and companions’ sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee.	For the sake of my brothers and friends, I will say, “Peace be within you.”
PSA	122	9	여호와 우리 하나님의 집을 위하여 내가 네 복을 구하리로다	Because of the house of the Lord our God I will seek thy good.	For the sake of the house of the LORD our God, I will seek your prosperity.
PSA	123	1	성전에 올라가는 노래 하늘에 계신 주여 내가 눈을 들어 주께 향하나이다	A Song of degrees. Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dwellest in the heavens.	A song of ascents. I lift up my eyes to You, the One enthroned in heaven.
PSA	123	2	종의 눈이 그 상전의 손을 여종의 눈이 그 주모의 손을 바람 같이 우리 눈이 여호와 우리 하나님을 바라며 우리를 긍휼히 여기시기를 기다리나이다	Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress; so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until that he have mercy upon us.	As the eyes of servants look to the hand of their master, as the eyes of a maidservant look to the hand of her mistress, so our eyes are on the LORD our God until He shows us mercy.
PSA	123	3	여호와여 우리를 긍휼히 여기시고 긍휼히 여기소서 심한 멸시가 우리에게 넘치나이다	Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us: for we are exceedingly filled with contempt.	Have mercy on us, O LORD, have mercy, for we have endured much contempt.
PSA	123	4	평안한 자의 조소와 교만한 자의 멸시가 우리 심령에 넘치나이다	Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at ease, and with the contempt of the proud.	We have endured much scorn from the arrogant, much contempt from the proud.
PSA	124	1	다윗의 시 곧 성전에 올라가는 노래 이스라엘은 이제 말하기를 여호와께서 우리 편에 계시지 아니하시고	A Song of degrees of David. If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, now may Israel say;	A song of ascents. Of David. If the LORD had not been on our side— let Israel now declare—
PSA	124	2	사람들이 우리를 치러 일어날 때에 여호와께서 우리 편에 계시지 아니하셨더면	If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against us:	if the LORD had not been on our side when men attacked us,
PSA	124	3	그 때에 저희의 노가 위리를 대하여 맹열하여 위리를 산 채로 삼켯을 것이며	Then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us:	when their anger flared against us, then they would have swallowed us alive,
PSA	124	4	그 때에 물이 우리를 엄몰하며 시내가 우리 영혼을 잠갔을 것이며	Then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul:	then the floods would have engulfed us, then the torrent would have overwhelmed us,
PSA	124	5	그 때에 넘치는 물이 우리 영혼을 잠갔을 것이라 할 것이로다	Then the proud waters had gone over our soul.	then the raging waters would have swept us away.
PSA	124	6	우리를 저희 이에 주어 씹히지 않게 하신 여호와를 찬송할지로다	Blessed be the Lord, who hath not given us as a prey to their teeth.	Blessed be the LORD, who has not given us as prey to their teeth.
PSA	124	7	우리 혼이 새가 사냥군의 올무에서 벗어남 같이 되었나니 올무가 끊어지므로 우리가 벗어났도다	Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers: the snare is broken, and we are escaped.	We have escaped like a bird from the snare of the fowler; the net is torn, and we have slipped away.
PSA	124	8	우리의 도움은 천지를 지으신 여호와의 이름에 있도다	Our help is in the name of the Lord, who made heaven and earth.	Our help is in the name of the LORD, the Maker of heaven and earth.
PSA	125	1	성전에 올라가는 노래 여호와를 의뢰하는 자는 시온 산이 요동치 아니하고 영원히 있음 같도다	A Song of degrees. They that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but abideth for ever.	A song of ascents. Those who trust in the LORD are like Mount Zion. It cannot be moved; it abides forever.
PSA	125	2	산들이 예루살렘을 두름과 같이 여호와께서 그 백성을 지금부터 영원까지 두르시리로다	As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his people from henceforth even for ever.	As the mountains surround Jerusalem, so the LORD surrounds His people, both now and forevermore.
PSA	125	3	악인의 권세가 의인의 업에 미치지 못하리니 이는 의인으로 죄악에 손을 대지 않게 함이로다	For the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous; lest the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity.	For the scepter of the wicked will not rest upon the land allotted to the righteous, so that the righteous will not put forth their hands to injustice.
PSA	125	4	여호와여 선인에게와 마음이 정직한 자에게 선을 행하소서	Do good, O Lord, unto those that be good, and to them that are upright in their hearts.	Do good, O LORD, to those who are good, and to the upright in heart.
PSA	125	5	자기의 굽은 길로 치우치는 자를 여호와께서 죄악을 짓는 자와 함께 다니게 하시리로다 이스라엘에게는 평강이 있을지어다	As for such as turn aside unto their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity: but peace shall be upon Israel.	But those who turn to crooked ways the LORD will banish with the evildoers. Peace be upon Israel.
PSA	126	1	성전에 올라가는 노래 여호와께서 시온의 포로를 돌리실 때에 우리가 꿈꾸는 것 같았도다	A Song of degrees. When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream.	A song of ascents. When the LORD restored the captives of Zion, we were like dreamers.
PSA	126	2	그 때에 우리 입에는 웃음이 가득하고 우리 혀에는 찬양이 찼었도다 열방 중에서 말하기를 여호와께서 저희를 위하여 대사를 행하셨다 하였도다	Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing: then said they among the heathen, The Lord hath done great things for them.	Then our mouths were filled with laughter, our tongues with shouts of joy. Then it was said among the nations, “The LORD has done great things for them.”
PSA	126	3	여호와를 위하여 대사를 행하셨으니 우리는 기쁘도다	The Lord hath done great things for us; whereof we are glad.	The LORD has done great things for us; we are filled with joy.
PSA	126	4	여호와여 우리의 포로를 남방 시내들 같이 돌리소서	Turn again our captivity, O Lord, as the streams in the south.	Restore our captives, O LORD, like streams in the Negev.
PSA	126	5	눈물을 흘리며 씨를 뿌리는 자는 기쁨으로 거두리로다	They that sow in tears shall reap in joy.	Those who sow in tears will reap with shouts of joy.
PSA	126	6	울며 씨를 뿌리러 나가는 자는 정녕 기쁨으로 그 단을 가지고 돌아오리로다	He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.	He who goes out weeping, bearing a trail of seed, will surely return with shouts of joy, carrying sheaves of grain.
PSA	127	1	솔로몬의 시 곧 성전에 올라가는 노래 여호와께서 집을 세우지 아니하시면 세우는 자의 수고가 헛되며 여호와께서 성을 지키지 아니하시면 파수꾼의 경성함이 허사로다	A Song of degrees for Solomon. Except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that build it: except the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain.	A song of ascents. Of Solomon. Unless the LORD builds the house, its builders labor in vain; unless the LORD protects the city, its watchmen stand guard in vain.
PSA	127	2	너희가 일찍이 일어나고 늦게 누우며 수고의 떡을 먹음이 헛되도다 그러므로 여호와께서 그 사랑하시는 자에게는 잠을 주시는도다	It is vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows: for so he giveth his beloved sleep.	In vain you rise early and stay up late, toiling for bread to eat— for He gives sleep to His beloved.
PSA	127	3	자식은 여호와의 주신 기업이요 태의 열매는 그의 상급이로다	Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord: and the fruit of the womb is his reward.	Children are indeed a heritage from the LORD, and the fruit of the womb is His reward.
PSA	127	4	젊은 자의 자식은 장사의 수중의 화살 같으니	As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man; so are children of the youth.	Like arrows in the hand of a warrior, so are children born in one’s youth.
PSA	127	5	이것이 그 전통에 가득한 자는 복되도다 저희가 성문에서 그 원수와 말할 때에 수치를 당치 아니하리로다	Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them: they shall not be ashamed, but they shall speak with the enemies in the gate.	Blessed is the man whose quiver is full of them. He will not be put to shame when he confronts the enemies at the gate.
PSA	128	1	성전에 올라가는 노래 여호와를 경외하며 그 도에 행하는 자마다 복이 있도다	A Song of degrees. Blessed is every one that feareth the Lord; that walketh in his ways.	A song of ascents. Blessed are all who fear the LORD, who walk in His ways!
PSA	128	2	네가 네 손이 수고한 대로 먹을 것이라 네가 복되고 형통하리로다	For thou shalt eat the labour of thine hands: happy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee.	For when you eat the fruit of your labor, blessings and prosperity will be yours.
PSA	128	3	네 집 내실에 있는 네 아내는 결실한 포도나무 같으며 네 상에 둘린 자식은 어린 감람나무 같으리로다	Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine by the sides of thine house: thy children like olive plants round about thy table.	Your wife will be like a fruitful vine flourishing within your house, your sons like olive shoots sitting around your table.
PSA	128	4	여호와를 경외하는 자는 이같이 복을 얻으리로다	Behold, that thus shall the man be blessed that feareth the Lord.	In this way indeed shall blessing come to the man who fears the LORD.
PSA	128	5	여호와께서 시온에서 네게 복을 주실지어다 너는 평생에 예루살렘의 복을 보며	The Lord shall bless thee out of Zion: and thou shalt see the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy life.	May the LORD bless you from Zion, that you may see the prosperity of Jerusalem all the days of your life,
PSA	128	6	네 자식의 자식을 볼지어다 이스라엘에게 평강이 있을지로다	Yea, thou shalt see thy children’s children, and peace upon Israel.	that you may see your children’s children. Peace be upon Israel!
PSA	129	1	성전에 올라가는 노래 이스라엘은 이제 말하기를 저희가 나의 소시부터 여러 번 나를 괴롭게 하였도다	A Song of degrees. Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, may Israel now say:	A song of ascents. Many a time they have persecuted me from my youth— let Israel now declare—
PSA	129	2	저희가 나의 소시부터 여러 번 나를 괴롭게 하였으나 나를 이기지 못하였도다	Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth: yet they have not prevailed against me.	many a time they have persecuted me from my youth, but they have not prevailed against me.
PSA	129	3	밭가는 자가 내 등에 갈아 그 고랑을 길게 지었도다	The plowers plowed upon my back: they made long their furrows.	The plowmen plowed over my back; they made their furrows long.
PSA	129	4	여호와께서는 의로우사 악인의 줄을 끊으셨도다	The Lord is righteous: he hath cut asunder the cords of the wicked.	The LORD is righteous; He has cut me from the cords of the wicked.
PSA	129	5	무릇 시온을 미워하는 자는 수치를 당하여 물러갈지어다	Let them all be confounded and turned back that hate Zion.	May all who hate Zion be turned back in shame.
PSA	129	6	저희는 지붕의 풀과 같을지어다 그것은 자라기 전에 마르는 것이라	Let them be as the grass upon the housetops, which withereth afore it groweth up:	May they be like grass on the rooftops, which withers before it can grow,
PSA	129	7	이런 것은 베는 자의 줌과 묶는 자의 품에 차지 아니하나니	Wherewith the mower filleth not his hand; nor he that bindeth sheaves his bosom.	unable to fill the hands of the reaper, or the arms of the binder of sheaves.
PSA	129	8	지나가는 자도 여호와의 복이 너희에게 있을지어다 하거나 우리가 여호와의 이름으로 너희에게 축복한다 하지 아니하느니라	Neither do they which go by say, The blessing of the Lord be upon you: we bless you in the name of the Lord.	May none who pass by say to them, “The blessing of the LORD be on you; we bless you in the name of the LORD.”
PSA	130	1	성전에 올라가는 노래 여호와여 내가 깊은 데서 주께 부르짖었나이다	A Song of degrees. Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O Lord.	A song of ascents. Out of the depths I cry to You, O LORD!
PSA	130	2	주여 내 소리를 들으시며 나의 간구하는 소리에 귀를 기울이소서	Lord, hear my voice: let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my supplications.	O Lord, hear my voice; let Your ears be attentive to my plea for mercy.
PSA	130	3	여호와여 주께서 죄악을 감찰하실진대 주여 누가 서리이까	If thou, Lord, shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand?	If You, O LORD, kept track of iniquities, then who, O Lord, could stand?
PSA	130	4	그러나 사유하심이 주께 있음은 주를 경외케 하심이니이다	But there is forgiveness with thee, that thou mayest be feared.	But with You there is forgiveness, so that You may be feared.
PSA	130	5	나 곧 내 영혼이 여호와를 기다리며 내가 그 말씀을 바라는도다	I wait for the Lord, my soul doth wait, and in his word do I hope.	I wait for the LORD; my soul does wait, and in His word I put my hope.
PSA	130	6	파수꾼이 아침을 기다림보다 내 영혼이 주를 더 기다리나니 참으로 파수꾼의 아침을 기다림보다 더하도다	My soul waiteth for the Lord more than they that watch for the morning: I say, more than they that watch for the morning.	My soul waits for the Lord more than watchmen wait for the morning— more than watchmen wait for the morning.
PSA	130	7	이스라엘아 여호와를 바랄지어다 여호와께는 인자하심과 풍성한 구속이 있음이라	Let Israel hope in the Lord: for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption.	O Israel, put your hope in the LORD, for with the LORD is loving devotion, and with Him is redemption in abundance.
PSA	130	8	저가 이스라엘을 그 모든 죄악에서 구속하시리로다	And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.	And He will redeem Israel from all iniquity.
PSA	131	1	다윗의 시 곧 성전에 올라가는 노래 여호와여 내 마음이 교만치 아니하고 내 눈이 높지 아니하오며 내가 큰 일과 미치지 못할 기이한 일을 힘쓰지 아니하나이다	A Song of degrees of David. Lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty: neither do I exercise myself in great matters, or in things too high for me.	A song of ascents. Of David. My heart is not proud, O LORD, my eyes are not haughty. I do not aspire to great things or matters too lofty for me.
PSA	131	2	실로 내가 내 심령으로 고요하고 평온케 하기를 젖 뗀 아이가 그 어미 품에 있음 같게 하였나니 내 중심이 젖 뗀 아이와 같도다	Surely I have behaved and quieted myself, as a child that is weaned of his mother: my soul is even as a weaned child.	Surely I have stilled and quieted my soul; like a weaned child with his mother, like a weaned child is my soul within me.
PSA	131	3	이스라엘아 지금부터 영원까지 여호와를 바랄지어다	Let Israel hope in the Lord from henceforth and for ever.	O Israel, put your hope in the LORD, both now and forevermore.
PSA	132	1	성전에 올라가는 노래 여호와여 다윗을 위하여 그의 모든 근심한 것을 기억하소서	A Song of degrees. Lord, remember David, and all his afflictions:	A song of ascents. O LORD, remember on behalf of David all the hardships he endured,
PSA	132	2	저가 여호와께 맹세하며 야곱의 전능자에게 서원하기를	How he sware unto the Lord, and vowed unto the mighty God of Jacob;	how he swore an oath to the LORD, and vowed to the Mighty One of Jacob:
PSA	132	3	내가 실로 나의 거하는 장막에 들어가지 아니하며 내 침상에 오르지 아니하며	Surely I will not come into the tabernacle of my house, nor go up into my bed;	“I will not enter my house or get into my bed,
PSA	132	4	내 눈으로 잠들게 아니하며 내 눈꺼풀로 졸게 아니하기를	I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids,	I will not give sleep to my eyes or slumber to my eyelids,
PSA	132	5	여호와의 처소 곧 야곱의 전능자의 성막을 발견하기까지 하리라 하였나이다	Until I find out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob.	until I find a place for the LORD, a dwelling for the Mighty One of Jacob.”
PSA	132	6	우리가 그것이 에브라다에 있다 함을 들었더니 나무 밭에서 찾았도다	Lo, we heard of it at Ephratah: we found it in the fields of the wood.	We heard that the ark was in Ephrathah; we found it in the fields of Jaar.
PSA	132	7	우리가 그의 성막에 들어가서 그 발등상 앞에서 경배하리로다	We will go into his tabernacles: we will worship at his footstool.	Let us go to His dwelling place; let us worship at His footstool.
PSA	132	8	여호와여 일어나사 주의 권능의 궤와 함께 평안한 곳으로 들어가소서	Arise, O Lord, into thy rest; thou, and the ark of thy strength.	Arise, O LORD, to Your resting place, You and the ark of Your strength.
PSA	132	9	주의 제사장들은 의를 입고 주의 성도들은 즐거이 외칠지어다	Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness; and let thy saints shout for joy.	May Your priests be clothed with righteousness, and Your saints shout for joy.
PSA	132	10	주의 종 다윗을 위하여 주의 기름 받은 자의 얼굴을 물리치지 마옵소서	For thy servant David’s sake turn not away the face of thine anointed.	For the sake of Your servant David, do not reject Your anointed one.
PSA	132	11	여호와께서 다윗에게 성실히 맹세하셨으니 변치 아니하실지라 이르시기를 네 몸의 소생을 네 위에 둘지라	The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David; he will not turn from it; Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne.	The LORD swore an oath to David, a promise He will not revoke: “One of your descendants I will place on your throne.
PSA	132	12	네 자손이 내 언약과 저희에게 교훈하는 내 증거를 지킬진대 저희 후손도 영원히 네 위에 앉으리라 하셨도다	If thy children will keep my covenant and my testimony that I shall teach them, their children shall also sit upon thy throne for evermore.	If your sons keep My covenant and the testimony I will teach them, then their sons will also sit on your throne forever and ever.”
PSA	132	13	여호와께서 시온을 택하시고 자기 거처를 삼고자 하여 이르시기를	For the Lord hath chosen Zion; he hath desired it for his habitation.	For the LORD has chosen Zion; He has desired it for His home:
PSA	132	14	이는 나의 영원히 쉴 곳이라 내가 여기 거할 것은 이를 원하였음이로다	This is my rest for ever: here will I dwell; for I have desired it.	“This is My resting place forever and ever; here I will dwell, for I have desired this home.
PSA	132	15	내가 이 성의 식료품에 풍족히 복을 주고 양식으로 그 빈민을 만족케 하리로다	I will abundantly bless her provision: I will satisfy her poor with bread.	I will bless her with abundant provisions; I will satisfy her poor with bread.
PSA	132	16	내가 그 제사장들에게 구원으로 입히리니 그 성도들은 즐거움으로 외치리로다	I will also clothe her priests with salvation: and her saints shall shout aloud for joy.	I will clothe her priests with salvation, and her saints will sing out in joy.
PSA	132	17	내가 거기서 다윗에게 뿔이 나게 할 것이라 내가 내 기름 부은 자를 위하여 등을 예비하였도다	There will I make the horn of David to bud: I have ordained a lamp for mine anointed.	There I will make a horn grow for David; I have prepared a lamp for My anointed one.
PSA	132	18	내가 저의 원수에게는 수치로 입히고 저에게는 면류관이 빛나게 하리라 하셨도다	His enemies will I clothe with shame: but upon himself shall his crown flourish.	I will clothe his enemies with shame, but the crown upon him will gleam.”
PSA	133	1	다윗의 시 곧 성전에 올라가는 노래 형제가 연합하여 동거함이 어찌 그리 선하고 아름다운고	A Song of degrees of David. Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!	A song of ascents. Of David. Behold, how good and pleasant it is when brothers live together in harmony!
PSA	133	2	머리에 있는 보배로운 기름이 수염 곧 아론의 수염에 흘러서 그 옷깃까지 내림 같고	It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, even Aaron’s beard: that went down to the skirts of his garments;	It is like fine oil on the head, running down on the beard, running down Aaron’s beard over the collar of his robes.
PSA	133	3	헐몬의 이슬이 시온의 산들에 내림 같도다 거기서 여호와께서 복을 명하셨니 곧 영생이로다	As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the mountains of Zion: for there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore.	It is like the dew of Hermon falling on the mountains of Zion. For there the LORD has bestowed the blessing of life forevermore.
PSA	134	1	성전에 올라가는 노래 밤에 여호와의 집에 섰는 여호와의 모든 종들아 여호와를 송축하라	A Song of degrees. Behold, bless ye the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord, which by night stand in the house of the Lord.	A song of ascents. Come, bless the LORD, all you servants of the LORD who serve by night in the house of the LORD!
PSA	134	2	성소를 향하여 너희 손을 들고 여호와를 송축하라	Lift up your hands in the sanctuary, and bless the Lord.	Lift up your hands to the sanctuary and bless the LORD!
PSA	134	3	천지를 지으신 여호와께서 시온에서 네게 복을 주실지어다	The Lord that made heaven and earth bless thee out of Zion.	May the LORD, the Maker of heaven and earth, bless you from Zion.
PSA	135	1	할렐루야 여호와의 이름을 찬송하라 여호와의 종들아 찬송하라	Praise ye the Lord. Praise ye the name of the Lord; praise him, O ye servants of the Lord.	Hallelujah! Praise the name of the LORD. Give praise, O servants of the LORD,
PSA	135	2	여호와의 집 우리 하나님의 전정에 섰는 너희여	Ye that stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of our God,	who stand in the house of the LORD, in the courts of the house of our God.
PSA	135	3	여호와를 찬송하라 여호와는 선하시며 그 이름이 아름다우니 그 이름을 찬양하라	Praise the Lord; for the Lord is good: sing praises unto his name; for it is pleasant.	Hallelujah, for the LORD is good; sing praises to His name, for it is lovely.
PSA	135	4	여호와께서 자기를 위하여 야곱 곧 이스라엘을 자기의 특별한 소유로 택하셨음이로다	For the Lord hath chosen Jacob unto himself, and Israel for his peculiar treasure.	For the LORD has chosen Jacob as His own, Israel as His treasured possession.
PSA	135	5	내가 알거니와 여호와께서는 광대하시며 우리 모든 신보다 높으시도다	For I know that the Lord is great, and that our Lord is above all gods.	For I know that the LORD is great; our Lord is above all gods.
PSA	135	6	여호와께서 무릇 기뻐하시는 일을 천지와 바다와 모든 깊은 데서 행하셨도다	Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven, and in earth, in the seas, and all deep places.	The LORD does all that pleases Him in the heavens and on the earth, in the seas and in all their depths.
PSA	135	7	안개를 땅 끝에서 일으키시며 비를 위하여 번개를 만드시며 바람을 그 곳간에서 내시는도다	He causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth; he maketh lightnings for the rain; he bringeth the wind out of his treasuries.	He causes the clouds to rise from the ends of the earth. He generates the lightning with the rain and brings forth the wind from His storehouses.
PSA	135	8	저가 애굽의 처음 난 자를 사람부터 짐승까지 치셨도다	Who smote the firstborn of Egypt, both of man and beast.	He struck down the firstborn of Egypt, of both man and beast.
PSA	135	9	애굽이여 여호와께서 너의 중에 징조와 기사를 보내사 바로와 그 모든 신복에게 임하게 하셨도다	Who sent tokens and wonders into the midst of thee, O Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his servants.	He sent signs and wonders into your midst, O Egypt, against Pharaoh and all his servants.
PSA	135	10	저가 많은 나라를 치시고 강한 왕들을 죽이셨나니	Who smote great nations, and slew mighty kings;	He struck down many nations and slaughtered mighty kings:
PSA	135	11	곧 아모리인의 왕 시혼과 바산 왕 옥과 가나안의 모든 국왕이로다	Sihon king of the Amorites, and Og king of Bashan, and all the kingdoms of Canaan:	Sihon king of the Amorites, Og king of Bashan, and all the kings of Canaan.
PSA	135	12	저희의 땅을 기업으로 주시되 자기 백성 이스라엘에게 기업으로 주셨도다	And gave their land for an heritage, an heritage unto Israel his people.	He gave their land as an inheritance, as a heritage to His people Israel.
PSA	135	13	여호와여 주의 이름이 영원하시니이다 여호와여 주의 기념이 대대에 이르리이다	Thy name, O Lord, endureth for ever; and thy memorial, O Lord, throughout all generations.	Your name, O LORD, endures forever, Your renown, O LORD, through all generations.
PSA	135	14	여호와께서 자기 백성을 판단하시며 그 종들을 긍휼히 여기시리로다	For the Lord will judge his people, and he will repent himself concerning his servants.	For the LORD will vindicate His people and will have compassion on His servants.
PSA	135	15	열방의 우상은 은금이요 사람의 수공물이라	The idols of the heathen are silver and gold, the work of men’s hands.	The idols of the nations are silver and gold, made by the hands of men.
PSA	135	16	입이 있어도 말하지 못하며 눈이 있어도 보지 못하며	They have mouths, but they speak not; eyes have they, but they see not;	They have mouths, but cannot speak; they have eyes, but cannot see;
PSA	135	17	귀가 있어도 듣지 못하며 그 입에는 아무 기식도 없나니	They have ears, but they hear not; neither is there any breath in their mouths.	they have ears, but cannot hear; nor is there breath in their mouths.
PSA	135	18	그것을 만든 자와 그것을 의지하는 자가 다 그것과 같으리라	They that make them are like unto them: so is every one that trusteth in them.	Those who make them become like them, as do all who trust in them.
PSA	135	19	이스라엘 족속아 여호와를 송축하라 아론의 족속아 여호와를 송축하라	Bless the Lord, O house of Israel: bless the Lord, O house of Aaron:	O house of Israel, bless the LORD; O house of Aaron, bless the LORD;
PSA	135	20	레위 족속아 여호와를 송축하라 여호와를 경외하는 너희들아 여호와를 송축하라	Bless the Lord, O house of Levi: ye that fear the Lord, bless the Lord.	O house of Levi, bless the LORD; you who fear the LORD, bless the LORD!
PSA	135	21	예루살렘에 거하신 여호와는 시온에서 찬송을 받으실지어다 할렐루야	Blessed be the Lord out of Zion, which dwelleth at Jerusalem. Praise ye the Lord.	Blessed be the LORD from Zion— He who dwells in Jerusalem. Hallelujah!
PSA	136	1	여호와께 감사하라 그는 선하시며 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever.	Give thanks to the LORD, for He is good. His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	2	모든 신에 뛰어나신 하나님께 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	O give thanks unto the God of gods: for his mercy endureth for ever.	Give thanks to the God of gods. His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	3	모든 주에 뛰어나신 주께 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	O give thanks to the Lord of lords: for his mercy endureth for ever.	Give thanks to the Lord of lords. His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	4	홀로 큰 기사를 행하시는 이에게 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	To him who alone doeth great wonders: for his mercy endureth for ever.	He alone does great wonders. His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	5	지혜로 하늘을 지으신 이에게 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	To him that by wisdom made the heavens: for his mercy endureth for ever.	By His insight He made the heavens. His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	6	땅을 물 위에 펴신 이에게 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	To him that stretched out the earth above the waters: for his mercy endureth for ever.	He spread out the earth upon the waters. His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	7	큰 빛들을 지으신 이에게 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	To him that made great lights: for his mercy endureth for ever:	He made the great lights— His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	8	해로 낮을 주관케 하신 이에게 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	The sun to rule by day: for his mercy endureth for ever:	the sun to rule the day, His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	9	달과 별들로 밤을 주관케 하신 이에게 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	The moon and stars to rule by night: for his mercy endureth for ever.	the moon and stars to govern the night. His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	10	애굽의 장자를 치신 이에게 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	To him that smote Egypt in their firstborn: for his mercy endureth for ever:	He struck down the firstborn of Egypt His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	11	이스라엘을 저희 중에서 인도하여 내신 이에게 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	And brought out Israel from among them: for his mercy endureth for ever:	and brought Israel out from among them His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	12	강한 손과 펴신 팔로 인도하여 내신 이에게 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	With a strong hand, and with a stretched out arm: for his mercy endureth for ever.	with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm. His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	13	홍해를 가르신 이에게 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	To him which divided the Red sea into parts: for his mercy endureth for ever:	He divided the Red Sea in two His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	14	이스라엘로 그 가운데로 통과케 하신 이에게 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	And made Israel to pass through the midst of it: for his mercy endureth for ever:	and led Israel through the midst, His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	15	바로와 그 군대를 홍해에 엎드러뜨리신 이에게 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	But overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red sea: for his mercy endureth for ever.	but swept Pharaoh and his army into the Red Sea. His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	16	그 백성을 인도하여 광야로 통과케 하신 이에게 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	To him which led his people through the wilderness: for his mercy endureth for ever.	He led His people through the wilderness. His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	17	큰 왕들을 치신 이에게 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	To him which smote great kings: for his mercy endureth for ever:	He struck down great kings His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	18	유명한 왕들을 죽이신 이에게 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	And slew famous kings: for his mercy endureth for ever:	and slaughtered mighty kings— His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	19	아모리인의 왕 시혼을 죽이신 이에게 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	Sihon king of the Amorites: for his mercy endureth for ever:	Sihon king of the Amorites His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	20	바산 왕 옥을 죽이신 이에게 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	And Og the king of Bashan: for his mercy endureth for ever:	and Og king of Bashan— His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	21	저희의 땅을 기업으로 주신 이에게 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	And gave their land for an heritage: for his mercy endureth for ever:	and He gave their land as an inheritance, His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	22	곧 그 종 이스라엘에게 기업으로 주신 이에게 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	Even an heritage unto Israel his servant: for his mercy endureth for ever.	a heritage to His servant Israel. His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	23	우리를 비천한 데서 기념하신 이에게 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	Who remembered us in our low estate: for his mercy endureth for ever:	He remembered us in our low estate His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	24	우리를 우리 대적에게서 건지신 이에게 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	And hath redeemed us from our enemies: for his mercy endureth for ever.	and freed us from our enemies. His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	25	모든 육체에게 식물을 주신 이에게 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	Who giveth food to all flesh: for his mercy endureth for ever.	He gives food to every creature. His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	136	26	하늘의 하나님께 감사하라 그 인자하심이 영원함이로다	O give thanks unto the God of heaven: for his mercy endureth for ever.	Give thanks to the God of heaven! His loving devotion endures forever.
PSA	137	1	우리가 바벨론의 여러 강변 거기 앉아서 시온을 기억하며 울었도다	By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea, we wept, when we remembered Zion.	By the rivers of Babylon we sat and wept when we remembered Zion.
PSA	137	2	그 중의 버드나무에 우리가 우리의 수금을 걸었나니	We hanged our harps upon the willows in the midst thereof.	There on the willows we hung our harps,
PSA	137	3	이는 우리를 사로잡은 자가 거기서 우리에게 노래를 청하며 우리를 황폐케 한 자가 기쁨을 청하고 자기들을 위하여 시온 노래 중 하나를 노래하라 함이로다	For there they that carried us away captive required of us a song; and they that wasted us required of us mirth, saying, Sing us one of the songs of Zion.	for there our captors requested a song; our tormentors demanded songs of joy: “Sing us a song of Zion.”
PSA	137	4	우리가 이방에 있어서 어찌 여호와의 노래를 부를꼬	How shall we sing the Lord’s song in a strange land?	How can we sing a song of the LORD in a foreign land?
PSA	137	5	예루살렘아 내가 너를 잊을진대 내 오른손이 그 재주를 잊을지로다	If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning.	If I forget you, O Jerusalem, may my right hand cease to function.
PSA	137	6	내가 예루살렘을 기억지 아니하거나 내가 너를 나의 제일 즐거워하는 것보다 지나치게 아니할진대 내 혀가 내 입천장에 붙을지로다	If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy.	May my tongue cling to the roof of my mouth if I do not remember you, if I do not exalt Jerusalem as my greatest joy!
PSA	137	7	여호와여 예루살렘이 해 받던 날을 기억하시고 에돔 자손을 치소서 저희 말이 훼파하라 훼파하라 그 기초까지 훼파하라 하였나이다	Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem; who said, Rase it, rase it, even to the foundation thereof.	Remember, O LORD, the sons of Edom on the day Jerusalem fell: “Destroy it,” they said, “tear it down to its foundations!”
PSA	137	8	여자 같은 멸망할 바벨론아 네가 우리에게 행한 대로 네게 갚는 자가 유복하리로다	O daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed; happy shall he be, that rewardeth thee as thou hast served us.	O Daughter of Babylon, doomed to destruction, blessed is he who repays you as you have done to us.
PSA	137	9	네 어린 것들을 반석에 메어치는 자는 유복하리로다	Happy shall he be, that taketh and dasheth thy little ones against the stones.	Blessed is he who seizes your infants and dashes them against the rocks.
PSA	138	1	다윗의 시 내가 전심으로 주께 감사하며 신들 앞에서 주께 찬양하리이다	A Psalm of David. I will praise thee with my whole heart: before the gods will I sing praise unto thee.	Of David. I give You thanks with all my heart; before the gods I sing Your praises.
PSA	138	2	내가 주의 성전을 향하여 경배하며 주의 인자하심과 성실하심을 인하여 주의 이름에 감사하오리니 이는 주께서 주의 말씀을 주의 모든 이름 위에 높게 하셨음이라	I will worship toward thy holy temple, and praise thy name for thy lovingkindness and for thy truth: for thou hast magnified thy word above all thy name.	I bow down toward Your holy temple and give thanks to Your name for Your loving devotion and Your faithfulness; You have exalted Your name and Your word above all else.
PSA	138	3	내가 간구하는 날에 주께서 응답하시고 내 영혼을 장려하여 강하게 하셨나이다	In the day when I cried thou answeredst me, and strengthenedst me with strength in my soul.	On the day I called, You answered me; You emboldened me and strengthened my soul.
PSA	138	4	여호와여 땅의 열왕이 주께 감사할 것은 저희가 주의 입의 말씀을 들음이오며	All the kings of the earth shall praise thee, O Lord, when they hear the words of thy mouth.	All the kings of the earth will give You thanks, O LORD, when they hear the words of Your mouth.
PSA	138	5	저희가 여호와의 도를 노래할 것은 여호와의 영광이 크심이니이다	Yea, they shall sing in the ways of the Lord: for great is the glory of the Lord.	They will sing of the ways of the LORD, for the glory of the LORD is great.
PSA	138	6	여호와께서 높이 계셔도 낮은 자를 하감하시며 멀리서도 교만한 자를 아시나이다	Though the Lord be high, yet hath he respect unto the lowly: but the proud he knoweth afar off.	Though the LORD is on high, He attends to the lowly; but the proud He knows from afar.
PSA	138	7	내가 환난 중에 다닐지라도 주께서 나를 소성케 하시고 주의 손을 펴사 내 원수들의 노를 막으시며 주의 오른손이 나를 구원하시리이다	Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou wilt revive me: thou shalt stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of mine enemies, and thy right hand shall save me.	If I walk in the midst of trouble, You preserve me from the anger of my foes; You extend Your hand, and Your right hand saves me.
PSA	138	8	여호와께서 내게 관계된 것을 완전케 하실지라 여호와여 주의 인자하심이 영원하오니 주의 손으로 지으신 것을 버리지 마옵소서	The Lord will perfect that which concerneth me: thy mercy, O Lord, endureth for ever: forsake not the works of thine own hands.	The LORD will fulfill His purpose for me. O LORD, Your loving devotion endures forever— do not abandon the works of Your hands.
PSA	139	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 한 노래 여호와여 주께서 나를 감찰하시고 아셨나이다	To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. O Lord, thou hast searched me, and known me.	For the choirmaster. A Psalm of David. O LORD, You have searched me and known me.
PSA	139	2	주께서 나의 앉고 일어섬을 아시며 멀리서도 나의 생각을 통족하시오며	Thou knowest my downsitting and mine uprising, thou understandest my thought afar off.	You know when I sit and when I rise; You understand my thoughts from afar.
PSA	139	3	나의 길과 눕는 것을 감찰하시며 나의 모든 행위를 익히 아시오니	Thou compassest my path and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways.	You search out my path and my lying down; You are aware of all my ways.
PSA	139	4	여호와여 내 혀의 말을 알지 못하시는 것이 하나도 없으시니이다	For there is not a word in my tongue, but, lo, O Lord, thou knowest it altogether.	Even before a word is on my tongue, You know all about it, O LORD.
PSA	139	5	주께서 나의 전후를 두르시며 내게 안수하셨나이다	Thou hast beset me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me.	You hem me in behind and before; You have laid Your hand upon me.
PSA	139	6	이 지식이 내게 너무 기이하니 높아서 내가 능히 미치지 못하나이다	Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; it is high, I cannot attain unto it.	Such knowledge is too wonderful for me, too lofty for me to attain.
PSA	139	7	내가 주의 신을 떠나 어디로 가며 주의 앞에서 어디로 피하리이까	Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence?	Where can I go to escape Your Spirit? Where can I flee from Your presence?
PSA	139	8	내가 하늘에 올라갈지라도 거기 계시며 음부에 내 자리를 펼지라도 거기 계시니이다	If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there.	If I ascend to the heavens, You are there; if I make my bed in Sheol, You are there.
PSA	139	9	내가 새벽 날개를 치며 바다 끝에 가서 거할지라도	If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea;	If I rise on the wings of the dawn, if I settle by the farthest sea,
PSA	139	10	곧 거기서도 주의 손이 나를 인도하시며 주의 오른손이 나를 붙드시리이다	Even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me.	even there Your hand will guide me; Your right hand will hold me fast.
PSA	139	11	내가 혹시 말하기를 흑암이 정녕 나를 덮고 나를 두른 빛은 밤이 되리라 할지라도	If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me; even the night shall be light about me.	If I say, “Surely the darkness will hide me, and the light become night around me”—
PSA	139	12	주에게서는 흑암이 숨기지 못하며 밤이 낮과 같이 비취나니 주에게는 흑암과 빛이 일반이니이다	Yea, the darkness hideth not from thee; but the night shineth as the day: the darkness and the light are both alike to thee.	even the darkness is not dark to You, but the night shines like the day, for darkness is as light to You.
PSA	139	13	주께서 내 장부를 지으시며 나의 모태에서 나를 조직하셨나이다	For thou hast possessed my reins: thou hast covered me in my mother’s womb.	For You formed my inmost being; You knit me together in my mother’s womb.
PSA	139	14	내가 주께 감사하옴은 나를 지으심이 신묘막측하심이라 주의 행사가 기이함을 내 영혼이 잘 아나이다	I will praise thee; for I am fearfully and wonderfully made: marvellous are thy works; and that my soul knoweth right well.	I praise You, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made. Marvelous are Your works, and I know this very well.
PSA	139	15	내가 은밀한 데서 지음을 받고 땅의 깊은 곳에서 기이하게 지음을 받은 때에 나의 형체가 주의 앞에 숨기우지 못하였나이다	My substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth.	My frame was not hidden from You when I was made in secret, when I was woven together in the depths of the earth.
PSA	139	16	내 형질이 이루기 전에 주의 눈이 보셨으며 나를 위하여 정한 날이 하나도 되기 전에 주의 책에 다 기록이 되었나이다	Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfect; and in thy book all my members were written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them.	Your eyes saw my unformed body; all my days were written in Your book and ordained for me before one of them came to be.
PSA	139	17	하나님이여 주의 생각이 내게 어찌 그리 보배로우신지요 그 수가 어찌 그리 많은지요	How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, O God! how great is the sum of them!	How precious to me are Your thoughts, O God, how vast is their sum!
PSA	139	18	내가 세려고 할지라도 그 수가 모래보다 많도소이다 내가 깰 때에도 오히려 주와 함께 있나이다	If I should count them, they are more in number than the sand: when I awake, I am still with thee.	If I were to count them, they would outnumber the grains of sand; and when I awake, I am still with You.
PSA	139	19	하나님이여 주께서 정녕히 악인을 죽이시리이다 피 흘리기를 즐기는 자들아 나를 떠날지어다	Surely thou wilt slay the wicked, O God: depart from me therefore, ye bloody men.	O God, that You would slay the wicked— away from me, you bloodthirsty men—
PSA	139	20	저희가 주를 대하여 악하게 말하며 주의 원수들이 헛되이 주의 이름을 칭하나이다	For they speak against thee wickedly, and thine enemies take thy name in vain.	who speak of You deceitfully; Your enemies take Your name in vain.
PSA	139	21	여호와여 내가 주를 미워하는 자를 미워하지 아니하오며 주를 치러 일어나는 자를 한하지 아니하나이까	Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? and am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee?	Do I not hate those who hate You, O LORD, and detest those who rise against You?
PSA	139	22	내가 저희를 심히 미워하니 저희는 나의 원수니이다	I hate them with perfect hatred: I count them mine enemies.	I hate them with perfect hatred; I count them as my enemies.
PSA	139	23	하나님이여 나를 살피사 내 마음을 아시며 나를 시험하사 내 뜻을 아옵소서	Search me, O God, and know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts:	Search me, O God, and know my heart; test me and know my concerns.
PSA	139	24	내게 무슨 악한 행위가 있나 보시고 나를 영원한 길로 인도하소서	And see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting.	See if there is any offensive way in me; lead me in the way everlasting.
PSA	140	1	다윗의 시, 영장으로 한 노래 여호와여 악인에게서 나를 건지시며 강포한 자에게서 나를 보전하소서	To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil man: preserve me from the violent man;	For the choirmaster. A Psalm of David. Rescue me, O LORD, from evil men. Protect me from men of violence,
PSA	140	2	저희가 중심에 해하기를 꾀하고 싸우기 위하여 매일 모이오며	Which imagine mischiefs in their heart; continually are they gathered together for war.	who devise evil in their hearts and stir up war all day long.
PSA	140	3	뱀 같이 그 혀를 날카롭게 하니 그 입술 아래는 독사의 독이 있나이다(셀라)	They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent; adders’ poison is under their lips. Selah.	They sharpen their tongues like snakes; the venom of vipers is on their lips. Selah
PSA	140	4	여호와여 나를 지키사 악인의 손에 빠지지 않게 하시며 나를 보전하사 강포한 자에게서 벗어나게 하소서 저희는 나의 걸음을 밀치려 하나이다	Keep me, O Lord, from the hands of the wicked; preserve me from the violent man; who have purposed to overthrow my goings.	Guard me, O LORD, from the hands of the wicked. Keep me safe from men of violence who scheme to make me stumble.
PSA	140	5	교만한 자가 나를 해하려고 올무와 줄을 놓으며 길 곁에 그물을 치며 함정을 두었나이다(셀라)	The proud have hid a snare for me, and cords; they have spread a net by the wayside; they have set gins for me. Selah.	The proud hide a snare for me; the cords of their net are spread along the path, and lures are set out for me. Selah
PSA	140	6	내가 여호와께 말하기를 주는 나의 하나님이시니 여호와여 나의 간구하는 소리에 귀를 기울이소서 하였나이다	I said unto the Lord, Thou art my God: hear the voice of my supplications, O Lord.	I say to the LORD, “You are my God.” Hear, O LORD, my cry for help.
PSA	140	7	내 구원의 능력이신 주 여호와여 전쟁의 날에 주께서 내 머리를 가리우셨나이다	O God the Lord, the strength of my salvation, thou hast covered my head in the day of battle.	O GOD the Lord, the strength of my salvation, You shield my head in the day of battle.
PSA	140	8	여호와여 악인의 소원을 허락지 마시며 그 악한 꾀를 이루지 못하게 하소서 저희가 자고할까 하나이다(셀라)	Grant not, O Lord, the desires of the wicked: further not his wicked device; lest they exalt themselves. Selah.	Grant not, O LORD, the desires of the wicked; do not promote their evil plans, lest they be exalted. Selah
PSA	140	9	나를 에우는 자가 그 머리를 들 때에 저희 입술의 해가 저희를 덮게 하소서	As for the head of those that compass me about, let the mischief of their own lips cover them.	May the heads of those who surround me be covered in the trouble their lips have caused.
PSA	140	10	뜨거운 숯불이 저희에게 떨어지게 하시며 불 가운데와 깊은 웅덩이에 저희로 빠져 다시 일어나지 못하게 하소서	Let burning coals fall upon them: let them be cast into the fire; into deep pits, that they rise not up again.	May burning coals fall on them; may they be thrown into the fire, into the miry pits, never to rise again.
PSA	140	11	악담하는 자는 세상에서 굳게 서지 못하며 강포한 자에게는 재앙이 따라서 패망케 하리이다	Let not an evil speaker be established in the earth: evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him.	May no slanderer be established in the land; may calamity hunt down the man of violence.
PSA	140	12	내가 알거니와 여호와는 고난 당하는 자를 신원하시며 궁핍한 자에게 공의를 베푸시리이다	I know that the Lord will maintain the cause of the afflicted, and the right of the poor.	I know that the LORD upholds justice for the poor and defends the cause of the needy.
PSA	140	13	진실로 의인이 주의 이름에 감사하며 정직한 자가 주의 앞에 거하리이다	Surely the righteous shall give thanks unto thy name: the upright shall dwell in thy presence.	Surely the righteous will praise Your name; the upright will dwell in Your presence.
PSA	141	1	다윗의 시 여호와여 제가 주를 불렀사오니 속히 내게 임하소서 내가 주께 부르짖을 때에 내 음성에 귀를 기울이소서	A Psalm of David. Lord, I cry unto thee: make haste unto me; give ear unto my voice, when I cry unto thee.	A Psalm of David. I call upon You, O LORD; come quickly to me. Hear my voice when I call to You.
PSA	141	2	나의 기도가 주의 앞에 분향함과 같이 되며 나의 손드는 것이 저녁 제사 같이 되게 하소서	Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense; and the lifting up of my hands as the evening sacrifice.	May my prayer be set before You like incense, my uplifted hands like the evening offering.
PSA	141	3	여호와여 내 입 앞에 파수꾼을 세우시고 내 입술의 문을 지키소서	Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth; keep the door of my lips.	Set a guard, O LORD, over my mouth; keep watch at the door of my lips.
PSA	141	4	내 마음이 악한 일에 기울어 죄악을 행하는 자와 함께 악을 행치 말게 하시며 저희 진수를 먹지 말게 하소서	Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to practise wicked works with men that work iniquity: and let me not eat of their dainties.	Do not let my heart be drawn to any evil thing or take part in works of wickedness with men who do iniquity; let me not feast on their delicacies.
PSA	141	5	의인이 나를 칠지라도 은혜로 여기며 책망할지라도 머리의 기름 같이 여겨서 내 머리가 이를 거절치 아니할지라 저희의 재난 중에라도 내가 항상 기도하리로다	Let the righteous smite me; it shall be a kindness: and let him reprove me; it shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break my head: for yet my prayer also shall be in their calamities.	Let the righteous man strike me; let his rebuke be an act of loving devotion. It is oil for my head; let me not refuse it. For my prayer is ever against the deeds of the wicked.
PSA	141	6	저희의 관장들이 바위 곁에 내려 던지웠도다 내 말이 달므로 무리가 들으리로다	When their judges are overthrown in stony places, they shall hear my words; for they are sweet.	When their rulers are thrown down from the cliffs, the people will listen to my words, for they are pleasant.
PSA	141	7	사람이 밭 갈아 흙을 부스러뜨림 같이 우리의 해골이 음부 문에 흩어졌도다	Our bones are scattered at the grave’s mouth, as when one cutteth and cleaveth wood upon the earth.	As when one plows and breaks up the soil, so our bones have been scattered at the mouth of Sheol.
PSA	141	8	주 여호와여 내 눈이 주께 향하며 내가 주께 피하오니 내 영혼을 빈궁한 대로 버려두지 마옵소서	But mine eyes are unto thee, O God the Lord: in thee is my trust; leave not my soul destitute.	But my eyes are fixed on You, O GOD the Lord. In You I seek refuge; do not leave my soul defenseless.
PSA	141	9	나를 지키사 저희가 나를 잡으려고 놓은 올무와 행악자의 함정에서 벗어나게 하옵소서	Keep me from the snares which they have laid for me, and the gins of the workers of iniquity.	Keep me from the snares they have laid for me, and from the lures of evildoers.
PSA	141	10	악인은 자기 그물에 걸리게 하시고 나는 온전히 면하게 하소서	Let the wicked fall into their own nets, whilst that I withal escape.	Let the wicked fall into their own nets, while I pass by in safety.
PSA	142	1	다윗이 굴에 있을 때에 지은 마스길 내가 소리내어 여호와께 부르짖으며 소리내어 여호와께 간구하는도다	Maschil of David; A Prayer when he was in the cave. I cried unto the Lord with my voice; with my voice unto the Lord did I make my supplication.	A Maskil of David, when he was in the cave. A prayer. I cry aloud to the LORD; I lift my voice to the LORD for mercy.
PSA	142	2	내가 내 원통함을 그 앞에 토하며 내 우환을 그 앞에 진술하는도다	I poured out my complaint before him; I shewed before him my trouble.	I pour out my complaint before Him; I reveal my trouble to Him.
PSA	142	3	내 심령이 속에서 상할 때에도 주께서 내 길을 아셨나이다 나의 행하는 길에 저희가 나를 잡으려고 올무를 숨겼나이다	When my spirit was overwhelmed within me, then thou knewest my path. In the way wherein I walked have they privily laid a snare for me.	Although my spirit grows faint within me, You know my way. Along the path I travel they have hidden a snare for me.
PSA	142	4	내 우편을 살펴 보소서 나를 아는 자도 없고 피난처도 없고 내 영혼을 돌아보는 자도 없나이다	I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man that would know me: refuge failed me; no man cared for my soul.	Look to my right and see; no one attends to me. There is no refuge for me; no one cares for my soul.
PSA	142	5	여호와여 내가 주께 부르짖어 말하기를 주는 나의 피난처시요 생존 세계에서 나의 분깃이시라 하였나이다	I cried unto thee, O Lord: I said, Thou art my refuge and my portion in the land of the living.	I cry to You, O LORD: “You are my refuge, my portion in the land of the living.”
PSA	142	6	나의 부르짖음을 들으소서 나는 심히 비천하니이다 나를 핍박하는 자에게서 건지소서 저희는 나보다 강하니이다	Attend unto my cry; for I am brought very low: deliver me from my persecutors; for they are stronger than I.	Listen to my cry, for I am brought quite low. Rescue me from my pursuers, for they are too strong for me.
PSA	142	7	내 영혼을 옥에서 이끌어 내사 주의 이름을 감사케 하소서 주께서 나를 후대하시리니 의인이 나를 두르리이다	Bring my soul out of prison, that I may praise thy name: the righteous shall compass me about; for thou shalt deal bountifully with me.	Free my soul from prison, that I may praise Your name. The righteous will gather around me because of Your goodness to me.
PSA	143	1	다윗의 시 여호와여 내 기도를 들으시며 내 간구에 귀를 기울이시고 주의 진실과 의로 내게 응답하소서	A Psalm of David. Hear my prayer, O Lord, give ear to my supplications: in thy faithfulness answer me, and in thy righteousness.	A Psalm of David. O LORD, hear my prayer. In Your faithfulness, give ear to my plea; in Your righteousness, answer me.
PSA	143	2	주의 종에게 심판을 행치 마소서 주의 목전에는 의로운 인생이 하나도 없나이다	And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall no man living be justified.	Do not bring Your servant into judgment, for no one alive is righteous before You.
PSA	143	3	원수가 내 영혼을 핍박하며 내 생명을 땅에 엎어서 나로 죽은지 오랜 자 같이 흑암한 곳에 거하게 하였나이다	For the enemy hath persecuted my soul; he hath smitten my life down to the ground; he hath made me to dwell in darkness, as those that have been long dead.	For the enemy has pursued my soul, crushing my life to the ground, making me dwell in darkness like those long since dead.
PSA	143	4	그러므로 내 심령이 속에서 상하며 내 마음이 속에서 참담하니이다	Therefore is my spirit overwhelmed within me; my heart within me is desolate.	My spirit grows faint within me; my heart is dismayed inside me.
PSA	143	5	내가 옛날을 기억하고 주의 모든 행하신 것을 묵상하며 주의 손의 행사를 생각하고	I remember the days of old; I meditate on all thy works; I muse on the work of thy hands.	I remember the days of old; I meditate on all Your works; I consider the work of Your hands.
PSA	143	6	주를 향하여 손을 펴고 내 영혼이 마른 땅 같이 주를 사모하나이다(셀라)	I stretch forth my hands unto thee: my soul thirsteth after thee, as a thirsty land. Selah.	I stretch out my hands to You; my soul thirsts for You like a parched land. Selah
PSA	143	7	여호와여 속히 내게 응답하소서 내 영혼이 피곤하니이다 주의 얼굴을 내게서 숨기지 마소서 내가 무덤에 내려가는 자 같을까 두려워하나이다	Hear me speedily, O Lord: my spirit faileth: hide not thy face from me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit.	Answer me quickly, O LORD; my spirit fails. Do not hide Your face from me, or I will be like those who descend to the Pit.
PSA	143	8	아침에 나로 주의 인자한 말씀을 듣게 하소서 내가 주를 의뢰함이니이다 나의 다닐 길을 알게 하소서 내가 내 영혼을 주께 받듦이니이다	Cause me to hear thy lovingkindness in the morning; for in thee do I trust: cause me to know the way wherein I should walk; for I lift up my soul unto thee.	Let me hear Your loving devotion in the morning, for I have put my trust in You. Teach me the way I should walk, for to You I lift up my soul.
PSA	143	9	여호와여 나를 내 원수들에게서 건지소서 내가 주께 피하여 숨었나이다	Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies: I flee unto thee to hide me.	Deliver me from my enemies, O LORD; I flee to You for refuge.
PSA	143	10	주는 나의 하나님이시니 나를 가르쳐 주의 뜻을 행케 하소서 주의 신이 선하시니 나를 공평한 땅에 인도하소서	Teach me to do thy will; for thou art my God: thy spirit is good; lead me into the land of uprightness.	Teach me to do Your will, for You are my God. May Your good Spirit lead me on level ground.
PSA	143	11	여호와여 주의 이름을 인하여 나를 살리시고 주의 의로 내 영혼을 환난에서 끌어내소서	Quicken me, O Lord, for thy name’s sake: for thy righteousness’ sake bring my soul out of trouble.	For the sake of Your name, O LORD, revive me. In Your righteousness, bring my soul out of trouble.
PSA	143	12	주의 인자하심으로 나의 원수들을 끊으시고 내 영혼을 괴롭게 하는 자를 다 멸하소서 나는 주의 종이니이다	And of thy mercy cut off mine enemies, and destroy all them that afflict my soul: for I am thy servant.	And in Your loving devotion, cut off my enemies. Destroy all who afflict me, for I am Your servant.
PSA	144	1	다윗의 시 나의 반석 여호와를 찬송하리로다 저가 내 손을 가르쳐 싸우게 하시며 손가락을 가르쳐 치게 하시도다	A Psalm of David. Blessed be the Lord my strength, which teacheth my hands to war, and my fingers to fight:	Of David. Blessed be the LORD, my Rock, who trains my hands for war, my fingers for battle.
PSA	144	2	여호와는 나의 인자시요 나의 요새시요 나의 산성이시요 나를 건지는 자시요 나의 방패시요 나의 피난처시요 내 백성을 내게 복종케 하시는 자시로다	My goodness, and my fortress; my high tower, and my deliverer; my shield, and he in whom I trust; who subdueth my people under me.	He is my steadfast love and my fortress, my stronghold and my deliverer. He is my shield, in whom I take refuge, who subdues peoples under me.
PSA	144	3	여호와여 사람이 무엇이관대 주께서 저를 알아주시며 인생이 무엇이관대 주께서 저를 생각하시나이까	Lord, what is man, that thou takest knowledge of him! or the son of man, that thou makest account of him!	O LORD, what is man, that You regard him, the son of man that You think of him?
PSA	144	4	사람은 헛것 같고 그의 날은 지나가는 그림자 같으니이다	Man is like to vanity: his days are as a shadow that passeth away.	Man is like a breath; his days are like a passing shadow.
PSA	144	5	여호와여 주의 하늘을 드리우고 강림하시며 산들에 접촉하사 연기가 발하게 하소서	Bow thy heavens, O Lord, and come down: touch the mountains, and they shall smoke.	Part Your heavens, O LORD, and come down; touch the mountains, that they may smoke.
PSA	144	6	번개를 번득이사 대적을 흩으시며 주의 살을 발하사 저희를 파하소서	Cast forth lightning, and scatter them: shoot out thine arrows, and destroy them.	Flash forth Your lightning and scatter them; shoot Your arrows and rout them.
PSA	144	7	위에서부터 주의 손을 펴사 나를 큰 물과 이방인의 손에서 구하여 건지소서	Send thine hand from above; rid me, and deliver me out of great waters, from the hand of strange children;	Reach down from on high; set me free and rescue me from the deep waters, from the grasp of foreigners,
PSA	144	8	저희 입은 궤사를 말하며 그 오른손은 거짓의 오른손이니이다	Whose mouth speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood.	whose mouths speak falsehood, whose right hands are deceitful.
PSA	144	9	하나님이여 내가 주께 새 노래로 노래하며 열 줄 비파로 주를 찬양하리이다	I will sing a new song unto thee, O God: upon a psaltery and an instrument of ten strings will I sing praises unto thee.	I will sing to You a new song, O God; on a harp of ten strings I will make music to You—
PSA	144	10	주는 왕들에게 구원을 베푸시는 자시요 종 다윗을 그 해하는 칼에서 구하시는 자시니이다	It is he that giveth salvation unto kings: who delivereth David his servant from the hurtful sword.	to Him who gives victory to kings, who frees His servant David from the deadly sword.
PSA	144	11	이방인의 손에서 나를 구하여 건지소서 저희 입은 궤사를 말하며 그 오른손은 거짓의 오른손이니이다	Rid me, and deliver me from the hand of strange children, whose mouth speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood:	Set me free and rescue me from the grasp of foreigners, whose mouths speak falsehood, whose right hands are deceitful.
PSA	144	12	우리 아들들은 어리다가 장성한 나무 같으며 우리 딸들은 궁전의 식양대로 아름답게 다듬은 모퉁이 돌과 같으며	That our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth; that our daughters may be as corner stones, polished after the similitude of a palace:	Then our sons will be like plants nurtured in their youth, our daughters like corner pillars carved to adorn a palace.
PSA	144	13	우리의 곳간에는 백곡이 가득하며 우리의 양은 들에서 천천과 만만으로 번성하며	That our garners may be full, affording all manner of store: that our sheep may bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our streets:	Our storehouses will be full, supplying all manner of produce; our flocks will bring forth thousands, tens of thousands in our fields.
PSA	144	14	우리 수소는 무겁게 실었으며 또 우리를 침로하는 일이나 우리가 나아가 막는 일이 없으며 우리 거리에는 슬피 부르짖음이 없을진대	That our oxen may be strong to labour; that there be no breaking in, nor going out; that there be no complaining in our streets.	Our oxen will bear great loads. There will be no breach in the walls, no going into captivity, and no cry of lament in our streets.
PSA	144	15	이러한 백성은 복이 있나니 여호와를 자기 하나님으로 삼는 백성은 복이 있도다	Happy is that people, that is in such a case: yea, happy is that people, whose God is the Lord.	Blessed are the people of whom this is so; blessed are the people whose God is the LORD.
PSA	145	1	다윗의 찬송시 왕이신 나의 하나님이여 내가 주를 높이고 영원히 주의 이름을 송축하리이다	David’s Psalm of praise. I will extol thee, my God, O king; and I will bless thy name for ever and ever.	A Psalm of praise. Of David. I will exalt You, my God and King; I will bless Your name forever and ever.
PSA	145	2	내가 날마다 주를 송축하며 영영히 주의 이름을 송축하리이다	Every day will I bless thee; and I will praise thy name for ever and ever.	Every day I will bless You, and I will praise Your name forever and ever.
PSA	145	3	여호와는 광대하시니 크게 찬양할 것이라 그의 광대하심을 측량치 못하리로다	Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised; and his greatness is unsearchable.	Great is the LORD and greatly to be praised; His greatness is unsearchable.
PSA	145	4	대대로 주의 행사를 크게 칭송하며 주의 능한 일을 선포하리로다	One generation shall praise thy works to another, and shall declare thy mighty acts.	One generation will commend Your works to the next, and will proclaim Your mighty acts—
PSA	145	5	주의 존귀하고 영광스러운 위엄과 주의 기사를 나는 묵상하리이다	I will speak of the glorious honour of thy majesty, and of thy wondrous works.	the glorious splendor of Your majesty. And I will meditate on Your wondrous works.
PSA	145	6	사람들은 주의 두려운 일의 세력을 말할 것이요 나도 주의 광대하심을 선포하리이다	And men shall speak of the might of thy terrible acts: and I will declare thy greatness.	They will proclaim the power of Your awesome deeds, and I will declare Your greatness.
PSA	145	7	저희가 주의 크신 은혜를 기념하여 말하며 주의 의를 노래하리이다	They shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodness, and shall sing of thy righteousness.	They will extol the fame of Your abundant goodness and sing joyfully of Your righteousness.
PSA	145	8	여호와는 은혜로우시며 자비하시며 노하기를 더디하시며 인자하심이 크시도다	The Lord is gracious, and full of compassion; slow to anger, and of great mercy.	The LORD is gracious and compassionate, slow to anger and abounding in loving devotion.
PSA	145	9	여호와께서는 만유를 선대하시며 그 지으신 모든 것에 긍휼을 베푸시는도다	The Lord is good to all: and his tender mercies are over all his works.	The LORD is good to all; His compassion rests on all He has made.
PSA	145	10	여호와여 주의 지으신 모든 것이 주께 감사하며 주의 성도가 주를 송축하리이다	All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord; and thy saints shall bless thee.	All You have made will give You thanks, O LORD, and Your saints will bless You.
PSA	145	11	저희가 주의 나라의 영광을 말하며 주의 능을 일러서	They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power;	They will tell of the glory of Your kingdom and speak of Your might,
PSA	145	12	주의 능하신 일과 주의 나라의 위엄의 영광을 인생에게 알게 하리이다	To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the glorious majesty of his kingdom.	to make known to men Your mighty acts and the glorious splendor of Your kingdom.
PSA	145	13	주의 나라는 영원한 나라이니 주의 통치는 대대에 이르리이다	Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endureth throughout all generations.	Your kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and Your dominion endures through all generations. The LORD is faithful in all His words and kind in all His actions.
PSA	145	14	여호와께서는 모든 넘어지는 자를 붙드시며 비굴한 자를 일으키시는도다	The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and raiseth up all those that be bowed down.	The LORD upholds all who fall and lifts up all who are bowed down.
PSA	145	15	중생의 눈이 주를 앙망하오니 주는 때를 따라 저희에게 식물을 주시며	The eyes of all wait upon thee; and thou givest them their meat in due season.	The eyes of all look to You, and You give them their food in season.
PSA	145	16	손을 펴사 모든 생물의 소원을 만족케 하시나이다	Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing.	You open Your hand and satisfy the desire of every living thing.
PSA	145	17	여호와께서는 그 모든 행위에 의로우시며 그 모든 행사에 은혜로우시도다	The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works.	The LORD is righteous in all His ways and kind in all His deeds.
PSA	145	18	여호와께서는 자기에게 간구하는 모든 자 곧 진실하게 간구하는 모든 자에게 가까이 하시는도다	The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth.	The LORD is near to all who call on Him, to all who call out to Him in truth.
PSA	145	19	저는 자기를 경외하는 자의 소원을 이루시며 또 저희 부르짖음을 들으사 구원하시리로다	He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their cry, and will save them.	He fulfills the desires of those who fear Him; He hears their cry and saves them.
PSA	145	20	여호와께서 자기를 사랑하는 자는 다 보호하시고 악인은 다 멸하시리로다	The Lord preserveth all them that love him: but all the wicked will he destroy.	The LORD preserves all who love Him, but all the wicked He will destroy.
PSA	145	21	내 입이 여호와의 영예를 말하며 모든 육체가 그의 성호를 영영히 송축할지로다	My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord: and let all flesh bless his holy name for ever and ever.	My mouth will declare the praise of the LORD; let every creature bless His holy name forever and ever.
PSA	146	1	할렐루야 내 영혼아 여호와를 찬양하라	Praise ye the Lord. Praise the Lord, O my soul.	Hallelujah! Praise the LORD, O my soul.
PSA	146	2	나의 생전에 여호와를 찬양하며 나의 평생에 내 하나님을 찬송하리로다	While I live will I praise the Lord: I will sing praises unto my God while I have any being.	I will praise the LORD all my life; I will sing praises to my God while I have my being.
PSA	146	3	방백들을 의지하지 말며 도울 힘이 없는 인생도 의지하지 말지니	Put not your trust in princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help.	Put not your trust in princes, in mortal man, who cannot save.
PSA	146	4	그 호흡이 끊어지면 흙으로 돌아가서 당일에 그 도모가 소멸하리로다	His breath goeth forth, he returneth to his earth; in that very day his thoughts perish.	When his spirit departs, he returns to the ground; on that very day his plans perish.
PSA	146	5	야곱의 하나님으로 자기 도움을 삼으며 여호와 자기 하나님에게 그 소망을 두는 자는 복이 있도다	Happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God:	Blessed is he whose help is the God of Jacob, whose hope is in the LORD his God,
PSA	146	6	여호와는 천지와 바다와 그 중의 만물을 지으시며 영원히 진실함을 지키시며	Which made heaven, and earth, the sea, and all that therein is: which keepeth truth for ever:	the Maker of heaven and earth, the sea, and everything in them. He remains faithful forever.
PSA	146	7	압박 당하는 자를 위하여 공의로 판단하시며 주린 자에게 식물을 주시는 자시로다 여호와께서 갇힌 자를 해방하시며	Which executeth judgment for the oppressed: which giveth food to the hungry. The Lord looseth the prisoners:	He executes justice for the oppressed and gives food to the hungry. The LORD sets the prisoners free,
PSA	146	8	여호와께서 소경의 눈을 여시며 여호와께서 비굴한 자를 일으키시며 여호와께서 의인을 사랑하시며	The Lord openeth the eyes of the blind: the Lord raiseth them that are bowed down: the Lord loveth the righteous:	the LORD opens the eyes of the blind, the LORD lifts those who are weighed down, the LORD loves the righteous.
PSA	146	9	여호와께서 객을 보호하시며 고아와 과부를 붙드시고 악인의 길은 굽게 하시는도다	The Lord preserveth the strangers; he relieveth the fatherless and widow: but the way of the wicked he turneth upside down.	The LORD protects foreigners; He sustains the fatherless and the widow, but the ways of the wicked He frustrates.
PSA	146	10	시온아 여호와 네 하나님은 영원히 대대에 통치하시리로다 할렐루야	The Lord shall reign for ever, even thy God, O Zion, unto all generations. Praise ye the Lord.	The LORD reigns forever, your God, O Zion, for all generations. Hallelujah!
PSA	147	1	할렐루야 우리 하나님께 찬양함이 선함이여 찬송함이 아름답고 마땅하도다	Praise ye the Lord: for it is good to sing praises unto our God; for it is pleasant; and praise is comely.	Hallelujah! How good it is to sing praises to our God, how pleasant and lovely to praise Him!
PSA	147	2	여호와께서 예루살렘을 세우시며 이스라엘의 흩어진 자를 모으시며	The Lord doth build up Jerusalem: he gathereth together the outcasts of Israel.	The LORD builds up Jerusalem; He gathers the exiles of Israel.
PSA	147	3	상심한 자를 고치시며 저희 상처를 싸매시는도다	He healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up their wounds.	He heals the brokenhearted and binds up their wounds.
PSA	147	4	저가 별의 수효를 계수하시고 저희를 다 이름대로 부르시는도다	He telleth the number of the stars; he calleth them all by their names.	He determines the number of the stars; He calls them each by name.
PSA	147	5	우리 주는 광대하시며 능력이 많으시며 그 지혜가 무궁하시도다	Great is our Lord, and of great power: his understanding is infinite.	Great is our Lord, and mighty in power; His understanding has no limit.
PSA	147	6	여호와께서 겸손한 자는 붙드시고 악인은 땅에 엎드러뜨리시는도다	The Lord lifteth up the meek: he casteth the wicked down to the ground.	The LORD sustains the humble, but casts the wicked to the ground.
PSA	147	7	감사함으로 여호와께 노래하며 수금으로 하나님께 찬양할지어다	Sing unto the Lord with thanksgiving; sing praise upon the harp unto our God:	Sing to the LORD with thanksgiving; make music on the harp to our God,
PSA	147	8	저가 구름으로 하늘을 덮으시며 땅을 위하여 비를 예비하시며 산에 풀이 자라게 하시며	Who covereth the heaven with clouds, who prepareth rain for the earth, who maketh grass to grow upon the mountains.	who covers the sky with clouds, who prepares rain for the earth, who makes grass to grow on the hills.
PSA	147	9	들짐승과 우는 까마귀 새끼에게 먹을 것을 주시는도다	He giveth to the beast his food, and to the young ravens which cry.	He provides food for the animals, and for the young ravens when they call.
PSA	147	10	여호와는 말의 힘을 즐거워 아니하시며 사람의 다리도 기뻐 아니하시고	He delighteth not in the strength of the horse: he taketh not pleasure in the legs of a man.	He does not delight in the strength of the horse; He takes no pleasure in the legpower of the man.
PSA	147	11	자기를 경외하는 자와 그 인자하심을 바라는 자들을 기뻐하시는도다	The Lord taketh pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy.	The LORD is pleased with those who fear Him, who hope in His loving devotion.
PSA	147	12	예루살렘아 여호와를 찬송할지어다 시온아 네 하나님을 찬양할지어다	Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem; praise thy God, O Zion.	Exalt the LORD, O Jerusalem; praise your God, O Zion!
PSA	147	13	저가 네 문빗장을 견고히 하시고 너의 가운데 자녀에게 복을 주셨으며	For he hath strengthened the bars of thy gates; he hath blessed thy children within thee.	For He strengthens the bars of your gates and blesses the children within you.
PSA	147	14	네 경내를 평안케 하시고 아름다운 밀로 너를 배불리시며	He maketh peace in thy borders, and filleth thee with the finest of the wheat.	He makes peace at your borders; He fills you with the finest wheat.
PSA	147	15	그 명을 땅에 보내시니 그 말씀이 속히 달리는도다	He sendeth forth his commandment upon earth: his word runneth very swiftly.	He sends forth His command to the earth; His word runs swiftly.
PSA	147	16	눈을 양털 같이 내리시며 서리를 재 같이 흩으시며	He giveth snow like wool: he scattereth the hoarfrost like ashes.	He spreads the snow like wool; He scatters the frost like ashes;
PSA	147	17	우박을 떡 부스러기 같이 뿌리시나니 누가 능히 그 추위를 감당하리요	He casteth forth his ice like morsels: who can stand before his cold?	He casts forth His hail like pebbles. Who can withstand His icy blast?
PSA	147	18	그 말씀을 보내사 그것들을 녹이시고 바람을 불게 하신즉 물이 흐르는도다	He sendeth out his word, and melteth them: he causeth his wind to blow, and the waters flow.	He sends forth His word and melts them; He unleashes His winds, and the waters flow.
PSA	147	19	저가 그 말씀을 야곱에게 보이시며 그 율례와 규례를 이스라엘에게 보이시는도다	He sheweth his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel.	He declares His word to Jacob, His statutes and judgments to Israel.
PSA	147	20	아무 나라에게도 이같이 행치 아니하셨나니 저희는 그 규례를 알지 못하였도다 할렐루야	He hath not dealt so with any nation: and as for his judgments, they have not known them. Praise ye the Lord.	He has done this for no other nation; they do not know His judgments. Hallelujah!
PSA	148	1	할렐루야 하늘에서 여호와를 찬양하며 높은 데서 찬양할지어다	Praise ye the Lord. Praise ye the Lord from the heavens: praise him in the heights.	Hallelujah! Praise the LORD from the heavens; praise Him in the highest places.
PSA	148	2	그의 모든 사자여 찬양하며 모든 군대여 찬양할지어다	Praise ye him, all his angels: praise ye him, all his hosts.	Praise Him, all His angels; praise Him, all His heavenly hosts.
PSA	148	3	해와 달아 찬양하며 광명한 별들아 찬양할지어다	Praise ye him, sun and moon: praise him, all ye stars of light.	Praise Him, O sun and moon; praise Him, all you shining stars.
PSA	148	4	하늘의 하늘도 찬양하며 하늘 위에 있는 물들도 찬양할지어다	Praise him, ye heavens of heavens, and ye waters that be above the heavens.	Praise Him, O highest heavens, and you waters above the skies.
PSA	148	5	그것들이 여호와의 이름을 찬양할 것은 저가 명하시매 지음을 받았음이로다	Let them praise the name of the Lord: for he commanded, and they were created.	Let them praise the name of the LORD, for He gave the command and they were created.
PSA	148	6	저가 또 그것들을 영영히 세우시고 폐치 못할 명을 정하셨도다	He hath also stablished them for ever and ever: he hath made a decree which shall not pass.	He established them forever and ever; He issued a decree that will never pass away.
PSA	148	7	너희 용들과 바다여 땅에서 여호와를 찬양하라	Praise the Lord from the earth, ye dragons, and all deeps:	Praise the LORD from the earth, all great sea creatures and ocean depths,
PSA	148	8	불과 우박과 눈과 안개와 그 말씀을 좇는 광풍이며	Fire, and hail; snow, and vapour; stormy wind fulfilling his word:	lightning and hail, snow and clouds, powerful wind fulfilling His word,
PSA	148	9	산들과 모든 작은 산과 과목과 모든 백향목이며	Mountains, and all hills; fruitful trees, and all cedars:	mountains and all hills, fruit trees and all cedars,
PSA	148	10	짐승과 모든 가축과 기는 것과 나는 새며	Beasts, and all cattle; creeping things, and flying fowl:	wild animals and all cattle, crawling creatures and flying birds,
PSA	148	11	세상의 왕들과 모든 백성과 방백과 땅의 모든 사사며	Kings of the earth, and all people; princes, and all judges of the earth:	kings of the earth and all peoples, princes and all rulers of the earth,
PSA	148	12	청년 남자와 처녀와 노인과 아이들아	Both young men, and maidens; old men, and children:	young men and maidens, old and young together.
PSA	148	13	다 여호와의 이름을 찬양할지어다 그 이름이 홀로 높으시며 그 영광이 천지에 뛰어나심이로다	Let them praise the name of the Lord: for his name alone is excellent; his glory is above the earth and heaven.	Let them praise the name of the LORD, for His name alone is exalted; His splendor is above the earth and the heavens.
PSA	148	14	저가 그 백성의 뿔을 높이셨으니 저는 모든 성도 곧 저를 친근히 하는 이스라엘 자손의 찬양거리로다 할렐루야	He also exalteth the horn of his people, the praise of all his saints; even of the children of Israel, a people near unto him. Praise ye the Lord.	He has raised up a horn for His people, the praise of all His saints, of Israel, a people near to Him. Hallelujah!
PSA	149	1	할렐루야 새 노래로 여호와께 노래하며 성도의 회중에서 찬양할지어다	Praise ye the Lord. Sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise in the congregation of saints.	Hallelujah! Sing to the LORD a new song— His praise in the assembly of the godly.
PSA	149	2	이스라엘은 자기를 지으신 자로 인하여 즐거워하며 시온의 자민은 저희의 왕으로 인하여 즐거워 할지어다	Let Israel rejoice in him that made him: let the children of Zion be joyful in their King.	Let Israel rejoice in their Maker; let the children of Zion rejoice in their King.
PSA	149	3	춤 추며 그의 이름을 찬양하며 소고와 수금으로 그를 찬양할지어다	Let them praise his name in the dance: let them sing praises unto him with the timbrel and harp.	Let them praise His name with dancing, and make music to Him with tambourine and harp.
PSA	149	4	여호와께서는 자기 백성을 기뻐하시며 겸손한 자를 구원으로 아름답게 하심이로다	For the Lord taketh pleasure in his people: he will beautify the meek with salvation.	For the LORD takes pleasure in His people; He adorns the afflicted with salvation.
PSA	149	5	성도들은 영광 중에 즐거워하며 저희 침상에서 기쁨으로 노래할지어다	Let the saints be joyful in glory: let them sing aloud upon their beds.	Let the saints exult in glory; let them shout for joy upon their beds.
PSA	149	6	그 입에는 하나님의 존영이요 그 수중에는 두 날 가진 칼이로다	Let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a twoedged sword in their hand;	May the high praises of God be in their mouths, and a double-edged sword in their hands,
PSA	149	7	이것으로 열방에 보수하며 민족들을 벌하며	To execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishments upon the people;	to inflict vengeance on the nations and punishment on the peoples,
PSA	149	8	저희 왕들은 사슬로, 저희 귀인은 철고랑으로 결박하고	To bind their kings with chains, and their nobles with fetters of iron;	to bind their kings with chains and their nobles with shackles of iron,
PSA	149	9	기록한 판단대로 저희에게 시행할지로다 이런 영광은 그 모든 성도에게 있도다 할렐루야	To execute upon them the judgment written: this honour have all his saints. Praise ye the Lord.	to execute the judgment written against them. This honor is for all His saints. Hallelujah!
PSA	150	1	할렐루야 그 성소에서 하나님을 찬양하며 그 권능의 궁창에서 그를 찬양할지어다	Praise ye the Lord. Praise God in his sanctuary: praise him in the firmament of his power.	Hallelujah! Praise God in His sanctuary. Praise Him in His mighty heavens.
PSA	150	2	그의 능하신 행동을 인하여 찬양하며 그의 지극히 광대하심을 좇아 찬양할지어다	Praise him for his mighty acts: praise him according to his excellent greatness.	Praise Him for His mighty acts; praise Him for His excellent greatness.
PSA	150	3	나팔 소리로 찬양하며 비파와 수금으로 찬양할지어다	Praise him with the sound of the trumpet: praise him with the psaltery and harp.	Praise Him with the sound of the horn; praise Him with the harp and lyre.
PSA	150	4	소고 치며 춤추어 찬양하며 현악과 퉁소로 찬양할지어다	Praise him with the timbrel and dance: praise him with stringed instruments and organs.	Praise Him with tambourine and dancing; praise Him with strings and flute.
PSA	150	5	큰 소리 나는 제금으로 찬양하며 높은 소리 나는 제금으로 찬양할지어다	Praise him upon the loud cymbals: praise him upon the high sounding cymbals.	Praise Him with clashing cymbals; praise Him with resounding cymbals.
PSA	150	6	호흡이 있는 자마다 여호와를 찬양할지어다 할렐루야	Let every thing that hath breath praise the Lord. Praise ye the Lord.	Let everything that has breath praise the LORD! Hallelujah!
PRO	1	1	다윗의 아들 이스라엘 왕 솔로몬의 잠언이라	The proverbs of Solomon the son of David, king of Israel;	These are the proverbs of Solomon son of David, king of Israel,
PRO	1	2	이는 지혜와 훈계를 알게 하며 명철의 말씀을 깨닫게 하며	To know wisdom and instruction; to perceive the words of understanding;	for gaining wisdom and discipline, for comprehending words of insight,
PRO	1	3	지혜롭게, 의롭게, 공평하게, 정직하게 행할 일에 대하여 훈계를 받게 하며	To receive the instruction of wisdom, justice, and judgment, and equity;	and for receiving instruction in wise living and in righteousness, justice, and equity.
PRO	1	4	어리석은 자로 슬기롭게 하며 젊은 자에게 지식과 근신함을 주기 위한 것이니	To give subtilty to the simple, to the young man knowledge and discretion.	To impart prudence to the simple and knowledge and discretion to the young,
PRO	1	5	지혜있는 자는 듣고 학식이 더할 것이요 명철한 자는 모략을 얻을 것이라	A wise man will hear, and will increase learning; and a man of understanding shall attain unto wise counsels:	let the wise listen and gain instruction, and the discerning acquire wise counsel
PRO	1	6	잠언과 비유와 지혜있는 자의 말과 그 오묘한 말을 깨달으리라	To understand a proverb, and the interpretation; the words of the wise, and their dark sayings.	by understanding the proverbs and parables, the sayings and riddles of the wise.
PRO	1	7	여호와를 경외하는 것이 지식의 근본이어늘 미련한 자는 지혜와 훈계를 멸시하느니라	The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge: but fools despise wisdom and instruction.	The fear of the LORD is the beginning of knowledge, but fools despise wisdom and discipline.
PRO	1	8	내 아들아 네 아비의 훈계를 들으며 네 어미의 법을 떠나지 말라	My son, hear the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy mother:	Listen, my son, to your father’s instruction, and do not forsake the teaching of your mother.
PRO	1	9	이는 네 머리의 아름다운 관이요 네 목의 금사슬이니라	For they shall be an ornament of grace unto thy head, and chains about thy neck.	For they are a garland of grace on your head and a pendant around your neck.
PRO	1	10	내 아들아 악한 자가 너를 꾈지라도 좇지 말라	My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not.	My son, if sinners entice you, do not yield to them.
PRO	1	11	그들이 네게 말하기를 우리와 함께 가자 우리가 가만히 엎드렸다가 사람의 피를 흘리자 죄없는 자를 까닭없이 숨어 기다리다가	If they say, Come with us, let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause:	If they say, “Come along, let us lie in wait for blood, let us ambush the innocent without cause,
PRO	1	12	음부 같이 그들을 산 채로 삼키며 무덤에 내려가는 자 같게 통으로 삼키자	Let us swallow them up alive as the grave; and whole, as those that go down into the pit:	let us swallow them alive like Sheol, and whole like those descending into the Pit.
PRO	1	13	우리가 온갖 보화를 얻으며 빼앗은 것으로 우리 집에 채우리니	We shall find all precious substance, we shall fill our houses with spoil:	We will find all manner of precious goods; we will fill our houses with plunder.
PRO	1	14	너는 우리와 함께 제비를 뽑고 우리가 함께 전대 하나만 두자 할지라도	Cast in thy lot among us; let us all have one purse:	Throw in your lot with us; let us all share one purse”—
PRO	1	15	내 아들아 그들과 함께 길에 다니지 말라 네 발을 금하여 그 길을 밟지 말라	My son, walk not thou in the way with them; refrain thy foot from their path:	my son, do not walk the road with them or set foot upon their path.
PRO	1	16	대저 그 발은 악으로 달려가며 피를 흘리는 데 빠름이니라	For their feet run to evil, and make haste to shed blood.	For their feet run to evil, and they are swift to shed blood.
PRO	1	17	무릇 새가 그물 치는 것을 보면 헛 일이겠거늘	Surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird.	How futile it is to spread the net where any bird can see it!
PRO	1	18	그들의 가만히 엎드림은 자기의 피를 흘릴 뿐이요 숨어 기다림은 자기의 생명을 해할 뿐이니	And they lay wait for their own blood; they lurk privily for their own lives.	But they lie in wait for their own blood; they ambush their own lives.
PRO	1	19	무릇 이를 탐하는 자의 길은 다 이러하여 자기의 생명을 잃게 하느니라	So are the ways of every one that is greedy of gain; which taketh away the life of the owners thereof.	Such is the fate of all who are greedy, whose unjust gain takes the lives of its possessors.
PRO	1	20	지혜가 길거리에서 부르며 광장에서 소리를 높이며	Wisdom crieth without; she uttereth her voice in the streets:	Wisdom calls out in the street, she lifts her voice in the square;
PRO	1	21	훤화하는 길 머리에서 소리를 지르며 성문 어귀와 성중에서 그 소리를 발하여 가로되	She crieth in the chief place of concourse, in the openings of the gates: in the city she uttereth her words, saying,	in the main concourse she cries aloud, at the city gates she makes her speech:
PRO	1	22	너희 어리석은 자들은 어리석음을 좋아하며 거만한 자들은 거만을 기뻐하며 미련한 자들은 지식을 미워하니 어느 때까지 하겠느냐	How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? and the scorners delight in their scorning, and fools hate knowledge?	“How long, O simple ones, will you love your simple ways? How long will scoffers delight in their scorn and fools hate knowledge?
PRO	1	23	나의 책망을 듣고 돌이키라 보라 내가 나의 신을 너희에게 부어주며 나의 말을 너희에게 보이리라	Turn you at my reproof: behold, I will pour out my spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto you.	If you had repented at my rebuke, then surely I would have poured out my spirit on you; I would have made my words known to you.
PRO	1	24	내가 부를지라도 너희가 듣기 싫어 하였고 내가 손을 펼지라도 돌아보는 자가 없었고	Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded;	Because you refused my call, and no one took my outstretched hand,
PRO	1	25	도리어 나의 모든 교훈을 멸시하며 나의 책망을 받지 아니하였은즉	But ye have set at nought all my counsel, and would none of my reproof:	because you neglected all my counsel, and wanted none of my correction,
PRO	1	26	너희가 재앙을 만날 때에 내가 웃을 것이며 너희에게 두려움이 임할 때에 내가 비웃으리라	I also will laugh at your calamity; I will mock when your fear cometh;	in turn I will mock your calamity; I will sneer when terror strikes you,
PRO	1	27	너희의 두려움이 광풍 같이 임하겠고 너희의 재앙이 폭풍 같이 임하리니	When your fear cometh as desolation, and your destruction cometh as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish cometh upon you.	when your dread comes like a storm, and your destruction like a whirlwind, when distress and anguish overwhelm you.
PRO	1	28	그 때에 너희가 나를 부르리라 그래도 내가 대답지 아니하겠고 부지런히 나를 찾으리라 그래도 나를 만나지 못하리니	Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me:	Then they will call on me, but I will not answer; they will earnestly seek me, but will not find me.
PRO	1	29	대저 너희가 지식을 미워하며 여호와 경외하기를 즐거워하지 아니하며	For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord:	For they hated knowledge and chose not to fear the LORD.
PRO	1	30	나의 교훈을 받지 아니하고 나의 모든 책망을 업신여겼음이라	They would none of my counsel: they despised all my reproof.	They accepted none of my counsel; they despised all my reproof.
PRO	1	31	그러므로 자기 행위의 열매를 먹으며 자기 꾀에 배부르리라	Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices.	So they will eat the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices.
PRO	1	32	어리석은 자의 퇴보는 자기를 죽이며 미련한 자의 안일은 자기를 멸망시키려니와	For the turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them.	For the waywardness of the simple will slay them, and the complacency of fools will destroy them.
PRO	1	33	오직 나를 듣는 자는 안연히 살며 재앙의 두려움이 없이 평안하리라	But whoso hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of evil.	But whoever listens to me will dwell in safety, secure from the fear of evil.”
PRO	2	1	내 아들아 네가 만일 나의 말을 받으며 나의 계명을 네게 간직하며	My son, if thou wilt receive my words, and hide my commandments with thee;	My son, if you accept my words and hide my commandments within you,
PRO	2	2	네 귀를 지혜에 기울이며 네 마음을 명철에 두며	So that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom, and apply thine heart to understanding;	if you incline your ear to wisdom and direct your heart to understanding,
PRO	2	3	지식을 불러 구하며 명철을 얻으려고 소리를 높이며	Yea, if thou criest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding;	if you truly call out to insight and lift your voice to understanding,
PRO	2	4	은을 구하는 것 같이 그것을 구하며 감추인 보배를 찾는 것 같이 그것을 찾으면	If thou seekest her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasures;	if you seek it like silver and search it out like hidden treasure,
PRO	2	5	여호와 경외하기를 깨달으며 하나님을 알게 되리니	Then shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God.	then you will discern the fear of the LORD and discover the knowledge of God.
PRO	2	6	대저 여호와는 지혜를 주시며 지식과 명철을 그 입에서 내심이며	For the Lord giveth wisdom: out of his mouth cometh knowledge and understanding.	For the LORD gives wisdom; from His mouth come knowledge and understanding.
PRO	2	7	그는 정직한 자를 위하여 완전한 지혜를 예비하시며 행실이 온전한 자에게 방패가 되시나니	He layeth up sound wisdom for the righteous: he is a buckler to them that walk uprightly.	He stores up sound wisdom for the upright; He is a shield to those who walk with integrity,
PRO	2	8	대저 그는 공평의 길을 보호하시며 그 성도들의 길을 보전하려 하심이니라	He keepeth the paths of judgment, and preserveth the way of his saints.	to guard the paths of justice and protect the way of His saints.
PRO	2	9	그런즉 네가 공의와 공평과 정직 곧 모든 선한 길을 깨달을 것이라	Then shalt thou understand righteousness, and judgment, and equity; yea, every good path.	Then you will discern righteousness and justice and equity—every good path.
PRO	2	10	곧 지혜가 네 마음에 들어가며 지식이 네 영혼에 즐겁게 될 것이요	When wisdom entereth into thine heart, and knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul;	For wisdom will enter your heart, and knowledge will delight your soul.
PRO	2	11	근신이 너를 지키며 명철이 너를 보호하여	Discretion shall preserve thee, understanding shall keep thee:	Discretion will watch over you, and understanding will guard you,
PRO	2	12	악한 자의 길과 패역을 말하는 자에게서 건져내리라	To deliver thee from the way of the evil man, from the man that speaketh froward things;	to deliver you from the way of evil, from the man who speaks perversity,
PRO	2	13	이 무리는 정직한 길을 떠나 어두운 길로 행하며	Who leave the paths of uprightness, to walk in the ways of darkness;	from those who leave the straight paths to walk in the ways of darkness,
PRO	2	14	행악하기를 기뻐하며 악인의 패역을 즐거워하나니	Who rejoice to do evil, and delight in the frowardness of the wicked;	from those who enjoy doing evil and rejoice in the twistedness of evil,
PRO	2	15	그 길은 구부러지고 그 행위는 패역하리라	Whose ways are crooked, and they froward in their paths:	whose paths are crooked and whose ways are devious.
PRO	2	16	지혜가 또 너를 음녀에게서, 말로 호리는 이방 계집에게서 구원하리니	To deliver thee from the strange woman, even from the stranger which flattereth with her words;	It will rescue you from the forbidden woman, from the stranger with seductive words
PRO	2	17	그는 소시의 짝을 버리며 그 하나님의 언약을 잊어버린 자라	Which forsaketh the guide of her youth, and forgetteth the covenant of her God.	who abandons the partner of her youth and forgets the covenant of her God.
PRO	2	18	그 집은 사망으로, 그 길은 음부로 기울어졌나니	For her house inclineth unto death, and her paths unto the dead.	For her house sinks down to death, and her tracks to the departed spirits.
PRO	2	19	누구든지 그에게로 가는 자는 돌아오지 못하며 또 생명길을 얻지 못하느니라	None that go unto her return again, neither take they hold of the paths of life.	None who go to her return or negotiate the paths of life.
PRO	2	20	지혜가 너로 선한 자의 길로 행하게 하며 또 의인의 길을 지키게 하리니	That thou mayest walk in the way of good men, and keep the paths of the righteous.	So you will follow in the ways of the good, and keep to the paths of the righteous.
PRO	2	21	대저 정직한 자는 땅에 거하며 완전한 자는 땅에 남아 있으리라	For the upright shall dwell in the land, and the perfect shall remain in it.	For the upright will inhabit the land, and the blameless will remain in it;
PRO	2	22	그러나 악인은 땅에서 끊어지겠고 궤휼한 자는 땅에서 뽑히리라	But the wicked shall be cut off from the earth, and the transgressors shall be rooted out of it.	but the wicked will be cut off from the land, and the unfaithful will be uprooted.
PRO	3	1	내 아들아 나의 법을 잊어버리지 말고 네 마음으로 나의 명령을 지키라	My son, forget not my law; but let thine heart keep my commandments:	My son, do not forget my teaching, but let your heart keep my commandments;
PRO	3	2	그리하면 그것이 너로 장수하여 많은 해를 누리게 하며 평강을 더하게 하리라	For length of days, and long life, and peace, shall they add to thee.	for they will add length to your days, years and peace to your life.
PRO	3	3	인자와 진리로 네게서 떠나지 않게 하고 그것을 네 목에 매며 네 마음판에 새기라	Let not mercy and truth forsake thee: bind them about thy neck; write them upon the table of thine heart:	Never let loving devotion or faithfulness leave you; bind them around your neck, write them on the tablet of your heart.
PRO	3	4	그리하면 네가 하나님과 사람 앞에서 은총과 귀중히 여김을 받으리라	So shalt thou find favour and good understanding in the sight of God and man.	Then you will find favor and high regard in the sight of God and man.
PRO	3	5	너는 마음을 다하여 여호와를 의뢰하고 네 명철을 의지하지 말라	Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding.	Trust in the LORD with all your heart, and lean not on your own understanding;
PRO	3	6	너는 범사에 그를 인정하라 그리하면 네 길을 지도하시리라	In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.	in all your ways acknowledge Him, and He will make your paths straight.
PRO	3	7	스스로 지혜롭게 여기지 말지어다 여호와를 경외하며 악을 떠날지어다	Be not wise in thine own eyes: fear the Lord, and depart from evil.	Be not wise in your own eyes; fear the LORD and turn away from evil.
PRO	3	8	이것이 네 몸에 양약이 되어 네 골수로 윤택하게 하리라	It shall be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones.	This will bring healing to your body and refreshment to your bones.
PRO	3	9	네 재물과 네 소산물의 처음 익은 열매로 여호와를 공경하라	Honour the Lord with thy substance, and with the firstfruits of all thine increase:	Honor the LORD with your wealth and with the firstfruits of all your harvest;
PRO	3	10	그리하면 네 창고가 가득히 차고 네 즙틀에 새 포도즙이 넘치리라	So shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst out with new wine.	then your barns will be filled with plenty, and your vats will overflow with new wine.
PRO	3	11	내 아들아 여호와의 징계를 경히 여기지 말라 그 꾸지람을 싫어하지 말라	My son, despise not the chastening of the Lord; neither be weary of his correction:	My son, do not reject the discipline of the LORD, and do not loathe His rebuke;
PRO	3	12	대저 여호와께서 그 사랑하시는 자를 징계하시기를 마치 아비가 그 기뻐하는 아들을 징계함 같이 하시느니라	For whom the Lord loveth he correcteth; even as a father the son in whom he delighteth.	for the LORD disciplines the one He loves, as does a father the son in whom he delights.
PRO	3	13	지혜를 얻은 자와 명철을 얻은 자는 복이 있나니	Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that getteth understanding.	Blessed is the man who finds wisdom, the man who acquires understanding,
PRO	3	14	이는 지혜를 얻는 것이 은을 얻는 것보다 낫고 그 이익이 정금보다 나음이니라	For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold.	for she is more profitable than silver, and her gain is better than fine gold.
PRO	3	15	지혜는 진주보다 귀하니 너의 사모하는 모든 것으로 이에 비교할 수 없도다	She is more precious than rubies: and all the things thou canst desire are not to be compared unto her.	She is more precious than rubies; nothing you desire compares with her.
PRO	3	16	그 우편 손에는 장수가 있고 그 좌편 손에는 부귀가 있나니	Length of days is in her right hand; and in her left hand riches and honour.	Long life is in her right hand; in her left hand are riches and honor.
PRO	3	17	그 길은 즐거운 길이요 그 첩경은 다 평강이니라	Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.	All her ways are pleasant, and all her paths are peaceful.
PRO	3	18	지혜는 그 얻은 자에게 생명 나무라 지혜를 가진 자는 복되도다	She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her: and happy is every one that retaineth her.	She is a tree of life to those who embrace her, and those who lay hold of her are blessed.
PRO	3	19	여호와께서는 지혜로 땅을 세우셨으며 명철로 하늘을 굳게 펴셨고	The Lord by wisdom hath founded the earth; by understanding hath he established the heavens.	The LORD founded the earth by wisdom and established the heavens by understanding.
PRO	3	20	그 지식으로 해양이 갈라지게 하셨으며 공중에서 이슬이 내리게 하셨느니라	By his knowledge the depths are broken up, and the clouds drop down the dew.	By His knowledge the watery depths were broken open, and the clouds dripped with dew.
PRO	3	21	내 아들아 완전한 지혜와 근신을 지키고 이것들로 네 눈 앞에서 떠나지 않게 하라	My son, let not them depart from thine eyes: keep sound wisdom and discretion:	My son, do not lose sight of this: Preserve sound judgment and discernment.
PRO	3	22	그리하면 그것이 네 영혼의 생명이 되며 네 목에 장식이 되리니	So shall they be life unto thy soul, and grace to thy neck.	They will be life to your soul and adornment to your neck.
PRO	3	23	네가 네 길을 안연히 행하겠고 네 발이 거치지 아니하겠으며	Then shalt thou walk in thy way safely, and thy foot shall not stumble.	Then you will go on your way in safety, and your foot will not stumble.
PRO	3	24	네가 누울 때에 두려워하지 아니하겠고 네가 누운즉 네 잠이 달리로다	When thou liest down, thou shalt not be afraid: yea, thou shalt lie down, and thy sleep shall be sweet.	When you lie down, you will not be afraid; when you rest, your sleep will be sweet.
PRO	3	25	너는 창졸간의 두려움이나 악인의 멸망이 임할 때나 두려워하지 말라	Be not afraid of sudden fear, neither of the desolation of the wicked, when it cometh.	Do not fear sudden danger or the ruin that overtakes the wicked,
PRO	3	26	대저 여호와는 너의 의지할 자이시라 네 발을 지켜 걸리지 않게 하시리라	For the Lord shall be thy confidence, and shall keep thy foot from being taken.	for the LORD will be your confidence and will keep your foot from the snare.
PRO	3	27	네 손이 선을 베풀 힘이 있거든 마땅히 받을 자에게 베풀기를 아끼지 말며	Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine hand to do it.	Do not withhold good from the deserving when it is within your power to act.
PRO	3	28	네게 있거든 이웃에게 이르기를 갔다가 다시 오라 내일 주겠노라 하지 말며	Say not unto thy neighbour, Go, and come again, and to morrow I will give; when thou hast it by thee.	Do not tell your neighbor, “Come back tomorrow and I will provide”— when you already have the means.
PRO	3	29	네 이웃이 네 곁에서 안연히 살거든 그를 모해하지 말며	Devise not evil against thy neighbour, seeing he dwelleth securely by thee.	Do not devise evil against your neighbor, for he trustfully dwells beside you.
PRO	3	30	사람이 네게 악을 행하지 아니하였거든 까닭없이 더불어 다투지 말며	Strive not with a man without cause, if he have done thee no harm.	Do not accuse a man without cause, when he has done you no harm.
PRO	3	31	포학한 자를 부러워하지 말며 그 아무 행위든지 좇지 말라	Envy thou not the oppressor, and choose none of his ways.	Do not envy a violent man or choose any of his ways;
PRO	3	32	대저 패역한 자는 여호와의 미워하심을 입거니와 정직한 자에게는 그의 교통하심이 있으며	For the froward is abomination to the Lord: but his secret is with the righteous.	for the LORD detests the perverse, but He is a friend to the upright.
PRO	3	33	악인의 집에는 여호와의 저주가 있거니와 의인의 집에는 복이 있느니라	The curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked: but he blesseth the habitation of the just.	The curse of the LORD is on the house of the wicked, but He blesses the home of the righteous.
PRO	3	34	진실로 그는 거만한 자를 비웃으시며 겸손한 자에게 은혜를 베푸시나니	Surely he scorneth the scorners: but he giveth grace unto the lowly.	He mocks the mockers, but gives grace to the humble.
PRO	3	35	지혜로운 자는 영광을 기업으로 받거니와 미련한 자의 현달함은 욕이 되느니라	The wise shall inherit glory: but shame shall be the promotion of fools.	The wise will inherit honor, but fools are held up to shame.
PRO	4	1	아들들아 아비의 훈계를 들으며 명철을 얻기에 주의하라	Hear, ye children, the instruction of a father, and attend to know understanding.	Listen, my sons, to a father’s instruction; pay attention and gain understanding.
PRO	4	2	내가 선한 도리를 너희에게 전하노니 내 법을 떠나지 말라	For I give you good doctrine, forsake ye not my law.	For I give you sound teaching; do not abandon my directive.
PRO	4	3	나도 내 아버지에게 아들이었었으며 내 어머니 보기에 유약한 외아들이었었노라	For I was my father’s son, tender and only beloved in the sight of my mother.	When I was a son to my father, tender and the only child of my mother,
PRO	4	4	아버지가 내게 가르쳐 이르기를 내 말을 네 마음에 두라 내 명령을 지키라 그리하면 살리라	He taught me also, and said unto me, Let thine heart retain my words: keep my commandments, and live.	he taught me and said, “Let your heart lay hold of my words; keep my commands and you will live.
PRO	4	5	지혜를 얻으며 명철을 얻으라 내 입의 말을 잊지 말며 어기지 말라	Get wisdom, get understanding: forget it not; neither decline from the words of my mouth.	Get wisdom, get understanding; do not forget my words or turn from them.
PRO	4	6	지혜를 버리지 말라 그가 너를 보호하리라 그를 사랑하라 그가 너를 지키리라	Forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee: love her, and she shall keep thee.	Do not forsake wisdom, and she will preserve you; love her, and she will guard you.
PRO	4	7	지혜가 제일이니 지혜를 얻으라 무릇 너의 얻은 것을 가져 명철을 얻을지니라	Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get wisdom: and with all thy getting get understanding.	Wisdom is supreme; so acquire wisdom. And whatever you may acquire, gain understanding.
PRO	4	8	그를 높이라 그리하면 그가 너를 높이 들리라 만일 그를 품으면 그가 너를 영화롭게 하리라	Exalt her, and she shall promote thee: she shall bring thee to honour, when thou dost embrace her.	Prize her, and she will exalt you; if you embrace her, she will honor you.
PRO	4	9	그가 아름다운 관을 네 머리에 두겠고 영화로운 면류관을 네게 주리라 하였느니라	She shall give to thine head an ornament of grace: a crown of glory shall she deliver to thee.	She will set a garland of grace on your head; she will present you with a crown of beauty.”
PRO	4	10	내 아들아 들으라 내 말을 받으라 그리하면 네 생명의 해가 길리라	Hear, O my son, and receive my sayings; and the years of thy life shall be many.	Listen, my son, and receive my words, and the years of your life will be many.
PRO	4	11	내가 지혜로운 길로 네게 가르쳤으며 정직한 첩경으로 너를 인도하였은즉	I have taught thee in the way of wisdom; I have led thee in right paths.	I will guide you in the way of wisdom; I will lead you on straight paths.
PRO	4	12	다닐 때에 네 걸음이 곤란하지 아니하겠고 달려갈 때에 실족하지 아니하리라	When thou goest, thy steps shall not be straitened; and when thou runnest, thou shalt not stumble.	When you walk, your steps will not be impeded; when you run, you will not stumble.
PRO	4	13	훈계를 굳게 잡아 놓치지 말고 지키라 이것이 네 생명이니라	Take fast hold of instruction; let her not go: keep her; for she is thy life.	Hold on to instruction; do not let go. Guard it, for it is your life.
PRO	4	14	사특한 자의 첩경에 들어가지 말며 악인의 길로 다니지 말지어다	Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil men.	Do not set foot on the path of the wicked or walk in the way of evildoers.
PRO	4	15	그 길을 피하고 지나가지 말며 돌이켜 떠나갈지어다	Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away.	Avoid it; do not travel on it. Turn from it and pass on by.
PRO	4	16	그들은 악을 행하지 못하면 자지 못하며 사람을 넘어뜨리지 못하면 잠이 오지 아니하며	For they sleep not, except they have done mischief; and their sleep is taken away, unless they cause some to fall.	For they cannot sleep unless they do evil; they are deprived of slumber until they make someone fall.
PRO	4	17	불의의 떡을 먹으며 강포의 술을 마심이니라	For they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of violence.	For they eat the bread of wickedness and drink the wine of violence.
PRO	4	18	의인의 길은 돋는 햇볕 같아서 점점 빛나서 원만한 광명에 이르거니와	But the path of the just is as the shining light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day.	The path of the righteous is like the first gleam of dawn, shining brighter and brighter until midday.
PRO	4	19	악인의 길은 어둠 같아서 그가 거쳐 넘어져도 그것이 무엇인지 깨닫지 못하느니라	The way of the wicked is as darkness: they know not at what they stumble.	But the way of the wicked is like the darkest gloom; they do not know what makes them stumble.
PRO	4	20	내 아들아 내 말에 주의하며 나의 이르는 것에 네 귀를 기울이라	My son, attend to my words; incline thine ear unto my sayings.	My son, pay attention to my words; incline your ear to my sayings.
PRO	4	21	그것을 네 눈에서 떠나게 말며 네 마음 속에 지키라	Let them not depart from thine eyes; keep them in the midst of thine heart.	Do not lose sight of them; keep them within your heart.
PRO	4	22	그것은 얻는 자에게 생명이 되며 그 온 육체의 건강이 됨이니라	For they are life unto those that find them, and health to all their flesh.	For they are life to those who find them, and health to the whole body.
PRO	4	23	무릇 지킬만한 것보다 더욱 네 마음을 지키라 생명의 근원이 이에서 남이니라	Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of life.	Guard your heart with all diligence, for from it flow springs of life.
PRO	4	24	궤휼을 네 입에서 버리며 사곡을 네 입술에서 멀리하라	Put away from thee a froward mouth, and perverse lips put far from thee.	Put away deception from your mouth; keep your lips from perverse speech.
PRO	4	25	네 눈은 바로 보며 네 눈꺼풀은 네 앞을 곧게 살펴	Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look straight before thee.	Let your eyes look forward; fix your gaze straight ahead.
PRO	4	26	네 발의 행할 첩경을 평탄케 하며 네 모든 길을 든든히 하라	Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be established.	Make a level path for your feet, and all your ways will be sure.
PRO	4	27	우편으로나 좌편으로나 치우치지 말고 네 발을 악에서 떠나게 하라	Turn not to the right hand nor to the left: remove thy foot from evil.	Do not swerve to the right or to the left; turn your feet away from evil.
PRO	5	1	내 아들아 내 지혜에 주의하며 내 명철에 네 귀를 기울여서	My son, attend unto my wisdom, and bow thine ear to my understanding:	My son, pay attention to my wisdom; incline your ear to my insight,
PRO	5	2	근신을 지키며 네 입술로 지식을 지키도록 하라	That thou mayest regard discretion, and that thy lips may keep knowledge.	that you may maintain discretion and your lips may preserve knowledge.
PRO	5	3	대저 음녀의 입술은 꿀을 떨어뜨리며 그 입은 기름보다 미끄러우나	For the lips of a strange woman drop as an honeycomb, and her mouth is smoother than oil:	Though the lips of the forbidden woman drip honey and her speech is smoother than oil,
PRO	5	4	나중은 쑥 같이 쓰고 두 날 가진 칼 같이 날카로우며	But her end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a twoedged sword.	in the end she is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a double-edged sword.
PRO	5	5	그 발은 사지로 내려가며 그 걸음은 음부로 나아가나니	Her feet go down to death; her steps take hold on hell.	Her feet go down to death; her steps lead straight to Sheol.
PRO	5	6	그는 생명의 평탄한 길을 찾지 못하며 자기 길이 든든치 못하여 그것을 깨닫지 못하느니라	Lest thou shouldest ponder the path of life, her ways are moveable, that thou canst not know them.	She does not consider the path of life; she does not know that her ways are unstable.
PRO	5	7	그런즉 아들들아 나를 들으며 내 입의 말을 버리지 말고	Hear me now therefore, O ye children, and depart not from the words of my mouth.	So now, my sons, listen to me, and do not turn aside from the words of my mouth.
PRO	5	8	네 길을 그에게서 멀리하라 그 집 문에도 가까이 가지 말라	Remove thy way far from her, and come not nigh the door of her house:	Keep your path far from her; do not go near the door of her house,
PRO	5	9	두렵건대 네 존영이 남에게 잃어버리게 되며 네 수한이 잔포자에게 빼앗기게 될까 하노라	Lest thou give thine honour unto others, and thy years unto the cruel:	lest you concede your vigor to others, and your years to one who is cruel;
PRO	5	10	두렵건대 타인이 네 재물로 충족하게 되며 네 수고한 것이 외인의 집에 있게 될까 하노라	Lest strangers be filled with thy wealth; and thy labours be in the house of a stranger;	lest strangers feast on your wealth, and your labors enrich the house of a foreigner.
PRO	5	11	두렵건대 마지막에 이르러 네 몸, 네 육체가 쇠패할 때에 네가 한탄하여	And thou mourn at the last, when thy flesh and thy body are consumed,	At the end of your life you will groan when your flesh and your body are spent,
PRO	5	12	말하기를 내가 어찌하여 훈계를 싫어하며 내 마음이 꾸지람을 가벼이 여기고	And say, How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof;	and you will say, “How I hated discipline, and my heart despised reproof!
PRO	5	13	내 선생의 목소리를 청종치 아니하며 나를 가르치는 이에게 귀를 기울이지 아니하였던고	And have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed me!	I did not listen to the voice of my teachers or incline my ear to my mentors.
PRO	5	14	많은 무리들이 모인 중에서 모든 악에 거의 빠지게 되었었노라 하게 될까 하노라	I was almost in all evil in the midst of the congregation and assembly.	I am on the brink of utter ruin in the midst of the whole assembly.”
PRO	5	15	너는 네 우물에서 물을 마시며 네 샘에서 흐르는 물을 마시라	Drink waters out of thine own cistern, and running waters out of thine own well.	Drink water from your own cistern, and running water from your own well.
PRO	5	16	어찌하여 네 샘물을 집 밖으로 넘치게 하겠으며 네 도랑물을 거리로 흘러가게 하겠느냐	Let thy fountains be dispersed abroad, and rivers of waters in the streets.	Why should your springs flow in the streets, your streams of water in the public squares?
PRO	5	17	그 물로 네게만 있게 하고 타인으로 더불어 그것을 나누지 말라	Let them be only thine own, and not strangers’ with thee.	Let them be yours alone, never to be shared with strangers.
PRO	5	18	네 샘으로 복되게 하라 네가 젊어서 취한 아내를 즐거워하라	Let thy fountain be blessed: and rejoice with the wife of thy youth.	May your fountain be blessed, and may you rejoice in the wife of your youth:
PRO	5	19	그는 사랑스러운 암사슴 같고 아름다운 암노루 같으니 너는 그 품을 항상 족하게 여기며 그 사랑을 항상 연모하라	Let her be as the loving hind and pleasant roe; let her breasts satisfy thee at all times; and be thou ravished always with her love.	A loving doe, a graceful fawn— may her breasts satisfy you always; may you be captivated by her love forever.
PRO	5	20	내 아들아 어찌하여 음녀를 연모하겠으며 어찌하여 이방 계집의 가슴을 안겠느냐	And why wilt thou, my son, be ravished with a strange woman, and embrace the bosom of a stranger?	Why be captivated, my son, by an adulteress, or embrace the bosom of a stranger?
PRO	5	21	대저 사람의 길은 여호와의 눈 앞에 있나니 그가 그 모든 길을 평탄케 하시느니라	For the ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings.	For a man’s ways are before the eyes of the LORD, and the LORD examines all his paths.
PRO	5	22	악인은 자기의 악에 걸리며 그 죄의 줄에 매이나니	His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden with the cords of his sins.	The iniquities of a wicked man entrap him; the cords of his sin entangle him.
PRO	5	23	그는 훈계를 받지 아니함을 인하여 죽겠고 미련함이 많음을 인하여 혼미하게 되느니라	He shall die without instruction; and in the greatness of his folly he shall go astray.	He dies for lack of discipline, led astray by his own great folly.
PRO	6	1	내 아들아 네가 만일 이웃을 위하여 담보하며 타인을 위하여 보증하였으면	My son, if thou be surety for thy friend, if thou hast stricken thy hand with a stranger,	My son, if you have put up security for your neighbor, if you have struck hands in pledge with a stranger,
PRO	6	2	네 입의 말로 네가 얽혔으며 네 입의 말로 인하여 잡히게 되었느니라	Thou art snared with the words of thy mouth, thou art taken with the words of thy mouth.	if you have been trapped by the words of your lips, ensnared by the words of your mouth,
PRO	6	3	내 아들아 네가 네 이웃의 손에 빠졌은즉 이같이 하라 너는 곧 가서 겸손히 네 이웃에게 간구하여 스스로 구원하되	Do this now, my son, and deliver thyself, when thou art come into the hand of thy friend; go, humble thyself, and make sure thy friend.	then do this, my son, to free yourself, for you have fallen into your neighbor’s hands: Go, humble yourself, and press your plea with your neighbor.
PRO	6	4	네 눈으로 잠들게 하지 말며 눈꺼풀로 감기게 하지 말고	Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids.	Allow no sleep to your eyes or slumber to your eyelids.
PRO	6	5	노루가 사냥꾼의 손에서 벗어나는 것 같이 새가 그물 치는 자의 손에서 벗어나는 것 같이 스스로 구원하라	Deliver thyself as a roe from the hand of the hunter, and as a bird from the hand of the fowler.	Free yourself, like a gazelle from the hand of the hunter, like a bird from the snare of the fowler.
PRO	6	6	게으른 자여 개미에게로 가서 그 하는 것을 보고 지혜를 얻으라	Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways, and be wise:	Walk in the manner of the ant, O slacker; observe its ways and become wise.
PRO	6	7	개미는 두령도 없고 간역자도 없고 주권자도 없으되	Which having no guide, overseer, or ruler,	Without a commander, without an overseer or ruler,
PRO	6	8	먹을 것을 여름 동안에 예비하며 추수 때에 양식을 모으느니라	Provideth her meat in the summer, and gathereth her food in the harvest.	it prepares its provisions in summer; it gathers its food at harvest.
PRO	6	9	게으른 자여 네가 어느 때까지 눕겠느냐 네가 어느 때에 잠이 깨어 일어나겠느나	How long wilt thou sleep, O sluggard? when wilt thou arise out of thy sleep?	How long will you lie there, O slacker? When will you get up from your sleep?
PRO	6	10	좀더 자자, 좀더 졸자, 손을 모으고 좀더 눕자 하면	Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep:	A little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to rest,
PRO	6	11	네 빈궁이 강도 같이 오며 네 곤핍이 군사 같이 이르리라	So shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth, and thy want as an armed man.	and poverty will come upon you like a robber, and need like a bandit.
PRO	6	12	불량하고 악한 자는 그 행동에 궤휼한 입을 벌리며	A naughty person, a wicked man, walketh with a froward mouth.	A worthless person, a wicked man, walks with a perverse mouth,
PRO	6	13	눈짓을 하며 발로 뜻을 보이며 손가락질로 알게 하며	He winketh with his eyes, he speaketh with his feet, he teacheth with his fingers;	winking his eyes, speaking with his feet, and pointing with his fingers.
PRO	6	14	그 마음에 패역을 품으며 항상 악을 꾀하여 다툼을 일으키는 자라	Frowardness is in his heart, he deviseth mischief continually; he soweth discord.	With deceit in his heart he devises evil; he continually sows discord.
PRO	6	15	그러므로 그 재앙이 갑자기 임한즉 도움을 얻지 못하고 당장에 패망하리라	Therefore shall his calamity come suddenly; suddenly shall he be broken without remedy.	Therefore calamity will come upon him suddenly; in an instant he will be shattered beyond recovery.
PRO	6	16	여호와의 미워하시는 것 곧 그 마음에 싫어하시는 것이 육 칠 가지니	These six things doth the Lord hate: yea, seven are an abomination unto him:	There are six things that the LORD hates, seven that are detestable to Him:
PRO	6	17	곧 교만한 눈과 거짓된 혀와 무죄한 자의 피를 흘리는 손과	A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood,	haughty eyes, a lying tongue, hands that shed innocent blood,
PRO	6	18	악한 계교를 꾀하는 마음과 빨리 악으로 달려가는 발과	An heart that deviseth wicked imaginations, feet that be swift in running to mischief,	a heart that devises wicked schemes, feet that run swiftly to evil,
PRO	6	19	거짓을 말하는 망령된 증인과 및 형제 사이를 이간하는 자니라	A false witness that speaketh lies, and he that soweth discord among brethren.	a false witness who gives false testimony, and one who stirs up discord among brothers.
PRO	6	20	내 아들아 네 아비의 명령을 지키며 네 어미의 법을 떠나지 말고	My son, keep thy father’s commandment, and forsake not the law of thy mother:	My son, keep your father’s commandment, and do not forsake your mother’s teaching.
PRO	6	21	그것을 항상 네 마음에 새기며 네 목에 매라	Bind them continually upon thine heart, and tie them about thy neck.	Bind them always upon your heart; tie them around your neck.
PRO	6	22	그것이 너의 다닐 때에 너를 인도하며 너의 잘 때에 너를 보호하며 너의 깰 때에 너로 더불어 말하리니	When thou goest, it shall lead thee; when thou sleepest, it shall keep thee; and when thou awakest, it shall talk with thee.	When you walk, they will guide you; when you lie down, they will watch over you; when you awake, they will speak to you.
PRO	6	23	대저 명령은 등불이요 법은 빛이요 훈계의 책망은 곧 생명의 길이라	For the commandment is a lamp; and the law is light; and reproofs of instruction are the way of life:	For this commandment is a lamp, this teaching is a light, and the reproofs of discipline are the way to life,
PRO	6	24	이것이 너를 지켜서 악한 계집에게, 이방 계집의 혀로 호리는 말에 빠지지 않게 하리라	To keep thee from the evil woman, from the flattery of the tongue of a strange woman.	to keep you from the evil woman, from the smooth tongue of the adulteress.
PRO	6	25	네 마음에 그 아름다운 색을 탐하지 말며 그 눈꺼풀에 홀리지 말라	Lust not after her beauty in thine heart; neither let her take thee with her eyelids.	Do not lust in your heart for her beauty or let her captivate you with her eyes.
PRO	6	26	음녀로 인하여 사람이 한조각 떡만 남게 됨이며 음란한 계집은 귀한 생명을 사냥함이니라	For by means of a whorish woman a man is brought to a piece of bread: and the adulteress will hunt for the precious life.	For the levy of the prostitute is poverty, and the adulteress preys upon your very life.
PRO	6	27	사람이 불을 품에 품고야 어찌 그 옷이 타지 아니하겠으며	Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burned?	Can a man embrace fire and his clothes not be burned?
PRO	6	28	사람이 숯불을 밟고야 어찌 그 발이 데지 아니하겠느냐	Can one go upon hot coals, and his feet not be burned?	Can a man walk on hot coals without scorching his feet?
PRO	6	29	남의 아내와 통간하는 자도 이와 같을 것이라 무릇 그를 만지기만 하는 자도 죄 없게 되지 아니하리라	So he that goeth in to his neighbour’s wife; whosoever toucheth her shall not be innocent.	So is he who sleeps with another man’s wife; no one who touches her will go unpunished.
PRO	6	30	도적이 만일 주릴 때에 배를 채우려고 도적질하면 사람이 그를 멸시치는 아니하려니와	Men do not despise a thief, if he steal to satisfy his soul when he is hungry;	Men do not despise the thief if he steals to satisfy his hunger.
PRO	6	31	들키면 칠 배를 갚아야 하리니 심지어 자기 집에 있는 것을 다 내어 주게 되리라	But if he be found, he shall restore sevenfold; he shall give all the substance of his house.	Yet if caught, he must pay sevenfold; he must give up all the wealth of his house.
PRO	6	32	부녀와 간음하는 자는 무지한 자라 이것을 행하는 자는 자기의 영혼을 망하게 하며	But whoso committeth adultery with a woman lacketh understanding: he that doeth it destroyeth his own soul.	He who commits adultery lacks judgment; whoever does so destroys himself.
PRO	6	33	상함과 능욕을 받고 부끄러움을 씻을 수 없게 되나니	A wound and dishonour shall he get; and his reproach shall not be wiped away.	Wounds and dishonor will befall him, and his reproach will never be wiped away.
PRO	6	34	그 남편이 투기함으로 분노하여 원수를 갚는 날에 용서하지 아니하고	For jealousy is the rage of a man: therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance.	For jealousy enrages a husband, and he will show no mercy in the day of vengeance.
PRO	6	35	아무 벌금도 돌아 보지 아니하며 많은 선물을 줄지라도 듣지 아니하리라	He will not regard any ransom; neither will he rest content, though thou givest many gifts.	He will not be appeased by any ransom, or persuaded by lavish gifts.
PRO	7	1	내 아들아 내 말을 지키며 내 명령을 네게 간직하라	My son, keep my words, and lay up my commandments with thee.	My son, keep my words and treasure my commandments within you.
PRO	7	2	내 명령을 지켜서 살며 내 법을 네 눈동자처럼 지키라	Keep my commandments, and live; and my law as the apple of thine eye.	Keep my commandments and live; guard my teachings as the apple of your eye.
PRO	7	3	이것을 네 손가락에 매며 이것을 네 마음판에 새기라	Bind them upon thy fingers, write them upon the table of thine heart.	Tie them to your fingers; write them on the tablet of your heart.
PRO	7	4	지혜에게 너는 내 누이라 하며 명철에게 너는 내 친족이라 하라	Say unto wisdom, Thou art my sister; and call understanding thy kinswoman:	Say to wisdom, “You are my sister,” and call understanding your kinsman,
PRO	7	5	그리하면 이것이 너를 지켜서 음녀에게, 말로 호리는 이방 계집에게 빠지지 않게 하리라	That they may keep thee from the strange woman, from the stranger which flattereth with her words.	that they may keep you from the adulteress, from the stranger with seductive words.
PRO	7	6	내가 내 집 들창으로, 살창으로 내어다 보다가	For at the window of my house I looked through my casement,	For at the window of my house I looked through the lattice.
PRO	7	7	어리석은 자 중에, 소년 중에 한 지혜 없는 자를 보았노라	And beheld among the simple ones, I discerned among the youths, a young man void of understanding,	I saw among the simple, I noticed among the youths, a young man lacking judgment,
PRO	7	8	그가 거리를 지나 음녀의 골목 모퉁이로 가까이 하여 그 집으로 들어가는데	Passing through the street near her corner; and he went the way to her house,	crossing the street near her corner, strolling down the road to her house,
PRO	7	9	저물 때, 황혼 때, 깊은 밤 흑암 중에라	In the twilight, in the evening, in the black and dark night:	at twilight, as the day was fading into the dark of the night.
PRO	7	10	그 때에 기생의 옷을 입은 간교한 계집이 그를 맞으니	And, behold, there met him a woman with the attire of an harlot, and subtil of heart.	Then a woman came out to meet him, with the attire of a harlot and cunning of heart.
PRO	7	11	이 계집은 떠들며 완패하며 그 발이 집에 머물지 아니하여	(She is loud and stubborn; her feet abide not in her house:	She is loud and defiant; her feet do not remain at home.
PRO	7	12	어떤 때에는 거리, 어떤 때에는 광장 모퉁이, 모퉁이에 서서 사람을 기다리는 자라	Now is she without, now in the streets, and lieth in wait at every corner.)	Now in the street, now in the squares, she lurks at every corner.
PRO	7	13	그 계집이 그를 붙잡고 입을 맞추며 부끄러움을 모르는 얼굴로 말하되	So she caught him, and kissed him, and with an impudent face said unto him,	She seizes him and kisses him; she brazenly says to him:
PRO	7	14	내가 화목제를 드려서 서원한 것을 오늘날 갚았노라	I have peace offerings with me; this day have I payed my vows.	“I have made my peace offerings; today I have paid my vows.
PRO	7	15	이러므로 내가 너를 맞으려고 나와서 네 얼굴을 찾다가 너를 만났도다	Therefore came I forth to meet thee, diligently to seek thy face, and I have found thee.	So I came out to meet you; I sought you, and I have found you.
PRO	7	16	내 침상에는 화문 요와 애굽의 문채 있는 이불을 폈고	I have decked my bed with coverings of tapestry, with carved works, with fine linen of Egypt.	I have decked my bed with coverings, with colored linen from Egypt.
PRO	7	17	몰약과 침향과 계피를 뿌렸노라	I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.	I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, with aloes, and with cinnamon.
PRO	7	18	오라 우리가 아침까지 흡족하게 서로 사랑하며 사랑함으로 희락하자	Come, let us take our fill of love until the morning: let us solace ourselves with loves.	Come, let us take our fill of love till morning. Let us delight in loving caresses!
PRO	7	19	남편은 집을 떠나 먼 길을 갔는데	For the goodman is not at home, he is gone a long journey:	For my husband is not at home; he has gone on a long journey.
PRO	7	20	은 주머니를 가졌은즉 보름에나 집에 돌아오리라 하여	He hath taken a bag of money with him, and will come home at the day appointed.	He took with him a bag of money and will not return till the moon is full.”
PRO	7	21	여러가지 고운 말로 혹하게 하며 입술의 호리는 말로 꾀므로	With her much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the flattering of her lips she forced him.	With her great persuasion she entices him; with her flattering lips she lures him.
PRO	7	22	소년이 곧 그를 따랐으니 소가 푸주로 가는 것 같고 미련한 자가 벌을 받으려고 쇠사슬에 매이러 가는 것과 일반이라	He goeth after her straightway, as an ox goeth to the slaughter, or as a fool to the correction of the stocks;	He follows her on impulse, like an ox going to the slaughter, like a deer bounding into a trap,
PRO	7	23	필경은 살이 그 간을 뚫기까지에 이를 것이라 새가 빨리 그물로 들어가되 그 생명을 잃어버릴 줄을 알지 못함과 일반이니라	Till a dart strike through his liver; as a bird hasteth to the snare, and knoweth not that it is for his life.	until an arrow pierces his liver, like a bird darting into a snare— not knowing it will cost him his life.
PRO	7	24	아들들아 나를 듣고 내 입의 말에 주의하라	Hearken unto me now therefore, O ye children, and attend to the words of my mouth.	Now, my sons, listen to me, and attend to the words of my mouth.
PRO	7	25	네 마음이 음녀의 길로 치우치지 말며 그 길에 미혹지 말지어다	Let not thine heart decline to her ways, go not astray in her paths.	Do not let your heart turn aside to her ways; do not stray into her paths.
PRO	7	26	대저 그가 많은 사람을 상하여 엎드러지게 하였나니 그에게 죽은 자가 허다하니라	For she hath cast down many wounded: yea, many strong men have been slain by her.	For she has brought many down to death; her slain are many in number.
PRO	7	27	그 집은 음부의 길이라 사망의 방으로 내려가느니라	Her house is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death.	Her house is the road to Sheol, descending to the chambers of death.
PRO	8	1	지혜가 부르지 아니하느냐 명철이 소리를 높이지 아니하느냐	Doth not wisdom cry? and understanding put forth her voice?	Does not wisdom call out, and understanding raise her voice?
PRO	8	2	그가 길가의 높은 곳과 사거리에 서며	She standeth in the top of high places, by the way in the places of the paths.	On the heights overlooking the road, at the crossroads she takes her stand.
PRO	8	3	성문 곁과 문 어귀와 여러 출입하는 문에서 불러 가로되	She crieth at the gates, at the entry of the city, at the coming in at the doors.	Beside the gates to the city, at the entrances she cries out:
PRO	8	4	사람들아 내가 너희를 부르며 내가 인자들에게 소리를 높이노라	Unto you, O men, I call; and my voice is to the sons of man.	“To you, O men, I call out, and my cry is to the sons of men.
PRO	8	5	어리석은 자들아 너희는 명철할지니라 미련한 자들아 너희는 마음이 밝을지니라 너희는 들을지어다	O ye simple, understand wisdom: and, ye fools, be ye of an understanding heart.	O simple ones, learn to be shrewd; O fools, gain understanding.
PRO	8	6	내가 가장 선한 것을 말하리라 내 입술을 열어 정직을 내리라	Hear; for I will speak of excellent things; and the opening of my lips shall be right things.	Listen, for I speak of noble things, and the opening of my lips will reveal right.
PRO	8	7	내 입은 진리를 말하며 내 입술은 악을 미워하느니라	For my mouth shall speak truth; and wickedness is an abomination to my lips.	For my mouth will speak the truth, and wickedness is detestable to my lips.
PRO	8	8	내 입의 말은 다 의로운즉 그 가운데 굽은 것과 패역한 것이 없나니	All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing froward or perverse in them.	All the words of my mouth are righteous; none are crooked or perverse.
PRO	8	9	이는 다 총명 있는 자의 밝히 아는 바요 지식 얻은 자의 정직히 여기는 바니라	They are all plain to him that understandeth, and right to them that find knowledge.	They are all plain to the discerning, and upright to those who find knowledge.
PRO	8	10	너희가 은을 받지 말고 나의 훈계를 받으며 정금보다 지식을 얻으라	Receive my instruction, and not silver; and knowledge rather than choice gold.	Receive my instruction instead of silver, and knowledge rather than pure gold.
PRO	8	11	대저 지혜는 진주보다 나으므로 무릇 원하는 것을 이에 비교할 수 없음이니라	For wisdom is better than rubies; and all the things that may be desired are not to be compared to it.	For wisdom is more precious than rubies, and nothing you desire compares with her.
PRO	8	12	나 지혜는 명철로 주소를 삼으며 지식과 근신을 찾아 얻나니	I wisdom dwell with prudence, and find out knowledge of witty inventions.	I, wisdom, dwell together with prudence, and I find knowledge and discretion.
PRO	8	13	여호와를 경외하는 것은 악을 미워하는 것이라 나는 교만과 거만과 악한 행실과 패역한 입을 미워하느니라	The fear of the Lord is to hate evil: pride, and arrogancy, and the evil way, and the froward mouth, do I hate.	To fear the LORD is to hate evil; I hate arrogant pride, evil conduct, and perverse speech.
PRO	8	14	내게는 도략과 참 지식이 있으며 나는 명철이라 내게 능력이 있으므로	Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom: I am understanding; I have strength.	Counsel and sound judgment are mine; I have insight and strength.
PRO	8	15	나로 말미암아 왕들이 치리하며 방백들이 공의를 세우며	By me kings reign, and princes decree justice.	By me kings reign, and rulers enact just laws;
PRO	8	16	나로 말미암아 재상과 존귀한 자 곧 세상의 모든 재판관들이 다스리느니라	By me princes rule, and nobles, even all the judges of the earth.	By me princes rule, and all nobles who govern justly.
PRO	8	17	나를 사랑하는 자들이 나의 사랑을 입으며 나를 간절히 찾는 자가 나를 만날 것이니라	I love them that love me; and those that seek me early shall find me.	I love those who love me, and those who seek me early shall find me.
PRO	8	18	부귀가 내게 있고 장구한 재물과 의도 그러하니라	Riches and honour are with me; yea, durable riches and righteousness.	With me are riches and honor, enduring wealth and righteousness.
PRO	8	19	내 열매는 금이나 정금보다 나으며 내 소득은 천은보다 나으니라	My fruit is better than gold, yea, than fine gold; and my revenue than choice silver.	My fruit is better than gold, pure gold, and my harvest surpasses choice silver.
PRO	8	20	나는 의로운 길로 행하며 공평한 길 가운데로 다니나니	I lead in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of judgment:	I walk in the way of righteousness, along the paths of justice,
PRO	8	21	이는 나를 사랑하는 자로 재물을 얻어서 그 곳간에 채우게 하려함이니라	That I may cause those that love me to inherit substance; and I will fill their treasures.	bestowing wealth on those who love me and making their treasuries full.
PRO	8	22	여호와께서 그 조화의 시작 곧 태초에 일하시기 전에 나를 가지셨으며	The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old.	The LORD created me as His first course, before His works of old.
PRO	8	23	만세 전부터, 상고부터, 땅이 생기기 전부터 내가 세움을 입었나니	I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was.	From everlasting I was established, from the beginning, before the earth began.
PRO	8	24	아직 바다가 생기지 아니하였고 큰 샘들이 있기 전에 내가 이미났으며	When there were no depths, I was brought forth; when there were no fountains abounding with water.	When there were no watery depths, I was brought forth, when no springs were overflowing with water.
PRO	8	25	산이 세우심을 입기 전에, 언덕이 생기기 전에 내가 이미 났으니	Before the mountains were settled, before the hills was I brought forth:	Before the mountains were settled, before the hills, I was brought forth,
PRO	8	26	하나님이 아직 땅도, 들도, 세상 진토의 근원도 짓지 아니하셨을 때에라	While as yet he had not made the earth, nor the fields, nor the highest part of the dust of the world.	before He made the land or fields, or any of the dust of the earth.
PRO	8	27	그가 하늘을 지으시며 궁창으로 해면에 두르실 때에 내가 거기 있었고	When he prepared the heavens, I was there: when he set a compass upon the face of the depth:	I was there when He established the heavens, when He inscribed a circle on the face of the deep,
PRO	8	28	그가 위로 구름 하늘을 견고하게 하시며 바다의 샘들을 힘 있게 하시며	When he established the clouds above: when he strengthened the fountains of the deep:	when He established the clouds above, when the fountains of the deep gushed forth,
PRO	8	29	바다의 한계를 정하여 물로 명령을 거스리지 못하게 하시며 또 땅의 기초를 정하실 때에	When he gave to the sea his decree, that the waters should not pass his commandment: when he appointed the foundations of the earth:	when He set a boundary for the sea, so that the waters would not surpass His command, when He marked out the foundations of the earth.
PRO	8	30	내가 그 곁에 있어서 창조자가 되어 날마다 그 기뻐하신 바가 되었으며 항상 그 앞에서 즐거워하였으며	Then I was by him, as one brought up with him: and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him;	Then I was a skilled craftsman at His side, and His delight day by day, rejoicing always in His presence.
PRO	8	31	사람이 거처할 땅에서 즐거워하며 인자들을 기뻐하였었느니라	Rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth; and my delights were with the sons of men.	I was rejoicing in His whole world, delighting together in the sons of men.
PRO	8	32	아들들아 이제 내게 들으라 내 도를 지키는 자가 복이 있느니라	Now therefore hearken unto me, O ye children: for blessed are they that keep my ways.	Now therefore, my sons, listen to me, for blessed are those who keep my ways.
PRO	8	33	훈계를 들어서 지혜를 얻으라 그것을 버리지 말라	Hear instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not.	Listen to instruction and be wise; do not ignore it.
PRO	8	34	누구든지 내게 들으며 날마다 내 문 곁에서 기다리며 문설주 옆에서 기다리는 자는 복이 있나니	Blessed is the man that heareth me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors.	Blessed is the man who listens to me, watching daily at my doors, waiting at the posts of my doorway.
PRO	8	35	대저 나를 얻는 자는 생명을 얻고 여호와께 은총을 얻을 것임이니라	For whoso findeth me findeth life, and shall obtain favour of the Lord.	For whoever finds me finds life and obtains the favor of the LORD.
PRO	8	36	그러나 나를 잃는 자는 자기의 영혼을 해하는 자라 무릇 나를 미워하는 자는 사망을 사랑하느니라	But he that sinneth against me wrongeth his own soul: all they that hate me love death.	But he who fails to find me harms himself; all who hate me love death.”
PRO	9	1	지혜가 그 집을 짓고 일곱 기둥을 다듬고	Wisdom hath builded her house, she hath hewn out her seven pillars:	Wisdom has built her house; she has carved out her seven pillars.
PRO	9	2	짐승을 잡으며 포도주를 혼합하여 상을 갖추고	She hath killed her beasts; she hath mingled her wine; she hath also furnished her table.	She has prepared her meat and mixed her wine; she has also set her table.
PRO	9	3	그 여종을 보내어 성중 높은 곳에서 불러 이르기를	She hath sent forth her maidens: she crieth upon the highest places of the city,	She has sent out her maidservants; she calls out from the heights of the city.
PRO	9	4	무릇 어리석은 자는 이리로 돌이키라 또 지혜 없는 자에게 이르기를	Whoso is simple, let him turn in hither: as for him that wanteth understanding, she saith to him,	“Whoever is simple, let him turn in here!” she says to him who lacks judgment.
PRO	9	5	너는 와서 내 식물을 먹으며 내 혼합한 포도주를 마시고	Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled.	“Come, eat my bread and drink the wine I have mixed.
PRO	9	6	어리석음을 버리고 생명을 얻으라 명철의 길을 행하라 하느니라	Forsake the foolish, and live; and go in the way of understanding.	Leave your folly behind, and you will live; walk in the way of understanding.”
PRO	9	7	거만한 자를 징계하는 자는 도리어 능욕을 받고 악인을 책망하는 자는 도리어 흠을 잡히느니라	He that reproveth a scorner getteth to himself shame: and he that rebuketh a wicked man getteth himself a blot.	He who corrects a mocker brings shame on himself; he who rebukes a wicked man taints himself.
PRO	9	8	거만한 자를 책망하지 말라 그가 너를 미워할까 두려우니라 지혜있는 자를 책망하라 그가 너를 사랑하리라	Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee: rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee.	Do not rebuke a mocker, or he will hate you; rebuke a wise man, and he will love you.
PRO	9	9	지혜 있는 자에게 교훈을 더하라 그가 더욱 지혜로워질 것이요 의로운 사람을 가르치라 그의 학식이 더하리라	Give instruction to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser: teach a just man, and he will increase in learning.	Instruct a wise man, and he will be wiser still; teach a righteous man, and he will increase his learning.
PRO	9	10	여호와를 경외하는 것이 지혜의 근본이요 거룩하신 자를 아는 것이 명철이니라	The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: and the knowledge of the holy is understanding.	The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom, and knowledge of the Holy One is understanding.
PRO	9	11	나 지혜로 말미암아 네 날이 많아질 것이요 네 생명의 해가 더하리라	For by me thy days shall be multiplied, and the years of thy life shall be increased.	For through wisdom your days will be multiplied, and years will be added to your life.
PRO	9	12	네가 만일 지혜로우면 그 지혜가 네게 유익할 것이나 네가 만일 거만하면 너 홀로 해를 당하리라	If thou be wise, thou shalt be wise for thyself: but if thou scornest, thou alone shalt bear it.	If you are wise, you are wise to your own advantage; but if you scoff, you alone will bear the consequences.
PRO	9	13	미련한 계집이 떠들며 어리석어서 아무 것도 알지 못하고	A foolish woman is clamorous: she is simple, and knoweth nothing.	The woman named Folly is loud; she is naive and knows nothing.
PRO	9	14	자기 집 문에 앉으며 성읍 높은 곳에 있는 자리에 앉아서	For she sitteth at the door of her house, on a seat in the high places of the city,	She sits at the door of her house, on a seat in the heights of the city,
PRO	9	15	자기 길을 바로 가는 행객을 불러 이르되	To call passengers who go right on their ways:	calling out to those who pass by, who make their paths straight.
PRO	9	16	무릇 어리석은 자는 이리로 돌이키라 또 지혜 없는 자에게 이르기를	Whoso is simple, let him turn in hither: and as for him that wanteth understanding, she saith to him,	“Whoever is simple, let him turn in here!” she says to him who lacks judgment.
PRO	9	17	도적질한 물이 달고 몰래 먹는 떡이 맛이 있다 하는도다	Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant.	“Stolen water is sweet, and bread eaten in secret is tasty!”
PRO	9	18	오직 그 어리석은 자는 죽은 자가 그의 곳에 있는 것과 그의 객들이 음부 깊은 곳에 있는 것을 알지 못하느니라	But he knoweth not that the dead are there; and that her guests are in the depths of hell.	But they do not know that the dead are there, that her guests are in the depths of Sheol.
PRO	10	1	솔로몬의 잠언이라 지혜로운 아들은 아비로 기쁘게 하거니와 미련한 아들은 어미의 근심이니라	The proverbs of Solomon. A wise son maketh a glad father: but a foolish son is the heaviness of his mother.	The proverbs of Solomon: A wise son brings joy to his father, but a foolish son grief to his mother.
PRO	10	2	불의의 재물은 무익하여도 의리는 죽음에서 건지느니라	Treasures of wickedness profit nothing: but righteousness delivereth from death.	Ill-gotten treasures profit nothing, but righteousness brings deliverance from death.
PRO	10	3	여호와께서 의인의 영혼은 주리지 않게 하시나 악인의 소욕은 물리치시느니라	The Lord will not suffer the soul of the righteous to famish: but he casteth away the substance of the wicked.	The LORD does not let the righteous go hungry, but He denies the craving of the wicked.
PRO	10	4	손을 게으르게 놀리는 자는 가난하게 되고 손이 부지런한 자는 부하게 되느니라	He becometh poor that dealeth with a slack hand: but the hand of the diligent maketh rich.	Idle hands make one poor, but diligent hands bring wealth.
PRO	10	5	여름에 거두는 자는 지혜로운 아들이나 추수 때에 자는 자는 부끄러움을 끼치는 아들이니라	He that gathereth in summer is a wise son: but he that sleepeth in harvest is a son that causeth shame.	He who gathers in summer is a wise son, but he who sleeps during harvest is a disgraceful son.
PRO	10	6	의인의 머리에는 복이 임하거늘 악인의 입은 독을 머금었느니라	Blessings are upon the head of the just: but violence covereth the mouth of the wicked.	Blessings are on the head of the righteous, but the mouth of the wicked conceals violence.
PRO	10	7	의인을 기념할 때에는 칭찬하거니와 악인의 이름은 썩으리라	The memory of the just is blessed: but the name of the wicked shall rot.	The memory of the righteous is a blessing, but the name of the wicked will rot.
PRO	10	8	마음이 지혜로운 자는 명령을 받거니와 입이 미련한 자는 패망하리라	The wise in heart will receive commandments: but a prating fool shall fall.	A wise heart will receive commandments, but foolish lips will come to ruin.
PRO	10	9	바른 길로 행하는 자는 걸음이 평안하려니와 굽은 길로 행하는 자는 드러나리라	He that walketh uprightly walketh surely: but he that perverteth his ways shall be known.	He who walks in integrity walks securely, but he who perverts his ways will be found out.
PRO	10	10	눈짓하는 자는 근심을 끼치고 입이 미련한 자는 패망하느니라	He that winketh with the eye causeth sorrow: but a prating fool shall fall.	He who winks the eye causes grief, and foolish lips will come to ruin.
PRO	10	11	의인의 입은 생명의 샘이라도 악인의 입은 독을 머금었느니라	The mouth of a righteous man is a well of life: but violence covereth the mouth of the wicked.	The mouth of the righteous is a fountain of life, but the mouth of the wicked conceals violence.
PRO	10	12	미움은 다툼을 일으켜도 사랑은 모든 허물을 가리우느니라	Hatred stirreth up strifes: but love covereth all sins.	Hatred stirs up dissension, but love covers all transgressions.
PRO	10	13	명철한 자의 입술에는 지혜가 있어도 지혜없는 자의 등을 위하여는 채찍이 있느니라	In the lips of him that hath understanding wisdom is found: but a rod is for the back of him that is void of understanding.	Wisdom is found on the lips of the discerning, but a rod is for the back of him who lacks judgment.
PRO	10	14	지혜로운 자는 지식을 간직하거니와 미련한 자의 입은 멸망에 가까우니라	Wise men lay up knowledge: but the mouth of the foolish is near destruction.	The wise store up knowledge, but the mouth of the fool invites destruction.
PRO	10	15	부자의 재물은 그의 견고한 성이요 가난한 자의 궁핍은 그의 패망이니라	The rich man’s wealth is his strong city: the destruction of the poor is their poverty.	The wealth of the rich man is his fortified city, but poverty is the ruin of the poor.
PRO	10	16	의인의 수고는 생명에 이르고 악인의 소득은 죄에 이르느니라	The labour of the righteous tendeth to life: the fruit of the wicked to sin.	The labor of the righteous leads to life, but the gain of the wicked brings punishment.
PRO	10	17	훈계를 지키는 자는 생명길로 행하여도 징계를 버리는 자는 그릇 가느니라	He is in the way of life that keepeth instruction: but he that refuseth reproof erreth.	Whoever heeds instruction is on the path to life, but he who ignores reproof goes astray.
PRO	10	18	미워함을 감추는 자는 거짓의 입술을 가진 자요 참소하는 자는 미련한 자니라	He that hideth hatred with lying lips, and he that uttereth a slander, is a fool.	The one who conceals hatred has lying lips, and whoever spreads slander is a fool.
PRO	10	19	말이 많으면 허물을 면키 어려우나 그 입술을 제어하는 자는 지혜가 있느니라	In the multitude of words there wanteth not sin: but he that refraineth his lips is wise.	When words are many, sin is unavoidable, but he who restrains his lips is wise.
PRO	10	20	의인의 혀는 천은과 같거니와 악인의 마음은 가치가 적으니라	The tongue of the just is as choice silver: the heart of the wicked is little worth.	The tongue of the righteous is choice silver, but the heart of the wicked has little worth.
PRO	10	21	의인의 입술은 여러 사람을 교육하나 미련한 자는 지식이 없으므로 죽느니라	The lips of the righteous feed many: but fools die for want of wisdom.	The lips of the righteous feed many, but fools die for lack of judgment.
PRO	10	22	여호와께서 복을 주시므로 사람으로 부하게 하시고 근심을 겸하여 주지 아니하시느니라	The blessing of the Lord, it maketh rich, and he addeth no sorrow with it.	The blessing of the LORD enriches, and He adds no sorrow to it.
PRO	10	23	미련한 자는 행악으로 낙을 삼는 것 같이 명철한 자는 지혜로 낙을 삼느니라	It is as sport to a fool to do mischief: but a man of understanding hath wisdom.	The fool delights in shameful conduct, but a man of understanding has wisdom.
PRO	10	24	악인에게는 그의 두려워하는 것이 임하거니와 의인은 그 원하는 것이 이루어지느니라	The fear of the wicked, it shall come upon him: but the desire of the righteous shall be granted.	What the wicked man dreads will overtake him, but the desire of the righteous will be granted.
PRO	10	25	회리바람이 지나가면 악인은 없어져도 의인은 영원한 기초 같으니라	As the whirlwind passeth, so is the wicked no more: but the righteous is an everlasting foundation.	When the whirlwind passes, the wicked are no more, but the righteous are secure forever.
PRO	10	26	게으른 자는 그 부리는 사람에게 마치 이에 초 같고 눈에 연기 같으니라	As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke to the eyes, so is the sluggard to them that send him.	Like vinegar to the teeth and smoke to the eyes, so is the slacker to those who send him.
PRO	10	27	여호와를 경외하면 장수하느니라 그러나 악인의 연세는 짧아지느니라	The fear of the Lord prolongeth days: but the years of the wicked shall be shortened.	The fear of the LORD prolongs life, but the years of the wicked will be cut short.
PRO	10	28	의인의 소망은 즐거움을 이루어도 악인의 소망은 끊어지느니라	The hope of the righteous shall be gladness: but the expectation of the wicked shall perish.	The hope of the righteous is joy, but the expectations of the wicked will perish.
PRO	10	29	여호와의 도가 정직한 자에게는 산성이요 행악하는 자에게는 멸망이니라	The way of the Lord is strength to the upright: but destruction shall be to the workers of iniquity.	The way of the LORD is a refuge to the upright, but destruction awaits those who do evil.
PRO	10	30	의인은 영영히 이동되지 아니하여도 악인은 땅에 거하지 못하게 되느니라	The righteous shall never be removed: but the wicked shall not inhabit the earth.	The righteous will never be shaken, but the wicked will not inhabit the land.
PRO	10	31	의인의 입은 지혜를 내어도 패역한 혀는 베임을 당할 것이니라	The mouth of the just bringeth forth wisdom: but the froward tongue shall be cut out.	The mouth of the righteous brings forth wisdom, but a perverse tongue will be cut out.
PRO	10	32	의인의 입술은 기쁘게 할 것을 알거늘 악인의 입은 패역을 말하느니라	The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable: but the mouth of the wicked speaketh frowardness.	The lips of the righteous know what is fitting, but the mouth of the wicked is perverse.
PRO	11	1	속이는 저울은 여호와께서 미워하셔도 공평한 추는 그가 기뻐하시느니라	A false balance is abomination to the Lord: but a just weight is his delight.	Dishonest scales are an abomination to the LORD, but an accurate weight is His delight.
PRO	11	2	교만이 오면 욕도 오거니와 겸손한 자에게는 지혜가 있느니라	When pride cometh, then cometh shame: but with the lowly is wisdom.	When pride comes, disgrace follows, but with humility comes wisdom.
PRO	11	3	정직한 자의 성실은 자기를 인도하거니와 사특한 자의 패역은 자기를 망케 하느니라	The integrity of the upright shall guide them: but the perverseness of transgressors shall destroy them.	The integrity of the upright guides them, but the perversity of the faithless destroys them.
PRO	11	4	재물은 진노하시는 날에 무익하나 의리는 죽음을 면케 하느니라	Riches profit not in the day of wrath: but righteousness delivereth from death.	Riches are worthless in the day of wrath, but righteousness brings deliverance from death.
PRO	11	5	완전한 자는 그 의로 인하여 그 길이 곧게 되려니와 악한 자는 그 악을 인하여 넘어지리라	The righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way: but the wicked shall fall by his own wickedness.	The righteousness of the blameless directs their path, but the wicked fall by their own wickedness.
PRO	11	6	정직한 자는 그 의로 인하여 구원을 얻으려니와 사특한 자는 자기의 악에 잡히리라	The righteousness of the upright shall deliver them: but transgressors shall be taken in their own naughtiness.	The righteousness of the upright delivers them, but the faithless are trapped by their own desires.
PRO	11	7	악인은 죽을 때에 그 소망이 끊어지나니 불의의 소망이 없어지느니라	When a wicked man dieth, his expectation shall perish: and the hope of unjust men perisheth.	When the wicked man dies, his hope perishes, and the hope of his strength vanishes.
PRO	11	8	의인은 환난에서 구원을 얻고 악인은 와서 그를 대신하느니라	The righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked cometh in his stead.	The righteous man is delivered from trouble; in his place the wicked man goes in.
PRO	11	9	사특한 자는 입으로 그 이웃을 망하게 하여도 의인은 그 지식으로 말미암아 구원을 얻느니라	An hypocrite with his mouth destroyeth his neighbour: but through knowledge shall the just be delivered.	With his mouth the ungodly man destroys his neighbor, but through knowledge the righteous are rescued.
PRO	11	10	의인이 형통하면 성읍이 즐거워하고 악인이 패망하면 기뻐 외치느니라	When it goeth well with the righteous, the city rejoiceth: and when the wicked perish, there is shouting.	When the righteous thrive, the city rejoices, and when the wicked perish, there are shouts of joy.
PRO	11	11	성읍은 정직한 자의 축원을 인하여 진흥하고 악한 자의 입을 인하여 무너지느니라	By the blessing of the upright the city is exalted: but it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked.	By the blessing of the upright a city is built up, but by the mouth of the wicked it is torn down.
PRO	11	12	지혜 없는 자는 그 이웃을 멸시하나 명철한 자는 잠잠하느니라	He that is void of wisdom despiseth his neighbour: but a man of understanding holdeth his peace.	Whoever shows contempt for his neighbor lacks judgment, but a man of understanding remains silent.
PRO	11	13	두루 다니며 한담하는 자는 남의 비밀을 누설하나 마음이 신실한 자는 그런 것을 숨기느니라	A talebearer revealeth secrets: but he that is of a faithful spirit concealeth the matter.	A gossip reveals a secret, but a trustworthy person keeps a confidence.
PRO	11	14	도략이 없으면 백성이 망하여도 모사가 많으면 평안을 누리느니라	Where no counsel is, the people fall: but in the multitude of counsellors there is safety.	For lack of guidance, a nation falls, but with many counselors comes deliverance.
PRO	11	15	타인을 위하여 보증이 되는 자는 손해를 당하여도 보증이 되기를 싫어하는 자는 평안하니라	He that is surety for a stranger shall smart for it: and he that hateth suretiship is sure.	He who puts up security for a stranger will surely suffer, but the one who hates indebtedness is secure.
PRO	11	16	유덕한 여자는 존영을 얻고 근면한 남자는 재물을 얻느니라	A gracious woman retaineth honour: and strong men retain riches.	A gracious woman attains honor, but ruthless men gain only wealth.
PRO	11	17	인자한 자는 자기의 영혼을 이롭게 하고 잔인한 자는 자기의 몸을 해롭게 하느니라	The merciful man doeth good to his own soul: but he that is cruel troubleth his own flesh.	A kind man benefits himself, but a cruel man brings trouble on himself.
PRO	11	18	악인의 삯은 허무하되 의를 뿌린 자의 상은 확실하니라	The wicked worketh a deceitful work: but to him that soweth righteousness shall be a sure reward.	The wicked man earns an empty wage, but he who sows righteousness reaps a true reward.
PRO	11	19	의를 굳게 지키는 자는 생명에 이르고 악을 따르는 자는 사망에 이르느니라	As righteousness tendeth to life: so he that pursueth evil pursueth it to his own death.	Genuine righteousness leads to life, but the pursuit of evil brings death.
PRO	11	20	마음이 패려한 자는 여호와의 미움을 받아도 행위가 온전한 자는 그의 기뻐하심을 받느니라	They that are of a froward heart are abomination to the Lord: but such as are upright in their way are his delight.	The perverse in heart are an abomination to the LORD, but the blameless in their walk are His delight.
PRO	11	21	악인은 피차 손을 잡을지라도 벌을 면치 못할 것이나 의인의 자손은 구원을 얻으리라	Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished: but the seed of the righteous shall be delivered.	Be assured that the wicked will not go unpunished, but the offspring of the righteous will escape.
PRO	11	22	아름다운 여인이 삼가지 아니하는 것은 마치 돼지 코에 금고리 같으니라	As a jewel of gold in a swine’s snout, so is a fair woman which is without discretion.	Like a gold ring in a pig’s snout is a beautiful woman who lacks discretion.
PRO	11	23	의인의 소원은 오직 선하나 악인의 소망은 진노를 이루느니라	The desire of the righteous is only good: but the expectation of the wicked is wrath.	The desire of the righteous leads only to good, but the hope of the wicked brings wrath.
PRO	11	24	흩어 구제하여도 더욱 부하게 되는 일이 있나니 과도히 아껴도 가난하게 될 뿐이니라	There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth; and there is that withholdeth more than is meet, but it tendeth to poverty.	One gives freely, yet gains even more; another withholds what is right, only to become poor.
PRO	11	25	구제를 좋아하는 자는 풍족하여질 것이요 남을 윤택하게 하는 자는 윤택하여지리라	The liberal soul shall be made fat: and he that watereth shall be watered also himself.	A generous soul will prosper, and he who refreshes others will himself be refreshed.
PRO	11	26	곡식을 내지 아니하는 자는 백성에게 저주를 받을 것이나 파는 자는 그 머리에 복이 임하리라	He that withholdeth corn, the people shall curse him: but blessing shall be upon the head of him that selleth it.	The people will curse the hoarder of grain, but blessing will crown the one who sells it.
PRO	11	27	선을 간절히 구하는 자는 은총을 얻으려니와 악을 더듬어 찾는 자에게는 악이 임하리라	He that diligently seeketh good procureth favour: but he that seeketh mischief, it shall come unto him.	He who searches out good finds favor, but evil will come to him who seeks it.
PRO	11	28	자기의 재물을 의지하는 자는 패망하려니와 의인은 푸른 잎사귀 같아서 번성하리라	He that trusteth in his riches shall fall: but the righteous shall flourish as a branch.	He who trusts in his riches will fall, but the righteous will thrive like foliage.
PRO	11	29	자기 집을 해롭게 하는 자의 소득은 바람이라 미련한 자는 마음이 지혜로운 자의 종이 되리라	He that troubleth his own house shall inherit the wind: and the fool shall be servant to the wise of heart.	He who brings trouble on his house will inherit the wind, and the fool will be servant to the wise of heart.
PRO	11	30	의인의 열매는 생명나무라 지혜로운 자는 사람을 얻느니라	The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life; and he that winneth souls is wise.	The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life, and he who wins souls is wise.
PRO	11	31	보라 의인이라도 이 세상에서 보응을 받겠거든 하물며 악인과 죄인이리요	Behold, the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth: much more the wicked and the sinner.	If the righteous receive their due on earth, how much more the ungodly and the sinner!
PRO	12	1	훈계를 좋아하는 자는 지식을 좋아하나니 징계를 싫어하는 자는 짐승과 같으니라	Whoso loveth instruction loveth knowledge: but he that hateth reproof is brutish.	Whoever loves discipline loves knowledge, but he who hates correction is stupid.
PRO	12	2	선인은 여호와께 은총을 받으려니와 악을 꾀하는 자는 정죄하심을 받으리라	A good man obtaineth favour of the Lord: but a man of wicked devices will he condemn.	The good man obtains favor from the LORD, but the LORD condemns a man who devises evil.
PRO	12	3	사람이 악으로 굳게 서지 못하나니 의인의 뿌리는 움직이지 아니하느니라	A man shall not be established by wickedness: but the root of the righteous shall not be moved.	A man cannot be established through wickedness, but the righteous cannot be uprooted.
PRO	12	4	어진 여인은 그 지아비의 면류관이나 욕을 끼치는 여인은 그 지아비로 뼈가 썩음 같게 하느니라	A virtuous woman is a crown to her husband: but she that maketh ashamed is as rottenness in his bones.	A wife of noble character is her husband’s crown, but she who causes shame is like decay in his bones.
PRO	12	5	의인의 생각은 공직하여도 악인의 도모는 궤휼이니라	The thoughts of the righteous are right: but the counsels of the wicked are deceit.	The plans of the righteous are just, but the counsel of the wicked leads to deceit.
PRO	12	6	악인의 말은 사람을 엿보아 피를 흘리자 하는 것이어니와 정직한 자의 입은 사람을 구원하느니라	The words of the wicked are to lie in wait for blood: but the mouth of the upright shall deliver them.	The words of the wicked lie in wait for blood, but the speech of the upright rescues them.
PRO	12	7	악인은 엎드러져서 소멸되려니와 의인의 집은 서 있으리라	The wicked are overthrown, and are not: but the house of the righteous shall stand.	The wicked are overthrown and perish, but the house of the righteous will stand.
PRO	12	8	사람은 그 지혜대로 칭찬을 받으려니와 마음이 패려한 자는 멸시를 받으리라	A man shall be commended according to his wisdom: but he that is of a perverse heart shall be despised.	A man is praised according to his wisdom, but a twisted mind is despised.
PRO	12	9	비천히 여김을 받을지라도 종을 부리는 자는 스스로 높은 체 하고도 음식이 핍절한 자보다 나으니라	He that is despised, and hath a servant, is better than he that honoureth himself, and lacketh bread.	Better to be lightly esteemed yet have a servant, than to be self-important but lack food.
PRO	12	10	의인은 그 육축의 생명을 돌아보나 악인의 긍휼은 잔인이니라	A righteous man regardeth the life of his beast: but the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel.	A righteous man regards the life of his animal, but the tender mercies of the wicked are only cruelty.
PRO	12	11	자기의 토지를 경작하는 자는 먹을 것이 많거니와 방탕한 것을 따르는 자는 지혜가 없느니라	He that tilleth his land shall be satisfied with bread: but he that followeth vain persons is void of understanding.	The one who works his land will have plenty of food, but whoever chases fantasies lacks judgment.
PRO	12	12	악인은 불의의 이를 탐하나 의인은 그 뿌리로 말미암아 결실하느니라	The wicked desireth the net of evil men: but the root of the righteous yieldeth fruit.	The wicked desire the plunder of evil men, but the root of the righteous flourishes.
PRO	12	13	악인은 입술의 허물로 인하여 그물에 걸려도 의인은 환난에서 벗어나느니라	The wicked is snared by the transgression of his lips: but the just shall come out of trouble.	An evil man is trapped by his rebellious speech, but a righteous man escapes from trouble.
PRO	12	14	사람은 입의 열매로 인하여 복록에 족하며 그 손의 행하는 대로 자기가 받느니라	A man shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of his mouth: and the recompence of a man’s hands shall be rendered unto him.	By fruitful speech a man is filled with good things, and the work of his hands returns to him.
PRO	12	15	미련한 자는 자기 행위를 바른 줄로 여기나 지혜로운 자는 권고를 듣느니라	The way of a fool is right in his own eyes: but he that hearkeneth unto counsel is wise.	The way of a fool is right in his own eyes, but a wise man listens to counsel.
PRO	12	16	미련한 자는 분노를 당장에 나타내거니와 슬기로운 자는 수욕을 참느니라	A fool’s wrath is presently known: but a prudent man covereth shame.	A fool’s anger is known at once, but a prudent man overlooks an insult.
PRO	12	17	진리를 말하는 자는 의를 나타내어도 거짓 증인은 궤휼을 말하느니라	He that speaketh truth sheweth forth righteousness: but a false witness deceit.	He who speaks the truth declares what is right, but a false witness speaks deceit.
PRO	12	18	혹은 칼로 찌름 같이 함부로 말하거니와 지혜로운 자의 혀는 양약 같으니라	There is that speaketh like the piercings of a sword: but the tongue of the wise is health.	Speaking rashly is like a piercing sword, but the tongue of the wise brings healing.
PRO	12	19	진실한 입술은 영원히 보존되거니와 거짓 혀는 눈 깜짝일 동안만 있을 뿐이니라	The lip of truth shall be established for ever: but a lying tongue is but for a moment.	Truthful lips endure forever, but a lying tongue lasts only a moment.
PRO	12	20	악을 꾀하는 자의 마음에는 궤휼이 있고 화평을 논하는 자에게는 희락이 있느니라	Deceit is in the heart of them that imagine evil: but to the counsellors of peace is joy.	Deceit is in the hearts of those who devise evil, but the counselors of peace have joy.
PRO	12	21	의인에게는 아무 재앙도 임하지 아니하려니와 악인에게는 앙화가 가득하리라	There shall no evil happen to the just: but the wicked shall be filled with mischief.	No harm befalls the righteous, but the wicked are filled with trouble.
PRO	12	22	거짓 입술은 여호와께 미움을 받아도 진실히 행하는 자는 그의 기뻐하심을 받느니라	Lying lips are abomination to the Lord: but they that deal truly are his delight.	Lying lips are detestable to the LORD, but those who deal faithfully are His delight.
PRO	12	23	슬기로운 자는 지식을 감추어 두어도 미련한 자의 마음은 미련한 것을 전파하느니라	A prudent man concealeth knowledge: but the heart of fools proclaimeth foolishness.	A shrewd man keeps his knowledge to himself, but a foolish heart proclaims its folly.
PRO	12	24	부지런한 자의 손은 사람을 다스리게 되어도 게으른 자는 부림을 받느니라	The hand of the diligent shall bear rule: but the slothful shall be under tribute.	The hand of the diligent will rule, but laziness ends in forced labor.
PRO	12	25	근심이 사람의 마음에 있으면 그것으로 번뇌케 하나 선한 말은 그것을 즐겁게 하느니라	Heaviness in the heart of man maketh it stoop: but a good word maketh it glad.	Anxiety weighs down the heart of a man, but a good word cheers it up.
PRO	12	26	의인은 그 이웃의 인도자가 되나 악인의 소행은 자기를 미혹하게 하느니라	The righteous is more excellent than his neighbour: but the way of the wicked seduceth them.	A righteous man is cautious in friendship, but the ways of the wicked lead them astray.
PRO	12	27	게으른 자는 그 잡을 것도 사냥하지 아니하나니 사람의 부귀는 부지런한 것이니라	The slothful man roasteth not that which he took in hunting: but the substance of a diligent man is precious.	A lazy man does not roast his game, but a diligent man prizes his possession.
PRO	12	28	의로운 길에 생명이 있나니 그 길에는 사망이 없느니라	In the way of righteousness is life; and in the pathway thereof there is no death.	There is life in the path of righteousness, but another path leads to death.
PRO	13	1	지혜로운 아들은 아비의 훈계를 들으나 거만한 자는 꾸지람을 즐겨 듣지 아니하느니라	A wise son heareth his father’s instruction: but a scorner heareth not rebuke.	A wise son heeds his father’s discipline, but a mocker does not listen to rebuke.
PRO	13	2	사람은 입의 열매로 인하여 복록을 누리거니와 마음이 궤사한 자는 강포를 당하느니라	A man shall eat good by the fruit of his mouth: but the soul of the transgressors shall eat violence.	From the fruit of his lips a man enjoys good things, but the desire of the faithless is violence.
PRO	13	3	입을 지키는 자는 그 생명을 보전하나 입술을 크게 벌리는 자에게는 멸망이 오느니라	He that keepeth his mouth keepeth his life: but he that openeth wide his lips shall have destruction.	He who guards his mouth protects his life, but the one who opens his lips invites his own ruin.
PRO	13	4	게으른 자는 마음으로 원하여도 얻지 못하나 부지런한 자의 마음은 풍족함을 얻느니라	The soul of the sluggard desireth, and hath nothing: but the soul of the diligent shall be made fat.	The slacker craves yet has nothing, but the soul of the diligent is fully satisfied.
PRO	13	5	의인은 거짓말을 미워하나 악인은 행위가 흉악하여 부끄러운 데 이르느니라	A righteous man hateth lying: but a wicked man is loathsome, and cometh to shame.	The righteous hate falsehood, but the wicked bring shame and disgrace.
PRO	13	6	의는 행실이 정직한 자를 보호하고 악은 죄인을 패망케 하느니라	Righteousness keepeth him that is upright in the way: but wickedness overthroweth the sinner.	Righteousness guards the man of integrity, but wickedness undermines the sinner.
PRO	13	7	스스로 부한 체 하여도 아무 것도 없는 자가 있고 스스로 가난한 체 하여도 재물이 많은 자가 있느니라	There is that maketh himself rich, yet hath nothing: there is that maketh himself poor, yet hath great riches.	One pretends to be rich, but has nothing; another pretends to be poor, yet has great wealth.
PRO	13	8	사람의 재물이 그 생명을 속할 수는 있으나 가난한 자는 협박을 받을 일이 없느니라	The ransom of a man’s life are his riches: but the poor heareth not rebuke.	Riches may ransom a man’s life, but a poor man hears no threat.
PRO	13	9	의인의 빛은 환하게 빛나고 악인의 등불은 꺼지느니라	The light of the righteous rejoiceth: but the lamp of the wicked shall be put out.	The light of the righteous shines brightly, but the lamp of the wicked is extinguished.
PRO	13	10	교만에서는 다툼만 일어날 뿐이라 권면을 듣는 자는 지혜가 있느니라 망령되이 얻은 재물은 줄어가고 손으로 모은 것은 늘어가느니라	Only by pride cometh contention: but with the well advised is wisdom.	Arrogance leads only to strife, but wisdom is with the well-advised.
PRO	13	11	망령되이 얻은 재물은 줄어가고 손으로 모은 것은 늘어가느니라	Wealth gotten by vanity shall be diminished: but he that gathereth by labour shall increase.	Dishonest wealth will dwindle, but what is earned through hard work will be multiplied.
PRO	13	12	소망이 더디 이루게 되면 그것이 마음을 상하게 하나니 소원이 이루는 것은 곧 생명나무니라	Hope deferred maketh the heart sick: but when the desire cometh, it is a tree of life.	Hope deferred makes the heart sick, but desire fulfilled is a tree of life.
PRO	13	13	말씀을 멸시하는 자는 패망을 이루고 계명을 두려워하는 자는 상을 얻느니라	Whoso despiseth the word shall be destroyed: but he that feareth the commandment shall be rewarded.	He who despises instruction will pay the penalty, but the one who respects a command will be rewarded.
PRO	13	14	지혜 있는 자의 교훈은 생명의 샘이라 사람으로 사망의 그물을 벗어나게 하느니라	The law of the wise is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death.	The teaching of the wise is a fountain of life, turning one from the snares of death.
PRO	13	15	선한 지혜는 은혜를 베푸나 궤사한 자의 길은 험하니라	Good understanding giveth favour: but the way of transgressors is hard.	Good understanding wins favor, but the way of the faithless is difficult.
PRO	13	16	무릇 슬기로운 자는 지식으로 행하여도 미련한 자는 자기의 미련한 것을 나타내느니라	Every prudent man dealeth with knowledge: but a fool layeth open his folly.	Every prudent man acts with knowledge, but a fool displays his folly.
PRO	13	17	악한 사자는 재앙에 빠져도 충성된 사신은 양약이 되느니라	A wicked messenger falleth into mischief: but a faithful ambassador is health.	A wicked messenger falls into trouble, but a faithful envoy brings healing.
PRO	13	18	훈계를 저버리는 자에게는 궁핍과 수욕이 이르거니와 경계를 지키는 자는 존영을 얻느니라	Poverty and shame shall be to him that refuseth instruction: but he that regardeth reproof shall be honoured.	Poverty and shame come to him who ignores discipline, but whoever heeds correction is honored.
PRO	13	19	소원을 성취하면 마음에 달아도 미련한 자는 악에서 떠나기를 싫어하느니라	The desire accomplished is sweet to the soul: but it is abomination to fools to depart from evil.	Desire fulfilled is sweet to the soul, but turning from evil is detestable to fools.
PRO	13	20	지혜로운 자와 동행하면 지혜를 얻고 미련한 자와 사귀면 해를 받느니라	He that walketh with wise men shall be wise: but a companion of fools shall be destroyed.	He who walks with the wise will become wise, but the companion of fools will be destroyed.
PRO	13	21	재앙은 죄인을 따르고 선한 보응은 의인에게 이르느니라	Evil pursueth sinners: but to the righteous good shall be repayed.	Disaster pursues sinners, but prosperity is the reward of the righteous.
PRO	13	22	선인은 그 산업을 자자 손손에게 끼쳐도 죄인의 재물은 의인을 위하여 쌓이느니라	A good man leaveth an inheritance to his children’s children: and the wealth of the sinner is laid up for the just.	A good man leaves an inheritance to his children’s children, but the sinner’s wealth is passed to the righteous.
PRO	13	23	가난한 자는 밭을 경작하므로 양식이 많아지거늘 혹 불의로 인하여 가산을 탕패하는 자가 있느니라	Much food is in the tillage of the poor: but there is that is destroyed for want of judgment.	Abundant food is in the fallow ground of the poor, but without justice it is swept away.
PRO	13	24	초달을 차마 못하는 자는 그 자식을 미워함이라 자식을 사랑하는 자는 근실히 징계하느니라	He that spareth his rod hateth his son: but he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes.	He who spares the rod hates his son, but he who loves him disciplines him diligently.
PRO	13	25	의인은 포식하여도 악인의 배는 주리느니라	The righteous eateth to the satisfying of his soul: but the belly of the wicked shall want.	A righteous man eats to his heart’s content, but the stomach of the wicked is empty.
PRO	14	1	무릇 지혜로운 여인은 그 집을 세우되 미련한 여인은 자기 손으로 그것을 허느니라	Every wise woman buildeth her house: but the foolish plucketh it down with her hands.	Every wise woman builds her house, but a foolish one tears it down with her own hands.
PRO	14	2	정직하게 행하는 자는 여호와를 경외하여도 패역하게 행하는 자는 여호와를 경멸히 여기느니라	He that walketh in his uprightness feareth the Lord: but he that is perverse in his ways despiseth him.	He who walks in uprightness fears the LORD, but the one who is devious in his ways despises Him.
PRO	14	3	미련한 자는 교만하여 입으로 매를 자청하고 지혜로운 자는 입술로 스스로 보전하느니라	In the mouth of the foolish is a rod of pride: but the lips of the wise shall preserve them.	The proud speech of a fool brings a rod to his back, but the lips of the wise protect them.
PRO	14	4	소가 없으면 구유는 깨끗하려니와 소의 힘으로 얻는 것이 많으니라	Where no oxen are, the crib is clean: but much increase is by the strength of the ox.	Where there are no oxen, the manger is empty, but an abundant harvest comes through the strength of the ox.
PRO	14	5	신실한 증인은 거짓말을 아니하여도 거짓 증인은 거짓말을 뱉느니라	A faithful witness will not lie: but a false witness will utter lies.	An honest witness does not deceive, but a dishonest witness pours forth lies.
PRO	14	6	거만한 자는 지혜를 구하여도 얻지 못하거니와 명철한 자는 지식 얻기가 쉬우니라	A scorner seeketh wisdom, and findeth it not: but knowledge is easy unto him that understandeth.	A mocker seeks wisdom and finds none, but knowledge comes easily to the discerning.
PRO	14	7	너는 미련한 자의 앞을 떠나라 그 입술에 지식 있음을 보지 못함이니라	Go from the presence of a foolish man, when thou perceivest not in him the lips of knowledge.	Stay away from a foolish man; you will gain no knowledge from his speech.
PRO	14	8	슬기로운 자의 지혜는 자기의 길을 아는 것이라도 미련한 자의 어리석음은 속이는 것이니라	The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way: but the folly of fools is deceit.	The wisdom of the prudent is to discern his way, but the folly of fools deceives them.
PRO	14	9	미련한 자는 죄를 심상히 여겨도 정직한 자 중에는 은혜가 있느니라	Fools make a mock at sin: but among the righteous there is favour.	Fools mock the making of amends, but goodwill is found among the upright.
PRO	14	10	마음의 고통은 자기가 알고 마음의 즐거움도 타인이 참예하지 못하느니라	The heart knoweth his own bitterness; and a stranger doth not intermeddle with his joy.	The heart knows its own bitterness, and no stranger shares in its joy.
PRO	14	11	악한 자의 집은 망하겠고 정직한 자의 장막은 흥하리라	The house of the wicked shall be overthrown: but the tabernacle of the upright shall flourish.	The house of the wicked will be destroyed, but the tent of the upright will flourish.
PRO	14	12	어떤 길은 사람의 보기에 바르나 필경은 사망의 길이니라	There is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death.	There is a way that seems right to a man, but its end is the way of death.
PRO	14	13	웃을 때에도 마음에 슬픔이 있고 즐거움의 끝에도 근심이 있느니라	Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful; and the end of that mirth is heaviness.	Even in laughter the heart may ache, and joy may end in sorrow.
PRO	14	14	마음이 패려한 자는 자기 행위로 보응이 만족하겠고 선한 사람도 자기의 행위로 그러하리라	The backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways: and a good man shall be satisfied from himself.	The backslider in heart receives the fill of his own ways, but a good man is rewarded for his ways.
PRO	14	15	어리석은 자는 온갖 말을 믿으나 슬기로운 자는 그 행동을 삼가느니라	The simple believeth every word: but the prudent man looketh well to his going.	The simple man believes every word, but the prudent man watches his steps.
PRO	14	16	지혜로운 자는 두려워하여 악을 떠나나 어리석은 자는 방자하여 스스로 믿느니라	A wise man feareth, and departeth from evil: but the fool rageth, and is confident.	A wise man fears and turns from evil, but a fool is careless and reckless.
PRO	14	17	노하기를 속히 하는 자는 어리석은 일을 행하고 악한 계교를 꾀하는 자는 미움을 받느니라	He that is soon angry dealeth foolishly: and a man of wicked devices is hated.	A quick-tempered man acts foolishly, and a devious man is hated.
PRO	14	18	어리석은 자는 어리석음으로 기업을 삼아도 슬기로운 자는 지식으로 면류관을 삼느니라	The simple inherit folly: but the prudent are crowned with knowledge.	The simple inherit folly, but the prudent are crowned with knowledge.
PRO	14	19	악인은 선인 앞에 엎드리고 불의자는 의인의 문에 엎드리느니라	The evil bow before the good; and the wicked at the gates of the righteous.	The evil bow before the good, and the wicked at the gates of the righteous.
PRO	14	20	가난한 자는 그 이웃에게도 미움을 받게 되나 부요한 자는 친구가 많으니라	The poor is hated even of his own neighbour: but the rich hath many friends.	The poor man is hated even by his neighbor, but many are those who love the rich.
PRO	14	21	그 이웃을 업신여기는 자는 죄를 범하는 자요 빈곤한 자를 불쌍히 여기는 자는 복이 있는 자니라	He that despiseth his neighbour sinneth: but he that hath mercy on the poor, happy is he.	He who despises his neighbor sins, but blessed is he who shows kindness to the poor.
PRO	14	22	악을 도모하는 자는 그릇 가는 것이 아니냐 선을 도모하는 자에게는 인자와 진리가 있으리라	Do they not err that devise evil? but mercy and truth shall be to them that devise good.	Do not those who contrive evil go astray? But those who plan goodness find loving devotion and faithfulness.
PRO	14	23	모든 수고에는 이익이 있어도 입술의 말은 궁핍을 이룰 뿐이니라	In all labour there is profit: but the talk of the lips tendeth only to penury.	There is profit in all labor, but mere talk leads only to poverty.
PRO	14	24	지혜로운 자의 재물은 그의 면류관이요 미련한 자의 소유는 다만 그 미련한 것이니라	The crown of the wise is their riches: but the foolishness of fools is folly.	The crown of the wise is their wealth, but the effort of fools is folly.
PRO	14	25	진실한 증인은 사람의 생명을 구원하여도 거짓말을 뱉는 사람은 속이느니라	A true witness delivereth souls: but a deceitful witness speaketh lies.	A truthful witness saves lives, but one who utters lies is deceitful.
PRO	14	26	여호와를 경외하는 자에게는 견고한 의뢰가 있나니 그 자녀들에게 피난처가 있으리라	In the fear of the Lord is strong confidence: and his children shall have a place of refuge.	He who fears the LORD is secure in confidence, and his children shall have a place of refuge.
PRO	14	27	여호와를 경외하는 것은 생명의 샘이라 사망의 그물에서 벗어나게 하느니라	The fear of the Lord is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death.	The fear of the LORD is a fountain of life, turning a man from the snares of death.
PRO	14	28	백성이 많은 것은 왕의 영광이요 백성이 적은 것은 주권자의 패망이니라	In the multitude of people is the king’s honour: but in the want of people is the destruction of the prince.	A large population is a king’s splendor, but a lack of subjects is a prince’s ruin.
PRO	14	29	노하기를 더디 하는 자는 크게 명철하여도 마음이 조급한 자는 어리석음을 나타내느니라	He that is slow to wrath is of great understanding: but he that is hasty of spirit exalteth folly.	A patient man has great understanding, but a quick-tempered man promotes folly.
PRO	14	30	마음의 화평은 육신의 생명이나 시기는 뼈의 썩음이니라	A sound heart is the life of the flesh: but envy the rottenness of the bones.	A tranquil heart is life to the body, but envy rots the bones.
PRO	14	31	가난한 사람을 학대하는 자는 그를 지으신 이를 멸시하는 자요 궁핍한 사람을 불쌍히 여기는 자는 주를 존경하는 자니라	He that oppresseth the poor reproacheth his Maker: but he that honoureth him hath mercy on the poor.	Whoever oppresses the poor taunts their Maker, but whoever is kind to the needy honors Him.
PRO	14	32	악인은 그 환난에 엎드러져도 의인은 그 죽음에도 소망이 있느니라	The wicked is driven away in his wickedness: but the righteous hath hope in his death.	The wicked man is thrown down by his own sin, but the righteous man has a refuge even in death.
PRO	14	33	지혜는 명철한 자의 마음에 머물거니와 미련한 자의 속에 있는 것은 나타나느니라	Wisdom resteth in the heart of him that hath understanding: but that which is in the midst of fools is made known.	Wisdom rests in the heart of the discerning; even among fools she is known.
PRO	14	34	의는 나라로 영화롭게 하고 죄는 백성을 욕되게 하느니라	Righteousness exalteth a nation: but sin is a reproach to any people.	Righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is a disgrace to any people.
PRO	14	35	슬기롭게 행하는 신하는 왕의 은총을 입고 욕을 끼치는 신하는 그의 진노를 당하느니라	The king’s favour is toward a wise servant: but his wrath is against him that causeth shame.	A king delights in a wise servant, but his anger falls on the shameful.
PRO	15	1	유순한 대답은 분노를 쉬게 하여도 과격한 말은 노를 격동하느니라	A soft answer turneth away wrath: but grievous words stir up anger.	A gentle answer turns away wrath, but a harsh word stirs up anger.
PRO	15	2	지혜 있는 자의 혀는 지식을 선히 베풀고 미련한 자의 입은 미련한 것을 쏟느니라	The tongue of the wise useth knowledge aright: but the mouth of fools poureth out foolishness.	The tongue of the wise commends knowledge, but the mouth of the fool spouts folly.
PRO	15	3	여호와의 눈은 어디서든지 악인과 선인을 감찰하시느니라	The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and the good.	The eyes of the LORD are in every place, observing the evil and the good.
PRO	15	4	온량한 혀는 곧 생명 나무라도 패려한 혀는 마음을 상하게 하느니라	A wholesome tongue is a tree of life: but perverseness therein is a breach in the spirit.	A soothing tongue is a tree of life, but a perverse tongue crushes the spirit.
PRO	15	5	아비의 훈계를 업신여기는 자는 미련한 자요 경계를 받는 자는 슬기를 얻을 자니라	A fool despiseth his father’s instruction: but he that regardeth reproof is prudent.	A fool rejects his father’s discipline, but whoever heeds correction is prudent.
PRO	15	6	의인의 집에는 많은 보물이 있어도 악인의 소득은 고통이 되느니라	In the house of the righteous is much treasure: but in the revenues of the wicked is trouble.	The house of the righteous has great treasure, but the income of the wicked is trouble.
PRO	15	7	지혜로운 자의 입술은 지식을 전파하여도 미련한 자의 마음은 정함이 없느니라	The lips of the wise disperse knowledge: but the heart of the foolish doeth not so.	The lips of the wise spread knowledge, but not so the hearts of fools.
PRO	15	8	악인의 제사는 여호와께서 미워하셔도 정직한 자의 기도는 그가 기뻐하시느니라	The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord: but the prayer of the upright is his delight.	The sacrifice of the wicked is detestable to the LORD, but the prayer of the upright is His delight.
PRO	15	9	악인의 길은 여호와께서 미워하셔도 의를 따라가는 자는 그가 사랑하시느니라	The way of the wicked is an abomination unto the Lord: but he loveth him that followeth after righteousness.	The LORD detests the way of the wicked, but He loves those who pursue righteousness.
PRO	15	10	도를 배반하는 자는 엄한 징계를 받을 것이요 견책을 싫어하는 자는 죽을 것이니라	Correction is grievous unto him that forsaketh the way: and he that hateth reproof shall die.	Discipline is harsh for him who leaves the path; he who hates correction will die.
PRO	15	11	음부와 유명도 여호와의 앞에 드러나거든 하물며 인생의 마음이리요	Hell and destruction are before the Lord: how much more then the hearts of the children of men?	Sheol and Abaddon lie open before the LORD— how much more the hearts of men!
PRO	15	12	거만한 자는 견책 받기를 좋아하지 아니하며 지혜 있는 자에게로 가지도 아니하느니라	A scorner loveth not one that reproveth him: neither will he go unto the wise.	A mocker does not love to be reproved, nor will he consult the wise.
PRO	15	13	마음의 즐거움은 얼굴을 빛나게 하여도 마음의 근심은 심령을 상하게 하느니라	A merry heart maketh a cheerful countenance: but by sorrow of the heart the spirit is broken.	A joyful heart makes a cheerful countenance, but sorrow of the heart crushes the spirit.
PRO	15	14	명철한 자의 마음은 지식을 요구하고 미련한 자의 입은 미련한 것을 즐기느니라	The heart of him that hath understanding seeketh knowledge: but the mouth of fools feedeth on foolishness.	A discerning heart seeks knowledge, but the mouth of a fool feeds on folly.
PRO	15	15	고난 받는 자는 그 날이 다 험악하나 마음이 즐거운 자는 항상 잔치하느니라	All the days of the afflicted are evil: but he that is of a merry heart hath a continual feast.	All the days of the oppressed are bad, but a cheerful heart has a continual feast.
PRO	15	16	가산이 적어도 여호와를 경외하는 것이 크게 부하고 번뇌하는 것보다 나으니라	Better is little with the fear of the Lord than great treasure and trouble therewith.	Better a little with the fear of the LORD than great treasure with turmoil.
PRO	15	17	여간 채소를 먹으며 서로 사랑하는 것이 살진 소를 먹으며 서로 미워하는 것보다 나으니라	Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, than a stalled ox and hatred therewith.	Better a dish of vegetables where there is love than a fattened ox with hatred.
PRO	15	18	분을 쉽게 내는 자는 다툼을 일으켜도 노하기를 더디하는 자는 시비를 그치게 하느니라	A wrathful man stirreth up strife: but he that is slow to anger appeaseth strife.	A hot-tempered man stirs up strife, but he who is slow to anger calms dispute.
PRO	15	19	게으른 자의 길은 가시울타리 같으나 정직한 자의 길은 대로니라	The way of the slothful man is as an hedge of thorns: but the way of the righteous is made plain.	The way of the slacker is like a hedge of thorns, but the path of the upright is a highway.
PRO	15	20	지혜로운 아들은 아비를 즐겁게 하여도 미련한 자는 어미를 업신여기느니라	A wise son maketh a glad father: but a foolish man despiseth his mother.	A wise son brings joy to his father, but a foolish man despises his mother.
PRO	15	21	무지한 자는 미련한 것을 즐겨하여도 명철한 자는 그 길을 바르게 하느니라	Folly is joy to him that is destitute of wisdom: but a man of understanding walketh uprightly.	Folly is joy to one who lacks judgment, but a man of understanding walks a straight path.
PRO	15	22	의논이 없으면 경영이 파하고 모사가 많으면 경영이 성립하느니라	Without counsel purposes are disappointed: but in the multitude of counsellors they are established.	Plans fail for lack of counsel, but with many advisers they succeed.
PRO	15	23	사람은 그 입의 대답으로 말미암아 기쁨을 얻나니 때에 맞은 말이 얼마나 아름다운고	A man hath joy by the answer of his mouth: and a word spoken in due season, how good is it!	A man takes joy in a fitting reply— and how good is a timely word!
PRO	15	24	지혜로운 자는 위로 향한 생명길로 말미암음으로 그 아래 있는 음부를 떠나게 되느니라	The way of life is above to the wise, that he may depart from hell beneath.	The path of life leads upward for the wise, that he may avoid going down to Sheol.
PRO	15	25	여호와는 교만한 자의 집을 허시며 과부의 지계를 정하시느니라	The Lord will destroy the house of the proud: but he will establish the border of the widow.	The LORD tears down the house of the proud, but He protects the boundaries of the widow.
PRO	15	26	악한 꾀는 여호와의 미워하시는 것이라도 선한 말은 정결하니라	The thoughts of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord: but the words of the pure are pleasant words.	The LORD detests the thoughts of the wicked, but the words of the pure are pleasant to Him.
PRO	15	27	이를 탐하는 자는 자기 집을 해롭게 하나 뇌물을 싫어하는 자는 사느니라	He that is greedy of gain troubleth his own house; but he that hateth gifts shall live.	He who is greedy for unjust gain brings trouble on his household, but he who hates bribes will live.
PRO	15	28	의인의 마음은 대답할 말을 깊이 생각하여도 악인의 입은 악을 쏟느니라	The heart of the righteous studieth to answer: but the mouth of the wicked poureth out evil things.	The heart of the righteous ponders how to answer, but the mouth of the wicked blurts out evil.
PRO	15	29	여호와는 악인을 멀리 하시고 의인의 기도를 들으시느니라	The Lord is far from the wicked: but he heareth the prayer of the righteous.	The LORD is far from the wicked, but He hears the prayer of the righteous.
PRO	15	30	눈의 밝은 것은 마음을 기쁘게 하고 좋은 기별은 뼈를 윤택하게 하느니라	The light of the eyes rejoiceth the heart: and a good report maketh the bones fat.	The light of the eyes cheers the heart, and good news nourishes the bones.
PRO	15	31	생명의 경계를 듣는 귀는 지혜로운 자 가운데 있느니라	The ear that heareth the reproof of life abideth among the wise.	He who listens to life-giving reproof will dwell among the wise.
PRO	15	32	훈계 받기를 싫어하는 자는 자기의 영혼을 경히 여김이라 견책을 달게 받는 자는 지식을 얻느니라	He that refuseth instruction despiseth his own soul: but he that heareth reproof getteth understanding.	He who ignores discipline despises himself, but whoever heeds correction gains understanding.
PRO	15	33	여호와를 경외하는 것은 지혜의 훈계라 겸손은 존귀의 앞잡이니라	The fear of the Lord is the instruction of wisdom; and before honour is humility.	The fear of the LORD is the instruction of wisdom, and humility comes before honor.
PRO	16	1	마음의 경영은 사람에게 있어도 말의 응답은 여호와께로서 나느니라	The preparations of the heart in man, and the answer of the tongue, is from the Lord.	The plans of the heart belong to man, but the reply of the tongue is from the LORD.
PRO	16	2	사람의 행위가 자기 보기에는 모두 깨끗하여도 여호와는 심령을 감찰하시느니라	All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes; but the Lord weigheth the spirits.	All a man’s ways are pure in his own eyes, but his motives are weighed out by the LORD.
PRO	16	3	너의 행사를 여호와께 맡기라 그리하면 너의 경영하는 것이 이루리라	Commit thy works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be established.	Commit your works to the LORD and your plans will be achieved.
PRO	16	4	여호와께서 온갖 것을 그 씌움에 적당하게 지으셨나니 악인도 악한 날에 적당하게 하셨느니라	The Lord hath made all things for himself: yea, even the wicked for the day of evil.	The LORD has made everything for His purpose— even the wicked for the day of disaster.
PRO	16	5	무릇 마음이 교만한 자를 여호와께서 미워하시나니 피차 손을 잡을지라도 벌을 면치 못하리라	Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the Lord: though hand join in hand, he shall not be unpunished.	Everyone who is proud in heart is detestable to the LORD; be assured that he will not go unpunished.
PRO	16	6	인자와 진리로 인하여 죄악이 속하게 되고 여호와를 경외함으로 인하여 악에서 떠나게 되느니라	By mercy and truth iniquity is purged: and by the fear of the Lord men depart from evil.	By loving devotion and faithfulness iniquity is atoned for, and by the fear of the LORD one turns aside from evil.
PRO	16	7	사람의 행위가 여호와를 기쁘시게 하면 그 사람의 원수라도 그로 더불어 화목하게 하시느니라	When a man’s ways please the Lord, he maketh even his enemies to be at peace with him.	When a man’s ways please the LORD, He makes even the man’s enemies live at peace with him.
PRO	16	8	적은 소득이 의를 겸하면 많은 소득이 불의를 겸한 것보다 나으니라	Better is a little with righteousness than great revenues without right.	Better a little with righteousness than great gain with injustice.
PRO	16	9	사람이 마음으로 자기의 길을 계획할지라도 그 걸음을 인도하는 자는 여호와시니라	A man’s heart deviseth his way: but the Lord directeth his steps.	A man’s heart plans his course, but the LORD determines his steps.
PRO	16	10	하나님의 말씀이 왕의 입술에 있은즉 재판할 때에 그 입이 그릇하지 아니하리라	A divine sentence is in the lips of the king: his mouth transgresseth not in judgment.	A divine verdict is on the lips of a king; his mouth must not betray justice.
PRO	16	11	공평한 간칭과 명칭은 여호와의 것이요 주머니 속의 추돌들도 다 그의 지으신 것이니라	A just weight and balance are the Lord’s: all the weights of the bag are his work.	Honest scales and balances are from the LORD; all the weights in the bag are His concern.
PRO	16	12	악을 행하는 것은 왕의 미워할 바니 이는 그 보좌가 공의로 말미암아 굳게 섬이니라	It is an abomination to kings to commit wickedness: for the throne is established by righteousness.	Wicked behavior is detestable to kings, for a throne is established through righteousness.
PRO	16	13	의로운 입술은 왕들의 기뻐하는 것이요 정직히 말하는 자는 그들의 사랑을 입느니라	Righteous lips are the delight of kings; and they love him that speaketh right.	Righteous lips are a king’s delight, and he who speaks honestly is beloved.
PRO	16	14	왕의 진노는 살륙의 사자와 같아도 지혜로운 사람은 그것을 쉬게 하리라	The wrath of a king is as messengers of death: but a wise man will pacify it.	The wrath of a king is a messenger of death, but a wise man will pacify it.
PRO	16	15	왕의 희색에 생명이 있나니 그 은택이 늦은 비를 내리는 구름과 같으니라	In the light of the king’s countenance is life; and his favour is as a cloud of the latter rain.	When a king’s face brightens, there is life; his favor is like a rain cloud in spring.
PRO	16	16	지혜를 얻는 것이 금을 얻는 것보다 얼마나 나은고 명철을 얻는 것이 은을 얻는 것보다 더욱 나으니라	How much better is it to get wisdom than gold! and to get understanding rather to be chosen than silver!	How much better to acquire wisdom than gold! To gain understanding is more desirable than silver.
PRO	16	17	악을 떠나는 것은 정직한 사람의 대로니 그 길을 지키는 자는 자기의 영혼을 보전하느니라	The highway of the upright is to depart from evil: he that keepeth his way preserveth his soul.	The highway of the upright leads away from evil; he who guards his way protects his life.
PRO	16	18	교만은 패망의 선봉이요 거만한 마음은 넘어짐의 앞잡이니라	Pride goeth before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall.	Pride goes before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall.
PRO	16	19	겸손한 자와 함께하여 마음을 낮추는 것이 교만한 자와 함께 하여 탈취물을 나누는 것보다 나으니라	Better it is to be of an humble spirit with the lowly, than to divide the spoil with the proud.	It is better to be lowly in spirit among the humble than to divide the spoil with the proud.
PRO	16	20	삼가 말씀에 주의하는 자는 좋은 것을 얻나니 여호와를 의지하는 자가 복이 있느니라	He that handleth a matter wisely shall find good: and whoso trusteth in the Lord, happy is he.	Whoever heeds instruction will find success, and blessed is he who trusts in the LORD.
PRO	16	21	마음이 지혜로운 자가 명철하다 일컬음을 받고 입이 선한 자가 남의 학식을 더하게 하느니라	The wise in heart shall be called prudent: and the sweetness of the lips increaseth learning.	The wise in heart are called discerning, and pleasant speech promotes instruction.
PRO	16	22	명철한 자에게는 그 명철이 생명의 샘이 되거니와 미련한 자에게는 그 미련한 것이 징계가 되느니라	Understanding is a wellspring of life unto him that hath it: but the instruction of fools is folly.	Understanding is a fountain of life to its possessor, but the discipline of fools is folly.
PRO	16	23	지혜로운 자의 마음은 그 입을 슬기롭게 하고 또 그 입술에 지식을 더하느니라	The heart of the wise teacheth his mouth, and addeth learning to his lips.	The heart of the wise man instructs his mouth and adds persuasiveness to his lips.
PRO	16	24	선한 말은 꿀송이 같아서 마음에 달고 뼈에 양약이 되느니라	Pleasant words are as an honeycomb, sweet to the soul, and health to the bones.	Pleasant words are a honeycomb, sweet to the soul and healing to the bones.
PRO	16	25	어떤 길은 사람의 보기에 바르나 필경은 사망의 길이니라	There is a way that seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death.	There is a way that seems right to a man, but its end is the way of death.
PRO	16	26	노력하는 자는 식욕을 인하여 애쓰나니 이는 그 입이 자기를 독촉함이니라	He that laboureth laboureth for himself; for his mouth craveth it of him.	A worker’s appetite works for him because his hunger drives him onward.
PRO	16	27	불량한 자는 악을 꾀하나니 그 입술에는 맹렬한 불 같은 것이 있느니라	An ungodly man diggeth up evil: and in his lips there is as a burning fire.	A worthless man digs up evil, and his speech is like a scorching fire.
PRO	16	28	패려한 자는 다툼을 일으키고 말장이는 친한 벗을 이간하느니라	A froward man soweth strife: and a whisperer separateth chief friends.	A perverse man spreads dissension, and a gossip divides close friends.
PRO	16	29	강포한 사람은 그 이웃을 꾀어 불선한 길로 인도하느니라	A violent man enticeth his neighbour, and leadeth him into the way that is not good.	A violent man entices his neighbor and leads him down a path that is not good.
PRO	16	30	눈을 감는 자는 패역한 일을 도모하며 입술을 닫는 자는 악한 일을 이루느니라	He shutteth his eyes to devise froward things: moving his lips he bringeth evil to pass.	He who winks his eye devises perversity; he who purses his lips is bent on evil.
PRO	16	31	백발은 영화의 면류관이라 의로운 길에서 얻으리라	The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness.	Gray hair is a crown of glory; it is attained along the path of righteousness.
PRO	16	32	노하기를 더디하는 자는 용사보다 낫고 자기의 마음을 다스리는 자는 성을 빼앗는 자보다 나으니라	He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city.	He who is slow to anger is better than a warrior, and he who controls his temper is greater than one who captures a city.
PRO	16	33	사람이 제비는 뽑으나 일을 작정하기는 여호와께 있느니라	The lot is cast into the lap; but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord.	The lot is cast into the lap, but its every decision is from the LORD.
PRO	17	1	마른 떡 한 조각만 있고도 화목하는 것이 육선이 집에 가득하고 다투는 것보다 나으니라	Better is a dry morsel, and quietness therewith, than an house full of sacrifices with strife.	Better a dry morsel in quietness than a house full of feasting with strife.
PRO	17	2	슬기로운 종은 주인의 부끄러움을 끼치는 아들을 다스리겠고 또 그 아들들 중에서 유업을 나눠 얻으리라	A wise servant shall have rule over a son that causeth shame, and shall have part of the inheritance among the brethren.	A wise servant will rule over a disgraceful son and share his inheritance as one of the brothers.
PRO	17	3	도가니는 은을, 풀무는 금을 연단하거니와 여호와는 마음을 연단하시느니라	The fining pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold: but the Lord trieth the hearts.	A crucible for silver and a furnace for gold, but the LORD is the tester of hearts.
PRO	17	4	악을 행하는 자는 궤사한 입술을 잘 듣고 거짓말을 하는 자는 악한 혀에 귀를 기울이느니라	A wicked doer giveth heed to false lips; and a liar giveth ear to a naughty tongue.	A wicked man listens to evil lips; a liar gives ear to a destructive tongue.
PRO	17	5	가난한 자를 조롱하는 자는 이를 지으신 주를 멸시하는 자요 사람의 재앙을 기뻐하는 자는 형벌을 면치 못할 자니라	Whoso mocketh the poor reproacheth his Maker: and he that is glad at calamities shall not be unpunished.	He who mocks the poor insults their Maker; whoever gloats over calamity will not go unpunished.
PRO	17	6	손자는 노인의 면류관이요 아비는 자식의 영화니라	Children’s children are the crown of old men; and the glory of children are their fathers.	Grandchildren are the crown of the aged, and the glory of a son is his father.
PRO	17	7	분외의 말을 하는 것도 미련한 자에게 합당치 아니하거든 하물며 거짓말을 하는 것이 존귀한 자에게 합당하겠느냐	Excellent speech becometh not a fool: much less do lying lips a prince.	Eloquent words are unfit for a fool; how much worse are lying lips to a ruler!
PRO	17	8	뇌물은 임자의 보기에 보석 같은즉 어디로 향하든지 형통케 하느니라	A gift is as a precious stone in the eyes of him that hath it: whithersoever it turneth, it prospereth.	A bribe is a charm to its giver; wherever he turns, he succeeds.
PRO	17	9	허물을 덮어 주는 자는 사랑을 구하는 자요 그것을 거듭 말하는 자는 친한 벗을 이간하는 자니라	He that covereth a transgression seeketh love; but he that repeateth a matter separateth very friends.	Whoever conceals an offense promotes love, but he who brings it up separates friends.
PRO	17	10	한 마디로 총명한 자를 경계하는 것이 매 백 개로 미련한 자를 때리는 것보다 더욱 깊이 박이느니라	A reproof entereth more into a wise man than an hundred stripes into a fool.	A rebuke cuts into a man of discernment deeper than a hundred lashes cut into a fool.
PRO	17	11	악한 자는 반역만 힘쓰나니 그러므로 그에게 잔인한 사자가 보냄을 입으리라	An evil man seeketh only rebellion: therefore a cruel messenger shall be sent against him.	An evil man seeks only rebellion; a cruel messenger will be sent against him.
PRO	17	12	차라리 새끼 빼앗긴 암콤을 만날지언정 미련한 일을 행하는 미련한 자를 만나지 말 것이니라	Let a bear robbed of her whelps meet a man, rather than a fool in his folly.	It is better to meet a bear robbed of her cubs than a fool in his folly.
PRO	17	13	누구든지 악으로 선을 갚으면 악이 그 집을 떠나지 아니하리라	Whoso rewardeth evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house.	If anyone returns evil for good, evil will never leave his house.
PRO	17	14	다투는 시작은 방축에서 물이 새는 것 같은즉 싸움이 일어나기 전에 시비를 그칠 것이니라	The beginning of strife is as when one letteth out water: therefore leave off contention, before it be meddled with.	To start a quarrel is to release a flood; so abandon the dispute before it breaks out.
PRO	17	15	악인을 의롭다 하며 의인을 악하다 하는 이 두 자는 다 여호와의 미워하심을 입느라	He that justifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the just, even they both are abomination to the Lord.	Acquitting the guilty and condemning the righteous— both are detestable to the LORD.
PRO	17	16	미련한 자는 무지하거늘 손에 값을 가지고 지혜를 사려 함은 어찜인고	Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing he hath no heart to it?	Why should the fool have money in his hand with no intention of buying wisdom?
PRO	17	17	친구는 사랑이 끊이지 아니하고 형제는 위급한 때까지 위하여 났느니라	A friend loveth at all times, and a brother is born for adversity.	A friend loves at all times, and a brother is born for adversity.
PRO	17	18	지혜없는 자는 남의 손을 잡고 그 이웃 앞에서 보증이 되느니라	A man void of understanding striketh hands, and becometh surety in the presence of his friend.	A man lacking judgment strikes hands in pledge and puts up security for his neighbor.
PRO	17	19	다툼을 좋아하는 자는 죄과를 좋아하는 자요 자기 문을 높이는 자는 파괴를 구하는 자니라	He loveth transgression that loveth strife: and he that exalteth his gate seeketh destruction.	He who loves transgression loves strife; he who builds his gate high invites destruction.
PRO	17	20	마음이 사특한 자는 복을 얻지 못하고 혀가 패역한 자는 재앙에 빠지느니라	He that hath a froward heart findeth no good: and he that hath a perverse tongue falleth into mischief.	The one with a perverse heart finds no good, and he whose tongue is deceitful falls into trouble.
PRO	17	21	미련한 자를 낳는 자는 근심을 당하나니 미련한 자의 아비는 낙이 없느니라	He that begetteth a fool doeth it to his sorrow: and the father of a fool hath no joy.	A man fathers a fool to his own grief; the father of a fool has no joy.
PRO	17	22	마음의 즐거움은 양약이라도 심령의 근심은 뼈로 마르게 하느니라	A merry heart doeth good like a medicine: but a broken spirit drieth the bones.	A joyful heart is good medicine, but a broken spirit dries up the bones.
PRO	17	23	악인은 사람의 품에서 뇌물을 받고 재판을 굽게 하느니라	A wicked man taketh a gift out of the bosom to pervert the ways of judgment.	A wicked man takes a covert bribe to subvert the course of justice.
PRO	17	24	지혜는 명철한 자의 앞에 있거늘 미련한 자는 눈을 땅 끝에 두느니라	Wisdom is before him that hath understanding; but the eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth.	Wisdom is the focus of the discerning, but the eyes of a fool wander to the ends of the earth.
PRO	17	25	미련한 아들은 그 아비의 근심이 되고 그 어미의 고통이 되느니라	A foolish son is a grief to his father, and bitterness to her that bare him.	A foolish son brings grief to his father and bitterness to her who bore him.
PRO	17	26	의인을 벌하는 것과 귀인을 정직하다고 때리는 것이 선치 못하니라	Also to punish the just is not good, nor to strike princes for equity.	It is surely not good to punish the innocent or to flog a noble for his honesty.
PRO	17	27	말을 아끼는 자는 지식이 있고 성품이 안존한 자는 명철하니라	He that hath knowledge spareth his words: and a man of understanding is of an excellent spirit.	A man of knowledge restrains his words, and a man of understanding maintains a calm spirit.
PRO	17	28	미련한 자라도 잠잠하면 지혜로운 자로 여기우고 그 입술을 닫히면 슬기로운 자로 여기우느니라	Even a fool, when he holdeth his peace, is counted wise: and he that shutteth his lips is esteemed a man of understanding.	Even a fool is considered wise if he keeps silent, and discerning when he holds his tongue.
PRO	18	1	무리에게서 스스로 나뉘는 자는 자기 소욕을 따르는 자라 온갖 참 지혜를 배척하느니라	Through desire a man, having separated himself, seeketh and intermeddleth with all wisdom.	He who isolates himself pursues selfish desires; he rebels against all sound judgment.
PRO	18	2	미련한 자는 명철을 기뻐하지 아니하고 자기의 의사를 드러내기만 기뻐하느니라	A fool hath no delight in understanding, but that his heart may discover itself.	A fool does not delight in understanding, but only in airing his opinions.
PRO	18	3	악한 자가 이를 때에는 멸시도 따라오고 부끄러운 것이 이를 때에는 능욕도 함께 오느니라	When the wicked cometh, then cometh also contempt, and with ignominy reproach.	With a wicked man comes contempt as well, and shame is accompanied by disgrace.
PRO	18	4	명철한 사람의 입의 말은 깊은 물과 같고 지혜의 샘은 솟쳐 흐르는 내와 같으니라	The words of a man’s mouth are as deep waters, and the wellspring of wisdom as a flowing brook.	The words of a man’s mouth are deep waters; the fountain of wisdom is a bubbling brook.
PRO	18	5	악인을 두호하는 것과 재판할 때에 의인을 억울하게 하는 것이 선하지 아니하니라	It is not good to accept the person of the wicked, to overthrow the righteous in judgment.	Showing partiality to the wicked is not good, nor is depriving the innocent of justice.
PRO	18	6	미련한 자의 입술은 다툼을 일으키고 그 입은 매를 자청하느니라	A fool’s lips enter into contention, and his mouth calleth for strokes.	A fool’s lips bring him strife, and his mouth invites a beating.
PRO	18	7	미련한 자의 입은 그의 멸망이 되고 그 입술은 그의 영혼의 그물이 되느니라	A fool’s mouth is his destruction, and his lips are the snare of his soul.	A fool’s mouth is his ruin, and his lips are a snare to his soul.
PRO	18	8	남의 말하기를 좋아하는 자의 말은 별식과 같아서 뱃 속 깊은 데로 내려가느니라	The words of a talebearer are as wounds, and they go down into the innermost parts of the belly.	The words of a gossip are like choice morsels that go down into the inmost being.
PRO	18	9	자기의 일을 게을리 하는 자는 패가하는 자의 형제니라	He also that is slothful in his work is brother to him that is a great waster.	Whoever is slothful in his work is brother to him who destroys.
PRO	18	10	여호와의 이름은 견고한 망대라 의인은 그리로 달려가서 안전함을 얻느니라	The name of the Lord is a strong tower: the righteous runneth into it, and is safe.	The name of the LORD is a strong tower; the righteous run to it and are safe.
PRO	18	11	부자의 재물은 그의 견고한 성이라 그가 높은 성벽 같이 여기느니라	The rich man’s wealth is his strong city, and as an high wall in his own conceit.	A rich man’s wealth is his fortified city; it is like a high wall in his imagination.
PRO	18	12	사람의 마음의 교만은 멸망의 선봉이요 겸손은 존귀의 앞잡이니라	Before destruction the heart of man is haughty, and before honour is humility.	Before his downfall a man’s heart is proud, but humility comes before honor.
PRO	18	13	사연을 듣기 전에 대답하는 자는 미련하여 욕을 당하느니라	He that answereth a matter before he heareth it, it is folly and shame unto him.	He who answers a matter before he hears it— this is folly and disgrace to him.
PRO	18	14	사람의 심령은 그 병을 능히 이기려니와 심령이 상하면 그것을 누가 일으키겠느냐	The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity; but a wounded spirit who can bear?	The spirit of a man can endure his sickness, but who can survive a broken spirit?
PRO	18	15	명철한 자의 마음은 지식을 얻고 지혜로운 자의 귀는 지식을 구하느니라	The heart of the prudent getteth knowledge; and the ear of the wise seeketh knowledge.	The heart of the discerning acquires knowledge, and the ear of the wise seeks it out.
PRO	18	16	선물은 그 사람의 길을 너그럽게 하며 또 존귀한 자의 앞으로 그를 인도하느니라	A man’s gift maketh room for him, and bringeth him before great men.	A man’s gift opens doors for him, and brings him before great men.
PRO	18	17	송사에 원고의 말이 바른 것 같으나 그 피고가 와서 밝히느니라	He that is first in his own cause seemeth just; but his neighbour cometh and searcheth him.	The first to state his case seems right until another comes and cross-examines him.
PRO	18	18	제비 뽑는 것은 다툼을 그치게 하여 강한 자 사이에 해결케 하느니라	The lot causeth contentions to cease, and parteth between the mighty.	Casting the lot ends quarrels and separates strong opponents.
PRO	18	19	노엽게 한 형제와 화목하기가 견고한 성을 취하기보다 어려운즉 이러한 다툼은 산성 문빗장 같으니라	A brother offended is harder to be won than a strong city: and their contentions are like the bars of a castle.	An offended brother is harder to win than a fortified city, and disputes are like the bars of a castle.
PRO	18	20	사람은 입에서 나오는 열매로 하여 배가 부르게 되나니 곧 그 입술에서 나는 것으로하여 만족케 되느니라	A man’s belly shall be satisfied with the fruit of his mouth; and with the increase of his lips shall he be filled.	From the fruit of his mouth a man’s belly is filled; with the harvest from his lips he is satisfied.
PRO	18	21	죽고 사는 것이 혀의 권세에 달렸나니 혀를 쓰기 좋아하는 자는 그 열매를 먹으리라	Death and life are in the power of the tongue: and they that love it shall eat the fruit thereof.	Life and death are in the power of the tongue, and those who love it will eat its fruit.
PRO	18	22	아내를 얻는 자는 복을 얻고 여호와께 은총을 받는 자니라	Whoso findeth a wife findeth a good thing, and obtaineth favour of the Lord.	He who finds a wife finds a good thing and obtains favor from the LORD.
PRO	18	23	가난한 자는 간절한 말로 구하여도 부자는 엄한 말로 대답하느니라	The poor useth intreaties; but the rich answereth roughly.	The poor man pleads for mercy, but the rich man answers harshly.
PRO	18	24	많은 친구를 얻는 자는 해를 당하게 되거니와 어떤 친구는 형제보다 친밀하니라	A man that hath friends must shew himself friendly: and there is a friend that sticketh closer than a brother.	A man of many companions may come to ruin, but there is a friend who stays closer than a brother.
PRO	19	1	성실히 행하는 가난한 자는 입술이 패려하고 미련한 자보다 나으니라	Better is the poor that walketh in his integrity, than he that is perverse in his lips, and is a fool.	Better a poor man who walks with integrity than a fool whose lips are perverse.
PRO	19	2	지식 없는 소원은 선치 못하고 발이 급한 사람은 그릇하느니라	Also, that the soul be without knowledge, it is not good; and he that hasteth with his feet sinneth.	Even zeal is no good without knowledge, and he who hurries his footsteps misses the mark.
PRO	19	3	사람이 미련하므로 자기 길을 굽게 하고 마음으로 여호와를 원망하느니라	The foolishness of man perverteth his way: and his heart fretteth against the Lord.	A man’s own folly subverts his way, yet his heart rages against the LORD.
PRO	19	4	재물은 많은 친구를 더하게 하나 가난한즉 친구가 끊어지느니라	Wealth maketh many friends; but the poor is separated from his neighbour.	Wealth attracts many friends, but a poor man is deserted by his friend.
PRO	19	5	거짓 증인은 벌을 면치 못할 것이요 거짓말을 내는 자도 피치 못하리라	A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaketh lies shall not escape.	A false witness will not go unpunished, and one who utters lies will not escape.
PRO	19	6	너그러운 사람에게는 은혜를 구하는 자가 많고 선물을 주기를 좋아하는 자에게는 사람마다 친구가 되느니라	Many will intreat the favour of the prince: and every man is a friend to him that giveth gifts.	Many seek the favor of the prince, and everyone is a friend of the gift giver.
PRO	19	7	가난한 자는 그 형제들에게도 미움을 받거든 하물며 친구야 그를 멀리 아니하겠느냐 따라가며 말하려 할지라도 그들이 없어졌으리라	All the brethren of the poor do hate him: how much more do his friends go far from him? he pursueth them with words, yet they are wanting to him.	All the brothers of a poor man hate him— how much more do his friends avoid him! He may pursue them with pleading, but they are nowhere to be found.
PRO	19	8	지혜를 얻는 자는 자기 영혼을 사랑하고 명철을 지키는 자는 복을 얻느니라	He that getteth wisdom loveth his own soul: he that keepeth understanding shall find good.	He who acquires wisdom loves himself; one who safeguards understanding will find success.
PRO	19	9	거짓 증인은 벌을 면치 못할 것이요 거짓말을 내는 자는 망할 것이니라	A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaketh lies shall perish.	A false witness will not go unpunished, and one who pours out lies will perish.
PRO	19	10	미련한 자가 사치하는 것이 적당치 못하거든 하물며 종이 방백을 다스림이랴	Delight is not seemly for a fool; much less for a servant to have rule over princes.	Luxury is unseemly for a fool— how much worse for a slave to rule over princes!
PRO	19	11	노하기를 더디하는 것이 사람의 슬기요 허물을 용서하는 것이 자기의 영광이니라	The discretion of a man deferreth his anger; and it is his glory to pass over a transgression.	A man’s insight gives him patience, and his virtue is to overlook an offense.
PRO	19	12	왕의 노함은 사자의 부르짖음 같고 그의 은택은 풀 위에 이슬 같으니라	The king’s wrath is as the roaring of a lion; but his favour is as dew upon the grass.	A king’s rage is like the roar of a lion, but his favor is like dew on the grass.
PRO	19	13	미련한 아들은 그 아비의 재앙이요 다투는 아내는 이어 떨어지는 물방울이니라	A foolish son is the calamity of his father: and the contentions of a wife are a continual dropping.	A foolish son is his father’s ruin, and a quarrelsome wife is like a constant dripping.
PRO	19	14	집과 재물은 조상에게서 상속하거니와 슬기로운 아내는 여호와께로서 말미암느니라	House and riches are the inheritance of fathers: and a prudent wife is from the Lord.	Houses and wealth are inherited from fathers, but a prudent wife is from the LORD.
PRO	19	15	게으름이 사람으로 깊이 잠들게 하나니 해태한 사람은 주릴 것이니라	Slothfulness casteth into a deep sleep; and an idle soul shall suffer hunger.	Laziness brings on deep sleep, and an idle soul will suffer hunger.
PRO	19	16	계명을 지키는 자는 자기의 영혼을 지키거니와 그 행실을 삼가지 아니하는 자는 죽으리라	He that keepeth the commandment keepeth his own soul; but he that despiseth his ways shall die.	He who keeps a commandment preserves his soul, but he who is careless in his ways will die.
PRO	19	17	가난한 자를 불쌍히 여기는 것은 여호와께 꾸이는 것이니 그 선행을 갚아 주시리라	He that hath pity upon the poor lendeth unto the Lord; and that which he hath given will he pay him again.	Kindness to the poor is a loan to the LORD, and He will repay the lender.
PRO	19	18	네가 네 아들에게 소망이 있은즉 그를 징계하고 죽일 마음은 두지 말지니라	Chasten thy son while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare for his crying.	Discipline your son, for in that there is hope; do not be party to his death.
PRO	19	19	노하기를 맹렬히 하는 자는 벌을 받을 것이라 네가 그를 건져 주면 다시 건져 주게 되리라	A man of great wrath shall suffer punishment: for if thou deliver him, yet thou must do it again.	A man of great anger must pay the penalty; if you rescue him, you will have to do so again.
PRO	19	20	너는 권고를 들으며 훈계를 받으라 그리하면 네가 필경은 지혜롭게 되리라	Hear counsel, and receive instruction, that thou mayest be wise in thy latter end.	Listen to counsel and accept discipline, that you may be wise the rest of your days.
PRO	19	21	사람의 마음에는 많은 계획이 있어도 오직 여호와의 뜻이 완전히 서리라	There are many devices in a man’s heart; nevertheless the counsel of the Lord, that shall stand.	Many plans are in a man’s heart, but the purpose of the LORD will prevail.
PRO	19	22	사람은 그 인자함으로 남에게 사모함을 받느니라 가난한 자는 거짓말하는 자보다 나으니라	The desire of a man is his kindness: and a poor man is better than a liar.	The desire of a man is loving devotion; better to be poor than a liar.
PRO	19	23	여호와를 경외하는 것은 사람으로 생명에 이르게 하는 것이라 경외하는 자는 족하게 지내고 재앙을 만나지 아니하느니라	The fear of the Lord tendeth to life: and he that hath it shall abide satisfied; he shall not be visited with evil.	The fear of the LORD leads to life, that one may rest content, without visitation from harm.
PRO	19	24	게으른 자는 그 손을 그릇에 넣고도 입으로 올리기를 괴로워하느니라	A slothful man hideth his hand in his bosom, and will not so much as bring it to his mouth again.	The slacker buries his hand in the dish; he will not even bring it back to his mouth.
PRO	19	25	거만한 자를 때리라 그리하면 어리석은 자도 경성하리라 명철한 자를 견책하라 그리하면 그가 지식을 얻으리라	Smite a scorner, and the simple will beware: and reprove one that hath understanding, and he will understand knowledge.	Strike a mocker, and the simple will beware; rebuke the discerning man, and he will gain knowledge.
PRO	19	26	아비를 구박하고 어미를 쫓아 내는 자는 부끄러움을 끼치며 능욕을 부르는 자식이니라	He that wasteth his father, and chaseth away his mother, is a son that causeth shame, and bringeth reproach.	He who assaults his father or evicts his mother is a son who brings shame and disgrace.
PRO	19	27	내 아들아 지식의 말씀에서 떠나게 하는 교훈을 듣지 말지니라	Cease, my son, to hear the instruction that causeth to err from the words of knowledge.	If you cease to hear instruction, my son, you will stray from the words of knowledge.
PRO	19	28	망령된 증인은 공의를 업신여기고 악인의 입은 죄악을 삼키느니라	An ungodly witness scorneth judgment: and the mouth of the wicked devoureth iniquity.	A corrupt witness mocks justice, and a wicked mouth swallows iniquity.
PRO	19	29	심판은 거만한 자를 위하여 예비된 것이요 채찍은 어리석은 자의 등을 위하여 예비된 것이니라	Judgments are prepared for scorners, and stripes for the back of fools.	Judgments are prepared for mockers, and beatings for the backs of fools.
PRO	20	1	포도주는 거만케 하는 것이요 독주는 떠들게 하는 것이라 무릇 이에 미혹되는 자에게는 지혜가 없느니라	Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging: and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise.	Wine is a mocker, strong drink is a brawler, and whoever is led astray by them is not wise.
PRO	20	2	왕의 진노는 사자의 부르짖음 같으니 그를 노하게 하는 것은 자기의 생명을 해하는 것이니라	The fear of a king is as the roaring of a lion: whoso provoketh him to anger sinneth against his own soul.	The terror of a king is like the roar of a lion; whoever provokes him forfeits his own life.
PRO	20	3	다툼을 멀리 하는 것이 사람에게 영광이어늘 미련한 자마다 다툼을 일으키느니라	It is an honour for a man to cease from strife: but every fool will be meddling.	It is honorable for a man to resolve a dispute, but any fool will quarrel.
PRO	20	4	게으른 자는 가을에 밭 갈지 아니하나니 그러므로 거둘 때에는 구걸할지라도 얻지 못하리라	The sluggard will not plow by reason of the cold; therefore shall he beg in harvest, and have nothing.	The slacker does not plow in season; at harvest time he looks, but nothing is there.
PRO	20	5	사람의 마음에 있는 모략은 깊은 물 같으니라 그럴찌라도 명철한 사람은 그것을 길어 내느니라	Counsel in the heart of man is like deep water; but a man of understanding will draw it out.	The intentions of a man’s heart are deep waters, but a man of understanding draws them out.
PRO	20	6	많은 사람은 각기 자기의 인자함을 자랑하나니 충성된 자를 누가 만날 수 있으랴	Most men will proclaim every one his own goodness: but a faithful man who can find?	Many a man proclaims his loving devotion, but who can find a trustworthy man?
PRO	20	7	완전히 행하는 자가 의인이라 그 후손에게 복이 있느니라	The just man walketh in his integrity: his children are blessed after him.	The righteous man walks with integrity; blessed are his children after him.
PRO	20	8	심판 자리에 앉은 왕은 그 눈으로 모든 악을 흩어지게 하느니라	A king that sitteth in the throne of judgment scattereth away all evil with his eyes.	A king who sits on a throne to judge sifts out all evil with his eyes.
PRO	20	9	내가 내 마음을 정하게 하였다 내 죄를 깨끗하게 하였다 할 자가 누구뇨	Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin?	Who can say, “I have kept my heart pure; I am cleansed from my sin”?
PRO	20	10	한결 같지 않은 저울 추와 말은 다 여호와께서 미워하시느니라	Divers weights, and divers measures, both of them are alike abomination to the Lord.	Differing weights and unequal measures— both are detestable to the LORD.
PRO	20	11	비록 아이라도 그 동작으로 자기의 품행의 청결하며 정직한 여부를 나타내느니라	Even a child is known by his doings, whether his work be pure, and whether it be right.	Even a young man is known by his actions— whether his conduct is pure and upright.
PRO	20	12	듣는 귀와 보는 눈은 다 여호와의 지으신 것이니라	The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, the Lord hath made even both of them.	Ears that hear and eyes that see— the LORD has made them both.
PRO	20	13	너는 잠자기를 좋아하지 말라 네가 빈궁하게 될까 두려우니라 네 눈을 뜨라 그리하면 양식에 족하리라	Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty; open thine eyes, and thou shalt be satisfied with bread.	Do not love sleep, or you will grow poor; open your eyes, and you will have plenty of food.
PRO	20	14	사는 자가 물건이 좋지 못하다 좋지 못하다 하다가 돌아간 후에는 자랑하느니라	It is naught, it is naught, saith the buyer: but when he is gone his way, then he boasteth.	“Worthless, worthless!” says the buyer, but on the way out, he gloats.
PRO	20	15	세상에 금도 있고 진주도 많거니와 지혜로운 입술이 더욱 귀한 보배니라	There is gold, and a multitude of rubies: but the lips of knowledge are a precious jewel.	There is an abundance of gold and rubies, but lips of knowledge are a rare treasure.
PRO	20	16	타인을 위하여 보증이 된 자의 옷을 취하라 외인들의 보증이 된 자는 그 몸을 볼모잡힐지니라	Take his garment that is surety for a stranger: and take a pledge of him for a strange woman.	Take the garment of the one who posts security for a stranger; get collateral if it is for a foreigner.
PRO	20	17	속이고 취한 식물은 맛이 좋은듯하나 후에는 그 입에 모래가 가득하게 되리라	Bread of deceit is sweet to a man; but afterwards his mouth shall be filled with gravel.	Food gained by fraud is sweet to a man, but later his mouth is full of gravel.
PRO	20	18	무릇 경영은 의논함으로 성취하나니 모략을 베풀고 전쟁할지니라	Every purpose is established by counsel: and with good advice make war.	Set plans by consultation, and wage war under sound guidance.
PRO	20	19	두루 다니며 한담하는 자는 남의 비밀를 누설하니니 입술을 벌린 자를 사귀지 말지니라	He that goeth about as a talebearer revealeth secrets: therefore meddle not with him that flattereth with his lips.	He who reveals secrets is a constant gossip; avoid the one who babbles with his lips.
PRO	20	20	자기의 아비나 어미를 저주하는 자는 그 등불이 유암 중에 꺼짐을 당하리라	Whoso curseth his father or his mother, his lamp shall be put out in obscure darkness.	Whoever curses his father or mother, his lamp will be extinguished in deepest darkness.
PRO	20	21	처음에 속히 잡은 산업은 마침내 복이 되지 아니하느니라	An inheritance may be gotten hastily at the beginning; but the end thereof shall not be blessed.	An inheritance gained quickly will not be blessed in the end.
PRO	20	22	너는 악을 갚겠다 말하지 말고 여호와를 기다리라 그가 너를 구원하시리라	Say not thou, I will recompense evil; but wait on the Lord, and he shall save thee.	Do not say, “I will avenge this evil!” Wait on the LORD, and He will save you.
PRO	20	23	한결같지 않은 저울 추는 여호와의 미워하시는 것이요 속이는 저울은 좋지 못한 것이니라	Divers weights are an abomination unto the Lord; and a false balance is not good.	Unequal weights are detestable to the LORD, and dishonest scales are no good.
PRO	20	24	사람의 걸음은 여호와께로서 말미암나니 사람이 어찌 자기의 길을 알 수 있으랴	Man’s goings are of the Lord; how can a man then understand his own way?	A man’s steps are from the LORD, so how can anyone understand his own way?
PRO	20	25	함부로 이 물건을 거룩하다 하여 서원하고 그 후에 살피면 그것이 그물이 되느니라	It is a snare to the man who devoureth that which is holy, and after vows to make enquiry.	It is a trap for a man to dedicate something rashly, only later to reconsider his vows.
PRO	20	26	지혜로운 왕은 악인을 키질하며 타작하는 바퀴로 그 위에 굴리느니라	A wise king scattereth the wicked, and bringeth the wheel over them.	A wise king separates out the wicked and drives the threshing wheel over them.
PRO	20	27	사람의 영혼은 여호와의 등불이라 사람의 깊은 속을 살피느니라	The spirit of man is the candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of the belly.	The spirit of a man is the lamp of the LORD, searching out his inmost being.
PRO	20	28	왕은 인자와 진리로 스스로 보호하고 그 위도 인자함으로 말미암아 견고하니라	Mercy and truth preserve the king: and his throne is upholden by mercy.	Loving devotion and faithfulness preserve a king; by these he maintains his throne.
PRO	20	29	젊은 자의 영화는 그 힘이요 늙은 자의 아름다운 것은 백발이니라	The glory of young men is their strength: and the beauty of old men is the gray head.	The glory of young men is their strength, and gray hair is the splendor of the old.
PRO	20	30	상하게 때리는 것이 악을 없이 하나니 매는 사람의 속에 깊이 들어가느니라	The blueness of a wound cleanseth away evil: so do stripes the inward parts of the belly.	Lashes and wounds scour evil, and beatings cleanse the inmost parts.
PRO	21	1	왕의 마음이 여호와의 손에 있음이 마치 보의 물과 같아서 그가 임의로 인도하시느니라	The king’s heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water: he turneth it whithersoever he will.	The king’s heart is a waterway in the hand of the LORD; He directs it where He pleases.
PRO	21	2	사람의 행위가 자기 보기에는 모두 정직하여도 여호와는 심령을 감찰하시느니라	Every way of a man is right in his own eyes: but the Lord pondereth the hearts.	All a man’s ways seem right to him, but the LORD weighs the heart.
PRO	21	3	의와 공평을 행하는 것은 제사 드리는 것보다 여호와께서 기쁘게 여기시느니라	To do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord than sacrifice.	To do righteousness and justice is more desirable to the LORD than sacrifice.
PRO	21	4	눈이 높은 것과 마음이 교만한 것과 악인의 형통한 것은 다 죄니라	An high look, and a proud heart, and the plowing of the wicked, is sin.	Haughty eyes and a proud heart— the guides of the wicked—are sin.
PRO	21	5	부지런한 자의 경영은 풍부함에 이를 것이나 조급한 자는 궁핍함에 이를 따름이니라	The thoughts of the diligent tend only to plenteousness; but of every one that is hasty only to want.	The plans of the diligent bring plenty, as surely as haste leads to poverty.
PRO	21	6	속이는 말로 재물을 모으는 것은 죽음을 구하는 것이라 곧 불려 다니는 안개니라	The getting of treasures by a lying tongue is a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death.	Making a fortune by a lying tongue is a vanishing mist, a deadly pursuit.
PRO	21	7	악인의 강포는 자기를 소멸하나니 이는 공의 행하기를 싫어함이니라	The robbery of the wicked shall destroy them; because they refuse to do judgment.	The violence of the wicked will sweep them away because they refuse to do what is just.
PRO	21	8	죄를 크게 범한 자의 길은 심히 구부러지고 깨끗한 자의 길은 곧으니라	The way of man is froward and strange: but as for the pure, his work is right.	The way of a guilty man is crooked, but the conduct of the innocent is upright.
PRO	21	9	다투는 여인과 함께 큰 집에서 사는 것보다 움막에서 혼자 사는 것이 나으니라	It is better to dwell in a corner of the housetop, than with a brawling woman in a wide house.	Better to live on a corner of the roof than to share a house with a quarrelsome wife.
PRO	21	10	악인의 마음은 남의 재앙을 원하나니 그 이웃도 그 앞에서 은혜를 입지 못하느니라	The soul of the wicked desireth evil: his neighbour findeth no favour in his eyes.	The soul of the wicked man craves evil; his neighbor finds no favor in his eyes.
PRO	21	11	거만한 자가 벌을 받으면 어리석은 자는 경성하겠고 지혜로운 자가 교훈을 받으면 지식이 더 하리라	When the scorner is punished, the simple is made wise: and when the wise is instructed, he receiveth knowledge.	When a mocker is punished, the simple gain wisdom; and when a wise man is instructed, he acquires knowledge.
PRO	21	12	의로우신 자는 악인의 집을 감찰하시고 악인을 환난에 던지시느니라	The righteous man wisely considereth the house of the wicked: but God overthroweth the wicked for their wickedness.	The Righteous One considers the house of the wicked and brings the wicked to ruin.
PRO	21	13	귀를 막아 가난한 자의 부르짖는 소리를 듣지 아니하면 자기의 부르짖을 때에도 들을 자가 없으리라	Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry himself, but shall not be heard.	Whoever shuts his ears to the cry of the poor, he too shall cry out and receive no answer.
PRO	21	14	은밀한 선물은 노를 쉬게 하고 품의 뇌물은 맹렬한 분을 그치게 하느니라	A gift in secret pacifieth anger: and a reward in the bosom strong wrath.	A gift in secret soothes anger, and a covert bribe pacifies great wrath.
PRO	21	15	공의를 행하는 것이 의인에게는 즐거움이요 죄인에게는 패망이니라	It is joy to the just to do judgment: but destruction shall be to the workers of iniquity.	Justice executed is a joy to the righteous, but a terror to the workers of iniquity.
PRO	21	16	명철의 길을 떠난 사람은 사망의 회중에 거하리라	The man that wandereth out of the way of understanding shall remain in the congregation of the dead.	The man who strays from the path of understanding will rest in the assembly of the dead.
PRO	21	17	연락을 좋아하는 자는 가난하게 되고 술과 기름을 좋아하는 자는 부하게 되지 못하느니라	He that loveth pleasure shall be a poor man: he that loveth wine and oil shall not be rich.	He who loves pleasure will become poor; the one who loves wine and oil will never be rich.
PRO	21	18	악인은 의인의 대속이 되고 궤사한 자는 정직한 자의 대신이 되느니라	The wicked shall be a ransom for the righteous, and the transgressor for the upright.	The wicked become a ransom for the righteous, and the faithless for the upright.
PRO	21	19	다투며 성내는 여인과 함께 사는 것보다 광야에서 혼자 사는 것이 나으니라	It is better to dwell in the wilderness, than with a contentious and an angry woman.	Better to live in the desert than with a contentious and ill-tempered wife.
PRO	21	20	지혜 있는 자의 집에는 귀한 보배와 기름이 있으나 미련한 자는 이것을 다 삼켜 버리느니라	There is treasure to be desired and oil in the dwelling of the wise; but a foolish man spendeth it up.	Precious treasures and oil are in the dwelling of the wise, but a foolish man consumes them.
PRO	21	21	의와 인자를 따라 구하는 자는 생명과 의와 영광을 얻느니라	He that followeth after righteousness and mercy findeth life, righteousness, and honour.	He who pursues righteousness and loving devotion finds life, righteousness, and honor.
PRO	21	22	지혜로운 자는 용사의 성에 올라가서 그 성의 견고히 의뢰하는 것을 파하느니라	A wise man scaleth the city of the mighty, and casteth down the strength of the confidence thereof.	A wise man scales the city of the mighty and pulls down the stronghold in which they trust.
PRO	21	23	입과 혀를 지키는 자는 그 영혼을 환난에서 보전하느니라	Whoso keepeth his mouth and his tongue keepeth his soul from troubles.	He who guards his mouth and tongue keeps his soul from distress.
PRO	21	24	무례하고 교만한 자를 이름하여 망령된 자라 하나니 이는 넘치는 교만으로 행함이니라	Proud and haughty scorner is his name, who dealeth in proud wrath.	Mocker is the name of the proud and arrogant man— of him who acts with excessive pride.
PRO	21	25	게으른 자의 정욕이 그를 죽이나니 이는 그 손으로 일하기를 싫어함이니라	The desire of the slothful killeth him; for his hands refuse to labour.	The craving of the slacker kills him because his hands refuse to work.
PRO	21	26	어떤 자는 종일토록 탐하기만 하나 의인은 아끼지 아니하고 시제하느니라	He coveteth greedily all the day long: but the righteous giveth and spareth not.	All day long he covets more, but the righteous give without restraint.
PRO	21	27	악인의 제물은 본래 가증하거든 하물며 악한 뜻으로 드리는 것이랴	The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination: how much more, when he bringeth it with a wicked mind?	The sacrifice of the wicked is detestable— how much more so when brought with ill intent!
PRO	21	28	거짓 증인은 패망하려니와 확실한 증인의 말은 힘이 있느니라	A false witness shall perish: but the man that heareth speaketh constantly.	A lying witness will perish, but the man who listens to truth will speak forever.
PRO	21	29	악인은 그 얼굴을 굳게 하나 정직한 자는 그 행위를 삼가느니라	A wicked man hardeneth his face: but as for the upright, he directeth his way.	A wicked man hardens his face, but the upright man makes his way sure.
PRO	21	30	지혜로도, 명철로도, 모략으로도 여호와를 당치 못하느니라	There is no wisdom nor understanding nor counsel against the Lord.	There is no wisdom, no understanding, no counsel that can prevail against the LORD.
PRO	21	31	싸울 날을 위하여 마병을 예비하거니와 이김은 여호와께 있느니라	The horse is prepared against the day of battle: but safety is of the Lord.	A horse is prepared for the day of battle, but victory is of the LORD.
PRO	22	1	많은 재물보다 명예를 택할 것이요 은이나 금보다 은총을 더욱 택할 것이니라	A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches, and loving favour rather than silver and gold.	A good name is more desirable than great riches; favor is better than silver and gold.
PRO	22	2	빈부가 섞여 살거니와 무릇 그들을 지으신 이는 여호와시니라	The rich and poor meet together: the Lord is the maker of them all.	The rich and the poor have this in common: The LORD is Maker of them all.
PRO	22	3	슬기로운 자는 재앙을 보면 숨어 피하여도 어리석은 자들은 나아가다가 해를 받느니라	A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hideth himself: but the simple pass on, and are punished.	The prudent see danger and take cover, but the simple keep going and suffer the consequences.
PRO	22	4	겸손과 여호와를 경외함의 보응은 재물과 영광과 생명이니라	By humility and the fear of the Lord are riches, and honour, and life.	The rewards of humility and the fear of the LORD are wealth and honor and life.
PRO	22	5	패역한 자의 길에는 가시와 올무가 있거니와 영혼을 지키는 자는 이를 멀리 하느니라	Thorns and snares are in the way of the froward: he that doth keep his soul shall be far from them.	Thorns and snares lie on the path of the perverse; he who guards his soul stays far from them.
PRO	22	6	마땅히 행할 길을 아이에게 가르치라 그리하면 늙어도 그것을 떠나지 아니하리라	Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not depart from it.	Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it.
PRO	22	7	부자는 가난한 자를 주관하고 빚진 자는 채주의 종이 되느니라	The rich ruleth over the poor, and the borrower is servant to the lender.	The rich rule over the poor, and the borrower is slave to the lender.
PRO	22	8	악을 뿌리는 자는 재앙을 거두리니 그 분노의 기세가 쇠하리라	He that soweth iniquity shall reap vanity: and the rod of his anger shall fail.	He who sows injustice will reap disaster, and the rod of his fury will be destroyed.
PRO	22	9	선한 눈을 가진 자는 복을 받으리니 이는 양식을 가난한 자에게 줌이니라	He that hath a bountiful eye shall be blessed; for he giveth of his bread to the poor.	A generous man will be blessed, for he shares his bread with the poor.
PRO	22	10	거만한 자를 쫓아내면 다툼이 쉬고 싸움과 수욕이 그치느니라	Cast out the scorner, and contention shall go out; yea, strife and reproach shall cease.	Drive out the mocker, and conflict will depart; even quarreling and insults will cease.
PRO	22	11	마음의 정결을 사모하는 자의 입술에는 덕이 있으므로 임금이 그의 친구가 되느니라	He that loveth pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips the king shall be his friend.	He who loves a pure heart and gracious lips will have the king for a friend.
PRO	22	12	여호와께서는 지식 있는 자를 그 눈으로 지키시나 궤사한 자의 말은 패하게 하시느니라	The eyes of the Lord preserve knowledge, and he overthroweth the words of the transgressor.	The LORD’s eyes keep watch over knowledge, but He frustrates the words of the faithless.
PRO	22	13	게으른 자는 말하기를 사자가 밖에 있은즉 내가 나가면 거리에서 찢기겠다 하느니라	The slothful man saith, There is a lion without, I shall be slain in the streets.	The slacker says, “There is a lion outside! I will be slain in the streets!”
PRO	22	14	음녀의 입은 깊은 함정이라 여호와의 노를 당한 자는 거기 빠지리라	The mouth of strange women is a deep pit: he that is abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein.	The mouth of an adulteress is a deep pit; he who is under the wrath of the LORD will fall into it.
PRO	22	15	아이의 마음에는 미련한 것이 얽혔으나 징계하는 채찍이 이를 멀리 쫓아내리라	Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child; but the rod of correction shall drive it far from him.	Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a child, but the rod of discipline drives it far from him.
PRO	22	16	이를 얻으려고 가난한 자를 학대하는 자와 부자에게 주는 자는 가난하여질 뿐이니라	He that oppresseth the poor to increase his riches, and he that giveth to the rich, shall surely come to want.	Oppressing the poor to enrich oneself or giving gifts to the rich will surely lead to poverty.
PRO	22	17	너는 귀를 기울여 지혜 있는 자의 말씀을 들으며 내 지식에 마음을 둘지어다	Bow down thine ear, and hear the words of the wise, and apply thine heart unto my knowledge.	Incline your ear and hear the words of the wise— apply your mind to my knowledge—
PRO	22	18	이것을 네 속에 보존하며 네 입술에 있게 함이 아름다우니라	For it is a pleasant thing if thou keep them within thee; they shall withal be fitted in thy lips.	for it is pleasing when you keep them within you and they are constantly on your lips.
PRO	22	19	내가 너로 여호와를 의뢰하게 하려 하여 이것을 오늘 특별히 네게 알게 하였노니	That thy trust may be in the Lord, I have made known to thee this day, even to thee.	So that your trust may be in the LORD, I instruct you today—yes, you.
PRO	22	20	내가 모략과 지식의 아름다운 것을 기록하여	Have not I written to thee excellent things in counsels and knowledge,	Have I not written for you thirty sayings about counsel and knowledge,
PRO	22	21	너로 진리의 확실한 말씀을 깨닫게 하며 또 너를 보내는 자에게 진리의 말씀으로 회답하게 하려 함이 아니냐	That I might make thee know the certainty of the words of truth; that thou mightest answer the words of truth to them that send unto thee?	to show you true and reliable words, that you may soundly answer those who sent you?
PRO	22	22	약한 자를 약하다고 탈취하지 말며 곤고한 자를 성문에서 압제하지 말라	Rob not the poor, because he is poor: neither oppress the afflicted in the gate:	Do not rob a poor man because he is poor, and do not crush the afflicted at the gate,
PRO	22	23	대저 여호와께서 신원하여 주시고 또 그를 노략하는 자의 생명을 빼앗으시리라	For the Lord will plead their cause, and spoil the soul of those that spoiled them.	for the LORD will take up their case and will plunder those who rob them.
PRO	22	24	노를 품는 자와 사귀지 말며 울분한 자와 동행하지 말지니	Make no friendship with an angry man; and with a furious man thou shalt not go:	Do not make friends with an angry man, and do not associate with a hot-tempered man,
PRO	22	25	그 행위를 본받아서 네 영혼을 올무에 빠칠까 두려움이니라	Lest thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy soul.	or you may learn his ways and entangle yourself in a snare.
PRO	22	26	너는 사람으로 더불어 손을 잡지 말며 남의 빚에 보증이 되지 말라	Be not thou one of them that strike hands, or of them that are sureties for debts.	Do not be one who gives pledges, who puts up security for debts.
PRO	22	27	만일 갚을 것이 없으면 네 누운 침상도 빼앗길 것이라 네가 어찌 그리 하겠느냐	If thou hast nothing to pay, why should he take away thy bed from under thee?	If you have nothing with which to pay, why should your bed be taken from under you?
PRO	22	28	네 선조의 세운 옛 지계석을 옮기지 말지니라	Remove not the ancient landmark, which thy fathers have set.	Do not move an ancient boundary stone which your fathers have placed.
PRO	22	29	네가 자기 사업에 근실한 사람을 보았느냐 이러한 사람은 왕 앞에 설 것이요 천한 자 앞에 서지 아니하리라	Seest thou a man diligent in his business? he shall stand before kings; he shall not stand before mean men.	Do you see a man skilled in his work? He will be stationed in the presence of kings; he will not stand before obscure men.
PRO	23	1	네가 관원과 함께 앉아 음식을 먹게 되거든 삼가 네 앞에 있는 자가 누구인지 생각하며	When thou sittest to eat with a ruler, consider diligently what is before thee:	When you sit down to dine with a ruler, consider carefully what is set before you,
PRO	23	2	네가 만일 탐식자여든 네 목에 칼을 둘 것이니라	And put a knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to appetite.	and put a knife to your throat if you possess a great appetite.
PRO	23	3	그 진찬을 탐하지 말라 그것은 간사하게 베푼 식물이니라	Be not desirous of his dainties: for they are deceitful meat.	Do not crave his delicacies, for that food is deceptive.
PRO	23	4	부자 되기에 애쓰지 말고 네 사사로운 지혜를 버릴지어다	Labour not to be rich: cease from thine own wisdom.	Do not wear yourself out to get rich; be wise enough to restrain yourself.
PRO	23	5	네가 어찌 허무한 것에 주목하겠느냐 정녕히 재물은 날개를 내어 하늘에 나는 독수리처럼 날아가리라	Wilt thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches certainly make themselves wings; they fly away as an eagle toward heaven.	When you glance at wealth, it disappears, for it makes wings for itself and flies like an eagle to the sky.
PRO	23	6	악한 눈이 있는 자의 음식을 먹지 말며 그 진찬을 탐하지 말지어다	Eat thou not the bread of him that hath an evil eye, neither desire thou his dainty meats:	Do not eat the bread of a stingy man, and do not crave his delicacies;
PRO	23	7	대저 그 마음의 생각이 어떠하면 그 위인도 그러한즉 그가 너더러 먹고 마시라 할지라도 그 마음은 너와 함께 하지 아니함이라	For as he thinketh in his heart, so is he: Eat and drink, saith he to thee; but his heart is not with thee.	for he is keeping track, inwardly counting the cost. “Eat and drink,” he says to you, but his heart is not with you.
PRO	23	8	네가 조금 먹은 것도 토하겠고 네 아름다운 말도 헛된 데로 돌아가리라	The morsel which thou hast eaten shalt thou vomit up, and lose thy sweet words.	You will vomit up what little you have eaten and waste your pleasant words.
PRO	23	9	미련한 자의 귀에 말하지 말지니 이는 그가 네 지혜로운 말을 업신여길 것임이니라	Speak not in the ears of a fool: for he will despise the wisdom of thy words.	Do not speak to a fool, for he will despise the wisdom of your words.
PRO	23	10	옛 지계석을 옮기지 말며 외로운 자식의 밭을 침범하지 말지어다	Remove not the old landmark; and enter not into the fields of the fatherless:	Do not move an ancient boundary stone or encroach on the fields of the fatherless,
PRO	23	11	대저 그들의 구속자는 강하시니 너를 대적하사 그 원을 펴시리라	For their redeemer is mighty; he shall plead their cause with thee.	for their Redeemer is strong; He will take up their case against you.
PRO	23	12	훈계에 착심하며 지식의 말씀에 귀를 기울이라	Apply thine heart unto instruction, and thine ears to the words of knowledge.	Apply your heart to instruction and your ears to words of knowledge.
PRO	23	13	아이를 훈계하지 아니치 말라 채찍으로 그를 때릴지라도 죽지 아니하리라	Withhold not correction from the child: for if thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not die.	Do not withhold discipline from a child; although you strike him with a rod, he will not die.
PRO	23	14	그를 채찍으로 때리면 그 영혼을 음부에서 구원하리라	Thou shalt beat him with the rod, and shalt deliver his soul from hell.	Strike him with a rod, and you will deliver his soul from Sheol.
PRO	23	15	내 아들아 만일 네 마음이 지혜로우면 나 곧 내 마음이 즐겁겠고	My son, if thine heart be wise, my heart shall rejoice, even mine.	My son, if your heart is wise, my own heart will indeed rejoice.
PRO	23	16	만일 네 입술이 정직을 말하면 내 속이 유쾌하리라	Yea, my reins shall rejoice, when thy lips speak right things.	My inmost being will rejoice when your lips speak what is right.
PRO	23	17	네 마음으로 죄인의 형통을 부러워하지 말고 항상 여호와를 경외하라	Let not thine heart envy sinners: but be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long.	Do not let your heart envy sinners, but always continue in the fear of the LORD.
PRO	23	18	정녕히 네 장래가 있겠고 네 소망이 끊어지지 아니하리라	For surely there is an end; and thine expectation shall not be cut off.	For surely there is a future, and your hope will not be cut off.
PRO	23	19	내 아들아 너는 듣고 지혜를 얻어 네 마음을 정로로 인도할지니라	Hear thou, my son, and be wise, and guide thine heart in the way.	Listen, my son, and be wise, and guide your heart on the right course.
PRO	23	20	술을 즐겨하는 자와 고기를 탐하는 자로 더불어 사귀지 말라	Be not among winebibbers; among riotous eaters of flesh:	Do not join those who drink too much wine or gorge themselves on meat.
PRO	23	21	술 취하고 탐식하는 자는 가난하여질 것이요 잠자기를 즐겨하는 자는 해어진 옷을 입을 것임이니라	For the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty: and drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags.	For the drunkard and the glutton will come to poverty, and drowsiness will clothe them in rags.
PRO	23	22	너 낳은 아비에게 청종하고 네 늙은 어미를 경히 여기지 말지니라	Hearken unto thy father that begat thee, and despise not thy mother when she is old.	Listen to your father who gave you life, and do not despise your mother when she is old.
PRO	23	23	진리를 사고서 팔지 말며 지혜와 훈계와 명철도 그리할지니라	Buy the truth, and sell it not; also wisdom, and instruction, and understanding.	Invest in truth and never sell it— in wisdom and instruction and understanding.
PRO	23	24	의인의 아비는 크게 즐거울 것이요 지혜로운 자식을 낳은 자는 그를 인하여 즐거울 것이니라	The father of the righteous shall greatly rejoice: and he that begetteth a wise child shall have joy of him.	The father of a righteous man will greatly rejoice, and he who fathers a wise son will delight in him.
PRO	23	25	네 부모를 즐겁게 하며 너 낳은 어미를 기쁘게 하라	Thy father and thy mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee shall rejoice.	May your father and mother be glad, and may she who gave you birth rejoice!
PRO	23	26	내 아들아 네 마음을 내게 주며 네 눈으로 내 길을 즐거워할지어다	My son, give me thine heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways.	My son, give me your heart, and let your eyes delight in my ways.
PRO	23	27	대저 음녀는 깊은 구렁이요 이방 여인은 좁은 함정이라	For a whore is a deep ditch; and a strange woman is a narrow pit.	For a prostitute is a deep pit, and an adulteress is a narrow well.
PRO	23	28	그는 강도 같이 매복하며 인간에 궤사한 자가 많아지게 하느니라	She also lieth in wait as for a prey, and increaseth the transgressors among men.	Like a robber she lies in wait and multiplies the faithless among men.
PRO	23	29	재앙이 뉘게 있느뇨 근심이 뉘게 있느뇨 분쟁이 뉘게 있느뇨 원망이 뉘게 있느뇨 까닭 없는 창상이 뉘게 있느뇨 붉은 눈이 뉘게 있느뇨	Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? who hath contentions? who hath babbling? who hath wounds without cause? who hath redness of eyes?	Who has woe? Who has sorrow? Who has contentions? Who has complaints? Who has needless wounds? Who has bloodshot eyes?
PRO	23	30	술에 잠긴 자에게 있고 혼합한 술을 구하러 다니는 자에게 있느니라	They that tarry long at the wine; they that go to seek mixed wine.	Those who linger over wine, who go to taste mixed drinks.
PRO	23	31	포도주는 붉고 잔에서 번쩍이며 순하게 내려가나니 너는 그것을 보지도 말지어다	Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it giveth his colour in the cup, when it moveth itself aright.	Do not gaze at wine while it is red, when it sparkles in the cup and goes down smoothly.
PRO	23	32	이것이 마침내 뱀 같이 물 것이요 독사 같이 쏠 것이며	At the last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder.	In the end it bites like a snake and stings like a viper.
PRO	23	33	또 네 눈에는 괴이한 것이 보일 것이요 네 마음은 망령된 것을 발할 것이며	Thine eyes shall behold strange women, and thine heart shall utter perverse things.	Your eyes will see strange things, and your mind will utter perversities.
PRO	23	34	너는 바다 가운데 누운 자 같을 것이요 돛대 위에 누운 자 같을 것이며	Yea, thou shalt be as he that lieth down in the midst of the sea, or as he that lieth upon the top of a mast.	You will be like one sleeping on the high seas or lying on the top of a mast:
PRO	23	35	네가 스스로 말하기를 사람이 나를 때려도 나는 아프지 아니하고 나를 상하게 하여도 내게 감각이 없도다 내가 언제나 깰까 다시 술을 찾겠다 하리라	They have stricken me, shalt thou say, and I was not sick; they have beaten me, and I felt it not: when shall I awake? I will seek it yet again.	“They struck me, but I feel no pain! They beat me, but I did not know it! When can I wake up to search for another drink?”
PRO	24	1	너는 악인의 형통을 부러워하지 말며 그와 함께 있기도 원하지 말지어다	Be not thou envious against evil men, neither desire to be with them.	Do not envy wicked men or desire their company;
PRO	24	2	그들의 마음은 강포를 품고 그 입술은 잔해를 말함이니라	For their heart studieth destruction, and their lips talk of mischief.	for their hearts devise violence, and their lips declare trouble.
PRO	24	3	집은 지혜로 말미암아 건축되고 명철로 말미암아 견고히 되며	Through wisdom is an house builded; and by understanding it is established:	By wisdom a house is built and by understanding it is established;
PRO	24	4	또 방들은 지식으로 말미암아 각종 귀하고 아름다운 보배로 채우게 되느니라	And by knowledge shall the chambers be filled with all precious and pleasant riches.	through knowledge its rooms are filled with every precious and beautiful treasure.
PRO	24	5	지혜 있는 자는 강하고 지식 있는 자는 힘을 더하나니	A wise man is strong; yea, a man of knowledge increaseth strength.	A wise man is strong, and a man of knowledge enhances his strength.
PRO	24	6	너는 모략으로 싸우라 승리는 모사가 많음에 있느니라	For by wise counsel thou shalt make thy war: and in multitude of counsellors there is safety.	Only with sound guidance should you wage war, and victory lies in a multitude of counselors.
PRO	24	7	지혜는 너무 높아서 미련한 자의 미치지 못할 것이므로 그는 성문에서 입을 열지 못하느니라	Wisdom is too high for a fool: he openeth not his mouth in the gate.	Wisdom is too high for a fool; he does not open his mouth in the meeting place.
PRO	24	8	악을 행하기를 꾀하는 자를 일컬어 사특한 자라 하느니라	He that deviseth to do evil shall be called a mischievous person.	He who plots evil will be called a schemer.
PRO	24	9	미련한 자의 생각은 죄요 거만한 자는 사람의 미움을 받느니라	The thought of foolishness is sin: and the scorner is an abomination to men.	A foolish scheme is sin, and a mocker is detestable to men.
PRO	24	10	네가 만일 환난날에 낙담하면 네 힘의 미약함을 보임이니라	If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small.	If you faint in the day of distress, how small is your strength!
PRO	24	11	너는 사망으로 끌려가는 자를 건져주며 살륙을 당하게 된 자를 구원하지 아니치 말라	If thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto death, and those that are ready to be slain;	Rescue those being led away to death, and restrain those stumbling toward the slaughter.
PRO	24	12	네가 말하기를 나는 그것을 알지 못하였노라 할지라도 마음을 저울질 하시는 이가 어찌 통찰하지 못하시겠으며 네 영혼을 지키시는 이가 어찌 알지 못하시겠느냐 그가 각 사람의 행위대로 보증하시리라	If thou sayest, Behold, we knew it not; doth not he that pondereth the heart consider it? and he that keepeth thy soul, doth not he know it? and shall not he render to every man according to his works?	If you say, “Behold, we did not know about this,” does not He who weighs hearts consider it? Does not the One who guards your life know? Will He not repay a man according to his deeds?
PRO	24	13	내 아들아 꿀을 먹으라 이것이 좋으니라 송이꿀을 먹으라 이것이 네 입에 다니라	My son, eat thou honey, because it is good; and the honeycomb, which is sweet to thy taste:	Eat honey, my son, for it is good, and the honeycomb is sweet to your taste.
PRO	24	14	지혜가 네 영혼에게 이와 같은 줄을 알라 이것을 얻으면 정녕히 네 장래가 있겠고 네 소망이 끊어지지 아니하리라	So shall the knowledge of wisdom be unto thy soul: when thou hast found it, then there shall be a reward, and thy expectation shall not be cut off.	Know therefore that wisdom is sweet to your soul. If you find it, there is a future for you, and your hope will never be cut off.
PRO	24	15	악한 자여 의인의 집을 엿보지 말며 그 쉬는 처소를 헐지 말지니라	Lay not wait, O wicked man, against the dwelling of the righteous; spoil not his resting place:	Do not lie in wait, O wicked man, near the dwelling of the righteous; do not destroy his resting place.
PRO	24	16	대저 의인은 일곱 번 넘어질지라도 다시 일어나려니와 악인은 재앙으로 인하여 엎드러지느니라	For a just man falleth seven times, and riseth up again: but the wicked shall fall into mischief.	For though a righteous man may fall seven times, he still gets up; but the wicked stumble in bad times.
PRO	24	17	네 원수가 넘어질 때에 즐거워하지 말며 그가 엎드러질 때에 마음에 기뻐하지 말라	Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, and let not thine heart be glad when he stumbleth:	Do not gloat when your enemy falls, and do not let your heart rejoice when he stumbles,
PRO	24	18	여호와께서 이것을 보시고 기뻐 아니하사 그 진노를 그에게서 옮기실까 두려우니라	Lest the Lord see it, and it displease him, and he turn away his wrath from him.	or the LORD will see and disapprove, and turn His wrath away from him.
PRO	24	19	너는 행악자의 득의함을 인하여 분을 품지 말며 악인의 형통을 부러워하지 말라	Fret not thyself because of evil men, neither be thou envious at the wicked;	Do not fret over evildoers, and do not be envious of the wicked.
PRO	24	20	대저 행악자는 장래가 없겠고 악인의 등불은 꺼지리라	For there shall be no reward to the evil man; the candle of the wicked shall be put out.	For the evil man has no future; the lamp of the wicked will be extinguished.
PRO	24	21	내 아들아 여호와와 왕을 경외하고 반역자로 더불어 사귀지 말라	My son, fear thou the Lord and the king: and meddle not with them that are given to change:	My son, fear the LORD and the king, and do not associate with the rebellious.
PRO	24	22	대저 그들의 재앙은 속히 임하리니 이 두 자의 멸망을 누가 알랴	For their calamity shall rise suddenly; and who knoweth the ruin of them both?	For they will bring sudden destruction. Who knows what ruin they can bring?
PRO	24	23	이것도 지혜로운 자의 말씀이라 재판할 때에 낯을 보아주는 것이 옳지 못하니라	These things also belong to the wise. It is not good to have respect of persons in judgment.	These also are sayings of the wise: To show partiality in judgment is not good.
PRO	24	24	무릇 악인더러 옳다 하는 자는 백성에게 저주를 받을 것이요 국민에게 미움을 받으려니와	He that saith unto the wicked, Thou art righteous; him shall the people curse, nations shall abhor him:	Whoever tells the guilty, “You are innocent”— peoples will curse him, and nations will denounce him;
PRO	24	25	오직 그를 견책하는 자는 기쁨을 얻을 것이요 또 좋은 복을 받으리라	But to them that rebuke him shall be delight, and a good blessing shall come upon them.	but it will go well with those who convict the guilty, and rich blessing will come upon them.
PRO	24	26	적당한 말로 대답함은 입맞춤과 같으니라	Every man shall kiss his lips that giveth a right answer.	An honest answer given is like a kiss on the lips.
PRO	24	27	네 일을 밖에서 다스리며 밭에서 예비하고 그 후에 네 집을 세울지니라	Prepare thy work without, and make it fit for thyself in the field; and afterwards build thine house.	Complete your outdoor work and prepare your field; after that, you may build your house.
PRO	24	28	너는 까닭없이 네 이웃을 쳐서 증인이 되지 말며 네 입술로 속이지 말지니라	Be not a witness against thy neighbour without cause; and deceive not with thy lips.	Do not testify against your neighbor without cause, and do not deceive with your lips.
PRO	24	29	너는 그가 내게 행함 같이 나도 그에게 행하여 그 행한 대로 갚겠다 말하지 말지니라	Say not, I will do so to him as he hath done to me: I will render to the man according to his work.	Do not say, “I will do to him as he has done to me; I will repay the man according to his work.”
PRO	24	30	내가 증왕에 게으른 자의 밭과 지혜 없는 자의 포도원을 지나며 본즉	I went by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard of the man void of understanding;	I went past the field of a slacker and by the vineyard of a man lacking judgment.
PRO	24	31	가시덤불이 퍼졌으며 거친 풀이 지면에 덮였고 돌담이 무너졌기로	And, lo, it was all grown over with thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall thereof was broken down.	Thorns had grown up everywhere, thistles had covered the ground, and the stone wall was broken down.
PRO	24	32	내가 보고 생각이 깊었고 내가 보고 훈계를 받았었노라	Then I saw, and considered it well: I looked upon it, and received instruction.	I observed and took it to heart; I looked and received instruction:
PRO	24	33	네가 좀더 자자, 좀더 졸자, 손을 모으고 좀더 눕자 하니 네 빈궁이 강도 같이 오며	Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep:	A little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to rest,
PRO	24	34	네 곤핍이 군사 같이 이르리라	So shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth; and thy want as an armed man.	and poverty will come upon you like a robber, and need like a bandit.
PRO	25	1	이것도 솔로몬의 잠언이요 유다 왕 히스기야의 신하들의 편집한 것이니라	These are also proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah king of Judah copied out.	These are additional proverbs of Solomon, which were copied by the men of Hezekiah king of Judah:
PRO	25	2	일을 숨기는 것은 하나님의 영화요 일을 살피는 것은 왕의 영화니라	It is the glory of God to conceal a thing: but the honour of kings is to search out a matter.	It is the glory of God to conceal a matter and the glory of kings to search it out.
PRO	25	3	하늘의 높음과 땅의 깊음 같이 왕의 마음은 헤아릴 수 없느니라	The heaven for height, and the earth for depth, and the heart of kings is unsearchable.	As the heavens are high and the earth is deep, so the hearts of kings cannot be searched.
PRO	25	4	은에서 찌끼를 제하라 그리하면 장색의 쓸만한 그릇이 나올 것이요	Take away the dross from the silver, and there shall come forth a vessel for the finer.	Remove the dross from the silver, and a vessel for a silversmith will come forth.
PRO	25	5	왕 앞에서 악한 자를 제하라 그리하면 그 위가 의로 말미암아 견고히 서리라	Take away the wicked from before the king, and his throne shall be established in righteousness.	Remove the wicked from the king’s presence, and his throne will be established in righteousness.
PRO	25	6	왕 앞에서 스스로 높은 체 하지 말며 대인의 자리에 서지 말라	Put not forth thyself in the presence of the king, and stand not in the place of great men:	Do not exalt yourself in the presence of the king, and do not stand in the place of great men;
PRO	25	7	이는 사람이 너더러 이리로 올라오라 하는 것이 네 눈에 보이는 귀인 앞에서 저리로 내려가라 하는 것보다 나음이니라	For better it is that it be said unto thee, Come up hither; than that thou shouldest be put lower in the presence of the prince whom thine eyes have seen.	for it is better that he says to you, “Come up here!” than that you should be demoted in the presence of the prince. Even what you have seen with your own eyes,
PRO	25	8	너는 급거히 나가서 다투지 말라 마침내 네가 이웃에게 욕을 보게 될 때에 네가 어찌 할 줄을 알지 못할까 두려우니라	Go not forth hastily to strive, lest thou know not what to do in the end thereof, when thy neighbour hath put thee to shame.	do not bring hastily to court. Otherwise, what will you do in the end when your neighbor puts you to shame?
PRO	25	9	너는 이웃과 다투거든 변론만 하고 남의 은밀한 일은 누설하지 말라	Debate thy cause with thy neighbour himself; and discover not a secret to another:	Argue your case with your neighbor without betraying another’s confidence,
PRO	25	10	듣는 자가 너를 꾸짖을 터이요 또 수욕이 네게서 떠나지 아니할까 두려우니라	Lest he that heareth it put thee to shame, and thine infamy turn not away.	lest the one who hears may disgrace you, and your infamy never go away.
PRO	25	11	경우에 합당한 말은 아로새긴 은쟁반에 금사과니라	A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in pictures of silver.	A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in settings of silver.
PRO	25	12	슬기로운 자의 책망은 청종하는 귀에 금고리와 정금 장식이니라	As an earring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, so is a wise reprover upon an obedient ear.	Like an earring of gold or an ornament of fine gold is a wise man’s rebuke to a listening ear.
PRO	25	13	충성된 사자는 그를 보낸 이에게 마치 추수하는 날에 얼음 냉수 같아서 능히 그 주인의 마음을 시원케 하느니라	As the cold of snow in the time of harvest, so is a faithful messenger to them that send him: for he refresheth the soul of his masters.	Like the cold of snow in the time of harvest is a trustworthy messenger to those who send him; he refreshes the soul of his masters.
PRO	25	14	선물한다고 거짓 자랑하는 자는 비 없는 구름과 바람 같으니라	Whoso boasteth himself of a false gift is like clouds and wind without rain.	Like clouds and wind without rain is the man who boasts of gifts never given.
PRO	25	15	오래 참으면 관원이 그 말을 용납하나니 부드러운 혀는 뼈를 꺾느니라	By long forbearing is a prince persuaded, and a soft tongue breaketh the bone.	Through patience a ruler can be persuaded, and a gentle tongue can break a bone.
PRO	25	16	너는 꿀을 만나거든 족하리만큼 먹으라 과식하므로 토할까 두려우니라	Hast thou found honey? eat so much as is sufficient for thee, lest thou be filled therewith, and vomit it.	If you find honey, eat just what you need, lest you have too much and vomit it up.
PRO	25	17	너는 이웃집에 자주 다니지 말라 그가 너를 싫어하며 미워할까 두려우니라	Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbour’s house; lest he be weary of thee, and so hate thee.	Seldom set foot in your neighbor’s house, lest he grow weary and hate you.
PRO	25	18	그 이웃을 쳐서 거짓 증거하는 사람은 방망이요 칼이요 뾰족한 살이니라	A man that beareth false witness against his neighbour is a maul, and a sword, and a sharp arrow.	Like a club or sword or sharp arrow is a man who bears false witness against his neighbor.
PRO	25	19	환난날에 진실치 못한 자를 의뢰하는 의뢰는 부러진 이와 위골된 발 같으니라	Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble is like a broken tooth, and a foot out of joint.	Like a broken tooth or a foot out of joint is confidence in a faithless man in time of trouble.
PRO	25	20	마음이 상한 자에게 노래하는 것은 추운 날에 옷을 벗음 같고 쏘다 위에 초를 부음 같으니라	As he that taketh away a garment in cold weather, and as vinegar upon nitre, so is he that singeth songs to an heavy heart.	Like one who removes a garment on a cold day or vinegar poured on a wound is one who sings songs to a heavy heart.
PRO	25	21	네 원수가 배고파하거든 식물을 먹이고 목말라하거든 물을 마시우라	If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat; and if he be thirsty, give him water to drink:	If your enemy is hungry, give him food to eat, and if he is thirsty, give him water to drink.
PRO	25	22	그리하는 것은 핀 숯으로 그의 머리에 놓는 것과 일반이요 여호와께서는 네게 상을 주시리라	For thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head, and the Lord shall reward thee.	For in so doing, you will heap burning coals on his head, and the LORD will reward you.
PRO	25	23	북풍이 비를 일으킴 같이 참소하는 혀는 사람의 얼굴에 분을 일으키느니라	The north wind driveth away rain: so doth an angry countenance a backbiting tongue.	As the north wind brings forth rain, so a backbiting tongue brings angry looks.
PRO	25	24	다투는 여인과 함께 큰 집에서 사는 것보다 움막에서 혼자 사는 것이 나으니라	It is better to dwell in the corner of the housetop, than with a brawling woman and in a wide house.	Better to live on a corner of the roof than to share a house with a quarrelsome wife.
PRO	25	25	먼 땅에서 오는 좋은 기별은 목마른 사람에게 냉수 같으니라	As cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far country.	Like cold water to a weary soul is good news from a distant land.
PRO	25	26	의인이 악인 앞에 굴복하는 것은 우물의 흐리어짐과 샘의 더러워짐 같으니라	A righteous man falling down before the wicked is as a troubled fountain, and a corrupt spring.	Like a muddied spring or a polluted well is a righteous man who gives way to the wicked.
PRO	25	27	꿀을 많이 먹는 것이 좋지 못하고 자기의 영예를 구하는 것이 헛되니라	It is not good to eat much honey: so for men to search their own glory is not glory.	It is not good to eat too much honey or to search out one’s own glory.
PRO	25	28	자기의 마음을 제어하지 아니하는 자는 성읍이 무너지고 성벽이 없는 것 같으니라	He that hath no rule over his own spirit is like a city that is broken down, and without walls.	Like a city whose walls are broken down is a man who does not control his temper.
PRO	26	1	미련한 자에게는 영예가 적당하지 아니하니 마치 여름에 눈오는 것과 추수 때에 비오는 것 같으니라	As snow in summer, and as rain in harvest, so honour is not seemly for a fool.	Like snow in summer and rain at harvest, honor does not befit a fool.
PRO	26	2	까닭 없는 저주는 참새의 떠도는 것과 제비의 날아가는 것 같이 이르지 아니하느니라	As the bird by wandering, as the swallow by flying, so the curse causeless shall not come.	Like a fluttering sparrow or darting swallow, an undeserved curse does not come to rest.
PRO	26	3	말에게는 채찍이요 나귀에게는 자갈이요 미련한 자의 등에는 막대기니라	A whip for the horse, a bridle for the ass, and a rod for the fool’s back.	A whip for the horse, a bridle for the donkey, and a rod for the backs of fools!
PRO	26	4	미련한 자의 어리석은 것을 따라 대답하지 말라 두렵건대 네가 그와 같을까 하노라	Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like unto him.	Do not answer a fool according to his folly, or you yourself will be like him.
PRO	26	5	미련한 자의 어리석은 것을 따라 그에게 대답하라 두렵건대 그가 스스로 지혜롭게 여길까 하노라	Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit.	Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he become wise in his own eyes.
PRO	26	6	미련한 자 편에 기별하는 것은 자기의 발을 베어 버림이라 해를 받느니라	He that sendeth a message by the hand of a fool cutteth off the feet, and drinketh damage.	Like cutting off one’s own feet or drinking violence is the sending of a message by the hand of a fool.
PRO	26	7	저는 자의 다리는 힘 없이 달렸나니 미련한 자의 입의 잠언도 그러하니라	The legs of the lame are not equal: so is a parable in the mouth of fools.	Like lame legs hanging limp is a proverb in the mouth of a fool.
PRO	26	8	미련한 자에게 영예를 주는 것은 돌을 물매에 매는 것과 같으니라	As he that bindeth a stone in a sling, so is he that giveth honour to a fool.	Like binding a stone into a sling is the giving of honor to a fool.
PRO	26	9	미련한 자의 입의 잠언은 술 취한 자의 손에 든 가시나무 같으니라	As a thorn goeth up into the hand of a drunkard, so is a parable in the mouth of fools.	Like a thorn that falls into the hand of a drunkard is a proverb in the mouth of a fool.
PRO	26	10	장인이 온갖 것을 만들지라도 미련한 자를 고용하는 것은 지나가는 자를 고용함과 같으니라	The great God that formed all things both rewardeth the fool, and rewardeth transgressors.	Like an archer who wounds at random is he who hires a fool or passerby.
PRO	26	11	개가 그 토한 것을 도로 먹는 것 같이 미련한 자는 그 미련한 것을 거듭 행하느니라	As a dog returneth to his vomit, so a fool returneth to his folly.	As a dog returns to its vomit, so a fool repeats his folly.
PRO	26	12	네가 스스로 지혜롭게 여기는 자를 보느냐 그보다 미련한 자에게 오히려 바랄 것이 있느니라	Seest thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a fool than of him.	Do you see a man who is wise in his own eyes? There is more hope for a fool than for him.
PRO	26	13	게으른 자는 길에 사자가 있다 거리에 사자가 있다 하느니라	The slothful man saith, There is a lion in the way; a lion is in the streets.	The slacker says, “A lion is in the road! A fierce lion roams the public square!”
PRO	26	14	문짝이 돌쩌귀를 따라서 도는 것 같이 게으른 자는 침상에서 구으느니라	As the door turneth upon his hinges, so doth the slothful upon his bed.	As a door turns on its hinges, so the slacker turns on his bed.
PRO	26	15	게으른 자는 그 손을 그릇에 넣고도 입으로 올리기를 괴로워하느니라	The slothful hideth his hand in his bosom; it grieveth him to bring it again to his mouth.	The slacker buries his hand in the dish; it wearies him to bring it back to his mouth.
PRO	26	16	게으른 자는 선히 대답하는 사람 일곱보다 자기를 지혜롭게 여기느니라	The sluggard is wiser in his own conceit than seven men that can render a reason.	The slacker is wiser in his own eyes than seven men who answer discreetly.
PRO	26	17	길로 지나다가 자기에게 상관없는 다툼을 간섭하는 자는 개 귀를 잡는 자와 같으니라	He that passeth by, and meddleth with strife belonging not to him, is like one that taketh a dog by the ears.	Like one who grabs a dog by the ears is a passerby who meddles in a quarrel not his own.
PRO	26	18	횃불을 던지며 살을 쏘아서 사람을 죽이는 미친 사람이 있나니	As a mad man who casteth firebrands, arrows, and death,	Like a madman shooting firebrands and deadly arrows,
PRO	26	19	자기 이웃을 속이고 말하기를 내가 희롱하였노라 하는 자도 그러하니라	So is the man that deceiveth his neighbour, and saith, Am not I in sport?	so is the man who deceives his neighbor and says, “I was only joking!”
PRO	26	20	나무가 다하면 불이 꺼지고 말장이가 없어지면 다툼이 쉬느니라	Where no wood is, there the fire goeth out: so where there is no talebearer, the strife ceaseth.	Without wood, a fire goes out; without gossip, a conflict ceases.
PRO	26	21	숯불 위에 숯을 더하는 것과 타는 불에 나무를 더하는 것 같이 다툼을 좋아하는 자는 시비를 일으키느니라	As coals are to burning coals, and wood to fire; so is a contentious man to kindle strife.	Like charcoal for embers and wood for fire, so is a quarrelsome man for kindling strife.
PRO	26	22	남의 말하기를 좋아하는 자의 말은 별식과 같아서 뱃 속 깊은 데로 내려가느니라	The words of a talebearer are as wounds, and they go down into the innermost parts of the belly.	The words of a gossip are like choice morsels that go down into the inmost being.
PRO	26	23	온유한 입술에 악한 마음은 낮은 은을 입힌 토기니라	Burning lips and a wicked heart are like a potsherd covered with silver dross.	Like glaze covering an earthen vessel are burning lips and a wicked heart.
PRO	26	24	감정 있는 자는 입술로는 꾸미고 속에는 궤휼을 품나니	He that hateth dissembleth with his lips, and layeth up deceit within him;	A hateful man disguises himself with his speech, but he lays up deceit in his heart.
PRO	26	25	그 말이 좋을지라도 믿지 말 것은 그 마음에 일곱 가지 가증한 것이 있음이라	When he speaketh fair, believe him not: for there are seven abominations in his heart.	When he speaks graciously, do not believe him, for seven abominations fill his heart.
PRO	26	26	궤휼로 그 감정을 감출지라도 그 악이 회중 앞에 드러나리라	Whose hatred is covered by deceit, his wickedness shall be shewed before the whole congregation.	Though his hatred is concealed by deception, his wickedness will be exposed in the assembly.
PRO	26	27	함정을 파는 자는 그것에 빠질 것이요 돌을 굴리는 자는 도리어 그것에 치이리라	Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein: and he that rolleth a stone, it will return upon him.	He who digs a pit will fall into it, and he who rolls a stone will have it roll back on him.
PRO	26	28	거짓말하는 자는 자기의 해한 자를 미워하고 아첨하는 입은 패망을 일으키느니라	A lying tongue hateth those that are afflicted by it; and a flattering mouth worketh ruin.	A lying tongue hates those it crushes, and a flattering mouth causes ruin.
PRO	27	1	너는 내일 일을 자랑하지 말라 하루 동안에 무슨 일이 날는지 네가 알 수 없음이니라	Boast not thyself of to morrow; for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth.	Do not boast about tomorrow, for you do not know what a day may bring.
PRO	27	2	타인으로 너를 칭찬하게 하고 네 입으로는 말며 외인으로 너를 칭찬하게 하고 네 입술로는 말지니라	Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth; a stranger, and not thine own lips.	Let another praise you, and not your own mouth— a stranger, and not your own lips.
PRO	27	3	돌은 무겁고 모래도 가볍지 아니하거니와 미련한 자의 분노는 이 둘보다 무거우니라	A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty; but a fool’s wrath is heavier than them both.	A stone is heavy and sand is a burden, but aggravation from a fool outweighs them both.
PRO	27	4	분은 잔인하고 노는 창수 같거니와 투기 앞에야 누가 서리요	Wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous; but who is able to stand before envy?	Wrath is cruel and anger is like a flood, but who can withstand jealousy?
PRO	27	5	면책은 숨은 사랑보다 나으니라	Open rebuke is better than secret love.	Better an open rebuke than love that is concealed.
PRO	27	6	친구의 통책은 충성에서 말미암은 것이나 원수의 자주 입맞춤은 거짓에서 난 것이니라	Faithful are the wounds of a friend; but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful.	The wounds of a friend are faithful, but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful.
PRO	27	7	배부른 자는 꿀이라도 싫어하고 주린 자에게는 쓴 것이라도 다니라	The full soul loatheth an honeycomb; but to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet.	The soul that is full loathes honey, but to a hungry soul, any bitter thing is sweet.
PRO	27	8	본향을 떠나 유리하는 사람은 보금자리를 떠나 떠도는 새와 같으니라	As a bird that wandereth from her nest, so is a man that wandereth from his place.	Like a bird that strays from its nest is a man who wanders from his home.
PRO	27	9	기름과 향이 사람의 마음을 즐겁게 하나니 친구의 충성된 권고가 이와 같이 아름다우니라	Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart: so doth the sweetness of a man’s friend by hearty counsel.	Oil and incense bring joy to the heart, and the sweetness of a friend is counsel to the soul.
PRO	27	10	네 친구와 네 아비의 친구를 버리지 말며 네 환난날에 형제의 집에 들어가지 말지어다 가까운 이웃이 먼 형제보다 나으니라	Thine own friend, and thy father’s friend, forsake not; neither go into thy brother’s house in the day of thy calamity: for better is a neighbour that is near than a brother far off.	Do not forsake your friend or your father’s friend, and do not go to your brother’s house in the day of your calamity; better a neighbor nearby than a brother far away.
PRO	27	11	내 아들아 지혜를 얻고 내 마음을 기쁘게 하라 그리하면 나를 비방하는 자에게 내가 대답할 수 있겠노라	My son, be wise, and make my heart glad, that I may answer him that reproacheth me.	Be wise, my son, and bring joy to my heart, so that I can answer him who taunts me.
PRO	27	12	슬기로운 자는 재앙을 보면 숨어 피하여도 어리석은 자들은 나아가다가 해를 받느니라	A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hideth himself; but the simple pass on, and are punished.	The prudent see danger and take cover; but the simple keep going and pay the penalty.
PRO	27	13	타인을 위하여 보증이 된 자의 옷을 취하라 외인들의 보증이 된 자는 그 몸을 볼모잡힐지니라	Take his garment that is surety for a stranger, and take a pledge of him for a strange woman.	Take the garment of him who posts security for a stranger; get collateral if it is for a foreigner.
PRO	27	14	이른 아침에 큰 소리로 그 이웃을 축복하면 도리어 저주 같이 여기게 되리라	He that blesseth his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning, it shall be counted a curse to him.	If one blesses his neighbor with a loud voice early in the morning, it will be counted to him as a curse.
PRO	27	15	다투는 부녀는 비오는 날에 이어 떨어지는 물방울이라	A continual dropping in a very rainy day and a contentious woman are alike.	A constant dripping on a rainy day and a contentious woman are alike—
PRO	27	16	그를 제어하기가 바람을 제어하는 것 같고 오른손으로 기름을 움키는 것 같으니라	Whosoever hideth her hideth the wind, and the ointment of his right hand, which bewrayeth itself.	restraining her is like holding back the wind or grasping oil with one’s right hand.
PRO	27	17	철이 철을 날카롭게 하는 것 같이 사람이 그 친구의 얼굴을 빛나게 하느니라	Iron sharpeneth iron; so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend.	As iron sharpens iron, so one man sharpens another.
PRO	27	18	무화과나무를 지키는 자는 그 과실을 먹고 자기 주인을 시종하는 자는 영화를 얻느니라	Whoso keepeth the fig tree shall eat the fruit thereof: so he that waiteth on his master shall be honoured.	Whoever tends a fig tree will eat its fruit, and he who looks after his master will be honored.
PRO	27	19	물에 비취이면 얼굴이 서로 같은 것 같이 사람의 마음도 서로 비취느니라	As in water face answereth to face, so the heart of man to man.	As water reflects the face, so the heart reflects the true man.
PRO	27	20	음부와 유명은 만족함이 없고 사람의 눈도 만족함이 없느니라	Hell and destruction are never full; so the eyes of man are never satisfied.	Sheol and Abaddon are never satisfied; so the eyes of man are never satisfied.
PRO	27	21	도가니로 은을, 풀무로 금을, 칭찬으로 사람을 시련하느니라	As the fining pot for silver, and the furnace for gold; so is a man to his praise.	A crucible for silver and a furnace for gold, but a man is tested by the praise accorded him.
PRO	27	22	미련한 자를 곡물과 함께 절구에 넣고 공이로 찧을지라도 그의 미련은 벗어지지 아니하느니라	Though thou shouldest bray a fool in a mortar among wheat with a pestle, yet will not his foolishness depart from him.	Though you grind a fool like grain with mortar and a pestle, yet his folly will not depart from him.
PRO	27	23	네 양떼의 형편을 부지런히 살피며 네 소떼에 마음을 두라	Be thou diligent to know the state of thy flocks, and look well to thy herds.	Be sure to know the state of your flocks, and pay close attention to your herds;
PRO	27	24	대저 재물은 영영히 있지 못하나니 면류관이 어찌 대대에 있으랴	For riches are not for ever: and doth the crown endure to every generation?	for riches are not forever, nor does a crown endure to every generation.
PRO	27	25	풀을 벤 후에는 새로 움이 돋나니 산에서 꼴을 거둘 것이니라	The hay appeareth, and the tender grass sheweth itself, and herbs of the mountains are gathered.	When hay is removed and new growth appears and the grain from the hills is gathered,
PRO	27	26	어린 양의 털은 네 옷이 되며 염소는 밭을 사는 값이 되며	The lambs are for thy clothing, and the goats are the price of the field.	the lambs will provide you with clothing, and the goats with the price of a field.
PRO	27	27	염소의 젖은 넉넉하여 너와 네 집 사람의 식물이 되며 네 여종의 먹을 것이 되느니라	And thou shalt have goats’ milk enough for thy food, for the food of thy household, and for the maintenance for thy maidens.	You will have plenty of goats’ milk to feed you— food for your household and nourishment for your maidservants.
PRO	28	1	악인은 쫓아 오는 자가 없어도 도망하나 의인은 사자 같이 담대하니라	The wicked flee when no man pursueth: but the righteous are bold as a lion.	The wicked flee when no one pursues, but the righteous are as bold as a lion.
PRO	28	2	나라는 죄가 있으면 주관자가 많아져도 명철과 지식 있는 사람으로 말미암아 장구하게 되느니라	For the transgression of a land many are the princes thereof: but by a man of understanding and knowledge the state thereof shall be prolonged.	A land in rebellion has many rulers, but a man of understanding and knowledge maintains order.
PRO	28	3	가난한 자를 학대하는 가난한 자는 곡식을 남기지 아니하는 폭우 같으니라	A poor man that oppresseth the poor is like a sweeping rain which leaveth no food.	A destitute leader who oppresses the poor is like a driving rain that leaves no food.
PRO	28	4	율법을 버린 자는 악인을 칭찬하나 율법을 지키는 자는 악인을 대적하느니라	They that forsake the law praise the wicked: but such as keep the law contend with them.	Those who forsake the law praise the wicked, but those who keep the law resist them.
PRO	28	5	악인은 공의를 깨닫지 못하나 여호와를 찾는 자는 모든 것을 깨닫느니라	Evil men understand not judgment: but they that seek the Lord understand all things.	Evil men do not understand justice, but those who seek the LORD comprehend fully.
PRO	28	6	성실히 행하는 가난한 자는 사곡히 행하는 부자보다 나으니라	Better is the poor that walketh in his uprightness, than he that is perverse in his ways, though he be rich.	Better a poor man who walks with integrity than a rich man whose ways are perverse.
PRO	28	7	율법을 지키는 자는 지혜로운 아들이요 탐식자를 사귀는 자는 아비를 욕되게 하는 자니라	Whoso keepeth the law is a wise son: but he that is a companion of riotous men shameth his father.	A discerning son keeps the law, but a companion of gluttons disgraces his father.
PRO	28	8	중한 변리로 자기 재산을 많아지게 하는 것은 가난한 사람 불쌍히 여기는 자를 위하여 그 재산을 저축하는 것이니라	He that by usury and unjust gain increaseth his substance, he shall gather it for him that will pity the poor.	He who increases his wealth by interest and usury lays it up for one who is kind to the poor.
PRO	28	9	사람이 귀를 돌이키고 율법을 듣지 아니하면 그의 기도도 가증하니라	He that turneth away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be abomination.	Whoever turns his ear away from hearing the law, even his prayer is detestable.
PRO	28	10	정직한 자를 악한 길로 유인하는 자는 스스로 자기 함정에 빠져도 성실한 자는 복을 얻느니라	Whoso causeth the righteous to go astray in an evil way, he shall fall himself into his own pit: but the upright shall have good things in possession.	He who leads the upright along the path of evil will fall into his own pit, but the blameless will inherit what is good.
PRO	28	11	부자는 자기를 지혜롭게 여겨도 명철한 가난한 자는 그를 살펴 아느니라	The rich man is wise in his own conceit; but the poor that hath understanding searcheth him out.	A rich man is wise in his own eyes, but a poor man with discernment sees through him.
PRO	28	12	의인이 득의하면 큰 영화가 있고 악인이 일어나면 사람이 숨느니라	When righteous men do rejoice, there is great glory: but when the wicked rise, a man is hidden.	When the righteous triumph, there is great glory, but when the wicked rise, men hide themselves.
PRO	28	13	자기의 죄를 숨기는 자는 형통치 못하나 죄를 자복하고 버리는 자는 불쌍히 여김을 받으리라	He that covereth his sins shall not prosper: but whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy.	He who conceals his sins will not prosper, but whoever confesses and renounces them will find mercy.
PRO	28	14	항상 경외하는 자는 복되거니와 마음을 강퍅하게 하는 자는 재앙에 빠지리라	Happy is the man that feareth alway: but he that hardeneth his heart shall fall into mischief.	Blessed is the man who is always reverent, but he who hardens his heart falls into trouble.
PRO	28	15	가난한 백성을 압제하는 악한 관원은 부르짖는 사자와 주린 곰 같으니라	As a roaring lion, and a ranging bear; so is a wicked ruler over the poor people.	Like a roaring lion or a charging bear is a wicked ruler over a helpless people.
PRO	28	16	무지한 치리자는 포학을 크게 행하거니와 탐욕을 미워하는 자는 장수하리라	The prince that wanteth understanding is also a great oppressor: but he that hateth covetousness shall prolong his days.	A leader who lacks judgment is also a great oppressor, but he who hates dishonest profit will prolong his days.
PRO	28	17	사람의 피를 흘린 자는 함정으로 달려갈 것이니 그를 막지 말지니라	A man that doeth violence to the blood of any person shall flee to the pit; let no man stay him.	A man burdened by bloodguilt will flee into the Pit; let no one support him.
PRO	28	18	성실히 행하는 자는 구원을 얻을 것이나 사곡히 행하는 자는 곧 넘어지리라	Whoso walketh uprightly shall be saved: but he that is perverse in his ways shall fall at once.	He who walks with integrity will be kept safe, but whoever is perverse in his ways will suddenly fall.
PRO	28	19	자기의 토지를 경작하는 자는 먹을 것이 많으려니와 방탕을 좇는 자는 궁핍함이 많으리라	He that tilleth his land shall have plenty of bread: but he that followeth after vain persons shall have poverty enough.	The one who works his land will have plenty of food, but whoever chases fantasies will have his fill of poverty.
PRO	28	20	충성된 자는 복이 많아도 속히 부하고자 하는 자는 형벌을 면치 못하리라	A faithful man shall abound with blessings: but he that maketh haste to be rich shall not be innocent.	A faithful man will abound with blessings, but one eager to be rich will not go unpunished.
PRO	28	21	사람의 낯을 보아주는 것이 좋지 못하고 한 조각 떡을 인하여 범법하는 것도 그러하니라	To have respect of persons is not good: for for a piece of bread that man will transgress.	To show partiality is not good, yet a man will do wrong for a piece of bread.
PRO	28	22	악한 눈이 있는 자는 재물을 얻기에만 급하고 빈궁이 자기에게로 임할 줄은 알지 못하느니라	He that hasteth to be rich hath an evil eye, and considereth not that poverty shall come upon him.	A stingy man hastens after wealth and does not know that poverty awaits him.
PRO	28	23	사람을 경책하는 자는 혀로 아첨하는 자보다 나중에 더욱 사랑을 받느니라	He that rebuketh a man afterwards shall find more favour than he that flattereth with the tongue.	He who rebukes a man will later find more favor than one who flatters with his tongue.
PRO	28	24	부모의 물건을 도적질하고 죄가 아니라 하는 자는 멸망케 하는 자의 동류니라	Whoso robbeth his father or his mother, and saith, It is no transgression; the same is the companion of a destroyer.	He who robs his father or mother, saying, “It is not wrong,” is a companion to the man who destroys.
PRO	28	25	마음이 탐하는 자는 다툼을 일으키나 여호와를 의지하는 자는 풍족하게 되느니라	He that is of a proud heart stirreth up strife: but he that putteth his trust in the Lord shall be made fat.	A greedy man stirs up strife, but he who trusts in the LORD will prosper.
PRO	28	26	자기의 마음을 믿는 자는 미련한 자요 지혜롭게 행하는 자는 구원을 얻을 자니라	He that trusteth in his own heart is a fool: but whoso walketh wisely, he shall be delivered.	He who trusts in himself is a fool, but one who walks in wisdom will be safe.
PRO	28	27	가난한 자를 구제하는 자는 궁핍하지 아니하려니와 못본체 하는 자에게는 저주가 많으리라	He that giveth unto the poor shall not lack: but he that hideth his eyes shall have many a curse.	Whoever gives to the poor will not be in need, but he who hides his eyes will receive many curses.
PRO	28	28	악인이 일어나면 사람이 숨고 그가 멸망하면 의인이 많아지느니라	When the wicked rise, men hide themselves: but when they perish, the righteous increase.	When the wicked come to power, people hide themselves; but when they perish, the righteous flourish.
PRO	29	1	자주 책망을 받으면서도 목이 곧은 사람은 갑자기 패망을 당하고 피하지 못하리라	He, that being often reproved hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy.	A man who remains stiff-necked after much reproof will suddenly be shattered beyond recovery.
PRO	29	2	의인이 많아지면 백성이 즐거워하고 악인이 권세를 잡으면 백성이 탄식하느니라	When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice: but when the wicked beareth rule, the people mourn.	When the righteous flourish, the people rejoice, but when the wicked rule, the people groan.
PRO	29	3	지혜를 사모하는 자는 아비를 즐겁게 하여도 창기를 사귀는 자는 재물을 없이 하느니라	Whoso loveth wisdom rejoiceth his father: but he that keepeth company with harlots spendeth his substance.	A man who loves wisdom brings joy to his father, but a companion of prostitutes squanders his wealth.
PRO	29	4	왕은 공의로 나라를 견고케 하나 뇌물을 억지로 내게 하는 자는 나라를 멸망시키느니라	The king by judgment establisheth the land: but he that receiveth gifts overthroweth it.	By justice a king brings stability to the land, but a man who exacts tribute demolishes it.
PRO	29	5	이웃에게 아첨하는 것은 그의 발 앞에 그물을 치는 것이니라	A man that flattereth his neighbour spreadeth a net for his feet.	A man who flatters his neighbor spreads a net for his feet.
PRO	29	6	악인의 범죄하는 것은 스스로 올무가 되게 하는 것이나 의인은 노래하고 기뻐하느니라	In the transgression of an evil man there is a snare: but the righteous doth sing and rejoice.	An evil man is caught by his own sin, but a righteous one sings and rejoices.
PRO	29	7	의인은 가난한 자의 사정을 알아 주나 악인은 알아 줄 지식이 없느니라	The righteous considereth the cause of the poor: but the wicked regardeth not to know it.	The righteous consider the cause of the poor, but the wicked have no regard for such concerns.
PRO	29	8	모만한 자는 성읍을 요란케 하여도 슬기로운 자는 노를 그치게 하느니라	Scornful men bring a city into a snare: but wise men turn away wrath.	Mockers inflame a city, but the wise turn away anger.
PRO	29	9	지혜로운 자와 미련한 자가 다투면 지혜로운 자가 노하든지 웃든지 그 다툼이 그침이 없느니라	If a wise man contendeth with a foolish man, whether he rage or laugh, there is no rest.	If a wise man goes to court with a fool, there will be raving and laughing with no resolution.
PRO	29	10	피 흘리기를 좋아하는 자는 온전한 자를 미워하고 정직한 자의 생명을 찾느니라	The bloodthirsty hate the upright: but the just seek his soul.	Men of bloodshed hate a blameless man, but the upright care for his life.
PRO	29	11	어리석은 자는 그 노를 다 드러내어도 지혜로운 자는 그 노를 억제하느니라	A fool uttereth all his mind: but a wise man keepeth it in till afterwards.	A fool vents all his anger, but a wise man holds it back.
PRO	29	12	관원이 거짓말을 신청하면 그 하인은 다 악하니라	If a ruler hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked.	If a ruler listens to lies, all his officials will be wicked.
PRO	29	13	가난한 자와 포학한 자가 섞여 살거니와 여호와께서는 그들의 눈에 빛을 주시느니라	The poor and the deceitful man meet together: the Lord lighteneth both their eyes.	The poor man and the oppressor have this in common: The LORD gives light to the eyes of both.
PRO	29	14	왕이 가난한 자를 성실히 신원하면 그 위가 영원히 견고하리라	The king that faithfully judgeth the poor, his throne shall be established for ever.	A king who judges the poor with fairness— his throne will be established forever.
PRO	29	15	채찍과 꾸지람이 지혜를 주거늘 임의로 하게 버려두면 그 자식은 어미를 욕되게 하느니라	The rod and reproof give wisdom: but a child left to himself bringeth his mother to shame.	A rod of correction imparts wisdom, but a child left to himself disgraces his mother.
PRO	29	16	악인이 많아지면 죄도 많아지나니 의인은 그들의 망함을 보리라	When the wicked are multiplied, transgression increaseth: but the righteous shall see their fall.	When the wicked thrive, rebellion increases; but the righteous will see their downfall.
PRO	29	17	네 자식을 징계하라 그리하면 그가 너를 평안하게 하겠고 또 네 마음에 기쁨을 주리라	Correct thy son, and he shall give thee rest; yea, he shall give delight unto thy soul.	Discipline your son, and he will give you rest; he will bring delight to your soul.
PRO	29	18	묵시가 없으면 백성이 방자히 행하거니와 율법을 지키는 자는 복이 있느니라	Where there is no vision, the people perish: but he that keepeth the law, happy is he.	Where there is no vision, the people cast off restraint; but blessed is he who keeps the Law.
PRO	29	19	종은 말로만 하면 고치지 아니하나니 이는 그가 알고도 청종치 아니함이니라	A servant will not be corrected by words: for though he understand he will not answer.	A servant cannot be corrected by words alone; though he understands, he will not respond.
PRO	29	20	네가 언어에 조급한 사람을 보느냐 그보다 미련한 자에게 오히려 바랄 것이 있느니라	Seest thou a man that is hasty in his words? there is more hope of a fool than of him.	Do you see a man who speaks in haste? There is more hope for a fool than for him.
PRO	29	21	종을 어렸을 때부터 곱게 양육하면 그가 나중에는 자식인체 하리라	He that delicately bringeth up his servant from a child shall have him become his son at the length.	A servant pampered from his youth will bring grief in the end.
PRO	29	22	노하는 자는 다툼을 일으키고 분하여 하는 자는 범죄함이 많으니라	An angry man stirreth up strife, and a furious man aboundeth in transgression.	An angry man stirs up dissension, and a hot-tempered man abounds in transgression.
PRO	29	23	사람이 교만하면 낮아지게 되겠고 마음이 겸손하면 영예를 얻으리라	A man’s pride shall bring him low: but honour shall uphold the humble in spirit.	A man’s pride will bring him low, but a humble spirit will obtain honor.
PRO	29	24	도적과 짝하는 자는 자기의 영혼을 미워하는 자라 그는 맹세함을 들어도 직고하지 아니하느니라	Whoso is partner with a thief hateth his own soul: he heareth cursing, and bewrayeth it not.	A partner to a thief hates his own soul; he receives the oath, but does not testify.
PRO	29	25	사람을 두려워하면 올무에 걸리게 되거니와 여호와를 의지하는 자는 안전하리라	The fear of man bringeth a snare: but whoso putteth his trust in the Lord shall be safe.	The fear of man is a snare, but whoever trusts in the LORD is set securely on high.
PRO	29	26	주권자에게 은혜를 구하는 자가 많으나 사람의 일의 작정은 여호와께로 말미암느니라	Many seek the ruler’s favour; but every man’s judgment cometh from the Lord.	Many seek the ruler’s favor, but a man receives justice from the LORD.
PRO	29	27	불의한 자는 의인에게 미움을 받고 정직한 자는 악인에게 미움을 받느니라	An unjust man is an abomination to the just: and he that is upright in the way is abomination to the wicked.	An unjust man is detestable to the righteous, and one whose way is upright is detestable to the wicked.
PRO	30	1	이 말씀은 야게의 아들 아굴의 잠언이니 그가 이디엘과 우갈에게 이른 것이니라	The words of Agur the son of Jakeh, even the prophecy: the man spake unto Ithiel, even unto Ithiel and Ucal,	These are the words of Agur son of Jakeh—the burden that this man declared to Ithiel: “I am weary, O God, and worn out.
PRO	30	2	나는 다른 사람에게 비하면 짐승이라 내게는 사람의 총명이 있지 아니하니라	Surely I am more brutish than any man, and have not the understanding of a man.	Surely I am the most ignorant of men, and I lack the understanding of a man.
PRO	30	3	나는 지혜를 배우지 못하였고 또 거룩하신 자를 아는 지식이 없거니와	I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy.	I have not learned wisdom, and I have no knowledge of the Holy One.
PRO	30	4	하늘에 올라갔다가 내려온 자가 누구인지, 바람을 그 장중에 모은 자가 누구인지, 물을 옷에 싼 자가 누구인지, 땅의 모든 끝을 정한 자가 누구인지, 그 이름이 무엇인지, 그 아들의 이름이 무엇인지 너는 아느냐	Who hath ascended up into heaven, or descended? who hath gathered the wind in his fists? who hath bound the waters in a garment? who hath established all the ends of the earth? what is his name, and what is his son’s name, if thou canst tell?	Who has ascended to heaven and come down? Who has gathered the wind in His hands? Who has bound up the waters in His cloak? Who has established all the ends of the earth? What is His name, and what is the name of His Son— surely you know!
PRO	30	5	하나님의 말씀은 다 순전하며 하나님은 그를 의지하는 자의 방패시니라	Every word of God is pure: he is a shield unto them that put their trust in him.	Every word of God is flawless; He is a shield to those who take refuge in Him.
PRO	30	6	너는 그 말씀에 더하지 말라 그가 너를 책망하시겠고 너는 거짓말 하는 자가 될까 두려우니라	Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar.	Do not add to His words, lest He rebuke you and prove you a liar.
PRO	30	7	내가 두 가지 일을 주께 구하였사오니 나의 죽기 전에 주시옵소서	Two things have I required of thee; deny me them not before I die:	Two things I ask of You— do not refuse me before I die:
PRO	30	8	곧 허탄과 거짓말을 내게서 멀리 하옵시며 나로 가난하게도 마옵시고 부하게도 마옵시고 오직 필요한 양식으로 내게 먹이시옵소서	Remove far from me vanity and lies: give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with food convenient for me:	Keep falsehood and deceitful words far from me. Give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with the bread that is my portion.
PRO	30	9	혹 내가 배불러서 하나님을 모른다 여호와가 누구냐 할까 하오며 혹 내가 가난하여 도적질하고 내 하나님의 이름을 욕되게 할까 두려워함이니이다	Lest I be full, and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? or lest I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my God in vain.	Otherwise, I may have too much and deny You, saying, ‘Who is the LORD?’ Or I may become poor and steal, profaning the name of my God.
PRO	30	10	너는 종을 그 상전에게 훼방하지 말라 그가 너를 저주하겠고 너는 죄책을 당할까 두려우니라	Accuse not a servant unto his master, lest he curse thee, and thou be found guilty.	Do not slander a servant to his master, or he will curse you, and you will bear the guilt.
PRO	30	11	아비를 저주하며 어미를 축복하지 아니하는 무리가 있느니라	There is a generation that curseth their father, and doth not bless their mother.	There is a generation of those who curse their fathers and do not bless their mothers.
PRO	30	12	스스로 깨끗한 자로 여기면서 오히려 그 더러운 것을 씻지 아니하는 무리가 있느니라	There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes, and yet is not washed from their filthiness.	There is a generation of those who are pure in their own eyes and yet unwashed of their filth.
PRO	30	13	눈이 심히 높으며 그 눈꺼풀이 높이 들린 무리가 있느니라	There is a generation, O how lofty are their eyes! and their eyelids are lifted up.	There is a generation—how haughty are their eyes and pretentious are their glances—
PRO	30	14	앞니는 장검 같고 어금니는 군도 같아서 가난한 자를 땅에서 삼키며 궁핍한 자를 사람 중에서 삼키는 무리가 있느니라	There is a generation, whose teeth are as swords, and their jaw teeth as knives, to devour the poor from off the earth, and the needy from among men.	there is a generation whose teeth are swords and whose jaws are knives, devouring the oppressed from the earth and the needy from among men.
PRO	30	15	거머리에게는 두 딸이 있어 다고 다고 하느니라 족한 줄을 알지 못하여 족하다 하지 아니하는 것 서넛이 있나니	The horseleach hath two daughters, crying, Give, give. There are three things that are never satisfied, yea, four things say not, It is enough:	The leech has two daughters: Give and Give. There are three things that are never satisfied, four that never say, ‘Enough!’:
PRO	30	16	곧 음부와 아이 배지 못하는 태와 물로 채울 수 없는 땅과 족하다 하지 아니하는 불이니라	The grave; and the barren womb; the earth that is not filled with water; and the fire that saith not, It is enough.	Sheol, the barren womb, land never satisfied with water, and fire that never says, ‘Enough!’
PRO	30	17	아비를 조롱하며 어미 순종하기를 싫어하는 자의 눈은 골짜기의 까마귀에게 쪼이고 독수리 새끼에게 먹히리라	The eye that mocketh at his father, and despiseth to obey his mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young eagles shall eat it.	As for the eye that mocks a father and scorns obedience to a mother, may the ravens of the valley pluck it out and young vultures devour it.
PRO	30	18	내가 심히 기이히 여기고도 깨닫지 못하는 것 서넛이 있나니	There be three things which are too wonderful for me, yea, four which I know not:	There are three things too wonderful for me, four that I cannot understand:
PRO	30	19	곧 공중에 날아 다니는 독수리의 자취와 반석 위로 기어 다니는 뱀의 자취와 바다로 지나다니는 배의 자취와 남자가 여자와 함께 한 자취며	The way of an eagle in the air; the way of a serpent upon a rock; the way of a ship in the midst of the sea; and the way of a man with a maid.	the way of an eagle in the sky, the way of a snake on a rock, the way of a ship at sea, and the way of a man with a maiden.
PRO	30	20	음녀의 자취도 그러하니라 그가 먹고 그 입을 씻음 같이 말하기를 내가 악을 행치 아니하였다 하느니라	Such is the way of an adulterous woman; she eateth, and wipeth her mouth, and saith, I have done no wickedness.	This is the way of an adulteress: She eats and wipes her mouth and says, ‘I have done nothing wrong.’
PRO	30	21	세상을 진동시키며 세상으로 견딜 수 없게 하는 것 서넛이 있나니	For three things the earth is disquieted, and for four which it cannot bear:	Under three things the earth trembles, under four it cannot bear up:
PRO	30	22	곧 종이 임금된 것과 미련한 자가 배부른 것과	For a servant when he reigneth; and a fool when he is filled with meat;	a servant who becomes king, a fool who is filled with food,
PRO	30	23	꺼림을 받는 계집이 시집간 것과 계집 종이 주모를 이은 것이니라	For an odious woman when she is married; and an handmaid that is heir to her mistress.	an unloved woman who marries, and a maidservant who supplants her mistress.
PRO	30	24	땅에 작고도 가장 지혜로운 것 넷이 있나니	There be four things which are little upon the earth, but they are exceeding wise:	Four things on earth are small, yet they are exceedingly wise:
PRO	30	25	곧 힘이 없는 종류로되 먹을 것을 여름에 예비하는 개미와	The ants are a people not strong, yet they prepare their meat in the summer;	The ants are creatures of little strength, yet they store up their food in the summer;
PRO	30	26	약한 종류로되 집을 바위 사이에 짓는 사반과	The conies are but a feeble folk, yet make they their houses in the rocks;	the rock badgers are creatures of little power, yet they make their homes in the rocks;
PRO	30	27	임군이 없으되 다 떼를 지어 나아가는 메뚜기와	The locusts have no king, yet go they forth all of them by bands;	the locusts have no king, yet they all advance in formation;
PRO	30	28	손에 잡힐만하여도 왕궁에 있는 도마뱀이니라	The spider taketh hold with her hands, and is in kings’ palaces.	and the lizard can be caught in one’s hands, yet it is found in the palaces of kings.
PRO	30	29	잘 걸으며 위풍 있게 다니는 것 서넛이 있나니	There be three things which go well, yea, four are comely in going:	There are three things that are stately in their stride, and four that are impressive in their walk:
PRO	30	30	곧 짐승 중에 가장 강하여 아무 짐승 앞에서도 물러가지 아니하는 사자와	A lion which is strongest among beasts, and turneth not away for any;	a lion, mighty among beasts, refusing to retreat before anything;
PRO	30	31	사냥개와 수염소와 및 당할 수 없는 왕이니라	A greyhound; an he goat also; and a king, against whom there is no rising up.	a strutting rooster; a he-goat; and a king with his army around him.
PRO	30	32	만일 네가 미련하여 스스로 높은 체 하였거나 혹 악한 일을 도모하였거든 네 손으로 입을 막으라	If thou hast done foolishly in lifting up thyself, or if thou hast thought evil, lay thine hand upon thy mouth.	If you have foolishly exalted yourself or if you have plotted evil, put your hand over your mouth.
PRO	30	33	대저 젖을 저으면 뻐터가 되고 코를 비틀면 피가 나는 것 같이 노를 격동하면 다툼이 남이니라	Surely the churning of milk bringeth forth butter, and the wringing of the nose bringeth forth blood: so the forcing of wrath bringeth forth strife.	For as the churning of milk yields butter, and the twisting of the nose draws blood, so the stirring of anger brings forth strife.”
PRO	31	1	르무엘 왕의 말씀한 바 곧 그 어머니가 그를 훈계한 잠언이라	The words of king Lemuel, the prophecy that his mother taught him.	These are the words of King Lemuel—the burden that his mother taught him:
PRO	31	2	내 아들아 내가 무엇을 말할꼬 내 태에서 난 아들아 내가 무엇을 말할꼬 서원대로 얻은 아들아 내가 무엇을 말할꼬	What, my son? and what, the son of my womb? and what, the son of my vows?	What shall I say, O my son? What, O son of my womb? What, O son of my vows?
PRO	31	3	네 힘을 여자들에게 쓰지 말며 왕들을 멸망시키는 일을 행치 말지어다	Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy ways to that which destroyeth kings.	Do not spend your strength on women or your vigor on those who ruin kings.
PRO	31	4	르무엘아 포도주를 마시는 것이 왕에게 마땅치 아니하고 왕에게 마땅치 아니하며 독주를 찾는 것이 주권자에게 마땅치 않도다	It is not for kings, O Lemuel, it is not for kings to drink wine; nor for princes strong drink:	It is not for kings, O Lemuel, it is not for kings to drink wine, or for rulers to crave strong drink,
PRO	31	5	술을 마시다가 법을 잊어버리고 모든 간곤한 백성에게 공의를 굽게 할까 두려우니라	Lest they drink, and forget the law, and pervert the judgment of any of the afflicted.	lest they drink and forget what is decreed, depriving all the oppressed of justice.
PRO	31	6	독주는 죽게된 자에게, 포도주는 마음에 근심하는 자에게 줄지어다	Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto those that be of heavy hearts.	Give strong drink to one who is perishing, and wine to the bitter in soul.
PRO	31	7	그는 마시고 빈궁한 것을 잊어버리겠고 다시 그 고통을 기억지 아니하리라	Let him drink, and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more.	Let him drink and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more.
PRO	31	8	너는 벙어리와 고독한 자의 송사를 위하여 입을 열지니라	Open thy mouth for the dumb in the cause of all such as are appointed to destruction.	Open your mouth for those with no voice, for the cause of all the dispossessed.
PRO	31	9	너는 입을 열어 공의로 재판하여 간곤한 자와 궁핍한 자를 신원할지니라	Open thy mouth, judge righteously, and plead the cause of the poor and needy.	Open your mouth, judge righteously, and defend the cause of the poor and needy.
PRO	31	10	누가 현숙한 여인을 찾아 얻겠느냐 그 값은 진주보다 더 하니라	Who can find a virtuous woman? for her price is far above rubies.	A wife of noble character, who can find? She is far more precious than rubies.
PRO	31	11	그런 자의 남편의 마음은 그를 믿나니 산업이 핍절치 아니하겠으며	The heart of her husband doth safely trust in her, so that he shall have no need of spoil.	The heart of her husband trusts in her, and he lacks nothing of value.
PRO	31	12	그런 자는 살아 있는 동안에 그 남편에게 선을 행하고 악을 행치 아니하느니라	She will do him good and not evil all the days of her life.	She brings him good and not harm all the days of her life.
PRO	31	13	그는 양털과 삼을 구하여 부지런히 손으로 일하며	She seeketh wool, and flax, and worketh willingly with her hands.	She selects wool and flax and works with eager hands.
PRO	31	14	상고의 배와 같아서 먼 데서 양식을 가져오며	She is like the merchants’ ships; she bringeth her food from afar.	She is like the merchant ships, bringing her food from afar.
PRO	31	15	밤이 새기 전에 일어나서 그 집 사람에게 식물을 나눠주며 여종에게 일을 정하여 맡기며	She riseth also while it is yet night, and giveth meat to her household, and a portion to her maidens.	She rises while it is still night to provide food for her household and portions for her maidservants.
PRO	31	16	밭을 간품하여 사며 그 손으로 번 것을 가지고 포도원을 심으며	She considereth a field, and buyeth it: with the fruit of her hands she planteth a vineyard.	She appraises a field and buys it; from her earnings she plants a vineyard.
PRO	31	17	힘으로 허리를 묶으며 그 팔을 강하게 하며	She girdeth her loins with strength, and strengtheneth her arms.	She girds herself with strength and shows that her arms are strong.
PRO	31	18	자기의 무역하는 것이 이로운 줄을 깨닫고 밤에 등불을 끄지 아니하고	She perceiveth that her merchandise is good: her candle goeth not out by night.	She sees that her gain is good, and her lamp is not extinguished at night.
PRO	31	19	손으로 솜뭉치를 들고 손가락으로 가락을 잡으며	She layeth her hands to the spindle, and her hands hold the distaff.	She stretches out her hands to the distaff and grasps the spindle with her fingers.
PRO	31	20	그는 간곤한 자에게 손을 펴며 궁핍한 자를 위하여 손을 내밀며	She stretcheth out her hand to the poor; yea, she reacheth forth her hands to the needy.	She opens her arms to the poor and reaches out her hands to the needy.
PRO	31	21	그 집 사람들은 다 홍색 옷을 입었으므로 눈이 와도 그는 집 사람을 위하여 두려워하지 아니하며	She is not afraid of the snow for her household: for all her household are clothed with scarlet.	When it snows, she has no fear for her household, for they are all clothed in scarlet.
PRO	31	22	그는 자기를 위하여 아름다운 방석을 지으며 세마포와 자색 옷을 입으며	She maketh herself coverings of tapestry; her clothing is silk and purple.	She makes coverings for her bed; her clothing is fine linen and purple.
PRO	31	23	그 남편은 그 땅의 장로로 더불어 성문에 앉으며 사람의 아는 바가 되며	Her husband is known in the gates, when he sitteth among the elders of the land.	Her husband is known at the city gate, where he sits among the elders of the land.
PRO	31	24	그는 베로 옷을 지어 팔며 띠를 만들어 상고에게 맡기며	She maketh fine linen, and selleth it; and delivereth girdles unto the merchant.	She makes linen garments and sells them; she delivers sashes to the merchants.
PRO	31	25	능력과 존귀로 옷을 삼고 후일을 웃으며	Strength and honour are her clothing; and she shall rejoice in time to come.	Strength and honor are her clothing, and she can laugh at the days to come.
PRO	31	26	입을 열어 지혜를 베풀며 그 혀로 인애의 법을 말하며	She openeth her mouth with wisdom; and in her tongue is the law of kindness.	She opens her mouth with wisdom, and faithful instruction is on her tongue.
PRO	31	27	그 집안 일을 보살피고 게을리 얻은 양식을 먹지 아니하나니	She looketh well to the ways of her household, and eateth not the bread of idleness.	She watches over the affairs of her household and does not eat the bread of idleness.
PRO	31	28	그 자식들은 일어나 사례하며 그 남편은 칭찬하기를	Her children arise up, and call her blessed; her husband also, and he praiseth her.	Her children rise up and call her blessed; her husband praises her as well:
PRO	31	29	덕행 있는 여자가 많으나 그대는 여러 여자보다 뛰어난다 하느니라	Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all.	“Many daughters have done noble things, but you surpass them all!”
PRO	31	30	고운 것도 거짓되고 아름다운 것도 헛되나 오직 여호와를 경외하는 여자는 칭찬을 받을 것이라	Favour is deceitful, and beauty is vain: but a woman that feareth the Lord, she shall be praised.	Charm is deceptive and beauty is fleeting, but a woman who fears the LORD is to be praised.
PRO	31	31	그 손의 열매가 그에게로 돌아갈 것이요 그 행한 일을 인하여 성문에서 칭찬을 받으리라	Give her of the fruit of her hands; and let her own works praise her in the gates.	Give her the fruit of her hands, and let her works praise her at the gates.
ECC	1	1	다윗의 아들 예루살렘 왕 전도자의 말씀이라	The words of the Preacher, the son of David, king in Jerusalem.	These are the words of the Teacher, the son of David, king in Jerusalem:
ECC	1	2	전도자가 가로되 헛되고 헛되며 헛되고 헛되니 모든 것이 헛되도다	Vanity of vanities, saith the Preacher, vanity of vanities; all is vanity.	“Futility of futilities,” says the Teacher, “futility of futilities! Everything is futile!”
ECC	1	3	사람이 해 아래서 수고하는 모든 수고가 자기에게 무엇이 유익한고	What profit hath a man of all his labour which he taketh under the sun?	What does a man gain from all his labor, at which he toils under the sun?
ECC	1	4	한 세대는 가고 한 세대는 오되 땅은 영원히 있도다	One generation passeth away, and another generation cometh: but the earth abideth for ever.	Generations come and generations go, but the earth remains forever.
ECC	1	5	해는 떴다가 지며 그 떴던 곳으로 빨리 돌아가고	The sun also ariseth, and the sun goeth down, and hasteth to his place where he arose.	The sun rises and the sun sets; it hurries back to where it rises.
ECC	1	6	바람은 남으로 불다가 북으로 돌이키며 이리 돌며 저리 돌아 불던 곳으로 돌아가고	The wind goeth toward the south, and turneth about unto the north; it whirleth about continually, and the wind returneth again according to his circuits.	The wind blows southward, then turns northward; round and round it swirls, ever returning on its course.
ECC	1	7	모든 강물은 다 바다로 흐르되 바다를 채우지 못하며 어느 곳으로 흐르든지 그리로 연하여 흐르느니라	All the rivers run into the sea; yet the sea is not full; unto the place from whence the rivers come, thither they return again.	All the rivers flow into the sea, yet the sea is never full; to the place from which the streams come, there again they flow.
ECC	1	8	만물의 피곤함을 사람이 말로 다 할 수 없나니 눈은 보아도 족함이 없고 귀는 들어도 차지 아니하는도다	All things are full of labour; man cannot utter it: the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing.	All things are wearisome, more than one can describe; the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear content with hearing.
ECC	1	9	이미 있던 것이 후에 다시 있겠고 이미 한 일을 후에 다시 할지라 해 아래는 새 것이 없나니	The thing that hath been, it is that which shall be; and that which is done is that which shall be done: and there is no new thing under the sun.	What has been will be again, and what has been done will be done again; there is nothing new under the sun.
ECC	1	10	무엇을 가리켜 이르기를 보라 이것이 새 것이라 할 것이 있으랴 오래 전 세대에도 이미 있었느니라	Is there any thing whereof it may be said, See, this is new? it hath been already of old time, which was before us.	Is there a case where one can say, “Look, this is new”? It has already existed in the ages before us.
ECC	1	11	이전 세대를 기억함이 없으니 장래 세대도 그 후 세대가 기억함이 없으리라	There is no remembrance of former things; neither shall there be any remembrance of things that are to come with those that shall come after.	There is no remembrance of those who came before, and those yet to come will not be remembered by those who follow after.
ECC	1	12	나 전도자는 예루살렘에서 이스라엘 왕이 되어	I the Preacher was king over Israel in Jerusalem.	I, the Teacher, was king over Israel in Jerusalem.
ECC	1	13	마음을 다하며 지혜를 써서 하늘 아래서 행하는 모든 일을 궁구하며 살핀즉 이는 괴로운 것이니 하나님이 인생들에게 주사 수고하게 하신 것이라	And I gave my heart to seek and search out by wisdom concerning all things that are done under heaven: this sore travail hath God given to the sons of man to be exercised therewith.	And I set my mind to seek and explore by wisdom all that is done under heaven. What a heavy burden God has laid upon the sons of men to occupy them!
ECC	1	14	내가 해 아래서 행하는 모든 일을 본즉 다 헛되어 바람을 잡으려는 것이로다	I have seen all the works that are done under the sun; and, behold, all is vanity and vexation of spirit.	I have seen all the things that are done under the sun, and have found them all to be futile, a pursuit of the wind.
ECC	1	15	구부러진 것을 곧게 할 수 없고 이지러진 것을 셀 수 없도다	That which is crooked cannot be made straight: and that which is wanting cannot be numbered.	What is crooked cannot be straightened, and what is lacking cannot be counted.
ECC	1	16	내가 마음 가운데 말하여 이르기를 내가 큰 지혜를 많이 얻었으므로 나보다 먼저 예루살렘에 있던 자보다 낫다 하였나니 곧 내 마음이 지혜와 지식을 많이 만나 보았음이로다	I communed with mine own heart, saying, Lo, I am come to great estate, and have gotten more wisdom than all they that have been before me in Jerusalem: yea, my heart had great experience of wisdom and knowledge.	I said to myself, “Behold, I have grown and increased in wisdom beyond all those before me who were over Jerusalem, and my mind has observed a wealth of wisdom and knowledge.”
ECC	1	17	내가 다시 지혜를 알고자 하며 미친 것과 미련한 것을 알고자 하여 마음을 썼으나 이것도 바람을 잡으려는 것인 줄을 깨달았도다	And I gave my heart to know wisdom, and to know madness and folly: I perceived that this also is vexation of spirit.	So I set my mind to know wisdom and madness and folly; I learned that this, too, is a pursuit of the wind.
ECC	1	18	지혜가 많으면 번뇌도 많으니 지식을 더하는 자는 근심을 더하느니라	For in much wisdom is much grief: and he that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow.	For with much wisdom comes much sorrow, and as knowledge grows, grief increases.
ECC	2	1	나는 내 마음에 이르기를 자, 내가 시험적으로 너를 즐겁게 하리니 너는 낙을 누리라 하였으나 본즉 이것도 헛되도다	I said in mine heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with mirth, therefore enjoy pleasure: and, behold, this also is vanity.	I said to myself, “Come now, I will test you with pleasure; enjoy what is good!” But it proved to be futile.
ECC	2	2	내가 웃음을 논하여 이르기를 미친 것이라 하였고 희락을 논하여 이르기를 저가 무엇을 하는가 하였노라	I said of laughter, It is mad: and of mirth, What doeth it?	I said of laughter, “It is folly,” and of pleasure, “What does it accomplish?”
ECC	2	3	내 마음이 궁구하기를 내가 어떻게 하여야 내 마음에 지혜로 다스림을 받으면서 술로 내 육신을 즐겁게 할까 또 어떻게 하여야 어리석음을 취하여서 천하 인생의 종신토록 생활함에 어떤 것이 쾌락인지 알까 하여	I sought in mine heart to give myself unto wine, yet acquainting mine heart with wisdom; and to lay hold on folly, till I might see what was that good for the sons of men, which they should do under the heaven all the days of their life.	I sought to cheer my body with wine and to embrace folly—my mind still guiding me with wisdom—until I could see what was worthwhile for men to do under heaven during the few days of their lives.
ECC	2	4	나의 사업을 크게 하였노라 내가 나를 위하여 집들을 지으며 포도원을 심으며	I made me great works; I builded me houses; I planted me vineyards:	I expanded my pursuits. I built houses and planted vineyards for myself.
ECC	2	5	여러 동산과 과원을 만들고 그 가운데 각종 과목을 심었으며	I made me gardens and orchards, and I planted trees in them of all kind of fruits:	I made gardens and parks for myself, where I planted all kinds of fruit trees.
ECC	2	6	수목을 기르는 삼림에 물주기 위하여 못을 팠으며	I made me pools of water, to water therewith the wood that bringeth forth trees:	I built reservoirs to water my groves of flourishing trees.
ECC	2	7	노비는 사기도 하였고 집에서 나게도 하였으며 나보다 먼저 예루살렘에 있던 모든 자보다도 소와 양떼의 소유를 많게 하였으며	I got me servants and maidens, and had servants born in my house; also I had great possessions of great and small cattle above all that were in Jerusalem before me:	I acquired menservants and maidservants, and servants were born in my house. I also owned more herds and flocks than anyone in Jerusalem before me,
ECC	2	8	은금과 왕들의 보배와 여러 도의 보배를 쌓고 또 노래하는 남녀와 인생들의 기뻐하는 처와 첩들을 많이 두었노라	I gathered me also silver and gold, and the peculiar treasure of kings and of the provinces: I gat me men singers and women singers, and the delights of the sons of men, as musical instruments, and that of all sorts.	and I accumulated for myself silver and gold and the treasure of kings and provinces. I gathered to myself male and female singers, and the delights of the sons of men—many concubines.
ECC	2	9	내가 이같이 창성하여 나보다 먼저 예루살렘에 있던 모든 자보다 지나고 내 지혜도 내게 여전하여	So I was great, and increased more than all that were before me in Jerusalem: also my wisdom remained with me.	So I became great and surpassed all in Jerusalem who had preceded me; and my wisdom remained with me.
ECC	2	10	무엇이든지 내 마음이 즐거워하는 것을 내가 막지 아니하였으니 이는 나의 모든 수고를 내 마음이 기뻐하였음이라 이것이 나의 모든 수고로 말미암아 얻은 분복이로다	And whatsoever mine eyes desired I kept not from them, I withheld not my heart from any joy; for my heart rejoiced in all my labour: and this was my portion of all my labour.	Anything my eyes desired, I did not deny myself. I refused my heart no pleasure. For my heart took delight in all my work, and this was the reward for all my labor.
ECC	2	11	그 후에 본즉 내 손으로 한 모든 일과 수고한 모든 수고가 다 헛되어 바람을 잡으려는 것이며 해 아래서 무익한 것이로다	Then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and on the labour that I had laboured to do: and, behold, all was vanity and vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under the sun.	Yet when I considered all the works that my hands had accomplished and what I had toiled to achieve, I found everything to be futile, a pursuit of the wind; there was nothing to be gained under the sun.
ECC	2	12	내가 돌이켜 지혜와 망령됨과 어리석음을 보았나니 왕의 뒤에 오는 자는 무슨 일을 행할꼬 행한지 오랜 일일 뿐이리라	And I turned myself to behold wisdom, and madness, and folly: for what can the man do that cometh after the king? even that which hath been already done.	Then I turned to consider wisdom and madness and folly; for what more can the king’s successor do than what has already been accomplished?
ECC	2	13	내가 보건대 지혜가 우매보다 뛰어남이 빛이 어두움보다 뛰어남 같도다	Then I saw that wisdom excelleth folly, as far as light excelleth darkness.	And I saw that wisdom exceeds folly, just as light exceeds darkness:
ECC	2	14	지혜자는 눈이 밝고 우매자는 어두움에 다니거니와 이들의 당하는 일이 일반인 줄을 내가 깨닫고	The wise man’s eyes are in his head; but the fool walketh in darkness: and I myself perceived also that one event happeneth to them all.	The wise man has eyes in his head, but the fool walks in darkness. Yet I also came to realize that one fate overcomes them both.
ECC	2	15	심중에 이르기를 우매자의 당한 것을 나도 당하리니 내가 심중에 이르기를 이것도 헛되도다	Then said I in my heart, As it happeneth to the fool, so it happeneth even to me; and why was I then more wise? Then I said in my heart, that this also is vanity.	So I said to myself, “The fate of the fool will also befall me. What then have I gained by being wise?” And I said to myself that this too is futile.
ECC	2	16	지혜자나 우매자나 영원토록 기억함을 얻지 못하나니 후일에는 다 잊어버린 지 오랠 것임이라 오호라 지혜자의 죽음이 우매자의 죽음과 일반이로다	For there is no remembrance of the wise more than of the fool for ever; seeing that which now is in the days to come shall all be forgotten. And how dieth the wise man? as the fool.	For there is no lasting remembrance of the wise, just as with the fool, seeing that both will be forgotten in the days to come. Alas, the wise man will die just like the fool!
ECC	2	17	이러므로 내가 사는 것을 한하였노니 이는 해 아래서 하는 일이 내게 괴로움이요 다 헛되어 바람을 잡으려는 것임이로다	Therefore I hated life; because the work that is wrought under the sun is grievous unto me: for all is vanity and vexation of spirit.	So I hated life, because the work that is done under the sun was grievous to me. For everything is futile and a pursuit of the wind.
ECC	2	18	내가 해 아래서 나의 수고한 모든 수고를 한하였노니 이는 내 뒤를 이을 자에게 끼치게 됨이라	Yea, I hated all my labour which I had taken under the sun: because I should leave it unto the man that shall be after me.	I hated all for which I had toiled under the sun, because I must leave it to the man who comes after me.
ECC	2	19	그 사람이 지혜자일지, 우매자일지야 누가 알랴마는 내가 해 아래서 내 지혜를 나타내어 수고한 모든 결과를 저가 다 관리하리니 이것도 헛되도다	And who knoweth whether he shall be a wise man or a fool? yet shall he have rule over all my labour wherein I have laboured, and wherein I have shewed myself wise under the sun. This is also vanity.	And who knows whether that man will be wise or foolish? Yet he will take over all the labor at which I have worked skillfully under the sun. This too is futile.
ECC	2	20	이러므로 내가 해 아래서 수고한 모든 수고에 대하여 도리어 마음으로 실망케 하였도다	Therefore I went about to cause my heart to despair of all the labour which I took under the sun.	So my heart began to despair over all the labor that I had done under the sun.
ECC	2	21	어떤 사람은 그 지혜와 지식과 재주를 써서 수고하였어도 그 얻은 것을 수고하지 아니한 자에게 업으로 끼치리니 이것도 헛된 것이라 큰 해로다	For there is a man whose labour is in wisdom, and in knowledge, and in equity; yet to a man that hath not laboured therein shall he leave it for his portion. This also is vanity and a great evil.	When there is a man who has labored with wisdom, knowledge, and skill, and he must give his portion to a man who has not worked for it, this too is futile and a great evil.
ECC	2	22	사람이 해 아래서 수고하는 모든 수고와 마음에 애쓰는 것으로 소득이 무엇이랴	For what hath man of all his labour, and of the vexation of his heart, wherein he hath laboured under the sun?	For what does a man get for all the toil and striving with which he labors under the sun?
ECC	2	23	일평생에 근심하며 수고하는 것이 슬픔뿐이라 그 마음이 밤에도 쉬지 못하나니 이것도 헛되도다	For all his days are sorrows, and his travail grief; yea, his heart taketh not rest in the night. This is also vanity.	Indeed, all his days are filled with grief, and his task is sorrowful; even at night, his mind does not rest. This too is futile.
ECC	2	24	사람이 먹고 마시며 수고하는 가운데서 심령으로 낙을 누리게 하는 것보다 나은 것이 없나니 내가 이것도 본즉 하나님의 손에서 나는 것이로다	There is nothing better for a man, than that he should eat and drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy good in his labour. This also I saw, that it was from the hand of God.	Nothing is better for a man than to eat and drink and enjoy his work. I have also seen that this is from the hand of God.
ECC	2	25	먹고 즐거워하는 일에 누가 나보다 승하랴	For who can eat, or who else can hasten hereunto, more than I?	For apart from Him, who can eat and who can find enjoyment?
ECC	2	26	하나님이 그 기뻐하시는 자에게는 지혜와 지식과 희락을 주시나 죄인에게는 노고를 주시고 저로 모아 쌓게 하사 하나님을 기뻐하는 자에게 주게 하시나니 이것도 헛되어 바람을 잡으려는 것이로다	For God giveth to a man that is good in his sight wisdom, and knowledge, and joy: but to the sinner he giveth travail, to gather and to heap up, that he may give to him that is good before God. This also is vanity and vexation of spirit.	To the man who is pleasing in His sight, He gives wisdom and knowledge and joy, but to the sinner He assigns the task of gathering and accumulating that which he will hand over to one who pleases God. This too is futile and a pursuit of the wind.
ECC	3	1	천하에 범사가 기한이 있고 모든 목적이 이룰 때가 있나니	To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven:	To everything there is a season, and a time for every purpose under heaven:
ECC	3	2	날 때가 있고 죽을 때가 있으며 심을 때가 있고 심은 것을 뽑을 때가 있으며	A time to be born, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted;	a time to be born and a time to die, a time to plant and a time to uproot,
ECC	3	3	죽일 때가 있고 치료시킬 때가 있으며 헐 때가 있고 세울 때가 있으며	A time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to break down, and a time to build up;	a time to kill and a time to heal, a time to break down and a time to build,
ECC	3	4	울 때가 있고 웃을 때가 있으며 슬퍼할 때가 있고 춤출 때가 있으며	A time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance;	a time to weep and a time to laugh, a time to mourn and a time to dance,
ECC	3	5	돌을 던져 버릴 때가 있고 돌을 거둘 때가 있으며 안을 때가 있고 안는 일을 멀리 할 때가 있으며	A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together; a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing;	a time to cast away stones and a time to gather stones together, a time to embrace and a time to refrain from embracing,
ECC	3	6	찾을 때가 있고 잃을 때가 있으며 지킬 때가 있고 버릴 때가 있으며	A time to get, and a time to lose; a time to keep, and a time to cast away;	a time to search and a time to count as lost, a time to keep and a time to discard,
ECC	3	7	찢을 때가 있고 꿰멜 때가 있으며 잠잠할 때가 있고 말할 때가 있으며	A time to rend, and a time to sew; a time to keep silence, and a time to speak;	a time to tear and a time to mend, a time to be silent and a time to speak,
ECC	3	8	사랑할 때가 있고 미워할 때가 있으며 전쟁할 때가 있고 평화할 때가 있느니라	A time to love, and a time to hate; a time of war, and a time of peace.	a time to love and a time to hate, a time for war and a time for peace.
ECC	3	9	일하는 자가 그 수고로 말미암아 무슨 이익이 있으랴	What profit hath he that worketh in that wherein he laboureth?	What does the worker gain from his toil?
ECC	3	10	하나님이 인생들에게 노고를 주사 애쓰게 하신 것을 내가 보았노라	I have seen the travail, which God hath given to the sons of men to be exercised in it.	I have seen the burden that God has laid upon the sons of men to occupy them.
ECC	3	11	하나님이 모든 것을 지으시되 때를 따라 아름답게 하셨고 또 사람에게 영원을 사모하는 마음을 주셨느니라 그러나 하나님의 하 시는 일의 시종을 사람으로 측량할 수 없게 하셨도다	He hath made every thing beautiful in his time: also he hath set the world in their heart, so that no man can find out the work that God maketh from the beginning to the end.	He has made everything beautiful in its time. He has also set eternity in the hearts of men, yet they cannot fathom the work that God has done from beginning to end.
ECC	3	12	사람이 사는 동안에 기뻐하며 선을 행하는 것보다 나은 것이 없는 줄을 내가 알았고	I know that there is no good in them, but for a man to rejoice, and to do good in his life.	I know that there is nothing better for them than to rejoice and do good while they live,
ECC	3	13	사람마다 먹고 마시는 것과 수고함으로 낙을 누리는 것이 하나님의 선물인 줄을 또한 알았도다	And also that every man should eat and drink, and enjoy the good of all his labour, it is the gift of God.	and also that every man should eat and drink and find satisfaction in all his labor—this is the gift of God.
ECC	3	14	무릇 하나님의 행하시는 것은 영원히 있을 것이라 더 할 수도 없고 덜 할 수도 없나니 하나님이 이같이 행하심은 사람으로 그 앞에서 경외하게 하려 하심인 줄을 내가 알았도다	I know that, whatsoever God doeth, it shall be for ever: nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it: and God doeth it, that men should fear before him.	I know that everything God does endures forever; nothing can be added to it or taken from it. God does it so that they should fear Him.
ECC	3	15	이제 있는 것이 옛적에 있었고 장래에 있을 것도 옛적에 있었나니 하나님은 이미 지난 것을 다시 찾으시느니라	That which hath been is now; and that which is to be hath already been; and God requireth that which is past.	What exists has already been, and what will be has already been, for God will call to account what has passed.
ECC	3	16	내가 해 아래서 또 보건대 재판하는 곳에 악이 있고 공의를 행하는 곳에도 악이 있도다	And moreover I saw under the sun the place of judgment, that wickedness was there; and the place of righteousness, that iniquity was there.	Furthermore, I saw under the sun that in the place of judgment there is wickedness, and in the place of righteousness there is wickedness.
ECC	3	17	내가 심중에 이르기를 의인과 악인을 하나님이 심판하시리니 이는 모든 목적과 모든 일이 이룰 때가 있음이라 하였으며	I said in mine heart, God shall judge the righteous and the wicked: for there is a time there for every purpose and for every work.	I said in my heart, “God will judge the righteous and the wicked, since there is a time for every activity and every deed.”
ECC	3	18	내가 심중에 이르기를 인생의 일에 대하여 하나님이 저희를 시험하시리니 저희로 자기가 짐승보다 다름이 없는 줄을 깨닫게 하려 하심이라 하였노라	I said in mine heart concerning the estate of the sons of men, that God might manifest them, and that they might see that they themselves are beasts.	I said to myself, “As for the sons of men, God tests them so that they may see for themselves that they are but beasts.”
ECC	3	19	인생에게 임하는 일이 일반이라 다 동일한 호흡이 있어서 이의 죽음 같이 저도 죽으니 사람이 짐승보다 뛰어남이 없음은 모든 것이 헛됨이로다	For that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts; even one thing befalleth them: as the one dieth, so dieth the other; yea, they have all one breath; so that a man hath no preeminence above a beast: for all is vanity.	For the fates of both men and beasts are the same: As one dies, so dies the other—they all have the same breath. Man has no advantage over the animals, since everything is futile.
ECC	3	20	다 흙으로 말미암았으므로 다 흙으로 돌아가나니 다 한 곳으로 가거니와	All go unto one place; all are of the dust, and all turn to dust again.	All go to one place; all come from dust, and all return to dust.
ECC	3	21	인생의 혼은 위로 올라가고 짐승의 혼은 아래 곧 땅으로 내려가는 줄을 누가 알랴	Who knoweth the spirit of man that goeth upward, and the spirit of the beast that goeth downward to the earth?	Who knows if the spirit of man rises upward and the spirit of the animal descends into the earth?
ECC	3	22	그러므로 내 소견에는 사람이 자기 일에 즐거워하는 것보다 나은 것이 없나니 이는 그의 분복이라 그 신후사를 보게 하려고 저를 도로 데리고 올 자가 누구이랴	Wherefore I perceive that there is nothing better, than that a man should rejoice in his own works; for that is his portion: for who shall bring him to see what shall be after him?	I have seen that there is nothing better for a man than to enjoy his work, because that is his lot. For who can bring him to see what will come after him?
ECC	4	1	내가 돌이켜 해 아래서 행하는 모든 학대를 보았도다 오호라 학대받는 자가 눈물을 흘리되 저희에게 위로자가 없도다 저희를 학대하는 자의 손에는 권세가 있으나 저희에게는 위로자가 없도다	So I returned, and considered all the oppressions that are done under the sun: and behold the tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no comforter; and on the side of their oppressors there was power; but they had no comforter.	Again I looked, and I considered all the oppression taking place under the sun. I saw the tears of the oppressed, and they had no comforter; the power lay in the hands of their oppressors, and there was no comforter.
ECC	4	2	그러므로 나는 살아 있는 산 자보다 죽은 지 오랜 죽은 자를 복되다 하였으며	Wherefore I praised the dead which are already dead more than the living which are yet alive.	So I admired the dead, who had already died, above the living, who are still alive.
ECC	4	3	이 둘보다도 출생하지 아니하여 해 아래서 행하는 악을 보지 못한 자가 더욱 낫다 하였노라	Yea, better is he than both they, which hath not yet been, who hath not seen the evil work that is done under the sun.	But better than both is he who has not yet existed, who has not seen the evil that is done under the sun.
ECC	4	4	내가 또 본즉 사람이 모든 수고와 여러 가지 교묘한 일로 인하여 이웃에게 시기를 받으니 이것도 헛되어 바람을 잡으려는 것이로다	Again, I considered all travail, and every right work, that for this a man is envied of his neighbour. This is also vanity and vexation of spirit.	I saw that all labor and success spring from a man’s envy of his neighbor. This too is futile and a pursuit of the wind.
ECC	4	5	우매자는 손을 거두고 자기 살을 먹느니라	The fool foldeth his hands together, and eateth his own flesh.	The fool folds his hands and consumes his own flesh.
ECC	4	6	한 손에만 가득하고 평온함이 두 손에 가득하고 수고하며 바람을 잡으려는 것보다 나으니라	Better is an handful with quietness, than both the hands full with travail and vexation of spirit.	Better one handful with tranquility than two handfuls with toil and pursuit of the wind.
ECC	4	7	내가 또 돌이켜 해 아래서 헛된 것을 보았도다	Then I returned, and I saw vanity under the sun.	Again, I saw futility under the sun.
ECC	4	8	어떤 사람은 아들도 없고 형제도 없으니 아무도 없이 홀로 있으나 수고하기를 마지 아니하며 부를 눈에 족하게 여기지 아니하면서도 이르기를 내가 누구를 위하여 수고하고 내 심령으로 낙을 누리지 못하게 하는고 하나니 이것도 헛되어 무익한 노고로다	There is one alone, and there is not a second; yea, he hath neither child nor brother: yet is there no end of all his labour; neither is his eye satisfied with riches; neither saith he, For whom do I labour, and bereave my soul of good? This is also vanity, yea, it is a sore travail.	There is a man all alone, without even a son or brother. And though there is no end to his labor, his eyes are still not content with his wealth: “For whom do I toil and bereave my soul of enjoyment?” This too is futile—a miserable task.
ECC	4	9	두 사람이 한 사람보다 나음은 저희가 수고함으로 좋은 상을 얻을 것임이라	Two are better than one; because they have a good reward for their labour.	Two are better than one, because they have a good return for their labor.
ECC	4	10	혹시 저희가 넘어지면 하나가 그 동무를 붙들어 일으키려니와 홀로 있어 넘어지고 붙들어 일으킬 자가 없는 자에게는 화가 있으리라	For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow: but woe to him that is alone when he falleth; for he hath not another to help him up.	For if one falls down, his companion can lift him up; but pity the one who falls without another to help him up!
ECC	4	11	두 사람이 함께 누우면 따뜻하거니와 한 사람이면 어찌 따뜻하랴	Again, if two lie together, then they have heat: but how can one be warm alone?	Again, if two lie down together, they will keep warm; but how can one keep warm alone?
ECC	4	12	한 사람이면 패하겠거니와 두 사람이면 능히 당하나니 삼겹 줄은 쉽게 끊어지지 아니하느니라	And if one prevail against him, two shall withstand him; and a threefold cord is not quickly broken.	And though one may be overpowered, two can resist. Moreover, a cord of three strands is not quickly broken.
ECC	4	13	가난하여도 지혜로운 소년은 늙고 둔하여 간함을 받을줄 모르는 왕보다 나으니	Better is a poor and a wise child than an old and foolish king, who will no more be admonished.	Better is a poor but wise youth than an old but foolish king who no longer knows how to take a warning.
ECC	4	14	저는 그 나라에서 나면서 가난한 자로서 옥에서 나와서 왕이 되었음이니라	For out of prison he cometh to reign; whereas also he that is born in his kingdom becometh poor.	For the youth has come from the prison to the kingship, though he was born poor in his own kingdom.
ECC	4	15	내가 본즉 해 아래서 다니는 인생들이 왕의 버금으로 대신하여 일어난 소년과 함께 있으매	I considered all the living which walk under the sun, with the second child that shall stand up in his stead.	I saw that all who lived and walked under the sun followed this second one, the youth who succeeded the king.
ECC	4	16	저희 치리를 받는 백성들이 무수하였을지라도 후에 오는 자들은 저를 기뻐하지 아니하리니 이것도 헛되어 바람을 잡으려는 것이로다	There is no end of all the people, even of all that have been before them: they also that come after shall not rejoice in him. Surely this also is vanity and vexation of spirit.	There is no limit to all the people who were before them. Yet the successor will not be celebrated by those who come even later. This too is futile and a pursuit of the wind.
ECC	5	1	너는 하나님의 전에 들어갈 때에 네 발을 삼갈지어다 가까이 하여 말씀을 듣는 것이 우매자의 제사 드리는 것보다 나으니 저희는 악을 행하면서도 깨닫지 못함이니라	Keep thy foot when thou goest to the house of God, and be more ready to hear, than to give the sacrifice of fools: for they consider not that they do evil.	Guard your steps when you go to the house of God. Draw near to listen rather than to offer the sacrifice of fools, who do not know that they do wrong.
ECC	5	2	너는 하나님 앞에서 함부로 입을 열지 말며 급한 마음으로 말을 내지 말라 하나님은 하늘에 계시고 너는 땅에 있음이니라 그런즉 마땅히 말을 적게 할 것이라	Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God: for God is in heaven, and thou upon earth: therefore let thy words be few.	Do not be quick to speak, and do not be hasty in your heart to utter a word before God. After all, God is in heaven and you are on earth. So let your words be few.
ECC	5	3	일이 많으면 꿈이 생기고 말이 많으면 우매자의 소리가 나타나느니라	For a dream cometh through the multitude of business; and a fool’s voice is known by multitude of words.	As a dream comes through many cares, so the speech of a fool comes with many words.
ECC	5	4	네가 하나님께 서원하였거든 갚기를 더디게 말라 하나님은 우매자를 기뻐하지 아니하시나니 서원한 것을 갚으라	When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he hath no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou hast vowed.	When you make a vow to God, do not delay in fulfilling it, because He takes no pleasure in fools. Fulfill your vow.
ECC	5	5	서원하고 갚지 아니하는 것보다 서원하지 아니하는 것이 나으니	Better is it that thou shouldest not vow, than that thou shouldest vow and not pay.	It is better not to vow than to make a vow and not fulfill it.
ECC	5	6	네 입으로 네 육체를 범죄케 말라 사자 앞에서 내가 서원한 것이 실수라고 말하지 말라 어찌 하나님으로 네 말소리를 진노하사 네 손으로 한 것을 멸하시게 하랴	Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin; neither say thou before the angel, that it was an error: wherefore should God be angry at thy voice, and destroy the work of thine hands?	Do not let your mouth cause your flesh to sin, and do not tell the messenger that your vow was a mistake. Why should God be angry with your words and destroy the work of your hands?
ECC	5	7	꿈이 많으면 헛된 것이 많고 말이 많아도 그러하니 오직 너는 하나님을 경외할지니라	For in the multitude of dreams and many words there are also divers vanities: but fear thou God.	For as many dreams bring futility, so do many words. Therefore, fear God.
ECC	5	8	너는 어느 도에서든지 빈민을 학대하는 것과 공의를 박멸하는 것을 볼지라도 그것을 이상히 여기지 말라 높은 자보다 더 높은 자가 감찰하고 그들보다 더 높은 자들이 있음이니라	If thou seest the oppression of the poor, and violent perverting of judgment and justice in a province, marvel not at the matter: for he that is higher than the highest regardeth; and there be higher than they.	If you see the oppression of the poor and the denial of justice and righteousness in the province, do not be astonished at the matter; for one official is watched by a superior, and others higher still are over them.
ECC	5	9	땅의 이익은 뭇 사람을 위하여 있나니 왕도 밭의 소산을 받느니라	Moreover the profit of the earth is for all: the king himself is served by the field.	The produce of the earth is taken by all; the king himself profits from the fields.
ECC	5	10	은을 사랑하는 자는 은으로 만족함이 없고 풍부를 사랑하는 자는 소득으로 만족함이 없나니 이것도 헛되도다	He that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver; nor he that loveth abundance with increase: this is also vanity.	He who loves money is never satisfied by money, and he who loves wealth is never satisfied by income. This too is futile.
ECC	5	11	재산이 더하면 먹는 자도 더하나니 그 소유주가 눈으로 보는 외에 무엇이 유익하랴	When goods increase, they are increased that eat them: and what good is there to the owners thereof, saving the beholding of them with their eyes?	When good things increase, so do those who consume them; what then is the profit to the owner, except to behold them with his eyes?
ECC	5	12	노동자는 먹는 것이 많든지 적든지 잠을 달게 자거니와 부자는 배부름으로 자지 못하느니라	The sleep of a labouring man is sweet, whether he eat little or much: but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep.	The sleep of the worker is sweet, whether he eats little or much, but the abundance of the rich man permits him no sleep.
ECC	5	13	내가 해 아래서 큰 폐단되는 것을 보았나니 곧 소유주가 재물을 자기에게 해 되도록 지키는 것이라	There is a sore evil which I have seen under the sun, namely, riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt.	There is a grievous evil I have seen under the sun: wealth hoarded to the harm of its owner,
ECC	5	14	그 재물이 재난을 인하여 패하나니 비록 아들은 낳았으나 그 손에 아무 것도 없느니라	But those riches perish by evil travail: and he begetteth a son, and there is nothing in his hand.	or wealth lost in a failed venture, so when that man has a son there is nothing to pass on.
ECC	5	15	저가 모태에서 벌거벗고 나왔은즉 그 나온 대로 돌아가고 수고하여 얻은 것을 아무 것도 손에 가지고 가지 못하리니	As he came forth of his mother’s womb, naked shall he return to go as he came, and shall take nothing of his labour, which he may carry away in his hand.	As a man came from his mother’s womb, so he will depart again, naked as he arrived. He takes nothing for his labor to carry in his hands.
ECC	5	16	이것도 폐단이라 어떻게 왔든지 그대로 가리니 바람을 잡으려는 수고가 저에게 무엇이 유익하랴	And this also is a sore evil, that in all points as he came, so shall he go: and what profit hath he that hath laboured for the wind?	This too is a grievous evil: Exactly as a man is born, so he will depart. What does he gain as he toils for the wind?
ECC	5	17	일평생을 어두운 데서 먹으며 번뇌와 병과 분노가 저에게 있느니라	All his days also he eateth in darkness, and he hath much sorrow and wrath with his sickness.	Moreover, all his days he eats in darkness, with much sorrow, sickness, and anger.
ECC	5	18	사람이 하나님의 주신 바 그 일평생에 먹고 마시며 해 아래서 수고하는 모든 수고 중에서 낙을 누리는 것이 선하고 아름다움을 내가 보았나니 이것이 그의 분복이로다	Behold that which I have seen: it is good and comely for one to eat and to drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labour that he taketh under the sun all the days of his life, which God giveth him: for it is his portion.	Here is what I have seen to be good and fitting: to eat and drink, and to find satisfaction in all the labor one does under the sun during the few days of life that God has given him—for this is his lot.
ECC	5	19	어떤 사람에게든지 하나님이 재물과 부요를 주사 능히 누리게 하시며 분복을 받아 수고함으로 즐거워하게 하신 것은 하나님의 선물이라	Every man also to whom God hath given riches and wealth, and hath given him power to eat thereof, and to take his portion, and to rejoice in his labour; this is the gift of God.	Furthermore, God has given riches and wealth to every man, and He has enabled him to enjoy them, to accept his lot, and to rejoice in his labor. This is a gift from God.
ECC	5	20	저는 그 생명의 날을 깊이 관념치 아니하리니 이는 하나님이 저의 마음의 기뻐하는 것으로 응하심이라	For he shall not much remember the days of his life; because God answereth him in the joy of his heart.	For a man seldom considers the days of his life, because God keeps him occupied with the joy of his heart.
ECC	6	1	내가 해 아래서 한가지 폐단 있는 것을 보았나니 이는 사람에게 중한 것이라	There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, and it is common among men:	There is another evil I have seen under the sun, and it weighs heavily upon mankind:
ECC	6	2	어떤 사람은 그 심령의 모든 소원에 부족함이 없어 재물과 부요와 존귀를 하나님께 받았으나 능히 누리게 하심을 얻지 못하였으므로 다른 사람이 누리나니 이것도 헛되어 악한 병이로다	A man to whom God hath given riches, wealth, and honour, so that he wanteth nothing for his soul of all that he desireth, yet God giveth him not power to eat thereof, but a stranger eateth it: this is vanity, and it is an evil disease.	God gives a man riches, wealth, and honor, so that he lacks nothing his heart desires; but God does not allow him to enjoy them. Instead, a stranger will enjoy them. This is futile and a grievous affliction.
ECC	6	3	사람이 비록 일백 자녀를 낳고 또 장수하여 사는 날이 많을지라도 그 심령에 낙이 족하지 못하고 또 그 몸이 매장되지 못하면 나는 이르기를 낙태된 자가 저보다 낫다 하노니	If a man beget an hundred children, and live many years, so that the days of his years be many, and his soul be not filled with good, and also that he have no burial; I say, that an untimely birth is better than he.	A man may father a hundred children and live for many years; yet no matter how long he lives, if he is unsatisfied with his prosperity and does not even receive a proper burial, I say that a stillborn child is better off than he.
ECC	6	4	낙태된 자는 헛되이 왔다가 어두운 중에 가매 그 이름이 어두움에 덮이니	For he cometh in with vanity, and departeth in darkness, and his name shall be covered with darkness.	For a stillborn child enters in futility and departs in darkness, and his name is shrouded in obscurity.
ECC	6	5	햇빛을 보지 못하고 알지 못하나 이가 저보다 평안함이라	Moreover he hath not seen the sun, nor known any thing: this hath more rest than the other.	The child, though neither seeing the sun nor knowing anything, has more rest than that man,
ECC	6	6	저가 비록 천 년의 갑절을 산다 할지라도 낙을 누리지 못하면 마침내 다 한 곳으로 돌아가는 것뿐이 아니냐	Yea, though he live a thousand years twice told, yet hath he seen no good: do not all go to one place?	even if he lives a thousand years twice over but fails to enjoy his prosperity. Do not all go to the same place?
ECC	6	7	사람의 수고는 다 그 입을 위함이나 그 식욕은 차지 아니하느니라	All the labour of man is for his mouth, and yet the appetite is not filled.	All a man’s labor is for his mouth, yet his appetite is never satisfied.
ECC	6	8	지혜자가 우매자보다 나은 것이 무엇이뇨 인생 앞에서 행할 줄 아는 가난한 자는 무엇이 유익한고	For what hath the wise more than the fool? what hath the poor, that knoweth to walk before the living?	What advantage, then, has the wise man over the fool? What gain comes to the poor man who knows how to conduct himself before others?
ECC	6	9	눈으로 보는 것이 심령의 공상보다 나으나 이것도 헛되어 바람을 잡으려는 것이로다	Better is the sight of the eyes than the wandering of the desire: this is also vanity and vexation of spirit.	Better what the eye can see than the wandering of desire. This too is futile and a pursuit of the wind.
ECC	6	10	이미 있는 무엇이든지 오래 전부터 그 이름이 칭한 바 되었으며 사람이 무엇인지도 이미 안 바 되었나니 자기보다 강한 자와 능히 다툴 수 없느니라	That which hath been is named already, and it is known that it is man: neither may he contend with him that is mightier than he.	Whatever exists was named long ago, and what happens to a man is foreknown; but he cannot contend with one stronger than he.
ECC	6	11	헛된 것을 더하게 하는 많은 일이 있나니 사람에게 무엇이 유익하랴	Seeing there be many things that increase vanity, what is man the better?	For the more words, the more futility—and how does that profit anyone?
ECC	6	12	헛된 생명의 모든 날을 그림자 같이 보내는 일평생에 사람에게 무엇이 낙인지 누가 알며 그 신후에 해 아래서 무슨 일이 있을 것을 누가 능히 그에게 고하리요	For who knoweth what is good for man in this life, all the days of his vain life which he spendeth as a shadow? for who can tell a man what shall be after him under the sun?	For who knows what is good for a man during the few days in which he passes through his fleeting life like a shadow? Who can tell a man what will come after him under the sun?
ECC	7	1	아름다운 이름이 보배로운 기름보다 낫고 죽는 날이 출생하는 날보다 나으며	A good name is better than precious ointment; and the day of death than the day of one’s birth.	A good name is better than fine perfume, and one’s day of death is better than his day of birth.
ECC	7	2	초상집에 가는 것이 잔치집에 가는 것보다 나으니 모든 사람의 결국이 이와 같이 됨이라 산 자가 이것에 유심하리로다	It is better to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the house of feasting: for that is the end of all men; and the living will lay it to his heart.	It is better to enter a house of mourning than a house of feasting, since death is the end of every man, and the living should take this to heart.
ECC	7	3	슬픔이 웃음보다 나음은 얼굴에 근심함으로 마음이 좋게 됨이니라	Sorrow is better than laughter: for by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better.	Sorrow is better than laughter, for a sad countenance is good for the heart.
ECC	7	4	지혜자의 마음은 초상집에 있으되 우매자의 마음은 연락하는 집에 있느니라	The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning; but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth.	The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning, but the heart of fools is in the house of pleasure.
ECC	7	5	사람이 지혜자의 책망을 듣는 것이 우매자의 노래를 듣는 것보다 나으니라	It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise, than for a man to hear the song of fools.	It is better to heed a wise man’s rebuke than to listen to the song of fools.
ECC	7	6	우매자의 웃음 소리는 솥 밑에서 가시나무의 타는 소리 같으니 이것도 헛되니라	For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of the fool: this also is vanity.	For like the crackling of thorns under the pot, so is the laughter of the fool. This too is futile.
ECC	7	7	탐학이 지혜자를 우매하게 하고 뇌물이 사람의 명철을 망케 하느니라	Surely oppression maketh a wise man mad; and a gift destroyeth the heart.	Surely extortion turns a wise man into a fool, and a bribe corrupts the heart.
ECC	7	8	일의 끝이 시작보다 낫고 참는 마음이 교만한 마음보다 나으니	Better is the end of a thing than the beginning thereof: and the patient in spirit is better than the proud in spirit.	The end of a matter is better than the beginning, and a patient spirit is better than a proud one.
ECC	7	9	급한 마음으로 노를 발하지 말라 노는 우매자의 품에 머무름이니라	Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry: for anger resteth in the bosom of fools.	Do not be quickly provoked in your spirit, for anger settles in the lap of a fool.
ECC	7	10	옛날이 오늘보다 나은 것이 어찜이냐 하지 말라 이렇게 묻는 것이 지혜가 아니니라	Say not thou, What is the cause that the former days were better than these? for thou dost not enquire wisely concerning this.	Do not say, “Why were the old days better than these?” For it is unwise of you to ask about this.
ECC	7	11	지혜는 유업 같이 아름답고 햇빛을 보는 자에게 유익하도다	Wisdom is good with an inheritance: and by it there is profit to them that see the sun.	Wisdom, like an inheritance, is good, and it benefits those who see the sun.
ECC	7	12	지혜도 보호하는 것이 되고 돈도 보호하는 것이 되나 지식이 더욱 아름다움은 지혜는 지혜 얻은 자의 생명을 보존함이니라	For wisdom is a defence, and money is a defence: but the excellency of knowledge is, that wisdom giveth life to them that have it.	For wisdom, like money, is a shelter, and the advantage of knowledge is that wisdom preserves the life of its owner.
ECC	7	13	하나님의 행하시는 일을 보라 하나님이 굽게 하신 것을 누가 능히 곧게 하겠느냐	Consider the work of God: for who can make that straight, which he hath made crooked?	Consider the work of God: Who can straighten what He has bent?
ECC	7	14	형통한 날에는 기뻐하고 곤고한 날에는 생각하라 하나님이 이 두가지를 병행하게 하사 사람으로 그 장래 일을 능히 헤아려 알지 못하게 하셨느니라	In the day of prosperity be joyful, but in the day of adversity consider: God also hath set the one over against the other, to the end that man should find nothing after him.	In the day of prosperity, be joyful, but in the day of adversity, consider this: God has made one of these along with the other, so that a man cannot discover anything that will come after him.
ECC	7	15	내가 내 헛된 날에 이 모든 일을 본즉 자기의 의로운 중에서 멸망하는 의인이 있고 자기의 악행 중에서 장수하는 악인이 있으니	All things have I seen in the days of my vanity: there is a just man that perisheth in his righteousness, and there is a wicked man that prolongeth his life in his wickedness.	In my futile life I have seen both of these: A righteous man perishing in his righteousness, and a wicked man living long in his wickedness.
ECC	7	16	지나치게 의인이 되지 말며 지나치게 지혜자도 되지 말라 어찌하여 스스로 패망케 하겠느냐	Be not righteous over much; neither make thyself over wise: why shouldest thou destroy thyself?	Do not be overly righteous, and do not make yourself too wise. Why should you destroy yourself?
ECC	7	17	지나치게 악인이 되지 말며 우매자도 되지 말라 어찌하여 기한 전에 죽으려느냐	Be not over much wicked, neither be thou foolish: why shouldest thou die before thy time?	Do not be excessively wicked, and do not be a fool. Why should you die before your time?
ECC	7	18	너는 이것을 잡으며 저것을 놓지 마는 것이 좋으니 하나님을 경외하는 자는 이 모든 일에서 벗어날 것임이니라	It is good that thou shouldest take hold of this; yea, also from this withdraw not thine hand: for he that feareth God shall come forth of them all.	It is good to grasp the one and not let the other slip from your hand. For he who fears God will follow both warnings.
ECC	7	19	지혜가 지혜자로 성읍 가운데 열 유사보다 능력이 있게 하느니라	Wisdom strengtheneth the wise more than ten mighty men which are in the city.	Wisdom makes the wise man stronger than ten rulers in a city.
ECC	7	20	선을 행하고 죄를 범치 아니하는 의인은 세상에 아주 없느니라	For there is not a just man upon earth, that doeth good, and sinneth not.	Surely there is no righteous man on earth who does good and never sins.
ECC	7	21	무릇 사람의 말을 들으려고 마음을 두지 말라 염려컨대 네 종이 너를 저주하는 것을 들으리라	Also take no heed unto all words that are spoken; lest thou hear thy servant curse thee:	Do not pay attention to every word that is spoken, or you may hear your servant cursing you.
ECC	7	22	너도 가끔 사람을 저주한 것을 네 마음이 아느니라	For oftentimes also thine own heart knoweth that thou thyself likewise hast cursed others.	For you know in your heart that many times you yourself have cursed others.
ECC	7	23	내가 이 모든 것을 지혜로 시험하며 스스로 이르기를 내가 지혜자가 되리라 하였으나 지혜가 나를 멀리하였도다	All this have I proved by wisdom: I said, I will be wise; but it was far from me.	All this I tested by wisdom, saying, “I resolve to be wise.” But it was beyond me.
ECC	7	24	무릇 된 것이 멀고 깊고 깊도다 누가 능히 통달하랴	That which is far off, and exceeding deep, who can find it out?	What exists is out of reach and very deep. Who can fathom it?
ECC	7	25	내가 돌이켜 전심으로 지혜와 명철을 살피고 궁구하여 악한 것이 어리석은 것이요 어리석은 것이 미친 것인 줄을 알고자 하였더니	I applied mine heart to know, and to search, and to seek out wisdom, and the reason of things, and to know the wickedness of folly, even of foolishness and madness:	I directed my mind to understand, to explore, to search out wisdom and explanations, and to understand the stupidity of wickedness and the folly of madness.
ECC	7	26	내가 깨달은즉 마음이 올무와 그물 같고 손이 포승 같은 여인은 사망보다 독한 자라 하나님을 기뻐하는 자는 저를 피하려니와 죄인은 저에게 잡히리로다	And I find more bitter than death the woman, whose heart is snares and nets, and her hands as bands: whoso pleaseth God shall escape from her; but the sinner shall be taken by her.	And I find more bitter than death the woman who is a snare, whose heart is a net, and whose hands are chains. The man who pleases God escapes her, but the sinner is ensnared.
ECC	7	27	전도자가 가로되 내가 낱낱이 살펴 그 이치를 궁구하여 이것을 깨달았노라	Behold, this have I found, saith the preacher, counting one by one, to find out the account:	“Behold,” says the Teacher, “I have discovered this by adding one thing to another to find an explanation.
ECC	7	28	내 마음에 찾아도 아직 얻지 못한 것이 이것이라 일천 남자 중에서 하나를 얻었거니와 일천 여인 중에서는 하나도 얻지 못하였느니라	Which yet my soul seeketh, but I find not: one man among a thousand have I found; but a woman among all those have I not found.	While my soul was still searching but not finding, among a thousand I have found one upright man, but among all these I have not found one such woman.
ECC	7	29	나의 깨달은 것이 이것이라 곧 하나님이 사람을 정직하게 지으셨으나 사람은 많은 꾀를 낸 것이니라	Lo, this only have I found, that God hath made man upright; but they have sought out many inventions.	Only this have I found: I have discovered that God made men upright, but they have sought out many schemes.”
ECC	8	1	지혜자와 같은 자 누구며 사리의 해석을 아는 자 누구냐 사람의 지혜는 그 사람의 얼굴에 광채가 나게 하나니 그 얼굴의 사나운 것이 변하느니라	Who is as the wise man? and who knoweth the interpretation of a thing? a man’s wisdom maketh his face to shine, and the boldness of his face shall be changed.	Who is like the wise man? Who knows the interpretation of a matter? A man’s wisdom brightens his face, and the sternness of his face is changed.
ECC	8	2	내가 권하노니 왕의 명령을 지키라 이미 하나님을 가리켜 맹세하였음이니라	I counsel thee to keep the king’s commandment, and that in regard of the oath of God.	Keep the king’s command, I say, because of your oath before God.
ECC	8	3	왕 앞에서 물러가기를 급거히 말며 악한 것을 일삼지 말라 왕은 그 하고자 하는 것을 다 행함이니라	Be not hasty to go out of his sight: stand not in an evil thing; for he doeth whatsoever pleaseth him.	Do not hasten to leave his presence, and do not persist in a bad cause, for he will do whatever he pleases.
ECC	8	4	왕의 말은 권능이 있나니 누가 이르기를 왕께서 무엇을 하시나이까 할 수 있으랴	Where the word of a king is, there is power: and who may say unto him, What doest thou?	For the king’s word is supreme, and who can say to him, “What are you doing?”
ECC	8	5	무릇 명령을 지키는 자는 화를 모르리라 지혜자의 마음은 시기와 판단을 분변하나니	Whoso keepeth the commandment shall feel no evil thing: and a wise man’s heart discerneth both time and judgment.	Whoever keeps his command will come to no harm, and a wise heart knows the right time and procedure.
ECC	8	6	무론 무슨 일에든지 시기와 판단이 있으므로 사람에게 임하는 화가 심함이니라	Because to every purpose there is time and judgment, therefore the misery of man is great upon him.	For there is a right time and procedure to every purpose, though a man’s misery weighs heavily upon him.
ECC	8	7	사람이 장래 일을 알지 못하나니 장래 일을 가르칠 자가 누구이랴	For he knoweth not that which shall be: for who can tell him when it shall be?	Since no one knows what will happen, who can tell him what is to come?
ECC	8	8	생기를 주장하여 생기로 머무르게 할 사람도 없고 죽는 날을 주장할 자도 없고 전쟁할 때에 모면할 자도 없으며 악이 행악자를 건져낼 수도 없느니라	There is no man that hath power over the spirit to retain the spirit; neither hath he power in the day of death: and there is no discharge in that war; neither shall wickedness deliver those that are given to it.	As no man has power over the wind to contain it, so no one has authority over his day of death. As no one can be discharged in wartime, so wickedness will not release those who practice it.
ECC	8	9	내가 이런 것들을 다 보고 마음을 다하여 해 아래서 행하는 모든 일을 살핀즉 사람이 사람을 주장하여 해롭게 하는 때가 있으며	All this have I seen, and applied my heart unto every work that is done under the sun: there is a time wherein one man ruleth over another to his own hurt.	All this I have seen, applying my mind to every deed that is done under the sun; there is a time when one man lords it over another to his own detriment.
ECC	8	10	내가 본즉 악인은 장사 지낸 바 되어 무덤에 들어 갔고 선을 행한 자는 거룩한 곳에서 떠나 성읍 사람의 잊어버린 바 되었으니 이것도 헛되도다	And so I saw the wicked buried, who had come and gone from the place of the holy, and they were forgotten in the city where they had so done: this is also vanity.	Then too, I saw the burial of the wicked who used to go in and out of the holy place, and they were praised in the city where they had done so. This too is futile.
ECC	8	11	악한 일에 징벌이 속히 실행되지 않으므로 인생들이 악을 행하기에 마음이 담대하도다	Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.	When the sentence for a crime is not speedily executed, the hearts of men become fully set on doing evil.
ECC	8	12	죄인이 백번 악을 행하고도 장수하거니와 내가 정녕히 아노니 하나님을 경외하여 그 앞에서 경외하는 자가 잘 될 것이요	Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet surely I know that it shall be well with them that fear God, which fear before him:	Although a sinner does evil a hundred times and still lives long, yet I also know that it will go well with those who fear God, who are reverent in His presence.
ECC	8	13	악인은 잘 되지 못하며 장수하지 못하고 그 날이 그림자와 같으리니 이는 하나님 앞에 경외하지 아니함이니라	But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days, which are as a shadow; because he feareth not before God.	Yet because the wicked do not fear God, it will not go well with them, and their days will not lengthen like a shadow.
ECC	8	14	세상에 행하는 헛된 일이 있나니 곧 악인의 행위대로 받는 의인도 있고 의인의 행위대로 받는 악인도 있는 것이라 내가 이르노니 이것도 헛되도다	There is a vanity which is done upon the earth; that there be just men, unto whom it happeneth according to the work of the wicked; again, there be wicked men, to whom it happeneth according to the work of the righteous: I said that this also is vanity.	There is a futility that is done on the earth: There are righteous men who get what the actions of the wicked deserve, and there are wicked men who get what the actions of the righteous deserve. I say that this too is futile.
ECC	8	15	이에 내가 희락을 칭찬하노니 이는 사람이 먹고 마시고 즐거워하는 것보다 해 아래서 나은 것이 없음이라 하나님이 사람으로 해 아래서 살게 하신 날 동안 수고하는 중에 이것이 항상 함께 있을 것이니라	Then I commended mirth, because a man hath no better thing under the sun, than to eat, and to drink, and to be merry: for that shall abide with him of his labour the days of his life, which God giveth him under the sun.	So I commended the enjoyment of life, because there is nothing better for a man under the sun than to eat and drink and be merry. For this joy will accompany him in his labor during the days of his life that God gives him under the sun.
ECC	8	16	내가 마음을 다하여 지혜를 알고자 하며 세상에서 하는 노고를 보고자 하는 동시에 (밤낮으로 자지 못하는 자도 있도다)	When I applied mine heart to know wisdom, and to see the business that is done upon the earth: (for also there is that neither day nor night seeth sleep with his eyes:)	When I applied my mind to know wisdom and to observe the task that one performs on the earth—though his eyes do not see sleep in the day or even in the night—
ECC	8	17	하나님의 모든 행사를 살펴보니 해 아래서 하시는 일을 사람이 능히 깨달을 수 없도다 사람이 아무리 애써 궁구할지라도 능히 깨닫지 못하나니 비록 지혜자가 아노라 할지라도 능히 깨닫지 못하리로다	Then I beheld all the work of God, that a man cannot find out the work that is done under the sun: because though a man labour to seek it out, yet he shall not find it; yea further; though a wise man think to know it, yet shall he not be able to find it.	I saw every work of God, and that a man is unable to comprehend the work that is done under the sun. Despite his efforts to search it out, he cannot find its meaning; even if the wise man claims to know, he is unable to comprehend.
ECC	9	1	내가 마음을 다하여 이 모든 일을 궁구하며 살펴본즉 의인과 지혜자나 그들의 행하는 일이나 다 하나님의 손에 있으니 사랑을 받을는지 미움을 받을는지 사람이 알지 못하는 것은 모두 그 미래임이니라	For all this I considered in my heart even to declare all this, that the righteous, and the wise, and their works, are in the hand of God: no man knoweth either love or hatred by all that is before them.	So I took all this to heart and concluded that the righteous and the wise, as well as their deeds, are in God’s hands. Man does not know what lies ahead, whether love or hate.
ECC	9	2	모든 사람에게 임하는 모든 것이 일반이라 의인과 악인이며 선하고 깨끗한 자와 깨끗지 않은 자며 제사를 드리는 자와 제사를 드리지 아니하는 자의 결국이 일반이니 선인과 죄인이며 맹세하는 자와 맹세하기를 무서워하는 자가 일반이로다	All things come alike to all: there is one event to the righteous, and to the wicked; to the good and to the clean, and to the unclean; to him that sacrificeth, and to him that sacrificeth not: as is the good, so is the sinner; and he that sweareth, as he that feareth an oath.	It is the same for all: There is a common fate for the righteous and the wicked, for the good and the bad, for the clean and the unclean, for the one who sacrifices and the one who does not. As it is for the good, so it is for the sinner; as it is for the one who makes a vow, so it is for the one who refuses to take a vow.
ECC	9	3	모든 사람의 결국이 일반인 그것은 해 아래서 모든 일 중에 악한 것이니 곧 인생의 마음에 악이 가득하여 평생에 미친 마음을 품다가 후에는 죽은 자에게로 돌아가는 것이라	This is an evil among all things that are done under the sun, that there is one event unto all: yea, also the heart of the sons of men is full of evil, and madness is in their heart while they live, and after that they go to the dead.	This is an evil in everything that is done under the sun: There is one fate for everyone. Furthermore, the hearts of men are full of evil and madness while they are alive, and afterward they join the dead.
ECC	9	4	모든 산 자 중에 참예한 자가 소망이 있음은 산 개가 죽은 사자보다 나음이니라	For to him that is joined to all the living there is hope: for a living dog is better than a dead lion.	There is hope, however, for anyone who is among the living; for even a live dog is better than a dead lion.
ECC	9	5	무릇 산 자는 죽을 줄을 알되 죽은 자는 아무 것도 모르며 다시는 상도 받지 못하는 것은 그 이름이 잊어버린 바 됨이라	For the living know that they shall die: but the dead know not any thing, neither have they any more a reward; for the memory of them is forgotten.	For the living know that they will die, but the dead know nothing. They have no further reward, because the memory of them is forgotten.
ECC	9	6	그 사랑함과 미워함과 시기함이 없어진 지 오래니 해 아래서 행하는 모든 일에 저희가 다시는 영영히 분복이 없느니라	Also their love, and their hatred, and their envy, is now perished; neither have they any more a portion for ever in any thing that is done under the sun.	Their love, their hate, and their envy have already vanished, and they will never again have a share in all that is done under the sun.
ECC	9	7	너는 가서 기쁨으로 네 식물을 먹고 즐거운 마음으로 네 포도주를 마실지어다 이는 하나님이 너의 하는 일을 벌써 기쁘게 받으셨음이니라	Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart; for God now accepteth thy works.	Go, eat your bread with joy, and drink your wine with a cheerful heart, for God has already approved your works:
ECC	9	8	네 의복을 항상 희게 하며 네 머리에 향 기름을 그치지 않게 할지니라	Let thy garments be always white; and let thy head lack no ointment.	Let your garments always be white, and never spare the oil for your head.
ECC	9	9	네 헛된 평생의 모든 날 곧 하나님이 해 아래서 네게 주신 모든 헛된 날에 사랑하는 아내와 함께 즐겁게 살지어다 이는 네가 일평생에 해 아래서 수고하고 얻은 분복이니라	Live joyfully with the wife whom thou lovest all the days of the life of thy vanity, which he hath given thee under the sun, all the days of thy vanity: for that is thy portion in this life, and in thy labour which thou takest under the sun.	Enjoy life with your beloved wife all the days of the fleeting life that God has given you under the sun—all your fleeting days. For this is your portion in life and in your labor under the sun.
ECC	9	10	무릇 네 손이 일을 당하는 대로 힘을 다하여 할지어다 네가 장차 들어갈 음부에는 일도 없고 계획도 없고 지식도 없고 지혜도 없음이니라	Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest.	Whatever you find to do with your hands, do it with all your might, for in Sheol, where you are going, there is no work or planning or knowledge or wisdom.
ECC	9	11	내가 돌이켜 해 아래서 보니 빠른 경주자라고 선착하는 것이 아니며 유력자라고 전쟁에 승리하는 것이 아니며 지혜자라고 식물을 얻는 것이 아니며 명철자라고 재물을 얻는 것이 아니며 기능자라고 은총을 입는 것이 아니니 이는 시기와 우연이 이 모든 자에게 임함이라	I returned, and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favour to men of skill; but time and chance happeneth to them all.	I saw something else under the sun: The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong; neither is the bread to the wise, nor the wealth to the intelligent, nor the favor to the skillful. For time and chance happen to all.
ECC	9	12	대저 사람은 자기의 시기를 알지 못하나니 물고기가 재앙의 그물에 걸리고 새가 올무에 걸림 같이 인생도 재앙의 날이 홀연히 임하면 거기 걸리느니라	For man also knoweth not his time: as the fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare; so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falleth suddenly upon them.	For surely no man knows his time: Like fish caught in a cruel net or birds trapped in a snare, so men are ensnared in an evil time that suddenly falls upon them.
ECC	9	13	내가 또 해 아래서 지혜를 보고 크게 여긴 것이 이러하니	This wisdom have I seen also under the sun, and it seemed great unto me:	I have also seen this wisdom under the sun, and it was great to me:
ECC	9	14	곧 어떤 작고 인구가 많지 않은 성읍에 큰 임금이 와서 에워싸고 큰 흉벽을 쌓고 치고자 할 때에	There was a little city, and few men within it; and there came a great king against it, and besieged it, and built great bulwarks against it:	There was a small city with few men. A mighty king came against it, surrounded it, and built large siege ramps against it.
ECC	9	15	그 성읍 가운데 가난한 지혜자가 있어서 그 지혜로 그 성읍을 건진 것이라 그러나 이 가난한 자를 기억하는 사람이 없었도다	Now there was found in it a poor wise man, and he by his wisdom delivered the city; yet no man remembered that same poor man.	Now a poor wise man was found in the city, and he saved the city by his wisdom. Yet no one remembered that poor man.
ECC	9	16	그러므로 내가 이르기를 지혜가 힘보다 낫다마는 가난한 자의 지혜가 멸시를 받고 그 말이 신청되지 아니한다 하였노라	Then said I, Wisdom is better than strength: nevertheless the poor man’s wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard.	And I said, “Wisdom is better than strength, but the wisdom of the poor man is despised, and his words are not heeded.”
ECC	9	17	종용히 들리는 지혜자의 말이 우매자의 어른의 호령보다 나으니라	The words of wise men are heard in quiet more than the cry of him that ruleth among fools.	The calm words of the wise are heeded over the shouts of a ruler among fools.
ECC	9	18	지혜가 병기보다 나으니라 그러나 한 죄인이 많은 선을 패궤케 하느니라	Wisdom is better than weapons of war: but one sinner destroyeth much good.	Wisdom is better than weapons of war, but one sinner destroys much good.
ECC	10	1	죽은 파리가 향기름으로 악취가 나게 하는 것 같이 적은 우매가 지혜와 존귀로 패하게 하느니라	Dead flies cause the ointment of the apothecary to send forth a stinking savour: so doth a little folly him that is in reputation for wisdom and honour.	As dead flies bring a stench to the perfumer’s oil, so a little folly outweighs wisdom and honor.
ECC	10	2	지혜자의 마음은 오른편에 있고 우매자의 마음은 왼편에 있느니라	A wise man’s heart is at his right hand; but a fool’s heart at his left.	A wise man’s heart inclines to the right, but the heart of a fool to the left.
ECC	10	3	우매자는 길에 행할 때에도 지혜가 결핍하여 각 사람에게 자기의 우매한 것을 말하느니라	Yea also, when he that is a fool walketh by the way, his wisdom faileth him, and he saith to every one that he is a fool.	Even as the fool walks along the road, his sense is lacking, and he shows everyone that he is a fool.
ECC	10	4	주권자가 네게 분을 일으키거든 너는 네 자리를 떠나지 말라 공순이 큰 허물을 경하게 하느니라	If the spirit of the ruler rise up against thee, leave not thy place; for yielding pacifieth great offences.	If the ruler’s temper flares against you, do not abandon your post, for calmness lays great offenses to rest.
ECC	10	5	내가 해 아래서 한 가지 폐단 곧 주권자에게서 나는 허물인 듯한 것을 보았노니	There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, as an error which proceedeth from the ruler:	There is an evil I have seen under the sun— an error that proceeds from the ruler:
ECC	10	6	우매자가 크게 높은 지위를 얻고 부자가 낮은 지위에 앉는도다	Folly is set in great dignity, and the rich sit in low place.	Folly is appointed to great heights, but the rich sit in lowly positions.
ECC	10	7	또 보았노니 종들은 말을 타고 방백들은 종처럼 땅에 걸어 다니는도다	I have seen servants upon horses, and princes walking as servants upon the earth.	I have seen slaves on horseback, while princes go on foot like slaves.
ECC	10	8	함정을 파는 자는 거기 빠질 것이요 담을 허는 자는 뱀에게 물리리라	He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it; and whoso breaketh an hedge, a serpent shall bite him.	He who digs a pit may fall into it, and he who breaches a wall may be bitten by a snake.
ECC	10	9	돌을 떠내는 자는 그로 인하여 상할 것이요 나무를 쪼개는 자는 그로 인하여 위험을 당하리라	Whoso removeth stones shall be hurt therewith; and he that cleaveth wood shall be endangered thereby.	The one who quarries stones may be injured by them, and he who splits logs endangers himself.
ECC	10	10	무딘 철 연장 날을 갈지 아니하면 힘이 더 드느니라 오직 지혜는 성공하기에 유익하니라	If the iron be blunt, and he do not whet the edge, then must he put to more strength: but wisdom is profitable to direct.	If the axe is dull and the blade unsharpened, more strength must be exerted, but skill produces success.
ECC	10	11	방술을 베풀기 전에 뱀에게 물렸으면 술객은 무용하니라	Surely the serpent will bite without enchantment; and a babbler is no better.	If the snake bites before it is charmed, there is no profit for the charmer.
ECC	10	12	지혜자의 입의 말은 은혜로우나 우매자의 입술은 자기를 삼키나니	The words of a wise man’s mouth are gracious; but the lips of a fool will swallow up himself.	The words of a wise man’s mouth are gracious, but the lips of a fool consume him.
ECC	10	13	그 입의 말의 시작은 우매요 끝은 광패니라	The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness: and the end of his talk is mischievous madness.	The beginning of his talk is folly, and the end of his speech is evil madness.
ECC	10	14	우매자는 말을 많이 하거니와 사람이 장래 일을 알지 못하나니 신후사를 알게 할 자가 누구이냐	A fool also is full of words: a man cannot tell what shall be; and what shall be after him, who can tell him?	Yet the fool multiplies words. No one knows what is coming, and who can tell him what will come after him?
ECC	10	15	우매자들의 수고는 제각기 곤하게 할 뿐이라 저희는 성읍에 들어갈 줄도 알지 못함이니라	The labour of the foolish wearieth every one of them, because he knoweth not how to go to the city.	The toil of a fool wearies him, for he does not know the way to the city.
ECC	10	16	왕은 어리고 대신들은 아침에 연락하는 이 나라여 화가 있도다	Woe to thee, O land, when thy king is a child, and thy princes eat in the morning!	Woe to you, O land whose king is a youth, and whose princes feast in the morning.
ECC	10	17	왕은 귀족의 아들이요 대신들은 취하려 함이 아니라 기력을 보하려고 마땅한 때에 먹는 이 나라여 복이 있도다	Blessed art thou, O land, when thy king is the son of nobles, and thy princes eat in due season, for strength, and not for drunkenness!	Blessed are you, O land whose king is a son of nobles, and whose princes feast at the proper time— for strength and not for drunkenness.
ECC	10	18	게으른즉 석가래가 퇴락하고 손이 풀어진즉 집이 새느니라	By much slothfulness the building decayeth; and through idleness of the hands the house droppeth through.	Through laziness the roof caves in, and in the hands of the idle, the house leaks.
ECC	10	19	잔치는 희락을 위하여 베푸는 것이요 포도주는 생명을 기쁘게 하는 것이나 돈은 범사에 응용되느니라	A feast is made for laughter, and wine maketh merry: but money answereth all things.	A feast is prepared for laughter, and wine makes life merry, but money is the answer for everything.
ECC	10	20	심중에라도 왕을 저주하지 말며 침방에서라도 부자를 저주하지 말라 공중의 새가 그 소리를 전하고 날짐승이 그 일을 전파할 것임이니라	Curse not the king, no not in thy thought; and curse not the rich in thy bedchamber: for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which hath wings shall tell the matter.	Do not curse the king even in your thoughts, or curse the rich even in your bedroom, for a bird of the air may carry your words, and a winged creature may report your speech.
ECC	11	1	너는 네 식물을 물 위에 던지라 여러 날 후에 도로 찾으리라	Cast thy bread upon the waters: for thou shalt find it after many days.	Cast your bread upon the waters, for after many days you will find it again.
ECC	11	2	일곱에게나 여덟에게 나눠줄지어다 무슨 재앙이 땅에 임할는지 네가 알지 못함이니라	Give a portion to seven, and also to eight; for thou knowest not what evil shall be upon the earth.	Divide your portion among seven, or even eight, for you do not know what disaster may befall the land.
ECC	11	3	구름에 비가 가득하면 땅에 쏟아지며 나무가 남으로나 북으로나 쓰러지면 그 쓰러진 곳에 그냥 있으리라	If the clouds be full of rain, they empty themselves upon the earth: and if the tree fall toward the south, or toward the north, in the place where the tree falleth, there it shall be.	If the clouds are full, they will pour out rain upon the earth; whether a tree falls to the south or to the north, in the place where it falls, there it will lie.
ECC	11	4	풍세를 살펴보는 자는 파종하지 아니할 것이요 구름을 바라보는 자는 거두지 아니하리라	He that observeth the wind shall not sow; and he that regardeth the clouds shall not reap.	He who watches the wind will fail to sow, and he who observes the clouds will fail to reap.
ECC	11	5	바람의 길이 어떠함과 아이 밴 자의 태에서 뼈가 어떻게 자라는 것을 네가 알지 못함 같이 만사를 성취하시는 하나님의 일을 네가 알지 못하느니라	As thou knowest not what is the way of the spirit, nor how the bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child: even so thou knowest not the works of God who maketh all.	As you do not know the path of the wind, or how the bones are formed in a mother’s womb, so you cannot understand the work of God, the Maker of all things.
ECC	11	6	너는 아침에 씨를 뿌리고 저녁에도 손을 거두지 말라 이것이 잘 될는지, 저것이 잘 될는지, 혹 둘이 다 잘 될는지 알지 못함이니라	In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thine hand: for thou knowest not whether shall prosper, either this or that, or whether they both shall be alike good.	Sow your seed in the morning, and do not rest your hands in the evening, for you do not know which will succeed, whether this or that, or if both will equally prosper.
ECC	11	7	빛은 실로 아름다운 것이라 눈으로 해를 보는 것이 즐거운 일이로다	Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the sun:	Light is sweet, and it pleases the eyes to see the sun.
ECC	11	8	사람이 여러 해를 살면 항상 즐거워할지로다 그러나 캄캄한 날이 많으리니 그 날을 생각할지로다 장래 일은 다 헛되도다	But if a man live many years, and rejoice in them all; yet let him remember the days of darkness; for they shall be many. All that cometh is vanity.	So if a man lives many years, let him rejoice in them all. But let him remember the days of darkness, for they will be many. Everything to come is futile.
ECC	11	9	청년이여 네 어린 때를 즐거워하며 네 청년의 날을 마음에 기뻐하여 마음에 원하는 길과 네 눈이 보는 대로 좇아 행하라 그러나 하나님이 이 모든 일로 인하여 너를 심판하실 줄 알라	Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into judgment.	Rejoice, O young man, while you are young, and let your heart be glad in the days of your youth. Walk in the ways of your heart and in the sight of your eyes, but know that for all these things God will bring you to judgment.
ECC	11	10	그런즉 근심으로 네 마음에서 떠나게 하며 악으로 네 몸에서 물러가게 하라 어릴 때와 청년의 때가 다 헛되니라	Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart, and put away evil from thy flesh: for childhood and youth are vanity.	So banish sorrow from your heart, and cast off pain from your body, for youth and vigor are fleeting.
ECC	12	1	너는 청년의 때 곧 곤고한 날이 이르기 전, 나는 아무 낙이 없다고 할 해가 가깝기 전에 너의 창조자를 기억하라	Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them;	Remember your Creator in the days of your youth, before the days of adversity come and the years approach of which you will say, “I find no pleasure in them,”
ECC	12	2	해와 빛과 달과 별들이 어둡기 전에, 비 뒤에 구름이 다시 일어나기 전에 그리하라	While the sun, or the light, or the moon, or the stars, be not darkened, nor the clouds return after the rain:	before the light of the sun, moon, and stars is darkened, and the clouds return after the rain,
ECC	12	3	그런 날에는 집을 지키는 자들이 떨 것이며 힘있는 자들이 구부러질 것이며 맷돌질 하는 자들이 적으므로 그칠 것이며 창들로 내어다 보는 자가 어두워질 것이며	In the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease because they are few, and those that look out of the windows be darkened,	on the day the keepers of the house tremble and the strong men stoop, when those grinding cease because they are few and those watching through windows see dimly,
ECC	12	4	길거리 문들이 닫혀질 것이며 맷돌 소리가 적어질 것이며 새의 소리를 인하여 일어날 것이며 음악하는 여자들은 다 쇠하여질 것이며	And the doors shall be shut in the streets, when the sound of the grinding is low, and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the daughters of musick shall be brought low;	when the doors to the street are shut and the sound of the mill fades away, when one rises at the sound of a bird and all the daughters of song grow faint,
ECC	12	5	그런 자들은 높은 곳을 두려워할 것이며 길에서는 놀랄 것이며 살구나무가 꽃이 필 것이며 메뚜기도 짐이 될 것이며 원욕이 그치리니 이는 사람이 자기 영원한 집으로 돌아가고 조문자들이 거리로 왕래하게 됨이라	Also when they shall be afraid of that which is high, and fears shall be in the way, and the almond tree shall flourish, and the grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire shall fail: because man goeth to his long home, and the mourners go about the streets:	when men fear the heights and dangers of the road, when the almond tree blossoms, the grasshopper loses its spring, and the caper berry shrivels— for then man goes to his eternal home and mourners walk the streets.
ECC	12	6	은줄이 풀리고 금 그릇이 깨어지고 항아리가 샘 곁에서 깨어지고 바퀴가 우물 위에서 깨어지고	Or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the cistern.	Remember Him before the silver cord is snapped and the golden bowl is crushed, before the pitcher is shattered at the spring and the wheel is broken at the well,
ECC	12	7	흙은 여전히 땅으로 돌아가고 신은 그 주신 하나님께로 돌아가기 전에 기억하라	Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it.	before the dust returns to the ground from which it came and the spirit returns to God who gave it.
ECC	12	8	전도자가 가로되 헛되고 헛되도다 모든 것이 헛되도다	Vanity of vanities, saith the preacher; all is vanity.	“Futility of futilities,” says the Teacher. “Everything is futile!”
ECC	12	9	전도자가 지혜로움으로 여전히 백성에게 지식을 가르쳤고 또 묵상하고 궁구하여 잠언을 많이 지었으며	And moreover, because the preacher was wise, he still taught the people knowledge; yea, he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in order many proverbs.	Not only was the Teacher wise, but he also taught the people knowledge; he pondered, searched out, and arranged many proverbs.
ECC	12	10	전도자가 힘써 아름다운 말을 구하였나니 기록한 것은 정직하여 진리의 말씀이니라	The preacher sought to find out acceptable words: and that which was written was upright, even words of truth.	The Teacher searched to find delightful sayings and to record accurate words of truth.
ECC	12	11	지혜자의 말씀은 찌르는 채찍같고 회중의 스승의 말씀은 잘 박힌 못 같으니 다 한 목자의 주신 바니라	The words of the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened by the masters of assemblies, which are given from one shepherd.	The words of the wise are like goads, and the anthologies of the masters are like firmly embedded nails driven by a single Shepherd.
ECC	12	12	내 아들아 또 경계를 받으라 여러 책을 짓는 것은 끝이 없고 많이 공부하는 것은 몸을 피곤케 하느니라	And further, by these, my son, be admonished: of making many books there is no end; and much study is a weariness of the flesh.	And by these, my son, be further warned: There is no end to the making of many books, and much study wearies the body.
ECC	12	13	일의 결국을 다 들었으니 하나님을 경외하고 그 명령을 지킬지어다 이것이 사람의 본분이니라	Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man.	When all has been heard, the conclusion of the matter is this: Fear God and keep His commandments, because this is the whole duty of man.
ECC	12	14	하나님은 모든 행위와 모든 은밀한 일을 선악간에 심판하시리라	For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.	For God will bring every deed into judgment, along with every hidden thing, whether good or evil.
SNG	1	1	솔로몬의 아가라	The song of songs, which is Solomon’s.	This is Solomon’s Song of Songs.
SNG	1	2	내게 입맞추기를 원하니 네 사랑이 포도주보다 나음이로구나	Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: for thy love is better than wine.	Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth! For your love is more delightful than wine.
SNG	1	3	네 기름이 향기로워 아름답고 네 이름이 쏟은 향기름 같으므로 처녀들이 너를 사랑하는구나	Because of the savour of thy good ointments thy name is as ointment poured forth, therefore do the virgins love thee.	The fragrance of your perfume is pleasing; your name is like perfume poured out. No wonder the maidens adore you.
SNG	1	4	왕이 나를 침궁으로 이끌어 들이시니 너는 나를 인도하라 우리가 너를 따라 달려가리라 우리가 너를 인하여 기뻐하며 즐거워하니 네 사랑이 포도주에서 지남이라 처녀들이 너를 사랑함이 마땅하니라	Draw me, we will run after thee: the king hath brought me into his chambers: we will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy love more than wine: the upright love thee.	Take me away with you—let us hurry! May the king bring me to his chambers. We will rejoice and delight in you; we will praise your love more than wine. It is only right that they adore you.
SNG	1	5	예루살렘 여자들아 내가 비록 검으나 아름다우니 게달의 장막 같을지라도 솔로몬의 휘장과도 같구나	I am black, but comely, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, as the tents of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon.	I am dark, yet lovely, O daughters of Jerusalem, like the tents of Kedar, like the curtains of Solomon.
SNG	1	6	내가 일광에 쬐어서 거무스름할지라도 흘겨보지 말 것은 내 어미의 아들들이 나를 노하여 포도원지기를 삼았음이라 나의 포도원은 내가 지키지 못하였구나	Look not upon me, because I am black, because the sun hath looked upon me: my mother’s children were angry with me; they made me the keeper of the vineyards; but mine own vineyard have I not kept.	Do not stare because I am dark, for the sun has gazed upon me. My mother’s sons were angry with me; they made me a keeper of the vineyards, but my own vineyard I have neglected.
SNG	1	7	내 마음에 사랑하는 자야 너의 양떼 먹이는 곳과 오정에 쉬게 하는 곳을 내게 고하라 내가 네 동무 양떼 곁에서 어찌 얼굴을 가리운 자 같이 되랴	Tell me, O thou whom my soul loveth, where thou feedest, where thou makest thy flock to rest at noon: for why should I be as one that turneth aside by the flocks of thy companions?	Tell me, O one I love, where do you pasture your sheep? Where do you rest them at midday? Why should I be like a veiled woman beside the flocks of your companions?
SNG	1	8	여인 중에 어여쁜 자야 네가 알지 못하겠거든 양떼의 발자취를 따라 목자들의 장막 곁에서 너의 염소 새끼를 먹일지니라	If thou know not, O thou fairest among women, go thy way forth by the footsteps of the flock, and feed thy kids beside the shepherds’ tents.	If you do not know, O fairest of women, follow the tracks of the flock, and graze your young goats near the tents of the shepherds.
SNG	1	9	내 사랑아 내가 너를 바로의 병거의 준마에 비하였구나	I have compared thee, O my love, to a company of horses in Pharaoh’s chariots.	I compare you, my darling, to a mare among Pharaoh’s chariots.
SNG	1	10	네 두 뺨은 땋은 머리털로, 네 목은 구슬 꿰미로 아름답구나	Thy cheeks are comely with rows of jewels, thy neck with chains of gold.	Your cheeks are beautiful with ornaments, your neck with strings of jewels.
SNG	1	11	우리가 너를 위하여 금사슬을 은을 박아 만들리라	We will make thee borders of gold with studs of silver.	We will make you ornaments of gold, studded with beads of silver.
SNG	1	12	왕이 상에 앉았을 때에 나의 나도 기름이 향기를 토하였구나	While the king sitteth at his table, my spikenard sendeth forth the smell thereof.	While the king was at his table, my perfume spread its fragrance.
SNG	1	13	나의 사랑하는 자는 내 품 가운데 몰약 향낭이요	A bundle of myrrh is my wellbeloved unto me; he shall lie all night betwixt my breasts.	My beloved is to me a sachet of myrrh resting between my breasts.
SNG	1	14	나의 사랑하는 자는 내게 엔게디 포도원의 고벨화 송이로구나	My beloved is unto me as a cluster of camphire in the vineyards of En–gedi.	My beloved is to me a cluster of henna blossoms in the vineyards of En-gedi.
SNG	1	15	내 사랑아 너는 어여쁘고 어여쁘다 네 눈이 비둘기 같구나	Behold, thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair; thou hast doves’ eyes.	How beautiful you are, my darling! Oh, how very beautiful! Your eyes are like doves.
SNG	1	16	나의 사랑하는 자야 너는 어여쁘고 화창하다 우리의 침상은 푸르고	Behold, thou art fair, my beloved, yea, pleasant: also our bed is green.	How handsome you are, my beloved! Oh, how delightful! The soft grass is our bed.
SNG	1	17	우리 집은 백향목 들보, 잣나무 석가래로구나	The beams of our house are cedar, and our rafters of fir.	The beams of our house are cedars; our rafters are fragrant firs.
SNG	2	1	나는 사론의 수선화요 골짜기의 백합화로구나	I am the rose of Sharon, and the lily of the valleys.	I am a rose of Sharon, a lily of the valley.
SNG	2	2	여자들 중에 내 사랑은 가시나무 가운데 백합화 같구나	As the lily among thorns, so is my love among the daughters.	Like a lily among the thorns is my darling among the maidens.
SNG	2	3	남자들 중에 나의 사랑하는 자는 수풀 가운데 사과나무 같구나 내가 그 그늘에 앉아서 심히 기뻐하였고 그 실과는 내 입에 달았구나	As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste.	Like an apple tree among the trees of the forest is my beloved among the young men. I delight to sit in his shade, and his fruit is sweet to my taste.
SNG	2	4	그가 나를 인도하여 잔치집에 들어갔으니 그 사랑이 내 위에 기로구나	He brought me to the banqueting house, and his banner over me was love.	He has brought me to the house of wine, and his banner over me is love.
SNG	2	5	너희는 건포도로 내 힘을 돕고 사과로 나를 시원케 하라 내가 사랑하므로 병이 났음이니라	Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples: for I am sick of love.	Sustain me with raisins; refresh me with apples, for I am faint with love.
SNG	2	6	그가 왼손으로 내 머리에 베게하고 오른손으로 나를 안는구나	His left hand is under my head, and his right hand doth embrace me.	His left hand is under my head, and his right arm embraces me.
SNG	2	7	예루살렘 여자들아 내가 노루와 들사슴으로 너희에게 부탁한다 내 사랑이 원하기 전에는 흔들지 말고 깨우지 말지니라	I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, and by the hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, till he please.	O daughters of Jerusalem, I adjure you by the gazelles and does of the field: Do not arouse or awaken love until the time is right.
SNG	2	8	나의 사랑하는 자의 목소리로구나 보라 그가 산에서 달리고 작은 산을 빨리 넘어 오는구나	The voice of my beloved! behold, he cometh leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills.	Listen! My beloved approaches. Look! Here he comes, leaping across the mountains, bounding over the hills.
SNG	2	9	나의 사랑하는 자는 노루와도 같고 어린 사슴과도 같아서 우리 벽 뒤에 서서 창으로 들여다 보며 창살 틈으로 엿보는구나	My beloved is like a roe or a young hart: behold, he standeth behind our wall, he looketh forth at the windows, shewing himself through the lattice.	My beloved is like a gazelle or a young stag. Look, he stands behind our wall, gazing through the windows, peering through the lattice.
SNG	2	10	나의 사랑하는 자가 내게 말하여 이르기를 나의 사랑 나의 어여쁜 자야 일어나서 함께 가자	My beloved spake, and said unto me, Rise up, my love, my fair one, and come away.	My beloved calls to me, “Arise, my darling. Come away with me, my beautiful one.
SNG	2	11	겨울도 지나고 비도 그쳤고	For, lo, the winter is past, the rain is over and gone;	For now the winter is past; the rain is over and gone.
SNG	2	12	지면에는 꽃이 피고 새의 노래할 때가 이르렀는데 반구의 소리가 우리 땅에 들리는구나	The flowers appear on the earth; the time of the singing of birds is come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in our land;	The flowers have appeared in the countryside; the season of singing has come, and the cooing of turtledoves is heard in our land.
SNG	2	13	무화과 나무에는 푸른 열매가 익었고 포도나무는 꽃이 피어 향기를 토하는구나 나의 사랑 나의 어여쁜 자야 일어나서 함께 가자	The fig tree putteth forth her green figs, and the vines with the tender grape give a good smell. Arise, my love, my fair one, and come away.	The fig tree ripens its figs; the blossoming vines spread their fragrance. Arise, come away, my darling; come away with me, my beautiful one.”
SNG	2	14	바위 틈 낭떠러지 은밀한 속에 있는 나의 비둘기야 나로 네 얼굴을 보게 하라 네 소리를 듣게 하라 네 소리는 부드럽고 네 얼굴은 아름답구나	O my dove, that art in the clefts of the rock, in the secret places of the stairs, let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely.	O my dove in the clefts of the rock, in the crevices of the cliff, let me see your face, let me hear your voice; for your voice is sweet, and your countenance is lovely.
SNG	2	15	우리를 위하여 여우 곧 포도원을 허는 작은 여우를 잡으라 우리의 포도원에 꽃이 피었음이니라	Take us the foxes, the little foxes, that spoil the vines: for our vines have tender grapes.	Catch for us the foxes— the little foxes that ruin the vineyards— for our vineyards are in bloom.
SNG	2	16	나의 사랑하는 자는 내게 속하였고 나는 그에게 속하였구나 그가 백합화 가운데서 양떼를 먹이는구나	My beloved is mine, and I am his: he feedeth among the lilies.	My beloved is mine and I am his; he pastures his flock among the lilies.
SNG	2	17	나의 사랑하는 자야 날이 기울고 그림자가 갈 때에 돌아와서 베데르 산에서의 노루와 어린 사슴 같아여라	Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, turn, my beloved, and be thou like a roe or a young hart upon the mountains of Bether.	Before the day breaks and shadows flee, turn, my beloved, and be like a gazelle or a young stag on the mountains of Bether.
SNG	3	1	내가 밤에 침상에서 마음에 사랑하는 자를 찾았구나 찾아도 발견치 못하였구나	By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loveth: I sought him, but I found him not.	On my bed at night I sought the one I love; I sought him, but did not find him.
SNG	3	2	이에 내가 일어나서 성중으로 돌아다니며 마음에 사랑하는 자를 거리에서나 큰 길에서나 찾으리라 하고 찾으나 만나지 못하였구나	I will rise now, and go about the city in the streets, and in the broad ways I will seek him whom my soul loveth: I sought him, but I found him not.	I will arise now and go about the city, through the streets and squares. I will seek the one I love. So I sought him but did not find him.
SNG	3	3	성중의 행순하는 자들을 만나서 묻기를 내 마음에 사랑하는 자를 너희가 보았느냐 하고	The watchmen that go about the city found me: to whom I said, Saw ye him whom my soul loveth?	I encountered the watchmen on their rounds of the city: “Have you seen the one I love?”
SNG	3	4	그들을 떠나자마자 마음에 사랑하는 자를 만나서 그를 붙잡고 내 어미 집으로, 나를 잉태한 자의 방으로 가기까지 놓지 아니하였노라	It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my soul loveth: I held him, and would not let him go, until I had brought him into my mother’s house, and into the chamber of her that conceived me.	I had just passed them when I found the one I love. I held him and would not let go until I had brought him to my mother’s house, to the chamber of the one who conceived me.
SNG	3	5	예루살렘 여자들아 내가 노루와 들 사슴으로 너희에게 부탁한다 사랑하는 자가 원하기 전에는 흔들지 말고 깨우지 말지니라	I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, and by the hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, till he please.	O daughters of Jerusalem, I adjure you by the gazelles and does of the field: Do not arouse or awaken love until the time is right.
SNG	3	6	연기 기둥과도 같고 몰약과 유향과 장사의 여러가지 향품으로 향기롭게도 하고 거친 들에서 오는 자가 누구인고	Who is this that cometh out of the wilderness like pillars of smoke, perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the merchant?	Who is this coming up from the wilderness like a column of smoke, scented with myrrh and frankincense from all the spices of the merchant?
SNG	3	7	이는 솔로몬의 연이라 이스라엘 용사 중 육십 인이 옹위하였는데	Behold his bed, which is Solomon’s; threescore valiant men are about it, of the valiant of Israel.	Behold, it is Solomon’s carriage, escorted by sixty of the mightiest men of Israel.
SNG	3	8	다 칼을 잡고 싸움에 익숙한 사람들이라 밤의 두려움을 인하여 각기 허리에 칼을 찼느니라	They all hold swords, being expert in war: every man hath his sword upon his thigh because of fear in the night.	All are skilled with the sword, experienced in warfare. Each has his sword at his side prepared for the terror of the night.
SNG	3	9	솔로몬 왕이 레바논 나무로 자기의 연을 만들었는데	King Solomon made himself a chariot of the wood of Lebanon.	King Solomon has made his carriage out of the timber of Lebanon.
SNG	3	10	그 기둥은 은이요 바닥은 금이요 자리는 자색 담이라 그 안에는 예루살렘 여자들의 사랑이 입혔구나	He made the pillars thereof of silver, the bottom thereof of gold, the covering of it of purple, the midst thereof being paved with love, for the daughters of Jerusalem.	He has made its posts of silver, its base of gold, its seat of purple fabric. Its interior is inlaid with love by the daughters of Jerusalem.
SNG	3	11	시온의 여자들아 나와서 솔로몬 왕을 보라 혼인날 마음이 기쁠 때에 그 모친의 씌운 면류관이 그 머리에 있구나	Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and behold king Solomon with the crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in the day of the gladness of his heart.	Come out, O daughters of Zion, and gaze at King Solomon, wearing the crown his mother bestowed on the day of his wedding— the day of his heart’s rejoicing.
SNG	4	1	내 사랑 너는 어여쁘고도 어여쁘다 너울 속에 있는 네 눈이 비둘기 같고 네 머리털은 길르앗 산 기슭에 누운 무리 염소 같구나	Behold, thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair; thou hast doves’ eyes within thy locks: thy hair is as a flock of goats, that appear from mount Gilead.	How beautiful you are, my darling— how very beautiful! Your eyes are like doves behind your veil. Your hair is like a flock of goats streaming down Mount Gilead.
SNG	4	2	네 이는 목욕장에서 나온 털 깎인 암양 곧 새끼 없는 것은 하나도 없이 각각 쌍태를 낳은 양 같구나	Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep that are even shorn, which came up from the washing; whereof every one bear twins, and none is barren among them.	Your teeth are like a flock of newly shorn sheep coming up from the washing; each has its twin, and not one of them is lost.
SNG	4	3	네 입술은 홍색 실 같고 네 입은 어여쁘고 너울 속의 네 뺨은 석류 한 쪽 같구나	Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, and thy speech is comely: thy temples are like a piece of a pomegranate within thy locks.	Your lips are like a scarlet ribbon, and your mouth is lovely. Your brow behind your veil is like a slice of pomegranate.
SNG	4	4	네 목은 군기를 두려고 건축한 다윗의 망대 곧 일천 방패, 용사의 모든 방패가 달린 망대 같고	Thy neck is like the tower of David builded for an armoury, whereon there hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men.	Your neck is like the tower of David, built with rows of stones; on it hang a thousand shields, all of them shields of warriors.
SNG	4	5	네 두 유방은 백합화 가운데서 꼴을 먹는 쌍태 노루 새끼 같구나	Thy two breasts are like two young roes that are twins, which feed among the lilies.	Your breasts are like two fawns, twins of a gazelle grazing among the lilies.
SNG	4	6	날이 기울고 그림자가 갈 때에 내가 몰약 산과 유향의 작은 산으로 가리라	Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, I will get me to the mountain of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense.	Before the day breaks and the shadows flee, I will make my way to the mountain of myrrh and to the hill of frankincense.
SNG	4	7	나의 사랑 너는 순전히 어여뻐서 아무 흠이 없구나	Thou art all fair, my love; there is no spot in thee.	You are altogether beautiful, my darling; in you there is no flaw.
SNG	4	8	나의 신부야 너는 레바논에서부터 나와 함께 하고 레바논에서부터 나와 함께 가자 아마나와 스닐과 헤르몬 꼭대기에서 사자 굴과 표범 산에서 내려다보아라	Come with me from Lebanon, my spouse, with me from Lebanon: look from the top of Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon, from the lions’ dens, from the mountains of the leopards.	Come with me from Lebanon, my bride, come with me from Lebanon! Descend from the peak of Amana, from the summits of Senir and Hermon, from the dens of the lions, from the mountains of the leopards.
SNG	4	9	나의 누이, 나의 신부야 네가 내 마음을 빼앗았구나 네 눈으로 한번 보는 것과 네 목의 구슬 한 꿰미로 내 마음을 빼앗았구나	Thou hast ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse; thou hast ravished my heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck.	You have captured my heart, my sister, my bride; you have stolen my heart with one glance of your eyes, with one jewel of your neck.
SNG	4	10	나의 누이, 나의 신부야 네 사랑이 어찌 그리 아름다운지 네 사랑은 포도주에 지나고 네 기름의 향기는 각양 향품보다 승하구나	How fair is thy love, my sister, my spouse! how much better is thy love than wine! and the smell of thine ointments than all spices!	How delightful is your love, my sister, my bride! Your love is much better than wine, and the fragrance of your perfume than all spices.
SNG	4	11	내 신부야 네 입술에서는 꿀 방울이 떨어지고 네 혀 밑에는 꿀과 젖이 있고 네 의복의 향기는 레바논의 향기 같구나	Thy lips, O my spouse, drop as the honeycomb: honey and milk are under thy tongue; and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon.	Your lips, my bride, drip sweetness like the honeycomb; honey and milk are under your tongue, and the fragrance of your garments is like the aroma of Lebanon.
SNG	4	12	나의 누이, 나의 신부는 잠근 동산이요 덮은 우물이요 봉한 샘이로구나	A garden inclosed is my sister, my spouse; a spring shut up, a fountain sealed.	My sister, my bride, you are a garden locked up, a spring enclosed, a fountain sealed.
SNG	4	13	네게서 나는 것은 석류나무와 각종 아름다운 과수와 고벨화와 나도초와	Thy plants are an orchard of pomegranates, with pleasant fruits; camphire, with spikenard,	Your branches are an orchard of pomegranates with the choicest of fruits, with henna and nard,
SNG	4	14	나도와 번홍화와 창포와 계수와 각종 유향목과 몰약과 침향과 모든 귀한 향품이요	Spikenard and saffron; calamus and cinnamon, with all trees of frankincense; myrrh and aloes, with all the chief spices:	with nard and saffron, with calamus and cinnamon, with every kind of frankincense tree, with myrrh and aloes, with all the finest spices.
SNG	4	15	너는 동산의 샘이요 생수의 우물이요 레바논에서부터 흐르는 시내로구나	A fountain of gardens, a well of living waters, and streams from Lebanon.	You are a garden spring, a well of fresh water flowing down from Lebanon.
SNG	4	16	북풍아 일어나라 남풍아 오라 나의 동산에 불어서 향기를 날리라 나의 사랑하는 자가 그 동산에 들어가서 그 아름다운 실과 먹기를 원하노라	Awake, O north wind; and come, thou south; blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out. Let my beloved come into his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits.	Awake, O north wind, and come, O south wind. Breathe on my garden and spread the fragrance of its spices. Let my beloved come into his garden and taste its choicest fruits.
SNG	5	1	나의 누이, 나의 신부야 내가 내 동산에 들어와서 나의 몰약과 향재료를 거두고 나의 꿀송이와 꿀을 먹고 내 포도주와 내 젖을 마셨으니 나의 친구들아 먹으라 나의 사랑하는 사람들아 마시고 많이 마시라	I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse: I have gathered my myrrh with my spice; I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey; I have drunk my wine with my milk: eat, O friends; drink, yea, drink abundantly, O beloved.	I have come to my garden, my sister, my bride; I have gathered my myrrh with my spice. I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey; I have drunk my wine with my milk. Eat, O friends, and drink; drink freely, O beloved.
SNG	5	2	내가 잘지라도 마음은 깨었는데 나의 사랑하는 자의 소리가 들리는구나 문을 두드려 이르기를 나의 누이, 나의 사랑, 나의 비둘기, 나의 완전한 자야 문 열어 다고 내 머리에는 이슬이, 내 머리털에는 밤 이슬이 가득하였다 하는구나	I sleep, but my heart waketh: it is the voice of my beloved that knocketh, saying, Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled: for my head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night.	I sleep, but my heart is awake. A sound! My beloved is knocking: “Open to me, my sister, my darling, my dove, my flawless one. My head is drenched with dew, my hair with the dampness of the night.”
SNG	5	3	내가 옷을 벗었으니 어찌 다시 입겠으며 내가 발을 씻었으니 어찌 다시 더럽히랴마는	I have put off my coat; how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet; how shall I defile them?	I have taken off my robe— must I put it back on? I have washed my feet— must I soil them again?
SNG	5	4	나의 사랑하는 자가 문틈으로 손을 들이밀매 내 마음이 동하여서	My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, and my bowels were moved for him.	My beloved put his hand to the latch; my heart pounded for him.
SNG	5	5	일어나서 나의 사랑하는 자 위하여 문을 열 때 몰약이 내 손에서, 몰약의 즙이 내 손가락에서 문빗장에 듣는구나	I rose up to open to my beloved; and my hands dropped with myrrh, and my fingers with sweet smelling myrrh, upon the handles of the lock.	I rose up to open for my beloved. My hands dripped with myrrh, my fingers with flowing myrrh on the handles of the bolt.
SNG	5	6	내가 나의 사랑하는 자 위하여 문을 열었으나 그가 벌써 물러갔네 그가 말할 때에 내 혼이 나갔구나 내가 그를 찾아도 못 만났고 불러도 응답이 없었구나	I opened to my beloved; but my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone: my soul failed when he spake: I sought him, but I could not find him; I called him, but he gave me no answer.	I opened for my beloved, but he had turned and gone. My heart sank at his departure. I sought him, but did not find him. I called, but he did not answer.
SNG	5	7	성중에서 행순하는 자들이 나를 만나매 나를 쳐서 상하게 하였고 성벽을 파수하는 자들이 나의 웃옷을 벗겨 취하였구나	The watchmen that went about the city found me, they smote me, they wounded me; the keepers of the walls took away my veil from me.	I encountered the watchmen on their rounds of the city. They beat me and bruised me; they took away my cloak, those guardians of the walls.
SNG	5	8	예루살렘 여자들아 너희에게 내가 부탁한다 너희가 나의 사랑하는 자를 만나거든 내가 사랑하므로 병이 났다고 하려무나	I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, that ye tell him, that I am sick of love.	O daughters of Jerusalem, I adjure you, if you find my beloved, tell him I am sick with love.
SNG	5	9	여자 중 극히 어여쁜 자야 너의 사랑하는 자가 남의 사랑하는 자보다 나은 것이 무엇인가 너의 사랑하는 자가 남의 사랑하는 자보다 나은 것이 무엇이기에 이같이 우리에게 부탁하는가	What is thy beloved more than another beloved, O thou fairest among women? what is thy beloved more than another beloved, that thou dost so charge us?	How is your beloved better than others, O most beautiful among women? How is your beloved better than another, that you charge us so?
SNG	5	10	나의 사랑하는 자는 희고도 붉어 만 사람에 뛰어난다	My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand.	My beloved is dazzling and ruddy, outstanding among ten thousand.
SNG	5	11	머리는 정금 같고 머리털은 고불고불하고 까마귀 같이 검구나	His head is as the most fine gold, his locks are bushy, and black as a raven.	His head is purest gold; his hair is wavy and black as a raven.
SNG	5	12	눈은 시냇가의 비둘기 같은데 젖으로 씻은 듯하고 아름답게도 박혔구나	His eyes are as the eyes of doves by the rivers of waters, washed with milk, and fitly set.	His eyes are like doves beside the streams of water, bathed in milk and mounted like jewels.
SNG	5	13	뺨은 향기로운 꽃밭 같고 향기로운 풀언덕과도 같고 입술은 백합화 같고 몰약의 즙이 뚝뚝 떨어진다	His cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers: his lips like lilies, dropping sweet smelling myrrh.	His cheeks are like beds of spice, towers of perfume. His lips are like lilies, dripping with flowing myrrh.
SNG	5	14	손은 황옥을 물린 황금 노리개 같고 몸은 아로새긴 상아에 청옥을 입힌듯 하구나	His hands are as gold rings set with the beryl: his belly is as bright ivory overlaid with sapphires.	His arms are rods of gold set with beryl. His body is an ivory panel bedecked with sapphires.
SNG	5	15	다리는 정금 받침에 세운 화반석 기둥 같고 형상은 레바논 같고 백향목처럼 보기 좋고	His legs are as pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold: his countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the cedars.	His legs are pillars of marble set on bases of pure gold. His appearance is like Lebanon, as majestic as the cedars.
SNG	5	16	입은 심히 다니 그 전체가 사랑스럽구나 예루살렘 여자들아 이는 나의 사랑하는 자요 나의 친구일다	His mouth is most sweet: yea, he is altogether lovely. This is my beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem.	His mouth is most sweet; he is altogether lovely. This is my beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem.
SNG	6	1	여자 중 극히 어여쁜 자야 너의 사랑하는 자가 어디로 갔는가 너의 사랑하는 자가 어디로 돌이켰는가 우리가 너와 함께 찾으리라	Whither is thy beloved gone, O thou fairest among women? whither is thy beloved turned aside? that we may seek him with thee.	Where has your beloved gone, O most beautiful among women? Which way has he turned? We will seek him with you.
SNG	6	2	나의 사랑하는 자가 자기 동산으로 내려가 향기로운 꽃밭에 이르러서 동산 가운데서 양떼를 먹이며 백합화를 꺾는구나	My beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds of spices, to feed in the gardens, and to gather lilies.	My beloved has gone down to his garden, to the beds of spices, to pasture his flock in the gardens and to gather lilies.
SNG	6	3	나는 나의 사랑하는 자에게 속하였고 나의 사랑하는 자는 내게 속하였다 그가 백합화 가운데서 그 양떼를 먹이는구나	I am my beloved’s, and my beloved is mine: he feedeth among the lilies.	I belong to my beloved and he belongs to me; he pastures his flock among the lilies.
SNG	6	4	내 사랑아 너의 어여쁨이 디르사 같고 너의 고움이 예루살렘 같고 엄위함이 기치를 벌인 군대 같구나	Thou art beautiful, O my love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible as an army with banners.	You are as beautiful, my darling, as Tirzah, as lovely as Jerusalem, as majestic as troops with banners.
SNG	6	5	네 눈이 나를 놀래니 돌이켜 나를 보지 말라 네 머리털은 길르앗 산 기슭에 누운 염소떼 같고	Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me: thy hair is as a flock of goats that appear from Gilead.	Turn your eyes away from me, for they have overcome me. Your hair is like a flock of goats streaming down from Gilead.
SNG	6	6	네 이는 목욕장에서 나온 암양떼 곧 새끼 없는 것은 하나도 없이 각각 쌍태를 낳은 양 같고	Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep which go up from the washing, whereof every one beareth twins, and there is not one barren among them.	Your teeth are like a flock of sheep coming up from the washing; each has its twin, and not one of them is lost.
SNG	6	7	너울 속의 너의 뺨은 석류 한 쪽 같구나	As a piece of a pomegranate are thy temples within thy locks.	Your brow behind your veil is like a slice of pomegranate.
SNG	6	8	왕후가 육십이요 비빈이 팔십이요 시녀가 무수하되	There are threescore queens, and fourscore concubines, and virgins without number.	There are sixty queens and eighty concubines, and maidens without number,
SNG	6	9	나의 비둘기, 나의 완전한 자는 하나뿐이로구나 그는 그 어미의 외딸이요 그 낳은 자의 귀중히 여기는 자로구나 여자들이 그를 보고 복된 자라 하고 왕후와 비빈들도 그를 칭찬하는구나	My dove, my undefiled is but one; she is the only one of her mother, she is the choice one of her that bare her. The daughters saw her, and blessed her; yea, the queens and the concubines, and they praised her.	but my dove, my perfect one, is unique, the favorite of the mother who bore her. The maidens see her and call her blessed; the queens and concubines sing her praises.
SNG	6	10	아침빛 같이 뚜렷하고 달 같이 아름답고 해 같이 맑고 기치를 벌인 군대 같이 엄위한 여자가 누구인가	Who is she that looketh forth as the morning, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners?	Who is this who shines like the dawn, as fair as the moon, as bright as the sun, as majestic as the stars in procession?
SNG	6	11	골짜기의 푸른 초목을 보려고 포도나무가 순이 났는가 석류나무가 꽃이 피었는가 알려고 내가 호도 동산으로 내려갔을 때에	I went down into the garden of nuts to see the fruits of the valley, and to see whether the vine flourished, and the pomegranates budded.	I went down to the walnut grove to see the blossoms of the valley, to see if the vines were budding or the pomegranates were in bloom.
SNG	6	12	부지 중에 내 마음이 나로 내 귀한 백성의 수레 가운데 이르게 하였구나	Or ever I was aware, my soul made me like the chariots of Amminadib.	Before I realized it, my desire had set me among the royal chariots of my people.
SNG	6	13	너희가 어찌하여 마하나임의 춤추는 것을 보는 것처럼 술람미 여자를 보려느냐	Return, return, O Shulamite; return, return, that we may look upon thee. What will ye see in the Shulamite? As it were the company of two armies.	Come back, come back, O Shulammite! Come back, come back, that we may gaze upon you. Why do you look at the Shulammite, as on the dance of Mahanaim?
SNG	7	1	귀한 자의 딸아 신을 신은 네 발이 어찌 그리 아름다운가 네 넓적다리는 둥글어서 공교한 장색의 만든 구슬 꿰미 같구나	How beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O prince’s daughter! the joints of thy thighs are like jewels, the work of the hands of a cunning workman.	How beautiful are your sandaled feet, O daughter of the prince! The curves of your thighs are like jewels, the handiwork of a master.
SNG	7	2	배꼽은 섞은 포도주를 가득히 부은 둥근 잔 같고 허리는 백합화로 두른 밀단 같구나	Thy navel is like a round goblet, which wanteth not liquor: thy belly is like an heap of wheat set about with lilies.	Your navel is a rounded goblet; it never lacks blended wine. Your waist is a mound of wheat encircled by the lilies.
SNG	7	3	두 유방은 암사슴의 쌍태 새끼 같고	Thy two breasts are like two young roes that are twins.	Your breasts are like two fawns, twins of a gazelle.
SNG	7	4	목은 상아 망대 같구나 눈은 헤스본 바드랍빔 문 곁의 못 같고 코는 다메섹을 향한 레바논 망대 같구나	Thy neck is as a tower of ivory; thine eyes like the fishpools in Heshbon, by the gate of Bath–rabbim: thy nose is as the tower of Lebanon which looketh toward Damascus.	Your neck is like a tower made of ivory; your eyes are like the pools of Heshbon by the gate of Bath-rabbim; your nose is like the tower of Lebanon, facing toward Damascus.
SNG	7	5	머리는 갈멜산 같고 드리운 머리털은 자주 빛이 있으니 왕이 그 머리카락에 매이었구나	Thine head upon thee is like Carmel, and the hair of thine head like purple; the king is held in the galleries.	Your head crowns you like Mount Carmel, the hair of your head like purple threads; the king is captured in your tresses.
SNG	7	6	사랑아 네가 어찌 그리 아름다운지, 어찌 그리 화창한지 쾌락하게 하는구나	How fair and how pleasant art thou, O love, for delights!	How fair and pleasant you are, O love, with your delights!
SNG	7	7	네 키는 종려나무 같고 네 유방은 그 열매 송이 같구나	This thy stature is like to a palm tree, and thy breasts to clusters of grapes.	Your stature is like a palm tree; your breasts are clusters of fruit.
SNG	7	8	내가 말하기를 종려나무에 올라가서 그 가지를 잡으리라 하였나니 네 유방은 포도송이 같고 네 콧김은 사과 냄새 같고	I said, I will go up to the palm tree, I will take hold of the boughs thereof: now also thy breasts shall be as clusters of the vine, and the smell of thy nose like apples;	I said, “I will climb the palm tree; I will take hold of its fruit.” May your breasts be like clusters of the vine, the fragrance of your breath like apples,
SNG	7	9	네 입은 좋은 포도주 같을 것이니라 이 포도주는 나의 사랑하는 자를 위하여 미끄럽게 흘러 내려서 자는 자의 입으로 움직이게 하느니라	And the roof of thy mouth like the best wine for my beloved, that goeth down sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak.	and your mouth like the finest wine. May it flow smoothly to my beloved, gliding gently over lips and teeth.
SNG	7	10	나는 나의 사랑하는 자에게 속하였구나 그가 나를 사모하는구나	I am my beloved’s, and his desire is toward me.	I belong to my beloved, and his desire is for me.
SNG	7	11	나의 사랑하는 자야 우리가 함께 들로 가서 동네에서 유숙하자	Come, my beloved, let us go forth into the field; let us lodge in the villages.	Come, my beloved, let us go to the countryside; let us spend the night among the wildflowers.
SNG	7	12	우리가 일찍이 일어나서 포도원으로 가서 포도 움이 돋았는지 꽃술이 퍼졌는지 석류꽃이 피었는지 보자 거기서 내가 나의 사랑을 네게 주리라	Let us get up early to the vineyards; let us see if the vine flourish, whether the tender grape appear, and the pomegranates bud forth: there will I give thee my loves.	Let us go early to the vineyards to see if the vine has budded, if the blossom has opened, if the pomegranates are in bloom— there I will give you my love.
SNG	7	13	합환채가 향기를 토하고 우리의 문 앞에는 각양 귀한 실과가 새 것, 묵은 것이 구비하였구나 내가 나의 사랑하는 자 너를 위하여 쌓아둔 것이로구나	The mandrakes give a smell, and at our gates are all manner of pleasant fruits, new and old, which I have laid up for thee, O my beloved.	The mandrakes send forth a fragrance, and at our door is every delicacy, new as well as old, that I have treasured up for you, my beloved.
SNG	8	1	네가 내 어미의 젖을 먹은 오라비 같았었더면 내가 밖에서 너를 만날 때에 입을 맞추어도 나를 업신여길 자가 없었을 것이라	O that thou wert as my brother, that sucked the breasts of my mother! when I should find thee without, I would kiss thee; yea, I should not be despised.	O that you were to me like a brother who nursed at my mother’s breasts! If I found you outdoors, I would kiss you, and no one would despise me.
SNG	8	2	내가 너를 이끌어 내 어미 집에 들이고 네게서 교훈을 받았으리라 나는 향기로운 술 곧 석류즙으로 네게 마시웠겠고	I would lead thee, and bring thee into my mother’s house, who would instruct me: I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine of the juice of my pomegranate.	I would lead you and bring you to the house of my mother who taught me. I would give you spiced wine to drink, the nectar of my pomegranates.
SNG	8	3	너는 왼손으론 내 머리에 베개하고 오른손으론 나를 안았었으리라	His left hand should be under my head, and his right hand should embrace me.	His left hand is under my head, and his right arm embraces me.
SNG	8	4	예루살렘 여자들아 내가 너희에게 부탁한다 나의 사랑하는 자가 원하기 전에는 흔들지 말며 깨우지 말지니라	I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, until he please.	O daughters of Jerusalem, I adjure you: Do not arouse or awaken love until the time is right.
SNG	8	5	그 사랑하는 자를 의지하고 거친 들에서 올라오는 여자가 누구인고 너를 인하여 네 어미가 신고한, 너를 낳은 자가 애쓴 그곳 사과나무 아래서 내가 너를 깨웠노라	Who is this that cometh up from the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved? I raised thee up under the apple tree: there thy mother brought thee forth: there she brought thee forth that bare thee.	Who is this coming up from the wilderness, leaning on her beloved? I roused you under the apple tree; there your mother conceived you; there she travailed and brought you forth.
SNG	8	6	너는 나를 인 같이 마음에 품고 도장 같이 팔에 두라 사랑은 죽음 같이 강하고 투기는 음부 같이 잔혹하며 불 같이 일어나니 그 기세가 여호와의 불과 같으니라	Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm: for love is strong as death; jealousy is cruel as the grave: the coals thereof are coals of fire, which hath a most vehement flame.	Set me as a seal over your heart, as a seal upon your arm. For love is as strong as death, its jealousy as unrelenting as Sheol. Its sparks are fiery flames, the fiercest blaze of all.
SNG	8	7	이 사랑은 많은 물이 꺼치지 못하겠고 홍수라도 엄몰하지 못하나니 사람이 그 온 가산을 다 주고 사랑과 바꾸려 할지라도 오히려 멸시를 받으리라	Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it: if a man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be contemned.	Mighty waters cannot quench love; rivers cannot sweep it away. If a man were to give all the wealth of his house for love, his offer would be utterly scorned.
SNG	8	8	우리에게 있는 작은 누이는 아직도 유방이 없구나 그가 청혼함을 받는 날에는 우리가 그를 위하여 무엇을 할꼬	We have a little sister, and she hath no breasts: what shall we do for our sister in the day when she shall be spoken for?	We have a little sister, and her breasts are not yet grown. What shall we do for our sister on the day she is spoken for?
SNG	8	9	그가 성벽일진대 우리는 은 망대를 그 위에 세울 것이요 그가 문일진대 우리는 백향목 판자로 두르리라	If she be a wall, we will build upon her a palace of silver: and if she be a door, we will inclose her with boards of cedar.	If she is a wall, we will build a tower of silver upon her. If she is a door, we will enclose her with panels of cedar.
SNG	8	10	나는 성벽이요 나의 유방은 망대 같으니 그러므로 나는 그의 보기에 화평을 얻은 자 같구나	I am a wall, and my breasts like towers: then was I in his eyes as one that found favour.	I am a wall, and my breasts are like towers. So I have become in his eyes like one who brings peace.
SNG	8	11	솔로몬이 바알하몬에 포도원이 있어 지키는 자들에게 맡겨두고 그들로 각기 그 실과를 인하여서 은 일천을 바치게 하였구나	Solomon had a vineyard at Baal–hamon; he let out the vineyard unto keepers; every one for the fruit thereof was to bring a thousand pieces of silver.	Solomon had a vineyard in Baal-hamon. He leased it to the tenants. For its fruit, each was to bring a thousand shekels of silver.
SNG	8	12	솔로몬 너는 일천을 얻겠고 실과 지키는 자도 이백을 얻으려니와 내게 속한 내 포도원은 내 앞에 있구나	My vineyard, which is mine, is before me: thou, O Solomon, must have a thousand, and those that keep the fruit thereof two hundred.	But my own vineyard is mine to give; the thousand shekels are for you, O Solomon, and two hundred are for those who tend its fruit.
SNG	8	13	너 동산에 거한 자야 동무들이 네 소리에 귀를 기울이니 나로 듣게 하려무나	Thou that dwellest in the gardens, the companions hearken to thy voice: cause me to hear it.	You who dwell in the gardens, my companions are listening for your voice. Let me hear it!
SNG	8	14	나의 사랑하는 자야 너는 빨리 달리라 향기로운 산들에서 노루와도 같고 어린 사슴과도 같아여라	Make haste, my beloved, and be thou like to a roe or to a young hart upon the mountains of spices.	Come away, my beloved, and be like a gazelle or a young stag on the mountains of spices.
ISA	1	1	유다 왕 웃시야와 요담과 아하스와 히스기야 시대에 아모스의 아들 이사야가 유다와 예루살렘에 대하여 본 이상이라	The vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz, which he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah.	This is the vision concerning Judah and Jerusalem that Isaiah son of Amoz saw during the reigns of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah.
ISA	1	2	하늘이여 들으라 땅이여 귀를 기울이라 여호와께서 말씀하시기를 내가 자식을 양육하였거늘 그들이 나를 거역하였도다	Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth: for the Lord hath spoken, I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me.	Listen, O heavens, and give ear, O earth, for the LORD has spoken: “I have raised children and brought them up, but they have rebelled against Me.
ISA	1	3	소는 그 임자를 알고 나귀는 주인의 구유를 알건마는 이스라엘은 알지 못하고 나의 백성은 깨닫지 못하는도다 하셨도다	The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master’s crib: but Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider.	The ox knows its owner, and the donkey its master’s manger, but Israel does not know; My people do not understand.”
ISA	1	4	슬프다 범죄한 나라요 허물진 백성이요 행악의 종자요 행위가 부패한 자식이로다 그들이 여호와를 버리며 이스라엘의 거룩한 자를 만홀히 여겨 멀리하고 물러갔도다	Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evildoers, children that are corrupters: they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy One of Israel unto anger, they are gone away backward.	Alas, O sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a brood of evildoers, children of depravity! They have forsaken the LORD; they have despised the Holy One of Israel and turned their backs on Him.
ISA	1	5	너희가 어찌하여 매를 더 맞으려고 더욱 더욱 패역하느냐 온 머리는 병들었고 온 마음은 피곤하였으며	Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more: the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint.	Why do you want more beatings? Why do you keep rebelling? Your head has a massive wound, and your whole heart is afflicted.
ISA	1	6	발바닥에서 머리까지 성한 곳이 없이 상한 것과 터진 것과 새로 맞은 흔적뿐이어늘 그것을 짜며 싸매며 기름으로 유하게 함을 받지 못하였도다	From the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness in it; but wounds, and bruises, and putrifying sores: they have not been closed, neither bound up, neither mollified with ointment.	From the sole of your foot to the top of your head, there is no soundness— only wounds and welts and festering sores neither cleansed nor bandaged nor soothed with oil.
ISA	1	7	너희 땅은 황무하였고 너희 성읍들은 불에 탔고 너희 토지는 너희 목전에 이방인에게 삼키웠으며 이방인에게 파괴됨 같이 황무하였고	Your country is desolate, your cities are burned with fire: your land, strangers devour it in your presence, and it is desolate, as overthrown by strangers.	Your land is desolate; your cities are burned with fire. Foreigners devour your fields before you— a desolation demolished by strangers.
ISA	1	8	딸 시온은 포도원의 망대 같이, 원두밭의 상직막 같이, 에워싸인 성읍 같이 겨우 남았도다	And the daughter of Zion is left as a cottage in a vineyard, as a lodge in a garden of cucumbers, as a besieged city.	And the Daughter of Zion is abandoned like a shelter in a vineyard, like a shack in a cucumber field, like a city besieged.
ISA	1	9	만군의 여호와께서 우리를 위하여 조금 남겨 두지 아니하셨더면 우리가 소돔 같고 고모라 같았었으리로다	Except the Lord of hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah.	Unless the LORD of Hosts had left us a few survivors, we would have become like Sodom, we would have resembled Gomorrah.
ISA	1	10	너희 소돔의 관원들아 여호와의 말씀을 들을지어다 너희 고모라의 백성아 우리 하나님의 법에 귀를 기울일지어다	Hear the word of the Lord, ye rulers of Sodom; give ear unto the law of our God, ye people of Gomorrah.	Hear the word of the LORD, you rulers of Sodom; listen to the instruction of our God, you people of Gomorrah!
ISA	1	11	여호와께서 말씀하시되 너희의 무수한 제물이 내게 무엇이 유익하뇨 나는 수양의 번제와 살진 짐승의 기름에 배불렀고 나는 수송아지나 어린 양이나 수염소의 피를 기뻐하지 아니하노라	To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me? saith the Lord: I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts; and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he goats.	“What good to Me is your multitude of sacrifices?” says the LORD. “I am full from the burnt offerings of rams and the fat of well-fed cattle; I take no delight in the blood of bulls and lambs and goats.
ISA	1	12	너희가 내 앞에 보이러 오니 그것을 누가 너희에게 요구하였느뇨 내 마당만 밟을 뿐이니라	When ye come to appear before me, who hath required this at your hand, to tread my courts?	When you come to appear before Me, who has required this of you— this trampling of My courts?
ISA	1	13	헛된 제물을 다시 가져오지 말라 분향은 나의 가증히 여기는 바요 월삭과 안식일과 대회로 모이는 것도 그러하니 성회와 아울러 악을 행하는 것을 내가 견디지 못하겠노라	Bring no more vain oblations; incense is an abomination unto me; the new moons and sabbaths, the calling of assemblies, I cannot away with; it is iniquity, even the solemn meeting.	Bring your worthless offerings no more; your incense is detestable to Me— your New Moons, Sabbaths, and convocations. I cannot endure iniquity in a solemn assembly.
ISA	1	14	내 마음이 너희의 월삭과 정한 절기를 싫어하나니 그것이 내게 무거운 짐이라 내가 지기에 곤비하였느니라	Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth: they are a trouble unto me; I am weary to bear them.	I hate your New Moons and your appointed feasts. They have become a burden to Me; I am weary of bearing them.
ISA	1	15	너희가 손을 펼 때에 내가 눈을 가리우고 너희가 많이 기도할지라도 내가 듣지 아니하리니 이는 너희의 손에 피가 가득함이니라	And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear: your hands are full of blood.	When you spread out your hands in prayer, I will hide My eyes from you; even though you multiply your prayers, I will not listen. Your hands are covered with blood.
ISA	1	16	너희는 스스로 씻으며 스스로 깨끗케 하여 내 목전에서 너희 악업을 버리며 악행을 그치고	Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil;	Wash and cleanse yourselves. Remove your evil deeds from My sight. Stop doing evil!
ISA	1	17	선행을 배우며 공의를 구하며 학대 받는 자를 도와주며 고아를 위하여 신원하며 과부를 위하여 변호하라 하셨느니라	Learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow.	Learn to do right; seek justice and correct the oppressor. Defend the fatherless and plead the case of the widow.”
ISA	1	18	여호와께서 말씀하시되 오라 우리가 서로 변론하자 너희 죄가 주홍 같을지라도 눈과 같이 희어질 것이요 진홍 같이 붉을지라도 양털 같이 되리라	Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.	“Come now, let us reason together,” says the LORD. “Though your sins are like scarlet, they will be as white as snow; though they are as red as crimson, they will become like wool.
ISA	1	19	너희가 즐겨 순종하면 땅의 아름다운 소산을 먹을 것이요	If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land:	If you are willing and obedient, you will eat the best of the land.
ISA	1	20	너희가 거절하여 배반하면 칼에 삼키우리라 여호와의 입의 말씀이니라	But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.	But if you resist and rebel, you will be devoured by the sword.” For the mouth of the LORD has spoken.
ISA	1	21	신실하던 성읍이 어찌하여 창기가 되었는고 공평이 거기 충만하였고 의리가 그 가운데 거하였었더니 이제는 살인자들뿐이었도다	How is the faithful city become an harlot! it was full of judgment; righteousness lodged in it; but now murderers.	See how the faithful city has become a harlot! She once was full of justice; righteousness resided within her, but now only murderers!
ISA	1	22	네 은은 찌끼가 되었고 너의 포도주에는 물이 섞였도다	Thy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water:	Your silver has become dross; your fine wine is diluted with water.
ISA	1	23	네 방백들은 패역하여 도적과 짝하며 다 뇌물을 사랑하며 사례물을 구하며 고아를 위하여 신원치 아니하며 과부의 송사를 수리치 아니하는도다	Thy princes are rebellious, and companions of thieves: every one loveth gifts, and followeth after rewards: they judge not the fatherless, neither doth the cause of the widow come unto them.	Your rulers are rebels, friends of thieves. They all love bribes and chasing after rewards. They do not defend the fatherless, and the plea of the widow never comes before them.
ISA	1	24	그러므로 주 만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 전능자가 말씀하시되 슬프다 내가 장차 내 대적에게 보응하여 내 마음을 편케 하겠고 내 원수에게 보수하겠으며	Therefore saith the Lord, the Lord of hosts, the mighty One of Israel, Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies:	Therefore the Lord GOD of Hosts, the Mighty One of Israel, declares: “Ah, I will be relieved of My foes and avenge Myself on My enemies.
ISA	1	25	내가 또 나의 손을 네게 돌려 너의 찌끼를 온전히 청결하여 버리며 너의 혼잡물을 다 제하여 버리고	And I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tin:	I will turn My hand against you; I will thoroughly purge your dross; I will remove all your impurities.
ISA	1	26	내가 너의 사사들을 처음과 같이, 너의 모사들을 본래와 같이 회복할 것이라 그리한 후에야 네가 의의 성읍이라, 신실한 고을이라 칭함이 되리라 하셨나니	And I will restore thy judges as at the first, and thy counsellors as at the beginning: afterward thou shalt be called, The city of righteousness, the faithful city.	I will restore your judges as at first, and your counselors as at the beginning. After that you will be called the City of Righteousness, the Faithful City.”
ISA	1	27	시온은 공평으로 구속이 되고 그 귀정한 자는 의로 구속이 되리라	Zion shall be redeemed with judgment, and her converts with righteousness.	Zion will be redeemed with justice, her repentant ones with righteousness.
ISA	1	28	그러나 패역한 자와 죄인은 함께 패망하고 여호와를 버린 자도 멸망할 것이라	And the destruction of the transgressors and of the sinners shall be together, and they that forsake the Lord shall be consumed.	But rebels and sinners will together be shattered, and those who forsake the LORD will perish.
ISA	1	29	너희가 너희의 기뻐하던 상수리나무로 인하여 부끄러움을 당할 것이요 너희가 너희의 택한 동산으로 인하여 수치를 당할 것이며	For they shall be ashamed of the oaks which ye have desired, and ye shall be confounded for the gardens that ye have chosen.	Surely you will be ashamed of the sacred oaks in which you have delighted; you will be embarrassed by the gardens that you have chosen.
ISA	1	30	너희는 잎사귀 마른 상수리 나무 같을 것이요 물 없는 동산 같으리니	For ye shall be as an oak whose leaf fadeth, and as a garden that hath no water.	For you will become like an oak whose leaves are withered, like a garden without water.
ISA	1	31	강한 자는 삼오라기 같고 그의 행위는 불티 같아서 함께 탈 것이나 끌 사람이 없으리라	And the strong shall be as tow, and the maker of it as a spark, and they shall both burn together, and none shall quench them.	The strong man will become tinder and his work will be a spark; both will burn together, with no one to quench the flames.
ISA	2	1	아모스의 아들 이사야가 받은바 유다와 예루살렘에 관한 말씀이라	The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem.	This is the message that was revealed to Isaiah son of Amoz concerning Judah and Jerusalem:
ISA	2	2	말일에 여호와의 전의 산이 모든 산 꼭대기에 굳게 설 것이요 모든 작은 산 위에 뛰어나리니 만방이 그리로 모여들 것이라	And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord’s house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it.	In the last days the mountain of the house of the LORD will be established as the chief of the mountains; it will be raised above the hills, and all nations will stream to it.
ISA	2	3	많은 백성이 가며 이르기를 오라 우리가 여호와의 산에 오르며 야곱의 하나님의 전에 이르자 그가 그 도로 우리에게 가르치실 것이라 우리가 그 길로 행하리라 하리니 이는 율법이 시온에서부터 나올 것이요 여호와의 말씀이 예루살렘에서부터 나올 것임이니라	And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.	And many peoples will come and say: “Come, let us go up to the mountain of the LORD, to the house of the God of Jacob. He will teach us His ways so that we may walk in His paths.” For the law will go forth from Zion, and the word of the LORD from Jerusalem.
ISA	2	4	그가 열방 사이에 판단하시며 많은 백성을 판결하시리니 무리가 그 칼을 쳐서 보습을 만들고 그 창을 쳐서 낫을 만들 것이며 이 나라와 저 나라가 다시는 칼을 들고 서로 치지 아니하며 다시는 전쟁을 연습지 아니하리라	And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people: and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.	Then He will judge between the nations and arbitrate for many peoples. They will beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks. Nation will no longer take up the sword against nation, nor train anymore for war.
ISA	2	5	야곱 족속아 오라 우리가 여호와의 빛에 행하자	O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord.	Come, O house of Jacob, let us walk in the light of the LORD.
ISA	2	6	주께서 주의 백성 야곱 족속을 버리셨음은 그들에게 동방 풍속이 가득하며 그들이 블레셋 사람 같이 술객이 되며 이방인으로 더불어 손을 잡아 언약하였음이라	Therefore thou hast forsaken thy people the house of Jacob, because they be replenished from the east, and are soothsayers like the Philistines, and they please themselves in the children of strangers.	For You have abandoned Your people, the house of Jacob, because they are filled with influences from the east; they are soothsayers like the Philistines; they strike hands with the children of foreigners.
ISA	2	7	그 땅에는 은금이 가득하고 보화가 무한하며 그 땅에는 마필이 가득하고 병거가 무수하며	Their land also is full of silver and gold, neither is there any end of their treasures; their land is also full of horses, neither is there any end of their chariots:	Their land is full of silver and gold, with no limit to their treasures; their land is full of horses, with no limit to their chariots.
ISA	2	8	그 땅에는 우상도 가득하므로 그들이 자기 손으로 짓고 자기 손가락으로 만든 것을 공경하여	Their land also is full of idols; they worship the work of their own hands, that which their own fingers have made:	Their land is full of idols; they bow down to the work of their hands, to what their fingers have made.
ISA	2	9	천한 자도 절하며 귀한 자도 굴복하오니 그들을 용서하지 마옵소서	And the mean man boweth down, and the great man humbleth himself: therefore forgive them not.	So mankind is brought low, and man is humbled— do not forgive them!
ISA	2	10	너희는 바위 틈에 들어가며 진토에 숨어 여호와의 위엄과 그 광대하심의 영광을 피하라	Enter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty.	Go into the rocks and hide in the dust from the terror of the LORD and the splendor of His majesty.
ISA	2	11	그 날에 눈이 높은 자가 낮아지며 교만한 자가 굴복되고 여호와께서 홀로 높임을 받으시리라	The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.	The proud look of man will be humbled, and the loftiness of men brought low; the LORD alone will be exalted in that day.
ISA	2	12	대저 만군의 여호와의 한 날이 모든 교만자와 거만자와 자고한 자에게 임하여 그들로 낮아지게 하고	For the day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up; and he shall be brought low:	For the Day of the LORD of Hosts will come against all the proud and lofty, against all that is exalted— it will be humbled—
ISA	2	13	또 레바논의 높고 높은 모든 백향목과 바산의 모든 상수리 나무와	And upon all the cedars of Lebanon, that are high and lifted up, and upon all the oaks of Bashan,	against all the cedars of Lebanon, lofty and lifted up, against all the oaks of Bashan,
ISA	2	14	모든 높은 산과 모든 솟아오른 작은 산과	And upon all the high mountains, and upon all the hills that are lifted up,	against all the tall mountains, against all the high hills,
ISA	2	15	모든 높은 망대와 견고한 성벽과	And upon every high tower, and upon every fenced wall,	against every high tower, against every fortified wall,
ISA	2	16	다시스의 모든 배와 보든 아름다운 조각물에 임하리니	And upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon all pleasant pictures.	against every ship of Tarshish, and against every stately vessel.
ISA	2	17	그 날에 자고한 자는 굴복되며 교만한 자는 낮아지고 여호와께서 홀로 높임을 받으실 것이요	And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be made low: and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.	So the pride of man will be brought low, and the loftiness of men will be humbled; the LORD alone will be exalted in that day,
ISA	2	18	우상들은 온전히 없어질 것이며	And the idols he shall utterly abolish.	and the idols will vanish completely.
ISA	2	19	사람들이 암혈과 토굴로 들어가서 여호와께서 일어나사 땅을 진동시키는 그의 위엄과 그 광대하심의 영광을 피할 것이라	And they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth.	Men will flee to caves in the rocks and holes in the ground, away from the terror of the LORD and from the splendor of His majesty, when He rises to shake the earth.
ISA	2	20	사람이 숭배하려고 만들었던 그 은 우상과 금 우상을 그 날에 두더쥐와 박쥐에게 던지고	In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which they made each one for himself to worship, to the moles and to the bats;	In that day men will cast away to the moles and bats their idols of silver and gold— the idols they made to worship.
ISA	2	21	암혈과 험악한 바위틈에 들어가서 여호와께서 일어나사 땅을 진동시키시는 그의 위엄과 그 광대하심의 영광을 피하리라	To go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth.	They will flee to caverns in the rocks and crevices in the cliffs, away from the terror of the LORD and from the splendor of His majesty, when He rises to shake the earth.
ISA	2	22	너희는 인생을 의지하지 말라 그의 호흡은 코에 있나니 수에 칠 가치가 어디 있느뇨	Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils: for wherein is he to be accounted of?	Put no more trust in man, who has only the breath in his nostrils. Of what account is he?
ISA	3	1	보라 주 만군의 여호와께서 예루살렘과 유다의 의뢰하며 의지하는 것을 제하여 버리시되 곧 그 의뢰하는 모든 양식과 그 의뢰하는 모든 물과	For, behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts, doth take away from Jerusalem and from Judah the stay and the staff, the whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water,	For behold, the Lord GOD of Hosts is about to remove from Jerusalem and Judah both supply and support: the whole supply of food and water,
ISA	3	2	용사와 전사와 재판관과 선지자와 복술자와 장로와	The mighty man, and the man of war, the judge, and the prophet, and the prudent, and the ancient,	the mighty man and the warrior, the judge and the prophet, the soothsayer and the elder,
ISA	3	3	오십부장과 귀인과 모사와 공교한 장인과 능란한 요술자를 그리하실 것이며	The captain of fifty, and the honourable man, and the counsellor, and the cunning artificer, and the eloquent orator.	the commander of fifty and the dignitary, the counselor, the cunning magician, and the clever enchanter.
ISA	3	4	그가 또 아이들로 그들의 방백을 삼으시며 적자들로 그들을 다스리게 하시리니	And I will give children to be their princes, and babes shall rule over them.	“I will make mere lads their leaders, and children will rule over them.”
ISA	3	5	백성이 서로 학대하며 각기 이웃을 잔해하며 아이가 노인에게, 비천한 자가 존귀한 자에게 교만할 것이며	And the people shall be oppressed, every one by another, and every one by his neighbour: the child shall behave himself proudly against the ancient, and the base against the honourable.	The people will oppress one another, man against man, neighbor against neighbor; the young will rise up against the old, and the base against the honorable.
ISA	3	6	혹시 사람이 그 아비의 집에서 그 형제를 붙잡고 말하기를 너는 의복이 오히려 있으니 우리 관장이 되어 이 멸망을 네 수하에 두라 할 것이면	When a man shall take hold of his brother of the house of his father, saying, Thou hast clothing, be thou our ruler, and let this ruin be under thy hand:	A man will seize his brother within his father’s house: “You have a cloak—you be our leader! Take charge of this heap of rubble.”
ISA	3	7	그 날에 그가 소리를 높여 이르기를 나는 고치는 자가 되지 않겠노라 내 집에는 양식도 없고 의복도 없으니 너희는 나로 백성의 관장을 삼지 말라 하리라	In that day shall he swear, saying, I will not be an healer; for in my house is neither bread nor clothing: make me not a ruler of the people.	On that day he will cry aloud: “I am not a healer. I have no food or clothing in my house. Do not make me leader of the people!”
ISA	3	8	예루살렘이 멸망하였고 유다가 엎드러졌음은 그들의 언어와 행위가 여호와를 거스려서 그 영광의 눈을 촉범하였음이라	For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen: because their tongue and their doings are against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his glory.	For Jerusalem has stumbled and Judah has fallen because they spoke and acted against the LORD, defying His glorious presence.
ISA	3	9	그들의 안색이 스스로 증거하며 그 죄를 발표하고 숨기지 아니함이 소돔과 같으니 그들의 영혼에 화가 있을진저 그들이 재앙을 자취하였도다	The shew of their countenance doth witness against them; and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe unto their soul! for they have rewarded evil unto themselves.	The expression on their faces testifies against them, and like Sodom they flaunt their sin; they do not conceal it. Woe to them, for they have brought disaster upon themselves.
ISA	3	10	너희는 의인에게 복이 있으리라 말하라 그들은 그 행위의 열매를 먹을 것임이요	Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with him: for they shall eat the fruit of their doings.	Tell the righteous it will be well with them, for they will enjoy the fruit of their labor.
ISA	3	11	악인에게는 화가 있으리니 화가 있을 것은 그 손으로 행한 대로 보응을 받을 것임이니라	Woe unto the wicked! it shall be ill with him: for the reward of his hands shall be given him.	Woe to the wicked; disaster is upon them! For they will be repaid with what their hands have done.
ISA	3	12	내 백성을 학대하는 자는 아이요 관할하는 자는 부녀라 나의 백성이여 너의 인도자가 너를 유혹하여 너의 다닐 길을 훼파하느니라	As for my people, children are their oppressors, and women rule over them. O my people, they which lead thee cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy paths.	Youths oppress My people, and women rule over them. O My people, your guides mislead you; they turn you from your paths.
ISA	3	13	여호와께서 변론하러 일어나시며 백성들을 심판하려고 서시도다	The Lord standeth up to plead, and standeth to judge the people.	The LORD arises to contend; He stands to judge the people.
ISA	3	14	여호와께서 그 백성의 장로들과 방백들을 국문하시되 포도원을 삼킨 자는 너희며 가난한 자에게서 탈취한 물건은 너희 집에 있도다	The Lord will enter into judgment with the ancients of his people, and the princes thereof: for ye have eaten up the vineyard; the spoil of the poor is in your houses.	The LORD brings this charge against the elders and leaders of His people: “You have devoured the vineyard; the plunder of the poor is in your houses.
ISA	3	15	어찌하여 너희가 내 백성을 짓밟으며 가난한 자의 얼굴에 맷돌질하느뇨 주 만군의 여호와 내가 말하였느니라 하시리로다	What mean ye that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor? saith the Lord God of hosts.	Why do you crush My people and grind the faces of the poor?” declares the Lord GOD of Hosts.
ISA	3	16	여호와께서 또 말씀하시되 시온의 딸들이 교만하여 늘인 목, 정을 통하는 눈으로 다니며 아기죽거려 행하며 발로는 쟁쟁한 소리를 낸다 하시도다	Moreover the Lord saith, Because the daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet:	The LORD also says: “Because the daughters of Zion are haughty— walking with heads held high and wanton eyes, prancing and skipping as they go, jingling the bracelets on their ankles—
ISA	3	17	그러므로 주께서 시온의 딸들의 정수리에 딱지가 생기게 하시며 여호와께서 그들의 하체로 드러나게 하시리라	Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the head of the daughters of Zion, and the Lord will discover their secret parts.	the Lord will bring sores on the heads of the daughters of Zion, and the LORD will make their foreheads bare.”
ISA	3	18	주께서 그 날에 그들의 장식한 발목 고리와 머리의 망사와 반달 장식과	In that day the Lord will take away the bravery of their tinkling ornaments about their feet, and their cauls, and their round tires like the moon,	In that day the Lord will take away their finery: their anklets and headbands and crescents;
ISA	3	19	귀고리와 팔목 고리와 면박과	The chains, and the bracelets, and the mufflers,	their pendants, bracelets, and veils;
ISA	3	20	화관과 발목 사슬과 띠와 향합과 호신부와	The bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs, and the headbands, and the tablets, and the earrings,	their headdresses, ankle chains, and sashes; their perfume bottles and charms;
ISA	3	21	지환과 코 고리와	The rings, and nose jewels,	their signet rings and nose rings;
ISA	3	22	예복과 겉옷과 목도리와 손주머니와	The changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the wimples, and the crisping pins,	their festive robes, capes, cloaks, and purses;
ISA	3	23	손 거울과 세마포 옷과 머리 수건과 너울을 제하시리니	The glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoods, and the vails.	and their mirrors, linen garments, tiaras, and shawls.
ISA	3	24	그 때에 썩은 냄새가 향을 대신하고 노끈이 띠를 대신하고 대머리가 숱한 머리털을 대신하고 굵은 베옷이 화려한 옷을 대신하고 자자한 흔적이 고운 얼굴을 대신할 것이며	And it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet smell there shall be stink; and instead of a girdle a rent; and instead of well set hair baldness; and instead of a stomacher a girding of sackcloth; and burning instead of beauty.	Instead of fragrance there will be a stench; instead of a belt, a rope; instead of styled hair, baldness; instead of fine clothing, sackcloth; instead of beauty, shame.
ISA	3	25	너희 장정은 칼에, 너희 용사는 전란에 망할 것이며	Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy mighty in the war.	Your men will fall by the sword, and your warriors in battle.
ISA	3	26	그 성문은 슬퍼하며 곡할 것이요 시온은 황무하여 땅에 앉으리라	And her gates shall lament and mourn; and she being desolate shall sit upon the ground.	And the gates of Zion will lament and mourn; destitute, she will sit on the ground.
ISA	4	1	그 날에 일곱 여자가 한 남자를 붙잡고 말하기를 우리가 우리 떡을 먹으며 우리 옷을 입으리니 오직 당신의 이름으로 우리를 칭하게 하여 우리로 수치를 면케 하라 하리라	And in that day seven women shall take hold of one man, saying, We will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel: only let us be called by thy name, to take away our reproach.	In that day seven women will take hold of one man and say, “We will eat our own bread and provide our own clothes. Just let us be called by your name. Take away our disgrace!”
ISA	4	2	그 날에 여호와의 싹이 아름답고 영화로울 것이요 그 땅의 소산은 이스라엘의 피난한 자를 위하여 영화롭고 아름다울 것이며	In that day shall the branch of the Lord be beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the earth shall be excellent and comely for them that are escaped of Israel.	On that day the Branch of the LORD will be beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the land will be the pride and glory of Israel’s survivors.
ISA	4	3	시온에 남아 있는 자, 예루살렘에 머물러 있는 자 곧 예루살렘에 있어 생존한 자 중 녹명된 모든 사람은 거룩하다 칭함을 얻으리니	And it shall come to pass, that he that is left in Zion, and he that remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem:	Whoever remains in Zion and whoever is left in Jerusalem will be called holy— all in Jerusalem who are recorded among the living—
ISA	4	4	이는 주께서 그 심판하는 영과 소멸하는 영으로 시온의 딸들의 더러움을 씻으시며 예루살렘의 피를 그 중에서 청결케 하실 때가 됨이라	When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning.	when the Lord has washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion and cleansed the bloodstains from the heart of Jerusalem by a spirit of judgment and a spirit of fire.
ISA	4	5	여호와께서 그 거하시는 온 시온산과 모든 집회 위에 낮이면 구름과 연기, 밤이면 화염의 빛을 만드시고 그 모든 영광 위에 천막을 덮으실 것이며	And the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a defence.	Then the LORD will create over all of Mount Zion and over her assemblies a cloud of smoke by day and a glowing flame of fire by night. For over all the glory there will be a canopy,
ISA	4	6	또 천막이 있어서 낮에는 더위를 피하는 그늘을 지으며 또 풍우를 피하여 숨는 곳이 되리라	And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the daytime from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from storm and from rain.	a shelter to give shade from the heat by day, and a refuge and hiding place from the storm and the rain.
ISA	5	1	내가 나의 사랑하는 자를 위하여 노래하되 나의 사랑하는 자의 포도원을 노래하리라 나의 사랑하는 자에게 포도원이 있음이여 심히 기름진 산에로다	Now will I sing to my wellbeloved a song of my beloved touching his vineyard. My wellbeloved hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hill:	I will sing for my beloved a song of his vineyard: My beloved had a vineyard on a very fertile hill.
ISA	5	2	땅을 파서 돌을 제하고 극상품 포도나무를 심었었도다 그 중에 망대를 세웠고 그 안에 술틀을 팠었도다 좋은 포도 맺기를 바랐더니 들 포도를 맺혔도다	And he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with the choicest vine, and built a tower in the midst of it, and also made a winepress therein: and he looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes.	He dug it up and cleared the stones and planted the finest vines. He built a watchtower in the middle and dug out a winepress as well. He waited for the vineyard to yield good grapes, but the fruit it produced was sour!
ISA	5	3	예루살렘 거민과 유다 사람들아 구하노니 이제 나와 내 포도원 사이에 판단하라	And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge, I pray you, betwixt me and my vineyard.	“And now, O dwellers of Jerusalem and men of Judah, I exhort you to judge between Me and My vineyard.
ISA	5	4	내가 내 포도원을 위하여 행한 것 외에 무엇을 더할 것이 있었으랴 내가 좋은 포도 맺기를 기다렸거늘 들 포도를 맺힘은 어찜인고	What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it? wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes?	What more could I have done for My vineyard than I already did for it? Why, when I expected sweet grapes, did it bring forth sour fruit?
ISA	5	5	이제 내가 내 포도원에 어떻게 행할 것을 너희에게 이르리라 내가 그 울타리를 걷어 먹힘을 당케 하며 그 담을 헐어 짓밟히게 할 것이요	And now go to; I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard: I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; and break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down:	Now I will tell you what I am about to do to My vineyard: I will take away its hedge, and it will be consumed; I will tear down its wall, and it will be trampled.
ISA	5	6	내가 그것으로 황무케 하리니 다시는 가지를 자름이나 북을 돋우지 못하여 질려와 형극이 날 것이며 내가 또 구름을 명하여 그 위에 비를 내리지 말라 하리라 하셨으니	And I will lay it waste: it shall not be pruned, nor digged; but there shall come up briers and thorns: I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it.	I will make it a wasteland, neither pruned nor cultivated, and thorns and briers will grow up. I will command the clouds that rain shall not fall on it.”
ISA	5	7	대저 만군의 여호와의 포도원은 이스라엘 족속이요 그의 기뻐하시는 나무는 유다 사람이라 그들에게 공평을 바라셨더니 도리어 포학이요 그들에게 의로움을 바라셨더니 도리어 부르짖음이었도다	For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant plant: and he looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry.	For the vineyard of the LORD of Hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah are the plant of His delight. He looked for justice, but saw bloodshed; for righteousness, but heard a cry of distress.
ISA	5	8	가옥에 가옥을 연하며 전토에 전토를 더하여 빈 틈이 없도록 하고 이 땅 가운데서 홀로 거하려 하는 그들은 화 있을진저	Woe unto them that join house to house, that lay field to field, till there be no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth!	Woe to you who add house to house and join field to field until no place is left and you live alone in the land.
ISA	5	9	만군의 여호와께서 내 귀에 말씀하시되 정녕히 허다한 가옥이 황폐하리니 크고 아름다울지라도 거할 자가 없을 것이며	In mine ears said the Lord of hosts, Of a truth many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair, without inhabitant.	I heard the LORD of Hosts declare: “Surely many houses will become desolate, great mansions left unoccupied.
ISA	5	10	열흘갈이 포도원에 겨우 포도주 한 바트가 나겠고 한 호멜지기에는 간신히 한 에바가 나리라 하시도다	Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath, and the seed of an homer shall yield an ephah.	For ten acres of vineyard will yield but a bath of wine, and a homer of seed only an ephah of grain.”
ISA	5	11	아침에 일찍이 일어나 독주를 따라가며 밤이 깊도록 머물러 포도주에 취하는 그들은 화 있을진저	Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may follow strong drink; that continue until night, till wine inflame them!	Woe to those who rise early in the morning in pursuit of strong drink, who linger into the evening, to be inflamed by wine.
ISA	5	12	그들이 연회에는 수금과 비파와 소고와 저와 포도주를 갖추었어도 여호와의 행하심을 관심치 아니하며 그의 손으로 하신 일을 생각지 아니하는도다	And the harp, and the viol, the tabret, and pipe, and wine, are in their feasts: but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands.	At their feasts are the lyre and harp, tambourines and flutes and wine. They disregard the actions of the LORD and fail to see the work of His hands.
ISA	5	13	이러므로 나의 백성이 무지함을 인하여 사로잡힐 것이요 그 귀한 자는 주릴 것이요 무리는 목마를 것이며	Therefore my people are gone into captivity, because they have no knowledge: and their honourable men are famished, and their multitude dried up with thirst.	Therefore My people will go into exile for their lack of understanding; their dignitaries are starving and their masses are parched with thirst.
ISA	5	14	음부가 그 욕망을 크게 내어 한량 없이 그 입을 벌린즉 그들의 호화로움과 그들의 많은 무리와 그들의 떠드는 것과 그 중에서 연락하는 자가 거기 빠질 것이라	Therefore hell hath enlarged herself, and opened her mouth without measure: and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoiceth, shall descend into it.	Therefore Sheol enlarges its throat and opens wide its enormous jaws, and down go Zion’s nobles and masses, her revelers and carousers!
ISA	5	15	천한 자는 굴복되고 귀한 자는 낮아지고 오만한 자의 눈도 낮아질 것이로되	And the mean man shall be brought down, and the mighty man shall be humbled, and the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled:	So mankind will be brought low, and each man humbled; the arrogant will lower their eyes.
ISA	5	16	오직 만군의 여호와는 공평하므로 높임을 받으시며 거룩하신 하나님은 의로우시므로 거룩하다 함을 받으시리니	But the Lord of hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and God that is holy shall be sanctified in righteousness.	But the LORD of Hosts will be exalted by His justice, and the holy God will show Himself holy in righteousness.
ISA	5	17	그 때에는 어린 양들이 자기 초장에 있는 것 같이 먹을 것이요 살찐 자의 황무한 밭의 소산은 유리하는 자들이 먹으리라	Then shall the lambs feed after their manner, and the waste places of the fat ones shall strangers eat.	Lambs will graze as in their own pastures, and strangers will feed in the ruins of the wealthy.
ISA	5	18	거짓으로 끈을 삼아 죄악을 끌며 수레 줄로 함 같이 죄악을 끄는 자는 화 있을진저	Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart rope:	Woe to those who draw iniquity with cords of deceit and pull sin along with cart ropes,
ISA	5	19	그들이 이르기를 그는 그 일을 속속히 이루어 우리로 보게 할 것이며 이스라엘의 거룩한 자는 그 도모를 속히 임하게 하여 우리로 알게 할 것이라 하는도다	That say, Let him make speed, and hasten his work, that we may see it: and let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know it!	to those who say, “Let Him hurry and hasten His work so that we may see it! Let the plan of the Holy One of Israel come so that we may know it!”
ISA	5	20	악을 선하다 하며 선을 악하다 하며 흑암으로 광명을 삼으며 광명으로 흑암을 삼으며 쓴 것으로 단 것을 삼으며 단 것으로 쓴 것을 삼는 그들은 화 있을진저	Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!	Woe to those who call evil good and good evil, who turn darkness to light and light to darkness, who replace bitter with sweet and sweet with bitter.
ISA	5	21	스스로 지혜롭다 하며 스스로 명철하다 하는 그들은 화 있을진저	Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight!	Woe to those who are wise in their own eyes and clever in their own sight.
ISA	5	22	포도주를 마시기에 용감하며 독주를 빚기에 유력한 그들은 화 있을진저	Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink:	Woe to those who are heroes in drinking wine and champions in mixing strong drink,
ISA	5	23	그들은 뇌물로 인하여 악인을 의롭다 하고 의인에게서 그 의를 빼았는도다	Which justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him!	who acquit the guilty for a bribe and deprive the innocent of justice.
ISA	5	24	이로 인하여 불꽃이 그루터기를 삼킴 같이, 마른 풀이 불 속에 떨어짐 같이 그들의 뿌리가 썩겠고 꽃이 티끌처럼 날리리니 그들이 만군의 여호와의 율법을 버리며 이스라엘의 거룩하신 자의 말씀을 멸시하였음이라	Therefore as the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumeth the chaff, so their root shall be as rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust: because they have cast away the law of the Lord of hosts, and despised the word of the Holy One of Israel.	Therefore, as a tongue of fire consumes the straw, and as dry grass shrivels in the flame, so their roots will decay and their blossoms will blow away like dust; for they have rejected the instruction of the LORD of Hosts and despised the word of the Holy One of Israel.
ISA	5	25	그러므로 여호와께서 자기 백성에게 노를 발하시고 손을 들어 그들을 치신지라 산들은 진동하며 그들의 시체는 거리 가운데 분토 같이 되었으나 그 노가 돌아서지 아니하였고 그 손이 오히려 펴졌느니라	Therefore is the anger of the Lord kindled against his people, and he hath stretched forth his hand against them, and hath smitten them: and the hills did tremble, and their carcases were torn in the midst of the streets. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.	Therefore the anger of the LORD burns against His people; His hand is raised against them to strike them down. The mountains quake, and the corpses lay like refuse in the streets. Despite all this, His anger is not turned away; His hand is still upraised.
ISA	5	26	기를 세우시고 먼 나라들을 불러 땅 끝에서부터 오게 하실 것이라 보라 그들이 빨리 달려 올 것이로되	And he will lift up an ensign to the nations from far, and will hiss unto them from the end of the earth: and, behold, they shall come with speed swiftly:	He lifts a banner for the distant nations and whistles for those at the ends of the earth. Behold—how speedily and swiftly they come!
ISA	5	27	그 중에 곤핍하여 넘어지는 자도 없을 것이며 조는 자나 자는 자도 없을 것이며 그들의 허리띠는 풀리지 아니하며 그들의 신들메는 끊어지지 아니하며	None shall be weary nor stumble among them; none shall slumber nor sleep; neither shall the girdle of their loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken:	None of them grows weary or stumbles; no one slumbers or sleeps. No belt is loose and no sandal strap is broken.
ISA	5	28	그들의 살은 날카롭고 모든 활은 당기어졌으며 그 말굽은 부싯돌 같고 차 바퀴는 회리바람 같을 것이며	Whose arrows are sharp, and all their bows bent, their horses’ hoofs shall be counted like flint, and their wheels like a whirlwind:	Their arrows are sharpened, and all their bows are strung. The hooves of their horses are like flint; their chariot wheels are like a whirlwind.
ISA	5	29	그 부르짖는 것은 암사자 같을 것이요 그 소리지름은 어린 사자들과 같을 것이라 그들이 부르짖으며 물건을 움키어 염려 없이 가져가도 건질 자가 없으리로다	Their roaring shall be like a lion, they shall roar like young lions: yea, they shall roar, and lay hold of the prey, and shall carry it away safe, and none shall deliver it.	Their roaring is like that of a lion; they roar like young lions. They growl and seize their prey; they carry it away from deliverance.
ISA	5	30	그 날에 그들이 바다 물결 소리 같이 백성을 향하여 부르짖으리니 사람이 그 땅을 바라보면 흑암과 고난이 있고 빛은 구름에 가리워져서 어두우리라	And in that day they shall roar against them like the roaring of the sea: and if one look unto the land, behold darkness and sorrow, and the light is darkened in the heavens thereof.	In that day they will roar over it, like the roaring of the sea. If one looks over the land, he will see darkness and distress; even the light will be obscured by clouds.
ISA	6	1	웃시야 왕의 죽던 해에 내가 본즉 주께서 높이 들린 보좌에 앉으셨는데 그 옷자락은 성전에 가득하였고	In the year that king Uzziah died I saw also the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and his train filled the temple.	In the year that King Uzziah died, I saw the Lord seated on a throne, high and exalted; and the train of His robe filled the temple.
ISA	6	2	스랍들은 모셔 섰는데 각기 여섯 날개가 있어 그 둘로는 그 얼굴을 가리었고 그 둘로는 그 발을 가리었고 그 둘로는 날며	Above it stood the seraphims: each one had six wings; with twain he covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did fly.	Above Him stood seraphim, each having six wings: With two wings they covered their faces, with two they covered their feet, and with two they were flying.
ISA	6	3	서로 창화하여 가로되 거룩하다 거룩하다 거룩하다 만군의 여호와여 그 영광이 온 땅에 충만하도다	And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory.	And they were calling out to one another: “Holy, holy, holy is the LORD of Hosts; all the earth is full of His glory.”
ISA	6	4	이같이 창화하는 자의 소리로 인하여 문지방의 터가 요동하며 집에 연기가 충만한지라	And the posts of the door moved at the voice of him that cried, and the house was filled with smoke.	At the sound of their voices the doorposts and thresholds shook, and the temple was filled with smoke.
ISA	6	5	그 때에 내가 말하되 화로다 나여 망하게 되었도다 나는 입술이 부정한 사람이요 입술이 부정한 백성 중에 거하면서 만군의 여호와이신 왕을 뵈었음이로다	Then said I, Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips: for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts.	Then I said: “Woe is me, for I am ruined, because I am a man of unclean lips dwelling among a people of unclean lips; for my eyes have seen the King, the LORD of Hosts.”
ISA	6	6	때에 그 스랍의 하나가 화저로 단에서 취한 바 핀 숯을 손에 가지고 내게로 날아와서	Then flew one of the seraphims unto me, having a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar:	Then one of the seraphim flew to me, and in his hand was a glowing coal that he had taken with tongs from the altar.
ISA	6	7	그것을 내 입에 대며 가로되 보라 이것이 네 입에 닿았으니 네 악이 제하여졌고 네 죄가 사하여졌느니라 하더라	And he laid it upon my mouth, and said, Lo, this hath touched thy lips; and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged.	And with it he touched my mouth and said: “Now that this has touched your lips, your iniquity is removed and your sin is atoned for.”
ISA	6	8	내가 또 주의 목소리를 들은즉 이르시되 내가 누구를 보내며 누가 우리를 위하여 갈꼬 그 때에 내가 가로되 내가 여기 있나이다 나를 보내소서	Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? Then said I, Here am I; send me.	Then I heard the voice of the Lord saying: “Whom shall I send? Who will go for Us?” And I said: “Here am I. Send me!”
ISA	6	9	여호와께서 가라사대 가서 이 백성에게 이르기를 너희가 듣기는 들어도 깨닫지 못할 것이요 보기는 보아도 알지 못하리라 하여	And he said, Go, and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not.	And He replied: “Go and tell this people, ‘Be ever hearing, but never understanding; be ever seeing, but never perceiving.’
ISA	6	10	이 백성의 마음으로 둔하게 하며 그 귀가 막히고 눈이 감기게 하라 염려컨대 그들이 눈으로 보고 귀로 듣고 마음으로 깨닫고 다시 돌아와서 고침을 받을까 하노라	Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed.	Make the hearts of this people calloused; deafen their ears and close their eyes. Otherwise they might see with their eyes, hear with their ears, understand with their hearts, and turn and be healed.”
ISA	6	11	내가 가로되 주여 어느 때까지니이까 대답하시되 성읍들은 황폐하여 거민이 없으며 가옥들에는 사람이 없고 이 토지가 전폐하게 되며	Then said I, Lord, how long? And he answered, Until the cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate,	Then I asked: “How long, O Lord?” And He replied: “Until the cities lie ruined and without inhabitant, until the houses are left unoccupied and the land is desolate and ravaged,
ISA	6	12	사람들이 여호와께 멀리 옮기워서 이 땅 가운데 폐한 곳이 많을 때까지니라	And the Lord have removed men far away, and there be a great forsaking in the midst of the land.	until the LORD has driven men far away and the land is utterly forsaken.
ISA	6	13	그 중에 십분의 일이 오히려 남아 있을지라도 이것도 삼키운바 될 것이나 밤나무, 상수리나무가 베임을 당하여도 그 그루터기는 남아 있는 것 같이 거룩한 씨가 이 땅의 그루터기니라	But yet in it shall be a tenth, and it shall return, and shall be eaten: as a teil tree, and as an oak, whose substance is in them, when they cast their leaves: so the holy seed shall be the substance thereof.	And though a tenth remains in the land, it will be burned again. As the terebinth and oak leave stumps when felled, so the holy seed will be a stump in the land.”
ISA	7	1	웃시야의 손자요 요담의 아들인 유다 왕 아하스 때에 아람 왕 르신과 르말리야의 아들 이스라엘 왕 베가가 올라와서 예루살렘을 쳤으나 능히 이기지 못하니라	And it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, that Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, went up toward Jerusalem to war against it, but could not prevail against it.	Now in the days that Ahaz son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, was king of Judah, Rezin king of Aram marched up to wage war against Jerusalem. He was accompanied by Pekah son of Remaliah the king of Israel, but he could not overpower the city.
ISA	7	2	혹이 다윗 집에 고하여 가로되 아람이 에브라임과 동맹하였다 하였으므로 왕의 마음과 그 백성의 마음이 삼림이 바람에 흔들림 같이 흔들렸더라	And it was told the house of David, saying, Syria is confederate with Ephraim. And his heart was moved, and the heart of his people, as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind.	When it was reported to the house of David that Aram was in league with Ephraim, the hearts of Ahaz and his people trembled like trees in the forest shaken by the wind.
ISA	7	3	때에 여호와께서 이사야에게 이르시되 너와 네 아들 스알야숩은 윗못 수도 끝 세탁자의 밭 큰 길에 나가서 아하스를 만나	Then said the Lord unto Isaiah, Go forth now to meet Ahaz, thou, and Shear–jashub thy son, at the end of the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the fuller’s field;	Then the LORD said to Isaiah, “Go out with your son Shear-jashub to meet Ahaz at the end of the aqueduct that feeds the upper pool, on the road to the Launderer’s Field,
ISA	7	4	그에게 이르기를 너는 삼가며 종용하라 아람 왕 르신과 르말리야의 아들이 심히 노할지라도 연기나는 두 부지깽이 그루터기에 불과하니 두려워 말며 낙심치 말라	And say unto him, Take heed, and be quiet; fear not, neither be fainthearted for the two tails of these smoking firebrands, for the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria, and of the son of Remaliah.	and say to him: Calm down and be quiet. Do not be afraid or disheartened over these two smoldering stubs of firewood—over the fierce anger of Rezin and Aram and of the son of Remaliah.
ISA	7	5	아람과 에브라임 왕과 르말리야의 아들이 악한 꾀로 너를 대적하여 이르기를	Because Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah, have taken evil counsel against thee, saying,	For Aram, along with Ephraim and the son of Remaliah, has plotted your ruin, saying:
ISA	7	6	우리가 올라가 유다를 쳐서 그것을 곤하게 하고 우리를 위하여 그것을 파하고 다브엘의 아들을 그 중에 세워 왕을 삼자 하였으나	Let us go up against Judah, and vex it, and let us make a breach therein for us, and set a king in the midst of it, even the son of Tabeal:	‘Let us invade Judah, terrorize it, and divide it among ourselves. Then we can install the son of Tabeal over it as king.’
ISA	7	7	주 여호와의 말씀에 이 도모가 서지 못하며 이루지 못하리라	Thus saith the Lord God, It shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass.	But this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘It will not arise; it will not happen.
ISA	7	8	대저 아람의 머리는 다메섹이요 다메섹의 머리는 르신이며 에브라임의 머리는 사마리아요 사마리아의 머리는 르말리야의 아들이라도 육십오 년 내에 에브라임이 패하여 다시는 나라를 이루지 못하리라 만일 너희가 믿지 아니하면 정녕히 굳게 서지 못하리라 하셨다 할지니라	For the head of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is Rezin; and within threescore and five years shall Ephraim be broken, that it be not a people.	For the head of Aram is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is Rezin. Within sixty-five years Ephraim will be shattered as a people.
ISA	7	9	8절과 같음	And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is Remaliah’s son. If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established.	The head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is the son of Remaliah. If you do not stand firm in your faith, then you will not stand at all.’”
ISA	7	10	여호와께서 또 아하스에게 일러 가라사대	Moreover the Lord spake again unto Ahaz, saying,	Again the LORD spoke to Ahaz, saying,
ISA	7	11	너는 네 하나님 여호와께 한 징조를 구하되 깊은 데서든지 높은 데서든지 구하라	Ask thee a sign of the Lord thy God; ask it either in the depth, or in the height above.	“Ask for a sign from the LORD your God, whether from the depths of Sheol or the heights of heaven.”
ISA	7	12	아하스가 가로되 나는 구하지 아니하겠나이다 나는 여호와를 시험치 아니하겠나이다 한지라	But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord.	But Ahaz replied, “I will not ask; I will not test the LORD.”
ISA	7	13	이사야가 가로되 다윗의 집이여 청컨대 들을지어다 너희가 사람을 괴롭게 하고 그것을 작은 일로 여겨서 또 나의 하나님을 괴로우시게 하려느냐	And he said, Hear ye now, O house of David; Is it a small thing for you to weary men, but will ye weary my God also?	Then Isaiah said, “Hear now, O house of David! Is it not enough to try the patience of men? Will you try the patience of my God as well?
ISA	7	14	그러므로 주께서 친히 징조로 너희에게 주실 것이라 보라 처녀가 잉태하여 아들을 낳을 것이요 그 이름을 임마누엘이라 하리라	Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel.	Therefore the Lord Himself will give you a sign: Behold, the virgin will be with child and will give birth to a son, and will call Him Immanuel.
ISA	7	15	그가 악을 버리며 선을 택할 줄 알 때에 미쳐 뻐터와 꿀을 먹을 것이라	Butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil, and choose the good.	By the time He knows enough to reject evil and choose good, He will be eating curds and honey.
ISA	7	16	대저 이 아이가 악을 버리며 선을 택할 줄 알기 전에 너의 미워하는 두 왕의 땅이 폐한바 되리라	For before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the good, the land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her kings.	For before the boy knows enough to reject evil and choose good, the land of the two kings you dread will be laid waste.
ISA	7	17	여호와께서 에브라임이 유다를 떠날 때부터 당하여 보지 못한 날을 너와 네 백성과 네 아비 집에 임하게 하시리니 곧 앗수르 왕의 오는 날이니라	The Lord shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon thy father’s house, days that have not come, from the day that Ephraim departed from Judah; even the king of Assyria.	The LORD will bring on you and on your people and on the house of your father a time unlike any since the day Ephraim separated from Judah—He will bring the king of Assyria.”
ISA	7	18	그 날에는 여호와께서 애굽 하수에서 먼 지경의 파리와 앗수르 땅의 벌을 부르시리니	And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall hiss for the fly that is in the uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt, and for the bee that is in the land of Assyria.	On that day the LORD will whistle to the flies at the farthest streams of the Nile and to the bees in the land of Assyria.
ISA	7	19	다 와서 거친 골짜기와 바위틈과 가시나무 울타리와 모든 초장에 앉으리라	And they shall come, and shall rest all of them in the desolate valleys, and in the holes of the rocks, and upon all thorns, and upon all bushes.	And they will all come and settle in the steep ravines and clefts of the rocks, in all the thornbushes and watering holes.
ISA	7	20	그 날에는 주께서 하수 저편에서 세내어 온 삭도 곧 앗수르 왕으로 네 백성의 머리털과 발털을 미실 것이요 수염도 깎으시리라	In the same day shall the Lord shave with a razor that is hired, namely, by them beyond the river, by the king of Assyria, the head, and the hair of the feet: and it shall also consume the beard.	On that day the Lord will use a razor hired from beyond the Euphrates—the king of Assyria—to shave your head and the hair of your legs, and to remove your beard as well.
ISA	7	21	그 날에는 사람이 한 어린 암소와 두 양을 기르리니	And it shall come to pass in that day, that a man shall nourish a young cow, and two sheep;	On that day a man will raise a young cow and two sheep,
ISA	7	22	그 내는 젖이 많으므로 뻐터를 먹을 것이라 무릇 그 땅 가운데 남아 있는 자는 뻐터와 꿀을 먹으리라	And it shall come to pass, for the abundance of milk that they shall give he shall eat butter: for butter and honey shall every one eat that is left in the land.	and from the abundance of milk they give, he will eat curds; for all who remain in the land will eat curds and honey.
ISA	7	23	그 날에는 천 주에 은 일천 개의 가치 되는 포도나무 있던 곳마다 질려와 형극이 날 것이라	And it shall come to pass in that day, that every place shall be, where there were a thousand vines at a thousand silverlings, it shall even be for briers and thorns.	And on that day, in every place that had a thousand vines worth a thousand shekels of silver, only briers and thorns will be found.
ISA	7	24	온 땅에 질려와 형극이 있으므로 살과 활을 가지고 그리로 갈 것이요	With arrows and with bows shall men come thither; because all the land shall become briers and thorns.	Men will go there with bow and arrow, for the land will be covered with briers and thorns.
ISA	7	25	보습으로 갈던 산에도 질려와 형극 까닭에 두려워서 그리로 가지 못할 것이요 그 땅은 소를 놓으며 양의 밟는 곳이 되리라	And on all hills that shall be digged with the mattock, there shall not come thither the fear of briers and thorns: but it shall be for the sending forth of oxen, and for the treading of lesser cattle.	For fear of the briers and thorns, you will no longer traverse the hills once tilled by the hoe; they will become places for oxen to graze and sheep to trample.
ISA	8	1	여호와께서 내게 이르시되 너는 큰 서판을 취하여 그 위에 통용문자로 마헬살랄하스바스라 쓰라	Moreover the Lord said unto me, Take thee a great roll, and write in it with a man’s pen concerning Maher–shalal–hash–baz.	Then the LORD said to me, “Take a large scroll and write on it with an ordinary stylus: Maher-shalal-hash-baz.
ISA	8	2	내가 진실한 증인 제사장 우리야와 여베레기야의 아들 스갸랴를 불러 증거하게 하리라 하시더니	And I took unto me faithful witnesses to record, Uriah the priest, and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah.	And I will appoint for Myself trustworthy witnesses—Uriah the priest and Zechariah son of Jeberekiah.”
ISA	8	3	내가 내 아내와 동침하매 그가 잉태하여 아들을 낳은지라 여호와께서 내게 이르시되 그 이름을 마헬살랄하스바스라 하라	And I went unto the prophetess; and she conceived, and bare a son. Then said the Lord to me, Call his name Maher–shalal–hash–baz.	And I had relations with the prophetess, and she conceived and gave birth to a son. The LORD said to me, “Name him Maher-shalal-hash-baz.
ISA	8	4	이는 이 아이가 내 아빠, 내 엄마라 할 줄 알기 전에 다메섹의 재물과 사마리아의 노략물이 앗수르 왕 앞에 옮긴바 될 것임이니라	For before the child shall have knowledge to cry, My father, and my mother, the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria shall be taken away before the king of Assyria.	For before the boy knows how to cry ‘Father’ or ‘Mother,’ the wealth of Damascus and the plunder of Samaria will be carried off by the king of Assyria.”
ISA	8	5	여호와께서 다시 내게 일러 가라사대	The Lord spake also unto me again, saying,	And the LORD spoke to me further:
ISA	8	6	이 백성이 천천히 흐르는 실로아 물을 버리고 르신과 르말라야의 아들을 기뻐하나니	Forasmuch as this people refuseth the waters of Shiloah that go softly, and rejoice in Rezin and Remaliah’s son;	“Because this people has rejected the gently flowing waters of Shiloah and rejoiced in Rezin and the son of Remaliah,
ISA	8	7	그러므로 주 내가 흉용하고 창일한 큰 하수 곧 앗수르 왕과 그의 모든 위력으로 그들 위에 덮을 것이라 그 모든 곬에 차고 모든 언덕에 넘쳐	Now therefore, behold, the Lord bringeth up upon them the waters of the river, strong and many, even the king of Assyria, and all his glory: and he shall come up over all his channels, and go over all his banks:	the Lord will surely bring against them the mighty floodwaters of the Euphrates— the king of Assyria and all his pomp. It will overflow its channels and overrun its banks.
ISA	8	8	흘러 유다에 들어와서 창일하고 목에까지 미치리라 임마누엘이여 그의 펴는 날개가 네 땅에 편만하리라 하셨느니라	And he shall pass through Judah; he shall overflow and go over, he shall reach even to the neck; and the stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel.	It will pour into Judah, swirling and sweeping over it, reaching up to the neck; its spreading streams will cover your entire land, O Immanuel!
ISA	8	9	너희 민족들아 훤화하라 필경 패망하리라 너희 먼 나라 백성들아 들을지니라 너희 허리를 동이라 필경 패망하리라 너희 허리에 띠를 띠라 필경 패망하리라	Associate yourselves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces; and give ear, all ye of far countries: gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces.	Huddle together, O peoples, and be shattered; pay attention, all you distant lands; prepare for battle, and be shattered; prepare for battle, and be shattered!
ISA	8	10	너희는 함께 도모하라 필경 이루지 못하리라 말을 내어라 시행되지 못하리라 이는 하나님이 우리와 함께 하심이니라	Take counsel together, and it shall come to nought; speak the word, and it shall not stand: for God is with us.	Devise a plan, but it will be thwarted; state a proposal, but it will not happen. For God is with us.”
ISA	8	11	여호와께서 강한 손으로 내게 알게 하시며 이 백성의 길로 행치 말 것을 내게 경성시켜 가라사대	For the Lord spake thus to me with a strong hand, and instructed me that I should not walk in the way of this people, saying,	For this is what the LORD has spoken to me with a strong hand, instructing me not to walk in the way of this people:
ISA	8	12	이 백성이 맹약한 자가 있다 말하여도 너희는 그 모든 말을 따라 맹약한 자가 있다 하지 말며 그들의 두려워하는 것을 너희는 두려워하지 말며 놀라지 말고	Say ye not, A confederacy, to all them to whom this people shall say, A confederacy; neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid.	“Do not call conspiracy everything these people regard as conspiracy. Do not fear what they fear; do not live in dread.
ISA	8	13	만군의 여호와 그를 너희가 거룩하다 하고 그로 너희의 두려워하며 놀랄 자를 삼으라	Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread.	The LORD of Hosts is the One you shall regard as holy. Only He should be feared; only He should be dreaded.
ISA	8	14	그가 거룩한 피할 곳이 되시리라 그러나 이스라엘의 두 집에는 거치는 돌, 걸리는 반석이 되실 것이며 예루살렘 거민에게는 함정, 올무가 되시리니	And he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of offence to both the houses of Israel, for a gin and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.	And He will be a sanctuary— but to both houses of Israel a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense, to the dwellers of Jerusalem a trap and a snare.
ISA	8	15	많은 사람들이 그로 인하여 거칠 것이며 넘어질 것이며 부러질 것이며 걸릴 것이며 잡힐 것이니라	And many among them shall stumble, and fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken.	Many will stumble over these; they will fall and be broken; they will be ensnared and captured.”
ISA	8	16	너는 증거의 말씀을 싸매며 율법을 나의 제자 중에 봉함하라	Bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples.	Bind up the testimony and seal the law among my disciples.
ISA	8	17	이제 야곱 집에 대하여 낯을 가리우시는 여호와를 나는 기다리며 그를 바라보리라	And I will wait upon the Lord, that hideth his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him.	I will wait for the LORD, who is hiding His face from the house of Jacob. I will put my trust in Him.
ISA	8	18	보라 나와 및 여호와께서 내게 주신 자녀들이 이스라엘 중에 징조와 예표가 되었나니 이는 시온산에 계신 만군의 여호와께로 말미암은 것이니라	Behold, I and the children whom the Lord hath given me are for signs and for wonders in Israel from the Lord of hosts, which dwelleth in mount Zion.	Here am I, and the children the LORD has given me as signs and symbols in Israel from the LORD of Hosts, who dwells on Mount Zion.
ISA	8	19	혹이 너희에게 고하기를 지절거리며 속살거리는 신접한 자와 마술사에게 물으라 하거든 백성이 자기 하나님께 구할 것이 아니냐 산 자를 위하여 죽은 자에게 구하겠느냐 하라	And when they shall say unto you, Seek unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep, and that mutter: should not a people seek unto their God? for the living to the dead?	When men tell you to consult the spirits of the dead and the spiritists who whisper and mutter, shouldn’t a people consult their God instead? Why consult the dead on behalf of the living?
ISA	8	20	마땅히 율법과 증거의 말씀을 좇을지니 그들의 말하는 바가 이 말씀에 맞지 아니하면 그들이 정녕히 아침 빛을 보지 못하고	To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them.	To the law and to the testimony! If they do not speak according to this word, they have no light of dawn.
ISA	8	21	이 땅으로 헤매며 곤고하며 주릴 것이라 그 주릴 때에 번조하여 자기의 왕 자기의 하나님을 저주할 것이며 위를 쳐다보거나	And they shall pass through it, hardly bestead and hungry: and it shall come to pass, that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and curse their king and their God, and look upward.	They will roam the land, dejected and hungry. When they are famished, they will become enraged; and looking upward, they will curse their king and their God.
ISA	8	22	땅을 굽어보아도 환난과 흑암과 고통의 흑암뿐이리니 그들이 심한 흑암 중으로 쫓겨 들어가리라	And they shall look unto the earth; and behold trouble and darkness, dimness of anguish; and they shall be driven to darkness.	Then they will look to the earth and see only distress and darkness and the gloom of anguish. And they will be driven into utter darkness.
ISA	9	1	전에 고통하던 자에게는 흑암이 없으리로다 옛적에는 여호와께서 스불론 땅과 납달리 땅으로 멸시를 당케 하셨더니 후에는 해변길과 요단 저편 이방의 갈릴리를 영화롭게 하셨느니라	Nevertheless the dimness shall not be such as was in her vexation, when at the first he lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, and afterward did more grievously afflict her by the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, in Galilee of the nations.	Nevertheless, there will be no more gloom for those in distress. In the past He humbled the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, but in the future He will honor the Way of the Sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the nations:
ISA	9	2	흑암에 행하던 백성이 큰 빛을 보고 사망의 그늘진 땅에 거하던 자에게 빛이 비취도다	The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light: they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light shined.	The people walking in darkness have seen a great light; on those living in the land of the shadow of death, a light has dawned.
ISA	9	3	주께서 이 나라를 창성케 하시며 그 즐거움을 더하게 하셨으므로 추수하는 즐거움과 탈취물을 나누는 때의 즐거움 같이 그들이 주의 앞에서 즐거워하오니	Thou hast multiplied the nation, and not increased the joy: they joy before thee according to the joy in harvest, and as men rejoice when they divide the spoil.	You have enlarged the nation and increased its joy. The people rejoice before You as they rejoice at harvest time, as men rejoice in dividing the plunder.
ISA	9	4	이는 그들의 무겁게 멘 멍에와 그 어깨의 채찍과 그 압제자의 막대기를 꺾으시되 미디안의 날과 같이 하셨음이니이다	For thou hast broken the yoke of his burden, and the staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, as in the day of Midian.	For as in the day of Midian You have shattered the yoke of their burden, the bar across their shoulders, and the rod of their oppressor.
ISA	9	5	어지러이 싸우는 군인의 갑옷과 피묻은 복장이 불에 섶 같이 살라지리니	For every battle of the warrior is with confused noise, and garments rolled in blood; but this shall be with burning and fuel of fire.	For every trampling boot of battle and every garment rolled in blood will be burned as fuel for the fire.
ISA	9	6	이는 한 아기가 우리에게 났고 한 아들을 우리에게 주신바 되었는데 그 어깨에는 정사를 메었고 그 이름은 기묘자라, 모사라, 전능하신 하나님이라, 영존하시는 아버지라, 평강의 왕이라 할 것임이라	For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace.	For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given, and the government will be upon His shoulders. And He will be called Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace.
ISA	9	7	그 정사와 평강의 더함이 무궁하며 또 다윗의 위에 앉아서 그 나라를 굳게 세우고 자금 이후 영원토록 공평과 정의로 그것을 보존하실 것이라 만군의 여호와의 열심이 이를 이루시리라	Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this.	Of the increase of His government and peace there will be no end. He will reign on the throne of David and over his kingdom, to establish and sustain it with justice and righteousness from that time and forevermore. The zeal of the LORD of Hosts will accomplish this.
ISA	9	8	주께서 야곱에게 말씀을 보내시며 그것을 이스라엘에게 임하게 하셨은즉	The Lord sent a word into Jacob, and it hath lighted upon Israel.	The Lord has sent a message against Jacob, and it has fallen upon Israel.
ISA	9	9	모든 백성 곧 에브라임과 사마리아 거민이 알 것이어늘 그들이 교만하고 완악한 마음으로 말하기를	And all the people shall know, even Ephraim and the inhabitant of Samaria, that say in the pride and stoutness of heart,	All the people will know it— Ephraim and the dwellers of Samaria. With pride and arrogance of heart they will say:
ISA	9	10	벽돌이 무너졌으나 우리는 다듬은 돌로 쌓고 뽕나무들이 찍혔으나 우리는 백향목으로 그것을 대신하리라 하도다	The bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones: the sycomores are cut down, but we will change them into cedars.	“The bricks have fallen, but we will rebuild with finished stone; the sycamores have been felled, but we will replace them with cedars.”
ISA	9	11	그러므로 여호와께서 르신의 대적을 일으켜 그를 치게 하시며 그 원수들을 격동시키시리니	Therefore the Lord shall set up the adversaries of Rezin against him, and join his enemies together;	The LORD has raised up the foes of Rezin against him and joined his enemies together.
ISA	9	12	앞에는 아람 사람이요 뒤에는 블레셋 사람이라 그들이 그 입을 벌려 이스라엘을 삼키리라 그럴지라도 여호와의 노가 쉬지 아니하며 그 손이 여전히 펴지리라	The Syrians before, and the Philistines behind; and they shall devour Israel with open mouth. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.	Aram from the east and Philistia from the west have devoured Israel with open mouths. Despite all this, His anger is not turned away; His hand is still upraised.
ISA	9	13	이 백성이 오히려 자기들을 치시는 자에게로 돌아오지 아니하며 만군의 여호와를 찾지 아니하도다	For the people turneth not unto him that smiteth them, neither do they seek the Lord of hosts.	But the people did not return to Him who struck them; they did not seek the LORD of Hosts.
ISA	9	14	이러므로 여호와께서 하루 사이에 이스라엘 중에서 머리와 꼬리며 종려가지와 갈대를 끊으시리니	Therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel head and tail, branch and rush, in one day.	So the LORD will cut off Israel’s head and tail, both palm branch and reed in a single day.
ISA	9	15	머리는 곧 장로와 존귀한 자요 꼬리는 곧 거짓말을 가르치는 선지자라	The ancient and honourable, he is the head; and the prophet that teacheth lies, he is the tail.	The head is the elder and honorable man, and the tail is the prophet who teaches lies.
ISA	9	16	백성을 인도하는 자가 그들로 미혹케 하니 인도를 받는 자가 멸망을 당하는도다	For the leaders of this people cause them to err; and they that are led of them are destroyed.	For those who guide this people mislead them, and those they mislead are swallowed up.
ISA	9	17	이 백성이 각기 설만하며 악을 행하며 입으로 망령되이 말하니 그러므로 주께서 그 장정을 기뻐 아니하시며 그 고아와 과부를 긍휼히 여기지 아니하시리라 그럴지라도 여호와의 노가 쉬지 아니하며 그 손이 여전히 펴지리라	Therefore the Lord shall have no joy in their young men, neither shall have mercy on their fatherless and widows: for every one is an hypocrite and an evildoer, and every mouth speaketh folly. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.	Therefore the Lord takes no pleasure in their young men; He has no compassion on their fatherless and widows. For every one of them is godless and wicked, and every mouth speaks folly. Despite all this, His anger is not turned away; His hand is still upraised.
ISA	9	18	대저 악행은 불 태우는 것 같으니 곧 질려와 형극을 삼키며 빽빽한 수풀을 살라서 연기로 위로 올라가게 함과 같은 것이라	For wickedness burneth as the fire: it shall devour the briers and thorns, and shall kindle in the thickets of the forest, and they shall mount up like the lifting up of smoke.	For wickedness burns like a fire that consumes the thorns and briers and kindles the forest thickets which roll upward in billows of smoke.
ISA	9	19	만군의 여호와의 진노로 인하여 이 땅이 소화되리니 백성은 불에 타는 섶나무와 같을 것이라 사람이 그 형제를 아끼지 아니하며	Through the wrath of the Lord of hosts is the land darkened, and the people shall be as the fuel of the fire: no man shall spare his brother.	By the wrath of the LORD of Hosts the land is scorched, and the people are fuel for the fire. No man even spares his brother.
ISA	9	20	우편으로 움킬지라도 주리고 좌편으로 먹을지라도 배부르지 못하여 각각 자기 팔의 고기를 먹을 것이며	And he shall snatch on the right hand, and be hungry; and he shall eat on the left hand, and they shall not be satisfied: they shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm:	They carve out what is on the right, but they are still hungry; they eat what is on the left, but they are still not satisfied. Each one devours the flesh of his own offspring.
ISA	9	21	므낫세는 에브라임을, 에브라임은 므낫세를 먹을 것이요 또 그들이 합하여 유다를 치리라 그럴지라도 여호와의 노가 쉬지 아니하며 그 손이 여전히 펴지리라	Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Manasseh: and they together shall be against Judah. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.	Manasseh devours Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasseh; together they turn against Judah. Despite all this, His anger is not turned away; His hand is still upraised.
ISA	10	1	불의한 법령을 발포하며 불의한 말을 기록하며	Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write grievousness which they have prescribed;	Woe to those who enact unjust statutes and issue oppressive decrees,
ISA	10	2	빈핍한 자를 불공평하게 판결하여 내 백성의 가련한 자의 권리를 박탈하며 과부에게 토색하고 고아의 것을 약탈하는 자는 화 있을진저	To turn aside the needy from judgment, and to take away the right from the poor of my people, that widows may be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherless!	to deprive the poor of fair treatment and withhold justice from the oppressed of My people, to make widows their prey and orphans their plunder.
ISA	10	3	너희에게 벌하시는 날에와 멀리서 오는 환난 때에 너희가 어떻게 하려느냐 누구에게로 도망하여 도움을 구하겠으며 너희 영화를 어느 곳에 두려느냐	And what will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the desolation which shall come from far? to whom will ye flee for help? and where will ye leave your glory?	What will you do on the day of reckoning when devastation comes from afar? To whom will you flee for help? Where will you leave your wealth?
ISA	10	4	포로 된 자의 아래에 구푸리며 죽임을 당한 자의 아래에 엎드러질 따름이니라 그럴지라도 여호와의 노가 쉬지 아니하며 그 손이 여전히 펴지리라	Without me they shall bow down under the prisoners, and they shall fall under the slain. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.	Nothing will remain but to crouch among the captives or fall among the slain. Despite all this, His anger is not turned away; His hand is still upraised.
ISA	10	5	화 있을진저 앗수르 사람이여 그는 나의 진노의 막대기요 그 손의 몽둥이는 나의 분한이라	O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is mine indignation.	Woe to Assyria, the rod of My anger; the staff in their hands is My wrath.
ISA	10	6	내가 그를 보내어 한 나라를 치게 하며 내가 그에게 명하여 나의 노한 백성을 쳐서 탈취하며 노략하게 하며 또 그들을 가로상의 진흙 같이 짓밟게 하려 하거늘	I will send him against an hypocritical nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge, to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets.	I will send him against a godless nation; I will dispatch him against a people destined for My rage, to take spoils and seize plunder, and to trample them down like clay in the streets.
ISA	10	7	그의 뜻은 이같지 아니하며 그 마음의 생각도 이같지 아니하고 오직 그 마음에 허다한 나라를 파괴하며 멸절하려 하여	Howbeit he meaneth not so, neither doth his heart think so; but it is in his heart to destroy and cut off nations not a few.	But this is not his intention; this is not his plan. For it is in his heart to destroy and cut off many nations.
ISA	10	8	이르기를 나의 방백들은 다 왕이 아니냐	For he saith, Are not my princes altogether kings?	“Are not all my commanders kings?” he says.
ISA	10	9	갈로는 갈그미스와 같지 아니하며 하맛은 아르밧과 같지 아니하며 사마리아는 다메섹과 같지 아니하냐	Is not Calno as Carchemish? is not Hamath as Arpad? is not Samaria as Damascus?	“Is not Calno like Carchemish? Is not Hamath like Arpad? Is not Samaria like Damascus?
ISA	10	10	내 손이 이미 신상을 섬기는 나라에 미쳤나니 그 조각한 신상이 예루살렘과 사마리아의 신상보다 우승하였느니라	As my hand hath found the kingdoms of the idols, and whose graven images did excel them of Jerusalem and of Samaria;	As my hand seized the idolatrous kingdoms whose images surpassed those of Jerusalem and Samaria,
ISA	10	11	내가 사마리아와 그 신상에게 행함 같이 예루살렘과 그 신상에게 행치 못하겠느냐 하도다	Shall I not, as I have done unto Samaria and her idols, so do to Jerusalem and her idols?	and as I have done to Samaria and its idols, will I not also do to Jerusalem and her idols?”
ISA	10	12	이러므로 주 내가 나의 일을 시온산과 예루살렘에 다 행한 후에 앗수르 왕의 완악한 마음의 열매와 높은 눈의 자랑을 벌하리라	Wherefore it shall come to pass, that when the Lord hath performed his whole work upon mount Zion and on Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the king of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks.	So when the Lord has completed all His work against Mount Zion and Jerusalem, He will say, “I will punish the king of Assyria for the fruit of his arrogant heart and the proud look in his eyes.
ISA	10	13	그의 말에 나는 내 손의 힘과 내 지혜로 이 일을 행하였나니 나는 총명한 자라 열국의 경계를 옮겼고 그 재물을 약탈하였으며 또 용감한 자 같이 위에 거한 자를 낮추었으며	For he saith, By the strength of my hand I have done it, and by my wisdom; for I am prudent: and I have removed the bounds of the people, and have robbed their treasures, and I have put down the inhabitants like a valiant man:	For he says: ‘By the strength of my hand I have done this, and by my wisdom, for I am clever. I have removed the boundaries of nations and plundered their treasures; like a mighty one I subdued their rulers.
ISA	10	14	나의 손으로 열국의 재물을 얻은 것은 새의 보금자리를 얻음 같고 온 세계를 얻은 것은 내어버린 알을 주움 같았으나 날개를 치거나 입을 벌리거나 지저귀는 것이 하나도 없었다 하는도다	And my hand hath found as a nest the riches of the people: and as one gathereth eggs that are left, have I gathered all the earth; and there was none that moved the wing, or opened the mouth, or peeped.	My hand reached as into a nest to seize the wealth of the nations. Like one gathering abandoned eggs, I gathered all the earth. No wing fluttered, no beak opened or chirped.’”
ISA	10	15	도끼가 어찌 찍는 자에게 스스로 자랑하겠으며 톱이 어찌 켜는 자에게 스스로 큰 체 하겠느냐 이는 막대기가 자기를 드는 자를 움직이려 하며 몽둥이가 나무 아닌 사람을 들려 함과 일반이로다	Shall the axe boast itself against him that heweth therewith? or shall the saw magnify itself against him that shaketh it? as if the rod should shake itself against them that lift it up, or as if the staff should lift up itself, as if it were no wood.	Does an axe raise itself above the one who swings it? Does a saw boast over him who saws with it? It would be like a rod waving the one who lifts it, or a staff lifting him who is not wood!
ISA	10	16	그러므로 주 만군의 여호와께서 살찐 자로 파리하게 하시며 그 영화의 아래에 불이 붙는 것 같이 맹렬히 타게 하실 것이라	Therefore shall the Lord, the Lord of hosts, send among his fat ones leanness; and under his glory he shall kindle a burning like the burning of a fire.	Therefore the Lord GOD of Hosts will send a wasting disease among Assyria’s stout warriors, and under his pomp will be kindled a fire like a burning flame.
ISA	10	17	이스라엘의 빛은 불이요 그 거룩한 자는 불꽃이라 하루 사이에 그의 형극과 질려가 소멸되며	And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his Holy One for a flame: and it shall burn and devour his thorns and his briers in one day;	And the Light of Israel will become a fire, and its Holy One a flame. In a single day it will burn and devour Assyria’s thorns and thistles.
ISA	10	18	그 삼림과 기름진 밭의 영광이 전부 소멸되리니 병인이 점점 쇠약하여감 같을 것이라	And shall consume the glory of his forest, and of his fruitful field, both soul and body: and they shall be as when a standardbearer fainteth.	The splendor of its forests and orchards, both soul and body, it will completely destroy, as a sickness consumes a man.
ISA	10	19	그 삼림에 남은 나무의 수가 희소하여 아이라도 능히 계산할 수 있으리라	And the rest of the trees of his forest shall be few, that a child may write them.	The remaining trees of its forests will be so few that a child could count them.
ISA	10	20	그 날에 이스라엘의 남은 자와 야곱 족속의 피난한 자들이 다시 자기를 친 자를 의뢰치 아니하고 이스라엘의 거룩하신 자 여호와를 진실히 의뢰하리니	And it shall come to pass in that day, that the remnant of Israel, and such as are escaped of the house of Jacob, shall no more again stay upon him that smote them; but shall stay upon the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, in truth.	On that day the remnant of Israel and the survivors of the house of Jacob will no longer depend on him who struck them, but they will truly rely on the LORD, the Holy One of Israel.
ISA	10	21	남은 자 곧 야곱의 남은 자가 능하신 하나님께로 돌아올 것이라	The remnant shall return, even the remnant of Jacob, unto the mighty God.	A remnant will return—a remnant of Jacob— to the Mighty God.
ISA	10	22	이스라엘이여 네 백성이 바다의 모래 같을지라도 남은 자만 돌아오리니 넘치는 공의로 훼멸이 작정되었음이라	For though thy people Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a remnant of them shall return: the consumption decreed shall overflow with righteousness.	Though your people, O Israel, be like the sand of the sea, only a remnant will return. Destruction has been decreed, overflowing with righteousness.
ISA	10	23	이미 작정되었은즉 주 만군의 여호와께서 온 세계 중에 끝까지 행하시리라	For the Lord God of hosts shall make a consumption, even determined, in the midst of all the land.	For the Lord GOD of Hosts will carry out the destruction decreed upon the whole land.
ISA	10	24	주 만군의 여호와께서 가라사대 시온에 거한 나의 백성들아 앗수르 사람이 애굽을 본받아 막대기로 너를 때리며 몽둥이를 들어 너를 칠지라도 그를 두려워 말라	Therefore thus saith the Lord God of hosts, O my people that dwellest in Zion, be not afraid of the Assyrian: he shall smite thee with a rod, and shall lift up his staff against thee, after the manner of Egypt.	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD of Hosts says: “O My people who dwell in Zion, do not fear Assyria, who strikes you with a rod and lifts his staff against you as the Egyptians did.
ISA	10	25	내가 불구에 네게는 분을 그치고 노를 옮겨 그들을 멸하리라 하시도다	For yet a very little while, and the indignation shall cease, and mine anger in their destruction.	For in just a little while My fury against you will subside, and My anger will turn to their destruction.”
ISA	10	26	만군의 여호와께서 채찍을 들어 그를 치시되 오렙 반석에서 미디안 사람을 쳐 죽이신 것 같이 하실 것이며 막대기를 드시되 바다를 향하여 애굽에 드신 것 같이 하실 것이라	And the Lord of hosts shall stir up a scourge for him according to the slaughter of Midian at the rock of Oreb: and as his rod was upon the sea, so shall he lift it up after the manner of Egypt.	And the LORD of Hosts will brandish a whip against them, as when He struck Midian at the rock of Oreb. He will raise His staff over the sea, as He did in Egypt.
ISA	10	27	그 날에 그의 무거운 짐이 네 어깨에서 떠나고 그의 멍에가 네 목에서 벗어지되 기름진 까닭에 멍에가 부러지리라	And it shall come to pass in that day, that his burden shall be taken away from off thy shoulder, and his yoke from off thy neck, and the yoke shall be destroyed because of the anointing.	On that day the burden will be lifted from your shoulders, and the yoke from your neck. The yoke will be broken because your neck will be too large.
ISA	10	28	앗수르 왕이 아얏에 이르러 미그론을 지나 믹마스에 치중을 머무르고	He is come to Aiath, he is passed to Migron; at Michmash he hath laid up his carriages:	Assyria has entered Aiath and passed through Migron, storing their supplies at Michmash.
ISA	10	29	영을 넘어 게바에서 유숙하매 라마는 떨고 사울의 기브아 사람은 도망하도다	They are gone over the passage: they have taken up their lodging at Geba; Ramah is afraid; Gibeah of Saul is fled.	They have crossed at the ford: “We will spend the night at Geba.” Ramah trembles; Gibeah of Saul flees.
ISA	10	30	딸 갈림아 큰 소리로 외칠지어다 라이사야 자세히 들을지어다 가련하다 너 아나돗이여	Lift up thy voice, O daughter of Gallim: cause it to be heard unto Laish, O poor Anathoth.	Cry aloud, O Daughter of Gallim! Listen, O Laishah! O wretched Anathoth!
ISA	10	31	맛메나 사람은 피난하며 게빔 거민은 도망하도다	Madmenah is removed; the inhabitants of Gebim gather themselves to flee.	Madmenah flees; the people of Gebim take refuge.
ISA	10	32	이 날에 그가 놉에서 쉬고 딸 시온 산 곧 예루살렘 산을 향하여 그 손을 흔들리로다	As yet shall he remain at Nob that day: he shall shake his hand against the mount of the daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem.	Yet today they will halt at Nob, shaking a fist at the mount of Daughter Zion, at the hill of Jerusalem.
ISA	10	33	주 만군의 여호와께서 혁혁한 위력으로 그 가지를 꺾으시리니 그 장대한 자가 찍힐 것이요 높은 자가 낮아질 것이며	Behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts, shall lop the bough with terror: and the high ones of stature shall be hewn down, and the haughty shall be humbled.	Behold, the Lord GOD of Hosts will lop off the branches with terrifying power. The tall trees will be cut down, the lofty ones will be felled.
ISA	10	34	철로 그 빽빽한 삼림을 베시리니 레바논이 권능 있는 자에게 작벌을 당하리라	And he shall cut down the thickets of the forest with iron, and Lebanon shall fall by a mighty one.	He will clear the forest thickets with an axe, and Lebanon will fall before the Mighty One.
ISA	11	1	이새의 줄기에서 한 싹이 나며 그 뿌리에서 한 가지가 나서 결실할 것이요	And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a Branch shall grow out of his roots:	Then a shoot will spring up from the stump of Jesse, and a Branch from his roots will bear fruit.
ISA	11	2	여호와의 신 곧 지혜와 총명의 신이요 모략과 재능의 신이요 지식과 여호와를 경외하는 신이 그 위에 강림하시리니	And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord;	The Spirit of the LORD will rest on Him— the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of counsel and strength, the Spirit of knowledge and fear of the LORD.
ISA	11	3	그가 여호와를 경외함으로 즐거움을 삼을 것이며 그 눈에 보이는 대로 심판치 아니하며 귀에 들리는 대로 판단치 아니하며	And shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord: and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears:	And He will delight in the fear of the LORD. He will not judge by what His eyes see, and He will not decide by what His ears hear,
ISA	11	4	공의로 빈핍한 자를 심판하며 정직으로 세상의 겸손한 자를 판단할 것이며 그 입의 막대기로 세상을 치며 입술의 기운으로 악인을 죽일 것이며	But with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth: and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.	but with righteousness He will judge the poor, and with equity He will decide for the lowly of the earth. He will strike the earth with the rod of His mouth and slay the wicked with the breath of His lips.
ISA	11	5	공의로 그 허리띠를 삼으며 성실로 몸의 띠를 삼으리라	And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins.	Righteousness will be the belt around His hips, and faithfulness the sash around His waist.
ISA	11	6	그 때에 이리가 어린 양과 함께 거하며 표범이 어린 염소와 함께 누우며 송아지와 어린 사자와 살찐 짐승이 함께 있어 어린 아이에게 끌리며	The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them.	The wolf will live with the lamb, and the leopard will lie down with the goat; the calf and young lion and fatling will be together, and a little child will lead them.
ISA	11	7	암소와 곰이 함께 먹으며 그것들의 새끼가 함께 엎드리며 사자가 소처럼 풀을 먹을 것이며	And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.	The cow will graze with the bear, their young will lie down together, and the lion will eat straw like the ox.
ISA	11	8	젖먹는 아이가 독사의 구멍에서 장난하며 젖뗀 어린 아이가 독사의 굴에 손을 넣을 것이라	And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice’ den.	The infant will play by the cobra’s den, and the toddler will reach into the viper’s nest.
ISA	11	9	나의 거룩한 산 모든 곳에서 해됨도 없고 상함도 없을 것이니 이는 물이 바다를 덮음 같이 여호와를 아는 지식이 세상에 충만할 것임이니라	They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.	They will neither harm nor destroy on all My holy mountain, for the earth will be full of the knowledge of the LORD as the sea is full of water.
ISA	11	10	그 날에 이새의 뿌리에서 한 싹이 나서 만민의 기호로 설 것이요 열방이 그에게로 돌아오리니 그 거한 곳이 영화로우리라	And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek: and his rest shall be glorious.	On that day the Root of Jesse will stand as a banner for the peoples. The nations will seek Him, and His place of rest will be glorious.
ISA	11	11	그 날에 주께서 다시 손을 펴사 그 남은 백성을 앗수르와 애굽과 바드로스와 구스와 엘람과 시날과 하맛과 바다 섬들에서 돌아오게 하실 것이라	And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea.	On that day the Lord will extend His hand a second time to recover the remnant of His people from Assyria, from Egypt, from Pathros, from Cush, from Elam, from Shinar, from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea.
ISA	11	12	여호와께서 열방을 향하여 기호를 세우시고 이스라엘의 쫓긴 자를 모으시며 땅 사방에서 유다의 이산한 자를 모으시리니	And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth.	He will raise a banner for the nations and gather the exiles of Israel; He will collect the scattered of Judah from the four corners of the earth.
ISA	11	13	에브라임의 투기는 없어지고 유다를 괴롭게 하던 자는 끊어지며 에브라임은 유다를 투기하지 아니하며 유다는 에브라임을 괴롭게 하지 아니할 것이요	The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim.	Then the jealousy of Ephraim will depart, and the adversaries of Judah will be cut off. Ephraim will no longer envy Judah, nor will Judah harass Ephraim.
ISA	11	14	그들이 서으로 블레셋 사람의 어깨에 날아 앉고 함께 동방 백성을 노략하며 에돔과 모압에 손을 대며 암몬 자손을 자기에게 복종시키리라	But they shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines toward the west; they shall spoil them of the east together: they shall lay their hand upon Edom and Moab; and the children of Ammon shall obey them.	They will swoop down on the slopes of the Philistines to the west; together they will plunder the sons of the east. They will lay their hands on Edom and Moab, and the Ammonites will be subject to them.
ISA	11	15	여호와께서 애굽 해고를 말리우시고 손을 유브라데 하수 위에 흔들어 뜨거운 바람을 일으켜서 그 하수를 쳐서 일곱 갈래로 나눠 신 신고 건너가게 하실 것이라	And the Lord shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea; and with his mighty wind shall he shake his hand over the river, and shall smite it in the seven streams, and make men go over dryshod.	The LORD will devote to destruction the gulf of the Sea of Egypt; with a scorching wind He will sweep His hand over the Euphrates. He will split it into seven streams for men to cross with dry sandals.
ISA	11	16	그의 남아 있는 백성을 위하여 앗수르에서부터 돌아오는 대로가 있게 하시되 이스라엘이 애굽 땅에서 나오던 날과 같게 하시리라	And there shall be an highway for the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria; like as it was to Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt.	There will be a highway for the remnant of His people who remain from Assyria, as there was for Israel when they came up from the land of Egypt.
ISA	12	1	그 날에 네가 말하기를 여호와여 주께서 전에는 내게 노하셨사오나 이제는 그 노가 쉬었고 또 나를 안위하시오니 내가 주께 감사겠나이다 할 것이니라	And in that day thou shalt say, O Lord, I will praise thee: though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortedst me.	In that day you will say: “O LORD, I will praise You. Although You were angry with me, Your anger has turned away, and You have comforted me.
ISA	12	2	보라 하나님은 나의 구원이시라 내가 의뢰하고 두려움이 없으리니 주 여호와는 나의 힘이시며 나의 노래시며 나의 구원이심이라	Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid: for the Lord Jehovah is my strength and my song; he also is become my salvation.	Surely God is my salvation; I will trust and not be afraid. For the LORD GOD is my strength and my song, and He also has become my salvation.”
ISA	12	3	그러므로 너희가 기쁨으로 구원의 우물들에서 물을 길으리로다	Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation.	With joy you will draw water from the springs of salvation,
ISA	12	4	그 날에 너희가 또 말하기를 여호와께 감사하라 그 이름을 부르며 그 행하심을 만국 중에 선포하며 그 이름이 높다 하라	And in that day shall ye say, Praise the Lord, call upon his name, declare his doings among the people, make mention that his name is exalted.	and on that day you will say: “Give praise to the LORD; proclaim His name! Make His works known among the peoples; declare that His name is exalted.
ISA	12	5	여호와를 찬송할 것은 극히 아름다운 일을 하셨음이니 온 세계에 알게 할지어다	Sing unto the Lord; for he hath done excellent things: this is known in all the earth.	Sing to the LORD, for He has done glorious things. Let this be known in all the earth.
ISA	12	6	시온의 거민아 소리를 높여 부르라 이스라엘의 거룩하신 자가 너희 중에서 크심이니라 할 것이니라	Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion: for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee.	Cry out and sing, O citizen of Zion, for great among you is the Holy One of Israel.”
ISA	13	1	아모스의 아들 이사야가 바벨론에 대하여 받은 경고라	The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz did see.	This is the burden against Babylon that Isaiah son of Amoz received:
ISA	13	2	너희는 자산 위에 기호를 세우고 소리를 높여 그들을 부르며 손을 흔들어 그들로 존귀한 자의 문에 들어가게 하라	Lift ye up a banner upon the high mountain, exalt the voice unto them, shake the hand, that they may go into the gates of the nobles.	Raise a banner on a barren hilltop; call aloud to them. Wave your hand, that they may enter the gates of the nobles.
ISA	13	3	내가 나의 거룩히 구별한 자에게 명하고 나의 위엄을 기뻐하는 용사들을 불러 나의 노를 풀게 하였느니라	I have commanded my sanctified ones, I have also called my mighty ones for mine anger, even them that rejoice in my highness.	I have commanded My sanctified ones; I have even summoned My warriors to execute My wrath and exult in My triumph.
ISA	13	4	산에서 무리의 소리가 남이여 많은 백성의 소리 같으니 곧 열국 민족이 함께 모여 떠드는 소리라 만군의 여호와께서 싸움을 위하여 군대를 검열하심이로다	The noise of a multitude in the mountains, like as of a great people; a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of nations gathered together: the Lord of hosts mustereth the host of the battle.	Listen, a tumult on the mountains, like that of a great multitude! Listen, an uproar among the kingdoms, like nations gathered together! The LORD of Hosts is mobilizing an army for war.
ISA	13	5	무리가 먼 나라에서, 하늘 가에서 왔음이여 곧 여호와와 그 진노의 병기라 온 땅을 멸하려 함이로다	They come from a far country, from the end of heaven, even the Lord, and the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole land.	They are coming from faraway lands, from the ends of the heavens— the LORD and the weapons of His wrath— to destroy the whole country.
ISA	13	6	너희는 애곡할지어다 여호와의 날이 가까웠으니 전능자에게서 멸망이 임할 것임이로다	Howl ye; for the day of the Lord is at hand; it shall come as a destruction from the Almighty.	Wail, for the Day of the LORD is near; it will come as destruction from the Almighty.
ISA	13	7	그러므로 모든 손이 피곤하며 각 사람의 마음이 녹을 것이라	Therefore shall all hands be faint, and every man’s heart shall melt:	Therefore all hands will fall limp, and every man’s heart will melt.
ISA	13	8	그들이 놀라며 괴로움과 슬픔에 잡혀서 임산한 여자 같이 고통하며 서로 보고 놀라며 얼굴은 불꽃 같으리로다	And they shall be afraid: pangs and sorrows shall take hold of them; they shall be in pain as a woman that travaileth: they shall be amazed one at another; their faces shall be as flames.	Terror, pain, and anguish will seize them; they will writhe like a woman in labor. They will look at one another, their faces flushed with fear.
ISA	13	9	여호와의 날 곧 잔혹히 분냄과 맹렬히 노하는 날이 임하여 땅을 황무케 하며 그 중에서 죄인을 멸하리니	Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the land desolate: and he shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it.	Behold, the Day of the LORD is coming— cruel, with fury and burning anger— to make the earth a desolation and to destroy the sinners within it.
ISA	13	10	하늘의 별들과 별 떨기가 그 빛을 내지 아니하며 해가 돋아도 어두우며 달이 그 빛을 비취지 아니할 것이로다	For the stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall not give their light: the sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine.	For the stars of heaven and their constellations will not give their light. The rising sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light.
ISA	13	11	내가 세상의 악과 악인의 죄를 벌하며 교만한 자의 오만을 끊으며 강포한 자의 거만을 낮출 것이며	And I will punish the world for their evil, and the wicked for their iniquity; and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible.	I will punish the world for its evil and the wicked for their iniquity. I will end the haughtiness of the arrogant and lay low the pride of the ruthless.
ISA	13	12	내가 사람을 정금보다 희소케 하며 오빌의 순금보다 희귀케 하리로다	I will make a man more precious than fine gold; even a man than the golden wedge of Ophir.	I will make man scarcer than pure gold, and mankind rarer than the gold of Ophir.
ISA	13	13	나 만군의 여호와가 분하여 맹렬히 노하는 날에 하늘을 진동시키며 땅을 흔들어 그 자리에서 떠나게 하리니	Therefore I will shake the heavens, and the earth shall remove out of her place, in the wrath of the Lord of hosts, and in the day of his fierce anger.	Therefore I will make the heavens tremble, and the earth will be shaken from its place at the wrath of the LORD of Hosts on the day of His burning anger.
ISA	13	14	그들이 쫓긴 노루나 모으는 자 없는 양 같이 각기 동족에게로 돌아가며 본향으로 도망할 것이나	And it shall be as the chased roe, and as a sheep that no man taketh up: they shall every man turn to his own people, and flee every one into his own land.	Like a hunted gazelle, like a sheep without a shepherd, each will return to his own people, each will flee to his native land.
ISA	13	15	만나는 자는 창에 찔리겠고 잡히는 자는 칼에 엎드러지겠고	Every one that is found shall be thrust through; and every one that is joined unto them shall fall by the sword.	Whoever is caught will be stabbed, and whoever is captured will die by the sword.
ISA	13	16	그들의 어린 아이들은 그 목전에 메어침을 입겠고 그 집은 노략을 당하겠고 그 아내는 욕을 당하리라	Their children also shall be dashed to pieces before their eyes; their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished.	Their infants will be dashed to pieces before their eyes, their houses will be looted, and their wives will be ravished.
ISA	13	17	보라 은을 돌아보지 아니하며 금을 기뻐하지 아니하는 메대 사람을 내가 격동시켜 그들을 치게 하리니	Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall not regard silver; and as for gold, they shall not delight in it.	Behold, I will stir up against them the Medes, who have no regard for silver and no desire for gold.
ISA	13	18	메대 사람이 활로 청년을 쏘아 죽이며 태의 열매를 긍휼히 여기지 아니하며 아이를 가석히 보지 아니하리라	Their bows also shall dash the young men to pieces; and they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eye shall not spare children.	Their bows will dash young men to pieces; they will have no mercy on the fruit of the womb; they will not look with pity on the children.
ISA	13	19	열국의 영광이요 갈대아 사람의 자랑하는 노리개가 된 바벨론이 하나님께 멸망 당한 소돔과 고모라 같이 되리니	And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees’ excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.	And Babylon, the jewel of the kingdoms, the glory of the pride of the Chaldeans, will be overthrown by God like Sodom and Gomorrah.
ISA	13	20	그곳에 처할 자가 없겠고 거할 사람이 대대에 없을 것이며 아라비아 사람도 거기 장막을 치지 아니하며 목자들도 그곳에 그 양떼를 쉬게 하지 아니할 것이요	It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation: neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there; neither shall the shepherds make their fold there.	She will never be inhabited or settled from generation to generation; no nomad will pitch his tent there, no shepherd will rest his flock there.
ISA	13	21	오직 들짐승들이 거기 엎드리고 부르짖는 짐승이 그 가옥에 충만하며 타조가 거기 깃들이며 들 양이 거기서 뛸 것이요	But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there; and their houses shall be full of doleful creatures; and owls shall dwell there, and satyrs shall dance there.	But desert creatures will lie down there, and howling creatures will fill her houses. Ostriches will dwell there, and wild goats will leap about.
ISA	13	22	그 궁성에는 시랑이 부르짖을 것이요 화려한 전에는 들개가 울 것이라 그의 때가 가까우며 그의 날이 오래지 아니하리라	And the wild beasts of the islands shall cry in their desolate houses, and dragons in their pleasant palaces: and her time is near to come, and her days shall not be prolonged.	Hyenas will howl in her fortresses and jackals in her luxurious palaces. Babylon’s time is at hand, and her days will not be prolonged.
ISA	14	1	여호와께서 야곱을 긍휼히 여기시며 이스라엘을 다시 택하여 자기 고토에 두시리니 나그네 된 자가 야곱 족속에게 가입되어 그들과 연합할 것이며	For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own land: and the strangers shall be joined with them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob.	For the LORD will have compassion on Jacob; once again He will choose Israel and settle them in their own land. The foreigner will join them and unite with the house of Jacob.
ISA	14	2	민족들이 그들을 데리고 그들의 본토에 돌아오리니 이스라엘 족속이 어호와의 땅에서 그들을 얻어 노비를 삼겠고 전에 자기를 사로잡던 자를 사로잡고 자기를 압제하던 자를 주관하리라	And the people shall take them, and bring them to their place: and the house of Israel shall possess them in the land of the Lord for servants and handmaids: and they shall take them captives, whose captives they were; and they shall rule over their oppressors.	The nations will escort Israel and bring it to its homeland. Then the house of Israel will possess the nations as menservants and maidservants in the LORD’s land. They will make captives of their captors and rule over their oppressors.
ISA	14	3	여호와께서 너를 슬픔과 곤고와 및 너의 수고하는 고역에서 놓으시고 안식을 주시는 날에	And it shall come to pass in the day that the Lord shall give thee rest from thy sorrow, and from thy fear, and from the hard bondage wherein thou wast made to serve,	On the day that the LORD gives you rest from your pain and torment, and from the hard labor into which you were forced,
ISA	14	4	너는 바벨론 왕에 대하여 이 노래를 지어 이르기를 학대하던 자가 어찌 그리 그쳤으며 강포한 성이 어찌 그리 폐하였는고	That thou shalt take up this proverb against the king of Babylon, and say, How hath the oppressor ceased! the golden city ceased!	you will sing this song of contempt against the king of Babylon: How the oppressor has ceased, and how his fury has ended!
ISA	14	5	여호와께서 악인의 몽둥이와 패권자의 홀을 꺾으셨도다	The Lord hath broken the staff of the wicked, and the sceptre of the rulers.	The LORD has broken the staff of the wicked, the scepter of the rulers.
ISA	14	6	그들이 분내어 여러 민족을 치되 치기를 마지 아니하였고 노하여 열방을 억압하여도 그 억압을 막을 자 없었더니	He who smote the people in wrath with a continual stroke, he that ruled the nations in anger, is persecuted, and none hindereth.	It struck the peoples in anger with unceasing blows; it subdued the nations in rage with relentless persecution.
ISA	14	7	이제는 온 땅이 평안하고 정온하니 무리가 소리질러 노래하는도다	The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet: they break forth into singing.	All the earth is at peace and at rest; they break out in song.
ISA	14	8	향나무와 레바논 백향목도 너로 인하여 기뻐하여 이르기를 네가 넘어뜨리웠은즉 올라와서 우리를 작벌할 자 없다 하는도다	Yea, the fir trees rejoice at thee, and the cedars of Lebanon, saying, Since thou art laid down, no feller is come up against us.	Even the cypresses and cedars of Lebanon exult over you: “Since you have been laid low, no woodcutter comes against us.”
ISA	14	9	아래의 음부가 너로 인하여 소동하여 너의 옴을 영접하되 그것이 세상에서의 모든 영웅을 너로 인하여 동하게 하며 열방의 모든 왕으로 그 보좌에서 일어서게 하므로	Hell from beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming: it stirreth up the dead for thee, even all the chief ones of the earth; it hath raised up from their thrones all the kings of the nations.	Sheol beneath is eager to meet you upon your arrival. It stirs the spirits of the dead to greet you— all the rulers of the earth. It makes all the kings of the nations rise from their thrones.
ISA	14	10	그들은 다 네게 말하여 이르기를 너도 우리 같이 연약하게 되었느냐 너도 우리 같이 되었느냐 하리로다	All they shall speak and say unto thee, Art thou also become weak as we? art thou become like unto us?	They will all respond to you, saying, “You too have become weak, as we are; you have become like us!”
ISA	14	11	네 영화가 음부에 떨어졌음이여 너의 비파 소리까지로다 구더기가 네 아래 깔림이여 지렁이가 너를 덮었도다	Thy pomp is brought down to the grave, and the noise of thy viols: the worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee.	Your pomp has been brought down to Sheol, along with the music of your harps. Maggots are your bed and worms your blanket.
ISA	14	12	너 아침의 아들 계명성이여 어찌 그리 하늘에서 떨어졌으며 너 열국을 엎은 자여 어찌 그리 땅에 찍혔는고	How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations!	How you have fallen from heaven, O day star, son of the dawn! You have been cut down to the ground, O destroyer of nations.
ISA	14	13	네가 네 마음에 이르기를 내가 하늘에 올라 하나님의 뭇별 위에 나의 보좌를 높이리라 내가 북극 집회의 산 위에 좌정하리라	For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north:	You said in your heart: “I will ascend to the heavens; I will raise my throne above the stars of God. I will sit on the mount of assembly, in the far reaches of the north.
ISA	14	14	가장 높은 구름에 올라 지극히 높은 자와 비기리라 하도다	I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most High.	I will ascend above the tops of the clouds; I will make myself like the Most High.”
ISA	14	15	그러나 이제 네가 음부 곧 구덩이의 맨 밑에 빠치우리로다	Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit.	But you will be brought down to Sheol, to the lowest depths of the Pit.
ISA	14	16	너를 보는 자가 주목하여 너를 자세히 살펴 보며 말하기를 이 사람이 땅을 진동시키며 열국을 경동시키며	They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and consider thee, saying, Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake kingdoms;	Those who see you will stare; they will ponder your fate: “Is this the man who shook the earth and made the kingdoms tremble,
ISA	14	17	세계를 황무케 하며 성읍을 파괴하며 사로잡힌 자를 그 집으로 놓아 보내지 않던 자가 아니뇨 하리로다	That made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the cities thereof; that opened not the house of his prisoners?	who turned the world into a desert and destroyed its cities, who refused to let the captives return to their homes?”
ISA	14	18	열방의 왕들은 모두 각각 자기 집에서 영광 중에 자건마는	All the kings of the nations, even all of them, lie in glory, every one in his own house.	All the kings of the nations lie in state, each in his own tomb.
ISA	14	19	오직 너는 자기 무덤에서 내어쫓겼으니 가증한 나무가지 같고 칼에 찔려 돌구덩이에 빠진 주검에 둘러싸였으니 밟힌 시체와 같도다	But thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch, and as the raiment of those that are slain, thrust through with a sword, that go down to the stones of the pit; as a carcase trodden under feet.	But you are cast out of your grave like a rejected branch, covered by those slain with the sword, and dumped into a rocky pit like a carcass trampled underfoot.
ISA	14	20	네가 자기 땅을 망케 하였고 자기 백성을 죽였으므로 그들과 일반으로 안장함을 얻지 못하나니 악을 행하는 자의 후손은 영영히 이름이 나지 못하리로다	Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial, because thou hast destroyed thy land, and slain thy people: the seed of evildoers shall never be renowned.	You will not join them in burial, since you have destroyed your land and slaughtered your own people. The offspring of the wicked will never again be mentioned.
ISA	14	21	너희는 그들의 열조의 죄악을 인하여 그 자손 도륙하기를 예비하여 그들로 일어나 땅을 취하여 세상에 성읍을 충만케 하지 못하게 하라	Prepare slaughter for his children for the iniquity of their fathers; that they do not rise, nor possess the land, nor fill the face of the world with cities.	Prepare a place to slaughter his sons for the iniquities of their forefathers. They will never rise up to possess a land or cover the earth with their cities.
ISA	14	22	만군의 여호와께서 말씀하시되 내가 일어나 그들을 쳐서 그 이름과 남은 자와 아들과 후손을 바벨론에서 끊으리라 나 여호와의 말이니라	For I will rise up against them, saith the Lord of hosts, and cut off from Babylon the name, and remnant, and son, and nephew, saith the Lord.	“I will rise up against them,” declares the LORD of Hosts. “I will cut off from Babylon her name and her remnant, her offspring and her posterity,” declares the LORD.
ISA	14	23	내가 또 그것으로 고슴도치의 굴혈과 물웅덩이가 되게 하고 또 멸망의 비로 소제하리라 나 만군의 여호와의 말이니라	I will also make it a possession for the bittern, and pools of water: and I will sweep it with the besom of destruction, saith the Lord of hosts.	“I will make her a place for owls and for swamplands; I will sweep her away with the broom of destruction,” declares the LORD of Hosts.
ISA	14	24	만군의 여호와께서 맹세하여 가라사대 나의 생각한 것이 반드시 되며 나의 경영한 것이 반드시 이루리라	The Lord of hosts hath sworn, saying, Surely as I have thought, so shall it come to pass; and as I have purposed, so shall it stand:	The LORD of Hosts has sworn: “Surely, as I have planned, so will it be; as I have purposed, so will it stand.
ISA	14	25	내가 앗수르 사람을 나의 땅에서 파하며 나의 산에서 발아래 밟으리니 그 때에 그의 멍에가 이스라엘에게서 떠나고 그의 짐이 그들의 어깨에서 벗어질 것이라	That I will break the Assyrian in my land, and upon my mountains tread him under foot: then shall his yoke depart from off them, and his burden depart from off their shoulders.	I will break Assyria in My land; I will trample him on My mountain. His yoke will be taken off My people, and his burden removed from their shoulders.”
ISA	14	26	이것이 온 세계를 향하여 정한 경영이며 이것이 열방을 향하여 편 손이라 하셨나니	This is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth: and this is the hand that is stretched out upon all the nations.	This is the plan devised for the whole earth, and this is the hand stretched out over all the nations.
ISA	14	27	만군의 여호와께서 경영하셨은즉 누가 능히 그것을 폐하며 그 손을 펴셨은즉 누가 능히 그것을 돌이키랴	For the Lord of hosts hath purposed, and who shall disannul it? and his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back?	The LORD of Hosts has purposed, and who can thwart Him? His hand is outstretched, so who can turn it back?
ISA	14	28	아하스 왕의 죽던 해에 받은 경고라	In the year that king Ahaz died was this burden.	In the year that King Ahaz died, this burden was received:
ISA	14	29	블레셋 온 땅이여 너를 치던 막대기가 부러졌다고 기뻐하지 말라 뱀의 뿌리에서는 독사가 나겠고 그 열매는 나는 불뱀이 되리라	Rejoice not thou, whole Palestina, because the rod of him that smote thee is broken: for out of the serpent’s root shall come forth a cockatrice, and his fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent.	Do not rejoice, all you Philistines, that the rod that struck you is broken. For a viper will spring from the root of the snake, and a flying serpent from its egg.
ISA	14	30	가난한 자의 장자는 먹겠고 빈핍한 자는 평안히 누우려니와 내가 너의 뿌리를 기근으로 죽일 것이요 너의 남은 자는 살륙을 당하리라	And the firstborn of the poor shall feed, and the needy shall lie down in safety: and I will kill thy root with famine, and he shall slay thy remnant.	Then the firstborn of the poor will find pasture, and the needy will lie down in safety, but I will kill your root by famine, and your remnant will be slain.
ISA	14	31	성문이여 슬피 울지어다 성읍이여 부르짖을지어다 너 블레셋이여 다 소멸되게 되었도다 대저 연기가 북방에서 오는데 그 항오를 떨어져 행하는 자 없느니라	Howl, O gate; cry, O city; thou, whole Palestina, art dissolved: for there shall come from the north a smoke, and none shall be alone in his appointed times.	Wail, O gate! Cry out, O city! Melt away, all you Philistines! For a cloud of smoke comes from the north, and there are no stragglers in its ranks.
ISA	14	32	그 나라 사신들에게 어떻게 대답하겠느냐 여호와께서 시온을 세우셨으니 그의 백성의 곤고한 자들이 그 안에서 피난하리라 할 것이니라	What shall one then answer the messengers of the nation? That the Lord hath founded Zion, and the poor of his people shall trust in it.	What answer will be given to the envoys of that nation? “The LORD has founded Zion, where His afflicted people will find refuge.”
ISA	15	1	모압에 관한 경고라 하루 밤에 모압 알이 망하여 황폐할 것이며 하루 밤에 모압 길이 망하여 황폐할 것이라	The burden of Moab. Because in the night Ar of Moab is laid waste, and brought to silence; because in the night Kir of Moab is laid waste, and brought to silence;	This is the burden against Moab: Ar in Moab is ruined, destroyed in a night! Kir in Moab is devastated, destroyed in a night!
ISA	15	2	그들은 바잇과 디본 산당에 올라가서 울며 모압은 느보와 메드바를 위하여 통곡하도다 그들이 각각 머리털을 없이 하였고 수염을 깎았으며	He is gone up to Bajith, and to Dibon, the high places, to weep: Moab shall howl over Nebo, and over Medeba: on all their heads shall be baldness, and every beard cut off.	Dibon goes up to its temple to weep at its high places. Moab wails over Nebo, as well as over Medeba. Every head is shaved, every beard is cut off.
ISA	15	3	거리에서는 굵은 베로 몸을 동였으며 지붕과 넓은 곳에서는 각기 애통하여 심히 울며	In their streets they shall gird themselves with sackcloth: on the tops of their houses, and in their streets, every one shall howl, weeping abundantly.	In its streets they wear sackcloth; on the rooftops and in the public squares they all wail, falling down weeping.
ISA	15	4	헤스본과 엘르알레는 부르짖으며 그 소리는 야하스까지 들리니 그러므로 모압의 전사가 크게 부르짖으며 그 혼이 속에서 떨도다	And Heshbon shall cry, and Elealeh: their voice shall be heard even unto Jahaz: therefore the armed soldiers of Moab shall cry out; his life shall be grievous unto him.	Heshbon and Elealeh cry out; their voices are heard as far as Jahaz. Therefore the soldiers of Moab cry out; their souls tremble within.
ISA	15	5	내 마음이 모압을 위하여 부르짖는도다 그 귀인들은 소알과 에글랏 슬리시야로 도망하여 울며 루힛 비탈길로 올라가며 호로나임 길에서 패망을 부르짖으니	My heart shall cry out for Moab; his fugitives shall flee unto Zoar, an heifer of three years old: for by the mounting up of Luhith with weeping shall they go it up; for in the way of Horonaim they shall raise up a cry of destruction.	My heart cries out over Moab; her fugitives flee as far as Zoar, as far as Eglath-shelishiyah. With weeping they ascend the slope of Luhith; they lament their destruction on the road to Horonaim.
ISA	15	6	니므림 물이 마르고 풀이 시들었으며 연한 풀이 말라 청청한 것이 없음이로다	For the waters of Nimrim shall be desolate: for the hay is withered away, the grass faileth, there is no green thing.	The waters of Nimrim are dried up, and the grass is withered; the vegetation is gone, and the greenery is no more.
ISA	15	7	그러므로 그들이 얻은 재물과 쌓았던 것을 가지고 버드나무 시내를 건너리니	Therefore the abundance they have gotten, and that which they have laid up, shall they carry away to the brook of the willows.	So they carry their wealth and belongings over the Brook of the Willows.
ISA	15	8	이는 곡성이 모압 사방에 둘렸고 슬피 부르짖음이 에글라임에 이르며 부르짖음이 브엘엘림에 미치며	For the cry is gone round about the borders of Moab; the howling thereof unto Eglaim, and the howling thereof unto Beer–elim.	For their outcry echoes to the border of Moab. Their wailing reaches Eglaim; it is heard in Beer-elim.
ISA	15	9	디몬 물에는 피가 가득함이로다 그럴지라도 내가 디몬에 재앙을 더 내리되 모압에 도피한 자와 그 땅의 남은 자에게 사자를 보내리라	For the waters of Dimon shall be full of blood: for I will bring more upon Dimon, lions upon him that escapeth of Moab, and upon the remnant of the land.	The waters of Dimon are full of blood, but I will bring more upon Dimon— a lion upon the fugitives of Moab and upon the remnant of the land.
ISA	16	1	너희는 이 땅 치리자에게 어린 양들을 드리되 셀라에서부터 광야를 지나 딸 시온 산으로 보낼지니라	Send ye the lamb to the ruler of the land from Sela to the wilderness, unto the mount of the daughter of Zion.	Send the tribute lambs to the ruler of the land, from Sela in the desert to the mount of Daughter Zion.
ISA	16	2	모압의 여자들은 아르논 나루에서 떠다니는 새 같고 보금자리에서 흩어진 새 새끼 같을 것이라	For it shall be, that, as a wandering bird cast out of the nest, so the daughters of Moab shall be at the fords of Arnon.	Like fluttering birds pushed out of the nest, so are the daughters of Moab at the fords of the Arnon:
ISA	16	3	너는 모략을 베풀며 공의로 판결하며 오정 때에 밤 같이 그늘을 짓고 쫓겨난 자를 숨기며 도망한 자를 발각시키지 말며	Take counsel, execute judgment; make thy shadow as the night in the midst of the noonday; hide the outcasts; bewray not him that wandereth.	“Give us counsel; render a decision. Shelter us at noonday with shade as dark as night. Hide the refugees; do not betray the one who flees.
ISA	16	4	나의 쫓겨난 자들로 너와 함께 있게 하되 너 모압은 멸절하는 자 앞에서 그 피할 곳이 되라 대저 토색하는 자가 망하였고 멸절하는 자가 그쳤고 압제하는 자가 이 땅에서 멸절하였으며	Let mine outcasts dwell with thee, Moab; be thou a covert to them from the face of the spoiler: for the extortioner is at an end, the spoiler ceaseth, the oppressors are consumed out of the land.	Let my fugitives stay with you; be a refuge for Moab from the destroyer.” When the oppressor has gone, destruction has ceased, and the oppressors have vanished from the land,
ISA	16	5	다윗의 장막에 왕위는 인자함으로 굳게 설 것이요 그 위에 앉을 자는 충실함으로 판결하며 공평을 구하며 의를 신속히 행하리라	And in mercy shall the throne be established: and he shall sit upon it in truth in the tabernacle of David, judging, and seeking judgment, and hasting righteousness.	in loving devotion a throne will be established in the tent of David. A judge seeking justice and hastening righteousness will sit on it in faithfulness.
ISA	16	6	우리가 모압의 교만을 들었나니 심히 교만하도다 그의 거만하며 교만하며 분노함도 들었거니와 그 과장이 헛되도다	We have heard of the pride of Moab; he is very proud: even of his haughtiness, and his pride, and his wrath: but his lies shall not be so.	We have heard of Moab’s pomposity, his exceeding pride and conceit, his overflowing arrogance. But his boasting is empty.
ISA	16	7	그러므로 모압이 모압을 위하여 통곡하되 다 통곡하며 길하레셋 건포도 떡을 위하여 그들이 슬퍼하며 심히 근심하리니	Therefore shall Moab howl for Moab, every one shall howl: for the foundations of Kir–hareseth shall ye mourn; surely they are stricken.	Therefore let Moab wail; let them wail together for Moab. Moan for the raisin cakes of Kir-hareseth, you who are utterly stricken.
ISA	16	8	이는 헤스본의 밭과 십마의 포도나무가 말랐음이라 전에는 그 가지가 야셀에 미쳐 광야에 이르고 그 싹이 자라서 바다를 건넜더니 이제 열국 주권자들이 그 좋은 가지를 꺾었도다	For the fields of Heshbon languish, and the vine of Sibmah: the lords of the heathen have broken down the principal plants thereof, they are come even unto Jazer, they wandered through the wilderness: her branches are stretched out, they are gone over the sea.	For the fields of Heshbon have withered, along with the grapevines of Sibmah. The rulers of the nations have trampled its choicest vines, which had reached as far as Jazer and spread toward the desert. Their shoots had spread out and passed over the sea.
ISA	16	9	그러므로 내가 야셀의 울음처럼 십마의 포도나무를 위하여 울리라 헤스본이여 엘르알레여 나의 눈물로 너를 적시리니 너의 여름 실과, 너의 농작물에 떠드는 소리가 일어남이니라	Therefore I will bewail with the weeping of Jazer the vine of Sibmah: I will water thee with my tears, O Heshbon, and Elealeh: for the shouting for thy summer fruits and for thy harvest is fallen.	So I weep with Jazer for the vines of Sibmah; I drench Heshbon and Elealeh with my tears. Triumphant shouts have fallen silent over your summer fruit and your harvest.
ISA	16	10	즐거움과 기쁨이 기름진 밭에서 떠났고 포도원에는 노래와 즐거운 소리가 없어지겠고 틀에는 포도를 밟을 사람이 없으리니 이는 내가 그 소리를 그치게 하였음이라	And gladness is taken away, and joy out of the plentiful field; and in the vineyards there shall be no singing, neither shall there be shouting: the treaders shall tread out no wine in their presses; I have made their vintage shouting to cease.	Joy and gladness are removed from the orchard; no one sings or shouts in the vineyards. No one tramples the grapes in the winepresses; I have put an end to the cheering.
ISA	16	11	이러므로 나의 마음이 모압을 위하여 수금 같이 소리를 발하며 나의 창자가 길하레셋을 위하여 그러하도다	Wherefore my bowels shall sound like an harp for Moab, and mine inward parts for Kir–haresh.	Therefore my heart laments for Moab like a harp, my inmost being for Kir-heres.
ISA	16	12	모압 사람이 그 산당에서 피곤하도록 봉사하며 자기 성소에 나아가서 기도할지라도 무효하리로다	And it shall come to pass, when it is seen that Moab is weary on the high place, that he shall come to his sanctuary to pray; but he shall not prevail.	When Moab appears on the high place, when he wearies himself and enters his sanctuary to pray, it will do him no good.
ISA	16	13	이는 여호와께서 전에 모압을 들어 하신 말씀이어니와	This is the word that the Lord hath spoken concerning Moab since that time.	This is the message that the LORD spoke earlier concerning Moab.
ISA	16	14	이제 여호와께서 말씀하여 가라사대 품군의 정한 해와 같이 삼 년내에 모압의 영화와 그 큰 무리가 능욕을 당할지라 그 남은 수가 심히 적어 소용이 없이 되리라 하시도다	But now the Lord hath spoken, saying, Within three years, as the years of an hireling, and the glory of Moab shall be contemned, with all that great multitude; and the remnant shall be very small and feeble.	And now the LORD says, “In three years, as a hired worker counts the years, Moab’s splendor will become an object of contempt, with all her many people. And those who are left will be few and feeble.”
ISA	17	1	다메섹에 관한 경고라 보라 다메섹이 장차 성읍 모양을 이루지 못하고 무너진 무더기가 될 것이라	The burden of Damascus. Behold, Damascus is taken away from being a city, and it shall be a ruinous heap.	This is the burden against Damascus: “Behold, Damascus is no longer a city; it has become a heap of ruins.
ISA	17	2	아로엘의 성읍들이 버림을 당하리니 양 무리를 치는 곳이 되어 양이 눕되 놀라게 할 자가 없을 것이며	The cities of Aroer are forsaken: they shall be for flocks, which shall lie down, and none shall make them afraid.	The cities of Aroer are forsaken; they will be left to the flocks, which will lie down with no one to fear.
ISA	17	3	에브라임의 요새와 다메섹 나라와 아람의 남은 백성이 멸절하여 이스라엘 자손의 영광 같이 되리라 만군의 여호와의 말씀이니라	The fortress also shall cease from Ephraim, and the kingdom from Damascus, and the remnant of Syria: they shall be as the glory of the children of Israel, saith the Lord of hosts.	The fortress will disappear from Ephraim, and the sovereignty from Damascus. The remnant of Aram will be like the splendor of the Israelites,” declares the LORD of Hosts.
ISA	17	4	그 날에 야곱의 영광이 쇠하고 그 살찐 몸이 파리하리니	And in that day it shall come to pass, that the glory of Jacob shall be made thin, and the fatness of his flesh shall wax lean.	“In that day the splendor of Jacob will fade, and the fat of his body will waste away,
ISA	17	5	마치 추수하는 자가 곡식을 거두어 가지고 그 손으로 이삭을 벤 것 같고 르바임 골짜기에서 이삭을 주운 것 같으리라	And it shall be as when the harvestman gathereth the corn, and reapeth the ears with his arm; and it shall be as he that gathereth ears in the valley of Rephaim.	as the reaper gathers the standing grain and harvests the ears with his arm, as one gleans heads of grain in the Valley of Rephaim.
ISA	17	6	그러나 오히려 주울 것이 남으리니 감람나무를 흔들 때에 가장 높은 가지 꼭대기에 실과 이 삼 개가 남음 같겠고 무성한 나무의 가장 먼 가지에 사 오 개가 남음 같으리라 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와의 말씀이니라	Yet gleaning grapes shall be left in it, as the shaking of an olive tree, two or three berries in the top of the uppermost bough, four or five in the outmost fruitful branches thereof, saith the Lord God of Israel.	Yet gleanings will remain, like an olive tree that has been beaten— two or three berries atop the tree, four or five on its fruitful branches,” declares the LORD, the God of Israel.
ISA	17	7	그 날에 사람이 자기를 지으신 자를 쳐다보겠으며 그 눈이 이스라엘의 거룩하신 자를 바라보겠고	At that day shall a man look to his Maker, and his eyes shall have respect to the Holy One of Israel.	In that day men will look to their Maker and turn their eyes to the Holy One of Israel.
ISA	17	8	자기 손으로 만든 단을 쳐다보지 아니하며 자기 손가락으로 지은 아세라나 태양상을 바라보지 아니할 것이며	And he shall not look to the altars, the work of his hands, neither shall respect that which his fingers have made, either the groves, or the images.	They will not look to the altars they have fashioned with their hands or to the Asherahs and incense altars they have made with their fingers.
ISA	17	9	그 날에 그 견고한 성읍들이 옛적에 이스라엘 자손 앞에서 버린바 된 수풀 속의 처소와 작은 산꼭대기의 처소 같아서 황폐하리니	In that day shall his strong cities be as a forsaken bough, and an uppermost branch, which they left because of the children of Israel: and there shall be desolation.	In that day their strong cities will be like forsaken thickets and summits, abandoned to the Israelites and to utter desolation.
ISA	17	10	이는 네가 자기의 구원의 하나님을 잊어버리며 자기의 능력의 반석을 마음에 두지 않은 까닭이라 그러므로 네가 기뻐하는 식물을 심으며 이방의 가지도 이종하고	Because thou hast forgotten the God of thy salvation, and hast not been mindful of the rock of thy strength, therefore shalt thou plant pleasant plants, and shalt set it with strange slips:	For you have forgotten the God of your salvation and failed to remember the Rock of your refuge. Therefore, though you cultivate delightful plots and set out cuttings from exotic vines—
ISA	17	11	네가 심는 날에 울타리로 두르고 아침에 너의 씨로 잘 발육하도록 하였으나 근심과 심한 슬픔의 날에 농작물이 없어지리라	In the day shalt thou make thy plant to grow, and in the morning shalt thou make thy seed to flourish: but the harvest shall be a heap in the day of grief and of desperate sorrow.	though on the day you plant you make them grow, and on that morning you help your seed sprout— yet the harvest will vanish on the day of disease and incurable pain.
ISA	17	12	슬프다 많은 민족이 소동하였으되 바다 파도의 뛰노는 소리 같이 그들이 소동하였고 열방이 충돌하였으되 큰 물의 몰려옴 같이 그들도 충돌하였도다	Woe to the multitude of many people, which make a noise like the noise of the seas; and to the rushing of nations, that make a rushing like the rushing of mighty waters!	Alas, the tumult of many peoples; they rage like the roaring seas and clamoring nations; they rumble like the crashing of mighty waters.
ISA	17	13	열방이 충돌하기를 많은 물의 몰려옴과 같이 하나 주께서 그들을 꾸짖으시리니 그들이 멀리 도망함이 산에 겨가 바람 앞에 흩어짐 같겠고 폭풍 앞에 떠도는 티끌 같을 것이라	The nations shall rush like the rushing of many waters: but God shall rebuke them, and they shall flee far off, and shall be chased as the chaff of the mountains before the wind, and like a rolling thing before the whirlwind.	The nations rage like the rush of many waters. He rebukes them, and they flee far away, driven before the wind like chaff on the hills, like tumbleweeds before a gale.
ISA	17	14	보라 저녁에 두려움을 당하고 아침 전에 그들이 없어졌나니 이는 우리를 노략한 자의 분깃이요 우리를 강탈한 자의 보응이니라	And behold at eveningtide trouble; and before the morning he is not. This is the portion of them that spoil us, and the lot of them that rob us.	In the evening, there is sudden terror! Before morning, they are no more! This is the portion of those who loot us and the lot of those who plunder us.
ISA	18	1	슬프다 구스의 강 건너편 날개치는 소리 나는 땅이여	Woe to the land shadowing with wings, which is beyond the rivers of Ethiopia:	Woe to the land of whirring wings, along the rivers of Cush,
ISA	18	2	갈대 배를 물에 띄우고 그 사자를 수로로 보내며 이르기를 너희 경첩한 사자들아 너희는 강들이 흘러 나누인 나라로 가되 장대하고 준수한 백성 곧 시초부터 두려움이 되며 강성하여 대적을 밟는 백성에게로 가라 하도다	That sendeth ambassadors by the sea, even in vessels of bulrushes upon the waters, saying, Go, ye swift messengers, to a nation scattered and peeled, to a people terrible from their beginning hitherto; a nation meted out and trodden down, whose land the rivers have spoiled!	which sends couriers by sea, in papyrus vessels on the waters. Go, swift messengers, to a people tall and smooth-skinned, to a people widely feared, to a powerful nation of strange speech, whose land is divided by rivers.
ISA	18	3	세상의 모든 거민, 지상에 거하는 너희여 산들 위에 기호를 세우거든 너희는 보고 나팔을 불거든 너희는 들을지니라	All ye inhabitants of the world, and dwellers on the earth, see ye, when he lifteth up an ensign on the mountains; and when he bloweth a trumpet, hear ye.	All you people of the world and dwellers of the earth, when a banner is raised on the mountains, you will see it; when a ram’s horn sounds, you will hear it.
ISA	18	4	여호와께서 내게 이르시되 내가 나의 처소에서 종용히 감찰함이 쬐이는 일광 같고 가을 더위에 운무 같도다	For so the Lord said unto me, I will take my rest, and I will consider in my dwelling place like a clear heat upon herbs, and like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.	For this is what the LORD has told me: “I will quietly look on from My dwelling place, like shimmering heat in the sunshine, like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.”
ISA	18	5	추수하기 전에 꽃이 떨어지고 포도가 맺혀 익어 갈 때에 내가 낫으로 그 연한 가지를 베며 퍼진 가지를 찍어버려서	For afore the harvest, when the bud is perfect, and the sour grape is ripening in the flower, he shall both cut off the sprigs with pruning hooks, and take away and cut down the branches.	For before the harvest, when the blossom is gone and the flower becomes a ripening grape, He will cut off the shoots with a pruning knife and remove and discard the branches.
ISA	18	6	산의 독수리들에게와 땅의 들짐승들에게 끼쳐주리니 산의 독수리들이 그것으로 과하하며 땅의 들짐승들이 다 그것으로 과동하리라 하셨음이니라	They shall be left together unto the fowls of the mountains, and to the beasts of the earth: and the fowls shall summer upon them, and all the beasts of the earth shall winter upon them.	They will all be left to the mountain birds of prey, and to the beasts of the land. The birds will feed on them in summer, and all the wild animals in winter.
ISA	18	7	그 때에 강들이 흘러 나누인 나라의 장대하고 준수하며 시초부터 두려움이 되며 강성하여 대적을 밟는 백성에게서 만군의 여호와께 드릴 예물을 가지고 만군의 여호와의 이름을 두신 곳 시온 산에 이르리라	In that time shall the present be brought unto the Lord of hosts of a people scattered and peeled, and from a people terrible from their beginning hitherto; a nation meted out and trodden under foot, whose land the rivers have spoiled, to the place of the name of the Lord of hosts, the mount Zion.	At that time gifts will be brought to the LORD of Hosts— from a people tall and smooth-skinned, from a people widely feared, from a powerful nation of strange speech, whose land is divided by rivers— to Mount Zion, the place of the Name of the LORD of Hosts.
ISA	19	1	애굽에 관한 경고라 보라 여호와께서 빠른 구름을 타고 애굽에 임하시리니 애굽의 우상들이 그 앞에서 떨겠고 애굽인의 마음이 그 속에서 녹으리로다	The burden of Egypt. Behold, the Lord rideth upon a swift cloud, and shall come into Egypt: and the idols of Egypt shall be moved at his presence, and the heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst of it.	This is the burden against Egypt: Behold, the LORD rides on a swift cloud; He is coming to Egypt. The idols of Egypt will tremble before Him, and the hearts of the Egyptians will melt within them.
ISA	19	2	그가 애굽인을 격동하사 애굽인을 치게 하시리니 그들이 각기 형제를 치며 각기 이웃을 칠 것이요 성읍이 성읍을 치며 나라가 나라를 칠 것이며	And I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians: and they shall fight every one against his brother, and every one against his neighbour; city against city, and kingdom against kingdom.	“So I will incite Egyptian against Egyptian; brother will fight against brother, neighbor against neighbor, city against city, and kingdom against kingdom.
ISA	19	3	애굽인의 정신이 그 속에서 쇠약할 것이요 그 도모는 그의 파하신 바가 되리니 그들이 우상과 마술사와 신접한 자와 요술객에게 물으리로다	And the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst thereof; and I will destroy the counsel thereof: and they shall seek to the idols, and to the charmers, and to them that have familiar spirits, and to the wizards.	Then the spirit of the Egyptians will be emptied out from among them, and I will frustrate their plans, so that they will resort to idols and spirits of the dead, to mediums and spiritists.
ISA	19	4	그가 애굽인을 잔인한 군주의 손에 붙이시리니 포학한 왕이 그들을 치리하리라 주 만군의 여호와의 말씀이니라	And the Egyptians will I give over into the hand of a cruel lord; and a fierce king shall rule over them, saith the Lord, the Lord of hosts.	I will deliver the Egyptians into the hands of harsh masters, and a fierce king will rule over them,” declares the Lord GOD of Hosts.
ISA	19	5	바닷물이 없어지겠고 강이 잦아서 마르겠고	And the waters shall fail from the sea, and the river shall be wasted and dried up.	The waters of the Nile will dry up, and the riverbed will be parched and empty.
ISA	19	6	강들에서는 악취가 나겠고 애굽 시냇물은 줄어들고 마르므로 달과 같이 시들겠으며	And they shall turn the rivers far away; and the brooks of defence shall be emptied and dried up: the reeds and flags shall wither.	The canals will stink; the streams of Egypt will trickle and dry up; the reeds and rushes will wither.
ISA	19	7	나일 가까운 곳 나일 언덕의 초장과 나일강 가까운 곡식 밭이 다 말라서 날아 없어질 것이며	The paper reeds by the brooks, by the mouth of the brooks, and every thing sown by the brooks, shall wither, be driven away, and be no more.	The bulrushes by the Nile, by the mouth of the river, and all the fields sown along the Nile, will wither, blow away, and be no more.
ISA	19	8	어부들은 탄식하며 무릇 나일강에 낚시를 던지는 자는 슬퍼하며 물에 그물을 치는 자는 피곤할 것이며	The fishers also shall mourn, and all they that cast angle into the brooks shall lament, and they that spread nets upon the waters shall languish.	Then the fishermen will mourn, all who cast a hook into the Nile will lament, and those who spread nets on the waters will pine away.
ISA	19	9	세마포를 만드는 자와 백목을 짜는 자들이 수치를 당할 것이며	Moreover they that work in fine flax, and they that weave networks, shall be confounded.	The workers in flax will be dismayed, and the weavers of fine linen will turn pale.
ISA	19	10	애굽의 기둥이 부숴지고 품꾼들이 다 마음에 근심하리라	And they shall be broken in the purposes thereof, all that make sluices and ponds for fish.	The workers in cloth will be dejected, and all the hired workers will be sick at heart.
ISA	19	11	소안의 방백은 지극히 어리석었고 바로의 가장 지혜로운 모사의 모략은 우준하여졌으니 너희가 어떻게 바로에게 이르기를 나는 지혜로운 자들의 자손이라는 옛 왕들의 후예라 할 수 있으랴	Surely the princes of Zoan are fools, the counsel of the wise counsellors of Pharaoh is become brutish: how say ye unto Pharaoh, I am the son of the wise, the son of ancient kings?	The princes of Zoan are mere fools; Pharaoh’s wise counselors give senseless advice. How can you say to Pharaoh, “I am one of the wise, a son of eastern kings”?
ISA	19	12	너의 지혜로운 자가 어디 있느냐 그들이 만군의 여호와께서 애굽에 대하여 정하신 뜻을 알 것이요 곧 네게 고할 것이니라	Where are they? where are thy wise men? and let them tell thee now, and let them know what the Lord of hosts hath purposed upon Egypt.	Where are your wise men now? Let them tell you and reveal what the LORD of Hosts has planned against Egypt.
ISA	19	13	소안의 방백들은 어리석었고 놉의 방백들은 미혹되었도다 그들은 애굽 지파들의 모퉁이 돌이어늘 애굽으로 그릇가게 하였도다	The princes of Zoan are become fools, the princes of Noph are deceived; they have also seduced Egypt, even they that are the stay of the tribes thereof.	The princes of Zoan have become fools; the princes of Memphis are deceived. The cornerstones of her tribes have led Egypt astray.
ISA	19	14	여호와께서 그 가운데 사특한 마음을 섞으셨으므로 그들이 애굽으로 매사에 잘못 가게 함이 취한 자가 토하면서 비틀거림 같게 하였으니	The Lord hath mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof: and they have caused Egypt to err in every work thereof, as a drunken man staggereth in his vomit.	The LORD has poured into her a spirit of confusion. Egypt has been led astray in all she does, as a drunkard staggers through his own vomit.
ISA	19	15	애굽에서 머리나 꼬리나 종려나무 가지나 갈대나 아무 할 일이 없으리라	Neither shall there be any work for Egypt, which the head or tail, branch or rush, may do.	There is nothing Egypt can do— head or tail, palm or reed.
ISA	19	16	그 날에 애굽인이 부녀와 같을 것이라 그들이 만군의 여호와의 흔드시는 손이 그 위에 흔들림을 인하여 떨며 두려워할 것이며	In that day shall Egypt be like unto women: and it shall be afraid and fear because of the shaking of the hand of the Lord of hosts, which he shaketh over it.	In that day the Egyptians will be like women. They will tremble with fear beneath the uplifted hand of the LORD of Hosts, when He brandishes it against them.
ISA	19	17	유다의 땅은 애굽의 두려움이 되리니 이는 만군의 여호와께서 애굽에 대하여 정하신 모략을 인함이라 그 소문을 듣는 자마다 떨리라	And the land of Judah shall be a terror unto Egypt, every one that maketh mention thereof shall be afraid in himself, because of the counsel of the Lord of hosts, which he hath determined against it.	The land of Judah will bring terror to Egypt; whenever Judah is mentioned, Egypt will tremble over what the LORD of Hosts has planned against it.
ISA	19	18	그 날에 애굽 땅에 가나안 방언을 말하며 만군의 여호와를 가리켜 맹세하는 다섯 성읍이 있을 것이며 그 중 하나를 장망성이라 칭하리라	In that day shall five cities in the land of Egypt speak the language of Canaan, and swear to the Lord of hosts; one shall be called, The city of destruction.	In that day five cities in the land of Egypt will speak the language of Canaan and swear allegiance to the LORD of Hosts. One of them will be called the City of the Sun.
ISA	19	19	그 날에 애굽 땅 중앙에는 여호와를 위하여 제단이 있겠고 그 변경에는 여호와를 위하여 기둥이 있을 것이요	In that day shall there be an altar to the Lord in the midst of the land of Egypt, and a pillar at the border thereof to the Lord.	In that day there will be an altar to the LORD in the center of the land of Egypt, and a pillar to the LORD near her border.
ISA	19	20	이것이 애굽 땅에서 만군의 여호와를 위하여 표적과 증거가 되리니 이는 그들이 그 압박하는 자의 연고로 여호와께 부르짖겠고 여호와께서는 한 구원자, 보호자를 보내사 그들을 건지실 것임이라	And it shall be for a sign and for a witness unto the Lord of hosts in the land of Egypt: for they shall cry unto the Lord because of the oppressors, and he shall send them a saviour, and a great one, and he shall deliver them.	It will be a sign and a witness to the LORD of Hosts in the land of Egypt. When they cry out to the LORD because of their oppressors, He will send them a savior and defender to rescue them.
ISA	19	21	여호와께서 자기를 애굽에 알게 하시리니 그 날에 애굽인이 여호와를 알고 제물과 예물을 그에게 드리고 경배할 것이요 여호와께 서원하고 그대로 행하리라	And the Lord shall be known to Egypt, and the Egyptians shall know the Lord in that day, and shall do sacrifice and oblation; yea, they shall vow a vow unto the Lord, and perform it.	The LORD will make Himself known to Egypt, and on that day Egypt will acknowledge the LORD. They will worship with sacrifices and offerings; they will make vows to the LORD and fulfill them.
ISA	19	22	여호와께서 애굽을 치실 것이라도 치시고는 고치실 것인고로 그들이 여호와께로 돌아올 것이라 여호와께서 그 간구함을 들으시고 그를 고쳐주시리라	And the Lord shall smite Egypt: he shall smite and heal it: and they shall return even to the Lord, and he shall be intreated of them, and shall heal them.	And the LORD will strike Egypt with a plague; He will strike them but heal them. They will turn to the LORD, and He will hear their prayers and heal them.
ISA	19	23	그 날에 애굽에서 앗수르로 통하는 대로가 있어 앗수르 사람은 애굽으로 가겠고 애굽 사람은 앗수르로 갈 것이며 애굽 사람이 앗수르 사람과 함께 경배하리라	In that day shall there be a highway out of Egypt to Assyria, and the Assyrian shall come into Egypt, and the Egyptian into Assyria, and the Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians.	In that day there will be a highway from Egypt to Assyria. The Assyrians will go to Egypt, and the Egyptians to Assyria. The Egyptians and Assyrians will worship together.
ISA	19	24	그 날에 이스라엘이 애굽과 앗수르로 더불어 셋이 세계 중에 복이 되리니	In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and with Assyria, even a blessing in the midst of the land:	In that day Israel will join a three-party alliance with Egypt and Assyria—a blessing upon the earth.
ISA	19	25	이는 만군의 여호와께서 복을 주어 가라사대 나의 백성 애굽이여, 나의 손으로 지은 앗수르여, 나의 산업 이스라엘이여, 복이 있을 지어다 하실 것임이니라	Whom the Lord of hosts shall bless, saying, Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance.	The LORD of Hosts will bless them, saying, “Blessed be Egypt My people, Assyria My handiwork, and Israel My inheritance.”
ISA	20	1	앗수르 왕 사르곤이 군대장관을 아스돗으로 보내매 그가 와서 아스돗을 쳐서 취하던 해	In the year that Tartan came unto Ashdod, (when Sargon the king of Assyria sent him,) and fought against Ashdod, and took it;	Before the year that the chief commander, sent by Sargon king of Assyria, came to Ashdod and attacked and captured it,
ISA	20	2	곧 그 때에 여호와께서 아모스의 아들 이사야에게 일러 가라사대 갈지어다 네 허리에서 베를 끄르고 네 발에서 신을 벗을지니라 하시매 그가 그대로 하여 벗은 몸과 벗은 발로 행하니라	At the same time spake the Lord by Isaiah the son of Amoz, saying, Go and loose the sackcloth from off thy loins, and put off thy shoe from thy foot. And he did so, walking naked and barefoot.	the LORD had already spoken through Isaiah son of Amoz, saying, “Go, remove the sackcloth from your waist and the sandals from your feet.” And Isaiah did so, walking around naked and barefoot.
ISA	20	3	여호와께서 가라사대 나의 종 이사야가 삼 년동안 벗은 몸과 벗은 발로 행하여 애굽과 구스에 대하여 예표와 기적이 되게 되었느니라	And the Lord said, Like as my servant Isaiah hath walked naked and barefoot three years for a sign and wonder upon Egypt and upon Ethiopia;	Then the LORD said, “Just as My servant Isaiah has gone naked and barefoot for three years as a sign and omen against Egypt and Cush,
ISA	20	4	이와 같이 애굽의 포로와 구스의 사로잡힌 자가 앗수르 왕에게 끌려 갈 때에 젊은 자나 늙은 자가 다 벗은 몸, 벗은 발로 볼기까지 드러내어 애굽의 수치를 뵈이리니	So shall the king of Assyria lead away the Egyptians prisoners, and the Ethiopians captives, young and old, naked and barefoot, even with their buttocks uncovered, to the shame of Egypt.	so the king of Assyria will lead away the captives of Egypt and the exiles of Cush, young and old alike, naked and barefoot, with bared buttocks—to Egypt’s shame.
ISA	20	5	그들이 그 바라던 구스와 자랑하던 애굽을 인하여 놀라고 부끄러워할 것이라	And they shall be afraid and ashamed of Ethiopia their expectation, and of Egypt their glory.	Those who made Cush their hope and Egypt their boast will be dismayed and ashamed.
ISA	20	6	그 날에 이 해변 거민이 말하기를 우리가 믿던 나라 곧 우리가 앗수르 왕에게서 벗어나기를 바라고 달려가서 도움을 구하던 나라가 이같이 되었은즉 우리가 어찌 능히 피하리요 하리라	And the inhabitant of this isle shall say in that day, Behold, such is our expectation, whither we flee for help to be delivered from the king of Assyria: and how shall we escape?	And on that day the dwellers of this coastland will say, ‘See what has happened to our source of hope, those to whom we fled for help and deliverance from the king of Assyria! How then can we escape?’”
ISA	21	1	해변 광야에 관한 경고라 적병이 광야에서 두려운 땅에서 남방 회리바람 같이 몰려왔도다	The burden of the desert of the sea. As whirlwinds in the south pass through; so it cometh from the desert, from a terrible land.	This is the burden against the Desert by the Sea: Like whirlwinds sweeping through the Negev, an invader comes from the desert, from a land of terror.
ISA	21	2	혹독한 묵시가 내게 보였도다 주께서 가라사대 속이는 자는 속이고 약탈하는 자는 약탈하도다 엘람이여 올라가고 매대여 에워싸라 그의 모든 탄식을 내가 그치게 하였노라 하시도다	A grievous vision is declared unto me; the treacherous dealer dealeth treacherously, and the spoiler spoileth. Go up, O Elam: besiege, O Media; all the sighing thereof have I made to cease.	A dire vision is declared to me: “The traitor still betrays, and the destroyer still destroys. Go up, O Elam! Lay siege, O Media! I will put an end to all her groaning.”
ISA	21	3	이러므로 나의 요통이 심하여 임산한 여인의 고통 같은 고통이 내게 임하였으므로 고통으로 인하여 듣지 못하며 놀라서 보지 못하도다	Therefore are my loins filled with pain: pangs have taken hold upon me, as the pangs of a woman that travaileth: I was bowed down at the hearing of it; I was dismayed at the seeing of it.	Therefore my body is filled with anguish. Pain grips me, like the pains of a woman in labor. I am bewildered to hear, I am dismayed to see.
ISA	21	4	내 마음이 진동하며 두려움이 나를 놀래며 희망의 서광이 변하여 내게 떨림이 되도다	My heart panted, fearfulness affrighted me: the night of my pleasure hath he turned into fear unto me.	My heart falters; fear makes me tremble. The twilight of my desire has turned to horror.
ISA	21	5	그들이 식탁을 베풀고 파수꾼을 세우고 먹고 마시도다 너희 방백들아 일어나 방패에 기름을 바를지어다	Prepare the table, watch in the watchtower, eat, drink: arise, ye princes, and anoint the shield.	They prepare a table, they lay out a carpet, they eat, they drink! Rise up, O princes, oil the shields!
ISA	21	6	주께서 내게 이르시되 가서 파수꾼을 세우고 그 보는 것을 고하게 하되	For thus hath the Lord said unto me, Go, set a watchman, let him declare what he seeth.	For this is what the Lord says to me: “Go, post a lookout and have him report what he sees.
ISA	21	7	마병대가 쌍쌍이 오는 것과 나귀떼와 약대떼를 보거든 자세히 유심히 들으라 하셨더니	And he saw a chariot with a couple of horsemen, a chariot of asses, and a chariot of camels; and he hearkened diligently with much heed:	When he sees chariots with teams of horsemen, riders on donkeys, riders on camels, he must be alert, fully alert.”
ISA	21	8	파수꾼이 사자 같이 부르짖기를 주여 내가 낮에 늘 망대에 섰었고 밤이 맞도록 파수하는 곳에 있었더니	And he cried, A lion: My lord, I stand continually upon the watchtower in the daytime, and I am set in my ward whole nights:	Then the lookout shouted: “Day after day, my lord, I stand on the watchtower; night after night I stay at my post.
ISA	21	9	마병대가 쌍쌍이 오나이다 그가 대답하여 가라사대 함락되었도다 함락되었도다 바벨론이여 그 신들의 조각한 형상이 다 부숴져 땅에 떨어졌도다 하시도다	And, behold, here cometh a chariot of men, with a couple of horsemen. And he answered and said, Babylon is fallen, is fallen; and all the graven images of her gods he hath broken unto the ground.	Look, here come the riders, horsemen in pairs.” And one answered, saying: “Fallen, fallen is Babylon! All the images of her gods lie shattered on the ground!”
ISA	21	10	너 나의 타작한 것이여 나의 마당의 곡식이여 내가 이스라엘의 하나님 만군의 여호와께 들은 대로 너희에게 고하였노라	O my threshing, and the corn of my floor: that which I have heard of the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, have I declared unto you.	O my people, crushed on the threshing floor, I tell you what I have heard from the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel.
ISA	21	11	두마에 관한 경고라 사람이 세일에서 나를 부르되 파수꾼이여 밤이 어떻게 되었느뇨 파수꾼이여 밤이 어떻게 되었느뇨	The burden of Dumah. He calleth to me out of Seir, Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night?	This is the burden against Dumah: One calls to me from Seir, “Watchman, what is left of the night? Watchman, what is left of the night?”
ISA	21	12	파수꾼이 가로되 아침이 오나니 밤도 오리라 네가 물으려거든 물으라 너희는 돌아올지니라	The watchman said, The morning cometh, and also the night: if ye will enquire, enquire ye: return, come.	The watchman replies, “Morning has come, but also the night. If you would inquire, then inquire. Come back yet again.”
ISA	21	13	아라비아에 관한 경고라 드단 대상이여 너희가 아라비아 수풀에서 유숙하리라	The burden upon Arabia. In the forest in Arabia shall ye lodge, O ye travelling companies of Dedanim.	This is the burden against Arabia: In the thickets of Arabia you must lodge, O caravans of Dedanites.
ISA	21	14	데마 땅의 거민들아 물을 가져다가 목마른 자에게 주고 떡을 가지고 도피하는 자를 영접하라	The inhabitants of the land of Tema brought water to him that was thirsty, they prevented with their bread him that fled.	Bring water for the thirsty, O dwellers of Tema; meet the refugees with food.
ISA	21	15	그들이 칼날을 피하며 뺀 칼과 당긴 활과 전쟁의 어려움에서 도망하였음이니라	For they fled from the swords, from the drawn sword, and from the bent bow, and from the grievousness of war.	For they flee from the sword— the sword that is drawn— from the bow that is bent, and from the stress of battle.
ISA	21	16	주께서 이같이 내게 이르시되 품군의 정한 기한 같이 일 년내에 게달의 영광이 다 쇠멸하리니	For thus hath the Lord said unto me, Within a year, according to the years of an hireling, and all the glory of Kedar shall fail:	For this is what the Lord says to me: “Within one year, as a hired worker would count it, all the glory of Kedar will be gone.
ISA	21	17	게달 자손 중 활 가진 용사의 남은 수가 적으리라 하시니라 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와의 말씀이니라	And the residue of the number of archers, the mighty men of the children of Kedar, shall be diminished: for the Lord God of Israel hath spoken it.	The remaining archers, the warriors of Kedar, will be few.” For the LORD, the God of Israel, has spoken.
ISA	22	1	이상 골짜기에 관한 경고라 네가 지붕에 올라감은 어찜인고	The burden of the valley of vision. What aileth thee now, that thou art wholly gone up to the housetops?	This is the burden against the Valley of Vision: What ails you now, that you have all gone up to the rooftops,
ISA	22	2	훤화하며 떠들던 성, 즐거워하던 고을이여 너의 죽임을 당한 자가 칼에 죽은 것도 아니요 전쟁에 사망한 것도 아니며	Thou that art full of stirs, a tumultuous city, a joyous city: thy slain men are not slain with the sword, nor dead in battle.	O city of commotion, O town of revelry? Your slain did not die by the sword, nor were they killed in battle.
ISA	22	3	너의 관원들은 다 함께 도망하였다가 활을 버리고 결박을 당하였고 너의 멀리 도망한 자도 발견되어 다 함께 결박을 당하였도다	All thy rulers are fled together, they are bound by the archers: all that are found in thee are bound together, which have fled from far.	All your rulers have fled together, captured without a bow. All your fugitives were captured together, having fled to a distant place.
ISA	22	4	이러므로 내가 말하노니 돌이켜 나를 보지 말지어다 나는 슬피 통곡하겠노라 내 딸 백성이 패멸하였음을 인하여 나를 위로하려고 힘쓰지 말지니라	Therefore said I, Look away from me; I will weep bitterly, labour not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of the daughter of my people.	Therefore I said, “Turn away from me, let me weep bitterly! Do not try to console me over the destruction of the daughter of my people.”
ISA	22	5	이상의 골짜기에 주 만군의 여호와께로서 이르는 분요와 밟힘과 혼란의 날이여 성벽의 무너뜨림과 산악에 사무치는 부르짖는 소리로다	For it is a day of trouble, and of treading down, and of perplexity by the Lord God of hosts in the valley of vision, breaking down the walls, and of crying to the mountains.	For the Lord GOD of Hosts has set a day of tumult and trampling and confusion in the Valley of Vision— of breaking down the walls and crying to the mountains.
ISA	22	6	엘람 사람은 전통을 졌고 병거탄 자와 마병이 함께 하였고 기르 사람은 방패를 들어 내었으니	And Elam bare the quiver with chariots of men and horsemen, and Kir uncovered the shield.	Elam takes up a quiver, with chariots and horsemen, and Kir uncovers the shield.
ISA	22	7	병거는 너의 아름다운 골짜기에 가득하였고 마병은 성문에 정렬되었도다	And it shall come to pass, that thy choicest valleys shall be full of chariots, and the horsemen shall set themselves in array at the gate.	Your choicest valleys are full of chariots, and horsemen are posted at the gates.
ISA	22	8	그가 유다에게 덮였던 것을 벗기매 이 날에야 네가 수풀 곳간의 병기를 바라보았고	And he discovered the covering of Judah, and thou didst look in that day to the armour of the house of the forest.	He has uncovered the defenses of Judah. On that day you looked to the weapons in the House of the Forest.
ISA	22	9	너희가 다윗성의 무너진 곳이 많은 것도 보며 너희가 아래 못의 물도 모으며	Ye have seen also the breaches of the city of David, that they are many: and ye gathered together the waters of the lower pool.	You saw that there were many breaches in the walls of the City of David. You collected water from the lower pool.
ISA	22	10	또 예루살렘의 가옥을 계수하며 그 가옥을 헐어 성벽을 견고케도 하며	And ye have numbered the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses have ye broken down to fortify the wall.	You counted the houses of Jerusalem and tore them down to strengthen the wall.
ISA	22	11	너희가 또 옛못의 물을 위하여 두 성벽 사이에 저수지를 만들었느니라 그러나 너희가 이 일을 하신 자를 앙망하지 아니하였고 이 일을 옛적부터 경영하신 자를 존경하지 아니하였느니라	Ye made also a ditch between the two walls for the water of the old pool: but ye have not looked unto the maker thereof, neither had respect unto him that fashioned it long ago.	You built a reservoir between the walls for the waters of the ancient pool, but you did not look to the One who made it, or consider Him who planned it long ago.
ISA	22	12	그 날에 주 만군의 여호와께서 명하사 통곡하며 애호하며 머리털을 뜯으며 굵은 베를 띠라 하셨거늘	And in that day did the Lord God of hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth:	On that day the Lord GOD of Hosts called for weeping and wailing, for shaven heads and the wearing of sackcloth.
ISA	22	13	너희가 기뻐하며 즐거워하여 소를 잡고 양을 죽여 고기를 먹고 포도주를 마시면서 내일 죽으리니 먹고 마시자 하도다	And behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine: let us eat and drink; for to morrow we shall die.	But look, there is joy and gladness, butchering of cattle and slaughtering of sheep, eating of meat and drinking of wine: “Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die!”
ISA	22	14	만군의 여호와께서 친히 내 귀에 들려 가라사대 진실로 이 죄악은 너희 죽기까지 속하지 못하리라 하셨느니라 주 만군의 여호와의 말씀이니라	And it was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of hosts, Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die, saith the Lord God of hosts.	The LORD of Hosts has revealed in my hearing: “Until your dying day, this sin of yours will never be atoned for,” says the Lord GOD of Hosts.
ISA	22	15	주 만군의 여호와께서 가라사대 너는 가서 그 국고를 맡고 궁을 차지한 셉나를 보고 이르기를	Thus saith the Lord God of hosts, Go, get thee unto this treasurer, even unto Shebna, which is over the house, and say,	This is what the Lord GOD of Hosts says: “Go, say to Shebna, the steward in charge of the palace:
ISA	22	16	네가 여기 무슨 관계가 있느냐 여기 누가 있기에 여기서 너를 위하여 묘실을 팠느냐 높은 곳에 자기를 위하여 묘실을 팠고 반석에 자기를 위하여 처소를 쪼아 내었도다	What hast thou here? and whom hast thou here, that thou hast hewed thee out a sepulchre here, as he that heweth him out a sepulchre on high, and that graveth an habitation for himself in a rock?	What are you doing here, and who authorized you to carve out a tomb for yourself here—to chisel your tomb in the height and cut your resting place in the rock?
ISA	22	17	나 여호와가 너를 단단히 속박하고 장사 같이 맹렬히 던지되	Behold, the Lord will carry thee away with a mighty captivity, and will surely cover thee.	Look, O mighty man! The LORD is about to shake you violently. He will take hold of you,
ISA	22	18	정녕히 너를 말아 싸서 공 같이 광막한 지경에 던질 것이라 주인의 집에 수치를 끼치는 너여 네가 그곳에서 죽겠고 네 영광의 수레도 거기 있으리라	He will surely violently turn and toss thee like a ball into a large country: there shalt thou die, and there the chariots of thy glory shall be the shame of thy lord’s house.	roll you into a ball, and sling you into a wide land. There you will die, and there your glorious chariots will remain—a disgrace to the house of your master.
ISA	22	19	내가 너를 네 관직에서 쫓아내며 네 지위에서 낮추고	And I will drive thee from thy station, and from thy state shall he pull thee down.	I will remove you from office, and you will be ousted from your position.
ISA	22	20	그 날에 내가 힐기야의 아들 내 종 엘리아김을 불러	And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will call my servant Eliakim the son of Hilkiah:	On that day I will summon My servant, Eliakim son of Hilkiah.
ISA	22	21	네 옷을 그에게 입히며 네 띠를 그에게 띠워 힘 있게 하고 네 정권을 그의 손에 맡기리니 그가 예루살렘 거민과 유다 집의 아비가 될 것이며	And I will clothe him with thy robe, and strengthen him with thy girdle, and I will commit thy government into his hand: and he shall be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah.	I will clothe him with your robe and tie your sash around him. I will put your authority in his hand, and he will be a father to the dwellers of Jerusalem and to the house of Judah.
ISA	22	22	내가 또 다윗집의 열쇠를 그의 어깨에 두리니 그가 열면 닫을 자가 없겠고 닫으면 열 자가 없으리라	And the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder; so he shall open, and none shall shut; and he shall shut, and none shall open.	I will place on his shoulder the key to the house of David. What he opens no one can shut, and what he shuts no one can open.
ISA	22	23	못이 단단한 곳에 박힘 같이 그를 견고케 하리니 그가 그 아비 집에 영광의 보좌가 될 것이요	And I will fasten him as a nail in a sure place; and he shall be for a glorious throne to his father’s house.	I will drive him like a peg into a firm place, and he will be a throne of glory for the house of his father.
ISA	22	24	그 아비 집의 모든 영광이 그 위에 걸리리니 그 후손과 족속 되는 각 작은 그릇 곧 종지로부터 항아리까지리라	And they shall hang upon him all the glory of his father’s house, the offspring and the issue, all vessels of small quantity, from the vessels of cups, even to all the vessels of flagons.	So they will hang on him all the glory of his father’s house: the descendants and the offshoots—all the lesser vessels, from bowls to every kind of jar.
ISA	22	25	만군의 여호와께서 가라사대 그 날에는 단단한 곳에 박혔던 못이 삭으리니 그 못이 부러져 떨어지므로 그 위에 걸린 물건이 파쇄되리라 하셨다 하라 나 여호와의 말이니라	In that day, saith the Lord of hosts, shall the nail that is fastened in the sure place be removed, and be cut down, and fall; and the burden that was upon it shall be cut off: for the Lord hath spoken it.	In that day, declares the LORD of Hosts, the peg driven into a firm place will give way; it will be sheared off and fall, and the load upon it will be cut down.” Indeed, the LORD has spoken.
ISA	23	1	두로에 관한 경고라 다시스의 선척들아 너희는 슬피 부르짖을지어다 두로가 황무하여 집이 없고 들어갈 곳도 없음이요 이 소식이 깃딤 땅에서부터 그들에게 전파되었음이니라	The burden of Tyre. Howl, ye ships of Tarshish; for it is laid waste, so that there is no house, no entering in: from the land of Chittim it is revealed to them.	This is the burden against Tyre: Wail, O ships of Tarshish, for Tyre is laid waste, without house or harbor. Word has reached them from the land of Cyprus.
ISA	23	2	바다에 왕래하는 시돈 상고로 말미암아 부요하게 된 너희 해변 거민들아 잠잠하라	Be still, ye inhabitants of the isle; thou whom the merchants of Zidon, that pass over the sea, have replenished.	Be silent, O dwellers of the coastland, you merchants of Sidon, whose traders have crossed the sea.
ISA	23	3	시홀의 곡식 곧 나일의 추수를 큰 물로 수운하여 들였으니 열국의 시장이었도다	And by great waters the seed of Sihor, the harvest of the river, is her revenue; and she is a mart of nations.	On the great waters came the grain of Shihor; the harvest of the Nile was the revenue of Tyre; she was the merchant of the nations.
ISA	23	4	시돈이여 너는 부끄러워할지어다 대저 바다 곧 바다의 보장이 말하기를 나는 구로하지 못하였으며 생산하지 못하였으며 청년 남자들을 양육하지 못하였으며 처녀들을 생육지도 못하였다 하였음이니라	Be thou ashamed, O Zidon: for the sea hath spoken, even the strength of the sea, saying, I travail not, nor bring forth children, neither do I nourish up young men, nor bring up virgins.	Be ashamed, O Sidon, the stronghold of the sea, for the sea has spoken: “I have not been in labor or given birth. I have not raised young men or brought up young women.”
ISA	23	5	그 소식이 애굽에 이르면 그들이 두로의 소식을 인하여 통도하리로다	As at the report concerning Egypt, so shall they be sorely pained at the report of Tyre.	When the report reaches Egypt, they will writhe in agony over the news of Tyre.
ISA	23	6	너희는 다시스로 건너갈지어다 해변 거민아 너희는 슬피 부르짖을지어다	Pass ye over to Tarshish; howl, ye inhabitants of the isle.	Cross over to Tarshish; wail, O inhabitants of the coastland!
ISA	23	7	이것이 고대에 건설된 너희 희락의 성 곧 그 백성이 자기 발로 먼 지방까지 가서 유하던 성이냐	Is this your joyous city, whose antiquity is of ancient days? her own feet shall carry her afar off to sojourn.	Is this your jubilant city, whose origin is from antiquity, whose feet have taken her to settle far away?
ISA	23	8	면류관을 씌우던 자요 그 상고들은 방백이요 그 무역자들은 세상에 존귀한 자이던 두로에 대하여 누가 이 일을 정하였느뇨	Who hath taken this counsel against Tyre, the crowning city, whose merchants are princes, whose traffickers are the honourable of the earth?	Who planned this against Tyre, the bestower of crowns, whose traders are princes, whose merchants are renowned on the earth?
ISA	23	9	만군의 여호와의 정하신 것이라 모든 영광의 교만을 욕되게 하시며 세상의 모든 존귀한 자로 멸시를 받게 하려 하심이니라	The Lord of hosts hath purposed it, to stain the pride of all glory, and to bring into contempt all the honourable of the earth.	The LORD of Hosts planned it, to defile all its glorious beauty, to disgrace all the renowned of the earth.
ISA	23	10	딸 다시스여 나일 같이 너희 땅에 넘칠지어다 너를 속박함이 다시는 없으리라	Pass through thy land as a river, O daughter of Tarshish: there is no more strength.	Cultivate your land like the Nile, O Daughter of Tarshish; there is no longer a harbor.
ISA	23	11	여호와께서 바다 위에 손을 펴사 열방을 흔드시며 여호와께서 가나안에 대하여 명을 내려 그 견고한 성을 훼파하게 하시고	He stretched out his hand over the sea, he shook the kingdoms: the Lord hath given a commandment against the merchant city, to destroy the strong holds thereof.	The LORD has stretched out His hand over the sea; He has made kingdoms tremble. He has given a command that the strongholds of Canaan be destroyed.
ISA	23	12	가라사대 너 학대 받은 처녀 딸 시돈아 네게 다시는 희락이 없으리니 일어나 깃딤으로 건너가라 거기서도 네가 평안을 얻지 못하리라 하셨느니라	And he said, Thou shalt no more rejoice, O thou oppressed virgin, daughter of Zidon: arise, pass over to Chittim; there also shalt thou have no rest.	He said, “You shall rejoice no more, O oppressed Virgin Daughter of Sidon. Get up and cross over to Cyprus— even there you will find no rest.”
ISA	23	13	갈대아 사람의 땅을 보라 그 백성이 없어졌나니 곧 앗수르 사람이 들짐승의 거하는 곳이 되게 하였으되 그들이 망대를 세우고 궁전을 헐어 황무케 하였느니라	Behold the land of the Chaldeans; this people was not, till the Assyrian founded it for them that dwell in the wilderness: they set up the towers thereof, they raised up the palaces thereof; and he brought it to ruin.	Look at the land of the Chaldeans— a people now of no account. The Assyrians destined it for the desert creatures; they set up their siege towers and stripped its palaces. They brought it to ruin.
ISA	23	14	다시스의 선척들아 너희는 슬피 부르짖으라 너희 견고한 성이 파괴되었느니라	Howl, ye ships of Tarshish: for your strength is laid waste.	Wail, O ships of Tarshish, for your harbor has been destroyed!
ISA	23	15	그 날부터 두로가 한 왕의 연한 같이 칠십 년을 잊어버림이 되었다가 칠십 년이 필한 후에 두로는 기생 노래의 뜻 같이 될 것이라	And it shall come to pass in that day, that Tyre shall be forgotten seventy years, according to the days of one king: after the end of seventy years shall Tyre sing as an harlot.	At that time Tyre will be forgotten for seventy years—the span of a king’s life. But at the end of seventy years, it will happen to Tyre as in the song of the harlot:
ISA	23	16	잊어버린바 되었던 기생 너여 수금을 가지고 성읍에 두루 행하며 기묘한 곡조로 많은 노래를 불러서 너를 다시 기억케 하라 하였느니라	Take an harp, go about the city, thou harlot that hast been forgotten; make sweet melody, sing many songs, that thou mayest be remembered.	“Take up your harp, stroll through the city, O forgotten harlot. Make sweet melody, sing many a song, so you will be remembered.”
ISA	23	17	칠십 년이 필한 후에 여호와께서 두로를 권고하시리니 그가 다시 취리하여 지면에 있는 열방과 음란을 행할 것이며	And it shall come to pass after the end of seventy years, that the Lord will visit Tyre, and she shall turn to her hire, and shall commit fornication with all the kingdoms of the world upon the face of the earth.	And at the end of seventy years, the LORD will restore Tyre. Then she will return to hire as a prostitute and sell herself to all the kingdoms on the face of the earth.
ISA	23	18	그 무역한 것과 이익을 거룩히 여호와께 돌리고 간직하거나 쌓아두지 아니하리니 그 무역한 것이 여호와 앞에 거하는 자의 배불리 먹을 자료, 잘 입을 자료가 되리라	And her merchandise and her hire shall be holiness to the Lord: it shall not be treasured nor laid up; for her merchandise shall be for them that dwell before the Lord, to eat sufficiently, and for durable clothing.	Yet her profits and wages will be set apart to the LORD; they will not be stored or saved, for her profit will go to those who live before the LORD, for abundant food and fine clothing.
ISA	24	1	여호와께서 땅을 공허하게 하시며 황무하게 하시며 뒤집어 엎으시고 그 거민을 흩으시리니	Behold, the Lord maketh the earth empty, and maketh it waste, and turneth it upside down, and scattereth abroad the inhabitants thereof.	Behold, the LORD lays waste the earth and leaves it in ruins. He will twist its surface and scatter its inhabitants—
ISA	24	2	백성과 제사장이 일반일 것이며 종과 상전이 일반일 것이며 비자와 가모가 일반일 것이며 사는 자와 파는 자가 일반일 것이며 채급하는 자와 채용하는 자가 일반일 것이며 이자를 받는 자와 이자를 내는 자가 일반일 것이라	And it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest; as with the servant, so with his master; as with the maid, so with her mistress; as with the buyer, so with the seller; as with the lender, so with the borrower; as with the taker of usury, so with the giver of usury to him.	people and priest alike, servant and master, maid and mistress, buyer and seller, lender and borrower, creditor and debtor.
ISA	24	3	땅이 온전히 공허하게 되고 온전히 황무하게 되리라 여호와께서 이 말씀을 하셨느니라	The land shall be utterly emptied, and utterly spoiled: for the Lord hath spoken this word.	The earth will be utterly laid waste and thoroughly plundered. For the LORD has spoken this word.
ISA	24	4	땅이 슬퍼하고 쇠잔하며 세계가 쇠약하고 쇠잔하며 세상 백성 중에 높은 자가 쇠약하며	The earth mourneth and fadeth away, the world languisheth and fadeth away, the haughty people of the earth do languish.	The earth mourns and withers; the world languishes and fades; the exalted of the earth waste away.
ISA	24	5	땅이 또한 그 거민 아래서 더럽게 되었으니 이는 그들이 율법을 범하며 율례를 어기며 영원한 언약을 파하였음이라	The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant.	The earth is defiled by its people; they have transgressed the laws; they have overstepped the decrees and broken the everlasting covenant.
ISA	24	6	그러므로 저주가 땅을 삼켰고 그 중에 거하는 자들이 정죄함을 당하였고 땅의 거민이 불타서 남은 자가 적으며	Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left.	Therefore a curse has consumed the earth, and its inhabitants must bear the guilt; the earth’s dwellers have been burned, and only a few survive.
ISA	24	7	새 포도즙이 슬퍼하고 포도나무가 쇠잔하며 마음이 즐겁던 자가 다 탄식하며	The new wine mourneth, the vine languisheth, all the merryhearted do sigh.	The new wine dries up, the vine withers. All the merrymakers now groan.
ISA	24	8	소고치는 기쁨이 그치고 즐거워하는 자의 소리가 마치고 수금 타는 기쁨이 그쳤으며	The mirth of tabrets ceaseth, the noise of them that rejoice endeth, the joy of the harp ceaseth.	The joyful tambourines have ceased; the noise of revelers has stopped; the joyful harp is silent.
ISA	24	9	노래하며 포도주를 마시지 못하고 독주는 그 마시는 자에게 쓰게 될 것이며	They shall not drink wine with a song; strong drink shall be bitter to them that drink it.	They no longer sing and drink wine; strong drink is bitter to those who consume it.
ISA	24	10	약탈을 당한 성읍이 훼파되고 집마다 닫히었고 들어가는 자가 없으며	The city of confusion is broken down: every house is shut up, that no man may come in.	The city of chaos is shattered; every house is closed to entry.
ISA	24	11	포도주가 없으므로 거리에서 부르짖으며 모든 즐거움이 암흑하여졌으며 땅의 기쁨이 소멸되었으며	There is a crying for wine in the streets; all joy is darkened, the mirth of the land is gone.	In the streets they cry out for wine. All joy turns to gloom; rejoicing is exiled from the land.
ISA	24	12	성읍이 황무하고 성문이 파괴되었느니라	In the city is left desolation, and the gate is smitten with destruction.	The city is left in ruins; its gate is reduced to rubble.
ISA	24	13	세계 민족 중에 이러한 일이 있으리니 곧 감람나무를 흔듦 같고 포도를 거둔 후에 그 남은 것을 주움 같을 것이니라	When thus it shall be in the midst of the land among the people, there shall be as the shaking of an olive tree, and as the gleaning grapes when the vintage is done.	So will it be on the earth and among the nations, like a harvested olive tree, like a gleaning after a grape harvest.
ISA	24	14	무리가 소리를 높여 부를 것이며 여호와의 위엄을 인하여 바다에서부터 크게 외치리니	They shall lift up their voice, they shall sing for the majesty of the Lord, they shall cry aloud from the sea.	They raise their voices, they shout for joy; from the west they proclaim the majesty of the LORD.
ISA	24	15	그러므로 너희가 동방에서 여호와를 영화롭게 하며 바다 모든 섬에서 이스라엘 하나님 여호와의 이름을 영화롭게 할 것이라	Wherefore glorify ye the Lord in the fires, even the name of the Lord God of Israel in the isles of the sea.	Therefore glorify the LORD in the east. Extol the name of the LORD, the God of Israel in the islands of the sea.
ISA	24	16	땅 끝에서부터 노래하는 소리가 우리에게 들리기를 의로우신 자에게 영광을 돌리세 하도다 그러나 나는 이르기를 나는 쇠잔하였고 나는 쇠잔하였으니 내게 화가 있도다 궤휼자가 궤휼을 행하도다 궤휼자가 심히 궤휼을 행하도다 하였도다	From the uttermost part of the earth have we heard songs, even glory to the righteous. But I said, My leanness, my leanness, woe unto me! the treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously; yea, the treacherous dealers have dealt very treacherously.	From the ends of the earth we hear singing: “Glory to the Righteous One.” But I said, “I am wasting away! I am wasting away! Woe is me.” The treacherous betray; the treacherous deal in treachery.
ISA	24	17	땅의 거민아 두려움과 함정과 올무가 네게 임하였나니	Fear, and the pit, and the snare, are upon thee, O inhabitant of the earth.	Terror and pit and snare await you, O dweller of the earth.
ISA	24	18	두려운 소리를 인하여 도망하는 자는 함정에 빠지겠고 함정 속에서 올라오는 자는 올무에 걸리리니 이는 위에 있는 문이 열리고 땅의 기초가 진동함이라	And it shall come to pass, that he who fleeth from the noise of the fear shall fall into the pit; and he that cometh up out of the midst of the pit shall be taken in the snare: for the windows from on high are open, and the foundations of the earth do shake.	Whoever flees the sound of panic will fall into the pit, and whoever climbs from the pit will be caught in the snare. For the windows of heaven are open, and the foundations of the earth are shaken.
ISA	24	19	땅이 깨어지고 깨어지며 땅이 갈라지고 땅이 흔들리고 흔들리며	The earth is utterly broken down, the earth is clean dissolved, the earth is moved exceedingly.	The earth is utterly broken apart, the earth is split open, the earth is shaken violently.
ISA	24	20	땅이 취한 자 같이 비틀비틀하며 침망 같이 흔들리며 그 위의 죄악이 중하므로 떨어지고 다시 일지 못하리라	The earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard, and shall be removed like a cottage; and the transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it; and it shall fall, and not rise again.	The earth staggers like a drunkard and sways like a shack. Earth’s rebellion weighs it down, and it falls, never to rise again.
ISA	24	21	그 날에 여호와께서 높은 데서 높은 군대를 벌하시며 땅에서 땅 왕들을 벌하시리니	And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall punish the host of the high ones that are on high, and the kings of the earth upon the earth.	In that day the LORD will punish the host of heaven above and the kings of the earth below.
ISA	24	22	그들이 죄수가 깊은 옥에 모임 같이 모음을 입고 옥에 갇혔다가 여러 날 후에 형벌을 받을 것이라	And they shall be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison, and after many days shall they be visited.	They will be gathered together like prisoners in a pit. They will be confined to a dungeon and punished after many days.
ISA	24	23	그 때에 달이 무색하고 해가 부끄러워하리니 이는 만군의 여호와께서 시온산과 예루살렘에서 왕이 되시고 그 장로들 앞에서 영광을 나타내실 것임이니라	Then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall reign in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before his ancients gloriously.	The moon will be confounded and the sun will be ashamed; for the LORD of Hosts will reign on Mount Zion and in Jerusalem, and before His elders with great glory.
ISA	25	1	여호와여 주는 나의 하나님이시라 내가 주를 높이고 주의 이름을 찬송하오리니 주는 기사를 옛적의 정하신 뜻대로 성실함과 진실함으로 행하셨음이라	O Lord, thou art my God; I will exalt thee, I will praise thy name; for thou hast done wonderful things; thy counsels of old are faithfulness and truth.	O LORD, You are my God! I will exalt You; I will praise Your name. For You have worked wonders— plans formed long ago— in perfect faithfulness.
ISA	25	2	주께서 성읍으로 무더기를 이루시며 견고한 성읍으로 황무케 하시며 외인의 궁정으로 성읍이 되지 못하게 하사 영영히 건설되지 못하게 하셨으므로	For thou hast made of a city an heap; of a defenced city a ruin: a palace of strangers to be no city; it shall never be built.	Indeed, You have made the city a heap of rubble, the fortified town a ruin. The fortress of strangers is a city no more; it will never be rebuilt.
ISA	25	3	강한 민족이 주를 영화롭게 하며 포학한 나라들의 성읍이 주를 경외하리이다	Therefore shall the strong people glorify thee, the city of the terrible nations shall fear thee.	Therefore, a strong people will honor You. The cities of ruthless nations will revere You.
ISA	25	4	주는 포학자의 기세가 성벽을 충돌하는 폭풍과 같을 때에 빈궁한 자의 보장이시며 환난 당한 빈핍한 자의 보장이시며 폭풍 중에 피난처시며 폭양을 피하는 그늘이 되셨사오니	For thou hast been a strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against the wall.	For You have been a refuge for the poor, a stronghold for the needy in distress, a refuge from the storm, a shade from the heat. For the breath of the ruthless is like rain against a wall,
ISA	25	5	마른 땅에 폭양을 제함 같이 주께서 외인의 훤화를 그치게 하시며 폭양을 구름으로 가리움 같이 포학한 자의 노래를 낮추시리이다	Thou shalt bring down the noise of strangers, as the heat in a dry place; even the heat with the shadow of a cloud: the branch of the terrible ones shall be brought low.	like heat in a dry land. You subdue the uproar of foreigners. As the shade of a cloud cools the heat, so the song of the ruthless is silenced.
ISA	25	6	만군의 여호와께서 이 산에서 만민을 위하여 기름진 것과 오래 저장하였던 포도주로 연회를 베푸시리니 곧 골수가 가득한 기름진 것과 오래 저장하였던 맑은 포도주로 하실 것이며	And in this mountain shall the Lord of hosts make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined.	On this mountain the LORD of Hosts will prepare a banquet for all the peoples, a feast of aged wine, of choice meat, of finely aged wine.
ISA	25	7	또 이 산에서 모든 민족의 그 가리워진 면박과 열방의 그 덮인 휘장을 제하시며	And he will destroy in this mountain the face of the covering cast over all people, and the vail that is spread over all nations.	On this mountain He will swallow up the shroud that enfolds all peoples, the sheet that covers all nations;
ISA	25	8	사망을 영원히 멸하실 것이라 주 여호와께서 모든 얼굴에서 눈물을 씻기시며 그 백성의 수치를 온 천하에서 제하시리라 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하셨느니라	He will swallow up death in victory; and the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces; and the rebuke of his people shall he take away from off all the earth: for the Lord hath spoken it.	He will swallow up death forever. The Lord GOD will wipe away the tears from every face and remove the disgrace of His people from the whole earth. For the LORD has spoken.
ISA	25	9	그 날에 말하기를 이는 우리의 하나님이시라 우리가 그를 기다렸으니 그가 우리를 구원하시리로다 이는 여호와시라 우리가 그를 기다렸으니 우리는 그 구원을 기뻐하며 즐거워하리라 할 것이며	And it shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our God; we have waited for him, and he will save us: this is the Lord; we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.	And in that day it will be said, “Surely this is our God; we have waited for Him, and He has saved us. This is the LORD for whom we have waited. Let us rejoice and be glad in His salvation.”
ISA	25	10	여호와의 손이 이 산에 나타나시리니 모압이 거름물 속의 초개의 밟힘 같이 자기 처소에서 밟힐 것인즉	For in this mountain shall the hand of the Lord rest, and Moab shall be trodden down under him, even as straw is trodden down for the dunghill.	For the hand of the LORD will rest on this mountain. But Moab will be trampled in his place as straw is trodden into the dung pile.
ISA	25	11	그가 헤엄치는 자의 헤엄치려고 손을 폄 같이 그 속에서 그 손을 펼 것이나 여호와께서 그 교만과 그 손의 교활을 누르실 것이라	And he shall spread forth his hands in the midst of them, as he that swimmeth spreadeth forth his hands to swim: and he shall bring down their pride together with the spoils of their hands.	He will spread out his hands within it, as a swimmer spreads his arms to swim. His pride will be brought low, despite the skill of his hands.
ISA	25	12	너의 성벽의 높은 보장을 헐어 땅에 내리시되 진토에 미치게 하시리라	And the fortress of the high fort of thy walls shall he bring down, lay low, and bring to the ground, even to the dust.	The high-walled fortress will be brought down, cast to the ground, into the dust.
ISA	26	1	그 날에 유다 땅에서 이 노래를 부르리라 우리에게 견고한 성읍이 있음이여 여호와께서 구원으로 성과 곽을 삼으시리로다	In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah; We have a strong city; salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks.	In that day this song will be sung in the land of Judah: We have a strong city; salvation is established as its walls and ramparts.
ISA	26	2	너희는 문들을 열고 신을 지키는 의로운 나라로 들어오게 할지어다	Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation which keepeth the truth may enter in.	Open the gates so a righteous nation may enter— one that remains faithful.
ISA	26	3	주께서 심지가 견고한 자를 평강에 평강으로 지키시리니 이는 그가 주를 의뢰함이니이다	Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee: because he trusteth in thee.	You will keep in perfect peace the steadfast of mind, because he trusts in You.
ISA	26	4	너희는 여호와를 영원히 의뢰하라 주 여호와는 영원한 반석이심이로다	Trust ye in the Lord for ever: for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength:	Trust in the LORD forever, because GOD the LORD is the Rock eternal.
ISA	26	5	높은 데 거하는 자를 낮추시며 솟은 성을 헐어 땅에 엎으시되 진토에 미치게 하셨도다	For he bringeth down them that dwell on high; the lofty city, he layeth it low; he layeth it low, even to the ground; he bringeth it even to the dust.	For He has humbled those who dwell on high; He lays the lofty city low. He brings it down to the ground; He casts it into the dust.
ISA	26	6	발이 그것을 밟으리니 곧 빈궁한 자의 발과 곤핍한 자의 걸음이리로다	The foot shall tread it down, even the feet of the poor, and the steps of the needy.	Feet trample it down— the feet of the oppressed, the steps of the poor.
ISA	26	7	의인의 길은 정직함이여 정직하신 주께서 의인의 첩경을 평탄케 하시도다	The way of the just is uprightness: thou, most upright, dost weigh the path of the just.	The path of the righteous is level; You clear a straight path for the upright.
ISA	26	8	여호와여 주의 심판하시는 길에서 우리가 주를 기다렸사오며 주의 이름 곧 주의 기념 이름을 우리 영혼이 사모하나이다	Yea, in the way of thy judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee; the desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee.	Yes, we wait for You, O LORD; we walk in the path of Your judgments. Your name and renown are the desire of our souls.
ISA	26	9	밤에 내 영혼이 주를 사모하였사온즉 내 중심이 주를 간절히 구하오리니 이는 주께서 땅에서 심판하시는 때에 세계의 거민이 의를 배움이니이다	With my soul have I desired thee in the night; yea, with my spirit within me will I seek thee early: for when thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness.	My soul longs for You in the night; indeed, my spirit seeks You at dawn. For when Your judgments come upon the earth, the people of the world learn righteousness.
ISA	26	10	악인은 은총을 입을지라도 의를 배우지 아니하며 정직한 땅에서 불의를 행하고 여호와의 위엄을 돌아보지 아니하는도다	Let favour be shewed to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness: in the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly, and will not behold the majesty of the Lord.	Though grace is shown to the wicked man, he does not learn righteousness. In the land of righteousness he acts unjustly and fails to see the majesty of the LORD.
ISA	26	11	여호와여 주의 손이 높이 들릴지라도 그들이 보지 아니하나이다마는 백성을 위하시는 주의 열성을 보면 부끄러워할 것이라 불이 주의 대적을 사르리이다	Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see: but they shall see, and be ashamed for their envy at the people; yea, the fire of thine enemies shall devour them.	O LORD, Your hand is upraised, but they do not see it. They will see Your zeal for Your people and be put to shame. The fire set for Your enemies will consume them!
ISA	26	12	여호와여 주께서 우리를 위하여 평강을 베푸시오리니 주께서 우리 모든 일을 우리를 위하여 이루심이니이다	Lord, thou wilt ordain peace for us: for thou also hast wrought all our works in us.	O LORD, You will establish peace for us. For all that we have accomplished, You have done for us.
ISA	26	13	여호와 우리 하나님이시여 주 외에 다른 주들이 우리를 관할하였사오나 우리가 주만 의뢰하고 주의 이름을 부르리이다	O Lord our God, other lords beside thee have had dominion over us: but by thee only will we make mention of thy name.	O LORD our God, other lords besides You have had dominion, but Your name alone do we confess.
ISA	26	14	그들은 죽었은즉 다시 살지 못하겠고 사망하였은즉 일어나지 못할 것이니 이는 주께서 벌하여 멸하사 그 모든 기억을 멸절하였음이니이다	They are dead, they shall not live; they are deceased, they shall not rise: therefore hast thou visited and destroyed them, and made all their memory to perish.	The dead will not live; the departed spirits will not rise. Therefore You have punished and destroyed them; You have wiped out all memory of them.
ISA	26	15	여호와여 주께서 이 나라를 더 크게 하셨고 이 나라를 더 크게 하셨나이다 스스로 영광을 얻으시고 이 땅의 모든 경계를 확장하셨나이다	Thou hast increased the nation, O Lord, thou hast increased the nation: thou art glorified: thou hadst removed it far unto all the ends of the earth.	You have enlarged the nation, O LORD; You have enlarged the nation. You have gained glory for Yourself; You have extended all the borders of the land.
ISA	26	16	여호와여 백성이 환난 중에 주를 앙모하였사오며 주의 징벌이 그들에게 임할 때에 그들이 간절히 주께 기도하였나이다	Lord, in trouble have they visited thee, they poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them.	O LORD, they sought You in their distress; when You disciplined them, they poured out a quiet prayer.
ISA	26	17	여호와여 잉태한 여인이 산기가 임박하여 구로하며 부르짖음 같이 우리가 주의 앞에 이러하니이다	Like as a woman with child, that draweth near the time of her delivery, is in pain, and crieth out in her pangs; so have we been in thy sight, O Lord.	As a woman with child about to give birth writhes and cries out in pain, so were we in Your presence, O LORD.
ISA	26	18	우리가 잉태하고 고통하였을지라도 낳은 것은 바람 같아서 땅에 구원을 베풀지 못하였고 세계의 거민을 생산치 못하였나이다	We have been with child, we have been in pain, we have as it were brought forth wind; we have not wrought any deliverance in the earth; neither have the inhabitants of the world fallen.	We were with child; we writhed in pain; but we gave birth to wind. We have given no salvation to the earth, nor brought any life into the world.
ISA	26	19	주의 죽은 자들은 살아나고 우리의 시체들은 일어나리이다 티끌에 거하는 자들아 너희는 깨어 노래하라 주의 이슬은 빛난 이슬이니 땅이 죽은 자를 내어 놓으리로다	Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead.	Your dead will live; their bodies will rise. Awake and sing, you who dwell in the dust! For your dew is like the dew of the morning, and the earth will bring forth her dead.
ISA	26	20	내 백성아 갈지어다 네 밀실에 들어가서 네 문을 닫고 분노가 지나기까지 잠간 숨을지어다	Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee: hide thyself as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast.	Go, my people, enter your rooms and shut your doors behind you. Hide yourselves a little while until the wrath has passed.
ISA	26	21	보라 여호와께서 그 처소에서 나오사 땅의 거민의 죄악을 벌하실 것이라 땅이 그 위에 잦았던 피를 드러내고 그 살해당한 자를 다시는 가리우지 아니하리라	For, behold, the Lord cometh out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: the earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain.	For behold, the LORD is coming out of His dwelling to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity. The earth will reveal her bloodshed and will no longer conceal her slain.
ISA	27	1	그 날에 여호와께서 그 견고하고 크고 강한 칼로 날랜 뱀 리워야단 곧 꼬불꼬불한 뱀 리워야단을 벌하시며 바다에 있는 용을 죽이시리라	In that day the Lord with his sore and great and strong sword shall punish leviathan the piercing serpent, even leviathan that crooked serpent; and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea.	In that day the LORD will take His sharp, great, and mighty sword, and bring judgment on Leviathan the fleeing serpent—Leviathan the coiling serpent—and He will slay the dragon of the sea.
ISA	27	2	그 날에 너희는 아름다운 포도원을 두고 노래를 부를지어다	In that day sing ye unto her, A vineyard of red wine.	In that day: “Sing about a fruitful vineyard.
ISA	27	3	나 여호와는 포도원지기가 됨이여 때때로 물을 주며 밤낮으로 간수하여 아무든지 상해하지 못하게 하리로다	I the Lord do keep it; I will water it every moment: lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day.	I, the LORD, am its keeper; I water it continually. I guard it night and day so no one can disturb it;
ISA	27	4	나는 포도원에 대하여 노함이 없나니 질려와 형극이 나를 대적하여 싸운다 하자 내가 그것을 밟고 모아 불사르리라	Fury is not in me: who would set the briers and thorns against me in battle? I would go through them, I would burn them together.	I am not angry. If only thorns and briers confronted Me, I would march and trample them, I would burn them to the ground.
ISA	27	5	그리하지 아니할 것 같으면 나의 힘을 의지하고 나와 화친하며 나로 더불어 화친할 것이니라	Or let him take hold of my strength, that he may make peace with me; and he shall make peace with me.	Or let them lay claim to My protection; let them make peace with Me— yes, let them make peace with Me.”
ISA	27	6	후일에는 야곱의 뿌리가 박히며 이스라엘의 움이 돋고 꽃이 필 것이라 그들이 그 결실로 지면에 채우리로다	He shall cause them that come of Jacob to take root: Israel shall blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit.	In the days to come, Jacob will take root. Israel will bud and blossom and fill the whole world with fruit.
ISA	27	7	주께서 그 백성을 치셨은들 그 백성을 친 자들을 치심과 같았겠으며 백성이 살륙을 당하였은들 백성을 도륙한 자의 살륙을 당함과 같았겠느냐	Hath he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him? or is he slain according to the slaughter of them that are slain by him?	Has the LORD struck Israel as He struck her oppressors? Was she killed like those who slayed her?
ISA	27	8	주께서 백성을 적당하게 견책하사 쫓아내실 때에 동풍 부는 날에 폭풍으로 그들을 옮기셨느니라	In measure, when it shooteth forth, thou wilt debate with it: he stayeth his rough wind in the day of the east wind.	By warfare and exile You contended with her and removed her with a fierce wind, as on the day the east wind blows.
ISA	27	9	야곱의 불의가 속함을 얻으며 그 죄를 없이함을 얻을 결과는 이로 인하나니 곧 그가 제단의 모든 돌로 부숴진 횟돌 같게 하며 아세라와 태양상으로 다시 서지 못하게 함에 있는 것이라	By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged; and this is all the fruit to take away his sin; when he maketh all the stones of the altar as chalkstones that are beaten in sunder, the groves and images shall not stand up.	Therefore Jacob’s guilt will be atoned for, and the full fruit of the removal of his sin will be this: When he makes all the altar stones like crushed bits of chalk, no Asherah poles or incense altars will remain standing.
ISA	27	10	대저 견고한 성읍은 적막하고 거처가 황무하며 버림이 되어 광야와 같았은즉 송아지가 거기서 먹고 거기 누우며 그 나무 가지를 먹어 없이하리라	Yet the defenced city shall be desolate, and the habitation forsaken, and left like a wilderness: there shall the calf feed, and there shall he lie down, and consume the branches thereof.	For the fortified city lies deserted— a homestead abandoned, a wilderness forsaken. There the calves graze, and there they lie down; they strip its branches bare.
ISA	27	11	가지가 마르면 꺾이나니 여인이 와서 그것을 불사를 것이라 이 백성이 지각이 없으므로 그들을 지으신 자가 불쌍히 여기지 아니하시며 그들을 조성하신 자가 은혜를 베풀지 아니하시리라	When the boughs thereof are withered, they shall be broken off: the women come, and set them on fire: for it is a people of no understanding: therefore he that made them will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them will shew them no favour.	When its limbs are dry, they are broken off. Women come and use them for kindling; for this is a people without understanding. Therefore their Maker has no compassion on them, and their Creator shows them no favor.
ISA	27	12	너희 이스라엘 자손들아 그 날에 여호와께서 창일하는 하수에서부터 애굽 시내에까지 과실을 떠는 것 같이 너희를 일일이 모으시리라	And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall beat off from the channel of the river unto the stream of Egypt, and ye shall be gathered one by one, O ye children of Israel.	In that day the LORD will thresh from the flowing Euphrates to the Wadi of Egypt, and you, O Israelites, will be gathered one by one.
ISA	27	13	그 날에 큰 나팔을 울려 불리니 앗수르 땅에서 파멸케 된 자와 애굽 땅으로 쫓겨난 자가 돌아와서 예루살렘 성산에서 여호와께 경배하리라	And it shall come to pass in that day, that the great trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come which were ready to perish in the land of Assyria, and the outcasts in the land of Egypt, and shall worship the Lord in the holy mount at Jerusalem.	And in that day a great ram’s horn will sound, and those who were perishing in Assyria will come forth with those who were exiles in Egypt. And they will worship the LORD on the holy mountain in Jerusalem.
ISA	28	1	취한 자 에브라임의 교만한 면류관이여 화 있을진저 술에 빠진 자의 성 곧 영화로운 관 같이 기름진 골짜기 꼭대기에 세운 성이여 쇠잔해가는 꽃 같으니 화 있을진저	Woe to the crown of pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim, whose glorious beauty is a fading flower, which are on the head of the fat valleys of them that are overcome with wine!	Woe to the majestic crown of Ephraim’s drunkards, to the fading flower of his glorious splendor, set on the summit above the fertile valley, the pride of those overcome by wine.
ISA	28	2	보라 주께 있는 강하고 힘 있는 자가 쏟아지는 우박 같이, 파괴하는 광풍 같이, 큰 물의 창일함 같이 손으로 그 면류관을 땅에 던지리니	Behold, the Lord hath a mighty and strong one, which as a tempest of hail and a destroying storm, as a flood of mighty waters overflowing, shall cast down to the earth with the hand.	Behold, the Lord has one who is strong and mighty. Like a hailstorm or destructive tempest, like a driving rain or flooding downpour, he will smash that crown to the ground.
ISA	28	3	에브라임의 취한 자의 교만한 면류관이 발에 밟힐 것이라	The crown of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim, shall be trodden under feet:	The majestic crown of Ephraim’s drunkards will be trampled underfoot.
ISA	28	4	그 기름진 골짜기 꼭대기에 있는 그 영화의 쇠잔해 가는 꽃이 여름 전에 처음 익은 무화과와 같으니 보는 자가 그것을 보고 얼른 따서 먹으리로다	And the glorious beauty, which is on the head of the fat valley, shall be a fading flower, and as the hasty fruit before the summer; which when he that looketh upon it seeth, while it is yet in his hand he eateth it up.	The fading flower of his beautiful splendor, set on the summit above the fertile valley, will be like a ripe fig before the summer harvest: Whoever sees it will take it in his hand and swallow it.
ISA	28	5	그 날에 만군의 여호와께서 그 남은 백성에게 영화로운 면류관이 되시며 아름다운 화관이 되실 것이라	In that day shall the Lord of hosts be for a crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty, unto the residue of his people,	On that day the LORD of Hosts will be a crown of glory, a diadem of splendor to the remnant of His people,
ISA	28	6	재판석에 앉은 자에게는 판결하는 신이 되시며 성문에서 싸움을 물리치는 자에게는 힘이 되시리로다마는	And for a spirit of judgment to him that sitteth in judgment, and for strength to them that turn the battle to the gate.	a spirit of justice to him who sits in judgment, and a strength to those who repel the onslaught at the gate.
ISA	28	7	이 유다 사람들도 포도주로 인하여 옆걸음 치며 독주로 인하여 비틀거리며 제사장과 선지자도 독주로 인하여 옆걸음 치며 포도주에 빠지며 독주로 인하여 비틀거리며 이상을 그릇 풀며 재판할 때에 실수하나니	But they also have erred through wine, and through strong drink are out of the way; the priest and the prophet have erred through strong drink, they are swallowed up of wine, they are out of the way through strong drink; they err in vision, they stumble in judgment.	These also stagger from wine and stumble from strong drink: Priests and prophets reel from strong drink and are befuddled by wine. They stumble because of strong drink, muddled in their visions and stumbling in their judgments.
ISA	28	8	모든 상에는 토한 것 더러운 것이 가득하고 깨끗한 곳이 없도다	For all tables are full of vomit and filthiness, so that there is no place clean.	For all their tables are covered with vomit; there is not a place without filth.
ISA	28	9	그들이 이르기를 그가 뉘게 지식을 가르치며 뉘게 도를 전하여 깨닫게 하려는가 젖 떨어져 품을 떠난 자들에게 하려는가	Whom shall he teach knowledge? and whom shall he make to understand doctrine? them that are weaned from the milk, and drawn from the breasts.	Whom is He trying to teach? To whom is He explaining His message? To infants just weaned from milk? To babies removed from the breast?
ISA	28	10	대저 경계에 경계를 더하며 경계에 경계를 더하며 교훈에 교훈을 더하며 교훈에 교훈을 더하되 여기서도 조금, 저기서도 조금 하는구나 하는도다	For precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a little, and there a little:	For they hear: “Order on order, order on order, line on line, line on line; a little here, a little there.”
ISA	28	11	그러므로 생소한 입술과 다른 방언으로 이 백성에게 말씀하시리라	For with stammering lips and another tongue will he speak to this people.	Indeed, with mocking lips and foreign tongues, He will speak to this people
ISA	28	12	전에 그들에게 이르시기를 이것이 너희 안식이요 이것이 너희 상쾌함이니 너희는 곤비한 자에게 안식을 주라 하셨으나 그들이 듣지 아니하였으므로	To whom he said, This is the rest wherewith ye may cause the weary to rest; and this is the refreshing: yet they would not hear.	to whom He has said: “This is the place of rest, let the weary rest; this is the place of repose.” But they would not listen.
ISA	28	13	여호와께서 그들에게 말씀하시되 경계에 경계를 더하며 경계에 경계를 더하며 교훈에 교훈을 더하며 교훈에 교훈을 더하고 여기서도 조금, 저기서도 조금 하사 그들로 가다가 뒤로 넘어져 부러지며 걸리며 잡히게 하시리라	But the word of the Lord was unto them precept upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a little, and there a little; that they might go, and fall backward, and be broken, and snared, and taken.	Then the word of the LORD to them will become: “Order on order, order on order, line on line, line on line; a little here, a little there,” so that they will go stumbling backward and will be injured, ensnared, and captured.
ISA	28	14	이러므로 예루살렘에 있는 이 백성을 치리하는 너희 경만한 자여 여호와의 말씀을 들을지어다	Wherefore hear the word of the Lord, ye scornful men, that rule this people which is in Jerusalem.	Therefore hear the word of the LORD, O scoffers who rule this people in Jerusalem.
ISA	28	15	너희 말이 우리는 사망과 언약하였고 음부와 맹약하였은즉 넘치는 재앙이 유행할지라도 우리에게 미치지 못하리니 우리는 거짓으로 우리 피난처를 삼았고 허위 아래 우리를 숨겼음이라 하는도다	Because ye have said, We have made a covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us: for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves:	For you said, “We have made a covenant with death; we have fashioned an agreement with Sheol. When the overwhelming scourge passes through it will not touch us, because we have made lies our refuge and falsehood our hiding place.”
ISA	28	16	그러므로 주 여호와께서 가라사대 보라 내가 한 돌을 시온에 두어 기초를 삼았노니 곧 시험한 돌이요 귀하고 견고한 기초 돌이라 그것을 믿는 자는 급절하게 되지 아니하리로다	Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation: he that believeth shall not make haste.	So this is what the Lord GOD says: “See, I lay a stone in Zion, a tested stone, a precious cornerstone, a sure foundation; the one who believes will never be shaken.
ISA	28	17	나는 공평으로 줄을 삼고 의로 추를 삼으니 우박이 거짓의 피난처를 소탕하며 물이 그 숨는 곳에 넘칠 것인즉	Judgment also will I lay to the line, and righteousness to the plummet: and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the hiding place.	I will make justice the measuring line and righteousness the level. Hail will sweep away your refuge of lies, and water will flood your hiding place.
ISA	28	18	너희의 사망으로 더불어 세운 언약이 폐하며 음부로 더불어 맺은 맹약이 서지 못하여 넘치는 재앙이 유행할 때에 너희가 그것에게 밟힘을 당할 것이라	And your covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it.	Your covenant with death will be dissolved, and your agreement with Sheol will not stand. When the overwhelming scourge passes through, you will be trampled by it.
ISA	28	19	그것이 유행할 때마다 너희를 잡을 것이니 아침마다 유행하고 주야로 유행한즉 그 전하는 도를 깨닫는 것이 오직 두려움이라	From the time that it goeth forth it shall take you: for morning by morning shall it pass over, by day and by night: and it shall be a vexation only to understand the report.	As often as it passes through, it will carry you away; it will sweep through morning after morning, by day and by night.” The understanding of this message will bring sheer terror.
ISA	28	20	침상이 짧아서 능히 몸을 펴지 못하며 이불이 좁아서 능히 몸을 싸지 못함 같으리라 하셨나니	For the bed is shorter than that a man can stretch himself on it: and the covering narrower than that he can wrap himself in it.	Indeed, the bed is too short to stretch out on, and the blanket too small to wrap around you.
ISA	28	21	대저 여호와께서 브라심 산에서와 같이 일어나시며 기브온 골짜기에서와 같이 진노하사 자기 일을 행하시리니 그 일이 비상할 것이며 자기 공을 이루시리니 그 공이 기이할 것임이라	For the Lord shall rise up as in mount Perazim, he shall be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work; and bring to pass his act, his strange act.	For the LORD will rise up as at Mount Perazim. He will rouse Himself as in the Valley of Gibeon, to do His work, His strange work, and to perform His task, His disturbing task.
ISA	28	22	그러므로 너희는 경만한 자가 되지 말라 너희 결박이 우심할까 하노라 대저 온 땅을 멸망시키기로 작정하신 것을 내가 만군의 주 여호와께로서 들었느니라	Now therefore be ye not mockers, lest your bands be made strong: for I have heard from the Lord God of hosts a consumption, even determined upon the whole earth.	So now, do not mock, or your shackles will become heavier. Indeed, I have heard from the Lord GOD of Hosts a decree of destruction against the whole land.
ISA	28	23	너희는 귀를 기울여 내 목소리를 들으라 자세히 내 말을 들으라	Give ye ear, and hear my voice; hearken, and hear my speech.	Listen and hear my voice. Pay attention and hear what I say.
ISA	28	24	파종하려고 가는 자가 어찌 끊이지 않고 갈기만 하겠느냐 그 땅을 개간하며 고르게만 하겠느냐	Doth the plowman plow all day to sow? doth he open and break the clods of his ground?	Does the plowman plow for planting every day? Does he continuously loosen and harrow the soil?
ISA	28	25	지면을 이미 평평히 하였으면 소회향을 뿌리며 대회향을 뿌리며 소맥을 줄줄이 심으며 대맥을 정한 곳에 심으며 귀리를 그 가에 심지 않겠느냐	When he hath made plain the face thereof, doth he not cast abroad the fitches, and scatter the cummin, and cast in the principal wheat and the appointed barley and the rie in their place?	When he has leveled its surface, does he not sow caraway and scatter cumin? He plants wheat in rows and barley in plots, and rye within its border.
ISA	28	26	이는 그의 하나님이 그에게 적당한 방법으로 보이사 가르치셨음이며	For his God doth instruct him to discretion, and doth teach him.	For his God instructs and teaches him properly.
ISA	28	27	소회향은 도리깨로 떨지 아니하며 대회향에는 수레 바퀴를 굴리지 아니하고 소회향은 작대기로 떨고 대회향은 막대기로 떨며	For the fitches are not threshed with a threshing instrument, neither is a cart wheel turned about upon the cummin; but the fitches are beaten out with a staff, and the cummin with a rod.	Surely caraway is not threshed with a sledge, and the wheel of a cart is not rolled over the cumin. But caraway is beaten out with a stick, and cumin with a rod.
ISA	28	28	곡식은 부수는가, 아니라 늘 떨기만 하지 아니하고 그것에 수레 바퀴를 굴리고 그것을 말굽으로 밟게 할지라도 부수지는 아니하나니	Bread corn is bruised; because he will not ever be threshing it, nor break it with the wheel of his cart, nor bruise it with his horsemen.	Grain for bread must be ground, but it is not endlessly threshed. Though the wheels of the cart roll over it, the horses do not crush it.
ISA	28	29	이도 만군의 여호와께로서 난 것이라 그의 모략은 기묘하며 지혜는 광대하니라	This also cometh forth from the Lord of hosts, which is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working.	This also comes from the LORD of Hosts, who is wonderful in counsel and excellent in wisdom.
ISA	29	1	슬프다 아리엘이여 아리엘이여 다윗의 진 친 성읍이여 연부년 절기가 돌아오려니와	Woe to Ariel, to Ariel, the city where David dwelt! add ye year to year; let them kill sacrifices.	Woe to you, O Ariel, the city of Ariel where David camped! Year upon year let your festivals recur.
ISA	29	2	내가 필경 너 아리엘을 괴롭게 하리니 네가 슬퍼하고 애곡하며 내게 아리엘과 같이 되리라	Yet I will distress Ariel, and there shall be heaviness and sorrow: and it shall be unto me as Ariel.	And I will constrain Ariel, and there will be mourning and lamentation; she will be like an altar hearth before Me.
ISA	29	3	내가 너를 사면으로 둘러 진을 치며 군대로 너를 에우며 대를 쌓아 너를 치리니	And I will camp against thee round about, and will lay siege against thee with a mount, and I will raise forts against thee.	I will camp in a circle around you; I will besiege you with towers and set up siege works against you.
ISA	29	4	네가 낮아져서 땅에서 말하며 네 말소리가 나직히 티끌에서 날 것이라 네 목소리가 신접한 자의 목소리 같이 땅에서 나며 네 말소리가 티끌에서 지꺼리리라	And thou shalt be brought down, and shalt speak out of the ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the dust, and thy voice shall be, as of one that hath a familiar spirit, out of the ground, and thy speech shall whisper out of the dust.	You will be brought low, you will speak from the ground, and out of the dust your words will be muffled. Your voice will be like a spirit from the ground; your speech will whisper out of the dust.
ISA	29	5	그럴지라도 네 대적의 무리는 세미한 티끌 같겠고 강포한 자의 무리는 불려가는 겨 같으리니 그 일이 경각간에 갑자기 이룰 것이라	Moreover the multitude of thy strangers shall be like small dust, and the multitude of the terrible ones shall be as chaff that passeth away: yea, it shall be at an instant suddenly.	But your many foes will be like fine dust, the multitude of the ruthless like blowing chaff. Then suddenly, in an instant,
ISA	29	6	만군의 여호와께서 벽력과 지진과 큰소리와 회리바람과 폭풍과 맹렬한 불꽃으로 그들을 징벌하실 것인즉	Thou shalt be visited of the Lord of hosts with thunder, and with earthquake, and great noise, with storm and tempest, and the flame of devouring fire.	you will be visited by the LORD of Hosts with thunder and earthquake and loud noise, with windstorm and tempest and consuming flame of fire.
ISA	29	7	아리엘을 치는 열방의 무리 곧 아리엘과 그 보장을 쳐서 곤고케 하는 모든 자는 꿈 같이, 밤의 환상 같이 되리니	And the multitude of all the nations that fight against Ariel, even all that fight against her and her munition, and that distress her, shall be as a dream of a night vision.	All the many nations going out to battle against Ariel— even all who war against her, laying siege and attacking her— will be like a dream, like a vision in the night,
ISA	29	8	주린 자가 꿈에 먹었을지라도 깨면 그 속은 여전히 비고 목마른 자가 꿈에 마셨을지라도 깨면 곤비하며 그 속에 갈증이 있는 것 같이 시온산을 치는 열방의 무리가 그와 같으리라	It shall even be as when an hungry man dreameth, and, behold, he eateth; but he awaketh, and his soul is empty: or as when a thirsty man dreameth, and, behold, he drinketh; but he awaketh, and, behold, he is faint, and his soul hath appetite: so shall the multitude of all the nations be, that fight against mount Zion.	as when a hungry man dreams he is eating, then awakens still hungry; as when a thirsty man dreams he is drinking, then awakens faint and parched. So will it be for all the many nations who go to battle against Mount Zion.
ISA	29	9	너희는 놀라고 놀라라 너희는 소경이 되고 소경이 되라 그들의 취함이 포도주로 인함이 아니며 그들의 비틀거림이 독주로 인함이 아니라	Stay yourselves, and wonder; cry ye out, and cry: they are drunken, but not with wine; they stagger, but not with strong drink.	Stop and be astonished; blind yourselves and be sightless; be drunk, but not with wine; stagger, but not from strong drink.
ISA	29	10	대저 여호와께서 깊이 잠들게 하는 신을 너희에게 부어주사 너희의 눈을 감기셨음이니 눈은 선지자요 너희를 덮으셨음이니 머리는 선견자라	For the Lord hath poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and hath closed your eyes: the prophets and your rulers, the seers hath he covered.	For the LORD has poured out on you a spirit of deep sleep. He has shut your eyes, O prophets; He has covered your heads, O seers.
ISA	29	11	그러므로 모든 묵시가 너희에게는 마치 봉한 책의 말이라 그것을 유식한 자에게 주며 이르기를 그대에게 청하노니 이를 읽으라 하면 대답하기를 봉하였으니 못하겠노라 할 것이요	And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it is sealed:	And the entire vision will be to you like the words sealed in a scroll. If it is handed to someone to read, he will say, “I cannot, because it is sealed.”
ISA	29	12	또 무식한 자에게 주며 이르기를 그대에게 청하노니 이를 읽으라 하면 대답하기를 나는 무식하다 할 것이니라	And the book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I am not learned.	Or if the scroll is handed to one unable to read, he will say, “I cannot read.”
ISA	29	13	주께서 가라사대 이 백성이 입으로는 나를 가까이하며 입술로는 나를 존경하나 그 마음은 내게서 멀리 떠났나니 그들이 나를 경외함은 사람의 계명으로 가르침을 받았을 뿐이라	Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men:	Therefore the Lord said: “These people draw near to Me with their mouths and honor Me with their lips, but their hearts are far from Me. Their worship of Me is but rules taught by men.
ISA	29	14	그러므로 내가 이 백성 중에 기이한 일 곧 기이하고 가장 기이한 일을 다시 행하리니 그들 중의 지혜자의 지혜가 없어지고 명철자의 총명이 가리워지리라	Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid.	Therefore I will again confound these people with wonder upon wonder. The wisdom of the wise will vanish, and the intelligence of the intelligent will be hidden.”
ISA	29	15	화 있을진저 자기의 도모를 여호와께 깊이 숨기려하는 자여 그 일을 어두운데서 행하며 이르기를 누가 우리를 보랴 누가 우리를 알랴 하니	Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, and their works are in the dark, and they say, Who seeth us? and who knoweth us?	Woe to those who dig deep to hide their plans from the LORD. In darkness they do their works and say, “Who sees us, and who will know?”
ISA	29	16	너희의 패리함이 심하도다 토기장이를 어찌 진흙 같이 여기겠느냐 지음을 받은 물건이 어찌 자기를 지은 자에 대하여 이르기를 그가 나를 짓지 아니하였다 하겠으며 빚음을 받은 물건이 자기를 빚은 자에 대하여 이르기를 그가 총명이 없다 하겠느냐	Surely your turning of things upside down shall be esteemed as the potter’s clay: for shall the work say of him that made it, He made me not? or shall the thing framed say of him that framed it, He had no understanding?	You have turned things upside down, as if the potter were regarded as clay. Shall what is formed say to him who formed it, “He did not make me”? Can the pottery say of the potter, “He has no understanding”?
ISA	29	17	미구에 레바논이 기름진 밭으로 변하지 않겠으며 기름진 밭이 삼림으로 여김이 되지 않겠느냐	Is it not yet a very little while, and Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field, and the fruitful field shall be esteemed as a forest?	In a very short time, will not Lebanon become an orchard, and the orchard seem like a forest?
ISA	29	18	그 날에 귀머거리가 책의 말을 들을 것이며 어둡고 캄캄한 데서 소경의 눈이 볼 것이며	And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness.	On that day the deaf will hear the words of the scroll, and out of the deep darkness the eyes of the blind will see.
ISA	29	19	겸손한 자가 여호와를 인하여 기쁨이 더하겠고 사람 중 빈핍한 자가 이스라엘의 거룩하신 자를 인하여 즐거워하리니	The meek also shall increase their joy in the Lord, and the poor among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel.	The humble will increase their joy in the LORD, and the poor among men will rejoice in the Holy One of Israel.
ISA	29	20	이는 강포한 자가 소멸되었으며 경만한 자가 그쳤으며 죄악의 기회를 엿보던 자가 다 끊어졌음이라	For the terrible one is brought to nought, and the scorner is consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are cut off:	For the ruthless will vanish, the mockers will disappear, and all who look for evil will be cut down—
ISA	29	21	그들은 송사에 사람에게 죄를 입히며 성문에서 판단하는 자를 올무로 잡듯하며 헛된 일로 의인을 억울케 하느니라	That make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of nought.	those who indict a man with a word, who ensnare the mediator at the gate, and who with false charges deprive the innocent of justice.
ISA	29	22	그러므로 아브라함을 구속하신 여호와께서 야곱 족속에 대하여 말씀하시되 야곱이 이제부터는 부끄러워 아니하겠고 그 얼굴이 이제부터는 실색하지 아니할 것이며	Therefore thus saith the Lord, who redeemed Abraham, concerning the house of Jacob, Jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his face now wax pale.	Therefore the LORD who redeemed Abraham says of the house of Jacob: “No longer will Jacob be ashamed and no more will his face grow pale.
ISA	29	23	그 자손은 나의 손으로 그 가운데서 행한 것을 볼 때에 내 이름을 거룩하다 하며 야곱의 거룩한 자를 거룩하다 하며 이스라엘의 하나님을 경외할 것이며	But when he seeth his children, the work of mine hands, in the midst of him, they shall sanctify my name, and sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, and shall fear the God of Israel.	For when he sees his children around him, the work of My hands, they will honor My name, they will sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, and they will stand in awe of the God of Israel.
ISA	29	24	마음이 혼미하던 자도 총명하게 되며 원망하던 자도 교훈을 받으리라 하셨느니라	They also that erred in spirit shall come to understanding, and they that murmured shall learn doctrine.	Then the wayward in spirit will come to understanding, and those who grumble will accept instruction.”
ISA	30	1	여호와께서 가라사대 화 있을진저 패역한 자식들이여 그들이 계교를 베푸나 나로 말미암아 하지 아니하며 맹약을 맺으나 나의 신으로 말미암아 하지 아니하였음이로다 그들이 바로의 세력 안에서 스스로 강하려 하며 애굽의 그늘에 피하려 하여 애굽으로 내려갔으되 나의 입에 묻지 아니하였으니 죄에 죄를 더하도다	Woe to the rebellious children, saith the Lord, that take counsel, but not of me; and that cover with a covering, but not of my spirit, that they may add sin to sin:	“Woe to the rebellious children,” declares the LORD, “to those who carry out a plan that is not Mine, who form an alliance, but against My will, heaping up sin upon sin.
ISA	30	2		That walk to go down into Egypt, and have not asked at my mouth; to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to trust in the shadow of Egypt!	They set out to go down to Egypt without asking My advice, to seek shelter under Pharaoh’s protection and take refuge in Egypt’s shade.
ISA	30	3	그러므로 바로의 세력이 너희의 수치가 되며 애굽의 그늘에 피함이 너희의 수욕이 될 것이라	Therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh be your shame, and the trust in the shadow of Egypt your confusion.	But Pharaoh’s protection will become your shame, and the refuge of Egypt’s shade your disgrace.
ISA	30	4	그 방백들이 소안에 있고 그 사신들이 하네스에 이르렀으나	For his princes were at Zoan, and his ambassadors came to Hanes.	For though their princes are at Zoan and their envoys have arrived in Hanes,
ISA	30	5	그들이 다 자기를 유익하게 못하는 민족을 인하여 수치를 당하리니 그 민족이 돕지도 못하며 유익하게도 못하고 수치가 되게 하며 수욕이 되게 할 뿐임이니라	They were all ashamed of a people that could not profit them, nor be an help nor profit, but a shame, and also a reproach.	everyone will be put to shame because of a people useless to them. They cannot be of help; they are good for nothing but shame and reproach.”
ISA	30	6	남방 짐승에 관한 경고라 사신들이 그 재물을 어린 나귀 등에 싣고 그 보물을 약대 제물 안장에 얹고 암사자와 수사자와 독사와 및 날아다니는 불뱀이 나오는 위험하고 곤고한 땅을 지나 자기에게 무익한 민족에게로 갔으나	The burden of the beasts of the south: into the land of trouble and anguish, from whence come the young and old lion, the viper and fiery flying serpent, they will carry their riches upon the shoulders of young asses, and their treasures upon the bunches of camels, to a people that shall not profit them.	This is the burden against the beasts of the Negev: Through a land of hardship and distress, of lioness and lion, of viper and flying serpent, they carry their wealth on the backs of donkeys and their treasures on the humps of camels, to a people of no profit to them.
ISA	30	7	애굽의 도움이 헛되고 무익하니라 그러므로 내가 애굽을 가만히 앉은 라합이라 일컬었느니라	For the Egyptians shall help in vain, and to no purpose: therefore have I cried concerning this, Their strength is to sit still.	Egypt’s help is futile and empty; therefore I have called her Rahab Who Sits Still.
ISA	30	8	이제 가서 백성 앞에서 서판에 기록하며 책에 써서 후세에 영영히 있게 하라	Now go, write it before them in a table, and note it in a book, that it may be for the time to come for ever and ever:	Go now, write it on a tablet in their presence and inscribe it on a scroll; it will be for the days to come, a witness forever and ever.
ISA	30	9	대저 이는 패역한 백성이요 거짓말하는 자식이요 여호와의 법을 듣기 싫어하는 자식이라	That this is a rebellious people, lying children, children that will not hear the law of the Lord:	These are rebellious people, deceitful children, children unwilling to obey the LORD’s instruction.
ISA	30	10	그들이 선견자에게 이르기를 선견하지 말라 선지자에게 이르기를 우리에게 정직한 것을 보이지 말라 부드러운 말을 하라 거짓된 것을 보이라	Which say to the seers, See not; and to the prophets, Prophesy not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things, prophesy deceits:	They say to the seers, “Stop seeing visions!” and to the prophets, “Do not prophesy to us the truth! Speak to us pleasant words; prophesy illusions.
ISA	30	11	너희는 정로를 버리며 첩경에서 돌이키라 이스라엘의 거룩하신 자로 우리 앞에서 떠나시게 하라 하는도다	Get you out of the way, turn aside out of the path, cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us.	Get out of the way; turn off the road. Rid us of the Holy One of Israel!”
ISA	30	12	이러므로 이스라엘의 거룩하신 자가 말씀하시되 너희가 이 말을 업신여기고 압박과 허망을 믿어 그것에 의뢰하니	Wherefore thus saith the Holy One of Israel, Because ye despise this word, and trust in oppression and perverseness, and stay thereon:	Therefore this is what the Holy One of Israel says: “Because you have rejected this message, trusting in oppression and relying on deceit,
ISA	30	13	이 죄악이 너희로 마치 무너지게 된 높은 담이 불쑥 나와 경각간에 홀연히 무너짐 같게 하리라 하셨은즉	Therefore this iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking cometh suddenly at an instant.	this iniquity of yours is like a breach about to fail, a bulge in a high wall, whose collapse will come suddenly— in an instant!
ISA	30	14	그가 이 나라를 훼파하시되 토기장이가 그릇을 훼파함 같이 아낌이 없이 파쇄하시리니 그 조각 중에서, 아궁이에서 불을 취하거나 물웅덩이에서 물을 뜰 것도 얻지 못하리라	And he shall break it as the breaking of the potters’ vessel that is broken in pieces; he shall not spare: so that there shall not be found in the bursting of it a sherd to take fire from the hearth, or to take water withal out of the pit.	It will break in pieces like a potter’s jar, shattered so that no fragment can be found. Not a shard will be found in the dust large enough to scoop the coals from a hearth or to skim the water from a cistern.”
ISA	30	15	주 여호와 이스라엘의 거룩하신 자가 말씀하시되 너희가 돌이켜 안연히 처하여야 구원을 얻을 것이요 잠잠하고 신뢰하여야 힘을 얻을 것이어늘 너희가 원치 아니하고	For thus saith the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel; In returning and rest shall ye be saved; in quietness and in confidence shall be your strength: and ye would not.	For the Lord GOD, the Holy One of Israel, has said: “By repentance and rest you would be saved; your strength would lie in quiet confidence— but you were not willing.”
ISA	30	16	이르기를 아니라 우리가 말 타고 도망하리라 한고로 너희가 도망할 것이요 또 이르기를 우리가 빠른 짐승을 타리라 한고로 너희를 쫓는 자가 빠르리니	But ye said, No; for we will flee upon horses; therefore shall ye flee: and, We will ride upon the swift; therefore shall they that pursue you be swift.	“No,” you say, “we will flee on horses.” Therefore you will flee! “We will ride swift horses,” but your pursuers will be faster.
ISA	30	17	한 사람이 꾸짖은즉 천 사람이 도망하겠고 다섯이 꾸짖은즉 너희가 다 도망하고 너희 남은 자는 겨우 산꼭대기의 깃대 같겠고 영 위의 기호 같으리라 하셨느니라	One thousand shall flee at the rebuke of one; at the rebuke of five shall ye flee: till ye be left as a beacon upon the top of a mountain, and as an ensign on an hill.	A thousand will flee at the threat of one; at the threat of five you will all flee, until you are left alone like a pole on a mountaintop, like a banner on a hill.
ISA	30	18	그러나 여호와께서 기다리시나니 이는 너희에게 은혜를 베풀려 하심이요 일어나시리니 이는 저희를 긍휼히 여기려 하심이라 대저 여호와는 공의의 하나님이심이라 무릇 그를 기다리는 자는 복이 있도다	And therefore will the Lord wait, that he may be gracious unto you, and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you: for the Lord is a God of judgment: blessed are all they that wait for him.	Therefore the LORD longs to be gracious to you; therefore He rises to show you compassion, for the LORD is a just God. Blessed are all who wait for Him.
ISA	30	19	시온에 거하며 예루살렘에 거하는 백성아 너는 다시 통곡하지 않을 것이라 그가 너의 부르짖는 소리를 인하여 네게 은혜를 베푸시되 들으실 때에 네게 응답하시리라	For the people shall dwell in Zion at Jerusalem: thou shalt weep no more: he will be very gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry; when he shall hear it, he will answer thee.	O people in Zion who dwell in Jerusalem, you will weep no more. He will surely be gracious when you cry for help; when He hears, He will answer you.
ISA	30	20	주께서 너희에게 환난의 떡과 고생의 물을 주시나 네 스승은 다시 숨기지 아니하시리니 네 눈이 네 스승을 볼 것이며	And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers:	The Lord will give you the bread of adversity and the water of affliction, but your Teacher will no longer hide Himself—with your own eyes you will see Him.
ISA	30	21	너희가 우편으로 치우치든지 좌편으로 치우치든지 네 뒤에서 말소리가 네 귀에 들려 이르기를 이것이 정로니 너희는 이리로 행하라 할 것이며	And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left.	And whether you turn to the right or to the left, your ears will hear this command behind you: “This is the way. Walk in it.”
ISA	30	22	또 너희가 너희 조각한 우상에 입힌 은과 부어만든 우상에 올린 금을 더럽게 하여 불결한 물건을 던짐 같이 던지며 이르기를 나가라 하리라	Ye shall defile also the covering of thy graven images of silver, and the ornament of thy molten images of gold: thou shalt cast them away as a menstruous cloth; thou shalt say unto it, Get thee hence.	So you will desecrate your silver-plated idols and your gold-plated images. You will throw them away like menstrual cloths, saying to them, “Be gone!”
ISA	30	23	네가 땅에 뿌린 종자에 주께서 비를 주사 땅 소산의 곡식으로 살찌고 풍성케 하실 것이며 그 날에 너의 가축이 광활한 목장에서 먹을 것이요	Then shall he give the rain of thy seed, that thou shalt sow the ground withal; and bread of the increase of the earth, and it shall be fat and plenteous: in that day shall thy cattle feed in large pastures.	Then He will send rain for the seed that you have sown in the ground, and the food that comes from your land will be rich and plentiful. On that day your cattle will graze in open pastures.
ISA	30	24	밭가는 소와 어린 나귀도 키와 육지창으로 까부르고 맛있게 한 먹이를 먹을 것이며	The oxen likewise and the young asses that ear the ground shall eat clean provender, which hath been winnowed with the shovel and with the fan.	The oxen and donkeys that work the ground will eat salted fodder, winnowed with shovel and pitchfork.
ISA	30	25	크게 살륙하는 날 망대가 무너질 때에 각 고산 각 준령에 개울과 시냇물이 흐를 것이며	And there shall be upon every high mountain, and upon every high hill, rivers and streams of waters in the day of the great slaughter, when the towers fall.	And from every high mountain and every raised hill, streams of water will flow in the day of great slaughter, when the towers fall.
ISA	30	26	여호와께서 그 백성의 상처를 싸매시며 그들의 맞은 자리를 고치시는 날에는 달빛은 햇빛 같겠고 햇빛은 칠 배가 되어 일곱 날의 빛과 같으리라	Moreover the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the day that the Lord bindeth up the breach of his people, and healeth the stroke of their wound.	The light of the moon will be as bright as the sun, and the light of the sun will be seven times brighter—like the light of seven days—on the day that the LORD binds up the brokenness of His people and heals the wounds He has inflicted.
ISA	30	27	보라 여호와의 이름이 원방에서부터 오되 그의 진노가 불붙듯하며 빽빽한 연기가 일어 나듯하며 그 입술에는 분노가 찼으며 그 혀는 맹렬한 불 같으며	Behold, the name of the Lord cometh from far, burning with his anger, and the burden thereof is heavy: his lips are full of indignation, and his tongue as a devouring fire:	Behold, the Name of the LORD comes from afar, with burning anger and dense smoke. His lips are full of fury, and His tongue is like a consuming fire.
ISA	30	28	그 호흡은 마치 창일하여 목에까지 미치는 하수 같은즉 그가 멸하는 키로 열방을 까부르며 미혹되게 하는 자갈을 여러 민족의 입에 먹이시리니	And his breath, as an overflowing stream, shall reach to the midst of the neck, to sift the nations with the sieve of vanity: and there shall be a bridle in the jaws of the people, causing them to err.	His breath is like a rushing torrent that rises to the neck. He comes to sift the nations in a sieve of destruction; He bridles the jaws of the peoples to lead them astray.
ISA	30	29	너희가 거룩한 절기를 지키는 밤에와 같이 노래할 것이며 저를 불며 여호와의 산으로 가서 이스라엘의 반석에게로 나아가는 자 같이 마음에 즐거워할 것이라	Ye shall have a song, as in the night when a holy solemnity is kept; and gladness of heart, as when one goeth with a pipe to come into the mountain of the Lord, to the mighty One of Israel.	You will sing as on the night of a holy festival, and your heart will rejoice like one who walks to the music of a flute, going up to the mountain of the LORD, to the Rock of Israel.
ISA	30	30	여호와께서 그 장엄한 목소리를 듣게 하시며 혁혁한 진노로 그 팔의 치심을 보이시되 맹렬한 화염과 폭풍과 폭우와 우박으로 하시리니	And the Lord shall cause his glorious voice to be heard, and shall shew the lighting down of his arm, with the indignation of his anger, and with the flame of a devouring fire, with scattering, and tempest, and hailstones.	And the LORD will cause His majestic voice to be heard and His mighty arm to be revealed, striking in angry wrath with a flame of consuming fire, and with cloudburst, storm, and hailstones.
ISA	30	31	여호와의 목소리에 앗수르가 낙담할 것이며 주께서는 막대기로 치실 것인데	For through the voice of the Lord shall the Assyrian be beaten down, which smote with a rod.	For Assyria will be shattered at the voice of the LORD; He will strike them with His scepter.
ISA	30	32	여호와께서 예정하신 몽둥이를 앗수르 위에 더하실 때마다 소고를 치며 수금을 탈 것이며 그는 전쟁 때에 팔을 들어 그들을 치시리라	And in every place where the grounded staff shall pass, which the Lord shall lay upon him, it shall be with tabrets and harps: and in battles of shaking will he fight with it.	And with every stroke of the rod of punishment that the LORD brings down on them, the tambourines and lyres will sound as He battles with weapons brandished.
ISA	30	33	대저 도벳은 이미 설립되었고 또 왕을 위하여 예비된 것이라 깊고 넓게 하였고 거기 불과 많은 나무가 있은즉 여호와의 호흡이 유황 개천 같아서 이를 사르시리라	For Tophet is ordained of old; yea, for the king it is prepared; he hath made it deep and large: the pile thereof is fire and much wood; the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle it.	For Topheth has long been prepared; it has been made ready for the king. Its funeral pyre is deep and wide, with plenty of fire and wood. The breath of the LORD, like a torrent of burning sulfur, sets it ablaze.
ISA	31	1	도움을 구하러 애굽으로 내려가는 자들은 화 있을진저 그들은 말을 의뢰하며 병거의 많음과 마병의 심히 강함을 의지하고 이스라엘의 거룩하신 자를 앙모치 아니하며 여호와를 구하지 아니하거니와	Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help; and stay on horses, and trust in chariots, because they are many; and in horsemen, because they are very strong; but they look not unto the Holy One of Israel, neither seek the Lord!	Woe to those who go down to Egypt for help, who rely on horses, who trust in their abundance of chariots and in their multitude of horsemen. They do not look to the Holy One of Israel; they do not seek the LORD.
ISA	31	2	여호와께서도 지혜로우신즉 재앙을 내리실 것이라 그 말을 변치 아니하시고 일어나사 악행하는 자의 집을 치시며 행악을 돕는 자를 치시리니	Yet he also is wise, and will bring evil, and will not call back his words: but will arise against the house of the evildoers, and against the help of them that work iniquity.	Yet He too is wise and brings disaster; He does not call back His words. He will rise up against the house of the wicked and against the allies of evildoers.
ISA	31	3	애굽은 사람이요 신이 아니며 그 말들은 육체요 영이 아니라 여호와께서 그 손을 드시면 돕는 자도 넘어지며 도움을 받는 자도 엎드러져서 다 함께 멸망하리라	Now the Egyptians are men, and not God; and their horses flesh, and not spirit. When the Lord shall stretch out his hand, both he that helpeth shall fall, and he that is holpen shall fall down, and they all shall fail together.	But the Egyptians are men, not God; their horses are flesh, not spirit. When the LORD stretches out His hand, the helper will stumble, and the one he helps will fall; both will perish together.
ISA	31	4	여호와께서 이같이 내게 이르시되 큰 사자나 젊은 사자가 그 식물을 움키고 으르렁거릴 때에 그것을 치려고 여러 목자가 불려왔다 할지라도 그것이 그들의 소리로 인하여 놀라지 아니할 것이요 그들의 떠듦을 인하여 굴복지 아니할 것이라 이와 같이 나 만군의 여호와가 강림하여 시온산과 그 영 위에서 싸울 것이며	For thus hath the Lord spoken unto me, Like as the lion and the young lion roaring on his prey, when a multitude of shepherds is called forth against him, he will not be afraid of their voice, nor abase himself for the noise of them: so shall the Lord of hosts come down to fight for mount Zion, and for the hill thereof.	For this is what the LORD has said to me: “Like a lion roaring or a young lion over its prey— and though a band of shepherds is called out against it, it is not terrified by their shouting or subdued by their clamor— so the LORD of Hosts will come down to do battle on Mount Zion and its heights.
ISA	31	5	새가 날개치며 그 새끼를 보호함 같이 나 만군의 여호와가 예루살렘을 보호할 것이라 그것을 호위하며 건지며 넘어와서 구원하리라 하셨나니	As birds flying, so will the Lord of hosts defend Jerusalem; defending also he will deliver it; and passing over he will preserve it.	Like birds hovering overhead, so the LORD of Hosts will protect Jerusalem. He will shield it and deliver it; He will pass over it and preserve it.”
ISA	31	6	이스라엘 자손들아 저희는 심히 거역하던 자에게로 돌아오라	Turn ye unto him from whom the children of Israel have deeply revolted.	Return to the One against whom you have so blatantly rebelled, O children of Israel.
ISA	31	7	너희가 자기 손으로 만들어 범죄한 은우상, 금우상을 그 날에는 각 사람이 던져버릴 것이며	For in that day every man shall cast away his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which your own hands have made unto you for a sin.	For on that day, every one of you will reject the idols of silver and gold that your own hands have sinfully made.
ISA	31	8	앗수르는 칼에 엎드러질 것이나 사람의 칼로 말미암음이 아니겠고 칼에 삼키울 것이나 여러 사람의 칼로 말미암음이 아닐 것이며 그는 칼 앞에서 도망할 것이요 그 장정들은 복역하는 자가 될 것이라	Then shall the Assyrian fall with the sword, not of a mighty man; and the sword, not of a mean man, shall devour him: but he shall flee from the sword, and his young men shall be discomfited.	“Then Assyria will fall, but not by the sword of man; a sword will devour them, but not one made by mortals. They will flee before the sword, and their young men will be put to forced labor.
ISA	31	9	그의 반석은 두려움을 인하여 물러가겠고 그의 방백들은 기호를 인하여 놀라리라 이는 여호와의 말씀이라 여호와의 불은 시온에 있고 여호와의 풀무는 예루살렘에 있느니라	And he shall pass over to his strong hold for fear, and his princes shall be afraid of the ensign, saith the Lord, whose fire is in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem.	Their rock will pass away for fear, and their princes will panic at the sight of the battle standard,” declares the LORD, whose fire is in Zion, whose furnace is in Jerusalem.
ISA	32	1	보라 장차 한 왕이 의로 통치할 것이요 방백들이 공평으로 정사할 것이며	Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness, and princes shall rule in judgment.	Behold, a king will reign in righteousness, and princes will rule with justice.
ISA	32	2	또 그 사람은 광풍을 피하는 곳, 폭우를 가리우는 곳 같을 것이며 마른 땅에 냇물 같을 것이며 곤비한 땅에 큰 바위 그늘 같으리니	And a man shall be as an hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest; as rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.	Each will be like a shelter from the wind, a refuge from the storm, like streams of water in a dry land, like the shadow of a great rock in an arid land.
ISA	32	3	보는 자의 눈이 감기지 아니할 것이요 듣는 자의 귀가 기울어질 것이며	And the eyes of them that see shall not be dim, and the ears of them that hear shall hearken.	Then the eyes of those who see will no longer be closed, and the ears of those who hear will listen.
ISA	32	4	조급한 자의 마음이 지식을 깨닫고 어눌한 자의 혀가 민첩하여 말을 분명히 할 것이라	The heart also of the rash shall understand knowledge, and the tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to speak plainly.	The mind of the rash will know and understand, and the stammering tongue will speak clearly and fluently.
ISA	32	5	어리석은 자를 다시 존귀하다 칭하지 아니하겠고 궤휼한 자를 다시 정대하다 말하지 아니하리니	The vile person shall be no more called liberal, nor the churl said to be bountiful.	No longer will a fool be called noble, nor a scoundrel be respected.
ISA	32	6	이는 어리석은 자는 어리석은 것을 말하며 그 마음에 불의를 품어 간사를 행하며 패역한 말로 여호와를 거스리며 주린 자의 심령을 비게 하며 목마른 자의 마시는 것을 없어지게 함이며	For the vile person will speak villany, and his heart will work iniquity, to practise hypocrisy, and to utter error against the Lord, to make empty the soul of the hungry, and he will cause the drink of the thirsty to fail.	For a fool speaks foolishness; his mind plots iniquity. He practices ungodliness and speaks falsely about the LORD; he leaves the hungry empty and deprives the thirsty of drink.
ISA	32	7	궤휼한 자는 그 그릇이 악하여 악한 계획을 베풀어 거짓말로 가련한 자를 멸하며 빈핍한 자가 말을 바르게 할지라도 그리함이어니와	The instruments also of the churl are evil: he deviseth wicked devices to destroy the poor with lying words, even when the needy speaketh right.	The weapons of the scoundrel are destructive; he hatches plots to destroy the poor with lies, even when the plea of the needy is just.
ISA	32	8	고명한 자는 고명한 일을 도모하나니 그는 항상 고명한 일에 서리라	But the liberal deviseth liberal things; and by liberal things shall he stand.	But a noble man makes honorable plans; he stands up for worthy causes.
ISA	32	9	너희 안일한 부녀들아 일어나 내 목소리를 들을지어다 너희 염려 없는 딸들아 내 말에 귀를 기울일지라	Rise up, ye women that are at ease; hear my voice, ye careless daughters; give ear unto my speech.	Stand up, you complacent women; listen to me. Give ear to my word, you overconfident daughters.
ISA	32	10	너희 염려 없는 여자들아 일 년 남짓이 지나면 너희가 당황하여 하리니 포도 수확이 없으며 열매 거두는 기한이 이르지 않을 것임이니라	Many days and years shall ye be troubled, ye careless women: for the vintage shall fail, the gathering shall not come.	In a little more than a year you will tremble, O secure ones. For the grape harvest will fail and the fruit harvest will not arrive.
ISA	32	11	너희 안일한 여자들아 떨지어다 너희 염려 없는 자들아 당황하여 할지어다 옷을 벗어 몸을 드러내고 베로 허리를 동일지어다	Tremble, ye women that are at ease; be troubled, ye careless ones: strip you, and make you bare, and gird sackcloth upon your loins.	Shudder, you ladies of leisure; tremble, you daughters of complacency. Strip yourselves bare and put sackcloth around your waists.
ISA	32	12	좋은 밭을 위하며 열매 많은 포도나무를 위하여 가슴을 치게 될 것이니라	They shall lament for the teats, for the pleasant fields, for the fruitful vine.	Beat your breasts for the pleasant fields, for the fruitful vines,
ISA	32	13	형극과 질려가 내 백성의 땅에 나며 희락의 성읍, 기뻐하는 모든 집에 나리니	Upon the land of my people shall come up thorns and briers; yea, upon all the houses of joy in the joyous city:	and for the land of my people, overgrown with thorns and briers— even for every house of merriment in this city of revelry.
ISA	32	14	대저 궁전이 폐한 바 되며 인구 많던 성읍이 적막하며 산과 망대가 영영히 굴혈이 되며 들나귀의 즐겨하는 곳과 양 떼의 풀 먹는 곳이 될 것임이어니와	Because the palaces shall be forsaken; the multitude of the city shall be left; the forts and towers shall be for dens for ever, a joy of wild asses, a pasture of flocks;	For the palace will be forsaken, the busy city abandoned. The hill and the watchtower will become caves forever— the delight of wild donkeys and a pasture for flocks—
ISA	32	15	필경은 위에서부터 성신을 우리에게 부어주시리니 광야가 아름다운 밭이 되며 아름다운 밭을 삼림으로 여기게 되리라	Until the spirit be poured upon us from on high, and the wilderness be a fruitful field, and the fruitful field be counted for a forest.	until the Spirit is poured out upon us from on high. Then the desert will be an orchard, and the orchard will seem like a forest.
ISA	32	16	그 때에 공평이 광야에 거하며 의가 아름다운 밭에 있으리니	Then judgment shall dwell in the wilderness, and righteousness remain in the fruitful field.	Then justice will inhabit the wilderness, and righteousness will dwell in the fertile field.
ISA	32	17	의의 공효는 화평이요 의의 결과는 영원한 평안과 안전이라	And the work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever.	The work of righteousness will be peace; the service of righteousness will be quiet confidence forever.
ISA	32	18	내 백성이 화평한 집과 안전한 거처와 종용히 쉬는 곳에 있으려니와	And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places;	Then my people will dwell in a peaceful place, in safe and secure places of rest.
ISA	32	19	먼저 그 삼림은 우박에 상하고 성읍은 파괴되리라	When it shall hail, coming down on the forest; and the city shall be low in a low place.	But hail will level the forest, and the city will sink to the depths.
ISA	32	20	모든 물가에 씨를 뿌리고 소와 나귀를 그리로 모은 너희는 복이 있느니라	Blessed are ye that sow beside all waters, that send forth thither the feet of the ox and the ass.	Blessed are those who sow beside abundant waters, who let the ox and donkey range freely.
ISA	33	1	화 있을진저 너 학대를 당치 아니하고도 학대하며 속임을 입지 아니하고도 속이는 자여 네가 학대하기를 마치면 네가 학대를 당할 것이며 네가 속이기를 그치면 사람이 너를 속이리라	Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled; and dealest treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee! when thou shalt cease to spoil, thou shalt be spoiled; and when thou shalt make an end to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee.	Woe to you, O destroyer never destroyed, O traitor never betrayed! When you have finished destroying, you will be destroyed. When you have finished betraying, you will be betrayed.
ISA	33	2	여호와여 우리에게 은혜를 베푸소서 우리가 주를 앙망하오니 주는 아침마다 우리의 팔이 되시며 환난 때에 우리의 구원이 되소서	O Lord, be gracious unto us; we have waited for thee: be thou their arm every morning, our salvation also in the time of trouble.	O LORD, be gracious to us! We wait for You. Be our strength every morning and our salvation in time of trouble.
ISA	33	3	진동 시키시는 소리로 인하여 민족들이 도망하며 주께서 일어나시므로 인하여 열방이 흩어졌나이다	At the noise of the tumult the people fled; at the lifting up of thyself the nations were scattered.	The peoples flee the thunder of Your voice; the nations scatter when You rise.
ISA	33	4	황충의 모임 같이 사람이 너희 노략물을 모을 것이며 메뚜기의 뛰어 오름 같이 그들이 그 위로 뛰어 오르리라	And your spoil shall be gathered like the gathering of the caterpiller: as the running to and fro of locusts shall he run upon them.	Your spoil, O nations, is gathered as by locusts; like a swarm of locusts men sweep over it.
ISA	33	5	여호와께서는 지존하시니 이는 높은 데 거하심이요 공평과 의로 시온에 충만케 하심이라	The Lord is exalted; for he dwelleth on high: he hath filled Zion with judgment and righteousness.	The LORD is exalted, for He dwells on high; He has filled Zion with justice and righteousness.
ISA	33	6	너의 시대에 평안함이 있으며 구원과 지혜와 지식이 풍성할 것이니 여호와를 경외함이 너의 보배니라	And wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times, and strength of salvation: the fear of the Lord is his treasure.	He will be the sure foundation for your times, a storehouse of salvation, wisdom, and knowledge. The fear of the LORD is Zion’s treasure.
ISA	33	7	보라 그들의 용사가 밖에서 부르짖으며 평화의 사신들이 슬피 곡하며	Behold, their valiant ones shall cry without: the ambassadors of peace shall weep bitterly.	Behold, their valiant ones cry aloud in the streets; the envoys of peace weep bitterly.
ISA	33	8	대로가 황폐하여 행인이 끊치며 대적이 조약을 파하고 성읍들을 멸시하며 사람을 생각지 아니하며	The highways lie waste, the wayfaring man ceaseth: he hath broken the covenant, he hath despised the cities, he regardeth no man.	The highways are deserted; travel has ceased. The treaty has been broken, the witnesses are despised, and human life is disregarded.
ISA	33	9	땅이 슬퍼하고 쇠잔하며 레바논은 부끄러워 마르고 사론은 사막과 같고 바산 갈멜은 목엽을 떨어치는도다	The earth mourneth and languisheth: Lebanon is ashamed and hewn down: Sharon is like a wilderness; and Bashan and Carmel shake off their fruits.	The land mourns and languishes; Lebanon is ashamed and decayed. Sharon is like a desert; Bashan and Carmel shake off their leaves.
ISA	33	10	여호와께서 가라사대 내가 이제 일어나며 내가 이제 나를 높이며 내가 이제 지극히 높이우리니	Now will I rise, saith the Lord; now will I be exalted; now will I lift up myself.	“Now I will arise,” says the LORD. “Now I will lift Myself up. Now I will be exalted.
ISA	33	11	너희가 겨를 잉태하고 짚을 해산할 것이며 너희의 호흡은 불이 되어 너희를 삼킬 것이며	Ye shall conceive chaff, ye shall bring forth stubble: your breath, as fire, shall devour you.	You conceive chaff; you give birth to stubble. Your breath is a fire that will consume you.
ISA	33	12	민족들은 불에 굽는 횟돌 같겠고 베어서 불에 사르는 가시나무 같으리로다	And the people shall be as the burnings of lime: as thorns cut up shall they be burned in the fire.	The peoples will be burned to ashes, like thorns cut down and set ablaze.
ISA	33	13	너희 먼 데 있는 자들아 나의 행한 것을 들으라 너희 가까이 있는 자들아 나의 권능을 알라	Hear, ye that are far off, what I have done; and, ye that are near, acknowledge my might.	You who are far off, hear what I have done; you who are near, acknowledge My might.”
ISA	33	14	시온의 죄인들이 두려워하며 경건치 아니한 자들이 떨며 이르기를 우리 중에 누가 삼키는 불과 함께 거하겠으며 우리 중에 누가 영영히 타는 것과 함께 거하리요 하도다	The sinners in Zion are afraid; fearfulness hath surprised the hypocrites. Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?	The sinners in Zion are afraid; trembling grips the ungodly: “Who of us can dwell with a consuming fire? Who of us can dwell with everlasting flames?”
ISA	33	15	오직 의롭게 행하는 자, 정직히 말하는자, 토색한 재물을 가증히 여기는 자, 손을 흔들어 뇌물을 받지 아니하는 자, 귀를 막아 피 흘리려는 꾀를 듣지 아니하는 자, 눈을 감아 악을 보지 아니하는 자,	He that walketh righteously, and speaketh uprightly; he that despiseth the gain of oppressions, that shaketh his hands from holding of bribes, that stoppeth his ears from hearing of blood, and shutteth his eyes from seeing evil;	He who walks righteously and speaks with sincerity, who refuses gain from extortion, whose hand never takes a bribe, who stops his ears against murderous plots and shuts his eyes tightly against evil—
ISA	33	16	그는 높은 곳에 거하리니 견고한 바위가 그 보장이 되며 그 양식은 공급되고 그 물은 끊치지 아니하리라 하셨느니라	He shall dwell on high: his place of defence shall be the munitions of rocks: bread shall be given him; his waters shall be sure.	he will dwell on the heights; the mountain fortress will be his refuge; his food will be provided and his water assured.
ISA	33	17	너의 눈은 그 영광 중의 왕을 보며 광활한 땅을 목도하겠고	Thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty: they shall behold the land that is very far off.	Your eyes will see the King in His beauty and behold a land that stretches afar.
ISA	33	18	너의 마음에는 두려워하던 것을 생각하여 내리라 계산하던 자가 어디 있느냐 공세를 칭량하던 자가 어디 있느냐 망대를 계수하던 자가 어디 있느냐	Thine heart shall meditate terror. Where is the scribe? where is the receiver? where is he that counted the towers?	Your mind will ponder the former terror: “Where is he who tallies? Where is he who weighs? Where is he who counts the towers?”
ISA	33	19	네가 강포한 백성을 다시 보지 아니하리라 그 백성은 방언이 어려워서 네가 알아 듣지 못하며 말이 이상하여 네가 깨닫지 못하는 자니라	Thou shalt not see a fierce people, a people of a deeper speech than thou canst perceive; of a stammering tongue, that thou canst not understand.	You will no longer see the insolent, a people whose speech is unintelligible, who stammer in a language you cannot understand.
ISA	33	20	우리의 절기 지키는 시온성을 보라 네 눈에 안정한 처소된 예루살렘이 보이리니 그것은 옮겨지지 아니할 장막이라 그 말뚝이 영영히 뽑히지 아니할 것이요 그 줄이 하나도 끊치지 아니할 것이며	Look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities: thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be taken down; not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken.	Look upon Zion, the city of our appointed feasts. Your eyes will see Jerusalem, a peaceful pasture, a tent that does not wander; its tent pegs will not be pulled up, nor will any of its cords be broken.
ISA	33	21	여호와께서는 거기서 위엄 중에 우리와 함께 계시리니 그곳은 마치 노질하는 배나 큰 배가 통행치 못할 넓은 하수나 강이 둘림 같을 것이라	But there the glorious Lord will be unto us a place of broad rivers and streams; wherein shall go no galley with oars, neither shall gallant ship pass thereby.	But there the Majestic One, our LORD, will be for us a place of rivers and wide canals, where no galley with oars will row, and no majestic vessel will pass.
ISA	33	22	대저 여호와는 우리 재판장이시요 여호와는 우리에게 율법을 세우신 자시요 여호와는 우리의 왕이시니 우리를 구원하실 것임이니라	For the Lord is our judge, the Lord is our lawgiver, the Lord is our king; he will save us.	For the LORD is our Judge, the LORD is our lawgiver, the LORD is our King. It is He who will save us.
ISA	33	23	너의 돛대 줄이 풀렸었고 돛대 밑을 튼튼히 하지 못하였었고 돛을 달지 못하였느니라 때가 되면 많은 재물을 탈취하여 나누리니 저는 자도 그 재물을 취할 것이며	Thy tacklings are loosed; they could not well strengthen their mast, they could not spread the sail: then is the prey of a great spoil divided; the lame take the prey.	Your ropes are slack; they cannot secure the mast or spread the sail. Then an abundance of spoils will be divided, and even the lame will carry off plunder.
ISA	33	24	그 거민은 내가 병들었노라 하지 아니할 것이라 거기 거하는 백성이 사죄함을 받으리라	And the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick: the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity.	And no resident of Zion will say, “I am sick.” The people who dwell there will be forgiven of iniquity.
ISA	34	1	열국이여 너희는 나아와 들을지어다 민족들이여 귀를 기울일지어다 땅과 땅에 충만한 것, 세계와 세계에서 나는 모든 것이여 들을지어다	Come near, ye nations, to hear; and hearken, ye people: let the earth hear, and all that is therein; the world, and all things that come forth of it.	Come near, O nations, to listen; pay attention, O peoples. Let the earth hear, and all that fills it, the world and all that springs from it.
ISA	34	2	대저 여호와께서 만국을 향하여 진노하시며 그들의 만군을 향하여 분내사 그들을 진멸하시며 살륙케 하셨은즉	For the indignation of the Lord is upon all nations, and his fury upon all their armies: he hath utterly destroyed them, he hath delivered them to the slaughter.	The LORD is angry with all the nations and furious with all their armies. He will devote them to destruction; He will give them over to slaughter.
ISA	34	3	그 살륙 당한 자는 내어던진바 되며 그 사체의 악취가 솟아오르고 그 피에 산들이 녹을 것이며	Their slain also shall be cast out, and their stink shall come up out of their carcases, and the mountains shall be melted with their blood.	Their slain will be left unburied, and the stench of their corpses will rise; the mountains will flow with their blood.
ISA	34	4	하늘의 만상이 사라지고 하늘들이 두루마리 같이 말리되 그 만상의 쇠잔함이 포도나무 잎이 마름 같고 무화과나무 잎이 마름 같으리라	And all the host of heaven shall be dissolved, and the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll: and all their host shall fall down, as the leaf falleth off from the vine, and as a falling fig from the fig tree.	All the stars of heaven will be dissolved. The skies will be rolled up like a scroll, and all their stars will fall like withered leaves from the vine, like foliage from the fig tree.
ISA	34	5	여호와의 칼이 하늘에서 족하게 마셨은즉 보라 이것이 에돔 위에 내리며 멸망으로 정한 백성 위에 내려서 그를 심판할 것이라	For my sword shall be bathed in heaven: behold, it shall come down upon Idumea, and upon the people of my curse, to judgment.	When My sword has drunk its fill in the heavens, then it will come down upon Edom, upon the people I have devoted to destruction.
ISA	34	6	여호와의 칼이 피 곧 어린 양과 염소의 피에 만족하고 기름 곧 수양의 콩팥 기름에 윤택하니 이는 여호와께서 보스라에서 희생을 내시며 에돔 땅에서 큰 살륙을 행하심이라	The sword of the Lord is filled with blood, it is made fat with fatness, and with the blood of lambs and goats, with the fat of the kidneys of rams: for the Lord hath a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the land of Idumea.	The sword of the LORD is bathed in blood. It drips with fat— with the blood of lambs and goats, with the fat of the kidneys of rams. For the LORD has a sacrifice in Bozrah, a great slaughter in the land of Edom.
ISA	34	7	들소와 송아지와 수소가 한 가지로 도살장에 내려가니 그들의 땅이 피에 취하며 흙이 기름으로 윤택하리라	And the unicorns shall come down with them, and the bullocks with the bulls; and their land shall be soaked with blood, and their dust made fat with fatness.	And the wild oxen will fall with them, the young bulls with the strong ones. Their land will be drenched with blood, and their soil will be soaked with fat.
ISA	34	8	이것은 여호와의 보수할 날이요 시온의 송사를 위하여 신원하실 해라	For it is the day of the Lord’s vengeance, and the year of recompences for the controversy of Zion.	For the LORD has a day of vengeance, a year of recompense for the cause of Zion.
ISA	34	9	에돔의 시내들은 변하여 역청이 되고 그 티끌은 유황이 되고 그 땅은 불 붙는 역청이 되며	And the streams thereof shall be turned into pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and the land thereof shall become burning pitch.	Edom’s streams will be turned to tar, and her soil to sulfur; her land will become a blazing pitch.
ISA	34	10	낮에나 밤에나 꺼지지 않고 그 연기가 끊임 없이 떠오를 것이며 세세에 황무하여 그리로 지날 자가 영영히 없겠고	It shall not be quenched night nor day; the smoke thereof shall go up for ever: from generation to generation it shall lie waste; none shall pass through it for ever and ever.	It will not be quenched—day or night. Its smoke will ascend forever. From generation to generation it will lie desolate; no one will ever again pass through it.
ISA	34	11	당아와 고슴도치가 그 땅을 차지하며 부엉이와 까마귀가 거기 거할 것이라 여호와께서 혼란의 줄과 공허의 추를 에돔에 베푸실 것인즉	But the cormorant and the bittern shall possess it; the owl also and the raven shall dwell in it: and he shall stretch out upon it the line of confusion, and the stones of emptiness.	The desert owl and screech owl will possess it, and the great owl and raven will dwell in it. The LORD will stretch out over Edom a measuring line of chaos and a plumb line of destruction.
ISA	34	12	그들이 국가를 이으려 하여 귀인들을 부르되 아무도 없겠고 그 모든 방백도 없게 될 것이요	They shall call the nobles thereof to the kingdom, but none shall be there, and all her princes shall be nothing.	No nobles will be left to proclaim a king, and all her princes will come to nothing.
ISA	34	13	그 궁궐에는 가시나무가 나며 그 견고한 성에는 엉겅퀴와 새품이 자라서 시랑의 굴과 타조의 처소가 될 것이니	And thorns shall come up in her palaces, nettles and brambles in the fortresses thereof: and it shall be an habitation of dragons, and a court for owls.	Her towers will be overgrown with thorns, her fortresses with thistles and briers. She will become a haunt for jackals, an abode for ostriches.
ISA	34	14	들짐승이 이리와 만나며 수염소가 그 동류를 부르며 올빼미가 거기 거하여 쉬는 처소를 삼으며	The wild beasts of the desert shall also meet with the wild beasts of the island, and the satyr shall cry to his fellow; the screech owl also shall rest there, and find for herself a place of rest.	The desert creatures will meet with hyenas, and one wild goat will call to another. There the night creature will settle and find her place of repose.
ISA	34	15	부엉이가 거기 깃들이고 알을 낳아 까서 그 그늘에 모으며 솔개들도 그 짝과 함께 거기 모이리라	There shall the great owl make her nest, and lay, and hatch, and gather under her shadow: there shall the vultures also be gathered, every one with her mate.	There the owl will make her nest; she will lay and hatch her eggs and gather her brood under her shadow. Even there the birds of prey will gather, each with its mate.
ISA	34	16	너희는 여호와의 책을 자세히 읽어보라 이것들이 하나도 빠진 것이 없고 하나도 그 짝이 없는 것이 없으리니 이는 여호와의 입이 이를 명하셨고 그의 신이 이것들을 모으셨음이라	Seek ye out of the book of the Lord, and read: no one of these shall fail, none shall want her mate: for my mouth it hath commanded, and his spirit it hath gathered them.	Search and read the scroll of the LORD: Not one of these will go missing, not one will lack her mate, because He has ordered it by His mouth, and He will gather them by His Spirit.
ISA	34	17	여호와께서 그것들을 위하여 제비를 뽑으시며 친수로 줄을 띠어 그 땅을 그것들에게 나뉘 주셨으니 그것들이 영영히 차지하며 대대로 거기 거하리라	And he hath cast the lot for them, and his hand hath divided it unto them by line: they shall possess it for ever, from generation to generation shall they dwell therein.	He has allotted their portion; His hand has distributed it by measure. They will possess it forever; they will dwell in it from generation to generation.
ISA	35	1	광야와 메마른 땅이 기뻐하며 사막이 백합화 같이 피어 즐거워하며	The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them; and the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose.	The wilderness and the land will be glad; the desert will rejoice and blossom like a rose.
ISA	35	2	무성하게 피어 기쁜 노래로 즐거워하며 레바논의 영광과 갈멜과 사론의 아름다움을 얻을 것이라 그것들이 여호와의 영광 곧 우리 하나님의 아름다움을 보리로다	It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing: the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon, they shall see the glory of the Lord, and the excellency of our God.	It will bloom profusely and rejoice with joy and singing. The glory of Lebanon will be given to it, the splendor of Carmel and Sharon. They will see the glory of the LORD, the splendor of our God.
ISA	35	3	너희는 약한 손을 강하게 하여주며 떨리는 무릎을 굳게 하여주며	Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees.	Strengthen the limp hands and steady the feeble knees!
ISA	35	4	겁내는 자에게 이르기를 너는 굳세게 하라, 두려워 말라, 보라 너희 하나님이 오사 보수하시며 보복하여 주실 것이라 그가 오사 너희를 구하시리라 하라	Say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not: behold, your God will come with vengeance, even God with a recompence; he will come and save you.	Say to those with anxious hearts: “Be strong, do not fear! Behold, your God will come with vengeance. With divine retribution He will come to save you.”
ISA	35	5	그 때에 소경의 눈이 밝을 것이며 귀머거리의 귀가 열릴 것이며	Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped.	Then the eyes of the blind will be opened and the ears of the deaf unstopped.
ISA	35	6	그 때에 저는 자는 사슴 같이 뛸 것이며 벙어리의 혀는 노래하리니 이는 광야에서 물이 솟겠고 사막에서 시내가 흐를 것임이라	Then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the dumb sing: for in the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the desert.	Then the lame will leap like a deer and the mute tongue will shout for joy. For waters will gush forth in the wilderness, and streams in the desert.
ISA	35	7	뜨거운 사막이 변하여 못이 될 것이며 메마른 땅이 변하여 원천이 될 것이며 시랑의 눕던 곳에 풀과 갈대와 부들이 날 것이며	And the parched ground shall become a pool, and the thirsty land springs of water: in the habitation of dragons, where each lay, shall be grass with reeds and rushes.	The parched ground will become a pool, the thirsty land springs of water. In the haunt where jackals once lay, there will be grass and reeds and papyrus.
ISA	35	8	거기 대로가 있어 그 길을 거룩한 길이라 일컫는바 되리니 깨끗지 못한 자는 지나지 못하겠고 오직 구속함을 입은 자들을 위하여 있게 된 것이라 우매한 행인은 그 길을 범치 못할 것이며	And an highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called The way of holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it; but it shall be for those: the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein.	And there will be a highway called the Way of Holiness. The unclean will not travel it— only those who walk in the Way— and fools will not stray onto it.
ISA	35	9	거기는 사자가 없고 사나운 짐승이 그리로 올라가지 아니하므로 그것을 만나지 못하겠고 오직 구속함을 얻은 자만 그리로 행할 것이며	No lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast shall go up thereon, it shall not be found there; but the redeemed shall walk there:	No lion will be there, and no vicious beast will go up on it. Such will not be found there, but the redeemed will walk upon it.
ISA	35	10	여호와의 속량함을 얻은 자들이 돌아오되 노래하며 시온에 이르러 그 머리 위에 영영한 희락을 띠고 기쁨과 즐거움을 얻으리니 슬픔과 탄식이 달아나리로다	And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.	So the redeemed of the LORD will return and enter Zion with singing, crowned with everlasting joy. Gladness and joy will overtake them, and sorrow and sighing will flee.
ISA	36	1	히스기야 왕 십사 년에 앗수르 왕 산헤립이 올라와서 유다 모든 견고한 성을 쳐서 취하니라	Now it came to pass in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah, that Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the defenced cities of Judah, and took them.	In the fourteenth year of Hezekiah’s reign, Sennacherib king of Assyria attacked and captured all the fortified cities of Judah.
ISA	36	2	앗수르 왕이 라기스에서부터 랍사게를 예루살렘으로 보내되 대군을 거느리고 히스기야 왕에게로 가게 하매 그가 세탁업자의 터의 대로 윗못 수도구 곁에 서매	And the king of Assyria sent Rabshakeh from Lachish to Jerusalem unto king Hezekiah with a great army. And he stood by the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the fuller’s field.	And the king of Assyria sent the Rabshakeh, with a great army, from Lachish to King Hezekiah at Jerusalem. And he stopped by the aqueduct of the upper pool, on the road to the Launderer’s Field.
ISA	36	3	힐기야의 아들 궁내 대신 엘리아김과 서기관 셉나와 아삽의 아들 사관 요아가 그에게 나아가니라	Then came forth unto him Eliakim, Hilkiah’s son, which was over the house, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, Asaph’s son, the recorder.	Then Eliakim son of Hilkiah the palace administrator, Shebna the scribe, and Joah son of Asaph the recorder, went out to him.
ISA	36	4	랍사게가 그들에게 이르되 이제 히스기야에게 고하라 대왕 앗수르 왕이 이같이 말씀하시기를 네가 의뢰하니 무엇을 의뢰하느냐	And Rabshakeh said unto them, Say ye now to Hezekiah, Thus saith the great king, the king of Assyria, What confidence is this wherein thou trustest?	The Rabshakeh said to them, “Tell Hezekiah that this is what the great king, the king of Assyria, says: What is the basis of this confidence of yours?
ISA	36	5	내가 말하노니 네가 족히 싸울 모략과 용맹이 있노라 함은 입술에 붙은 말뿐이니라 네가 이제 누구를 의뢰하고 나를 반역하느냐	I say, sayest thou, (but they are but vain words) I have counsel and strength for war: now on whom dost thou trust, that thou rebellest against me?	You claim to have a strategy and strength for war, but these are empty words. In whom are you now trusting, that you have rebelled against me?
ISA	36	6	보라 네가 애굽을 의뢰하도다 그것은 상한 갈대 지팡이와 일반이라 사람이 그것을 의지하면 손에 찔려들어가리니 애굽 왕 바로는 그 의뢰하는 자에게 이와 같으니라	Lo, thou trustest in the staff of this broken reed, on Egypt; whereon if a man lean, it will go into his hand, and pierce it: so is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all that trust in him.	Look now, you are trusting in Egypt, that splintered reed of a staff that will pierce the hand of anyone who leans on it. Such is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all who trust in him.
ISA	36	7	혹시 네가 내게 이르기를 우리는 우리 하나님 여호와를 의뢰하노라 하리라마는 그는 그의 산당과 제단을 히스기야가 제하여 버리고 유다와 예루살렘에 명하기를 너희는 이 제단 앞에서만 경배하라 하던 그 신이 아니냐 하셨느니라	But if thou say to me, We trust in the Lord our God: is it not he, whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath taken away, and said to Judah and to Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this altar?	But if you say to me, ‘We trust in the LORD our God,’ is He not the One whose high places and altars Hezekiah has removed, saying to Judah and Jerusalem, ‘You must worship before this altar’?
ISA	36	8	그러므로 이제 청하노니 내 주 앗수르 왕과 내기하라 나는 네게 말 이천 필을 주어도 너는 그 탈 자를 능히 내지 못하리라	Now therefore give pledges, I pray thee, to my master the king of Assyria, and I will give thee two thousand horses, if thou be able on thy part to set riders upon them.	Now, therefore, make a bargain with my master, the king of Assyria. I will give you two thousand horses—if you can put riders on them!
ISA	36	9	그런즉 네가 어찌 내 주의 종 가운데 극히 작은 장관 한 사람인들 물리칠 수 있으랴 어찌 애굽을 의뢰하여 병거와 기병을 얻으려 하느냐	How then wilt thou turn away the face of one captain of the least of my master’s servants, and put thy trust on Egypt for chariots and for horsemen?	For how can you repel a single officer among the least of my master’s servants when you depend on Egypt for chariots and horsemen?
ISA	36	10	내가 이제 올라와서 이 땅을 멸하는 것이 여호와의 뜻이 없음이겠느냐 여호와께서 내게 이르시기를 올라가 그 땅을 쳐서 멸하라 하셨느니라	And am I now come up without the Lord against this land to destroy it? the Lord said unto me, Go up against this land, and destroy it.	So now, was it apart from the LORD that I have come up against this land to destroy it? The LORD Himself said to me, ‘Go up against this land and destroy it.’”
ISA	36	11	이에 엘리아김과 셉나와 요아가 랍사게에게 이르되 우리가 아람 방언을 아오니 청컨대 그 방언으로 당신의 종들에게 말씀하고 성 위에 있는 백성의 듣는 데서 유다 방언으로 말하지 마소서	Then said Eliakim and Shebna and Joah unto Rabshakeh, Speak, I pray thee, unto thy servants in the Syrian language; for we understand it: and speak not to us in the Jews’ language, in the ears of the people that are on the wall.	Then Eliakim, Shebna, and Joah said to the Rabshakeh, “Please speak to your servants in Aramaic, since we understand it. Do not speak to us in Hebrew in the hearing of the people on the wall.”
ISA	36	12	랍사게가 가로되 내 주께서 이 일을 네 주와 네게만 말하라고 나를 보내신 것이냐 너희와 함께 자기의 대변을 먹으며 자기의 소변을 마실 성 위에 앉은 사람들에게도 하라고 보내신 것이 아니냐	But Rabshakeh said, Hath my master sent me to thy master and to thee to speak these words? hath he not sent me to the men that sit upon the wall, that they may eat their own dung, and drink their own piss with you?	But the Rabshakeh replied, “Has my master sent me to speak these words only to you and your master, and not to the men sitting on the wall, who are destined with you to eat their own dung and drink their own urine?”
ISA	36	13	이에 랍사게가 일어서서 유다 방언으로 크게 외쳐 가로되 너희는 대왕 앗수르 왕의 말씀을 들으라	Then Rabshakeh stood, and cried with a loud voice in the Jews’ language, and said, Hear ye the words of the great king, the king of Assyria.	Then the Rabshakeh stood and called out loudly in Hebrew: “Hear the words of the great king, the king of Assyria!
ISA	36	14	왕의 말씀에 너희는 히스기야에게 미혹되지 말라 그가 능히 너희를 건지지 못할 것이니라	Thus saith the king, Let not Hezekiah deceive you: for he shall not be able to deliver you.	This is what the king says: Do not let Hezekiah deceive you, for he cannot deliver you.
ISA	36	15	히스기야가 너희로 여호와를 의뢰하게 하려는 것을 받지 말라 그가 말하기를 여호와께서 반드시 우리를 건지시리니 이 성이 앗수르 왕의 손에 붙임이 되지 아니하리라 할지라도	Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the Lord, saying, The Lord will surely deliver us: this city shall not be delivered into the hand of the king of Assyria.	Do not let Hezekiah persuade you to trust in the LORD when he says, ‘The LORD will surely deliver us; this city will not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.’
ISA	36	16	히스기야를 청종치 말라 앗수르 왕이 또 말씀하시기를 너희는 내게 항복하고 내게로 나아오라 그리하면 너희가 각각 자기의 포도와 자기의 무화과를 먹을 것이며 각각 자기의 우물 물을 마실 것이요	Hearken not to Hezekiah: for thus saith the king of Assyria, Make an agreement with me by a present, and come out to me: and eat ye every one of his vine, and every one of his fig tree, and drink ye every one the waters of his own cistern;	Do not listen to Hezekiah, for this is what the king of Assyria says: Make peace with me and come out to me. Then every one of you will eat from his own vine and his own fig tree, and drink water from his own cistern,
ISA	36	17	내가 와서 너희를 너희 본토와 같이 곡식과 포도주와 떡과 포도원이 있는 땅에 옮기기까지 하리라	Until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a land of bread and vineyards.	until I come and take you away to a land like your own—a land of grain and new wine, a land of bread and vineyards.
ISA	36	18	혹시 히스기야가 너희에게 이르기를 여호와께서 우리를 건지시리라 할지라도 꾀임을 받지 말라 열국의 신들 중에 그 땅을 앗수르 왕의 손에서 건진 자가 있느냐	Beware lest Hezekiah persuade you, saying, The Lord will deliver us. Hath any of the gods of the nations delivered his land out of the hand of the king of Assyria?	Do not let Hezekiah mislead you when he says, ‘The LORD will deliver us.’ Has the god of any nation ever delivered his land from the hand of the king of Assyria?
ISA	36	19	하맛과 아르밧의 신들이 어디 있느냐 스발와임의 신들이 어디 있느냐 그들이 사마리아를 내 손에서 건졌느냐	Where are the gods of Hamath and Arphad? where are the gods of Sepharvaim? and have they delivered Samaria out of my hand?	Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim? Have they delivered Samaria from my hand?
ISA	36	20	이 열방의 신들 중에 어떤 신이 그 나라를 내 손에서 건져내었기에 여호와가 능히 예루살렘을 내 손에서 건지겠느냐 하셨느니라	Who are they among all the gods of these lands, that have delivered their land out of my hand, that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?	Who among all the gods of these lands has delivered his land from my hand? How then can the LORD deliver Jerusalem from my hand?”
ISA	36	21	그러나 그들이 잠잠하여 한 말도 대답지 아니하였으니 이는 왕이 그들에게 명하여 대답지 말라 하였음이었더라	But they held their peace, and answered him not a word: for the king’s commandment was, saying, Answer him not.	But the people remained silent and did not answer a word, for Hezekiah had commanded, “Do not answer him.”
ISA	36	22	때에 힐기야의 아들 궁내대신 엘리아김과 서기관 셉나와 아삽의 아들 사관 요아가 그 옷을 찢고 히스기야에게 나아가서 랍사게의 말을 고하니라	Then came Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah, that was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, the son of Asaph, the recorder, to Hezekiah with their clothes rent, and told him the words of Rabshakeh.	Then Hilkiah’s son Eliakim the palace administrator, Shebna the scribe, and Asaph’s son Joah the recorder came to Hezekiah with their clothes torn, and they relayed to him the words of the Rabshakeh.
ISA	37	1	히스기야 왕이 듣고 그 옷을 찢고 굵은 베를 입고 여호와의 전으로 갔고	And it came to pass, when king Hezekiah heard it, that he rent his clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the house of the Lord.	On hearing this report, King Hezekiah tore his clothes, put on sackcloth, and entered the house of the LORD.
ISA	37	2	궁내대신 엘리아김과 서기관 셉나와 제사장 중 어른들도 굵은 베를 입으니라 왕이 그들을 아모스의 아들 선지자 이사야에게로 보내매	And he sent Eliakim, who was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests covered with sackcloth, unto Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz.	And he sent Eliakim the palace administrator, Shebna the scribe, and the leading priests, all wearing sackcloth, to the prophet Isaiah son of Amoz
ISA	37	3	그들이 이사야에게 이르되 히스기야의 말씀에 오늘은 환난과 책벌과 능욕의 날이라 아이를 낳으려하나 해산할 힘이 없음 같도다	And they said unto him, Thus saith Hezekiah, This day is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of blasphemy: for the children are come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.	to tell him, “This is what Hezekiah says: Today is a day of distress, rebuke, and disgrace; for children have come to the point of birth, but there is no strength to deliver them.
ISA	37	4	당신의 하나님 여호와께서 랍사게의 말을 들으셨을 것이라 그가 그 주 앗수르 왕의 보냄을 받고 사시는 하나님을 훼방하였은즉 당신의 하나님 여호와께서 혹시 그 말에 견책하실까 하노라 그런즉 바라건대 당신은 이 남아있는 자를 위하여 기도하라 하시더이다	It may be the Lord thy God will hear the words of Rabshakeh, whom the king of Assyria his master hath sent to reproach the living God, and will reprove the words which the Lord thy God hath heard: wherefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is left.	Perhaps the LORD your God will hear the words of the Rabshakeh, whom his master the king of Assyria has sent to defy the living God, and He will rebuke him for the words that the LORD your God has heard. Therefore lift up a prayer for the remnant that still survives.”
ISA	37	5	이와 같이 히스기야 왕의 신하들이 이사야에게 나아가매	So the servants of king Hezekiah came to Isaiah.	So the servants of King Hezekiah went to Isaiah,
ISA	37	6	이사야가 그들에게 이르되 너희는 너희 주에게 이렇게 고하라 여호와께서 말씀하시되 너희의 들은바 앗수르 왕의 종들이 나를 능욕한 말을 인하여 두려워 말라	And Isaiah said unto them, Thus shall ye say unto your master, Thus saith the Lord, Be not afraid of the words that thou hast heard, wherewith the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me.	who replied, “Tell your master that this is what the LORD says: ‘Do not be afraid of the words you have heard, with which the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed Me.
ISA	37	7	보라 내가 신을 그의 속에 두리니 그가 풍성을 듣고 그 고토로 돌아갈 것이며 또 내가 그를 그 고토에서 칼에 죽게 하리라 하셨느니라	Behold, I will send a blast upon him, and he shall hear a rumour, and return to his own land; and I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land.	Behold, I will put a spirit in him so that he will hear a rumor and return to his own land, where I will cause him to fall by the sword.’”
ISA	37	8	랍사게가 앗수르 왕이 라기스를 떠났다 함을 듣고 돌아가다가 그 왕이 립나 치는 것을 만나니라	So Rabshakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria warring against Libnah: for he had heard that he was departed from Lachish.	When the Rabshakeh heard that the king of Assyria had left Lachish, he withdrew and found the king fighting against Libnah.
ISA	37	9	그 때에 앗수르 왕이 구스 왕 디르하가의 일에 대하여 들은즉 이르기를 그가 나와서 왕과 싸우려 한다 하는지라 이 말을 듣고 사자들을 히스기야에게 보내며 가로되	And he heard say concerning Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, He is come forth to make war with thee. And when he heard it, he sent messengers to Hezekiah, saying,	Now Sennacherib had been warned about Tirhakah king of Cush: “He has set out to fight against you.” On hearing this, Sennacherib sent messengers to Hezekiah, saying,
ISA	37	10	너희는 유다 왕 히스기야에게 이같이 고하여 이르기를 너는 너의 의뢰하는 하나님이 예루살렘이 앗수르 왕의 손에 넘어가지 아니하리라 하는 말에 속지 말라	Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of Judah, saying, Let not thy God, in whom thou trustest, deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.	“Give this message to Hezekiah king of Judah: ‘Do not let your God, in whom you trust, deceive you by saying that Jerusalem will not be delivered into the hand of the king of Assyria.
ISA	37	11	앗수르 왕들이 모든 나라에 어떤 일을 행하였으며 그것을 어떻게 멸절시켰는지 네가 들었으리니 네가 건짐을 얻겠느냐	Behold, thou hast heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands by destroying them utterly; and shalt thou be delivered?	Surely you have heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all the other countries, devoting them to destruction. Will you then be spared?
ISA	37	12	나의 열조가 멸하신 열방 고산과 하란과 레셉과 및 들라살에 거하는 에덴 자손을 그 나라 신들이 건졌더냐	Have the gods of the nations delivered them which my fathers have destroyed, as Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children of Eden which were in Telassar?	Did the gods of the nations destroyed by my fathers rescue those nations—the gods of Gozan, Haran, and Rezeph, and of the people of Eden in Telassar?
ISA	37	13	하맛 왕과 아르밧 왕과 스발와임성의 왕과 헤나 왕과 이와 왕이 어디 있느냐 하라 하였더라	Where is the king of Hamath, and the king of Arphad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivah?	Where are the kings of Hamath, Arpad, Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivvah?’”
ISA	37	14	히스기야가 사자의 손에서 글을 받아 보고 여호와의 전에 올라가서 그 글을 여호와 앞에 펴놓고	And Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the messengers, and read it: and Hezekiah went up unto the house of the Lord, and spread it before the Lord.	So Hezekiah received the letter from the messengers, read it, and went up to the house of the LORD and spread it out before the LORD.
ISA	37	15	여호와께 기도하여 가로되	And Hezekiah prayed unto the Lord, saying,	And Hezekiah prayed to the LORD:
ISA	37	16	그룹 사이에 계신 이스라엘 하나님 만군의 여호와여 주는 천하 만국의 유일하신 하나님이시라 주께서 천지를 조성하셨나이다	O Lord of hosts, God of Israel, that dwellest between the cherubims, thou art the God, even thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth: thou hast made heaven and earth.	“O LORD of Hosts, God of Israel, enthroned above the cherubim, You alone are God over all the kingdoms of the earth. You made the heavens and the earth.
ISA	37	17	여호와여 귀를 기울여 들으시옵소서 여호와여 눈을 떠 보시옵소서 산헤립이 사자로 사시는 하나님을 훼방한 모든 말을 들으시옵소서	Incline thine ear, O Lord, and hear; open thine eyes, O Lord, and see: and hear all the words of Sennacherib, which hath sent to reproach the living God.	Incline Your ear, O LORD, and hear; open Your eyes, O LORD, and see. Listen to all the words that Sennacherib has sent to defy the living God.
ISA	37	18	여호와여 앗수르 왕들이 과연 열국과 그 땅을 황폐케 하였고	Of a truth, Lord, the kings of Assyria have laid waste all the nations, and their countries,	Truly, O LORD, the kings of Assyria have laid waste all these countries and their lands.
ISA	37	19	그들의 신들을 불에 던졌사오나 이들은 참 신이 아니라 사람의 손으로 만든 것뿐이요 나무와 돌이라 그러므로 멸망을 당하였나이다	And have cast their gods into the fire: for they were no gods, but the work of men’s hands, wood and stone: therefore they have destroyed them.	They have cast their gods into the fire and destroyed them, for they were not gods, but only wood and stone—the work of human hands.
ISA	37	20	우리 하나님 여호와여 이제 우리를 그의 손에서 구원하사 천하 만국으로 주만 여호와이신 줄을 알게 하옵소서	Now therefore, O Lord our God, save us from his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou art the Lord, even thou only.	And now, O LORD our God, save us from his hand, so that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that You alone, O LORD, are God.”
ISA	37	21	아모스의 아들 이사야가 보내어 히스기야에게 이르되 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께서 말씀하시되 네가 앗수르 왕 산헤립의 일로 내게 기도하였도다 하시고	Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent unto Hezekiah, saying, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Whereas thou hast prayed to me against Sennacherib king of Assyria:	Then Isaiah son of Amoz sent a message to Hezekiah: “This is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: Because you have prayed to Me concerning Sennacherib king of Assyria,
ISA	37	22	여호와께서 그에 대하여 이같이 이르시되 처녀 딸 시온이 너를 멸시하며 조소하였고 딸 예루살렘이 너를 향하여 머리를 흔들었느니라	This is the word which the Lord hath spoken concerning him; The virgin, the daughter of Zion, hath despised thee, and laughed thee to scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head at thee.	this is the word that the LORD has spoken against him: ‘The Virgin Daughter of Zion despises you and mocks you; the Daughter of Jerusalem shakes her head behind you.
ISA	37	23	네가 훼방하며 능욕한 것은 누구에게냐 네가 소리를 높이며 눈을 높이 들어 향한 것은 누구에게냐 곧 이스라엘의 거룩한 자에게니라	Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom hast thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against the Holy One of Israel.	Whom have you taunted and blasphemed? Against whom have you raised your voice and lifted your eyes in pride? Against the Holy One of Israel!
ISA	37	24	네가 네 종으로 주를 훼방하여 이르기를 내가 나의 허다한 병거를 거느리고 산들의 꼭대기에 올라가며 레바논의 깊은 곳에 이르렀으니 높은 백향목과 아름다운 향나무를 베고 또 그 한계되는 높은 곳에 들어가며 살진 땅의 수풀에 이를 것이며	By thy servants hast thou reproached the Lord, and hast said, By the multitude of my chariots am I come up to the height of the mountains, to the sides of Lebanon; and I will cut down the tall cedars thereof, and the choice fir trees thereof: and I will enter into the height of his border, and the forest of his Carmel.	Through your servants you have taunted the Lord, and you have said: “With my many chariots I have ascended to the heights of the mountains, to the remote peaks of Lebanon. I have cut down its tallest cedars, the finest of its cypresses. I have reached its farthest heights, the densest of its forests.
ISA	37	25	내가 우물을 파서 물을 마셨으니 나의 발바닥으로 애굽의 모든 하수를 밟아 말리리라 하였도다	I have digged, and drunk water; and with the sole of my feet have I dried up all the rivers of the besieged places.	I have dug wells and drunk foreign waters. With the soles of my feet I have dried up all the streams of Egypt.”
ISA	37	26	네가 어찌 듣지 못하였겠느냐 이 일들은 내가 태초부터 행한 바요 상고부터 정한 바로서 이제 내가 이루어 너로 견고한 성을 헐어 돌무더기가 되게 하였노라	Hast thou not heard long ago, how I have done it; and of ancient times, that I have formed it? now have I brought it to pass, that thou shouldest be to lay waste defenced cities into ruinous heaps.	Have you not heard? Long ago I ordained it; in days of old I planned it. Now I have brought it to pass, that you should crush fortified cities into piles of rubble.
ISA	37	27	그러므로 그 거민들이 힘이 약하여 놀라며 수치를 당하여 들의 풀 같이, 푸른 나물 같이, 지붕의 풀 같이, 자라지 못한 곡초 같았었느니라	Therefore their inhabitants were of small power, they were dismayed and confounded: they were as the grass of the field, and as the green herb, as the grass on the housetops, and as corn blasted before it be grown up.	Therefore their inhabitants, devoid of power, are dismayed and ashamed. They are like plants in the field, tender green shoots, grass on the rooftops, scorched before it is grown.
ISA	37	28	네 거처와 네 출입과 나를 거스려 분노함을 내가 아노라	But I know thy abode, and thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy rage against me.	But I know your sitting down, your going out and coming in, and your raging against Me.
ISA	37	29	네가 나를 거스려 분노함과 네 오만함이 내 귀에 들렸으므로 내가 갈고리로 네 코를 꿰며 자갈을 네 입에 먹여 너를 오던 길로 돌아가게 하리라 하셨나이다	Because thy rage against me, and thy tumult, is come up into mine ears, therefore will I put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest.	Because your rage and arrogance against Me have reached My ears, I will put My hook in your nose and My bit in your mouth; I will send you back the way you came.’
ISA	37	30	왕이여 이것이 왕에게 징조가 되리니 금년에는 스스로 난 것을 먹을 것이요 제이년에는 또 거기서 난 것을 먹을 것이요 제삼년에는 심고 거두며 포도나무를 심고 그 열매를 먹을 것이니이다	And this shall be a sign unto thee, Ye shall eat this year such as groweth of itself; and the second year that which springeth of the same: and in the third year sow ye, and reap, and plant vineyards, and eat the fruit thereof.	And this will be a sign to you, O Hezekiah: This year you will eat what grows on its own, and in the second year what springs from the same. But in the third year you will sow and reap; you will plant vineyards and eat their fruit.
ISA	37	31	유다 족속 중에 피하여 남는 자는 다시 아래로 뿌리를 박고 위로 열매를 맺히리니	And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah shall again take root downward, and bear fruit upward:	And the surviving remnant of the house of Judah will again take root below and bear fruit above.
ISA	37	32	이는 남는 자가 예루살렘에서 나오며 피하는 자가 시온에서 나올 것임이라 만군의 여호와의 열심이 이를 이루시리이다	For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and they that escape out of mount Zion: the zeal of the Lord of hosts shall do this.	For a remnant will go forth from Jerusalem, and survivors from Mount Zion. The zeal of the LORD of Hosts will accomplish this.
ISA	37	33	그러므로 여호와께서 앗수르 왕에 대하여 가라사대 그가 이 성에 이르지 못하며 한 살도 이리로 쏘지 못하며 방패를 가지고 성에 가까이 오지도 못하며 흉벽을 쌓고 치지도 못할 것이요	Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning the king of Assyria, He shall not come into this city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with shields, nor cast a bank against it.	So this is what the LORD says about the king of Assyria: ‘He will not enter this city or shoot an arrow into it. He will not come before it with a shield or build up a siege ramp against it.
ISA	37	34	그가 오던 길 곧 그 길로 돌아가고 이 성에 이르지 못하리라 나 여호와의 말이니라	By the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and shall not come into this city, saith the Lord.	He will go back the way he came, and he will not enter this city,’ declares the LORD.
ISA	37	35	대저 내가 나를 위하며 내 종 다윗을 위하여 이 성을 보호하며 구원하리라 하셨나이다	For I will defend this city to save it for mine own sake, and for my servant David’s sake.	‘I will defend this city and save it for My own sake and for the sake of My servant David.’”
ISA	37	36	여호와의 사자가 나가서 앗수르 진 중에서 십팔만 오천 인을 쳤으므로 아침에 일찍이 일어나 본즉 시체뿐이라	Then the angel of the Lord went forth, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and fourscore and five thousand: and when they arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses.	Then the angel of the LORD went out and struck down 185,000 men in the camp of the Assyrians. When the people got up the next morning, there were all the dead bodies!
ISA	37	37	이에 앗수르 왕 산헤립이 떠나 돌아가서 니느웨에 거하더니	So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went and returned, and dwelt at Nineveh.	So Sennacherib king of Assyria broke camp and withdrew. He returned to Nineveh and stayed there.
ISA	37	38	자기 신 니스록의 묘에서 경배할 때에 그 아들 아드람멜렉과 사레셀이 그를 칼로 죽이고 아라랏 땅으로 도망한고로 그 아들 에살핫돈이 이어 왕이 되니라	And it came to pass, as he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote him with the sword; and they escaped into the land of Armenia: and Esar–haddon his son reigned in his stead.	One day, while he was worshiping in the temple of his god Nisroch, his sons Adrammelech and Sharezer put him to the sword and escaped to the land of Ararat. And his son Esar-haddon reigned in his place.
ISA	38	1	그즈음에 히스기야가 병들어 죽게 되니 아모스의 아들 선지자 이사야가 나아와 그에게 이르되 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시기를 너는 네 집에 유언하라 네가 죽고 살지 못하리라 하셨나이다	In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death. And Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz came unto him, and said unto him, Thus saith the Lord, Set thine house in order: for thou shalt die, and not live.	In those days Hezekiah became mortally ill. The prophet Isaiah son of Amoz came to him and said, “This is what the LORD says: ‘Put your house in order, for you are about to die; you will not recover.’”
ISA	38	2	히스기야가 얼굴을 벽으로 향하고 여호와께 기도하여	Then Hezekiah turned his face toward the wall, and prayed unto the Lord,	Then Hezekiah turned his face to the wall and prayed to the LORD,
ISA	38	3	가로되 여호와여 구하오니 내가 주의 앞에서 진실과 전심으로 행하며 주의 목전에서 선하게 행한 것을 추억하옵소서 하고 심히 통곡하니	And said, Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. And Hezekiah wept sore.	saying, “Please, O LORD, remember how I have walked before You faithfully and with wholehearted devotion; I have done what was good in Your sight.” And Hezekiah wept bitterly.
ISA	38	4	이에 여호와의 말씀이 이사야에게 임하니라 가라사대	Then came the word of the Lord to Isaiah, saying,	And the word of the LORD came to Isaiah, saying,
ISA	38	5	너는 가서 히스기야에게 이르기를 네 조상 다윗의 하나님 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시기를 내가 네 기도를 들었고 네 눈물을 보았노라 내가 네 수한에 십오 년을 더하고	Go, and say to Hezekiah, Thus saith the Lord, the God of David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears: behold, I will add unto thy days fifteen years.	“Go and tell Hezekiah that this is what the LORD, the God of your father David, says: ‘I have heard your prayer; I have seen your tears. Behold, I will add fifteen years to your life.
ISA	38	6	너와 이 성을 앗수르 왕의 손에서 건져내겠고 내가 또 이 성을 보호하리라	And I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria: and I will defend this city.	And I will deliver you and this city from the hand of the king of Assyria. I will defend this city.
ISA	38	7	나 여호와가 말한 것을 네게 이룰 증거로 이 징조를 네게 주리라	And this shall be a sign unto thee from the Lord, that the Lord will do this thing that he hath spoken;	This will be a sign to you from the LORD that He will do what He has promised:
ISA	38	8	보라 아하스의 일영표에 나아갔던 해 그림자를 뒤로 십 도를 물러가게 하리라 하셨다 하라 하시더니 이에 일영표에 나아갔던 해의 그림자가 십 도를 물러가니라	Behold, I will bring again the shadow of the degrees, which is gone down in the sun dial of Ahaz, ten degrees backward. So the sun returned ten degrees, by which degrees it was gone down.	I will make the sun’s shadow that falls on the stairway of Ahaz go back ten steps.’” So the sunlight went back the ten steps it had descended.
ISA	38	9	유다 왕 히스기야가 병들었다가 그 병이 나을 때에 기록한 글이 이러하니라	The writing of Hezekiah king of Judah, when he had been sick, and was recovered of his sickness:	This is a writing by Hezekiah king of Judah after his illness and recovery:
ISA	38	10	내가 말하기를 내가 중년에 음부의 문에 들어가고 여년을 빼앗기게 되리라 하였도다	I said in the cutting off of my days, I shall go to the gates of the grave: I am deprived of the residue of my years.	I said, “In the prime of my life I must go through the gates of Sheol and be deprived of the remainder of my years.”
ISA	38	11	내가 또 말하기를 내가 다시는 여호와를 뵈옵지 못하리니 생존 세계에서 다시는 여호와를 뵈옵지 못하겠고 내가 세상 거민 중에서 한 사람도 다시는 보지 못하리라 하였도다	I said, I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord, in the land of the living: I shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world.	I said, “I will never again see the LORD, even the LORD, in the land of the living; I will no longer look on mankind with those who dwell in this world.
ISA	38	12	나의 거처는 목자의 장막을 걷음 같이 나를 떠나 옮겼고 내가 내 생명을 말기를 직공이 베를 걷어 말음 같이 하였도다 주께서 나를 틀에서 끊으시리니 나의 명이 조석간에 마치리이다	Mine age is departed, and is removed from me as a shepherd’s tent: I have cut off like a weaver my life: he will cut me off with pining sickness: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me.	My dwelling has been picked up and removed from me like a shepherd’s tent. I have rolled up my life like a weaver; He cuts me off from the loom; from day until night You make an end of me.
ISA	38	13	내가 아침까지 견디었사오나 주께서 사자 같이 나의 모든 뼈를 꺾으시오니 나의 명이 조석간에 마치리이다	I reckoned till morning, that, as a lion, so will he break all my bones: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me.	I composed myself until the morning. Like a lion He breaks all my bones; from day until night You make an end of me.
ISA	38	14	나는 제비 같이, 학 같이 지저귀며 비둘기 같이 슬피 울며 나의 눈이 쇠하도록 앙망하나이다 여호와여 내가 압제를 받사오니 나의 중보가 되옵소서	Like a crane or a swallow, so did I chatter: I did mourn as a dove: mine eyes fail with looking upward: O Lord, I am oppressed; undertake for me.	I chirp like a swallow or crane; I moan like a dove. My eyes grow weak as I look upward. O Lord, I am oppressed; be my security.”
ISA	38	15	주께서 내게 말씀하시고 또 친히 이루셨사오니 내가 무슨 말씀을 하오리이까 내 영혼의 고통을 인하여 내가 종신토록 각근히 행하리이다	What shall I say? he hath both spoken unto me, and himself hath done it: I shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of my soul.	What can I say? He has spoken to me, and He Himself has done this. I will walk slowly all my years because of the anguish of my soul.
ISA	38	16	주여 사람의 사는 것이 이에 있고 내 심령의 생명도 온전히 거기 있사오니 원컨대 나를 치료하시며 나를 살려주옵소서	O Lord, by these things men live, and in all these things is the life of my spirit: so wilt thou recover me, and make me to live.	O Lord, by such things men live, and in all of them my spirit finds life. You have restored me to health and have let me live.
ISA	38	17	보옵소서 내게 큰 고통을 더하신 것은 내게 평안을 주려 하심이라 주께서 나의 영혼을 사랑하사 멸망의 구덩이에서 건지셨고 나의 모든 죄는 주의 등 뒤에 던지셨나이다	Behold, for peace I had great bitterness: but thou hast in love to my soul delivered it from the pit of corruption: for thou hast cast all my sins behind thy back.	Surely for my own welfare I had such great anguish; but Your love has delivered me from the pit of oblivion, for You have cast all my sins behind Your back.
ISA	38	18	음부가 주께 사례하지 못하며 사망이 주를 찬양하지 못하며 구덩이에 들어간 자가 주의 신실을 바라지 못하되	For the grave cannot praise thee, death can not celebrate thee: they that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy truth.	For Sheol cannot thank You; Death cannot praise You. Those who descend to the Pit cannot hope for Your faithfulness.
ISA	38	19	오직 산 자 곧 산 자는 오늘날 내가 하는 것과 같이 주께 감사하며 주의 신실을 아비가 그 자녀에게 알게 하리이다	The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day: the father to the children shall make known thy truth.	The living, only the living, can thank You, as I do today; fathers will tell their children about Your faithfulness.
ISA	38	20	여호와께서 나를 구원하시리니 우리가 종신토록 여호와의 전에서 수금으로 나의 노래를 노래하리로다	The Lord was ready to save me: therefore we will sing my songs to the stringed instruments all the days of our life in the house of the Lord.	The LORD will save me; we will play songs on stringed instruments all the days of our lives in the house of the LORD.
ISA	38	21	이사야는 이르기를 한 뭉치 무화과를 취하여 종처에 붙이면 왕이 나으리라 하였었고	For Isaiah had said, Let them take a lump of figs, and lay it for a plaister upon the boil, and he shall recover.	Now Isaiah had said, “Prepare a lump of pressed figs and apply it to the boil, and he will recover.”
ISA	38	22	히스기야도 말하기를 내가 여호와의 전에 올라갈 징조가 무엇이뇨 하였었더라	Hezekiah also had said, What is the sign that I shall go up to the house of the Lord?	And Hezekiah had asked, “What will be the sign that I will go up to the house of the LORD?”
ISA	39	1	그 때에 발라단의 아들 바벨론 왕 므로닥발라단이 히스기야가 병들었다가 나았다 함을 듣고 글과 예물을 보낸지라	At that time Merodach–baladan, the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a present to Hezekiah: for he had heard that he had been sick, and was recovered.	At that time Merodach-baladan son of Baladan king of Babylon sent letters and a gift to Hezekiah, for he had heard about Hezekiah’s illness and recovery.
ISA	39	2	히스기야가 사자를 인하여 기뻐하여 그에게 궁중 보물 곧 은금과 향료와 보배로운 기름과 모든 무기고와 보물고에 있는 것을 다 보였으니 궁중의 소유와 전 국내의 소유를 보이지 아니한 것이 없은지라	And Hezekiah was glad of them, and shewed them the house of his precious things, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and the precious ointment, and all the house of his armour, and all that was found in his treasures: there was nothing in his house, nor in all his dominion, that Hezekiah shewed them not.	And Hezekiah welcomed the envoys gladly and showed them what was in his treasure house—the silver, the gold, the spices, and the precious oil, as well as his entire armory—all that was found in his storehouses. There was nothing in his palace or in all his dominion that Hezekiah did not show them.
ISA	39	3	이에 선지자 이사야가 히스기야 왕에게 나아와 묻되 그 사람들이 무슨 말을 하였으며 어디서 왕에게 왔나이까 히스기야가 가로되 그들이 원방 곧 바벨론에서 내게 왔나이다	Then came Isaiah the prophet unto king Hezekiah, and said unto him, What said these men? and from whence came they unto thee? And Hezekiah said, They are come from a far country unto me, even from Babylon.	Then the prophet Isaiah went to King Hezekiah and asked, “Where did those men come from, and what did they say to you?” “They came to me from a distant land,” Hezekiah replied, “from Babylon.”
ISA	39	4	이사야가 가로되 그들이 왕의 궁전에서 무엇을 보았나이까 히스기야가 대답하되 그들이 내 궁전에 있는 것을 다 보았나이다 내 보물은 보이지 아니한 것이 하나도 없나이다	Then said he, What have they seen in thine house? And Hezekiah answered, All that is in mine house have they seen: there is nothing among my treasures that I have not shewed them.	“What have they seen in your palace?” Isaiah asked. “They have seen everything in my palace,” answered Hezekiah. “There is nothing among my treasures that I did not show them.”
ISA	39	5	이사야가 히스기야에게 이르되 왕은 만군의 여호와의 말씀을 들으소서	Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah, Hear the word of the Lord of hosts:	Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah, “Hear the word of the LORD of Hosts:
ISA	39	6	보라 날이 이르리니 네 집에 있는 모든 소유와 네 열조가 오늘까지 쌓아둔 것이 모두 바벨론으로 옮긴 바 되고 남을 것이 없으리라 여호와의 말이니라	Behold, the days come, that all that is in thine house, and that which thy fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be carried to Babylon: nothing shall be left, saith the Lord.	The time will surely come when everything in your palace and all that your fathers have stored up until this day will be carried off to Babylon. Nothing will be left, says the LORD.
ISA	39	7	또 네게서 날 자손 중에서 몇이 사로잡혀 바벨론 왕궁의 환관이 되리라 하셨나이다	And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, which thou shalt beget, shall they take away; and they shall be eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.	And some of your descendants, your own flesh and blood, will be taken away to be eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.”
ISA	39	8	히스기야가 이사야에게 이르되 당신의 이른바 여호와의 말씀이 좋소이다 또 가로되 나의 생전에는 평안과 견고함이 있으리로다 하니라	Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, Good is the word of the Lord which thou hast spoken. He said moreover, For there shall be peace and truth in my days.	But Hezekiah said to Isaiah, “The word of the LORD that you have spoken is good.” For he thought, “At least there will be peace and security in my lifetime.”
ISA	40	1	너희 하나님이 가라사대 너희는 위로하라 내 백성을 위로하라	Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God.	“Comfort, comfort My people,” says your God.
ISA	40	2	너희는 정다이 예루살렘에 말하며 그것에게 외쳐 고하라 그 복역의 때가 끝났고 그 죄악의 사함을 입었느니라 그 모든 죄를 인하여 여호와의 손에서 배나 받았느니라 할지니라	Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned: for she hath received of the Lord’s hand double for all her sins.	“Speak tenderly to Jerusalem, and proclaim to her that her forced labor has been completed; her iniquity has been pardoned. For she has received from the hand of the LORD double for all her sins.”
ISA	40	3	외치는 자의 소리여 가로되 너희는 광야에서 여호와의 길을 예비하라 사막에서 우리 하나님의 대로를 평탄케 하라	The voice of him that crieth in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert a highway for our God.	A voice of one calling: “Prepare the way for the LORD in the wilderness; make a straight highway for our God in the desert.
ISA	40	4	골짜기마다 돋우어지며 산마다, 작은 산마다 낮아지며 고르지 않은 곳이 평탄케 되며 험한 곳이 평지가 될 것이요	Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made low: and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough places plain:	Every valley shall be lifted up, and every mountain and hill made low; the uneven ground will become smooth, and the rugged land a plain.
ISA	40	5	여호와의 영광이 나타나고 모든 육체가 그것을 함께 보리라 대저 여호와의 입이 말씀하셨느니라	And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.	And the glory of the LORD will be revealed, and all humanity together will see it. For the mouth of the LORD has spoken.”
ISA	40	6	말하는 자의 소리여 가로되 외치라 대답하되 내가 무엇이라 외치리이까 가로되 모든 육체는 풀이요 그 모든 아름다움은 들의 꽃 같으니	The voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field:	A voice says, “Cry out!” And I asked, “What should I cry out?” “All flesh is like grass, and all its glory like the flowers of the field.
ISA	40	7	풀은 마르고 꽃은 시듦은 여호와의 기운이 그 위에 붊이라 이 백성은 실로 풀이로다	The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: because the spirit of the Lord bloweth upon it: surely the people is grass.	The grass withers and the flowers fall when the breath of the LORD blows on them; indeed, the people are grass.
ISA	40	8	풀은 마르고 꽃은 시드나 우리 하나님의 말씀은 영영히 서리라 하라	The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: but the word of our God shall stand for ever.	The grass withers and the flowers fall, but the word of our God stands forever.”
ISA	40	9	아름다운 소식을 시온에 전하는 자여 너는 높은 산에 오르라 아름다운 소식을 예루살렘에 전하는 자여 너는 힘써 소리를 높이라 두려워 말고 소리를 높여 유다의 성읍들에 이르기를 너희 하나님을 보라 하라	O Zion, that bringest good tidings, get thee up into the high mountain; O Jerusalem, that bringest good tidings, lift up thy voice with strength; lift it up, be not afraid; say unto the cities of Judah, Behold your God!	Go up on a high mountain, O Zion, herald of good news. Raise your voice loudly, O Jerusalem, herald of good news. Lift it up, do not be afraid! Say to the cities of Judah, “Here is your God!”
ISA	40	10	보라 주 여호와께서 장차 강한 자로 임하실 것이요 친히 그 팔로 다스리실 것이라 보라 상급이 그에게 있고 보응이 그 앞에 있으며	Behold, the Lord God will come with strong hand, and his arm shall rule for him: behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him.	Behold, the Lord GOD comes with might, and His arm establishes His rule. His reward is with Him, and His recompense accompanies Him.
ISA	40	11	그는 목자 같이 양무리를 먹이시며 어린 양을 그 팔로 모아 품에 안으시며 젖먹이는 암컷들을 온순히 인도하시리로다	He shall feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young.	He tends His flock like a shepherd; He gathers the lambs in His arms and carries them close to His heart. He gently leads the nursing ewes.
ISA	40	12	누가 손바닥으로 바다 물을 헤아렸으며 뼘으로 하늘을 재었으며 땅의 티끌을 되에 담아 보았으며 명칭으로 산들을, 간칭으로 작은 산들을 달아 보았으랴	Who hath measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance?	Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, or marked off the heavens with the span of his hand? Who has held the dust of the earth in a basket, or weighed the mountains on a scale and the hills with a balance?
ISA	40	13	누가 여호와의 신을 지도하였으며 그의 모사가 되어 그를 가르쳤으랴	Who hath directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his counsellor hath taught him?	Who has directed the Spirit of the LORD, or informed Him as His counselor?
ISA	40	14	그가 누구로 더불어 의논하셨으며 누가 그를 교훈하였으며 그에게 공평의 도로 가르쳤으며 지식을 가르쳤으며 통달의 도를 보여주었느뇨	With whom took he counsel, and who instructed him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and shewed to him the way of understanding?	Whom did He consult to enlighten Him, and who taught Him the paths of justice? Who imparted knowledge to Him and showed Him the way of understanding?
ISA	40	15	보라 그에게는 열방은 통의 한 방울 물 같고 저울의 적은 티끌 같으며 섬들은 떠오르는 먼지 같으니	Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance: behold, he taketh up the isles as a very little thing.	Surely the nations are like a drop in a bucket; they are considered a speck of dust on the scales; He lifts up the islands like fine dust.
ISA	40	16	레바논 짐승들은 번제 소용에도 부족하겠고 그 삼림은 그 화목 소용에도 부족할 것이라	And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof sufficient for a burnt offering.	Lebanon is not sufficient for fuel, nor its animals enough for a burnt offering.
ISA	40	17	그 앞에는 모든 열방이 아무 것도 아니라 그는 그들을 없는 것 같이, 빈 것 같이 여기시느니라	All nations before him are as nothing; and they are counted to him less than nothing, and vanity.	All the nations are as nothing before Him; He regards them as nothingness and emptiness.
ISA	40	18	그런즉 너희가 하나님을 누구와 같다 하겠으며 무슨 형상에 비기겠느냐	To whom then will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye compare unto him?	To whom will you liken God? To what image will you compare Him?
ISA	40	19	우상은 장인이 부어 만들었고 장색이 금으로 입혔고 또 위하여 은사슬을 만든 것이니라	The workman melteth a graven image, and the goldsmith spreadeth it over with gold, and casteth silver chains.	To an idol that a craftsman casts and a metalworker overlays with gold and fits with silver chains?
ISA	40	20	궁핍하여 이런 것을 드리지 못하는 자는 썩지 않는 나무를 택하고 공교한 장인을 구하여 우상을 만들어서 흔들리지 않도록 세우느니라	He that is so impoverished that he hath no oblation chooseth a tree that will not rot; he seeketh unto him a cunning workman to prepare a graven image, that shall not be moved.	To one bereft of an offering who chooses wood that will not rot, who seeks a skilled craftsman to set up an idol that will not topple?
ISA	40	21	너희가 알지 못하였느냐 너희가 듣지 못하였느냐 태초부터 너희에게 전하지 아니하였느냐 땅의 기초가 창조될 때부터 너희가 깨닫지 못하였느냐	Have ye not known? have ye not heard? hath it not been told you from the beginning? have ye not understood from the foundations of the earth?	Do you not know? Have you not heard? Has it not been declared to you from the beginning? Have you not understood since the foundation of the earth?
ISA	40	22	그는 땅 위 궁창에 앉으시나니 땅의 거민들은 메뚜기 같으니라 그가 하늘을 차일 같이 펴셨으며 거할 천막 같이 베푸셨고	It is he that sitteth upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers; that stretcheth out the heavens as a curtain, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in:	He sits enthroned above the circle of the earth; its dwellers are like grasshoppers. He stretches out the heavens like a curtain, and spreads them out like a tent to dwell in.
ISA	40	23	귀인들을 폐하시며 세상의 사사들을 헛되게 하시나니	That bringeth the princes to nothing; he maketh the judges of the earth as vanity.	He brings the princes to nothing and makes the rulers of the earth meaningless.
ISA	40	24	그들은 겨우 심기웠고 겨우 뿌리웠고 그 줄기가 겨우 땅에 뿌리를 박자 곧 하나님의 부심을 받고 말라 회리바람에 불려가는 초개 같도다	Yea, they shall not be planted; yea, they shall not be sown: yea, their stock shall not take root in the earth: and he shall also blow upon them, and they shall wither, and the whirlwind shall take them away as stubble.	No sooner are they planted, no sooner are they sown, no sooner have their stems taken root in the ground, than He blows on them and they wither, and a whirlwind sweeps them away like stubble.
ISA	40	25	거룩하신 자가 가라사대 그런즉 너희가 나를 누구에게 비기며 나로 그와 동등이 되게 하겠느냐 하시느니라	To whom then will ye liken me, or shall I be equal? saith the Holy One.	“To whom will you liken Me, or who is My equal?” asks the Holy One.
ISA	40	26	너희는 눈을 높이 들어 누가 이 모든 것을 창조하였나 보라 주께서는 수효대로 만상을 이끌어 내시고 각각 그 이름을 부르시나니 그의 권세가 크고 그의 능력이 강하므로 하나도 빠짐이 없느니라	Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who hath created these things, that bringeth out their host by number: he calleth them all by names by the greatness of his might, for that he is strong in power; not one faileth.	Lift up your eyes on high: Who created all these? He leads forth the starry host by number; He calls each one by name. Because of His great power and mighty strength, not one of them is missing.
ISA	40	27	야곱아 네가 어찌하여 말하며 이스라엘아 네가 어찌하여 이르기를 내 사정은 여호와께 숨겨졌으며 원통한 것은 내 하나님에게서 수리하심을 받지 못한다 하느냐	Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest, O Israel, My way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over from my God?	Why do you say, O Jacob, and why do you assert, O Israel, “My way is hidden from the LORD, and my claim is ignored by my God”?
ISA	40	28	너는 알지 못하였느냐 듣지 못하였느냐 영원하신 하나님 여호와, 땅 끝까지 창조하신 자는 피곤치 아니하시며 곤비치 아니하시며 명철이 한이 없으시며	Hast thou not known? hast thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not, neither is weary? there is no searching of his understanding.	Do you not know? Have you not heard? The LORD is the everlasting God, the Creator of the ends of the earth. He will not grow tired or weary; His understanding is beyond searching out.
ISA	40	29	피곤한 자에게는 능력을 주시며 무능한 자에게는 힘을 더하시나니	He giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might he increaseth strength.	He gives power to the faint and increases the strength of the weak.
ISA	40	30	소년이라도 피곤하며 곤비하며 장정이라도 넘어지며 자빠지되	Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall:	Even youths grow tired and weary, and young men stumble and fall.
ISA	40	31	오직 여호와를 앙망하는 자는 새 힘을 얻으리니 독수리의 날개치며 올라감 같을 것이요 달음박질하여도 곤비치 아니하겠고 걸어가도 피곤치 아니하리로다	But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint.	But those who wait upon the LORD will renew their strength; they will mount up with wings like eagles; they will run and not grow weary, they will walk and not faint.
ISA	41	1	섬들아 내 앞에 잠잠하라 민족들아 힘을 새롭게 하라 가까이 나아오라 그리하고 말하라 우리가 가까이하여 서로 변론하자	Keep silence before me, O islands; and let the people renew their strength: let them come near; then let them speak: let us come near together to judgment.	“Be silent before Me, O islands, and let the peoples renew their strength. Let them come forward and testify; let us together draw near for judgment.
ISA	41	2	누가 동방에서 사람을 일으키며 의로 불러서 자기 발 앞에 이르게 하였느뇨 열국으로 그 앞에 굴복케 하며 그로 왕들을 치리하게 하되 그들로 그의 칼에 티끌 같게, 그의 활에 불리는 초개 같게 하매	Who raised up the righteous man from the east, called him to his foot, gave the nations before him, and made him rule over kings? he gave them as the dust to his sword, and as driven stubble to his bow.	Who has aroused one from the east and called him to his feet in righteousness? He hands nations over to him and subdues kings before him. He turns them to dust with his sword, to windblown chaff with his bow.
ISA	41	3	그가 그들을 쫓아서 그 발로 가 보지 못한 길을 안전히 지났나니	He pursued them, and passed safely; even by the way that he had not gone with his feet.	He pursues them, going on safely, hardly touching the path with his feet.
ISA	41	4	이 일을 누가 행하였느냐 누가 이루었느냐 누가 태초부터 만대를 명정하였느냐 나 여호와라 태초에도 나요 나중 있을 자에게도 내가 곧 그니라	Who hath wrought and done it, calling the generations from the beginning? I the Lord, the first, and with the last; I am he.	Who has performed this and carried it out, calling forth the generations from the beginning? I, the LORD—the first and the last— I am He.”
ISA	41	5	섬들이 보고 두려워하며 땅 끝이 무서워 떨며 함께 모여 와서	The isles saw it, and feared; the ends of the earth were afraid, drew near, and came.	The islands see and fear; the ends of the earth tremble. They approach and come forward.
ISA	41	6	각기 이웃을 도우며 그 형제에게 이르기를 너는 담대하라 하고	They helped every one his neighbour; and every one said to his brother, Be of good courage.	Each one helps the other and says to his brother, “Be strong!”
ISA	41	7	목공은 금장색을 장려하며 마치로 고르게 하는 자는 메질꾼을 장려하며 가로되 땜이 잘 된다 하며 못을 단단히 박아 우상으로 흔들리지 않게 하는도다	So the carpenter encouraged the goldsmith, and he that smootheth with the hammer him that smote the anvil, saying, It is ready for the sodering: and he fastened it with nails, that it should not be moved.	The craftsman encourages the goldsmith, and he who wields the hammer cheers him who strikes the anvil, saying of the welding, “It is good.” He nails it down so it will not be toppled.
ISA	41	8	그러나 나의 종 너 이스라엘아 나의 택한 야곱아 나의 벗 아브라함의 자손아	But thou, Israel, art my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham my friend.	“But you, O Israel, My servant, Jacob, whom I have chosen, descendant of Abraham My friend—
ISA	41	9	내가 땅 끝에서부터 너를 붙들며 땅 모퉁이에서부터 너를 부르고 네게 이르기를 너는 나의 종이라 내가 너를 택하고 싫어버리지 아니하였다 하였노라	Thou whom I have taken from the ends of the earth, and called thee from the chief men thereof, and said unto thee, Thou art my servant; I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away.	I brought you from the ends of the earth and called you from its farthest corners. I said, ‘You are My servant.’ I have chosen and not rejected you.
ISA	41	10	두려워 말라 내가 너와 함께 함이니라 놀라지 말라 나는 네 하나님이 됨이니라 내가 너를 굳세게 하리라 참으로 너를 도와주리라 참으로 나의 의로운 오른손으로 너를 붙들리라	Fear thou not; for I am with thee: be not dismayed; for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness.	Do not fear, for I am with you; do not be afraid, for I am your God. I will strengthen you; I will surely help you; I will uphold you with My right hand of righteousness.
ISA	41	11	보라 네게 노하던 자들이 수치와 욕을 당할 것이요 너와 다투는 자들이 아무 것도 아닌 것 같이 될 것이며 멸망할 것이라	Behold, all they that were incensed against thee shall be ashamed and confounded: they shall be as nothing; and they that strive with thee shall perish.	Behold, all who rage against you will be ashamed and disgraced; those who contend with you will be reduced to nothing and will perish.
ISA	41	12	네가 찾아도 너와 싸우던 자들을 만나지 못할 것이요 너를 치는 자들은 아무 것도 아닌 것 같이, 허무한 것 같이 되리니	Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not find them, even them that contended with thee: they that war against thee shall be as nothing, and as a thing of nought.	You will seek them but will not find them. Those who wage war against you will come to nothing.
ISA	41	13	이는 나 여호와 너의 하나님이 네 오른손을 붙들고 네게 이르기를 두려워 말라 내가 너를 도우리라 할 것임이니라	For I the Lord thy God will hold thy right hand, saying unto thee, Fear not; I will help thee.	For I am the LORD your God, who takes hold of your right hand and tells you: Do not fear, I will help you.
ISA	41	14	지렁이 같은 너 야곱아, 너희 이스라엘 사람들아 두려워 말라 나 여호와가 말하노니 내가 너를 도울 것이라 네 구속자는 이스라엘의 거룩한 자니라	Fear not, thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel; I will help thee, saith the Lord, and thy redeemer, the Holy One of Israel.	Do not fear, O worm of Jacob, O few men of Israel. I will help you,” declares the LORD. “Your Redeemer is the Holy One of Israel.
ISA	41	15	보라 내가 너로 이가 날카로운 새 타작 기계를 삼으리니 네가 산들을 쳐서 부스러기를 만들 것이며 작은 산들로 겨 같게 할 것이라	Behold, I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument having teeth: thou shalt thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shalt make the hills as chaff.	Behold, I will make you into a threshing sledge, new and sharp, with many teeth. You will thresh the mountains and crush them, and reduce the hills to chaff.
ISA	41	16	네가 그들을 까부른즉 바람이 그것을 날리겠고 회리바람이 그것을 흩어버릴 것이로되 너는 여호와로 인하여 즐거워하겠고 이스라엘의 거룩한 자로 인하여 자랑하리라	Thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the whirlwind shall scatter them: and thou shalt rejoice in the Lord, and shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel.	You will winnow them, and a wind will carry them away; a gale will scatter them. But you will rejoice in the LORD; you will glory in the Holy One of Israel.
ISA	41	17	가련하고 빈핍한 자가 물을 구하되 물이 없어서 갈증으로 그들의 혀가 마를 때에 나 여호와가 그들에게 응답하겠고 나 이스라엘의 하나님이 그들을 버리지 아니할 것이라	When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue faileth for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them.	The poor and needy seek water, but there is none; their tongues are parched with thirst. I, the LORD, will answer them; I, the God of Israel, will not forsake them.
ISA	41	18	내가 자산에 강을 열며 골짜기 가운데 샘이 나게 하며 광야로 못이 되게 하며 마른 땅으로 샘 근원이 되게 할 것이며	I will open rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst of the valleys: I will make the wilderness a pool of water, and the dry land springs of water.	I will open rivers on the barren heights, and fountains in the middle of the valleys. I will turn the desert into a pool of water, and the dry land into flowing springs.
ISA	41	19	내가 광야에는 백향목과 싯딤나무와 화석류와 들 감람나무를 심고 사막에는 잣나무와 소나무와 황양목을 함께 두리니	I will plant in the wilderness the cedar, the shittah tree, and the myrtle, and the oil tree; I will set in the desert the fir tree, and the pine, and the box tree together:	I will plant cedars in the wilderness, acacias, myrtles, and olive trees. I will set cypresses in the desert, elms and boxwood together,
ISA	41	20	무리가 그것을 보고 여호와의 손이 지은 바요 이스라엘의 거룩한 자가 창조한 바인줄 알며 헤아리며 깨달으리라	That they may see, and know, and consider, and understand together, that the hand of the Lord hath done this, and the Holy One of Israel hath created it.	so that all may see and know, may consider and understand, that the hand of the LORD has done this and the Holy One of Israel has created it.”
ISA	41	21	나 여호와가 말하노니 너희 우상들은 소송을 일으키라 야곱의 왕이 말하노니 너희는 확실한 증거를 보이라	Produce your cause, saith the Lord; bring forth your strong reasons, saith the King of Jacob.	“Present your case,” says the LORD. “Submit your arguments,” says the King of Jacob.
ISA	41	22	장차 당할 일을 우리에게 진술하라 또 이전 일의 어떠한 것도 고하라 우리가 연구하여 그 결국을 알리라 혹 장래사를 보이며	Let them bring them forth, and shew us what shall happen: let them shew the former things, what they be, that we may consider them, and know the latter end of them; or declare us things for to come.	“Let them come and tell us what will happen. Tell the former things, so that we may reflect on them and know the outcome. Or announce to us what is coming.
ISA	41	23	후래사를 진술하라 너희의 신 됨을 우리가 알리라 또 복을 내리든지 화를 내리라 우리가 함께 보고 놀라리라	Shew the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are gods: yea, do good, or do evil, that we may be dismayed, and behold it together.	Tell us the things that are to come, so that we may know that you are gods. Yes, do something good or evil, that we may look on together in dismay.
ISA	41	24	과연 너희는 아무 것도 아니며 너희 일은 허망하며 너희를 택한 자는 가증하니라	Behold, ye are of nothing, and your work of nought: an abomination is he that chooseth you.	Behold, you are nothing and your work is of no value. Anyone who chooses you is detestable.
ISA	41	25	내가 한 사람을 일으켜 북방에서 오게 하며 내 이름을 부르는 자를 해 돋는 곳에서 오게 하였나니 그가 이르러 방백들을 회삼물 같이, 토기장이의 진흙을 밟음 같이 밟을 것이니	I have raised up one from the north, and he shall come: from the rising of the sun shall he call upon my name: and he shall come upon princes as upon morter, and as the potter treadeth clay.	I have raised up one from the north, and he has come— one from the east who calls on My name. He will march over rulers as if they were mortar, like a potter who treads the clay.
ISA	41	26	누가 처음부터 이 일을 우리에게 고하여 알게 하였느뇨 누가 이전부터 우리에게 고하여 이가 옳다고 말하게 하였느뇨 능히 고하는 자도 없고 보이는 자도 없고 너희 말을 듣는 자도 없도다	Who hath declared from the beginning, that we may know? and beforetime, that we may say, He is righteous? yea, there is none that sheweth, yea, there is none that declareth, yea, there is none that heareth your words.	Who has declared this from the beginning, so that we may know, and from times past, so that we may say: ‘He was right’? No one announced it, no one foretold it, no one heard your words.
ISA	41	27	내가 비로소 시온에 이르기를 너희는 보라 그들을 보라 하였노라 내가 기쁜 소식 전할 자를 예루살렘에 주리라	The first shall say to Zion, Behold, behold them: and I will give to Jerusalem one that bringeth good tidings.	I was the first to tell Zion: ‘Look, here they are!’ And I gave to Jerusalem a herald of good news.
ISA	41	28	내가 본즉 한 사람도 없으며 내가 물어도 그들 가운데 한 말도 능히 대답할 모사가 없도다	For I beheld, and there was no man; even among them, and there was no counsellor, that, when I asked of them, could answer a word.	When I look, there is no one; there is no counselor among them; when I ask them, they have nothing to say.
ISA	41	29	과연 그들의 모든 행사는 공허하며 허무하며 그들의 부어만든 우상은 바람이요 허탄한 것뿐이니라	Behold, they are all vanity; their works are nothing: their molten images are wind and confusion.	See, they are all a delusion; their works amount to nothing; their images are as empty as the wind.
ISA	42	1	내가 붙드는 나의 종, 내 마음에 기뻐하는 나의 택한 사람을 보라 내가 나의 신을 그에게 주었은즉 그가 이방에 공의를 베풀리라	Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, in whom my soul delighteth; I have put my spirit upon him: he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles.	“Here is My Servant, whom I uphold, My Chosen One, in whom My soul delights. I will put My Spirit on Him, and He will bring justice to the nations.
ISA	42	2	그는 외치지 아니하며 목소리를 높이지 아니하며 그 소리로 거리에 들리게 아니하며	He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street.	He will not cry out or raise His voice, nor make His voice heard in the streets.
ISA	42	3	상한 갈대를 꺾지 아니하며 꺼져가는 등불을 끄지 아니하고 진리로 공의를 베풀 것이며	A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he not quench: he shall bring forth judgment unto truth.	A bruised reed He will not break and a smoldering wick He will not extinguish; He will faithfully bring forth justice.
ISA	42	4	그는 쇠하지 아니하며 낙담하지 아니하고 세상에 공의를 세우기에 이르리니 섬들이 그 교훈을 앙망하리라	He shall not fail nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth: and the isles shall wait for his law.	He will not grow weak or discouraged before He has established justice on the earth. In His law the islands will put their hope.”
ISA	42	5	하늘을 창조하여 펴시고 땅과 그 소산을 베푸시며 땅 위의 백성에게 호흡을 주시며 땅에 행하는 자에게 신을 주시는 하나님 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되	Thus saith God the Lord, he that created the heavens, and stretched them out; he that spread forth the earth, and that which cometh out of it; he that giveth breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein:	This is what God the LORD says— He who created the heavens and stretched them out, who spread out the earth and its offspring, who gives breath to the people on it and life to those who walk in it:
ISA	42	6	나 여호와가 의로 너를 불렀은즉 내가 네 손을 잡아 너를 보호하며 너를 세워 백성의 언약과 이방의 빛이 되게 하리니	I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles;	“I, the LORD, have called you for a righteous purpose, and I will take hold of your hand. I will keep you and appoint you to be a covenant for the people and a light to the nations,
ISA	42	7	네가 소경의 눈을 밝히며 갇힌 자를 옥에서 이끌어 내며 흑암에 처한 자를 간에서 나오게 하리라	To open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house.	to open the eyes of the blind, to bring prisoners out of the dungeon and those sitting in darkness out from the prison house.
ISA	42	8	나는 여호와니 이는 내 이름이라 나는 내 영광을 다른 자에게, 내 찬송을 우상에게 주지 아니하리라	I am the Lord: that is my name: and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images.	I am the LORD; that is My name! I will not yield My glory to another or My praise to idols.
ISA	42	9	보라 전에 예언한 일이 이미 이루었느니라 이제 내가 새 일을 고하노라 그 일이 시작되기 전이라도 너희에게 이르노라	Behold, the former things are come to pass, and new things do I declare: before they spring forth I tell you of them.	Behold, the former things have happened, and now I declare new things. Before they spring forth I proclaim them to you.”
ISA	42	10	항해하는 자와 바다 가운데 만물과 섬들과 그 거민들아 여호와께 새 노래로 노래하며 땅 끝에서부터 찬송하라	Sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise from the end of the earth, ye that go down to the sea, and all that is therein; the isles, and the inhabitants thereof.	Sing to the LORD a new song— His praise from the ends of the earth— you who go down to the sea, and all that is in it, you islands, and all who dwell in them.
ISA	42	11	광야와 거기 있는 성읍들과 게달 사람의 거하는 촌락들은 소리를 높이라 셀라의 거민들은 노래하며 산 꼭대기에서 즐거이 부르라	Let the wilderness and the cities thereof lift up their voice, the villages that Kedar doth inhabit: let the inhabitants of the rock sing, let them shout from the top of the mountains.	Let the desert and its cities raise their voices; let the villages of Kedar cry aloud. Let the people of Sela sing for joy; let them cry out from the mountaintops.
ISA	42	12	여호와께 영광을 돌리며 섬들 중에서 그의 찬송을 선전할지어다	Let them give glory unto the Lord, and declare his praise in the islands.	Let them give glory to the LORD and declare His praise in the islands.
ISA	42	13	여호와께서 용사 같이 나가시며 전사 같이 분발하여 외쳐 크게 부르시며 그 대적을 크게 치시리로다	The Lord shall go forth as a mighty man, he shall stir up jealousy like a man of war: he shall cry, yea, roar; he shall prevail against his enemies.	The LORD goes forth like a mighty one; He stirs up His zeal like a warrior. He shouts; yes, He roars in triumph over His enemies:
ISA	42	14	내가 오래 동안 고요히 하며 잠잠하여 참았으나 이제는 내가 해산하는 여인 같이 부르짖으리니 숨이 차서 심히 헐떡일 것이라	I have long time holden my peace; I have been still, and refrained myself: now will I cry like a travailing woman; I will destroy and devour at once.	“I have kept silent from ages past; I have remained quiet and restrained. But now I will groan like a woman in labor; I will at once gasp and pant.
ISA	42	15	내가 큰 산과 작은 산을 황무케 하며 그 초목을 마르게 하며 강들로 섬이 되게 하며 못들을 마르게 할 것이며	I will make waste mountains and hills, and dry up all their herbs; and I will make the rivers islands, and I will dry up the pools.	I will lay waste the mountains and hills and dry up all their vegetation. I will turn the rivers into dry land and drain the marshes.
ISA	42	16	내가 소경을 그들의 알지 못하는 길로 이끌며 그들의 알지 못하는 첩경으로 인도하며 흑암으로 그 앞에 광명이 되게 하며 굽은 데를 곧게 할 것이라 내가 이 일을 행하여 그들을 버리지 아니하리니	And I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not; I will lead them in paths that they have not known: I will make darkness light before them, and crooked things straight. These things will I do unto them, and not forsake them.	I will lead the blind by a way they did not know; I will guide them on unfamiliar paths. I will turn darkness into light before them and rough places into level ground. These things I will do for them, and I will not forsake them.
ISA	42	17	조각한 우상을 의뢰하며 부어 만든 우상을 향하여 너희는 우리의 신이라 하는 자는 물리침을 받아 크게 수치를 당하리라	They shall be turned back, they shall be greatly ashamed, that trust in graven images, that say to the molten images, Ye are our gods.	But those who trust in idols and say to molten images, ‘You are our gods!’ will be turned back in utter shame.
ISA	42	18	너희 귀머거리들아 들으라 너희 소경들아 밝히 보라	Hear, ye deaf; and look, ye blind, that ye may see.	Listen, you deaf ones; look, you blind ones, that you may see!
ISA	42	19	소경이 누구냐 내 종이 아니냐 누가 나의 보내는 나의 사자 같이 귀머거리겠느냐 누가 나와 친한 자 같이 소경이겠느냐 누가 여호와의 종 같이 소경이겠느냐	Who is blind, but my servant? or deaf, as my messenger that I sent? who is blind as he that is perfect, and blind as the Lord’s servant?	Who is blind but My servant, or deaf like the messenger I am sending? Who is blind like My covenant partner, or blind like the servant of the LORD?
ISA	42	20	네가 많은 것을 볼지라도 유의치 아니하며 귀는 밝을지라도 듣지 아니하는도다	Seeing many things, but thou observest not; opening the ears, but he heareth not.	Though seeing many things, you do not keep watch. Though your ears are open, you do not hear.”
ISA	42	21	여호와께서 자기의 의로우심을 인하여 기쁨으로 그 교훈을 크게 하며 존귀케 하려 하셨으나	The Lord is well pleased for his righteousness’ sake; he will magnify the law, and make it honourable.	The LORD was pleased, for the sake of His righteousness, to magnify His law and make it glorious.
ISA	42	22	이 백성이 도적 맞으며 탈취를 당하며 다 굴 속에 잡히며 옥에 갇히도다 노략을 당하되 구할 자가 없고 탈취를 당하되 도로 주라 할 자가 없도다	But this is a people robbed and spoiled; they are all of them snared in holes, and they are hid in prison houses: they are for a prey, and none delivereth; for a spoil, and none saith, Restore.	But this is a people plundered and looted, all trapped in caves or imprisoned in dungeons. They have become plunder with no one to rescue them, and loot with no one to say, “Send them back!”
ISA	42	23	너희 중에 누가 이 일에 귀를 기울이겠느냐 누가 장래사를 삼가 듣겠느냐	Who among you will give ear to this? who will hearken and hear for the time to come?	Who among you will pay attention to this? Who will listen and obey hereafter?
ISA	42	24	야곱으로 탈취를 당케 하신 자가 누구냐 이스라엘을 도적에게 붙이신 자가 누구냐 여호와가 아니시냐 우리가 그에게 범죄하였도다 백성들이 그 길로 행치 아니하며 그 율법을 순종치 아니하였도다	Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? did not the Lord, he against whom we have sinned? for they would not walk in his ways, neither were they obedient unto his law.	Who gave Jacob up for spoil, and Israel to the plunderers? Was it not the LORD, against whom we have sinned? They were unwilling to walk in His ways, and they would not obey His law.
ISA	42	25	그러므로 여호와께서 진노와 전쟁의 위력으로 이스라엘에게 베푸시매 그 사방으로 불붙듯하나 깨닫지 못하며 몸이 타나 마음에 두지 아니하는도다	Therefore he hath poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle: and it hath set him on fire round about, yet he knew not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart.	So He poured out on them His furious anger and the fierceness of battle. It enveloped them in flames, but they did not understand; it consumed them, but they did not take it to heart.
ISA	43	1	야곱아 너를 창조하신 여호와께서 이제 말씀하시느니라 이스라엘아 너를 조성하신 자가 이제 말씀하시느니라 너는 두려워 말라 내가 너를 구속하였고 내가 너를 지명하여 불렀나니 너는 내 것이라	But now thus saith the Lord that created thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Israel, Fear not: for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name; thou art mine.	Now this is what the LORD says— He who created you, O Jacob, and He who formed you, O Israel: “Do not fear, for I have redeemed you; I have called you by your name; you are Mine!
ISA	43	2	네가 물 가운데로 지날 때에 내가 함께할 것이라 강을 건널 때에 물이 너를 침몰치 못할 것이며 네가 불 가운데로 행할 때에 타지도 아니할 것이요 불꽃이 너를 사르지도 못하리니	When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.	When you pass through the waters, I will be with you; and when you go through the rivers, they will not overwhelm you. When you walk through the fire, you will not be scorched; the flames will not set you ablaze.
ISA	43	3	대저 나는 여호와 네 하나님이요 이스라엘의 거룩한 자요 네 구원자임이라 내가 애굽을 너의 속량물로, 구스와 스바를 너의 대신으로 주었노라	For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour: I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee.	For I am the LORD your God, the Holy One of Israel, your Savior; I give Egypt for your ransom, Cush and Seba in your place.
ISA	43	4	내가 너를 보배롭고 존귀하게 여기고 너를 사랑하였은즉 내가 사람들을 주어 너를 바꾸며 백성들로 네 생명을 대신하리니	Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou hast been honourable, and I have loved thee: therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy life.	Because you are precious and honored in My sight, and because I love you, I will give men in exchange for you and nations in place of your life.
ISA	43	5	두려워 말라 내가 너와 함께 하여 네 자손을 동방에서부터 오게 하며 서방에서부터 너를 모을 것이며	Fear not: for I am with thee: I will bring thy seed from the east, and gather thee from the west;	Do not be afraid, for I am with you; I will bring your offspring from the east and gather you from the west.
ISA	43	6	내가 북방에게 이르기를 놓으라 남방에게 이르기를 구류하지 말라 내 아들들을 원방에서 이끌며 내 딸들을 땅 끝에서 오게 하라	I will say to the north, Give up; and to the south, Keep not back: bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth;	I will say to the north, ‘Give them up!’ and to the south, ‘Do not hold them back!’ Bring My sons from afar, and My daughters from the ends of the earth—
ISA	43	7	무릇 내 이름으로 일컫는 자 곧 내가 내 영광을 위하여 창조한 자를 오게 하라 그들을 내가 지었고 만들었느니라	Even every one that is called by my name: for I have created him for my glory, I have formed him; yea, I have made him.	everyone called by My name and created for My glory, whom I have indeed formed and made.”
ISA	43	8	눈이 있어도 소경이요 귀가 있어도 귀머거리인 백성을 이끌어 내라	Bring forth the blind people that have eyes, and the deaf that have ears.	Bring out a people who have eyes but are blind, and who have ears but are deaf.
ISA	43	9	열방은 모였으며 민족들이 회집하였은들 그들 중에 누가 능히 이 일을 고하며 이전 일을 우리에게 보이겠느냐 그들로 증인을 세워서 자기의 옳음을 나타내어 듣는 자들로 옳다 말하게 하라	Let all the nations be gathered together, and let the people be assembled: who among them can declare this, and shew us former things? let them bring forth their witnesses, that they may be justified: or let them hear, and say, It is truth.	All the nations gather together and the peoples assemble. Who among them can declare this, and proclaim to us the former things? Let them present their witnesses to vindicate them, so that others may hear and say, “It is true.”
ISA	43	10	나 여호와가 말하노라 너희는 나의 증인, 나의 종으로 택함을 입었나니 이는 너희로 나를 알고 믿으며 내가 그인줄 깨닫게 하려 함이라 나의 전에 지음을 받은 신이 없었느니라 나의 후에도 없으리라	Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, and my servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he: before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me.	“You are My witnesses,” declares the LORD, “and My servant whom I have chosen, so that you may consider and believe Me and understand that I am He. Before Me no god was formed, and after Me none will come.
ISA	43	11	나 곧 나는 여호와라 나 외에 구원자가 없느니라	I, even I, am the Lord; and beside me there is no saviour.	I, yes I, am the LORD, and there is no Savior but Me.
ISA	43	12	내가 고하였으며 구원하였으며 보였고 너희 중에 다른 신이 없었나니 그러므로 너희는 나의 증인이요 나는 하나님이니라 여호와의 말이니라	I have declared, and have saved, and I have shewed, when there was no strange god among you: therefore ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, that I am God.	I alone decreed and saved and proclaimed— I, and not some foreign god among you. So you are My witnesses,” declares the LORD, “that I am God.
ISA	43	13	과연 태초부터 나는 그니 내 손에서 능히 건질 자가 없도다 내가 행하리니 누가 막으리요	Yea, before the day was I am he; and there is none that can deliver out of my hand: I will work, and who shall let it?	Even from eternity I am He, and none can deliver out of My hand. When I act, who can reverse it?”
ISA	43	14	너희의 구속자요 이스라엘의 거룩한 자 여호와가 말하노라 너희를 위하여 내가 바벨론에 보내어 모든 갈대아 사람으로 자기들의 연락하던 배를 타고 도망하여 내려가게 하리라	Thus saith the Lord, your redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; For your sake I have sent to Babylon, and have brought down all their nobles, and the Chaldeans, whose cry is in the ships.	Thus says the LORD your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel: “For your sake, I will send to Babylon and bring them all as fugitives, even the Chaldeans, in the ships in which they rejoice.
ISA	43	15	나는 여호와 너희의 거룩한 자요 이스라엘의 창조자요 너희 왕이니라	I am the Lord, your Holy One, the creator of Israel, your King.	I am the LORD, your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, and your King.”
ISA	43	16	바다 가운데 길을, 큰 물 가운데 첩경을 내고	Thus saith the Lord, which maketh a way in the sea, and a path in the mighty waters;	Thus says the LORD, who makes a way in the sea and a path through the surging waters,
ISA	43	17	병거와 말과 군대의 용사를 이끌어 내어서 그들로 일시에 엎드러져 일지 못하고 소멸하기를 꺼져가는 등불 같게 한 나 여호와가 말하노라	Which bringeth forth the chariot and horse, the army and the power; they shall lie down together, they shall not rise: they are extinct, they are quenched as tow.	who brings out the chariots and horses, the armies and warriors together, to lie down, never to rise again; to be extinguished, snuffed out like a wick:
ISA	43	18	너희는 이전 일을 기억하지 말며 옛적 일을 생각하지 말라	Remember ye not the former things, neither consider the things of old.	“Do not call to mind the former things; pay no attention to the things of old.
ISA	43	19	보라 내가 새 일을 행하리니 이제 나타낼 것이라 너희가 그것을 알지 못하겠느냐 정녕히 내가 광야에 길과 사막에 강을 내리니	Behold, I will do a new thing; now it shall spring forth; shall ye not know it? I will even make a way in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert.	Behold, I am about to do something new; even now it is coming. Do you not see it? Indeed, I will make a way in the wilderness and streams in the desert.
ISA	43	20	장차 들짐승 곧 시랑과 및 타조도 나를 존경할 것은 내가 광야에 물들을, 사막에 강들을 내어 내 백성, 나의 택한 자로 마시게 할 것임이라	The beast of the field shall honour me, the dragons and the owls: because I give waters in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen.	The beasts of the field will honor Me, the jackals and the ostriches, because I provide water in the wilderness and rivers in the desert, to give drink to My chosen people.
ISA	43	21	이 백성은 내가 나를 위하여 지었나니 나의 찬송을 부르게 하려 함이니라	This people have I formed for myself; they shall shew forth my praise.	The people I formed for Myself will declare My praise.
ISA	43	22	그러나 야곱아 너는 나를 부르지 아니하였고 이스라엘아 너는 나를 괴로워하였으며	But thou hast not called upon me, O Jacob; but thou hast been weary of me, O Israel.	But you have not called on Me, O Jacob, because you have grown weary of Me, O Israel.
ISA	43	23	네 번제의 양을 내게로 가져 오지 아니하였고 네 제물로 나를 공경하지 아니하였느니라 나는 예물로 인하여 너를 수고롭게 아니하였고 유향으로 인하여 너를 괴롭게 아니하였거늘	Thou hast not brought me the small cattle of thy burnt offerings; neither hast thou honoured me with thy sacrifices. I have not caused thee to serve with an offering, nor wearied thee with incense.	You have not brought Me sheep for burnt offerings, nor honored Me with your sacrifices. I have not burdened you with offerings, nor wearied you with frankincense.
ISA	43	24	너는 나를 위하여 돈으로 향품을 사지 아니하며 희생의 기름으로 나를 흡족케 아니하고 네 죄 짐으로 나를 수고롭게 하며 네 악으로 나를 괴롭게 하였느니라	Thou hast bought me no sweet cane with money, neither hast thou filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices: but thou hast made me to serve with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with thine iniquities.	You have not bought Me sweet cane with your silver, nor satisfied Me with the fat of your sacrifices. But you have burdened Me with your sins; you have wearied Me with your iniquities.
ISA	43	25	나 곧 나는 나를 위하여 네 허물을 도말하는 자니 네 죄를 기억지 아니하리라	I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins.	I, yes I, am He who blots out your transgressions for My own sake and remembers your sins no more.
ISA	43	26	너는 나로 기억이 나게 하고 서로 변론하자 너는 네 일을 말하여 의를 나타내라	Put me in remembrance: let us plead together: declare thou, that thou mayest be justified.	Remind Me, let us argue the matter together. State your case, so that you may be vindicated.
ISA	43	27	네 시조가 범죄하였고 너의 교사들이 나를 배역하였나니	Thy first father hath sinned, and thy teachers have transgressed against me.	Your first father sinned, and your spokesmen rebelled against Me.
ISA	43	28	그러므로 내가 성소의 어른들로 욕을 보게 하며 야곱으로 저주를 입게 하며 이스라엘로 비방거리가 되게 하리라	Therefore I have profaned the princes of the sanctuary, and have given Jacob to the curse, and Israel to reproaches.	So I will disgrace the princes of your sanctuary, and I will devote Jacob to destruction and Israel to reproach.”
ISA	44	1	나의 종 야곱, 나의 택한 이스라엘아 이제 들으라	Yet now hear, O Jacob my servant; and Israel, whom I have chosen:	But now listen, O Jacob My servant, Israel, whom I have chosen.
ISA	44	2	너를 지으며 너를 모태에서 조성하고 너을 도와줄 여호와가 말하노라 나의 종 야곱, 나의 택한 여수룬아 두려워 말라	Thus saith the Lord that made thee, and formed thee from the womb, which will help thee; Fear not, O Jacob, my servant; and thou, Jesurun, whom I have chosen.	This is the word of the LORD, your Maker, who formed you from the womb and who will help you: “Do not be afraid, O Jacob My servant, Jeshurun, whom I have chosen.
ISA	44	3	대저 내가 갈한 자에게 물을 주며 마른 땅에 시내가 흐르게 하며 나의 신을 네 자손에게, 나의 복을 네 후손에게 내리리니	For I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring:	For I will pour water on the thirsty land, and currents on the dry ground. I will pour out My Spirit on your descendants, and My blessing on your offspring.
ISA	44	4	그들이 풀 가운데서 솟아나기를 시냇가의 버들 같이 할 것이라	And they shall spring up as among the grass, as willows by the water courses.	They will sprout among the grass like willows by flowing streams.
ISA	44	5	혹은 이르기를 나는 여호와께 속하였다 할 것이며 혹은 야곱의 이름으로 자칭할 것이며 혹은 자기가 여호와께 속하였음을 손으로 기록하고 이스라엘의 이름으로 칭호하리라	One shall say, I am the Lord’s; and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob; and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the name of Israel.	One will say, ‘I belong to the LORD,’ another will call himself by the name of Jacob, and still another will write on his hand, ‘The LORD’s,’ and will take the name of Israel.”
ISA	44	6	이스라엘의 왕인 여호와, 이스라엘의 구속자인 만군의 여호와가 말하노라 나는 처음이요 나는 마지막이라 나 외에 다른 신이 없느니라	Thus saith the Lord the King of Israel, and his redeemer the Lord of hosts; I am the first, and I am the last; and beside me there is no God.	Thus says the LORD, the King and Redeemer of Israel, the LORD of Hosts: “I am the first and I am the last, and there is no God but Me.
ISA	44	7	내가 옛날 백성을 세운 이후로 나처럼 외치며 고하며 진술할 자가 누구뇨 있거든 될 일과 장차 올 일을 고할지어다	And who, as I, shall call, and shall declare it, and set it in order for me, since I appointed the ancient people? and the things that are coming, and shall come, let them shew unto them.	Who then is like Me? Let him say so! Let him declare his case before Me, since I established an ancient people. Let him foretell the things to come, and what is to take place.
ISA	44	8	너희는 두려워 말며 겁내지 말라 내가 예로부터 너희에게 들리지 아니하였느냐 고하지 아니하였느냐 너희는 나의 증인이라 나 외에 신이 있겠느냐 과연 반석이 없나니 다른 신이 있음을 알지 못하노라	Fear ye not, neither be afraid: have not I told thee from that time, and have declared it? ye are even my witnesses. Is there a God beside me? yea, there is no God; I know not any.	Do not tremble or fear. Have I not told you and declared it long ago? You are My witnesses! Is there any God but Me? There is no other Rock; I know not one.”
ISA	44	9	우상을 만드는 자는 다 허망하도다 그들의 기뻐하는 우상은 무익한 것이어늘 그것의 증인들은 보지도 못하며 알지도 못하니 그러므로 수치를 당하리라	They that make a graven image are all of them vanity; and their delectable things shall not profit; and they are their own witnesses; they see not, nor know; that they may be ashamed.	All makers of idols are nothing, and the things they treasure are worthless. Their witnesses fail to see or comprehend, so they are put to shame.
ISA	44	10	신상을 만들며 무익한 우상을 부어 만든 자가 누구뇨	Who hath formed a god, or molten a graven image that is profitable for nothing?	Who fashions a god or casts an idol which profits him nothing?
ISA	44	11	보라 그 동류가 다 수치를 당할 것이라 그 장색들은 사람이라 그들이 다 모여 서서 두려워하며 함께 수치를 당할 것이니라	Behold, all his fellows shall be ashamed: and the workmen, they are of men: let them all be gathered together, let them stand up; yet they shall fear, and they shall be ashamed together.	Behold, all his companions will be put to shame, for the craftsmen themselves are only human. Let them all assemble and take their stand; they will all be brought to terror and shame.
ISA	44	12	철공은 철을 숯불에 불리고 메로 치고 강한 팔로 괄리므로 심지어 주려서 기력이 진하며 물을 마시지 아니하여 곤비하며	The smith with the tongs both worketh in the coals, and fashioneth it with hammers, and worketh it with the strength of his arms: yea, he is hungry, and his strength faileth: he drinketh no water, and is faint.	The blacksmith takes a tool and labors over the coals; he fashions an idol with hammers and forges it with his strong arms. Yet he grows hungry and loses his strength; he fails to drink water and grows faint.
ISA	44	13	목공은 줄을 늘여 재고 붓으로 긋고 대패로 밀고 정규로 그어 사람의 아름다움을 따라 인형을 새겨 집에 두게 하며	The carpenter stretcheth out his rule; he marketh it out with a line; he fitteth it with planes, and he marketh it out with the compass, and maketh it after the figure of a man, according to the beauty of a man; that it may remain in the house.	The woodworker extends a measuring line; he marks it out with a stylus; he shapes it with chisels and outlines it with a compass. He fashions it in the likeness of man, like man in all his glory, that it may dwell in a shrine.
ISA	44	14	그는 혹 백향목을 베이며 혹 디르사 나무와 상수리 나무를 취하며 혹 삼림 중에 자기를 위하여 한 나무를 택하며 혹 나무를 심고 비에 자라게도 하나니	He heweth him down cedars, and taketh the cypress and the oak, which he strengtheneth for himself among the trees of the forest: he planteth an ash, and the rain doth nourish it.	He cuts down cedars or retrieves a cypress or oak. He lets it grow strong among the trees of the forest. He plants a laurel, and the rain makes it grow.
ISA	44	15	무릇 이 나무는 사람이 화목을 삼는 것이어늘 그가 그것을 가지고 자기 몸을 더웁게도 하고 그것으로 불을 피워서 떡을 굽기도 하고 그것으로 신상을 만들어 숭배하며 우상을 만들고 그 앞에 부복하기도 하는구나	Then shall it be for a man to burn: for he will take thereof, and warm himself; yea, he kindleth it, and baketh bread; yea, he maketh a god, and worshippeth it; he maketh it a graven image, and falleth down thereto.	It serves as fuel for man. He takes some of it to warm himself, and he kindles a fire and bakes his bread; he even fashions it into a god and worships it; he makes an idol and bows down to it.
ISA	44	16	그 중에 얼마는 불사르고 얼마는 고기를 삶아 먹기도 하며 고기를 구워 배불리기도 하며 또 몸을 더웁게 하여 이르기를 아하 따뜻하다 내가 불을 보았구나 하면서	He burneth part thereof in the fire; with part thereof he eateth flesh; he roasteth roast, and is satisfied: yea, he warmeth himself, and saith, Aha, I am warm, I have seen the fire:	He burns half of it in the fire, and he roasts meat on that half. He eats the roast and is satisfied. Indeed, he warms himself and says, “Ah! I am warm; I see the fire.”
ISA	44	17	그 나머지로 신상 곧 자기의 우상을 만들고 그 앞에 부복하여 경배하며 그것에게 기도하여 이르기를 너는 나의 신이니 나를 구원하라 하는도다	And the residue thereof he maketh a god, even his graven image: he falleth down unto it, and worshippeth it, and prayeth unto it, and saith, Deliver me; for thou art my god.	From the rest he makes a god, his graven image. He bows down to it and worships; he prays to it and says, “Save me, for you are my god.”
ISA	44	18	그들이 알지도 못하고 깨닫지도 못함은 그 눈이 가리워져서 보지 못하며 그 마음이 어두워져서 깨닫지 못함이라	They have not known nor understood: for he hath shut their eyes, that they cannot see; and their hearts, that they cannot understand.	They do not comprehend or discern, for He has shut their eyes so they cannot see and closed their minds so they cannot understand.
ISA	44	19	마음에 생각도 없고 지식도 없고 총명도 없으므로 내가 그 나무의 얼마로 불을 사르고 그 숯불 위에 떡도 굽고 고기도 구워 먹었거늘 내가 어찌 그 나머지로 가증한 물건을 만들겠으며 내가 어찌 그 나무토막 앞에 굴복하리요 말하지 아니하니	And none considereth in his heart, neither is there knowledge nor understanding to say, I have burned part of it in the fire; yea, also I have baked bread upon the coals thereof; I have roasted flesh, and eaten it: and shall I make the residue thereof an abomination? shall I fall down to the stock of a tree?	And no one considers in his heart, no one has the knowledge or insight to say, “I burned half of it in the fire, and I baked bread on its coals; I roasted meat and I ate. Shall I make something detestable with the rest of it? Shall I bow down to a block of wood?”
ISA	44	20	그는 재를 먹고 미혹한 마음에 미혹되어서 스스로 그 영혼을 구원하지 못하며 나의 오른손에 거짓 것이 있지 아니하냐 하지도 못하느니라	He feedeth on ashes: a deceived heart hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand?	He feeds on ashes. His deluded heart has led him astray, and he cannot deliver himself or say, “Is not this thing in my right hand a lie?”
ISA	44	21	야곱아 이스라엘아 이를 기억하라 너는 내 종이니라 내가 너를 지었으니 너는 내 종이니라 이스라엘아 너는 나의 잊음이 되지 아니하리라	Remember these, O Jacob and Israel; for thou art my servant: I have formed thee; thou art my servant: O Israel, thou shalt not be forgotten of me.	Remember these things, O Jacob, for you are My servant, O Israel. I have made you, and you are My servant; O Israel, I will never forget you.
ISA	44	22	내가 네 허물을 빽빽한 구름의 사라짐 같이, 네 죄를 안개의 사라짐 같이 도말하였으니 너는 내게로 돌아오라 내가 너를 구속하였음이니라	I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and, as a cloud, thy sins: return unto me; for I have redeemed thee.	I have blotted out your transgressions like a cloud, and your sins like a mist. Return to Me, for I have redeemed you.
ISA	44	23	여호와께서 이 일을 행하셨으니 하늘아 노래할지어다 땅의 깊은 곳들아 높이 부를지어다 산들아 삼림과 그 가운데 모든 나무들아 소리내어 노래할지어다 여호와께서 야곱을 구속하셨으니 이스라엘로 자기를 영화롭게 하실 것임이로다	Sing, O ye heavens; for the Lord hath done it: shout, ye lower parts of the earth: break forth into singing, ye mountains, O forest, and every tree therein: for the Lord hath redeemed Jacob, and glorified himself in Israel.	Sing for joy, O heavens, for the LORD has done this; shout aloud, O depths of the earth. Break forth in song, O mountains, you forests and all your trees. For the LORD has redeemed Jacob, and revealed His glory in Israel.
ISA	44	24	네 구속자요 모태에서 너를 조성한 나 여호와가 말하노라 나는 만물을 지은 여호와라 나와 함께한 자 없이 홀로 하늘을 폈으며 땅을 베풀었고	Thus saith the Lord, thy redeemer, and he that formed thee from the womb, I am the Lord that maketh all things; that stretcheth forth the heavens alone; that spreadeth abroad the earth by myself;	Thus says the LORD, your Redeemer who formed you from the womb: “I am the LORD, who has made all things, who alone stretched out the heavens, who by Myself spread out the earth,
ISA	44	25	거짓말 하는 자의 징조를 폐하며 점 치는 자를 미치게 하며 지혜로운 자들을 물리쳐 그 지식을 어리석게 하며	That frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and maketh diviners mad; that turneth wise men backward, and maketh their knowledge foolish;	who foils the signs of false prophets and makes fools of diviners, who confounds the wise and turns their knowledge into nonsense,
ISA	44	26	내 종의 말을 응하게 하며 내 사자의 모략을 성취하게 하며 예루살렘에 대하여는 이르기를 거기 사람이 살리라 하며 유다 성읍들에 대하여는 이르기를 중건될 것이라 내가 그 황폐한 곳들을 복구시키리라 하며	That confirmeth the word of his servant, and performeth the counsel of his messengers; that saith to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be inhabited; and to the cities of Judah, Ye shall be built, and I will raise up the decayed places thereof:	who confirms the message of His servant and fulfills the counsel of His messengers, who says of Jerusalem, ‘She will be inhabited,’ and of the cities of Judah, ‘They will be rebuilt, and I will restore their ruins,’
ISA	44	27	깊음에 대하여는 이르기를 마르라 내가 네 강물들을 마르게 하리라 하며	That saith to the deep, Be dry, and I will dry up thy rivers:	who says to the depths of the sea, ‘Be dry, and I will dry up your currents,’
ISA	44	28	고레스에 대하여는 이르기를 그는 나의 목자라 나의 모든 기쁨을 성취하리라 하며 예루살렘에 대하여는 이르기를 중건 되리라 하며 성전에 대하여는 이르기를 네 기초가 세움이 되리라 하는 자니라	That saith of Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure: even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built; and to the temple, Thy foundation shall be laid.	who says of Cyrus, ‘My shepherd will fulfill all that I desire,’ who says of Jerusalem, ‘She will be rebuilt,’ and of the temple, ‘Let its foundation be laid.’”
ISA	45	1	나 여호와는 나의 기름 받은 고레스의 오른손을 잡고 열국으로 그 앞에 항복하게 하며 열왕의 허리를 풀며 성 문을 그 앞에 열어서 닫지 못하게 하리라 내가 고레스에게 이르기를	Thus saith the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him; and I will loose the loins of kings, to open before him the two leaved gates; and the gates shall not be shut;	This is what the LORD says to Cyrus His anointed, whose right hand I have grasped to subdue nations before him, to disarm kings, to open the doors before him, so that the gates will not be shut:
ISA	45	2	내가 네 앞서 가서 험한 곳을 평탄케 하며 놋문을 쳐서 부수며 쇠빗장을 꺽고	I will go before thee, and make the crooked places straight: I will break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron:	“I will go before you and level the mountains; I will break down the gates of bronze and cut through the bars of iron.
ISA	45	3	네게 흑암 중의 보화와 은밀한 곳에 숨은 재물을 주어서 너로 너를 지명하여 부른 자가 나 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님인 줄 알게 하리라	And I will give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of secret places, that thou mayest know that I, the Lord, which call thee by thy name, am the God of Israel.	I will give you the treasures of darkness and the riches hidden in secret places, so that you may know that I am the LORD, the God of Israel, who calls you by name.
ISA	45	4	내가 나의 종 야곱, 나의 택한 이스라엘을 위하여 너를 지명하여 불렀나니 너는 나를 알지 못하였을지라도 나는 네게 칭호를 주었노라	For Jacob my servant’s sake, and Israel mine elect, I have even called thee by thy name: I have surnamed thee, though thou hast not known me.	For the sake of Jacob My servant and Israel My chosen one, I call you by name; I have given you a title of honor, though you have not known Me.
ISA	45	5	나는 여호와라 나 외에 다른 이가 없나니 나 밖에 신이 없느니라 너는 나를 알지 못하였을지라도 나는 네 띠를 동일 것이요	I am the Lord, and there is none else, there is no God beside me: I girded thee, though thou hast not known me:	I am the LORD, and there is no other; there is no God but Me. I will equip you for battle, though you have not known Me,
ISA	45	6	해 뜨는 곳에서든지 지는 곳에서든지 나 밖에 다른 이가 없는 줄을 무리로 알게 하리라 나는 여호와라 다른 이가 없느니라	That they may know from the rising of the sun, and from the west, that there is none beside me. I am the Lord, and there is none else.	so that all may know, from where the sun rises to where it sets, that there is none but Me; I am the LORD, and there is no other.
ISA	45	7	나는 빛도 짓고 어두움도 창조하며 나는 평안도 짓고 환난도 창조하나니 나는 여호와라 이 모든 일을 행하는 자니라 하였노라	I form the light, and create darkness: I make peace, and create evil: I the Lord do all these things.	I form the light and create the darkness; I bring prosperity and create calamity. I, the LORD, do all these things.
ISA	45	8	너 하늘이여 위에서부터 의로움을 비 같이 듣게 할지어다 궁창이여 의를 부어 내릴지어다 땅이여 열려서 구원을 내고 의도 함께 움돋게 할지어다 나 여호와가 이 일을 창조하였느니라	Drop down, ye heavens, from above, and let the skies pour down righteousness: let the earth open, and let them bring forth salvation, and let righteousness spring up together; I the Lord have created it.	Drip down, O heavens, from above, and let the skies pour down righteousness. Let the earth open up that salvation may sprout and righteousness spring up with it; I, the LORD, have created it.
ISA	45	9	질그릇 조각 중 한 조각 같은 자가 자기를 지으신 자로 더불어 다툴진저 화 있을진저 진흙이 토기장이를 대하여 너는 무엇을 만드느뇨 할 수 있겠으며 너의 만든 것이 너를 가리켜 그는 손이 없다 할 수 있겠느뇨	Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker! Let the potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth. Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What makest thou? or thy work, He hath no hands?	Woe to him who quarrels with his Maker— one clay pot among many. Does the clay ask the potter, ‘What are you making?’ Does your work say, ‘He has no hands’?
ISA	45	10	아비에게 묻기를 네가 무엇을 났느냐 어미에게 묻기를 네가 무엇을 낳으려고 구로하느냐 하는 자에게 화 있을진저	Woe unto him that saith unto his father, What begettest thou? or to the woman, What hast thou brought forth?	Woe to him who says to his father, ‘What have you begotten?’ or to his mother, ‘What have you brought forth?’”
ISA	45	11	이스라엘의 거룩하신 자 곧 이스라엘을 지으신 여호와께서 가라사대 장래 일을 내게 물으라 또 내 아들들의 일과 내 손으로 한 일에 대하여 내게 부탁하라	Thus saith the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, and his Maker, Ask me of things to come concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my hands command ye me.	Thus says the LORD, the Holy One of Israel, and its Maker: “How dare you question Me about My sons, or instruct Me in the work of My hands?
ISA	45	12	내가 땅을 만들고 그 위에 사람을 창조하였으며 내가 친수로 하늘을 펴고 그 만상을 명하였노라	I have made the earth, and created man upon it: I, even my hands, have stretched out the heavens, and all their host have I commanded.	It is I who made the earth and created man upon it. It was My hands that stretched out the heavens, and I ordained all their host.
ISA	45	13	내가 의로 그를 일으킨지라 그의 모든 길을 곧게 하리니 그가 나의 성읍을 건축할 것이며 나의 사로잡힌 자들을 값이나 갚음 없이 놓으리라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라 하셨느니라	I have raised him up in righteousness, and I will direct all his ways: he shall build my city, and he shall let go my captives, not for price nor reward, saith the Lord of hosts.	I will raise up Cyrus in righteousness, and I will make all his ways straight. He will rebuild My city and set My exiles free, but not for payment or reward, says the LORD of Hosts.”
ISA	45	14	여호와께서 말씀하시되 애굽의 수고한 것과 구스의 무역한 것과 스바의 장대한 족속들이 다 네게로 돌아와서 네게 속할 것이요 그들이 너를 따를 것이라 사슬에 매여 건너와서 네게 굴복하고 간구하기를 하나님이 과연 네게 계시고 그 외에는 다른 하나님이 없다 하리라 하시니라	Thus saith the Lord, The labour of Egypt, and merchandise of Ethiopia and of the Sabeans, men of stature, shall come over unto thee, and they shall be thine: they shall come after thee; in chains they shall come over, and they shall fall down unto thee, they shall make supplication unto thee, saying, Surely God is in thee; and there is none else, there is no God.	This is what the LORD says: “The products of Egypt and the merchandise of Cush, along with the Sabeans, men of stature, will come over to you and will be yours; they will trudge behind you; they will come over in chains and bow down to you. They will confess to you: ‘God is indeed with you, and there is no other; there is no other God.’”
ISA	45	15	구원자 이스라엘의 하나님이여 진실로 주는 스스로 숨어 계시는 하나님이시니이다	Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the Saviour.	Truly You are a God who hides Himself, O God of Israel, the Savior.
ISA	45	16	우상을 만드는 자는 부끄러움을 당하며 욕을 받아 다 함께 수욕 중에 들어갈 것이로되	They shall be ashamed, and also confounded, all of them: they shall go to confusion together that are makers of idols.	They will all be put to shame and humiliated; the makers of idols will depart together in disgrace.
ISA	45	17	이스라엘은 여호와께 구원을 입어 영원한 구원을 얻으리니 영세에 부끄러움을 당하거나 욕을 받지 아니하리로다	But Israel shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting salvation: ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded world without end.	But Israel will be saved by the LORD with an everlasting salvation; you will not be put to shame or humiliated, to ages everlasting.
ISA	45	18	여호와는 하늘을 창조하신 하나님이시며 땅도 조성하시고 견고케 하시되 헛되이 창조치 아니하시고 사람으로 거하게 지으신 자시니라 그 말씀에 나는 여호와라 나 외에 다른 이가 없느니라	For thus saith the Lord that created the heavens; God himself that formed the earth and made it; he hath established it, he created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited: I am the Lord; and there is none else.	For thus says the LORD, who created the heavens—He is God; He formed the earth and fashioned it; He established it; He did not create it to be empty, but formed it to be inhabited: “I am the LORD, and there is no other.
ISA	45	19	나는 흑암한 곳에서 은밀히 말하지 아니하였으며 야곱 자손에게 너희가 나를 헛되이 찾으라 이르지 아니하였노라 나 여호와는 의를 말하고 정직을 고하느니라	I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth: I said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain: I the Lord speak righteousness, I declare things that are right.	I have not spoken in secret, from a place in a land of darkness. I did not say to the descendants of Jacob, ‘Seek Me in a wasteland.’ I, the LORD, speak the truth; I say what is right.
ISA	45	20	열방 중에서 피난한 자들아 너희는 모여 오라 한가지로 가까이 나아 오라 나무 우상을 가지고 다니며 능히 구원치 못하는 신에게 기도하는 자들은 무지한 자니라	Assemble yourselves and come; draw near together, ye that are escaped of the nations: they have no knowledge that set up the wood of their graven image, and pray unto a god that cannot save.	Come, gather together, and draw near, you fugitives from the nations. Ignorant are those who carry idols of wood and pray to a god that cannot save.
ISA	45	21	너희는 고하며 진술하고 또 피차 상의하여 보라 이 일을 이전부터 보인 자가 누구냐 예로부터 고한 자가 누구냐 나 여호와가 아니냐 나 외에 다른 신이 없나니 나는 공의를 행하며 구원을 베푸는 하나님이라 나 외에 다른 이가 없느니라	Tell ye, and bring them near; yea, let them take counsel together: who hath declared this from ancient time? who hath told it from that time? have not I the Lord? and there is no God else beside me; a just God and a Saviour; there is none beside me.	Speak up and present your case— yes, let them take counsel together. Who foretold this long ago? Who announced it from ancient times? Was it not I, the LORD? There is no other God but Me, a righteous God and Savior; there is none but Me.
ISA	45	22	땅 끝의 모든 백성아 나를 앙망하라 그리하며 구원을 얻으리라 나는 하나님이라 다른 이가 없음이니라	Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: for I am God, and there is none else.	Turn to Me and be saved, all the ends of the earth; for I am God, and there is no other.
ISA	45	23	내가 나를 두고 맹세하기를 나의 입에서 의로운 말이 나갔은즉 돌아오지 아니하나니 내게 모든 무릎이 꿇겠고 모든 혀가 맹약하리라 하였노라	I have sworn by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, That unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear.	By Myself I have sworn; truth has gone out from My mouth, a word that will not be revoked: Every knee will bow before Me, every tongue will swear allegiance.
ISA	45	24	어떤 자의 내게 대한 말에 의와 힘은 여호와께만 있나니 사람들은 그에게로 나아갈 것이라 무릇 그를 노하는 자는 부끄러움을 당하리라마는	Surely, shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength: even to him shall men come; and all that are incensed against him shall be ashamed.	Surely they will say of Me, ‘In the LORD alone are righteousness and strength.’” All who rage against Him will come to Him and be put to shame.
ISA	45	25	이스라엘 자손은 다 여호와로 의롭다 함을 얻고 자랑하리라 하느니라 하셨느니라	In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory.	In the LORD all descendants of Israel will be justified and will exult.
ISA	46	1	벨은 엎드러졌고 느보는 구부러졌도다 그들의 우상들은 짐승과 가축에게 실리웠으니 너희가 떠메고 다니던 그것은 피곤한 짐승의 무거운 짐이 되었도다	Bel boweth down, Nebo stoopeth, their idols were upon the beasts, and upon the cattle: your carriages were heavy loaden; they are a burden to the weary beast.	Bel crouches; Nebo cowers. Their idols weigh down beasts and cattle. The images you carry are burdensome, a load to the weary animal.
ISA	46	2	그들은 구부러졌고 그들은 일제히 엎드러졌으므로 그 짐을 구하여 내지 못하고 자기도 잡혀 갔느니라	They stoop, they bow down together; they could not deliver the burden, but themselves are gone into captivity.	The gods cower; they crouch together, unable to relieve the burden; but they themselves go into captivity.
ISA	46	3	야곱 집이여 이스라엘 집의 남은 모든 자여 나를 들을지어다 배에서 남으로부터 내게 안겼고 태에서 남으로부터 내게 품기운 너희여	Hearken unto me, O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the house of Israel, which are borne by me from the belly, which are carried from the womb:	“Listen to Me, O house of Jacob, all the remnant of the house of Israel, who have been sustained from the womb, carried along since birth.
ISA	46	4	너희가 노년에 이르기까지 내가 그리하겠고 백발이 되기까지 내가 너희를 품을 것이라 내가 지었은즉 안을 것이요 품을 것이요 구하여 내리라	And even to your old age I am he; and even to hoar hairs will I carry you: I have made, and I will bear; even I will carry, and will deliver you.	Even to your old age, I will be the same, and I will bear you up when you turn gray. I have made you, and I will carry you; I will sustain you and deliver you.
ISA	46	5	너희가 나를 누구에 비기며 누구와 짝하며 누구와 비교하여 서로 같다 하겠느냐	To whom will ye liken me, and make me equal, and compare me, that we may be like?	To whom will you liken Me or count Me equal? To whom will you compare Me, that we should be alike?
ISA	46	6	사람들이 주머니에서 금을 쏟아 내며 은을 저울에 달아 장색에게 주고 그것으로 신을 만들게 하고 그것에게 엎드려 경배하고	They lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh silver in the balance, and hire a goldsmith; and he maketh it a god: they fall down, yea, they worship.	They pour out their bags of gold and weigh out silver on scales; they hire a goldsmith to fashion it into a god, so they can bow down and worship.
ISA	46	7	그것을 들어 어깨에 메어다가 그의 처소에 두면 그것이 서서 있고 거기서 능히 움직이지 못하며 그에게 부르짖어도 능히 응답지 못하며 고난에서 구하여 내지도 못하느니라	They bear him upon the shoulder, they carry him, and set him in his place, and he standeth; from his place shall he not remove: yea, one shall cry unto him, yet can he not answer, nor save him out of his trouble.	They lift it to their shoulder and carry it along; they set it in its place, and there it stands, not budging from that spot. They cry out to it, but it does not answer; it saves no one from his troubles.
ISA	46	8	너희 패역한 자들아 이 일을 기억하고 장부가 되라 이 일을 다시 생각하라	Remember this, and shew yourselves men: bring it again to mind, O ye transgressors.	Remember this and be brave; take it to heart, you transgressors!
ISA	46	9	너희는 옛적 일을 기억하라 나는 하나님이라 나 외에 다른 이가 없느니라 나는 하나님이라 나 같은 이가 없느니라	Remember the former things of old: for I am God, and there is none else; I am God, and there is none like me,	Remember what happened long ago, for I am God, and there is no other; I am God, and there is none like Me.
ISA	46	10	내가 종말을 처음부터 고하며 아직 이루지 아니한 일을 옛적부터 보이고 이르기를 나의 모략이 설 것이니 내가 나의 모든 기뻐하는 것을 이루리라 하였노라	Declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure:	I declare the end from the beginning, and ancient times from what is still to come. I say, ‘My purpose will stand, and all My good pleasure I will accomplish.’
ISA	46	11	내가 동방에서 독수리를 부르며 먼 나라에서 나의 모략을 이룰 사람을 부를 것이라 내가 말하였은즉 정녕 이룰 것이요 경영하였은즉 정녕 행하리라	Calling a ravenous bird from the east, the man that executeth my counsel from a far country: yea, I have spoken it, I will also bring it to pass; I have purposed it, I will also do it.	I summon a bird of prey from the east, a man for My purpose from a far-off land. Truly I have spoken, and truly I will bring it to pass. I have planned it, and I will surely do it.
ISA	46	12	마음이 완악하여 의에서 멀리 떠난 너희여 나를 들으라	Hearken unto me, ye stouthearted, that are far from righteousness:	Listen to Me, you stubborn people, far removed from righteousness:
ISA	46	13	내가 나의 의를 가깝게 할 것인즉 상거가 멀지 아니하니 나의 구원이 지체치 아니할 것이라 내가 나의 영광인 이스라엘을 위하여 구원을 시온에 베풀리라	I bring near my righteousness; it shall not be far off, and my salvation shall not tarry: and I will place salvation in Zion for Israel my glory.	I am bringing My righteousness near; it is not far away, and My salvation will not be delayed. I will grant salvation to Zion and adorn Israel with My splendor.
ISA	47	1	처녀 딸 바벨론이여 내려 티끌에 앉으라 딸 갈대아여 보좌가 없어졌으니 땅에 앉으라 네가 다시는 곱고 아리땁다 칭함을 받지 못할 것임이니라	Come down, and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on the ground: there is no throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called tender and delicate.	“Go down and sit in the dust, O Virgin Daughter of Babylon. Sit on the ground without a throne, O Daughter of Chaldea! For you will no longer be called tender or delicate.
ISA	47	2	맷돌을 취하여 가루를 갈라 면박을 벗으며 치마를 걷어 다리를 드러내고 강을 건너라	Take the millstones, and grind meal: uncover thy locks, make bare the leg, uncover the thigh, pass over the rivers.	Take millstones and grind flour; remove your veil; strip off your skirt, bare your thigh, and wade through the streams.
ISA	47	3	네 살이 드러나고 네 부끄러운 것이 보일 것이라 내가 보수하되 사람을 아끼지 아니하리라	Thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yea, thy shame shall be seen: I will take vengeance, and I will not meet thee as a man.	Your nakedness will be uncovered and your shame will be exposed. I will take vengeance; I will spare no one.”
ISA	47	4	(우리의 구속자는 그 이름이 만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 거룩한 자시니라)	As for our redeemer, the Lord of hosts is his name, the Holy One of Israel.	Our Redeemer—the LORD of Hosts is His name— is the Holy One of Israel.
ISA	47	5	딸 갈대아여 잠잠히 앉으라 흑암으로 들어가라 네가 다시는 열국의 주모라 칭함을 받지 못하리라	Sit thou silent, and get thee into darkness, O daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called, The lady of kingdoms.	“Sit in silence and go into darkness, O Daughter of Chaldea. For you will no longer be called the queen of kingdoms.
ISA	47	6	전에 내가 내 백성을 노함으로 내 기업을 욕되게 하여 그들을 네 손에 붙였거늘 네가 그들을 긍휼히 여기지 아니하고 늙은이에게 네 멍에를 심히 무겁게 메우며	I was wroth with my people, I have polluted mine inheritance, and given them into thine hand: thou didst shew them no mercy; upon the ancient hast thou very heavily laid thy yoke.	I was angry with My people; I profaned My heritage, and I placed them under your control. You showed them no mercy; even on the elderly you laid a most heavy yoke.
ISA	47	7	말하기를 내가 영영히 주모가 되리라 하고 이 일을 네 마음에 두지도 아니하며 그 종말도 생각지 아니하였도다	And thou saidst, I shall be a lady for ever: so that thou didst not lay these things to thy heart, neither didst remember the latter end of it.	You said, ‘I will be queen forever.’ You did not take these things to heart or consider their outcome.
ISA	47	8	그러므로 사치하고 평안히 지내며 마음에 이르기를 나뿐이라 나 외에 다른 이가 없도다 나는 과부로 지내지도 아니하며 자녀를 잃어버리는 일도 모르리라 하는 자여 너는 이제 들을지어다	Therefore hear now this, thou that art given to pleasures, that dwellest carelessly, that sayest in thine heart, I am, and none else beside me; I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know the loss of children:	So now hear this, O lover of luxury who sits securely, who says to herself, ‘I am, and there is none besides me. I will never be a widow or know the loss of children.’
ISA	47	9	한 날에 홀연히 자녀를 잃으며 과부가 되는 이 두 일이 네게 임할 것이라 네가 무수한 사술과 많은 진언을 베풀지라도 이 일이 전히 네게 임하리라	But these two things shall come to thee in a moment in one day, the loss of children, and widowhood: they shall come upon thee in their perfection for the multitude of thy sorceries, and for the great abundance of thine enchantments.	These two things will overtake you in a moment, in a single day: loss of children, and widowhood. They will come upon you in full measure, in spite of your many sorceries and the potency of your spells.
ISA	47	10	네가 네 악을 의지하고 스스로 이르기를 나를 보는 자가 없다 하나니 네 지혜와 네 지식이 너를 유혹하였음이니라 네 마음에 이르기를 나뿐이라 나 외에 다른 이가 없다 하였으므로	For thou hast trusted in thy wickedness: thou hast said, None seeth me. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, it hath perverted thee; and thou hast said in thine heart, I am, and none else beside me.	You were secure in your wickedness; you said, ‘No one sees me.’ Your wisdom and knowledge led you astray; you told yourself, ‘I am, and there is none besides me.’
ISA	47	11	재앙이 네게 임하리라 그러나 네가 그 근본을 알지 못할 것이며 손해가 네게 이르리라 그러나 이를 물리칠 능이 없을 것이며 파멸이 홀연히 네게 임하리라 그러나 네가 헤아리지 못할 것이니라	Therefore shall evil come upon thee; thou shalt not know from whence it riseth: and mischief shall fall upon thee; thou shalt not be able to put it off: and desolation shall come upon thee suddenly, which thou shalt not know.	But disaster will come upon you; you will not know how to charm it away. A calamity will befall you that you will be unable to ward off. Devastation will happen to you suddenly and unexpectedly.
ISA	47	12	이제 너는 젊어서부터 힘쓰던 진언과 많은 사술을 가지고 서서 시험하여 보라 혹시 유익을 얻을 수 있을는지, 혹시 원수를 이길 수 있을는지	Stand now with thine enchantments, and with the multitude of thy sorceries, wherein thou hast laboured from thy youth; if so be thou shalt be able to profit, if so be thou mayest prevail.	So take your stand with your spells and with your many sorceries, with which you have wearied yourself from your youth. Perhaps you will succeed; perhaps you will inspire terror!
ISA	47	13	네가 많은 모략을 인하여 피곤케 되었도다 하늘을 살피는 자와 별을 보는 자와 월삭에 예고하는 자들로 일어나 네게 임할 그 일에서 너를 구원케 하여 보라	Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels. Let now the astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee.	You are wearied by your many counselors; let them come forward now and save you— your astrologers who observe the stars, who monthly predict your fate.
ISA	47	14	보라 그들은 초개 같아서 불에 타리니 그 불꽃의 세력에서 스스로 구원치 못할 것이라 이 불은 더웁게 할 숯불이 아니요 그 앞에 앉을 만한 불도 아니니라	Behold, they shall be as stubble; the fire shall burn them; they shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame: there shall not be a coal to warm at, nor fire to sit before it.	Surely they are like stubble; the fire will burn them up. They cannot deliver themselves from the power of the flame. There will be no coals to warm them or fire to sit beside.
ISA	47	15	너의 근로하던 것들이 네게 이같이 되리니 너 어려서부터 너와 함께 무역하던 자들이 각기 소향대로 유리하고 너를 구원할 자 없으리라	Thus shall they be unto thee with whom thou hast laboured, even thy merchants, from thy youth: they shall wander every one to his quarter; none shall save thee.	This is what they are to you— those with whom you have labored and traded from youth— each one strays in his own direction; not one of them can save you.
ISA	48	1	야곱 집이여 이스라엘의 이름으로 일컬음을 받으며 유다의 근원에서 나왔으며 거룩한 성 백성이라 칭하며 그 이름이 만군의 여호와이신 이스라엘의 하나님을 의지하면서 성실치 아니하고 의로움이 없이 여호와의 이름으로 맹세하며 이스라엘의 하나님을 부르는 너희는 들을지어다	Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, which are called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of Judah, which swear by the name of the Lord, and make mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth, nor in righteousness.	“Listen to this, O house of Jacob, you who are called by the name of Israel, who have descended from the line of Judah, who swear by the name of the LORD, who invoke the God of Israel— but not in truth or righteousness—
ISA	48	2		For they call themselves of the holy city, and stay themselves upon the God of Israel; The Lord of hosts is his name.	who indeed call yourselves after the holy city and lean on the God of Israel; the LORD of Hosts is His name.
ISA	48	3	여호와께서 가라사대 내가 옛적에 장래사를 고하였고 내 입에서 내어 보였고 내가 홀연히 그 일을 행하여 이루었느니라	I have declared the former things from the beginning; and they went forth out of my mouth, and I shewed them; I did them suddenly, and they came to pass.	I foretold the former things long ago; they came out of My mouth and I proclaimed them. Suddenly I acted, and they came to pass.
ISA	48	4	내가 알거니와 너는 완악하며 네 목의 힘줄은 무쇠요 네 이마는 놋이라	Because I knew that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow brass;	For I knew that you are stubborn; your neck is iron and your forehead is bronze.
ISA	48	5	그러므로 내가 이 일을 옛적부터 네게 고하였고 성사하기 전에 그것을 네게 보였느니라 그렇지 않았더면 네 말이 내 신의 행한 바요 내 새긴 신상과 부어만든 신상의 명한 바라 하였으리라	I have even from the beginning declared it to thee; before it came to pass I shewed it thee: lest thou shouldest say, Mine idol hath done them, and my graven image, and my molten image, hath commanded them.	Therefore I declared it to you long ago; I announced it before it came to pass, so that you could not claim, ‘My idol has done this; my carved image and molten god has ordained it.’
ISA	48	6	네가 이미 들었으니 이것을 다 보라 너희가 선전치 아니하겠느뇨 이제부터 내가 새 일 곧 네가 알지 못하던 은비한 일을 네게 보이노니	Thou hast heard, see all this; and will not ye declare it? I have shewed thee new things from this time, even hidden things, and thou didst not know them.	You have heard these things; look at them all. Will you not acknowledge them? From now on I will tell you of new things, hidden things unknown to you.
ISA	48	7	이 일들은 이제 창조된 것이요 옛적 것이 아니라 오늘 이전에는 네가 듣지 못하였느니라 그렇지 않았더면 네가 말하기를 내가 이미 알았노라 하였으리라	They are created now, and not from the beginning; even before the day when thou heardest them not; lest thou shouldest say, Behold, I knew them.	They are created now, and not long ago; you have not heard of them before today. So you cannot claim, ‘I already knew them!’
ISA	48	8	네가 과연 듣지도 못하였고 알지도 못하였으며 네 귀가 옛적부터 열리지 못하였었나니 이는 네가 궤휼하고 궤휼하여 모태에서부터 패역한 자라 칭함을 입은 줄을 내가 알았음이라	Yea, thou heardest not; yea, thou knewest not; yea, from that time that thine ear was not opened: for I knew that thou wouldest deal very treacherously, and wast called a transgressor from the womb.	You have never heard; you have never understood; for a long time your ears have not been open. For I knew how deceitful you are; you have been called a rebel from birth.
ISA	48	9	내 이름을 위하여 내가 노하기를 더디 할 것이며 내 영예를 위하여 내가 참고 너를 멸절하지 아니하리라	For my name’s sake will I defer mine anger, and for my praise will I refrain for thee, that I cut thee not off.	For the sake of My name I will delay My wrath; for the sake of My praise I will restrain it, so that you will not be cut off.
ISA	48	10	보라 내가 너를 연단하였으나 은처럼 하지 아니하고 너를 고난의 풀무에서 택하였노라	Behold, I have refined thee, but not with silver; I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction.	See, I have refined you, but not as silver; I have tested you in the furnace of affliction.
ISA	48	11	내가 나를 위하며 내가 나를 위하여 이를 이룰 것이라 어찌 내 이름을 욕되게 하리요 내 영광을 다른 자에게 주지 아니하리라	For mine own sake, even for mine own sake, will I do it: for how should my name be polluted? and I will not give my glory unto another.	For My own sake, My very own sake, I will act; for how can I let Myself be defamed? I will not yield My glory to another.
ISA	48	12	야곱아 나의 부른 이스라엘아 나를 들으라 나는 그니 나는 처음이요 또 마지막이라	Hearken unto me, O Jacob and Israel, my called; I am he; I am the first, I also am the last.	Listen to Me, O Jacob, and Israel, whom I have called: I am He; I am the first, and I am the last.
ISA	48	13	과연 내 손이 땅의 기초를 정하였고 내 오른손이 하늘에 폈나니 내가 부르면 천지가 일제히 서느니라	Mine hand also hath laid the foundation of the earth, and my right hand hath spanned the heavens: when I call unto them, they stand up together.	Surely My own hand founded the earth, and My right hand spread out the heavens; when I summon them, they stand up together.
ISA	48	14	너희는 다 모여 들으라 나 여호와의 사랑하는 자가 나의 뜻을 바벨론에 행하리니 그의 팔이 갈대아인에게 임할 것이라 그들 중에 누가 이 일을 예언하였느뇨	All ye, assemble yourselves, and hear; which among them hath declared these things? The Lord hath loved him: he will do his pleasure on Babylon, and his arm shall be on the Chaldeans.	Come together, all of you, and listen: Which of the idols has foretold these things? The LORD’s chosen ally will carry out His desire against Babylon, and His arm will be against the Chaldeans.
ISA	48	15	나 곧 내가 말하였고 또 내가 그를 부르며 그를 인도하였나니 그 길이 형통하리라	I, even I, have spoken; yea, I have called him: I have brought him, and he shall make his way prosperous.	I, even I, have spoken; yes, I have called him. I have brought him, and he will succeed in his mission.
ISA	48	16	너희는 내게 가까이 나아와 이 말을 들으라 내가 처음부터 그것을 비밀히 말하지 아니하였나니 그 말이 있을 때부터 내가 거기 있었노라 하셨느니라 이제는 주 여호와께서 나와 그 신을 보내셨느니라	Come ye near unto me, hear ye this; I have not spoken in secret from the beginning; from the time that it was, there am I: and now the Lord God, and his Spirit, hath sent me.	Come near to Me and listen to this: From the beginning I have not spoken in secret; from the time it happened, I was there.” And now the Lord GOD has sent me, accompanied by His Spirit.
ISA	48	17	너희의 구속자시요 이스라엘의 거룩하신 자이신 여호와께서 가라사대 나는 네게 유익하도록 가르치고 너를 마땅히 행할 길로 인도하는 너희 하나님 여호와라	Thus saith the Lord, thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; I am the Lord thy God which teacheth thee to profit, which leadeth thee by the way that thou shouldest go.	Thus says the LORD your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel: “I am the LORD your God, who teaches you for your benefit, who directs you in the way you should go.
ISA	48	18	슬프다 네가 나의 명령을 듣지 아니하였도다 만일 들었더면 네 평강이 강과 같았겠고 네 의가 바다 물결 같았을 것이며	O that thou hadst hearkened to my commandments! then had thy peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea:	If only you had paid attention to My commandments, your peace would have been like a river, and your righteousness like waves of the sea.
ISA	48	19	네 자손이 모래 같았겠고 네 몸의 소생이 모래 알갱이 같아서 그 이름이 내 앞에서 끊어지지 아니하였겠고 없어지지 아니하였으리라 하셨느니라	Thy seed also had been as the sand, and the offspring of thy bowels like the gravel thereof; his name should not have been cut off nor destroyed from before me.	Your descendants would have been as countless as the sand, and your offspring as numerous as its grains; their name would never be cut off or eliminated from My presence.”
ISA	48	20	너희는 바벨론에서 나와서 갈대아인을 피하고 즐거운 소리로 이를 선파하여 들리며 땅 끝까지 반포하여 이르기를 여호와께서 그 종 야곱을 구속하셨다 하라	Go ye forth of Babylon, flee ye from the Chaldeans, with a voice of singing declare ye, tell this, utter it even to the end of the earth; say ye, The Lord hath redeemed his servant Jacob.	Leave Babylon! Flee from the Chaldeans! Declare it with a shout of joy, proclaim it, let it go out to the ends of the earth, saying, “The LORD has redeemed His servant Jacob!”
ISA	48	21	여호와께서 그들을 사막으로 통과하게 하시던 때에 그들로 목마르지 않게 하시되 그들을 위하여 바위에서 물이 흘러나게 하시며 바위를 쪼개사 물로 솟아나게 하셨느니라	And they thirsted not when he led them through the deserts: he caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them: he clave the rock also, and the waters gushed out.	They did not thirst when He led them through the deserts; He made water flow for them from the rock; He split the rock, and water gushed out.
ISA	48	22	여호와께서 말씀하시되 악인에게는 평강이 없다 하셨느니라	There is no peace, saith the Lord, unto the wicked.	“There is no peace,” says the LORD, “for the wicked.”
ISA	49	1	섬들아 나를 들으라 원방 백성들아 귀를 기울이라 여호와께서 내가 태에서 나옴으로부터 나를 부르셨고 내가 어미 복중에서 나옴으로부터 내 이름을 말씀하셨으며	Listen, O isles, unto me; and hearken, ye people, from far; The Lord hath called me from the womb; from the bowels of my mother hath he made mention of my name.	Listen to Me, O islands; pay attention, O distant peoples: The LORD called Me from the womb; from the body of My mother He named Me.
ISA	49	2	내 입을 날카로운 칼 같이 만드시고 나를 그 손 그늘에 숨기시며 나로 마광한 살을 만드사 그 전통에 감추시고	And he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow of his hand hath he hid me, and made me a polished shaft; in his quiver hath he hid me;	He made My mouth like a sharp sword; He hid Me in the shadow of His hand. He made Me like a polished arrow; He hid Me in His quiver.
ISA	49	3	내게 이르시되 너는 나의 종이요 내 영광을 나타낼 이스라엘이라 하셨느니라	And said unto me, Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified.	He said to Me, “You are My Servant, Israel, in whom I will display My glory.”
ISA	49	4	그러나 나는 말하기를 내가 헛되이 수고하였으며 무익히 공연히 내 힘을 다하였다 하였도다 정녕히 나의 신원이 여호와께 있고 나의 보응이 나의 하나님께 있느니라	Then I said, I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for nought, and in vain: yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God.	But I said, “I have labored in vain, I have spent My strength in futility and vanity; yet My vindication is with the LORD, and My reward is with My God.”
ISA	49	5	나는 여호와의 보시기에 존귀한 자라 나의 하나님이 나의 힘이 되셨도다 다시 야곱을 자기에게로 돌아오게 하시며 이스라엘을 자기에게로 모이게 하시려고 나를 태에서 나옴으로부터 자기 종을 삼으신 여호와께서 말씀하시니라	And now, saith the Lord that formed me from the womb to be his servant, to bring Jacob again to him, Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength.	And now says the LORD, who formed Me from the womb to be His Servant, to bring Jacob back to Him, that Israel might be gathered to Him— for I am honored in the sight of the LORD, and My God is My strength—
ISA	49	6	그가 가라사대 네가 나의 종이 되어 야곱의 지파들을 일으키며 이스라엘 중에 보전된 자를 돌아오게 할 것은 오히려 경한 일이라 내가 또 너로 이방의 빛을 삼아 나의 구원을 베풀어서 땅 끝까지 이르게 하리라	And he said, It is a light thing that thou shouldest be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel: I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth.	He says: “It is not enough for You to be My Servant, to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the protected ones of Israel. I will also make You a light for the nations, to bring My salvation to the ends of the earth.”
ISA	49	7	이스라엘의 구속자, 이스라엘의 거룩한 자이신 여호와께서 사람에게 멸시를 당하는 자, 백성에게 미움을 받는 자, 관원들에게 종이 된 자에게 이같이 이르시되 너를 보고 열왕이 일어서며 방백들이 경배하리니 이는 너를 택한 바 신실한 나 여호와 이스라엘의 거룩한 자를 인함이니라	Thus saith the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel, and his Holy One, to him whom man despiseth, to him whom the nation abhorreth, to a servant of rulers, Kings shall see and arise, princes also shall worship, because of the Lord that is faithful, and the Holy One of Israel, and he shall choose thee.	Thus says the LORD, the Redeemer and Holy One of Israel, to Him who was despised and abhorred by the nation, to the Servant of rulers: “Kings will see You and rise, and princes will bow down, because of the LORD, who is faithful, the Holy One of Israel, who has chosen You.”
ISA	49	8	여호와께서 또 가라사대 은혜의 때에 내가 네게 응답하였고 구원의 날에 내가 너를 도왔도다 내가 장차 너를 보호하여 너로 백성의 언약을 삼으며 나라를 일으켜 그들로 그 황무하였던 땅을 기업으로 상속케 하리라	Thus saith the Lord, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee: and I will preserve thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages;	This is what the LORD says: “In the time of favor I will answer You, and in the day of salvation I will help You; I will keep You and appoint You to be a covenant for the people, to restore the land, to apportion its desolate inheritances,
ISA	49	9	내가 잡혀 있는 자에게 이르기를 나오라 하며 흑암에 있는 자에게 나타나라 하리라 그들이 길에서 먹겠고 모든 자산에도 그들의 풀밭이 있을 것인즉	That thou mayest say to the prisoners, Go forth; to them that are in darkness, Shew yourselves. They shall feed in the ways, and their pastures shall be in all high places.	to say to the prisoners, ‘Come out,’ and to those in darkness, ‘Show yourselves.’ They will feed along the pathways, and find pasture on every barren hill.
ISA	49	10	그들이 주리거나 목마르지 아니할 것이며 더위와 볕이 그들을 상하지 아니하리니 이는 그들을 긍휼히 여기는 자가 그들을 이끌되 샘물 근원으로 인도할 것임이니라	They shall not hunger nor thirst; neither shall the heat nor sun smite them: for he that hath mercy on them shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he guide them.	They will not hunger or thirst, nor will scorching heat or sun beat down on them. For He who has compassion on them will guide them and lead them beside springs of water.
ISA	49	11	내가 나의 모든 산을 길로 삼고 나의 대로를 돋우리니	And I will make all my mountains a way, and my highways shall be exalted.	I will turn all My mountains into roads, and My highways will be raised up.
ISA	49	12	혹자는 원방에서, 혹자는 북방과 서방에서, 혹자는 시님 땅에서 오리라	Behold, these shall come from far: and, lo, these from the north and from the west; and these from the land of Sinim.	Behold, they will come from far away, from the north and from the west, and from the land of Aswan.”
ISA	49	13	하늘이여 노래하라 땅이여 기뻐하라 산들이여 즐거이 노래하라 여호와가 그 백성을 위로하였은즉 그 고난 당한 자를 긍휼히 여길 것임이니라	Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, O earth; and break forth into singing, O mountains: for the Lord hath comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted.	Shout for joy, O heavens; rejoice, O earth; break forth in song, O mountains! For the LORD has comforted His people, and He will have compassion on His afflicted ones.
ISA	49	14	오직 시온이 이르기를 여호와께서 나를 버리시며 주께서 나를 잊으셨다 하였거니와	But Zion said, The Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgotten me.	But Zion said, “The LORD has forsaken me; the Lord has forgotten me!”
ISA	49	15	여인이 어찌 그 젖먹는 자식을 잊겠으며 자기 태에서 난 아들을 긍휼히 여기지 않겠느냐 그들은 혹시 잊을지라도 나는 너를 잊지 아니할 것이라	Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee.	“Can a woman forget her nursing child, or lack compassion for the son of her womb? Even if she could forget, I will not forget you!
ISA	49	16	내가 너를 내 손바닥에 새겼고 너의 성벽이 항상 내 앞에 있나니	Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands; thy walls are continually before me.	Behold, I have inscribed you on the palms of My hands; your walls are ever before Me.
ISA	49	17	네 자녀들은 속히 돌아오고 너를 헐며 너를 황폐케 하던 자들은 너를 떠나가리라	Thy children shall make haste; thy destroyers and they that made thee waste shall go forth of thee.	Your builders hasten back; your destroyers and wreckers depart from you.
ISA	49	18	네 눈을 들어 사방을 보라 그들이 다 모여 네게로 오느니라 나 여호와가 이르노라 내가 나의 삶으로 맹세하노니 네가 반드시 그 모든 무리로 장식을 삼아 몸에 차며 띠기를 신부처럼 할 것이라	Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold: all these gather themselves together, and come to thee. As I live, saith the Lord, thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all, as with an ornament, and bind them on thee, as a bride doeth.	Lift up your eyes and look around. They all gather together; they come to you. As surely as I live,” declares the LORD, “you will wear them all as jewelry and put them on like a bride.
ISA	49	19	대저 네 황폐하고 적막한 곳들과 네 파멸을 당하였던 땅이 이제는 거민이 많으므로 좁게 될 것이며 너를 삼켰던 자들이 멀리 떠날 것이니라	For thy waste and thy desolate places, and the land of thy destruction, shall even now be too narrow by reason of the inhabitants, and they that swallowed thee up shall be far away.	For your ruined and desolate places and your ravaged land will now indeed be too small for your people, and those who devoured you will be far away.
ISA	49	20	고난 중에 낳은 자녀가 후일에 네 귀에 말하기를 이곳이 우리에게 좁으니 넓혀서 우리로 거처하게 하라 하리니	The children which thou shalt have, after thou hast lost the other, shall say again in thine ears, The place is too strait for me: give place to me that I may dwell.	Yet the children of your bereavement will say in your hearing, ‘This place is too small for us; make room for us to live here.’
ISA	49	21	그 때에 네 심중에 이르기를 누가 나를 위하여 이 무리를 낳았는고 나는 자녀를 잃고 외로워졌으며 사로잡혔으며 유리하였거늘 이 무리를 누가 양육하였는고 나는 홀로 되었거늘 이 무리는 어디서 생겼는고 하리라	Then shalt thou say in thine heart, Who hath begotten me these, seeing I have lost my children, and am desolate, a captive, and removing to and fro? and who hath brought up these? Behold, I was left alone; these, where had they been?	Then you will say in your heart, ‘Who has begotten these for me? I was bereaved and barren; I was exiled and rejected. So who has reared them? Look, I was left all alone, so where did they come from?’”
ISA	49	22	나 주 여호와가 이르노라 내가 열방을 향하여 나의 손을 들고 민족들을 향하여 나의 기호를 세울 것이라 그들이 네 아들들을 품에 안고 네 딸들을 어깨에 메고 올 것이며	Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people: and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders.	This is what the Lord GOD says: “Behold, I will lift up My hand to the nations, and raise My banner to the peoples. They will bring your sons in their arms and carry your daughters on their shoulders.
ISA	49	23	열왕은 네 양부가 되며 왕비들은 네 유모가 될 것이며 그들이 얼굴을 땅에 대고 네게 절하고 네 발의 티끌을 핥을 것이니 네가 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라 나를 바라는 자는 수치를 당하지 아니하리라	And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy nursing mothers: they shall bow down to thee with their face toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou shalt know that I am the Lord: for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me.	Kings will be your foster fathers, and their queens your nursing mothers. They will bow to you facedown and lick the dust at your feet. Then you will know that I am the LORD; those who hope in Me will never be put to shame.”
ISA	49	24	용사의 빼앗은 것을 어떻게 도로 빼앗으며 승리자에게 사로잡힌 자를 어떻게 건져낼 수 있으랴마는	Shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captive delivered?	Can the plunder be snatched from the mighty, or the captives of a tyrant be delivered?
ISA	49	25	나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 용사의 포로도 빼앗을 것이요 강포자의 빼앗은 것도 건져낼 것이니 이는 내가 너를 대적하는 자를 대적하고 네 자녀를 구원할 것임이라	But thus saith the Lord, Even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered: for I will contend with him that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy children.	Indeed, this is what the LORD says: “Even the captives of the mighty will be taken away, and the plunder of the tyrant will be retrieved; I will contend with those who contend with you, and I will save your children.
ISA	49	26	내가 너를 학대하는 자로 자기의 고기를 먹게 하며 새 술에 취함 같이 자기의 피에 취하게 하리니 모든 육체가 나 여호와는 네 구원자요 네 구속자요 야곱의 전능자인줄 알리라	And I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh; and they shall be drunken with their own blood, as with sweet wine: and all flesh shall know that I the Lord am thy Saviour and thy Redeemer, the mighty One of Jacob.	I will make your oppressors eat their own flesh; they will be drunk on their own blood, as with wine. Then all mankind will know that I, the LORD, am your Savior and your Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.”
ISA	50	1	나 여호와가 이같이 이르노라 내가 너희 어미를 내어보낸 이혼서가 어디 있느냐 내가 어느 채주에게 너희를 팔았느냐 오직 너희는 너희의 죄악을 인하여 팔렸고 너희 어미는 너희의 허물을 인하여 내어보냄을 입었느니라	Thus saith the Lord, Where is the bill of your mother’s divorcement, whom I have put away? or which of my creditors is it to whom I have sold you? Behold, for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put away.	This is what the LORD says: “Where is your mother’s certificate of divorce with which I sent her away? Or to which of My creditors did I sell you? Look, you were sold for your iniquities, and for your transgressions your mother was sent away.
ISA	50	2	내가 왔어도 사람이 없었으며 내가 불러도 대답하는 자가 없었음은 어찜이뇨 내 손이 어찌 짧아 구속하지 못하겠느냐 내게 어찌 건질 능력이 없겠느냐 보라 내가 꾸짖은즉 바다가 마르며 하수가 광야가 될 것이며 거기 물이 없어졌으므로 어족이 갈하여 죽어 악취를 발하게 되느니라	Wherefore, when I came, was there no man? when I called, was there none to answer? Is my hand shortened at all, that it cannot redeem? or have I no power to deliver? behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea, I make the rivers a wilderness: their fish stinketh, because there is no water, and dieth for thirst.	Why was no one there when I arrived? Why did no one answer when I called? Is My hand too short to redeem you? Or do I lack the strength to deliver you? Behold, My rebuke dries up the sea; I turn the rivers into a desert; the fish rot for lack of water and die of thirst.
ISA	50	3	내가 흑암으로 하늘을 입히며 굵은 베로 덮느니라	I clothe the heavens with blackness, and I make sackcloth their covering.	I clothe the heavens in black and make sackcloth their covering.”
ISA	50	4	주 여호와께서 학자의 혀를 내게 주사 나로 곤핍한 자를 말로 어떻게 도와줄 줄을 알게 하시고 아침마다 깨우치시되 나의 귀를 깨우치사 학자 같이 알아듣게 하시도다	The Lord God hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary: he wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned.	The Lord GOD has given Me the tongue of discipleship, to sustain the weary with a word. He awakens Me morning by morning; He awakens My ear to listen as a disciple.
ISA	50	5	주 여호와께서 나의 귀를 열으셨으므로 내가 거역지도 아니하며 뒤로 물러가지도 아니하며	The Lord God hath opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned away back.	The Lord GOD has opened My ears, and I have not been rebellious, nor have I turned back.
ISA	50	6	나를 때리는 자들에게 내 등을 맡기며 나의 수염을 뽑는 자들에게 나의 뺨을 맡기며 수욕과 침 뱉음을 피하려고 내 얼굴을 가리우지 아니하였느니라	I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair: I hid not my face from shame and spitting.	I offered My back to those who struck Me, and My cheeks to those who tore out My beard. I did not hide My face from scorn and spittle.
ISA	50	7	주 여호와께서 나를 도우시므로 내가 부끄러워 아니하고 내 얼굴을 부싯돌 같이 굳게 하였은즉 내가 수치를 당치 아니할 줄 아노라	For the Lord God will help me; therefore shall I not be confounded: therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed.	Because the Lord GOD helps Me, I have not been disgraced; therefore I have set My face like flint, and I know that I will not be put to shame.
ISA	50	8	나를 의롭다 하시는 이가 가까이 계시니 나와 다툴 자가 누구뇨 나와 함께 설지어다 나의 대적이 누구뇨 내게 가까이 나아올지어다	He is near that justifieth me; who will contend with me? let us stand together: who is mine adversary? let him come near to me.	The One who vindicates Me is near. Who will dare to contend with Me? Let us confront each other! Who has a case against Me? Let him approach Me!
ISA	50	9	주 여호와께서 나를 도우시리니 나를 정죄할 자 누구뇨 그들은 다 옷과 같이 해어지며 좀에게 먹히리라	Behold, the Lord God will help me; who is he that shall condemn me? lo, they all shall wax old as a garment; the moth shall eat them up.	Surely the Lord GOD helps Me. Who is there to condemn Me? See, they will all wear out like a garment; the moths will devour them.
ISA	50	10	너희 중에 여호와를 경외하며 그 종의 목소리를 청종하는 자가 누구뇨 흑암 중에 행하여 빛이 없는 자라도 여호와의 이름을 의뢰하며 자기 하나님께 의지할지어다	Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light? let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God.	Who among you fears the LORD and obeys the voice of His Servant? Who among you walks in darkness and has no light? Let him trust in the name of the LORD; let him lean on his God.
ISA	50	11	불을 피우고 횃불을 둘러띤 자여 너희가 다 너희의 불꽃 가운데로 들어가며 너희의 피운 횃불 가운데로 들어갈지어다 너희가 내 손에서 얻을 것이 이것이라 너희가 슬픔 중에 누우리라	Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass yourselves about with sparks: walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand; ye shall lie down in sorrow.	Behold, all you who kindle a fire, who array yourselves with firebrands, walk in the light of your fire and of the firebrands you have lit! This is what you will receive from My hand: You will lie down in a place of torment.
ISA	51	1	의를 좇으며 여호와를 찾아 구하는 너희는 나를 들을지어다 너희를 떠낸 반석과 너희를 파낸 우묵한 구덩이를 생각하여 보라	Hearken to me, ye that follow after righteousness, ye that seek the Lord: look unto the rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence ye are digged.	“Listen to Me, you who pursue righteousness, you who seek the LORD: Look to the rock from which you were cut, and to the quarry from which you were hewn.
ISA	51	2	너희 조상 아브라함과 너희를 생산한 사라를 생각하여 보라 아브라함이 혈혈 단신으로 있을 때에 내가 부르고 그에게 복을 주어 창성케 하였느니라	Look unto Abraham your father, and unto Sarah that bare you: for I called him alone, and blessed him, and increased him.	Look to Abraham your father, and to Sarah who gave you birth. When I called him, he was but one; then I blessed him and multiplied him.
ISA	51	3	대저 나 여호와가 시온을 위로하되 그 모든 황폐한 곳을 위로하여 그 광야로 에덴 같고 그 사막으로 여호와의 동산 같게 하였나니 그 가운데 기뻐함과 즐거움과 감사함과 창화하는 소리가 있으리라	For the Lord shall comfort Zion: he will comfort all her waste places; and he will make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of the Lord; joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of melody.	For the LORD will comfort Zion and will look with compassion on all her ruins; He will make her wilderness like Eden and her desert like the garden of the LORD. Joy and gladness will be found in her, thanksgiving and melodious song.
ISA	51	4	내 백성이여 내게 주의하라 내 나라여 내게 귀를 기울이라 이는 율법이 내게서부터 발할 것임이라 내가 내 공의를 만민의 빛으로 세우리라	Hearken unto me, my people; and give ear unto me, O my nation: for a law shall proceed from me, and I will make my judgment to rest for a light of the people.	Pay attention to Me, My people, and listen to Me, My nation; for a law will go out from Me, and My justice will become a light to the nations; I will bring it about quickly.
ISA	51	5	내 의가 가깝고 내 구원이 나갔은즉 내 팔이 만민을 심판하리니 섬들이 나를 앙망하여 내 팔에 의지하리라	My righteousness is near; my salvation is gone forth, and mine arms shall judge the people; the isles shall wait upon me, and on mine arm shall they trust.	My righteousness draws near, My salvation is on the way, and My arms will bring justice to the nations. The islands will look for Me and wait in hope for My arm.
ISA	51	6	너희는 하늘로 눈을 들며 그 아래의 땅을 살피라 하늘이 연기 같이 사라지고 땅이 옷 같이 해어지며 거기 거한 자들이 하루살이 같이 죽으려니와 나의 구원은 영원히 있고 나의 의는 폐하여지지 아니하리라	Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath: for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in like manner: but my salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished.	Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look at the earth below; for the heavens will vanish like smoke, the earth will wear out like a garment, and its people will die like gnats. But My salvation will last forever, and My righteousness will never fail.
ISA	51	7	의를 아는 자들아, 마음에 내 율법이 있는 백성들아, 너희는 나를 듣고 사람의 훼방을 두려워 말라 사람의 비방에 놀라지 말라	Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart is my law; fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings.	Listen to Me, you who know what is right, you people with My law in your hearts: Do not fear the scorn of men; do not be broken by their insults.
ISA	51	8	그들은 옷 같이 좀에게 먹힐 것이며 그들은 양털 같이 벌레에게 먹힐 것이로되 나의 의는 영원히 있겠고 나의 구원은 세세에 미치리라	For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool: but my righteousness shall be for ever, and my salvation from generation to generation.	For the moth will devour them like a garment, and the worm will eat them like wool. But My righteousness will last forever, My salvation through all generations.”
ISA	51	9	여호와의 팔이여 깨소서 깨소서 능력을 베푸소서 옛날 옛 시대에 깨신 것 같이 하소서 라합을 저미시고 용을 찌르신 이가 어찌 주가 아니시며	Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord; awake, as in the ancient days, in the generations of old. Art thou not it that hath cut Rahab, and wounded the dragon?	Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the LORD. Wake up as in days past, as in generations of old. Was it not You who cut Rahab to pieces, who pierced through the dragon?
ISA	51	10	바다를, 넓고 깊은 물을 말리시고 바다 깊은 곳에 길을 내어 구속얻은 자들로 건너게 하신 이가 어찌 주가 아니시니이까	Art thou not it which hath dried the sea, the waters of the great deep; that hath made the depths of the sea a way for the ransomed to pass over?	Was it not You who dried up the sea, the waters of the great deep, who made a road in the depths of the sea for the redeemed to cross over?
ISA	51	11	여호와께 구속된 자들이 돌아와서 노래하며 시온으로 들어와서 그 머리 위에 영영한 기쁨을 쓰고 즐거움과 기쁨을 얻으리니 슬픔과 탄식이 달아나리이다	Therefore the redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come with singing unto Zion; and everlasting joy shall be upon their head: they shall obtain gladness and joy; and sorrow and mourning shall flee away.	So the redeemed of the LORD will return and enter Zion with singing, crowned with everlasting joy. Gladness and joy will overtake them, and sorrow and sighing will flee.
ISA	51	12	가라사대 너희를 위로하는 자는 나여늘 나여늘 너는 어떠한 자이기에 죽을 사람을 두려워하며 풀 같이 될 인자를 두려워하느냐	I, even I, am he that comforteth you: who art thou, that thou shouldest be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the son of man which shall be made as grass;	“I, even I, am He who comforts you. Why should you be afraid of mortal man, of a son of man who withers like grass?
ISA	51	13	하늘을 펴고 땅의 기초를 정하고 너를 지은 자 여호와를 어찌하여 잊어버렸느냐 너를 멸하려고 예비하는 저 학대자의 분노를 어찌하여 항상 종일 두려워하느냐 학대자의 분노가 어디 있느냐	And forgettest the Lord thy maker, that hath stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth; and hast feared continually every day because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy? and where is the fury of the oppressor?	But you have forgotten the LORD, your Maker, who stretched out the heavens and laid the foundations of the earth. You live in terror all day long because of the fury of the oppressor who is bent on destruction. But where is the fury of the oppressor?
ISA	51	14	결박된 포로가 속히 놓일 것이니 죽지도 아니할 것이요 구덩이로 내려가지도 아니할 것이며 그 양식이 핍절하지도 아니하리라	The captive exile hasteneth that he may be loosed, and that he should not die in the pit, nor that his bread should fail.	The captive will soon be freed; he will not die in the dungeon, and his bread will not be lacking.
ISA	51	15	나는 네 하나님 여호와라 바다를 저어서 그 물결로 흉용케 하는 자니 내 이름은 만군의 여호와니라	But I am the Lord thy God, that divided the sea, whose waves roared: The Lord of hosts is his name.	For I am the LORD your God who stirs up the sea so that its waves roar— the LORD of Hosts is His name.
ISA	51	16	내가 내 말을 네 입에 두고 내 손 그늘로 너를 덮었나니 이는 내가 하늘을 펴며 땅의 기초를 정하며 시온에게 이르기를 너는 내 백성이라 하려 하였음이니라	And I have put my words in thy mouth, and I have covered thee in the shadow of mine hand, that I may plant the heavens, and lay the foundations of the earth, and say unto Zion, Thou art my people.	I have put My words in your mouth, and covered you with the shadow of My hand, to establish the heavens, to found the earth, and to say to Zion, ‘You are My people.’”
ISA	51	17	여호와의 손에서 그 분노의 잔을 마신 예루살렘이여 깰지어다 깰지어다 일어설지어다 네가 이미 비틀걸음 치게 하는 큰 잔을 마셔 다하였도다	Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, which hast drunk at the hand of the Lord the cup of his fury; thou hast drunken the dregs of the cup of trembling, and wrung them out.	Awake, awake! Rise up, O Jerusalem, you who have drunk from the hand of the LORD the cup of His fury; you who have drained the goblet to the dregs— the cup that makes men stagger.
ISA	51	18	네가 낳은 모든 아들 중에 너를 인도할 자가 없고 너의 양육한 모든 아들 중에 그 손으로 너를 이끌 자도 없도다	There is none to guide her among all the sons whom she hath brought forth; neither is there any that taketh her by the hand of all the sons that she hath brought up.	Among all the sons she bore, there is no one to guide her; among all the sons she brought up, there is no one to take her hand.
ISA	51	19	이 두 가지 일이 네게 당하였으니 누가 너를 위하여 슬퍼하랴 곧 황폐와 멸망이요 기근과 칼이라 내가 어떻게 너를 위로하랴	These two things are come unto thee; who shall be sorry for thee? desolation, and destruction, and the famine, and the sword: by whom shall I comfort thee?	These pairs have befallen you: devastation and destruction, famine and sword. Who will grieve for you? Who can comfort you?
ISA	51	20	네 아들들이 곤비하여 그물에 걸린 영양 같이 온 거리 모퉁이에 누웠으니 그들에게 여호와의 분노와 네 하나님의 견책이 가득하였도다	Thy sons have fainted, they lie at the head of all the streets, as a wild bull in a net: they are full of the fury of the Lord, the rebuke of thy God.	Your sons have fainted; they lie at the head of every street, like an antelope in a net. They are full of the wrath of the LORD, the rebuke of your God.
ISA	51	21	그러므로 너 곤고하며 포도주가 아니라도 취한 자여 이 말을 들으라	Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted, and drunken, but not with wine:	Therefore now hear this, you afflicted one, drunken, but not with wine.
ISA	51	22	네 주 여호와, 그 백성을 신원하시는 네 하나님이 이같이 말씀하시되 보라 내가 비틀걸음 치게 하는 잔 곧 나의 분노의 큰 잔을 네 손에서 거두어서 너로 다시는 마시지 않게 하고	Thus saith thy Lord the Lord, and thy God that pleadeth the cause of his people, Behold, I have taken out of thine hand the cup of trembling, even the dregs of the cup of my fury; thou shalt no more drink it again:	Thus says your Lord, the LORD, even your God, who defends His people: “See, I have removed from your hand the cup of staggering. From that goblet, the cup of My fury, you will never drink again.
ISA	51	23	그 잔을 너를 곤고케 하던 자들의 손에 두리라 그들은 일찍이 네게 이르기를 엎드리라 우리가 넘어가리라 하던 자들이라 너를 넘어가려는 그들의 앞에 네가 네 허리를 펴서 땅 같게, 거리 같게 하였느니라 하시니라	But I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee; which have said to thy soul, Bow down, that we may go over: and thou hast laid thy body as the ground, and as the street, to them that went over.	I will place it in the hands of your tormentors, who told you: ‘Lie down, so we can walk over you,’ so that you made your back like the ground, like a street to be traversed.”
ISA	52	1	시온이여 깰지어다 깰지어다 네 힘을 입을지어다 거룩한 성 예루살렘이여 네 아름다운 옷을 입을지어다 이제부터 할례받지 않은 자와 부정한 자가 다시는 네게로 들어옴이 없을 것임이니라	Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city: for henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean.	Awake, awake, clothe yourself with strength, O Zion! Put on your garments of splendor, O Jerusalem, holy city! For the uncircumcised and unclean will no longer enter you.
ISA	52	2	너는 티끌을 떨어버릴지어다 예루살렘이여 일어나 보좌에 앉을지어다 사로잡힌 딸 시온이여 네 목의 줄을 스스로 풀지어다	Shake thyself from the dust; arise, and sit down, O Jerusalem: loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion.	Shake off your dust! Rise up and sit on your throne, O Jerusalem. Remove the chains from your neck, O captive Daughter of Zion.
ISA	52	3	여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 너희가 값 없이 팔렸으니 돈 없이 속량되리라	For thus saith the Lord, Ye have sold yourselves for nought; and ye shall be redeemed without money.	For this is what the LORD says: “You were sold for nothing, and without money you will be redeemed.”
ISA	52	4	주 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 내 백성이 이왕에 애굽에 내려가서 거기 우거하였었고 앗수르인은 공연히 그들을 압박하였도다	For thus saith the Lord God, My people went down aforetime into Egypt to sojourn there; and the Assyrian oppressed them without cause.	For this is what the Lord GOD says: “At first My people went down to Egypt to live, then Assyria oppressed them without cause.
ISA	52	5	여호와께서 말씀하시되 내 백성이 까닭없이 잡혀갔으니 내가 여기서 어떻게 할꼬 여호와께서 말씀하시되 그들을 관할하는 자들이 떠들며 내 이름을 항상 종일 더럽히도다	Now therefore, what have I here, saith the Lord, that my people is taken away for nought? they that rule over them make them to howl, saith the Lord; and my name continually every day is blasphemed.	And now what have I here? declares the LORD. For My people have been taken without cause; those who rule them taunt, declares the LORD, and My name is blasphemed continually all day long.
ISA	52	6	그러므로 내 백성은 내 이름을 알리라 그러므로 그 날에는 그들이 이 말을 하는 자가 나인 줄 알리라 곧 내니라	Therefore my people shall know my name: therefore they shall know in that day that I am he that doth speak: behold, it is I.	Therefore My people will know My name; therefore they will know on that day that I am He who speaks. Here I am!”
ISA	52	7	좋은 소식을 가져오며 평화를 공포하며 복된 좋은 소식을 가져오며 구원을 공포하며 시온을 향하여 이르기를 네 하나님이 통치하신다 하는 자의 산을 넘는 발이 어찌 그리 아름다운고	How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth!	How beautiful on the mountains are the feet of those who bring good news, who proclaim peace, who bring good tidings, who proclaim salvation, who say to Zion, “Your God reigns!”
ISA	52	8	들을지어다 너의 파수꾼들의 소리로다 그들이 소리를 높여 일제히 노래하니 이는 여호와께서 시온으로 돌아오실 때에 그들의 눈이 마주 봄이로다	Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the voice together shall they sing: for they shall see eye to eye, when the Lord shall bring again Zion.	Listen! Your watchmen lift up their voices, together they shout for joy. For every eye will see when the LORD returns to Zion.
ISA	52	9	너 예루살렘의 황폐한 곳들아 기쁜 소리를 발하여 함께 노래할지어다 이는 여호와께서 그 백성을 위로하셨고 예루살렘을 구속하셨음이라	Break forth into joy, sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem: for the Lord hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed Jerusalem.	Break forth in joy, sing together, O ruins of Jerusalem, for the LORD has comforted His people; He has redeemed Jerusalem.
ISA	52	10	여호와께서 열방의 목전에서 그 거룩한 팔을 나타내셨으므로 모든 땅 끝까지도 우리 하나님의 구원을 보았도다	The Lord hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our God.	The LORD has bared His holy arm in the sight of all the nations; all the ends of the earth will see the salvation of our God.
ISA	52	11	너희는 떠날지어다 떠날지어다 거기서 나오고 부정한 것을 만지지 말지어다 그 가운데서 나올지어다 여호와의 기구를 메는 자여 스스로 정결케 할지어다	Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing; go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord.	Depart, depart, go out from there! Touch no unclean thing; come out from it, purify yourselves, you who carry the vessels of the LORD.
ISA	52	12	여호와께서 너희 앞에 행하시며 이스라엘의 하나님이 너희 뒤에 호위하시리니 너희가 황급히 나오지 아니하며 도망하여 행하지 아니하리라	For ye shall not go out with haste, nor go by flight: for the Lord will go before you; and the God of Israel will be your rereward.	For you will not leave in a hurry nor flee in haste, for the LORD goes before you, and the God of Israel is your rear guard.
ISA	52	13	여호와께서 가라사대 보라 내 종이 형통하리니 받들어 높이 들려서 지극히 존귀하게 되리라	Behold, my servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted and extolled, and be very high.	Behold, My Servant will prosper; He will be raised and lifted up and highly exalted.
ISA	52	14	이왕에는 그 얼굴이 타인보다 상하였고 그 모양이 인생보다 상하였으므로 무리가 그를 보고 놀랐거니와	As many were astonied at thee; his visage was so marred more than any man, and his form more than the sons of men:	Just as many were appalled at Him— His appearance was disfigured beyond that of any man, and His form was marred beyond human likeness—
ISA	52	15	후에는 그가 열방을 놀랠 것이며 열왕은 그를 인하여 입을 봉하리니 이는 그들이 아직 전파되지 않은 것을 볼 것이요 아직 듣지 못한 것을 깨달을 것임이라 하시니라	So shall he sprinkle many nations; the kings shall shut their mouths at him: for that which had not been told them shall they see; and that which they had not heard shall they consider.	so He will sprinkle many nations. Kings will shut their mouths because of Him. For they will see what they have not been told, and they will understand what they have not heard.
ISA	53	1	우리의 전한 것을 누가 믿었느뇨 여호와의 팔이 뉘게 나타났느뇨	Who hath believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?	Who has believed our message? And to whom has the arm of the LORD been revealed?
ISA	53	2	그는 주 앞에서 자라나기를 연한 순 같고 마른 땅에서 나온 줄기 같아서 고운 모양도 없고 풍채도 없은즉 우리의 보기에 흠모할만한 아름다운 것이 없도다	For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground: he hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him.	He grew up before Him like a tender shoot, and like a root out of dry ground. He had no stately form or majesty to attract us, no beauty that we should desire Him.
ISA	53	3	그는 멸시를 받아서 사람에게 싫어버린 바 되었으며 간고를 많이 겪었으며 질고를 아는 자라 마치 사람들에게 얼굴을 가리우고 보지 않음을 받는 자 같아서 멸시를 당하였고 우리도 그를 귀히 여기지 아니하였도다	He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not.	He was despised and rejected by men, a man of sorrows, acquainted with grief. Like one from whom men hide their faces, He was despised, and we esteemed Him not.
ISA	53	4	그는 실로 우리의 질고를 지고 우리의 슬픔을 당하였거늘 우리는 생각하기를 그는 징벌을 받아서 하나님에게 맞으며 고난을 당한다 하였노라	Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.	Surely He took on our infirmities and carried our sorrows; yet we considered Him stricken by God, struck down and afflicted.
ISA	53	5	그가 찔림은 우리의 허물을 인함이요 그가 상함은 우리의 죄악을 인함이라 그가 징계를 받음으로 우리가 평화를 누리고 그가 채찍에 맞음으로 우리가 나음을 입었도다	But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed.	But He was pierced for our transgressions, He was crushed for our iniquities; the punishment that brought us peace was upon Him, and by His stripes we are healed.
ISA	53	6	우리는 다 양 같아서 그릇 행하여 각기 제 길로 갔거늘 여호와께서는 우리 무리의 죄악을 그에게 담당시키셨도다	All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.	We all like sheep have gone astray, each one has turned to his own way; and the LORD has laid upon Him the iniquity of us all.
ISA	53	7	그가 곤욕을 당하여 괴로울 때에도 그 입을 열지 아니하였음이여 마치 도수장으로 끌려가는 어린 양과 털 깎는 자 앞에 잠잠한 양 같이 그 입을 열지 아니하였도다	He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth.	He was oppressed and afflicted, yet He did not open His mouth. He was led like a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is silent, so He did not open His mouth.
ISA	53	8	그가 곤욕과 심문을 당하고 끌려 갔으니 그 세대 중에 누가 생각하기를 그가 산 자의 땅에서 끊어짐은 마땅히 형벌 받을 내 백성의 허물을 인함이라 하였으리요	He was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living: for the transgression of my people was he stricken.	By oppression and judgment He was taken away, and who can recount His descendants? For He was cut off from the land of the living; He was stricken for the transgression of My people.
ISA	53	9	그는 강포를 행치 아니하였고 그 입에 궤사가 없었으나 그 무덤이 악인과 함께 되었으며 그 묘실이 부자와 함께 되었도다	And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death; because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth.	He was assigned a grave with the wicked, and with a rich man in His death, although He had done no violence, nor was any deceit in His mouth.
ISA	53	10	여호와께서 그로 상함을 받게 하시기를 원하사 질고를 당케 하셨은즉 그 영혼을 속건제물로 드리기에 이르면 그가 그 씨를 보게 되며 그 날은 길 것이요 또 그의 손으로 여호와의 뜻을 성취하리로다	Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him; he hath put him to grief: when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.	Yet it was the LORD’s will to crush Him and to cause Him to suffer; and when His soul is made a guilt offering, He will see His offspring, He will prolong His days, and the good pleasure of the LORD will prosper in His hand.
ISA	53	11	가라사대 그가 자기 영혼의 수고한 것을 보고 만족히 여길 것이라 나의 의로운 종이 자기 지식으로 많은 사람을 의롭게 하며 또 그들의 죄악을 친히 담당하리라	He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities.	After the anguish of His soul, He will see the light of life and be satisfied. By His knowledge My righteous Servant will justify many, and He will bear their iniquities.
ISA	53	12	이러므로 내가 그로 존귀한 자와 함께 분깃을 얻게 하며 강한 자와 함께 탈취한 것을 나누게 하리니 이는 그가 자기 영혼을 버려 사망에 이르게 하며 범죄자 중 하나로 헤아림을 입었음이라 그러나 실상은 그가 많은 사람의 죄를 지며 범죄자를 위하여 기도하였느니라 하시니라	Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; because he hath poured out his soul unto death: and he was numbered with the transgressors; and he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors.	Therefore I will allot Him a portion with the great, and He will divide the spoils with the strong, because He has poured out His life unto death, and He was numbered with the transgressors. Yet He bore the sin of many and made intercession for the transgressors.
ISA	54	1	잉태치 못하며 생산치 못한 너는 노래할지어다 구로치 못한 너는 외쳐 노래할지어다 홀로 된 여인의 자식이 남편 있는 자의 자식보다 많음이니라 여호와의 말이니라	Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear; break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou that didst not travail with child: for more are the children of the desolate than the children of the married wife, saith the Lord.	“Shout for joy, O barren woman, who bears no children; break forth in song and cry aloud, you who have never travailed; because more are the children of the desolate woman than of her who has a husband,” says the LORD.
ISA	54	2	네 장막터를 넓히며 네 처소의 휘장을 아끼지 말고 널리 펴되 너의 줄을 길게 하며 너의 말뚝을 견고히 할지어다	Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitations: spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes;	“Enlarge the site of your tent, stretch out the curtains of your dwellings, do not hold back. Lengthen your ropes and drive your stakes in deep.
ISA	54	3	이는 네가 좌우로 퍼지며 네 자손은 열방을 얻으며 황폐한 성읍들로 사람 살 곳이 되게 할 것임이니라	For thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the left; and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate cities to be inhabited.	For you will spread out to the right and left; your descendants will dispossess the nations and inhabit the desolate cities.
ISA	54	4	두려워 말라 네가 수치를 당치 아니하리라 놀라지 말라 네가 부끄러움을을 보지 아니하니라 네가 네 청년 때의 수치를 잊겠고 과부 때의 치욕을 다시 기억함이 없으리니	Fear not; for thou shalt not be ashamed: neither be thou confounded; for thou shalt not be put to shame: for thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy widowhood any more.	Do not be afraid, for you will not be put to shame; do not be intimidated, for you will not be humiliated. For you will forget the shame of your youth and will remember no more the reproach of your widowhood.
ISA	54	5	이는 너를 지으신 자는 네 남편이시라 그 이름은 만군의 여호와시며 네 구속자는 이스라엘의 거룩한 자시라 온 세상의 하나님이라 칭함을 받으실 것이며	For thy Maker is thine husband; the Lord of hosts is his name; and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel; The God of the whole earth shall he be called.	For your husband is your Maker— the LORD of Hosts is His name— the Holy One of Israel is your Redeemer; He is called the God of all the earth.
ISA	54	6	여호와께서 너를 부르시되 마치 버림을 입어 마음에 근심하는 아내 곧 소시에 아내 되었다가 버림을 입은 자에게 함 같이 하실 것임이니라 네 하나님의 말씀이니라	For the Lord hath called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy God.	For the LORD has called you back, like a wife deserted and wounded in spirit, like the rejected wife of one’s youth,” says your God.
ISA	54	7	내가 잠시 너를 버렸으나 큰 긍휼로 너를 모을 것이요	For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies will I gather thee.	“For a brief moment I forsook you, but with great compassion I will bring you back.
ISA	54	8	내가 넘치는 진노로 내 얼굴을 네게서 잠시 가리웠으나 영원한 자비로 너를 긍휼히 여기리라 네 구속자 여호와의 말이니라	In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer.	In a surge of anger I hid My face from you for a moment, but with everlasting kindness I will have compassion on you,” says the LORD your Redeemer.
ISA	54	9	이는 노아의 홍수에 비하리로다 내가 다시는 노아의 홍수로 땅 위에 범람치 않게 하리라 맹세한 것 같이 내가 다시는 너를 노하지 아니하며 다시는 너를 책망하지 아니하기로 맹세하였노니	For this is as the waters of Noah unto me: for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth; so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee.	“For to Me this is like the days of Noah, when I swore that the waters of Noah would never again cover the earth. So I have sworn that I will not be angry with you or rebuke you.
ISA	54	10	산들은 떠나며 작은 산들은 옮길지라도 나의 인자는 네게서 떠나지 아니하며 화평케 하는 나의 언약은 옮기지 아니하리라 너를 긍휼히 여기는 여호와의 말이니라	For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee.	Though the mountains may be removed and the hills may be shaken, My loving devotion will not depart from you, and My covenant of peace will not be broken,” says the LORD, who has compassion on you.
ISA	54	11	너 곤고하며 광풍에 요동하여 안위를 받지 못한 자여 보라 내가 화려한 채색으로 네 돌 사이에 더하며 청옥으로 네 기초를 쌓으며	O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted, behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colours, and lay thy foundations with sapphires.	“O afflicted city, lashed by storms, without solace, surely I will set your stones in antimony and lay your foundations with sapphires.
ISA	54	12	홍보석으로 네 성첩을 지으며 석류석으로 네 성문을 만들고 네 지경을 다 보석으로 꾸밀 것이며	And I will make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones.	I will make your pinnacles of rubies, your gates of sparkling jewels, and all your walls of precious stones.
ISA	54	13	네 모든 자녀는 여호와의 교훈을 받을 것이니 네 자녀는 크게 평강할 것이며	And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children.	Then all your sons will be taught by the LORD, and great will be their prosperity.
ISA	54	14	너는 의로 설 것이며 학대가 네게서 멀어질 것인즉 네가 두려워 아니할 것이며 공포 그것도 너를 가까이 못할 것이라	In righteousness shalt thou be established: thou shalt be far from oppression; for thou shalt not fear: and from terror; for it shall not come near thee.	In righteousness you will be established, far from oppression, for you will have no fear. Terror will be far removed, for it will not come near you.
ISA	54	15	그들이 모일지라도 나로 말미암지 아니한 것이니 누구든지 모여 너를 치는 자는 너를 인하여 패망하리라	Behold, they shall surely gather together, but not by me: whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake.	If anyone attacks you, it is not from Me; whoever assails you will fall before you.
ISA	54	16	숯불을 불어서 자기가 쓸만한 기계를 제조하는 장인도 내가 창조하였고 파괴하며 진멸하는 자도 내가 창조하였은즉	Behold, I have created the smith that bloweth the coals in the fire, and that bringeth forth an instrument for his work; and I have created the waster to destroy.	Behold, I have created the craftsman who fans the coals into flame and forges a weapon fit for its task; and I have created the destroyer to wreak havoc.
ISA	54	17	무릇 너를 치려고 제조된 기계가 날카롭지 못할 것이라 무릇 일어나 너를 대적하여 송사하는 혀는 네게 정죄를 당하리니 이는 여호와의 종들의 기업이요 이는 그들이 내게서 얻은 의니라 여호와의 말이니라	No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me, saith the Lord.	No weapon formed against you shall prosper, and you will refute every tongue that accuses you. This is the heritage of the servants of the LORD, and their vindication is from Me,” declares the LORD.
ISA	55	1	너희 목마른 자들아 물로 나아오라 돈 없는 자도 오라 너희는 와서 사 먹되 돈 없이 값 없이 와서 포도주와 젖을 사라	Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money; come ye, buy, and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and without price.	“Come, all you who are thirsty, come to the waters; and you without money, come, buy, and eat! Come, buy wine and milk without money and without cost!
ISA	55	2	너희가 어찌하여 양식 아닌 것을 위하여 은을 달아 주며 배부르게 못할 것을 위하여 수고하느냐 나를 청종하라 그리하면 너희가 좋은 것을 먹을 것이며 너희 마음이 기름진 것으로 즐거움을 얻으리라	Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labour for that which satisfieth not? hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness.	Why spend money on that which is not bread, and your labor on that which does not satisfy? Listen carefully to Me, and eat what is good, and your soul will delight in the richest of foods.
ISA	55	3	너희는 귀를 기울이고 내게 나아와 들으라 그리하면 너희 영혼이 살리라 내가 너희에게 영원한 언약을 세우리니 곧 다윗에게 허락한 확실한 은혜니라	Incline your ear, and come unto me: hear, and your soul shall live; and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David.	Incline your ear and come to Me; listen, so that your soul may live. I will make with you an everlasting covenant— My loving devotion promised to David.
ISA	55	4	내가 그를 만민에게 증거로 세웠고 만민의 인도자와 명령자를 삼았었나니	Behold, I have given him for a witness to the people, a leader and commander to the people.	Behold, I have made him a witness to the nations, a leader and commander of the peoples.
ISA	55	5	네가 알지 못하는 나라를 부를 것이며 너를 알지 못하는 나라가 네게 달려올 것은 나 여호와 네 하나님 곧 이스라엘의 거룩한 자를 인함이니라 내가 너를 영화롭게 하였느니라	Behold, thou shalt call a nation that thou knowest not, and nations that knew not thee shall run unto thee because of the Lord thy God, and for the Holy One of Israel; for he hath glorified thee.	Surely you will summon a nation you do not know, and nations who do not know you will run to you. For the LORD your God, the Holy One of Israel, has bestowed glory on you.”
ISA	55	6	너희는 여호와를 만날 만한 때에 찾으라 가까이 계실 때에 그를 부르라	Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near:	Seek the LORD while He may be found; call on Him while He is near.
ISA	55	7	악인은 그 길을, 불의한 자는 그 생각을 버리고 여호와께로 돌아오라 그리하면 그가 긍휼히 여기시리라 우리 하나님께로 나아오라 그가 널리 용서하시리라	Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.	Let the wicked man forsake his own way and the unrighteous man his own thoughts; let him return to the LORD, that He may have compassion, and to our God, for He will freely pardon.
ISA	55	8	여호와의 말씀에 내 생각은 너희 생각과 다르며 내 길은 너희 길과 달라서	For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord.	“For My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways My ways,” declares the LORD.
ISA	55	9	하늘이 땅보다 높음 같이 내 길은 너희 길보다 높으며 내 생각은 너희 생각보다 높으니라	For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.	“For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so My ways are higher than your ways and My thoughts than your thoughts.
ISA	55	10	비와 눈이 하늘에서 내려서는 다시 그리로 가지 않고 토지를 적시어서 싹이 나게 하며 열매가 맺게 하여 파종하는 자에게 종자를 주며 먹는 자에게 양식을 줌과 같이	For as the rain cometh down, and the snow from heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater:	For just as rain and snow fall from heaven and do not return without watering the earth, making it bud and sprout, and providing seed to sow and food to eat,
ISA	55	11	내 입에서 나가는 말도 헛되이 내게로 돌아오지 아니하고 나의 뜻을 이루며 나의 명하여 보낸 일에 형통하리라	So shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.	so My word that proceeds from My mouth will not return to Me empty, but it will accomplish what I please, and it will prosper where I send it.
ISA	55	12	너희는 기쁨으로 나아가며 평안히 인도함을 받을 것이요 산들과 작은 산들이 너희 앞에서 노래를 발하고 들의 모든 나무가 손바닥을 칠 것이며	For ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth with peace: the mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their hands.	You will indeed go out with joy and be led forth in peace; the mountains and hills will burst into song before you, and all the trees of the field will clap their hands.
ISA	55	13	잣나무는 가시나무를 대신하여 나며 화석류는 질려를 대신하여 날 것이라 이것이 여호와의 명예가 되며 영영한 표징이 되어 끊어지지 아니하리라 하시니라	Instead of the thorn shall come up the fir tree, and instead of the brier shall come up the myrtle tree: and it shall be to the Lord for a name, for an everlasting sign that shall not be cut off.	Instead of the thornbush, a cypress will grow, and instead of the brier, a myrtle will spring up; they will make a name for the LORD, an everlasting sign, never to be destroyed.”
ISA	56	1	여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 너희는 공평을 지키며 의를 행하라 나의 구원이 가까이 왔고 나의 의가 쉬 나타날 것임이라 하셨은즉	Thus saith the Lord, Keep ye judgment, and do justice: for my salvation is near to come, and my righteousness to be revealed.	This is what the LORD says: “Maintain justice and do what is right, for My salvation is coming soon, and My righteousness will be revealed.
ISA	56	2	안식일을 지켜 더럽히지 아니하며 그 손을 금하여 모든 악을 행치 아니하여야 하나니 이같이 행하는 사람, 이같이 굳이 잡는 인생은 복이 있느니라	Blessed is the man that doeth this, and the son of man that layeth hold on it; that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and keepeth his hand from doing any evil.	Blessed is the man who does this, and the son of man who holds it fast, who keeps the Sabbath without profaning it and keeps his hand from doing any evil.”
ISA	56	3	여호와께 연합한 이방인은 여호와께서 나를 그 백성 중에서 반드시 갈라내시리라 말하지 말며 고자도 나는 마른 나무라 말하지 말라	Neither let the son of the stranger, that hath joined himself to the Lord, speak, saying, The Lord hath utterly separated me from his people: neither let the eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree.	Let no foreigner who has joined himself to the LORD say, “The LORD will utterly exclude me from His people.” And let the eunuch not say, “I am but a dry tree.”
ISA	56	4	여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시기를 나의 안식일을 지키며 나를 기뻐하는 일을 선택하며 나의 언약을 굳게 잡는 고자들에게는	For thus saith the Lord unto the eunuchs that keep my sabbaths, and choose the things that please me, and take hold of my covenant;	For this is what the LORD says: “To the eunuchs who keep My Sabbaths, who choose what pleases Me and hold fast to My covenant—
ISA	56	5	내가 내 집에서, 내 성안에서 자녀보다 나은 기념물과 이름을 주며 영영한 이름을 주어 끊치지 않게 할 것이며	Even unto them will I give in mine house and within my walls a place and a name better than of sons and of daughters: I will give them an everlasting name, that shall not be cut off.	I will give them, in My house and within My walls, a memorial and a name better than that of sons and daughters. I will give them an everlasting name that will not be cut off.
ISA	56	6	또 나 여호와에게 연합하여 섬기며 나 여호와의 이름을 사랑하며 나의 종이 되며 안식일을 지켜 더럽히지 아니하며 나의 언약을 굳게 지키는 이방인마다	Also the sons of the stranger, that join themselves to the Lord, to serve him, and to love the name of the Lord, to be his servants, every one that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and taketh hold of my covenant;	And the foreigners who join themselves to the LORD to minister to Him, to love the name of the LORD, and to be His servants— all who keep the Sabbath without profaning it and who hold fast to My covenant—
ISA	56	7	내가 그를 나의 성산으로 인도하여 기도하는 내 집에서 그들을 기쁘게 할 것이며 그들의 번제와 희생은 나의 단에서 기꺼이 받게 되리니 이는 내 집은 만민의 기도하는 집이라 일컬음이 될 것임이라	Even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer: their burnt offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine altar; for mine house shall be called an house of prayer for all people.	I will bring them to My holy mountain and make them joyful in My house of prayer. Their burnt offerings and sacrifices will be accepted on My altar, for My house will be called a house of prayer for all the nations.”
ISA	56	8	이스라엘의 쫓겨난 자를 모으는 주 여호와가 말하노니 내가 이미 모은 본 백성 외에 또 모아 그에게 속하게 하리라 하셨느니라	The Lord God which gathereth the outcasts of Israel saith, Yet will I gather others to him, beside those that are gathered unto him.	Thus declares the Lord GOD, who gathers the dispersed of Israel: “I will gather to them still others besides those already gathered.”
ISA	56	9	들의 짐승들아 삼림 중의 짐승들아 다 와서 삼키라	All ye beasts of the field, come to devour, yea, all ye beasts in the forest.	Come, all you beasts of the field; eat greedily, all you beasts of the forest.
ISA	56	10	그 파수꾼들은 소경이요 다 무지하며 벙어리 개라 능히 짖지 못하며 다 꿈꾸는 자요 누운 자요 잠자기를 좋아하는 자니	His watchmen are blind: they are all ignorant, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber.	Israel’s watchmen are blind, they are all oblivious; they are all mute dogs, they cannot bark; they are dreamers lying around, loving to slumber.
ISA	56	11	이 개들은 탐욕이 심하여 족한 줄을 알지 못하는 자요 그들은 몰각한 목자들이라 다 자기 길로 돌이키며 어디 있는 자이든지 자기 이만 도모하며	Yea, they are greedy dogs which can never have enough, and they are shepherds that cannot understand: they all look to their own way, every one for his gain, from his quarter.	Like ravenous dogs, they are never satisfied. They are shepherds with no discernment; they all turn to their own way, each one seeking his own gain:
ISA	56	12	피차 이르기를 오라 내가 포도주를 가져오리라 우리가 독주를 잔뜩 먹자 내일도 오늘 같이 또 크게 넘치리라 하느니라	Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill ourselves with strong drink; and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant.	“Come, let me get the wine, let us imbibe the strong drink, and tomorrow will be like today, only far better!”
ISA	57	1	의인이 죽을지라도 마음에 두는 자가 없고 자비한 자들이 취하여감을 입을지라도 그 의인은 화액 전에 취하여 감을 입은 것인 줄로 깨닫는 자가 없도다	The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart: and merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come.	The righteous perish, and no one takes it to heart; devout men are swept away, while no one considers that the righteous are guided from the presence of evil.
ISA	57	2	그는 평안에 들어갔나니 무릇 정로로 행하는 자는 자기들의 침상에서 편히 쉬느니라	He shall enter into peace: they shall rest in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness.	Those who walk uprightly enter into peace; they find rest, lying down in death.
ISA	57	3	무녀의 자식, 간음자와 음녀의 씨 너희는 가까이 오라	But draw near hither, ye sons of the sorceress, the seed of the adulterer and the whore.	“But come here, you sons of a sorceress, you offspring of adulterers and prostitutes!
ISA	57	4	너희가 누구를 희롱하느냐 누구를 향하여 입을 크게 벌리며 혀를 내미느냐 너희는 패역의 자식, 궤휼의 종류가 아니냐	Against whom do ye sport yourselves? against whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue? are ye not children of transgression, a seed of falsehood,	Whom are you mocking? At whom do you snarl and stick out your tongue? Are you not children of transgression, offspring of deceit,
ISA	57	5	너희가 상수리나무 사이, 모든 푸른 나무 아래서 음욕을 피우며 골짜기 가운데 바위 틈에서 자녀를 죽이는도다	Enflaming yourselves with idols under every green tree, slaying the children in the valleys under the clifts of the rocks?	who burn with lust among the oaks, under every luxuriant tree, who slaughter your children in the valleys, under the clefts of the rocks?
ISA	57	6	골짜기 가운데 매끄러운 돌 중에 너희 소득이 있으니 그것이 곧 너희가 제비 뽑아 얻은 것이라 너희가 전제와 예물을 그것들에게 드리니 내가 어찌 이를 용인하겠느냐	Among the smooth stones of the stream is thy portion; they, they are thy lot: even to them hast thou poured a drink offering, thou hast offered a meat offering. Should I receive comfort in these?	Your portion is among the smooth stones of the valley; indeed, they are your lot. Even to them you have poured out a drink offering and offered a grain offering. Should I relent because of these?
ISA	57	7	네가 높고 높은 산 위에 침상을 베풀었고 네가 또 그리로 올라가서 제사를 드렸으며	Upon a lofty and high mountain hast thou set thy bed: even thither wentest thou up to offer sacrifice.	On a high and lofty hill you have made your bed, and there you went up to offer sacrifices.
ISA	57	8	네가 또 네 기념표를 문과 문설주 뒤에 두었으며 네가 나를 배반하고 다른 자를 위하여 몸을 드러내고 올라가며 네 침상을 넓히고 그들과 언약하며 또 그들의 침상을 사랑하여 그 처소를 예비하였으며	Behind the doors also and the posts hast thou set up thy remembrance: for thou hast discovered thyself to another than me, and art gone up; thou hast enlarged thy bed, and made thee a covenant with them; thou lovedst their bed where thou sawest it.	Behind the door and doorpost you have set up your memorial. Forsaking Me, you uncovered your bed; you climbed up and opened it wide. And you have made a pact with those whose bed you have loved; you have gazed upon their nakedness.
ISA	57	9	네가 기름을 가지고 몰렉에게 나아가되 향품을 더욱 더하였으며 네가 또 사신을 원방에 보내고 음부까지 스스로 낮추었으며	And thou wentest to the king with ointment, and didst increase thy perfumes, and didst send thy messengers far off, and didst debase thyself even unto hell.	You went to Molech with oil and multiplied your perfumes. You have sent your envoys a great distance; you have descended even to Sheol itself.
ISA	57	10	네가 길이 멀어서 피곤할지라도 헛되다 아니함은 네 힘이 소성되었으므로 쇠약하여 가지 아니함이니라	Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way; yet saidst thou not, There is no hope: thou hast found the life of thine hand; therefore thou wast not grieved.	You are wearied by your many journeys, but you did not say, “There is no hope!” You found renewal of your strength; therefore you did not grow weak.
ISA	57	11	네가 누구를 두려워하며 누구로하여 놀랐기에 거짓을 말하며 나를 생각지 아니하며 이를 마음에 두지 아니하였느냐 네가 나를 경외치 아니함은 내가 오래동안 잠잠함을 인함이 아니냐	And of whom hast thou been afraid or feared, that thou hast lied, and hast not remembered me, nor laid it to thy heart? have not I held my peace even of old, and thou fearest me not?	Whom have you dreaded and feared, so that you lied and failed to remember Me or take this to heart? Is it not because I have long been silent that you do not fear Me?
ISA	57	12	너의 의를 내가 보이리라 너의 소위가 네게 무익하니라	I will declare thy righteousness, and thy works; for they shall not profit thee.	I will expose your righteousness and your works, and they will not profit you.
ISA	57	13	네가 부르짖을 때에 네가 모은 우상으로 너를 구원하게 하라 그것은 다 바람에 떠 가겠고 기운에 불려갈 것이로되 나를 의뢰하는 자는 땅을 차지하겠고 나의 거룩한 산을 기업으로 얻으리라	When thou criest, let thy companies deliver thee; but the wind shall carry them all away; vanity shall take them: but he that putteth his trust in me shall possess the land, and shall inherit my holy mountain;	When you cry out, let your companies of idols deliver you! Yet the wind will carry off all of them, a breath will take them away. But he who seeks refuge in Me will inherit the land and possess My holy mountain.”
ISA	57	14	장차 말하기를 돋우고 돋우어 길을 수축하여 내 백성의 길에서 거치는 것을 제하여 버리라 하리라	And shall say, Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the stumblingblock out of the way of my people.	And it will be said, “Build it up, build it up, prepare the way, take every obstacle out of the way of My people.”
ISA	57	15	지존무상하며 영원히 거하며 거룩하다 이름하는 자가 이같이 말씀하시되 내가 높고 거룩한 곳에 거하며 또한 통회하고 마음이 겸손한 자와 함께 거하나니 이는 겸손한 자의 영을 소성케 하며 통회하는 자의 마음을 소성케 하려 함이라	For thus saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy; I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.	For thus says the One who is high and lifted up, who inhabits eternity, whose name is Holy: “I dwell in a high and holy place, and with the oppressed and humble in spirit, to restore the spirit of the lowly and revive the heart of the contrite.
ISA	57	16	내가 영원히는 다투지 아니하며 내가 장구히는 노하지 아니할 것은 나의 지은 그 영과 혼이 내 앞에서 곤비할까 함이니라	For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth: for the spirit should fail before me, and the souls which I have made.	For I will not accuse you forever, nor will I always be angry; for then the spirit of man would grow weak before Me, with the breath of those I have made.
ISA	57	17	그의 탐심의 죄악을 인하여 내가 노하여 그를 쳤으며 또 내 얼굴을 가리우고 노하였으나 그가 오히려 패역하여 자기 마음의 길로 행하도다	For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote him: I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart.	I was enraged by his sinful greed, so I struck him and hid My face in anger; yet he kept turning back to the desires of his heart.
ISA	57	18	내가 그 길을 보았은즉 그를 고쳐 줄 것이라 그를 인도하며 그와 그의 슬퍼하는 자에게 위로를 다시 얻게 하리라	I have seen his ways, and will heal him: I will lead him also, and restore comforts unto him and to his mourners.	I have seen his ways, but I will heal him; I will guide him and restore comfort to him and his mourners,
ISA	57	19	입술의 열매를 짓는 나 여호와가 말하노라 먼 데 있는 자에게든지 가까운 데 있는 자에게든지 평강이 있을지어다 평강이 있을지어다 내가 그를 고치리라 하셨느니라	I create the fruit of the lips; Peace, peace to him that is far off, and to him that is near, saith the Lord; and I will heal him.	bringing praise to their lips. Peace, peace to those far and near,” says the LORD, “and I will heal them.”
ISA	57	20	오직 악인은 능히 안정치 못하고 그 물이 진흙과 더러운 것을 늘 솟쳐내는 요동하는 바다와 같으니라	But the wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt.	But the wicked are like the storm-tossed sea, for it cannot be still, and its waves churn up mire and muck.
ISA	57	21	내 하나님의 말씀에 악인에게는 평강이 없다 하셨느니라	There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked.	“There is no peace,” says my God, “for the wicked.”
ISA	58	1	크게 외치라 아끼지 말라 네 목소리를 나팔 같이 날려 내 백성에게 허물을, 야곱 집에 그 죄를 고하라	Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and shew my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins.	“Cry aloud, do not hold back! Raise your voice like a ram’s horn. Declare to My people their transgression and to the house of Jacob their sins.
ISA	58	2	그들이 날마다 나를 찾아 나의 길 알기를 즐거워함이 마치 의를 행하여 그 하나님의 규례를 폐하지 아니하는 나라 같아서 의로운 판단을 내게 구하며 하나님과 가까이 하기를 즐겨하며	Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a nation that did righteousness, and forsook not the ordinance of their God: they ask of me the ordinances of justice; they take delight in approaching to God.	For day after day they seek Me and delight to know My ways, like a nation that does what is right and does not forsake the justice of their God. They ask Me for righteous judgments; they delight in the nearness of God.”
ISA	58	3	이르기를 우리가 금식하되 주께서 보지 아니하심은 어찜이오며 우리가 마음을 괴롭게 하되 주께서 알아주지 아니하심은 어찜이니이까 하느니라 보라 너희가 금식하는 날에 오락을 찾아 얻으며 온갖 일을 시키는도다	Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou seest not? wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and thou takest no knowledge? Behold, in the day of your fast ye find pleasure, and exact all your labours.	“Why have we fasted, and You have not seen? Why have we humbled ourselves, and You have not noticed?” “Behold, on the day of your fast, you do as you please, and you oppress all your workers.
ISA	58	4	보라 너희가 금식하면서 다투며 싸우며 악한 주먹으로 치는도다 너희의 오늘 금식하는 것은 너희 목소리로 상달케 하려 하는 것이 아니라	Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness: ye shall not fast as ye do this day, to make your voice to be heard on high.	You fast with contention and strife to strike viciously with your fist. You cannot fast as you do today and have your voice be heard on high.
ISA	58	5	이것이 어찌 나의 기뻐하는 금식이 되겠으며 이것이 어찌 사람이 그 마음을 괴롭게 하는 날이 되겠느냐 그 머리를 갈대 같이 숙이고 굵은 베와 재를 펴는 것을 어찌 금식이라 하겠으며 여호와께 열납될 날이라 하겠느냐	Is it such a fast that I have chosen? a day for a man to afflict his soul? is it to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? wilt thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day to the Lord?	Is this the fast I have chosen: a day for a man to deny himself, to bow his head like a reed, and to spread out sackcloth and ashes? Will you call this a fast and a day acceptable to the LORD?
ISA	58	6	나의 기뻐하는 금식은 흉악의 결박을 풀어주며 멍에의 줄을 끌러주며 압제 당하는 자를 자유케 하며 모든 멍에를 꺾는 것이 아니겠느냐	Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke?	Isn’t this the fast that I have chosen: to break the chains of wickedness, to untie the cords of the yoke, to set the oppressed free and tear off every yoke?
ISA	58	7	또 주린 자에게 네 식물을 나눠 주며 유리하는 빈민을 네 집에 들이며 벗은 자를 보면 입히며 또 네 골육을 피하여 스스로 숨지 아니하는 것이 아니겠느냐	Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house? when thou seest the naked, that thou cover him; and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh?	Isn’t it to share your bread with the hungry, to bring the poor and homeless into your home, to clothe the naked when you see him, and not to turn away from your own flesh and blood?
ISA	58	8	그리하면 네 빛이 아침 같이 비췰 것이며 네 치료가 급속할 것이며 네 의가 네 앞에 행하고 여호와의 영광이 네 뒤에 호위하리니	Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily: and thy righteousness shall go before thee; the glory of the Lord shall be thy rereward.	Then your light will break forth like the dawn, and your healing will come quickly. Your righteousness will go before you, and the glory of the LORD will be your rear guard.
ISA	58	9	네가 부를 때에는 나 여호와가 응답하겠고 네가 부르짖을 때에는 말하기를 내가 여기 있다 하리라 만일 네가 너희 중에서 멍에와 손가락질과 허망한 말을 제하여 버리고	Then shalt thou call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shalt cry, and he shall say, Here I am. If thou take away from the midst of thee the yoke, the putting forth of the finger, and speaking vanity;	Then you will call, and the LORD will answer; you will cry out, and He will say, ‘Here I am.’ If you remove the yoke from your midst, the pointing of the finger and malicious talk,
ISA	58	10	주린 자에게 네 심정을 동하며 괴로워하는 자의 마음을 만족케 하면 네 빛이 흑암 중에서 발하여 네 어두움이 낮과 같이 될 것이며	And if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul; then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the noonday:	and if you give yourself to the hungry and satisfy the afflicted soul, then your light will go forth in the darkness, and your night will be like noonday.
ISA	58	11	나 여호와가 너를 항상 인도하여 마른 곳에서도 네 영혼을 만족케 하며 네 뼈를 견고케 하리니 너는 물댄 동산 같겠고 물이 끊어지지 아니하는 샘 같을 것이라	And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones: and thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not.	The LORD will always guide you; He will satisfy you in a sun-scorched land and strengthen your frame. You will be like a well-watered garden, like a spring whose waters never fail.
ISA	58	12	네게서 날 자들이 오래 황폐된 곳들을 다시 세울 것이며 너는 역대의 파괴된 기초를 쌓으리니 너를 일컬어 무너진 데를 수보하는 자라 할 것이며 길을 수축하여 거할 곳이 되게 하는 자라 하리라	And they that shall be of thee shall build the old waste places: thou shalt raise up the foundations of many generations; and thou shalt be called, The repairer of the breach, The restorer of paths to dwell in.	Your people will rebuild the ancient ruins; you will restore the age-old foundations; you will be called Repairer of the Breach, Restorer of the Streets of Dwelling.
ISA	58	13	만일 안식일에 네 발을 금하여 내 성일에 오락을 행치 아니하고 안식일을 일컬어 즐거운 날이라, 여호와의 성일을 존귀한 날이라 하여 이를 존귀히 여기고 네 길로 행치 아니하며 네 오락을 구치 아니하며 사사로운 말을 하지 아니하면	If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day; and call the sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honourable; and shalt honour him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words:	If you turn your foot from breaking the Sabbath, from doing as you please on My holy day, if you call the Sabbath a delight, and the LORD’s holy day honorable, if you honor it by not going your own way or seeking your own pleasure or speaking idle words,
ISA	58	14	네가 여호와의 안에서 즐거움을 얻을 것이라 내가 너를 땅의 높은 곳에 올리고 네 조상 야곱의 업으로 기르리라 여호와의 입의 말이니라	Then shalt thou delight thyself in the Lord; and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.	then you will delight yourself in the LORD, and I will make you ride on the heights of the land and feed you with the heritage of your father Jacob.” For the mouth of the LORD has spoken.
ISA	59	1	여호와의 손이 짧아 구원치 못하심도 아니요 귀가 둔하여 듣지 못하심도 아니라	Behold, the Lord’s hand is not shortened, that it cannot save; neither his ear heavy, that it cannot hear:	Surely the arm of the LORD is not too short to save, nor His ear too dull to hear.
ISA	59	2	오직 너희 죄악이 너희와 너희 하나님 사이를 내었고 너희 죄가 그 얼굴을 가리워서 너희를 듣지 않으시게 함이니	But your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear.	But your iniquities have built barriers between you and your God, and your sins have hidden His face from you, so that He does not hear.
ISA	59	3	이는 너희 손이 피에, 너희 손가락이 죄악에 더러웠으며 너희 입술은 거짓을 말하며 너희 혀는 악독을 발함이라	For your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with iniquity; your lips have spoken lies, your tongue hath muttered perverseness.	For your hands are stained with blood, and your fingers with iniquity; your lips have spoken lies, and your tongue mutters injustice.
ISA	59	4	공의대로 소송하는 자도 없고 진리대로 판결하는 자도 없으며 허망한 것을 의뢰하며 거짓을 말하며 잔해를 잉태하여 죄악을 생산하며	None calleth for justice, nor any pleadeth for truth: they trust in vanity, and speak lies; they conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity.	No one calls for justice; no one pleads his case honestly. They rely on empty pleas; they tell lies; they conceive mischief and give birth to iniquity.
ISA	59	5	독사의 알을 품으며 거미줄을 짜나니 그 알을 먹는 자는 죽을 것이요 그 알이 밟힌즉 터져서 독사가 나올 것이니라	They hatch cockatrice’ eggs, and weave the spider’s web: he that eateth of their eggs dieth, and that which is crushed breaketh out into a viper.	They hatch the eggs of vipers and weave a spider’s web. Whoever eats their eggs will die; crack one open, and a viper is hatched.
ISA	59	6	그 짠 것으로는 옷을 이룰 수 없을 것이요 그 행위로는 자기를 가리울 수 없을 것이며 그 행위는 죄악의 행위라 그 손에는 강포한 행습이 있으며	Their webs shall not become garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their works: their works are works of iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hands.	Their cobwebs cannot be made into clothing, and they cannot cover themselves with their works. Their deeds are sinful deeds, and acts of violence are in their hands.
ISA	59	7	그 발은 행악하기에 빠르고 무죄한 피를 흘리기에 신속하며 그 사상은 죄악의 사상이라 황폐와 파멸이 그 길에 끼쳐졌으며	Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood: their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity; wasting and destruction are in their paths.	Their feet run to evil; they are swift to shed innocent blood. Their thoughts are sinful thoughts; ruin and destruction lie in their wake.
ISA	59	8	그들은 평강의 길을 알지 못하며 그들의 행하는 곳에는 공의가 없으며 굽은 길을 스스로 만드나니 무릇 이 길을 밟는 자는 평강을 알지 못하느니라	The way of peace they know not; and there is no judgment in their goings: they have made them crooked paths: whosoever goeth therein shall not know peace.	The way of peace they have not known, and there is no justice in their tracks. They have turned them into crooked paths; no one who treads on them will know peace.
ISA	59	9	그러므로 공평이 우리에게서 멀고 의가 우리에게 미치지 못한즉 우리가 빛을 바라나 어두움뿐이요 밝은 것을 바라나 캄캄한 가운데 행하므로	Therefore is judgment far from us, neither doth justice overtake us: we wait for light, but behold obscurity; for brightness, but we walk in darkness.	Therefore justice is far from us, and righteousness does not reach us. We hope for light, but there is darkness; for brightness, but we walk in gloom.
ISA	59	10	우리가 소경 같이 담을 더듬으며 눈 없는 자 같이 두루 더듬으며 낮에도 황혼 때 같이 넘어지니 우리는 강장한 자 중에서도 죽은 자 같은지라	We grope for the wall like the blind, and we grope as if we had no eyes: we stumble at noonday as in the night; we are in desolate places as dead men.	Like the blind, we feel our way along the wall, groping like those without eyes. We stumble at midday as in the twilight; among the vigorous we are like the dead.
ISA	59	11	우리가 곰 같이 부르짖으며 비둘기 같이 슬피 울며 공평을 바라나 없고 구원을 바라나 우리에게서 멀도다	We roar all like bears, and mourn sore like doves: we look for judgment, but there is none; for salvation, but it is far off from us.	We all growl like bears and moan like doves. We hope for justice, but find none, for salvation, but it is far from us.
ISA	59	12	대저 우리의 허물이 주의 앞에 심히 많으며 우리의 죄가 우리를 쳐서 증거하오니 이는 우리의 허물이 우리와 함께 있음이라 우리의 죄악을 우리가 아나이다	For our transgressions are multiplied before thee, and our sins testify against us: for our transgressions are with us; and as for our iniquities, we know them;	For our transgressions are multiplied before You, and our sins testify against us. Our transgressions are indeed with us, and we know our iniquities:
ISA	59	13	우리가 여호와를 배반하고 인정치 아니하며 우리 하나님을 좇는데서 돌이켜 포학과 패역을 말하며 거짓말을 마음에 잉태하여 발하니	In transgressing and lying against the Lord, and departing away from our God, speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving and uttering from the heart words of falsehood.	rebelling and denying the LORD, turning away from our God, speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving and uttering lies from the heart.
ISA	59	14	공평이 뒤로 물리침이 되고 의가 멀리 섰으며 성실이 거리에 엎드러지고 정직이 들어가지 못하는도다	And judgment is turned away backward, and justice standeth afar off: for truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter.	So justice is turned away, and righteousness stands at a distance. For truth has stumbled in the public square, and honesty cannot enter.
ISA	59	15	성실이 없어지므로 악을 떠나는 자가 탈취를 당하는도다 여호와께서 이를 감찰하시고 그 공평이 없은 것을 기뻐 아니하시고	Yea, truth faileth; and he that departeth from evil maketh himself a prey: and the Lord saw it, and it displeased him that there was no judgment.	Truth is missing, and whoever turns from evil becomes prey. The LORD looked and was displeased that there was no justice.
ISA	59	16	사람이 없음을 보시며 중재자 없음을 이상히 여기셨으므로 자기 팔로 스스로 구원을 베푸시며 자기의 의를 스스로 의지하사	And he saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no intercessor: therefore his arm brought salvation unto him; and his righteousness, it sustained him.	He saw that there was no man; He was amazed that there was no one to intercede. So His own arm brought salvation, and His own righteousness sustained Him.
ISA	59	17	의로 호심경을 삼으시며 구원을 그 머리에 써서 투구를 삼으시고 보수로 옷을 삼으시며 열심을 입어 겉옷을 삼으시고	For he put on righteousness as a breastplate, and an helmet of salvation upon his head; and he put on the garments of vengeance for clothing, and was clad with zeal as a cloke.	He put on righteousness like a breastplate, and the helmet of salvation on His head; He put on garments of vengeance and wrapped Himself in a cloak of zeal.
ISA	59	18	그들의 행위대로 갚으시되 그 대적에게 분노하시며 그 원수에게 보응하시며 섬들에게 보복하실 것이라	According to their deeds, accordingly he will repay, fury to his adversaries, recompence to his enemies; to the islands he will repay recompence.	So He will repay according to their deeds: fury to His enemies, retribution to His foes, and recompense to the islands.
ISA	59	19	서방에서 여호와의 이름을 두려워하겠고 해돋는 편에서 그 기운에 몰려 급히 흐르는 하수 같이 오실 것임이로다	So shall they fear the name of the Lord from the west, and his glory from the rising of the sun. When the enemy shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him.	So shall they fear the name of the LORD where the sun sets, and His glory where it rises. For He will come like a raging flood, driven by the breath of the LORD.
ISA	59	20	여호와께서 가라사대 구속자가 시온에 임하며 야곱 중에 죄과를 떠나는 자에게 임하리라	And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord.	“The Redeemer will come to Zion, to those in Jacob who turn from transgression,” declares the LORD.
ISA	59	21	여호와께서 또 가라사대 내가 그들과 세운 나의 언약이 이러하니 곧 네 위에 있는 나의 신과 네 입에 둔 나의 말이 이제부터 영영토록 네 입에서와 네 후손의 입에서와 네 후손의 후손의 입에서 떠나지 아니하리라 하시니라 여호와의 말씀이니라	As for me, this is my covenant with them, saith the Lord; My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed’s seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.	“As for Me, this is My covenant with them,” says the LORD. “My Spirit will not depart from you, and My words that I have put in your mouth will not depart from your mouth or from the mouths of your children and grandchildren, from now on and forevermore,” says the LORD.
ISA	60	1	일어나라 빛을 발하라 이는 네 빛이 이르렀고 여호와의 영광이 네 위에 임하였음이니라	Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.	Arise, shine, for your light has come, and the glory of the LORD rises upon you.
ISA	60	2	보라 어두움이 땅을 덮을 것이며 캄캄함이 만민을 가리우려니와 오직 여호와께서 네 위에 임하실 것이며 그 영광이 네 위에 나타나리니	For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee.	For behold, darkness covers the earth, and thick darkness is over the peoples; but the LORD will rise upon you, and His glory will appear over you.
ISA	60	3	열방은 네 빛으로, 열왕은 비취는 네 광명으로 나아오리라	And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising.	Nations will come to your light, and kings to the brightness of your dawn.
ISA	60	4	네 눈을 들어 사면을 보라 무리가 다 모여 네게로 오느니라 네 아들들은 원방에서 오겠고 네 딸들은 안기워 올 것이라	Lift up thine eyes round about, and see: all they gather themselves together, they come to thee: thy sons shall come from far, and thy daughters shall be nursed at thy side.	Lift up your eyes and look around: They all gather and come to you; your sons will come from afar, and your daughters will be carried on the arm.
ISA	60	5	그 때에 네가 보고 희색을 발하며 네 마음이 놀라고 또 화창하리니 이는 바다의 풍부가 네게로 돌아오며 열방의 재물이 네게로 옴이라	Then thou shalt see, and flow together, and thine heart shall fear, and be enlarged; because the abundance of the sea shall be converted unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee.	Then you will look and be radiant, and your heart will tremble and swell with joy, because the riches of the sea will be brought to you, and the wealth of the nations will come to you.
ISA	60	6	허다한 약대, 미디안과 에바의 젊은 약대가 네 가운데 편만할 것이며 스바의 사람들은 다 금과 유향을 가지고 와서 여호와의 찬송을 전파할 것이며	The multitude of camels shall cover thee, the dromedaries of Midian and Ephah; all they from Sheba shall come: they shall bring gold and incense; and they shall shew forth the praises of the Lord.	Caravans of camels will cover your land, young camels of Midian and Ephah, and all from Sheba will come, bearing gold and frankincense and proclaiming the praises of the LORD.
ISA	60	7	게달의 양 무리는 다 네게로 모여지고 느바욧의 수양은 네게 공급되고 내 단에 올라 기꺼이 받음이 되리니 내가 내 영광의 집을 영화롭게 하리라	All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together unto thee, the rams of Nebaioth shall minister unto thee: they shall come up with acceptance on mine altar, and I will glorify the house of my glory.	All the flocks of Kedar will be gathered to you; the rams of Nebaioth will serve you and go up on My altar with acceptance; I will adorn My glorious house.
ISA	60	8	저 구름 같이, 비둘기가 그 보금자리로 날아 오는 것 같이 날아 오는 자들이 누구뇨	Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their windows?	Who are these who fly like clouds, like doves to their shelters?
ISA	60	9	곧 섬들이 나를 앙망하고 다시스의 배들이 먼저 이르되 원방에서 네 자손과 그 은금을 아울러 싣고 와서 네 하나님 여호와의 이름에 드리려 하며 이스라엘의 거룩한 자에게 드리려 하는 자들이라 이는 내가 너를 영화롭게 하였음이니라	Surely the isles shall wait for me, and the ships of Tarshish first, to bring thy sons from far, their silver and their gold with them, unto the name of the Lord thy God, and to the Holy One of Israel, because he hath glorified thee.	Surely the islands will wait for Me, with the ships of Tarshish in the lead, to bring your children from afar, with their silver and gold, to the honor of the LORD your God, the Holy One of Israel, for He has glorified you.
ISA	60	10	내가 노하여 너를 쳤으나 이제는 나의 은혜로 너를 긍휼히 여겼은즉 이방인들이 네 성벽을 쌓을 것이요 그 왕들이 너를 봉사할 것이며	And the sons of strangers shall build up thy walls, and their kings shall minister unto thee: for in my wrath I smote thee, but in my favour have I had mercy on thee.	Foreigners will rebuild your walls, and their kings will serve you. Although I struck you in anger, yet in favor I will show you mercy.
ISA	60	11	네 성문이 항상 열려 주야로 닫히지 아니하리니 이는 사람들이 네게로 열방의 재물을 가져오며 그 왕들을 포로로 이끌어 옴이라	Therefore thy gates shall be open continually; they shall not be shut day nor night; that men may bring unto thee the forces of the Gentiles, and that their kings may be brought.	Your gates will always stand open; they will never be shut, day or night, so that the wealth of the nations may be brought into you, with their kings being led in procession.
ISA	60	12	너를 섬기지 아니하는 백성과 나라는 파멸하리니 그 백성들은 반드시 진멸되리라	For the nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish; yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted.	For the nation or kingdom that will not serve you will perish; it will be utterly destroyed.
ISA	60	13	레바논의 영광 곧 잣나무와 소나무와 황양목이 함께 네게 이르러 내 거룩한 곳을 아름답게 할 것이며 내가 나의 발 둘 곳을 영화롭게 할 것이라	The glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, the fir tree, the pine tree, and the box together, to beautify the place of my sanctuary; and I will make the place of my feet glorious.	The glory of Lebanon will come to you— its cypress, elm, and boxwood together— to adorn the place of My sanctuary, and I will glorify the place of My feet.
ISA	60	14	너를 괴롭게 하던 자의 자손이 몸을 굽혀 네게 나아오며 너를 멸시하던 모든 자가 네 발 아래 엎드리어 너를 일컬어 여호와의 성읍이라 이스라엘의 거룩한 자의 시온이라 하리라	The sons also of them that afflicted thee shall come bending unto thee; and all they that despised thee shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet; and they shall call thee, The city of the Lord, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel.	The sons of your oppressors will come and bow down to you; all who reviled you will fall facedown at your feet and call you the City of the LORD, Zion of the Holy One of Israel.
ISA	60	15	전에는 네가 버림을 입으며 미움을 당하였으므로 네게로 지나는 자가 없었으나 이제는 내가 너로 영영한 아름다움과 대대의 기쁨이 되게 하리니	Whereas thou hast been forsaken and hated, so that no man went through thee, I will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many generations.	Whereas you have been forsaken and despised, with no one passing through, I will make you an everlasting pride, a joy from age to age.
ISA	60	16	네가 열방의 젖을 빨며 열왕의 유방을 빨고 나 여호와는 네 구원자, 네 구속자, 야곱의 전능자인 줄 알리라	Thou shalt also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shalt suck the breast of kings: and thou shalt know that I the Lord am thy Saviour and thy Redeemer, the mighty One of Jacob.	You will drink the milk of nations and nurse at the breasts of royalty; you will know that I, the LORD, am your Savior and your Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.
ISA	60	17	내가 금을 가져 놋을 대신하며 은을 가져 철을 대신하며 놋으로 나무를 대신하며 철로 돌을 대신하며 화평을 세워 관원을 삼으며 의를 세워 감독을 삼으리니	For brass I will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for stones iron: I will also make thy officers peace, and thine exactors righteousness.	Instead of bronze I will bring you gold; I will bring silver in place of iron, bronze instead of wood, and iron instead of stones. I will appoint peace as your governor and righteousness as your ruler.
ISA	60	18	다시는 강포한 일이 네 땅에 들리지 않을 것이요 황폐와 파멸이 네 경내에 다시 없을 것이며 네가 네 성벽을 구원이라, 네 성문을 찬송이라 칭할 것이라	Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor destruction within thy borders; but thou shalt call thy walls Salvation, and thy gates Praise.	No longer will violence be heard in your land, nor ruin or destruction within your borders. But you will name your walls Salvation and your gates Praise.
ISA	60	19	다시는 낮에 해가 네 빛이 되지 아니하며 달도 네게 빛을 비취지 않을 것이요 오직 여호와가 네게 영영한 빛이 되며 네 하나님이 네 영광이 되리니	The sun shall be no more thy light by day; neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto thee: but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory.	No longer will the sun be your light by day, nor the brightness of the moon shine on your night; for the LORD will be your everlasting light, and your God will be your splendor.
ISA	60	20	다시는 네 해가 지지 아니하며 네 달이 물러가지 아니할 것은 여호와가 네 영영한 빛이 되고 네 슬픔의 날이 마칠 것임이니라	Thy sun shall no more go down; neither shall thy moon withdraw itself: for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended.	Your sun will no longer set, and your moon will not wane; for the LORD will be your everlasting light, and the days of your sorrow will cease.
ISA	60	21	네 백성이 다 의롭게 되어 영영히 땅을 차지하리니 그들은 나의 심은 가지요 나의 손으로 만든 것으로서 나의 영광을 나타낼 것인즉	Thy people also shall be all righteous: they shall inherit the land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified.	Then all your people will be righteous; they will possess the land forever; they are the branch of My planting, the work of My hands, so that I may be glorified.
ISA	60	22	그 작은 자가 천을 이루겠고 그 약한 자가 강국을 이룰 것이라 때가 되면 나 여호와가 속히 이루리라	A little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong nation: I the Lord will hasten it in his time.	The least of you will become a thousand, and the smallest a mighty nation. I am the LORD; in its time I will accomplish it quickly.
ISA	61	1	주 여호와의 신이 내게 임하셨으니 이는 여호와께서 내게 기름을 부으사 가난한 자에게 아름다운 소식을 전하게 하려 하심이라 나를 보내사 마음이 상한 자를 고치며 포로 된 자에게 자유를, 갇힌 자에게 놓임을 전파하며	The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound;	The Spirit of the Lord GOD is on Me, because the LORD has anointed Me to preach good news to the poor. He has sent Me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives and freedom to the prisoners,
ISA	61	2	여호와의 은혜의 해와 우리 하나님의 신원의 날을 전파하여 모든 슬픈 자를 위로하되	To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn;	to proclaim the year of the LORD’s favor and the day of our God’s vengeance, to comfort all who mourn,
ISA	61	3	무릇 시온에서 슬퍼하는 자에게 화관을 주어 그 재를 대신하며 희락의 기름으로 그 슬픔을 대신하며 찬송의 옷으로 그 근심을 대신하시고 그들로 의의 나무 곧 여호와의 심으신 바 그 영광을 나타낼 자라 일컬음을 얻게 하려 하심이니라	To appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness; that they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified.	to console the mourners in Zion— to give them a crown of beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, and a garment of praise for a spirit of despair. So they will be called oaks of righteousness, the planting of the LORD, that He may be glorified.
ISA	61	4	그들은 오래 황폐하였던 곳을 다시 쌓을 것이며 예로부터 무너진 곳을 다시 일으킬 것이며 황폐한 성읍 곧 대대로 무너져 있던 것들을 중수할 것이며	And they shall build the old wastes, they shall raise up the former desolations, and they shall repair the waste cities, the desolations of many generations.	They will rebuild the ancient ruins; they will restore the places long devastated; they will renew the ruined cities, the desolations of many generations.
ISA	61	5	외인은 서서 너희 양떼를 칠 것이요 이방 사람은 너희 농부와 포도원지기가 될 것이나	And strangers shall stand and feed your flocks, and the sons of the alien shall be your plowmen and your vinedressers.	Strangers will stand and feed your flocks, and foreigners will be your plowmen and vinedressers.
ISA	61	6	오직 너희는 여호와의 제사장이라 일컬음을 얻을 것이라 사람들이 너희를 우리 하나님의 봉사자라 할 것이며 너희가 열방의 재물을 먹으며 그들의 영광을 얻어 자랑할 것이며	But ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord: men shall call you the Ministers of our God: ye shall eat the riches of the Gentiles, and in their glory shall ye boast yourselves.	But you will be called the priests of the LORD; they will speak of you as ministers of our God; you will feed on the wealth of nations, and you will boast in their riches.
ISA	61	7	너희가 수치 대신에 배나 얻으며 능욕 대신에 분깃을 인하여 즐거워할 것이라 그리하여 고토에서 배나 얻고 영영한 기쁨이 있으리라	For your shame ye shall have double; and for confusion they shall rejoice in their portion: therefore in their land they shall possess the double: everlasting joy shall be unto them.	Instead of shame, My people will have a double portion, and instead of humiliation, they will rejoice in their share; and so they will inherit a double portion in their land, and everlasting joy will be theirs.
ISA	61	8	대저 나 여호와는 공의를 사랑하며 불의의 강탈을 미워하여 성실히 그들에게 갚아 주고 그들과 영영한 언약을 세울 것이라	For I the Lord love judgment, I hate robbery for burnt offering; and I will direct their work in truth, and I will make an everlasting covenant with them.	For I, the LORD, love justice; I hate robbery and iniquity; in My faithfulness I will give them their recompense and make an everlasting covenant with them.
ISA	61	9	그 자손을 열방 중에, 그 후손을 만민 중에 알리리니 무릇 이를 보는 자가 그들은 여호와께 복 받은 자손이라 인정하리라	And their seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their offspring among the people: all that see them shall acknowledge them, that they are the seed which the Lord hath blessed.	Their descendants will be known among the nations, and their offspring among the peoples. All who see them will acknowledge that they are a people the LORD has blessed.
ISA	61	10	내가 여호와로 인하여 크게 기뻐하며 내 영혼이 나의 하나님으로 인하여 즐거워하리니 이는 그가 구원의 옷으로 내게 입히시며 의의 겉옷으로 내게 더하심이 신랑이 사모를 쓰며 신부가 자기 보물로 단장함 같게 하셨음이라	I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation, he hath covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth herself with her jewels.	I will rejoice greatly in the LORD, my soul will exult in my God; for He has clothed me with garments of salvation and wrapped me in a robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom wears a priestly headdress, as a bride adorns herself with her jewels.
ISA	61	11	땅이 싹을 내며 동산이 거기 뿌린 것을 움돋게 함 같이 주 여호와께서 의와 찬송을 열방 앞에 발생하게 하시리라	For as the earth bringeth forth her bud, and as the garden causeth the things that are sown in it to spring forth; so the Lord God will cause righteousness and praise to spring forth before all the nations.	For as the earth brings forth its growth, and as a garden enables seed to spring up, so the Lord GOD will cause righteousness and praise to spring up before all the nations.
ISA	62	1	나는 시온의 공의가 빛 같이, 예루살렘의 구원이 횃불 같이 나타나도록 시온을 위하여 잠잠하지 아니하며 예루살렘을 위하여 쉬지 아니할 것인즉	For Zion’s sake will I not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem’s sake I will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burneth.	For Zion’s sake I will not keep silent, and for Jerusalem’s sake I will not keep still, until her righteousness shines like a bright light, her salvation like a blazing torch.
ISA	62	2	열방이 네 공의를, 열왕이 다 네 영광을 볼 것이요 너는 여호와의 입으로 정하실 새 이름으로 일컬음이 될 것이며	And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy glory: and thou shalt be called by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name.	Nations will see your righteousness, and all kings your glory. You will be called by a new name that the mouth of the LORD will bestow.
ISA	62	3	너는 또 여호와의 손의 아름다운 면류관, 네 하나님의 손의 왕관이 될 것이라	Thou shalt also be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God.	You will be a crown of glory in the hand of the LORD, a royal diadem in the palm of your God.
ISA	62	4	다시는 너를 버리운 자라 칭하지 아니하며 다시는 네 땅을 황무지라 칭하지 아니하고 오직 너를 헵시바라 하며 네 땅을 쁄라라 하리니 이는 여호와께서 너를 기뻐하실 것이며 네 땅이 결혼한 바가 될 것임이라	Thou shalt no more be termed Forsaken; neither shall thy land any more be termed Desolate: but thou shalt be called Hephzi–bah, and thy land Beulah: for the Lord delighteth in thee, and thy land shall be married.	No longer will you be called Forsaken, nor your land named Desolate; but you will be called Hephzibah, and your land Beulah; for the LORD will take delight in you, and your land will be His bride.
ISA	62	5	마치 청년이 처녀와 결혼함 같이 네 아들들이 너를 취하겠고 신랑이 신부를 기뻐함 같이 네 하나님이 너를 기뻐하시리라	For as a young man marrieth a virgin, so shall thy sons marry thee: and as the bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee.	For as a young man marries a young woman, so your sons will marry you; and as a bridegroom rejoices over his bride, so your God will rejoice over you.
ISA	62	6	예루살렘이여 내가 너의 성벽 위에 파수꾼을 세우고 그들로 종일 종야에 잠잠치 않게 하였느니라 너희 여호와로 기억하시게 하는 자들아 너희는 쉬지 말며	I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which shall never hold their peace day nor night: ye that make mention of the Lord, keep not silence,	On your walls, O Jerusalem, I have posted watchmen; they will never be silent day or night. You who call on the LORD shall take no rest for yourselves,
ISA	62	7	또 여호와께서 예루살렘을 세워 세상에서 찬송을 받게 하시기까지 그로 쉬지 못하시게 하라	And give him no rest, till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth.	nor give Him any rest until He establishes Jerusalem and makes her the praise of the earth.
ISA	62	8	여호와께서 그 오른손, 그 능력의 팔로 맹세하시되 내가 다시는 네 곡식을 네 원수들에게 식물로 주지 아니하겠고 너의 수고하여 얻은 포도주를 이방인으로 마시지 않게 할 것인즉	The Lord hath sworn by his right hand, and by the arm of his strength, Surely I will no more give thy corn to be meat for thine enemies; and the sons of the stranger shall not drink thy wine, for the which thou hast laboured:	The LORD has sworn by His right hand and by His mighty arm: “Never again will I give your grain to your enemies for food, nor will foreigners drink the new wine for which you have toiled.
ISA	62	9	오직 추수한 자가 그것을 먹고 나 여호와를 찬송할 것이요 거둔 자가 그것을 나의 성소 뜰에서 마시리라 하셨느니라	But they that have gathered it shall eat it, and praise the Lord; and they that have brought it together shall drink it in the courts of my holiness.	For those who harvest grain will eat it and praise the LORD, and those who gather grapes will drink the wine in My holy courts.”
ISA	62	10	성문으로 나아가라 나아가라 백성의 길을 예비하라 대로를 수축하고 수축하라 돌을 제하라 만민을 위하여 기를 들라	Go through, go through the gates; prepare ye the way of the people; cast up, cast up the highway; gather out the stones; lift up a standard for the people.	Go out, go out through the gates; prepare the way for the people! Build it up, build up the highway; clear away the stones; raise a banner for the nations!
ISA	62	11	여호와께서 땅 끝까지 반포하시되 너희는 딸 시온에게 이르라 보라 네 구원이 임하느니라 보라 상급이 그에게 있고 보응이 그 앞에 있느니라 하셨느니라	Behold, the Lord hath proclaimed unto the end of the world, Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation cometh; behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him.	Behold, the LORD has proclaimed to the ends of the earth, “Say to Daughter Zion: See, your Savior comes! Look, His reward is with Him, and His recompense goes before Him.”
ISA	62	12	사람들이 너를 일컬어 거룩한 백성이라, 여호와의 구속하신 자라 하겠고 또 너를 일컬어 찾은 바 된 자요 버리지 아니한 성읍이라 하리라	And they shall call them, The holy people, The redeemed of the Lord: and thou shalt be called, Sought out, A city not forsaken.	And they will be called the Holy People, the Redeemed of The LORD; and you will be called Sought Out, A City Not Forsaken.
ISA	63	1	에돔에서 오며 홍의를 입고 보스라에서 오는 자가 누구뇨 그 화려한 의복, 큰 능력으로 걷는 자가 누구뇨 그는 내니 의를 말하는 자요 구원하기에 능한 자니라	Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah? this that is glorious in his apparel, travelling in the greatness of his strength? I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save.	Who is this coming from Edom, from Bozrah with crimson-stained garments? Who is this robed in splendor, marching in the greatness of His strength? “It is I, proclaiming vindication, mighty to save.”
ISA	63	2	어찌하여 네 의복이 붉으며 네 옷이 포도즙 틀을 밟는 자 같으뇨	Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him that treadeth in the winefat?	Why are Your clothes red, and Your garments like one who treads the winepress?
ISA	63	3	만민 중에 나와 함께한 자가 없이 내가 홀로 포도즙 틀을 밟았는데 내가 노함을 인하여 무리를 밟았고 분함을 인하여 짓밟았으므로 그들의 선혈이 내 옷에 뛰어 내 의복을 다 더럽혔음이니	I have trodden the winepress alone; and of the people there was none with me: for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment.	“I have trodden the winepress alone, and no one from the nations was with Me. I trampled them in My anger and trod them down in My fury; their blood spattered My garments, and all My clothes were stained.
ISA	63	4	이는 내 원수 갚는 날이 내 마음에 있고 내 구속할 해가 왔으나	For the day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come.	For the day of vengeance was in My heart, and the year of My redemption had come.
ISA	63	5	내가 본즉 도와주는 자도 없고 붙들어 주는 자도 없으므로 이상히 여겨 내 팔이 나를 구원하며 내 분이 나를 붙들었음이라	And I looked, and there was none to help; and I wondered that there was none to uphold: therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me; and my fury, it upheld me.	I looked, but there was no one to help; I was appalled that no one assisted. So My arm brought Me salvation, and My own wrath upheld Me.
ISA	63	6	내가 노함을 인하여 만민을 밟았으며 내가 분함을 인하여 그들을 취케 하고 그들의 선혈로 땅에 쏟아지게 하였느니라	And I will tread down the people in mine anger, and make them drunk in my fury, and I will bring down their strength to the earth.	I trampled the nations in My anger; in My wrath I made them drunk and poured out their blood on the ground.”
ISA	63	7	내가 여호와께서 우리에게 베푸신 모든 자비와 그 찬송을 말하며 그 긍휼을 따라, 그 많은 자비를 따라 이스라엘 집에 베푸신 큰 은총을 말하리라	I will mention the lovingkindnesses of the Lord, and the praises of the Lord, according to all that the Lord hath bestowed on us, and the great goodness toward the house of Israel, which he hath bestowed on them according to his mercies, and according to the multitude of his lovingkindnesses.	I will make known the LORD’s loving devotion and His praiseworthy acts, because of all that the LORD has done for us— the many good things for the house of Israel according to His great compassion and loving devotion.
ISA	63	8	여호와께서 말씀하시되 그들은 실로 나의 백성이요 거짓을 행치 아니하는 자녀라 하시고 그들의 구원자가 되사	For he said, Surely they are my people, children that will not lie: so he was their Saviour.	For He said, “They are surely My people, sons who will not be disloyal.” So He became their Savior.
ISA	63	9	그들의 모든 환난에 동참하사 자기 앞의 사자로 그들을 구원하시며 그 사랑과 그 긍휼로 그들을 구속하시고 옛적 모든 날에 그들을 드시며 안으셨으나	In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his presence saved them: in his love and in his pity he redeemed them; and he bare them, and carried them all the days of old.	In all their distress, He too was afflicted, and the Angel of His Presence saved them. In His love and compassion He redeemed them; He lifted them up and carried them all the days of old.
ISA	63	10	그들이 반역하여 주의 성신을 근심케 하였으므로 그가 돌이켜 그들의 대적이 되사 친히 그들을 치셨더니	But they rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit: therefore he was turned to be their enemy, and he fought against them.	But they rebelled and grieved His Holy Spirit. So He turned and became their enemy, and He Himself fought against them.
ISA	63	11	백성이 옛적 모세의 날을 추억하여 가로되 백성과 양 무리의 목자를 바다에서 올라오게 하신 자가 이제 어디 계시뇨 그들 중에 성신을 두신 자가 이제 어디 계시뇨	Then he remembered the days of old, Moses, and his people, saying, Where is he that brought them up out of the sea with the shepherd of his flock? where is he that put his holy Spirit within him?	Then His people remembered the days of old, the days of Moses. Where is He who brought them through the sea with the shepherds of His flock? Where is the One who set His Holy Spirit among them,
ISA	63	12	그 영광의 팔을 모세의 오른손과 함께 하시며 그 이름을 영영케 하려 하사 그들 앞에서 물로 갈라지게 하시고	That led them by the right hand of Moses with his glorious arm, dividing the water before them, to make himself an everlasting name?	who sent His glorious arm to lead them by the right hand of Moses, who divided the waters before them to gain for Himself everlasting renown,
ISA	63	13	그들을 깊음으로 인도하시되 말이 광야에 행함과 같이 넘어지지 않게 하신 자가 이제 어디 계시뇨	That led them through the deep, as an horse in the wilderness, that they should not stumble?	who led them through the depths like a horse in the wilderness, so that they did not stumble?
ISA	63	14	여호와의 신이 그들로 골짜기로 내려가는 가축 같이 편히 쉬게 하셨도다 주께서 이같이 주의 백성을 인도하사 이름을 영화롭게 하셨나이다 하였느니라	As a beast goeth down into the valley, the Spirit of the Lord caused him to rest: so didst thou lead thy people, to make thyself a glorious name.	Like cattle going down to the valley, the Spirit of the LORD gave them rest. You led Your people this way to make for Yourself a glorious name.
ISA	63	15	주여 하늘에서 굽어 살피시며 주의 거룩하시고 영화로운 처소에서 보옵소서 주의 열성과 주의 능하신 행동이 이제 어디 있나이까 주의 베푸시던 간곡한 자비와 긍휼이 내게 그쳤나이다	Look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy holiness and of thy glory: where is thy zeal and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies toward me? are they restrained?	Look down from heaven and see, from Your holy and glorious habitation. Where are Your zeal and might? Your yearning and compassion for me are restrained.
ISA	63	16	주는 우리 아버지시라 아브라함은 우리를 모르고 이스라엘은 우리를 인정치 아니할지라도 여호와여 주는 우리의 아버지시라 상고부터 주의 이름을 우리의 구속자라 하셨거늘	Doubtless thou art our father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not: thou, O Lord, art our father, our redeemer; thy name is from everlasting.	Yet You are our Father, though Abraham does not know us and Israel does not acknowledge us. You, O LORD, are our Father; our Redeemer from Everlasting is Your name.
ISA	63	17	여호와여 어찌하여 우리로 주의 길에서 떠나게 하시며 우리의 마음을 강퍅케 하사 주를 경외하지 않게 하시나이까 원컨대 주의 종들 곧 주의 산업인 지파들을 위하사 돌아오시옵소서	O Lord, why hast thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our heart from thy fear? Return for thy servants’ sake, the tribes of thine inheritance.	Why, O LORD, do You make us stray from Your ways and harden our hearts from fearing You? Return, for the sake of Your servants, the tribes of Your heritage.
ISA	63	18	주의 거룩한 백성이 땅을 차지한지 오래지 아니하여서 우리의 대적이 주의 성소를 유린하였사오니	The people of thy holiness have possessed it but a little while: our adversaries have trodden down thy sanctuary.	For a short while Your people possessed Your holy place, but our enemies have trampled Your sanctuary.
ISA	63	19	우리는 주의 다스림을 받지 못하는 자 같으며 주의 이름으로 칭함을 받지 못하는 자 같이 되었나이다	We are thine: thou never barest rule over them; they were not called by thy name.	We have become like those You never ruled, like those not called by Your name.
ISA	64	1	원컨대 주는 하늘을 가르고 강림하시고 주의 앞에서 산들로 진동하기를	Oh that thou wouldest rend the heavens, that thou wouldest come down, that the mountains might flow down at thy presence,	If only You would rend the heavens and come down, so that mountains would quake at Your presence,
ISA	64	2	불이 섶을 사르며 불이 물을 끓임 같게 하사 주의 대적으로 주의 이름을 알게 하시며 열방으로 주의 앞에서 떨게 하옵소서	As when the melting fire burneth, the fire causeth the waters to boil, to make thy name known to thine adversaries, that the nations may tremble at thy presence!	as fire kindles the brushwood and causes the water to boil, to make Your name known to Your enemies, so that the nations will tremble at Your presence!
ISA	64	3	주께서 강림하사 우리의 생각 밖에 두려운 일을 행하시던 그 때에 산들이 주의 앞에서 진동하였사오니	When thou didst terrible things which we looked not for, thou camest down, the mountains flowed down at thy presence.	When You did awesome works that we did not expect, You came down, and the mountains trembled at Your presence.
ISA	64	4	주 외에는 자기를 앙망하는 자를 위하여 이런 일을 행한 신을 예로부터 들은 자도 없고 귀로 깨달은 자도 없고 눈으로 본 자도 없었나이다	For since the beginning of the world men have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither hath the eye seen, O God, beside thee, what he hath prepared for him that waiteth for him.	From ancient times no one has heard, no ear has perceived, no eye has seen any God besides You, who acts on behalf of those who wait for Him.
ISA	64	5	주께서 기쁘게 의를 행하는 자와 주의 길에서 주를 기억하는 자를 선대하시거늘 우리가 범죄하므로 주께서 진노하셨사오며 이 현상이 이미 오랬사오니 우리가 어찌 구원을 얻을 수 있으리이까	Thou meetest him that rejoiceth and worketh righteousness, those that remember thee in thy ways: behold, thou art wroth; for we have sinned: in those is continuance, and we shall be saved.	You welcome those who gladly do right, who remember Your ways. Surely You were angry, for we sinned. How can we be saved if we remain in our sins?
ISA	64	6	대저 우리는 다 부정한 자 같아서 우리의 의는 다 더러운 옷 같으며 우리는 다 쇠패함이 잎사귀 같으므로 우리의 죄악이 바람 같이 우리를 몰아 가나이다	But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags; and we all do fade as a leaf; and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away.	Each of us has become like something unclean, and all our righteous acts are like filthy rags; we all wither like a leaf, and our iniquities carry us away like the wind.
ISA	64	7	주의 이름을 부르는 자가 없으며 스스로 분발하여 주를 붙잡는 자가 없사오니 이는 주께서 우리에게 얼굴을 숨기시며 우리의 죄악을 인하여 우리로 소멸되게 하셨음이니라	And there is none that calleth upon thy name, that stirreth up himself to take hold of thee: for thou hast hid thy face from us, and hast consumed us, because of our iniquities.	No one calls on Your name or strives to take hold of You. For You have hidden Your face from us and delivered us into the hand of our iniquity.
ISA	64	8	그러나 여호와여 주는 우리 아버지시니이다 우리는 진흙이요 주는 토기장이시니 우리는 다 주의 손으로 지으신 것이라	But now, O Lord, thou art our father; we are the clay, and thou our potter; and we all are the work of thy hand.	But now, O LORD, You are our Father; we are the clay, and You are the potter; we are all the work of Your hand.
ISA	64	9	여호와여 과히 분노하지 마옵시며 죄악을 영영히 기억하지 마옵소서 구하오니 보시옵소서 보시옵소서 우리는 다 주의 백성이니이다	Be not wroth very sore, O Lord, neither remember iniquity for ever: behold, see, we beseech thee, we are all thy people.	Do not be angry, O LORD, beyond measure; do not remember our iniquity forever. Oh, look upon us, we pray; we are all Your people!
ISA	64	10	주의 거룩한 성읍들이 광야가 되었으며 시온이 광야가 되었으며 예루살렘이 황폐하였나이다	Thy holy cities are a wilderness, Zion is a wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation.	Your holy cities have become a wilderness. Zion has become a wasteland and Jerusalem a desolation.
ISA	64	11	우리 열조가 주를 찬송하던 우리의 거룩하고 아름다운 전이 불에 탔으며 우리의 즐거워하던 곳이 다 황무하였나이다	Our holy and our beautiful house, where our fathers praised thee, is burned up with fire: and all our pleasant things are laid waste.	Our holy and beautiful temple, where our fathers praised You, has been burned with fire, and all that was dear to us lies in ruins.
ISA	64	12	여호와여 일이 이러하거늘 주께서 오히려 스스로 억제하시리이까 주께서 오히려 잠잠하시고 우리로 심한 괴로움을 받게 하시리이까	Wilt thou refrain thyself for these things, O Lord? wilt thou hold thy peace, and afflict us very sore?	After all this, O LORD, will You restrain Yourself? Will You keep silent and afflict us beyond measure?
ISA	65	1	나는 나를 구하지 아니하던 자에게 물음을 받았으며 나를 찾지 아니하던 자에게 찾아냄이 되었으며 내 이름을 부르지 아니하던 나라에게 내가 여기 있노라 내가 여기 있노라 하였노라	I am sought of them that asked not for me; I am found of them that sought me not: I said, Behold me, behold me, unto a nation that was not called by my name.	“I revealed Myself to those who did not ask for Me; I was found by those who did not seek Me. To a nation that did not call My name, I said, ‘Here I am! Here I am!’
ISA	65	2	내가 종일 손을 펴서 자기 생각을 좇아 불선한 길을 행하는 패역한 백성들을 불렀나니	I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious people, which walketh in a way that was not good, after their own thoughts;	All day long I have held out My hands to an obstinate people who walk in the wrong path, who follow their own imaginations,
ISA	65	3	곧 동산에서 제사하며 벽돌 위에서 분향하여 내 앞에서 항상 내 노를 일으키는 백성이라	A people that provoketh me to anger continually to my face; that sacrificeth in gardens, and burneth incense upon altars of brick;	to a people who continually provoke Me to My face, sacrificing in the gardens and burning incense on altars of brick,
ISA	65	4	그들이 무덤 사이에 앉으며 은밀한 처소에서 지내며 돼지 고기를 먹으며 가증한 물건의 국을 그릇에 담으면서	Which remain among the graves, and lodge in the monuments, which eat swine’s flesh, and broth of abominable things is in their vessels;	sitting among the graves, spending nights in secret places, eating the meat of pigs and polluted broth from their bowls.
ISA	65	5	사람에게 이르기를 너는 네 자리에 섰고 내게 가까이 하지 말라 나는 너보다 거룩함이니라 하나니 이런 자들은 내 코의 연기요 종일 타는 불이로다	Which say, Stand by thyself, come not near to me; for I am holier than thou. These are a smoke in my nose, a fire that burneth all the day.	They say, ‘Keep to yourself; do not come near me, for I am holier than you!’ Such people are smoke in My nostrils, a fire that burns all day long.
ISA	65	6	보라 이것이 내 앞에 기록되었으니 내가 잠잠치 아니하고 반드시 보응하되 그들의 품에 보응할지라	Behold, it is written before me: I will not keep silence, but will recompense, even recompense into their bosom,	Behold, it is written before Me: I will not keep silent, but I will repay; I will pay it back into their laps,
ISA	65	7	너희의 죄악과 너희 열조의 죄악을 함께 하리니 그들이 산 위에서 분향하며 작은 산 위에서 나를 능욕하였음이라 그러므로 내가 먼저 그 행위를 헤아리고 그 품에 보응하리라 여호와가 말하였느니라	Your iniquities, and the iniquities of your fathers together, saith the Lord, which have burned incense upon the mountains, and blasphemed me upon the hills: therefore will I measure their former work into their bosom.	both for your iniquities and for those of your fathers,” says the LORD. “Because they burned incense on the mountains and scorned Me on the hills, I will measure into their laps full payment for their former deeds.”
ISA	65	8	여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 포도송이에는 즙이 있으므로 혹이 말하기를 그것을 상하지 말라 거기 복이 있느니라 하나니 나도 내 종들을 위하여 그같이 행하여 다 멸하지 아니하고	Thus saith the Lord, As the new wine is found in the cluster, and one saith, Destroy it not; for a blessing is in it: so will I do for my servants’ sakes, that I may not destroy them all.	This is what the LORD says: “As the new wine is found in a cluster of grapes, and men say, ‘Do not destroy it, for it contains a blessing,’ so I will act on behalf of My servants; I will not destroy them all.
ISA	65	9	내가 야곱 중에서 씨를 내며 유다 중에서 나의 산들을 기업으로 얻을 자를 내리니 나의 택한 자가 이를 기업으로 얻을 것이요 나의 종들이 거기 거할 것이라	And I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob, and out of Judah an inheritor of my mountains: and mine elect shall inherit it, and my servants shall dwell there.	And I will bring forth descendants from Jacob, and heirs from Judah; My elect will possess My mountains, and My servants will dwell there.
ISA	65	10	사론은 양떼의 우리가 되겠고 아골 골짜기는 소떼의 눕는 곳이 되어 나를 찾은 내 백성의 소유가 되려니와	And Sharon shall be a fold of flocks, and the valley of Achor a place for the herds to lie down in, for my people that have sought me.	Sharon will become a pasture for flocks, and the Valley of Achor a resting place for herds, for My people who seek Me.
ISA	65	11	오직 나 여호와를 버리며 나의 성산을 잊고 갓에게 상을 베풀어 놓으며 므니에게 섞은 술을 가득히 붓는 너희여	But ye are they that forsake the Lord, that forget my holy mountain, that prepare a table for that troop, and that furnish the drink offering unto that number.	But you who forsake the LORD, who forget My holy mountain, who set a table for Fortune and fill bowls of mixed wine for Destiny,
ISA	65	12	내가 너희를 칼에 붙일 것인즉 다 구푸리고 살륙을 당하리니 이는 내가 불러도 너희가 대답지 아니하며 내가 말하여도 듣지 아니하고 나의 눈에 악을 행하였으며 나의 즐겨하지 아니하는 일을 택하였음이니라	Therefore will I number you to the sword, and ye shall all bow down to the slaughter: because when I called, ye did not answer; when I spake, ye did not hear; but did evil before mine eyes, and did choose that wherein I delighted not.	I will destine you for the sword, and you will all kneel down to be slaughtered, because I called and you did not answer, I spoke and you did not listen; you did evil in My sight and chose that in which I did not delight.”
ISA	65	13	이러므로 주 여호와가 말하노라 보라 나의 종들은 먹을 것이로되 너희는 주릴 것이니라 보라 나의 종들은 마실 것이로되 너희는 갈할 것이니라 보라 나의 종들은 기뻐할 것이로되 너희는 수치를 당할 것이니라	Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry: behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty: behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed:	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: “My servants will eat, but you will go hungry; My servants will drink, but you will go thirsty; My servants will rejoice, but you will be put to shame.
ISA	65	14	보라 나의 종들은 마음이 즐거우므로 노래할 것이로되 너희는 마음이 슬프므로 울며 심령이 상하므로 통곡할 것이며	Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation of spirit.	My servants will shout for joy with a glad heart, but you will cry out with a heavy heart and wail with a broken spirit.
ISA	65	15	또 너희의 끼친 이름은 나의 택한 자의 저줏거리가 될 것이니라 주 여호와 내가 너를 죽이고 내 종들은 다른 이름으로 칭하리라	And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my chosen: for the Lord God shall slay thee, and call his servants by another name:	You will leave behind your name as a curse for My chosen ones, and the Lord GOD will slay you; but to His servants He will give another name.
ISA	65	16	이러므로 땅에서 자기를 위하여 복을 구하는 자는 진리의 하나님을 향하여 복을 구할 것이요 땅에서 맹세하는 자는 진리의 하나님으로 맹세하리니 이는 이전 환난이 잊어졌고 내 눈 앞에 숨겨졌음이니라	That he who blesseth himself in the earth shall bless himself in the God of truth; and he that sweareth in the earth shall swear by the God of truth; because the former troubles are forgotten, and because they are hid from mine eyes.	Whoever invokes a blessing in the land will do so by the God of truth, and whoever takes an oath in the land will swear by the God of truth. For the former troubles will be forgotten and hidden from My sight.
ISA	65	17	보라 내가 새 하늘과 새 땅을 창조하나니 이전 것은 기억되거나 마음에 생각나지 아니할 것이라	For, behold, I create new heavens and a new earth: and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind.	For behold, I will create new heavens and a new earth. The former things will not be remembered, nor will they come to mind.
ISA	65	18	너희는 나의 창조하는 것을 인하여 영원히 기뻐하며 즐거워할지니라 보라 내가 예루살렘으로 즐거움을 창조하며 그 백성으로 기쁨을 삼고	But be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create: for, behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy.	But be glad and rejoice forever in what I create; for I will create Jerusalem to be a joy and its people to be a delight.
ISA	65	19	내가 예루살렘을 즐거워하며 나의 백성을 기뻐하리니 우는 소리와 부르짖는 소리가 그 가운데서 다시는 들리지 아니할 것이며	And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people: and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying.	I will rejoice in Jerusalem and take delight in My people. The sounds of weeping and crying will no longer be heard in her.
ISA	65	20	거기는 날 수가 많지 못하여 죽는 유아와 수한이 차지 못한 노인이 다시는 없을 것이라 곧 백 세에 죽는 자가 아이겠고 백 세 못되어 죽는 자는 저주 받은 것이리라	There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days: for the child shall die an hundred years old; but the sinner being an hundred years old shall be accursed.	No longer will a nursing infant live but a few days, or an old man fail to live out his years. For the youth will die at a hundred years, and he who fails to reach a hundred will be considered accursed.
ISA	65	21	그들이 가옥을 건축하고 그것에 거하겠고 포도원을 재배하고 열매를 먹을 것이며	And they shall build houses, and inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them.	They will build houses and dwell in them; they will plant vineyards and eat their fruit.
ISA	65	22	그들의 건축한 데 타인이 거하지 아니할 것이며 그들의 재배한 것을 타인이 먹지 아니하리니 이는 내 백성의 수한이 나무의 수한과 같겠고 나의 택한 자가 그 손으로 일한 것을 길이 누릴 것임이며	They shall not build, and another inhabit; they shall not plant, and another eat: for as the days of a tree are the days of my people, and mine elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands.	No longer will they build houses for others to inhabit, nor plant for others to eat. For as is the lifetime of a tree, so will be the days of My people, and My chosen ones will fully enjoy the work of their hands.
ISA	65	23	그들의 수고가 헛되지 않겠고 그들의 생산한 것이 재난에 걸리지 아니하리니 그들은 여호와의 복된 자의 자손이요 그 소생도 그들과 함께 될 것임이라	They shall not labour in vain, nor bring forth for trouble; for they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring with them.	They will not labor in vain or bear children doomed to disaster; for they will be a people blessed by the LORD— they and their descendants with them.
ISA	65	24	그들이 부르기 전에 내가 응답하겠고 그들이 말을 마치기 전에 내가 들을 것이며	And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer; and while they are yet speaking, I will hear.	Even before they call, I will answer, and while they are still speaking, I will hear.
ISA	65	25	이리와 어린 양이 함께 먹을 것이며 사자가 소처럼 짚을 먹을 것이며 뱀은 흙으로 식물을 삼을 것이니 나의 성산에서는 해함도 없겠고 상함도 없으리라 여호와의 말이니라	The wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion shall eat straw like the bullock: and dust shall be the serpent’s meat. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, saith the Lord.	The wolf and the lamb will feed together, and the lion will eat straw like the ox, but the food of the serpent will be dust. They will neither harm nor destroy on all My holy mountain,” says the LORD.
ISA	66	1	여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 하늘은 나의 보좌요 땅은 나의 발등상이니 너희가 나를 위하여 무슨 집을 지을꼬 나의 안식할 처소가 어디랴	Thus saith the Lord, The heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool: where is the house that ye build unto me? and where is the place of my rest?	This is what the LORD says: “Heaven is My throne, and earth is My footstool. What kind of house will you build for Me? Or where will My place of repose be?
ISA	66	2	나 여호와가 말하노라 나의 손이 이 모든 것을 지어서 다 이루었느니라 무릇 마음이 가난하고 심령에 통회하며 나의 말을 인하여 떠는 자 그 사람은 내가 권고하려니와	For all those things hath mine hand made, and all those things have been, saith the Lord: but to this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my word.	Has not My hand made all these things? And so they came into being,” declares the LORD. “This is the one I will esteem: he who is humble and contrite in spirit, who trembles at My word.
ISA	66	3	소를 잡아 드리는 것은 살인함과 다름이 없고 어린 양으로 제사드리는 것은 개의 목을 꺾음과 다름이 없으며 드리는 예물은 돼지의 피와 다름이 없고 분향하는 것은 우상을 찬송함과 다름이 없이 하는 그들은 자기의 길을 택하며 그들의 마음은 가증한 것을 기뻐한즉	He that killeth an ox is as if he slew a man; he that sacrificeth a lamb, as if he cut off a dog’s neck; he that offereth an oblation, as if he offered swine’s blood; he that burneth incense, as if he blessed an idol. Yea, they have chosen their own ways, and their soul delighteth in their abominations.	Whoever slaughters an ox is like one who slays a man; whoever sacrifices a lamb is like one who breaks a dog’s neck; whoever presents a grain offering is like one who offers pig’s blood; whoever offers frankincense is like one who blesses an idol. Indeed, they have chosen their own ways and delighted in their abominations.
ISA	66	4	나도 유혹을 그들에게 택하여 주며 그 무서워하는 것을 그들에게 임하게 하리니 이는 내가 불러도 대답하는 자 없으며 내가 말하여도 그들이 청종하지 않고 오직 나의 목전에 악을 행하며 나의 기뻐하지 아니하는 것을 택하였음이니라 하시니라	I also will choose their delusions, and will bring their fears upon them; because when I called, none did answer; when I spake, they did not hear: but they did evil before mine eyes, and chose that in which I delighted not.	So I will choose their punishment and I will bring terror upon them, because I called and no one answered, I spoke and no one listened. But they did evil in My sight and chose that in which I did not delight.”
ISA	66	5	여호와의 말씀을 인하여 떠는 자들아 그 말씀을 들을지어다 이르시되 너희 형제가 너희를 미워하며 내 이름을 인하여 너희를 쫓아내며 이르기를 여호와께서는 영광을 나타내사 너희 기쁨을 우리에게 보이시기를 원하노라 하였으나 그들은 수치를 당하리라 하셨느니라	Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word; Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name’s sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified: but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed.	You who tremble at His word, hear the word of the LORD: “Your brothers who hate you and exclude you because of My name have said, ‘Let the LORD be glorified that we may see your joy!’ But they will be put to shame.”
ISA	66	6	훤화하는 소리가 성읍에서부터 오며 목소리가 성전에서부터 들리니 이는 여호와께서 그 대적에게 보응하시는 목소리로다	A voice of noise from the city, a voice from the temple, a voice of the Lord that rendereth recompence to his enemies.	Hear the uproar from the city; listen to the voice from the temple! It is the voice of the LORD, repaying His enemies what they deserve!
ISA	66	7	시온은 구로하기 전에 생산하며 고통을 당하기 전에 남자를 낳았으니	Before she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came, she was delivered of a man child.	“Before she was in labor, she gave birth; before she was in pain, she delivered a boy.
ISA	66	8	이러한 일을 들은 자가 누구이며 이러한 일을 본 자가 누구이뇨 나라가 어찌 하루에 생기겠으며 민족이 어찌 순식간에 나겠느냐 그러나 시온은 구로하는 즉시에 그 자민을 순산하였도다	Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things? Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? or shall a nation be born at once? for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children.	Who has heard of such as this? Who has seen such things? Can a country be born in a day or a nation be delivered in an instant? Yet as soon as Zion was in labor, she gave birth to her children.
ISA	66	9	여호와께서 가라사대 내가 임산케 하였은즉 해산케 아니하겠느냐 네 하나님이 가라사대 나는 해산케 하는 자인즉 어찌 태를 닫겠느냐 하시니라	Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth? saith the Lord: shall I cause to bring forth, and shut the womb? saith thy God.	Shall I bring a baby to the point of birth and not deliver it?” says the LORD. “Or will I who deliver close the womb?” says your God.
ISA	66	10	예루살렘을 사랑하는 자여 다 그와 함께 기뻐하라 다 그와 함께 즐거워하라 그를 위하여 슬퍼하는 자여 다 그의 기쁨을 인하여 그와 함께 기뻐하라	Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that love her: rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn for her:	Be glad for Jerusalem and rejoice over her, all who love her. Rejoice greatly with her, all who mourn over her,
ISA	66	11	너희가 젖을 빠는 것 같이 그 위로하는 품에서 만족하겠고 젖을 넉넉히 빤 것 같이 그 영광의 풍성함을 인하여 즐거워하리라	That ye may suck, and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolations; that ye may milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of her glory.	so that you may nurse and be satisfied at her comforting breasts; you may drink deeply and delight yourselves in her glorious abundance.
ISA	66	12	여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 보라 내가 그에게 평강을 강 같이, 그에게 열방의 영광을 넘치는 시내 같이 주리니 너희가 그 젖을 빨 것이며 너희가 옆에 안기며 그 무릎에서 놀 것이라	For thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will extend peace to her like a river, and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream: then shall ye suck, ye shall be borne upon her sides, and be dandled upon her knees.	For this is what the LORD says: “I will extend peace to her like a river, and the wealth of nations like a flowing stream; you will nurse and be carried on her arm, and bounced upon her knees.
ISA	66	13	어미가 자식을 위로함 같이 내가 너희를 위로할 것인즉 너희가 예루살렘에서 위로를 받으리니	As one whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort you; and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem.	As a mother comforts her son, so will I comfort you, and you will be consoled over Jerusalem.”
ISA	66	14	너희가 이를 보고 마음이 기뻐서 너희 뼈가 연한 풀의 무성함 같으리라 여호와의 손은 그 종들에게 나타나겠고 그의 진노는 그 원수에게 더하리라	And when ye see this, your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish like an herb: and the hand of the Lord shall be known toward his servants, and his indignation toward his enemies.	When you see, you will rejoice, and you will flourish like grass; then the hand of the LORD will be revealed to His servants, but His wrath will be shown to His enemies.
ISA	66	15	보라 여호와께서 불에 옹위되어 강림하시리니 그 수레들은 회리바람 같으리로다 그가 혁혁한 위세로 노를 베푸시며 맹렬한 화염으로 견책하실 것이라	For, behold, the Lord will come with fire, and with his chariots like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire.	For behold, the LORD will come with fire— His chariots are like a whirlwind— to execute His anger with fury and His rebuke with flames of fire.
ISA	66	16	여호와께서 불과 칼로 모든 혈육에게 심판을 베푸신즉 여호와께 살륙 당할 자가 많으리니	For by fire and by his sword will the Lord plead with all flesh: and the slain of the Lord shall be many.	For by fire and by His sword, the LORD will execute judgment on all flesh, and many will be slain by the LORD.
ISA	66	17	스스로 거룩히 구별하며 스스로 정결케 하고 동산에 들어가서 그 가운데 있는 자를 따라 돼지 고기와 가증한 물건과 쥐를 먹는 자가 다 함께 망하리라 여호와의 말씀이니라	They that sanctify themselves, and purify themselves in the gardens behind one tree in the midst, eating swine’s flesh, and the abomination, and the mouse, shall be consumed together, saith the Lord.	“Those who consecrate and purify themselves to enter the groves—to follow one in the center of those who eat the flesh of swine and vermin and rats—will perish together,” declares the LORD.
ISA	66	18	내가 그들의 소위와 사상을 아노라 때가 이르면 열방과 열족을 모으리니 그들이 와서 나의 영광을 볼 것이며	For I know their works and their thoughts: it shall come, that I will gather all nations and tongues; and they shall come, and see my glory.	“And I, knowing their deeds and thoughts, am coming to gather all nations and tongues, and they will come and see My glory.
ISA	66	19	내가 그들 중에 징조를 세워서 그들 중 도피한 자를 열방 곧 다시스와 뿔과 활을 당기는 룻과 및 두발과 야완과 또 나의 명성을 듣지도 못하고 나의 영광을 보지도 못한 먼 섬들로 보내리니 그들이 나의 영광을 열방에 선파하리라	And I will set a sign among them, and I will send those that escape of them unto the nations, to Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, that draw the bow, to Tubal, and Javan, to the isles afar off, that have not heard my fame, neither have seen my glory; and they shall declare my glory among the Gentiles.	I will establish a sign among them, and I will send survivors from among them to the nations—to Tarshish, Put, and the archers of Lud; to Tubal, Javan, and the islands far away who have not heard of My fame or seen My glory. So they will proclaim My glory among the nations.
ISA	66	20	나 여호와가 말하노라 이스라엘 자손이 예물을 깨끗한 그릇에 담아 여호와의 집에 드림 같이 그들이 너희 모든 형제를 열방에서 나의 성산 예루살렘으로 말과 수레와 교자와 노새와 약대에 태워다가 여호와께 예물로 드릴 것이요	And they shall bring all your brethren for an offering unto the Lord out of all nations upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters, and upon mules, and upon swift beasts, to my holy mountain Jerusalem, saith the Lord, as the children of Israel bring an offering in a clean vessel into the house of the Lord.	And they will bring all your brothers from all the nations as a gift to the LORD on horses and chariots and wagons, on mules and camels, to My holy mountain Jerusalem,” says the LORD, “just as the Israelites bring an offering in a clean vessel to the house of the LORD.”
ISA	66	21	나는 그 중에서 택하여 제사장과 레위인을 삼으리라 여호와의 말이니라	And I will also take of them for priests and for Levites, saith the Lord.	“And I will select some of them as priests and Levites,” says the LORD.
ISA	66	22	나 여호와가 말하노라 나의 지을 새 하늘과 새 땅이 내 앞에 항상 있을 것 같이 너희 자손과 너희 이름이 항상 있으리라	For as the new heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall remain before me, saith the Lord, so shall your seed and your name remain.	“For just as the new heavens and the new earth, which I will make, will endure before Me,” declares the LORD, “so your descendants and your name will endure.
ISA	66	23	여호와가 말하노라 매 월삭과 매 안식일에 모든 혈육이 이르러 내 앞에 경배하리라	And it shall come to pass, that from one new moon to another, and from one sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me, saith the Lord.	From one New Moon to another and from one Sabbath to another, all mankind will come to worship before Me,” says the LORD.
ISA	66	24	그들이 나가서 내게 패역한 자들의 시체들을 볼 것이라 그 벌레가 죽지 아니하며 그 불이 꺼지지 아니하여 모든 혈육에게 가증함이 되리라	And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcases of the men that have transgressed against me: for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh.	“As they go forth, they will see the corpses of the men who have rebelled against Me; for their worm will never die, their fire will never be quenched, and they will be a horror to all mankind.”
JER	1	1	베냐민 땅 아나돗의 제사장 중 힐기야의 아들 예레미야의 말이라	The words of Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah, of the priests that were in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin:	These are the words of Jeremiah son of Hilkiah, one of the priests in Anathoth in the territory of Benjamin.
JER	1	2	아몬의 아들 유다 왕 요시야의 다스린지 십삼 년에 여호와의 말씀이 예레미야에게 임하였고	To whom the word of the Lord came in the days of Josiah the son of Amon king of Judah, in the thirteenth year of his reign.	The word of the LORD came to Jeremiah in the thirteenth year of the reign of Josiah son of Amon king of Judah,
JER	1	3	요시야의 아들 유다 왕 여호야김 시대부터 요시야의 아들 유다 왕 시드기야의 제십일년 말까지 임하니라 이 해 오 월에 예루살렘이 사로잡히니라	It came also in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, unto the end of the eleventh year of Zedekiah the son of Josiah king of Judah, unto the carrying away of Jerusalem captive in the fifth month.	and through the days of Jehoiakim son of Josiah king of Judah, until the fifth month of the eleventh year of Zedekiah son of Josiah king of Judah, when the people of Jerusalem went into exile.
JER	1	4	여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하니라 이르시되	Then the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	The word of the LORD came to me, saying:
JER	1	5	내가 너를 복중에 짓기 전에 너를 알았고 네가 태에서 나오기 전에 너를 구별하였고 너를 열방의 선지자로 세웠노라 하시기로	Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations.	“Before I formed you in the womb I knew you, and before you were born I set you apart and appointed you as a prophet to the nations.”
JER	1	6	내가 가로되 슬프도소이다 주 여호와여 보소서 나는 아이라 말할 줄을 알지 못하나이다	Then said I, Ah, Lord God! behold, I cannot speak: for I am a child.	“Ah, Lord GOD,” I said, “I surely do not know how to speak, for I am only a child!”
JER	1	7	여호와께서 내게 이르시되 너는 아이라 하지 말고 내가 너를 누구에게 보내든지 너는 가며 내가 네게 무엇을 명하든지 너는 말할지니라	But the Lord said unto me, Say not, I am a child: for thou shalt go to all that I shall send thee, and whatsoever I command thee thou shalt speak.	But the LORD told me: “Do not say, ‘I am only a child.’ For to everyone I send you, you must go, and all that I command you, you must speak.
JER	1	8	너는 그들을 인하여 두려워 말라 내가 너와 함께 하여 너를 구원하리라 나 여호와의 말이니라 하시고	Be not afraid of their faces: for I am with thee to deliver thee, saith the Lord.	Do not be afraid of them, for I am with you to deliver you,” declares the LORD.
JER	1	9	여호와께서 그 손을 내밀어 내 입에 대시며 내게 이르시되 보라 내가 내 말을 네 입에 두었노라	Then the Lord put forth his hand, and touched my mouth. And the Lord said unto me, Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth.	Then the LORD reached out His hand, touched my mouth, and said to me: “Behold, I have put My words in your mouth.
JER	1	10	보라 내가 오늘날 너를 열방 만국 위에 세우고 너를 뽑으며 파괴하며 파멸하며 넘어뜨리며 건설하며 심게 하였느니라	See, I have this day set thee over the nations and over the kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to build, and to plant.	See, I have appointed you today over nations and kingdoms to uproot and tear down, to destroy and overthrow, to build and plant.”
JER	1	11	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하니라 이르시되 예레미야야 네가 무엇을 보느냐 대답하되 내가 살구나무 가지를 보나이다	Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Jeremiah, what seest thou? And I said, I see a rod of an almond tree.	And the word of the LORD came to me, asking, “Jeremiah, what do you see?” “I see a branch of an almond tree,” I replied.
JER	1	12	여호와께서 내게 이르시되 네가 잘 보았도다 이는 내가 내 말을 지켜 그대로 이루려 함이니라	Then said the Lord unto me, Thou hast well seen: for I will hasten my word to perform it.	“You have observed correctly,” said the LORD, “for I am watching over My word to accomplish it.”
JER	1	13	여호와의 말씀이 다시 내게 임하니라 이르시되 네가 무엇을 보느냐 대답하되 끓는 가마를 보나이다 그 면이 북에서부터 기울어졌나이다	And the word of the Lord came unto me the second time, saying, What seest thou? And I said, I see a seething pot; and the face thereof is toward the north.	Again the word of the LORD came to me, asking, “What do you see?” “I see a boiling pot,” I replied, “and it is tilting toward us from the north.”
JER	1	14	여호와께서 내게 이르시되 재앙이 북방에서 일어나 이 땅의 모든 거민에게 임하리라	Then the Lord said unto me, Out of the north an evil shall break forth upon all the inhabitants of the land.	Then the LORD said to me, “Disaster from the north will be poured out on all who live in the land.
JER	1	15	나 여호와가 말하노라 내가 북방 모든 나라의 족속을 부를 것인즉 그들이 와서 예루살렘 성문 어귀에 각기 자리를 정하고 그 사면 성벽과 유다 모든 성읍을 치리라	For, lo, I will call all the families of the kingdoms of the north, saith the Lord; and they shall come, and they shall set every one his throne at the entering of the gates of Jerusalem, and against all the walls thereof round about, and against all the cities of Judah.	For I am about to summon all the clans and kingdoms of the north,” declares the LORD. “Their kings will come and set up their thrones at the entrance of the gates of Jerusalem. They will attack all her surrounding walls and all the other cities of Judah.
JER	1	16	무리가 나를 버리고 다른 신들에게 분향하며 자기 손으로 만든 것에 절하였은즉 내가 나의 심판을 베풀어 그들의 모든 죄악을 징계하리라	And I will utter my judgments against them touching all their wickedness, who have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, and worshipped the works of their own hands.	I will pronounce My judgments against them for all their wickedness, because they have forsaken Me to burn incense to other gods and to worship the works of their own hands.
JER	1	17	그러므로 너는 네 허리를 동이고 일어나 내가 네게 명한 바를 다 그들에게 고하라 그들을 인하여 두려워 말라 두렵건대 내가 너로 그들 앞에서 두려움을 당하게 할까 하노라	Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them all that I command thee: be not dismayed at their faces, lest I confound thee before them.	Get yourself ready. Stand up and tell them everything that I command you. Do not be intimidated by them, or I will terrify you before them.
JER	1	18	보라 내가 오늘날 너로 그 온 땅과 유다 왕들과 그 족장들과 그 제사장들과 그 땅 백성 앞에 견고한 성읍, 쇠기둥, 놋성벽이 되게하였은즉	For, behold, I have made thee this day a defenced city, and an iron pillar, and brasen walls against the whole land, against the kings of Judah, against the princes thereof, against the priests thereof, and against the people of the land.	Now behold, this day I have made you like a fortified city, an iron pillar, and bronze walls against the whole land—against the kings of Judah, its officials, its priests, and the people of the land.
JER	1	19	그들이 너를 치나 이기지 못하리니 이는 내가 너와 함께 하여 너를 구원할 것임이니라 여호와의 말이니라	And they shall fight against thee; but they shall not prevail against thee; for I am with thee, saith the Lord, to deliver thee.	They will fight against you but will never overcome you, since I am with you to deliver you,” declares the LORD.
JER	2	1	여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하니라 이르시되	Moreover the word of the Lord came to me, saying,	Now the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
JER	2	2	가서 예루살렘 거민의 귀에 외쳐 말할지니라 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시기를 네 소년 때의 우의와 네 결혼 때의 사랑 곧 씨 뿌리지 못하는 땅, 광야에서 어떻게 나를 좇았음을 내가 너를 위하여 기억하노라	Go and cry in the ears of Jerusalem, saying, Thus saith the Lord; I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a land that was not sown.	“Go and proclaim in the hearing of Jerusalem that this is what the LORD says: ‘I remember the devotion of your youth, your love as a bride, how you followed Me in the wilderness, in a land not sown.
JER	2	3	그 때에 이스라엘은 나 여호와의 성물 곧 나의 소산 중 처음 열매가 되었나니 그를 삼키는 자면 다 벌을 받아 재앙을 만났으리라 여호와의 말이니라	Israel was holiness unto the Lord, and the firstfruits of his increase: all that devour him shall offend; evil shall come upon them, saith the Lord.	Israel was holy to the LORD, the firstfruits of His harvest. All who devoured her found themselves guilty; disaster came upon them,’” declares the LORD.
JER	2	4	야곱 집과 이스라엘 집 모든 가족아 나 여호와의 말을 들으라	Hear ye the word of the Lord, O house of Jacob, and all the families of the house of Israel:	Hear the word of the LORD, O house of Jacob, and all you families of the house of Israel.
JER	2	5	나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 너희 열조가 내게서 무슨 불의함을 보았관대 나를 멀리하고 허탄한 것을 따라 헛되이 행하였느냐	Thus saith the Lord, What iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and have walked after vanity, and are become vain?	This is what the LORD says: “What fault did your fathers find in Me that they strayed so far from Me, and followed worthless idols, and became worthless themselves?
JER	2	6	그들이 우리를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내시고 광야 곧 사막과 구덩이 땅, 건조하고 사망의 음침한 땅, 사람이 다니지 아니하고 거주하지 아니하는 땅을 통과케 하시던 여호와께서 어디 계시냐 말하지 아니하였도다	Neither said they, Where is the Lord that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, that led us through the wilderness, through a land of deserts and of pits, through a land of drought, and of the shadow of death, through a land that no man passed through, and where no man dwelt?	They did not ask, ‘Where is the LORD who brought us up from the land of Egypt, who led us through the wilderness, through a land of deserts and pits, a land of drought and darkness, a land where no one travels and no one lives?’
JER	2	7	내가 너희를 인도하여 기름진 땅에 들여 그 과실과 그 아름다운 것을 먹게 하였거늘 너희가 이리로 들어와서는 내 땅을 더럽히고 내 기업을 가증히 만들었으며	And I brought you into a plentiful country, to eat the fruit thereof and the goodness thereof; but when ye entered, ye defiled my land, and made mine heritage an abomination.	I brought you into a fertile land to eat its fruit and bounty, but you came and defiled My land, and made My inheritance detestable.
JER	2	8	제사장들은 여호와께서 어디 계시냐 하지 아니하며 법 잡은 자들은 나를 알지 못하며 관리들도 나를 항거하며 선지자들은 바알의 이름으로 예언하고 무익한 것을 좇았느니라	The priests said not, Where is the Lord? and they that handle the law knew me not: the pastors also transgressed against me, and the prophets prophesied by Baal, and walked after things that do not profit.	The priests did not ask, ‘Where is the LORD?’ The experts in the law no longer knew Me, and the leaders rebelled against Me. The prophets prophesied by Baal and followed useless idols.
JER	2	9	그러므로 내가 여전히 너희와 다투고 너희 후손과도 다투리라 여호와의 말이니라	Wherefore I will yet plead with you, saith the Lord, and with your children’s children will I plead.	Therefore, I will contend with you again, declares the LORD, and I will bring a case against your children’s children.
JER	2	10	너희는 깃딤 섬들에 건너가 보며 게달에도 사람을 보내어 이같은 일의 유무를 자세히 살펴보라	For pass over the isles of Chittim, and see; and send unto Kedar, and consider diligently, and see if there be such a thing.	Cross over to the coasts of Cyprus and take a look; send to Kedar and consider carefully; see if there has ever been anything like this:
JER	2	11	어느 나라가 그 신을 신 아닌 것과 바꾼 일이 있느냐 그러나 나의 백성은 그 영광을 무익한 것과 바꾸었도다	Hath a nation changed their gods, which are yet no gods? but my people have changed their glory for that which doth not profit.	Has a nation ever changed its gods, though they are no gods at all? Yet My people have exchanged their Glory for useless idols.
JER	2	12	너 하늘아 이 일을 인하여 놀랄지어다 심히 떨지어다 두려워할지어다 여호와의 말이니라	Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, saith the Lord.	Be stunned by this, O heavens; be shocked and utterly appalled,” declares the LORD.
JER	2	13	내 백성이 두 가지 악을 행하였나니 곧 생수의 근원되는 나를 버린 것과 스스로 웅덩이를 판 것인데 그것은 물을 저축지 못할 터진 웅덩이니라	For my people have committed two evils; they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water.	“For My people have committed two evils: They have forsaken Me, the fountain of living water, and they have dug their own cisterns— broken cisterns that cannot hold water.
JER	2	14	이스라엘이 종이냐 씨종이냐 어찌하여 포로가 되었느냐	Is Israel a servant? is he a homeborn slave? why is he spoiled?	Is Israel a slave? Was he born into slavery? Why then has he become prey?
JER	2	15	어린 사자들이 너를 향하여 부르짖으며 수리를 날려 네 땅을 황무케 하였으며 네 성읍들은 불타서 거민이 없게 되었으며	The young lions roared upon him, and yelled, and they made his land waste: his cities are burned without inhabitant.	The young lions have roared at him; they have growled with a loud voice. They have laid waste his land; his cities lie in ruins, without inhabitant.
JER	2	16	놉과 다바네스의 자손도 네 정수리를 상하였으니	Also the children of Noph and Tahapanes have broken the crown of thy head.	The men of Memphis and Tahpanhes have shaved the crown of your head.
JER	2	17	네 하나님 여호와가 너를 길로 인도할 때에 네가 나를 떠남으로 이를 자취함이 아니냐	Hast thou not procured this unto thyself, in that thou hast forsaken the Lord thy God, when he led thee by the way?	Have you not brought this on yourself by forsaking the LORD your God when He led you in the way?
JER	2	18	네가 시홀의 물을 마시려고 애굽 길에 있음은 어찜이며 또 그 하수를 마시려고 앗수르 길에 있음은 어찜이뇨	And now what hast thou to do in the way of Egypt, to drink the waters of Sihor? or what hast thou to do in the way of Assyria, to drink the waters of the river?	Now what will you gain on your way to Egypt to drink the waters of the Nile? What will you gain on your way to Assyria to drink the waters of the Euphrates?
JER	2	19	네 악이 너를 징계하겠고 네 패역이 너를 책할 것이라 그런즉 네 하나님 여호와를 버림과 네 속에 나를 경외함이 없는 것이 악이요 고통인 줄 알라 주 만군의 여호와의 말이니라	Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall reprove thee: know therefore and see that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou hast forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, saith the Lord God of hosts.	Your own evil will discipline you; your own apostasies will reprimand you. Consider and realize how evil and bitter it is for you to forsake the LORD your God and to have no fear of Me,” declares the Lord GOD of Hosts.
JER	2	20	네가 옛적부터 네 멍에를 꺾고 네 결박을 끊으며 말하기를 나는 순복지 아니하리라 하고 모든 높은 산 위와 모든 푸른 나무 아래서 몸을 굽혀 행음하도다	For of old time I have broken thy yoke, and burst thy bands; and thou saidst, I will not transgress; when upon every high hill and under every green tree thou wanderest, playing the harlot.	“For long ago you broke your yoke and tore off your chains, saying, ‘I will not serve!’ Indeed, on every high hill and under every green tree you lay down as a prostitute.
JER	2	21	내가 너를 순전한 참 종자 곧 귀한 포도나무로 심었거늘 내게 대하여 이방 포도나무의 악한 가지가 됨은 어찜이뇨	Yet I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed: how then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange vine unto me?	I had planted you like a choice vine from the very best seed. How could you turn yourself before Me into a rotten, wild vine?
JER	2	22	주 여호와 내가 말하노라 네가 잿물로 스스로 씻으며 수다한 비누를 쓸지라도 네 죄악이 오히려 내 앞에 그저 있으리니	For though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me, saith the Lord God.	Although you wash with lye and use an abundance of soap, the stain of your guilt is still before Me,” declares the Lord GOD.
JER	2	23	네가 어찌 말하기를 나는 더럽히지 아니하였다 바알들을 좇지 아니하였다 하겠느냐 골짜기 속에 있는 네 길을 보라 네 행한 바를 알 것이니라 너는 발이 빠른 젊은 암약대가 그 길에 어지러이 달림 같았으며	How canst thou say, I am not polluted, I have not gone after Baalim? see thy way in the valley, know what thou hast done: thou art a swift dromedary traversing her ways;	“How can you say, ‘I am not defiled; I have not run after the Baals’? Look at your behavior in the valley; acknowledge what you have done. You are a swift young she-camel galloping here and there,
JER	2	24	너는 광야에 익숙한 들 암나귀가 그 성욕이 동하므로 헐떡거림 같았도다 그 성욕의 때에 누가 그것을 막으리요 그것을 찾는 자들이 수고치 아니하고 그것의 달에 만나리라	A wild ass used to the wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure; in her occasion who can turn her away? all they that seek her will not weary themselves; in her month they shall find her.	a wild donkey at home in the wilderness, sniffing the wind in the heat of her desire. Who can restrain her passion? All who seek her need not weary themselves; in mating season they will find her.
JER	2	25	내가 또 말하기를 네 발을 제어하여 벗은 발이 되게 말며 목을 갈하게 말라 하였으나 오직 너는 말하기를 아니라 이는 헛된 말이라 내가 이방 신을 사랑하였은즉 그를 따라 가겠노라 하도다	Withhold thy foot from being unshod, and thy throat from thirst: but thou saidst, There is no hope: no; for I have loved strangers, and after them will I go.	You should have kept your feet from going bare and your throat from being thirsty. But you said, ‘It is hopeless! For I love foreign gods, and I must go after them.’
JER	2	26	도적이 붙들리면 수치를 당함 같이 이스라엘 집 곧 그 왕들과 족장들과 제사장들과 선지자들이 수치를 당하였느니라	As the thief is ashamed when he is found, so is the house of Israel ashamed; they, their kings, their princes, and their priests, and their prophets,	As the thief is ashamed when he is caught, so the house of Israel is disgraced. They, their kings, their officials, their priests, and their prophets
JER	2	27	그들이 나무를 향하여 너는 나의 아비라 하며 돌을 향하여 너는 나를 낳았다 하고 그 등을 내게로 향하고 그 얼굴은 내게로 향치 아니하다가 환난을 당할 때에는 이르기를 일어나 우리를 구원하소서 하리라	Saying to a stock, Thou art my father; and to a stone, Thou hast brought me forth: for they have turned their back unto me, and not their face: but in the time of their trouble they will say, Arise, and save us.	say to a tree, ‘You are my father,’ and to a stone, ‘You gave me birth.’ For they have turned their backs to Me and not their faces, yet in the time of trouble they beg, ‘Rise up and save us!’
JER	2	28	네가 만든 네 신들이 어디 있느뇨 그들이 너의 환난을 당할 때에 구원할 수 있으면 일어날 것이니라 유다여 너의 신들이 너의 성읍 수와 같도다	But where are thy gods that thou hast made thee? let them arise, if they can save thee in the time of thy trouble: for according to the number of thy cities are thy gods, O Judah.	But where are the gods you made for yourselves? Let them rise up in your time of trouble and save you if they can; for your gods are as numerous as your cities, O Judah.
JER	2	29	나 여호와가 말하노라 너희가 나와 다툼은 어찜이뇨 너희가 다 내게 범과하였느니라	Wherefore will ye plead with me? ye all have transgressed against me, saith the Lord.	Why do you bring a case against Me? You have all rebelled against Me,” declares the LORD.
JER	2	30	내가 너희 자녀를 때림도 무익함은 그들도 징책을 받지 아니함이라 너희 칼이 사나운 사자 같이 너희 선지자들을 삼켰느니라	In vain have I smitten your children; they received no correction: your own sword hath devoured your prophets, like a destroying lion.	“I have struck your sons in vain; they accepted no discipline. Your own sword has devoured your prophets like a voracious lion.”
JER	2	31	너희 이 세대여 여호와의 말을 들어 보라 내가 이스라엘에게 광야가 되었었느냐 흑암한 땅이 되었었느냐 무슨 연고로 내 백성이 말하기를 우리는 놓였으니 다시 주께로 가지 않겠다 하느냐	O generation, see ye the word of the Lord. Have I been a wilderness unto Israel? a land of darkness? wherefore say my people, We are lords; we will come no more unto thee?	You people of this generation, consider the word of the LORD: “Have I been a wilderness to Israel or a land of dense darkness? Why do My people say, ‘We are free to roam; we will come to You no more’?
JER	2	32	처녀가 어찌 그 패물을 잊겠느냐 신부가 어찌 그 고운 옷을 잊겠느냐 오직 내 백성은 나를 잊었나니 그 날 수는 계수할 수 없거늘	Can a maid forget her ornaments, or a bride her attire? yet my people have forgotten me days without number.	Does a maiden forget her jewelry or a bride her wedding sash? Yet My people have forgotten Me for days without number.
JER	2	33	네가 어찌 사랑을 얻으려고 네 행위를 아름답게 꾸미느냐 그러므로 네 행위를 악한 여자들에게까지 가르쳤으며	Why trimmest thou thy way to seek love? therefore hast thou also taught the wicked ones thy ways.	How skillfully you pursue love! Even the most immoral of women could learn from your ways.
JER	2	34	또 네 옷단에 죄 없는 가난한 자를 죽인 피가 묻었나니 그들이 담 구멍을 뚫음을 인함이 아니라 오직 이 모든 일로 너를 책망함을 인함이니라	Also in thy skirts is found the blood of the souls of the poor innocents: I have not found it by secret search, but upon all these.	Moreover, your skirts are stained with the blood of the innocent poor, though you did not find them breaking in. But in spite of all these things
JER	2	35	그러나 너는 말하시기를 나는 무죄하니 그 진노가 참으로 내게서 떠났다 하거니와 보라 네 말이 나는 죄를 범치 아니하였다 함을 인하여 내가 너를 심판하리라	Yet thou sayest, Because I am innocent, surely his anger shall turn from me. Behold, I will plead with thee, because thou sayest, I have not sinned.	you say, ‘I am innocent. Surely His anger will turn from me.’ Behold, I will judge you, because you say, ‘I have not sinned.’
JER	2	36	네가 어찌하여 네 길을 바꾸어 부지런히 돌아다니느뇨 네가 앗수르로 인하여 수치를 당함 같이 애굽으로 인하여 수치를 당할 것이라	Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way? thou also shalt be ashamed of Egypt, as thou wast ashamed of Assyria.	How unstable you are, constantly changing your ways! You will be disappointed by Egypt just as you were by Assyria.
JER	2	37	네가 두 손으로 네 머리를 싸고 거기서도 나가리니 이는 네가 의지하는 자들을 나 여호와가 버렸으므로 네가 그들을 인하여 형통치 못할 것임이니라	Yea, thou shalt go forth from him, and thine hands upon thine head: for the Lord hath rejected thy confidences, and thou shalt not prosper in them.	Moreover, you will leave that place with your hands on your head, for the LORD has rejected those you trust; you will not prosper by their help.”
JER	3	1	세상에서 말하기를 가령 사람이 그 아내를 버리므로 그가 떠나 타인의 아내가 된다 하자 본부가 그를 다시 받겠느냐 그리하면 그 땅이 크게 더러워지지 않겠느냐 하느니라 나 여호와가 말하노라 네가 많은 무리와 행음하고도 내게로 돌아오려느냐	They say, If a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and become another man’s, shall he return unto her again? shall not that land be greatly polluted? but thou hast played the harlot with many lovers; yet return again to me, saith the Lord.	“If a man divorces his wife and she leaves him to marry another, can he ever return to her? Would not such a land be completely defiled? But you have played the harlot with many lovers— and you would return to Me?” declares the LORD.
JER	3	2	네 눈을 들어 자산을 보라 너의 행음치 아니한 곳이 어디 있느냐 네가 길 가에 앉아 사람을 기다린 것이 광야에 있는 아라바 사람 같아서 음란과 행악으로 이 땅을 더럽혔도다	Lift up thine eyes unto the high places, and see where thou hast not been lien with. In the ways hast thou sat for them, as the Arabian in the wilderness; and thou hast polluted the land with thy whoredoms and with thy wickedness.	“Lift up your eyes to the barren heights and see. Is there any place where you have not been violated? You sat beside the highways waiting for your lovers, like a nomad in the desert. You have defiled the land with your prostitution and wickedness.
JER	3	3	그러므로 단 비가 그쳐졌고 늦은 비가 없어졌느니라 그럴지라도 네가 창녀의 낯을 가졌으므로 수치를 알지 못하느니라	Therefore the showers have been withholden, and there hath been no latter rain; and thou hadst a whore’s forehead, thou refusedst to be ashamed.	Therefore the showers have been withheld, and no spring rains have fallen. Yet you have the brazen look of a prostitute; you refuse to be ashamed.
JER	3	4	네가 이제부터는 내게 부르짖기를 나의 아버지여 아버지는 나의 소시의 애호자시오니	Wilt thou not from this time cry unto me, My father, thou art the guide of my youth?	Have you not just called to Me, ‘My Father, You are my friend from youth.
JER	3	5	노를 한 없이 계속하시겠으며 끝까지 두시겠나이까 하지 않겠느냐 보라 네가 이같이 말하여도 악을 행하여 네 욕심을 이루었느니라 하시니라	Will he reserve his anger for ever? will he keep it to the end? Behold, thou hast spoken and done evil things as thou couldest.	Will He be angry forever? Will He be indignant to the end?’ This you have spoken, but you keep doing all the evil you can.”
JER	3	6	요시야 왕 때에 여호와께서 또 내게 이르시되 네가 배역한 이스라엘의 행한 바를 보았느냐 그가 모든 높은 산에 오르며 모든 푸른 나무 아래로 가서 거기서 행음하였도다	The Lord said also unto me in the days of Josiah the king, Hast thou seen that which backsliding Israel hath done? she is gone up upon every high mountain and under every green tree, and there hath played the harlot.	Now in the days of King Josiah, the LORD said to me, “Have you seen what faithless Israel has done? She has gone up on every high hill and under every green tree to prostitute herself there.
JER	3	7	그가 이 모든 일을 행한 후에 내가 말하기를 그가 내게로 돌아오리라 하였으나 오히려 내게로 돌아오지 아니하였고 그 패역한 자매 유다는 그것을 보았느니라	And I said after she had done all these things, Turn thou unto me. But she returned not. And her treacherous sister Judah saw it.	I thought that after she had done all these things, she would return to Me. But she did not return, and her unfaithful sister Judah saw it.
JER	3	8	내게 배역한 이스라엘이 간음을 행하였으므로 내가 그를 내어 쫓고 이혼서까지 주었으되 그 패역한 자매 유다가 두려워 아니하고 자기도 가서 행음함을 내가 보았노라	And I saw, when for all the causes whereby backsliding Israel committed adultery I had put her away, and given her a bill of divorce; yet her treacherous sister Judah feared not, but went and played the harlot also.	She saw that because faithless Israel had committed adultery, I gave her a certificate of divorce and sent her away. Yet that unfaithful sister Judah had no fear and prostituted herself as well.
JER	3	9	그가 돌과 나무로 더불어 행음함을 가볍게 여기고 행음하여 이 땅을 더럽혔거늘	And it came to pass through the lightness of her whoredom, that she defiled the land, and committed adultery with stones and with stocks.	Indifferent to her own infidelity, Israel had defiled the land and committed adultery with stones and trees.
JER	3	10	이 모든 일이 있어도 그 패역한 자매 유다가 진심으로 내게 돌아오지 아니하고 거짓으로 할 뿐이니라 여호와의 말이니라	And yet for all this her treacherous sister Judah hath not turned unto me with her whole heart, but feignedly, saith the Lord.	Yet in spite of all this, her unfaithful sister Judah did not return to Me with all her heart, but only in pretense,” declares the LORD.
JER	3	11	여호와께서 내게 이르시되 배역한 이스라엘은 패역한 유다보다 오히려 의로움이 나타났나니	And the Lord said unto me, The backsliding Israel hath justified herself more than treacherous Judah.	And the LORD said to me, “Faithless Israel has shown herself more righteous than unfaithful Judah.
JER	3	12	너는 가서 북을 향하여 이 말을 선포하여 이르라 여호와께서 가라사대 배역한 이스라엘아 돌아오라 나의 노한 얼굴을 너희에게로 향하지 아니하리라 나는 긍휼이 있는 자라 노를 한 없이 품지 아니하느니라 여호와의 말이니라	Go and proclaim these words toward the north, and say, Return, thou backsliding Israel, saith the Lord; and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you: for I am merciful, saith the Lord, and I will not keep anger for ever.	Go, proclaim this message toward the north: ‘Return, O faithless Israel,’ declares the LORD. ‘I will no longer look on you with anger, for I am merciful,’ declares the LORD. ‘I will not be angry forever.
JER	3	13	너는 오직 네 죄를 자복하라 이는 네 하나님 여호와를 배반하고 네 길로 달려 모든 푸른 나무 아래서 이방 신에게 절하고 내 목소리를 듣지 아니하였음이니라 여호와의 말이니라	Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou hast transgressed against the Lord thy God, and hast scattered thy ways to the strangers under every green tree, and ye have not obeyed my voice, saith the Lord.	Only acknowledge your guilt, that you have rebelled against the LORD your God. You have scattered your favors to foreign gods under every green tree and have not obeyed My voice,’” declares the LORD.
JER	3	14	나 여호와가 말하노라 배역한 자식들아 돌아오라 나는 너희 남편임이니라 내가 너희를 성읍에서 하나와 족속 중에서 둘을 택하여 시온으로 데려오겠고	Turn, O backsliding children, saith the Lord; for I am married unto you: and I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion:	“Return, O faithless children,” declares the LORD, “for I am your master, and I will take you—one from a city and two from a family—and bring you to Zion.
JER	3	15	내가 또 내 마음에 합하는 목자를 너희에게 주리니 그들이 지식과 명철로 너희를 양육하리라	And I will give you pastors according to mine heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding.	Then I will give you shepherds after My own heart, who will feed you with knowledge and understanding.”
JER	3	16	나 여호와가 말하노라 너희가 이 땅에서 번성하여 많아질 때에는 사람 사람이 여호와의 언약궤를 다시는 말하지 아니할 것이요 생각지 아니할 것이요 기억지 아니할 것이요 찾지 아니할 것이요 만들지 아니할 것이며	And it shall come to pass, when ye be multiplied and increased in the land, in those days, saith the Lord, they shall say no more, The ark of the covenant of the Lord: neither shall it come to mind: neither shall they remember it; neither shall they visit it; neither shall that be done any more.	“In those days, when you multiply and increase in the land,” declares the LORD, “they will no longer discuss the ark of the covenant of the LORD. It will never come to mind, and no one will remember it or miss it, nor will another one be made.
JER	3	17	그 때에 예루살렘이 여호와의 보좌라 일컬음이 되며 열방이 그리로 모이리니 곧 여호와의 이름으로 인하여 예루살렘에 모이고 다시는 그들의 악한 마음의 강팍한 대로 행치 아니할 것이며	At that time they shall call Jerusalem the throne of the Lord; and all the nations shall be gathered unto it, to the name of the Lord, to Jerusalem: neither shall they walk any more after the imagination of their evil heart.	At that time Jerusalem will be called The Throne of the LORD, and all the nations will be gathered in Jerusalem to honor the name of the LORD. They will no longer follow the stubbornness of their evil hearts.
JER	3	18	그 때에 유다 족속이 이스라엘 족속과 동행하여 북에서부터 나와서 내가 너희 열조에게 기업으로 준 땅에 함께 이르리라	In those days the house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel, and they shall come together out of the land of the north to the land that I have given for an inheritance unto your fathers.	In those days the house of Judah will walk with the house of Israel, and they will come together from the land of the north to the land that I gave to your fathers as an inheritance.
JER	3	19	내가 스스로 말하기를 내가 어떻게 하든지 너를 자녀 중에 두며 허다한 나라 중에 아름다운 산업인 이 낙토를 네게 주리라 하였고 내가 다시 말하기를 너희가 나를 나의 아버지라 하고 나를 떠나지 말 것이니라 하였노라	But I said, How shall I put thee among the children, and give thee a pleasant land, a goodly heritage of the hosts of nations? and I said, Thou shalt call me, My father; and shalt not turn away from me.	Then I said, ‘How I long to make you My sons and give you a desirable land, the most beautiful inheritance of all the nations!’ I thought you would call Me ‘Father’ and never turn away from following Me.
JER	3	20	그런데 이스라엘 족속아 마치 아내가 그 남편을 속이고 떠남 같이 너희가 정녕히 나를 속였느니라 여호와의 말이니라	Surely as a wife treacherously departeth from her husband, so have ye dealt treacherously with me, O house of Israel, saith the Lord.	But as a woman may betray her husband, so you have betrayed Me, O house of Israel,” declares the LORD.
JER	3	21	소리가 자산 위에서 들리니 곧 이스라엘 자손의 애곡하며 간구하는 것이라 그들이 그 길을 굽게 하며 자기 하나님 여호와를 잊어버렸음이로다	A voice was heard upon the high places, weeping and supplications of the children of Israel: for they have perverted their way, and they have forgotten the Lord their God.	A voice is heard on the barren heights, the children of Israel weeping and begging for mercy, because they have perverted their ways and forgotten the LORD their God.
JER	3	22	배역한 자식들아 돌아오라 내가 너희의 배역함을 고치리라 보소서 우리가 주께 왔사오니 주는 우리 하나님 여호와이심이니이다	Return, ye backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings. Behold, we come unto thee; for thou art the Lord our God.	“Return, O faithless children, and I will heal your faithlessness.” “Here we are. We come to You, for You are the LORD our God.
JER	3	23	작은 산들과 큰 산 위의 떠드는 무리에게 바라는 것은 참으로 허사라 이스라엘의 구원은 진실로 우리 하나님 여호와께 있나이다	Truly in vain is salvation hoped for from the hills, and from the multitude of mountains: truly in the Lord our God is the salvation of Israel.	Surely deception comes from the hills, and commotion from the mountains. Surely the salvation of Israel is in the LORD our God.
JER	3	24	부끄러운 그것이 우리의 어렸을 때로부터 우리 열조의 산업인 양떼와 소떼와 아들들과 딸들을 삼켰사온즉	For shame hath devoured the labour of our fathers from our youth; their flocks and their herds, their sons and their daughters.	From our youth, that shameful god has consumed what our fathers have worked for— their flocks and herds, their sons and daughters.
JER	3	25	우리는 수치 중에 눕겠고 우리는 수욕에 덮이울 것이니 이는 우리와 우리 열조가 어렸을 때로부터 오늘까지 우리 하나님 여호와께 범죄하여 우리 하나님 여호와의 목소리를 청종치 아니하였음이니이다	We lie down in our shame, and our confusion covereth us: for we have sinned against the Lord our God, we and our fathers, from our youth even unto this day, and have not obeyed the voice of the Lord our God.	Let us lie down in our shame; let our disgrace cover us. We have sinned against the LORD our God, both we and our fathers; from our youth even to this day we have not obeyed the voice of the LORD our God.”
JER	4	1	여호와께서 가라사대 이스라엘아 네가 돌아오려거든 내게로 돌아오라 네가 만일 나의 목전에서 가증한 것을 버리고 마음이 요동치 아니하며	If thou wilt return, O Israel, saith the Lord, return unto me: and if thou wilt put away thine abominations out of my sight, then shalt thou not remove.	“If you will return, O Israel, return to Me,” declares the LORD. “If you will remove your detestable idols from My sight and no longer waver,
JER	4	2	진실과 공평과 정의로 여호와의 삶을 가리켜 맹세하면 열방이 나로 인하여 스스로 복을 빌며 나로 인하여 자랑하리라	And thou shalt swear, The Lord liveth, in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness; and the nations shall bless themselves in him, and in him shall they glory.	and if you can swear, ‘As surely as the LORD lives,’ in truth, in justice, and in righteousness, then the nations will be blessed by Him, and in Him they will glory.”
JER	4	3	나 여호와가 유다와 예루살렘 사람에게 이같이 이르노라 너희 묵은 땅을 갈고 가시덤불 속에 파종하지 말라	For thus saith the Lord to the men of Judah and Jerusalem, Break up your fallow ground, and sow not among thorns.	For this is what the LORD says to the men of Judah and Jerusalem: “Break up your unplowed ground, and do not sow among the thorns.
JER	4	4	유다인과 예루살렘 거민들아 너희는 스스로 할례를 행하여 너희 마음 가죽을 베고 나 여호와께 속하라 그렇지 아니하면 너희 행악을 인하여 나의 분노가 불 같이 발하여 사르리니 그것을 끌 자가 없으리라	Circumcise yourselves to the Lord, and take away the foreskins of your heart, ye men of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem: lest my fury come forth like fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings.	Circumcise yourselves to the LORD, and remove the foreskins of your hearts, O men of Judah and people of Jerusalem. Otherwise, My wrath will break out like fire and burn with no one to extinguish it, because of your evil deeds.”
JER	4	5	너희는 유다에 선포하며 예루살렘에 공포하여 이르기를 이 땅에서 나팔을 불라 하며 또 크게 외쳐 이르기를 너희는 모이라 우리가 견고한 성으로 들어가자 하고	Declare ye in Judah, and publish in Jerusalem; and say, Blow ye the trumpet in the land: cry, gather together, and say, Assemble yourselves, and let us go into the defenced cities.	Announce in Judah, proclaim in Jerusalem, and say: “Blow the ram’s horn throughout the land. Cry aloud and say, ‘Assemble yourselves and let us flee to the fortified cities.’
JER	4	6	시온을 향하여 기호를 세우라, 도피하라, 지체하지 말라, 내가 북방에서 재앙과 큰 멸망으로 이르게 할 것임이니라	Set up the standard toward Zion: retire, stay not: for I will bring evil from the north, and a great destruction.	Raise a signal flag toward Zion. Seek refuge! Do not delay! For I am bringing disaster from the north, and terrible destruction.
JER	4	7	사자가 그 수풀에서 올라왔으며 열방을 멸하는 자가 나아왔으되 네 땅을 황폐케 하려고 이미 그 처소를 떠나 나왔은즉 네 성읍들이 황폐하여 거민이 없게 되리니	The lion is come up from his thicket, and the destroyer of the Gentiles is on his way; he is gone forth from his place to make thy land desolate; and thy cities shall be laid waste, without an inhabitant.	A lion has gone up from his thicket, and a destroyer of nations has set out. He has left his lair to lay waste your land. Your cities will be reduced to ruins and lie uninhabited.
JER	4	8	이를 인하여 너희는 굵은 베를 두르고 애곡하라 대저 여호와의 맹렬한 노가 아직 너희에게서 돌이키지 아니하였음이니라	For this gird you with sackcloth, lament and howl: for the fierce anger of the Lord is not turned back from us.	So put on sackcloth, mourn and wail, for the fierce anger of the LORD has not turned away from us.”
JER	4	9	나 여호와가 말하노라 그 날에 왕과 방백들은 실심할 것이며 제사장들은 놀랄 것이며 선지자들은 깜짝 놀라리라	And it shall come to pass at that day, saith the Lord, that the heart of the king shall perish, and the heart of the princes; and the priests shall be astonished, and the prophets shall wonder.	“In that day,” declares the LORD, “the king and officials will lose their courage. The priests will tremble in fear, and the prophets will be astounded.”
JER	4	10	내가 가로되 슬프도소이다 주 여호와여 주께서 진실로 이 백성과 예루살렘을 크게 속이셨나이다 이르시기를 너희에게 평강이 있으리라 하시더니 칼이 생명에 미쳤나이다	Then said I, Ah, Lord God! surely thou hast greatly deceived this people and Jerusalem, saying, Ye shall have peace; whereas the sword reacheth unto the soul.	Then I said, “Ah, Lord GOD, how completely You have deceived this people and Jerusalem by saying, ‘You will have peace,’ while a sword is at our throats.”
JER	4	11	그 때에 이 백성과 예루살렘에 이를 자 있어서 뜨거운 바람이 광야 자산에서 내 딸 백성에게 불어온다 하리라 이는 키질하기 위함도 아니요 정결케 하려함도 아니며	At that time shall it be said to this people and to Jerusalem, A dry wind of the high places in the wilderness toward the daughter of my people, not to fan, nor to cleanse,	At that time it will be said to this people and to Jerusalem, “A searing wind from the barren heights in the desert blows toward the daughter of My people, but not to winnow or to sift;
JER	4	12	이보다 더 강한 바람이 나를 위하여 오리니 이제 내가 그들에게 심판을 베풀 것이라	Even a full wind from those places shall come unto me: now also will I give sentence against them.	a wind too strong for that comes from Me. Now I also pronounce judgments against them.”
JER	4	13	보라 그가 구름 같이 올라오나니 그 병거는 회리바람 같고 그 말들은 독수리보다 빠르도다 우리에게 화 있도다 우리는 멸망하도다 하리라	Behold, he shall come up as clouds, and his chariots shall be as a whirlwind: his horses are swifter than eagles. Woe unto us! for we are spoiled.	Behold, he advances like the clouds, his chariots like the whirlwind. His horses are swifter than eagles. Woe to us, for we are ruined!
JER	4	14	예루살렘아 네 마음의 악을 씻어 버리라 그리하면 구원을 얻으리라 네 악한 생각이 네 속에 얼마나 오래 머물겠느냐	O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou mayest be saved. How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee?	Wash the evil from your heart, O Jerusalem, so that you may be saved. How long will you harbor wicked thoughts within you?
JER	4	15	단에서 소리를 선포하며 에브라임 산에서 재앙을 공포하는도다	For a voice declareth from Dan, and publisheth affliction from mount Ephraim.	For a voice resounds from Dan, proclaiming disaster from the hills of Ephraim.
JER	4	16	너희는 열방에 고하며 또 예루살렘에 알게 하기를 에워싸고 치는 자들이 먼 땅에서부터 와서 유다 성읍들을 향하여 소리를 지른다 하라	Make ye mention to the nations; behold, publish against Jerusalem, that watchers come from a far country, and give out their voice against the cities of Judah.	Warn the nations now! Proclaim to Jerusalem: “A besieging army comes from a distant land; they raise their voices against the cities of Judah.
JER	4	17	그들이 밭을 지키는 자 같이 예루살렘을 에워싸나니 이는 그가 나를 거역한 연고니라 여호와의 말이니라	As keepers of a field, are they against her round about; because she hath been rebellious against me, saith the Lord.	They surround her like men guarding a field, because she has rebelled against Me,” declares the LORD.
JER	4	18	네 길과 행사가 이 일들을 부르게 하였나니 이는 너의 악함이라 그 고통이 네 마음에까지 미치느니라	Thy way and thy doings have procured these things unto thee; this is thy wickedness, because it is bitter, because it reacheth unto thine heart.	“Your ways and deeds have brought this upon you. This is your punishment; how bitter it is, because it pierces to the heart!”
JER	4	19	슬프고 아프다 내 마음 속이 아프고 내 마음이 답답하여 잠잠할 수 없으니 이는 나의 심령 네가 나팔소리와 전쟁의 경보를 들음이로다	My bowels, my bowels! I am pained at my very heart; my heart maketh a noise in me; I cannot hold my peace, because thou hast heard, O my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm of war.	My anguish, my anguish! I writhe in pain! Oh, the pain in my chest! My heart pounds within me; I cannot be silent. For I have heard the sound of the horn, the alarm of battle.
JER	4	20	패망에 패망이 연속하여 온 땅이 탈취를 당하니 나의 천막은 홀연히 파멸되며 나의 휘장은 잠시간에 열파되도다	Destruction upon destruction is cried; for the whole land is spoiled: suddenly are my tents spoiled, and my curtains in a moment.	Disaster after disaster is proclaimed, for the whole land is laid waste. My tents are destroyed in an instant, my curtains in a moment.
JER	4	21	내가 저 기호를 보며 나팔소리 듣기를 어느 때까지 할꼬	How long shall I see the standard, and hear the sound of the trumpet?	How long must I see the signal flag and hear the sound of the horn?
JER	4	22	내 백성은 나를 알지 못하는 우준한 자요 지각이 없는 미련한 자식이라 악을 행하기에는 지각이 있으나 선을 행하기에는 무지하도다	For my people is foolish, they have not known me; they are sottish children, and they have none understanding: they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge.	“For My people are fools; they have not known Me. They are foolish children, without understanding. They are skilled in doing evil, but they know not how to do good.”
JER	4	23	내가 땅을 본즉 혼돈하고 공허하며 하늘들을 우러른즉 거기 빛이 없으며	I beheld the earth, and, lo, it was without form, and void; and the heavens, and they had no light.	I looked at the earth, and it was formless and void; I looked to the heavens, and they had no light.
JER	4	24	내가 산들을 본즉 다 진동하며 작은 산들도 요동하며	I beheld the mountains, and, lo, they trembled, and all the hills moved lightly.	I looked at the mountains, and behold, they were quaking; all the hills were swaying.
JER	4	25	내가 본즉 사람이 없으며 공중의 새가 다 날아갔으며	I beheld, and, lo, there was no man, and all the birds of the heavens were fled.	I looked, and no man was left; all the birds of the air had fled.
JER	4	26	내가 본즉 좋은 땅이 황무지가 되었으며 그 모든 성읍이 여호와의 앞 그 맹렬한 진노 앞에 무너졌으니	I beheld, and, lo, the fruitful place was a wilderness, and all the cities thereof were broken down at the presence of the Lord, and by his fierce anger.	I looked, and the fruitful land was a desert. All its cities were torn down before the LORD, before His fierce anger.
JER	4	27	이는 여호와의 말씀에 이 온 땅이 황폐할 것이나 내가 진멸하지는 아니할 것이며	For thus hath the Lord said, The whole land shall be desolate; yet will I not make a full end.	For this is what the LORD says: “The whole land will be desolate, but I will not finish its destruction.
JER	4	28	이로 인하여 땅이 슬퍼할 것이며 위의 하늘이 흑암할 것이라 내가 이미 말하였으며 작정하였고 후회하지 아니하였은즉 또한 돌이키지 아니하리라 하셨음이로다	For this shall the earth mourn, and the heavens above be black: because I have spoken it, I have purposed it, and will not repent, neither will I turn back from it.	Therefore the earth will mourn and the heavens above will grow dark. I have spoken, I have planned, and I will not relent or turn back.”
JER	4	29	기병과 활 쏘는 자의 훤화로 인하여 모든 성읍이 도망하여 수풀에 들어가고 바위에 기어오르며 각 성읍이 버림을 당하여 거기 거하는 사람이 없나니	The whole city shall flee for the noise of the horsemen and bowmen; they shall go into thickets, and climb up upon the rocks: every city shall be forsaken, and not a man dwell therein.	Every city flees at the sound of the horseman and archer. They enter the thickets and climb among the rocks. Every city is abandoned; no inhabitant is left.
JER	4	30	멸망을 당한 자여 네가 어떻게 하려느냐 네가 붉은 옷을 입고 금장식으로 단장하고 눈을 그려 꾸밀지라도 너의 화장한 것이 헛된 일이라 연인들이 너를 멸시하여 네 생명을 찾느니라	And when thou art spoiled, what wilt thou do? Though thou clothest thyself with crimson, though thou deckest thee with ornaments of gold, though thou rentest thy face with painting, in vain shalt thou make thyself fair; thy lovers will despise thee, they will seek thy life.	And you, O devastated one, what will you do, though you dress yourself in scarlet, though you adorn yourself with gold jewelry, though you enlarge your eyes with paint? You adorn yourself in vain; your lovers despise you; they want to take your life.
JER	4	31	내가 소리를 들은즉 여인의 해산하는 소리 같고 초산하는 자의 고통하는 소리 같으니 이는 딸 시온의 소리라 그가 헐떡이며 그 손을 펴고 이르기를 내게 화 있도다 살륙하는 자를 인하여 나의 심령이 피곤하도다 하는도다	For I have heard a voice as of a woman in travail, and the anguish as of her that bringeth forth her first child, the voice of the daughter of Zion, that bewaileth herself, that spreadeth her hands, saying, Woe is me now! for my soul is wearied because of murderers.	For I hear a cry like a woman in labor, a cry of anguish like one bearing her first child— the cry of the Daughter of Zion gasping for breath, stretching out her hands to say, “Woe is me, for my soul faints before the murderers!”
JER	5	1	너희는 예루살렘 거리로 빨리 왕래하며 그 넓은 거리에서 찾아보고 알라 너희가 만일 공의를 행하며 진리를 구하는 자를 한 사람이라도 찾으면 내가 이 성을 사하리라	Run ye to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any that executeth judgment, that seeketh the truth; and I will pardon it.	“Go up and down the streets of Jerusalem. Look now and take note; search her squares. If you can find a single person, anyone who acts justly, anyone who seeks the truth, then I will forgive the city.
JER	5	2	그들이 여호와의 사심으로 맹세할지라도 실상은 거짓 맹세니라	And though they say, The Lord liveth; surely they swear falsely.	Although they say, ‘As surely as the LORD lives,’ they are swearing falsely.”
JER	5	3	여호와여 주의 눈이 성실을 돌아보지 아니하시나이까 주께서 그들을 치셨을지라도 그들이 아픈 줄을 알지 못하며 그들을 거의 멸하셨을지라도 그들이 징계를 받지 아니하고 그 얼굴을 반석보다 굳게 하여 돌아오기를 싫어하므로	O Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth? thou hast stricken them, but they have not grieved; thou hast consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction: they have made their faces harder than a rock; they have refused to return.	O LORD, do not Your eyes look for truth? You struck them, but they felt no pain. You finished them off, but they refused to accept discipline. They have made their faces harder than stone and refused to repent.
JER	5	4	내가 말하기를 이 무리는 비천하고 우준한 것뿐이라 여호와의 길, 자기 하나님의 법을 알지 못하니	Therefore I said, Surely these are poor; they are foolish: for they know not the way of the Lord, nor the judgment of their God.	Then I said, “They are only the poor; they have played the fool, for they do not know the way of the LORD, the justice of their God.
JER	5	5	내가 귀인들에게 가서 그들에게 말하리라 그들은 여호와의 길, 자기 하나님의 법을 안다 하였더니 그들도 일제히 그 멍에를 꺾고 결박을 끊은지라	I will get me unto the great men, and will speak unto them; for they have known the way of the Lord, and the judgment of their God: but these have altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bonds.	I will go to the powerful and speak to them. Surely they know the way of the LORD, the justice of their God.” But they too, with one accord, had broken the yoke and torn off the chains.
JER	5	6	그러므로 수풀에서 나오는 사자가 그들을 죽이며 사막의 이리가 그들을 멸하며 표범이 성읍들을 엿보온즉 그리로 나오는 자마다 찢기오리니 이는 그들의 허물이 많고 패역이 심함이니이다	Wherefore a lion out of the forest shall slay them, and a wolf of the evenings shall spoil them, a leopard shall watch over their cities: every one that goeth out thence shall be torn in pieces: because their transgressions are many, and their backslidings are increased.	Therefore a lion from the forest will strike them down, a wolf from the desert will ravage them. A leopard will lie in wait near their cities, and everyone who ventures out will be torn to pieces. For their rebellious acts are many, and their unfaithful deeds are numerous.
JER	5	7	내가 어찌 너를 사하겠느냐 네 자녀가 나를 버리고 신이 아닌 것들로 맹세하였으며 내가 그들을 배불리 먹인즉 그들이 행음하며 창기의 집에 허다히 모이며	How shall I pardon thee for this? thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no gods: when I had fed them to the full, they then committed adultery, and assembled themselves by troops in the harlots’ houses.	“Why should I forgive you? Your children have forsaken Me and sworn by gods that are not gods. I satisfied their needs, yet they committed adultery and assembled at the houses of prostitutes.
JER	5	8	그들은 살찌고 두루 다니는 수 말 같이 각기 이웃의 아내를 따라 부르짖는도다	They were as fed horses in the morning: every one neighed after his neighbour’s wife.	They are well-fed, lusty stallions, each neighing after his neighbor’s wife.
JER	5	9	나 여호와가 이르노라 내가 어찌 이 일들을 인하여 벌하지 아니하겠으며 내 마음이 이런 나라에 보수하지 않겠느냐	Shall I not visit for these things? saith the Lord: and shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?	Should I not punish them for these things?” declares the LORD. “Should I not avenge Myself on such a nation as this?
JER	5	10	너희는 그 성벽에 올라가 훼파하되 다 훼파하지 말고 그 가지만 꺾어버리라 여호와의 것이 아님이니라	Go ye up upon her walls, and destroy; but make not a full end: take away her battlements; for they are not the Lord’s.	Go up through her vineyards and ravage them, but do not finish them off. Strip off her branches, for they do not belong to the LORD.
JER	5	11	나 여호와가 말하노라 이스라엘 족속과 유다 족속이 내게 심히 패역하였느니라	For the house of Israel and the house of Judah have dealt very treacherously against me, saith the Lord.	For the house of Israel and the house of Judah have been utterly unfaithful to Me,” declares the LORD.
JER	5	12	그들이 여호와를 인정치 아니하며 말하기를 여호와는 계신 것이 아닌즉 재앙이 우리에게 임하지 않을 것이요 우리가 칼과 기근을 보지 아니할 것이며	They have belied the Lord, and said, It is not he; neither shall evil come upon us; neither shall we see sword nor famine:	They have lied about the LORD and said: “He will not do anything; harm will not come to us; we will not see sword or famine.
JER	5	13	선지자들은 바람이라 말씀이 그들의 속에 있지 아니한즉 그같이 그들이 당하리라 하느니라	And the prophets shall become wind, and the word is not in them: thus shall it be done unto them.	The prophets are but wind, for the word is not in them. So let their own predictions befall them.”
JER	5	14	그러므로 만군의 하나님 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 그들이 이 말을 하였은즉 볼지어다 내가 네 입에 있는 나의 말로 불이 되게 하고 이 백성으로 나무가 되게 하리니 그 불이 그들을 사르리라	Wherefore thus saith the Lord God of hosts, Because ye speak this word, behold, I will make my words in thy mouth fire, and this people wood, and it shall devour them.	Therefore this is what the LORD God of Hosts says: “Because you have spoken this word, I will make My words a fire in your mouth and this people the wood it consumes.
JER	5	15	나 여호와가 말하노라 이스라엘 족속아 보라 내가 한 나라를 원방에서 너희에게로 오게 하리니 곧 강하고 오랜 나라이라 그 방언을 네가 알지 못하며 그 말을 네가 깨닫지 못하느니라	Lo, I will bring a nation upon you from far, O house of Israel, saith the Lord: it is a mighty nation, it is an ancient nation, a nation whose language thou knowest not, neither understandest what they say.	Behold, I am bringing a distant nation against you, O house of Israel,” declares the LORD. “It is an established nation, an ancient nation, a nation whose language you do not know and whose speech you do not understand.
JER	5	16	그 전통은 열린 묘실이요 그 사람들은 다 용사라	Their quiver is as an open sepulchre, they are all mighty men.	Their quivers are like open graves; they are all mighty men.
JER	5	17	그들이 네 자녀들의 먹을 추수 곡물과 양식을 먹으며 네 양떼와 소떼를 먹으며 네 포도나무와 무화과나무 열매를 먹으며 네가 의뢰하는 견고한 성들을 칼로 파멸하리라	And they shall eat up thine harvest, and thy bread, which thy sons and thy daughters should eat: they shall eat up thy flocks and thine herds: they shall eat up thy vines and thy fig trees: they shall impoverish thy fenced cities, wherein thou trustedst, with the sword.	They will devour your harvest and food; they will consume your sons and daughters; they will eat up your flocks and herds; they will feed on your vines and fig trees. With the sword they will destroy the fortified cities in which you trust.”
JER	5	18	나 여호와가 말하노라 그 때에도 내가 너희를 진멸치는 아니하리라	Nevertheless in those days, saith the Lord, I will not make a full end with you.	“Yet even in those days,” declares the LORD, “I will not make a full end of you.
JER	5	19	그들이 만일 이르기를 우리 하나님 여호와께서 어찌하여 이 모든 일을 우리에게 행하셨느뇨 하거든 너는 그들에게 이르기를 너희가 여호와를 버리고 너희 땅에서 이방 신들을 섬겼은즉 이와 같이 너희 것이 아닌 땅에서 이방인들을 섬기리라 하라	And it shall come to pass, when ye shall say, Wherefore doeth the Lord our God all these things unto us? then shalt thou answer them, Like as ye have forsaken me, and served strange gods in your land, so shall ye serve strangers in a land that is not yours.	And when the people ask, ‘For what offense has the LORD our God done all these things to us?’ You are to tell them, ‘Just as you have forsaken Me and served foreign gods in your land, so will you serve foreigners in a land that is not your own.’”
JER	5	20	너는 이를 야곱 집에 선포하며 유다에 공포하여 이르기를	Declare this in the house of Jacob, and publish it in Judah, saying,	Declare this in the house of Jacob and proclaim it in Judah:
JER	5	21	우준하여 지각이 없으며 눈이 있어도 보지 못하며 귀가 있어도 듣지 못하는 백성이여 이를 들을지어다	Hear now this, O foolish people, and without understanding; which have eyes, and see not; which have ears, and hear not:	“Hear this, O foolish and senseless people, who have eyes but do not see, who have ears but do not hear.
JER	5	22	여호와께서 말씀하시되 너희가 나를 두려워 아니하느냐 내 앞에서 떨지 아니하겠느냐 내가 모래를 두어 바다의 계한을 삼되 그것으로 영원한 계한을 삼고 지나치지 못하게 하였으므로 파도가 흉용하나 그것을 이기지 못하며 뛰노나 그것을 넘지 못하느니라	Fear ye not me? saith the Lord: will ye not tremble at my presence, which have placed the sand for the bound of the sea by a perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it: and though the waves thereof toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet can they not pass over it?	Do you not fear Me?” declares the LORD. “Do you not tremble before Me, the One who set the sand as the boundary for the sea, an enduring barrier it cannot cross? The waves surge, but they cannot prevail. They roar but cannot cross it.
JER	5	23	그러나 너희 백성은 배반하며 패역하는 마음이 있어서 이미 배반하고 갔으며	But this people hath a revolting and a rebellious heart; they are revolted and gone.	But these people have stubborn and rebellious hearts. They have turned aside and gone away.
JER	5	24	또 너희 마음으로 우리에게 이른 비와 늦은 비를 때를 따라 주시며 우리를 위하여 추수 기한을 정하시는 우리 하나님 여호와를 경외하자 말하지도 아니하니	Neither say they in their heart, Let us now fear the Lord our God, that giveth rain, both the former and the latter, in his season: he reserveth unto us the appointed weeks of the harvest.	They have not said in their hearts, ‘Let us fear the LORD our God, who gives the rains, both autumn and spring, in season, who keeps for us the appointed weeks of harvest.’
JER	5	25	너희 허물이 이러한 일들을 물리쳤고 너희 죄가 너희에게 오는 좋은 것을 막았느니라	Your iniquities have turned away these things, and your sins have withholden good things from you.	Your iniquities have diverted these from you; your sins have deprived you of My bounty.
JER	5	26	내 백성 너희 중에 악인이 있어서 새 사냥꾼의 매복함 같이 지키며 덫을 놓아 사람을 잡으며	For among my people are found wicked men: they lay wait, as he that setteth snares; they set a trap, they catch men.	For among My people are wicked men; they watch like fowlers lying in wait; they set a trap to catch men.
JER	5	27	조롱에 새들이 가득함 같이 너희 집들에 속임이 가득하도다 그러므로 너희가 창대하고 거부가 되어	As a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit: therefore they are become great, and waxen rich.	Like cages full of birds, so their houses are full of deceit. Therefore they have become powerful and rich.
JER	5	28	살찌고 윤택하며 또 행위가 심히 악하여 자기 이익을 얻으려고 송사 곧 고아의 송사를 공정히 하지 아니하며 빈민의 송사를 공평히 판결치 아니하니	They are waxen fat, they shine: yea, they overpass the deeds of the wicked: they judge not the cause, the cause of the fatherless, yet they prosper; and the right of the needy do they not judge.	They have grown fat and sleek, and have excelled in the deeds of the wicked. They have not taken up the cause of the fatherless, that they might prosper; nor have they defended the rights of the needy.
JER	5	29	내가 이 일들을 인하여 벌하지 아니하겠으며 내 마음이 이같은 나라에 보수하지 않겠느냐 여호와의 말이니라	Shall I not visit for these things? saith the Lord: shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?	Should I not punish them for these things?” declares the LORD. “Should I not avenge Myself on such a nation as this?
JER	5	30	이 땅에 기괴하고 놀라운 일이 있도다	A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the land;	A horrible and shocking thing has happened in the land.
JER	5	31	선지자들은 거짓을 예언하며 제사장들은 자기 권력으로 다스리며 내 백성은 그것을 좋게 여기니 그 결국에는 너희가 어찌 하려느냐	The prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests bear rule by their means; and my people love to have it so: and what will ye do in the end thereof?	The prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests rule by their own authority. My people love it so, but what will you do in the end?
JER	6	1	베냐민 자손들아 예루살렘 중에서 피난하라 드고아에서 나팔을 불고 벧학게렘에서 기호를 들라 재앙과 큰 파멸이 북방에서 엿보아 옴이니라	O ye children of Benjamin, gather yourselves to flee out of the midst of Jerusalem, and blow the trumpet in Tekoa, and set up a sign of fire in Beth–haccerem: for evil appeareth out of the north, and great destruction.	“Run for cover, O sons of Benjamin; flee from Jerusalem! Sound the ram’s horn in Tekoa; send up a signal over Beth-haccherem, for disaster looms from the north, even great destruction.
JER	6	2	아름답고 묘한 딸 시온을 내가 멸절하리니	I have likened the daughter of Zion to a comely and delicate woman.	Though she is beautiful and delicate, I will destroy the Daughter of Zion.
JER	6	3	목자들이 그 무리 양을 몰고 와서 그 사면에 자기 장막을 치고 각기 처소에서 먹이리로다	The shepherds with their flocks shall come unto her; they shall pitch their tents against her round about; they shall feed every one in his place.	Shepherds and their flocks will come against her; they will pitch their tents all around her, each tending his own portion:
JER	6	4	너희는 그를 치기를 준비하라 일어나라 우리가 정오에 올라가자 아하 아깝다 날이 기울어 저녁볕 그늘이 길었구나	Prepare ye war against her; arise, and let us go up at noon. Woe unto us! for the day goeth away, for the shadows of the evening are stretched out.	‘Prepare for battle against her; rise up, let us attack at noon. Woe to us, for the daylight is fading; the evening shadows grow long.
JER	6	5	일어나라 우리가 밤으로 올라가서 그 전각들을 헐자 하도다	Arise, and let us go by night, and let us destroy her palaces.	Rise up, let us attack by night and destroy her fortresses!’”
JER	6	6	나 만군의 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 너희는 나무를 베어서 예루살렘을 향하여 흉벽을 쌓으라 이는 벌 받을 성이라 그 중에는 오직 포학한 것뿐이니라	For thus hath the Lord of hosts said, Hew ye down trees, and cast a mount against Jerusalem: this is the city to be visited; she is wholly oppression in the midst of her.	For this is what the LORD of Hosts says: “Cut down the trees and raise a siege ramp against Jerusalem. This city must be punished; there is nothing but oppression in her midst.
JER	6	7	샘이 그 물을 솟쳐냄 같이 그가 그 악을 발하니 강포와 탈취가 거기서 들리며 질병과 창상이 내 앞에 계속하느니라	As a fountain casteth out her waters, so she casteth out her wickedness: violence and spoil is heard in her; before me continually is grief and wounds.	As a well gushes its water, so she pours out her evil. Violence and destruction resound in her; sickness and wounds are ever before Me.
JER	6	8	예루살렘아 너는 훈계를 받으라 그리하지 아니하면 내 마음이 너를 싫어하고 너로 황무케 하여 거민이 없는 땅을 만들리라	Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee; lest I make thee desolate, a land not inhabited.	Be forewarned, O Jerusalem, or I will turn away from you; I will make you a desolation, a land without inhabitant.”
JER	6	9	만군의 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 포도를 땀 같이 그들이 이스라엘의 남은 자를 말갛게 주우리라 너는 포도 따는 자처럼 네 손을 광주리에 자주자주 놀리라 하시나니	Thus saith the Lord of hosts, They shall throughly glean the remnant of Israel as a vine: turn back thine hand as a grapegatherer into the baskets.	This is what the LORD of Hosts says: “Glean the remnant of Israel as thoroughly as a vine. Pass your hand once more like a grape gatherer over the branches.”
JER	6	10	내가 누구에게 말하며 누구에게 경책하여 듣게 할꼬 보라 그 귀가 할례를 받지 못하였으므로 듣지 못하는도다 보라 여호와의 말씀을 그들이 자기에게 욕으로 여기고 이를 즐겨 아니하니	To whom shall I speak, and give warning, that they may hear? behold, their ear is uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken: behold, the word of the Lord is unto them a reproach; they have no delight in it.	To whom can I give this warning? Who will listen to me? Look, their ears are closed, so they cannot hear. See, the word of the LORD has become offensive to them; they find no pleasure in it.
JER	6	11	그러므로 여호와의 분노가 내게 가득하여 참기 어렵도다 그것을 거리에 있는 아이들과 모인 청년들에게 부으리니 지아비와 지어미와 노인과 늙은이가 다 잡히리로다	Therefore I am full of the fury of the Lord; I am weary with holding in: I will pour it out upon the children abroad, and upon the assembly of young men together: for even the husband with the wife shall be taken, the aged with him that is full of days.	But I am full of the LORD’s wrath; I am tired of holding it back. “Pour it out on the children in the street, and on the young men gathered together. For both husband and wife will be captured, the old and the very old alike.
JER	6	12	여호와께서 말씀하시되 내가 그 땅 거민에게 내 손을 펼 것인즉 그들의 집과 전지와 아내가 타인의 소유로 이전되리니	And their houses shall be turned unto others, with their fields and wives together: for I will stretch out my hand upon the inhabitants of the land, saith the Lord.	Their houses will be turned over to others, their fields and wives as well, for I will stretch out My hand against the inhabitants of the land,” declares the LORD.
JER	6	13	이는 그들이 가장 작은 자로부터 큰 자까지 다 탐남하며 선지자로부터 제사장까지 다 거짓을 행함이라	For from the least of them even unto the greatest of them every one is given to covetousness; and from the prophet even unto the priest every one dealeth falsely.	“For from the least of them to the greatest, all are greedy for gain; from prophet to priest, all practice deceit.
JER	6	14	그들이 내 백성의 상처를 심상히 고쳐 주며 말하기를 평강하다 평강하다 하나 평강이 없도다	They have healed also the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace; when there is no peace.	They dress the wound of My people with very little care, saying, ‘Peace, peace,’ when there is no peace at all.
JER	6	15	그들이 가증한 일을 행할 때에 부끄러워하였느냐 아니라 조금도 부끄러워 아니할뿐 아니라 얼굴도 붉어지지 않았느니라 그러므로 그들이 엎드러지는 자와 함께 엎드러질 것이라 내가 그들을 벌하리니 그 때에 그들이 거꾸러지리라 여호와의 말이니라	Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush: therefore they shall fall among them that fall: at the time that I visit them they shall be cast down, saith the Lord.	Are they ashamed of the abomination they have committed? No, they have no shame at all; they do not even know how to blush. So they will fall among the fallen; when I punish them, they will collapse,” says the LORD.
JER	6	16	여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 너희는 길에 서서 보며 옛적 길 곧 선한 길이 어디인지 알아보고 그리로 행하라 너희 심령이 평강을 얻으리라 하나 그들의 대답이 우리는 그리로 행치 않겠노라 하였으며	Thus saith the Lord, Stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls. But they said, We will not walk therein.	This is what the LORD says: “Stand at the crossroads and look. Ask for the ancient paths: ‘Where is the good way?’ Then walk in it, and you will find rest for your souls. But they said, ‘We will not walk in it!’
JER	6	17	내가 또 너희 위에 파수꾼을 세웠으니 나팔소리를 들으라 하나 그들의 대답이 우리는 듣지 않겠노라 하였도다	Also I set watchmen over you, saying, Hearken to the sound of the trumpet. But they said, We will not hearken.	I appointed watchmen over you and said, ‘Listen for the sound of the ram’s horn.’ But they answered, ‘We will not listen!’
JER	6	18	그러므로 너희 열방아 들으라 회중아 그들의 당할 일을 알라	Therefore hear, ye nations, and know, O congregation, what is among them.	Therefore hear, O nations, and learn, O congregations, what will happen to them.
JER	6	19	땅이여 들으라 내가 이 백성에게 재앙을 내리리니 이것이 그들의 생각의 결과라 그들이 내 말을 듣지 아니하며 내 법을 버렸음이니라	Hear, O earth: behold, I will bring evil upon this people, even the fruit of their thoughts, because they have not hearkened unto my words, nor to my law, but rejected it.	Hear, O earth! I am bringing disaster on this people, the fruit of their own schemes, because they have paid no attention to My word and have rejected My instruction.
JER	6	20	시바에서 유향과 원방에서 향품을 내게로 가져옴은 어찜이뇨 나는 그들의 번제를 받지 아니하며 그들의 희생을 달게 여기지 않노라	To what purpose cometh there to me incense from Sheba, and the sweet cane from a far country? your burnt offerings are not acceptable, nor your sacrifices sweet unto me.	What use to Me is frankincense from Sheba or sweet cane from a distant land? Your burnt offerings are not acceptable; your sacrifices do not please Me.”
JER	6	21	그러므로 나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 보라 내가 이 백성 앞에 거침을 두리니 아비와 아들들이 한 가지로 거기 거치며 이웃과 그 친구가 함께 멸망하리라	Therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will lay stumblingblocks before this people, and the fathers and the sons together shall fall upon them; the neighbour and his friend shall perish.	Therefore this is what the LORD says: “I will lay stumbling blocks before this people; fathers and sons alike will be staggered; friends and neighbors will perish.”
JER	6	22	여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 보라 한 민족이 북방에서 오며 큰 나라가 땅 끝에서부터 떨쳐 일어나나니	Thus saith the Lord, Behold, a people cometh from the north country, and a great nation shall be raised from the sides of the earth.	This is what the LORD says: “Behold, an army is coming from the land of the north; a great nation is stirred up from the ends of the earth.
JER	6	23	그들은 활과 창을 잡았고 잔인하여 자비가 없으며 그 목소리는 바다가 흉용함 같은 자라 그들이 말을 타고 전사 같이 다 항오를 벌이고 딸 시온 너를 치려하느니라 하시도다	They shall lay hold on bow and spear; they are cruel, and have no mercy; their voice roareth like the sea; and they ride upon horses, set in array as men for war against thee, O daughter of Zion.	They grasp the bow and spear; they are cruel and merciless. Their voice roars like the sea, and they ride upon horses, lined up like men in formation against you, O Daughter of Zion.”
JER	6	24	우리가 그 소문을 들었으므로 손이 약하여졌고 고통이 우리를 잡았으므로 아픔이 해산하는 여인 같도다	We have heard the fame thereof: our hands wax feeble: anguish hath taken hold of us, and pain, as of a woman in travail.	We have heard the report; our hands hang limp. Anguish has gripped us, pain like that of a woman in labor.
JER	6	25	너희는 밭에도 나가지 말라 길로도 행치 말라 대적의 칼이 있고 사방에 두려움이 있음이니라	Go not forth into the field, nor walk by the way; for the sword of the enemy and fear is on every side.	Do not go out to the fields; do not walk the road. For the enemy has a sword; terror is on every side.
JER	6	26	딸 내 백성이 굵은 베를 두르고 재에서 굴며 독자를 잃음 같이 슬퍼하며 통곡할지어다 멸망시킬 자가 홀연히 우리에게 올 것임이니라	O daughter of my people, gird thee with sackcloth, and wallow thyself in ashes: make thee mourning, as for an only son, most bitter lamentation: for the spoiler shall suddenly come upon us.	O daughter of my people, dress yourselves in sackcloth and roll in ashes. Mourn with bitter wailing, as you would for an only son, for suddenly the destroyer will come upon us.
JER	6	27	주께서 가라사대 내가 이미 너로 내 백성 중에 살피는 자와 요새를 삼아 그들의 길을 알고 살피게 하였노라	I have set thee for a tower and a fortress among my people, that thou mayest know and try their way.	“I have appointed you to examine My people like ore, so you may know and try their ways.
JER	6	28	그들은 다 심히 패역한 자며 다니며 비방하는 자며 그들은 놋과 철이며 다 사악한 자라	They are all grievous revolters, walking with slanders: they are brass and iron; they are all corrupters.	All are hardened rebels, walking around as slanderers. They are bronze and iron; all of them are corrupt.
JER	6	29	풀무를 맹렬히 불면 그 불에 납이 살라져서 단련하는 자의 일이 헛되게 되느니라 이와 같이 악한 자가 제하여지지 아니하나니	The bellows are burned, the lead is consumed of the fire; the founder melteth in vain: for the wicked are not plucked away.	The bellows blow fiercely, blasting away the lead with fire. The refining proceeds in vain, for the wicked are not purged.
JER	6	30	사람들이 그들을 내어버린 은이라 칭하게 될 것은 나 여호와가 그들을 버렸음이니라	Reprobate silver shall men call them, because the Lord hath rejected them.	They are called rejected silver, because the LORD has rejected them.”
JER	7	1	여호와께로서 예레미야에게 말씀이 임하니라 가라사대	The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying,	This is the word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD, saying,
JER	7	2	너는 여호와의 집 문에 서서 이 말을 선포하여 이르기를 여호와께 경배하러 이 문으로 들어가는 유다인아 다 여호와의 말씀을 들으라	Stand in the gate of the Lord’s house, and proclaim there this word, and say, Hear the word of the Lord, all ye of Judah, that enter in at these gates to worship the Lord.	“Stand in the gate of the house of the LORD and proclaim this message: Hear the word of the LORD, all you people of Judah who enter through these gates to worship the LORD.
JER	7	3	만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 이같이 말씀하시되 너희 길과 행위를 바르게 하라 그리하면 내가 너희로 이곳에 거하게 하리라	Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, Amend your ways and your doings, and I will cause you to dwell in this place.	Thus says the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel: Correct your ways and deeds, and I will let you live in this place.
JER	7	4	너희는 이것이 여호와의 전이라, 여호와의 전이라, 여호와의 전이라 하는 거짓말을 믿지 말라	Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The temple of the Lord, The temple of the Lord, The temple of the Lord, are these.	Do not trust in deceptive words, chanting: ‘This is the temple of the LORD, the temple of the LORD, the temple of the LORD.’
JER	7	5	너희가 만일 길과 행위를 참으로 바르게 하여 이웃들 사이에 공의를 행하며	For if ye throughly amend your ways and your doings; if ye throughly execute judgment between a man and his neighbour;	For if you really correct your ways and deeds, if you act justly toward one another,
JER	7	6	이방인과 고아와 과부를 압제하지 말며 무죄한 자의 피를 이곳에서 흘리지 아니하며 다른 신들을 좇아 스스로 해하지 아니하면	If ye oppress not the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, and shed not innocent blood in this place, neither walk after other gods to your hurt:	if you no longer oppress the foreigner and the fatherless and the widow, and if you no longer shed innocent blood in this place or follow other gods to your own harm,
JER	7	7	내가 너희를 이곳에 거하게 하리니 곧 너희 조상에게 영원 무궁히 준 이 땅에니라	Then will I cause you to dwell in this place, in the land that I gave to your fathers, for ever and ever.	then I will let you live in this place, in the land that I gave to your fathers forever and ever.
JER	7	8	너희가 무익한 거짓말을 의뢰하는도다	Behold, ye trust in lying words, that cannot profit.	But look, you keep trusting in deceptive words to no avail.
JER	7	9	너희가 도적질하며 살인하며 간음하며 거짓 맹세하며 바알에게 분향하며 너희의 알지 못하는 다른 신들을 좇으면서	Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense unto Baal, and walk after other gods whom ye know not;	Will you steal and murder, commit adultery and perjury, burn incense to Baal, and follow other gods that you have not known,
JER	7	10	내 이름으로 일컬음을 받는 이 집에 들어와서 내 앞에 서서 말하기를 우리가 구원을 얻었나이다 하느냐 이는 이 모든 가증한 일을 행하려 함이로다	And come and stand before me in this house, which is called by my name, and say, We are delivered to do all these abominations?	and then come and stand before Me in this house, which bears My Name, and say, ‘We are delivered, so we can continue with all these abominations’?
JER	7	11	내 이름으로 일컬음을 받는 이 집이 너희 눈에는 도적의 굴혈로 보이느냐 보라 나 곧 내가 그것을 보았노라 여호와의 말이니라	Is this house, which is called by my name, become a den of robbers in your eyes? Behold, even I have seen it, saith the Lord.	Has this house, which bears My Name, become a den of robbers in your sight? Yes, I too have seen it, declares the LORD.
JER	7	12	너희는 내가 처음으로 내 이름을 둔 처소 실로에 가서 내 백성 이스라엘의 악을 인하여 내가 어떻게 행한 것을 보라	But go ye now unto my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my name at the first, and see what I did to it for the wickedness of my people Israel.	But go now to the place in Shiloh where I first made a dwelling for My Name, and see what I did to it because of the wickedness of My people Israel.
JER	7	13	나 여호와가 말하노라 이제 너희가 그 모든 일을 행하였으며 내가 너희에게 말하되 새벽부터 부지런히 말하여도 듣지 아니하였고 너희를 불러도 대답지 아니하였느니라	And now, because ye have done all these works, saith the Lord, and I spake unto you, rising up early and speaking, but ye heard not; and I called you, but ye answered not;	And now, because you have done all these things, declares the LORD, and because I have spoken to you again and again but you would not listen, and I have called to you but you would not answer,
JER	7	14	그러므로 내가 실로에 행함 같이 너희가 의뢰하는 바 내 이름으로 일컬음을 받는 이 집 곧 너희와 너희 열조에게 준 이곳에 행하겠고	Therefore will I do unto this house, which is called by my name, wherein ye trust, and unto the place which I gave to you and to your fathers, as I have done to Shiloh.	therefore what I did to Shiloh I will now do to the house that bears My Name, the house in which you trust, the place that I gave to you and your fathers.
JER	7	15	내가 너희 모든 형제 곧 에브라임 온 자손을 쫓아냄 같이 내 앞에서 너희를 쫓아내리라 하셨다 할지니라	And I will cast you out of my sight, as I have cast out all your brethren, even the whole seed of Ephraim.	And I will cast you out of My presence, just as I have cast out all your brothers, all the descendants of Ephraim.
JER	7	16	그런즉 너는 이 백성을 위하여 기도하지 말라 그들을 위하여 부르짖어 구하지 말라 내게 간구하지 말라 내가 너를 듣지 아니하리라	Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to me: for I will not hear thee.	As for you, do not pray for these people, do not offer a plea or petition on their behalf, and do not beg Me, for I will not listen to you.
JER	7	17	너는 그들이 유다 성읍들과 예루살렘 거리에서 행하는 일을 보지 못하느냐	Seest thou not what they do in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem?	Do you not see what they are doing in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem?
JER	7	18	자식들은 나무를 줍고 아비들은 불을 피우며 부녀들은 가루를 반죽하여 하늘 황후를 위하여 과자를 만들며 그들이 또 다른 신들에게 전제를 부음으로 나의 노를 격동하느니라	The children gather wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead their dough, to make cakes to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto other gods, that they may provoke me to anger.	The sons gather wood, the fathers light the fire, and the women knead the dough to make cakes for the Queen of Heaven; they pour out drink offerings to other gods to provoke Me to anger.
JER	7	19	나 여호와가 말하노라 그들이 나를 격노케 함이냐 어찌 자기 얼굴에 수욕을 자취함이 아니냐	Do they provoke me to anger? saith the Lord: do they not provoke themselves to the confusion of their own faces?	But am I the One they are provoking? declares the LORD. Is it not themselves they spite, to their own shame?
JER	7	20	그러므로 주 여호와 내가 이같이 말하노라 보라 나의 진노와 분한을 이곳에 붓되 사람과 짐승과 들나무와 땅의 소산에 부으리니 불 같이 살라지고 꺼지지 아니하리라 하시니라	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Behold, mine anger and my fury shall be poured out upon this place, upon man, and upon beast, and upon the trees of the field, and upon the fruit of the ground; and it shall burn, and shall not be quenched.	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: Behold, My anger and My fury will be poured out on this place, on man and beast, on the trees of the field and the produce of the land, and it will burn and not be extinguished.
JER	7	21	만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 이같이 말씀하시되 너희 희생에 번제물을 아울러 그 고기를 먹으라	Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Put your burnt offerings unto your sacrifices, and eat flesh.	This is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: Add your burnt offerings to your other sacrifices and eat the meat yourselves!
JER	7	22	대저 내가 너희 열조를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 낸 날에 번제나 희생에 대하여 말하지 아니하며 명하지 아니하고	For I spake not unto your fathers, nor commanded them in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt offerings or sacrifices:	For when I brought your fathers out of the land of Egypt, I did not merely command them about burnt offerings and sacrifices,
JER	7	23	오직 내가 이것으로 그들에게 명하여 이르기를 너희는 내 목소리를 들으라 그리하면 나는 너희 하나님이 되겠고 너희는 내 백성이 되리라 너희는 나의 명한 모든 길로 행하라 그리하면 복을 받으리라 하였으나	But this thing commanded I them, saying, Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people: and walk ye in all the ways that I have commanded you, that it may be well unto you.	but this is what I commanded them: Obey Me, and I will be your God, and you will be My people. You must walk in all the ways I have commanded you, so that it may go well with you.
JER	7	24	그들이 청종치 아니하며 귀를 기울이지도 아니하고 자기의 악한 마음의 꾀와 강퍅한 대로 행하여 그 등을 내게로 향하고 그 얼굴을 향치 아니하였으며	But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear, but walked in the counsels and in the imagination of their evil heart, and went backward, and not forward.	Yet they did not listen or incline their ear, but they followed the stubborn inclinations of their own evil hearts. They went backward and not forward.
JER	7	25	너희 열조가 애굽 땅에서 나온 날부터 오늘까지 내가 내 종 선지자들을 너희에게 보내었으되 부지런히 보내었으나	Since the day that your fathers came forth out of the land of Egypt unto this day I have even sent unto you all my servants the prophets, daily rising up early and sending them:	From the day your fathers came out of the land of Egypt until this day, I have sent you all My servants the prophets again and again.
JER	7	26	너희가 나를 청종치 아니하며 귀를 기울이지 아니하고 목을 굳게 하여 너희 열조보다 악을 더 행하였느니라	Yet they hearkened not unto me, nor inclined their ear, but hardened their neck: they did worse than their fathers.	Yet they would not listen to Me or incline their ear, but they stiffened their necks and did more evil than their fathers.
JER	7	27	네가 그들에게 이 모든 말을 할지라도 그들이 너를 청종치 아니할 것이요 네가 그들을 불러도 그들이 네게 대답지 아니하리니	Therefore thou shalt speak all these words unto them; but they will not hearken to thee: thou shalt also call unto them; but they will not answer thee.	When you tell them all these things, they will not listen to you. When you call to them, they will not answer.
JER	7	28	너는 그들에게 말하기를 너희는 너희 하나님 여호와의 목소리를 청종치 아니하며 교훈을 받지 아니하는 국민이라 진실이 없어져 너희 입에서 끊어졌다 할지니라	But thou shalt say unto them, This is a nation that obeyeth not the voice of the Lord their God, nor receiveth correction: truth is perished, and is cut off from their mouth.	Therefore you must say to them, ‘This is the nation that would not listen to the voice of the LORD their God and would not receive correction. Truth has perished; it has disappeared from their lips.
JER	7	29	예루살렘아 너의 머리털을 베어 버리고 자산 위에서 호곡할지어다 여호와께서 그 노하신 바 이 세대를 끊어버리셨음이니라	Cut off thine hair, O Jerusalem, and cast it away, and take up a lamentation on high places; for the Lord hath rejected and forsaken the generation of his wrath.	Cut off your hair and throw it away. Raise up a lamentation on the barren heights, for the LORD has rejected and forsaken the generation of His wrath.’
JER	7	30	여호와께서 말씀하시되 유다 자손이 나의 목전에 악을 행하여 내이름으로 일컬음을 받는 집에 그들의 가증한 것을 두어 집을 더럽혔으며	For the children of Judah have done evil in my sight, saith the Lord: they have set their abominations in the house which is called by my name, to pollute it.	For the people of Judah have done evil in My sight, declares the LORD. They have set up their abominations in the house that bears My Name, and so have defiled it.
JER	7	31	힌놈의 아들 골짜기에 도벳 사당을 건축하고 그 자녀를 불에 살랐나니 내가 명하지 아니하였고 내 마음에 생각지도 아니한 일이니라	And they have built the high places of Tophet, which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their sons and their daughters in the fire; which I commanded them not, neither came it into my heart.	They have built the high places of Topheth in the Valley of Hinnom so they could burn their sons and daughters in the fire—something I never commanded, nor did it even enter My mind.
JER	7	32	그러므로 나 여호와가 말하노라 날이 이르면 이곳을 도벳이라 하거나 힌놈의 아들의 골짜기라 칭하지 아니하고 살륙의 골짜기라 칭하리니 매장할 자리가 없도록 도벳에 장사함을 인함이니라	Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that it shall no more be called Tophet, nor the valley of the son of Hinnom, but the valley of slaughter: for they shall bury in Tophet, till there be no place.	So behold, the days are coming, declares the LORD, when this place will no longer be called Topheth and the Valley of Hinnom, but the Valley of Slaughter. For they will bury the dead in Topheth until there is no more room.
JER	7	33	이 백성의 시체가 공중의 새와 땅 짐승의 밥이 될 것이나 그것을 쫓을 자가 없을 것이라	And the carcases of this people shall be meat for the fowls of the heaven, and for the beasts of the earth; and none shall fray them away.	The corpses of this people will become food for the birds of the air and the beasts of the earth, and there will be no one to scare them away.
JER	7	34	그 때에 내가 유다 성읍들과 예루살렘 거리에 기뻐하는 소리, 즐기는 소리, 신랑의 소리, 신부의 소리가 끊쳐지게 하리니 땅이 황폐하리라	Then will I cause to cease from the cities of Judah, and from the streets of Jerusalem, the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride: for the land shall be desolate.	I will remove from the cities of Judah and the streets of Jerusalem the sounds of joy and gladness and the voices of the bride and bridegroom, for the land will become a wasteland.”
JER	8	1	나 여호와가 말하노라 그 때에 사람들이 유다 왕들의 뼈와 그 방백들의 뼈와 제사장들의 뼈와 선지자들의 뼈와 예루살렘 거민의 뼈를 그 묘실에서 끌어내어	At that time, saith the Lord, they shall bring out the bones of the kings of Judah, and the bones of his princes, and the bones of the priests, and the bones of the prophets, and the bones of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, out of their graves:	“At that time,” declares the LORD, “the bones of the kings of Judah, the bones of the officials, the bones of the priests, the bones of the prophets, and the bones of the people of Jerusalem will be removed from their graves.
JER	8	2	그들의 사랑하며 섬기며 순종하며 구하며 경배하던 해와 달과 하늘의 뭇 별 아래 쬐리니 그 뼈가 거두이거나 묻히지 못하여 지면에서 분토 같을 것이며	And they shall spread them before the sun, and the moon, and all the host of heaven, whom they have loved, and whom they have served, and after whom they have walked, and whom they have sought, and whom they have worshipped: they shall not be gathered, nor be buried; they shall be for dung upon the face of the earth.	They will be exposed to the sun and moon, and to all the host of heaven which they have loved, served, followed, consulted, and worshiped. Their bones will not be gathered up or buried, but will become like dung lying on the ground.
JER	8	3	이 악한 족속의 남아 있는 자, 무릇 내게 쫓겨나서 각처에 남아 있는 자가 사는 것보다 죽는 것을 원하리라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라	And death shall be chosen rather than life by all the residue of them that remain of this evil family, which remain in all the places whither I have driven them, saith the Lord of hosts.	And wherever I have banished them, the remnant of this evil family will choose death over life,” declares the LORD of Hosts.
JER	8	4	너는 또 그들에게 말하기를 여호와의 말씀에 사람이 엎드러지면 어찌 일어나지 아니하겠으며 사람이 떠나갔으면 어찌 돌아오지 아니하겠느냐	Moreover thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord; Shall they fall, and not arise? shall he turn away, and not return?	So you are to tell them this is what the LORD says: “Do men fall and not get up again? Does one turn away and not return?
JER	8	5	이 예루살렘 백성이 항상 나를 떠나 물러감은 어찜이뇨 그들이 거짓을 고집하고 돌아오기를 거절하도다	Why then is this people of Jerusalem slidden back by a perpetual backsliding? they hold fast deceit, they refuse to return.	Why then have these people turned away? Why does Jerusalem always turn away? They cling to deceit; they refuse to return.
JER	8	6	내가 귀를 기울여 들은즉 그들이 정직을 말하지 아니하며 그 악을 뉘우쳐서 나의 행한 것이 무엇인고 말하는 자가 없고 전장을 향하여 달리는 말 같이 각각 그 길로 행하도다	I hearkened and heard, but they spake not aright: no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? every one turned to his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle.	I have listened and heard; they do not speak what is right. No one repents of his wickedness, asking, ‘What have I done?’ Everyone has pursued his own course like a horse charging into battle.
JER	8	7	공중의 학은 그 정한 시기를 알고 반구와 제비와 두루미는 그 올 때를 지키거늘 내 백성은 여호와의 규례를 알지 못하도다 하셨다 하라	Yea, the stork in the heaven knoweth her appointed times; and the turtle and the crane and the swallow observe the time of their coming; but my people know not the judgment of the Lord.	Even the stork in the sky knows her appointed seasons. The turtledove, the swift, and the thrush keep their time of migration, but My people do not know the requirements of the LORD.
JER	8	8	너희가 어찌 우리는 지혜가 있고 우리에게는 여호와의 율법이 있다 말하겠느뇨 참으로 서기관의 거짓 붓이 거짓되게 하였나니	How do ye say, We are wise, and the law of the Lord is with us? Lo, certainly in vain made he it; the pen of the scribes is in vain.	How can you say, ‘We are wise, and the Law of the LORD is with us,’ when in fact the lying pen of the scribes has produced a deception?
JER	8	9	지혜롭다 하는 자들은 수욕을 받으며 경황 중에 잡히리라 보라 그들이 나 여호와의 말을 버렸으니 그들에게 무슨 지혜가 있으랴	The wise men are ashamed, they are dismayed and taken: lo, they have rejected the word of the Lord; and what wisdom is in them?	The wise will be put to shame; they will be dismayed and trapped. Since they have rejected the word of the LORD, what wisdom do they really have?
JER	8	10	그러므로 내가 그들의 아내를 타인에게 주겠고 그들의 전지를 그 차지할 자들에게 주리니 그들은 가장 작은 자로부터 큰 자까지 다 탐남하며 선지자로부터 제사장까지 다 거짓을 행함이라	Therefore will I give their wives unto others, and their fields to them that shall inherit them: for every one from the least even unto the greatest is given to covetousness, from the prophet even unto the priest every one dealeth falsely.	Therefore I will give their wives to other men and their fields to new owners. For from the least of them to the greatest, all are greedy for gain; from prophet to priest, all practice deceit.
JER	8	11	그들이 딸 내 백성의 상처를 심상히 고쳐주며 말하기를 평강하다, 평강하다 하나 평강이 없도다	For they have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace; when there is no peace.	They dress the wound of the daughter of My people with very little care, saying, ‘Peace, peace,’ when there is no peace at all.
JER	8	12	그들이 가증한 일을 행할 때에 부끄러워하였느냐 아니라 조금도 부끄러워 아니할 뿐 아니라 얼굴도 붉어지지 아니하였느니라 그러므로 그들이 엎드러질 자와 함께 엎드러질 것이라 내가 그들을 벌할 때에 그들이 거꾸러지리라 여호와의 말이니라	Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush: therefore shall they fall among them that fall: in the time of their visitation they shall be cast down, saith the Lord.	Are they ashamed of the abomination they have committed? No, they have no shame at all; they do not even know how to blush. So they will fall among the fallen; when I punish them, they will collapse, says the LORD.
JER	8	13	여호와께서 말씀하시되 내가 그들을 진멸하리니 포도나무에 포도가 없을 것이며 무화과 나무에 무화과가 없을 것이며 그 잎사귀가 마를 것이라 내가 그들에게 준 것이 없어지리라 하셨나니	I will surely consume them, saith the Lord: there shall be no grapes on the vine, nor figs on the fig tree, and the leaf shall fade; and the things that I have given them shall pass away from them.	I will take away their harvest, declares the LORD. There will be no grapes on the vine, nor figs on the tree, and even the leaf will wither. Whatever I have given them will be lost to them.”
JER	8	14	우리가 어찌 가만히 앉았으랴 모일지어다 우리가 견고한 성읍들로나 들어가서 거기서 멸망하자 우리가 여호와께 범죄하였으므로 우리 하나님 여호와께서 우리를 멸하시며 우리에게 독한 물을 마시우심이니라	Why do we sit still? assemble yourselves, and let us enter into the defenced cities, and let us be silent there: for the Lord our God hath put us to silence, and given us water of gall to drink, because we have sinned against the Lord.	Why are we just sitting here? Gather together, let us flee to the fortified cities and perish there, for the LORD our God has doomed us. He has given us poisoned water to drink, because we have sinned against the LORD.
JER	8	15	우리가 평강을 바라나 좋은 것이 없으며 고치심을 입을 때를 바라나 놀라움뿐이로다	We looked for peace, but no good came; and for a time of health, and behold trouble!	We hoped for peace, but no good has come, for a time of healing, but there was only terror.
JER	8	16	그 말의 부르짖음이 단에서부터 들리고 그 준마들의 우는 소리에 온 땅이 진동하며 그들이 이르러 이 땅과 그 소유와 성읍과 그 중의 거민을 삼켰도다	The snorting of his horses was heard from Dan: the whole land trembled at the sound of the neighing of his strong ones; for they are come, and have devoured the land, and all that is in it; the city, and those that dwell therein.	The snorting of enemy horses is heard from Dan. At the sound of the neighing of mighty steeds, the whole land quakes. They come to devour the land and everything in it, the city and all who dwell in it.
JER	8	17	여호와께서 말씀하시되 내가 술법으로도 제어할 수 없는 뱀과 독사를 너희 중에 보내리니 그것들이 너희를 물리라 하시도다	For, behold, I will send serpents, cockatrices, among you, which will not be charmed, and they shall bite you, saith the Lord.	“For behold, I will send snakes among you, vipers that cannot be charmed, and they will bite you,” declares the LORD.
JER	8	18	슬프다 나의 근심이여 어떻게 위로를 얻을 수 있을까 나의 중심이 번뇌하도다	When I would comfort myself against sorrow, my heart is faint in me.	My sorrow is beyond healing; my heart is faint within me.
JER	8	19	딸 내 백성의 심히 먼 땅에서 부르짖는 소리로다 이르기를 여호와께서 시온에 계시지 아니한가 그 왕이 그 중에 계시지 아니한가 그러나 여호와께서는 이르시기를 그들이 어찌하여 그 조각한 신상과 이방의 헛된 것들로 나를 격노케 하였는고 하시니	Behold the voice of the cry of the daughter of my people because of them that dwell in a far country: Is not the Lord in Zion? is not her king in her? Why have they provoked me to anger with their graven images, and with strange vanities?	Listen to the cry of the daughter of my people from a land far away: “Is the LORD no longer in Zion? Is her King no longer there?” “Why have they provoked Me to anger with their carved images, with their worthless foreign idols?”
JER	8	20	추수할 때가 지나고 여름이 다하였으나 우리는 구원을 얻지 못한다 하는도다	The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and we are not saved.	“The harvest has passed, the summer has ended, but we have not been saved.”
JER	8	21	딸 내 백성이 상하였으므로 나도 상하여 슬퍼하며 놀라움에 잡혔도다	For the hurt of the daughter of my people am I hurt; I am black; astonishment hath taken hold on me.	For the brokenness of the daughter of my people I am crushed. I mourn; horror has gripped me.
JER	8	22	길르앗에는 유향이 있지 아니한가 그곳에는 의사가 있지 아니한가 딸 내 백성이 치료를 받지 못함은 어찜인고	Is there no balm in Gilead; is there no physician there? why then is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered?	Is there no balm in Gilead? Is no physician there? Why then has the health of the daughter of my people not been restored?
JER	9	1	어찌하면 내 머리는 물이 되고 내 눈은 눈물 근원이 될꼬 그렇게 되면 살륙 당한 딸 내 백성을 위하여 주야로 곡읍하리로다	Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people!	Oh, that my head were a spring of water, and my eyes a fountain of tears! I would weep day and night over the slain daughter of my people.
JER	9	2	어찌하면 내가 광야에서 나그네의 유할 곳을 얻을꼬 그렇게 되면 내 백성을 떠나 가리니 그들은 다 행음하는 자요 패역한 자의 무리가 됨이로다	Oh that I had in the wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring men; that I might leave my people, and go from them! for they be all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men.	If only I had a traveler’s lodge in the wilderness, I would abandon my people and depart from them, for they are all adulterers, a crowd of faithless people.
JER	9	3	여호와께서 말씀하시되 그들이 활을 당김 같이 그 혀를 놀려 거짓을 말하며 그들이 이 땅에서 강성하나 진실하지 아니하고 악에서 악으로 진행하며 또 나를 알지 아니하느니라	And they bend their tongues like their bow for lies: but they are not valiant for the truth upon the earth; for they proceed from evil to evil, and they know not me, saith the Lord.	“They bend their tongues like bows; lies prevail over truth in the land. For they proceed from evil to evil, and they do not take Me into account,” declares the LORD.
JER	9	4	너희는 각기 이웃을 삼가며 아무 형제든지 믿지 말라 형제마다 온전히 속이며 이웃마다 다니며 비방함이니라	Take ye heed every one of his neighbour, and trust ye not in any brother: for every brother will utterly supplant, and every neighbour will walk with slanders.	“Let everyone guard against his neighbor; do not trust any brother, for every brother deals craftily, and every friend spreads slander.
JER	9	5	그들은 각기 이웃을 속이며 진실을 말하지 아니하며 그 혀로 거짓말 하기를 가르치며 악을 행하기에 수고하거늘	And they will deceive every one his neighbour, and will not speak the truth: they have taught their tongue to speak lies, and weary themselves to commit iniquity.	Each one betrays his friend; no one tells the truth. They have taught their tongues to lie; they wear themselves out committing iniquity.
JER	9	6	네 처소는 궤휼 가운데 있도다 그들은 궤휼로 인하여 나 알기를 싫어하느니라 나 여호와의 말이니라 하시니라	Thine habitation is in the midst of deceit; through deceit they refuse to know me, saith the Lord.	You dwell in the midst of deception; in their deceit they refuse to know Me,” declares the LORD.
JER	9	7	만군의 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 보라 내가 내 딸 백성을 어떻게 처치할꼬 그들을 녹이고 연단하리라	Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, Behold, I will melt them, and try them; for how shall I do for the daughter of my people?	Therefore this is what the LORD of Hosts says: “Behold, I will refine them and test them, for what else can I do because of the daughter of My people?
JER	9	8	그들의 혀는 죽이는 살이라 거짓을 말하며 입으로는 그 이웃에게 평화를 말하나 중심에는 해를 도모하는도다	Their tongue is as an arrow shot out; it speaketh deceit: one speaketh peaceably to his neighbour with his mouth, but in heart he layeth his wait.	Their tongues are deadly arrows; they speak deception. With his mouth a man speaks peace to his neighbor, but in his heart he sets a trap for him.
JER	9	9	내가 이 일들을 인하여 그들에게 벌하지 아니하겠으며 내 마음이 이런 나라에 보수하지 않겠느냐 여호와의 말이니라	Shall I not visit them for these things? saith the Lord: shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?	Should I not punish them for these things? declares the LORD. Should I not avenge Myself on such a nation as this?”
JER	9	10	내가 산들을 위하여 곡하며 부르짖으며 광야 목장을 위하여 슬퍼하나니 이는 그것들이 불에 탔으므로 지나는 자가 없으며 거기서 가축의 소리가 들리지 아니하며 공중의 새도 짐승도 다 도망하여 없어졌음이니라	For the mountains will I take up a weeping and wailing, and for the habitations of the wilderness a lamentation, because they are burned up, so that none can pass through them; neither can men hear the voice of the cattle; both the fowl of the heavens and the beast are fled; they are gone.	I will take up a weeping and wailing for the mountains, a dirge over the wilderness pasture, for they have been scorched so no one passes through, and the lowing of cattle is not heard. Both the birds of the air and the beasts have fled; they have gone away.
JER	9	11	내가 예루살렘으로 무더기를 만들며 시랑의 굴혈이 되게 하겠고 유다 성읍들로 황폐케 하여 거민이 없게 하리라	And I will make Jerusalem heaps, and a den of dragons; and I will make the cities of Judah desolate, without an inhabitant.	“And I will make Jerusalem a heap of rubble, a haunt for jackals; and I will make the cities of Judah a desolation, without inhabitant.”
JER	9	12	지혜가 있어서 이 일을 깨달을 만한 자가 누구며 여호와의 입의 말씀을 받아서 광포할 자가 누구인고 이 땅이 어찌하여 멸망하여 광야 같이 타서 지나는 자가 없게 되었느뇨	Who is the wise man, that may understand this? and who is he to whom the mouth of the Lord hath spoken, that he may declare it, for what the land perisheth and is burned up like a wilderness, that none passeth through?	Who is the man wise enough to understand this? To whom has the mouth of the LORD spoken, that he may explain it? Why is the land destroyed and scorched like a desert, so no one can pass through it?
JER	9	13	여호와께서 말씀하시되 이는 그들이 내가 그들의 앞에 세운 나의 법을 버리고 내 목소리를 청종치 아니하며 그대로 행치 아니하고	And the Lord saith, Because they have forsaken my law which I set before them, and have not obeyed my voice, neither walked therein;	And the LORD answered, “It is because they have forsaken My law, which I set before them; they have not walked in it or obeyed My voice.
JER	9	14	그 마음의 강퍅함을 따라 그 열조가 자기에게 가르친 바알들을 좇았음이라	But have walked after the imagination of their own heart, and after Baalim, which their fathers taught them:	Instead, they have followed the stubbornness of their hearts and gone after the Baals, as their fathers taught them.”
JER	9	15	그러므로 만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님 내가 말하노라 보라 내가 그들 곧 이 백성에게 쑥을 먹이며 독한 물을 마시우고	Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will feed them, even this people, with wormwood, and give them water of gall to drink.	Therefore this is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: “Behold, I will feed this people wormwood and give them poisoned water to drink.
JER	9	16	그들과 그들의 조상이 알지 못하던 열국 중에 그들을 헤치고 진멸되기까지 그 뒤로 칼을 보내리라 하셨느니라	I will scatter them also among the heathen, whom neither they nor their fathers have known: and I will send a sword after them, till I have consumed them.	I will scatter them among the nations that neither they nor their fathers have known, and I will send a sword after them until I have finished them off.”
JER	9	17	만군의 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 너희는 잘 생각하고 곡하는 부녀를 불러오며 또 보내어 지혜로운 부녀를 불러오되	Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Consider ye, and call for the mourning women, that they may come; and send for cunning women, that they may come:	This is what the LORD of Hosts says: “Take note, and summon the wailing women; send for the most skillful among them.
JER	9	18	그들로 빨리 와서 우리를 위하여 애곡하게 하여 우리의 눈에서 눈물이 떨어지게 하며 우리 눈꺼풀에서 물이 쏟아지게 하라	And let them make haste, and take up a wailing for us, that our eyes may run down with tears, and our eyelids gush out with waters.	Let them come quickly and take up a lament over us, that our eyes may overflow with tears, and our eyelids may gush with water.
JER	9	19	이는 시온에서 호곡하는 소리가 들려 이르기를 우리가 아주 망하였구나 우리가 크게 수욕을 당하였구나 우리가 그 땅을 떠난 것은 그들이 우리 주택을 헐었음이로다 함이로다	For a voice of wailing is heard out of Zion, How are we spoiled! we are greatly confounded, because we have forsaken the land, because our dwellings have cast us out.	For the sound of wailing is heard from Zion: ‘How devastated we are! How great is our shame! For we have abandoned the land because our dwellings have been torn down.’”
JER	9	20	부녀들이여 여호와의 말씀을 들으라 너희 귀에 그 입의 말씀을 받으라 너희 딸 들에게 애곡을 가르치며 각기 이웃에게 애가를 가르치라	Yet hear the word of the Lord, O ye women, and let your ear receive the word of his mouth, and teach your daughters wailing, and every one her neighbour lamentation.	Now, O women, hear the word of the LORD. Open your ears to the word of His mouth. Teach your daughters to wail, and one another to lament.
JER	9	21	대저 사망이 우리 창문에 올라오며 우리 궁실에 들어오며 밖에서는 자녀와 거리에서는 청년들을 멸절하려 하느니라	For death is come up into our windows, and is entered into our palaces, to cut off the children from without, and the young men from the streets.	For death has climbed in through our windows; it has entered our fortresses to cut off the children from the streets, the young men from the town squares.
JER	9	22	너는 이같이 이르라 여호와의 말씀에 사람의 시체가 분토 같이 들에 떨어질 것이며 추수하는 자의 뒤에 떨어지고 거두지 못한 뭇 같이 되리라 하셨느니라	Speak, Thus saith the Lord, Even the carcases of men shall fall as dung upon the open field, and as the handful after the harvestman, and none shall gather them.	Declare that this is what the LORD says: “The corpses of men will fall like dung upon the open field, like newly cut grain behind the reaper, with no one to gather it.”
JER	9	23	여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 지혜로운 자는 그 지혜를 자랑치 말라 용사는 그 용맹을 자랑치 말라 부자는 그 부함을 자랑치 말라	Thus saith the Lord, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches:	This is what the LORD says: “Let not the wise man boast in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength, nor the wealthy man in his riches.
JER	9	24	자랑하는 자는 이것으로 자랑할지니 곧 명철하여 나를 아는 것과 나 여호와는 인애와 공평과 정직을 땅에 행하는 자인줄 깨닫는 것이라 나는 이 일을 기뻐하노라 여호와의 말이니라	But let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me, that I am the Lord which exercise lovingkindness, judgment, and righteousness, in the earth: for in these things I delight, saith the Lord.	But let him who boasts boast in this, that he understands and knows Me, that I am the LORD, who exercises loving devotion, justice and righteousness on the earth— for I delight in these things,” declares the LORD.
JER	9	25	여호와께서 말씀하시되 날이 이르면 할례 받은 자와 할례 받지 못한 자를 내가 다 벌하리니	Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will punish all them which are circumcised with the uncircumcised;	“Behold, the days are coming,” declares the LORD, “when I will punish all who are circumcised yet uncircumcised:
JER	9	26	곧 애굽과 유다와 에돔과 암몬 자손과 모압과 및 광야에 거하여 그 머리털을 모지게 깎은 자들에게라 대저 열방은 할례를 받지 못하였고 이스라엘은 마음에 할례를 받지 못하였느니라 하셨느니라	Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, and the children of Ammon, and Moab, and all that are in the utmost corners, that dwell in the wilderness: for all these nations are uncircumcised, and all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in the heart.	Egypt, Judah, Edom, Ammon, Moab, and all the inhabitants of the desert who clip the hair of their temples. For all these nations are uncircumcised, and the whole house of Israel is uncircumcised in heart.”
JER	10	1	이스라엘 집이여 여호와께서 너희에게 이르시는 말씀을 들을지어다	Hear ye the word which the Lord speaketh unto you, O house of Israel:	Hear the word that the LORD speaks to you, O house of Israel.
JER	10	2	여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 열방의 길을 배우지 말라 열방인은 하늘의 징조를 두려워하거니와 너희는 그것을 두려워 말라	Thus saith the Lord, Learn not the way of the heathen, and be not dismayed at the signs of heaven; for the heathen are dismayed at them.	This is what the LORD says: “Do not learn the ways of the nations or be terrified by the signs in the heavens, though the nations themselves are terrified by them.
JER	10	3	열방의 규례는 헛된 것이라 그 위하는 것은 삼림에서 벤 나무요 공장의 손이 도끼로 만든 것이라	For the customs of the people are vain: for one cutteth a tree out of the forest, the work of the hands of the workman, with the axe.	For the customs of the peoples are worthless; they cut down a tree from the forest; it is shaped with a chisel by the hands of a craftsman.
JER	10	4	그들이 은과 금으로 그것에 꾸미고 못과 장도리로 그것을 든든히 하여 요동치 않게 하나니	They deck it with silver and with gold; they fasten it with nails and with hammers, that it move not.	They adorn it with silver and gold and fasten it with hammer and nails, so that it will not totter.
JER	10	5	그것이 갈린 기둥 같아서 말도 못하며 걸어 다니지도 못하므로 사람에게 메임을 입느니라 그것이 화를 주거나 복을 주지 못하나니 너희는 두려워 말라 하셨느니라	They are upright as the palm tree, but speak not: they must needs be borne, because they cannot go. Be not afraid of them; for they cannot do evil, neither also is it in them to do good.	Like scarecrows in a cucumber patch, their idols cannot speak. They must be carried because they cannot walk. Do not fear them, for they can do no harm, and neither can they do any good.”
JER	10	6	여호와여 주와 같은 자 없나이다 주는 크시니 주의 이름이 그 권능으로 인하여 크시니이다	Forasmuch as there is none like unto thee, O Lord; thou art great, and thy name is great in might.	There is none like You, O LORD. You are great, and Your name is mighty in power.
JER	10	7	열방의 왕이시여 주를 경외치 아니할 자가 누구리이까 이는 주께 당연한 일이라 열방의 지혜로운 자들과 왕족 중에 주와 같은 자 없음이니이다	Who would not fear thee, O King of nations? for to thee doth it appertain: forasmuch as among all the wise men of the nations, and in all their kingdoms, there is none like unto thee.	Who would not fear You, O King of nations? This is Your due. For among all the wise men of the nations, and in all their kingdoms, there is none like You.
JER	10	8	그들은 다 무지하고 어리석은 것이니 우상의 도는 나무뿐이라	But they are altogether brutish and foolish: the stock is a doctrine of vanities.	But they are altogether senseless and foolish, instructed by worthless idols made of wood!
JER	10	9	다시스에서 가져온 은박과 우바스에서 가져온 금으로 꾸미되 공장과 장색의 손으로 만들었고 청색 자색 감으로 그 옷을 삼았나니 이는 공교한 사람의 만든 것이어니와	Silver spread into plates is brought from Tarshish, and gold from Uphaz, the work of the workman, and of the hands of the founder: blue and purple is their clothing: they are all the work of cunning men.	Hammered silver is brought from Tarshish, and gold from Uphaz— the work of a craftsman from the hands of a goldsmith. Their clothes are blue and purple, all fashioned by skilled workers.
JER	10	10	오직 여호와는 참 하나님이시요 사시는 하나님이시요 영원한 왕이시라 그 진노하심에 땅이 진동하며 그 분노하심을 열방이 능히 당치 못하느니라	But the Lord is the true God, he is the living God, and an everlasting king: at his wrath the earth shall tremble, and the nations shall not be able to abide his indignation.	But the LORD is the true God; He is the living God and eternal King. The earth quakes at His wrath, and the nations cannot endure His indignation.
JER	10	11	너희는 이같이 그들에게 이르기를 천지를 짓지 아니한 신들은 땅 위에서, 이 하늘 아래서 망하리라 하라	Thus shall ye say unto them, The gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, even they shall perish from the earth, and from under these heavens.	Thus you are to tell them: “These gods, who have made neither the heavens nor the earth, will perish from this earth and from under these heavens.”
JER	10	12	여호와께서 그 권능으로 땅을 지으셨고 그 지혜로 세계를 세우셨고 그 명철로 하늘들을 펴셨으며	He hath made the earth by his power, he hath established the world by his wisdom, and hath stretched out the heavens by his discretion.	The LORD made the earth by His power; He established the world by His wisdom and stretched out the heavens by His understanding.
JER	10	13	그가 목소리를 발하신즉 하늘에 많은 물이 생기나니 그는 땅 끝에서 구름이 오르게 하시며 비를 위하여 번개하게 하시며 그 곳간에서 바람을 내시거늘	When he uttereth his voice, there is a multitude of waters in the heavens, and he causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth; he maketh lightnings with rain, and bringeth forth the wind out of his treasures.	When He thunders, the waters in the heavens roar; He causes the clouds to rise from the ends of the earth. He generates the lightning with the rain and brings forth the wind from His storehouses.
JER	10	14	사람마다 우준하고 무식하도다 금장색마다 자기의 조각한 신상으로 인하여 수치를 당하나니 이는 그 부어 만든 우상은 거짓 것이요 그 속에 생기가 없음이라	Every man is brutish in his knowledge: every founder is confounded by the graven image: for his molten image is falsehood, and there is no breath in them.	Every man is senseless and devoid of knowledge; every goldsmith is put to shame by his idols. For his molten images are a fraud, and there is no breath in them.
JER	10	15	그것들은 헛 것이요 망령되이 만든 것인즉 징벌하실 때에 멸망할 것이나	They are vanity, and the work of errors: in the time of their visitation they shall perish.	They are worthless, a work to be mocked. In the time of their punishment they will perish.
JER	10	16	야곱의 분깃은 이같지 아니하시니 그는 만물의 조성자요 이스라엘은 그 산업의 지파라 그 이름은 만군의 여호와시니라	The portion of Jacob is not like them: for he is the former of all things; and Israel is the rod of his inheritance: The Lord of hosts is his name.	The Portion of Jacob is not like these, for He is the Maker of all things, and Israel is the tribe of His inheritance— the LORD of Hosts is His name.
JER	10	17	에워싸인 가운데 앉은 자여 네 꾸러미를 이 땅에서 수습하라	Gather up thy wares out of the land, O inhabitant of the fortress.	Gather up your belongings from this land, you who live under siege.
JER	10	18	여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 보라 내가 이 땅에 거하는 자를 이번에는 내어던질 것이라 그들을 괴롭게 하여 깨닫게 하리라 하셨느니라	For thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will sling out the inhabitants of the land at this once, and will distress them, that they may find it so.	For this is what the LORD says: “Behold, at this time I will sling out the inhabitants of the land and bring distress upon them so that they may be captured.”
JER	10	19	슬프다 내 상처여 내가 중상을 당하였도다 그러나 내가 말하노라 이는 참으로 나의 고난이라 내가 참아야 하리로다	Woe is me for my hurt! my wound is grievous: but I said, Truly this is a grief, and I must bear it.	Woe to me because of my brokenness; my wound is grievous! But I said, “This is truly my sickness, and I must bear it.”
JER	10	20	내 장막이 훼파되고 나의 모든 줄이 끊어졌으며 내 자녀가 나를 떠나가고 있지 아니하니 내 장막을 세울 자와 내 장을 칠 자가 다시 없도다	My tabernacle is spoiled, and all my cords are broken: my children are gone forth of me, and they are not: there is none to stretch forth my tent any more, and to set up my curtains.	My tent is destroyed, and all its ropes are snapped. My sons have departed from me and are no more. I have no one left to pitch my tent or set up my curtains.
JER	10	21	목자들은 우준하여 여호와를 찾지 아니하므로 형통치 못하며 그 모든 양떼는 흩어졌도다	For the pastors are become brutish, and have not sought the Lord: therefore they shall not prosper, and all their flocks shall be scattered.	For the shepherds have become senseless; they do not seek the LORD. Therefore they have not prospered, and all their flock is scattered.
JER	10	22	들을지어다 북방에서부터 크게 떠드는 풍성이 오니 유다 성읍들로 황폐케 하여 시랑의 거처가 되게 하리로다	Behold, the noise of the bruit is come, and a great commotion out of the north country, to make the cities of Judah desolate, and a den of dragons.	Listen! The sound of a report is coming— a great commotion from the land to the north. The cities of Judah will be made a desolation, a haunt for jackals.
JER	10	23	여호와여 내가 알거니와 인생의 길이 자기에게 있지 아니하니 걸음을 지도함이 걷는 자에게 있지 아니하니이다	O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself: it is not in man that walketh to direct his steps.	I know, O LORD, that a man’s way is not his own; no one who walks directs his own steps.
JER	10	24	여호와여 나를 징계하옵시되 너그러이 하시고 진노로 하지 마옵소서 주께서 나로 없어지게 하실까 두려워하나이다	O Lord, correct me, but with judgment; not in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing.	Correct me, O LORD, but only with justice— not in Your anger, or You will bring me to nothing.
JER	10	25	주를 알지 못하는 열방과 주의 이름으로 기도하지 아니하는 족속들에게 주의 분노를 부으소서 그들은 야곱을 씹어 삼켜 멸하고 그 거처를 황폐케 하였나이다	Pour out thy fury upon the heathen that know thee not, and upon the families that call not on thy name: for they have eaten up Jacob, and devoured him, and consumed him, and have made his habitation desolate.	Pour out Your wrath on the nations that do not acknowledge You, and on the families that do not call on Your name. For they have devoured Jacob; they have consumed him and finished him off; they have devastated his homeland.
JER	11	1	여호와께로부터 예레미야에게 임한 말씀이라 가라사대	The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying,	This is the word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD:
JER	11	2	너희는 이 언약의 말을 듣고 유다인과 예루살렘 거민에게 고하라	Hear ye the words of this covenant, and speak unto the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem;	“Listen to the words of this covenant and tell them to the men of Judah and the residents of Jerusalem.
JER	11	3	그들에게 이르기를 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 이 언약의 말을 좇지 않는 자는 저주를 받을 것이니라	And say thou unto them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel; Cursed be the man that obeyeth not the words of this covenant,	You must tell them that this is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: Cursed is the man who does not obey the words of this covenant,
JER	11	4	이 언약은 내가 너희 열조를 쇠풀무 애굽 땅에서 이끌어 내던 날에 그들에게 명한 것이라 곧 내가 이르기를 너희는 나의 목소리를 청종하고 나의 모든 명령을 좇아 행하라 그리하면 너희는 내 백성이 되겠고 나는 너희 하나님이 되리라	Which I commanded your fathers in the day that I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, from the iron furnace, saying, Obey my voice, and do them, according to all which I command you: so shall ye be my people, and I will be your God:	which I commanded your forefathers when I brought them out of the land of Egypt, out of the iron furnace, saying, ‘Obey Me, and do everything I command you, and you will be My people, and I will be your God.’
JER	11	5	내가 또 너희 열조에게 한 맹세 곧 그들에게 젖과 꿀이 흐르는 땅을 주리라 한 언약을 이루리라 한 것인데 오늘날이 그것을 증거하느니라 하라 하시기로 내가 대답하여 가로되 아멘 여호와여 하였노라	That I may perform the oath which I have sworn unto your fathers, to give them a land flowing with milk and honey, as it is this day. Then answered I, and said, So be it, O Lord.	This was in order to establish the oath I swore to your forefathers, to give them a land flowing with milk and honey, as it is to this day.” “Amen, LORD,” I answered.
JER	11	6	여호와께서 내게 이르시되 너는 이 모든 말로 유다 성읍들과 예루살렘 거리에서 선포하여 이르기를 너희는 이 언약의 말을 듣고 준행하라	Then the Lord said unto me, Proclaim all these words in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, saying, Hear ye the words of this covenant, and do them.	Then the LORD said to me, “Proclaim all these words in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem, saying: Hear the words of this covenant and carry them out.
JER	11	7	내가 너희 열조를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 낸 날부터 오늘까지 간절히 경계하며 부지런히 경계하기를 너희는 내 목소리를 청종하라 하였으나	For I earnestly protested unto your fathers in the day that I brought them up out of the land of Egypt, even unto this day, rising early and protesting, saying, Obey my voice.	For from the time I brought your fathers out of the land of Egypt until today, I strongly warned them again and again, saying, ‘Obey My voice.’
JER	11	8	그들이 청종치 아니하며 귀를 기울이지도 아니하고 각각 그 악한 마음의 강퍅한 대로 행하였으므로 내가 그들에게 행하라 명하였어도 그들이 행치 아니한 이 언약의 모든 말로 그들에게 응하게 하였느니라 하라	Yet they obeyed not, nor inclined their ear, but walked every one in the imagination of their evil heart: therefore I will bring upon them all the words of this covenant, which I commanded them to do; but they did them not.	Yet they would not obey or incline their ears, but each one followed the stubbornness of his evil heart. So I brought on them all the curses of this covenant I had commanded them to follow but they did not keep.”
JER	11	9	여호와께서 또 내게 이르시되 유다인과 예루살렘 거민 중에 반역이 있도다	And the Lord said unto me, A conspiracy is found among the men of Judah, and among the inhabitants of Jerusalem.	And the LORD told me, “There is a conspiracy among the men of Judah and the residents of Jerusalem.
JER	11	10	그들이 내 말 듣기를 거절한 자기들의 선조의 죄악에 돌아가서 다른 신들을 좇아 섬겼은즉 이스라엘 집과 유다 집이 내가 그 열조와 맺은 언약을 파하였도다	They are turned back to the iniquities of their forefathers, which refused to hear my words; and they went after other gods to serve them: the house of Israel and the house of Judah have broken my covenant which I made with their fathers.	They have returned to the sins of their forefathers who refused to obey My words. They have followed other gods to serve them. The house of Israel and the house of Judah have broken the covenant I made with their fathers.
JER	11	11	그러므로 나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 보라 내가 재앙을 그들에게 내리리니 그들이 피할 수 없을 것이라 그들이 내게 부르짖을 지라도 내가 듣지 아니할 것인즉	Therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will bring evil upon them, which they shall not be able to escape; and though they shall cry unto me, I will not hearken unto them.	Therefore this is what the LORD says: ‘I am about to bring upon them a disaster that they cannot escape. They will cry out to Me, but I will not listen to them.
JER	11	12	유다 성읍들과 예루살렘 거민이 그 분향하는 신들에게 가서 부르짖을지라도 그 신들이 그 곤액 중에서 절대로 그들을 구원치 못하리라	Then shall the cities of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem go, and cry unto the gods unto whom they offer incense: but they shall not save them at all in the time of their trouble.	Then the cities of Judah and the residents of Jerusalem will go and cry out to the gods to which they have been burning incense, but these gods certainly will not save them in their time of disaster.
JER	11	13	유다야 네 신들이 네 성읍의 수효와 같도다 너희가 예루살렘 거리의 수효대로 그 수치되는 물건의 단 곧 바알에게 분향하는 단을 쌓았도다	For according to the number of thy cities were thy gods, O Judah; and according to the number of the streets of Jerusalem have ye set up altars to that shameful thing, even altars to burn incense unto Baal.	Your gods are indeed as numerous as your cities, O Judah; the altars of shame you have set up—the altars to burn incense to Baal—are as many as the streets of Jerusalem.’
JER	11	14	그러므로 너는 이 백성을 위하여 기도하지 말라 그들을 위하여 부르짖거나 구하지 말라 그들이 그 곤액을 인하여 내게 부르짖을 때에 내가 그들을 듣지 아니하리라	Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up a cry or prayer for them: for I will not hear them in the time that they cry unto me for their trouble.	As for you, do not pray for these people. Do not raise up a cry or a prayer on their behalf, for I will not be listening when they call out to Me in their time of disaster.
JER	11	15	나의 사랑하는 자가 많이 행음하였으므로 거룩한 제육이 그에게서 떠났거늘 나의 집에서 무엇을 하는고 그가 악을 행하며 기뻐하도다	What hath my beloved to do in mine house, seeing she hath wrought lewdness with many, and the holy flesh is passed from thee? when thou doest evil, then thou rejoicest.	What right has My beloved in My house, having carried out so many evil schemes? Can consecrated meat avert your doom, so that you can rejoice?
JER	11	16	나 여호와가 그 이름을 일컬어 좋은 행실 맺는 아름다운 푸른 감람나무라 하였었으나 큰 소동 중에 그 위에 불을 피웠고 그 가지는 꺾였도다	The Lord called thy name, A green olive tree, fair, and of goodly fruit: with the noise of a great tumult he hath kindled fire upon it, and the branches of it are broken.	The LORD once called you a flourishing olive tree, beautiful with well-formed fruit. But with a mighty roar He will set it on fire, and its branches will be consumed.
JER	11	17	바알에게 분향함으로 나의 노를 격동한 이스라엘 집과 유다 집의 악을 인하여 그를 심은 만군의 여호와 내가 그에게 재앙을 선언하였느니라	For the Lord of hosts, that planted thee, hath pronounced evil against thee, for the evil of the house of Israel and of the house of Judah, which they have done against themselves to provoke me to anger in offering incense unto Baal.	The LORD of Hosts, who planted you, has decreed disaster against you on account of the evil that the house of Israel and the house of Judah have brought upon themselves, provoking Me to anger by burning incense to Baal.”
JER	11	18	여호와께서 내게 알게 하셨으므로 내가 그것을 알았나이다 그 때에 주께서 그들의 행위를 내게 보이셨나이다	And the Lord hath given me knowledge of it, and I know it: then thou shewedst me their doings.	And the LORD informed me, so I knew. Then You showed me their deeds.
JER	11	19	나는 끌려서 잡히러 가는 순한 어린 양과 같으므로 그들이 나를 해하려고 꾀하기를 우리가 그 나무와 과실을 함께 박멸하자 그를 산 자의 땅에서 끊어서 그 이름으로 다시 기억되지 못하게 하자 함을 내가 알지 못하였나이다	But I was like a lamb or an ox that is brought to the slaughter; and I knew not that they had devised devices against me, saying, Let us destroy the tree with the fruit thereof, and let us cut him off from the land of the living, that his name may be no more remembered.	For I was like a gentle lamb led to slaughter; I did not know that they had plotted against me: “Let us destroy the tree with its fruit; let us cut him off from the land of the living, that his name may be remembered no more.”
JER	11	20	공의로 판단하시며 사람의 심장을 감찰하시는 만군의 여호와여 나의 원정을 주께 아뢰었사오니 그들에게 대한 주의 보수를 내가 보리이다 하였더니	But, O Lord of hosts, that judgest righteously, that triest the reins and the heart, let me see thy vengeance on them: for unto thee have I revealed my cause.	O LORD of Hosts, who judges righteously, who examines the heart and mind, let me see Your vengeance upon them, for to You I have committed my cause.
JER	11	21	여호와께서 아나돗 사람들에 대하여 이같이 말씀하시되 그들이 네 생명을 취하려고 찾아 이르기를 너는 여호와의 이름으로 예언하지 말라 두렵건대 우리 손에 죽을까 하노라 하도다	Therefore thus saith the Lord of the men of Anathoth, that seek thy life, saying, Prophesy not in the name of the Lord, that thou die not by our hand:	Therefore this is what the LORD says concerning the people of Anathoth who are seeking your life and saying, “You must not prophesy in the name of the LORD, or you will die by our hand.”
JER	11	22	그러므로 만군의 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 보라 내가 그들을 벌하리니 청년들은 칼에 죽으며 자녀들은 기근에 죽고	Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, Behold, I will punish them: the young men shall die by the sword; their sons and their daughters shall die by famine:	So this is what the LORD of Hosts says: “I will punish them. Their young men will die by the sword, their sons and daughters by famine.
JER	11	23	남는 자가 없으리라 내가 아나돗 사람에게 재앙을 내리리니 곧 그들을 벌할 해에니라	And there shall be no remnant of them: for I will bring evil upon the men of Anathoth, even the year of their visitation.	There will be no remnant, for I will bring disaster on the people of Anathoth in the year of their punishment.”
JER	12	1	여호와여 내가 주와 쟁변할 때에는 주는 의로우시니이다 그러나 내가 주께 질문하옵나니 악한 자의 길이 형통하며 패역한 자가 다 안락함은 무슨 연고니이까	Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee: yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments: Wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously?	Righteous are You, O LORD, when I plead before You. Yet about Your judgments I wish to contend with You: Why does the way of the wicked prosper? Why do all the faithless live at ease?
JER	12	2	주께서 그들을 심으시므로 그들이 뿌리가 박히고 장성하여 열매를 맺었거늘 그들의 입은 주께 가까우나 그 마음은 머니이다	Thou hast planted them, yea, they have taken root: they grow, yea, they bring forth fruit: thou art near in their mouth, and far from their reins.	You planted them, and they have taken root. They have grown and produced fruit. You are ever on their lips, but far from their hearts.
JER	12	3	여호와여 주께서 나를 아시고 나를 보시며 내 마음이 주를 향하여 어떠함을 감찰하시오니 양을 잡으려고 끌어냄과 같이 그들을 끌어 내시되 죽일 날을 위하여 그들을 예비하옵소서	But thou, O Lord, knowest me: thou hast seen me, and tried mine heart toward thee: pull them out like sheep for the slaughter, and prepare them for the day of slaughter.	But You know me, O LORD; You see me and test my heart toward You. Drag away the wicked like sheep to the slaughter and set them apart for the day of carnage.
JER	12	4	언제까지 이 땅이 슬퍼하며 온 지방의 채소가 마르리이까 짐승과 새들도 멸절하게 되었사오니 이는 이 땅 거민이 악하여 스스로 말하기를 그가 우리의 결국을 보지 못하리라 함이니이다	How long shall the land mourn, and the herbs of every field wither, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein? the beasts are consumed, and the birds; because they said, He shall not see our last end.	How long will the land mourn and the grass of every field be withered? Because of the evil of its residents, the animals and birds have been swept away, for the people have said, “He cannot see what our end will be.”
JER	12	5	네가 보행자와 함께 달려도 피곤하면 어찌 능히 말과 경주하겠느냐 네가 평안한 땅에서는 무사하려니와 요단의 창일한 중에서는 어찌하겠느냐	If thou hast run with the footmen, and they have wearied thee, then how canst thou contend with horses? and if in the land of peace, wherein thou trustedst, they wearied thee, then how wilt thou do in the swelling of Jordan?	“If you have raced with men on foot and they have worn you out, how can you compete with horses? If you stumble in a peaceful land, how will you do in the thickets of the Jordan?
JER	12	6	네 형제와 아비의 집이라도 너를 속이며 네 뒤에서 크게 외치나니 그들이 네게 좋은 말을 할지라도 너는 믿지 말지니라	For even thy brethren, and the house of thy father, even they have dealt treacherously with thee; yea, they have called a multitude after thee: believe them not, though they speak fair words unto thee.	Even your brothers— your own father’s household— even they have betrayed you; even they have cried aloud against you. Do not trust them, though they speak well of you.
JER	12	7	내가 내 집을 버리며 내 산업을 내어던져 내 마음의 사랑하는 것을 그 대적의 손에 붙였노니	I have forsaken mine house, I have left mine heritage; I have given the dearly beloved of my soul into the hand of her enemies.	I have forsaken My house; I have abandoned My inheritance. I have given the love of My life into the hands of her enemies.
JER	12	8	내 산업이 삼림 중의 사자 같이 되어서 나를 향하여 그 소리를 발하는고로 내가 그를 미워하였음이로다	Mine heritage is unto me as a lion in the forest; it crieth out against me: therefore have I hated it.	My inheritance has become to Me like a lion in the forest. She has roared against Me; therefore I hate her.
JER	12	9	내 산업이 내게 대하여는 무늬 있는 매가 아니냐 매들이 그를 에워싸지 아니하느냐 너희는 가서 들짐승들을 모아다가 그것을 삼키게 하라	Mine heritage is unto me as a speckled bird, the birds round about are against her; come ye, assemble all the beasts of the field, come to devour.	Is not My inheritance to Me like a speckled bird of prey with other birds of prey circling against her? Go, gather all the beasts of the field; bring them to devour her.
JER	12	10	많은 목자가 내 포도원을 훼파하며 내 분깃을 유린하여 나의 낙토로 황무지를 만들었도다	Many pastors have destroyed my vineyard, they have trodden my portion under foot, they have made my pleasant portion a desolate wilderness.	Many shepherds have destroyed My vineyard; they have trampled My plot of ground. They have turned My pleasant field into a desolate wasteland.
JER	12	11	그들이 이를 황무케 하였으므로 그 황무지가 나를 향하여 슬퍼하는도다 온 땅이 황무함은 이를 개의하는 자가 없음이로다	They have made it desolate, and being desolate it mourneth unto me; the whole land is made desolate, because no man layeth it to heart.	They have made it a desolation; desolate before Me, it mourns. All the land is laid waste, but no man takes it to heart.
JER	12	12	훼멸하는 자들이 광야 모든 자산 위에 이르렀고 여호와의 칼이 땅 이 끝에서 저 끝까지 삼키니 무릇 혈육 있는 자가 평안치 못하도다	The spoilers are come upon all high places through the wilderness: for the sword of the Lord shall devour from the one end of the land even to the other end of the land: no flesh shall have peace.	Over all the barren heights in the wilderness the destroyers have come, for the sword of the LORD devours from one end of the earth to the other. No flesh has peace.
JER	12	13	무리가 밀을 심어도 가시를 거두며 수고하여도 소득이 없은즉 그 소산으로 인하여 스스로 수치를 당하리니 이는 여호와의 분노를 인함이니라	They have sown wheat, but shall reap thorns: they have put themselves to pain, but shall not profit: and they shall be ashamed of your revenues because of the fierce anger of the Lord.	They have sown wheat but harvested thorns. They have exhausted themselves to no avail. Bear the shame of your harvest because of the fierce anger of the LORD.”
JER	12	14	내가 내 백성 이스라엘에게 산업으로 준 산업을 다치는 나의 모든 악한 이웃에게 대하여 나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 보라 내가 그들을 그 땅에서 뽑아버리겠고 유다 집은 그들 중에서 뽑아내리라	Thus saith the Lord against all mine evil neighbours, that touch the inheritance which I have caused my people Israel to inherit; Behold, I will pluck them out of their land, and pluck out the house of Judah from among them.	This is what the LORD says: “As for all My evil neighbors who attack the inheritance that I bequeathed to My people Israel, I am about to uproot them from their land, and I will uproot the house of Judah from among them.
JER	12	15	내가 그들을 뽑아낸 후에 내가 돌이켜 그들을 긍휼히 여겨서 각 사람을 그 산업으로, 각 사람을 그 땅으로 다시 인도하리니	And it shall come to pass, after that I have plucked them out I will return, and have compassion on them, and will bring them again, every man to his heritage, and every man to his land.	But after I have uprooted them, I will once again have compassion on them and return each one to his inheritance and to his land.
JER	12	16	그들이 내 백성의 도를 부지런히 배우며 사는 여호와 내 이름으로 맹세하기를 자기들이 내 백성을 가리켜 바알로 맹세하게 한 것 같이 하면 그들이 내 백성 중에 세움을 입으려니와	And it shall come to pass, if they will diligently learn the ways of my people, to swear by my name, The Lord liveth; as they taught my people to swear by Baal; then shall they be built in the midst of my people.	And if they will diligently learn the ways of My people and swear by My name, saying, ‘As surely as the LORD lives’—just as they once taught My people to swear by Baal—then they will be established among My people.
JER	12	17	그들이 그리하지 아니하면 내가 반드시 그 나라를 뽑으리라 뽑아 멸하리라 여호와의 말이니라	But if they will not obey, I will utterly pluck up and destroy that nation, saith the Lord.	But if they will not obey, then I will uproot that nation; I will uproot it and destroy it, declares the LORD.”
JER	13	1	여호와께서 이같이 내게 이르시되 너는 가서 베띠를 사서 네 허리에 띠고 물에 두지 말라 하시기로	Thus saith the Lord unto me, Go and get thee a linen girdle, and put it upon thy loins, and put it not in water.	This is what the LORD said to me: “Go and buy yourself a linen loincloth and put it around your waist, but do not let it touch water.”
JER	13	2	내가 여호와의 말씀대로 띠를 사서 내 허리에 띠니라	So I got a girdle according to the word of the Lord, and put it on my loins.	So I bought a loincloth as the LORD had instructed me, and I put it around my waist.
JER	13	3	여호와의 말씀이 다시 내게 임하니라 가라사대	And the word of the Lord came unto me the second time, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to me a second time:
JER	13	4	너는 사서 네 허리에 띤 띠를 가지고 일어나 유브라데로 가서 거기서 그것을 바위 틈에 감추라 하시기로	Take the girdle that thou hast got, which is upon thy loins, and arise, go to Euphrates, and hide it there in a hole of the rock.	“Take the loincloth that you bought and are wearing, and go at once to Perath and hide it there in a crevice of the rocks.”
JER	13	5	내가 여호와께서 내게 명하신 대로 가서 그것을 유브라데 물 가에 감추니라	So I went, and hid it by Euphrates, as the Lord commanded me.	So I went and hid it at Perath, as the LORD had commanded me.
JER	13	6	여러 날 후에 여호와께서 내게 이르시되 일어나 유브라데로 가서 내가 네게 명하여 거기 감추게 한 띠를 취하라 하시기로	And it came to pass after many days, that the Lord said unto me, Arise, go to Euphrates, and take the girdle from thence, which I commanded thee to hide there.	Many days later the LORD said to me, “Arise, go to Perath, and get the loincloth that I commanded you to hide there.”
JER	13	7	내가 유브라데로 가서 그 감추었던 곳을 파고 띠를 취하니 띠가 썩어서 쓸데 없이 되었더라	Then I went to Euphrates, and digged, and took the girdle from the place where I had hid it: and, behold, the girdle was marred, it was profitable for nothing.	So I went to Perath and dug up the loincloth, and I took it from the place where I had hidden it. But now it was ruined—of no use at all.
JER	13	8	여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하니라 가라사대	Then the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to me:
JER	13	9	나 여호와가 말하노라 내가 유다의 교만과 예루살렘의 큰 교만을 이같이 썩게 하리라	Thus saith the Lord, After this manner will I mar the pride of Judah, and the great pride of Jerusalem.	“This is what the LORD says: In the same way I will ruin the pride of Judah and the great pride of Jerusalem.
JER	13	10	이 악한 백성이 내 말 듣기를 거절하고 그 마음의 강퍅한 대로 행하며 다른 신들을 좇아 그를 섬기며 그에게 절하니 그들이 이 띠의 쓸데 없음 같이 되리라	This evil people, which refuse to hear my words, which walk in the imagination of their heart, and walk after other gods, to serve them, and to worship them, shall even be as this girdle, which is good for nothing.	These evil people, who refuse to listen to My words, who follow the stubbornness of their own hearts, and who go after other gods to serve and worship them, they will be like this loincloth—of no use at all.
JER	13	11	나 여호와가 말하노라 띠가 사람의 허리에 속함 같이 내가 이스라엘 온 집과 유다 온 집으로 내게 속하게 하여 그들로 내 백성이 되게 하며 내 이름과 칭예와 영광이 되게 하려 하였으나 그들이 듣지 아니하였느니라	For as the girdle cleaveth to the loins of a man, so have I caused to cleave unto me the whole house of Israel and the whole house of Judah, saith the Lord; that they might be unto me for a people, and for a name, and for a praise, and for a glory: but they would not hear.	For just as a loincloth clings to a man’s waist, so I have made the whole house of Israel and the whole house of Judah cling to Me, declares the LORD, so that they might be My people for My renown and praise and glory. But they did not listen.
JER	13	12	그러므로 너는 이 말로 그들에게 이르기를 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와의 말씀에 모든 병이 포도주로 차리라 하셨다 하라 그리하면 그들이 네게 이르기를 모든 병이 포도주로 찰줄을 우리가 어찌 알지 못하리요 하리니	Therefore thou shalt speak unto them this word; Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Every bottle shall be filled with wine: and they shall say unto thee, Do we not certainly know that every bottle shall be filled with wine?	Therefore you are to tell them that this is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: ‘Every wineskin shall be filled with wine.’ And when they reply, ‘Don’t we surely know that every wineskin should be filled with wine?’
JER	13	13	너는 다시 그들에게 이르기를 여호와의 말씀에 보라 내가 이 땅의 모든 거민과 다윗의 위에 앉은 왕들과 제사장들과 선지자들과 예루살렘 모든 거민으로 잔뜩 취하게 하고	Then shalt thou say unto them, Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will fill all the inhabitants of this land, even the kings that sit upon David’s throne, and the priests, and the prophets, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, with drunkenness.	then you are to tell them that this is what the LORD says: ‘I am going to fill with drunkenness all who live in this land—the kings who sit on David’s throne, the priests, the prophets, and all the people of Jerusalem.
JER	13	14	또 그들로 피차 충돌하여 상하게 하되 부자간에도 그러하게 할 것이라 내가 그들을 불쌍히 여기지 아니하며 관용치 아니하며 아끼지 아니하고 멸하리라 하셨다 하라 여호와의 말이니라	And I will dash them one against another, even the fathers and the sons together, saith the Lord: I will not pity, nor spare, nor have mercy, but destroy them.	I will smash them against one another, fathers and sons alike, declares the LORD. I will allow no mercy or pity or compassion to keep Me from destroying them.’”
JER	13	15	너희는 들을지어다, 귀를 기울일지어다, 교만하지 말지어다, 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시느니라	Hear ye, and give ear; be not proud: for the Lord hath spoken.	Listen and give heed. Do not be arrogant, for the LORD has spoken.
JER	13	16	그가 흑암을 일으키시기전, 너희 발이 흑암한 산에 거치기전, 너희 바라는 빛이 사망의 그늘로 변하여 침침한 흑암이 되게 하시기 전에 너희 하나님 여호와께 영광을 돌리라	Give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darkness, and before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and, while ye look for light, he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness.	Give glory to the LORD your God before He brings darkness, before your feet stumble on the dusky mountains. You wait for light, but He turns it into deep gloom and thick darkness.
JER	13	17	너희가 이를 듣지 아니하면 나의 심령이 너희 교만을 인하여 은근히 곡할 것이며 여호와의 양무리가 사로잡힘을 인하여 눈물을 흘려 통곡하리라	But if ye will not hear it, my soul shall weep in secret places for your pride; and mine eye shall weep sore, and run down with tears, because the Lord’s flock is carried away captive.	But if you do not listen, I will weep in secret because of your pride. My eyes will overflow with tears, because the LORD’s flock has been taken captive.
JER	13	18	너는 왕과 왕후에게 고하기를 스스로 낮추어 앉으라 관 곧 영광의 면류관이 내려졌다 하라	Say unto the king and to the queen, Humble yourselves, sit down: for your principalities shall come down, even the crown of your glory.	Say to the king and to the queen mother: “Take a lowly seat, for your glorious crowns have fallen from your heads.”
JER	13	19	남방의 성읍들이 봉쇄되고 열 자가 없고 유다가 다 잡혀가되 온전히 잡혀가도다	The cities of the south shall be shut up, and none shall open them: Judah shall be carried away captive all of it, it shall be wholly carried away captive.	The cities of the Negev have been shut tight, and no one can open them. All Judah has been carried into exile, wholly taken captive.
JER	13	20	너는 눈을 들어 북방에서 오는 자들을 보라 네가 받았던 떼, 네 아름다운 양떼는 어디 있느뇨	Lift up your eyes, and behold them that come from the north: where is the flock that was given thee, thy beautiful flock?	Lift up your eyes and see those coming from the north. Where is the flock entrusted to you, the sheep that were your pride?
JER	13	21	너의 친구 삼았던 자를 그가 네 위에 수령으로 세우실 때에 네가 무슨 말을 하겠느냐 너의 고통에 잡힘이 구로하는 여인 같지 않겠느냐	What wilt thou say when he shall punish thee? for thou hast taught them to be captains, and as chief over thee: shall not sorrows take thee, as a woman in travail?	What will you say when He sets over you close allies whom you yourself trained? Will not pangs of anguish grip you, as they do a woman in labor?
JER	13	22	네가 심중에 이르기를 어찌하여 이런 일이 내게 임하였는고 하겠으나 네 죄악이 크므로 네 치마가 들리고 네 발뒤꿈치가 상함이니라	And if thou say in thine heart, Wherefore come these things upon me? For the greatness of thine iniquity are thy skirts discovered, and thy heels made bare.	And if you ask yourself, “Why has this happened to me?” It is because of the magnitude of your iniquity that your skirts have been stripped off and your body has been exposed.
JER	13	23	구스인이 그 피부를, 표범이 그 반점을 변할 수 있느뇨 할 수 있을진대 악에 익숙한 너희도 선을 행할 수 있으리라	Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil.	Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots? Neither are you able to do good— you who are accustomed to doing evil.
JER	13	24	그러므로 내가 그들을 사막 바람에 불려가는 초개 같이 흩으리로다	Therefore will I scatter them as the stubble that passeth away by the wind of the wilderness.	“I will scatter you like chaff driven by the desert wind.
JER	13	25	여호와께서 가라사대 이는 네 응득이요 내가 헤아려 정하여 네게 준 분깃이니 네가 나를 잊어버리고 거짓을 신뢰하는 연고라	This is thy lot, the portion of thy measures from me, saith the Lord; because thou hast forgotten me, and trusted in falsehood.	This is your lot, the portion I have measured to you,” declares the LORD, “because you have forgotten Me and trusted in falsehood.
JER	13	26	그러므로 내가 네 치마를 네 얼굴에까지 들춰서 네 수치를 드러내리라	Therefore will I discover thy skirts upon thy face, that thy shame may appear.	So I will pull your skirts up over your face, that your shame may be seen.
JER	13	27	내가 너의 간음과 사특한 소리와 들의 작은 산 위에서 행한 네 음행의 비루하고 가증한 것을 보았노라 화 있을진저 예루살렘이여 네가 얼마나 오랜 후에야 정결하게 되겠느뇨	I have seen thine adulteries, and thy neighings, the lewdness of thy whoredom, and thine abominations on the hills in the fields. Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem! wilt thou not be made clean? when shall it once be?	Your adulteries and lustful neighings, your shameless prostitution on the hills and in the fields— I have seen your detestable acts. Woe to you, O Jerusalem! How long will you remain unclean?”
JER	14	1	가뭄에 대하여 예레미야에게 임한 여호와의 말씀이라	The word of the Lord that came to Jeremiah concerning the dearth.	This is the word of the LORD that came to Jeremiah concerning the drought:
JER	14	2	유다가 슬퍼하며 성문의 무리가 곤비하여 땅에 앉아 애통하니 예루살렘의 부르짖음이 위에 오르도다	Judah mourneth, and the gates thereof languish; they are black unto the ground; and the cry of Jerusalem is gone up.	“Judah mourns and her gates languish. Her people wail for the land, and a cry goes up from Jerusalem.
JER	14	3	귀인들은 자기 사환들을 보내어 물을 길으라 하나 그들이 우물에 갔어도 물을 얻지 못하여 빈 그릇으로 돌아오니 부끄럽고 근심하여 그 머리를 가리우며	And their nobles have sent their little ones to the waters: they came to the pits, and found no water; they returned with their vessels empty; they were ashamed and confounded, and covered their heads.	The nobles send their servants for water; they go to the cisterns, but find no water; their jars return empty. They are ashamed and humiliated; they cover their heads.
JER	14	4	땅에 비가 없어 지면이 갈라지니 밭가는 자가 부끄러워서 그 머리를 가리는도다	Because the ground is chapt, for there was no rain in the earth, the plowmen were ashamed, they covered their heads.	The ground is cracked because no rain has fallen on the land. The farmers are ashamed; they cover their heads.
JER	14	5	들의 암사슴은 새끼를 낳아도 풀이 없으므로 내어버리며	Yea, the hind also calved in the field, and forsook it, because there was no grass.	Even the doe in the field deserts her newborn fawn because there is no grass.
JER	14	6	들나귀들은 자산 위에 서서 시랑 같이 헐떡이며 풀이 없으므로 눈이 아득하여 하는도다	And the wild asses did stand in the high places, they snuffed up the wind like dragons; their eyes did fail, because there was no grass.	Wild donkeys stand on barren heights; they pant for air like jackals; their eyes fail for lack of pasture.”
JER	14	7	여호와여 우리의 죄악이 우리에게 대하여 증거할지라도 주는 주의 이름을 위하여 일하소서 우리의 타락함이 많으니이다 우리가 주께 범죄하였나이다	O Lord, though our iniquities testify against us, do thou it for thy name’s sake: for our backslidings are many; we have sinned against thee.	Although our iniquities testify against us, O LORD, act for the sake of Your name. Indeed, our rebellions are many; we have sinned against You.
JER	14	8	이스라엘의 소망이시요 곤란한 때의 구원자시여 어찌하여 이 땅에서 거류하는 자 같이, 하룻밤을 유숙하는 행인 같이 하시나이까	O the hope of Israel, the saviour thereof in time of trouble, why shouldest thou be as a stranger in the land, and as a wayfaring man that turneth aside to tarry for a night?	O Hope of Israel, its Savior in times of distress, why are You like a stranger in the land, like a traveler who stays but a night?
JER	14	9	어찌하여 놀라 벙벙하는 자 같으시며 구원치 못하는 용사 같으시니이까 여호와여 주는 오히려 우리 중에 계시고 우리는 주의 이름으로 일컬음을 받는 자이오니 우리를 버리지 마옵소서	Why shouldest thou be as a man astonied, as a mighty man that cannot save? yet thou, O Lord, art in the midst of us, and we are called by thy name; leave us not.	Why are You like a man taken by surprise, like a warrior powerless to save? Yet You are among us, O LORD, and we are called by Your name. Do not forsake us!
JER	14	10	여호와께서 이 백성에 대하여 말씀하시되 그들이 어그러진 길을 사랑하여 그 발을 금하지 아니하므로 나 여호와가 그들을 받지 아니하고 이제 그들의 죄를 기억하고 그 죄를 벌하리라 하시고	Thus saith the Lord unto this people, Thus have they loved to wander, they have not refrained their feet, therefore the Lord doth not accept them; he will now remember their iniquity, and visit their sins.	This is what the LORD says about this people: “Truly they love to wander; they have not restrained their feet. So the LORD does not accept them; He will now remember their guilt and call their sins to account.”
JER	14	11	여호와께서 또 내게 이르시되 너는 이 백성을 위하여 복을 구하지 말라	Then said the Lord unto me, Pray not for this people for their good.	Then the LORD said to me, “Do not pray for the well-being of this people.
JER	14	12	그들이 금식할지라도 내가 그 부르짖음을 듣지 아니하겠고 번제와 소제를 드릴지라도 내가 그것을 받지 아니할 뿐 아니라 칼과 기근과 염병으로 그들을 멸하리라	When they fast, I will not hear their cry; and when they offer burnt offering and an oblation, I will not accept them: but I will consume them by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence.	Although they may fast, I will not listen to their cry; although they may offer burnt offerings and grain offerings, I will not accept them. Instead, I will finish them off by sword and famine and plague.”
JER	14	13	이에 내가 가로되 슬프도소이다 주 여호와여 보시옵소서 선지자들이 그들에게 이르기를 너희가 칼을 보지 아니하겠고 기근은 너희에게 이르지 아니할 것이라 여호와께서 이곳에서 너희에게 확실한 평강을 주시리라 하나이다	Then said I, Ah, Lord God! behold, the prophets say unto them, Ye shall not see the sword, neither shall ye have famine; but I will give you assured peace in this place.	“Ah, Lord GOD!” I replied, “Look, the prophets are telling them, ‘You will not see the sword or suffer famine, but I will give you lasting peace in this place.’”
JER	14	14	여호와께서 내게 이르시되 선지자들이 내 이름으로 거짓 예언을 하도다 나는 그들을 보내지 아니하였고 그들에게 명하거나 이르지 아니하였거늘 그들이 거짓 계시와 복술과 허탄한 것과 자기 마음의 속임으로 너희에게 예언하도다	Then the Lord said unto me, The prophets prophesy lies in my name: I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, neither spake unto them: they prophesy unto you a false vision and divination, and a thing of nought, and the deceit of their heart.	“The prophets are prophesying lies in My name,” replied the LORD. “I did not send them or appoint them or speak to them. They are prophesying to you a false vision, a worthless divination, the futility and delusion of their own minds.
JER	14	15	그러므로 내가 보내지 아니하였어도 내 이름으로 예언하여 이르기를 칼과 기근이 이 땅에 이르지 아니하리라 하는 선지자들에 대하여 나 여호와가 이같이 이르노라 그 선지자들은 칼과 기근에 멸망할 것이요	Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning the prophets that prophesy in my name, and I sent them not, yet they say, Sword and famine shall not be in this land; By sword and famine shall those prophets be consumed.	Therefore this is what the LORD says about the prophets who prophesy in My name: I did not send them, yet they say, ‘No sword or famine will touch this land.’ By sword and famine these very prophets will meet their end!
JER	14	16	그들의 예언을 받은 백성은 기근과 칼로 인하여 예루살렘 거리에 던짐을 입을 것인즉 그들을 장사할 자가 없을 것이요 그 아내와 그 아들과 그 딸도 그렇게 되리니 이는 내가 그들의 악을 그 위에 부음이니라	And the people to whom they prophesy shall be cast out in the streets of Jerusalem because of the famine and the sword; and they shall have none to bury them, them, their wives, nor their sons, nor their daughters: for I will pour their wickedness upon them.	And the people to whom they prophesy will be thrown into the streets of Jerusalem because of famine and sword. There will be no one to bury them or their wives, their sons or their daughters. I will pour out their own evil upon them.
JER	14	17	너는 이 말로 그들에게 이르라 내 눈이 밤낮으로 끊치지 아니하고 눈물을 흘리리니 이는 처녀 딸 내 백성이 큰 파멸, 중한 창상을 인하여 망함이라	Therefore thou shalt say this word unto them; Let mine eyes run down with tears night and day, and let them not cease: for the virgin daughter of my people is broken with a great breach, with a very grievous blow.	You are to speak this word to them: ‘My eyes overflow with tears; day and night they do not cease, for the virgin daughter of my people has been shattered by a crushing blow, a severely grievous wound.
JER	14	18	내가 들에 나간즉 칼에 죽은 자요 내가 성에 들어간즉 기근으로 병든 자며 선지자나 제사장이나 다 땅에 두루 다니며 어찌할 바를 알지 못하는도다	If I go forth into the field, then behold the slain with the sword! and if I enter into the city, then behold them that are sick with famine! yea, both the prophet and the priest go about into a land that they know not.	If I go out to the country, I see those slain by the sword; if I enter the city, I see those ravaged by famine! For both prophet and priest travel to a land they do not know.’”
JER	14	19	주께서 유다를 온전히 버리시나이까 주의 심령이 시온을 싫어하시나이까 어찌하여 우리를 치시고 치료하지 아니하시나이까 우리가 평강을 바라도 좋은 것이 없고 치료받기를 기다려도 놀람을 보나이다	Hast thou utterly rejected Judah? hath thy soul lothed Zion? why hast thou smitten us, and there is no healing for us? we looked for peace, and there is no good; and for the time of healing, and behold trouble!	Have You rejected Judah completely? Do You despise Zion? Why have You stricken us so that we are beyond healing? We hoped for peace, but no good has come, and for the time of healing, but there was only terror.
JER	14	20	여호와여 우리가 우리의 악과 우리 조상의 죄악을 인정하나이다 우리가 주께 범죄하였나이다	We acknowledge, O Lord, our wickedness, and the iniquity of our fathers: for we have sinned against thee.	We acknowledge our wickedness, O LORD, the guilt of our fathers; indeed, we have sinned against You.
JER	14	21	주의 이름을 위하여 우리를 미워하지 마옵소서 주의 영광의 위를 욕되게 마옵소서 우리와 세우신 주의 언약을 기억하시고 폐하지 마옵소서	Do not abhor us, for thy name’s sake, do not disgrace the throne of thy glory: remember, break not thy covenant with us.	For the sake of Your name do not despise us; do not disgrace Your glorious throne. Remember Your covenant with us; do not break it.
JER	14	22	열방의 허무한 것 중에 능히 비를 내리게 할 자가 있나이까 하늘이 능히 소나기를 내릴 수 있으리이까 우리 하나님 여호와여 그리하는 자가 주가 아니시니이까 그러므로 우리가 주를 앙망하옵는 것은 주께서 이 모든 것을 만드셨음이니이다	Are there any among the vanities of the Gentiles that can cause rain? or can the heavens give showers? art not thou he, O Lord our God? therefore we will wait upon thee: for thou hast made all these things.	Can the worthless idols of the nations bring rain? Do the skies alone send showers? Is this not by You, O LORD our God? So we put our hope in You, for You have done all these things.
JER	15	1	여호와께서 내게 이르시되 모세와 사무엘이 내 앞에 섰다 할지라도 내 마음은 이 백성을 향할 수 없나니 그들을 내 앞에서 쫓아내치라	Then said the Lord unto me, Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not be toward this people: cast them out of my sight, and let them go forth.	Then the LORD said to me: “Even if Moses and Samuel should stand before Me, My heart would not go out to this people. Send them from My presence, and let them go.
JER	15	2	그들이 만일 네게 말하기를 우리가 어디로 나아가리요 하거든 너는 그들에게 이르기를 여호와의 말씀에 사망할 자는 사망으로 나아가고 칼을 받을 자는 칼로 나아가고 기근을 당할 자는 기근으로 나아가고 포로 될 자는 포로 됨으로 나아갈지니라 하셨다 하라	And it shall come to pass, if they say unto thee, Whither shall we go forth? then thou shalt tell them, Thus saith the Lord; Such as are for death, to death; and such as are for the sword, to the sword; and such as are for the famine, to the famine; and such as are for the captivity, to the captivity.	If they ask you, ‘Where shall we go?’ you are to tell them that this is what the LORD says: ‘Those destined for death, to death; those destined for the sword, to the sword; those destined for famine, to famine; and those destined for captivity, to captivity.’
JER	15	3	나 여호와가 말하노라 내가 그들을 네 가지로 벌하리니 곧 죽이는 칼과 찢는 개와 삼켜 멸하는 공중의 새와 땅의 짐승으로 할 것이며	And I will appoint over them four kinds, saith the Lord: the sword to slay, and the dogs to tear, and the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the earth, to devour and destroy.	I will appoint over them four kinds of destroyers, declares the LORD: the sword to kill, the dogs to drag away, and the birds of the air and beasts of the earth to devour and destroy.
JER	15	4	유다 왕 히스기야의 아들 므낫세가 예루살렘에 행한 바를 인하여 내가 그들을 세계 열방 중에 흩으리라	And I will cause them to be removed into all kingdoms of the earth, because of Manasseh the son of Hezekiah king of Judah, for that which he did in Jerusalem.	I will make them a horror to all the kingdoms of the earth because of what Manasseh son of Hezekiah king of Judah did in Jerusalem.
JER	15	5	예루살렘아 너를 불쌍히 여길 자 누구며 너를 곡할 자 누구며 돌이켜 네 평안을 물을 자 누구뇨	For who shall have pity upon thee, O Jerusalem? or who shall bemoan thee? or who shall go aside to ask how thou doest?	Who will have pity on you, O Jerusalem? Who will mourn for you? Who will turn aside to ask about your welfare?
JER	15	6	여호와께서 가라사대 네가 나를 버렸고 내게서 물러갔으므로 네게로 내 손을 펴서 너를 멸하였노니 이는 내가 뜻을 돌이키기에 염증이 났음이로다	Thou hast forsaken me, saith the Lord, thou art gone backward: therefore will I stretch out my hand against thee, and destroy thee; I am weary with repenting.	You have forsaken Me, declares the LORD. You have turned your back. So I will stretch out My hand against you and I will destroy you; I am weary of showing compassion.
JER	15	7	내가 그들을 그 땅의 여러 성문에서 키로 까불러 그 자식을 끊어서 내 백성을 멸하였나니 이는 그들이 그 길에서 돌이키지 아니하였음이라	And I will fan them with a fan in the gates of the land; I will bereave them of children, I will destroy my people, since they return not from their ways.	I will scatter them with a winnowing fork at the gates of the land. I will bereave and destroy My people who have not turned from their ways.
JER	15	8	그들의 과부가 내 앞에 바다 모래보다 더 많아졌느니라 내가 대낮에 훼멸할 자를 그들에게로 데려다가 그들과 청년들의 어미를 쳐서 놀람과 두려움을 그들에게 졸지에 임하게 하였으며	Their widows are increased to me above the sand of the seas: I have brought upon them against the mother of the young men a spoiler at noonday: I have caused him to fall upon it suddenly, and terrors upon the city.	I will make their widows more numerous than the sand of the sea. I will bring a destroyer at noon against the mothers of young men. I will suddenly bring upon them anguish and dismay.
JER	15	9	일곱 자식을 생산한 여인으로는 쇠약하여 기절하게 하며 오히려 백주에 그의 해로 떨어져서 그로 수치와 근심을 당케 하였느니라 그 남은 자는 그 대적의 칼에 붙이리라 여호와의 말이니라	She that hath borne seven languisheth: she hath given up the ghost; her sun is gone down while it was yet day: she hath been ashamed and confounded: and the residue of them will I deliver to the sword before their enemies, saith the Lord.	The mother of seven will grow faint; she will breathe her last breath. Her sun will set while it is still day; she will be disgraced and humiliated. And the rest I will put to the sword in the presence of their enemies,” declares the LORD.
JER	15	10	내게 재앙이로다 나의 모친이여 모친이 나를 온 세계에게 다툼과 침을 당할 자로 낳으셨도다 내가 뀌어 주지도 아니하였고 사람이 내게 뀌이지도 아니하였건마는 다 나를 저주하는도다	Woe is me, my mother, that thou hast borne me a man of strife and a man of contention to the whole earth! I have neither lent on usury, nor men have lent to me on usury; yet every one of them doth curse me.	Woe to me, my mother, that you have borne me, a man of strife and conflict in all the land. I have neither lent nor borrowed, yet everyone curses me.
JER	15	11	여호와께서 가라사대 내가 진실로 너를 강하게 할 것이요 너로 복을 얻게 할 것이며 내가 진실로 네 대적으로 재앙과 환난의 때에 간구하게 하리라	The Lord said, Verily it shall be well with thy remnant; verily I will cause the enemy to entreat thee well in the time of evil and in the time of affliction.	The LORD said: “Surely I will deliver you for a good purpose; surely I will intercede with your enemy in your time of trouble, in your time of distress.
JER	15	12	누가 능히 철 곧 북방의 철과 놋을 꺾으리요	Shall iron break the northern iron and the steel?	Can anyone smash iron— iron from the north—or bronze?
JER	15	13	그러나 네 모든 죄로 인하여 네 사경의 모든 재산과 보물로 값 없이 탈취를 당하게 할 것이며	Thy substance and thy treasures will I give to the spoil without price, and that for all thy sins, even in all thy borders.	Your wealth and your treasures I will give up as plunder, without charge for all your sins within all your borders.
JER	15	14	너로 네 대적과 함께 네가 알지 못하는 땅에 이르게 하리니 이는 나의 진노의 맹렬한 불이 너희를 사르려 함이니라	And I will make thee to pass with thine enemies into a land which thou knowest not: for a fire is kindled in mine anger, which shall burn upon you.	Then I will enslave you to your enemies in a land you do not know, for My anger will kindle a fire that will burn against you.”
JER	15	15	여호와여 주께서 아시오니 원컨대 주는 나를 기억하시며 권고하사 나를 박해하는 자에게 보복하시고 주의 오래 참으심을 인하여 나로 멸망치 말게 하옵시며 주를 위하여 내가 치욕 당하는 줄을 아시옵소서	O Lord, thou knowest: remember me, and visit me, and revenge me of my persecutors; take me not away in thy longsuffering: know that for thy sake I have suffered rebuke.	You understand, O LORD; remember me and attend to me. Avenge me against my persecutors. In Your patience, do not take me away. Know that I endure reproach for Your honor.
JER	15	16	만군의 하나님 여호와시여 나는 주의 이름으로 일컬음을 받는 자라 내가 주의 말씀을 얻어 먹었사오니 주의 말씀은 내게 기쁨과 내 마음의 즐거움이오나	Thy words were found, and I did eat them; and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart: for I am called by thy name, O Lord God of hosts.	Your words were found, and I ate them. Your words became my joy and my heart’s delight. For I bear Your name, O LORD God of Hosts.
JER	15	17	내가 기뻐하는 자의 회에 앉지 아니하며 즐거워하지도 아니하고 주의 손을 인하여 홀로 앉았사오니 이는 주께서 분노로 내게 채우셨음이니이다	I sat not in the assembly of the mockers, nor rejoiced; I sat alone because of thy hand: for thou hast filled me with indignation.	I never sat with the band of revelers, nor did I celebrate with them. Because Your hand was on me, I sat alone, for You have filled me with indignation.
JER	15	18	나의 고통이 계속하며 상처가 중하여 낫지 아니함은 어찜이니이까 주께서는 내게 대하여 물이 말라서 속이는 시내 같으시리이까	Why is my pain perpetual, and my wound incurable, which refuseth to be healed? wilt thou be altogether unto me as a liar, and as waters that fail?	Why is my pain unending, and my wound incurable, refusing to be healed? You have indeed become like a mirage to me— water that is not there.
JER	15	19	여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 네가 만일 돌아오면 내가 너를 다시 이끌어서 내 앞에 세울 것이며 네가 만일 천한 것에서 귀한 것을 취할 것 같으면 너는 내 입 같이 될 것이라 그들은 네게로 돌아오려니와 너는 그들에게로 돌아가지 말지니라	Therefore thus saith the Lord, If thou return, then will I bring thee again, and thou shalt stand before me: and if thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth: let them return unto thee; but return not thou unto them.	Therefore this is what the LORD says: “If you return, I will restore you; you will stand in My presence. And if you speak words that are noble instead of worthless, you will be My spokesman. It is they who must turn to you, but you must not turn to them.
JER	15	20	내가 너로 이 백성 앞에 견고한 놋 성벽이 되게 하리니 그들이 너를 칠지라도 이기지 못할 것은 내가 너와 함께 하여 너를 구하여 건짐이니라 여호와의 말이니라	And I will make thee unto this people a fenced brasen wall: and they shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee: for I am with thee to save thee and to deliver thee, saith the Lord.	Then I will make you a wall to this people, a fortified wall of bronze; they will fight against you but will not overcome you, for I am with you to save and deliver you, declares the LORD.
JER	15	21	내가 너를 악한 자의 손에서 건지며 무서운 자의 손에서 구속하리라	And I will deliver thee out of the hand of the wicked, and I will redeem thee out of the hand of the terrible.	I will deliver you from the hand of the wicked and redeem you from the grasp of the ruthless.”
JER	16	1	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하니라 가라사대	The word of the Lord came also unto me, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
JER	16	2	너는 이 땅에서 아내를 취하지 말며 자녀를 두지 말지니라	Thou shalt not take thee a wife, neither shalt thou have sons or daughters in this place.	“You must not marry or have sons or daughters in this place.”
JER	16	3	이곳에서 생산한 자녀와 이 땅에서 그들을 해산한 어미와 그들을 낳은 아비에 대하여 나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라	For thus saith the Lord concerning the sons and concerning the daughters that are born in this place, and concerning their mothers that bare them, and concerning their fathers that begat them in this land;	For this is what the LORD says concerning the sons and daughters born in this place, and the mothers who bore them, and the fathers who fathered them in this land:
JER	16	4	그들은 독한 병으로 죽고 슬퍼함을 입지 못하며 매장함을 얻지 못하여 지면의 분토와 같을 것이며 칼과 기근에 망하고 그 시체는 공중의 새와 땅 짐승의 밥이 되리라	They shall die of grievous deaths; they shall not be lamented; neither shall they be buried; but they shall be as dung upon the face of the earth: and they shall be consumed by the sword, and by famine; and their carcases shall be meat for the fowls of heaven, and for the beasts of the earth.	“They will die from deadly diseases. They will not be mourned or buried, but will lie like dung on the ground. They will be finished off by sword and famine, and their corpses will become food for the birds of the air and beasts of the earth.”
JER	16	5	여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 상가에 들어가지 말라 가서 통곡하지 말며 그들을 위하여 애곡하지 말라 내가 이 백성에게서 나의 평강을 빼앗으며 인자와 긍휼을 제함이니라 여호와의 말이니라	For thus saith the Lord, Enter not into the house of mourning, neither go to lament nor bemoan them: for I have taken away my peace from this people, saith the Lord, even lovingkindness and mercies.	Indeed, this is what the LORD says: “Do not enter a house where there is a funeral meal. Do not go to mourn or show sympathy, for I have removed from this people My peace, My loving devotion, and My compassion,” declares the LORD.
JER	16	6	큰 자든지 작은 자든지 이 땅에서 죽으리니 그들이 매장되지 못할 것이며 그들을 위하여 애곡하는 자도 없겠고 자기 몸을 베거나 대머리 되게 하는 자도 없을 것이며	Both the great and the small shall die in this land: they shall not be buried, neither shall men lament for them, nor cut themselves, nor make themselves bald for them:	“Both great and small will die in this land. They will not be buried or mourned, nor will anyone cut himself or shave his head for them.
JER	16	7	슬플 때에 떡을 떼며 그 죽은 자를 인하여 그들을 위로하는 자가 없을 것이며 그들의 아비나 어미의 상사를 위하여 위로의 잔을 그들에게 마시울 자가 없으리라	Neither shall men tear themselves for them in mourning, to comfort them for the dead; neither shall men give them the cup of consolation to drink for their father or for their mother.	No food will be offered to comfort those who mourn the dead; not even a cup of consolation will be given for the loss of a father or mother.
JER	16	8	너는 잔치집에 들어가서 그들과 함께 앉아 먹거나 마시지 말라	Thou shalt not also go into the house of feasting, to sit with them to eat and to drink.	You must not enter a house where there is feasting and sit down with them to eat and drink.
JER	16	9	만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 이같이 말하노라 보라 기뻐하는 소리와 즐거워하는 소리와 신랑의 소리와 신부의 소리를 내가 네 목전, 네 시대에 이곳에서 끊어지게 하리라	For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will cause to cease out of this place in your eyes, and in your days, the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride.	For this is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: I am going to remove from this place, before your very eyes and in your days, the sounds of joy and gladness, the voices of the bride and bridegroom.
JER	16	10	네가 이 모든 말로 백성에게 고할 때에 그들이 네게 묻기를 여호와께서 우리에게 이 모든 큰 재앙을 광포하심은 어찜이며 우리의 죄악은 무엇이며 우리가 우리 하나님 여호와께 범한 죄는 무엇이뇨 하거든	And it shall come to pass, when thou shalt shew this people all these words, and they shall say unto thee, Wherefore hath the Lord pronounced all this great evil against us? or what is our iniquity? or what is our sin that we have committed against the Lord our God?	When you tell these people all these things, they will ask you, ‘Why has the LORD pronounced all this great disaster against us? What is our guilt? What is the sin that we have committed against the LORD our God?’
JER	16	11	너는 그들에게 대답하기를 여호와께서 말씀하시되 너희 열조가 나를 버리고 다른 신들을 좇아서 그들을 섬기며 그들에게 절하고 나를 버려 내 법을 지키지 아니하였음이라	Then shalt thou say unto them, Because your fathers have forsaken me, saith the Lord, and have walked after other gods, and have served them, and have worshipped them, and have forsaken me, and have not kept my law;	Then you are to answer them: ‘It is because your fathers have forsaken Me, declares the LORD, and followed other gods, and served and worshiped them. They abandoned Me and did not keep My instruction.
JER	16	12	너희가 너희 열조보다 더욱 악을 행하였도다 보라 너희가 각기 악한 마음의 강퍅함을 따라 행하고 나를 청종치 아니하였으므로	And ye have done worse than your fathers; for, behold, ye walk every one after the imagination of his evil heart, that they may not hearken unto me:	And you have done more evil than your fathers. See how each of you follows the stubbornness of his evil heart instead of obeying Me.
JER	16	13	내가 너희를 이 땅에서 쫓아 내어 너희와 너희 열조의 알지 못하던 땅에 이르게 할 것이라 너희가 거기서 주야로 다른 신들을 섬기리니 이는 내가 너희에게 은혜를 베풀지 아니함이라 하셨다 하라	Therefore will I cast you out of this land into a land that ye know not, neither ye nor your fathers; and there shall ye serve other gods day and night; where I will not shew you favour.	So I will cast you out of this land into a land that neither you nor your fathers have known. There you will serve other gods day and night, for I will show you no favor.’
JER	16	14	여호와께서 가라사대 그러나 보라 날이 이르리니 다시는 이스라엘 자손을 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내신 여호와의 사심으로 맹세하지 아니하고	Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that it shall no more be said, The Lord liveth, that brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt;	Yet behold, the days are coming, declares the LORD, when they will no longer say, ‘As surely as the LORD lives, who brought the Israelites up out of the land of Egypt.’
JER	16	15	이스라엘 자손을 북방 땅과 그 모든 쫓겨났던 나라에서 인도하여 내신 여호와의 사심으로 맹세하리라 내가 그들을 그 열조에게 준 그들의 땅으로 인도하여 들이리라	But, The Lord liveth, that brought up the children of Israel from the land of the north, and from all the lands whither he had driven them: and I will bring them again into their land that I gave unto their fathers.	Instead they will say, ‘As surely as the LORD lives, who brought the Israelites up out of the land of the north and all the other lands to which He had banished them.’ For I will return them to their land that I gave to their forefathers.
JER	16	16	여호와께서 가라사대 보라 내가 많은 어부를 불러다가 그들을 낚게 하며 그 후에 많은 포수를 불러다가 그들을 모든 산과 모든 작은 산과 암혈에서 사냥하게 하리니	Behold, I will send for many fishers, saith the Lord, and they shall fish them; and after will I send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the holes of the rocks.	But for now I will send for many fishermen, declares the LORD, and they will catch them. After that I will send for many hunters, and they will hunt them down on every mountain and hill, even from the clefts of the rocks.
JER	16	17	내 눈이 그들의 행위를 감찰하므로 그들이 내 얼굴 앞에서 숨김을 얻지 못하며 그들의 죄악이 내 목전에서 은폐되지 못함이라	For mine eyes are upon all their ways: they are not hid from my face, neither is their iniquity hid from mine eyes.	For My eyes are on all their ways. They are not hidden from My face, and their guilt is not concealed from My eyes.
JER	16	18	내가 위선 그들의 악과 죄를 배나 갚을 것은 그들이 그 미운 물건의 시체로 내 땅을 더럽히며 그들의 가증한 것으로 내 산업에 가득하게 하였음이니라	And first I will recompense their iniquity and their sin double; because they have defiled my land, they have filled mine inheritance with the carcases of their detestable and abominable things.	And I will first repay them double their iniquity and their sin, because they have defiled My land with the carcasses of their detestable idols, and they have filled My inheritance with their abominations.”
JER	16	19	여호와 나의 힘, 나의 보장, 환난날의 피난처시여 열방이 땅 끝에서 주께 이르러 말하기를 우리 열조의 계승한 바는 허무하고 망탄하고 무익한 것뿐이라	O Lord, my strength, and my fortress, and my refuge in the day of affliction, the Gentiles shall come unto thee from the ends of the earth, and shall say, Surely our fathers have inherited lies, vanity, and things wherein there is no profit.	O LORD, my strength and my fortress, my refuge in the day of distress, the nations will come to You from the ends of the earth, and they will say, “Our fathers inherited nothing but lies, worthless idols of no benefit at all.
JER	16	20	인생이 어찌 신 아닌 것을 자기의 신으로 삼겠나이까 하리이다	Shall a man make gods unto himself, and they are no gods?	Can man make gods for himself? Such are not gods!”
JER	16	21	여호와께서 가라사대 보라 이번에 그들에게 내 손과 내 능을 알려서 그들로 내 이름이 여호와인 줄 알게 하리라	Therefore, behold, I will this once cause them to know, I will cause them to know mine hand and my might; and they shall know that my name is The Lord.	“Therefore behold, I will inform them, and this time I will make them know My power and My might; then they will know that My name is the LORD.
JER	17	1	유다의 죄는 금강석 끝 철필로 기록되되 그들의 마음 판과 그들의 단 뿔에 새겨졌거늘	The sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond: it is graven upon the table of their heart, and upon the horns of your altars;	“The sin of Judah is written with an iron stylus, engraved with a diamond point on the tablets of their hearts and on the horns of their altars.
JER	17	2	그들의 자녀가 높은 메 위 푸른 나무곁에 있는 그 단들과 아세라들을 생각하도다	Whilst their children remember their altars and their groves by the green trees upon the high hills.	Even their children remember their altars and Asherah poles by the green trees and on the high hills.
JER	17	3	들에 있는 나의 산아 네 온 지경의 죄로 인하여 내가 네 재산과 네 모든 보물과 산당들로 노략을 당하게 하리니	O my mountain in the field, I will give thy substance and all thy treasures to the spoil, and thy high places for sin, throughout all thy borders.	O My mountain in the countryside, I will give over your wealth and all your treasures as plunder, because of the sin of your high places, within all your borders.
JER	17	4	내가 네게 준 네 기업에서 네 손을 뗄 것이며 또 내가 너로 너의 알지 못하는 땅에서 네 대적을 섬기게 하리니 이는 너희가 내 노로 맹렬케 하여 영영히 타는 불을 일으켰음이니라	And thou, even thyself, shalt discontinue from thine heritage that I gave thee; and I will cause thee to serve thine enemies in the land which thou knowest not: for ye have kindled a fire in mine anger, which shall burn for ever.	And you yourself will relinquish the inheritance that I gave you. I will enslave you to your enemies in a land that you do not know, for you have kindled My anger; it will burn forever.”
JER	17	5	나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 무릇 사람을 믿으며 혈육으로 그 권력을 삼고 마음이 여호와에게서 떠난 그 사람은 저주를 받을 것이라	Thus saith the Lord; Cursed be the man that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm, and whose heart departeth from the Lord.	This is what the LORD says: “Cursed is the man who trusts in mankind, who makes the flesh his strength and turns his heart from the LORD.
JER	17	6	그는 사막의 떨기나무 같아서 좋은 일의 오는 것을 보지 못하고 광야 간조한 곳, 건건한 땅, 사람이 거하지 않는 땅에 거하리라	For he shall be like the heath in the desert, and shall not see when good cometh; but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, in a salt land and not inhabited.	He will be like a shrub in the desert; he will not see when prosperity comes. He will dwell in the parched places of the desert, in a salt land where no one lives.
JER	17	7	그러나 무릇 여호와를 의지하며 여호와를 의뢰하는 그 사람은 복을 받을 것이라	Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is.	But blessed is the man who trusts in the LORD, whose confidence is in Him.
JER	17	8	그는 물가에 심기운 나무가 그 뿌리를 강변에 뻗치고 더위가 올지라도 두려워 아니하며 그 잎이 청청하며 가무는 해에도 걱정이 없고 결실이 그치지 아니함 같으리라	For he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, and that spreadeth out her roots by the river, and shall not see when heat cometh, but her leaf shall be green; and shall not be careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit.	He is like a tree planted by the waters that sends out its roots toward the stream. It does not fear when the heat comes, and its leaves are always green. It does not worry in a year of drought, nor does it cease to produce fruit.
JER	17	9	만물보다 거짓되고 심히 부패한 것은 마음이라 누가 능히 이를 알리요마는	The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked: who can know it?	The heart is deceitful above all things and beyond cure. Who can understand it?
JER	17	10	나 여호와는 심장을 살피며 폐부를 시험하고 각각 그 행위와 그 행실대로 보응하나니	I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, even to give every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings.	I, the LORD, search the heart; I examine the mind to reward a man according to his way, by what his deeds deserve.
JER	17	11	불의로 치부하는 자는 자고새가 낳지 아니한 알을 품음 같아서 그 중년에 그것이 떠나겠고 필경은 어리석은 자가 되리라	As the partridge sitteth on eggs, and hatcheth them not; so he that getteth riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool.	Like a partridge hatching eggs it did not lay is the man who makes a fortune unjustly. In the middle of his days his riches will desert him, and in the end he will be the fool.”
JER	17	12	영화로우신 보좌여 원시부터 높이 계시며 우리의 성소이시며	A glorious high throne from the beginning is the place of our sanctuary.	A glorious throne, exalted from the beginning, is the place of our sanctuary.
JER	17	13	이스라엘의 소망이신 여호와여 무릇 주를 버리는 자는 다 수치를 당할 것이라 무릇 여호와를 떠나는 자는 흙에 기록이 되오리니 이는 생수의 근원이신 여호와를 버림이니이다	O Lord, the hope of Israel, all that forsake thee shall be ashamed, and they that depart from me shall be written in the earth, because they have forsaken the Lord, the fountain of living waters.	O LORD, the hope of Israel, all who abandon You will be put to shame. All who turn away will be written in the dust, for they have abandoned the LORD, the fountain of living water.
JER	17	14	여호와여 주는 나의 찬송이시오니 나를 고치소서 그리하시면 내가 낫겠나이다 나를 구원하소서 그리하시면 내가 구원을 얻으리이다	Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed; save me, and I shall be saved: for thou art my praise.	Heal me, O LORD, and I will be healed; save me, and I will be saved, for You are my praise.
JER	17	15	그들이 내게 이르기를 여호와의 말씀이 어디 있느뇨 이제 임하게 할지어다 하나이다	Behold, they say unto me, Where is the word of the Lord? let it come now.	Behold, they keep saying to me, “Where is the word of the LORD? Let it come now!”
JER	17	16	나는 목자의 직분에서 물러가지 아니하고 주를 좇았사오며 재앙의 날도 내가 원치 아니하였음을 주께서 아시는 바라 내 입술에서 나온 것이 주의 목전에 있나이다	As for me, I have not hastened from being a pastor to follow thee: neither have I desired the woeful day; thou knowest: that which came out of my lips was right before thee.	But I have not run away from being Your shepherd; I have not desired the day of despair. You know that the utterance of my lips was spoken in Your presence.
JER	17	17	주는 내게 두려움이 되지 마옵소서 재앙의 날에 주는 나의 피난처시니이다	Be not a terror unto me: thou art my hope in the day of evil.	Do not become a terror to me; You are my refuge in the day of disaster.
JER	17	18	나를 박해하는 자로 수욕을 당케 하시고 나로 수욕을 당케 마옵소서 그들로 놀라게 하시고 나로 놀라게 마시옵소서 재앙의 날을 그들에게 임하게 하시며 배나 되는 멸망으로 그들을 멸하소서	Let them be confounded that persecute me, but let not me be confounded: let them be dismayed, but let not me be dismayed: bring upon them the day of evil, and destroy them with double destruction.	Let my persecutors be put to shame, but do not let me be put to shame. Let them be terrified, but do not let me be terrified. Bring upon them the day of disaster and shatter them with double destruction.
JER	17	19	여호와께서 내게 이같이 말씀하시되 너는 가서 유다 왕들의 출입하는 평민의 문과 예루살렘 모든 문에 서서	Thus said the Lord unto me; Go and stand in the gate of the children of the people, whereby the kings of Judah come in, and by the which they go out, and in all the gates of Jerusalem;	This is what the LORD said to me: “Go and stand at the gate of the people, through which the kings of Judah go in and out; and stand at all the other gates of Jerusalem.
JER	17	20	무리에게 이르기를 이 문으로 들어오는 유다 왕들과 유다 모든 백성과 예루살렘 모든 거민 너희는 여호와의 말씀을 들을지어다	And say unto them, Hear ye the word of the Lord, ye kings of Judah, and all Judah, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that enter in by these gates:	Say to them, ‘Hear the word of the LORD, O kings of Judah, all people of Judah and Jerusalem who enter through these gates.
JER	17	21	여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 너희는 스스로 삼가서 안식일에 짐을 지고 예루살렘 문으로 들어오지 말며	Thus saith the Lord; Take heed to yourselves, and bear no burden on the sabbath day, nor bring it in by the gates of Jerusalem;	This is what the LORD says: Take heed for yourselves; do not carry a load or bring it through the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day.
JER	17	22	안식일에 너희 집에서 짐을 내지 말며 아무 일이든지 하지 말아서 내가 너희 열조에게 명함 같이 안식일을 거룩히 할지어다	Neither carry forth a burden out of your houses on the sabbath day, neither do ye any work, but hallow ye the sabbath day, as I commanded your fathers.	You must not carry a load out of your houses or do any work on the Sabbath day, but you must keep the Sabbath day holy, just as I commanded your forefathers.
JER	17	23	그들은 청종치 아니하며 귀를 기울이지 아니하며 그 목을 곧게 하여 듣지 아니하며 교훈을 받지 아니하였느니라	But they obeyed not, neither inclined their ear, but made their neck stiff, that they might not hear, nor receive instruction.	Yet they would not listen or incline their ear, but they stiffened their necks and would not listen or receive My discipline.
JER	17	24	나 여호와가 말하노라 너희가 만일 삼가 나를 청종하여 안식일에 짐을 지고 이 성문으로 들어오지 아니하며 안식일을 거룩히 하여 아무 일이든지 하지 아니하면	And it shall come to pass, if ye diligently hearken unto me, saith the Lord, to bring in no burden through the gates of this city on the sabbath day, but hallow the sabbath day, to do no work therein;	If, however, you listen carefully to Me, says the LORD, and bring no load through the gates of this city on the Sabbath day, and keep the Sabbath day holy, and do no work on it,
JER	17	25	다윗의 위에 앉는 왕들과 방백들이 병거와 말을 타고 이 성문으로 들어오되 그들과 유다 모든 백성과 예루살렘 거민들이 함께 그리할 것이요 이 성은 영영히 있을 것이며	Then shall there enter into the gates of this city kings and princes sitting upon the throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses, they, and their princes, the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem: and this city shall remain for ever.	then kings and princes will enter through the gates of this city. They will sit on the throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses with their officials, along with the men of Judah and the residents of Jerusalem, and this city will be inhabited forever.
JER	17	26	사람들이 유다 성읍들과 예루살렘에 둘린 곳들과 베냐민 땅과 평지와 산지와 남방에서 이르러서 번제와 희생과 소제와 유향과 감사의 희생을 가지고 여호와의 집으로 오려니와	And they shall come from the cities of Judah, and from the places about Jerusalem, and from the land of Benjamin, and from the plain, and from the mountains, and from the south, bringing burnt offerings, and sacrifices, and meat offerings, and incense, and bringing sacrifices of praise, unto the house of the Lord.	And people will come from the cities of Judah and the places around Jerusalem, from the land of Benjamin, and from the foothills, the hill country, and the Negev, bringing burnt offerings and sacrifices, grain offerings and frankincense, and thank offerings to the house of the LORD.
JER	17	27	너희가 나를 청종치 아니하고 안식일을 거룩케 아니하여 안식일에 짐을 지고 예루살렘 문으로 들어오면 내가 성문에 불을 놓아 예루살렘 궁전을 삼키게 하리니 그 불이 꺼지지 아니하리라 하셨다 할지니라	But if ye will not hearken unto me to hallow the sabbath day, and not to bear a burden, even entering in at the gates of Jerusalem on the sabbath day; then will I kindle a fire in the gates thereof, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched.	But if you do not listen to Me to keep the Sabbath day holy by not carrying a load while entering the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day, then I will kindle an unquenchable fire in its gates to consume the citadels of Jerusalem.’”
JER	18	1	여호와께로부터 예레미야에게 임한 말씀에 가라사대	The word which came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying,	This is the word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD:
JER	18	2	너는 일어나 토기장이의 집으로 내려가라 내가 거기서 내 말을 네게 들리리라 하시기로	Arise, and go down to the potter’s house, and there I will cause thee to hear my words.	“Go down at once to the potter’s house, and there I will reveal My message to you.”
JER	18	3	내가 토기장이의 집으로 내려가서 본즉 그가 녹로로 일을 하는데	Then I went down to the potter’s house, and, behold, he wrought a work on the wheels.	So I went down to the potter’s house and saw him working at the wheel.
JER	18	4	진흙으로 만든 그릇이 토기장이의 손에서 파상하매 그가 그것으로 자기 의견에 선한 대로 다른 그릇을 만들더라	And the vessel that he made of clay was marred in the hand of the potter: so he made it again another vessel, as seemed good to the potter to make it.	But the vessel that he was shaping from the clay became flawed in his hand; so he formed it into another vessel, as it seemed best for him to do.
JER	18	5	때에 여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하니라 가라사대	Then the word of the Lord came to me, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
JER	18	6	나 여호와가 이르노라 이스라엘 족속아 이 토기장이의 하는 것 같이 내가 능히 너희에게 행하지 못하겠느냐 이스라엘 족속아 진흙이 토기장이의 손에 있음 같이 너희가 내 손에 있느니라	O house of Israel, cannot I do with you as this potter? saith the Lord. Behold, as the clay is in the potter’s hand, so are ye in mine hand, O house of Israel.	“O house of Israel, declares the LORD, can I not treat you as this potter treats his clay? Just like clay in the potter’s hand, so are you in My hand, O house of Israel.
JER	18	7	내가 언제든지 어느 민족이나 국가를 뽑거나 파하거나 멸하리라 한다고 하자	At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it;	At any time I might announce that a nation or kingdom will be uprooted, torn down, and destroyed.
JER	18	8	만일 나의 말한 그 민족이 그 악에서 돌이키면 내가 그에게 내리기로 생각하였던 재앙에 대하여 뜻을 돌이키겠고	If that nation, against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them.	But if that nation I warned turns from its evil, then I will relent of the disaster I had planned to bring.
JER	18	9	내가 언제든지 어느 민족이나 국가를 건설하거나 심으리라 한다고 하자	And at what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to build and to plant it;	And if at another time I announce that I will build up and establish a nation or kingdom,
JER	18	10	만일 그들이 나 보기에 악한 것을 행하여 내 목소리를 청종치 아니하면 내가 그에게 유익케 하리라 한 선에 대하여 뜻을 돌이키리라	If it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice, then I will repent of the good, wherewith I said I would benefit them.	and if it does evil in My sight and does not listen to My voice, then I will relent of the good I had intended for it.
JER	18	11	그러므로 이제 너는 유다 사람들과 예루살렘 거민들에게 말하여 이르기를 여호와의 말씀에 보라 내가 너희에게 재앙을 내리며 계책을 베풀어 너희를 치려하노니 너희는 각기 악한 길에서 돌이키며 너희 길과 행위를 선하게 하라 하셨다 하라	Now therefore go to, speak to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, Thus saith the Lord; Behold, I frame evil against you, and devise a device against you: return ye now every one from his evil way, and make your ways and your doings good.	Now therefore, tell the men of Judah and the residents of Jerusalem that this is what the LORD says: ‘Behold, I am planning a disaster for you and devising a plan against you. Turn now, each of you, from your evil ways, and correct your ways and deeds.’
JER	18	12	그러나 그들이 말하기를 이는 헛된 말이라 우리는 우리의 도모대로 행하며 우리는 각기 악한 마음의 강퍅한 대로 행하리라 하느니라	And they said, There is no hope: but we will walk after our own devices, and we will every one do the imagination of his evil heart.	But they will reply, ‘It is hopeless. We will follow our own plans, and each of us will act according to the stubbornness of his evil heart.’”
JER	18	13	그러므로 나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 너희는 누가 이러한 일을 들었는가 열방 중에 물어보라 처녀 이스라엘이 심히 가증한 일을 행하였도다	Therefore thus saith the Lord; Ask ye now among the heathen, who hath heard such things: the virgin of Israel hath done a very horrible thing.	Therefore this is what the LORD says: “Inquire among the nations: Who has ever heard things like these? Virgin Israel has done a most terrible thing.
JER	18	14	레바논의 눈이 어찌 들의 반석을 떠나겠으며 원방에서 흘러 내리는 찬물이 어찌 마르겠느냐	Will a man leave the snow of Lebanon which cometh from the rock of the field? or shall the cold flowing waters that come from another place be forsaken?	Does the snow of Lebanon ever leave its rocky slopes? Or do its cool waters flowing from a distance ever run dry?
JER	18	15	대저 내 백성은 나를 잊고 허무한 것에게 분향하거니와 이러한 것들은 그들로 그 길 곧 그 옛길에서 넘어지게 하며 곁길 곧 닦지 아니한 길로 행케 하여	Because my people hath forgotten me, they have burned incense to vanity, and they have caused them to stumble in their ways from the ancient paths, to walk in paths, in a way not cast up;	Yet My people have forgotten Me. They burn incense to worthless idols that make them stumble in their ways, leaving the ancient roads to walk on rutted bypaths instead of on the highway.
JER	18	16	그들의 땅으로 놀랍고 영영한 치소가 되게 하리니 그리로 지나는 자마다 놀라서 그 머리를 흔들리라	To make their land desolate, and a perpetual hissing; every one that passeth thereby shall be astonished, and wag his head.	They have made their land a desolation, a perpetual object of scorn; all who pass by will be appalled and shake their heads.
JER	18	17	내가 그들을 그 원수 앞에서 흩기를 동풍으로 함 같이 할 것이며 그들의 재난의 날에는 내가 그들에게 등을 보이고 얼굴을 보이지 아니하리라	I will scatter them as with an east wind before the enemy; I will shew them the back, and not the face, in the day of their calamity.	I will scatter them before the enemy like the east wind. I will show them My back and not My face in the day of their calamity.”
JER	18	18	그들이 말하기를 오라 우리가 꾀를 내어 예레미야를 치자 제사장에게서 율법이, 지혜로운 자에게서 모략이, 선지자에게서 말씀이 끊어지지 아니할 것이니 오라 우리가 혀로 그를 치고 그의 아무 말에도 주의치 말자 하나이다	Then said they, Come, and let us devise devices against Jeremiah; for the law shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the prophet. Come, and let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words.	Then some said, “Come, let us make plans against Jeremiah, for the law will never be lost to the priest, nor counsel to the wise, nor an oracle to the prophet. Come, let us denounce him and pay no heed to any of his words.”
JER	18	19	여호와여 나를 돌아보사 나로 더불어 다투는 그들의 목소리를 들어보옵소서	Give heed to me, O Lord, and hearken to the voice of them that contend with me.	Attend to me, O LORD. Hear what my accusers are saying!
JER	18	20	어찌 악으로 선을 갚으리이까마는 그들이 나의 생명을 해하려고 구덩이를 팠나이다 내가 주의 분노를 그들에게서 돌이키려 하고 주의 앞에 서서 그들을 위하여 선한 말씀 한 것을 기억하옵소서	Shall evil be recompensed for good? for they have digged a pit for my soul. Remember that I stood before thee to speak good for them, and to turn away thy wrath from them.	Should good be repaid with evil? Yet they have dug a pit for me. Remember how I stood before You to speak good on their behalf, to turn Your wrath from them.
JER	18	21	그러하온즉 그들의 자녀를 기근에 내어주시며 그들을 칼의 세력에 붙이시며 그들의 아내들은 자녀를 잃고 과부가 되며 그 장정은 사망을 당하며 그 청년은 전장에서 칼을 맞게 하시며	Therefore deliver up their children to the famine, and pour out their blood by the force of the sword; and let their wives be bereaved of their children, and be widows; and let their men be put to death; let their young men be slain by the sword in battle.	Therefore, hand their children over to famine; pour out the power of the sword upon them. Let their wives become childless and widowed; let their husbands be slain by disease, their young men struck down by the sword in battle.
JER	18	22	주께서 군대로 졸지에 그들에게 임하게 하사 그들의 집에서 부르짖음이 들리게 하옵소서 이는 그들이 나를 취하려고 구덩이를 팠고 내 발을 빠치려고 올무를 베풀었음이니이다	Let a cry be heard from their houses, when thou shalt bring a troop suddenly upon them: for they have digged a pit to take me, and hid snares for my feet.	Let a cry be heard from their houses when You suddenly bring raiders against them, for they have dug a pit to capture me and have hidden snares for my feet.
JER	18	23	여호와여 그들이 나를 죽이려 하는 계략을 주께서 다 아시오니 그 악을 사하지 마시며 그 죄를 주의 목전에서 도말치 마시고 그들로 주의 앞에 넘어지게 하시되 주의 노하시는 때에 이같이 그들에게 행하옵소서	Yet, Lord, thou knowest all their counsel against me to slay me: forgive not their iniquity, neither blot out their sin from thy sight, but let them be overthrown before thee; deal thus with them in the time of thine anger.	But You, O LORD, know all their deadly plots against me. Do not wipe out their guilt or blot out their sin from Your sight. Let them be overthrown before You; deal with them in the time of Your anger.
JER	19	1	여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 가서 토기장이의 오지병을 사고 백성의 어른들과 제사장의 어른 몇 사람을 데리고	Thus saith the Lord, Go and get a potter’s earthen bottle, and take of the ancients of the people, and of the ancients of the priests;	This is what the LORD says: “Go and buy a clay jar from a potter. Take some of the elders of the people and leaders of the priests,
JER	19	2	하시드 문 어귀 곁에 있는 힌놈의 아들의 골짜기로 가서 거기서 내가 네게 이른 말을 선포하여	And go forth unto the valley of the son of Hinnom, which is by the entry of the east gate, and proclaim there the words that I shall tell thee,	and go out to the Valley of Ben-hinnom near the entrance of the Potsherd Gate. Proclaim there the words I speak to you,
JER	19	3	이르기를 너희 유다 왕들과 예루살렘 거민아 여호와의 말씀을 들으라 만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 이같이 말씀하시되 보라 내가 이곳에 재앙을 내릴 것이라 무릇 그것을 듣는 자의 귀가 진동하리니	And say, Hear ye the word of the Lord, O kings of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem; Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, the which whosoever heareth, his ears shall tingle.	saying, ‘Hear the word of the LORD, O kings of Judah and residents of Jerusalem. This is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: I am going to bring such disaster on this place that the ears of all who hear of it will ring,
JER	19	4	이는 그들이 나를 버리고 이곳을 불결케 하며 이곳에서 자기와 자기 열조와 유다 왕들의 알지 못하던 다른 신들에게 분향하며 무죄한 자의 피로 이곳에 채웠음이며	Because they have forsaken me, and have estranged this place, and have burned incense in it unto other gods, whom neither they nor their fathers have known, nor the kings of Judah, and have filled this place with the blood of innocents;	because they have abandoned Me and made this a foreign place. They have burned incense in this place to other gods that neither they nor their fathers nor the kings of Judah have ever known. They have filled this place with the blood of the innocent.
JER	19	5	또 그들이 바알을 위하여 산당을 건축하고 자기 아들들을 바알에게 번제로 불살라 드렸나니 이는 내가 명하거나 뜻한 바가 아니니라	They have built also the high places of Baal, to burn their sons with fire for burnt offerings unto Baal, which I commanded not, nor spake it, neither came it into my mind:	They have built high places to Baal on which to burn their children in the fire as offerings to Baal—something I never commanded or mentioned, nor did it even enter My mind.
JER	19	6	그러므로 나 여호와가 말하노라 보라 다시는 이곳을 도벳이나 힌놈의 아들의 골짜기라 칭하지 아니하고 살륙의 골짜기라 칭하는 날이 이를 것이라	Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that this place shall no more be called Tophet, nor The valley of the son of Hinnom, but The valley of slaughter.	So behold, the days are coming, declares the LORD, when this place will no longer be called Topheth or the Valley of Ben-hinnom, but the Valley of Slaughter.
JER	19	7	내가 이곳에서 유다와 예루살렘의 모계를 무효케 하여 그들로 그 대적 앞과 생명을 찾는 자의 손의 칼에 엎드러지게 하고 그 시체를 공중의 새와 땅 짐승의 밥이 되게 하며	And I will make void the counsel of Judah and Jerusalem in this place; and I will cause them to fall by the sword before their enemies, and by the hands of them that seek their lives: and their carcases will I give to be meat for the fowls of the heaven, and for the beasts of the earth.	And in this place I will ruin the plans of Judah and Jerusalem. I will make them fall by the sword before their enemies, by the hands of those who seek their lives, and I will give their carcasses as food to the birds of the air and the beasts of the earth.
JER	19	8	이 성으로 놀람과 모욕거리가 되게 하리니 그 모든 재앙을 인하여 지나는 자마다 놀라며 모욕할 것이며	And I will make this city desolate, and an hissing; every one that passeth thereby shall be astonished and hiss because of all the plagues thereof.	I will make this city a desolation and an object of scorn. All who pass by will be appalled and will scoff at all her wounds.
JER	19	9	그들이 그 대적과 그들의 생명을 찾는 자에게 둘러싸여 곤핍을 당할 때에 내가 그들로 그 아들의 고기, 딸의 고기를 먹게 하고 또 각기 친구의 고기를 먹게 하리라 하셨다 하고	And I will cause them to eat the flesh of their sons and the flesh of their daughters, and they shall eat every one the flesh of his friend in the siege and straitness, wherewith their enemies, and they that seek their lives, shall straiten them.	I will make them eat the flesh of their sons and daughters, and they will eat one another’s flesh in the siege and distress inflicted on them by their enemies who seek their lives.’
JER	19	10	너는 함께 가는 자의 목전에서 그 오지병을 깨뜨리고	Then shalt thou break the bottle in the sight of the men that go with thee,	Then you are to shatter the jar in the presence of the men who accompany you,
JER	19	11	그들에게 이르기를 만군의 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 사람이 토기장이의 그릇을 한번 깨뜨리면 다시 완전하게 할 수 없나니 이와 같이 내가 이 백성과 이 성을 파하리니 그들을 매장할 자리가 없도록 도벳에 장사하리라	And shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Even so will I break this people and this city, as one breaketh a potter’s vessel, that cannot be made whole again: and they shall bury them in Tophet, till there be no place to bury.	and you are to proclaim to them that this is what the LORD of Hosts says: I will shatter this nation and this city, like one shatters a potter’s jar that can never again be repaired. They will bury the dead in Topheth until there is no more room to bury them.
JER	19	12	나 여호와가 말하노라 내가 이곳과 그 중 거민에게 이같이 행하여 이 성으로 도벳 같게 할 것이라	Thus will I do unto this place, saith the Lord, and to the inhabitants thereof, and even make this city as Tophet:	This is what I will do to this place and to its residents, declares the LORD. I will make this city like Topheth.
JER	19	13	예루살렘 집들과 유다 왕들의 집들 곧 그 집들이 그 집 위에서 하늘의 만상에 분향하고 다른 신들에게 전제를 부음으로 더러워졌은즉 도벳 땅처럼 되리라 하셨다 하라	And the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses of the kings of Judah, shall be defiled as the place of Tophet, because of all the houses upon whose roofs they have burned incense unto all the host of heaven, and have poured out drink offerings unto other gods.	The houses of Jerusalem and the houses of the kings of Judah will be defiled like that place, Topheth—all the houses on whose rooftops they burned incense to all the host of heaven and poured out drink offerings to other gods.”
JER	19	14	예레미야가 여호와께서 자기를 보내사 예언하게 하신 도벳에서 돌아와 여호와의 집 뜰에 서서 모든 백성에게 말하되	Then came Jeremiah from Tophet, whither the Lord had sent him to prophesy; and he stood in the court of the Lord’s house; and said to all the people,	Then Jeremiah returned from Topheth, where the LORD had sent him to prophesy, and he stood in the courtyard of the house of the LORD and proclaimed to all the people,
JER	19	15	만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 말씀하시되 보라 내가 이 성에 대하여 선언한 모든 재앙을 이 성과 그 모든 촌락에 내리리니 이는 그 목을 곧게 하여 내 말을 듣지 아니함이니라 하셨다 하라	Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will bring upon this city and upon all her towns all the evil that I have pronounced against it, because they have hardened their necks, that they might not hear my words.	“This is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: ‘Behold, I am about to bring on this city and on all the villages around it every disaster I have pronounced against them, because they have stiffened their necks so as not to heed My words.’”
JER	20	1	제사장 임멜의 아들 바스훌은 여호와의 집 유사장이라 그가 예레미야의 이 일 예언함을 들은지라	Now Pashur the son of Immer the priest, who was also chief governor in the house of the Lord, heard that Jeremiah prophesied these things.	When Pashhur the priest, the son of Immer and the chief official in the house of the LORD, heard Jeremiah prophesying these things,
JER	20	2	이에 바스훌이 선지자 예레미야를 때리고 여호와의 집 베냐민의 윗문에 있는 착고에 채웠더니	Then Pashur smote Jeremiah the prophet, and put him in the stocks that were in the high gate of Benjamin, which was by the house of the Lord.	he had Jeremiah the prophet beaten and put in the stocks at the Upper Gate of Benjamin, which was by the house of the LORD.
JER	20	3	다음날 바스훌이 예레미야를 착고에서 놓아 주매 예레미야가 그에게 이르되 여호와께서 네 이름을 바스훌이라 아니하시고 마골밋사빕이라 하시느니라	And it came to pass on the morrow, that Pashur brought forth Jeremiah out of the stocks. Then said Jeremiah unto him, The Lord hath not called thy name Pashur, but Magor–missabib.	The next day, when Pashhur released Jeremiah from the stocks, Jeremiah said to him, “The LORD does not call you Pashhur, but Magor-missabib.
JER	20	4	대저 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 보라 내가 너로 너와 네 모든 친구에게 두려움이 되게 하리니 그들이 그 원수의 칼에 엎드러질 것이요 네 눈은 그것을 볼 것이며 내가 온 유다를 바벨론 왕의 손에 붙이리니 그가 그들을 사로잡아 바벨론으로 옮겨 칼로 죽이리라	For thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will make thee a terror to thyself, and to all thy friends: and they shall fall by the sword of their enemies, and thine eyes shall behold it: and I will give all Judah into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall carry them captive into Babylon, and shall slay them with the sword.	For this is what the LORD says: ‘I will make you a terror to yourself and to all your friends. They will fall by the sword of their enemies before your very eyes. And I will hand Judah over to the king of Babylon, and he will carry them away to Babylon and put them to the sword.
JER	20	5	내가 또 이 성의 모든 부와 그 모든 소득과 그 모든 귀물과 유다 왕들의 모든 보물을 그 원수의 손에 붙이리니 그들이 그것을 탈취하여 바벨론으로 가져가리라	Moreover I will deliver all the strength of this city, and all the labours thereof, and all the precious things thereof, and all the treasures of the kings of Judah will I give into the hand of their enemies, which shall spoil them, and take them, and carry them to Babylon.	I will give away all the wealth of this city—all its products and valuables, and all the treasures of the kings of Judah—to their enemies. They will plunder them, seize them, and carry them off to Babylon.
JER	20	6	바스훌아 너와 네 집에 거하는 모든 자가 포로 되어 옮기우리니 네가 바벨론에 이르러 거기서 죽어 거기 묻힐 것이라 너와 네가 거짓 예언을 하여 들린 네 모든 친구도 일반이리라 하셨느니라	And thou, Pashur, and all that dwell in thine house shall go into captivity: and thou shalt come to Babylon, and there thou shalt die, and shalt be buried there, thou, and all thy friends, to whom thou hast prophesied lies.	And you, Pashhur, and all who live in your house, will go into captivity. You will go to Babylon, and there you will die and be buried—you and all your friends to whom you have prophesied these lies.’”
JER	20	7	여호와여 주께서 나를 권유하시므로 내가 그 권유를 받았사오며 주께서 나보다 강하사 이기셨으므로 내가 조롱거리가 되니 사람마다 종일토록 나를 조롱하나이다	O Lord, thou hast deceived me, and I was deceived: thou art stronger than I, and hast prevailed: I am in derision daily, every one mocketh me.	You have deceived me, O LORD, and I was deceived. You have overcome me and prevailed. I am a laughingstock all day long; everyone mocks me.
JER	20	8	대저 내가 말할 때마다 외치며 강포와 멸망을 부르짖으오니 여호와의 말씀으로 하여 내가 종일토록 치욕과 모욕거리가 됨이니이다	For since I spake, I cried out, I cried violence and spoil; because the word of the Lord was made a reproach unto me, and a derision, daily.	For whenever I speak, I cry out; I proclaim violence and destruction. For the word of the LORD has become to me a reproach and derision all day long.
JER	20	9	내가 다시는 여호와를 선포하지 아니하며 그 이름으로 말하지 아니하리라 하면 나의 중심이 불붙는 것 같아서 골수에 사무치니 답답하여 견딜 수 없나이다	Then I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his name. But his word was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay.	If I say, “I will not mention Him or speak any more in His name,” His message becomes a fire burning in my heart, shut up in my bones, and I become weary of holding it in, and I cannot prevail.
JER	20	10	나는 무리의 비방과 사방의 두려움을 들었나이다 그들이 이르기를 고소하라 우리도 고소하리라 하오며 나의 친한 벗도 다 나의 타락하기를 기다리며 피차 이르기를 그가 혹시 유혹을 받으리니 우리가 그를 이기어 우리 원수를 갚자 하나이다	For I heard the defaming of many, fear on every side. Report, say they, and we will report it. All my familiars watched for my halting, saying, Peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him, and we shall take our revenge on him.	For I have heard the whispering of many: “Terror is on every side! Report him; let us report him!” All my trusted friends watch for my fall: “Perhaps he will be deceived so that we may prevail against him and take our vengeance upon him.”
JER	20	11	그러하오나 여호와는 두려운 용사 같으시며 나와 함께하시는고로 나를 박해하는 자가 넘어지고 이기지 못할 것이오며 그들은 지혜롭게 행치 못하므로 큰 수욕을 당하오리니 그 수욕은 영영히 잊지 못할 것이니이다	But the Lord is with me as a mighty terrible one: therefore my persecutors shall stumble, and they shall not prevail: they shall be greatly ashamed; for they shall not prosper: their everlasting confusion shall never be forgotten.	But the LORD is with me like a fearsome warrior. Therefore, my persecutors will stumble and will not prevail. Since they have not succeeded, they will be utterly put to shame, with an everlasting disgrace that will never be forgotten.
JER	20	12	의인을 시험하사 그 폐부와 심장을 보시는 만군의 여호와여 나의 사정을 주께 아뢰었사온즉 주께서 그들에게 보수하심을 나로 보게 하옵소서	But, O Lord of hosts, that triest the righteous, and seest the reins and the heart, let me see thy vengeance on them: for unto thee have I opened my cause.	O LORD of Hosts, who examines the righteous, who sees the heart and mind, let me see Your vengeance upon them, for to You I have committed my cause.
JER	20	13	여호와께 노래하라 너희는 여호와를 찬양하라 가난한 자의 생명을 행악자의 손에서 구원하셨음이니라	Sing unto the Lord, praise ye the Lord: for he hath delivered the soul of the poor from the hand of evildoers.	Sing to the LORD! Praise the LORD! For He rescues the life of the needy from the hands of evildoers.
JER	20	14	내 생일이 저주를 받았더면, 나의 어미가 나를 생산하던 날이 복이 없었더면,	Cursed be the day wherein I was born: let not the day wherein my mother bare me be blessed.	Cursed be the day I was born! May the day my mother bore me never be blessed.
JER	20	15	나의 아비에게 소식을 전하여 이르기를 네가 생남하였다 하여 아비를 즐겁게 하던 자가 저주를 받았더면,	Cursed be the man who brought tidings to my father, saying, A man child is born unto thee; making him very glad.	Cursed be the man who brought my father the news, saying, “A son is born to you,” bringing him great joy.
JER	20	16	그 사람은 여호와께서 훼파하시고 후회치 아니하신 성읍 같이 되었더면, 그로 아침에는 부르짖는 소리, 낮에는 떠드는 소리를 듣게 하였더면,	And let that man be as the cities which the Lord overthrew, and repented not: and let him hear the cry in the morning, and the shouting at noontide;	May that man be like the cities that the LORD overthrew without compassion. May he hear an outcry in the morning and a battle cry at noon,
JER	20	17	이는 그가 나를 태에서 죽이지 아니하셨으며 나의 어미로 내 무덤이 되게 하지 아니하셨으며 그 배로 항상 부르게 하지 아니하신 연고로다	Because he slew me not from the womb; or that my mother might have been my grave, and her womb to be always great with me.	because he did not kill me in the womb so that my mother might have been my grave, and her womb forever enlarged.
JER	20	18	어찌하여 내가 태에서 나와서 고생과 슬픔을 보며 나의 날을 수욕으로 보내는고	Wherefore came I forth out of the womb to see labour and sorrow, that my days should be consumed with shame?	Why did I come out of the womb to see only trouble and sorrow, and to end my days in shame?
JER	21	1	시드기야 왕이 말기야의 아들 바스훌과 제사장 마아세야의 아들 스바냐를 보내어 예레미야에게 말하기를 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살이 우리를 치니 청컨대 너는 우리를 위하여 여호와께 간구하라 여호와께서 혹시 그 모든 기사로 우리를 도와 행하시면 그가 우리를 떠나리라 하던 그 때에 여호와께로부터 예레미야에게 말씀이 임하니라	The word which came unto Jeremiah from the Lord, when king Zedekiah sent unto him Pashur the son of Melchiah, and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest, saying,	This is the word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD when King Zedekiah sent to him Pashhur son of Malchijah and the priest Zephaniah son of Maaseiah. They said,
JER	21	2		Enquire, I pray thee, of the Lord for us; for Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon maketh war against us; if so be that the Lord will deal with us according to all his wondrous works, that he may go up from us.	“Please inquire of the LORD on our behalf, since Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon is waging war against us. Perhaps the LORD will perform for us something like all His past wonders, so that Nebuchadnezzar will withdraw from us.”
JER	21	3	예레미야가 그들에게 대답하되 너희는 시드기야에게 이같이 말하라	Then said Jeremiah unto them, Thus shall ye say to Zedekiah:	But Jeremiah answered, “You are to tell Zedekiah that
JER	21	4	이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 보라 너희가 성밖에서 바벨론 왕과 또 너희를 에운 갈대아인과 싸우는 바 너희 손에 가진 병기를 내가 돌이킬 것이요 그들을 이 성 중에 모아 들이리라	Thus saith the Lord God of Israel; Behold, I will turn back the weapons of war that are in your hands, wherewith ye fight against the king of Babylon, and against the Chaldeans, which besiege you without the walls, and I will assemble them into the midst of this city.	this is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: ‘I will turn against you the weapons of war in your hands, with which you are fighting the king of Babylon and the Chaldeans who besiege you outside the wall, and I will assemble their forces in the center of this city.
JER	21	5	내가 든 손과 강한 팔 곧 노와 분과 대노로 친히 너희를 칠 것이며	And I myself will fight against you with an outstretched hand and with a strong arm, even in anger, and in fury, and in great wrath.	And I Myself will fight against you with an outstretched hand and a mighty arm, with anger, fury, and great wrath.
JER	21	6	내가 또 이 성에 거주하는 자를 사람이나 짐승이나 다 치리니 그들이 큰 염병에 죽으리라 하셨다 하라	And I will smite the inhabitants of this city, both man and beast: they shall die of a great pestilence.	I will strike down the residents of this city, both man and beast. They will die in a terrible plague.’
JER	21	7	여호와께서 또 말씀하시되 그 후에 내가 유다 왕 시드기야와 그 신하들과 백성과 및 이 성읍에서 염병과 칼과 기근에서 남은 자를 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살의 손과 그 대적의 손과 그 생명을 찾는 자들의 손에 붙이리니 그가 칼날로 그들을 치되 아끼지 아니하며 긍휼히 여기지 아니하며 불쌍히 여기지 아니하리라 하셨느니라	And afterward, saith the Lord, I will deliver Zedekiah king of Judah, and his servants, and the people, and such as are left in this city from the pestilence, from the sword, and from the famine, into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those that seek their life: and he shall smite them with the edge of the sword; he shall not spare them, neither have pity, nor have mercy.	‘After that,’ declares the LORD, ‘I will hand over Zedekiah king of Judah, his officers, and the people in this city who survive the plague and sword and famine, to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon and to their enemies who seek their lives. He will put them to the sword; he will not spare them or show pity or compassion.’
JER	21	8	여호와께서 가라사대 너는 또 백성에게 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하신다 하라 보라 내가 너희 앞에 생명의 길과 사망의 길을 두었노니	And unto this people thou shalt say, Thus saith the Lord; Behold, I set before you the way of life, and the way of death.	Furthermore, you are to tell this people that this is what the LORD says: ‘Behold, I set before you the way of life and the way of death.
JER	21	9	이 성에 거주하는 자는 칼과 기근과 염병에 죽으려니와 너희를 에운 갈대아인에게 나가서 항복하는 자는 살리니 그의 생명은 노략한 것 같이 얻으리라	He that abideth in this city shall die by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence: but he that goeth out, and falleth to the Chaldeans that besiege you, he shall live, and his life shall be unto him for a prey.	Whoever stays in this city will die by sword and famine and plague, but whoever goes out and surrenders to the Chaldeans who besiege you will live; he will retain his life like a spoil of war.
JER	21	10	나 여호와가 말하노라 내가 나의 얼굴을 이 성으로 향함은 복을 위함이 아니요 화를 위함이라 이 성이 바벨론 왕의 손에 붙임이 될 것이요 그는 그것을 불로 사르리라	For I have set my face against this city for evil, and not for good, saith the Lord: it shall be given into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire.	For I have set My face against this city to bring disaster and not good, declares the LORD. It will be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon, who will destroy it with fire.’
JER	21	11	유다 왕의 집에 대한 여호와의 말을 들으라	And touching the house of the king of Judah, say, Hear ye the word of the Lord;	Moreover, tell the house of the king of Judah to hear the word of the LORD.
JER	21	12	나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 다윗의 집이여 너는 아침마다 공평히 판결하여 탈취 당한 자를 압박자의 손에서 건지라 그리하지 아니하면 너희는 악행을 인하여 내 노가 불 같이 일어나서 사르리니 능히 끌 자가 없으리라	O house of David, thus saith the Lord; Execute judgment in the morning, and deliver him that is spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor, lest my fury go out like fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings.	O house of David, this is what the LORD says: ‘Administer justice every morning, and rescue the victim of robbery from the hand of his oppressor, or My wrath will go forth like fire and burn with no one to extinguish it because of their evil deeds.
JER	21	13	나 여호와가 이르노라 골짜기와 평원 반석의 거민아 보라 너희가 말하기를 누가 내려와서 우리를 치리요 누가 우리의 거처에 들어오리요 하거니와 나는 네 대적이라	Behold, I am against thee, O inhabitant of the valley, and rock of the plain, saith the Lord; which say, Who shall come down against us? or who shall enter into our habitations?	Behold, I am against you who dwell above the valley, atop the rocky plateau— declares the LORD— you who say, “Who can come against us? Who can enter our dwellings?”
JER	21	14	내가 너희 행위대로 벌할 것이요 내가 또 수풀에 불을 놓아 그 사경을 사르리라 여호와의 말이니라	But I will punish you according to the fruit of your doings, saith the Lord: and I will kindle a fire in the forest thereof, and it shall devour all things round about it.	I will punish you as your deeds deserve, declares the LORD. I will kindle a fire in your forest that will consume everything around you.’”
JER	22	1	여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 너는 유다 왕의 집에 내려가서 거기서 이를 선언하여	Thus saith the Lord; Go down to the house of the king of Judah, and speak there this word,	This is what the LORD says: “Go down to the palace of the king of Judah and proclaim this message there,
JER	22	2	이르기를 다윗의 위에 앉은 유다 왕이여 너와 네 신하와 이 문들로 들어오는 네 백성은 여호와의 말씀을 들을지니라	And say, Hear the word of the Lord, O king of Judah, that sittest upon the throne of David, thou, and thy servants, and thy people that enter in by these gates:	saying, ‘Hear the word of the LORD, O king of Judah, who sits on the throne of David—you and your officials and your people who enter these gates.
JER	22	3	여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 너희가 공평과 정의를 행하여 탈취 당한 자를 압박하는 자의 손에서 건지고 이방인과 고아와 과부를 압박하거나 학대하지 말며 이곳에서 무죄한 피를 흘리지 말라	Thus saith the Lord; Execute ye judgment and righteousness, and deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor: and do no wrong, do no violence to the stranger, the fatherless, nor the widow, neither shed innocent blood in this place.	This is what the LORD says: Administer justice and righteousness. Rescue the victim of robbery from the hand of his oppressor. Do no wrong or violence to the foreigner, the fatherless, or the widow. Do not shed innocent blood in this place.
JER	22	4	너희가 참으로 이 말을 준행하면 다윗의 위에 앉을 왕들과 신하들과 백성이 병거와 말을 타고 이 집 문으로 들어오게 되리라마는	For if ye do this thing indeed, then shall there enter in by the gates of this house kings sitting upon the throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses, he, and his servants, and his people.	For if you will indeed carry out these commands, then kings who sit on David’s throne will enter through the gates of this palace riding on chariots and horses—they and their officials and their people.
JER	22	5	너희가 이 말을 듣지 아니하면 내가 나로 맹세하노니 이 집이 황무하리라 나 여호와의 말이니라	But if ye will not hear these words, I swear by myself, saith the Lord, that this house shall become a desolation.	But if you do not obey these words, then I swear by Myself, declares the LORD, that this house will become a pile of rubble.’”
JER	22	6	나 여호와가 유다 왕의 집에 대하여 이같이 말하노라 네가 내게 길르앗 같고 레바논의 꼭대기 같으나 내가 정녕히 너로 광야와 거민이 없는 성을 만들 것이라	For thus saith the Lord unto the king’s house of Judah; Thou art Gilead unto me, and the head of Lebanon: yet surely I will make thee a wilderness, and cities which are not inhabited.	For this is what the LORD says concerning the house of the king of Judah: “You are like Gilead to Me, like the summit of Lebanon; but I will surely turn you into a desert, like cities that are uninhabited.
JER	22	7	내가 너 파멸할 자를 준비하리니 그들이 각기 손에 병기를 가지고 네 아름다운 백향목을 찍어 불에 던지리라	And I will prepare destroyers against thee, every one with his weapons: and they shall cut down thy choice cedars, and cast them into the fire.	I will appoint destroyers against you, each man with his weapons, and they will cut down the choicest of your cedars and throw them into the fire.
JER	22	8	여러 나라 사람이 이 성으로 지나며 피차 말하기를 여호와가 이 큰 성에 이같이 행함은 어찜인고 하겠고	And many nations shall pass by this city, and they shall say every man to his neighbour, Wherefore hath the Lord done thus unto this great city?	And many nations will pass by this city and ask one another, ‘Why has the LORD done such a thing to this great city?’
JER	22	9	대답하기는 이는 그들이 자기 하나님 여호와의 언약을 버리고 다른 신들에게 절하고 그를 섬긴 연고라 하리라 하셨다 할찌니라	Then they shall answer, Because they have forsaken the covenant of the Lord their God, and worshipped other gods, and served them.	Then people will reply, ‘Because they have forsaken the covenant of the LORD their God and have worshiped and served other gods.’”
JER	22	10	너희는 죽은 자를 위하여 울지 말며 그를 위하여 애통하지 말고 잡혀간 자를 위하여 슬피 울라 그는 다시 돌아와서 그 고국을 보지 못할 것임이니라	Weep ye not for the dead, neither bemoan him: but weep sore for him that goeth away: for he shall return no more, nor see his native country.	Do not weep for the dead king; do not mourn his loss. Weep bitterly for the one who is exiled, for he will never return to see his native land.
JER	22	11	나 여호와가 유다 왕 요시야의 아들 곧 그 아비 요시야를 이어 왕이 되었다가 이곳에서 나간 살룸에 대하여 말하노라 그가 이곳으로 다시 돌아오지 못하고	For thus saith the Lord touching Shallum the son of Josiah king of Judah, which reigned instead of Josiah his father, which went forth out of this place; He shall not return thither any more:	For this is what the LORD says concerning Shallum son of Josiah, king of Judah, who succeeded his father Josiah but has gone forth from this place: “He will never return,
JER	22	12	잡혀간 곳에서 죽으리니 이 땅을 다시 보지 못하리라	But he shall die in the place whither they have led him captive, and shall see this land no more.	but he will die in the place to which he was exiled; he will never see this land again.”
JER	22	13	불의로 그 집을 세우며 불공평으로 그 다락방을 지으며 그 이웃을 고용하고 그 고가를 주지 아니하는 자에게 화 있을진저	Woe unto him that buildeth his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong; that useth his neighbour’s service without wages, and giveth him not for his work;	“Woe to him who builds his palace by unrighteousness, and his upper rooms without justice, who makes his countrymen serve without pay, and fails to pay their wages,
JER	22	14	그가 이르기를 내가 나를 위하여 광대한 집과 광활한 다락방을 지으리라 하고 자기를 위하여 창을 만들고 그것에 백향목으로 입히고 붉은 빛으로 칠하도다	That saith, I will build me a wide house and large chambers, and cutteth him out windows; and it is cieled with cedar, and painted with vermilion.	who says, ‘I will build myself a great palace, with spacious upper rooms.’ So he cuts windows in it, panels it with cedar, and paints it with vermilion.
JER	22	15	네가 백향목으로 집 짓기를 경쟁하므로 왕이 될 수 있겠느냐 네 아비가 먹으며 마시지 아니하였으며 공평과 의리를 행치 아니하였느냐 그 때에 그가 형통하였었느니라	Shalt thou reign, because thou closest thyself in cedar? did not thy father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice, and then it was well with him?	Does it make you a king to excel in cedar? Did not your father have food and drink? He administered justice and righteousness, and so it went well with him.
JER	22	16	그는 가난한 자와 궁핍한 자를 신원하고 형통하였나니 이것이 나를 앎이 아니냐 여호와의 말이니라	He judged the cause of the poor and needy; then it was well with him: was not this to know me? saith the Lord.	He took up the cause of the poor and needy, and so it went well with him. Is this not what it means to know Me?” declares the LORD.
JER	22	17	그러나 네 눈과 마음은 탐남과 무죄한 피를 흘림과 압박과 강포를 행하려 할 뿐이니라	But thine eyes and thine heart are not but for thy covetousness, and for to shed innocent blood, and for oppression, and for violence, to do it.	“But your eyes and heart are set on nothing except your own dishonest gain, on shedding innocent blood, on practicing extortion and oppression.”
JER	22	18	그러므로 나 여호와가 유다 왕 요시야의 아들 여호야김에게 대하여 이같이 말하노라 무리가 그를 위하여 슬프다 내 형제여 슬프다 내 자매여 하며 통곡하지 아니할 것이며 그를 위하여 슬프다 주여 슬프다 그 영광이여 하며 통곡하지도 아니할 것이라	Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah; They shall not lament for him, saying, Ah my brother! or, Ah sister! they shall not lament for him, saying, Ah lord! or, Ah his glory!	Therefore this is what the LORD says concerning Jehoiakim son of Josiah king of Judah: “They will not mourn for him: ‘Alas, my brother! Alas, my sister!’ They will not mourn for him: ‘Alas, my master! Alas, his splendor!’
JER	22	19	그가 끌려 예루살렘 문 밖에 던지우고 나귀 같이 매장함을 당하리라	He shall be buried with the burial of an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem.	He will be buried like a donkey, dragged away and thrown outside the gates of Jerusalem.
JER	22	20	너는 레바논에 올라 외치며 바산에서 네 소리를 높이며 아바림에서 외치라 이는 너를 사랑하는 자가 다 멸망하였음이니라	Go up to Lebanon, and cry; and lift up thy voice in Bashan, and cry from the passages: for all thy lovers are destroyed.	Go up to Lebanon and cry out; raise your voice in Bashan; cry out from Abarim, for all your lovers have been crushed.
JER	22	21	네가 평안할 때에 내가 네게 말하였으나 네 말이 나는 듣지 아니하리라 하였나니 네가 어려서부터 내 목소리를 청종치 아니함이 네 습관이라	I spake unto thee in thy prosperity; but thou saidst, I will not hear. This hath been thy manner from thy youth, that thou obeyedst not my voice.	I warned you when you were secure. You said, ‘I will not listen.’ This has been your way from youth, that you have not obeyed My voice.
JER	22	22	네 목자들은 다 바람에 삼키울 것이요 너를 사랑하는 자들은 사로잡혀 가리니 그 때에 네가 반드시 네 모든 악을 인하여 수치와 욕을 당하리라	The wind shall eat up all thy pastors, and thy lovers shall go into captivity: surely then shalt thou be ashamed and confounded for all thy wickedness.	The wind will drive away all your shepherds, and your lovers will go into captivity. Then you will be ashamed and humiliated because of all your wickedness.
JER	22	23	레바논에 거하여 백향목에 깃들이는 자여 여인의 해산하는 고통같은 고통이 네게 임할 때에 너의 가련함이 얼마나 심하랴	O inhabitant of Lebanon, that makest thy nest in the cedars, how gracious shalt thou be when pangs come upon thee, the pain as of a woman in travail!	O inhabitant of Lebanon, nestled in the cedars, how you will groan when pangs of anguish come upon you, agony like a woman in labor.”
JER	22	24	나 여호와가 말하노라 나의 삶으로 맹세하노니 유다 왕 여호야김의 아들 너 고니야가 나의 오른손의 인장반지라 할지라도 내가 빼어	As I live, saith the Lord, though Coniah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah were the signet upon my right hand, yet would I pluck thee thence;	“As surely as I live,” declares the LORD, “even if you, Coniah son of Jehoiakim king of Judah, were a signet ring on My right hand, I would pull you off.
JER	22	25	네 생명을 찾는 자의 손과 너의 두려워하는 자의 손 곧 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살의 손과 갈대아인의 손에 줄 것이라	And I will give thee into the hand of them that seek thy life, and into the hand of them whose face thou fearest, even into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of the Chaldeans.	In fact, I will hand you over to those you dread, who want to take your life—to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon and to the Chaldeans.
JER	22	26	내가 너와 너를 낳은 어미를 너희가 나지 아니한 다른 지방에 쫓아내리니 너희가 거기서 죽고	And I will cast thee out, and thy mother that bare thee, into another country, where ye were not born; and there shall ye die.	I will hurl you and the mother who gave you birth into another land, where neither of you were born—and there you both will die.
JER	22	27	너희 마음에 돌아오기를 사모하는 땅에 돌아오지 못하리라	But to the land whereunto they desire to return, thither shall they not return.	You will never return to the land for which you long.”
JER	22	28	이 사람 고니야는 천한 파기냐 좋아하지 아니하는 그릇이냐 어찌하여 그와 그 자손이 쫓겨나서 알지 못하는 땅에 들어갔는고	Is this man Coniah a despised broken idol? is he a vessel wherein is no pleasure? wherefore are they cast out, he and his seed, and are cast into a land which they know not?	Is this man Coniah a despised and shattered pot, a jar that no one wants? Why are he and his descendants hurled out and cast into a land they do not know?
JER	22	29	땅이여, 땅이여, 땅이여 여호와의 말을 들을지니라	O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord.	O land, land, land, hear the word of the LORD!
JER	22	30	나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 너희는 이 사람이 무자하겠고 그 평생에 형통치 못할 자라 기록하라 이는 그 자손 중 형통하여 다윗의 위에 앉아 유다를 다스릴 사람이 다시는 없을 것임이니라	Thus saith the Lord, Write ye this man childless, a man that shall not prosper in his days: for no man of his seed shall prosper, sitting upon the throne of David, and ruling any more in Judah.	This is what the LORD says: “Enroll this man as childless, a man who will not prosper in his lifetime. None of his descendants will prosper to sit on the throne of David or to rule again in Judah.”
JER	23	1	나 여호와가 말하노라 내 목장의 양무리를 멸하며 흩는 목자에게 화 있으리라	Woe be unto the pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my pasture! saith the Lord.	“Woe to the shepherds who destroy and scatter the sheep of My pasture!” declares the LORD.
JER	23	2	그러므로 이스라엘 하나님 나 여호와가 내 백성을 기르는 목자에게 이같이 말하노라 너희가 내 양무리를 흩으며 그것을 몰아내고 돌아보지 아니하였도다 보라 내가 너희의 악행을 인하여 너희에게 보응하리라 여호와의 말이니라	Therefore thus saith the Lord God of Israel against the pastors that feed my people; Ye have scattered my flock, and driven them away, and have not visited them: behold, I will visit upon you the evil of your doings, saith the Lord.	Therefore this is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says about the shepherds who tend My people: “You have scattered My flock and driven them away, and have not attended to them. Behold, I will attend to you for the evil of your deeds, declares the LORD.
JER	23	3	내가 내 양무리의 남은 자를 그 몰려갔던 모든 지방에서 모아 내어 다시 그 우리로 돌아오게 하리니 그들의 생육이 번성할 것이며	And I will gather the remnant of my flock out of all countries whither I have driven them, and will bring them again to their folds; and they shall be fruitful and increase.	Then I Myself will gather the remnant of My flock from all the lands to which I have banished them, and I will return them to their pasture, where they will be fruitful and multiply.
JER	23	4	내가 그들을 기르는 목자들을 그들 위에 세우리니 그들이 다시는 두려워하거나 놀라거나 축이 나지 아니하리라 여호와의 말이니라	And I will set up shepherds over them which shall feed them: and they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither shall they be lacking, saith the Lord.	I will raise up shepherds over them who will tend them, and they will no longer be afraid or dismayed, nor will any go missing, declares the LORD.
JER	23	5	나 여호와가 말하노라 보라 때가 이르리니 내가 다윗에게 한 의로운 가지를 일으킬 것이라 그가 왕이 되어 지혜롭게 행사하며 세상에서 공평과 정의를 행할 것이며	Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth.	Behold, the days are coming, declares the LORD, when I will raise up for David a righteous Branch, and He will reign wisely as King and will administer justice and righteousness in the land.
JER	23	6	그의 날에 유다는 구원을 얻겠고 이스라엘은 평안히 거할 것이며 그 이름은 여호와 우리의 의라 일컬음을 받으리라	In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: and this is his name whereby he shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.	In His days Judah will be saved, and Israel will dwell securely. And this is His name by which He will be called: The LORD Our Righteousness.
JER	23	7	그러므로 나 여호와가 말하노라 보라 날이 이르리니 그들이 다시는 이스라엘 자손을 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내신 여호와의 사심으로 맹세하지 아니하고	Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that they shall no more say, The Lord liveth, which brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt;	So behold, the days are coming, declares the LORD, when they will no longer say, ‘As surely as the LORD lives, who brought the Israelites up out of the land of Egypt.’
JER	23	8	이스라엘 집 자손을 북방 땅 그 모든 쫓겨났던 나라에서 인도하여 내신 여호와의 사심으로 맹세할 것이며 그들이 자기 땅에 거하리라 하시니라	But, The Lord liveth, which brought up and which led the seed of the house of Israel out of the north country, and from all countries whither I had driven them; and they shall dwell in their own land.	Instead they will say, ‘As surely as the LORD lives, who brought and led the descendants of the house of Israel up out of the land of the north and all the other lands to which He had banished them.’ Then they will dwell once more in their own land.”
JER	23	9	선지자들에 대한 말씀이라 내 중심이 상하며 내 모든 뼈가 떨리며 내가 취한 사람 같으며 포도주에 잡힌 사람 같으니 이는 여호와와 그 거룩한 말씀을 인함이라	Mine heart within me is broken because of the prophets; all my bones shake; I am like a drunken man, and like a man whom wine hath overcome, because of the Lord, and because of the words of his holiness.	As for the prophets: My heart is broken within me, and all my bones tremble. I have become like a drunkard, like a man overcome by wine, because of the LORD, because of His holy words.
JER	23	10	이 땅에 행음하는 자가 가득하도다 저주로 인하여 땅이 슬퍼하며 광야의 초장들이 마르나니 그들의 행위가 악하고 힘쓰는 것이 정직하지 못함이로다	For the land is full of adulterers; for because of swearing the land mourneth; the pleasant places of the wilderness are dried up, and their course is evil, and their force is not right.	For the land is full of adulterers— because of the curse, the land mourns and the pastures of the wilderness have dried up— their course is evil and their power is misused.
JER	23	11	여호와께서 말씀하시되 선지자와 제사장이 다 사특한지라 내가 내 집에서도 그들의 악을 발견하였노라	For both prophet and priest are profane; yea, in my house have I found their wickedness, saith the Lord.	“For both prophet and priest are ungodly; even in My house I have found their wickedness,” declares the LORD.
JER	23	12	그러므로 그들의 길이 그들에게 흑암 중에 미끄러운 곳과 같이 되고 그들이 밀침을 받아 그 길에 엎드러질 것이라 그들을 벌하는 해에 내가 그들에게 재앙을 내리리라 여호와의 말이니라	Wherefore their way shall be unto them as slippery ways in the darkness: they shall be driven on, and fall therein: for I will bring evil upon them, even the year of their visitation, saith the Lord.	“Therefore their path will become slick; they will be driven away into the darkness and fall into it. For I will bring disaster upon them in the year of their punishment,” declares the LORD.
JER	23	13	내가 사마리아 선지자들 중에 우매함이 있음을 보았나니 그들은 바알을 의탁하고 예언하여 내 백성 이스라엘을 그릇되게 하였고	And I have seen folly in the prophets of Samaria; they prophesied in Baal, and caused my people Israel to err.	“Among the prophets of Samaria I saw an offensive thing: They prophesied by Baal and led My people Israel astray.
JER	23	14	내가 예루살렘 선지자들 중에도 가증한 일이 있음을 보았나니 그들은 간음을 행하며 행악자의 손을 굳게 하여 사람으로 그 악에서 돌이킴이 없게 하였은즉 그들은 다 내 앞에서 소돔 사람과 다름이 없고 그 거민은 고모라 사람과 다름이 없느니라	I have seen also in the prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing: they commit adultery, and walk in lies: they strengthen also the hands of evildoers, that none doth return from his wickedness: they are all of them unto me as Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah.	And among the prophets of Jerusalem I have seen a horrible thing: They commit adultery and walk in lies. They strengthen the hands of evildoers, so that no one turns his back on wickedness. They are all like Sodom to Me; the people of Jerusalem are like Gomorrah.”
JER	23	15	그러므로 만군의 여호와 내가 선지자에 대하여 이같이 말하노라 보라 내가 그들에게 쑥을 먹이며 독한 물을 마시우리니 이는 사악이 예루살렘 선지자들에게로서 나와서 온 땅에 퍼짐이라 하시니라	Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts concerning the prophets; Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and make them drink the water of gall: for from the prophets of Jerusalem is profaneness gone forth into all the land.	Therefore this is what the LORD of Hosts says concerning the prophets: “I will feed them wormwood and give them poisoned water to drink, for from the prophets of Jerusalem ungodliness has spread throughout the land.”
JER	23	16	만군의 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 너희에게 예언하는 선지자들의 말을 듣지 말라 그들은 너희에게 헛된 것을 가르치나니 그들의 말한 묵시는 자기 마음으로 말미암은 것이요 여호와의 입에서 나온 것이 아니니라	Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Hearken not unto the words of the prophets that prophesy unto you: they make you vain: they speak a vision of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord.	This is what the LORD of Hosts says: “Do not listen to the words of the prophets who prophesy to you. They are filling you with false hopes. They speak visions from their own minds, not from the mouth of the LORD.
JER	23	17	항상 그들이 나를 멸시하는 자에게 이르기를 너희가 평안하리라 여호와의 말씀이니라 하며 또 자기 마음의 강퍅한 대로 행하는 모든 사람에게 이르기를 재앙이 너희에게 임하지 아니하리라 하였느니라	They say still unto them that despise me, The Lord hath said, Ye shall have peace; and they say unto every one that walketh after the imagination of his own heart, No evil shall come upon you.	They keep saying to those who despise Me, ‘The LORD says that you will have peace,’ and to everyone who walks in the stubbornness of his own heart, ‘No harm will come to you.’
JER	23	18	누가 여호와의 회의에 참여하여 그 말을 알아들었으며 누가 귀를 기울여 그 말을 들었느뇨	For who hath stood in the counsel of the Lord, and hath perceived and heard his word? who hath marked his word, and heard it?	But which of them has stood in the council of the LORD to see and hear His word? Who has given heed to His word and obeyed it?
JER	23	19	보라 나 여호와의 노가 발하여 폭풍과 회리바람처럼 악인의 머리를 칠 것이라	Behold, a whirlwind of the Lord is gone forth in fury, even a grievous whirlwind: it shall fall grievously upon the head of the wicked.	Behold, the storm of the LORD has gone out with fury, a whirlwind swirling down upon the heads of the wicked.
JER	23	20	나 여호와의 노는 내 마음의 뜻하는 바를 행하여 이루기까지는 쉬지 아니하나니 너희가 말일에 그것을 완전히 깨달으리라	The anger of the Lord shall not return, until he have executed, and till he have performed the thoughts of his heart: in the latter days ye shall consider it perfectly.	The anger of the LORD will not turn back until He has fully accomplished the purposes of His heart. In the days to come you will understand this clearly.
JER	23	21	이 선지자들은 내가 보내지 아니하였어도 달음질하며 내가 그들에게 이르지 아니하였어도 예언하였은즉	I have not sent these prophets, yet they ran: I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied.	I did not send these prophets, yet they have run with their message; I did not speak to them, yet they have prophesied.
JER	23	22	그들이 만일 나의 회의에 참예하였더면 내 백성에게 내 말을 들려서 그들로 악한 길과 악한 행위에서 돌이키게 하였으리라	But if they had stood in my counsel, and had caused my people to hear my words, then they should have turned them from their evil way, and from the evil of their doings.	But if they had stood in My council, they would have proclaimed My words to My people and turned them back from their evil ways and deeds.”
JER	23	23	나 여호와가 말하노라 나는 가까운데 하나님이요 먼데 하나님은 아니냐	Am I a God at hand, saith the Lord, and not a God afar off?	“Am I only a God nearby,” declares the LORD, “and not a God far away?”
JER	23	24	나 여호와가 말하노라 사람이 내게 보이지 아니하려고 누가 자기를 은밀한 곳에 숨길 수 있겠느냐 나 여호와가 말하노라 나는 천지에 충만하지 아니하냐	Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him? saith the Lord. Do not I fill heaven and earth? saith the Lord.	“Can a man hide in secret places where I cannot see him?” declares the LORD. “Do I not fill the heavens and the earth?” declares the LORD.
JER	23	25	내 이름으로 거짓을 예언하는 선지자들의 말에 내가 몽사를 얻었다 함을 내가 들었노라	I have heard what the prophets said, that prophesy lies in my name, saying, I have dreamed, I have dreamed.	“I have heard the sayings of the prophets who prophesy lies in My name: ‘I had a dream! I had a dream!’
JER	23	26	거짓을 예언하는 선지자들이 언제까지 이 마음을 품겠느냐 그들은 그 마음의 간교한 것을 예언하느니라	How long shall this be in the heart of the prophets that prophesy lies? yea, they are prophets of the deceit of their own heart;	How long will this continue in the hearts of these prophets who prophesy falsehood, these prophets of the delusion of their own minds?
JER	23	27	그들이 서로 몽사를 말하니 그 생각인즉 그들의 열조가 바알로 인하여 내 이름을 잊어버린 것 같이 내 백성으로 내 이름을 잊게 하려 함이로다	Which think to cause my people to forget my name by their dreams which they tell every man to his neighbour, as their fathers have forgotten my name for Baal.	They suppose the dreams that they tell one another will make My people forget My name, just as their fathers forgot My name through the worship of Baal.
JER	23	28	나 여호와가 말하노라 몽사를 얻은 선지자는 몽사를 말할 것이요 내 말을 받은 자는 성실함으로 내 말을 말할 것이라 겨와 밀을 어찌 비교하겠느냐	The prophet that hath a dream, let him tell a dream; and he that hath my word, let him speak my word faithfully. What is the chaff to the wheat? saith the Lord.	Let the prophet who has a dream retell it, but let him who has My word speak it truthfully. For what is straw compared to grain?” declares the LORD.
JER	23	29	나 여호와가 말하노라 내 말이 불같지 아니하냐 반석을 쳐서 부스러뜨리는 방망이 같지 아니하냐	Is not my word like as a fire? saith the Lord; and like a hammer that breaketh the rock in pieces?	“Is not My word like fire,” declares the LORD, “and like a hammer that smashes a rock?”
JER	23	30	나 여호와가 말하노라 그러므로 보라 서로 내 말을 도적질하는 선지자들을 내가 치리라	Therefore, behold, I am against the prophets, saith the Lord, that steal my words every one from his neighbour.	“Therefore behold,” declares the LORD, “I am against the prophets who steal from one another words they attribute to Me.”
JER	23	31	나 여호와가 말하노라 보라 그들이 혀를 놀려 그가 말씀하셨다 하는 선지자들을 내가 치리라	Behold, I am against the prophets, saith the Lord, that use their tongues, and say, He saith.	“Yes,” declares the LORD, “I am against the prophets who wag their own tongues and proclaim, ‘The LORD declares it.’”
JER	23	32	나 여호와가 말하노라 보라 거짓 몽사를 예언하여 이르며 거짓과 헛된 자만으로 내 백성을 미혹하게 하는 자를 내가 치리라 내가 그들을 보내지 아니하였으며 명하지 아니하였나니 그들이 이 백성에게 아무 유익이 없느니라 여호와의 말이니라	Behold, I am against them that prophesy false dreams, saith the Lord, and do tell them, and cause my people to err by their lies, and by their lightness; yet I sent them not, nor commanded them: therefore they shall not profit this people at all, saith the Lord.	“Indeed,” declares the LORD, “I am against those who prophesy false dreams and retell them to lead My people astray with their reckless lies. It was not I who sent them or commanded them, and they are of no benefit at all to these people,” declares the LORD.
JER	23	33	이 백성이나 선지자나 제사장이 네게 물어 이르기를 여호와의 엄중한 말씀이 무엇이뇨 하거든 너는 그들에게 대답하기를 엄중한 말씀이 무엇이냐 하느냐 여호와의 말씀에 내가 너희를 버리리라 하셨고	And when this people, or the prophet, or a priest, shall ask thee, saying, What is the burden of the Lord? thou shalt then say unto them, What burden? I will even forsake you, saith the Lord.	“Now when this people or a prophet or priest asks you, ‘What is the burden of the LORD?’ you are to say to them, ‘What burden? I will forsake you, declares the LORD.’
JER	23	34	또 여호와의 엄중한 말씀이라 하는 선지자에게나 제사장에게나 백성에게는 내가 그 사람과 그 집에 벌하리라 하셨다 하고	And as for the prophet, and the priest, and the people, that shall say, The burden of the Lord, I will even punish that man and his house.	As for the prophet or priest or anyone who claims, ‘This is the burden of the LORD,’ I will punish that man and his household.
JER	23	35	너는 또 말하기를 너희는 서로 이웃과 형제에게 묻기를 여호와께서 무엇이라 응답하셨으며 무엇이라 말씀하셨느뇨 하고	Thus shall ye say every one to his neighbour, and every one to his brother, What hath the Lord answered? and, What hath the Lord spoken?	This is what each man is to say to his friend and to his brother: ‘What has the LORD answered?’ or ‘What has the LORD spoken?’
JER	23	36	다시는 여호와의 엄중한 말씀이라 말하지 말라 각 사람의 말이 자기에게 중벌이 되리니 이는 너희가 사시는 하나님 만군의 여호와 우리 하나님의 말씀을 망령되이 씀이니라 하고	And the burden of the Lord shall ye mention no more: for every man’s word shall be his burden; for ye have perverted the words of the living God, of the Lord of hosts our God.	But refer no more to the burden of the LORD, for each man’s word becomes the burden, so that you pervert the words of the living God, the LORD of Hosts, our God.
JER	23	37	너는 또 선지자에게 말하기를 여호와께서 네게 무엇이라 대답하셨으며 여호와께서 무엇이라 말씀하셨느뇨	Thus shalt thou say to the prophet, What hath the Lord answered thee? and, What hath the Lord spoken?	Thus you are to say to the prophet: ‘What has the LORD answered you?’ and ‘What has the LORD spoken?’
JER	23	38	너희는 여호와의 엄중한 말씀이라 말하도다 그러므로 여호와께서 가라사대 내가 너희에게 보내어 여호와의 엄중한 말씀이라 하지 말라 하였어도 너희가 여호와의 엄중한 말씀이라 하였은즉	But since ye say, The burden of the Lord; therefore thus saith the Lord; Because ye say this word, The burden of the Lord, and I have sent unto you, saying, Ye shall not say, The burden of the Lord;	But if you claim, ‘This is the burden of the LORD,’ then this is what the LORD says: Because you have said, ‘This is the burden of the LORD,’ and I specifically told you not to make this claim,
JER	23	39	내가 너희를 온전히 잊어버리며 내가 너희와 너희 열조에게 준 이 성읍을 내 앞에서 내어버려	Therefore, behold, I, even I, will utterly forget you, and I will forsake you, and the city that I gave you and your fathers, and cast you out of my presence:	therefore I will surely forget you and will cast you out of My presence, both you and the city that I gave to you and your fathers.
JER	23	40	너희로 영원한 치욕과 잊지 못할 영구한 수치를 당케 하리라 하셨다 할지니라	And I will bring an everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame, which shall not be forgotten.	And I will bring upon you everlasting shame and perpetual humiliation that will never be forgotten.”
JER	24	1	바벨론 왕 느부갓네살이 유다 왕 여호야김의 아들 여고냐와 유다 방백들과 목공들과 철공들을 예루살렘에서 바벨론으로 옮긴 후에 여호와께서 여호와의 전 앞에 놓인 무화과 두 광주리로 내게 보이셨는데	The Lord shewed me, and, behold, two baskets of figs were set before the temple of the Lord, after that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon had carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah, and the princes of Judah, with the carpenters and smiths, from Jerusalem, and had brought them to Babylon.	After Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had carried away Jeconiah son of Jehoiakim king of Judah, as well as the officials of Judah and the craftsmen and metalsmiths from Jerusalem, and had brought them to Babylon, the LORD showed me two baskets of figs placed in front of the temple of the LORD.
JER	24	2	한 광주리에는 처음 익은 듯한 극히 좋은 무화과가 있고 한 광주리에는 악하여 먹을 수 없는 극히 악한 무화과가 있더라	One basket had very good figs, even like the figs that are first ripe: and the other basket had very naughty figs, which could not be eaten, they were so bad.	One basket had very good figs, like those that ripen early, but the other basket contained very poor figs, so bad they could not be eaten.
JER	24	3	여호와께서 내게 이르시되 예레미야야 네가 무엇을 보느냐 내가 대답하되 무화과이온데 그 좋은 무화과는 극히 좋고 그 악한 것은 극히 악하여 먹을 수 없게 악하니라	Then said the Lord unto me, What seest thou, Jeremiah? And I said, Figs; the good figs, very good; and the evil, very evil, that cannot be eaten, they are so evil.	“Jeremiah,” the LORD asked, “what do you see?” “Figs!” I replied. “The good figs are very good, but the bad figs are very bad, so bad they cannot be eaten.”
JER	24	4	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하니라 가라사대	Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
JER	24	5	이스라엘의 하나님 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 내가 이곳에서 옮겨 갈대아인의 땅에 이르게 한 유다 포로를 이 좋은 무화과 같이 보아 좋게 할 것이라	Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel; Like these good figs, so will I acknowledge them that are carried away captive of Judah, whom I have sent out of this place into the land of the Chaldeans for their good.	“This is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: ‘Like these good figs, so I regard as good the exiles from Judah, whom I have sent away from this place to the land of the Chaldeans.
JER	24	6	내가 그들을 돌아보아 좋게 하여 다시 이 땅으로 인도하고 세우고 헐지 아니하며 심고 뽑지 아니하겠고	For I will set mine eyes upon them for good, and I will bring them again to this land: and I will build them, and not pull them down; and I will plant them, and not pluck them up.	I will keep My eyes on them for good and will return them to this land. I will build them up and not tear them down; I will plant them and not uproot them.
JER	24	7	내가 여호와인 줄 아는 마음을 그들에게 주어서 그들로 전심으로 내게 돌아오게 하리니 그들은 내 백성이 되겠고 나는 그들의 하나님이 되리라	And I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord: and they shall be my people, and I will be their God: for they shall return unto me with their whole heart.	I will give them a heart to know Me, that I am the LORD. They will be My people, and I will be their God, for they will return to Me with all their heart.
JER	24	8	나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 내가 유다 왕 시드기야와 그 방백들과 예루살렘의 남은 자로서 이 땅에 남아 있는 자와 애굽 땅에 거하는 자들을 이 악하여 먹을 수 없는 악한 무화과 같이 버리되	And as the evil figs, which cannot be eaten, they are so evil; surely thus saith the Lord, So will I give Zedekiah the king of Judah, and his princes, and the residue of Jerusalem, that remain in this land, and them that dwell in the land of Egypt:	But like the bad figs, so bad they cannot be eaten,’ says the LORD, ‘so will I deal with Zedekiah king of Judah, his officials, and the remnant of Jerusalem—those remaining in this land and those living in the land of Egypt.
JER	24	9	세상 모든 나라 중에 흩어서 그들로 환난을 당하게 할 것이며 또 그들로 내가 쫓아보낼 모든 곳에서 치욕을 당케 하며 말거리가 되게 하며 조롱과 저주를 받게 할 것이며	And I will deliver them to be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth for their hurt, to be a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse, in all places whither I shall drive them.	I will make them a horror and an offense to all the kingdoms of the earth, a disgrace and an object of scorn, ridicule, and cursing wherever I have banished them.
JER	24	10	내가 칼과 기근과 염병을 그들 중에 보내어 그들로 내가 그들과 그 열조에게 준 땅에서 멸절하기까지 이르게 하리라 하시니라	And I will send the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, among them, till they be consumed from off the land that I gave unto them and to their fathers.	And I will send against them sword and famine and plague, until they have perished from the land that I gave to them and their fathers.’”
JER	25	1	유다 왕 요시야의 아들 여호야김 사년 곧 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살 원년에 유다 모든 백성에 관한 말씀이 예레미야에게 임하니라	The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the people of Judah in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, that was the first year of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon;	This is the word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the people of Judah in the fourth year of Jehoiakim son of Josiah king of Judah, which was the first year of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon.
JER	25	2	선지자 예레미야가 유다 모든 백성과 예루살렘 모든 거민에게 고하여 가로되	The which Jeremiah the prophet spake unto all the people of Judah, and to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying,	So the prophet Jeremiah spoke to all the people of Judah and all the residents of Jerusalem as follows:
JER	25	3	유다 왕 아몬의 아들 요시야의 십삼년부터 오늘까지 이십삼 년 동안에 여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하기로 내가 너희에게 이르되 부지런히 일렀으나 너희가 듣지 아니하였으며	From the thirteenth year of Josiah the son of Amon king of Judah, even unto this day, that is the three and twentieth year, the word of the Lord hath come unto me, and I have spoken unto you, rising early and speaking; but ye have not hearkened.	“From the thirteenth year of Josiah son of Amon king of Judah until this very day—twenty-three years—the word of the LORD has come to me, and I have spoken to you again and again, but you have not listened.
JER	25	4	여호와께서 그 모든 종 선지자를 너희에게 보내시되 부지런히 보내셨으나 너희가 듣지 아니하였으며 귀를 기울여 들으려고도 아니하였도다	And the Lord hath sent unto you all his servants the prophets, rising early and sending them; but ye have not hearkened, nor inclined your ear to hear.	And the LORD has sent all His servants the prophets to you again and again, but you have not listened or inclined your ear to hear.
JER	25	5	이르시기를 너희는 각기 악한 길과 너희 악행에서 돌이키라 그리하면 나 여호와가 너희와 너희 열조에게 옛적에 주어 영원히 있게 한 그 땅에 거하리니	They said, Turn ye again now every one from his evil way, and from the evil of your doings, and dwell in the land that the Lord hath given unto you and to your fathers for ever and ever:	The prophets told you, ‘Turn now, each of you, from your evil ways and deeds, and you can dwell in the land that the LORD has given to you and your fathers forever and ever.
JER	25	6	너희는 다른 신을 좇아 섬기거나 숭배하지 말며 너희 손으로 만든 것을 인하여 나의 노를 격동치 말라 그리하면 내가 너희를 해치 아니하리라 하였으나	And go not after other gods to serve them, and to worship them, and provoke me not to anger with the works of your hands; and I will do you no hurt.	Do not follow other gods to serve and worship them, and do not provoke Me to anger with the works of your hands. Then I will do you no harm.’
JER	25	7	너희가 내 말을 듣지 아니하고 너희 손으로 만든 것으로 나의 노를 격동하여 스스로 해하였느니라 여호와의 말이니라	Yet ye have not hearkened unto me, saith the Lord; that ye might provoke me to anger with the works of your hands to your own hurt.	‘But to your own harm, you have not listened to Me,’ declares the LORD, ‘so you have provoked Me to anger with the works of your hands.’
JER	25	8	그러므로 나 만군의 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 너희가 내 말을 듣지 아니하였은즉	Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts; Because ye have not heard my words,	Therefore this is what the LORD of Hosts says: ‘Because you have not obeyed My words,
JER	25	9	보라 내가 보내어 북방 모든 족속과 내 종 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살을 불러다가 이 땅과 그 거민과 사방 모든 나라를 쳐서 진멸하여 그들로 놀램과 치소거리가 되게 하며 땅으로 영영한 황무지가 되게 할 것이라	Behold, I will send and take all the families of the north, saith the Lord, and Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and will bring them against this land, and against the inhabitants thereof, and against all these nations round about, and will utterly destroy them, and make them an astonishment, and an hissing, and perpetual desolations.	behold, I will summon all the families of the north, declares the LORD, and I will send for My servant Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, whom I will bring against this land, against its residents, and against all the surrounding nations. So I will devote them to destruction and make them an object of horror and contempt, an everlasting desolation.
JER	25	10	내가 그들 중에서 기뻐하는 소리와 즐거워하는 소리와 신랑의 소리와 신부의 소리와 맷돌소리와 등불 빛이 끊쳐지게 하리니	Moreover I will take from them the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride, the sound of the millstones, and the light of the candle.	Moreover, I will banish from them the sounds of joy and gladness, the voices of the bride and bridegroom, the sound of the millstones, and the light of the lamp.
JER	25	11	이 온 땅이 황폐하여 놀램이 될 것이며 이 나라들은 칠십 년 동안 바벨론 왕을 섬기리라	And this whole land shall be a desolation, and an astonishment; and these nations shall serve the king of Babylon seventy years.	And this whole land will become a desolate wasteland, and these nations will serve the king of Babylon for seventy years.
JER	25	12	나 여호와가 말하노라 칠십 년이 마치면 내가 바벨론 왕과 그 나라와 갈대아인의 땅을 그 죄악으로 인하여 벌하여 영영히 황무케 하되	And it shall come to pass, when seventy years are accomplished, that I will punish the king of Babylon, and that nation, saith the Lord, for their iniquity, and the land of the Chaldeans, and will make it perpetual desolations.	But when seventy years are complete, I will punish the king of Babylon and that nation, the land of the Chaldeans, for their guilt, declares the LORD, and I will make it an everlasting desolation.
JER	25	13	내가 그 땅에 대하여 선고한 바 곧 예레미야가 열방에 대하여 예언하고 이 책에 기록한 나의 모든 말을 그 땅에 임하게 하리니	And I will bring upon that land all my words which I have pronounced against it, even all that is written in this book, which Jeremiah hath prophesied against all the nations.	I will bring upon that land all the words I have pronounced against it, all that is written in this book, which Jeremiah has prophesied against all the nations.
JER	25	14	여러 나라와 큰 왕들이 그들로 자기 역군을 삼으리라 내가 그들의 행위와 그들의 손의 행한 대로 보응하리라 하시니라	For many nations and great kings shall serve themselves of them also: and I will recompense them according to their deeds, and according to the works of their own hands.	For many nations and great kings will enslave them, and I will repay them according to their deeds and according to the work of their hands.’”
JER	25	15	이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께서 이같이 내게 이르시되 너는 내 손에서 이 진노의 잔을 받아 가지고 내가 너를 보내는 바 그 모든 나라로 마시게 하라	For thus saith the Lord God of Israel unto me; Take the wine cup of this fury at my hand, and cause all the nations, to whom I send thee, to drink it.	This is what the LORD, the God of Israel, said to me: “Take from My hand this cup of the wine of wrath, and make all the nations to whom I send you drink from it.
JER	25	16	그들이 마시고 비틀거리며 미치리니 이는 내가 그들 중에 칼을 보냄을 인함이니라 하시기로	And they shall drink, and be moved, and be mad, because of the sword that I will send among them.	And they will drink and stagger and go out of their minds, because of the sword that I will send among them.”
JER	25	17	내가 여호와의 손에서 그 잔을 받아서 여호와께서 나를 보내신 바 그 모든 나라로 마시게 하되	Then took I the cup at the Lord’s hand, and made all the nations to drink, unto whom the Lord had sent me:	So I took the cup from the LORD’s hand and made all the nations drink from it, each one to whom the LORD had sent me,
JER	25	18	예루살렘과 유다 성읍들과 그 왕들과 그 방백들로 마시게 하였더니 그들이 멸망과 놀램과 치소와 저주를 당함이 오늘날과 같으니라	To wit, Jerusalem, and the cities of Judah, and the kings thereof, and the princes thereof, to make them a desolation, an astonishment, an hissing, and a curse; as it is this day;	to make them a ruin, an object of horror and contempt and cursing, as they are to this day—Jerusalem and the cities of Judah, its kings and officials;
JER	25	19	또 애굽 왕 바로와 그의 신하들과 그의 방백들과 그의 모든 백성과	Pharaoh king of Egypt, and his servants, and his princes, and all his people;	Pharaoh king of Egypt, his officials, his leaders, and all his people;
JER	25	20	모든 잡족과 우스 땅 모든 왕과 블레셋 사람의 땅 모든 왕과 아스글론과 가사와 에그론과 아스돗의 남은 자와	And all the mingled people, and all the kings of the land of Uz, and all the kings of the land of the Philistines, and Ashkelon, and Azzah, and Ekron, and the remnant of Ashdod,	all the mixed tribes; all the kings of Uz; all the kings of the Philistines: Ashkelon, Gaza, Ekron, and the remnant of Ashdod;
JER	25	21	에돔과 모압과 암몬 자손과	Edom, and Moab, and the children of Ammon,	Edom, Moab, and the Ammonites;
JER	25	22	두로의 모든 왕과 시돈의 모든 왕과 바다 저편 섬의 왕들과	And all the kings of Tyrus, and all the kings of Zidon, and the kings of the isles which are beyond the sea,	all the kings of Tyre and Sidon; the kings of the coastlands across the sea;
JER	25	23	드단과 데마와 부스와 털을 모지게 깎은 모든 자와	Dedan, and Tema, and Buz, and all that are in the utmost corners,	Dedan, Tema, Buz, and all who cut the corners of their hair;
JER	25	24	아라비아 모든 왕과 광야에 거하는 잡족의 모든 왕과	And all the kings of Arabia, and all the kings of the mingled people that dwell in the desert,	all the kings of Arabia, and all the kings of the mixed tribes who dwell in the desert;
JER	25	25	시므리의 모든 왕과 엘람의 모든 왕과 메대의 모든 왕과	And all the kings of Zimri, and all the kings of Elam, and all the kings of the Medes,	all the kings of Zimri, Elam, and Media;
JER	25	26	북방 원근의 모든 왕과 지면에 있는 세상의 모든 나라로 마시게 하니라 세삭 왕은 그 후에 마시리라	And all the kings of the north, far and near, one with another, and all the kingdoms of the world, which are upon the face of the earth: and the king of Sheshach shall drink after them.	all the kings of the north, both near and far, one after another—all the kingdoms on the face of the earth. And after all of them, the king of Sheshach will drink it too.
JER	25	27	너는 그들에게 이르기를 만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님의 말씀에 너희는 마시라 취하라 토하라 엎드러지고 다시는 일어나지 말라 이는 내가 너희 중에 칼을 보냄을 인함이니라 하셨다 하라	Therefore thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Drink ye, and be drunken, and spue, and fall, and rise no more, because of the sword which I will send among you.	“Then you are to tell them that this is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: ‘Drink, get drunk, and vomit. Fall down and never get up again, because of the sword I will send among you.’
JER	25	28	그들이 만일 네 손에서 잔을 받아 마시기를 거절하거든 너는 그들에게 이르기를 만군의 여호와의 말씀에 너희가 반드시 마시리라	And it shall be, if they refuse to take the cup at thine hand to drink, then shalt thou say unto them, Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Ye shall certainly drink.	If they refuse to take the cup from your hand and drink it, you are to tell them that this is what the LORD of Hosts says: ‘You most certainly must drink it!
JER	25	29	보라 내가 내 이름으로 일컬음을 받는 성에서부터 재앙 내리기를 시작하였은즉 너희가 어찌 능히 형벌을 면할 수 있느냐 면치 못하리니 이는 내가 칼을 불러 세상의 모든 거민을 칠 것임이니라 하셨다 하라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라	For, lo, I begin to bring evil on the city which is called by my name, and should ye be utterly unpunished? Ye shall not be unpunished: for I will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth, saith the Lord of hosts.	For behold, I am beginning to bring disaster on the city that bears My Name, so how could you possibly go unpunished? You will not go unpunished, for I am calling down a sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth, declares the LORD of Hosts.’
JER	25	30	그러므로 너는 그들에게 이 모든 말로 예언하여 이르기를 여호와께서 높은 데서 부르시며 그 거룩한 처소에서 소리를 발하시며 그 양의 우리를 향하여 크게 부르시며 세상 모든 거민을 대하여 포도 밟는 자 같이 외치시리니	Therefore prophesy thou against them all these words, and say unto them, The Lord shall roar from on high, and utter his voice from his holy habitation; he shall mightily roar upon his habitation; he shall give a shout, as they that tread the grapes, against all the inhabitants of the earth.	So you are to prophesy all these words against them and say to them: ‘The LORD will roar from on high; He will raise His voice from His holy habitation. He will roar loudly over His pasture; like those who tread the grapes, He will call out with a shout against all the inhabitants of the earth.
JER	25	31	요란한 소리가 땅 끝까지 이름은 여호와께서 열국과 다투시며 모든 육체를 심판하시며 악인을 칼에 붙이심을 인함이라 하라 여호와의 말이니라	A noise shall come even to the ends of the earth; for the Lord hath a controversy with the nations, he will plead with all flesh; he will give them that are wicked to the sword, saith the Lord.	The tumult will resound to the ends of the earth because the LORD brings a charge against the nations. He brings judgment on all mankind and puts the wicked to the sword,’” declares the LORD.
JER	25	32	나 만군의 여호와가 말하노라 보라 재앙이 나서 나라에서 나라에 미칠 것이며 대풍이 땅 끝에서 일어날 것이라	Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Behold, evil shall go forth from nation to nation, and a great whirlwind shall be raised up from the coasts of the earth.	This is what the LORD of Hosts says: “Behold! Disaster is spreading from nation to nation; a mighty storm is rising from the ends of the earth.”
JER	25	33	그 날에 나 여호와에게 살륙을 당한 자가 땅 이 끝에서 땅 저 끝에 미칠 것이나 그들이 슬퍼함을 받지 못하며 염습함을 입지 못하며 매장함을 얻지 못하고 지면에서 분토가 되리로다	And the slain of the Lord shall be at that day from one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth: they shall not be lamented, neither gathered, nor buried; they shall be dung upon the ground.	Those slain by the LORD on that day will be spread from one end of the earth to the other. They will not be mourned, gathered, or buried. They will be like dung lying on the ground.
JER	25	34	너희 목자들아 외쳐 애곡하라 너희 양떼의 인도자들아 재에 굴라 이는 너희 도륙을 당할 날과 흩음을 당할 기한이 찼음인즉 너희가 귀한 그릇의 떨어짐 같이 될 것이라	Howl, ye shepherds, and cry; and wallow yourselves in the ashes, ye principal of the flock: for the days of your slaughter and of your dispersions are accomplished; and ye shall fall like a pleasant vessel.	Wail, you shepherds, and cry out; roll in the dust, you leaders of the flock. For the days of your slaughter have come; you will fall and be shattered like fine pottery.
JER	25	35	목자들은 도망할 수 없겠고 양떼의 인도자들은 도피할 수 없으리로다	And the shepherds shall have no way to flee, nor the principal of the flock to escape.	Flight will evade the shepherds, and escape will elude the leaders of the flock.
JER	25	36	목자들의 부르짖음과 양떼의 인도자들의 애곡하는 소리여 나 여호와가 그들의 초장으로 황폐케 함이로다	A voice of the cry of the shepherds, and an howling of the principal of the flock, shall be heard: for the Lord hath spoiled their pasture.	Hear the cry of the shepherds, the wailing of the leaders of the flock, for the LORD is destroying their pasture.
JER	25	37	평안한 목장들이 적막하니 이는 여호와의 진노의 연고로다	And the peaceable habitations are cut down because of the fierce anger of the Lord.	The peaceful meadows have been silenced because of the LORD’s burning anger.
JER	25	38	그가 사자 같이 그 소혈에서 나오셨도다 그 잔멸하는 자의 진노와 그 극렬한 분으로 인하여 그들의 땅이 황량하였도다	He hath forsaken his covert, as the lion: for their land is desolate because of the fierceness of the oppressor, and because of his fierce anger.	He has left His den like a lion, for their land has been made a desolation by the sword of the oppressor, and because of the fierce anger of the LORD.
JER	26	1	유다 왕 요시야의 아들 여호야김의 즉위 초에 여호와께로서 이 말씀이 임하니라 가라사대	In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah came this word from the Lord, saying,	At the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim son of Josiah king of Judah, this word came from the LORD:
JER	26	2	나 여호와가 이같이 이르노라 너는 여호와의 집 뜰에 서서 유다 모든 성읍에서 여호와의 집에 와서 경배하는 자에게 내가 네게 명하여 이르게 한 모든 말을 고하되 한 말도 감하지 말라	Thus saith the Lord; Stand in the court of the Lord’s house, and speak unto all the cities of Judah, which come to worship in the Lord’s house, all the words that I command thee to speak unto them; diminish not a word:	“This is what the LORD says: Stand in the courtyard of the house of the LORD and speak all the words I have commanded you to speak to all the cities of Judah who come to worship there. Do not omit a word.
JER	26	3	그들이 듣고 혹시 각각 그 악한 길에서 떠나리라 그리하면 내가 그들의 악행으로 인하여 재앙을 그들에게 내리려 하던 뜻을 돌이키리라	If so be they will hearken, and turn every man from his evil way, that I may repent me of the evil, which I purpose to do unto them because of the evil of their doings.	Perhaps they will listen and turn—each from his evil way of life—so that I may relent of the disaster I am planning to bring upon them because of the evil of their deeds.
JER	26	4	너는 그들에게 이르기를 여호와의 말씀에 너희가 나를 청종치 아니하며 내가 너희 앞에 둔 내 법을 행치 아니하며	And thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord; If ye will not hearken to me, to walk in my law, which I have set before you,	And you are to tell them that this is what the LORD says: ‘If you do not listen to Me and walk in My law, which I have set before you,
JER	26	5	내가 너희에게 보내고 부지런히 보낸 나의 종 선지자들의 말을 이미 듣지 아니하였거니와 너희가 만일 다시 듣지 아니하면	To hearken to the words of my servants the prophets, whom I sent unto you, both rising up early, and sending them, but ye have not hearkened;	and if you do not listen to the words of My servants the prophets, whom I have sent you again and again even though you did not listen,
JER	26	6	내가 이 집을 실로 같이 되게 하고 이 성으로 세계 열방의 저줏거리가 되게 하리라 하셨다 하라	Then will I make this house like Shiloh, and will make this city a curse to all the nations of the earth.	then I will make this house like Shiloh, and I will make this city an object of cursing among all the nations of the earth.’”
JER	26	7	예레미야가 여호와의 집에서 이 말을 하매 제사장들과 선지자들과 모든 백성이 듣더라	So the priests and the prophets and all the people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of the Lord.	Now the priests and prophets and all the people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of the LORD,
JER	26	8	에레미야가 여호와께서 명하신 말씀을 모든 백성에게 고하기를 마치매 제사장들과 선지자들과 모든 백성이 그를 붙잡고 이르되 네가 반드시 죽으리라	Now it came to pass, when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking all that the Lord had commanded him to speak unto all the people, that the priests and the prophets and all the people took him, saying, Thou shalt surely die.	and as soon as he had finished telling all the people everything the LORD had commanded him to say, the priests and prophets and all the people seized him, shouting, “You must surely die!
JER	26	9	어찌하여 네가 여호와의 이름을 의탁하고 예언하여 이르기를 이 집이 실로 같이 되겠고 이 성이 황무하여 거민이 없으리라 하느뇨 하며 그 모든 백성이 여호와의 집에서 예레미야에게로 모여드니라	Why hast thou prophesied in the name of the Lord, saying, This house shall be like Shiloh, and this city shall be desolate without an inhabitant? And all the people were gathered against Jeremiah in the house of the Lord.	How dare you prophesy in the name of the LORD that this house will become like Shiloh and this city will be desolate and deserted!” And all the people assembled against Jeremiah in the house of the LORD.
JER	26	10	유다 방백들이 이 일을 듣고 왕궁에서 여호와의 집으로 올라와서 여호와의 집 새문 어귀에 앉으매	When the princes of Judah heard these things, then they came up from the king’s house unto the house of the Lord, and sat down in the entry of the new gate of the Lord’s house.	When the officials of Judah heard these things, they went up from the king’s palace to the house of the LORD and sat there at the entrance of the New Gate.
JER	26	11	제사장들과 선지자들이 방백들과 모든 백성에게 말하여 가로되 이 사람은 죽음이 합당하니 너희 귀로 들음 같이 이 성을 쳐서 예언하였느니라	Then spake the priests and the prophets unto the princes and to all the people, saying, This man is worthy to die; for he hath prophesied against this city, as ye have heard with your ears.	Then the priests and prophets said to the officials and all the people, “This man is worthy of death, for he has prophesied against this city, as you have heard with your own ears!”
JER	26	12	예레미야가 모든 방백과 백성에게 일러 가로되 여호와께서 나를 보내사 너희의 들은 바 모든 말로 이 집과 이 성을 쳐서 예언하게 하셨느니라	Then spake Jeremiah unto all the princes and to all the people, saying, The Lord sent me to prophesy against this house and against this city all the words that ye have heard.	But Jeremiah said to all the officials and all the people, “The LORD sent me to prophesy against this house and against this city all the words that you have heard.
JER	26	13	그런즉 너희는 너희 길과 행위를 고치고 너희 하나님 여호와의 목소리를 청종하라 그리하면 여호와께서 너희에게 선고하신 재앙에 대하여 뜻을 돌이키시리라	Therefore now amend your ways and your doings, and obey the voice of the Lord your God; and the Lord will repent him of the evil that he hath pronounced against you.	So now, correct your ways and deeds, and obey the voice of the LORD your God, so that He might relent of the disaster He has pronounced against you.
JER	26	14	보라 나는 너희 손에 있으니 너희 소견에 선한 대로, 옳은 대로 하려니와	As for me, behold, I am in your hand: do with me as seemeth good and meet unto you.	As for me, here I am in your hands; do to me what you think is good and right.
JER	26	15	너희는 분명히 알라 너희가 나를 죽이면 정녕히 무죄한 피로 너희 몸과 이 성과 이 성 거민에게로 돌아가게 하리라 이는 여호와께서 진실로 나를 보내사 이 모든 말을 너희 귀에 이르게 하셨음이니라	But know ye for certain, that if ye put me to death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood upon yourselves, and upon this city, and upon the inhabitants thereof: for of a truth the Lord hath sent me unto you to speak all these words in your ears.	But know for certain that if you put me to death, you will bring innocent blood upon yourselves, upon this city, and upon its residents; for truly the LORD has sent me to speak all these words in your hearing.”
JER	26	16	방백들과 모든 백성이 제사장들과 선지자들에게 이르되 이 사람이 우리 하나님 여호와의 이름을 의탁하고 우리에게 말하였으니 죽음이 부당하니라	Then said the princes and all the people unto the priests and to the prophets; This man is not worthy to die: for he hath spoken to us in the name of the Lord our God.	Then the officials and all the people told the priests and prophets, “This man is not worthy of death, for he has spoken to us in the name of the LORD our God!”
JER	26	17	때에 그 땅 장로 중 몇 사람이 일어나 백성의 온 회중에 말하여 가로되	Then rose up certain of the elders of the land, and spake to all the assembly of the people, saying,	Some of the elders of the land stood up and said to the whole assembly of the people,
JER	26	18	유다 왕 히스기야 시대에 모레셋 사람 미가가 유다 모든 백성에게 예언하여 가로되 만군의 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시기를 시온은 밭 같이 경작함을 당하며 예루살렘은 무더기가 되며 이 전의 산은 수풀의 높은 곳들 같이 되리라 하였으나	Micah the Morasthite prophesied in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and spake to all the people of Judah, saying, Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Zion shall be plowed like a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high places of a forest.	“Micah the Moreshite prophesied in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah and told all the people of Judah that this is what the LORD of Hosts says: ‘Zion will be plowed like a field, Jerusalem will become a heap of rubble, and the temple mount a wooded ridge.’
JER	26	19	유다 왕 히스기야와 모든 유다가 그를 죽였느냐 히스기야가 여호와를 두려워하여 여호와께 간구하매 여호와께서 그들에게 선고한 재앙에 대하여 뜻을 돌이키지 아니하셨느냐 우리가 이같이 하면 우리 생명을 스스로 크게 해하는 일이니라	Did Hezekiah king of Judah and all Judah put him at all to death? did he not fear the Lord, and besought the Lord, and the Lord repented him of the evil which he had pronounced against them? Thus might we procure great evil against our souls.	Did Hezekiah king of Judah or anyone else in Judah put him to death? Did Hezekiah not fear the LORD and seek His favor, and did not the LORD relent of the disaster He had pronounced against them? But we are about to bring great harm on ourselves!”
JER	26	20	또 여호와의 이름을 의탁하고 예언한 사람이 있었는데 곧 기럇여아림 스마야의 아들 우리야라 그가 예레미야의 모든 말과 같이 이 성과 이 땅을 쳐서 예언하매	And there was also a man that prophesied in the name of the Lord, Urijah the son of Shemaiah of Kirjath–jearim, who prophesied against this city and against this land according to all the words of Jeremiah:	Now there was another man prophesying in the name of the LORD, Uriah son of Shemaiah from Kiriath-jearim. He prophesied against this city and against this land the same things that Jeremiah did.
JER	26	21	여호야김 왕과 그 모든 용사와 모든 방백이 그 말을 듣고는 왕이 그를 죽이려 하매 우리야가 이를 듣고 두려워 애굽으로 도망하여 간지라	And when Jehoiakim the king, with all his mighty men, and all the princes, heard his words, the king sought to put him to death: but when Urijah heard it, he was afraid, and fled, and went into Egypt;	King Jehoiakim and all his mighty men and officials heard his words, and the king sought to put him to death. But when Uriah found out about it, he fled in fear and went to Egypt.
JER	26	22	여호야김 왕이 사람을 애굽으로 보내되 곧 악볼의 아들 엘라단과 몇 사람을 함께 애굽으로 보내었더니	And Jehoiakim the king sent men into Egypt, namely, Elnathan the son of Achbor, and certain men with him into Egypt.	Then King Jehoiakim sent men to Egypt: Elnathan son of Achbor along with some other men.
JER	26	23	그들이 우리야를 애굽에서 끌어내어 여호야김 왕께로 데려오매 왕이 칼로 그를 죽이고 그 시체를 평민의 묘실에 던지게 하였다 하니라	And they fetched forth Urijah out of Egypt, and brought him unto Jehoiakim the king; who slew him with the sword, and cast his dead body into the graves of the common people.	They brought Uriah out of Egypt and took him to King Jehoiakim, who had him put to the sword and his body thrown into the burial place of the common people.
JER	26	24	사반의 아들 아히감이 예레미야를 보호하여 예레미야를 백성의 손에 내어주지 아니하여 죽이지 못하게 하니라	Nevertheless the hand of Ahikam the son of Shaphan was with Jeremiah, that they should not give him into the hand of the people to put him to death.	Nevertheless, Ahikam son of Shaphan supported Jeremiah, so he was not handed over to the people to be put to death.
JER	27	1	유다 왕 요시야의 아들 여호야김의 즉위한 지 오래지 아니하여서 여호와께서 말씀으로 나 예레미야에게 이르시니라	In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah came this word unto Jeremiah from the Lord, saying,	At the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah son of Josiah king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from the LORD.
JER	27	2	여호와께서 이같이 내게 이르시되 너는 줄과 멍에를 만들어 네 목에 얹고	Thus saith the Lord to me; Make thee bonds and yokes, and put them upon thy neck,	This is what the LORD said to me: “Make for yourself a yoke out of leather straps and put it on your neck.
JER	27	3	유다 왕 시드기야를 보러 예루살렘에 온 사신들의 손에도 그것을 붙여 에돔 왕과 모압 왕과 암몬 자손의 왕과 두로 왕과 시돈 왕에게 보내며	And send them to the king of Edom, and to the king of Moab, and to the king of the Ammonites, and to the king of Tyrus, and to the king of Zidon, by the hand of the messengers which come to Jerusalem unto Zedekiah king of Judah;	Send word to the kings of Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tyre, and Sidon through the envoys who have come to Jerusalem to Zedekiah king of Judah.
JER	27	4	그들에게 명하여 그 주에게 이르게 하기를 만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 말씀하시되 너희는 너희 주에게 이같이 고하라	And command them to say unto their masters, Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Thus shall ye say unto your masters;	Give them a message from the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, to relay to their masters:
JER	27	5	나는 내 큰 능과 나의 든 팔로 땅과 그 위에 있는 사람과 짐승들을 만들고 나의 소견에 옳은 대로 땅을 사람에게 주었노라	I have made the earth, the man and the beast that are upon the ground, by my great power and by my outstretched arm, and have given it unto whom it seemed meet unto me.	By My great power and outstretched arm, I made the earth and the men and beasts on the face of it, and I give it to whom I please.
JER	27	6	이제 내가 이 모든 땅을 내 종 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살의 손에 주고 또 들짐승들을 그에게 주어서 부리게 하였나니	And now have I given all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant; and the beasts of the field have I given him also to serve him.	So now I have placed all these lands under the authority of My servant Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon. I have even made the beasts of the field subject to him.
JER	27	7	열방이 그와 그 아들과 손자를 섬기리라 그의 땅의 기한이 이르면 여러 나라와 큰 왕이 그로 자기를 섬기게 하리라마는	And all nations shall serve him, and his son, and his son’s son, until the very time of his land come: and then many nations and great kings shall serve themselves of him.	All nations will serve him and his son and grandson, until the time of his own land comes; then many nations and great kings will enslave him.
JER	27	8	나 여호와가 이르노라 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살을 섬기지 아니하는 국민이나 그 목으로 바벨론 왕의 멍에를 메지 아니하는 백성은 내가 그의 손으로 진멸시키기까지 칼과 기근과 염병으로 벌하리라	And it shall come to pass, that the nation and kingdom which will not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, and that will not put their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, that nation will I punish, saith the Lord, with the sword, and with the famine, and with the pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hand.	As for the nation or kingdom that does not serve Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon and does not place its neck under his yoke, I will punish that nation by sword and famine and plague, declares the LORD, until I have destroyed it by his hand.
JER	27	9	너희는 너희 선지자나 너희 복술이나 너희 꿈꾸는 자나 너희 술사나 너희 요술객이 너희에게 이르기를 너희가 바벨론 왕을 섬기지 아니하리라 하여도 듣지 말라	Therefore hearken not ye to your prophets, nor to your diviners, nor to your dreamers, nor to your enchanters, nor to your sorcerers, which speak unto you, saying, Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon:	But as for you, do not listen to your prophets, your diviners, your interpreters of dreams, your mediums, or your sorcerers who declare, ‘You will not serve the king of Babylon.’
JER	27	10	그들은 너희에게 거짓을 예언하여서 너희로 너희 땅에서 멀리 떠나게 하며 또 나로 너희를 몰아내게 하며 너희를 멸하게 하느니라	For they prophesy a lie unto you, to remove you far from your land; and that I should drive you out, and ye should perish.	For they prophesy to you a lie that will serve to remove you from your land; I will banish you and you will perish.
JER	27	11	오직 그 목으로 바벨론 왕의 멍에를 메고 그를 섬기는 나라는 내가 그들을 그 땅에 머물러서 밭을 갈며 거기 거하게 하리라 하셨다 하라 여호와의 말이니라	But the nations that bring their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him, those will I let remain still in their own land, saith the Lord; and they shall till it, and dwell therein.	But the nation that will put its neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon and serve him, I will leave in its own land, to cultivate it and reside in it, declares the LORD.”
JER	27	12	내가 이 모든 말씀대로 유다 왕 시드기야에게 고하여 가로되 왕과 백성은 목으로 바벨론 왕의 멍에를 메고 그와 그 백성을 섬기소서 그리하면 살리이다	I spake also to Zedekiah king of Judah according to all these words, saying, Bring your necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him and his people, and live.	And to Zedekiah king of Judah I spoke the same message: “Put your necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon; serve him and his people, and live!
JER	27	13	어찌하여 왕과 왕의 백성이 여호와께서 바벨론 왕을 섬기지 아니하는 나라에 대하여 하신 말씀 같이 칼과 기근과 염병에 죽으려 하나이까	Why will ye die, thou and thy people, by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, as the Lord hath spoken against the nation that will not serve the king of Babylon?	Why should you and your people die by sword and famine and plague, as the LORD has decreed against any nation that does not serve the king of Babylon?
JER	27	14	왕과 백성에게 바벨론 왕을 섬기지 아니하리라 하는 선지자의 말을 듣지 마소서 그들은 거짓을 예언하나이다	Therefore hearken not unto the words of the prophets that speak unto you, saying, Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon: for they prophesy a lie unto you.	Do not listen to the words of the prophets who say, ‘You must not serve the king of Babylon,’ for they are prophesying to you a lie.
JER	27	15	여호와께서 말씀하시되 내가 그들을 보내지 아니하였거늘 그들이 내 이름으로 거짓을 예언하니 내가 너희를 몰아내며 너희와 너희에게 예언하는 선지자들을 멸망시키기에 이르리라 하셨나이다	For I have not sent them, saith the Lord, yet they prophesy a lie in my name; that I might drive you out, and that ye might perish, ye, and the prophets that prophesy unto you.	For I have not sent them, declares the LORD, and yet they are prophesying falsely in My name; therefore I will banish you, and you will perish—you and the prophets who prophesy to you.”
JER	27	16	내가 또 제사장들과 그 모든 백성에게 고하여 가로되 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 여호와의 집 기구를 이제 바벨론에서 속히 돌려오리라고 너희에게 예언하는 선지자들의 말을 듣지 말라 이는 그들이 거짓을 예언함이니라 하셨나니	Also I spake to the priests and to all this people, saying, Thus saith the Lord; Hearken not to the words of your prophets that prophesy unto you, saying, Behold, the vessels of the Lord’s house shall now shortly be brought again from Babylon: for they prophesy a lie unto you.	Then I said to the priests and to all this people, “This is what the LORD says: Do not listen to the words of your prophets who prophesy to you, saying, ‘Look, very soon now the articles from the house of the LORD will be brought back from Babylon.’ They are prophesying to you a lie.
JER	27	17	너희는 그들을 듣지 말고 바벨론 왕을 섬기라 그리하면 살리라 어찌하여 이 성으로 황무지가 되게 하겠느냐	Hearken not unto them; serve the king of Babylon, and live: wherefore should this city be laid waste?	Do not listen to them. Serve the king of Babylon and live! Why should this city become a ruin?
JER	27	18	만일 그들이 선지자이고 여호와의 말씀이 그들에게 있을진대 그들이 여호와의 집에와 유다 왕의 집에와 예루살렘에 남아 있는 기구가 바벨론으로 옮겨가지 않도록 만군의 여호와께 구하여야 할 것이니라	But if they be prophets, and if the word of the Lord be with them, let them now make intercession to the Lord of hosts, that the vessels which are left in the house of the Lord, and in the house of the king of Judah, and at Jerusalem, go not to Babylon.	If they are indeed prophets and the word of the LORD is with them, let them now plead with the LORD of Hosts that the articles remaining in the house of the LORD, in the palace of the king of Judah, and in Jerusalem, not be taken to Babylon.
JER	27	19	만군의 여호와께서 기둥들과 놋바다와 받침들과 및 이 성에 남아있는 기구에 대하여 이같이 말씀하시나니	For thus saith the Lord of hosts concerning the pillars, and concerning the sea, and concerning the bases, and concerning the residue of the vessels that remain in this city,	For this is what the LORD of Hosts says about the pillars, the sea, the bases, and the rest of the articles that remain in this city,
JER	27	20	이것은 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살이 유다 왕 여호야김의 아들 여고니야와 유다와 예루살렘 모든 귀족을 예루살렘에서 바벨론으로 사로잡아 옮길 때에 취하지 아니하였던 것이라	Which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took not, when he carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah from Jerusalem to Babylon, and all the nobles of Judah and Jerusalem;	which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon did not take when he carried Jeconiah son of Jehoiakim king of Judah into exile from Jerusalem to Babylon, along with all the nobles of Judah and Jerusalem.
JER	27	21	만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 여호와의 집에와 유다 왕의 집에와 예루살렘에 남아 있는 그 기구에 대하여 이같이 말씀하시되	Yea, thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, concerning the vessels that remain in the house of the Lord, and in the house of the king of Judah and of Jerusalem;	Yes, this is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says about the articles that remain in the house of the LORD, in the palace of the king of Judah, and in Jerusalem:
JER	27	22	그것들이 바벨론으로 옮김을 입고 내가 이것을 돌아보는 날까지 거기 있을 것이니라 그 후에 내가 그것을 옮겨 이곳에 다시 두리라 여호와의 말이니라	They shall be carried to Babylon, and there shall they be until the day that I visit them, saith the Lord; then will I bring them up, and restore them to this place.	‘They will be carried to Babylon and will remain there until the day I attend to them again,’ declares the LORD. ‘Then I will bring them back and restore them to this place.’”
JER	28	1	이 해 유다 왕 시드기야의 즉위한 지 오래지 않은 해 곧 사년 오월에 기브온 앗술의 아들 선지자 하나냐가 여호와의 집에서 제사장들과 모든 백성 앞에서 내게 말하여 가로되	And it came to pass the same year, in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the fourth year, and in the fifth month, that Hananiah the son of Azur the prophet, which was of Gibeon, spake unto me in the house of the Lord, in the presence of the priests and of all the people, saying,	In the fifth month of that same year, the fourth year, near the beginning of the reign of King Zedekiah of Judah, the prophet Hananiah son of Azzur, who was from Gibeon, said to me in the house of the LORD in the presence of the priests and all the people:
JER	28	2	만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 이같이 말씀하여 가라사대 내가 바벨론 왕의 멍에를 꺾었느니라	Thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, saying, I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon.	“This is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: ‘I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon.
JER	28	3	내가 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살의 이곳에서 바벨론으로 옮겨간 여호와의 집 모든 기구를 두 해가 차기 전에 다시 이곳으로 가져오게 하겠고	Within two full years will I bring again into this place all the vessels of the Lord’s house, that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took away from this place, and carried them to Babylon:	Within two years I will restore to this place all the articles of the house of the LORD that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon removed from here and carried to Babylon.
JER	28	4	내가 또 유다 왕 여호야김의 아들 여고니야와 바벨론으로 간 유다 모든 포로를 다시 이곳으로 돌아오게 하리니 이는 내가 바벨론 왕의 멍에를 꺾을 것임이니라 여호와의 말이니라 하셨다 하는지라	And I will bring again to this place Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah, with all the captives of Judah, that went into Babylon, saith the Lord: for I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.	And I will restore to this place Jeconiah son of Jehoiakim king of Judah, along with all the exiles from Judah who went to Babylon,’ declares the LORD, ‘for I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.’”
JER	28	5	선지자 예레미야가 여호와의 집에 선 제사장들의 앞과 모든 백성 앞에서 선지자 하나냐에게 말할쌔	Then the prophet Jeremiah said unto the prophet Hananiah in the presence of the priests, and in the presence of all the people that stood in the house of the Lord,	Then the prophet Jeremiah replied to the prophet Hananiah in the presence of the priests and all the people who were standing in the house of the LORD.
JER	28	6	선지자 예레미야가 말하되 아멘 여호와는 이같이 하옵소서 여호와께서 네 예언대로 이루사 여호와의 집 기구와 모든 포로를 바벨론에서 이곳으로 다시 옮겨 오시기를 원하노라	Even the prophet Jeremiah said, Amen: the Lord do so: the Lord perform thy words which thou hast prophesied, to bring again the vessels of the Lord’s house, and all that is carried away captive, from Babylon into this place.	“Amen!” Jeremiah said. “May the LORD do so! May the LORD fulfill the words you have prophesied, and may He restore the articles of His house and all the exiles back to this place from Babylon.
JER	28	7	그러나 너는 이제 내가 네 귀와 모든 백성의 귀에 이르는 이 말을 들으라	Nevertheless hear thou now this word that I speak in thine ears, and in the ears of all the people;	Nevertheless, listen now to this message I am speaking in your hearing and in the hearing of all the people.
JER	28	8	나와 너 이전 선지자들이 자고로 여러 나라와 큰 국가들에 대하여 전쟁과 재앙과 염병을 예언하였느니라	The prophets that have been before me and before thee of old prophesied both against many countries, and against great kingdoms, of war, and of evil, and of pestilence.	The prophets of old who preceded you and me prophesied war, disaster, and plague against many lands and great kingdoms.
JER	28	9	평화를 예언하는 선지자는 그 예언자의 말이 응한 후에야 그는 진실로 여호와의 보내신 선지자로 알게 되리라	The prophet which prophesieth of peace, when the word of the prophet shall come to pass, then shall the prophet be known, that the Lord hath truly sent him.	As for the prophet who prophesies peace, only if the word of the prophet comes true will the prophet be recognized as one the LORD has truly sent.”
JER	28	10	선지자 하나냐가 선지자 예레미야의 목에서 멍에를 취하여 꺾고	Then Hananiah the prophet took the yoke from off the prophet Jeremiah’s neck, and brake it.	Then the prophet Hananiah took the yoke off the neck of Jeremiah the prophet and broke it.
JER	28	11	모든 백성 앞에서 말하여 가로되 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 내가 두 해가 차기 전에 열방의 목에서 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살의 멍에를 이같이 꺾어 버리리라 하셨느니라 하매 선지자 예레미야가 자기 길을 가니라	And Hananiah spake in the presence of all the people, saying, Thus saith the Lord; Even so will I break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon from the neck of all nations within the space of two full years. And the prophet Jeremiah went his way.	And in the presence of all the people Hananiah proclaimed, “This is what the LORD says: ‘In this way, within two years I will break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon off the neck of all the nations.’” At this, Jeremiah the prophet went on his way.
JER	28	12	선지자 하나냐가 선지자 예레미야의 목에서 멍에를 꺾어버린 후에 여호와의 말씀이 예레미야에게 임하니라 가라사대	Then the word of the Lord came unto Jeremiah the prophet, after that Hananiah the prophet had broken the yoke from off the neck of the prophet Jeremiah, saying,	But shortly after Hananiah the prophet had broken the yoke off his neck, the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah:
JER	28	13	너는 가서 하나냐에게 말하여 이르기를 여호와의 말씀에 네가 나무 멍에를 꺾었으나 그 대신 쇠 멍에를 만들었느니라	Go and tell Hananiah, saying, Thus saith the Lord; Thou hast broken the yokes of wood; but thou shalt make for them yokes of iron.	“Go and tell Hananiah that this is what the LORD says: ‘You have broken a yoke of wood, but in its place you have fashioned a yoke of iron.’
JER	28	14	만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 이같이 말하노라 내가 쇠 멍에로 이 모든 나라의 목에 메워 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살을 섬기게 하였으니 그들이 그를 섬기리라 내가 들짐승도 그에게 주었느니라 하신다 하라	For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; I have put a yoke of iron upon the neck of all these nations, that they may serve Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon; and they shall serve him: and I have given him the beasts of the field also.	For this is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: ‘I have put a yoke of iron on the neck of all these nations to make them serve Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and they will serve him. I have even given him control of the beasts of the field.’”
JER	28	15	선지자 예레미야가 선지자 하나냐에게 이르되 하나냐여 들으라 여호와께서 너를 보내지 아니하셨거늘 네가 이 백성으로 거짓을 믿게 하는도다	Then said the prophet Jeremiah unto Hananiah the prophet, Hear now, Hananiah; The Lord hath not sent thee; but thou makest this people to trust in a lie.	Then the prophet Jeremiah said to the prophet Hananiah, “Listen, Hananiah! The LORD did not send you, but you have persuaded this people to trust in a lie.
JER	28	16	그러므로 여호와께서 말씀하시되 내가 너를 지면에서 제하리니 네가 여호와께 패역하는 말을 하였음이라 금년에 죽으리라 하셨느니라 하더니	Therefore thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will cast thee from off the face of the earth: this year thou shalt die, because thou hast taught rebellion against the Lord.	Therefore this is what the LORD says: ‘I am about to remove you from the face of the earth. You will die this year because you have preached rebellion against the LORD.’”
JER	28	17	선지자 하나냐가 그 해 칠월에 죽었더라	So Hananiah the prophet died the same year in the seventh month.	And in the seventh month of that very year, the prophet Hananiah died.
JER	29	1	선지자 예레미야가 예루살렘에서 이같은 편지를 느부갓네살이 예루살렘에서 바벨론으로 옮겨간 포로 중 남아 있는 장로들과 제사장들과 선지자들과 모든 백성에게 보내었는데	Now these are the words of the letter that Jeremiah the prophet sent from Jerusalem unto the residue of the elders which were carried away captives, and to the priests, and to the prophets, and to all the people whom Nebuchadnezzar had carried away captive from Jerusalem to Babylon;	This is the text of the letter that Jeremiah the prophet sent from Jerusalem to the surviving elders among the exiles and to the priests, the prophets, and all the others Nebuchadnezzar had carried into exile from Jerusalem to Babylon.
JER	29	2	때는 여고니야 왕과 국모와 환관들과 및 유다와 예루살렘 방백들과 목공들과 철공들이 예루살렘에서 떠난 후라	(After that Jeconiah the king, and the queen, and the eunuchs, the princes of Judah and Jerusalem, and the carpenters, and the smiths, were departed from Jerusalem;)	(This was after King Jeconiah, the queen mother, the court officials, the officials of Judah and Jerusalem, the craftsmen, and the metalsmiths had been exiled from Jerusalem.)
JER	29	3	유다 왕 시드기야가 바벨론으로 보내어 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살에게로 가게 한 사반의 아들 엘라사와 힐기야의 아들 그마랴의 손에 위탁하였더라 이렀으되	By the hand of Elasah the son of Shaphan, and Gemariah the son of Hilkiah, (whom Zedekiah king of Judah sent unto Babylon to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon) saying,	The letter was entrusted to Elasah son of Shaphan and Gemariah son of Hilkiah, whom Zedekiah king of Judah sent to King Nebuchadnezzar in Babylon. It stated:
JER	29	4	만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님 내가 예루살렘에서 바벨론으로 사로잡혀 가게 한 모든 포로에게 이같이 이르노라	Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, unto all that are carried away captives, whom I have caused to be carried away from Jerusalem unto Babylon;	This is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says to all the exiles who were carried away from Jerusalem to Babylon:
JER	29	5	너희는 집을 짓고 거기 거하며 전원을 만들고 그 열매를 먹으라	Build ye houses, and dwell in them; and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them;	“Build houses and settle down. Plant gardens and eat their produce.
JER	29	6	아내를 취하여 자녀를 생산하며 너희 아들로 아내를 취하며 너희 딸로 남편을 맞아 그들로 자녀를 생산케 하여 너희로 거기서 번성하고 쇠잔하지 않게 하라	Take ye wives, and beget sons and daughters; and take wives for your sons, and give your daughters to husbands, that they may bear sons and daughters; that ye may be increased there, and not diminished.	Take wives and have sons and daughters. Take wives for your sons and give your daughters in marriage, so that they too may have sons and daughters. Multiply there; do not decrease.
JER	29	7	너희는 내가 사로잡혀 가게 한 그 성읍의 평안하기를 힘쓰고 위하여 여호와께 기도하라 이는 그 성이 평안함으로 너희도 평안할 것임이니라	And seek the peace of the city whither I have caused you to be carried away captives, and pray unto the Lord for it: for in the peace thereof shall ye have peace.	Seek the prosperity of the city to which I have sent you as exiles. Pray to the LORD on its behalf, for if it prospers, you too will prosper.”
JER	29	8	만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 이같이 말하노라 너희 중 선지자들에게와 복술에게 혹하지 말며 너희가 꾼 바 꿈도 신청하지 말라	For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Let not your prophets and your diviners, that be in the midst of you, deceive you, neither hearken to your dreams which ye cause to be dreamed.	For this is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: “Do not be deceived by the prophets and diviners among you, and do not listen to the dreams you elicit from them.
JER	29	9	내가 그들을 보내지 아니하였어도 그들이 내 이름으로 거짓을 예언함이니라 여호와의 말이니라	For they prophesy falsely unto you in my name: I have not sent them, saith the Lord.	For they are falsely prophesying to you in My name; I have not sent them, declares the LORD.”
JER	29	10	나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 바벨론에서 칠십 년이 차면 내가 너희를 권고하고 나의 선한 말을 너희에게 실행하여 너희를 이곳으로 돌아오게 하리라	For thus saith the Lord, That after seventy years be accomplished at Babylon I will visit you, and perform my good word toward you, in causing you to return to this place.	For this is what the LORD says: “When Babylon’s seventy years are complete, I will attend to you and confirm My promise to restore you to this place.
JER	29	11	나 여호와가 말하노라 너희를 향한 나의 생각은 내가 아나니 재앙이 아니라 곧 평안이요 너희 장래에 소망을 주려하는 생각이라	For I know the thoughts that I think toward you, saith the Lord, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end.	For I know the plans I have for you, declares the LORD, plans to prosper you and not to harm you, to give you a future and a hope.
JER	29	12	너희는 내게 부르짖으며 와서 내게 기도하면 내가 너희를 들을 것이요	Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you.	Then you will call upon Me and come and pray to Me, and I will listen to you.
JER	29	13	너희가 전심으로 나를 찾고 찾으면 나를 만나리라	And ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart.	You will seek Me and find Me when you search for Me with all your heart.
JER	29	14	나 여호와가 말하노라 내가 너희에게 만나지겠고 너희를 포로된 중에서 다시 돌아오게 하되 내가 쫓아 보내었던 열방과 모든 곳에서 모아 사로잡혀 떠나게 하던 본 곳으로 돌아오게 하리라 여호와의 말이니라 하셨느니라	And I will be found of you, saith the Lord: and I will turn away your captivity, and I will gather you from all the nations, and from all the places whither I have driven you, saith the Lord; and I will bring you again into the place whence I caused you to be carried away captive.	I will be found by you, declares the LORD, and I will restore you from captivity and gather you from all the nations and places to which I have banished you, declares the LORD. I will restore you to the place from which I sent you into exile.”
JER	29	15	너희가 말하기를 여호와께서 바벨론에서 우리를 위하여 선지자들을 일으키셨다 하므로	Because ye have said, The Lord hath raised us up prophets in Babylon;	Because you may say, “The LORD has raised up for us prophets in Babylon,”
JER	29	16	여호와께서 다윗의 위에 앉은 왕과 이 성에 거하는 모든 백성 곧 너희와 함께 포로되어 가지 아니한 너희 형제에게 대하여 이같이 말씀하시느니라	Know that thus saith the Lord of the king that sitteth upon the throne of David, and of all the people that dwelleth in this city, and of your brethren that are not gone forth with you into captivity;	this is what the LORD says about the king who sits on David’s throne and all the people who remain in this city, your brothers who did not go with you into exile—
JER	29	17	만군의 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 보라 내가 칼과 기근과 염병을 그들에게 보내어 그들로 악하여 먹을 수 없는 악한 무화과 같게 하겠고	Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Behold, I will send upon them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and will make them like vile figs, that cannot be eaten, they are so evil.	this is what the LORD of Hosts says: “I will send against them sword and famine and plague, and I will make them like rotten figs, so bad they cannot be eaten.
JER	29	18	내가 칼과 기근과 염병으로 그들을 따르게 하며 그들을 세계 열방 중에 흩어 학대를 당하게 할 것이며 내가 그들을 쫓아 보낸 열방 중에서 저줏거리와 놀램과 치소와 모욕거리가 되게 하리니	And I will persecute them with the sword, with the famine, and with the pestilence, and will deliver them to be removed to all the kingdoms of the earth, to be a curse, and an astonishment, and an hissing, and a reproach, among all the nations whither I have driven them:	I will pursue them with sword and famine and plague. I will make them a horror to all the kingdoms of the earth—a curse, a desolation, and an object of scorn and reproach among all the nations to which I banish them.
JER	29	19	이는 내가 내 종 선지자들을 그들에게 보내되 부지런히 보내었으나 그들이 나 여호와의 말을 듣지 아니하며 듣지 아니함이니라 여호와의 말이니라	Because they have not hearkened to my words, saith the Lord, which I sent unto them by my servants the prophets, rising up early and sending them; but ye would not hear, saith the Lord.	I will do this because they have not listened to My words, declares the LORD, which I sent to them again and again through My servants the prophets. And neither have you exiles listened, declares the LORD.”
JER	29	20	그런즉 내가 예루살렘에서 바벨론으로 보낸 너희 모든 포로여 나 여호와의 말을 들을지니라	Hear ye therefore the word of the Lord, all ye of the captivity, whom I have sent from Jerusalem to Babylon:	So hear the word of the LORD, all you exiles I have sent away from Jerusalem to Babylon.
JER	29	21	만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님 내가 골라야의 아들 아합과 마아세야의 아들 시드기야에 대하여 말하노라 그들은 내 이름으로 너희에게 거짓을 예언한 자라 보라 내가 그들을 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살의 손에 붙이리니 그가 너희 목전에서 그들을 죽일 것이라	Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, of Ahab the son of Kolaiah, and of Zedekiah the son of Maaseiah, which prophesy a lie unto you in my name; Behold, I will deliver them into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; and he shall slay them before your eyes;	This is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says about Ahab son of Kolaiah and Zedekiah son of Maaseiah, who are prophesying to you lies in My name: “I will deliver them to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and he will kill them before your very eyes.
JER	29	22	너희 바벨론에 있는 유다 모든 포로가 그들로 저줏거리를 삼아서 이르기를 여호와께서 너로 바벨론 왕이 불살라 죽인 시드기야와 아합 같게 하시기를 원하노라 하리니	And of them shall be taken up a curse by all the captivity of Judah which are in Babylon, saying, The Lord make thee like Zedekiah and like Ahab, whom the king of Babylon roasted in the fire;	Because of them, all the exiles of Judah who are in Babylon will use this curse: ‘May the LORD make you like Zedekiah and Ahab, whom the king of Babylon roasted in the fire!’
JER	29	23	이는 그들이 이스라엘 중에서 망령되이 행하여 그 이웃의 아내와 행음하며 내가 그들에게 명하지 아니한 거짓을 내 이름으로 말함이니라 나는 아는 자요 증거인이니라 여호와의 말이니라 하셨다 하였더라	Because they have committed villany in Israel, and have committed adultery with their neighbours’ wives, and have spoken lying words in my name, which I have not commanded them; even I know, and am a witness, saith the Lord.	For they have committed an outrage in Israel by committing adultery with the wives of their neighbors and speaking lies in My name, which I did not command them to do. I am He who knows, and I am a witness, declares the LORD.”
JER	29	24	너는 느헬람 사람 스마야에게 이같이 말하여 이르라	Thus shalt thou also speak to Shemaiah the Nehelamite, saying,	You are to tell Shemaiah the Nehelamite that
JER	29	25	만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 이같이 말씀하여 가라사대 네가 네 이름으로 예루살렘에 있는 모든 백성과 제사장 마아세야의 아들 스바냐와 모든 제사장에게 글을 보내어 이르기를	Thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, saying, Because thou hast sent letters in thy name unto all the people that are at Jerusalem, and to Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest, and to all the priests, saying,	this is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: “In your own name you have sent out letters to all the people of Jerusalem, to the priest Zephaniah son of Maaseiah, and to all the priests. You said to Zephaniah:
JER	29	26	여호와께서 너로 제사장 여호야다를 대신하여 제사장을 삼아 여호와의 집 유사로 세우심은 무릇 미친 자와 자칭 선지자를 착고에 채우며 칼을 메우게 하심이어늘	The Lord hath made thee priest in the stead of Jehoiada the priest, that ye should be officers in the house of the Lord, for every man that is mad, and maketh himself a prophet, that thou shouldest put him in prison, and in the stocks.	‘The LORD has appointed you priest in place of Jehoiada, to be the chief officer in the house of the LORD, responsible for any madman who acts like a prophet—you must put him in stocks and neck irons.
JER	29	27	이제 네가 어찌하여 너희 중에 자칭 선지자라 하는 아나돗 사람 예레미야를 책망하지 아니하느냐	Now therefore why hast thou not reproved Jeremiah of Anathoth, which maketh himself a prophet to you?	So now, why have you not rebuked Jeremiah of Anathoth, who poses as a prophet among you?
JER	29	28	대저 그가 바벨론에 있는 우리에게 편지하기를 때가 오래리니 너희는 집을 짓고 거기 거하며 전원을 만들고 그 열매를 먹으라 하였다 하였느니라	For therefore he sent unto us in Babylon, saying, This captivity is long: build ye houses, and dwell in them; and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them.	For he has sent to us in Babylon, claiming: Since the exile will be lengthy, build houses and settle down; plant gardens and eat their produce.’”
JER	29	29	제사장 스바냐가 스마야의 글을 선지자 예레미야에게 읽어 들릴 때에	And Zephaniah the priest read this letter in the ears of Jeremiah the prophet.	(Zephaniah the priest, however, had read this letter to Jeremiah the prophet.)
JER	29	30	여호와의 말씀이 예레미야에게 임하여 가라사대	Then came the word of the Lord unto Jeremiah, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah:
JER	29	31	너는 모든 포로에게 글을 보내어 이르기를 여호와께서 느헬람 사람 스마야에 대하여 이같이 말씀하시되 내가 스마야를 보내지 아니하였거늘 그가 너희에게 예언하고 너희로 거짓을 믿게 하였도다	Send to all them of the captivity, saying, Thus saith the Lord concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite; Because that Shemaiah hath prophesied unto you, and I sent him not, and he caused you to trust in a lie:	“Send a message telling all the exiles what the LORD says concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite. Because Shemaiah has prophesied to you—though I did not send him—and has made you trust in a lie,
JER	29	32	그러므로 나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 보라 내가 느헬람 사람 스마야와 그 자손을 벌하리니 그가 나 여호와께 패역한 말을 하였음을 인하여 이 백성 중에 거할 그의 사람이 하나도 없을 것이라 내가 내 백성에게 행하려 하는 선한 일을 그가 보지 못하리라 하셨다 하라 여호와의 말이니라	Therefore thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will punish Shemaiah the Nehelamite, and his seed: he shall not have a man to dwell among this people; neither shall he behold the good that I will do for my people, saith the Lord; because he hath taught rebellion against the Lord.	this is what the LORD says: ‘I will surely punish Shemaiah the Nehelamite and his descendants. He will have no one left among this people, nor will he see the good that I will bring to My people, declares the LORD, for he has preached rebellion against the LORD.’”
JER	30	1	여호와께로서 말씀이 예레미야에게 임하여 이르시니라	The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying,	This is the word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD:
JER	30	2	이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께서 이같이 일러 가라사대 내가 네게 이른 모든 말을 책에 기록하라	Thus speaketh the Lord God of Israel, saying, Write thee all the words that I have spoken unto thee in a book.	“This is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: ‘Write in a book all the words that I have spoken to you.
JER	30	3	나 여호와가 말하노라 내가 내 백성 이스라엘과 유다의 포로를 돌이킬 때가 이르리니 내가 그들을 그 열조에게 준 땅으로 돌아오게 할 것이라 그들이 그것을 차지하리라 여호와의 말이니라	For, lo, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will bring again the captivity of my people Israel and Judah, saith the Lord: and I will cause them to return to the land that I gave to their fathers, and they shall possess it.	For behold, the days are coming, declares the LORD, when I will restore from captivity My people Israel and Judah, declares the LORD. I will restore them to the land that I gave to their fathers, and they will possess it.’”
JER	30	4	여호와께서 이스라엘과 유다에 대하여 하신 말씀이 이러하니라	And these are the words that the Lord spake concerning Israel and concerning Judah.	These are the words that the LORD spoke concerning Israel and Judah.
JER	30	5	여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 우리가 떨리는 소리를 들으니 두려움이요 평안함이 아니로다	For thus saith the Lord; We have heard a voice of trembling, of fear, and not of peace.	Yes, this is what the LORD says: “A cry of panic is heard— a cry of terror, not of peace.
JER	30	6	너희는 자식을 해산하는 남자가 있는가 물어보라 남자마다 해산하는 여인 같이 손으로 각기 허리를 짚고 그 얼굴 빛이 창백하여 보임은 어찜이뇨	Ask ye now, and see whether a man doth travail with child? wherefore do I see every man with his hands on his loins, as a woman in travail, and all faces are turned into paleness?	Ask now, and see: Can a male give birth? Why then do I see every man with his hands on his stomach like a woman in labor and every face turned pale?
JER	30	7	슬프다 그 날이여 비할 데 없이 크니 이는 야곱의 환난의 때가 됨이로다마는 그가 이에서 구하여 냄을 얻으리로다	Alas! for that day is great, so that none is like it: it is even the time of Jacob’s trouble; but he shall be saved out of it.	How awful that day will be! None will be like it! It is the time of Jacob’s distress, but he will be saved out of it.
JER	30	8	만군의 여호와가 말하노라 그 날에 내가 네 목에서 그 멍에를 꺾어버리며 네 줄을 끊으리니 이방인이 다시는 너를 부리지 못할 것이며	For it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord of hosts, that I will break his yoke from off thy neck, and will burst thy bonds, and strangers shall no more serve themselves of him:	On that day, declares the LORD of Hosts, I will break the yoke off their necks and tear off their bonds, and no longer will strangers enslave them.
JER	30	9	너희는 너희 하나님 나 여호와를 섬기며 내가 너희를 위하여 일으킬 너희 왕 다윗을 섬기리라	But they shall serve the Lord their God, and David their king, whom I will raise up unto them.	Instead, they will serve the LORD their God and David their king, whom I will raise up for them.
JER	30	10	그러므로 나 여호와가 말하노라 내 종 야곱아 두려워 말라 이스라엘아 놀라지 말라 내가 너를 원방에서 구원하고 네 자손을 포로된 땅에서 구원하리니 야곱이 돌아와서 태평과 안락을 얻을 것이라 너를 두렵게 할 자가 없으리라	Therefore fear thou not, O my servant Jacob, saith the Lord; neither be dismayed, O Israel: for, lo, I will save thee from afar, and thy seed from the land of their captivity; and Jacob shall return, and shall be in rest, and be quiet, and none shall make him afraid.	As for you, O Jacob My servant, do not be afraid, declares the LORD, and do not be dismayed, O Israel. For I will surely save you out of a distant place, your descendants from the land of their captivity! Jacob will return to quiet and ease, with no one to make him afraid.
JER	30	11	나 여호와가 말하노라 내가 너와 함께 하여 너를 구원할 것이라 내가 너를 흩었던 그 열방은 진멸한다 할지라도 너는 진멸하지 아니하리라 그러나 내가 공도로 너를 징책할 것이요 결코 무죄한 자로 여기지 아니하리라	For I am with thee, saith the Lord, to save thee: though I make a full end of all nations whither I have scattered thee, yet will I not make a full end of thee: but I will correct thee in measure, and will not leave thee altogether unpunished.	For I am with you to save you, declares the LORD. Though I will completely destroy all the nations to which I have scattered you, I will not completely destroy you. Yet I will discipline you justly, and will by no means leave you unpunished.”
JER	30	12	나 여호와가 말하노라 네 상처는 고칠 수 없고 네 창상은 중하도다	For thus saith the Lord, Thy bruise is incurable, and thy wound is grievous.	For this is what the LORD says: “Your injury is incurable; your wound is grievous.
JER	30	13	네 송사를 변호할 자가 없고 네 상처를 싸맬 약이 없도다	There is none to plead thy cause, that thou mayest be bound up: thou hast no healing medicines.	There is no one to plead your cause, no remedy for your sores, no recovery for you.
JER	30	14	너를 사랑하던 자가 다 너를 잊고 찾지 아니하니 이는 네 허물이 크고 네 죄가 수다함을 인하여 내가 대적의 상하게 하는 그것으로 너를 상하게 하며 잔학한 자의 징계하는 그것으로 너를 징계함이어늘	All thy lovers have forgotten thee; they seek thee not; for I have wounded thee with the wound of an enemy, with the chastisement of a cruel one, for the multitude of thine iniquity; because thy sins were increased.	All your lovers have forgotten you; they no longer seek you, for I have struck you as an enemy would, with the discipline of someone cruel, because of your great iniquity and your numerous sins.
JER	30	15	어찌하여 네 상처를 인하여 부르짖느뇨 네 고통이 낫지 못하리라 네 죄악의 큼과 죄의 수다함을 인하여 내가 네게 이 일을 행하였느니라	Why criest thou for thine affliction? thy sorrow is incurable for the multitude of thine iniquity: because thy sins were increased, I have done these things unto thee.	Why do you cry out over your wound? Your pain has no cure! Because of your great iniquity and your numerous sins I have done these things to you.
JER	30	16	그러나 무릇 너를 먹는 자는 먹히며 무릇 너를 치는 자는 다 포로가 되며 너를 탈취하는 자는 탈취를 당하며 무릇 너를 약탈하는 자는 내가 그로 약탈을 당하게 하리라	Therefore all they that devour thee shall be devoured; and all thine adversaries, every one of them, shall go into captivity; and they that spoil thee shall be a spoil, and all that prey upon thee will I give for a prey.	Nevertheless, all who devour you will be devoured, and all your adversaries—every one of them— will go off into exile. Those who plundered you will be plundered, and all who raided you will be raided.
JER	30	17	나 여호와가 말하노라 그들이 쫓겨난 자라 하며 찾는 자가 없는 시온이라 한즉 내가 너를 치료하여 네 상처를 낫게 하리라	For I will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds, saith the Lord; because they called thee an Outcast, saying, This is Zion, whom no man seeketh after.	But I will restore your health and heal your wounds, declares the LORD, because they call you an outcast, Zion, for whom no one cares.”
JER	30	18	나 여호와가 말하노라 보라 내가 포로된 야곱의 장막들을 돌이키고 그 거하는 곳들을 긍휼히 여길 것이라 그 성읍은 자기 산에 중건될 것이요 그 궁궐은 본래대로 거하는 곳이 될 것이며	Thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will bring again the captivity of Jacob’s tents, and have mercy on his dwellingplaces; and the city shall be builded upon her own heap, and the palace shall remain after the manner thereof.	This is what the LORD says: “I will restore the fortunes of Jacob’s tents and have compassion on his dwellings. And the city will be rebuilt on her own ruins, and the palace will stand in its rightful place.
JER	30	19	감사하는 소리와 즐거워하는 자의 목소리가 그 중에서 나오리라 내가 그들을 번성케 하리니 쇠잔치 아니하겠고 내가 그들을 영화롭게 하리니 비천하지 아니하겠으며	And out of them shall proceed thanksgiving and the voice of them that make merry: and I will multiply them, and they shall not be few; I will also glorify them, and they shall not be small.	Thanksgiving will proceed from them, a sound of celebration. I will multiply them, and they will not be decreased; I will honor them, and they will not be belittled.
JER	30	20	그 자손은 여전하겠고 그 회중은 내 앞에 굳게 설 것이며 무릇 그를 압박하는 자는 내가 다 벌하리라	Their children also shall be as aforetime, and their congregation shall be established before me, and I will punish all that oppress them.	Their children will be as in days of old, and their congregation will be established before Me; and I will punish all their oppressors.
JER	30	21	그 왕은 그 본족에게서 날 것이요 그 통치자는 그들 중에서 나올 것이며 내가 그를 가까이 오게 하므로 그가 내게 접근하리라 그렇지 않고 담대히 내게 접근할 자가 누구뇨 여호와의 말이니라	And their nobles shall be of themselves, and their governor shall proceed from the midst of them; and I will cause him to draw near, and he shall approach unto me: for who is this that engaged his heart to approach unto me? saith the Lord.	Their leader will be one of their own, and their ruler will arise from their midst. And I will bring him near, and he will approach Me, for who would dare on his own to approach Me?” declares the LORD.
JER	30	22	너희는 내 백성이 되겠고 나는 너희 하나님이 되리라	And ye shall be my people, and I will be your God.	“And you will be My people, and I will be your God.”
JER	30	23	보라 여호와의 노가 발하여 폭풍과 회리바람처럼 악인의 머리를 칠 것이라	Behold, the whirlwind of the Lord goeth forth with fury, a continuing whirlwind: it shall fall with pain upon the head of the wicked.	Behold, the storm of the LORD has gone out with fury, a whirlwind swirling down upon the heads of the wicked.
JER	30	24	나 여호와의 진노는 내 마음의 뜻한 바를 행하여 이루기까지는 쉬지 아니하나니 너희가 말일에 그것을 깨달으리라	The fierce anger of the Lord shall not return, until he have done it, and until he have performed the intents of his heart: in the latter days ye shall consider it.	The fierce anger of the LORD will not turn back until He has fully accomplished the purposes of His heart. In the days to come you will understand this.
JER	31	1	나 여호와가 말하노라 그 때에 내가 이스라엘 모든 가족의 하나님이 되고 그들은 내 백성이 되리라	At the same time, saith the Lord, will I be the God of all the families of Israel, and they shall be my people.	“At that time,” declares the LORD, “I will be the God of all the families of Israel, and they will be My people.”
JER	31	2	나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 칼에서 벗어난 백성이 광야에서 은혜를 얻었나니 곧 내가 이스라엘로 안식을 얻게 하러 갈 때에라	Thus saith the Lord, The people which were left of the sword found grace in the wilderness; even Israel, when I went to cause him to rest.	This is what the LORD says: “The people who survived the sword found favor in the wilderness when Israel went to find rest.”
JER	31	3	나 여호와가 옛적에 이스라엘에게 나타나 이르기를 내가 무궁한 사랑으로 너를 사랑하는 고로 인자함으로 너를 인도하였다 하였노라	The Lord hath appeared of old unto me, saying, Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love: therefore with lovingkindness have I drawn thee.	The LORD appeared to us in the past, saying: “I have loved you with an everlasting love; therefore I have drawn you with loving devotion.
JER	31	4	처녀 이스라엘아 내가 다시 너를 세우리니 네가 세움을 입을 것이요 네가 다시 소고로 너를 장식하고 즐거운 무리처럼 춤추며 나올 것이며	Again I will build thee, and thou shalt be built, O virgin of Israel: thou shalt again be adorned with thy tabrets, and shalt go forth in the dances of them that make merry.	Again I will build you, and you will be rebuilt, O Virgin Israel. Again you will take up your tambourines and go out in joyful dancing.
JER	31	5	네가 다시 사마리아 산들에 포도원을 심되 심는 자가 심고 그 과실을 먹으리라	Thou shalt yet plant vines upon the mountains of Samaria: the planters shall plant, and shall eat them as common things.	Again you will plant vineyards on the hills of Samaria; the farmers will plant and enjoy the fruit.
JER	31	6	에브라임 산 위에서 파수꾼이 외치는 날이 이를 것이라 이르기를 너희는 일어나라 우리가 시온에 올라가서 우리 하나님 여호와께로 나아가자 하리라	For there shall be a day, that the watchmen upon the mount Ephraim shall cry, Arise ye, and let us go up to Zion unto the Lord our God.	For there will be a day when watchmen will call out on the hills of Ephraim, ‘Arise, let us go up to Zion, to the LORD our God!’”
JER	31	7	나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 너희는 야곱을 위하여 기뻐 노래하며 만국의 머리 된 자를 위하여 외쳐 전파하며 찬양하며 이르기를 여호와여 주의 백성 이스라엘의 남은 자를 구원하소서 하라	For thus saith the Lord; Sing with gladness for Jacob, and shout among the chief of the nations: publish ye, praise ye, and say, O Lord, save thy people, the remnant of Israel.	For this is what the LORD says: “Sing with joy for Jacob; shout for the foremost of the nations! Make your praises heard, and say, ‘O LORD, save Your people, the remnant of Israel!’
JER	31	8	보라 내가 그들을 북편 땅에서 인도하며 땅 끝에서부터 모으리니 그들 중에는 소경과 절뚝발이와 잉태한 여인과 해산하는 여인이 함께 하여 큰 무리를 이루어 이곳으로 돌아오되	Behold, I will bring them from the north country, and gather them from the coasts of the earth, and with them the blind and the lame, the woman with child and her that travaileth with child together: a great company shall return thither.	Behold, I will bring them from the land of the north and gather them from the farthest parts of the earth, including the blind and the lame, expectant mothers and women in labor. They will return as a great assembly!
JER	31	9	울며 올 것이며 그들이 나의 인도함을 입고 간구할 때에 내가 그들로 넘어지지 아니하고 하숫가의 바른 길로 행하게 하리라 나는 이스라엘의 아비요 에브라임은 나의 장자니라	They shall come with weeping, and with supplications will I lead them: I will cause them to walk by the rivers of waters in a straight way, wherein they shall not stumble: for I am a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my firstborn.	They will come with weeping, and by their supplication I will lead them; I will make them walk beside streams of waters, on a level path where they will not stumble. For I am Israel’s Father, and Ephraim is My firstborn.”
JER	31	10	열방이여 너희는 나 여호와의 말을 듣고 먼 섬에 전파하여 이르기를 이스라엘을 흩으신 자가 그를 모으시고 목자가 그 양무리에게 행함 같이 그를 지키시리로다	Hear the word of the Lord, O ye nations, and declare it in the isles afar off, and say, He that scattered Israel will gather him, and keep him, as a shepherd doth his flock.	Hear, O nations, the word of the LORD, and proclaim it in distant coastlands: “The One who scattered Israel will gather them and keep them as a shepherd keeps his flock.
JER	31	11	여호와께서 야곱을 속량하시되 그들보다 강한 자의 손에서 구속하셨으니	For the Lord hath redeemed Jacob, and ransomed him from the hand of him that was stronger than he.	For the LORD has ransomed Jacob and redeemed him from the hand that had overpowered him.
JER	31	12	그들이 와서 시온의 높은 곳에서 찬송하며 여호와의 은사 곧 곡식과 새 포도주와 기름과 어린 양의 떼와 소의 떼에 모일 것이라 그 심령은 물댄 동산 같겠고 다시는 근심이 없으리로다 할지어다	Therefore they shall come and sing in the height of Zion, and shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord, for wheat, and for wine, and for oil, and for the young of the flock and of the herd: and their soul shall be as a watered garden; and they shall not sorrow any more at all.	They will come and shout for joy on the heights of Zion; they will be radiant over the bounty of the LORD— the grain, new wine, and oil, and the young of the flocks and herds. Their life will be like a well-watered garden, and never again will they languish.
JER	31	13	그 때에 처녀는 춤추며 즐거워하겠고 청년과 노인이 함께 즐거워하리니 내가 그들의 슬픔을 돌이켜 즐겁게 하며 그들을 위로하여 근심한 후에 기쁨을 얻게 할 것임이니라	Then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance, both young men and old together: for I will turn their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice from their sorrow.	Then the maidens will rejoice with dancing, young men and old as well. I will turn their mourning into joy, and give them comfort and joy for their sorrow.
JER	31	14	내가 기름으로 제사장들의 심령에 흡족케 하며 내 은혜로 내 백성에게 만족케 하리라 여호와의 말이니라	And I will satiate the soul of the priests with fatness, and my people shall be satisfied with my goodness, saith the Lord.	I will fill the souls of the priests abundantly, and will fill My people with My goodness,” declares the LORD.
JER	31	15	나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 라마에서 슬퍼하며 통곡하는 소리가 들리니 라헬이 그 자식을 위하여 애곡하는 것이라 그가 자식이 없으므로 위로 받기를 거절하는도다	Thus saith the Lord; A voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation, and bitter weeping; Rahel weeping for her children refused to be comforted for her children, because they were not.	This is what the LORD says: “A voice is heard in Ramah, mourning and great weeping, Rachel weeping for her children, and refusing to be comforted, because they are no more.”
JER	31	16	나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 네 소리를 금하여 울지 말며 네 눈을 금하여 눈물을 흘리지 말라 네 일에 갚음을 받을 것인즉 그들이 그 대적의 땅에서 돌아오리라 여호와의 말이니라	Thus saith the Lord; Refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears: for thy work shall be rewarded, saith the Lord; and they shall come again from the land of the enemy.	This is what the LORD says: “Keep your voice from weeping and your eyes from tears, for the reward for your work will come, declares the LORD. Then your children will return from the land of the enemy.
JER	31	17	나 여호와가 말하노라 너의 최후에 소망이 있을 것이라 너의 자녀가 자기들의 경내로 돌아오리라	And there is hope in thine end, saith the Lord, that thy children shall come again to their own border.	So there is hope for your future, declares the LORD, and your children will return to their own land.
JER	31	18	에브라임이 스스로 탄식함을 내가 정녕히 들었노니 이르기를 주께서 나를 징벌하시매 멍에에 익숙지 못한 송아지 같은 내가 징벌을 받았나이다 주는 나의 하나님 여호와시니 나를 이끌어 돌이키소서 그리하시면 내가 돌아오겠나이다	I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus; Thou hast chastised me, and I was chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke: turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou art the Lord my God.	I have surely heard Ephraim’s moaning: ‘You disciplined me severely, like an untrained calf. Restore me, that I may return, for You are the LORD my God.
JER	31	19	내가 돌이킴을 받은 후에 뉘우쳤고 내가 교훈을 받은 후에 내 볼기를 쳤사오니 이는 어렸을 때의 치욕을 진고로 부끄럽고 욕됨이니이다 하도다	Surely after that I was turned, I repented; and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh: I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth.	After I returned, I repented; and after I was instructed, I struck my thigh in grief. I was ashamed and humiliated because I bore the disgrace of my youth.’
JER	31	20	에브라임은 나의 사랑하는 아들 기뻐하는 자식이 아니냐 내가 그를 책망하여 말할 때마다 깊이 생각하노라 그러므로 그를 위하여 내 마음이 측은한즉 내가 반드시 그를 긍휼히 여기리라 여호와의 말이니라	Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for since I spake against him, I do earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowels are troubled for him; I will surely have mercy upon him, saith the Lord.	Is not Ephraim a precious son to Me, a delightful child? Though I often speak against him, I still remember him. Therefore My heart yearns for him; I have great compassion for him,” declares the LORD.
JER	31	21	처녀 이스라엘아 너를 위하여 길표를 세우며 너를 위하여 표목을 만들고 대로 곧 네가 전에 가던 길에 착념하라 돌아오라 네 성읍들로 돌아오라	Set thee up waymarks, make thee high heaps: set thine heart toward the highway, even the way which thou wentest: turn again, O virgin of Israel, turn again to these thy cities.	“Set up the roadmarks, establish the signposts. Keep the highway in mind, the road you have traveled. Return, O Virgin Israel, return to these cities of yours.
JER	31	22	패역한 딸아 네가 어느 때까지 방황하겠느냐 여호와가 새 일을 세상에 창조하였나니 곧 여자가 남자를 안으리라	How long wilt thou go about, O thou backsliding daughter? for the Lord hath created a new thing in the earth, A woman shall compass a man.	How long will you wander, O faithless daughter? For the LORD has created a new thing in the land— a woman will shelter a man.”
JER	31	23	나 만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 이같이 말하노라 내가 그 사로잡힌 자를 돌아오게 할 때에 그들이 유다 땅과 그 성읍들에서 다시 이 말을 쓰리니 곧 의로운 처소여, 거룩한 산이여, 여호와께서 네게 복 주시기를 원하노라 할 것이며	Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; As yet they shall use this speech in the land of Judah and in the cities thereof, when I shall bring again their captivity; The Lord bless thee, O habitation of justice, and mountain of holiness.	This is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: “When I restore them from captivity, they will once again speak this word in the land of Judah and in its cities: ‘May the LORD bless you, O righteous dwelling place, O holy mountain.’
JER	31	24	유다와 그 모든 성읍의 농부와 양떼를 인도하는 자가 거기 함께 거하리니	And there shall dwell in Judah itself, and in all the cities thereof together, husbandmen, and they that go forth with flocks.	And Judah and all its cities will dwell together in the land, the farmers and those who move with the flocks,
JER	31	25	이는 내가 그 피곤한 심령을 만족케 하며 무릇 슬픈 심령을 상쾌케 하였음이니라 하시기로	For I have satiated the weary soul, and I have replenished every sorrowful soul.	for I will refresh the weary soul and replenish all who are weak.”
JER	31	26	내가 깨어보니 내 잠이 달았더라	Upon this I awaked, and beheld; and my sleep was sweet unto me.	At this I awoke and looked around. My sleep had been most pleasant to me.
JER	31	27	여호와께서 가라사대 보라 내가 사람의 씨와 짐승의 씨를 이스라엘 집과 유다 집에 뿌릴 날이 이르리니	Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah with the seed of man, and with the seed of beast.	“The days are coming,” declares the LORD, “when I will sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah with the seed of man and of beast.
JER	31	28	내가 경성하여 그들을 뽑으며 훼파하며 전복하며 멸하며 곤란케 하던 것 같이 경성하여 그들을 세우며 심으리라 여호와의 말이니라	And it shall come to pass, that like as I have watched over them, to pluck up, and to break down, and to throw down, and to destroy, and to afflict; so will I watch over them, to build, and to plant, saith the Lord.	Just as I watched over them to uproot and tear down, to demolish, destroy, and bring disaster, so I will watch over them to build and to plant,” declares the LORD.
JER	31	29	그 때에 그들이 다시는 이르기를 아비가 신 포도를 먹었으므로 아들들의 이가 시다 하지 아니하겠고	In those days they shall say no more, The fathers have eaten a sour grape, and the children’s teeth are set on edge.	“In those days, it will no longer be said: ‘The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the teeth of the children are set on edge.’
JER	31	30	신 포도를 먹는 자마다 그 이가 심 같이 각기 자기 죄악으로만 죽으리라	But every one shall die for his own iniquity: every man that eateth the sour grape, his teeth shall be set on edge.	Instead, each will die for his own iniquity. If anyone eats the sour grapes, his own teeth will be set on edge.
JER	31	31	나 여호와가 말하노라 보라 날이 이르리니 내가 이스라엘 집과 유다 집에 새 언약을 세우리라	Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah:	Behold, the days are coming, declares the LORD, when I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah.
JER	31	32	나 여호와가 말하노라 이 언약은 내가 그들의 열조의 손을 잡고 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내던 날에 세운 것과 같지 아니할 것은 내가 그들의 남편이 되었어도 그들이 내 언약을 파하였음이니라	Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; which my covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto them, saith the Lord:	It will not be like the covenant I made with their fathers when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt— a covenant they broke, though I was a husband to them,” declares the LORD.
JER	31	33	나 여호와가 말하노라 그러나 그 날 후에 내가 이스라엘 집에 세울 언약은 이러하니 곧 내가 나의 법을 그들의 속에 두며 그 마음에 기록하여 나는 그들의 하나님이 되고 그들은 내 백성이 될 것이라	But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; After those days, saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people.	“But this is the covenant I will make with the house of Israel after those days, declares the LORD. I will put My law in their minds and inscribe it on their hearts. And I will be their God, and they will be My people.
JER	31	34	그들이 다시는 각기 이웃과 형제를 가리켜 이르기를 너는 여호와를 알라 하지 아니하리니 이는 작은 자로부터 큰 자까지 다 나를 앎이니라 내가 그들의 죄악을 사하고 다시는 그 죄를 기억지 아니하리라 여호와의 말이니라	And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more.	No longer will each man teach his neighbor or his brother, saying, ‘Know the LORD,’ because they will all know Me, from the least of them to the greatest, declares the LORD. For I will forgive their iniquities and will remember their sins no more.”
JER	31	35	나 여호와는 해를 낮의 빛으로 주었고 달과 별들을 밤의 빛으로 규정하였고 바다를 격동시켜 그 파도로 소리치게 하나니 내 이름은 만군의 여호와니라 내가 말하노라	Thus saith the Lord, which giveth the sun for a light by day, and the ordinances of the moon and of the stars for a light by night, which divideth the sea when the waves thereof roar; The Lord of hosts is his name:	Thus says the LORD, who gives the sun for light by day, who sets in order the moon and stars for light by night, who stirs up the sea so that its waves roar—the LORD of Hosts is His name:
JER	31	36	이 규정이 내 앞에서 폐할진대 이스라엘 자손도 내 앞에서 폐함을 입어 영영히 나라가 되지 못하리라	If those ordinances depart from before me, saith the Lord, then the seed of Israel also shall cease from being a nation before me for ever.	“Only if this fixed order departed from My presence, declares the LORD, would Israel’s descendants ever cease to be a nation before Me.”
JER	31	37	나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 위로 하늘을 측량할 수 있으며 아래로 땅의 기초를 탐지할 수 있다면 내가 이스라엘 자손의 행한 모든 일을 인하여 그들을 다 버리리라 여호와의 말이니라	Thus saith the Lord; If heaven above can be measured, and the foundations of the earth searched out beneath, I will also cast off all the seed of Israel for all that they have done, saith the Lord.	This is what the LORD says: “Only if the heavens above could be measured and the foundations of the earth below searched out would I reject all of Israel’s descendants because of all they have done,” declares the LORD.
JER	31	38	나 여호와가 말하노라 보라 날이 이르리니 이 성을 하나넬 망대에서부터 모퉁이 문까지 여호와를 위하여 건축할 것이라	Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that the city shall be built to the Lord from the tower of Hananeel unto the gate of the corner.	“The days are coming,” declares the LORD, “when this city will be rebuilt for Me, from the tower of Hananel to the Corner Gate.
JER	31	39	측량줄이 곧게 가렙 산에 이르고 고아 방면으로 돌아	And the measuring line shall yet go forth over against it upon the hill Gareb, and shall compass about to Goath.	The measuring line will once again stretch out straight to the hill of Gareb and then turn toward Goah.
JER	31	40	시체와 재의 골짜기와 기드론 시내에 이르는 데까지와 동편 말문 모퉁이에 이르기까지의 모든 밭에 이르리니 다 여호와의 성지가 되고 영영히 다시는 뽑히거나 전복되지 아니하리라	And the whole valley of the dead bodies, and of the ashes, and all the fields unto the brook of Kidron, unto the corner of the horse gate toward the east, shall be holy unto the Lord; it shall not be plucked up, nor thrown down any more for ever.	The whole valley of the dead bodies and ashes, and all the fields as far as the Kidron Valley, to the corner of the Horse Gate to the east, will be holy to the LORD. It will never again be uprooted or demolished.”
JER	32	1	유다 왕 시드기야의 제십년 곧 느부갓네살의 제십팔년에 여호와의 말씀이 예레미야에게 임하니라	The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord in the tenth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, which was the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar.	This is the word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD in the tenth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, which was the eighteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar.
JER	32	2	때에 바벨론 군대는 예루살렘을 에워싸고 선지자 예레미야는 유다 왕의 궁중에 있는 시위대 뜰에 갇혔으니	For then the king of Babylon’s army besieged Jerusalem: and Jeremiah the prophet was shut up in the court of the prison, which was in the king of Judah’s house.	At that time the army of the king of Babylon was besieging Jerusalem, and Jeremiah the prophet was imprisoned in the courtyard of the guard, which was in the palace of the king of Judah.
JER	32	3	이는 그가 예언하기를 여호와의 말씀에 보라 내가 이 성을 바벨론 왕의 손에 붙이리니 그가 취할 것이며 유다 왕 시드기야는 갈대아 인의 손에서 벗어나지 못하고 반드시 바벨론 왕의 손에 붙이운 바 되리니 입이 입을 대하여 말하고 눈이 서로 볼 것이며	For Zedekiah king of Judah had shut him up, saying, Wherefore dost thou prophesy, and say, Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall take it;	For Zedekiah king of Judah had imprisoned him, saying: “Why are you prophesying like this? You claim that the LORD says, ‘Behold, I am about to deliver this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will capture it.
JER	32	4	그가 시드기야를 바벨론으로 끌어가리니 시드기야가 나의 권고할 때까지 거기 있으리라 나 여호와가 말하노라	And Zedekiah king of Judah shall not escape out of the hand of the Chaldeans, but shall surely be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon, and shall speak with him mouth to mouth, and his eyes shall behold his eyes;	Zedekiah king of Judah will not escape from the hands of the Chaldeans, but he will surely be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon, and will speak with him face to face and see him eye to eye.
JER	32	5	너희가 갈대아 인과 싸울지라도 승리치 못하리라 하셨다 하였더니 유다 왕 시드기야가 가로되 네가 어찌 이같이 예언하였느뇨 하고 그를 가두었음이었더라	And he shall lead Zedekiah to Babylon, and there shall he be until I visit him, saith the Lord: though ye fight with the Chaldeans, ye shall not prosper.	He will take Zedekiah to Babylon, where he will stay until I attend to him, declares the LORD. If you fight against the Chaldeans, you will not succeed.’”
JER	32	6	예레미야가 가로되 여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하였느니라 이르시기를	And Jeremiah said, The word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	Jeremiah replied, “The word of the LORD came to me, saying:
JER	32	7	보라 네 숙부 살룸의 아들 하나멜이 네게 와서 말하기를 너는 아나돗에 있는 내 밭을 사라 이 기업을 무를 권리가 네게 있느니라 하리라 하시더니	Behold, Hanameel the son of Shallum thine uncle shall come unto thee, saying, Buy thee my field that is in Anathoth: for the right of redemption is thine to buy it.	Behold! Hanamel, the son of your uncle Shallum, is coming to you to say, ‘Buy for yourself my field in Anathoth, for you have the right of redemption to buy it.’
JER	32	8	여호와의 말씀 같이 나의 숙부의 아들 하나멜이 시위대 뜰 안 내게로 와서 이르되 청하노니 너는 베냐민 땅 아나돗에 있는 나의 밭을 사라 기업의 상속권이 네게 있고 무를 권리가 네게 있으니 너를 위하여 사라 하는지라 내가 이것이 여호와의 말씀인 줄 알았으므로	So Hanameel mine uncle’s son came to me in the court of the prison according to the word of the Lord, and said unto me, Buy my field, I pray thee, that is in Anathoth, which is in the country of Benjamin: for the right of inheritance is thine, and the redemption is thine; buy it for thyself. Then I knew that this was the word of the Lord.	Then, as the LORD had said, my cousin Hanamel came to me in the courtyard of the guard and urged me, ‘Please buy my field in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin, for you own the right of inheritance and redemption. Buy it for yourself.’” Then I knew that this was the word of the LORD.
JER	32	9	내 숙부의 아들 하나멜의 아나돗에 있는 밭을 사는데 은 십칠 세겔을 달아 주되	And I bought the field of Hanameel my uncle’s son, that was in Anathoth, and weighed him the money, even seventeen shekels of silver.	So I bought the field in Anathoth from my cousin Hanamel, and I weighed out seventeen shekels of silver.
JER	32	10	증서를 써서 인봉하고 증인을 세우고 은을 저울에 달아 주고	And I subscribed the evidence, and sealed it, and took witnesses, and weighed him the money in the balances.	I signed and sealed the deed, called in witnesses, and weighed out the silver on the scales.
JER	32	11	법과 규례대로 인봉하고 인봉치 아니한 매매 증서를 내가 취하여	So I took the evidence of the purchase, both that which was sealed according to the law and custom, and that which was open:	Then I took the deed of purchase—the sealed copy with its terms and conditions, as well as the open copy—
JER	32	12	나의 숙부의 아들 하나멜과 매매 증서에 인 친 증인의 앞과 시위대 뜰에 앉은 유다 모든 사람 앞에서 그 매매 증서를 마세야의 손자 네리야의 아들 바룩에게 부치며	And I gave the evidence of the purchase unto Baruch the son of Neriah, the son of Maaseiah, in the sight of Hanameel mine uncle’s son, and in the presence of the witnesses that subscribed the book of the purchase, before all the Jews that sat in the court of the prison.	and I gave this deed to Baruch son of Neriah, the son of Mahseiah, in the sight of my cousin Hanamel and the witnesses who were signing the purchase agreement and all the Jews sitting in the courtyard of the guard.
JER	32	13	그들의 앞에서 바룩에게 명하여 이르되	And I charged Baruch before them, saying,	In their sight I instructed Baruch,
JER	32	14	만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 이같이 말씀하시기를 너는 이 증서 곧 인봉하고 인봉치 않은 매매증서를 취하여 토기에 담아 많은 날 동안 보존케 하라	Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Take these evidences, this evidence of the purchase, both which is sealed, and this evidence which is open; and put them in an earthen vessel, that they may continue many days.	“This is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: Take these deeds—both the sealed copy and the open copy of the deed of purchase—and put them in a clay jar to preserve them for a long time.
JER	32	15	만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님 내가 이같이 말하노라 사람이 이 땅에서 집과 밭과 포도원을 다시 사게 되리라 하셨다 하니라	For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Houses and fields and vineyards shall be possessed again in this land.	For this is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: Houses, fields, and vineyards will again be bought in this land.”
JER	32	16	내가 매매 증서를 네리야의 아들 바룩에게 부친 후에 여호와께 기도하여 가로되	Now when I had delivered the evidence of the purchase unto Baruch the son of Neriah, I prayed unto the Lord, saying,	After I had given the deed of purchase to Baruch son of Neriah, I prayed to the LORD:
JER	32	17	슬프도소이다 주 여호와여 주께서 큰 능과 드신 팔로 천지를 지으셨사오니 주에게는 능치 못한 일이 없으시니이다	Ah Lord God! behold, thou hast made the heaven and the earth by thy great power and stretched out arm, and there is nothing too hard for thee:	“Oh, Lord GOD! You have made the heavens and the earth by Your great power and outstretched arm. Nothing is too difficult for You!
JER	32	18	주는 은혜를 천만인에게 베푸시며 아비의 죄악을 그 후 자손의 품에 갚으시오니 크고 능하신 하나님이시요 이름은 만군의 여호와시니이다	Thou shewest lovingkindness unto thousands, and recompensest the iniquity of the fathers into the bosom of their children after them: the Great, the Mighty God, the Lord of hosts, is his name,	You show loving devotion to thousands but lay the iniquity of the fathers into the laps of their children after them, O great and mighty God whose name is the LORD of Hosts,
JER	32	19	주는 모략에 크시며 행사에 능하시며 인류의 모든 길에 주목하시며 그 길과 그 행위의 열매대로 보응하시나이다	Great in counsel, and mighty in work: for thine eyes are open upon all the ways of the sons of men: to give every one according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings:	the One great in counsel and mighty in deed, whose eyes are on all the ways of the sons of men, to reward each one according to his ways and according to the fruit of his deeds.
JER	32	20	주께서 애굽 땅에서 징조와 기사로 행하셨고 오늘까지도 이스라엘과 외인 중에 그같이 행하사 주의 이름을 오늘과 같이 되게 하셨나이다	Which hast set signs and wonders in the land of Egypt, even unto this day, and in Israel, and among other men; and hast made thee a name, as at this day;	You performed signs and wonders in the land of Egypt, and You do so to this very day, both in Israel and among all mankind. And You have made a name for Yourself, as is the case to this day.
JER	32	21	주께서 징조와 기사와 강한 손과 드신 팔과 큰 두려움으로 주의 백성 이스라엘을 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내시고	And hast brought forth thy people Israel out of the land of Egypt with signs, and with wonders, and with a strong hand, and with a stretched out arm, and with great terror;	You brought Your people Israel out of the land of Egypt with signs and wonders, with a strong hand and an outstretched arm, and with great terror.
JER	32	22	그들에게 주시기로 그 열조에게 맹세하신 바 젖과 꿀이 흐르는 이 땅을 그들에게 주셨으므로	And hast given them this land, which thou didst swear to their fathers to give them, a land flowing with milk and honey;	You gave them this land that You had sworn to give their fathers, a land flowing with milk and honey.
JER	32	23	그들이 들어가서 이를 차지하였거늘 주의 목소리를 청종치 아니하며 주의 도에 행치 아니하며 무릇 주께서 행하라 명하신 일을 행치 아니하였으므로 주께서 이 모든 재앙을 그들에게 내리셨나이다	And they came in, and possessed it; but they obeyed not thy voice, neither walked in thy law; they have done nothing of all that thou commandedst them to do: therefore thou hast caused all this evil to come upon them:	They came in and possessed it, but they did not obey Your voice or walk in Your law. They failed to perform all that You commanded them to do, and so You have brought upon them all this disaster.
JER	32	24	보옵소서 이 성을 취하려 하는 자가 와서 흉벽을 쌓았고 칼과 기근과 염병으로 인하여 이 성이 이를 치는 갈대아인의 손에 붙인 바 되었으니 주의 말씀대로 되었음을 주께서 보시나이다	Behold the mounts, they are come unto the city to take it; and the city is given into the hand of the Chaldeans, that fight against it, because of the sword, and of the famine, and of the pestilence: and what thou hast spoken is come to pass; and, behold, thou seest it.	See how the siege ramps are mounted against the city to capture it. And by sword and famine and plague, the city has been given into the hands of the Chaldeans who are fighting against it. What You have spoken has happened, as You now see!
JER	32	25	주 여호와여 주께서 내게 은으로 밭을 사며 증인을 세우라 하셨으나 이 성은 갈대아인의 손에 붙인 바 되었나이다	And thou hast said unto me, O Lord God, Buy thee the field for money, and take witnesses; for the city is given into the hand of the Chaldeans.	Yet You, O Lord GOD, have said to me, ‘Buy for yourself the field with silver and call in witnesses, even though the city has been delivered into the hands of the Chaldeans!’”
JER	32	26	때에 여호와의 말씀이 예레미야에게 임하여 이르시되	Then came the word of the Lord unto Jeremiah, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah:
JER	32	27	나는 여호와요 모든 육체의 하나님이라 내게 능치 못한 일이 있겠느냐	Behold, I am the Lord, the God of all flesh: is there any thing too hard for me?	“Behold, I am the LORD, the God of all flesh. Is anything too difficult for Me?
JER	32	28	그러므로 나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 보라 내가 이 성을 갈대아인의 손과 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살의 손에 붙일 것인즉 그가 취할 것이라	Therefore thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the Chaldeans, and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and he shall take it:	Therefore this is what the LORD says: Behold, I am about to deliver this city into the hands of the Chaldeans and of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, who will capture it.
JER	32	29	이 성을 치는 갈대아인이 와서 이 성읍에 불을 놓아 성과 집 곧 그 지붕에서 바알에게 분향하며 다른 신들에게 전제를 드려 나를 격노케 한 집들을 사르리니	And the Chaldeans, that fight against this city, shall come and set fire on this city, and burn it with the houses, upon whose roofs they have offered incense unto Baal, and poured out drink offerings unto other gods, to provoke me to anger.	And the Chaldeans who are fighting against this city will come in, set it on fire, and burn it, along with the houses of those who provoked Me to anger by burning incense to Baal on their rooftops and by pouring out drink offerings to other gods.
JER	32	30	이는 이스라엘 자손과 유다 자손이 예로부터 내 목전에 악만 행하였음이라 이스라엘 자손은 그 손으로 만든 것을 가지고 나를 격노케 한 것뿐이니라 나 여호와가 말하노라	For the children of Israel and the children of Judah have only done evil before me from their youth: for the children of Israel have only provoked me to anger with the work of their hands, saith the Lord.	For the children of Israel and of Judah have done nothing but evil in My sight from their youth; indeed, they have done nothing but provoke Me to anger by the work of their hands, declares the LORD.
JER	32	31	이 성이 건설된 날부터 오늘까지 나의 노와 분을 격발하므로 내가 내 앞에서 그것을 옮기려 하노니	For this city hath been to me as a provocation of mine anger and of my fury from the day that they built it even unto this day; that I should remove it from before my face,	For this city has aroused My wrath and fury from the day it was built until now. Therefore I will remove it from My presence
JER	32	32	이는 이스라엘 자손과 유다 자손이 모든 악을 행하며 내 노를 격동하였음이라 그들과 그들의 왕들과 그 방백들과 그 제사장들과 그 선지자들과 유다 사람들과 예루살렘 거민들이 다 그러하였느니라	Because of all the evil of the children of Israel and of the children of Judah, which they have done to provoke me to anger, they, their kings, their princes, their priests, and their prophets, and the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.	because of all the evil the children of Israel and of Judah have done to provoke Me to anger—they, their kings, their officials, their priests and prophets, the men of Judah, and the residents of Jerusalem.
JER	32	33	그들이 등을 내게로 향하고 얼굴을 내게로 향치 아니하며 내가 그들을 가르치되 부지런히 가르칠지라도 그들이 교훈을 듣지 아니하며 받지 아니하고	And they have turned unto me the back, and not the face: though I taught them, rising up early and teaching them, yet they have not hearkened to receive instruction.	They have turned their backs to Me and not their faces. Though I taught them again and again, they would not listen or respond to discipline.
JER	32	34	내 이름으로 일컬음을 받는 집에 자기들의 가증한 물건들을 세워서 그 집을 더럽게 하며	But they set their abominations in the house, which is called by my name, to defile it.	They have placed their abominations in the house that bears My Name, and so have defiled it.
JER	32	35	힌놈의 아들의 골짜기에 바알의 산당을 건축하였으며 자기들의 자녀를 몰렉의 불에 지나가게 하였느니라 그들이 이런 가증한 일을 행하여 유다로 범죄케 한 것은 나의 명한 것도 아니요 내 마음에 둔 것도 아니니라	And they built the high places of Baal, which are in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to cause their sons and their daughters to pass through the fire unto Molech; which I commanded them not, neither came it into my mind, that they should do this abomination, to cause Judah to sin.	They have built the high places of Baal in the Valley of Hinnom to make their sons and daughters pass through the fire to Molech—something I never commanded them, nor had it ever entered My mind, that they should commit such an abomination and cause Judah to sin.
JER	32	36	그러나 이스라엘의 하나님 나 여호와가 너희의 말하는 바 칼과 기근과 염병으로 인하여 바벨론 왕의 손에 붙인 바 되었다 하는 이 성에 대하여 이같이 말하노라	And now therefore thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, concerning this city, whereof ye say, It shall be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence;	Now therefore, about this city of which you say, ‘It will be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon by sword and famine and plague,’ this is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says:
JER	32	37	보라 내가 노와 분과 큰 분노로 그들을 쫓아 보내었던 모든 지방에서 그들을 모아내어 이곳으로 다시 인도하여 안전히 거하게 할 것이라	Behold, I will gather them out of all countries, whither I have driven them in mine anger, and in my fury, and in great wrath; and I will bring them again unto this place, and I will cause them to dwell safely:	I will surely gather My people from all the lands to which I have banished them in My furious anger and great wrath, and I will return them to this place and make them dwell in safety.
JER	32	38	그들은 내 백성이 되겠고 나는 그들의 하나님이 될 것이며	And they shall be my people, and I will be their God:	They will be My people, and I will be their God.
JER	32	39	내가 그들에게 한 마음과 한 도를 주어 자기들과 자기 후손의 복을 위하여 항상 나를 경외하게 하고	And I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of their children after them:	I will give them one heart and one way, so that they will always fear Me for their own good and for the good of their children after them.
JER	32	40	내가 그들에게 복을 주기 위하여 그들을 떠나지 아니하리라 하는 영영한 언약을 그들에게 세우고 나를 경외함을 그들의 마음에 두어 나를 떠나지 않게 하고	And I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.	I will make an everlasting covenant with them: I will never turn away from doing good to them, and I will put My fear in their hearts, so that they will never turn away from Me.
JER	32	41	내가 기쁨으로 그들에게 복을 주되 정녕히 나의 마음과 정신을 다하여 그들을 이 땅에 심으리라	Yea, I will rejoice over them to do them good, and I will plant them in this land assuredly with my whole heart and with my whole soul.	Yes, I will rejoice in doing them good, and I will faithfully plant them in this land with all My heart and with all My soul.
JER	32	42	나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 내가 이 백성에게 이 큰 재앙을 내린 것 같이 허락한 모든 복을 그들에게 내리리라	For thus saith the Lord; Like as I have brought all this great evil upon this people, so will I bring upon them all the good that I have promised them.	For this is what the LORD says: Just as I have brought all this great disaster on this people, so I will bring on them all the good I have promised them.
JER	32	43	너희가 말하기를 황폐하여 사람이나 짐승이 없으며 갈대아인의 손에 붙인 바 되었다 하는 이 땅에서 사람들이 밭을 사되	And fields shall be bought in this land, whereof ye say, It is desolate without man or beast; it is given into the hand of the Chaldeans.	And fields will be bought in this land about which you are saying, ‘It is a desolation, without man or beast; it has been delivered into the hands of the Chaldeans.’
JER	32	44	베냐민 땅과 예루살렘 사방과 유다 성읍들과 산지의 성읍들과 평지의 성읍들과 남방의 성읍들에 있는 밭을 은으로 사고 증서를 기록하여 인봉하고 증인을 세우리니 이는 내가 그들의 포로로 돌아오게 함이니라 여호와의 말이니라	Men shall buy fields for money, and subscribe evidences, and seal them, and take witnesses in the land of Benjamin, and in the places about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, and in the cities of the mountains, and in the cities of the valley, and in the cities of the south: for I will cause their captivity to return, saith the Lord.	Fields will be purchased with silver, and deeds will be signed, sealed, and witnessed in the land of Benjamin, in the areas surrounding Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah—the cities of the hill country, the foothills, and the Negev—because I will restore them from captivity, declares the LORD.”
JER	33	1	예레미야가 아직 시위대 뜰에 갇혔을 때에 여호와의 말씀이 그에게 임하니라 가라사대	Moreover the word of the Lord came unto Jeremiah the second time, while he was yet shut up in the court of the prison, saying,	While Jeremiah was still confined in the courtyard of the guard, the word of the LORD came to him a second time:
JER	33	2	일을 행하는 여호와, 그것을 지어 성취하는 여호와, 그 이름을 여호와라 하는 자가 이같이 이르노라	Thus saith the Lord the maker thereof, the Lord that formed it, to establish it; the Lord is his name;	“Thus says the LORD who made the earth, the LORD who formed it and established it, the LORD is His name:
JER	33	3	너는 내게 부르짖으라 내가 네게 응답하겠고 네가 알지 못하는 크고 비밀한 일을 네게 보이리라	Call unto me, and I will answer thee, and shew thee great and mighty things, which thou knowest not.	Call to Me, and I will answer and show you great and unsearchable things you do not know.
JER	33	4	이스라엘의 하나님 여호와가 말하노라 무리가 이 성읍의 가옥과 유다 왕궁을 헐어서 갈대아인의 흉벽과 칼을 막아	For thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, concerning the houses of this city, and concerning the houses of the kings of Judah, which are thrown down by the mounts, and by the sword;	For this is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says about the houses of this city and the palaces of the kings of Judah that have been torn down for defense against the siege ramps and the sword:
JER	33	5	싸우려 하였으나 내가 나의 노와 분함으로 그들을 죽이고 그 시체로 이 성에 채우게 하였나니 이는 그들의 모든 악을 인하여 나의 얼굴을 가리워 이 성을 돌아보지 아니하였음이니라	They come to fight with the Chaldeans, but it is to fill them with the dead bodies of men, whom I have slain in mine anger and in my fury, and for all whose wickedness I have hid my face from this city.	The Chaldeans are coming to fight and to fill those places with the corpses of the men I will strike down in My anger and in My wrath. I have hidden My face from this city because of all its wickedness.
JER	33	6	그러나 보라 내가 이 성을 치료하며 고쳐 낫게 하고 평강과 성실함에 풍성함을 그들에게 나타낼 것이며	Behold, I will bring it health and cure, and I will cure them, and will reveal unto them the abundance of peace and truth.	Nevertheless, I will bring to it health and healing, and I will heal its people and reveal to them the abundance of peace and truth.
JER	33	7	내가 유다의 포로와 이스라엘의 포로를 돌아오게 하여 그들을 처음과 같이 세울 것이며	And I will cause the captivity of Judah and the captivity of Israel to return, and will build them, as at the first.	I will restore Judah and Israel from captivity and will rebuild them as in former times.
JER	33	8	내가 그들을 내게 범한 그 모든 죄악에서 정하게 하며 그들의 내게 범하여 행한 모든 죄악을 사할 것이라	And I will cleanse them from all their iniquity, whereby they have sinned against me; and I will pardon all their iniquities, whereby they have sinned, and whereby they have transgressed against me.	And I will cleanse them from all the iniquity they have committed against Me, and will forgive all their sins of rebellion against Me.
JER	33	9	이 성읍이 세계 열방 앞에서 내게 기쁜 이름이 될 것이며 찬송과 영광이 될 것이요 그들은 나의 이 백성에게 베푼 모든 복을 들을 것이요 나의 이 성읍에 베푼 모든 복과 모든 평강을 인하여 두려워하며 떨리라	And it shall be to me a name of joy, a praise and an honour before all the nations of the earth, which shall hear all the good that I do unto them: and they shall fear and tremble for all the goodness and for all the prosperity that I procure unto it.	So this city will bring Me renown, joy, praise, and glory before all the nations of the earth, who will hear of all the good I do for it. They will tremble in awe because of all the goodness and prosperity that I will provide for it.
JER	33	10	나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 너희가 가리켜 말하기를 황폐하여 사람도 없고 짐승도 없다 하던 여기 곧 황폐하여 사람도 없고 주민도 없고 짐승도 없던 유다 성읍들과 예루살렘 거리에서 즐거워하는 소리, 기뻐하는 소리, 신랑의 소리, 신부의 소리와 및 만군의 여호와께 감사하라, 여호와는 선하시니 그 인자하심이 영원하다	Thus saith the Lord; Again there shall be heard in this place, which ye say shall be desolate without man and without beast, even in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, that are desolate, without man, and without inhabitant, and without beast,	This is what the LORD says: In this place you say is a wasteland without man or beast, in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem that are deserted—inhabited by neither man nor beast—there will be heard again
JER	33	11	하는 소리와 여호와의 집에 감사제를 드리는 자들의 소리가 다시 들리리니 이는 내가 이 땅의 포로로 돌아와서 처음과 같이 되게 할 것이니라 여호와의 말이니라	The voice of joy, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride, the voice of them that shall say, Praise the Lord of hosts: for the Lord is good; for his mercy endureth for ever: and of them that shall bring the sacrifice of praise into the house of the Lord. For I will cause to return the captivity of the land, as at the first, saith the Lord.	the sounds of joy and gladness, the voices of the bride and bridegroom, and the voices of those bringing thank offerings into the house of the LORD, saying: ‘Give thanks to the LORD of Hosts, for the LORD is good; His loving devotion endures forever.’ For I will restore the land from captivity as in former times, says the LORD.
JER	33	12	나 만군의 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 황폐하여 사람도 없고 짐승도 없던 이 곳과 그 모든 성읍에 다시 목자의 거할 곳이 있으리니 그 양무리를 눕게 할 것이라	Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Again in this place, which is desolate without man and without beast, and in all the cities thereof, shall be an habitation of shepherds causing their flocks to lie down.	This is what the LORD of Hosts says: In this desolate place, without man or beast, and in all its cities, there will once more be pastures for shepherds to rest their flocks.
JER	33	13	산지 성읍들과 평지 성읍들과 남방의 성읍들과 베냐민 땅과 예루살렘 사면과 유다 성읍들에서 양 무리가 다시 계수하는 자의 손 아래로 지나리라 여호와의 말이니라	In the cities of the mountains, in the cities of the vale, and in the cities of the south, and in the land of Benjamin, and in the places about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, shall the flocks pass again under the hands of him that telleth them, saith the Lord.	In the cities of the hill country, the foothills, and the Negev, in the land of Benjamin and the cities surrounding Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, the flocks will again pass under the hands of the one who counts them, says the LORD.
JER	33	14	나 여호와가 말하노라 보라 내가 이스라엘 집과 유다 집에 대하여 이른 선한 말을 성취할 날이 이르리라	Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will perform that good thing which I have promised unto the house of Israel and to the house of Judah.	Behold, the days are coming, declares the LORD, when I will fulfill the gracious promise that I have spoken to the house of Israel and the house of Judah.
JER	33	15	그 날 그 때에 내가 다윗에게 한 의로운 가지가 나게 하리니 그가 이 땅에 공평과 정의를 실행할 것이라	In those days, and at that time, will I cause the Branch of righteousness to grow up unto David; and he shall execute judgment and righteousness in the land.	In those days and at that time I will cause to sprout for David a righteous Branch, and He will administer justice and righteousness in the land.
JER	33	16	그 날에 유다가 구원을 얻겠고 예루살렘이 안전히 거할 것이며 그 성은 여호와 우리의 의라 일컬음을 입으리라	In those days shall Judah be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell safely: and this is the name wherewith she shall be called, The Lord our righteousness.	In those days Judah will be saved, and Jerusalem will dwell securely, and this is the name by which it will be called: The LORD Our Righteousness.
JER	33	17	나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 이스라엘 집 위에 앉을 사람이 다윗에게 영영히 끊어지지 아니할 것이며	For thus saith the Lord; David shall never want a man to sit upon the throne of the house of Israel;	For this is what the LORD says: David will never lack a man to sit on the throne of the house of Israel,
JER	33	18	내 앞에서 번제를 드리며 소제를 사르며 다른 제를 항상 드릴 레위 사람 제사장들도 끊어지지 아니하리라 하시니라	Neither shall the priests the Levites want a man before me to offer burnt offerings, and to kindle meat offerings, and to do sacrifice continually.	nor will the priests who are Levites ever fail to have a man before Me to offer burnt offerings, to burn grain offerings, and to present sacrifices.”
JER	33	19	여호와의 말씀이 예레미야에게 임하니라 가라사대	And the word of the Lord came unto Jeremiah, saying,	And the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah:
JER	33	20	나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 너희가 능히 낮에 대한 나의 약정과 밤에 대한 나의 약정을 파하여 주야로 그 때를 잃게할 수 있을진대	Thus saith the Lord; If ye can break my covenant of the day, and my covenant of the night, and that there should not be day and night in their season;	“This is what the LORD says: If you can break My covenant with the day and My covenant with the night, so that day and night cease to occupy their appointed time,
JER	33	21	내 종 다윗에게 세운 나의 언약도 파하여 그로 그 위에 앉아 다스릴 아들이 없게 할 수 있겠으며 내가 나를 섬기는 레위인 제사장에게 세운 언약도 파할 수 있으리라	Then may also my covenant be broken with David my servant, that he should not have a son to reign upon his throne; and with the Levites the priests, my ministers.	then My covenant may also be broken with David My servant and with My ministers the Levites who are priests, so that David will not have a son to reign on his throne.
JER	33	22	하늘의 만상은 셀 수 없으며 바다의 모래는 측량할 수 없나니 내가 그와 같이 내 종 다윗의 자손과 나를 섬기는 레위인을 번성케 하리라 하시니라	As the host of heaven cannot be numbered, neither the sand of the sea measured: so will I multiply the seed of David my servant, and the Levites that minister unto me.	As the hosts of heaven cannot be counted and as the sand on the seashore cannot be measured, so too will I multiply the descendants of My servant David and the Levites who minister before Me.”
JER	33	23	여호와의 말씀이 예레미야에게 임하니라 가라사대	Moreover the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah, saying,	Moreover, the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah:
JER	33	24	이 백성이 말하기를 여호와께서 그 택하신 두 족속을 버리셨다 한 것을 네가 생각지 아니하느냐 그들이 내 백성을 멸시하여 자기들 앞에서 나라로 인정치 아니하도다	Considerest thou not what this people have spoken, saying, The two families which the Lord hath chosen, he hath even cast them off? thus they have despised my people, that they should be no more a nation before them.	“Have you not noticed what these people are saying: ‘The LORD has rejected the two families He had chosen’? So they despise My people and no longer regard them as a nation.
JER	33	25	나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 나의 주야의 약정이 서지 아니할 수 있다든지 천지의 규례가 정한 대로 되지 아니할 수 있다 할진대	Thus saith the Lord; If my covenant be not with day and night, and if I have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth;	This is what the LORD says: If I have not established My covenant with the day and the night and the fixed order of heaven and earth,
JER	33	26	내가 야곱과 내 종 다윗의 자손을 버려서 다시는 다윗의 자손 중에서 아브라함과 이삭과 야곱의 자손을 다스릴 자를 택하지 아니하리라 내가 그 포로된 자로 돌아오게 하고 그를 긍휼히 여기리라	Then will I cast away the seed of Jacob, and David my servant, so that I will not take any of his seed to be rulers over the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: for I will cause their captivity to return, and have mercy on them.	then I would also reject the descendants of Jacob and of My servant David, so as not to take from his descendants rulers over the descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. For I will restore them from captivity and will have compassion on them.”
JER	34	1	바벨론 왕 느부갓네살과 그 모든 군대와 그 통치하에 있는 땅의 모든 나라와 모든 백성이 예루살렘과 그 모든 성읍을 칠 때에 말씀이 여호와께로서 예레미야에게 임하니라 가라사대	The word which came unto Jeremiah from the Lord, when Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and all his army, and all the kingdoms of the earth of his dominion, and all the people, fought against Jerusalem, and against all the cities thereof, saying,	This is the word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD when Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, all his army, all the earthly kingdoms under his control, and all the other nations were fighting against Jerusalem and all its surrounding cities.
JER	34	2	이스라엘의 하나님 나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 너는 가서 유다 왕 시드기야에게 고하여 이르기를 여호와의 말씀에 보라 내가 이 성을 바벨론 왕의 손에 붙이리니 그가 이 성을 불사를 것이라	Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel; Go and speak to Zedekiah king of Judah, and tell him, Thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire:	The LORD, the God of Israel, told Jeremiah to go and speak to Zedekiah king of Judah and tell him that this is what the LORD says: “Behold, I am about to deliver this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will burn it down.
JER	34	3	네가 그 손에서 벗어나지 못하고 반드시 사로잡혀 그 손에 붙임을 입고 네 눈은 바벨론 왕의 눈을 볼 것이며 그 입은 네 입을 마주 대하여 말할 것이요 너는 바벨론으로 가리라	And thou shalt not escape out of his hand, but shalt surely be taken, and delivered into his hand; and thine eyes shall behold the eyes of the king of Babylon, and he shall speak with thee mouth to mouth, and thou shalt go to Babylon.	And you yourself will not escape his grasp, but will surely be captured and delivered into his hand. You will see the king of Babylon eye to eye and speak with him face to face; and you will go to Babylon.
JER	34	4	그러나 유다 왕 시드기야여 나 여호와의 말을 들으라 나 여호와가 네게 대하여 이같이 말하노라 네가 칼에 죽지 아니하고	Yet hear the word of the Lord, O Zedekiah king of Judah; Thus saith the Lord of thee, Thou shalt not die by the sword:	Yet hear the word of the LORD, O Zedekiah king of Judah. This is what the LORD says concerning you: You will not die by the sword;
JER	34	5	평안히 죽을 것이며 사람이 너보다 먼저 있은 네 열조 선왕에게 분향하던 일례로 네게 분향하며 너를 위하여 애통하기를 슬프다 주여 하리니 이는 내가 말하였음이니라 여호와의 말이니라	But thou shalt die in peace: and with the burnings of thy fathers, the former kings which were before thee, so shall they burn odours for thee; and they will lament thee, saying, Ah lord! for I have pronounced the word, saith the Lord.	you will die in peace. As spices were burned for your fathers, the former kings who preceded you, so people will burn spices for you and lament, ‘Alas, O master!’ For I Myself have spoken this word, declares the LORD.”
JER	34	6	선지자 예레미야가 이 모든 말씀을 예루살렘에서 유다 왕 시드기야에게 고하니라	Then Jeremiah the prophet spake all these words unto Zedekiah king of Judah in Jerusalem,	In Jerusalem, then, Jeremiah the prophet relayed all these words to Zedekiah king of Judah
JER	34	7	때에 바벨론 왕의 군대가 예루살렘과 유다의 남은 모든 성을 쳤으니 곧 라기스와 아세가라 유다의 견고한 성읍 중에 이것들만 남았음이더라	When the king of Babylon’s army fought against Jerusalem, and against all the cities of Judah that were left, against Lachish, and against Azekah: for these defenced cities remained of the cities of Judah.	as the army of the king of Babylon was fighting against Jerusalem and the remaining cities of Judah—against Lachish and Azekah. For these were the only fortified cities remaining in Judah.
JER	34	8	시드기야 왕이 예루살렘에 있는 모든 백성과 언약하고 자유를 선언한 후에 여호와께로서 말씀이 예레미야에게 임하니라	This is the word that came unto Jeremiah from the Lord, after that the king Zedekiah had made a covenant with all the people which were at Jerusalem, to proclaim liberty unto them;	After King Zedekiah had made a covenant with all the people in Jerusalem to proclaim liberty, the word came to Jeremiah from the LORD
JER	34	9	그 언약은 곧 사람으로 각기 히브리 남녀 노비를 놓아 자유케 하고 그 동족 유다인으로 종을 삼지 못하게 한 것이라	That every man should let his manservant, and every man his maidservant, being an Hebrew or an Hebrewess, go free; that none should serve himself of them, to wit, of a Jew his brother.	that each man should free his Hebrew slaves, both male and female, and no one should hold his fellow Jew in bondage.
JER	34	10	이 언약에 참가한 방백들과 모든 백성이 각기 노비를 자유케하고 다시는 종을 삼지 말라 함을 듣고 순복하여 놓았더니	Now when all the princes, and all the people, which had entered into the covenant, heard that every one should let his manservant, and every one his maidservant, go free, that none should serve themselves of them any more, then they obeyed, and let them go.	So all the officials and all the people who entered into this covenant agreed that they would free their menservants and maidservants and no longer hold them in bondage. They obeyed and released them,
JER	34	11	후에 그들의 뜻이 변하여 자유케 하였던 노비를 끌어다가 다시 복종시켜 노비를 삼았더라	But afterward they turned, and caused the servants and the handmaids, whom they had let go free, to return, and brought them into subjection for servants and for handmaids.	but later they changed their minds and took back the menservants and maidservants they had freed, and they forced them to become slaves again.
JER	34	12	그러므로 여호와의 말씀이 여호와께로서 예레미야에게 임하니라 가라사대	Therefore the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah from the LORD, saying,
JER	34	13	이스라엘 하나님 나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 내가 너희 선조를 애굽 땅 종 되었던 집에서 인도하여 낼 때에 그들과 언약을 세워 이르기를	Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel; I made a covenant with your fathers in the day that I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondmen, saying,	“This is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: I made a covenant with your forefathers when I brought them out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery, saying:
JER	34	14	너희 형제 히브리 사람이 네게 팔렸거든 칠 년 만에 너희는 각기 놓으라 그가 육 년을 너를 섬겼은즉 그를 놓아 자유케 할지라 하였으나 너희 선조가 나를 듣지 아니하며 귀를 기울이지도 아니하였느니라	At the end of seven years let ye go every man his brother an Hebrew, which hath been sold unto thee; and when he hath served thee six years, thou shalt let him go free from thee: but your fathers hearkened not unto me, neither inclined their ear.	Every seventh year, each of you must free his Hebrew brother who has sold himself to you. He may serve you six years, but then you must let him go free. But your fathers did not listen or incline their ear.
JER	34	15	그러나 너희는 이제 돌이켜 내 목전에 정당히 행하여 각기 이웃에게 자유를 선언하되 내 이름으로 일컬음을 받는 집에서 내 앞에서 언약을 세웠거늘	And ye were now turned, and had done right in my sight, in proclaiming liberty every man to his neighbour; and ye had made a covenant before me in the house which is called by my name:	Recently you repented and did what pleased Me; each of you proclaimed freedom for his neighbor. You made a covenant before Me in the house that bears My Name.
JER	34	16	너희가 뜻을 변하여 내 이름을 더럽히고 각기 놓아 그들의 마음대로 자유케 하였던 노비를 끌어다가 다시 너희에게 복종시켜서 너희 노비를 삼았도다	But ye turned and polluted my name, and caused every man his servant, and every man his handmaid, whom ye had set at liberty at their pleasure, to return, and brought them into subjection, to be unto you for servants and for handmaids.	But now you have changed your minds and profaned My name. Each of you has taken back the menservants and maidservants whom you had set at liberty to go wherever they wanted, and you have again forced them to be your slaves.
JER	34	17	그러므로 나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 너희가 나를 듣지 아니하고 각기 형제와 이웃에게 자유를 선언한 것을 실행치 아니하였은즉 내가 너희에게 자유를 선언하여 너희를 칼과 염병과 기근에 붙이리라 나 여호와의 말이니라 내가 너희를 세계 열방 중에 흩어지게 할 것이며	Therefore thus saith the Lord; Ye have not hearkened unto me, in proclaiming liberty, every one to his brother, and every man to his neighbour: behold, I proclaim a liberty for you, saith the Lord, to the sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine; and I will make you to be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth.	Therefore this is what the LORD says: You have not obeyed Me; you have not proclaimed freedom, each man for his brother and for his neighbor. So now I proclaim freedom for you, declares the LORD—freedom to fall by sword, by plague, and by famine! I will make you a horror to all the kingdoms of the earth.
JER	34	18	송아지를 둘에 쪼개고 그 두 사이로 지나서 내 앞에 언약을 세우고 그 말을 실행치 아니하여 내 언약을 범한 너희를	And I will give the men that have transgressed my covenant, which have not performed the words of the covenant which they had made before me, when they cut the calf in twain, and passed between the parts thereof,	And those who have transgressed My covenant and have not fulfilled the terms of the covenant they made before Me, I will treat like the calf they cut in two in order to pass between its pieces.
JER	34	19	곧 쪼갠 송아지 사이로 지난 유다 방백들과 예루살렘 백성들과 환관들과 제사장들과 이 땅 모든 백성을	The princes of Judah, and the princes of Jerusalem, the eunuchs, and the priests, and all the people of the land, which passed between the parts of the calf;	The officials of Judah and Jerusalem, the court officials, the priests, and all the people of the land who passed between the pieces of the calf,
JER	34	20	내가 너희 원수의 손과 너희 생명을 찾는 자의 손에 붙이리니 너희 시체가 공중의 새들과 땅 짐승의 식물이 될 것이며	I will even give them into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life: and their dead bodies shall be for meat unto the fowls of the heaven, and to the beasts of the earth.	I will deliver into the hands of their enemies who seek their lives. Their corpses will become food for the birds of the air and the beasts of the earth.
JER	34	21	또 내가 유다 왕 시드기야와 그 방백들을 그 원수의 손과 그 생명을 찾는 자의 손과 너희에게서 떠나간 바벨론 왕의 군대의 손에 붙이리라	And Zedekiah king of Judah and his princes will I give into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life, and into the hand of the king of Babylon’s army, which are gone up from you.	And I will deliver Zedekiah king of Judah and his officials into the hands of their enemies who seek their lives, to the army of the king of Babylon that had withdrawn from you.
JER	34	22	나 여호와가 말하노라 보라 내가 그들에게 명하여 이 성에 다시 오게 하리니 그들이 이 성을 쳐서 취하여 불사를 것이라 내가 유다 성읍들로 황무하여 거민이 없게 하리라	Behold, I will command, saith the Lord, and cause them to return to this city; and they shall fight against it, and take it, and burn it with fire: and I will make the cities of Judah a desolation without an inhabitant.	Behold, I am going to give the command, declares the LORD, and I will bring them back to this city. They will fight against it, capture it, and burn it down. And I will make the cities of Judah a desolation, without inhabitant.”
JER	35	1	유다 왕 요시야의 아들 여호야김 때에 여호와께로서 말씀이 예레미야에게 임하니라 가라사대	The word which came unto Jeremiah from the Lord in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, saying,	This is the word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD in the days of Jehoiakim son of Josiah king of Judah:
JER	35	2	너는 레갑 족속에게 가서 그들에게 말하고 그들을 여호와의 집 한 방으로 데려다가 포도주를 마시우라	Go unto the house of the Rechabites, and speak unto them, and bring them into the house of the Lord, into one of the chambers, and give them wine to drink.	“Go to the house of the Rechabites, speak to them, and bring them to one of the chambers of the house of the LORD to offer them a drink of wine.”
JER	35	3	이에 내가 하바시냐의 손자요 예레미야의 아들인 야아사냐와 그 형제와 그 모든 아들과 레갑 온 족속을 데리고	Then I took Jaazaniah the son of Jeremiah, the son of Habaziniah, and his brethren, and all his sons, and the whole house of the Rechabites;	So I took Jaazaniah son of Jeremiah, the son of Habazziniah, and his brothers and all his sons—the entire house of the Rechabites—
JER	35	4	여호와의 집에 이르러 익다랴의 아들 하나님의 사람 하난의 아들들의 방에 들였는데 그 방은 방백들의 방 곁이요 문을 지키는 살룸의 아들 마아세야의 방 위더라	And I brought them into the house of the Lord, into the chamber of the sons of Hanan, the son of Igdaliah, a man of God, which was by the chamber of the princes, which was above the chamber of Maaseiah the son of Shallum, the keeper of the door:	and I brought them into the house of the LORD, to a chamber occupied by the sons of Hanan son of Igdaliah, a man of God. This room was near the chamber of the officials, which was above the chamber of Maaseiah son of Shallum the doorkeeper.
JER	35	5	내가 레갑 족속 사람들 앞에 포도주가 가득한 사발과 잔을 놓고 마시라 권하매	And I set before the sons of the house of the Rechabites pots full of wine, and cups, and I said unto them, Drink ye wine.	Then I set pitchers full of wine and some cups before the men of the house of the Rechabites, and I said to them, “Drink some wine.”
JER	35	6	그들이 가로되 우리는 포도주를 마시지 아니하겠노라 레갑의 아들 우리 선조 요나답이 우리에게 명하여 이르기를 너희와 너희 자손은 영영히 포도주를 마시지 말며	But they said, We will drink no wine: for Jonadab the son of Rechab our father commanded us, saying, Ye shall drink no wine, neither ye, nor your sons for ever:	“We do not drink wine,” they replied, “for our forefather Jonadab son of Rechab commanded us, ‘Neither you nor your descendants are ever to drink wine.
JER	35	7	집도 짓지 말며 파종도 하지 말며 포도원도 재배치 말며 두지도 말고 너희 평생에 장막에 거처하라 그리하면 너희의 우거하는 땅에서 너희 생명이 길리라 하였으므로	Neither shall ye build house, nor sow seed, nor plant vineyard, nor have any: but all your days ye shall dwell in tents; that ye may live many days in the land where ye be strangers.	Nor are you ever to build a house or sow seed or plant a vineyard. Those things are not for you. Instead, you must live in tents all your lives, so that you may live a long time in the land where you wander.’
JER	35	8	우리가 레갑의 아들 우리 선조 요나답의 우리에게 명한 모든 말을 순종하여 우리와 우리 아내와 자녀가 평생에 포도주를 마시지 아니하며	Thus have we obeyed the voice of Jonadab the son of Rechab our father in all that he hath charged us, to drink no wine all our days, we, our wives, our sons, nor our daughters;	And we have obeyed the voice of our forefather Jonadab son of Rechab in all he commanded us. So we have not drunk wine all our lives—neither we nor our wives nor our sons and daughters.
JER	35	9	거처할 집도 짓지 아니하며 포도원이나 밭이나 종자도 두지 아니하고	Nor to build houses for us to dwell in: neither have we vineyard, nor field, nor seed:	Nor have we built houses in which to live, and we have not owned any vineyards or fields or crops.
JER	35	10	장막에 거처하여 우리 선조 요나답의 우리에게 명한 대로 다 준행하였노라	But we have dwelt in tents, and have obeyed, and done according to all that Jonadab our father commanded us.	But we have lived in tents and have obeyed and done exactly as our forefather Jonadab commanded us.
JER	35	11	그러나 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살이 이 땅에 올라왔을 때에 우리가 말하기를 갈대아인의 군대와 수리아인의 군대가 두려운즉 예루살렘으로 가자 하고 우리가 예루살렘에 거하였노라	But it came to pass, when Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon came up into the land, that we said, Come, and let us go to Jerusalem for fear of the army of the Chaldeans, and for fear of the army of the Syrians: so we dwell at Jerusalem.	So when Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon marched into the land, we said: ‘Come, let us go into Jerusalem to escape the armies of the Chaldeans and the Arameans.’ So we have remained in Jerusalem.”
JER	35	12	때에 여호와의 말씀이 예레미야에게 임하여 가라사대	Then came the word of the Lord unto Jeremiah, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah:
JER	35	13	만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 이같이 말하노라 너는 가서 유다 사람들과 예루살렘 거민에게 이르기를 여호와의 말씀에 너희가 내 말을 들으며 교훈을 받지 아니하겠느냐	Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Go and tell the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Will ye not receive instruction to hearken to my words? saith the Lord.	“This is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: Go and tell the men of Judah and the residents of Jerusalem: ‘Will you not accept discipline and obey My words?’ declares the LORD.
JER	35	14	레갑의 아들 요나답이 그 자손에게 포도주를 마시지 말라 한 그 명령은 실행되도다 그들은 그 선조의 명령을 순종하여 오늘까지 마시지 아니하거늘 내가 너희에게 말하고 부지런히 말하여도 너희는 나를 듣지 아니하도다	The words of Jonadab the son of Rechab, that he commanded his sons not to drink wine, are performed; for unto this day they drink none, but obey their father’s commandment: notwithstanding I have spoken unto you, rising early and speaking; but ye hearkened not unto me.	The words of Jonadab son of Rechab have been carried out. He commanded his sons not to drink wine, and they have not drunk it to this very day because they have obeyed the command of their forefather. But I have spoken to you again and again, and you have not obeyed Me!
JER	35	15	나도 내 종 모든 선지자를 너희에게 보내고 부지런히 보내며 이르기를 너희는 이제 각기 악한 길에서 돌이켜 행위를 고치고 다른 신을 좇아 그를 섬기지 말라 그리하면 너희가 나의 너희와 너희 선조에게 준 이 땅에 거하리라 하여도 너희가 귀를 기울이지 아니하며 나를 듣지 아니하였느니라	I have sent also unto you all my servants the prophets, rising up early and sending them, saying, Return ye now every man from his evil way, and amend your doings, and go not after other gods to serve them, and ye shall dwell in the land which I have given to you and to your fathers: but ye have not inclined your ear, nor hearkened unto me.	Again and again I have sent you all My servants the prophets, proclaiming: ‘Turn now, each of you, from your wicked ways, and correct your actions. Do not go after other gods to serve them. Live in the land that I have given to you and your fathers.’ But you have not inclined your ear or listened to Me.
JER	35	16	레갑의 아들 요나답의 자손은 그 선조가 그들에게 명한 그 명령을 준행하나 이 백성은 나를 듣지 아니하도다	Because the sons of Jonadab the son of Rechab have performed the commandment of their father, which he commanded them; but this people hath not hearkened unto me:	Yes, the sons of Jonadab son of Rechab carried out the command their forefather gave them, but these people have not listened to Me.
JER	35	17	그러므로 나 만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 이같이 말하노라 보라 내가 유다와 예루살렘 모든 거민에게 나의 그들에게 대하여 선포한 모든 재앙을 내리리니 이는 내가 그들에게 말하여도 듣지 아니하며 불러도 대답지 아니함이니라 하셨다 하라	Therefore thus saith the Lord God of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will bring upon Judah and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem all the evil that I have pronounced against them: because I have spoken unto them, but they have not heard; and I have called unto them, but they have not answered.	Therefore this is what the LORD God of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: ‘Behold, I will bring to Judah and to all the residents of Jerusalem all the disaster I have pronounced against them, because I have spoken to them but they have not obeyed, and I have called to them but they have not answered.’”
JER	35	18	예레미야가 레갑 족속에게 이르되 만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 이같이 말씀하시기를 너희가 너희 선조 요나답의 명령을 준종하여 그 모든 훈계를 지키며 그가 너희에게 명한 것을 행하였도다	And Jeremiah said unto the house of the Rechabites, Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Because ye have obeyed the commandment of Jonadab your father, and kept all his precepts, and done according unto all that he hath commanded you:	Then Jeremiah said to the house of the Rechabites: “This is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: ‘Because you have obeyed the command of your forefather Jonadab and have kept all his commandments and have done all that he charged you to do,
JER	35	19	그러므로 나 만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 이같이 말하노라 레갑의 아들 요나답에게서 내 앞에 설 사람이 영영히 끊어지지 아니하리라	Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Jonadab the son of Rechab shall not want a man to stand before me for ever.	this is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: Jonadab son of Rechab will never fail to have a man to stand before Me.’”
JER	36	1	유다 왕 요시야의 아들 여호야김 사년에 여호와께로서 예레미야에게 말씀이 임하니라 가라사대	And it came to pass in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, that this word came unto Jeremiah from the Lord, saying,	In the fourth year of Jehoiakim son of Josiah king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from the LORD:
JER	36	2	너는 두루마리 책을 취하여 내가 네게 말하던 날 곧 요시야의 날부터 오늘까지 이스라엘과 유다와 열방에 대하여 나의 네게 이른 모든 말을 그것에 기록하라	Take thee a roll of a book, and write therein all the words that I have spoken unto thee against Israel, and against Judah, and against all the nations, from the day I spake unto thee, from the days of Josiah, even unto this day.	“Take a scroll and write on it all the words I have spoken to you concerning Israel, Judah, and all the nations, from the day I first spoke to you during the reign of Josiah until today.
JER	36	3	유다 족속이 내가 그들에게 내리려한 모든 재앙을 듣고 각기 악한 길에서 돌이킬듯 하니라 그리하면 내가 그 악과 죄를 사하리라	It may be that the house of Judah will hear all the evil which I purpose to do unto them; that they may return every man from his evil way; that I may forgive their iniquity and their sin.	Perhaps when the people of Judah hear about all the calamity I plan to bring upon them, each of them will turn from his wicked way. Then I will forgive their iniquity and their sin.”
JER	36	4	이에 예레미야가 네리야의 아들 바룩을 부르매 바룩이 예레미야의 구전대로 여호와께서 그에게 이르신 모든 말씀을 두루마리 책에 기록하니라	Then Jeremiah called Baruch the son of Neriah: and Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the Lord, which he had spoken unto him, upon a roll of a book.	So Jeremiah called Baruch son of Neriah, and at the dictation of Jeremiah, Baruch wrote on a scroll all the words that the LORD had spoken to Jeremiah.
JER	36	5	예레미야가 바룩을 명하여 가로되 나는 감금을 당한지라 여호와의 집에 들어갈 수 없은즉	And Jeremiah commanded Baruch, saying, I am shut up; I cannot go into the house of the Lord:	Then Jeremiah commanded Baruch, “I am restricted; I cannot enter the house of the LORD;
JER	36	6	너는 들어가서 나의 구전대로 두루마리에 기록한 여호와의 말씀을 금식일에 여호와의 집에 있는 백성의 귀에 낭독하고 유다 모든 성에서 온 자들의 귀에도 낭독하라	Therefore go thou, and read in the roll, which thou hast written from my mouth, the words of the Lord in the ears of the people in the Lord’s house upon the fasting day: and also thou shalt read them in the ears of all Judah that come out of their cities.	so you are to go to the house of the LORD on a day of fasting, and in the hearing of the people you are to read the words of the LORD from the scroll you have written at my dictation. Read them in the hearing of all the people of Judah who are coming from their cities.
JER	36	7	그들이 여호와 앞에 기도를 드리며 각기 악한 길을 떠날듯 하니라 여호와께서 이 백성에 대하여 선포하신 노와 분이 크니라	It may be they will present their supplication before the Lord, and will return every one from his evil way: for great is the anger and the fury that the Lord hath pronounced against this people.	Perhaps they will bring their petition before the LORD, and each one will turn from his wicked way; for great are the anger and fury that the LORD has pronounced against this people.”
JER	36	8	네리야의 아들 바룩이 무릇 선지자 예레미야의 자기에게 명한 대로 하여 여호와의 집에서 책에 있는 여호와의 말씀을 낭독하니라	And Baruch the son of Neriah did according to all that Jeremiah the prophet commanded him, reading in the book the words of the Lord in the Lord’s house.	So Baruch son of Neriah did everything that Jeremiah the prophet had commanded him. In the house of the LORD he read the words of the LORD from the scroll.
JER	36	9	유다 왕 요시야의 아들 여호야김의 오년 구월에 예루살렘 모든 백성과 유다 성읍들에서 예루살렘에 이른 모든 백성이 여호와 앞에서 금식을 선포한지라	And it came to pass in the fifth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, in the ninth month, that they proclaimed a fast before the Lord to all the people in Jerusalem, and to all the people that came from the cities of Judah unto Jerusalem.	Now in the ninth month of the fifth year of Jehoiakim son of Josiah king of Judah, a fast before the LORD was proclaimed to all the people of Jerusalem and all who had come there from the cities of Judah.
JER	36	10	바룩이 여호와의 집 윗뜰 곧 여호와의 집 새문 어귀의 곁에 있는 사반의 아들 서기관 그마랴의 방에서 그 책에 있는 예레미야의 말을 낭독하여 모든 백성에게 들리니라	Then read Baruch in the book the words of Jeremiah in the house of the Lord, in the chamber of Gemariah the son of Shaphan the scribe, in the higher court, at the entry of the new gate of the Lord’s house, in the ears of all the people.	From the chamber of Gemariah son of Shaphan the scribe, which was in the upper courtyard at the opening of the New Gate of the house of the LORD, Baruch read from the scroll the words of Jeremiah in the hearing of all the people.
JER	36	11	사반의 손자요 그마랴의 아들인 미가야가 그 책에 있는 여호와의 말씀을 다 듣고	When Michaiah the son of Gemariah, the son of Shaphan, had heard out of the book all the words of the Lord,	When Micaiah son of Gemariah, the son of Shaphan, heard all the words of the LORD from the scroll,
JER	36	12	왕궁에 내려가서 서기관의 방에 들어가니 모든 방백 곧 서기관 엘리사마와 스마야의 아들 들라야와 악볼의 아들 엘라단과 사반의 아들 그마랴와 하나냐의 아들 시드기야와 모든 방백이 거기 앉았는지라	Then he went down into the king’s house, into the scribe’s chamber: and, lo, all the princes sat there, even Elishama the scribe, and Delaiah the son of Shemaiah, and Elnathan the son of Achbor, and Gemariah the son of Shaphan, and Zedekiah the son of Hananiah, and all the princes.	he went down to the scribe’s chamber in the king’s palace, where all the officials were sitting: Elishama the scribe, Delaiah son of Shemaiah, Elnathan son of Achbor, Gemariah son of Shaphan, Zedekiah son of Hananiah, and all the other officials.
JER	36	13	미가야가 바룩의 백성의 귀에 책을 낭독할 때에 들은 모든 말로 그들에게 고하매	Then Michaiah declared unto them all the words that he had heard, when Baruch read the book in the ears of the people.	And Micaiah reported to them all the words he had heard Baruch read from the scroll in the hearing of the people.
JER	36	14	이에 모든 방백이 구시의 증손 셀레먀의 손자 느다냐의 아들 여후디를 바룩에게 보내어 이르되 너는 백성의 귀에 낭독한 두루마리를 손에 가지고 오라 네리야의 아들 바룩이 두루마리를 손에 가지고 그들에게로 가매	Therefore all the princes sent Jehudi the son of Nethaniah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Cushi, unto Baruch, saying, Take in thine hand the roll wherein thou hast read in the ears of the people, and come. So Baruch the son of Neriah took the roll in his hand, and came unto them.	Then all the officials sent word to Baruch through Jehudi son of Nethaniah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Cushi, saying, “Bring the scroll that you read in the hearing of the people, and come here.” So Baruch son of Neriah took the scroll and went to them.
JER	36	15	그들이 바룩에게 이르되 앉아서 이를 귀에 낭독하라 바룩이 그들 귀에 낭독하매	And they said unto him, Sit down now, and read it in our ears. So Baruch read it in their ears.	“Please sit down,” they said, “and read it in our hearing.” So Baruch read it in their hearing.
JER	36	16	그들이 그 모든 말씀을 듣고 놀라서 서로 보며 바룩에게 이르되 우리가 이 모든 말을 왕에게 고하리라	Now it came to pass, when they had heard all the words, they were afraid both one and other, and said unto Baruch, We will surely tell the king of all these words.	When they had heard all these words, they turned to one another in fear and said to Baruch, “Surely we must report all these words to the king.”
JER	36	17	그들이 또 바룩에게 물어 가로되 네가 그 구전하는 이 모든 말을 어떻게 기록하였느뇨 청컨대 우리에게 이르라	And they asked Baruch, saying, Tell us now, How didst thou write all these words at his mouth?	“Tell us now,” they asked Baruch, “how did you write all these words? Was it at Jeremiah’s dictation?”
JER	36	18	바룩이 대답하되 그가 그 입으로 이 모든 말을 내게 베풀기로 내가 먹으로 책에 기록하였노라	Then Baruch answered them, He pronounced all these words unto me with his mouth, and I wrote them with ink in the book.	“It was at his dictation,” Baruch replied. “He recited all these words to me and I wrote them in ink on the scroll.”
JER	36	19	이에 방백들이 바룩에게 이르되 너는 가서 예레미야와 함께 숨고 너희 있는 곳을 사람에게 알리지 말라 하니라	Then said the princes unto Baruch, Go, hide thee, thou and Jeremiah; and let no man know where ye be.	Then the officials said to Baruch, “You and Jeremiah must hide yourselves and tell no one where you are.”
JER	36	20	그들이 두루마리를 서기관 엘리사마의 방에 두고 뜰에 들어가 왕께 나아가서 이 모든 말로 왕의 귀에 고하니	And they went in to the king into the court, but they laid up the roll in the chamber of Elishama the scribe, and told all the words in the ears of the king.	So the officials went to the king in the courtyard. And having stored the scroll in the chamber of Elishama the scribe, they reported everything to the king.
JER	36	21	왕이 여후디를 보내어 두루마리를 가져오게 하매 여후디가 서기관 엘리사마의 방에서 가져다가 왕과 왕의 곁에 선 모든 방백의 귀에 낭독하니	So the king sent Jehudi to fetch the roll: and he took it out of Elishama the scribe’s chamber. And Jehudi read it in the ears of the king, and in the ears of all the princes which stood beside the king.	Then the king sent Jehudi to get the scroll, and he took it from the chamber of Elishama the scribe. And Jehudi read it in the hearing of the king and all the officials who were standing beside him.
JER	36	22	때는 구월이라 왕이 겨울궁전에 앉았고 그 앞에는 불 피운 화로가 있더라	Now the king sat in the winterhouse in the ninth month: and there was a fire on the hearth burning before him.	Since it was the ninth month, the king was sitting in his winter quarters with a fire burning before him.
JER	36	23	여후디가 삼편 사편을 낭독하면 왕이 소도로 그것을 연하여 베어 화로 불에 던져서 온 두루마리를 태웠더라	And it came to pass, that when Jehudi had read three or four leaves, he cut it with the penknife, and cast it into the fire that was on the hearth, until all the roll was consumed in the fire that was on the hearth.	And as soon as Jehudi had read three or four columns, Jehoiakim would cut them off with a scribe’s knife and throw them into the firepot, until the entire scroll had been consumed by the fire.
JER	36	24	왕과 그 신하들이 이 모든 말을 듣고도 두려워하거나 그 옷을 찢지 아니하였고	Yet they were not afraid, nor rent their garments, neither the king, nor any of his servants that heard all these words.	Yet in hearing all these words, the king and his servants did not become frightened or tear their garments.
JER	36	25	엘라단과 들라야와 그마랴가 왕께 두루마리를 사르지 말기를 간구하여도 왕이 듣지 아니하였으며	Nevertheless Elnathan and Delaiah and Gemariah had made intercession to the king that he would not burn the roll: but he would not hear them.	Even though Elnathan, Delaiah, and Gemariah urged the king not to burn the scroll, he would not listen to them.
JER	36	26	왕이 왕의 아들 여라므엘과 아스리엘의 아들 스라야와 압디엘의 아들 셀레먀를 명하여 서기관 바룩과 선지자 예레미야를 잡으라 하였으나 여호와께서 그들을 숨기셨더라	But the king commanded Jerahmeel the son of Hammelech, and Seraiah the son of Azriel, and Shelemiah the son of Abdeel, to take Baruch the scribe and Jeremiah the prophet: but the Lord hid them.	Instead, the king commanded Jerahmeel, a son of the king, as well as Seraiah son of Azriel and Shelemiah son of Abdeel, to seize Baruch the scribe and Jeremiah the prophet. But the LORD had hidden them.
JER	36	27	왕이 두루마리와 바룩이 예레미야의 구전으로 기록한 말씀을 불사른 후에 여호와의 말씀이 예레미야에게 임하니라 가라사대	Then the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah, after that the king had burned the roll, and the words which Baruch wrote at the mouth of Jeremiah, saying,	After the king had burned the scroll containing the words that Baruch had written at Jeremiah’s dictation, the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah:
JER	36	28	너는 다시 다른 두루마리를 가지고 유다 왕 여호야김의 불사른 첫 두루마리의 모든 말을 기록하고	Take thee again another roll, and write in it all the former words that were in the first roll, which Jehoiakim the king of Judah hath burned.	“Take another scroll and rewrite on it the very words that were on the original scroll, which Jehoiakim king of Judah has burned.
JER	36	29	또 유다 왕 여호야김에 대하여 이같이 말하기를 여호와의 말씀에 그가 이 두루마리를 불사르며 말하기를 네가 어찌하여 바벨론 왕이 정녕히 와서 이 땅을 멸하고 사람과 짐승을 이 땅에서 없어지게 하리라 하는 말을 이 두루마리에 기록하였느뇨 하도다	And thou shalt say to Jehoiakim king of Judah, Thus saith the Lord; Thou hast burned this roll, saying, Why hast thou written therein, saying, The king of Babylon shall certainly come and destroy this land, and shall cause to cease from thence man and beast?	You are to proclaim concerning Jehoiakim king of Judah that this is what the LORD says: You have burned the scroll and said, ‘Why have you written on it that the king of Babylon would surely come and destroy this land and deprive it of man and beast?’
JER	36	30	그러므로 나 여호와가 유다 왕 여호야김에 대하여 이같이 말하노라 그에게 다윗의 위에 앉을 자가 없게 될 것이요 그 시체는 버림을 입어서 낮에는 더위, 밤에는 추위를 당하리라	Therefore thus saith the Lord of Jehoiakim king of Judah; He shall have none to sit upon the throne of David: and his dead body shall be cast out in the day to the heat, and in the night to the frost.	Therefore this is what the LORD says about Jehoiakim king of Judah: He will have no one to sit on David’s throne, and his body will be thrown out and exposed to heat by day and frost by night.
JER	36	31	또 내가 그와 그 자손과 신하들을 그들의 죄악을 인하여 벌할 것이라 내가 일찍 그들과 예루살렘 거민과 유다 사람에게 선포하였으나 그들이 듣지 아니한 그 모든 재앙을 내리리라 하셨다 하라	And I will punish him and his seed and his servants for their iniquity; and I will bring upon them, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and upon the men of Judah, all the evil that I have pronounced against them; but they hearkened not.	I will punish him and his descendants and servants for their iniquity. I will bring on them, on the residents of Jerusalem, and on the men of Judah, all the calamity about which I warned them but they did not listen.”
JER	36	32	이에 예레미야가 다른 두루마리를 취하여 네리야의 아들 서기관 바룩에게 주매 그가 유다 왕 여호야김의 불사른 책의 모든 말을 예레미야의 구전대로 기록하고 그 외에도 그 같은 말을 많이 더 하였더라	Then took Jeremiah another roll, and gave it to Baruch the scribe, the son of Neriah; who wrote therein from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the book which Jehoiakim king of Judah had burned in the fire: and there were added besides unto them many like words.	Then Jeremiah took another scroll and gave it to the scribe Baruch son of Neriah, and at Jeremiah’s dictation he wrote on it all the words of the scroll that Jehoiakim king of Judah had burned in the fire. And many similar words were added to them.
JER	37	1	요시야의 아들 시드기야가 여호야김의 아들 고니야를 대신하여 왕이 되었으니 이는 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살이 그로 유다 땅의 왕을 삼음이었더라	And king Zedekiah the son of Josiah reigned instead of Coniah the son of Jehoiakim, whom Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon made king in the land of Judah.	Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon made Zedekiah son of Josiah the king of Judah, and he reigned in place of Coniah son of Jehoiakim.
JER	37	2	그와 그 신하와 그 땅 백성이 여호와께서 선지자 예레미야로 하신 말씀을 듣지 아니하니라	But neither he, nor his servants, nor the people of the land, did hearken unto the words of the Lord, which he spake by the prophet Jeremiah.	But he and his officers and the people of the land refused to obey the words that the LORD had spoken through Jeremiah the prophet.
JER	37	3	시드기야 왕이 셀레먀의 아들 여후갈과 마아세야의 아들 제사장 스바냐를 선지자 예레미야에게 보내어 청하되 너는 우리를 위하여 우리 하나님 여호와께 기도하라 하였으니	And Zedekiah the king sent Jehucal the son of Shelemiah and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest to the prophet Jeremiah, saying, Pray now unto the Lord our God for us.	Yet King Zedekiah sent Jehucal son of Shelemiah and Zephaniah the priest, the son of Maaseiah, to Jeremiah the prophet with the message, “Please pray to the LORD our God for us!”
JER	37	4	때에 예레미야가 갇히지 아니하였으므로 백성 가운데 출입하는 중이었더라	Now Jeremiah came in and went out among the people: for they had not put him into prison.	Now Jeremiah was free to come and go among the people, for they had not yet put him in prison.
JER	37	5	바로의 군대가 애굽에서 나오매 예루살렘을 에워쌌던 갈대아인이 그 소문을 듣고 예루살렘에서 떠났더라	Then Pharaoh’s army was come forth out of Egypt: and when the Chaldeans that besieged Jerusalem heard tidings of them, they departed from Jerusalem.	Pharaoh’s army had left Egypt, and when the Chaldeans who were besieging Jerusalem heard the report, they withdrew from Jerusalem.
JER	37	6	여호와의 말씀이 선지자 예레미야에게 임하여 가라사대	Then came the word of the Lord unto the prophet Jeremiah, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah the prophet:
JER	37	7	이스라엘의 하나님 나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 너희를 보내어 내게 구하게 한 유다 왕에게 이르라 너희를 도우려고 나왔던 바로의 군대는 자기 땅 애굽으로 돌아가겠고	Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel; Thus shall ye say to the king of Judah, that sent you unto me to enquire of me; Behold, Pharaoh’s army, which is come forth to help you, shall return to Egypt into their own land.	“This is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says that you are to tell the king of Judah, who sent you to Me: Behold, Pharaoh’s army, which has marched out to help you, will go back to its own land of Egypt.
JER	37	8	갈대아인이 다시 와서 이 성을 쳐서 취하여 불사르리라	And the Chaldeans shall come again, and fight against this city, and take it, and burn it with fire.	Then the Chaldeans will return and fight against this city. They will capture it and burn it down.
JER	37	9	나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 너희는 스스로 속여 말하기를 갈대아인이 반드시 우리를 떠나리라 하지 말라 그들이 떠나지 아니하리라	Thus saith the Lord; Deceive not yourselves, saying, The Chaldeans shall surely depart from us: for they shall not depart.	This is what the LORD says: Do not deceive yourselves by saying, ‘The Chaldeans will go away for good,’ for they will not!
JER	37	10	가령 너희가 너희를 치는 갈대아인의 온 군대를 쳐서 그 중에 부상자만 남긴다 할지라도 그들이 각기 장막에서 일어나 이 성을 불사르리라	For though ye had smitten the whole army of the Chaldeans that fight against you, and there remained but wounded men among them, yet should they rise up every man in his tent, and burn this city with fire.	Indeed, if you were to strike down the entire army of the Chaldeans that is fighting against you, and only wounded men remained in their tents, they would still get up and burn this city down.”
JER	37	11	갈대아인의 군대가 바로의 군대를 두려워하여 예루살렘에서 떠나매	And it came to pass, that when the army of the Chaldeans was broken up from Jerusalem for fear of Pharaoh’s army,	When the Chaldean army withdrew from Jerusalem for fear of Pharaoh’s army,
JER	37	12	예레미야가 베냐민 땅에서 백성 중 분깃을 받으려고 예루살렘을 떠나 그리로 가려하여	Then Jeremiah went forth out of Jerusalem to go into the land of Benjamin, to separate himself thence in the midst of the people.	Jeremiah started to leave Jerusalem to go to the land of Benjamin to claim his portion there among the people.
JER	37	13	베냐민 문에 이른즉 하나냐의 손자요 셀레먀의 아들인 이리야라 이름하는 문지기의 두목이 선지자 예레미야를 붙잡아 가로되 네가 갈대아인에게 항복하려 하는도다	And when he was in the gate of Benjamin, a captain of the ward was there, whose name was Irijah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Hananiah; and he took Jeremiah the prophet, saying, Thou fallest away to the Chaldeans.	But when he reached the Gate of Benjamin, the captain of the guard, whose name was Irijah son of Shelemiah, the son of Hananiah, seized him and said, “You are deserting to the Chaldeans!”
JER	37	14	예레미야가 가로되 망령되다 나는 갈대아인에게 항복하려 하지 아니하노라 이리야가 듣지 아니하고 예레미야를 잡아 방백들에게로 끌어가매	Then said Jeremiah, It is false; I fall not away to the Chaldeans. But he hearkened not to him: so Irijah took Jeremiah, and brought him to the princes.	“That is a lie,” Jeremiah replied. “I am not deserting to the Chaldeans!” But Irijah would not listen to him; instead, he arrested Jeremiah and took him to the officials.
JER	37	15	방백들이 노하여 예레미야를 때려서 서기관 요나단의 집에 가두었으니 이는 그들이 이 집으로 옥을 삼았음이더라	Wherefore the princes were wroth with Jeremiah, and smote him, and put him in prison in the house of Jonathan the scribe: for they had made that the prison.	The officials were angry with Jeremiah, and they beat him and placed him in jail in the house of Jonathan the scribe, for it had been made into a prison.
JER	37	16	예레미야가 토굴 옥 음실에 들어간지 여러 날 만에	When Jeremiah was entered into the dungeon, and into the cabins, and Jeremiah had remained there many days;	So Jeremiah went into a cell in the dungeon and remained there a long time.
JER	37	17	시드기야 왕이 보내어 그를 이끌어 내고 왕궁에서 그에게 비밀히 물어 가로되 여호와께로서 받은 말씀이 있느뇨 예레미야가 대답하되 있나이다 또 가로되 왕이 바벨론 왕의 손에 붙임을 입으리이다	Then Zedekiah the king sent, and took him out: and the king asked him secretly in his house, and said, Is there any word from the Lord? And Jeremiah said, There is: for, said he, thou shalt be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon.	Later, King Zedekiah sent for Jeremiah and received him in his palace, where he asked him privately, “Is there a word from the LORD?” “There is,” Jeremiah replied. “You will be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon.”
JER	37	18	예레미야가 다시 시드기야 왕에게 이르되 내가 왕에게나 왕의 신하에게나 이 백성에게 무슨 죄를 범하였관대 나를 옥에 가두었나이까	Moreover Jeremiah said unto king Zedekiah, What have I offended against thee, or against thy servants, or against this people, that ye have put me in prison?	Then Jeremiah asked King Zedekiah, “How have I sinned against you or your servants or these people, that you have put me in prison?
JER	37	19	바벨론 왕이 와서 왕과 이 땅을 치지 아니하리라고 예언한 왕의 선지자들이 이제 어디 있나이까	Where are now your prophets which prophesied unto you, saying, The king of Babylon shall not come against you, nor against this land?	Where are your prophets who prophesied to you, claiming, ‘The king of Babylon will not come against you or this land’?
JER	37	20	내 주 왕이여 이제 청컨대 나를 들으시며 나의 탄원을 받으사 나를 서기관 요나단의 집으로 돌려 보내지 마옵소서 내가 거기서 죽을까 두려워하나이다	Therefore hear now, I pray thee, O my lord the king: let my supplication, I pray thee, be accepted before thee; that thou cause me not to return to the house of Jonathan the scribe, lest I die there.	But now please listen, O my lord the king. May my petition come before you. Do not send me back to the house of Jonathan the scribe, or I will die there.”
JER	37	21	이에 시드기야 왕이 명하여 예레미야를 시위대 뜰에 두고 떡 만드는 자의 거리에서 매일 떡 한덩이씩 그에게 주게 하매 성중에 떡이 다할 때까지 이르니라 예레미야가 시위대 뜰에 머무니라	Then Zedekiah the king commanded that they should commit Jeremiah into the court of the prison, and that they should give him daily a piece of bread out of the bakers’ street, until all the bread in the city were spent. Thus Jeremiah remained in the court of the prison.	So King Zedekiah gave orders for Jeremiah to be placed in the courtyard of the guard and given a loaf of bread daily from the street of the bakers, until all the bread in the city was gone. So Jeremiah remained in the courtyard of the guard.
JER	38	1	맛단의 아들 스바댜와 바스훌의 아들 그다랴와 셀레먀의 아들 유갈과 밀기야의 아들 바스훌이 예레미야의 모든 백성에게 이르는 말을 들은즉 이르기를	Then Shephatiah the son of Mattan, and Gedaliah the son of Pashur, and Jucal the son of Shelemiah, and Pashur the son of Malchiah, heard the words that Jeremiah had spoken unto all the people, saying,	Now Shephatiah son of Mattan, Gedaliah son of Pashhur, Jucal son of Shelemiah, and Pashhur son of Malchijah heard that Jeremiah had been telling all the people:
JER	38	2	여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 이 성에 머무는 자는 칼과 기근과 염병에 죽으리라 그러나 갈대아인에게 항복하는 자는 살리니 그의 생명이 노략물을 얻음 같이 살리라	Thus saith the Lord, He that remaineth in this city shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence: but he that goeth forth to the Chaldeans shall live; for he shall have his life for a prey, and shall live.	“This is what the LORD says: Whoever stays in this city will die by sword and famine and plague, but whoever surrenders to the Chaldeans will live; he will retain his life like a spoil of war, and he will live.
JER	38	3	나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 이 성이 반드시 바벨론 왕의 군대의 손에 붙이우리니 그가 취하리라 하셨다 하는지라	Thus saith the Lord, This city shall surely be given into the hand of the king of Babylon’s army, which shall take it.	This is what the LORD says: This city will surely be delivered into the hands of the army of the king of Babylon, and he will capture it.”
JER	38	4	이에 그 방백들이 왕께 고하되 이 사람이 백성의 평안을 구치 아니하고 해를 구하오니 청컨대 이 사람을 죽이소서 그가 이같이 말하여 이 성에 남은 군사의 손과 모든 백성의 손을 약하게 하나이다	Therefore the princes said unto the king, We beseech thee, let this man be put to death: for thus he weakeneth the hands of the men of war that remain in this city, and the hands of all the people, in speaking such words unto them: for this man seeketh not the welfare of this people, but the hurt.	Then the officials said to the king, “This man ought to die, for he is discouraging the warriors who remain in this city, as well as all the people, by speaking such words to them; this man is not seeking the well-being of these people, but their ruin.”
JER	38	5	시드기야 왕이 가로되 보라 그가 너희 손에 있느니라 왕은 조금도 너희를 거스릴 수 없느니라	Then Zedekiah the king said, Behold, he is in your hand: for the king is not he that can do any thing against you.	“Here he is,” replied King Zedekiah. “He is in your hands, since the king can do nothing to stop you.”
JER	38	6	그들이 예레미야를 취하여 시위대 뜰에 있는 왕의 아들 말기야의 구덩이에 던져 넣을 때에 예레미야를 줄로 달아내리웠는데 그 구덩이에는 물이 없고 진흙뿐이므로 예레미야가 진흙 중에 빠졌더라	Then took they Jeremiah, and cast him into the dungeon of Malchiah the son of Hammelech, that was in the court of the prison: and they let down Jeremiah with cords. And in the dungeon there was no water, but mire: so Jeremiah sunk in the mire.	So they took Jeremiah and dropped him into the cistern of Malchiah, the king’s son, which was in the courtyard of the guard. They lowered Jeremiah with ropes into the cistern, which had no water but only mud, and Jeremiah sank down into the mud.
JER	38	7	왕궁 환관 구스인 에벳멜렉이 그들의 예레미야를 구덩이에 던져넣었음을 들으니라 때에 왕이 베냐민 문에 앉았더니	Now when Ebed–melech the Ethiopian, one of the eunuchs which was in the king’s house, heard that they had put Jeremiah in the dungeon; the king then sitting in the gate of Benjamin;	Now Ebed-melech the Cushite, a court official in the royal palace, heard that Jeremiah had been put into the cistern. While the king was sitting at the Gate of Benjamin,
JER	38	8	에벳멜렉이 왕궁에서 나와 왕께 고하여 가로되	Ebed–melech went forth out of the king’s house, and spake to the king, saying,	Ebed-melech went out from the king’s palace and said to the king,
JER	38	9	내 주 왕이여 저 사람들이 선지자 예레미야에게 행한 모든 일은 악하니이다 성 중에 떡이 떨어졌거늘 그들이 그를 구덩이에 던져 넣었으니 그가 거기서 주려 죽으리이다	My lord the king, these men have done evil in all that they have done to Jeremiah the prophet, whom they have cast into the dungeon; and he is like to die for hunger in the place where he is: for there is no more bread in the city.	“My lord the king, these men have acted wickedly in all that they have done to Jeremiah the prophet. They have dropped him into the cistern, where he will starve to death, for there is no more bread in the city.”
JER	38	10	왕이 구스인 에벳멜렉에게 명하여 가로되 너는 여기서 삼십 명을 데리고 가서 선지자 예레미야의 죽기 전에 그를 구덩이에서 끌어내라	Then the king commanded Ebed–melech the Ethiopian, saying, Take from hence thirty men with thee, and take up Jeremiah the prophet out of the dungeon, before he die.	So the king commanded Ebed-melech the Cushite, “Take thirty men from here with you and pull Jeremiah the prophet out of the cistern before he dies.”
JER	38	11	에벳멜렉이 사람들을 데리고 왕궁 곳간 밑 방에 들어가서 거기서 헝겊과 낡은 옷을 취하고 그것을 구덩이에 있는 예레미야에게 줄로 내리우며	So Ebed–melech took the men with him, and went into the house of the king under the treasury, and took thence old cast clouts and old rotten rags, and let them down by cords into the dungeon to Jeremiah.	Then Ebed-melech took the men with him and went to the king’s palace, to a place below the storehouse. From there he took old rags and worn-out clothes and lowered them with ropes to Jeremiah in the cistern.
JER	38	12	구스인 에벳멜렉이 예레미야에게 이르되 너는 이 헝겊과 낡은 옷을 네 겨드랑이에 대고 줄을 그 아래 대라 예레미야가 그대로 하매	And Ebed–melech the Ethiopian said unto Jeremiah, Put now these old cast clouts and rotten rags under thine armholes under the cords. And Jeremiah did so.	Ebed-melech the Cushite cried out to Jeremiah, “Put these worn-out rags and clothes under your arms to pad the ropes.” Jeremiah did so,
JER	38	13	그들이 줄로 예레미야를 구덩이에서 끌어낸지라 예레미야가 시위대 뜰에 머무니라	So they drew up Jeremiah with cords, and took him up out of the dungeon: and Jeremiah remained in the court of the prison.	and they pulled him up with the ropes and lifted him out of the cistern. And Jeremiah remained in the courtyard of the guard.
JER	38	14	시드기야 왕이 보내어 선지자 예레미야를 여호와의 집 제삼문으로 데려오게 하고 왕이 예레미야에게 이르되 내가 네게 한 일을 물으리니 일호도 내게 숨기지 말라	Then Zedekiah the king sent, and took Jeremiah the prophet unto him into the third entry that is in the house of the Lord: and the king said unto Jeremiah, I will ask thee a thing; hide nothing from me.	Then King Zedekiah sent for Jeremiah the prophet and received him at the third entrance to the house of the LORD. “I am going to ask you something,” said the king to Jeremiah. “Do not hide anything from me.”
JER	38	15	예레미야가 시드기야에게 이르되 내가 이 일을 왕에게 아시게 하여도 왕이 단정코 나를 죽이지 아니하시리이까 가령 내가 왕을 권한다 할지라도 왕이 듣지 아니하시리이다	Then Jeremiah said unto Zedekiah, If I declare it unto thee, wilt thou not surely put me to death? and if I give thee counsel, wilt thou not hearken unto me?	“If I tell you,” Jeremiah replied, “you will surely put me to death. And even if I give you advice, you will not listen to me.”
JER	38	16	시드기야 왕이 비밀히 예레미야에게 맹세하여 가로되 우리에게 이 영혼을 지으신 여호와께서 사시거니와 내가 너를 죽이지도 아니하겠고 네 생명을 찾는 그 사람들의 손에 붙이지도 아니하리라	So Zedekiah the king sware secretly unto Jeremiah, saying, As the Lord liveth, that made us this soul, I will not put thee to death, neither will I give thee into the hand of these men that seek thy life.	But King Zedekiah swore secretly to Jeremiah, “As surely as the LORD lives, who has given us this life, I will not kill you, nor will I deliver you into the hands of these men who are seeking your life.”
JER	38	17	예레미야가 시드기야에게 이르되 만군의 하나님이신 이스라엘 하나님 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 네가 만일 바벨론 왕의 방백들에게 항복하면 네 생명이 살겠고 이 성이 불사름을 입지 아니하겠고 너와 네 가족이 살려니와	Then said Jeremiah unto Zedekiah, Thus saith the Lord, the God of hosts, the God of Israel; If thou wilt assuredly go forth unto the king of Babylon’s princes, then thy soul shall live, and this city shall not be burned with fire; and thou shalt live, and thine house:	Then Jeremiah said to Zedekiah, “This is what the LORD God of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: ‘If you indeed surrender to the officers of the king of Babylon, then you will live, this city will not be burned down, and you and your household will survive.
JER	38	18	네가 만일 나가서 바벨론 왕의 방백들에게 항복하지 아니하면 이 성이 갈대아인의 손에 붙이우리니 그들이 이 성을 불사를 것이며 너는 그들의 손을 벗어나지 못하리라 하셨나이다	But if thou wilt not go forth to the king of Babylon’s princes, then shall this city be given into the hand of the Chaldeans, and they shall burn it with fire, and thou shalt not escape out of their hand.	But if you do not surrender to the officers of the king of Babylon, then this city will be delivered into the hands of the Chaldeans. They will burn it down, and you yourself will not escape their grasp.’”
JER	38	19	시드기야 왕이 예레미야에게 이르되 나는 갈대아인에게 항복한 유다인을 두려워하노라 염려컨대 갈대아인이 나를 그들의 손에 붙이면 그들이 나를 조롱할까 하노라	And Zedekiah the king said unto Jeremiah, I am afraid of the Jews that are fallen to the Chaldeans, lest they deliver me into their hand, and they mock me.	But King Zedekiah said to Jeremiah, “I am afraid of the Jews who have deserted to the Chaldeans, for the Chaldeans may deliver me into their hands to abuse me.”
JER	38	20	예레미야가 가로되 그 무리가 왕을 그들에게 붙이지 아니하리이다 원하옵나니 내가 왕에게 고한 바 여호와의 목소리를 청종하소서 그리하면 왕이 복을 받아 생명을 보존하시리이다	But Jeremiah said, They shall not deliver thee. Obey, I beseech thee, the voice of the Lord, which I speak unto thee: so it shall be well unto thee, and thy soul shall live.	“They will not hand you over,” Jeremiah replied. “Obey the voice of the LORD in what I am telling you, that it may go well with you and you may live.
JER	38	21	그러나 만일 항복하기를 거절하시면 여호와께서 내게 보이신 말씀대로 되리이다	But if thou refuse to go forth, this is the word that the Lord hath shewed me:	But if you refuse to surrender, this is the word that the LORD has shown me:
JER	38	22	곧 유다 왕궁에 남아 있는 모든 여자가 바벨론 왕의 방백들에게로 끌려갈 것이요 그들은 네게 말하기를 네 친구들이 너를 꾀어 이기고 네 발이 진흙에 빠짐을 보고 물러갔도다 하리라	And, behold, all the women that are left in the king of Judah’s house shall be brought forth to the king of Babylon’s princes, and those women shall say, Thy friends have set thee on, and have prevailed against thee: thy feet are sunk in the mire, and they are turned away back.	All the women who remain in the palace of the king of Judah will be brought out to the officials of the king of Babylon, and those women will say: ‘They misled you and overcame you— those trusted friends of yours. Your feet sank into the mire, and they deserted you.’
JER	38	23	네 아내들과 자녀는 갈대아인에게로 끌어냄을 입겠고 너는 그들의 손에서 벗어나지 못하고 바벨론 왕의 손에 잡히리라 또 네가 이 성으로 불사름을 입게 하리라 하셨나이다	So they shall bring out all thy wives and thy children to the Chaldeans: and thou shalt not escape out of their hand, but shalt be taken by the hand of the king of Babylon: and thou shalt cause this city to be burned with fire.	All your wives and children will be brought out to the Chaldeans. And you yourself will not escape their grasp, for you will be seized by the king of Babylon, and this city will be burned down.”
JER	38	24	시드기야가 예레미야에게 이르되 너는 이 말을 사람으로 알게 하지 말라 그리하면 네가 죽지 아니하리라	Then said Zedekiah unto Jeremiah, Let no man know of these words, and thou shalt not die.	Then Zedekiah warned Jeremiah, “Do not let anyone know about this conversation, or you will die.
JER	38	25	만일 방백들이 내가 너와 말하였다 함을 듣고 와서 네게 말하기를 네가 왕에게 말씀한 것을 우리에게 고하라 우리에게 숨기지 말라 그리하면 우리가 너를 죽이지 아니하리라 또 왕이 네게 말씀한 것을 고하라 하거든	But if the princes hear that I have talked with thee, and they come unto thee, and say unto thee, Declare unto us now what thou hast said unto the king, hide it not from us, and we will not put thee to death; also what the king said unto thee:	If the officials hear that I have spoken with you, and they come and demand of you, ‘Tell us what you said to the king and what he said to you; do not hide it from us, or we will kill you,’
JER	38	26	그들에게 대답하되 내가 왕의 앞에 간구하기를 나를 요나단의 집으로 도로 보내지 말아서 거기서 죽지 않게 하옵소서 하였다 하라 하니라	Then thou shalt say unto them, I presented my supplication before the king, that he would not cause me to return to Jonathan’s house, to die there.	then tell them, ‘I was presenting to the king my petition that he not return me to the house of Jonathan to die there.’”
JER	38	27	모든 방백이 예레미야에게 와서 물으매 그가 왕의 명한 모든 말대로 대답하였으므로 일이 탄로치 아니하였고 그들은 더불어 말하기를 그쳤더라	Then came all the princes unto Jeremiah, and asked him: and he told them according to all these words that the king had commanded. So they left off speaking with him; for the matter was not perceived.	When all the officials came to Jeremiah and questioned him, he relayed to them the exact words the king had commanded him to say. So they said no more to him, for no one had overheard the conversation.
JER	38	28	예레미야가 예루살렘이 함락되는 날까지 시위대 뜰에 머물렀더라	So Jeremiah abode in the court of the prison until the day that Jerusalem was taken: and he was there when Jerusalem was taken.	And Jeremiah remained in the courtyard of the guard until the day Jerusalem was captured.
JER	39	1	유다 왕 시드기야의 구년 시월에 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살과 그 모든 군대가 와서 예루살렘을 에워싸고 치더니	In the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the tenth month, came Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon and all his army against Jerusalem, and they besieged it.	In the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the tenth month, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon marched against Jerusalem with his entire army and laid siege to the city.
JER	39	2	시드기야의 제십일년 사월 구일에 성이 함락되니라 예루살렘이 함락되매	And in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the fourth month, the ninth day of the month, the city was broken up.	And on the ninth day of the fourth month of Zedekiah’s eleventh year, the city was breached.
JER	39	3	바벨론 왕의 모든 방백이 이르러 중문에 앉으니 곧 네르갈사레셀과 삼갈르보와 환관장 살스김과 박사장 네르갈사레셀과 바벨론 왕의 기타 모든 방백들이었더라	And all the princes of the king of Babylon came in, and sat in the middle gate, even Nergal–sharezer, Samgar–nebo, Sarsechim, Rab–saris, Nergal–sharezer, Rab–mag, with all the residue of the princes of the king of Babylon.	Then all the officials of the king of Babylon entered and sat in the Middle Gate: Nergal-sharezer of Samgar, Nebo-sarsekim the Rabsaris, Nergal-sharezer the Rabmag, and all the rest of the officials of the king of Babylon.
JER	39	4	유다 왕 시드기야와 모든 군사가 그들을 보고 도망하되 밤에 왕의 동산길로 좇아 두 담 샛문을 통하여 성읍을 벗어나서 아라바로 갔더니	And it came to pass, that when Zedekiah the king of Judah saw them, and all the men of war, then they fled, and went forth out of the city by night, by the way of the king’s garden, by the gate betwixt the two walls: and he went out the way of the plain.	When Zedekiah king of Judah and all the soldiers saw them, they fled. They left the city at night by way of the king’s garden, through the gate between the two walls, and they went out along the route to the Arabah.
JER	39	5	갈대아인의 군대가 그들을 따라 여리고 평원에서 시드기야에게 미쳐 그를 잡아서 데리고 하맛 땅 립나에 있는 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살에게로 올라가매 왕이 그를 심문하였더라	But the Chaldeans’ army pursued after them, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho: and when they had taken him, they brought him up to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath, where he gave judgment upon him.	But the army of the Chaldeans pursued them and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho. They seized him and brought him up to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon at Riblah in the land of Hamath, where he pronounced judgment on him.
JER	39	6	바벨론 왕이 립나에서 시드기야의 목전에서 그 아들들을 죽였고 왕이 또 유다의 모든 귀인을 죽였으며	Then the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah in Riblah before his eyes: also the king of Babylon slew all the nobles of Judah.	There at Riblah the king of Babylon slaughtered the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes, and he also killed all the nobles of Judah.
JER	39	7	왕이 또 시드기야의 눈을 빼게 하고 바벨론으로 옮기려 하여 사슬로 결박하였더라	Moreover he put out Zedekiah’s eyes, and bound him with chains, to carry him to Babylon.	Then he put out Zedekiah’s eyes and bound him with bronze chains to take him to Babylon.
JER	39	8	갈대아인들이 왕궁과 백성의 집을 불사르며 예루살렘 성벽을 헐었고	And the Chaldeans burned the king’s house, and the houses of the people, with fire, and brake down the walls of Jerusalem.	The Chaldeans set fire to the palace of the king and to the houses of the people, and they broke down the walls of Jerusalem.
JER	39	9	시위대장 느부사라단이 성 중에 남아 있는 백성과 자기에게 항복한 자와 그 외의 남은 백성을 바벨론으로 잡아 옮겼으며	Then Nebuzar–adan the captain of the guard carried away captive into Babylon the remnant of the people that remained in the city, and those that fell away, that fell to him, with the rest of the people that remained.	Then Nebuzaradan captain of the guard carried away to Babylon the remnant of the people who had remained in the city, along with the deserters who had defected to him.
JER	39	10	시위대장 느부사라단이 아무 소유가 없는 빈민을 유다 땅에 남겨두고 그 날에 포도원과 밭을 그들에게 주었더라	But Nebuzar–adan the captain of the guard left of the poor of the people, which had nothing, in the land of Judah, and gave them vineyards and fields at the same time.	But Nebuzaradan left behind in the land of Judah some of the poor people who had no property, and at that time he gave them vineyards and fields.
JER	39	11	바벨론 왕 느부갓네살이 예레미야에 대하여 시위대장 느부사라단에게 명하여 가로되	Now Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon gave charge concerning Jeremiah to Nebuzar–adan the captain of the guard, saying,	Now Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had given orders about Jeremiah through Nebuzaradan captain of the guard, saying,
JER	39	12	그를 데려다가 선대하고 해하지 말며 그가 네게 말하는 대로 행하라	Take him, and look well to him, and do him no harm; but do unto him even as he shall say unto thee.	“Take him, look after him, and do not let any harm come to him; do for him whatever he says.”
JER	39	13	이에 시위대장 느부사라단과 환관장 느부사스반과 박사장 네르갈사레셀과 바벨론 왕의 모든 장관이	So Nebuzar–adan the captain of the guard sent, and Nebushasban, Rab–saris, and Nergal–sharezer, Rab–mag, and all the king of Babylon’s princes;	So Nebuzaradan captain of the guard, Nebushazban the Rabsaris, Nergal-sharezer the Rabmag, and all the captains of the king of Babylon
JER	39	14	보내어 예레미야를 시위대 뜰에서 취하여 내어 사반의 손자 아히감의 아들 그다랴에게 붙여서 그를 집으로 데려가게 하매 그가 백성 중에 거하니라	Even they sent, and took Jeremiah out of the court of the prison, and committed him unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan, that he should carry him home: so he dwelt among the people.	had Jeremiah brought from the courtyard of the guard, and they turned him over to Gedaliah son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, to take him home. So Jeremiah remained among his own people.
JER	39	15	예레미야가 시위대 뜰에 갇혔을 때에 여호와의 말씀이 그에게 임하니라 가라사대	Now the word of the Lord came unto Jeremiah, while he was shut up in the court of the prison, saying,	And while Jeremiah had been confined in the courtyard of the guard, the word of the LORD had come to him:
JER	39	16	너는 가서 구스인 에벳멜렉에게 말하기를 만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님의 말씀에 내가 이 성에 재앙을 내리고 복을 내리지 아니하리라 한 나의 말이 그 날에 네 목전에 이루리라	Go and speak to Ebed–melech the Ethiopian, saying, Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will bring my words upon this city for evil, and not for good; and they shall be accomplished in that day before thee.	“Go and tell Ebed-melech the Cushite that this is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: ‘I am about to fulfill My words against this city for harm and not for good, and on that day they will be fulfilled before your eyes.
JER	39	17	나 여호와가 말하노라 내가 그 날에 너를 구원하리니 네가 그 두려워하는 사람들의 손에 붙이우지 아니하리라	But I will deliver thee in that day, saith the Lord: and thou shalt not be given into the hand of the men of whom thou art afraid.	But I will deliver you on that day, declares the LORD, and you will not be delivered into the hands of the men whom you fear.
JER	39	18	내가 단정코 너를 구원할 것인즉 네가 칼에 죽지 아니하고 네 생명이 노략물을 얻음 같이 되리니 이는 네가 나를 신뢰함이니라 여호와의 말이니라	For I will surely deliver thee, and thou shalt not fall by the sword, but thy life shall be for a prey unto thee: because thou hast put thy trust in me, saith the Lord.	For I will surely rescue you so that you do not fall by the sword. Because you have trusted in Me, you will escape with your life like a spoil of war, declares the LORD.’”
JER	40	1	시위대장 느부사라단이 예루살렘과 유다 포로를 바벨론으로 옮기는 중에 예레미야도 잡혀 사슬로 결박되어 가다가 라마에서 해방된 후에 말씀이 여호와께로서 예레미야에게 임하니라	The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord, after that Nebuzar–adan the captain of the guard had let him go from Ramah, when he had taken him being bound in chains among all that were carried away captive of Jerusalem and Judah, which were carried away captive unto Babylon.	This is the word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD after Nebuzaradan captain of the guard had released him at Ramah, having found him bound in chains among all the captives of Jerusalem and Judah who were being exiled to Babylon.
JER	40	2	시위대장이 예레미야를 불러다가 이르되 네 하나님 여호와께서 이곳에 재앙을 선포하시더니	And the captain of the guard took Jeremiah, and said unto him, The Lord thy God hath pronounced this evil upon this place.	The captain of the guard found Jeremiah and said to him, “The LORD your God decreed this disaster on this place,
JER	40	3	여호와께서 그 말씀하신 대로 행하셨으니 이는 너희가 여호와께 범죄하고 그 목소리를 청종치 아니하였으므로 이 일이 너희에게 임한 것이니라	Now the Lord hath brought it, and done according as he hath said: because ye have sinned against the Lord, and have not obeyed his voice, therefore this thing is come upon you.	and now the LORD has fulfilled it; He has done just as He said. Because you people have sinned against the LORD and have not obeyed His voice, this thing has happened to you.
JER	40	4	보라 내가 오늘 네 손의 사슬을 풀어 너를 해방하노니 만일 네가 나와 함께 바벨론으로 가는 것을 선히 여기거든 오라 내가 너를 선대하리라 만일 나와 함께 바벨론으로 가는 것을 좋지 않게 여기거든 그만 두라 보라 온 땅이 네 앞에 있나니 네가 선히 여기는 대로 가하게 여기는 곳으로 갈지니라	And now, behold, I loose thee this day from the chains which were upon thine hand. If it seem good unto thee to come with me into Babylon, come; and I will look well unto thee: but if it seem ill unto thee to come with me into Babylon, forbear: behold, all the land is before thee: whither it seemeth good and convenient for thee to go, thither go.	But now, behold, I am freeing you today from the chains that were on your wrists. If it pleases you to come with me to Babylon, then come, and I will take care of you. But if it seems wrong to you to come with me to Babylon, go no farther. Look, the whole land is before you. Wherever it seems good and right to you, go there.”
JER	40	5	예레미야가 아직 돌이키기 전에 그가 다시 이르되 너는 바벨론 왕이 유다 성읍들의 총독으로 세우신 사반의 손자 아히감의 아들 그다랴에게로 돌아가서 그와 함께 백성 중에 거하거나 너의 가하게 여기는 곳으로 가거나 할지니라 하고 그 시위대장이 그에게 양식과 선물을 주어 보내매	Now while he was not yet gone back, he said, Go back also to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan, whom the king of Babylon hath made governor over the cities of Judah, and dwell with him among the people: or go wheresoever it seemeth convenient unto thee to go. So the captain of the guard gave him victuals and a reward, and let him go.	But before Jeremiah turned to go, Nebuzaradan added, “Return to Gedaliah son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, whom the king of Babylon has appointed over the cities of Judah, and stay with him among the people, or go anywhere else that seems right.” Then the captain of the guard gave him a ration and a gift and released him.
JER	40	6	예레미야가 미스바로 가서 아히감의 아들 그다랴에게로 나아가서 그 땅에 남아 있는 백성 중에서 그와 함께 거하니라	Then went Jeremiah unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah; and dwelt with him among the people that were left in the land.	So Jeremiah went to Gedaliah son of Ahikam at Mizpah and stayed with him among the people who were left in the land.
JER	40	7	들에 있는 군대장관들과 그들의 사람들이 바벨론 왕이 아히감의 아들 그다랴를 이 땅 총독으로 세우고 남녀와 유아와 바벨론으로 옮기지 아니한 빈민을 그에게 위임하였다 함을 듣고	Now when all the captains of the forces which were in the fields, even they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah the son of Ahikam governor in the land, and had committed unto him men, and women, and children, and of the poor of the land, of them that were not carried away captive to Babylon;	When all the commanders and men of the armies in the field heard that the king of Babylon had appointed Gedaliah son of Ahikam over the land and that he had put him in charge of the men, women, and children who were the poorest of the land and had not been exiled to Babylon,
JER	40	8	그들 곧 느다냐의 아들 이스마엘과 가레아의 두 아들 요하난과 요나단과 단후멧의 아들 스라야와 느도바 사람 에배의 아들들과 마아가 사람의 아들 여사냐와 그들의 사람들이 미스바로 가서 그다랴에게 이르니	Then they came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, even Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan and Jonathan the sons of Kareah, and Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of Ephai the Netophathite, and Jezaniah the son of a Maachathite, they and their men.	they came to Gedaliah at Mizpah—Ishmael son of Nethaniah, Johanan and Jonathan the sons of Kareah, Seraiah son of Tanhumeth, the sons of Ephai the Netophathite, and Jezaniah son of the Maacathite—they and their men.
JER	40	9	사반의 손자 아히감의 아들 그다랴가 그들과 그들의 사람들에게 맹세하며 가로되 너희는 갈대아인 섬기기를 두려워하지 말고 이 땅에 거하여 바벨론 왕을 섬기라 그리하면 너희에게 유익하리라	And Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan sware unto them and to their men, saying, Fear not to serve the Chaldeans: dwell in the land, and serve the king of Babylon, and it shall be well with you.	Gedaliah son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, swore an oath to them and their men, assuring them, “Do not be afraid to serve the Chaldeans. Live in the land and serve the king of Babylon, and it will go well with you.
JER	40	10	나는 미스바에 거하여 우리에게로 오는 갈대아인을 섬기리니 너희는 포도주와 여름 실과와 기름을 모아 그릇에 저축하고 너희의 얻은 성읍들에 거하라 하니라	As for me, behold, I will dwell at Mizpah to serve the Chaldeans, which will come unto us: but ye, gather ye wine, and summer fruits, and oil, and put them in your vessels, and dwell in your cities that ye have taken.	As for me, I will stay in Mizpah to represent you before the Chaldeans who come to us. As for you, gather wine grapes, summer fruit, and oil, place them in your storage jars, and live in the cities you have taken.”
JER	40	11	모압과 암몬 자손 중과 에돔과 모든 지방에 있는 유다인도 바벨론 왕이 유다에 사람을 남겨 둔 것과 사반의 손자 아히감의 아들 그다랴를 그들의 위에 세웠다 함을 듣고	Likewise when all the Jews that were in Moab, and among the Ammonites, and in Edom, and that were in all the countries, heard that the king of Babylon had left a remnant of Judah, and that he had set over them Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan;	When all the Jews in Moab, Ammon, Edom, and all the other lands heard that the king of Babylon had left a remnant in Judah and had appointed Gedaliah son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, over them,
JER	40	12	그 모든 유다인이 쫓겨났던 각처에서 돌아와 유다 땅 미스바 그다랴에게 이르러 포도주와 여름 실과를 심히 많이 모으니라	Even all the Jews returned out of all places whither they were driven, and came to the land of Judah, to Gedaliah, unto Mizpah, and gathered wine and summer fruits very much.	they all returned from all the places to which they had been banished and came to the land of Judah, to Gedaliah at Mizpah. And they gathered an abundance of wine grapes and summer fruit.
JER	40	13	가레아의 아들 요하난과 들에 있던 군대장관들이 미스바 그다랴에게 이르러	Moreover Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that were in the fields, came to Gedaliah to Mizpah,	Meanwhile, Johanan son of Kareah and all the commanders of the armies in the field came to Gedaliah at Mizpah
JER	40	14	그에게 이르되 암몬 자손의 왕 바알리스가 네 생명을 취하려 하여 느다냐의 아들 이스마엘을 보낸 줄 네가 아느냐 하되 아히감의 아들 그다랴가 믿지 아니한지라	And said unto him, Dost thou certainly know that Baalis the king of the Ammonites hath sent Ishmael the son of Nethaniah to slay thee? But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam believed them not.	and said to him, “Are you aware that Baalis king of the Ammonites has sent Ishmael son of Nethaniah to take your life?” But Gedaliah son of Ahikam did not believe them.
JER	40	15	가레아의 아들 요하난이 미스바에서 그다랴에게 비밀히 말하여 가로되 청하노니 나로 가서 사람이 모르게 느다냐의 아들 이스마엘을 죽이게 하라 어찌하여 그로 네 생명을 취케 하여 네게 모인 모든 유다인으로 흩어지며 유다의 남은 자로 멸망을 당케 하랴	Then Johanan the son of Kareah spake to Gedaliah in Mizpah secretly, saying, Let me go, I pray thee, and I will slay Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and no man shall know it: wherefore should he slay thee, that all the Jews which are gathered unto thee should be scattered, and the remnant in Judah perish?	Then Johanan son of Kareah spoke privately to Gedaliah at Mizpah. “Let me go and kill Ishmael son of Nethaniah,” he said. “No one will know it. Why should he take your life and scatter all the people of Judah who have gathered to you, so that the remnant of Judah would perish?”
JER	40	16	그러나 아히감의 아들 그다랴가 가레아의 아들 요하난에게 이르되 네가 이 일을 행치 말 것이니라 너의 이스마엘에 대한 말은 진정이 아니니라 하니라	But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam said unto Johanan the son of Kareah, Thou shalt not do this thing: for thou speakest falsely of Ishmael.	But Gedaliah son of Ahikam said to Johanan son of Kareah, “Do not do such a thing! What you are saying about Ishmael is a lie.”
JER	41	1	칠월에 왕의 종친 엘리사마의 손자 느다냐의 아들 왕의 장관 이스마엘이 열 사람과 함께 미스바로 가서 아히감의 아들 그다랴에게 이르러 미스바에서 함께 떡을 먹다가	Now it came to pass in the seventh month, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah the son of Elishama, of the seed royal, and the princes of the king, even ten men with him, came unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah; and there they did eat bread together in Mizpah.	In the seventh month, Ishmael son of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, who was a member of the royal family and one of the king’s chief officers, came with ten men to Gedaliah son of Ahikam at Mizpah, and they ate a meal together there.
JER	41	2	느다냐의 아들 이스마엘과 그와 함께 한 열 사람이 일어나서 바벨론 왕의 그 땅 총독으로 세운 바 사반의 손자 아히감의 아들 그다랴를 칼로 쳐죽였고	Then arose Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and the ten men that were with him, and smote Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan with the sword, and slew him, whom the king of Babylon had made governor over the land.	Then Ishmael son of Nethaniah and the ten men who were with him got up and struck down Gedaliah son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, with the sword, killing the one whom the king of Babylon had appointed to govern the land.
JER	41	3	이스마엘이 또 미스바에서 그다랴와 함께한 모든 유다인과 거기 있는 갈대아 군사를 죽였더라	Ishmael also slew all the Jews that were with him, even with Gedaliah, at Mizpah, and the Chaldeans that were found there, and the men of war.	Ishmael also killed all the Jews who were with Gedaliah at Mizpah, as well as the Chaldean soldiers who were there.
JER	41	4	그가 그다랴를 죽인 지 이틀이 되었어도 이를 아는 사람이 없었더라	And it came to pass the second day after he had slain Gedaliah, and no man knew it,	On the second day after the murder of Gedaliah, when no one yet knew about it,
JER	41	5	때에 사람 팔십 명이 그 수염을 깎고 옷을 찢고 몸을 상하고 손에 소제물과 유향을 가지고 세겜과 실로와 사마리아에서부터 와서 여호와의 집으로 나아가려 한지라	That there came certain from Shechem, from Shiloh, and from Samaria, even fourscore men, having their beards shaven, and their clothes rent, and having cut themselves, with offerings and incense in their hand, to bring them to the house of the Lord.	eighty men who had shaved off their beards, torn their garments, and cut themselves came from Shechem, Shiloh, and Samaria, carrying grain offerings and frankincense for the house of the LORD.
JER	41	6	느다냐의 아들 이스마엘이 그들을 영접하러 미스바에서 나와서 울며 행하다가 그들을 만나 아히감의 아들 그다랴에게로 가자 하여	And Ishmael the son of Nethaniah went forth from Mizpah to meet them, weeping all along as he went: and it came to pass, as he met them, he said unto them, Come to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam.	And Ishmael son of Nethaniah went out from Mizpah to meet them, weeping as he went. When Ishmael encountered the men, he said, “Come to Gedaliah son of Ahikam.”
JER	41	7	그들이 성 중앙에 이를 때에 느다냐의 아들 이스마엘이 자기와 함께 한 사람들로 더불어 그들을 죽여 구덩이에 던지니라	And it was so, when they came into the midst of the city, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah slew them, and cast them into the midst of the pit, he, and the men that were with him.	And when they came into the city, Ishmael son of Nethaniah and the men with him slaughtered them and threw them into a cistern.
JER	41	8	그 중에 열 사람은 이스마엘에게 이르기를 우리가 밀과 보리와 기름과 꿀을 밭에 감추었으니 우리를 죽이지 말라 하였으므로 그가 그치고 그들을 그 형제와 함께 죽이지 아니하였더라	But ten men were found among them that said unto Ishmael, Slay us not: for we have treasures in the field, of wheat, and of barley, and of oil, and of honey. So he forbare, and slew them not among their brethren.	But ten of the men among them said to Ishmael, “Do not kill us, for we have hidden treasure in the field—wheat, barley, oil, and honey!” So he refrained from killing them with the others.
JER	41	9	이스마엘이 그다랴에게 속한 사람들을 죽이고 그 시체를 던진 구덩이는 아사 왕이 이스라엘 왕 바아사를 두려워하여 팠던 것이라 느다냐의 아들 이스마엘이 그 죽인 시체로 거기 채우고	Now the pit wherein Ishmael had cast all the dead bodies of the men, whom he had slain because of Gedaliah, was it which Asa the king had made for fear of Baasha king of Israel: and Ishmael the son of Nethaniah filled it with them that were slain.	Now the cistern into which Ishmael had thrown all the bodies of the men he had struck down along with Gedaliah was a large one that King Asa had made for fear of Baasha king of Israel. Ishmael son of Nethaniah filled it with the slain.
JER	41	10	미스바에 남아 있는 왕의 딸들과 모든 백성 곧 시위대장 느부사라단이 아히감의 아들 그다랴에게 위임하였던 바 미스바에 남아 있는 모든 백성을 사로잡되 곧 느다냐의 아들 이스마엘이 그들을 사로잡고 암몬 자손에게로 가려 하여 떠나니라	Then Ishmael carried away captive all the residue of the people that were in Mizpah, even the king’s daughters, and all the people that remained in Mizpah, whom Nebuzar–adan the captain of the guard had committed to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam: and Ishmael the son of Nethaniah carried them away captive, and departed to go over to the Ammonites.	Then Ishmael took captive all the remnant of the people of Mizpah—the daughters of the king along with all the others who remained in Mizpah—over whom Nebuzaradan captain of the guard had appointed Gedaliah son of Ahikam. Ishmael son of Nethaniah took them captive and set off to cross over to the Ammonites.
JER	41	11	가레아의 아들 요하난과 그와 함께 있는 모든 군대장관이 느다냐의 아들 이스마엘의 행한 모든 악을 듣고	But when Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that were with him, heard of all the evil that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had done,	When Johanan son of Kareah and all the commanders of the armies with him heard of all the crimes that Ishmael son of Nethaniah had committed,
JER	41	12	모든 사람을 데리고 느다냐의 아들 이스마엘과 싸우러 가다가 기브온 큰 물가에서 그를 만나매	Then they took all the men, and went to fight with Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and found him by the great waters that are in Gibeon.	they took all their men and went to fight Ishmael son of Nethaniah. And they found him near the great pool in Gibeon.
JER	41	13	이스마엘과 함께 있던 모든 백성이 가레아의 아들 요하난과 그와 함께 한 모든 군대장관을 보고 기뻐한지라	Now it came to pass, that when all the people which were with Ishmael saw Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that were with him, then they were glad.	When all the people with Ishmael saw Johanan son of Kareah and all the commanders of the army with him, they rejoiced,
JER	41	14	이에 미스바에서 이스마엘에게 포로되었던 그 모든 백성이 돌이켜 가레아의 아들 요하난에게로 돌아가니	So all the people that Ishmael had carried away captive from Mizpah cast about and returned, and went unto Johanan the son of Kareah.	and all the people whom Ishmael had taken captive at Mizpah turned and went over to Johanan son of Kareah.
JER	41	15	느다냐의 아들 이스마엘이 여덟 사람과 함께 요하난을 피하여 암몬 자손에게로 가니라	But Ishmael the son of Nethaniah escaped from Johanan with eight men, and went to the Ammonites.	But Ishmael son of Nethaniah and eight of his men escaped from Johanan and went to the Ammonites.
JER	41	16	가레아의 아들 요하난과 그와 함께하는 모든 군대장관이 느다냐의 아들 이스마엘이 아히감의 아들 그다랴를 죽이고 미스바에서 잡아간 모든 남은 백성 곧 군사와 여인과 유아와 환관을 기브온에서 빼앗아 가지고 돌아와서	Then took Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that were with him, all the remnant of the people whom he had recovered from Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, from Mizpah, after that he had slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, even mighty men of war, and the women, and the children, and the eunuchs, whom he had brought again from Gibeon:	Then Johanan son of Kareah and all the commanders of the armies with him took the whole remnant of the people from Mizpah whom he had recovered from Ishmael son of Nethaniah after Ishmael had killed Gedaliah son of Ahikam: the soldiers, women, children, and court officials he had brought back from Gibeon.
JER	41	17	애굽으로 가려 하여 떠나 베들레헴 근처에 있는 게롯김함에 머무렀으니	And they departed, and dwelt in the habitation of Chimham, which is by Beth–lehem, to go to enter into Egypt,	And they went and stayed in Geruth Chimham, near Bethlehem, in order to proceed into Egypt
JER	41	18	이는 느다냐의 아들 이스마엘이 바벨론 왕의 그 땅 총독으로 세운 아히감의 아들 그다랴을 죽였으므로 그들이 갈대아인을 두려워함이었더라	Because of the Chaldeans: for they were afraid of them, because Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, whom the king of Babylon made governor in the land.	to escape the Chaldeans. For they were afraid of the Chaldeans because Ishmael son of Nethaniah had struck down Gedaliah son of Ahikam, whom the king of Babylon had appointed over the land.
JER	42	1	이에 모든 군대의 장관과 가레아의 아들 요하난과 호사야의 아들 여사냐와 백성의 작은 자로부터 큰 자까지 다 나아와	Then all the captains of the forces, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and Jezaniah the son of Hoshaiah, and all the people from the least even unto the greatest, came near,	Then all the commanders of the forces, along with Johanan son of Kareah, Jezaniah son of Hoshaiah, and all the people from the least to the greatest, approached
JER	42	2	선지가 예레미야에게 이르되 당신은 우리의 간구를 들으시고 이 남아 있는 모든 자를 위하여 당신의 하나님 여호와께 기도하소서 당신이 목도하시거니와 우리는 많은 중에서 조금만 남았사오니	And said unto Jeremiah the prophet, Let, we beseech thee, our supplication be accepted before thee, and pray for us unto the Lord thy God, even for all this remnant; (for we are left but a few of many, as thine eyes do behold us:)	Jeremiah the prophet and said, “May our petition come before you; pray to the LORD your God on behalf of this entire remnant. For few of us remain of the many, as you can see with your own eyes.
JER	42	3	당신의 하나님 여호와께서 우리의 마땅히 갈 길과 할 일을 보이시기를 원하나이다	That the Lord thy God may shew us the way wherein we may walk, and the thing that we may do.	Pray that the LORD your God will tell us the way we should walk and the thing we should do.”
JER	42	4	선지자 예레미야가 그들에게 이르되 내가 너희 말을 들었은즉 너희 말대로 너희 하나님 여호와께 기도하고 무릇 여호와께서 너희에게 응답하시는 것을 숨김이 없이 너희에게 고하리라	Then Jeremiah the prophet said unto them, I have heard you; behold, I will pray unto the Lord your God according to your words; and it shall come to pass, that whatsoever thing the Lord shall answer you, I will declare it unto you; I will keep nothing back from you.	“I have heard you,” replied Jeremiah the prophet. “I will surely pray to the LORD your God as you request, and I will tell you everything that the LORD answers; I will not withhold a word from you.”
JER	42	5	그들이 예레미야에게 이르되 우리가 당신의 하나님 여호와께서 당신을 보내사 우리에게 이르시는 모든 말씀대로 행하리이다 여호와는 우리 중에 진실 무망한 증인이 되시옵소서	Then they said to Jeremiah, The Lord be a true and faithful witness between us, if we do not even according to all things for the which the Lord thy God shall send thee to us.	Then they said to Jeremiah, “May the LORD be a true and faithful witness against us if we do not act upon every word that the LORD your God sends you to tell us.
JER	42	6	우리가 당신을 우리 하나님 여호와께 보냄은 그의 목소리가 우리에게 좋고 좋지 아니함을 물론하고 청종하려 함이라 우리가 우리 하나님 여호와의 목소리를 청종하면 우리에게 복이 있으리이다	Whether it be good, or whether it be evil, we will obey the voice of the Lord our God, to whom we send thee; that it may be well with us, when we obey the voice of the Lord our God.	Whether it is pleasant or unpleasant, we will obey the voice of the LORD our God to whom we are sending you, so that it may go well with us, for we will obey the voice of the LORD our God!”
JER	42	7	십 일 후에 여호와의 말씀이 예레미야에게 임하니	And it came to pass after ten days, that the word of the Lord came unto Jeremiah.	After ten days the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah,
JER	42	8	그가 가레아의 아들 요하난과 그와 함께 있는 모든 군대장관과 백성의 작은 자로부터 큰 자까지 다 부르고	Then called he Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces which were with him, and all the people from the least even to the greatest,	and he summoned Johanan son of Kareah, all the commanders of the forces who were with him, and all the people from the least to the greatest.
JER	42	9	그들에게 이르되 너희가 나를 보내어 너희의 간구를 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께 드리게 하지 아니하였느냐 그가 가라사대	And said unto them, Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, unto whom ye sent me to present your supplication before him;	Jeremiah told them, “Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel, to whom you sent me to present your petition:
JER	42	10	너희가 이 땅에 여전히 거하면 내가 너희를 세우고 헐지 아니하며 너희를 심고 뽑지 아니하리니 이는 내가 너희에게 내린 재앙에 대하여 뜻을 돌이킴이니라	If ye will still abide in this land, then will I build you, and not pull you down, and I will plant you, and not pluck you up: for I repent me of the evil that I have done unto you.	‘If you will indeed stay in this land, then I will build you up and not tear you down; I will plant you and not uproot you, for I will relent of the disaster I have brought upon you.
JER	42	11	나 여호와가 말하노라 너희는 그 두려워하는 바벨론 왕을 두려워 말라 내가 너희와 함께 하여 너희를 구원하며 그의 손에서 너희를 건지리니 두려워 말라	Be not afraid of the king of Babylon, of whom ye are afraid; be not afraid of him, saith the Lord: for I am with you to save you, and to deliver you from his hand.	Do not be afraid of the king of Babylon, whom you now fear; do not be afraid of him, declares the LORD, for I am with you to save you and deliver you from him.
JER	42	12	내가 너희를 긍휼히 여기리니 그로도 너희를 긍휼히 여기게 하여 너희를 너희 본향으로 돌려 보내게 하리라 하셨느니라	And I will shew mercies unto you, that he may have mercy upon you, and cause you to return to your own land.	And I will show you compassion, and he will have compassion on you and restore you to your own land.’
JER	42	13	그러나 만일 너희가 너희 하나님 여호와의 말씀을 순복지 아니하고 말하기를 우리는 이 땅에 거하지 아니하리라 하며	But if ye say, We will not dwell in this land, neither obey the voice of the Lord your God,	But if you say, ‘We will not stay in this land,’ and you thus disobey the voice of the LORD your God,
JER	42	14	또 말하기를 우리는 전쟁도 보이지 아니하며 나팔소리도 들리지 아니하며 식물의 핍절도 당치 아니하는 애굽 땅으로 결단코 들어가 거하리라 하면 잘못되리라	Saying, No; but we will go into the land of Egypt, where we shall see no war, nor hear the sound of the trumpet, nor have hunger of bread; and there will we dwell:	and if you say, ‘No, but we will go to the land of Egypt and live there, where we will not see war or hear the sound of the ram’s horn or hunger for bread,’
JER	42	15	너희 유다의 남은 자여 이제 여호와의 말씀을 들으라 만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 이같이 말씀하시되 너희가 만일 애굽에 들어가서 거기 거하기로 고집하면	And now therefore hear the word of the Lord, ye remnant of Judah; Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; If ye wholly set your faces to enter into Egypt, and go to sojourn there;	then hear the word of the LORD, O remnant of Judah! This is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: ‘If you are determined to go to Egypt and reside there,
JER	42	16	너희의 두려워하는 칼이 애굽 땅으로 따라가서 너희에게 미칠 것이요 너희의 두려워하는 기근이 애굽으로 급히 따라가서 너희에게 임하리니 너희가 거기서 죽을 것이라	Then it shall come to pass, that the sword, which ye feared, shall overtake you there in the land of Egypt, and the famine, whereof ye were afraid, shall follow close after you there in Egypt; and there ye shall die.	then the sword you fear will overtake you there, and the famine you dread will follow on your heels into Egypt, and you will die there.
JER	42	17	무릇 애굽으로 들어가서 거기 우거하기로 고집하는 모든 사람은 이같이 되리니 곧 칼과 기근과 염병에 죽을 것인즉 내가 그들에게 내리는 재앙을 벗어나서 남을 자 없으리라	So shall it be with all the men that set their faces to go into Egypt to sojourn there; they shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence: and none of them shall remain or escape from the evil that I will bring upon them.	So all who resolve to go to Egypt to reside there will die by sword and famine and plague. Not one of them will survive or escape the disaster I will bring upon them.’
JER	42	18	만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 이같이 말씀하시되 나의 노와 분을 예루살렘 거민에게 부은 것 같이 너희가 애굽에 이른 때에 나의 분을 너희에게 부으리니 너희가 가증함과 놀램과 저주와 치욕거리가 될 것이라 너희가 다시는 이 땅을 보지 못하리라 하시도다	For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; As mine anger and my fury hath been poured forth upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem; so shall my fury be poured forth upon you, when ye shall enter into Egypt: and ye shall be an execration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach; and ye shall see this place no more.	For this is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: ‘Just as My anger and wrath were poured out on the residents of Jerusalem, so will My wrath be poured out on you if you go to Egypt. You will become an object of cursing and horror, of vilification and disgrace, and you will never see this place again.’
JER	42	19	유다의 남은 자들아 여호와께서 너희 일로 하신 말씀에 너희는 애굽으로 가지 말라 하셨고 나도 오늘날 너희에게 경계한 것을 너희는 분명히 알라	The Lord hath said concerning you, O ye remnant of Judah; Go ye not into Egypt: know certainly that I have admonished you this day.	The LORD has told you, O remnant of Judah, ‘Do not go to Egypt.’ Know for sure that I have warned you today!
JER	42	20	너희가 나를 너희 하나님 여호와께 보내며 이르기를 우리를 위하여 우리 하나님 여호와께 기도하고 우리 하나님 여호와께서 말씀하신 대로 우리에게 고하라 우리가 이를 행하리라 하여 너희 마음을 속였느니라	For ye dissembled in your hearts, when ye sent me unto the Lord your God, saying, Pray for us unto the Lord our God; and according unto all that the Lord our God shall say, so declare unto us, and we will do it.	For you have deceived yourselves by sending me to the LORD your God, saying, ‘Pray to the LORD our God on our behalf, and as for all that the LORD our God says, tell it to us and we will do it.’
JER	42	21	너희 하나님 여호와께서 나를 보내사 너희에게 명하신 말씀을 내가 오늘날 너희에게 고하였어도 너희가 그 목소리를 도무지 순종치 아니하였은즉	And now I have this day declared it to you; but ye have not obeyed the voice of the Lord your God, nor any thing for the which he hath sent me unto you.	For I have told you today, but you have not obeyed the voice of the LORD your God in all He has sent me to tell you.
JER	42	22	너희가 가서 우거하려 하는 곳에서 칼과 기근과 염병에 죽을줄 분명히 알지니라	Now therefore know certainly that ye shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, in the place whither ye desire to go and to sojourn.	Now therefore, know for sure that by sword and famine and plague you will die in the place where you desire to go to reside.”
JER	43	1	예레미야가 모든 백성에게 그들의 하나님 여호와의 말씀 곧 그들의 하나님 여호와께서 자기를 보내사 그들에게 이르게 하신 이 모든 말씀을 다 말하매	And it came to pass, that when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking unto all the people all the words of the Lord their God, for which the Lord their God had sent him to them, even all these words,	When Jeremiah had finished telling all the people all the words of the LORD their God—everything that the LORD had sent him to say—
JER	43	2	호사야의 아들 아사랴와 가레아의 아들 요하난과 및 모든 교만한 자가 예레미야에게 말하여 가로되 네가 거짓을 말하는도다 우리 하나님 여호와께서는 너희는 애굽에 거하려고 그리로 가지 말라고 너를 보내어 말하게 하지 아니하셨느니라	Then spake Azariah the son of Hoshaiah, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the proud men, saying unto Jeremiah, Thou speakest falsely: the Lord our God hath not sent thee to say, Go not into Egypt to sojourn there:	Azariah son of Hoshaiah, Johanan son of Kareah, and all the arrogant men said to Jeremiah, “You are lying! The LORD our God has not sent you to say, ‘You must not go to Egypt to reside there.’
JER	43	3	이는 네리야의 아들 바룩이 너를 꼬드겨서 우리를 대적하여 갈대아인의 손에 붙여 죽이며 바벨론으로 잡아가게 하려 함이니라 하고	But Baruch the son of Neriah setteth thee on against us, for to deliver us into the hand of the Chaldeans, that they might put us to death, and carry us away captives into Babylon.	Rather, Baruch son of Neriah is inciting you against us to deliver us into the hands of the Chaldeans, so that they may put us to death or exile us to Babylon!”
JER	43	4	이에 가레아의 아들 요하난과 모든 군대 장관과 모든 백성이 유다 땅에 거하라 하시는 여호와의 목소리를 청종치 아니하고	So Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces, and all the people, obeyed not the voice of the Lord, to dwell in the land of Judah.	So Johanan son of Kareah and all the commanders of the forces disobeyed the command of the LORD to stay in the land of Judah.
JER	43	5	가레아의 아들 요하난과 모든 군대장관이 유다의 남은 자 곧 쫓겨났던 열방 중에서 유다 땅에 거하려하여 돌아온 자	But Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces, took all the remnant of Judah, that were returned from all nations, whither they had been driven, to dwell in the land of Judah;	Instead, Johanan son of Kareah and all the commanders of the forces took the whole remnant of Judah, those who had returned to the land of Judah from all the nations to which they had been scattered,
JER	43	6	곧 남자와 여자와 유아와 왕의 딸들과 시위대장 느부사라단이 사반의 손자 아히감의 아들 그다랴에게 넘겨 둔 모든 사람과 선지자 예레미야와 네리야의 아들 바룩을 영솔하고	Even men, and women, and children, and the king’s daughters, and every person that Nebuzar–adan the captain of the guard had left with Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and Jeremiah the prophet, and Baruch the son of Neriah.	the men, the women, the children, the king’s daughters, and everyone whom Nebuzaradan captain of the guard had allowed to remain with Gedaliah son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, as well as Jeremiah the prophet and Baruch son of Neriah.
JER	43	7	애굽 땅에 들어가 다바네스에 이르렀으니 그들이 여호와의 목소리를 청종치 아니함이 이러하였더라	So they came into the land of Egypt: for they obeyed not the voice of the Lord: thus came they even to Tahpanhes.	So they entered the land of Egypt because they did not obey the voice of the LORD, and they went as far as Tahpanhes.
JER	43	8	다바네스에서 여호와의 말씀이 예레미야에게 임하여 가라사대	Then came the word of the Lord unto Jeremiah in Tahpanhes, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah at Tahpanhes:
JER	43	9	너는 유다 사람의 목전에서 네 손으로 큰 돌들을 가져다가 다바네스 바로의 집 어귀의 벽돌 깔린 곳에 진흙으로 감추고	Take great stones in thine hand, and hide them in the clay in the brickkiln, which is at the entry of Pharaoh’s house in Tahpanhes, in the sight of the men of Judah;	“In the sight of the Jews, pick up some large stones and bury them in the clay of the brick pavement at the entrance to Pharaoh’s palace at Tahpanhes.
JER	43	10	그들에게 이르기를 만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 이같이 말씀하시되 보라 내가 내 종 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살을 불러오리니 그가 그 보좌를 내가 감추게 한 이 돌 위에 두고 또 그 화려한 장막을 그 위에 치리라	And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will send and take Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and will set his throne upon these stones that I have hid; and he shall spread his royal pavilion over them.	Then tell them that this is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: ‘I will send for My servant Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and I will set his throne over these stones that I have embedded, and he will spread his royal pavilion over them.
JER	43	11	그가 와서 애굽 땅을 치고 죽일 자는 죽이고 사로잡을 자는 사로잡고 칼로 칠 자는 칼로 칠 것이라	And when he cometh, he shall smite the land of Egypt, and deliver such as are for death to death; and such as are for captivity to captivity; and such as are for the sword to the sword.	He will come and strike down the land of Egypt, bringing death to those destined for death, captivity to those destined for captivity, and the sword to those destined for the sword.
JER	43	12	내가 애굽 신들의 집에 불을 놓을 것인즉 느부갓네살이 그들을 불사르며 그들을 사로잡을 것이요 목자가 그 몸에 옷을 두름 같이 애굽 땅을 자기 몸에 두르고 평안히 그곳을 떠날 것이며	And I will kindle a fire in the houses of the gods of Egypt; and he shall burn them, and carry them away captives: and he shall array himself with the land of Egypt, as a shepherd putteth on his garment; and he shall go forth from thence in peace.	I will kindle a fire in the temples of the gods of Egypt, and Nebuchadnezzar will burn those temples and take their gods as captives. So he will wrap himself with the land of Egypt as a shepherd wraps himself in his garment, and he will depart from there unscathed.
JER	43	13	그가 또 애굽 땅 벧세메스의 주상들을 깨뜨리고 애굽 신들의 집을 불사르리라 하셨다 할지니라	He shall break also the images of Beth–shemesh, that is in the land of Egypt; and the houses of the gods of the Egyptians shall he burn with fire.	He will demolish the sacred pillars of the temple of the sun in the land of Egypt, and he will burn down the temples of the gods of Egypt.’”
JER	44	1	애굽 땅에 거하는 모든 유다인 곧 믹돌과 다바네스와 놉과 바드로스 지방에 거하는 자에 대하여 말씀이 예레미야에게 임하니라 가라사대	The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the Jews which dwell in the land of Egypt, which dwell at Migdol, and at Tahpanhes, and at Noph, and in the country of Pathros, saying,	This is the word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the Jews living in the land of Egypt—in Migdol, Tahpanhes, and Memphis—and in the land of Pathros:
JER	44	2	만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 이같이 말하노라 너희가 예루살렘과 유다 모든 성읍에 내린 나의 모든 재앙을 보았느니라 보라 오늘날 그것들이 황무지가 되었고 거하는 사람이 없나니	Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Ye have seen all the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem, and upon all the cities of Judah; and, behold, this day they are a desolation, and no man dwelleth therein,	“This is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: You have seen all the disaster that I brought against Jerusalem and all the cities of Judah; and behold, they lie today in ruins and desolation
JER	44	3	이는 그들이 자기나 너희나 너희 열조의 알지 못하는 다른 신들에게 나아가 분향하여 섬겨서 나의 노를 격동한 악행을 인함이라	Because of their wickedness which they have committed to provoke me to anger, in that they went to burn incense, and to serve other gods, whom they knew not, neither they, ye, nor your fathers.	because of the evil they have done. They provoked Me to anger by continuing to burn incense and to serve other gods that neither they nor you nor your fathers ever knew.
JER	44	4	내가 나의 모든 종 선지자들을 그들에게 보내되 부지런히 보내어 이르기를 너희는 나의 미워하는 이 가증한 일을 행치 말라 하였어도	Howbeit I sent unto you all my servants the prophets, rising early and sending them, saying, Oh, do not this abominable thing that I hate.	Yet I sent you all My servants the prophets again and again, saying: ‘Do not do this detestable thing that I hate.’
JER	44	5	그들이 듣지 아니하며 귀를 기울이지 아니하고 다를 신들에게 여전히 분향하여 그 악에서 둘이키지 아니하였으므로	But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear to turn from their wickedness, to burn no incense unto other gods.	But they did not listen or incline their ears; they did not turn from their wickedness or stop burning incense to other gods.
JER	44	6	나의 분과 나의 노를 쏟아서 유다 성읍들과 예루살렘 거리를 살랐더니 그것들이 오늘과 같이 황폐하고 적막하였느니라	Wherefore my fury and mine anger was poured forth, and was kindled in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem; and they are wasted and desolate, as at this day.	Therefore My wrath and anger poured out and burned in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem, so that they have become the desolate ruin they are today.
JER	44	7	나 만군의 하나님 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 너희가 어찌하여 큰 악을 행하여 자기 영혼을 해하며 유다 중에서 너희의 남자와 여자와 아이와 젖먹는 자를 멸절하여 하나도 남기지 않게 하려느냐	Therefore now thus saith the Lord, the God of hosts, the God of Israel; Wherefore commit ye this great evil against your souls, to cut off from you man and woman, child and suckling, out of Judah, to leave you none to remain;	So now, this is what the LORD God of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: Why are you doing such great harm to yourselves by cutting off from Judah man and woman, child and infant, leaving yourselves without a remnant?
JER	44	8	어찌하여 너희가 너희 손의 소위로 나의 노를 격동하여 너희의 가서 우거하는 애굽 땅에서 다른 신들에게 분향함으로 끊어버림을 당하여 세계 열방 중에서 저주와 모욕거리가 되고자 하느냐	In that ye provoke me unto wrath with the works of your hands, burning incense unto other gods in the land of Egypt, whither ye be gone to dwell, that ye might cut yourselves off, and that ye might be a curse and a reproach among all the nations of the earth?	Why are you provoking Me to anger by the work of your hands by burning incense to other gods in the land of Egypt, where you have gone to reside? As a result, you will be cut off and will become an object of cursing and reproach among all the nations of the earth.
JER	44	9	너희가 유다 땅과 예루살렘 거리에서 행한 너희 열조의 악과 유다 왕들의 악과 왕비들의 악과 너희의 악과 너희 아내들의 악을 잊었느냐	Have ye forgotten the wickedness of your fathers, and the wickedness of the kings of Judah, and the wickedness of their wives, and your own wickedness, and the wickedness of your wives, which they have committed in the land of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem?	Have you forgotten the wickedness of your fathers and of the kings of Judah and their wives, as well as the wickedness that you and your wives committed in the land of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem?
JER	44	10	그들이 오늘까지 겸비치 아니하며 두려워하지도 아니하고 내가 너희와 너희 열조 앞에 세운 나의 법과 나의 율례를 준행치 아니하느니라	They are not humbled even unto this day, neither have they feared, nor walked in my law, nor in my statutes, that I set before you and before your fathers.	To this day they have not humbled themselves or shown reverence, nor have they followed My instruction or the statutes that I set before you and your fathers.
JER	44	11	그러므로 나 만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 이같이 말하노라 보라 내가 얼굴을 너희에게로 향하여 재앙을 내리고 온 유다를 끊어 버릴 것이며	Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will set my face against you for evil, and to cut off all Judah.	Therefore this is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: I will set My face to bring disaster and to cut off all Judah.
JER	44	12	내가 또 애굽 땅에 우거하기로 고집하고 그리로 들어간 유다의 남은 자들을 취하리니 그들이 다 멸망하여 애굽 땅에서 엎드러질 것이라 그들이 칼과 기근에 망하되 작은 자로부터 큰 자까지 칼과 기근에 죽어서 가증함과 놀램과 저주와 모욕거리가 되리라	And I will take the remnant of Judah, that have set their faces to go into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, and they shall all be consumed, and fall in the land of Egypt; they shall even be consumed by the sword and by the famine: they shall die, from the least even unto the greatest, by the sword and by the famine: and they shall be an execration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach.	And I will take away the remnant of Judah who have resolved to go to the land of Egypt to reside there; they will meet their end. They will all fall by the sword or be consumed by famine. From the least to the greatest, they will die by sword or famine; and they will become an object of cursing and horror, of vilification and reproach.
JER	44	13	내가 예루살렘을 벌한 것 같이 애굽 땅에 거하는 자들을 칼과 기근과 염병으로 벌하리니	For I will punish them that dwell in the land of Egypt, as I have punished Jerusalem, by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence:	I will punish those who live in the land of Egypt, just as I punished Jerusalem, by sword and famine and plague,
JER	44	14	애굽 땅에 들어가서 거기 우거하는 유다의 남은 자 중에 피하거나 남아서 그 사모하여 돌아와서 거하려는 유다 땅에 돌아올 자가 없을 것이라 도피하는 자들 외에는 돌아올 자가 없으리라 하셨느니라	So that none of the remnant of Judah, which are gone into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, shall escape or remain, that they should return into the land of Judah, to the which they have a desire to return to dwell there: for none shall return but such as shall escape.	so that none of the remnant of Judah who have gone to reside in Egypt will escape or survive to return to the land of Judah, where they long to return and live; for none will return except a few fugitives.”
JER	44	15	때에 자기 아내들이 다른 신들에게 분향하는 줄을 아는 모든 남자와 곁에 섰던 모든 여인 곧 애굽 땅 바드로스에 거하는 모든 백성의 큰 무리가 예레미야에게 대답하여 가로되	Then all the men which knew that their wives had burned incense unto other gods, and all the women that stood by, a great multitude, even all the people that dwelt in the land of Egypt, in Pathros, answered Jeremiah, saying,	Then all the men who knew that their wives were burning incense to other gods, and all the women standing by—a great assembly—along with all the people living in the land of Egypt and in Pathros, said to Jeremiah,
JER	44	16	네가 여호와의 이름으로 우리에게 하는 말을 우리가 듣지 아니하고	As for the word that thou hast spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee.	“As for the word you have spoken to us in the name of the LORD, we will not listen to you!
JER	44	17	우리 입에서 낸 모든 말을 정녕히 실행하여 우리의 본래 하던 것 곧 우리와 우리 선조와 우리 왕들과 우리 방백들이 유다 성읍들과 예루살렘 거리에서 하던 대로 하늘 여신에게 분향하고 그 앞에 전제를 드리리라 대저 그 때에는 우리가 식물이 풍부하며 복을 받고 재앙을 만나지 아니하였더니	But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goeth forth out of our own mouth, to burn incense unto the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, as we have done, we, and our fathers, our kings, and our princes, in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem: for then had we plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw no evil.	Instead, we will do everything we vowed to do: We will burn incense to the Queen of Heaven and offer drink offerings to her, just as we, our fathers, our kings, and our officials did in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem. At that time we had plenty of food and good things, and we saw no disaster.
JER	44	18	우리가 하늘 여신에게 분향하고 그 앞에 전제 드리던 것을 폐한 후부터는 모든 것이 핍절하고 칼과 기근에 멸망을 당하였느니라 하며	But since we left off to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, we have wanted all things, and have been consumed by the sword and by the famine.	But from the time we stopped burning incense to the Queen of Heaven and pouring out drink offerings to her, we have lacked everything and have been perishing by sword and famine.”
JER	44	19	여인들은 가로되 우리가 하늘 여신에게 분향하고 그 앞에 전제를 드릴 때에 어찌 우리 남편의 허락이 없이 그에게 경배하는 과자를 만들어 놓고 전제를 드렸느냐	And when we burned incense to the queen of heaven, and poured out drink offerings unto her, did we make her cakes to worship her, and pour out drink offerings unto her, without our men?	“Moreover,” said the women, “when we burned incense to the Queen of Heaven and poured out drink offerings to her, was it without our husbands’ knowledge that we made sacrificial cakes in her image and poured out drink offerings to her?”
JER	44	20	예레미야가 남녀 모든 무리 곧 이 말로 대답하는 모든 백성에게 일러 가로되	Then Jeremiah said unto all the people, to the men, and to the women, and to all the people which had given him that answer, saying,	Then Jeremiah said to all the people, both men and women, who were answering him,
JER	44	21	너희가 너희 선조와 너희 왕들과 방백들과 유다 땅 백성이 유다 성읍들과 예루살렘 거리들에서 분향한 일을 여호와께서 기억지 아니하셨느냐 생각지 아니하셨느냐	The incense that ye burned in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, ye, and your fathers, your kings, and your princes, and the people of the land, did not the Lord remember them, and came it not into his mind?	“As for the incense you burned in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem—you, your fathers, your kings, your officials, and the people of the land—did the LORD not remember and bring this to mind?
JER	44	22	여호와께서 너희 악행과 가증한 소위를 더 참으실 수 없으셨으므로 너희 땅이 오늘과 같이 황무하며 놀램과 저줏거리가 되어 거민이 없게 되었나니	So that the Lord could no longer bear, because of the evil of your doings, and because of the abominations which ye have committed; therefore is your land a desolation, and an astonishment, and a curse, without an inhabitant, as at this day.	So the LORD could no longer endure the evil deeds and detestable acts you committed, and your land became a desolation, a horror, and an object of cursing, without inhabitant, as it is this day.
JER	44	23	너희가 분향하여 여호와께 범죄하였으며 여호와의 목소리를 청종치 아니하고 여호와의 법과 율례와 증거대로 행치 아니하였으므로 이 재앙이 오늘과 같이 너희에게 미쳤느니라	Because ye have burned incense, and because ye have sinned against the Lord, and have not obeyed the voice of the Lord, nor walked in his law, nor in his statutes, nor in his testimonies; therefore this evil is happened unto you, as at this day.	Because you burned incense and sinned against the LORD, and did not obey the voice of the LORD or walk in His instruction, His statutes, and His testimonies, this disaster has befallen you, as you see today.”
JER	44	24	예레미야가 다시 모든 백성과 모든 여인에게 말하되 애굽 땅에서 사는 모든 유다여 여호와의 말씀을 들으라	Moreover Jeremiah said unto all the people, and to all the women, Hear the word of the Lord, all Judah that are in the land of Egypt:	Then Jeremiah said to all the people, including all the women, “Hear the word of the LORD, all those of Judah who are in the land of Egypt.
JER	44	25	만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 이같이 말씀하시되 너희와 너희 아내들이 입으로 말하고 손으로 이루려 하여 이르기를 우리가 서원한 대로 반드시 이행하여 하늘 여신에게 분향하고 전제를 드리리라 하였은즉 너희 서원을 성립하며 너희 서원을 이행하라 하시느니라	Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, saying; Ye and your wives have both spoken with your mouths, and fulfilled with your hand, saying, We will surely perform our vows that we have vowed, to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her: ye will surely accomplish your vows, and surely perform your vows.	This is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: As for you and your wives, you have spoken with your mouths and fulfilled with your hands your words: ‘We will surely perform our vows that we have made to burn incense to the Queen of Heaven and to pour out drink offerings to her.’ Go ahead, then, do what you have promised! Keep your vows!
JER	44	26	그러므로 애굽 땅에서 사는 모든 유다여 여호와의 말씀을 들으라 여호와께서 말씀하시되 내가 나의 큰 이름으로 맹세하였은즉 애굽 온 땅에 거하는 유다 사람들의 입에서 다시는 내 이름을 일컬어서 주 여호와의 사심으로 맹세하노라 하는 자가 없게 되리라	Therefore hear ye the word of the Lord, all Judah that dwell in the land of Egypt; Behold, I have sworn by my great name, saith the Lord, that my name shall no more be named in the mouth of any man of Judah in all the land of Egypt, saying, The Lord God liveth.	Nevertheless, hear the word of the LORD, all you people of Judah living in Egypt: Behold, I have sworn by My great name, says the LORD, that never again will any man of Judah living in the land of Egypt invoke My name or say, ‘As surely as the Lord GOD lives.’
JER	44	27	보라 내가 경성하여 그들에게 재앙을 내리고 복을 내리지 아니하리니 애굽 땅에 있는 유다 모든 사람이 칼과 기근에 망하여 멸절되리라	Behold, I will watch over them for evil, and not for good: and all the men of Judah that are in the land of Egypt shall be consumed by the sword and by the famine, until there be an end of them.	I am watching over them for harm and not for good, and every man of Judah who is in the land of Egypt will meet his end by sword or famine, until they are finished off.
JER	44	28	그런즉 칼을 피한 소수의 사람이 애굽 땅에서 나와 유다 땅으로 돌아오리니 애굽 땅에 들어가서 거기 우거하는 유다의 모든 남은 자가 내 말이 성립되었는지, 자기들의 말이 성립되었는지 알리라	Yet a small number that escape the sword shall return out of the land of Egypt into the land of Judah, and all the remnant of Judah, that are gone into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, shall know whose words shall stand, mine, or theirs.	Those who escape the sword will return from Egypt to Judah, few in number, and the whole remnant of Judah who went to dwell in the land of Egypt will know whose word will stand, Mine or theirs!
JER	44	29	나 여호와가 말하노라 내가 이곳에서 너희를 벌할 표징이 이것이라 내가 너희에게 내앙을 내리리라 한 말이 단정코 성립될 것을 그것으로 알게 하리라	And this shall be a sign unto you, saith the Lord, that I will punish you in this place, that ye may know that my words shall surely stand against you for evil:	This will be a sign to you that I will punish you in this place, declares the LORD, so that you may know that My threats of harm against you will surely stand.
JER	44	30	보라 내가 유다 왕 시드기야를 그 원수 곧 그 생명을 찾는 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살의 손에 붙인 것 같이 애굽 왕 바로 호브라를 그 원수들 곧 그 생명을 찾는 자들의 손에 붙이리라 나 여호와가 이같이 말하였느니라 하시니라	Thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will give Pharaoh–hophra king of Egypt into the hand of his enemies, and into the hand of them that seek his life; as I gave Zedekiah king of Judah into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, his enemy, and that sought his life.	This is what the LORD says: Behold, I will deliver Pharaoh Hophra king of Egypt into the hands of his enemies who seek his life, just as I delivered Zedekiah king of Judah into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, the enemy who was seeking his life.”
JER	45	1	유다 왕 요시야의 아들 여호야김 제사년에 네리야의 아들 바룩이 예레미야의 구전대로 이 모든 말을 책에 기록하니라 때에 선지자 예레미야가 그에게 말하여 가로되	The word that Jeremiah the prophet spake unto Baruch the son of Neriah, when he had written these words in a book at the mouth of Jeremiah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, saying,	This is the word that Jeremiah the prophet spoke to Baruch son of Neriah when he wrote these words on a scroll at the dictation of Jeremiah in the fourth year of Jehoiakim son of Josiah, king of Judah:
JER	45	2	바룩아 이스라엘의 하나님 여호와께서 네게 이같이 말씀하시되	Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, unto thee, O Baruch;	“This is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says to you, Baruch:
JER	45	3	네가 일찍 말하기를 슬프다 여호와께서 나의 고통에 슬픔을 더하셨으니 나는 나의 탄식으로 피곤하여 평안치 못하다 하도다 하셨고	Thou didst say, Woe is me now! for the Lord hath added grief to my sorrow; I fainted in my sighing, and I find no rest.	You have said, ‘Woe is me because the LORD has added sorrow to my pain! I am worn out with groaning and have found no rest.’”
JER	45	4	또 내게 이르시기를 너는 그에게 이르라 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시기를 보라 나는 나의 세운 것을 헐기도 하며 나의 심은 것을 뽑기도 하나니 온 땅에 이러하거늘	Thus shalt thou say unto him, The Lord saith thus; Behold, that which I have built will I break down, and that which I have planted I will pluck up, even this whole land.	Thus Jeremiah was to say to Baruch: “This is what the LORD says: Throughout the land I will demolish what I have built and uproot what I have planted.
JER	45	5	네가 너를 위하여 대사를 경영하느냐 그것을 경영하지 말라 보라 내가 모든 육체에게 재앙을 내리리라 그러나 너의 가는 모든 곳에서는 내가 너로 생명 얻기를 노략물을 얻는 것 같게 하리라 여호와의 말이니라 하셨느니라	And seekest thou great things for thyself? seek them not: for, behold, I will bring evil upon all flesh, saith the Lord: but thy life will I give unto thee for a prey in all places whither thou goest.	But as for you, do you seek great things for yourself? Stop seeking! For I will bring disaster on every living creature, declares the LORD, but wherever you go, I will grant your life as a spoil of war.”
JER	46	1	열국에 대하여 선지자 예레미아에 임한 여호와의 말씀이라	The word of the Lord which came to Jeremiah the prophet against the Gentiles;	This is the word of the LORD about the nations—the word that came to Jeremiah the prophet
JER	46	2	애굽을 논한 것이니 곧 유다 왕 요시야의 아들 여호야김 제사년에 유부라데 하숫가 갈그미스에서 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살에게 패한 애굽 왕 바로느고의 군대에 대한 말씀이라	Against Egypt, against the army of Pharaoh–necho king of Egypt, which was by the river Euphrates in Carchemish, which Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon smote in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah.	concerning Egypt and the army of Pharaoh Neco king of Egypt, which was defeated at Carchemish on the Euphrates River by Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah:
JER	46	3	너희는 큰 방패, 작은 방패를 예비하고 나가서 싸우라	Order ye the buckler and shield, and draw near to battle.	“Deploy your shields, small and large; advance for battle!
JER	46	4	너희 기병이여 말에 안장을 지워 타며 투구를 쓰고 나서며 창을 갈며 갑옷을 입으라	Harness the horses; and get up, ye horsemen, and stand forth with your helmets; furbish the spears, and put on the brigandines.	Harness the horses; mount the steeds; take your positions with helmets on! Polish your spears; put on armor!
JER	46	5	여호와께서 가라사대 내가 본즉 그들이 놀라 물러가며 그들의 용사는 패하여 급히 도망하며 뒤를 돌아보지 아니함은 어찜인고 두려움이 그들의 사방에 있음이로다 하셨나니	Wherefore have I seen them dismayed and turned away back? and their mighty ones are beaten down, and are fled apace, and look not back: for fear was round about, saith the Lord.	Why am I seeing this? They are terrified, they are retreating; their warriors are defeated, they flee in haste without looking back; terror is on every side!” declares the LORD.
JER	46	6	발이 빠른 자도 도망하지 못하며 용맹이 있는 자도 피하지 못하고 그들이 다 북방에서 유브라데 하숫가에 넘어지며 엎드러지는도다	Let not the swift flee away, nor the mighty man escape; they shall stumble, and fall toward the north by the river Euphrates.	“The swift cannot flee, and the warrior cannot escape! In the north by the River Euphrates they stumble and fall.
JER	46	7	저 나일의 창일함과 강물의 흉용함 같은 자 누구뇨	Who is this that cometh up as a flood, whose waters are moved as the rivers?	Who is this, rising like the Nile, like rivers whose waters churn?
JER	46	8	애굽이 나일의 창일함과 강물의 흉용함 같도다 그가 가로되 내가 일어나 땅을 덮어 성읍들과 그 거민을 멸할 것이라	Egypt riseth up like a flood, and his waters are moved like the rivers; and he saith, I will go up, and will cover the earth; I will destroy the city and the inhabitants thereof.	Egypt rises like the Nile, and its waters churn like rivers, boasting, ‘I will rise and cover the earth; I will destroy the cities and their people.’
JER	46	9	말들아 달리라 병거들아 급히 동하라 용사여 나오라 방패 잡은 구스인과 붓인과 활을 당기는 루딤인이여 나올지니라 하거니와	Come up, ye horses; and rage, ye chariots; and let the mighty men come forth; the Ethiopians and the Libyans, that handle the shield; and the Lydians, that handle and bend the bow.	Advance, O horses! Race furiously, O chariots! Let the warriors come forth— Cush and Put carrying their shields, men of Lydia drawing the bow.
JER	46	10	그 날은 주 만군의 여호와께서 그 대적에게 원수 갚는 보수일이라 칼이 배부르게 삼키며 그들의 피를 가득히 마시리니 주 만군의 여호와께서 북편 유브라데 하숫가에서 희생을 내실 것임이로다	For this is the day of the Lord God of hosts, a day of vengeance, that he may avenge him of his adversaries: and the sword shall devour, and it shall be satiate and made drunk with their blood: for the Lord God of hosts hath a sacrifice in the north country by the river Euphrates.	For that day belongs to the Lord GOD of Hosts, a day of vengeance against His foes. The sword will devour until it is satisfied, until it is quenched with their blood. For the Lord GOD of Hosts will hold a sacrifice in the land of the north by the River Euphrates.
JER	46	11	처녀 딸 애굽이여 길르앗으로 올라가서 유향을 취하라 네가 많은 의약을 쓸지라도 무효하여 낫지 못하리라	Go up into Gilead, and take balm, O virgin, the daughter of Egypt: in vain shalt thou use many medicines; for thou shalt not be cured.	Go up to Gilead for balm, O Virgin Daughter of Egypt! In vain you try many remedies, but for you there is no healing.
JER	46	12	네 수치가 열방에 들렸고 네 부르짖음은 땅에 가득하였나니 용사가 용사에게 부딪쳐 둘이 함께 엎드러졌음이니라	The nations have heard of thy shame, and thy cry hath filled the land: for the mighty man hath stumbled against the mighty, and they are fallen both together.	The nations have heard of your shame, and your outcry fills the earth, because warrior stumbles over warrior and both of them have fallen together.”
JER	46	13	바벨론 왕 느부갓네살이 와서 애굽 땅을 칠 일에 대하여 선지자 예레미아에게 이르신 여호와의 말씀이라	The word that the Lord spake to Jeremiah the prophet, how Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon should come and smite the land of Egypt.	This is the word that the LORD spoke to Jeremiah the prophet about the coming of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon to strike the land of Egypt:
JER	46	14	너희는 애굽에 선포하며 믹돌과 놉과 다바네스에 선포하여 말하기를 너희는 굳게 서서 예비하라 네 사방이 칼에 삼키웠느니라	Declare ye in Egypt, and publish in Migdol, and publish in Noph and in Tahpanhes: say ye, Stand fast, and prepare thee; for the sword shall devour round about thee.	“Announce it in Egypt, and proclaim it in Migdol; proclaim it in Memphis and Tahpanhes: ‘Take your positions and prepare yourself, for the sword devours those around you.’
JER	46	15	너희 장사들이 쓰러짐은 어찜이뇨 그들의 서지 못함은 여호와께서 그들을 몰아내신 연고니라	Why are thy valiant men swept away? they stood not, because the Lord did drive them.	Why have your warriors been laid low? They cannot stand, for the LORD has thrust them down.
JER	46	16	그가 많은 자로 넘어지게 하시매 사람이 사람 위에 엎드러지며 이르되 일어나라 우리가 포악한 칼을 피하여 우리 민족에게로, 우리 고토로 돌아가자 하며	He made many to fall, yea, one fell upon another: and they said, Arise, and let us go again to our own people, and to the land of our nativity, from the oppressing sword.	They continue to stumble; indeed, they have fallen over one another. They say, ‘Get up! Let us return to our people and to the land of our birth, away from the sword of the oppressor.’
JER	46	17	거기서 부르짖기를 애굽 왕 바로가 망하였도다 그가 시기를 잃었도다	They did cry there, Pharaoh king of Egypt is but a noise; he hath passed the time appointed.	There they will cry out: ‘Pharaoh king of Egypt was all noise; he has let the appointed time pass him by.’
JER	46	18	만군의 여호와라 일컫는 왕이 가라사대 나의 삶으로 맹세하노니 그가 과연 산들 중의 다볼 같이, 해변의 갈멜 같이 오리라	As I live, saith the King, whose name is the Lord of hosts, Surely as Tabor is among the mountains, and as Carmel by the sea, so shall he come.	As surely as I live, declares the King, whose name is the LORD of Hosts, there will come one who is like Tabor among the mountains and like Carmel by the sea.
JER	46	19	애굽에 사는 딸이여 너는 너를 위하여 포로의 행리를 준비하라 놉이 황무하며 불에 타서 거민이 없을 것임이니라	O thou daughter dwelling in Egypt, furnish thyself to go into captivity: for Noph shall be waste and desolate without an inhabitant.	Pack your bags for exile, O daughter dwelling in Egypt! For Memphis will be laid waste, destroyed and uninhabited.
JER	46	20	애굽은 심히 아름다운 암송아지라도 북에서부터 멸망에 이르렀고 이르렀느니라	Egypt is like a very fair heifer, but destruction cometh; it cometh out of the north.	Egypt is a beautiful heifer, but a gadfly from the north is coming against her.
JER	46	21	또 그 중의 고용꾼은 외양간의 송아지 같아서 돌이켜 함께 도망하고 서지 못하였나니 재난의 날이 이르렀고 벌 받는 때가 왔음이라	Also her hired men are in the midst of her like fatted bullocks; for they also are turned back, and are fled away together: they did not stand, because the day of their calamity was come upon them, and the time of their visitation.	Even the mercenaries among her are like fattened calves. They too will turn back; together they will flee, they will not stand their ground, for the day of calamity is coming upon them— the time of their punishment.
JER	46	22	애굽의 소리가 뱀의 소리 같으리니 이는 그들의 군대가 벌목하는 자 같이 도끼를 가지고 올 것임이니라	The voice thereof shall go like a serpent; for they shall march with an army, and come against her with axes, as hewers of wood.	Egypt will hiss like a fleeing serpent, for the enemy will advance in force; with axes they will come against her like woodsmen cutting down trees.
JER	46	23	나 여호와가 말하노라 그들이 황충보다 많고 계수할 수 없으므로 조사할 수 없는 그의 수풀을 찍을 것이라	They shall cut down her forest, saith the Lord, though it cannot be searched; because they are more than the grasshoppers, and are innumerable.	They will chop down her forest, declares the LORD, dense though it may be, for they are more numerous than locusts; they cannot be counted.
JER	46	24	딸 애굽이 수치를 당하여 북방 백성의 손에 붙임을 입으리로다	The daughter of Egypt shall be confounded; she shall be delivered into the hand of the people of the north.	The Daughter of Egypt will be put to shame; she will be delivered into the hands of the people of the north.”
JER	46	25	나 만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 말하노라 보라 내가 노의 아몬과 바로와 애굽과 애굽 신들과 왕들 곧 바로와 및 그를 의지하는 자들을 벌할 것이라	The Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, saith; Behold, I will punish the multitude of No, and Pharaoh, and Egypt, with their gods, and their kings; even Pharaoh, and all them that trust in him:	The LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: “Behold, I am about to punish Amon god of Thebes, along with Pharaoh, Egypt with her gods and kings, and those who trust in Pharaoh.
JER	46	26	내가 그들의 생명을 찾는 자의 손 곧 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살의 손과 그 신하들의 손에 붙이리라 그럴지라도 그 후에는 그 땅이 여전히 사람 살 곳이 되리라 여호와의 말이니라	And I will deliver them into the hand of those that seek their lives, and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of his servants: and afterward it shall be inhabited, as in the days of old, saith the Lord.	I will deliver them into the hands of those who seek their lives—of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon and his officers. But after this, Egypt will be inhabited as in days of old, declares the LORD.
JER	46	27	내 종 야곱아 두려워 말라 이스라엘아 놀라지 말라 보라 내가 너를 원방에서 구원하며 네 자손을 포로된 땅에서 구원하리니 야곱이 돌아와서 평안히, 정온히 거할것이라 그를 두렵게 할 자 없으리라	But fear not thou, O my servant Jacob, and be not dismayed, O Israel: for, behold, I will save thee from afar off, and thy seed from the land of their captivity; and Jacob shall return, and be in rest and at ease, and none shall make him afraid.	But you, O Jacob My servant, do not be afraid, and do not be dismayed, O Israel. For I will surely save you out of a distant place, your descendants from the land of their captivity! Jacob will return to quiet and ease, with no one to make him afraid.
JER	46	28	나 여호와가 말하노라 내 종 야곱아 내가 너와 함께 하나니 두려워 말라 내가 너를 흩었던 그 열방은 다 멸할지라도 너는 아주 멸하지 아니하리라 내가 너를 공도로 징책할 것이요 결코 무죄한 자로 여기지 아니하리라	Fear thou not, O Jacob my servant, saith the Lord: for I am with thee; for I will make a full end of all the nations whither I have driven thee: but I will not make a full end of thee, but correct thee in measure; yet will I not leave thee wholly unpunished.	And you, My servant Jacob, do not be afraid, declares the LORD, for I am with you. Though I will completely destroy all the nations to which I have banished you, I will not completely destroy you. Yet I will discipline you justly, and will by no means leave you unpunished.”
JER	47	1	바로가 가사를 치기 전에 블레셋 사람에 대하여 선지자 예레미야에게 임한 여호와의 말씀이라	The word of the Lord that came to Jeremiah the prophet against the Philistines, before that Pharaoh smote Gaza.	This is the word of the LORD that came to Jeremiah the prophet about the Philistines before Pharaoh struck down Gaza.
JER	47	2	여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 보라 물이 북방에서 일어나 창일하는 시내를 이루어 그 땅과 그 중에 있는 모든 것과 그 성읍과 거기 거하는 자들을 엄몰시키리니 사람들이 부르짖으며 그 땅 모든 거민이 애곡할 것이라	Thus saith the Lord; Behold, waters rise up out of the north, and shall be an overflowing flood, and shall overflow the land, and all that is therein; the city, and them that dwell therein: then the men shall cry, and all the inhabitants of the land shall howl.	This is what the LORD says: “See how the waters are rising from the north and becoming an overflowing torrent. They will overflow the land and its fullness, the cities and their inhabitants. The people will cry out, and all who dwell in the land will wail
JER	47	3	힘센 것의 굽치는 소리와 달리는 병거 바퀴의 울리는 소리에 아비의 손이 풀려서 그 자녀를 돌아보지 못하리니	At the noise of the stamping of the hoofs of his strong horses, at the rushing of his chariots, and at the rumbling of his wheels, the fathers shall not look back to their children for feebleness of hands;	at the sound of the galloping hooves of stallions, the rumbling of chariots, and the clatter of their wheels. The fathers will not turn back for their sons; their hands will hang limp.
JER	47	4	이는 블레셋 사람을 진멸하시며 두로와 시돈에 남아 있는 바 도와 줄 자를 다 끊어 버리시는 날이 이름이라 여호와께서 갑돌 섬에 남아 있는 블레셋 사람을 멸하시리라	Because of the day that cometh to spoil all the Philistines, and to cut off from Tyrus and Zidon every helper that remaineth: for the Lord will spoil the Philistines, the remnant of the country of Caphtor.	For the day has come to destroy all the Philistines, to cut off from Tyre and Sidon every remaining ally. Indeed, the LORD is about to destroy the Philistines, the remnant from the coasts of Caphtor.
JER	47	5	가사가 삭발되었고 아스글론과 그들에게 남아 있는 평지가 멸망되었나니 네가 네 몸 베기를 어느 때까지 하겠느냐	Baldness is come upon Gaza; Ashkelon is cut off with the remnant of their valley: how long wilt thou cut thyself?	The people of Gaza will shave their heads in mourning; Ashkelon will be silenced. O remnant of their valley, how long will you gash yourself?
JER	47	6	여호와의 칼이여 네가 언제까지 쉬지 않겠느냐 네 집에 들어가서 가만히 쉴지어다	O thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? put up thyself into thy scabbard, rest, and be still.	‘Alas, O sword of the LORD, how long until you rest? Return to your sheath; cease and be still!’
JER	47	7	여호와께서 이를 명하셨은즉 어떻게 쉬겠느냐 아스글론과 해변을 치려 하여 그가 명정하셨느니라	How can it be quiet, seeing the Lord hath given it a charge against Ashkelon, and against the sea shore? there hath he appointed it.	How can it rest when the LORD has commanded it? He has appointed it against Ashkelon and the shore of its coastland.”
JER	48	1	모압에 대한 말씀이라 만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 이같이 말씀하시되 슬프다 느보여 그것이 황폐되었도다 기랴다임이 수치를 당하여 점령되었고 미스갑이 수치를 당하여 파괴되었으니	Against Moab thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Woe unto Nebo! for it is spoiled: Kiriathaim is confounded and taken: Misgab is confounded and dismayed.	Concerning Moab, this is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: “Woe to Nebo, for it will be devastated. Kiriathaim will be captured and disgraced; the fortress will be shattered and dismantled.
JER	48	2	모압의 칭송이 없어졌도다 헤스본에서 무리가 그를 모해하여 이르기를 와서 그를 끊어서 나라를 이루지 못하게 하자 하는도다 맛멘이여 너도 적막하게 되리니 칼이 너를 따르리로다	There shall be no more praise of Moab: in Heshbon they have devised evil against it; come, and let us cut it off from being a nation. Also thou shalt be cut down, O Madmen; the sword shall pursue thee.	There is no longer praise for Moab; in Heshbon they devise evil against her: ‘Come, let us cut her off from nationhood.’ You too, O people of Madmen, will be silenced; the sword will pursue you.
JER	48	3	호로나임에서 부르짖는 소리여 황무와 큰 파멸이로다	A voice of crying shall be from Horonaim, spoiling and great destruction.	A voice cries out from Horonaim: ‘Devastation and great destruction!’
JER	48	4	모압이 멸망을 당하여 그 영아들의 부르짖음이 들리는도다	Moab is destroyed; her little ones have caused a cry to be heard.	Moab will be shattered; her little ones will cry out.
JER	48	5	그들이 울고 울며 루힛 언덕으로 올라감이여 호로나임 내려가는 데서 참패를 부즈짖는 고통이 들리도다	For in the going up of Luhith continual weeping shall go up; for in the going down of Horonaim the enemies have heard a cry of destruction.	For on the ascent to Luhith they weep bitterly as they go, and on the descent to Horonaim cries of distress resound over the destruction:
JER	48	6	도망하여 네 생명을 구원하여 광야의 떨기나무 같이 될지어다	Flee, save your lives, and be like the heath in the wilderness.	‘Flee! Run for your lives! Become like a juniper in the desert.’
JER	48	7	네가 네 공작과 보물을 의뢰하므로 너도 취함을 당할 것이요 그모스는 그 제사장들과 방백들과 함께 포로되어 갈 것이라	For because thou hast trusted in thy works and in thy treasures, thou shalt also be taken: and Chemosh shall go forth into captivity with his priests and his princes together.	Because you trust in your works and treasures, you too will be captured, and Chemosh will go into exile with his priests and officials.
JER	48	8	파멸하는 자가 각 성에 이를 것인즉 한 성도 면치 못할 것이며 골짜기는 훼파되며 평원은 파멸되어 여호와의 말씀과 같으리로다	And the spoiler shall come upon every city, and no city shall escape: the valley also shall perish, and the plain shall be destroyed, as the Lord hath spoken.	The destroyer will move against every city, and not one town will escape. The valley will also be ruined, and the high plain will be destroyed, as the LORD has said.
JER	48	9	모압에 날개를 주어 날아 피하게 하라 그 성읍들이 황무하여 거기 거하는 자 없으리로다	Give wings unto Moab, that it may flee and get away: for the cities thereof shall be desolate, without any to dwell therein.	Put salt on Moab, for she will be laid waste; her cities will become desolate, with no one to dwell in them.
JER	48	10	여호와의 일을 태만히 하는 자는 저주를 받을 것이요 자기 칼을 금하여 피를 흘리지 아니하는 자도 저주를 당할 것이로다	Cursed be he that doeth the work of the Lord deceitfully, and cursed be he that keepeth back his sword from blood.	Cursed is the one who is remiss in doing the work of the LORD, and cursed is he who withholds his sword from bloodshed.
JER	48	11	모압은 예로부터 평안하고 포로도 되지 아니하였으므로 마치 술의 그 찌끼 위에 있고 이 그릇에서 저 그릇으로 옮기지 않음 같아서 그 맛이 남아 있고 냄새가 변치 아니하였도다	Moab hath been at ease from his youth, and he hath settled on his lees, and hath not been emptied from vessel to vessel, neither hath he gone into captivity: therefore his taste remained in him, and his scent is not changed.	Moab has been at ease from youth, settled like wine on its dregs; he has not been poured from vessel to vessel or gone into exile. So his flavor has remained the same, and his aroma is unchanged.
JER	48	12	그러므로 나 여호와가 말하노라 날이 이르리니 내가 그 그릇을 기울일 자를 보낼 것이라 그들이 기울여서 그 그릇을 비게 하고 그 병들을 부수리니	Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will send unto him wanderers, that shall cause him to wander, and shall empty his vessels, and break their bottles.	Therefore behold, the days are coming, declares the LORD, when I will send to him wanderers, who will pour him out. They will empty his vessels and shatter his jars.
JER	48	13	이스라엘 집이 벧엘을 의뢰하므로 수치를 당한 것 같이 모압이 그모스로 인하여 수치를 당하리로다	And Moab shall be ashamed of Chemosh, as the house of Israel was ashamed of Beth–el their confidence.	Then Moab will be ashamed of Chemosh, just as the house of Israel was ashamed when they trusted in Bethel.
JER	48	14	너희가 어찌하여 말하기를 우리는 용사요 전쟁의 맹사라 하느뇨	How say ye, We are mighty and strong men for the war?	How can you say, ‘We are warriors, mighty men ready for battle’?
JER	48	15	만군의 여호와라 일컫는 왕이 이같이 말하노라 모압이 황폐되었도다 그 성읍들은 연기가 되어 올라가고 그 택한 청년들은 내려가서 살륙을 당하니	Moab is spoiled, and gone up out of her cities, and his chosen young men are gone down to the slaughter, saith the King, whose name is the Lord of hosts.	Moab has been destroyed and its towns have been invaded; the best of its young men have gone down in the slaughter, declares the King, whose name is the LORD of Hosts.
JER	48	16	모압의 재난이 가까웠고 그 고난이 속히 임하리로다	The calamity of Moab is near to come, and his affliction hasteth fast.	Moab’s calamity is at hand, and his affliction is rushing swiftly.
JER	48	17	그의 사면에 있는 모든 자여, 그 이름을 아는 모든 자여, 그를 위하여 탄식하여 말하기를 어찌하여 강한 막대기, 아름다운 지팡이가 부러졌는고 할지니라	All ye that are about him, bemoan him; and all ye that know his name, say, How is the strong staff broken, and the beautiful rod!	Mourn for him, all you who surround him, everyone who knows his name; tell how the mighty scepter is shattered— the glorious staff!
JER	48	18	디본에 거하는 딸아 네 영광 자리에서 내려 메마른 데 앉으라 모압을 파멸하는 자가 올라와서 너를 쳐서 네 요새를 파하였음이로다	Thou daughter that dost inhabit Dibon, come down from thy glory, and sit in thirst; for the spoiler of Moab shall come upon thee, and he shall destroy thy strong holds.	Come down from your glory; sit on parched ground, O daughter dwelling in Dibon, for the destroyer of Moab has come against you; he has destroyed your fortresses.
JER	48	19	아로엘에 거하는 여인이여 길곁에 서서 지키며 도망하는 자와 피하는 자에게 일이 어찌 되었는가 물을지어다	O inhabitant of Aroer, stand by the way, and espy; ask him that fleeth, and her that escapeth, and say, What is done?	Stand by the road and watch, O dweller of Aroer! Ask the man fleeing or the woman escaping, ‘What has happened?’
JER	48	20	모압이 패하여 수치를 받나니 너희는 곡하며 부르짖으며 아르논가에서 이르기를 모압이 황무하였다 할지어다	Moab is confounded; for it is broken down: howl and cry; tell ye it in Arnon, that Moab is spoiled,	Moab is put to shame, for it has been shattered. Wail and cry out! Declare by the Arnon that Moab is destroyed.
JER	48	21	심판이 평지에 임하였나니 곧 홀론과 야사와 메바앗과	And judgment is come upon the plain country; upon Holon, and upon Jahazah, and upon Mephaath,	Judgment has come upon the high plain— upon Holon, Jahzah, and Mephaath,
JER	48	22	디본과 느보와 벧디불라다임과	And upon Dibon, and upon Nebo, and upon Beth–diblathaim,	upon Dibon, Nebo, and Beth-diblathaim,
JER	48	23	기랴다임과 벧가물과 벧므온과	And upon Kiriathaim, and upon Beth–gamul, and upon Beth–meon,	upon Kiriathaim, Beth-gamul, and Beth-meon,
JER	48	24	그리욧과 보스라와 모압 땅 원근 모든 성에로다	And upon Kerioth, and upon Bozrah, and upon all the cities of the land of Moab, far or near.	upon Kerioth, Bozrah, and all the towns of Moab, those far and near.
JER	48	25	모압의 뿔이 찍혔고 그 팔이 부러졌도다 여호와의 말이니라	The horn of Moab is cut off, and his arm is broken, saith the Lord.	The horn of Moab has been cut off, and his arm is broken,” declares the LORD.
JER	48	26	모압으로 취하게 할지어다 이는 그가 나 여호와를 거스려 자만함이라 그가 그 토한 것에서 굴므로 조롱거리가 되리로다	Make ye him drunken: for he magnified himself against the Lord: Moab also shall wallow in his vomit, and he also shall be in derision.	“Make him drunk, because he has magnified himself against the LORD; so Moab will wallow in his own vomit, and he will also become a laughingstock.
JER	48	27	네가 이스라엘을 조롱하지 아니하였느냐 그가 도적 중에서 발견되었느냐 네가 그를 말할 때마다 네 머리를 흔드는도다	For was not Israel a derision unto thee? was he found among thieves? for since thou spakest of him, thou skippedst for joy.	Was not Israel your object of ridicule? Was he ever found among thieves? For whenever you speak of him you shake your head.
JER	48	28	모압 거민들아 너희는 성읍을 떠나 바위 사이에 거할지어다 깊은 골짜기 어귀에 깃들이는 비둘기 같이 할지어다	O ye that dwell in Moab, leave the cities, and dwell in the rock, and be like the dove that maketh her nest in the sides of the hole’s mouth.	Abandon the towns and settle among the rocks, O dwellers of Moab! Be like a dove that nests at the mouth of a cave.
JER	48	29	우리가 모압의 교만을 들었나니 심한 교만 곧 그 자고와 오만과 자긍과 그 마음의 거만이로다	We have heard the pride of Moab, (he is exceeding proud) his loftiness, and his arrogancy, and his pride, and the haughtiness of his heart.	We have heard of Moab’s pomposity, his exceeding pride and conceit, his proud arrogance and haughtiness of heart.
JER	48	30	나 여호와가 말하노라 내가 그 노함의 허탄함을 아노니 그가 자긍하여도 아무 것도 성취치 못하였도다	I know his wrath, saith the Lord; but it shall not be so; his lies shall not so effect it.	I know his insolence,” declares the LORD, “but it is futile. His boasting is as empty as his deeds.
JER	48	31	그러므로 내가 모압을 위하여 울며 온 모압을 위하여 부르짖으리니 무리가 길헤레스 사람을 위하여 슬퍼하리로다	Therefore will I howl for Moab, and I will cry out for all Moab; mine heart shall mourn for the men of Kir–heres.	Therefore I will wail for Moab; I will cry out for all of Moab; I will moan for the men of Kir-heres.
JER	48	32	십마의 포도나무여 너의 가지가 바다를 넘어 야셀 바다까지 뻗었더니 너의 여름 실과와 포도에 파멸하는 자가 이르렀으니 내가 너를 위하여 곡하기를 야셀의 곡함보다 더하리로다	O vine of Sibmah, I will weep for thee with the weeping of Jazer: thy plants are gone over the sea, they reach even to the sea of Jazer: the spoiler is fallen upon thy summer fruits and upon thy vintage.	I will weep for you, O vine of Sibmah, more than I weep for Jazer. Your tendrils have extended to the sea; they reach even to Jazer. The destroyer has descended on your summer fruit and grape harvest.
JER	48	33	기쁨과 즐거움이 옥토와 모압 땅에서 빼앗겼도다 내가 포도주틀에 포도주가 없게 하리니 외치며 밟는 자가 없을 것이라 그 외침은 즐거운 외침이 되지 못하리로다	And joy and gladness is taken from the plentiful field, and from the land of Moab; and I have caused wine to fail from the winepresses: none shall tread with shouting; their shouting shall be no shouting.	Joy and gladness are removed from the orchard and from the fields of Moab. I have stopped the flow of wine from the presses; no one treads them with shouts of joy; their shouts are not for joy.
JER	48	34	헤스본에서 엘르알레를 지나 야하스까지와 소알에서 호로나임을 지나 에글랏셀리시야까지의 사람들이 소리를 발하여 부르짖음은 니므림의 물도 말랐음이로다	From the cry of Heshbon even unto Elealeh, and even unto Jahaz, have they uttered their voice, from Zoar even unto Horonaim, as an heifer of three years old: for the waters also of Nimrim shall be desolate.	There is a cry from Heshbon to Elealeh; they raise their voices to Jahaz, from Zoar to Horonaim and Eglath-shelishiyah; for even the waters of Nimrim have dried up.
JER	48	35	나 여호와가 말하노라 모압 산당에서 제사하며 그 신들에게 분향하는 자를 내가 그치게 하리라	Moreover I will cause to cease in Moab, saith the Lord, him that offereth in the high places, and him that burneth incense to his gods.	In Moab, declares the LORD, I will bring an end to those who make offerings on the high places and burn incense to their gods.
JER	48	36	그러므로 나의 마음이 모압을 위하여 피리 같이 소리하며 나의 마음이 길헤레스 사람들을 위하여 피리 같이 소리하나니 이는 그 모았던 재물이 없어졌음이니라	Therefore mine heart shall sound for Moab like pipes, and mine heart shall sound like pipes for the men of Kir–heres: because the riches that he hath gotten are perished.	Therefore My heart laments like a flute for Moab; it laments like a flute for the men of Kir-heres, because the wealth they acquired has perished.
JER	48	37	각 사람의 두발이 밀렸고 수염이 깎였으며 손이 베어졌으며 허리에 굵은 베가 둘렸고	For every head shall be bald, and every beard clipped: upon all the hands shall be cuttings, and upon the loins sackcloth.	For every head is shaved and every beard is clipped; on every hand is a gash, and around every waist is sackcloth.
JER	48	38	모압의 모든 지붕에서와 거리 각처에서 애곡함이 있으니 내가 모압을 재미 없는 그릇 같이 깨뜨렸음이니라 여호와의 말이니라	There shall be lamentation generally upon all the housetops of Moab, and in the streets thereof: for I have broken Moab like a vessel wherein is no pleasure, saith the Lord.	On all the rooftops of Moab and in the public squares, everyone is mourning; for I have shattered Moab like an unwanted jar,” declares the LORD.
JER	48	39	아하 모압이 파괴되었도다 그들이 애곡하는도다 모압이 부끄러워서 등을 돌이켰도다 그런즉 모압이 그 사방 모든 자의 조롱거리와 두려움이 되리로다	They shall howl, saying, How is it broken down! how hath Moab turned the back with shame! so shall Moab be a derision and a dismaying to all them about him.	“How shattered it is! How they wail! How Moab has turned his back in shame! Moab has become an object of ridicule and horror to all those around him.”
JER	48	40	나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 보라 그가 독수리 같이 날아와서 모압 위에 그 날개를 펴리라	For thus saith the Lord; Behold, he shall fly as an eagle, and shall spread his wings over Moab.	For this is what the LORD says: “Behold, an eagle swoops down and spreads his wings against Moab.
JER	48	41	성읍들이 취함을 당하며 요새가 함락되는 날에 모압 용사의 마음이 구로하는 여인 같을 것이라	Kerioth is taken, and the strong holds are surprised, and the mighty men’s hearts in Moab at that day shall be as the heart of a woman in her pangs.	Kirioth has been taken, and the strongholds seized. In that day the heart of Moab’s warriors will be like the heart of a woman in labor.
JER	48	42	모압이 여호와를 거스려 자만하였으므로 멸망하고 다시 나라를 이루지 못하리라	And Moab shall be destroyed from being a people, because he hath magnified himself against the Lord.	Moab will be destroyed as a nation because he vaunted himself against the LORD.
JER	48	43	나 여호와가 말하노라 모압 거민아 두려움과 함정과 올무가 네게 임하나니	Fear, and the pit, and the snare, shall be upon thee, O inhabitant of Moab, saith the Lord.	Terror and pit and snare await you, O dweller of Moab,” declares the LORD.
JER	48	44	두려움에서 도망하는 자는 함정에 떨어지겠고 함정에서 나오는 자는 올무에 걸리리니 이는 내가 모압의 벌 받을 해로 임하게 할 것임이니라 여호와의 말이니라	He that fleeth from the fear shall fall into the pit; and he that getteth up out of the pit shall be taken in the snare: for I will bring upon it, even upon Moab, the year of their visitation, saith the Lord.	“Whoever flees the panic will fall into the pit, and whoever climbs from the pit will be caught in the snare. For I will bring upon Moab the year of their punishment,” declares the LORD.
JER	48	45	도망하는 자들이 기진하여 헤스본 그늘 아래 서니 이는 불이 헤스본에서 발하며 화염이 시혼의 속에서 나서 모압의 살쩍과 훤화하는 자들의 정수리를 사름이로다	They that fled stood under the shadow of Heshbon because of the force: but a fire shall come forth out of Heshbon, and a flame from the midst of Sihon, and shall devour the corner of Moab, and the crown of the head of the tumultuous ones.	“Those who flee will stand helpless in Heshbon’s shadow, because fire has gone forth from Heshbon and a flame from within Sihon. It devours the foreheads of Moab and the skulls of the sons of tumult.
JER	48	46	모압이여 네게 화 있도다 그모스 백성이 망하였도다 네 아들들은 사로잡혀 갔고 네 딸들은 포로가 되었도다	Woe be unto thee, O Moab! the people of Chemosh perisheth: for thy sons are taken captives, and thy daughters captives.	Woe to you, O Moab! The people of Chemosh have perished; for your sons have been taken into exile and your daughters have gone into captivity.
JER	48	47	그러나 내가 말일에 모압의 포로로 돌아오게 하리라 여호와의 말이니라 하시니라 모압을 심판하는 말씀이 이에 그쳤느니라	Yet will I bring again the captivity of Moab in the latter days, saith the Lord. Thus far is the judgment of Moab.	Yet in the latter days I will restore Moab from captivity,” declares the LORD. Here ends the judgment on Moab.
JER	49	1	암몬 자손에 대한 말씀이라 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 이스라엘이 무자하냐 상속자가 없느냐 말감이 갓을 점령하며 그 백성이 그 성읍들에 거함은 어찜이뇨	Concerning the Ammonites, thus saith the Lord; Hath Israel no sons? hath he no heir? why then doth their king inherit Gad, and his people dwell in his cities?	Concerning the Ammonites, this is what the LORD says: “Has Israel no sons? Is he without heir? Why then has Milcom taken possession of Gad? Why have his people settled in their cities?
JER	49	2	그러므로 나 여호와가 말하노라 보라 날이 이르리니 내가 전쟁소리로 암몬 자손의 랍바에 들리게 할 것이라 랍바는 거친 무더기가 되겠고 그 촌락들은 불에 탈 것이며 그 때에 이스라엘은 자기를 점령하였던 자를 점령하리라 여호와의 말이니라	Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will cause an alarm of war to be heard in Rabbah of the Ammonites; and it shall be a desolate heap, and her daughters shall be burned with fire: then shall Israel be heir unto them that were his heirs, saith the Lord.	Therefore, behold, the days are coming, declares the LORD, when I will sound the battle cry against Rabbah of the Ammonites. It will become a heap of ruins, and its villages will be burned. Then Israel will drive out their dispossessors, says the LORD.
JER	49	3	헤스본아 애곡할지어다 아이가 황폐하였도다 너희 랍바의 딸들아 부르짖을지어다 굵은 베를 감고 애통하며 울타리 가운데서 앞뒤로 달릴지어다 말감과 그 제사장들과 그 방백들이 다 사로잡혀 가리로다	Howl, O Heshbon, for Ai is spoiled: cry, ye daughters of Rabbah, gird you with sackcloth; lament, and run to and fro by the hedges; for their king shall go into captivity, and his priests and his princes together.	Wail, O Heshbon, for Ai has been destroyed; cry out, O daughters of Rabbah! Put on sackcloth and mourn; run back and forth within your walls, for Milcom will go into exile together with his priests and officials.
JER	49	4	타락한 딸아 어찌하여 골짜기 곧 네 흐르는 골짜기로 자랑하느냐 네가 어찌하여 재물을 의뢰하여 말하기를 누가 내게 오리요 하느냐	Wherefore gloriest thou in the valleys, thy flowing valley, O backsliding daughter? that trusted in her treasures, saying, Who shall come unto me?	Why do you boast of your valleys— your valleys so fruitful, O faithless daughter? You trust in your riches and say, ‘Who can come against me?’
JER	49	5	주 만군의 여호와가 말하노라 보라 내가 두려움을 네 사방에서 네게 오게 하리니 너희 각 사람이 쫓겨서 바로 나갈 것이요 도망하는 자들을 모을 자가 없으리라	Behold, I will bring a fear upon thee, saith the Lord God of hosts, from all those that be about thee; and ye shall be driven out every man right forth; and none shall gather up him that wandereth.	Behold, I am about to bring terror upon you, declares the Lord GOD of Hosts, from all those around you. You will each be driven headlong, with no one to regather the fugitives.
JER	49	6	그러나 그 후에 내가 암몬 자손의 포로로 돌아오게 하리라 여호와의 말이니라	And afterward I will bring again the captivity of the children of Ammon, saith the Lord.	Yet afterward I will restore the Ammonites from captivity,” declares the LORD.
JER	49	7	에돔에 대한 말씀이라 만군의 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 데만에 다시는 지혜가 없게 되었느냐 명철한 자에게 모략이 끊어졌느냐 그들의 지혜가 없어졌느냐	Concerning Edom, thus saith the Lord of hosts; Is wisdom no more in Teman? is counsel perished from the prudent? is their wisdom vanished?	Concerning Edom, this is what the LORD of Hosts says: “Is there no longer wisdom in Teman? Has counsel perished from the prudent? Has their wisdom decayed?
JER	49	8	드단 거민아 돌이켜 도망할지어다 깊은 데 숨을지어다 내가 에서의 재난을 그에게 임하게 하여 그를 벌할 때가 이르게 하리로다	Flee ye, turn back, dwell deep, O inhabitants of Dedan; for I will bring the calamity of Esau upon him, the time that I will visit him.	Turn and run! Lie low, O dwellers of Dedan, for I will bring disaster on Esau at the time I punish him.
JER	49	9	포도를 거두는 자들이 네게 이르면 약간의 열매도 남기지 아니하겠고 밤에 도적이 오면 그 욕심이 차기까지 멸하느니라	If grapegatherers come to thee, would they not leave some gleaning grapes? if thieves by night, they will destroy till they have enough.	If grape gatherers came to you, would they not leave some gleanings? Were thieves to come in the night, would they not steal only what they wanted?
JER	49	10	대저 내가 에서로 적신이 되게 하여 그 비밀한 곳들이 드러나게 하였나니 그가 그 몸을 숨길 수 없을 것이라 그 자손과 형제와 이웃이 멸망하였은즉 그가 없어졌느니라	But I have made Esau bare, I have uncovered his secret places, and he shall not be able to hide himself: his seed is spoiled, and his brethren, and his neighbours, and he is not.	But I will strip Esau bare; I will uncover his hiding places, and he will be unable to conceal himself. His descendants will be destroyed along with his relatives and neighbors, and he will be no more.
JER	49	11	네 고아들을 남겨 두라 내가 그들을 살려 두리라 네 과부들은 나를 의지할 것이니라	Leave thy fatherless children, I will preserve them alive; and let thy widows trust in me.	Abandon your orphans; I will preserve their lives. Let your widows trust in Me.”
JER	49	12	나 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 보라 이 잔을 마시지 않을 자도 마시지 않지 못하겠거늘 네가 형벌을 온전히 면하겠느냐 면하지 못하고 반드시 마시리라	For thus saith the Lord; Behold, they whose judgment was not to drink of the cup have assuredly drunken; and art thou he that shall altogether go unpunished? thou shalt not go unpunished, but thou shalt surely drink of it.	For this is what the LORD says: “If those who do not deserve to drink the cup must drink it, can you possibly remain unpunished? You will not go unpunished, for you must drink it too.
JER	49	13	나 여호와가 말하노라 내가 나로 맹세하노니 보스라가 놀램과 수욕거리와 황폐함과 저줏거리가 될 것이요 그 모든 성읍이 영영히 황폐하리라	For I have sworn by myself, saith the Lord, that Bozrah shall become a desolation, a reproach, a waste, and a curse; and all the cities thereof shall be perpetual wastes.	For by Myself I have sworn, declares the LORD, that Bozrah will become a desolation, a disgrace, a ruin, and a curse, and all her cities will be in ruins forever.”
JER	49	14	내가 여호와에게서부터 오는 소식을 들었노라 사자를 열방 중에 보내어 이르시되 너희는 모여와서 그를 치며 일어나서 싸우라 하시도다	I have heard a rumour from the Lord, and an ambassador is sent unto the heathen, saying, Gather ye together, and come against her, and rise up to the battle.	I have heard a message from the LORD; an envoy has been sent to the nations: “Assemble yourselves to march against her! Rise up for battle!”
JER	49	15	여호와께서 가라사대 내가 너를 열방 중에 작게 하였고 사람들 중에 멸시를 받게 하였느니라	For, lo, I will make thee small among the heathen, and despised among men.	“For behold, I will make you small among nations, despised among men.
JER	49	16	바위 틈에 거하며 산꼭대기를 점령한 자여 스스로 두려운 자인줄로 여김과 네 마음의 교만이 너를 속였도다 네가 독수리 같이 보금자리를 높이 지었을지라도 내가 거기서 너를 끌어 내리리라 여호와의 말이니라	Thy terribleness hath deceived thee, and the pride of thine heart, O thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock, that holdest the height of the hill: though thou shouldest make thy nest as high as the eagle, I will bring thee down from thence, saith the Lord.	The terror you cause and the pride of your heart have deceived you, O dwellers in the clefts of the rocks, O occupiers of the mountain summit. Though you elevate your nest like the eagle, even from there I will bring you down,” declares the LORD.
JER	49	17	에돔이 놀라운 것이 되리니 그리로 지나는 자마다 놀라며 그 모든 재앙을 인하여 비웃으리로다	Also Edom shall be a desolation: every one that goeth by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss at all the plagues thereof.	“Edom will become an object of horror. All who pass by will be appalled and will scoff at all her wounds.
JER	49	18	나 여호와가 말하노라 소돔과 고모라와 그 이웃 성읍들의 멸망된 것 같이 거기 거하는 사람이 없으며 그 중에 우거할 아무 인자가 없으리라	As in the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbour cities thereof, saith the Lord, no man shall abide there, neither shall a son of man dwell in it.	As Sodom and Gomorrah were overthrown along with their neighbors,” says the LORD, “no one will dwell there; no man will abide there.
JER	49	19	보라 사자가 요단의 수풀에서 올라오는 것 같이 그가 와서 견고한 처소를 칠 것이라 내가 즉시 그들을 거기서 쫓아내고 택한 자를 내가 그 위에 세우리니 나와 같는 자 누구며 나로 더불어 다툴 자 누구며 내 앞에 설 목자가 누구뇨	Behold, he shall come up like a lion from the swelling of Jordan against the habitation of the strong: but I will suddenly make him run away from her: and who is a chosen man, that I may appoint over her? for who is like me? and who will appoint me the time? and who is that shepherd that will stand before me?	Behold, one will come up like a lion from the thickets of the Jordan to the watered pasture. For in an instant I will chase Edom from her land. Who is the chosen one I will appoint for this? For who is like Me, and who can challenge Me? What shepherd can stand against Me?”
JER	49	20	그런즉 에돔에 대한 나 여호와의 도모와 데만 거민에 대하여 경영한 나 여호와의 뜻을 들으라 양떼의 어린 것들을 그들이 반드시 끌어가고 그 처소로 황무케 하리니	Therefore hear the counsel of the Lord, that he hath taken against Edom; and his purposes, that he hath purposed against the inhabitants of Teman: Surely the least of the flock shall draw them out: surely he shall make their habitations desolate with them.	Therefore hear the plans that the LORD has drawn up against Edom and the strategies He has devised against the people of Teman: Surely the little ones of the flock will be dragged away; certainly their pasture will be made desolate because of them.
JER	49	21	그 넘어지는 소리에 땅이 진동하며 그 부르짖는 소리는 홍해에 들리리라	The earth is moved at the noise of their fall, at the cry the noise thereof was heard in the Red sea.	At the sound of their fall the earth will quake; their cry will resound to the Red Sea.
JER	49	22	보라 원수가 독수리 같이 날아와서 그 날개를 보스라 위에 펴는 그 날에 에돔 용사의 마음이 구로하는 여인 같으리라	Behold, he shall come up and fly as the eagle, and spread his wings over Bozrah: and at that day shall the heart of the mighty men of Edom be as the heart of a woman in her pangs.	Look! An eagle will soar and swoop down, spreading its wings over Bozrah. In that day the hearts of Edom’s mighty men will be like the heart of a woman in labor.
JER	49	23	다메섹에 대한 말씀이라 하맛과 아르밧이 수치를 당하리니 이는 흉한 소문을 듣고 낙담함이라 바닷가에 슬픔이 있고 평안이 없도다	Concerning Damascus. Hamath is confounded, and Arpad: for they have heard evil tidings: they are fainthearted; there is sorrow on the sea; it cannot be quiet.	Concerning Damascus: “Hamath and Arpad are put to shame, for they have heard a bad report; they are agitated like the sea; their anxiety cannot be calmed.
JER	49	24	다메섹이 피곤하여 몸을 돌이켜 달아나려 하니 떨림이 그를 움켰고 해산하는 여인 같이 고통과 슬픔이 그를 잡았도다	Damascus is waxed feeble, and turneth herself to flee, and fear hath seized on her: anguish and sorrows have taken her, as a woman in travail.	Damascus has become feeble; she has turned to flee. Panic has gripped her; anguish and pain have seized her like a woman in labor.
JER	49	25	찬송의 성읍, 나의 즐거운 성읍이 어찌 버린 것이 되지 않겠느냐	How is the city of praise not left, the city of my joy!	How is the city of praise not forsaken, the town that brings Me joy?
JER	49	26	나 만군의 여호와가 말하노라 그런즉 그 날에 그의 청년들은 그 거리에 엎드러지겠고 모든 군사는 멸절될 것이며	Therefore her young men shall fall in her streets, and all the men of war shall be cut off in that day, saith the Lord of hosts.	For her young men will fall in the streets, and all her warriors will be silenced in that day,” declares the LORD of Hosts.
JER	49	27	내가 다메섹의 성벽에 불을 놓으리니 벤하닷의 궁전이 살라지리라	And I will kindle a fire in the wall of Damascus, and it shall consume the palaces of Ben–hadad.	“I will set fire to the walls of Damascus; it will consume the fortresses of Ben-hadad.”
JER	49	28	바벨론 왕 느부갓네살에게 공격된 바 게달과 하솔 나라들에 대한 말씀이라 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 너희는 일어나 게달로 올라가서 동방 자손들을 멸하라	Concerning Kedar, and concerning the kingdoms of Hazor, which Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon shall smite, thus saith the Lord; Arise ye, go up to Kedar, and spoil the men of the east.	Concerning Kedar and the kingdoms of Hazor, which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon defeated, this is what the LORD says: “Rise up, advance against Kedar, and destroy the people of the east!
JER	49	29	너희는 그 장막과 양떼를 취하며 휘장과 모든 기구와 약대를 빼앗아다가 소유를 삼고 그들을 향하여 외치기를 두려움이 사방에 있다 할지니라	Their tents and their flocks shall they take away: they shall take to themselves their curtains, and all their vessels, and their camels; and they shall cry unto them, Fear is on every side.	They will take their tents and flocks, their tent curtains and all their goods. They will take their camels for themselves. They will shout to them: ‘Terror is on every side!’
JER	49	30	나 여호와가 말하노라 하솔 거민아 도망하라 멀리 가서 깊은 데 거하라 이는 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살이 너를 칠 모략과 너를 칠 계책을 정하였음이니라	Flee, get you far off, dwell deep, O ye inhabitants of Hazor, saith the Lord; for Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon hath taken counsel against you, and hath conceived a purpose against you.	Run! Escape quickly! Lie low, O residents of Hazor,” declares the LORD, “for Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon has drawn up a plan against you; he has devised a strategy against you.
JER	49	31	나 여호와가 말하노라 너는 일어나 저 평안하고 염려없이 거하는 백성 곧 성문이나 문빗장이 없이 홀로 거하는 국민을 치라	Arise, get you up unto the wealthy nation, that dwelleth without care, saith the Lord, which have neither gates nor bars, which dwell alone.	Rise up, advance against a nation at ease, one that dwells securely,” declares the LORD. “They have no gates or bars; they live alone.
JER	49	32	그들의 약대들은 노략되겠고 그 많은 가축은 탈취를 당할것이라 내가 그 머리털을 모지게 깎는 자들을 사면에 흩고 그 재난을 각 방에서 오게 하리라 여호와의 말이니라	And their camels shall be a booty, and the multitude of their cattle a spoil: and I will scatter into all winds them that are in the utmost corners; and I will bring their calamity from all sides thereof, saith the Lord.	Their camels will become plunder, and their large herds will be spoil. I will scatter to the wind in every direction those who shave their temples; I will bring calamity on them from all sides,” declares the LORD.
JER	49	33	하솔은 시랑의 거처가 되어 영원히 황무하리니 거기 거하는 사람이나 그 중에 우거하는 아무 인자가 없게 되리라	And Hazor shall be a dwelling for dragons, and a desolation for ever: there shall no man abide there, nor any son of man dwell in it.	“Hazor will become a haunt for jackals, a desolation forever. No one will dwell there; no man will abide there.”
JER	49	34	유다 왕 시드기야의 즉위한지 오래지 아니하여서 엘람에 대한 여호와의 말씀이 선지자 예레미야에게 임하니라 가라사대	The word of the Lord that came to Jeremiah the prophet against Elam in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, saying,	This is the word of the LORD that came to Jeremiah the prophet concerning Elam at the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah.
JER	49	35	나 만군의 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 보라 내가 엘람의 힘의 으뜸되는 활을 꺽을 것이요	Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Behold, I will break the bow of Elam, the chief of their might.	This is what the LORD of Hosts says: “Behold, I will shatter Elam’s bow, the mainstay of their might.
JER	49	36	하늘의 사방에서부터 사방 바람을 엘람에 이르게 하여 그들을 사방으로 흩으리니 엘람에서 쫓겨난 자의 이르지 아니하는 나라가 없으리라	And upon Elam will I bring the four winds from the four quarters of heaven, and will scatter them toward all those winds; and there shall be no nation whither the outcasts of Elam shall not come.	I will bring the four winds against Elam from the four corners of the heavens, and I will scatter them to all these winds. There will not be a nation to which Elam’s exiles will not go.
JER	49	37	나 여호와가 말하노라 내가 엘람으로 그 원수의 앞, 그 생명을 찾는 자의 앞에서 놀라게 할 것이며 내가 재앙 곧 나의 진노를 그 위에 내릴 것이며 내가 또 그 뒤로 칼을 보내어 그를 진멸하기까지 할 것이라	For I will cause Elam to be dismayed before their enemies, and before them that seek their life: and I will bring evil upon them, even my fierce anger, saith the Lord; and I will send the sword after them, till I have consumed them:	So I will shatter Elam before their foes, before those who seek their lives. I will bring disaster upon them, even My fierce anger,” declares the LORD. “I will send out the sword after them until I finish them off.
JER	49	38	내가 나의 위를 엘림에 베풀고 왕과 족장들을 그곳에서 멸하리라 여호와의 말이니라	And I will set my throne in Elam, and will destroy from thence the king and the princes, saith the Lord.	I will set My throne in Elam, and destroy its king and officials,” declares the LORD.
JER	49	39	그러나 끝날에 이르러는 내가 엘람의 포로를 돌아오게 하리라 여호와의 말이니라	But it shall come to pass in the latter days, that I will bring again the captivity of Elam, saith the Lord.	“Yet in the last days, I will restore Elam from captivity,” declares the LORD.
JER	50	1	여호와께서 선지자 예레미야로 바벨론과 갈대아인의 땅에 대하여 하신 말씀이라	The word that the Lord spake against Babylon and against the land of the Chaldeans by Jeremiah the prophet.	This is the word that the LORD spoke through Jeremiah the prophet concerning Babylon and the land of the Chaldeans:
JER	50	2	너희는 열방 중에 광고하라 공포하라 기를 세우라 숨김이 없이 공포하여 이르라 바벨론이 함락되고 벨이 수치를 당하며 므로닥이 부스러지며 그 신상들은 수치를 당하며 우상들은 부스러진다 하라	Declare ye among the nations, and publish, and set up a standard; publish, and conceal not: say, Babylon is taken, Bel is confounded, Merodach is broken in pieces; her idols are confounded, her images are broken in pieces.	“Announce and declare to the nations; lift up a banner and proclaim it; hold nothing back when you say, ‘Babylon is captured; Bel is put to shame; Marduk is shattered, her images are disgraced, her idols are broken in pieces.’
JER	50	3	이는 한 나라가 북방에서 나와서 그를 쳐서 그 땅으로 황폐케하여 그 중에 거하는 자가 없게 함이라 사람이나 짐승이 다 도망하여 가느니라	For out of the north there cometh up a nation against her, which shall make her land desolate, and none shall dwell therein: they shall remove, they shall depart, both man and beast.	For a nation from the north will come against her; it will make her land a desolation. No one will live in it; both man and beast will flee.”
JER	50	4	나 여호와가 말하노라 그 날 그 때에 이스라엘 자손이 돌아오며 그와 함께 유다 자손이 돌아오되 그들이 울며 그 길을 행하며 그 하나님 여호와께 구할 것이며	In those days, and in that time, saith the Lord, the children of Israel shall come, they and the children of Judah together, going and weeping: they shall go, and seek the Lord their God.	“In those days and at that time, declares the LORD, the children of Israel and the children of Judah will come together, weeping as they come, and will seek the LORD their God.
JER	50	5	그들이 그 얼굴을 시온으로 향하여 그 길을 물으며 말하기를 너희는 오라 잊어 버리지 아니할 영영한 언약으로 여호와와 연합하자 하리라	They shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward, saying, Come, and let us join ourselves to the Lord in a perpetual covenant that shall not be forgotten.	They will ask the way to Zion and turn their faces toward it. They will come and join themselves to the LORD in an everlasting covenant that will never be forgotten.
JER	50	6	내 백성은 잃어 버린 양떼로다 그 목자들이 그들을 곁길로 가게하여 산으로 돌이키게 하였으므로 그들이 산에서 작은 산으로 돌아다니며 쉴 곳을 잊었도다	My people hath been lost sheep: their shepherds have caused them to go astray, they have turned them away on the mountains: they have gone from mountain to hill, they have forgotten their restingplace.	My people are lost sheep; their shepherds have led them astray, causing them to roam the mountains. They have wandered from mountain to hill; they have forgotten their resting place.
JER	50	7	그들을 만나는 자들은 그들을 삼키며 그 대적은 말하기를 그들은 여호와 곧 의로운 처소시며 그 열조의 소망이신 여호와께 범죄하였음인즉 우리는 무죄하다 하였느니라	All that found them have devoured them: and their adversaries said, We offend not, because they have sinned against the Lord, the habitation of justice, even the Lord, the hope of their fathers.	All who found them devoured them, and their enemies said, ‘We are not guilty, for they have sinned against the LORD, their true pasture, the LORD, the hope of their fathers.’
JER	50	8	너희는 바벨론 가운데서 도망하라 갈대아인의 땅에서 나오라 떼에 앞서 가는 수염소 같이 하라	Remove out of the midst of Babylon, and go forth out of the land of the Chaldeans, and be as the he goats before the flocks.	Flee from the midst of Babylon; depart from the land of the Chaldeans; be like the he-goats that lead the flock.
JER	50	9	보라 내가 큰 연합국으로 북방에서 일어나 나와서 바벨론을 치게 하리니 그들이 항오를 벌이고 쳐서 취할 것이라 그들의 화살은 연숙한 용사의 화살 같아서 헛되이 돌아오지 아니하리로다	For, lo, I will raise and cause to come up against Babylon an assembly of great nations from the north country: and they shall set themselves in array against her; from thence she shall be taken: their arrows shall be as of a mighty expert man; none shall return in vain.	For behold, I stir up and bring against Babylon an assembly of great nations from the land of the north. They will line up against her; from the north she will be captured. Their arrows will be like skilled warriors who do not return empty-handed.
JER	50	10	갈대아가 약탈을 당할 것이라 그를 약탈하는 자마다 만족하리라 여호와의 말이니라	And Chaldea shall be a spoil: all that spoil her shall be satisfied, saith the Lord.	Chaldea will be plundered; all who plunder her will have their fill,” declares the LORD.
JER	50	11	나의 산업을 노략하는 자여 너희가 즐거워하며 기뻐하며 곡식을 가는 송아지 같이 뛰며 힘센 말 같이 울도다	Because ye were glad, because ye rejoiced, O ye destroyers of mine heritage, because ye are grown fat as the heifer at grass, and bellow as bulls;	“Because you rejoice, because you sing in triumph— you who plunder My inheritance— because you frolic like a heifer treading grain and neigh like stallions,
JER	50	12	그러므로 너희의 어미가 온전히 수치를 당하리라 너희를 낳은 자가 치욕을 당하리라 보라 그가 열방의 말째와 광야와 마른 땅과 사막이 될 것이며	Your mother shall be sore confounded; she that bare you shall be ashamed: behold, the hindermost of the nations shall be a wilderness, a dry land, and a desert.	your mother will be greatly ashamed; she who bore you will be disgraced. Behold, she will be the least of the nations, a wilderness, a dry land, and a desert.
JER	50	13	여호와의 진노로 인하여 거민이 없는 온전한 황무지가 될 것이라 바벨론으로 지나는 자마다 그 모든 재앙을 놀라며 비웃으리로다	Because of the wrath of the Lord it shall not be inhabited, but it shall be wholly desolate: every one that goeth by Babylon shall be astonished, and hiss at all her plagues.	Because of the wrath of the LORD, she will not be inhabited; she will become completely desolate. All who pass through Babylon will be horrified and will hiss at all her wounds.
JER	50	14	바벨론을 둘러 항오를 벌이고 활을 당기는 모든 자여 화살을 아끼지 말고 쏘라 그가 여호와께 범죄하였음이니라	Put yourselves in array against Babylon round about: all ye that bend the bow, shoot at her, spare no arrows: for she hath sinned against the Lord.	Line up in formation around Babylon, all you who draw the bow! Shoot at her! Spare no arrows! For she has sinned against the LORD.
JER	50	15	그 사면에서 소리질러 칠지어다 그가 항복하였고 그 보장은 무너졌고 그 성벽은 훼파되었으니 이는 여호와의 보수하시는 것이라 그의 행한 대로 그에게 행하여 보수하라	Shout against her round about: she hath given her hand: her foundations are fallen, her walls are thrown down: for it is the vengeance of the Lord: take vengeance upon her; as she hath done, do unto her.	Raise a war cry against her on every side! She has thrown up her hands in surrender; her towers have fallen; her walls are torn down. Since this is the vengeance of the LORD, take out your vengeance upon her; as she has done, do the same to her.
JER	50	16	파종하는 자와 추수 때에 낫을 잡은 자를 바벨론에서 끊어버리라 사람들이 그 압박하는 칼을 두려워하여 각기 동족에게로 돌아가며 고향으로 도망하리라	Cut off the sower from Babylon, and him that handleth the sickle in the time of harvest: for fear of the oppressing sword they shall turn every one to his people, and they shall flee every one to his own land.	Cut off the sower from Babylon, and the one who wields the sickle at harvest time. In the face of the oppressor’s sword, each will turn to his own people, each will flee to his own land.
JER	50	17	이스라엘은 흩어진 양이라 사자들이 그를 따르도다 처음에는 앗수르 왕이 먹었고 다음에는 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살이 그 뼈를 꺾도다	Israel is a scattered sheep; the lions have driven him away: first the king of Assyria hath devoured him; and last this Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon hath broken his bones.	Israel is a scattered flock, chased away by lions. The first to devour him was the king of Assyria; the last to crush his bones was Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon.”
JER	50	18	그러므로 나 만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 이같이 말하노라 보라 내가 앗수르 왕을 벌한 것 같이 바벨론 왕과 그 땅을 벌하고	Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will punish the king of Babylon and his land, as I have punished the king of Assyria.	Therefore this is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: “I will punish the king of Babylon and his land as I punished the king of Assyria.
JER	50	19	이스라엘을 다시 그 목장으로 돌아오게 하리니 그가 갈멜과 바산에서 먹을 것이며 그 마음이 에브라임과 길르앗 산에서 만족하리라	And I will bring Israel again to his habitation, and he shall feed on Carmel and Bashan, and his soul shall be satisfied upon mount Ephraim and Gilead.	I will return Israel to his pasture, and he will graze on Carmel and Bashan; his soul will be satisfied on the hills of Ephraim and Gilead.
JER	50	20	나 여호와가 말하노라 그 날 그 때에는 이스라엘의 죄악을 찾을지라도 없겠고 유다의 죄를 찾을지라도 발견치 못하리니 이는 내가 나의 남긴 자를 사할 것임이니라	In those days, and in that time, saith the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found: for I will pardon them whom I reserve.	In those days and at that time, declares the LORD, a search will be made for Israel’s guilt, but there will be none, and for Judah’s sins, but they will not be found; for I will forgive the remnant I preserve.
JER	50	21	나 여호와가 말하노라 너희는 올라가서 므라다임의 땅을 치며 브곳의 거민을 쳐서 진멸하되 내가 너희에게 명한 대로 다하라	Go up against the land of Merathaim, even against it, and against the inhabitants of Pekod: waste and utterly destroy after them, saith the Lord, and do according to all that I have commanded thee.	Go up against the land of Merathaim, and against the residents of Pekod. Kill them and devote them to destruction. Do all that I have commanded you,” declares the LORD.
JER	50	22	그 땅에 싸움의 소리와 큰 파멸의 소리가 있으리라	A sound of battle is in the land, and of great destruction.	“The noise of battle is in the land— the noise of great destruction.
JER	50	23	온 세계의 방망이가 어찌 그리 꺾여 부숴졌는고 바벨론이 어찌 그리 열방 중에 황무지가 되었는고	How is the hammer of the whole earth cut asunder and broken! how is Babylon become a desolation among the nations!	How the hammer of the whole earth lies broken and shattered! What a horror Babylon has become among the nations!
JER	50	24	바벨론아 내가 너를 잡으려고 올무를 놓았더니 네가 깨닫지 못하고 걸렸고 네가 나 여호와와 다투었으므로 만난바 되어 잡혔도다	I have laid a snare for thee, and thou art also taken, O Babylon, and thou wast not aware: thou art found, and also caught, because thou hast striven against the Lord.	I laid a snare for you, O Babylon, and you were caught before you knew it. You were found and captured because you challenged the LORD.
JER	50	25	나 여호와가 그 병고를 열고 분노의 병기를 냄은 주 만군의 여호와 내가 갈대아인의 땅에 행할 일이 있음이라	The Lord hath opened his armoury, and hath brought forth the weapons of his indignation: for this is the work of the Lord God of hosts in the land of the Chaldeans.	The LORD has opened His armory and brought out His weapons of wrath, for this is the work of the Lord GOD of Hosts in the land of the Chaldeans.
JER	50	26	먼 데 있는 너희는 와서 그를 치고 그 곳간을 열고 그것을 쌓아 무더기 같게 하라 그를 진멸하고 남기지 말라	Come against her from the utmost border, open her storehouses: cast her up as heaps, and destroy her utterly: let nothing of her be left.	Come against her from the farthest border. Break open her granaries; pile her up like mounds of grain. Devote her to destruction; leave her no survivors.
JER	50	27	그 황소를 다 죽이라 도수장으로 내려가게 하라 그들에게 화있도다 그들의 날, 그 벌받는 때가 이르렀음이로다	Slay all her bullocks; let them go down to the slaughter: woe unto them! for their day is come, the time of their visitation.	Kill all her young bulls; let them go down to the slaughter. Woe to them, for their day has come— the time of their punishment.
JER	50	28	바벨론 땅에서 도피한 자의 소리여 시온에서 우리 하나님 여호와의 보수하시는 것, 그 성전의 보수하시는 것을 선포하는 소리로다	The voice of them that flee and escape out of the land of Babylon, to declare in Zion the vengeance of the Lord our God, the vengeance of his temple.	Listen to the fugitives and refugees from the land of Babylon, declaring in Zion the vengeance of the LORD our God, the vengeance for His temple.
JER	50	29	활 쏘는 자를 바벨론에 소집하라 무릇 활을 당기는 자여 그 사면으로 진을 치고 쳐서 피하는 자가 없게 하라 그 일한 대로 갚고 그 행한 대로 그에게 행하라 그가 이스라엘의 거룩한 자 여호와를 향하여 교만하였음이니라	Call together the archers against Babylon: all ye that bend the bow, camp against it round about; let none thereof escape: recompense her according to her work; according to all that she hath done, do unto her: for she hath been proud against the Lord, against the Holy One of Israel.	Summon the archers against Babylon, all who string the bow. Encamp all around her; let no one escape. Repay her according to her deeds; do to her as she has done. For she has defied the LORD, the Holy One of Israel.
JER	50	30	그러므로 그 날에 청년들이 그 거리에 엎드러지겠고 군사들이 멸절되리라 여호와의 말이니라	Therefore shall her young men fall in the streets, and all her men of war shall be cut off in that day, saith the Lord.	Therefore, her young men will fall in the streets, and all her warriors will be silenced in that day,” declares the LORD.
JER	50	31	주 만군의 여호와가 말하노라 교만하 자여 보라 내가 너를 대적하나니 네 날 곧 너를 벌할 때가 이르렀음이라	Behold, I am against thee, O thou most proud, saith the Lord God of hosts: for thy day is come, the time that I will visit thee.	“Behold, I am against you, O arrogant one,” declares the Lord GOD of Hosts, “for your day has come, the time when I will punish you.
JER	50	32	교만한 자가 걸려 넘어지겠고 그를 일으킬 자가 없을 것이며 내가 그 성읍들에 불을 놓으리니 그 사면에 있는 것이 다 살라지리라	And the most proud shall stumble and fall, and none shall raise him up: and I will kindle a fire in his cities, and it shall devour all round about him.	The arrogant one will stumble and fall with no one to pick him up. And I will kindle a fire in his cities to consume all those around him.”
JER	50	33	나 만군의 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 이스라엘 자손과 유다 자손이 함께 학대를 받는도다 그들을 사로잡은 자는 다 그들을 엄히 지켜 놓아주지 아니하거니와	Thus saith the Lord of hosts; The children of Israel and the children of Judah were oppressed together: and all that took them captives held them fast; they refused to let them go.	This is what the LORD of Hosts says: “The sons of Israel are oppressed, and the sons of Judah as well. All their captors hold them fast, refusing to release them.
JER	50	34	그들의 구속자는 강하니 그 이름은 만군의 여호와라 결코 그들의 원을 펴서 그 땅에 평안함을 주고 바벨론 거민으로 불안케 하리라	Their Redeemer is strong; the Lord of hosts is his name: he shall throughly plead their cause, that he may give rest to the land, and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon.	Their Redeemer is strong; the LORD of Hosts is His name. He will fervently plead their case so that He may bring rest to the earth, but turmoil to those who live in Babylon.
JER	50	35	나 여호와가 말하노라 칼이 갈대아인의 위에와 바벨론 거민의 위에와 그 방백들과 지혜로운 자의 위에 임하며	A sword is upon the Chaldeans, saith the Lord, and upon the inhabitants of Babylon, and upon her princes, and upon her wise men.	A sword is against the Chaldeans, declares the LORD, against those who live in Babylon, and against her officials and wise men.
JER	50	36	칼이 자긍하는 자의 위에 임하리니 그들이 어리석게 될 것이며 칼이 용사의 위에 임하리니 그들이 놀랄 것이며	A sword is upon the liars; and they shall dote: a sword is upon her mighty men; and they shall be dismayed.	A sword is against her false prophets, and they will become fools. A sword is against her warriors, and they will be filled with terror.
JER	50	37	칼이 그들의 말들과 병거들과 그들 중에 있는 잡족의 위에 임하리니 그들이 부녀 같이 될 것이며 칼이 보물 위에 임하리니 그것이 노략될 것이요	A sword is upon their horses, and upon their chariots, and upon all the mingled people that are in the midst of her; and they shall become as women: a sword is upon her treasures; and they shall be robbed.	A sword is against her horses and chariots and against all the foreigners in her midst, and they will become like women. A sword is against her treasuries, and they will be plundered.
JER	50	38	가뭄이 물 위에 그것을 말리우리니 이는 그 땅이 조각한 신상의 땅이요 그들은 우상에 미쳤음이니라	A drought is upon her waters; and they shall be dried up: for it is the land of graven images, and they are mad upon their idols.	A drought is upon her waters, and they will be dried up. For it is a land of graven images, and the people go mad over idols.
JER	50	39	그러므로 사막의 들짐승이 시랑과 함께 거기 거하겠고 타조도 그 중에 깃들일 것이요 영영히 거민이 없으며 대대에 거할 자가 없으리라	Therefore the wild beasts of the desert with the wild beasts of the islands shall dwell there, and the owls shall dwell therein: and it shall be no more inhabited for ever; neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation.	So the desert creatures and hyenas will live there and ostriches will dwell there. It will never again be inhabited or lived in from generation to generation.
JER	50	40	나 여호와가 말하노라 나 하나님이 소돔과 고모라와 그 이웃 성읍들을 무너지게 한 것 같이 거기 거하는 사람이 없게 하며 그 중에 우거하는 아무 인자가 없게 하리라	As God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbour cities thereof, saith the Lord; so shall no man abide there, neither shall any son of man dwell therein.	As God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah along with their neighbors,” declares the LORD, “no one will dwell there; no man will abide there.
JER	50	41	보라 한 족속이 북방에서 오고 큰 나라와 여러 왕이 격동을 받아 땅끝에서 오나니	Behold, a people shall come from the north, and a great nation, and many kings shall be raised up from the coasts of the earth.	Behold, an army is coming from the north; a great nation and many kings are stirred up from the ends of the earth.
JER	50	42	그들은 활과 창을 가진 자라 잔인하며 긍휼히 여기지 아니하며 그 목소리는 파도가 흉용함 같도다 딸 바벨론아 그들이 말을 타고 무사 같이 각기 항오를 벌여 너를 칠 것이라	They shall hold the bow and the lance: they are cruel, and will not shew mercy: their voice shall roar like the sea, and they shall ride upon horses, every one put in array, like a man to the battle, against thee, O daughter of Babylon.	They grasp the bow and spear; they are cruel and merciless. Their voice roars like the sea, and they ride upon horses, lined up like men in formation against you, O Daughter of Babylon.
JER	50	43	바벨론 왕이 그 소문을 듣고 손이 약하여지며 고통에 잡혀 해산하는 여인의 구로함 같도다	The king of Babylon hath heard the report of them, and his hands waxed feeble: anguish took hold of him, and pangs as of a woman in travail.	The king of Babylon has heard the report, and his hands hang limp. Anguish has gripped him, pain like that of a woman in labor.
JER	50	44	보라 사자가 요단의 수풀에서 올라오는 것 같이 그가 와서 견고한 처소를 칠 것이라 내가 즉시 그들을 거기서 쫓아내고 택한 자를 내가 그 위에 세우리니 나와 같은 자 누구며 나로 더불어 다툴 자 누구며 내 앞에 설 목자가 누구뇨	Behold, he shall come up like a lion from the swelling of Jordan unto the habitation of the strong: but I will make them suddenly run away from her: and who is a chosen man, that I may appoint over her? for who is like me? and who will appoint me the time? and who is that shepherd that will stand before me?	Behold, one will come up like a lion from the thickets of the Jordan to the watered pasture. For in an instant I will chase Babylon from her land. Who is the chosen one I will appoint for this? For who is like Me, and who can challenge Me? What shepherd can stand against Me?”
JER	50	45	그런즉 바벨론에 대한 나 여호와의 도모와 갈대아인의 땅에 대하여 경영한 나 여호와의 뜻을 들으라 양떼의 어린 것들을 그들이 반드시 끌어가고 그 처소로 황무케 하리니	Therefore hear ye the counsel of the Lord, that he hath taken against Babylon; and his purposes, that he hath purposed against the land of the Chaldeans: Surely the least of the flock shall draw them out: surely he shall make their habitation desolate with them.	Therefore hear the plans that the LORD has drawn up against Babylon and the strategies He has devised against the land of the Chaldeans: Surely the little ones of the flock will be dragged away; certainly their pasture will be made desolate because of them.
JER	50	46	바벨론의 함락하는 소리에 땅이 진동하며 그 부르짖음이 열방 중에 들리리라 하시도다	At the noise of the taking of Babylon the earth is moved, and the cry is heard among the nations.	At the sound of Babylon’s capture the earth will quake; a cry will be heard among the nations.
JER	51	1	여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 보라 내가 멸망시키는 자의 마음을 일으켜 바벨론을 치고 또 나를 대적하는 자 중에 처하는 자를 치되	Thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will raise up against Babylon, and against them that dwell in the midst of them that rise up against me, a destroying wind;	This is what the LORD says: “Behold, I will stir up against Babylon and against the people of Leb-kamai the spirit of a destroyer.
JER	51	2	내가 타국인을 바벨론에 보내어 키질하여 그 땅을 비게 하리니 재앙의 날에 그를 에워 치리로다	And will send unto Babylon fanners, that shall fan her, and shall empty her land: for in the day of trouble they shall be against her round about.	I will send strangers to Babylon to winnow her and empty her land; for they will come against her from every side in her day of disaster.
JER	51	3	활을 당기는 자를 향하며 갑주를 갖추고 선 자를 향하여 쏘는 자는 그 활을 당길 것이라 그 청년들을 아끼지 말며 그 군대를 진멸하라	Against him that bendeth let the archer bend his bow, and against him that lifteth himself up in his brigandine: and spare ye not her young men; destroy ye utterly all her host.	Do not let the archer bend his bow or put on his armor. Do not spare her young men; devote all her army to destruction!
JER	51	4	무리가 갈대아인의 땅에서 죽임을 당하여 엎드러질 것이요 그 거리에서 찔림을 당한 자가 엎드러지리라 하시도다	Thus the slain shall fall in the land of the Chaldeans, and they that are thrust through in her streets.	And they will fall slain in the land of the Chaldeans, and pierced through in her streets.
JER	51	5	대저 이스라엘과 유다가 이스라엘의 거룩하신 자를 거역하므로 죄과가 땅에 가득하나 그 하나님 만군의 여호와에게 버림을 입지 아니하였나니	For Israel hath not been forsaken, nor Judah of his God, of the Lord of hosts; though their land was filled with sin against the Holy One of Israel.	For Israel and Judah have not been abandoned by their God, the LORD of Hosts, though their land is full of guilt before the Holy One of Israel.”
JER	51	6	바벨론 가운데서 도망하여 나와서 각기 생명을 구원하고 그의 죄악으로 인하여 끊침을 보지 말지어다 이는 여호와의 보수의 때니 그에게 보복하시리라	Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul: be not cut off in her iniquity; for this is the time of the Lord’s vengeance; he will render unto her a recompence.	Flee from Babylon! Escape with your lives! Do not be destroyed in her punishment. For this is the time of the LORD’s vengeance; He will pay her what she deserves.
JER	51	7	바벨론은 여호와의 수중의 온 세계로 취케 하는 금잔이라 열방이 그 포도주를 마시고 인하여 미쳤도다	Babylon hath been a golden cup in the Lord’s hand, that made all the earth drunken: the nations have drunken of her wine; therefore the nations are mad.	Babylon was a gold cup in the hand of the LORD, making the whole earth drunk. The nations drank her wine; therefore the nations have gone mad.
JER	51	8	바벨론이 졸지에 넘어져 파멸되니 이로 인하여 울라 그 창상을 인하여 유향을 구하라 혹 나으리로다	Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed: howl for her; take balm for her pain, if so be she may be healed.	Suddenly Babylon has fallen and been shattered. Wail for her; get her balm for her pain; perhaps she can be healed.
JER	51	9	우리가 바벨론을 치료하려 하여도 낫지 아니한즉 버리고 각기 고토로 돌아가자 그 화가 하늘에 미쳤고 궁창에 달하였음이로다	We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed: forsake her, and let us go every one into his own country: for her judgment reacheth unto heaven, and is lifted up even to the skies.	“We tried to heal Babylon, but she could not be healed. Abandon her! Let each of us go to his own land, for her judgment extends to the sky and reaches to the clouds.”
JER	51	10	여호와께서 우리 의를 드러내셨으니 오라 시온에서 우리 하나님 여호와의 일을 선포하자	The Lord hath brought forth our righteousness: come, and let us declare in Zion the work of the Lord our God.	“The LORD has brought forth our vindication; come, let us tell in Zion what the LORD our God has accomplished.”
JER	51	11	화살을 갈며 방패를 굳게 잡으라 여호와께서 메대 왕들의 마음을 격발하사 바벨론을 멸하기로 뜻하시나니 이는 여호와의 보수하시는 것 곧 그 성전의 보수하시는 것이라	Make bright the arrows; gather the shields: the Lord hath raised up the spirit of the kings of the Medes: for his device is against Babylon, to destroy it; because it is the vengeance of the Lord, the vengeance of his temple.	Sharpen the arrows! Fill the quivers! The LORD has aroused the spirit of the kings of the Medes, because His plan is aimed at Babylon to destroy her, for it is the vengeance of the LORD— vengeance for His temple.
JER	51	12	바벨론 성벽을 향하여 기를 세우고 튼튼히 지키며 파수꾼을 세우며 복병을 베풀어 방비하라 이는 여호와께서 바벨론 거민에 대하여 말씀하신 대로 경영하시고 행하심이로다	Set up the standard upon the walls of Babylon, make the watch strong, set up the watchmen, prepare the ambushes: for the Lord hath both devised and done that which he spake against the inhabitants of Babylon.	Raise a banner against the walls of Babylon; post the guard; station the watchmen; prepare the ambush. For the LORD has both devised and accomplished what He spoke against the people of Babylon.
JER	51	13	많은 물 가에 거하여 재물이 많은 자여 네 탐남의 한정, 네 결국이 이르렀도다	O thou that dwellest upon many waters, abundant in treasures, thine end is come, and the measure of thy covetousness.	You who dwell by many waters, rich in treasures, your end has come; the thread of your life is cut.
JER	51	14	만군의 여호와께서 자기로 맹세하시되 내가 진실로 사람을 황충 같이 네게 가득히 하리니 그들이 너를 향하여 소리를 높이리라 하시도다	The Lord of hosts hath sworn by himself, saying, Surely I will fill thee with men, as with caterpillers; and they shall lift up a shout against thee.	The LORD of Hosts has sworn by Himself: “Surely I will fill you up with men as with locusts, and they will shout in triumph over you.”
JER	51	15	여호와께서 그 권능으로 땅을 지으셨고 그 지혜로 세계를 세우셨고 그 명철로 하늘들을 펴셨으며	He hath made the earth by his power, he hath established the world by his wisdom, and hath stretched out the heaven by his understanding.	The LORD made the earth by His power; He established the world by His wisdom and stretched out the heavens by His understanding.
JER	51	16	그가 목소리를 발하신즉 하늘에 많은 물이 생기나니 그는 땅끝에서 구름이 오르게 하시며 비를 위하여 번개하게 하시며 그 곳간에서 바람을 내시거늘	When he uttereth his voice, there is a multitude of waters in the heavens; and he causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth: he maketh lightnings with rain, and bringeth forth the wind out of his treasures.	When He thunders, the waters in the heavens roar; He causes the clouds to rise from the ends of the earth. He generates the lightning with the rain and brings forth the wind from His storehouses.
JER	51	17	사람마다 우준하고 무식하도다 금장색마다 자기의 만든 신상으로 인하여 수치를 당하나니 이는 그 부어만든 우상은 거짓이요 그 속에 생기가 없음이라	Every man is brutish by his knowledge; every founder is confounded by the graven image: for his molten image is falsehood, and there is no breath in them.	Every man is senseless and devoid of knowledge; every goldsmith is put to shame by his idols. For his molten images are a fraud, and there is no breath in them.
JER	51	18	그것들은 헛것이요 망령되이 만든 것인즉 징벌하시는 때에 멸망할 것이나	They are vanity, the work of errors: in the time of their visitation they shall perish.	They are worthless, a work to be mocked. In the time of their punishment they will perish.
JER	51	19	야곱의 분깃은 이같지 아니하시니 그는 만물의 조성자요 이스라엘은 그 산업의 지파라 그 이름은 만군의 여호와시니라	The portion of Jacob is not like them; for he is the former of all things: and Israel is the rod of his inheritance: the Lord of hosts is his name.	The Portion of Jacob is not like these, for He is the Maker of all things, and of the tribe of His inheritance— the LORD of Hosts is His name.
JER	51	20	여호와께서 가라사대 너는 나의 철퇴 곧 병기라 내가 너로 열방을 파하며 너로 국가들을 멸하며	Thou art my battle axe and weapons of war: for with thee will I break in pieces the nations, and with thee will I destroy kingdoms;	“You are My war club, My weapon for battle. With you I shatter nations; with you I bring kingdoms to ruin.
JER	51	21	내가 너로 말과 그 탄 자를 부수며 너로 병거와 그 탄 자를 부수며	And with thee will I break in pieces the horse and his rider; and with thee will I break in pieces the chariot and his rider;	With you I shatter the horse and rider; with you I shatter the chariot and driver.
JER	51	22	너로 남자와 여자를 부수며 너로 노년과 유년을 부수며 너로 청년과 처녀를 부수며	With thee also will I break in pieces man and woman; and with thee will I break in pieces old and young; and with thee will I break in pieces the young man and the maid;	With you I shatter man and woman; with you I shatter the old man and the youth; with you I shatter the young man and the maiden.
JER	51	23	너로 목자와 그 양떼를 부수며 너로 농부와 그 멍엣소를 부수며 너로 방백들과 두령들을 부수리로다	I will also break in pieces with thee the shepherd and his flock; and with thee will I break in pieces the husbandman and his yoke of oxen; and with thee will I break in pieces captains and rulers.	With you I shatter the shepherd and his flock; with you I shatter the farmer and his oxen; with you I shatter the governors and officials.
JER	51	24	그들이 너희 목전에 시온에서 모든 악을 행한 대로 내가 바벨론과 갈대아 모든 거민에게 갚으리라 여호와의 말이니라	And I will render unto Babylon and to all the inhabitants of Chaldea all their evil that they have done in Zion in your sight, saith the Lord.	Before your very eyes I will repay Babylon and all the dwellers of Chaldea for all the evil they have done in Zion,” declares the LORD.
JER	51	25	나 여호와가 말하노라 온 세계를 멸한 멸망의 산아 보라 나는 네 대적이라 나의 손을 네 위에 펴서 너를 바위에서 굴리고 너로 불 탄 산이 되게 할 것이니	Behold, I am against thee, O destroying mountain, saith the Lord, which destroyest all the earth: and I will stretch out mine hand upon thee, and roll thee down from the rocks, and will make thee a burnt mountain.	“Behold, I am against you, O destroying mountain, you who devastate the whole earth, declares the LORD. I will stretch out My hand against you; I will roll you over the cliffs and turn you into a charred mountain.
JER	51	26	사람이 네게서 집 모퉁이 돌이나 기초돌을 취하지 아니할 것이요 너는 영영히 황무지가 될 것이니라 여호와의 말이니라	And they shall not take of thee a stone for a corner, nor a stone for foundations; but thou shalt be desolate for ever, saith the Lord.	No one shall retrieve from you a cornerstone or a foundation stone, because you will become desolate forever,” declares the LORD.
JER	51	27	땅에 기를 세우며 열방 중에 나팔을 불어서 열국을 예비시켜 그를 치며 아라랏과 민니와 아스그나스 나라를 불러 모아 그를 치며 대장으로 세우고 그를 치되 사나운 황충 같이 그 말들을 몰아오게 하라	Set ye up a standard in the land, blow the trumpet among the nations, prepare the nations against her, call together against her the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and Ashchenaz; appoint a captain against her; cause the horses to come up as the rough caterpillers.	“Raise a banner in the land! Blow the ram’s horn among the nations! Prepare the nations against her. Summon the kingdoms against her— Ararat, Minni, and Ashkenaz. Appoint a captain against her; bring up horses like swarming locusts.
JER	51	28	열국 곧 메대인의 왕들과 그 방백들과 그 모든 두령과 그 관할하는 모든 땅을 예비시켜 그를 치게 하라	Prepare against her the nations with the kings of the Medes, the captains thereof, and all the rulers thereof, and all the land of his dominion.	Prepare the nations for battle against her— the kings of the Medes, their governors and all their officials, and all the lands they rule.
JER	51	29	땅이 진동하며 고통하나니 이는 나 여호와가 바벨론을 쳐서 그 땅으로 황무하여 거민이 없게 할 경영이 섰음이라	And the land shall tremble and sorrow: for every purpose of the Lord shall be performed against Babylon, to make the land of Babylon a desolation without an inhabitant.	The earth quakes and writhes because the LORD’s intentions against Babylon stand: to make the land of Babylon a desolation, without inhabitant.
JER	51	30	바벨론의 용사는 싸움을 그치고 그 요새에 머무르나 기력이 쇠하여 여인 같이 되며 그 거처는 불타고 그 문빗장은 부러졌으며	The mighty men of Babylon have forborn to fight, they have remained in their holds: their might hath failed; they became as women: they have burned her dwellingplaces; her bars are broken.	The warriors of Babylon have stopped fighting; they sit in their strongholds. Their strength is exhausted; they have become like women. Babylon’s homes have been set ablaze, the bars of her gates are broken.
JER	51	31	보발꾼이 달려 만나고 사자가 달려 만나서 바벨론 왕에게 고하기를 그 성읍 사방이 함락되었으며	One post shall run to meet another, and one messenger to meet another, to shew the king of Babylon that his city is taken at one end,	One courier races to meet another, and messenger follows messenger, to announce to the king of Babylon that his city has been captured from end to end.
JER	51	32	모든 나루는 빼앗겼으며 갈밭이 불탔으며 군사들이 두려워하더이다 하리라	And that the passages are stopped, and the reeds they have burned with fire, and the men of war are affrighted.	The fords have been seized, the marshes set on fire, and the soldiers are terrified.”
JER	51	33	만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 이같이 말씀하시되 딸 바벨론은 때가 이른 타작마당과 같은지라 미구에 추수 때가 이르리라 하시도다	For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; The daughter of Babylon is like a threshingfloor, it is time to thresh her: yet a little while, and the time of her harvest shall come.	For this is what the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, says: “The Daughter of Babylon is like a threshing floor at the time it is trampled. In just a little while her harvest time will come.”
JER	51	34	바벨론 왕 느부갓네살이 나를 먹으며 나를 멸하며 나로 빈 그릇이 되게 하며 용 같이 나를 삼키며 나의 좋은 음식으로 그 배를 채우고 나를 쫓아내었으니	Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon hath devoured me, he hath crushed me, he hath made me an empty vessel, he hath swallowed me up like a dragon, he hath filled his belly with my delicates, he hath cast me out.	“Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon has devoured me; he has crushed me. He has set me aside like an empty vessel; he has swallowed me like a monster; he filled his belly with my delicacies and vomited me out.
JER	51	35	나와 내 육체에 대한 잔학이 바벨론에 돌아가기를 원한다고 시온 거민이 말할 것이요 내 피 흘린 죄가 갈대아 거민에게로 돌아가기를 원한다고 예루살렘이 말하리라	The violence done to me and to my flesh be upon Babylon, shall the inhabitant of Zion say; and my blood upon the inhabitants of Chaldea, shall Jerusalem say.	May the violence done to me and to my flesh be upon Babylon,” says the dweller of Zion. “May my blood be on the dwellers of Chaldea,” says Jerusalem.
JER	51	36	그러므로 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 보라 내가 네 송사를 듣고 너를 위하여 보수하여 그 바다를 말리며 그 샘을 말리리니	Therefore thus saith the Lord; Behold, I will plead thy cause, and take vengeance for thee; and I will dry up her sea, and make her springs dry.	Therefore this is what the LORD says: “Behold, I will plead your case and take vengeance on your behalf; I will dry up her sea and make her springs run dry.
JER	51	37	바벨론이 황폐한 무더기가 되어서 시랑의 거처와 놀람과 치솟거리가 되고 거민이 없으리라	And Babylon shall become heaps, a dwellingplace for dragons, an astonishment, and an hissing, without an inhabitant.	Babylon will become a heap of rubble, a haunt for jackals, an object of horror and scorn, without inhabitant.
JER	51	38	그들이 다 사자 같이 소리하며 어린 사자 같이 부르짖으며	They shall roar together like lions: they shall yell as lions’ whelps.	They will roar together like young lions; they will growl like lion cubs.
JER	51	39	열정이 일어날 때에 내가 연회를 베풀고 그들로 취하여 기뻐하다가 영영히 잠들어 깨지 못하게 하리라 여호와의 말이니라	In their heat I will make their feasts, and I will make them drunken, that they may rejoice, and sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, saith the Lord.	While they are flushed with heat, I will serve them a feast, and I will make them drunk so that they may revel; then they will fall asleep forever and never wake up, declares the LORD.
JER	51	40	내가 그들을 끌어 내려서 어린 양과 수양과 수염소가 도수장으로 가는 것 같게 하리라	I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter, like rams with he goats.	I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter, like rams with male goats.
JER	51	41	슬프다 세삭이 함락되었도다 온 세상의 칭찬 받는 성이 빼앗겼도다 슬프다 바벨론이 열방 중에 황폐하였도다	How is Sheshach taken! and how is the praise of the whole earth surprised! how is Babylon become an astonishment among the nations!	How Sheshach has been captured! The praise of all the earth has been seized. What a horror Babylon has become among the nations!
JER	51	42	바다가 바벨론에 넘침이여 그 많은 파도가 그것에 덮였도다	The sea is come up upon Babylon: she is covered with the multitude of the waves thereof.	The sea has come up over Babylon; she is covered in turbulent waves.
JER	51	43	그 성읍들은 황폐하여 마른 땅과 사막과 거민이 없는 땅이 되었으니 그리로 지나가는 인자가 없도다	Her cities are a desolation, a dry land, and a wilderness, a land wherein no man dwelleth, neither doth any son of man pass thereby.	Her cities have become a desolation, a dry and arid land, a land where no one lives, where no son of man passes through.
JER	51	44	내가 벨을 바벨론에서 벌하고 그 삼킨 것을 그 입에서 끌어 내리니 열방이 다시는 그에게로 흘러가지 아니하겠고 바벨론 성벽은 무너지리로다	And I will punish Bel in Babylon, and I will bring forth out of his mouth that which he hath swallowed up: and the nations shall not flow together any more unto him: yea, the wall of Babylon shall fall.	I will punish Bel in Babylon. I will make him spew out what he swallowed. The nations will no longer stream to him; even the wall of Babylon will fall.
JER	51	45	나의 백성아 너희는 그 중에서 나와 각기 나 여호와의 진노에서 스스로 구원하라	My people, go ye out of the midst of her, and deliver ye every man his soul from the fierce anger of the Lord.	Come out of her, My people! Save your lives, each of you, from the fierce anger of the LORD.
JER	51	46	너희 마음을 겁약하게 말며 이 땅에서 들리는 풍설을 인하여 두려워 말라 풍설은 이 해에도 있었고 저 해에도 있으리라 경내에는 강포함이 있어 관원끼리 서로 치리라	And lest your heart faint, and ye fear for the rumour that shall be heard in the land; a rumour shall both come one year, and after that in another year shall come a rumour, and violence in the land, ruler against ruler.	Do not let your heart grow faint, and do not be afraid when the rumor is heard in the land; for a rumor will come one year— and then another the next year— of violence in the land and of ruler against ruler.
JER	51	47	그러므로 보라 날이 이르리니 내가 바벨론의 조각한 신상들을 벌할 것이라 그 온 땅이 치욕을 당하겠고 그 살육당한 모든 자가 그 가운데 엎드러질 것이며	Therefore, behold, the days come, that I will do judgment upon the graven images of Babylon: and her whole land shall be confounded, and all her slain shall fall in the midst of her.	Therefore, behold, the days are coming when I will punish the idols of Babylon. Her entire land will suffer shame, and all her slain will lie fallen within her.
JER	51	48	하늘과 땅과 그 중의 모든 것이 바벨론을 인하여 기뻐 노래하리니 이는 파멸시키는 자가 북방에서 그에게 옴이니라 여호와의 말이니라	Then the heaven and the earth, and all that is therein, shall sing for Babylon: for the spoilers shall come unto her from the north, saith the Lord.	Then heaven and earth and all that is in them will shout for joy over Babylon because the destroyers from the north will come against her,” declares the LORD.
JER	51	49	바벨론이 이스라엘 사람을 살육하여 엎드러뜨림 같이 온 땅 사람이 바벨론에서 살육을 당하여 엎드러지리라 하시도다	As Babylon hath caused the slain of Israel to fall, so at Babylon shall fall the slain of all the earth.	“Babylon must fall on account of the slain of Israel, just as the slain of all the earth have fallen because of Babylon.
JER	51	50	칼을 면한 자들이여 서지 말라 행하라 원방에서 여호와를 생각하며 예루살렘을 너희 마음에 두라	Ye that have escaped the sword, go away, stand not still: remember the Lord afar off, and let Jerusalem come into your mind.	You who have escaped the sword, depart and do not linger! Remember the LORD from far away, and let Jerusalem come to mind.”
JER	51	51	이방인이 여호와의 집 성소에 들어가므로 우리가 책망을 들으며 수치를 당하여 부끄러움이 우리 얼굴에 덮였느니라	We are confounded, because we have heard reproach: shame hath covered our faces: for strangers are come into the sanctuaries of the Lord’s house.	“We are ashamed because we have heard reproach; disgrace has covered our faces, because foreigners have entered the holy places of the LORD’s house.”
JER	51	52	그러므로 여호와께서 가라사대 보라 날이 이르리니 내가 그 조각한 신상을 벌할 것이라 상함을 입은 자들이 그 땅에서 신음하리라	Wherefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will do judgment upon her graven images: and through all her land the wounded shall groan.	“Therefore, behold, the days are coming,” declares the LORD, “when I will punish her idols, and throughout her land the wounded will groan.
JER	51	53	가령 바벨론이 하늘까지 솟아오른다 하자 멸망시킬 자가 내게서부터 그들에게 임하리라 여호와의 말이니라	Though Babylon should mount up to heaven, and though she should fortify the height of her strength, yet from me shall spoilers come unto her, saith the Lord.	Even if Babylon ascends to the heavens and fortifies her lofty stronghold, the destroyers I send will come against her,” declares the LORD.
JER	51	54	바벨론에서 부르짖는 소리여 갈대아인의 땅에 큰 파멸의 소리로다	A sound of a cry cometh from Babylon, and great destruction from the land of the Chaldeans:	“The sound of a cry comes from Babylon, the sound of great destruction from the land of the Chaldeans!
JER	51	55	이는 여호와께서 바벨론을 황폐케 하사 그 떠드는 소리를 끊으심이로다 그 대적이 많은 물의 요동함 같이 요란한 소리를 발하니	Because the Lord hath spoiled Babylon, and destroyed out of her the great voice; when her waves do roar like great waters, a noise of their voice is uttered:	For the LORD will destroy Babylon; He will silence her mighty voice. The waves will roar like great waters; the tumult of their voices will resound.
JER	51	56	곧 멸망시키는 자가 바벨론에 임함이라 그 용사들이 사로 잡히고 그들의 활이 꺾이도다 여호와는 보복의 하나님이시니 반드시 보응하시리로다	Because the spoiler is come upon her, even upon Babylon, and her mighty men are taken, every one of their bows is broken: for the Lord God of recompences shall surely requite.	For a destroyer is coming against her— against Babylon. Her warriors will be captured, and their bows will be broken, for the LORD is a God of retribution; He will repay in full.
JER	51	57	만군의 여호와라 일컫는 왕이 이같이 말씀하시되 내가 그 방백들과 박사들과 감독들과 관장들과 용사들로 취하게 하리니 그들이 영영히 자고 깨지 못하리라	And I will make drunk her princes, and her wise men, her captains, and her rulers, and her mighty men: and they shall sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, saith the King, whose name is the Lord of hosts.	I will make her princes and wise men drunk, along with her governors, officials, and warriors. Then they will fall asleep forever and not wake up,” declares the King, whose name is the LORD of Hosts.
JER	51	58	만군의 여호와가 이같이 말하노라 바벨론의 넓은 성벽은 온전히 무너지겠고 그 높은 문들은 불에 탈 것이며 백성들의 수고는 헛될 것이요 민족들의 수고는 불탈 것인즉 그들이 쇠패하리라 하시니라	Thus saith the Lord of hosts; The broad walls of Babylon shall be utterly broken, and her high gates shall be burned with fire; and the people shall labour in vain, and the folk in the fire, and they shall be weary.	This is what the LORD of Hosts says: “Babylon’s thick walls will be leveled, and her high gates consumed by fire. So the labor of the people will be for nothing; the nations will exhaust themselves to fuel the flames.”
JER	51	59	유다와 시드기야 사년에 마세야의 손자 네리야의 아들 스라야가 왕과 함께 바벨론으로 갈 때에 선지자 예레미야가 그에게 말씀을 명하니 스라야는 시종장이더라	The word which Jeremiah the prophet commanded Seraiah the son of Neriah, the son of Maaseiah, when he went with Zedekiah the king of Judah into Babylon in the fourth year of his reign. And this Seraiah was a quiet prince.	This is the message that Jeremiah the prophet gave to the quartermaster Seraiah son of Neriah, the son of Mahseiah, when he went to Babylon with King Zedekiah of Judah in the fourth year of Zedekiah’s reign.
JER	51	60	예레미야가 바벨론에 임한 모든 재앙 곧 바벨론에 대하여 기록한 이 모든 말씀을 한 책에 기록하고	So Jeremiah wrote in a book all the evil that should come upon Babylon, even all these words that are written against Babylon.	Jeremiah had written on a single scroll about all the disaster that would come upon Babylon—all these words that had been written concerning Babylon.
JER	51	61	예레미야가 스라야에게 이르되 너는 바벨론에 이르거든 삼가 이 모든 말씀을 읽고	And Jeremiah said to Seraiah, When thou comest to Babylon, and shalt see, and shalt read all these words;	And Jeremiah said to Seraiah, “When you get to Babylon, see that you read all these words aloud,
JER	51	62	말하기를 여호와여 주께서 이곳에 대하여 말씀하시기를 이 땅을 멸하여 사람이나 짐승이 거기 거하지 못하게 하고 영영히 황폐케 하리라 하셨나이다 하라	Then shalt thou say, O Lord, thou hast spoken against this place, to cut it off, that none shall remain in it, neither man nor beast, but that it shall be desolate for ever.	and say, ‘O LORD, You have promised to cut off this place so that no one will remain—neither man nor beast. Indeed, it will be desolate forever.’
JER	51	63	너는 이 책 읽기를 다한 후에 책에 돌을 매어 유브라데 하수 속에 던지며	And it shall be, when thou hast made an end of reading this book, that thou shalt bind a stone to it, and cast it into the midst of Euphrates:	When you finish reading this scroll, tie a stone to it and cast it into the Euphrates.
JER	51	64	말하기를 바벨론이 나의 재앙 내림을 인하여 이같이 침륜하고 다시 일어나지 못하리니 그들이 쇠패하리라 하라 하니라 예레미야의 말이 이에 마치니라	And thou shalt say, Thus shall Babylon sink, and shall not rise from the evil that I will bring upon her: and they shall be weary. Thus far are the words of Jeremiah.	Then you are to say, ‘In the same way Babylon will sink and never rise again, because of the disaster I will bring upon her. And her people will grow weary.’” Here end the words of Jeremiah.
JER	52	1	시드기야가 위에 나아갈 때에 나이 이십일 세라 예루살렘에서 십일 년을 치리하니라	Zedekiah was one and twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.	Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem eleven years. His mother’s name was Hamutal daughter of Jeremiah; she was from Libnah.
JER	52	2	시드기야가 여호야김의 모든 행위를 본받아 여호와 보시기에 악을 행한지라	And he did that which was evil in the eyes of the Lord, according to all that Jehoiakim had done.	And Zedekiah did evil in the sight of the LORD, just as Jehoiakim had done.
JER	52	3	여호와께서 예루살렘과 유다를 진노하심이 그들을 그 앞에서 쫓아내시기까지 이르렀더라 시드기야가 바벨론 왕을 배반하매	For through the anger of the Lord it came to pass in Jerusalem and Judah, till he had cast them out from his presence, that Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.	For because of the anger of the LORD, all this happened in Jerusalem and Judah, until He finally banished them from His presence. And Zedekiah also rebelled against the king of Babylon.
JER	52	4	시드기야 구년 시월 십일에 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살이 그 모든 군대를 거느리고 예루살렘을 치러 올라와서 그 성을 대하여 진을 치고 사면으로 흉벽을 쌓으매	And it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon came, he and all his army, against Jerusalem, and pitched against it, and built forts against it round about.	So in the ninth year of Zedekiah’s reign, on the tenth day of the tenth month, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon marched against Jerusalem with his entire army. They encamped outside the city and built a siege wall all around it.
JER	52	5	성이 시드기야 왕 십일년까지 에워싸였더니	So the city was besieged unto the eleventh year of king Zedekiah.	And the city was kept under siege until King Zedekiah’s eleventh year.
JER	52	6	그 사월 구일에 성중에 기근이 심하여 그 땅 백성의 식물이 진하였더라	And in the fourth month, in the ninth day of the month, the famine was sore in the city, so that there was no bread for the people of the land.	By the ninth day of the fourth month, the famine in the city was so severe that the people of the land had no food.
JER	52	7	갈대아인이 그 성읍을 에워쌌더니 성벽을 깨뜨리매 모든 군사가 밤 중에 두 성벽 사이 왕의 동산 곁문 길로 도망하여 아라바 길로 가더니	Then the city was broken up, and all the men of war fled, and went forth out of the city by night by the way of the gate between the two walls, which was by the king’s garden; (now the Chaldeans were by the city round about:) and they went by the way of the plain.	Then the city was breached; and though the Chaldeans had surrounded the city, all the men of war fled the city by night by way of the gate between the two walls near the king’s garden. They headed toward the Arabah,
JER	52	8	갈대아인의 군대가 시드기야 왕을 쫓아가서 여리고 평지에서 미치매 왕의 모든 군대가 그를 떠나 흩어진지라	But the army of the Chaldeans pursued after the king, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho; and all his army was scattered from him.	but the army of the Chaldeans pursued the king and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho, and all his army was separated from him.
JER	52	9	그들이 왕을 잡아가지고 하맛 땅 립나에 있는 바벨론 왕에게로 끌고가매 그를 신문하니라	Then they took the king, and carried him up unto the king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath; where he gave judgment upon him.	The Chaldeans seized the king and brought him up to the king of Babylon at Riblah in the land of Hamath, where he pronounced judgment on Zedekiah.
JER	52	10	바벨론 왕이 시드기야의 아들들을 그의 목전에서 죽이고 또 립나에서 유다의 모든 방백을 죽이며	And the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes: he slew also all the princes of Judah in Riblah.	There at Riblah the king of Babylon slaughtered the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes, and he also killed all the officials of Judah.
JER	52	11	시드기야의 두 눈을 빼고 사슬로 결박하여 바벨론으로 끌어다가 그 죽는 날까지 옥에 두었더라	Then he put out the eyes of Zedekiah; and the king of Babylon bound him in chains, and carried him to Babylon, and put him in prison till the day of his death.	Then he put out Zedekiah’s eyes, bound him with bronze shackles, and took him to Babylon, where he kept him in custody until his dying day.
JER	52	12	바벨론 왕 느부갓네살의 십구년 오월 십일에 바벨론 왕의 어전 시위대 장관 느부사라단이 예루살렘에 이르러	Now in the fifth month, in the tenth day of the month, which was the nineteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, came Nebuzar–adan, captain of the guard, which served the king of Babylon, into Jerusalem,	On the tenth day of the fifth month, in the nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar’s reign over Babylon, Nebuzaradan captain of the guard, a servant of the king of Babylon, entered Jerusalem.
JER	52	13	여호와의 전과 왕궁을 불사르고 예루살렘의 모든 집을 귀인의 집까지 불살랐으며	And burned the house of the Lord, and the king’s house; and all the houses of Jerusalem, and all the houses of the great men, burned he with fire:	He burned down the house of the LORD, the royal palace, and all the houses of Jerusalem—every significant building.
JER	52	14	시위대 장관을 좇는 갈대아인의 온 군대가 예루살렘 사면 성벽을 헐었으며	And all the army of the Chaldeans, that were with the captain of the guard, brake down all the walls of Jerusalem round about.	And the whole army of the Chaldeans under the captain of the guard broke down all the walls around Jerusalem.
JER	52	15	시위대 장관 느부사라단이 백성 중 빈한한 자와 성중에 남아있는 백성과 바벨론 왕에게 항복한 자와 무리의 남은 자를 사로잡아 옮겨가고	Then Nebuzar–adan the captain of the guard carried away captive certain of the poor of the people, and the residue of the people that remained in the city, and those that fell away, that fell to the king of Babylon, and the rest of the multitude.	Then Nebuzaradan captain of the guard carried into exile some of the poorest people and those who remained in the city, along with the deserters who had defected to the king of Babylon and the rest of the craftsmen.
JER	52	16	비천한 국민을 남겨두어 포도원을 다스리는 자와 농부가 되게 하였더라	But Nebuzar–adan the captain of the guard left certain of the poor of the land for vinedressers and for husbandmen.	But Nebuzaradan captain of the guard left behind some of the poorest of the land to tend the vineyards and fields.
JER	52	17	갈대아인이 또 여호와의 전의 두 놋기둥과 받침들과 여호와의 전의 놋바다를 깨뜨려 그 놋을 바벨론으로 가져갔고	Also the pillars of brass that were in the house of the Lord, and the bases, and the brasen sea that was in the house of the Lord, the Chaldeans brake, and carried all the brass of them to Babylon.	Moreover, the Chaldeans broke up the bronze pillars and stands and the bronze Sea in the house of the LORD, and they carried all the bronze to Babylon.
JER	52	18	또 가마들과 부삽들과 불집게들과 주발들과 숟가락들과 섬길 때에 쓰는 모든 놋그릇을 다 가져 갔으며	The caldrons also, and the shovels, and the snuffers, and the bowls, and the spoons, and all the vessels of brass wherewith they ministered, took they away.	They also took away the pots, shovels, wick trimmers, sprinkling bowls, dishes, and all the articles of bronze used in the temple service.
JER	52	19	시위대 장관이 또 잔들과 화로들과 주발들과 솥들과 촛대들과 숟가락들과 바리들 곧 금물의 금과 은물의 은을 가져갔는데	And the basons, and the firepans, and the bowls, and the caldrons, and the candlesticks, and the spoons, and the cups; that which was of gold in gold, and that which was of silver in silver, took the captain of the guard away.	The captain of the guard also took away the basins, censers, sprinkling bowls, pots, lampstands, pans, and drink offering bowls—anything made of pure gold or fine silver.
JER	52	20	솔로몬 왕이 여호와의 전을 위하여 만든 두 기둥과 한 바다와 그 받침 아래 있는 열두 놋소 곧 이 모든 기구의 놋 중수를 헤아릴 수 없었더라	The two pillars, one sea, and twelve brasen bulls that were under the bases, which king Solomon had made in the house of the Lord: the brass of all these vessels was without weight.	As for the two pillars, the Sea, the twelve bronze bulls under it, and the movable stands that King Solomon had made for the house of the LORD, the weight of the bronze from all these articles was beyond measure.
JER	52	21	그 기둥은 한 기둥의 고가 십팔 규빗이요 그 주위는 십이 규빗이며 그 속이 비었고 그 두께는 사지놓이며	And concerning the pillars, the height of one pillar was eighteen cubits; and a fillet of twelve cubits did compass it; and the thickness thereof was four fingers: it was hollow.	Each pillar was eighteen cubits tall and twelve cubits in circumference; each was hollow, four fingers thick.
JER	52	22	기둥 위에 놋머리가 있어 그 고가 다섯 규빗이요 머리 사면으로 돌아가며 꾸민 그물과 석류가 다 놋이며 또 다른 기둥에도 이런 모든 것과 석류가 있었으며	And a chapiter of brass was upon it; and the height of one chapiter was five cubits, with network and pomegranates upon the chapiters round about, all of brass. The second pillar also and the pomegranates were like unto these.	The bronze capital atop one pillar was five cubits high, with a network of bronze pomegranates all around. The second pillar, with its pomegranates, was similar.
JER	52	23	그 사면에 있는 석류는 구십륙이요 그 기둥에 둘린 그물 위에 있는 석류는 도합이 일백이었더라	And there were ninety and six pomegranates on a side; and all the pomegranates upon the network were an hundred round about.	Each capital had ninety-six pomegranates on the sides, and a total of a hundred pomegranates were above the surrounding network.
JER	52	24	시위대 장관이 대제사장 스라야와 부제사장 스바냐와 전 문지기 세 사람을 잡고	And the captain of the guard took Seraiah the chief priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the three keepers of the door:	The captain of the guard also took away Seraiah the chief priest, Zephaniah the priest of second rank, and the three doorkeepers.
JER	52	25	또 성중에서 사람을 잡았으니 곧 군사를 거느린 장관 하나와 또 성중에서 만난 바 왕의 시종 칠 인과 국민을 초모하는 군대장관의 서기관 하나와 성중에서 만난 바 국민 육십 명이라	He took also out of the city an eunuch, which had the charge of the men of war; and seven men of them that were near the king’s person, which were found in the city; and the principal scribe of the host, who mustered the people of the land; and threescore men of the people of the land, that were found in the midst of the city.	Of those still in the city, he took a court official who had been appointed over the men of war, as well as seven trusted royal advisers. He also took the scribe of the captain of the army, who had enlisted the people of the land, and sixty men who were found in the city.
JER	52	26	시위대 장관 느부사라단이 그들을 잡아가지고 립나 바벨론 왕에게 나아가매	So Nebuzar–adan the captain of the guard took them, and brought them to the king of Babylon to Riblah.	Nebuzaradan captain of the guard took them and brought them to the king of Babylon at Riblah.
JER	52	27	바벨론 왕이 하맛 땅 립나에서 다 쳐죽였더라 이와 같이 유다가 사로잡혀 본토에서 떠났더라	And the king of Babylon smote them, and put them to death in Riblah in the land of Hamath. Thus Judah was carried away captive out of his own land.	There at Riblah in the land of Hamath, the king of Babylon struck them down and put them to death. So Judah was taken into exile, away from its own land.
JER	52	28	느부갓네살의 사로잡아 옮긴 백성이 이러하니라 제칠년에 유다인이 삼천이십삼이요	This is the people whom Nebuchadrezzar carried away captive: in the seventh year three thousand Jews and three and twenty:	These are the people Nebuchadnezzar carried away: in the seventh year, 3,023 Jews;
JER	52	29	느부갓네살의 십팔년에 예루살렘에서 사로잡아 옮긴 자가 팔백삼십이 인이요	In the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar he carried away captive from Jerusalem eight hundred thirty and two persons:	in Nebuchadnezzar’s eighteenth year, 832 people from Jerusalem;
JER	52	30	느부갓네살의 이십삼년에 시위대 장관 느부사라단이 사로잡아 옮긴 유다인이 칠백사십오 인이니 그 총수가 사천육백 인이었더라	In the three and twentieth year of Nebuchadrezzar Nebuzar–adan the captain of the guard carried away captive of the Jews seven hundred forty and five persons: all the persons were four thousand and six hundred.	in Nebuchadnezzar’s twenty-third year, Nebuzaradan captain of the guard carried away 745 Jews. So in all, 4,600 people were taken away.
JER	52	31	유다 왕 여호야긴이 사로잡혀간지 삼십칠년 곧 바렙론 왕 에윌므로닥의 즉위 원년 십이월 이십오일에 그가 유다 왕 여호야긴을 옥에서 내어놓아 그 머리를 들게 하고	And it came to pass in the seven and thirtieth year of the captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, in the five and twentieth day of the month, that Evil–merodach king of Babylon in the first year of his reign lifted up the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah, and brought him forth out of prison,	On the twenty-fifth day of the twelfth month of the thirty-seventh year of the exile of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the first year of the reign of Evil-merodach king of Babylon, he pardoned Jehoiachin king of Judah and released him from prison.
JER	52	32	그에게 선히 말하고 그의 위를 그와 함께 바벨론에 있는 왕들의 위보다 높이고	And spake kindly unto him, and set his throne above the throne of the kings that were with him in Babylon,	And he spoke kindly to Jehoiachin and set his throne above the thrones of the other kings who were with him in Babylon.
JER	52	33	그 죄수의 의복을 바꾸게 하고 그 일평생에 항상 왕의 앞에서 먹게 하였으며	And changed his prison garments: and he did continually eat bread before him all the days of his life.	So Jehoiachin changed out of his prison clothes, and he dined regularly at the king’s table for the rest of his life.
JER	52	34	그의 쓸 것은 날마다 바벨론 왕에게서 받는 정수가 있어서 죽는 날까지 곧 종신토록 끊이지 아니하였더라	And for his diet, there was a continual diet given him of the king of Babylon, every day a portion until the day of his death, all the days of his life.	And the king of Babylon provided Jehoiachin a daily portion for the rest of his life, until the day of his death.
LAM	1	1	슬프다 이 성이여 본래는 거민이 많더니 이제는 어찌 그리 적막히 앉았는고 본래는 열국 중에 크던 자가 이제는 과부 같고 본래는 열방 중에 공주 되었던 자가 이제는 조공 드리는 자가 되었도다	How doth the city sit solitary, that was full of people! how is she become as a widow! she that was great among the nations, and princess among the provinces, how is she become tributary!	How lonely lies the city, once so full of people! She who was great among the nations has become a widow. The princess of the provinces has become a slave.
LAM	1	2	밤새도록 애곡하니 눈물이 뺨에 흐름이여 사랑하던 자 중에 위로하는 자가 없고 친구도 다 배반하여 원수가 되었도다	She weepeth sore in the night, and her tears are on her cheeks: among all her lovers she hath none to comfort her: all her friends have dealt treacherously with her, they are become her enemies.	She weeps aloud in the night, with tears upon her cheeks. Among all her lovers there is no one to comfort her. All her friends have betrayed her; they have become her enemies.
LAM	1	3	유다는 환난과 많은 수고로 인하여 사로잡혀 갔도다 저가 열방에 거하여 평강을 얻지 못함이여 그 모든 핍박하는 자가 저를 쫓아 협착한 곳에 미쳤도다	Judah is gone into captivity because of affliction, and because of great servitude: she dwelleth among the heathen, she findeth no rest: all her persecutors overtook her between the straits.	Judah has gone into exile under affliction and harsh slavery; she dwells among the nations but finds no place to rest. All her pursuers have overtaken her in the midst of her distress.
LAM	1	4	시온의 도로가 처량함이여 절기에 나아가는 사람이 없음이로다 모든 성문이 황적하며 제사장들이 탄식하며 처녀들이 근심하며 저도 곤고를 받았도다	The ways of Zion do mourn, because none come to the solemn feasts: all her gates are desolate: her priests sigh, her virgins are afflicted, and she is in bitterness.	The roads to Zion mourn, because no one comes to her appointed feasts. All her gates are deserted; her priests groan, her maidens grieve, and she herself is bitter with anguish.
LAM	1	5	저의 대적이 머리가 되고 저의 원수가 형통함은 저의 죄가 많으므로 여호와께서 곤고케 하셨음이라 어린 자녀들이 대적에게 사로잡혔도다	Her adversaries are the chief, her enemies prosper; for the Lord hath afflicted her for the multitude of her transgressions: her children are gone into captivity before the enemy.	Her foes have become her masters; her enemies are at ease. For the LORD has brought her grief because of her many transgressions. Her children have gone away as captives before the enemy.
LAM	1	6	처녀 시온의 모든 영광이 떠나감이여 저의 목백은 꼴을 찾지 못한 사슴이 쫓는 자 앞에서 힘없이 달림 같도다	And from the daughter of Zion all her beauty is departed: her princes are become like harts that find no pasture, and they are gone without strength before the pursuer.	All the splendor has departed from the Daughter of Zion. Her princes are like deer that find no pasture; they lack the strength to flee in the face of the hunter.
LAM	1	7	예루살렘이 환난과 군박을 당하는 날에 옛날의 모든 즐거움을 생각함이여 백성이 대적의 손에 빠지나 돕는 자가 없고 대적은 보고 그 황적함을 비웃도다	Jerusalem remembered in the days of her affliction and of her miseries all her pleasant things that she had in the days of old, when her people fell into the hand of the enemy, and none did help her: the adversaries saw her, and did mock at her sabbaths.	In the days of her affliction and wandering Jerusalem remembers all the treasures that were hers in days of old. When her people fell into enemy hands she received no help. Her enemies looked upon her, laughing at her downfall.
LAM	1	8	예루살렘이 크게 범죄하므로 불결한 자 같이 되니 전에 높이던 모든 자가 그 적신을 보고 업신여김이여 저가 탄식하며 물러가도다	Jerusalem hath grievously sinned; therefore she is removed: all that honoured her despise her, because they have seen her nakedness: yea, she sigheth, and turneth backward.	Jerusalem has sinned greatly; therefore she has become an object of scorn. All who honored her now despise her, for they have seen her nakedness; she herself groans and turns away.
LAM	1	9	저의 더러움이 그 치마에 있으나 결국을 생각지 아니함이여 그러므로 놀랍게 낮아져도 위로할 자가 없도다 여호와여 원수가 스스로 큰 체하오니 나의 환난을 감찰하소서	Her filthiness is in her skirts; she remembereth not her last end; therefore she came down wonderfully: she had no comforter. O Lord, behold my affliction: for the enemy hath magnified himself.	Her uncleanness stains her skirts; she did not consider her end. Her downfall was astounding; there was no one to comfort her. Look, O LORD, on my affliction, for the enemy has triumphed!
LAM	1	10	대적이 손을 펴서 보물을 빼앗았나이다 주께서 이미 이방인을 금하여 주의 공회에 들어오지 못하게 하셨사오나 저희가 성소에 들어간 것을 예루살렘이 보았나이다	The adversary hath spread out his hand upon all her pleasant things: for she hath seen that the heathen entered into her sanctuary, whom thou didst command that they should not enter into thy congregation.	The adversary has seized all her treasures. For she has seen the nations enter her sanctuary— those You had forbidden to enter Your assembly.
LAM	1	11	그 모든 백성이 생명을 소성시키려고 보물로 식물들을 바꾸었더니 지금도 탄식하며 양식을 구하나이다 나는 비천하오니 여호와여 나를 권고하옵소서	All her people sigh, they seek bread; they have given their pleasant things for meat to relieve the soul: see, O Lord, and consider; for I am become vile.	All her people groan as they search for bread. They have traded their treasures for food to keep themselves alive. Look, O LORD, and consider, for I have become despised.
LAM	1	12	무릇 지나가는 자여 너희에게는 관계가 없는가 내게 임한 근심 같은 근심이 있는가 볼지어다 여호와께서 진노하신 날에 나를 괴롭게 하신 것이로다	Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? behold, and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord hath afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger.	Is this nothing to you, all you who pass by? Look around and see! Is there any sorrow like mine, which was inflicted on me, which the LORD made me suffer on the day of His fierce anger?
LAM	1	13	위에서부터 나의 골수에 불을 보내어 이기게 하시고 내 발 앞에 그물을 베푸사 나로 물러가게 하셨음이여 종일토록 고적하여 곤비케 하셨도다	From above hath he sent fire into my bones, and it prevaileth against them: he hath spread a net for my feet, he hath turned me back: he hath made me desolate and faint all the day.	He sent fire from on high, and it overpowered my bones. He spread a net for my feet and turned me back. He made me desolate, faint all the day long.
LAM	1	14	내 죄악의 멍에를 그 손으로 묶고 얽어 내 목에 올리사 내 힘을 피곤케 하셨음이여 내가 당할 수 없는 자의 손에 주께서 나를 붙이셨도다	The yoke of my transgressions is bound by his hand: they are wreathed, and come up upon my neck: he hath made my strength to fall, the Lord hath delivered me into their hands, from whom I am not able to rise up.	My transgressions are bound into a yoke, knit together by His hand; they are draped over my neck, and the Lord has broken my strength. He has delivered me into the hands of those I cannot withstand.
LAM	1	15	주께서 내 지경 안 모든 용사를 없는 것 같이 여기시고 성회를 모아 내 소년들을 부수심이여 처녀 유다를 술틀에 밟으셨도다	The Lord hath trodden under foot all my mighty men in the midst of me: he hath called an assembly against me to crush my young men: the Lord hath trodden the virgin, the daughter of Judah, as in a winepress.	The Lord has rejected all the mighty men in my midst; He has summoned an army against me to crush my young warriors. Like grapes in a winepress, the Lord has trampled the Virgin Daughter of Judah.
LAM	1	16	이를 인하여 내가 우니 내 눈에 눈물이 물 같이 흐름이여 나를 위로하여 내 영을 소성시킬 자가 멀리 떠났음이로다 원수들이 이기매 내 자녀들이 외롭도다	For these things I weep; mine eye, mine eye runneth down with water, because the comforter that should relieve my soul is far from me: my children are desolate, because the enemy prevailed.	For these things I weep; my eyes flow with tears. For there is no one nearby to comfort me, no one to revive my soul. My children are destitute because the enemy has prevailed.
LAM	1	17	시온이 두손을 폈으나 위로할 자가 없도다 여호와께서 야곱의 사면에 있는 자를 명하여 야곱의 대적이 되게 하셨으니 예루살렘은 저희 가운데 불결한 자 같도다	Zion spreadeth forth her hands, and there is none to comfort her: the Lord hath commanded concerning Jacob, that his adversaries should be round about him: Jerusalem is as a menstruous woman among them.	Zion stretches out her hands, but there is no one to comfort her. The LORD has decreed against Jacob that his neighbors become his foes. Jerusalem has become an unclean thing among them.
LAM	1	18	여호와는 의로우시도다 내가 여호와의 명령을 거역하였도다 너희 모든 백성들아 내 말을 듣고 내 근심을 볼지어다 나의 처녀와 소년들이 사로잡혀 갔도다	The Lord is righteous; for I have rebelled against his commandment: hear, I pray you, all people, and behold my sorrow: my virgins and my young men are gone into captivity.	The LORD is righteous, for I have rebelled against His command. Listen, all you people; look upon my suffering. My young men and maidens have gone into captivity.
LAM	1	19	내가 내 사랑하는 자를 불렀으나 저희가 나를 속였으며 나의 제사장들과 장로들은 소성시킬 식물을 구하다가 성중에서 기절하였도다	I called for my lovers, but they deceived me: my priests and mine elders gave up the ghost in the city, while they sought their meat to relieve their souls.	I called out to my lovers, but they have betrayed me. My priests and elders perished in the city while they searched for food to keep themselves alive.
LAM	1	20	여호와여 돌아보옵소서 내가 환난 중에서 마음이 괴롭고 마음이 번뇌하오니 나의 패역이 심히 큼이니이다 밖으로는 칼의 살륙이 있고 집에는 사망 같은 것이 있나이다	Behold, O Lord; for I am in distress: my bowels are troubled; mine heart is turned within me; for I have grievously rebelled: abroad the sword bereaveth, at home there is as death.	See, O LORD, how distressed I am! I am churning within; my heart is pounding within me, for I have been most rebellious. Outside, the sword bereaves; inside, there is death.
LAM	1	21	저희가 나의 탄식을 들었으나 나를 위로하는 자가 없고 나의 모든 원수가 나의 재앙을 들었으나 주께서 이렇게 행하심을 기뻐하나이다 주께서 반포하신 날을 이르게 하시리니 저희가 나와 같이 되겠나이다	They have heard that I sigh: there is none to comfort me: all mine enemies have heard of my trouble; they are glad that thou hast done it: thou wilt bring the day that thou hast called, and they shall be like unto me.	People have heard my groaning, but there is no one to comfort me. All my enemies have heard of my trouble; they are glad that You have caused it. May You bring the day You have announced, so that they may become like me.
LAM	1	22	저희 모든 악을 주 앞에 나타내시고 나의 모든 죄악을 인하여 내게 행하신 것 같이 저희에게 행하옵소서 나의 탄식이 많고 나의 마음이 곤비하니이다	Let all their wickedness come before thee; and do unto them, as thou hast done unto me for all my transgressions: for my sighs are many, and my heart is faint.	Let all their wickedness come before You, and deal with them as You have dealt with me because of all my transgressions. For my groans are many, and my heart is faint.
LAM	2	1	슬프다 주께서 어찌 그리 진노하사 처녀 시온을 구름으로 덮으셨는고 이스라엘의 아름다운 것을 하늘에서 땅에 던지셨음이여 진노하신 날에 그 발등상을 기억지 아니하셨도다	How hath the Lord covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud in his anger, and cast down from heaven unto the earth the beauty of Israel, and remembered not his footstool in the day of his anger!	How the Lord has covered the Daughter of Zion with the cloud of His anger! He has cast the glory of Israel from heaven to earth. He has abandoned His footstool in the day of His anger.
LAM	2	2	주께서 야곱의 모든 거처를 삼키시고 긍휼히 여기지 아니하셨음이여 노하사 처녀 유다의 견고한 성을 헐어 땅에 엎으시고 나라와 방백으로 욕되게 하셨도다	The Lord hath swallowed up all the habitations of Jacob, and hath not pitied: he hath thrown down in his wrath the strong holds of the daughter of Judah; he hath brought them down to the ground: he hath polluted the kingdom and the princes thereof.	Without pity the Lord has swallowed up all the dwellings of Jacob. In His wrath He has demolished the fortified cities of the Daughter of Judah. He brought to the ground and defiled her kingdom and its princes.
LAM	2	3	맹렬한 진노로 이스라엘 모든 뿔을 자르셨음이여 원수 앞에서 오른손을 거두시고 맹렬한 불이 사방으로 사름 같이 야곱을 사르셨도다	He hath cut off in his fierce anger all the horn of Israel: he hath drawn back his right hand from before the enemy, and he burned against Jacob like a flaming fire, which devoureth round about.	In fierce anger He has cut off every horn of Israel and withdrawn His right hand at the approach of the enemy. He has burned in Jacob like a flaming fire that consumes everything around it.
LAM	2	4	원수 같이 활을 당기고 대적처럼 오른손을 들고 서서 눈에 아름다운 모든 자를 살륙하셨음이여 처녀 시온의 장막에 노를 불처럼 쏟으셨도다	He hath bent his bow like an enemy: he stood with his right hand as an adversary, and slew all that were pleasant to the eye in the tabernacle of the daughter of Zion: he poured out his fury like fire.	He has bent His bow like an enemy; His right hand is positioned. Like a foe He has killed all who were pleasing to the eye; He has poured out His wrath like fire on the tent of the Daughter of Zion.
LAM	2	5	주께서 원수 같이 되어 이스라엘을 삼키셨음이여 모든 궁을 삼키셨고 견고한 성들을 훼파하사 처녀 유다에 근심과 애통을 더하셨도다	The Lord was as an enemy: he hath swallowed up Israel, he hath swallowed up all her palaces: he hath destroyed his strong holds, and hath increased in the daughter of Judah mourning and lamentation.	The Lord is like an enemy; He has swallowed up Israel. He has swallowed up all her palaces and destroyed her strongholds. He has multiplied mourning and lamentation for the Daughter of Judah.
LAM	2	6	성막을 동산의 초막 같이 헐어 버리시며 공회 처소를 훼파하셨도다 여호와께서 시온 가운데서 절기와 안식일을 잊어버리게 하시며 진노하사 왕과 제사장을 멸시하셨도다	And he hath violently taken away his tabernacle, as if it were of a garden: he hath destroyed his places of the assembly: the Lord hath caused the solemn feasts and sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion, and hath despised in the indignation of his anger the king and the priest.	He has laid waste His tabernacle like a garden booth; He has destroyed His place of meeting. The LORD has made Zion forget her appointed feasts and Sabbaths. In His fierce anger He has despised both king and priest.
LAM	2	7	여호와께서 또 자기 제단을 버리시며 자기 성소를 미워하시며 궁장을 원수의 손에 붙이셨으매 저희가 여호와의 전에서 훤화하기를 절기날과 같이 하였도다	The Lord hath cast off his altar, he hath abhorred his sanctuary, he hath given up into the hand of the enemy the walls of her palaces; they have made a noise in the house of the Lord, as in the day of a solemn feast.	The Lord has rejected His altar; He has abandoned His sanctuary; He has delivered the walls of her palaces into the hand of the enemy. They have raised a shout in the house of the LORD as on the day of an appointed feast.
LAM	2	8	여호와께서 처녀 시온의 성을 헐기로 결심하시고 줄을 띠고 훼파함에서 손을 거두지 아니하사 성과 곽으로 통곡하게 하셨으매 저희가 함께 쇠하였도다	The Lord hath purposed to destroy the wall of the daughter of Zion: he hath stretched out a line, he hath not withdrawn his hand from destroying: therefore he made the rampart and the wall to lament; they languished together.	The LORD determined to destroy the wall of the Daughter of Zion. He stretched out a measuring line and did not withdraw His hand from destroying. He made the ramparts and walls lament; together they waste away.
LAM	2	9	성문이 땅에 묻히며 빗장이 꺾여 훼파되고 왕과 방백들이 율법없는 열방 가운데 있으며 그 선지자들은 여호와의 묵시를 받지 못하는도다	Her gates are sunk into the ground; he hath destroyed and broken her bars: her king and her princes are among the Gentiles: the law is no more; her prophets also find no vision from the Lord.	Her gates have sunk into the ground; He has destroyed and shattered their bars. Her king and her princes are exiled among the nations, the law is no more, and even her prophets find no vision from the LORD.
LAM	2	10	처녀 시온의 장로들이 땅에 앉아 잠잠하고 티끌을 머리에 무릅쓰고 굵은 베를 허리에 둘렀음이여 예루살렘 처녀들은 머리를 땅에 숙였도다	The elders of the daughter of Zion sit upon the ground, and keep silence: they have cast up dust upon their heads; they have girded themselves with sackcloth: the virgins of Jerusalem hang down their heads to the ground.	The elders of the Daughter of Zion sit on the ground in silence. They have thrown dust on their heads and put on sackcloth. The young women of Jerusalem have bowed their heads to the ground.
LAM	2	11	내 눈이 눈물에 상하며 내 창자가 끓으며 내 간이 땅에 쏟아졌으니 이는 처녀 내 백성이 패망하여 어린 자녀와 젖먹는 아이들이 성읍 길거리에 혼미함이로다	Mine eyes do fail with tears, my bowels are troubled, my liver is poured upon the earth, for the destruction of the daughter of my people; because the children and the sucklings swoon in the streets of the city.	My eyes fail from weeping; I am churning within. My heart is poured out in grief over the destruction of the daughter of my people, because children and infants faint in the streets of the city.
LAM	2	12	저희가 성읍 길거리에서 상한 자처럼 혼미하여 그 어미의 품에서 혼이 떠날 때에 어미에게 이르기를 곡식과 포도주가 어디 있느뇨 하도다	They say to their mothers, Where is corn and wine? when they swooned as the wounded in the streets of the city, when their soul was poured out into their mothers’ bosom.	They cry out to their mothers: “Where is the grain and wine?” as they faint like the wounded in the streets of the city, as their lives fade away in the arms of their mothers.
LAM	2	13	처녀 예루살렘이여 내가 무엇으로 네게 증거하며 무엇으로 네게 비유할꼬 처녀 시온이여 내가 무엇으로 네게 비교하여 너를 위로할꼬 너의 파괴됨이 바다 같이 크니 누가 너를 고칠소냐	What thing shall I take to witness for thee? what thing shall I liken to thee, O daughter of Jerusalem? what shall I equal to thee, that I may comfort thee, O virgin daughter of Zion? for thy breach is great like the sea: who can heal thee?	What can I say for you? To what can I compare you, O Daughter of Jerusalem? To what can I liken you, that I may console you, O Virgin Daughter of Zion? For your wound is as deep as the sea. Who can ever heal you?
LAM	2	14	네 선지자들이 네게 대하여 헛되고 어리석은 묵시를 보았으므로 네 죄악을 드러내어서 네 사로잡힌 것을 돌이키지 못하였도다 저희가 거짓 경고와 미혹케 할 것만 보았도다	Thy prophets have seen vain and foolish things for thee: and they have not discovered thine iniquity, to turn away thy captivity; but have seen for thee false burdens and causes of banishment.	The visions of your prophets were empty and deceptive; they did not expose your guilt to ward off your captivity. The burdens they envisioned for you were empty and misleading.
LAM	2	15	무릇 지나가는 자는 다 너를 향하여 박장하며 처녀 예루살렘을 향하여 비소하고 머리를 흔들며 말하기를 온전한 영광이라, 천하의 희락이라 일컫던 성이 이 성이냐 하며	All that pass by clap their hands at thee; they hiss and wag their head at the daughter of Jerusalem, saying, Is this the city that men call The perfection of beauty, The joy of the whole earth?	All who pass by clap their hands at you in scorn. They hiss and shake their heads at the Daughter of Jerusalem: “Is this the city that was called the perfection of beauty, the joy of all the earth?”
LAM	2	16	너의 모든 원수는 너를 향하여 입을 벌리며 비소하고 이를 갈며 말하기를 우리가 저를 삼켰도다 우리가 바라던 날이 과연 이 날이라 우리가 얻기도 하고 보기도 하였다 하도다	All thine enemies have opened their mouth against thee: they hiss and gnash the teeth: they say, We have swallowed her up: certainly this is the day that we looked for; we have found, we have seen it.	All your enemies open their mouths against you. They hiss and gnash their teeth, saying, “We have swallowed her up. This is the day for which we have waited. We have lived to see it!”
LAM	2	17	여호와께서 이미 정하신 일을 행하시고 옛날에 명하신 말씀을 다 이루셨음이여 긍휼히 여기지 아니하시고 훼파하사 원수로 너를 인하여 즐거워하게 하며 너의 대적의 뿔로 높이 들리게 하셨도다	The Lord hath done that which he had devised; he hath fulfilled his word that he had commanded in the days of old: he hath thrown down, and hath not pitied: and he hath caused thine enemy to rejoice over thee, he hath set up the horn of thine adversaries.	The LORD has done what He planned; He has accomplished His decree, which He ordained in days of old; He has overthrown you without pity. He has let the enemy gloat over you and exalted the horn of your foes.
LAM	2	18	저희 마음이 주를 향하여 부르짖기를 처녀 시온의 성곽아 너는 밤낮으로 눈물을 강처럼 흘릴지어다 스스로 쉬지 말고 네 눈동자로 쉬게 하지 말지어다	Their heart cried unto the Lord, O wall of the daughter of Zion, let tears run down like a river day and night: give thyself no rest; let not the apple of thine eye cease.	The hearts of the people cry out to the Lord. O wall of the Daughter of Zion, let your tears run down like a river day and night. Give yourself no relief, and your eyes no rest.
LAM	2	19	밤 초경에 일어나 부르짖을지어다 네 마음을 주의 얼굴 앞에 물 쏟듯 할지어다 각 길머리에서 주려 혼미한 네 어린 자녀의 생명을 위하여 주를 향하여 손을 들지어다 하였도다	Arise, cry out in the night: in the beginning of the watches pour out thine heart like water before the face of the Lord: lift up thy hands toward him for the life of thy young children, that faint for hunger in the top of every street.	Arise, cry out in the night from the first watch of the night. Pour out your heart like water in the presence of the Lord. Lift up your hands to Him for the lives of your children who are fainting from hunger on the corner of every street.
LAM	2	20	여호와여 감찰하소서 뉘게 이같이 행하셨는지요 여인들이 어찌 자기 열매 곧 손에 받든 아이를 먹으오며 제사장들과 선지자들이 어찌 주의 성소에서 살륙을 당하오리이까	Behold, O Lord, and consider to whom thou hast done this. Shall the women eat their fruit, and children of a span long? shall the priest and the prophet be slain in the sanctuary of the Lord?	Look, O LORD, and consider: Whom have You ever treated like this? Should women eat their offspring, the infants they have nurtured? Should priests and prophets be killed in the sanctuary of the Lord?
LAM	2	21	노유는 다 길바닥에 엎드러졌사오며 내 처녀들과 소년들이 칼에 죽었나이다 주께서 진노하신 날에 죽이시되 긍휼히 여기지 아니하시고 살륙하셨나이다	The young and the old lie on the ground in the streets: my virgins and my young men are fallen by the sword; thou hast slain them in the day of thine anger; thou hast killed, and not pitied.	Both young and old lie together in the dust of the streets. My young men and maidens have fallen by the sword. You have slain them in the day of Your anger; You have slaughtered them without compassion.
LAM	2	22	주께서 내 두려운 일을 사방에서 부르시기를 절기에 무리를 부름 같이 하셨나이다 여호와께서 진노하신 날에 피하거나 남은 자가 없었나이다 내 손에 받들어 기르는 자를 내 원수가 다 멸하였나이다	Thou hast called as in a solemn day my terrors round about, so that in the day of the Lord’s anger none escaped nor remained: those that I have swaddled and brought up hath mine enemy consumed.	You summoned my attackers on every side, as for the day of an appointed feast. In the day of the LORD’s anger no one escaped or survived; my enemy has destroyed those I nurtured and reared.
LAM	3	1	여호와의 노하신 매로 인하여 고난 당한 자는 내로다	I am the man that hath seen affliction by the rod of his wrath.	I am the man who has seen affliction under the rod of God’s wrath.
LAM	3	2	나를 이끌어 흑암에 행하고 광명에 행치 않게 하셨으며	He hath led me, and brought me into darkness, but not into light.	He has driven me away and made me walk in darkness instead of light.
LAM	3	3	종일토록 손을 돌이켜 자주 자주 나를 치시도다	Surely against me is he turned; he turneth his hand against me all the day.	Indeed, He keeps turning His hand against me all day long.
LAM	3	4	나의 살과 가죽을 쇠하게 하시며 나의 뼈를 꺾으셨고	My flesh and my skin hath he made old; he hath broken my bones.	He has worn away my flesh and skin; He has shattered my bones.
LAM	3	5	담즙과 수고를 쌓아 나를 에우셨으며	He hath builded against me, and compassed me with gall and travail.	He has besieged me and surrounded me with bitterness and hardship.
LAM	3	6	나로 흑암에 거하게 하시기를 죽은지 오랜 자 같게 하셨도다	He hath set me in dark places, as they that be dead of old.	He has made me dwell in darkness like those dead for ages.
LAM	3	7	나를 둘러 싸서 나가지 못하게 하시고 나의 사슬을 무겁게 하셨으며	He hath hedged me about, that I cannot get out: he hath made my chain heavy.	He has walled me in so I cannot escape; He has weighed me down with chains.
LAM	3	8	내가 부르짖어 도움을 구하나 내 기도를 물리치시며	Also when I cry and shout, he shutteth out my prayer.	Even when I cry out and plead for help, He shuts out my prayer.
LAM	3	9	다듬은 돌을 쌓아 내 길을 막으사 내 첩경을 굽게 하셨도다	He hath inclosed my ways with hewn stone, he hath made my paths crooked.	He has barred my ways with cut stones; He has made my paths crooked.
LAM	3	10	저는 내게 대하여 엎드리어 기다리는 곰과 은밀한 곳의 사자 같으사	He was unto me as a bear lying in wait, and as a lion in secret places.	He is a bear lying in wait, a lion hiding in ambush.
LAM	3	11	나의 길로 치우치게 하시며 내 몸을 찢으시며 나로 적막하게 하셨도다	He hath turned aside my ways, and pulled me in pieces: he hath made me desolate.	He forced me off my path and tore me to pieces; He left me without help.
LAM	3	12	활을 당기고 나로 과녁을 삼으심이여	He hath bent his bow, and set me as a mark for the arrow.	He bent His bow and set me as the target for His arrow.
LAM	3	13	전동의 살로 내 허리를 맞추셨도다	He hath caused the arrows of his quiver to enter into my reins.	He pierced my kidneys with His arrows.
LAM	3	14	나는 내 모든 백성에게 조롱거리 곧 종일토록 그들의 노랫거리가 되었도다	I was a derision to all my people; and their song all the day.	I am a laughingstock to all my people; they mock me in song all day long.
LAM	3	15	나를 쓴 것으로 배불리시고 쑥으로 취하게 하셨으며	He hath filled me with bitterness, he hath made me drunken with wormwood.	He has filled me with bitterness; He has intoxicated me with wormwood.
LAM	3	16	조약돌로 내 이를 꺾으시고 재로 나를 덮으셨도다	He hath also broken my teeth with gravel stones, he hath covered me with ashes.	He has ground my teeth with gravel and trampled me in the dust.
LAM	3	17	주께서 내 심령으로 평강을 멀리 떠나게 하시니 내가 복을 잊어버렸음이여	And thou hast removed my soul far off from peace: I forgat prosperity.	My soul has been deprived of peace; I have forgotten what prosperity is.
LAM	3	18	스스로 이르기를 나의 힘과 여호와께 대한 내 소망이 끊어졌다 하였도다	And I said, My strength and my hope is perished from the Lord:	So I say, “My strength has perished, along with my hope from the LORD.”
LAM	3	19	내 고초와 재난 곧 쑥과 담즙을 기억하소서	Remembering mine affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the gall.	Remember my affliction and wandering, the wormwood and the gall.
LAM	3	20	내 심령이 그것을 기억하고 낙심이 되오나	My soul hath them still in remembrance, and is humbled in me.	Surely my soul remembers and is humbled within me.
LAM	3	21	중심에 회상한즉 오히려 소망이 있사옴은	This I recall to my mind, therefore have I hope.	Yet I call this to mind, and therefore I have hope:
LAM	3	22	여호와의 자비와 긍휼이 무궁하시므로 우리가 진멸되지 아니함이니이다	It is of the Lord’s mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not.	Because of the loving devotion of the LORD we are not consumed, for His mercies never fail.
LAM	3	23	이것이 아침마다 새로우니 주의 성실이 크도소이다	They are new every morning: great is thy faithfulness.	They are new every morning; great is Your faithfulness!
LAM	3	24	내 심령에 이르기를 여호와는 나의 기업이시니 그러므로 내가 저를 바라리라 하도다	The Lord is my portion, saith my soul; therefore will I hope in him.	“The LORD is my portion,” says my soul, “therefore I will hope in Him.”
LAM	3	25	무릇 기다리는 자에게나 구하는 영혼에게 여호와께서 선을 베푸시는도다	The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the soul that seeketh him.	The LORD is good to those who wait for Him, to the soul who seeks Him.
LAM	3	26	사람이 여호와의 구원을 바라고 잠잠히 기다림이 좋도다	It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord.	It is good to wait quietly for the salvation of the LORD.
LAM	3	27	사람이 젊었을 때에 멍에를 메는 것이 좋으니	It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth.	It is good for a man to bear the yoke while he is still young.
LAM	3	28	혼자 앉아서 잠잠할 것은 주께서 그것을 메우셨음이라	He sitteth alone and keepeth silence, because he hath borne it upon him.	Let him sit alone in silence, for God has disciplined him.
LAM	3	29	입을 티끌에 댈지어다 혹시 소망이 있을지로다	He putteth his mouth in the dust; if so be there may be hope.	Let him bury his face in the dust— perhaps there is still hope.
LAM	3	30	때리는 자에게 뺨을 향하여 수욕으로 배불릴지어다	He giveth his cheek to him that smiteth him: he is filled full with reproach.	Let him offer his cheek to the one who would strike him; let him be filled with reproach.
LAM	3	31	이는 주께서 영원토록 버리지 않으실 것임이며	For the Lord will not cast off for ever:	For the Lord will not cast us off forever.
LAM	3	32	저가 비록 근심케 하시나 그 풍부한 자비대로 긍휼히 여기실 것임이니라	But though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion according to the multitude of his mercies.	Even if He causes grief, He will show compassion according to His abundant loving devotion.
LAM	3	33	주께서 인생으로 고생하며 근심하게 하심이 본심이 아니시로다	For he doth not afflict willingly nor grieve the children of men.	For He does not willingly afflict or grieve the sons of men.
LAM	3	34	세상에 모든 갇힌 자를 발로 밟는 것과	To crush under his feet all the prisoners of the earth,	To crush underfoot all the prisoners of the land,
LAM	3	35	지극히 높으신 자의 얼굴 앞에서 사람의 재판을 굽게 하는 것과	To turn aside the right of a man before the face of the most High,	to deny a man justice before the Most High,
LAM	3	36	사람의 송사를 억울케 하는 것은 다 주의 기쁘게 보시는 것이 아니로다	To subvert a man in his cause, the Lord approveth not.	to subvert a man in his lawsuit— of these the Lord does not approve.
LAM	3	37	주의 명령이 아니면 누가 능히 말하여 이루게 하라	Who is he that saith, and it cometh to pass, when the Lord commandeth it not?	Who has spoken and it came to pass, unless the Lord has ordained it?
LAM	3	38	화, 복이 지극히 높으신 자의 입으로 나오지 아니하느냐	Out of the mouth of the most High proceedeth not evil and good?	Do not both adversity and good come from the mouth of the Most High?
LAM	3	39	살아 있는 사람은 자기 죄로 벌을 받나니 어찌 원망하랴	Wherefore doth a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins?	Why should any mortal man complain, in view of his sins?
LAM	3	40	우리가 스스로 행위를 조사하고 여호와께로 돌아가자	Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord.	Let us examine and test our ways, and turn back to the LORD.
LAM	3	41	마음과 손을 아울러 하늘에 계신 하나님께 들자	Let us lift up our heart with our hands unto God in the heavens.	Let us lift up our hearts and hands to God in heaven:
LAM	3	42	우리의 범죄함과 패역함을 주께서 사하지 아니하시고	We have transgressed and have rebelled: thou hast not pardoned.	“We have sinned and rebelled; You have not forgiven.”
LAM	3	43	진노로 스스로 가리우시고 우리를 군축하시며 살륙하사 긍휼을 베풀지 아니하셨나이다	Thou hast covered with anger, and persecuted us: thou hast slain, thou hast not pitied.	You have covered Yourself in anger and pursued us; You have killed without pity.
LAM	3	44	주께서 구름으로 스스로 가리우사 기도로 상달치 못하게 하시고	Thou hast covered thyself with a cloud, that our prayer should not pass through.	You have covered Yourself with a cloud that no prayer can pass through.
LAM	3	45	우리를 열방 가운데서 진개와 폐물을 삼으셨으므로	Thou hast made us as the offscouring and refuse in the midst of the people.	You have made us scum and refuse among the nations.
LAM	3	46	우리의 모든 대적이 우리를 향하여 입을 크게 벌렸나이다	All our enemies have opened their mouths against us.	All our enemies open their mouths against us.
LAM	3	47	두려움과 함정과 잔해와 멸망이 우리에게 임하였도다	Fear and a snare is come upon us, desolation and destruction.	Panic and pitfall have come upon us— devastation and destruction.
LAM	3	48	처녀 내 백성의 파멸을 인하여 내 눈에 눈물이 시내처럼 흐르도다	Mine eye runneth down with rivers of water for the destruction of the daughter of my people.	Streams of tears flow from my eyes over the destruction of the daughter of my people.
LAM	3	49	내 눈의 흐르는 눈물이 그치지 아니하고 쉬지 아니함이여	Mine eye trickleth down, and ceaseth not, without any intermission,	My eyes overflow unceasingly, without relief,
LAM	3	50	여호와께서 하늘에서 살피시고 돌아보시기를 기다리는도다	Till the Lord look down, and behold from heaven.	until the LORD looks down from heaven and sees.
LAM	3	51	나의 성읍의 모든 여자를 인하여 내 눈이 내 심령을 상하게 하는도다	Mine eye affecteth mine heart because of all the daughters of my city.	My eyes bring grief to my soul because of all the daughters of my city.
LAM	3	52	무고히 나의 대적이 된 자가 나를 새와 같이 심히 쫓도다	Mine enemies chased me sore, like a bird, without cause.	Without cause my enemies hunted me like a bird.
LAM	3	53	저희가 내 생명을 끊으려고 나를 구덩이에 넣고 그 위에 돌을 던짐이여	They have cut off my life in the dungeon, and cast a stone upon me.	They dropped me alive into a pit and cast stones upon me.
LAM	3	54	물이 내 머리에 넘치니 내가 스스로 이르기를 이제는 멸절되었다 하도다	Waters flowed over mine head; then I said, I am cut off.	The waters flowed over my head, and I thought I was going to die.
LAM	3	55	여호와여 내가 심히 깊은 구덩이에서 주의 이름을 불렀나이다	I called upon thy name, O Lord, out of the low dungeon.	I called on Your name, O LORD, out of the depths of the Pit.
LAM	3	56	주께서 이미 나의 음성을 들으셨사오니 이제 나의 탄식과 부르짖음에 주의 귀를 가리우지 마옵소서	Thou hast heard my voice: hide not thine ear at my breathing, at my cry.	You heard my plea: “Do not ignore my cry for relief.”
LAM	3	57	내가 주께 아뢴 날에 주께서 내게 가까이 하여 가라사대 두려워 말라 하셨나이다	Thou drewest near in the day that I called upon thee: thou saidst, Fear not.	You drew near when I called on You; You said, “Do not be afraid.”
LAM	3	58	주여 주께서 내 심령의 원통을 펴셨고 내 생명을 속하셨나이다	O Lord, thou hast pleaded the causes of my soul; thou hast redeemed my life.	You defend my cause, O Lord; You redeem my life.
LAM	3	59	여호와여 나의 억울을 감찰하셨사오니 나를 위하여 신원하옵소서	O Lord, thou hast seen my wrong: judge thou my cause.	You have seen, O LORD, the wrong done to me; vindicate my cause!
LAM	3	60	저희가 내게 보수하며 나를 모해함을 주께서 다 감찰하셨나이다	Thou hast seen all their vengeance and all their imaginations against me.	You have seen all their malice, all their plots against me.
LAM	3	61	여호와여 저희가 나를 훼파하며 나를 모해하는 것	Thou hast heard their reproach, O Lord, and all their imaginations against me;	O LORD, You have heard their insults, all their plots against me—
LAM	3	62	곧 일어나 나를 치는 자의 입술에서 나오는 것과 종일 모해하는 것을 들으셨나이다	The lips of those that rose up against me, and their device against me all the day.	the slander and murmuring of my assailants against me all day long.
LAM	3	63	저희가 앉든지 서든지 나를 노래하는 것을 주여 보옵소서	Behold their sitting down, and their rising up; I am their musick.	When they sit and when they rise, see how they mock me in song.
LAM	3	64	여호와여 주께서 저의 손으로 행한 대로 보응하사	Render unto them a recompence, O Lord, according to the work of their hands.	You will pay them back what they deserve, O LORD, according to the work of their hands.
LAM	3	65	그 마음을 강퍅하게 하시고 저주를 더하시며	Give them sorrow of heart, thy curse unto them.	Put a veil of anguish over their hearts; may Your curse be upon them!
LAM	3	66	진노로 저희를 군축하사 여호와의 천하에서 멸하시리이다	Persecute and destroy them in anger from under the heavens of the Lord.	You will pursue them in anger and exterminate them from under Your heavens, O LORD.
LAM	4	1	슬프다 어찌 그리 금이 빛을 잃고 정금이 변하였으며 성소의 돌이 각 거리 머리에 쏟아졌는고	How is the gold become dim! how is the most fine gold changed! the stones of the sanctuary are poured out in the top of every street.	How the gold has become tarnished, the pure gold has become dull! The gems of the temple lie scattered on every street corner.
LAM	4	2	시온의 아들들이 보배로워 정금에 비할러니 어찌 그리 토기장이의 만든 질항아리 같이 여김이 되었는고	The precious sons of Zion, comparable to fine gold, how are they esteemed as earthen pitchers, the work of the hands of the potter!	How the precious sons of Zion, once worth their weight in pure gold, are now esteemed as jars of clay, the work of a potter’s hands!
LAM	4	3	들개는 오히려 젖을 내어 새끼를 먹이나 처녀 내 백성은 잔인하여 광야의 타조 같도다	Even the sea monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to their young ones: the daughter of my people is become cruel, like the ostriches in the wilderness.	Even jackals offer their breasts to nurse their young, but the daughter of my people has become cruel, like an ostrich in the wilderness.
LAM	4	4	젖먹이가 목말라서 혀가 입천장에 붙음이여 어린 아이가 떡을 구하나 떼어 줄 사람이 없도다	The tongue of the sucking child cleaveth to the roof of his mouth for thirst: the young children ask bread, and no man breaketh it unto them.	The nursing infant’s tongue clings in thirst to the roof of his mouth. Little children beg for bread, but no one gives them any.
LAM	4	5	진수를 먹던 자가 거리에 외로움이여 전에는 붉은 옷을 입고 길리운 자가 이제는 거름더미를 안았도다	They that did feed delicately are desolate in the streets: they that were brought up in scarlet embrace dunghills.	Those who once ate delicacies are destitute in the streets; those brought up in crimson huddle in ash heaps.
LAM	4	6	전에 소돔이 사람의 손을 대지 않고 경각간에 무너지더니 이제 처녀 내 백성의 죄가 소돔의 죄악보다 중하도다	For the punishment of the iniquity of the daughter of my people is greater than the punishment of the sin of Sodom, that was overthrown as in a moment, and no hands stayed on her.	The punishment of the daughter of my people is greater than that of Sodom, which was overthrown in an instant without a hand turned to help her.
LAM	4	7	전에는 존귀한 자의 몸이 눈보다 깨끗하고 젖보다 희며 산호보다 붉어 그 윤택함이 마광한 청옥 같더니	Her Nazarites were purer than snow, they were whiter than milk, they were more ruddy in body than rubies, their polishing was of sapphire:	Her dignitaries were brighter than snow, whiter than milk; their bodies were more ruddy than rubies, their appearance like sapphires.
LAM	4	8	이제는 그 얼굴이 숯보다 검고 그 가죽이 뼈에 붙어 막대기 같이 말랐으니 거리에서 알 사람이 없도다	Their visage is blacker than a coal; they are not known in the streets: their skin cleaveth to their bones; it is withered, it is become like a stick.	But now their appearance is blacker than soot; they are not recognized in the streets. Their skin has shriveled on their bones; it has become as dry as a stick.
LAM	4	9	칼에 죽은 자가 주려 죽은 자보다 나음은 토지 소산이 끊어지므로 이들이 찔림 같이 점점 쇠약하여 감이로다	They that be slain with the sword are better than they that be slain with hunger: for these pine away, stricken through for want of the fruits of the field.	Those slain by the sword are better off than those who die of hunger, who waste away, pierced with pain because the fields lack produce.
LAM	4	10	처녀 내 백성의 멸망할 때에 자비한 부녀가 손으로 자기 자녀를 삶아 식물을 삼았도다	The hands of the pitiful women have sodden their own children: they were their meat in the destruction of the daughter of my people.	The hands of compassionate women have cooked their own children, who became their food in the destruction of the daughter of my people.
LAM	4	11	여호와께서 분을 발하시며 맹렬한 노를 쏟으심이여 시온에 불을 피우사 그 지대를 사르셨도다	The Lord hath accomplished his fury; he hath poured out his fierce anger, and hath kindled a fire in Zion, and it hath devoured the foundations thereof.	The LORD has exhausted His wrath; He has poured out His fierce anger; He has kindled a fire in Zion, and it has consumed her foundations.
LAM	4	12	대적과 원수가 예루살렘 성문으로 들어갈 줄은 세상 열왕과 천하 모든 백성이 믿지 못하였었도다	The kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the world, would not have believed that the adversary and the enemy should have entered into the gates of Jerusalem.	The kings of the earth did not believe, nor any people of the world, that an enemy or a foe could enter the gates of Jerusalem.
LAM	4	13	그 선지자들의 죄와 제사장들의 죄악을 인함이니 저희가 성읍 중에서 의인의 피를 흘렀도다	For the sins of her prophets, and the iniquities of her priests, that have shed the blood of the just in the midst of her,	But this was for the sins of her prophets and the guilt of her priests, who shed the blood of the righteous in her midst.
LAM	4	14	저희가 거리에서 소경 같이 방황함이여 그 옷이 피에 더러웠으므로 사람이 만질 수 없도다	They have wandered as blind men in the streets, they have polluted themselves with blood, so that men could not touch their garments.	They wandered blind in the streets, defiled by this blood, so that no one dared to touch their garments.
LAM	4	15	사람이 저희에게 외쳐 이르기를 부정하다 가라, 가라, 가라, 만지지말라 하였음이여 저희가 도망하여 방황할 때에 이방인이 이르기를 저희가 다시는 여기 거하지 못하리라 하였도다	They cried unto them, Depart ye; it is unclean; depart, depart, touch not: when they fled away and wandered, they said among the heathen, They shall no more sojourn there.	“Go away! Unclean!” men shouted at them. “Away, away! Do not touch us!” So they fled and wandered. Among the nations it was said, “They can stay here no longer.”
LAM	4	16	여호와께서 노하여 흩으시고 다시 권고치 아니하시리니 저희가 제사장들을 높이지 아니하였으며 장로들을 대접지 아니하였음이로다	The anger of the Lord hath divided them; he will no more regard them: they respected not the persons of the priests, they favoured not the elders.	The presence of the LORD has scattered them; He regards them no more. The priests are shown no honor; the elders find no favor.
LAM	4	17	우리가 헛되이 도움을 바라므로 우리 눈이 상함이여 우리를 구원치 못할 나라를 바라보고 바라보았도다	As for us, our eyes as yet failed for our vain help: in our watching we have watched for a nation that could not save us.	All the while our eyes were failing as we looked in vain for help. We watched from our towers for a nation that could not save us.
LAM	4	18	저희가 우리 자취를 엿보니 우리가 거리에 행할 수 없음이여 우리의 끝이 가깝고 우리의 날이 다하였고 우리의 마지막이 이르렀도다	They hunt our steps, that we cannot go in our streets: our end is near, our days are fulfilled; for our end is come.	They stalked our every step, so that we could not walk in our streets. Our end drew near, our time ran out, for our end had come!
LAM	4	19	우리를 쫓는 자가 공중의 독수리보다 빠름이여 산꼭대기에서도 쫓고 광야에도 매복하였도다	Our persecutors are swifter than the eagles of the heaven: they pursued us upon the mountains, they laid wait for us in the wilderness.	Those who chased us were swifter than the eagles in the sky; they pursued us over the mountains and ambushed us in the wilderness.
LAM	4	20	우리의 콧김 곧 여호와의 기름 부으신 자가 저희 함정에 빠졌음이여 우리가 저를 가리키며 전에 이르기를 우리가 저의 그늘 아래서 열국 중에 살겠다 하던 자로다	The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord, was taken in their pits, of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall live among the heathen.	The LORD’s anointed, the breath of our life, was captured in their pits. We had said of him, “Under his shadow we will live among the nations.”
LAM	4	21	우스 땅에 거하는 처녀 에돔아 즐거워하며 기뻐하려무나 잔이 네게도 이를지니 네가 취하여 벌거벗으리라	Rejoice and be glad, O daughter of Edom, that dwellest in the land of Uz; the cup also shall pass through unto thee: thou shalt be drunken, and shalt make thyself naked.	So rejoice and be glad, O Daughter of Edom, you who dwell in the land of Uz. Yet the cup will pass to you as well; you will get drunk and expose yourself.
LAM	4	22	처녀 시온아 네 죄악의 형벌이 다하였으니 주께서 다시는 너로 사로잡혀 가지 않게 하시리로다 처녀 에돔아 주께서 네 죄악을 벌하시며 네 허물을 드러내시리로다	The punishment of thine iniquity is accomplished, O daughter of Zion; he will no more carry thee away into captivity: he will visit thine iniquity, O daughter of Edom; he will discover thy sins.	O Daughter of Zion, your punishment is complete; He will not prolong your exile. But He will punish your iniquity, O Daughter of Edom; He will expose your sins.
LAM	5	1	여호와여 우리의 당한 것을 기억하시고 우리의 수욕을 감찰하옵소서	Remember, O Lord, what is come upon us: consider, and behold our reproach.	Remember, O LORD, what has happened to us. Look and see our disgrace!
LAM	5	2	우리 기업이 외인에게, 우리 집들도 외인에게 돌아갔나이다	Our inheritance is turned to strangers, our houses to aliens.	Our inheritance has been turned over to strangers, our houses to foreigners.
LAM	5	3	우리는 아비 없는 외로운 자식이오며 우리 어미는 과부 같으니	We are orphans and fatherless, our mothers are as widows.	We have become fatherless orphans; our mothers are widows.
LAM	5	4	우리가 은을 주고 물을 마시며 값을 주고 섶을 얻으오며	We have drunken our water for money; our wood is sold unto us.	We must buy the water we drink; our wood comes at a price.
LAM	5	5	우리를 쫓는 자는 우리 목을 눌렀사오니 우리가 곤비하여 쉴 수 없나이다	Our necks are under persecution: we labour, and have no rest.	We are closely pursued; we are weary and find no rest.
LAM	5	6	우리가 애굽 사람과 앗수르 사람과 악수하고 양식을 얻어 배불리고자 하였나이다	We have given the hand to the Egyptians, and to the Assyrians, to be satisfied with bread.	We submitted to Egypt and Assyria to get enough bread.
LAM	5	7	우리 열조는 범죄하고 없어졌고 우리는 그 죄악을 담당하였나이다	Our fathers have sinned, and are not; and we have borne their iniquities.	Our fathers sinned and are no more, but we bear their punishment.
LAM	5	8	종들이 우리를 관할함이여 그 손에서 건져낼 자가 없나이다	Servants have ruled over us: there is none that doth deliver us out of their hand.	Slaves rule over us; there is no one to deliver us from their hands.
LAM	5	9	광야에는 칼이 있으므로 죽기를 무릅써야 양식을 얻사오니	We gat our bread with the peril of our lives because of the sword of the wilderness.	We get our bread at the risk of our lives because of the sword in the wilderness.
LAM	5	10	주림의 열기로 인하여 우리의 피부가 아궁이처럼 검으니이다	Our skin was black like an oven because of the terrible famine.	Our skin is as hot as an oven with fever from our hunger.
LAM	5	11	대적이 시온에서 부녀들을, 유다 각 성에서 처녀들을 욕보였나이다	They ravished the women in Zion, and the maids in the cities of Judah.	Women have been ravished in Zion, virgins in the cities of Judah.
LAM	5	12	방백들의 손이 매어달리며 장로들의 얼굴이 존경을 받지 못하나이다	Princes are hanged up by their hand: the faces of elders were not honoured.	Princes have been hung up by their hands; elders receive no respect.
LAM	5	13	소년들이 맷돌을 지오며 아이들이 섶을 지다가 엎드러지오며	They took the young men to grind, and the children fell under the wood.	Young men toil at millstones; boys stagger under loads of wood.
LAM	5	14	노인은 다시 성문에 앉지 못하며 소년은 다시 노래하지 못하나이다	The elders have ceased from the gate, the young men from their musick.	The elders have left the city gate; the young men have stopped their music.
LAM	5	15	우리 마음에 희락이 그쳤고 우리의 무도가 변하여 애통이 되었사오며	The joy of our heart is ceased; our dance is turned into mourning.	Joy has left our hearts; our dancing has turned to mourning.
LAM	5	16	우리 머리에서 면류관이 떨어졌사오니 오호라 우리의 범죄함을 인함이니이다	The crown is fallen from our head: woe unto us, that we have sinned!	The crown has fallen from our head. Woe to us, for we have sinned!
LAM	5	17	이러므로 우리 마음이 피곤하고 이러므로 우리 눈이 어두우며	For this our heart is faint; for these things our eyes are dim.	Because of this, our hearts are faint; because of these, our eyes grow dim—
LAM	5	18	시온 산이 황무하여 여우가 거기서 노나이다	Because of the mountain of Zion, which is desolate, the foxes walk upon it.	because of Mount Zion, which lies desolate, patrolled by foxes.
LAM	5	19	여호와여 주는 영원히 계시오며 주의 보좌는 세세에 미치나이다	Thou, O Lord, remainest for ever; thy throne from generation to generation.	You, O LORD, reign forever; Your throne endures from generation to generation.
LAM	5	20	주께서 어찌하여 우리를 영원히 잊으시오며 우리를 이같이 오래 버리시나이까	Wherefore dost thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so long time?	Why have You forgotten us forever? Why have You forsaken us for so long?
LAM	5	21	여호와여 우리를 주께로 돌이키소서 그리하시면 우리가 주께로 돌아 가겠사오니 우리의 날을 다시 새롭게 하사 옛적 같게 하옵소서	Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned; renew our days as of old.	Restore us to Yourself, O LORD, so we may return; renew our days as of old,
LAM	5	22	주께서 우리를 아주 버리셨사오며 우리에게 진노하심이 특심하시니이다	But thou hast utterly rejected us; thou art very wroth against us.	unless You have utterly rejected us and remain angry with us beyond measure.
EZK	1	1	제삼십년 사월 오일에 내가 그발 강 가 사로잡힌 자 중에 있더니 하늘이 열리며 하나님의 이상을 내게 보이시니	Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year, in the fourth month, in the fifth day of the month, as I was among the captives by the river of Chebar, that the heavens were opened, and I saw visions of God.	In the thirtieth year, on the fifth day of the fourth month, while I was among the exiles by the River Kebar, the heavens opened and I saw visions of God.
EZK	1	2	여호야긴 왕의 사로잡힌지 오년 그 달 오일이라	In the fifth day of the month, which was the fifth year of king Jehoiachin’s captivity,	On the fifth day of the month—it was the fifth year of the exile of King Jehoiachin—
EZK	1	3	갈대아 땅 그발 강 가에서 여호와의 말씀이 부시의 아들 제사장 나 에스겔에게 특별히 임하고 여호와의 권능이 내 위에 있으니라	The word of the Lord came expressly unto Ezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans by the river Chebar; and the hand of the Lord was there upon him.	the word of the LORD came directly to Ezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans by the River Kebar. And there the LORD’s hand was upon him.
EZK	1	4	내가 보니 북방에서부터 폭풍과 큰 구름이 오는데 그 속에서 불이 번쩍번쩍하여 빛이 그 사면에 비취며 그 불 가운데 단쇠 같은 것이 나타나 보이고	And I looked, and, behold, a whirlwind came out of the north, a great cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a brightness was about it, and out of the midst thereof as the colour of amber, out of the midst of the fire.	I looked and saw a whirlwind coming from the north, a great cloud with fire flashing back and forth and brilliant light all around it. In the center of the fire was a gleam like amber,
EZK	1	5	그 속에서 네 생물의 형상이 나타나는데 그 모양이 이러하니 사람의 형상이라	Also out of the midst thereof came the likeness of four living creatures. And this was their appearance; they had the likeness of a man.	and within it was the form of four living creatures. And this was their appearance: They had a human form,
EZK	1	6	각각 네 얼굴과 네 날개가 있고	And every one had four faces, and every one had four wings.	but each had four faces and four wings.
EZK	1	7	그 다리는 곧고 그 발바닥은 송아지 발바닥 같고 마광한 구리 같이 빛나며	And their feet were straight feet; and the sole of their feet was like the sole of a calf’s foot: and they sparkled like the colour of burnished brass.	Their legs were straight, and the soles of their feet were like the hooves of a calf, gleaming like polished bronze.
EZK	1	8	그 사면 날개 밑에는 각각 사람의 손이 있더라 그 네 생물의 얼굴과 날개가 이러하니	And they had the hands of a man under their wings on their four sides; and they four had their faces and their wings.	Under their wings on their four sides they had human hands. All four living creatures had faces and wings,
EZK	1	9	날개는 다 서로 연하였으며 행할 때에는 돌이키지 아니하고 일제히 앞으로 곧게 행하며	Their wings were joined one to another; they turned not when they went; they went every one straight forward.	and their wings were touching one another. They did not turn as they moved; each one went straight ahead.
EZK	1	10	그 얼굴들의 모양은 넷의 앞은 사람의 얼굴이요 넷의 우편은 사자의 얼굴이요 넷의 좌편은 소의 얼굴이요 넷의 뒤는 독수리의 얼굴이니	As for the likeness of their faces, they four had the face of a man, and the face of a lion, on the right side: and they four had the face of an ox on the left side; they four also had the face of an eagle.	The form of their faces was that of a man, and each of the four had the face of a lion on the right side, the face of an ox on the left side, and also the face of an eagle.
EZK	1	11	그 얼굴은 이러하며 그 날개는 들어 펴서 각기 둘씩 서로 연하였고 또 둘은 몸을 가리웠으며	Thus were their faces: and their wings were stretched upward; two wings of every one were joined one to another, and two covered their bodies.	Such were their faces. Their wings were spread upward; each had two wings touching the wings of the creature on either side, and two wings covering its body.
EZK	1	12	신이 어느 편으로 가려면 그 생물들이 그대로 가되 돌이키지 아니하고 일제히 앞으로 곧게 행하며	And they went every one straight forward: whither the spirit was to go, they went; and they turned not when they went.	Each creature went straight ahead. Wherever the spirit would go, they would go, without turning as they moved.
EZK	1	13	또 생물의 모양은 숯불과 횃불 모양 같은데 그 불이 그 생물 사이에서 오르락 내리락 하며 그 불은 광채가 있고 그 가운데서는 번개가 나며	As for the likeness of the living creatures, their appearance was like burning coals of fire, and like the appearance of lamps: it went up and down among the living creatures; and the fire was bright, and out of the fire went forth lightning.	In the midst of the living creatures was the appearance of glowing coals of fire, or of torches. Fire moved back and forth between the living creatures; it was bright, and lightning flashed out of it.
EZK	1	14	그 생물의 왕래가 번개 같이 빠르더라	And the living creatures ran and returned as the appearance of a flash of lightning.	The creatures were darting back and forth as quickly as flashes of lightning.
EZK	1	15	내가 그 생물을 본즉 그 생물 곁 땅 위에 바퀴가 있는데 그 네 얼굴을 따라 하나씩 있고	Now as I beheld the living creatures, behold one wheel upon the earth by the living creatures, with his four faces.	When I looked at the living creatures, I saw a wheel on the ground beside each creature with its four faces.
EZK	1	16	그 바퀴의 형상과 그 구조는 넷이 한결 같은데 황옥 같고 그 형상과 구조는 바퀴 안에 바퀴가 있는 것 같으며	The appearance of the wheels and their work was like unto the colour of a beryl: and they four had one likeness: and their appearance and their work was as it were a wheel in the middle of a wheel.	The workmanship of the wheels looked like the gleam of beryl, and all four had the same likeness. Their workmanship looked like a wheel within a wheel.
EZK	1	17	행할 때에는 사방으로 향한 대로 돌이키지 않고 행하며	When they went, they went upon their four sides: and they turned not when they went.	As they moved, they went in any of the four directions, without pivoting as they moved.
EZK	1	18	그 둘레는 높고 무서우며 그 네 둘레로 돌아가면서 눈이 가득하며	As for their rings, they were so high that they were dreadful; and their rings were full of eyes round about them four.	Their rims were high and awesome, and all four rims were full of eyes all around.
EZK	1	19	생물이 행할 때에 바퀴도 그 곁에서 행하고 생물이 땅에서 들릴 때에 바퀴도 들려서	And when the living creatures went, the wheels went by them: and when the living creatures were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up.	So as the living creatures moved, the wheels moved beside them, and when the creatures rose from the ground, the wheels also rose.
EZK	1	20	어디든지 신이 가려하면 생물도 신의 가려하는 곳으로 가고 바퀴도 그 곁에서 들리니 이는 생물의 신이 그 바퀴 가운데 있음이라	Whithersoever the spirit was to go, they went, thither was their spirit to go; and the wheels were lifted up over against them: for the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels.	Wherever the spirit would go, they would go, and the wheels would rise alongside them, because the spirit of the living creatures was in the wheels.
EZK	1	21	저들이 행하면 이들도 행하고 저들이 그치면 이들도 그치고 저들이 땅에서 들릴 때에는 이들도 그 곁에서 들리니 이는 생물의 신이 그 바퀴 가운데 있음이더라	When those went, these went; and when those stood, these stood; and when those were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up over against them: for the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels.	When the creatures moved, the wheels moved; when the creatures stood still, the wheels stood still; and when the creatures rose from the ground, the wheels rose alongside them, because the spirit of the living creatures was in the wheels.
EZK	1	22	그 생물의 머리 위에는 수정 같은 궁창의 형상이 펴 있어 보기에 심히 두려우며	And the likeness of the firmament upon the heads of the living creature was as the colour of the terrible crystal, stretched forth over their heads above.	Spread out above the heads of the living creatures was the likeness of an awesome expanse, gleaming like crystal.
EZK	1	23	그 궁창 밑에 생물들의 날개가 서로 향하여 펴 있는데 이 생물은 두 날개로 몸을 가리웠고 저 생물도 두 날개로 몸을 가리웠으며	And under the firmament were their wings straight, the one toward the other: every one had two, which covered on this side, and every one had two, which covered on that side, their bodies.	And under the expanse, their wings stretched out toward one another. Each one also had two wings covering its body.
EZK	1	24	생물들이 행할 때에 내가 그 날개 소리를 들은즉 많은 물 소리와도 같으며 전능자의 음성과도 같으며 떠드는 소리 곧 군대의 소리와도 같더니 그 생물이 설 때에 그 날개를 드리우더라	And when they went, I heard the noise of their wings, like the noise of great waters, as the voice of the Almighty, the voice of speech, as the noise of an host: when they stood, they let down their wings.	When the creatures moved, I heard the sound of their wings like the roar of many waters, like the voice of the Almighty, like the tumult of an army. When they stood still, they lowered their wings.
EZK	1	25	그 머리 위에 있는 궁창 위에서부터 음성이 나더라 그 생물이 설 때에 그 날개를 드리우더라	And there was a voice from the firmament that was over their heads, when they stood, and had let down their wings.	And there came a voice from above the expanse over their heads as they stood still with their wings lowered.
EZK	1	26	그 머리 위에 있는 궁창 위에 보좌의 형상이 있는데 그 모양이 남보석 같고 그 보좌의 형상 위에 한 형상이 있어 사람의 모양 같더라	And above the firmament that was over their heads was the likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire stone: and upon the likeness of the throne was the likeness as the appearance of a man above upon it.	Above the expanse over their heads was the likeness of a throne with the appearance of sapphire, and on the throne high above was a figure like that of a man.
EZK	1	27	내가 본즉 그 허리 이상의 모양은 단 쇠 같아서 그 속과 주위가 불 같고 그 허리 이하의 모양도 불 같아서 사면으로 광채가 나며	And I saw as the colour of amber, as the appearance of fire round about within it, from the appearance of his loins even upward, and from the appearance of his loins even downward, I saw as it were the appearance of fire, and it had brightness round about.	From what seemed to be His waist up, I saw a gleam like amber, with what looked like fire within it all around. And from what seemed to be His waist down, I saw what looked like fire; and brilliant light surrounded Him.
EZK	1	28	그 사면 광채의 모양은 비 오는 날 구름에 있는 무지개 같으니 이는 여호와의 영광의 형상의 모양이라 내가 보고 곧 엎드리어 그 말씀하시는 자의 음성을 들으니라	As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of rain, so was the appearance of the brightness round about. This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the Lord. And when I saw it, I fell upon my face, and I heard a voice of one that spake.	The appearance of the brilliant light all around Him was like that of a rainbow in a cloud on a rainy day. This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the LORD. And when I saw it, I fell facedown and heard a voice speaking.
EZK	2	1	그가 내게 이르시되 인자야 일어서라 내가 네게 말하리라 하시며	And he said unto me, Son of man, stand upon thy feet, and I will speak unto thee.	“Son of man,” He said to me, “stand up on your feet and I will speak to you.”
EZK	2	2	말씀하실 때에 그 신이 내게 임하사 나를 일으켜 세우시기로 내가 그 말씀하시는 자의 소리를 들으니	And the spirit entered into me when he spake unto me, and set me upon my feet, that I heard him that spake unto me.	And as He spoke to me, the Spirit entered me and set me on my feet, and I heard Him speaking to me.
EZK	2	3	내게 이르시되 인자야 내가 너를 이스라엘 자손 곧 패역한 백성, 나를 배반하는 자에게 보내노라 그들과 그 열조가 내게 범죄하여 오늘날까지 이르렀나니	And he said unto me, Son of man, I send thee to the children of Israel, to a rebellious nation that hath rebelled against me: they and their fathers have transgressed against me, even unto this very day.	“Son of man,” He said to me, “I am sending you to the Israelites, to a rebellious nation that has rebelled against Me. To this very day they and their fathers have rebelled against Me.
EZK	2	4	이 자손은 얼굴이 뻔뻔하고 마음이 강퍅한 자니라 내가 너를 그들에게 보내노니 너는 그들에게 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀이 이러하시다 하라	For they are impudent children and stiffhearted. I do send thee unto them; and thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God.	They are obstinate and stubborn children. I am sending you to them, and you are to say to them, ‘This is what the Lord GOD says.’
EZK	2	5	그들은 패역한 족속이라 듣든지 아니 듣든지 그들 가운데 선지자 있은 줄은 알지니라	And they, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, (for they are a rebellious house,) yet shall know that there hath been a prophet among them.	And whether they listen or refuse to listen—for they are a rebellious house—they will know that a prophet has been among them.
EZK	2	6	인자야 너는 비록 가시와 찔레와 함께 처하며 전갈 가운데 거할지라도 그들을 두려워 말고 그 말을 두려워 말지어다 그들은 패역한 족속이라도 그 말을 두려워 말며 그 얼굴을 무서워 말지어다	And thou, son of man, be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of their words, though briers and thorns be with thee, and thou dost dwell among scorpions: be not afraid of their words, nor be dismayed at their looks, though they be a rebellious house.	But you, son of man, do not be afraid of them or their words. Do not be afraid, though briers and thorns surround you, and you dwell among scorpions. Do not be afraid of their words or dismayed by their presence, though they are a rebellious house.
EZK	2	7	그들은 심히 패역한 자라 듣든지 아니 듣든지 너는 내 말로 고할지어다	And thou shalt speak my words unto them, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear: for they are most rebellious.	But speak My words to them, whether they listen or refuse to listen, for they are rebellious.
EZK	2	8	인자야 내가 네게 이르는 말을 듣고 그 패역한 족속 같이 패역하지 말고 네 입을 벌리고 내가 네게 주는 것을 먹으라 하시기로	But thou, son of man, hear what I say unto thee; Be not thou rebellious like that rebellious house: open thy mouth, and eat that I give thee.	And you, son of man, listen to what I tell you. Do not be rebellious like that rebellious house. Open your mouth and eat what I give you.”
EZK	2	9	내가 보니 한 손이 나를 향하여 펴지고 그 손에 두루마리 책이 있더라	And when I looked, behold, an hand was sent unto me; and, lo, a roll of a book was therein;	Then I looked and saw a hand reaching out to me, and in it was a scroll,
EZK	2	10	그가 그것을 내 앞에 펴시니 그 안팎에 글이 있는데 애가와 애곡과 재앙의 말이 기록되었더라	And he spread it before me; and it was written within and without: and there was written therein lamentations, and mourning, and woe.	which He unrolled before me. And written on the front and back of it were words of lamentation, mourning, and woe.
EZK	3	1	그가 또 내게 이르시되 인자야 너는 받는 것을 먹으라 너는 이 두루마리를 먹고 가서 이스라엘 족속에게 고하라 하시기로	Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, eat that thou findest; eat this roll, and go speak unto the house of Israel.	“Son of man,” He said to me, “eat what you find here. Eat this scroll, then go and speak to the house of Israel.”
EZK	3	2	내가 입을 벌리니 그가 그 두루마리를 내게 먹이시며	So I opened my mouth, and he caused me to eat that roll.	So I opened my mouth, and He fed me the scroll.
EZK	3	3	내게 이르시되 인자야 내가 네게 주는 이 두루마리로 네 배에 넣으며 네 창자에 채우라 하시기에 내가 먹으니 그것이 내 입에서 달기가 꿀 같더라	And he said unto me, Son of man, cause thy belly to eat, and fill thy bowels with this roll that I give thee. Then did I eat it; and it was in my mouth as honey for sweetness.	“Son of man,” He said to me, “eat and fill your stomach with this scroll I am giving you.” So I ate, and it was as sweet as honey in my mouth.
EZK	3	4	그가 또 내게 이르시되 인자야 이스라엘 족속에게 가서 내 말로 그들에게 고하라	And he said unto me, Son of man, go, get thee unto the house of Israel, and speak with my words unto them.	Then He said to me, “Son of man, go now to the house of Israel and speak My words to them.
EZK	3	5	너를 방언이 다르거나 말이 어려운 백성에게 보내는 것이 아니요 이스라엘 족속에게 보내는 것이라	For thou art not sent to a people of a strange speech and of an hard language, but to the house of Israel;	For you are not being sent to a people of unfamiliar speech or difficult language, but to the house of Israel—
EZK	3	6	너를 방언이 다르거나 말이 어려워 네가 알아듣지 못할 열국에 보내는 것이 아니니라 내가 너를 그들에게 보내었더면 그들은 정녕 네 말을 들었으리라	Not to many people of a strange speech and of an hard language, whose words thou canst not understand. Surely, had I sent thee to them, they would have hearkened unto thee.	not to the many peoples of unfamiliar speech and difficult language whose words you cannot understand. Surely if I had sent you to them, they would have listened to you.
EZK	3	7	그러나 이스라엘 족속은 이마가 굳고 마음이 강퍅하여 네 말을 듣고자 아니하리니 이는 내 말을 듣고자 아니함이니라	But the house of Israel will not hearken unto thee; for they will not hearken unto me: for all the house of Israel are impudent and hardhearted.	But the house of Israel will be unwilling to listen to you, since they are unwilling to listen to Me. For the whole house of Israel is hard-headed and hard-hearted.
EZK	3	8	내가 그들의 얼굴을 대하도록 네 얼굴을 굳게 하였고 그들의 이마를 대하도록 네 이마를 굳게 하였으되	Behold, I have made thy face strong against their faces, and thy forehead strong against their foreheads.	Behold, I will make your face as hard as their faces, and your forehead as hard as their foreheads.
EZK	3	9	네 이마로 화석보다 굳은 금강석 같이 하였으니 그들이 비록 패역한 족속이라도 두려워 말며 그 얼굴을 무서워 말라 하시고	As an adamant harder than flint have I made thy forehead: fear them not, neither be dismayed at their looks, though they be a rebellious house.	I will make your forehead like a diamond, harder than flint. Do not be afraid of them or dismayed at their presence, even though they are a rebellious house.”
EZK	3	10	또 내게 이르시되 인자야 내가 네게 이를 모든 말을 너는 마음으로 받으며 귀로 듣고	Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, all my words that I shall speak unto thee receive in thine heart, and hear with thine ears.	“Son of man,” He added, “listen carefully to all the words I speak to you, and take them to heart.
EZK	3	11	사로잡힌 네 민족에게로 가서 그들이 듣든지 아니 듣든지 그들에게 고하여 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀이 이러하시다 하라 하시더라	And go, get thee to them of the captivity, unto the children of thy people, and speak unto them, and tell them, Thus saith the Lord God; whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear.	Go to your people, the exiles; speak to them and tell them, ‘This is what the Lord GOD says,’ whether they listen or refuse to listen.”
EZK	3	12	때에 주의 신이 나를 들어 올리시는데 내 뒤에 크게 울리는 소리가 들려 이르기를 여호와의 처소에서 나는 영광을 찬송할지어다 하니	Then the spirit took me up, and I heard behind me a voice of a great rushing, saying, Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.	Then the Spirit lifted me up, and I heard a great rumbling sound behind me: ‘Blessed be the glory of the LORD in His dwelling place!’
EZK	3	13	이는 생물들의 날개가 서로 부딪히는 소리와 생물 곁에 바퀴 소리라 크게 울리는 소리더라	I heard also the noise of the wings of the living creatures that touched one another, and the noise of the wheels over against them, and a noise of a great rushing.	It was the sound of the wings of the living creatures brushing against one another and the sound of the wheels beside them, a great rumbling sound.
EZK	3	14	주의 신이 나를 들어올려 데리고 가시는데 내가 근심하고 분한 마음으로 행하니 여호와의 권능이 힘있게 나를 감동하시더라	So the spirit lifted me up, and took me away, and I went in bitterness, in the heat of my spirit; but the hand of the Lord was strong upon me.	So the Spirit lifted me up and took me away, and I went in bitterness and in the anger of my spirit, with the strong hand of the LORD upon me.
EZK	3	15	이에 내가 델아빕에 이르러 그 사로잡힌 백성 곧 그발 강 가에 거하는 자들에게 나아가 그 중에서 민답히 칠 일을 지내니라	Then I came to them of the captivity at Tel–abib, that dwelt by the river of Chebar, and I sat where they sat, and remained there astonished among them seven days.	I came to the exiles at Tel-abib who dwelt by the River Kebar. And for seven days I sat where they sat and remained there among them, overwhelmed.
EZK	3	16	칠 일 후에 여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 가라사대	And it came to pass at the end of seven days, that the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	At the end of seven days the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	3	17	인자야 내가 너를 이스라엘 족속의 파수꾼으로 세웠으니 너는 내 입의 말을 듣고 나를 대신하여 그들을 깨우치라	Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel: therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me.	“Son of man, I have made you a watchman for the house of Israel. Whenever you hear a word from My mouth, give them a warning from Me.
EZK	3	18	가령 내가 악인에게 말하기를 너는 꼭 죽으리라 할 때에 네가 깨우치지 아니하거나 말로 악인에게 일러서 그 악한 길을 떠나 생명을 구원케 하지 아니하면 그 악인은 그 죄악 중에서 죽으려니와 내가 그 피 값을 네 손에서 찾을 것이고	When I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; and thou givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn the wicked from his wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand.	If I say to the wicked man, ‘You will surely die,’ but you do not warn him or speak out to warn him from his wicked way to save his life, that wicked man will die in his iniquity, and I will hold you responsible for his blood.
EZK	3	19	네가 악인을 깨우치되 그가 그 악한 마음과 악한 행위에서 돌이키지 아니하면 그는 그 죄악 중에서 죽으려니와 너는 네 생명을 보존하리라	Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul.	But if you warn a wicked man and he does not turn from his wickedness and his wicked way, he will die in his iniquity, but you will have saved yourself.
EZK	3	20	또 의인이 그 의에서 돌이켜 악을 행할 때에는 이미 행한 그 의는 기억할 바 아니라 내가 그 앞에 거치는 것을 두면 그가 죽을지니 이는 네가 그를 깨우치지 않음이라 그가 그 죄 중에서 죽으려니와 그 피 값은 내가 네 손에서 찾으리라	Again, When a righteous man doth turn from his righteousness, and commit iniquity, and I lay a stumblingblock before him, he shall die: because thou hast not given him warning, he shall die in his sin, and his righteousness which he hath done shall not be remembered; but his blood will I require at thine hand.	Now if a righteous man turns from his righteousness and commits iniquity, and I put a stumbling block before him, he will die. If you did not warn him, he will die in his sin, and the righteous acts he did will not be remembered. And I will hold you responsible for his blood.
EZK	3	21	그러나 네가 그 의인을 깨우쳐 범죄치 않게 하므로 그가 범죄치 아니하면 정녕 살리니 이는 깨우침을 받음이며 너도 네 영혼을 보존하리라	Nevertheless if thou warn the righteous man, that the righteous sin not, and he doth not sin, he shall surely live, because he is warned; also thou hast delivered thy soul.	But if you warn the righteous man not to sin, and he does not sin, he will indeed live because he heeded your warning, and you will have saved yourself.”
EZK	3	22	여호와께서 권능으로 거기서 내게 임하시고 또 내게 이르시되 일어나 들로 나아가라 내가 거기서 너와 말하리라 하시기로	And the hand of the Lord was there upon me; and he said unto me, Arise, go forth into the plain, and I will there talk with thee.	And there the hand of the LORD was upon me, and He said to me, “Get up, go out to the plain, and there I will speak with you.”
EZK	3	23	내가 일어나 들로 나아가니 여호와의 영광이 거기 머물렀는데 내가 전에 그발 강 가에서 보던 영광과 같은지라 내가 곧 엎드리니	Then I arose, and went forth into the plain: and, behold, the glory of the Lord stood there, as the glory which I saw by the river of Chebar: and I fell on my face.	So I got up and went out to the plain, and behold, the glory of the LORD was present there, like the glory I had seen by the River Kebar, and I fell facedown.
EZK	3	24	주의 신이 내게 임하사 나를 일으켜 세우시고 내게 말씀하여 가라사대 너는 가서 네 집에 들어가 문을 닫으라	Then the spirit entered into me, and set me upon my feet, and spake with me, and said unto me, Go, shut thyself within thine house.	Then the Spirit entered me and set me on my feet. He spoke with me and said, “Go, shut yourself inside your house.
EZK	3	25	인자야 무리가 줄로 너를 동여매리니 네가 그들 가운데서 나오지 못할 것이라	But thou, O son of man, behold, they shall put bands upon thee, and shall bind thee with them, and thou shalt not go out among them:	And you, son of man, they will tie with ropes, and you will be bound so that you cannot go out among the people.
EZK	3	26	내가 네 혀로 네 입천장에 붙게 하여 너로 벙어리 되어 그들의 책망자가 되지 못하게 하리니 그들은 패역한 족속임이니라	And I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth, that thou shalt be dumb, and shalt not be to them a reprover: for they are a rebellious house.	I will make your tongue stick to the roof of your mouth, and you will be silent and unable to rebuke them, though they are a rebellious house.
EZK	3	27	그러나 내가 너와 말할 때에 네 입을 열리니 너는 그들에게 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀이 이러하시다 하라 들을 자는 들을 것이요 듣기 싫은 자는 듣지 아니하리니 그들은 패역한 족속임이니라	But when I speak with thee, I will open thy mouth, and thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God; He that heareth, let him hear; and he that forbeareth, let him forbear: for they are a rebellious house.	But when I speak with you, I will open your mouth, and you are to tell them, ‘This is what the Lord GOD says.’ Whoever listens, let him listen; and whoever refuses, let him refuse, for they are a rebellious house.
EZK	4	1	너 인자야 박석을 가져다가 네 앞에 놓고 한 성읍 곧 예루살렘을 그 위에 그리고	Thou also, son of man, take thee a tile, and lay it before thee, and pourtray upon it the city, even Jerusalem:	“Now you, son of man, take a brick, place it before you, and draw on it the city of Jerusalem.
EZK	4	2	그 성읍을 에워싸되 운제를 세우고 토둔을 쌓고 진을 치고 공성퇴를 둘러 세우고	And lay siege against it, and build a fort against it, and cast a mount against it; set the camp also against it, and set battering rams against it round about.	Then lay siege against it: Construct a siege wall, build a ramp to it, set up camps against it, and place battering rams around it on all sides.
EZK	4	3	또 전철을 가져다가 너와 성읍 사이에 두어 철성을 삼고 성을 향하여 에워싸는 것처럼 에워싸라 이것이 이스라엘 족속에게 징조가 되리라	Moreover take thou unto thee an iron pan, and set it for a wall of iron between thee and the city: and set thy face against it, and it shall be besieged, and thou shalt lay siege against it. This shall be a sign to the house of Israel.	Then take an iron plate and set it up as an iron wall between yourself and the city. Turn your face toward it so that it is under siege, and besiege it. This will be a sign to the house of Israel.
EZK	4	4	너는 또 좌편으로 누워 이스라엘 족속의 죄악을 당하되 네 눕는 날 수대로 그 죄악을 담당할지니라	Lie thou also upon thy left side, and lay the iniquity of the house of Israel upon it: according to the number of the days that thou shalt lie upon it thou shalt bear their iniquity.	Then lie down on your left side and place the iniquity of the house of Israel upon yourself. You are to bear their iniquity for the number of days you lie on your side.
EZK	4	5	내가 그들의 범죄한 햇수대로 네게 날수를 정하였나니 곧 삼백구십 일이니라 너는 이렇게 이스라엘 족속의 죄악을 담당하고	For I have laid upon thee the years of their iniquity, according to the number of the days, three hundred and ninety days: so shalt thou bear the iniquity of the house of Israel.	For I have assigned to you 390 days, according to the number of years of their iniquity. So you shall bear the iniquity of the house of Israel.
EZK	4	6	그 수가 차거든 너는 우편으로 누워 유다 족속의 죄악을 담당하라 내가 네게 사십 일로 정하였나니 일 일이 일 년이니라	And when thou hast accomplished them, lie again on thy right side, and thou shalt bear the iniquity of the house of Judah forty days: I have appointed thee each day for a year.	When you have completed these days, lie down again, but on your right side, and bear the iniquity of the house of Judah. I have assigned to you 40 days, a day for each year.
EZK	4	7	너는 또 에워싼 예루살렘을 향하여 팔을 벗어 메고 예언하라	Therefore thou shalt set thy face toward the siege of Jerusalem, and thine arm shall be uncovered, and thou shalt prophesy against it.	You must turn your face toward the siege of Jerusalem with your arm bared, and prophesy against it.
EZK	4	8	내가 줄로 너를 동이리니 네가 에워싸는 날이 맞도록 몸을 이리 저리 돌리지 못하리라	And, behold, I will lay bands upon thee, and thou shalt not turn thee from one side to another, till thou hast ended the days of thy siege.	Now behold, I will tie you up with ropes so you cannot turn from side to side until you have finished the days of your siege.
EZK	4	9	너는 말과 보리와 콩과 팥과 조와 귀리를 가져다가 한 그릇에 담고 떡을 만들어 네 모로 눕는 날수 곧 삼백구십 일에 먹되	Take thou also unto thee wheat, and barley, and beans, and lentiles, and millet, and fitches, and put them in one vessel, and make thee bread thereof, according to the number of the days that thou shalt lie upon thy side, three hundred and ninety days shalt thou eat thereof.	But take wheat, barley, beans, lentils, millet, and spelt; put them in a single container and make them into bread for yourself. This is what you are to eat during the 390 days you lie on your side.
EZK	4	10	너는 식물을 달아서 하루 이십 세겔 중씩 때를 따라 먹고	And thy meat which thou shalt eat shall be by weight, twenty shekels a day: from time to time shalt thou eat it.	You are to weigh out twenty shekels of food to eat each day, and you are to eat it at set times.
EZK	4	11	물도 힌 육분 일씩 되어서 때를 따라 마시라	Thou shalt drink also water by measure, the sixth part of an hin: from time to time shalt thou drink.	You are also to measure out a sixth of a hin of water to drink, and you are to drink it at set times.
EZK	4	12	너는 그것을 보리떡처럼 만들어 먹되 그들의 목전에서 인분 불을 피워 구울지니라	And thou shalt eat it as barley cakes, and thou shalt bake it with dung that cometh out of man, in their sight.	And you shall eat the food as you would a barley cake, after you bake it over dried human excrement in the sight of the people.”
EZK	4	13	여호와께서 또 가라사대 내가 열국으로 쫓아 흩을 이스라엘 자손이 거기서 이와 같이 부정한 떡을 먹으리라 하시기로	And the Lord said, Even thus shall the children of Israel eat their defiled bread among the Gentiles, whither I will drive them.	Then the LORD said, “This is how the Israelites will eat their defiled bread among the nations to which I will banish them.”
EZK	4	14	내가 가로되 오호라 주 여호와여 나는 영혼을 더럽힌 일이 없었나이다 어려서부터 지금까지 스스로 죽은 것이나 짐승에게 찢긴 것을 먹지 아니하였고 가증한 고기를 입에 넣지 아니하였나이다	Then said I, Ah Lord God! behold, my soul hath not been polluted: for from my youth up even till now have I not eaten of that which dieth of itself, or is torn in pieces; neither came there abominable flesh into my mouth.	“Ah, Lord GOD,” I said, “I have never defiled myself. From my youth until now I have not eaten anything found dead or mauled by wild beasts. No unclean meat has ever entered my mouth.”
EZK	4	15	여호와께서 내게 이르시되 쇠똥으로 인분을 대신하기를 허하노니 너는 그것으로 떡을 구울지니라	Then he said unto me, Lo, I have given thee cow’s dung for man’s dung, and thou shalt prepare thy bread therewith.	“Look,” He replied, “I will let you use cow dung instead of human excrement, and you may bake your bread over that.”
EZK	4	16	또 내게 이르시되 인자야 내가 예루살렘에서 의뢰하는 양식을 끊으리니 백성이 경겁 중에 떡을 달아 먹고 민답 중에 물을 되어 마시다가	Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, behold, I will break the staff of bread in Jerusalem: and they shall eat bread by weight, and with care; and they shall drink water by measure, and with astonishment:	Then He told me, “Son of man, I am going to cut off the supply of food in Jerusalem. They will anxiously eat bread rationed by weight, and in despair they will drink water by measure.
EZK	4	17	떡과 물이 결핍하여 피차에 민답하여 하며 그 죄악 중에서 쇠패하리라	That they may want bread and water, and be astonied one with another, and consume away for their iniquity.	So they will lack food and water; they will be appalled at the sight of one another wasting away in their iniquity.
EZK	5	1	인자야 너는 날카로운 칼을 취하여 삭도를 삼아 네 머리털과 수염을 깎아서 저울에 달아 나누었다가	And thou, son of man, take thee a sharp knife, take thee a barber’s razor, and cause it to pass upon thine head and upon thy beard: then take thee balances to weigh, and divide the hair.	“As for you, son of man, take a sharp sword, use it as a barber’s razor, and shave your head and beard. Then take a set of scales and divide the hair.
EZK	5	2	그 성읍을 에워싸는 날이 차거든 너는 터럭 삼분지 일은 성읍 안에서 불사르고 삼분지 일은 가지고 성읍 사방에서 칼로 치고 또 삼분지 일은 바람에 흩으라 내가 그 뒤를 따라 칼을 빼리라	Thou shalt burn with fire a third part in the midst of the city, when the days of the siege are fulfilled: and thou shalt take a third part, and smite about it with a knife: and a third part thou shalt scatter in the wind; and I will draw out a sword after them.	When the days of the siege have ended, you are to burn up a third of the hair inside the city; you are also to take a third and slash it with the sword all around the city; and you are to scatter a third to the wind. For I will unleash a sword behind them.
EZK	5	3	너는 터럭 중에서 조금을 가져 네 옷자락에 싸고	Thou shalt also take thereof a few in number, and bind them in thy skirts.	But you are to take a few strands of hair and secure them in the folds of your garment.
EZK	5	4	또 그 가운데서 얼마를 가져 불에 던져 사르라 그 속에서 불이 이스라엘 온 족속에게로 나오리라	Then take of them again, and cast them into the midst of the fire, and burn them in the fire; for thereof shall a fire come forth into all the house of Israel.	Again, take a few of these, throw them into the fire, and burn them. From there a fire will spread to the whole house of Israel.
EZK	5	5	주 여호와께서 가라사대 이것이 곧 예루살렘이라 내가 그를 이방인 가운데 두어 열방으로 둘러 있게 하였거늘	Thus saith the Lord God; This is Jerusalem: I have set it in the midst of the nations and countries that are round about her.	This is what the Lord GOD says: ‘This is Jerusalem, which I have set in the center of the nations, with countries all around her.
EZK	5	6	그가 내 규례를 거스려서 이방인보다 악을 더 행하며 내 율례도 그리함이 그 둘러 있는 열방보다 더하니 이는 그들이 내 규례를 버리고 내 율례를 행치 아니하였음이니라	And she hath changed my judgments into wickedness more than the nations, and my statutes more than the countries that are round about her: for they have refused my judgments and my statutes, they have not walked in them.	But she has rebelled against My ordinances more wickedly than the nations, and against My statutes worse than the countries around her. For her people have rejected My ordinances and have not walked in My statutes.’
EZK	5	7	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 너희 요란함이 너희를 둘러 있는 이방인보다 더하여 내 율례를 행치 아니하며 내 규례를 지키지 아니하고 너희를 둘러 있는 이방인의 규례대로도 행치 아니하였느니라	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Because ye multiplied more than the nations that are round about you, and have not walked in my statutes, neither have kept my judgments, neither have done according to the judgments of the nations that are round about you;	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘You have been more insubordinate than the nations around you; you have not walked in My statutes or kept My ordinances, nor have you even conformed to the ordinances of the nations around you.’
EZK	5	8	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 나 곧 내가 저를 치며 이방인의 목전에서 너희 중에 벌을 내리되	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I, even I, am against thee, and will execute judgments in the midst of thee in the sight of the nations.	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Behold, I Myself am against you, Jerusalem, and I will execute judgments among you in the sight of the nations.
EZK	5	9	네 모든 가증한 일로 인하여 내가 전무후무하게 네게 내릴지라	And I will do in thee that which I have not done, and whereunto I will not do any more the like, because of all thine abominations.	Because of all your abominations, I will do to you what I have never done before and will never do again.
EZK	5	10	그리한즉 너희 중에서 아비가 아들을 먹고 아들이 그 아비를 먹으리라 내가 벌을 네게 내리고 너희 중에 남은 자를 다 사방에 흩으리라	Therefore the fathers shall eat the sons in the midst of thee, and the sons shall eat their fathers; and I will execute judgments in thee, and the whole remnant of thee will I scatter into all the winds.	As a result, fathers among you will eat their sons, and sons will eat their fathers. I will execute judgments against you and scatter all your remnant to every wind.’
EZK	5	11	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 나의 삶을 두고 맹세하노니 네가 모든 미운 물건과 모든 가증한 일로 내 성소를 더럽혔은즉 나도 너를 아껴 보지 아니하며 긍휼을 베풀지 아니하고 미약하게 하리니	Wherefore, as I live, saith the Lord God; Surely, because thou hast defiled my sanctuary with all thy detestable things, and with all thine abominations, therefore will I also diminish thee; neither shall mine eye spare, neither will I have any pity.	Therefore as surely as I live, declares the Lord GOD, because you have defiled My sanctuary with all your detestable idols and abominations, I Myself will withdraw My favor; I will not look upon you with pity, nor will I spare you.
EZK	5	12	너희 가운데서 삼분지 일은 온역으로 죽으며 기근으로 멸망할 것이요 삼분지 일은 너희 사방에서 칼에 엎드러질 것이며 삼분지 일은 내가 사방에 흩고 또 그 뒤를 따라 칼을 빼리라	A third part of thee shall die with the pestilence, and with famine shall they be consumed in the midst of thee: and a third part shall fall by the sword round about thee; and I will scatter a third part into all the winds, and I will draw out a sword after them.	A third of your people will die by plague or be consumed by famine within you, a third will fall by the sword outside your walls, and a third I will scatter to every wind and unleash a sword behind them.
EZK	5	13	이와 같이 내 노가 다한즉 그들에게 향한 분이 풀려서 내 마음이 시원하리라 내 분이 그들에게 다한즉 나 여호와가 열심으로 말한 줄을 그들이 알리라	Thus shall mine anger be accomplished, and I will cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will be comforted: and they shall know that I the Lord have spoken it in my zeal, when I have accomplished my fury in them.	And when My anger is spent and I have vented My wrath against them, I will be appeased. And when I have spent My wrath on them, they will know that I, the LORD, in My zeal have spoken.
EZK	5	14	내가 또 너로 황무케 하고 너를 둘러 있는 이방인 중에서 모든 지나가는 자의 목전에 능욕거리가 되게 하리니	Moreover I will make thee waste, and a reproach among the nations that are round about thee, in the sight of all that pass by.	I will make you a ruin and a disgrace among the nations around you, in the sight of all who pass by.
EZK	5	15	내 노와 분과 중한 책망으로 네게 벌을 내린즉 너를 둘러 있는 이방인에게 네가 수욕과 조롱을 당하고 경계와 괴이한 것이 되리라 나 여호와의 말이니라	So it shall be a reproach and a taunt, an instruction and an astonishment unto the nations that are round about thee, when I shall execute judgments in thee in anger and in fury and in furious rebukes. I the Lord have spoken it.	So you will be a reproach and a taunt, a warning and a horror to the nations around you, when I execute judgments against you in anger, wrath, and raging fury. I, the LORD, have spoken.
EZK	5	16	내가 멸망케 하는 기근의 독한 살로 너희를 멸하러 보내되 기근을 더하여 너희의 의뢰하는 양식을 끊을 것이라	When I shall send upon them the evil arrows of famine, which shall be for their destruction, and which I will send to destroy you: and I will increase the famine upon you, and will break your staff of bread:	When I shower you with the deadly arrows of famine and destruction that I will send to destroy you, I will intensify the famine against you and cut off your supply of food.
EZK	5	17	내가 기근과 악한 짐승을 너희에게 보내어 외롭게 하고 너희 가운데 온역과 살륙으로 행하게 하고 또 칼이 너희에게 임하게 하리라 나 여호와의 말이니라	So will I send upon you famine and evil beasts, and they shall bereave thee; and pestilence and blood shall pass through thee; and I will bring the sword upon thee. I the Lord have spoken it.	I will send famine and wild beasts against you, and they will leave you childless. Plague and bloodshed will sweep through you, and I will bring a sword against you. I, the LORD, have spoken.”
EZK	6	1	여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 가라사대	And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	6	2	인자야 너는 이스라엘 산을 향하여 그들에게 예언하여	Son of man, set thy face toward the mountains of Israel, and prophesy against them,	“Son of man, set your face against the mountains of Israel and prophesy against them.
EZK	6	3	이르기를 이스라엘 산들아 주 여호와의 말씀을 들으라 주 여호와께서 산과 작은 산과 시내와 골짜기를 대하여 말씀하시기를 나 곧 내가 칼로 너희에게 임하게 하여 너희 산당을 멸하리니	And say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord God; Thus saith the Lord God to the mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers, and to the valleys; Behold, I, even I, will bring a sword upon you, and I will destroy your high places.	You are to say: ‘O mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord GOD! This is what the Lord GOD says to the mountains and hills, to the ravines and valleys: I am about to bring a sword against you, and I will destroy your high places.
EZK	6	4	너희 제단이 황무하고 태양상이 훼파될 것이며 내가 또 너희 중에서 살륙을 당하여 너희 우상 앞에 엎드러지게 할 것이라	And your altars shall be desolate, and your images shall be broken: and I will cast down your slain men before your idols.	Your altars will be demolished and your incense altars will be smashed; and I will cast down your slain before your idols.
EZK	6	5	이스라엘 자손의 시체를 그 우상 앞에 두며 너희 해골을 너희 제단 사방에 흩으리라	And I will lay the dead carcases of the children of Israel before their idols; and I will scatter your bones round about your altars.	I will lay the corpses of the Israelites before their idols and scatter your bones around your altars.
EZK	6	6	내가 너희 거하는 모든 성읍으로 사막이 되며 산당으로 황무하게 하리니 이는 너희 제단이 깨어지고 황폐하며 너희 우상들이 깨어져 없어지며 너희 태양상들이 찍히며 너희 만든 것이 다 폐하며	In all your dwellingplaces the cities shall be laid waste, and the high places shall be desolate; that your altars may be laid waste and made desolate, and your idols may be broken and cease, and your images may be cut down, and your works may be abolished.	Wherever you live, the cities will be laid waste and the high places will be demolished, so that your altars will be laid waste and desecrated, your idols smashed and obliterated, your incense altars cut down, and your works blotted out.
EZK	6	7	또 너희 중에서 살륙을 당하여 엎드러지게 하여 너희로 나를 여호와인 줄 알게 하려 함이니라	And the slain shall fall in the midst of you, and ye shall know that I am the Lord.	The slain will fall among you, and you will know that I am the LORD.
EZK	6	8	그러나 너희가 열방에 흩어질 때에 내가 너희 중에서 칼을 피하여 이방 중에 남아 있는 자가 있게 할지라	Yet will I leave a remnant, that ye may have some that shall escape the sword among the nations, when ye shall be scattered through the countries.	Yet I will leave a remnant, for some of you will escape the sword when you are scattered among the nations and throughout the lands.
EZK	6	9	너희 중 피한 자가 사로잡혀 이방인 중에 있어서 나를 기억하되 그들이 음란한 마음으로 나를 떠나고 음란한 눈으로 우상을 섬겨 나로 근심케 한 것을 기억하고 스스로 한탄하리니 이는 그 모든 가증한 일로 악을 행하였음이라	And they that escape of you shall remember me among the nations whither they shall be carried captives, because I am broken with their whorish heart, which hath departed from me, and with their eyes, which go a whoring after their idols: and they shall lothe themselves for the evils which they have committed in all their abominations.	Then in the nations to which they have been carried captive, your survivors will remember Me—how I have been grieved by their adulterous hearts that turned away from Me, and by their eyes that lusted after idols. So they will loathe themselves for the evil they have done and for all their abominations.
EZK	6	10	그 때에야 그들이 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라 내가 이런 재앙을 그들에게 내리겠다 한 말이 헛되지 아니하니라	And they shall know that I am the Lord, and that I have not said in vain that I would do this evil unto them.	And they will know that I am the LORD; I did not declare in vain that I would bring this calamity upon them.
EZK	6	11	주 여호와께서 가라사대 너는 손뼉을 치고 발을 구르며 말할지어다 오호라 이스라엘 족속이 모든 가증한 악을 행하므로 필경 칼과 기근과 온역에 망하되	Thus saith the Lord God; Smite with thine hand, and stamp with thy foot, and say, Alas for all the evil abominations of the house of Israel! for they shall fall by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence.	This is what the Lord GOD says: Clap your hands, stomp your feet, and cry out “Alas!” because of all the wicked abominations of the house of Israel, who will fall by sword and famine and plague.
EZK	6	12	먼데 있는 자는 온역에 죽고 가까운데 있는 자는 칼에 엎드러지고 남아 있어 에워싸인 자는 기근에 죽으리라 이같이 내 진노를 그들에게 이룬즉	He that is far off shall die of the pestilence; and he that is near shall fall by the sword; and he that remaineth and is besieged shall die by the famine: thus will I accomplish my fury upon them.	He who is far off will die by the plague, he who is near will fall by the sword, and he who remains will die by famine. So I will vent My fury upon them.
EZK	6	13	그 살륙 당한 시체가 그 우상 사이에, 제단 사방에, 각 높은 고개에, 모든 산꼭대기에, 모든 푸른 나무 아래에, 무성한 상수리나무 아래 곧 그 우상에게 분향하던 곳에 있으리니 너희가 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	Then shall ye know that I am the Lord, when their slain men shall be among their idols round about their altars, upon every high hill, in all the tops of the mountains, and under every green tree, and under every thick oak, the place where they did offer sweet savour to all their idols.	Then you will know that I am the LORD, when their slain lie among their idols around their altars, on every high hill, on all the mountaintops, and under every green tree and leafy oak—the places where they offered fragrant incense to all their idols.
EZK	6	14	내가 내 손을 그들의 위에 펴서 그 거하는 온 땅 곧 광야에서부터 디블라까지 처량하고 황무하게 하리니 그들이 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	So will I stretch out my hand upon them, and make the land desolate, yea, more desolate than the wilderness toward Diblath, in all their habitations: and they shall know that I am the Lord.	I will stretch out My hand against them, and wherever they live I will make the land a desolate waste, from the wilderness to Diblah. Then they will know that I am the LORD.’”
EZK	7	1	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	7	2	너 인자야 주 여호와 내가 이스라엘 땅에 대하여 말하노라 끝났도다 이 땅 사방의 일이 끝났도다	Also, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord God unto the land of Israel; An end, the end is come upon the four corners of the land.	“O son of man, this is what the Lord GOD says to the land of Israel: ‘The end! The end has come upon the four corners of the land.
EZK	7	3	이제는 네게 끝이 이르렀나니 내가 내 진노를 네게 발하여 네 행위를 국문하고 너의 모든 가증한 일을 보응하리라	Now is the end come upon thee, and I will send mine anger upon thee, and will judge thee according to thy ways, and will recompense upon thee all thine abominations.	The end is now upon you, and I will unleash My anger against you. I will judge you according to your ways and repay you for all your abominations.
EZK	7	4	내가 너를 아껴 보지 아니하며 긍휼히 여기지도 아니하고 네 행위대로 너를 벌하여 너의 가증한 일이 너희 중에 나타나게 하리니 너희가 나를 여호와인줄 알리라	And mine eye shall not spare thee, neither will I have pity: but I will recompense thy ways upon thee, and thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee: and ye shall know that I am the Lord.	I will not look on you with pity, nor will I spare you, but I will punish you for your ways and for the abominations among you. Then you will know that I am the LORD.’
EZK	7	5	주 여호와께서 가라사대 재앙이로다 비상한 재앙이로다 볼지어다 임박하도다	Thus saith the Lord God; An evil, an only evil, behold, is come.	This is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Disaster! An unprecedented disaster— behold, it is coming!
EZK	7	6	끝이 났도다, 끝이 났도다 끝이 너를 치러 일어났나니 볼지어다 임박하도다	An end is come, the end is come: it watcheth for thee; behold, it is come.	The end has come! The end has come! It has roused itself against you. Behold, it has come!
EZK	7	7	이 땅 거민아 정한 재앙이 네게 임하도다 때가 이르렀고 날이 가까웠으니 요란한 날이요 산에서 즐거이 부르는 날이 아니로다	The morning is come unto thee, O thou that dwellest in the land: the time is come, the day of trouble is near, and not the sounding again of the mountains.	Doom has come to you, O inhabitants of the land. The time has come; the day is near; there is panic on the mountains instead of shouts of joy.
EZK	7	8	이제 내가 속히 분을 네게 쏟고 내 진노를 네게 이루어서 네 행위대로 너를 심판하여 네 모든 가증한 일을 네게 보응하되	Now will I shortly pour out my fury upon thee, and accomplish mine anger upon thee: and I will judge thee according to thy ways, and will recompense thee for all thine abominations.	Very soon I will pour out My wrath upon you and vent My anger against you; I will judge you according to your ways and repay you for all your abominations.
EZK	7	9	내가 너를 아껴 보지 아니하며 긍휼히 여기지도 아니하고 네 행위대로 너를 벌하여 너의 가증한 일이 너희 중에 나타나게 하리니 나 여호와가 치는 줄을 네가 알리라	And mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity: I will recompense thee according to thy ways and thine abominations that are in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that I am the Lord that smiteth.	I will not look on you with pity, nor will I spare you, but I will punish you for your ways and for the abominations among you. Then you will know that it is I, the LORD, who strikes the blow.
EZK	7	10	볼지어다 그 날이로다 볼지어다 임박하도다 정한 재앙이 이르렀으니 몽둥이가 꽃 피며 교만이 싹났도다	Behold the day, behold, it is come: the morning is gone forth; the rod hath blossomed, pride hath budded.	Behold, the day is here! It has come! Doom has gone out, the rod has budded, arrogance has bloomed.
EZK	7	11	포학이 일어나서 죄악의 몽둥이가 되었은즉 그들도, 그 무리도, 그 재물도 하나도 남지 아니하고 그 중의 아름다운 것도 없어지리로다	Violence is risen up into a rod of wickedness: none of them shall remain, nor of their multitude, nor of any of theirs: neither shall there be wailing for them.	Their violence has grown into a rod to punish their wickedness. None of them will remain: none of their multitude, none of their wealth, and nothing of value.
EZK	7	12	때가 이르렀고 날이 가까웠으니 사는 자도 기뻐하지 말고 파는 자도 근심하지 말 것은 진노가 그 모든 무리에게 임함이로다	The time is come, the day draweth near: let not the buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn: for wrath is upon all the multitude thereof.	The time has come; the day has arrived. Let the buyer not rejoice and the seller not mourn, for wrath is upon the whole multitude.
EZK	7	13	판 자가 살아 있다 할지라도 다시 돌아가서 그 판 것을 얻지 못하니 이는 묵시로 그 모든 무리를 가리켜 말하기를 하나도 돌아갈 자가 없겠고 악한 생활로 스스로 강하게 할 자도 없으리라 하였음이로다	For the seller shall not return to that which is sold, although they were yet alive: for the vision is touching the whole multitude thereof, which shall not return; neither shall any strengthen himself in the iniquity of his life.	The seller will surely not recover what he sold while both remain alive. For the vision concerning the whole multitude will not be revoked, and because of their iniquity, not one of them will preserve his life.
EZK	7	14	그들이 나팔을 불어 온갖 것을 예비하였을지라도 전쟁에 나갈 사람이 없나니 이는 내 진노가 그 모든 무리에게 미쳤음이라	They have blown the trumpet, even to make all ready; but none goeth to the battle: for my wrath is upon all the multitude thereof.	They have blown the trumpet and made everything ready, but no one goes to war, for My wrath is upon the whole multitude.
EZK	7	15	밖에는 칼이 있고 안에는 온역과 기근이 있어서 밭에 있는 자는 칼에 죽을 것이요 성읍에 있는 자는 기근과 온역에 망할 것이며	The sword is without, and the pestilence and the famine within: he that is in the field shall die with the sword; and he that is in the city, famine and pestilence shall devour him.	The sword is outside; plague and famine are within. Those in the country will die by the sword, and those in the city will be devoured by famine and plague.
EZK	7	16	도망하는 자는 산 위로 피하여 다 각기 자기 죄악 까닭에 골짜기 비둘기처럼 슬피 울 것이며	But they that escape of them shall escape, and shall be on the mountains like doves of the valleys, all of them mourning, every one for his iniquity.	The survivors will escape and live in the mountains, moaning like doves of the valley, each for his own iniquity.
EZK	7	17	모든 손은 피곤하고 모든 무릎은 물과 같이 약할 것이라	All hands shall be feeble, and all knees shall be weak as water.	Every hand will go limp, and every knee will turn to water.
EZK	7	18	그들이 굵은 베로 허리를 묶을 것이요 두려움이 그들을 덮을 것이요 모든 얼굴에는 수치가 있고 모든 머리는 대머리가 될 것이며	They shall also gird themselves with sackcloth, and horror shall cover them; and shame shall be upon all faces, and baldness upon all their heads.	They will put on sackcloth, and terror will overwhelm them. Shame will cover all their faces, and all their heads will be shaved.
EZK	7	19	그들이 그 은을 거리에 던지며 그 금을 오예물 같이 여기리니 이는 여호와 내가 진노를 베푸는 날에 그 은과 금이 능히 그들을 건지지 못하며 능히 그 심령을 족하게 하거나 그 창자를 채우지 못하고 오직 죄악에 빠치는 것이 됨이로다	They shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold shall be removed: their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of the Lord: they shall not satisfy their souls, neither fill their bowels: because it is the stumblingblock of their iniquity.	They will throw their silver into the streets, and their gold will seem unclean. Their silver and gold cannot save them in the day of the wrath of the LORD. They cannot satisfy their appetites or fill their stomachs with wealth, for it became the stumbling block that brought their iniquity.
EZK	7	20	그들이 그 화려한 장식으로 인하여 교만을 품었고 또 그것으로 가증한 우상과 미운 물건을 지었은즉 내가 그것으로 그들에게 오예물이 되게 하여	As for the beauty of his ornament, he set it in majesty: but they made the images of their abominations and of their detestable things therein: therefore have I set it far from them.	His beautiful ornaments they transformed into pride and used them to fashion their vile images and detestable idols. Therefore I will make these into something unclean for them.
EZK	7	21	외인의 손에 붙여 노략하게 하며 세상 악인에게 붙여 그들로 약탈하여 더럽히게 하고	And I will give it into the hands of the strangers for a prey, and to the wicked of the earth for a spoil; and they shall pollute it.	And I will hand these things over as plunder to foreigners and loot to the wicked of the earth, who will defile them.
EZK	7	22	내가 또 내 얼굴을 그들에게서 돌이키리니 그들이 내 은밀한 처소를 더럽히고 강포한 자도 거기 들어와서 더럽히리라	My face will I turn also from them, and they shall pollute my secret place: for the robbers shall enter into it, and defile it.	I will turn My face away from them, and they will defile My treasured place. Violent men will enter it, and they will defile it.
EZK	7	23	너는 쇠사슬을 만들라 이는 피 흘리는 죄가 그 땅에 가득하고 강포가 그 성읍에 찼음이라	Make a chain: for the land is full of bloody crimes, and the city is full of violence.	Forge the chain, for the land is full of crimes of bloodshed, and the city is full of violence.
EZK	7	24	내가 극히 악한 이방인으로 이르러 그 집들을 점령하게 하고 악한 자의 교만을 그치게 하리니 그 성소가 더럽힘을 당하리라	Wherefore I will bring the worst of the heathen, and they shall possess their houses: I will also make the pomp of the strong to cease; and their holy places shall be defiled.	So I will bring the most wicked of nations to take possession of their houses. I will end the pride of the mighty, and their holy places will be profaned.
EZK	7	25	패망이 이르리니 그들이 평강을 구하여도 없을 것이라	Destruction cometh; and they shall seek peace, and there shall be none.	Anguish is coming! They will seek peace, but find none.
EZK	7	26	환난에 환난이 더하고 소문에 소문이 더할 때에 그들이 선지자에게 묵시를 구하나 헛될 것이며 제사장에게는 율법이 없어질 것이요 장로에게는 모략이 없어질 것이며	Mischief shall come upon mischief, and rumour shall be upon rumour; then shall they seek a vision of the prophet; but the law shall perish from the priest, and counsel from the ancients.	Disaster upon disaster will come, and rumor after rumor. Then they will seek a vision from a prophet, but instruction from the priests will perish, as will counsel from the elders.
EZK	7	27	왕은 애통하고 방백은 놀람을 옷 입듯하며 거민의 손은 떨리리라 내가 그 행위대로 그들에게 갚고 그 죄악대로 그들을 국문한즉 그들이 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	The king shall mourn, and the prince shall be clothed with desolation, and the hands of the people of the land shall be troubled: I will do unto them after their way, and according to their deserts will I judge them; and they shall know that I am the Lord.	The king will mourn, the prince will be clothed with despair, and the hands of the people of the land will tremble. I will deal with them according to their conduct, and I will judge them by their own standards. Then they will know that I am the LORD.’”
EZK	8	1	제육년 유월 오일에 나는 집에 앉았고 유다 장로들은 내 앞에 앉았는데 주 여호와의 권능이 거기서 내게 임하기로	And it came to pass in the sixth year, in the sixth month, in the fifth day of the month, as I sat in mine house, and the elders of Judah sat before me, that the hand of the Lord God fell there upon me.	In the sixth year, on the fifth day of the sixth month, I was sitting in my house, and the elders of Judah were sitting before me; and there the hand of the Lord GOD fell upon me.
EZK	8	2	내가 보니 불 같은 형상이 있어 그 허리 이하 모양은 불 같고 허리 이상은 광채가 나서 단 쇠 같은데	Then I beheld, and lo a likeness as the appearance of fire: from the appearance of his loins even downward, fire; and from his loins even upward, as the appearance of brightness, as the colour of amber.	Then I looked and saw a figure like that of a man. From His waist down His appearance was like fire, and from His waist up He was as bright as the gleam of amber.
EZK	8	3	그가 손 같은 것을 펴서 내 머리털 한 모숨을 잡으며 주의 신이 나를 들어 천지 사이로 올리시고 하나님의 이상 가운데 나를 이끌어 예루살렘으로 가서 안뜰로 들어가는 북향한 문에 이르시니 거기는 투기의 우상 곧 투기를 격발케 하는 우상의 자리가 있는 곳이라	And he put forth the form of an hand, and took me by a lock of mine head; and the spirit lifted me up between the earth and the heaven, and brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem, to the door of the inner gate that looketh toward the north; where was the seat of the image of jealousy, which provoketh to jealousy.	He stretched out what looked like a hand and took me by the hair of my head. Then the Spirit lifted me up between earth and heaven and carried me in visions of God to Jerusalem, to the entrance of the north gate of the inner court, where the idol that provokes jealousy was seated.
EZK	8	4	이스라엘 하나님의 영광이 거기 있는데 내가 들에서 보던 이상과 같더라	And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel was there, according to the vision that I saw in the plain.	And there I saw the glory of the God of Israel, like the vision I had seen in the plain.
EZK	8	5	그가 내게 이르시되 인자야 이제 너는 눈을 들어 북편을 바라보라 하시기로 내가 눈을 들어 북편을 바라보니 제단문 어귀 북편에 그 투기의 우상이 있더라	Then said he unto me, Son of man, lift up thine eyes now the way toward the north. So I lifted up mine eyes the way toward the north, and behold northward at the gate of the altar this image of jealousy in the entry.	“Son of man,” He said to me, “now lift up your eyes to the north.” So I lifted up my eyes to the north, and in the entrance north of the Altar Gate I saw this idol of jealousy.
EZK	8	6	그가 또 내게 이르시되 인자야 이스라엘 족속의 행하는 일을 보느냐 그들이 여기서 크게 가증한 일을 행하여 나로 내 성소를 멀리 떠나게 하느니라 너는 다시 다른 큰 가증한 일을 보리라 하시더라	He said furthermore unto me, Son of man, seest thou what they do? even the great abominations that the house of Israel committeth here, that I should go far off from my sanctuary? but turn thee yet again, and thou shalt see greater abominations.	“Son of man,” He said to me, “do you see what they are doing—the great abominations that the house of Israel is committing—to drive Me far from My sanctuary? Yet you will see even greater abominations.”
EZK	8	7	그가 나를 이끌고 뜰 문에 이르시기로 내가 본즉 담에 구멍이 있더라	And he brought me to the door of the court; and when I looked, behold a hole in the wall.	Then He brought me to the entrance to the court, and I looked and saw a hole in the wall.
EZK	8	8	그가 내게 이르시되 인자야 너는 이 담을 헐라 하시기로 내가 그 담을 허니 한 문이 있더라	Then said he unto me, Son of man, dig now in the wall: and when I had digged in the wall, behold a door.	“Son of man,” He told me, “dig through the wall.” So I dug through the wall and discovered a doorway.
EZK	8	9	또 내게 이르시되 들어가서 그들이 거기서 행하는 가증하고 악한 일을 보라 하시기로	And he said unto me, Go in, and behold the wicked abominations that they do here.	Then He said to me, “Go in and see the wicked abominations they are committing here.”
EZK	8	10	내가 들어가 보니 각양 곤충과 가증한 짐승과 이스라엘 족속의 모든 우상을 그 사면 벽에 그렸고	So I went in and saw; and behold every form of creeping things, and abominable beasts, and all the idols of the house of Israel, pourtrayed upon the wall round about.	So I went in and looked, and engraved all around the wall was every kind of crawling creature and detestable beast, along with all the idols of the house of Israel.
EZK	8	11	이스라엘 족속의 장로 중 칠십 인이 그 앞에 섰으며 사반의 아들 야아사냐도 그 가운데 섰고 각기 손에 향로를 들었는데 향연이 구름 같이 오르더라	And there stood before them seventy men of the ancients of the house of Israel, and in the midst of them stood Jaazaniah the son of Shaphan, with every man his censer in his hand; and a thick cloud of incense went up.	Before them stood seventy elders of the house of Israel, with Jaazaniah son of Shaphan standing among them. Each had a censer in his hand, and a fragrant cloud of incense was rising.
EZK	8	12	또 내게 이르시되 인자야 이스라엘 족속의 장로들이 각각 그 우상의 방안 어두운 가운데서 행하는 것을 네가 보았느냐 그들이 이르기를 여호와께서 우리를 보지 아니하시며 이 땅을 버리셨다 하느니라	Then said he unto me, Son of man, hast thou seen what the ancients of the house of Israel do in the dark, every man in the chambers of his imagery? for they say, The Lord seeth us not; the Lord hath forsaken the earth.	“Son of man,” He said to me, “do you see what the elders of the house of Israel are doing in the darkness, each at the shrine of his own idol? For they are saying, ‘The LORD does not see us; the LORD has forsaken the land.’”
EZK	8	13	또 내게 이르시되 너는 다시 그들의 행하는 바 다른 큰 가증한 일을 보리라 하시더라	He said also unto me, Turn thee yet again, and thou shalt see greater abominations that they do.	Again, He told me, “You will see them committing even greater abominations.”
EZK	8	14	그가 또 나를 데리고 여호와의 전으로 들어가는 북문에 이르시기로 보니 거기 여인들이 앉아 담무스를 위하여 애곡하더라	Then he brought me to the door of the gate of the Lord’s house which was toward the north; and, behold, there sat women weeping for Tammuz.	Then He brought me to the entrance of the north gate of the house of the LORD, and I saw women sitting there, weeping for Tammuz.
EZK	8	15	그가 또 내게 이르시되 인자야 네가 그것을 보았느냐 너는 또 이보다 더 큰 가증한 일을 보리라 하시더라	Then said he unto me, Hast thou seen this, O son of man? turn thee yet again, and thou shalt see greater abominations than these.	“Son of man,” He said to me, “do you see this? Yet you will see even greater abominations than these.”
EZK	8	16	그가 또 나를 데리고 여호와의 전 안뜰에 들어가시기로 보니 여호와의 전문 앞 현관과 제단 사이에서 약 이십오 인이 여호와의 전을 등지고 낯을 동으로 향하여 동방 태양에 경배하더라	And he brought me into the inner court of the Lord’s house, and, behold, at the door of the temple of the Lord, between the porch and the altar, were about five and twenty men, with their backs toward the temple of the Lord, and their faces toward the east; and they worshipped the sun toward the east.	So He brought me to the inner court of the house of the LORD, and there at the entrance to the temple of the LORD, between the portico and the altar, were about twenty-five men with their backs to the temple of the LORD and their faces toward the east; and they were bowing to the east in worship of the sun.
EZK	8	17	또 내게 이르시되 인자야 네가 보았느냐 유다 족속이 여기서 행한 가증한 일을 적다 하겠느냐 그들이 강포로 이 땅에 채우고 또 다시 내 노를 격동하고 심지어 나무가지를 그 코에 두었느니라	Then he said unto me, Hast thou seen this, O son of man? Is it a light thing to the house of Judah that they commit the abominations which they commit here? for they have filled the land with violence, and have returned to provoke me to anger: and, lo, they put the branch to their nose.	“Son of man,” He said to me, “do you see this? Is it not enough for the house of Judah to commit the abominations they are practicing here, that they must also fill the land with violence and continually provoke Me to anger? Look, they are even putting the branch to their nose!
EZK	8	18	그러므로 나도 분노로 갚아 아껴 보지 아니하고 긍휼을 베풀지도 아니하리니 그들이 큰 소리로 내 귀에 부르짖을지라도 내가 듣지 아니하리라	Therefore will I also deal in fury: mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity: and though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them.	Therefore I will respond with wrath. I will not look on them with pity, nor will I spare them. Although they shout loudly in My ears, I will not listen to them.”
EZK	9	1	그가 또 큰 소리로 내 귀에 외쳐 가라사대 이 성읍을 관할하는 자들로 각기 살륙하는 기계를 손에 들고 나아오게 하라 하시더라	He cried also in mine ears with a loud voice, saying, Cause them that have charge over the city to draw near, even every man with his destroying weapon in his hand.	Then I heard Him call out in a loud voice, saying, “Draw near, O executioners of the city, each with a weapon of destruction in hand.”
EZK	9	2	내가 본즉 여섯 사람이 북향한 윗문 길로 좇아 오는데 각 사람의 손에 살륙하는 기계를 잡았고 그 중에 한 사람은 가는 베옷을 입고 허리에 서기관의 먹 그릇을 찼더라 그들이 들어 와서 놋 제단 곁에 서더라	And, behold, six men came from the way of the higher gate, which lieth toward the north, and every man a slaughter weapon in his hand; and one man among them was clothed with linen, with a writer’s inkhorn by his side: and they went in, and stood beside the brasen altar.	And I saw six men coming from the direction of the Upper Gate, which faces north, each with a weapon of slaughter in his hand. With them was another man clothed in linen who had a writing kit at his side. And they came in and stood beside the bronze altar.
EZK	9	3	그룹에 머물러 있던 이스라엘 하나님의 영광이 올라 성전 문지방에 이르더니 여호와께서 그 가는 베옷을 입고 서기관의 먹 그릇을 찬 사람을 불러	And the glory of the God of Israel was gone up from the cherub, whereupon he was, to the threshold of the house. And he called to the man clothed with linen, which had the writer’s inkhorn by his side;	Then the glory of the God of Israel rose from above the cherubim, where it had been, and moved to the threshold of the temple. And He called to the man clothed in linen who had the writing kit at his side.
EZK	9	4	이르시되 너는 예루살렘 성읍 중에 순행하여 그 가운데서 행하는 모든 가증한 일로 인하여 탄식하며 우는 자의 이마에 표하라 하시고	And the Lord said unto him, Go through the midst of the city, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and that cry for all the abominations that be done in the midst thereof.	“Go throughout the city of Jerusalem,” said the LORD, “and put a mark on the foreheads of the men sighing and groaning over all the abominations committed there.”
EZK	9	5	나의 듣는데 또 그 남은 자에게 이르시되 너희는 그 뒤를 좇아 성읍 중에 순행하며 아껴보지도 말며 긍휼을 베풀지도 말고 쳐서	And to the others he said in mine hearing, Go ye after him through the city, and smite: let not your eye spare, neither have ye pity:	And as I listened, He said to the others, “Follow him through the city and start killing; do not show pity or spare anyone!
EZK	9	6	늙은 자와 젊은 자와 처녀와 어린 아이와 부녀를 다 죽이되 이마에 표 있는 자에게는 가까이 말라 내 성소에서 시작할지니라 하시매 그들이 성전 앞에 있는 늙은 자들로부터 시작하더라	Slay utterly old and young, both maids, and little children, and women: but come not near any man upon whom is the mark; and begin at my sanctuary. Then they began at the ancient men which were before the house.	Slaughter the old men, the young men and maidens, the women and children; but do not go near anyone who has the mark. Now begin at My sanctuary.” So they began with the elders who were before the temple.
EZK	9	7	그가 또 그들에게 이르시되 너희는 성전을 더럽혀 시체로 모든 뜰에 채우라 너희는 나가라 하시매 그들이 나가서 성읍 중에서 치더라	And he said unto them, Defile the house, and fill the courts with the slain: go ye forth. And they went forth, and slew in the city.	Then He told them, “Defile the temple and fill the courts with the slain. Go forth!” So they went out and began killing throughout the city.
EZK	9	8	그들이 칠 때에 내가 홀로 있는지라 엎드리어 부르짖어 가로되 오호라 주 여호와여 예루살렘을 향하여 분노를 쏟으시오니 이스라엘 남은 자를 모두 멸하려 하시나이까	And it came to pass, while they were slaying them, and I was left, that I fell upon my face, and cried, and said, Ah Lord God! wilt thou destroy all the residue of Israel in thy pouring out of thy fury upon Jerusalem?	While they were killing, I was left alone. And I fell facedown and cried out, “Oh, Lord GOD, when You pour out Your wrath on Jerusalem, will You destroy the entire remnant of Israel?”
EZK	9	9	그가 내게 이르시되 이스라엘과 유다 족속의 죄악이 심히 중하여 그 땅에 피가 가득하며 그 성읍에 불법이 찼나니 이는 그들이 이르기를 여호와께서 이 땅을 버리셨으며 보지 아니하신다 함이라	Then said he unto me, The iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah is exceeding great, and the land is full of blood, and the city full of perverseness: for they say, The Lord hath forsaken the earth, and the Lord seeth not.	He replied, “The iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah is exceedingly great. The land is full of bloodshed, and the city is full of perversity. For they say, ‘The LORD has forsaken the land; the LORD does not see.’
EZK	9	10	그러므로 내가 그들을 아껴 보지 아니하며 긍휼을 베풀지 아니하고 그 행위대로 그 머리에 갚으리라 하시더라	And as for me also, mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity, but I will recompense their way upon their head.	But as for Me, I will not look on them with pity, nor will I spare them. I will bring their deeds down upon their own heads.”
EZK	9	11	가는 베옷을 입고 허리에 먹 그릇을 찬 사람이 복명하여 가로되 주께서 내게 명하신 대로 내가 준행하였나이다 하더라	And, behold, the man clothed with linen, which had the inkhorn by his side, reported the matter, saying, I have done as thou hast commanded me.	Then the man clothed in linen with the writing kit at his side reported back, “I have done as You commanded.”
EZK	10	1	이에 내가 보니 그룹들 머리 위 궁창에 남보석 같은 것이 나타나는데 보좌 형상 같더라	Then I looked, and, behold, in the firmament that was above the head of the cherubims there appeared over them as it were a sapphire stone, as the appearance of the likeness of a throne.	And I looked and saw above the expanse, above the heads of the cherubim, the likeness of a throne of sapphire.
EZK	10	2	하나님이 가는 베옷 입은 사람에게 일러 가라사대 너는 그룹 밑바퀴 사이로 들어가서 그 속에서 숯불을 두 손에 가득히 움켜 가지고 성읍 위에 흩으라 하시매 그가 내 목전에 들어가더라	And he spake unto the man clothed with linen, and said, Go in between the wheels, even under the cherub, and fill thine hand with coals of fire from between the cherubims, and scatter them over the city. And he went in in my sight.	And the LORD said to the man clothed in linen, “Go inside the wheelwork beneath the cherubim. Fill your hands with burning coals from among the cherubim and scatter them over the city.” And as I watched, he went in.
EZK	10	3	그 사람이 들어갈 때에 그룹들은 성전 우편에 섰고 구름은 안 뜰에 가득하며	Now the cherubims stood on the right side of the house, when the man went in; and the cloud filled the inner court.	Now when the man went in, the cherubim were standing on the south side of the temple, and a cloud filled the inner court.
EZK	10	4	여호와의 영광이 그룹에서 올라 성전 문지방에 임하니 구름이 성전에 가득하며 여호와의 영화로운 광채가 뜰에 가득하였고	Then the glory of the Lord went up from the cherub, and stood over the threshold of the house; and the house was filled with the cloud, and the court was full of the brightness of the Lord’s glory.	Then the glory of the LORD rose from above the cherubim and stood over the threshold of the temple. The temple was filled with the cloud, and the court was filled with the brightness of the glory of the LORD.
EZK	10	5	그룹들의 날개 소리는 바깥 뜰까지 들리는데 전능하신 하나님의 말씀하시는 음성 같더라	And the sound of the cherubims’ wings was heard even to the outer court, as the voice of the Almighty God when he speaketh.	The sound of the wings of the cherubim could be heard as far as the outer court, like the voice of God Almighty when He speaks.
EZK	10	6	하나님이 가는 베옷 입은 자에게 명하시기를 바퀴 사이 곧 그룹들 사이에서 불을 취하라 하셨으므로 그가 들어가 바퀴 옆에 서매	And it came to pass, that when he had commanded the man clothed with linen, saying, Take fire from between the wheels, from between the cherubims; then he went in, and stood beside the wheels.	When the LORD commanded the man clothed in linen, saying, “Take fire from within the wheelwork, from among the cherubim,” the man went in and stood beside a wheel.
EZK	10	7	한 그룹이 그룹들 사이에서 손을 내밀어 그 그룹들 사이에 있는 불을 취하여 가는 베옷 입은 자의 손에 주매 그가 받아 가지고 나가는데	And one cherub stretched forth his hand from between the cherubims unto the fire that was between the cherubims, and took thereof, and put it into the hands of him that was clothed with linen: who took it, and went out.	Then one of the cherubim reached out his hand and took some of the fire that was among them. And he put it into the hands of the man clothed in linen, who received it and went out.
EZK	10	8	그룹들의 날개 밑에 사람의 손 같은 것이 나타났더라	And there appeared in the cherubims the form of a man’s hand under their wings.	(The cherubim appeared to have the form of human hands under their wings.)
EZK	10	9	내가 보니 그룹들 곁에 네 바퀴가 있는데 이 그룹 곁에도 한 바퀴가 있고 저 그룹 곁에도 한 바퀴가 있으며 그 바퀴 모양은 황옥 같으며	And when I looked, behold the four wheels by the cherubims, one wheel by one cherub, and another wheel by another cherub: and the appearance of the wheels was as the colour of a beryl stone.	Then I looked and saw four wheels beside the cherubim, one wheel beside each cherub. And the wheels gleamed like a beryl stone.
EZK	10	10	그 모양은 넷이 한결 같은데 마치 바퀴 안에 바퀴가 있는 것 같으며	And as for their appearances, they four had one likeness, as if a wheel had been in the midst of a wheel.	As for their appearance, all four had the same form, like a wheel within a wheel.
EZK	10	11	그룹들이 행할 때에는 사방으로 향한 대로 돌이키지 않고 행하되 돌이키지 않고 그 머리 향한 곳으로 행하며	When they went, they went upon their four sides; they turned not as they went, but to the place whither the head looked they followed it; they turned not as they went.	When they moved, they would go in any of the four directions, without turning as they moved. For wherever the head faced, the cherubim would go in that direction, without turning as they moved.
EZK	10	12	그 온 몸과 등과 손과 날개와 바퀴 곧 네 그룹의 바퀴의 둘레에 다 눈이 가득하더라	And their whole body, and their backs, and their hands, and their wings, and the wheels, were full of eyes round about, even the wheels that they four had.	Their entire bodies, including their backs, hands, and wings, were full of eyes all around, as were their four wheels.
EZK	10	13	내가 들으니 그 바퀴들을 도는 것이라 칭하며	As for the wheels, it was cried unto them in my hearing, O wheel.	I heard the wheels being called “the whirling wheels.”
EZK	10	14	그룹들은 각기 네 면이 있는데 첫 면은 그룹의 얼굴이요 둘째 면은 사람의 얼굴이요 셋째는 사자의 얼굴이요 넷째는 독수리의 얼굴이더라	And every one had four faces: the first face was the face of a cherub, and the second face was the face of a man, and the third the face of a lion, and the fourth the face of an eagle.	Each of the cherubim had four faces: the first face was that of a cherub, the second that of a man, the third that of a lion, and the fourth that of an eagle.
EZK	10	15	그룹들이 올라가니 그들은 내가 그발 강 가에서 보던 생물이라	And the cherubims were lifted up. This is the living creature that I saw by the river of Chebar.	Then the cherubim rose upward. These were the living creatures I had seen by the River Kebar.
EZK	10	16	그룹들이 행할 때에는 바퀴도 그 곁에서 행하고 그룹들이 날개를 들고 땅에서 올라가려 할 때에도 바퀴가 그 곁을 떠나지 아니하며	And when the cherubims went, the wheels went by them: and when the cherubims lifted up their wings to mount up from the earth, the same wheels also turned not from beside them.	When the cherubim moved, the wheels moved beside them, and even when they spread their wings to rise from the ground, the wheels did not veer away from their side.
EZK	10	17	그들이 서면 이들도 서고 그들이 올라가면 이들도 함께 올라가니 이는 생물의 신이 바퀴 가운데 있음이더라	When they stood, these stood; and when they were lifted up, these lifted up themselves also: for the spirit of the living creature was in them.	When the cherubim stood still, the wheels also stood still, and when they ascended, the wheels ascended with them, for the spirit of the living creatures was in the wheels.
EZK	10	18	여호와의 영광이 성전 문지방을 떠나서 그룹들 위에 머무르니	Then the glory of the Lord departed from off the threshold of the house, and stood over the cherubims.	Then the glory of the LORD moved away from the threshold of the temple and stood above the cherubim.
EZK	10	19	그룹들이 날개를 들고 내 목전에 땅에서 올라가는데 그들이 나갈 때에 바퀴도 그 곁에서 함께 하더라 그들이 여호와의 전으로 들어가는 동문에 머물고 이스라엘 하나님의 영광이 그 위에 덮였더라	And the cherubims lifted up their wings, and mounted up from the earth in my sight: when they went out, the wheels also were beside them, and every one stood at the door of the east gate of the Lord’s house; and the glory of the God of Israel was over them above.	As I watched, the cherubim lifted their wings and rose up from the ground, with the wheels beside them as they went. And they stopped at the entrance of the east gate of the house of the LORD, with the glory of the God of Israel above them.
EZK	10	20	그것은 내가 그발 강 가에서 본바 이스라엘 하나님의 아래 있던 생물이라 그들이 그룹들인 줄을 내가 아니라	This is the living creature that I saw under the God of Israel by the river of Chebar; and I knew that they were the cherubims.	These were the living creatures I had seen beneath the God of Israel by the River Kebar, and I knew that they were cherubim.
EZK	10	21	각기 네 얼굴과 네 날개가 있으며 날개 밑에는 사람의 손 형상이 있으니	Every one had four faces apiece, and every one four wings; and the likeness of the hands of a man was under their wings.	Each had four faces and four wings, with what looked like human hands under their wings.
EZK	10	22	그 얼굴의 형상은 내가 그발 강 가에서 보던 얼굴이며 그 모양과 몸뚱이도 그러하며 각기 곧게 앞으로 행하더라	And the likeness of their faces was the same faces which I saw by the river of Chebar, their appearances and themselves: they went every one straight forward.	Their faces looked like the faces I had seen by the River Kebar. Each creature went straight ahead.
EZK	11	1	때에 주의 신이 나를 들어 데리고 여호와의 전 동문 곧 동향한 문에 이르시기로 본즉 그 문에 이십오 인이 있는데 내가 그 중에서 앗술의 아들 야아사냐와 브나야의 아들 블라댜를 보았으니 그들은 백성의 방백이라	Moreover the spirit lifted me up, and brought me unto the east gate of the Lord’s house, which looketh eastward: and behold at the door of the gate five and twenty men; among whom I saw Jaazaniah the son of Azur, and Pelatiah the son of Benaiah, princes of the people.	Then the Spirit lifted me up and brought me to the gate of the house of the LORD that faces east. And there at the entrance of the gate were twenty-five men. Among them I saw Jaazaniah son of Azzur and Pelatiah son of Benaiah, who were leaders of the people.
EZK	11	2	그가 내게 이르시되 인자야 이 사람들은 불의를 품고 이 성 중에서 악한 꾀를 베푸는 자니라	Then said he unto me, Son of man, these are the men that devise mischief, and give wicked counsel in this city:	And the LORD said to me, “Son of man, these are the men who plot evil and give wicked counsel in this city.
EZK	11	3	그들의 말이 집 건축할 때가 가깝지 아니한즉 이 성읍은 가마가 되고 우리는 고기가 된다 하나니	Which say, It is not near; let us build houses: this city is the caldron, and we be the flesh.	They are saying, ‘Is not the time near to build houses? The city is the cooking pot, and we are the meat.’
EZK	11	4	그러므로 인자야 너는 그들을 쳐서 예언하고 예언할지니라	Therefore prophesy against them, prophesy, O son of man.	Therefore prophesy against them; prophesy, O son of man!”
EZK	11	5	여호와의 신이 내게 임하여 가라사대 너는 말하기를 여호와의 말씀에 이스라엘 족속아 너희가 이렇게 말하였도다 너희 마음에서 일어나는 것을 내가 다 아노라	And the Spirit of the Lord fell upon me, and said unto me, Speak; Thus saith the Lord; Thus have ye said, O house of Israel: for I know the things that come into your mind, every one of them.	And the Spirit of the LORD fell upon me and told me to declare that this is what the LORD says: “That is what you are thinking, O house of Israel; and I know the thoughts that arise in your minds.
EZK	11	6	너희가 이 성읍에서 많이 살륙하여 그 시체로 거리에 채웠도다	Ye have multiplied your slain in this city, and ye have filled the streets thereof with the slain.	You have multiplied those you killed in this city and filled its streets with the dead.
EZK	11	7	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 이 성읍 중에서 너희가 살륙한 시체는 그 고기요 이 성읍은 그 가마려니와 너희는 그 가운데서 끌려 나오리라	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Your slain whom ye have laid in the midst of it, they are the flesh, and this city is the caldron: but I will bring you forth out of the midst of it.	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: The slain you have laid within this city are the meat, and the city is the pot; but I will remove you from it.
EZK	11	8	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 너희가 칼을 두려워하니 내가 칼로 너희에게 임하게 하고	Ye have feared the sword; and I will bring a sword upon you, saith the Lord God.	You fear the sword, so I will bring the sword against you, declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	11	9	너희를 그 성읍 가운데서 끌어내어 타국인의 손에 붙여 너희에게 벌을 내리리니	And I will bring you out of the midst thereof, and deliver you into the hands of strangers, and will execute judgments among you.	I will bring you out of the city and deliver you into the hands of foreigners, and I will execute judgments against you.
EZK	11	10	너희가 칼에 엎드러질 것이라 내가 이스라엘 변경에서 너희를 국문하리니 너희가 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	Ye shall fall by the sword; I will judge you in the border of Israel; and ye shall know that I am the Lord.	You will fall by the sword, and I will judge you even to the borders of Israel. Then you will know that I am the LORD.
EZK	11	11	이 성읍은 너희 가마가 되지 아니하고 너희는 그 가운데 고기가 되지 아니할지라 내가 너희를 이스라엘 변경에서 국문하리니	This city shall not be your caldron, neither shall ye be the flesh in the midst thereof; but I will judge you in the border of Israel:	The city will not be a pot for you, nor will you be the meat within it. I will judge you even to the borders of Israel.
EZK	11	12	너희가 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라 너희가 내 율례를 행치 아니하며 규례를 지키지 아니하고 너희 사면에 있는 이방인의 규례대로 행하였느니라 하셨다 하라	And ye shall know that I am the Lord: for ye have not walked in my statutes, neither executed my judgments, but have done after the manners of the heathen that are round about you.	Then you will know that I am the LORD. For you have neither followed My statutes nor practiced My ordinances, but you have conformed to the ordinances of the nations around you.”
EZK	11	13	이에 내가 예언할 때에 브나야의 아들 블라댜가 죽기로 내가 엎드리어 큰 소리로 부르짖어 가로되 오호라 주 여호와여 이스라엘의 남은 자를 다 멸절하고자 하시나이까 하니라	And it came to pass, when I prophesied, that Pelatiah the son of Benaiah died. Then fell I down upon my face, and cried with a loud voice, and said, Ah Lord God! wilt thou make a full end of the remnant of Israel?	Now as I was prophesying, Pelatiah son of Benaiah died. Then I fell facedown and cried out in a loud voice, “Oh, Lord GOD, will You bring the remnant of Israel to a complete end?”
EZK	11	14	여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 가라사대	Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	11	15	인자야 예루살렘 거민이 너의 형제 곧 너의 형제와 친속과 이스라엘 온 족속을 향하여 이르기를 너희는 여호와에게서 멀리 떠나라 이 땅은 우리에게 주어 기업이 되게 하신 것이라 하였나니	Son of man, thy brethren, even thy brethren, the men of thy kindred, and all the house of Israel wholly, are they unto whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem have said, Get you far from the Lord: unto us is this land given in possession.	“Son of man, your brothers—your relatives, your fellow exiles, and the whole house of Israel—are those of whom the people of Jerusalem have said, ‘They are far away from the LORD; this land has been given to us as a possession.’
EZK	11	16	그런즉 너는 말하기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 내가 비록 그들을 멀리 이방인 가운데로 쫓고 열방에 흩었으나 그들이 이른 열방에서 내가 잠간 그들에게 성소가 되리라 하셨다 하고	Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord God; Although I have cast them far off among the heathen, and although I have scattered them among the countries, yet will I be to them as a little sanctuary in the countries where they shall come.	Therefore declare that this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Although I sent them far away among the nations and scattered them among the countries, yet for a little while I have been a sanctuary for them in the countries to which they have gone.’
EZK	11	17	너는 또 말하기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 내가 너희를 만민 가운데 모으며 너희를 흩은 열방 가운데서 모아 내고 이스라엘 땅으로 너희에게 주리라 하셨다 하라	Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord God; I will even gather you from the people, and assemble you out of the countries where ye have been scattered, and I will give you the land of Israel.	Therefore declare that this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘I will gather you from the peoples and assemble you from the countries to which you have been scattered, and I will give back to you the land of Israel.’
EZK	11	18	그들이 그리로 가서 그 가운데 모든 미운 물건과 가증한 것을 제하여 버릴지라	And they shall come thither, and they shall take away all the detestable things thereof and all the abominations thereof from thence.	When they return to it, they will remove all its detestable things and all its abominations.
EZK	11	19	내가 그들에게 일치한 마음을 주고 그 속에 새 신을 주며 그 몸에서 굳은 마음을 제하고 부드러운 마음을 주어서	And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within you; and I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them an heart of flesh:	And I will give them singleness of heart and put a new spirit within them; I will remove their heart of stone and give them a heart of flesh,
EZK	11	20	내 율례를 좇으며 내 규례를 지켜 행하게 하리니 그들은 내 백성이 되고 나는 그들의 하나님이 되리라	That they may walk in my statutes, and keep mine ordinances, and do them: and they shall be my people, and I will be their God.	so that they may follow My statutes, keep My ordinances, and practice them. Then they will be My people, and I will be their God.
EZK	11	21	그러나 미운 것과 가증한 것을 마음으로 좇는 자는 내가 그 행위대로 그 머리에 갚으리라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	But as for them whose heart walketh after the heart of their detestable things and their abominations, I will recompense their way upon their own heads, saith the Lord God.	But as for those whose hearts pursue detestable things and abominations, I will bring their conduct down upon their own heads, declares the Lord GOD.”
EZK	11	22	때에 그룹들이 날개를 드는데 바퀴도 그 곁에 있고 이스라엘 하나님의 영광도 그 위에 덮였더니	Then did the cherubims lift up their wings, and the wheels beside them; and the glory of the God of Israel was over them above.	Then the cherubim, with the wheels beside them, spread their wings, and the glory of the God of Israel was above them.
EZK	11	23	여호와의 영광이 성읍 중에서부터 올라가서 성읍 동편 산에 머물고	And the glory of the Lord went up from the midst of the city, and stood upon the mountain which is on the east side of the city.	And the glory of the LORD rose up from within the city and stood over the mountain east of the city.
EZK	11	24	주의 신이 나를 들어 하나님의 신의 이상 중에 데리고 갈대아에 있는 사로잡힌 자 중에 이르시더니 내가 보는 이상이 나를 떠난지라	Afterwards the spirit took me up, and brought me in a vision by the Spirit of God into Chaldea, to them of the captivity. So the vision that I had seen went up from me.	And the Spirit lifted me up and carried me back to Chaldea, to the exiles in the vision given by the Spirit of God. After the vision had gone up from me,
EZK	11	25	내가 사로잡힌 자들에게 여호와께서 내게 보이신 모든 일로 고하니라	Then I spake unto them of the captivity all the things that the Lord had shewed me.	I told the exiles everything the LORD had shown me.
EZK	12	1	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	The word of the Lord also came unto me, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	12	2	인자야 네가 패역한 족속 중에 거하도다 그들은 볼 눈이 있어도 보지 아니하고 들을 귀가 있어도 듣지 아니하나니 그들은 패역한 족속임이니라	Son of man, thou dwellest in the midst of a rebellious house, which have eyes to see, and see not; they have ears to hear, and hear not: for they are a rebellious house.	“Son of man, you are living in a rebellious house. They have eyes to see but do not see, and ears to hear but do not hear, for they are a rebellious house.
EZK	12	3	인자야 너는 행구를 준비하고 낮에 그들의 목전에서 이사하라 네가 네 처소를 다른 곳으로 옮기는 것을 그들이 보면 비록 패역한 족속이라도 혹 생각이 있으리라	Therefore, thou son of man, prepare thee stuff for removing, and remove by day in their sight; and thou shalt remove from thy place to another place in their sight: it may be they will consider, though they be a rebellious house.	Therefore, son of man, pack your bags for exile. In broad daylight, set out from your place and go to another as they watch. Perhaps they will understand, though they are a rebellious house.
EZK	12	4	너는 낮에 그 목전에서 네 행구를 밖으로 내기를 이사하는 행구 같이 하고 저물 때에 너는 그 목전에서 밖으로 나가기를 포로되어 가는 자 같이 하라	Then shalt thou bring forth thy stuff by day in their sight, as stuff for removing: and thou shalt go forth at even in their sight, as they that go forth into captivity.	Bring out your baggage for exile by day, as they watch. Then in the evening, as they watch, go out like those who go into exile.
EZK	12	5	너는 그 목전에서 성벽을 뚫고 그리로 좇아 옮기되	Dig thou through the wall in their sight, and carry out thereby.	As they watch, dig through the wall and carry your belongings out through it.
EZK	12	6	캄캄할 때에 그 목전에서 어깨에 메고 나가며 얼굴을 가리우고 땅을 보지 말지어다 이는 내가 너를 세워 이스라엘 족속에게 징조가 되게 함이니라 하시기로	In their sight shalt thou bear it upon thy shoulders, and carry it forth in the twilight: thou shalt cover thy face, that thou see not the ground: for I have set thee for a sign unto the house of Israel.	And as they watch, lift your bags to your shoulder and take them out at dusk; cover your face so that you cannot see the land. For I have made you a sign to the house of Israel.”
EZK	12	7	내가 그 명대로 행하여 낮에 나의 행구를 이사하는 행구 같이 내어 놓고 저물 때에 내 손으로 성벽을 뚫고 캄캄할 때에 행구를 내어다가 그 목전에서 어깨에 메고 나가니라	And I did so as I was commanded: I brought forth my stuff by day, as stuff for captivity, and in the even I digged through the wall with mine hand; I brought it forth in the twilight, and I bare it upon my shoulder in their sight.	So I did as I was commanded. I brought out my bags for exile by day, and in the evening I dug through the wall by hand. I took my belongings out at dusk, carrying them on my shoulder as they watched.
EZK	12	8	이튿날 아침에 여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	And in the morning came the word of the Lord unto me, saying,	And in the morning the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	12	9	인자야 이스라엘 족속 곧 그 패역한 족속이 네게 묻기를 무엇을 하느냐 하지 아니하더냐	Son of man, hath not the house of Israel, the rebellious house, said unto thee, What doest thou?	“Son of man, hasn’t the rebellious house of Israel asked you, ‘What are you doing?’
EZK	12	10	너는 그들에게 말하기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 이것은 예루살렘 왕과 그 가운데 있는 이스라엘 온 족속에 대한 예조라 하셨다 하고	Say thou unto them, Thus saith the Lord God; This burden concerneth the prince in Jerusalem, and all the house of Israel that are among them.	Tell them that this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘This burden concerns the prince in Jerusalem and all the house of Israel who are there.’
EZK	12	11	또 말하기를 나는 너희 징조라 내가 행한 대로 그들이 당하여 사로잡혀 옮겨갈지라	Say, I am your sign: like as I have done, so shall it be done unto them: they shall remove and go into captivity.	You are to say, ‘I am a sign to you.’ Just as it happened here, so will it be done to them; they will go into exile as captives.
EZK	12	12	무리가 성벽을 뚫고 행구를 그리로 가지고 나가고 그 중에 왕은 어두울 때에 어깨에 행구를 메고 나가며 눈으로 땅을 보지 아니하려고 자기 얼굴을 가리우리라 하라	And the prince that is among them shall bear upon his shoulder in the twilight, and shall go forth: they shall dig through the wall to carry out thereby: he shall cover his face, that he see not the ground with his eyes.	And at dusk the prince among them will lift his bags to his shoulder and go out. They will dig through the wall to bring him out. He will cover his face so he cannot see the land.
EZK	12	13	내가 또 내 그물을 그의 위에 치고 내 올무에 걸리게 하여 그를 끌고 갈대아 땅 바벨론에 이르리니 그가 거기서 죽으려니와 그 땅을 보지 못하리라	My net also will I spread upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare: and I will bring him to Babylon to the land of the Chaldeans; yet shall he not see it, though he shall die there.	But I will spread My net over him, and he will be caught in My snare. I will bring him to Babylon, the land of the Chaldeans; yet he will not see it, and there he will die.
EZK	12	14	내가 그 호위하는 자와 부대들을 다 사방으로 흩고 또 그 뒤를 따라 칼을 빼리라	And I will scatter toward every wind all that are about him to help him, and all his bands; and I will draw out the sword after them.	And I will scatter to every wind all the attendants around him and all his troops, and I will draw a sword to chase after them.
EZK	12	15	내가 그들을 이방인 가운데로 흩으며 열방 중에 헤친 후에야 그들이 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	And they shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall scatter them among the nations, and disperse them in the countries.	And they will know that I am the LORD, when I disperse them among the nations and scatter them throughout the countries.
EZK	12	16	그러나 내가 그 중 몇 사람을 남겨 칼과 기근과 온역을 벗어나게 하여 그들로 이르는 이방인 중에 자기의 모든 가증한 일을 자백하게 하리니 그들이 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	But I will leave a few men of them from the sword, from the famine, and from the pestilence; that they may declare all their abominations among the heathen whither they come; and they shall know that I am the Lord.	But I will spare a few of them from sword and famine and plague, so that in the nations to which they go, they can recount all their abominations. Then they will know that I am the LORD.”
EZK	12	17	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	Moreover the word of the Lord came to me, saying,	Moreover, the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	12	18	인자야 너는 떨면서 네 식물을 먹고 놀라고 근심하면서 네 물을 마시며	Son of man, eat thy bread with quaking, and drink thy water with trembling and with carefulness;	“Son of man, eat your bread with trembling, and drink your water with quivering and anxiety.
EZK	12	19	이 땅 백성에게 말하되 주 여호와께서 예루살렘 거민과 이스라엘 땅에 대하여 이르시기를 그들이 근심하면서 그 식물을 먹으며 놀라면서 그 물을 마실 것은 이 땅 모든 거민의 강포를 인하여 땅에 가득한 것이 황무하게 됨이라	And say unto the people of the land, Thus saith the Lord God of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and of the land of Israel; They shall eat their bread with carefulness, and drink their water with astonishment, that her land may be desolate from all that is therein, because of the violence of all them that dwell therein.	Then tell the people of the land that this is what the Lord GOD says about those living in Jerusalem and in the land of Israel: ‘They will eat their bread with anxiety and drink their water in dread, for their land will be stripped of everything in it because of the violence of all who dwell in it.
EZK	12	20	사람의 거하는 성읍들이 황페하며 땅이 황무하리니 너희가 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라 하셨다 하라	And the cities that are inhabited shall be laid waste, and the land shall be desolate; and ye shall know that I am the Lord.	The inhabited cities will be laid waste, and the land will become desolate. Then you will know that I am the LORD.’”
EZK	12	21	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	Again the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	12	22	인자야 이스라엘 땅에서 이르기를 날이 더디고 모든 묵시가 응험이 없다 하는 너희의 속담이 어찜이뇨	Son of man, what is that proverb that ye have in the land of Israel, saying, The days are prolonged, and every vision faileth?	“Son of man, what is this proverb that you have in the land of Israel: ‘The days go by, and every vision fails’?
EZK	12	23	그러므로 너는 그들에게 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 내가 이 속담을 그치게 하리니 사람이 다시는 이스라엘 가운데서 이 속담을 못하리라 하셨다 하고 또 그들에게 이르기를 날과 모든 묵시의 응함이 가까우니	Tell them therefore, Thus saith the Lord God; I will make this proverb to cease, and they shall no more use it as a proverb in Israel; but say unto them, The days are at hand, and the effect of every vision.	Therefore tell them that this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘I will put an end to this proverb, and in Israel they will no longer recite it.’ But say to them: ‘The days are at hand when every vision will be fulfilled.
EZK	12	24	이스라엘 족속 중에 허탄한 묵시나 아첨하는 복술이 다시 있지 못하리라 하라	For there shall be no more any vain vision nor flattering divination within the house of Israel.	For there will be no more false visions or flattering divinations within the house of Israel,
EZK	12	25	나는 여호와라 내가 말하리니 내가 하는 말이 다시는 더디지 아니하고 응하리라 패역한 족속아 내가 너희 생전에 말하고 이루리라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라 하셨다 하라	For I am the Lord: I will speak, and the word that I shall speak shall come to pass; it shall be no more prolonged: for in your days, O rebellious house, will I say the word, and will perform it, saith the Lord God.	because I, the LORD, will speak whatever word I speak, and it will be fulfilled without delay. For in your days, O rebellious house, I will speak a message and bring it to pass, declares the Lord GOD.’”
EZK	12	26	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	Again the word of the Lord came to me, saying,	Furthermore, the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	12	27	인자야 이스라엘 족속의 말이 그의 보는 묵시는 여러 날 후의 일이라 그가 먼 때에 대하여 예언하는도다 하나니	Son of man, behold, they of the house of Israel say, The vision that he seeth is for many days to come, and he prophesieth of the times that are far off.	“Son of man, take note that the house of Israel is saying, ‘The vision that he sees is for many years from now; he prophesies about the distant future.’
EZK	12	28	그러므로 너는 그들에게 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 나의 말이 하나도 다시 더디지 않을지니 나의 한 말이 이루리라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라 하셨다 하라	Therefore say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God; There shall none of my words be prolonged any more, but the word which I have spoken shall be done, saith the Lord God.	Therefore tell them that this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘None of My words will be delayed any longer. The message I speak will be fulfilled, declares the Lord GOD.’”
EZK	13	1	여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 가라사대	And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	13	2	인자야 너는 이스라엘의 예언하는 선지자를 쳐서 예언하되 자기 마음에서 나는 대로 예언하는 자에게 말하기를 너희는 여호와의 말씀을 들으라	Son of man, prophesy against the prophets of Israel that prophesy, and say thou unto them that prophesy out of their own hearts, Hear ye the word of the Lord;	“Son of man, prophesy against the prophets of Israel who are now prophesying. Tell those who prophesy out of their own imagination: Hear the word of the LORD!
EZK	13	3	주 여호와의 말씀에 본 것이 없이 자기 심령을 따라 예언하는 우매한 선지자에게 화 있을진저	Thus saith the Lord God; Woe unto the foolish prophets, that follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing!	This is what the Lord GOD says: Woe to the foolish prophets who follow their own spirit, yet have seen nothing.
EZK	13	4	이스라엘아 너의 선지자들은 황무지에 있는 여우 같으니라	O Israel, thy prophets are like the foxes in the deserts.	Your prophets, O Israel, are like foxes among the ruins.
EZK	13	5	너희 선지자들이 성 무너진 곳에 올라가지도 아니하였으며 이스라엘 족속을 위하여 여호와의 날에 전쟁을 방비하게 하려고 성벽을 수축하지도 아니하였느니라	Ye have not gone up into the gaps, neither made up the hedge for the house of Israel to stand in the battle in the day of the Lord.	You did not go up to the gaps or restore the wall around the house of Israel so that it would stand in the battle on the Day of the LORD.
EZK	13	6	여호와께서 말씀하셨다고 하는 자들이 허탄한 것과 거짓된 점괘를 보며 사람으로 그 말이 굳게 이루기를 바라게 하거니와 여호와가 보낸 자가 아니라	They have seen vanity and lying divination, saying, The Lord saith: and the Lord hath not sent them: and they have made others to hope that they would confirm the word.	They see false visions and speak lying divinations. They claim, ‘Thus declares the LORD,’ when the LORD did not send them; yet they wait for the fulfillment of their message.
EZK	13	7	너희가 말하기는 여호와의 말씀이라 하여도 내가 말한 것이 아닌즉 어찌 허탄한 묵시를 보며 거짓된 점괘를 말한 것이 아니냐	Have ye not seen a vain vision, and have ye not spoken a lying divination, whereas ye say, The Lord saith it; albeit I have not spoken?	Haven’t you seen a false vision and spoken a lying divination when you proclaim, ‘Thus declares the LORD,’ even though I have not spoken?
EZK	13	8	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 또 말하노라 너희가 허탄한 것을 말하며 거짓된 것을 보았은즉 내가 너희를 치리라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Because ye have spoken vanity, and seen lies, therefore, behold, I am against you, saith the Lord God.	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: Because you have uttered vain words and seen false visions, I am against you, declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	13	9	그 선지자들이 허탄한 묵시를 보며 거짓 것을 점쳤으니 내 손이 그들을 쳐서 내 백성의 공회에 들어오지 못하게 하며 이스라엘 족속의 호적에도 기록되지 못하게 하며 이스라엘 땅에도 들어가지 못하게 하리니 너희가 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	And mine hand shall be upon the prophets that see vanity, and that divine lies: they shall not be in the assembly of my people, neither shall they be written in the writing of the house of Israel, neither shall they enter into the land of Israel; and ye shall know that I am the Lord God.	My hand will be against the prophets who see false visions and speak lying divinations. They will not belong to the council of My people or be recorded in the register of the house of Israel, nor will they enter the land of Israel. Then you will know that I am the Lord GOD.
EZK	13	10	이렇게 칠 것은 그들이 내 백성을 유혹하여 평강이 없으나 평강이 있다 함이라 혹이 담을 쌓을 때에 그들이 회칠을 하는도다	Because, even because they have seduced my people, saying, Peace; and there was no peace; and one built up a wall, and, lo, others daubed it with untempered morter:	Because they have led My people astray, saying, ‘Peace,’ when there is no peace, and whitewashing any flimsy wall that is built,
EZK	13	11	그러므로 너는 회칠하는 자에게 이르기를 그것이 무너지리라 폭우가 내리며 큰 우박덩이가 떨어지며 폭풍이 열파하리니	Say unto them which daub it with untempered morter, that it shall fall: there shall be an overflowing shower; and ye, O great hailstones, shall fall; and a stormy wind shall rend it.	tell those whitewashing the wall that it will fall. Rain will come in torrents, I will send hailstones plunging down, and a windstorm will burst forth.
EZK	13	12	그 담이 무너진즉 혹이 너희에게 말하기를 그것에 칠한 회가 어디 있느뇨 하지 아니하겠느냐	Lo, when the wall is fallen, shall it not be said unto you, Where is the daubing wherewith ye have daubed it?	Surely when the wall has fallen, you will not be asked, ‘Where is the whitewash with which you covered it?’
EZK	13	13	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 분노하여 폭풍으로 열파하고 내가 진노하여 폭우를 내리고 분노하여 큰 우박덩이로 훼멸하리라	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; I will even rend it with a stormy wind in my fury; and there shall be an overflowing shower in mine anger, and great hailstones in my fury to consume it.	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: In My wrath I will release a windstorm, and in My anger torrents of rain and hail will fall with destructive fury.
EZK	13	14	회칠한 담을 내가 이렇게 훼파하여 땅에 넘어뜨리고 그 기초를 드러낼 것이라 담이 무너진즉 너희가 그 가운데서 망하리니 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	So will I break down the wall that ye have daubed with untempered morter, and bring it down to the ground, so that the foundation thereof shall be discovered, and it shall fall, and ye shall be consumed in the midst thereof: and ye shall know that I am the Lord.	I will tear down the wall you whitewashed and level it to the ground, so that its foundation is exposed. The city will fall, and you will be destroyed within it. Then you will know that I am the LORD.
EZK	13	15	이와 같이 내가 내 노를 담과 회칠한 자에게 다 이루고 또 너희에게 말하기를 담도 없어지고 칠한 자들도 없어졌다 하리니	Thus will I accomplish my wrath upon the wall, and upon them that have daubed it with untempered morter, and will say unto you, The wall is no more, neither they that daubed it;	And after I have vented My wrath against the wall and against those who whitewashed it, I will say to you: ‘The wall is gone, and so are those who whitewashed it—
EZK	13	16	이들은 예루살렘에 대하여 예언하여 평강이 없으나 평강의 묵시를 본다 하는 이스라엘의 선지자들이니라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라 하셨다 하라	To wit, the prophets of Israel which prophesy concerning Jerusalem, and which see visions of peace for her, and there is no peace, saith the Lord God.	those prophets of Israel who prophesied to Jerusalem and saw a vision of peace for her when there was no peace, declares the Lord GOD.’
EZK	13	17	너 인자야 너의 백성 중 자기 마음에서 나는 대로 예언하는 부녀들을 대면하여 쳐서 예언하여	Likewise, thou son of man, set thy face against the daughters of thy people, which prophesy out of their own heart; and prophesy thou against them,	Now, O son of man, set your face against the daughters of your people who prophesy out of their own imagination. Prophesy against them
EZK	13	18	이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 사람의 영혼을 사냥하고자 하여 방석을 모든 팔뚝에 꿰어 매고 수건을 키가 큰 자나 작은 자의 머리를 위하여 만드는 부녀들에게 화 있을진저 너희가 어찌하여 내 백성의 영혼을 사냥하면서 자기를 위하여 영혼을 살리려 하느냐	And say, Thus saith the Lord God; Woe to the women that sew pillows to all armholes, and make kerchiefs upon the head of every stature to hunt souls! Will ye hunt the souls of my people, and will ye save the souls alive that come unto you?	and tell them that this is what the Lord GOD says: Woe to the women who sew magic charms on their wrists and make veils for the heads of people of every height, in order to ensnare their souls. Will you ensnare the souls of My people but preserve your own?
EZK	13	19	너희가 두어 웅큼 보리와 두어 조각 떡을 위하여 나를 내 백성 가운데서 욕되게 하여 거짓말을 지어서 죽지 아니할 영혼을 죽이고 살지 못할 영혼을 살리는도다	And will ye pollute me among my people for handfuls of barley and for pieces of bread, to slay the souls that should not die, and to save the souls alive that should not live, by your lying to my people that hear your lies?	You have profaned Me among My people for handfuls of barley and scraps of bread. By lying to My people who would listen, you have killed those who should not have died and spared those who should not have lived.
EZK	13	20	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 너희가 새를 사냥하듯 영혼들을 사냥하는 그 방석을 내가 너희 팔에서 떼어버리고 너희가 새처럼 사냥한 그 영혼들을 놓으며	Wherefore thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I am against your pillows, wherewith ye there hunt the souls to make them fly, and I will tear them from your arms, and will let the souls go, even the souls that ye hunt to make them fly.	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: See, I am against the magic charms with which you ensnare souls like birds, and I will tear them from your arms. So I will free the souls you have ensnared like birds.
EZK	13	21	또 너희 수건을 찢고 내 백성을 너희 손에서 건지고 다시는 너희 손에 사냥물이 되지 않게 하리니 너희가 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	Your kerchiefs also will I tear, and deliver my people out of your hand, and they shall be no more in your hand to be hunted; and ye shall know that I am the Lord.	I will also tear off your veils and deliver My people from your hands, so that they will no longer be prey in your hands. Then you will know that I am the LORD.
EZK	13	22	내가 슬프게 하지 아니한 의인의 마음을 너희가 거짓말로 근심하게 하며 너희가 또 악인의 손을 굳게 하여 그 악한 길에서 돌이켜 떠나 삶을 얻지 못하게 하였은즉	Because with lies ye have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad; and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way, by promising him life:	Because you have disheartened the righteous with your lies, even though I have caused them no grief, and because you have encouraged the wicked not to turn from their evil ways to save their lives,
EZK	13	23	너희가 다시는 허탄한 묵시를 보지 못하고 점복도 못할지라 내가 내 백성을 너희 손에서 건져 내리니 너희가 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라 하셨다 하라	Therefore ye shall see no more vanity, nor divine divinations: for I will deliver my people out of your hand: and ye shall know that I am the Lord.	therefore you will no longer see false visions or practice divination. I will deliver My people from your hands. Then you will know that I am the LORD.”
EZK	14	1	이스라엘 장로 두어 사람이 나아와 내 앞에 앉으니	Then came certain of the elders of Israel unto me, and sat before me.	Then some of the elders of Israel came and sat down before me.
EZK	14	2	여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 가라사대	And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	14	3	인자야 이 사람들이 자기 우상을 마음에 들이며 죄악의 거치는 것을 자기 앞에 두었으니 그들이 내게 묻기를 내가 조금인들 용납하랴	Son of man, these men have set up their idols in their heart, and put the stumblingblock of their iniquity before their face: should I be enquired of at all by them?	“Son of man, these men have set up idols in their hearts and put wicked stumbling blocks before their faces. Should I consult with them in any way?
EZK	14	4	그런즉 너는 그들에게 말하여 이르라 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 이스라엘 족속 중에 무릇 그 우상을 마음에 들이며 죄악의 거치는 것을 자기 앞에 두고 선지자에게 나아오는 자에게는 나 여호와가 그 우상의 많은 대로 응답하리니	Therefore speak unto them, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God; Every man of the house of Israel that setteth up his idols in his heart, and putteth the stumblingblock of his iniquity before his face, and cometh to the prophet; I the Lord will answer him that cometh according to the multitude of his idols;	Therefore speak to them and tell them that this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘When any Israelite sets up idols in his heart and puts a wicked stumbling block before his face, and then comes to the prophet, I the LORD will answer him according to his great idolatry,
EZK	14	5	이는 이스라엘 족속이 다 그 우상으로 인하여 나를 배반하였으므로 내가 그들의 마음에 먹은 대로 그들을 잡으려 함이니라	That I may take the house of Israel in their own heart, because they are all estranged from me through their idols.	so that I may take hold of the hearts of the people of Israel. For because of their idols, they are all estranged from Me.’
EZK	14	6	그런즉 너는 이스라엘 족속에게 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 너희는 마음을 돌이켜 우상을 떠나고 얼굴을 돌이켜 모든 가증한 것을 떠나라	Therefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God; Repent, and turn yourselves from your idols; and turn away your faces from all your abominations.	Therefore tell the house of Israel that this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Repent and turn away from your idols; turn your faces away from all your abominations.
EZK	14	7	이스라엘 족속과 이스라엘 가운데 우거하는 외인 중에 무릇 나를 떠나고 자기 우상을 마음에 들이며 죄악의 거치는 것을 자기 앞에 두고 자기를 위하여 내게 묻고자 하여 선지자에게 나아오는 자에게는 나 여호와가 친히 응답하여	For every one of the house of Israel, or of the stranger that sojourneth in Israel, which separateth himself from me, and setteth up his idols in his heart, and putteth the stumblingblock of his iniquity before his face, and cometh to a prophet to enquire of him concerning me; I the Lord will answer him by myself:	For when any Israelite or any foreigner dwelling in Israel separates himself from Me, sets up idols in his heart, and puts a wicked stumbling block before his face, and then comes to the prophet to inquire of Me, I the LORD will answer him Myself.
EZK	14	8	그 사람을 대적하여 그들로 놀라움과 감계와 속담거리가 되게 하여 내 백성 가운데서 끊으리니 너희가 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	And I will set my face against that man, and will make him a sign and a proverb, and I will cut him off from the midst of my people; and ye shall know that I am the Lord.	I will set My face against that man and make him a sign and a proverb; I will cut him off from among My people. Then you will know that I am the LORD.
EZK	14	9	만일 선지자가 유혹을 받고 말을 하면 나 여호와가 그 선지자로 유혹을 받게 하였음이어니와 내가 손을 펴서 내 백성 이스라엘 가운데서 그를 멸할 것이라	And if the prophet be deceived when he hath spoken a thing, I the Lord have deceived that prophet, and I will stretch out my hand upon him, and will destroy him from the midst of my people Israel.	But if the prophet is enticed to speak a message, then it was I the LORD who enticed him, and I will stretch out My hand against him and destroy him from among My people Israel.
EZK	14	10	선지자의 죄악과 그에게 묻는 자의 죄악이 같은즉 각각 자기의 죄악을 담당하리니	And they shall bear the punishment of their iniquity: the punishment of the prophet shall be even as the punishment of him that seeketh unto him;	They will bear their punishment—the punishment of the inquirer will be the same as that of the prophet—
EZK	14	11	이는 이스라엘 족속으로 다시는 미혹하여 나를 떠나지 않게 하며 다시는 모든 범죄함으로 스스로 더럽히지 않게 하여 그들로 내 백성을 삼고 나는 그들의 하나님이 되려 함이니라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라 하셨다 하라	That the house of Israel may go no more astray from me, neither be polluted any more with all their transgressions; but that they may be my people, and I may be their God, saith the Lord God.	in order that the house of Israel may no longer stray from Me and no longer defile themselves with all their transgressions. Then they will be My people and I will be their God, declares the Lord GOD.’”
EZK	14	12	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	The word of the Lord came again to me, saying,	And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	14	13	인자야 가령 어느 나라가 불법하여 내게 범죄하므로 내가 손을 그 위에 펴서 그 의뢰하는 양식을 끊어 기근을 내려서 사람과 짐승을 그 나라에서 끊는다 하자	Son of man, when the land sinneth against me by trespassing grievously, then will I stretch out mine hand upon it, and will break the staff of the bread thereof, and will send famine upon it, and will cut off man and beast from it:	“Son of man, if a land sins against Me by acting unfaithfully, and I stretch out My hand against it to cut off its supply of food, to send famine upon it, and to cut off from it both man and beast,
EZK	14	14	비록 노아, 다니엘, 욥, 이 세 사람이 거기 있을지라도 그들은 자기의 의로 자기의 생명만 건지리라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it, they should deliver but their own souls by their righteousness, saith the Lord God.	then even if these three men—Noah, Daniel, and Job—were in it, their righteousness could deliver only themselves, declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	14	15	가령 내가 사나운 짐승으로 그 땅에 통행하여 적막케 하며 황무케 하여 사람으로 그 짐승을 인하여 능히 통행하지 못하게 한다 하자	If I cause noisome beasts to pass through the land, and they spoil it, so that it be desolate, that no man may pass through because of the beasts:	Or if I send wild beasts through the land to leave it childless and desolate, with no man passing through it for fear of the beasts,
EZK	14	16	비록 이 세 사람이 거기 있을지라도 나의 삶을 두고 맹세하노니 그들은 자녀도 건지지 못하고 자기만 건지겠고 그 땅은 황무하리라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	Though these three men were in it, as I live, saith the Lord God, they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters; they only shall be delivered, but the land shall be desolate.	then as surely as I live, declares the Lord GOD, even if these three men were in it, they could not deliver their own sons or daughters. They alone would be delivered, but the land would be desolate.
EZK	14	17	가령 내가 칼로 그 땅에 임하게 하고 명하기를 칼아 이 땅에 통행하라 하여 사람과 짐승을 거기서 끊는다 하자	Or if I bring a sword upon that land, and say, Sword, go through the land; so that I cut off man and beast from it:	Or if I bring a sword against that land and say, ‘Let a sword pass through it,’ so that I cut off from it both man and beast,
EZK	14	18	비록 이 세 사람이 거기 있을지라도 나의 삶을 두고 맹세하노니 그들은 자녀도 건지지 못하고 자기만 건지리라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	Though these three men were in it, as I live, saith the Lord God, they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters, but they only shall be delivered themselves.	then as surely as I live, declares the Lord GOD, even if these three men were in it, they could not deliver their own sons or daughters. They alone would be delivered.
EZK	14	19	가령 내가 그 땅에 온역을 내려 죽임으로 내 분을 그 위에 쏟아 사람과 짐승을 거기서 끊는다 하자	Or if I send a pestilence into that land, and pour out my fury upon it in blood, to cut off from it man and beast:	Or if I send a plague into that land and pour out My wrath upon it through bloodshed, cutting off from it both man and beast,
EZK	14	20	비록 노아, 다니엘, 욥이 거기 있을지라도 나의 삶을 두고 맹세하오니 그들은 자녀도 건지지 못하고 자기의 의로 자기의 생명만 건지리라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라 하시니라	Though Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it, as I live, saith the Lord God, they shall deliver neither son nor daughter; they shall but deliver their own souls by their righteousness.	then as surely as I live, declares the Lord GOD, even if Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, they could not deliver their own sons or daughters. Their righteousness could deliver only themselves.
EZK	14	21	주 여호와께서 가라사대 내가 나의 네 가지 중한 벌 곧 칼과 기근과 사나운 짐승과 온역을 예루살렘에 함께 내려 사람과 짐승을 그 중에서 끊으리니 그 해가 더욱 심하지 않겠느냐	For thus saith the Lord God; How much more when I send my four sore judgments upon Jerusalem, the sword, and the famine, and the noisome beast, and the pestilence, to cut off from it man and beast?	For this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘How much worse will it be when I send against Jerusalem My four dire judgments—sword, famine, wild beasts, and plague—in order to cut off from it both man and beast?
EZK	14	22	그러나 그 가운데 면하는 자가 남아 있어 끌려 나오리니 곧 자녀들이라 그들이 너희에게로 나아오리니 너희가 그 행동과 소위를 보면 내가 예루살렘에 내린 재앙 곧 그 내린 모든 일에 대하여 너희가 위로를 받을 것이라	Yet, behold, therein shall be left a remnant that shall be brought forth, both sons and daughters: behold, they shall come forth unto you, and ye shall see their way and their doings: and ye shall be comforted concerning the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem, even concerning all that I have brought upon it.	Yet, behold, some survivors will be left in it—sons and daughters who will be brought out. They will come out to you, and when you see their conduct and actions, you will be comforted regarding the disaster I have brought upon Jerusalem—all that I have brought upon it.
EZK	14	23	너희가 그 행동과 소위를 볼 때에 그들로 인하여 위로를 받고 내가 예루살렘에서 행한 모든 일이 무고히 한 것이 아닌 줄을 알리라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	And they shall comfort you, when ye see their ways and their doings: and ye shall know that I have not done without cause all that I have done in it, saith the Lord God.	They will bring you consolation when you see their conduct and actions, and you will know that it was not without cause that I have done all these things within it,’ declares the Lord GOD.”
EZK	15	1	여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 가라사대	And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	15	2	인자야 포도나무가 모든 나무보다 나은 것이 무엇이랴 삼림 중 여러 나무 가운데 있는 그 포도나무 가지가 나은 것이 무엇이랴	Son of man, What is the vine tree more than any tree, or than a branch which is among the trees of the forest?	“Son of man, how does the wood of the vine surpass any other branch among the trees in the forest?
EZK	15	3	그 나무를 가지고 무엇을 제조할 수 있겠느냐 그것으로 무슨 그릇을 걸 못을 만들 수 있겠느냐	Shall wood be taken thereof to do any work? or will men take a pin of it to hang any vessel thereon?	Can wood be taken from it to make something useful? Or can one make from it a peg on which to hang utensils?
EZK	15	4	불에 던질 화목이 될 뿐이라 불이 그 두 끝을 사르고 그 가운데도 태웠으면 제조에 무슨 소용이 있겠느냐	Behold, it is cast into the fire for fuel; the fire devoureth both the ends of it, and the midst of it is burned. Is it meet for any work?	No, it is cast into the fire for fuel. The fire devours both ends, and the middle is charred. Can it be useful for anything?
EZK	15	5	그것이 온전할 때에도 아무 제조에 합당치 않았거든 하물며 불에 살라지고 탄 후에 어찌 제조에 합당하겠느냐	Behold, when it was whole, it was meet for no work: how much less shall it be meet yet for any work, when the fire hath devoured it, and it is burned?	Even when it was whole, it could not be made useful. How much less can it ever be useful when the fire has consumed it and charred it!
EZK	15	6	그러므로 주 여호와 내가 말하노라 내가 수풀 가운데 포도나무를 불에 던질 화목이 되게 한 것 같이 내가 예루살렘 거민도 그같이 할지라	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; As the vine tree among the trees of the forest, which I have given to the fire for fuel, so will I give the inhabitants of Jerusalem.	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Like the wood of the vine among the trees of the forest, which I have given to the fire for fuel, so I will give up the people of Jerusalem.
EZK	15	7	내가 그들을 대적한즉 그들이 그 불에서 나와도 불이 그들을 사르리니 내가 그들을 대적할 때에 너희가 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	And I will set my face against them; they shall go out from one fire, and another fire shall devour them; and ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I set my face against them.	And I will set My face against them. Though they may have escaped the fire, yet another fire will consume them. And when I set My face against them, you will know that I am the LORD.
EZK	15	8	내가 그 땅을 황무케 하리니 이는 그들이 범법함이니라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라 하시니라	And I will make the land desolate, because they have committed a trespass, saith the Lord God.	Thus I will make the land desolate, because they have acted unfaithfully,’ declares the Lord GOD.”
EZK	16	1	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	Again the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	16	2	인자야 예루살렘으로 그 가증한 일을 알게 하여	Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations,	“Son of man, confront Jerusalem with her abominations
EZK	16	3	이르기를 주 여호와께서 예루살렘에 대하여 말씀하시되 네 근본과 난 땅은 가나안이요 네 아비는 아모리 사람이요 네 어미는 헷사람이라	And say, Thus saith the Lord God unto Jerusalem; Thy birth and thy nativity is of the land of Canaan; thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite.	and tell her that this is what the Lord GOD says to Jerusalem: Your origin and your birth were in the land of the Canaanites. Your father was an Amorite and your mother a Hittite.
EZK	16	4	너의 난 것을 말하건대 네가 날 때에 네 배꼽줄을 자르지 아니하였고 너를 물로 씻어 정결케 하지 아니하였고 네게 소금을 뿌리지 아니하였고 너를 강보에 싸지도 아니하였나니	And as for thy nativity, in the day thou wast born thy navel was not cut, neither wast thou washed in water to supple thee; thou wast not salted at all, nor swaddled at all.	On the day of your birth your cord was not cut, nor were you washed with water for cleansing. You were not rubbed with salt or wrapped in cloths.
EZK	16	5	너를 돌아 보아 이 중에 한 가지라도 네게 행하여 너를 긍휼히 여긴 자가 없었으므로 네가 나던 날에 네 몸이 꺼린바 되어 네가 들에 버리웠었느니라	None eye pitied thee, to do any of these unto thee, to have compassion upon thee; but thou wast cast out in the open field, to the lothing of thy person, in the day that thou wast born.	No one cared enough for you to do even one of these things out of compassion for you. Instead, you were thrown out into the open field, because you were despised on the day of your birth.
EZK	16	6	내가 네 곁으로 지나 갈 때에 네가 피투성이가 되어 발짓하는 것을 보고 네게 이르기를 너는 피투성이라도 살라 다시 이르기를 너는 피투성이라도 살라 하고	And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood, I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live; yea, I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live.	Then I passed by and saw you wallowing in your blood, and as you lay there in your blood I said to you, ‘Live!’ There I said to you, ‘Live!’
EZK	16	7	내가 너로 들의 풀 같이 많게 하였더니 네가 크게 자라고 심히 아름다우며 유방이 뚜렷하고 네 머리털이 자랐으나 네가 오히려 벌거벗은 적신이더라	I have caused thee to multiply as the bud of the field, and thou hast increased and waxen great, and thou art come to excellent ornaments: thy breasts are fashioned, and thine hair is grown, whereas thou wast naked and bare.	I made you thrive like a plant of the field. You grew up and matured and became very beautiful. Your breasts were formed and your hair grew, but you were naked and bare.
EZK	16	8	내가 네 곁으로 지나며 보니 네 때가 사랑스러운 때라 내 옷으로 너를 덮어 벌거벗은 것을 가리우고 네게 맹세하고 언약하여 너로 내게 속하게 하였었느니라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold, thy time was the time of love; and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness: yea, I sware unto thee, and entered into a covenant with thee, saith the Lord God, and thou becamest mine.	Then I passed by and saw you, and you were indeed old enough for love. So I spread My cloak over you and covered your nakedness. I pledged Myself to you, entered into a covenant with you, and you became Mine, declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	16	9	내가 물로 너를 씻겨서 네 피를 없이 하며 네게 기름을 바르고	Then washed I thee with water; yea, I throughly washed away thy blood from thee, and I anointed thee with oil.	Then I bathed you with water, rinsed off your blood, and anointed you with oil.
EZK	16	10	수 놓은 옷을 입히고 물돼지 가죽신을 신기고 가는 베로 띠우고 명주로 덧입히고	I clothed thee also with broidered work, and shod thee with badgers’ skin, and I girded thee about with fine linen, and I covered thee with silk.	I clothed you in embroidered cloth and gave you sandals of fine leather. I wrapped you in fine linen and covered you with silk.
EZK	16	11	패물을 채우고 팔고리를 손목에 끼우고 사슬을 목에 드리우고	I decked thee also with ornaments, and I put bracelets upon thy hands, and a chain on thy neck.	I adorned you with jewelry, and I put bracelets on your wrists and a chain around your neck.
EZK	16	12	코고리를 코에 달고 귀고리를 귀에 달고 화려한 면류관을 머리에 씌웠나니	And I put a jewel on thy forehead, and earrings in thine ears, and a beautiful crown upon thine head.	I put a ring in your nose, earrings on your ears, and a beautiful crown upon your head.
EZK	16	13	이와 같이 네가 금, 은으로 장식하고 가는 베와 명주와 수놓은 것을 입으며 또 고운 밀가루와 꿀과 기름을 먹음으로 극히 곱고 형통하여 왕후의 지위에 나아갔느니라	Thus wast thou decked with gold and silver; and thy raiment was of fine linen, and silk, and broidered work; thou didst eat fine flour, and honey, and oil: and thou wast exceeding beautiful, and thou didst prosper into a kingdom.	So you were adorned with gold and silver, and your clothing was made of fine linen, silk, and embroidered cloth. You ate fine flour, honey, and oil. You became very beautiful and rose to be queen.
EZK	16	14	네 화려함을 인하여 네 명성이 이방인 중에 퍼졌음은 내가 네게 입힌 영화로 네 화려함이 온전함이니라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	And thy renown went forth among the heathen for thy beauty: for it was perfect through my comeliness, which I had put upon thee, saith the Lord God.	Your fame spread among the nations on account of your beauty, for it was perfect in the splendor I bestowed on you, declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	16	15	그러나 네가 네 화려함을 믿고 네 명성을 인하여 행음하되 무릇 지나가는 자면 더불어 음란을 많이 행하므로 네 몸이 그들의 것이 되도다	But thou didst trust in thine own beauty, and playedst the harlot because of thy renown, and pouredst out thy fornications on every one that passed by; his it was.	But because of your fame, you trusted in your beauty and played the harlot. You lavished your favors on everyone who passed by, and your beauty was theirs for the asking.
EZK	16	16	네가 네 의복을 취하여 색스러운 산당을 너를 위하여 만들고 거기서 행음하였나니 이런 일은 전무후무하니라	And of thy garments thou didst take, and deckedst thy high places with divers colours, and playedst the harlot thereupon: the like things shall not come, neither shall it be so.	You took some of your garments and made colorful high places for yourself, and on them you prostituted yourself. Such things should not have happened; never should they have occurred!
EZK	16	17	네가 또 나의 준 금, 은 장식품으로 너를 위하여 남자 우상을 만들어 행음하며	Thou hast also taken thy fair jewels of my gold and of my silver, which I had given thee, and madest to thyself images of men, and didst commit whoredom with them,	You also took the fine jewelry of gold and silver I had given you, and you made male idols with which to prostitute yourself.
EZK	16	18	또 네 수 놓은 옷으로 그 우상에게 입히고 나의 기름과 향으로 그 앞에 베풀며	And tookest thy broidered garments, and coveredst them: and thou hast set mine oil and mine incense before them.	You took your embroidered garments to cover them, and you set My oil and incense before them.
EZK	16	19	또 내가 네게 주어 먹게 한 내 식물 곧 고운 밀가루와 기름과 꿀을 네가 그 앞에 베풀어 향기를 삼았나니 과연 그렇게 하였느니라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	My meat also which I gave thee, fine flour, and oil, and honey, wherewith I fed thee, thou hast even set it before them for a sweet savour: and thus it was, saith the Lord God.	And you set before them as a pleasing aroma the food I had given you—the fine flour, oil, and honey that I had fed you. That is what happened, declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	16	20	또 네가 나를 위하여 낳은 네 자녀를 가져 그들에게 드려 제물을 삼아 불살랐느니라 네가 너의 음행을 작은 일로 여겨서	Moreover thou hast taken thy sons and thy daughters, whom thou hast borne unto me, and these hast thou sacrificed unto them to be devoured. Is this of thy whoredoms a small matter,	You even took the sons and daughters you bore to Me and sacrificed them as food to idols. Was your prostitution not enough?
EZK	16	21	나의 자녀들을 죽여 우상에게 붙여 불 가운데로 지나가게 하였느냐	That thou hast slain my children, and delivered them to cause them to pass through the fire for them?	You slaughtered My children and delivered them up through the fire to idols.
EZK	16	22	네 어렸을 때에 벌거벗어 적신이었으며 피투성이가 되어서 발짓하던 것을 기억지 아니하고 네가 모든 가증한 일과 음란을 행하였느니라	And in all thine abominations and thy whoredoms thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, when thou wast naked and bare, and wast polluted in thy blood.	And in all your abominations and acts of prostitution, you did not remember the days of your youth when you were naked and bare, wallowing in your own blood.
EZK	16	23	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 너는 화 있을진저 화 있을진저 네가 모든 악을 행한 후에	And it came to pass after all thy wickedness, (woe, woe unto thee! saith the Lord God;)	Woe! Woe to you, declares the Lord GOD. And in addition to all your other wickedness,
EZK	16	24	너를 위하여 누를 건축하며 모든 거리에 높은 대를 쌓았도다	That thou hast also built unto thee an eminent place, and hast made thee an high place in every street.	you built yourself a mound and made yourself a lofty shrine in every public square.
EZK	16	25	네가 높은 대를 모든 길 머리에 쌓고 네 아름다움을 가증하게 하여 모든 지나가는 자에게 다리를 벌려 심히 행음하고	Thou hast built thy high place at every head of the way, and hast made thy beauty to be abhorred, and hast opened thy feet to every one that passed by, and multiplied thy whoredoms.	At the head of every street you built your lofty shrines and degraded your beauty. With increasing promiscuity, you spread your legs to all who passed by.
EZK	16	26	하체가 큰 네 이웃나라 애굽 사람과도 행음하되 심히 음란히 하여 내 노를 격동하였도다	Thou hast also committed fornication with the Egyptians thy neighbours, great of flesh; and hast increased thy whoredoms, to provoke me to anger.	You prostituted yourself with your lustful neighbors, the Egyptians, and increased your promiscuity to provoke Me to anger.
EZK	16	27	그러므로 내가 내 손을 네 위에 펴서 네 일용 양식을 감하고 너를 미워하는 블레셋 여자 곧 네 더러운 행실을 부끄러워하는 자에게 너를 붙여 임의로 하게 하였거늘	Behold, therefore I have stretched out my hand over thee, and have diminished thine ordinary food, and delivered thee unto the will of them that hate thee, the daughters of the Philistines, which are ashamed of thy lewd way.	Therefore I stretched out My hand against you and reduced your portion. I gave you over to the desire of those who hate you, the daughters of the Philistines, who were ashamed of your lewd conduct.
EZK	16	28	네가 음욕이 차지 아니하여 또 앗수르 사람과 행음하고 그들과 행음하고도 오히려 부족히 여겨	Thou hast played the whore also with the Assyrians, because thou wast unsatiable; yea, thou hast played the harlot with them, and yet couldest not be satisfied.	Then you prostituted yourself with the Assyrians, because you were not yet satisfied. Even after that, you were still not satisfied.
EZK	16	29	장사하는 땅 갈대아에까지 심히 행음하되 오히려 족한 줄을 알지 못하였느니라	Thou hast moreover multiplied thy fornication in the land of Canaan unto Chaldea; and yet thou wast not satisfied herewith.	So you extended your promiscuity to Chaldea, the land of merchants—but even with this you were not satisfied!
EZK	16	30	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 네가 이 모든 일을 행하니 이는 방자한 음부의 행위라 네 마음이 어찌 그리 약한지	How weak is thine heart, saith the Lord God, seeing thou doest all these things, the work of an imperious whorish woman;	How weak-willed is your heart, declares the Lord GOD, while you do all these things, the acts of a shameless prostitute!
EZK	16	31	네가 누를 모든 길 머리에 건축하며 높은 대를 모든 거리에 쌓고도 값을 싫어하니 창기 같지도 않도다	In that thou buildest thine eminent place in the head of every way, and makest thine high place in every street; and hast not been as an harlot, in that thou scornest hire;	But when you built your mounds at the head of every street and made your lofty shrines in every public square, you were not even like a prostitute, because you scorned payment.
EZK	16	32	그 지아비 대신에 외인과 사통하여 간음하는 아내로다	But as a wife that committeth adultery, which taketh strangers instead of her husband!	You adulterous wife! You receive strangers instead of your own husband!
EZK	16	33	사람들은 모든 창기에게 선물을 주거늘 오직 너는 네 모든 정든 자에게 선물을 주며 값을 주어서 사방에서 와서 너와 행음하게 하니	They give gifts to all whores: but thou givest thy gifts to all thy lovers, and hirest them, that they may come unto thee on every side for thy whoredom.	Men give gifts to all their prostitutes, but you gave gifts to all your lovers. You bribed them to come to you from everywhere for your illicit favors.
EZK	16	34	너의 음란함이 다른 여인과 같지 아니함은 행음하려고 너를 따르는 자가 없음이며 또 네가 값을 받지 아니하고 도리어 줌이라 그런즉 다른 여인과 같지 아니하니라	And the contrary is in thee from other women in thy whoredoms, whereas none followeth thee to commit whoredoms: and in that thou givest a reward, and no reward is given unto thee, therefore thou art contrary.	So your prostitution is the opposite of that of other women: No one solicited your favors, and you paid a fee instead of receiving one; so you are the very opposite!
EZK	16	35	그러므로 너 음부야 여호와의 말을 들을지어다	Wherefore, O harlot, hear the word of the Lord:	Therefore, O prostitute, hear the word of the LORD!
EZK	16	36	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 네가 네 누추한 것을 쏟으며 네 정든 자와 행음함으로 벗은 몸을 드러내며 또 가증한 우상을 위하여 네 자녀의 피를 그 우상에게 드렸은즉	Thus saith the Lord God; Because thy filthiness was poured out, and thy nakedness discovered through thy whoredoms with thy lovers, and with all the idols of thy abominations, and by the blood of thy children, which thou didst give unto them;	This is what the Lord GOD says: Because you poured out your wealth and exposed your nakedness in your promiscuity with your lovers and with all your detestable idols, and because of the blood of your children which you gave to them,
EZK	16	37	내가 저의 즐거워하는 정든 자와 사랑하던 모든 자와 미워하던 모든 자를 모으되 사방에서 모아 너를 대적하게 할 것이요 또 네 벗은 몸을 그 앞에 드러내어 그들로 그것을 다 보게 할 것이며	Behold, therefore I will gather all thy lovers, with whom thou hast taken pleasure, and all them that thou hast loved, with all them that thou hast hated; I will even gather them round about against thee, and will discover thy nakedness unto them, that they may see all thy nakedness.	therefore I will surely gather all the lovers with whom you found pleasure, all those you loved and all those you hated. I will gather them against you from all around and expose you before them, and they will see you completely naked.
EZK	16	38	내가 또 간음하고 사람의 피를 흘리는 여인을 국문함 같이 너를 국문하여 진노의 피와 투기의 피를 네게 돌리고	And I will judge thee, as women that break wedlock and shed blood are judged; and I will give thee blood in fury and jealousy.	And I will sentence you to the punishment of women who commit adultery and those who shed blood; so I will bring upon you the wrath of your bloodshed and jealousy.
EZK	16	39	내가 또 너를 그들의 손에 붙이리니 그들이 네 누를 헐며 네 높은 대를 훼파하며 네 의복을 벗기고 네 장식품을 빼앗고 네 몸을 벌거벗겨 버려두며	And I will also give thee into their hand, and they shall throw down thine eminent place, and shall break down thy high places: they shall strip thee also of thy clothes, and shall take thy fair jewels, and leave thee naked and bare.	Then I will deliver you into the hands of your lovers, and they will level your mounds and tear down your lofty shrines. They will strip off your clothes, take your fine jewelry, and leave you naked and bare.
EZK	16	40	무리를 데리고 와서 너를 돌로 치며 칼로 찌르며	They shall also bring up a company against thee, and they shall stone thee with stones, and thrust thee through with their swords.	They will bring a mob against you, who will stone you and cut you to pieces with their swords.
EZK	16	41	불로 너의 집들을 사르고 여러 여인의 목전에서 너를 벌할지라 내가 너로 곧 음행을 그치게 하리니 네가 다시는 값을 주지 아니하리라	And they shall burn thine houses with fire, and execute judgments upon thee in the sight of many women: and I will cause thee to cease from playing the harlot, and thou also shalt give no hire any more.	Then they will burn down your houses and execute judgment against you in the sight of many women. I will put an end to your prostitution, and you will never again pay your lovers.
EZK	16	42	그리한즉 내가 네게 대한 내 분노가 그치며 내 투기가 네게서 떠나고 마음이 평안하여 다시는 노하지 아니하리라	So will I make my fury toward thee to rest, and my jealousy shall depart from thee, and I will be quiet, and will be no more angry.	So I will lay to rest My wrath against you, and My jealousy will turn away from you. Then I will be calm and no longer angry.
EZK	16	43	네가 어렸을 때를 기억지 아니하고 이 모든 일로 나를 격노케 하였은즉 내가 네 행위대로 네 머리에 보응하리니 네가 이 음란과 네 모든 가증한 일을 다시는 행하지 아니하리라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	Because thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, but hast fretted me in all these things; behold, therefore I also will recompense thy way upon thine head, saith the Lord God: and thou shalt not commit this lewdness above all thine abominations.	Because you did not remember the days of your youth, but enraged Me with all these things, I will surely bring your deeds down upon your own head, declares the Lord GOD. Have you not committed this lewdness on top of all your other abominations?
EZK	16	44	무릇 속담하는 자가 네게 대하여 속담하기를 어미가 어떠하면 딸도 그렇다 하리라	Behold, every one that useth proverbs shall use this proverb against thee, saying, As is the mother, so is her daughter.	Behold, all who speak in proverbs will quote this proverb about you: ‘Like mother, like daughter.’
EZK	16	45	너는 그 남편과 자녀를 싫어한 어미의 딸이요 너는 그 남편과 자녀를 싫어한 형의 동생이로다 네 어미는 헷 사람이요 네 아비는 아모리 사람이며	Thou art thy mother’s daughter, that lotheth her husband and her children; and thou art the sister of thy sisters, which lothed their husbands and their children: your mother was an Hittite, and your father an Amorite.	You are the daughter of your mother, who despised her husband and children. You are the sister of your sisters, who despised their husbands and children. Your mother was a Hittite and your father an Amorite.
EZK	16	46	네 형은 그 딸들과 함께 네 좌편에 거하는 사마리아요 네 아우는 그 딸들과 함께 네 우편에 거하는 소돔이라	And thine elder sister is Samaria, she and her daughters that dwell at thy left hand: and thy younger sister, that dwelleth at thy right hand, is Sodom and her daughters.	Your older sister was Samaria, who lived with her daughters to your north; and your younger sister was Sodom, who lived with her daughters to your south.
EZK	16	47	네가 그들의 행위대로만 행치 아니하며 그 가증한 대로만 행치 아니하고 그것을 적게 여겨서 네 모든 행위가 그보다 더욱 부패하였도다	Yet hast thou not walked after their ways, nor done after their abominations: but, as if that were a very little thing, thou wast corrupted more than they in all thy ways.	And you not only walked in their ways and practiced their abominations, but soon you were more depraved than they were.
EZK	16	48	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 나의 삶을 두고 맹세하노니 네 아우 소돔 곧 그와 그 딸들은 너와 네 딸들의 행위 같이 행치 아니하였느니라	As I live, saith the Lord God, Sodom thy sister hath not done, she nor her daughters, as thou hast done, thou and thy daughters.	As surely as I live, declares the Lord GOD, your sister Sodom and her daughters never did as you and your daughters have done.
EZK	16	49	네 아우 소돔의 죄악은 이러하니 그와 그 딸들에게 교만함과 식물의 풍족함과 태평함이 있음이며 또 그가 가난하고 궁핍한 자를 도와주지 아니하며	Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, pride, fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her and in her daughters, neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy.	Now this was the iniquity of your sister Sodom: She and her daughters were arrogant, overfed, and complacent; they did not help the poor and needy.
EZK	16	50	거만하여 가증한 일을 내 앞에서 행하였음이라 그러므로 내가 보고 곧 그들을 없이 하였느니라	And they were haughty, and committed abomination before me: therefore I took them away as I saw good.	Thus they were haughty and committed abominations before Me. Therefore I removed them, as you have seen.
EZK	16	51	사마리아는 네 죄의 절반도 범치 아니하였느니라 네가 그들보다 가증한 일을 심히 행한고로 너의 가증한 행위로 네 형과 아우를 의롭게 하였느니라	Neither hath Samaria committed half of thy sins; but thou hast multiplied thine abominations more than they, and hast justified thy sisters in all thine abominations which thou hast done.	Furthermore, Samaria did not commit half the sins you did. You have multiplied your abominations beyond theirs, and all the abominations you have committed have made your sisters appear righteous.
EZK	16	52	네가 네 형과 아우를 논단하였은즉 너도 네 수치를 담당할지니라 네가 그들보다 더욱 가증한 죄를 범하므로 그들이 너보다 의롭게 되었나니 네가 네 형과 아우를 의롭게 하였은즉 너는 놀라며 네 수치를 담당할지니라	Thou also, which hast judged thy sisters, bear thine own shame for thy sins that thou hast committed more abominable than they: they are more righteous than thou: yea, be thou confounded also, and bear thy shame, in that thou hast justified thy sisters.	So now you must bear your disgrace, since you have brought justification for your sisters. For they appear more righteous than you, because your sins were more vile than theirs. So you too must bear your shame and disgrace, since you have made your sisters appear righteous.
EZK	16	53	내가 그들의 사로잡힘 곧 소돔과 그 딸들의 사로잡힘과 사마리아와 그 딸들의 사로잡힘과 그들 중에 너의 사로잡힌 자의 사로잡힘을 돌이켜서	When I shall bring again their captivity, the captivity of Sodom and her daughters, and the captivity of Samaria and her daughters, then will I bring again the captivity of thy captives in the midst of them:	But I will restore Sodom and her daughters from captivity, as well as Samaria and her daughters. And I will restore you along with them.
EZK	16	54	너로 네 수욕을 담당하고 너의 행한 모든 일을 인하여 부끄럽게 하리니 이는 네가 그들에게 위로가 됨이라	That thou mayest bear thine own shame, and mayest be confounded in all that thou hast done, in that thou art a comfort unto them.	So you will bear your disgrace and be ashamed of all you did to comfort them.
EZK	16	55	네 아우 소돔과 그 딸들이 옛 지위를 회복할 것이요 사마리아와 그 딸들도 그 옛 지위를 회복할 것이며 너와 네 딸들도 너희 옛 지위를 회복할 것이니라	When thy sisters, Sodom and her daughters, shall return to their former estate, and Samaria and her daughters shall return to their former estate, then thou and thy daughters shall return to your former estate.	And your sisters, Sodom with her daughters and Samaria with her daughters, will return to their former state. You and your daughters will also return to your former state.
EZK	16	56	네가 교만하던 때에 네 아우 소돔을 네 입으로 말하지도 아니하였나니	For thy sister Sodom was not mentioned by thy mouth in the day of thy pride,	Did you not treat your sister Sodom as an object of scorn in the day of your pride,
EZK	16	57	곧 네 악이 드러나기 전에며 아람 딸들이 너를 능욕하기 전에며 너의 사방에 둘러 있는 블레셋 딸들이 너를 멸시하기 전에니라	Before thy wickedness was discovered, as at the time of thy reproach of the daughters of Syria, and all that are round about her, the daughters of the Philistines, which despise thee round about.	before your wickedness was uncovered? Even so, you are now scorned by the daughters of Edom and all those around her, and by the daughters of the Philistines—all those around you who despise you.
EZK	16	58	네 음란과 네 가증한 일을 네가 담당하였느니라 나 여호와의 말이니라	Thou hast borne thy lewdness and thine abominations, saith the Lord.	You will bear the consequences of your lewdness and your abominations, declares the LORD.
EZK	16	59	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 네가 맹세를 멸시하여 언약을 배반하였은즉 내가 네 행한 대로 네게 행하리라	For thus saith the Lord God; I will even deal with thee as thou hast done, which hast despised the oath in breaking the covenant.	For this is what the Lord GOD says: I will deal with you according to your deeds, since you have despised the oath by breaking the covenant.
EZK	16	60	그러나 내가 너의 어렸을 때에 너와 세운 언약을 기억하고 너와 영원한 언약을 세우리라	Nevertheless I will remember my covenant with thee in the days of thy youth, and I will establish unto thee an everlasting covenant.	But I will remember the covenant I made with you in the days of your youth, and I will establish an everlasting covenant with you.
EZK	16	61	네가 네 형과 아우를 접대할 때에 네 행위를 기억하고 부끄러워할 것이라 내가 그들을 네게 딸로 주려니와 네 언약으로 말미암음이 아니니라	Then thou shalt remember thy ways, and be ashamed, when thou shalt receive thy sisters, thine elder and thy younger: and I will give them unto thee for daughters, but not by thy covenant.	Then you will remember your ways and be ashamed when you receive your older and younger sisters. I will give them to you as daughters, but not because of My covenant with you.
EZK	16	62	내가 네게 내 언약을 세워서 너로 나를 여호와인 줄 알게 하리니	And I will establish my covenant with thee; and thou shalt know that I am the Lord:	So I will establish My covenant with you, and you will know that I am the LORD,
EZK	16	63	이는 내가 네 모든 행한 일을 용서한 후에 너로 기억하고 놀라고 부끄러워서 다시는 입을 열지 못하게 하려 함이니라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라 하셨다 하라	That thou mayest remember, and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou hast done, saith the Lord God.	so that when I make atonement for all you have done, you will remember and be ashamed and never again open your mouth because of your disgrace, declares the Lord GOD.”
EZK	17	1	여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 가라사대	And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	Now the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	17	2	인자야 너는 수수께끼와 비유를 이스라엘 족속에게 베풀어	Son of man, put forth a riddle, and speak a parable unto the house of Israel;	“Son of man, pose a riddle; speak a parable to the house of Israel
EZK	17	3	이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 채색이 구비하고 날개가 크고 깃이 길고 털이 숱한 큰 독수리가 레바논에 이르러 백향목 높은 가지를 취하되	And say, Thus saith the Lord God; A great eagle with great wings, longwinged, full of feathers, which had divers colours, came unto Lebanon, and took the highest branch of the cedar:	and tell them that this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘A great eagle with great wings and long pinions, full of feathers of many colors, came to Lebanon and took away the top of the cedar.
EZK	17	4	그 연한 가지 끝을 꺾어 가지고 장사하는 땅에 이르러 상고의 성읍에 두고	He cropped off the top of his young twigs, and carried it into a land of traffick; he set it in a city of merchants.	He plucked off its topmost shoot, carried it to the land of merchants, and planted it in a city of traders.
EZK	17	5	또 그 땅의 종자를 취하여 옥토에 심되 수양버들 가지처럼 큰 물가에 심더니	He took also of the seed of the land, and planted it in a fruitful field; he placed it by great waters, and set it as a willow tree.	He took some of the seed of the land and planted it in fertile soil; he placed it by abundant waters and set it out like a willow.
EZK	17	6	그것이 자라며 퍼져서 높지 아니한 포도나무 곧 굵은 가지와 가는 가지가 난 포도나무가 되어 그 가지는 독수리를 향하였고 그 뿌리는 독수리의 아래 있었더라	And it grew, and became a spreading vine of low stature, whose branches turned toward him, and the roots thereof were under him: so it became a vine, and brought forth branches, and shot forth sprigs.	It sprouted and became a spreading vine, low in height, with branches turned toward him; yet its roots remained where it stood. So it became a vine and yielded branches and sent out shoots.
EZK	17	7	또 날개가 크고 털이 많은 큰 독수리에게 물을 받으려고 그 심긴 두둑에서 그를 향하여 뿌리가 발하고 가지가 퍼졌도다	There was also another great eagle with great wings and many feathers: and, behold, this vine did bend her roots toward him, and shot forth her branches toward him, that he might water it by the furrows of her plantation.	But there was another great eagle with great wings and many feathers. And behold, this vine bent its roots toward him. It stretched out its branches to him from its planting bed, so that he might water it.
EZK	17	8	그 포도나무를 큰 물 가 옥토에 심은 것은 가지를 내고 열매를 맺어서 아름다운 포도나무를 이루게 하려 하였음이니라	It was planted in a good soil by great waters, that it might bring forth branches, and that it might bear fruit, that it might be a goodly vine.	It had been planted in good soil by abundant waters in order to yield branches and bear fruit and become a splendid vine.’
EZK	17	9	너는 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 그 나무가 능히 번성하겠느냐 이 독수리가 어찌 그 뿌리를 빼고 실과를 따며 그 나무로 시들게 하지 아니하겠으며 그 연한 잎사귀로 마르게 하지 아니하겠느냐 많은 백성이나 강한 팔이 아니라도 그 뿌리를 뽑으리라	Say thou, Thus saith the Lord God; Shall it prosper? shall he not pull up the roots thereof, and cut off the fruit thereof, that it wither? it shall wither in all the leaves of her spring, even without great power or many people to pluck it up by the roots thereof.	So you are to tell them that this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Will it flourish? Will it not be uprooted and stripped of its fruit so that it shrivels? All its foliage will wither! It will not take a strong arm or many people to pull it up by its roots.
EZK	17	10	볼지어다 그것이 심겼으나 번성하겠느냐 동풍이 부딪힐 때에 아주 마르지 아니하겠느냐 그 자라던 두둑에서 마르리라 하셨다 하라	Yea, behold, being planted, shall it prosper? shall it not utterly wither, when the east wind toucheth it? it shall wither in the furrows where it grew.	Even if it is transplanted, will it flourish? Will it not completely wither when the east wind strikes? It will wither on the bed where it sprouted.’”
EZK	17	11	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	17	12	너는 패역한 족속에게 묻기를 너희가 이 비유를 깨닫지 못하겠느냐 하고 그들에게 고하기를 바벨론 왕이 예루살렘에 이르러 왕과 방백을 사로잡아 바벨론 자기에게로 끌어가고	Say now to the rebellious house, Know ye not what these things mean? tell them, Behold, the king of Babylon is come to Jerusalem, and hath taken the king thereof, and the princes thereof, and led them with him to Babylon;	“Now say to this rebellious house: ‘Do you not know what these things mean?’ Tell them, ‘Behold, the king of Babylon came to Jerusalem, carried off its king and officials, and brought them back with him to Babylon.
EZK	17	13	그 왕족 중에 하나를 택하여 언약을 세우고 그로 맹세케 하고 또 그 땅의 능한 자들을 옮겨 갔나니	And hath taken of the king’s seed, and made a covenant with him, and hath taken an oath of him: he hath also taken the mighty of the land:	He took a member of the royal family and made a covenant with him, putting him under oath. Then he carried away the leading men of the land,
EZK	17	14	이는 나라를 낮추어 스스로 서지 못하고 그 언약을 지켜야 능히 서게 하려 하였음이어늘	That the kingdom might be base, that it might not lift itself up, but that by keeping of his covenant it might stand.	so that the kingdom would be brought low, unable to lift itself up, surviving only by keeping his covenant.
EZK	17	15	그가 사자를 애굽에 보내어 말과 군대를 구함으로 바벨론 왕을 배반하였으니 형통하겠느냐 이런 일을 행한 자가 피하겠느냐 언약을 배반하고야 피하겠느냐	But he rebelled against him in sending his ambassadors into Egypt, that they might give him horses and much people. Shall he prosper? shall he escape that doeth such things? or shall he break the covenant, and be delivered?	But this king rebelled against Babylon by sending his envoys to Egypt to ask for horses and a large army. Will he flourish? Will the one who does such things escape? Can he break a covenant and yet escape?’
EZK	17	16	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 나의 삶을 두고 맹세하노니 바벨론 왕이 그를 왕으로 세웠거늘 그가 맹세를 업신여겨 언약을 배반하였은즉 그 왕의 거하는 곳 바벨론 중에서 왕과 함께 있다가 죽을 것이라	As I live, saith the Lord God, surely in the place where the king dwelleth that made him king, whose oath he despised, and whose covenant he brake, even with him in the midst of Babylon he shall die.	‘As surely as I live,’ declares the Lord GOD, ‘he will die in Babylon, in the land of the king who enthroned him, whose oath he despised and whose covenant he broke.
EZK	17	17	대적이 토성을 쌓으며 운제를 세우고 많은 사람을 멸절하려 할 때에 바로가 그 큰 군대와 많은 무리로도 그 전쟁에 그를 도와주지 못하리라	Neither shall Pharaoh with his mighty army and great company make for him in the war, by casting up mounts, and building forts, to cut off many persons:	Pharaoh with his mighty army and vast horde will not help him in battle, when ramps are built and siege walls constructed to destroy many lives.
EZK	17	18	그가 이미 손을 내어 밀어 언약하였거늘 맹세를 업신여겨 언약을 배반하고 이 모든 일을 행하였으니 피하지 못하리라	Seeing he despised the oath by breaking the covenant, when, lo, he had given his hand, and hath done all these things, he shall not escape.	He despised the oath by breaking the covenant. Seeing that he gave his hand in pledge yet did all these things, he will not escape!’
EZK	17	19	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 나의 삶을 두고 맹세하노니 그가 내 맹세를 업신여기고 내 언약을 배반하였은즉 내가 그 죄를 그 머리에 돌리되	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; As I live, surely mine oath that he hath despised, and my covenant that he hath broken, even it will I recompense upon his own head.	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘As surely as I live, I will bring down upon his head My oath that he despised and My covenant that he broke.
EZK	17	20	내 그물을 그 위에 베풀며 내 올무에 걸리게 하여 끌고 바벨론으로 가서 나를 반역한 그 반역을 거기서 국문할지며	And I will spread my net upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare, and I will bring him to Babylon, and will plead with him there for his trespass that he hath trespassed against me.	I will spread My net over him and catch him in My snare. I will bring him to Babylon and execute judgment upon him there for the treason he committed against Me.
EZK	17	21	그 모든 군대에서 도망한 자들은 다 칼에 엎드러질 것이요 그 남은 자는 사방으로 흩어지리니 나 여호와가 이것을 말한 줄을 너희가 알리라	And all his fugitives with all his bands shall fall by the sword, and they that remain shall be scattered toward all winds: and ye shall know that I the Lord have spoken it.	All his choice troops will fall by the sword, and those who survive will be scattered to every wind. Then you will know that I, the LORD, have spoken.’
EZK	17	22	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 또 백향목 꼭대기에서 높은 가지를 취하여 심으리라 내가 그 높은 새 가지 끝에서 연한 가지를 꺾어 높고 빼어난 산에 심되	Thus saith the Lord God; I will also take of the highest branch of the high cedar, and will set it; I will crop off from the top of his young twigs a tender one, and will plant it upon an high mountain and eminent:	This is what the Lord GOD says: ‘I will take a shoot from the lofty top of the cedar, and I will set it out. I will pluck a tender sprig from its topmost shoots, and I will plant it on a high and lofty mountain.
EZK	17	23	이스라엘 높은 산에 심으리니 그 가지가 무성하고 열매를 맺어서 아름다운 백향목을 이룰 것이요 각양 새가 그 아래 깃들이며 그 가지 그늘에 거할지라	In the mountain of the height of Israel will I plant it: and it shall bring forth boughs, and bear fruit, and be a goodly cedar: and under it shall dwell all fowl of every wing; in the shadow of the branches thereof shall they dwell.	I will plant it on the mountain heights of Israel so that it will bear branches; it will yield fruit and become a majestic cedar. Birds of every kind will nest under it, taking shelter in the shade of its branches.
EZK	17	24	들의 모든 나무가 나 여호와는 높은 나무를 낮추고 낮은 나무를 높이며 푸른 나무를 말리우고 마른 나무를 무성케 하는 줄 알리라 나 여호와는 말하고 이루느니라 하라	And all the trees of the field shall know that I the Lord have brought down the high tree, have exalted the low tree, have dried up the green tree, and have made the dry tree to flourish: I the Lord have spoken and have done it.	Then all the trees of the field will know that I am the LORD. I bring the tall tree down and make the low tree tall. I dry up the green tree and make the withered tree flourish. I, the LORD, have spoken, and I have done it.’”
EZK	18	1	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	The word of the Lord came unto me again, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	18	2	너희가 이스라엘 땅에 대한 속담에 이르기를 아비가 신 포도를 먹었으므로 아들의 이가 시다고 함은 어찜이뇨	What mean ye, that ye use this proverb concerning the land of Israel, saying, The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children’s teeth are set on edge?	“What do you people mean by quoting this proverb about the land of Israel: ‘The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the teeth of the children are set on edge’?
EZK	18	3	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 나의 삶을 두고 맹세하노니 너희가 이스라엘 가운데서 다시는 이 속담을 쓰지 못하게 되리라	As I live, saith the Lord God, ye shall not have occasion any more to use this proverb in Israel.	As surely as I live, declares the Lord GOD, you will no longer quote this proverb in Israel.
EZK	18	4	모든 영혼이 다 내게 속한지라 아비의 영혼이 내게 속함 같이 아들의 영혼도 내게 속하였나니 범죄하는 그 영혼이 죽으리라	Behold, all souls are mine; as the soul of the father, so also the soul of the son is mine: the soul that sinneth, it shall die.	Behold, every soul belongs to Me; both father and son are Mine. The soul who sins is the one who will die.
EZK	18	5	사람이 만일 의로워서 법과 의를 따라 행하며	But if a man be just, and do that which is lawful and right,	Now suppose a man is righteous and does what is just and right:
EZK	18	6	산 위에서 제물을 먹지 아니하며 이스라엘 족속의 우상에게 눈을 들지 아니하며 이웃의 아내를 더럽히지 아니하며 월경 중에 있는 여인을 가까이 하지 아니하며	And hath not eaten upon the mountains, neither hath lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, neither hath defiled his neighbour’s wife, neither hath come near to a menstruous woman,	He does not eat at the mountain or look to the idols of the house of Israel. He does not defile his neighbor’s wife or approach a woman during her period.
EZK	18	7	사람을 학대하지 아니하며 빚진 자의 전당물을 도로 주며 억탈하지 아니하며 주린 자에게 식물을 주며 벗은 자에게 옷을 입히며	And hath not oppressed any, but hath restored to the debtor his pledge, hath spoiled none by violence, hath given his bread to the hungry, and hath covered the naked with a garment;	He does not oppress another, but restores the pledge to the debtor. He does not commit robbery, but gives his bread to the hungry and covers the naked with clothing.
EZK	18	8	변을 위하여 꾸이지 아니하며 이식을 받지 아니하며 스스로 손을 금하여 죄악을 짓지 아니하며 사람 사람 사이에 진실히 판단하며	He that hath not given forth upon usury, neither hath taken any increase, that hath withdrawn his hand from iniquity, hath executed true judgment between man and man,	He does not engage in usury or take excess interest, but he withholds his hand from iniquity and executes true justice between men.
EZK	18	9	내 율례를 좇으며 내 규례를 지켜 진실히 행할진대 그는 의인이니 정녕 살리라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	Hath walked in my statutes, and hath kept my judgments, to deal truly; he is just, he shall surely live, saith the Lord God.	He follows My statutes and faithfully keeps My ordinances. That man is righteous; surely he will live, declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	18	10	가령 그가 아들을 낳았다 하자 그 아들이 이 모든 선은 하나도 행치 아니하고 이 악 중 하나를 범하여 강포하거나 살인하거나	If he beget a son that is a robber, a shedder of blood, and that doeth the like to any one of these things,	Now suppose that man has a violent son, who sheds blood or does any of these things,
EZK	18	11	산 위에서 제물을 먹거나 이웃의 아내를 더럽히거나	And that doeth not any of those duties, but even hath eaten upon the mountains, and defiled his neighbour’s wife,	though the father has done none of them: Indeed, the son eats at the mountain and defiles his neighbor’s wife.
EZK	18	12	가난하고 궁핍한 자를 학대하거나 억탈하거나 빚진 자의 전당물을 도로 주지 아니하거나 우상에게 눈을 들거나 가증한 일을 행하거나	Hath oppressed the poor and needy, hath spoiled by violence, hath not restored the pledge, and hath lifted up his eyes to the idols, hath committed abomination,	He oppresses the poor and needy; he commits robbery and does not restore a pledge. He lifts his eyes to idols; he commits abominations.
EZK	18	13	변을 위하여 꾸이거나 이식을 받거나 할진대 그가 살겠느냐 살지 못하리니 이 모든 가증한 일을 행하였은즉 정녕 죽을지라 자기의 피가 자기에게 돌아가리라	Hath given forth upon usury, and hath taken increase: shall he then live? he shall not live: he hath done all these abominations; he shall surely die; his blood shall be upon him.	He engages in usury and takes excess interest. Will this son live? He will not! Since he has committed all these abominations, he will surely die; his blood will be on his own head.
EZK	18	14	또 가령 그가 아들을 낳았다 하자 그 아들이 그 아비의 행한 모든 죄를 보고 두려워하여 그대로 행하지 아니하고	Now, lo, if he beget a son, that seeth all his father’s sins which he hath done, and considereth, and doeth not such like,	Now suppose this son has a son who sees all the sins his father has committed, considers them, and does not do likewise:
EZK	18	15	산 위에서 제물을 먹지도 아니하며 이스라엘 족속의 우상에게 눈을 들지도 아니하며 이웃의 아내를 더럽히지도 아니하며	That hath not eaten upon the mountains, neither hath lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, hath not defiled his neighbour’s wife,	He does not eat at the mountain or look to the idols of the house of Israel. He does not defile his neighbor’s wife.
EZK	18	16	사람을 학대하지도 아니하며 전당을 잡지도 아니하며 억탈하지도 아니하고 주린 자에게 식물을 주며 벗은 자에게 옷을 입히며	Neither hath oppressed any, hath not withholden the pledge, neither hath spoiled by violence, but hath given his bread to the hungry, and hath covered the naked with a garment,	He does not oppress another, or retain a pledge, or commit robbery. He gives his bread to the hungry and covers the naked with clothing.
EZK	18	17	손을 금하여 가난한 자를 압제하지 아니하며 변이나 이식을 취하지 아니하여 내 규례를 지키며 내 율례를 행할진대 이 사람은 그 아비의 죄악으로 인하여 죽지 아니하고 정녕 살겠고	That hath taken off his hand from the poor, that hath not received usury nor increase, hath executed my judgments, hath walked in my statutes; he shall not die for the iniquity of his father, he shall surely live.	He withholds his hand from harming the poor and takes no interest or usury. He keeps My ordinances and follows My statutes. Such a man will not die for his father’s iniquity. He will surely live.
EZK	18	18	그 아비는 심히 포학하여 그 동족을 억탈하고 민간에 불선을 행하였으므로 그는 그 죄악으로 인하여 죽으리라	As for his father, because he cruelly oppressed, spoiled his brother by violence, and did that which is not good among his people, lo, even he shall die in his iniquity.	As for his father, he will die for his own iniquity, because he practiced extortion, robbed his brother, and did what was wrong among his people.
EZK	18	19	그런데 너희는 이르기를 아들이 어찌 아비의 죄를 담당치 않겠느뇨 하는도다 아들이 법과 의를 행하며 내 모든 율례를 지켜 행하였으면 그는 정녕 살려니와	Yet say ye, Why? doth not the son bear the iniquity of the father? When the son hath done that which is lawful and right, and hath kept all my statutes, and hath done them, he shall surely live.	Yet you may ask, ‘Why shouldn’t the son bear the iniquity of his father?’ Since the son has done what is just and right, carefully observing all My statutes, he will surely live.
EZK	18	20	범죄하는 그 영혼은 죽을지라 아들은 아비의 죄악을 담당치 아니할 것이요 아비는 아들의 죄악을 담당치 아니하리니 의인의 의도 자기에게로 돌아가고 악인의 악도 자기에게로 돌아가리라	The soul that sinneth, it shall die. The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son: the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him.	The soul who sins is the one who will die. A son will not bear the iniquity of his father, and a father will not bear the iniquity of his son. The righteousness of the righteous man will fall upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked man will fall upon him.
EZK	18	21	그러나 악인이 만일 그 행한 모든 죄에서 돌이켜 떠나 내 모든 율례를 지키고 법과 의를 행하면 정녕 살고 죽지 아니할 것이라	But if the wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die.	But if the wicked man turns from all the sins he has committed, keeps all My statutes, and does what is just and right, he will surely live; he will not die.
EZK	18	22	그 범죄한 것이 하나도 기억함이 되지 아니하리니 그 행한 의로 인하여 살리라	All his transgressions that he hath committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him: in his righteousness that he hath done he shall live.	None of the transgressions he has committed will be held against him. Because of the righteousness he has practiced, he will live.
EZK	18	23	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 어찌 악인의 죽는 것을 조금인들 기뻐하랴 그가 돌이켜 그 길에서 떠나서 사는 것을 어찌 기뻐하지 아니하겠느냐	Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die? saith the Lord God: and not that he should return from his ways, and live?	Do I take any pleasure in the death of the wicked? declares the Lord GOD. Wouldn’t I prefer that he turn from his ways and live?
EZK	18	24	만일 의인이 돌이켜 그 의에서 떠나서 범죄하고 악인의 행하는 모든 가증한 일대로 행하면 살겠느냐 그 행한 의로운 일은 하나도 기억함이 되지 아니하리니 그가 그 범한 허물과 그 지은 죄로 인하여 죽으리라	But when the righteous turneth away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, and doeth according to all the abominations that the wicked man doeth, shall he live? All his righteousness that he hath done shall not be mentioned: in his trespass that he hath trespassed, and in his sin that he hath sinned, in them shall he die.	But if a righteous man turns from his righteousness and practices iniquity, committing the same abominations as the wicked, will he live? None of the righteous acts he did will be remembered. Because of the unfaithfulness and sin he has committed, he will die.
EZK	18	25	그런데 너희는 이르기를 주의 길이 공평치 않다 하는도다 이스라엘 족속아 들을지어다 내 길이 어찌 공평치 아니하냐 너희 길이 공평치 않은 것이 아니냐	Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not equal. Hear now, O house of Israel; Is not my way equal? are not your ways unequal?	Yet you say, ‘The way of the Lord is not just.’ Hear now, O house of Israel: Is it My way that is unjust? Is it not your ways that are unjust?
EZK	18	26	만일 의인이 그 의를 떠나 죄악을 행하고 인하여 죽으면 그 행한 죄악으로 인하여 죽는 것이요	When a righteous man turneth away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, and dieth in them; for his iniquity that he hath done shall he die.	If a righteous man turns from his righteousness and practices iniquity, he will die for this. He will die because of the iniquity he has committed.
EZK	18	27	만일 악인이 그 행한 악을 떠나 법과 의를 행하면 그 영혼을 보전하리라	Again, when the wicked man turneth away from his wickedness that he hath committed, and doeth that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive.	But if a wicked man turns from the wickedness he has committed and does what is just and right, he will save his life.
EZK	18	28	그가 스스로 헤아리고 그 행한 모든 죄악에서 돌이켜 떠났으니 정녕 살고 죽지 아니하리라	Because he considereth, and turneth away from all his transgressions that he hath committed, he shall surely live, he shall not die.	Because he considered and turned from all the transgressions he had committed, he will surely live; he will not die.
EZK	18	29	그런데 이스라엘 족속은 이르기를 주의 길이 공평치 않다 하는도다 이스라엘 족속아 나의 길이 어찌 공평치 아니하냐 너희 길이 공평치 않은 것이 아니냐	Yet saith the house of Israel, The way of the Lord is not equal. O house of Israel, are not my ways equal? are not your ways unequal?	Yet the house of Israel says, ‘The way of the Lord is not just.’ Are My ways unjust, O house of Israel? Is it not your ways that are unjust?
EZK	18	30	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 이스라엘 족속아 내가 너희 각 사람의 행한 대로 국문할지니라 너희는 돌이켜 회개하고 모든 죄에서 떠날지어다 그리한즉 죄악이 너희를 패망케 아니하리라	Therefore I will judge you, O house of Israel, every one according to his ways, saith the Lord God. Repent, and turn yourselves from all your transgressions; so iniquity shall not be your ruin.	Therefore, O house of Israel, I will judge you, each according to his ways, declares the Lord GOD. Repent and turn from all your transgressions, so that your iniquity will not become your downfall.
EZK	18	31	너희는 범한 모든 죄악을 버리고 마음과 영을 새롭게 할지어다 이스라엘 족속아 너희가 어찌하여 죽고자 하느냐	Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed; and make you a new heart and a new spirit: for why will ye die, O house of Israel?	Cast away from yourselves all the transgressions you have committed, and fashion for yourselves a new heart and a new spirit. Why should you die, O house of Israel?
EZK	18	32	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 죽는 자의 죽는 것은 내가 기뻐하지 아니하노니 너희는 스스로 돌이키고 살지니라	For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, saith the Lord God: wherefore turn yourselves, and live ye.	For I take no pleasure in anyone’s death, declares the Lord GOD. So repent and live!
EZK	19	1	너는 이스라엘 방백들을 위하여 애가를 지어	Moreover take thou up a lamentation for the princes of Israel,	“As for you, take up a lament for the princes of Israel
EZK	19	2	부르기를 네 어미는 무엇이냐 암사자라 그가 사자들 가운데 엎드리어 젊은 사자 중에서 그 새끼를 기르는데	And say, What is thy mother? A lioness: she lay down among lions, she nourished her whelps among young lions.	and say: ‘What was your mother? A lioness among the lions! She lay down among the young lions; she reared her cubs.
EZK	19	3	그 새끼 하나를 키우매 젊은 사자가 되어 식물 움키기를 배워 사람을 삼키매	And she brought up one of her whelps: it became a young lion, and it learned to catch the prey; it devoured men.	She brought up one of her cubs, and he became a young lion. After learning to tear his prey, he devoured men.
EZK	19	4	이방이 듣고 함정으로 그를 잡아 갈고리로 꿰어끌고 애굽 땅으로 간지라	The nations also heard of him; he was taken in their pit, and they brought him with chains unto the land of Egypt.	When the nations heard of him, he was trapped in their pit. With hooks they led him away to the land of Egypt.
EZK	19	5	암사자가 기다리다가 소망이 끊어진 줄을 알고 그 새끼 하나를 또 취하여 젊은 사자가 되게 하니	Now when she saw that she had waited, and her hope was lost, then she took another of her whelps, and made him a young lion.	When she saw that she had waited in vain, that her hope was lost, she took another of her cubs and made him a young lion.
EZK	19	6	젊은 사자가 되매 여러 사자 가운데 왕래하며 식물 움키기를 배워 사람을 삼키며	And he went up and down among the lions, he became a young lion, and learned to catch the prey, and devoured men.	He prowled among the lions, and became a young lion. After learning to tear his prey, he devoured men.
EZK	19	7	그의 궁실들을 헐고 성읍들을 훼파하니 그 우는 소리로 인하여 땅과 그 가득한 것이 황무한지라	And he knew their desolate palaces, and he laid waste their cities; and the land was desolate, and the fulness thereof, by the noise of his roaring.	He broke down their strongholds and devastated their cities. The land and everything in it shuddered at the sound of his roaring.
EZK	19	8	이방이 둘려 있는 지방에서 그를 치러 와서 그의 위에 그물을 치고 함정에 잡아	Then the nations set against him on every side from the provinces, and spread their net over him: he was taken in their pit.	Then the nations set out against him from the provinces on every side. They spread their net over him; he was trapped in their pit.
EZK	19	9	갈고리로 꿰고 철롱에 넣어 끌고 바벨론 왕에게 이르렀나니 그를 옥에 가두어서 그 소리로 다시 이스라엘 산에 들리지 않게 하려 함이니라	And they put him in ward in chains, and brought him to the king of Babylon: they brought him into holds, that his voice should no more be heard upon the mountains of Israel.	With hooks they caged him and brought him to the king of Babylon. They brought him into captivity so that his roar was heard no longer on the mountains of Israel.
EZK	19	10	네 피의 어미는 물 가에 심긴 포도나무 같아서 물이 많으므로 실과가 많고 가지가 무성하며	Thy mother is like a vine in thy blood, planted by the waters: she was fruitful and full of branches by reason of many waters.	Your mother was like a vine in your vineyard, planted by the water; it was fruitful and full of branches because of the abundant waters.
EZK	19	11	그 가지들은 견강하여 권세 잡은 자의 홀이 될 만한데 그 하나의 키가 굵은 가지 가운데서 높았으며 많은 가지 가운데서 뛰어나서 보이다가	And she had strong rods for the sceptres of them that bare rule, and her stature was exalted among the thick branches, and she appeared in her height with the multitude of her branches.	It had strong branches, fit for a ruler’s scepter. It towered high above the thick branches, conspicuous for its height and for its dense foliage.
EZK	19	12	분노 중에 뽑혀서 땅에 던짐을 당하매 그 실과는 동풍에 마르고 그 견강한 가지들은 꺾이고 말라 불에 탔더니	But she was plucked up in fury, she was cast down to the ground, and the east wind dried up her fruit: her strong rods were broken and withered; the fire consumed them.	But it was uprooted in fury, cast down to the ground, and the east wind dried up its fruit. Its strong branches were stripped off and they withered; the fire consumed them.
EZK	19	13	이제는 광야, 메마르고 가물이 든 땅에 심긴바 되고	And now she is planted in the wilderness, in a dry and thirsty ground.	Now it is planted in the wilderness, in a dry and thirsty land.
EZK	19	14	불이 그 가지 중 하나에서부터 나와서 그 실과를 태우니 권세 잡은 자의 홀이 될만한 견강한 가지가 없도다 이것이 애가라 후에도 애가가 되리라	And fire is gone out of a rod of her branches, which hath devoured her fruit, so that she hath no strong rod to be a sceptre to rule. This is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation.	Fire has gone out from its main branch and devoured its fruit; on it no strong branch remains fit for a ruler’s scepter.’ This is a lament and shall be used as a lament.”
EZK	20	1	제칠년 오월 십일에 이스라엘 장로 두어 사람이 여호와께 물으려고 와서 내 앞에 앉으니	And it came to pass in the seventh year, in the fifth month, the tenth day of the month, that certain of the elders of Israel came to enquire of the Lord, and sat before me.	In the seventh year, on the tenth day of the fifth month, some of the elders of Israel came to inquire of the LORD, and they sat down before me.
EZK	20	2	여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 가라사대	Then came the word of the Lord unto me, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	20	3	인자야 이스라엘 장로들에게 고하여 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 너희가 내게 물으려고 왔느냐 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 나의 삶을 두고 맹세하노니 너희가 내게 묻기를 내가 용납지 아니하리라 하셨다 하라	Son of man, speak unto the elders of Israel, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God; Are ye come to enquire of me? As I live, saith the Lord God, I will not be enquired of by you.	“Son of man, speak to the elders of Israel and tell them that this is what the Lord GOD says: Have you come to inquire of Me? As surely as I live, I will not be consulted by you, declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	20	4	인자야 네가 그들을 국문하려느냐 네가 그들을 국문하려하느냐 너는 그들로 그 열조의 가증한 일을 알게 하여	Wilt thou judge them, son of man, wilt thou judge them? cause them to know the abominations of their fathers:	Will you judge them, will you judge them, son of man? Confront them with the abominations of their fathers
EZK	20	5	이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 옛날에 내가 이스라엘을 택하고 야곱 집의 후예를 향하여 맹세하고 애굽 땅에서 그들에게 나타나서 맹세하여 이르기를 나는 여호와 너희 하나님이라 하였었노라	And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God; In the day when I chose Israel, and lifted up mine hand unto the seed of the house of Jacob, and made myself known unto them in the land of Egypt, when I lifted up mine hand unto them, saying, I am the Lord your God;	and tell them that this is what the Lord GOD says: On the day I chose Israel, I swore an oath to the descendants of the house of Jacob and made Myself known to them in the land of Egypt. With an uplifted hand I said to them, ‘I am the LORD your God.’
EZK	20	6	그 날에 내가 그들에게 맹세하기를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내어서 그들을 위하여 찾아 두었던 땅 곧 젖과 꿀이 흐르는 땅이요 모든 땅 중의 아름다운 곳에 이르게 하리라 하고	In the day that I lifted up mine hand unto them, to bring them forth of the land of Egypt into a land that I had espied for them, flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of all lands:	On that day I swore to bring them out of the land of Egypt into a land that I had searched out for them, a land flowing with milk and honey, the glory of all lands.
EZK	20	7	또 그들에게 이르기를 너희는 눈을 드는바 가증한 것을 각기 버리고 애굽의 우상들로 스스로 더럽히지 말라 나는 여호와 너희 하나님이니라 하였으나	Then said I unto them, Cast ye away every man the abominations of his eyes, and defile not yourselves with the idols of Egypt: I am the Lord your God.	And I said to them: ‘Each of you must throw away the abominations before his eyes, and you must not defile yourselves with the idols of Egypt. I am the LORD your God.’
EZK	20	8	그들이 내게 패역하여 내 말을 즐겨 듣지 아니하고 그 눈을 드는 바 가증한 것을 각기 버리지 아니하며 애굽의 우상들을 떠나지 아니하므로 내가 말하기를 내가 애굽 땅에서 나의 분을 그들의 위에 쏟으며 노를 그들에게 이루리라 하였었노라	But they rebelled against me, and would not hearken unto me: they did not every man cast away the abominations of their eyes, neither did they forsake the idols of Egypt: then I said, I will pour out my fury upon them, to accomplish my anger against them in the midst of the land of Egypt.	But they rebelled against Me and refused to listen. None of them cast away the abominations before their eyes, and they did not forsake the idols of Egypt. So I resolved to pour out My wrath upon them and vent My anger against them in the land of Egypt.
EZK	20	9	그러나 내가 그들의 거하는 이방인의 목전에서 그들에게 나타나서 그들을 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내었었나니 이는 내 이름을 위함이라 내 이름을 그 이방인의 목전에서 더럽히지 않으려 하여 행하였음이로라	But I wrought for my name’s sake, that it should not be polluted before the heathen, among whom they were, in whose sight I made myself known unto them, in bringing them forth out of the land of Egypt.	But I acted for the sake of My name, that it should not be profaned in the eyes of the nations among whom they were living, in whose sight I had revealed Myself to Israel by bringing them out of the land of Egypt.
EZK	20	10	그러므로 내가 그들로 애굽 땅에서 나와서 광야에 이르게 하고	Wherefore I caused them to go forth out of the land of Egypt, and brought them into the wilderness.	So I brought them out of the land of Egypt and led them into the wilderness.
EZK	20	11	사람이 준행하면 그로 인하여 삶을 얻을 내 율례를 주며 내 규례를 알게 하였고	And I gave them my statutes, and shewed them my judgments, which if a man do, he shall even live in them.	And I gave them My statutes and made known to them My ordinances—for the man who does these things will live by them.
EZK	20	12	또 나는 그들을 거룩하게 하는 여호와인 줄 알게 하려 하여 내가 내 안식일을 주어 그들과 나 사이에 표징을 삼았었노라	Moreover also I gave them my sabbaths, to be a sign between me and them, that they might know that I am the Lord that sanctify them.	I also gave them My Sabbaths as a sign between us, so that they would know that I am the LORD who sanctifies them.
EZK	20	13	그러나 이스라엘 족속이 광야에서 내게 패역하여 사람이 준행하면 그로 인하여 삶을 얻을 나의 율례를 준행치 아니하며 나의 규례를 멸시하였고 나의 안식일을 크게 더럽혔으므로 내가 이르기를 내가 내 분노를 광야에서 그들의 위에 쏟아 멸하리라 하였으나	But the house of Israel rebelled against me in the wilderness: they walked not in my statutes, and they despised my judgments, which if a man do, he shall even live in them; and my sabbaths they greatly polluted: then I said, I would pour out my fury upon them in the wilderness, to consume them.	Yet the house of Israel rebelled against Me in the wilderness. They did not follow My statutes and they rejected My ordinances—though the man who does these things will live by them—and they utterly profaned My Sabbaths. Then I resolved to pour out My wrath upon them and put an end to them in the wilderness.
EZK	20	14	내가 내 이름을 위하여 달리 행하였었나니 내가 그들을 인도하여 내는 것을 목도한 열국 앞에서 내 이름을 더럽히지 아니하려 하였음이로라	But I wrought for my name’s sake, that it should not be polluted before the heathen, in whose sight I brought them out.	But I acted for the sake of My name, so that it would not be profaned in the eyes of the nations in whose sight I had brought them out.
EZK	20	15	또 내가 광야에서 그들에게 맹세하기를 내가 그들에게 허한 땅 곧 젖과 꿀이 흐르는 땅이요 모든 땅 중의 아름다운 곳으로 그들을 인도하여 들이지 아니하리라 한 것은	Yet also I lifted up my hand unto them in the wilderness, that I would not bring them into the land which I had given them, flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of all lands;	Moreover, with an uplifted hand I swore to them in the wilderness that I would not bring them into the land that I had given them—a land flowing with milk and honey, the glory of all lands—
EZK	20	16	그들이 마음으로 우상을 좇아 나의 규례를 업신여기며 나의 율례를 행치 아니하며 나의 안식일을 더럽혔음이니라	Because they despised my judgments, and walked not in my statutes, but polluted my sabbaths: for their heart went after their idols.	because they kept rejecting My ordinances, refusing to walk in My statutes, and profaning My Sabbaths; for their hearts continually went after their idols.
EZK	20	17	그러나 내가 그들을 아껴 보아 광야에서 멸하여 아주 없이 하지 아니하였었노라	Nevertheless mine eye spared them from destroying them, neither did I make an end of them in the wilderness.	Yet I looked on them with pity and did not destroy them or bring them to an end in the wilderness.
EZK	20	18	내가 광야에서 그들의 자손에게 이르기를 너희 열조의 율례를 좇지 말며 그 규례를 지키지 말며 그 우상들로 스스로 더럽히지 말라	But I said unto their children in the wilderness, Walk ye not in the statutes of your fathers, neither observe their judgments, nor defile yourselves with their idols:	In the wilderness I said to their children: ‘Do not walk in the statutes of your fathers or keep their ordinances or defile yourselves with their idols.
EZK	20	19	나는 여호와 너희 하나님이라 너희는 나의 율례를 좇으며 나의 규례를 지켜 행하고	I am the Lord your God; walk in my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do them;	I am the LORD your God; walk in My statutes, keep My ordinances, and practice them.
EZK	20	20	또 나의 안식일을 거룩하게 할지어다 이것이 나와 너희 사이에 표징이 되어 너희로 내가 여호와 너희 하나님인 줄 알게 하리라 하였었노라	And hallow my sabbaths; and they shall be a sign between me and you, that ye may know that I am the Lord your God.	Keep My Sabbaths holy, that they may be a sign between us, so that you may know that I am the LORD your God.’
EZK	20	21	그러나 그 자손이 내게 패역하여 사람이 준행하면 그로 인하여 삶을 얻을 나의 율례를 좇지 아니하며 나의 규례를 지켜 행하지 아니하였고 나의 안식일을 더럽혔는지라 이에 내가 이르기를 내가 광야에서 내 분을 그들의 위에 쏟으며 내 노를 그들에게 이루리라 하였으나	Notwithstanding the children rebelled against me: they walked not in my statutes, neither kept my judgments to do them, which if a man do, he shall even live in them; they polluted my sabbaths: then I said, I would pour out my fury upon them, to accomplish my anger against them in the wilderness.	But the children rebelled against Me. They did not walk in My statutes or carefully observe My ordinances—though the man who does these things will live by them—and they profaned My Sabbaths. So I resolved to pour out My wrath upon them and vent My anger against them in the wilderness.
EZK	20	22	내가 내 이름을 위하여 내 손을 금하고 달리 행하였었나니 내가 그들을 인도하여 내는 것을 목도한 열국 앞에서 내 이름을 더럽히지 아니하려 하였음이로다	Nevertheless I withdrew mine hand, and wrought for my name’s sake, that it should not be polluted in the sight of the heathen, in whose sight I brought them forth.	But I withheld My hand and acted for the sake of My name, so that it would not be profaned in the eyes of the nations in whose sight I had brought them out.
EZK	20	23	또 내가 광야에서 그들에게 맹세하기를 내가 그들을 이방인 중에 흩으며 열방 중에 헤치리라 하였었나니	I lifted up mine hand unto them also in the wilderness, that I would scatter them among the heathen, and disperse them through the countries;	However, with an uplifted hand I swore to them in the wilderness that I would scatter them among the nations and disperse them throughout the lands.
EZK	20	24	이는 그들이 나의 규례를 행치 아니하며 나의 율례를 멸시하며 내 안식일을 더럽히고 눈으로 그 열조의 우상들을 사모함이며	Because they had not executed my judgments, but had despised my statutes, and had polluted my sabbaths, and their eyes were after their fathers’ idols.	For they did not practice My ordinances, but they rejected My statutes and profaned My Sabbaths, fixing their eyes on the idols of their fathers.
EZK	20	25	또 내가 그들에게 선치 못한 율례와 능히 살게 하지 못할 규례를 주었고	Wherefore I gave them also statutes that were not good, and judgments whereby they should not live;	I also gave them over to statutes that were not good and ordinances by which they could not live.
EZK	20	26	그들이 장자를 다 화제로 드리는 그 예물로 내가 그들을 더럽혔음은 그들로 멸망케 하여 나를 여호와인 줄 알게 하려 하였음이니라	And I polluted them in their own gifts, in that they caused to pass through the fire all that openeth the womb, that I might make them desolate, to the end that they might know that I am the Lord.	And I pronounced them unclean through their gifts—the sacrifice of every firstborn in the fire—so that I might devastate them, in order that they would know that I am the LORD.
EZK	20	27	그런즉 인자야 이스라엘 족속에게 고하여 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 너희 열조가 또 내게 범죄하여 나를 욕되게 하였느니라	Therefore, son of man, speak unto the house of Israel, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God; Yet in this your fathers have blasphemed me, in that they have committed a trespass against me.	Therefore, son of man, speak to the house of Israel, and tell them that this is what the Lord GOD says: In this way also your fathers blasphemed Me by their unfaithfulness against Me.
EZK	20	28	내가 그들에게 주기로 맹세한 땅으로 그들을 인도하여 들였더니 그들이 모든 높은 산과 모든 무성한 나무를 보고 거기서 제사를 드리고 격노케 하는 제물을 올리며 거기서 또 분향하고 전제를 부어 드린지라	For when I had brought them into the land, for the which I lifted up mine hand to give it to them, then they saw every high hill, and all the thick trees, and they offered there their sacrifices, and there they presented the provocation of their offering: there also they made their sweet savour, and poured out there their drink offerings.	When I brought them into the land that I swore to give them and they saw any high hill or leafy tree, there they offered their sacrifices, presented offerings that provoked Me, sent up their fragrant incense, and poured out their drink offerings.
EZK	20	29	이에 내가 그들에게 이르기를 너희가 다니는 산당이 무엇이냐 하였노라 (그것을 오늘날까지 바마라 일컫느니라)	Then I said unto them, What is the high place whereunto ye go? And the name thereof is called Bamah unto this day.	So I asked them: ‘What is this high place to which you go?’ (And to this day it is called Bamah.)
EZK	20	30	그러므로 너는 이스라엘 족속에게 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 너희가 열조의 풍속을 따라 스스로 더럽히며 그 모든 가증한 것을 좇아 행음하느냐	Wherefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God; Are ye polluted after the manner of your fathers? and commit ye whoredom after their abominations?	Therefore tell the house of Israel that this is what the Lord GOD says: Will you defile yourselves the way your fathers did, prostituting yourselves with their abominations?
EZK	20	31	너희가 또 너희 아들로 화제를 삼아 예물로 드려 오늘날까지 우상들로 스스로 더럽히느냐 이스라엘 족속아 너희가 내게 묻기를 내가 용납하겠느냐 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 나의 삶을 두고 맹세하노니 너희가 내게 묻기를 내가 용납지 아니하리라	For when ye offer your gifts, when ye make your sons to pass through the fire, ye pollute yourselves with all your idols, even unto this day: and shall I be enquired of by you, O house of Israel? As I live, saith the Lord God, I will not be enquired of by you.	When you offer your gifts, sacrificing your sons in the fire, you continue to defile yourselves with all your idols to this day. So should I be consulted by you, O house of Israel? As surely as I live, declares the Lord GOD, I will not be consulted by you!
EZK	20	32	너희가 스스로 이르기를 우리가 이방인 곧 열국 족속 같이 되어서 목석을 숭배하리라 하거니와 너희 마음에 품은 것을 결코 이루지 못하리라	And that which cometh into your mind shall not be at all, that ye say, We will be as the heathen, as the families of the countries, to serve wood and stone.	When you say, ‘Let us be like the nations, like the peoples of the lands, serving wood and stone,’ what you have in mind will never come to pass.
EZK	20	33	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 나의 삶을 두고 맹세하노니 내가 능한 손과 편 팔로 분노를 쏟아 너희를 단정코 다스릴지라	As I live, saith the Lord God, surely with a mighty hand, and with a stretched out arm, and with fury poured out, will I rule over you:	As surely as I live, declares the Lord GOD, with a strong hand, an outstretched arm, and outpoured wrath I will rule over you.
EZK	20	34	능한 손과 편 팔로 본노를 쏟아 너희를 열국 중에서 나오게 하며 너희의 흩어진 열방 중에서 모아내고	And I will bring you out from the people, and will gather you out of the countries wherein ye are scattered, with a mighty hand, and with a stretched out arm, and with fury poured out.	With a strong hand, an outstretched arm, and outpoured wrath I will bring you out from the peoples and gather you from the lands to which you have been scattered.
EZK	20	35	너희를 인도하여 열국 광야에 이르러 거기서 너희를 대면하여 국문하되	And I will bring you into the wilderness of the people, and there will I plead with you face to face.	And I will bring you into the wilderness of the nations, where I will enter into judgment with you face to face.
EZK	20	36	내가 애굽 땅 광야에서 너희 열조를 국문한 것 같이 너희를 국문하리라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	Like as I pleaded with your fathers in the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so will I plead with you, saith the Lord God.	Just as I entered into judgment with your fathers in the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so I will enter into judgment with you, declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	20	37	내가 너희를 막대기 아래로 지나게 하며 언약의 줄로 매려니와	And I will cause you to pass under the rod, and I will bring you into the bond of the covenant:	I will make you pass under the rod and will bring you into the bond of the covenant.
EZK	20	38	너희 가운데서 패역한 자와 내게 범죄한 자를 모두 제하여 버릴지라 그들을 그 우거하던 땅에서는 나오게 하여도 이스라엘 땅에는 들어가지 못하게 하리니 너희가 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	And I will purge out from among you the rebels, and them that transgress against me: I will bring them forth out of the country where they sojourn, and they shall not enter into the land of Israel: and ye shall know that I am the Lord.	And I will purge you of those who rebel and transgress against Me. I will bring them out of the land in which they dwell, but they will not enter the land of Israel. Then you will know that I am the LORD.
EZK	20	39	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 이스라엘 족속아 너희가 내 말을 듣지 아니하려거든 가서 각각 그 우상을 섬기고 이 후에도 그리하려무나 마는 다시는 너희 예물과 너희 우상들로 내 거룩한 이름을 더럽히지 말지니라	As for you, O house of Israel, thus saith the Lord God; Go ye, serve ye every one his idols, and hereafter also, if ye will not hearken unto me: but pollute ye my holy name no more with your gifts, and with your idols.	And as for you, O house of Israel, this is what the Lord GOD says: Go and serve your idols, every one of you. But afterward, you will surely listen to Me, and you will no longer defile My holy name with your gifts and idols.
EZK	20	40	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 이스라엘 온 족속이 그 땅에 있어서 내 거룩한 산 곧 이스라엘의 높은 산에서 다 나를 섬기리니 거기서 내가 그들을 기쁘게 받을지라 거기서 너희 예물과 너희 천신하는 첫 열매와 너희 모든 성물을 요구하리라	For in mine holy mountain, in the mountain of the height of Israel, saith the Lord God, there shall all the house of Israel, all of them in the land, serve me: there will I accept them, and there will I require your offerings, and the firstfruits of your oblations, with all your holy things.	For on My holy mountain, the high mountain of Israel, declares the Lord GOD, there the whole house of Israel, all of them, will serve Me in the land. There I will accept them and will require your offerings and choice gifts, along with all your holy sacrifices.
EZK	20	41	내가 너희를 인도하여 열국 중에서 나오게 하고 너희의 흩어진 열방 중에서 모아 낼 때에 내가 너희를 향기로 받고 내가 또 너희로 말미암아 내 거룩함을 열국의 목전에서 나타낼 것이며	I will accept you with your sweet savour, when I bring you out from the people, and gather you out of the countries wherein ye have been scattered; and I will be sanctified in you before the heathen.	When I bring you from the peoples and gather you from the lands to which you have been scattered, I will accept you as a pleasing aroma. And I will show My holiness through you in the sight of the nations.
EZK	20	42	내가 너희 열조에게 주기로 맹세한 땅 곧 이스라엘 땅으로 너희를 인도하여 들일 때에 너희가 나를 여호와인 줄 알고	And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall bring you into the land of Israel, into the country for the which I lifted up mine hand to give it to your fathers.	Then you will know that I am the LORD, when I bring you into the land of Israel, the land that I swore to give your fathers.
EZK	20	43	거기서 너희의 길과 스스로 더럽힌 모든 행위를 기억하고 이미 행한 모든 악을 인하여 스스로 미워하리라	And there shall ye remember your ways, and all your doings, wherein ye have been defiled; and ye shall lothe yourselves in your own sight for all your evils that ye have committed.	There you will remember your ways and all the deeds with which you have defiled yourselves, and you will loathe yourselves for all the evils you have done.
EZK	20	44	이스라엘 족속아 내가 너희의 악한 길과 더러운 행위대로 하지 아니하고 내 이름을 위하여 행한 후에야 너희가 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라 하셨다 하라	And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have wrought with you for my name’s sake, not according to your wicked ways, nor according to your corrupt doings, O ye house of Israel, saith the Lord God.	Then you will know, O house of Israel, that I am the LORD, when I have dealt with you for the sake of My name and not according to your wicked ways and corrupt acts, declares the Lord GOD.”
EZK	20	45	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	Now the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	20	46	인자야 너는 얼굴을 남으로 향하라 남으로 향하여 소리내어 남방들의 삼림을 쳐서 예언하라	Son of man, set thy face toward the south, and drop thy word toward the south, and prophesy against the forest of the south field;	“Son of man, set your face toward the south, preach against it, and prophesy against the forest of the Negev.
EZK	20	47	남방 삼림에게 이르기를 여호와의 말씀을 들을지어다 주 여호와의 말씀에 내가 너의 가운데 불을 일으켜 모든 푸른 나무와 모든 마른 나무를 멸하리니 맹렬한 불꽃이 꺼지지 아니하고 남에서 북까지 모든 얼굴이 그슬릴지라	And say to the forest of the south, Hear the word of the Lord; Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I will kindle a fire in thee, and it shall devour every green tree in thee, and every dry tree: the flaming flame shall not be quenched, and all faces from the south to the north shall be burned therein.	Say to the forest of the Negev: Hear the word of the LORD! This is what the Lord GOD says: I am about to ignite in you a fire, and it will devour all your trees, both green and dry. The blazing flame will not be quenched, and by it every face from south to north will be scorched.
EZK	20	48	무릇 혈기 있는 자는 나 여호와가 그 불을 일으킨 줄을 알리니 그것이 꺼지지 아니하리라 하셨다 하라 하시기로	And all flesh shall see that I the Lord have kindled it: it shall not be quenched.	Then all people will see that I, the LORD, have kindled it; it will not be quenched.”
EZK	20	49	내가 가로되 오호라 주 여호와여 그들이 나를 가리켜 말하기를 그는 비유로 말하는 자가 아니냐 하나이다 하니라	Then said I, Ah Lord God! they say of me, Doth he not speak parables?	Then I said, “Ah, Lord GOD, they are saying of me, ‘Is he not just telling parables?’”
EZK	21	1	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	21	2	인자야 너는 얼굴을 예루살렘으로 향하며 성소를 향하여 소리내어 이스라엘 땅을 쳐서 예언하라	Son of man, set thy face toward Jerusalem, and drop thy word toward the holy places, and prophesy against the land of Israel,	“Son of man, set your face against Jerusalem and preach against the sanctuaries. Prophesy against the land of Israel
EZK	21	3	이스라엘 땅에게 이르기를 여호와의 말씀에 내가 너를 대적하여 내 칼을 집에서 빼어 의인과 악인을 네게서 끊을지라	And say to the land of Israel, Thus saith the Lord; Behold, I am against thee, and will draw forth my sword out of his sheath, and will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked.	and tell her that this is what the LORD says: ‘I am against you, and I will draw My sword from its sheath and cut off from you both the righteous and the wicked.
EZK	21	4	내가 의인과 악인을 네게서 끊을터이므로 내 칼을 집에서 빼어 무릇 혈기 있는 자를 남에서 북까지 치리니	Seeing then that I will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked, therefore shall my sword go forth out of his sheath against all flesh from the south to the north:	Because I will cut off both the righteous and the wicked, My sword will be unsheathed against everyone from south to north.
EZK	21	5	무릇 혈기 있는 자는 나 여호와가 내 칼을 집에서 빼어낸 줄을 알지라 칼이 다시 꽂혀지지 아니하리라 하셨다 하라	That all flesh may know that I the Lord have drawn forth my sword out of his sheath: it shall not return any more.	Then all flesh will know that I, the LORD, have taken My sword from its sheath, not to return it again.’
EZK	21	6	인자야 너는 탄식하되 허리가 끊어지는듯이 그들의 목전에서 슬피 탄식하라	Sigh therefore, thou son of man, with the breaking of thy loins; and with bitterness sigh before their eyes.	But you, son of man, groan! Groan before their eyes with a broken heart and bitter grief.
EZK	21	7	그들이 네게 묻기를 네가 어찌하여 탄식하느냐 하거든 대답하기를 소문을 인함이라 재앙이 오나니 각 마음이 녹으며 모든 손이 약하여지며 각 영이 쇠하며 모든 무릎이 물과 같이 약하리라 보라 재앙이 오나니 정녕 이루리라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라 하라	And it shall be, when they say unto thee, Wherefore sighest thou? that thou shalt answer, For the tidings; because it cometh: and every heart shall melt, and all hands shall be feeble, and every spirit shall faint, and all knees shall be weak as water: behold, it cometh, and shall be brought to pass, saith the Lord God.	And when they ask, ‘Why are you groaning?’ you are to say, ‘Because of the news that is coming. Every heart will melt, and every hand will go limp. Every spirit will faint, and every knee will turn to water.’ Yes, it is coming and it will surely happen, declares the Lord GOD.”
EZK	21	8	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	Again the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	21	9	인자야 너는 예언하여 이르기를 여호와의 말씀에 칼이여 칼이여 날카롭고도 마광되었도다	Son of man, prophesy, and say, Thus saith the Lord; Say, A sword, a sword is sharpened, and also furbished:	“Son of man, prophesy and tell them that this is what the Lord says: ‘A sword, a sword, sharpened and polished—
EZK	21	10	그 칼이 날카로움은 살륙을 위함이요 마광됨은 번개 같이 되기 위함이니 우리가 즐거워하겠느냐 내 아들의 홀이 모든 나무를 업신여기는도다	It is sharpened to make a sore slaughter; it is furbished that it may glitter: should we then make mirth? it contemneth the rod of my son, as every tree.	it is sharpened for the slaughter, polished to flash like lightning! Should we rejoice in the scepter of My son? The sword despises every such stick.
EZK	21	11	그 칼이 손에 잡아 쓸만하도록 마광되되 살륙하는 자의 손에 붙이기 위하여 날카롭고도 마광되었도다 하셨다 하라	And he hath given it to be furbished, that it may be handled: this sword is sharpened, and it is furbished, to give it into the hand of the slayer.	The sword is appointed to be polished, to be grasped in the hand. It is sharpened and polished, to be placed in the hand of the slayer.
EZK	21	12	인자야 너는 부르짖어 슬피 울지어다 이것이 내 백성에게 임하며 이스라엘 모든 방백에게 임함이로다 그들과 내 백성이 함께 칼에 붙인바 되었으니 너는 네 넓적다리를 칠지어다	Cry and howl, son of man: for it shall be upon my people, it shall be upon all the princes of Israel: terrors by reason of the sword shall be upon my people: smite therefore upon thy thigh.	Cry out and wail, O son of man, for the sword is wielded against My people; it is against all the princes of Israel! They are tossed to the sword with My people; therefore strike your thigh.
EZK	21	13	이것이 시험이라 만일 업신여기는 홀이 없어지면 어찌할꼬 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	Because it is a trial, and what if the sword contemn even the rod? it shall be no more, saith the Lord God.	Surely testing will come! And what if even the scepter, which the sword despises, does not continue?’ declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	21	14	그러므로 인자야 너는 예언하며 손뼉을 쳐서 칼로 세 번 거듭 씌우게 하라 이 칼은 중상케 하는 칼이라 밀실에 들어가서 대인을 중상케 하는 칼이로다	Thou therefore, son of man, prophesy, and smite thine hands together, and let the sword be doubled the third time, the sword of the slain: it is the sword of the great men that are slain, which entereth into their privy chambers.	‘So then, son of man, prophesy and strike your hands together. Let the sword strike two times, even three. It is a sword that slays, a sword of great slaughter closing in on every side!
EZK	21	15	내가 그들로 낙담하여 많이 엎드러지게 하려고 그 모든 성문을 향하여 번쩍번쩍하는 칼을 베풀었도다 오호라 그 칼이 번개 같고 살륙을 위하여 날카로왔도다	I have set the point of the sword against all their gates, that their heart may faint, and their ruins be multiplied: ah! it is made bright, it is wrapped up for the slaughter.	So that their hearts may melt and many may stumble, I have appointed at all their gates a sword for slaughter. Yes, it is ready to flash like lightning; it is drawn for slaughter.
EZK	21	16	칼아 모이라 우향하라 항오를 차리라 좌향하라 향한 대로 가라	Go thee one way or other, either on the right hand, or on the left, whithersoever thy face is set.	Slash to the right; set your blade to the left— wherever your blade is directed.
EZK	21	17	나도 내 손뼉을 치며 내 분을 다 하리로다 나 여호와의 말이니라	I will also smite mine hands together, and I will cause my fury to rest: I the Lord have said it.	I too will strike My hands together, and I will satisfy My wrath.’ I, the LORD, have spoken.”
EZK	21	18	여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 가라사대	The word of the Lord came unto me again, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	21	19	인자야 너는 바벨론 왕의 칼이 올 두 길을 한 땅에서 나오도록 그리되 곧 성으로 들어가는 길 머리에다가 길이 나뉘는 지시표를 하여	Also, thou son of man, appoint thee two ways, that the sword of the king of Babylon may come: both twain shall come forth out of one land: and choose thou a place, choose it at the head of the way to the city.	“Now you, son of man, mark out two roads for the sword of the king of Babylon to take, both starting from the same land. And make a signpost where the road branches off to each city.
EZK	21	20	칼이 암몬 족속의 랍바에 이르는 길과 유다 견고한 성 예루살렘에 이르는 길을 그리라	Appoint a way, that the sword may come to Rabbath of the Ammonites, and to Judah in Jerusalem the defenced.	Mark out one road for the sword to come against Rabbah of the Ammonites, and another against Judah into fortified Jerusalem.
EZK	21	21	바벨론 왕이 갈랫길 곧 두 길 머리에 서서 점을 치되 살들을 흔들어 우상에게 묻고 희생의 간을 살펴서	For the king of Babylon stood at the parting of the way, at the head of the two ways, to use divination: he made his arrows bright, he consulted with images, he looked in the liver.	For the king of Babylon stands at the fork in the road, at the junction of the two roads, to seek an omen: He shakes the arrows, he consults the idols, he examines the liver.
EZK	21	22	오른손에 예루살렘으로 갈 점괘를 얻었으므로 공성퇴를 베풀며 입을 벌리고 살륙하며 소리를 높여 외치며 성문을 향하여 공성퇴를 베풀고 토성을 쌓고 운제를 세우게 되었나니	At his right hand was the divination for Jerusalem, to appoint captains, to open the mouth in the slaughter, to lift up the voice with shouting, to appoint battering rams against the gates, to cast a mount, and to build a fort.	In his right hand appears the portent for Jerusalem, where he is to set up battering rams, to call for the slaughter, to lift a battle cry, to direct the battering rams against the gates, to build a ramp, and to erect a siege wall.
EZK	21	23	전에 그들에게 맹약한 자들은 그것을 헛점으로 여길 것이나 바벨론 왕은 그 죄악을 기억하고 그 무리를 잡으리라	And it shall be unto them as a false divination in their sight, to them that have sworn oaths: but he will call to remembrance the iniquity, that they may be taken.	It will seem like a false omen to the eyes of those who have sworn allegiance to him, but it will draw attention to their guilt and take them captive.
EZK	21	24	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 너희의 악이 기억을 일으키며 너희의 건과가 드러나며 너희 모든 행위의 죄가 나타났도다 너희가 기억한바 되었은즉 그 손에 잡히리라	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Because ye have made your iniquity to be remembered, in that your transgressions are discovered, so that in all your doings your sins do appear; because, I say, that ye are come to remembrance, ye shall be taken with the hand.	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Because you have drawn attention to your guilt, exposing your transgressions, so that your sins are revealed in all your deeds—because you have come to remembrance—you shall be taken in hand.
EZK	21	25	너 극악하여 중상을 당할 이스라엘 왕아 네 날이 이르렀나니 곧 죄악의 끝 때니라	And thou, profane wicked prince of Israel, whose day is come, when iniquity shall have an end,	And you, O profane and wicked prince of Israel, the day has come for your final punishment.’
EZK	21	26	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 관을 제하며 면류관을 벗길지라 그대로 두지 못하리니 낮은 자를 높이고 높은 자를 낮출 것이니라	Thus saith the Lord God; Remove the diadem, and take off the crown: this shall not be the same: exalt him that is low, and abase him that is high.	This is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Remove the turban, and take off the crown. Things will not remain as they are: Exalt the lowly and bring low the exalted.
EZK	21	27	내가 엎드러뜨리고 엎드러뜨리고 엎드러뜨리려니와 이것도 다시 있지 못하리라 마땅히 얻을 자가 이르면 그에게 주리라	I will overturn, overturn, overturn, it: and it shall be no more, until he come whose right it is; and I will give it him.	A ruin, a ruin, I will make it a ruin! And it will not be restored until the arrival of Him to whom it belongs, to whom I have assigned the right of judgment.’
EZK	21	28	인자야 주 여호와께서 암몬 족속과 그 능욕에 대하여 말씀하셨다고 너는 예언하라 너는 이르기를 칼이 뽑히도다 칼이 뽑히도다 살륙하며 멸절하며 번개 같이 되기 위하여 마광되었도다	And thou, son of man, prophesy and say, Thus saith the Lord God concerning the Ammonites, and concerning their reproach; even say thou, The sword, the sword is drawn: for the slaughter it is furbished, to consume because of the glittering:	Now prophesy, son of man, and declare that this is what the Lord GOD says concerning the Ammonites and their contempt: ‘A sword! A sword is drawn for slaughter, polished to consume, to flash like lightning—
EZK	21	29	네게 대하여 허무한 것을 보며 네게 대하여 거짓 복술을 하는 자가 너를 중상을 당한 악인의 목 위에 두리니 이는 그의 날 곧 죄악의 끝 때가 이름이로다	Whiles they see vanity unto thee, whiles they divine a lie unto thee, to bring thee upon the necks of them that are slain, of the wicked, whose day is come, when their iniquity shall have an end.	while they offer false visions for you and lying divinations about you— to be placed on the necks of the wicked who are slain, whose day has come, the time of their final punishment.
EZK	21	30	그러나 칼을 그 집에 꽂을지어다 네가 지음을 받은 곳에서 너의 생장한 땅에서 내가 너를 국문하리로다	Shall I cause it to return into his sheath? I will judge thee in the place where thou wast created, in the land of thy nativity.	Return the sword to its sheath! In the place where you were created, in the land of your origin, I will judge you.
EZK	21	31	내가 내 분노를 네게 쏟으며 내 진노의 불을 네게 불고 너를 짐승 같은 자 곧 멸하기에 익숙한 자의 손에 붙이리로다	And I will pour out mine indignation upon thee, I will blow against thee in the fire of my wrath, and deliver thee into the hand of brutish men, and skilful to destroy.	I will pour out My anger upon you; I will breathe the fire of My fury against you; I will hand you over to brutal men, skilled in destruction.
EZK	21	32	네가 불에 섶과 같이 될 것이며 네 피가 나라 가운데 있을 것이며 네가 다시 기억되지 못할 것이니 나 여호와가 말하였음이니라 하라	Thou shalt be for fuel to the fire; thy blood shall be in the midst of the land; thou shalt be no more remembered: for I the Lord have spoken it.	You will be fuel for the fire. Your blood will stain your own land. You will not be remembered, for I, the LORD, have spoken.’”
EZK	22	1	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	22	2	인자야 네가 국문하려느냐 이 피 흘린 성읍을 국문하려느냐 그리하려거든 자기의 모든 가증한 일을 그들로 알게 하라	Now, thou son of man, wilt thou judge, wilt thou judge the bloody city? yea, thou shalt shew her all her abominations.	“As for you, son of man, will you judge her? Will you pass judgment on the city of bloodshed? Then confront her with all her abominations
EZK	22	3	너는 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 자기 가운데 피를 흘려 벌 받을 때로 이르게 하며 우상을 만들어 스스로 더럽히는 성아	Then say thou, Thus saith the Lord God, The city sheddeth blood in the midst of it, that her time may come, and maketh idols against herself to defile herself.	and tell her that this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘O city who brings her own doom by shedding blood within her walls and making idols to defile herself,
EZK	22	4	네가 흘린 피로 인하여 죄가 있고 네가 만든 우상으로 인하여 스스로 더럽혔으니 네 날이 가까웠고 네 연한이 찼도다 그러므로 내가 너로 이방의 능욕을 받으며 만국의 조롱거리가 되게 하였노라	Thou art become guilty in thy blood that thou hast shed; and hast defiled thyself in thine idols which thou hast made; and thou hast caused thy days to draw near, and art come even unto thy years: therefore have I made thee a reproach unto the heathen, and a mocking to all countries.	you are guilty of the blood you have shed, and you are defiled by the idols you have made. You have brought your days to a close and have come to the end of your years. Therefore I have made you a reproach to the nations and a mockery to all the lands.
EZK	22	5	너 이름이 더럽고 어지러움이 많은 자여 가까운 자나 먼 자나 다 너를 조롱하리라	Those that be near, and those that be far from thee, shall mock thee, which art infamous and much vexed.	Those near and far will mock you, O infamous city, full of turmoil.
EZK	22	6	이스라엘 모든 방백은 각기 권세대로 피를 흘리려고 네 가운데 있었도다	Behold, the princes of Israel, every one were in thee to their power to shed blood.	See how every prince of Israel within you has used his power to shed blood.
EZK	22	7	그들이 네 가운데서 부모를 업신여겼으며 네 가운데서 나그네를 학대하였으며 네 가운데서 고아와 과부를 해하였도다	In thee have they set light by father and mother: in the midst of thee have they dealt by oppression with the stranger: in thee have they vexed the fatherless and the widow.	Father and mother are treated with contempt. Within your walls the foreign resident is exploited, the fatherless and the widow are oppressed.
EZK	22	8	너는 나의 성물들을 업신여겼으며 나의 안식일을 더럽혔으며	Thou hast despised mine holy things, and hast profaned my sabbaths.	You have despised My holy things and profaned My Sabbaths.
EZK	22	9	네 가운데 피를 흘리려고 이간을 붙이는 자도 있었으며 네 가운데 산 위에서 제물을 먹는 자도 있었으며 네 가운데 음란하는 자도 있었으며	In thee are men that carry tales to shed blood: and in thee they eat upon the mountains: in the midst of thee they commit lewdness.	Among you are slanderous men bent on bloodshed; within you are those who eat on the mountain shrines and commit acts of indecency.
EZK	22	10	네 가운데 자기 아비의 하체를 드러내는 자도 있었으며 네 가운데 월경하는 부정한 여인에게 구합하는 자도 있었으며	In thee have they discovered their fathers’ nakedness: in thee have they humbled her that was set apart for pollution.	In you they have uncovered the nakedness of their fathers; in you they violate women during their menstrual impurity.
EZK	22	11	혹은 그 이웃의 아내와 가증한 일을 행하였으며 혹은 그 며느리를 더럽혀 음행하였으며 네 가운데 혹은 그 자매 곧 아비의 딸과 구합하였으며	And one hath committed abomination with his neighbour’s wife; and another hath lewdly defiled his daughter in law; and another in thee hath humbled his sister, his father’s daughter.	One man commits an abomination with his neighbor’s wife; another wickedly defiles his daughter-in-law; and yet another violates his sister, his own father’s daughter.
EZK	22	12	네 가운데 피를 흘리려고 뇌물을 받는 자도 있었으며 네가 변전과 이식을 취하였으며 이를 탐하여 이웃에게 토색하였으며 나를 잊어버렸도다 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	In thee have they taken gifts to shed blood; thou hast taken usury and increase, and thou hast greedily gained of thy neighbours by extortion, and hast forgotten me, saith the Lord God.	In you they take bribes to shed blood. You engage in usury, take excess interest, and extort your neighbors. But Me you have forgotten, declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	22	13	너의 불의를 행하여 이를 얻은 일과 네 가운데 피 흘린 일을 인하여 내가 손뼉을 쳤나니	Behold, therefore I have smitten mine hand at thy dishonest gain which thou hast made, and at thy blood which hath been in the midst of thee.	Now look, I strike My hands together against your unjust gain and against the blood you have shed in your midst.
EZK	22	14	내가 네게 보응하는 날에 네 마음이 견디겠느냐 네 손이 힘이 있겠느냐 나 여호와가 말하였으니 이룰지라	Can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong, in the days that I shall deal with thee? I the Lord have spoken it, and will do it.	Will your courage endure or your hands be strong in the day I deal with you? I, the LORD, have spoken, and I will act.
EZK	22	15	내가 너를 열국 중에 흩으며 각 나라에 헤치고 너의 더러운 것을 네 가운데서 멸하리라	And I will scatter thee among the heathen, and disperse thee in the countries, and will consume thy filthiness out of thee.	I will disperse you among the nations and scatter you throughout the lands; I will purge your uncleanness.
EZK	22	16	네가 자기 까닭으로 열국의 목전에서 수치를 당하리니 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라 하셨다 하라	And thou shalt take thine inheritance in thyself in the sight of the heathen, and thou shalt know that I am the Lord.	And when you have defiled yourself in the eyes of the nations, then you will know that I am the LORD.’”
EZK	22	17	여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 가라사대	And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	22	18	인자야 이스라엘 족속이 내게 찌끼가 되었나니 곧 풀무 가운데 있는 놋이나 상납이나 철이나 납이며 은의 찌끼로다	Son of man, the house of Israel is to me become dross: all they are brass, and tin, and iron, and lead, in the midst of the furnace; they are even the dross of silver.	“Son of man, the house of Israel has become dross to Me. All of them are copper, tin, iron, and lead inside the furnace; they are but the dross of silver.
EZK	22	19	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 너희가 다 찌끼가 되었은즉 내가 너희를 예루살렘 가운데로 모으고	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Because ye are all become dross, behold, therefore I will gather you into the midst of Jerusalem.	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Because all of you have become dross, behold, I will gather you into Jerusalem.
EZK	22	20	사람이 은이나 놋이나 철이나 납이나 상납이나 모아서 풀무 속에 넣고 불을 불어 녹이는 것 같이 내가 노와 분으로 너희를 모아 거기 두고 녹일지라	As they gather silver, and brass, and iron, and lead, and tin, into the midst of the furnace, to blow the fire upon it, to melt it; so will I gather you in mine anger and in my fury, and I will leave you there, and melt you.	Just as one gathers silver, copper, iron, lead, and tin into the furnace to melt with a fiery blast, so I will gather you in My anger and wrath, leave you there, and melt you.
EZK	22	21	내가 너희를 모으고 내 분노의 불을 너희에게 분즉 너희가 그 가운데서 녹되	Yea, I will gather you, and blow upon you in the fire of my wrath, and ye shall be melted in the midst thereof.	Yes, I will gather you together and blow on you with the fire of My wrath, and you will be melted within the city.
EZK	22	22	은이 풀무 가운데서 녹는 것 같이 너희가 그 가운데서 녹으리니 나 여호와가 분노를 너희 위에 쏟은 줄을 너희가 알리라	As silver is melted in the midst of the furnace, so shall ye be melted in the midst thereof; and ye shall know that I the Lord have poured out my fury upon you.	As silver is melted in a furnace, so you will be melted within the city. Then you will know that I, the LORD, have poured out My wrath upon you.’”
EZK	22	23	여호와의 말씀이 네게 임하여 가라사대	And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	22	24	인자야 너는 그에게 이르기를 너는 정결함을 얻지 못한 땅이요 진노의 날에 비를 얻지 못한 땅이로다 하라	Son of man, say unto her, Thou art the land that is not cleansed, nor rained upon in the day of indignation.	“Son of man, say to her, ‘In the day of indignation, you are a land that has not been cleansed, upon which no rain has fallen.’
EZK	22	25	그 가운데서 선지자들의 배역함이 우는 사자가 식물을 움킴 같았도다 그들이 사람의 영혼을 삼켰으며 전재와 보물을 탈취하며 과부로 그 가운데 많게 하였으며	There is a conspiracy of her prophets in the midst thereof, like a roaring lion ravening the prey; they have devoured souls; they have taken the treasure and precious things; they have made her many widows in the midst thereof.	The conspiracy of the princes in her midst is like a roaring lion tearing its prey. They devour the people, seize the treasures and precious things, and multiply the widows within her.
EZK	22	26	그 제사장들은 내 율법을 범하였으며 나의 성물을 더럽혔으며 거룩함과 속된 것을 분변치 아니하였으며 부정함과 정한 것을 사람으로 분변하게 하지 아니하였으며 그 눈을 가리워 나의 안식일을 보지 아니하였으므로 내가 그 가운데서 더럽힘을 받았느니라	Her priests have violated my law, and have profaned mine holy things: they have put no difference between the holy and profane, neither have they shewed difference between the unclean and the clean, and have hid their eyes from my sabbaths, and I am profaned among them.	Her priests do violence to My law and profane My holy things. They make no distinction between the holy and the common, and they fail to distinguish between the clean and the unclean. They disregard My Sabbaths, so that I am profaned among them.
EZK	22	27	그 가운데 그 방백들은 식물을 삼키는 이리 같아서 불의의 이를 취하려고 피를 흘려 영혼을 멸하거늘	Her princes in the midst thereof are like wolves ravening the prey, to shed blood, and to destroy souls, to get dishonest gain.	Her officials within her are like wolves tearing their prey, shedding blood, and destroying lives for dishonest gain.
EZK	22	28	그 선지자들이 그들을 위하여 회를 칠하고 스스로 허탄한 이상을 보며 거짓 복술을 행하며 여호와가 말하지 아니하였어도 주 여호와의 말씀이라 하였으며	And her prophets have daubed them with untempered morter, seeing vanity, and divining lies unto them, saying, Thus saith the Lord God, when the Lord hath not spoken.	Her prophets whitewash these deeds by false visions and lying divinations, saying, ‘This is what the Lord GOD says,’ when the LORD has not spoken.
EZK	22	29	이 땅 백성은 강포하며 늑탈하여 가난하고 궁핍한 자를 압제하였으며 우거한 자를 불법하게 학대하였으므로	The people of the land have used oppression, and exercised robbery, and have vexed the poor and needy: yea, they have oppressed the stranger wrongfully.	The people of the land have practiced extortion and committed robbery. They have oppressed the poor and needy and have exploited the foreign resident without justice.
EZK	22	30	이 땅을 위하여 성을 쌓으며 성 무너진 데를 막아서서 나로 멸하지 못하게 할 사람을 내가 그 가운데서 찾다가 얻지 못한고로	And I sought for a man among them, that should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before me for the land, that I should not destroy it: but I found none.	I searched for a man among them to repair the wall and stand in the gap before Me on behalf of the land, so that I should not destroy it. But I found no one.
EZK	22	31	내가 내 분으로 그 위에 쏟으며 내 진노의 불로 멸하여 그 행위대로 그 머리에 보응하였느니라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	Therefore have I poured out mine indignation upon them; I have consumed them with the fire of my wrath: their own way have I recompensed upon their heads, saith the Lord God.	So I have poured out My indignation upon them and consumed them with the fire of My fury. I have brought their ways down upon their own heads, declares the Lord GOD.”
EZK	23	1	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying,	Again the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	23	2	인자야 두 여인이 있었으니 한 어미의 딸이라	Son of man, there were two women, the daughters of one mother:	“Son of man, there were two women, daughters of the same mother,
EZK	23	3	그들이 애굽에서 행음하되 어렸을 때에 행음하여 그들의 유방이 눌리며 그 처녀의 가슴이 어루만진 바 되었었나니	And they committed whoredoms in Egypt; they committed whoredoms in their youth: there were their breasts pressed, and there they bruised the teats of their virginity.	and they played in Egypt, prostituting themselves from their youth. Their breasts were fondled there, and their virgin bosoms caressed.
EZK	23	4	그 이름이 형은 오홀라요 아우는 오홀리바라 그들이 내게 속하여 자녀를 낳았나니 그 이름으로 말하면 오홀라는 사마리아요 오홀리바는 예루살렘이니라	And the names of them were Aholah the elder, and Aholibah her sister: and they were mine, and they bare sons and daughters. Thus were their names; Samaria is Aholah, and Jerusalem Aholibah.	The older was named Oholah, and her sister was named Oholibah. They became Mine and gave birth to sons and daughters. As for their identities, Oholah is Samaria, and Oholibah is Jerusalem.
EZK	23	5	오홀라가 내게 속하였을 때에 행음하여 그 연애하는 자 곧 그 이웃 앗수르 사람을 사모하였나니	And Aholah played the harlot when she was mine; and she doted on her lovers, on the Assyrians her neighbours,	Oholah prostituted herself while she was still Mine. She lusted after her lovers, the Assyrians—warriors
EZK	23	6	그들은 다 자색 옷을 입은 방백과 감독이요 준수한 소년, 말 타는 자들이라	Which were clothed with blue, captains and rulers, all of them desirable young men, horsemen riding upon horses.	clothed in blue, governors and commanders, all desirable young men, horsemen mounted on steeds.
EZK	23	7	그가 앗수르 중에 잘 생긴 그 모든 자들과 행음하고 누구를 연애하든지 그들의 모든 우상으로 스스로 더럽혔으며	Thus she committed her whoredoms with them, with all them that were the chosen men of Assyria, and with all on whom she doted: with all their idols she defiled herself.	She offered sexual favors to all the elite of Assyria. She defiled herself with all the idols of those for whom she lusted.
EZK	23	8	그가 젊었을 때에 애굽 사람과 동침하매 그 처녀의 가슴이 어루만진바 되며 그 몸에 음란을 쏟음을 당한바 되었더니 그가 그 때부터 행음함을 마지 아니하였느니라	Neither left she her whoredoms brought from Egypt: for in her youth they lay with her, and they bruised the breasts of her virginity, and poured their whoredom upon her.	She did not give up the prostitution she began in Egypt, when men slept with her in her youth, caressed her virgin bosom, and poured out their lust upon her.
EZK	23	9	그러므로 내가 그를 그 정든 자 곧 그 연애하는 앗수르 사람의 손에 붙였더니	Wherefore I have delivered her into the hand of her lovers, into the hand of the Assyrians, upon whom she doted.	Therefore I delivered her into the hands of her lovers, the Assyrians for whom she lusted.
EZK	23	10	그들이 그 하체를 드러내고 그 자녀를 빼앗으며 칼로 그를 죽여 그 누명을 여자에게 드러내었나니 이는 그들이 그에게 심문을 행함이니라	These discovered her nakedness: they took her sons and her daughters, and slew her with the sword: and she became famous among women; for they had executed judgment upon her.	They exposed her nakedness, seized her sons and daughters, and put her to the sword. Thus she became a byword among women, and they executed judgment against her.
EZK	23	11	그 아우 오홀리바가 이것을 보고도 그 형보다 음욕을 더하며 그 형의 간음함보다 그 간음이 더 심하므로 그 형보다 더 부패하여졌느니라	And when her sister Aholibah saw this, she was more corrupt in her inordinate love than she, and in her whoredoms more than her sister in her whoredoms.	Her sister Oholibah saw this, yet in her lust and prostitution she was more depraved than her sister.
EZK	23	12	그가 그 이웃 앗수르 사람을 연애하였나니 그들은 화려한 의복을 입은 방백과 감독이요 말타는 자들과 준수한 소년이었느니라	She doted upon the Assyrians her neighbours, captains and rulers clothed most gorgeously, horsemen riding upon horses, all of them desirable young men.	She too lusted after the Assyrians—governors and commanders, warriors dressed in splendor, horsemen riding on steeds, all desirable young men.
EZK	23	13	그 두 여인이 한 길로 행하므로 그도 더러워졌음을 내가 보았노라	Then I saw that she was defiled, that they took both one way,	And I saw that she too had defiled herself; both of them had taken the same path.
EZK	23	14	그가 음행을 더하였음은 붉은 것으로 벽에 그린 사람의 형상 곧 갈대아 사람의 형상을 보았음이니	And that she increased her whoredoms: for when she saw men pourtrayed upon the wall, the images of the Chaldeans pourtrayed with vermilion,	But Oholibah carried her prostitution even further. She saw the men portrayed on the wall, images of the Chaldeans, engraved in vermilion,
EZK	23	15	그 형상은 허리를 띠로 동이고 머리를 긴 수건으로 쌌으며 용모는 다 존귀한 자 곧 그 고토 갈대아 바벨론 사람 같은 것이라	Girded with girdles upon their loins, exceeding in dyed attire upon their heads, all of them princes to look to, after the manner of the Babylonians of Chaldea, the land of their nativity:	wearing belts on their waists and flowing turbans on their heads; all of them looked like officers of the Babylonians in Chaldea, the land of their birth.
EZK	23	16	그가 보고 곧 연애하여 사자를 갈대아 그들에게로 보내매	And as soon as she saw them with her eyes, she doted upon them, and sent messengers unto them into Chaldea.	At the sight of them, she lusted for them and sent messengers to them in Chaldea.
EZK	23	17	바벨론 사람이 나아와 연애하는 침상에 올라 음란으로 그를 더럽히매 그가 더럽힘을 입은 후에 그들을 싫어하는 마음이 생겼느니라	And the Babylonians came to her into the bed of love, and they defiled her with their whoredom, and she was polluted with them, and her mind was alienated from them.	Then the Babylonians came to her, to the bed of love, and in their lust they defiled her. But after she had been defiled by them, she turned away in disgust.
EZK	23	18	그가 이와 같이 그 음행을 나타내며 그 하체를 드러내므로 내 마음이 그 형을 싫어한 것 같이 그를 싫어하였으나	So she discovered her whoredoms, and discovered her nakedness: then my mind was alienated from her, like as my mind was alienated from her sister.	When Oholibah openly prostituted herself and exposed her nakedness, I turned away from her in disgust, just as I had turned away from her sister.
EZK	23	19	그가 그 음행을 더하여 그 젊었을 때 곧 애굽 땅에서 음행하던 때를 생각하고	Yet she multiplied her whoredoms, in calling to remembrance the days of her youth, wherein she had played the harlot in the land of Egypt.	Yet she multiplied her promiscuity, remembering the days of her youth, when she had prostituted herself in the land of Egypt
EZK	23	20	그 하체는 나귀 같고 그 정수는 말 같은 음란한 간부를 연애하였도다	For she doted upon their paramours, whose flesh is as the flesh of asses, and whose issue is like the issue of horses.	and lusted after their lovers, whose genitals were like those of donkeys and whose emission was like that of stallions.
EZK	23	21	네가 젊었을 때에 행음하여 애굽 사람에게 네 가슴과 유방이 어루만진바 되었던 것을 오히려 생각하도다	Thus thou calledst to remembrance the lewdness of thy youth, in bruising thy teats by the Egyptians for the paps of thy youth.	So you revisited the indecency of your youth, when the Egyptians caressed your bosom and pressed your young breasts.
EZK	23	22	그러므로 오홀리바야 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 너의 연애하다가 싫어하던 자들을 격동시켜서 그들로 사방에서 와서 너를 치게 하리니	Therefore, O Aholibah, thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I will raise up thy lovers against thee, from whom thy mind is alienated, and I will bring them against thee on every side;	Therefore, Oholibah, this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘I will incite your lovers against you, those from whom you turned away in disgust. And I will bring them against you from every side—
EZK	23	23	그들은 바벨론 사람과 갈대아 모든 무리 브곳과 소아와 고아 사람과 또 그와 함께 한 모든 앗수르 사람 곧 준수한 소년이며 다 방백과 감독이며 귀인과 유명한 자, 다 말 타는 자들이라	The Babylonians, and all the Chaldeans, Pekod, and Shoa, and Koa, and all the Assyrians with them: all of them desirable young men, captains and rulers, great lords and renowned, all of them riding upon horses.	the Babylonians and all the Chaldeans, the men of Pekod, Shoa, and Koa, and all the Assyrians with them—all desirable young men, governors and commanders, officers and men of renown, mounted on horses.
EZK	23	24	그들이 병기와 병거와 수레와 크고 작은 방패를 이끌고 투구 쓴 군대를 거느리고 치러 와서 너를 에워쌀지라 내가 심문권을 그들에게 맡긴즉 그들이 그 심문권대로 너를 심문하리라	And they shall come against thee with chariots, wagons, and wheels, and with an assembly of people, which shall set against thee buckler and shield and helmet round about: and I will set judgment before them, and they shall judge thee according to their judgments.	They will come against you with a host of peoples, with weapons, chariots, and wagons. They will array themselves against you on every side with buckler and shield and helmet. I will delegate judgment to them, and they will punish you according to their own standards.
EZK	23	25	내가 너를 향하여 투기를 발하리니 그들이 분노로 네게 행하여 네 코와 귀를 깎아버리고 남은 자를 칼로 엎드러뜨리며 네 자녀를 빼앗고 그 남은 자를 불에 사르며	And I will set my jealousy against thee, and they shall deal furiously with thee: they shall take away thy nose and thine ears; and thy remnant shall fall by the sword: they shall take thy sons and thy daughters; and thy residue shall be devoured by the fire.	And I will set My jealous rage against you, and they will deal with you in fury. They will cut off your noses and ears, and your survivors will fall by the sword. They will seize your sons and daughters, and your remnant will be consumed by fire.
EZK	23	26	또 네 옷을 벗기며 네 장식품을 빼앗을지라	They shall also strip thee out of thy clothes, and take away thy fair jewels.	They will strip off your clothes and take your fine jewelry.
EZK	23	27	이와 같이 내가 네 음란과 애굽 땅에서부터 음행하던 것을 그치게 하여 너로 그들을 향하여 눈을 들지도 못하게 하며 다시는 애굽을 기억하지도 못하게 하리라	Thus will I make thy lewdness to cease from thee, and thy whoredom brought from the land of Egypt: so that thou shalt not lift up thine eyes unto them, nor remember Egypt any more.	So I will put an end to your indecency and prostitution, which began in the land of Egypt, and you will not lift your eyes to them or remember Egypt anymore.’
EZK	23	28	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 너의 미워하는 자와 네 마음에 싫어하는 자의 손에 너를 붙이리니	For thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I will deliver thee into the hand of them whom thou hatest, into the hand of them from whom thy mind is alienated:	For this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Surely I will deliver you into the hands of those you hate, from whom you turned away in disgust.
EZK	23	29	그들이 미워하는 마음으로 네게 행하여 네 모든 수고한 것을 빼앗고 너를 벌거벗겨 적신으로 두어서 네 음행의 벗은 몸 곧 네 음란하며 음행하던 것을 드러낼 것이라	And they shall deal with thee hatefully, and shall take away all thy labour, and shall leave thee naked and bare: and the nakedness of thy whoredoms shall be discovered, both thy lewdness and thy whoredoms.	They will treat you with hatred, take all for which you have worked, and leave you naked and bare, so that the shame of your prostitution will be exposed. Your indecency and promiscuity
EZK	23	30	네가 이같이 당할 것은 네가 음란히 이방을 좇고 그 우상들로 더럽혔음이로다	I will do these things unto thee, because thou hast gone a whoring after the heathen, and because thou art polluted with their idols.	have brought these things upon you, because you have prostituted yourself with the nations and defiled yourself with their idols.
EZK	23	31	네가 네 형의 길로 행하였은즉 내가 그의 잔을 네 손에 주리라	Thou hast walked in the way of thy sister; therefore will I give her cup into thine hand.	Because you have followed the path of your sister, I will put her cup into your hand.’
EZK	23	32	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 깊고 크고 가득히 담긴 네 형의 잔을 네가 마시고 비소와 조롱을 당하리라	Thus saith the Lord God; Thou shalt drink of thy sister’s cup deep and large: thou shalt be laughed to scorn and had in derision; it containeth much.	This is what the Lord GOD says: ‘You will drink your sister’s cup, a cup deep and wide. It will bring scorn and derision, for it holds so much.
EZK	23	33	네가 네 형 사마리아의 잔 곧 놀람과 패망의 잔에 넘치게 취하고 근심할지라	Thou shalt be filled with drunkenness and sorrow, with the cup of astonishment and desolation, with the cup of thy sister Samaria.	You will be filled with drunkenness and grief, with a cup of devastation and desolation, the cup of your sister Samaria.
EZK	23	34	네가 그 잔을 다 기울여 마시고 그 깨어진 조각을 씹으며 네 유방을 꼬집을 것은 내가 이렇게 말하였음이니라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	Thou shalt even drink it and suck it out, and thou shalt break the sherds thereof, and pluck off thine own breasts: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord God.	You will drink it and drain it; you will dash it to pieces, and tear your breasts. For I have spoken,’ declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	23	35	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 네가 나를 잊었고 또 나를 네 등 뒤에 버렸은즉 너는 네 음란과 네 음행의 죄를 담당할지니라 하시니라	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Because thou hast forgotten me, and cast me behind thy back, therefore bear thou also thy lewdness and thy whoredoms.	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Because you have forgotten Me and have cast Me behind your back, you must bear the consequences of your indecency and prostitution.’”
EZK	23	36	여호와께서 또 내게 이르시되 인자야 네가 오홀라와 오홀리바를 국문하려느냐 그러면 그 가증한 일을 그들에게 고하라	The Lord said moreover unto me; Son of man, wilt thou judge Aholah and Aholibah? yea, declare unto them their abominations;	Then the LORD said to me: “Son of man, will you pass judgment against Oholah and Oholibah? Then declare to them their abominations.
EZK	23	37	그들이 행음하였으며 피를 손에 묻혔으며 또 그 우상과 행음하며 내게 낳아준 자식들을 우상을 위하여 화제로 살랐으며	That they have committed adultery, and blood is in their hands, and with their idols have they committed adultery, and have also caused their sons, whom they bare unto me, to pass for them through the fire, to devour them.	For they have committed adultery, and blood is on their hands. They have committed adultery with their idols. They have even sacrificed their children, whom they bore to Me, in the fire as food for their idols.
EZK	23	38	이 외에도 그들이 내게 행한 것이 있나니 당일에 내 성소를 더럽히며 내 안식일을 범하였도다	Moreover this they have done unto me: they have defiled my sanctuary in the same day, and have profaned my sabbaths.	They have also done this to Me: On that very same day, they defiled My sanctuary and profaned My Sabbaths.
EZK	23	39	그들이 자녀를 죽여 그 우상에게 드린 당일에 내 성소에 들어와서 더럽혔으되 그들이 내 성전 가운데서 그렇게 행하였으며	For when they had slain their children to their idols, then they came the same day into my sanctuary to profane it; and, lo, thus have they done in the midst of mine house.	On the very day they slaughtered their children for their idols, they entered My sanctuary to profane it. Yes, they did this inside My house.
EZK	23	40	또 사자를 원방에 보내어 사람을 불러오게 하고 그들이 오매 그들을 위하여 목욕하며 눈썹을 그리며 스스로 단장하고	And furthermore, that ye have sent for men to come from far, unto whom a messenger was sent; and, lo, they came: for whom thou didst wash thyself, paintedst thy eyes, and deckedst thyself with ornaments,	Furthermore, you sisters sent messengers for men who came from afar; and behold, when they arrived, you bathed for them, painted your eyes, and adorned yourself with jewelry.
EZK	23	41	화려한 자리에 앉아 앞에 상을 베풀고 내 향과 기름을 그 위에 놓고	And satest upon a stately bed, and a table prepared before it, whereupon thou hast set mine incense and mine oil.	You sat on a couch of luxury with a table spread before it, on which you had set My incense and My oil,
EZK	23	42	그 무리와 편히 지껄이고 즐겼으며 또 광야에서 잡류와 술취한 사람을 청하여 오매 그들이 팔쇠를 그 손목에 끼우고 아름다운 면류관을 그 머리에 씌웠도다	And a voice of a multitude being at ease was with her: and with the men of the common sort were brought Sabeans from the wilderness, which put bracelets upon their hands, and beautiful crowns upon their heads.	accompanied by the sound of a carefree crowd. Drunkards were brought in from the desert along with men from the rabble, who put bracelets on your wrists and beautiful crowns on your head.
EZK	23	43	내가 음행으로 쇠한 여인을 가리켜 말하노라 그가 그래도 그들과 피차 행음하는도다	Then said I unto her that was old in adulteries, Will they now commit whoredoms with her, and she with them?	Then I said of her who had grown old in adulteries: ‘Now let them use her as a prostitute, for that is all she is!’
EZK	23	44	그들이 그에게 나아오기를 기생에게 나아옴 같이 음란한 여인 오홀라와 오홀리바에게 나아왔은즉	Yet they went in unto her, as they go in unto a woman that playeth the harlot: so went they in unto Aholah and unto Aholibah, the lewd women.	And they slept with her as with a prostitute; they slept with Oholah and Oholibah, those lewd women.
EZK	23	45	의인이 음부를 심문함 같이 심문하며 피를 흘린 여인을 심문함 같이 심문하리니 그들은 음부요 또 피가 그 손에 묻었음이니라	And the righteous men, they shall judge them after the manner of adulteresses, and after the manner of women that shed blood; because they are adulteresses, and blood is in their hands.	But righteous men will sentence them to the punishment of those who commit adultery and bloodshed, because they are adulteresses with blood on their hands.
EZK	23	46	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 군대를 거느리고 와서 치게 하여 그들로 학대와 약탈을 당하게 하리니	For thus saith the Lord God; I will bring up a company upon them, and will give them to be removed and spoiled.	This is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Bring a mob against them and consign them to terror and plunder.
EZK	23	47	그 군대가 그들을 돌로 치며 칼로 죽이고 그 자녀도 죽이며 그 집들을 불사르리라	And the company shall stone them with stones, and dispatch them with their swords; they shall slay their sons and their daughters, and burn up their houses with fire.	The mob will stone them and cut them down with their swords. They will kill their sons and daughters and burn down their houses.
EZK	23	48	이와 같이 내가 이 땅에서 음란을 그치게 한즉 모든 여인이 경성하여 너희 음행을 본받지 아니하리라	Thus will I cause lewdness to cease out of the land, that all women may be taught not to do after your lewdness.	So I will put an end to indecency in the land, and all the women will be admonished not to imitate your behavior.
EZK	23	49	그들이 너희 음란으로 너희에게 보응한즉 너희가 모든 우상을 위하던 죄를 담당할지라 너희가 나를 주 여호와인 줄 알리라 하시니라	And they shall recompense your lewdness upon you, and ye shall bear the sins of your idols: and ye shall know that I am the Lord God.	They will repay you for your indecency, and you will bear the consequences of your sins of idolatry. Then you will know that I am the Lord GOD.’”
EZK	24	1	제구년 시월 십일에 여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 가라사대	Again in the ninth year, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	In the ninth year, on the tenth day of the tenth month, the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	24	2	인자야 너는 날짜 곧 오늘날을 기록하라 바벨론 왕이 오늘날 예루살렘에 핍근하였느니라	Son of man, write thee the name of the day, even of this same day: the king of Babylon set himself against Jerusalem this same day.	“Son of man, write down today’s date, for on this very day the king of Babylon has laid siege to Jerusalem.
EZK	24	3	너는 이 패역한 족속에게 비유를 베풀어 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 한 가마를 걸라	And utter a parable unto the rebellious house, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God; Set on a pot, set it on, and also pour water into it:	Now speak a parable to this rebellious house and tell them that this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Put the pot on the fire; put it on and pour in the water.
EZK	24	4	건 후에 물을 붓고 양떼에서 고른 것을 가지고 각을 뜨고 그 넓적다리와 어깨고기의 모든 좋은 덩이를 그 가운데 모아 넣으며 고른 뼈를 가득히 담고 그 뼈를 위하여 가마 밑에 나무를 쌓아 넣고 잘 삶되 가마속의 뼈가 무르도록 삶을지어다	Gather the pieces thereof into it, even every good piece, the thigh, and the shoulder; fill it with the choice bones.	Put in the pieces of meat, every good piece— thigh and shoulder— fill it with choice bones.
EZK	24	5		Take the choice of the flock, and burn also the bones under it, and make it boil well, and let them seethe the bones of it therein.	Take the choicest of the flock and pile the fuel beneath it. Bring it to a boil and cook the bones in it.’
EZK	24	6	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 피흘린 성읍, 녹슨 가마 곧 그 속의 녹을 없이 하지 아니한 가마여 화 있을진저 제비 뽑을 것도 없이 그 덩이를 일일이 꺼낼지어다	Wherefore thus saith the Lord God; Woe to the bloody city, to the pot whose scum is therein, and whose scum is not gone out of it! bring it out piece by piece; let no lot fall upon it.	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Woe to the city of bloodshed, to the pot now rusted, whose rust will not come off! Empty it piece by piece; cast no lots for its contents.
EZK	24	7	그 피가 그 가운데 있음이여 피를 땅에 쏟아서 티끌이 덮이게 하지 않고 말간 반석 위에 두었도다	For her blood is in the midst of her; she set it upon the top of a rock; she poured it not upon the ground, to cover it with dust;	For the blood she shed is still within her; she poured it out on the bare rock; she did not pour it on the ground to cover it with dust.
EZK	24	8	내가 그 피를 말간 반석 위에 두고 덮이지 않게 함은 분노를 발하여 보응하려 함이로라	That it might cause fury to come up to take vengeance; I have set her blood upon the top of a rock, that it should not be covered.	In order to stir up wrath and take vengeance, I have placed her blood on the bare rock, so that it would not be covered.’
EZK	24	9	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 화 있을진저 피를 흘린 성읍이여 내가 또 나무 무더기를 크게 하리라	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Woe to the bloody city! I will even make the pile for fire great.	Yes, this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Woe to the city of bloodshed! I, too, will pile the kindling high.
EZK	24	10	나무를 많이 쌓고 불을 피워 그 고기를 삶아 녹이고 국물을 졸이고 그 뼈를 태우고	Heap on wood, kindle the fire, consume the flesh, and spice it well, and let the bones be burned.	Pile on the logs and kindle the fire; cook the meat well and mix in the spices; let the bones be burned.
EZK	24	11	가마가 빈 후에는 숯불 위에 놓아 뜨겁게 하며 그 가마의 놋을 달궈서 그 속에 더러운 것을 녹게 하며 녹이 소멸하게 하라	Then set it empty upon the coals thereof, that the brass of it may be hot, and may burn, and that the filthiness of it may be molten in it, that the scum of it may be consumed.	Set the empty pot on its coals until it becomes hot and its copper glows. Then its impurity will melt within; its rust will be consumed.
EZK	24	12	이 성읍이 수고하므로 스스로 곤비하나 많은 녹이 그 속에서 벗어지지 아니하며 불에서도 없어지지 아니하는도다	She hath wearied herself with lies, and her great scum went not forth out of her: her scum shall be in the fire.	It has frustrated every effort; its thick rust has not been removed, even by the fire.
EZK	24	13	너의 더러운 중에 음란이 하나이라 내가 너를 정하게 하나 네가 정하여지지 아니하니 내가 네게 향한 분노를 풀기 전에는 네 더러움이 다시 정하여지지 아니하리라	In thy filthiness is lewdness: because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shalt not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee.	Because of the indecency of your uncleanness I tried to cleanse you, but you would not be purified from your filthiness. You will not be pure again until My wrath against you has subsided.
EZK	24	14	나 여호와가 말하였은즉 그 일이 이룰지라 내가 돌이키지도 아니하며 아끼지도 아니하며 뉘우치지도 아니하고 행하리니 그들이 네 모든 행위대로 너를 심문하리라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라 하셨다 하라	I the Lord have spoken it: it shall come to pass, and I will do it; I will not go back, neither will I spare, neither will I repent; according to thy ways, and according to thy doings, shall they judge thee, saith the Lord God.	I, the LORD, have spoken; the time is coming, and I will act. I will not refrain or show pity, nor will I relent. I will judge you according to your ways and deeds,’ declares the Lord GOD.”
EZK	24	15	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	Also the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	24	16	인자야 내가 네 눈에 기뻐하는 것을 한 번 쳐서 빼앗으리니 너는 슬퍼하거나 울거나 눈물을 흘리거나 하지 말며	Son of man, behold, I take away from thee the desire of thine eyes with a stroke: yet neither shalt thou mourn nor weep, neither shall thy tears run down.	“Son of man, behold, I am about to take away the desire of your eyes with a fatal blow. But you must not mourn or weep or let your tears flow.
EZK	24	17	죽은 자들을 위하여 슬퍼하지 말고 종용히 탄식하며 수건으로 머리를 동이고 발에 신을 신고 입술을 가리우지 말고 사람의 부의하는 식물을 먹지 말라 하신지라	Forbear to cry, make no mourning for the dead, bind the tire of thine head upon thee, and put on thy shoes upon thy feet, and cover not thy lips, and eat not the bread of men.	Groan quietly; do not mourn for the dead. Put on your turban and strap your sandals on your feet; do not cover your lips or eat the bread of mourners.”
EZK	24	18	내가 아침에 백성에게 고하였더니 저녁에 내 아내가 죽기로 아침에 내가 받은 명령대로 행하매	So I spake unto the people in the morning: and at even my wife died; and I did in the morning as I was commanded.	So I spoke to the people in the morning, and in the evening my wife died. And the next morning I did as I had been commanded.
EZK	24	19	백성이 내게 이르되 네가 행하는 이 일이 우리에게 무슨 상관이 되는지 너는 우리에게 고하지 아니하겠느냐 하므로	And the people said unto me, Wilt thou not tell us what these things are to us, that thou doest so?	Then the people asked me, “Won’t you tell us what these things you are doing mean to us?”
EZK	24	20	내가 그들에게 대답하기를 여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 가라사대	Then I answered them, The word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	So I answered them, “The word of the LORD came to me, saying:
EZK	24	21	너는 이스라엘 족속에게 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 내 성소는 너희 세력의 영광이요 너희 눈의 기쁨이요 너희 마음에 아낌이 되거니와 내가 더럽힐 것이며 너희의 버려둔 자녀를 칼에 엎드러지게 할지라	Speak unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I will profane my sanctuary, the excellency of your strength, the desire of your eyes, and that which your soul pitieth; and your sons and your daughters whom ye have left shall fall by the sword.	Tell the house of Israel that this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘I am about to desecrate My sanctuary, the pride of your power, the desire of your eyes, and the delight of your soul. And the sons and daughters you left behind will fall by the sword.’
EZK	24	22	너희가 에스겔의 행한 바와 같이 행하여 입술을 가리우지 아니하며 사람의 식물을 먹지 아니하며	And ye shall do as I have done: ye shall not cover your lips, nor eat the bread of men.	Then you will do as I have done: You will not cover your lips or eat the bread of mourners.
EZK	24	23	수건으로 머리를 동인 채, 발에 신을 신은 채로 두고 슬퍼하지도 아니하며 울지도 아니하되 죄악 중에 쇠패하여 피차 바라보고 탄식하리라	And your tires shall be upon your heads, and your shoes upon your feet: ye shall not mourn nor weep; but ye shall pine away for your iniquities, and mourn one toward another.	Your turbans will remain on your heads and your sandals on your feet. You will not mourn or weep, but you will waste away because of your sins, and you will groan among yourselves.
EZK	24	24	이와 같이 에스겔이 너희에게 표징이 되리니 그가 행한 대로 너희가 다 행할지라 이 일이 이루면 너희가 나를 주 여호와인 줄 알리라 하라 하셨느니라	Thus Ezekiel is unto you a sign: according to all that he hath done shall ye do: and when this cometh, ye shall know that I am the Lord God.	‘Thus Ezekiel will be a sign for you; you will do everything that he has done. When this happens, you will know that I am the Lord GOD.’
EZK	24	25	인자야 내가 그 힘과 그 즐거워하는 영광과 그 눈의 기뻐하는 것과 그 마음의 간절히 생각하는 자녀를 제하는 날	Also, thou son of man, shall it not be in the day when I take from them their strength, the joy of their glory, the desire of their eyes, and that whereupon they set their minds, their sons and their daughters,	And you, son of man, know that on the day I take away their stronghold, their pride and joy—the desire of their eyes which uplifted their souls—and their sons and daughters as well,
EZK	24	26	곧 그 날에 도피한 자가 네게 나아와서 네 귀에 그 일을 들리지 아니하겠느냐	That he that escapeth in that day shall come unto thee, to cause thee to hear it with thine ears?	on that day a fugitive will come and tell you the news.
EZK	24	27	그 날에 네 입이 열려서 도피한 자에게 말하고 다시는 잠잠하지 아니하리라 이와 같이 너는 그들에게 표징이 되고 그들은 내가 여호와인 줄 알리라	In that day shall thy mouth be opened to him which is escaped, and thou shalt speak, and be no more dumb: and thou shalt be a sign unto them; and they shall know that I am the Lord.	On that day your mouth will be opened to him who has escaped; you will speak and no longer be mute. So you will be a sign to them, and they will know that I am the LORD.”
EZK	25	1	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	25	2	인자야 암몬 족속을 향하여 그들을 쳐서 예언하라	Son of man, set thy face against the Ammonites, and prophesy against them;	“Son of man, set your face against the Ammonites and prophesy against them.
EZK	25	3	너는 암몬 족속에게 이르기를 너희는 주 여호와의 말씀을 들을지어다 주 여호와의 말씀에 내 성소를 더럽힐 때에 네가 그것을 대하여, 이스라엘 땅이 황무할 때에 네가 그것을 대하여, 유다 족속이 사로 잡힐 때에 네가 그들을 대하여 이르기를 아하 좋다 하였도다	And say unto the Ammonites, Hear the word of the Lord God; Thus saith the Lord God; Because thou saidst, Aha, against my sanctuary, when it was profaned; and against the land of Israel, when it was desolate; and against the house of Judah, when they went into captivity;	Tell the Ammonites to hear the word of the Lord GOD, for this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Because you exclaimed, “Aha!” when My sanctuary was profaned, when the land of Israel was laid waste, and when the house of Judah went into exile,
EZK	25	4	그러므로 내가 너를 동방 사람에게 기업으로 붙이리니 그들이 네 가운데 진을 치며 네 가운데 그 거처를 베풀며 네 실과를 먹으며 네 젖을 마실지라	Behold, therefore I will deliver thee to the men of the east for a possession, and they shall set their palaces in thee, and make their dwellings in thee: they shall eat thy fruit, and they shall drink thy milk.	therefore I will indeed give you as a possession to the people of the East. They will set up their camps and pitch their tents among you. They will eat your fruit and drink your milk.
EZK	25	5	내가 랍바로 약대의 우리를 만들며 암몬 족속의 땅으로 양무리의 눕는 곳을 삼은즉 너희가 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	And I will make Rabbah a stable for camels, and the Ammonites a couchingplace for flocks: and ye shall know that I am the Lord.	I will make Rabbah a pasture for camels, and Ammon a resting place for sheep. Then you will know that I am the LORD.’
EZK	25	6	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 네가 이스라엘 땅을 대하여 손뼉을 치며 발을 구르며 마음을 다하여 멸시하며 즐거워하였나니	For thus saith the Lord God; Because thou hast clapped thine hands, and stamped with the feet, and rejoiced in heart with all thy despite against the land of Israel;	For this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Because you clapped your hands and stomped your feet and rejoiced over the land of Israel with a heart full of contempt,
EZK	25	7	그런즉 내가 손을 네 위에 펴서 너를 다른 민족에게 붙여 노략을 당하게 하며 너를 만민 중에 끊어버리며 너를 열국 중에서 패망케 하여 멸하리니 네가 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라 하셨다 하라	Behold, therefore I will stretch out mine hand upon thee, and will deliver thee for a spoil to the heathen; and I will cut thee off from the people, and I will cause thee to perish out of the countries: I will destroy thee; and thou shalt know that I am the Lord.	therefore I will indeed stretch out My hand against you and give you as plunder to the nations. I will cut you off from the peoples and exterminate you from the countries. I will destroy you, and you will know that I am the LORD.’
EZK	25	8	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 모압과 세일이 이르기를 유다 족속은 모든 이방과 일반이라 하도다	Thus saith the Lord God; Because that Moab and Seir do say, Behold, the house of Judah is like unto all the heathen;	This is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Because Moab and Seir said, “Look, the house of Judah is like all the other nations,”
EZK	25	9	그러므로 내가 모압의 한편 곧 그 나라 변경에 있는 영화로운 성읍들 벧여시못과 바알므온과 기랴다임을 열고	Therefore, behold, I will open the side of Moab from the cities, from his cities which are on his frontiers, the glory of the country, Beth–jeshimoth, Baal–meon, and Kiriathaim,	therefore I will indeed expose the flank of Moab beginning with its frontier cities—Beth-jeshimoth, Baal-meon, and Kiriathaim—the glory of the land.
EZK	25	10	암몬 족속 일반으로 동방 사람에게 붙여 기업을 삼게 할 것이라 암몬 족속으로 다시는 이방 가운데서 기억되지 아니하게 하려니와	Unto the men of the east with the Ammonites, and will give them in possession, that the Ammonites may not be remembered among the nations.	I will give it along with the Ammonites as a possession to the people of the East, so that the Ammonites will no longer be remembered among the nations.
EZK	25	11	내가 모압에 벌을 내리리니 그들이 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	And I will execute judgments upon Moab; and they shall know that I am the Lord.	So I will execute judgments on Moab, and they will know that I am the LORD.’
EZK	25	12	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 에돔이 유다 족속을 쳐서 원수를 갚았고 원수를 갚음으로 심히 범죄하였도다	Thus saith the Lord God; Because that Edom hath dealt against the house of Judah by taking vengeance, and hath greatly offended, and revenged himself upon them;	This is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Because Edom acted vengefully against the house of Judah, and in so doing incurred grievous guilt,
EZK	25	13	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 내 손을 에돔 위에 펴서 사람과 짐승을 그 가운데서 끊어 데만에서부터 황무하게 하리니 드단까지 칼에 엎드러지리라	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; I will also stretch out mine hand upon Edom, and will cut off man and beast from it; and I will make it desolate from Teman; and they of Dedan shall fall by the sword.	therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: I will stretch out My hand against Edom and cut off from it both man and beast. I will make it a wasteland, and from Teman to Dedan they will fall by the sword.
EZK	25	14	내가 내 백성 이스라엘의 손을 빙자하여 내 원수를 에돔에게 갚으리니 그들이 내 노와 분을 따라 에돔에 행한즉 내가 원수를 갚음인 줄을 에돔이 알리라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	And I will lay my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people Israel: and they shall do in Edom according to mine anger and according to my fury; and they shall know my vengeance, saith the Lord God.	I will take My vengeance on Edom by the hand of My people Israel, and they will deal with Edom according to My anger and wrath. Then they will know My vengeance, declares the Lord GOD.’
EZK	25	15	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 블레셋 사람이 옛날부터 미워하여 멸시하는 마음으로 원수를 갚아 진멸코자 하였도다	Thus saith the Lord God; Because the Philistines have dealt by revenge, and have taken vengeance with a despiteful heart, to destroy it for the old hatred;	This is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Because the Philistines acted in vengeance, taking vengeance with malice of soul to destroy Judah with ancient hostility,
EZK	25	16	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 블레셋 사람 위에 손을 펴서 그렛 사람을 끊으며 해변에 남은 자를 진멸하되	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I will stretch out mine hand upon the Philistines, and I will cut off the Cherethims, and destroy the remnant of the sea coast.	therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: Behold, I will stretch out My hand against the Philistines, and I will cut off the Cherethites and destroy the remnant along the coast.
EZK	25	17	분노의 책벌로 내 원수를 그들에게 크게 갚으리라 내가 그들에게 원수를 갚은즉 그들이 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라 하시니라	And I will execute great vengeance upon them with furious rebukes; and they shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall lay my vengeance upon them.	I will execute great vengeance against them with furious reproof. Then they will know that I am the LORD, when I lay My vengeance upon them.’”
EZK	26	1	제십일년 어느달 초 일일에 여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 가라사대	And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first day of the month, that the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	In the eleventh month of the twelfth year, on the first day of the month, the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	26	2	인자야 두로가 예루살렘을 쳐서 이르기를 아하 좋다 만민의 문이 깨어져서 내게로 돌아왔도다 그가 황무하였으니 내가 충만함을 얻으리라 하였도다	Son of man, because that Tyrus hath said against Jerusalem, Aha, she is broken that was the gates of the people: she is turned unto me: I shall be replenished, now she is laid waste:	“Son of man, because Tyre has said of Jerusalem, ‘Aha! The gate to the nations is broken; it has swung open to me; now that she lies in ruins I will be filled,’
EZK	26	3	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 두로야 내가 너를 대적하여 바다가 그 파도로 흉용케 함 같이 열국으로 와서 너를 치게 하리니	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I am against thee, O Tyrus, and will cause many nations to come up against thee, as the sea causeth his waves to come up.	therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Behold, O Tyre, I am against you, and I will raise up many nations against you, as the sea brings up its waves.
EZK	26	4	그들이 두로의 성벽을 훼파하며 그 망대를 헐 것이요 나도 티끌을 그 위에서 쓸어 버려서 말간 반석이 되게 하며	And they shall destroy the walls of Tyrus, and break down her towers: I will also scrape her dust from her, and make her like the top of a rock.	They will destroy the walls of Tyre and demolish her towers. I will scrape the soil from her and make her a bare rock.
EZK	26	5	바다 가운데 그물 치는 곳이 되게 하리니 내가 말하였음이니라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라 그가 이방의 노략거리가 될 것이요	It shall be a place for the spreading of nets in the midst of the sea: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord God: and it shall become a spoil to the nations.	She will become a place to spread nets in the sea, for I have spoken, declares the Lord GOD. She will become plunder for the nations,
EZK	26	6	들에 있는 그의 딸들은 칼에 죽으리니 그들이 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	And her daughters which are in the field shall be slain by the sword; and they shall know that I am the Lord.	and the villages on her mainland will be slain by the sword. Then they will know that I am the LORD.’
EZK	26	7	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 열왕의 왕 곧 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살로 북방에서 말과 병거와 기병과 군대와 백성의 큰 무리를 거느리고 와서 두로를 치게 할 때에	For thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I will bring upon Tyrus Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, a king of kings, from the north, with horses, and with chariots, and with horsemen, and companies, and much people.	For this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Behold, I will bring against Tyre from the north Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, king of kings, with horses and chariots, with cavalry and a great company of troops.
EZK	26	8	그가 들에 있는 너의 딸들을 칼로 죽이고 너를 치려고 운제를 세우며 토성을 쌓으며 방패를 갖출 것이며	He shall slay with the sword thy daughters in the field: and he shall make a fort against thee, and cast a mount against thee, and lift up the buckler against thee.	He will slaughter the villages of your mainland with the sword; he will set up siege works against you, build a ramp to your walls, and raise his shields against you.
EZK	26	9	공성퇴를 베풀어 네 성을 치며 도끼로 망대를 찍을 것이며	And he shall set engines of war against thy walls, and with his axes he shall break down thy towers.	He will direct the blows of his battering rams against your walls and tear down your towers with his axes.
EZK	26	10	말이 많으므로 그 티끌이 너를 가리울 것이며 사람이 훼파된 성 구멍으로 들어가는 것 같이 그가 네 성문으로 들어갈 때에 그 기병과 수레와 병거의 소리로 인하여 네 성곽이 진동할 것이며	By reason of the abundance of his horses their dust shall cover thee: thy walls shall shake at the noise of the horsemen, and of the wheels, and of the chariots, when he shall enter into thy gates, as men enter into a city wherein is made a breach.	His multitude of horses will cover you in their dust. When he enters your gates as an army entering a breached city, your walls will shake from the noise of cavalry, wagons, and chariots.
EZK	26	11	그가 그 말굽으로 네 모든 거리를 밟을 것이며 칼로 네 백성을 죽일 것이며 네 견고한 석상을 땅에 엎드러뜨릴 것이며	With the hoofs of his horses shall he tread down all thy streets: he shall slay thy people by the sword, and thy strong garrisons shall go down to the ground.	The hooves of his horses will trample all your streets. He will slaughter your people with the sword, and your mighty pillars will fall to the ground.
EZK	26	12	네 재물을 빼앗을 것이며 네 무역한 것을 노략할 것이며 네 성을 헐 것이며 네 기뻐하는 집을 무너뜨릴 것이며 또 네 돌들과 네 재목과 네 흙을 다 물 가운데 던질 것이라	And they shall make a spoil of thy riches, and make a prey of thy merchandise: and they shall break down thy walls, and destroy thy pleasant houses: and they shall lay thy stones and thy timber and thy dust in the midst of the water.	They will plunder your wealth and pillage your merchandise. They will demolish your walls, tear down your beautiful homes, and throw your stones and timber and soil into the water.
EZK	26	13	내가 네 노래 소리로 그치게 하며 네 수금 소리로 다시 들리지 않게 하고	And I will cause the noise of thy songs to cease; and the sound of thy harps shall be no more heard.	So I will silence the sound of your songs, and the music of your lyres will no longer be heard.
EZK	26	14	너로 말간 반석이 되게 한즉 네가 그물 말리는 곳이 되고 다시는 건축되지 못하리니 나 여호와가 말하였음이니라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	And I will make thee like the top of a rock: thou shalt be a place to spread nets upon; thou shalt be built no more: for I the Lord have spoken it, saith the Lord God.	I will make you a bare rock, and you will become a place to spread the fishing nets. You will never be rebuilt, for I, the LORD, have spoken, declares the Lord GOD.’
EZK	26	15	주 여호와께서 두로를 대하여 말씀하시되 너의 엎드러지는 소리에 모든 섬이 진동하지 아니하겠느냐 곧 너희 중에 상한 자가 부르짖으며 살륙을 당할 때에라	Thus saith the Lord God to Tyrus; Shall not the isles shake at the sound of thy fall, when the wounded cry, when the slaughter is made in the midst of thee?	This is what the Lord GOD says to Tyre: ‘Will not the coastlands quake at the sound of your downfall, when the wounded groan at the slaughter in your midst?
EZK	26	16	그 때에 바다의 모든 왕이 그 보좌에서 내려 조복을 벗으며 수 놓은 옷을 버리고 떨림을 입듯하고 땅에 앉아서 너로 인하여 무시로 떨며 놀랄 것이며	Then all the princes of the sea shall come down from their thrones, and lay away their robes, and put off their broidered garments: they shall clothe themselves with trembling; they shall sit upon the ground, and shall tremble at every moment, and be astonished at thee.	All the princes of the sea will descend from their thrones, remove their robes, and strip off their embroidered garments. Clothed with terror, they will sit on the ground, trembling every moment, appalled over you.
EZK	26	17	그들이 너를 위하여 애가를 불러 이르기를 항해자의 거한 유명한 성이여 너와 너의 거민이 바다 가운데 있어 견고하였었도다 해변의 모든 거민을 두렵게 하였더니 어찌 그리 멸망하였는고	And they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and say to thee, How art thou destroyed, that wast inhabited of seafaring men, the renowned city, which wast strong in the sea, she and her inhabitants, which cause their terror to be on all that haunt it!	Then they will lament for you, saying, “How you have perished, O city of renown inhabited by seafaring men— she who was powerful on the sea, along with her people, who imposed terror on all peoples!
EZK	26	18	너의 무너지는 그 날에 섬들이 진동할 것임이여 바다 가운데 섬들이 네 결국을 보고 놀라리로다 하리라	Now shall the isles tremble in the day of thy fall; yea, the isles that are in the sea shall be troubled at thy departure.	Now the coastlands tremble on the day of your downfall; the islands in the sea are dismayed by your demise.”’
EZK	26	19	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 너로 거민이 없는 성과 같이 황무한 성이 되게 하고 깊은 바다로 네 위에 오르게 하며 큰 물로 너를 덮게 할 때에	For thus saith the Lord God; When I shall make thee a desolate city, like the cities that are not inhabited; when I shall bring up the deep upon thee, and great waters shall cover thee;	For this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘When I make you a desolate city like other deserted cities, and when I raise up the deep against you so that the mighty waters cover you,
EZK	26	20	내가 너로 구덩이에 내려가는 자와 함께 내려가서 옛적 사람에게로 나아가게 하고 너로 그 구덩이에 내려간 자와 함께 땅 깊은 곳 예로부터 황적한 곳에 거하게 할지라 네가 다시는 사람이 거하는 곳이 되지 못하리니 산 자의 땅에서 영광을 얻지 못하리라	When I shall bring thee down with them that descend into the pit, with the people of old time, and shall set thee in the low parts of the earth, in places desolate of old, with them that go down to the pit, that thou be not inhabited; and I shall set glory in the land of the living;	then I will bring you down with those who descend to the Pit, to the people of antiquity. I will make you dwell in the earth below like the ancient ruins, with those who descend to the Pit, so that you will no longer be inhabited or set in splendor in the land of the living.
EZK	26	21	내가 너를 패망케 하여 다시 있지 못하게 하리니 사람이 비록 너를 찾으나 다시는 영원히 만나지 못하리라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	I will make thee a terror, and thou shalt be no more: though thou be sought for, yet shalt thou never be found again, saith the Lord God.	I will make you an object of horror, and you will be no more. You will be sought, but will never be found,’ declares the Lord GOD.”
EZK	27	1	여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 가라사대	The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	27	2	인자야 너는 두로를 위하여 애가를 지으라	Now, thou son of man, take up a lamentation for Tyrus;	“Now you, son of man, take up a lament for Tyre.
EZK	27	3	너는 두로를 향하여 이르기를 바다 어귀에 거하여 여러 섬 백성과 통상하는 자여 주 여호와의 말씀에 두로야 네가 말하기를 나는 온전히 아름답다 하였도다	And say unto Tyrus, O thou that art situate at the entry of the sea, which art a merchant of the people for many isles, Thus saith the Lord God; O Tyrus, thou hast said, I am of perfect beauty.	Tell Tyre, who dwells at the gateway to the sea, merchant of the peoples on many coasts, that this is what the Lord GOD says: You have said, O Tyre, ‘I am perfect in beauty.’
EZK	27	4	네 지경이 바다 가운데 있음이여 너를 지은 자가 네 아름다움을 온전케 하였도다	Thy borders are in the midst of the seas, thy builders have perfected thy beauty.	Your borders are in the heart of the seas; your builders perfected your beauty.
EZK	27	5	스닐의 잣나무로 네 판자를 만들었음이여 너를 위하여 레바논 백향목을 가져 돛대를 만들었도다	They have made all thy ship boards of fir trees of Senir: they have taken cedars from Lebanon to make masts for thee.	They constructed all your planking with cypress from Senir. They took a cedar from Lebanon to make a mast for you.
EZK	27	6	바산 상수리나무로 네 노를 만들었음이여 깃딤 섬 황양목에 상아로 꾸며 갑판을 만들었도다	Of the oaks of Bashan have they made thine oars; the company of the Ashurites have made thy benches of ivory, brought out of the isles of Chittim.	Of oaks from Bashan they made your oars; of wood from the coasts of Cyprus they made your deck, inlaid with ivory.
EZK	27	7	애굽의 수 놓은 가는 베로 돛을 만들어 기를 삼았음이여 엘리사 섬의 청색 자색 베로 차일을 만들었도다	Fine linen with broidered work from Egypt was that which thou spreadest forth to be thy sail; blue and purple from the isles of Elishah was that which covered thee.	Of embroidered fine linen from Egypt they made your sail, which served as your banner. Of blue and purple from the coasts of Elishah they made your awning.
EZK	27	8	시돈과 아르왓 거민들이 네 사공이 되었음이여 두로야 네 가운데 있는 박사가 네 선장이 되었도다	The inhabitants of Zidon and Arvad were thy mariners: thy wise men, O Tyrus, that were in thee, were thy pilots.	The men of Sidon and Arvad were your oarsmen. Your men of skill, O Tyre, were there as your captains.
EZK	27	9	그발의 노인과 박사들이 네 가운데서 배의 틈을 막는 자가 되었음이여 바다의 모든 배와 그 사공들은 네 가운데서 무역하였도다	The ancients of Gebal and the wise men thereof were in thee thy calkers: all the ships of the sea with their mariners were in thee to occupy thy merchandise.	The elders of Gebal were aboard as shipwrights, repairing your leaks. All the ships of the sea and their sailors came alongside to barter for your merchandise.
EZK	27	10	바사와 룻과 붓이 네 군대 가운데서 병정이 되었음이여 네 가운데서 방패와 투구를 달아 네 영광을 나타내었도다	They of Persia and of Lud and of Phut were in thine army, thy men of war: they hanged the shield and helmet in thee; they set forth thy comeliness.	Men of Persia, Lydia, and Put served as warriors in your army. They hung their shields and helmets on your walls; they gave you splendor.
EZK	27	11	아르왓 사람과 네 군대는 네 사면 성 위에 있었고 용사들은 네 여러 망대에 있었음이여 네 사면 성 위에 방패를 달아 네 아름다움을 온전케 하였도다	The men of Arvad with thine army were upon thy walls round about, and the Gammadims were in thy towers: they hanged their shields upon thy walls round about; they have made thy beauty perfect.	Men of Arvad and Helech manned your walls all around, and the men of Gammad were in your towers. They hung their shields around your walls; they perfected your beauty.
EZK	27	12	다시스는 각종 보화가 풍부하므로 너와 통상하였음이여 은과 철과 상납과 납을 가지고 네 물품을 무역하였도다	Tarshish was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of all kind of riches; with silver, iron, tin, and lead, they traded in thy fairs.	Tarshish was your merchant because of your great wealth of goods; they exchanged silver, iron, tin, and lead for your wares.
EZK	27	13	야완과 두발과 메섹은 네 장사가 되었음이여 사람과 놋그릇을 가지고 네 상품을 무역하였도다	Javan, Tubal, and Meshech, they were thy merchants: they traded the persons of men and vessels of brass in thy market.	Javan, Tubal, and Meshech were your merchants. They exchanged slaves and bronze utensils for your merchandise.
EZK	27	14	도갈마 족속은 말과 전마와 노새를 가지고 네 물품을 무역하며	They of the house of Togarmah traded in thy fairs with horses and horsemen and mules.	The men of Beth-togarmah exchanged horses, war horses, and mules for your wares.
EZK	27	15	드단 사람은 네 장사가 되었음이여 여러 섬이 너와 통상하여 상아와 오목을 가져 네 물품을 무역하였도다	The men of Dedan were thy merchants; many isles were the merchandise of thine hand: they brought thee for a present horns of ivory and ebony.	The men of Dedan were your clients; many coastlands were your market; they paid you with ivory tusks and ebony.
EZK	27	16	너의 제조품이 풍부하므로 아람은 너와 통상하였음이여 남보석과 자색 베와 수 놓은 것과 가는 베와 산호와 홍보석을 가지고 네 물품을 무역하였도다	Syria was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of the wares of thy making: they occupied in thy fairs with emeralds, purple, and broidered work, and fine linen, and coral, and agate.	Aram was your customer because of your many products; they exchanged turquoise, purple, embroidered work, fine linen, coral, and rubies for your wares.
EZK	27	17	유다와 이스라엘 땅 사람이 네 장사가 되었음이여 민닛 밀과 과자와 꿀과 기름과 유향을 가지고 네 물품을 무역하였도다	Judah, and the land of Israel, they were thy merchants: they traded in thy market wheat of Minnith, and Pannag, and honey, and oil, and balm.	Judah and the land of Israel traded with you; they exchanged wheat from Minnith, cakes and honey, oil and balm for your merchandise.
EZK	27	18	너의 제조품이 많고 각종 보화가 풍부하므로 다메섹이 너와 통상하였음이여 헬본 포도주와 흰 양털을 가지고 너와 무역하였도다	Damascus was thy merchant in the multitude of the wares of thy making, for the multitude of all riches; in the wine of Helbon, and white wool.	Because of your many products and your great wealth of goods, Damascus traded with you wine from Helbon, wool from Zahar,
EZK	27	19	워단과 야완은 길쌈하는 실로 네 물품을 무역하였음이여 백철과 육계와 창포가 네 상품 중에 있었도다	Dan also and Javan going to and fro occupied in thy fairs: bright iron, cassia, and calamus, were in thy market.	and casks of wine from Izal for your wares. Wrought iron, cassia, and sweet cane were exchanged for your merchandise.
EZK	27	20	드단은 네 장사가 되었음이여 탈 때 까는 담으로 너와 무역하였도다	Dedan was thy merchant in precious clothes for chariots.	Dedan was your merchant in saddlecloths for riding.
EZK	27	21	아라비아와 게달의 모든 방백은 네 수하에 상고가 되어 어린 양과 수양과 염소들, 그것으로 너와 무역하였도다	Arabia, and all the princes of Kedar, they occupied with thee in lambs, and rams, and goats: in these were they thy merchants.	Arabia and all the princes of Kedar were your customers, trading in lambs, rams, and goats.
EZK	27	22	스바와 라아마의 장사들도 너의 장사들이 됨이여 각종 상등 향재료와 각종 보석과 황금으로 네 물품을 무역하였도다	The merchants of Sheba and Raamah, they were thy merchants: they occupied in thy fairs with chief of all spices, and with all precious stones, and gold.	The merchants of Sheba and Raamah traded with you; for your wares they exchanged gold, the finest of all spices, and precious stones.
EZK	27	23	하란과 간네와 에덴과 스바와 앗수르와 길맛의 장사들도 너의 장사들이라	Haran, and Canneh, and Eden, the merchants of Sheba, Asshur, and Chilmad, were thy merchants.	Haran, Canneh, and Eden traded with you, and so did the merchants of Sheba, Asshur, and Chilmad.
EZK	27	24	이들이 아름다운 물화 곧 청색 옷과 수놓은 물품과 빛난 옷을 백향목 상자에 담고 노끈으로 묶어 가지고 너와 통상하여 네 물품을 무역하였도다	These were thy merchants in all sorts of things, in blue clothes, and broidered work, and in chests of rich apparel, bound with cords, and made of cedar, among thy merchandise.	In your marketplace they traded with you fine garments of blue, embroidered work, and multicolored rugs with cords tightly twisted and knotted.
EZK	27	25	다시스의 배는 떼를 지어 네 물화를 실었음이여 네가 바다 중심에서 풍부하여 영화가 극하였도다	The ships of Tarshish did sing of thee in thy market: and thou wast replenished, and made very glorious in the midst of the seas.	The ships of Tarshish carried your merchandise. And you were filled with heavy cargo in the heart of the sea.
EZK	27	26	네 사공이 너를 인도하여 큰 물에 이름이여 동풍이 바다 중심에서 너를 파하도다	Thy rowers have brought thee into great waters: the east wind hath broken thee in the midst of the seas.	Your oarsmen have brought you onto the high seas, but the east wind will shatter you in the heart of the sea.
EZK	27	27	네 재물과 상품과 무역한 물건과 네 사공과 선장과 네 배의 틈을 막는 자와 네 장사와 네 가운데 있는 모든 용사와 네 가운데 있는 모든 무리가 네 패망하는 날에 다 바다 중심에 빠질 것임이여	Thy riches, and thy fairs, thy merchandise, thy mariners, and thy pilots, thy calkers, and the occupiers of thy merchandise, and all thy men of war, that are in thee, and in all thy company which is in the midst of thee, shall fall into the midst of the seas in the day of thy ruin.	Your wealth, wares, and merchandise, your sailors, captains, and shipwrights, your merchants and all the warriors within you, with all the other people on board, will sink into the heart of the sea on the day of your downfall.
EZK	27	28	네 선장의 부르짖는 소리에 물결이 흔들리리로다	The suburbs shall shake at the sound of the cry of thy pilots.	The countryside will shake when your sailors cry out.
EZK	27	29	무릇 노를 잡은 자와 사공과 바다의 선장들이 다 배에 내려 언덕에 서서	And all that handle the oar, the mariners, and all the pilots of the sea, shall come down from their ships, they shall stand upon the land;	All who handle the oars will abandon their ships. The sailors and all the captains of the sea will stand on the shore.
EZK	27	30	너를 위하여 크게 소리질러 통곡하고 티끌을 머리에 무릎쓰며 재 가운데 굶이여	And shall cause their voice to be heard against thee, and shall cry bitterly, and shall cast up dust upon their heads, they shall wallow themselves in the ashes:	They will raise their voices for you and cry out bitterly. They will throw dust on their heads and roll in ashes.
EZK	27	31	그들이 다 너를 위하여 머리털을 밀고 굵은 베로 띠를 띠고 마음이 아프게 슬피 통곡하리로다	And they shall make themselves utterly bald for thee, and gird them with sackcloth, and they shall weep for thee with bitterness of heart and bitter wailing.	They will shave their heads for you and wrap themselves in sackcloth. They will weep over you with anguish of soul and bitter mourning.
EZK	27	32	그들이 통곡할 때에 너를 위하여 애가를 불러 조상하는 말씀이여 두로 같이 바다 가운데서 적막한 자 누구인고	And in their wailing they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and lament over thee, saying, What city is like Tyrus, like the destroyed in the midst of the sea?	As they wail and mourn over you, they will take up a lament for you: ‘Who was ever like Tyre, silenced in the middle of the sea?
EZK	27	33	네 물품을 바다로 실어 낼 때에 네가 여러 백성을 풍족하게 하였음이여 네 재물과 무역품이 많으므로 세상 열왕을 풍부케 하였었도다	When thy wares went forth out of the seas, thou filledst many people; thou didst enrich the kings of the earth with the multitude of thy riches and of thy merchandise.	When your wares went out to sea, you satisfied many nations. You enriched the kings of the earth with your abundant wealth and merchandise.
EZK	27	34	네가 바다 깊은데서 파선한 때에 네 무역품과 네 승객이 다 빠졌음이여	In the time when thou shalt be broken by the seas in the depths of the waters thy merchandise and all thy company in the midst of thee shall fall.	Now you are shattered by the seas in the depths of the waters; your merchandise and the people among you have gone down with you.
EZK	27	35	섬의 거민들이 너를 인하여 놀라고 열왕이 심히 두려워하여 얼굴에 근심이 나타나도다	All the inhabitants of the isles shall be astonished at thee, and their kings shall be sore afraid, they shall be troubled in their countenance.	All the people of the coastlands are appalled over you. Their kings shudder with fear; their faces are contorted.
EZK	27	36	열국의 상고가 다 너를 비웃음이여 네가 경계거리가 되고 네가 영원히 다시 있지 못하리라 하리로다 하셨다 하라	The merchants among the people shall hiss at thee; thou shalt be a terror, and never shalt be any more.	Those who trade among the nations hiss at you; you have come to a horrible end and will be no more.’”
EZK	28	1	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying,	And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	28	2	인자야 너는 두로 왕에게 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 네 마음이 교만하여 말하기를 나는 신이라 내가 하나님의 자리 곧 바다 중심에 앉았다 하도다 네 마음이 하나님의 마음 같은 체 할지라도 너는 사람이요 신이 아니어늘	Son of man, say unto the prince of Tyrus, Thus saith the Lord God; Because thine heart is lifted up, and thou hast said, I am a God, I sit in the seat of God, in the midst of the seas; yet thou art a man, and not God, though thou set thine heart as the heart of God:	“Son of man, tell the ruler of Tyre that this is what the Lord GOD says: Your heart is proud, and you have said, ‘I am a god; I sit in the seat of gods in the heart of the sea.’ Yet you are a man and not a god, though you have regarded your heart as that of a god.
EZK	28	3	네가 다니엘보다 지혜로워서 은밀한 것을 깨닫지 못할 것이 없다 하고	Behold, thou art wiser than Daniel; there is no secret that they can hide from thee:	Behold, you are wiser than Daniel; no secret is hidden from you!
EZK	28	4	네 지혜와 총명으로 재물을 얻었으며 금, 은을 곳간에 저축하였으며	With thy wisdom and with thine understanding thou hast gotten thee riches, and hast gotten gold and silver into thy treasures:	By your wisdom and understanding you have gained your wealth and amassed gold and silver for your treasuries.
EZK	28	5	네 큰 지혜와 장사함으로 재물을 더하고 그 재물로 인하여 네 마음이 교만하였도다	By thy great wisdom and by thy traffick hast thou increased thy riches, and thine heart is lifted up because of thy riches:	By your great skill in trading you have increased your wealth, but your heart has grown proud because of it.
EZK	28	6	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 네 마음이 하나님의 마음 같은 체 하였으니	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Because thou hast set thine heart as the heart of God;	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: Because you regard your heart as the heart of a god,
EZK	28	7	그런즉 내가 외인 곧 열국의 강포한 자를 거느리고 와서 너를 치리니 그들이 칼을 빼어 네 지혜의 아름다운 것을 치며 네 영화를 더럽히며	Behold, therefore I will bring strangers upon thee, the terrible of the nations: and they shall draw their swords against the beauty of thy wisdom, and they shall defile thy brightness.	behold, I will bring foreigners against you, the most ruthless of nations. They will draw their swords against the beauty of your wisdom and will defile your splendor.
EZK	28	8	또 너를 구덩이에 빠뜨려서 너로 바다 가운데서 살륙을 당한 자의 죽음 같이 바다 중심에서 죽게 할지라	They shall bring thee down to the pit, and thou shalt die the deaths of them that are slain in the midst of the seas.	They will bring you down to the Pit, and you will die a violent death in the heart of the seas.
EZK	28	9	너를 살륙하는 자 앞에서 네가 그래도 말하기를 내가 하나님이라 하겠느냐 너를 치는 자의 수중에서 사람뿐이요 신이 아니라	Wilt thou yet say before him that slayeth thee, I am God? but thou shalt be a man, and no God, in the hand of him that slayeth thee.	Will you still say, ‘I am a god,’ in the presence of those who slay you? You will be only a man, not a god, in the hands of those who wound you.
EZK	28	10	네가 외인의 손에서 죽기를 할례 받지 않은 자의 죽음 같이 하리니 내가 말하였음이니라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라 하셨다 하라	Thou shalt die the deaths of the uncircumcised by the hand of strangers: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord God.	You will die the death of the uncircumcised at the hands of foreigners. For I have spoken, declares the Lord GOD.”
EZK	28	11	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	Again the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	28	12	인자야 두로 왕을 위하여 애가를 지어 그에게 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 너는 완전한 인이었고 지혜가 충족하며 온전히 아름다왔도다	Son of man, take up a lamentation upon the king of Tyrus, and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord God; Thou sealest up the sum, full of wisdom, and perfect in beauty.	“Son of man, take up a lament for the king of Tyre and tell him that this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘You were the seal of perfection, full of wisdom and perfect in beauty.
EZK	28	13	네가 옛적에 하나님의 동산 에덴에 있어서 각종 보석 곧 홍보석과 황보석과 금강석과 황옥과 홍마노와 창옥과 청보석과 남보석과 홍옥과 황금으로 단장하였었음이여 네가 지음을 받던 날에 너를 위하여 소고와 비파가 예비되었었도다	Thou hast been in Eden the garden of God; every precious stone was thy covering, the sardius, topaz, and the diamond, the beryl, the onyx, and the jasper, the sapphire, the emerald, and the carbuncle, and gold: the workmanship of thy tabrets and of thy pipes was prepared in thee in the day that thou wast created.	You were in Eden, the garden of God. Every kind of precious stone adorned you: ruby, topaz, and diamond, beryl, onyx, and jasper, sapphire, turquoise, and emerald. Your mountings and settings were crafted in gold, prepared on the day of your creation.
EZK	28	14	너는 기름 부음을 받은 덮는 그룹임이여 내가 너를 세우매 네가 하나님의 성산에 있어서 화광석 사이에 왕래하였었도다	Thou art the anointed cherub that covereth; and I have set thee so: thou wast upon the holy mountain of God; thou hast walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire.	You were anointed as a guardian cherub, for I had ordained you. You were on the holy mountain of God; you walked among the fiery stones.
EZK	28	15	네가 지음을 받던 날로부터 네 모든 길에 완전하더니 마침내 불의가 드러났도다	Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast created, till iniquity was found in thee.	From the day you were created you were blameless in your ways— until wickedness was found in you.
EZK	28	16	네 무역이 풍성하므로 네 가운데 강포가 가득하여 네가 범죄하였도다 너 덮는 그룹아 그러므로 내가 너를 더럽게 여겨 하나님의 산에서 쫓아 내었고 화광석 사이에서 멸하였도다	By the multitude of thy merchandise they have filled the midst of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned: therefore I will cast thee as profane out of the mountain of God: and I will destroy thee, O covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire.	By the vastness of your trade, you were filled with violence, and you sinned. So I drove you in disgrace from the mountain of God, and I banished you, O guardian cherub, from among the fiery stones.
EZK	28	17	네가 아름다우므로 마음이 교만하였으며 네가 영화로우므로 네 지혜를 더럽혔음이여 내가 너를 땅에 던져 열왕 앞에 두어 그들의 구경거리가 되게 하였도다	Thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty, thou hast corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy brightness: I will cast thee to the ground, I will lay thee before kings, that they may behold thee.	Your heart grew proud of your beauty; you corrupted your wisdom because of your splendor; so I cast you to the earth; I made you a spectacle before kings.
EZK	28	18	네가 죄악이 많고 무역이 불의하므로 네 모든 성소를 더럽혔음이여 내가 네 가운데서 불을 내어 너를 사르게 하고 너를 목도하는 모든 자 앞에서 너로 땅 위에 재가 되게 하였도다	Thou hast defiled thy sanctuaries by the multitude of thine iniquities, by the iniquity of thy traffick; therefore will I bring forth a fire from the midst of thee, it shall devour thee, and I will bring thee to ashes upon the earth in the sight of all them that behold thee.	By the multitude of your iniquities and the dishonesty of your trading you have profaned your sanctuaries. So I made fire come from within you, and it consumed you. I reduced you to ashes on the ground in the eyes of all who saw you.
EZK	28	19	만민 중에 너를 아는 자가 너로 인하여 다 놀랄 것임이여 네가 경계거리가 되고 네가 영원히 다시 있지 못하리로다 하셨다 하라	All they that know thee among the people shall be astonished at thee: thou shalt be a terror, and never shalt thou be any more.	All the nations who know you are appalled over you. You have come to a horrible end and will be no more.’”
EZK	28	20	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	28	21	인자야 너는 낯을 시돈으로 향하고 그를 쳐서 예언하라	Son of man, set thy face against Zidon, and prophesy against it,	“Son of man, set your face against Sidon and prophesy against her.
EZK	28	22	너는 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 시돈아 내가 너를 대적하나니 네 가운데서 내 영광이 나타나리라 하셨다 하라 내가 그 가운데서 국문을 행하여 내 거룩함을 나타낼 때에 무리가 나를 여호와인 줄 알지라	And say, Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I am against thee, O Zidon; and I will be glorified in the midst of thee: and they shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall have executed judgments in her, and shall be sanctified in her.	And you are to declare that this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Behold, I am against you, O Sidon, and I will be glorified within you. They will know that I am the LORD when I execute judgments against her and demonstrate My holiness through her.
EZK	28	23	내가 그에게 염병을 보내며 그의 거리에 피가 흐르게 하리니 사방에서 오는 칼에 상한 자가 그 가운데 엎드러질 것인즉 무리가 나를 여호와인 줄 알겠고	For I will send into her pestilence, and blood into her streets; and the wounded shall be judged in the midst of her by the sword upon her on every side; and they shall know that I am the Lord.	I will send a plague against her and shed blood in her streets; the slain will fall within her, while the sword is against her on every side. Then they will know that I am the LORD.
EZK	28	24	이스라엘 족속에게는 그 사면에서 그들을 멸시하는 자 중에 찌르는 가시와 아프게 하는 가시가 다시는 없으리니 그들이 나를 주 여호와인 줄 알리라	And there shall be no more a pricking brier unto the house of Israel, nor any grieving thorn of all that are round about them, that despised them; and they shall know that I am the Lord God.	For the people of Israel will no longer face a pricking brier or a painful thorn from all around them who treat them with contempt. Then they will know that I am the Lord GOD.’
EZK	28	25	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 열방에 흩어 있는 이스라엘 족속을 모으고 그들로 인하여 열국의 목전에서 내 거룩함을 나타낼 때에 그들이 고토 곧 내 종 야곱에게 준 땅에 거할지라	Thus saith the Lord God; When I shall have gathered the house of Israel from the people among whom they are scattered, and shall be sanctified in them in the sight of the heathen, then shall they dwell in their land that I have given to my servant Jacob.	This is what the Lord GOD says: ‘When I gather the house of Israel from the peoples among whom they have been scattered, I will show Myself holy among them in the sight of the nations. Then they will dwell in their own land, which I have given to My servant Jacob.
EZK	28	26	그들이 그 가운데 평안히 거하여 집을 건축하며 포도원을 심고 그들의 사면에서 멸시하던 모든 자를 내가 국문할 때에 그들이 평안히 살며 나를 그 하나님 여호와인 줄 알리라	And they shall dwell safely therein, and shall build houses, and plant vineyards; yea, they shall dwell with confidence, when I have executed judgments upon all those that despise them round about them; and they shall know that I am the Lord their God.	And there they will dwell securely, build houses, and plant vineyards. They will dwell securely when I execute judgments against all those around them who treat them with contempt. Then they will know that I am the LORD their God.’”
EZK	29	1	제십년 시월 십이일에 여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 가라사대	In the tenth year, in the tenth month, in the twelfth day of the month, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	In the tenth year, on the twelfth day of the tenth month, the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	29	2	인자야 너는 애굽 왕 바로와 온 애굽으로 낯을 향하고 쳐서 예언하라	Son of man, set thy face against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and prophesy against him, and against all Egypt:	“Son of man, set your face against Pharaoh king of Egypt and prophesy against him and against all Egypt.
EZK	29	3	너는 말하여 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 애굽 왕 바로야 내가 너를 대적하노라 너는 자기의 강들 중에 누운 큰 악어라 스스로 이르기를 내 이 강은 내 것이라 내가 나를 위하여 만들었다 하는도다	Speak, and say, Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I am against thee, Pharaoh king of Egypt, the great dragon that lieth in the midst of his rivers, which hath said, My river is mine own, and I have made it for myself.	Speak to him and tell him that this is what the Lord GOD says: Behold, I am against you, O Pharaoh king of Egypt, O great monster who lies among his rivers, who says, ‘The Nile is mine; I made it myself.’
EZK	29	4	내가 갈고리로 네 아가미를 꿰고 네 강의 고기로 네 비늘에 붙게 하고 네 비늘에 붙은 강의 모든 고기와 함께 너를 네 강들 중에서 끌어내고	But I will put hooks in thy jaws, and I will cause the fish of thy rivers to stick unto thy scales, and I will bring thee up out of the midst of thy rivers, and all the fish of thy rivers shall stick unto thy scales.	But I will put hooks in your jaws and cause the fish of your streams to cling to your scales. I will haul you up out of your rivers, and all the fish of your streams will cling to your scales.
EZK	29	5	너와 네 강의 모든 고기를 들에 던지리니 네가 지면에 떨어지고 다시는 거두거나 모음을 입지 못할 것은 내가 너를 들짐승과 공중의 새의 식물로 주었음이라	And I will leave thee thrown into the wilderness, thee and all the fish of thy rivers: thou shalt fall upon the open fields; thou shalt not be brought together, nor gathered: I have given thee for meat to the beasts of the field and to the fowls of the heaven.	I will leave you in the desert, you and all the fish of your streams. You will fall on the open field and will not be taken away or gathered for burial. I have given you as food to the beasts of the earth and the birds of the air.
EZK	29	6	애굽의 모든 거민이 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라 애굽은 본래 이스라엘 족속에게 갈대 지팡이라	And all the inhabitants of Egypt shall know that I am the Lord, because they have been a staff of reed to the house of Israel.	Then all the people of Egypt will know that I am the LORD. For you were only a staff of reeds to the house of Israel.
EZK	29	7	그들이 너를 손으로 잡은즉 네가 부러져서 그들의 모든 어깨를 찢었고 그들이 너를 의지한즉 네가 부러져서 그들의 모든 허리로 흔들리게 하였느니라	When they took hold of thee by thy hand, thou didst break, and rend all their shoulder: and when they leaned upon thee, thou brakest, and madest all their loins to be at a stand.	When Israel took hold of you with their hands, you splintered, tearing all their shoulders; when they leaned on you, you broke, and their backs were wrenched.
EZK	29	8	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 칼로 네게 임하게 하여 네게서 사람과 짐승을 끊은즉	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I will bring a sword upon thee, and cut off man and beast out of thee.	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: I will bring a sword against you and cut off from you man and beast.
EZK	29	9	애굽 땅이 사막과 황무지가 되리니 그들이 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라 네가 스스로 이르기를 이 강은 내 것이라 내가 만들었다 하도다	And the land of Egypt shall be desolate and waste; and they shall know that I am the Lord: because he hath said, The river is mine, and I have made it.	The land of Egypt will become a desolate wasteland. Then they will know that I am the LORD. Because you said, ‘The Nile is mine; I made it,’
EZK	29	10	그러므로 내가 너와 네 강들을 쳐서 애굽 땅 믹돌에서부터 수에네 곧 구스 지경까지 황무한 황무지 곧 사막이 되게 하리니	Behold, therefore I am against thee, and against thy rivers, and I will make the land of Egypt utterly waste and desolate, from the tower of Syene even unto the border of Ethiopia.	therefore I am against you and against your rivers. I will turn the land of Egypt into a ruin, a desolate wasteland from Migdol to Syene, and as far as the border of Cush.
EZK	29	11	그 가운데로 사람의 발도 지나가지 아니하며 짐승의 발도 지나가지 아니하고 거접하는 사람이 없이 사십 년이 지날지라	No foot of man shall pass through it, nor foot of beast shall pass through it, neither shall it be inhabited forty years.	No foot of man or beast will pass through, and it will be uninhabited for forty years.
EZK	29	12	내가 애굽 땅으로 황무한 열국 같이 황무하게 하며 애굽 성읍도 사막이 된 열국의 성읍 같이 사십 년 동안 황무하게 하고 애굽 사람들은 각국 가운데로 흩으며 열방 가운데로 헤치리라	And I will make the land of Egypt desolate in the midst of the countries that are desolate, and her cities among the cities that are laid waste shall be desolate forty years: and I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and will disperse them through the countries.	I will make the land of Egypt a desolation among desolate lands, and her cities will lie desolate for forty years among the ruined cities. And I will disperse the Egyptians among the nations and scatter them throughout the countries.
EZK	29	13	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 사십 년 끝에 내가 만민 중에 흩은 애굽 사람을 다시 모아 내되	Yet thus saith the Lord God; At the end of forty years will I gather the Egyptians from the people whither they were scattered:	For this is what the Lord GOD says: At the end of forty years I will gather the Egyptians from the nations to which they were scattered.
EZK	29	14	애굽의 사로잡힌 자들을 돌이켜 바드로스 땅 곧 그 고토로 돌아가게 할 것이라 그들이 거기서 미약한 나라가 되되	And I will bring again the captivity of Egypt, and will cause them to return into the land of Pathros, into the land of their habitation; and they shall be there a base kingdom.	I will restore Egypt from captivity and bring them back to the land of Pathros, the land of their origin. There they will be a lowly kingdom.
EZK	29	15	나라 중에 지극히 미약한 나라가 되어 다시는 열국 위에 스스로 높이지 못하리니 내가 그들을 감하여 다시는 열국을 다스리지 못하게 할 것임이라	It shall be the basest of the kingdoms; neither shall it exalt itself any more above the nations: for I will diminish them, that they shall no more rule over the nations.	Egypt will be the lowliest of kingdoms and will never again exalt itself above the nations. For I will diminish Egypt so that it will never again rule over the nations.
EZK	29	16	그들이 다시는 이스라엘 족속의 의뢰가 되지 못할 것이요 이스라엘 족속은 돌이켜 그들을 바라보지 아니하므로 그 죄악이 기억나게 되지 아니하리니 그들이 나를 주 여호와인 줄 알리라 하셨다 하라	And it shall be no more the confidence of the house of Israel, which bringeth their iniquity to remembrance, when they shall look after them: but they shall know that I am the Lord God.	Egypt will never again be an object of trust for the house of Israel, but will remind them of their iniquity in turning to the Egyptians. Then they will know that I am the Lord GOD.”
EZK	29	17	제이십칠년 정월 초 일일에 여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 가라사대	And it came to pass in the seven and twentieth year, in the first month, in the first day of the month, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	In the twenty-seventh year, on the first day of the first month, the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	29	18	인자야 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살이 그 군대로 두로를 치게 할 때에 크게 수고하여 각 머리털이 무지러졌고 각 어깨가 벗어졌으나 그와 군대가 그 수고한 보수를 두로에서 얻지 못하였느니라	Son of man, Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon caused his army to serve a great service against Tyrus: every head was made bald, and every shoulder was peeled: yet had he no wages, nor his army, for Tyrus, for the service that he had served against it:	“Son of man, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon caused his army to labor strenuously against Tyre. Every head was made bald and every shoulder made raw. But he and his army received no wages from Tyre for the labor they expended on it.
EZK	29	19	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 애굽 땅을 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살에게 붙이리니 그가 그 무리를 옮겨가며 물건을 노략하며 빼앗아 갈 것이라 이것이 그 군대의 보수가 되리라	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I will give the land of Egypt unto Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; and he shall take her multitude, and take her spoil, and take her prey; and it shall be the wages for his army.	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: I will give the land of Egypt to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, who will carry off its wealth, seize its spoil, and remove its plunder. This will be the wages for his army.
EZK	29	20	그들의 수고는 나를 위하여 함인즉 그 보수로 내가 애굽 땅을 그에게 주었느니라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	I have given him the land of Egypt for his labour wherewith he served against it, because they wrought for me, saith the Lord God.	I have given him the land of Egypt as the reward for his labor, because it was done for Me, declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	29	21	그 날에 내가 이스라엘 족속에게 한 뿔이 솟아나게 하고 내가 또 너로 그들 중에서 입을 열게 하리니 그들이 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	In that day will I cause the horn of the house of Israel to bud forth, and I will give thee the opening of the mouth in the midst of them; and they shall know that I am the Lord.	In that day I will cause a horn to sprout for the house of Israel, and I will open your mouth to speak among them. Then they will know that I am the LORD.”
EZK	30	1	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying,	Again the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	30	2	인자야 너는 예언하여 이르라 주 여호와의 말씀에 너희는 통곡하며 이르기를 슬프다 이 날이여 하라	Son of man, prophesy and say, Thus saith the Lord God; Howl ye, Woe worth the day!	“Son of man, prophesy and declare that this is what the Lord GOD says: Wail, ‘Alas for that day!’
EZK	30	3	그 날이 가까웠도다 여호와의 날이 가까웠도다 구름의 날일 것이요 열국의 때이리로다	For the day is near, even the day of the Lord is near, a cloudy day; it shall be the time of the heathen.	For the day is near, the Day of the LORD is near. It will be a day of clouds, a time of doom for the nations.
EZK	30	4	애굽에 칼이 임할 것이라 애굽에서 살륙 당한 자들이 엎드러질 때에 구스에 심한 근심이 있을 것이며 애굽의 무리가 옮기우며 그 기지가 헐릴 것이요	And the sword shall come upon Egypt, and great pain shall be in Ethiopia, when the slain shall fall in Egypt, and they shall take away her multitude, and her foundations shall be broken down.	A sword will come against Egypt, and there will be anguish in Cush when the slain fall in Egypt, its wealth is taken away, and its foundations are torn down.
EZK	30	5	구스와 붓과 룻과 모든 섞인 백성과 굽과 및 동맹한 땅의 백성들이 그들과 함께 칼에 엎드러지리라	Ethiopia, and Libya, and Lydia, and all the mingled people, and Chub, and the men of the land that is in league, shall fall with them by the sword.	Cush, Put, and Lud, and all the various peoples, as well as Libya and the men of the covenant land, will fall with Egypt by the sword.
EZK	30	6	나 여호와가 말하노라 애굽을 붙들어 주는 자도 엎드러질 것이요 애굽의 교만한 권세도 낮아질 것이라 믹돌에서부터 수에네까지 무리가 그 가운데서 칼에 엎드러지리라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	Thus saith the Lord; They also that uphold Egypt shall fall; and the pride of her power shall come down: from the tower of Syene shall they fall in it by the sword, saith the Lord God.	For this is what the LORD says: The allies of Egypt will fall, and her proud strength will collapse. From Migdol to Syene they will fall by the sword within her, declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	30	7	황무한 열방 같이 그들도 황무할 것이며 사막이 된 성읍들 같이 그 성읍들도 사막이 될 것이라	And they shall be desolate in the midst of the countries that are desolate, and her cities shall be in the midst of the cities that are wasted.	They will be desolate among desolate lands, and their cities will lie among ruined cities.
EZK	30	8	내가 애굽에 불을 일으키며 그 모든 돕는 자를 멸할 때에 그들이 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	And they shall know that I am the Lord, when I have set a fire in Egypt, and when all her helpers shall be destroyed.	Then they will know that I am the LORD when I set fire to Egypt and all her helpers are shattered.
EZK	30	9	그 날에 사자들이 내 앞에서 배로 나아가서 염려 없는 구스 사람을 두렵게 하리니 애굽의 재앙의 날과 같이 그들에게도 심한 근심이 있으리라 이것이 오리로다	In that day shall messengers go forth from me in ships to make the careless Ethiopians afraid, and great pain shall come upon them, as in the day of Egypt: for, lo, it cometh.	On that day messengers will go out from Me in ships to frighten Cush out of complacency. Anguish will come upon them on the day of Egypt’s doom. For it is indeed coming.
EZK	30	10	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 또 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살의 손으로 애굽 무리들을 끊으리니	Thus saith the Lord God; I will also make the multitude of Egypt to cease by the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon.	This is what the Lord GOD says: I will put an end to the hordes of Egypt by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon.
EZK	30	11	그가 열국 중에 강포한 자기 군대를 거느리고 와서 그 땅을 멸할 때에 칼을 빼어 애굽을 쳐서 살륙 당한 자로 땅에 가득하게 하리라	He and his people with him, the terrible of the nations, shall be brought to destroy the land: and they shall draw their swords against Egypt, and fill the land with the slain.	He and his people with him, the most ruthless of the nations, will be brought in to destroy the land. They will draw their swords against Egypt and fill the land with the slain.
EZK	30	12	내가 그 모든 강을 말리우고 그 땅을 악인의 손에 팔겠으며 타국 사람의 손으로 그 땅과 그 가운데 있는 모든 것을 황무케 하리라 나 여호와의 말이니라	And I will make the rivers dry, and sell the land into the hand of the wicked: and I will make the land waste, and all that is therein, by the hand of strangers: I the Lord have spoken it.	I will make the streams dry up and sell the land to the wicked. By the hands of foreigners I will bring desolation upon the land and everything in it. I, the LORD, have spoken.
EZK	30	13	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 그 우상들을 멸하며 신상들을 놉 가운데서 끊으며 애굽 땅에서 왕이 다시 나지 못하게 하고 그 땅에 두려움이 있게 하리라	Thus saith the Lord God; I will also destroy the idols, and I will cause their images to cease out of Noph; and there shall be no more a prince of the land of Egypt: and I will put a fear in the land of Egypt.	This is what the Lord GOD says: I will destroy the idols and put an end to the images in Memphis. There will no longer be a prince in Egypt, and I will instill fear in that land.
EZK	30	14	내가 바드로스를 황무케 하며 소안에 불을 일으키며 노를 국문하며	And I will make Pathros desolate, and will set fire in Zoan, and will execute judgments in No.	I will lay waste Pathros, set fire to Zoan, and execute judgment on Thebes.
EZK	30	15	내 분노를 애굽의 견고한 성 신에 쏟고 또 노의 무리를 끊을 것이라	And I will pour my fury upon Sin, the strength of Egypt; and I will cut off the multitude of No.	I will pour out My wrath on Pelusium, the stronghold of Egypt, and cut off the crowds of Thebes.
EZK	30	16	내가 애굽에 불을 일으키리니 신이 심히 근심할 것이며 노는 찢어 나뉠 것이며 놉은 날로 대적이 있을 것이며	And I will set fire in Egypt: Sin shall have great pain, and No shall be rent asunder, and Noph shall have distresses daily.	I will set fire to Egypt, Pelusium will writhe in anguish, Thebes will be split open, and Memphis will face daily distress.
EZK	30	17	아웬과 비베셋의 소년들은 칼에 엎드러질 것이며 그 성읍 거민들은 포로될 것이라	The young men of Aven and of Pi–beseth shall fall by the sword: and these cities shall go into captivity.	The young men of On and Pi-beseth will fall by the sword, and those cities will go into captivity.
EZK	30	18	내가 애굽 멍에를 꺾으며 그 교만한 권세를 그 가운데서 그치게 할 때에 드합느헤스에서는 날이 어둡겠고 그 성읍에는 구름이 덮일 것이며 그 딸들은 포로 될 것이라	At Tehaphnehes also the day shall be darkened, when I shall break there the yokes of Egypt: and the pomp of her strength shall cease in her: as for her, a cloud shall cover her, and her daughters shall go into captivity.	The day will be darkened in Tahpanhes when I break the yoke of Egypt and her proud strength comes to an end. A cloud will cover her, and her daughters will go into captivity.
EZK	30	19	이와 같이 내가 애굽을 국문하리니 그들이 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라 하셨다 하라	Thus will I execute judgments in Egypt: and they shall know that I am the Lord.	So I will execute judgment on Egypt, and they will know that I am the LORD.”
EZK	30	20	제십일년 정월 칠일에 여호와의 말씀이 네게 임하여 가라사대	And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first month, in the seventh day of the month, that the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	In the eleventh year, on the seventh day of the first month, the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	30	21	인자야 내가 애굽 왕 바로의 팔을 꺾었더니 칼을 잡을 힘이 있도록 그것을 그저 싸매지도 못하였고 약을 붙여 싸매지도 못하였느니라	Son of man, I have broken the arm of Pharaoh king of Egypt; and, lo, it shall not be bound up to be healed, to put a roller to bind it, to make it strong to hold the sword.	“Son of man, I have broken the arm of Pharaoh king of Egypt. See, it has not been bound up for healing, or splinted for strength to hold the sword.
EZK	30	22	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 애굽 왕 바로를 대적하여 그 두 팔 곧 성한 팔과 이미 꺾인 팔을 꺾어서 칼이 그 손에서 떨어지게 하고	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I am against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and will break his arms, the strong, and that which was broken; and I will cause the sword to fall out of his hand.	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: Behold, I am against Pharaoh king of Egypt. I will break his arms, both the strong one and the one already broken, and will make the sword fall from his hand.
EZK	30	23	애굽 사람을 열국 가운데로 흩으며 열방 가운데로 헤칠지라	And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and will disperse them through the countries.	I will disperse the Egyptians among the nations and scatter them throughout the lands.
EZK	30	24	내가 바벨론 왕의 팔을 견고하게 하고 내 칼을 그 손에 붙이려니와 내가 바로의 팔을 꺾으리니 그가 바벨론 왕의 앞에서 고통하기를 죽게 상한 자의 고통하듯 하리라	And I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and put my sword in his hand: but I will break Pharaoh’s arms, and he shall groan before him with the groanings of a deadly wounded man.	I will strengthen the arms of Babylon’s king and place My sword in his hand, but I will break the arms of Pharaoh, who will groan before him like a mortally wounded man.
EZK	30	25	내가 바벨론 왕의 팔은 들어주고 바로의 팔은 떨어뜨릴 것이라 내가 내 칼을 바벨론 왕의 손에 붙이고 그로 들어 애굽 땅을 치게 하리니 그들이 나를 여호와인 줄 알겠고	But I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and the arms of Pharaoh shall fall down; and they shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall put my sword into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall stretch it out upon the land of Egypt.	I will strengthen the arms of Babylon’s king, but Pharaoh’s arms will fall limp. Then they will know that I am the LORD, when I place My sword in the hand of Babylon’s king, and he wields it against the land of Egypt.
EZK	30	26	내가 애굽 사람을 열국 가운데로 흩으며 열방 가운데로 헤치리니 그들이 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and disperse them among the countries; and they shall know that I am the Lord.	I will disperse the Egyptians among the nations and scatter them throughout the lands. Then they will know that I am the LORD.”
EZK	31	1	제십일년 삼월 초 일일에 여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 가라사대	And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the third month, in the first day of the month, that the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	In the eleventh year, on the first day of the third month, the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	31	2	인자야 너는 애굽 왕 바로와 그 무리에게 이르기를 네 큰 위엄을 뉘게 비하랴	Son of man, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, and to his multitude; Whom art thou like in thy greatness?	“Son of man, say to Pharaoh king of Egypt and to his multitude: ‘Who can be compared to your greatness?
EZK	31	3	볼지어다 앗수르 사람은 가지가 아름답고 그늘은 삼림의 그늘 같으며 키가 높고 꼭대기가 구름에 닿은 레바논 백향목이었느니라	Behold, the Assyrian was a cedar in Lebanon with fair branches, and with a shadowing shroud, and of an high stature; and his top was among the thick boughs.	Look at Assyria, a cedar in Lebanon, with beautiful branches that shaded the forest. It towered on high; its top was among the clouds.
EZK	31	4	물들이 그것을 기르며 깊은 물이 그것을 자라게 하며 강들이 그 심긴 곳을 둘러 흐르며 보의 물이 들의 모든 나무에까지 미치매	The waters made him great, the deep set him up on high with her rivers running round about his plants, and sent out her little rivers unto all the trees of the field.	The waters made it grow; the deep springs made it tall, directing their streams all around its base and sending their channels to all the trees of the field.
EZK	31	5	그 나무가 물이 많으므로 키가 들의 모든 나무보다 높으며 굵은 가지가 번성하며 가는 가지가 길게 빼어났고	Therefore his height was exalted above all the trees of the field, and his boughs were multiplied, and his branches became long because of the multitude of waters, when he shot forth.	Therefore it towered higher than all the trees of the field. Its branches multiplied, and its boughs grew long as it spread them out because of the abundant waters.
EZK	31	6	공중의 모든 새가 그 큰 가지에 깃들이며 들의 모든 짐승이 그 가는 가지 밑에 새끼를 낳으며 모든 큰 나라가 그 그늘 아래 거하였었느니라	All the fowls of heaven made their nests in his boughs, and under his branches did all the beasts of the field bring forth their young, and under his shadow dwelt all great nations.	All the birds of the air nested in its branches, and all the beasts of the field gave birth beneath its boughs; all the great nations lived in its shade.
EZK	31	7	그 뿌리가 큰 물가에 있으므로 그 나무가 크고 가지가 길어 모양이 아름다우매	Thus was he fair in his greatness, in the length of his branches: for his root was by great waters.	It was beautiful in its greatness, in the length of its limbs, for its roots extended to abundant waters.
EZK	31	8	하나님의 동산의 백향목이 능히 그를 가리우지 못하며 잣나무가 그 굵은 가지만 못하며 단풍나무가 그 가는 가지만 못하며 하나님의 동산의 아무 나무도 그 아름다운 모양과 같지 못하였도다	The cedars in the garden of God could not hide him: the fir trees were not like his boughs, and the chesnut trees were not like his branches; nor any tree in the garden of God was like unto him in his beauty.	The cedars in the garden of God could not rival it; the cypresses could not compare with its branches, nor the plane trees match its boughs. No tree in the garden of God could compare with its beauty.
EZK	31	9	내가 그 가지로 많게 하여 모양이 아름답게 하였더니 하나님의 동산 에덴에 있는 모든 나무가지가 다 투기하였느니라	I have made him fair by the multitude of his branches: so that all the trees of Eden, that were in the garden of God, envied him.	I made it beautiful with its many branches, the envy of all the trees of Eden, which were in the garden of God.’
EZK	31	10	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 그의 키가 높고 꼭대기가 구름에 닿아서 높이 빼어났으므로 마음이 교만하였은즉	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Because thou hast lifted up thyself in height, and he hath shot up his top among the thick boughs, and his heart is lifted up in his height;	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Since it became great in height and set its top among the clouds, and it grew proud on account of its height,
EZK	31	11	내가 열국의 능한 자의 손에 붙일지라 그가 임의로 대접할 것은 내가 그의 악을 인하여 쫓아내었음이라	I have therefore delivered him into the hand of the mighty one of the heathen; he shall surely deal with him: I have driven him out for his wickedness.	I delivered it into the hand of the ruler of the nations, for him to deal with it according to its wickedness. I have banished it.
EZK	31	12	열국의 강포한 다른 민족이 그를 찍어버렸으므로 그 가는 가지가 산과 모든 골짜기에 떨어졌고 그 굵은 가지가 그 땅 모든 물 가에 꺾어졌으며 세상 모든 백성이 그를 버리고 그 그늘 아래서 떠나매	And strangers, the terrible of the nations, have cut him off, and have left him: upon the mountains and in all the valleys his branches are fallen, and his boughs are broken by all the rivers of the land; and all the people of the earth are gone down from his shadow, and have left him.	Foreigners, the most ruthless of the nations, cut it down and left it. Its branches have fallen on the mountains and in every valley; its boughs lay broken in all the earth’s ravines. And all the peoples of the earth left its shade and abandoned it.
EZK	31	13	공중의 모든 새가 그 넘어진 나무에 거하며 들의 모든 짐승이 그 가지에 있으리니	Upon his ruin shall all the fowls of the heaven remain, and all the beasts of the field shall be upon his branches:	All the birds of the air nested on its fallen trunk, and all the beasts of the field lived among its boughs.
EZK	31	14	이는 물 가에 있는 모든 나무로 키가 높다고 교만치 못하게 하며 그 꼭대기로 구름에 닿지 못하게 하며 또 물 대임을 받는 능한 자로 스스로 높아 서지 못하게 함이니 그들을 다 죽는데 붙여서 인생 중 구덩이로 내려가는 자와 함께 지하로 내려가게 하였음이니라	To the end that none of all the trees by the waters exalt themselves for their height, neither shoot up their top among the thick boughs, neither their trees stand up in their height, all that drink water: for they are all delivered unto death, to the nether parts of the earth, in the midst of the children of men, with them that go down to the pit.	This happened so that no other trees by the waters would become great in height and set their tops among the clouds, and no other well-watered trees would reach them in height. For they have all been consigned to death, to the depths of the earth, among the mortals who descend to the Pit.’
EZK	31	15	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 그가 음부에 내려가던 날에 내가 그를 위하여 애곡하게 하며 깊은 바다를 덮으며 모든 강을 쉬게 하며 큰 물을 그치게 하고 레바논으로 그를 위하여 애곡하게 하며 들의 모든 나무로 그로 인하여 쇠잔하게 하였느니라	Thus saith the Lord God; In the day when he went down to the grave I caused a mourning: I covered the deep for him, and I restrained the floods thereof, and the great waters were stayed: and I caused Lebanon to mourn for him, and all the trees of the field fainted for him.	This is what the Lord GOD says: ‘On the day it was brought down to Sheol, I caused mourning. I covered the deep because of it; I held back its rivers; its abundant waters were restrained. I made Lebanon mourn for it, and all the trees of the field fainted because of it.
EZK	31	16	내가 그로 구덩이에 내려가는 자와 함께 음부에 떨어뜨리던 때에 열국으로 그 떨어지는 소리를 인하여 진동하게 하였고 물 대임을 받은 에덴의 모든 나무 곧 레바논의 뛰어나고 아름다운 나무들로 지하에서 위로를 받게 하였느니라	I made the nations to shake at the sound of his fall, when I cast him down to hell with them that descend into the pit: and all the trees of Eden, the choice and best of Lebanon, all that drink water, shall be comforted in the nether parts of the earth.	I made the nations quake at the sound of its downfall, when I cast it down to Sheol with those who descend to the Pit. Then all the trees of Eden, the choicest and best of Lebanon, all the well-watered trees, were consoled in the earth below.
EZK	31	17	그러나 그들도 그와 함께 음부에 내려 칼에 살륙을 당한 자에게 이르렀나니 그들은 옛적에 그의 팔이 된 자요 열국 중에서 그 그늘 아래 거하던 자니라	They also went down into hell with him unto them that be slain with the sword; and they that were his arm, that dwelt under his shadow in the midst of the heathen.	They too descended with it to Sheol, to those slain by the sword. As its allies they had lived in its shade among the nations.
EZK	31	18	너의 영화와 광대함이 에덴 모든 나무 중에 어떤 것과 같은고 그러나 네가 에덴 나무와 함께 지하에 내려갈 것이요 거기서 할례 받지 못하고 칼에 살륙 당한 자 중에 누우리라 이들은 바로와 그 모든 군대니라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라 하라	To whom art thou thus like in glory and in greatness among the trees of Eden? yet shalt thou be brought down with the trees of Eden unto the nether parts of the earth: thou shalt lie in the midst of the uncircumcised with them that be slain by the sword. This is Pharaoh and all his multitude, saith the Lord God.	Who then is like you in glory and greatness among the trees of Eden? You also will be brought down to the depths of the earth to be with the trees of Eden. You will lie among the uncircumcised, with those slain by the sword. This is Pharaoh and all his multitude, declares the Lord GOD.’”
EZK	32	1	제십이년 십이월 초 일일에 여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 가라사대	And it came to pass in the twelfth year, in the twelfth month, in the first day of the month, that the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	In the twelfth year, on the first day of the twelfth month, the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	32	2	인자야 너는 애굽 왕 바로에 대하여 애가를 불러 그에게 이르라 너를 열국에서 젊은 사자에 비하였더니 실상은 바다 가운데 큰 악어라 강에서 뛰어 일어나 발로 물을 요동하여 그 강을 더럽혔도다	Son of man, take up a lamentation for Pharaoh king of Egypt, and say unto him, Thou art like a young lion of the nations, and thou art as a whale in the seas: and thou camest forth with thy rivers, and troubledst the waters with thy feet, and fouledst their rivers.	“Son of man, take up a lament for Pharaoh king of Egypt and say to him: ‘You are like a lion among the nations; you are like a monster in the seas. You thrash about in your rivers, churning up the waters with your feet and muddying the streams.’
EZK	32	3	나 주 여호와의 말이여 내가 많은 백성의 무리를 거느리고 내 그물을 네 위에 치고 그 그물로 너를 끌어 오리로다	Thus saith the Lord God; I will therefore spread out my net over thee with a company of many people; and they shall bring thee up in my net.	This is what the Lord GOD says: ‘I will spread My net over you with a company of many peoples, and they will draw you up in My net.
EZK	32	4	내가 너를 뭍에 버리며 들에 던져 공중의 새들로 네 위에 앉게 할 것임이여 온 땅의 짐승으로 너를 먹어 배부르게 하리로다	Then will I leave thee upon the land, I will cast thee forth upon the open field, and will cause all the fowls of the heaven to remain upon thee, and I will fill the beasts of the whole earth with thee.	I will abandon you on the land and hurl you into the open field. I will cause all the birds of the air to settle upon you, and all the beasts of the earth to eat their fill of you.
EZK	32	5	내가 네 고기를 여러 산에 두며 네 시체를 여러 골짜기에 채울 것임이여	And I will lay thy flesh upon the mountains, and fill the valleys with thy height.	I will put your flesh on the mountains and fill the valleys with your remains.
EZK	32	6	네 피로 네 헤엄치는 땅에 물 대듯하여 산에 미치게 하며 그 모든 개천에 채우리로다	I will also water with thy blood the land wherein thou swimmest, even to the mountains; and the rivers shall be full of thee.	I will drench the land with the flow of your blood, all the way to the mountains— the ravines will be filled.
EZK	32	7	내가 너를 불 끄듯 할 때에 하늘을 가리워 별로 어둡게 하며 해를 구름으로 가리우며 달로 빛을 발하지 못하게 할 것임이여	And when I shall put thee out, I will cover the heaven, and make the stars thereof dark; I will cover the sun with a cloud, and the moon shall not give her light.	When I extinguish you, I will cover the heavens and darken their stars. I will cover the sun with a cloud, and the moon will not give its light.
EZK	32	8	하늘의 모든 밝은 빛을 내가 네 위에서 어둡게 하여 어두움을 네 땅에 베풀리로다 나 주 여호와의 말이로다	All the bright lights of heaven will I make dark over thee, and set darkness upon thy land, saith the Lord God.	All the shining lights in the heavens I will darken over you, and I will bring darkness upon your land,’ declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	32	9	내가 네 패망의 소문으로 열국 곧 너의 알지 못하는 열방에 이르게 할 때에 많은 백성의 마음을 번뇌케 할 것임이여	I will also vex the hearts of many people, when I shall bring thy destruction among the nations, into the countries which thou hast not known.	‘I will trouble the hearts of many peoples, when I bring about your destruction among the nations, in countries you do not know.
EZK	32	10	내가 그 많은 백성으로 너를 인하여 놀라게 할 것이며 내가 내 칼로 그들의 왕 앞에서 춤추게 할 때에 그 왕이 너를 인하여 심히 두려워할 것이며 네가 엎드러지는 날에 그들이 각각 자기 생명을 위하여 무시로 떨리로다	Yea, I will make many people amazed at thee, and their kings shall be horribly afraid for thee, when I shall brandish my sword before them; and they shall tremble at every moment, every man for his own life, in the day of thy fall.	I will cause many peoples to be appalled over you, and their kings will shudder in horror because of you when I brandish My sword before them. On the day of your downfall each of them will tremble every moment for his life.’
EZK	32	11	나 주 여호와가 말함이여 바벨론 왕의 칼이 네게 임하리로다	For thus saith the Lord God; The sword of the king of Babylon shall come upon thee.	For this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘The sword of the king of Babylon will come against you!
EZK	32	12	내가 네 무리로 용사 곧 열국의 무서운 자들의 칼에 엎드러지게 할 것임이여 그들이 애굽의 교만을 폐하며 그 모든 무리를 멸하리로다	By the swords of the mighty will I cause thy multitude to fall, the terrible of the nations, all of them: and they shall spoil the pomp of Egypt, and all the multitude thereof shall be destroyed.	I will make your hordes fall by the swords of the mighty, the most ruthless of all nations. They will ravage the pride of Egypt and all her multitudes will be destroyed.
EZK	32	13	내가 또 그 모든 짐승을 큰 물 가에서 멸하리니 사람의 발이나 짐승의 굽이 다시는 그 물을 흐리지 못할 것임이여	I will destroy also all the beasts thereof from beside the great waters; neither shall the foot of man trouble them any more, nor the hoofs of beasts trouble them.	I will slaughter all her cattle beside the abundant waters. No human foot will muddy them again, and no cattle hooves will disturb them.
EZK	32	14	그 때에 내가 그 물을 맑게 하여 그 강으로 기름 같이 흐르게 하리로다 나 주 여호와의 말이로다	Then will I make their waters deep, and cause their rivers to run like oil, saith the Lord God.	Then I will let her waters settle and will make her rivers flow like oil,’ declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	32	15	내가 애굽 땅으로 황무하여 사막이 되게 하여 거기 풍성한 것이 없게 할 것임이여 그 가운데 모든 거민을 치리니 그들이 나를 여호와인 줄 알리로다	When I shall make the land of Egypt desolate, and the country shall be destitute of that whereof it was full, when I shall smite all them that dwell therein, then shall they know that I am the Lord.	‘When I make the land of Egypt a desolation and empty it of all that filled it, when I strike down all who live there, then they will know that I am the LORD.’
EZK	32	16	이는 슬피 부를 애가니 열국 여자들이 이것을 슬피 부름이여 애굽과 그 모든 무리를 위하여 이것을 슬피 부르리로다 나 주 여호와의 말이로다 하라	This is the lamentation wherewith they shall lament her: the daughters of the nations shall lament her: they shall lament for her, even for Egypt, and for all her multitude, saith the Lord God.	This is the lament they will chant for her; the daughters of the nations will chant it. Over Egypt and all her multitudes they will chant it, declares the Lord GOD.”
EZK	32	17	제십이년 어느 달 십오일에 여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 가라사대	It came to pass also in the twelfth year, in the fifteenth day of the month, that the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	In the twelfth year, on the fifteenth day of the month, the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	32	18	인자야 애굽의 무리를 애곡하고 그와 유명한 나라 여자들을 구덩이에 내려가는 자와 함께 지하에 던지며	Son of man, wail for the multitude of Egypt, and cast them down, even her, and the daughters of the famous nations, unto the nether parts of the earth, with them that go down into the pit.	“Son of man, wail for the multitudes of Egypt, and consign her and the daughters of the mighty nations to the depths of the earth with those who descend to the Pit:
EZK	32	19	이르라 너의 아름다움이 누구보다 지나가는고 너는 내려가서 할례 받지 않은 자와 함께 뉘울지어다	Whom dost thou pass in beauty? go down, and be thou laid with the uncircumcised.	Whom do you surpass in beauty? Go down and be placed with the uncircumcised!
EZK	32	20	그들이 살륙 당한 자 중에 엎드러질 것임이여 그는 칼에 붙인바 되었은즉 그와 그 모든 무리를 끌지어다	They shall fall in the midst of them that are slain by the sword: she is delivered to the sword: draw her and all her multitudes.	They will fall among those slain by the sword. The sword is appointed! Let them drag her away along with all her multitudes.
EZK	32	21	용사 중에 강한 자가 그를 돕는 자와 함께 음부 가운데서 그에게 말함이여 할례 받지 않은 자 곧 칼에 살륙 당한 자들이 내려와서 가만히 누웠다 하리로다	The strong among the mighty shall speak to him out of the midst of hell with them that help him: they are gone down, they lie uncircumcised, slain by the sword.	Mighty chiefs will speak from the midst of Sheol about Egypt and her allies: ‘They have come down and lie with the uncircumcised, with those slain by the sword.’
EZK	32	22	거기 앗수르와 그 온 무리가 있음이여 다 살륙을 당하여 칼에 엎드러진 자라 그 무덤이 그 사방에 있도다	Asshur is there and all her company: his graves are about him: all of them slain, fallen by the sword:	Assyria is there with her whole company; her graves are all around her. All of them are slain, fallen by the sword.
EZK	32	23	그 무덤이 구덩이 깊은 곳에 베풀렸고 그 무리가 그 무덤 사방에 있음이여 그들은 다 살륙을 당하여 칼에 엎드러진 자 곧 생존 세상에서 사람을 두렵게 하던 자로다	Whose graves are set in the sides of the pit, and her company is round about her grave: all of them slain, fallen by the sword, which caused terror in the land of the living.	Her graves are set in the depths of the Pit, and her company is all around her grave. All of them are slain, fallen by the sword— those who once spread terror in the land of the living.
EZK	32	24	거기 엘람이 있고 그 모든 무리가 그 무덤 사면에 있음이여 그들은 다 할례를 받지 못하고 살륙을 당하여 칼에 엎드러져 지하에 내려간 자로다 그들이 생존 세상에서 두렵게 하였었으나 이제는 구덩이에 내려가는 자와 함께 수치를 당하였도다	There is Elam and all her multitude round about her grave, all of them slain, fallen by the sword, which are gone down uncircumcised into the nether parts of the earth, which caused their terror in the land of the living; yet have they borne their shame with them that go down to the pit.	Elam is there with all her multitudes around her grave. All of them are slain, fallen by the sword— those who went down uncircumcised to the earth below, who once spread their terror in the land of the living. They bear their disgrace with those who descend to the Pit.
EZK	32	25	그와 그 모든 무리를 위하여 침상을 살륙 당한 자 중에 베풀었고 그 여러 무덤은 사면에 있음이여 그들은 다 할례를 받지 못하고 칼에 살륙을 당한 자로다 그들이 생존 세상에서 두렵게 하였었으나 이제는 구덩이에 내려가는 자와 함께 수치를 당하고 살륙 당한 자 중에 뉘었도다	They have set her a bed in the midst of the slain with all her multitude: her graves are round about him: all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword: though their terror was caused in the land of the living, yet have they borne their shame with them that go down to the pit: he is put in the midst of them that be slain.	Among the slain they prepare a resting place for Elam with all her hordes, with her graves all around her. All of them are uncircumcised, slain by the sword, although their terror was once spread in the land of the living. They bear their disgrace with those who descend to the Pit. They are placed among the slain.
EZK	32	26	거기 메섹과 두발과 그 모든 무리가 있고 그 여러 무덤은 사면에 있음이여 그들은 다 할례를 받지 못하고 칼에 살륙을 당한 자로 다 그들이 생존 세상에서 두렵게 하였었으나	There is Meshech, Tubal, and all her multitude: her graves are round about him: all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword, though they caused their terror in the land of the living.	Meshech and Tubal are there with all their multitudes, with their graves all around them. All of them are uncircumcised, slain by the sword, because they spread their terror in the land of the living.
EZK	32	27	그들이 할례 받지 못한 자 중에 이미 엎드러진 용사와 함께 누운 것이 마땅치 아니하냐 이 용사들은 다 병기를 가지고 음부에 내려 자기의 칼을 베게 하였으니 그 백골이 자기 죄악을 졌음이여 생존 세상에서 용사의 두려움이 있던 자로다	And they shall not lie with the mighty that are fallen of the uncircumcised, which are gone down to hell with their weapons of war: and they have laid their swords under their heads, but their iniquities shall be upon their bones, though they were the terror of the mighty in the land of the living.	They do not lie down with the fallen warriors of old, who went down to Sheol with their weapons of war, whose swords were placed under their heads, whose shields rested on their bones, although the terror of the mighty was once in the land of the living.
EZK	32	28	오직 너는 할례 받지 못한 자와 일반으로 패망할 것임이여 칼에 살륙 당한 자와 함께 누우리로다	Yea, thou shalt be broken in the midst of the uncircumcised, and shalt lie with them that are slain with the sword.	But you too will be shattered and lie down among the uncircumcised, with those slain by the sword.
EZK	32	29	거기 에돔 곧 그 열왕과 그 모든 방백이 있음이여 그들이 강성하였었으나 칼에 살륙 당한 자와 함께 있겠고 할례 받지 못하고 구덩이에 내려간 자와 함께 누우리로다	There is Edom, her kings, and all her princes, which with their might are laid by them that were slain by the sword: they shall lie with the uncircumcised, and with them that go down to the pit.	Edom is there, and all her kings and princes, who despite their might are laid among those slain by the sword. They lie down with the uncircumcised, with those who descend to the Pit.
EZK	32	30	거기 살륙 당한 자와 함께 내려간 북방 모든 방백과 모든 시돈 사람이 있음이여 그들이 본래는 강성하였으므로 두렵게 하였었으나 이제는 부끄러움을 품고 할례 받지 못하고 칼에 살륙 당한 자와 함께 누웠고 구덩이에 내려가는 자와 함께 수욕을 당하였도다	There be the princes of the north, all of them, and all the Zidonians, which are gone down with the slain; with their terror they are ashamed of their might; and they lie uncircumcised with them that be slain by the sword, and bear their shame with them that go down to the pit.	All the leaders of the north and all the Sidonians are there; they went down in disgrace with the slain, despite the terror of their might. They lie uncircumcised with those slain by the sword and bear their shame with those who descend to the Pit.
EZK	32	31	바로가 그들을 보고 그 모든 무리로 인하여 위로를 받을 것임이여 칼에 살륙당한 바로와 그 온 군대가 그러하리로다 나 주 여호와의 말이로다	Pharaoh shall see them, and shall be comforted over all his multitude, even Pharaoh and all his army slain by the sword, saith the Lord God.	Pharaoh will see them and be comforted over all his multitude— Pharaoh and all his army, slain by the sword, declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	32	32	내가 바로로 생존 세상에서 사람을 두렵게 하게 하였었으나 이제는 그가 그 모든 무리로 더불어 할례받지 못한 자 곧 칼에 살륙 당한 자와 함께 뉘우리로다 나 주 여호와의 말이로다	For I have caused my terror in the land of the living: and he shall be laid in the midst of the uncircumcised with them that are slain with the sword, even Pharaoh and all his multitude, saith the Lord God.	For I will spread My terror in the land of the living, so that Pharaoh and all his multitude will be laid to rest among the uncircumcised, with those slain by the sword, declares the Lord GOD.”
EZK	33	1	여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 가라사대	Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	Again the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	33	2	인자야 너는 네 민족에게 고하여 이르라 가령 내가 칼을 한 땅에 임하게 한다 하자 그 땅 백성이 자기 중에 하나를 택하여 파수꾼을 삼은	Son of man, speak to the children of thy people, and say unto them, When I bring the sword upon a land, if the people of the land take a man of their coasts, and set him for their watchman:	“Son of man, speak to your people and tell them: ‘Suppose I bring the sword against a land, and the people of that land choose a man from among them, appointing him as their watchman,
EZK	33	3	그 사람이 칼이 그 땅에 임함을 보고 나팔을 불어 백성에게 경고하되	If when he seeth the sword come upon the land, he blow the trumpet, and warn the people;	and he sees the sword coming against that land and blows the ram’s horn to warn the people.
EZK	33	4	나팔 소리를 듣고도 경비를 하지 아니하므로 그 임하는 칼에 제함을 당하면 그 피가 자기의 머리로 돌아갈 것이라	Then whosoever heareth the sound of the trumpet, and taketh not warning; if the sword come, and take him away, his blood shall be upon his own head.	Then if anyone hears the sound of the horn but fails to heed the warning, and the sword comes and takes him away, his blood will be on his own head.
EZK	33	5	그가 경비를 하였던들 자기 생명을 보전하였을 것이나 나팔 소리를 듣고도 경비를 하지 아니하였으니 그 피가 자기에게로 돌아가리라	He heard the sound of the trumpet, and took not warning; his blood shall be upon him. But he that taketh warning shall deliver his soul.	Since he heard the sound of the horn but failed to heed the warning, his blood will be on his own head. If he had heeded the warning, he would have saved his life.
EZK	33	6	그러나 파수꾼이 칼이 임함을 보고도 나팔을 불지 아니하여 백성에게 경고치 아니하므로 그 중에 한 사람이 그 임하는 칼에 제함을 당하면 그는 자기 죄악 중에서 제한바 되려니와 그 죄를 내가 파수꾼의 손에서 찾으리라	But if the watchman see the sword come, and blow not the trumpet, and the people be not warned; if the sword come, and take any person from among them, he is taken away in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at the watchman’s hand.	But if the watchman sees the sword coming and fails to blow the horn to warn the people, and the sword comes and takes away a life, then that one will be taken away in his iniquity, but I will hold the watchman accountable for his blood.’
EZK	33	7	인자야 내가 너로 이스라엘 족속의 파수꾼을 삼음이 이와 같으니라 그런즉 너는 내 입의 말을 듣고 나를 대신하여 그들에게 경고할지어다	So thou, O son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; therefore thou shalt hear the word at my mouth, and warn them from me.	As for you, O son of man, I have made you a watchman for the house of Israel; so hear the word from My mouth and give them the warning from Me.
EZK	33	8	가령 내가 악인에게 이르기를 악인아 너는 정녕 죽으리라 하였다 하자 네가 그 악인에게 말로 경고하여 그 길에서 떠나게 아니하면 그 악인은 자기 죄악 중에서 죽으려니와 내가 그 피를 네 손에서 찾으리라	When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shalt surely die; if thou dost not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand.	If I say to the wicked, ‘O wicked man, you will surely die,’ but you do not speak out to dissuade him from his way, then that wicked man will die in his iniquity, yet I will hold you accountable for his blood.
EZK	33	9	그러나 너는 악인에게 경고하여 돌이켜 그 길에서 떠나라고 하되 그가 돌이켜 그 길에서 떠나지 아니하면 그는 자기 죄악 중에서 죽으려니와 너는 네 생명을 보전하리라	Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it; if he do not turn from his way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul.	But if you warn the wicked man to turn from his way, and he does not turn from it, he will die in his iniquity, but you will have saved your life.
EZK	33	10	그런즉 인자야 너는 이스라엘 족속에게 이르기를 너희가 말하여 이르되 우리의 허물과 죄가 이미 우리에게 있어 우리로 그 중에서 쇠패하게 하니 어찌 능히 살리요 하거니와	Therefore, O thou son of man, speak unto the house of Israel; Thus ye speak, saying, If our transgressions and our sins be upon us, and we pine away in them, how should we then live?	Now as for you, son of man, tell the house of Israel that this is what they have said: ‘Our transgressions and our sins are heavy upon us, and we are wasting away because of them! How can we live?’
EZK	33	11	주 여호와의 말씀에 나의 삶을 두고 맹세하노니 나는 악인의 죽는 것을 기뻐하지 아니하고 악인이 그 길에서 돌이켜 떠나서 사는 것을 기뻐하노라 이스라엘 족속아 돌이키고 돌이키라 너희 악한 길에서 떠나라 어찌 죽고자 하느냐 하셨다 하라	Say unto them, As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel?	Say to them: ‘As surely as I live, declares the Lord GOD, I take no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but rather that the wicked should turn from their ways and live. Turn! Turn from your evil ways! For why should you die, O house of Israel?’
EZK	33	12	인자야 너는 네 민족에게 이르기를 의인이 범죄하는 날에는 그 의가 구원치 못할 것이요 악인이 돌이켜 그 악에서 떠나는 날에는 그 악이 그를 엎드러뜨리지 못할 것인즉 의인이 범죄하는 날에는 그 의로 인하여는 살지 못하리라	Therefore, thou son of man, say unto the children of thy people, The righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver him in the day of his transgression: as for the wickedness of the wicked, he shall not fall thereby in the day that he turneth from his wickedness; neither shall the righteous be able to live for his righteousness in the day that he sinneth.	Therefore, son of man, say to your people: ‘The righteousness of the righteous man will not deliver him in the day of his transgression; neither will the wickedness of the wicked man cause him to stumble on the day he turns from his wickedness. Nor will the righteous man be able to survive by his righteousness on the day he sins.’
EZK	33	13	가령 내가 의인에게 말하기를 너는 살리라 하였다 하자 그가 그 의를 스스로 믿고 죄악을 행하면 그 모든 의로운 행위가 하나도 기억되지 아니하리니 그가 그 지은 죄악 중 곧 그 중에서 죽으리라	When I shall say to the righteous, that he shall surely live; if he trust to his own righteousness, and commit iniquity, all his righteousnesses shall not be remembered; but for his iniquity that he hath committed, he shall die for it.	If I tell the righteous man that he will surely live, but he then trusts in his righteousness and commits iniquity, then none of his righteous works will be remembered; he will die because of the iniquity he has committed.
EZK	33	14	가령 내가 악인에게 말하기를 너는 죽으리라 하였다 하자 그가 돌이켜 자기의 죄에서 떠나서 법과 의대로 행하여	Again, when I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; if he turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right;	But if I tell the wicked man, ‘You will surely die,’ and he turns from his sin and does what is just and right—
EZK	33	15	전당물을 도로 주며 억탈물을 돌려 보내고 생명의 율례를 준행하여 다시는 죄악을 짓지 아니하면 그가 정녕 살고 죽지 않을지라	If the wicked restore the pledge, give again that he had robbed, walk in the statutes of life, without committing iniquity; he shall surely live, he shall not die.	if he restores a pledge, makes restitution for what he has stolen, and walks in the statutes of life without practicing iniquity—then he will surely live; he will not die.
EZK	33	16	그의 본래 범한 모든 죄가 기억되지 아니하리니 그가 정녕 살리라 이는 법과 의를 행하였음이니라 하라	None of his sins that he hath committed shall be mentioned unto him: he hath done that which is lawful and right; he shall surely live.	None of the sins he has committed will be held against him. He has done what is just and right; he will surely live.
EZK	33	17	그래도 네 민족은 말하기를 주의 길이 공평치 않다 하는도다 그러나 실상은 그들의 길이 공평치 아니하니라	Yet the children of thy people say, The way of the Lord is not equal: but as for them, their way is not equal.	Yet your people say, ‘The way of the Lord is not just.’ But it is their way that is not just.
EZK	33	18	만일 의인이 돌이켜 그 의에서 떠나 죄악을 지으면 그가 그 가운데서 죽을 것이고	When the righteous turneth from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, he shall even die thereby.	If a righteous man turns from his righteousness and commits iniquity, he will die for it.
EZK	33	19	만일 악인이 돌이켜 그 악에서 떠나 법과 의대로 행하면 그가 그로 인하여 살리라	But if the wicked turn from his wickedness, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall live thereby.	But if a wicked man turns from his wickedness and does what is just and right, he will live because of this.
EZK	33	20	그러나 너희가 이르기를 주의 길이 공평치 않다 하는도다 이스라엘 족속아 내가 너희의 각기 행한 대로 심판하리라 하시니라	Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not equal. O ye house of Israel, I will judge you every one after his ways.	Yet you say, ‘The way of the Lord is not just.’ But I will judge each of you according to his ways, O house of Israel.”
EZK	33	21	우리가 사로잡힌지 십이년 시월 오일에 예루살렘에서부터 도망하여 온 자가 내게 나아와 말하기를 그 성이 함락되었다 하였는데	And it came to pass in the twelfth year of our captivity, in the tenth month, in the fifth day of the month, that one that had escaped out of Jerusalem came unto me, saying, The city is smitten.	In the twelfth year of our exile, on the fifth day of the tenth month, a fugitive from Jerusalem came to me and reported, “The city has been taken!”
EZK	33	22	그 도망한 자가 내게 나아오기 전날 저녁에 여호와의 손이 내게 임하여 내 입을 여시더니 다음 아침 그 사람이 내게 나아올 임시에 내 입이 열리기로 내가 다시는 잠잠하지 아니하였노라	Now the hand of the Lord was upon me in the evening, afore he that was escaped came; and had opened my mouth, until he came to me in the morning; and my mouth was opened, and I was no more dumb.	Now the evening before the fugitive arrived, the hand of the LORD was upon me, and He opened my mouth before the man came to me in the morning. So my mouth was opened and I was no longer mute.
EZK	33	23	여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 가라사대	Then the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	33	24	인자야 이 이스라엘 황무한 땅에 거한 자들이 말하여 이르기를 아브라함은 오직 한 사람이라도 이 땅을 기업으로 얻었나니 우리가 중다한즉 더욱 이 땅으로 우리에게 기업으로 주신 것이 되느니라 하는도다	Son of man, they that inhabit those wastes of the land of Israel speak, saying, Abraham was one, and he inherited the land: but we are many; the land is given us for inheritance.	“Son of man, those living in the ruins in the land of Israel are saying, ‘Abraham was only one man, yet he possessed the land. But we are many; surely the land has been given to us as a possession.’
EZK	33	25	그러므로 너는 그들에게 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 너희가 피있는 고기를 먹으며 너희 우상들에게 눈을 들며 피를 흘리니 그 땅이 너희의 기업이 될까보냐	Wherefore say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God; Ye eat with the blood, and lift up your eyes toward your idols, and shed blood: and shall ye possess the land?	Therefore tell them that this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘You eat meat with the blood in it, lift up your eyes to your idols, and shed blood. Should you then possess the land?
EZK	33	26	너희가 칼을 믿어 가증한 일을 행하며 각기 이웃의 아내를 더럽히니 그 땅이 너희의 기업이 될까보냐 하고	Ye stand upon your sword, ye work abomination, and ye defile every one his neighbour’s wife: and shall ye possess the land?	You have relied on your swords, you have committed detestable acts, and each of you has defiled his neighbor’s wife. Should you then possess the land?’
EZK	33	27	너는 그들에게 또 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 내가 나의 삶을 두고 맹세하노니 황무지에 있는 자는 칼에 엎드러뜨리고 들에 있는 자는 들짐승에게 붙여 먹게 하고 산성과 굴에 있는 자는 온역에 죽게 하리라	Say thou thus unto them, Thus saith the Lord God; As I live, surely they that are in the wastes shall fall by the sword, and him that is in the open field will I give to the beasts to be devoured, and they that be in the forts and in the caves shall die of the pestilence.	Tell them that this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘As surely as I live, those in the ruins will fall by the sword, those in the open field I will give to be devoured by wild animals, and those in the strongholds and caves will die by plague.
EZK	33	28	내가 그 땅으로 황무지와 놀라움이 되게 하고 그 권능의 교만을 그치게 하리니 이스라엘의 산들이 황무하여 지나갈 사람이 없으리라	For I will lay the land most desolate, and the pomp of her strength shall cease; and the mountains of Israel shall be desolate, that none shall pass through.	I will make the land a desolate waste, and the pride of her strength will come to an end. The mountains of Israel will become desolate, so that no one will pass through.
EZK	33	29	내가 그들의 행한 모든 가증한 일로 인하여 그 땅으로 황무지와 놀라움이 되게 하면 그 때에 그들이 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라 하라	Then shall they know that I am the Lord, when I have laid the land most desolate because of all their abominations which they have committed.	Then they will know that I am the LORD, when I have made the land a desolate waste because of all the abominations they have committed.’
EZK	33	30	인자야 네 민족이 담 곁에서와 집 문에서 너를 의논하며 각각 그 형제로 더불어 말하여 이르기를 자, 가서 여호와께로부터 무슨 말씀이 나오는가 들어보자 하고	Also, thou son of man, the children of thy people still are talking against thee by the walls and in the doors of the houses, and speak one to another, every one to his brother, saying, Come, I pray you, and hear what is the word that cometh forth from the Lord.	As for you, son of man, your people are talking about you near the city walls and in the doorways of their houses. One speaks to another, each saying to his brother, ‘Come and hear the message that has come from the LORD!’
EZK	33	31	백성이 모이는 것 같이 네게 나아오며 내 백성처럼 네 앞에 앉아서 네 말을 들으나 그대로 행치 아니하니 이는 그 입으로는 사랑을 나타내어도 마음은 이욕을 좇음이라	And they come unto thee as the people cometh, and they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them: for with their mouth they shew much love, but their heart goeth after their covetousness.	So My people come to you as usual, sit before you, and hear your words; but they do not put them into practice. Although they express love with their mouths, their hearts pursue dishonest gain.
EZK	33	32	그들이 너를 음악을 잘하며 고운 음성으로 사랑의 노래를 하는 자 같이 여겼나니 네 말을 듣고도 준행치 아니하거니와	And, lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument: for they hear thy words, but they do them not.	Indeed, you are to them like a singer of love songs with a beautiful voice, who skillfully plays an instrument. They hear your words but do not put them into practice.
EZK	33	33	그 말이 응하리니 응할 때에는 그들이 한 선지자가 자기 가운데 있었던 줄을 알리라	And when this cometh to pass, (lo, it will come,) then shall they know that a prophet hath been among them.	So when it comes to pass—and surely it will come—then they will know that a prophet has been among them.”
EZK	34	1	여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 가라사대	And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	34	2	인자야 너는 이스라엘 목자들을 쳐서 예언하라 그들 곧 목자들에게 예언하여 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 자기만 먹이는 이스라엘 목자들은 화 있을진저 목자들이 양의 무리를 먹이는 것이 마땅치 아니하냐	Son of man, prophesy against the shepherds of Israel, prophesy, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God unto the shepherds; Woe be to the shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves! should not the shepherds feed the flocks?	“Son of man, prophesy against the shepherds of Israel. Prophesy and tell them that this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Woe to the shepherds of Israel, who only feed themselves! Should not the shepherds feed their flock?
EZK	34	3	너희가 살진 양을 잡아 그 기름을 먹으며 그 털을 입되 양의 무리는 먹이지 아니하는도다	Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with the wool, ye kill them that are fed: but ye feed not the flock.	You eat the fat, wear the wool, and butcher the fattened sheep, but you do not feed the flock.
EZK	34	4	너희가 그 연약한 자를 강하게 아니하며 병든 자를 고치지 아니하며 상한 자를 싸매어 주지 아니하며 쫓긴 자를 돌아오게 아니하며 잃어버린 자를 찾지 아니하고 다만 강포로 그것들을 다스렸도다	The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost; but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them.	You have not strengthened the weak, healed the sick, bound up the injured, brought back the strays, or searched for the lost. Instead, you have ruled them with violence and cruelty.
EZK	34	5	목자가 없으므로 그것들이 흩어지며 흩어져서 모든 들짐승의 밥이 되었도다	And they were scattered, because there is no shepherd: and they became meat to all the beasts of the field, when they were scattered.	They were scattered for lack of a shepherd, and when they were scattered they became food for all the wild beasts.
EZK	34	6	내 양의 무리가 모든 산과 높은 멧부리에마다 유리되었고 내 양의 무리가 온 지면에 흩어졌으되 찾고 찾는 자가 없었도다	My sheep wandered through all the mountains, and upon every high hill: yea, my flock was scattered upon all the face of the earth, and none did search or seek after them.	My flock went astray on all the mountains and every high hill. They were scattered over the face of all the earth, with no one to search for them or seek them out.’
EZK	34	7	그러므로 목자들아 여호와의 말씀을 들을지어다	Therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word of the Lord;	Therefore, you shepherds, hear the word of the LORD:
EZK	34	8	주 여호와의 말씀에 내가 나의 삶을 두고 맹세하노라 내 양의 무리가 노략거리가 되고 모든 들짐승의 밥이 된 것은 목자가 없음이라 내 목자들이 양을 찾지 아니하고 자기만 먹이고 내 양의 무리를 먹이지 아니하였도다	As I live, saith the Lord God, surely because my flock became a prey, and my flock became meat to every beast of the field, because there was no shepherd, neither did my shepherds search for my flock, but the shepherds fed themselves, and fed not my flock;	‘As surely as I live, declares the Lord GOD, because My flock lacks a shepherd and has become prey and food for every wild beast, and because My shepherds did not search for My flock but fed themselves instead,
EZK	34	9	그러므로 너희 목자들아 여호와의 말씀을 들을지어다	Therefore, O ye shepherds, hear the word of the Lord;	therefore, you shepherds, hear the word of the LORD!’
EZK	34	10	주 여호와의 말씀에 내가 목자들을 대적하여 내 양의 무리를 그들의 손에서 찾으리니 목자들이 양을 먹이지 못할 뿐 아니라 그들이 다시는 자기를 먹이지 못할지라 내가 내 양을 그들의 입에서 건져내어서 다시는 그 식물이 되지 않게 하리라	Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I am against the shepherds; and I will require my flock at their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding the flock; neither shall the shepherds feed themselves any more; for I will deliver my flock from their mouth, that they may not be meat for them.	This is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Behold, I am against the shepherds, and I will demand from them My flock and remove them from tending the flock, so that they can no longer feed themselves. For I will deliver My flock from their mouths, and it will no longer be food for them.’
EZK	34	11	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 나 곧 내가 내 양을 찾고 찾되	For thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I, even I, will both search my sheep, and seek them out.	For this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Behold, I Myself will search for My flock and seek them out.
EZK	34	12	목자가 양 가운데 있는 날에 양이 흩어졌으면 그 떼를 찾는 것 같이 내가 내 양을 찾아서 흐리고 캄캄한 날에 그 흩어진 모든 곳에서 그것들을 건져낼지라	As a shepherd seeketh out his flock in the day that he is among his sheep that are scattered; so will I seek out my sheep, and will deliver them out of all places where they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day.	As a shepherd looks for his scattered sheep when he is among the flock, so I will look for My flock. I will rescue them from all the places to which they were scattered on a day of clouds and darkness.
EZK	34	13	내가 그것들을 만민 중에서 끌어내며 열방 중에서 모아 그 본토로 데리고 가서 이스라엘 산 위에와 시냇가에와 그 땅 모든 거주지에서 먹이되	And I will bring them out from the people, and gather them from the countries, and will bring them to their own land, and feed them upon the mountains of Israel by the rivers, and in all the inhabited places of the country.	I will bring them out from the peoples, gather them from the countries, and bring them into their own land. I will feed them on the mountains of Israel, in the ravines, and in all the settlements of the land.
EZK	34	14	좋은 꼴로 먹이고 그 우리를 이스라엘 높은 산 위에 두리니 그것들이 거기서 좋은 우리에 누워 있으며 이스라엘 산 위에서 살진 꼴을 먹으리라	I will feed them in a good pasture, and upon the high mountains of Israel shall their fold be: there shall they lie in a good fold, and in a fat pasture shall they feed upon the mountains of Israel.	I will feed them in good pasture, and the lofty mountains of Israel will be their grazing land. There they will lie down in a good grazing land; they will feed in rich pasture on the mountains of Israel.
EZK	34	15	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 친히 내 양의 목자가 되어 그것들로 누워 있게 할지라	I will feed my flock, and I will cause them to lie down, saith the Lord God.	I will tend My flock and make them lie down, declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	34	16	그 잃어버린 자를 내가 찾으며 쫓긴 자를 내가 돌아오게 하며 상한 자를 내가 싸매어 주며 병든 자를 내가 강하게 하려니와 살진 자와 강한 자는 내가 멸하고 공의대로 그것들을 먹이리라	I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen that which was sick: but I will destroy the fat and the strong; I will feed them with judgment.	I will seek the lost, bring back the strays, bind up the broken, and strengthen the weak; but the sleek and strong I will destroy. I will shepherd them with justice.’
EZK	34	17	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 나의 양떼 너희여 내가 양과 양의 사이와 수양과 수염소의 사이에 심판하노라	And as for you, O my flock, thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I judge between cattle and cattle, between the rams and the he goats.	This is what the Lord GOD says to you, My flock: ‘I will judge between one sheep and another, between the rams and the goats.
EZK	34	18	너희가 좋은 꼴 먹은 것을 작은 일로 여기느냐 어찌하여 남은 꼴을 발로 밟았느냐 너희가 맑은 물 마신 것을 작은 일로 여기느냐 어찌하여 남은 물을 발로 더럽혔느냐	Seemeth it a small thing unto you to have eaten up the good pasture, but ye must tread down with your feet the residue of your pastures? and to have drunk of the deep waters, but ye must foul the residue with your feet?	Is it not enough for you to feed on the good pasture? Must you also trample the rest of the pasture with your feet? Is it not enough for you to drink the clear waters? Must you also muddy the rest with your feet?
EZK	34	19	나의 양은 너희 발로 밟은 것을 먹으며 너희 발로 더럽힌 것을 마시는도다 하셨느니라	And as for my flock, they eat that which ye have trodden with your feet; and they drink that which ye have fouled with your feet.	Why must My flock feed on what your feet have trampled, and drink what your feet have muddied?’
EZK	34	20	그러므로 주 여호와께서 그들에게 대하여 말씀하시기를 나 곧 내가 살진 양과 파리한 양 사이에 심판하리라	Therefore thus saith the Lord God unto them; Behold, I, even I, will judge between the fat cattle and between the lean cattle.	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says to them: ‘Behold, I Myself will judge between the fat sheep and the lean sheep.
EZK	34	21	너희가 옆구리와 어깨로 밀뜨리고 모든 병든 자를 뿔로 받아 무리로 밖으로 흩어지게 하는도다	Because ye have thrust with side and with shoulder, and pushed all the diseased with your horns, till ye have scattered them abroad;	Since you shove with flank and shoulder, butting all the weak ones with your horns until you have scattered them abroad,
EZK	34	22	그러므로 내가 내 양떼를 구원하여 그들로 다시는 노략거리가 되지 않게 하고 양과 양 사이에 심판하리라	Therefore will I save my flock, and they shall no more be a prey; and I will judge between cattle and cattle.	I will save My flock, and they will no longer be prey. I will judge between one sheep and another.
EZK	34	23	내가 한 목자를 그들의 위에 세워 먹이게 하리니 그는 내 종 다윗이라 그가 그들을 먹이고 그들의 목자가 될지라	And I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my servant David; he shall feed them, and he shall be their shepherd.	I will appoint over them one shepherd, My servant David, and he will feed them. He will feed them and be their shepherd.
EZK	34	24	나 여호와는 그들의 하나님이 되고 내 종 다윗은 그들 중에 왕이 되리라 나 여호와의 말이니라	And I the Lord will be their God, and my servant David a prince among them; I the Lord have spoken it.	I, the LORD, will be their God, and My servant David will be a prince among them. I, the LORD, have spoken.
EZK	34	25	내가 또 그들과 화평의 언약을 세우고 악한 짐승을 그 땅에서 그치게 하리니 그들이 빈 들에 평안히 거하며 수풀 가운데서 잘지라	And I will make with them a covenant of peace, and will cause the evil beasts to cease out of the land: and they shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods.	I will make with them a covenant of peace and rid the land of wild animals, so that they may dwell securely in the wilderness and sleep in the forest.
EZK	34	26	내가 그들에게 복을 내리며 내 산 사면 모든 곳도 복되게 하여 때를 따라 비를 내리되 복된 장마비를 내리리라	And I will make them and the places round about my hill a blessing; and I will cause the shower to come down in his season; there shall be showers of blessing.	I will make them and the places around My hill a blessing. I will send down showers in season—showers of blessing.
EZK	34	27	그리한즉 밭에 나무가 열매를 맺으며 땅이 그 소산을 내리니 그들이 그 땅에서 평안할지라 내가 그들의 멍엣목을 꺾고 그들로 종을 삼은 자의 손에서 그들을 건져낸 후에 그들이 나를 여호와인 줄 알겠고	And the tree of the field shall yield her fruit, and the earth shall yield her increase, and they shall be safe in their land, and shall know that I am the Lord, when I have broken the bands of their yoke, and delivered them out of the hand of those that served themselves of them.	The trees of the field will give their fruit, and the land will yield its produce; My flock will be secure in their land. Then they will know that I am the LORD, when I have broken the bars of their yoke and delivered them from the hands that enslaved them.
EZK	34	28	그들이 다시는 이방의 노략거리가 되지 아니하며 땅의 짐승의 삼킨바 되지 아니하고 평안히 거하리니 놀랠 사람이 없으리라	And they shall no more be a prey to the heathen, neither shall the beast of the land devour them; but they shall dwell safely, and none shall make them afraid.	They will no longer be prey for the nations, and the beasts of the earth will not consume them. They will dwell securely, and no one will frighten them.
EZK	34	29	내가 그들을 위하여 유명한 종식할 땅을 일으키리니 그들이 다시는 그 땅에서 기근으로 멸망하지 아니할지며 다시는 열국의 수치를 받지 아니할지라	And I will raise up for them a plant of renown, and they shall be no more consumed with hunger in the land, neither bear the shame of the heathen any more.	And I will raise up for them a garden of renown, and they will no longer be victims of famine in the land or bear the scorn of the nations.
EZK	34	30	그들이 나 여호와 그들의 하나님이 그들과 함께 있는 줄을 알며 그들 곧 이스라엘 족속이 내 백성인 줄 알리라 나 주 여호와의 말이라	Thus shall they know that I the Lord their God am with them, and that they, even the house of Israel, are my people, saith the Lord God.	Then they will know that I, the LORD their God, am with them, and that they, the house of Israel, are My people,’ declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	34	31	내 양 곧 내 초장의 양 너희는 사람이요 나는 너희 하나님이라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	And ye my flock, the flock of my pasture, are men, and I am your God, saith the Lord God.	‘You are My flock, the sheep of My pasture, My people, and I am your God,’ declares the Lord GOD.”
EZK	35	1	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	Moreover, the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	35	2	인자야 네 얼굴을 세일 산으로 향하고 그를 쳐서 예언하여	Son of man, set thy face against mount Seir, and prophesy against it,	“Son of man, set your face against Mount Seir and prophesy against it,
EZK	35	3	이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 세일 산아 내가 너를 대적하여 내 손을 네 위에 펴서 너로 황무지와 놀라움이 되게 할지라	And say unto it, Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, O mount Seir, I am against thee, and I will stretch out mine hand against thee, and I will make thee most desolate.	and declare that this is what the Lord GOD says: Behold, I am against you, O Mount Seir. I will stretch out My hand against you and make you a desolate waste.
EZK	35	4	내가 네 성읍들을 무너뜨리며 너로 황무케 하리니 네가 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	I will lay thy cities waste, and thou shalt be desolate, and thou shalt know that I am the Lord.	I will turn your cities into ruins, and you will become a desolation. Then you will know that I am the LORD.
EZK	35	5	네가 옛날부터 한을 품고 이스라엘 족속의 환난 때 곧 죄악의 끝 때에 칼의 권능에 그들을 붙였도다	Because thou hast had a perpetual hatred, and hast shed the blood of the children of Israel by the force of the sword in the time of their calamity, in the time that their iniquity had an end:	Because you harbored an ancient hatred and delivered the Israelites over to the sword in the time of their disaster at the final stage of their punishment,
EZK	35	6	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 나의 삶을 두고 맹세하노니 내가 너로 피를 만나게 한즉 피가 너를 따르리라 네가 피를 미워하지 아니하였은즉 피가 너를 따르리라	Therefore, as I live, saith the Lord God, I will prepare thee unto blood, and blood shall pursue thee: sith thou hast not hated blood, even blood shall pursue thee.	therefore as surely as I live, declares the Lord GOD, I will give you over to bloodshed and it will pursue you. Since you did not hate bloodshed, it will pursue you.
EZK	35	7	내가 세일 산으로 놀라움과 황무지가 되게 하여 그 위에 왕래하는 자를 다 끊을지라	Thus will I make mount Seir most desolate, and cut off from it him that passeth out and him that returneth.	I will make Mount Seir a desolate waste and will cut off from it those who come and go.
EZK	35	8	내가 그 살륙 당한 자로 그 여러 산에 채우되 칼에 살륙 당한 자로 네 여러 멧부리에, 골짜기에, 모든 시내에 엎드러지게 하고	And I will fill his mountains with his slain men: in thy hills, and in thy valleys, and in all thy rivers, shall they fall that are slain with the sword.	I will fill its mountains with the slain; those killed by the sword will fall on your hills, in your valleys, and in all your ravines.
EZK	35	9	너로 영원히 황무케 하여 네 성읍들에 다시는 거하는 자가 없게 하리니 너희가 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	I will make thee perpetual desolations, and thy cities shall not return: and ye shall know that I am the Lord.	I will make you a perpetual desolation, and your cities will not be inhabited. Then you will know that I am the LORD.
EZK	35	10	네가 말하기를 이 두 민족과 이 두 땅은 다 내게로 돌아와서 내 기업이 되리라 하였도다 그러나 나 여호와가 거기 있었느니라	Because thou hast said, These two nations and these two countries shall be mine, and we will possess it; whereas the Lord was there:	Because you have said, ‘These two nations and countries will be ours, and we will possess them,’ even though the LORD was there,
EZK	35	11	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 나의 삶을 두고 맹세하노니 네가 그들을 미워하여 노하며 질투한 대로 내가 네게 행하여 너를 국문할 때에 그들로 나를 알게 하리라	Therefore, as I live, saith the Lord God, I will even do according to thine anger, and according to thine envy which thou hast used out of thy hatred against them; and I will make myself known among them, when I have judged thee.	therefore as surely as I live, declares the Lord GOD, I will treat you according to the anger and jealousy you showed in your hatred against them, and I will make Myself known among them when I judge you.
EZK	35	12	네가 이스라엘 산들을 가리켜 말하기를 저 산들이 황무하였으니 우리에게 붙이워서 삼키게 되었다 하여 욕하는 모든 말을 나 여호와가 들은 줄을 네가 알리로다	And thou shalt know that I am the Lord, and that I have heard all thy blasphemies which thou hast spoken against the mountains of Israel, saying, They are laid desolate, they are given us to consume.	Then you will know that I, the LORD, have heard every contemptuous word you uttered against the mountains of Israel when you said, ‘They are desolate; they are given to us to devour!’
EZK	35	13	너희가 나를 대적하여 입으로 자랑하며 나를 대적하여 여러가지로 말한 것을 내가 들었노라	Thus with your mouth ye have boasted against me, and have multiplied your words against me: I have heard them.	You boasted against Me with your mouth and multiplied your words against Me. I heard it Myself!
EZK	35	14	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 온 땅이 즐거워할 때에 내가 너를 황무케 하되	Thus saith the Lord God; When the whole earth rejoiceth, I will make thee desolate.	This is what the Lord GOD says: While the whole earth rejoices, I will make you desolate.
EZK	35	15	이스라엘 족속의 기업이 황무함을 인하여 네가 즐거워한 것 같이 내가 너로 황무케 하리라 세일 산아 너와 에돔 온 땅이 황무하리니 무리가 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라 하셨다 하라	As thou didst rejoice at the inheritance of the house of Israel, because it was desolate, so will I do unto thee: thou shalt be desolate, O mount Seir, and all Idumea, even all of it: and they shall know that I am the Lord.	As you rejoiced when the inheritance of the house of Israel became desolate, so will I do to you. You will become a desolation, O Mount Seir, and so will all of Edom. Then they will know that I am the LORD.
EZK	36	1	인자야 너는 이스라엘 산들에게 예언하여 이르기를 이스라엘 산들아 여호와의 말씀을 들으라	Also, thou son of man, prophesy unto the mountains of Israel, and say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord:	“And you, son of man, prophesy to the mountains of Israel and say: O mountains of Israel, hear the word of the LORD.
EZK	36	2	주 여호와의 말씀에 대적이 네게 대하여 말하기를 하하 옛적 높은 곳이 우리의 기업이 되었도다 하였느니라	Thus saith the Lord God; Because the enemy hath said against you, Aha, even the ancient high places are ours in possession:	This is what the Lord GOD says: Because the enemy has said of you, ‘Aha! The ancient heights have become our possession,’
EZK	36	3	그러므로 너는 예언하여 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 그들이 너희를 황무케 하고 너희 사방을 삼켜서 너희로 남은 이방인의 기업이 되게 하여 사람의 말거리와 백성의 비방거리가 되게 하였도다	Therefore prophesy and say, Thus saith the Lord God; Because they have made you desolate, and swallowed you up on every side, that ye might be a possession unto the residue of the heathen, and ye are taken up in the lips of talkers, and are an infamy of the people:	therefore prophesy and declare that this is what the Lord GOD says: Because they have made you desolate and have trampled you on every side, so that you became a possession of the rest of the nations and were taken up in slander by the lips of their talkers,
EZK	36	4	그러므로 이스라엘 산들아 주 여호와의 말씀을 들을지어다 주 여호와께서 산들과 멧부리들과 시내들과 골짜기들과 황무한 사막들과 사면에 남아 있는 이방인의 노략거리와 조롱거리가 된 버린 성읍들에게 말씀하셨느니라	Therefore, ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord God; Thus saith the Lord God to the mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers, and to the valleys, to the desolate wastes, and to the cities that are forsaken, which became a prey and derision to the residue of the heathen that are round about;	therefore, O mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord GOD. This is what the Lord GOD says to the mountains and hills, to the ravines and valleys, to the desolate ruins and abandoned cities, which have become a spoil and a mockery to the rest of the nations around you.
EZK	36	5	주 여호와의 말씀에 내가 진실로 내 맹렬한 투기로 남아 있는 이방인과 에돔 온 땅을 쳐서 말하였노니 이는 그들이 심히 즐거워 하는 마음과 멸시하는 심령으로 내 땅을 빼앗아 노략하여 자기 소유를 삼았음이니라	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Surely in the fire of my jealousy have I spoken against the residue of the heathen, and against all Idumea, which have appointed my land into their possession with the joy of all their heart, with despiteful minds, to cast it out for a prey.	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: Surely in My burning zeal I have spoken against the rest of the nations, and against all Edom, who took My land as their own possession with wholehearted joy and utter contempt, so that its pastureland became plunder.
EZK	36	6	그러므로 너는 이스라엘 땅을 대하여 예언하되 그 산들과 멧부리들과 시내들과 골짜기들을 대하여 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 내가 내 투기와 내 분노로 말하였나니 이는 너희가 이방의 수욕을 당하였음이라	Prophesy therefore concerning the land of Israel, and say unto the mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers, and to the valleys, Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I have spoken in my jealousy and in my fury, because ye have borne the shame of the heathen:	Therefore, prophesy concerning the land of Israel and tell the mountains and hills, the ravines and valleys, that this is what the Lord GOD says: Behold, I have spoken in My burning zeal because you have endured the reproach of the nations.
EZK	36	7	그러므로 주 여호와의 말씀에 내가 맹세하였은즉 너희 사면에 있는 이방인이 자기 수욕을 정녕 당하리라	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; I have lifted up mine hand, Surely the heathen that are about you, they shall bear their shame.	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: I have sworn with an uplifted hand that surely the nations around you will endure reproach of their own.
EZK	36	8	그러나 너희 이스라엘 산들아 너희는 가지를 내고 내 백성 이스라엘을 위하여 과실을 맺으리니 그들의 올 때가 가까이 이르렀음이니라	But ye, O mountains of Israel, ye shall shoot forth your branches, and yield your fruit to my people of Israel; for they are at hand to come.	But you, O mountains of Israel, will produce branches and bear fruit for My people Israel, for they will soon come home.
EZK	36	9	내가 돌이켜 너희와 함께 하리니 사람이 너희를 갈고 심을 것이며	For, behold, I am for you, and I will turn unto you, and ye shall be tilled and sown:	For behold, I am on your side; I will turn toward you, and you will be tilled and sown.
EZK	36	10	내가 또 사람을 너희 위에 많게 하리니 이들은 이스라엘 온 족속이라 그들로 성읍들에 거하게 하며 빈 땅에 건축하게 하리라	And I will multiply men upon you, all the house of Israel, even all of it: and the cities shall be inhabited, and the wastes shall be builded:	I will multiply the people upon you—the house of Israel in its entirety. The cities will be inhabited and the ruins rebuilt.
EZK	36	11	내가 너희 위에 사람과 짐승으로 많게 하되 생육이 중다하고 번성하게 할 것이라 너희 전 지위대로 사람이 거하게 하여 너희를 처음보다 낫게 대접하리니 너희가 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	And I will multiply upon you man and beast; and they shall increase and bring fruit: and I will settle you after your old estates, and will do better unto you than at your beginnings: and ye shall know that I am the Lord.	I will fill you with people and animals, and they will multiply and be fruitful. I will make you as inhabited as you once were, and I will make you prosper more than before. Then you will know that I am the LORD.
EZK	36	12	내가 사람으로 너희 위에 행하게 하리니 그들은 내 백성 이스라엘이라 그들은 너를 얻고 너는 그 기업이 되어 다시는 그들로 자식들을 잃어버리지 않게 하리라	Yea, I will cause men to walk upon you, even my people Israel; and they shall possess thee, and thou shalt be their inheritance, and thou shalt no more henceforth bereave them of men.	Yes, I will cause My people Israel to walk upon you; they will possess you, and you will be their inheritance, and you will no longer deprive them of their children.
EZK	36	13	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 그들이 너희에게 이르기를 너는 사람을 삼키는 자요 네 나라 백성을 제한 자라 하거니와	Thus saith the Lord God; Because they say unto you, Thou land devourest up men, and hast bereaved thy nations;	For this is what the Lord GOD says: Because people say to you, ‘You devour men and deprive your nation of its children,’
EZK	36	14	네가 다시는 사람을 삼키지 아니하며 다시는 네 나라 백성을 제하지 아니하리라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	Therefore thou shalt devour men no more, neither bereave thy nations any more, saith the Lord God.	therefore you will no longer devour men or deprive your nation of its children, declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	36	15	내가 또 너로 열국의 수욕을 듣지 않게 하며 만민의 비방을 다시 받지 않게 하며 네 나라 백성을 다시 넘어뜨리지 않게 하리라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라 하셨다 하라	Neither will I cause men to hear in thee the shame of the heathen any more, neither shalt thou bear the reproach of the people any more, neither shalt thou cause thy nations to fall any more, saith the Lord God.	I will no longer allow the taunts of the nations to be heard against you, and you will no longer endure the reproach of the peoples or cause your nation to stumble, declares the Lord GOD.”
EZK	36	16	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	Again the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	36	17	인자야 이스라엘 족속이 그 고토에 거할 때에 그 행위로 그 땅을 더럽혔나니 나 보기에 그 소위가 월경 중에 있는 여인의 부정함과 같았느니라	Son of man, when the house of Israel dwelt in their own land, they defiled it by their own way and by their doings: their way was before me as the uncleanness of a removed woman.	“Son of man, when the people of Israel lived in their land, they defiled it by their own ways and deeds. Their behavior before Me was like the uncleanness of a woman’s impurity.
EZK	36	18	그들이 땅 위에 피를 쏟았으며 그 우상들로 더럽혔으므로 내가 분노를 그들의 위에 쏟아	Wherefore I poured my fury upon them for the blood that they had shed upon the land, and for their idols wherewith they had polluted it:	So I poured out My wrath upon them because of the blood they had shed on the land, and because they had defiled it with their idols.
EZK	36	19	그들을 그 행위대로 심판하여 각국에 흩으며 열방에 헤쳤더니	And I scattered them among the heathen, and they were dispersed through the countries: according to their way and according to their doings I judged them.	I dispersed them among the nations, and they were scattered throughout the lands. I judged them according to their ways and deeds.
EZK	36	20	그들의 이른바 그 열국에서 내 거룩한 이름이 그들로 인하여 더러워졌나니 곧 사람들이 그들을 가리켜 이르기를 이들은 여호와의 백성이라도 여호와의 땅에서 떠난 자라 하였음이니라	And when they entered unto the heathen, whither they went, they profaned my holy name, when they said to them, These are the people of the Lord, and are gone forth out of his land.	And wherever they went among the nations, they profaned My holy name, because it was said of them, ‘These are the people of the LORD, yet they had to leave His land.’
EZK	36	21	그러나 이스라엘 족속이 들어간 그 열국에서 더럽힌 내 거룩한 이름을 내가 아꼈노라	But I had pity for mine holy name, which the house of Israel had profaned among the heathen, whither they went.	But I had concern for My holy name, which the house of Israel had profaned among the nations to which they had gone.
EZK	36	22	그러므로 너는 이스라엘 족속에게 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 이스라엘 족속아 내가 이렇게 행함은 너희를 위함이 아니요 너희가 들어간 그 열국에서 더럽힌 나의 거룩한 이름을 위함이라	Therefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God; I do not this for your sakes, O house of Israel, but for mine holy name’s sake, which ye have profaned among the heathen, whither ye went.	Therefore tell the house of Israel that this is what the Lord GOD says: It is not for your sake that I will act, O house of Israel, but for My holy name, which you profaned among the nations to which you went.
EZK	36	23	열국 가운데서 더럽힘을 받은 이름 곧 너희가 그들 중에서 더럽힌 나의 큰 이름을 내가 거룩하게 할지라 내가 그들의 목전에서 너희로 인하여 나의 거룩함을 나타내리니 열국 사람이 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	And I will sanctify my great name, which was profaned among the heathen, which ye have profaned in the midst of them; and the heathen shall know that I am the Lord, saith the Lord God, when I shall be sanctified in you before their eyes.	I will show the holiness of My great name, which has been profaned among the nations—the name you have profaned among them. Then the nations will know that I am the LORD, declares the Lord GOD, when I show My holiness in you before their eyes.
EZK	36	24	내가 너희를 열국 중에서 취하여 내고 열국 중에서 모아 데리고 고토에 들어가서	For I will take you from among the heathen, and gather you out of all countries, and will bring you into your own land.	For I will take you from among the nations and gather you out of all the countries, and I will bring you back into your own land.
EZK	36	25	맑은 물로 너희에게 뿌려서 너희로 정결케 하되 곧 너희 모든 더러운 것에서와 모든 우상을 섬김에서 너희를 정결케 할 것이며	Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean: from all your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I cleanse you.	I will also sprinkle clean water on you, and you will be clean. I will cleanse you from all your impurities and all your idols.
EZK	36	26	또 새 영을 너희 속에 두고 새 마음을 너희에게 주되 너희 육신에서 굳은 마음을 제하고 부드러운 마음을 줄 것이며	A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh.	I will give you a new heart and put a new spirit within you; I will remove your heart of stone and give you a heart of flesh.
EZK	36	27	또 내 신을 너희 속에 두어 너희로 내 율례를 행하게 하리니 너희가 내 규례를 지켜 행할지라	And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.	And I will put My Spirit within you and cause you to walk in My statutes and to carefully observe My ordinances.
EZK	36	28	내가 너희 열조에게 준 땅에 너희가 거하여 내 백성이 되고 나는 너희 하나님이 되리라	And ye shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers; and ye shall be my people, and I will be your God.	Then you will live in the land that I gave your forefathers; you will be My people, and I will be your God.
EZK	36	29	내가 너희를 모든 더러운 데서 구원하고 곡식으로 풍성하게 하여 기근이 너희에게 임하지 아니하게 할 것이며	I will also save you from all your uncleannesses: and I will call for the corn, and will increase it, and lay no famine upon you.	I will save you from all your uncleanness. I will summon the grain and make it plentiful, and I will not bring famine upon you.
EZK	36	30	또 나무의 실과와 밭의 소산을 풍성케 하여 너희로 다시는 기근의 욕을 열국에게 받지 않게 하리니	And I will multiply the fruit of the tree, and the increase of the field, that ye shall receive no more reproach of famine among the heathen.	I will also make the fruit of the trees and the crops of the field plentiful, so that you will no longer bear reproach among the nations on account of famine.
EZK	36	31	그 때에 너희가 너희 악한 길과 너희 불선한 행위를 기억하고 너희 모든 죄악과 가증한 일을 인하여 스스로 밉게 보리라	Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall lothe yourselves in your own sight for your iniquities and for your abominations.	Then you will remember your evil ways and wicked deeds, and you will loathe yourselves for your iniquities and abominations.
EZK	36	32	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 이렇게 행함은 너희를 위함이 아닌 줄을 너희가 알리라 이스라엘 족속아 너희 행위를 인하여 부끄러워하고 한탄할지어다	Not for your sakes do I this, saith the Lord God, be it known unto you: be ashamed and confounded for your own ways, O house of Israel.	It is not for your sake that I will act, declares the Lord GOD—let it be known to you. Be ashamed and disgraced for your ways, O house of Israel!
EZK	36	33	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 너희를 모든 죄악에서 정결케 하는 날에 성읍들에 사람이 거접되게 하며 황폐한 것이 건축되게 할 것인즉	Thus saith the Lord God; In the day that I shall have cleansed you from all your iniquities I will also cause you to dwell in the cities, and the wastes shall be builded.	This is what the Lord GOD says: On the day I cleanse you from all your iniquities, I will cause the cities to be resettled and the ruins to be rebuilt.
EZK	36	34	전에는 지나가는 자의 눈에 황무하게 보이던 그 황무한 땅이 장차 기경이 될지라	And the desolate land shall be tilled, whereas it lay desolate in the sight of all that passed by.	The desolate land will be cultivated instead of lying desolate in the sight of all who pass through.
EZK	36	35	사람이 이르기를 이 땅이 황무하더니 이제는 에덴 동산 같이 되었고 황량하고 적막하고 무너진 성읍들에 성벽과 거민이 있다 하리니	And they shall say, This land that was desolate is become like the garden of Eden; and the waste and desolate and ruined cities are become fenced, and are inhabited.	Then they will say, ‘This land that was desolate has become like the garden of Eden. The cities that were once ruined, desolate, and destroyed are now fortified and inhabited.’
EZK	36	36	너희 사면에 남은 이방 사람이 나 여호와가 무너진 곳을 건축하며 황무한 자리에 심은 줄 알리라 나 여호와가 말하였으니 이루리라	Then the heathen that are left round about you shall know that I the Lord build the ruined places, and plant that that was desolate: I the Lord have spoken it, and I will do it.	Then the nations around you that remain will know that I, the LORD, have rebuilt what was destroyed, and I have replanted what was desolate. I, the LORD, have spoken, and I will do it.
EZK	36	37	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 그래도 이스라엘 족속이 이와 같이 자기들에게 이루어 주기를 내게 구하여야 할지라 내가 그들의 인수로 양떼 같이 많아지게 하되	Thus saith the Lord God; I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them; I will increase them with men like a flock.	This is what the Lord GOD says: Once again I will hear the plea of the house of Israel and do for them this: I will multiply their people like a flock.
EZK	36	38	제사드릴 양떼 곧 예루살렘 정한 절기의 양떼 같이 황폐한 성읍에 사람의 떼로 채우리라 그리한즉 그들이 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라 하셨느니라	As the holy flock, as the flock of Jerusalem in her solemn feasts; so shall the waste cities be filled with flocks of men: and they shall know that I am the Lord.	Like the numerous flocks for sacrifices at Jerusalem during her appointed feasts, so the ruined cities will be filled with flocks of people. Then they will know that I am the LORD.”
EZK	37	1	여호와께서 권능으로 내게 임하시고 그 신으로 나를 데리고 가서 골짜기 가운데 두셨는데 거기 뼈가 가득하더라	The hand of the Lord was upon me, and carried me out in the spirit of the Lord, and set me down in the midst of the valley which was full of bones,	The hand of the LORD was upon me, and He brought me out by His Spirit and set me down in the middle of the valley, and it was full of bones.
EZK	37	2	나를 그 뼈 사방으로 지나게 하시기로 본즉 그 골짜기 지면에 뼈가 심히 많고 아주 말랐더라	And caused me to pass by them round about: and, behold, there were very many in the open valley; and, lo, they were very dry.	He led me all around among them, and I saw a great many bones on the floor of the valley, and indeed, they were very dry.
EZK	37	3	그가 내게 이르시되 인자야 이 뼈들이 능히 살겠느냐 하시기로 내가 대답하되 주 여호와여 주께서 아시나이다	And he said unto me, Son of man, can these bones live? And I answered, O Lord God, thou knowest.	Then He asked me, “Son of man, can these bones come to life?” “O Lord GOD,” I replied, “only You know.”
EZK	37	4	또 내게 이르시되 너는 이 모든 뼈에게 대언하여 이르기를 너희 마른 뼈들아 여호와의 말씀을 들을지어다	Again he said unto me, Prophesy upon these bones, and say unto them, O ye dry bones, hear the word of the Lord.	And He said to me, “Prophesy concerning these bones and tell them, ‘Dry bones, hear the word of the LORD!
EZK	37	5	주 여호와께서 이 뼈들에게 말씀하시기를 내가 생기로 너희에게 들어가게 하리니 너희가 살리라	Thus saith the Lord God unto these bones; Behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live:	This is what the Lord GOD says to these bones: I will cause breath to enter you, and you will come to life.
EZK	37	6	너희 위에 힘줄을 두고 살을 입히고 가죽으로 덮고 너희 속에 생기를 두리니 너희가 살리라 또 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라 하셨다 하라	And I will lay sinews upon you, and will bring up flesh upon you, and cover you with skin, and put breath in you, and ye shall live; and ye shall know that I am the Lord.	I will attach tendons to you and make flesh grow upon you and cover you with skin. I will put breath within you so that you will come to life. Then you will know that I am the LORD.’”
EZK	37	7	이에 내가 명을 좇아 대언하니 대언할 때에 소리가 나고 움직이더니 이 뼈, 저 뼈가 들어 맞아서 뼈들이 서로 연락하더라	So I prophesied as I was commanded: and as I prophesied, there was a noise, and behold a shaking, and the bones came together, bone to his bone.	So I prophesied as I had been commanded. And as I prophesied, there was suddenly a noise, a rattling, and the bones came together, bone to bone.
EZK	37	8	내가 또 보니 그 뼈에 힘줄이 생기고 살이 오르며 그 위에 가죽이 덮이나 그 속에 생기는 없더라	And when I beheld, lo, the sinews and the flesh came up upon them, and the skin covered them above: but there was no breath in them.	As I looked on, tendons appeared on them, flesh grew, and skin covered them; but there was no breath in them.
EZK	37	9	또 내게 이르시되 인자야 너는 생기를 향하여 대언하라 생기에게 대언하여 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 생기야 사방에서부터 와서 이 사망을 당한 자에게 불어서 살게 하라 하셨다 하라	Then said he unto me, Prophesy unto the wind, prophesy, son of man, and say to the wind, Thus saith the Lord God; Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain, that they may live.	Then He said to me, “Prophesy to the breath; prophesy, son of man, and tell the breath that this is what the Lord GOD says: Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe into these slain, so that they may live!”
EZK	37	10	이에 내가 그 명대로 대언하였더니 생기가 그들에게 들어가매 그들이 곧 살아 일어나서 서는데 극히 큰 군대더라	So I prophesied as he commanded me, and the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceeding great army.	So I prophesied as He had commanded me, and the breath entered them, and they came to life and stood on their feet—a vast army.
EZK	37	11	또 내게 이르시되 인자야 이 뼈들은 이스라엘 온 족속이라 그들이 이르기를 우리의 뼈들이 말랐고 우리의 소망이 없어졌으니 우리는 다 멸절되었다 하느니라	Then he said unto me, Son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel: behold, they say, Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost: we are cut off for our parts.	Then He said to me, “Son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel. Look, they are saying, ‘Our bones are dried up, and our hope has perished; we are cut off.’
EZK	37	12	그러므로 너는 대언하여 그들에게 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 내 백성들아 내가 너희 무덤을 열고 너희로 거기서 나오게 하고 이스라엘 땅으로 들어가게 하리라	Therefore prophesy and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, O my people, I will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, and bring you into the land of Israel.	Therefore prophesy and tell them that this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘O My people, I will open your graves and bring you up from them, and I will bring you back to the land of Israel.
EZK	37	13	내 백성들아 내가 너희 무덤을 열고 너희로 거기서 나오게 한즉 너희가 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have opened your graves, O my people, and brought you up out of your graves,	Then you, My people, will know that I am the LORD, when I open your graves and bring you up from them.
EZK	37	14	내가 또 내 신을 너희 속에 두어 너희로 살게 하고 내가 또 너희를 너희 고토에 거하게 하리니 나 여호와가 이 일을 말하고 이룬줄을 너희가 알리라 나 여호와의 말이니라 하셨다 하라	And shall put my spirit in you, and ye shall live, and I shall place you in your own land: then shall ye know that I the Lord have spoken it, and performed it, saith the Lord.	I will put My Spirit in you and you will live, and I will settle you in your own land. Then you will know that I, the LORD, have spoken, and I will do it, declares the LORD.’”
EZK	37	15	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying,	Again the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	37	16	인자야 너는 막대기 하나를 취하여 그 위에 유다와 그 짝 이스라엘 자손이라 쓰고 또 다른 막대기 하나를 취하여 그 위에 에브라임의 막대기 곧 요셉과 그 짝 이스라엘 온 족속이라 쓰고	Moreover, thou son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions: then take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel his companions:	“And you, son of man, take a single stick and write on it: ‘Belonging to Judah and to the Israelites associated with him.’ Then take another stick and write on it: ‘Belonging to Joseph—the stick of Ephraim—and to all the house of Israel associated with him.’
EZK	37	17	그 막대기들을 서로 연합하여 하나가 되게 하라 네 손에서 둘이 하나가 되리라	And join them one to another into one stick; and they shall become one in thine hand.	Then join them together into one stick, so that they become one in your hand.
EZK	37	18	네 민족이 네게 말하여 이르기를 이것이 무슨 뜻인지 우리에게 고하지 아니하겠느냐 하거든	And when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee, saying, Wilt thou not shew us what thou meanest by these?	When your people ask you, ‘Won’t you explain to us what you mean by these?’
EZK	37	19	너는 곧 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 내가 에브라임의 손에 있는바 요셉과 그 짝 이스라엘 지파들의 막대기를 취하여 유다의 막대기에 붙여서 한 막대기가 되게 한즉 내 손에서 하나가 되리라 하셨다 하고	Say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his fellows, and will put them with him, even with the stick of Judah, and make them one stick, and they shall be one in mine hand.	you are to tell them that this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel associated with him, and I will put them together with the stick of Judah. I will make them into a single stick, and they will become one in My hand.’
EZK	37	20	너는 그 글 쓴 막대기들을 무리의 목전에서 손에 잡고	And the sticks whereon thou writest shall be in thine hand before their eyes.	When the sticks on which you write are in your hand and in full view of the people,
EZK	37	21	그들에게 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 내가 이스라엘 자손을 그 간바 열국에서 취하며 그 사면에서 모아서 그 고토로 돌아가게 하고	And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I will take the children of Israel from among the heathen, whither they be gone, and will gather them on every side, and bring them into their own land:	you are to tell them that this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘I will take the Israelites out of the nations to which they have gone, and I will gather them from all around and bring them into their own land.
EZK	37	22	그 땅 이스라엘 모든 산에서 그들로 한 나라를 이루어서 한 임금이 모두 다스리게 하리니 그들이 다시는 두 민족이 되지 아니하며 두 나라로 나누이지 아니할지라	And I will make them one nation in the land upon the mountains of Israel; and one king shall be king to them all: and they shall be no more two nations, neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms any more at all:	I will make them one nation in the land, on the mountains of Israel, and one king will rule over all of them. Then they will no longer be two nations and will never again be divided into two kingdoms.
EZK	37	23	그들이 그 우상들과 가증한 물건과 그 모든 죄악으로 스스로 더럽히지 아니하리라 내가 그들을 그 범죄한 모든 처소에서 구원하여 정결케 한즉 그들은 내 백성이 되고 나는 그들의 하나님이 되리라	Neither shall they defile themselves any more with their idols, nor with their detestable things, nor with any of their transgressions: but I will save them out of all their dwellingplaces, wherein they have sinned, and will cleanse them: so shall they be my people, and I will be their God.	They will no longer defile themselves with their idols or detestable images, or with any of their transgressions. I will save them from all their apostasies by which they sinned, and I will cleanse them. Then they will be My people, and I will be their God.
EZK	37	24	내 조상 다윗이 그들의 왕이 되리니 그들에게 다 한 목자가 있을 것이라 그들이 내 규례를 준행하고 내 율례를 지켜 행하며	And David my servant shall be king over them; and they all shall have one shepherd: they shall also walk in my judgments, and observe my statutes, and do them.	My servant David will be king over them, and there will be one shepherd for all of them. They will follow My ordinances and keep and observe My statutes.
EZK	37	25	내가 내 종 야곱에게 준 땅 곧 그 열조가 거하던 땅에 그들이 거하되 그들과 그 자자손손이 영원히 거기 거할 것이요 내 종 다윗이 영원히 그 왕이 되리라	And they shall dwell in the land that I have given unto Jacob my servant, wherein your fathers have dwelt; and they shall dwell therein, even they, and their children, and their children’s children for ever: and my servant David shall be their prince for ever.	They will live in the land that I gave to My servant Jacob, where your fathers lived. They will live there forever with their children and grandchildren, and My servant David will be their prince forever.
EZK	37	26	내가 그들과 화평의 언약을 세워서 영원한 언약이 되게 하고 또 그들을 견고하고 번성케 하며 내 성소를 그 가운데 세워서 영원히 이르게 하리니	Moreover I will make a covenant of peace with them; it shall be an everlasting covenant with them: and I will place them, and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore.	And I will make a covenant of peace with them; it will be an everlasting covenant. I will establish them and multiply them, and I will set My sanctuary among them forever.
EZK	37	27	내 처소가 그들의 가운데 있을 것이며 나는 그들의 하나님이 되고 그들은 내 백성이 되리라	My tabernacle also shall be with them: yea, I will be their God, and they shall be my people.	My dwelling place will be with them; I will be their God, and they will be My people.
EZK	37	28	내 성소가 영원토록 그들의 가운데 있으리니 열국이 나를 이스라엘을 거룩케 하는 여호와인 줄 알리라 하셨다 하라	And the heathen shall know that I the Lord do sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for evermore.	Then the nations will know that I the LORD sanctify Israel, when My sanctuary is among them forever.’”
EZK	38	1	여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 가라사대	And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
EZK	38	2	인자야 너는 마곡 땅에 있는 곡 곧 로스와 메섹과 두발 왕에게로 얼굴을 향하고 그를 쳐서 예언하여	Son of man, set thy face against Gog, the land of Magog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal, and prophesy against him,	“Son of man, set your face against Gog of the land of Magog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal. Prophesy against him
EZK	38	3	이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 로스와 메섹과 두발 왕 곡아 내가 너를 대적하여	And say, Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal:	and declare that this is what the Lord GOD says: Behold, I am against you, O Gog, chief prince of Meshech and Tubal.
EZK	38	4	너를 돌이켜 갈고리로 네 아가리를 꿰고 너와 말과 기병 곧 네 온 군대를 끌어내되 완전한 갑옷을 입고 큰 방패와 작은 방패를 가지며 칼을 잡은 큰 무리와	And I will turn thee back, and put hooks into thy jaws, and I will bring thee forth, and all thine army, horses and horsemen, all of them clothed with all sorts of armour, even a great company with bucklers and shields, all of them handling swords:	I will turn you around, put hooks in your jaws, and bring you out with all your army—your horses, your horsemen in full armor, and a great company armed with shields and bucklers, all brandishing their swords.
EZK	38	5	그들과 함께 한바 방패와 투구를 갖춘 바사와 구스와 붓과	Persia, Ethiopia, and Libya with them; all of them with shield and helmet:	Persia, Cush, and Put will accompany them, all with shields and helmets,
EZK	38	6	고멜과 그 모든 떼와 극한 북방의 도갈마 족속과 그 모든 떼 곧 많은 백성의 무리를 너와 함께 끌어 내리라	Gomer, and all his bands; the house of Togarmah of the north quarters, and all his bands: and many people with thee.	as well as Gomer with all its troops, and Beth-togarmah from the far north with all its troops—the many nations with you.
EZK	38	7	너는 스스로 예비하되 너와 네게 모인 무리들이 다 스스로 예비하고 너는 그들의 대장이 될지어다	Be thou prepared, and prepare for thyself, thou, and all thy company that are assembled unto thee, and be thou a guard unto them.	Get ready; prepare yourself, you and all your company gathered around you; you will be their guard.
EZK	38	8	여러날 후 곧 말년에 네가 명령을 받고 그 땅 곧 오래 황무하였던 이스라엘 산에 이르리니 그 땅 백성은 칼을 벗어나서 열국에서부터 모여 들어오며 이방에서부터 나와서 다 평안히 거하는 중이라	After many days thou shalt be visited: in the latter years thou shalt come into the land that is brought back from the sword, and is gathered out of many people, against the mountains of Israel, which have been always waste: but it is brought forth out of the nations, and they shall dwell safely all of them.	After a long time you will be summoned. In the latter years you will enter a land that has recovered from war, whose people were gathered from many nations to the mountains of Israel, which had long been desolate. They had been brought out from the nations, and all now dwell securely.
EZK	38	9	네가 올라오되 너와 네 모든 떼와 너와 함께한 많은 백성이 광풍 같이 이르고 구름 같이 땅을 덮으리라	Thou shalt ascend and come like a storm, thou shalt be like a cloud to cover the land, thou, and all thy bands, and many people with thee.	You and all your troops, and many peoples with you will go up, advancing like a thunderstorm; you will be like a cloud covering the land.
EZK	38	10	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 그 날에 네 마음에서 여러가지 생각이 나서 악한 꾀를 내어	Thus saith the Lord God; It shall also come to pass, that at the same time shall things come into thy mind, and thou shalt think an evil thought:	This is what the Lord GOD says: On that day, thoughts will arise in your mind, and you will devise an evil plan.
EZK	38	11	말하기를 내가 평원의 고을들로 올라가리라 성벽도 없고 문이나 빗장이 없어도 염려없이 다 평안히 거하는 백성에게 나아가서	And thou shalt say, I will go up to the land of unwalled villages; I will go to them that are at rest, that dwell safely, all of them dwelling without walls, and having neither bars nor gates,	You will say, ‘I will go up against a land of unwalled villages; I will come against a tranquil people who dwell securely, all of them living without walls or bars or gates—
EZK	38	12	물건을 겁탈하며 노략하리라 하고 네 손을 들어서 황무하였다가 지금 사람이 거처하는 땅과 열국 중에서 모여서 짐승과 재물을 얻고 세상 중앙에 거하는 백성을 치고자 할 때에	To take a spoil, and to take a prey; to turn thine hand upon the desolate places that are now inhabited, and upon the people that are gathered out of the nations, which have gotten cattle and goods, that dwell in the midst of the land.	in order to seize the spoil and carry off the plunder, to turn a hand against the desolate places now inhabited and against a people gathered from the nations, who have acquired livestock and possessions and who live at the center of the land.’
EZK	38	13	스바와 드단과 다시스의 상고와 그 부자들이 네게 이르기를 네가 탈취하러 왔느냐 네가 네 무리를 모아 노략하고자 하느냐 은과 금을 빼앗으며 짐승과 재물을 취하며 물건을 크게 약탈하여 가고자 하느냐 하리라 하셨다 하라	Sheba, and Dedan, and the merchants of Tarshish, with all the young lions thereof, shall say unto thee, Art thou come to take a spoil? hast thou gathered thy company to take a prey? to carry away silver and gold, to take away cattle and goods, to take a great spoil?	Sheba and Dedan and the merchants of Tarshish with all its villages will ask, ‘Have you come to capture the plunder? Have you assembled your hordes to carry away loot, to make off with silver and gold, to take cattle and goods, to seize great spoil?’
EZK	38	14	인자야 너는 또 예언하여 곡에게 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 내 백성 이스라엘이 평안히 거하는 날에 네가 어찌 그것을 알지 못하겠느냐	Therefore, son of man, prophesy and say unto Gog, Thus saith the Lord God; In that day when my people of Israel dwelleth safely, shalt thou not know it?	Therefore prophesy, son of man, and tell Gog that this is what the Lord GOD says: On that day when My people Israel are dwelling securely, will you not take notice of this?
EZK	38	15	네가 네 고토 극한 북방에서 많은 백성 곧 다 말을 탄 큰 떼와 능한 군대와 함께 오되	And thou shalt come from thy place out of the north parts, thou, and many people with thee, all of them riding upon horses, a great company, and a mighty army:	And you will come from your place out of the far north—you and many peoples with you, all riding horses—a mighty horde, a huge army.
EZK	38	16	구름이 땅에 덮임 같이 내 백성 이스라엘을 치러 오리라 곡아 끝날에 내가 너를 이끌어다가 내 땅을 치게 하리니 이는 내가 너로 말미암아 이방 사람의 목전에서 내 거룩함을 나타내어 그들로 다 나를 알게 하려 함이니라	And thou shalt come up against my people of Israel, as a cloud to cover the land; it shall be in the latter days, and I will bring thee against my land, that the heathen may know me, when I shall be sanctified in thee, O Gog, before their eyes.	You will advance against My people Israel like a cloud covering the land. It will happen in the latter days, O Gog, that I will bring you against My land, so that the nations may know Me when I show Myself holy in you before their eyes.
EZK	38	17	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 옛적에 내 종 이스라엘 선지자들을 빙자하여 말한 사람이 네가 아니냐 그들이 그 때에 여러 해 동안 예언하기를 내가 너를 이끌어다가 그들을 치게 하리라 하였느니라 하셨다 하라	Thus saith the Lord God; Art thou he of whom I have spoken in old time by my servants the prophets of Israel, which prophesied in those days many years that I would bring thee against them?	This is what the Lord GOD says: Are you the one of whom I have spoken in former days through My servants, the prophets of Israel, who in those times prophesied for years that I would bring you against them?
EZK	38	18	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 그 날에 곡이 이스라엘 땅을 치러 오면 내 노가 내 얼굴에 나타나리라	And it shall come to pass at the same time when Gog shall come against the land of Israel, saith the Lord God, that my fury shall come up in my face.	Now on that day when Gog comes against the land of Israel, declares the Lord GOD, My wrath will flare up.
EZK	38	19	내가 투기와 맹렬한 노로 말하였거니와 그 날에 큰 지진이 이스라엘 땅에 일어나서	For in my jealousy and in the fire of my wrath have I spoken, Surely in that day there shall be a great shaking in the land of Israel;	In My zeal and fiery rage I proclaim that on that day there will be a great earthquake in the land of Israel.
EZK	38	20	바다의 고기들과 공중의 새들과 들의 짐승들과 땅에 기는 모든 벌레와 지면에 있는 모든 사람이 내 앞에서 떨 것이며 모든 산이 무너지며 절벽이 떨어지며 모든 성벽이 땅에 무너지리라	So that the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the field, and all creeping things that creep upon the earth, and all the men that are upon the face of the earth, shall shake at my presence, and the mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep places shall fall, and every wall shall fall to the ground.	The fish of the sea, the birds of the air, the beasts of the field, every creature that crawls upon the ground, and all mankind on the face of the earth will tremble at My presence. The mountains will be thrown down, the cliffs will collapse, and every wall will fall to the ground.
EZK	38	21	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 내 모든 산 중에서 그를 칠 칼을 부르리니 각 사람의 칼이 그 형제를 칠 것이며	And I will call for a sword against him throughout all my mountains, saith the Lord God: every man’s sword shall be against his brother.	And I will summon a sword against Gog on all My mountains, declares the Lord GOD, and every man’s sword will be against his brother.
EZK	38	22	내가 또 온역과 피로 그를 국문하며 쏟아지는 폭우와 큰 우박덩이와 불과 유황으로 그와 그 모든 떼와 그 함께한 많은 백성에게 비를 내리듯 하리라	And I will plead against him with pestilence and with blood; and I will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people that are with him, an overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire, and brimstone.	I will execute judgment upon him with plague and bloodshed. I will pour out torrents of rain, hailstones, fire, and sulfur on him and on his troops and on the many nations with him.
EZK	38	23	이와 같이 내가 여러 나라의 눈에 내 존대함과 내 거룩함을 나타내어 나를 알게 하리니 그들이 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	Thus will I magnify myself, and sanctify myself; and I will be known in the eyes of many nations, and they shall know that I am the Lord.	I will magnify and sanctify Myself, and will reveal Myself in the sight of many nations. Then they will know that I am the LORD.
EZK	39	1	그러므로 인자야 너는 곡을 쳐서 예언하여 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀에 로스와 메섹과 두발 왕 곡아 내가 너를 대적하여	Therefore, thou son of man, prophesy against Gog, and say, Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal:	“As for you, O son of man, prophesy against Gog and declare that this is what the Lord GOD says: Behold, I am against you, O Gog, chief prince of Meshech and Tubal.
EZK	39	2	너를 돌이켜서 이끌고 먼 북방에서부터 나와서 이스라엘 산 위에 이르러	And I will turn thee back, and leave but the sixth part of thee, and will cause thee to come up from the north parts, and will bring thee upon the mountains of Israel:	I will turn you around, drive you along, bring you up from the far north, and send you against the mountains of Israel.
EZK	39	3	네 활을 쳐서 네 왼손에서 떨어뜨리고 네 살을 네 오른손에서 떨어뜨리리니	And I will smite thy bow out of thy left hand, and will cause thine arrows to fall out of thy right hand.	Then I will strike the bow from your left hand and dash down the arrows from your right hand.
EZK	39	4	너와 네 모든 떼와 너와 함께한 백성이 다 이스라엘 산에 엎드러지리라 내가 너를 각종 움키는 새와 들짐승에게 붙여 먹게 하리니	Thou shalt fall upon the mountains of Israel, thou, and all thy bands, and the people that is with thee: I will give thee unto the ravenous birds of every sort, and to the beasts of the field to be devoured.	On the mountains of Israel you will fall—you and all your troops and the nations with you. I will give you as food to every kind of ravenous bird and wild beast.
EZK	39	5	네가 빈들에 엎드러지리라 이는 내가 말하였음이니라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	Thou shalt fall upon the open field: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord God.	You will fall in the open field, for I have spoken, declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	39	6	내가 또 불을 마곡과 및 섬에 평안히 거하는 자에게 내리리니 그들이 나를 여호와인 줄 알리라	And I will send a fire on Magog, and among them that dwell carelessly in the isles: and they shall know that I am the Lord.	I will send fire on Magog and on those who dwell securely in the coastlands, and they will know that I am the LORD.
EZK	39	7	내가 내 거룩한 이름을 내 백성 이스라엘 가운데 알게 하여 다시는 내 거룩한 이름을 더럽히지 않게 하리니 열국이 나를 여호와 곧 이스라엘의 거룩한 자인 줄 알리라 하셨다 하라	So will I make my holy name known in the midst of my people Israel; and I will not let them pollute my holy name any more: and the heathen shall know that I am the Lord, the Holy One in Israel.	So I will make My holy name known among My people Israel and will no longer allow it to be profaned. Then the nations will know that I am the LORD, the Holy One in Israel.
EZK	39	8	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 볼지어다 그 일이 이르고 이루리니 내가 말한 그 날이 이 날이니라	Behold, it is come, and it is done, saith the Lord God; this is the day whereof I have spoken.	Yes, it is coming, and it will surely happen, declares the Lord GOD. This is the day of which I have spoken.
EZK	39	9	이스라엘 성읍들에 거한 자가 나가서 그 병기를 불 피워 사르되 큰 방패와 작은 방패와 활과 살과 몽둥이와 창을 취하여 칠 년 동안 불 피우리라	And they that dwell in the cities of Israel shall go forth, and shall set on fire and burn the weapons, both the shields and the bucklers, the bows and the arrows, and the handstaves, and the spears, and they shall burn them with fire seven years:	Then those who dwell in the cities of Israel will go out, kindle fires, and burn up the weapons—the bucklers and shields, the bows and arrows, the clubs and spears. For seven years they will use them for fuel.
EZK	39	10	이와 같이 그 병기로 불을 피울 것이므로 그들이 들에서 나무를 취하지 아니하며 삼림에서 벌목하지 아니하겠고 전에 자기에게서 약탈하던 자의 것을 약탈하며 전에 자기에게서 늑탈하던 자의 것을 늑탈하리라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	So that they shall take no wood out of the field, neither cut down any out of the forests; for they shall burn the weapons with fire: and they shall spoil those that spoiled them, and rob those that robbed them, saith the Lord God.	They will not gather wood from the countryside or cut it from the forests, for they will use the weapons for fuel. They will loot those who looted them and plunder those who plundered them, declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	39	11	그 날에 내가 곡을 위하여 이스라엘 땅 곧 바다 동편 사람의 통행하는 골짜기를 매장지로 주리니 통행하던 것이 막힐 것이라 사람이 거기서 곡과 그 모든 무리를 장사하고 그 이름을 하몬곡의 골짜기라 일컬으리라	And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will give unto Gog a place there of graves in Israel, the valley of the passengers on the east of the sea: and it shall stop the noses of the passengers: and there shall they bury Gog and all his multitude: and they shall call it The valley of Hamon–gog.	And on that day I will give Gog a burial place in Israel, the Valley of the Travelers, east of the Sea. It will block those who travel through, because Gog and all his hordes will be buried there. So it will be called the Valley of Hamon-gog.
EZK	39	12	이스라엘 족속이 일곱 달 동안에 그들을 장사하여 그 땅을 정결케 할 것이라	And seven months shall the house of Israel be burying of them, that they may cleanse the land.	For seven months the house of Israel will be burying them in order to cleanse the land.
EZK	39	13	그 땅 모든 백성이 그들을 장사하고 그로 말미암아 이름을 얻으리니 이는 나의 영광이 나타나는 날이니라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	Yea, all the people of the land shall bury them; and it shall be to them a renown the day that I shall be glorified, saith the Lord God.	All the people of the land will bury them, and it will bring them renown on the day I display My glory, declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	39	14	그들이 사람을 택하여 그 땅에 늘 순행하며 장사할 사람으로 더불어 지면에 남아 있는 시체를 장사하여 그 땅을 정결케 할 것이라 일곱 달 후에 그들이 살펴 보되	And they shall sever out men of continual employment, passing through the land to bury with the passengers those that remain upon the face of the earth, to cleanse it: after the end of seven months shall they search.	And men will be employed to continually pass through the land to cleanse it by burying the invaders who remain on the ground. At the end of the seven months they will begin their search.
EZK	39	15	순행하는 자가 그 땅으로 통행하다가 사람의 뼈를 보면 그 곁에 표를 세워 장사하는 자로 와서 하몬곡 골짜기에 장사하게 할 것이요	And the passengers that pass through the land, when any seeth a man’s bone, then shall he set up a sign by it, till the buriers have buried it in the valley of Hamon–gog.	As they pass through the land, anyone who sees a human bone will set up a pillar next to it, until the gravediggers have buried it in the Valley of Hamon-gog.
EZK	39	16	성의 이름도 하모나라 하리라 그들이 이와 같이 그 땅을 정결케 하리라	And also the name of the city shall be Hamonah. Thus shall they cleanse the land.	(Even the city will be named Hamonah.) And so they will cleanse the land.
EZK	39	17	너 인자야 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 너는 각종 새와 들의 각종 짐승에게 이르기를 너희는 모여 오라 내가 너희를 위한 잔치 곧 이스라엘 산 위에 예비한 큰 잔치로 너희는 사방에서 모여서 고기를 먹으며 피를 마실지어다	And, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord God; Speak unto every feathered fowl, and to every beast of the field, Assemble yourselves, and come; gather yourselves on every side to my sacrifice that I do sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh, and drink blood.	And as for you, son of man, this is what the Lord GOD says: Call out to every kind of bird and to every beast of the field: ‘Assemble and come together from all around to the sacrificial feast that I am preparing for you, a great feast on the mountains of Israel. There you will eat flesh and drink blood.
EZK	39	18	너희가 용사의 고기를 먹으며 세상 왕들의 피를 마시기를 바산의 살진 짐승 곧 수양이나 어린 양이나 염소나 수송아지를 먹듯 할지라	Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of the princes of the earth, of rams, of lambs, and of goats, of bullocks, all of them fatlings of Bashan.	You will eat the flesh of the mighty and drink the blood of the princes of the earth as though they were rams, lambs, goats, and bulls—all the fattened animals of Bashan.
EZK	39	19	내가 너희를 위하여 예비한 잔치의 기름을 너희가 배불리 먹으며 그 피를 취토록 마시되	And ye shall eat fat till ye be full, and drink blood till ye be drunken, of my sacrifice which I have sacrificed for you.	At the sacrifice I am preparing, you will eat fat until you are gorged and drink blood until you are drunk.
EZK	39	20	내 상에서 말과 기병과 용사와 모든 군사를 배불리 먹을지니라 하라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	Thus ye shall be filled at my table with horses and chariots, with mighty men, and with all men of war, saith the Lord God.	And at My table you will eat your fill of horses and riders, of mighty men and warriors of every kind,’ declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	39	21	내가 내 영광을 열국 중에 나타내어 열국으로 나의 행한 심판과 내가 그 위에 나타낸 권능을 보게 하리니	And I will set my glory among the heathen, and all the heathen shall see my judgment that I have executed, and my hand that I have laid upon them.	I will display My glory among the nations, and all the nations will see the judgment that I execute and the hand that I lay upon them.
EZK	39	22	그 날 이후에 이스라엘 족속은 나를 여호와 자기들의 하나님인 줄 알겠고	So the house of Israel shall know that I am the Lord their God from that day and forward.	From that day forward the house of Israel will know that I am the LORD their God.
EZK	39	23	열국은 이스라엘 족속이 그 죄악으로 인하여 사로잡혀 갔던줄 알지라 그들이 내게 범죄하였으므로 내 얼굴을 그들에게 가리우고 그들을 그 대적의 손에 붙여 다 칼에 엎드러지게 하였으되	And the heathen shall know that the house of Israel went into captivity for their iniquity: because they trespassed against me, therefore hid I my face from them, and gave them into the hand of their enemies: so fell they all by the sword.	And the nations will know that the house of Israel went into exile for their iniquity, because they were unfaithful to Me. So I hid My face from them and delivered them into the hands of their enemies, so that they all fell by the sword.
EZK	39	24	내가 그들의 더러움과 그들의 범죄한 대로 행하여 그들에게 내 얼굴을 가리웠었느니라	According to their uncleanness and according to their transgressions have I done unto them, and hid my face from them.	I dealt with them according to their uncleanness and transgressions, and I hid My face from them.
EZK	39	25	그러므로 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 내가 이제 내 거룩한 이름을 위하여 열심을 내어 야곱의 사로잡힌 자를 돌아오게 하며 이스라엘 온 족속에게 긍휼을 베풀지라	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; Now will I bring again the captivity of Jacob, and have mercy upon the whole house of Israel, and will be jealous for my holy name;	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: Now I will restore Jacob from captivity and will have compassion on the whole house of Israel, and I will be jealous for My holy name.
EZK	39	26	그들이 그 땅에 평안히 거하고 두렵게 할 자가 없게 될 때에 부끄러움을 품고 내게 범한 죄를 뉘우치리니	After that they have borne their shame, and all their trespasses whereby they have trespassed against me, when they dwelt safely in their land, and none made them afraid.	They will forget their disgrace and all the treachery they committed against Me, when they dwell securely in their land, with no one to frighten them.
EZK	39	27	곧 내가 그들을 만민 중에서 돌아오게 하고 적국 중에서 모아내어 열국 목전에서 그들로 인하여 나의 거룩함을 나타낼 때에라	When I have brought them again from the people, and gathered them out of their enemies’ lands, and am sanctified in them in the sight of many nations;	When I bring them back from the peoples and gather them out of the lands of their enemies, I will show My holiness in them in the sight of many nations.
EZK	39	28	전에는 내가 그들로 사로잡혀 열국에 이르게 하였거니와 후에는 내가 그들을 모아 고토로 돌아오게 하고 그 한 사람도 이방에 남기지 아니하리니 그들이 나를 여호와 자기들의 하나님인 줄 알리라	Then shall they know that I am the Lord their God, which caused them to be led into captivity among the heathen: but I have gathered them unto their own land, and have left none of them any more there.	Then they will know that I am the LORD their God, when I regather them to their own land, not leaving any of them behind after their exile among the nations.
EZK	39	29	내가 다시는 내 얼굴을 그들에게 가리우지 아니하리니 이는 내가 내 신을 이스라엘 족속에게 쏟았음이니라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	Neither will I hide my face any more from them: for I have poured out my spirit upon the house of Israel, saith the Lord God.	And I will no longer hide My face from them, for I will pour out My Spirit on the house of Israel, declares the Lord GOD.”
EZK	40	1	우리가 사로잡힌지 이십오년이요 성이 함락된 후 십사년 정월 십일 곧 그 날에 여호와의 권능이 내게 임하여 나를 데리고 이스라엘 땅으로 가시되	In the five and twentieth year of our captivity, in the beginning of the year, in the tenth day of the month, in the fourteenth year after that the city was smitten, in the selfsame day the hand of the Lord was upon me, and brought me thither.	In the twenty-fifth year of our exile, at the beginning of the year, on the tenth day of the month—in the fourteenth year after Jerusalem had been struck down—on that very day the hand of the LORD was upon me, and He took me there.
EZK	40	2	하나님의 이상 중에 나를 데리고 그 땅에 이르러 나를 극히 높은 산 위에 내려 놓으시는데 거기서 남으로 향하여 성읍 형상 같은 것이 있더라	In the visions of God brought he me into the land of Israel, and set me upon a very high mountain, by which was as the frame of a city on the south.	In visions of God He took me to the land of Israel and set me on a very high mountain, on whose southern slope was a structure that resembled a city.
EZK	40	3	나를 데리시고 거기 이르시니 모양이 놋 같이 빛난 사람 하나가 손에 삼줄과 척량하는 장대를 가지고 문에 서서 있더니	And he brought me thither, and, behold, there was a man, whose appearance was like the appearance of brass, with a line of flax in his hand, and a measuring reed; and he stood in the gate.	So He took me there, and I saw a man whose appearance was like bronze. He was standing in the gateway with a linen cord and a measuring rod in his hand.
EZK	40	4	그 사람이 내게 이르되 인자야 내가 네게 보이는 그것을 눈으로 보고 귀로 들으며 네 마음으로 생각할지어다 내가 이것을 네게 보이려고 이리로 데리고 왔나니 너는 본 것을 다 이스라엘 족속에게 고할지어다 하더라	And the man said unto me, Son of man, behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears, and set thine heart upon all that I shall shew thee; for to the intent that I might shew them unto thee art thou brought hither: declare all that thou seest to the house of Israel.	“Son of man,” he said to me, “look with your eyes, hear with your ears, and pay attention to everything I am going to show you, for that is why you have been brought here. Report to the house of Israel everything you see.”
EZK	40	5	내가 본즉 집 바깥 사면으로 담이 있더라 그 사람의 손에 척량하는 장대를 잡았는데 그 장이 팔꿈치에서 손가락에 이르고 한 손바닥 넓이가 더한 자로 육 척이라 그 담을 척량하니 두께가 한 장대요 고도 한 장대며	And behold a wall on the outside of the house round about, and in the man’s hand a measuring reed of six cubits long by the cubit and an hand breadth: so he measured the breadth of the building, one reed; and the height, one reed.	And I saw a wall surrounding the temple area. Now the length of the measuring rod in the man’s hand was six long cubits (each measuring a cubit and a handbreadth), and he measured the wall to be one rod thick and one rod high.
EZK	40	6	그가 동향한 문에 이르러 층계에 올라 그 문통을 척량하니 장이 한 장대요 그 문 안통의 장도 한 장대며	Then came he unto the gate which looketh toward the east, and went up the stairs thereof, and measured the threshold of the gate, which was one reed broad; and the other threshold of the gate, which was one reed broad.	Then he came to the gate facing east and climbed its steps. He measured the threshold of the gate to be one rod deep.
EZK	40	7	그 문간에 문지기 방들이 있는데 각기 장이 한 장대요 광이 한 장대요 매방 사이 벽이 오 척이며 안 문통의 장이 한 장대요 그 앞에 현관이 있고 그 앞에 안 문이 있으며	And every little chamber was one reed long, and one reed broad; and between the little chambers were five cubits; and the threshold of the gate by the porch of the gate within was one reed.	Each gate chamber was one rod long and one rod wide, and there were five cubits between the gate chambers. The inner threshold of the gate by the portico facing inward was one rod deep.
EZK	40	8	그가 또 안 문의 현관을 척량하니 한 장대며	He measured also the porch of the gate within, one reed.	Then he measured the portico of the gateway inside;
EZK	40	9	안 문의 현관을 또 척량하니 팔 척이요 그 문 벽은 이 척이라 그 문의 현관이 안으로 향하였으며	Then measured he the porch of the gate, eight cubits; and the posts thereof, two cubits; and the porch of the gate was inward.	it was eight cubits deep, and its jambs were two cubits thick. And the portico of the gateway faced the temple.
EZK	40	10	그 동문간의 문지기 방은 좌편에 셋이 있고 우편에 셋이 있으니 그 셋이 각각 한 척수요 그 좌우편 벽도 다 한 척수며	And the little chambers of the gate eastward were three on this side, and three on that side; they three were of one measure: and the posts had one measure on this side and on that side.	There were three gate chambers on each side of the east gate, each with the same measurements, and the gateposts on either side also had the same measurements.
EZK	40	11	또 그 문통을 척량하니 광이 십 척이요 장이 십삼 척이며	And he measured the breadth of the entry of the gate, ten cubits; and the length of the gate, thirteen cubits.	And he measured the width of the gateway entrance to be ten cubits, and its length was thirteen cubits.
EZK	40	12	방 앞에 퇴가 있는데 이편 퇴도 일 척이요 저편 퇴도 일 척이며 그 방은 이편도 육 척이요 저편도 육 척이며	The space also before the little chambers was one cubit on this side, and the space was one cubit on that side: and the little chambers were six cubits on this side, and six cubits on that side.	In front of each gate chamber was a wall one cubit high, and the gate chambers were six cubits square.
EZK	40	13	그가 그 문간을 척량하니 이 방 지붕 가에서 저 방 지붕 가까지 광이 이십오 척인데 방 문은 서로 반대되었으며	He measured then the gate from the roof of one little chamber to the roof of another: the breadth was five and twenty cubits, door against door.	Then he measured the gateway from the roof of one gate chamber to the roof of the opposite one; the distance was twenty-five cubits from doorway to doorway.
EZK	40	14	그가 또 현관을 척량하니 광이 이십 척이요 현관 사면에 뜰이 있으며	He made also posts of threescore cubits, even unto the post of the court round about the gate.	Next he measured the gateposts to be sixty cubits high. The gateway extended around to the gatepost of the courtyard.
EZK	40	15	바깥 문통에서부터 안 문 현관 앞까지 오십 척이며	And from the face of the gate of the entrance unto the face of the porch of the inner gate were fifty cubits.	And the distance from the entrance of the gateway to the far end of its inner portico was fifty cubits.
EZK	40	16	문지기 방에는 각각 닫힌 창이 있고 문안 좌우편에 있는 벽 사이에도 창이 있고 그 현관도 그러하고 그 창은 안 좌우편으로 벌여 있으며 각 문 벽 위에는 종려나무를 새겼더라	And there were narrow windows to the little chambers, and to their posts within the gate round about, and likewise to the arches: and windows were round about inward: and upon each post were palm trees.	The gate chambers and their side pillars had beveled windows all around the inside of the gateway. The porticos also had windows all around on the inside. Each side pillar was decorated with palm trees.
EZK	40	17	그가 나를 데리고 바깥 뜰에 들어가니 뜰 삼면에 박석 깔린 땅이 있고 그 박석 깔린 땅 위에 여러 방이 있는데 모두 삼십이며	Then brought he me into the outward court, and, lo, there were chambers, and a pavement made for the court round about: thirty chambers were upon the pavement.	Then he brought me into the outer court, and there were chambers and a pavement laid out all around the court. Thirty chambers faced the pavement,
EZK	40	18	그 박석 깔린 땅의 위치는 각 문간의 좌우편인데 그 광이 문간 길이와 같으니 이는 아래 박석 땅이며	And the pavement by the side of the gates over against the length of the gates was the lower pavement.	which flanked the gateways and corresponded to the length of the gates; this was the lower pavement.
EZK	40	19	그가 아래 문간 앞에서부터 안 뜰 바깥 문간 앞까지 척량하니 그 광이 일백 척이며 동편과 북편이 일반이더라	Then he measured the breadth from the forefront of the lower gate unto the forefront of the inner court without, an hundred cubits eastward and northward.	Then he measured the distance from the front of the lower gateway to the outside of the inner court; it was a hundred cubits on the east side as well as on the north.
EZK	40	20	그가 바깥 뜰 북향한 문간의 장광을 척량하니	And the gate of the outward court that looked toward the north, he measured the length thereof, and the breadth thereof.	He also measured the length and width of the gateway of the outer court facing north.
EZK	40	21	장이 오십 척이요 광이 이십오 척이며 문지기 방이 이편에도 셋이요 저편에도 셋이요 그 벽과 그 현관도 먼저 척량한 문간과 같으며	And the little chambers thereof were three on this side and three on that side; and the posts thereof and the arches thereof were after the measure of the first gate: the length thereof was fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.	Its three gate chambers on each side, its side pillars, and its portico all had the same measurements as the first gate: fifty cubits long and twenty-five cubits wide.
EZK	40	22	그 창과 현관의 장, 광과 종려나무가 다 동향한 문간과 같으며 그 문간으로 올라가는 일곱 층계가 있고 그 안에 현관이 있으며	And their windows, and their arches, and their palm trees, were after the measure of the gate that looketh toward the east; and they went up unto it by seven steps; and the arches thereof were before them.	Its windows, portico, and palm trees had the same measurements as those of the gate facing east. Seven steps led up to it, with its portico opposite them.
EZK	40	23	안 뜰에도 북편 문간과 동편 문간과 마주 대한 문간들이 있는데 그가 이 문간에서 맞은편 문간까지 척량하니 일백 척이더라	And the gate of the inner court was over against the gate toward the north, and toward the east; and he measured from gate to gate an hundred cubits.	There was a gate to the inner court facing the north gate, just as there was on the east. He measured the distance from gateway to gateway to be a hundred cubits.
EZK	40	24	그가 또 나를 이끌고 남으로 간즉 남향한 문간이 있는데 그 벽과 현관을 척량하니 먼저 척량한 것과 같고	After that he brought me toward the south, and behold a gate toward the south: and he measured the posts thereof and the arches thereof according to these measures.	Then he led me to the south side, and I saw a gateway facing south. He measured its side pillars and portico, and they had the same measurements as the others.
EZK	40	25	그 문간과 현관 좌우에 있는 창도 먼저 말한 창과 같더라 그 문간의 장이 오십 척이요 광이 이십오 척이며	And there were windows in it and in the arches thereof round about, like those windows: the length was fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.	Both the gateway and its portico had windows all around, like the other windows. It was fifty cubits long and twenty-five cubits wide.
EZK	40	26	또 그리로 올라가는 일곱 층계가 있고 그 안에 현관이 있으며 또 이편, 저편 문 벽 위에 종려나무를 새겼으며	And there were seven steps to go up to it, and the arches thereof were before them: and it had palm trees, one on this side, and another on that side, upon the posts thereof.	Seven steps led up to it, and its portico was opposite them; it had palm trees on its side pillars, one on each side.
EZK	40	27	안 뜰에도 남향한 문간이 있는데 그가 남향한 그 문간에서 맞은편 문간까지 척량하니 일백 척이더라	And there was a gate in the inner court toward the south: and he measured from gate to gate toward the south an hundred cubits.	The inner court also had a gate facing south, and he measured the distance from gateway to gateway toward the south to be a hundred cubits.
EZK	40	28	그가 나를 데리고 그 남문으로 말미암아 안 뜰에 들어가서 그 남문간을 척량하니 척수는	And he brought me to the inner court by the south gate: and he measured the south gate according to these measures;	Next he brought me into the inner court through the south gate, and he measured the south gate; it had the same measurements as the others.
EZK	40	29	장이 오십 척이요 광이 이십오 척이며 그 문지기 방과 벽과 현관도 먼저 척량한 것과 같고 그 문간과 그 현관 좌우에도 창이 있으며	And the little chambers thereof, and the posts thereof, and the arches thereof, according to these measures: and there were windows in it and in the arches thereof round about: it was fifty cubits long, and five and twenty cubits broad.	Its gate chambers, side pillars, and portico had the same measurements as the others. Both the gateway and its portico had windows all around; it was fifty cubits long and twenty-five cubits wide.
EZK	40	30	그 사면 현관의 장은 이십오 척이요 광은 오 척이며	And the arches round about were five and twenty cubits long, and five cubits broad.	(The porticoes around the inner court were twenty-five cubits long and five cubits deep.)
EZK	40	31	현관이 바깥 뜰로 향하였고 그 문 벽 위에도 종려나무를 새겼으며 그 문간으로 올라가는 여덟 층계가 있더라	And the arches thereof were toward the utter court; and palm trees were upon the posts thereof: and the going up to it had eight steps.	Its portico faced the outer court, and its side pillars were decorated with palm trees. Eight steps led up to it.
EZK	40	32	그가 나를 데리고 안 뜰 동편으로 가서 그 문간을 척량하니 척수는	And he brought me into the inner court toward the east: and he measured the gate according to these measures.	And he brought me to the inner court on the east side, and he measured the gateway; it had the same measurements as the others.
EZK	40	33	장이 오십 척이요 광이 이십오 척이며 그 문지기 방과 벽과 현관이 먼저 척량한 것과 같고 그 문간과 그 현관 좌우에도 창이 있으며	And the little chambers thereof, and the posts thereof, and the arches thereof, were according to these measures: and there were windows therein and in the arches thereof round about: it was fifty cubits long, and five and twenty cubits broad.	Its gate chambers, side pillars, and portico had the same measurements as the others. Both the gateway and its portico had windows all around. It was fifty cubits long and twenty-five cubits wide.
EZK	40	34	그 현관이 바깥 뜰로 향하였고 그 이편, 저편 문 벽 위에도 종려나무를 새겼으며 그 문간으로 올라가는 여덟 층계가 있더라	And the arches thereof were toward the outward court; and palm trees were upon the posts thereof, on this side, and on that side: and the going up to it had eight steps.	Its portico faced the outer court, and its side pillars were decorated with palm trees on each side. Eight steps led up to it.
EZK	40	35	그가 또 나를 데리고 북문에 이르러 척량하니 척수는	And he brought me to the north gate, and measured it according to these measures;	Then he brought me to the north gate and measured it. It had the same measurements as the others,
EZK	40	36	장이 오십 척이요 광이 이십오 척이며 그 문지기 방과 벽과 현관이 다 그러하여 그 좌우에도 창이 있으며	The little chambers thereof, the posts thereof, and the arches thereof, and the windows to it round about: the length was fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.	as did its gate chambers, side pillars, and portico. It also had windows all around. It was fifty cubits long and twenty-five cubits wide.
EZK	40	37	그 현관이 바깥 뜰로 향하였고 그 이편, 저편 문 벽 위에도 종려나무를 새겼으며 그 문간으로 올라가는 여덟 층계가 있더라	And the posts thereof were toward the utter court; and palm trees were upon the posts thereof, on this side, and on that side: and the going up to it had eight steps.	Its portico faced the outer court, and its side pillars were decorated with palm trees on each side. Eight steps led up to it.
EZK	40	38	그 문 벽 곁에 문이 있는 방이 있는데 그것은 번제물을 씻는 방이며	And the chambers and the entries thereof were by the posts of the gates, where they washed the burnt offering.	There was a chamber with a doorway by the portico in each of the inner gateways. There the burnt offering was to be washed.
EZK	40	39	그 문의 현관 이편에 상 둘이 있고 저편에 상 둘이 있으니 그 위에서 번제와 속죄제와 속건제의 희생을 잡게 한 것이며	And in the porch of the gate were two tables on this side, and two tables on that side, to slay thereon the burnt offering and the sin offering and the trespass offering.	Inside the portico of the gateway were two tables on each side, on which the burnt offerings, sin offerings, and guilt offerings were to be slaughtered.
EZK	40	40	그 북문 바깥 곧 입구로 올라가는 곳 이편에 상 둘이 있고 문의 현관 저편에 상 둘이 있으니	And at the side without, as one goeth up to the entry of the north gate, were two tables; and on the other side, which was at the porch of the gate, were two tables.	Outside, as one goes up to the entrance of the north gateway, there were two tables on one side and two more tables on the other side of the gate’s portico.
EZK	40	41	문 곁 이편에 상이 넷이 있고 저편에 상이 넷이 있어 합이 여덟 상이라 그 위에서 희생을 잡는 소용이며	Four tables were on this side, and four tables on that side, by the side of the gate; eight tables, whereupon they slew their sacrifices.	So there were four tables inside the gateway and four outside—eight tables in all—on which the sacrifices were to be slaughtered.
EZK	40	42	또 다듬은 돌로 만들어서 번제에 쓰는 상 넷이 있는데 각 장이 일 척 반이요 광이 일 척 반이요 고가 일 척이라 번제의 희생을 잡을 때에 쓰는 기구가 그 위에 놓였으며	And the four tables were of hewn stone for the burnt offering, of a cubit and an half long, and a cubit and an half broad, and one cubit high: whereupon also they laid the instruments wherewith they slew the burnt offering and the sacrifice.	There were also four tables of dressed stone for the burnt offering, each a cubit and a half long, a cubit and a half wide, and a cubit high. On these were placed the utensils used to slaughter the burnt offerings and the other sacrifices.
EZK	40	43	현관 안에는 길이가 손바닥 넒이 만한 갈고리가 사면에 박혔으며 상들에는 희생의 고기가 있더라	And within were hooks, an hand broad, fastened round about: and upon the tables was the flesh of the offering.	The double-pronged hooks, each a handbreadth long, were fastened all around the inside of the room, and the flesh of the offering was to be placed on the tables.
EZK	40	44	안 문안 안 뜰에는 방 둘이 있는데 북문 곁에 있는 방은 남으로 향하였고 남문 곁에 있는 방은 북으로 향하였더라	And without the inner gate were the chambers of the singers in the inner court, which was at the side of the north gate; and their prospect was toward the south: one at the side of the east gate having the prospect toward the north.	Outside the inner gate, within the inner court, were two chambers, one beside the north gate and facing south, and another beside the south gate and facing north.
EZK	40	45	그가 내게 이르되 남향한 이 방은 성전을 수직하는 제사장들의 쓸 것이요	And he said unto me, This chamber, whose prospect is toward the south, is for the priests, the keepers of the charge of the house.	Then the man said to me: “The chamber that faces south is for the priests who keep charge of the temple,
EZK	40	46	북향한 방은 제단을 수직하는 제사장들의 쓸 것이라 이들은 레위의 후손 중 사독의 자손으로서 여호와께 가까이 나아가 수종드는 자니라 하고	And the chamber whose prospect is toward the north is for the priests, the keepers of the charge of the altar: these are the sons of Zadok among the sons of Levi, which come near to the Lord to minister unto him.	and the chamber that faces north is for the priests who keep charge of the altar. These are the sons of Zadok, the only Levites who may approach the LORD to minister before Him.”
EZK	40	47	그가 또 그 뜰을 척량하니 장이 일백 척이요 광이 일백 척이라 네모 반듯하며 제단은 전 앞에 있더라	So he measured the court, an hundred cubits long, and an hundred cubits broad, foursquare; and the altar that was before the house.	Next he measured the court. It was square, a hundred cubits long and a hundred cubits wide. And the altar was in front of the temple.
EZK	40	48	그가 나를 데리고 전문 현관에 이르러 그 문의 좌우 벽을 척량하니 광이 이편도 오 척이요 저편도 오 척이며 두께가 문 이편도 삼 척이요 문 저편도 삼 척이며	And he brought me to the porch of the house, and measured each post of the porch, five cubits on this side, and five cubits on that side: and the breadth of the gate was three cubits on this side, and three cubits on that side.	Then he brought me to the portico of the temple and measured the side pillars of the portico to be five cubits on each side. The width of the gateway was fourteen cubits and its sidewalls were three cubits on either side.
EZK	40	49	그 현관의 광은 이십 척이요 장은 십일 척이며 문간으로 올라가는 층계가 있고 문 벽 곁에는 기둥이 있는데 하나는 이편에 있고 하나는 저편에 있더라	The length of the porch was twenty cubits, and the breadth eleven cubits; and he brought me by the steps whereby they went up to it: and there were pillars by the posts, one on this side, and another on that side.	The portico was twenty cubits wide and twelve cubits deep, and ten steps led up to it. There were columns by the side pillars, one on each side.
EZK	41	1	그가 나를 데리고 성소에 이르러 그 문벽을 척량하니 이편 두께도 육 척이요 저편 두께도 육 척이라 두께가 이와 같으며	Afterward he brought me to the temple, and measured the posts, six cubits broad on the one side, and six cubits broad on the other side, which was the breadth of the tabernacle.	Then the man brought me into the outer sanctuary and measured the side pillars to be six cubits wide on each side.
EZK	41	2	그 문통의 광이 십 척이요 문통 이편 벽의 광이 오 척이요 저편 벽의 광이 오 척이며 그가 성소를 척량하니 그 장이 사십 척이요 그 광이 이십 척이며	And the breadth of the door was ten cubits; and the sides of the door were five cubits on the one side, and five cubits on the other side: and he measured the length thereof, forty cubits: and the breadth, twenty cubits.	The width of the entrance was ten cubits, and the sides of the entrance were five cubits on each side. He also measured the length of the outer sanctuary to be forty cubits, and the width to be twenty cubits.
EZK	41	3	그가 안으로 들어가서 내전 문통의 벽을 척량하니 두께가 이 척이요 문통이 육 척이요 문통의 벽의 광이 각기 칠 척이며	Then went he inward, and measured the post of the door, two cubits; and the door, six cubits; and the breadth of the door, seven cubits.	And he went into the inner sanctuary and measured the side pillars at the entrance to be two cubits wide. The entrance was six cubits wide, and the walls on each side were seven cubits wide.
EZK	41	4	그가 내전을 척량하니 장이 이십 척이요 광이 이십 척이라 그가 내게 이르되 이는 지성소니라 하고	So he measured the length thereof, twenty cubits; and the breadth, twenty cubits, before the temple: and he said unto me, This is the most holy place.	Then he measured the room adjacent to the inner sanctuary to be twenty cubits long and twenty cubits wide. And he said to me, “This is the Most Holy Place.”
EZK	41	5	전의 벽을 척량하니 두께가 육 척이며 전 삼면에 골방이 있는데 광이 각기 사 척이며	After he measured the wall of the house, six cubits; and the breadth of every side chamber, four cubits, round about the house on every side.	Next he measured the wall of the temple to be six cubits thick, and the width of each side room around the temple was four cubits.
EZK	41	6	골방은 삼 층인데 골방 위에 골방이 있어 모두 삼십이라 그 삼면 골방이 전 벽 밖으로 그 벽에 의지하였고 전 벽 속은 범하지 아니하였으며	And the side chambers were three, one over another, and thirty in order; and they entered into the wall which was of the house for the side chambers round about, that they might have hold, but they had not hold in the wall of the house.	The side rooms were arranged one above another in three levels of thirty rooms each. There were ledges all around the wall of the temple to serve as supports for the side rooms, so that the supports would not be fastened into the wall of the temple itself.
EZK	41	7	이 두루 있는 골방이 그 층이 높아갈수록 넓으므로 전에 둘린 이 골방이 높아갈수록 전에 가까워졌으나 전의 넓이는 아래 위가 같으며 골방은 아랫층에서 중층으로 윗층에 올라가게 되었더라	And there was an enlarging, and a winding about still upward to the side chambers: for the winding about of the house went still upward round about the house: therefore the breadth of the house was still upward, and so increased from the lowest chamber to the highest by the midst.	The side rooms surrounding the temple widened at each successive level, because the structure surrounding the temple ascended by stages corresponding to the narrowing of the temple wall as it rose upward. And so a stairway went up from the lowest story to the highest, through the middle one.
EZK	41	8	내가 보니 전 삼면의 지대 곧 모든 골방 밑 지대의 고가 한 장대 곧 큰 자로 육 척인데	I saw also the height of the house round about: the foundations of the side chambers were a full reed of six great cubits.	I saw that the temple had a raised base all around it, forming the foundation of the side rooms. It was the full length of a rod, six long cubits.
EZK	41	9	전을 의지한 그 골방 바깥벽 두께는 오 척이요 그 외에 빈 터가 남았으며	The thickness of the wall, which was for the side chamber without, was five cubits: and that which was left was the place of the side chambers that were within.	The outer wall of the side rooms was five cubits thick, and the open area between the side rooms of the temple
EZK	41	10	전 골방 삼면에 광이 이십 척 되는 뜰이 둘려 있으며	And between the chambers was the wideness of twenty cubits round about the house on every side.	and the outer chambers was twenty cubits wide all around the temple.
EZK	41	11	그 골방 문은 다 빈 터로 향하였는데 한 문은 북으로 향하였고 한 문은 남으로 향하였으며 그 둘려 있는 빈 터의 광은 오 척이더라	And the doors of the side chambers were toward the place that was left, one door toward the north, and another door toward the south: and the breadth of the place that was left was five cubits round about.	The side rooms opened into this area, with one entrance on the north and another on the south. The open area was five cubits wide all around.
EZK	41	12	서편 뜰 뒤에 건물이 있는데 광이 칠십 척이요 장이 구십 척이며 그 사면 벽의 두께가 오 척이더라	Now the building that was before the separate place at the end toward the west was seventy cubits broad; and the wall of the building was five cubits thick round about, and the length thereof ninety cubits.	Now the building that faced the temple courtyard on the west was seventy cubits wide, and the wall of the building was five cubits thick all around, with a length of ninety cubits.
EZK	41	13	그가 전을 척량하니 장이 일백 척이요 또 서편 뜰과 그 건물과 그 벽을 합하여 장이 일백 척이요	So he measured the house, an hundred cubits long; and the separate place, and the building, with the walls thereof, an hundred cubits long;	Then he measured the temple to be a hundred cubits long, and the temple courtyard and the building with its walls were also a hundred cubits long.
EZK	41	14	전 전면의 광이 일백 척이요 그 앞 동향한 뜰의 광도 그러하며	Also the breadth of the face of the house, and of the separate place toward the east, an hundred cubits.	The width of the temple courtyard on the east, including the front of the temple, was a hundred cubits.
EZK	41	15	그가 뒷뜰 뒤에 있는 건물을 척량하니 그 좌우편 다락까지 일백 척이더라 내전과 외전과 그 뜰의 현관과	And he measured the length of the building over against the separate place which was behind it, and the galleries thereof on the one side and on the other side, an hundred cubits, with the inner temple, and the porches of the court;	Next he measured the length of the building facing the temple courtyard at the rear of the temple, including its galleries on each side; it was a hundred cubits. The outer sanctuary, the inner sanctuary, and the porticoes facing the court,
EZK	41	16	문통 벽과 닫힌 창과 삼면에 둘려 있는 다락은 문통 안편에서부터 땅에서 창까지 널판으로 가리웠고 (창은 이미 닫히었더라)	The door posts, and the narrow windows, and the galleries round about on their three stories, over against the door, cieled with wood round about, and from the ground up to the windows, and the windows were covered;	as well as the thresholds and the beveled windows and the galleries all around with their three levels opposite the threshold, were overlaid with wood on all sides. They were paneled from the ground to the windows, and the windows were covered.
EZK	41	17	문통 위와 내전과 외전의 사면 벽도 다 그러하니 곧 척량한 대소대로며	To that above the door, even unto the inner house, and without, and by all the wall round about within and without, by measure.	In the space above the outside of the entrance to the inner sanctuary on all the walls, spaced evenly around the inner and outer sanctuary,
EZK	41	18	널판에는 그룹들과 종려나무를 새겼는데 두 그룹 사이에 종려나무 하나가 있으며 매 그룹에 두 얼굴이 있으니	And it was made with cherubims and palm trees, so that a palm tree was between a cherub and a cherub; and every cherub had two faces;	were alternating carved cherubim and palm trees. Each cherub had two faces:
EZK	41	19	하나는 사람의 얼굴이라 이편 종려나무를 향하였고 하나는 어린 사자의 얼굴이라 저편 종려나무를 향하였으며 온 전 사면이 다 그러하여	So that the face of a man was toward the palm tree on the one side, and the face of a young lion toward the palm tree on the other side: it was made through all the house round about.	the face of a man was toward the palm tree on one side, and the face of a young lion was toward the palm tree on the other side. They were carved all the way around the temple.
EZK	41	20	땅에서부터 문통 위에까지 그룹들과 종려나무들을 새겼으니 성전벽이 다 그러하더라	From the ground unto above the door were cherubims and palm trees made, and on the wall of the temple.	Cherubim and palm trees were carved on the wall of the outer sanctuary from the floor to the space above the entrance.
EZK	41	21	외전 문설주는 네모졌고 내전 전면에 있는 식양은 이러하니	The posts of the temple were squared, and the face of the sanctuary; the appearance of the one as the appearance of the other.	The outer sanctuary had a rectangular doorframe, and the doorframe of the sanctuary was similar.
EZK	41	22	곧 나무 제단의 고가 삼 척이요 장이 이 척이며 그 모퉁이와 옆과 면을 다 나무로 만들었더라 그가 내게 이르되 이는 여호와의 앞의 상이라 하더라	The altar of wood was three cubits high, and the length thereof two cubits; and the corners thereof, and the length thereof, and the walls thereof, were of wood: and he said unto me, This is the table that is before the Lord.	There was an altar of wood three cubits high and two cubits square. Its corners, base, and sides were of wood. And the man told me, “This is the table that is before the LORD.”
EZK	41	23	내전과 외전에 각기 문이 있는데	And the temple and the sanctuary had two doors.	Both the outer sanctuary and the inner sanctuary had double doors,
EZK	41	24	문마다 각기 두 문짝 곧 접치는 두 문짝이 있어 이 문에 두 짝이요 저 문에 두 짝이며	And the doors had two leaves apiece, two turning leaves; two leaves for the one door, and two leaves for the other door.	and each door had two swinging panels. There were two panels for one door and two for the other.
EZK	41	25	이 성전 문에 그룹과 종려나무를 새겼는데 벽에 있는 것과 같고 현관 앞에는 나무 디딤판이 있으며	And there were made on them, on the doors of the temple, cherubims and palm trees, like as were made upon the walls; and there were thick planks upon the face of the porch without.	Cherubim and palm trees like those on the walls were carved on the doors of the outer sanctuary, and there was a wooden canopy outside, on the front of the portico.
EZK	41	26	현관 좌우편에는 닫힌 창도 있고 종려나무도 새겼고 전의 골방과 디딤판도 그러하더라	And there were narrow windows and palm trees on the one side and on the other side, on the sides of the porch, and upon the side chambers of the house, and thick planks.	There were beveled windows and palm trees on the sidewalls of the portico. The side rooms of the temple also had canopies.
EZK	42	1	그가 나를 데리고 밖으로 나가 북편 뜰로 가서 두 방에 이르니 그 두 방의 하나는 골방 앞 뜰을 향하였고 하나는 북편 건물을 향하였는데	Then he brought me forth into the utter court, the way toward the north: and he brought me into the chamber that was over against the separate place, and which was before the building toward the north.	Then the man led me out northward into the outer court, and he brought me to the group of chambers opposite the temple courtyard and the outer wall on the north side.
EZK	42	2	그 방들의 자리의 장이 일백 척이요 광이 오십 척이며 그 문은 북을 향하였고	Before the length of an hundred cubits was the north door, and the breadth was fifty cubits.	The building with the door facing north was a hundred cubits long and fifty cubits wide.
EZK	42	3	그 방 삼층에 툇마루들이 있는데 한 방의 툇마루는 이십 척 되는 안 뜰과 마주 대하였고 한 방의 툇마루는 바깥 뜰 박석 깔린 곳과 마주 대하였으며	Over against the twenty cubits which were for the inner court, and over against the pavement which was for the utter court, was gallery against gallery in three stories.	Gallery faced gallery in three levels opposite the twenty cubits that belonged to the inner court and opposite the pavement that belonged to the outer court.
EZK	42	4	그 두 방 사이에 통한 길이 있어 광이 십 척이요 장이 일백 척이며 그 문들은 북을 향하였으며	And before the chambers was a walk of ten cubits breadth inward, a way of one cubit; and their doors toward the north.	In front of the chambers was an inner walkway ten cubits wide and a hundred cubits long. Their doors were on the north.
EZK	42	5	그 상층의 방은 제일 좁으니 이는 툇마루를 인하여 하층과 중층보다 상층이 더 줄어짐이라	Now the upper chambers were shorter: for the galleries were higher than these, than the lower, and than the middlemost of the building.	Now the upper chambers were smaller because the galleries took more space from the chambers on the lower and middle floors of the building.
EZK	42	6	그 방이 삼층이라도 뜰의 기둥 같은 기둥이 없으므로 그 상층이 하층과 중층보다 더욱 좁아짐이더라	For they were in three stories, but had not pillars as the pillars of the courts: therefore the building was straitened more than the lowest and the middlemost from the ground.	For they were arranged in three stories, and unlike the courts, they had no pillars. So the upper chambers were set back further than the lower and middle floors.
EZK	42	7	그 한 방의 바깥 담 곧 뜰의 담과 마주 대한 담의 장이 오십 척이니	And the wall that was without over against the chambers, toward the utter court on the forepart of the chambers, the length thereof was fifty cubits.	An outer wall in front of the chambers was fifty cubits long and ran parallel to the chambers and the outer court.
EZK	42	8	바깥 뜰로 향한 방의 장이 오십 척임이며 성전 앞을 향한 방은 일백 척이며	For the length of the chambers that were in the utter court was fifty cubits: and, lo, before the temple were an hundred cubits.	For the chambers on the outer court were fifty cubits long, while those facing the temple were a hundred cubits long.
EZK	42	9	이 방들 아래에 동편에서 들어가는 통행구가 있으니 곧 바깥 뜰에서 들어가는 통행구더라	And from under these chambers was the entry on the east side, as one goeth into them from the utter court.	And below these chambers was the entrance on the east side as one enters them from the outer court.
EZK	42	10	남편 골방 뜰 맞은편과 남편 건물 맞은편에도 방 둘이 있는데	The chambers were in the thickness of the wall of the court toward the east, over against the separate place, and over against the building.	On the south side along the length of the wall of the outer court were chambers adjoining the courtyard and opposite the building,
EZK	42	11	그 두 방 사이에 길이 있고 그 방들의 모양은 북편 방 같고 그 장광도 같으며 그 출입구와 문도 그와 같으며	And the way before them was like the appearance of the chambers which were toward the north, as long as they, and as broad as they: and all their goings out were both according to their fashions, and according to their doors.	with a passageway in front of them, just like the chambers that were on the north. They had the same length and width, with similar exits and dimensions.
EZK	42	12	남편 방에 출입하는 문이 있는데 담 동편 길머리에 있더라	And according to the doors of the chambers that were toward the south was a door in the head of the way, even the way directly before the wall toward the east, as one entereth into them.	And corresponding to the doors of the chambers that were facing south, there was a door in front of the walkway that was parallel to the wall extending eastward.
EZK	42	13	그가 내게 이르되 좌우 골방 뜰 앞 곧 북편 남편에 있는 방들은 거룩한 방이라 여호와를 가까이 하는 제사장들이 지성물을 거기서 먹을 것이며 지성물 곧 소제와 속죄제와 속건제의 제물을 거기 둘 것이며 이는 거룩한 곳이라	Then said he unto me, The north chambers and the south chambers, which are before the separate place, they be holy chambers, where the priests that approach unto the Lord shall eat the most holy things: there shall they lay the most holy things, and the meat offering, and the sin offering, and the trespass offering; for the place is holy.	Then the man said to me, “The north and south chambers facing the temple courtyard are the holy chambers where the priests who approach the LORD will eat the most holy offerings. There they will place the most holy offerings—the grain offerings, the sin offerings, and the guilt offerings—for the place is holy.
EZK	42	14	제사장의 의복은 거룩하므로 제사장이 성소에 들어갔다가 나올 때에 바로 바깥 뜰로 가지 못하고 수종드는 그 의복을 그 방에 두고 다른 옷을 입고 백성의 뜰로 나갈 것이니라 하더라	When the priests enter therein, then shall they not go out of the holy place into the utter court, but there they shall lay their garments wherein they minister; for they are holy; and shall put on other garments, and shall approach to those things which are for the people.	Once the priests have entered the holy area, they must not go out into the outer court until they have left behind the garments in which they minister, for these are holy. They are to put on other clothes before they approach the places that are for the people.”
EZK	42	15	그가 안에 있는 전 척량하기를 마친 후에 나를 데리고 동향한 문길로 나가서 사면 담을 척량하는데	Now when he had made an end of measuring the inner house, he brought me forth toward the gate whose prospect is toward the east, and measured it round about.	Now when the man had finished measuring the interior of the temple area, he led me out by the gate that faced east, and he measured the area all around:
EZK	42	16	그가 척량하는 장대 곧 그 장대로 동편을 척량하니 오백 척이요	He measured the east side with the measuring reed, five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed round about.	With a measuring rod he measured the east side to be five hundred cubits long.
EZK	42	17	그 장대로 북편을 척량하니 오백 척이요	He measured the north side, five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed round about.	He measured the north side to be five hundred cubits long.
EZK	42	18	그 장대로 남편을 척량하니 오백 척이요	He measured the south side, five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed.	He measured the south side to be five hundred cubits long.
EZK	42	19	서편으로 돌이켜 그 장대로 척량하니 오백 척이라	He turned about to the west side, and measured five hundred reeds with the measuring reed.	And he came around and measured the west side to be five hundred cubits long.
EZK	42	20	그가 이와 같이 그 사방을 척량하니 그 사방 담 안 마당의 장과 광이 오백 척씩이라 그 담은 거룩한 것과 속된 것을 구별하는 것이더라	He measured it by the four sides: it had a wall round about, five hundred reeds long, and five hundred broad, to make a separation between the sanctuary and the profane place.	So he measured the area on all four sides. It had a wall all around, five hundred cubits long and five hundred cubits wide, to separate the holy from the common.
EZK	43	1	그 후에 그가 나를 데리고 문에 이르니 곧 동향한 문이라	Afterward he brought me to the gate, even the gate that looketh toward the east:	Then the man brought me back to the gate that faces east,
EZK	43	2	이스라엘 하나님의 영광이 동편에서부터 오는데 하나님의 음성이 많은 물소리 같고 땅은 그 영광으로 인하여 빛나니	And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the east: and his voice was like a noise of many waters: and the earth shined with his glory.	and I saw the glory of the God of Israel coming from the east. His voice was like the roar of many waters, and the earth shone with His glory.
EZK	43	3	그 모양이 내가 본 이상 곧 전에 성읍을 멸하러 올 때에 보던 이상 같고 그발 하숫가에서 보던 이상과도 같기로 내가 곧 얼굴을 땅에 대고 엎드렸더니	And it was according to the appearance of the vision which I saw, even according to the vision that I saw when I came to destroy the city: and the visions were like the vision that I saw by the river Chebar; and I fell upon my face.	The vision I saw was like the vision I had seen when He came to destroy the city and like the visions I had seen by the River Kebar. I fell facedown,
EZK	43	4	여호와의 영광이 동문으로 말미암아 전으로 들어가고	And the glory of the Lord came into the house by the way of the gate whose prospect is toward the east.	and the glory of the LORD entered the temple through the gate facing east.
EZK	43	5	성신이 나를 들어 데리고 안뜰에 들어가시기로 내가 보니 여호와의 영광이 전에 가득하더라	So the spirit took me up, and brought me into the inner court; and, behold, the glory of the Lord filled the house.	Then the Spirit lifted me up and brought me into the inner court, and the glory of the LORD filled the temple.
EZK	43	6	들은즉 누구인지 전에서 내게 말하더니 사람이 내 곁에 서서	And I heard him speaking unto me out of the house; and the man stood by me.	While the man was standing beside me, I heard someone speaking to me from inside the temple,
EZK	43	7	내게 이르시되 인자야 이는 내 보좌의 처소, 내 발을 두는 처소, 내가 이스라엘 족속 가운데 영원히 거할 곳이라 이스라엘 족속 곧 그들과 그 왕들이 음란히 행하며 그 죽은 왕들의 시체로 다시는 내 거룩한 이름을 더럽히지 아니하리라	And he said unto me, Son of man, the place of my throne, and the place of the soles of my feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel for ever, and my holy name, shall the house of Israel no more defile, neither they, nor their kings, by their whoredom, nor by the carcases of their kings in their high places.	and He said to me, “Son of man, this is the place of My throne and the place for the soles of My feet, where I will dwell among the Israelites forever. The house of Israel will never again defile My holy name—neither they nor their kings—by their prostitution and by the funeral offerings for their kings at their deaths.
EZK	43	8	그들이 그 문지방을 내 문지방 곁에 두며 그 문설주를 내 문설주 곁에 두어서 그들과 나 사이에 겨우 한 담이 막히게 하였고 또 그 행하는 가증한 일로 내 거룩한 이름을 더럽혔으므로 내가 노하여 멸하였거니와	In their setting of their threshold by my thresholds, and their post by my posts, and the wall between me and them, they have even defiled my holy name by their abominations that they have committed: wherefore I have consumed them in mine anger.	When they placed their threshold next to My threshold and their doorposts beside My doorposts, with only a wall between Me and them, they defiled My holy name by the abominations they committed. Therefore I have consumed them in My anger.
EZK	43	9	이제는 그들이 그 음란과 그 왕들의 시체를 내게서 멀리 제하여 버려야 할 것이라 그리하면 내가 영원토록 그들의 가운데 거하리라	Now let them put away their whoredom, and the carcases of their kings, far from me, and I will dwell in the midst of them for ever.	Now let them remove far from Me their prostitution and the funeral offerings for their kings, and I will dwell among them forever.
EZK	43	10	인자야 너는 이 전을 이스라엘 족속에게 보여서 그들로 자기의 죄악을 부끄러워하고 그 형상을 측량하게 하라	Thou son of man, shew the house to the house of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities: and let them measure the pattern.	As for you, son of man, describe the temple to the people of Israel, so that they may be ashamed of their iniquities. Let them measure the plan,
EZK	43	11	만일 그들이 자기의 행한 모든 일을 부끄러워하거든 너는 이 전의 제도와 식양과 그 출입하는 곳과 그 모든 형상을 보이며 또 그 모든 규례와 그 모든 법도와 그 모든 율례를 알게 하고 그 목전에 그것을 써서 그들로 그 모든 법도와 그 모든 규례를 지켜 행하게 하라	And if they be ashamed of all that they have done, shew them the form of the house, and the fashion thereof, and the goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the laws thereof: and write it in their sight, that they may keep the whole form thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and do them.	and if they are ashamed of all they have done, then make known to them the design of the temple—its arrangement and its exits and entrances—its whole design along with all its statutes, forms, and laws. Write it down in their sight, so that they may keep its complete design and all its statutes and may carry them out.
EZK	43	12	전의 법은 이러하니라 산 꼭대기 지점의 주위는 지극히 거룩하리라 전의 법은 이러하니라	This is the law of the house; Upon the top of the mountain the whole limit thereof round about shall be most holy. Behold, this is the law of the house.	This is the law of the temple: All its surrounding territory on top of the mountain will be most holy. Yes, this is the law of the temple.
EZK	43	13	제단의 척수는 이러하니라 (한 자는 팔꿈치에서부터 손가락에 이르고 한 손바닥 넓이가 더한 것이라) 제단 밑받침의 고가 일 척이요 그 사면 가장자리의 광이 일 척이며 그 가으로 둘린 턱의 광이 한 뼘이니 이는 제단 밑받침이요	And these are the measures of the altar after the cubits: The cubit is a cubit and an hand breadth; even the bottom shall be a cubit, and the breadth a cubit, and the border thereof by the edge thereof round about shall be a span: and this shall be the higher place of the altar.	These are the measurements of the altar in long cubits (a cubit and a handbreadth): Its gutter shall be a cubit deep and a cubit wide, with a rim of one span around its edge. And this is the height of the altar:
EZK	43	14	이 땅에 닿은 밑받침 면에서 아랫층의 고가 이 척이요 그 가장자리의 광이 일 척이며 이 아랫층 면에서 이층의 고가 사 척이요 그 가장자리의 광이 일 척이며	And from the bottom upon the ground even to the lower settle shall be two cubits, and the breadth one cubit; and from the lesser settle even to the greater settle shall be four cubits, and the breadth one cubit.	The space from the gutter on the ground to the lower ledge shall be two cubits, and the ledge one cubit wide. The space from the smaller ledge to the larger ledge shall be four cubits, and the ledge one cubit wide.
EZK	43	15	그 번제단 윗층의 고가 사 척이며 그 번제하는 바닥에서 솟은 뿔이 넷이며	So the altar shall be four cubits; and from the altar and upward shall be four horns.	The altar hearth shall be four cubits high, and four horns shall project upward from the hearth.
EZK	43	16	그 번제하는 바닥의 장이 십이 척이요 광이 십이 척이니 네모 반듯하고	And the altar shall be twelve cubits long, twelve broad, square in the four squares thereof.	The altar hearth shall be square at its four corners, twelve cubits long and twelve cubits wide.
EZK	43	17	그 아랫층의 장이 십사 척이요 광이 십사 척이니 네모 반듯하고 그 밑받침에 둘린 턱의 광이 반 척이며 그 가장자리의 광이 일 척이니라 그 층계는 동을 향하게 할지니라	And the settle shall be fourteen cubits long and fourteen broad in the four squares thereof; and the border about it shall be half a cubit; and the bottom thereof shall be a cubit about; and his stairs shall look toward the east.	The ledge shall also be square, fourteen cubits long and fourteen cubits wide, with a rim of half a cubit and a gutter of a cubit all around it. The steps of the altar shall face east.”
EZK	43	18	그가 내게 이르시되 인자야 나 주 여호와가 말하노라 이 제단을 만드는 날에 그 위에 번제를 드리며 피를 뿌리는 규례가 이러하니라	And he said unto me, Son of man, thus saith the Lord God; These are the ordinances of the altar in the day when they shall make it, to offer burnt offerings thereon, and to sprinkle blood thereon.	Then He said to me: “Son of man, this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘These are the statutes for the altar on the day it is constructed, so that burnt offerings may be sacrificed on it and blood may be sprinkled on it:
EZK	43	19	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 나를 가까이 하여 내게 수종드는 사독의 자손 레위사람 제사장에게 너는 어린 수송아지 하나를 주어 속죄 제물을 삼되	And thou shalt give to the priests the Levites that be of the seed of Zadok, which approach unto me, to minister unto me, saith the Lord God, a young bullock for a sin offering.	You are to give a young bull from the herd as a sin offering to the Levitical priests who are of the family of Zadok, who approach Me to minister before Me, declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	43	20	네가 그 피를 취하여 제단의 네 뿔과 아랫층 네 모퉁이와 사면 가장자리에 발라 속죄하여 제단을 정결케 하고	And thou shalt take of the blood thereof, and put it on the four horns of it, and on the four corners of the settle, and upon the border round about: thus shalt thou cleanse and purge it.	You are to take some of its blood and put it on the four horns of the altar, on the four corners of the ledge, and all around the rim; thus you will cleanse the altar and make atonement for it.
EZK	43	21	그 속죄 제물의 수송아지를 취하여 전의 정한 처소 곧 성소 밖에서 불사를지며	Thou shalt take the bullock also of the sin offering, and he shall burn it in the appointed place of the house, without the sanctuary.	Then you are to take away the bull for the sin offering and burn it in the appointed part of the temple area outside the sanctuary.
EZK	43	22	다음 날에는 흠 없는 수염소 하나로 속죄 제물을 삼아 드려서 그 제단을 정결케 하기를 수송아지로 정결케 함과 같이 하고	And on the second day thou shalt offer a kid of the goats without blemish for a sin offering; and they shall cleanse the altar, as they did cleanse it with the bullock.	On the second day you are to present an unblemished male goat as a sin offering, and the altar is to be cleansed as it was with the bull.
EZK	43	23	정결케 하기를 마친 후에는 흠 없는 수송아지 하나와 떼 가운데서 흠 없는 수양 하나를 드리되	When thou hast made an end of cleansing it, thou shalt offer a young bullock without blemish, and a ram out of the flock without blemish.	When you have finished the purification, you are to present a young, unblemished bull and an unblemished ram from the flock.
EZK	43	24	나 여호와 앞에 받들어다가 제사장은 그 위에 소금을 쳐서 나 여호와께 번제로 드릴 것이며	And thou shalt offer them before the Lord, and the priests shall cast salt upon them, and they shall offer them up for a burnt offering unto the Lord.	You must present them before the LORD; the priests are to sprinkle salt on them and sacrifice them as a burnt offering to the LORD.
EZK	43	25	칠 일 동안은 매일 염소 하나를 갖추어 속죄 제물을 삼고 또 어린 수송아지 하나와 떼 가운데서 수양 하나를 흠 없는 것으로 갖출 것이며	Seven days shalt thou prepare every day a goat for a sin offering: they shall also prepare a young bullock, and a ram out of the flock, without blemish.	For seven days you are to provide a male goat daily for a sin offering; you are also to provide a young bull and a ram from the flock, both unblemished.
EZK	43	26	이와 같이 칠 일 동안 제단을 위하여 속죄제를 드려 정결케 하며 봉헌할 것이요	Seven days shall they purge the altar and purify it; and they shall consecrate themselves.	For seven days the priests are to make atonement for the altar and cleanse it; so they shall consecrate it.
EZK	43	27	이 모든 날이 찬 후 제팔일에와 그 다음에는 제사장이 제단 위에서 너희 번제와 감사제를 드릴 것이라 그리하면 내가 너희를 즐겁게 받으리라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라 하시더라	And when these days are expired, it shall be, that upon the eighth day, and so forward, the priests shall make your burnt offerings upon the altar, and your peace offerings; and I will accept you, saith the Lord God.	At the end of these days, from the eighth day on, the priests are to present your burnt offerings and peace offerings on the altar. Then I will accept you, declares the Lord GOD.’”
EZK	44	1	그가 나를 데리고 성소 동향한 바깥문에 돌아오시니 그 문이 닫히었더라	Then he brought me back the way of the gate of the outward sanctuary which looketh toward the east; and it was shut.	The man then brought me back to the outer gate of the sanctuary that faced east, but it was shut.
EZK	44	2	여호와께서 내게 이르시되 이 문은 닫고 다시 열지 못할지니 아무 사람도 그리로 들어 오지 못할 것은 이스라엘 하나님 나 여호와가 그리로 들어왔음이라 그러므로 닫아 둘지니라	Then said the Lord unto me; This gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no man shall enter in by it; because the Lord, the God of Israel, hath entered in by it, therefore it shall be shut.	And the LORD said to me, “This gate is to remain shut. It shall not be opened, and no man shall enter through it, because the LORD, the God of Israel, has entered through it. Therefore it will remain shut.
EZK	44	3	왕은 왕인 까닭에 안 길로 이 문 현관으로 들어와서 거기 앉아서 나 여호와 앞에서 음식을 먹고 그 길로 나갈 것이니라	It is for the prince; the prince, he shall sit in it to eat bread before the Lord; he shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate, and shall go out by the way of the same.	Only the prince himself may sit inside the gateway to eat in the presence of the LORD. He must enter by way of the portico of the gateway and go out the same way.”
EZK	44	4	그가 또 나를 데리고 북문을 통하여 전 앞에 이르시기로 내가 보니 여호와의 영광이 여호와의 전에 가득한지라 내가 얼굴을 땅에 대고 엎드린대	Then brought he me the way of the north gate before the house: and I looked, and, behold, the glory of the Lord filled the house of the Lord: and I fell upon my face.	Then the man brought me to the front of the temple by way of the north gate. I looked and saw the glory of the LORD filling His temple, and I fell facedown.
EZK	44	5	여호와께서 내게 이르시되 인자야 너는 전심으로 주목하여 내가 네게 말하는바 여호와의 전의 모든 규례와 모든 율례를 귀로 듣고 또 전의 입구와 성소의 출구를 전심으로 주의하고	And the Lord said unto me, Son of man, mark well, and behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears all that I say unto thee concerning all the ordinances of the house of the Lord, and all the laws thereof; and mark well the entering in of the house, with every going forth of the sanctuary.	The LORD said to me: “Son of man, pay attention; look carefully with your eyes and listen closely with your ears to everything I tell you concerning all the statutes and laws of the house of the LORD. Take careful note of the entrance to the temple, along with all the exits of the sanctuary.
EZK	44	6	너는 패역한 자 곧 이스라엘 족속에게 이르기를 주 여호와의 말씀이 이스라엘 족속아 너희의 모든 가증한 일이 족하니라	And thou shalt say to the rebellious, even to the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God; O ye house of Israel, let it suffice you of all your abominations,	Tell the rebellious house of Israel that this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘I have had enough of all your abominations, O house of Israel.
EZK	44	7	대저 너희가 마음과 몸에 할례 받지 아니한 이방인을 데려오고 떡과 기름과 피를 드릴 때에 그들로 내 성소 안에 있게 하여 내 전을 더럽히므로 너희의 모든 가증한 일 외에 그들이 내 언약을 위반케 하는 것이 되었으며	In that ye have brought into my sanctuary strangers, uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in my sanctuary, to pollute it, even my house, when ye offer my bread, the fat and the blood, and they have broken my covenant because of all your abominations.	In addition to all your other abominations, you brought in foreigners uncircumcised in both heart and flesh to occupy My sanctuary; you defiled My temple when you offered My food—the fat and the blood; you broke My covenant.
EZK	44	8	너희가 내 성물의 직분을 지키지 아니하고 내 성소에 사람을 두어 너희 직분을 대신 지키게 하였느니라	And ye have not kept the charge of mine holy things: but ye have set keepers of my charge in my sanctuary for yourselves.	And you have not kept charge of My holy things, but have appointed others to keep charge of My sanctuary for you.’
EZK	44	9	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 이스라엘 족속 중에 있는 이방인 중에 마음과 몸이 할례를 받지 아니한 이방인은 내 성소에 들어오지 못하리라	Thus saith the Lord God; No stranger, uncircumcised in heart, nor uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into my sanctuary, of any stranger that is among the children of Israel.	This is what the Lord GOD says: No foreigner uncircumcised in heart and flesh may enter My sanctuary—not even a foreigner who lives among the Israelites.
EZK	44	10	이스라엘 족속이 그릇하여 나를 떠날 때에 레위 사람도 그릇하여 그 우상을 좇아 나를 멀리 떠났으니 그 죄악을 담당하리라	And the Levites that are gone away far from me, when Israel went astray, which went astray away from me after their idols; they shall even bear their iniquity.	Surely the Levites who wandered away from Me when Israel went astray, and who wandered away from Me after their idols, will bear the consequences of their iniquity.
EZK	44	11	그러나 그들이 내 성소에서 수종들어 전문을 맡을 것이며 전에서 수종들어 백성의 번제의 희생과 및 다른 희생을 잡아 앞에 서서 수종들게 되리라	Yet they shall be ministers in my sanctuary, having charge at the gates of the house, and ministering to the house: they shall slay the burnt offering and the sacrifice for the people, and they shall stand before them to minister unto them.	Yet they shall be ministers in My sanctuary, having charge of the gates of the temple and ministering there. They shall slaughter the burnt offerings and other sacrifices for the people and stand before them to minister to them.
EZK	44	12	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 그들이 전에 백성을 위하여 그 우상 앞에서 수종들어서 이스라엘 족속으로 죄악에 거치게 하였으므로 내가 내 손을 들어 쳐서 그들로 그 죄악을 담당하여	Because they ministered unto them before their idols, and caused the house of Israel to fall into iniquity; therefore have I lifted up mine hand against them, saith the Lord God, and they shall bear their iniquity.	Because they ministered before their idols and became a stumbling block of iniquity to the house of Israel, therefore I swore with an uplifted hand concerning them that they would bear the consequences of their iniquity, declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	44	13	내게 가까이 나아와 제사장의 직분을 행치 못하게 하며 또 내 성물 곧 지성물에 가까이 오지 못하게 하리니 그들이 자기의 수욕과 그 행한바 가증한 일을 담당하리라	And they shall not come near unto me, to do the office of a priest unto me, nor to come near to any of my holy things, in the most holy place: but they shall bear their shame, and their abominations which they have committed.	They must not approach Me to serve Me as priests or come near any of My holy things or the most holy things. They will bear the shame of the abominations they have committed.
EZK	44	14	그러나 내가 그들을 세워 전을 수직하게 하고 전에 모든 수종드는 일과 그 가운데서 행하는 모든 일을 맡기리라	But I will make them keepers of the charge of the house, for all the service thereof, and for all that shall be done therein.	Yet I will appoint them to keep charge of all the work for the temple and everything to be done in it.
EZK	44	15	이스라엘 족속이 그릇하여 나를 떠날 때에 사독의 자손 레위 사람 제사장들은 내 성소의 직분을 지켰은즉 그들은 내게 가까이 나아와 수종을 들되 내 앞에 서서 기름과 피를 내게 드릴지니라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	But the priests the Levites, the sons of Zadok, that kept the charge of my sanctuary when the children of Israel went astray from me, they shall come near to me to minister unto me, and they shall stand before me to offer unto me the fat and the blood, saith the Lord God:	But the Levitical priests, who are descended from Zadok and who kept charge of My sanctuary when the Israelites went astray from Me, are to approach Me to minister before Me. They will stand before Me to offer Me fat and blood, declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	44	16	그들이 내 성소에 들어오며 또 내 상에 가까이 나아와 내게 수종들어 나의 맡긴 직분을 지키되	They shall enter into my sanctuary, and they shall come near to my table, to minister unto me, and they shall keep my charge.	They alone shall enter My sanctuary and draw near to My table to minister before Me. They will keep My charge.
EZK	44	17	그들이 안 뜰 문에 들어올 때에나 안뜰 문과 전 안에서 수종들 때에는 양털 옷을 입지 말고 가는 베옷을 입을 것이니	And it shall come to pass, that when they enter in at the gates of the inner court, they shall be clothed with linen garments; and no wool shall come upon them, whiles they minister in the gates of the inner court, and within.	When they enter the gates of the inner court, they are to wear linen garments; they must not wear anything made of wool when they minister at the gates of the inner court or inside the temple.
EZK	44	18	가는 베 관을 머리에 쓰며 가는 베 바지를 입고 땀 나게 하는 것으로 허리를 동이지 말 것이며	They shall have linen bonnets upon their heads, and shall have linen breeches upon their loins; they shall not gird themselves with any thing that causeth sweat.	They are to wear linen turbans on their heads and linen undergarments around their waists. They must not wear anything that makes them perspire.
EZK	44	19	그들이 바깥 뜰 백성에게로 나갈 때에는 수종드는 옷을 벗어 거룩한 방에 두고 다른 옷을 입을지니 이는 그 옷으로 백성을 거룩케 할까 함이니라	And when they go forth into the utter court, even into the utter court to the people, they shall put off their garments wherein they ministered, and lay them in the holy chambers, and they shall put on other garments; and they shall not sanctify the people with their garments.	When they go out to the outer court, to the people, they are to take off the garments in which they have ministered, leave them in the holy chambers, and dress in other clothes so that they do not transmit holiness to the people with their garments.
EZK	44	20	그들은 또 머리털을 밀지도 말며 머리털을 길게 자라게도 말고 그 머리털을 깎기만 할 것이며	Neither shall they shave their heads, nor suffer their locks to grow long; they shall only poll their heads.	They must not shave their heads or let their hair grow long, but must carefully trim their hair.
EZK	44	21	아무 제사장이든지 안 뜰에 들어갈 때에는 포도주를 마시지 말 것이며	Neither shall any priest drink wine, when they enter into the inner court.	No priest may drink wine before he enters the inner court.
EZK	44	22	과부나 이혼한 여인에게 장가 들지 말고 오직 이스라엘 족속의 처녀나 혹시 제사장의 과부에게 장가 들 것이며	Neither shall they take for their wives a widow, nor her that is put away: but they shall take maidens of the seed of the house of Israel, or a widow that had a priest before.	And they shall not marry a widow or a divorced woman, but must marry a virgin of the descendants of the house of Israel, or a widow of a priest.
EZK	44	23	내 백성에게 거룩한 것과 속된 것의 구별을 가르치며 부정한 것과 정한 것을 분별하게 할 것이며	And they shall teach my people the difference between the holy and profane, and cause them to discern between the unclean and the clean.	They are to teach My people the difference between the holy and the common, and show them how to discern between the clean and the unclean.
EZK	44	24	송사하는 일을 재판하되 내 규례대로 재판할 것이며 내 모든 정한 절기에는 내 법도와 율례를 지킬 것이며 또 내 안식일을 거룩케 하며	And in controversy they shall stand in judgment; and they shall judge it according to my judgments: and they shall keep my laws and my statutes in all mine assemblies; and they shall hallow my sabbaths.	In any dispute, they shall officiate as judges and judge according to My ordinances. They must keep My laws and statutes regarding all My appointed feasts, and they must keep My Sabbaths holy.
EZK	44	25	시체를 가까이하여 스스로 더럽히지 못할 것이로되 부모나 자녀나 형제나 시집가지 아니한 자매를 위하여는 더럽힐 수 있으며	And they shall come at no dead person to defile themselves: but for father, or for mother, or for son, or for daughter, for brother, or for sister that hath had no husband, they may defile themselves.	A priest must not defile himself by going near a dead person. However, for a father, a mother, a son, a daughter, a brother, or an unmarried sister, he may do so,
EZK	44	26	이런 자는 스스로 정결케 한 후에 칠 일을 더 지낼 것이요	And after he is cleansed, they shall reckon unto him seven days.	and after he is cleansed, he must count off seven days for himself.
EZK	44	27	성소에 수종들려 하여 안 뜰과 성소에 들어갈 때에는 속죄제를 드릴지니라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	And in the day that he goeth into the sanctuary, unto the inner court, to minister in the sanctuary, he shall offer his sin offering, saith the Lord God.	And on the day he goes into the sanctuary, into the inner court, to minister in the sanctuary, he must present his sin offering, declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	44	28	그들은 기업이 있으리니 내가 곧 그 기업이라 너희는 이스라엘 가운데서 그들에게 산업을 주지 말라 나는 그 산업이 됨이니라	And it shall be unto them for an inheritance: I am their inheritance: and ye shall give them no possession in Israel: I am their possession.	In regard to their inheritance, I am their inheritance. You are to give them no possession in Israel, for I am their possession.
EZK	44	29	그들은 소제와 속죄제와 속건제의 제물을 먹을지니 이스라엘 중에서 구별하여 드리는 물건을 다 그들에게 돌리며	They shall eat the meat offering, and the sin offering, and the trespass offering; and every dedicated thing in Israel shall be theirs.	They shall eat the grain offerings, the sin offerings, and the guilt offerings. Everything in Israel devoted to the LORD will belong to them.
EZK	44	30	또 각종 처음 익은 열매와 너희 모든 예물 중에 각종 거제 제물을 다 제사장에게 돌리고 너희가 또 첫 밀가루를 제사장에게 주어 그들로 네 집에 복이 임하도록 하게 하라	And the first of all the firstfruits of all things, and every oblation of all, of every sort of your oblations, shall be the priest’s: ye shall also give unto the priest the first of your dough, that he may cause the blessing to rest in thine house.	The best of all the firstfruits and of every contribution from all your offerings will belong to the priests. You are to give your first batch of dough to the priest, so that a blessing may rest upon your homes.
EZK	44	31	무릇 새나 육축의 스스로 죽은 것이나 찢긴 것은 다 제사장이 먹지 못할 것이니라	The priests shall not eat of any thing that is dead of itself, or torn, whether it be fowl or beast.	The priests may not eat any bird or animal found dead or torn by wild beasts.
EZK	45	1	너희는 제비 뽑아 땅을 나누어 기업을 삼을 때에 한 구역을 거룩한 땅으로 삼아 여호와께 예물로 드릴지니 그 장은 이만 오천 척 이요 광은 일만 척이라 그 구역 안 전부가 거룩하리라	Moreover, when ye shall divide by lot the land for inheritance, ye shall offer an oblation unto the Lord, an holy portion of the land: the length shall be the length of five and twenty thousand reeds, and the breadth shall be ten thousand. This shall be holy in all the borders thereof round about.	“When you divide the land by lot as an inheritance, you are to set aside a portion for the LORD, a holy portion of the land 25,000 cubits long and 20,000 cubits wide. This entire tract of land will be holy.
EZK	45	2	그 중에서 성소에 속할 땅은 장이 오백 척이요 광이 오백 척이니 네모 반듯하며 그 외에 사면 오십 척으로 뜰이 되게 하되	Of this there shall be for the sanctuary five hundred in length, with five hundred in breadth, square round about; and fifty cubits round about for the suburbs thereof.	Within this area there is to be a section for the sanctuary 500 cubits square, with 50 cubits around it for open land.
EZK	45	3	이 척량한 중에서 장 이만 오천 척과 광 일만 척을 척량하고 그 가운데 성소를 둘지니 지극히 거룩한 곳이요	And of this measure shalt thou measure the length of five and twenty thousand, and the breadth of ten thousand: and in it shall be the sanctuary and the most holy place.	From this holy portion, you are to measure off a length of 25,000 cubits and a width of 10,000 cubits, and in it will be the sanctuary, the Most Holy Place.
EZK	45	4	그 땅의 거룩한 구역이라 여호와께 가까이 나아가서 성소에서 수종드는 제사장에게 돌려 그 집을 위하여 있는 곳이 되게 하며 성소를 위하여 있는 거룩한 곳이 되게 하고	The holy portion of the land shall be for the priests the ministers of the sanctuary, which shall come near to minister unto the Lord: and it shall be a place for their houses, and an holy place for the sanctuary.	It will be a holy portion of the land to be used by the priests who minister in the sanctuary, who draw near to minister before the LORD. It will be a place for their houses, as well as a holy area for the sanctuary.
EZK	45	5	또 장 이만 오천 척과 광 일만 척을 척량하여 전에서 수종드는 레위 사람에게 돌려 그들의 산업을 삼아 촌 이십을 세우게 하고	And the five and twenty thousand of length, and the ten thousand of breadth, shall also the Levites, the ministers of the house, have for themselves, for a possession for twenty chambers.	An adjacent area 25,000 cubits long and 10,000 cubits wide shall belong to the Levites who minister in the temple; it will be their possession for towns in which to live.
EZK	45	6	구별한 거룩한 구역 옆에 광 오천 척과 장 이만 오천 척을 척량하여 성읍의 기지를 삼아 이스라엘 온 족속에게 돌리고	And ye shall appoint the possession of the city five thousand broad, and five and twenty thousand long, over against the oblation of the holy portion: it shall be for the whole house of Israel.	As the property of the city, you are to set aside an area 5,000 cubits wide and 25,000 cubits long, adjacent to the holy district. It will belong to the whole house of Israel.
EZK	45	7	드린바 거룩한 구역과 성읍의 기지 된 땅의 좌우편 곧 드린바 거룩한 구역의 옆과 성읍의 기지 옆의 땅을 왕에게 돌리되 서편으로 향하여 서편 국경까지와 동편으로 향하여 동편 국경까지니 그 장이 구역 하나와 서로 같을지니라	And a portion shall be for the prince on the one side and on the other side of the oblation of the holy portion, and of the possession of the city, before the oblation of the holy portion, and before the possession of the city, from the west side westward, and from the east side eastward: and the length shall be over against one of the portions, from the west border unto the east border.	Now the prince will have the area bordering each side of the area formed by the holy district and the property of the city, extending westward from the western side and eastward from the eastern side, running lengthwise from the western boundary to the eastern boundary and parallel to one of the tribal portions.
EZK	45	8	이 땅으로 왕에게 돌려 이스라엘 중에 기업을 삼게 하면 나의 왕들이 다시는 내 백성을 압제하지 아니하리라 그 나머지 땅은 이스라엘 족속에게 그 지파대로 나눠 줄지니라	In the land shall be his possession in Israel: and my princes shall no more oppress my people; and the rest of the land shall they give to the house of Israel according to their tribes.	This land will be his possession in Israel. And My princes will no longer oppress My people, but will give the rest of the land to the house of Israel according to their tribes.
EZK	45	9	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 이스라엘의 치리자들아 너희에게 족하니라 너희는 강포와 겁탈을 제하여 버리고 공평과 공의를 행하여 내 백성에게 토색함을 그칠지니라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	Thus saith the Lord God; Let it suffice you, O princes of Israel: remove violence and spoil, and execute judgment and justice, take away your exactions from my people, saith the Lord God.	For this is what the Lord GOD says: ‘Enough, O princes of Israel! Cease your violence and oppression, and do what is just and right. Stop dispossessing My people, declares the Lord GOD.’
EZK	45	10	너희는 공평한 저울과 공평한 에바와 공평한 밧을 쓸지니	Ye shall have just balances, and a just ephah, and a just bath.	You must use honest scales, a just ephah, and a just bath.
EZK	45	11	에바와 밧은 그 용량을 동일히 하되 호멜의 용량을 따라 밧은 호멜 십분지 일을 담게 하고 에바도 호멜 십분지 일을 담게 할 것이며	The ephah and the bath shall be of one measure, that the bath may contain the tenth part of an homer, and the ephah the tenth part of an homer: the measure thereof shall be after the homer.	The ephah and the bath shall be the same quantity so that the bath will contain a tenth of a homer, and the ephah a tenth of a homer; the homer will be the standard measure for both.
EZK	45	12	세겔은 이십 게라니 이십 세겔과 이십오 세겔과 십오 세겔로 너희 마네가 되게 하라	And the shekel shall be twenty gerahs: twenty shekels, five and twenty shekels, fifteen shekels, shall be your maneh.	The shekel will consist of twenty gerahs. Twenty shekels plus twenty-five shekels plus fifteen shekels will equal one mina.
EZK	45	13	너희의 마땅히 드릴 예물이 이러하니 밀 한 호멜에서는 에바 육분지 일을 드리고 보리 한 호멜에서도 에바 육분지 일을 드리며	This is the oblation that ye shall offer; the sixth part of an ephah of an homer of wheat, and ye shall give the sixth part of an ephah of an homer of barley:	This is the contribution you are to offer: a sixth of an ephah from each homer of wheat, and a sixth of an ephah from each homer of barley.
EZK	45	14	기름은 정한 규례대로 한 고르에서 밧 십분지 일을 드릴지니 기름의 밧으로 말하면 한 고르는 십 밧 곧 한 호멜이며 (십 밧은 한 호멜이라)	Concerning the ordinance of oil, the bath of oil, ye shall offer the tenth part of a bath out of the cor, which is an homer of ten baths; for ten baths are an homer:	The prescribed portion of oil, measured by the bath, is a tenth of a bath from each cor (a cor consists of ten baths or one homer, since ten baths are equivalent to a homer).
EZK	45	15	또 이스라엘 윤택한 초장의 떼 이백 마리에서는 한 어린 양을 드릴 것이라 백성을 속죄하기 위하여 이것들로 소제와 번제와 감사제물을 삼을지니라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	And one lamb out of the flock, out of two hundred, out of the fat pastures of Israel; for a meat offering, and for a burnt offering, and for peace offerings, to make reconciliation for them, saith the Lord God.	And one sheep shall be given from each flock of two hundred from the well-watered pastures of Israel. These are for the grain offerings, burnt offerings, and peace offerings, to make atonement for the people, declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	45	16	이 땅 모든 백성은 이 예물로 이스라엘 왕에게 드리고	All the people of the land shall give this oblation for the prince in Israel.	All the people of the land must participate in this contribution for the prince in Israel.
EZK	45	17	왕은 본분대로 번제와 소제와 전제를 절기와 월삭과 안식일과 이스라엘 족속의 모든 정한 절기에 드릴지니 이스라엘 족속을 속죄하기 위하여 이 속죄제와 소제와 번제와 감사제물을 갖출지니라	And it shall be the prince’s part to give burnt offerings, and meat offerings, and drink offerings, in the feasts, and in the new moons, and in the sabbaths, in all solemnities of the house of Israel: he shall prepare the sin offering, and the meat offering, and the burnt offering, and the peace offerings, to make reconciliation for the house of Israel.	And it shall be the prince’s part to provide the burnt offerings, grain offerings, and drink offerings for the feasts, New Moons, and Sabbaths—for all the appointed feasts of the house of Israel. He will provide the sin offerings, grain offerings, burnt offerings, and peace offerings to make atonement for the house of Israel.
EZK	45	18	나 여호와가 말하노라 정월 초하룻날에 흠없는 수송아지 하나를 취하여 성소를 정결케 하되	Thus saith the Lord God; In the first month, in the first day of the month, thou shalt take a young bullock without blemish, and cleanse the sanctuary:	This is what the Lord GOD says: ‘On the first day of the first month you are to take a young bull without blemish and purify the sanctuary.
EZK	45	19	제사장이 그 속죄제 희생의 피를 취하여 전 문설주와 제단 아랫층 네 모퉁이와 안 뜰 문설주에 바를 것이요	And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering, and put it upon the posts of the house, and upon the four corners of the settle of the altar, and upon the posts of the gate of the inner court.	And the priest is to take some of the blood from the sin offering and put it on the doorposts of the temple, on the four corners of the ledge of the altar, and on the gateposts of the inner court.
EZK	45	20	그 달 칠일에도 모든 그릇 범죄한 자와 부지중 범죄한 자를 위하여 역시 그렇게 하여 전을 속죄할지니라	And so thou shalt do the seventh day of the month for every one that erreth, and for him that is simple: so shall ye reconcile the house.	You must do the same thing on the seventh day of the month for anyone who strays unintentionally or in ignorance. In this way you will make atonement for the temple.
EZK	45	21	정월 십사일에는 유월절 곧 칠 일 절기를 지키며 누룩 없는 떡을 먹을 것이라	In the first month, in the fourteenth day of the month, ye shall have the passover, a feast of seven days; unleavened bread shall be eaten.	On the fourteenth day of the first month you are to observe the Passover, a feast of seven days, during which unleavened bread shall be eaten.
EZK	45	22	그 날에 왕은 자기와 이 땅 모든 백성을 위하여 송아지 하나를 갖추어 속죄제를 드릴 것이요	And upon that day shall the prince prepare for himself and for all the people of the land a bullock for a sin offering.	On that day the prince shall provide a bull as a sin offering for himself and for all the people of the land.
EZK	45	23	또 절기 칠 일 동안에는 그가 나 여호와를 위하여 번제를 갖추되 곧 칠 일 동안에 매일 흠 없는 수송아지 일곱과 수양 일곱이며 또 매일 수염소 하나를 갖추어 속죄제를 드릴 것이며	And seven days of the feast he shall prepare a burnt offering to the Lord, seven bullocks and seven rams without blemish daily the seven days; and a kid of the goats daily for a sin offering.	Each day during the seven days of the feast, he shall provide seven bulls and seven rams without blemish as a burnt offering to the LORD, along with a male goat for a sin offering.
EZK	45	24	또 소제를 갖추되 수송아지 하나에는 밀가루 한 에바요 수양 하나에도 한 에바며 밀가루 한 에바에는 기름 한 힌씩이며	And he shall prepare a meat offering of an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and an hin of oil for an ephah.	He shall also provide as a grain offering an ephah for each bull and an ephah for each ram, along with a hin of olive oil for each ephah of grain.
EZK	45	25	칠월 십오일 절기 칠 일 동안에도 이대로 행하여 속죄제와 번제며 그 밀가루와 기름을 드릴지니라	In the seventh month, in the fifteenth day of the month, shall he do the like in the feast of the seven days, according to the sin offering, according to the burnt offering, and according to the meat offering, and according to the oil.	During the seven days of the feast that begins on the fifteenth day of the seventh month, he is to make the same provision for sin offerings, burnt offerings, grain offerings, and oil.’
EZK	46	1	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 안 뜰 동향한 문을 일하는 육 일 동안에는 닫되 안식일에는 열며 월삭에도 열고	Thus saith the Lord God; The gate of the inner court that looketh toward the east shall be shut the six working days; but on the sabbath it shall be opened, and in the day of the new moon it shall be opened.	“This is what the Lord GOD says: ‘The gate of the inner court that faces east must be kept shut during the six days of work, but on the Sabbath day and on the day of the New Moon it shall be opened.
EZK	46	2	왕은 바깥 문 현관을 통하여 들어와서 문 벽 곁에 서고 제사장은 그를 위하여 번제와 감사제를 드릴 것이요 왕은 문통에서 경배한 후에 밖으로 나가고 그 문은 저녁까지 닫지 말 것이며	And the prince shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate without, and shall stand by the post of the gate, and the priests shall prepare his burnt offering and his peace offerings, and he shall worship at the threshold of the gate: then he shall go forth; but the gate shall not be shut until the evening.	The prince is to enter from the outside through the portico of the gateway and stand by the gatepost, while the priests sacrifice his burnt offerings and peace offerings. He is to bow in worship at the threshold of the gate and then depart, but the gate must not be shut until evening.
EZK	46	3	이 땅 백성도 안식일과 월삭에 이 문통에서 나 여호와 앞에 경배할 것이며	Likewise the people of the land shall worship at the door of this gate before the Lord in the sabbaths and in the new moons.	On the Sabbaths and New Moons the people of the land are also to bow in worship before the LORD at the entrance to that gateway.
EZK	46	4	안식일에 왕이 여호와께 드릴 번제는 흠 없는 어린 양 여섯과 흠없는 수양 하나라	And the burnt offering that the prince shall offer unto the Lord in the sabbath day shall be six lambs without blemish, and a ram without blemish.	The burnt offering that the prince presents to the LORD on the Sabbath day shall be six unblemished male lambs and an unblemished ram.
EZK	46	5	그 소제는 수양 하나에는 밀가루 한 에바요 모든 어린 양에는 그 힘대로 할 것이며 밀가루 한 에바에는 기름 한 힌씩이니라	And the meat offering shall be an ephah for a ram, and the meat offering for the lambs as he shall be able to give, and an hin of oil to an ephah.	The grain offering with the ram shall be one ephah, and the grain offering with the lambs shall be as much as he is able, along with a hin of oil per ephah.
EZK	46	6	월삭에는 흠 없는 수송아지 하나와 어린 양 여섯과 수양 하나를 드리되 모두 흠 없는 것으로 할 것이며	And in the day of the new moon it shall be a young bullock without blemish, and six lambs, and a ram: they shall be without blemish.	On the day of the New Moon he shall offer a young, unblemished bull, six lambs, and a ram without blemish.
EZK	46	7	또 소제를 갖추되 수송아지에는 밀가루 한 에바요 수양에도 밀가루 한 에바며 모든 어린 양에는 그 힘대로 할 것이요 밀가루 한 에바에는 기름 한 힌씩이며	And he shall prepare a meat offering, an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and for the lambs according as his hand shall attain unto, and an hin of oil to an ephah.	He is to provide a grain offering of an ephah with the bull, an ephah with the ram, and as much as he is able with the lambs, along with a hin of oil per ephah.
EZK	46	8	왕이 올 때에는 이 문 현관을 통하여 들어오고 나갈 때에도 그리할지니라	And when the prince shall enter, he shall go in by the way of the porch of that gate, and he shall go forth by the way thereof.	When the prince enters, he shall go in through the portico of the gateway, and he shall go out the same way.
EZK	46	9	그러나 모든 정한 절기에 이 땅 거민이 나 여호와 앞에 나아올 때에는 북문으로 들어와서 경배하는 자는 남문으로 나가고 남문으로 들어오는 자는 북문으로 나갈지라 들어온 문으로 도로 나가지 말고 그 몸이 앞으로 향한 대로 나갈지며	But when the people of the land shall come before the Lord in the solemn feasts, he that entereth in by the way of the north gate to worship shall go out by the way of the south gate; and he that entereth by the way of the south gate shall go forth by the way of the north gate: he shall not return by the way of the gate whereby he came in, but shall go forth over against it.	When the people of the land come before the LORD at the appointed feasts, whoever enters by the north gate to worship must go out by the south gate, and whoever enters by the south gate must go out by the north gate. No one is to return through the gate by which he entered, but each must go out by the opposite gate.
EZK	46	10	왕은 무리 가운데 있어서 그들의 들어올 때에 들어오고 그들의 나갈 때에 나갈지니라	And the prince in the midst of them, when they go in, shall go in; and when they go forth, shall go forth.	When the people enter, the prince shall go in with them, and when they leave, he shall leave.
EZK	46	11	절기와 성회 때에 그 소제는 수송아지 하나에 밀가루 한 에바요 수양 하나에도 한 에바요 모든 어린 양에는 그 힘대로 할 것이며 밀가루 한 에바에는 기름 한 힌씩이며	And in the feasts and in the solemnities the meat offering shall be an ephah to a bullock, and an ephah to a ram, and to the lambs as he is able to give, and an hin of oil to an ephah.	At the festivals and appointed feasts, the grain offering shall be an ephah with a bull, an ephah with a ram, and as much as one is able to give with the lambs, along with a hin of oil per ephah.
EZK	46	12	만일 왕이 자원하여 번제를 갖추거나 혹 자원하여 감사제를 갖추어 나 여호와께 드릴 때에는 그를 위하여 동향한 문을 열고 그가 번제와 감사제를 안식일에 드림 같이 드리고 밖으로 나갈지며 나간 후에 문을 닫을지니라	Now when the prince shall prepare a voluntary burnt offering or peace offerings voluntarily unto the Lord, one shall then open him the gate that looketh toward the east, and he shall prepare his burnt offering and his peace offerings, as he did on the sabbath day: then he shall go forth; and after his going forth one shall shut the gate.	When the prince makes a freewill offering to the LORD, whether a burnt offering or a peace offering, the gate facing east must be opened for him. He is to offer his burnt offering or peace offering just as he does on the Sabbath day. Then he shall go out, and the gate must be closed after he goes out.
EZK	46	13	아침마다 일 년 되고 흠 없는 어린 양 하나로 번제를 갖추어 나 여호와께 드리고	Thou shalt daily prepare a burnt offering unto the Lord of a lamb of the first year without blemish: thou shalt prepare it every morning.	And you shall provide an unblemished year-old lamb as a daily burnt offering to the LORD; you are to offer it every morning.
EZK	46	14	또 아침마다 그것과 함께 드릴 소제를 갖추되 곧 밀가루 에바 육분지 일과 기름 힌 삼분지 일을 섞을 것이니 이는 영원한 규례를 삼아 항상 나 여호와께 드릴 소제라	And thou shalt prepare a meat offering for it every morning, the sixth part of an ephah, and the third part of an hin of oil, to temper with the fine flour; a meat offering continually by a perpetual ordinance unto the Lord.	You are also to provide with it every morning a grain offering of a sixth of an ephah with a third of a hin of oil to moisten the fine flour—a grain offering to the LORD. This is a permanent statute.
EZK	46	15	이와 같이 아침마다 그 어린 양과 밀가루와 기름을 갖추어 항상 드리는 번제를 삼을지니라	Thus shall they prepare the lamb, and the meat offering, and the oil, every morning for a continual burnt offering.	Thus they shall provide the lamb, the grain offering, and the oil every morning as a regular burnt offering.’
EZK	46	16	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 왕이 만일 한 아들에게 선물을 준즉 그의 기업이 되어 그 자손에게 속하나니 이는 그 기업을 이어 받음이어니와	Thus saith the Lord God; If the prince give a gift unto any of his sons, the inheritance thereof shall be his sons’; it shall be their possession by inheritance.	This is what the Lord GOD says: ‘If the prince gives a gift to any of his sons as an inheritance, it will belong to his descendants. It will become their property by inheritance.
EZK	46	17	왕이 만일 그 기업으로 한 종에게 선물로 준즉 그 종에게 속하여 희년까지 이르고 그 후에는 왕에게로 돌아갈 것이니 왕의 기업은 그 아들이 이어 받을 것임이니라	But if he give a gift of his inheritance to one of his servants, then it shall be his to the year of liberty; after it shall return to the prince: but his inheritance shall be his sons’ for them.	But if he gives a gift from his inheritance to one of his servants, it will belong to that servant until the year of freedom; then it will revert to the prince. His inheritance belongs only to his sons; it shall be theirs.
EZK	46	18	왕은 백성의 기업을 취하여 그 산업에서 쫓아내지 못할지니 왕이 자기 아들에게 기업으로 줄 것은 자기 산업으로만 할 것임이니라 백성으로 각각 그 산업을 떠나 흩어지지 않게 할 것이니라	Moreover the prince shall not take of the people’s inheritance by oppression, to thrust them out of their possession; but he shall give his sons inheritance out of his own possession: that my people be not scattered every man from his possession.	The prince must not take any of the inheritance of the people by evicting them from their property. He is to provide an inheritance for his sons from his own property, so that none of My people will be displaced from his property.’”
EZK	46	19	그 후에 그가 나를 데리고 문곁 통행구로 말미암아 제사장의 북향한 거룩한 방에 들어가시니 그 방 뒤 서편에 한 처소가 있더라	After he brought me through the entry, which was at the side of the gate, into the holy chambers of the priests, which looked toward the north: and, behold, there was a place on the two sides westward.	Then the man brought me through the entrance at the side of the gate into the holy chambers facing north, which belonged to the priests, and he showed me a place there at the far western end
EZK	46	20	그가 내게 이르시되 이는 제사장이 속건제와 속죄제 희생을 삶으며 소제 제물을 구울 처소니 그들이 이 성물을 가지고 바깥 뜰에 나가면 백성을 거룩하게 할까 함이니라 하시고	Then said he unto me, This is the place where the priests shall boil the trespass offering and the sin offering, where they shall bake the meat offering; that they bear them not out into the utter court, to sanctify the people.	and said to me, “This is the place where the priests shall boil the guilt offering and the sin offering, and where they shall bake the grain offering, so that they do not bring them into the outer court and transmit holiness to the people.”
EZK	46	21	나를 데리고 바깥 뜰로 나가서 나로 뜰 네 구석을 지나가게 하시는데 본즉 그 뜰 매 구석에 또 뜰이 있는데	Then he brought me forth into the utter court, and caused me to pass by the four corners of the court; and, behold, in every corner of the court there was a court.	Then he brought me into the outer court and led me around to its four corners, and I saw a separate court in each of its corners.
EZK	46	22	뜰 네 구석에 있는 그 뜰에 담이 둘렸으니 뜰의 장이 사십 척이요 광이 삼십 척이라 구석의 네 뜰이 한 척수며	In the four corners of the court there were courts joined of forty cubits long and thirty broad: these four corners were of one measure.	In the four corners of the outer court there were enclosed courts, each forty cubits long and thirty cubits wide. Each of the four corner areas had the same dimensions.
EZK	46	23	그 작은 네 뜰 사면으로 돌아가며 부엌이 있고 그 사면 부엌에 삶는 기구가 설비되었는데	And there was a row of building round about in them, round about them four, and it was made with boiling places under the rows round about.	Around the inside of each of the four courts was a row of masonry with ovens built at the base of the walls on all sides.
EZK	46	24	그가 내게 이르시되 이는 삶는 부엌이니 전에 수종드는 자가 백성의 제물을 여기서 삶을 것이니라 하시더라	Then said he unto me, These are the places of them that boil, where the ministers of the house shall boil the sacrifice of the people.	And he said to me, “These are the kitchens where those who minister at the temple will cook the sacrifices offered by the people.”
EZK	47	1	그가 나를 데리고 전 문에 이르시니 전의 전면이 동을 향하였는데 그 문지방 밑에서 물이 나와서 동으로 흐르다가 전 우편 제단 남편으로 흘러 내리더라	Afterward he brought me again unto the door of the house; and, behold, waters issued out from under the threshold of the house eastward: for the forefront of the house stood toward the east, and the waters came down from under from the right side of the house, at the south side of the altar.	Then the man brought me back to the entrance of the temple, and I saw water flowing from under the threshold of the temple toward the east (for the temple faced east). The water was coming down from under the south side of the temple, south of the altar.
EZK	47	2	그가 또 나를 데리고 북문으로 나가서 바깥 길로 말미암아 꺾여 동향한 바깥 문에 이르시기로 본즉 물이 그 우편에서 스미어 나오더라	Then brought he me out of the way of the gate northward, and led me about the way without unto the utter gate by the way that looketh eastward; and, behold, there ran out waters on the right side.	Next he brought me out through the north gate and led me around the outside to the outer gate facing east, and there I saw the water trickling out from the south side.
EZK	47	3	그 사람이 손에 줄을 잡고 동으로 나아가며 일천 척을 척량한 후에 나로 그 물을 건너게 하시니 물이 발목에 오르더니	And when the man that had the line in his hand went forth eastward, he measured a thousand cubits, and he brought me through the waters; the waters were to the ankles.	As the man went eastward with a measuring line in his hand, he measured off a thousand cubits and led me through ankle-deep water.
EZK	47	4	다시 일천 척을 척량하고 나로 물을 건너게 하시니 물이 무릎에 오르고 다시 일천 척을 척량하고 나로 물을 건너게 하시니 물이 허리에 오르고	Again he measured a thousand, and brought me through the waters; the waters were to the knees. Again he measured a thousand, and brought me through; the waters were to the loins.	Then he measured off a thousand cubits and led me through knee-deep water. Again he measured a thousand cubits and led me through waist-deep water.
EZK	47	5	다시 일천 척을 척량하시니 물이 내가 건너지 못할 강이 된지라 그 물이 창일하여 헤엄할 물이요 사람이 능히 건너지 못할 강이더라	Afterward he measured a thousand; and it was a river that I could not pass over: for the waters were risen, waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed over.	Once again he measured off a thousand cubits, but now it was a river that I could not cross, because the water had risen and was deep enough for swimming—a river that could not be crossed on foot.
EZK	47	6	그가 내게 이르시되 인자야 네가 이것을 보았느냐 하시고 나를 인도하여 강 가로 돌아가게 하시기로	And he said unto me, Son of man, hast thou seen this? Then he brought me, and caused me to return to the brink of the river.	“Son of man, do you see this?” he asked. Then he led me back to the bank of the river.
EZK	47	7	내가 돌아간즉 강 좌우편에 나무가 심히 많더라	Now when I had returned, behold, at the bank of the river were very many trees on the one side and on the other.	When I arrived, I saw a great number of trees along both banks of the river.
EZK	47	8	그가 내게 이르시되 이 물이 동방으로 향하여 흘러 아라바로 내려가서 바다에 이르리니 이 흘러내리는 물로 그 바다의 물이 소성함을 얻을지라	Then said he unto me, These waters issue out toward the east country, and go down into the desert, and go into the sea: which being brought forth into the sea, the waters shall be healed.	And he said to me, “This water flows out to the eastern region and goes down into the Arabah. When it empties into the Sea, the water there becomes fresh.
EZK	47	9	이 강물이 이르는 곳마다 번성하는 모든 생물이 살고 또 고기가 심히 많으리니 이 물이 흘러 들어가므로 바닷물이 소성함을 얻겠고 이 강이 이르는 각처에 모든 것이 살 것이며	And it shall come to pass, that every thing that liveth, which moveth, whithersoever the rivers shall come, shall live: and there shall be a very great multitude of fish, because these waters shall come thither: for they shall be healed; and every thing shall live whither the river cometh.	Wherever the river flows, there will be swarms of living creatures and a great number of fish, because it flows there and makes the waters fresh; so wherever the river flows, everything will flourish.
EZK	47	10	또 이 강 가에 어부가 설 것이니 엔게디에서부터 에네글라임까지 그물 치는 곳이 될 것이라 그 고기가 각기 종류를 따라 큰 바다의 고기 같이 심히 많으려니와	And it shall come to pass, that the fishers shall stand upon it from En–gedi even unto En–eglaim; they shall be a place to spread forth nets; their fish shall be according to their kinds, as the fish of the great sea, exceeding many.	Fishermen will stand by the shore; from En-gedi to En-eglaim they will spread their nets to catch fish of many kinds, like the fish of the Great Sea.
EZK	47	11	그 진펄과 개펄은 소성되지 못하고 소금 땅이 될 것이며	But the miry places thereof and the marishes thereof shall not be healed; they shall be given to salt.	But the swamps and marshes will not become fresh; they will be left for salt.
EZK	47	12	강 좌우 가에는 각종 먹을 실과나무가 자라서 그 잎이 시들지 아니하며 실과가 끊치지 아니하고 달마다 새 실과를 맺으리니 그 물이 성소로 말미암아 나옴이라 그 실과는 먹을만하고 그 잎사귀는 약 재료가 되리라	And by the river upon the bank thereof, on this side and on that side, shall grow all trees for meat, whose leaf shall not fade, neither shall the fruit thereof be consumed: it shall bring forth new fruit according to his months, because their waters they issued out of the sanctuary: and the fruit thereof shall be for meat, and the leaf thereof for medicine.	Along both banks of the river, fruit trees of all kinds will grow. Their leaves will not wither, and their fruit will not fail. Each month they will bear fruit, because the water from the sanctuary flows to them. Their fruit will be used for food and their leaves for healing.”
EZK	47	13	나 주 여호와가 말하노라 너희는 이 지계대로 이스라엘 십이 지파에게 이 땅을 나누어 기업이 되게 하되 요셉에게는 두 분깃이니라	Thus saith the Lord God; This shall be the border, whereby ye shall inherit the land according to the twelve tribes of Israel: Joseph shall have two portions.	This is what the Lord GOD says: “These are the boundaries by which you are to divide the land as an inheritance among the twelve tribes of Israel; Joseph shall receive two portions.
EZK	47	14	내가 옛적에 맹세하여 이 땅으로 너희 열조에게 주마 하였었나니 너희는 피차 없이 나누어 기업을 삼으라 이 땅이 너희의 기업이 되리라	And ye shall inherit it, one as well as another: concerning the which I lifted up mine hand to give it unto your fathers: and this land shall fall unto you for inheritance.	You are to divide it equally among them. Because I swore with an uplifted hand to give it to your forefathers, this land will fall to you as an inheritance.
EZK	47	15	이 땅 지계는 이러하니라 북방은 대해에서 헤들론 길로 말미암아 스닷 어귀까지니	And this shall be the border of the land toward the north side, from the great sea, the way of Hethlon, as men go to Zedad;	This shall be the boundary of the land:
EZK	47	16	곧 하맛과 브로다며 다메섹 지계와 하맛 지계 사이에 있는 시브라임과 하우란 지계 곁에 있는 하셀핫디곤이라	Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, which is between the border of Damascus and the border of Hamath; Hazar–hatticon, which is by the coast of Hauran.	On the north side it will extend from the Great Sea by way of Hethlon through Lebo-hamath to Zedad, Berothah, and Sibraim (which is on the border between Damascus and Hamath), as far as Hazer-hatticon, which is on the border of Hauran.
EZK	47	17	그 지계가 바닷가에서부터 다메섹과 지계에 있는 하살에논까지요 그 지계가 또 극북방에 있는 하맛 지계에 미쳤나니 이는 그 북방이요	And the border from the sea shall be Hazar–enan, the border of Damascus, and the north northward, and the border of Hamath. And this is the north side.	So the border will run from the Sea to Hazar-enan, along the northern border of Damascus, with the territory of Hamath to the north. This will be the northern boundary.
EZK	47	18	동방은 하우란과 다메섹과 및 길르앗과 이스라엘 땅 사이에 있는 요단 강이니 북편 지계에서부터 동해까지 척량하라 이는 그 동방이요	And the east side ye shall measure from Hauran, and from Damascus, and from Gilead, and from the land of Israel by Jordan, from the border unto the east sea. And this is the east side.	On the east side the border will run between Hauran and Damascus, along the Jordan between Gilead and the land of Israel, to the Eastern Sea and as far as Tamar. This will be the eastern boundary.
EZK	47	19	남방은 다말에서부터 므리봇 가데스 물에 이르고 애굽 시내를 따라 대해에 이르나니 이는 그 남방이요	And the south side southward, from Tamar even to the waters of strife in Kadesh, the river to the great sea. And this is the south side southward.	On the south side it will run from Tamar to the waters of Meribath-kadesh, and along the Brook of Egypt to the Great Sea. This will be the southern boundary.
EZK	47	20	서방은 대해라 남편 지계에서부터 맞은편 하맛 어귀까지 이르나니 이는 그 서방이니라	The west side also shall be the great sea from the border, till a man come over against Hamath. This is the west side.	And on the west side, the Great Sea will be the boundary up to a point opposite Lebo-hamath. This will be the western boundary.
EZK	47	21	그런즉 너희가 이스라엘 모든 지파대로 이 땅을 나누어 차지하라	So shall ye divide this land unto you according to the tribes of Israel.	You are to divide this land among yourselves according to the tribes of Israel.
EZK	47	22	너희는 이 땅을 나누되 제비 뽑아 너희와 너희 가운데 우거하는 외인 곧 너희 가운데서 자녀를 낳은 자의 기업이 되게 할지니 너희는 그 외인을 본토에서 난 이스라엘 족속 같이 여기고 그들로 이스라엘 지파 중에서 너희와 함께 기업을 얻게 하되	And it shall come to pass, that ye shall divide it by lot for an inheritance unto you, and to the strangers that sojourn among you, which shall beget children among you: and they shall be unto you as born in the country among the children of Israel; they shall have inheritance with you among the tribes of Israel.	You shall allot it as an inheritance for yourselves and for the foreigners who dwell among you and who have children. You are to treat them as native-born Israelites; along with you, they shall be allotted an inheritance among the tribes of Israel.
EZK	47	23	외인이 우거하는 그 지파에서 그 기업을 줄지니라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	And it shall come to pass, that in what tribe the stranger sojourneth, there shall ye give him his inheritance, saith the Lord God.	In whatever tribe a foreigner dwells, you are to assign his inheritance there,” declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	48	1	모든 지파의 이름대로 이 같을지니라 극북에서부터 헤들론 길로 말미암아 하맛 어귀를 지나서 다메섹 지계에 있는 하살에논까지 곧 북으로 하맛 지계에 미치는 땅 동편에서 서편까지는 단의 분깃이요	Now these are the names of the tribes. From the north end to the coast of the way of Hethlon, as one goeth to Hamath, Hazar–enan, the border of Damascus northward, to the coast of Hamath; for these are his sides east and west; a portion for Dan.	“Now these are the names of the tribes: At the northern frontier, Dan will have one portion bordering the road of Hethlon to Lebo-hamath and running on to Hazar-enan on the border of Damascus with Hamath to the north, and extending from the east side to the west side.
EZK	48	2	단 지계 다음으로 동편에서 서편까지는 아셀의 분깃이요	And by the border of Dan, from the east side unto the west side, a portion for Asher.	Asher will have one portion bordering the territory of Dan from east to west.
EZK	48	3	아셀 지계 다음으로 동편에서 서편까지는 납달리의 분깃이요	And by the border of Asher, from the east side even unto the west side, a portion for Naphtali.	Naphtali will have one portion bordering the territory of Asher from east to west.
EZK	48	4	납달리 지계 다음으로 동편에서 서편까지는 므낫세의 분깃이요	And by the border of Naphtali, from the east side unto the west side, a portion for Manasseh.	Manasseh will have one portion bordering the territory of Naphtali from east to west.
EZK	48	5	므낫세 지계 다음으로 동편에서 서편까지는 에브라임의 분깃이요	And by the border of Manasseh, from the east side unto the west side, a portion for Ephraim.	Ephraim will have one portion bordering the territory of Manasseh from east to west.
EZK	48	6	에브라임 지계 다음으로 동편에서 서편까지는 르우벤의 분깃이요	And by the border of Ephraim, from the east side even unto the west side, a portion for Reuben.	Reuben will have one portion bordering the territory of Ephraim from east to west.
EZK	48	7	르우벤 지계 다음으로 동편에서 서편까지는 유다의 분깃이요	And by the border of Reuben, from the east side unto the west side, a portion for Judah.	Judah will have one portion bordering the territory of Reuben from east to west.
EZK	48	8	유다 지계 다음으로 동편에서 서편까지는 너희가 예물로 드릴 땅이라 광이 이만 오천 척이요 장은 다른 분깃의 동편에서 서편까지와 같고 성소는 그 중앙에 있을지니	And by the border of Judah, from the east side unto the west side, shall be the offering which ye shall offer of five and twenty thousand reeds in breadth, and in length as one of the other parts, from the east side unto the west side: and the sanctuary shall be in the midst of it.	Bordering the territory of Judah, from east to west, will be the portion you are to set apart. It will be 25,000 cubits wide, and the length of a tribal portion from east to west. In the center will be the sanctuary.
EZK	48	9	곧 너희가 여호와께 드려 예물로 삼을 땅의 장이 이만 오천 척이요 광이 일만 척이라	The oblation that ye shall offer unto the Lord shall be of five and twenty thousand in length, and of ten thousand in breadth.	The special portion you set apart to the LORD shall be 25,000 cubits long and 10,000 cubits wide.
EZK	48	10	이 드리는 거룩한 땅은 제사장에게 돌릴지니 북편으로 장이 이만 오천 척이요 서편으로 광이 일만 척이요 동편으로 광이 일만 척이요 남편으로 장이 이만 오천 척이라 그 중앙에 여호와의 성소가 있게 하고	And for them, even for the priests, shall be this holy oblation; toward the north five and twenty thousand in length, and toward the west ten thousand in breadth, and toward the east ten thousand in breadth, and toward the south five and twenty thousand in length: and the sanctuary of the Lord shall be in the midst thereof.	This will be the holy portion for the priests. It will be 25,000 cubits long on the north side, 10,000 cubits wide on the west side, 10,000 cubits wide on the east side, and 25,000 cubits long on the south side. In the center will be the sanctuary of the LORD.
EZK	48	11	이 땅으로 사독의 자손 중 거룩히 구별한 제사장에게 돌릴지어다 그들은 직분을 지키고 이스라엘 족속이 그릇할 때에 레위 사람의 그릇한 것처럼 그릇하지 아니하였느니라	It shall be for the priests that are sanctified of the sons of Zadok; which have kept my charge, which went not astray when the children of Israel went astray, as the Levites went astray.	It will be for the consecrated priests, the descendants of Zadok, who kept My charge and did not go astray as the Levites did when the Israelites went astray.
EZK	48	12	이 온 땅 중에서 예물로 드리는 땅 곧 레위 지계와 연접한 땅을 그들이 지극히 거룩한 것으로 여길지니라	And this oblation of the land that is offered shall be unto them a thing most holy by the border of the Levites.	It will be a special portion for them set apart from the land, a most holy portion adjacent to the territory of the Levites.
EZK	48	13	제사장의 지계를 따라 레위 사람의 분깃을 주되 장이 이만 오천 척이요 광이 일만 척으로 할지니 이 구역의 장이 이만 오천 척이요 광이 각기 일만 척이라	And over against the border of the priests the Levites shall have five and twenty thousand in length, and ten thousand in breadth: all the length shall be five and twenty thousand, and the breadth ten thousand.	Bordering the territory of the priests, the Levites shall have an area 25,000 cubits long and 10,000 cubits wide. The whole length will be 25,000 cubits, and the width 10,000 cubits.
EZK	48	14	그들이 그 땅을 팔지도 못하며 바꾸지도 못하며 그 땅의 처음 익은 열매를 남에게 주지도 못하리니 이는 나 여호와에게 거룩히 구별한 것임이니라	And they shall not sell of it, neither exchange, nor alienate the firstfruits of the land: for it is holy unto the Lord.	They must not sell or exchange any of it, and they must not transfer this best part of the land, for it is holy to the LORD.
EZK	48	15	이 이만 오천 척 다음으로 광 오천 척은 속된 땅으로 하여 성읍을 세우며 거하는 곳과 들을 삼되 성이 그 중앙에 있게 할지니	And the five thousand, that are left in the breadth over against the five and twenty thousand, shall be a profane place for the city, for dwelling, and for suburbs: and the city shall be in the midst thereof.	The remaining area, 5,000 cubits wide and 25,000 cubits long, will be for common use by the city, for houses, and for pastureland. The city will be in the center of it
EZK	48	16	그 척수는 북편도 사천오백 척이요 남편도 사천오백 척이요 동편도 사천오백 척이요 서편도 사천오백 척이며	And these shall be the measures thereof; the north side four thousand and five hundred, and the south side four thousand and five hundred, and on the east side four thousand and five hundred, and the west side four thousand and five hundred.	and will have these measurements: 4,500 cubits on the north side, 4,500 cubits on the south side, 4,500 cubits on the east side, and 4,500 cubits on the west side.
EZK	48	17	그 성의 들은 북으로 이백오십 척이요 남으로 이백오십 척이요 동으로 이백오십 척이요 서으로 이백오십 척이며	And the suburbs of the city shall be toward the north two hundred and fifty, and toward the south two hundred and fifty, and toward the east two hundred and fifty, and toward the west two hundred and fifty.	The pastureland of the city will extend 250 cubits to the north, 250 cubits to the south, 250 cubits to the east, and 250 cubits to the west.
EZK	48	18	예물을 삼아 거룩히 구별할 땅과 연접하여 남아 있는 땅의 장이 동으로 일만 척이요 서으로 일만 척이라 곧 예물을 삼아 거룩히 구별할 땅과 연접하였으며 그 땅의 소산은 성읍에서 역사하는 자의 양식을 삼을지라	And the residue in length over against the oblation of the holy portion shall be ten thousand eastward, and ten thousand westward: and it shall be over against the oblation of the holy portion; and the increase thereof shall be for food unto them that serve the city.	The remainder of the length bordering the holy portion and running adjacent to it will be 10,000 cubits on the east side and 10,000 cubits on the west side. Its produce will supply food for the workers of the city.
EZK	48	19	이스라엘 모든 지파 중에 그 성읍에서 역사하는 자는 그 땅을 기경할지니라	And they that serve the city shall serve it out of all the tribes of Israel.	The workers of the city who cultivate it will come from all the tribes of Israel.
EZK	48	20	그런즉 예물로 드리는 땅의 도합은 장도 이만 오천 척이요 광도 이만 오천 척이라 너희가 거룩히 구별하여 드릴 땅은 성읍의 기지와 합하여 네모 반듯할 것이니라	All the oblation shall be five and twenty thousand by five and twenty thousand: ye shall offer the holy oblation foursquare, with the possession of the city.	The entire portion will be a square, 25,000 cubits by 25,000 cubits. You are to set apart the holy portion, along with the city property.
EZK	48	21	거룩히 구별할 땅과 성읍의 기지 좌우편에 남은 땅은 왕에게 돌릴지니 곧 거룩히 구별할 땅의 동향한 그 지계 앞 이만 오천 척이라 다른 분깃들과 연접한 땅이니 이것을 왕에게 돌릴 것이며 거룩히 구별할 땅과 전의 성소가 그 중간에 있으리라	And the residue shall be for the prince, on the one side and on the other of the holy oblation, and of the possession of the city, over against the five and twenty thousand of the oblation toward the east border, and westward over against the five and twenty thousand toward the west border, over against the portions for the prince: and it shall be the holy oblation; and the sanctuary of the house shall be in the midst thereof.	The remaining area on both sides of the holy portion and of the property of the city will belong to the prince. He will own the land adjacent to the tribal portions, extending eastward from the 25,000 cubits of the holy district toward the eastern border, and westward from the 25,000 cubits to the western border. And in the center of them will be the holy portion and the sanctuary of the temple.
EZK	48	22	그런즉 왕에게 돌려 그에게 속할 땅은 레위 사람의 기업 좌우편과 성읍의 기지 좌우편이며 유다 지경과 베냐민 지경 사이에 있을지니라	Moreover from the possession of the Levites, and from the possession of the city, being in the midst of that which is the prince’s, between the border of Judah and the border of Benjamin, shall be for the prince.	So the Levitical property and the city property will lie in the center of the area belonging to the prince—the area between the borders of Judah and Benjamin.
EZK	48	23	그 나머지 모든 지파는 동편에서 서편까지는 베냐민의 분깃이요	As for the rest of the tribes, from the east side unto the west side, Benjamin shall have a portion.	As for the rest of the tribes: Benjamin will have one portion extending from the east side to the west side.
EZK	48	24	베냐민 지계 다음으로 동편에서 서편까지는 시므온의 분깃이요	And by the border of Benjamin, from the east side unto the west side, Simeon shall have a portion.	Simeon will have one portion bordering the territory of Benjamin from east to west.
EZK	48	25	시므온 지계 다음으로 동편에서 서편까지는 잇사갈의 분깃이요	And by the border of Simeon, from the east side unto the west side, Issachar a portion.	Issachar will have one portion bordering the territory of Simeon from east to west.
EZK	48	26	잇사갈 지계 다음으로 동편에서 서편까지는 스불론의 분깃이요	And by the border of Issachar, from the east side unto the west side, Zebulun a portion.	Zebulun will have one portion bordering the territory of Issachar from east to west.
EZK	48	27	스불론 지계 다음으로 동편에서 서편까지는 갓의 분깃이며	And by the border of Zebulun, from the east side unto the west side, Gad a portion.	And Gad will have one portion bordering the territory of Zebulun from east to west.
EZK	48	28	갓 지계 다음으로 남편 지계는 다말에서부터 므리바가데스 물에 이르고 애굽 시내를 따라 대해에 이르나니	And by the border of Gad, at the south side southward, the border shall be even from Tamar unto the waters of strife in Kadesh, and to the river toward the great sea.	The southern border of Gad will run from Tamar to the waters of Meribath-kadesh, then along the Brook of Egypt and out to the Great Sea.
EZK	48	29	이것은 너희가 제비 뽑아 이스라엘 지파에게 나누어 주어 기업이 되게 할 땅이요 또 이것들은 그들의 분깃이니라 나 주 여호와의 말이니라	This is the land which ye shall divide by lot unto the tribes of Israel for inheritance, and these are their portions, saith the Lord God.	This is the land you are to allot as an inheritance to the tribes of Israel, and these will be their portions,” declares the Lord GOD.
EZK	48	30	그 성읍의 출입구는 이러하니라 북편의 광이 사천오백 척이라	And these are the goings out of the city on the north side, four thousand and five hundred measures.	“These will be the exits of the city:
EZK	48	31	그 성읍의 문들은 이스라엘 지파들의 이름을 따를 것인데 북으로 문이 셋이라 하나는 르우벤 문이요 하나는 유다 문이요 하나는 레위 문이며	And the gates of the city shall be after the names of the tribes of Israel: three gates northward; one gate of Reuben, one gate of Judah, one gate of Levi.	Beginning on the north side, which will be 4,500 cubits long, the gates of the city will be named after the tribes of Israel. On the north side there will be three gates: the gate of Reuben, the gate of Judah, and the gate of Levi.
EZK	48	32	동편의 광이 사천오백 척이니 또한 문이 셋이라 하나는 요셉 문이요 하나는 베냐민 문이요 하나는 단 문이며	And at the east side four thousand and five hundred: and three gates; and one gate of Joseph, one gate of Benjamin, one gate of Dan.	On the east side, which will be 4,500 cubits long, there will be three gates: the gate of Joseph, the gate of Benjamin, and the gate of Dan.
EZK	48	33	남편의 광이 사천오백 척이니 또한 문이 셋이라 하나는 시므온 문이요 하나는 잇사갈 문이요 하나는 스불론 문이며	And at the south side four thousand and five hundred measures: and three gates; one gate of Simeon, one gate of Issachar, one gate of Zebulun.	On the south side, which will be 4,500 cubits long, there will be three gates: the gate of Simeon, the gate of Issachar, and the gate of Zebulun.
EZK	48	34	서편도 사천오백 척이니 또한 문이 셋이라 하나는 갓 문이요 하나는 아셀 문이요 하나는 납달리 문이며	At the west side four thousand and five hundred, with their three gates; one gate of Gad, one gate of Asher, one gate of Naphtali.	And on the west side, which will be 4,500 cubits long, there will be three gates: the gate of Gad, the gate of Asher, and the gate of Naphtali.
EZK	48	35	그 사면의 도합이 일만 팔천 척이라 그 날 후로는 그 성읍의 이름을 여호와삼마라 하리라	It was round about eighteen thousand measures: and the name of the city from that day shall be, The Lord is there.	The perimeter of the city will be 18,000 cubits, and from that day on the name of the city will be: THE LORD IS THERE.”
DAN	1	1	유다 왕 여호야김이 위에 있은 지 삼년에 바벨론 왕 느부갓네살이 예루살렘에 이르러 그것을 에워쌌더니	In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah came Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon unto Jerusalem, and besieged it.	In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came to Jerusalem and besieged it.
DAN	1	2	주께서 유다 왕 여호야김과 하나님의 전 기구 얼마를 그의 손에 붙이시매 그가 그것을 가지고 시날 땅 자기 신의 묘에 이르러 그 신의 보고에 두었더라	And the Lord gave Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand, with part of the vessels of the house of God: which he carried into the land of Shinar to the house of his god; and he brought the vessels into the treasure house of his god.	And the Lord delivered into his hand Jehoiakim king of Judah, along with some of the articles from the house of God. He carried these off to the land of Shinar, to the house of his god, where he put them in the treasury of his god.
DAN	1	3	왕이 환관장 아스부나스에게 명하여 이스라엘 자손 중에서 왕족과 귀족의 몇 사람	And the king spake unto Ashpenaz the master of his eunuchs, that he should bring certain of the children of Israel, and of the king’s seed, and of the princes;	Then the king ordered Ashpenaz, the chief of his court officials, to bring in some Israelites from the royal family and the nobility—
DAN	1	4	곧 흠이 없고 아름다우며 모든 재주를 통달하며 지식이 구비하며 학문에 익숙하여 왕궁에 모실 만한 소년을 데려오게 하였고 그들에게 갈대아 사람의 학문과 방언을 가르치게 하였고	Children in whom was no blemish, but well favoured, and skilful in all wisdom, and cunning in knowledge, and understanding science, and such as had ability in them to stand in the king’s palace, and whom they might teach the learning and the tongue of the Chaldeans.	young men without blemish, handsome, gifted in all wisdom, knowledgeable, quick to understand, and qualified to serve in the king’s palace—and to teach them the language and literature of the Chaldeans.
DAN	1	5	또 왕이 지정하여 자기의 진미와 자기의 마시는 포도주에서 그들의 날마다 쓸 것을 주어 삼 년을 기르게 하였으니 이는 그 후에 그들로 왕의 앞에 모셔 서게 하려 함이었더라	And the king appointed them a daily provision of the king’s meat, and of the wine which he drank: so nourishing them three years, that at the end thereof they might stand before the king.	The king assigned them daily provisions of the royal food and wine. They were to be trained for three years, after which they were to enter the king’s service.
DAN	1	6	그들 중에 유다 자손 곧 다니엘과 하나냐와 미사엘과 아사랴가 있었더니	Now among these were of the children of Judah, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah:	Among these young men were some from Judah: Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah.
DAN	1	7	환관장이 그들의 이름을 고쳐 다니엘은 벨드사살이라 하고 하나냐는 사드락이라 하고 미사엘은 메삭이라 하고 아사랴는 아벳느고라 하였더라	Unto whom the prince of the eunuchs gave names: for he gave unto Daniel the name of Belteshazzar; and to Hananiah, of Shadrach; and to Mishael, of Meshach; and to Azariah, of Abed–nego.	The chief official gave them new names: To Daniel he gave the name Belteshazzar; to Hananiah, Shadrach; to Mishael, Meshach; and to Azariah, Abednego.
DAN	1	8	다니엘은 뜻을 정하여 왕의 진미와 그의 마시는 포도주로 자기를 더럽히지 아니하리라 하고 자기를 더럽히지 않게 하기를 환관장에게 구하니	But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself with the portion of the king’s meat, nor with the wine which he drank: therefore he requested of the prince of the eunuchs that he might not defile himself.	But Daniel made up his mind that he would not defile himself with the king’s food or wine. So he asked the chief official for permission not to defile himself.
DAN	1	9	하나님이 다니엘로 환관장에게 은혜와 긍휼을 얻게 하신지라	Now God had brought Daniel into favour and tender love with the prince of the eunuchs.	Now God had granted Daniel favor and compassion from the chief official,
DAN	1	10	환관장이 다니엘에게 이르되 내가 내 주 왕을 두려워하노라 그가 너희 먹을 것과 너희 마실 것을 지정하셨거늘 너희의 얼굴이 초췌하여 동무 소년들만 못한 것을 그로 보시게 할 것이 무엇이냐 그렇게 되면 너희 까닭에 내 머리가 왕 앞에서 위태하게 되리라 하니라	And the prince of the eunuchs said unto Daniel, I fear my lord the king, who hath appointed your meat and your drink: for why should he see your faces worse liking than the children which are of your sort? then shall ye make me endanger my head to the king.	but he said to Daniel, “I fear my lord the king, who has assigned your food and drink. For why should he see your faces looking thinner than those of the other young men your age? You would endanger my head before the king!”
DAN	1	11	환관장이 세워 다니엘과 하나냐와 미사엘과 아사랴를 감독하게 한 자에게 다니엘이 말하되	Then said Daniel to Melzar, whom the prince of the eunuchs had set over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah,	Then Daniel said to the steward whom the chief official had appointed over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah,
DAN	1	12	청하오니 당신의 종들을 열흘 동안 시험하여 채식을 주어 먹게 하고 물을 주어 마시게 한 후에	Prove thy servants, I beseech thee, ten days; and let them give us pulse to eat, and water to drink.	“Please test your servants for ten days. Let us be given only vegetables to eat and water to drink.
DAN	1	13	당신 앞에서 우리의 얼굴과 왕의 진미를 먹는 소년들의 얼굴을 비교하여 보아서 보이는 대로 종들에게 처분하소서 하매	Then let our countenances be looked upon before thee, and the countenance of the children that eat of the portion of the king’s meat: and as thou seest, deal with thy servants.	Then compare our appearances with those of the young men who are eating the royal food, and deal with your servants according to what you see.”
DAN	1	14	그가 그들의 말을 좇아 열흘을 시험하더니	So he consented to them in this matter, and proved them ten days.	So he consented to this and tested them for ten days.
DAN	1	15	열흘 후에 그들의 얼굴이 더욱 아름답고 살이 더욱 윤택하여 왕의 진미를 먹는 모든 소년보다 나아 보인지라	And at the end of ten days their countenances appeared fairer and fatter in flesh than all the children which did eat the portion of the king’s meat.	And at the end of ten days, they looked healthier and better nourished than all the young men who were eating the king’s food.
DAN	1	16	이러므로 감독하는 자가 그들에게 분정된 진미와 마실 포도주를 제하고 채식을 주니라	Thus Melzar took away the portion of their meat, and the wine that they should drink; and gave them pulse.	So the steward continued to withhold their choice food and the wine they were to drink, and he gave them vegetables instead.
DAN	1	17	하나님이 이 네 소년에게 지식을 얻게 하시며 모든 학문과 재주에 명철하게 하신 외에 다니엘은 또 모든 이상과 몽조를 깨달아 알더라	As for these four children, God gave them knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom: and Daniel had understanding in all visions and dreams.	To these four young men God gave knowledge and understanding in every kind of literature and wisdom. And Daniel had insight into all kinds of visions and dreams.
DAN	1	18	왕의 명한바 그들을 불러들일 기한이 찼으므로 환관장이 그들을 데리고 느부갓네살 앞으로 들어갔더니	Now at the end of the days that the king had said he should bring them in, then the prince of the eunuchs brought them in before Nebuchadnezzar.	Now at the end of the time specified by the king, the chief official presented them to Nebuchadnezzar.
DAN	1	19	왕이 그들과 말하여 보매 무리 중에 다니엘과 하나냐와 미사엘과 아사랴와 같은 자 없으므로 그들로 왕 앞에 모시게 하고	And the king communed with them; and among them all was found none like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah: therefore stood they before the king.	And the king spoke with them, and among all the young men he found no one equal to Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah. So they entered the king’s service.
DAN	1	20	왕이 그들에게 모든 일을 묻는 중에 그 지혜와 총명이 온 나라 박수와 술객보다 십 배나 나은 줄을 아니라	And in all matters of wisdom and understanding, that the king enquired of them, he found them ten times better than all the magicians and astrologers that were in all his realm.	In every matter of wisdom and understanding about which the king consulted them, he found them ten times better than all the magicians and enchanters in his entire kingdom.
DAN	1	21	다니엘은 고레스 왕 원년까지 있으니라	And Daniel continued even unto the first year of king Cyrus.	And Daniel remained there until the first year of King Cyrus.
DAN	2	1	느부갓네살이 위에 있은지 이년에 꿈을 꾸고 그로 인하여 마음이 번민하여 잠을 이루지 못한지라	And in the second year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams, wherewith his spirit was troubled, and his sleep brake from him.	In the second year of his reign, Nebuchadnezzar had dreams that troubled his spirit, and sleep escaped him.
DAN	2	2	왕이 그 꿈을 자기에게 고하게 하려고 명하여 박수와 술객과 점장이와 갈대아 술사를 부르매 그들이 들어와서 왕의 앞에 선지라	Then the king commanded to call the magicians, and the astrologers, and the sorcerers, and the Chaldeans, for to shew the king his dreams. So they came and stood before the king.	So the king gave orders to summon the magicians, enchanters, sorcerers, and astrologers to explain his dreams. When they came and stood before the king,
DAN	2	3	왕이 그들에게 이르되 내가 꿈을 꾸고 그 꿈을 알고자 하여 마음이 번민하도다	And the king said unto them, I have dreamed a dream, and my spirit was troubled to know the dream.	he said to them, “I have had a dream, and my spirit is anxious to understand it.”
DAN	2	4	갈대아 술사들이 아람 방언으로 왕에게 말하되 왕이여 만세수를 하옵소서 왕은 그 꿈을 종들에게 이르시면 우리가 해석하여 드리겠나이다	Then spake the Chaldeans to the king in Syriack, O king, live for ever: tell thy servants the dream, and we will shew the interpretation.	Then the astrologers answered the king in Aramaic, “O king, may you live forever! Tell your servants the dream, and we will give the interpretation.”
DAN	2	5	왕이 갈대아 술사에게 대답하여 가로되 내가 명령을 내렸나니 너희가 만일 꿈과 그 해석을 나로 알게 하지 아니하면 너희 몸을 쪼갤 것이며 너희 집으로 거름터를 삼을 것이요	The king answered and said to the Chaldeans, The thing is gone from me: if ye will not make known unto me the dream, with the interpretation thereof, ye shall be cut in pieces, and your houses shall be made a dunghill.	The king replied to the astrologers, “My word is final: If you do not tell me the dream and its interpretation, you will be cut into pieces and your houses will be reduced to rubble.
DAN	2	6	너희가 만일 꿈과 그 해석을 보이면 너희가 선물과 상과 큰 영광을 내게서 얻으리라 그런즉 꿈과 그 해석을 내게 보이라	But if ye shew the dream, and the interpretation thereof, ye shall receive of me gifts and rewards and great honour: therefore shew me the dream, and the interpretation thereof.	But if you tell me the dream and its interpretation, you will receive from me gifts and rewards and great honor. So tell me the dream and its interpretation.”
DAN	2	7	그들이 다시 대답하여 가로되 청컨대 왕은 꿈을 종들에게 이르소서 그리하시면 우리가 해석하여 드리겠나이다	They answered again and said, Let the king tell his servants the dream, and we will shew the interpretation of it.	They answered a second time, “Let the king tell the dream to his servants, and we will give the interpretation.”
DAN	2	8	왕이 대답하여 가로되 내가 분명히 아노라 너희가 나의 명령이 내렸음을 보았으므로 시간을 천연하려 함이로다	The king answered and said, I know of certainty that ye would gain the time, because ye see the thing is gone from me.	The king replied, “I know for sure that you are stalling for time, because you see that my word is final.
DAN	2	9	너희가 만일 이 꿈을 나로 알게 하지 아니하면 너희를 처치할 법이 오직 하나이니 이는 너희가 거짓말과 망령된 말을 내 앞에서 꾸며 말하여 때가 변하기를 기다리려 함이니라 이제 그 꿈을 내게 알게 하라 그리하면 너희가 그 해석도 보일 줄을 내가 알리라	But if ye will not make known unto me the dream, there is but one decree for you: for ye have prepared lying and corrupt words to speak before me, till the time be changed: therefore tell me the dream, and I shall know that ye can shew me the interpretation thereof.	If you do not tell me the dream, there is only one decree for you. You have conspired to speak before me false and fraudulent words, hoping the situation will change. Therefore tell me the dream, and I will know that you can give me its interpretation.”
DAN	2	10	갈대아 술사들이 왕 앞에 대답하여 가로되 세상에는 왕의 그 일을 보일 자가 하나도 없으므로 크고 권력있는 왕이 이런 것으로 박수에게나 술객에게나 갈대아 술사에게 물은 자가 절대로 있지 아니하였나이다	The Chaldeans answered before the king, and said, There is not a man upon the earth that can shew the king’s matter: therefore there is no king, lord, nor ruler, that asked such things at any magician, or astrologer, or Chaldean.	The astrologers answered the king, “No one on earth can do what the king requests! No king, however great and powerful, has ever asked anything like this of any magician, enchanter, or astrologer.
DAN	2	11	왕의 물으신 것은 희한한 일이라 육체와 함께 거하지 아니하는 신들 외에는 왕 앞에 그것을 보일 자가 없나이다 한지라	And it is a rare thing that the king requireth, and there is none other that can shew it before the king, except the gods, whose dwelling is not with flesh.	What the king requests is so difficult that no one can tell it to him except the gods, whose dwelling is not with mortals.”
DAN	2	12	왕이 이로 인하여 진노하고 통분하여 바벨론 모든 박사를 다 멸하라 명하니라	For this cause the king was angry and very furious, and commanded to destroy all the wise men of Babylon.	This response made the king so furious with anger that he gave orders to destroy all the wise men of Babylon.
DAN	2	13	왕의 명령이 내리매 박사들은 죽게 되었고 다니엘과 그 동무도 죽이려고 찾았더라	And the decree went forth that the wise men should be slain; and they sought Daniel and his fellows to be slain.	So the decree went out that the wise men were to be executed, and men went to look for Daniel and his friends to execute them.
DAN	2	14	왕의 시위대 장관 아리옥이 바벨론 박사들을 죽이러 나가매 다니엘이 명철하고 슬기로운 말로	Then Daniel answered with counsel and wisdom to Arioch the captain of the king’s guard, which was gone forth to slay the wise men of Babylon:	When Arioch, the commander of the king’s guard, had gone out to execute the wise men of Babylon, Daniel replied with discretion and tact.
DAN	2	15	왕의 장관 아리옥에게 물어 가로되 왕의 명령이 어찌 그리 급하뇨 아리옥이 그 일을 다니엘에게 고하매	He answered and said to Arioch the king’s captain, Why is the decree so hasty from the king? Then Arioch made the thing known to Daniel.	“Why is the decree from the king so harsh?” he asked. At this time Arioch explained the situation to Daniel.
DAN	2	16	다니엘이 들어가서 왕께 구하기를 기한하여 주시면 왕에게 그 해석을 보여 드리겠다 하니라	Then Daniel went in, and desired of the king that he would give him time, and that he would shew the king the interpretation.	So Daniel went in and asked the king to give him some time, so that he could give him the interpretation.
DAN	2	17	이에 다니엘이 자기 집으로 돌아가서 그 동무 하나냐와 미사엘과 아사랴에게 그 일을 고하고	Then Daniel went to his house, and made the thing known to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, his companions:	Then Daniel returned to his house and explained the matter to his friends Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah,
DAN	2	18	하늘에 계신 하나님이 이 은밀한 일에 대하여 긍휼히 여기사 자기 다니엘과 동무들이 바벨론의 다른 박사와 함께 죽임을 당치 않게 하시기를 그들로 구하게 하니라	That they would desire mercies of the God of heaven concerning this secret; that Daniel and his fellows should not perish with the rest of the wise men of Babylon.	urging them to plead for mercy from the God of heaven concerning this mystery, so that Daniel and his friends would not be killed with the rest of the wise men of Babylon.
DAN	2	19	이에 이 은밀한 것이 밤에 이상으로 다니엘에게 나타나 보이매 다니엘이 하늘에 계신 하나님을 찬송하니라	Then was the secret revealed unto Daniel in a night vision. Then Daniel blessed the God of heaven.	During the night, the mystery was revealed to Daniel in a vision, and he blessed the God of heaven
DAN	2	20	다니엘이 말하여 가로되 영원 무궁히 하나님의 이름을 찬송할 것은 지혜와 권능이 그에게 있음이로다	Daniel answered and said, Blessed be the name of God for ever and ever: for wisdom and might are his:	and declared: “Blessed be the name of God forever and ever, for wisdom and power belong to Him.
DAN	2	21	그는 때와 기한을 변하시며 왕들을 폐하시고 왕들을 세우시며 지혜자에게 지혜를 주시고 지식자에게 총명을 주시는도다	And he changeth the times and the seasons: he removeth kings, and setteth up kings: he giveth wisdom unto the wise, and knowledge to them that know understanding:	He changes the times and seasons; He removes kings and establishes them. He gives wisdom to the wise and knowledge to the discerning.
DAN	2	22	그는 깊고 은밀한 일을 나타내시고 어두운 데 있는 것을 아시며 또 빛이 그와 함께 있도다	He revealeth the deep and secret things: he knoweth what is in the darkness, and the light dwelleth with him.	He reveals the deep and hidden things; He knows what lies in darkness, and light dwells with Him.
DAN	2	23	나의 열조의 하나님이여 주께서 이제 내게 지혜와 능력을 주시고 우리가 주께 구한바 일을 내게 알게 하셨사오니 내가 주께 감사하고 주를 찬양하나이다 곧 주께서 왕의 그 일을 내게 보이셨나이다 하니라	I thank thee, and praise thee, O thou God of my fathers, who hast given me wisdom and might, and hast made known unto me now what we desired of thee: for thou hast now made known unto us the king’s matter.	To You, O God of my fathers, I give thanks and praise, because You have given me wisdom and power. And now You have made known to me what we have requested, for You have made known to us the dream of the king.”
DAN	2	24	이에 다니엘이 왕이 바벨론 박사들을 멸하라 명한 이리옥에게로 가서 이르매 그에게 이같이 이르되 바벨론 박사들을 멸하지 말고 나를 왕의 앞으로 인도하라 그리하면 내가 그 해석을 왕께 보여 드리리라	Therefore Daniel went in unto Arioch, whom the king had ordained to destroy the wise men of Babylon: he went and said thus unto him; Destroy not the wise men of Babylon: bring me in before the king, and I will shew unto the king the interpretation.	Therefore Daniel went to Arioch, whom the king had appointed to destroy the wise men of Babylon, and said to him, “Do not execute the wise men of Babylon! Bring me before the king, and I will give him the interpretation.”
DAN	2	25	이에 아리옥이 다니엘을 데리고 급히 왕의 앞에 들어가서 고하되 내가 사로잡혀 온 유다 자손 중에서 한 사람을 얻었나이다 그가 그 해석을 왕께 아시게 하리이다	Then Arioch brought in Daniel before the king in haste, and said thus unto him, I have found a man of the captives of Judah, that will make known unto the king the interpretation.	Arioch hastily brought Daniel before the king and said to him, “I have found a man among the exiles from Judah who will tell the king the interpretation.”
DAN	2	26	왕이 대답하여 벨드사살이라 이름한 다니엘에게 이르되 내가 얻은 꿈과 그 해석을 네가 능히 내게 알게 하겠느냐	The king answered and said to Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar, Art thou able to make known unto me the dream which I have seen, and the interpretation thereof?	The king responded to Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar, “Are you able to tell me what I saw in the dream, as well as its interpretation?”
DAN	2	27	다니엘이 왕 앞에 대답하여 가로되 왕의 물으신바 은밀한 것은 박사나 술객이나 박수나 점장이가 능히 왕께 보일 수 없으되	Daniel answered in the presence of the king, and said, The secret which the king hath demanded cannot the wise men, the astrologers, the magicians, the soothsayers, shew unto the king;	Daniel answered the king, “No wise man, enchanter, medium, or magician can explain to the king the mystery of which he inquires.
DAN	2	28	오직 은밀한 것을 나타내실 자는 하늘에 계신 하나님이시라 그가 느부갓네살 왕에게 후일에 될 일을 알게 하셨나이다 왕의 꿈 곧 왕이 침상에서 뇌 속으로 받은 이상은 이러하니이다	But there is a God in heaven that revealeth secrets, and maketh known to the king Nebuchadnezzar what shall be in the latter days. Thy dream, and the visions of thy head upon thy bed, are these;	But there is a God in heaven who reveals mysteries, and He has made known to King Nebuchadnezzar what will happen in the latter days. Your dream and the visions that came into your mind as you lay on your bed were these:
DAN	2	29	왕이여 왕이 침상에 나아가서 장래 일을 생각하실 때에 은밀한 것을 나타내시는 이가 장래 일을 왕에게 알게 하셨사오며	As for thee, O king, thy thoughts came into thy mind upon thy bed, what should come to pass hereafter: and he that revealeth secrets maketh known to thee what shall come to pass.	As you lay on your bed, O king, your thoughts turned to the future, and the Revealer of Mysteries made known to you what will happen.
DAN	2	30	내게 이 은밀한 것을 나타내심은 내 지혜가 다른 인생보다 나은 것이 아니라 오직 그 해석을 왕에게 알려서 왕의 마음으로 생각하던 것을 왕으로 알게하려 하심이니이다	But as for me, this secret is not revealed to me for any wisdom that I have more than any living, but for their sakes that shall make known the interpretation to the king, and that thou mightest know the thoughts of thy heart.	And to me this mystery has been revealed, not because I have more wisdom than any man alive, but in order that the interpretation might be made known to the king, and that you may understand the thoughts of your mind.
DAN	2	31	왕이여 왕이 한 큰 신상을 보셨나이다 그 신상이 왕의 앞에 섰는데 크고 광채가 특심하며 그 모양이 심히 두려우니	Thou, O king, sawest, and behold a great image. This great image, whose brightness was excellent, stood before thee; and the form thereof was terrible.	As you, O king, were watching, a great statue appeared. A great and dazzling statue stood before you, and its form was awesome.
DAN	2	32	그 우상의 머리는 정금이요 가슴과 팔들은 은이요 배와 넓적다리는 놋이요	This image’s head was of fine gold, his breast and his arms of silver, his belly and his thighs of brass,	The head of the statue was pure gold, its chest and arms were silver, its belly and thighs were bronze,
DAN	2	33	그 종아리는 철이요 그 발은 얼마는 철이요 얼마는 진흙이었나이다	His legs of iron, his feet part of iron and part of clay.	its legs were iron, and its feet were part iron and part clay.
DAN	2	34	또 왕이 보신즉 사람의 손으로 하지 아니하고 뜨인 돌이 신상의 철과 진흙의 발을 쳐서 부숴뜨리매	Thou sawest till that a stone was cut out without hands, which smote the image upon his feet that were of iron and clay, and brake them to pieces.	As you watched, a stone was cut out, but not by human hands. It struck the statue on its feet of iron and clay, and crushed them.
DAN	2	35	때에 철과 진흙과 놋과 은과 금이 다 부숴져 여름 타작 마당의 겨 같이 되어 바람에 불려 간 곳이 없었고 우상을 친 돌은 태산을 이루어 온 세계에 가득하였었나이다	Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold, broken to pieces together, and became like the chaff of the summer threshingfloors; and the wind carried them away, that no place was found for them: and the stone that smote the image became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth.	Then the iron, clay, bronze, silver, and gold were shattered and became like chaff on the threshing floor in summer. The wind carried them away, and not a trace of them could be found. But the stone that had struck the statue became a great mountain and filled the whole earth.
DAN	2	36	그 꿈이 이러한즉 내가 이제 그 해석을 왕 앞에 진술하리이다	This is the dream; and we will tell the interpretation thereof before the king.	This was the dream; now we will tell the king its interpretation.
DAN	2	37	왕이여 왕은 열왕의 왕이시라 하늘의 하나님이 나라와 권세와 능력과 영광을 왕에게 주셨고	Thou, O king, art a king of kings: for the God of heaven hath given thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory.	You, O king, are the king of kings, to whom the God of heaven has given sovereignty, power, strength, and glory.
DAN	2	38	인생들과 들짐승과 공중의 새들, 어느 곳에 있는 것을 무론하고 그것들을 왕의 손에 붙이사 다 다스리게 하셨으니 왕은 곧 그 금머리니이다	And wheresoever the children of men dwell, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the heaven hath he given into thine hand, and hath made thee ruler over them all. Thou art this head of gold.	Wherever the sons of men or beasts of the field or birds of the air dwell, He has given them into your hand and has made you ruler over them all. You are that head of gold.
DAN	2	39	왕의 후에 왕만 못한 다른 나라가 일어날 것이요 셋째로 또 놋 같은 나라가 일어나서 온 세계를 다스릴 것이며	And after thee shall arise another kingdom inferior to thee, and another third kingdom of brass, which shall bear rule over all the earth.	But after you, there will arise another kingdom, inferior to yours. Next, a third kingdom, one of bronze, will rule the whole earth.
DAN	2	40	넷째 나라는 강하기가 철 같으리니 철은 모든 물건을 부숴뜨리고 이기는 것이라 철이 모든 것을 부수는 것 같이 그 나라가 뭇 나라를 부숴뜨리고 빻을 것이며	And the fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron: forasmuch as iron breaketh in pieces and subdueth all things: and as iron that breaketh all these, shall it break in pieces and bruise.	Finally, there will be a fourth kingdom as strong as iron; for iron shatters and crushes all things, and like iron that crushes all things, it will shatter and crush all the others.
DAN	2	41	왕께서 그 발과 발가락이 얼마는 토기장이의 진흙이요 얼마는 철인 것을 보셨은즉 그 나라가 나누일 것이며 왕께서 철과 진흙이 섞인 것을 보셨은즉 그 나라가 철의 든든함이 있을 것이나	And whereas thou sawest the feet and toes, part of potters’ clay, and part of iron, the kingdom shall be divided; but there shall be in it of the strength of the iron, forasmuch as thou sawest the iron mixed with miry clay.	And just as you saw that the feet and toes were made partly of fired clay and partly of iron, so this will be a divided kingdom, yet some of the strength of iron will be in it—just as you saw the iron mixed with clay.
DAN	2	42	그 발가락이 얼마는 철이요 얼마는 진흙인즉 그 나라가 얼마는 든든하고 얼마는 부숴질 만할 것이며	And as the toes of the feet were part of iron, and part of clay, so the kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly broken.	And as the toes of the feet were partly iron and partly clay, so this kingdom will be partly strong and partly brittle.
DAN	2	43	왕께서 철과 진흙이 섞인 것을 보셨은즉 그들이 다른 인종과 서로 섞일 것이나 피차에 합하지 아니함이 철과 진흙이 합하지 않음과 같으리이다	And whereas thou sawest iron mixed with miry clay, they shall mingle themselves with the seed of men: but they shall not cleave one to another, even as iron is not mixed with clay.	As you saw the iron mixed with clay, so the peoples will mix with one another, but will not hold together any more than iron mixes with clay.
DAN	2	44	이 열왕의 때에 하늘의 하나님이 한 나라를 세우시리니 이것은 영원히 망하지도 아니할 것이요 그 국권이 다른 백성에게로 돌아가지도 아니할 것이요 도리어 이 모든 나라를 쳐서 멸하고 영원히 설 것이라	And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.	In the days of those kings, the God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be destroyed, nor will it be left to another people. It will shatter all these kingdoms and bring them to an end, but will itself stand forever.
DAN	2	45	왕이 사람의 손으로 아니하고 산에서 뜨인 돌이 철과 놋과 진흙과 은과 금을 부숴뜨린 것을 보신 것은 크신 하나님이 장래 일을 왕께 알게 하신 것이라 이 꿈이 참되고 이 해석이 확실하니이다	Forasmuch as thou sawest that the stone was cut out of the mountain without hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold; the great God hath made known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter: and the dream is certain, and the interpretation thereof sure.	And just as you saw a stone being cut out of the mountain without human hands, and it shattered the iron, bronze, clay, silver, and gold, so the great God has told the king what will happen in the future. The dream is true, and its interpretation is trustworthy.”
DAN	2	46	이에 느부갓네살 왕이 엎드려 다니엘에게 절하고 명하여 예물과 향품을 그에게 드리게 하니라	Then the king Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face, and worshipped Daniel, and commanded that they should offer an oblation and sweet odours unto him.	At this, King Nebuchadnezzar fell on his face, paid homage to Daniel, and ordered that an offering of incense be presented to him.
DAN	2	47	왕이 대답하여 다니엘에게 이르되 너희 하나님은 참으로 모든 신의 신이시요 모든 왕의 주재시로다 네가 능히 이 은밀한 것을 나타내었으니 네 하나님은 또 은밀한 것을 나타내시는 자시로다	The king answered unto Daniel, and said, Of a truth it is, that your God is a God of gods, and a Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets, seeing thou couldest reveal this secret.	The king said to Daniel, “Your God is truly the God of gods and Lord of kings, the Revealer of Mysteries, since you were able to reveal this mystery.”
DAN	2	48	왕이 이에 다니엘을 높여 귀한 선물을 많이 주며 세워 바벨론 모든 박사의 어른을 삼았으며	Then the king made Daniel a great man, and gave him many great gifts, and made him ruler over the whole province of Babylon, and chief of the governors over all the wise men of Babylon.	Then the king promoted Daniel and gave him many generous gifts. He made him ruler over the entire province of Babylon and chief administrator over all the wise men of Babylon.
DAN	2	49	왕이 또 다니엘의 청구대로 사드락과 메삭과 아벳느고를 세워 바벨론 도의 일을 다스리게 하였고 다니엘은 왕궁에 있었더라	Then Daniel requested of the king, and he set Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed–nego, over the affairs of the province of Babylon: but Daniel sat in the gate of the king.	And at Daniel’s request, the king appointed Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego to manage the province of Babylon, while Daniel remained in the king’s court.
DAN	3	1	느부갓네살 왕이 금으로 신상을 만들었으니 고는 육십 규빗이요 광은 여섯 규빗이라 그것을 바벨론 도의 두라 평지에 세웠더라	Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold, whose height was threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof six cubits: he set it up in the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon.	King Nebuchadnezzar made a golden statue sixty cubits high and six cubits wide, and he set it up on the plain of Dura in the province of Babylon.
DAN	3	2	느부갓네살 왕이 보내어 방백과 수령과 도백과 재판관과 재무관과 모사와 법률사와 각 도 모든 관원을 자기 느부갓네살 왕의 세운 신상의 낙성 예식에 참집하게 하매	Then Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to gather together the princes, the governors, and the captains, the judges, the treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, to come to the dedication of the image which Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.	Then King Nebuchadnezzar sent word to assemble the satraps, prefects, governors, advisers, treasurers, judges, magistrates, and all the other officials of the provinces to attend the dedication of the statue he had set up.
DAN	3	3	이에 방백과 수령과 도백과 재판관과 재무관과 모사와 법률사와 각 도 모든 관원이 느부갓네살 왕의 세운 신상의 낙성 예식에 참집하여 느부갓네살의 세운 신상 앞에 서니라	Then the princes, the governors, and captains, the judges, the treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, were gathered together unto the dedication of the image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up; and they stood before the image that Nebuchadnezzar had set up.	So the satraps, prefects, governors, advisers, treasurers, judges, magistrates, and all the rulers of the provinces assembled for the dedication of the statue that King Nebuchadnezzar had set up, and they stood before it.
DAN	3	4	반포하는 자가 크게 외쳐 가로되 백성들과 나라들과 각 방언하는 자들아 왕이 너희 무리에게 명하시나니	Then an herald cried aloud, To you it is commanded, O people, nations, and languages,	Then the herald loudly proclaimed, “O people of every nation and language, this is what you are commanded:
DAN	3	5	너희는 나팔과 피리와 수금과 삼현금과 양금과 생황과 및 모든 악기 소리를 들을 때에 엎드리어 느부갓네살 왕의 세운 금신상에게 절하라	That at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, ye fall down and worship the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king hath set up:	As soon as you hear the sound of the horn, flute, zither, lyre, harp, pipes, and all kinds of music, you must fall down and worship the golden statue that King Nebuchadnezzar has set up.
DAN	3	6	누구든지 엎드리어 절하지 아니하는 자는 즉시 극렬히 타는 풀무에 던져 넣으리라 하매	And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth shall the same hour be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.	And whoever does not fall down and worship will immediately be thrown into the blazing fiery furnace.”
DAN	3	7	모든 백성과 나라들과 각 방언하는 자들이 나팔과 피리와 수금과 삼현금과 양금과 및 모든 악기 소리를 듣자 곧 느부갓네살 왕의 세운 금신상에게 엎드리어 절하니라	Therefore at that time, when all the people heard the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and all kinds of musick, all the people, the nations, and the languages, fell down and worshipped the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.	Therefore, as soon as all the people heard the sound of the horn, flute, zither, lyre, harp, and all kinds of music, the people of every nation and language would fall down and worship the golden statue that King Nebuchadnezzar had set up.
DAN	3	8	그 때에 어떤 갈대아 사람들이 나아와 유다 사람들을 참소하니라	Wherefore at that time certain Chaldeans came near, and accused the Jews.	At this time some astrologers came forward and maliciously accused the Jews,
DAN	3	9	그들이 느부갓네살 왕에게 고하여 가로되 왕이여 만세수를 하옵소서	They spake and said to the king Nebuchadnezzar, O king, live for ever.	saying to King Nebuchadnezzar, “O king, may you live forever!
DAN	3	10	왕이여 왕이 명령을 내리사 무릇 사람마다 나팔과 피리와 수금과 삼현금과 양금과 생황과 및 모든 악기 소리를 듣거든 엎드리어 금 신상에게 절할 것이라	Thou, O king, hast made a decree, that every man that shall hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, shall fall down and worship the golden image:	You, O king, have issued a decree that everyone who hears the sound of the horn, flute, zither, lyre, harp, pipes, and all kinds of music must fall down and worship the golden statue,
DAN	3	11	누구든지 엎드리어 절하지 아니하는 자는 극렬히 타는 풀무 가운데 던져 넣음을 당하리라 하지 아니하셨나이까	And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth, that he should be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.	and that whoever does not fall down and worship will be thrown into the blazing fiery furnace.
DAN	3	12	이제 몇 유다 사람 사드락과 메삭과 아벳느고는 왕이 세워 바벨론 도를 다스리게 하신 자이어늘 왕이여 이 사람들이 왕을 높이지 아니하며 왕의 신들을 섬기지 아니하며 왕이 세우신 금 신상에게 절하지 아니하나이다	There are certain Jews whom thou hast set over the affairs of the province of Babylon, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed–nego; these men, O king, have not regarded thee: they serve not thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.	But there are some Jews you have appointed to manage the province of Babylon—Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego—who have ignored you, O king, and have refused to serve your gods or worship the golden statue you have set up.”
DAN	3	13	느부갓네살 왕이 노하고 분하여 사드락과 메삭과 아벳느고를 끌어 오라 명하매 드디어 그 사람들을 왕의 앞으로 끌어온지라	Then Nebuchadnezzar in his rage and fury commanded to bring Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed–nego. Then they brought these men before the king.	Then Nebuchadnezzar, furious with rage, summoned Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. So these men were brought before the king,
DAN	3	14	느부갓네살이 그들에게 물어 가로되 사드락, 메삭, 아벳느고야 너희가 내 신을 섬기지 아니하며 내가 세운 그 신상에게 절하지 아니하니 짐짓 그리하였느냐	Nebuchadnezzar spake and said unto them, Is it true, O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed–nego, do not ye serve my gods, nor worship the golden image which I have set up?	and Nebuchadnezzar said to them, “Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, is it true that you do not serve my gods or worship the golden statue I have set up?
DAN	3	15	이제라도 너희가 예비하였다가 언제든지 나팔과 피리와 수금과 삼현금과 양금과 생황과 및 모든 악기 소리를 듣거든 내가 만든 신상 앞에 엎드리어 절하면 좋거니와 너희가 만일 절하지 아니하면 즉시 너희를 극렬히 타는 풀무 가운데 던져 넣을 것이니 능히 너희를 내 손에서 건져낼 신이 어떤 신이겠느냐	Now if ye be ready that at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, ye fall down and worship the image which I have made; well: but if ye worship not, ye shall be cast the same hour into the midst of a burning fiery furnace; and who is that God that shall deliver you out of my hands?	Now, if you are ready, as soon as you hear the sound of the horn, flute, zither, lyre, harp, pipes, and all kinds of music, you must fall down and worship the statue I have made. But if you refuse to worship, you will be thrown at once into the blazing fiery furnace. Then what god will be able to deliver you from my hands?”
DAN	3	16	사드락과 메삭과 아벳느고가 왕에게 대답하여 가로되 느부갓네살이여 우리가 이 일에 대하여 왕에게 대답할 필요가 없나이다	Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed–nego, answered and said to the king, O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter.	Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego replied to the king, “O Nebuchadnezzar, we have no need to answer you in this matter.
DAN	3	17	만일 그럴 것이면 왕이여 우리가 섬기는 우리 하나님이 우리를 극렬히 타는 풀무 가운데서 능히 건져 내시겠고 왕의 손에서도 건져내시리이다	If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O king.	If the God whom we serve exists, then He is able to deliver us from the blazing fiery furnace and from your hand, O king.
DAN	3	18	그리 아니하실지라도 왕이여 우리가 왕의 신들을 섬기지도 아니하고 왕의 세우신 금 신상에게 절하지도 아니할 줄을 아옵소서	But if not, be it known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.	But even if He does not, let it be known to you, O king, that we will not serve your gods or worship the golden statue you have set up.”
DAN	3	19	느부갓네살이 분이 가득하여 사드락과 메삭과 아벳느고를 향하여 낯빛을 변하고 명하여 이르되 그 풀무를 뜨겁게 하기를 평일보다 칠 배나 뜨겁게 하라 하고	Then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury, and the form of his visage was changed against Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed–nego: therefore he spake, and commanded that they should heat the furnace one seven times more than it was wont to be heated.	At this, Nebuchadnezzar was filled with rage, and the expression on his face changed toward Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. He gave orders to heat the furnace seven times hotter than usual,
DAN	3	20	군대 중 용사 몇 사람을 명하여 사드락과 메삭과 아벳느고를 결박하여 극렬히 타는 풀무 가운데 던지라 하니	And he commanded the most mighty men that were in his army to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed–nego, and to cast them into the burning fiery furnace.	and he commanded some mighty men of valor in his army to tie up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego and throw them into the blazing fiery furnace.
DAN	3	21	이 사람들을 고의와 속옷과 겉옷과 별다른 옷을 입은 채 결박하여 극렬히 타는 풀무 가운데 던질 때에	Then these men were bound in their coats, their hosen, and their hats, and their other garments, and were cast into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.	So they were tied up, wearing robes, trousers, turbans, and other clothes, and they were thrown into the blazing fiery furnace.
DAN	3	22	왕의 명령이 엄하고 풀무가 심히 뜨거우므로 불꽃이 사드락과 메삭과 아벳느고를 붙든 사람을 태워 죽였고	Therefore because the king’s commandment was urgent, and the furnace exceeding hot, the flame of the fire slew those men that took up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed–nego.	The king’s command was so urgent and the furnace so hot that the fiery flames killed the men who carried up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.
DAN	3	23	이 세 사람 사드락과 메삭과 아벳느고는 결박된 채 극렬히 타는 풀무 가운데 떨어졌더라	And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed–nego, fell down bound into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.	And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, firmly bound, fell into the blazing fiery furnace.
DAN	3	24	때에 느부갓네살 왕이 놀라 급히 일어나서 모사들에게 물어 가로되 우리가 결박하여 불가운데 던진 자는 세 사람이 아니었느냐 그들이 왕에게 대답하여 가로되 왕이여 옳소이다	Then Nebuchadnezzar the king was astonied, and rose up in haste, and spake, and said unto his counsellors, Did not we cast three men bound into the midst of the fire? They answered and said unto the king, True, O king.	Suddenly King Nebuchadnezzar jumped up in amazement and asked his advisers, “Did we not throw three men, firmly bound, into the fire?” “Certainly, O king,” they replied.
DAN	3	25	왕이 또 말하여 가로되 내가 보니 결박되지 아니한 네 사람이 불 가운데로 다니는데 상하지도 아니하였고 그 넷째의 모양은 신들의 아들과 같도다 하고	He answered and said, Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God.	“Look!” he exclaimed. “I see four men, unbound and unharmed, walking around in the fire—and the fourth looks like a son of the gods!”
DAN	3	26	느부갓네살이 극렬히 타는 풀무 아구 가까이 가서 불러 가로되 지극히 높으신 하나님의 종 사드락, 메삭, 아벳느고야 나와서 이리로 오라 하매 사드락과 메삭과 아벳느고가 불 가운데서 나온지라	Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the mouth of the burning fiery furnace, and spake, and said, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed–nego, ye servants of the most high God, come forth, and come hither. Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed–nego, came forth of the midst of the fire.	Then Nebuchadnezzar approached the door of the blazing fiery furnace and called out, “Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, servants of the Most High God, come out!” So Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego came out of the fire,
DAN	3	27	방백과 수령과 도백과 왕의 모사들이 모여 이 사람들을 본즉 불이 능히 그 몸을 해하지 못하였고 머리털도 그슬리지 아니하였고 고의 빛도 변하지 아니하였고 불 탄 냄새도 없었더라	And the princes, governors, and captains, and the king’s counsellors, being gathered together, saw these men, upon whose bodies the fire had no power, nor was an hair of their head singed, neither were their coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on them.	and when the satraps, prefects, governors, and royal advisers had gathered around, they saw that the fire had no effect on the bodies of these men. Not a hair of their heads was singed, their robes were unaffected, and there was no smell of fire on them.
DAN	3	28	느부갓네살이 말하여 가로되 사드락과 메삭과 아벳느고의 하나님을 찬송할지로다 그가 그 사자를 보내사 자기를 의뢰하고 그 몸을 버려서 왕의 명을 거역하고 그 하나님 밖에는 다른 신을 섬기지 아니하며 그에게 절하지 아니한 종들을 구원하셨도다	Then Nebuchadnezzar spake, and said, Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed–nego, who hath sent his angel, and delivered his servants that trusted in him, and have changed the king’s word, and yielded their bodies, that they might not serve nor worship any god, except their own God.	Nebuchadnezzar declared, “Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who has sent His angel and delivered His servants who trusted in Him. They violated the king’s command and risked their lives rather than serve or worship any god except their own God.
DAN	3	29	그러므로 내가 이제 조서를 내리노니 각 백성과 각 나라와 각 방언하는 자가 무릇 사드락과 메삭과 아벳느고의 하나님께 설만히 말하거든 그 몸을 쪼개고 그 집으로 거름터를 삼을지니 이는 이같이 사람을 구원할 다른 신이 없음이니라 하고	Therefore I make a decree, That every people, nation, and language, which speak any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed–nego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a dunghill: because there is no other God that can deliver after this sort.	Therefore I decree that the people of any nation or language who say anything offensive against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego will be cut into pieces and their houses reduced to rubble. For there is no other god who can deliver in this way.”
DAN	3	30	왕이 드디어 사드락과 메삭과 아벳느고를 바벨론 도에서 더욱 높이니라	Then the king promoted Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed–nego, in the province of Babylon.	Then the king promoted Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego in the province of Babylon.
DAN	4	1	느부갓네살 왕은 천하에 거하는 백성들과 나라들과 각 방언하는 자에게 조서하노라 원하노니 너희에게 많은 평강이 있을지어다	Nebuchadnezzar the king, unto all people, nations, and languages, that dwell in all the earth; Peace be multiplied unto you.	King Nebuchadnezzar, To the people of every nation and language who dwell in all the earth: May your prosperity be multiplied.
DAN	4	2	지극히 높으신 하나님이 내게 행하신 이적과 기사를 내가 알게 하기를 즐겨하노라	I thought it good to shew the signs and wonders that the high God hath wrought toward me.	I am pleased to declare the signs and wonders that the Most High God has performed for me.
DAN	4	3	크도다 그 이적이여 능하도다 그 기사여 그 나라는 영원한 나라요 그 권병은 대대에 이르리로다	How great are his signs! and how mighty are his wonders! his kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and his dominion is from generation to generation.	How great are His signs, how mighty His wonders! His kingdom is an eternal kingdom; His dominion endures from generation to generation.
DAN	4	4	나 느부갓네살이 내 집에 편히 있으며 내 궁에서 평강할 때에	I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in mine house, and flourishing in my palace:	I, Nebuchadnezzar, was at ease in my house and flourishing in my palace.
DAN	4	5	한 꿈을 꾸고 그로 인하여 두려워하였으되 곧 내 침상에서 생각하는 것과 뇌 속으로 받은 이상을 인하여 번민하였었노라	I saw a dream which made me afraid, and the thoughts upon my bed and the visions of my head troubled me.	I had a dream, and it frightened me; while in my bed, the images and visions in my mind alarmed me.
DAN	4	6	이러므로 내가 명을 내려 바벨론 모든 박사를 내 앞으로 불러다가 그 꿈의 해석을 내게 알게 하라 하매	Therefore made I a decree to bring in all the wise men of Babylon before me, that they might make known unto me the interpretation of the dream.	So I issued a decree that all the wise men of Babylon be brought before me to interpret the dream for me.
DAN	4	7	박수와 술객과 갈대아 술사와 점장이가 들어왔기로 내가 그 꿈을 그들에게 고하였으나 그들이 그 해석을 내게 알게 하지 못하였느니라	Then came in the magicians, the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers: and I told the dream before them; but they did not make known unto me the interpretation thereof.	When the magicians, enchanters, astrologers, and diviners came in, I told them the dream, and they could not interpret it for me.
DAN	4	8	그 후에 다니엘이 내 앞에 들어왔으니 그는 내 신의 이름을 좇아 벨드사살이라 이름한 자요 그의 안에는 거룩한 신들의 영이 있는 자라 내가 그에게 꿈을 고하여 가로되	But at the last Daniel came in before me, whose name was Belteshazzar, according to the name of my god, and in whom is the spirit of the holy gods: and before him I told the dream, saying,	But at last, into my presence came Daniel (whose name is Belteshazzar after the name of my god, and in whom is the spirit of the holy gods). And I told him the dream:
DAN	4	9	박수장 벨드사살아 네 안에는 거룩한 신들의 영이 있은즉 아무 은밀한 것이라도 네게는 어려울 것이 없는 줄을 내가 아노니 내 꿈에 본 이상의 해석을 내게 고하라	O Belteshazzar, master of the magicians, because I know that the spirit of the holy gods is in thee, and no secret troubleth thee, tell me the visions of my dream that I have seen, and the interpretation thereof.	“O Belteshazzar, chief of the magicians, I know that the spirit of the holy gods is in you and that no mystery baffles you. So explain to me the visions I saw in my dream, and their interpretation.
DAN	4	10	내가 침상에서 나의 뇌 속으로 받은 이상이 이러하니라 내가 본즉 땅의 중앙에 한 나무가 있는데 고가 높더니	Thus were the visions of mine head in my bed; I saw, and behold a tree in the midst of the earth, and the height thereof was great.	In these visions of my mind as I was lying in bed, I saw this come to pass: There was a tree in the midst of the land, and its height was great.
DAN	4	11	그 나무가 자라서 견고하여지고 그 고는 하늘에 닿았으니 땅 끝에서도 보이겠고	The tree grew, and was strong, and the height thereof reached unto heaven, and the sight thereof to the end of all the earth:	The tree grew large and strong; its top reached the sky, and it was visible to the ends of the earth.
DAN	4	12	그 잎사귀는 아름답고 그 열매는 많아서 만민의 식물이 될 만하고 들짐승이 그 그늘에 있으며 공중에 나는 새는 그 가지에 깃들이고 무릇 혈기 있는 자가 거기서 식물을 얻더라	The leaves thereof were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it was meat for all: the beasts of the field had shadow under it, and the fowls of the heaven dwelt in the boughs thereof, and all flesh was fed of it.	Its leaves were beautiful, its fruit was abundant, and upon it was food for all. Under it the beasts of the field found shelter, in its branches the birds of the air nested, and from it every creature was fed.
DAN	4	13	내가 침상에서 뇌 속으로 받은 이상 가운데 또 본즉 한 순찰자, 한 거룩한 자가 하늘에서 내려왔는데	I saw in the visions of my head upon my bed, and, behold, a watcher and an holy one came down from heaven;	As I lay on my bed, I also saw in the visions of my mind a watcher, a holy one, coming down from heaven.
DAN	4	14	그가 소리 질러 외쳐서 이처럼 이르기를 그 나무를 베고 그 가지를 찍고 그 잎사귀를 떨고 그 열매를 헤치고 짐승들로 그 아래서 떠나게 하고 새들을 그 가지에서 쫓아내라	He cried aloud, and said thus, Hew down the tree, and cut off his branches, shake off his leaves, and scatter his fruit: let the beasts get away from under it, and the fowls from his branches:	He called out in a loud voice: ‘Cut down the tree and chop off its branches; strip off its leaves and scatter its fruit. Let the beasts flee from under it, and the birds from its branches.
DAN	4	15	그러나 그 뿌리의 그루터기를 땅에 남겨두고 철과 놋줄로 동이고 그것으로 들 청초 가운데 있게 하라 그것이 하늘 이슬에 젖고 땅의 풀 가운데서 짐승으로 더불어 그 분량을 같이 하리라	Nevertheless leave the stump of his roots in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the field; and let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts in the grass of the earth:	But leave the stump with its roots in the ground, and a band of iron and bronze around it, in the tender grass of the field. Let him be drenched with the dew of heaven and graze with the beasts on the grass of the earth.
DAN	4	16	또 그 마음은 변하여 인생의 마음 같지 아니하고 짐승의 마음을 받아 일곱 때를 지나리라	Let his heart be changed from man’s, and let a beast’s heart be given unto him; and let seven times pass over him.	Let his mind be changed from that of a man, and let him be given the mind of a beast till seven times pass him by.
DAN	4	17	이는 순찰자들의 명령대로요 거룩한 자들의 말대로니 곧 인생으로 지극히 높으신 자가 인간 나라를 다스리시며 자기의 뜻대로 그것을 누구에게든지 주시며 또 지극히 천한 자로 그 위에 세우시는 줄을 알게 하려 함이니라 하였느니라	This matter is by the decree of the watchers, and the demand by the word of the holy ones: to the intent that the living may know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will, and setteth up over it the basest of men.	This decision is the decree of the watchers, the verdict declared by the holy ones, so that the living will know that the Most High rules over the kingdom of mankind and gives it to whom He wishes, setting over it the lowliest of men.’
DAN	4	18	나 느부갓네살 왕이 이 꿈을 꾸었나니 너 벨드사살아 그 해석을 밝히 말하라 내 나라 모든 박사가 능히 그 해석을 내게 알게 하지 못하였으나 오직 너는 능히 하리니 이는 거룩한 신들의 영이 네 안에 있음이니라	This dream I king Nebuchadnezzar have seen. Now thou, O Belteshazzar, declare the interpretation thereof, forasmuch as all the wise men of my kingdom are not able to make known unto me the interpretation: but thou art able; for the spirit of the holy gods is in thee.	This is the dream that I, King Nebuchadnezzar, saw. Now, Belteshazzar, tell me the interpretation, because none of the wise men of my kingdom can interpret it for me. But you are able, because the spirit of the holy gods is in you.”
DAN	4	19	벨드사살이라 이름한 다니엘이 얼마 동안 놀라 벙벙하며 마음이 번민하여 하는지라 왕이 그에게 말하여 이르기를 벨드사살아 너는 이 꿈과 그 해석을 인하여 번민할 것이 아니니라 벨드사살이 대답하여 가로되 내 주여 그 꿈은 왕을 미워하는 자에게 응하기를 원하며 그 해석은 왕의 대적에게 응하기를 원하나이다	Then Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar, was astonied for one hour, and his thoughts troubled him. The king spake, and said, Belteshazzar, let not the dream, or the interpretation thereof, trouble thee. Belteshazzar answered and said, My lord, the dream be to them that hate thee, and the interpretation thereof to thine enemies.	For a time, Daniel, who was also known as Belteshazzar, was perplexed, and his thoughts alarmed him. So the king said, “Belteshazzar, do not let the dream or its interpretation alarm you.” “My lord,” replied Belteshazzar, “may the dream apply to those who hate you, and its interpretation to your enemies!
DAN	4	20	왕의 보신 그 나무가 자라서 견고하여지고 그 고는 하늘에 닿았으니 땅 끝에서도 보이겠고	The tree that thou sawest, which grew, and was strong, whose height reached unto the heaven, and the sight thereof to all the earth;	The tree you saw that grew large and strong, whose top reached the sky and was visible to all the earth,
DAN	4	21	그 잎사귀는 아름답고 그 열매는 많아서 만민의 식물이 될만하고 들짐승은 그 아래 거하며 공중에 나는 새는 그 가지에 깃들이더라 하시오니	Whose leaves were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it was meat for all; under which the beasts of the field dwelt, and upon whose branches the fowls of the heaven had their habitation:	whose foliage was beautiful and whose fruit was abundant, providing food for all, under which the beasts of the field lived, and in whose branches the birds of the air nested—
DAN	4	22	왕이여 이 나무는 곧 왕이시라 이는 왕이 자라서 견고하여지고 창대하사 하늘에 닿으시며 권세는 땅 끝까지 미치심이니이다	It is thou, O king, that art grown and become strong: for thy greatness is grown, and reacheth unto heaven, and thy dominion to the end of the earth.	you, O king, are that tree! For you have become great and strong; your greatness has grown to reach the sky, and your dominion extends to the ends of the earth.
DAN	4	23	왕이 보신즉 한 순찰자, 한 거룩한 자가 하늘에서 내려와서 이르기를 그 나무를 베고 멸하라 그러나 그 뿌리의 그루터기는 땅에 남겨두고 철과 놋줄로 동이고 그것을 들 청초 가운데 있게 하라 그것이 하늘 이슬에 젖고 또 들짐승으로 더불어 그 분량을 같이 하며 일곱 때를 지내리라 하더라 하시오니	And whereas the king saw a watcher and an holy one coming down from heaven, and saying, Hew the tree down, and destroy it; yet leave the stump of the roots thereof in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the field; and let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts of the field, till seven times pass over him;	And you, O king, saw a watcher, a holy one, coming down from heaven and saying: ‘Cut down the tree and destroy it, but leave the stump with its roots in the ground, and a band of iron and bronze around it, in the tender grass of the field. Let him be drenched with the dew of heaven, and graze with the beasts of the field till seven times pass him by.’
DAN	4	24	왕이여 그 해석은 이러하니이다 곧 지극히 높으신 자의 명정하신 것이 내 주 왕에게 미칠 것이라	This is the interpretation, O king, and this is the decree of the most High, which is come upon my lord the king:	This is the interpretation, O king, and this is the decree that the Most High has issued against my lord the king:
DAN	4	25	왕이 사람에게서 쫓겨나서 들짐승과 함께 거하며 소처럼 풀을 먹으며 하늘 이슬에 젖을 것이요 이와 같이 일곱 때를 지낼 것이라 그 때에 지극히 높으신 자가 인간 나라를 다스리시며 자기의 뜻대로 그것을 누구에게든지 주시는 줄을 아시리이다	That they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field, and they shall make thee to eat grass as oxen, and they shall wet thee with the dew of heaven, and seven times shall pass over thee, till thou know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will.	You will be driven away from mankind, and your dwelling will be with the beasts of the field. You will feed on grass like an ox and be drenched with the dew of heaven, and seven times shall pass you by, until you acknowledge that the Most High rules over the kingdom of mankind and gives it to whom He wishes.
DAN	4	26	또 그들이 그 나무 뿌리의 그루터기를 남겨 두라 하였은즉 하나님이 다스리시는 줄을 왕이 깨달은 후에야 왕의 나라가 견고하리이다	And whereas they commanded to leave the stump of the tree roots; thy kingdom shall be sure unto thee, after that thou shalt have known that the heavens do rule.	As for the command to leave the stump of the tree with its roots, your kingdom will be restored to you as soon as you acknowledge that Heaven rules.
DAN	4	27	그런즉 왕이여 나의 간하는 것을 받으시고 공의를 행함으로 죄를 속하고 가난한 자를 긍휼히 여김으로 죄악을 속하소서 그리하시면 왕의 평안함이 혹시 장구하리이다 하였느니라	Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by shewing mercy to the poor; if it may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity.	Therefore, may my advice be pleasing to you, O king. Break away from your sins by doing what is right, and from your iniquities by showing mercy to the oppressed. Perhaps there will be an extension of your prosperity.”
DAN	4	28	이 모든 일이 다 나 느부갓네살 왕에게 임하였느니라	All this came upon the king Nebuchadnezzar.	All this happened to King Nebuchadnezzar.
DAN	4	29	열두 달이 지난 후에 내가 바벨론 궁 지붕에서 거닐새	At the end of twelve months he walked in the palace of the kingdom of Babylon.	Twelve months later, as he was walking on the roof of the royal palace of Babylon,
DAN	4	30	나 왕이 말하여 가로되 이 큰 바벨론은 내가 능력과 권세로 건설하여 나의 도성을 삼고 이것으로 내 위엄의 영광을 나타낸 것이 아니냐 하였더니	The king spake, and said, Is not this great Babylon, that I have built for the house of the kingdom by the might of my power, and for the honour of my majesty?	the king exclaimed, “Is this not Babylon the Great, which I myself have built by the might of my power as a royal residence and for the glory of my majesty?”
DAN	4	31	이 말이 오히려 나 왕의 입에 있을 때에 하늘에서 소리가 내려 가로되 느부갓네살 왕아 네게 말하노니 나라의 위가 네게서 떠났느니라	While the word was in the king’s mouth, there fell a voice from heaven, saying, O king Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is spoken; The kingdom is departed from thee.	While the words were still in the king’s mouth, a voice came from heaven: “It is decreed to you, King Nebuchadnezzar, that the kingdom has departed from you.
DAN	4	32	네가 사람에게서 쫓겨나서 들짐승과 함께 거하며 소처럼 풀을 먹을 것이요 이와 같이 일곱 때를 지내서 지극히 높으신 자가 인간나라를 다스리시며 자기의 뜻대로 그것을 누구에게든지 주시는 줄을 알기까지 이르리라 하더니	And they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field: they shall make thee to eat grass as oxen, and seven times shall pass over thee, until thou know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will.	You will be driven away from mankind to live with the beasts of the field, and you will feed on grass like an ox. And seven times will pass you by, until you acknowledge that the Most High rules over the kingdom of mankind and gives it to whom He wishes.”
DAN	4	33	그 동시에 이 일이 나 느부갓네살에게 응하므로 내가 사람에게 쫓겨나서 소처럼 풀을 먹으며 몸이 하늘 이슬에 젖고 머리털이 독수리 털과 같았고 손톱은 새 발톱과 같았었느니라	The same hour was the thing fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar: and he was driven from men, and did eat grass as oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were grown like eagles’ feathers, and his nails like birds’ claws.	At that moment the sentence against Nebuchadnezzar was fulfilled. He was driven away from mankind. He ate grass like an ox, and his body was drenched with the dew of heaven, until his hair grew like the feathers of an eagle and his nails like the claws of a bird.
DAN	4	34	그 기한이 차매 나 느부갓네살이 하늘을 우러러 보았더니 내 총명이 다시 내게로 돌아온지라 이에 내가 지극히 높으신 자에게 감사하며 영생하시는 자를 찬양하고 존경하였노니 그 권세는 영원한 권세요 그 나라는 대대에 이르리로다	And at the end of the days I Nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine eyes unto heaven, and mine understanding returned unto me, and I blessed the most High, and I praised and honoured him that liveth for ever, whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is from generation to generation:	But at the end of those days I, Nebuchadnezzar, looked up to heaven, and my sanity was restored to me. Then I praised the Most High, and I honored and glorified Him who lives forever: “For His dominion is an everlasting dominion, and His kingdom endures from generation to generation.
DAN	4	35	땅의 모든 거민을 없는 것 같이 여기시며 하늘의 군사에게든지, 땅의 거민에게든지 그는 자기 뜻대로 행하시나니 누가 그의 손을 금하든지 혹시 이르기를 네가 무엇을 하느냐 할 자가 없도다	And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing: and he doeth according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What doest thou?	All the peoples of the earth are counted as nothing, and He does as He pleases with the army of heaven and the peoples of the earth. There is no one who can restrain His hand or say to Him, ‘What have You done?’”
DAN	4	36	그 동시에 내 총명이 내게로 돌아왔고 또 나라 영광에 대하여도 내 위엄과 광명이 내게로 돌아왔고 또 나의 모사들과 관원들이 내게 조회하니 내가 내 나라에서 다시 세움을 입고 또 지극한 위세가 내게 더하였느니라	At the same time my reason returned unto me; and for the glory of my kingdom, mine honour and brightness returned unto me; and my counsellors and my lords sought unto me; and I was established in my kingdom, and excellent majesty was added unto me.	At the same time my sanity was restored, my honor and splendor returned to me for the glory of my kingdom. My advisers and nobles sought me out, and I was restored to my throne, and surpassing greatness was added to me.
DAN	4	37	그러므로 지금 나 느부갓네살이 하늘의 왕을 찬양하며 칭송하며 존경하노니 그의 일이 다 진실하고 그의 행하심이 의로우시므로 무릇 교만하게 행하는 자를 그가 능히 낮추심이니라	Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and honour the King of heaven, all whose works are truth, and his ways judgment: and those that walk in pride he is able to abase.	Now I, Nebuchadnezzar, praise and exalt and glorify the King of heaven, for all His works are true and all His ways are just. And He is able to humble those who walk in pride.
DAN	5	1	벨사살 왕이 그 귀인 일천 명을 위하여 큰 잔치를 배설하고 그 일천 명 앞에서 술을 마시니라	Belshazzar the king made a great feast to a thousand of his lords, and drank wine before the thousand.	Later, King Belshazzar held a great feast for a thousand of his nobles, and he drank wine with them.
DAN	5	2	벨사살이 술을 마실 때에 명하여 그 부친 느부갓네살이 예루살렘 전에서 취하여 온 금, 은 기명을 가져오게 하였으니 이는 왕과 귀인들과 왕후들과 빈궁들이 다 그것으로 마시려 함이었더라	Belshazzar, whiles he tasted the wine, commanded to bring the golden and silver vessels which his father Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the temple which was in Jerusalem; that the king, and his princes, his wives, and his concubines, might drink therein.	Under the influence of the wine, Belshazzar gave orders to bring in the gold and silver vessels that Nebuchadnezzar his father had taken from the temple in Jerusalem, so that the king could drink from them, along with his nobles, his wives, and his concubines.
DAN	5	3	이에 예루살렘 하나님의 전 성소 중에서 취하여 온 금 기명을 가져오매 왕이 그 귀인들과 왕후들과 빈궁들로 더불어 그것으로 마시고	Then they brought the golden vessels that were taken out of the temple of the house of God which was at Jerusalem; and the king, and his princes, his wives, and his concubines, drank in them.	Thus they brought in the gold vessels that had been taken from the temple, the house of God in Jerusalem, and the king drank from them, along with his nobles, his wives, and his concubines.
DAN	5	4	무리가 술을 마시고는 그 금, 은, 동, 철, 목, 석으로 만든 신들을 찬양하니라	They drank wine, and praised the gods of gold, and of silver, of brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone.	As they drank the wine, they praised their gods of gold and silver, bronze and iron, wood and stone.
DAN	5	5	그 때에 사람의 손가락이 나타나서 왕궁 촛대 맞은편 분벽에 글자를 쓰는데 왕이 그 글자 쓰는 손가락을 본지라	In the same hour came forth fingers of a man’s hand, and wrote over against the candlestick upon the plaister of the wall of the king’s palace: and the king saw the part of the hand that wrote.	At that moment the fingers of a human hand appeared and wrote on the plaster of the wall, near the lampstand in the royal palace. As the king watched the hand that was writing,
DAN	5	6	이에 왕의 즐기던 빛이 변하고 그 생각이 번민하여 넓적다리 마디가 녹는 듯하고 그 무릎이 서로 부딪힌지라	Then the king’s countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another.	his face grew pale and his thoughts so alarmed him that his hips gave way and his knees knocked together.
DAN	5	7	왕이 크게 소리하여 술객과 갈대아 술사와 점장이를 불러 오게 하고 바벨론 박사들에게 일러 가로되 무론 누구든지 이 글자를 읽고 그 해석을 내게 보이면 자주옷을 입히고 금사슬로 그 목에 드리우고 그로 나라의 셋째 치리자를 삼으리라 하니라	The king cried aloud to bring in the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers. And the king spake, and said to the wise men of Babylon, Whosoever shall read this writing, and shew me the interpretation thereof, shall be clothed with scarlet, and have a chain of gold about his neck, and shall be the third ruler in the kingdom.	The king called out for the enchanters, astrologers, and diviners to be brought in, and he said to these wise men of Babylon, “Whoever reads this inscription and tells me its interpretation will be clothed in purple and have a gold chain placed around his neck, and he will be made the third highest ruler in the kingdom.”
DAN	5	8	때에 왕의 박사가 다 들어왔으나 능히 그 글자를 읽지 못하여 그 해석을 왕께 알게 하지 못하는지라	Then came in all the king’s wise men: but they could not read the writing, nor make known to the king the interpretation thereof.	So all the king’s wise men came in, but they could not read the inscription or interpret it for him.
DAN	5	9	그러므로 벨사살 왕이 크게 번민하여 그 낯빛이 변하였고 귀인들도 다 놀라니라	Then was king Belshazzar greatly troubled, and his countenance was changed in him, and his lords were astonied.	Then King Belshazzar became even more terrified, his face grew even more pale, and his nobles were bewildered.
DAN	5	10	태후가 왕과 그 귀인들의 말로 인하여 잔치하는 궁에 들어왔더니 이에 말하여 가로되 왕이여 만세수를 하옵소서 왕의 생각을 번민케 말며 낯빛을 변할 것이 아니니이다	Now the queen, by reason of the words of the king and his lords, came into the banquet house: and the queen spake and said, O king, live for ever: let not thy thoughts trouble thee, nor let thy countenance be changed:	Hearing the outcry of the king and his nobles, the queen entered the banquet hall. “O king, may you live forever!” she said. “Do not let your thoughts terrify you, or your face grow pale.
DAN	5	11	왕의 나라에 거룩한 신들의 영이 있는 사람이 있으니 곧 왕의 부친 때에 있던 자로서 명철과 총명과 지혜가 있어 신들의 지혜와 같은 자라 왕의 부친 느부갓네살 왕이 그를 세워 박수와 술객과 갈대아 술사와 점장이의 어른을 삼으셨으니	There is a man in thy kingdom, in whom is the spirit of the holy gods; and in the days of thy father light and understanding and wisdom, like the wisdom of the gods, was found in him; whom the king Nebuchadnezzar thy father, the king, I say, thy father, made master of the magicians, astrologers, Chaldeans, and soothsayers;	There is a man in your kingdom who has the spirit of the holy gods in him. In the days of your father he was found to have insight, intelligence, and wisdom like that of the gods. Your father, King Nebuchadnezzar, appointed him chief of the magicians, enchanters, astrologers, and diviners. Your own father, the king,
DAN	5	12	왕이 벨드사살이라 이름한 이 다니엘의 마음이 민첩하고 지식과 총명이 있어 능히 꿈을 해석하며 은밀한 말을 밝히며 의문을 파할 수 있었음이라 이제 다니엘을 부르소서 그리하시면 그가 그 해석을 알려드리리이다	Forasmuch as an excellent spirit, and knowledge, and understanding, interpreting of dreams, and shewing of hard sentences, and dissolving of doubts, were found in the same Daniel, whom the king named Belteshazzar: now let Daniel be called, and he will shew the interpretation.	did this because Daniel, the one he named Belteshazzar, was found to have an extraordinary spirit, as well as knowledge, understanding, and the ability to interpret dreams, explain riddles, and solve difficult problems. Summon Daniel, therefore, and he will give you the interpretation.”
DAN	5	13	이에 다니엘이 부름을 입어 왕의 앞에 나오매 왕이 다니엘에게 말하여 가로되 네가 우리 부왕이 유다에서 사로잡아 온 유다 자손 중의 그 다니엘이냐	Then was Daniel brought in before the king. And the king spake and said unto Daniel, Art thou that Daniel, which art of the children of the captivity of Judah, whom the king my father brought out of Jewry?	So Daniel was brought before the king, who asked him, “Are you Daniel, one of the exiles my father the king brought from Judah?
DAN	5	14	내가 네게 대하여 들은즉 네 안에는 신들의 영이 있으므로 네가 명철과 총명과 비상한 지혜가 있다 하도다	I have even heard of thee, that the spirit of the gods is in thee, and that light and understanding and excellent wisdom is found in thee.	I have heard that the spirit of the gods is in you, and that you have insight, intelligence, and extraordinary wisdom.
DAN	5	15	지금 여러 박사와 술객을 내 앞에 불러다가 그들로 이 글을 읽고 그 해석을 내게 알게 하라 하였으나 그들이 다 능히 그 해석을 내게 보이지 못하였느니라	And now the wise men, the astrologers, have been brought in before me, that they should read this writing, and make known unto me the interpretation thereof: but they could not shew the interpretation of the thing:	Now the wise men and enchanters were brought before me to read this inscription and interpret it for me, but they could not give its interpretation.
DAN	5	16	내가 네게 대하여 들은즉 너는 해석을 잘하고 의문을 파한다 하도다 그런즉 이제 네가 이 글을 읽고 그 해석을 내게 알게 하면 네게 자주옷을 입히고 금사슬을 네 목에 드리우고 너로 나라의 셋째 치리자를 삼으리라	And I have heard of thee, that thou canst make interpretations, and dissolve doubts: now if thou canst read the writing, and make known to me the interpretation thereof, thou shalt be clothed with scarlet, and have a chain of gold about thy neck, and shalt be the third ruler in the kingdom.	But I have heard about you, that you are able to give interpretations and solve difficult problems. Therefore, if you can read this inscription and give me its interpretation, you will be clothed in purple and have a gold chain placed around your neck, and you will be made the third highest ruler in the kingdom.”
DAN	5	17	다니엘이 왕에게 대답하여 가로되 왕의 예물은 왕이 스스로 취하시며 왕의 상급은 다른 사람에게 주옵소서 그럴지라도 내가 왕을 위하여 이 글을 읽으며 그 해석을 아시게 하리이다	Then Daniel answered and said before the king, Let thy gifts be to thyself, and give thy rewards to another; yet I will read the writing unto the king, and make known to him the interpretation.	In response, Daniel said to the king, “You may keep your gifts for yourself and give your rewards to someone else. Nevertheless, I will read the inscription for the king and interpret it for him.
DAN	5	18	왕이여 지극히 높으신 하나님이 왕의 부친 느부갓네살에게 나라와 큰 권세와 영광과 위엄을 주셨고	O thou king, the most high God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy father a kingdom, and majesty, and glory, and honour:	As for you, O king, the Most High God gave your father Nebuchadnezzar sovereignty and greatness, glory and honor.
DAN	5	19	그에게 큰 권세를 주셨으므로 백성들과 나라들과 각 방언하는 자들이 그의 앞에서 떨며 두려워하였으며 그는 임의로 죽이며 임의로 살리며 임의로 높이며 임의로 낮추었더니	And for the majesty that he gave him, all people, nations, and languages, trembled and feared before him: whom he would he slew; and whom he would he kept alive; and whom he would he set up; and whom he would he put down.	Because of the greatness that He bestowed on him, the people of every nation and language trembled in fear before him. He killed whom he wished and kept alive whom he wished; he exalted whom he wished and humbled whom he wished.
DAN	5	20	그가 마음이 높아지며 뜻이 강퍅하여 교만을 행하므로 그 왕위가 폐한 바 되며 그 영광을 빼앗기고	But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride, he was deposed from his kingly throne, and they took his glory from him:	But when his heart became arrogant and his spirit was hardened with pride, he was deposed from his royal throne, and his glory was taken from him.
DAN	5	21	인생 중에서 쫓겨나서 그 마음이 들짐승의 마음과 같았고 또 들나귀와 함께 거하며 또 소처럼 풀을 먹으며 그 몸이 하늘 이슬에 젖었으며 지극히 높으신 하나님이 인간 나라를 다스리시며 자기의 뜻대로 누구든지 그 위에 세우시는 줄을 알기까지 이르게 되었었나이다	And he was driven from the sons of men; and his heart was made like the beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild asses: they fed him with grass like oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven; till he knew that the most high God ruled in the kingdom of men, and that he appointeth over it whomsoever he will.	He was driven away from mankind, and his mind was like that of a beast. He lived with the wild donkeys and ate grass like an ox, and his body was drenched with the dew of heaven until he acknowledged that the Most High God rules over the kingdom of mankind, setting over it whom He wishes.
DAN	5	22	벨사살이여 왕은 그의 아들이 되어서 이것을 다 알고도 오히려 마음을 낮추지 아니하고	And thou his son, O Belshazzar, hast not humbled thine heart, though thou knewest all this;	But you his son, O Belshazzar, have not humbled your heart, even though you knew all this.
DAN	5	23	도리어 스스로 높여서 하늘의 주재를 거역하고 그 전 기명을 왕의 앞으로 가져다가 왕과 귀인들과 왕후들과 빈궁들이 다 그것으로 술을 마시고 왕이 또 보지도 듣지도 알지도 못하는 금, 은, 동, 철과 목, 석으로 만든 신상들을 찬양하고 도리어 왕의 호흡을 주장하시고 왕의 모든 길을 작정하시는 하나님께는 영광을 돌리지 아니한지라	But hast lifted up thyself against the Lord of heaven; and they have brought the vessels of his house before thee, and thou, and thy lords, thy wives, and thy concubines, have drunk wine in them; and thou hast praised the gods of silver, and gold, of brass, iron, wood, and stone, which see not, nor hear, nor know: and the God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, hast thou not glorified:	Instead, you have exalted yourself against the Lord of heaven. The vessels from His house were brought to you, and as you drank wine from them with your nobles, wives, and concubines, you praised your gods of silver and gold, bronze and iron, wood and stone, which cannot see or hear or understand. But you have failed to glorify the God who holds in His hand your very breath and all your ways.
DAN	5	24	이러므로 그의 앞에서 이 손가락이 나와서 이 글을 기록하였나이다	Then was the part of the hand sent from him; and this writing was written.	Therefore He sent the hand that wrote the inscription.
DAN	5	25	기록한 글자는 이것이니 곧 메네 메네 데겔 우바르신이라	And this is the writing that was written, MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN.	Now this is the inscription that was written: MENE, MENE, TEKEL, PARSIN.
DAN	5	26	그 뜻을 해석하건대 메네는 하나님이 이미 왕의 나라의 시대를 세어서 그것을 끝나게 하셨다 함이요	This is the interpretation of the thing: MENE; God hath numbered thy kingdom, and finished it.	And this is the interpretation of the message: MENE means that God has numbered the days of your reign and brought it to an end.
DAN	5	27	데겔은 왕이 저울에 달려서 부족함이 뵈었다 함이요	TEKEL; Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting.	TEKEL means that you have been weighed on the scales and found deficient.
DAN	5	28	베레스는 왕의 나라가 나뉘어서 메대와 바사 사람에게 준 바 되었다 함이니이다	PERES; Thy kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians.	PERES means that your kingdom has been divided and given over to the Medes and Persians.”
DAN	5	29	이에 벨사살이 명하여 무리로 다니엘에게 자주옷을 입히게 하며 금 사슬로 그의 목에 드리우게 하고 그를 위하여 조서를 내려 나라의 셋째 치리자를 삼으니라	Then commanded Belshazzar, and they clothed Daniel with scarlet, and put a chain of gold about his neck, and made a proclamation concerning him, that he should be the third ruler in the kingdom.	Then Belshazzar gave the command, and they clothed Daniel in purple, placed a gold chain around his neck, and proclaimed him the third highest ruler in the kingdom.
DAN	5	30	그날 밤에 갈대아 왕 벨사살이 죽임을 당하였고	In that night was Belshazzar the king of the Chaldeans slain.	That very night Belshazzar king of the Chaldeans was slain,
DAN	5	31	메대 사람 다리오가 나라를 얻었는데 때에 다리오는 육십이 세였더라	And Darius the Median took the kingdom, being about threescore and two years old.	and Darius the Mede received the kingdom at the age of sixty-two.
DAN	6	1	다리오가 자기의 심원대로 방백 일백이십 명을 세워 전국을 통치하게 하고	It pleased Darius to set over the kingdom an hundred and twenty princes, which should be over the whole kingdom;	Now it pleased Darius to appoint 120 satraps to rule throughout the kingdom,
DAN	6	2	또 그들 위에 총리 셋을 두었으니 다니엘이 그 중에 하나이라 이는 방백들로 총리에게 자기의 직무를 보고하게 하여 왕에게 손해가 없게 하려함이었더라	And over these three presidents; of whom Daniel was first: that the princes might give accounts unto them, and the king should have no damage.	and over them three administrators, including Daniel, to whom these satraps were accountable so that the king would not suffer loss.
DAN	6	3	다니엘은 마음이 민첩하여 총리들과 방백들 위에 뛰어나므로 왕이 그를 세워 전국을 다스리게 하고자 한지라	Then this Daniel was preferred above the presidents and princes, because an excellent spirit was in him; and the king thought to set him over the whole realm.	Soon, by his extraordinary spirit, Daniel distinguished himself among the administrators and satraps. So the king planned to set him over the whole kingdom.
DAN	6	4	이에 총리들과 방백들이 국사에 대하여 다니엘을 고소할 틈을 얻고자 하였으나 능히 아무 틈, 아무 허물을 얻지 못하였으니 이는 그가 충성되어 아무 그릇함도 없고 아무 허물도 없음이었더라	Then the presidents and princes sought to find occasion against Daniel concerning the kingdom; but they could find none occasion nor fault; forasmuch as he was faithful, neither was there any error or fault found in him.	Thus the administrators and satraps sought a charge against Daniel concerning the kingdom, but they could find no charge or corruption, because he was trustworthy, and no negligence or corruption was found in him.
DAN	6	5	그 사람들이 가로되 이 다니엘은 그 하나님의 율법에 대하여 그 틈을 얻지 못하면 그를 고소할 수 없으리라 하고	Then said these men, We shall not find any occasion against this Daniel, except we find it against him concerning the law of his God.	Finally these men said, “We will never find any charge against this Daniel, unless we find something against him concerning the law of his God.”
DAN	6	6	이에 총리들과 방백들이 모여 왕에게 나아가서 그에게 말하되 다리오 왕이여 만세수를 하옵소서	Then these presidents and princes assembled together to the king, and said thus unto him, King Darius, live for ever.	So the administrators and satraps went together to the king and said, “O King Darius, may you live forever!
DAN	6	7	나라의 모든 총리와 수령과 방백과 모사와 관원이 의논하고 왕에게 한 율법을 세우며 한 금령을 정하실 것을 구하려 하였는데 왕이여 그것은 곧 이제부터 삼십 일 동안에 누구든지 왕 외에 어느 신에게나 사람에게 무엇을 구하면 사자굴에 던져 넣기로 한 것이니이다	All the presidents of the kingdom, the governors, and the princes, the counsellors, and the captains, have consulted together to establish a royal statute, and to make a firm decree, that whosoever shall ask a petition of any God or man for thirty days, save of thee, O king, he shall be cast into the den of lions.	All the royal administrators, prefects, satraps, advisers, and governors have agreed that the king should establish an ordinance and enforce a decree that for thirty days anyone who petitions any god or man except you, O king, will be thrown into the den of lions.
DAN	6	8	그런즉 원컨대 금령을 세우시고 그 조서에 어인을 찍어서 메대와 바사의 변개치 아니하는 규례를 따라 그것을 다시 고치지 못하게 하옵소서 하매	Now, O king, establish the decree, and sign the writing, that it be not changed, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which altereth not.	Therefore, O king, establish the decree and sign the document so that it cannot be changed—in accordance with the law of the Medes and Persians, which cannot be repealed.”
DAN	6	9	이에 다리오 왕이 조서에 어인을 찍어 금령을 내니라	Wherefore king Darius signed the writing and the decree.	Therefore King Darius signed the written decree.
DAN	6	10	다니엘이 이 조서에 어인이 찍힌 것을 알고도 자기 집에 돌아가서는 그 방의 예루살렘으로 향하여 열린 창에서 전에 행하던 대로 하루 세 번씩 무릎을 꿇고 기도하며 그 하나님께 감사하였더라	Now when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went into his house; and his windows being open in his chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks before his God, as he did aforetime.	Now when Daniel learned that the document had been signed, he went into his house, where the windows of his upper room opened toward Jerusalem, and three times a day he got down on his knees, prayed, and gave thanks to his God, just as he had done before.
DAN	6	11	그 무리들이 모여서 다니엘이 자기 하나님 앞에 기도하며 간구하는 것을 발견하고	Then these men assembled, and found Daniel praying and making supplication before his God.	Then these men went as a group and found Daniel petitioning and imploring his God.
DAN	6	12	이에 그들이 나아가서 왕의 금령에 대하여 왕께 아뢰되 왕이여 왕이 이미 금령에 어인을 찍어서 이제부터 삼십 일 동안에 누구든지 왕 외에 어느 신에게나 사람에게 구하면 사자굴에 던져 넣기로 하지 아니하였나이까 왕이 대답하여 가로되 이 일이 적실하니 메대와 바사의 변개치 아니하는 규례대로 된 것이니라	Then they came near, and spake before the king concerning the king’s decree; Hast thou not signed a decree, that every man that shall ask a petition of any God or man within thirty days, save of thee, O king, shall be cast into the den of lions? The king answered and said, The thing is true, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which altereth not.	So they approached the king and asked about his royal decree: “Did you not sign a decree that for thirty days any man who petitions any god or man except you, O king, will be thrown into the den of lions?” The king replied, “According to the law of the Medes and Persians the order stands, and it cannot be repealed.”
DAN	6	13	그들이 왕 앞에서 대답하여 가로되 왕이여 사로잡혀 온 유다 자손 중에 그 다니엘이 왕과 왕의 어인이 찍힌 금령을 돌아보지 아니하고 하루 세 번씩 기도하나이다	Then answered they and said before the king, That Daniel, which is of the children of the captivity of Judah, regardeth not thee, O king, nor the decree that thou hast signed, but maketh his petition three times a day.	Then they told the king, “Daniel, one of the exiles from Judah, shows no regard for you, O king, or for the decree that you have signed. He still makes his petition three times a day.”
DAN	6	14	왕이 이 말을 듣고 그로 인하여 심히 근심하여 다니엘을 구원하려고 마음을 쓰며 그를 건져 내려고 힘을 다하여 해가 질 때까지 이르매	Then the king, when he heard these words, was sore displeased with himself, and set his heart on Daniel to deliver him: and he laboured till the going down of the sun to deliver him.	As soon as the king heard this, he was deeply distressed and set his mind on delivering Daniel, and he labored until sundown to rescue him.
DAN	6	15	그 무리들이 또 모여 왕에게로 나아와서 왕께 말씀하되 왕이여 메대와 바사의 규례를 아시거니와 왕의 세우신 금령과 법도는 변개하지 못할 것이니이다	Then these men assembled unto the king, and said unto the king, Know, O king, that the law of the Medes and Persians is, That no decree nor statute which the king establisheth may be changed.	Then the men approached the king together and said to him, “Remember, O king, that by the law of the Medes and Persians no decree or ordinance established by the king can be changed.”
DAN	6	16	이에 왕이 명하매 다니엘을 끌어다가 사자굴에 던져 넣는지라 왕이 다니엘에게 일러 가로되 너의 항상 섬기는 네 하나님이 너를 구원하시리라 하니라	Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniel, and cast him into the den of lions. Now the king spake and said unto Daniel, Thy God whom thou servest continually, he will deliver thee.	So the king gave the order, and they brought Daniel and threw him into the den of lions. The king said to Daniel, “May your God, whom you serve continually, deliver you!”
DAN	6	17	이에 돌을 굴려다가 굴 아구를 막으매 왕이 어인과 귀인들의 인을 쳐서 봉하였으니 이는 다니엘 처치한 것을 변개함이 없게 하려 함이었더라	And a stone was brought, and laid upon the mouth of the den; and the king sealed it with his own signet, and with the signet of his lords; that the purpose might not be changed concerning Daniel.	A stone was brought and placed over the mouth of the den, and the king sealed it with his own signet ring and with the rings of his nobles, so that nothing concerning Daniel could be changed.
DAN	6	18	왕이 궁에 돌아가서는 밤이 맞도록 금식하고 그 앞에 기악을 그치고 침수를 폐하니라	Then the king went to his palace, and passed the night fasting: neither were instruments of musick brought before him: and his sleep went from him.	Then the king went to his palace and spent the night fasting. No entertainment was brought before him, and sleep fled from him.
DAN	6	19	이튿날에 왕이 새벽에 일어나 급히 사자굴로 가서	Then the king arose very early in the morning, and went in haste unto the den of lions.	At the first light of dawn, the king got up and hurried to the den of lions.
DAN	6	20	다니엘의 든 굴에 가까이 이르러는 슬피 소리질러 다니엘에게 물어 가로되 사시는 하나님의 종 다니엘아 너의 항상 섬기는 네 하나님이 사자에게서 너를 구원하시기에 능하셨느냐	And when he came to the den, he cried with a lamentable voice unto Daniel: and the king spake and said to Daniel, O Daniel, servant of the living God, is thy God, whom thou servest continually, able to deliver thee from the lions?	When he reached the den, he cried out in a voice of anguish, “O Daniel, servant of the living God, has your God, whom you serve continually, been able to deliver you from the lions?”
DAN	6	21	다니엘이 왕에게 고하되 왕이여 원컨대 왕은 만세수를 하옵소서	Then said Daniel unto the king, O king, live for ever.	Then Daniel replied, “O king, may you live forever!
DAN	6	22	나의 하나님이 이미 그 천사를 보내어 사자들의 입을 봉하셨으므로 사자들이 나를 상해치 아니하였사오니 이는 나의 무죄함이 그 앞에 명백함이오며 또 왕이여 나는 왕의 앞에도 해를 끼치지 아니하였나이다	My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the lions’ mouths, that they have not hurt me: forasmuch as before him innocency was found in me; and also before thee, O king, have I done no hurt.	My God sent His angel and shut the mouths of the lions. They have not hurt me, for I was found innocent in His sight, and I have done no wrong against you, O king.”
DAN	6	23	왕이 심히 기뻐서 명하여 다니엘을 굴에서 올리라 하매 그들이 다니엘을 굴에서 올린즉 그 몸이 조금도 상하지 아니하였으니 이는 그가 자기 하나님을 의뢰함이었더라	Then was the king exceeding glad for him, and commanded that they should take Daniel up out of the den. So Daniel was taken up out of the den, and no manner of hurt was found upon him, because he believed in his God.	The king was overjoyed and gave orders to lift Daniel out of the den, and when Daniel was lifted out of the den, no wounds whatsoever were found on him, because he had trusted in his God.
DAN	6	24	왕이 명을 내려 다니엘을 참소한 사람들을 끌어오게 하고 그들을 그 처자들과 함께 사자굴에 던져 넣게 하였더니 그들이 굴 밑에 닿기 전에 사자가 곧 그들을 움켜서 그 뼈까지도 부숴뜨렸더라	And the king commanded, and they brought those men which had accused Daniel, and they cast them into the den of lions, them, their children, and their wives; and the lions had the mastery of them, and brake all their bones in pieces or ever they came at the bottom of the den.	At the command of the king, the men who had falsely accused Daniel were brought and thrown into the den of lions—they and their children and wives. And before they had reached the bottom of the den, the lions overpowered them and crushed all their bones.
DAN	6	25	이에 다리오 왕이 온 땅에 있는 모든 백성과 나라들과 각 방언하는 자들에게 조서를 내려 가로되 원컨대 많은 평강이 너희에게 있을지어다	Then king Darius wrote unto all people, nations, and languages, that dwell in all the earth; Peace be multiplied unto you.	Then King Darius wrote to the people of every nation and language throughout the land: “May your prosperity abound.
DAN	6	26	내가 이제 조서를 내리노라 내 나라 관할 아래 있는 사람들은 다다니엘의 하나님 앞에서 떨며 두려워할지니 그는 사시는 하나님이시요 영원히 변치 않으실 자시며 그 나라는 망하지 아니할 것이요 그 권세는 무궁할 것이며	I make a decree, That in every dominion of my kingdom men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel: for he is the living God, and stedfast for ever, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed, and his dominion shall be even unto the end.	I hereby decree that in every part of my kingdom, men are to tremble in fear before the God of Daniel: For He is the living God, and He endures forever; His kingdom will never be destroyed, and His dominion will never end.
DAN	6	27	그는 구원도 하시며 건져내기도 하시며 하늘에서든지 땅에서든지 이적과 기사를 행하시는 자로서 다니엘을 구원하여 사자의 입에서 벗어나게 하셨음이니라 하였더라	He delivereth and rescueth, and he worketh signs and wonders in heaven and in earth, who hath delivered Daniel from the power of the lions.	He delivers and rescues; He performs signs and wonders in the heavens and on the earth, for He has rescued Daniel from the power of the lions.”
DAN	6	28	이 다니엘이 다리오 왕의 시대와 바사 사람 고레스 왕의 시대에 형통하였더라	So this Daniel prospered in the reign of Darius, and in the reign of Cyrus the Persian.	So Daniel prospered during the reign of Darius and the reign of Cyrus the Persian.
DAN	7	1	바벨론 왕 벨사살 원년에 다니엘이 그 침상에서 꿈을 꾸며 뇌 속으로 이상을 받고 그 꿈을 기록하며 그 일의 대략을 진술하니라	In the first year of Belshazzar king of Babylon Daniel had a dream and visions of his head upon his bed: then he wrote the dream, and told the sum of the matters.	In the first year of the reign of Belshazzar over Babylon, Daniel had a dream, and visions passed through his mind as he lay on his bed. He wrote down the dream, and this is the summary of his account.
DAN	7	2	다니엘이 진술하여 가로되 내가 밤에 이상을 보았는데 하늘의 네 바람이 큰 바다로 몰려 불더니	Daniel spake and said, I saw in my vision by night, and, behold, the four winds of the heaven strove upon the great sea.	Daniel declared: “In my vision in the night I looked, and suddenly the four winds of heaven were churning up the great sea.
DAN	7	3	큰 짐승 넷이 바다에서 나왔는데 그 모양이 각각 다르니	And four great beasts came up from the sea, diverse one from another.	Then four great beasts came up out of the sea, each one different from the others:
DAN	7	4	첫째는 사자와 같은데 독수리의 날개가 있더니 내가 볼 사이에 그 날개가 뽑혔고 또 땅에서 들려서 사람처럼 두 발로 서게 함을 입었으며 또 사람의 마음을 받았으며	The first was like a lion, and had eagle’s wings: I beheld till the wings thereof were plucked, and it was lifted up from the earth, and made stand upon the feet as a man, and a man’s heart was given to it.	The first beast was like a lion, and it had the wings of an eagle. I watched until its wings were torn off and it was lifted up from the ground and made to stand on two feet like a man, and given the mind of a man.
DAN	7	5	다른 짐승 곧 둘째는 곰과 같은데 그것이 몸 한편을 들었고 그 입의 잇사이에는 세 갈빗대가 물렸는데 그에게 말하는 자가 있어 이르기를 일어나서 많은 고기를 먹으라 하였으며	And behold another beast, a second, like to a bear, and it raised up itself on one side, and it had three ribs in the mouth of it between the teeth of it: and they said thus unto it, Arise, devour much flesh.	Suddenly another beast appeared, which looked like a bear. It was raised up on one of its sides, and it had three ribs in its mouth between its teeth. So it was told, ‘Get up and gorge yourself on flesh!’
DAN	7	6	그 후에 내가 또 본즉 다른 짐승 곧 표범과 같은 것이 있는데 그 등에는 새의 날개 넷이 있고 그 짐승에게 또 머리 넷이 있으며 또 권세를 받았으며	After this I beheld, and lo another, like a leopard, which had upon the back of it four wings of a fowl; the beast had also four heads; and dominion was given to it.	Next, as I watched, another beast appeared. It was like a leopard, and on its back it had four wings like those of a bird. The beast also had four heads, and it was given authority to rule.
DAN	7	7	내가 밤 이상 가운데 그 다음에 본 넷째 짐승은 무섭고 놀라우며 또 극히 강하며 또 큰 철 이가 있어서 먹고 부숴뜨리고 그 나머지를 발로 밟았으며 이 짐승은 전의 모든 짐승과 다르고 또 열 뿔이 있으므로	After this I saw in the night visions, and behold a fourth beast, dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly; and it had great iron teeth: it devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with the feet of it: and it was diverse from all the beasts that were before it; and it had ten horns.	After this, as I watched in my vision in the night, suddenly a fourth beast appeared, and it was terrifying—dreadful and extremely strong—with large iron teeth. It devoured and crushed; then it trampled underfoot whatever was left. It was different from all the beasts before it, and it had ten horns.
DAN	7	8	내가 그 뿔을 유심히 보는 중 다른 작은 뿔이 그 사이에서 나더니 먼저 뿔 중에 셋이 그 앞에 뿌리까지 뽑혔으며 이 작은 뿔에는 사람의 눈 같은 눈이 있고 또 입이 있어 큰 말을 하였느니라	I considered the horns, and, behold, there came up among them another little horn, before whom there were three of the first horns plucked up by the roots: and, behold, in this horn were eyes like the eyes of man, and a mouth speaking great things.	While I was contemplating the horns, suddenly another horn, a little one, came up among them, and three of the first horns were uprooted before it. This horn had eyes like those of a man and a mouth that spoke words of arrogance.
DAN	7	9	내가 보았는데 왕좌가 놓이고 옛적부터 항상 계신 이가 좌정하셨는데 그 옷은 희기가 눈 같고 그 머리털은 깨끗한 양의 털 같고 그 보좌는 불꽃이요 그 바퀴는 붙는 불이며	I beheld till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool: his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire.	As I continued to watch, thrones were set in place, and the Ancient of Days took His seat. His clothing was white as snow, and the hair of His head was like pure wool. His throne was flaming with fire, and its wheels were all ablaze.
DAN	7	10	불이 강처럼 흘러 그 앞에서 나오며 그에게 수종하는 자는 천천이요 그 앞에 시위한 자는 만만이며 심판을 베푸는데 책들이 펴 놓였더라	A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him: thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him: the judgment was set, and the books were opened.	A river of fire was flowing, coming out from His presence. Thousands upon thousands attended Him, and myriads upon myriads stood before Him. The court was convened, and the books were opened.
DAN	7	11	그 때에 내가 그 큰 말하는 작은 뿔의 목소리로 인하여 주목하여 보는 사이에 짐승이 죽임을 당하고 그 시체가 상한 바 되어 붙는 불에 던진 바 되었으며	I beheld then because of the voice of the great words which the horn spake: I beheld even till the beast was slain, and his body destroyed, and given to the burning flame.	Then I kept watching because of the arrogant words the horn was speaking. As I continued to watch, the beast was slain, and its body was destroyed and thrown into the blazing fire.
DAN	7	12	그 남은 모든 짐승은 그 권세를 빼았겼으나 그 생명은 보존되어 정한 시기가 이르기를 기다리게 되었더라	As concerning the rest of the beasts, they had their dominion taken away: yet their lives were prolonged for a season and time.	As for the rest of the beasts, their dominion was removed, but they were granted an extension of life for a season and a time.
DAN	7	13	내가 또 밤 이상 중에 보았는데 인자 같은 이가 하늘 구름을 타고 와서 옛적부터 항상 계신 자에게 나아와 그 앞에 인도되매	I saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him.	In my vision in the night I continued to watch, and I saw One like the Son of Man coming with the clouds of heaven. He approached the Ancient of Days and was led into His presence.
DAN	7	14	그에게 권세와 영광과 나라를 주고 모든 백성과 나라들과 각 방언하는 자로 그를 섬기게 하였으니 그 권세는 영원한 권세라 옮기지 아니할 것이요 그 나라는 폐하지 아니할 것이니라	And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.	And He was given dominion, glory, and kingship, that the people of every nation and language should serve Him. His dominion is an everlasting dominion that will not pass away, and His kingdom is one that will never be destroyed.
DAN	7	15	나 다니엘이 중심에 근심하며 내 뇌 속에 이상이 나로 번민케 한지라	I Daniel was grieved in my spirit in the midst of my body, and the visions of my head troubled me.	I, Daniel, was grieved in my spirit, and the visions in my mind alarmed me.
DAN	7	16	내가 그 곁에 모신 자 중 하나에게 나아가서 이 모든 일의 진상을 물으매 그가 내게 고하여 그 일의 해석을 알게 하여 가로되	I came near unto one of them that stood by, and asked him the truth of all this. So he told me, and made me know the interpretation of the things.	I approached one of those who were standing there, and I asked him the true meaning of all this. So he told me the interpretation of these things:
DAN	7	17	그 네 큰 짐승은 네 왕이라 세상에 일어날 것이로되	These great beasts, which are four, are four kings, which shall arise out of the earth.	‘These four great beasts are four kings who will arise from the earth.
DAN	7	18	지극히 높으신 자의 성도들이 나라를 얻으리니 그 누림이 영원하고 영원하고 영원하리라	But the saints of the most High shall take the kingdom, and possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever.	But the saints of the Most High will receive the kingdom and possess it forever—yes, forever and ever.’
DAN	7	19	이에 내가 넷째 짐승의 진상을 알고자 하였으니 곧 그것은 모든 짐승과 달라서 심히 무섭고 그 이는 철이요 그 발톱은 놋이며 먹고 부숴뜨리고 나머지는 발로 밟았으며	Then I would know the truth of the fourth beast, which was diverse from all the others, exceeding dreadful, whose teeth were of iron, and his nails of brass; which devoured, brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with his feet;	Then I wanted to know the true meaning of the fourth beast, which was different from all the others—extremely terrifying—devouring and crushing with iron teeth and bronze claws, then trampling underfoot whatever was left.
DAN	7	20	또 그것의 머리에는 열 뿔이 있고 그 외에 또 다른 뿔이 나오매 세 뿔이 그 앞에 빠졌으며 그 뿔에는 눈도 있고 큰 말하는 입도 있고 그 모양이 동류보다 강하여 보인 것이라	And of the ten horns that were in his head, and of the other which came up, and before whom three fell; even of that horn that had eyes, and a mouth that spake very great things, whose look was more stout than his fellows.	I also wanted to know about the ten horns on its head and the other horn that came up, before which three of them fell—the horn whose appearance was more imposing than the others, with eyes and with a mouth that spoke words of arrogance.
DAN	7	21	내가 본즉 이 뿔이 성도들로 더불어 싸워 이기었더니	I beheld, and the same horn made war with the saints, and prevailed against them;	As I watched, this horn was waging war against the saints and prevailing against them,
DAN	7	22	옛적부터 항상 계신 자가 와서 지극히 높으신 자의 성도를 위하여 신원하셨고 때가 이르매 성도가 나라를 얻었더라	Until the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given to the saints of the most High; and the time came that the saints possessed the kingdom.	until the Ancient of Days arrived and pronounced judgment in favor of the saints of the Most High, and the time came for them to possess the kingdom.
DAN	7	23	모신 자가 이처럼 이르되 넷째 짐승은 곧 땅의 넷째 나라인데 이는 모든 나라보다 달라서 천하를 삼키고 밞아 부숴뜨릴 것이며	Thus he said, The fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdom upon earth, which shall be diverse from all kingdoms, and shall devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down, and break it in pieces.	This is what he said: ‘The fourth beast is a fourth kingdom that will appear on the earth, different from all the other kingdoms, and it will devour the whole earth, trample it down, and crush it.
DAN	7	24	그 열 뿔은 이 나라에서 일어날 열 왕이요 그 후에 또 하나가 일어나리니 그는 먼저 있던 자들과 다르고 또 세 왕을 복종시킬 것이며	And the ten horns out of this kingdom are ten kings that shall arise: and another shall rise after them; and he shall be diverse from the first, and he shall subdue three kings.	And the ten horns are ten kings who will rise from this kingdom. After them another king, different from the earlier ones, will rise and subdue three kings.
DAN	7	25	그가 장차 말로 지극히 높으신 자를 대적하며 또 지극히 높으신 자의 성도를 괴롭게 할 것이며 그가 또 때와 법을 변개코자 할 것이며 성도는 그의 손에 붙인 바 되어 한 때와 두 때와 반 때를 지내리라	And he shall speak great words against the most High, and shall wear out the saints of the most High, and think to change times and laws: and they shall be given into his hand until a time and times and the dividing of time.	He will speak out against the Most High and oppress the saints of the Most High, intending to change the appointed times and laws; and the saints will be given into his hand for a time, and times, and half a time.
DAN	7	26	그러나 심판이 시작된즉 그는 권세를 빼앗기고 끝까지 멸망할 것이요	But the judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his dominion, to consume and to destroy it unto the end.	But the court will convene, and his dominion will be taken away and completely destroyed forever.
DAN	7	27	나라와 권세와 온 천하 열국의 위세가 지극히 높으신 자의 성민에게 붙인 바 되리니 그의 나라는 영원한 나라이라 모든 권세 있는 자가 다 그를 섬겨 복종하리라 하여	And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him.	Then the sovereignty, dominion, and greatness of the kingdoms under all of heaven will be given to the people, the saints of the Most High. His kingdom will be an everlasting kingdom, and all rulers will serve and obey Him.’
DAN	7	28	그 말이 이에 그친지라 나 다니엘은 중심이 번민하였으며 내 낯 빛이 변하였으나 내가 이 일을 마음에 감추었느니라	Hitherto is the end of the matter. As for me Daniel, my cogitations much troubled me, and my countenance changed in me: but I kept the matter in my heart.	Thus ends the matter. As for me, Daniel, my thoughts troubled me greatly, and my face turned pale. But I kept the matter to myself.”
DAN	8	1	나 다니엘에게 처음에 나타난 이상 후 벨사살 왕 삼년에 다시 이상이 나타나니라	In the third year of the reign of king Belshazzar a vision appeared unto me, even unto me Daniel, after that which appeared unto me at the first.	In the third year of the reign of King Belshazzar, a vision appeared to me, Daniel, subsequent to the one that had appeared to me earlier.
DAN	8	2	내가 이상을 보았는데 내가 그것을 볼 때에 내 몸은 엘람도 수산 성에 있었고 내가 이상을 보기는 을래 강변에서니라	And I saw in a vision; and it came to pass, when I saw, that I was at Shushan in the palace, which is in the province of Elam; and I saw in a vision, and I was by the river of Ulai.	And in the vision I saw myself in the citadel of Susa, in the province of Elam. I saw in the vision that I was beside the Ulai Canal.
DAN	8	3	내가 눈을 들어본즉 강 가에 두 뿔 가진 수양이 섰는데 그 두 뿔이 다 길어도 한 뿔은 다른 뿔보다도 길었고 그 긴 것은 나중에 난 것이더라	Then I lifted up mine eyes, and saw, and, behold, there stood before the river a ram which had two horns: and the two horns were high; but one was higher than the other, and the higher came up last.	Then I lifted up my eyes and saw a ram with two horns standing beside the canal. The horns were long, but one was longer than the other, and the longer one grew up later.
DAN	8	4	내가 본즉 그 수양이 서와 북과 남을 향하여 받으나 그것을 당할 짐승이 하나도 없고 그 손에서 능히 구할 이가 절대로 없으므로 그것이 임의로 행하고 스스로 강대하더라	I saw the ram pushing westward, and northward, and southward; so that no beasts might stand before him, neither was there any that could deliver out of his hand; but he did according to his will, and became great.	I saw the ram charging toward the west and the north and the south. No animal could stand against him, and there was no deliverance from his power. He did as he pleased and became great.
DAN	8	5	내가 생각할 때에 한 수염소가 서편에서부터 와서 온 지면에 두루 다니되 땅에 닿지 아니하며 그 염소 두 눈 사이에는 현저한 뿔이 있더라	And as I was considering, behold, an he goat came from the west on the face of the whole earth, and touched not the ground: and the goat had a notable horn between his eyes.	As I was contemplating all this, suddenly a goat with a prominent horn between his eyes came out of the west, crossing the surface of the entire earth without touching the ground.
DAN	8	6	그것이 두 뿔 가진 수양 곧 내가 본 바 강가에 섰던 양에게로 나아가되 분노한 힘으로 그것에게로 달려가더니	And he came to the ram that had two horns, which I had seen standing before the river, and ran unto him in the fury of his power.	He came toward the two-horned ram I had seen standing beside the canal and rushed at him with furious power.
DAN	8	7	내가 본즉 그것이 수양에게로 가까이 나아가서는 더욱 성내어 그 수양을 땅에 엎드러뜨리고 짓밟았으나 능히 수양을 그 손에서 벗어나게 할 이가 없었더라	And I saw him come close unto the ram, and he was moved with choler against him, and smote the ram, and brake his two horns: and there was no power in the ram to stand before him, but he cast him down to the ground, and stamped upon him: and there was none that could deliver the ram out of his hand.	I saw him approach the ram in a rage against him, and he struck the ram and shattered his two horns. The ram was powerless to stand against him, and the goat threw him to the ground and trampled him, and no one could deliver the ram from his power.
DAN	8	8	수염소가 스스로 심히 강대하여 가더니 강성할 때에 그 큰 뿔이 꺾이고 그 대신에 현저한 뿔 넷이 하늘 사방을 향하여 났더라	Therefore the he goat waxed very great: and when he was strong, the great horn was broken; and for it came up four notable ones toward the four winds of heaven.	Thus the goat became very great, but at the height of his power, his large horn was broken off, and four prominent horns came up in its place, pointing toward the four winds of heaven.
DAN	8	9	그 중 한 뿔에서 또 작은 뿔 하나가 나서 남편과 동편과 또 영화로운 땅을 향하여 심히 커지더니	And out of one of them came forth a little horn, which waxed exceeding great, toward the south, and toward the east, and toward the pleasant land.	From one of these horns a little horn emerged and grew extensively toward the south and the east and toward the Beautiful Land.
DAN	8	10	그것이 하늘 군대에 미칠만큼 커져서 그 군대와 별 중에 몇을 땅에 떨어뜨리고 그것을 짓밞고	And it waxed great, even to the host of heaven; and it cast down some of the host and of the stars to the ground, and stamped upon them.	It grew as high as the host of heaven, and it cast down some of the host and some of the stars to the earth, and trampled them.
DAN	8	11	또 스스로 높아져서 군대의 주재를 대적하며 그에게 매일 드리는 제사를 제하여 버렸고 그의 성소를 헐었으며	Yea, he magnified himself even to the prince of the host, and by him the daily sacrifice was taken away, and the place of his sanctuary was cast down.	It magnified itself, even to the Prince of the host; it removed His daily sacrifice and overthrew the place of His sanctuary.
DAN	8	12	범죄함을 인하여 백성과 매일 드리는 제사가 그것에게 붙인 바 되었고 그것이 또 진리를 땅에 던지며 자의로 행하여 형통하였더라	And an host was given him against the daily sacrifice by reason of transgression, and it cast down the truth to the ground; and it practised, and prospered.	And in the rebellion, the host and the daily sacrifice were given over to the horn, and it flung truth to the ground and prospered in whatever it did.
DAN	8	13	내가 들은즉 거룩한 자가 말하더니 다른 거룩한 자가 그 말하는 자에게 묻되 이상에 나타난 바 매일 드리는 제사와 망하게 하는 죄악에 대한 일과 성소와 백성이 내어준 바 되며 짓밟힐 일이 어느 때까지 이를꼬 하매	Then I heard one saint speaking, and another saint said unto that certain saint which spake, How long shall be the vision concerning the daily sacrifice, and the transgression of desolation, to give both the sanctuary and the host to be trodden under foot?	Then I heard a holy one speaking, and another holy one said to him, “How long until the fulfillment of the vision of the daily sacrifice, the rebellion that causes desolation, and the surrender of the sanctuary and of the host to be trampled?”
DAN	8	14	그가 내게 이르되 이천삼백 주야까지니 그 때에 성소가 정결하게 함을 입으리라 하였느니라	And he said unto me, Unto two thousand and three hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be cleansed.	He said to me, “It will take 2,300 evenings and mornings; then the sanctuary will be properly restored.”
DAN	8	15	나 다니엘이 이 이상을 보고 그 뜻을 알고자 할 때에 사람 모양 같은 것이 내 앞에 섰고	And it came to pass, when I, even I Daniel, had seen the vision, and sought for the meaning, then, behold, there stood before me as the appearance of a man.	While I, Daniel, was watching the vision and trying to understand it, there stood before me one having the appearance of a man.
DAN	8	16	내가 들은즉 을래 강 두 언덕 사이에서 사람의 목소리가 있어 외쳐 이르되 가브리엘아 이 이상을 이 사람에게 깨닫게 하라 하더니	And I heard a man’s voice between the banks of Ulai, which called, and said, Gabriel, make this man to understand the vision.	And I heard the voice of a man calling from between the banks of the Ulai: “Gabriel, explain the vision to this man.”
DAN	8	17	그가 나의 선 곳으로 나아왔는데 그 나아올 때에 내가 두려워서 얼굴을 땅에 대고 엎드리매 그가 내게 이르되 인자야 깨달아 알라 이 이상은 정한 때 끝에 관한 것이니라	So he came near where I stood: and when he came, I was afraid, and fell upon my face: but he said unto me, Understand, O son of man: for at the time of the end shall be the vision.	As he came near to where I stood, I was terrified and fell facedown. “Son of man,” he said to me, “understand that the vision concerns the time of the end.”
DAN	8	18	그가 내게 말할 때에 내가 얼굴을 땅에 대고 엎드리어 깊이 잠들매 그가 나를 어루만져서 일으켜 세우며	Now as he was speaking with me, I was in a deep sleep on my face toward the ground: but he touched me, and set me upright.	While he was speaking with me, I fell into a deep sleep, with my face to the ground. Then he touched me, helped me to my feet,
DAN	8	19	가로되 진노하시는 때가 마친 후에 될 일을 내가 네게 알게 하리니 이 이상은 정한 때 끝에 관한 일임이니라	And he said, Behold, I will make thee know what shall be in the last end of the indignation: for at the time appointed the end shall be.	and said, “Behold, I will make known to you what will happen in the latter time of wrath, because it concerns the appointed time of the end.
DAN	8	20	네가 본 바 두 뿔 가진 수양은 곧 메대와 바사 왕들이요	The ram which thou sawest having two horns are the kings of Media and Persia.	The two-horned ram that you saw represents the kings of Media and Persia.
DAN	8	21	털이 많은 수염소는 곧 헬라 왕이요 두 눈 사이에 있는 큰 뿔은 곧 그 첫째 왕이요	And the rough goat is the king of Grecia: and the great horn that is between his eyes is the first king.	The shaggy goat represents the king of Greece, and the large horn between his eyes is the first king.
DAN	8	22	이 뿔이 꺾이고 그 대신에 네 뿔이 났은즉 그 나라 가운데서 네 나라가 일어나되 그 권세만 못하리라	Now that being broken, whereas four stood up for it, four kingdoms shall stand up out of the nation, but not in his power.	The four horns that replaced the broken one represent four kingdoms that will rise from that nation, but will not have the same power.
DAN	8	23	이 네 나라 마지막 때에 패역자들이 가득할 즈음에 한 왕이 일어나리니 그 얼굴은 엄장하며 궤휼에 능하며	And in the latter time of their kingdom, when the transgressors are come to the full, a king of fierce countenance, and understanding dark sentences, shall stand up.	In the latter part of their reign, when the rebellion has reached its full measure, an insolent king, skilled in intrigue, will come to the throne.
DAN	8	24	그 권세가 강할 것이나 자기의 힘으로 말미암은 것이 아니며 그가 장차 비상하게 파괴를 행하고 자의로 행하여 형통하며 강한 자들과 거룩한 백성을 멸하리라	And his power shall be mighty, but not by his own power: and he shall destroy wonderfully, and shall prosper, and practise, and shall destroy the mighty and the holy people.	His power will be great, but it will not be his own. He will cause terrible destruction and succeed in whatever he does. He will destroy the mighty men along with the holy people.
DAN	8	25	그가 꾀를 베풀어 제 손으로 궤휼을 이루고 마음에 스스로 큰 체하며 또 평화한 때에 많은 무리를 멸하며 또 스스로 서서 만왕의 왕을 대적할 것이나 그가 사람의 손을 말미암지 않고 깨어지리라	And through his policy also he shall cause craft to prosper in his hand; and he shall magnify himself in his heart, and by peace shall destroy many: he shall also stand up against the Prince of princes; but he shall be broken without hand.	Through his craft and by his hand, he will cause deceit to prosper, and in his own mind he will make himself great. In a time of peace he will destroy many, and he will even stand against the Prince of princes. Yet he will be broken off, but not by human hands.
DAN	8	26	이미 말한 바 주야에 대한 이상이 확실하니 너는 그 이상을 간수하라 이는 여러 날 후의 일임이니라	And the vision of the evening and the morning which was told is true: wherefore shut thou up the vision; for it shall be for many days.	The vision of the evenings and the mornings that has been spoken is true. Now you must seal up the vision, for it concerns the distant future.”
DAN	8	27	이에 나 다니엘이 혼절하여 수일을 앓다가 일어나서 왕의 일을 보았느니라 내가 그 이상을 인하여 놀랐고 그 뜻을 깨닫는 사람도 없었느니라	And I Daniel fainted, and was sick certain days; afterward I rose up, and did the king’s business; and I was astonished at the vision, but none understood it.	I, Daniel, was exhausted and lay ill for days. Then I got up and went about the king’s business. I was confounded by the vision; it was beyond understanding.
DAN	9	1	메대 족속 아하수에로의 아들 다리오가 갈대아 나라 왕으로 세움을 입던 원년	In the first year of Darius the son of Ahasuerus, of the seed of the Medes, which was made king over the realm of the Chaldeans;	In the first year of Darius son of Xerxes, a Mede by descent, who was made ruler over the kingdom of the Chaldeans—
DAN	9	2	곧 그 통치 원년에 나 다니엘이 서책으로 말미암아 여호와의 말씀이 선지자 예레미야에게 임하여 고하신 그 년수를 깨달았나니 곧 예루살렘의 황무함이 칠십 년만에 마치리라 하신 것이니라	In the first year of his reign I Daniel understood by books the number of the years, whereof the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the prophet, that he would accomplish seventy years in the desolations of Jerusalem.	in the first year of his reign, I, Daniel, understood from the sacred books, according to the word of the LORD to Jeremiah the prophet, that the desolation of Jerusalem would last seventy years.
DAN	9	3	내가 금식하며 베옷을 입고 재를 무릅쓰고 주 하나님께 기도하며 간구하기를 결심하고	And I set my face unto the Lord God, to seek by prayer and supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes:	So I turned my attention to the Lord God to seek Him by prayer and petition, with fasting, sackcloth, and ashes.
DAN	9	4	내 하나님 여호와께 기도하며 자복하여 이르기를 크시고 두려워할 주 하나님, 주를 사랑하고 주의 계명을 지키는 자를 위하여 언약을 지키시고 그에게 인자를 베푸시는 자시여	And I prayed unto the Lord my God, and made my confession, and said, O Lord, the great and dreadful God, keeping the covenant and mercy to them that love him, and to them that keep his commandments;	And I prayed to the LORD my God and confessed, “O, Lord, the great and awesome God, who keeps His covenant of loving devotion to those who love Him and keep His commandments,
DAN	9	5	우리는 이미 범죄하여 패역하며 행악하며 반역하여 주의 법도와 규례를 떠났사오며	We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts and from thy judgments:	we have sinned and done wrong. We have acted wickedly and rebelled. We have turned away from Your commandments and ordinances.
DAN	9	6	우리가 또 주의 종 선지자들이 주의 이름으로 우리의 열왕과 우리의 방백과 열조와 온 국민에게 말씀한 것을 듣지 아니하였나이다	Neither have we hearkened unto thy servants the prophets, which spake in thy name to our kings, our princes, and our fathers, and to all the people of the land.	We have not listened to Your servants the prophets, who spoke in Your name to our kings, leaders, and fathers, and to all the people of the land.
DAN	9	7	주여 공의는 주께로 돌아가고 수욕은 우리 얼굴로 돌아옴이 오늘날과 같아서 유다 사람들과 예루살렘 거민들과 이스라엘이 가까운 데 있는 자나 먼 데 있는 자가 다 주께서 쫓아 보내신 각국에서 수욕을 입었사오니 이는 그들이 주께 죄를 범하였음이니이다	O Lord, righteousness belongeth unto thee, but unto us confusion of faces, as at this day; to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and unto all Israel, that are near, and that are far off, through all the countries whither thou hast driven them, because of their trespass that they have trespassed against thee.	To You, O Lord, belongs righteousness, but this day we are covered with shame—the men of Judah, the people of Jerusalem, and all Israel near and far, in all the countries to which You have driven us because of our unfaithfulness to You.
DAN	9	8	주여 수욕이 우리에게 돌아오고 우리의 열왕과 우리의 방백과 열조에게 돌아온 것은 우리가 주께 범죄하였음이니이다 마는	O Lord, to us belongeth confusion of face, to our kings, to our princes, and to our fathers, because we have sinned against thee.	O LORD, we are covered with shame—our kings, our leaders, and our fathers—because we have sinned against You.
DAN	9	9	주 우리 하나님께는 긍휼과 사유하심이 있사오니 이는 우리가 주께 패역하였음이오며	To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against him;	To the Lord our God belong compassion and forgiveness, even though we have rebelled against Him
DAN	9	10	우리 하나님 여호와의 목소리를 청종치 아니하며 여호와께서 그 종 선지자들에게 부탁하여 우리 앞에 세우신 율법을 행치 아니하였음이니이다	Neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in his laws, which he set before us by his servants the prophets.	and have not obeyed the voice of the LORD our God to walk in His laws, which He set before us through His servants the prophets.
DAN	9	11	온 이스라엘이 주의 율법을 범하고 치우쳐 가서 주의 목소리를 청종치 아니하였으므로 이 저주가 우리에게 내렸으되 곧 하나님의 종 모세의 율법 가운데 기록된 맹세대로 되었사오니 이는 우리가 주께 범죄하였음이니이다	Yea, all Israel have transgressed thy law, even by departing, that they might not obey thy voice; therefore the curse is poured upon us, and the oath that is written in the law of Moses the servant of God, because we have sinned against him.	All Israel has transgressed Your law and turned away, refusing to obey Your voice; so the oath and the curse written in the Law of Moses the servant of God has been poured out on us, because we have sinned against You.
DAN	9	12	주께서 큰 재앙을 우리에게 내리사 우리와 및 우리를 재판하던 재판관을 쳐서 하신 말씀을 이루셨사오니 온 천하에 예루살렘에 임한 일 같은 것이 없나이다	And he hath confirmed his words, which he spake against us, and against our judges that judged us, by bringing upon us a great evil: for under the whole heaven hath not been done as hath been done upon Jerusalem.	You have carried out the words spoken against us and against our rulers by bringing upon us a great disaster. For under all of heaven, nothing has ever been done like what has been done to Jerusalem.
DAN	9	13	모세의 율법에 기록된 대로 이 모든 재앙이 이미 우리에게 임하였사오나 우리는 우리의 죄악을 떠나고 주의 진리를 깨닫도록 우리 하나님 여호와의 은총을 간구치 아니하였나이다	As it is written in the law of Moses, all this evil is come upon us: yet made we not our prayer before the Lord our God, that we might turn from our iniquities, and understand thy truth.	Just as it is written in the Law of Moses, all this disaster has come upon us, yet we have not sought the favor of the LORD our God by turning from our iniquities and giving attention to Your truth.
DAN	9	14	이러므로 여호와께서 이 재앙을 간직하여 두셨다가 우리에게 임하게 하셨사오니 우리의 하나님 여호와는 행하시는 모든 일이 공의로우시나 우리가 그 목소리를 청종치 아니하였음이니이다	Therefore hath the Lord watched upon the evil, and brought it upon us: for the Lord our God is righteous in all his works which he doeth: for we obeyed not his voice.	Therefore the LORD has kept the calamity in store and brought it upon us. For the LORD our God is righteous in all He does; yet we have not obeyed His voice.
DAN	9	15	강한 손으로 주의 백성을 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내시고 오늘과 같이 명성을 얻으신 우리 주 하나님이여 우리가 범죄하였고 악을 행하였나이다	And now, O Lord our God, that hast brought thy people forth out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, and hast gotten thee renown, as at this day; we have sinned, we have done wickedly.	Now, O Lord our God, who brought Your people out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, and who made for Yourself a name renowned to this day, we have sinned; we have acted wickedly.
DAN	9	16	주여 내가 구하옵나니 주는 주의 공의를 좇으사 주의 분노를 주의 성 예루살렘, 주의 거룩한 산에서 떠나게 하옵소서 이는 우리의 죄와 우리의 열조의 죄악을 인하여 예루살렘과 주의 백성이 사면에 있는 자에게 수욕을 받음이니이다	O Lord, according to all thy righteousness, I beseech thee, let thine anger and thy fury be turned away from thy city Jerusalem, thy holy mountain: because for our sins, and for the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and thy people are become a reproach to all that are about us.	O Lord, in keeping with all Your righteous acts, I pray that Your anger and wrath may turn away from Your city Jerusalem, Your holy mountain; for because of our sins and the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and Your people are a reproach to all around us.
DAN	9	17	그러하온즉 우리 하나님이여 지금 주의 종의 기도와 간구를 들으시고 주를 위하여 주의 얼굴 빛을 주의 황폐한 성소에 비취시옵소서	Now therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant, and his supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lord’s sake.	So now, our God, hear the prayers and petitions of Your servant. For Your sake, O Lord, cause Your face to shine upon Your desolate sanctuary.
DAN	9	18	나의 하나님이여 귀를 기울여 들으시며 눈을 떠서 우리의 황폐된 상황과 주의 이름으로 일컫는 성을 보옵소서 우리가 주의 앞에 간구하옵는 것은 우리의 의를 의지하여 하는 것이 아니요 주의 큰 긍휼을 의지하여 함이오니	O my God, incline thine ear, and hear; open thine eyes, and behold our desolations, and the city which is called by thy name: for we do not present our supplications before thee for our righteousnesses, but for thy great mercies.	Incline Your ear, O my God, and hear; open Your eyes and see the desolation of the city that bears Your name. For we are not presenting our petitions before You because of our righteous acts, but because of Your great compassion.
DAN	9	19	주여 들으소서 주여 용서하소서 주여 들으시고 행하소서 지체치 마옵소서 나의 하나님이여 주 자신을 위하여 하시옵소서 이는 주의 성과 주의 백성이 주의 이름으로 일컫는 바 됨이니이다	O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord, hearken and do; defer not, for thine own sake, O my God: for thy city and thy people are called by thy name.	O Lord, listen! O Lord, forgive! O Lord, hear and act! For Your sake, O my God, do not delay, because Your city and Your people bear Your name.”
DAN	9	20	내가 이같이 말하여 기도하며 내 죄와 및 내 백성 이스라엘의 죄를 자복하고 내 하나님의 거룩한 산을 위하여 내 하나님 여호와 앞에 간구할 때	And whiles I was speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplication before the Lord my God for the holy mountain of my God;	While I was speaking, praying, confessing my sin and that of my people Israel, and presenting my petition before the LORD my God concerning His holy mountain—
DAN	9	21	곧 내가 말하여 기도할 때에 이전 이상 중에 본 그 사람 가브리엘이 빨리 날아서 저녁 제사를 드릴 때 즈음에 내게 이르더니	Yea, whiles I was speaking in prayer, even the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning, being caused to fly swiftly, touched me about the time of the evening oblation.	while I was still praying, Gabriel, the man I had seen in the earlier vision, came to me in swift flight about the time of the evening sacrifice.
DAN	9	22	내게 가르치며 내게 말하여 가로되 다니엘아 내가 이제 네게 지혜와 총명을 주려고 나왔나니	And he informed me, and talked with me, and said, O Daniel, I am now come forth to give thee skill and understanding.	He instructed me and spoke with me, saying: “O Daniel, I have come now to give you insight and understanding.
DAN	9	23	곧 네가 기도를 시작할 즈음에 명령이 내렸으므로 이제 네게 고하러 왔느니라 너는 크게 은총을 입은 자라 그런즉 너는 이 일을 생각하고 그 이상을 깨달을지니라	At the beginning of thy supplications the commandment came forth, and I am come to shew thee; for thou art greatly beloved: therefore understand the matter, and consider the vision.	At the beginning of your petitions, an answer went out, and I have come to tell you, for you are highly precious. So consider the message and understand the vision:
DAN	9	24	네 백성과 네 거룩한 성을 위하여 칠십 이레로 기한을 정하였나니 허물이 마치며 죄가 끝나며 죄악이 영속되며 영원한 의가 드러나며 이상과 예언이 응하며 또 지극히 거룩한 자가 기름부음을 받으리라	Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people and upon thy holy city, to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision and prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy.	Seventy weeks are decreed for your people and your holy city to stop their transgression, to put an end to sin, to make atonement for iniquity, to bring in everlasting righteousness, to seal up vision and prophecy, and to anoint the Most Holy Place.
DAN	9	25	그러므로 너는 깨달아 알지니라 예루살렘을 중건하라는 영이 날 때부터 기름부음을 받은 자 곧 왕이 일어나기까지 일곱 이레와 육십이 이레가 지날 것이요 그 때 곤란한 동안에 성이 중건되어 거리와 해자가 이룰 것이며	Know therefore and understand, that from the going forth of the commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem unto the Messiah the Prince shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks: the street shall be built again, and the wall, even in troublous times.	Know and understand this: From the issuance of the decree to restore and rebuild Jerusalem, until the Messiah, the Prince, there will be seven weeks and sixty-two weeks. It will be rebuilt with streets and a trench, but in times of distress.
DAN	9	26	육십이 이레 후에 기름부음을 받은 자가 끊어져 없어질 것이며 장차 한 왕의 백성이 와서 그 성읍과 성소를 훼파하려니와 그의 종말은 홍수에 엄몰됨 같을 것이며 또 끝까지 전쟁이 있으리니 황폐할 것이 작정되었느니라	And after threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for himself: and the people of the prince that shall come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary; and the end thereof shall be with a flood, and unto the end of the war desolations are determined.	Then after the sixty-two weeks the Messiah will be cut off and will have nothing. Then the people of the prince who is to come will destroy the city and the sanctuary. The end will come like a flood, and until the end there will be war; desolations have been decreed.
DAN	9	27	그가 장차 많은 사람으로 더불어 한 이레 동안의 언약을 굳게 정하겠고 그가 그 이레의 절반에 제사와 예물을 금지할 것이며 또 잔포하여 미운 물건이 날개를 의지하여 설 것이며 또 이미 정한 종말까지 진노가 황페케 하는 자에게 쏟아지리라 하였느니라	And he shall confirm the covenant with many for one week: and in the midst of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease, and for the overspreading of abominations he shall make it desolate, even until the consummation, and that determined shall be poured upon the desolate.	And he will confirm a covenant with many for one week, but in the middle of the week he will put an end to sacrifice and offering. And on the wing of the temple will come the abomination that causes desolation, until the decreed destruction is poured out upon him.”
DAN	10	1	바사 왕 고레스 삼년에 한 일이 벨드사살이라 이름한 다니엘에게 나타났는데 그 일이 참되니 곧 큰 전쟁에 관한 것이라 다니엘이 그 일을 분명히 알았고 그 이상을 깨달으니라	In the third year of Cyrus king of Persia a thing was revealed unto Daniel, whose name was called Belteshazzar; and the thing was true, but the time appointed was long: and he understood the thing, and had understanding of the vision.	In the third year of Cyrus king of Persia, a message was revealed to Daniel, who was called Belteshazzar. The message was true, and it concerned a great conflict. And the understanding of the message was given to him in a vision.
DAN	10	2	그 때에 나 다니엘이 세 이레 동안을 슬퍼하며	In those days I Daniel was mourning three full weeks.	In those days I, Daniel, was mourning for three full weeks.
DAN	10	3	세 이레가 차기까지 좋은 떡을 먹지 아니하며 고기와 포도주를 입에 넣지 아니하며 또 기름을 바르지 아니하니라	I ate no pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth, neither did I anoint myself at all, till three whole weeks were fulfilled.	I ate no rich food, no meat or wine entered my mouth, and I did not anoint myself with oil until the three weeks were completed.
DAN	10	4	정월 이십사 일에 내가 힛데겔이라 하는 큰 강 가에 있었는데	And in the four and twentieth day of the first month, as I was by the side of the great river, which is Hiddekel;	On the twenty-fourth day of the first month, as I was standing on the bank of the great river, the Tigris,
DAN	10	5	그 때에 내가 눈을 들어 바라본즉 한 사람이 세마포 옷을 입었고 허리에는 우바스 정금 띠를 띠었고	Then I lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold a certain man clothed in linen, whose loins were girded with fine gold of Uphaz:	I lifted up my eyes, and behold, there was a certain man dressed in linen, with a belt of fine gold from Uphaz around his waist.
DAN	10	6	그 몸은 황옥 같고 그 얼굴은 번갯빛 같고 그 눈은 횃불 같고 그 팔과 발은 빛난 놋과 같고 그 말소리는 무리의 소리와 같더라	His body also was like the beryl, and his face as the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire, and his arms and his feet like in colour to polished brass, and the voice of his words like the voice of a multitude.	His body was like beryl, his face like the brilliance of lightning, his eyes like flaming torches, his arms and legs like the gleam of polished bronze, and his voice like the sound of a multitude.
DAN	10	7	이 이상은 나 다니엘이 홀로 보았고 나와 함께한 사람들은 이 이상은 보지 못하였어도 그들이 크게 떨며 도망하여 숨었었느니라	And I Daniel alone saw the vision: for the men that were with me saw not the vision; but a great quaking fell upon them, so that they fled to hide themselves.	Only I, Daniel, saw the vision; the men with me did not see it, but a great terror fell upon them, and they ran and hid themselves.
DAN	10	8	그러므로 나만 홀로 있어서 이 큰 이상을 볼 때에 내 몸에 힘이 빠졌고 나의 아름다운 빛이 변하여 썩은 듯하였고 나의 힘이 다 없어졌으나	Therefore I was left alone, and saw this great vision, and there remained no strength in me: for my comeliness was turned in me into corruption, and I retained no strength.	So I was left alone, gazing at this great vision. No strength remained in me; my face grew deathly pale, and I was powerless.
DAN	10	9	내가 그 말소리를 들었는데 그 말소리를 들을 때에 내가 얼굴을 땅에 대고 깊이 잠들었었느니라	Yet heard I the voice of his words: and when I heard the voice of his words, then was I in a deep sleep on my face, and my face toward the ground.	I heard the sound of his words, and as I listened, I fell into a deep sleep, with my face to the ground.
DAN	10	10	한 손이 있어 나를 어루만지기로 내가 떨더니 그가 내 무릎과 손바닥이 땅에 닿게 일으키고	And, behold, an hand touched me, which set me upon my knees and upon the palms of my hands.	Suddenly, a hand touched me and set me trembling on my hands and knees.
DAN	10	11	내게 이르되 은총을 크게 받은 사람 다니엘아 내가 네게 이르는 말을 깨닫고 일어서라 내가 네게 보내심을 받았느니라 그가 내게 이 말을 한 후에 내가 떨며 일어서매	And he said unto me, O Daniel, a man greatly beloved, understand the words that I speak unto thee, and stand upright: for unto thee am I now sent. And when he had spoken this word unto me, I stood trembling.	He said to me, “Daniel, you are a man who is highly precious. Consider carefully the words that I am about to say to you. Stand up, for I have now been sent to you.” And when he had said this to me, I stood up trembling.
DAN	10	12	그가 이르되 다니엘아 두려워하지 말라 네가 깨달으려 하여 네 하나님 앞에 스스로 겸비케 하기로 결심하던 첫 날부터 네 말이 들으신 바 되었으므로 내가 네 말로 인하여 왔느니라	Then said he unto me, Fear not, Daniel: for from the first day that thou didst set thine heart to understand, and to chasten thyself before thy God, thy words were heard, and I am come for thy words.	“Do not be afraid, Daniel,” he said, “for from the first day that you purposed to understand and to humble yourself before your God, your words were heard, and I have come in response to them.
DAN	10	13	그런데 바사국 군이 이십일 일 동안 나를 막았으므로 내가 거기 바사국 왕들과 함께 머물러 있더니 군장 중 하나 미가엘이 와서 나를 도와주므로	But the prince of the kingdom of Persia withstood me one and twenty days: but, lo, Michael, one of the chief princes, came to help me; and I remained there with the kings of Persia.	However, the prince of the kingdom of Persia opposed me for twenty-one days. Then Michael, one of the chief princes, came to help me, for I had been left there with the kings of Persia.
DAN	10	14	이제 내가 말일에 네 백성의 당할 일을 네게 깨닫게 하러 왔노라 대저 이 이상은 오래 후의 일이니라	Now I am come to make thee understand what shall befall thy people in the latter days: for yet the vision is for many days.	Now I have come to explain to you what will happen to your people in the latter days, for the vision concerns those days.”
DAN	10	15	그가 이런 말로 내게 이를 때에 내가 곧 얼굴을 땅에 향하고 벙벙하였더니	And when he had spoken such words unto me, I set my face toward the ground, and I became dumb.	While he was speaking these words to me, I set my face toward the ground and became speechless.
DAN	10	16	인자와 같은 이가 있어 내 입술을 만진지라 내가 곧 입을 열어 내 앞에 섰는 자에게 말하여 가로되 내 주여 이 이상을 인하여 근심이 내게 더하므로 내가 힘이 없어졌나이다	And, behold, one like the similitude of the sons of men touched my lips: then I opened my mouth, and spake, and said unto him that stood before me, O my lord, by the vision my sorrows are turned upon me, and I have retained no strength.	And suddenly one with the likeness of a man touched my lips, and I opened my mouth and said to the one standing before me, “My lord, because of the vision, I am overcome with anguish, and I have no strength.
DAN	10	17	내 몸에 힘이 없어졌고 호흡이 남지 아니하였사오니 내 주의 이 종이 어찌 능히 내 주로 더불어 말씀할 수 있으리이까	For how can the servant of this my lord talk with this my lord? for as for me, straightway there remained no strength in me, neither is there breath left in me.	How can I, your servant, speak with you, my lord? Now I have no strength, nor is any breath left in me.”
DAN	10	18	또 사람의 모양 같은 것 하나가 나를 만지며 나로 강건케 하여	Then there came again and touched me one like the appearance of a man, and he strengthened me,	Again the one with the likeness of a man touched me and strengthened me.
DAN	10	19	가로되 은총을 크게 받은 사람이여 두려워하지 말라 평안하라 강건하라 강건하라 그가 이같이 내게 말하매 내가 곧 힘이 나서 가로되 내 주께서 나로 힘이 나게 하셨사오니 말씀하옵소서	And said, O man greatly beloved, fear not: peace be unto thee, be strong, yea, be strong. And when he had spoken unto me, I was strengthened, and said, Let my lord speak; for thou hast strengthened me.	“Do not be afraid, you who are highly precious,” he said. “Peace be with you! Be strong now; be very strong!” As he spoke with me, I was strengthened and said, “Speak, my lord, for you have strengthened me.”
DAN	10	20	그가 이르되 내가 어찌하여 네게 나아온 것을 네가 아느냐 이제 내가 돌아가서 바사 군과 싸우려니와 내가 나간 후에는 헬라 군이 이를 것이라	Then said he, Knowest thou wherefore I come unto thee? and now will I return to fight with the prince of Persia: and when I am gone forth, lo, the prince of Grecia shall come.	“Do you know why I have come to you?” he said. “I must return at once to fight against the prince of Persia, and when I have gone forth, behold, the prince of Greece will come.
DAN	10	21	오직 내가 먼저 진리의 글에 기록된 것으로 네게 보이리라 나를 도와서 그들을 대적하는 자는 너희 군 미가엘뿐이니라	But I will shew thee that which is noted in the scripture of truth: and there is none that holdeth with me in these things, but Michael your prince.	But first I will tell you what is inscribed in the Book of Truth. Yet no one has the courage to support me against these, except Michael your prince.
DAN	11	1	내가 또 메대 사람 다리오 원년에 일어나 그를 돕고 강하게 한 일이 있었느니라	Also I in the first year of Darius the Mede, even I, stood to confirm and to strengthen him.	“And I, in the first year of Darius the Mede, stood up to strengthen and protect him.
DAN	11	2	이제 내가 참된 것을 네게 보이리라 보라 바사에서 또 세 왕이 일어날 것이요 그 후의 넷째는 그들보다 심히 부요할 것이며 그가 그 부요함으로 강하여진 후에는 모든 사람을 격동시켜 헬라국을 칠 것이며	And now will I shew thee the truth. Behold, there shall stand up yet three kings in Persia; and the fourth shall be far richer than they all: and by his strength through his riches he shall stir up all against the realm of Grecia.	Now then, I will tell you the truth: Three more kings will arise in Persia, and then a fourth, who will be far richer than all the others. By the power of his wealth, he will stir up everyone against the kingdom of Greece.
DAN	11	3	장차 한 능력 있는 왕이 일어나서 큰 권세로 다스리며 임의로 행하리라	And a mighty king shall stand up, that shall rule with great dominion, and do according to his will.	Then a mighty king will arise, who will rule with great authority and do as he pleases.
DAN	11	4	그러나 그가 강성할 때에 그 나라가 갈라져 천하 사방에 나누일 것이나 그 자손에게로 돌아가지도 아니할 것이요 또 자기가 주장하던 권세대로도 되지 아니하리니 이는 그 나라가 뽑혀서 이 외의 사람들에게로 돌아갈 것임이니라	And when he shall stand up, his kingdom shall be broken, and shall be divided toward the four winds of heaven; and not to his posterity, nor according to his dominion which he ruled: for his kingdom shall be plucked up, even for others beside those.	But as soon as he is established, his kingdom will be broken up and parceled out toward the four winds of heaven. It will not go to his descendants, nor will it have the authority with which he ruled, because his kingdom will be uprooted and given to others.
DAN	11	5	남방의 왕은 강할 것이나 그 군들 중에 하나는 그보다 강하여 권세를 떨치리니 그 권세가 심히 클 것이요	And the king of the south shall be strong, and one of his princes; and he shall be strong above him, and have dominion; his dominion shall be a great dominion.	The king of the South will grow strong, but one of his commanders will grow even stronger and will rule his own kingdom with great authority.
DAN	11	6	몇 해 후에 그들이 서로 맹약하리니 곧 남방 왕의 딸이 북방 왕에게 나아가서 화친하리라 그러나 이 공주의 힘이 쇠하고 그 왕은 서지도 못하며 권세가 없어질 뿐 아니라 이 공주와 그를 데리고 온 자와 그를 낳은 자와 그 때에 도와주던 자가 다 버림을 당하리라	And in the end of years they shall join themselves together; for the king’s daughter of the south shall come to the king of the north to make an agreement: but she shall not retain the power of the arm; neither shall he stand, nor his arm: but she shall be given up, and they that brought her, and he that begat her, and he that strengthened her in these times.	After some years they will form an alliance, and the daughter of the king of the South will go to the king of the North to seal the agreement. But his daughter will not retain her position of power, nor will his strength endure. At that time she will be given up, along with her royal escort and her father and the one who supported her.
DAN	11	7	그러나 이 공주의 본족에서 난 자 중에 하나가 그의 위를 이어 북방 왕의 군대를 치러 와서 그의 성에 들어가서 그들을 이기고	But out of a branch of her roots shall one stand up in his estate, which shall come with an army, and shall enter into the fortress of the king of the north, and shall deal against them, and shall prevail:	But one from her family line will rise up in his place, come against the army of the king of the North, and enter his fortress, fighting and prevailing.
DAN	11	8	그 신들과 부어만든 우상들과 그 은과 금의 아름다운 기구를 다 노략하여 애굽으로 가져갈 것이요 몇 해 동안은 그가 북방 왕을 치지 아니하리라	And shall also carry captives into Egypt their gods, with their princes, and with their precious vessels of silver and of gold; and he shall continue more years than the king of the north.	He will take even their gods captive to Egypt, with their metal images and their precious vessels of silver and gold. For some years he will stay away from the king of the North,
DAN	11	9	북방 왕이 남방 왕의 나라로 쳐 들어갈 것이나 자기 본국으로 물러 가리라	So the king of the south shall come into his kingdom, and shall return into his own land.	who will invade the realm of the king of the South and then return to his own land.
DAN	11	10	그 아들들이 전쟁을 준비하고 심히 많은 군대를 모아서 물의 넘침 같이 나아올 것이며 그가 또 와서 남방 왕의 견고한 성까지 칠 것이요	But his sons shall be stirred up, and shall assemble a multitude of great forces: and one shall certainly come, and overflow, and pass through: then shall he return, and be stirred up, even to his fortress.	But his sons will stir up strife and assemble a great army, which will advance forcefully, sweeping through like a flood, and will again carry the battle as far as his fortress.
DAN	11	11	남방 왕은 크게 노하여 나와서 북방 왕과 싸울 것이라 북방 왕이 큰 무리를 일으킬 것이나 그 무리가 그의 손에 붙인 바 되리라	And the king of the south shall be moved with choler, and shall come forth and fight with him, even with the king of the north: and he shall set forth a great multitude; but the multitude shall be given into his hand.	In a rage, the king of the South will march out to fight the king of the North, who will raise a large army, but it will be delivered into the hand of his enemy.
DAN	11	12	그가 큰 무리를 사로잡은 후에 그 마음이 스스로 높아져서 수만 명을 엎드러뜨릴 것이나 그 세력은 더하지 못할 것이요	And when he hath taken away the multitude, his heart shall be lifted up; and he shall cast down many ten thousands: but he shall not be strengthened by it.	When the army is carried off, the king of the South will be proud in heart and will cast down tens of thousands, but he will not triumph.
DAN	11	13	북방 왕은 돌아가서 다시 대군을 전보다 더 많이 준비하였다가 몇 때 곧 몇 해 후에 대군과 많은 물건을 거느리고 오리라	For the king of the north shall return, and shall set forth a multitude greater than the former, and shall certainly come after certain years with a great army and with much riches.	For the king of the North will raise another army, larger than the first, and after some years he will advance with a great army and many supplies.
DAN	11	14	그 때에 여러 사람이 일어나서 남방 왕을 칠 것이요 네 백성 중에서도 강포한 자가 스스로 높아져서 이상을 이루려 할 것이나 그들이 도리어 넘어지리라	And in those times there shall many stand up against the king of the south: also the robbers of thy people shall exalt themselves to establish the vision; but they shall fall.	In those times many will rise up against the king of the South. Violent ones among your own people will exalt themselves in fulfillment of the vision, but they will fail.
DAN	11	15	이에 북방 왕은 와서 토성을 쌓고 견고한 성읍을 취할 것이요 남방 군대는 그를 당할 힘이 없을 것이므로	So the king of the north shall come, and cast up a mount, and take the most fenced cities: and the arms of the south shall not withstand, neither his chosen people, neither shall there be any strength to withstand.	Then the king of the North will come, build up a siege ramp, and capture a fortified city. The forces of the South will not stand; even their best troops will not be able to resist.
DAN	11	16	오직 와서 치는 자가 임의로 행하리니 능히 그 앞에 설 사람이 없겠고 그가 영화로운 땅에 설 것이요 그 손에 멸망이 있으리라	But he that cometh against him shall do according to his own will, and none shall stand before him: and he shall stand in the glorious land, which by his hand shall be consumed.	The invader will do as he pleases, and no one will stand against him. He will establish himself in the Beautiful Land, with destruction in his hand.
DAN	11	17	그가 결심하고 전국의 힘을 다하여 이르렀다가 그와 화친할 것이요 또 여자의 딸을 그에게 주어 그 나라를 패망케 하려 할 것이나 이루지 못하리니 그에게 무익하리라	He shall also set his face to enter with the strength of his whole kingdom, and upright ones with him; thus shall he do: and he shall give him the daughter of women, corrupting her: but she shall not stand on his side, neither be for him.	He will resolve to come with the strength of his whole kingdom, and will reach an agreement with the king of the South. He will give him a daughter in marriage in order to overthrow the kingdom, but his plan will not succeed or help him.
DAN	11	18	그 후에 그가 얼굴을 섬들로 돌이켜 많이 취할 것이나 한 대장이 있어서 그의 보이는 수욕을 씻고 그 수욕을 그에게로 돌릴 것이므로	After this shall he turn his face unto the isles, and shall take many: but a prince for his own behalf shall cause the reproach offered by him to cease; without his own reproach he shall cause it to turn upon him.	Then he will turn his face to the coastlands and capture many of them. But a commander will put an end to his reproach and will turn it back upon him.
DAN	11	19	그가 드디어 그 얼굴을 돌이켜 자기 땅 산성들로 향할 것이나 거쳐 넘어지고 다시는 보이지 아니하리라	Then he shall turn his face toward the fort of his own land: but he shall stumble and fall, and not be found.	After this, he will turn back toward the fortresses of his own land, but he will stumble and fall and be no more.
DAN	11	20	그 위를 이을 자가 토색하는 자로 그 나라의 아름다운 곳으로 두루 다니게 할 것이나 그는 분노함이나 싸움이 없이 몇 날이 못되어 망할 것이요	Then shall stand up in his estate a raiser of taxes in the glory of the kingdom: but within few days he shall be destroyed, neither in anger, nor in battle.	In his place one will arise who will send out a tax collector for the glory of the kingdom; but within a few days he will be destroyed, though not in anger or in battle.
DAN	11	21	또 그 위를 이을 자는 한 비천한 사람이라 나라 영광을 그에게 주지 아니할 것이나 그가 평안한 때를 타서 궤휼로 그 나라를 얻을 것이며	And in his estate shall stand up a vile person, to whom they shall not give the honour of the kingdom: but he shall come in peaceably, and obtain the kingdom by flatteries.	In his place a despicable person will arise; royal honors will not be given to him, but he will come in a time of peace and seize the kingdom by intrigue.
DAN	11	22	넘치는 물 같은 군대가 그에게 넘침을 입어 패할 것이요 동맹한 왕도 그렇게 될 것이며	And with the arms of a flood shall they be overflown from before him, and shall be broken; yea, also the prince of the covenant.	Then a flood of forces will be swept away before him and destroyed, along with a prince of the covenant.
DAN	11	23	그와 약조한 후에 그는 거짓을 행하여 올라올 것이요 적은 백성을 거느리고 강하게 될 것이며	And after the league made with him he shall work deceitfully: for he shall come up, and shall become strong with a small people.	After an alliance is made with him, he will act deceitfully; for he will rise to power with only a few people.
DAN	11	24	그가 평안한 때에 그 도의 가장 기름진 곳에 들어와서 그 열조와 열조의 조상이 행하지 못하던 것을 행할 것이요 그는 노략하며 탈취한 재물을 무리에게 흩어주며 모략을 베풀어 얼마 동안 산성들을 칠 것인데 때가 이르기까지 그리하리라	He shall enter peaceably even upon the fattest places of the province; and he shall do that which his fathers have not done, nor his fathers’ fathers; he shall scatter among them the prey, and spoil, and riches: yea, and he shall forecast his devices against the strong holds, even for a time.	In a time of peace, he will invade the richest provinces and do what his fathers and forefathers never did. He will lavish plunder, loot, and wealth on his followers, and he will plot against the strongholds—but only for a time.
DAN	11	25	그가 그 힘을 떨치며 용맹을 발하여 큰 군대를 거느리고 남방 왕도 심히 크고 강한 군대를 거느리고 맞아 싸울 것이나 능히 당하지 못하리니 이는 그들이 모략을 베풀어 그를 침이니라	And he shall stir up his power and his courage against the king of the south with a great army; and the king of the south shall be stirred up to battle with a very great and mighty army; but he shall not stand: for they shall forecast devices against him.	And with a large army he will stir up his power and his courage against the king of the South, who will mobilize a very large and powerful army but will not withstand the plots devised against him.
DAN	11	26	자기의 진미를 먹는 자가 그를 멸하리니 그 군대가 흩어질 것이요 많은 자가 엎드러져 죽으리라	Yea, they that feed of the portion of his meat shall destroy him, and his army shall overflow: and many shall fall down slain.	Those who eat from his provisions will seek to destroy him; his army will be swept away, and many will fall slain.
DAN	11	27	이 두 왕이 마음에 서로 해코자 하여 한 밥상에 앉았을 때에 거짓말을 할 것이라 일이 형통하지 못하리니 이는 작정된 기한에 미쳐서 그 일이 끝날 것임이니라	And both these kings’ hearts shall be to do mischief, and they shall speak lies at one table; but it shall not prosper: for yet the end shall be at the time appointed.	And the two kings, with their hearts bent on evil, will speak lies at the same table, but to no avail, for still the end will come at the appointed time.
DAN	11	28	북방 왕은 많은 재물을 가지고 본국으로 돌아가리니 그는 마음으로 거룩한 언약을 거스리며 임의로 행하고 본토로 돌아갈 것이며	Then shall he return into his land with great riches; and his heart shall be against the holy covenant; and he shall do exploits, and return to his own land.	The king of the North will return to his land with great wealth, but his heart will be set against the holy covenant; so he will do damage and return to his own land.
DAN	11	29	작정된 기한에 그가 다시 나와서 남방에 이를 것이나 이번이 그 전번만 못하리니	At the time appointed he shall return, and come toward the south; but it shall not be as the former, or as the latter.	At the appointed time he will invade the South again, but this time will not be like the first.
DAN	11	30	이는 깃딤의 배들이 이르러 그를 칠 것임이라 그가 낙심하고 돌아가며 거룩한 언약을 한하고 임의로 행하며 돌아가서는 거룩한 언약을 배반하는 자를 중히 여길 것이며	For the ships of Chittim shall come against him: therefore he shall be grieved, and return, and have indignation against the holy covenant: so shall he do; he shall even return, and have intelligence with them that forsake the holy covenant.	Ships of Kittim will come against him, and he will lose heart. Then he will turn back and rage against the holy covenant and do damage. So he will return and show favor to those who forsake the holy covenant.
DAN	11	31	군대는 그의 편에 서서 성소 곧 견고한 곳을 더럽히며 매일 드리는 제사를 폐하며 멸망케 하는 미운 물건을 세울 것이며	And arms shall stand on his part, and they shall pollute the sanctuary of strength, and shall take away the daily sacrifice, and they shall place the abomination that maketh desolate.	His forces will rise up and desecrate the temple fortress. They will abolish the daily sacrifice and set up the abomination of desolation.
DAN	11	32	그가 또 언약을 배반하고 악행하는 자를 궤휼로 타락시킬 것이나 오직 자기의 하나님을 아는 백성은 강하여 용맹을 발하리라	And such as do wickedly against the covenant shall he corrupt by flatteries: but the people that do know their God shall be strong, and do exploits.	With flattery he will corrupt those who violate the covenant, but the people who know their God will firmly resist him.
DAN	11	33	백성 중에 지혜로운 자가 많은 사람을 가르칠 것이나 그들이 칼날과 불꽃과 사로잡힘과 약탈을 당하여 여러 날 동안 쇠패하리라	And they that understand among the people shall instruct many: yet they shall fall by the sword, and by flame, by captivity, and by spoil, many days.	Those with insight will instruct many, though for a time they will fall by sword or flame, or be captured or plundered.
DAN	11	34	그들이 쇠패할 때에 도움을 조금 얻을 것이나 많은 사람은 궤휼로 그들과 친합할 것이며	Now when they shall fall, they shall be holpen with a little help: but many shall cleave to them with flatteries.	Now when they fall, they will be granted a little help, but many will join them insincerely.
DAN	11	35	또 그들 중 지혜로운 자 몇 사람이 쇠패하여 무리로 연단되며 정결케 되며 희게 되어 마지막 때까지 이르게 하리니 이는 작정된 기한이 있음이니라	And some of them of understanding shall fall, to try them, and to purge, and to make them white, even to the time of the end: because it is yet for a time appointed.	Some of the wise will fall, so that they may be refined, purified, and made spotless until the time of the end, for it will still come at the appointed time.
DAN	11	36	이 왕이 자기 뜻대로 행하며 스스로 높여 모든 신보다 크다 하며 비상한 말로 신들의 신을 대적하며 형통하기를 분노하심이 쉴 때까지 하리니 이는 그 작정된 일이 반드시 이룰 것임이니라	And the king shall do according to his will; and he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself above every god, and shall speak marvellous things against the God of gods, and shall prosper till the indignation be accomplished: for that that is determined shall be done.	Then the king will do as he pleases and will exalt and magnify himself above every god, and he will speak monstrous things against the God of gods. He will be successful until the time of wrath is completed, for what has been decreed must be accomplished.
DAN	11	37	그가 모든 것보다 스스로 크다 하고 그 열조의 신들과 여자의 사모하는 것을 돌아보지 아니하며 아무 신이든지 돌아보지 아니할 것이나	Neither shall he regard the God of his fathers, nor the desire of women, nor regard any god: for he shall magnify himself above all.	He will show no regard for the gods of his fathers, nor for the one desired by women, nor for any other god, because he will magnify himself above them all.
DAN	11	38	그 대신에 세력의 신을 공경할 것이요 또 그 열조가 알지 못하던 신에게 금, 은 보석과 보물을 드려 공경할 것이며	But in his estate shall he honour the God of forces: and a god whom his fathers knew not shall he honour with gold, and silver, and with precious stones, and pleasant things.	And in their place, he will honor a god of fortresses—a god his fathers did not know—with gold, silver, precious stones, and riches.
DAN	11	39	그는 이방 신을 힘입어 크게 견고한 산성들을 취할 것이요 무릇 그를 안다 하는 자에게는 영광을 더하여 여러 백성을 다스리게도 하며 그에게서 뇌물을 받고 땅을 나눠주기도 하리라	Thus shall he do in the most strong holds with a strange god, whom he shall acknowledge and increase with glory: and he shall cause them to rule over many, and shall divide the land for gain.	He will attack the strongest fortresses with the help of a foreign god and will greatly honor those who acknowledge him, making them rulers over many and distributing the land for a price.
DAN	11	40	마지막 때에 남방 왕이 그를 찌르리니 북방 왕이 병거와 마병과 많은 배로 회리바람처럼 그에게로 마주 와서 그 여러 나라에 들어가며 물이 넘침 같이 지나갈 것이요	And at the time of the end shall the king of the south push at him: and the king of the north shall come against him like a whirlwind, with chariots, and with horsemen, and with many ships; and he shall enter into the countries, and shall overflow and pass over.	At the time of the end, the king of the South will engage him in battle, but the king of the North will storm out against him with chariots, horsemen, and many ships, invading many countries and sweeping through them like a flood.
DAN	11	41	그가 또 영화로운 땅에 들어갈 것이요 많은 나라를 패망케 할 것이나 오직 에돔과 모압과 암몬 자손의 존귀한 자들은 그 손에서 벗어나리라	He shall enter also into the glorious land, and many countries shall be overthrown: but these shall escape out of his hand, even Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the children of Ammon.	He will also invade the Beautiful Land, and many countries will fall. But these will be delivered from his hand: Edom, Moab, and the leaders of the Ammonites.
DAN	11	42	그가 열국에 그 손을 펴리니 애굽 땅도 면치 못할 것이므로	He shall stretch forth his hand also upon the countries: and the land of Egypt shall not escape.	He will extend his power over many countries, and not even the land of Egypt will escape.
DAN	11	43	그가 권세로 애굽의 금 은과 모든 보물을 잡을 것이요 리비아 사람과 구스 사람이 그의 시종이 되리라	But he shall have power over the treasures of gold and of silver, and over all the precious things of Egypt: and the Libyans and the Ethiopians shall be at his steps.	He will gain control of the treasures of gold and silver and over all the riches of Egypt, and the Libyans and Cushites will also submit to him.
DAN	11	44	그러나 동북에서부터 소문이 이르러 그로 번민케 하므로 그가 분노하여 나가서 많은 무리를 다 도륙하며 진멸코자 할 것이요	But tidings out of the east and out of the north shall trouble him: therefore he shall go forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to make away many.	But news from the east and the north will alarm him, and he will go out with great fury to destroy many and devote them to destruction.
DAN	11	45	그가 장막 궁전을 바다와 영화롭고 거룩한 산 사이에 베풀 것이나 그의 끝이 이르리니 도와줄 자가 없으리라	And he shall plant the tabernacles of his palace between the seas in the glorious holy mountain; yet he shall come to his end, and none shall help him.	He will pitch his royal tents between the sea and the beautiful holy mountain, but he will meet his end with no one to help him.
DAN	12	1	그 때에 네 민족을 호위하는 대군 미가엘이 일어날 것이요 또 환난이 있으리니 이는 개국 이래로 그 때까지 없던 환난일 것이며 그 때에 네 백성 중 무릇 책에 기록된 모든 자가 구원을 얻을 것이라	And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great prince which standeth for the children of thy people: and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a nation even to that same time: and at that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written in the book.	“At that time Michael, the great prince who stands watch over your people, will rise up. There will be a time of distress, the likes of which will not have occurred from the beginning of nations until that time. But at that time your people—everyone whose name is found written in the book—will be delivered.
DAN	12	2	땅의 티끌 가운데서 자는 자 중에 많이 깨어 영생을 얻는 자도 있겠고 수욕을 받아서 무궁히 부끄러움을 입을 자도 있을 것이며	And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.	And many who sleep in the dust of the earth will awake, some to everlasting life, but others to shame and everlasting contempt.
DAN	12	3	지혜 있는 자는 궁창의 빛과 같이 빛날 것이요 많은 사람을 옳은 데로 돌아오게 한 자는 별과 같이 영원토록 비취리라	And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever and ever.	Then the wise will shine like the brightness of the heavens, and those who lead many to righteousness will shine like the stars forever and ever.
DAN	12	4	다니엘아 마지막 때까지 이 말을 간수하고 이 글을 봉함하라 많은 사람이 빨리 왕래하며 지식이 더하리라	But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book, even to the time of the end: many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.	But you, Daniel, shut up these words and seal the book until the time of the end. Many will roam to and fro, and knowledge will increase.”
DAN	12	5	나 다니엘이 본즉 다른 두 사람이 있어 하나는 강 이편 언덕에 섰고 하나는 강 저편 언덕에 섰더니	Then I Daniel looked, and, behold, there stood other two, the one on this side of the bank of the river, and the other on that side of the bank of the river.	Then I, Daniel, looked and saw two others standing there, one on this bank of the river and one on the opposite bank.
DAN	12	6	그 중에 하나가 세마포 옷을 입은 자 곧 강물 위에 있는 자에게 이르되 이 기사의 끝이 어느 때까지냐 하기로	And one said to the man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters of the river, How long shall it be to the end of these wonders?	One of them said to the man dressed in linen, who was above the waters of the river, “How long until the fulfillment of these wonders?”
DAN	12	7	내가 들은즉 그 세마포 옷을 입고 강물 위에 있는 자가 그 좌우 손을 들어 하늘을 향하여 영생하시는 자를 가리켜 맹세하여 가로되 반드시 한 때 두 때 반 때를 지나서 성도의 권세가 다 깨어지기까지니 그렇게 되면 이 모든 일이 다 끝나리라 하더라	And I heard the man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters of the river, when he held up his right hand and his left hand unto heaven, and sware by him that liveth for ever that it shall be for a time, times, and an half; and when he shall have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, all these things shall be finished.	And the man dressed in linen, who was above the waters of the river, raised his right hand and his left hand toward heaven, and I heard him swear by Him who lives forever, saying, “It will be for a time, and times, and half a time. When the power of the holy people has finally been shattered, all these things will be completed.”
DAN	12	8	내가 듣고도 깨닫지 못한지라 내가 가로되 내 주여 이 모든 일의 결국이 어떠하겠삽나이까	And I heard, but I understood not: then said I, O my Lord, what shall be the end of these things?	I heard, but I did not understand. So I asked, “My lord, what will be the outcome of these things?”
DAN	12	9	그가 가로되 다니엘아 갈지어다 대저 이 말은 마지막 때까지 간수하고 봉함할 것임이니라	And he said, Go thy way, Daniel: for the words are closed up and sealed till the time of the end.	“Go on your way, Daniel,” he replied, “for the words are closed up and sealed until the time of the end.
DAN	12	10	많은 사람이 연단을 받아 스스로 정결케 하며 희게 할 것이나 악한 사람은 악을 행하리니 악한 자는 아무도 깨닫지 못하되 오직 지혜 있는 자는 깨달으리라	Many shall be purified, and made white, and tried; but the wicked shall do wickedly: and none of the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall understand.	Many will be purified, made spotless, and refined, but the wicked will continue to act wickedly. None of the wicked will understand, but the wise will understand.
DAN	12	11	매일 드리는 제사를 폐하며 멸망케 할 미운 물건을 세울 때부터 일천이백구십 일을 지낼 것이요	And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination that maketh desolate set up, there shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety days.	And from the time the daily sacrifice is abolished and the abomination of desolation set up, there will be 1,290 days.
DAN	12	12	기다려서 일천삼백삼십오 일까지 이르는 그 사람은 복이 있으리라	Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to the thousand three hundred and five and thirty days.	Blessed is he who waits and reaches the end of the 1,335 days.
DAN	12	13	너는 가서 마지막을 기다리라 이는 네가 평안히 쉬다가 끝날에는 네 업을 누릴 것임이니라	But go thou thy way till the end be: for thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the days.	But as for you, go on your way until the end. You will rest, and will arise to your inheritance at the end of the days.”
HOS	1	1	웃시야와 요담과 아하스와 히스기야가 이어 유다 왕이 된 시대 곧 요아스의 아들 여로보암이 이스라엘 왕이 된 시대에 브에리의 아들 호세아에게 임한 여호와의 말씀이라	The word of the Lord that came unto Hosea, the son of Beeri, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash, king of Israel.	This is the word of the LORD that came to Hosea son of Beeri in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah, and of Jeroboam son of Jehoash, king of Israel.
HOS	1	2	여호와께서 비로소 호세아로 말씀하시니라 여호와께서 호세아에게 이르시되 너는 가서 음란한 아내를 취하여 음란한 자식들을 낳으라 이 나라가 여호와를 떠나 크게 행음함이니라	The beginning of the word of the Lord by Hosea. And the Lord said to Hosea, Go, take unto thee a wife of whoredoms and children of whoredoms: for the land hath committed great whoredom, departing from the Lord.	When the LORD first spoke through Hosea, He told him, “Go, take a prostitute as your wife and have children of adultery, because this land is flagrantly prostituting itself by departing from the LORD.”
HOS	1	3	이에 저가 가서 디블라임의 딸 고멜을 취하였더니 저가 잉태하여 아들을 낳으매	So he went and took Gomer the daughter of Diblaim; which conceived, and bare him a son.	So Hosea went and married Gomer daughter of Diblaim, and she conceived and bore him a son.
HOS	1	4	여호와께서 호세아에게 이르시되 그 이름을 이스르엘이라 하라 조금 후에 내가 이스르엘의 피를 예후의 집에 갚으며 이스라엘 족속의 나라를 폐할 것임이니라	And the Lord said unto him, Call his name Jezreel; for yet a little while, and I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, and will cause to cease the kingdom of the house of Israel.	Then the LORD said to Hosea, “Name him Jezreel, for soon I will bring the bloodshed of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, and I will put an end to the kingdom of Israel.
HOS	1	5	그 날에 내가 이스르엘 골짜기에서 이스라엘의 활을 꺾으리라 하시니라	And it shall come to pass at that day, that I will break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jezreel.	And on that day I will break the bow of Israel in the Valley of Jezreel.”
HOS	1	6	고멜이 또 잉태하여 딸을 낳으매 여호와께서 호세아에게 이르시되 그 이름을 로루하마라 하라 내가 다시는 이스라엘 족속을 긍휼히 여겨서 사하지 않을 것임이니라	And she conceived again, and bare a daughter. And God said unto him, Call her name Lo–ruhamah: for I will no more have mercy upon the house of Israel; but I will utterly take them away.	Gomer again conceived and gave birth to a daughter, and the LORD said to Hosea, “Name her Lo-ruhamah, for I will no longer have compassion on the house of Israel, that I should ever forgive them.
HOS	1	7	그러나 내가 유다 족속을 긍휼히 여겨 저희 하나님 여호와로 구원하겠고 활과 칼이나 전쟁이나 말과 마병으로 구원하지 아니하리라 하시니라	But I will have mercy upon the house of Judah, and will save them by the Lord their God, and will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by battle, by horses, nor by horsemen.	Yet I will have compassion on the house of Judah, and I will save them—not by bow or sword or war, not by horses and cavalry, but by the LORD their God.”
HOS	1	8	고멜이 로루하마를 젖뗀 후에 또 잉태하여 아들을 낳으매	Now when she had weaned Lo–ruhamah, she conceived, and bare a son.	After she had weaned Lo-ruhamah, Gomer conceived and gave birth to a son.
HOS	1	9	여호와께서 이르시되 그 이름을 로암미라 하라 너희는 내 백성이 아니요 나는 너희 하나님이 되지 아니할 것임이니라	Then said God, Call his name Lo–ammi: for ye are not my people, and I will not be your God.	And the LORD said, “Name him Lo-ammi, for you are not My people, and I am not your God.
HOS	1	10	그러나 이스라엘 자손의 수가 바닷가의 모래 같이 되어서 측량할 수도 없고 셀 수도 없을 것이며 전에 저희에게 이르기를 너희는 내 백성이 아니라 한 그곳에서 저희에게 이르기를 너희는 사신 하나님의 자녀라 할 것이라	Yet the number of the children of Israel shall be as the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured nor numbered; and it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said unto them, Ye are not my people, there it shall be said unto them, Ye are the sons of the living God.	Yet the number of the Israelites will be like the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured or counted. And it will happen that in the very place where it was said to them, ‘You are not My people,’ they will be called ‘sons of the living God.’
HOS	1	11	이에 유다 자손과 이스라엘 자손이 함께 모여 한 두목을 세우고 그 땅에서부터 올라 오리니 이스르엘의 날이 클 것임이로다	Then shall the children of Judah and the children of Israel be gathered together, and appoint themselves one head, and they shall come up out of the land: for great shall be the day of Jezreel.	Then the people of Judah and of Israel will be gathered together, and they will appoint for themselves one leader, and will go up out of the land. For great will be the day of Jezreel.
HOS	2	1	너희 형제에게는 암미라 하고 너희 자매에게는 루하마라 하라	Say ye unto your brethren, Ammi; and to your sisters, Ru–hamah.	“Say of your brothers, ‘My people,’ and of your sisters, ‘My loved one.’
HOS	2	2	너희 어미와 쟁론하고 쟁론하라 저는 내 아내가 아니요 나는 저의 남편이 아니라 저로 그 얼굴에서 음란을 제하게 하고 그 유방 사이에서 음행을 제하게 하라	Plead with your mother, plead: for she is not my wife, neither am I her husband: let her therefore put away her whoredoms out of her sight, and her adulteries from between her breasts;	Rebuke your mother, rebuke her, for she is not My wife, and I am not her husband. Let her remove the adultery from her face and the unfaithfulness from between her breasts.
HOS	2	3	그렇지 아니하면 내가 저를 벌거벗겨서 그 나던 날과 같게 할 것이요 저로 광야 같이 되게 하며 마른 땅 같이 되게 하여 목말라 죽게 할 것이며	Lest I strip her naked, and set her as in the day that she was born, and make her as a wilderness, and set her like a dry land, and slay her with thirst.	Otherwise, I will strip her naked and expose her like the day of her birth. I will make her like a desert and turn her into a parched land, and I will let her die of thirst.
HOS	2	4	내가 그 자녀를 긍휼히 여기지 아니하리니 이는 저희가 음란한 자식들임이니라	And I will not have mercy upon her children; for they be the children of whoredoms.	I will have no compassion on her children, because they are the children of adultery.
HOS	2	5	저희의 어미는 행음하였고 저희를 배었던 자가 부끄러운 일을 행하였나니 대저 저가 이르기를 나는 나를 연애하는 자들을 따르리니 저희가 내 떡과 내 물과 내 양털과 내 삼과 내 기름과 내 술들을 내게 준다 하였느니라	For their mother hath played the harlot: she that conceived them hath done shamefully: for she said, I will go after my lovers, that give me my bread and my water, my wool and my flax, mine oil and my drink.	For their mother has played the harlot and has conceived them in disgrace. For she thought, ‘I will go after my lovers, who give me bread and water, wool and linen, oil and drink.’
HOS	2	6	그러므로 내가 가시로 그 길을 막으며 담을 쌓아 저로 그 길을 찾지 못하게 하리니	Therefore, behold, I will hedge up thy way with thorns, and make a wall, that she shall not find her paths.	Therefore, behold, I will hedge up her path with thorns; I will enclose her with a wall, so she cannot find her way.
HOS	2	7	저가 그 연애하는 자를 따라 갈지라도 미치지 못하며 저희를 찾을지라도 만나지 못할 것이라 그제야 저가 이르기를 내가 본 남편에게로 돌아가리니 그 때의 내 형편이 지금보다 나았음이라 하리라	And she shall follow after her lovers, but she shall not overtake them; and she shall seek them, but shall not find them: then shall she say, I will go and return to my first husband; for then was it better with me than now.	She will pursue her lovers but not catch them; she will seek them but not find them. Then she will say, ‘I will return to my first husband, for then I was better off than now.’
HOS	2	8	곡식과 새 포도주와 기름은 내가 저에게 준 것이요 저희가 바알을 위하여 쓴 은과 금도 내가 저에게 더하여 준 것이어늘 저가 알지 못하도다	For she did not know that I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, and multiplied her silver and gold, which they prepared for Baal.	For she does not acknowledge that it was I who gave her grain, new wine, and oil, who lavished on her silver and gold— which they crafted for Baal.
HOS	2	9	그러므로 그 시절에 내가 내 곡식을 도로 찾으며 그 시기에 내가 내 새 포도주를 도로 찾으며 또 저희 벌거벗은 몸을 가리울 내 양털과 내 삼을 빼앗으리라	Therefore will I return, and take away my corn in the time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof, and will recover my wool and my flax given to cover her nakedness.	Therefore I will take back My grain in its time and My new wine in its season; I will take away My wool and linen, which were given to cover her nakedness.
HOS	2	10	이제 내가 그 수치를 그 연애하는 자의 눈앞에 드러내리니 저를 내 손에서 건져낼 사람이 없으리라	And now will I discover her lewdness in the sight of her lovers, and none shall deliver her out of mine hand.	And then I will expose her lewdness in the sight of her lovers, and no one will deliver her out of My hands.
HOS	2	11	내가 그 모든 희락과 절기와 월삭과 안식일과 모든 명절을 폐하겠고	I will also cause all her mirth to cease, her feast days, her new moons, and her sabbaths, and all her solemn feasts.	I will put an end to all her exultation: her feasts, New Moons, and Sabbaths— all her appointed feasts.
HOS	2	12	저가 전에 이르기를 이것은 나를 연애하는 자들이 내게 준 값이라 하던 그 포도나무와 무화과나무를 거칠게 하여 수풀이 되게 하며 들짐승들로 먹게 하리라	And I will destroy her vines and her fig trees, whereof she hath said, These are my rewards that my lovers have given me: and I will make them a forest, and the beasts of the field shall eat them.	I will destroy her vines and fig trees, which she thinks are the wages paid by her lovers. So I will make them into a thicket, and the beasts of the field will devour them.
HOS	2	13	저가 귀고리와 패물로 장식하고 그 연애하는 자를 따라가서 나를 잊어버리고 향을 살라 바알들을 섬긴 시일을 따라 내가 저에게 벌을 주리라 나 여호와의 말이니라	And I will visit upon her the days of Baalim, wherein she burned incense to them, and she decked herself with her earrings and her jewels, and she went after her lovers, and forgat me, saith the Lord.	I will punish her for the days of the Baals when she burned incense to them, when she decked herself with rings and jewelry, and went after her lovers. But Me she forgot,” declares the LORD.
HOS	2	14	그러므로 내가 저를 개유하여 거친 들로 데리고 가서 말로 위로하고	Therefore, behold, I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her.	“Therefore, behold, I will allure her and lead her to the wilderness, and speak to her tenderly.
HOS	2	15	거기서 비로소 저의 포도원을 저에게 주고 아골 골짜기로 소망의 문을 삼아 주리니 저가 거기서 응대하기를 어렸을 때와 애굽 땅에서 올라오던 날과 같이 하리라	And I will give her her vineyards from thence, and the valley of Achor for a door of hope: and she shall sing there, as in the days of her youth, and as in the day when she came up out of the land of Egypt.	There I will give back her vineyards and make the Valley of Achor into a gateway of hope. There she will respond as she did in the days of her youth, as in the day she came up out of Egypt.
HOS	2	16	여호와께서 이르시되 그 날에 네가 나를 내 남편이라 일컫고 다시는 내 바알이라 일컫지 아니하리라	And it shall be at that day, saith the Lord, that thou shalt call me Ishi; and shalt call me no more Baali.	In that day,” declares the LORD, “you will call Me ‘my Husband,’ and no longer call Me ‘my Master.’
HOS	2	17	내가 바알들의 이름을 저의 입에서 제하여 다시는 그 이름을 기억하여 일컬음이 없게 하리라	For I will take away the names of Baalim out of her mouth, and they shall no more be remembered by their name.	For I will remove from her lips the names of the Baals; no longer will their names be invoked.
HOS	2	18	그 날에는 내가 저희를 위하여 들짐승과 공중의 새와 땅의 곤충으로 더불어 언약을 세우며 또 이 땅에서 활과 칼을 꺾어 전쟁을 없이 하고 저희로 평안히 눕게 하리라	And in that day will I make a covenant for them with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, and with the creeping things of the ground: and I will break the bow and the sword and the battle out of the earth, and will make them to lie down safely.	On that day I will make a covenant for them with the beasts of the field and the birds of the air and the creatures that crawl on the ground. And I will abolish bow and sword and weapons of war in the land, and will make them lie down in safety.
HOS	2	19	내가 네게 장가들어 영원히 살되 의와 공변됨과 은총과 긍휼히 여김으로 네게 장가들며	And I will betroth thee unto me for ever; yea, I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in lovingkindness, and in mercies.	So I will betroth you to Me forever; I will betroth you in righteousness and justice, in loving devotion and compassion.
HOS	2	20	진실함으로 네게 장가들리니 네가 여호와를 알리라	I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness: and thou shalt know the Lord.	And I will betroth you in faithfulness, and you will know the LORD.”
HOS	2	21	여호와께서 가라사대 그 날에 내가 응하리라 나는 하늘에 응하고 하늘은 땅에 응하고	And it shall come to pass in that day, I will hear, saith the Lord, I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth;	“On that day I will respond—” declares the LORD— “I will respond to the heavens, and they will respond to the earth.
HOS	2	22	땅은 곡식과 포도주와 기름에 응하고 또 이것들은 이스르엘에 응하리라	And the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil; and they shall hear Jezreel.	And the earth will respond to the grain, to the new wine and oil, and they will respond to Jezreel.
HOS	2	23	내가 나를 위하여 이 땅에 심고 긍휼히 여김을 받지 못하였던 자를 긍휼히 여기며 내 백성 아니었던 자에게 향하여 이르기를 너는 내 백성이라 하리니 저희는 이르기를 주는 내 하나님이시라 하리라	And I will sow her unto me in the earth; and I will have mercy upon her that had not obtained mercy; and I will say to them which were not my people, Thou art my people; and they shall say, Thou art my God.	And I will sow her as My own in the land, and I will have compassion on ‘No Compassion.’ I will say to those called ‘Not My People,’ ‘You are My people,’ and they will say, ‘You are my God.’”
HOS	3	1	여호와께서 내게 이르시되 이스라엘 자손이 다른 신을 섬기고 건포도 떡을 즐길지라도 여호와가 저희를 사랑하나니 너는 또 가서 타인에게 연애를 받아 음부된 그 여인을 사랑하라 하시기로	Then said the Lord unto me, Go yet, love a woman beloved of her friend, yet an adulteress, according to the love of the Lord toward the children of Israel, who look to other gods, and love flagons of wine.	Then the LORD said to me, “Go show love to your wife again, though she is loved by another and is an adulteress. Love her as the LORD loves the Israelites, though they turn to other gods and offer raisin cakes to idols.”
HOS	3	2	내가 은 열다섯 개와 보리 한 호멜 반으로 나를 위하여 저를 사고	So I bought her to me for fifteen pieces of silver, and for an homer of barley, and an half homer of barley:	So I bought her for fifteen shekels of silver and a homer and a lethech of barley.
HOS	3	3	저에게 이르기를 너는 많은 날 동안 나와 함께 지내고 행음하지 말며 다른 남자를 좇지 말라 나도 네게 그리하리라 하였노라	And I said unto her, Thou shalt abide for me many days; thou shalt not play the harlot, and thou shalt not be for another man: so will I also be for thee.	Then I said to her, “You must live with me for many days; you must not be promiscuous or belong to another, and I will do the same for you.”
HOS	3	4	이스라엘 자손들이 많은 날 동안 왕도 없고 군도 없고 제사도 없고 주상도 없고 에봇도 없고 드라빔도 없이 지내다가	For the children of Israel shall abide many days without a king, and without a prince, and without a sacrifice, and without an image, and without an ephod, and without teraphim:	For the Israelites must live many days without king or prince, without sacrifice or sacred pillar, and without ephod or idol.
HOS	3	5	그 후에 저희가 돌아와서 그 하나님 여호와와 그 왕 다윗을 구하고 말일에는 경외하므로 여호와께로 와 그 은총으로 나아가리라	Afterward shall the children of Israel return, and seek the Lord their God, and David their king; and shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter days.	Afterward, the people of Israel will return and seek the LORD their God and David their king. They will come trembling to the LORD and to His goodness in the last days.
HOS	4	1	이스라엘 자손들아 여호와의 말씀을 들으라 여호와께서 이 땅 거민과 쟁변하시나니 이 땅에는 진실도 없고 인애도 없고 하나님을 아는 지식도 없고	Hear the word of the Lord, ye children of Israel: for the Lord hath a controversy with the inhabitants of the land, because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land.	Hear the word of the LORD, O children of Israel, for the LORD has a case against the people of the land: “There is no truth, no loving devotion, and no knowledge of God in the land!
HOS	4	2	오직 저주와 사위와 살인과 투절과 간음뿐이요 강포하여 피가 피를 뒤대임이라	By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery, they break out, and blood toucheth blood.	Cursing and lying, murder and stealing, and adultery are rampant; one act of bloodshed follows another.
HOS	4	3	그러므로 이 땅이 슬퍼하며 무릇 거기 거하는 자와 들짐승과 공중에 나는 새가 다 쇠잔할 것이요 바다의 고기도 없어지리라	Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one that dwelleth therein shall languish, with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven; yea, the fishes of the sea also shall be taken away.	Therefore the land mourns, and all who dwell in it will waste away with the beasts of the field and the birds of the air; even the fish of the sea disappear.
HOS	4	4	그러나 아무 사람이든지 다투지도 말며 책망하지도 말라 네 백성들이 제사장과 다투는 자 같이 되었음이니라	Yet let no man strive, nor reprove another: for thy people are as they that strive with the priest.	But let no man contend; let no man offer reproof; for your people are like those who contend with a priest.
HOS	4	5	너는 낮에 거치겠고 너와 함께 있는 선지자는 밤에 거치리라 내가 네 어미를 멸하리라	Therefore shalt thou fall in the day, and the prophet also shall fall with thee in the night, and I will destroy thy mother.	You will stumble by day, and the prophet will stumble with you by night; so I will destroy your mother—
HOS	4	6	내 백성이 지식이 없으므로 망하는도다 네가 지식을 버렸으니 나도 너를 버려 내 제사장이 되지 못하게 할 것이요 네가 네 하나님의 율법을 잊었으니 나도 네 자녀들을 잊어버리리라	My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: because thou hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shalt be no priest to me: seeing thou hast forgotten the law of thy God, I will also forget thy children.	My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge. Because you have rejected knowledge, I will also reject you as My priests. Since you have forgotten the law of your God, I will also forget your children.
HOS	4	7	저희는 번성할수록 내게 범죄하니 내가 저희의 영화를 변하여 욕이 되게 하리라	As they were increased, so they sinned against me: therefore will I change their glory into shame.	The more they multiplied, the more they sinned against Me; they exchanged their Glory for a thing of disgrace.
HOS	4	8	저희가 내 백성의 속죄 제물을 먹고 그 마음을 저희의 죄악에 두는도다	They eat up the sin of my people, and they set their heart on their iniquity.	They feed on the sins of My people and set their hearts on iniquity.
HOS	4	9	장차는 백성이나 제사장이나 일반이라 내가 그 소행대로 벌하며 그 소위대로 갚으리라	And there shall be, like people, like priest: and I will punish them for their ways, and reward them their doings.	And it shall be like people, like priest. I will punish both of them for their ways and repay them for their deeds.
HOS	4	10	저희가 먹어도 배부르지 아니하며 행음하여도 수효가 더하지 못하니 이는 여호와 좇기를 그쳤음이니라	For they shall eat, and not have enough: they shall commit whoredom, and shall not increase: because they have left off to take heed to the Lord.	They will eat but not be satisfied; they will be promiscuous but not multiply. For they have stopped obeying the LORD.
HOS	4	11	음행과 묵은 포도주와 새 포도주가 마음을 빼앗느니라	Whoredom and wine and new wine take away the heart.	Promiscuity, wine, and new wine take away understanding.
HOS	4	12	내 백성이 나무를 향하여 묻고 그 막대기는 저희에게 고하나니 이는 저희가 음란한 마음에 미혹되어 그 하나님의 수하를 음란하듯 떠났음이니라	My people ask counsel at their stocks, and their staff declareth unto them: for the spirit of whoredoms hath caused them to err, and they have gone a whoring from under their God.	My people consult their wooden idols, and their divining rods inform them. For a spirit of prostitution leads them astray and they have played the harlot against their God.
HOS	4	13	저희가 산 꼭대기에서 제사를 드리며 작은 산 위에서 분향하되 참나무와 버드나무와 상수리나무 아래서 하니 이는 그 나무 그늘이 아름다움이라 이러므로 너희 딸들이 행음하며 너희 며느리들이 간음을 행하는도다	They sacrifice upon the tops of the mountains, and burn incense upon the hills, under oaks and poplars and elms, because the shadow thereof is good: therefore your daughters shall commit whoredom, and your spouses shall commit adultery.	They sacrifice on the mountaintops and burn offerings on the hills, under oak, poplar, and terebinth, because their shade is pleasant. And so your daughters turn to prostitution and your daughters-in-law to adultery.
HOS	4	14	너희 딸들이 행음하며 너희 며느리들이 간음하여도 내가 벌하지 아니하리니 이는 남자들도 창기와 함께 나가며 음부와 함께 희생을 드림이니라 깨닫지 못하는 백성은 패망하리라	I will not punish your daughters when they commit whoredom, nor your spouses when they commit adultery: for themselves are separated with whores, and they sacrifice with harlots: therefore the people that doth not understand shall fall.	I will not punish your daughters when they prostitute themselves, nor your daughters-in-law when they commit adultery. For the men themselves go off with prostitutes and offer sacrifices with shrine prostitutes. So a people without understanding will come to ruin.
HOS	4	15	이스라엘아 너는 행음하여도 유다는 죄를 범치 말아야 할 것이라 너희는 길갈로 가지 말며 벧아웬으로 올라가지 말며 여호와의 사심을 가리켜 맹세하지 말지어다	Though thou, Israel, play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend; and come not ye unto Gilgal, neither go ye up to Beth–aven, nor swear, The Lord liveth.	Though you prostitute yourself, O Israel, may Judah avoid such guilt! Do not journey to Gilgal, do not go up to Beth-aven, and do not swear on oath, ‘As surely as the LORD lives!’
HOS	4	16	이스라엘은 완강한 암소처럼 완강하니 이제 여호와께서 어린 양을 넓은 들에서 먹임 같이 저희를 먹이시겠느냐	For Israel slideth back as a backsliding heifer: now the Lord will feed them as a lamb in a large place.	For Israel is as obstinate as a stubborn heifer. Can the LORD now shepherd them like lambs in an open meadow?
HOS	4	17	에브라임이 우상과 연합하였으니 버려두라	Ephraim is joined to idols: let him alone.	Ephraim is joined to idols; leave him alone!
HOS	4	18	저희가 마시기를 다 하고는 행음하기를 마지 아니하며 그 방백들은 수치를 기뻐하느니라	Their drink is sour: they have committed whoredom continually: her rulers with shame do love, Give ye.	When their liquor is gone, they turn to prostitution; their rulers dearly love disgrace.
HOS	4	19	바람이 그 날개로 저를 쌌나니 저희가 그 제물로 인하여 수치를 당하리라	The wind hath bound her up in her wings, and they shall be ashamed because of their sacrifices.	The whirlwind has wrapped them in its wings, and their sacrifices will bring them shame.
HOS	5	1	제사장들아 이를 들으라 이스라엘 족속들아 깨달으라 왕족들아 귀를 기울이라 너희에게 심판이 있나니 너희가 미스바에서 올무가 되며 다볼 위에서 친 그물이 됨이라	Hear ye this, O priests; and hearken, ye house of Israel; and give ye ear, O house of the king; for judgment is toward you, because ye have been a snare on Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor.	“Hear this, O priests! Take heed, O house of Israel! Give ear, O royal house! For this judgment is against you because you have been a snare at Mizpah, a net spread out on Tabor.
HOS	5	2	패역자가 살륙죄에 깊이 빠졌으매 내가 저희를 다 징책하노라	And the revolters are profound to make slaughter, though I have been a rebuker of them all.	The rebels are deep in slaughter; but I will chastise them all.
HOS	5	3	에브라임은 내가 알고 이스라엘은 내게 숨기지 못하나니 에브라임아 이제 네가 행음하였고 이스라엘이 이미 더러웠느니라	I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from me: for now, O Ephraim, thou committest whoredom, and Israel is defiled.	I know all about Ephraim, and Israel is not hidden from Me. For now, O Ephraim, you have turned to prostitution; Israel is defiled.
HOS	5	4	저희의 행위가 저희로 자기 하나님에게 돌아가지 못하게 하나니 이는 음란한 마음이 그 속에 있어 여호와를 알지 못하는 까닭이라	They will not frame their doings to turn unto their God: for the spirit of whoredoms is in the midst of them, and they have not known the Lord.	Their deeds do not permit them to return to their God, for a spirit of prostitution is within them, and they do not know the LORD.
HOS	5	5	이스라엘의 교만이 그 얼굴에 증거가 되나니 그 죄악을 인하여 이스라엘과 에브라임이 넘어지고 유다도 저희와 한가지로 넘어지리라	And the pride of Israel doth testify to his face: therefore shall Israel and Ephraim fall in their iniquity; Judah also shall fall with them.	Israel’s arrogance testifies against them; Israel and Ephraim stumble in their iniquity; even Judah stumbles with them.
HOS	5	6	저희가 양떼와 소떼를 끌고 여호와를 찾으러 갈지라도 만나지 못할 것은 이미 저희에게서 떠나셨음이라	They shall go with their flocks and with their herds to seek the Lord; but they shall not find him; he hath withdrawn himself from them.	They go with their flocks and herds to seek the LORD, but they do not find Him; He has withdrawn Himself from them.
HOS	5	7	저희가 여호와께 정조를 지키지 아니하고 사생자를 낳았으니 그러므로 새 달이 저희와 그 기업을 함께 삼키리로다	They have dealt treacherously against the Lord: for they have begotten strange children: now shall a month devour them with their portions.	They have been unfaithful to the LORD; for they have borne illegitimate children. Now the New Moon will devour them along with their land.
HOS	5	8	너희가 기브아에서 나팔을 불며 라마에서 호각을 불며 벧아웬에서 깨우쳐 소리하기를 베냐민아 네 뒤를 쫓는다 할지어다	Blow ye the cornet in Gibeah, and the trumpet in Ramah: cry aloud at Beth–aven, after thee, O Benjamin.	Blow the ram’s horn in Gibeah, the trumpet in Ramah; raise the battle cry in Beth-aven: Lead on, O Benjamin!
HOS	5	9	견책하는 날에 에브라임이 황무할 것이라 내가 이스라엘 지파 중에 필연 있을 일을 보였노라	Ephraim shall be desolate in the day of rebuke: among the tribes of Israel have I made known that which shall surely be.	Ephraim will be laid waste on the day of rebuke. Among the tribes of Israel I proclaim what is certain.
HOS	5	10	유다 방백들은 지계표를 옮기는 자 같으니 내가 나의 진노를 저희에게 물 같이 부으리라	The princes of Judah were like them that remove the bound: therefore I will pour out my wrath upon them like water.	The princes of Judah are like those who move boundary stones; I will pour out My fury upon them like water.
HOS	5	11	에브라임은 사람의 명령 좇기를 좋아하므로 학대를 받고 재판의 압제를 당하는도다	Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgment, because he willingly walked after the commandment.	Ephraim is oppressed, crushed in judgment, for he is determined to follow worthless idols.
HOS	5	12	그러므로 내가 에브라임에게는 좀 같으며 유다 족속에게는 썩이는 것 같도다	Therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a moth, and to the house of Judah as rottenness.	So I am like a moth to Ephraim, and like decay to the house of Judah.
HOS	5	13	에브라임이 자기의 병을 깨달으며 유다가 자기의 상처를 깨달았고 에브라임은 앗수르로 가서 야렙 왕에게 사람을 보내었으나 저가 능히 너희를 고치지 못하겠고 너희 상처를 낫게 하지 못하리라	When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah saw his wound, then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to king Jareb: yet could he not heal you, nor cure you of your wound.	When Ephraim saw his sickness and Judah his wound, then Ephraim turned to Assyria and sent to the great king. But he cannot cure you or heal your wound.
HOS	5	14	내가 에브라임에게는 사자 같고 유다 족속에게는 젊은 사자 같으니 나 곧 내가 움켜갈지라 내가 탈취하여 갈지라도 건져낼 자가 없으리라	For I will be unto Ephraim as a lion, and as a young lion to the house of Judah: I, even I, will tear and go away; I will take away, and none shall rescue him.	For I am like a lion to Ephraim and like a young lion to the house of Judah. I, even I, will tear them to pieces and then go away. I will carry them off where no one can rescue them.
HOS	5	15	내가 내 곳으로 돌아가서 저희가 그 죄를 뉘우치고 내 얼굴을 구하기까지 기다리리라 저희가 고난을 받을 때에 나를 간절히 구하여 이르기를	I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their offence, and seek my face: in their affliction they will seek me early.	Then I will return to My place until they admit their guilt and seek My face; in their affliction they will earnestly seek Me.”
HOS	6	1	오라 우리가 여호와께로 돌아가자 여호와께서 우리를 찢으셨으나 도로 낫게 하실 것이요 우리를 치셨으나 싸매어 주실 것임이라	Come, and let us return unto the Lord: for he hath torn, and he will heal us; he hath smitten, and he will bind us up.	Come, let us return to the LORD. For He has torn us to pieces, but He will heal us; He has wounded us, but He will bind up our wounds.
HOS	6	2	여호와께서 이틀 후에 우리를 살리시며 제삼일에 우리를 일으키시리니 우리가 그 앞에서 살리라	After two days will he revive us: in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight.	After two days He will revive us; on the third day He will raise us up, that we may live in His presence.
HOS	6	3	그러므로 우리가 여호와를 알자 힘써 여호와를 알자 그의 나오심은 새벽 빛 같이 일정하니 비와 같이, 땅을 적시는 늦은 비와 같이 우리에게 임하시리라 하리라	Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord: his going forth is prepared as the morning; and he shall come unto us as the rain, as the latter and former rain unto the earth.	So let us know— let us press on to know the LORD. As surely as the sun rises, He will appear; He will come to us like the rain, like the spring showers that water the earth.
HOS	6	4	에브라임아 내가 네게 어떻게 하랴 유다야 내가 네게 어떻게 하랴 너희의 인애가 아침 구름이나 쉬 없어지는 이슬 같도다	O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do unto thee? for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goeth away.	What shall I do with you, O Ephraim? What shall I do with you, O Judah? For your loyalty is like a morning mist, like the early dew that vanishes.
HOS	6	5	그러므로 내가 선지자들로 저희를 치고 내 입의 말로 저희를 죽였노니 내 심판은 발하는 빛과 같으니라	Therefore have I hewed them by the prophets; I have slain them by the words of my mouth: and thy judgments are as the light that goeth forth.	Therefore I have hewn them by the prophets; I have slain them by the words of My mouth, and My judgments go forth like lightning.
HOS	6	6	나는 인애를 원하고 제사를 원치 아니하며 번제보다 하나님을 아는 것을 원하노라	For I desired mercy, and not sacrifice; and the knowledge of God more than burnt offerings.	For I desire mercy, not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God rather than burnt offerings.
HOS	6	7	저희는 아담처럼 언약을 어기고 거기서 내게 패역을 행하였느니라	But they like men have transgressed the covenant: there have they dealt treacherously against me.	But they, like Adam, have transgressed the covenant; there they were unfaithful to Me.
HOS	6	8	길르앗은 행악자의 고을이라 피 발자취가 편만하도다	Gilead is a city of them that work iniquity, and is polluted with blood.	Gilead is a city of evildoers, tracked with footprints of blood.
HOS	6	9	강도 떼가 사람을 기다림 같이 제사장의 무리가 세겜 길에서 살인하니 저희가 사악을 행하였느니라	And as troops of robbers wait for a man, so the company of priests murder in the way by consent: for they commit lewdness.	Like raiders who lie in ambush, so does a band of priests; they murder on the way to Shechem; surely they have committed atrocities.
HOS	6	10	내가 이스라엘 집에서 가증한 일을 보았나니 거기서 에브라임은 행음하였고 이스라엘은 더럽혔느니라	I have seen an horrible thing in the house of Israel: there is the whoredom of Ephraim, Israel is defiled.	In the house of Israel I have seen a horrible thing: Ephraim practices prostitution there, and Israel is defiled.
HOS	6	11	유다여 내가 내 백성의 사로잡힘을 돌이킬 때에 네게도 추수할 일을 정하였느니라	Also, O Judah, he hath set an harvest for thee, when I returned the captivity of my people.	Also for you, O Judah, a harvest is appointed, when I restore My people from captivity.
HOS	7	1	내가 이스라엘을 치료하려 할 때에 에브라임의 죄와 사마리아의 악이 드러나도다 저희는 궤사를 행하며 안으로 들어가 도적질하고 밖으로 떼 지어 노략질하며	When I would have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, and the wickedness of Samaria: for they commit falsehood; and the thief cometh in, and the troop of robbers spoileth without.	When I heal Israel, the iniquity of Ephraim will be exposed, as well as the crimes of Samaria. For they practice deceit and thieves break in; bandits raid in the streets.
HOS	7	2	내가 그 여러 악을 기억하였음을 저희가 마음에 생각지 아니하거니와 이제 그 행위가 저희를 에워싸고 내 목전에 있도다	And they consider not in their hearts that I remember all their wickedness: now their own doings have beset them about; they are before my face.	But they fail to consider in their hearts that I remember all their evil. Now their deeds are all around them; they are before My face.
HOS	7	3	저희가 그 악으로 왕을, 그 거짓말로 방백들을 기쁘게 하도다	They make the king glad with their wickedness, and the princes with their lies.	They delight the king with their evil, and the princes with their lies.
HOS	7	4	저희는 다 간음하는 자라 빵 만드는 자에게 달궈진 화덕과 같도다 저가 반죽을 뭉침으로 발교되기까지만 불 일으키기를 그칠 뿐이니라	They are all adulterers, as an oven heated by the baker, who ceaseth from raising after he hath kneaded the dough, until it be leavened.	They are all adulterers, like an oven heated by a baker who needs not stoke the fire from the kneading to the rising of the dough.
HOS	7	5	우리 왕의 날에 방백들이 술의 뜨거움을 인하여 병이 나며 왕은 오만한 자들로 더불어 악수하는도다	In the day of our king the princes have made him sick with bottles of wine; he stretched out his hand with scorners.	The princes are inflamed with wine on the day of our king; so he joins hands with those who mock him.
HOS	7	6	저희는 엎드리어 기다릴 때에 그 마음을 화덕 같이 예비하니 마치 빵 만드는 자가 밤새도록 자고 아침에 피우는 불의 일어나는 것 같도다	For they have made ready their heart like an oven, whiles they lie in wait: their baker sleepeth all the night; in the morning it burneth as a flaming fire.	For they prepare their heart like an oven while they lie in wait; all night their anger smolders; in the morning it blazes like a flaming fire.
HOS	7	7	저희가 다 화덕 같이 뜨거워져서 그 재판장들을 삼키며 그 왕들을 다 엎드러지게 하며 저희 중에는 내게 부르짖는 자가 하나도 없도다	They are all hot as an oven, and have devoured their judges; all their kings are fallen: there is none among them that calleth unto me.	All of them are hot as an oven, and they devour their rulers. All their kings fall; not one of them calls upon Me.
HOS	7	8	에브라임이 열방에 혼잡되니 저는 곧 뒤집지 않은 전병이로다	Ephraim, he hath mixed himself among the people; Ephraim is a cake not turned.	Ephraim mixes with the nations; Ephraim is an unturned cake.
HOS	7	9	저는 이방인에게 그 힘이 삼키웠으나 알지 못하고 백발이 얼룩얼룩 할지라도 깨닫지 못하는도다	Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knoweth it not: yea, gray hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knoweth not.	Foreigners consume his strength, but he does not notice. Even his hair is streaked with gray, but he does not know.
HOS	7	10	이스라엘의 교만은 그 얼굴에 증거가 되나니 저희가 이 모든 일을 당하여도 그 하나님 여호와께로 돌아오지 아니하며 구하지 아니하도다	And the pride of Israel testifieth to his face: and they do not return to the Lord their God, nor seek him for all this.	Israel’s arrogance testifies against them, yet they do not return to the LORD their God; despite all this, they do not seek Him.
HOS	7	11	에브라임은 어리석은 비둘기 같이 지혜가 없어서 애굽을 향하여 부르짖으며 앗수르로 가는도다	Ephraim also is like a silly dove without heart: they call to Egypt, they go to Assyria.	So Ephraim has become like a silly, senseless dove— calling out to Egypt, then turning to Assyria.
HOS	7	12	저희가 갈 때에 내가 나의 그물을 그 위에 쳐서 공중의 새처럼 떨어뜨리고 전에 그 공회에 들려준 대로 저희를 징계하리라	When they shall go, I will spread my net upon them; I will bring them down as the fowls of the heaven; I will chastise them, as their congregation hath heard.	As they go, I will spread My net over them; I will bring them down like birds of the air. I will chastise them when I hear them flocking together.
HOS	7	13	화 있을진저 저희가 나를 떠나 그릇 갔음이니라 패망할진저 저희가 내게 범죄하였음이니라 내가 저희를 구속하려 하나 저희가 나를 거스려 거짓을 말하고	Woe unto them! for they have fled from me: destruction unto them! because they have transgressed against me: though I have redeemed them, yet they have spoken lies against me.	Woe to them, for they have strayed from Me! Destruction to them, for they have rebelled against Me! Though I would redeem them, they speak lies against Me.
HOS	7	14	성심으로 나를 부르지 아니하였으며 오직 침상에서 슬피 부르짖으며 곡식과 새 포도주를 인하여 모이며 나를 거역하는도다	And they have not cried unto me with their heart, when they howled upon their beds: they assemble themselves for corn and wine, and they rebel against me.	They do not cry out to Me from their hearts when they wail upon their beds. They slash themselves for grain and new wine, but turn away from Me.
HOS	7	15	내가 저희 팔을 연습시켜 강건케 하였으나 저희는 내게 대하여 악을 꾀하는도다	Though I have bound and strengthened their arms, yet do they imagine mischief against me.	Although I trained and strengthened their arms, they plot evil against Me.
HOS	7	16	저희가 돌아오나 높으신 자에게로 돌아오지 아니하니 속이는 활과 같으며 그 방백들은 그 혀의 거친 말로 인하여 칼에 엎드러지리니 이것이 애굽 땅에서 조롱거리가 되리라	They return, but not to the most High: they are like a deceitful bow: their princes shall fall by the sword for the rage of their tongue: this shall be their derision in the land of Egypt.	They turn, but not to the Most High; they are like a faulty bow. Their leaders will fall by the sword for the cursing of their tongue; for this they will be ridiculed in the land of Egypt.
HOS	8	1	나팔을 네 입에 댈지어다 대적이 독수리처럼 여호와의 집에 덮치리니 이는 무리가 내 언약을 어기며 내 율법을 범함이로다	Set the trumpet to thy mouth. He shall come as an eagle against the house of the Lord, because they have transgressed my covenant, and trespassed against my law.	Put the ram’s horn to your lips! An eagle looms over the house of the LORD, because the people have transgressed My covenant and rebelled against My law.
HOS	8	2	저희가 장차 내게 부르짖기를 나의 하나님이여 우리 이스라엘이 주를 아나이다 하리라	Israel shall cry unto me, My God, we know thee.	Israel cries out to Me, “O our God, we know You!”
HOS	8	3	이스라엘이 이미 선을 싫어 버렸으니 대적이 저를 따를 것이라	Israel hath cast off the thing that is good: the enemy shall pursue him.	But Israel has rejected good; an enemy will pursue him.
HOS	8	4	저희가 왕들을 세웠으나 내게서 말미암지 아니하였고 저희가 방백들을 세웠으나 나의 모르는 바며 저희가 또 그 은, 금으로 자기를 위하여 우상을 만들었나니 파멸을 이루리라	They have set up kings, but not by me: they have made princes, and I knew it not: of their silver and their gold have they made them idols, that they may be cut off.	They set up kings, but not by Me. They make princes, but without My approval. With their silver and gold they make themselves idols, to their own destruction.
HOS	8	5	사마리아여 네 송아지는 버리웠느니라 내 노가 무리를 향하여 타오르나니 저희가 어느 때에야 능히 무죄하겠느냐	Thy calf, O Samaria, hath cast thee off; mine anger is kindled against them: how long will it be ere they attain to innocency?	He has rejected your calf, O Samaria. My anger burns against them. How long will they be incapable of innocence?
HOS	8	6	이것은 이스라엘에서 나고 공장이 만든 것이라 참 신이 아니니 사마리아의 송아지가 부숴뜨리우리라	For from Israel was it also: the workman made it; therefore it is not God: but the calf of Samaria shall be broken in pieces.	For this thing is from Israel— a craftsman made it, and it is not God. It will be broken to pieces, that calf of Samaria.
HOS	8	7	저희가 바람을 심고 광풍을 거둘 것이라 심은 것이 줄기가 없으며 이삭은 열매를 맺히지 못할 것이요 설혹 맺힐지라도 이방 사람이 삼키리라	For they have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind: it hath no stalk: the bud shall yield no meal: if so be it yield, the strangers shall swallow it up.	For they sow the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind. There is no standing grain; what sprouts fails to yield flour. Even if it should produce, the foreigners would swallow it up.
HOS	8	8	이스라엘은 이미 삼키웠은즉 이제 열국 가운데 있는 것이 기뻐하지 아니하는 그릇 같도다	Israel is swallowed up: now shall they be among the Gentiles as a vessel wherein is no pleasure.	Israel is swallowed up! Now they are among the nations like a worthless vessel.
HOS	8	9	저희가 홀로 처한 들나귀처럼 앗수르로 갔고 에브라임이 값 주고 연애하는 자들을 얻었도다	For they are gone up to Assyria, a wild ass alone by himself: Ephraim hath hired lovers.	For they have gone up to Assyria like a wild donkey on its own. Ephraim has hired lovers.
HOS	8	10	저희가 열방 사람에게 값을 주었을지라도 이제 내가 저희를 모으리니 저희가 모든 방백의 임금의 지워준 짐을 인하여 쇠하기 시작하리라	Yea, though they have hired among the nations, now will I gather them, and they shall sorrow a little for the burden of the king of princes.	Though they hire allies among the nations, I will now round them up, and they will begin to diminish under the oppression of the king of princes.
HOS	8	11	에브라임이 죄를 위하여 제단을 많이 만들더니 그 제단이 저로 범죄케 하는 것이 되었도다	Because Ephraim hath made many altars to sin, altars shall be unto him to sin.	Though Ephraim multiplied the altars for sin, they became his altars for sinning.
HOS	8	12	내가 저를 위하여 내 율법을 만가지로 기록하였으나 저희가 관계없는 것으로 여기도다	I have written to him the great things of my law, but they were counted as a strange thing.	Though I wrote for them the great things of My law, they regarded them as something strange.
HOS	8	13	내게 드리는 제물로 말할지라도 저희가 고기로 제사를 드리고 먹거니와 여호와는 그것을 기뻐하지 아니하고 이제 저희의 죄악을 기억하여 그 죄를 벌하리니 저희가 애굽으로 다시 가리라	They sacrifice flesh for the sacrifices of mine offerings, and eat it; but the Lord accepteth them not; now will he remember their iniquity, and visit their sins: they shall return to Egypt.	Though they offer sacrifices as gifts to Me, and though they eat the meat, the LORD does not accept them. Now He will remember their iniquity and punish their sins: They will return to Egypt.
HOS	8	14	이스라엘은 자기를 지은 자를 잊어버리고 전각들을 세웠으며 유다는 견고한 성읍을 많이 쌓았으나 내가 그 고을들에 불을 보내어 그 성들을 삼키게 하리라	For Israel hath forgotten his Maker, and buildeth temples; and Judah hath multiplied fenced cities: but I will send a fire upon his cities, and it shall devour the palaces thereof.	Israel has forgotten his Maker and built palaces; Judah has multiplied its fortified cities. But I will send fire upon their cities, and it will consume their citadels.
HOS	9	1	이스라엘아 너는 이방 사람처럼 기뻐 뛰놀지 말라 네가 행음하여 네 하나님을 떠나고 각 타작 마당에서 음행의 값을 좋아하였느니라	Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy, as other people: for thou hast gone a whoring from thy God, thou hast loved a reward upon every cornfloor.	Do not rejoice, O Israel, with exultation like the nations, for you have played the harlot against your God; you have made love for hire on every threshing floor.
HOS	9	2	타작 마당이나 술 틀이 저희를 기르지 못할 것이며 새 포도주도 떨어질 것이요	The floor and the winepress shall not feed them, and the new wine shall fail in her.	The threshing floor and winepress will not feed them, and the new wine will fail them.
HOS	9	3	저희가 여호와의 땅에 거하지 못하며 에브라임이 애굽으로 다시 가고 앗수르에서 더러운 것을 먹을 것이니라	They shall not dwell in the Lord’s land; but Ephraim shall return to Egypt, and they shall eat unclean things in Assyria.	They will not remain in the land of the LORD; Ephraim will return to Egypt and eat unclean food in Assyria.
HOS	9	4	저희가 여호와께 전제를 드리지 못하여 여호와의 기뻐하시는 바도 되지 못할 것이라 저희의 제물은 거상 입은 자의 식물과 같아서 무릇 그것을 먹는 자는 더러워지나니 저희의 식물은 자기 먹기에만 소용될 뿐이라 여호와의 집에 드릴 것이 아님이니라	They shall not offer wine offerings to the Lord, neither shall they be pleasing unto him: their sacrifices shall be unto them as the bread of mourners; all that eat thereof shall be polluted: for their bread for their soul shall not come into the house of the Lord.	They will not pour out wine offerings to the LORD, and their sacrifices will not please Him, but will be to them like the bread of mourners; all who eat will be defiled. For their bread will be for themselves; it will not enter the house of the LORD.
HOS	9	5	너희가 명절일과 여호와의 절일에 무엇을 하겠느냐	What will ye do in the solemn day, and in the day of the feast of the Lord?	What will you do on the appointed day, on the day of the LORD’s feast?
HOS	9	6	보라 저희가 멸망을 피하여 갈지라도 애굽은 저희를 모으고 놉은 저희를 장사하리니 저희의 은 보물은 찔레가 덮을 것이요 저희의 장막 안에는 가시 덩굴이 퍼지리라	For, lo, they are gone because of destruction: Egypt shall gather them up, Memphis shall bury them: the pleasant places for their silver, nettles shall possess them: thorns shall be in their tabernacles.	For even if they flee destruction, Egypt will gather them and Memphis will bury them. Their precious silver will be taken over by thistles, and thorns will overrun their tents.
HOS	9	7	형벌의 날이 이르렀고 보응의 날이 임한 것을 이스라엘이 알지라 선지자가 어리석었고 신에 감동하는 자가 미쳤나니 이는 네 죄악이 많고 네 원한이 큼이니라	The days of visitation are come, the days of recompence are come; Israel shall know it: the prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is mad, for the multitude of thine iniquity, and the great hatred.	The days of punishment have come; the days of retribution have arrived— let Israel know it. The prophet is called a fool, and the inspired man insane, because of the greatness of your iniquity and hostility.
HOS	9	8	에브라임은 내 하나님의 파수꾼이어늘 선지자는 그 모든 행위에 새 잡는 자의 그물 같고 또 그 하나님의 전에서 원한을 품었도다	The watchman of Ephraim was with my God: but the prophet is a snare of a fowler in all his ways, and hatred in the house of his God.	The prophet is Ephraim’s watchman, along with my God, yet the snare of the fowler lies on all his paths. Hostility is in the house of his God!
HOS	9	9	저희는 기브아의 시대와 같이 심히 패괴한지라 여호와께서 그 악을 기억하시고 그 죄를 벌하시리라	They have deeply corrupted themselves, as in the days of Gibeah: therefore he will remember their iniquity, he will visit their sins.	They have deeply corrupted themselves as in the days of Gibeah; He will remember their guilt; He will punish their sins.
HOS	9	10	옛적에 내가 이스라엘 만나기를 광야에서 포도를 만남 같이 하였으며 너희 열조 보기를 무화과나무에서 처음 맺힌 첫 열매를 봄 같이 하였거늘 저희가 바알브올에 가서 부끄러운 우상에게 몸을 드림으로 저희의 사랑하는 우상 같이 가증하여졌도다	I found Israel like grapes in the wilderness; I saw your fathers as the firstripe in the fig tree at her first time: but they went to Baal–peor, and separated themselves unto that shame; and their abominations were according as they loved.	I found Israel like grapes in the wilderness. I saw your fathers as the firstfruits of the fig tree in its first season. But they went to Baal-peor, and consecrated themselves to Shame; so they became as detestable as the thing they loved.
HOS	9	11	에브라임의 영광이 새 같이 날아가리니 해산함이나 아이 뱀이나 잉태함이 없으리라	As for Ephraim, their glory shall fly away like a bird, from the birth, and from the womb, and from the conception.	Ephraim’s glory will fly away like a bird, with no birth, no pregnancy, and no conception.
HOS	9	12	혹 저희가 자식을 기를지라도 내가 그 자식을 없이 하여 한 사람도 남기지 아니할 것이라 내가 저희를 떠나는 때에는 저희에게 화가 미치리로다	Though they bring up their children, yet will I bereave them, that there shall not be a man left: yea, woe also to them when I depart from them!	Even if they raise their children, I will bereave them of each one. Yes, woe be to them when I turn away from them!
HOS	9	13	내가 보건대 에브라임은 아름다운 곳에 심긴 두로와 같으나 그 자식들을 살인하는 자에게로 끌어내리로다	Ephraim, as I saw Tyrus, is planted in a pleasant place: but Ephraim shall bring forth his children to the murderer.	I have seen Ephraim, like Tyre, planted in a meadow. But Ephraim will bring out his children for slaughter.
HOS	9	14	여호와여 저희에게 주소서 무엇을 주시려나이까 청컨대 배지 못하는 태와 젖 없는 유방을 주시옵소서	Give them, O Lord: what wilt thou give? give them a miscarrying womb and dry breasts.	Give them, O LORD— what will You give? Give them wombs that miscarry and breasts that dry up!
HOS	9	15	저희의 모든 악이 길갈에 있으므로 내가 거기서 저희를 미워하였노라 그 행위가 악하므로 내 집에서 쫓아내고 다시는 사랑하지 아니하리라 그 방백들은 다 패역한 자니라	All their wickedness is in Gilgal: for there I hated them: for the wickedness of their doings I will drive them out of mine house, I will love them no more: all their princes are revolters.	All their evil appears at Gilgal, for there I hated them. I will drive them from My house for the wickedness of their deeds. I will no longer love them; all their leaders are rebellious.
HOS	9	16	에브라임이 침을 입고 그 뿌리가 말라 과실을 맺지 못하나니 비록 아이를 낳을지라도 내가 그 사랑하는 태의 열매를 죽이리라	Ephraim is smitten, their root is dried up, they shall bear no fruit: yea, though they bring forth, yet will I slay even the beloved fruit of their womb.	Ephraim is struck down; their root is withered; they cannot bear fruit. Even if they bear children, I will slay the darlings of their wombs.
HOS	9	17	저희가 듣지 아니하므로 내 하나님이 저희를 버리시리니 저희가 열국 가운데 유리하는 자가 되리라	My God will cast them away, because they did not hearken unto him: and they shall be wanderers among the nations.	My God will reject them because they have not obeyed Him; and they shall be wanderers among the nations.
HOS	10	1	이스라엘은 열매 맺는 무성한 포도나무라 그 열매가 많을수록 제단을 많게 하며 그 땅이 아름다울수록 주상을 아름답게 하도다	Israel is an empty vine, he bringeth forth fruit unto himself: according to the multitude of his fruit he hath increased the altars; according to the goodness of his land they have made goodly images.	Israel was a luxuriant vine, yielding fruit for himself. The more his fruit increased, the more he increased the altars. The better his land produced, the better he made the sacred pillars.
HOS	10	2	저희가 두 마음을 품었으니 이제 죄를 받을 것이라 하나님이 그 제단을 쳐서 깨치시며 그 주상을 헐으시리라	Their heart is divided; now shall they be found faulty: he shall break down their altars, he shall spoil their images.	Their hearts are devious; now they must bear their guilt. The LORD will break down their altars and demolish their sacred pillars.
HOS	10	3	저희가 이제 이르기를 우리가 여호와를 두려워 아니하므로 우리에게 왕이 없거니와 왕이 우리를 위하여 무엇을 하리요 하리로다	For now they shall say, We have no king, because we feared not the Lord; what then should a king do to us?	Surely now they will say, “We have no king, for we do not revere the LORD. What can a king do for us?”
HOS	10	4	저희가 헛된 말을 내며 거짓 맹세를 발하여 언약을 세우니 그 재판이 밭이랑에 돋는 독한 인진 같으리로다	They have spoken words, swearing falsely in making a covenant: thus judgment springeth up as hemlock in the furrows of the field.	They speak mere words; with false oaths they make covenants. So judgment springs up like poisonous weeds in the furrows of a field.
HOS	10	5	사마리아 거민이 벧아웬의 송아지를 인하여 두려워할 것이라 그 백성이 슬퍼하며 그것을 기뻐하던 제사장들도 슬퍼하리니 이는 그 영광이 떠나감이며	The inhabitants of Samaria shall fear because of the calves of Beth–aven: for the people thereof shall mourn over it, and the priests thereof that rejoiced on it, for the glory thereof, because it is departed from it.	The people of Samaria will fear for the calf of Beth-aven. Indeed, its people will mourn with its idolatrous priests— those who rejoiced in its glory— for it has been taken from them into exile.
HOS	10	6	그 송아지는 앗수르로 옮겨다가 예물로 야렙 왕에게 드리리니 에브라임은 수치를 받을 것이요 이스라엘은 자기들의 계의를 부끄러워할 것이며	It shall be also carried unto Assyria for a present to king Jareb: Ephraim shall receive shame, and Israel shall be ashamed of his own counsel.	Yes, it will be carried to Assyria as tribute to the great king. Ephraim will be seized with shame; Israel will be ashamed of its wooden idols.
HOS	10	7	사마리아 왕은 물 위에 거품 같이 멸망할 것이며	As for Samaria, her king is cut off as the foam upon the water.	Samaria will be carried off with her king like a twig on the surface of the water.
HOS	10	8	이스라엘의 죄 된 아웬의 산당은 패괴되어 가시와 찔레가 그 단 위에 날 것이니 그 때에 저희가 산더러 우리를 가리우라 할 것이요 작은 산더러 우리 위에 무너지라 하리라	The high places also of Aven, the sin of Israel, shall be destroyed: the thorn and the thistle shall come up on their altars; and they shall say to the mountains, Cover us; and to the hills, Fall on us.	The high places of Aven will be destroyed— it is the sin of Israel; thorns and thistles will overgrow their altars. Then they will say to the mountains, “Cover us!” and to the hills, “Fall on us!”
HOS	10	9	이스라엘아 네가 기브아에 서서 흉악한 족속을 치는 전쟁을 거기서 면하였도다	O Israel, thou hast sinned from the days of Gibeah: there they stood: the battle in Gibeah against the children of iniquity did not overtake them.	Since the days of Gibeah you have sinned, O Israel, and there you have remained. Did not the battle in Gibeah overtake the sons of iniquity?
HOS	10	10	내가 원하는 때에 저희를 징계하리니 저희가 두 가지 죄에 걸릴 때에 만민이 모여서 저희를 치리라	It is in my desire that I should chastise them; and the people shall be gathered against them, when they shall bind themselves in their two furrows.	I will chasten them when I please; nations will be gathered against them to put them in bondage for their double transgression.
HOS	10	11	에브라임은 마치 길들인 암소 같아서 곡식 밟기를 좋아하나 내가 그 아름다운 목에 멍에를 메우고 그의 위에 사람을 태우리니 유다가 밭을 갈고 야곱이 흙덩이를 깨뜨리리라	And Ephraim is as an heifer that is taught, and loveth to tread out the corn; but I passed over upon her fair neck: I will make Ephraim to ride; Judah shall plow, and Jacob shall break his clods.	Ephraim is a well-trained heifer that loves to thresh; but I will place a yoke on her fair neck. I will harness Ephraim, Judah will plow, and Jacob will break the hard ground.
HOS	10	12	너희가 자기를 위하여 의를 심고 긍휼을 거두라 지금이 곧 여호와를 찾을 때니 너희 묵은 땅을 기경하라 마침내 여호와께서 임하사 의를 비처럼 너희에게 내리시리라	Sow to yourselves in righteousness, reap in mercy; break up your fallow ground: for it is time to seek the Lord, till he come and rain righteousness upon you.	Sow for yourselves righteousness and reap the fruit of loving devotion; break up your unplowed ground. For it is time to seek the LORD until He comes and sends righteousness upon you like rain.
HOS	10	13	너희는 악을 밭갈아 죄를 거두고 거짓 열매를 먹었나니 이는 네가 네 길과 네 용사의 많음을 의뢰하였음이라	Ye have plowed wickedness, ye have reaped iniquity; ye have eaten the fruit of lies: because thou didst trust in thy way, in the multitude of thy mighty men.	You have plowed wickedness and reaped injustice; you have eaten the fruit of lies. Because you have trusted in your own way and in the multitude of your mighty men,
HOS	10	14	그러므로 너희 백성 중에 요란함이 일어나며 네 산성들이 다 훼파되되 살만이 전쟁의 날에 벧아벨을 훼파한 것 같이 될 것이라 그 때에 어미와 자식이 함께 부숴졌도다	Therefore shall a tumult arise among thy people, and all thy fortresses shall be spoiled, as Shalman spoiled Beth–arbel in the day of battle: the mother was dashed in pieces upon her children.	the roar of battle will rise against your people, so that all your fortresses will be demolished as Shalman devastated Beth-arbel in the day of battle, when mothers were dashed to pieces along with their children.
HOS	10	15	너희의 큰 악을 인하여 벧엘이 이같이 너희에게 행하리니 이스라엘 왕이 새벽에 멸절하리로다	So shall Beth–el do unto you because of your great wickedness: in a morning shall the king of Israel utterly be cut off.	Thus it will be done to you, O Bethel, because of your great wickedness. When the day dawns, the king of Israel will be utterly cut off.
HOS	11	1	이스라엘의 어렸을 때에 내가 사랑하여 내 아들을 애굽에서 불러내었거늘	When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and called my son out of Egypt.	When Israel was a child, I loved him, and out of Egypt I called My son.
HOS	11	2	선지자들이 저희를 부를수록 저희가 점점 멀리하고 바알들에게 제사하며 아로새긴 우상 앞에서 분향하였느니라	As they called them, so they went from them: they sacrificed unto Baalim, and burned incense to graven images.	But the more I called Israel, the farther they departed from Me. They sacrificed to the Baals and burned incense to carved images.
HOS	11	3	그러나 내가 에브라임에게 걸음을 가르치고 내 팔로 안을지라도 내가 저희를 고치는 줄을 저희가 알지 못하였도다	I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by their arms; but they knew not that I healed them.	It was I who taught Ephraim to walk, taking them in My arms, but they never realized that it was I who healed them.
HOS	11	4	내가 사람의 줄 곧 사랑의 줄로 저희를 이끌었고 저희에게 대하여 그 목에서 멍에를 벗기는 자 같이 되었으며 저희 앞에서 먹을 것을 두었었노라	I drew them with cords of a man, with bands of love: and I was to them as they that take off the yoke on their jaws, and I laid meat unto them.	I led them with cords of kindness, with ropes of love; I lifted the yoke from their necks and bent down to feed them.
HOS	11	5	저희가 애굽 땅으로 다시 가지 못하겠거늘 내게 돌아오기를 싫어하니 앗수르 사람이 그 임금이 될 것이라	He shall not return into the land of Egypt, but the Assyrian shall be his king, because they refused to return.	Will they not return to the land of Egypt and be ruled by Assyria because they refused to repent?
HOS	11	6	칼이 저희의 성읍들을 치며 빗장을 깨뜨려 없이 하리니 이는 저희의 계책을 인함이니라	And the sword shall abide on his cities, and shall consume his branches, and devour them, because of their own counsels.	A sword will flash through their cities; it will destroy the bars of their gates and consume them in their own plans.
HOS	11	7	내 백성이 결심하고 내게서 물러가나니 비록 저희를 불러 위에 계신 자에게로 돌아오라 할지라도 일어나는 자가 하나도 없도다	And my people are bent to backsliding from me: though they called them to the most High, none at all would exalt him.	My people are bent on turning from Me. Though they call to the Most High, He will by no means exalt them.
HOS	11	8	에브라임이여 내가 어찌 너를 놓겠느냐 이스라엘이여 내가 어찌 너를 버리겠느냐 내가 어찌 아드마 같이 놓겠느냐 어찌 너를 스보임 같이 두겠느냐 내 마음이 내 속에서 돌아서 나의 긍휼이 온전히 불붙듯 하도다	How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together.	How could I give you up, O Ephraim? How could I surrender you, O Israel? How could I make you like Admah? How could I treat you like Zeboiim? My heart is turned within Me; My compassion is stirred!
HOS	11	9	내가 나의 맹렬한 진노를 발하지 아니하며 내가 다시는 에브라임을 멸하지 아니하리니 이는 내가 사람이 아니요 하나님임이라 나는 네 가운데 거하는 거룩한 자니 진노함으로 네게 임하지 아니하리라	I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim: for I am God, and not man; the Holy One in the midst of thee: and I will not enter into the city.	I will not execute the full fury of My anger; I will not turn back to destroy Ephraim. For I am God and not man— the Holy One among you— and I will not come in wrath.
HOS	11	10	저희가 사자처럼 소리를 발하시는 여호와를 좇을 것이라 여호와께서 소리를 발하시면 자손들이 서편에서부터 떨며 오되	They shall walk after the Lord: he shall roar like a lion: when he shall roar, then the children shall tremble from the west.	They will walk after the LORD; He will roar like a lion. When He roars, His children will come trembling from the west.
HOS	11	11	저희가 애굽에서부터 새 같이 앗수르에서부터 비둘기 같이 떨며 오리니 내가 저희로 각 집에 머물게 하리라 나 여호와의 말이니라	They shall tremble as a bird out of Egypt, and as a dove out of the land of Assyria: and I will place them in their houses, saith the Lord.	They will come trembling like birds from Egypt and like doves from the land of Assyria. Then I will settle them in their homes, declares the LORD.
HOS	11	12	에브라임은 거짓으로, 이스라엘 족속은 궤휼로 나를 에워쌌고 유다는 하나님 곧 신실하시고 거룩하신 자에게 대하여 정함이 없도다	Ephraim compasseth me about with lies, and the house of Israel with deceit: but Judah yet ruleth with God, and is faithful with the saints.	Ephraim surrounds Me with lies, the house of Israel with deceit; but Judah still walks with God and is faithful to the Holy One.
HOS	12	1	에브라임은 바람을 먹으며 동풍을 따라가서 날마다 거짓과 포학을 더하며 앗수르와 계약을 맺고 기름을 애굽에 보내도다	Ephraim feedeth on wind, and followeth after the east wind: he daily increaseth lies and desolation; and they do make a covenant with the Assyrians, and oil is carried into Egypt.	Ephraim chases the wind and pursues the east wind all day long; he multiplies lies and violence; he makes a covenant with Assyria and sends olive oil to Egypt.
HOS	12	2	여호와께서 유다와 쟁변하시고 야곱의 소행대로 벌주시며 그 소위대로 보응하시리라	The Lord hath also a controversy with Judah, and will punish Jacob according to his ways; according to his doings will he recompense him.	The LORD also brings a charge against Judah. He will punish Jacob according to his ways and repay him according to his deeds.
HOS	12	3	야곱은 태에서 그 형의 발뒤꿈치를 잡았고 또 장년에 하나님과 힘을 겨루되	He took his brother by the heel in the womb, and by his strength he had power with God:	In the womb he grasped his brother’s heel, and in his vigor he wrestled with God.
HOS	12	4	천사와 힘을 겨루어 이기고 울며 그에게 간구하였으며 하나님은 벧엘에서 저를 만나셨고 거기서 우리에게 말씀하셨나니	Yea, he had power over the angel, and prevailed: he wept, and made supplication unto him: he found him in Beth–el, and there he spake with us;	Yes, he struggled with the angel and prevailed; he wept and sought His favor; he found Him at Bethel and spoke with Him there—
HOS	12	5	저는 만군의 하나님 여호와시라 여호와는 그의 기념 칭호니라	Even the Lord God of hosts; the Lord is his memorial.	the LORD is the God of Hosts— the LORD is His name of renown.
HOS	12	6	그런즉 너의 하나님께로 돌아와서 인애와 공의를 지키며 항상 너의 하나님을 바라볼지니라	Therefore turn thou to thy God: keep mercy and judgment, and wait on thy God continually.	But you must return to your God, maintaining love and justice, and always waiting on your God.
HOS	12	7	저는 상고여늘 손에 거짓 저울을 가지고 사취하기를 좋아하는도다	He is a merchant, the balances of deceit are in his hand: he loveth to oppress.	A merchant loves to defraud with dishonest scales in his hands.
HOS	12	8	에브라임이 말하기를 나는 실로 부자라 내가 재물을 얻었는데 무릇 나의 수고한 중에서 죄라 할만한 불의를 발견할 자 없으리라 하거니와	And Ephraim said, Yet I am become rich, I have found me out substance: in all my labours they shall find none iniquity in me that were sin.	And Ephraim boasts: “How rich I have become! I have found wealth for myself. In all my labors, they can find in me no iniquity that is sinful.”
HOS	12	9	내가 애굽 땅에서 나옴으로부터 나는 네 하나님 여호와니라 내가 너로 다시 장막에 거하게 하기를 명절일에 하던 것 같게 하리라	And I that am the Lord thy God from the land of Egypt will yet make thee to dwell in tabernacles, as in the days of the solemn feast.	But I am the LORD your God ever since the land of Egypt. I will again make you dwell in tents, as in the days of the appointed feast.
HOS	12	10	내가 여러 선지자에게 말하였고 이상을 많이 보였으며 선지자들을 빙자하여 비유를 베풀었노라	I have also spoken by the prophets, and I have multiplied visions, and used similitudes, by the ministry of the prophets.	I spoke through the prophets and multiplied their visions; I gave parables through the prophets.
HOS	12	11	길르앗은 불의한 것이냐 저희는 과연 거짓되도다 길갈에서는 무리가 수송아지로 제사를 드리며 그 제단은 밭이랑에 쌓인 돌무더기 같도다	Is there iniquity in Gilead? surely they are vanity: they sacrifice bullocks in Gilgal; yea, their altars are as heaps in the furrows of the fields.	Is there iniquity in Gilead? They will surely come to nothing. Do they sacrifice bulls in Gilgal? Indeed, their altars will be heaps of stones in the furrows of the field.
HOS	12	12	옛적에 야곱이 아람 들로 도망하였으며 이스라엘이 아내 얻기 위하여 사람을 섬기며 아내 얻기 위하여 양을 쳤고	And Jacob fled into the country of Syria, and Israel served for a wife, and for a wife he kept sheep.	Jacob fled to the land of Aram and Israel worked for a wife— for a wife he tended sheep.
HOS	12	13	여호와께서는 선지자로 이스라엘을 애굽에서 인도하여 내시며 선지자로 저를 보호하셨거늘	And by a prophet the Lord brought Israel out of Egypt, and by a prophet was he preserved.	But by a prophet the LORD brought Israel out of Egypt, and by a prophet he was preserved.
HOS	12	14	에브라임이 격노케 함이 극심하였으니 그 주께서 그 피로 그 위에 머물러 있게 하시며 저의 수치를 저에게 돌리시리라	Ephraim provoked him to anger most bitterly: therefore shall he leave his blood upon him, and his reproach shall his Lord return unto him.	Ephraim has provoked bitter anger, so his Lord will leave his bloodguilt upon him and repay him for his contempt.
HOS	13	1	에브라임이 말을 발하면 사람이 떨었도다 저가 이스라엘 중에서 자기를 높이더니 바알로 인하여 범죄하므로 망하였거늘	When Ephraim spake trembling, he exalted himself in Israel; but when he offended in Baal, he died.	When Ephraim spoke, there was trembling; he was exalted in Israel. But he incurred guilt through Baal, and he died.
HOS	13	2	이제도 저희가 더욱 범죄하여 그 은으로 자기를 위하여 우상을 부어 만들되 자기의 공교함을 따라 우상을 만들었으며 그것은 다 장색이 만든 것이어늘 저희가 그것에 대하여 말하기를 제사를 드리는 자는 송아지의 입을 맞출 것이라 하도다	And now they sin more and more, and have made them molten images of their silver, and idols according to their own understanding, all of it the work of the craftsmen: they say of them, Let the men that sacrifice kiss the calves.	Now they sin more and more and make for themselves cast images, idols skillfully made from their silver, all of them the work of craftsmen. People say of them, “They offer human sacrifice and kiss the calves!”
HOS	13	3	이러므로 저희는 아침 구름 같으며 쉽게 사라지는 이슬 같으며 타작 마당에서 광풍에 날리우는 쭉정이 같으며 굴뚝에서 나가는 연기 같으리라	Therefore they shall be as the morning cloud, and as the early dew that passeth away, as the chaff that is driven with the whirlwind out of the floor, and as the smoke out of the chimney.	Therefore they will be like the morning mist, like the early dew that vanishes, like chaff blown from a threshing floor, like smoke through an open window.
HOS	13	4	그러나 네가 애굽 땅에서 나옴으로부터 나는 네 하나님 여호와라 나 밖에 네가 다른 신을 알지 말 것이라 나 외에는 구원자가 없느니라	Yet I am the Lord thy God from the land of Egypt, and thou shalt know no god but me: for there is no saviour beside me.	Yet I am the LORD your God ever since the land of Egypt; you know no God but Me, for there is no Savior besides Me.
HOS	13	5	내가 광야 마른 땅에서 너를 권고하였거늘	I did know thee in the wilderness, in the land of great drought.	I knew you in the wilderness, in the land of drought.
HOS	13	6	저희가 먹이운 대로 배부르며 배부름으로 마음이 교만하며 이로 인하여 나를 잊었느니라	According to their pasture, so were they filled; they were filled, and their heart was exalted; therefore have they forgotten me.	When they had pasture, they became satisfied; when they were satisfied, their hearts became proud, and as a result they forgot Me.
HOS	13	7	그러므로 내가 저희에게 사자같고 길 가에서 기다리는 표범 같으니라	Therefore I will be unto them as a lion: as a leopard by the way will I observe them:	So like a lion I will pounce on them; like a leopard I will lurk by the path.
HOS	13	8	내가 새끼 잃은 곰 같이 저희를 만나 그 염통 꺼풀을 찢고 거기서 암사자 같이 저희를 삼키리라 들짐승이 저희를 찢으리라	I will meet them as a bear that is bereaved of her whelps, and will rend the caul of their heart, and there will I devour them like a lion: the wild beast shall tear them.	Like a bear robbed of her cubs I will attack them, and I will tear open their chests. There I will devour them like a lion, like a wild beast would tear them apart.
HOS	13	9	이스라엘아 네가 패망하였나니 이는 너를 도와주는 나를 대적함이니라	O Israel, thou hast destroyed thyself; but in me is thine help.	You are destroyed, O Israel, because you are against Me— against your helper.
HOS	13	10	전에 네가 이르기를 내게 왕과 방백들을 주소서 하였느니라 네 모든 성읍에서 너를 구원할 자 네 왕이 이제 어디 있으며 네 재판장들이 어디 있느냐	I will be thy king: where is any other that may save thee in all thy cities? and thy judges of whom thou saidst, Give me a king and princes?	Where is your king now to save you in all your cities, and the rulers to whom you said, “Give me a king and princes”?
HOS	13	11	내가 분노하므로 네게 왕을 주고 진노하므로 폐하였노라	I gave thee a king in mine anger, and took him away in my wrath.	So in My anger I gave you a king, and in My wrath I took him away.
HOS	13	12	에브라임의 불의가 봉함되었고 그 죄가 저장되었나니	The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up; his sin is hid.	The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up; his sin is stored up.
HOS	13	13	해산하는 여인의 어려움이 저에게 임하리라 저는 어리석은 자식이로다 때가 임하였나니 산문에서 지체할 것이 아니니라	The sorrows of a travailing woman shall come upon him: he is an unwise son; for he should not stay long in the place of the breaking forth of children.	Labor pains come upon him, but he is an unwise son. When the time arrives, he fails to present himself at the opening of the womb.
HOS	13	14	내가 저희를 음부의 권세에서 속량하며 사망에서 구속하리니 사망아 네 재앙이 어디 있느냐 음부야 네 멸망이 어디 있느냐 뉘우침이 내 목전에 숨으리라	I will ransom them from the power of the grave; I will redeem them from death: O death, I will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be thy destruction: repentance shall be hid from mine eyes.	I will ransom them from the power of Sheol; I will redeem them from Death. Where, O Death, are your plagues? Where, O Sheol, is your sting? Compassion is hidden from My eyes.
HOS	13	15	저가 비록 형제 중에서 결실하나 동풍이 오리니 곧 광야에서 일어나는 여호와의 바람이라 그 근원이 마르며 그 샘이 마르고 그 적축한 바 모든 보배의 그릇이 약탈되리로다	Though he be fruitful among his brethren, an east wind shall come, the wind of the Lord shall come up from the wilderness, and his spring shall become dry, and his fountain shall be dried up: he shall spoil the treasure of all pleasant vessels.	Although he flourishes among his brothers, an east wind will come— a wind from the LORD rising up from the desert. His fountain will fail, and his spring will run dry. The wind will plunder his treasury of every precious article.
HOS	13	16	사마리아가 그 하나님을 배반하였으므로 형벌을 당하여 칼에 엎드러질 것이요 그 어린 아이는 부숴뜨리우며 그 아이 밴 여인은 배가 갈리우리라	Samaria shall become desolate; for she hath rebelled against her God: they shall fall by the sword: their infants shall be dashed in pieces, and their women with child shall be ripped up.	Samaria will bear her guilt because she has rebelled against her God. They will fall by the sword; their little ones will be dashed to pieces, and their pregnant women ripped open.
HOS	14	1	이스라엘아 네 하나님 여호와께로 돌아오라 네가 불의함을 인하여 엎드러졌느니라	O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God; for thou hast fallen by thine iniquity.	Return, O Israel, to the LORD your God, for you have stumbled by your iniquity.
HOS	14	2	너는 말씀을 가지고 여호와께로 돌아와서 아뢰기를 모든 불의를 제하시고 선한 바를 받으소서 우리가 입술로 수송아지를 대신하여 주께 드리리이다	Take with you words, and turn to the Lord: say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously: so will we render the calves of our lips.	Bring your confessions and return to the LORD. Say to Him: “Take away all our iniquity and receive us graciously, that we may present the fruit of our lips.
HOS	14	3	우리가 앗수르의 구원을 의지하지 아니하며 말을 타지 아니하며 다시는 우리의 손으로 지은 것을 향하여 너희는 우리 신이라 하지 아니하오리니 이는 고아가 주께로 말미암아 긍휼을 얻음이니이다 할지니라	Asshur shall not save us; we will not ride upon horses: neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, Ye are our gods: for in thee the fatherless findeth mercy.	Assyria will not save us, nor will we ride on horses. We will never again say, ‘Our gods!’ to the work of our own hands. For in You the fatherless find compassion.”
HOS	14	4	내가 저희의 패역을 고치고 즐거이 저희를 사랑하리니 나의 진노가 저에게서 떠났음이니라	I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely: for mine anger is turned away from him.	I will heal their apostasy; I will freely love them, for My anger has turned away from them.
HOS	14	5	내가 이스라엘에게 이슬과 같으리니 저가 백합화 같이 피겠고 레바논 백향목 같이 뿌리가 박힐 것이라	I will be as the dew unto Israel: he shall grow as the lily, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon.	I will be like the dew to Israel; he will blossom like the lily and take root like the cedars of Lebanon.
HOS	14	6	그 가지는 퍼지며 그 아름다움은 감람나무와 같고 그 향기는 레바논 백행목 같으리니	His branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the olive tree, and his smell as Lebanon.	His shoots will sprout, and his splendor will be like the olive tree, his fragrance like the cedars of Lebanon.
HOS	14	7	그 그늘 아래 거하는 자가 돌아올지라 저희는 곡식 같이 소성할 것이며 포도나무 같이 꽃이 필 것이며 그 향기는 레바논의 포도주 같이 되리라	They that dwell under his shadow shall return; they shall revive as the corn, and grow as the vine: the scent thereof shall be as the wine of Lebanon.	They will return and dwell in his shade; they will grow grain and blossom like the vine. His renown will be like the wine of Lebanon.
HOS	14	8	에브라임의 말이 내가 다시 우상과 무슨 상관이 있으리요 할지라 내가 저를 돌아보아 대답하기를 나는 푸른 잣나무 같으니 네가 나로 말미암아 열매를 얻으리라 하리라	Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with idols? I have heard him, and observed him: I am like a green fir tree. From me is thy fruit found.	O Ephraim, what have I to do anymore with idols? It is I who answer and watch over him. I am like a flourishing cypress; your fruit comes from Me.
HOS	14	9	누가 지혜가 있어 이런 일을 깨달으며 누가 총명이 있어 이런 일을 알겠느냐 여호와의 도는 정직하니 의인이라야 그 도에 행하리라 그러나 죄인은 그 도에 거쳐 넘어지리라	Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? prudent, and he shall know them? for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them: but the transgressors shall fall therein.	Whoever is wise, let him understand these things; whoever is discerning, let him know them. For the ways of the LORD are right, and the righteous walk in them but the rebellious stumble in them.
JOL	1	1	여호와께서 브두엘의 아들 요엘에게 이르신 말씀이라	The word of the Lord that came to Joel the son of Pethuel.	This is the word of the LORD that came to Joel son of Pethuel:
JOL	1	2	늙은 자들아 너희는 이것을 들을지어다 땅의 모든 거인아 너희는 귀를 기울일지어다 너희의 날에나 너희 열조의 날에 이런 일이 있었느냐	Hear this, ye old men, and give ear, all ye inhabitants of the land. Hath this been in your days, or even in the days of your fathers?	Hear this, O elders; and give ear, all who dwell in the land. Has anything like this ever happened in your days or in the days of your fathers?
JOL	1	3	너희는 이 일을 너희 자녀에게 고하고 너희 자녀는 자기 자녀에게 고하고 그 자녀는 후시대에 고할 것이니라	Tell ye your children of it, and let your children tell their children, and their children another generation.	Tell it to your children; let your children tell it to their children, and their children to the next generation.
JOL	1	4	팟종이가 남긴 것을 메뚜기가 먹고 메뚜기가 남긴 것을 늣이 먹고 늣이 남긴 것을 황충이 먹었도다	That which the palmerworm hath left hath the locust eaten; and that which the locust hath left hath the cankerworm eaten; and that which the cankerworm hath left hath the caterpiller eaten.	What the devouring locust has left, the swarming locust has eaten; what the swarming locust has left, the young locust has eaten; and what the young locust has left, the destroying locust has eaten.
JOL	1	5	무릇 취하는 자들아 너희는 깨어 울지어다 포도주를 마시는 자들아 너희는 곡할지어다 이는 단 포도주가 너희 입에서 끊어졌음이니	Awake, ye drunkards, and weep; and howl, all ye drinkers of wine, because of the new wine; for it is cut off from your mouth.	Wake up, you drunkards, and weep; wail, all you drinkers of wine, because of the sweet wine, for it has been cut off from your mouth.
JOL	1	6	한 이족이 내 땅에 올라왔음이로다 그들은 강하고 무수하며 그 이는 사자의 이 같고 그 어금니는 암사자의 어금니 같도다	For a nation is come up upon my land, strong, and without number, whose teeth are the teeth of a lion, and he hath the cheek teeth of a great lion.	For a nation has invaded My land, powerful and without number; its teeth are the teeth of a lion, and its fangs are the fangs of a lioness.
JOL	1	7	그들이 내 포도나무를 멸하며 내 무화과나무를 긁어 말갛게 벗겨서 버리니 그 모든 가지가 하얗게 되었도다	He hath laid my vine waste, and barked my fig tree: he hath made it clean bare, and cast it away; the branches thereof are made white.	It has laid waste My grapevine and splintered My fig tree. It has stripped off the bark and thrown it away; the branches have turned white.
JOL	1	8	너희는 애곡하기를 처녀가 어렸을 때에 약혼한 남편을 인하여 굵은 베로 동이고 애곡함 같이 할지어다	Lament like a virgin girded with sackcloth for the husband of her youth.	Wail like a virgin dressed in sackcloth, grieving for the husband of her youth.
JOL	1	9	소제와 전제가 여호와의 전에 끊어졌고 여호와께 수종드는 제사장은 슬퍼하도다	The meat offering and the drink offering is cut off from the house of the Lord; the priests, the Lord’s ministers, mourn.	Grain and drink offerings have been cut off from the house of the LORD; the priests are in mourning, those who minister before the LORD.
JOL	1	10	밭이 황무하고 토지가 처량하니 곡식이 진하여 새 포도주가 말랐고 기름이 다하였도다	The field is wasted, the land mourneth; for the corn is wasted: the new wine is dried up, the oil languisheth.	The field is ruined; the land mourns. For the grain is destroyed, the new wine is dried up, and the oil fails.
JOL	1	11	농부들아 너희는 부끄러워할지어다 포도원을 다스리는 자들아 곡할지어다 이는 밀과 보리의 연고라 밭의 소산이 다 없어졌음이로다	Be ye ashamed, O ye husbandmen; howl, O ye vinedressers, for the wheat and for the barley; because the harvest of the field is perished.	Be dismayed, O farmers, wail, O vinedressers, over the wheat and barley, because the harvest of the field has perished.
JOL	1	12	포도나무가 시들었고 무화과 나무가 말랐으며 석류나무와 대추나무와 사과나무와 및 밭의 모든 나무가 다 시들었으니 이러므로 인간의 희락이 말랐도다	The vine is dried up, and the fig tree languisheth; the pomegranate tree, the palm tree also, and the apple tree, even all the trees of the field, are withered: because joy is withered away from the sons of men.	The grapevine is dried up, and the fig tree is withered; the pomegranate, palm, and apple— all the trees of the orchard—are withered. Surely the joy of mankind has dried up.
JOL	1	13	제사장들아 너희는 굵은 베로 동이고 슬피 울지어다 단에 수송드는 자들아 너희는 곡할지어다 내 하나님께 수종드는 자들아 너희는 와서 굵은 베를 입고 밤이 맞도록 누울지어다 이는 소제와 전제를 너희 하나님의 전에 드리지 못함이라	Gird yourselves, and lament, ye priests: howl, ye ministers of the altar: come, lie all night in sackcloth, ye ministers of my God: for the meat offering and the drink offering is withholden from the house of your God.	Put on sackcloth and lament, O priests; wail, O ministers of the altar. Come, spend the night in sackcloth, O ministers of my God, because the grain and drink offerings are withheld from the house of your God.
JOL	1	14	너희는 금식일을 정하고 성회를 선포하여 장로들과 이 땅 모든 거민을 너희 하나님 여호와의 전으로 몰수히 모으고 여호와께 부르짖을지어다	Sanctify ye a fast, call a solemn assembly, gather the elders and all the inhabitants of the land into the house of the Lord your God, and cry unto the Lord,	Consecrate a fast; proclaim a solemn assembly! Gather the elders and all the residents of the land to the house of the LORD your God, and cry out to the LORD.
JOL	1	15	오호라 그 날이여 여호와의 날이 가까웠나니 곧 멸망 같이 전능자에게로서 이르리로다	Alas for the day! for the day of the Lord is at hand, and as a destruction from the Almighty shall it come.	Alas for the day! For the Day of the LORD is near, and it will come as destruction from the Almighty.
JOL	1	16	식물이 우리 목전에 끊어지지 아니하였느냐 기쁨과 즐거움이 우리 하나님의 전에 끊어지지 아니하였느냐	Is not the meat cut off before our eyes, yea, joy and gladness from the house of our God?	Has not the food been cut off before our very eyes— joy and gladness from the house of our God?
JOL	1	17	씨가 흙덩이 아래서 썩어졌고 창고가 비었고 곳간이 무너졌으니 이는 곡식이 시들었음이로다	The seed is rotten under their clods, the garners are laid desolate, the barns are broken down; for the corn is withered.	The seeds lie shriveled beneath the clods; the storehouses are in ruins; the granaries are broken down, for the grain has withered away.
JOL	1	18	생축이 탄식하고 소떼가 민망해하니 이는 꼴이 없음이라 양떼도 피곤하도다	How do the beasts groan! the herds of cattle are perplexed, because they have no pasture; yea, the flocks of sheep are made desolate.	How the cattle groan! The herds wander in confusion because they have no pasture. Even the flocks of sheep are suffering.
JOL	1	19	여호와여 내가 주께 부르짖으오니 불이 거친 들의 풀을 살랐고 불꽃이 밭의 모든 나무를 살랐음이니이다	O Lord, to thee will I cry: for the fire hath devoured the pastures of the wilderness, and the flame hath burned all the trees of the field.	To You, O LORD, I call, for fire has consumed the open pastures and flames have scorched all the trees of the field.
JOL	1	20	들짐승도 주를 향하여 헐떡거리오니 시내가 다 말랐고 들의 풀이 불에 탔음이니이다	The beasts of the field cry also unto thee: for the rivers of waters are dried up, and the fire hath devoured the pastures of the wilderness.	Even the beasts of the field pant for You, for the streams of water have dried up, and fire has consumed the open pastures.
JOL	2	1	시온에서 나팔을 불며 나의 성산에서 호각을 불어 이 땅 거민으로 다 떨게 할지니 이는 여호와의 날이 이르게 됨이니라 이제 임박하였으니	Blow ye the trumpet in Zion, and sound an alarm in my holy mountain: let all the inhabitants of the land tremble: for the day of the Lord cometh, for it is nigh at hand;	Blow the ram’s horn in Zion; sound the alarm on My holy mountain! Let all who dwell in the land tremble, for the Day of the LORD is coming; indeed, it is near—
JOL	2	2	곧 어둡고 캄캄한 날이요 빽빽한 구름이 끼인 날이라 새벽 빛이 산꼭대기에 덮인 것과 같으니 이는 많고 강한 백성이 이르렀음이라 이 같은 것이 자고 이래로 없었고 이후 세세에 없으리로다	A day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of clouds and of thick darkness, as the morning spread upon the mountains: a great people and a strong; there hath not been ever the like, neither shall be any more after it, even to the years of many generations.	a day of darkness and gloom, a day of clouds and blackness. Like the dawn overspreading the mountains a great and strong army appears, such as never was of old, nor will ever be in ages to come.
JOL	2	3	불이 그들의 앞을 사르며 불꽃이 그들의 뒤를 태우니 그 전의 땅은 에덴동산 같았으나 그 후의 땅은 황무한 들 같으니 그들을 피한 자가 없도다	A fire devoureth before them; and behind them a flame burneth: the land is as the garden of Eden before them, and behind them a desolate wilderness; yea, and nothing shall escape them.	Before them a fire devours, and behind them a flame scorches. The land before them is like the Garden of Eden, but behind them, it is like a desert wasteland— surely nothing will escape them.
JOL	2	4	그 모양은 말 같고 그 달리는 것은 기병 같으며	The appearance of them is as the appearance of horses; and as horsemen, so shall they run.	Their appearance is like that of horses, and they gallop like swift steeds.
JOL	2	5	그들의 산 꼭대기에서 뛰는 소리가 병거 소리와도 같고 불꽃이 초개를 사르는 소리와도 같으며 강한 군사가 항오를 벌이고 싸우는 것 같으니	Like the noise of chariots on the tops of mountains shall they leap, like the noise of a flame of fire that devoureth the stubble, as a strong people set in battle array.	With a sound like that of chariots they bound over the mountaintops, like the crackling of fire consuming stubble, like a mighty army deployed for battle.
JOL	2	6	그 앞에서 만민이 송구하여 하며 무리의 낯빛이 하얘졌도다	Before their face the people shall be much pained: all faces shall gather blackness.	Nations writhe in horror before them; every face turns pale.
JOL	2	7	그들이 용사 같이 달리며 무사 같이 성을 더위잡고 오르며 각기 자기의 길로 행하되 그 항오를 어기지 아니하며	They shall run like mighty men; they shall climb the wall like men of war; and they shall march every one on his ways, and they shall not break their ranks:	They charge like mighty men; they scale the walls like men of war. Each one marches in formation, not swerving from the course.
JOL	2	8	피차에 부딪히지 아니하고 각기 자기의 길로 행하며 병기를 충돌하고 나아가나 상치 아니하며	Neither shall one thrust another; they shall walk every one in his path: and when they fall upon the sword, they shall not be wounded.	They do not jostle one another; each proceeds in his path. They burst through the defenses, never breaking ranks.
JOL	2	9	성중에 뛰어 들어가며 성위에 달리며 집에 더위잡고 오르며 도적 같이 창으로 들어가니	They shall run to and fro in the city; they shall run upon the wall, they shall climb up upon the houses; they shall enter in at the windows like a thief.	They storm the city; they run along the wall; they climb into houses, entering through windows like thieves.
JOL	2	10	그 앞에서 땅이 진동하며 하늘이 떨며 일월이 캄캄하며 별들이 빛을 거두도다	The earth shall quake before them; the heavens shall tremble: the sun and the moon shall be dark, and the stars shall withdraw their shining:	Before them the earth quakes; the heavens tremble. The sun and moon grow dark, and the stars lose their brightness.
JOL	2	11	여호와께서 그 군대 앞에서 소리를 발하시고 그 진은 심히 크고 그 명령을 행하는 자는 강하니 여호와의 날이 크고 심히 두렵도다 당할 자가 누구이랴	And the Lord shall utter his voice before his army: for his camp is very great: for he is strong that executeth his word: for the day of the Lord is great and very terrible; and who can abide it?	The LORD raises His voice in the presence of His army. Indeed, His camp is very large, for mighty are those who obey His command. For the Day of the LORD is great and very dreadful. Who can endure it?
JOL	2	12	여호와의 말씀에 너희는 이제라도 금식하며 울며 애통하고 마음을 다하여 내게로 돌아오라 하셨나니	Therefore also now, saith the Lord, turn ye even to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning:	“Yet even now,” declares the LORD, “return to Me with all your heart, with fasting, weeping, and mourning.”
JOL	2	13	너희는 옷을 찢지 말고 마음을 찢고 너희 하나님 여호와께로 돌아올지어다 그는 은혜로우시며 자비로우시며 노하기를 더디하시며 인애가 크시사 뜻을 돌이켜 재앙을 내리지 아니하시나니	And rend your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God: for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repenteth him of the evil.	So rend your hearts and not your garments, and return to the LORD your God. For He is gracious and compassionate, slow to anger, abounding in loving devotion. And He relents from sending disaster.
JOL	2	14	주께서 혹시 마음과 뜻을 돌이키시고 그 뒤에 복을 끼치사 너희 하나님 여호와께 소제와 전제를 드리게 하지 아니하실는지 누가 알겠느냐	Who knoweth if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing behind him; even a meat offering and a drink offering unto the Lord your God?	Who knows? He may turn and relent and leave a blessing behind Him— grain and drink offerings for the LORD your God.
JOL	2	15	너희는 시온에서 나팔을 불어 거룩한 금식일을 정하고 성회를 선고하고	Blow the trumpet in Zion, sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly:	Blow the ram’s horn in Zion, consecrate a fast, proclaim a sacred assembly.
JOL	2	16	백성을 모아 그 회를 거룩케 하고 장로를 모으며 소아와 젖먹는 자를 모으며 신랑을 그 방에서 나오게 하며 신부도 그 골방에서 나오게 하고	Gather the people, sanctify the congregation, assemble the elders, gather the children, and those that suck the breasts: let the bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her closet.	Gather the people, sanctify the congregation, assemble the aged, gather the children, even those nursing at the breast. Let the bridegroom leave his room, and the bride her chamber.
JOL	2	17	여호와께 수종드는 제사장들은 낭실과 단 사이에서 울며 이르기를 여호와여 주의 백성을 긍휼히 여기소서 주의 기업으로 욕되게하여 열국들로 그들을 관할하지 못하게 하옵소서 어찌하여 이방인으로 그들의 하나님이 어디 있느뇨 말하게 하겠나이까 할지어다	Let the priests, the ministers of the Lord, weep between the porch and the altar, and let them say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach, that the heathen should rule over them: wherefore should they say among the people, Where is their God?	Let the priests who minister before the LORD weep between the portico and the altar, saying, “Spare Your people, O LORD, and do not make Your heritage a reproach, an object of scorn among the nations. Why should they say among the peoples, ‘Where is their God?’”
JOL	2	18	그 때에 여호와께서 자기 땅을 위하여 중심이 뜨거우시며 그 백성을 긍휼히 여기실 것이라	Then will the Lord be jealous for his land, and pity his people.	Then the LORD became jealous for His land, and He spared His people.
JOL	2	19	여호와께서 그들에게 응답하여 이르시기를 내가 너희에게 곡식과 새 포도주와 기름을 주리니 너희가 이로 인하여 흡족하리라 내가 다시는 너희로 열국 중에서 욕을 당하지 않게 할 것이며	Yea, the Lord will answer and say unto his people, Behold, I will send you corn, and wine, and oil, and ye shall be satisfied therewith: and I will no more make you a reproach among the heathen:	And the LORD answered His people: “Behold, I will send you grain, new wine, and oil, and by them you will be satisfied. I will never again make you a reproach among the nations.
JOL	2	20	내가 북편 군대를 너희에게서 멀리 떠나게 하여 메마르고 적막한 땅으로 쫓아내리니 그 전군은 동해로 그 후군은 서해로 들어갈 것이라 상한 냄새가 일어나고 악취가 오르리니 이는 큰 일을 행하였음이니라 하시리라	But I will remove far off from you the northern army, and will drive him into a land barren and desolate, with his face toward the east sea, and his hinder part toward the utmost sea, and his stink shall come up, and his ill savour shall come up, because he hath done great things.	The northern army I will drive away from you, banishing it to a barren and desolate land, its front ranks into the Eastern Sea, and its rear guard into the Western Sea. And its stench will rise; its foul odor will ascend. For He has done great things.
JOL	2	21	땅이여 두려워 말고 기뻐하며 즐거워할지어다 여호와께서 큰 일을 행하셨음이로다	Fear not, O land; be glad and rejoice: for the Lord will do great things.	Do not be afraid, O land; rejoice and be glad, for the LORD has done great things.
JOL	2	22	들짐승들아 두려워 말지어다 들의 풀이 싹이 나며 나무가 열매를 맺으며 무화과나무와 포도나무가 다 힘을 내는도다	Be not afraid, ye beasts of the field: for the pastures of the wilderness do spring, for the tree beareth her fruit, the fig tree and the vine do yield their strength.	Do not be afraid, O beasts of the field, for the open pastures have turned green, the trees bear their fruit, and the fig tree and vine yield their best.
JOL	2	23	시온의 자녀들아 너희는 너희 하나님 여호와로 인하여 기뻐하며 즐거워할지어다 그가 너희를 위하여 비를 내리시되 이른 비와 늦은 비가 전과 같을 것이라	Be glad then, ye children of Zion, and rejoice in the Lord your God: for he hath given you the former rain moderately, and he will cause to come down for you the rain, the former rain, and the latter rain in the first month.	Be glad, O children of Zion, and rejoice in the LORD your God, for He has given you the autumn rains for your vindication. He sends you showers, both autumn and spring rains, as before.
JOL	2	24	마당에는 밀이 가득하고 독에는 새 포도주와 기름이 넘치리로다	And the floors shall be full of wheat, and the fats shall overflow with wine and oil.	The threshing floors will be full of grain, and the vats will overflow with new wine and oil.
JOL	2	25	내가 전에 너희에게 보낸 큰 군대 곧 메뚜기와 늣과 황충과 팟종이의 먹은 햇수대로 너희에게 갚아주리니	And I will restore to you the years that the locust hath eaten, the cankerworm, and the caterpiller, and the palmerworm, my great army which I sent among you.	I will repay you for the years eaten by locusts— the swarming locust, the young locust, the destroying locust, and the devouring locust— My great army that I sent against you.
JOL	2	26	너희는 먹되 풍족히 먹고 너희를 기이히 대접한 너희 하나님 여호와의 이름을 찬송할 것이라 내 백성이 영영히 수치를 당치 아니하리로다	And ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and praise the name of the Lord your God, that hath dealt wondrously with you: and my people shall never be ashamed.	You will have plenty to eat, until you are satisfied. You will praise the name of the LORD your God, who has worked wonders for you. My people will never again be put to shame.
JOL	2	27	그런즉 내가 이스라엘 가운데 있어 너희 하나님 여호와가 되고 다른 이가 없는 줄을 너희가 알 것이라 내 백성이 영영히 수치를 당치 아니하리로다	And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am the Lord your God, and none else: and my people shall never be ashamed.	Then you will know that I am present in Israel and that I am the LORD your God, and there is no other. My people will never again be put to shame.
JOL	2	28	그 후에 내가 내 신을 만민에게 부어 주리니 너희 자녀들이 장래일을 말할 것이며 너희 늙은이는 꿈을 꾸며 너희 젊은이는 이상을 볼 것이며	And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions:	And afterward, I will pour out My Spirit on all people. Your sons and daughters will prophesy, your old men will dream dreams, your young men will see visions.
JOL	2	29	그 때에 내가 또 내 신으로 남종과 여종에게 부어 줄 것이며	And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit.	Even on My menservants and maidservants, I will pour out My Spirit in those days.
JOL	2	30	내가 이적을 하늘과 땅에 베풀리니 곧 피와 불과 연기 기둥이라	And I will shew wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke.	I will show wonders in the heavens and on the earth, blood and fire and columns of smoke.
JOL	2	31	여호와의 크고 두려운 날이 이르기 전에 해가 어두워지고 달이 핏빛 같이 변하려니와	The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and the terrible day of the Lord come.	The sun will be turned to darkness and the moon to blood before the coming of the great and awesome Day of the LORD.
JOL	2	32	누구든지 여호와의 이름을 부르는 자는 구원을 얻으리니 이는 나 여호와의 말대로 시온 산과 예루살렘에서 피할 자가 있을 것임이요 남은 자 중에 나 여호와의 부름을 받을 자가 있을 것임이니라	And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered: for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord hath said, and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call.	And everyone who calls on the name of the LORD will be saved; for on Mount Zion and in Jerusalem there will be deliverance, as the LORD has promised, among the remnant called by the LORD.
JOL	3	1	그 날 곧 내가 유다와 예루살렘의 사로잡힌 자를 돌아오게 할 그 때에	For, behold, in those days, and in that time, when I shall bring again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem,	“Yes, in those days and at that time, when I restore Judah and Jerusalem from captivity,
JOL	3	2	내가 만국을 모아 데리고 여호사밧 골짜기에 내려가서 내 백성 곧 내 기업된 이스라엘을 위하여 거기서 그들을 국문하리니 이는 그들이 이스라엘을 열국 중에 흩고 나의 땅을 나누었음이며	I will also gather all nations, and will bring them down into the valley of Jehoshaphat, and will plead with them there for my people and for my heritage Israel, whom they have scattered among the nations, and parted my land.	I will gather all the nations and bring them down to the Valley of Jehoshaphat. There I will enter into judgment against them concerning My people, My inheritance, Israel, whom they have scattered among the nations as they divided up My land.
JOL	3	3	또 제비 뽑아 내 백성을 취하고 동남으로 기생을 바꾸며 마셨음이니라	And they have cast lots for my people; and have given a boy for an harlot, and sold a girl for wine, that they might drink.	They cast lots for My people; they bartered a boy for a prostitute and sold a girl for wine to drink.
JOL	3	4	두로와 시돈과 블레셋 사방아 너희가 나와 무슨 상관이 있느냐 너희가 내게 보복하겠느냐 만일 내게 보복하면 너희의 보복하는 것을 내가 속속히 너희 머리에 돌리리니	Yea, and what have ye to do with me, O Tyre, and Zidon, and all the coasts of Palestine? will ye render me a recompence? and if ye recompense me, swiftly and speedily will I return your recompence upon your own head;	Now what do you have against Me, O Tyre, Sidon, and all the regions of Philistia? Are you rendering against Me a recompense? If you retaliate against Me, I will swiftly and speedily return your recompense upon your heads.
JOL	3	5	곧 너희가 내 은과 금을 취하고 나의 진기한 보물을 너희 신궁으로 가져갔으며	Because ye have taken my silver and my gold, and have carried into your temples my goodly pleasant things:	For you took My silver and gold and carried off My finest treasures to your temples.
JOL	3	6	또 유다 자손과 예루살렘 자손들을 헬라 족속에게 팔아서 본 지경에서 멀리 떠나게 하였음이니라	The children also of Judah and the children of Jerusalem have ye sold unto the Grecians, that ye might remove them far from their border.	You sold the people of Judah and Jerusalem to the Greeks, to send them far from their homeland.
JOL	3	7	보라 내가 그들을 너희가 팔아 이르게 한 곳에서 일으켜 나오게 하고 너희의 행한 것을 너희 머리에 돌려서	Behold, I will raise them out of the place whither ye have sold them, and will return your recompence upon your own head:	Behold, I will rouse them from the places to which you sold them; I will return your recompense upon your heads.
JOL	3	8	너희 자녀를 유다 자손의 손에 팔리니 그들은 다시 먼 나라 스바 사람에게 팔리라 나 여호와가 말하였느니라	And I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hand of the children of Judah, and they shall sell them to the Sabeans, to a people far off: for the Lord hath spoken it.	I will sell your sons and daughters into the hands of the people of Judah, and they will sell them to the Sabeans—to a distant nation.” Indeed, the LORD has spoken.
JOL	3	9	너희는 열국에 이렇게 광포할지어다 너희는 전쟁을 준비하고 용사를 격려하고 무사로 다 가까이 나아와서 올라오게 할지어다	Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles; Prepare war, wake up the mighty men, let all the men of war draw near; let them come up:	Proclaim this among the nations: “Prepare for war; rouse the mighty men; let all the men of war advance and attack!
JOL	3	10	너희는 보습을 쳐서 칼을 만들지어다 낫을 쳐서 창을 만들지어다 약한 자도 이르기를 나는 강하다 할지어다	Beat your plowshares into swords, and your pruninghooks into spears: let the weak say, I am strong.	Beat your plowshares into swords and your pruning hooks into spears. Let the weak say, ‘I am strong!’
JOL	3	11	사면의 열국아 너희는 속히 와서 모일지어다 여호와여 주의 용사들로 그리로 내려오게 하옵소서	Assemble yourselves, and come, all ye heathen, and gather yourselves together round about: thither cause thy mighty ones to come down, O Lord.	Come quickly, all you surrounding nations, and gather yourselves. Bring down Your mighty ones, O LORD.
JOL	3	12	열국은 동하여 여호사밧 골짜기로 올라올지어다 내가 거기 앉아서 사면의 열국을 다 심판하리로다	Let the heathen be wakened, and come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat: for there will I sit to judge all the heathen round about.	Let the nations be roused and advance to the Valley of Jehoshaphat, for there I will sit down to judge all the nations on every side.
JOL	3	13	너희는 낫을 쓰라 곡식이 익었도다 와서 밞을지어다 포도주 틀이 가득히 차고 포도주 독이 넘치니 그들의 악이 큼이로다	Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe: come, get you down; for the press is full, the fats overflow; for their wickedness is great.	Swing the sickle, for the harvest is ripe. Come, trample the grapes, for the winepress is full; the wine vats overflow because their wickedness is great.
JOL	3	14	사람이 많음이여 판결 골짜기에 사람이 많음이여 판결 골짜기에 여호와의 날이 가까움이로다	Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision: for the day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision.	Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision! For the Day of the LORD is near in the valley of decision.
JOL	3	15	해와 달이 캄캄하며 별들이 그 빛을 거두도다	The sun and the moon shall be darkened, and the stars shall withdraw their shining.	The sun and moon will grow dark, and the stars will no longer shine.
JOL	3	16	나 여호와가 시온에서 부르짖고 예루살렘에서 목소리를 발하리니 하늘과 땅이 진동되리로다 그러나 나는 내 백성의 피난처, 이스라엘 자손의 산성이 되리로다	The Lord also shall roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem; and the heavens and the earth shall shake: but the Lord will be the hope of his people, and the strength of the children of Israel.	The LORD will roar from Zion and raise His voice from Jerusalem; heaven and earth will tremble. But the LORD will be a refuge for His people, a stronghold for the people of Israel.
JOL	3	17	그런즉 너희가 나는 내 성산 시온에 거하는 너희 하나님 여호와인 줄 알 것이라 예루살렘이 거룩하리니 다시는 이방 사람이 그 가운데로 통행하지 못하리로다	So shall ye know that I am the Lord your God dwelling in Zion, my holy mountain: then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no strangers pass through her any more.	Then you will know that I am the LORD your God, who dwells in Zion, My holy mountain. Jerusalem will be holy, never again to be overrun by foreigners.
JOL	3	18	그 날에 산들이 단 포도주를 떨어뜨릴 것이며 작은 산들이 젖을 흘릴 것이며 유다 모든 시내가 물을 흘릴 것이며 여호와의 전에서 샘이 흘러 나와서 싯딤 골짜기에 대리라	And it shall come to pass in that day, that the mountains shall drop down new wine, and the hills shall flow with milk, and all the rivers of Judah shall flow with waters, and a fountain shall come forth of the house of the Lord, and shall water the valley of Shittim.	And in that day the mountains will drip with sweet wine, and the hills will flow with milk. All the streams of Judah will run with water, and a spring will flow from the house of the LORD to water the Valley of Acacias.
JOL	3	19	그러나 애굽은 황무지가 되겠고 에돔은 황무한 들이 되리니 이는 그들이 유다 자손에게 강포를 행하여 무죄한 피를 그 땅에서 흘렸음이니라	Egypt shall be a desolation, and Edom shall be a desolate wilderness, for the violence against the children of Judah, because they have shed innocent blood in their land.	Egypt will become desolate, and Edom a desert wasteland, because of the violence done to the people of Judah, in whose land they shed innocent blood.
JOL	3	20	유다는 영원히 있겠고 예루살렘은 대대로 있으리라	But Judah shall dwell for ever, and Jerusalem from generation to generation.	But Judah will be inhabited forever, and Jerusalem from generation to generation.
JOL	3	21	내가 전에는 그들의 피흘림 당한 것을 갚아주지 아니하였거니와 이제는 갚아주리니 이는 나 여호와가 시온에 거함이니라	For I will cleanse their blood that I have not cleansed: for the Lord dwelleth in Zion.	For I will avenge their blood, which I have not yet avenged.” For the LORD dwells in Zion.
AMO	1	1	유다 왕 웃시야의 시대 곧 이스라엘 왕 요아스의 아들 여로보암의 시대의 지진 전 이년에 드고아 목자 중 아모스가 이스라엘에 대하여 묵시 받은 말씀이라	The words of Amos, who was among the herdmen of Tekoa, which he saw concerning Israel in the days of Uzziah king of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel, two years before the earthquake.	These are the words of Amos, who was among the sheepherders of Tekoa—what he saw concerning Israel two years before the earthquake, in the days when Uzziah was king of Judah and Jeroboam son of Jehoash was king of Israel.
AMO	1	2	저가 가로되 여호와께서 시온에서부터 부르짖으시며 예루살렘에서부터 음성을 발하시리니 목자의 초장이 애통하며 갈멜 산 꼭대기가 마르리로다	And he said, The Lord will roar from Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem; and the habitations of the shepherds shall mourn, and the top of Carmel shall wither.	He said: “The LORD roars from Zion and raises His voice from Jerusalem; the pastures of the shepherds mourn, and the summit of Carmel withers.”
AMO	1	3	여호와께서 가라사대 다메섹의 서너 가지 죄로 인하여 내가 그 벌을 돌이키지 아니하리니 이는 저희가 철 타작기로 타작하듯 길르앗을 압박하였음이라	Thus saith the Lord; For three transgressions of Damascus, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they have threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of iron:	This is what the LORD says: “For three transgressions of Damascus, even four, I will not revoke My judgment, because they threshed Gilead with sledges of iron.
AMO	1	4	내가 하사엘의 집에 불을 보내리니 벤하닷의 궁궐들을 사르리라	But I will send a fire into the house of Hazael, which shall devour the palaces of Ben–hadad.	So I will send fire upon the house of Hazael to consume the citadels of Ben-hadad.
AMO	1	5	내가 다메섹 빗장을 꺾으며 아웬 골짜기에서 그 거민을 끊으며 벧에던에서 홀 잡은 자를 끊으리니 아람 백성이 사로잡혀 길에 이르리라 이는 여호와의 말씀이니라	I will break also the bar of Damascus, and cut off the inhabitant from the plain of Aven, and him that holdeth the sceptre from the house of Eden: and the people of Syria shall go into captivity unto Kir, saith the Lord.	I will break down the gates of Damascus; I will cut off the ruler of the Valley of Aven and the one who wields the scepter in Beth-eden. The people of Aram will be exiled to Kir,” says the LORD.
AMO	1	6	여호와께서 가라사대 가사의 서너 가지 죄로 인하여 내가 그 벌을 돌이키지 아니하리니 이는 저희가 모든 사로잡은 자를 끌어 에돔에 붙였음이라	Thus saith the Lord; For three transgressions of Gaza, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they carried away captive the whole captivity, to deliver them up to Edom:	This is what the LORD says: “For three transgressions of Gaza, even four, I will not revoke My judgment, because they exiled a whole population, delivering them up to Edom.
AMO	1	7	내가 가사 성에 불을 보내리니 그 궁궐들을 사르리라	But I will send a fire on the wall of Gaza, which shall devour the palaces thereof:	So I will send fire upon the walls of Gaza, to consume its citadels.
AMO	1	8	내가 또 아스돗에서 그 거민과 아스글론에서 홀 잡은 자를 끊고 또 손을 돌이켜 에그론을 치리니 블레셋의 남아 있는 자가 멸망하리라 이는 주 여호와의 말씀이니라	And I will cut off the inhabitant from Ashdod, and him that holdeth the sceptre from Ashkelon, and I will turn mine hand against Ekron: and the remnant of the Philistines shall perish, saith the Lord God.	I will cut off the ruler of Ashdod and the one who wields the scepter in Ashkelon. I will turn My hand against Ekron, and the remnant of the Philistines will perish,” says the Lord GOD.
AMO	1	9	여호와께서 가라사대 두로의 서너 가지 죄로 인하여 내가 그 벌을 돌이키지 아니하리니 이는 저희가 그 형제의 계약을 기억지 아니하고 모든 사로잡은 자를 에돔에 붙였음이라	Thus saith the Lord; For three transgressions of Tyrus, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they delivered up the whole captivity to Edom, and remembered not the brotherly covenant:	This is what the LORD says: “For three transgressions of Tyre, even four, I will not revoke My judgment, because they delivered up a whole congregation of exiles to Edom and broke a covenant of brotherhood.
AMO	1	10	내가 두로 성에 불을 보내리니 그 궁궐들을 사르리라	But I will send a fire on the wall of Tyrus, which shall devour the palaces thereof.	So I will send fire upon the walls of Tyre to consume its citadels.”
AMO	1	11	여호와께서 가라사대 에돔의 서너 가지 죄로 인하여 내가 그 벌을 돌이키지 아니하리니 이는 저가 칼로 그 형제를 쫓아가며 긍휼을 버리며 노가 항상 맹렬하며 분을 끝없이 품었음이라	Thus saith the Lord; For three transgressions of Edom, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because he did pursue his brother with the sword, and did cast off all pity, and his anger did tear perpetually, and he kept his wrath for ever:	This is what the LORD says: “For three transgressions of Edom, even four, I will not revoke My judgment, because he pursued his brother with the sword and stifled all compassion; his anger raged continually, and his fury flamed incessantly.
AMO	1	12	내가 데만에 불을 보내리니 보스라의 궁궐들을 사르리라	But I will send a fire upon Teman, which shall devour the palaces of Bozrah.	So I will send fire upon Teman to consume the citadels of Bozrah.”
AMO	1	13	여호와께서 가라사대 암몬 자손의 서너 가지 죄로 인하여 내가 그 벌을 돌이키지 아니하리니 이는 저희가 자기 지경을 넓히고자 하여 길르앗의 아이 밴 여인의 배를 갈랐음이니라	Thus saith the Lord; For three transgressions of the children of Ammon, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they have ripped up the women with child of Gilead, that they might enlarge their border:	This is what the LORD says: “For three transgressions of the Ammonites, even four, I will not revoke My judgment, because they ripped open the pregnant women of Gilead in order to enlarge their territory.
AMO	1	14	내가 랍바 성에 불을 놓아 그 궁궐들을 사르되 전쟁의 날에 외침과 회리바람 날에 폭풍으로 할 것이며	But I will kindle a fire in the wall of Rabbah, and it shall devour the palaces thereof, with shouting in the day of battle, with a tempest in the day of the whirlwind:	So I will kindle a fire in the walls of Rabbah to consume its citadels amid war cries on the day of battle and a violent wind on the day of tempest.
AMO	1	15	저희의 왕은 그 방백들과 함께 사로잡혀 가리라 이는 여호와의 말씀이니라	And their king shall go into captivity, he and his princes together, saith the Lord.	Their king will go into exile— he and his princes together,” says the LORD.
AMO	2	1	여호와께서 가라사대 모압의 서너 가지 죄로 인하여 내가 그 벌을 돌이키지 아니하리니 이는 저가 에돔 왕의 뼈를 불살라 회를 만들었음이라	Thus saith the Lord; For three transgressions of Moab, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because he burned the bones of the king of Edom into lime:	This is what the LORD says: “For three transgressions of Moab, even four, I will not revoke My judgment, because he burned to lime the bones of Edom’s king.
AMO	2	2	내가 모압에 불을 보내리니 그리욧 궁궐들을 사르리라 모압이 요란함과 외침과 나팔 소리 중에서 죽을 것이라	But I will send a fire upon Moab, and it shall devour the palaces of Kerioth: and Moab shall die with tumult, with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet:	So I will send fire against Moab to consume the citadels of Kerioth. Moab will die in tumult, amid war cries and the sound of the ram’s horn.
AMO	2	3	내가 그 중에서 재판장을 멸하며 방백들을 저와 함께 죽이리라 이는 여호와의 말씀이니라	And I will cut off the judge from the midst thereof, and will slay all the princes thereof with him, saith the Lord.	I will cut off the ruler of Moab and kill all the officials with him,” says the LORD.
AMO	2	4	여호와께서 가라사대 유다의 서너 가지 죄로 인하여 내가 그 벌을 돌이키지 아니하리니 이는 저희가 여호와의 율법을 멸시하며 그 율례를 지키지 아니하고 그 열조의 따라가던 거짓것에 미혹하였음이라	Thus saith the Lord; For three transgressions of Judah, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they have despised the law of the Lord, and have not kept his commandments, and their lies caused them to err, after the which their fathers have walked:	This is what the LORD says: “For three transgressions of Judah, even four, I will not revoke My judgment, because they reject the Law of the LORD and fail to keep His statutes; they are led astray by the lies in which their fathers walked.
AMO	2	5	내가 유다에 불을 보내리니 예루살렘의 궁궐들을 사르리라	But I will send a fire upon Judah, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem.	So I will send fire upon Judah to consume the citadels of Jerusalem.”
AMO	2	6	여호와께서 가라사대 이스라엘의 서너 가지 죄로 인하여 내가 그 벌을 돌이키지 아니하리니 이는 저희가 은을 받고 의인을 팔며 신 한 켤레를 받고 궁핍한 자를 팔며	Thus saith the Lord; For three transgressions of Israel, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they sold the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes;	This is what the LORD says: “For three transgressions of Israel, even four, I will not revoke My judgment, because they sell the righteous for silver and the needy for a pair of sandals.
AMO	2	7	가난한 자의 머리에 있는 티끌을 탐내며 겸손한 자의 길을 굽게하며 부자가 한 젊은 여인에게 다녀서 나의 거룩한 이름을 더럽히며	That pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor, and turn aside the way of the meek: and a man and his father will go in unto the same maid, to profane my holy name:	They trample on the heads of the poor as on the dust of the earth; they push the needy out of their way. A man and his father have relations with the same girl and so profane My holy name.
AMO	2	8	모든 단 옆에서 전당 잡은 옷 위에 누우며 저희 신의 전에서 벌금으로 얻은 포도주를 마심이니라	And they lay themselves down upon clothes laid to pledge by every altar, and they drink the wine of the condemned in the house of their god.	They lie down beside every altar on garments taken in pledge. And in the house of their God, they drink wine obtained through fines.
AMO	2	9	내가 아모리 사람을 저희 앞에서 멸하였나니 그 키는 백향목 높이와 같고 강하기는 상수리나무 같으나 내가 그 위의 열매와 그 아래의 뿌리를 진멸하지 아니하였느냐	Yet destroyed I the Amorite before them, whose height was like the height of the cedars, and he was strong as the oaks; yet I destroyed his fruit from above, and his roots from beneath.	Yet it was I who destroyed the Amorite before them, though his height was like that of the cedars, and he was as strong as the oaks. Yet I destroyed his fruit above and his roots below.
AMO	2	10	내가 너희를 애굽 땅에서 이끌어 내어 사십 년 동안 광야에서 인도하고 아모리 사람의 땅을 너희로 차지하게 하였고	Also I brought you up from the land of Egypt, and led you forty years through the wilderness, to possess the land of the Amorite.	And I brought you up from the land of Egypt and led you forty years in the wilderness, that you might take possession of the land of the Amorite.
AMO	2	11	또 너희 아들 중에서 선지자를, 너희 청년 중에서 나시르 사람을 일으켰나니 이스라엘 자손들아 과연 그렇지 아니하냐 이는 여호와의 말씀이니라	And I raised up of your sons for prophets, and of your young men for Nazarites. Is it not even thus, O ye children of Israel? saith the Lord.	I raised up prophets from your sons and Nazirites from your young men. Is this not true, O children of Israel?” declares the LORD.
AMO	2	12	그러나 너희가 나시르 사람으로 포도주를 마시게 하며 또 선지자에게 명하여 예언하지 말라 하였느니라	But ye gave the Nazarites wine to drink; and commanded the prophets, saying, Prophesy not.	“But you made the Nazirites drink wine and commanded the prophets not to prophesy.
AMO	2	13	곡식 단을 가득히 실은 수레가 흙을 누름 같이 내가 너희 자리에 너희를 누르리니	Behold, I am pressed under you, as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaves.	Behold, I am about to crush you in your place as with a cart full of grain.
AMO	2	14	빨리 달음박질하는 자도 도망할 수 없으며 강한 자도 자기 힘을 낼 수 없으며 용사도 피할 수 없으며	Therefore the flight shall perish from the swift, and the strong shall not strengthen his force, neither shall the mighty deliver himself:	Escape will fail the swift, the strong will not prevail by his strength, and the mighty will not save his life.
AMO	2	15	활을 가진 자도 설 수 없으며 발이 빠른 자도 피할 수 없으며 말타는 자도 피할 수 없고	Neither shall he stand that handleth the bow; and he that is swift of foot shall not deliver himself: neither shall he that rideth the horse deliver himself.	The archer will not stand his ground, the fleet of foot will not escape, and the horseman will not save his life.
AMO	2	16	용사 중에 굳센 자는 그 날에 벌거벗고야 도망하리라 이는 여호와의 말씀이니라	And he that is courageous among the mighty shall flee away naked in that day, saith the Lord.	Even the bravest of mighty men will flee naked on that day,” declares the LORD.
AMO	3	1	이스라엘 자손들아 여호와께서 너희를 쳐서 이르시는 이 말씀을 들으라 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 올리신 온 족속을 쳐서 이르시기를	Hear this word that the Lord hath spoken against you, O children of Israel, against the whole family which I brought up from the land of Egypt, saying,	Hear this word that the LORD has spoken against you, O children of Israel, against the whole family that I brought up out of the land of Egypt:
AMO	3	2	내가 땅의 모든 족속 중에 너희만 알았나니 그러므로 내가 너희 모든 죄악을 너희에게 보응하리라 하셨나니	You only have I known of all the families of the earth: therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities.	“Only you have I known from all the families of the earth; therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities.”
AMO	3	3	두 사람이 의합지 못하고야 어찌 동행하겠으며	Can two walk together, except they be agreed?	Can two walk together without agreeing where to go?
AMO	3	4	사자가 움킨 것이 없고야 어찌 수풀에서 부르짖겠으며 젊은 사자가 잡은 것이 없고야 어찌 굴에서 소리를 내겠느냐	Will a lion roar in the forest, when he hath no prey? will a young lion cry out of his den, if he have taken nothing?	Does a lion roar in the forest when he has no prey? Does a young lion growl in his den if he has caught nothing?
AMO	3	5	창애를 땅에 베풀지 아니하고야 새가 어찌 거기 치이겠으며 아무 잡힌 것이 없고야 창애가 어찌 땅에서 뛰겠느냐	Can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth, where no gin is for him? shall one take up a snare from the earth, and have taken nothing at all?	Does a bird land in a snare where no bait has been set? Does a trap spring from the ground when it has nothing to catch?
AMO	3	6	성읍에서 나팔을 불게 되고야 백성이 어찌 두려워하지 아니하겠으며 여호와의 시키심이 아니고야 재앙이 어찌 성읍에 임하겠느냐	Shall a trumpet be blown in the city, and the people not be afraid? shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord hath not done it?	If a ram’s horn sounds in a city, do the people not tremble? If calamity comes to a city, has not the LORD caused it?
AMO	3	7	주 여호와께서는 자기의 비밀을 그 종 선지자들에게 보이지 아니하시고는 결코 행하심이 없으시리라	Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets.	Surely the Lord GOD does nothing without revealing His plan to His servants the prophets.
AMO	3	8	사자가 부르짖은즉 누가 두려워하지 아니하겠느냐 주 여호와께서 말씀하신즉 누가 예언하지 아니하겠느냐	The lion hath roared, who will not fear? the Lord God hath spoken, who can but prophesy?	The lion has roared— who will not fear? The Lord GOD has spoken— who will not prophesy?
AMO	3	9	아스돗의 궁들과 애굽 땅 궁들에 광포하여 이르기를 너희는 사마리아 산들에 모여 그 성 중에서 얼마나 큰 요란함과 학대함이 있나 보라 하라	Publish in the palaces at Ashdod, and in the palaces in the land of Egypt, and say, Assemble yourselves upon the mountains of Samaria, and behold the great tumults in the midst thereof, and the oppressed in the midst thereof.	Proclaim to the citadels of Ashdod and to the citadels of Egypt: “Assemble on the mountains of Samaria; see the great unrest in the city and the acts of oppression in her midst.”
AMO	3	10	자기 궁궐에서 포학과 겁탈을 쌓는 자들이 바른 일 행할 줄을 모르느니라 이는 여호와의 말씀이니라	For they know not to do right, saith the Lord, who store up violence and robbery in their palaces.	“For they know not how to do right,” declares the LORD. “They store up violence and destruction in their citadels.”
AMO	3	11	그러므로 주 여호와께서 가라사대 이 땅 사면에 대적이 있어 네 힘을 쇠하게 하며 네 궁궐을 약탈하리라	Therefore thus saith the Lord God; An adversary there shall be even round about the land; and he shall bring down thy strength from thee, and thy palaces shall be spoiled.	Therefore this is what the Lord GOD says: “An enemy will surround the land; he will pull down your strongholds and plunder your citadels.”
AMO	3	12	여호와께서 가라사대 목자가 사자 입에서 양의 두 다리나 귀 조각을 건져냄과 같이 사마리아에서 침상 모퉁이에나 걸상에 비단 방석에 앉은 이스라엘 자손이 건져냄을 입으리라	Thus saith the Lord; As the shepherd taketh out of the mouth of the lion two legs, or a piece of an ear; so shall the children of Israel be taken out that dwell in Samaria in the corner of a bed, and in Damascus in a couch.	This is what the LORD says: “As the shepherd snatches from the mouth of the lion two legs or a piece of an ear, so the Israelites dwelling in Samaria will be rescued having just the corner of a bed or the cushion of a couch.
AMO	3	13	주 여호와 만군의 하나님이 가라사대 너희는 듣고 야곱의 족속에게 증거하라	Hear ye, and testify in the house of Jacob, saith the Lord God, the God of hosts,	Hear and testify against the house of Jacob, declares the Lord GOD, the God of Hosts.
AMO	3	14	내가 이스라엘의 모든 죄를 보응하는 날에 벧엘의 단들을 벌하여 그 단의 뿔들을 꺾어 땅에 떨어뜨리고	That in the day that I shall visit the transgressions of Israel upon him I will also visit the altars of Beth–el: and the horns of the altar shall be cut off, and fall to the ground.	On the day I punish Israel for their transgressions, I will visit destruction on the altars of Bethel; the horns of the altar will be cut off, and they will fall to the ground.
AMO	3	15	겨울 궁과 여름 궁을 치리니 상아궁들이 파멸되며 큰 궁들이 결단나리라 이는 여호와의 말씀이니라	And I will smite the winter house with the summer house; and the houses of ivory shall perish, and the great houses shall have an end, saith the Lord.	I will tear down the winter house along with the summer house; the houses of ivory will also perish, and the great houses will come to an end,” declares the LORD.
AMO	4	1	사마리아 산에 거하는 바산 암소들아 이 말을 들으라 너희는 가난한 자를 학대하며 궁핍한 자를 압제하며 가장에게 이르기를 술을 가져다가 우리로 마시게 하라 하는도다	Hear this word, ye kine of Bashan, that are in the mountain of Samaria, which oppress the poor, which crush the needy, which say to their masters, Bring, and let us drink.	Hear this word, you cows of Bashan on Mount Samaria, you women who oppress the poor and crush the needy, who say to your husbands, “Bring us more to drink.”
AMO	4	2	주 여호와께서 자기의 거룩함을 가리켜 맹세하시되 때가 너희에게 임할지라 사람이 갈고리로 너희를 끌어가며 낚시로 너희의 남은 자들을 그리하리라	The Lord God hath sworn by his holiness, that, lo, the days shall come upon you, that he will take you away with hooks, and your posterity with fishhooks.	The Lord GOD has sworn by His holiness: “Behold, the days are coming when you will be taken away with hooks, and your posterity with fishhooks.
AMO	4	3	너희가 성 무너진 데로 말미암아 각기 앞으로 바로 나가서 하르몬에 던지우리라 이는 여호와의 말씀이니라	And ye shall go out at the breaches, every cow at that which is before her; and ye shall cast them into the palace, saith the Lord.	You will go out through broken walls, each one straight ahead of her, and you will be cast out toward Harmon,” declares the LORD.
AMO	4	4	너희는 벧엘에 가서 범죄하며 길갈에 가서 죄를 더하며 아침마다 너희 희생을, 삼 일 마다 너희 십일조를 드리며	Come to Beth–el, and transgress; at Gilgal multiply transgression; and bring your sacrifices every morning, and your tithes after three years:	“Go to Bethel and transgress; rebel even more at Gilgal! Bring your sacrifices every morning, your tithes every three days.
AMO	4	5	누룩 넣은 것을 불살라 수은제로 드리며 낙헌제를 소리내어 광포하려무나 이스라엘 자손들아 이것이 너희의 기뻐하는 바니라 이는 주 여호와의 말씀이니라	And offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving with leaven, and proclaim and publish the free offerings: for this liketh you, O ye children of Israel, saith the Lord God.	Offer leavened bread as a thank offering, and loudly proclaim your freewill offerings. For that is what you children of Israel love to do,” declares the Lord GOD.
AMO	4	6	또 내가 너희 모든 성읍에서 너희 이를 한가하게 하며 너희 각처에서 양식이 떨어지게 하였으나 너희가 내게로 돌아오지 아니하였느니라 이는 여호와의 말씀이니라	And I also have given you cleanness of teeth in all your cities, and want of bread in all your places: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the Lord.	“I beset all your cities with cleanness of teeth and all your towns with lack of bread, yet you did not return to Me,” declares the LORD.
AMO	4	7	또 추수하기 석 달 전에 내가 너희에게 비를 멈추어 어떤 성읍에는 내리고 어떤 성읍에는 내리지 않게 하였더니 땅 한 부분은 비를 얻고 한 부분은 비를 얻지 못하여 말랐으매	And also I have withholden the rain from you, when there were yet three months to the harvest: and I caused it to rain upon one city, and caused it not to rain upon another city: one piece was rained upon, and the piece whereupon it rained not withered.	“I also withheld the rain from you when the harvest was three months away. I sent rain on one city but withheld it from another. One field received rain; another without rain withered.
AMO	4	8	두세 성읍 사람이 어떤 성읍으로 비틀거리며 물을 마시러 가서 만족히 마시지 못하였으나 너희가 내게로 돌아오지 아니하였느니라 이는 여호와의 말씀이니라	So two or three cities wandered unto one city, to drink water; but they were not satisfied: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the Lord.	People staggered from city to city for water to drink, but they were not satisfied; yet you did not return to Me,” declares the LORD.
AMO	4	9	내가 풍재와 깜부기 재앙으로 너희를 쳤으며 팟종이로 너희의 많은 동산과 포도원과 무화과나무와 감람나무를 다 먹게 하였으나 너희가 내게로 돌아오지 아니하였느니라 이는 여호와의 말씀이니라	I have smitten you with blasting and mildew: when your gardens and your vineyards and your fig trees and your olive trees increased, the palmerworm devoured them: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the Lord.	“I struck you with blight and mildew in your growing gardens and vineyards; the locust devoured your fig and olive trees, yet you did not return to Me,” declares the LORD.
AMO	4	10	내가 너희 중에 염병이 임하게 하기를 애굽에서 한 것처럼 하였으며 칼로 너희 청년들을 죽엿으며 너희 말들을 노략하게 하며 너희 진의 악취로 코를 찌르게 하였으나 너희가 내게로 돌아오지 아니하였느니라 이는 여호와의 말씀이니라	I have sent among you the pestilence after the manner of Egypt: your young men have I slain with the sword, and have taken away your horses; and I have made the stink of your camps to come up unto your nostrils: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the Lord.	“I sent plagues among you like those of Egypt; I killed your young men with the sword, along with your captured horses. I filled your nostrils with the stench of your camp, yet you did not return to Me,” declares the LORD.
AMO	4	11	내가 너희 중의 성읍 무너뜨리기를 하나님 내가 소돔과 고모라를 무너뜨림 같이 하였으므로 너희가 불 붙는 가운데서 빼낸 나무 조각 같이 되었으나 너희가 내게로 돌아오지 아니하였느니라 이는 여호와의 말씀이니라	I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the Lord.	“Some of you I overthrew as I overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and you were like a firebrand snatched from a blaze, yet you did not return to Me,” declares the LORD.
AMO	4	12	그러므로 이스라엘아 내가 이와 같이 네게 행하리라 내가 이것을 네게 행하리니 이스라엘아 네 하나님 만나기를 예비하라	Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel: and because I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.	“Therefore, that is what I will do to you, O Israel, and since I will do this to you, prepare to meet your God, O Israel!
AMO	4	13	대저 산들을 지으며 바람을 창조하며 자기 뜻을 사람에게 보이며 아침을 어둡게 하며 땅의 높은 데를 밟는 자는 그 이름이 만군의 하나님 여호와니라	For, lo, he that formeth the mountains, and createth the wind, and declareth unto man what is his thought, that maketh the morning darkness, and treadeth upon the high places of the earth, The Lord, The God of hosts, is his name.	For behold, He who forms the mountains, who creates the wind and reveals His thoughts to man, who turns the dawn to darkness and strides on the heights of the earth— the LORD, the God of Hosts, is His name.”
AMO	5	1	이스라엘 족속아 내가 너희에게 대하여 애가로 지은 이 말을 들으라	Hear ye this word which I take up against you, even a lamentation, O house of Israel.	Hear this word, O house of Israel, this lamentation I take up against you:
AMO	5	2	처녀 이스라엘이 엎드러졌음이여 다시 일어나지 못하리로다 자기 땅에 던지움이여 일으킬 자 없으리로다	The virgin of Israel is fallen; she shall no more rise: she is forsaken upon her land; there is none to raise her up.	“Fallen is Virgin Israel, never to rise again. She lies abandoned on her land, with no one to raise her up.”
AMO	5	3	주 여호와께서 가라사대 이스라엘 중에서 천 명이 나가던 성읍에는 백 명만 남고 백 명이 나가던 성읍에는 열 명만 남으리라 하셨느니라	For thus saith the Lord God; The city that went out by a thousand shall leave an hundred, and that which went forth by an hundred shall leave ten, to the house of Israel.	This is what the Lord GOD says: “The city that marches out a thousand strong will only see a hundred return, and the one that marches out a hundred strong will have but ten left in the house of Israel.”
AMO	5	4	여호와께서 이스라엘 족속에게 이르시기를 너희는 나를 찾으라 그리하면 살리라	For thus saith the Lord unto the house of Israel, Seek ye me, and ye shall live:	For this is what the LORD says to the house of Israel: “Seek Me and live!
AMO	5	5	벧엘을 찾지 말며 길갈로 들어가지 말며 브엘세바로도 나아가지 말라 길갈은 정녕 사로잡히겠고 벧엘은 허무하게 될 것임이라 하셨나니	But seek not Beth–el, nor enter into Gilgal, and pass not to Beer–sheba: for Gilgal shall surely go into captivity, and Beth–el shall come to nought.	Do not seek Bethel or go to Gilgal; do not journey to Beersheba, for Gilgal will surely go into exile, and Bethel will come to nothing.
AMO	5	6	너희는 여호와를 찾으라 그리하면 살리라 염려컨대 저가 불 같이 요셉의 집에 내리사 멸하시리니 벧엘에서 그 불들을 끌 자가 없을까 하노라	Seek the Lord, and ye shall live; lest he break out like fire in the house of Joseph, and devour it, and there be none to quench it in Beth–el.	Seek the LORD and live, or He will sweep like fire through the house of Joseph; it will devour everything, with no one at Bethel to extinguish it.
AMO	5	7	공법을 인진으로 변하며 정의를 땅에 던지는 자들아	Ye who turn judgment to wormwood, and leave off righteousness in the earth,	There are those who turn justice into wormwood and cast righteousness to the ground.
AMO	5	8	묘성과 삼성을 만드시며 사망의 그늘로 아침이 되게 하시며 백주로 어두운 밤이 되게 하시며 바닷물을 불러 지면에 쏟으시는 자를 찾으라 그 이름이 여호와시니라	Seek him that maketh the seven stars and Orion, and turneth the shadow of death into the morning, and maketh the day dark with night: that calleth for the waters of the sea, and poureth them out upon the face of the earth: The Lord is his name:	He who made the Pleiades and Orion, who turns darkness into dawn and darkens day into night, who summons the waters of the sea and pours them over the face of the earth— the LORD is His name—
AMO	5	9	저가 강한 자에게 홀연히 패망이 임하게 하신즉 그 패망이 산성에 미치느니라	That strengtheneth the spoiled against the strong, so that the spoiled shall come against the fortress.	He flashes destruction on the strong, so that fury comes upon the stronghold.
AMO	5	10	무리가 성문에서 책망하는 자를 미워하며 정직히 말하는 자를 싫어하는도다	They hate him that rebuketh in the gate, and they abhor him that speaketh uprightly.	There are those who hate the one who reproves in the gate and despise him who speaks with integrity.
AMO	5	11	너희가 가난한 자를 밟고 저에게서 밀의 부당한 세를 취하였은즉 너희가 비록 다듬은 돌로 집을 건축하였으나 거기 거하지 못할 것이요 아름다운 포도원을 심었으나 그 포도주를 마시지 못하리라	Forasmuch therefore as your treading is upon the poor, and ye take from him burdens of wheat: ye have built houses of hewn stone, but ye shall not dwell in them; ye have planted pleasant vineyards, but ye shall not drink wine of them.	Therefore, because you trample on the poor and exact from him a tax of grain, you will never live in the stone houses you have built; you will never drink the wine from the lush vineyards you have planted.
AMO	5	12	너희의 허물이 많고 죄악이 중함을 내가 아노라 너희는 의인을 학대하며 뇌물을 받고 성문에서 궁핍한 자를 억울하게 하는 자로다	For I know your manifold transgressions and your mighty sins: they afflict the just, they take a bribe, and they turn aside the poor in the gate from their right.	For I know that your transgressions are many and your sins are numerous. You oppress the righteous by taking bribes; you deprive the poor of justice in the gate.
AMO	5	13	그러므로 이런 때에 지혜자가 잠잠하나니 이는 악한 때임이니라	Therefore the prudent shall keep silence in that time; for it is an evil time.	Therefore, the prudent keep silent in such times, for the days are evil.
AMO	5	14	너희는 살기 위하여 선을 구하고 악을 구하지 말지어다 만군의 하나님 여호와께서 너희의 말과 같이 너희와 함께 하시리라	Seek good, and not evil, that ye may live: and so the Lord, the God of hosts, shall be with you, as ye have spoken.	Seek good, not evil, so that you may live. And the LORD, the God of Hosts, will be with you, as you have claimed.
AMO	5	15	너희는 악을 미워하고 선을 사랑하며 성문에서 공의를 세울지어다 만군의 하나님 여호와께서 혹시 요셉의 남은 자를 긍휼히 여기시리라	Hate the evil, and love the good, and establish judgment in the gate: it may be that the Lord God of hosts will be gracious unto the remnant of Joseph.	Hate evil and love good; establish justice in the gate. Perhaps the LORD, the God of Hosts, will be gracious to the remnant of Joseph.”
AMO	5	16	그러므로 주 만군의 하나님 여호와께서 말씀하시기를 사람이 모든 광장에서 울겠고 모든 거리에서 오호라 오호라 하겠으며 농부를 불러다가 애곡하게 하며 울음꾼을 불러다가 울게 할 것이며	Therefore the Lord, the God of hosts, the Lord, saith thus; Wailing shall be in all streets; and they shall say in all the highways, Alas! alas! and they shall call the husbandman to mourning, and such as are skilful of lamentation to wailing.	Therefore this is what the LORD, the God of Hosts, the Lord, says: “There will be wailing in all the public squares and cries of ‘Alas! Alas!’ in all the streets. The farmer will be summoned to mourn, and the mourners to wail.
AMO	5	17	모든 포도원에서도 울리니 이는 내가 너희 가운데로 지나갈 것임이니라 이는 여호와의 말씀이니라	And in all vineyards shall be wailing: for I will pass through thee, saith the Lord.	There will be wailing in all the vineyards, for I will pass through your midst,” says the LORD.
AMO	5	18	화 있을진저 여호와의 날을 사모하는 자여 너희가 어찌하여 여호와의 날을 사모하느뇨 그 날은 어두움이요 빛이 아니라	Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord! to what end is it for you? the day of the Lord is darkness, and not light.	Woe to you who long for the Day of the LORD! What will the Day of the LORD be for you? It will be darkness and not light.
AMO	5	19	마치 사람이 사자를 피하다가 곰을 만나거나 혹 집에 들어가서 손을 벽에 대었다가 뱀에게 물림 같도다	As if a man did flee from a lion, and a bear met him; or went into the house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a serpent bit him.	It will be like a man who flees from a lion, only to encounter a bear, or who enters his house and rests his hand against the wall, only to be bitten by a snake.
AMO	5	20	여호와의 날이 어찌 어두워서 빛이 없음이 아니며 캄캄하여 빛남이 없음이 아니냐	Shall not the day of the Lord be darkness, and not light? even very dark, and no brightness in it?	Will not the Day of the LORD be darkness and not light, even gloom with no brightness in it?
AMO	5	21	내가 너희 절기를 미워하여 멸시하며 너희 성회들을 기뻐하지 아니하나니	I hate, I despise your feast days, and I will not smell in your solemn assemblies.	“I hate, I despise your feasts! I cannot stand the stench of your solemn assemblies.
AMO	5	22	너희가 내게 번제나 소제를 드릴지라도 내가 받지 아니할 것이요 너희 살진 희생의 화목제도 내가 돌아보지 아니하리라	Though ye offer me burnt offerings and your meat offerings, I will not accept them: neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts.	Even though you offer Me burnt offerings and grain offerings, I will not accept them; for your peace offerings of fattened cattle I will have no regard.
AMO	5	23	네 노랫소리를 내 앞에서 그칠지어다 네 비파 소리도 내가 듣지 아니하리라	Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs; for I will not hear the melody of thy viols.	Take away from Me the noise of your songs! I will not listen to the music of your harps.
AMO	5	24	오직 공법을 물 같이, 정의를 하수 같이 흘릴지로다	But let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream.	But let justice roll on like a river, and righteousness like an ever-flowing stream.
AMO	5	25	이스라엘 족속아 너희가 사십 년 동안 광야에서 희생과 소제물을 내게 드렸느냐	Have ye offered unto me sacrifices and offerings in the wilderness forty years, O house of Israel?	Did you bring Me sacrifices and offerings forty years in the wilderness, O house of Israel?
AMO	5	26	너희가 너희 왕 식굿과 너희 우상 기윤 곧 너희가 너희를 위하여 만들어서 신으로 삼은 별 형상을 지고 가리라	But ye have borne the tabernacle of your Moloch and Chiun your images, the star of your god, which ye made to yourselves.	You have taken along Sakkuth your king and Kaiwan your star god, the idols you made for yourselves.
AMO	5	27	내가 너희를 다메섹 밖으로 사로잡혀 가게 하리라 이는 만군의 하나님이라 일컫는 여호와의 말씀이니라	Therefore will I cause you to go into captivity beyond Damascus, saith the Lord, whose name is The God of hosts.	Therefore I will send you into exile beyond Damascus,” says the LORD, whose name is the God of Hosts.
AMO	6	1	화 있을진저 시온에서 안일한 자와 사마리아 산에서 마음이 든든한 자 곧 열국 중 우승하여 유명하므로 이스라엘 족속이 따르는 자들이여	Woe to them that are at ease in Zion, and trust in the mountain of Samaria, which are named chief of the nations, to whom the house of Israel came!	Woe to those at ease in Zion and those secure on Mount Samaria, the distinguished ones of the foremost nation, to whom the house of Israel comes.
AMO	6	2	너희는 갈레에 건너가고 거기서 대 하맛으로 가고 또 블레셋 사람의 가드로 내려가 보라 그곳들이 이 나라들보다 나으냐 그 토지가 너희 토지보다 넓으냐	Pass ye unto Calneh, and see; and from thence go ye to Hamath the great: then go down to Gath of the Philistines: be they better than these kingdoms? or their border greater than your border?	Cross over to Calneh and see; go from there to the great Hamath; then go down to Gath of the Philistines. Are you better than these kingdoms? Is their territory larger than yours?
AMO	6	3	너희는 흉한 날이 멀다 하여 강포한 자리로 가까워지게 하고	Ye that put far away the evil day, and cause the seat of violence to come near;	You dismiss the day of calamity and bring near a reign of violence.
AMO	6	4	상아 상에 누우며 침상에서 기지개 켜며 양떼에서 어린 양과 우리에서 송아지를 취하여 먹고	That lie upon beds of ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall;	You lie on beds inlaid with ivory, and lounge upon your couches. You dine on lambs from the flock and calves from the stall.
AMO	6	5	비파에 맞추어 헛된 노래를 지절거리며 다윗처럼 자기를 위하여 악기를 제조하며	That chant to the sound of the viol, and invent to themselves instruments of musick, like David;	You improvise songs on the harp like David and invent your own musical instruments.
AMO	6	6	대접으로 포도주를 마시며 귀한 기름을 몸에 바르면서 요셉의 환난을 인하여는 근심치 아니하는 자로다	That drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments: but they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph.	You drink wine by the bowlful and anoint yourselves with the finest oils, but you fail to grieve over the ruin of Joseph.
AMO	6	7	그러므로 저희가 이제는 사로잡히는 자 중에 앞서 사로잡히리니 기지개 켜는 자의 떠드는 소리가 그치리라	Therefore now shall they go captive with the first that go captive, and the banquet of them that stretched themselves shall be removed.	Therefore, you will now go into exile as the first of the captives, and your feasting and lounging will come to an end.
AMO	6	8	만군의 하나님 여호와께서 가라사대 주 여호와가 자기를 가리켜 맹세하였노라 내가 야곱의 영광을 싫어하며 그 궁궐들을 미워하므로 이 성읍과 거기 가득한 것을 대적에게 붙이리라 하셨느니라	The Lord God hath sworn by himself, saith the Lord the God of hosts, I abhor the excellency of Jacob, and hate his palaces: therefore will I deliver up the city with all that is therein.	The Lord GOD has sworn by Himself—the LORD, the God of Hosts, has declared: “I abhor Jacob’s pride and detest his citadels, so I will deliver up the city and everything in it.”
AMO	6	9	한 집에 열 사람이 남는다 하여도 다 죽을 것이라	And it shall come to pass, if there remain ten men in one house, that they shall die.	And if there are ten men left in one house, they too will die.
AMO	6	10	죽은 사람의 친척 곧 그 시체를 불사를 자가 그 뼈를 집 밖으로 가져갈 때에 그 집 내실에 있는 자에게 묻기를 아직 너와 함께한 자가 있느냐 하여 대답하기를 아주 없다 하면 저가 또 말하기를 잠잠하라 우리가 여호와의 이름을 일컫지 못할 것이라 하리라	And a man’s uncle shall take him up, and he that burneth him, to bring out the bones out of the house, and shall say unto him that is by the sides of the house, Is there yet any with thee? and he shall say, No. Then shall he say, Hold thy tongue: for we may not make mention of the name of the Lord.	And when the relative who is to burn the bodies picks them up to remove them from the house, he will call to one inside, “Is anyone else with you?” “None,” that person will answer. “Silence,” the relative will retort, “for the name of the LORD must not be invoked.”
AMO	6	11	보라 여호와께서 명하시므로 큰 집이 침을 받아 갈라지며 작은 집이 침을 받아 터지리라	For, behold, the Lord commandeth, and he will smite the great house with breaches, and the little house with clefts.	For the LORD gives a command: “The great house will be smashed to pieces, and the small house to rubble.”
AMO	6	12	말들이 어찌 바위 위에서 달리겠으며 소가 어찌 거기 밭 갈겠느냐 그런데 너희는 공법을 쓸개로 변하며 정의의 열매를 인진으로 변하여	Shall horses run upon the rock? will one plow there with oxen? for ye have turned judgment into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into hemlock:	“Do horses gallop on the cliffs? Does one plow the sea with oxen? But you have turned justice into poison and the fruit of righteousness into wormwood—
AMO	6	13	허무한 것을 기뻐하며 이르기를 우리의 뿔은 우리 힘으로 취하지 아니하였느냐 하는 자로다	Ye which rejoice in a thing of nought, which say, Have we not taken to us horns by our own strength?	you who rejoice in Lo-debar and say, ‘Did we not take Karnaim by our own strength?’
AMO	6	14	만군의 하나님 여호와께서 가라사대 이스라엘 족속아 내가 한 나라를 일으켜 너희를 치리니 저희가 하맛 어귀에서부터 아라바 시내까지 너희를 학대하리라 하셨느니라	But, behold, I will raise up against you a nation, O house of Israel, saith the Lord the God of hosts; and they shall afflict you from the entering in of Hemath unto the river of the wilderness.	For behold, I will raise up a nation against you, O house of Israel,” declares the LORD, the God of Hosts, “and they will oppress you from Lebo-hamath to the Brook of the Arabah.”
AMO	7	1	주 여호와께서 내게 보이신 것이 이러하니라 왕이 풀을 벤 후 풀이 다시 움돋기 시작할 때에 주께서 황충을 지으시매	Thus hath the Lord God shewed unto me; and, behold, he formed grasshoppers in the beginning of the shooting up of the latter growth; and, lo, it was the latter growth after the king’s mowings.	This is what the Lord GOD showed me: He was preparing swarms of locusts just after the king’s harvest, as the late spring crop was coming up.
AMO	7	2	황충이 땅의 풀을 다 먹은지라 내가 가로되 주 여호와여 청컨대 사하소서 야곱이 미약하오니 어떻게 서리이까 하매	And it came to pass, that when they had made an end of eating the grass of the land, then I said, O Lord God, forgive, I beseech thee: by whom shall Jacob arise? for he is small.	And when the locusts had eaten every green plant in the land, I said, “Lord GOD, please forgive! How will Jacob survive, since he is so small?”
AMO	7	3	여호와께서 이에 대하여 뜻을 돌이켜 가라사대 이것이 이루지 아니하리라 하시니라	The Lord repented for this: It shall not be, saith the Lord.	So the LORD relented from this plan. “It will not happen,” He said.
AMO	7	4	주 여호와께서 또 내게 보이신 것이 이러하니라 주 여호와께서 명하여 불로 징벌하게 하시니 불이 큰 바다를 삼키고 육지까지 먹으려 하는지라	Thus hath the Lord God shewed unto me: and, behold, the Lord God called to contend by fire, and it devoured the great deep, and did eat up a part.	This is what the Lord GOD showed me: The Lord GOD was calling for judgment by fire. It consumed the great deep and devoured the land.
AMO	7	5	이에 내가 가로되 주 여호와여 청컨대 그치소서 야곱이 미약하오니 어떻게 서리이까 하매	Then said I, O Lord God, cease, I beseech thee: by whom shall Jacob arise? for he is small.	Then I said, “Lord GOD, please stop! How will Jacob survive, since he is so small?”
AMO	7	6	주 여호와께서 이에 대하여 뜻을 돌이켜 가라사대 이것도 이루지 아니하리라 하시니라	The Lord repented for this: This also shall not be, saith the Lord God.	So the LORD relented from this plan. “It will not happen either,” said the Lord GOD.
AMO	7	7	또 내게 보이신 것이 이러하니라 다림줄을 띄우고 쌓은 담 곁에 주께서 손에 다림줄을 잡고 서셨더니	Thus he shewed me: and, behold, the Lord stood upon a wall made by a plumbline, with a plumbline in his hand.	This is what He showed me: Behold, the Lord was standing by a wall true to plumb, with a plumb line in His hand.
AMO	7	8	내게 이르시되 아모스야 네가 무엇을 보느냐 내가 대답하되 다림줄을 내 백성 이스라엘 가운데 베풀고 다시는 용서치 아니하리니	And the Lord said unto me, Amos, what seest thou? And I said, A plumbline. Then said the Lord, Behold, I will set a plumbline in the midst of my people Israel: I will not again pass by them any more:	“Amos, what do you see?” asked the LORD. “A plumb line,” I replied. “Behold,” said the Lord, “I am setting a plumb line among My people Israel; I will no longer spare them:
AMO	7	9	이삭의 산당들이 황폐되며 이스라엘의 성소들이 훼파될 것이라 내가 일어나 칼로 여로보암의 집을 치리라 하시니라	And the high places of Isaac shall be desolate, and the sanctuaries of Israel shall be laid waste; and I will rise against the house of Jeroboam with the sword.	The high places of Isaac will be deserted, and the sanctuaries of Israel will be laid waste; and I will rise up against the house of Jeroboam with My sword.”
AMO	7	10	때에 벧엘의 제사장 아마샤가 이스라엘 왕 여로보암에게 기별하여 가로되 이스라엘 족속 중에 아모스가 왕을 모반하나니 그 모든 말을 이 땅이 견딜 수 없나이다	Then Amaziah the priest of Beth–el sent to Jeroboam king of Israel, saying, Amos hath conspired against thee in the midst of the house of Israel: the land is not able to bear all his words.	Then Amaziah the priest of Bethel sent word to Jeroboam king of Israel, saying, “Amos has conspired against you in the midst of the house of Israel. The land cannot bear all his words,
AMO	7	11	아모스가 말하기를 여로보암은 칼에 죽겠고 이스라엘은 정녕 사로잡혀 그 땅에서 떠나겠다 하나이다 하고	For thus Amos saith, Jeroboam shall die by the sword, and Israel shall surely be led away captive out of their own land.	for this is what Amos has said: ‘Jeroboam will die by the sword, and Israel will surely go into exile, away from their homeland.’”
AMO	7	12	아마샤가 또 아모스에게 이르되 선견자야 너는 유다 땅으로 도망하여 가서 거기서나 떡을 먹으며 거기서나 예언하고	Also Amaziah said unto Amos, O thou seer, go, flee thee away into the land of Judah, and there eat bread, and prophesy there:	And Amaziah said to Amos, “Go away, you seer! Flee to the land of Judah; earn your bread there and do your prophesying there.
AMO	7	13	다시는 벧엘에서 예언하지 말라 이는 왕의 성소요 왕의 궁임이니라	But prophesy not again any more at Beth–el: for it is the king’s chapel, and it is the king’s court.	But never prophesy at Bethel again, because it is the sanctuary of the king and the temple of the kingdom.”
AMO	7	14	아모스가 아마샤에게 대답하여 가로되 나는 선지자가 아니며 선지자의 아들도 아니요 나는 목자요 뽕나무를 배양하는 자로서	Then answered Amos, and said to Amaziah, I was no prophet, neither was I a prophet’s son; but I was an herdman, and a gatherer of sycomore fruit:	“I was not a prophet,” Amos replied, “nor was I the son of a prophet; rather, I was a herdsman and a tender of sycamore-fig trees.
AMO	7	15	양떼를 따를 때에 여호와께서 나를 데려다가 내게 이르시기를 가서 내 백성 이스라엘에게 예언하라 하셨나니	And the Lord took me as I followed the flock, and the Lord said unto me, Go, prophesy unto my people Israel.	But the LORD took me from following the flock and said to me, ‘Go, prophesy to My people Israel.’
AMO	7	16	이제 너는 여호와의 말씀을 들을지니라 네가 이르기를 이스라엘에 대하여 예언하지 말며 이삭의 집을 향하여 경계하지 말라 하므로	Now therefore hear thou the word of the Lord: Thou sayest, Prophesy not against Israel, and drop not thy word against the house of Isaac.	Now, therefore, hear the word of the LORD. You say: ‘Do not prophesy against Israel; do not preach against the house of Isaac.’
AMO	7	17	여호와께서 말씀하시기를 네 아내는 성읍 중에서 창기가 될 것이요 네 자녀들은 칼에 엎드러지며 네 땅은 줄 띄워 나누일 것이며 너는 더러운 땅에서 죽을 것이요 이스라엘은 정녕 사로잡혀 그 본토에서 떠나리라 하셨느니라	Therefore thus saith the Lord; Thy wife shall be an harlot in the city, and thy sons and thy daughters shall fall by the sword, and thy land shall be divided by line; and thou shalt die in a polluted land: and Israel shall surely go into captivity forth of his land.	Therefore this is what the LORD says: ‘Your wife will become a prostitute in the city, and your sons and daughters will fall by the sword. Your land will be divided by a measuring line, and you yourself will die on pagan soil. And Israel will surely go into exile, away from their homeland.’”
AMO	8	1	주 여호와께서 또 내게 여름 실과 한 광주리를 보이시며	Thus hath the Lord God shewed unto me: and behold a basket of summer fruit.	This is what the Lord GOD showed me: I saw a basket of summer fruit.
AMO	8	2	가라사대 아모스야 네가 무엇을 보느냐 내가 가로되 여름 실과 한 광주리니이다 하매 여호와께서 내게 이르시되 내 백성 이스라엘의 끝이 이르렀은즉 내가 다시는 저를 용서치 아니하리니	And he said, Amos, what seest thou? And I said, A basket of summer fruit. Then said the Lord unto me, The end is come upon my people of Israel; I will not again pass by them any more.	“Amos, what do you see?” He asked. “A basket of summer fruit,” I replied. So the LORD said to me, “The end has come for My people Israel; I will no longer spare them.”
AMO	8	3	그 날에 궁전의 노래가 애곡으로 변할 것이며 시체가 많아서 사람이 잠잠히 처처에 내어버리리라 이는 주 여호와의 말씀이니라	And the songs of the temple shall be howlings in that day, saith the Lord God: there shall be many dead bodies in every place; they shall cast them forth with silence.	“In that day,” declares the Lord GOD, “the songs of the temple will turn to wailing. Many will be the corpses, strewn in silence everywhere!”
AMO	8	4	궁핍한 자를 삼키며 땅의 가난한 자를 망케 하려는 자들아 이 말을 들으라	Hear this, O ye that swallow up the needy, even to make the poor of the land to fail,	Hear this, you who trample the needy, who do away with the poor of the land,
AMO	8	5	너희가 이르기를 월삭이 언제나 지나서 우리로 곡식을 팔게 하며 안식일이 언제나 지나서 우리로 밀을 내게 할꼬 에바를 작게하여 세겔을 크게 하며 거짓 저울로 속이며	Saying, When will the new moon be gone, that we may sell corn? and the sabbath, that we may set forth wheat, making the ephah small, and the shekel great, and falsifying the balances by deceit?	asking, “When will the New Moon be over, that we may sell grain? When will the Sabbath end, that we may market wheat? Let us reduce the ephah and increase the shekel; let us cheat with dishonest scales.
AMO	8	6	은으로 가난한 자를 사며 신 한 켤레로 궁핍한 자를 사며 잿밀을 팔자 하는도다	That we may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes; yea, and sell the refuse of the wheat?	Let us buy the poor with silver and the needy for a pair of sandals, selling even the chaff with the wheat!”
AMO	8	7	여호와께서 야곱의 영광을 가리켜 맹세하시되 내가 저희의 모든 소위를 영영 잊지 아니하리라 하셨나니	The Lord hath sworn by the excellency of Jacob, Surely I will never forget any of their works.	The LORD has sworn by the Pride of Jacob: “I will never forget any of their deeds.
AMO	8	8	이로 인하여 땅이 떨지 않겠으며 그 가운데 모든 거민이 애통하지 않겠느냐 온 땅이 하수의 넘침 같이 솟아오르며 애굽 강 같이 뛰놀다가 낮아지리라	Shall not the land tremble for this, and every one mourn that dwelleth therein? and it shall rise up wholly as a flood; and it shall be cast out and drowned, as by the flood of Egypt.	Will not the land quake for this, and all its dwellers mourn? All of it will swell like the Nile; it will surge and then subside like the Nile in Egypt.
AMO	8	9	주 여호와께서 가라사대 그 날에 내가 해로 대낮에 지게 하여 백주에 땅을 캄캄케 하며	And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord God, that I will cause the sun to go down at noon, and I will darken the earth in the clear day:	And in that day, declares the Lord GOD, I will make the sun go down at noon, and I will darken the earth in the daytime.
AMO	8	10	너희 절기를 애통으로, 너희 모든 노래를 애곡으로 변하며 모든 사람으로 굵은 베로 허리를 동이게 하며 모든 머리를 대머리 되게 하며 독자의 죽음을 인하여 애통하듯 하게 하며 그 결국으로 곤고한 날과 같게 하리라	And I will turn your feasts into mourning, and all your songs into lamentation; and I will bring up sackcloth upon all loins, and baldness upon every head; and I will make it as the mourning of an only son, and the end thereof as a bitter day.	I will turn your feasts into mourning and all your songs into lamentation. I will cause everyone to wear sackcloth and every head to be shaved. I will make it like a time of mourning for an only son, and its outcome like a bitter day.
AMO	8	11	주 여호와께서 가라사대 보라 날이 이를지라 내가 기근을 땅에 보내리니 양식이 없어 주림이 아니며 물이 없어 갈함이 아니요 여호와의 말씀을 듣지 못한 기갈이라	Behold, the days come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord:	Behold, the days are coming, declares the Lord GOD, when I will send a famine on the land— not a famine of bread or a thirst for water, but a famine of hearing the words of the LORD.
AMO	8	12	사람이 이 바다에서 저 바다까지 북에서 동까지 비틀거리며 여호와의 말씀을 구하려고 달려 왕래하되 얻지 못하리니	And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east, they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it.	People will stagger from sea to sea and roam from north to east, seeking the word of the LORD, but they will not find it.
AMO	8	13	그 날에 아름다운 처녀와 젊은 남자가 다 갈하여 피곤하리라	In that day shall the fair virgins and young men faint for thirst.	In that day the lovely young women— the young men as well— will faint from thirst.
AMO	8	14	무릇 사마리아의 죄된 우상을 가리켜 맹세하여 이르기를 단아 네 신의 생존을 가리켜 맹세하노라 하거나 브엘세바의 위하는 것의 생존을 가리켜 맹세하노라 하는 사람은 엎드러지고 다시 일어나지 못하리라	They that swear by the sin of Samaria, and say, Thy god, O Dan, liveth; and, The manner of Beer–sheba liveth; even they shall fall, and never rise up again.	Those who swear by the guilt of Samaria and say, ‘As surely as your god lives, O Dan,’ or, ‘As surely as the way of Beersheba lives’— they will fall, never to rise again.”
AMO	9	1	내가 보니 주께서 단 곁에 서서 이르시되 기둥 머리를 쳐서 문지방이 움직이게 하며 그것으로 부숴져서 무리의 머리에 떨어지게 하라 내가 그 남은 자를 칼로 살륙하리니 그 중에서 하나도 도망하지 못하며 그 중에서 하나도 피하지 못하리라	I saw the Lord standing upon the altar: and he said, Smite the lintel of the door, that the posts may shake: and cut them in the head, all of them; and I will slay the last of them with the sword: he that fleeth of them shall not flee away, and he that escapeth of them shall not be delivered.	I saw the Lord standing beside the altar, and He said: “Strike the tops of the pillars so that the thresholds shake. Topple them on the heads of all the people, and I will kill the rest with the sword. None of those who flee will get away; none of the fugitives will escape.
AMO	9	2	저희가 파고 음부로 들어갈지라도 내 손이 거기서 취하여 낼 것이요 하늘로 올라갈지라도 내가 거기서 취하여 내리울 것이며	Though they dig into hell, thence shall mine hand take them; though they climb up to heaven, thence will I bring them down:	Though they dig down to Sheol, from there My hand will take them; and though they climb up to heaven, from there I will pull them down.
AMO	9	3	갈멜 산 꼭대기에 숨을지라도 내가 거기서 찾아낼 것이요 내 눈을 피하여 바다 밑에 숨을지라도 내가 거기서 뱀을 명하여 물게 할 것이요	And though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search and take them out thence; and though they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the sea, thence will I command the serpent, and he shall bite them:	Though they hide themselves atop Carmel, there I will track them and seize them; and though they hide from Me at the bottom of the sea, there I will command the serpent to bite them.
AMO	9	4	그 원수 앞에 사로잡혀 갈지라도 내가 거기서 칼을 명하여 살륙하게 할 것이라 내가 저희에게 주목하여 화를 내리고 복을 내리지 아니하리라 하시니라	And though they go into captivity before their enemies, thence will I command the sword, and it shall slay them: and I will set mine eyes upon them for evil, and not for good.	Though they are driven by their enemies into captivity, there I will command the sword to slay them. I will fix My eyes upon them for harm and not for good.”
AMO	9	5	주 만군의 여호와는 땅을 만져 녹게 하사 무릇 거기 거한 자로 애통하게 하시며 그 온 땅으로 하수의 넘침 같이 솟아오르며 애굽 강 같이 낮아지게 하시는 자요	And the Lord God of hosts is he that toucheth the land, and it shall melt, and all that dwell therein shall mourn: and it shall rise up wholly like a flood; and shall be drowned, as by the flood of Egypt.	The Lord GOD of Hosts, He who touches the earth and it melts, and all its dwellers mourn— all the land rises like the Nile, then sinks like the river of Egypt—
AMO	9	6	그 전을 하늘에 세우시며 그 궁창의 기초를 땅에 두시며 바다 물을 불러 지면에 쏟으시는 자니 그 이름은 여호와시니라	It is he that buildeth his stories in the heaven, and hath founded his troop in the earth; he that calleth for the waters of the sea, and poureth them out upon the face of the earth: The Lord is his name.	He builds His upper rooms in the heavens and founds His vault upon the earth. He summons the waters of the sea and pours them over the face of the earth. The LORD is His name.
AMO	9	7	여호와께서 가라사대 이스라엘 자손들아 너희는 내게 구스 족속 같지 아니하냐 내가 이스라엘을 애굽 땅에서, 블레셋 사람을 갑돌에서, 아람 사람을 길에서 올라오게 하지 아니하였느냐	Are ye not as children of the Ethiopians unto me, O children of Israel? saith the Lord. Have not I brought up Israel out of the land of Egypt? and the Philistines from Caphtor, and the Syrians from Kir?	“Are you not like the Cushites to Me, O children of Israel?” declares the LORD. “Did I not bring Israel up from the land of Egypt, the Philistines from Caphtor, and the Arameans from Kir?
AMO	9	8	보라 주 여호와 내가 범죄한 나라에 주목하여 지면에서 멸하리라 그러나 야곱의 집은 온전히 멸하지는 아니하리라 이는 여호와의 말씀이니라	Behold, the eyes of the Lord God are upon the sinful kingdom, and I will destroy it from off the face of the earth; saving that I will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob, saith the Lord.	Surely the eyes of the Lord GOD are on the sinful kingdom, and I will destroy it from the face of the earth. Yet I will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob,” declares the LORD.
AMO	9	9	내가 명령하여 이스라엘 족속을 만국 중에 체질하기를 곡식을 체질함 같이 하려니와 그 한 알갱이도 땅에 떨어지지 아니하리라	For, lo, I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel among all nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the least grain fall upon the earth.	“For surely I will give the command, and I will shake the house of Israel among all the nations as grain is sifted in a sieve; but not a pebble will reach the ground.
AMO	9	10	내 백성 중에서 말하기를 화가 우리에게 미치지 아니하며 임하지 아니하리라 하는 모든 죄인은 칼에 죽으리라	All the sinners of my people shall die by the sword, which say, The evil shall not overtake nor prevent us.	All the sinners among My people will die by the sword— all those who say, ‘Disaster will never draw near or confront us.’”
AMO	9	11	그 날에 내가 다윗의 무너진 천막을 일으키고 그 틈을 막으며 그 퇴락한 것을 일으키고 옛적과 같이 세우고	In that day will I raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof; and I will raise up his ruins, and I will build it as in the days of old:	“In that day I will restore the fallen tent of David. I will repair its gaps, restore its ruins, and rebuild it as in the days of old,
AMO	9	12	저희로 에돔의 남은 자와 내 이름으로 일컫는 만국을 기업으로 얻게 하리라 이는 이를 행하시는 여호와의 말씀이니라	That they may possess the remnant of Edom, and of all the heathen, which are called by my name, saith the Lord that doeth this.	that they may possess the remnant of Edom and all the nations that bear My name,” declares the LORD, who will do this.
AMO	9	13	여호와께서 가라사대 보라 날이 이를지라 그 때에 밭가는 자가 곡식 베는 자의 뒤를 이으며 포도를 밟는 자가 씨 뿌리는 자의 뒤를 이으며 산들은 단 포도주를 흘리며 작은 산들은 녹으리라	Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that the plowman shall overtake the reaper, and the treader of grapes him that soweth seed; and the mountains shall drop sweet wine, and all the hills shall melt.	“Behold, the days are coming,” declares the LORD, “when the plowman will overtake the reaper and the treader of grapes, the sower of seed. The mountains will drip with sweet wine, with which all the hills will flow.
AMO	9	14	내가 내 백성 이스라엘의 사로잡힌 것을 돌이키리니 저희가 황무한 성읍을 건축하고 거하며 포도원들을 심고 그 포도주를 마시며 과원들을 만들고 그 과실을 먹으리라	And I will bring again the captivity of my people of Israel, and they shall build the waste cities, and inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and drink the wine thereof; they shall also make gardens, and eat the fruit of them.	I will restore My people Israel from captivity; they will rebuild and inhabit the ruined cities. They will plant vineyards and drink their wine; they will make gardens and eat their fruit.
AMO	9	15	내가 저희를 그 본토에 심으리니 저희가 나의 준 땅에서 다시 뽑히지 아니하리라 이는 네 하나님 여호와의 말씀이니라	And I will plant them upon their land, and they shall no more be pulled up out of their land which I have given them, saith the Lord thy God.	I will firmly plant them in their own land, never again to be uprooted from the land that I have given them,” says the LORD your God.
OBA	1	1	오바댜의 묵시라 주 여호와께서 에돔에 대하여 이같이 말씀하시니라 우리가 여호와께로 말미암아 소식을 들었나니 곧 사자가 열국 중에 보내심을 받고 이르기를 너희는 일어날지어다 우리가 일어나서 그로 더불어 싸우자 하는 것이니라	The vision of Obadiah. Thus saith the Lord God concerning Edom; We have heard a rumour from the Lord, and an ambassador is sent among the heathen, Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle.	This is the vision of Obadiah: This is what the Lord GOD says about Edom— We have heard a message from the LORD; an envoy has been sent among the nations to say, “Rise up, and let us go to battle against her!”—
OBA	1	2	여호와께서 가라사대 내가 너를 열국 중에 미약하게 하였으므로 네가 크게 멸시를 받느니라	Behold, I have made thee small among the heathen: thou art greatly despised.	“Behold, I will make you small among the nations; you will be deeply despised.
OBA	1	3	바위 틈에 거하며 높은 곳에 사는 자여 네가 중심에 이르기를 누가 능히 나를 땅에 끌어내리겠느냐 하니 너의 중심의 교만이 너를 속였도다	The pride of thine heart hath deceived thee, thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock, whose habitation is high; that saith in his heart, Who shall bring me down to the ground?	The pride of your heart has deceived you, O dwellers in the clefts of the rocks whose habitation is the heights, who say in your heart, ‘Who can bring me down to the ground?’
OBA	1	4	네가 독수리처럼 높이 오르며 별 사이에 깃들일지라도 내가 거기서 너를 끌어내리리라 나 여호와가 말하였느니라	Though thou exalt thyself as the eagle, and though thou set thy nest among the stars, thence will I bring thee down, saith the Lord.	Though you soar like the eagle and make your nest among the stars, even from there I will bring you down,” declares the LORD.
OBA	1	5	혹시 도적이 네게 이르렀으며 강도가 밤중에 네게 이르렀을지라도 그 마음에 만족하게 취하면 그치지 아니하였겠느냐 혹시 포도를 따는 자가 네게 이르렀을지라도 그것을 얼마쯤 남기지 아니하였겠느냐 네가 어찌 그리 망하였는고	If thieves came to thee, if robbers by night, (how art thou cut off!) would they not have stolen till they had enough? if the grapegatherers came to thee, would they not leave some grapes?	“If thieves came to you, if robbers by night— oh, how you will be ruined— would they not steal only what they wanted? If grape gatherers came to you, would they not leave some gleanings?
OBA	1	6	에서가 어찌 그리 수탐되었으며 그 감춘 보물이 어찌 그리 수탐되었는고	How are the things of Esau searched out! how are his hidden things sought up!	But how Esau will be pillaged, his hidden treasures sought out!
OBA	1	7	너와 약조한 자들이 다 너를 쫓아 변경에 이르게 하며 너와 화목하던 자들이 너를 속이고 이기며 네 식물을 먹는 자들이 네 아래 함정을 베푸니 네 마음에 지각이 없음이로다	All the men of thy confederacy have brought thee even to the border: the men that were at peace with thee have deceived thee, and prevailed against thee; they that eat thy bread have laid a wound under thee: there is none understanding in him.	All the men allied with you will drive you to the border; the men at peace with you will deceive and overpower you. Those who eat your bread will set a trap for you without your awareness of it.
OBA	1	8	나 여호와가 말하노라 그 날에 내가 에돔에서 지혜 있는 자를 멸하며 에서의 산에서 지각 있는 자를 멸하지 아니하겠느냐	Shall I not in that day, saith the Lord, even destroy the wise men out of Edom, and understanding out of the mount of Esau?	In that day, declares the LORD, will I not destroy the wise men of Edom and the men of understanding in the mountains of Esau?
OBA	1	9	드만아 네 용사들이 놀랄 것이라 이로 인하여 에서의 산의 거민이 살륙을 당하여 다 멸절되리라	And thy mighty men, O Teman, shall be dismayed, to the end that every one of the mount of Esau may be cut off by slaughter.	Then your mighty men, O Teman, will be terrified, so that everyone in the mountains of Esau will be cut down in the slaughter.
OBA	1	10	네가 네 형제 야곱에게 행한 포학을 인하여 수욕을 입고 영원히 멸절되리라	For thy violence against thy brother Jacob shame shall cover thee, and thou shalt be cut off for ever.	Because of the violence against your brother Jacob, you will be covered with shame and cut off forever.
OBA	1	11	네가 멀리 섰던 날 곧 이방인이 그의 재물을 늑탈하며 외국인이 그의 성문에 들어가서 예루살렘을 얻기 위하여 제비뽑던 날에 너도 그들 중 한 사람 같았었느니라	In the day that thou stoodest on the other side, in the day that the strangers carried away captive his forces, and foreigners entered into his gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem, even thou wast as one of them.	On the day you stood aloof while strangers carried off his wealth and foreigners entered his gate and cast lots for Jerusalem, you were just like one of them.
OBA	1	12	네가 형제의 날 곧 그 재앙의 날에 방관할 것이 아니며 그 고난의 날에 네가 입을 크게 벌릴 것이 아니라	But thou shouldest not have looked on the day of thy brother in the day that he became a stranger; neither shouldest thou have rejoiced over the children of Judah in the day of their destruction; neither shouldest thou have spoken proudly in the day of distress.	But you should not gloat in that day, your brother’s day of misfortune, nor rejoice over the people of Judah in the day of their destruction, nor boast proudly in the day of their distress.
OBA	1	13	내 백성이 환난을 당하는 날에 네가 그 성문에 들어가지 않을 것이며 환난을 당하는 날에 네가 그 고난을 방관하지 않을 것이며 환난을 당하는 날에 네가 그 재물에 손을 대지 않을 것이며	Thou shouldest not have entered into the gate of my people in the day of their calamity; yea, thou shouldest not have looked on their affliction in the day of their calamity, nor have laid hands on their substance in the day of their calamity;	You should not enter the gate of My people in the day of their disaster, nor gloat over their affliction in the day of their disaster, nor loot their wealth in the day of their disaster.
OBA	1	14	사거리에 서서 그 도망하는 자를 막지 않을 것이며 고난의 날에 그 남은 자를 대적에게 붙이지 않을 것이니라	Neither shouldest thou have stood in the crossway, to cut off those of his that did escape; neither shouldest thou have delivered up those of his that did remain in the day of distress.	Nor should you stand at the crossroads to cut off their fugitives, nor deliver up their survivors in the day of their distress.
OBA	1	15	여호와의 만국을 벌할 날이 가까웠나니 너의 행한 대로 너도 받을 것인즉 너의 행한 것이 네 머리로 돌아갈 것이라	For the day of the Lord is near upon all the heathen: as thou hast done, it shall be done unto thee: thy reward shall return upon thine own head.	For the Day of the LORD is near for all the nations. As you have done, it will be done to you; your recompense will return upon your own head.
OBA	1	16	너희가 내 성산에서 마신 것 같이 만국인이 항상 마시리니 곧 마시고 삼켜서 본래 없던 것 같이 되리라	For as ye have drunk upon my holy mountain, so shall all the heathen drink continually, yea, they shall drink, and they shall swallow down, and they shall be as though they had not been.	For as you drank on My holy mountain, so all the nations will drink continually. They will drink and gulp it down; they will be as if they had never existed.
OBA	1	17	오직 시온 산에서 피할 자가 있으리니 그 산이 거룩할 것이요 야곱 족속은 자기 기업을 누릴 것이며	But upon mount Zion shall be deliverance, and there shall be holiness; and the house of Jacob shall possess their possessions.	But on Mount Zion there will be deliverance, and it will be holy, and the house of Jacob will reclaim their possession.
OBA	1	18	야곱 족속은 불이 될 것이요 요셉 족속은 불꽃이 될 것이며 에서 족속은 초개가 될 것이라 그들이 그의 위에 붙어서 그를 사를 것인즉 에서 족속에 남은 자가 없으리니 이는 여호와께서 말씀하셨음이니라	And the house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau for stubble, and they shall kindle in them, and devour them; and there shall not be any remaining of the house of Esau; for the Lord hath spoken it.	Then the house of Jacob will be a blazing fire, and the house of Joseph a burning flame; but the house of Esau will be stubble— Jacob will set it ablaze and consume it. Therefore no survivor will remain from the house of Esau.” For the LORD has spoken.
OBA	1	19	남방 사람은 에서의 산을 얻을 것이며 평지 사람은 블레셋을 얻을 것이요 또 그들이 에브라임의 들과 사마리아의 들을 얻을 것이며 베냐민은 길르앗을 얻을 것이며	And they of the south shall possess the mount of Esau; and they of the plain the Philistines: and they shall possess the fields of Ephraim, and the fields of Samaria: and Benjamin shall possess Gilead.	Those from the Negev will possess the mountains of Esau; those from the foothills will possess the land of the Philistines. They will occupy the fields of Ephraim and Samaria, and Benjamin will possess Gilead.
OBA	1	20	사로잡혔던 이스라엘의 뭇 자손은 가나안 사람에게 속한 땅을 사르밧까지 얻을 것이며 예루살렘의 사로잡혔던 자 곧 스바랏에 있는 자는 남방의 성읍들을 얻을 것이니라	And the captivity of this host of the children of Israel shall possess that of the Canaanites, even unto Zarephath; and the captivity of Jerusalem, which is in Sepharad, shall possess the cities of the south.	And the exiles of this host of the Israelites will possess the land of the Canaanites as far as Zarephath; and the exiles from Jerusalem who are in Sepharad will possess the cities of the Negev.
OBA	1	21	구원자들이 시온 산에 올라와서 에서의 산을 심판하리니 나라가 여호와께 속하리라	And saviours shall come up on mount Zion to judge the mount of Esau; and the kingdom shall be the Lord’s.	The deliverers will ascend Mount Zion to rule over the mountains of Esau. And the kingdom will belong to the LORD.
JON	1	1	여호와의 말씀이 아밋대의 아들 요나에게 임하니라 이르시되	Now the word of the Lord came unto Jonah the son of Amittai, saying,	Now the word of the LORD came to Jonah son of Amittai, saying,
JON	1	2	너는 일어나 저 큰 성읍 니느웨로 가서 그것을 쳐서 외치라 그 악독이 내 앞에 상달하였음이니라 하시니라	Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and cry against it; for their wickedness is come up before me.	“Get up! Go to the great city of Nineveh and preach against it, because its wickedness has come up before Me.”
JON	1	3	그러나 요나가 여호와의 낯을 피하려고 일어나 다시스로 도망하려 하여 욥바로 내려갔더니 마침 다시스로 가는 배를 만난지라 여호와의 낯을 피하여 함께 다시스로 가려고 선가를 주고 배에 올랐더라	But Jonah rose up to flee unto Tarshish from the presence of the Lord, and went down to Joppa; and he found a ship going to Tarshish: so he paid the fare thereof, and went down into it, to go with them unto Tarshish from the presence of the Lord.	Jonah, however, got up to flee to Tarshish, away from the presence of the LORD. He went down to Joppa and found a ship bound for Tarshish. So he paid the fare and went aboard to sail for Tarshish, away from the presence of the LORD.
JON	1	4	여호와께서 대풍을 대작하여 배가 거의 깨어지게 된지라	But the Lord sent out a great wind into the sea, and there was a mighty tempest in the sea, so that the ship was like to be broken.	Then the LORD hurled a great wind upon the sea, and such a violent storm arose that the ship was in danger of breaking apart.
JON	1	5	사공이 두려워하여 각각 자기의 신을 부르고 또 배를 가볍게 하려고 그 가운데 물건을 바다에 던지니라 그러나 요나는 배 밑층에 내려가서 누워 깊이 잠이 든지라	Then the mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his god, and cast forth the wares that were in the ship into the sea, to lighten it of them. But Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship; and he lay, and was fast asleep.	The sailors were afraid, and each cried out to his own god. And they threw the ship’s cargo into the sea to lighten the load. But Jonah had gone down to the lowest part of the vessel, where he lay down and fell into a deep sleep.
JON	1	6	선장이 나아가서 그에게 이르되 자는 자여 어찜이뇨 일어나서 네 하나님께 구하라 혹시 하나님이 우리를 생각하사 망하지 않게 하시리라 하니라	So the shipmaster came to him, and said unto him, What meanest thou, O sleeper? arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon us, that we perish not.	The captain approached him and said, “How can you sleep? Get up and call upon your God. Perhaps this God will consider us, so that we may not perish.”
JON	1	7	그들이 서로 이르되 자 우리가 제비를 뽑아 이 재앙이 누구로 인하여 우리에게 임하였나 알자 하고 곧 제비를 뽑으니 제비가 요나에게 당한지라	And they said every one to his fellow, Come, and let us cast lots, that we may know for whose cause this evil is upon us. So they cast lots, and the lot fell upon Jonah.	“Come!” said the sailors to one another. “Let us cast lots to find out who is responsible for this calamity that is upon us.” So they cast lots, and the lot fell on Jonah.
JON	1	8	무리가 그에게 이르되 청컨대 이 재앙이 무슨 연고로 우리에게 임하였는가 고하라 네 생업이 무엇이며 어디서 왔으며 고국이 어디며 어느 민족에 속하였느냐	Then said they unto him, Tell us, we pray thee, for whose cause this evil is upon us; What is thine occupation? and whence comest thou? what is thy country? and of what people art thou?	“Tell us now,” they demanded, “who is to blame for this calamity that is upon us? What is your occupation, and where have you come from? What is your country, and who are your people?”
JON	1	9	그가 대답하되 나는 히브리 사람이요 바다와 육지를 지으신 하늘의 하나님 여호와를 경외하는 자로라 하고	And he said unto them, I am an Hebrew; and I fear the Lord, the God of heaven, which hath made the sea and the dry land.	“I am a Hebrew,” replied Jonah. “I worship the LORD, the God of the heavens, who made the sea and the dry land.”
JON	1	10	자기가 여호와의 낯을 피함인 줄을 그들에게 고하였으므로 무리가 알고 심히 두려워하여 이르되 네가 어찌하여 이렇게 행하였느냐 하니라	Then were the men exceedingly afraid, and said unto him, Why hast thou done this? For the men knew that he fled from the presence of the Lord, because he had told them.	Then the men were even more afraid and said to him, “What have you done?” The men knew that he was fleeing from the presence of the LORD, because he had told them.
JON	1	11	바다가 점점 흉용한지라 무리가 그에게 이르되 우리가 너를 어떻게 하여야 바다가 우리를 위하여 잔잔하겠느냐	Then said they unto him, What shall we do unto thee, that the sea may be calm unto us? for the sea wrought, and was tempestuous.	Now the sea was growing worse and worse, so they said to Jonah, “What must we do to you to calm this sea for us?”
JON	1	12	그가 대답하되 나를 들어 바다에 던지라 그리하면 바다가 너희를 위하여 잔잔하리라 너희가 이 큰 폭풍을 만난 것이 나의 연고인 줄을 내가 아노라 하니라	And he said unto them, Take me up, and cast me forth into the sea; so shall the sea be calm unto you: for I know that for my sake this great tempest is upon you.	“Pick me up,” he answered, “and cast me into the sea, so it may quiet down for you. For I know that I am to blame for this violent storm that has come upon you.”
JON	1	13	그러나 그 사람들이 힘써 노를 저어 배를 육지에 돌리고자 하다가 바다가 그들을 향하여 점점 더 흉용하므로 능히 못한지라	Nevertheless the men rowed hard to bring it to the land; but they could not: for the sea wrought, and was tempestuous against them.	Nevertheless, the men rowed hard to get back to dry land, but they could not, for the sea was raging against them more and more.
JON	1	14	무리가 여호와께 부르짖어 가로되 여호와여 구하고 구하오니 이 사람의 생명 까닭에 우리를 멸망시키지 마옵소서 무죄한 피를 우리에게 돌리지 마옵소서 주 여호와께서는 주의 뜻대로 행하심이니이다 하고	Wherefore they cried unto the Lord, and said, We beseech thee, O Lord, we beseech thee, let us not perish for this man’s life, and lay not upon us innocent blood: for thou, O Lord, hast done as it pleased thee.	So they cried out to the LORD: “Please, O LORD, do not let us perish on account of this man’s life! Do not charge us with innocent blood! For You, O LORD, have done as You pleased.”
JON	1	15	요나를 들어 바다에 던지매 바다의 뛰노는 것이 곧 그친지라	So they took up Jonah, and cast him forth into the sea: and the sea ceased from her raging.	At this, they picked up Jonah and cast him into the sea, and the raging sea grew calm.
JON	1	16	그 사람들이 여호와를 크게 두려워하여 여호와께 제물을 드리고 서원을 하였더라	Then the men feared the Lord exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice unto the Lord, and made vows.	Then the men feared the LORD greatly, and they offered a sacrifice to the LORD and made vows to Him.
JON	1	17	여호와께서 이미 큰 물고기를 예비하사 요나를 삼키게 하셨으므로 요나가 삼 일 삼 야를 물고기 배에 있으니라	Now the Lord had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah. And Jonah was in the belly of the fish three days and three nights.	Now the LORD had appointed a great fish to swallow Jonah, and Jonah spent three days and three nights in the belly of the fish.
JON	2	1	요나가 물고기 뱃속에서 그 하나님 여호와께 기도하여	Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord his God out of the fish’s belly,	From inside the fish, Jonah prayed to the LORD his God,
JON	2	2	가로되 내가 받는 고난을 인하여 여호와께 불러 이뢰었삽더니 주께서 내게 대답하셨고 내가 스올의 뱃속에서 부르짖었삽더니 주께서 나의 음성을 들으셨나이다	And said, I cried by reason of mine affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me; out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou heardest my voice.	saying: “In my distress I called to the LORD, and He answered me. From the belly of Sheol I called for help, and You heard my voice.
JON	2	3	주께서 나를 깊음 속 바다 가운데 던지셨으므로 큰 물이 나를 둘렀고 주의 파도와 큰 물결이 다 내 위에 넘쳤나이다	For thou hadst cast me into the deep, in the midst of the seas; and the floods compassed me about: all thy billows and thy waves passed over me.	For You cast me into the deep, into the heart of the seas, and the current swirled about me; all Your breakers and waves swept over me.
JON	2	4	내가 말하기를 내가 주의 목전에서 쫓겨났을지라도 다시 주의 성전을 바라보겠다 하였나이다	Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight; yet I will look again toward thy holy temple.	At this, I said, ‘I have been banished from Your sight; yet I will look once more toward Your holy temple.’
JON	2	5	물이 나를 둘렀으되 영혼까지 하였사오며 깊음이 나를 에웠고 바다 풀이 내 머리를 쌌나이다	The waters compassed me about, even to the soul: the depth closed me round about, the weeds were wrapped about my head.	The waters engulfed me to take my life; the watery depths closed around me; the seaweed wrapped around my head.
JON	2	6	내가 산의 뿌리까지 내려갔사오며 땅이 그 빗장으로 나를 오래도록 막았사오나 나의 하나님 여호와여 주께서 내 생명을 구덩이에서 건지셨나이다	I went down to the bottoms of the mountains; the earth with her bars was about me for ever: yet hast thou brought up my life from corruption, O Lord my God.	To the roots of the mountains I descended; the earth beneath me barred me in forever! But You raised my life from the pit, O LORD my God!
JON	2	7	내 영혼이 내 속에서 피곤할 때에 내가 여호와를 생각하였삽더니 내 기도가 주께 이르렀사오며 주의 성전에 미쳤나이다	When my soul fainted within me I remembered the Lord: and my prayer came in unto thee, into thine holy temple.	As my life was fading away, I remembered the LORD. My prayer went up to You, to Your holy temple.
JON	2	8	무릇 거짓되고 헛된 것을 숭상하는 자는 자기에게 베푸신 은혜를 버렸사오나	They that observe lying vanities forsake their own mercy.	Those who cling to worthless idols forsake His loving devotion.
JON	2	9	나는 감사하는 목소리로 주께 제사를 드리며 나의 서원을 주께 갚겠나이다 구원은 여호와께로서 말미암나이다 하니라	But I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving; I will pay that that I have vowed. Salvation is of the Lord.	But I, with the voice of thanksgiving, will sacrifice to You. I will fulfill what I have vowed. Salvation is from the LORD!”
JON	2	10	여호와께서 물고기에게 명하시매 요나를 육지에 토하니라	And the Lord spake unto the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry land.	And the LORD commanded the fish, and it vomited Jonah onto dry land.
JON	3	1	여호와의 말씀이 두 번째 요나에게 임하니라 이르시되	And the word of the Lord came unto Jonah the second time, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to Jonah a second time:
JON	3	2	일어나 저 큰 성읍 니느웨로 가서 내가 네게 명한 바를 그들에게 선포하라 하신지라	Arise, go unto Nineveh, that great city, and preach unto it the preaching that I bid thee.	“Get up! Go to the great city of Nineveh and proclaim to it the message that I give you.”
JON	3	3	요나가 여호와의 말씀대로 일어나서 니느웨로 가니라 니느웨는 극히 큰 성읍이므로 삼 일 길이라	So Jonah arose, and went unto Nineveh, according to the word of the Lord. Now Nineveh was an exceeding great city of three days’ journey.	This time Jonah got up and went to Nineveh, in accordance with the word of the LORD. Now Nineveh was an exceedingly great city, requiring a three-day journey.
JON	3	4	요나가 그 성에 들어가며 곧 하룻길을 행하며 외쳐 가로되 사십 일이 지나면 니느웨가 무너지리라 하였더니	And Jonah began to enter into the city a day’s journey, and he cried, and said, Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown.	On the first day of his journey, Jonah set out into the city and proclaimed, “Forty more days and Nineveh will be overturned!”
JON	3	5	니느웨 백성이 하나님을 믿고 금식을 선포하고 무론 대소하고 굵은 베를 입은지라	So the people of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth, from the greatest of them even to the least of them.	And the Ninevites believed God. They proclaimed a fast and dressed in sackcloth, from the greatest of them to the least.
JON	3	6	그 소문이 니느웨 왕에게 들리매 왕이 보좌에서 일어나 조복을 벗고 굵은 베를 입고 재에 앉으니라	For word came unto the king of Nineveh, and he arose from his throne, and he laid his robe from him, and covered him with sackcloth, and sat in ashes.	When word reached the king of Nineveh, he got up from his throne, took off his royal robe, covered himself with sackcloth, and sat in ashes.
JON	3	7	왕이 그 대신으로 더불어 조서를 내려 니느웨에 선포하여 가로되 사람이나 짐승이나 소떼나 양떼나 아무 것도 입에 대지 말지니 곧 먹지도 말 것이요 물도 마시지 말 것이며	And he caused it to be proclaimed and published through Nineveh by the decree of the king and his nobles, saying, Let neither man nor beast, herd nor flock, taste any thing: let them not feed, nor drink water:	Then he issued a proclamation in Nineveh: “By the decree of the king and his nobles: Let no man or beast, herd or flock, taste anything at all. They must not eat or drink.
JON	3	8	사람이든지 짐승이든지 다 굵은 베를 입을 것이요 힘써 여호와께 부르짖을 것이며 각기 악한 길과 손으로 행한 강포에서 떠날 것이라	But let man and beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God: yea, let them turn every one from his evil way, and from the violence that is in their hands.	Furthermore, let both man and beast be covered with sackcloth, and have everyone call out earnestly to God. Let each one turn from his evil ways and from the violence in his hands.
JON	3	9	하나님이 혹시 뜻을 돌이키시고 그 진노를 그치사 우리로 멸망치 않게 하시리라 그렇지 않을 줄을 누가 알겠느냐 한지라	Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not?	Who knows? God may turn and relent; He may turn from His fierce anger, so that we will not perish.”
JON	3	10	하나님이 그들의 행한 것 곧 그 악한 길에서 돌이켜 떠난 것을 감찰하시고 뜻을 돌이키사 그들에게 내리리라 말씀하신 재앙을 내리지 아니하시니라	And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way; and God repented of the evil, that he had said that he would do unto them; and he did it not.	When God saw their actions—that they had turned from their evil ways—He relented from the disaster He had threatened to bring upon them.
JON	4	1	요나가 심히 싫어하고 노하여	But it displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was very angry.	Jonah, however, was greatly displeased, and he became angry.
JON	4	2	여호와께 기도하여 가로되 여호와여 내가 고국에 있을 때에 이러하겠다고 말씀하지 아니하였나이까 그러므로 내가 빨리 다시스로 도망하였사오니 주께서는 은혜로우시며 자비로우시며 노하기를 더디하시며 인애가 크시사 뜻을 돌이켜 재앙을 내리지 아니하시는 하나님이신 줄을 내가 알았음이니이다	And he prayed unto the Lord, and said, I pray thee, O Lord, was not this my saying, when I was yet in my country? Therefore I fled before unto Tarshish: for I knew that thou art a gracious God, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest thee of the evil.	So he prayed to the LORD, saying, “O LORD, is this not what I said while I was still in my own country? This is why I was so quick to flee toward Tarshish. I knew that You are a gracious and compassionate God, slow to anger, abounding in loving devotion—One who relents from sending disaster.
JON	4	3	여호와여 원컨대 이제 내 생명을 취하소서 사는 것보다 죽는 것이 내게 나음이니이다	Therefore now, O Lord, take, I beseech thee, my life from me; for it is better for me to die than to live.	And now, O LORD, please take my life from me, for it is better for me to die than to live.”
JON	4	4	여호와께서 이르시되 너의 성냄이 어찌 합당하냐 하시니라	Then said the Lord, Doest thou well to be angry?	But the LORD replied, “Have you any right to be angry?”
JON	4	5	요나가 성에서 나가서 그 성 동편에 앉되 거기서 자기를 위하여 초막을 짓고 그 그늘 아래 앉아서 성읍이 어떻게 되는 것을 보려 하니라	So Jonah went out of the city, and sat on the east side of the city, and there made him a booth, and sat under it in the shadow, till he might see what would become of the city.	Then Jonah left the city and sat down east of it, where he made himself a shelter and sat in its shade to see what would happen to the city.
JON	4	6	하나님 여호와께서 박 넝쿨을 준비하사 요나 위에 가리우게 하셨으니 이는 그 머리를 위하여 그늘이 지게 하며 그 괴로움을 면케하려 하심이었더라 요나가 박 넝쿨을 인하여 심히 기뻐하였더니	And the Lord God prepared a gourd, and made it to come up over Jonah, that it might be a shadow over his head, to deliver him from his grief. So Jonah was exceeding glad of the gourd.	So the LORD God appointed a vine, and it grew up to provide shade over Jonah’s head to ease his discomfort, and Jonah was greatly pleased with the plant.
JON	4	7	하나님이 벌레를 준비하사 이튿날 새벽에 그 박 넝쿨을 씹게 하시매 곧 시드니라	But God prepared a worm when the morning rose the next day, and it smote the gourd that it withered.	When dawn came the next day, God appointed a worm that attacked the plant so that it withered.
JON	4	8	해가 뜰 때에 하나님이 뜨거운 동풍을 준비하셨고 해는 요나의 머리에 쬐매 요나가 혼곤하여 스스로 죽기를 구하여 가로되 사는 것보다 죽는 것이 내게 나으니이다	And it came to pass, when the sun did arise, that God prepared a vehement east wind; and the sun beat upon the head of Jonah, that he fainted, and wished in himself to die, and said, It is better for me to die than to live.	As the sun was rising, God appointed a scorching east wind, and the sun beat down on Jonah’s head so that he grew faint and wished to die, saying, “It is better for me to die than to live.”
JON	4	9	하나님이 요나에게 이르시되 네가 이 박 넝쿨로 인하여 성냄이 어찌 합당하냐 그가 대답하되 내가 성내어 죽기까지 할지라도 합당하니이다	And God said to Jonah, Doest thou well to be angry for the gourd? And he said, I do well to be angry, even unto death.	Then God asked Jonah, “Have you any right to be angry about the plant?” “I do,” he replied. “I am angry enough to die!”
JON	4	10	여호와께서 가라사대 네가 수고도 아니하였고 배양도 아니하였고 하룻밤에 났다가 하룻밤에 망한 이 박 넝쿨을 네가 아꼈거든	Then said the Lord, Thou hast had pity on the gourd, for the which thou hast not laboured, neither madest it grow; which came up in a night, and perished in a night:	But the LORD said, “You cared about the plant, which you neither tended nor made grow. It sprang up in a night and perished in a night.
JON	4	11	하물며 이 큰 성읍 니느웨에는 좌우를 분변치 못하는 자가 십이만여 명이요 육축도 많이 있나니 내가 아끼는 것이 어찌 합당치 아니하냐	And should not I spare Nineveh, that great city, wherein are more than sixscore thousand persons that cannot discern between their right hand and their left hand; and also much cattle?	So should I not care about the great city of Nineveh, which has more than 120,000 people who cannot tell their right hand from their left, and many cattle as well?”
MIC	1	1	유다 열왕 요담과 아하스와 히스기야 시대에 모레셋 사람 미가에게 임한 여호와의 말씀 곧 사마리아와 예루살렘에 관한 묵시라	The word of the Lord that came to Micah the Morasthite in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah, which he saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem.	This is the word of the LORD that came to Micah the Moreshite in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah—what he saw regarding Samaria and Jerusalem:
MIC	1	2	백성들아 너희는 다 들을지어다 땅과 거기 있는 모든 것들아 자세히 들을지어다 주 여호와께서 너희에게 대하여 증거하시되 곧 주께서 성전에서 그리하실 것이니라	Hear, all ye people; hearken, O earth, and all that therein is: and let the Lord God be witness against you, the Lord from his holy temple.	Hear, O peoples, all of you; listen, O earth, and everyone in it! May the Lord GOD bear witness against you, the Lord from His holy temple.
MIC	1	3	여호와께서 그 처소에서 나오시고 강림하사 땅의 높은 곳을 밟으실 것이라	For, behold, the Lord cometh forth out of his place, and will come down, and tread upon the high places of the earth.	For behold, the LORD comes forth from His dwelling place; He will come down and tread on the high places of the earth.
MIC	1	4	그 아래서 산들이 녹고 골짜기들이 갈라지기를 불 앞의 밀 같고 비탈로 쏟아지는 물 같을 것이니	And the mountains shall be molten under him, and the valleys shall be cleft, as wax before the fire, and as the waters that are poured down a steep place.	The mountains will melt beneath Him, and the valleys will split apart, like wax before the fire, like water rushing down a slope.
MIC	1	5	이는 다 야곱의 허물을 인함이요 이스라엘 족속의 죄를 인함이라 야곱의 허물이 무엇이뇨 사마리아가 아니뇨 유다의 산당이 무엇이뇨 예루살렘이 아니뇨	For the transgression of Jacob is all this, and for the sins of the house of Israel. What is the transgression of Jacob? is it not Samaria? and what are the high places of Judah? are they not Jerusalem?	All this is for the transgression of Jacob and the sins of the house of Israel. What is the transgression of Jacob? Is it not Samaria? And what is the high place of Judah? Is it not Jerusalem?
MIC	1	6	이러므로 내가 사마리아로 들의 무더기 같게 하고 포도 심을 동산 같게 하며 또 그 돌들을 골짜기에 쏟아 내리고 그 지대를 드러내며	Therefore I will make Samaria as an heap of the field, and as plantings of a vineyard: and I will pour down the stones thereof into the valley, and I will discover the foundations thereof.	Therefore I will make Samaria a heap of rubble in the open field, a planting area for a vineyard. I will pour her stones into the valley and expose her foundations.
MIC	1	7	그 새긴 우상을 다 파쇄하고 그 음행의 값을 다 불사르며 그 목상을 다 훼파하리니 그가 기생의 값으로 모았은즉 그것이 기생의 값으로 돌아가리라	And all the graven images thereof shall be beaten to pieces, and all the hires thereof shall be burned with the fire, and all the idols thereof will I lay desolate: for she gathered it of the hire of an harlot, and they shall return to the hire of an harlot.	All her carved images will be smashed to pieces; all her wages will be burned in the fire, and I will destroy all her idols. Since she collected the wages of a prostitute, they will be used again on a prostitute.
MIC	1	8	이러므로 내가 애통하며 애곡하고 벌거벗은 몸으로 행하며 들개 같이 애곡하고 타조 같이 애통하리니	Therefore I will wail and howl, I will go stripped and naked: I will make a wailing like the dragons, and mourning as the owls.	Because of this I will lament and wail; I will walk barefoot and naked. I will howl like a jackal and mourn like an ostrich.
MIC	1	9	이는 그 상처는 고칠 수 없고 그것이 유다까지도 이르고 내 백성의 성문 곧 예루살렘에도 미쳤음이니라	For her wound is incurable; for it is come unto Judah; he is come unto the gate of my people, even to Jerusalem.	For her wound is incurable; it has reached even Judah; it has approached the gate of my people, as far as Jerusalem itself.
MIC	1	10	가드에 고하지 말며 도무지 호곡하지 말지어다 베들레아브라에서 티끌에 굴지어다	Declare ye it not at Gath, weep ye not at all: in the house of Aphrah roll thyself in the dust.	Do not tell it in Gath; do not weep at all. Roll in the dust in Beth-leaphrah.
MIC	1	11	사빌 거민아 너는 벗은 몸에 수치를 무릅쓰고 나갈지어다 사아난 거민은 나오지 못하고 벧에셀이 애곡하여 너희로 의지할 곳이 없게 하리라	Pass ye away, thou inhabitant of Saphir, having thy shame naked: the inhabitant of Zaanan came not forth in the mourning of Beth–ezel; he shall receive of you his standing.	Depart in shameful nakedness, O dwellers of Shaphir. The dwellers of Zaanan will not come out. Beth-ezel is in mourning; its support is taken from you.
MIC	1	12	마롯 거민이 근심 중에 복을 바라니 이는 재앙이 여호와께로 말미암아 예루살렘 성문에 임함이니라	For the inhabitant of Maroth waited carefully for good: but evil came down from the Lord unto the gate of Jerusalem.	For the dwellers of Maroth pined for good, but calamity came down from the LORD, even to the gate of Jerusalem.
MIC	1	13	라기스 거민아 너는 준마에 병거를 메울지어다 라기스는 딸 시온의 죄의 근본이니 이는 이스라엘의 허물이 네게서 보였음이니라	O thou inhabitant of Lachish, bind the chariot to the swift beast: she is the beginning of the sin to the daughter of Zion: for the transgressions of Israel were found in thee.	Harness your chariot horses, O dweller of Lachish. You were the beginning of sin to the Daughter of Zion, for the transgressions of Israel were found in you.
MIC	1	14	이러므로 너는 가드 모레셋에 작별하는 예물을 줄지어다 악십의 집들이 이스라엘 열왕을 속이리라	Therefore shalt thou give presents to Moresheth–gath: the houses of Achzib shall be a lie to the kings of Israel.	Therefore, send farewell gifts to Moresheth-gath; the houses of Achzib will prove deceptive to the kings of Israel.
MIC	1	15	마레사 거민아 내가 장차 너를 얻을 자로 네게 임하게 하리니 이스라엘의 영광이 아둘람까지 이를 것이라	Yet will I bring an heir unto thee, O inhabitant of Mareshah: he shall come unto Adullam the glory of Israel.	I will again bring a conqueror against you, O dweller of Mareshah. The glory of Israel will come to Adullam.
MIC	1	16	너는 네 기뻐하는 자식으로 인하여 네 머리털을 깎아 대머리 같게 할지어다 네 머리로 크게 무여지게 하기를 독수리 같게 할지어다 이는 그들이 사로잡혀 너를 떠났음이니라	Make thee bald, and poll thee for thy delicate children; enlarge thy baldness as the eagle; for they are gone into captivity from thee.	Shave yourselves bald and cut off your hair in mourning for your precious children; make yourselves as bald as an eagle, for they will go from you into exile.
MIC	2	1	침상에서 악을 꾀하며 간사를 경영하고 날이 밝으면 그 손에 힘이 있으므로 그것을 행하는 자는 화 있을진저	Woe to them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds! when the morning is light, they practise it, because it is in the power of their hand.	Woe to those who devise iniquity and plot evil on their beds! At morning’s light they accomplish it because the power is in their hands.
MIC	2	2	밭들을 탐하여 빼앗고 집들을 탐하여 취하니 그들이 사람과 그 집 사람과 그 산업을 학대하도다	And they covet fields, and take them by violence; and houses, and take them away: so they oppress a man and his house, even a man and his heritage.	They covet fields and seize them; they take away houses. They deprive a man of his home, a fellow man of his inheritance.
MIC	2	3	그러므로 여호와의 말씀에 내가 이 족속에게 재앙 내리기를 계획하나니 너희의 목이 이에서 벗어나지 못할 것이요 또한 교만히 다니지 못할 것이라 이는 재앙의 때임이니라 하셨느니라	Therefore thus saith the Lord; Behold, against this family do I devise an evil, from which ye shall not remove your necks; neither shall ye go haughtily: for this time is evil.	Therefore this is what the LORD says: “I am planning against this nation a disaster from which you cannot free your necks. Then you will not walk so proudly, for it will be a time of calamity.
MIC	2	4	그 때에 너희에게 대하여 풍사를 지으며 슬픈 애가를 불러 이르기를 우리가 온전히 망하게 되었도다 그가 내 백성의 산업을 옮겨 내게서 떠나게 하시며 우리 밭을 나누어 패역자에게 주시는도다 하리니	In that day shall one take up a parable against you, and lament with a doleful lamentation, and say, We be utterly spoiled: he hath changed the portion of my people: how hath he removed it from me! turning away he hath divided our fields.	In that day they will take up a proverb against you and taunt you with this bitter lamentation: ‘We are utterly ruined! He has changed the portion of my people. How He has removed it from me! He has allotted our fields to traitors.’”
MIC	2	5	그러므로 여호와의 회중에서 제비를 뽑고 줄을 띨 자가 너희 중에 하나도 없으리라	Therefore thou shalt have none that shall cast a cord by lot in the congregation of the Lord.	Therefore, you will have no one in the assembly of the LORD to divide the land by lot.
MIC	2	6	그들이 말하기를 너희는 예언하지 말라 이것은 예언할 것이 아니어늘 욕하는 말을 그치지 아니한다 하는도다	Prophesy ye not, say they to them that prophesy: they shall not prophesy to them, that they shall not take shame.	“Do not preach,” they preach. “Do not preach these things; disgrace will not overtake us.”
MIC	2	7	너희 야곱의 족속아 어찌 이르기를 여호와의 신이 편급하시다 하겠느냐 그의 행위가 이러하시다 하겠느냐 나의 말이 행위 정직한 자에게 유익되지 아니하냐	O thou that art named the house of Jacob, is the spirit of the Lord straitened? are these his doings? do not my words do good to him that walketh uprightly?	Should it be said, O house of Jacob, “Is the Spirit of the LORD impatient? Are these the things He does?” Do not My words bring good to him who walks uprightly?
MIC	2	8	근래에 내 백성이 대적 같이 일어나서 전쟁을 피하여 평안히 지나가는 자들의 의복 중 겉옷을 벗기며	Even of late my people is risen up as an enemy: ye pull off the robe with the garment from them that pass by securely as men averse from war.	But of late My people have risen up like an enemy: You strip off the splendid robe from unsuspecting passersby like men returning from battle.
MIC	2	9	내 백성의 부녀들을 너희가 그 즐거운 집에서 쫓아내고 그 어린 자녀에게서 나의 영광을 영영히 빼앗는도다	The women of my people have ye cast out from their pleasant houses; from their children have ye taken away my glory for ever.	You drive the women of My people from their pleasant homes. You take away My blessing from their children forever.
MIC	2	10	이것이 너희의 쉴 곳이 아니니 일어나 떠날지어다 이는 그것이 이미 더러워졌음이라 그런즉 반드시 멸하리니 그 멸망이 크리라	Arise ye, and depart; for this is not your rest: because it is polluted, it shall destroy you, even with a sore destruction.	Arise and depart, for this is not your place of rest, because its defilement brings destruction— a grievous destruction!
MIC	2	11	사람이 만일 허망히 행하며 거짓말로 이르기를 내가 포도주와 독주에 대하여 네게 예언하리라 할 것 같으면 그 사람이 이 백성의 선지자가 되리로다	If a man walking in the spirit and falsehood do lie, saying, I will prophesy unto thee of wine and of strong drink; he shall even be the prophet of this people.	If a man of wind were to come and say falsely, “I will preach to you of wine and strong drink,” he would be just the preacher for this people!
MIC	2	12	야곱아 내가 정녕히 너희 무리를 다 모으며 내가 정녕히 이스라엘의 남은 자를 모으고 그들을 한 처소에 두기를 보스라 양떼 같게 하며 초장의 양떼 같게 하리니 그들의 인수가 많으므로 소리가 크게 들릴 것이며	I will surely assemble, O Jacob, all of thee; I will surely gather the remnant of Israel; I will put them together as the sheep of Bozrah, as the flock in the midst of their fold: they shall make great noise by reason of the multitude of men.	I will surely gather all of you, O Jacob; I will collect the remnant of Israel. I will bring them together like sheep in a pen, like a flock in the midst of its pasture— a noisy throng.
MIC	2	13	길을 여는 자가 그들의 앞서 올라가고 그들은 달려서 성문에 이르러서는 그리로 좇아 나갈 것이며 그들의 왕이 앞서 행하며 여호와께서 선두로 행하시리라	The breaker is come up before them: they have broken up, and have passed through the gate, and are gone out by it: and their king shall pass before them, and the Lord on the head of them.	One who breaks open the way will go up before them; they will break through the gate, and go out by it. Their King will pass through before them, the LORD as their leader.
MIC	3	1	내가 또 이르노니 야곱의 두령들과 이스라엘 족속의 치리자들아 청컨대 들으라 공의는 너희의 알 것이 아니냐	And I said, Hear, I pray you, O heads of Jacob, and ye princes of the house of Israel; Is it not for you to know judgment?	Then I said: “Hear now, O leaders of Jacob, you rulers of the house of Israel. Should you not know justice?
MIC	3	2	너희가 선을 미워하고 악을 좋아하여 내 백성의 가죽을 벗기고 그 뼈에서 살을 뜯어	Who hate the good, and love the evil; who pluck off their skin from off them, and their flesh from off their bones;	You hate good and love evil. You tear the skin from my people and strip the flesh from their bones.
MIC	3	3	그들의 살을 먹으며 그 가죽을 벗기며 그 뼈를 꺾어 다지기를 남비와 솥 가운데 담을 고기처럼 하는도다	Who also eat the flesh of my people, and flay their skin from off them; and they break their bones, and chop them in pieces, as for the pot, and as flesh within the caldron.	You eat the flesh of my people after stripping off their skin and breaking their bones. You chop them up like flesh for the cooking pot, like meat in a cauldron.”
MIC	3	4	그 때에 그들이 여호와께 부르짖을지라도 응답지 아니하시고 그들의 행위의 악하던 대로 그들 앞에 얼굴을 가리우시리라	Then shall they cry unto the Lord, but he will not hear them: he will even hide his face from them at that time, as they have behaved themselves ill in their doings.	Then they will cry out to the LORD, but He will not answer them. At that time He will hide His face from them because of the evil they have done.
MIC	3	5	내 백성을 유혹하는 선지자는 이에 물면 평강을 외치나 그 입에 무엇을 채워주지 아니하는 자에게는 전쟁을 준비하는도다 이런 선지자에 대하여 여호와께서 가라사대	Thus saith the Lord concerning the prophets that make my people err, that bite with their teeth, and cry, Peace; and he that putteth not into their mouths, they even prepare war against him.	This is what the LORD says: “As for the prophets who lead My people astray, who proclaim peace while they chew with their teeth, but declare war against one who puts nothing in their mouths:
MIC	3	6	그러므로 너희가 밤을 만나리니 이상을 보지 못할 것이요 흑암을 만나리니 점 치지 못하리라 하셨나니 이 선지자 위에는 해가 져서 낮이 캄캄할 것이라	Therefore night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a vision; and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine; and the sun shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall be dark over them.	Therefore night will come over you without visions, and darkness without divination. The sun will set on these prophets, and the daylight will turn black over them.
MIC	3	7	선견자가 부끄러워하며 술객이 수치를 당하여 다 입술을 가리울 것은 하나님이 응답지 아니하심이어니와	Then shall the seers be ashamed, and the diviners confounded: yea, they shall all cover their lips; for there is no answer of God.	Then the seers will be ashamed and the diviners will be disgraced. They will all cover their mouths because there is no answer from God.”
MIC	3	8	오직 나는 여호와의 신으로 말미암아 권능과 공의와 재능으로 채움을 얻고 야곱의 허물과 이스라엘의 죄를 그들에게 보이리라	But truly I am full of power by the spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and of might, to declare unto Jacob his transgression, and to Israel his sin.	As for me, however, I am filled with power by the Spirit of the LORD, with justice and courage, to declare to Jacob his transgression and to Israel his sin.
MIC	3	9	야곱 족속의 두령과 이스라엘 족속의 치리자 곧 공의를 미워하고 정직한 것을 굽게 하는 자들아 청컨대 이 말을 들을지어다	Hear this, I pray you, ye heads of the house of Jacob, and princes of the house of Israel, that abhor judgment, and pervert all equity.	Now hear this, O leaders of the house of Jacob and rulers of the house of Israel, who despise justice and pervert all that is right,
MIC	3	10	시온을 피로, 예루살렘을 죄악으로 건축하는도다	They build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity.	who build Zion with bloodshed and Jerusalem with iniquity.
MIC	3	11	그 두령은 뇌물을 위하여 재판하며 그 제사장은 삯을 위하여 교훈하며 그 선지자는 돈을 위하여 점 치면서 오히려 여호와를 의뢰하여 이르기를 여호와께서 우리 중에 계시지 아니하냐 재앙이 우리에게 임하지 아니하리라 하는도다	The heads thereof judge for reward, and the priests thereof teach for hire, and the prophets thereof divine for money: yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us.	Her leaders judge for a bribe, her priests teach for a price, and her prophets practice divination for money. Yet they lean upon the LORD, saying, “Is not the LORD among us? No disaster can come upon us.”
MIC	3	12	이러므로 너희로 인하여 시온은 밭 같이 갊을 당하고 예루살렘은 무더기가 되고 성전의 산은 수풀의 높은 곳과 같게 되리라	Therefore shall Zion for your sake be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high places of the forest.	Therefore, because of you, Zion will be plowed like a field, Jerusalem will become a heap of rubble, and the temple mount a wooded ridge.
MIC	4	1	말일에 이르러는 여호와의 전의 산이 산들의 꼭대기에 굳게 서며 작은 산들 위에 뛰어나고 민족들이 그리로 몰려갈 것이라	But in the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills; and people shall flow unto it.	In the last days the mountain of the house of the LORD will be established as the chief of the mountains; it will be raised above the hills, and the peoples will stream to it.
MIC	4	2	곧 많은 이방이 가며 이르기를 오라 우리가 여호와의 산에 올라가서 야곱의 하나님의 전에 이르자 그가 그 도로 우리에게 가르치실 것이라 우리가 그 길로 행하리라 하리니 이는 율법이 시온에서부터 나올 것이요 여호와의 말씀이 예루살렘에서부터 나올 것임이라	And many nations shall come, and say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for the law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.	And many nations will come and say: “Come, let us go up to the mountain of the LORD, to the house of the God of Jacob. He will teach us His ways, so that we may walk in His paths.” For the law will go forth from Zion and the word of the LORD from Jerusalem.
MIC	4	3	그가 많은 민족 중에 심판하시며 먼 곳 강한 이방을 판결하시리니 무리가 그 칼을 쳐서 보습을 만들고 창을 쳐서 낫을 만들 것이며 이 나라와 저 나라가 다시는 칼을 들고 서로 치지 아니하며 다시는 전쟁을 연습하지 아니하고	And he shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong nations afar off; and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.	Then He will judge between many peoples and arbitrate for strong nations far and wide. Then they will beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks. Nation will no longer take up the sword against nation, nor will they train anymore for war.
MIC	4	4	각 사람이 자기 포도나무 아래와 자기 무화과나무 아래 앉을 것이라 그들을 두렵게 할 자가 없으리니 이는 만군의 여호와의 입이 이같이 말씀하셨음이니라	But they shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig tree; and none shall make them afraid: for the mouth of the Lord of hosts hath spoken it.	And each man will sit under his own vine and under his own fig tree, with no one to frighten him. For the mouth of the LORD of Hosts has spoken.
MIC	4	5	만민이 각각 자기의 신의 이름을 빙자하여 행하되 오직 우리는 우리 하나님 여호와의 이름을 빙자하여 영원히 행하리로다	For all people will walk every one in the name of his god, and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever.	Though each of the peoples may walk in the name of his god, yet we will walk in the name of the LORD our God forever and ever.
MIC	4	6	여호와께서 말씀하시되 그 날에는 내가 저는 자를 모으며 쫓겨난 자와 내가 환난 받게한 자를 모아	In that day, saith the Lord, will I assemble her that halteth, and I will gather her that is driven out, and her that I have afflicted;	“On that day,” declares the LORD, “I will gather the lame; I will assemble the outcast, even those whom I have afflicted.
MIC	4	7	그 저는 자로 남은 백성이 되게 하며 멀리 쫓겨났던 자로 강한 나라가 되게 하고 나 여호와가 시온 산에서 이제부터 영원까지 그들을 치리하리라 하셨나니	And I will make her that halted a remnant, and her that was cast far off a strong nation: and the Lord shall reign over them in mount Zion from henceforth, even for ever.	And I will make the lame into a remnant, and the outcast into a strong nation. Then the LORD will rule over them in Mount Zion from that day and forever.
MIC	4	8	너 양떼의 망대요 딸 시온의 산이여 이전 권능 곧 딸 예루살렘의 나라가 네게로 돌아오리라	And thou, O tower of the flock, the strong hold of the daughter of Zion, unto thee shall it come, even the first dominion; the kingdom shall come to the daughter of Jerusalem.	And you, O watchtower of the flock, O stronghold of the Daughter of Zion— the former dominion will be restored to you; sovereignty will come to the Daughter of Jerusalem.”
MIC	4	9	이제 네가 어찌하여 부르짖느냐 너희 중에 왕이 없어졌고 네 모사가 죽었으므로 네가 해산하는 여인처럼 고통함이냐	Now why dost thou cry out aloud? is there no king in thee? is thy counsellor perished? for pangs have taken thee as a woman in travail.	Why do you now cry aloud? Is there no king among you? Has your counselor perished so that anguish grips you like a woman in labor?
MIC	4	10	딸 시온이여 해산하는 여인처럼 애써 구로하여 낳을지어다 이제 네가 성읍에서 나가서 들에 거하며 또 바벨론까지 이르러 거기 구원을 얻으리니 여호와께서 거기서 너를 너의 원수들의 손에서 속량하여 내시리라	Be in pain, and labour to bring forth, O daughter of Zion, like a woman in travail: for now shalt thou go forth out of the city, and thou shalt dwell in the field, and thou shalt go even to Babylon; there shalt thou be delivered; there the Lord shall redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies.	Writhe in agony, O Daughter of Zion, like a woman in labor. For now you will leave the city and camp in the open fields. You will go to Babylon; there you will be rescued; there the LORD will redeem you from the hand of your enemies!
MIC	4	11	이제 많은 이방이 모여서 너를 쳐 이르기를 시온이 더럽게 되며 그것을 우리 눈으로 바라보기를 원하노라 하거니와	Now also many nations are gathered against thee, that say, Let her be defiled, and let our eye look upon Zion.	But now many nations have assembled against you, saying, “Let her be defiled, and let us feast our eyes on Zion.”
MIC	4	12	그들이 여호와의 뜻을 알지 못하며 그 모략을 깨닫지 못한 것이라 여호와께서 곡식단을 타작마당에 모음 같이 그들을 모으셨나니	But they know not the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand they his counsel: for he shall gather them as the sheaves into the floor.	But they do not know the thoughts of the LORD or understand His plan, for He has gathered them like sheaves to the threshing floor.
MIC	4	13	딸 시온이여 일어나서 칠지어다 내가 네 뿔을 철 같게 하며 네 굽을 놋 같게 하리니 네가 여러 백성을 쳐서 깨뜨릴 것이라 내가 그들의 탈취물을 구별하여 여호와께 드리며 그들의 재물을 온 땅의 대주재께 돌리리라	Arise and thresh, O daughter of Zion: for I will make thine horn iron, and I will make thy hoofs brass: and thou shalt beat in pieces many people: and I will consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their substance unto the Lord of the whole earth.	Rise and thresh, O Daughter of Zion, for I will give you horns of iron and hooves of bronze to break to pieces many peoples. Then you will devote their gain to the LORD, their wealth to the Lord of all the earth.
MIC	5	1	딸 군대여 너는 떼를 모을지어다 그들이 우리를 에워쌌으니 막대기로 이스라엘 재판자의 뺨을 치리로다	Now gather thyself in troops, O daughter of troops: he hath laid siege against us: they shall smite the judge of Israel with a rod upon the cheek.	Now, O daughter of troops, mobilize your troops; for a siege is laid against us! With a rod they will strike the cheek of the judge of Israel.
MIC	5	2	베들레헴 에브라다야 너는 유다 족속 중에 작을지라도 이스라엘을 다스릴 자가 네게서 내게로 나올 것이라 그의 근본은 상고에 태초에니라	But thou, Beth–lehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting.	But you, Bethlehem Ephrathah, who are small among the clans of Judah, out of you will come forth for Me One to be ruler over Israel— One whose origins are of old, from the days of eternity.
MIC	5	3	그러므로 임산한 여인이 해산하기까지 그들을 붙여 두시겠고 그 후에는 그 형제 남은 자가 이스라엘 자손에게로 돌아오리니	Therefore will he give them up, until the time that she which travaileth hath brought forth: then the remnant of his brethren shall return unto the children of Israel.	Therefore Israel will be abandoned until she who is in labor has given birth; then the rest of His brothers will return to the children of Israel.
MIC	5	4	그가 여호와의 능력과 그 하나님 여호와의 이름의 위엄을 의지하고 서서 그 떼에게 먹여서 그들로 안연히 거하게 할 것이라 이제 그가 창대하여 땅 끝까지 미치리라	And he shall stand and feed in the strength of the Lord, in the majesty of the name of the Lord his God; and they shall abide: for now shall he be great unto the ends of the earth.	He will stand and shepherd His flock in the strength of the LORD, in the majestic name of the LORD His God. And they will dwell securely, for then His greatness will extend to the ends of the earth.
MIC	5	5	이 사람은 우리의 평강이 될 것이라 앗수르 사람이 우리 땅에 들어와서 우리 궁들을 밟을 때에는 우리가 일곱 목자와 여덟 군왕을 일으켜 그를 치리니	And this man shall be the peace, when the Assyrian shall come into our land: and when he shall tread in our palaces, then shall we raise against him seven shepherds, and eight principal men.	And He will be our peace when Assyria invades our land and tramples our citadels. We will raise against it seven shepherds, even eight leaders of men.
MIC	5	6	그들이 칼로 앗수르 땅을 황무케 하며 니므롯 땅에 들어와서 우리 지경을 밟을 때에는 그가 우리를 그에게서 건져 내리라	And they shall waste the land of Assyria with the sword, and the land of Nimrod in the entrances thereof: thus shall he deliver us from the Assyrian, when he cometh into our land, and when he treadeth within our borders.	And they will rule the land of Assyria with the sword, and the land of Nimrod with the blade drawn. So He will deliver us when Assyria invades our land and marches into our borders.
MIC	5	7	야곱의 남은 자는 많은 백성 중에 있으리니 그들은 여호와에게로서 내리는 이슬 같고 풀 위에 내리는 단비 같아서 사람을 기다리지 아니하며 인생을 기다리지 아니할 것이며	And the remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many people as a dew from the Lord, as the showers upon the grass, that tarrieth not for man, nor waiteth for the sons of men.	Then the remnant of Jacob will be in the midst of many peoples like dew from the LORD, like showers on the grass, which do not wait for man or linger for mankind.
MIC	5	8	야곱의 남은 자는 열국 중과 여러 백성 중에 있으리니 그들은 수풀의 짐승 중의 사자 같고 양떼 중의 젊은 사자 같아서 만일 지나간즉 밟고 찢으리니 능히 구원할 자가 없을 것이라	And the remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles in the midst of many people as a lion among the beasts of the forest, as a young lion among the flocks of sheep: who, if he go through, both treadeth down, and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver.	Then the remnant of Jacob will be among the nations, in the midst of many peoples, like a lion among the beasts of the forest, like a young lion among flocks of sheep, which tramples and tears as it passes through, with no one to rescue them.
MIC	5	9	네 손이 네 대적 위에 들려서 네 모든 원수를 진멸하기를 바라노라	Thine hand shall be lifted up upon thine adversaries, and all thine enemies shall be cut off.	Your hand will be lifted over your foes, and all your enemies will be cut off.
MIC	5	10	여호와께서 가라사대 그 날에 이르러는 내가 너의 말을 너의 중에서 멸절하며 너의 병거를 훼파하며	And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord, that I will cut off thy horses out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy chariots:	“In that day,” declares the LORD, “I will remove your horses from among you and wreck your chariots.
MIC	5	11	너의 땅의 성읍들을 멸하며 너의 모든 견고한 성을 무너뜨릴 것이며	And I will cut off the cities of thy land, and throw down all thy strong holds:	I will remove the cities of your land and tear down all your strongholds.
MIC	5	12	내가 또 복술을 너의 손에서 끊으리니 네게 다시는 점장이가 없게 될 것이며	And I will cut off witchcrafts out of thine hand; and thou shalt have no more soothsayers:	I will cut the sorceries from your hand, and you will have no fortune-tellers.
MIC	5	13	내가 너의 새긴 우상과 주상을 너의 중에서 멸절하리니 네가 네 손으로 만든 것을 다시는 섬기지 아니하리라	Thy graven images also will I cut off, and thy standing images out of the midst of thee; and thou shalt no more worship the work of thine hands.	I will also cut off the carved images and sacred pillars from among you, so that you will no longer bow down to the work of your own hands.
MIC	5	14	내가 또 너의 아세라 목상을 너의 중에서 빼어 버리고 너의 성읍들을 멸할 것이며	And I will pluck up thy groves out of the midst of thee: so will I destroy thy cities.	I will root out the Asherah poles from your midst and demolish your cities.
MIC	5	15	내가 또 진노와 분한으로 청종치 아니한 나라에 갚으리라 하셨느니라	And I will execute vengeance in anger and fury upon the heathen, such as they have not heard.	I will take vengeance in anger and wrath upon the nations that have not obeyed Me.”
MIC	6	1	너희는 여호와의 말씀을 들을지어다 내게 이르시기를 너는 일어나서 산 앞에서 쟁변하여 작은 산으로 네 목소리를 듣게 하라 하셨나니	Hear ye now what the Lord saith; Arise, contend thou before the mountains, and let the hills hear thy voice.	Hear now what the LORD says: “Arise, plead your case before the mountains, and let the hills hear your voice.
MIC	6	2	너희 산들과 땅의 견고한 지대들아 너희는 여호와의 쟁변을 들으라 여호와께서 자기 백성과 쟁변하시며 이스라엘과 변론하실 것이라	Hear ye, O mountains, the Lord’s controversy, and ye strong foundations of the earth: for the Lord hath a controversy with his people, and he will plead with Israel.	Hear, O mountains, the LORD’s indictment, you enduring foundations of the earth. For the LORD has a case against His people, and He will argue it against Israel:
MIC	6	3	이르시기를 내 백성아 내가 무엇을 네게 행하였으며 무엇에 너를 괴롭게 하였느냐 너는 내게 증거하라	O my people, what have I done unto thee? and wherein have I wearied thee? testify against me.	‘My people, what have I done to you? Testify against Me how I have wearied you!
MIC	6	4	내가 너를 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내어 종노릇 하는 집에서 속량하였고 모세와 아론과 미리암을 보내어 네 앞에 행하게 하였었느니라	For I brought thee up out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed thee out of the house of servants; and I sent before thee Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.	For I brought you up from the land of Egypt and redeemed you from the house of slavery. I sent Moses before you, as well as Aaron and Miriam.
MIC	6	5	내 백성아 너는 모압 왕 발락의 꾀한 것과 브올의 아들 발람이 그에게 대답한 것을 추억하며 싯딤에서부터 길갈까지의 일을 추억하라 그리하면 나 여호와의 의롭게 행한 것을 알리라 하실 것이니라	O my people, remember now what Balak king of Moab consulted, and what Balaam the son of Beor answered him from Shittim unto Gilgal; that ye may know the righteousness of the Lord.	My people, remember what Balak king of Moab counseled and what Balaam son of Beor answered. Remember your journey from Shittim to Gilgal, so that you may acknowledge the righteousness of the LORD.’”
MIC	6	6	내가 무엇을 가지고 여호와 앞에 나아가며 높으신 하나님께 경배할까 내가 번제물 일 년 된 송아지를 가지고 그 앞에 나아갈까	Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow myself before the high God? shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves of a year old?	With what shall I come before the LORD when I bow before the God on high? Should I come to Him with burnt offerings, with year-old calves?
MIC	6	7	여호와께서 천천의 수양이나 만만의 강수 같은 기름을 기뻐하실까 내 허물을 위하여 내 맏아들을, 내 영혼의 죄를 인하여 내 몸의 열매를 드릴까	Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?	Would the LORD be pleased with thousands of rams, with ten thousand rivers of oil? Shall I present my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?
MIC	6	8	사람아 주께서 선한 것이 무엇임을 네게 보이셨나니 여호와께서 네게 구하시는 것이 오직 공의를 행하며 인자를 사랑하며 겸손히 네 하나님과 함께 행하는 것이 아니냐	He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?	He has shown you, O man, what is good. And what does the LORD require of you but to act justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with your God?
MIC	6	9	여호와께서 성읍을 향하여 외쳐 부르시나니 완전한 지혜는 주의 이름을 경외함이니라 너희는 매를 순히 받고 그것을 정하신 자를 순종할지니라	The Lord’s voice crieth unto the city, and the man of wisdom shall see thy name: hear ye the rod, and who hath appointed it.	The voice of the LORD calls out to the city (and it is sound wisdom to fear Your name): “Heed the rod and the One who ordained it.
MIC	6	10	악인의 집에 오히려 불의한 재물이 있느냐 축소시킨 가증한 에바가 있느냐	Are there yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked, and the scant measure that is abominable?	Can I forget any longer, O house of the wicked, the treasures of wickedness and the short ephah, which is accursed?
MIC	6	11	내가 만일 부정한 저울을 썼거나 주머니에 거짓 저울추를 두었으면 깨끗하겠느냐	Shall I count them pure with the wicked balances, and with the bag of deceitful weights?	Can I excuse dishonest scales or bags of false weights?
MIC	6	12	그 부자들은 강포가 가득하였고 그 거민들은 거짓을 말하니 그 혀가 입에서 궤사하도다	For the rich men thereof are full of violence, and the inhabitants thereof have spoken lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their mouth.	For the wealthy of the city are full of violence, and its residents speak lies; their tongues are deceitful in their mouths.
MIC	6	13	그러므로 나도 너를 쳐서 중히 상하게 하였으며 네 죄를 인하여 너를 적막하게 하였나니	Therefore also will I make thee sick in smiting thee, in making thee desolate because of thy sins.	Therefore I am striking you severely, to ruin you because of your sins.
MIC	6	14	네가 먹으나 배부르지 못하고 속이 항상 빌 것이며 네가 감추나 보존되지 못하겠고 보존된 것은 내가 칼에 붙일 것이며	Thou shalt eat, but not be satisfied; and thy casting down shall be in the midst of thee; and thou shalt take hold, but shalt not deliver; and that which thou deliverest will I give up to the sword.	You will eat but not be satisfied, and your hunger will remain with you. What you acquire, you will not preserve; and what you save, I will give to the sword.
MIC	6	15	네가 씨를 뿌리나 추수하지 못할 것이며 감람을 밟으나 기름을 네 몸에 바르지 못할 것이며 포도를 밟으나 술을 마시지 못하리라	Thou shalt sow, but thou shalt not reap; thou shalt tread the olives, but thou shalt not anoint thee with oil; and sweet wine, but shalt not drink wine.	You will sow but not reap; you will press olives but not anoint yourselves with oil; you will tread grapes but not drink the wine.
MIC	6	16	너희가 오므리의 율례와 아합 집의 모든 행위를 지키고 그들의 꾀를 좇으니 이는 나로 너희를 황무케 하며 그 거민으로 사람의 치솟거리를 만들게 하려 함이라 너희가 내 백성의 수욕을 담당하리라	For the statutes of Omri are kept, and all the works of the house of Ahab, and ye walk in their counsels; that I should make thee a desolation, and the inhabitants thereof an hissing: therefore ye shall bear the reproach of my people.	You have kept the statutes of Omri and all the practices of Ahab’s house; you have followed their counsel. Therefore I will make you a desolation, and your inhabitants an object of contempt; you will bear the scorn of the nations.”
MIC	7	1	재앙이로다 나여 나는 여름 실과를 딴 후와 포도를 거둔 후 같아서 먹을 송이가 없으며 내 마음에 사모하는 처음 익은 무화과가 없도다	Woe is me! for I am as when they have gathered the summer fruits, as the grapegleanings of the vintage: there is no cluster to eat: my soul desired the firstripe fruit.	Woe is me! For I am like one gathering summer fruit at the gleaning of the vineyard; there is no cluster to eat, no early fig that I crave.
MIC	7	2	이와 같이 선인이 세상에서 끊쳤고 정직자가 인간에 없도다 무리가 다 피를 흘리려고 매복하며 각기 그물로 형제를 잡으려 하고	The good man is perished out of the earth: and there is none upright among men: they all lie in wait for blood; they hunt every man his brother with a net.	The godly man has perished from the earth; there is no one upright among men. They all lie in wait for blood; they hunt one another with a net.
MIC	7	3	두 손으로 악을 부지런히 행하도다 그 군장과 재판자는 뇌물을 구하며 대인은 마음의 악한 사욕을 발하며 서로 연락을 취하니	That they may do evil with both hands earnestly, the prince asketh, and the judge asketh for a reward; and the great man, he uttereth his mischievous desire: so they wrap it up.	Both hands are skilled at evil; the prince and the judge demand a bribe. When the powerful utters his evil desire, they all conspire together.
MIC	7	4	그들의 가장 선한 자라도 가시 같고 가장 정직한 자라도 찔레 울타리보다 더하도다 그들의 파수꾼들의 날 곧 그들의 형벌의 날이 임하였으니 이제는 그들이 요란하리로다	The best of them is as a brier: the most upright is sharper than a thorn hedge: the day of thy watchmen and thy visitation cometh; now shall be their perplexity.	The best of them is like a brier; the most upright is sharper than a hedge of thorns. The day for your watchmen has come, the day of your visitation. Now is the time of their confusion.
MIC	7	5	너희는 이웃을 믿지 말며 친구를 의지하지 말며 네 품에 누운 여인에게라도 네 입의 문을 지킬지어다	Trust ye not in a friend, put ye not confidence in a guide: keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lieth in thy bosom.	Do not rely on a friend; do not trust in a companion. Seal the doors of your mouth from her who lies in your arms.
MIC	7	6	아들이 아비를 멸시하며 딸이 어미를 대적하며 며느리가 시어미를 대적하리니 사람의 원수가 곧 자기의 집안 사람이로다	For the son dishonoureth the father, the daughter riseth up against her mother, the daughter in law against her mother in law; a man’s enemies are the men of his own house.	For a son dishonors his father, a daughter rises against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law. A man’s enemies are the members of his own household.
MIC	7	7	오직 나는 여호와를 우러러보며 나를 구원하시는 하나님을 바라보나니 하나님이 나를 들으시리로다	Therefore I will look unto the Lord; I will wait for the God of my salvation: my God will hear me.	But as for me, I will look to the LORD; I will wait for the God of my salvation. My God will hear me.
MIC	7	8	나의 대적이여 나로 인하여 기뻐하지 말지어다 나는 엎드러질지라도 일어날 것이요 어두운 데 앉을지라도 여호와께서 나의 빛이 되실 것임이로다	Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.	Do not gloat over me, my enemy! Though I have fallen, I will arise; though I sit in darkness, the LORD will be my light.
MIC	7	9	내가 여호와께 범죄하였으니 주께서 나를 위하여 심판하사 신원하시기까지는 그의 노를 당하려니와 주께서 나를 인도하사 광명에 이르게 하시리니 내가 그의 의를 보리로다	I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me: he will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness.	Because I have sinned against Him, I must endure the rage of the LORD, until He argues my case and executes justice for me. He will bring me into the light; I will see His righteousness.
MIC	7	10	나의 대적이 이것을 보고 부끄러워 하리니 그는 전에 내게 말하기를 네 하나님 여호와가 어디 있느냐 하던 자라 그가 거리의 진흙 같이 밟히리니 그것을 내가 목도하리로다	Then she that is mine enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her which said unto me, Where is the Lord thy God? mine eyes shall behold her: now shall she be trodden down as the mire of the streets.	Then my enemy will see and will be covered with shame— she who said to me, “Where is the LORD your God?” My eyes will see her; at that time she will be trampled like mud in the streets.
MIC	7	11	네 성벽을 건축하는 날 곧 그 날에는 지경이 넓혀질 것이라	In the day that thy walls are to be built, in that day shall the decree be far removed.	The day for rebuilding your walls will come— the day for extending your boundary.
MIC	7	12	그 날에는 앗수르에서 애굽 성읍들에까지 애굽에서 하수까지 이 바다에서 저 바다까지 이 산에서 저 산까지의 사람들이 네게로 돌아올 것이나	In that day also he shall come even to thee from Assyria, and from the fortified cities, and from the fortress even to the river, and from sea to sea, and from mountain to mountain.	On that day they will come to you from Assyria and the cities of Egypt, even from Egypt to the Euphrates, from sea to sea and mountain to mountain.
MIC	7	13	그 땅은 그 거민의 행위의 열매로 인하여 황무하리로다	Notwithstanding the land shall be desolate because of them that dwell therein, for the fruit of their doings.	Then the earth will become desolate because of its inhabitants, as the fruit of their deeds.
MIC	7	14	원컨대 주는 주의 지팡이로 주의 백성 곧 갈멜속 삼림에 홀로 거하는 주의 기업의 떼를 먹이시되 그들을 옛날 같이 바산과 길르앗에서 먹이옵소서	Feed thy people with thy rod, the flock of thine heritage, which dwell solitarily in the wood, in the midst of Carmel: let them feed in Bashan and Gilead, as in the days of old.	Shepherd with Your staff Your people, the flock of Your inheritance. They live alone in a woodland, surrounded by pastures. Let them graze in Bashan and Gilead, as in the days of old.
MIC	7	15	가라사대 네가 애굽 땅에서 나오던 날과 같이 내가 그들에게 기사를 보이리라	According to the days of thy coming out of the land of Egypt will I shew unto him marvellous things.	As in the days when you came out of Egypt, I will show My wonders.
MIC	7	16	가로되 열방이 보고 자기의 세력을 부끄려서 손으로 그 입을 막을 것이요 귀는 막힐 것이오며	The nations shall see and be confounded at all their might: they shall lay their hand upon their mouth, their ears shall be deaf.	Nations will see and be ashamed, deprived of all their might. They will put their hands over their mouths, and their ears will become deaf.
MIC	7	17	그들이 뱀처럼 티끌을 핥으며 땅에 기는 벌레처럼 떨며 그 좁은 구멍에서 나와서 두려워하며 우리 하나님 여호와께로 돌아와서 주로 인하여 두려워하리이다	They shall lick the dust like a serpent, they shall move out of their holes like worms of the earth: they shall be afraid of the Lord our God, and shall fear because of thee.	They will lick the dust like a snake, like reptiles slithering on the ground. They will crawl from their holes in the presence of the LORD our God; they will tremble in fear of You.
MIC	7	18	주와 같은 신이 어디 있으리이까 주께서는 죄악을 사유하시며 그 기업의 남은 자의 허물을 넘기시며 인애를 기뻐하심으로 노를 항상 품지 아니하시나이다	Who is a God like unto thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retaineth not his anger for ever, because he delighteth in mercy.	Who is a God like You, who pardons iniquity and passes over the transgression of the remnant of His inheritance— who does not retain His anger forever, because He delights in loving devotion?
MIC	7	19	다시 우리를 긍휼히 여기셔서 우리의 죄악을 발로 밟으시고 우리의 모든 죄를 깊은 바다에 던지시리이다	He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us; he will subdue our iniquities; and thou wilt cast all their sins into the depths of the sea.	He will again have compassion on us; He will vanquish our iniquities. You will cast out all our sins into the depths of the sea.
MIC	7	20	주께서 옛적에 우리 열조에게 맹세하신 대로 야곱에게 성실을 베푸시며 아브라함에게 인애를 더하시리이다	Thou wilt perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham, which thou hast sworn unto our fathers from the days of old.	You will show faithfulness to Jacob and loving devotion to Abraham, as You swore to our fathers from the days of old.
NAM	1	1	니느웨에 대한 중한 경고 곧 엘고스 사람 나훔의 묵시의 글이라	The burden of Nineveh. The book of the vision of Nahum the Elkoshite.	This is the burden against Nineveh, the book of the vision of Nahum the Elkoshite:
NAM	1	2	여호와는 투기하시며 보복하시는 하나님이시니라 여호와는 보복하시며 자기를 대적하는 자에게 진노를 품으시며	God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth; the Lord revengeth, and is furious; the Lord will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserveth wrath for his enemies.	The LORD is a jealous and avenging God; the LORD is avenging and full of wrath. The LORD takes vengeance on His foes and reserves wrath for His enemies.
NAM	1	3	여호와는 노하기를 더디하시며 권능이 크시며 죄인을 결코 사하지 아니하시느니라 여호와의 길은 회리바람과 광풍에 있고 구름은 그 발의 티끌이로다	The Lord is slow to anger, and great in power, and will not at all acquit the wicked: the Lord hath his way in the whirlwind and in the storm, and the clouds are the dust of his feet.	The LORD is slow to anger and great in power; the LORD will by no means leave the guilty unpunished. His path is in the whirlwind and storm, and clouds are the dust beneath His feet.
NAM	1	4	그는 바다를 꾸짖어 그것을 말리우시며 모든 강을 말리우시나니 바산과 갈멜이 쇠하며 레바논의 꽃이 이우는도다	He rebuketh the sea, and maketh it dry, and drieth up all the rivers: Bashan languisheth, and Carmel, and the flower of Lebanon languisheth.	He rebukes the sea and dries it up; He makes all the rivers run dry. Bashan and Carmel wither, and the flower of Lebanon wilts.
NAM	1	5	그로 인하여 산들이 진동하며 작은 산들이 녹고 그의 앞에서는 땅 곧 세계와 그 가운데 거하는 자들이 솟아오르는도다	The mountains quake at him, and the hills melt, and the earth is burned at his presence, yea, the world, and all that dwell therein.	The mountains quake before Him, and the hills melt away; the earth trembles at His presence— the world and all its dwellers.
NAM	1	6	누가 능히 그 분노하신 앞에 서며 누가 능히 그 진노를 감당하랴 그 진노를 불처럼 쏟으시니 그를 인하여 바위들이 깨어지는도다	Who can stand before his indignation? and who can abide in the fierceness of his anger? his fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by him.	Who can withstand His indignation? Who can endure His burning anger? His wrath is poured out like fire; even rocks are shattered before Him.
NAM	1	7	여호와는 선하시며 환난 날에 산성이시라 그는 자기에게 의뢰하는 자들을 아시느니라	The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble; and he knoweth them that trust in him.	The LORD is good, a stronghold in the day of distress; He cares for those who trust in Him.
NAM	1	8	그가 범람한 물로 그곳을 진멸하시고 자기 대적들을 흑암으로 쫓아내시리라	But with an overrunning flood he will make an utter end of the place thereof, and darkness shall pursue his enemies.	But with an overwhelming flood He will make an end of Nineveh and pursue His enemies into darkness.
NAM	1	9	너희가 여호와를 대하여 무엇을 꾀하느냐 그가 온전히 멸하시리니 재난이 다시 일어나지 아니하리라	What do ye imagine against the Lord? he will make an utter end: affliction shall not rise up the second time.	Whatever you plot against the LORD, He will bring to an end. Affliction will not rise up a second time.
NAM	1	10	가시덤불 같이 엉크러졌고 술을 마신 것 같이 취한 그들이 마른 지푸라기 같이 다 탈 것이어늘	For while they be folden together as thorns, and while they are drunken as drunkards, they shall be devoured as stubble fully dry.	For they will be entangled as with thorns and consumed like the drink of a drunkard— like stubble that is fully dry.
NAM	1	11	여호와께 악을 꾀하는 한 사람이 너희 중에서 나와서 사특한 것을 권하는도다	There is one come out of thee, that imagineth evil against the Lord, a wicked counsellor.	From you, O Nineveh, comes forth a plotter of evil against the LORD, a counselor of wickedness.
NAM	1	12	여호와께서 말씀하시기를 그들이 비록 강장하고 중다할지라도 반드시 멸절을 당하리니 그가 없어지리라 내가 전에는 너를 괴롭게 하였으나 다시는 너를 괴롭게 하지 아니할 것이라	Thus saith the Lord; Though they be quiet, and likewise many, yet thus shall they be cut down, when he shall pass through. Though I have afflicted thee, I will afflict thee no more.	This is what the LORD says: “Though they are allied and numerous, yet they will be cut down and pass away. Though I have afflicted you, O Judah, I will afflict you no longer.
NAM	1	13	이제 네게 지운 그의 멍에를 내가 깨뜨리고 너의 결박을 끊으리라	For now will I break his yoke from off thee, and will burst thy bonds in sunder.	For I will now break their yoke from your neck and tear away your shackles.”
NAM	1	14	나 여호와가 네게 대하여 명하였나니 네 이름이 다시는 전파되지 않을 것이라 내가 네 신들의 집에서 새긴 우상과 부은 우상을 멸절하며 네 무덤을 예비하리니 이는 네가 비루함이니라	And the Lord hath given a commandment concerning thee, that no more of thy name be sown: out of the house of thy gods will I cut off the graven image and the molten image: I will make thy grave; for thou art vile.	The LORD has issued a command concerning you, O Nineveh: “There will be no descendants to carry on your name. I will cut off the carved image and cast idol from the house of your gods; I will prepare your grave, for you are contemptible.”
NAM	1	15	볼지어다 아름다운 소식을 보하고 화평을 전하는 자의 발이 산 위에 있도다 유다야 네 절기를 지키고 네 서원을 갚을지어다 악인이 진멸되었으니 그가 다시는 네 가운데로 통행하지 아니하리로다	Behold upon the mountains the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace! O Judah, keep thy solemn feasts, perform thy vows: for the wicked shall no more pass through thee; he is utterly cut off.	Look to the mountains— the feet of one who brings good news, who proclaims peace! Celebrate your feasts, O Judah; fulfill your vows. For the wicked will never again march through you; they will be utterly cut off.
NAM	2	1	파괴하는 자가 너를 치러 올라왔나니 너는 산성을 지키며 길을 파수하며 네 허리를 견고히 묶고 네 힘을 크게 굳게 할지어다	He that dasheth in pieces is come up before thy face: keep the munition, watch the way, make thy loins strong, fortify thy power mightily.	One who scatters advances against you, O Nineveh. Guard the fortress! Watch the road! Brace yourselves! Summon all your strength!
NAM	2	2	여호와께서 야곱의 영광을 회복하시되 이스라엘의 영광 같게 하시나니 이는 약탈자들이 약탈하였고 또 그 포도나무 가지를 없이 하였음이라	For the Lord hath turned away the excellency of Jacob, as the excellency of Israel: for the emptiers have emptied them out, and marred their vine branches.	For the LORD will restore the splendor of Jacob like the splendor of Israel, though destroyers have laid them waste and ruined the branches of their vine.
NAM	2	3	그의 용사들의 방패는 붉고 그의 무사들의 옷도 붉으며 그 항오를 벌이는 날에 병거의 철이 번쩍이고 노송나무 창이 요동하는도다	The shield of his mighty men is made red, the valiant men are in scarlet: the chariots shall be with flaming torches in the day of his preparation, and the fir trees shall be terribly shaken.	The shields of his mighty men are red; the valiant warriors are dressed in scarlet. The fittings of the chariots flash like fire on the day they are prepared, and the spears of cypress have been brandished.
NAM	2	4	그 병거는 거리에 미치게 달리며 대로에서 이리 저리 빨리 가니 그 모양이 횃불 같고 빠르기 번개 같도다	The chariots shall rage in the streets, they shall justle one against another in the broad ways: they shall seem like torches, they shall run like the lightnings.	The chariots dash through the streets; they rush around the plazas, appearing like torches, darting about like lightning.
NAM	2	5	그가 그 존귀한 자를 생각해 내니 그들이 엎드러질 듯이 달려서 급히 성에 이르러 막을 것을 예비하도다	He shall recount his worthies: they shall stumble in their walk; they shall make haste to the wall thereof, and the defence shall be prepared.	He summons his nobles; they stumble as they advance. They race to its wall; the protective shield is set in place.
NAM	2	6	강들의 수문이 열리고 왕궁이 소멸되며	The gates of the rivers shall be opened, and the palace shall be dissolved.	The river gates are thrown open and the palace collapses.
NAM	2	7	정명대로 왕후가 벌거벗은 몸으로 끌려가며 그 모든 시녀가 가슴을 치며 비둘기 같이 슬피 우는도다	And Huzzab shall be led away captive, she shall be brought up, and her maids shall lead her as with the voice of doves, tabering upon their breasts.	It is decreed that the city be exiled and carried away; her maidservants moan like doves, and beat upon their breasts.
NAM	2	8	니느웨는 예로부터 물이 모인 못 같더니 이제 모두 도망하니 서라 서라 하나 돌아보는 자가 없도다	But Nineveh is of old like a pool of water: yet they shall flee away. Stand, stand, shall they cry; but none shall look back.	Nineveh has been like a pool of water throughout her days, but now it is draining away. “Stop! Stop!” they cry, but no one turns back.
NAM	2	9	은을 노략하라 금을 늑탈하라 그 저축한 것이 무한하고 아름다운 기구가 풍부함이니라	Take ye the spoil of silver, take the spoil of gold: for there is none end of the store and glory out of all the pleasant furniture.	“Plunder the silver! Plunder the gold!” There is no end to the treasure, an abundance of every precious thing.
NAM	2	10	니느웨가 공허하였고 황무하였도다 거민이 낙담하여 그 무릎이 서로 부딪히며 모든 허리가 아프게 되며 모든 낯이 빛을 잃도다	She is empty, and void, and waste: and the heart melteth, and the knees smite together, and much pain is in all loins, and the faces of them all gather blackness.	She is emptied! Yes, she is desolate and laid waste! Hearts melt, knees knock, bodies tremble, and every face grows pale!
NAM	2	11	이제 사자의 굴이 어디뇨 젊은 사자의 먹는 곳이 어디뇨 전에는 수사자 암사자가 그 새끼 사자와 함께 거기서 다니되 그것들을 두렵게 할 자가 없었으며	Where is the dwelling of the lions, and the feedingplace of the young lions, where the lion, even the old lion, walked, and the lion’s whelp, and none made them afraid?	Where is the lions’ lair or the feeding ground of the young lions, where the lion and lioness prowled with their cubs, with nothing to frighten them away?
NAM	2	12	수사자가 그 새끼를 위하여 식물을 충분히 찢고 그 암사자를 위하여 무엇을 움켜서는 취한 것으로 그 굴에 채웠고 찢은 것으로 그 구멍에 채웠었도다	The lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and strangled for his lionesses, and filled his holes with prey, and his dens with ravin.	The lion mauled enough for its cubs and strangled prey for the lioness. It filled its dens with the kill, and its lairs with mauled prey.
NAM	2	13	만군의 여호와의 말씀에 내가 네 대적이 되어 너의 병거들을 살라 연기가 되게 하고 너의 젊은 사자들을 칼로 멸할 것이며 내가 또 너의 노략한 것을 땅에서 끊으리니 너의 파견자의 목소리가 다시는 들리지 아니하리라 하셨느니라	Behold, I am against thee, saith the Lord of hosts, and I will burn her chariots in the smoke, and the sword shall devour thy young lions: and I will cut off thy prey from the earth, and the voice of thy messengers shall no more be heard.	“Behold, I am against you,” declares the LORD of Hosts. “I will send your chariots up in smoke, and the sword will devour your young lions. I will cut off your prey from the earth, and the voices of your messengers will no longer be heard.”
NAM	3	1	화 있을진저 피 성이여 그 속에서는 궤휼과 강포가 가득하며 늑탈이 떠나지 아니하는도다	Woe to the bloody city! it is all full of lies and robbery; the prey departeth not;	Woe to the city of blood, full of lies, full of plunder, never without prey.
NAM	3	2	휙휙하는 채찍 소리, 굉굉하는 병거바퀴 소리, 뛰는 말, 달리는 병거,	The noise of a whip, and the noise of the rattling of the wheels, and of the pransing horses, and of the jumping chariots.	The crack of the whip, the rumble of the wheel, galloping horse and bounding chariot!
NAM	3	3	충돌하는 기병, 번쩍이는 칼, 번개 같은 창, 살륙 당한 떼, 큰 무더기 주검, 무수한 시체여 사람이 그 시체에 걸려 넘어지니	The horseman lifteth up both the bright sword and the glittering spear: and there is a multitude of slain, and a great number of carcases; and there is none end of their corpses; they stumble upon their corpses:	Charging horseman, flashing sword, shining spear; heaps of slain, mounds of corpses, dead bodies without end— they stumble over their dead—
NAM	3	4	이는 마술의 주인된 아리따운 기생이 음행을 많이 함을 인함이라 그가 그 음행으로 열국을 미혹하고 그 마술로 여러 족속을 미혹하느니라	Because of the multitude of the whoredoms of the wellfavoured harlot, the mistress of witchcrafts, that selleth nations through her whoredoms, and families through her witchcrafts.	because of the many harlotries of the harlot, the seductive mistress of sorcery, who betrays nations by her prostitution and clans by her witchcraft.
NAM	3	5	만군의 여호와의 말씀에 내가 네 대적이 되어서 네 치마를 걷어쳐 네 얼굴에 이르게 하고 네 벌거벗은 것을 열국에 보이며 네 부끄러운 곳을 열방에 보일 것이요	Behold, I am against thee, saith the Lord of hosts; and I will discover thy skirts upon thy face, and I will shew the nations thy nakedness, and the kingdoms thy shame.	“Behold, I am against you,” declares the LORD of Hosts. “I will lift your skirts over your face. I will show your nakedness to the nations and your shame to the kingdoms.
NAM	3	6	내가 또 가증하고 더러운 것을 네 위에 던져 능욕하여 너로 구경거리가 되게 하리니	And I will cast abominable filth upon thee, and make thee vile, and will set thee as a gazingstock.	I will pelt you with filth and treat you with contempt; I will make a spectacle of you.
NAM	3	7	그 때에 너를 보는 자가 다 네게서 도망하며 이르기를 니느웨가 황무하였도다 누가 위하여 애곡하며 내가 어디서 너를 위로할 자를 구하리요 하리라 하시도다	And it shall come to pass, that all they that look upon thee shall flee from thee, and say, Nineveh is laid waste: who will bemoan her? whence shall I seek comforters for thee?	Then all who see you will recoil from you and say, ‘Nineveh is devastated; who will grieve for her?’ Where can I find comforters for you?”
NAM	3	8	네가 어찌 노아몬보다 낫겠느냐 그는 강들 사이에 있으므로 물이 둘렸으니 바다가 성루가 되었고 바다가 성벽이 되었으며	Art thou better than populous No, that was situate among the rivers, that had the waters round about it, whose rampart was the sea, and her wall was from the sea?	Are you better than Thebes, stationed by the Nile with water around her, whose rampart was the sea, whose wall was the water?
NAM	3	9	구스와 애굽이 그 힘이 되어 한이 없었고 붓과 루빔이 그의 돕는 자가 되었으나	Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength, and it was infinite; Put and Lubim were thy helpers.	Cush and Egypt were her boundless strength; Put and Libya were her allies.
NAM	3	10	그가 포로가 되어 사로잡혀 갔고 그 어린 아이들은 길 모퉁이 모퉁이에 메어침을 당하여 부숴졌으며 그 존귀한 자들은 제비 뽑혀 나뉘었고 그 모든 대인은 사슬에 결박되었나니	Yet was she carried away, she went into captivity: her young children also were dashed in pieces at the top of all the streets: and they cast lots for her honourable men, and all her great men were bound in chains.	Yet she became an exile; she went into captivity. Her infants were dashed to pieces at the head of every street. They cast lots for her dignitaries, and all her nobles were bound in chains.
NAM	3	11	너도 취한바 되어 숨으리라 너도 대적을 인하여 피난처를 찾아보리라	Thou also shalt be drunken: thou shalt be hid, thou also shalt seek strength because of the enemy.	You too will become drunk; you will go into hiding and seek refuge from the enemy.
NAM	3	12	너의 모든 산성은 무화과나무의 처음 익은 열매가 흔들기만 하면 먹는 자의 입에 떨어짐과 같으리라	All thy strong holds shall be like fig trees with the firstripe figs: if they be shaken, they shall even fall into the mouth of the eater.	All your fortresses are fig trees with the first ripe figs; when shaken, they fall into the mouth of the eater!
NAM	3	13	너의 중 장정들은 여인 같고 너의 땅의 성문들은 너의 대적 앞에 넓게 열리고 빗장들은 불에 타도다	Behold, thy people in the midst of thee are women: the gates of thy land shall be set wide open unto thine enemies: the fire shall devour thy bars.	Look at your troops— they are like your women! The gates of your land are wide open to your enemies; fire consumes their bars.
NAM	3	14	너는 물을 길어 에워싸일 것을 예비하며 너의 산성들을 견고케 하며 진흙에 들어가서 흙을 밟아 벽돌 가마를 수리하라	Draw thee waters for the siege, fortify thy strong holds: go into clay, and tread the morter, make strong the brickkiln.	Draw your water for the siege; strengthen your fortresses. Work the clay and tread the mortar; repair the brick kiln!
NAM	3	15	거기서 불이 너를 삼키며 칼이 너를 베기를 늣의 먹는 것 같이 하리라 네가 늣 같이 스스로 많게 할지어다 네가 메뚜기 같이 스스로 많게 할지어다	There shall the fire devour thee; the sword shall cut thee off, it shall eat thee up like the cankerworm: make thyself many as the cankerworm, make thyself many as the locusts.	There the fire will devour you; the sword will cut you down and consume you like a young locust. Make yourself many like the young locust; make yourself many like the swarming locust!
NAM	3	16	네가 네 상고를 하늘의 별보다 많게 하였으나 황충이 날개를 펴서 날아감과 같고	Thou hast multiplied thy merchants above the stars of heaven: the cankerworm spoileth, and flieth away.	You have multiplied your merchants more than the stars of the sky. The young locust strips the land and flies away.
NAM	3	17	너의 방백은 메뚜기 같고 너의 대장은 큰 메뚜기 떼가 추운 날에는 울타리에 깃들였다가 해가 뜨면 날아감과 같으니 그 있는 곳을 알 수 없도다	Thy crowned are as the locusts, and thy captains as the great grasshoppers, which camp in the hedges in the cold day, but when the sun ariseth they flee away, and their place is not known where they are.	Your guards are like the swarming locust, and your scribes like clouds of locusts that settle on the walls on a cold day. When the sun rises, they fly away, and no one knows where.
NAM	3	18	앗수르 왕이여 네 목자가 자고 네 귀족은 누워 쉬며 네 백성은 산들에 흩어지나 그들을 모을 사람이 없도다	Thy shepherds slumber, O king of Assyria: thy nobles shall dwell in the dust: thy people is scattered upon the mountains, and no man gathereth them.	O king of Assyria, your shepherds slumber; your officers sleep. Your people are scattered on the mountains with no one to gather them.
NAM	3	19	너의 다친 것은 고칠 수 없고 네 상처는 중하도다 네 소식을 듣는 자가 다 너를 인하여 손뼉을 치나니 이는 네 악행을 늘 받지 않은 자가 없음이 아니냐	There is no healing of thy bruise; thy wound is grievous: all that hear the bruit of thee shall clap the hands over thee: for upon whom hath not thy wickedness passed continually?	There is no healing for your injury; your wound is severe. All who hear the news of you applaud your downfall, for who has not experienced your constant cruelty?
HAB	1	1	선지자 하박국의 묵시로 받은 경고라	The burden which Habakkuk the prophet did see.	This is the burden that Habakkuk the prophet received in a vision:
HAB	1	2	여호와여 내가 부르짖어도 주께서 듣지 아니하시니 어느 때까지리이까 내가 강포를 인하여 외쳐도 주께서 구원치 아니하시나이다	O Lord, how long shall I cry, and thou wilt not hear! even cry out unto thee of violence, and thou wilt not save!	How long, O LORD, must I call for help but You do not hear, or cry out to You, “Violence!” but You do not save?
HAB	1	3	어찌하여 나로 간악을 보게 하시며 패역을 목도하게 하시나이까 대저 겁탈과 강포가 내 앞에 있고 변론과 분쟁이 일어났나이다	Why dost thou shew me iniquity, and cause me to behold grievance? for spoiling and violence are before me: and there are that raise up strife and contention.	Why do You make me see iniquity? Why do You tolerate wrongdoing? Destruction and violence are before me. Strife is ongoing, and conflict abounds.
HAB	1	4	이러므로 율법이 해이하고 공의가 아주 시행되지 못하오니 이는 악인이 의인을 에워쌌으므로 공의가 굽게 행함이니이다	Therefore the law is slacked, and judgment doth never go forth: for the wicked doth compass about the righteous; therefore wrong judgment proceedeth.	Therefore the law is paralyzed, and justice never goes forth. For the wicked hem in the righteous, so that justice is perverted.
HAB	1	5	여호와께서 가라사대 너희는 열국을 보고 또 보고 놀라고 또 놀랄지어다 너희 생전에 내가 한 일을 행할 것이라 혹이 너희에게 고할지라도 너희가 믿지 아니하리라	Behold ye among the heathen, and regard, and wonder marvellously: for I will work a work in your days, which ye will not believe, though it be told you.	“Look at the nations and observe— be utterly astounded! For I am doing a work in your days that you would never believe even if someone told you.
HAB	1	6	보라 내가 사납고 성급한 백성 곧 땅의 넓은 곳으로 다니며 자기의 소유 아닌 거할 곳들을 점령하는 갈대아 사람을 일으켰나니	For, lo, I raise up the Chaldeans, that bitter and hasty nation, which shall march through the breadth of the land, to possess the dwellingplaces that are not theirs.	For behold, I am raising up the Chaldeans— that ruthless and impetuous nation which marches through the breadth of the earth to seize dwellings not their own.
HAB	1	7	그들은 두렵고 무서우며 심판과 위령이 자기로 말미암으며	They are terrible and dreadful: their judgment and their dignity shall proceed of themselves.	They are dreaded and feared; from themselves they derive justice and sovereignty.
HAB	1	8	그 말은 표범보다 빠르고 저녁 이리보다 사나우며 그 기병은 원방에서부터 빨리 달려오는 기병이라 마치 식물을 움키려하는 독수리의 날음과 같으니라	Their horses also are swifter than the leopards, and are more fierce than the evening wolves: and their horsemen shall spread themselves, and their horsemen shall come from far; they shall fly as the eagle that hasteth to eat.	Their horses are swifter than leopards, fiercer than wolves of the night. Their horsemen charge ahead, and their cavalry comes from afar. They fly like a vulture, swooping down to devour.
HAB	1	9	그들은 다 강포를 행하러 오는데 앞을 향하여 나아가며 사람을 사로잡아 모으기를 모래 같이 많이 할 것이요	They shall come all for violence: their faces shall sup up as the east wind, and they shall gather the captivity as the sand.	All of them come bent on violence; their hordes advance like the east wind; they gather prisoners like sand.
HAB	1	10	열왕을 멸시하며 방백을 치소하며 모든 견고한 성을 비웃고 흉벽을 쌓아 그것을 취할 것이라	And they shall scoff at the kings, and the princes shall be a scorn unto them: they shall deride every strong hold; for they shall heap dust, and take it.	They scoff at kings and make rulers an object of scorn. They laugh at every fortress and build up siege ramps to seize it.
HAB	1	11	그들은 그 힘으로 자기 신을 삼는 자라 이에 바람 같이 급히 몰아 지나치게 행하여 득죄하리라	Then shall his mind change, and he shall pass over, and offend, imputing this his power unto his god.	Then they sweep by like the wind and pass on through. They are guilty; their own strength is their god.”
HAB	1	12	선지자가 가로되 여호와 나의 하나님 나의 거룩한 자시여 주께서는 만세 전부터 계시지 아니하시니이까 우리가 사망에 이르지 아니하리이다 여호와여 주께서 심판하기 위하여 그를 두셨나이다 반석이시여 주께서 경계하기 위하여 그를 세우셨나이다	Art thou not from everlasting, O Lord my God, mine Holy One? we shall not die. O Lord, thou hast ordained them for judgment; and, O mighty God, thou hast established them for correction.	Are You not from everlasting, O LORD, my God, my Holy One? We will not die. O LORD, You have appointed them to execute judgment; O Rock, You have established them for correction.
HAB	1	13	주께서는 눈이 정결하시므로 악을 참아 보지 못하시며 패역을 참아 보지 못하시거늘 어찌하여 궤휼한 자들을 방관하시며 악인이 자기보다 의로운 사람을 삼키되 잠잠하시나이까	Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and canst not look on iniquity: wherefore lookest thou upon them that deal treacherously, and holdest thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous than he?	Your eyes are too pure to look upon evil, and You cannot tolerate wrongdoing. So why do You tolerate the faithless? Why are You silent while the wicked swallow up those more righteous than themselves?
HAB	1	14	주께서 어찌하여 사람으로 바다의 어족 같게 하시며 주권자 없는 곤충 같게 하시나이까	And makest men as the fishes of the sea, as the creeping things, that have no ruler over them?	You have made men like the fish of the sea, like creeping things that have no ruler.
HAB	1	15	그가 낚시로 모두 취하며 그물로 잡으며 초망으로 모으고 인하여 기뻐하고 즐거워하여	They take up all of them with the angle, they catch them in their net, and gather them in their drag: therefore they rejoice and are glad.	The foe pulls all of them up with a hook; he catches them in his dragnet, and gathers them in his fishing net; so he rejoices gladly.
HAB	1	16	그물에 제사하며 초망 앞에 분향하오니 이는 그것을 힘입어 소득이 풍부하고 식물이 풍성케 됨이니이다	Therefore they sacrifice unto their net, and burn incense unto their drag; because by them their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous.	Therefore he sacrifices to his dragnet and burns incense to his fishing net, for by these things his portion is sumptuous and his food is rich.
HAB	1	17	그가 그물을 떨고는 연하여 늘 열국을 살륙함이 옳으니이까	Shall they therefore empty their net, and not spare continually to slay the nations?	Will he, therefore, empty his net and continue to slay nations without mercy?
HAB	2	1	내가 내 파수하는 곳에 서며 성루에 서리라 그가 내게 무엇이라 말씀하실는지 기다리고 바라보며 나의 질문에 대하여 어떻게 대답하실는지 보리라 그리하였더니	I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the tower, and will watch to see what he will say unto me, and what I shall answer when I am reproved.	I will stand at my guard post and station myself on the ramparts. I will watch to see what He will say to me, and how I should answer when corrected.
HAB	2	2	여호와께서 내게 대답하여 가라사대 너는 이 묵시를 기록하여 판에 명백히 새기되 달려가면서도 읽을 수 있게 하라	And the Lord answered me, and said, Write the vision, and make it plain upon tables, that he may run that readeth it.	Then the LORD answered me: “Write down this vision and clearly inscribe it on tablets, so that a herald may run with it.
HAB	2	3	이 묵시는 정한 때가 있나니 그 종말이 속히 이르겠고 결코 거짓되지 아니하리라 비록 더딜지라도 기다리라 지체되지 않고 정녕 응하리라	For the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak, and not lie: though it tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not tarry.	For the vision awaits an appointed time; it testifies of the end and does not lie. Though it lingers, wait for it, since it will surely come and will not delay.
HAB	2	4	보라 그의 마음은 교만하며 그의 속에서 정직하지 못하니라 그러나 의인은 믿음으로 말미암아 살리라	Behold, his soul which is lifted up is not upright in him: but the just shall live by his faith.	Look at the proud one; his soul is not upright— but the righteous will live by faith—
HAB	2	5	그는 술을 즐기며 궤휼하며 교만하여 가만히 있지 아니하고 그 욕심을 음부처럼 넓히며 또 그는 사망 같아서 족한 줄을 모르고 자기에게로 만국을 모으며 만민을 모으나니	Yea also, because he transgresseth by wine, he is a proud man, neither keepeth at home, who enlargeth his desire as hell, and is as death, and cannot be satisfied, but gathereth unto him all nations, and heapeth unto him all people:	and wealth indeed betrays him. He is an arrogant man never at rest. He enlarges his appetite like Sheol, and like Death, he is never satisfied. He gathers all the nations to himself and collects all the peoples as his own.
HAB	2	6	그 무리가 다 속담으로 그를 평론하며 조롱하는 시로 그를 풍자하지 않겠느냐 곧 이르기를 화 있을진저 자기 소유 아닌 것을 모으는 자여 언제까지 이르겠느냐 볼모잡은 것으로 무겁게 짐진 자여	Shall not all these take up a parable against him, and a taunting proverb against him, and say, Woe to him that increaseth that which is not his! how long? and to him that ladeth himself with thick clay!	Will not all of these take up a taunt against him, speaking with mockery and derision: ‘Woe to him who amasses what is not his and makes himself rich with many loans! How long will this go on?’
HAB	2	7	너를 물 자들이 홀연히 일어나지 않겠느냐 네가 그들에게 노략을 당하지 않겠느냐	Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee, and awake that shall vex thee, and thou shalt be for booties unto them?	Will not your creditors suddenly arise and those who disturb you awaken? Then you will become their prey.
HAB	2	8	네가 여러 나라를 노략하였으므로 그 모든 민족의 남은 자가 너를 노략하리니 이는 네가 사람의 피를 흘렸음이요 또 땅에, 성읍에, 그 안의 모든 거민에게 강포를 행하였음이니라 하리라	Because thou hast spoiled many nations, all the remnant of the people shall spoil thee; because of men’s blood, and for the violence of the land, of the city, and of all that dwell therein.	Because you have plundered many nations, the remnant of the people will plunder you— because of your bloodshed against man and your violence against the land, the city, and all their dwellers.
HAB	2	9	재앙을 피하기 위하여 높은데 깃들이려 하며 자기 집을 위하여 불의의 이를 취하는 자에게 화 있을진저	Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house, that he may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the power of evil!	Woe to him who builds his house by unjust gain, to place his nest on high and escape the hand of disaster!
HAB	2	10	네가 여러 민족을 멸한 것이 네 집에 욕을 부르며 너로 네 영혼에게 죄를 범하게 하는 것이 되었도다	Thou hast consulted shame to thy house by cutting off many people, and hast sinned against thy soul.	You have plotted shame for your house by cutting off many peoples and forfeiting your life.
HAB	2	11	담에서 돌이 부르짖고 집에서 들보가 응답하리라	For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it.	For the stones will cry out from the wall, and the rafters will echo it from the woodwork.
HAB	2	12	피로 읍을 건설하며 불의로 성을 건축하는 자에게 화 있을진저	Woe to him that buildeth a town with blood, and stablisheth a city by iniquity!	Woe to him who builds a city with bloodshed and establishes a town by iniquity!
HAB	2	13	민족들이 불탈 것으로 수고하는 것과 열국이 헛된 일로 곤비하게 되는 것이 만군의 여호와께로서 말미암음이 아니냐	Behold, is it not of the Lord of hosts that the people shall labour in the very fire, and the people shall weary themselves for very vanity?	Is it not indeed from the LORD of Hosts that the labor of the people only feeds the fire, and the nations weary themselves in vain?
HAB	2	14	대저 물이 바다를 덮음 같이 여호와의 영광을 인정하는 것이 세상에 가득하리라	For the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.	For the earth will be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the LORD as the waters cover the sea.
HAB	2	15	이웃에게 술을 마시우되 자기의 분노를 더하여 그로 취케 하고 그 하체를 드러내려 하는 자에게 화 있을진저	Woe unto him that giveth his neighbour drink, that puttest thy bottle to him, and makest him drunken also, that thou mayest look on their nakedness!	Woe to him who gives drink to his neighbors, pouring it from the wineskin until they are drunk, in order to gaze at their nakedness!
HAB	2	16	네게 영광이 아니요 수치가 가득한즉 너도 마시고 너의 할례 아니한 것을 드러내라 여호와의 오른손의 잔이 네게로 돌아올 것이라 더러운 욕이 네 영광을 가리우리라	Thou art filled with shame for glory: drink thou also, and let thy foreskin be uncovered: the cup of the Lord’s right hand shall be turned unto thee, and shameful spewing shall be on thy glory.	You will be filled with shame instead of glory. You too must drink and expose your uncircumcision! The cup in the LORD’s right hand will come around to you, and utter disgrace will cover your glory.
HAB	2	17	대저 네가 레바논에 강포를 행한 것과 짐승을 두렵게하여 잔해한 것 곧 사람의 피를 흘리며 땅과 성읍과 그 모든 거민에게 강포를 행한 것이 네게로 돌아오리라	For the violence of Lebanon shall cover thee, and the spoil of beasts, which made them afraid, because of men’s blood, and for the violence of the land, of the city, and of all that dwell therein.	For your violence against Lebanon will overwhelm you, and the destruction of animals will terrify you, because of your bloodshed against men and your violence against the land, the city, and all their dwellers.
HAB	2	18	새긴 우상은 그 새겨 만든 자에게 무엇이 유익하겠느냐 부어 만든 우상은 거짓 스승이라 만든 자가 이 말하지 못하는 우상을 의지하니 무엇이 유익하겠느냐	What profiteth the graven image that the maker thereof hath graven it; the molten image, and a teacher of lies, that the maker of his work trusteth therein, to make dumb idols?	What use is an idol, that a craftsman should carve it— or an image, a teacher of lies? For its maker trusts in his own creation; he makes idols that cannot speak.
HAB	2	19	나무더러 깨라 하며 말하지 못하는 돌더러 일어나라 하는 자에게 화 있을진저 그것이 교훈을 베풀겠느냐 보라 이는 금과 은으로 입힌 것인즉 그 속에는 생기가 도무지 없느니라	Woe unto him that saith to the wood, Awake; to the dumb stone, Arise, it shall teach! Behold, it is laid over with gold and silver, and there is no breath at all in the midst of it.	Woe to him who says to wood, ‘Awake!’ or to silent stone, ‘Arise!’ Can it give guidance? Behold, it is overlaid with gold and silver, yet there is no breath in it at all.”
HAB	2	20	오직 여호와는 그 성전에 계시니 온 천하는 그 앞에서 잠잠할지니라	But the Lord is in his holy temple: let all the earth keep silence before him.	But the LORD is in His holy temple; let all the earth be silent before Him.
HAB	3	1	시기오놋에 맞춘바 선지자 하박국의 기도라	A prayer of Habakkuk the prophet upon Shigionoth.	This is a prayer of Habakkuk the prophet, according to Shigionoth:
HAB	3	2	여호와여 내가 주께 대한 소문을 듣고 놀랐나이다 여호와여 주는 주의 일을 이 수년 내에 부흥케 하옵소서 이 수년 내에 나타내시옵소서 진노 중에라도 긍휼을 잊지 마옵소서	O Lord, I have heard thy speech, and was afraid: O Lord, revive thy work in the midst of the years, in the midst of the years make known; in wrath remember mercy.	O LORD, I have heard the report of You; I stand in awe, O LORD, of Your deeds. Revive them in these years; make them known in these years. In Your wrath, remember mercy!
HAB	3	3	하나님이 데만에서부터 오시며 거룩한 자가 바란 산에서부터 오시도다 (셀라) 그 영광이 하늘을 덮었고 그 찬송이 세계에 가득하도다	God came from Teman, and the Holy One from mount Paran. Selah. His glory covered the heavens, and the earth was full of his praise.	God came from Teman, and the Holy One from Mount Paran. Selah His glory covered the heavens, and His praise filled the earth.
HAB	3	4	그 광명이 햇빛 같고 광선이 그 손에서 나오니 그 권능이 그 속에 감취었도다	And his brightness was as the light; he had horns coming out of his hand: and there was the hiding of his power.	His radiance was like the sunlight; rays flashed from His hand, where His power is hidden.
HAB	3	5	온역이 그 앞에서 행하며 불덩이가 그 발밑에서 나오도다	Before him went the pestilence, and burning coals went forth at his feet.	Plague went before Him, and fever followed in His steps.
HAB	3	6	그가 서신즉 땅이 진동하며 그가 보신즉 열국이 전률하며 영원한 산이 무너지며 무궁한 작은 산이 엎드러지나니 그 행하심이 예로부터 그러하시도다	He stood, and measured the earth: he beheld, and drove asunder the nations; and the everlasting mountains were scattered, the perpetual hills did bow: his ways are everlasting.	He stood and measured the earth; He looked and startled the nations; the ancient mountains crumbled; the perpetual hills collapsed. His ways are everlasting.
HAB	3	7	내가 본즉 구산의 장막이 환난을 당하고 미디안 땅의 휘장이 흔들리도다	I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction: and the curtains of the land of Midian did tremble.	I saw the tents of Cushan in distress; the curtains of Midian were trembling.
HAB	3	8	여호와여 주께서 말을 타시며 구원의 병거를 모시오니 하수를 분히 여기심이니이까 강을 노여워하심이니이까 바다를 대하여 성내심이니이까	Was the Lord displeased against the rivers? was thine anger against the rivers? was thy wrath against the sea, that thou didst ride upon thine horses and thy chariots of salvation?	Were You angry at the rivers, O LORD? Was Your wrath against the streams? Did You rage against the sea when You rode on Your horses, on Your chariots of salvation?
HAB	3	9	주께서 활을 꺼내시고 살을 바로 발하셨나이다 (셀라) 주께서 하수들로 땅을 쪼개셨나이다	Thy bow was made quite naked, according to the oaths of the tribes, even thy word. Selah. Thou didst cleave the earth with rivers.	You brandished Your bow; You called for many arrows. Selah You split the earth with rivers.
HAB	3	10	산들이 주를 보고 흔들리며 창수가 넘치고 바다가 소리를 지르며 손을 높이 들었나이다	The mountains saw thee, and they trembled: the overflowing of the water passed by: the deep uttered his voice, and lifted up his hands on high.	The mountains saw You and quaked; torrents of water swept by. The deep roared with its voice and lifted its hands on high.
HAB	3	11	주의 날으는 살의 빛과 주의 번쩍이는 창의 광채로 인하여 해와 달이 그 처소에 멈추었나이다	The sun and moon stood still in their habitation: at the light of thine arrows they went, and at the shining of thy glittering spear.	Sun and moon stood still in their places at the flash of Your flying arrows, at the brightness of Your shining spear.
HAB	3	12	주께서 노를 발하사 땅에 돌리셨으며 분을 내사 열국을 밟으셨나이다	Thou didst march through the land in indignation, thou didst thresh the heathen in anger.	You marched across the earth with fury; You threshed the nations in wrath.
HAB	3	13	주께서 주의 백성을 구원하시려고, 기름 받은 자를 구원하시려고 나오사 악인의 집머리를 치시며 그 기초를 끝까지 드러내셨나이다 (셀라)	Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for salvation with thine anointed; thou woundedst the head out of the house of the wicked, by discovering the foundation unto the neck. Selah.	You went forth for the salvation of Your people, to save Your anointed. You crushed the head of the house of the wicked and stripped him from head to toe. Selah
HAB	3	14	그들이 회리바람처럼 이르러 나를 흩으려 하며 가만히 가난한 자 삼키기를 즐거워하나 오직 주께서 그들의 전사의 머리를 그들의 창으로 찌르셨나이다	Thou didst strike through with his staves the head of his villages: they came out as a whirlwind to scatter me: their rejoicing was as to devour the poor secretly.	With his own spear You pierced his head, when his warriors stormed out to scatter us, gloating as though ready to secretly devour the weak.
HAB	3	15	주께서 말을 타시고 바다 곧 큰 물의 파도를 밟으셨나이다	Thou didst walk through the sea with thine horses, through the heap of great waters.	You trampled the sea with Your horses, churning the great waters.
HAB	3	16	내가 들었으므로 내 창자가 흔들렸고 그 목소리로 인하여 내 입술이 떨렸도다 무리가 우리를 치러 올라오는 환난 날을 내가 기다리므로 내 뼈에 썩이는 것이 들어왔으며 내 몸은 내 처소에서 떨리는도다	When I heard, my belly trembled; my lips quivered at the voice: rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in myself, that I might rest in the day of trouble: when he cometh up unto the people, he will invade them with his troops.	I heard and trembled within; my lips quivered at the sound. Decay entered my bones; I trembled where I stood. Yet I must wait patiently for the day of distress to come upon the people who invade us.
HAB	3	17	비록 무화과나무가 무성치 못하며 포도나무에 열매가 없으며 감람나무에 소출이 없으며 밭에 식물이 없으며 우리에 양이 없으며 외양간에 소가 없을지라도	Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines; the labour of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls:	Though the fig tree does not bud and no fruit is on the vines, though the olive crop fails and the fields produce no food, though the sheep are cut off from the fold and no cattle are in the stalls,
HAB	3	18	나는 여호와를 인하여 즐거워하며 나의 구원의 하나님을 인하여 기뻐하리로다	Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation.	yet I will exult in the LORD; I will rejoice in the God of my salvation!
HAB	3	19	주 여호와는 나의 힘이시라 나의 발을 사슴과 같게 하사 나로 나의 높은 곳에 다니게 하시리로다 이 노래는 영장을 위하여 내 수금에 맞춘 것이니라	The Lord God is my strength, and he will make my feet like hinds’ feet, and he will make me to walk upon mine high places. To the chief singer on my stringed instruments.	GOD the Lord is my strength; He makes my feet like those of a deer; He makes me walk upon the heights! For the choirmaster. With stringed instruments.
ZEP	1	1	아몬의 아들 유다 왕 요시아의 시대에 스바냐에게 임한 여호와의 말씀이라 스바냐는 히스기야의 현손이요 아마랴의 증손이요 그다랴의 손자요 구시의 아들이었더라	The word of the Lord which came unto Zephaniah the son of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the son of Hizkiah, in the days of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah.	This is the word of the LORD that came to Zephaniah son of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the son of Hezekiah, in the days of Josiah son of Amon king of Judah:
ZEP	1	2	여호와께서 가라사대 내가 지면에서 모든 것을 진멸하리라	I will utterly consume all things from off the land, saith the Lord.	“I will completely sweep away everything from the face of the earth,” declares the LORD.
ZEP	1	3	내가 사람과 짐승을 진멸하고 공중의 새와 바다의 고기와 거치게 하는 것과 악인들을 아울러 진멸할 것이라 내가 사람을 지면에서 멸절하리라 나 여호와의 말이니라	I will consume man and beast; I will consume the fowls of the heaven, and the fishes of the sea, and the stumblingblocks with the wicked; and I will cut off man from off the land, saith the Lord.	“I will sweep away man and beast; I will sweep away the birds of the air, and the fish of the sea, and the idols with their wicked worshipers. I will cut off mankind from the face of the earth,” declares the LORD.
ZEP	1	4	내가 유다와 예루살렘 모든 거민 위에 손을 펴서 바알의 남아 있는 것을 그곳에서 멸절하며 그마림이란 이름과 및 그 제사장들을 아울러 멸절하며	I will also stretch out mine hand upon Judah, and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and I will cut off the remnant of Baal from this place, and the name of the Chemarims with the priests;	“I will stretch out My hand against Judah and against all who dwell in Jerusalem. I will cut off from this place every remnant of Baal, the names of the idolatrous and pagan priests—
ZEP	1	5	무릇 지붕에서 하늘의 일월성신에게 경배하는 자와 경배하며 여호와께 맹세하면서 말감을 가리켜 맹세하는 자와	And them that worship the host of heaven upon the housetops; and them that worship and that swear by the Lord, and that swear by Malcham;	those who bow on the rooftops to worship the host of heaven, those who bow down and swear by the LORD but also swear by Milcom,
ZEP	1	6	여호와를 배반하고 좇지 아니한 자와 여호와를 찾지도 아니하며 구하지도 아니한 자를 멸절하리라	And them that are turned back from the Lord; and those that have not sought the Lord, nor enquired for him.	and those who turn back from following the LORD, neither seeking the LORD nor inquiring of Him.”
ZEP	1	7	주 여호와 앞에서 잠잠할지어다 이는 여호와의 날이 가까웠으므로 여호와가 희생을 준비하고 그 청할 자를 구별하였음이니라	Hold thy peace at the presence of the Lord God: for the day of the Lord is at hand: for the Lord hath prepared a sacrifice, he hath bid his guests.	Be silent in the presence of the Lord GOD, for the Day of the LORD is near. Indeed, the LORD has prepared a sacrifice; He has consecrated His guests.
ZEP	1	8	여호와의 희생의 날에 내가 방백들과 왕자들과 이방의 의복을 입은 자들을 벌할 것이며	And it shall come to pass in the day of the Lord’s sacrifice, that I will punish the princes, and the king’s children, and all such as are clothed with strange apparel.	“On the Day of the LORD’s sacrifice I will punish the princes, the sons of the king, and all who are dressed in foreign apparel.
ZEP	1	9	그 날에 문턱을 뛰어 넘어서 강포와 궤휼로 자기 주인의 집에 채운 자들을 내가 벌하리라	In the same day also will I punish all those that leap on the threshold, which fill their masters’ houses with violence and deceit.	On that day I will punish all who leap over the threshold, who fill the house of their master with violence and deceit.
ZEP	1	10	나 여호와가 말하노라 그 날에 어문에서는 곡성이, 제이구역에서는 부르짖은 소리가, 작은 산들에서는 무너지는 소리가 일어나리라	And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord, that there shall be the noise of a cry from the fish gate, and an howling from the second, and a great crashing from the hills.	On that day,” declares the LORD, “a cry will go up from the Fish Gate, a wail from the Second District, and a loud crashing from the hills.
ZEP	1	11	막데스 거민들아 너희는 애곡하라 가나안 백성이 다 패망하고 은을 수운하는 자가 끊어졌음이니라	Howl, ye inhabitants of Maktesh, for all the merchant people are cut down; all they that bear silver are cut off.	Wail, O dwellers of the Hollow, for all your merchants will be silenced; all who weigh out silver will be cut off.
ZEP	1	12	그 때에 내가 등불로 예루살렘에 두루 찾아 무릇 찌끼 같이 가라앉아서 심중에 스스로 이르기를 여호와께서는 복도 내리지 아니하시며 화도 내리지 아니하시리라 하는 자를 벌하리니	And it shall come to pass at that time, that I will search Jerusalem with candles, and punish the men that are settled on their lees: that say in their heart, The Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil.	And at that time I will search Jerusalem with lamps and punish the men settled in complacency, who say to themselves, ‘The LORD will do nothing, either good or bad.’
ZEP	1	13	그들의 재물이 노략되며 그들의 집이 황무할 것이라 그들이 집을 건축하나 거기 거하지 못하며 포도원을 심으나 그 포도주를 마시지 못하리라	Therefore their goods shall become a booty, and their houses a desolation: they shall also build houses, but not inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, but not drink the wine thereof.	Their wealth will be plundered and their houses laid waste. They will build houses but not inhabit them, and plant vineyards but never drink their wine.
ZEP	1	14	여호와의 큰 날이 가깝도다 가깝고도 심히 빠르도다 여호와의 날의 소리로다 용사가 거기서 심히 애곡하는도다	The great day of the Lord is near, it is near, and hasteth greatly, even the voice of the day of the Lord: the mighty man shall cry there bitterly.	The great Day of the LORD is near— near and coming quickly. Listen, the Day of the LORD! Then the cry of the mighty will be bitter.
ZEP	1	15	그 날은 분노의 날이요 환난과 고통의 날이요 황무와 패괴의 날이요 캄캄하고 어두운 날이요 구름과 흑암의 날이요	That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness,	That day will be a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of destruction and desolation, a day of darkness and gloom, a day of clouds and blackness,
ZEP	1	16	나팔을 불어 경고하며 견고한 성읍을 치며 높은 망대를 치는 날이로다	A day of the trumpet and alarm against the fenced cities, and against the high towers.	a day of horn blast and battle cry against the fortified cities, and against the high corner towers.
ZEP	1	17	내가 사람들에게 고난을 내려 소경 같이 행하게 하리니 이는 그들이 나 여호와께 범죄하였음이라 또 그들의 피는 흘리워서 티끌 같이 되며 그들의 살은 분토 같이 될지라	And I will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned against the Lord: and their blood shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as the dung.	I will bring such distress on mankind that they will walk like the blind, because they have sinned against the LORD. Their blood will be poured out like dust and their flesh like dung.
ZEP	1	18	그들의 은과 금이 여호와의 분노의 날에 능히 그들을 건지지 못할 것이며 이 온 땅이 여호와의 질투의 불에 삼키우리니 이는 여호와가 이 땅 모든 거민을 멸절하되 놀랍게 멸절할 것임이니라	Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of the Lord’s wrath; but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy: for he shall make even a speedy riddance of all them that dwell in the land.	Neither their silver nor their gold will be able to deliver them on the Day of the LORD’s wrath. The whole earth will be consumed by the fire of His jealousy.” For indeed, He will make a sudden end of all who dwell on the earth.
ZEP	2	1	수치를 모르는 백성아 모일지어다 모일지어다	Gather yourselves together, yea, gather together, O nation not desired;	Gather yourselves, gather together, O shameful nation,
ZEP	2	2	명령이 시행되기 전, 광음이 겨 같이 날아 지나가기 전, 여호와의 진노가 너희에게 임하기 전, 여호와의 분노의 날이 너희에게 이르기 전에 그리할지어다	Before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the chaff, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before the day of the Lord’s anger come upon you.	before the decree takes effect and the day passes like chaff, before the burning anger of the LORD comes upon you, before the Day of the LORD’s anger comes upon you.
ZEP	2	3	여호와의 규례를 지키는 세상의 모든 겸손한 자들아 너희는 여호와를 찾으며 공의와 겸손을 구하라 너희가 혹시 여호와의 분노의 날에 숨김을 얻으리라	Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought his judgment; seek righteousness, seek meekness: it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lord’s anger.	Seek the LORD, all you humble of the earth who carry out His justice. Seek righteousness; seek humility. Perhaps you will be sheltered on the day of the LORD’s anger.
ZEP	2	4	가사가 버리우며 아스글론이 황폐되며 아스돗이 백주에 쫓겨나며 에그론이 뽑히우리라	For Gaza shall be forsaken, and Ashkelon a desolation: they shall drive out Ashdod at the noon day, and Ekron shall be rooted up.	For Gaza will be abandoned, and Ashkelon left in ruins. Ashdod will be driven out at noon, and Ekron will be uprooted.
ZEP	2	5	해변 거민 그렛 족속에게 화 있을진저 블레셋 사람의 땅 가나안아 여호와의 말이 너희를 치나니 내가 너를 멸하여 거민이 없게 하리라	Woe unto the inhabitants of the sea coast, the nation of the Cherethites! the word of the Lord is against you; O Canaan, the land of the Philistines, I will even destroy thee, that there shall be no inhabitant.	Woe to the dwellers of the seacoast, O nation of the Cherethites! The word of the LORD is against you, O Canaan, land of the Philistines: “I will destroy you, and no one will be left.”
ZEP	2	6	해변은 초장이 되어 목자의 움과 양떼의 우리가 거기 있을 것이며	And the sea coast shall be dwellings and cottages for shepherds, and folds for flocks.	So the seacoast will become a land of pastures, with wells for shepherds and folds for sheep.
ZEP	2	7	그 지경은 유다 족속의 남은 자에게로 돌아갈지라 그들이 거기서 양떼를 먹이고 저녁에는 아스글론 집들에 누우리니 이는 그들의 하나님 여호와가 그들을 권고하여 그 사로잡힘을 돌이킬 것임이니라	And the coast shall be for the remnant of the house of Judah; they shall feed thereupon: in the houses of Ashkelon shall they lie down in the evening: for the Lord their God shall visit them, and turn away their captivity.	The coast will belong to the remnant of the house of Judah; there they will find pasture. They will lie down in the evening among the houses of Ashkelon, for the LORD their God will attend to them and restore their captives.
ZEP	2	8	내가 모압의 훼방과 암몬 자손의 후욕을 들었나니 그들이 내 백성을 훼방하고 스스로 커서 그 경계를 침범하였느니라	I have heard the reproach of Moab, and the revilings of the children of Ammon, whereby they have reproached my people, and magnified themselves against their border.	“I have heard the reproach of Moab and the insults of the Ammonites, who have taunted My people and threatened their borders.
ZEP	2	9	그러므로 만군의 여호와 이스라엘의 하나님이 말하노라 내가 나의 삶을 두고 맹세하노니 장차 모압은 소돔 같으며 암몬 자손은 고모라 같을 것이라 찔레가 나며 소금 구덩이가 되어 영원히 황무하리니 나의 끼친 백성이 그들을 노략하며 나의 남은 국민이 그것을 기업으로 얻을 것이라	Therefore as I live, saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, Surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorrah, even the breeding of nettles, and saltpits, and a perpetual desolation: the residue of my people shall spoil them, and the remnant of my people shall possess them.	Therefore, as surely as I live,” declares the LORD of Hosts, the God of Israel, “surely Moab will be like Sodom and the Ammonites like Gomorrah— a place of weeds and salt pits, a perpetual wasteland. The remnant of My people will plunder them; the remainder of My nation will dispossess them.”
ZEP	2	10	그들이 이런 일을 당할 것은 교만하여 스스로 커서 만군의 여호와의 백성을 훼방함이니라	This shall they have for their pride, because they have reproached and magnified themselves against the people of the Lord of hosts.	This they shall have in return for their pride, for taunting and mocking the people of the LORD of Hosts.
ZEP	2	11	여호와가 그들에게 두렵게 되어서 세상의 모든 신을 쇠진케 하리니 이방의 모든 해변 사람들이 각각 자기 처소에서 여호와께 경배하리라	The Lord will be terrible unto them: for he will famish all the gods of the earth; and men shall worship him, every one from his place, even all the isles of the heathen.	The LORD will be terrifying to them when He starves all the gods of the earth. Then the nations of every shore will bow in worship to Him, each in its own place.
ZEP	2	12	구스 사람아 너희도 내 칼에 살륙을 당하리라	Ye Ethiopians also, ye shall be slain by my sword.	“You too, O Cushites, will be slain by My sword.”
ZEP	2	13	여호와가 북방을 향하여 손을 펴서 앗수르를 멸하며 니느웨로 황무케 하여 사막 같이 메마르게 하리니	And he will stretch out his hand against the north, and destroy Assyria; and will make Nineveh a desolation, and dry like a wilderness.	And He will stretch out His hand against the north and destroy Assyria; He will make Nineveh a desolation, as dry as a desert.
ZEP	2	14	각양 짐승이 그 가운데 떼로 누울 것이며 당아와 고슴도치가 그 기둥 꼭대기에 깃들일 것이며 창에서 울 것이며 문턱이 적막하리니 백향목으로 지은 것이 벗겨졌음이라	And flocks shall lie down in the midst of her, all the beasts of the nations: both the cormorant and the bittern shall lodge in the upper lintels of it; their voice shall sing in the windows; desolation shall be in the thresholds: for he shall uncover the cedar work.	Herds will lie down in her midst, creatures of every kind. Both the desert owl and screech owl will roost atop her pillars. Their calls will sound from the window, but desolation will lie on the threshold, for He will expose the beams of cedar.
ZEP	2	15	이는 기쁜 성이라 염려 없이 거하며 심중에 이르기를 오직 나만 있고 나 외에는 다른 이가 없다 하더니 어찌 이같이 황무하여 들짐승의 엎드릴 곳이 되었는고 지나가는 자마다 치소하여 손을 흔들리로다	This is the rejoicing city that dwelt carelessly, that said in her heart, I am, and there is none beside me: how is she become a desolation, a place for beasts to lie down in! every one that passeth by her shall hiss, and wag his hand.	This carefree city that dwells securely, that thinks to herself: “I am it, and there is none besides me,” what a ruin she has become, a resting place for beasts. Everyone who passes by her hisses and shakes his fist.
ZEP	3	1	패역하고 더러운 곳, 포학한 그 성읍이 화 있을진저	Woe to her that is filthy and polluted, to the oppressing city!	Woe to the city of oppressors, rebellious and defiled!
ZEP	3	2	그가 명령을 듣지 아니하며 교훈을 받지 아니하며 여호와를 의뢰하지 아니하며 자기 하나님에게 가까이 나아가지 아니하였도다	She obeyed not the voice; she received not correction; she trusted not in the Lord; she drew not near to her God.	She heeded no voice; she accepted no correction. She does not trust in the LORD; she has not drawn near to her God.
ZEP	3	3	그 가운데 방백들은 부르짖는 사자요 그 재판장들은 이튿날까지 남겨 두는 것이 없는 저녁 이리요	Her princes within her are roaring lions; her judges are evening wolves; they gnaw not the bones till the morrow.	Her princes are roaring lions; her judges are evening wolves, leaving nothing for the morning.
ZEP	3	4	그 선지자들은 위인이 경솔하고 간사한 자요 그 제사장들은 성소를 더럽히고 율법을 범하였도다	Her prophets are light and treacherous persons: her priests have polluted the sanctuary, they have done violence to the law.	Her prophets are reckless, faithless men. Her priests profane the sanctuary; they do violence to the law.
ZEP	3	5	그 중에 거하신 여호와는 의로우사 불의를 행치 아니하시고 아침마다 간단 없이 자기의 공의를 나타내시거늘 불의한 자는 수치를 알지 못하는도다	The just Lord is in the midst thereof; he will not do iniquity: every morning doth he bring his judgment to light, he faileth not; but the unjust knoweth no shame.	The LORD within her is righteous; He does no wrong. He applies His justice morning by morning; He does not fail at dawn, yet the unjust know no shame.
ZEP	3	6	내가 열국을 끊어 버렸으므로 그 망대가 황무하였고 내가 그 거리를 비게 하여 지나는 자가 없게 하였으므로 그 모든 성읍이 황폐되며 사람이 없으며 거할 자가 없게 되었느니라	I have cut off the nations: their towers are desolate; I made their streets waste, that none passeth by: their cities are destroyed, so that there is no man, that there is none inhabitant.	“I have cut off the nations; their corner towers are destroyed. I have made their streets deserted with no one to pass through. Their cities are laid waste, with no man, no inhabitant.
ZEP	3	7	내가 이르기를 너는 오직 나를 경외하고 교훈을 받으라 그리하면 내가 형벌을 내리기로 정하기는 하였거니와 너의 거처가 끊어지지 아니하리라 하였으나 그들이 부지런히 그 모든 행위를 더럽게 하였느니라	I said, Surely thou wilt fear me, thou wilt receive instruction; so their dwelling should not be cut off, howsoever I punished them: but they rose early, and corrupted all their doings.	I said, ‘Surely you will fear Me and accept correction.’ Then her dwelling place would not be cut off despite all for which I punished her. But they rose early to corrupt all their deeds.
ZEP	3	8	나 여호와가 말하노라 그러므로 내가 일어나 벌할 날까지 너희는 나를 기다리라 내가 뜻을 정하고 나의 분한과 모든 진노를 쏟으려고 나라들을 소집하며 열국을 모으리라 온 땅이 나의 질투의 불에 소멸되리라	Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the prey: for my determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger: for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy.	Therefore wait for Me,” declares the LORD, “until the day I rise to testify. For My decision is to gather nations, to assemble kingdoms, to pour out upon them My indignation— all My burning anger. For all the earth will be consumed by the fire of My jealousy.
ZEP	3	9	그 때에 내가 열방의 입술을 깨끗케 하여 그들로 다 나 여호와의 이름을 부르며 일심으로 섬기게 하리니	For then will I turn to the people a pure language, that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent.	For then I will restore pure lips to the peoples, that all may call upon the name of the LORD and serve Him shoulder to shoulder.
ZEP	3	10	내게 구하는 백성들 곧 내가 흩은 자의 딸이 구스 하수 건너편에서부터 예물을 가지고 와서 내게 드릴지라	From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia my suppliants, even the daughter of my dispersed, shall bring mine offering.	From beyond the rivers of Cush My worshipers, My scattered people, will bring Me an offering.
ZEP	3	11	그 날에 네가 내게 범죄한 모든 행위를 인하여 수치를 당하지 아니할 것은 그 때에 내가 너의 중에서 교만하여 자랑하는 자를 제하여 너로 나의 성산에서 다시는 교만하지 않게 할 것임이니라	In that day shalt thou not be ashamed for all thy doings, wherein thou hast transgressed against me: for then I will take away out of the midst of thee them that rejoice in thy pride, and thou shalt no more be haughty because of my holy mountain.	On that day you will not be put to shame for any of the deeds by which you have transgressed against Me. For then I will remove from among you those who rejoice in their pride, and you will never again be haughty on My holy mountain.
ZEP	3	12	내가 곤고하고 가난한 백성을 너의 중에 남겨 두리니 그들이 여호와의 이름을 의탁하여 보호를 받을지라	I will also leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the Lord.	But I will leave within you a meek and humble people, and they will trust in the name of the LORD.
ZEP	3	13	이스라엘의 남은 자는 악을 행치 아니하며 거짓을 말하지 아니하며 입에 궤휼한 혀가 없으며 먹으며 누우나 놀라게 할 자가 없으리라	The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies; neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth: for they shall feed and lie down, and none shall make them afraid.	The remnant of Israel will no longer do wrong or speak lies, nor will a deceitful tongue be found in their mouths. But they will feed and lie down, with no one to make them tremble.”
ZEP	3	14	시온의 딸아 노래할지어다 이스라엘아 기쁘게 부를지어다 예루살렘 딸아 전심으로 기뻐하며 즐거워할지어다	Sing, O daughter of Zion; shout, O Israel; be glad and rejoice with all the heart, O daughter of Jerusalem.	Sing for joy, O Daughter of Zion; shout aloud, O Israel! Be glad and rejoice with all your heart, O Daughter of Jerusalem!
ZEP	3	15	여호와가 너의 형벌을 제하였고 너의 원수를 쫓아내었으며 이스라엘 왕 여호와가 너의 중에 있으니 네가 다시는 화를 당할까 두려워하지 아니할 것이라	The Lord hath taken away thy judgments, he hath cast out thine enemy: the king of Israel, even the Lord, is in the midst of thee: thou shalt not see evil any more.	The LORD has taken away your punishment; He has turned back your enemy. Israel’s King, the LORD, is among you; no longer will you fear any harm.
ZEP	3	16	그 날에 사람이 예루살렘에게 이르기를 두려워하지 말라 시온아 네 손을 늘어뜨리지 말라	In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, Fear thou not: and to Zion, Let not thine hands be slack.	On that day they will say to Jerusalem: “Do not fear, O Zion; do not let your hands fall limp.
ZEP	3	17	너의 하나님 여호와가 너의 가운데 계시니 그는 구원을 베푸실 전능자시라 그가 너로 인하여 기쁨을 이기지 못하여 하시며 너를 잠잠히 사랑하시며 너로 인하여 즐거이 부르며 기뻐하시리라 하리라	The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty; he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy; he will rest in his love, he will joy over thee with singing.	The LORD your God is among you; He is mighty to save. He will rejoice over you with gladness; He will quiet you with His love; He will rejoice over you with singing.”
ZEP	3	18	내가 대회로 인하여 근심하는 자를 모으리니 그들은 네게 속한 자라 너의 치욕이 그들에게 무거운 짐이 되었느니라	I will gather them that are sorrowful for the solemn assembly, who are of thee, to whom the reproach of it was a burden.	“I will gather those among you who grieve over the appointed feasts, so that you will no longer suffer reproach.
ZEP	3	19	그 때에 내가 너를 괴롭게 하는 자를 다 벌하고 저는 자를 구원하며 쫓겨난 자를 모으며 온 세상에서 수욕 받는 자로 칭잔과 명성을 얻게 하리라	Behold, at that time I will undo all that afflict thee: and I will save her that halteth, and gather her that was driven out; and I will get them praise and fame in every land where they have been put to shame.	Behold, at that time, I will deal with all who afflict you. I will save the lame and gather the scattered; and I will appoint praise and fame for the disgraced throughout the earth.
ZEP	3	20	내가 그 때에 너희를 이끌고 그 때에 너희를 모을지라 내가 너희 목전에서 너희 사로잡힘을 돌이킬 때에 너희로 천하 만민 중에서 명성과 칭찬을 얻게 하리라 나 여호와의 말이니라	At that time will I bring you again, even in the time that I gather you: for I will make you a name and a praise among all people of the earth, when I turn back your captivity before your eyes, saith the Lord.	At that time I will bring you in; yes, at that time I will gather you. For I will give you fame and praise among all the peoples of the earth when I restore your captives before your very eyes,” says the LORD.
HAG	1	1	다리오 왕 이년 유월 곧 그 달 초하루에 여호와의 말씀이 선지자 학개로 말미암아 스알디엘의 아들 유다 총독 스룹바벨과 여호사닥의 아들 대제사장 여호수아에게 임하니라 가라사대	In the second year of Darius the king, in the sixth month, in the first day of the month, came the word of the Lord by Haggai the prophet unto Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest, saying,	In the second year of the reign of Darius, on the first day of the sixth month, the word of the LORD came through Haggai the prophet to Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua son of Jehozadak, the high priest, stating
HAG	1	2	만군의 여호와가 말하여 이르노라 이 백성이 말하기를 여호와의 전을 건축할 시기가 이르지 아니하였다 하느니라	Thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, saying, This people say, The time is not come, the time that the Lord’s house should be built.	that this is what the LORD of Hosts says: “These people say, ‘The time has not yet come to rebuild the house of the LORD.’”
HAG	1	3	여호와의 말씀이 선지자 학개에게 임하여 가라사대	Then came the word of the Lord by Haggai the prophet, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came through Haggai the prophet, saying:
HAG	1	4	이 전이 황무하였거늘 너희가 이 때에 판벽한 집에 거하는 것이 가하냐	Is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in your cieled houses, and this house lie waste?	“Is it a time for you yourselves to live in your paneled houses, while this house lies in ruins?”
HAG	1	5	그러므로 이제 나 만군의 여호와가 말하노니 너희는 자기의 소위를 살펴 볼지니라	Now therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts; Consider your ways.	Now this is what the LORD of Hosts says: “Consider carefully your ways.
HAG	1	6	너희가 많이 뿌릴지라도 수입이 적으며 먹을지라도 배부르지 못하며 마실지라도 흡족하지 못하며 입어도 따뜻하지 못하며 일꾼이 삯을 받아도 그것을 구멍 뚫어진 전대에 넣음이 되느니라	Ye have sown much, and bring in little; ye eat, but ye have not enough; ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink; ye clothe you, but there is none warm; and he that earneth wages earneth wages to put it into a bag with holes.	You have planted much but harvested little. You eat but never have enough. You drink but never have your fill. You put on clothes but never get warm. You earn wages to put into a bag pierced through.”
HAG	1	7	나 만군의 여호와가 말하노니 너희는 자기의 소위를 살펴 볼지니라	Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Consider your ways.	This is what the LORD of Hosts says: “Consider carefully your ways.
HAG	1	8	너희는 산에 올라가서 나무를 가져다가 전을 건축하라 그리하면 내가 그로 인하여 기뻐하고 또 영광을 얻으리라 나 여호와가 말하였느니라	Go up to the mountain, and bring wood, and build the house; and I will take pleasure in it, and I will be glorified, saith the Lord.	Go up into the hills, bring down lumber, and build the house, so that I may take pleasure in it and be glorified, says the LORD.
HAG	1	9	너희가 많은 것을 바랐으나 도리어 적었고 너희가 그것을 집으로 가져갔으나 내가 불어 버렸느니라 나 만군의 여호와가 말하노라 이것이 무슨 연고뇨 내 집은 황무하였으되 너희는 각각 자기의 집에 빨랐음이니라	Ye looked for much, and, lo, it came to little; and when ye brought it home, I did blow upon it. Why? saith the Lord of hosts. Because of mine house that is waste, and ye run every man unto his own house.	You expected much, but behold, it amounted to little. And what you brought home, I blew away. Why? declares the LORD of Hosts. Because My house still lies in ruins, while each of you is busy with his own house.
HAG	1	10	그러므로 너희로 인하여 하늘은 이슬을 그쳤고 땅은 산물을 그쳤으며	Therefore the heaven over you is stayed from dew, and the earth is stayed from her fruit.	Therefore, on account of you the heavens have withheld their dew and the earth has withheld its crops.
HAG	1	11	내가 한재를 불러 이 땅에, 산에, 곡물에, 새 포도주에, 기름에, 땅의 모든 소산에, 사람에게, 육축에게, 손으로 수고하는 모든 일에 임하게 하였느니라	And I called for a drought upon the land, and upon the mountains, and upon the corn, and upon the new wine, and upon the oil, and upon that which the ground bringeth forth, and upon men, and upon cattle, and upon all the labour of the hands.	I have summoned a drought on the fields and on the mountains, on the grain, new wine, and oil, and on whatever the ground yields, on man and beast, and on all the labor of your hands.”
HAG	1	12	스알디엘의 아들 스룹바벨과 여호사닥의 아들 대제사장 여호수아와 남은바 모든 백성이 그 하나님 여호와의 목소리와 선지자 학개의 말을 청종하였으니 이는 그들의 하나님 여호와께서 그를 보내셨음을 인함이라 백성이 다 여호와를 경외하매	Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest, with all the remnant of the people, obeyed the voice of the Lord their God, and the words of Haggai the prophet, as the Lord their God had sent him, and the people did fear before the Lord.	Then Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel and Joshua son of Jehozadak, the high priest, as well as all the remnant of the people, obeyed the voice of the LORD their God and the words of the prophet Haggai, because the LORD their God had sent him. So the people feared the LORD.
HAG	1	13	때에 여호와의 사자 학개가 여호와의 명을 의지하여 백성에게 고하여 가로되 나 여호와가 말하노니 내가 너희와 함께 하노라 하셨느니라 하니라	Then spake Haggai the Lord’s messenger in the Lord’s message unto the people, saying, I am with you, saith the Lord.	Haggai, the messenger of the LORD, delivered the message of the LORD to the people: “I am with you,” declares the LORD.
HAG	1	14	여호와께서 스알디엘의 아들 유다 총독 스룹바벨의 마음과 여호사닥의 아들 대제사장 여호수아의 마음과 남은바 모든 백성의 마음을 흥분시키시매 그들이 와서 만군의 여호와 그들의 하나님의 전역사를 하였으니	And the Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and the spirit of Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of the people; and they came and did work in the house of the Lord of hosts, their God,	So the LORD stirred the spirit of Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and the spirit of Joshua son of Jehozadak, the high priest, as well as the spirit of all the remnant of the people. And they came and began the work on the house of the LORD of Hosts, their God,
HAG	1	15	때는 다리오 왕 이년 유월 이십사일이었더라	In the four and twentieth day of the sixth month, in the second year of Darius the king.	on the twenty-fourth day of the sixth month, in the second year of King Darius.
HAG	2	1	칠월 곧 그 달 이십일일에 여호와의 말씀이 선지자 학개에게 임하니라 가라사대	In the seventh month, in the one and twentieth day of the month, came the word of the Lord by the prophet Haggai, saying,	On the twenty-first day of the seventh month, the word of the LORD came through Haggai the prophet, saying:
HAG	2	2	너는 스알디엘의 아들 유다 총독 스룹바벨과 여호사닥의 아들 대제사장 여호수아와 남은 백성에게 고하여 이르라	Speak now to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest, and to the residue of the people, saying,	“Speak to Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and also to the remnant of the people. Ask them,
HAG	2	3	너희 중에 남아 있는 자 곧 이 전의 이전 영광을 본 자가 누구냐 이제 이것이 너희에게 어떻게 보이느냐 이것이 너희 눈에 보잘것이 없지 아니하냐	Who is left among you that saw this house in her first glory? and how do ye see it now? is it not in your eyes in comparison of it as nothing?	‘Who is left among you who saw this house in its former glory? How does it look to you now? Does it not appear to you like nothing in comparison?’
HAG	2	4	그러나 여호와가 이르노라 스룹바벨아 스스로 굳세게 할지어다 여호사닥의 아들 대제사장 여호수아야 스스로 굳세게 할지어다 나 여호와의 말이니라 이 땅 모든 백성아 스스로 굳세게 하여 일할지어다 내가 너희와 함께 하노라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라	Yet now be strong, O Zerubbabel, saith the Lord; and be strong, O Joshua, son of Josedech, the high priest; and be strong, all ye people of the land, saith the Lord, and work: for I am with you, saith the Lord of hosts:	But now be strong, O Zerubbabel, declares the LORD. Be strong, O Joshua son of Jehozadak, the high priest. And be strong, all you people of the land, declares the LORD. Work! For I am with you, declares the LORD of Hosts.
HAG	2	5	너희가 애굽에서 나올 때에 내가 너희와 언약한 말과 나의 신이 오히려 너희 중에 머물러 있나니 너희는 두려워하지 말지어다	According to the word that I covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt, so my spirit remaineth among you: fear ye not.	This is the promise I made to you when you came out of Egypt. And My Spirit remains among you; do not be afraid.”
HAG	2	6	나 만군의 여호와가 말하노라 조금 있으면 내가 하늘과 땅과 바다와 육지를 진동시킬 것이요	For thus saith the Lord of hosts; Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land;	For this is what the LORD of Hosts says: “Once more, in a little while, I will shake the heavens and the earth, the sea and the dry land.
HAG	2	7	또한 만국을 진동시킬 것이며 만국의 보배가 이르리니 내가 영광으로 이 전에 충만케 하리라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라	And I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come: and I will fill this house with glory, saith the Lord of hosts.	I will shake all the nations, and they will come with all their treasures, and I will fill this house with glory, says the LORD of Hosts.
HAG	2	8	은도 내 것이요 금도 내 것이니라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라	The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, saith the Lord of hosts.	The silver is Mine, and the gold is Mine, declares the LORD of Hosts.
HAG	2	9	이 전의 나중 영광이 이전 영광보다 크리라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라 내가 이곳에 평강을 주리라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라	The glory of this latter house shall be greater than of the former, saith the Lord of hosts: and in this place will I give peace, saith the Lord of hosts.	The latter glory of this house will be greater than the former, says the LORD of Hosts. And in this place I will provide peace, declares the LORD of Hosts.”
HAG	2	10	다리오 왕 이년 구월 이십사일에 여호와의 말씀이 선지자 학개에게 임하니라 가라사대	In the four and twentieth day of the ninth month, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the Lord by Haggai the prophet, saying,	On the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, in the second year of Darius, the word of the LORD came to Haggai the prophet, saying,
HAG	2	11	나 만군의 여호와가 말하노니 너는 제사장에게 율법에 대하여 물어 이르기를	Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Ask now the priests concerning the law, saying,	“This is what the LORD of Hosts says: ‘Ask the priests for a ruling.
HAG	2	12	사람이 옷자락에 거룩한 고기를 쌌는데 그 옷자락이 만일 떡에나 국에나 포도주에나 기름에나 다른 식물에 닿았으면 그것이 성물이 되겠느냐 하라 학개가 물으매 제사장들이 대답하여 가로되 아니니라	If one bear holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt do touch bread, or pottage, or wine, or oil, or any meat, shall it be holy? And the priests answered and said, No.	If a man carries consecrated meat in the fold of his garment, and it touches bread, stew, wine, oil, or any other food, does that item become holy?’” “No,” replied the priests.
HAG	2	13	학개가 가로되 시체를 만져서 부정하여진 자가 만일 그것들 중에 하나를 만지면 그것이 부정하겠느냐 제사장들이 대답하여 가로되 부정하겠느니라	Then said Haggai, If one that is unclean by a dead body touch any of these, shall it be unclean? And the priests answered and said, It shall be unclean.	So Haggai asked, “If one who is defiled by contact with a corpse touches any of these, does it become defiled?” “Yes, it becomes defiled,” the priests answered.
HAG	2	14	이에 학개가 대답하여 가로되 여호와의 말씀에 내 앞에서 이 백성이 그러하고 이 나라가 그러하고 그 손의 모든 일도 그러하고 그들이 거기서 드리는 것도 부정하니라	Then answered Haggai, and said, So is this people, and so is this nation before me, saith the Lord; and so is every work of their hands; and that which they offer there is unclean.	Then Haggai replied, “So it is with this people and this nation before Me, declares the LORD, and so it is with every work of their hands; whatever they offer there is defiled.
HAG	2	15	이제 청컨대 너희는 오늘부터 이전 곧 여호와의 전에 돌이 돌 위에 첩놓이지 않았던 때를 추억하라	And now, I pray you, consider from this day and upward, from before a stone was laid upon a stone in the temple of the Lord:	Now consider carefully from this day forward: Before one stone was placed on another in the temple of the LORD,
HAG	2	16	그 때에는 이십 석 곡식더미에 이른즉 십 석뿐이었고 포도즙 틀에 오십 그릇을 길으려 이른즉 이십 그릇뿐이었었느니라	Since those days were, when one came to an heap of twenty measures, there were but ten: when one came to the pressfat for to draw out fifty vessels out of the press, there were but twenty.	from that time, when one came expecting a heap of twenty ephahs of grain, there were but ten. When one came to the winepress to draw out fifty baths, there were but twenty.
HAG	2	17	나 만군의 여호와가 말하노라 내가 너희 손으로 지은 모든 일에 폭풍과 곰팡과 우박으로 쳤으나 너희가 내게로 돌이키지 아니하였었느니라	I smote you with blasting and with mildew and with hail in all the labours of your hands; yet ye turned not to me, saith the Lord.	I struck you—all the work of your hands—with blight, mildew, and hail, but you did not turn to Me, declares the LORD.
HAG	2	18	너희는 오늘부터 이전을 추억하여 보라 구월 이십사일 곧 여호와의 전 지대를 쌓던 날부터 추억하여 보라	Consider now from this day and upward, from the four and twentieth day of the ninth month, even from the day that the foundation of the Lord’s temple was laid, consider it.	Consider carefully from this day forward—from the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, the day the foundation of the LORD’s temple was laid—consider carefully:
HAG	2	19	곡식 종자가 오히려 창고에 있느냐 포도나무, 무화과나무, 석류나무, 감람나무에 열매가 맺지 못하였었느니라 그러나 오늘부터는 내가 너희에게 복을 주리라	Is the seed yet in the barn? yea, as yet the vine, and the fig tree, and the pomegranate, and the olive tree, hath not brought forth: from this day will I bless you.	Is there still seed in the barn? The vine, the fig, the pomegranate, and the olive tree have not yet yielded fruit. But from this day on, I will bless you.”
HAG	2	20	그 달 이십사일에 여호와의 말씀이 다시 학개에게 임하니라 가라사대	And again the word of the Lord came unto Haggai in the four and twentieth day of the month, saying,	For the second time that day, the twenty-fourth day of the month, the word of the LORD came to Haggai, saying,
HAG	2	21	너는 유다 총독 스룹바벨에게 고하여 이르라 내가 하늘과 땅을 진동시킬 것이요	Speak to Zerubbabel, governor of Judah, saying, I will shake the heavens and the earth;	“Tell Zerubbabel governor of Judah that I am about to shake the heavens and the earth:
HAG	2	22	열국의 보좌를 엎을 것이요 열방의 세력을 멸할 것이요 그 병거들과 그 탄 자를 엎드러뜨리리니 말과 그 탄 자가 각각 그 동무의 칼에 엎드러지리라	And I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms, and I will destroy the strength of the kingdoms of the heathen; and I will overthrow the chariots, and those that ride in them; and the horses and their riders shall come down, every one by the sword of his brother.	I will overturn royal thrones and destroy the power of the kingdoms of the nations. I will overturn chariots and their riders; horses and their riders will fall, each by the sword of his brother.
HAG	2	23	나 만군의 여호와가 말하노라 스알디엘의 아들 내 종 스룹바벨아 나 여호와가 말하노라 그 날에 내가 너를 취하고 너로 인을 삼으리니 이는 내가 너를 택하였음이니라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라	In that day, saith the Lord of hosts, will I take thee, O Zerubbabel, my servant, the son of Shealtiel, saith the Lord, and will make thee as a signet: for I have chosen thee, saith the Lord of hosts.	On that day, declares the LORD of Hosts, I will take you, My servant, Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel, declares the LORD, and I will make you like My signet ring, for I have chosen you, declares the LORD of Hosts.”
ZEC	1	1	다리오 왕 이년 팔월에 여호와의 말씀이 잇도의 손자 베레갸의 아들 선지자 스가랴에게 임하니라 가라사대	In the eighth month, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the Lord unto Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo the prophet, saying,	In the eighth month of the second year of Darius, the word of the LORD came to the prophet Zechariah son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo, saying:
ZEC	1	2	나 여호와가 무리의 열조에게 심히 진노하였느니라	The Lord hath been sore displeased with your fathers.	“The LORD was very angry with your fathers.
ZEC	1	3	그러므로 너는 무리에게 고하기를 만군의 여호와께서 이처럼 이르시되 너희는 내게로 돌아오라 나 만군의 여호와의 말이니라 그리하면 내가 너희에게로 돌아가리라 나 만군의 여호와의 말이니라	Therefore say thou unto them, Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Turn ye unto me, saith the Lord of hosts, and I will turn unto you, saith the Lord of hosts.	So tell the people that this is what the LORD of Hosts says: ‘Return to Me, declares the LORD of Hosts, and I will return to you, says the LORD of Hosts.’
ZEC	1	4	너희 열조를 본받지 말라 옛적 선지자들이 그들에게 외쳐 가로되 만군의 여호와께서 말씀하시기를 너희가 악한 길, 악한 행실을 떠나서 돌아오라 하셨다 하나 그들이 듣지 않고 내게 귀를 기울이지 아니하였느니라 나 여호와의 말이니라	Be ye not as your fathers, unto whom the former prophets have cried, saying, Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Turn ye now from your evil ways, and from your evil doings: but they did not hear, nor hearken unto me, saith the Lord.	Do not be like your fathers, to whom the former prophets proclaimed that this is what the LORD of Hosts says: ‘Turn now from your evil ways and deeds.’ But they did not listen or pay attention to Me, declares the LORD.
ZEC	1	5	너희 열조가 어디 있느냐 선지자들이 영원히 살겠느냐	Your fathers, where are they? and the prophets, do they live for ever?	Where are your fathers now? And the prophets, do they live forever?
ZEC	1	6	내가 종 선지자들에게 명한 내 말과 내 전례들이 어찌 네 열조에게 임하지 아니하였느냐 그러므로 그들이 돌쳐 이르기를 만군의 여호와께서 우리 길대로 우리 행위대로 우리에게 행하시려고 뜻하신 것을 우리에게 행하셨도다 하였다 하셨느니라 하라	But my words and my statutes, which I commanded my servants the prophets, did they not take hold of your fathers? and they returned and said, Like as the Lord of hosts thought to do unto us, according to our ways, and according to our doings, so hath he dealt with us.	But did not My words and My statutes, which I commanded My servants the prophets, overtake your fathers? They repented and said, ‘Just as the LORD of Hosts purposed to do to us according to our ways and deeds, so He has done to us.’”
ZEC	1	7	다리오 왕 이년 십일월 곧 스밧월 이십사일에 잇도의 손자 베레갸의 아들 선지자 스가랴에게 여호와의 말씀이 임하여 이르시니라	Upon the four and twentieth day of the eleventh month, which is the month Sebat, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the Lord unto Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo the prophet, saying,	On the twenty-fourth day of the eleventh month, the month of Shebat, in the second year of Darius, the word of the LORD came to the prophet Zechariah son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo.
ZEC	1	8	내가 밤에 보니 사람이 홍마를 타고 골짜기 속 화석류나무 사이에 섰고 그 뒤에는 홍마와 자마와 백마가 있기로	I saw by night, and behold a man riding upon a red horse, and he stood among the myrtle trees that were in the bottom; and behind him were there red horses, speckled, and white.	I looked out into the night and saw a man riding on a red horse. He was standing among the myrtle trees in the hollow, and behind him were red, sorrel, and white horses.
ZEC	1	9	내가 가로되 내 주여 이들이 무엇이니이까 내게 말하는 천사가 내게 이르되 이들이 무엇인지 내가 네게 보이리라 하매	Then said I, O my lord, what are these? And the angel that talked with me said unto me, I will shew thee what these be.	“What are these, my lord?” I asked. And the angel who was speaking with me replied, “I will show you what they are.”
ZEC	1	10	화석류나무 사이에 선 자가 대답하여 가로되 이는 여호와께서 땅에 두루 다니라고 보내신 자들이니라	And the man that stood among the myrtle trees answered and said, These are they whom the Lord hath sent to walk to and fro through the earth.	Then the man standing among the myrtle trees explained, “They are the ones the LORD has sent to patrol the earth.”
ZEC	1	11	그들이 화석류나무 사이에 선 여호와의 사자에게 고하되 우리가 땅에 두루 다녀보니 온 땅이 평안하여 정온하더이다	And they answered the angel of the Lord that stood among the myrtle trees, and said, We have walked to and fro through the earth, and, behold, all the earth sitteth still, and is at rest.	And the riders answered the angel of the LORD who was standing among the myrtle trees, “We have patrolled the earth, and behold, all the earth is at rest and tranquil.”
ZEC	1	12	여호와의 사자가 응하여 가로되 만군의 여호와여 여호와께서 언제까지 예루살렘과 유다 성읍들을 긍휼히 여기지 아니하시려나이까 이를 노하신지 칠십 년이 되었나이다 하매	Then the angel of the Lord answered and said, O Lord of hosts, how long wilt thou not have mercy on Jerusalem and on the cities of Judah, against which thou hast had indignation these threescore and ten years?	Then the angel of the LORD said, “How long, O LORD of Hosts, will You withhold mercy from Jerusalem and the cities of Judah, with which You have been angry these seventy years?”
ZEC	1	13	여호와께서 내게 말하는 천사에게 선한 말씀, 위로하는 말씀으로 대답하시더라	And the Lord answered the angel that talked with me with good words and comfortable words.	So the LORD spoke kind and comforting words to the angel who was speaking with me.
ZEC	1	14	내게 말하는 천사가 내게 이르되 너는 외쳐 이르기를 만군의 여호와의 말씀에 내가 예루살렘을 위하며 시온을 위하여 크게 질투하며	So the angel that communed with me said unto me, Cry thou, saying, Thus saith the Lord of hosts; I am jealous for Jerusalem and for Zion with a great jealousy.	Then the angel who was speaking with me said, “Proclaim this word: This is what the LORD of Hosts says: ‘I am very jealous for Jerusalem and Zion,
ZEC	1	15	안일한 열국을 심히 진노하나니 나는 조금만 노하였거늘 그들은 힘을 내어 고난을 더하였음이라	And I am very sore displeased with the heathen that are at ease: for I was but a little displeased, and they helped forward the affliction.	but I am fiercely angry with the nations that are at ease. For I was a little angry, but they have added to the calamity.’
ZEC	1	16	그러므로 여호와가 이처럼 말하노라 내가 긍휼히 여기므로 예루살렘에 돌아왔은즉 내 집이 그 가운데 건축되리니 예루살렘 위에 먹줄이 치어지리라 나 만군의 여호와의 말이니라 하셨다 하라	Therefore thus saith the Lord; I am returned to Jerusalem with mercies: my house shall be built in it, saith the Lord of hosts, and a line shall be stretched forth upon Jerusalem.	Therefore this is what the LORD says: ‘I will return to Jerusalem with mercy, and there My house will be rebuilt, declares the LORD of Hosts, and a measuring line will be stretched out over Jerusalem.’
ZEC	1	17	다시 외쳐 이르기를 만군의 여호와의 말씀에 나의 성읍들이 넘치도록 다시 풍부할 것이라 여호와가 다시 시온을 안위하여 다시 예루살렘을 택하리라 하셨다 하라	Cry yet, saying, Thus saith the Lord of hosts; My cities through prosperity shall yet be spread abroad; and the Lord shall yet comfort Zion, and shall yet choose Jerusalem.	Proclaim further that this is what the LORD of Hosts says: ‘My cities will again overflow with prosperity; the LORD will again comfort Zion and choose Jerusalem.’”
ZEC	1	18	내가 눈을 들어 본즉 네 뿔이 보이기로	Then lifted I up mine eyes, and saw, and behold four horns.	Then I looked up and saw four horns.
ZEC	1	19	이에 내게 말하는 천사에게 묻되 이들이 무엇이니이까 내게 대답하되 이들은 유다와 이스라엘과 예루살렘을 헤친 뿔이니라	And I said unto the angel that talked with me, What be these? And he answered me, These are the horns which have scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem.	So I asked the angel who was speaking with me, “What are these?” And he told me, “These are the horns that have scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem.”
ZEC	1	20	때에 여호와께서 공장 네 명을 내게 보이시기로	And the Lord shewed me four carpenters.	Then the LORD showed me four craftsmen.
ZEC	1	21	내가 가로되 그들이 무엇하러 왔나이까 하매 대답하여 가라사대 그 뿔들이 유다를 헤쳐서 사람으로 능히 머리를 들지 못하게 하매 이 공장들이 와서 그것들을 두렵게 하고 이전에 뿔들을 들어 유다 땅을 헤친 열국의 뿔을 떨어 치려 하느니라 하시더라	Then said I, What come these to do? And he spake, saying, These are the horns which have scattered Judah, so that no man did lift up his head: but these are come to fray them, to cast out the horns of the Gentiles, which lifted up their horn over the land of Judah to scatter it.	“What are these coming to do?” I asked. And He replied, “These are the horns that scattered Judah so that no one could raise his head; but the craftsmen have come to terrify them and throw down these horns of the nations that have lifted up their horns against the land of Judah to scatter it.”
ZEC	2	1	내가 또 눈을 들어 본즉 한 사람이 척량줄을 그 손에 잡았기로	I lifted up mine eyes again, and looked, and behold a man with a measuring line in his hand.	Then I lifted up my eyes and saw a man with a measuring line in his hand.
ZEC	2	2	네가 어디로 가느냐 물은즉 내게 대답하되 예루살렘을 척량하여 그 장광을 보고자 하노라 할 때에	Then said I, Whither goest thou? And he said unto me, To measure Jerusalem, to see what is the breadth thereof, and what is the length thereof.	“Where are you going?” I asked. “To measure Jerusalem,” he replied, “and to determine its width and length.”
ZEC	2	3	내게 말하는 천사가 나가매 다른 천사가 나와서 그를 맞으며	And, behold, the angel that talked with me went forth, and another angel went out to meet him,	Then the angel who was speaking with me went out, and another angel came out to meet him
ZEC	2	4	이르되 너는 달려가서 그 소년에게 고하여 이르기를 예루살렘에 사람이 거하리니 그 가운데 사람과 육축이 많으므로 그것이 성곽없는 촌락과 같으리라	And said unto him, Run, speak to this young man, saying, Jerusalem shall be inhabited as towns without walls for the multitude of men and cattle therein:	and said to him, “Run and tell that young man: ‘Jerusalem will be a city without walls because of the multitude of men and livestock within it.
ZEC	2	5	여호와의 말씀에 내가 그 사면에서 불 성곽이 되며 그 가운데서 영광이 되리라	For I, saith the Lord, will be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be the glory in the midst of her.	For I will be a wall of fire around it, declares the LORD, and I will be the glory within it.’”
ZEC	2	6	여호와의 말씀에 내가 너를 하늘의 사방 바람 같이 흩어지게 하였거니와 이제 너희는 북방 땅에서 도망할지니라 나 여호와의 말이니라	Ho, ho, come forth, and flee from the land of the north, saith the Lord: for I have spread you abroad as the four winds of the heaven, saith the Lord.	“Get up! Get up! Flee from the land of the north,” declares the LORD, “for I have scattered you like the four winds of heaven,” declares the LORD.
ZEC	2	7	바벨론 성에 거하는 시온아 이제 너는 피할지니라	Deliver thyself, O Zion, that dwellest with the daughter of Babylon.	“Get up, O Zion! Escape, you who dwell with the Daughter of Babylon!”
ZEC	2	8	만군의 여호와께서 이같이 말씀하시되 너희를 노략한 열국으로 영광을 위하여 나를 보내셨나니 무릇 너희를 범하는 자는 그의 눈동자를 범하는 것이라	For thus saith the Lord of hosts; After the glory hath he sent me unto the nations which spoiled you: for he that toucheth you toucheth the apple of his eye.	For this is what the LORD of Hosts says: “After His Glory has sent Me against the nations that have plundered you—for whoever touches you touches the apple of His eye—
ZEC	2	9	내가 손을 그들 위에 움직인즉 그들이 자기를 섬기던 자에게 노략거리가 되리라 하셨나니 너희가 만군의 여호와께서 나를 보내신 줄 알리라	For, behold, I will shake mine hand upon them, and they shall be a spoil to their servants: and ye shall know that the Lord of hosts hath sent me.	I will surely wave My hand over them, so that they will become plunder for their own servants. Then you will know that the LORD of Hosts has sent Me.”
ZEC	2	10	여호와의 말씀에 시온의 딸아 노래하고 기뻐하라 이는 내가 임하여 네 가운데 거할 것임이니라	Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion: for, lo, I come, and I will dwell in the midst of thee, saith the Lord.	“Shout for joy and be glad, O Daughter of Zion, for I am coming to dwell among you,” declares the LORD.
ZEC	2	11	그 날에 많은 나라가 여호와께 속하여 내 백성이 될 것이요 나는 네 가운데 거하리라 네가 만군의 여호와께서 나를 네게 보내신 줄 알리라	And many nations shall be joined to the Lord in that day, and shall be my people: and I will dwell in the midst of thee, and thou shalt know that the Lord of hosts hath sent me unto thee.	“On that day many nations will join themselves to the LORD, and they will become My people. I will dwell among you, and you will know that the LORD of Hosts has sent Me to you.
ZEC	2	12	여호와께서 장차 유다를 취하여 거룩한 땅에서 자기 소유를 삼으시고 다시 예루살렘을 택하시리니	And the Lord shall inherit Judah his portion in the holy land, and shall choose Jerusalem again.	And the LORD will take possession of Judah as His portion in the Holy Land, and He will once again choose Jerusalem.
ZEC	2	13	무릇 혈기 있는 자들이 여호와 앞에서 잠잠할 것은 여호와께서 그 성소에서 일어나심이니라 하라 하더라	Be silent, O all flesh, before the Lord: for he is raised up out of his holy habitation.	Be silent before the LORD, all people, for He has roused Himself from His holy dwelling.”
ZEC	3	1	대제사장 여호수아는 여호와의 사자 앞에 섰고 사단은 그의 우편에 서서 그를 대적하는 것을 여호와께서 내게 보이시니라	And he shewed me Joshua the high priest standing before the angel of the Lord, and Satan standing at his right hand to resist him.	Then the angel showed me Joshua the high priest standing before the angel of the LORD, with Satan standing at his right hand to accuse him.
ZEC	3	2	여호와께서 사단에게 이르시되 사단아 여호와가 너를 책망하노라 예루살렘을 택한 여호와가 너를 책망하노라 이는 불에서 꺼낸 그슬린 나무가 아니냐 하실 때에	And the Lord said unto Satan, The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan; even the Lord that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee: is not this a brand plucked out of the fire?	And the LORD said to Satan: “The LORD rebukes you, Satan! Indeed, the LORD, who has chosen Jerusalem, rebukes you! Is not this man a firebrand snatched from the fire?”
ZEC	3	3	여호수아가 더러운 옷을 입고 천사 앞에 섰는지라	Now Joshua was clothed with filthy garments, and stood before the angel.	Now Joshua was dressed in filthy garments as he stood before the angel.
ZEC	3	4	여호와께서 자기 앞에 선 자들에게 명하사 그 더러운 옷을 벗기라 하시고 또 여호수아에게 이르시되 내가 네 죄과를 제하여 버렸으니 네게 아름다운 옷을 입히리라 하시기로	And he answered and spake unto those that stood before him, saying, Take away the filthy garments from him. And unto him he said, Behold, I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee with change of raiment.	So the angel said to those standing before him, “Take off his filthy clothes!” Then he said to Joshua, “See, I have removed your iniquity, and I will clothe you with splendid robes.”
ZEC	3	5	내가 말하되 정한 관을 그 머리에 씌우소서 하매 곧 정한 관을 그 머리에 씌우며 옷을 입히고 여호와의 사자는 곁에 섰더라	And I said, Let them set a fair mitre upon his head. So they set a fair mitre upon his head, and clothed him with garments. And the angel of the Lord stood by.	Then I said, “Let them put a clean turban on his head.” So a clean turban was placed on his head, and they clothed him, as the angel of the LORD stood by.
ZEC	3	6	여호와의 사자가 여호수아에게 증거하여 가로되	And the angel of the Lord protested unto Joshua, saying,	Then the angel of the LORD gave this charge to Joshua:
ZEC	3	7	만군의 여호와의 말씀에 네가 만일 내 도를 준행하며 내 율례를 지키면 네가 내 집을 다스릴 것이요 내 뜰을 지킬 것이며 내가 또 너로 여기 섰는 자들 중에 왕래케 하리라	Thus saith the Lord of hosts; If thou wilt walk in my ways, and if thou wilt keep my charge, then thou shalt also judge my house, and shalt also keep my courts, and I will give thee places to walk among these that stand by.	“This is what the LORD of Hosts says: ‘If you walk in My ways and keep My instructions, then you will govern My house and will also have charge of My courts; and I will give you a place among these who are standing here.
ZEC	3	8	대제사장 여호수아야 너와 네 앞에 앉은 네 동료들은 내 말을 들을 것이니라 이들은 예표의 사람이라 내가 내 종 순을 나게 하리라	Hear now, O Joshua the high priest, thou, and thy fellows that sit before thee: for they are men wondered at: for, behold, I will bring forth my servant the BRANCH.	Hear now, O high priest Joshua, you and your companions seated before you, who are indeed a sign. For behold, I am going to bring My servant, the Branch.
ZEC	3	9	만군의 여호와가 말하노라 내가 너 여호수아 앞에 세운 돌을 보라 한 돌에 일곱 눈이 있느니라 내가 새길 것을 새기며 이 땅의 죄악을 하루에 제하리라	For behold the stone that I have laid before Joshua; upon one stone shall be seven eyes: behold, I will engrave the graving thereof, saith the Lord of hosts, and I will remove the iniquity of that land in one day.	See the stone I have set before Joshua; on that one stone are seven eyes. Behold, I will engrave on it an inscription, declares the LORD of Hosts, and I will remove the iniquity of this land in a single day.
ZEC	3	10	만군의 여호와가 말하노라 그 날에 너희가 각각 포도나무와 무화과나무 아래로 서로 초대하리라 하셨느니라	In that day, saith the Lord of hosts, shall ye call every man his neighbour under the vine and under the fig tree.	On that day, declares the LORD of Hosts, you will each invite your neighbor to sit under your own vine and fig tree.’”
ZEC	4	1	내게 말하던 천사가 다시 와서 나를 깨우니 마치 자는 사람이 깨우임 같더라	And the angel that talked with me came again, and waked me, as a man that is wakened out of his sleep,	Then the angel who was speaking with me returned and woke me, as a man is awakened from his sleep.
ZEC	4	2	그가 내게 묻되 네가 무엇을 보느냐 내가 대답하되 내가 보니 순금 등대가 있는데 그 꼭대기에 주발 같은 것이 있고 또 그 등대에 일곱 등잔이 있으며 그 등대 꼭대기 등잔에는 일곱 관이 있고	And said unto me, What seest thou? And I said, I have looked, and behold a candlestick all of gold, with a bowl upon the top of it, and his seven lamps thereon, and seven pipes to the seven lamps, which are upon the top thereof:	“What do you see?” he asked. “I see a solid gold lampstand,” I replied, “with a bowl at the top and seven lamps on it, with seven spouts to the lamps.
ZEC	4	3	그 등대 곁에 두 감람나무가 있는데 하나는 그 주발 우편에 있고 하나는 그 좌편에 있나이다 하고	And two olive trees by it, one upon the right side of the bowl, and the other upon the left side thereof.	There are also two olive trees beside it, one on the right side of the bowl and the other on its left.”
ZEC	4	4	내게 말하는 천사에게 물어 가로되 내 주여 이것들이 무엇이니이까	So I answered and spake to the angel that talked with me, saying, What are these, my lord?	“What are these, my lord?” I asked the angel who was speaking with me.
ZEC	4	5	내게 말하는 천사가 대답하여 가로되 네가 이것들이 무엇인지 알지 못하느냐 내가 대답하되 내 주여 내가 알지 못하나이다	Then the angel that talked with me answered and said unto me, Knowest thou not what these be? And I said, No, my lord.	“Do you not know what they are?” replied the angel. “No, my lord,” I answered.
ZEC	4	6	그가 내게 일러 가로되 여호와께서 스룹바벨에게 하신 말씀이 이러하니라 만군의 여호와께서 말씀하시되 이는 힘으로 되지 아니하며 능으로 되지 아니하고 오직 나의 신으로 되느니라	Then he answered and spake unto me, saying, This is the word of the Lord unto Zerubbabel, saying, Not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, saith the Lord of hosts.	So he said to me, “This is the word of the LORD to Zerubbabel: Not by might nor by power, but by My Spirit, says the LORD of Hosts.
ZEC	4	7	큰 산아 네가 무엇이냐 네가 스룹바벨 앞에서 평지가 되리라 그가 머릿돌을 내어 놓을 때에 무리가 외치기를 은총, 은총이 그에게 있을지어다 하리라 하셨고	Who art thou, O great mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shalt become a plain: and he shall bring forth the headstone thereof with shoutings, crying, Grace, grace unto it.	What are you, O great mountain? Before Zerubbabel you will become a plain. Then he will bring forth the capstone accompanied by shouts of ‘Grace, grace to it!’”
ZEC	4	8	여호와의 말씀이 또 내게 임하여 가라사대	Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
ZEC	4	9	스룹바벨의 손이 이 전의 지대를 놓았은즉 그 손이 또한 그것을 마치리라 하셨나니 만군의 여호와께서 나를 너희에게 보내신 줄을 네가 알리라 하셨느니라	The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house; his hands shall also finish it; and thou shalt know that the Lord of hosts hath sent me unto you.	“The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house, and his hands will complete it. Then you will know that the LORD of Hosts has sent me to you.
ZEC	4	10	작은 일의 날이라고 멸시하는 자가 누구냐 이 일곱은 온 세상에 두루 행하는 여호와의 눈이라 다림줄이 스룹바벨의 손에 있음을 보고 기뻐하리라	For who hath despised the day of small things? for they shall rejoice, and shall see the plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel with those seven; they are the eyes of the Lord, which run to and fro through the whole earth.	For who has despised the day of small things? But these seven eyes of the LORD, which scan the whole earth, will rejoice when they see the plumb line in the hand of Zerubbabel.”
ZEC	4	11	내가 그에게 물어 가로되 등대 좌우의 두 감람나무는 무슨 뜻이니이까 하고	Then answered I, and said unto him, What are these two olive trees upon the right side of the candlestick and upon the left side thereof?	Then I asked the angel, “What are the two olive trees on the right and left of the lampstand?”
ZEC	4	12	다시 그에게 물어 가로되 금 기름을 흘려내는 두 금관 옆에 있는 이 감람나무 두 가지는 무슨 뜻이니이까	And I answered again, and said unto him, What be these two olive branches which through the two golden pipes empty the golden oil out of themselves?	And I questioned him further, “What are the two olive branches beside the two gold pipes from which the golden oil pours?”
ZEC	4	13	그가 내게 대답하여 가로되 네가 이것이 무엇인지 알지 못하느냐 대답하되 내 주여 알지 못하나이다	And he answered me and said, Knowest thou not what these be? And I said, No, my lord.	“Do you not know what these are?” he inquired. “No, my lord,” I replied.
ZEC	4	14	가로되 이는 기름 발리운 자 둘이니 온 세상의 주 앞에 모셔 섰는 자니라 하더라	Then said he, These are the two anointed ones, that stand by the Lord of the whole earth.	So he said, “These are the two anointed ones who are standing beside the Lord of all the earth.”
ZEC	5	1	내가 다시 눈을 든즉 날아가는 두루마리가 보이더라	Then I turned, and lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold a flying roll.	Again I lifted up my eyes and saw before me a flying scroll.
ZEC	5	2	그가 내게 묻되 네가 무엇을 보느냐 하기로 내가 대답하되 날아가는 두루마리를 보나이다 그 장이 이십 규빗이요 광이 십 규빗이니이다	And he said unto me, What seest thou? And I answered, I see a flying roll; the length thereof is twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof ten cubits.	“What do you see?” asked the angel. “I see a flying scroll,” I replied, “twenty cubits long and ten cubits wide.”
ZEC	5	3	그가 내게 이르되 이는 온 지면에 두루 행하는 저주라 무릇 도적질하는 자는 그 이편 글대로 끊쳐지고 무릇 맹세하는 자는 그 저편 글대로 끊쳐지리라	Then said he unto me, This is the curse that goeth forth over the face of the whole earth: for every one that stealeth shall be cut off as on this side according to it; and every one that sweareth shall be cut off as on that side according to it.	Then he told me, “This is the curse that is going out over the face of all the land, for according to one side of the scroll, every thief will be removed; and according to the other side, every perjurer will be removed.
ZEC	5	4	만군의 여호와께서 가라사대 내가 이것을 발하였나니 도적의 집에도 들어가며 내 이름을 가리켜 망령되이 맹세하는 자의 집에도 들어가서 그 집에 머무르며 그 집을 그 나무와 그 돌을 아울러 사르리라 하셨느니라	I will bring it forth, saith the Lord of hosts, and it shall enter into the house of the thief, and into the house of him that sweareth falsely by my name: and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume it with the timber thereof and the stones thereof.	I will send it out, declares the LORD of Hosts, and it will enter the house of the thief and the house of him who swears falsely by My name. It will remain inside his house and destroy it, down to its timbers and stones.”
ZEC	5	5	내게 말하던 천사가 나아와서 내게 이르되 너는 눈을 들어 나오는 이것이 무엇인가 보라 하기로	Then the angel that talked with me went forth, and said unto me, Lift up now thine eyes, and see what is this that goeth forth.	Then the angel who was speaking with me came forward and told me, “Now lift up your eyes and see what is approaching.”
ZEC	5	6	내가 묻되 이것이 무엇이니이까 그가 가로되 나오는 이것이 에바니라 또 가로되 온 땅에서 그들의 모양이 이러하니라	And I said, What is it? And he said, This is an ephah that goeth forth. He said moreover, This is their resemblance through all the earth.	“What is it?” I asked. And he replied, “A measuring basket is going forth.” Then he continued, “This is their iniquity in all the land.”
ZEC	5	7	이 에바 가운데에는 한 여인이 앉았느니라 하는 동시에 둥근 납 한 조각이 들리더라	And, behold, there was lifted up a talent of lead: and this is a woman that sitteth in the midst of the ephah.	And behold, the cover of lead was raised, and there was a woman sitting inside the basket.
ZEC	5	8	그가 가로되 이는 악이라 하고 그 여인을 에바 속으로 던져 넣고 납 조각을 에바 아구리 위에 던져 덮더라	And he said, This is wickedness. And he cast it into the midst of the ephah; and he cast the weight of lead upon the mouth thereof.	“This is Wickedness,” he said. And he shoved her down into the basket, pushing down the lead cover over its opening.
ZEC	5	9	내가 또 눈을 들어 본즉 두 여인이 나왔는데 학의 날개 같은 날개가 있고 그 날개에 바람이 있더라 그들이 그 에바를 천지 사이에 들었기로	Then lifted I up mine eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came out two women, and the wind was in their wings; for they had wings like the wings of a stork: and they lifted up the ephah between the earth and the heaven.	Then I lifted up my eyes and saw two women approaching, with the wind in their wings. Their wings were like those of a stork, and they lifted up the basket between heaven and earth.
ZEC	5	10	내가 내게 말하는 천사에게 묻되 그들이 에바를 어디로 옮겨 가나이까 하매	Then said I to the angel that talked with me, Whither do these bear the ephah?	“Where are they taking the basket?” I asked the angel who was speaking with me.
ZEC	5	11	내게 이르되 그들이 시날 땅으로 가서 그를 위하여 집을 지으려 함이니라 준공되면 그가 제 처소에 머물게 되리라 하더라	And he said unto me, To build it an house in the land of Shinar: and it shall be established, and set there upon her own base.	“To build a house for it in the land of Shinar,” he told me. “And when it is ready, the basket will be set there on its pedestal.”
ZEC	6	1	내가 또 눈을 들어본즉 네 병거가 두 산 사이에서 나왔는데 그 산은 놋 산이더라	And I turned, and lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came four chariots out from between two mountains; and the mountains were mountains of brass.	And again I lifted up my eyes and saw four chariots coming out from between two mountains—mountains of bronze.
ZEC	6	2	첫째 병거는 홍마들이, 둘째 병거는 흑마들이,	In the first chariot were red horses; and in the second chariot black horses;	The first chariot had red horses, the second black horses,
ZEC	6	3	셋째 벙거는 백마들이, 넷째 병거는 어룽지고 건장한 말들이 메었는지라	And in the third chariot white horses; and in the fourth chariot grisled and bay horses.	the third white horses, and the fourth dappled horses—all of them strong.
ZEC	6	4	내가 내게 말하는 천사에게 물어 가로되 내 주여 이것들이 무엇이니이까	Then I answered and said unto the angel that talked with me, What are these, my lord?	So I inquired of the angel who was speaking with me, “What are these, my lord?”
ZEC	6	5	천사가 대답하여 가로되 이는 하늘의 네 바람인데 온 세상의 주 앞에 모셨다가 나가는 것이라 하더라	And the angel answered and said unto me, These are the four spirits of the heavens, which go forth from standing before the Lord of all the earth.	And the angel told me, “These are the four spirits of heaven, going forth from their station before the Lord of all the earth.
ZEC	6	6	흑마는 북편 땅으로 나가매 백마의 그 뒤를 따르고 어룽진 말은 남편 땅으로 나가고	The black horses which are therein go forth into the north country; and the white go forth after them; and the grisled go forth toward the south country.	The one with the black horses is going toward the land of the north, the one with the white horses toward the west, and the one with the dappled horses toward the south.”
ZEC	6	7	건장한 말은 나가서 땅에 두루 다니고자 하니 그가 이르되 너희는 여기서 나가서 땅에 두루 다니라 하매 곧 땅에 두루 다니더라	And the bay went forth, and sought to go that they might walk to and fro through the earth: and he said, Get you hence, walk to and fro through the earth. So they walked to and fro through the earth.	As the strong horses went out, they were eager to go and patrol the earth; and the LORD said, “Go and patrol the earth.” So they patrolled the earth.
ZEC	6	8	그가 외쳐 내게 일러 가로되 북방으로 나간 자들이 북방에서 내 마음을 시원케 하였느니라 하더라	Then cried he upon me, and spake unto me, saying, Behold, these that go toward the north country have quieted my spirit in the north country.	Then the LORD summoned me and said, “Behold, those going to the land of the north have given rest to My Spirit in the land of the north.”
ZEC	6	9	여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 이르시되	And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,	The word of the LORD also came to me, saying,
ZEC	6	10	사로잡힌 자 중 바벨론에서부터 돌아온 헬대와 도비야와 여다야가 스바냐의 아들 요시아의 집에 들었나니 너는 이 날에 그 집에 들어가서 그들에게서 취하되	Take of them of the captivity, even of Heldai, of Tobijah, and of Jedaiah, which are come from Babylon, and come thou the same day, and go into the house of Josiah the son of Zephaniah;	“Take an offering from the exiles—from Heldai, Tobijah, and Jedaiah, who have arrived from Babylon—and go that same day to the house of Josiah son of Zephaniah.
ZEC	6	11	은과 금을 취하여 면류관을 만들어 여호사닥의 아들 대제사장 여호수아의 머리에 씌우고	Then take silver and gold, and make crowns, and set them upon the head of Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest;	Take silver and gold, make an ornate crown, and set it on the head of the high priest, Joshua son of Jehozadak.
ZEC	6	12	고하여 이르기를 만군의 여호와께서 말씀하시되 보라 순이라 이름하는 사람이 자기 곳에서 돋아나서 여호와의 전을 건축하리라	And speak unto him, saying, Thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, saying, Behold the man whose name is The BRANCH; and he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall build the temple of the Lord:	And you are to tell him that this is what the LORD of Hosts says: ‘Here is a man whose name is the Branch, and He will branch out from His place and build the temple of the LORD.
ZEC	6	13	그가 여호와의 전을 건축하고 영광도 얻고 그 위에 앉아서 다스릴 것이요 또 제사장이 자기 위에 있으리니 이 두 사이에 평화의 의논이 있으리라 하셨다 하고	Even he shall build the temple of the Lord; and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon his throne; and he shall be a priest upon his throne: and the counsel of peace shall be between them both.	Yes, He will build the temple of the LORD; He will be clothed in splendor and will sit on His throne and rule. And He will be a priest on His throne, and there will be peaceful counsel between the two.’
ZEC	6	14	그 면류관은 헬렘과 도비야와 여다야와 스바냐의 아들 헨을 기념하기 위하여 여호와의 전안에 주라 하시니라	And the crowns shall be to Helem, and to Tobijah, and to Jedaiah, and to Hen the son of Zephaniah, for a memorial in the temple of the Lord.	The crown will reside in the temple of the LORD as a memorial to Helem, Tobijah, Jedaiah, and the gracious son of Zephaniah.
ZEC	6	15	먼데 사람이 와서 여호와의 전을 건축하리니 만국의 여호와께서 나를 너희에게 보내신 줄을 너희가 알리라 너희가 만일 너희 하나님 여호와의 말씀을 청종할진대 이같이 되리라	And they that are far off shall come and build in the temple of the Lord, and ye shall know that the Lord of hosts hath sent me unto you. And this shall come to pass, if ye will diligently obey the voice of the Lord your God.	Even those far away will come and build the temple of the LORD, and you will know that the LORD of Hosts has sent Me to you. This will happen if you diligently obey the voice of the LORD your God.”
ZEC	7	1	다리오 왕 사년 구월 곧 기슬래월 사일에 여호와의 말씀이 스가랴에게 임하니라	And it came to pass in the fourth year of king Darius, that the word of the Lord came unto Zechariah in the fourth day of the ninth month, even in Chisleu;	In the fourth year of King Darius, the word of the LORD came to Zechariah on the fourth day of the ninth month, the month of Chislev.
ZEC	7	2	때에 벧엘 사람이 사레셀과 레겜멜렉과 그 종자를 보내어 여호와께 은혜를 구하고	When they had sent unto the house of God Sherezer and Regem–melech, and their men, to pray before the Lord,	Now the people of Bethel had sent Sharezer and Regem-melech, along with their men, to plead before the LORD
ZEC	7	3	만군의 여호와의 전에 있는 제사장들과 선지자들에게 물어 가로되 우리가 여러 해 동안에 행한 대로 오월간에 울며 재계하리이까 하매	And to speak unto the priests which were in the house of the Lord of hosts, and to the prophets, saying, Should I weep in the fifth month, separating myself, as I have done these so many years?	by asking the priests of the house of the LORD of Hosts, as well as the prophets, “Should I weep and fast in the fifth month, as I have done these many years?”
ZEC	7	4	만군의 여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 이르시되	Then came the word of the Lord of hosts unto me, saying,	Then the word of the LORD of Hosts came to me, saying,
ZEC	7	5	온 땅의 백성과 제사장들에게 이르라 너희가 칠십 년 동안 오월과 칠월에 금식하고 애통하였거니와 그 금식이 나를 위하여, 나를 위하여 한 것이냐	Speak unto all the people of the land, and to the priests, saying, When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, even those seventy years, did ye at all fast unto me, even to me?	“Ask all the people of the land and the priests, ‘When you fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh months for these seventy years, was it really for Me that you fasted?
ZEC	7	6	너희의 먹으며 마심이 전혀 자기을 위하여 먹으며 자기를 위하여 마심이 아니냐	And when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did not ye eat for yourselves, and drink for yourselves?	And when you were eating and drinking, were you not doing so simply for yourselves?
ZEC	7	7	여호와가 이전 선지자로 외친 말을 너희가 청종할 것이 아니냐 그 때에는 예루살렘과 사면 읍에 백성이 거하여 형통하였고 남방과 평원에도 사람이 거하였었느니라	Should ye not hear the words which the Lord hath cried by the former prophets, when Jerusalem was inhabited and in prosperity, and the cities thereof round about her, when men inhabited the south and the plain?	Are these not the words that the LORD proclaimed through the earlier prophets, when Jerusalem and its surrounding towns were populous and prosperous, and the Negev and the foothills were inhabited?’”
ZEC	7	8	여호와의 말씀이 스가랴에게 임하여 이르시되	And the word of the Lord came unto Zechariah, saying,	Then the word of the LORD came to Zechariah, saying,
ZEC	7	9	만군의 여호와가 이미 말하여 이르기를 너희는 진실한 재판을 행하며 피차에 인애와 긍휼을 베풀며	Thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, saying, Execute true judgment, and shew mercy and compassions every man to his brother:	“This is what the LORD of Hosts says: ‘Administer true justice. Show loving devotion and compassion to one another.
ZEC	7	10	과부와 고아와 나그네와 궁핍한 자를 압제하지 말며 남을 해하려 하여 심중에 도모하지 말라 하였으나	And oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, the stranger, nor the poor; and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart.	Do not oppress the widow or the fatherless, the foreigner or the poor. And do not plot evil in your hearts against one another.’
ZEC	7	11	그들이 청종하기를 싫어하여 등으로 향하며 듣지 아니하려고 귀를 막으며	But they refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears, that they should not hear.	But they refused to pay attention and turned a stubborn shoulder; they stopped up their ears from hearing.
ZEC	7	12	그 마음을 금강석 같게 하여 율법과 만군의 여호와가 신으로 이전 선지자를 빙자하여 전한 말을 듣지 아니하므로 큰 노가 나 만군의 여호와께로서 나왔도다	Yea, they made their hearts as an adamant stone, lest they should hear the law, and the words which the Lord of hosts hath sent in his spirit by the former prophets: therefore came a great wrath from the Lord of hosts.	They made their hearts like flint and would not listen to the law or to the words that the LORD of Hosts had sent by His Spirit through the earlier prophets. Therefore great anger came from the LORD of Hosts.
ZEC	7	13	만군의 여호와가 말하였었노라 내가 불러도 그들이 듣지 아니하였은즉 그들이 불러도 내가 듣지 아니하고	Therefore it is come to pass, that as he cried, and they would not hear; so they cried, and I would not hear, saith the Lord of hosts:	And just as I had called and they would not listen, so when they called I would not listen, says the LORD of Hosts.
ZEC	7	14	회리바람으로 그들을 그 알지 못하던 모든 열국에 헤치리라 한 후로 이 땅이 황무하여 왕래하는 사람이 없었나니 이는 그들이 아름다운 땅으로 황무하게 하였음이니라 하시니라	But I scattered them with a whirlwind among all the nations whom they knew not. Thus the land was desolate after them, that no man passed through nor returned: for they laid the pleasant land desolate.	But I scattered them with a whirlwind among all the nations that they had not known, and the land was left desolate behind them so that no one could come or go. Thus they turned the pleasant land into a desolation.”
ZEC	8	1	만군의 여호와의 말씀이 임하여 이르시되	Again the word of the Lord of hosts came to me, saying,	Again the word of the LORD of Hosts came to me, saying:
ZEC	8	2	만군의 여호와가 말하노라 내가 시온을 위하여 크게 질투하며 그를 위하여 크게 분노함으로 질투하노라	Thus saith the Lord of hosts; I was jealous for Zion with great jealousy, and I was jealous for her with great fury.	This is what the LORD of Hosts says: “I am jealous for Zion with great zeal; I am jealous for her with great fervor.”
ZEC	8	3	나 여호와가 말하노라 내가 시온에 돌아왔은즉 예루살렘 가운데 거하리니 예루살렘은 진리의 성읍이라 일컫겠고 만군의 여호와의 산은 성산이라 일컫게 되리라	Thus saith the Lord; I am returned unto Zion, and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem: and Jerusalem shall be called a city of truth; and the mountain of the Lord of hosts the holy mountain.	This is what the LORD says: “I will return to Zion and dwell in Jerusalem. Then Jerusalem will be called the City of Truth, and the mountain of the LORD of Hosts will be called the Holy Mountain.”
ZEC	8	4	만군의 여호와가 말하노라 예루살렘 길거리에 늙은 지아비와 늙은 지어미가 다시 앉을 것이라 다 나이 많으므로 각기 손에 지팡이를 잡을 것이요	Thus saith the Lord of hosts; There shall yet old men and old women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem, and every man with his staff in his hand for very age.	This is what the LORD of Hosts says: “Old men and old women will again sit along the streets of Jerusalem, each with a staff in hand because of great age.
ZEC	8	5	그 성읍 거리에 동남과 동녀가 가득하여 거기서 장난하리라	And the streets of the city shall be full of boys and girls playing in the streets thereof.	And the streets of the city will be filled with boys and girls playing there.”
ZEC	8	6	만군의 여호와가 말하노라 이 일이 그 날에 남은 백성의 눈에는 기이하려니와 내 눈에 어찌 기이하겠느냐 만군의 여호와의 말이니라	Thus saith the Lord of hosts; If it be marvellous in the eyes of the remnant of this people in these days, should it also be marvellous in mine eyes? saith the Lord of hosts.	This is what the LORD of Hosts says: “If this is impossible in the eyes of the remnant of this people in these days, should it also be impossible in My eyes?” declares the LORD of Hosts.
ZEC	8	7	만군의 여호와가 말하노라 내가 내 백성을 동방에서부터, 서방에서부터 구원하여 내고	Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Behold, I will save my people from the east country, and from the west country;	This is what the LORD of Hosts says: “I will save My people from the land of the east and from the land of the west.
ZEC	8	8	인도하여다가 예루살렘 가운데 거하게 하리니 그들은 내 백성이 되고 나는 성실과 정의로 그들의 하나님이 되리라	And I will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem: and they shall be my people, and I will be their God, in truth and in righteousness.	I will bring them back to dwell in Jerusalem, where they will be My people, and I will be their faithful and righteous God.”
ZEC	8	9	만군의 여호와가 말하노라 만군의 여호와의 집 곧 전을 건축하려고 그 지대를 쌓던 날에 일어난 선지자들의 입의 말을 이 때에 듣는 너희는 손을 견고히 할지어다	Thus saith the Lord of hosts; Let your hands be strong, ye that hear in these days these words by the mouth of the prophets, which were in the day that the foundation of the house of the Lord of hosts was laid, that the temple might be built.	This is what the LORD of Hosts says: “Let your hands be strong, you who now hear these words spoken by the prophets who were present when the foundations were laid to rebuild the temple, the house of the LORD of Hosts.
ZEC	8	10	그 날 전에는 사람도 삯을 얻지 못하였고 짐승도 삯을 받지 못하였으며 사람이 대적을 인하여 출입에 평안치 못하였었나니 이는 내가 뭇 사람으로 서로 치게 하였음이어니와	For before these days there was no hire for man, nor any hire for beast; neither was there any peace to him that went out or came in because of the affliction: for I set all men every one against his neighbour.	For before those days neither man nor beast received wages, nor was there safety from the enemy for anyone who came or went, for I had turned every man against his neighbor.
ZEC	8	11	만군의 여호와가 말하노니 이제는 내가 이 남은 백성을 대하기를 전일과 같이 아니할 것인즉	But now I will not be unto the residue of this people as in the former days, saith the Lord of hosts.	But now I will not treat the remnant of this people as I did in the past,” declares the LORD of Hosts.
ZEC	8	12	곧 평안한 추수를 얻을 것이라 포도나무가 열매를 맺으며 땅이 산물을 내며 하늘은 이슬을 내리리니 내가 이 남은 백성으로 이 모든 것을 누리게 하리라	For the seed shall be prosperous; the vine shall give her fruit, and the ground shall give her increase, and the heavens shall give their dew; and I will cause the remnant of this people to possess all these things.	“For the seed will be prosperous, the vine will yield its fruit, the ground will yield its produce, and the skies will give their dew. To the remnant of this people I will give all these things as an inheritance.
ZEC	8	13	유다 족속아 이스라엘 족속아 너희가 이방 가운데서 저주가 되었었으나 이제는 내가 너희를 구원하여 너희로 축복이 되게 하리니 두려워 말지니라 손을 견고히 할지니라	And it shall come to pass, that as ye were a curse among the heathen, O house of Judah, and house of Israel; so will I save you, and ye shall be a blessing: fear not, but let your hands be strong.	As you have been a curse among the nations, O house of Judah and house of Israel, so I will save you, and you will be a blessing. Do not be afraid; let your hands be strong.”
ZEC	8	14	만군의 여호와가 말하노라 전에 너희 열조가 나의 노를 격발할 때에 내가 그들에게 재앙을 내리기로 뜻하고 뉘우치지 아니하였었으나	For thus saith the Lord of hosts; As I thought to punish you, when your fathers provoked me to wrath, saith the Lord of hosts, and I repented not:	For this is what the LORD of Hosts says: “Just as I resolved to bring disaster upon you when your fathers provoked Me to anger, and I did not relent,” says the LORD of Hosts,
ZEC	8	15	이제 내가 예루살렘과 유다 족속에게 은혜를 베풀기로 뜻하였나니 너희는 두려워 말지니라	So again have I thought in these days to do well unto Jerusalem and to the house of Judah: fear ye not.	“so now I have resolved to do good again to Jerusalem and Judah. Do not be afraid.
ZEC	8	16	너희가 행할 일은 이러하니라 너희는 각기 이웃으로 더불어 진실을 말하며 너희 성문에서 진실하고 화평한 재판을 베풀고	These are the things that ye shall do; Speak ye every man the truth to his neighbour; execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates:	These are the things you must do: Speak truth to one another, render true and sound judgments in your gates,
ZEC	8	17	심중에 서로 해하기를 도모하지 말며 거짓 맹세를 좋아하지 말라 이 모든 일은 나의 미워하는 것임이니라 나 여호와의 말이니라	And let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbour; and love no false oath: for all these are things that I hate, saith the Lord.	do not plot evil in your hearts against your neighbor, and do not love to swear falsely, for I hate all these things,” declares the LORD.
ZEC	8	18	만군의 여호와의 말씀이 내게 임하여 이르시되	And the word of the Lord of hosts came unto me, saying,	Then the word of the LORD of Hosts came to me, saying,
ZEC	8	19	만군의 여호와가 말하노라 사월의 금식과 오월의 금식과 칠월의 금식이 변하여 유다 족속에게 기쁨과 즐거움과 희락의 절기가 되리니 오직 너희는 진실과 화평을 사랑할지니라	Thus saith the Lord of hosts; The fast of the fourth month, and the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth, shall be to the house of Judah joy and gladness, and cheerful feasts; therefore love the truth and peace.	“This is what the LORD of Hosts says: The fasts of the fourth, the fifth, the seventh, and the tenth months will become times of joy and gladness, cheerful feasts for the house of Judah. Therefore you are to love both truth and peace.”
ZEC	8	20	만군의 여호와가 말하노라 그 후에 여러 백성과 많은 성읍의 거민이 올 것이라	Thus saith the Lord of hosts; It shall yet come to pass, that there shall come people, and the inhabitants of many cities:	This is what the LORD of Hosts says: “Peoples will yet come—the residents of many cities—
ZEC	8	21	이 성읍 거민이 저 성읍에 가서 이르기를 우리가 속히 가서 만군의 여호와를 찾고 여호와께 은혜를 구하자 할 것이면 나도 가겠노라 하겠으며	And the inhabitants of one city shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of hosts: I will go also.	and the residents of one city will go to another, saying: ‘Let us go at once to plead before the LORD and to seek the LORD of Hosts. I myself am going.’
ZEC	8	22	많은 백성과 강대한 나라들이 예루살렘으로 와서 만군의 여호와를 찾고 여호와께 은혜를 구하리라	Yea, many people and strong nations shall come to seek the Lord of hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord.	And many peoples and strong nations will come to seek the LORD of Hosts in Jerusalem and to plead before the LORD.”
ZEC	8	23	만군의 여호와가 말하노라 그 날에는 방언이 다른 열국 백성 열 명이 유다 사람 하나의 옷자락을 잡을 것이라 곧 잡고 말하기를 하나님이 너희와 함께 하심을 들었나니 우리가 너희와 함께 가려 하노라 하리라 하시니라	Thus saith the Lord of hosts; In those days it shall come to pass, that ten men shall take hold out of all languages of the nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you: for we have heard that God is with you.	This is what the LORD of Hosts says: “In those days ten men from the nations of every tongue will tightly grasp the robe of a Jew, saying, ‘Let us go with you, for we have heard that God is with you.’”
ZEC	9	1	여호와의 말씀의 경고가 하드락 땅에 임하며 다메섹에 머물리니 세상 사람과 이스라엘 모든 지파의 눈이 여호와를 우러러 봄이니라	The burden of the word of the Lord in the land of Hadrach, and Damascus shall be the rest thereof: when the eyes of man, as of all the tribes of Israel, shall be toward the Lord.	This is the burden of the word of the LORD against the land of Hadrach and Damascus its resting place— for the eyes of men and of all the tribes of Israel are upon the LORD—
ZEC	9	2	그 접경된 하맛에도 임하겠고 두로와 시돈은 넓은 지혜가 있으니 그들에게도 임하리라	And Hamath also shall border thereby; Tyrus, and Zidon, though it be very wise.	and also against Hamath, which borders it, as well as Tyre and Sidon, though they are very shrewd.
ZEC	9	3	두로는 자기를 위하여 보장을 건축하며 은을 티끌 같이, 정금을 거리의 진흙 같이 쌓았은즉	And Tyrus did build herself a strong hold, and heaped up silver as the dust, and fine gold as the mire of the streets.	Tyre has built herself a fortress; she has heaped up silver like dust, and gold like the dirt of the streets.
ZEC	9	4	주께서 그를 쫓아 내시며 그의 바다 권세를 치시리니 그가 불에 삼키울지라	Behold, the Lord will cast her out, and he will smite her power in the sea; and she shall be devoured with fire.	Behold, the Lord will impoverish her and cast her wealth into the sea, and she will be consumed by fire.
ZEC	9	5	아스글론이 보고 무서워하며 가사도 심히 아파할 것이며 에그론은 그 소망이 수치가 되므로 역시 그러하리라 가사에는 임금이 끊칠 것이며 아스글론에는 거민이 없을 것이며	Ashkelon shall see it, and fear; Gaza also shall see it, and be very sorrowful, and Ekron; for her expectation shall be ashamed; and the king shall perish from Gaza, and Ashkelon shall not be inhabited.	Ashkelon will see and fear; Gaza will writhe in agony, as will Ekron, for her hope will wither. There will cease to be a king in Gaza, and Ashkelon will be uninhabited.
ZEC	9	6	아스돗에는 잡족이 거하리라 내가 블레셋 사람의 교만을 끊고	And a bastard shall dwell in Ashdod, and I will cut off the pride of the Philistines.	A mixed race will occupy Ashdod, and I will cut off the pride of the Philistines.
ZEC	9	7	그 입에서 그 피를, 그 잇사이에서 그 가증한 것을 제하리니 그도 남아서 우리 하나님께로 돌아와서 유다의 한 두목 같이 되겠고 에그론은 여부스 사람 같이 되리라	And I will take away his blood out of his mouth, and his abominations from between his teeth: but he that remaineth, even he, shall be for our God, and he shall be as a governor in Judah, and Ekron as a Jebusite.	I will remove the blood from their mouths and the abominations from between their teeth. Then they too will become a remnant for our God; they will become like a clan in Judah, and Ekron will be like the Jebusites.
ZEC	9	8	내가 내 집을 둘러 진을 쳐서 적군을 막아 거기 왕래하지 못하게 할 것이라 포학한 자가 다시는 그 지경으로 지나지 못하리니 이는 내가 눈으로 친히 봄이니라	And I will encamp about mine house because of the army, because of him that passeth by, and because of him that returneth: and no oppressor shall pass through them any more: for now have I seen with mine eyes.	But I will camp around My house because of an army, because of those who march to and fro, and never again will an oppressor overrun My people, for now I keep watch with My own eyes.
ZEC	9	9	시온의 딸아 크게 기뻐할지어다 예루살렘의 딸아 즐거이 부를지어다 보라 네 왕이 네게 임하나니 그는 공의로우며 구원을 베풀며 겸손하여서 나귀를 타나니 나귀의 작은 것 곧 나귀새끼니라	Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: behold, thy King cometh unto thee: he is just, and having salvation; lowly, and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt the foal of an ass.	Rejoice greatly, O Daughter of Zion! Shout in triumph, O Daughter of Jerusalem! See, your King comes to you, righteous and victorious, humble and riding on a donkey, on a colt, the foal of a donkey.
ZEC	9	10	내가 에브라임의 병거와 예루살렘의 말을 끊겠고 전쟁하는 활도 끊으리니 그가 이방 사람에게 화평을 전할 것이요 그의 정권은 바다에서 바다까지 이르고 유브라데 강에서 땅 끝까지 이르리라	And I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem, and the battle bow shall be cut off: and he shall speak peace unto the heathen: and his dominion shall be from sea even to sea, and from the river even to the ends of the earth.	And I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim and the horse from Jerusalem, and the bow of war will be broken. Then He will proclaim peace to the nations. His dominion will extend from sea to sea, and from the Euphrates to the ends of the earth.
ZEC	9	11	또 너로 말할진대 네 언약의 피를 인하여 내가 너의 갇힌 자들을 물 없는 구덩이에서 놓았나니	As for thee also, by the blood of thy covenant I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water.	As for you, because of the blood of My covenant, I will release your prisoners from the waterless pit.
ZEC	9	12	소망을 품은 갇혔던 자들아 너희는 보장으로 돌아올지니라 내가 오늘날도 이르노라 내가 배나 네게 갚을 것이라	Turn you to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope: even to day do I declare that I will render double unto thee;	Return to your stronghold, O prisoners of hope; even today I declare that I will restore to you double.
ZEC	9	13	내가 유다로 당긴 활을 삼고 에브라임으로 먹인 살을 삼았으니 시온아 내가 네 자식을 격동시켜 헬라 자식을 치게 하며 너로 용사의 칼과 같게 하리라	When I have bent Judah for me, filled the bow with Ephraim, and raised up thy sons, O Zion, against thy sons, O Greece, and made thee as the sword of a mighty man.	For I will bend Judah as My bow and fit it with Ephraim. I will rouse your sons, O Zion, against the sons of Greece. I will make you like the sword of a mighty man.
ZEC	9	14	여호와께서 그 위에 나타나서 그 살을 번개 같이 쏘아내실 것이며 주 여호와께서 나팔을 불리시며 남방 회리바람을 타고 행하실 것이라	And the Lord shall be seen over them, and his arrow shall go forth as the lightning: and the Lord God shall blow the trumpet, and shall go with whirlwinds of the south.	Then the LORD will appear over them, and His arrow will go forth like lightning. The Lord GOD will sound the ram’s horn and advance in the whirlwinds of the south.
ZEC	9	15	만군의 여호와께서 그들을 호위하시리니 그들이 원수를 삼키며 물매돌을 밟을 것이며 그들이 피를 마시고 즐거이 부르기를 술취한 것 같이 할 것인즉 피가 가득한 동이와도 같고 피 묻은 제단 모퉁이와도 같을 것이라	The Lord of hosts shall defend them; and they shall devour, and subdue with sling stones; and they shall drink, and make a noise as through wine; and they shall be filled like bowls, and as the corners of the altar.	The LORD of Hosts will shield them. They will destroy and conquer with slingstones; they will drink and roar as with wine. And they will be filled like sprinkling bowls, drenched like the corners of the altar.
ZEC	9	16	이 날에 그들의 하나님 여호와께서 그들을 자기 백성의 양떼 같이 구원하시리니 그들이 면류관의 보석 같이 여호와의 땅에 빛나리로다	And the Lord their God shall save them in that day as the flock of his people: for they shall be as the stones of a crown, lifted up as an ensign upon his land.	On that day the LORD their God will save them as the flock of His people; for like jewels in a crown they will sparkle over His land.
ZEC	9	17	그의 형통함과 그의 아름다움이 어찌 그리 큰지 소년은 곡식으로 강건하며 처녀는 새 포도주로 그러하리로다	For how great is his goodness, and how great is his beauty! corn shall make the young men cheerful, and new wine the maids.	How lovely they will be, and how beautiful! Grain will make the young men flourish, and new wine, the young women.
ZEC	10	1	봄비 때에 여호와 곧 번개를 내는 여호와께 비를 구하라 무리에게 소낙비를 내려서 밭의 채소를 각 사람에게 주리라	Ask ye of the Lord rain in the time of the latter rain; so the Lord shall make bright clouds, and give them showers of rain, to every one grass in the field.	Ask the LORD for rain in springtime; the LORD makes the storm clouds, and He will give everyone showers of rain and crops in the field.
ZEC	10	2	대저 드라빔들은 허탄한 것을 말하며 복술자는 진실치 않은 것을 보고 거짓꿈을 말한즉 그 위로함이 헛되므로 백성이 양 같이 유리하며 목자가 없으므로 곤고를 당하나니	For the idols have spoken vanity, and the diviners have seen a lie, and have told false dreams; they comfort in vain: therefore they went their way as a flock, they were troubled, because there was no shepherd.	For idols speak deceit and diviners see illusions; they tell false dreams and offer empty comfort. Therefore the people wander like sheep, oppressed for lack of a shepherd.
ZEC	10	3	내가 목자들에게 노를 발하며 내가 수염소들을 벌하리라 만군의 여호와가 그 무리 곧 유다 족속을 권고하여 그들로 전쟁의 준마와 같게 하리니	Mine anger was kindled against the shepherds, and I punished the goats: for the Lord of hosts hath visited his flock the house of Judah, and hath made them as his goodly horse in the battle.	“My anger burns against the shepherds, and I will punish the leaders. For the LORD of Hosts attends to His flock, the house of Judah; He will make them like His royal steed in battle.
ZEC	10	4	모퉁이 돌이 그에게로서, 말뚝이 그에게로서, 싸우는 활이 그에게로서, 권세 잡은 자가 다 일제히 그에게로서 나와서	Out of him came forth the corner, out of him the nail, out of him the battle bow, out of him every oppressor together.	The cornerstone will come from Judah, the tent peg from him, as well as the battle bow and every ruler together.
ZEC	10	5	싸울 때에 용사 같이 거리의 진흙 중에 대적을 밟을 것이라 여호와가 그들과 함께한즉 그들이 싸워 말탄 자들로 부끄러워하게 하리라	And they shall be as mighty men, which tread down their enemies in the mire of the streets in the battle: and they shall fight, because the Lord is with them, and the riders on horses shall be confounded.	They will be like mighty men in battle, trampling the enemy in the mire of the streets. They will fight because the LORD is with them, and they will put the horsemen to shame.
ZEC	10	6	내가 유다 족속을 견고하게 하며 요셉 족속을 구원할지라 내가 그들을 긍휼히 여김으로 그들로 돌아오게 하리니 그들이 내게 내어 버리움이 없었음 같이 되리라 나는 그들의 하나님 여호와라 내가 그들을 들으리라	And I will strengthen the house of Judah, and I will save the house of Joseph, and I will bring them again to place them; for I have mercy upon them: and they shall be as though I had not cast them off: for I am the Lord their God, and will hear them.	I will strengthen the house of Judah and save the house of Joseph. I will restore them because I have compassion on them, and they will be as though I had not rejected them. For I am the LORD their God, and I will answer them.
ZEC	10	7	에브라임이 용사 같아서 포도주를 마심 같이 마음이 즐거울 것이요 그 자손은 보고 기뻐하며 여호와를 인하여 마음에 즐거워하리라	And they of Ephraim shall be like a mighty man, and their heart shall rejoice as through wine: yea, their children shall see it, and be glad; their heart shall rejoice in the Lord.	Ephraim will be like a mighty man, and their hearts will be glad as with wine. Their children will see it and be joyful; their hearts will rejoice in the LORD.
ZEC	10	8	내가 그들을 향하여 휘파람 불어 모을 것은 내가 그들을 구속하였음이라 그들이 전에 번성하던 것 같이 번성하리라	I will hiss for them, and gather them; for I have redeemed them: and they shall increase as they have increased.	I will whistle for them to gather, for I have redeemed them; and they will be as numerous as they once were.
ZEC	10	9	내가 그들을 열방에 뿌리려니와 그들이 원방에서 나를 기억하고 그들의 자녀와 함께 다 생존하여 돌아올지라	And I will sow them among the people: and they shall remember me in far countries; and they shall live with their children, and turn again.	Though I sow them among the nations, they will remember Me in distant lands; they and their children will live and return.
ZEC	10	10	내가 그들을 애굽 땅에서 이끌어 돌아오며 그들을 앗수르에서부터 모으며 길르앗 땅과 레바논으로 그들을 이끌어 가리니 그 거할 곳이 부족하리라	I will bring them again also out of the land of Egypt, and gather them out of Assyria; and I will bring them into the land of Gilead and Lebanon; and place shall not be found for them.	I will bring them back from Egypt and gather them from Assyria. I will bring them to Gilead and Lebanon until no more room is found for them.
ZEC	10	11	내가 그들로 고해를 지나게 하며 바다 물결을 치리니 나일의 깊은 곳이 다 마르겠고 앗수르의 교만이 낮아지겠고 애굽의 홀이 없어지리라	And he shall pass through the sea with affliction, and shall smite the waves in the sea, and all the deeps of the river shall dry up: and the pride of Assyria shall be brought down, and the sceptre of Egypt shall depart away.	They will pass through the sea of distress and strike the waves of the sea; all the depths of the Nile will dry up. The pride of Assyria will be brought down, and the scepter of Egypt will depart.
ZEC	10	12	내가 그들로 나 여호와를 의지하여 견고케 하리니 그들이 내 이름을 받들어 왕래하리라 나 여호와의 말이니라	And I will strengthen them in the Lord; and they shall walk up and down in his name, saith the Lord.	I will strengthen them in the LORD, and in His name they will walk,” declares the LORD.
ZEC	11	1	레바논아 네 문을 열고 불이 네 백향목을 사르게 하라	Open thy doors, O Lebanon, that the fire may devour thy cedars.	Open your doors, O Lebanon, that the fire may consume your cedars!
ZEC	11	2	너 잣나무여 곡할지어다 백향목이 넘어졌고 아름다운 나무가 훼멸되었도다 바산의 상수리나무여 곡할지어다 무성한 삼림이 엎드러졌도다	Howl, fir tree; for the cedar is fallen; because the mighty are spoiled: howl, O ye oaks of Bashan; for the forest of the vintage is come down.	Wail, O cypress, for the cedar has fallen; the majestic trees are ruined! Wail, O oaks of Bashan, for the dense forest has been cut down!
ZEC	11	3	목자의 곡하는 소리가 남이여 그 영화로운 것이 훼멸되었음이로다 어린 사자의 부르짖는 소리가 남이여 이는 요단의 자랑이 황무하였음이로다	There is a voice of the howling of the shepherds; for their glory is spoiled: a voice of the roaring of young lions; for the pride of Jordan is spoiled.	Listen to the wailing of the shepherds, for their glory is in ruins. Listen to the roaring of the young lions, for the thickets of the Jordan are destroyed.
ZEC	11	4	여호와 나의 하나님이 가라사대 너는 잡힐 양떼를 먹이라	Thus saith the Lord my God; Feed the flock of the slaughter;	This is what the LORD my God says: “Pasture the flock marked for slaughter,
ZEC	11	5	산 자들은 그들을 잡아도 죄가 없다 하고 판 자들은 말하기를 내가 부요케 되었은즉 여호와께 찬송하리라 하고 그 목자들은 그들을 불쌍히 여기지 아니하는도다	Whose possessors slay them, and hold themselves not guilty: and they that sell them say, Blessed be the Lord; for I am rich: and their own shepherds pity them not.	whose buyers slaughter them without remorse. Those who sell them say, ‘Blessed be the LORD, for I am rich!’ Even their own shepherds have no compassion on them.
ZEC	11	6	여호와가 말하노라 내가 다시는 이 땅 거민을 불쌍히 여기지 아니하고 그 사람을 각각 그 이웃의 손과 임금의 손에 붙이리니 그들이 이 땅을 칠지라도 내가 그 손에서 건져내지 아니하리라 하시기로	For I will no more pity the inhabitants of the land, saith the Lord: but, lo, I will deliver the men every one into his neighbour’s hand, and into the hand of his king: and they shall smite the land, and out of their hand I will not deliver them.	For I will no longer have compassion on the people of the land, declares the LORD, but behold, I will cause each man to fall into the hands of his neighbor and his king, who will devastate the land, and I will not deliver it from their hands.”
ZEC	11	7	내가 이 잡힐 양떼를 먹이니 참으로 가련한 양이라 내가 이에 막대기 둘을 취하여 하나는 은총이라 하며 하나는 연락이라 하고 양떼를 먹일새	And I will feed the flock of slaughter, even you, O poor of the flock. And I took unto me two staves; the one I called Beauty, and the other I called Bands; and I fed the flock.	So I pastured the flock marked for slaughter, especially the afflicted of the flock. Then I took for myself two staffs, calling one Favor and the other Union, and I pastured the flock.
ZEC	11	8	한 달 동안에 내가 그 세 목자를 끊었으니 이는 내 마음에 그들을 싫어하였고 그들의 마음에도 나를 미워하였음이라	Three shepherds also I cut off in one month; and my soul lothed them, and their soul also abhorred me.	And in one month I dismissed three shepherds. My soul grew impatient with the flock, and their souls also detested me.
ZEC	11	9	내가 가로되 내가 너희를 먹이지 아니하고 죽는 자는 죽는 대로, 망할 자는 망할 대로, 그 나머지는 피차 살을 먹는 대로 두리라 하고	Then said I, I will not feed you: that that dieth, let it die; and that that is to be cut off, let it be cut off; and let the rest eat every one the flesh of another.	Then I said, “I will no longer shepherd you. Let the dying die, and the perishing perish; and let those who remain devour one another’s flesh.”
ZEC	11	10	이에 은총이라 하는 막대기를 취하여 잘랐으니 이는 모든 백성과 세운 언약을 폐하려 하였음이라	And I took my staff, even Beauty, and cut it asunder, that I might break my covenant which I had made with all the people.	Next I took my staff called Favor and cut it in two, revoking the covenant I had made with all the nations.
ZEC	11	11	당일에 곧 폐하매 내게 청종하던 가련한 양들은 이것이 여호와의 말씀이었던 줄 안지라	And it was broken in that day: and so the poor of the flock that waited upon me knew that it was the word of the Lord.	It was revoked on that day, and so the afflicted of the flock who were watching me knew that it was the word of the LORD.
ZEC	11	12	내가 그들에게 이르되 너희가 좋게 여기거든 내 고가를 내게 주고 그렇지 아니하거든 말라 그들이 곧 은 삼십을 달아서 내 고가를 삼은지라	And I said unto them, If ye think good, give me my price; and if not, forbear. So they weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver.	Then I told them, “If it seems right to you, give me my wages; but if not, keep them.” So they weighed out my wages, thirty pieces of silver.
ZEC	11	13	여호와께서 내게 이르시되 그들이 나를 헤아린바 그 준가를 토기장이에게 던지라 하시기로 내가 곧 그 은 삼십을 여호와의 전에서 토기장이에게 던지고	And the Lord said unto me, Cast it unto the potter: a goodly price that I was prised at of them. And I took the thirty pieces of silver, and cast them to the potter in the house of the Lord.	And the LORD said to me, “Throw it to the potter”—this magnificent price at which they valued me. So I took the thirty pieces of silver and threw them to the potter in the house of the LORD.
ZEC	11	14	내가 또 연락이라 하는 둘째 막대기를 잘랐으니 이는 유다와 이스라엘 형제의 의를 끊으려 함이었느니라	Then I cut asunder mine other staff, even Bands, that I might break the brotherhood between Judah and Israel.	Then I cut in two my second staff called Union, breaking the brotherhood between Judah and Israel.
ZEC	11	15	여호와께서 내게 이르시되 너는 또 우매한 목자의 기구들을 취할지니라	And the Lord said unto me, Take unto thee yet the instruments of a foolish shepherd.	And the LORD said to me: “Take up once more the equipment of a foolish shepherd.
ZEC	11	16	보라 내가 한 목자를 이 땅에 일으키리니 그가 없어진 자를 마음에 두지 아니하며 흩어진 자를 찾지 아니하며 상한 자를 고치지 아니하며 강건한 자를 먹이지 아니하고 오히려 살진 자의 고기를 먹으며 또 그 굽을 찢으리라	For, lo, I will raise up a shepherd in the land, which shall not visit those that be cut off, neither shall seek the young one, nor heal that that is broken, nor feed that that standeth still: but he shall eat the flesh of the fat, and tear their claws in pieces.	For behold, I will raise up a shepherd in the land who will neither care for the lost, nor seek the young, nor heal the broken, nor sustain the healthy, but he will devour the flesh of the choice sheep and tear off their hooves.
ZEC	11	17	화 있을진저 양떼를 버린 못된 목자여 칼이 그 팔에, 우편 눈에 임하리니 그 팔이 아주 마르고 그 우편 눈이 아주 어두우리라	Woe to the idol shepherd that leaveth the flock! the sword shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye: his arm shall be clean dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly darkened.	Woe to the worthless shepherd, who deserts the flock! May a sword strike his arm and his right eye! May his arm be completely withered and his right eye utterly blinded!”
ZEC	12	1	이스라엘에 관한 여호와의 말씀의 경고라 여호와 곧 하늘을 펴시며 땅의 터를 세우시며 사람 안에 심령을 지으신 자가 가라사대	The burden of the word of the Lord for Israel, saith the Lord, which stretcheth forth the heavens, and layeth the foundation of the earth, and formeth the spirit of man within him.	This is the burden of the word of the LORD concerning Israel. Thus declares the LORD, who stretches out the heavens and lays the foundation of the earth, who forms the spirit of man within him:
ZEC	12	2	보라 내가 예루살렘으로 그 사면 국민에게 혼취케 하는 잔이 되게 할 것이라 예루살렘이 에워싸일 때에 유다에까지 미치리라	Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling unto all the people round about, when they shall be in the siege both against Judah and against Jerusalem.	“Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of drunkenness to all the surrounding peoples. Judah will be besieged, as well as Jerusalem.
ZEC	12	3	그 날에는 내가 예루살렘으로 모든 국민에게 무거운 돌이 되게 하리니 무릇 그것을 드는 자는 크게 상할 것이라 천하 만국이 그것을 치려고 모이리라	And in that day will I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people: all that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth be gathered together against it.	On that day, when all the nations of the earth gather against her, I will make Jerusalem a heavy stone for all the peoples; all who would heave it away will be severely injured.
ZEC	12	4	여호와가 말하노라 그 날에 내가 모든 말을 쳐서 놀라게 하며 그 탄 자를 쳐서 미치게 하되 유다 족속은 내가 돌아보고 모든 국민의 말을 쳐서 눈이 멀게 하리니	In that day, saith the Lord, I will smite every horse with astonishment, and his rider with madness: and I will open mine eyes upon the house of Judah, and will smite every horse of the people with blindness.	On that day, declares the LORD, I will strike every horse with panic, and every rider with madness. I will keep a watchful eye on the house of Judah, but I will strike with blindness all the horses of the nations.
ZEC	12	5	유다의 두목들이 심중에 이르기를 예루살렘 거민이 그들의 하나님 만군의 여호와로 말미암아 힘을 얻었다 할지라	And the governors of Judah shall say in their heart, The inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my strength in the Lord of hosts their God.	Then the leaders of Judah will say in their hearts: ‘The people of Jerusalem are my strength, for the LORD of Hosts is their God.’
ZEC	12	6	그 날에 내가 유다 두목들로 나무 가운데 화로 같게 하며 곡식단 사이에 횃불 같게 하리니 그들이 그 좌우에 에워싼 모든 국민을 사를 것이요 예루살렘 사람은 다시 그 본 곳 예루살렘에 거하게 되리라	In that day will I make the governors of Judah like an hearth of fire among the wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheaf; and they shall devour all the people round about, on the right hand and on the left: and Jerusalem shall be inhabited again in her own place, even in Jerusalem.	On that day I will make the clans of Judah like a firepot in a woodpile, like a flaming torch among the sheaves; they will consume all the peoples around them on the right and on the left, while the people of Jerusalem remain secure there.
ZEC	12	7	여호와가 먼저 유다 장막을 구원하리니 이는 다윗의 집의 영광과 예루살렘 거민의 영광이 유다보다 더하지 못하게 하려 함이니라	The Lord also shall save the tents of Judah first, that the glory of the house of David and the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem do not magnify themselves against Judah.	The LORD will save the tents of Judah first, so that the glory of the house of David and of the people of Jerusalem may not be greater than that of Judah.
ZEC	12	8	그 날에 여호와가 예루살렘 거민을 보호하리니 그 중에 약한 자가 그 날에는 다윗 같겠고 다윗의 족속은 하나님 같고 무리 앞에 있는 여호와의 사자 같을 것이라	In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and he that is feeble among them at that day shall be as David; and the house of David shall be as God, as the angel of the Lord before them.	On that day the LORD will defend the people of Jerusalem, so that the weakest among them will be like David, and the house of David will be like God, like the angel of the LORD going before them.
ZEC	12	9	예루살렘을 치러 오는 열국을 그 날에 내가 멸하기를 힘쓰리라	And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will seek to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem.	So on that day I will set out to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem.
ZEC	12	10	내가 다윗의 집과 예루살렘 거민에게 은총과 간구하는 심령을 부어 주리니 그들이 그 찌른바 그를 바라보고 그를 위하여 애통하기를 독자를 위하여 애통하듯 하며 그를 위하여 통곡하기를 장자를 위하여 통곡하듯 하리로다	And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications: and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn.	Then I will pour out on the house of David and on the people of Jerusalem a spirit of grace and prayer, and they will look on Me, the One they have pierced. They will mourn for Him as one mourns for an only child, and grieve bitterly for Him as one grieves for a firstborn son.
ZEC	12	11	그 날에 예루살렘에 큰 애통이 있으리니 므깃도 골짜기 하다드림몬에 있던 애통과 같을 것이라	In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon.	On that day the wailing in Jerusalem will be as great as the wailing of Hadad-rimmon in the plain of Megiddo.
ZEC	12	12	온 땅 각 족속이 따로 애통하되 다윗의 족속이 따로 하고 그 아내들이 따로 하며 나단의 족속이 따로 하고 그 아내들이 따로 하며	And the land shall mourn, every family apart; the family of the house of David apart, and their wives apart; the family of the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart;	The land will mourn, each clan on its own: the clan of the house of David and their wives, the clan of the house of Nathan and their wives,
ZEC	12	13	레위의 족속이 따로 하고 그 아내들이 따로 하며 시므이의 족속이 따로 하고 그 아내들이 따로 하며	The family of the house of Levi apart, and their wives apart; the family of Shimei apart, and their wives apart;	the clan of the house of Levi and their wives, the clan of Shimei and their wives,
ZEC	12	14	모든 남은 족속도 각기 따로 하고 그 아내들이 따로 하리라	All the families that remain, every family apart, and their wives apart.	and all the remaining clans and their wives.
ZEC	13	1	그 날에 죄와 더러움을 씻는 샘이 다윗의 족속과 예루살렘 거민을 위하여 열리리라	In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness.	“On that day a fountain will be opened to the house of David and the people of Jerusalem, to cleanse them from sin and impurity.
ZEC	13	2	만군의 여호와가 말하노라 그 날에 내가 우상의 이름을 이 땅에서 끊어서 기억도 되지 못하게 할 것이며 거짓 선지자와 더러운 사귀를 이 땅에서 떠나게 할 것이라	And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord of hosts, that I will cut off the names of the idols out of the land, and they shall no more be remembered: and also I will cause the prophets and the unclean spirit to pass out of the land.	And on that day, declares the LORD of Hosts, I will erase the names of the idols from the land, and they will no longer be remembered. I will also remove the prophets and the spirit of impurity from the land.
ZEC	13	3	사람이 오히려 예언할 것 같으면 그 낳은 부모가 그에게 이르기를 네가 여호와의 이름을 빙자하여 거짓말을 하니 살지 못하리라 하고 낳은 부모가 그 예언할 때에 칼로 찌르리라	And it shall come to pass, that when any shall yet prophesy, then his father and his mother that begat him shall say unto him, Thou shalt not live; for thou speakest lies in the name of the Lord: and his father and his mother that begat him shall thrust him through when he prophesieth.	And if anyone still prophesies, his father and mother who bore him will say to him, ‘You shall not remain alive, because you have spoken falsely in the name of the LORD.’ When he prophesies, his father and mother who bore him will pierce him through.
ZEC	13	4	그 날에 선지자들이 예언할 때에 그 이상을 각기 부끄러워할 것이며	And it shall come to pass in that day, that the prophets shall be ashamed every one of his vision, when he hath prophesied; neither shall they wear a rough garment to deceive:	And on that day every prophet who prophesies will be ashamed of his vision, and he will not put on a hairy cloak in order to deceive.
ZEC	13	5	말하기를 나는 선지자가 아니요 나는 농부라 내가 어려서부터 사람의 종이 되었노라 할 것이요	But he shall say, I am no prophet, I am an husbandman; for man taught me to keep cattle from my youth.	He will say, ‘I am not a prophet; I work the land, for I was purchased as a servant in my youth.’
ZEC	13	6	혹이 그에게 묻기를 네 두 팔 사이에 상처는 어찜이냐 하면 대답하기를 이는 나의 친구의 집에서 받은 상처라 하리라	And one shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands? Then he shall answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends.	If someone asks him, ‘What are these wounds on your chest?’ he will answer, ‘These are the wounds I received in the house of my friends.’
ZEC	13	7	만군의 여호와가 말하노라 칼아 깨어서 내 목자, 내 짝된 자를 치라 목자를 치면 양이 흩어지려니와 작은 자들 위에는 내가 내 손을 드리우리라	Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow, saith the Lord of hosts: smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered: and I will turn mine hand upon the little ones.	Awake, O sword, against My Shepherd, against the man who is My Companion, declares the LORD of Hosts. Strike the Shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered, and I will turn My hand against the little ones.
ZEC	13	8	여호와가 말하노라 이 온 땅에서 삼분지 이는 멸절하고 삼분지 일은 거기 남으리니	And it shall come to pass, that in all the land, saith the Lord, two parts therein shall be cut off and die; but the third shall be left therein.	And in all the land, declares the LORD, two-thirds will be cut off and perish, but a third will be left in it.
ZEC	13	9	내가 그 삼분지 일을 불 가운데 던져 은 같이 연단하며 금 같이 시험할 것이라 그들이 내 이름을 부르리니 내가 들을 것이며 나는 말하기를 이는 내 백성이라 할 것이요 그들은 말하기를 여호와는 내 하나님이시라 하리라	And I will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine them as silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried: they shall call on my name, and I will hear them: I will say, It is my people: and they shall say, The Lord is my God.	This third I will bring through the fire; I will refine them like silver and test them like gold. They will call on My name, and I will answer them. I will say, ‘They are My people,’ and they will say, ‘The LORD is our God.’”
ZEC	14	1	여호와의 날이 이르리라 그 날에 네 재물이 약탈되어 너의 중에서 나누이리라	Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, and thy spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee.	Behold, a day of the LORD is coming when your plunder will be divided in your presence.
ZEC	14	2	내가 열국을 모아 예루살렘과 싸우게 하리니 성읍이 함락되며 가옥이 약탈되며 부녀가 욕을 보며 성읍 백성이 절반이나 사로잡혀 가려니와 남은 백성은 성읍에서 끊쳐지지 아니하리라	For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the city shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city.	For I will gather all the nations for battle against Jerusalem, and the city will be captured, the houses looted, and the women ravished. Half of the city will go into exile, but the rest of the people will not be removed from the city.
ZEC	14	3	그 때에 여호와께서 나가사 그 열국을 치시되 이왕 전쟁 날에 싸운 것 같이 하시리라	Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those nations, as when he fought in the day of battle.	Then the LORD will go out to fight against those nations, as He fights in the day of battle.
ZEC	14	4	그 날에 그의 발이 예루살렘 앞 곧 동편 감람 산에 서실 것이요 감람 산은 그 한가운데가 동서로 갈라져 매우 큰 골짜기가 되어서 산 절반은 북으로, 절반은 남으로 옮기고	And his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the east, and the mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof toward the east and toward the west, and there shall be a very great valley; and half of the mountain shall remove toward the north, and half of it toward the south.	On that day His feet will stand on the Mount of Olives, east of Jerusalem, and the Mount of Olives will be split in two from east to west, forming a great valley, with half the mountain moving to the north and half to the south.
ZEC	14	5	그 산 골짜기는 아셀까지 미칠지라 너희가 그의 산 골짜기로 도망하되 유다 왕 웃시야 때에 지진을 피하여 도망하던 것 같이 하리라 나의 하나님 여호와께서 임하실 것이요 모든 거룩한 자가 주와 함께 하리라	And ye shall flee to the valley of the mountains; for the valley of the mountains shall reach unto Azal: yea, ye shall flee, like as ye fled from before the earthquake in the days of Uzziah king of Judah: and the Lord my God shall come, and all the saints with thee.	You will flee by My mountain valley, for it will extend to Azal. You will flee as you fled from the earthquake in the days of Uzziah king of Judah. Then the LORD my God will come, and all the holy ones with Him.
ZEC	14	6	그 날에는 빛이 없겠고 광명한 자들이 떠날 것이라	And it shall come to pass in that day, that the light shall not be clear, nor dark:	On that day there will be no light, no cold or frost.
ZEC	14	7	여호와의 아시는 한 날이 있으리니 낮도 아니요 밤도 아니라 어두워 갈 때에 빛이 있으리로다	But it shall be one day which shall be known to the Lord, not day, nor night: but it shall come to pass, that at evening time it shall be light.	It will be a day known only to the LORD, without day or night; but when evening comes, there will be light.
ZEC	14	8	그 날에 생수가 예루살렘에서 솟아나서 절반은 동해로, 절반은 서해로 흐를 것이라 여름에도 겨울에도 그러하리라	And it shall be in that day, that living waters shall go out from Jerusalem; half of them toward the former sea, and half of them toward the hinder sea: in summer and in winter shall it be.	And on that day living water will flow out from Jerusalem, half of it toward the Eastern Sea and the other half toward the Western Sea, in summer and winter alike.
ZEC	14	9	여호와께서 천하의 왕이 되시리니 그 날에는 여호와께서 홀로 하나이실 것이요 그 이름이 홀로 하나이실 것이며	And the Lord shall be king over all the earth: in that day shall there be one Lord, and his name one.	On that day the LORD will become King over all the earth—the LORD alone, and His name alone.
ZEC	14	10	온 땅이 아라바 같이 되되 게바에서 예루살렘 남편 림몬까지 미칠 것이며 예루살렘이 높이 들려 그 본처에 있으리니 베냐민 문에서부터 첫문 자리와 성 모퉁이 문까지 또 하나넬 망대에서부터 왕의 포도주 짜는 곳까지라	All the land shall be turned as a plain from Geba to Rimmon south of Jerusalem: and it shall be lifted up, and inhabited in her place, from Benjamin’s gate unto the place of the first gate, unto the corner gate, and from the tower of Hananeel unto the king’s winepresses.	All the land from Geba to Rimmon south of Jerusalem will be turned into a plain, but Jerusalem will be raised up and will remain in her place, from the Benjamin Gate to the site of the First Gate to the Corner Gate, and from the Tower of Hananel to the royal winepresses.
ZEC	14	11	사람이 그 가운데 거하며 다시는 저주가 있지 아니하리니 예루살렘이 안연히 서리로다	And men shall dwell in it, and there shall be no more utter destruction; but Jerusalem shall be safely inhabited.	People will live there, and never again will there be an utter destruction. So Jerusalem will dwell securely.
ZEC	14	12	예루살렘을 친 모든 백성에게 여호와께서 내리실 재앙이 이러하니 곧 섰을 때에 그 살이 썩으며 그 눈이 구멍 속에서 썩으며 그 혀가 입속에서 썩을 것이요	And this shall be the plague wherewith the Lord will smite all the people that have fought against Jerusalem; Their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume away in their holes, and their tongue shall consume away in their mouth.	And this will be the plague with which the LORD strikes all the peoples who have warred against Jerusalem: Their flesh will rot while they stand on their feet, their eyes will rot in their sockets, and their tongues will rot in their mouths.
ZEC	14	13	그 날에 여호와께서 그들로 크게 요란케 하시리니 피차 손으로 붙잡으며 피차 손을 들어 칠 것이며	And it shall come to pass in that day, that a great tumult from the Lord shall be among them; and they shall lay hold every one on the hand of his neighbour, and his hand shall rise up against the hand of his neighbour.	On that day a great panic from the LORD will come upon them, so that each will seize the hand of another, and the hand of one will rise against the other.
ZEC	14	14	유다도 예루살렘에서 싸우리니 이 때에 사면에 있는 열국의 보화 곧 금 은과 의복이 심히 많이 모여질 것이요	And Judah also shall fight at Jerusalem; and the wealth of all the heathen round about shall be gathered together, gold, and silver, and apparel, in great abundance.	Judah will also fight at Jerusalem, and the wealth of all the surrounding nations will be collected—gold, silver, and apparel in great abundance.
ZEC	14	15	또 말과 노새와 약대와 나귀와 그 진에 있는 모든 육축에게 미칠 재앙도 그 재앙과 같으리라	And so shall be the plague of the horse, of the mule, of the camel, and of the ass, and of all the beasts that shall be in these tents, as this plague.	And a similar plague will strike the horses and mules, camels and donkeys, and all the animals in those camps.
ZEC	14	16	예루살렘을 치러 왔던 열국 중에 남은 자가 해마다 올라와서 그 왕 만군의 여호와께 숭배하며 초막절을 지킬 것이라	And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left of all the nations which came against Jerusalem shall even go up from year to year to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, and to keep the feast of tabernacles.	Then all the survivors from the nations that came against Jerusalem will go up year after year to worship the King, the LORD of Hosts, and to celebrate the Feast of Tabernacles.
ZEC	14	17	천하 만국 중에 그 왕 만군의 여호와께 숭배하러 예루살렘에 올라오지 아니하는 자에게는 비를 내리지 아니하실 것인즉	And it shall be, that whoso will not come up of all the families of the earth unto Jerusalem to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, even upon them shall be no rain.	And should any of the families of the earth not go up to Jerusalem to worship the King, the LORD of Hosts, then the rain will not fall on them.
ZEC	14	18	만일 애굽 족속이 올라오지 아니할 때에는 창일함이 있지 아니하리니 여호와께서 초막절을 지키러 올라오지 아니하는 열국 사람을 치시는 재앙을 그에게 내리실 것이라	And if the family of Egypt go not up, and come not, that have no rain; there shall be the plague, wherewith the Lord will smite the heathen that come not up to keep the feast of tabernacles.	And if the people of Egypt will not go up and enter in, then the rain will not fall on them; this will be the plague with which the LORD strikes the nations who do not go up to celebrate the Feast of Tabernacles.
ZEC	14	19	애굽 사람이나 열국 사람이나 초막절을 지키러 올라오지 아니하는 자의 받을 벌이 이러하니라	This shall be the punishment of Egypt, and the punishment of all nations that come not up to keep the feast of tabernacles.	This will be the punishment of Egypt and of all the nations that do not go up to celebrate the Feast of Tabernacles.
ZEC	14	20	그 날에는 말 방울에까지 여호와께 성결이라 기록될 것이라 여호와의 전에 모든 솥이 제단 앞 주발과 다름이 없을 것이니	In that day shall there be upon the bells of the horses, HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD; and the pots in the Lord’s house shall be like the bowls before the altar.	On that day, HOLY TO THE LORD will be inscribed on the bells of the horses, and the cooking pots in the house of the LORD will be like the sprinkling bowls before the altar.
ZEC	14	21	예루살렘과 유다의 모든 솥이 만군의 여호와의 성물이 될 것인즉 제사 드리는 자가 와서 이 솥을 취하여 그 가운데 고기를 삶으리라 그 날에는 만군의 여호와의 전에 가나안 사람이 다시 있지 아니하리라	Yea, every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah shall be holiness unto the Lord of hosts: and all they that sacrifice shall come and take of them, and seethe therein: and in that day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the Lord of hosts.	Indeed, every pot in Jerusalem and Judah will be holy to the LORD of Hosts, and all who sacrifice will come and take some pots and cook in them. And on that day there will no longer be a Canaanite in the house of the LORD of Hosts.
MAL	1	1	여호와께서 말라기로 이스라엘에게 말씀하신 경고라	The burden of the word of the Lord to Israel by Malachi.	This is the burden of the word of the LORD to Israel through Malachi:
MAL	1	2	여호와께서 가라사대 내가 너희를 사랑하였노라 하나 너희는 이르기를 주께서 어떻게 우리를 사랑하셨나이까 하는도다 나 여호와가 말하노라 에서는 야곱의 형이 아니냐 그러나 내가 야곱을 사랑하였고	I have loved you, saith the Lord. Yet ye say, Wherein hast thou loved us? Was not Esau Jacob’s brother? saith the Lord: yet I loved Jacob,	“I have loved you,” says the LORD. But you ask, “How have You loved us?” “Was not Esau Jacob’s brother?” declares the LORD. “Yet Jacob I have loved,
MAL	1	3	에서는 미워하였으며 그의 산들을 황무케 하였고 그의 산업을 광야의 시랑에게 붙였느니라	And I hated Esau, and laid his mountains and his heritage waste for the dragons of the wilderness.	but Esau I have hated, and I have made his mountains a wasteland and left his inheritance to the desert jackals.”
MAL	1	4	에돔은 말하기를 우리가 무너뜨림을 당하였으나 황페된 곳을 다시 쌓으리라 하거니와 나 만군의 여호와는 이르노라 그들은 쌓을지라도 나는 헐리라 사람들이 그들을 일컬어 악한 지경이라 할 것이요 여호와의 영영한 진노를 받은 백성이라 할 것이며	Whereas Edom saith, We are impoverished, but we will return and build the desolate places; thus saith the Lord of hosts, They shall build, but I will throw down; and they shall call them, The border of wickedness, and, The people against whom the Lord hath indignation for ever.	Though Edom may say, “We have been devastated, but we will rebuild the ruins,” this is what the LORD of Hosts says: “They may build, but I will demolish. They will be called the Land of Wickedness, and a people with whom the LORD is indignant forever.
MAL	1	5	너희는 목도하고 이르기를 여호와께서는 이스라엘 지경 밖에서 크시다 하리라	And your eyes shall see, and ye shall say, The Lord will be magnified from the border of Israel.	You will see this with your own eyes, and you yourselves will say, ‘The LORD is great—even beyond the borders of Israel.’”
MAL	1	6	내 이름을 멸시하는 제사장들아 나 만군의 여호와가 너희에게 이르기를 아들은 그 아비를, 종은 그 주인을 공경하나니 내가 아비일진대 나를 공경함이 어디 있느냐 내가 주인일진대 나를 두려워함이 어디 있느냐 하나 너희는 이르기를 우리가 어떻게 주의 이름을 멸시하였나이까 하는도다	A son honoureth his father, and a servant his master: if then I be a father, where is mine honour? and if I be a master, where is my fear? saith the Lord of hosts unto you, O priests, that despise my name. And ye say, Wherein have we despised thy name?	“A son honors his father, and a servant his master. But if I am a father, where is My honor? And if I am a master, where is your fear of Me?” says the LORD of Hosts to you priests who despise My name. “But you ask, ‘How have we despised Your name?’
MAL	1	7	너희가 더러운 떡을 나의 단에 드리고도 말하기를 우리가 어떻게 주를 더럽게 하였나이까 하는도다 이는 너희가 주의 상은 경멸히 여길 것이라 말함을 인함이니라	Ye offer polluted bread upon mine altar; and ye say, Wherein have we polluted thee? In that ye say, The table of the Lord is contemptible.	By presenting defiled food on My altar. But you ask, ‘How have we defiled You?’ By saying that the table of the LORD is contemptible.
MAL	1	8	만군의 여호와가 이르노라 너희가 눈 먼 희생으로 드리는 것이 어찌 악하지 아니하며 저는 것, 병든 것으로 드리는 것이 어찌 악하지 아니하냐 이제 그것을 너희 총독에게 드려보라 그가 너를 기뻐하겠느냐 너를 가납하겠느냐	And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? offer it now unto thy governor; will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person? saith the Lord of hosts.	When you offer blind animals for sacrifice, is it not wrong? And when you present the lame and sick ones, is it not wrong? Try offering them to your governor! Would he be pleased with you or show you favor?” asks the LORD of Hosts.
MAL	1	9	만군의 여호와가 이르노라 너희는 나 하나님께 은혜를 구하기를 우리를 긍휼히 여기소서 하여 보라 너희가 이같이 행하였으니 내가 너희 중 하나인들 받겠느냐	And now, I pray you, beseech God that he will be gracious unto us: this hath been by your means: will he regard your persons? saith the Lord of hosts.	“But ask now for God’s favor. Will He be gracious? Since this has come from your hands, will He show you favor?” asks the LORD of Hosts.
MAL	1	10	만군의 여호와가 이르노라 너희가 내 단 위에 헛되이 불 사르지 못하게 하기 위하여 너희 중에 성전 문을 닫을 자가 있었으면 좋겠도다 내가 너희를 기뻐하지 아니하며 너희 손으로 드리는 것을 받지도 아니하리라	Who is there even among you that would shut the doors for nought? neither do ye kindle fire on mine altar for nought. I have no pleasure in you, saith the Lord of hosts, neither will I accept an offering at your hand.	“Oh, that one of you would shut the temple doors, so that you would no longer kindle useless fires on My altar! I take no pleasure in you,” says the LORD of Hosts, “and I will accept no offering from your hands.
MAL	1	11	만군의 여호와가 이르노라 해 뜨는 곳에서부터 해 지는 곳까지의 이방 민족 중에서 내 이름이 크게 될 것이라 각처에서 내 이름을 위하여 분향하며 깨끗한 제물을 드리리니 이는 내 이름이 이방 민족 중에서 크게 될 것임이니라	For from the rising of the sun even unto the going down of the same my name shall be great among the Gentiles; and in every place incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure offering: for my name shall be great among the heathen, saith the Lord of hosts.	For My name will be great among the nations, from where the sun rises to where it sets. In every place, incense and pure offerings will be presented in My name, because My name will be great among the nations,” says the LORD of Hosts.
MAL	1	12	그러나 너희는 말하기를 여호와의 상은 더러웠고 그 위에 있는 실과 곧 식물은 경멸히 여길 것이라 하여 내 이름을 더럽히는도다	But ye have profaned it, in that ye say, The table of the Lord is polluted; and the fruit thereof, even his meat, is contemptible.	“But you profane it when you say, ‘The table of the Lord is defiled, and as for its fruit, its food is contemptible.’
MAL	1	13	만군의 여호와가 이르노라 너희가 또 말하기를 이 일이 얼마나 번폐스러운고 하며 코웃음하고 토색한 물건과 저는 것, 병든 것을 가져왔느니라 너희가 이같이 헌물을 가져오니 내가 그것을 너희 손에서 받겠느냐 여호와의 말이니라	Ye said also, Behold, what a weariness is it! and ye have snuffed at it, saith the Lord of hosts; and ye brought that which was torn, and the lame, and the sick; thus ye brought an offering: should I accept this of your hand? saith the Lord.	You also say: ‘Oh, what a nuisance!’ And you turn up your nose at it,” says the LORD of Hosts. “You bring offerings that are stolen, lame, or sick! Should I accept these from your hands?” asks the LORD.
MAL	1	14	떼 가운데 수컷이 있거늘 그 서원하는 일에 흠있는 것으로 사기하여 내게 드리는 자는 저주를 받으리니 나는 큰 임금이요 내 이름은 열방 중에서 두려워하는 것이 됨이니라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라	But cursed be the deceiver, which hath in his flock a male, and voweth, and sacrificeth unto the Lord a corrupt thing: for I am a great King, saith the Lord of hosts, and my name is dreadful among the heathen.	“But cursed is the deceiver who has an acceptable male in his flock and vows to give it, but sacrifices a defective animal to the Lord. For I am a great King,” says the LORD of Hosts, “and My name is to be feared among the nations.
MAL	2	1	너의 제사장들아 이제 너희에게 이같이 명령하노라	And now, O ye priests, this commandment is for you.	“And now this decree is for you, O priests:
MAL	2	2	만군의 여호와가 이르노라 너희가 만일 듣지 아니하며 마음에 두지 아니하여 내 이름을 영화롭게 하지 아니하면 내가 너희에게 저주를 내려 너희의 복을 저주하리라 내가 이미 저주하였나니 이는 너희가 그것을 마음에 두지 아니하였음이니라	If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto my name, saith the Lord of hosts, I will even send a curse upon you, and I will curse your blessings: yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it to heart.	If you do not listen, and if you do not take it to heart to honor My name,” says the LORD of Hosts, “I will send a curse among you, and I will curse your blessings. Yes, I have already begun to curse them, because you are not taking it to heart.
MAL	2	3	보라 내가 너희의 종자를 견책할 것이요 똥 곧 너희 절기의 희생의 똥을 너희 얼굴에 바를 것이라 너희가 그것과 함께 제하여 버림을 당하리라	Behold, I will corrupt your seed, and spread dung upon your faces, even the dung of your solemn feasts; and one shall take you away with it.	Behold, I will rebuke your descendants, and I will spread dung on your faces, the waste from your feasts, and you will be carried off with it.
MAL	2	4	만군의 여호와가 이르노라 내가 이 명령을 너희에게 내린 것은 레위와 세운 나의 언약이 항상 있게 하려 함인 줄을 너희가 알리라	And ye shall know that I have sent this commandment unto you, that my covenant might be with Levi, saith the Lord of hosts.	Then you will know that I have sent you this commandment so that My covenant with Levi may continue,” says the LORD of Hosts.
MAL	2	5	레위와 세운 나의 언약은 생명과 평강의 언약이라 내가 이것으로 그에게 준 것은 그로 경외하게 하려 함이라 그가 나를 경외하고 내 이름을 두려워하였으며	My covenant was with him of life and peace; and I gave them to him for the fear wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before my name.	“My covenant with him was one of life and peace, which I gave to him; it called for reverence, and he revered Me and stood in awe of My name.
MAL	2	6	그 입에는 진리의 법이 있었고 그 입술에는 불의함이 없었으며 그가 화평과 정직한 중에서 나와 동행하며 많은 사람을 돌이켜 죄악에서 떠나게 하였느니라	The law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his lips: he walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many away from iniquity.	True instruction was in his mouth, and nothing false was found on his lips. He walked with Me in peace and uprightness, and he turned many from iniquity.
MAL	2	7	대저 제사장의 입술은 지식을 지켜야 하겠고 사람들이 그 입에서 율법을 구하게 되어야 할 것이니 제사장은 만군의 여호와의 사자가 됨이어늘	For the priest’s lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts.	For the lips of a priest should preserve knowledge, and people should seek instruction from his mouth, because he is the messenger of the LORD of Hosts.
MAL	2	8	너희는 정도에서 떠나 많은 사람으로 율법에 거치게 하도다 나 만군의 여호와가 이르노니 너희가 레위의 언약을 파하였느니라	But ye are departed out of the way; ye have caused many to stumble at the law; ye have corrupted the covenant of Levi, saith the Lord of hosts.	But you have departed from the way, and your instruction has caused many to stumble. You have violated the covenant of Levi,” says the LORD of Hosts.
MAL	2	9	너희가 내 도를 지키지 아니하고 율법을 행할 때에 사람에게 편벽되이 하였으므로 나도 너희로 모든 백성 앞에 멸시와 천대를 당하게 하였느니라 하시니라	Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before all the people, according as ye have not kept my ways, but have been partial in the law.	“So I in turn have made you despised and humiliated before all the people, because you have not kept My ways, but have shown partiality in matters of the law.”
MAL	2	10	우리는 한 아버지를 가지지 아니하였느냐 한 하나님의 지으신 바가 아니냐 어찌하여 우리 각 사람이 자기 형제에게 궤사를 행하여 우리 열조의 언약을 욕되게 하느냐	Have we not all one father? hath not one God created us? why do we deal treacherously every man against his brother, by profaning the covenant of our fathers?	Do we not all have one Father? Did not one God create us? Why then do we break faith with one another so as to profane the covenant of our fathers?
MAL	2	11	유다는 궤사를 행하였고 이스라엘과 예루살렘 중에서는 가증한 일을 행하였으며 유다는 여호와의 사랑하시는 그 성결을 욕되게 하여 이방 신의 딸과 결혼하였으니	Judah hath dealt treacherously, and an abomination is committed in Israel and in Jerusalem; for Judah hath profaned the holiness of the Lord which he loved, and hath married the daughter of a strange god.	Judah has broken faith; an abomination has been committed in Israel and in Jerusalem. For Judah has profaned the LORD’s beloved sanctuary by marrying the daughter of a foreign god.
MAL	2	12	이 일을 행하는 사람에게 속한 자는 깨는 자나 응답하는 자는 물론이요 만군의 여호와께 제사를 드리는 자도 여호와께서 야곱의 장막 가운데서 끊어 버리시리라	The Lord will cut off the man that doeth this, the master and the scholar, out of the tabernacles of Jacob, and him that offereth an offering unto the Lord of hosts.	As for the man who does this, may the LORD cut off from the tents of Jacob everyone who is awake and aware—even if he brings an offering to the LORD of Hosts.
MAL	2	13	너희가 이런 일도 행하나니 곧 눈물과 울음과 탄식으로 여호와의 단을 가리우게 하도다 그러므로 여호와께서 다시는 너희의 헌물을 돌아보지도 아니하시며 그것을 너희 손에서 기꺼이 받지도 아니하시거늘	And this have ye done again, covering the altar of the Lord with tears, with weeping, and with crying out, insomuch that he regardeth not the offering any more, or receiveth it with good will at your hand.	And this is another thing you do: You cover the altar of the LORD with tears, with weeping and groaning, because He no longer regards your offerings or receives them gladly from your hands.
MAL	2	14	너희는 이르기를 어찜이니까 하는도다 이는 너와 너의 어려서 취한 아내 사이에 여호와께서 일찍이 증거하셨음을 인함이니라 그는 네 짝이요 너와 맹약한 아내로되 네가 그에게 궤사를 행하도다	Yet ye say, Wherefore? Because the Lord hath been witness between thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou hast dealt treacherously: yet is she thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant.	Yet you ask, “Why?” It is because the LORD has been a witness between you and the wife of your youth, against whom you have broken faith, though she is your companion and your wife by covenant.
MAL	2	15	여호와는 영이 유여하실지라도 오직 하나를 짓지 아니하셨느냐 어찌하여 하나만 지으셨느냐 이는 경건한 자손을 얻고자 하심이니라 그러므로 네 심령을 삼가 지켜 어려서 취한 아내에게 궤사를 행치 말지니라	And did not he make one? Yet had he the residue of the spirit. And wherefore one? That he might seek a godly seed. Therefore take heed to your spirit, and let none deal treacherously against the wife of his youth.	Has not the LORD made them one, having a portion of the Spirit? And why one? Because He seeks godly offspring. So guard yourselves in your spirit and do not break faith with the wife of your youth.
MAL	2	16	이스라엘의 하나님 여호와가 이르노니 나는 이혼하는 것과 학대로 옷을 가리우는 자를 미워하노라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라 그러므로 너희 심령을 삼가 지켜 궤사를 행치 말지니라	For the Lord, the God of Israel, saith that he hateth putting away: for one covereth violence with his garment, saith the Lord of hosts: therefore take heed to your spirit, that ye deal not treacherously.	“For I hate divorce,” says the LORD, the God of Israel. “He who divorces his wife covers his garment with violence,” says the LORD of Hosts. So guard yourselves in your spirit and do not break faith.
MAL	2	17	너희가 말로 여호와를 괴로우시게 하고도 이르기를 우리가 어떻게 여호와를 괴로우시게 하였나 하는도다 이는 너희가 말하기를 모든 행악하는 자는 여호와의 눈에 선히 보이며 그에게 기쁨이 된다 하며 또 말하기를 공의의 하나님이 어디 계시냐 함이니라	Ye have wearied the Lord with your words. Yet ye say, Wherein have we wearied him? When ye say, Every one that doeth evil is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delighteth in them; or, Where is the God of judgment?	You have wearied the LORD with your words; yet you ask, “How have we wearied Him?” By saying, “All who do evil are good in the sight of the LORD, and in them He delights,” or, “Where is the God of justice?”
MAL	3	1	만군의 여호와가 이르노라 보라 내가 내 사자를 보내리니 그가 내 앞에서 길을 예비할 것이요 또 너희의 구하는 바 주가 홀연히 그 전에 임하리니 곧 너희의 사모하는 바 언약의 사자가 임할 것이라	Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, he shall come, saith the Lord of hosts.	“Behold, I will send My messenger, who will prepare the way before Me. Then the Lord whom you seek will suddenly come to His temple—the Messenger of the covenant, in whom you delight—see, He is coming,” says the LORD of Hosts.
MAL	3	2	그의 임하는 날을 누가 능히 당하며 그의 나타나는 때에 누가 능히 서리요 그는 금을 연단하는 자의 불과 표백하는 자의 잿물과 같을 것이라	But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner’s fire, and like fullers’ soap:	But who can endure the day of His coming? And who can stand when He appears? For He will be like a refiner’s fire, like a launderer’s soap.
MAL	3	3	그가 은을 연단하여 깨끗케 하는 자 같이 앉아서 레위 자손을 깨끗케 하되 금, 은 같이 그들을 연단하리니 그들이 의로운 제물을 나 여호와께 드릴 것이라	And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness.	And He will sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; He will purify the sons of Levi and refine them like gold and silver. Then they will present offerings to the LORD in righteousness.
MAL	3	4	그 때에 유다와 예루살렘의 헌물이 옛날과 고대와 같이 나 여호와께 기쁨이 되려니와	Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years.	Then the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem will please the LORD, as in days of old and years gone by.
MAL	3	5	내가 심판하러 너희에게 임할 것이라 술수하는 자에게와 간음하는 자에게와 거짓 맹세하는 자에게와 품꾼의 삯에 대하여 억울케 하며 과부와 고아를 압제하며 나그네를 억울케 하며 나를 경외치 아니하는 자들에게 속히 증거하리라 만군의 여호와가 말하였느니라	And I will come near to you to judgment; and I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and against false swearers, and against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow, and the fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from his right, and fear not me, saith the Lord of hosts.	“Then I will draw near to you for judgment. And I will be a swift witness against sorcerers and adulterers and perjurers, against oppressors of the widowed and fatherless, and against those who defraud laborers of their wages and deny justice to the foreigner but do not fear Me,” says the LORD of Hosts.
MAL	3	6	나 여호와는 변역지 아니하나니 그러므로 야곱의 자손들아 너희가 소멸되지 아니하느니라	For I am the Lord, I change not; therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed.	“Because I, the LORD, do not change, you descendants of Jacob have not been destroyed.
MAL	3	7	만군의 여호와가 이르노라 너희 열조의 날로부터 너희가 나의 규례를 떠나 지키지 아니하였도다 그런즉 내게로 돌아오라 그리하면 나도 너희에게로 돌아가리라 하였더니 너희가 이르기를 우리가 어떻게 하여야 돌아가리이까 하도다	Even from the days of your fathers ye are gone away from mine ordinances, and have not kept them. Return unto me, and I will return unto you, saith the Lord of hosts. But ye said, Wherein shall we return?	Yet from the days of your fathers, you have turned away from My statutes and have not kept them. Return to Me, and I will return to you,” says the LORD of Hosts. “But you ask, ‘How can we return?’
MAL	3	8	사람이 어찌 하나님의 것을 도적질하겠느냐 그러나 너희는 나의 것을 도적질하고도 말하기를 우리가 어떻게 주의 것을 도적질하였나이까 하도다 이는 곧 십일조와 헌물이라	Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings.	Will a man rob God? Yet you are robbing Me! But you ask, ‘How do we rob You?’ In tithes and offerings.
MAL	3	9	너희 곧 온 나라가 나의 것을 도적질하였으므로 너희가 저주를 받았느니라	Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole nation.	You are cursed with a curse, yet you—the whole nation—are still robbing Me.
MAL	3	10	만군의 여호와가 이르노라 너희의 온전한 십일조를 창고에 들여 나의 집에 양식이 있게 하고 그것으로 나를 시험하여 내가 하늘 문을 열고 너희에게 복을 쌓을 곳이 없도록 붓지 아니하나 보라	Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it.	Bring the full tithe into the storehouse, so that there may be food in My house. Test Me in this,” says the LORD of Hosts. “See if I will not open the windows of heaven and pour out for you blessing without measure.
MAL	3	11	만군의 여호와가 이르노라 내가 너희를 위하여 황충을 금하여 너희 토지 소산을 멸하지 않게 하며 너희 밭에 포도나무의 과실로 기한 전에 떨어지지 않게 하리니	And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground; neither shall your vine cast her fruit before the time in the field, saith the Lord of hosts.	I will rebuke the devourer for you, so that it will not destroy the fruits of your land, and the vine in your field will not fail to produce fruit,” says the LORD of Hosts.
MAL	3	12	너희 땅이 아름다와지므로 열방이 너희를 복되다 하리라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라	And all nations shall call you blessed: for ye shall be a delightsome land, saith the Lord of hosts.	“Then all the nations will call you blessed, for you will be a land of delight,” says the LORD of Hosts.
MAL	3	13	여호와가 이르노라 너희가 완악한 말로 나를 대적하고도 이르기를 우리가 무슨 말로 주를 대적하였나이까 하는도다	Your words have been stout against me, saith the Lord. Yet ye say, What have we spoken so much against thee?	“Your words against Me have been harsh,” says the LORD. “Yet you ask, ‘What have we spoken against You?’
MAL	3	14	이는 너희가 말하기를 하나님을 섬기는 것이 헛되니 만군의 여호와 앞에 그 명령을 지키며 슬프게 행하는 것이 무엇이 유익하리요	Ye have said, It is vain to serve God: and what profit is it that we have kept his ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of hosts?	You have said, ‘It is futile to serve God. What have we gained by keeping His requirements and walking mournfully before the LORD of Hosts?
MAL	3	15	지금 우리는 교만한 자가 복되다 하며 악을 행하는 자가 창성하며 하나님을 시험하는 자가 화를 면한다 하노라 함이니라	And now we call the proud happy; yea, they that work wickedness are set up; yea, they that tempt God are even delivered.	So now we call the arrogant blessed. Not only do evildoers prosper, they even test God and escape.’”
MAL	3	16	그 때에 여호와를 경외하는 자들이 피차에 말하매 여호와께서 그것을 분명히 들으시고 여호와를 경외하는 자와 그 이름을 존중히 생각하는 자를 위하여 여호와 앞에 있는 기념책에 기록하셨느니라	Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another: and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name.	At that time those who feared the LORD spoke with one another, and the LORD listened and heard them. So a scroll of remembrance was written before Him regarding those who feared the LORD and honored His name.
MAL	3	17	만군의 여호와가 이르노라 내가 나의 정한 날에 그들로 나의 특별한 소유를 삼을 것이요 또 사람이 자기를 섬기는 아들을 아낌 같이 내가 그들을 아끼리니	And they shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels; and I will spare them, as a man spareth his own son that serveth him.	“They will be Mine,” says the LORD of Hosts, “on the day when I prepare My treasured possession. And I will spare them as a man spares his own son who serves him.
MAL	3	18	그 때에 너희가 돌아와서 의인과 악인이며 하나님을 섬기는 자와 섬기지 아니하는 자를 분별하리라	Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and him that serveth him not.	So you will again distinguish between the righteous and the wicked, between those who serve God and those who do not.”
MAL	4	1	만군의 여호와가 이르노라 보라 극렬한 풀무불 같은 날이 이르리니 교만한 자와 악을 행하는 자는 다 초개 같을 것이라 그 이르는 날이 그들을 살라 그 뿌리와 가지를 남기지 아니할 것이로되	For, behold, the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.	“For behold, the day is coming, burning like a furnace, when all the arrogant and every evildoer will be stubble; the day is coming when I will set them ablaze,” says the LORD of Hosts. “Not a root or branch will be left to them.”
MAL	4	2	내 이름을 경외하는 너희에게는 의로운 해가 떠올라서 치료하는 광선을 발하리니 너희가 나가서 외양간에서 나온 송아지 같이 뛰리라	But unto you that fear my name shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings; and ye shall go forth, and grow up as calves of the stall.	“But for you who fear My name, the sun of righteousness will rise with healing in its wings, and you will go out and leap like calves from the stall.
MAL	4	3	또 너희가 악인을 밟을 것이니 그들이 나의 정한 날에 너희 발바닥 밑에 재와 같으리라 만군의 여호와의 말이니라	And ye shall tread down the wicked; for they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet in the day that I shall do this, saith the Lord of hosts.	Then you will trample the wicked, for they will be ashes under the soles of your feet on the day I am preparing,” says the LORD of Hosts.
MAL	4	4	너희는 내가 호렙에서 온 이스라엘을 위하여 내 종 모세에게 명한 법 곧 율례와 법도를 기억하라	Remember ye the law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, with the statutes and judgments.	“Remember the law of My servant Moses, the statutes and ordinances I commanded him for all Israel at Horeb.
MAL	4	5	보라 여호와의 크고 두려운 날이 이르기 전에 내가 선지 엘리야를 너희에게 보내리니	Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord:	Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and awesome Day of the LORD.
MAL	4	6	그가 아비의 마음을 자녀에게로 돌이키게 하고 자녀들의 마음을 그들의 아비에게로 돌이키게 하리라 돌이키지 아니하면 두렵건대 내가 와서 저주로 그 땅을 칠까 하노라 하시니라	And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse.	And he will turn the hearts of the fathers to their children, and the hearts of the children to their fathers. Otherwise, I will come and strike the land with a curse.”
MAT	1	1	아브라함과 다윗의 자손 예수 그리스도의 세계라	The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham.	This is the record of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham:
MAT	1	2	아브라함이 이삭을 낳고 이삭은 야곱을 낳고 야곱은 유다와 그의 형제를 낳고	Abraham begat Isaac; and Isaac begat Jacob; and Jacob begat Judas and his brethren;	Abraham was the father of Isaac, Isaac the father of Jacob, and Jacob the father of Judah and his brothers.
MAT	1	3	유다는 다말에게서 베레스와 세라를 낳고 베레스는 헤스론을 낳고 헤스론은 람을 낳고	And Judas begat Phares and Zara of Thamar; and Phares begat Esrom; and Esrom begat Aram;	Judah was the father of Perez and Zerah by Tamar, Perez the father of Hezron, and Hezron the father of Ram.
MAT	1	4	람은 아미나답을 낳고 아미나답은 나손을 낳고 나손은 살몬을 낳고	And Aram begat Aminadab; and Aminadab begat Naasson; and Naasson begat Salmon;	Ram was the father of Amminadab, Amminadab the father of Nahshon, and Nahshon the father of Salmon.
MAT	1	5	살몬은 라합에게서 보아스를 낳고 보아스는 룻에게서 오벳을 낳고 오벳은 이새를 낳고	And Salmon begat Booz of Rachab; and Booz begat Obed of Ruth; and Obed begat Jesse;	Salmon was the father of Boaz by Rahab, Boaz the father of Obed by Ruth, Obed the father of Jesse,
MAT	1	6	이새는 다윗 왕을 낳으니라 다윗은 우리야의 아내에게서 솔로몬을 낳고	And Jesse begat David the king; and David the king begat Solomon of her that had been the wife of Urias;	and Jesse the father of David the king. Next: David was the father of Solomon by Uriah’s wife,
MAT	1	7	솔로몬은 르호보암을 낳고 르호보암은 아비야를 낳고 아비야는 아사를 낳고	And Solomon begat Roboam; and Roboam begat Abia; and Abia begat Asa;	Solomon the father of Rehoboam, Rehoboam the father of Abijah, and Abijah the father of Asa.
MAT	1	8	아사는 여호사밧을 낳고 여호사밧은 요람을 낳고 요람은 웃시야를 낳고	And Asa begat Josaphat; and Josaphat begat Joram; and Joram begat Ozias;	Asa was the father of Jehoshaphat, Jehoshaphat the father of Joram, and Joram the father of Uzziah.
MAT	1	9	웃시야는 요담을 낳고 요담은 아하스를 낳고 아하스는 히스기야를 낳고	And Ozias begat Joatham; and Joatham begat Achaz; and Achaz begat Ezekias;	Uzziah was the father of Jotham, Jotham the father of Ahaz, and Ahaz the father of Hezekiah.
MAT	1	10	히스기야는 므낫세를 낳고 므낫세는 아몬을 낳고 아몬은 요시야를 낳고	And Ezekias begat Manasses; and Manasses begat Amon; and Amon begat Josias;	Hezekiah was the father of Manasseh, Manasseh the father of Amon, Amon the father of Josiah,
MAT	1	11	바벨론으로 이거할 때에 요시야는 여고냐와 그의 형제를 낳으니라	And Josias begat Jechonias and his brethren, about the time they were carried away to Babylon:	and Josiah the father of Jeconiah and his brothers at the time of the exile to Babylon.
MAT	1	12	바벨론으로 이거한 후에 여고냐는 스알디엘을 낳고 스알디엘은 스룹바벨을 낳고	And after they were brought to Babylon, Jechonias begat Salathiel; and Salathiel begat Zorobabel;	After the exile to Babylon: Jeconiah was the father of Shealtiel, Shealtiel the father of Zerubbabel,
MAT	1	13	스룹바벨은 아비훗을 낳고 아비훗은 엘리아김을 낳고 엘리아김은 아소르를 낳고	And Zorobabel begat Abiud; and Abiud begat Eliakim; and Eliakim begat Azor;	Zerubbabel the father of Abiud, Abiud the father of Eliakim, and Eliakim the father of Azor.
MAT	1	14	아소르는 사독을 낳고 사독은 아킴를 낳고 아킴은 엘리웃을 낳고	And Azor begat Sadoc; and Sadoc begat Achim; and Achim begat Eliud;	Azor was the father of Zadok, Zadok the father of Achim, and Achim the father of Eliud.
MAT	1	15	엘리웃은 엘르아살을 낳고 엘르아살은 맛단을 낳고 맛단은 야곱을 낳고	And Eliud begat Eleazar; and Eleazar begat Matthan; and Matthan begat Jacob;	Eliud was the father of Eleazar, Eleazar the father of Matthan, Matthan the father of Jacob,
MAT	1	16	야곱은 마리아의 남편 요셉을 낳았으니 마리아에게서 그리스도라 칭하는 예수가 나시니라	And Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ.	and Jacob the father of Joseph, the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ.
MAT	1	17	그런즉 모든 대수가 아브라함부터 다윗까지 열네 대요 다윗부터 바벨론으로 이거할 때까지 열네 대요 바벨론으로 이거한 후부터 그리스도까지 열네 대러라	So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations; and from David until the carrying away into Babylon are fourteen generations; and from the carrying away into Babylon unto Christ are fourteen generations.	In all, then, there were fourteen generations from Abraham to David, fourteen from David to the exile to Babylon, and fourteen from the exile to the Christ.
MAT	1	18	예수 그리스도의 나심은 이러하니라 그 모친 마리아가 요셉과 정혼하고 동거하기 전에 성령으로 잉태된 것이 나타났더니	Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost.	This is how the birth of Jesus Christ came about: His mother Mary was pledged in marriage to Joseph, but before they came together, she was found to be with child through the Holy Spirit.
MAT	1	19	그 남편 요셉은 의로운 사람이라 저를 드러내지 아니하고 가만히 끊고자 하여	Then Joseph her husband, being a just man, and not willing to make her a publick example, was minded to put her away privily.	Because Joseph her husband was a righteous man and was unwilling to disgrace her publicly, he resolved to divorce her quietly.
MAT	1	20	이 일을 생각할 때에 주의 사자가 현몽하여 가로되 다윗의 자손 요셉아 네 아내 마리아 데려오기를 무서워 말라 저에게 잉태된 자는 성령으로 된 것이라	But while he thought on these things, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife: for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost.	But after he had pondered these things, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream and said, “Joseph, son of David, do not be afraid to embrace Mary as your wife, for the One conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit.
MAT	1	21	아들을 낳으리니 이름을 예수라 하라 이는 그가 자기 백성을 저희 죄에서 구원할 자이심이라 하니라	And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name JESUS: for he shall save his people from their sins.	She will give birth to a Son, and you are to give Him the name Jesus, because He will save His people from their sins.”
MAT	1	22	이 모든 일의 된 것은 주께서 선지자로 하신 말씀을 이루려 하심이니 가라사대	Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying,	All this took place to fulfill what the Lord had said through the prophet:
MAT	1	23	보라 처녀가 잉태하여 아들을 낳을 것이요 그 이름은 임마누엘이라 하리라 하셨으니 이를 번역한즉 하나님이 우리와 함께 계시다 함이라	Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us.	“Behold, the virgin will be with child and will give birth to a son, and they will call Him Immanuel” (which means, “God with us”).
MAT	1	24	요셉이 잠을 깨어 일어나서 주의 사자의 분부대로 행하여 그 아내를 데려왔으나	Then Joseph being raised from sleep did as the angel of the Lord had bidden him, and took unto him his wife:	When Joseph woke up, he did as the angel of the Lord had commanded him, and embraced Mary as his wife.
MAT	1	25	아들을 낳기까지 동침치 아니하더니 낳으매 이름을 예수라 하니라	And knew her not till she had brought forth her firstborn son: and he called his name JESUS.	But he had no union with her until she gave birth to a Son. And he gave Him the name Jesus.
MAT	2	1	헤롯 왕 때에 예수께서 유대 베들레헴에서 나시매 동방으로부터 박사들이 예루살렘에 이르러 말하되	Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the king, behold, there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem,	After Jesus was born in Bethlehem in Judea, during the time of King Herod, Magi from the east arrived in Jerusalem,
MAT	2	2	유대인의 왕으로 나신 이가 어디 계시뇨 우리가 동방에서 그의 별을 보고 그에게 경배하러 왔노라 하니	Saying, Where is he that is born King of the Jews? for we have seen his star in the east, and are come to worship him.	asking, “Where is the One who has been born King of the Jews? We saw His star in the east and have come to worship Him.”
MAT	2	3	헤롯 왕과 온 예루살렘이 듣고 소동한지라	When Herod the king had heard these things, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him.	When King Herod heard this, he was disturbed, and all Jerusalem with him.
MAT	2	4	왕이 모든 대제사장과 백성의 서기관들을 모아 그리스도가 어디서 나겠느뇨 물으니	And when he had gathered all the chief priests and scribes of the people together, he demanded of them where Christ should be born.	And when he had assembled all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he asked them where the Christ was to be born.
MAT	2	5	가로되 유대 베들레헴이오니 이는 선지자로 이렇게 기록된 바	And they said unto him, In Bethlehem of Judea: for thus it is written by the prophet,	“In Bethlehem in Judea,” they replied, “for this is what the prophet has written:
MAT	2	6	또 유대 땅 베들레헴아 너는 유대 고을 중에 가장 작지 아니하도다 네게서 한 다스리는 자가 나와서 내 백성 이스라엘의 목자가 되리라 하였음이니이다	And thou Bethlehem, in the land of Juda, art not the least among the princes of Juda: for out of thee shall come a Governor, that shall rule my people Israel.	‘But you, Bethlehem, in the land of Judah, are by no means least among the rulers of Judah, for out of you will come a ruler who will be the shepherd of My people Israel.’”
MAT	2	7	이에 헤롯이 가만히 박사들을 불러 별이 나타난 때를 자세히 묻고	Then Herod, when he had privily called the wise men, enquired of them diligently what time the star appeared.	Then Herod called the Magi secretly and learned from them the exact time the star had appeared.
MAT	2	8	베들레헴으로 보내며 이르되 가서 아기에 대하여 자세히 알아보고 찾거든 내게 고하여 나도 가서 그에게 경배하게 하라	And he sent them to Bethlehem, and said, Go and search diligently for the young child; and when ye have found him, bring me word again, that I may come and worship him also.	And sending them to Bethlehem, he said: “Go and search carefully for the Child, and when you find Him, report to me, so that I too may go and worship Him.”
MAT	2	9	박사들이 왕의 말을 듣고 갈새 동방에서 보던 그 별이 문득 앞서 인도하여 가다가 아기 있는 곳 위에 머물러 섰는지라	When they had heard the king, they departed; and, lo, the star, which they saw in the east, went before them, till it came and stood over where the young child was.	After they had heard the king, they went on their way, and the star they had seen in the east went ahead of them until it stood over the place where the Child was.
MAT	2	10	저희가 별을 보고 가장 크게 기뻐하고 기뻐하더라	When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy.	When they saw the star, they rejoiced with great delight.
MAT	2	11	집에 들어가 아기와 그 모친 마리아의 함께 있는 것을 보고 엎드려 아기께 경배하고 보배합을 열어 황금과 유향과 몰약을 예물로 드리니라	And when they were come into the house, they saw the young child with Mary his mother, and fell down, and worshipped him: and when they had opened their treasures, they presented unto him gifts; gold, and frankincense, and myrrh.	On coming to the house, they saw the Child with His mother Mary, and they fell down and worshiped Him. Then they opened their treasures and presented Him with gifts of gold and frankincense and myrrh.
MAT	2	12	꿈에 헤롯에게로 돌아가지 말라 지시하심을 받아 다른 길로 고국에 돌아가니라	And being warned of God in a dream that they should not return to Herod, they departed into their own country another way.	And having been warned in a dream not to return to Herod, they withdrew to their country by another route.
MAT	2	13	저희가 떠난 후에 주의 사자가 요셉에게 현몽하여 가로되 헤롯이 아기를 찾아 죽이려 하니 일어나 아기와 그의 모친을 데리고 애굽으로 피하여 내가 네게 이르기까지 거기 있으라 하시니	And when they were departed, behold, the angel of the Lord appeareth to Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be thou there until I bring thee word: for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him.	When the Magi had gone, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream. “Get up!” he said. “Take the Child and His mother and flee to Egypt. Stay there until I tell you, for Herod is going to search for the Child to kill Him.”
MAT	2	14	요셉이 일어나서 밤에 아기와 그의 모친을 데리고 애굽으로 떠나가	When he arose, he took the young child and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt:	So he got up, took the Child and His mother by night, and withdrew to Egypt,
MAT	2	15	헤롯이 죽기까지 거기 있었으니 이는 주께서 선지자로 말씀하신 바 애굽에서 내 아들을 불렀다 함을 이루려 하심이니라	And was there until the death of Herod: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called my son.	where he stayed until the death of Herod. This fulfilled what the Lord had spoken through the prophet: “Out of Egypt I called My Son.”
MAT	2	16	이에 헤롯이 박사들에게 속은 줄을 알고 심히 노하여 사람을 보내어 베들레헴과 그 모든 지경 안에 있는 사내아이를 박사들에게 자세히 알아 본 그 때를 표준하여 두 살부터 그 아래로 다 죽이니	Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, was exceeding wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old and under, according to the time which he had diligently enquired of the wise men.	When Herod saw that he had been outwitted by the Magi, he was filled with rage. Sending orders, he put to death all the boys in Bethlehem and its vicinity who were two years old and under, according to the time he had learned from the Magi.
MAT	2	17	이에 선지자 예레미야로 말씀하신 바	Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying,	Then what was spoken through the prophet Jeremiah was fulfilled:
MAT	2	18	라마에서 슬퍼하며 크게 통곡하는 소리가 들리니 라헬이 그 자식을 위하여 애곡하는 것이라 그가 자식이 없으므로 위로 받기를 거절하였도다 함이 이루어졌느니라	In Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation, and weeping, and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted, because they are not.	“A voice is heard in Ramah, weeping and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children, and refusing to be comforted, because they are no more.”
MAT	2	19	헤롯이 죽은 후에 주의 사자가 애굽에서 요셉에게 현몽하여 가로되	But when Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the Lord appeareth in a dream to Joseph in Egypt,	After Herod died, an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt.
MAT	2	20	일어나 아기와 그 모친을 데리고 이스라엘 땅으로 가라 아기의 목숨을 찾던 자들이 죽었느니라 하시니	Saying, Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel: for they are dead which sought the young child’s life.	“Get up!” he said. “Take the Child and His mother and go to the land of Israel, for those seeking the Child’s life are now dead.”
MAT	2	21	요셉이 일어나 아기와 그 모친을 데리고 이스라엘 땅으로 들어오니라	And he arose, and took the young child and his mother, and came into the land of Israel.	So Joseph got up, took the Child and His mother, and went to the land of Israel.
MAT	2	22	그러나 아켈라오가 그 부친 헤롯을 이어 유대의 임금 됨을 듣고 거기로 가기를 무서워하더니 꿈에 지시하심을 받아 갈릴리 지방으로 떠나가	But when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Judea in the room of his father Herod, he was afraid to go thither: notwithstanding, being warned of God in a dream, he turned aside into the parts of Galilee:	But when he learned that Archelaus was reigning in Judea in place of his father Herod, he was afraid to go there. And having been warned in a dream, he withdrew to the district of Galilee,
MAT	2	23	나사렛이란 동네에 와서 사니 이는 선지자로 하신 말씀에 나사렛 사람이라 칭하리라 하심을 이루려 함이러라	And he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets, He shall be called a Nazarene.	and he went and lived in a town called Nazareth. So was fulfilled what was spoken through the prophets: “He will be called a Nazarene.”
MAT	3	1	그 때에 침례 요한이 이르러 유대 광야에서 전파하여 가로되	In those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of Judea,	In those days John the Baptist came, preaching in the wilderness of Judea
MAT	3	2	회개하라 천국이 가까웠느니라 하였으니	And saying, Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.	and saying, “Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is near.”
MAT	3	3	저는 선지자 이사야로 말씀하신 자라 일렀으되 광야에 외치는 자의 소리가 있어 가로되 너희는 주의 길을 예비하라 그의 첩경을 평탄케 하라 하였느니라	For this is he that was spoken of by the prophet Esaias, saying, The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.	This is he who was spoken of through the prophet Isaiah: “A voice of one calling in the wilderness, ‘Prepare the way for the Lord, make straight paths for Him.’”
MAT	3	4	이 요한은 약대 털옷을 입고 허리에 가죽 띠를 띠고 음식은 메뚜기와 석청이었더라	And the same John had his raiment of camel’s hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins; and his meat was locusts and wild honey.	John wore a garment of camel’s hair, with a leather belt around his waist. His food was locusts and wild honey.
MAT	3	5	이 때에 예루살렘과 온 유대와 요단 강 사방에서 다 그에게 나아와	Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan,	People went out to him from Jerusalem and all Judea and the whole region around the Jordan.
MAT	3	6	자기들의 죄를 자복하고 요단 강에서 그에게 침례를 받더니	And were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins.	Confessing their sins, they were baptized by him in the Jordan River.
MAT	3	7	요한이 많은 바리새인과 사두개인이 침례 베푸는 데 오는 것을 보고 이르되 독사의 자식들아 누가 너희를 가르쳐 임박한 진노를 피하라 하더냐	But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees come to his baptism, he said unto them, O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come?	But when John saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his place of baptism, he said to them, “You brood of vipers, who warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
MAT	3	8	그러므로 회개에 합당한 열매를 맺고	Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance:	Produce fruit, then, in keeping with repentance.
MAT	3	9	속으로 아브라함이 우리 조상이라고 생각지 말라 내가 너희에게 이르노니 하나님이 능히 이 돌들로도 아브라함의 자손이 되게 하시리라	And think not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father: for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham.	And do not presume to say to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father.’ For I tell you that out of these stones God can raise up children for Abraham.
MAT	3	10	이미 도끼가 나무 뿌리에 놓였으니 좋은 열매 맺지 아니하는 나무마다 찍혀 불에 던지우리라	And now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees: therefore every tree which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire.	The axe lies ready at the root of the trees, and every tree that does not produce good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire.
MAT	3	11	나는 너희로 회개케 하기 위하여 물로 침례를 주거니와 내 뒤에 오시는 이는 나보다 능력이 많으시니 나는 그의 신을 들기도 감당치 못하겠노라 그는 성령과 불로 너희에게 침례를 주실 것이요	I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance: but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire:	I baptize you with water for repentance, but after me will come One more powerful than I, whose sandals I am not worthy to carry. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with fire.
MAT	3	12	손에 키를 들고 자기의 타작 마당을 정하게 하사 알곡은 모아 곡간에 들이고 쭉정이는 꺼지지 않는 불에 태우시리라	Whose fan is in his hand, and he will throughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat into the garner; but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.	His winnowing fork is in His hand to clear His threshing floor and to gather His wheat into the barn; but He will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.”
MAT	3	13	이 때에 예수께서 갈릴리로서 요단강에 이르러 요한에게 침례를 받으려 하신대	Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John, to be baptized of him.	At that time Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan to be baptized by John.
MAT	3	14	요한이 말려 가로되 내가 당신에게 침례를 받아야 할 터인데 당신이 내게로 오시나이까	But John forbad him, saying, I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to me?	But John tried to prevent Him, saying, “I need to be baptized by You, and do You come to me?”
MAT	3	15	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 이제 허락하라 우리가 이와 같이 하여 모든 의를 이루는 것이 합당하니라 하신대 이에 요한이 허락하는지라	And Jesus answering said unto him, Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness. Then he suffered him.	“Let it be so now,” Jesus replied. “It is fitting for us to fulfill all righteousness in this way.” Then John permitted Him.
MAT	3	16	예수께서 침례를 받으시고 곧 물에서 올라오실새 하늘이 열리고 하나님의 성령이 비둘기 같이 내려 자기 위에 임하심을 보시더니	And Jesus, when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the water: and, lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting upon him:	As soon as Jesus was baptized, He went up out of the water. Suddenly the heavens were opened, and He saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and resting on Him.
MAT	3	17	하늘로서 소리가 있어 말씀하시되 이는 내 사랑하는 아들이요 내 기뻐하는 자라 하시니라	And lo a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.	And a voice from heaven said, “This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased!”
MAT	4	1	그 때에 예수께서 성령에게 이끌리어 마귀에게 시험을 받으러 광야로 가사	Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil.	Then Jesus was led by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil.
MAT	4	2	사십 일을 밤낮으로 금식하신 후에 주리신지라	And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward an hungred.	After fasting forty days and forty nights, He was hungry.
MAT	4	3	시험하는 자가 예수께 나아가서 가로되 네가 만일 하나님의 아들이어든 명하여 이 돌들이 떡덩이가 되게 하라	And when the tempter came to him, he said, If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread.	The tempter came to Him and said, “If You are the Son of God, tell these stones to become bread.”
MAT	4	4	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 기록되었으되 사람이 떡으로만 살 것이 아니요 하나님의 입으로 나오는 모든 말씀으로 살 것이라 하였느니라 하시니	But he answered and said, It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.	But Jesus answered, “It is written: ‘Man shall not live on bread alone, but on every word that comes from the mouth of God.’”
MAT	4	5	이에 마귀가 예수를 거룩한 성으로 데려다가 성전 꼭대기에 세우고	Then the devil taketh him up into the holy city, and setteth him on a pinnacle of the temple,	Then the devil took Him to the holy city and set Him on the pinnacle of the temple.
MAT	4	6	가로되 네가 만일 하나님의 아들이어든 뛰어내리라 기록하였으되 저가 너를 위하여 그 사자들을 명하시리니 저희가 손으로 너를 받들어 발이 돌에 부딪히지 않게 하리로다 하였느니라	And saith unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down: for it is written, He shall give his angels charge concerning thee: and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone.	“If You are the Son of God,” he said, “throw Yourself down. For it is written: ‘He will command His angels concerning You, and they will lift You up in their hands, so that You will not strike Your foot against a stone.’”
MAT	4	7	예수께서 이르시되 또 기록되었으되 주 너의 하나님을 시험치 말라 하였느니라 하신대	Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.	Jesus replied, “It is also written: ‘Do not put the Lord your God to the test.’”
MAT	4	8	마귀가 또 그를 데리고 지극히 높은 산으로 가서 천하 만국과 그 영광을 보여	Again, the devil taketh him up into an exceeding high mountain, and sheweth him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them;	Again, the devil took Him to a very high mountain and showed Him all the kingdoms of the world and their glory.
MAT	4	9	가로되 만일 내게 엎드려 경배하면 이 모든 것을 네게 주리라	And saith unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me.	“All this I will give You,” he said, “if You will fall down and worship me.”
MAT	4	10	이에 예수께서 말씀하시되 사단아 물러가라 기록되었으되 주 너의 하나님께 경배하고 다만 그를 섬기라 하였느니라	Then saith Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.	“Away from Me, Satan!” Jesus declared. “For it is written: ‘Worship the Lord your God and serve Him only.’”
MAT	4	11	이에 마귀는 예수를 떠나고 천사들이 나아와서 수종드니라	Then the devil leaveth him, and, behold, angels came and ministered unto him.	Then the devil left Him, and angels came and ministered to Him.
MAT	4	12	예수께서 요한의 잡힘을 들으시고 갈릴리로 물러 가셨다가	Now when Jesus had heard that John was cast into prison, he departed into Galilee;	When Jesus heard that John had been imprisoned, He withdrew to Galilee.
MAT	4	13	나사렛을 떠나 스불론과 납달리 지경 해변에 있는 가버나움에 가서 사시니	And leaving Nazareth, he came and dwelt in Capernaum, which is upon the sea coast, in the borders of Zabulon and Nephthalim:	Leaving Nazareth, He went and lived in Capernaum, which is by the sea in the region of Zebulun and Naphtali,
MAT	4	14	이는 선지자 이사야로 하신 말씀을 이루려 하심이라 일렀으되	That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying,	to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet Isaiah:
MAT	4	15	스불론 땅과 납달리 땅과 요단 강 저편 해변 길과 이방의 갈릴리여	The land of Zabulon, and the land of Nephthalim, by the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles;	“Land of Zebulun and land of Naphtali, the Way of the Sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles—
MAT	4	16	흑암에 앉은 백성이 큰 빛을 보았고 사망의 땅과 그늘에 앉은 자들에게 빛이 비취었도다 하였느니라	The people which sat in darkness saw great light; and to them which sat in the region and shadow of death light is sprung up.	the people living in darkness have seen a great light; on those living in the land of the shadow of death, a light has dawned.”
MAT	4	17	이 때부터 예수께서 비로소 전파하여 가라사대 회개하라 천국이 가까웠느니라 하시더라	From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.	From that time on Jesus began to preach, “Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is near.”
MAT	4	18	갈릴리 해변에 다니시다가 두 형제 곧 베드로라 하는 시몬과 그 형제 안드레가 바다에 그물 던지는 것을 보시니 저희는 어부라	And Jesus, walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea: for they were fishers.	As Jesus was walking beside the Sea of Galilee, He saw two brothers, Simon called Peter and his brother Andrew. They were casting a net into the sea, for they were fishermen.
MAT	4	19	말씀하시되 나를 따라 오너라 내가 너희로 사람을 낚는 어부가 되게 하리라 하시니	And he saith unto them, Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men.	“Come, follow Me,” Jesus said, “and I will make you fishers of men.”
MAT	4	20	저희가 곧 그물을 버려 두고 예수를 좇으니라	And they straightway left their nets, and followed him.	And at once they left their nets and followed Him.
MAT	4	21	거기서 더 가시다가 다른 두 형제 곧 세베대의 아들 야고보와 그 형제 요한이 그 부친 세베대와 한가지로 배에서 그물 깁는 것을 보시고 부르시니	And going on from thence, he saw other two brethren, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in a ship with Zebedee their father, mending their nets; and he called them.	Going on from there, He saw two other brothers, James son of Zebedee and his brother John. They were in a boat with their father Zebedee, mending their nets. Jesus called them,
MAT	4	22	저희가 곧 배와 부친을 버려두고 예수를 좇으니라	And they immediately left the ship and their father, and followed him.	and immediately they left the boat and their father and followed Him.
MAT	4	23	예수께서 온 갈릴리에 두루 다니사 저희 회당에서 가르치시며 천국 복음을 전파하시며 백성 중에 모든 병과 모든 약한 것을 고치시니	And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing all manner of sickness and all manner of disease among the people.	Jesus went throughout Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every disease and sickness among the people.
MAT	4	24	그의 소문이 온 수리아에 퍼진지라 사람들이 모든 앓는 자 곧 각색 병과 고통에 걸린 자, 귀신 들린 자, 간질하는 자, 중풍병자들을 데려오니 저희를 고치시더라	And his fame went throughout all Syria: and they brought unto him all sick people that were taken with divers diseases and torments, and those which were possessed with devils, and those which were lunatick, and those that had the palsy; and he healed them.	News about Him spread all over Syria, and people brought to Him all who were ill with various diseases, those suffering acute pain, the demon-possessed, those having seizures, and the paralyzed—and He healed them.
MAT	4	25	갈릴리와 데가볼리와 예루살렘과 유대와 요단 강 건너 편에서 허다한 무리가 좇으니라	And there followed him great multitudes of people from Galilee, and from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judea, and from beyond Jordan.	The large crowds that followed Him came from Galilee, the Decapolis, Jerusalem, Judea, and beyond the Jordan.
MAT	5	1	예수께서 무리를 보시고 산에 올라가 앉으시니 제자들이 나아온지라	And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain: and when he was set, his disciples came unto him:	When Jesus saw the crowds, He went up on the mountain and sat down. His disciples came to Him,
MAT	5	2	입을 열어 가르쳐 가라사대	And he opened his mouth, and taught them, saying,	and He began to teach them, saying:
MAT	5	3	심령이 가난한 자는 복이 있나니 천국이 저희 것임이요	Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.	“Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
MAT	5	4	애통하는 자는 복이 있나니 저희가 위로를 받을 것임이요	Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted.	Blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted.
MAT	5	5	온유한 자는 복이 있나니 저희가 땅을 기업으로 받을 것임이요	Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.	Blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the earth.
MAT	5	6	의에 주리고 목마른 자는 복이 있나니 저희가 배부를 것임이요	Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled.	Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they will be filled.
MAT	5	7	긍휼히 여기는 자는 복이 있나니 저희가 긍휼히 여김을 받을 것임이요	Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy.	Blessed are the merciful, for they will be shown mercy.
MAT	5	8	마음이 청결한 자는 복이 있나니 저희가 하나님을 볼 것임이요	Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.	Blessed are the pure in heart, for they will see God.
MAT	5	9	화평케 하는 자는 복이 있나니 저희가 하나님의 아들이라 일컬음을 받을 것임이요	Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God.	Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called sons of God.
MAT	5	10	의를 위하여 핍박을 받은 자는 복이 있나니 천국이 저희 것임이라	Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.	Blessed are those who are persecuted because of righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
MAT	5	11	나를 인하여 너희를 욕하고 핍박하고 거짓으로 너희를 거스려 모든 악한 말을 할 때에는 너희에게 복이 있나니	Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake.	Blessed are you when people insult you, persecute you, and falsely say all kinds of evil against you because of Me.
MAT	5	12	기뻐하고 즐거워하라 하늘에서 너희의 상이 큼이라 너희 전에 있던 선지자들을 이같이 핍박하였느니라	Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you.	Rejoice and be glad, because great is your reward in heaven; for in the same way they persecuted the prophets before you.
MAT	5	13	너희는 세상의 소금이니 소금이 만일 그 맛을 잃으면 무엇으로 짜게 하리요 후에는 아무 쓸데 없어 다만 밖에 버리워 사람에게 밟힐 뿐이니라	Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have lost his savour, wherewith shall it be salted? it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men.	You are the salt of the earth. But if the salt loses its savor, how can it be made salty again? It is no longer good for anything, except to be thrown out and trampled by men.
MAT	5	14	너희는 세상의 빛이라 산 위에 있는 동네가 숨기우지 못할 것이요	Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on an hill cannot be hid.	You are the light of the world. A city on a hill cannot be hidden.
MAT	5	15	사람이 등불을 켜서 말 아래 두지 아니하고 등경 위에 두나니 이러므로 집안 모든 사람에게 비취느니라	Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house.	Neither do people light a lamp and put it under a basket. Instead, they set it on a stand, and it gives light to everyone in the house.
MAT	5	16	이같이 너희 빛을 사람 앞에 비취게 하여 저희로 너희 착한 행실을 보고 하늘에 계신 너희 아버지께 영광을 돌리게 하라	Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.	In the same way, let your light shine before men, that they may see your good deeds and glorify your Father in heaven.
MAT	5	17	내가 율법이나 선지자나 폐하러 온 줄로 생각지 말라 폐하러 온 것이 아니요 완전케 하려 함이로다	Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil.	Do not think that I have come to abolish the Law or the Prophets. I have not come to abolish them, but to fulfill them.
MAT	5	18	진실로 너희에게 이르노니 천지가 없어지기 전에는 율법의 일점 일획이라도 반드시 없어지지 아니하고 다 이루리라	For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled.	For I tell you truly, until heaven and earth pass away, not a single jot, not a stroke of a pen, will disappear from the Law until everything is accomplished.
MAT	5	19	그러므로 누구든지 이 계명 중에 지극히 작은 것 하나라도 버리고 또 그같이 사람을 가르치는 자는 천국에서 지극히 작다 일컬음을 받을 것이요 누구든지 이를 행하며 가르치는 자는 천국에서 크다 일컬음을 받으리라	Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.	So then, whoever breaks one of the least of these commandments and teaches others to do likewise will be called least in the kingdom of heaven; but whoever practices and teaches them will be called great in the kingdom of heaven.
MAT	5	20	내가 너희에게 이르노니 너희 의가 서기관과 바리새인보다 더 낫지 못하면 결단코 천국에 들어가지 못하리라	For I say unto you, That except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven.	For I tell you that unless your righteousness exceeds that of the scribes and Pharisees, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven.
MAT	5	21	옛 사람에게 말한 바 살인치 말라 누구든지 살인하면 심판을 받게 되리라 하였다는 것을 너희가 들었으나	Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment:	You have heard that it was said to the ancients, ‘Do not murder’ and ‘Anyone who murders will be subject to judgment.’
MAT	5	22	나는 너희에게 이르노니 형제에게 노하는 자마다 심판을 받게 되고 형제를 대하여 라가라 하는 자는 공회에 잡히게 되고 미련한 놈이라 하는 자는 지옥 불에 들어가게 되리라	But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council: but whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.	But I tell you that anyone who is angry with his brother will be subject to judgment. Again, anyone who says to his brother, ‘Raca,’ will be subject to the Sanhedrin. But anyone who says, ‘You fool!’ will be subject to the fire of hell.
MAT	5	23	그러므로 예물을 제단에 드리다가 거기서 네 형제에게 원망들을 만한 일이 있는 줄 생각나거든	Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee;	So if you are offering your gift at the altar and there remember that your brother has something against you,
MAT	5	24	예물을 제단 앞에 두고 먼저 가서 형제와 화목하고 그 후에 와서 예물을 드리라	Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.	leave your gift there before the altar. First go and be reconciled to your brother; then come and offer your gift.
MAT	5	25	너를 송사하는 자와 함께 길에 있을 때에 급히 사화하라 그 송사하는 자가 너를 재판관에게 내어주고 재판관이 관예에게 내어주어 옥에 가둘까 염려하라	Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him; lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison.	Reconcile quickly with your adversary, while you are still on the way to court. Otherwise, he may hand you over to the judge, and the judge may hand you over to the officer, and you may be thrown into prison.
MAT	5	26	진실로 네게 이르노니 네가 호리라도 남김이 없이 다 갚기 전에는 결단코 거기서 나오지 못하리라	Verily I say unto thee, Thou shalt by no means come out thence, till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing.	Truly I tell you, you will not get out until you have paid the last penny.
MAT	5	27	또 간음치 말라 하였다는 것을 너희가 들었으나	Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not commit adultery:	You have heard that it was said, ‘Do not commit adultery.’
MAT	5	28	나는 너희에게 이르노니 여자를 보고 음욕을 품는 자마다 마음에 이미 간음하였느니라	But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart.	But I tell you that anyone who looks at a woman to lust after her has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
MAT	5	29	만일 네 오른 눈이 너로 실족케 하거든 빼어 내버리라 네 백체 중 하나가 없어지고 온 몸이 지옥에 던지우지 않는 것이 유익하며	And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell.	If your right eye causes you to sin, gouge it out and throw it away. It is better for you to lose one part of your body than for your whole body to be thrown into hell.
MAT	5	30	또한 만일 네 오른손이 너로 실족케 하거든 찍어 내버리라 네 백체 중 하나가 없어지고 온 몸이 지옥에 던지우지 않는 것이 유익하니라	And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell.	And if your right hand causes you to sin, cut it off and throw it away. It is better for you to lose one part of your body than for your whole body to depart into hell.
MAT	5	31	또 일렀으되 누구든지 아내를 버리거든 이혼 증서를 줄 것이라 하였으나	It hath been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a writing of divorcement:	It has also been said, ‘Whoever divorces his wife must give her a certificate of divorce.’
MAT	5	32	나는 너희에게 이르노니 누구든지 음행한 연고 없이 아내를 버리면 이는 저로 간음하게 함이요 또 누구든지 버린 여자에게 장가드는 자도 간음함이니라	But I say unto you, That whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery: and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced committeth adultery.	But I tell you that anyone who divorces his wife, except for sexual immorality, brings adultery upon her. And he who marries a divorced woman commits adultery.
MAT	5	33	또 옛 사람에게 말한 바 헛 맹세를 하지 말고 네 맹세한 것을 주께 지키라 하였다는 것을 너희가 들었으나	Again, ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old time, Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine oaths:	Again, you have heard that it was said to the ancients, ‘Do not break your oath, but fulfill your vows to the Lord.’
MAT	5	34	나는 너희에게 이르노니 도무지 맹세하지 말찌니 하늘로도 말라 이는 하나님의 보좌임이요	But I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by heaven; for it is God’s throne:	But I tell you not to swear at all: either by heaven, for it is God’s throne;
MAT	5	35	땅으로도 말라 이는 하나님의 발등상임이요 예루살렘으로도 말라 이는 큰 임금의 성임이요	Nor by the earth; for it is his footstool: neither by Jerusalem; for it is the city of the great King.	or by the earth, for it is His footstool; or by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King.
MAT	5	36	네 머리로도 말라 이는 네가 한 터럭도 희고 검게 할 수 없음이라	Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst not make one hair white or black.	Nor should you swear by your head, for you cannot make a single hair white or black.
MAT	5	37	오직 너희 말은 옳다 옳다, 아니라 아니라 하라 이에서 지나는 것은 악으로 좇아 나느니라	But let your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay: for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil.	Simply let your ‘Yes’ be ‘Yes,’ and your ‘No,’ ‘No.’ Anything more comes from the evil one.
MAT	5	38	또 눈은 눈으로, 이는 이로 갚으라 하였다는 것을 너희가 들었으나	Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth:	You have heard that it was said, ‘Eye for eye and tooth for tooth.’
MAT	5	39	나는 너희에게 이르노니 악한 자를 대적지 말라 누구든지 네 오른편 뺨을 치거든 왼편도 돌려 대며	But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also.	But I tell you not to resist an evil person. If someone slaps you on your right cheek, turn to him the other also;
MAT	5	40	또 너를 송사하여 속옷을 가지고자 하는 자에게 겉옷까지도 가지게 하며	And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloke also.	if someone wants to sue you and take your tunic, let him have your cloak as well;
MAT	5	41	또 누구든지 너로 억지로 오 리를 가게 하거든 그 사람과 십 리를 동행하고	And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.	and if someone forces you to go one mile, go with him two miles.
MAT	5	42	네게 구하는 자에게 주며 네게 꾸고자 하는 자에게 거절하지 말라	Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would borrow of thee turn not thou away.	Give to the one who asks you, and do not turn away from the one who wants to borrow from you.
MAT	5	43	또 네 이웃을 사랑하고 네 원수를 미워하라 하였다는 것을 너희가 들었으나	Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy.	You have heard that it was said, ‘Love your neighbor’ and ‘Hate your enemy.’
MAT	5	44	나는 너희에게 이르노니 너희 원수를 사랑하며 너희를 핍박하는 자를 위하여 기도하라	But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you;	But I tell you, love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you,
MAT	5	45	이같이 한즉 하늘에 계신 너희 아버지의 아들이 되리니 이는 하나님이 그 해를 악인과 선인에게 비취게 하시며 비를 의로운 자와 불의한 자에게 내리우심이니라	That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.	that you may be sons of your Father in heaven. He causes His sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the righteous and the unrighteous.
MAT	5	46	너희가 너희를 사랑하는 자를 사랑하면 무슨 상이 있으리요 세리도 이같이 아니하느냐	For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even the publicans the same?	If you love those who love you, what reward will you get? Do not even tax collectors do the same?
MAT	5	47	또 너희가 너희 형제에게만 문안하면 남보다 더 하는 것이 무엇이냐 이방인들도 이같이 아니하느냐	And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more than others? do not even the publicans so?	And if you greet only your brothers, what are you doing more than others? Do not even Gentiles do the same?
MAT	5	48	그러므로 하늘에 계신 너희 아버지의 온전하심과 같이 너희도 온전하라	Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.	Be perfect, therefore, as your heavenly Father is perfect.
MAT	6	1	사람에게 보이려고 그들 앞에서 너희 의를 행치 않도록 주의하라 그렇지 아니하면 하늘에 계신 너희 아버지께 상을 얻지 못하느니라	Take heed that ye do not your alms before men, to be seen of them: otherwise ye have no reward of your Father which is in heaven.	“Be careful not to perform your righteous acts before men to be seen by them. If you do, you will have no reward from your Father in heaven.
MAT	6	2	그러므로 구제할 때에 외식하는 자가 사람에게 영광을 얻으려고 회당과 거리에서 하는 것 같이 너희 앞에 나팔을 불지 말라 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 저희는 자기 상을 이미 받았느니라	Therefore when thou doest thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have glory of men. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward.	So when you give to the needy, do not sound a trumpet before you, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and on the streets, to be honored by men. Truly I tell you, they already have their full reward.
MAT	6	3	너는 구제할 때에 오른손의 하는 것을 왼손이 모르게 하여	But when thou doest alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth:	But when you give to the needy, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing,
MAT	6	4	네 구제함이 은밀하게 하라 은밀한 중에 보시는 너의 아버지가 갚으시리라	That thine alms may be in secret: and thy Father which seeth in secret himself shall reward thee openly.	so that your giving may be in secret. And your Father, who sees what is done in secret, will reward you.
MAT	6	5	또 너희가 기도할 때에 외식하는 자와 같이 되지 말라 저희는 사람에게 보이려고 회당과 큰 거리 어귀에 서서 기도하기를 좋아하느니라 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 저희는 자기 상을 이미 받았느니라	And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are: for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward.	And when you pray, do not be like the hypocrites. For they love to pray standing in the synagogues and on the street corners to be seen by men. Truly I tell you, they already have their full reward.
MAT	6	6	너는 기도할 때에 네 골방에 들어가 문을 닫고 은밀한 중에 계신 네 아버지께 기도하라 은밀한 중에 보시는 네 아버지께서 갚으시리라	But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly.	But when you pray, go into your inner room, shut your door, and pray to your Father, who is unseen. And your Father, who sees what is done in secret, will reward you.
MAT	6	7	또 기도할 때에 이방인과 같이 중언부언하지 말라 저희는 말을 많이 하여야 들으실 줄 생각하느니라	But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do: for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.	And when you pray, do not babble on like pagans, for they think that by their many words they will be heard.
MAT	6	8	그러므로 저희를 본받지 말라 구하기 전에 너희에게 있어야 할 것을 하나님 너희 아버지께서 아시느니라	Be not ye therefore like unto them: for your Father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask him.	Do not be like them, for your Father knows what you need before you ask Him.
MAT	6	9	그러므로 너희는 이렇게 기도하라 하늘에 계신 우리 아버지여 이름이 거룩히 여김을 받으시오며	After this manner therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name.	So then, this is how you should pray: ‘Our Father in heaven, hallowed be Your name.
MAT	6	10	나라이 임하옵시며 뜻이 하늘에서 이룬 것 같이 땅에서도 이루어지이다	Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.	Your kingdom come, Your will be done, on earth as it is in heaven.
MAT	6	11	오늘날 우리에게 일용할 양식을 주옵시고	Give us this day our daily bread.	Give us this day our daily bread.
MAT	6	12	우리가 우리에게 죄 지은 자를 사하여 준 것 같이 우리 죄를 사하여 주옵시고	And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.	And forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven our debtors.
MAT	6	13	우리를 시험에 들게 하지 마옵시고 다만 악에서 구하옵소서 (나라와 권세와 영광이 아버지께 영원히 있사옵나이다 아멘)	And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen.	And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.’
MAT	6	14	너희가 사람의 과실을 용서하면 너희 천부께서도 너희 과실을 용서하시려니와	For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you:	For if you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you.
MAT	6	15	너희가 사람의 과실을 용서하지 아니하면 너희 아버지께서도 너희 과실을 용서하지 아니하시리라	But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.	But if you do not forgive men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive yours.
MAT	6	16	금식할 때에 너희는 외식하는 자들과 같이 슬픈 기색을 내지 말라 저희는 금식하는 것을 사람에게 보이려고 얼굴을 흉하게 하느니라 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 저희는 자기 상을 이미 받았느니라	Moreover when ye fast, be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance: for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward.	When you fast, do not be somber like the hypocrites, for they disfigure their faces to show men they are fasting. Truly I tell you, they already have their full reward.
MAT	6	17	너는 금식할 때에 머리에 기름을 바르고 얼굴을 씻으라	But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face;	But when you fast, anoint your head and wash your face,
MAT	6	18	이는 금식하는 자로 사람에게 보이지 않고 오직 은밀한 중에 계신 네 아버지께 보이게 하려 함이라 은밀한 중에 보시는 네 아버지께서 갚으시리라	That thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father which is in secret: and thy Father, which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly.	so that your fasting will not be obvious to men, but only to your Father, who is unseen. And your Father, who sees what is done in secret, will reward you.
MAT	6	19	너희를 위하여 보물을 땅에 쌓아 두지 말라 거기는 좀과 동록이 해하며 도적이 구멍을 뚫고 도적질하느니라	Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal:	Do not store up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and rust destroy, and where thieves break in and steal.
MAT	6	20	오직 너희를 위하여 보물을 하늘에 쌓아 두라 저기는 좀이나 동록이 해하지 못하며 도적이 구멍을 뚫지도 못하고 도적질도 못하느니라	But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal:	But store up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where moth and rust do not destroy, and where thieves do not break in and steal.
MAT	6	21	네 보물 있는 그 곳에는 네 마음도 있느니라	For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.	For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
MAT	6	22	눈은 몸의 등불이니 그러므로 네 눈이 성하면 온 몸이 밝을 것이요	The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light.	The eye is the lamp of the body. If your eyes are good, your whole body will be full of light.
MAT	6	23	눈이 나쁘면 온 몸이 어두울 것이니 그러므로 네게 있는 빛이 어두우면 그 어두움이 얼마나 하겠느뇨	But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness!	But if your eyes are bad, your whole body will be full of darkness. If then the light within you is darkness, how great is that darkness!
MAT	6	24	한 사람이 두 주인을 섬기지 못할 것이니 혹 이를 미워하며 저를 사랑하거나 혹 이를 중히 여기며 저를 경히 여김이라 너희가 하나님과 재물을 겸하여 섬기지 못하느니라	No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.	No one can serve two masters: Either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will be devoted to the one and despise the other. You cannot serve both God and money.
MAT	6	25	그러므로 내가 너희에게 이르노니 목숨을 위하여 무엇을 먹을까 무엇을 마실까 몸을 위하여 무엇을 입을까 염려하지 말라 목숨이 음식보다 중하지 아니하며 몸이 의복보다 중하지 아니하냐	Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment?	Therefore I tell you, do not worry about your life, what you will eat or drink; or about your body, what you will wear. Is not life more than food, and the body more than clothes?
MAT	6	26	공중의 새를 보라 심지도 않고 거두지도 않고 창고에 모아 들이지도 아니하되 너희 천부께서 기르시나니 너희는 이것들보다 귀하지 아니하냐	Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not much better than they?	Look at the birds of the air: They do not sow or reap or gather into barns—and yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not much more valuable than they?
MAT	6	27	너희 중에 누가 염려함으로 그 키를 한 자나 더할 수 있느냐	Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his stature?	Who of you by worrying can add a single hour to his life?
MAT	6	28	또 너희가 어찌 의복을 위하여 염려하느냐 들의 백합화가 어떻게 자라는가 생각하여 보아라 수고도 아니하고 길쌈도 아니하느니라	And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin:	And why do you worry about clothes? Consider how the lilies of the field grow: They do not labor or spin.
MAT	6	29	그러나 내가 너희에게 말하노니 솔로몬의 모든 영광으로도 입은 것이 이 꽃 하나만 같지 못하였느니라	And yet I say unto you, That even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.	Yet I tell you that not even Solomon in all his glory was adorned like one of these.
MAT	6	30	오늘 있다가 내일 아궁이에 던지우는 들풀도 하나님이 이렇게 입히시거든 하물며 너희일까보냐 믿음이 적은 자들아	Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith?	If that is how God clothes the grass of the field, which is here today and tomorrow is thrown into the furnace, will He not much more clothe you, O you of little faith?
MAT	6	31	그러므로 염려하여 이르기를 무엇을 먹을까 무엇을 마실까 무엇을 입을까 하지 말라	Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed?	Therefore do not worry, saying, ‘What shall we eat?’ or ‘What shall we drink?’ or ‘What shall we wear?’
MAT	6	32	이는 다 이방인들이 구하는 것이라 너희 천부께서 이 모든 것이 너희에게 있어야 할 줄을 아시느니라	(For after all these things do the Gentiles seek:) for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things.	For the Gentiles strive after all these things, and your heavenly Father knows that you need them.
MAT	6	33	너희는 먼저 그의 나라와 그의 의를 구하라 그리하면 이 모든 것을 너희에게 더하시리라	But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you.	But seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all these things will be added unto you.
MAT	6	34	그러므로 내일 일을 위하여 염려하지 말라 내일 일은 내일 염려할 것이요 한 날 괴로움은 그 날에 족하니라	Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall take thought for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.	Therefore do not worry about tomorrow, for tomorrow will worry about itself. Today has enough trouble of its own.
MAT	7	1	비판을 받지 아니하려거든 비판하지 말라	Judge not, that ye be not judged.	“Do not judge, or you will be judged.
MAT	7	2	너희의 비판하는 그 비판으로 너희가 비판을 받을 것이요 너희의 헤아리는 그 헤아림으로 너희가 헤아림을 받을 것이니라	For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.	For with the same judgment you pronounce, you will be judged; and with the measure you use, it will be measured to you.
MAT	7	3	어찌하여 형제의 눈 속에 있는 티는 보고 네 눈 속에 있는 들보는 깨닫지 못하느냐	And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother’s eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?	Why do you look at the speck in your brother’s eye, but fail to notice the beam in your own eye?
MAT	7	4	보라 네 눈 속에 들보가 있는데 어찌하여 형제에게 말하기를 나로 네 눈 속에 있는 티를 빼게 하라 하겠느냐	Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye; and, behold, a beam is in thine own eye?	How can you say to your brother, ‘Let me take the speck out of your eye,’ while there is still a beam in your own eye?
MAT	7	5	외식하는 자여 먼저 네 눈 속에서 들보를 빼어라 그 후에야 밝히 보고 형제의 눈 속에서 티를 빼리라	Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother’s eye.	You hypocrite! First take the beam out of your own eye, and then you will see clearly to remove the speck from your brother’s eye.
MAT	7	6	거룩한 것을 개에게 주지 말며 너희 진주를 돼지 앞에 던지지 말라 저희가 그것을 발로 밟고 돌이켜 너희를 찢어 상할까 염려하라	Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend you.	Do not give dogs what is holy; do not throw your pearls before swine. If you do, they may trample them under their feet, and then turn and tear you to pieces.
MAT	7	7	구하라 그러면 너희에게 주실 것이요 찾으라 그러면 찾을 것이요 문을 두드리라 그러면 너희에게 열릴 것이니	Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you:	Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and the door will be opened to you.
MAT	7	8	구하는 이마다 얻을 것이요 찾는 이가 찾을 것이요 두드리는 이에게 열릴 것이니라	For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened.	For everyone who asks receives; he who seeks finds; and to him who knocks, the door will be opened.
MAT	7	9	너희 중에 누가 아들이 떡을 달라 하면 돌을 주며	Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone?	Which of you, if his son asks for bread, will give him a stone?
MAT	7	10	생선을 달라 하면 뱀을 줄 사람이 있겠느냐	Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent?	Or if he asks for a fish, will give him a snake?
MAT	7	11	너희가 악한 자라도 좋은 것으로 자식에게 줄 줄 알거든 하물며 하늘에 계신 너희 아버지께서 구하는 자에게 좋은 것으로 주시지 않겠느냐	If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him?	So if you who are evil know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father in heaven give good things to those who ask Him!
MAT	7	12	그러므로 무엇이든지 남에게 대접을 받고자 하는대로 너희도 남을 대접하라 이것이 율법이요 선지자니라	Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the law and the prophets.	In everything, then, do to others as you would have them do to you. For this is the essence of the Law and the Prophets.
MAT	7	13	좁은 문으로 들어가라 멸망으로 인도하는 문은 크고 그 길이 넓어 그리로 들어가는 자가 많고	Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat:	Enter through the narrow gate. For wide is the gate and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many enter through it.
MAT	7	14	생명으로 인도하는 문은 좁고 길이 협착하여 찾는 이가 적음이니라	Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.	But small is the gate and narrow the way that leads to life, and only a few find it.
MAT	7	15	거짓 선지자들을 삼가라 양의 옷을 입고 너희에게 나아오나 속에는 노략질하는 이리라	Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves.	Beware of false prophets. They come to you in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly they are ravenous wolves.
MAT	7	16	그의 열매로 그들을 알찌니 가시나무에서 포도를 또는 엉겅퀴에서 무화과를 따겠느냐	Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?	By their fruit you will recognize them. Are grapes gathered from thornbushes, or figs from thistles?
MAT	7	17	이와 같이 좋은 나무마다 아름다운 열매를 맺고 못된 나무가 나쁜 열매를 맺나니	Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit.	Likewise, every good tree bears good fruit, but a bad tree bears bad fruit.
MAT	7	18	좋은 나무가 나쁜 열매를 맺을 수 없고 못된 나무가 아름다운 열매를 맺을 수 없느니라	A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.	A good tree cannot bear bad fruit, and a bad tree cannot bear good fruit.
MAT	7	19	아름다운 열매를 맺지 아니하는 나무마다 찍혀 불에 던지우느니라	Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire.	Every tree that does not bear good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.
MAT	7	20	이러므로 그의 열매로 그들을 알리라	Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.	So then, by their fruit you will recognize them.
MAT	7	21	나더러 주여 주여 하는 자마다 천국에 다 들어갈 것이 아니요 다만 하늘에 계신 내 아버지의 뜻대로 행하는 자라야 들어가리라	Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven.	Not everyone who says to Me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter the kingdom of heaven, but only he who does the will of My Father in heaven.
MAT	7	22	그 날에 많은 사람이 나더러 이르되 주여 주여 우리가 주의 이름으로 선지자 노릇하며 주의 이름으로 귀신을 쫓아 내며 주의 이름으로 많은 권능을 행치 아니하였나이까 하리니	Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works?	Many will say to Me on that day, ‘Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in Your name, and in Your name drive out demons and perform many miracles?’
MAT	7	23	그 때에 내가 저희에게 밝히 말하되 내가 너희를 도무지 알지 못하니 불법을 행하는 자들아 내게서 떠나가라 하리라	And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity.	Then I will tell them plainly, ‘I never knew you; depart from Me, you workers of lawlessness!’
MAT	7	24	그러므로 누구든지 나의 이 말을 듣고 행하는 자는 그 집을 반석 위에 지은 지혜로운 사람 같으리니	Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock:	Therefore everyone who hears these words of Mine and acts on them is like a wise man who built his house on the rock.
MAT	7	25	비가 내리고 창수가 나고 바람이 불어 그 집에 부딪히되 무너지지 아니하나니 이는 주초를 반석 위에 놓은 연고요	And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not: for it was founded upon a rock.	The rain fell, the torrents raged, and the winds blew and beat against that house; yet it did not fall, because its foundation was on the rock.
MAT	7	26	나의 이 말을 듣고 행치 아니하는 자는 그 집을 모래 위에 지은 어리석은 사람 같으리니	And every one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand:	But everyone who hears these words of Mine and does not act on them is like a foolish man who built his house on sand.
MAT	7	27	비가 내리고 창수가 나고 바람이 불어 그 집에 부딪히매 무너져 그 무너짐이 심하니라	And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell: and great was the fall of it.	The rain fell, the torrents raged, and the winds blew and beat against that house, and it fell—and great was its collapse!”
MAT	7	28	예수께서 이 말씀을 마치시매 무리들이 그 가르치심에 놀래니	And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people were astonished at his doctrine:	When Jesus had finished saying these things, the crowds were astonished at His teaching,
MAT	7	29	이는 그 가르치시는 것이 권세 있는 자와 같고 저희 서기관들과 같지 아니함일러라	For he taught them as one having authority, and not as the scribes.	because He taught as one who had authority, and not as their scribes.
MAT	8	1	예수께서 산에서 내려오시니 허다한 무리가 좇으니라	When he was come down from the mountain, great multitudes followed him.	When Jesus came down from the mountain, large crowds followed Him.
MAT	8	2	한 문둥병자가 나아와 절하고 가로되 주여 원하시면 저를 깨끗케 하실 수 있나이다 하거늘	And, behold, there came a leper and worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.	Suddenly a leper came and knelt before Him, saying, “Lord, if You are willing, You can make me clean.”
MAT	8	3	예수께서 손을 내밀어 저에게 대시며 가라사대 내가 원하노니 깨끗함을 받으라 하신대 즉시 그의 문둥병이 깨끗하여진지라	And Jesus put forth his hand, and touched him, saying, I will; be thou clean. And immediately his leprosy was cleansed.	Jesus reached out His hand and touched the man. “I am willing,” He said. “Be clean!” And immediately his leprosy was cleansed.
MAT	8	4	예수께서 이르시되 삼가 아무에게도 이르지 말고 다만 가서 제사장에게 네 몸을 보이고 모세의 명한 예물을 드려 저희에게 증거하라 하시니라	And Jesus saith unto him, See thou tell no man; but go thy way, shew thyself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them.	Then Jesus instructed him, “See that you don’t tell anyone. But go, show yourself to the priest and offer the gift prescribed by Moses, as a testimony to them.”
MAT	8	5	예수께서 가버나움에 들어가시니 한 백부장이 나아와 간구하여	And when Jesus was entered into Capernaum, there came unto him a centurion, beseeching him,	When Jesus had entered Capernaum, a centurion came and pleaded with Him,
MAT	8	6	가로되 주여 내 하인이 중풍병으로 집에 누워 몹시 괴로워하나이다	And saying, Lord, my servant lieth at home sick of the palsy, grievously tormented.	“Lord, my servant lies at home, paralyzed and in terrible agony.”
MAT	8	7	가라사대 내가 가서 고쳐주리라	And Jesus saith unto him, I will come and heal him.	“I will go and heal him,” Jesus replied.
MAT	8	8	백부장이 대답하여 가로되 주여 내 집에 들어오심을 나는 감당치 못하겠사오니 다만 말씀으로만 하옵소서 그러면 내 하인이 낫겠삽나이다	The centurion answered and said, Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldest come under my roof: but speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed.	The centurion answered, “Lord, I am not worthy to have You come under my roof. But just say the word, and my servant will be healed.
MAT	8	9	나도 남의 수하에 있는 사람이요 내 아래도 군사가 있으니 이더러 가라 하면 가고 저더러 오라 하면 오고 내 종더러 이것을 하라 하면 하나이다	For I am a man under authority, having soldiers under me: and I say to this man, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it.	For I myself am a man under authority, with soldiers under me. I tell one to go, and he goes; and another to come, and he comes. I tell my servant to do something, and he does it.”
MAT	8	10	예수께서 들으시고 기이히 여겨 좇는 자들에게 이르시되 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 이스라엘 중 아무에게서도 이만한 믿음을 만나보지 못하였노라	When Jesus heard it, he marvelled, and said to them that followed, Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel.	When Jesus heard this, He marveled and said to those following Him, “Truly I tell you, I have not found anyone in Israel with such great faith.
MAT	8	11	또 너희에게 이르노니 동서로부터 많은 사람이 이르러 아브라함과 이삭과 야곱과 함께 천국에 앉으려니와	And I say unto you, That many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven.	I say to you that many will come from the east and the west to share the banquet with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven.
MAT	8	12	나라의 본 자손들은 바깥 어두운 데 쫓겨나 거기서 울며 이를 갊이 있으리라	But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.	But the sons of the kingdom will be thrown into the outer darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”
MAT	8	13	예수께서 백부장에게 이르시되 가라 네 믿은 대로 될지어다 하시니 그 시로 하인이 나으니라	And Jesus said unto the centurion, Go thy way; and as thou hast believed, so be it done unto thee. And his servant was healed in the selfsame hour.	Then Jesus said to the centurion, “Go! As you have believed, so will it be done for you.” And his servant was healed at that very hour.
MAT	8	14	예수께서 베드로의 집에 들어가사 그의 장모가 열병으로 앓아 누운 것을 보시고	And when Jesus was come into Peter’s house, he saw his wife’s mother laid, and sick of a fever.	When Jesus arrived at Peter’s house, He saw Peter’s mother-in-law sick in bed with a fever.
MAT	8	15	그의 손을 만지시니 열병이 떠나가고 여인이 일어나서 예수께 수종들더라	And he touched her hand, and the fever left her: and she arose, and ministered unto them.	So He touched her hand, and the fever left her, and she got up and began to serve Him.
MAT	8	16	저물매 사람들이 귀신 들린 자를 많이 데리고 예수께 오거늘 예수께서 말씀으로 귀신들을 쫓아 내시고 병든 자를 다 고치시니	When the even was come, they brought unto him many that were possessed with devils: and he cast out the spirits with his word, and healed all that were sick:	When evening came, many who were demon-possessed were brought to Jesus, and He drove out the spirits with a word and healed all the sick.
MAT	8	17	이는 선지자 이사야로 하신 말씀에 우리 연약한 것을 친히 담당하시고 병을 짊어지셨도다 함을 이루려 하심이더라	That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, Himself took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses.	This was to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet Isaiah: “He took on our infirmities and carried our diseases.”
MAT	8	18	예수께서 무리가 자기를 에워쌈을 보시고 저편으로 건너 가기를 명하시니라	Now when Jesus saw great multitudes about him, he gave commandment to depart unto the other side.	When Jesus saw a large crowd around Him, He gave orders to cross to the other side of the sea.
MAT	8	19	한 서기관이 나아와 예수께 말씀하되 선생님이여 어디로 가시든지 저는 좇으리이다	And a certain scribe came, and said unto him, Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest.	And one of the scribes came to Him and said, “Teacher, I will follow You wherever You go.”
MAT	8	20	예수께서 이르시되 여우도 굴이 있고 공중의 새도 거처가 있으되 오직 인자는 머리 둘 곳이 없다 하시더라	And Jesus saith unto him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head.	Jesus replied, “Foxes have dens and birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man has no place to lay His head.”
MAT	8	21	제자 중에 또 하나가 가로되 주여 나로 먼저 가서 부친을 장사하게 허락하옵소서	And another of his disciples said unto him, Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father.	Another of His disciples requested, “Lord, first let me go and bury my father.”
MAT	8	22	예수께서 가라사대 죽은 자들로 저희 죽은 자를 장사하게 하고 너는 나를 좇으라 하시니라	But Jesus said unto him, Follow me; and let the dead bury their dead.	But Jesus told him, “Follow Me, and let the dead bury their own dead.”
MAT	8	23	배에 오르시매 제자들이 좇았더니	And when he was entered into a ship, his disciples followed him.	When He got into the boat, His disciples followed Him.
MAT	8	24	바다에 큰 놀이 일어나 물결이 배에 덮이게 되었으되 예수는 주무시는지라	And, behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch that the ship was covered with the waves: but he was asleep.	Suddenly a violent storm came up on the sea, so that the boat was engulfed by the waves; but Jesus was sleeping.
MAT	8	25	그 제자들이 나아와 깨우며 가로되 주여 구원하소서 우리가 죽겠나이다	And his disciples came to him, and awoke him, saying, Lord, save us: we perish.	The disciples went and woke Him, saying, “Lord, save us! We are perishing!”
MAT	8	26	예수께서 이르시되 어찌하여 무서워하느냐 믿음이 적은 자들아 하시고 곧 일어나사 바람과 바다를 꾸짖으신대 아주 잔잔하게 되거늘	And he saith unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? Then he arose, and rebuked the winds and the sea; and there was a great calm.	“You of little faith,” Jesus replied, “why are you so afraid?” Then He got up and rebuked the winds and the sea, and it was perfectly calm.
MAT	8	27	그 사람들이 기이히 여겨 가로되 이 어떠한 사람이기에 바람과 바다도 순종하는고 하더라	But the men marvelled, saying, What manner of man is this, that even the winds and the sea obey him!	The men were amazed and asked, “What kind of man is this? Even the winds and the sea obey Him!”
MAT	8	28	또 예수께서 건너편 가다라 지방에 가시매 귀신 들린 자 둘이 무덤 사이에서 나와 예수를 만나니 저희는 심히 사나와 아무도 그 길로 지나갈 수 없을 만하더라	And when he was come to the other side into the country of the Gergesenes, there met him two possessed with devils, coming out of the tombs, exceeding fierce, so that no man might pass by that way.	When Jesus arrived on the other side in the region of the Gadarenes, He was met by two demon-possessed men coming from the tombs. They were so violent that no one could pass that way.
MAT	8	29	이에 저희가 소리질러 가로되 하나님의 아들이여 우리와 당신과 무슨 상관이 있나이까 때가 이르기 전에 우리를 괴롭게 하려고 여기 오셨나이까 하더니	And, behold, they cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? art thou come hither to torment us before the time?	“What do You want with us, Son of God?” they shouted. “Have You come here to torture us before the appointed time?”
MAT	8	30	마침 멀리서 많은 돼지 떼가 먹고 있는지라	And there was a good way off from them an herd of many swine feeding.	In the distance a large herd of pigs was feeding.
MAT	8	31	귀신들이 예수께 간구하여 가로되 만일 우리를 쫓아 내실진대 돼지 떼에 들여 보내소서 한대	So the devils besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, suffer us to go away into the herd of swine.	So the demons begged Jesus, “If You drive us out, send us into the herd of pigs.”
MAT	8	32	저희더러 가라 하시니 귀신들이 나와서 돼지에게로 들어가는지라 온 떼가 비탈로 내리달아 바다에 들어가서 물에서 몰사하거늘	And he said unto them, Go. And when they were come out, they went into the herd of swine: and, behold, the whole herd of swine ran violently down a steep place into the sea, and perished in the waters.	“Go!” He told them. So they came out and went into the pigs, and the whole herd rushed down the steep bank into the sea and died in the waters.
MAT	8	33	치던 자들이 달아나 시내에 들어가 이 모든 일과 귀신들린 자의 일을 고하니	And they that kept them fled, and went their ways into the city, and told every thing, and what was befallen to the possessed of the devils.	Those tending the pigs ran off into the town and reported all this, including the account of the demon-possessed men.
MAT	8	34	온 시내가 예수를 만나려고 나가서 보고 그 지방에서 떠나시기를 간구하더라	And, behold, the whole city came out to meet Jesus: and when they saw him, they besought him that he would depart out of their coasts.	Then the whole town went out to meet Jesus. And when they saw Him, they begged Him to leave their region.
MAT	9	1	예수께서 배에 오르사 건너가 본 동네에 이르시니	And he entered into a ship, and passed over, and came into his own city.	Jesus got into a boat, crossed over, and came to His own town.
MAT	9	2	침상에 누운 중풍병자를 사람들이 데리고 오거늘 예수께서 저희의 믿음을 보시고 중풍병자에게 이르시되 소자야 안심하라 네 죄사함을 받았느니라	And, behold, they brought to him a man sick of the palsy, lying on a bed: and Jesus seeing their faith said unto the sick of the palsy; Son, be of good cheer; thy sins be forgiven thee.	Just then some men brought to Him a paralytic lying on a mat. When Jesus saw their faith, He said to the paralytic, “Take courage, son; your sins are forgiven.”
MAT	9	3	어떤 서기관들이 속으로 이르되 이 사람이 참람하도다	And, behold, certain of the scribes said within themselves, This man blasphemeth.	On seeing this, some of the scribes said to themselves, “This man is blaspheming!”
MAT	9	4	예수께서 그 생각을 아시고 가라사대 너희가 어찌하여 마음에 악한 생각을 하느냐	And Jesus knowing their thoughts said, Wherefore think ye evil in your hearts?	But Jesus knew what they were thinking and said, “Why do you harbor evil in your hearts?
MAT	9	5	네 죄 사함을 받았느니라 하는 말과 일어나 걸어가라 하는 말이 어느 것이 쉽겠느냐	For whether is easier, to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee; or to say, Arise, and walk?	Which is easier: to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Get up and walk?’
MAT	9	6	그러나 인자가 세상에서 죄를 사하는 권세가 있는 줄을 너희로 알게 하려 하노라 하시고 중풍병자에게 말씀하시되 일어나 네 침상을 가지고 집으로 가라 하시니	But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, (then saith he to the sick of the palsy,) Arise, take up thy bed, and go unto thine house.	But so that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins...” Then He said to the paralytic, “Get up, pick up your mat, and go home.”
MAT	9	7	그가 일어나 집으로 돌아가거늘	And he arose, and departed to his house.	And the man got up and went home.
MAT	9	8	무리가 보고 두려워하며 이런 권세를 사람에게 주신 하나님께 영광을 돌리니라	But when the multitudes saw it, they marvelled, and glorified God, which had given such power unto men.	When the crowds saw this, they were filled with awe and glorified God, who had given such authority to men.
MAT	9	9	예수께서 거기서 떠나 지나가시다가 마태라 하는 사람이 세관에 앉은 것을 보시고 이르시되 나를 좇으라 하시니 일어나 좇으니라	And as Jesus passed forth from thence, he saw a man, named Matthew, sitting at the receipt of custom: and he saith unto him, Follow me. And he arose, and followed him.	As Jesus went on from there, He saw a man named Matthew sitting at the tax booth. “Follow Me,” He told him, and Matthew got up and followed Him.
MAT	9	10	예수께서 마태의 집에서 앉아 음식을 잡수실 때에 많은 세리와 죄인들이 와서 예수와 그 제자들과 함께 앉았더니	And it came to pass, as Jesus sat at meat in the house, behold, many publicans and sinners came and sat down with him and his disciples.	Later, as Jesus was dining at Matthew’s house, many tax collectors and sinners came and ate with Him and His disciples.
MAT	9	11	바리새인들이 보고 그 제자들에게 이르되 어찌하여 너희 선생은 세리와 죄인들과 함께 잡수시느냐	And when the Pharisees saw it, they said unto his disciples, Why eateth your Master with publicans and sinners?	When the Pharisees saw this, they asked His disciples, “Why does your Teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners?”
MAT	9	12	예수께서 들으시고 이르시되 건강한 자에게는 의원이 쓸 데 없고 병든 자에게라야 쓸 데 있느니라	But when Jesus heard that, he said unto them, They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick.	On hearing this, Jesus said, “It is not the healthy who need a doctor, but the sick.
MAT	9	13	너희는 가서 내가 긍휼을 원하고 제사를 원치 아니하노라 하신 뜻이 무엇인지 배우라 내가 의인을 부르러 온 것이 아니요 죄인을 부르러 왔노라 하시니라	But go ye and learn what that meaneth, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice: for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.	But go and learn what this means: ‘I desire mercy, not sacrifice.’ For I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners.”
MAT	9	14	그 때에 요한의 제자들이 예수께 나아와 가로되 우리와 바래새인들은 금식하는데 어찌하여 당신의 제자들은 금식하지 아니하나이까	Then came to him the disciples of John, saying, Why do we and the Pharisees fast oft, but thy disciples fast not?	At that time John’s disciples came to Jesus and asked, “Why is it that we and the Pharisees fast so often, but Your disciples do not fast?”
MAT	9	15	예수께서 저희에게 이르시되 혼인집 손님들이 신랑과 함께 있을 동안에 슬퍼할 수 있느뇨 그러나 신랑을 빼앗길 날이 이르리니 그 때에는 금식할 것이니라	And Jesus said unto them, Can the children of the bridechamber mourn, as long as the bridegroom is with them? but the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast.	Jesus replied, “How can the guests of the bridegroom mourn while He is with them? But the time will come when the bridegroom will be taken from them; then they will fast.
MAT	9	16	생베 조각을 낡은 옷에 붙이는 자가 없나니 이는 기운 것이 그 옷을 당기어 해어짐이 더하게 됨이요	No man putteth a piece of new cloth unto an old garment, for that which is put in to fill it up taketh from the garment, and the rent is made worse.	No one sews a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old garment. For the patch will pull away from the garment, and a worse tear will result.
MAT	9	17	새 포도주를 낡은 가죽 부대에 넣지 아니하나니 그렇게 하면 부대가 터져 포도주도 쏟아지고 부대도 버리게 됨이라 새 포도주는 새 부대에 넣어야 둘이 다 보전되느니라	Neither do men put new wine into old bottles: else the bottles break, and the wine runneth out, and the bottles perish: but they put new wine into new bottles, and both are preserved.	Neither do men pour new wine into old wineskins. If they do, the skins will burst, the wine will spill, and the wineskins will be ruined. Instead, they pour new wine into new wineskins, and both are preserved.”
MAT	9	18	예수께서 이 말씀을 하실 때에 한 직원이 와서 절하고 가로되 내 딸이 방장 죽었사오나 오셔서 그 몸에 손을 얹으소서 그러면 살겠나이다 하니	While he spake these things unto them, behold, there came a certain ruler, and worshipped him, saying, My daughter is even now dead: but come and lay thy hand upon her, and she shall live.	While Jesus was saying these things, a synagogue leader came and knelt before Him. “My daughter has just died,” he said. “But come and place Your hand on her, and she will live.”
MAT	9	19	예수께서 일어나 따라 가시매 제자들도 가더니	And Jesus arose, and followed him, and so did his disciples.	So Jesus got up and went with him, along with His disciples.
MAT	9	20	열두 해를 혈루증으로 앓는 여자가 예수의 뒤로 와서 그 겉옷 가를 만지니	And, behold, a woman, which was diseased with an issue of blood twelve years, came behind him, and touched the hem of his garment:	Suddenly a woman who had suffered from bleeding for twelve years came up behind Him and touched the fringe of His cloak.
MAT	9	21	이는 제 마음에 그 겉옷만 만져도 구원을 받겠다 함이라	For she said within herself, If I may but touch his garment, I shall be whole.	She said to herself, “If only I touch His cloak, I will be healed.”
MAT	9	22	예수께서 돌이켜 그를 보시며 가라사대 딸아 안심하라 네 믿음이 너를 구원하였다 하시니 여자가 그 시로 구원을 받으니라	But Jesus turned him about, and when he saw her, he said, Daughter, be of good comfort; thy faith hath made thee whole. And the woman was made whole from that hour.	Jesus turned and saw her. “Take courage, daughter,” He said, “your faith has healed you.” And the woman was cured from that very hour.
MAT	9	23	예수께서 그 직원의 집에 가사 피리 부는 자들과 훤화하는 무리를 보시고	And when Jesus came into the ruler’s house, and saw the minstrels and the people making a noise,	When Jesus entered the house of the synagogue leader, He saw the flute players and the noisy crowd.
MAT	9	24	가라사대 물러가라 이 소녀가 죽은 것이 아니라 잔다 하시니 저들이 비웃더라	He said unto them, Give place: for the maid is not dead, but sleepeth. And they laughed him to scorn.	“Go away,” He told them. “The girl is not dead, but asleep.” And they laughed at Him.
MAT	9	25	무리를 내어 보낸 후에 예수께서 들어가사 소녀의 손을 잡으시매 일어나는지라	But when the people were put forth, he went in, and took her by the hand, and the maid arose.	After the crowd had been put outside, Jesus went in and took the girl by the hand, and she got up.
MAT	9	26	그 소문이 그 온 땅에 퍼지더라	And the fame hereof went abroad into all that land.	And the news about this spread throughout that region.
MAT	9	27	예수께서 거기서 떠나 가실새 두 소경이 따라오며 소리질러 가로되 다윗의 자손이여 우리를 불쌍히 여기소서 하더니	And when Jesus departed thence, two blind men followed him, crying, and saying, Thou Son of David, have mercy on us.	As Jesus went on from there, two blind men followed Him, crying out, “Have mercy on us, Son of David!”
MAT	9	28	예수께서 집에 들어가시매 소경들이 나아오거늘 예수께서 이르시되 내가 능히 이 일 할 줄을 믿느냐 대답하되 주여 그러하오이다 하니	And when he was come into the house, the blind men came to him: and Jesus saith unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this? They said unto him, Yea, Lord.	After Jesus had entered the house, the blind men came to Him. “Do you believe that I am able to do this?” He asked. “Yes, Lord,” they answered.
MAT	9	29	이에 예수께서 저희 눈을 만지시며 가라사대 너희 믿음대로 되라 하신대	Then touched he their eyes, saying, According to your faith be it unto you.	Then He touched their eyes and said, “According to your faith will it be done to you.”
MAT	9	30	그 눈들이 밝아진지라 예수께서 엄히 경계하시되 삼가 아무에게도 알게 하지 말라 하셨으나	And their eyes were opened; and Jesus straitly charged them, saying, See that no man know it.	And their eyes were opened. Jesus warned them sternly, “See that no one finds out about this!”
MAT	9	31	저희가 나가서 예수의 소문을 그 온 땅에 전파하니라	But they, when they were departed, spread abroad his fame in all that country.	But they went out and spread the news about Him throughout the land.
MAT	9	32	저희가 나갈 때에 귀신 들려 벙어리 된 자를 예수께 데려오니	As they went out, behold, they brought to him a dumb man possessed with a devil.	As they were leaving, a demon-possessed man who was mute was brought to Jesus.
MAT	9	33	귀신이 쫓겨나고 벙어리가 말하거늘 무리가 기이히 여겨 가로되 이스라엘 가운데서 이런 일을 본 때가 없다 하되	And when the devil was cast out, the dumb spake: and the multitudes marvelled, saying, It was never so seen in Israel.	And when the demon had been driven out, the man began to speak. The crowds were amazed and said, “Nothing like this has ever been seen in Israel!”
MAT	9	34	바리새인들은 가로되 저가 귀신의 왕을 빙자하여 귀신을 쫓아낸다 하더라	But the Pharisees said, He casteth out devils through the prince of the devils.	But the Pharisees said, “It is by the prince of demons that He drives out demons.”
MAT	9	35	예수께서 모든 성과 촌에 두루 다니사 저희 회당에서 가르치시며 천국 복음을 전파하시며 모든 병과 모든 약한 것을 고치시니라	And Jesus went about all the cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every sickness and every disease among the people.	Jesus went through all the towns and villages, teaching in their synagogues, preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every disease and sickness.
MAT	9	36	무리를 보시고 민망히 여기시니 이는 저희가 목자 없는 양과 같이 고생하며 유리함이라	But when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion on them, because they fainted, and were scattered abroad, as sheep having no shepherd.	When He saw the crowds, He was moved with compassion for them, because they were harassed and helpless, like sheep without a shepherd.
MAT	9	37	이에 제자들에게 이르시되 추수할 것은 많되 일꾼은 적으니	Then saith he unto his disciples, The harvest truly is plenteous, but the labourers are few;	Then He said to His disciples, “The harvest is plentiful, but the workers are few.
MAT	9	38	그러므로 추수하는 주인에게 청하여 추수할 일꾼들을 보내어 주소서 하라 하시니라	Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will send forth labourers into his harvest.	Ask the Lord of the harvest, therefore, to send out workers into His harvest.”
MAT	10	1	예수께서 그 열두 제자를 부르사 더러운 귀신을 쫓아내며 모든 병과 모든 약한 것을 고치는 권능을 주시니라	And when he had called unto him his twelve disciples, he gave them power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and all manner of disease.	And calling His twelve disciples to Him, Jesus gave them authority over unclean spirits, so that they could drive them out and heal every disease and sickness.
MAT	10	2	열두 사도의 이름은 이러하니 베드로라 하는 시몬을 비롯하여 그의 형제 안드레와 세베대의 아들 야고보와 그의 형제 요한,	Now the names of the twelve apostles are these; The first, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother; James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother;	These are the names of the twelve apostles: first Simon, called Peter, and his brother Andrew; James son of Zebedee, and his brother John;
MAT	10	3	빌립과 바돌로매, 도마와 세리 마태, 알패오의 아들 야고보와 다대오,	Philip, and Bartholomew; Thomas, and Matthew the publican; James the son of Alpheus, and Lebbeus, whose surname was Thaddeus;	Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas and Matthew the tax collector; James son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus;
MAT	10	4	가나안인 시몬과 및 가룟 유다 곧 예수를 판 자라	Simon the Canaanite, and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him.	Simon the Zealot, and Judas Iscariot, who betrayed Jesus.
MAT	10	5	예수께서 이 열둘을 내어 보내시며 명하여 가라사대 이방인의 길로도 가지 말고 사마리아인의 고을에도 들어가지 말고	These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not:	These twelve Jesus sent out with the following instructions: “Do not go onto the road of the Gentiles or enter any town of the Samaritans.
MAT	10	6	차라리 이스라엘 집의 잃어버린 양에게로 가라	But go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.	Go rather to the lost sheep of Israel.
MAT	10	7	가면서 전파하여 말하되 천국이 가까웠다 하고	And as ye go, preach, saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand.	As you go, preach this message: ‘The kingdom of heaven is near.’
MAT	10	8	병든 자를 고치며 죽은 자를 살리며 문둥이를 깨끗하게 하며 귀신을 쫓아내되 너희가 거저 받았으니 거저 주어라	Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils: freely ye have received, freely give.	Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse the lepers, drive out demons. Freely you have received; freely give.
MAT	10	9	너희 전대에 금이나 은이나 동이나 가지지 말고	Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses,	Do not carry any gold or silver or copper in your belts.
MAT	10	10	여행을 위하여 주머니나 두 벌 옷이나 신이나 지팡이를 가지지 말라 이는 일꾼이 저 먹을 것 받는 것이 마땅함이니라	Nor scrip for your journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves: for the workman is worthy of his meat.	Take no bag for the road, or second tunic, or sandals, or staff; for the worker is worthy of his provisions.
MAT	10	11	아무 성이나 촌에 들어가든지 그 중에 합당한 자를 찾아내어 너희 떠나기까지 거기서 머물라	And into whatsoever city or town ye shall enter, enquire who in it is worthy; and there abide till ye go thence.	Whatever town or village you enter, find out who is worthy there and stay at his house until you move on.
MAT	10	12	또 그 집에 들어가면서 평안하기를 빌라	And when ye come into an house, salute it.	As you enter the home, greet its occupants.
MAT	10	13	그 집이 이에 합당하면 너희 빈 평안이 거기 임할 것이요 만일 합당치 아니하면 그 평안이 너희에게 돌아올 것이니라	And if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it: but if it be not worthy, let your peace return to you.	If the home is worthy, let your peace rest on it; but if it is not, let your peace return to you.
MAT	10	14	누구든지 너희를 영접도 아니하고 너희 말을 듣지도 아니하거든 그 집이나 성에서 나가 너희 발의 먼지를 떨어 버리라	And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of that house or city, shake off the dust of your feet.	And if anyone will not welcome you or heed your words, shake the dust off your feet when you leave that home or town.
MAT	10	15	내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 심판날에 소돔과 고모라 땅이 그 성보다 견디기 쉬우리라	Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city.	Truly I tell you, it will be more bearable for Sodom and Gomorrah on the day of judgment than for that town.
MAT	10	16	보라 내가 너희를 보냄이 양을 이리 가운데 보냄과 같도다 그러므로 너희는 뱀 같이 지혜롭고 비둘기 같이 순결하라	Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.	Behold, I am sending you out like sheep among wolves; therefore be as shrewd as snakes and as innocent as doves.
MAT	10	17	사람들을 삼가라 저희가 너희를 공회에 넘겨 주겠고 저희 회당에서 채찍질하리라	But beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues;	But beware of men; for they will hand you over to their councils and flog you in their synagogues.
MAT	10	18	또 너희가 나를 인하여 총독들과 임금들 앞에 끌려 가리니 이는 저희와 이방인들에게 증거가 되게 하려 하심이라	And ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the Gentiles.	On My account, you will be brought before governors and kings as witnesses to them and to the Gentiles.
MAT	10	19	너희를 넘겨 줄 때에 어떻게 또는 무엇을 말할까 염려치 말라 그때에 무슨 말할 것을 주시리니	But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak.	But when they hand you over, do not worry about how to respond or what to say. In that hour you will be given what to say.
MAT	10	20	말하는 이는 너희가 아니라 너희 속에서 말씀하시는 자 곧 너희 아버지의 성령이시니라	For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you.	For it will not be you speaking, but the Spirit of your Father speaking through you.
MAT	10	21	장차 형제가 형제를 아비가 자식을 죽는 데 내어주며 자식들이 부모를 대적하여 죽게 하리라	And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death.	Brother will betray brother to death, and a father his child; children will rise against their parents and have them put to death.
MAT	10	22	또 너희가 내 이름을 인하여 모든 사람에게 미움을 받을 것이나 나중까지 견디는 자는 구원을 얻으리라	And ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake: but he that endureth to the end shall be saved.	You will be hated by everyone because of My name, but the one who perseveres to the end will be saved.
MAT	10	23	이 동네에서 너희를 핍박하거든 저 동네로 피하라 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 이스라엘의 모든 동네를 다 다니지 못하여서 인자가 오리라	But when they persecute you in this city, flee ye into another: for verily I say unto you, Ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son of man be come.	When they persecute you in one town, flee to the next. Truly I tell you, you will not reach all the towns of Israel before the Son of Man comes.
MAT	10	24	제자가 그 선생보다 또는 종이 그 상전보다 높지 못하나니	The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his lord.	A disciple is not above his teacher, nor a servant above his master.
MAT	10	25	제자가 그 선생 같고 종이 그 상전 같으면 족하도다 집 주인을 바알세불이라 하였거든 하물며 그 집 사람들이랴	It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master, and the servant as his lord. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his household?	It is enough for a disciple to be like his teacher, and a servant like his master. If the head of the house has been called Beelzebul, how much more the members of his household!
MAT	10	26	그런즉 저희를 두려워하지 말라 감추인 것이 드러나지 않을 것이 없고 숨은 것이 알려지지 않을 것이 없느니라	Fear them not therefore: for there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; and hid, that shall not be known.	So do not be afraid of them. For there is nothing concealed that will not be disclosed, and nothing hidden that will not be made known.
MAT	10	27	내가 너희에게 어두운 데서 이르는 것을 광명한 데서 말하며 너희가 귓속으로 듣는 것을 집 위에서 전파하라	What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light: and what ye hear in the ear, that preach ye upon the housetops.	What I tell you in the dark, speak in the daylight; what is whispered in your ear, proclaim from the housetops.
MAT	10	28	몸은 죽여도 영혼은 능히 죽이지 못하는 자들을 두려워하지 말고 오직 몸과 영혼을 능히 지옥에 멸하시는 자를 두려워하라	And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.	Do not be afraid of those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul. Instead, fear the One who can destroy both soul and body in hell.
MAT	10	29	참새 두 마리가 한 앗사리온에 팔리는 것이 아니냐 그러나 너희 아버지께서 허락지 아니하시면 그 하나라도 땅에 떨어지지 아니하리라	Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father.	Are not two sparrows sold for a penny? Yet not one of them will fall to the ground apart from the will of your Father.
MAT	10	30	너희에게는 머리털까지 다 세신바 되었나니	But the very hairs of your head are all numbered.	And even the very hairs of your head are all numbered.
MAT	10	31	두려워하지 말라 너희는 많은 참새보다 귀하니라	Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many sparrows.	So do not be afraid; you are worth more than many sparrows.
MAT	10	32	누구든지 사람 앞에서 나를 시인하면 나도 하늘에 계신 내 아버지 앞에서 저를 시인할 것이요	Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my Father which is in heaven.	Therefore everyone who confesses Me before men, I will also confess him before My Father in heaven.
MAT	10	33	누구든지 사람 앞에서 나를 부인하면 나도 하늘에 계신 내 아버지 앞에서 저를 부인하리라	But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven.	But whoever denies Me before men, I will also deny him before My Father in heaven.
MAT	10	34	내가 세상에 화평을 주러 온 줄로 생각지 말라 화평이 아니요 검을 주러 왔노라	Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword.	Do not assume that I have come to bring peace to the earth; I have not come to bring peace, but a sword.
MAT	10	35	내가 온 것은 사람이 그 아비와, 딸이 어미와, 며느리가 시어미와 불화하게 하려 함이니	For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law.	For I have come to turn ‘a man against his father, a daughter against her mother, a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.
MAT	10	36	사람의 원수가 자기 집안 식구리라	And a man’s foes shall be they of his own household.	A man’s enemies will be the members of his own household.’
MAT	10	37	아비나 어미를 나보다 더 사랑하는 자는 내게 합당치 아니하고 아들이나 딸을 나보다 더 사랑하는 자도 내게 합당치 아니하고	He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me.	Anyone who loves his father or mother more than Me is not worthy of Me; anyone who loves his son or daughter more than Me is not worthy of Me;
MAT	10	38	또 자기 십자가를 지고 나를 좇지 않는 자도 내게 합당치 아니하니라	And he that taketh not his cross, and followeth after me, is not worthy of me.	and anyone who does not take up his cross and follow Me is not worthy of Me.
MAT	10	39	자기 목숨을 얻는 자는 잃을 것이요 나를 위하여 자기 목숨을 잃는 자는 얻으리라	He that findeth his life shall lose it: and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it.	Whoever finds his life will lose it, and whoever loses his life for My sake will find it.
MAT	10	40	너희를 영접하는 자는 나를 영접하는 것이요 나를 영접하는 자는 나 보내신 이를 영접하는 것이니라	He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me.	He who receives you receives Me, and he who receives Me receives the One who sent Me.
MAT	10	41	선지자의 이름으로 선지자를 영접하는 자는 선지자의 상을 받을 것이요 의인의 이름으로 의인을 영접하는 자는 의인의 상을 받을 것이요	He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a prophet’s reward; and he that receiveth a righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous man’s reward.	Whoever receives a prophet because he is a prophet will receive a prophet’s reward, and whoever receives a righteous man because he is a righteous man will receive a righteous man’s reward.
MAT	10	42	또 누구든지 제자의 이름으로 이 소자 중 하나에게 냉수 한 그릇이라도 주는 자는 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 그 사람이 결단코 상을 잃지 아니하리라 하시니라	And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward.	And if anyone gives even a cup of cold water to one of these little ones because he is My disciple, truly I tell you, he will never lose his reward.”
MAT	11	1	예수께서 열 두 제자에게 명하시기를 마치시고 이에 저희 여러 동네에서 가르치시며 전도하시려고 거기를 떠나 가시니라	And it came to pass, when Jesus had made an end of commanding his twelve disciples, he departed thence to teach and to preach in their cities.	After Jesus had finished instructing His twelve disciples, He went on from there to teach and preach in their cities.
MAT	11	2	요한이 옥에서 그리스도의 하신 일을 듣고 제자들을 보내어	Now when John had heard in the prison the works of Christ, he sent two of his disciples,	Meanwhile John heard in prison about the works of Christ, and he sent his disciples
MAT	11	3	예수께 여짜오되 오실 그이가 당신이오니이까 우리가 다른 이를 기다리오리이까	And said unto him, Art thou he that should come, or do we look for another?	to ask Him, “Are You the One who was to come, or should we look for someone else?”
MAT	11	4	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 너희가 가서 듣고 보는 것을 요한에게 고하되	Jesus answered and said unto them, Go and shew John again those things which ye do hear and see:	Jesus replied, “Go back and report to John what you hear and see:
MAT	11	5	소경이 보며 앉은뱅이가 걸으며 문둥이가 깨끗함을 받으며 귀머거리가 들으며 죽은 자가 살아나며 가난한 자에게 복음이 전파된다 하라	The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have the gospel preached to them.	The blind receive sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the good news is preached to the poor.
MAT	11	6	누구든지 나를 인하여 실족하지 아니하는 자는 복이 있도다 하시니라	And blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me.	Blessed is the one who does not fall away on account of Me.”
MAT	11	7	저희가 떠나매 예수께서 무리에게 요한에 대하여 말씀하시되 너희가 무엇을 보려고 광야에 나갔더냐 바람에 흔들리는 갈대냐	And as they departed, Jesus began to say unto the multitudes concerning John, What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the wind?	As John’s disciples were leaving, Jesus began to speak to the crowds about John: “What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed swaying in the wind?
MAT	11	8	그러면 너희가 무엇을 보려고 나갔더냐 부드러운 옷 입은 사람이냐 부드러운 옷을 입은 자들은 왕궁에 있느니라	But what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? behold, they that wear soft clothing are in kings’ houses.	Otherwise, what did you go out to see? A man dressed in fine clothes? Look, those who wear fine clothing are found in kings’ palaces.
MAT	11	9	그러면 너희가 어찌하여 나갔더냐 선지자를 보려더냐 옳다 내가 너희에게 이르노니 선지자보다도 나은 자니라	But what went ye out for to see? A prophet? yea, I say unto you, and more than a prophet.	What then did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet.
MAT	11	10	기록된 바 보라 내가 내 사자를 네 앞에 보내노니 저가 네 길을 네 앞에 예비하리라 하신 것이 이 사람에 대한 말씀이니라	For this is he, of whom it is written, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.	This is the one about whom it is written: ‘Behold, I will send My messenger ahead of You, who will prepare Your way before You.’
MAT	11	11	내가 진실로 너희에게 말하노니 여자가 낳은 자 중에 침례 요한보다 큰 이가 일어남이 없도다 그러나 천국에서는 극히 작은 자라도 저보다 크니라	Verily I say unto you, Among them that are born of women there hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist: notwithstanding he that is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.	Truly I tell you, among those born of women there has risen no one greater than John the Baptist. Yet even the least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.
MAT	11	12	침례 요한의 때부터 지금까지 천국은 침노를 당하나니 침노하는 자는 빼앗느니라	And from the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force.	From the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven has been subject to violence, and the violent lay claim to it.
MAT	11	13	모든 선지자와 및 율법의 예언한 것이 요한까지니	For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John.	For all the Prophets and the Law prophesied until John.
MAT	11	14	만일 너희가 즐겨 받을진대 오리라 한 엘리야가 곧 이 사람이니라	And if ye will receive it, this is Elias, which was for to come.	And if you are willing to accept it, he is the Elijah who was to come.
MAT	11	15	귀 있는 자는 들을지어다	He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.	He who has ears, let him hear.
MAT	11	16	이 세대를 무엇으로 비유할꼬 비유컨대 아이들이 장터에 앉아 제 동무를 불러	But whereunto shall I liken this generation? It is like unto children sitting in the markets, and calling unto their fellows,	To what can I compare this generation? They are like children sitting in the marketplaces and calling out to others:
MAT	11	17	가로되 우리가 너희를 향하여 피리를 불어도 너희가 춤추지 않고 우리가 애곡하여도 너희가 가슴을 치지 아니하였다 함과 같도다	And saying, We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned unto you, and ye have not lamented.	‘We played the flute for you, and you did not dance; we sang a dirge, and you did not mourn.’
MAT	11	18	요한이 와서 먹지도 않고 마시지도 아니하매 저희가 말하기를 귀신이 들렸다 하더니	For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, He hath a devil.	For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, ‘He has a demon!’
MAT	11	19	인자는 와서 먹고 마시매 말하기를 보라 먹기를 탐하고 포도주를 즐기는 사람이요 세리와 죄인의 친구로다 하니 지혜는 그 행한 일로 인하여 옳다 함을 얻느니라	The Son of man came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold a man gluttonous, and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners. But wisdom is justified of her children.	The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, ‘Look at this glutton and drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’ But wisdom is vindicated by her actions.”
MAT	11	20	예수께서 권능을 가장 많이 베푸신 고을들이 회개치 아니하므로 그 때에 책망하시되	Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they repented not:	Then Jesus began to denounce the cities in which most of His miracles had been performed, because they did not repent.
MAT	11	21	화가 있을진저 고라신아 화가 있을진저 벳새다야 너희에게서 행한 모든 권능을 두로와 시돈에서 행하였더면 저희가 벌써 베옷을 입고 재에 앉아 회개하였으리라	Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the mighty works, which were done in you, had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.	“Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the miracles that were performed in you had been performed in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
MAT	11	22	내가 너희에게 이르노니 심판날에 두로와 시돈이 너희보다 견디기 쉬우리라	But I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the day of judgment, than for you.	But I tell you, it will be more bearable for Tyre and Sidon on the day of judgment than for you.
MAT	11	23	가버나움아 네가 하늘에까지 높아지겠느냐 음부에까지 낮아지리라 네게서 행한 모든 권능을 소돔에서 행하였더면 그 성이 오늘날까지 있었으리라	And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell: for if the mighty works, which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day.	And you, Capernaum, will you be lifted up to heaven? No, you will be brought down to Hades! For if the miracles that were performed in you had been performed in Sodom, it would have remained to this day.
MAT	11	24	내가 너희에게 이르노니 심판날에 소돔 땅이 너보다 견디기 쉬우리라 하시니라	But I say unto you, That it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee.	But I tell you that it will be more bearable for Sodom on the day of judgment than for you.”
MAT	11	25	그 때에 예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 천지의 주재이신 아버지여 이것을 지혜롭고 슬기 있는 자들에게는 숨기시고 어린 아이들에게는 나타내심을 감사하나이다	At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes.	At that time Jesus declared, “I praise You, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because You have hidden these things from the wise and learned, and revealed them to little children.
MAT	11	26	옳소이다 이렇게 된 것이 아버지의 뜻이니이다	Even so, Father: for so it seemed good in thy sight.	Yes, Father, for this was well-pleasing in Your sight.
MAT	11	27	내 아버지께서 모든 것을 내게 주셨으니 아버지 외에는 아들을 아는 자가 없고 아들과 또 아들의 소원대로 계시를 받는 자 외에는 아버지를 아는 자가 없느니라	All things are delivered unto me of my Father: and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him.	All things have been entrusted to Me by My Father. No one knows the Son except the Father, and no one knows the Father except the Son and those to whom the Son chooses to reveal Him.
MAT	11	28	수고하고 무거운 짐진 자들아 다 내게로 오라 내가 너희를 쉬게 하리라	Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.	Come to Me, all you who are weary and burdened, and I will give you rest.
MAT	11	29	나는 마음이 온유하고 겸손하니 나의 멍에를 메고 내게 배우라 그러면 너희 마음이 쉼을 얻으리니	Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls.	Take My yoke upon you and learn from Me; for I am gentle and humble in heart, and you will find rest for your souls.
MAT	11	30	이는 내 멍에는 쉽고 내 짐은 가벼움이라 하시니라	For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.	For My yoke is easy and My burden is light.”
MAT	12	1	그 때에 예수께서 안식일에 밀밭 사이로 가실새 제자들이 시장하여 이삭을 잘라 먹으니	At that time Jesus went on the sabbath day through the corn; and his disciples were an hungred, and began to pluck the ears of corn, and to eat.	At that time Jesus went through the grainfields on the Sabbath. His disciples were hungry and began to pick the heads of grain and eat them.
MAT	12	2	바리새인들이 보고 예수께 고하되 보시오 당신의 제자들이 안식일에 하지 못할 일을 하나이다	But when the Pharisees saw it, they said unto him, Behold, thy disciples do that which is not lawful to do upon the sabbath day.	When the Pharisees saw this, they said to Him, “Look, Your disciples are doing what is unlawful on the Sabbath.”
MAT	12	3	예수께서 가라사대 다윗이 자기와 그 함께 한 자들이 시장할 때에 한 일을 읽지 못하였느냐	But he said unto them, Have ye not read what David did, when he was an hungred, and they that were with him;	Jesus replied, “Have you not read what David did when he and his companions were hungry?
MAT	12	4	그가 하나님의 전에 들어가서 제사장 외에는 자기나 그 함께한 자들이 먹지 못하는 진설병을 먹지 아니하였느냐	How he entered into the house of God, and did eat the shewbread, which was not lawful for him to eat, neither for them which were with him, but only for the priests?	He entered the house of God, and he and his companions ate the consecrated bread, which was not lawful for them to eat, but only for the priests.
MAT	12	5	또 안식일에 제사장들이 성전 안에서 안식을 범하여도 죄가 없음을 너희가 율법에서 읽지 못하였느냐	Or have ye not read in the law, how that on the sabbath days the priests in the temple profane the sabbath, and are blameless?	Or haven’t you read in the Law that on the Sabbath the priests in the temple break the Sabbath and yet are innocent?
MAT	12	6	내가 너희에게 이르노니 성전보다 더 큰 이가 여기 있느니라	But I say unto you, That in this place is one greater than the temple.	But I tell you that something greater than the temple is here.
MAT	12	7	나는 자비를 원하고 제사를 원치 아니하노라 하신 뜻을 너희가 알았더면 무죄한 자를 죄로 정치 아니하였으리라	But if ye had known what this meaneth, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the guiltless.	If only you had known the meaning of ‘I desire mercy, not sacrifice,’ you would not have condemned the innocent.
MAT	12	8	인자는 안식일의 주인이니라 하시니라	For the Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath day.	For the Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath.”
MAT	12	9	거기를 떠나 저희 회당에 들어가시니	And when he was departed thence, he went into their synagogue:	Moving on from there, Jesus entered their synagogue,
MAT	12	10	한편 손 마른 사람이 있는지라 사람들이 예수를 송사하려 하여 물어 가로되 안식일에 병 고치는 것이 옳으니이까	And, behold, there was a man which had his hand withered. And they asked him, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath days? that they might accuse him.	and a man with a withered hand was there. In order to accuse Jesus, they asked Him, “Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath?”
MAT	12	11	예수께서 가라사대 너희 중에 어느 사람이 양 한 마리가 있어 안식일에 구덩이에 빠졌으면 붙잡아 내지 않겠느냐	And he said unto them, What man shall there be among you, that shall have one sheep, and if it fall into a pit on the sabbath day, will he not lay hold on it, and lift it out?	He replied, “If one of you has a sheep and it falls into a pit on the Sabbath, will he not take hold of it and lift it out?
MAT	12	12	사람이 양보다 얼마나 더 귀하냐 그러므로 안식일에 선을 행하는 것이 옳으니라 하시고	How much then is a man better than a sheep? Wherefore it is lawful to do well on the sabbath days.	How much more valuable is a man than a sheep! Therefore it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath.”
MAT	12	13	이에 그 사람에게 이르시되 손을 내밀라 하시니 저가 내밀매 다른 손과 같이 회복되어 성하더라	Then saith he to the man, Stretch forth thine hand. And he stretched it forth; and it was restored whole, like as the other.	Then Jesus said to the man, “Stretch out your hand.” So he stretched it out, and it was restored to full use, just like the other.
MAT	12	14	바리새인들이 나가서 어떻게 하여 예수를 죽일꼬 의논하거늘	Then the Pharisees went out, and held a council against him, how they might destroy him.	But the Pharisees went out and plotted how they might kill Jesus.
MAT	12	15	예수께서 아시고 거기를 떠나가시니 사람이 많이 좇는지라 예수께서 저희 병을 다 고치시고	But when Jesus knew it, he withdrew himself from thence: and great multitudes followed him, and he healed them all;	Aware of this, Jesus withdrew from that place. Large crowds followed Him, and He healed them all,
MAT	12	16	자기를 나타내지 말라 경계하셨으니	And charged them that they should not make him known:	warning them not to make Him known.
MAT	12	17	이는 선지자 이사야로 말씀하신 바	That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying,	This was to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet Isaiah:
MAT	12	18	보라 나의 택한 종 곧 내 마음에 기뻐하는 바 나의 사랑하는 자로다 내가 내 성령을 줄 터이니 그가 심판을 이방에 알게 하리라	Behold my servant, whom I have chosen; my beloved, in whom my soul is well pleased: I will put my spirit upon him, and he shall shew judgment to the Gentiles.	“Here is My Servant, whom I have chosen, My beloved, in whom My soul delights. I will put My Spirit on Him, and He will proclaim justice to the nations.
MAT	12	19	그가 다투지도 아니하며 들레지도 아니하리니 아무도 길에서 그 소리를 듣지 못하리라	He shall not strive, nor cry; neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets.	He will not quarrel or cry out; no one will hear His voice in the streets.
MAT	12	20	상한 갈대를 꺾지 아니하며 꺼져가는 심지를 끄지 아니하기를 심판하여 이길 때까지 하리니	A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory.	A bruised reed He will not break, and a smoldering wick He will not extinguish, till He leads justice to victory.
MAT	12	21	또한 이방들이 그 이름을 바라리라 함을 이루려 하심이니라	And in his name shall the Gentiles trust.	In His name the nations will put their hope.”
MAT	12	22	그 때에 귀신들려 눈 멀고 벙어리 된 자를 데리고 왔거늘 예수께서 고쳐 주시매 그 벙어리가 말하며 보게 된지라	Then was brought unto him one possessed with a devil, blind, and dumb: and he healed him, insomuch that the blind and dumb both spake and saw.	Then a demon-possessed man who was blind and mute was brought to Jesus, and He healed the man so that he could speak and see.
MAT	12	23	무리가 다 놀라 가로되 이는 다윗의 자손이 아니냐 하니	And all the people were amazed, and said, Is not this the son of David?	The crowds were astounded and asked, “Could this be the Son of David?”
MAT	12	24	바리새인들은 듣고 가로되 이가 귀신의 왕 바알세불을 힘입지 않고는 귀신을 쫓아 내지 못하느니라 하거늘	But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, This fellow doth not cast out devils, but by Beelzebub the prince of the devils.	But when the Pharisees heard this, they said, “Only by Beelzebul, the prince of demons, does this man drive out demons.”
MAT	12	25	예수께서 저희 생각을 아시고 가라사대 스스로 분쟁하는 나라마다 황폐하여질 것이요 스스로 분쟁하는 동네나 집마다 서지 못하리라	And Jesus knew their thoughts, and said unto them, Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation; and every city or house divided against itself shall not stand:	Knowing their thoughts, Jesus said to them, “Every kingdom divided against itself will be laid waste, and every city or household divided against itself will not stand.
MAT	12	26	사단이 만일 사단을 쫓아 내면 스스로 분쟁하는 것이니 그리하고야 저의 나라가 어떻게 서겠느냐	And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself; how shall then his kingdom stand?	If Satan drives out Satan, he is divided against himself. How then can his kingdom stand?
MAT	12	27	또 내가 바알세불을 힘입어 귀신을 쫓아 내면 너희 아들들은 누구를 힘입어 쫓아 내느냐 그러므로 저희가 너희 재판관이 되리라	And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your children cast them out? therefore they shall be your judges.	And if I drive out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your sons drive them out? So then, they will be your judges.
MAT	12	28	그러나 내가 하나님의 성령을 힘입어 귀신을 쫓아 내는 것이면 하나님의 나라가 이미 너희에게 임하였느니라	But if I cast out devils by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God is come unto you.	But if I drive out demons by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God has come upon you.
MAT	12	29	사람이 먼저 강한 자를 결박하지 않고야 어떻게 그 강한 자의 집에 들어가 그 세간을 늑탈하겠느냐 결박한 후에야 그 집을 늑탈하리라	Or else how can one enter into a strong man’s house, and spoil his goods, except he first bind the strong man? and then he will spoil his house.	Or again, how can anyone enter a strong man’s house and steal his possessions, unless he first ties up the strong man? Then he can plunder his house.
MAT	12	30	나와 함께 아니하는 자는 나를 반대하는 자요 나와 함께 모으지 아니하는 자는 헤치는 자니라	He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad.	He who is not with Me is against Me, and he who does not gather with Me scatters.
MAT	12	31	그러므로 내가 너희에게 이르노니 사람의 모든 죄와 훼방은 사하심을 얻되 성령을 훼방하는 것은 사하심을 얻지 못하겠고	Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men.	Therefore I tell you, every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven men, but the blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven.
MAT	12	32	또 누구든지 말로 인자를 거역하면 사하심을 얻되 누구든지 말로 성령을 거역하면 이 세상과 오는 세상에도 사하심을 얻지 못하리라	And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come.	Whoever speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven, either in this age or in the one to come.
MAT	12	33	나무도 좋고 실과도 좋다 하든지 나무도 좋지 않고 실과도 좋지 않다 하든지 하라 그 실과로 나무를 아느니라	Either make the tree good, and his fruit good; or else make the tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt: for the tree is known by his fruit.	Make a tree good and its fruit will be good, or make a tree bad and its fruit will be bad; for a tree is known by its fruit.
MAT	12	34	독사의 자식들아 너희는 악하니 어떻게 선한 말을 할 수 있느냐 이는 마음에 가득한 것을 입으로 말함이라	O generation of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things? for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh.	You brood of vipers, how can you who are evil say anything good? For out of the overflow of the heart, the mouth speaks.
MAT	12	35	선한 사람은 그 쌓은 선에서 선한 것을 내고 악한 사람은 그 쌓은 악에서 악한 것을 내느니라	A good man out of the good treasure of the heart bringeth forth good things: and an evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth forth evil things.	The good man brings good things out of his good store of treasure, and the evil man brings evil things out of his evil store of treasure.
MAT	12	36	내가 너희에게 이르노니 사람이 무슨 무익한 말을 하든지 심판 날에 이에 대하여 심문을 받으리니	But I say unto you, That every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment.	But I tell you that men will give an account on the day of judgment for every careless word they have spoken.
MAT	12	37	네 말로 의롭다함을 받고 네 말로 정죄함을 받으리라	For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned.	For by your words you will be acquitted, and by your words you will be condemned.”
MAT	12	38	그 때에 서기관과 바리새인 중 몇 사람이 말하되 선생님이여 우리에게 표적 보여 주시기를 원하나이다	Then certain of the scribes and of the Pharisees answered, saying, Master, we would see a sign from thee.	Then some of the scribes and Pharisees said to Him, “Teacher, we want to see a sign from You.”
MAT	12	39	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 악하고 음란한 세대가 표적을 구하나 선지자 요나의 표적 밖에는 보일 표적이 없느니라	But he answered and said unto them, An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas:	Jesus replied, “A wicked and adulterous generation demands a sign, but none will be given it except the sign of the prophet Jonah.
MAT	12	40	요나가 밤낮 사흘을 큰 물고기 뱃속에 있었던 것 같이 인자도 밤낮 사흘을 땅 속에 있으리라	For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the whale’s belly; so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.	For as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the great fish, so the Son of Man will be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
MAT	12	41	심판 때에 니느웨 사람들이 일어나 이 세대 사람을 정죄하리니 이는 그들이 요나의 전도를 듣고 회개하였음이어니와 요나보다 더 큰 이가 여기 있으며	The men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: because they repented at the preaching of Jonas; and, behold, a greater than Jonas is here.	The men of Nineveh will stand at the judgment with this generation and condemn it; for they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and now One greater than Jonah is here.
MAT	12	42	심판 때에 남방 여왕이 일어나 이 세대 사람을 정죄하리니 이는 그가 솔로몬의 지혜로운 말을 들으려고 땅 끝에서 왔음이어니와 솔로몬보다 더 큰 이가 여기 있느니라	The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: for she came from the uttermost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and, behold, a greater than Solomon is here.	The Queen of the South will rise at the judgment with this generation and condemn it; for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and now One greater than Solomon is here.
MAT	12	43	더러운 귀신이 사람에게서 나갔을 때에 물 없는 곳으로 다니며 쉬기를 구하되 얻지 못하고	When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through dry places, seeking rest, and findeth none.	When an unclean spirit comes out of a man, it passes through arid places seeking rest and does not find it.
MAT	12	44	이에 가로되 내가 나온 집으로 돌아가리라 하고 와 보니 그 집이 비고 소제되고 수리되었거늘	Then he saith, I will return into my house from whence I came out; and when he is come, he findeth it empty, swept, and garnished.	Then it says, ‘I will return to the house I left.’ On its return, it finds the house vacant, swept clean, and put in order.
MAT	12	45	이에 가서 저보다 더 악한 귀신 일곱을 데리고 들어가서 거하니 그 사람의 나중 형편이 전보다 더욱 심하게 되느니라 이 악한 세대가 또한 이렇게 되리라	Then goeth he, and taketh with himself seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell there: and the last state of that man is worse than the first. Even so shall it be also unto this wicked generation.	Then it goes and brings with it seven other spirits more wicked than itself, and they go in and dwell there; and the final plight of that man is worse than the first. So will it be with this wicked generation.”
MAT	12	46	예수께서 무리에게 말씀하실 때에 그 모친과 동생들이 예수께 말하려고 밖에 섰더니	While he yet talked to the people, behold, his mother and his brethren stood without, desiring to speak with him.	While Jesus was still speaking to the crowds, His mother and brothers stood outside, wanting to speak to Him.
MAT	12	47	한사람이 예수께 여짜오되 보소서 당신의 모친과 동생들이 당신께 말하려고 밖에 섰나이다 하니	Then one said unto him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring to speak with thee.	Someone told Him, “Look, Your mother and brothers are standing outside, wanting to speak to You.”
MAT	12	48	말하던 사람에게 대답하여 가라사대 누가 내 모친이며 내 동생들이냐 하시고	But he answered and said unto him that told him, Who is my mother? and who are my brethren?	But Jesus replied, “Who is My mother, and who are My brothers?”
MAT	12	49	손을 내밀어 제자들을 가리켜 가라사대 나의 모친과 나의 동생들을 보라	And he stretched forth his hand toward his disciples, and said, Behold my mother and my brethren!	Pointing to His disciples, He said, “Here are My mother and My brothers.
MAT	12	50	누구든지 하늘에 계신 내 아버지의 뜻대로 하는 자가 내 형제요 자매요 모친이니라 하시더라	For whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.	For whoever does the will of My Father in heaven is My brother and sister and mother.”
MAT	13	1	그 날에 예수께서 집에서 나가사 바닷가에 앉으시매	The same day went Jesus out of the house, and sat by the sea side.	That same day Jesus went out of the house and sat by the sea.
MAT	13	2	큰 무리가 그에게로 모여 들거늘 예수께서 배에 올라가 앉으시고 온 무리는 해변에 섰더니	And great multitudes were gathered together unto him, so that he went into a ship, and sat; and the whole multitude stood on the shore.	Such large crowds gathered around Him that He got into a boat and sat down, while all the people stood on the shore.
MAT	13	3	예수께서 비유로 여러가지를 저희에게 말씀하여 가라사대 씨를 뿌리는 자가 뿌리러 나가서	And he spake many things unto them in parables, saying, Behold, a sower went forth to sow;	And He told them many things in parables, saying, “A farmer went out to sow his seed.
MAT	13	4	뿌릴새 더러는 길 가에 떨어지매 새들이 와서 먹어버렸고	And when he sowed, some seeds fell by the way side, and the fowls came and devoured them up:	And as he was sowing, some seed fell along the path, and the birds came and devoured it.
MAT	13	5	더러는 흙이 얇은 돌밭에 떨어지매 흙이 깊지 아니하므로 곧 싹이 나오나	Some fell upon stony places, where they had not much earth: and forthwith they sprung up, because they had no deepness of earth:	Some fell on rocky ground, where it did not have much soil. It sprang up quickly because the soil was shallow.
MAT	13	6	해가 돋은 후에 타져서 뿌리가 없으므로 말랐고	And when the sun was up, they were scorched; and because they had no root, they withered away.	But when the sun rose, the seedlings were scorched, and they withered because they had no root.
MAT	13	7	더러는 가시떨기 위에 떨어지매 가시가 자라서 기운을 막았고	And some fell among thorns; and the thorns sprung up, and choked them:	Other seed fell among thorns, which grew up and choked the seedlings.
MAT	13	8	더러는 좋은 땅에 떨어지매 혹 백 배, 혹 육십 배, 혹 삼십 배의 결실을 하였느니라	But other fell into good ground, and brought forth fruit, some an hundredfold, some sixtyfold, some thirtyfold.	Still other seed fell on good soil and produced a crop—a hundredfold, sixtyfold, or thirtyfold.
MAT	13	9	귀 있는 자는 들으라 하시니라	Who hath ears to hear, let him hear.	He who has ears, let him hear.”
MAT	13	10	제자들이 예수께 나아와 가로되 어찌하여 저희에게 비유로 말씀하시나이까	And the disciples came, and said unto him, Why speakest thou unto them in parables?	Then the disciples came to Jesus and asked, “Why do You speak to the people in parables?”
MAT	13	11	대답하여 가라사대 천국의 비밀을 아는 것이 너희에게는 허락되었으나 저희에게는 아니 되었나니	He answered and said unto them, Because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given.	He replied, “The knowledge of the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven has been given to you, but not to them.
MAT	13	12	무릇 있는 자는 받아 넉넉하게 되되 무릇 없는 자는 그 있는 것도 빼앗기리라	For whosoever hath, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance: but whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken away even that he hath.	Whoever has will be given more, and he will have an abundance. Whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.
MAT	13	13	그러므로 내가 저희에게 비유로 말하기는 저희가 보아도 보지 못하며 들어도 듣지 못하며 깨닫지 못함이니라	Therefore speak I to them in parables: because they seeing see not; and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand.	This is why I speak to them in parables: ‘Though seeing, they do not see; though hearing, they do not hear or understand.’
MAT	13	14	이사야의 예언이 저희에게 이루었으니 일렀으되 너희가 듣기는 들어도 깨닫지 못할 것이요 보기는 보아도 알지 못하리라	And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias, which saith, By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive:	In them the prophecy of Isaiah is fulfilled: ‘You will be ever hearing but never understanding; you will be ever seeing but never perceiving.
MAT	13	15	이 백성들의 마음이 완악하여져서 그 귀는 듣기에 둔하고 눈은 감았으니 이는 눈으로 보고 귀로 듣고 마음으로 깨달아 돌이켜 내게 고침을 받을까 두려워 함이라 하였느니라	For this people’s heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have closed; lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them.	For this people’s heart has grown callous; they hardly hear with their ears, and they have closed their eyes. Otherwise they might see with their eyes, hear with their ears, understand with their hearts, and turn, and I would heal them.’
MAT	13	16	그러나 너희 눈은 봄으로 너희 귀는 들음으로 복이 있도다	But blessed are your eyes, for they see: and your ears, for they hear.	But blessed are your eyes because they see, and your ears because they hear.
MAT	13	17	내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 많은 선지자와 의인이 너희 보는 것들을 보고자 하여도 보지 못하였고 너희 듣는 것들을 듣고자 하여도 듣지 못하였느니라	For verily I say unto you, That many prophets and righteous men have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them.	For truly I tell you, many prophets and righteous men longed to see what you see but did not see it, and to hear what you hear but did not hear it.
MAT	13	18	그런즉 씨 뿌리는 비유를 들으라	Hear ye therefore the parable of the sower.	Consider, then, the parable of the sower:
MAT	13	19	아무나 천국 말씀을 듣고 깨닫지 못할 때는 악한 자가 와서 그 마음에 뿌리는 것을 빼앗나니 이는 곧 길가에 뿌리운 자요	When any one heareth the word of the kingdom, and understandeth it not, then cometh the wicked one, and catcheth away that which was sown in his heart. This is he which received seed by the way side.	When anyone hears the message of the kingdom but does not understand it, the evil one comes and snatches away what was sown in his heart. This is the seed sown along the path.
MAT	13	20	돌밭에 뿌리웠다는 것은 말씀을 듣고 즉시 기쁨으로 받되	But he that received the seed into stony places, the same is he that heareth the word, and anon with joy receiveth it;	The seed sown on rocky ground is the one who hears the word and at once receives it with joy.
MAT	13	21	그 속에 뿌리가 없어 잠시 견디다가 말씀을 인하여 환난이나 핍박이 일어나는 때에는 곧 넘어지는 자요	Yet hath he not root in himself, but dureth for a while: for when tribulation or persecution ariseth because of the word, by and by he is offended.	But since he has no root, he remains for only a season. When trouble or persecution comes because of the word, he quickly falls away.
MAT	13	22	가시떨기에 뿌리웠다는 것은 말씀을 들으나 세상의 염려와 재리의 유혹에 말씀이 막혀 결실치 못하는 자요	He also that received seed among the thorns is he that heareth the word; and the care of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, choke the word, and he becometh unfruitful.	The seed sown among the thorns is the one who hears the word, but the worries of this life and the deceitfulness of wealth choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful.
MAT	13	23	좋은 땅에 뿌리웠다는 것은 말씀을 듣고 깨닫는 자니 결실하여 혹 백 배, 혹 육십 배, 혹 삼십 배가 되느니라 하시더라	But he that received seed into the good ground is he that heareth the word, and understandeth it; which also beareth fruit, and bringeth forth, some an hundredfold, some sixty, some thirty.	But the seed sown on good soil is the one who hears the word and understands it. He indeed bears fruit and produces a crop—a hundredfold, sixtyfold, or thirtyfold.”
MAT	13	24	예수께서 그들 앞에 또 비유를 베풀어 가라사대 천국은 좋은 씨를 제 밭에 뿌린 사람과 같으니	Another parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is likened unto a man which sowed good seed in his field:	Jesus put before them another parable: “The kingdom of heaven is like a man who sowed good seed in his field.
MAT	13	25	사람들이 잘 때에 그 원수가 와서 곡식 가운데 가라지를 덧뿌리고 갔더니	But while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way.	But while everyone was asleep, his enemy came and sowed weeds among the wheat, and slipped away.
MAT	13	26	싹이 나고 결실할 때에 가라지도 보이거늘	But when the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares also.	When the wheat sprouted and bore grain, then the weeds also appeared.
MAT	13	27	집 주인의 종들이 와서 말하되 주여 밭에 좋은 씨를 심지 아니하였나이까 그러면 가라지가 어디서 생겼나이까	So the servants of the householder came and said unto him, Sir, didst not thou sow good seed in thy field? from whence then hath it tares?	The owner’s servants came to him and said, ‘Sir, didn’t you sow good seed in your field? Where then did the weeds come from?’
MAT	13	28	주인이 가로되 원수가 이렇게 하였구나 종들이 말하되 그러면 우리가 가서 이것을 뽑기를 원하시나이까	He said unto them, An enemy hath done this. The servants said unto him, Wilt thou then that we go and gather them up?	‘An enemy did this,’ he replied. So the servants asked him, ‘Do you want us to go and pull them up?’
MAT	13	29	주인이 가로되 가만 두어라 가라지를 뽑다가 곡식까지 뽑을까 염려하노라	But he said, Nay; lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat with them.	‘No,’ he said, ‘if you pull the weeds now, you might uproot the wheat with them.
MAT	13	30	둘 다 추수 때까지 함께 자라게 두어라 추수 때에 내가 추수꾼들에게 말하기를 가라지는 먼저 거두어 불사르게 단으로 묶고 곡식은 모아 내 곳간에 넣으라 하리라	Let both grow together until the harvest: and in the time of harvest I will say to the reapers, Gather ye together first the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them: but gather the wheat into my barn.	Let both grow together until the harvest. At that time I will tell the harvesters: First collect the weeds and tie them in bundles to be burned; then gather the wheat into my barn.’”
MAT	13	31	또 비유를 베풀어 가라사대 천국은 마치 사람이 자기 밭에 갖다 심은 겨자씨 한 알 같으니	Another parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is like to a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and sowed in his field:	He put before them another parable: “The kingdom of heaven is like a mustard seed that a man planted in his field.
MAT	13	32	이는 모든 씨보다 작은 것이로되 자란 후에는 나물보다 커서 나무가 되매 공중의 새들이 와서 그 가지에 깃들이느니라	Which indeed is the least of all seeds: but when it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof.	Although it is the smallest of all seeds, yet it grows into the largest of garden plants and becomes a tree, so that the birds of the air come and nest in its branches.”
MAT	13	33	또 비유로 말씀하시되 천국은 마치 여자가 가루 서 말 속에 갖다 넣어 전부 부풀게 한 누룩과 같으니라	Another parable spake he unto them; The kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a woman took, and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.	He told them still another parable: “The kingdom of heaven is like leaven that a woman took and mixed into three measures of flour, until all of it was leavened.”
MAT	13	34	예수께서 이 모든 것을 무리에게 비유로 말씀하시고 비유가 아니면 아무 것도 말씀하지 아니하셨으니	All these things spake Jesus unto the multitude in parables; and without a parable spake he not unto them:	Jesus spoke all these things to the crowds in parables. He did not tell them anything without using a parable.
MAT	13	35	이는 선지자로 말씀하신 바 내가 입을 열어 비유로 말하고 창세부터 감추인 것들을 드러내리라 함을 이루려 하심이니라	That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying, I will open my mouth in parables; I will utter things which have been kept secret from the foundation of the world.	So was fulfilled what was spoken through the prophet: “I will open My mouth in parables; I will utter things hidden since the foundation of the world.”
MAT	13	36	이에 예수께서 무리를 떠나사 집에 들어가시니 제자들이 나아와 가로되 밭의 가라지의 비유룰 우리에게 설명하여 주소서	Then Jesus sent the multitude away, and went into the house: and his disciples came unto him, saying, Declare unto us the parable of the tares of the field.	Then Jesus dismissed the crowds and went into the house. His disciples came to Him and said, “Explain to us the parable of the weeds in the field.”
MAT	13	37	대답하여 가라사대 좋은 씨를 뿌리는 이는 인자요	He answered and said unto them, He that soweth the good seed is the Son of man;	He replied, “The One who sows the good seed is the Son of Man.
MAT	13	38	밭은 세상이요 좋은 씨는 천국의 아들들이요 가라지는 악한 자의 아들들이요	The field is the world; the good seed are the children of the kingdom; but the tares are the children of the wicked one;	The field is the world, and the good seed represents the sons of the kingdom. The weeds are the sons of the evil one,
MAT	13	39	가라지를 심은 원수는 마귀요 추수 때는 세상 끝이요 추수꾼은 천사들이니	The enemy that sowed them is the devil; the harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are the angels.	and the enemy who sows them is the devil. The harvest is the end of the age, and the harvesters are angels.
MAT	13	40	그런즉 가라지를 거두어 불에 사르는 것 같이 세상 끝에도 그러하리라	As therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire; so shall it be in the end of this world.	As the weeds are collected and burned in the fire, so will it be at the end of the age.
MAT	13	41	인자가 그 천사들을 보내리니 저희가 그 나라에서 모든 넘어지게 하는 것과 또 불법을 행하는 자들을 거두어 내어	The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity;	The Son of Man will send out His angels, and they will weed out of His kingdom every cause of sin and all who practice lawlessness.
MAT	13	42	풀무불에 던져 넣으리니 거기서 울며 이를 갊이 있으리라	And shall cast them into a furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.	And they will throw them into the fiery furnace, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
MAT	13	43	그 때에 의인들은 자기 아버지 나라에서 해와 같이 빛나리라 귀있는 자는 들으라	Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. Who hath ears to hear, let him hear.	Then the righteous will shine like the sun in the kingdom of their Father. He who has ears, let him hear.
MAT	13	44	천국은 마치 밭에 감추인 보화와 같으니 사람이 이를 발견한 후 숨겨두고 기뻐하여 돌아가서 자기의 소유를 다 팔아 그 밭을 샀느니라	Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a field; the which when a man hath found, he hideth, and for joy thereof goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field.	The kingdom of heaven is like treasure hidden in a field. When a man found it, he hid it again, and in his joy he went and sold all he had and bought that field.
MAT	13	45	또 천국은 마치 좋은 진주를 구하는 장사와 같으니	Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant man, seeking goodly pearls:	Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a merchant in search of fine pearls.
MAT	13	46	극히 값진 진주 하나를 만나매 가서 자기의 소유를 다 팔아 그 진주를 샀느니라	Who, when he had found one pearl of great price, went and sold all that he had, and bought it.	When he found one very precious pearl, he went away and sold all he had and bought it.
MAT	13	47	또 천국은 마치 바다에 치고 각종 물고기를 모는 그물과 같으니	Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net, that was cast into the sea, and gathered of every kind:	Once again, the kingdom of heaven is like a net that was cast into the sea and caught all kinds of fish.
MAT	13	48	그물에 가득하매 물 가로 끌어 내고 앉아서 좋은 것은 그릇에 담고 못된 것은 내어 버리느니라	Which, when it was full, they drew to shore, and sat down, and gathered the good into vessels, but cast the bad away.	When it was full, the men pulled it ashore. Then they sat down and sorted the good fish into containers, but threw the bad away.
MAT	13	49	세상 끝에도 이러하리라 천사들이 와서 의인 중에서 악인을 갈라내어	So shall it be at the end of the world: the angels shall come forth, and sever the wicked from among the just,	So will it be at the end of the age: The angels will come and separate the wicked from the righteous,
MAT	13	50	풀무불에 던져 넣으리니 거기서 울며 이를 갊이 있으리라	And shall cast them into the furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.	and throw them into the fiery furnace, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
MAT	13	51	이 모든 것을 깨달았느냐 하시니 대답하되 그러하오이다	Jesus saith unto them, Have ye understood all these things? They say unto him, Yea, Lord.	Have you understood all these things?” “Yes,” they answered.
MAT	13	52	예수께서 가라사대 그러므로 천국의 제자된 서기관마다 마치 새 것과 옛 것을 그 곳간에서 내어 오는 집 주인과 같으니라	Then said he unto them, Therefore every scribe which is instructed unto the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an householder, which bringeth forth out of his treasure things new and old.	Then He told them, “For this reason, every scribe who has been discipled in the kingdom of heaven is like a homeowner who brings out of his storeroom new treasures as well as old.”
MAT	13	53	예수께서 이 모든 비유를 마치신 후에 거기를 떠나서	And it came to pass, that when Jesus had finished these parables, he departed thence.	When Jesus had finished these parables, He withdrew from that place.
MAT	13	54	고향으로 돌아가사 저희 회당에서 가르치시니 저희가 놀라 가로되 이 사람의 이 지혜와 이런 능력이 어디서 났느뇨	And when he was come into his own country, he taught them in their synagogue, insomuch that they were astonished, and said, Whence hath this man this wisdom, and these mighty works?	Coming to His hometown, He taught the people in their synagogue, and they were astonished. “Where did this man get such wisdom and miraculous powers?” they asked.
MAT	13	55	이는 그 목수의 아들이 아니냐 그 모친은 마리아, 그 형제들은 야고보, 요셉, 시몬, 유다라 하지 않느냐	Is not this the carpenter’s son? is not his mother called Mary? and his brethren, James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas?	“Isn’t this the carpenter’s son? Isn’t His mother’s name Mary, and aren’t His brothers James, Joseph, Simon, and Judas?
MAT	13	56	그 누이들은 다 우리와 함께 있지 아니하냐 그런즉 이 사람의 이 모든 것이 어디서 났느뇨 하고	And his sisters, are they not all with us? Whence then hath this man all these things?	Aren’t all His sisters with us as well? Where then did this man get all these things?”
MAT	13	57	예수를 배척한지라 예수께서 저희에게 말씀하시되 선지자가 자기 고향과 자기 집 외에서는 존경을 받지 않음이 없느니라 하시고	And they were offended in him. But Jesus said unto them, A prophet is not without honour, save in his own country, and in his own house.	And they took offense at Him. But Jesus said to them, “Only in his hometown and in his own household is a prophet without honor.”
MAT	13	58	저희의 믿지 않음을 인하여 거기서 많은 능력을 행치 아니하시니라	And he did not many mighty works there because of their unbelief.	And He did not do many miracles there, because of their unbelief.
MAT	14	1	그 때에 분봉 왕 헤롯이 예수의 소문을 듣고	At that time Herod the tetrarch heard of the fame of Jesus,	At that time Herod the tetrarch heard the reports about Jesus
MAT	14	2	그 신하들에게 이르되 이는 침례 요한이라 저가 죽은 자 가운데서 살아 났으니 그러므로 이런 권능이 그 속에서 운동하는도다 하더라	And said unto his servants, This is John the Baptist; he is risen from the dead; and therefore mighty works do shew forth themselves in him.	and said to his servants, “This is John the Baptist; he has risen from the dead! That is why miraculous powers are at work in him.”
MAT	14	3	전에 헤롯이 그 동생 빌립의 아내 헤로디아의 일로 요한을 잡아 결박하여 옥에 가두었으니	For Herod had laid hold on John, and bound him, and put him in prison for Herodias’ sake, his brother Philip’s wife.	Now Herod had arrested John and bound him and put him in prison on account of Herodias, his brother Philip’s wife,
MAT	14	4	이는 요한이 헤롯에게 말하되 당신이 그 여자를 취한 것이 옳지 않다 하였음이라	For John said unto him, It is not lawful for thee to have her.	because John had been telling him, “It is not lawful for you to have her.”
MAT	14	5	헤롯이 요한을 죽이려 하되 민중이 저를 선지자로 여기므로 민중을 두려워하더니	And when he would have put him to death, he feared the multitude, because they counted him as a prophet.	Although Herod wanted to kill John, he was afraid of the people, because they regarded John as a prophet.
MAT	14	6	마침 헤롯의 생일을 당하여 헤로디아의 딸이 연석 가운데서 춤을 추어 헤롯을 기쁘게 하니	But when Herod’s birthday was kept, the daughter of Herodias danced before them, and pleased Herod.	On Herod’s birthday, however, the daughter of Herodias danced before them and pleased Herod
MAT	14	7	헤롯이 맹세로 그에게 무엇이든지 달라는대로 주겠다 허락하거늘	Whereupon he promised with an oath to give her whatsoever she would ask.	so much that he promised with an oath to give to her whatever she asked.
MAT	14	8	그가 제 어미의 시킴을 듣고 가로되 침례 요한의 머리를 소반에 담아 여기서 내게 주소서 하니	And she, being before instructed of her mother, said, Give me here John Baptist’s head in a charger.	Prompted by her mother, she said, “Give me here on a platter the head of John the Baptist.”
MAT	14	9	왕이 근심하나 자기의 맹세한 것과 그 함께 앉은 사람들을 인하여 주라 명하고	And the king was sorry: nevertheless for the oath’s sake, and them which sat with him at meat, he commanded it to be given her.	The king was grieved, but because of his oaths and his guests, he ordered that her wish be granted
MAT	14	10	사람을 보내어 요한을 옥에서 목 베어	And he sent, and beheaded John in the prison.	and sent to have John beheaded in the prison.
MAT	14	11	그 머리를 소반에 담아다가 그 여아에게 주니 그가 제 어미에게 가져 가니라	And his head was brought in a charger, and given to the damsel: and she brought it to her mother.	John’s head was brought in on a platter and presented to the girl, who carried it to her mother.
MAT	14	12	요한의 제자들이 와서 시체를 가져다가 장사하고 가서 예수께 고하니라	And his disciples came, and took up the body, and buried it, and went and told Jesus.	Then John’s disciples came and took his body and buried it. And they went and informed Jesus.
MAT	14	13	예수께서 들으시고 배를 타고 떠나사 따로 빈 들에 가시니 무리가 듣고 여러 고을로부터 걸어서 좇아간지라	When Jesus heard of it, he departed thence by ship into a desert place apart: and when the people had heard thereof, they followed him on foot out of the cities.	When Jesus heard about John, He withdrew by boat privately to a solitary place. But the crowds found out about it and followed Him on foot from the towns.
MAT	14	14	예수께서 나오사 큰 무리를 보시고 불쌍히 여기사 그 중에 있는 병인을 고쳐 주시니라	And Jesus went forth, and saw a great multitude, and was moved with compassion toward them, and he healed their sick.	When He stepped ashore and saw a large crowd, He had compassion on them and healed their sick.
MAT	14	15	저녁이 되매 제자들이 나아와 가로되 이곳은 빈 들이요 때도 이미 저물었으니 무리를 보내어 마을에 들어가 먹을 것을 사먹게 하소서	And when it was evening, his disciples came to him, saying, This is a desert place, and the time is now past; send the multitude away, that they may go into the villages, and buy themselves victuals.	When evening came, the disciples came to Him and said, “This is a desolate place, and the hour is already late. Dismiss the crowds so they can go to the villages and buy themselves some food.”
MAT	14	16	예수께서 가라사대 갈 것 없다 너희가 먹을 것을 주라	But Jesus said unto them, They need not depart; give ye them to eat.	“They do not need to go away,” Jesus replied. “You give them something to eat.”
MAT	14	17	제자들이 가로되 여기 우리에게 있는 것은 떡 다섯 개와 물고기 두 마리뿐이니이다	And they say unto him, We have here but five loaves, and two fishes.	“We have here only five loaves of bread and two fish,” they answered.
MAT	14	18	가라사대 그것을 내게 가져오라 하시고	He said, Bring them hither to me.	“Bring them here to Me,” Jesus said.
MAT	14	19	무리를 명하여 잔디 위에 앉히시고 떡 다섯 개와 물고기 두 마리를 가지사 하늘을 우러러 축사하시고 떡을 떼어 제자들에게 주시매 제자들이 무리에게 주니	And he commanded the multitude to sit down on the grass, and took the five loaves, and the two fishes, and looking up to heaven, he blessed, and brake, and gave the loaves to his disciples, and the disciples to the multitude.	And He directed the crowds to sit down on the grass. Taking the five loaves and the two fish and looking up to heaven, He spoke a blessing. Then He broke the loaves and gave them to the disciples, and the disciples gave them to the people.
MAT	14	20	다 배불리 먹고 남은 조각을 열두 바구니에 차게 거두었으며	And they did all eat, and were filled: and they took up of the fragments that remained twelve baskets full.	They all ate and were satisfied, and the disciples picked up twelve basketfuls of broken pieces that were left over.
MAT	14	21	먹은 사람은 여자와 아이 외에 오천 명이나 되었더라	And they that had eaten were about five thousand men, beside women and children.	About five thousand men were fed, in addition to women and children.
MAT	14	22	예수께서 즉시 제자들을 재촉하사 자기가 무리를 보내는 동안에 배를 타고 앞서 건너편으로 가게 하시고	And straightway Jesus constrained his disciples to get into a ship, and to go before him unto the other side, while he sent the multitudes away.	Immediately Jesus made the disciples get into the boat and go on ahead of Him to the other side, while He dismissed the crowds.
MAT	14	23	무리를 보내신 후에 기도하러 따로 산에 올라가시다 저물매 거기 혼자 계시더니	And when he had sent the multitudes away, he went up into a mountain apart to pray: and when the evening was come, he was there alone.	After He had sent them away, He went up on the mountain by Himself to pray. When evening came, He was there alone,
MAT	14	24	배가 이미 육지에서 수 리나 떠나서 바람이 거슬리므로 물결을 인하여 고난을 당하더라	But the ship was now in the midst of the sea, tossed with waves: for the wind was contrary.	but the boat was already far from land, buffeted by the waves because the wind was against it.
MAT	14	25	밤 사경에 예수께서 바다 위로 걸어서 제자들에게 오시니	And in the fourth watch of the night Jesus went unto them, walking on the sea.	During the fourth watch of the night, Jesus went out to them, walking on the sea.
MAT	14	26	제자들이 그 바다 위로 걸어 오심을 보고 놀라 유령이라 하며 무서워하여 소리지르거늘	And when the disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were troubled, saying, It is a spirit; and they cried out for fear.	When the disciples saw Him walking on the sea, they were terrified. “It’s a ghost!” they said, and cried out in fear.
MAT	14	27	예수께서 즉시 일러 가라사대 안심하라 내니 두려워 말라	But straightway Jesus spake unto them, saying, Be of good cheer; it is I; be not afraid.	But Jesus spoke up at once: “Take courage! It is I. Do not be afraid.”
MAT	14	28	베드로가 대답하여 가로되 주여 만일 주시어든 나를 명하사 물 위로 오라 하소서 한대	And Peter answered him and said, Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto thee on the water.	“Lord, if it is You,” Peter replied, “command me to come to You on the water.”
MAT	14	29	오라 하시니 베드로가 배에서 내려 물 위로 걸어서 예수께로 가되	And he said, Come. And when Peter was come down out of the ship, he walked on the water, to go to Jesus.	“Come,” said Jesus. Then Peter got down out of the boat, walked on the water, and came toward Jesus.
MAT	14	30	바람을 보고 무서워 빠져 가는지라 소리질러 가로되 주여 나를 구원하소서 하니	But when he saw the wind boisterous, he was afraid; and beginning to sink, he cried, saying, Lord, save me.	But when he saw the strength of the wind, he was afraid, and beginning to sink, cried out, “Lord, save me!”
MAT	14	31	예수께서 즉시 손을 내밀어 저를 붙잡으시며 가라사대 믿음이 적은 자여 왜 의심하였느냐 하시고	And immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him, and said unto him, O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?	Immediately Jesus reached out His hand and took hold of Peter. “You of little faith,” He said, “why did you doubt?”
MAT	14	32	배에 함께 오르매 바람이 그치는지라	And when they were come into the ship, the wind ceased.	And when they had climbed back into the boat, the wind died down.
MAT	14	33	배에 있는 사람들이 예수께 절하며 가로되 진실로 하나님의 아들이로소이다 하더라	Then they that were in the ship came and worshipped him, saying, Of a truth thou art the Son of God.	Then those who were in the boat worshiped Him, saying, “Truly You are the Son of God!”
MAT	14	34	저희가 건너가 게네사렛 땅에 이르니	And when they were gone over, they came into the land of Gennesaret.	When they had crossed over, they landed at Gennesaret.
MAT	14	35	그 곳 사람들이 예수신 줄을 알고 그 근방에 두루 통지하여 모든 병든 자를 예수께 데리고 와서	And when the men of that place had knowledge of him, they sent out into all that country round about, and brought unto him all that were diseased;	And when the men of that place recognized Jesus, they sent word to all the surrounding region. People brought all the sick to Him
MAT	14	36	다만 예수의 옷가에라도 손을 대게 하시기를 간구하니 손을 대는 자는 다 나음을 얻으니라	And besought him that they might only touch the hem of his garment: and as many as touched were made perfectly whole.	and begged Him just to let them touch the fringe of His cloak. And all who touched Him were healed.
MAT	15	1	그 때에 바리새인과 서기관들이 예루살렘으로부터 예수께 나아와 가로되	Then came to Jesus scribes and Pharisees, which were of Jerusalem, saying,	Then some Pharisees and scribes came to Jesus from Jerusalem and asked,
MAT	15	2	당신의 제자들이 어찌하여 장로들의 유전을 범하나이까 떡 먹을 때에 손을 씻지 아니하나이다	Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? for they wash not their hands when they eat bread.	“Why do Your disciples break the tradition of the elders? They do not wash their hands before they eat.”
MAT	15	3	대답하여 가라사대 너희는 어찌하여 너희 유전으로 하나님의 계명을 범하느뇨	But he answered and said unto them, Why do ye also transgress the commandment of God by your tradition?	Jesus replied, “And why do you break the command of God for the sake of your tradition?
MAT	15	4	하나님이 이르셨으되 네 부모를 공경하라 하시고 또 아비나 어미를 훼방하는 자는 반드시 죽으리라 하셨거늘	For God commanded, saying, Honour thy father and mother: and, He that curseth father or mother, let him die the death.	For God said, ‘Honor your father and mother’ and ‘Anyone who curses his father or mother must be put to death.’
MAT	15	5	너희는 가로되 누구든지 아비에게나 어미에게 말하기를 내가 드려 유익하게 할 것이 하나님께 드림이 되었다고 하기만 하면	But ye say, Whosoever shall say to his father or his mother, It is a gift, by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me;	But you say that if anyone says to his father or mother, ‘Whatever you would have received from me is a gift devoted to God,’
MAT	15	6	그 부모를 공경할 것이 없다 하여 너희 유전으로 하나님의 말씀을 폐하는도다	And honour not his father or his mother, he shall be free. Thus have ye made the commandment of God of none effect by your tradition.	he need not honor his father or mother with it. Thus you nullify the word of God for the sake of your tradition.
MAT	15	7	외식하는 자들아 이사야가 너희에게 대하여 잘 예언하였도다 일렀으되	Ye hypocrites, well did Esaias prophesy of you, saying,	You hypocrites! Isaiah prophesied correctly about you:
MAT	15	8	이 백성이 입술로는 나를 존경하되 마음은 내게서 멀도다	This people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me with their lips; but their heart is far from me.	‘These people honor Me with their lips, but their hearts are far from Me.
MAT	15	9	사람의 계명으로 교훈을 삼아 가르치니 나를 헛되이 경배하는도다 하였느니라 하시고	But in vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.	They worship Me in vain; they teach as doctrine the precepts of men.’”
MAT	15	10	무리를 불러 이르시되 듣고 깨달으라	And he called the multitude, and said unto them, Hear, and understand:	Jesus called the crowd to Him and said, “Listen and understand.
MAT	15	11	입에 들어가는 것이 사람을 더럽게 하는 것이 아니라 입에서 나오는 그것이 사람을 더럽게 하는 것이니라	Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man; but that which cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man.	A man is not defiled by what enters his mouth, but by what comes out of it.”
MAT	15	12	이에 제자들이 나아와 가로되 바리새인들이 이 말씀을 듣고 걸림이 된 줄 아시나이까	Then came his disciples, and said unto him, Knowest thou that the Pharisees were offended, after they heard this saying?	Then the disciples came to Him and said, “Are You aware that the Pharisees were offended when they heard this?”
MAT	15	13	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 심은 것마다 내 천부께서 심으시지 않은 것은 뽑힐 것이니	But he answered and said, Every plant, which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up.	But Jesus replied, “Every plant that My heavenly Father has not planted will be pulled up by its roots.
MAT	15	14	그냥 두어라 저희는 소경이 소경을 인도하는 자로다 만일 소경이 되어 소경을 인도하면 둘이 다 구덩이에 빠지리라 하신대	Let them alone: they be blind leaders of the blind. And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch.	Disregard them! They are blind guides. If a blind man leads a blind man, both will fall into a pit.”
MAT	15	15	베드로가 대답하여 가로되 이 비유를 우리에게 설명하여 주옵소서	Then answered Peter and said unto him, Declare unto us this parable.	Peter said to Him, “Explain this parable to us.”
MAT	15	16	예수께서 가라사대 너희도 아직까지 깨달음이 없느냐	And Jesus said, Are ye also yet without understanding?	“Do you still not understand?” Jesus asked.
MAT	15	17	입으로 들어가는 모든 것은 배로 들어가서 뒤로 내어버려지는 줄을 알지 못하느냐	Do not ye yet understand, that whatsoever entereth in at the mouth goeth into the belly, and is cast out into the draught?	“Do you not yet realize that whatever enters the mouth goes into the stomach and then is eliminated?
MAT	15	18	입에서 나오는 것들은 마음에서 나오나니 이것이야말로 사람을 더럽게 하느니라	But those things which proceed out of the mouth come forth from the heart; and they defile the man.	But the things that come out of the mouth come from the heart, and these things defile a man.
MAT	15	19	마음에서 나오는 것은 악한 생각과 살인과 간음과 음란과 도적질과 거짓 증거와 훼방이니	For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies:	For out of the heart come evil thoughts, murder, adultery, sexual immorality, theft, false testimony, and slander.
MAT	15	20	이런 것들이 사람을 더럽게 하는 것이요 씻지 않은 손으로 먹는 것은 사람을 더럽게 하지 못하느니라	These are the things which defile a man: but to eat with unwashen hands defileth not a man.	These are what defile a man, but eating with unwashed hands does not defile him.”
MAT	15	21	예수께서 거기서 나가사 두로와 시돈 지방으로 들어가시니	Then Jesus went thence, and departed into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon.	Leaving that place, Jesus withdrew to the district of Tyre and Sidon.
MAT	15	22	가나안 여자 하나가 그 지경에서 나와서 소리질러 가로되 주 다윗의 자손이여 나를 불쌍히 여기소서 내 딸이 흉악히 귀신들렸나이다 하되	And, behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried unto him, saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of David; my daughter is grievously vexed with a devil.	And a Canaanite woman from that region came to Him, crying out, “Lord, Son of David, have mercy on me! My daughter is miserably possessed by a demon.”
MAT	15	23	예수는 한 말씀도 대답지 아니하시니 제자들이 와서 청하여 말하되 그 여자가 우리 뒤에서 소리를 지르오니 보내소서	But he answered her not a word. And his disciples came and besought him, saying, Send her away; for she crieth after us.	But Jesus did not answer a word. So His disciples came and urged Him, “Send her away, for she keeps crying out after us.”
MAT	15	24	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 나는 이스라엘 집의 잃어버린 양 외에는 다른 데로 보내심을 받지 아니하였노라 하신대	But he answered and said, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel.	He answered, “I was sent only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.”
MAT	15	25	여자가 와서 예수께 절하며 가로되 주여 저를 도우소서	Then came she and worshipped him, saying, Lord, help me.	The woman came and knelt before Him. “Lord, help me!” she said.
MAT	15	26	대답하여 가라사대 자녀의 떡을 취하여 개들에게 던짐이 마땅치 아니하니라	But he answered and said, It is not meet to take the children’s bread, and to cast it to dogs.	But Jesus replied, “It is not right to take the children’s bread and toss it to the dogs.”
MAT	15	27	여자가 가로되 주여 옳소이다마는 개들도 제 주인의 상에서 떨어지는 부스러기를 먹나이다 하니	And she said, Truth, Lord: yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters’ table.	“Yes, Lord,” she said, “even the dogs eat the crumbs that fall from their master’s table.”
MAT	15	28	이에 예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 여자야 네 믿음이 크도다 네 소원대로 되리라 하시니 그 시로부터 그의 딸이 나으니라	Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thee even as thou wilt. And her daughter was made whole from that very hour.	“O woman,” Jesus answered, “your faith is great! Let it be done for you as you desire.” And her daughter was healed from that very hour.
MAT	15	29	예수께서 거기서 떠나사 갈릴리 호숫가에 이르러 산에 올라가 거기 앉으시니	And Jesus departed from thence, and came nigh unto the sea of Galilee; and went up into a mountain, and sat down there.	Moving on from there, Jesus went along the Sea of Galilee. Then He went up on a mountain and sat down.
MAT	15	30	큰 무리가 절뚝발이와 불구자와 소경과 벙어리와 기타 여럿을 데리고 와서 예수의 발 앞에 두매 고쳐 주시니	And great multitudes came unto him, having with them those that were lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and many others, and cast them down at Jesus’ feet; and he healed them:	Large crowds came to Him, bringing the lame, the blind, the crippled, the mute, and many others, and laid them at His feet, and He healed them.
MAT	15	31	벙어리가 말하고 불구자가 건전하고 절뚝발이가 걸으며 소경이 보는 것을 무리가 보고 기이히 여겨 이스라엘의 하나님께 영광을 돌리니라	Insomuch that the multitude wondered, when they saw the dumb to speak, the maimed to be whole, the lame to walk, and the blind to see: and they glorified the God of Israel.	The crowd was amazed when they saw the mute speaking, the crippled restored, the lame walking, and the blind seeing. And they glorified the God of Israel.
MAT	15	32	예수께서 제자들을 불러 가라사대 내가 무리를 불쌍히 여기노라 저희가 나와 함께 있은지 이미 사흘이매 먹을 것이 없도다 길에서 기진할까 하여 굶겨 보내지 못하겠노라	Then Jesus called his disciples unto him, and said, I have compassion on the multitude, because they continue with me now three days, and have nothing to eat: and I will not send them away fasting, lest they faint in the way.	Then Jesus called His disciples to Him and said, “I have compassion for this crowd, because they have already been with Me three days and have nothing to eat. I do not want to send them away hungry, or they may faint along the way.”
MAT	15	33	제자들이 가로되 광야에 있어 우리가 어디서 이런 무리의 배부를 만큼 떡을 얻으리이까	And his disciples say unto him, Whence should we have so much bread in the wilderness, as to fill so great a multitude?	The disciples replied, “Where in this desolate place could we find enough bread to feed such a large crowd?”
MAT	15	34	예수께서 가라사대 너희에게 떡이 몇 개나 있느냐 가로되 일곱 개와 작은 생선 두어 마리가 있나이다 하거늘	And Jesus saith unto them, How many loaves have ye? And they said, Seven, and a few little fishes.	“How many loaves do you have?” Jesus asked. “Seven,” they replied, “and a few small fish.”
MAT	15	35	예수께서 무리를 명하여 땅에 앉게 하시고	And he commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground.	And He instructed the crowd to sit down on the ground.
MAT	15	36	떡 일곱 개와 그 생선을 가지사 축사하시고 떼어 제자들에게 주시니 제자들이 무리에게 주매	And he took the seven loaves and the fishes, and gave thanks, and brake them, and gave to his disciples, and the disciples to the multitude.	Taking the seven loaves and the fish, He gave thanks and broke them. Then He gave them to the disciples, and the disciples gave them to the people.
MAT	15	37	다 배불리 먹고 남은 조각을 일곱 광주리에 차게 거두었으며	And they did all eat, and were filled: and they took up of the broken meat that was left seven baskets full.	They all ate and were satisfied, and the disciples picked up seven basketfuls of broken pieces that were left over.
MAT	15	38	먹은 자는 여자와 아이 외에 사천 명이었더라	And they that did eat were four thousand men, beside women and children.	A total of four thousand men were fed, in addition to women and children.
MAT	15	39	예수께서 무리를 흩어 보내시고 배에 오르사 마가단 지경에 가시니라	And he sent away the multitude, and took ship, and came into the coasts of Magdala.	After Jesus had dismissed the crowds, He got into the boat and went to the region of Magadan.
MAT	16	1	바리새인과 사두개인들이 와서 예수를 시험하여 하늘로서 오는 표적 보이기를 청하니	The Pharisees also with the Sadducees came, and tempting desired him that he would shew them a sign from heaven.	Then the Pharisees and Sadducees came and tested Jesus by asking Him to show them a sign from heaven.
MAT	16	2	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 너희가 저녁에 하늘이 붉으면 날이 좋겠다 하고	He answered and said unto them, When it is evening, ye say, It will be fair weather: for the sky is red.	But He replied, “When evening comes, you say, ‘The weather will be fair, for the sky is red,’
MAT	16	3	아침에 하늘이 붉고 흐리면 오늘은 날이 궂겠다 하나니 너희가 천기는 분별할 줄 알면서 시대의 표적은 분별할 수 없느냐	And in the morning, It will be foul weather to day: for the sky is red and lowring. O ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky; but can ye not discern the signs of the times?	and in the morning, ‘Today it will be stormy, for the sky is red and overcast.’ You know how to interpret the appearance of the sky, but not the signs of the times.
MAT	16	4	악하고 음란한 세대가 표적을 구하나 요나의 표적 밖에는 보여줄 표적이 없느니라 하시고 저희를 떠나가시다	A wicked and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be given unto it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas. And he left them, and departed.	A wicked and adulterous generation demands a sign, but none will be given it except the sign of Jonah.” Then He left them and went away.
MAT	16	5	제자들이 건너편으로 갈새 떡 가져가기를 잊었더니	And when his disciples were come to the other side, they had forgotten to take bread.	When they crossed to the other side, the disciples forgot to take bread.
MAT	16	6	예수께서 이르시되 삼가 바리새인과 사두개인들의 누룩을 주의하라 하신대	Then Jesus said unto them, Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees.	“Watch out!” Jesus told them. “Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”
MAT	16	7	제자들이 서로 의논하여 가로되 우리가 떡을 가져오지 아니하였도다 하거늘	And they reasoned among themselves, saying, It is because we have taken no bread.	They discussed this among themselves and concluded, “It is because we did not bring any bread.”
MAT	16	8	예수께서 아시고 가라사대 믿음이 적은 자들아 어찌 떡이 없음으로 서로 의논하느냐	Which when Jesus perceived, he said unto them, O ye of little faith, why reason ye among yourselves, because ye have brought no bread?	Aware of their conversation, Jesus said, “You of little faith, why are you debating among yourselves about having no bread?
MAT	16	9	너희가 아직도 깨닫지 못하느냐 떡 다섯 개로 오천 명을 먹이고 주운 것이 몇 바구니며	Do ye not yet understand, neither remember the five loaves of the five thousand, and how many baskets ye took up?	Do you still not understand? Do you not remember the five loaves for the five thousand, and how many basketfuls you gathered?
MAT	16	10	떡 일곱 개로 사천 명을 먹이고 주운 것이 몇 광주리이던 것을 기억지 못하느냐	Neither the seven loaves of the four thousand, and how many baskets ye took up?	Or the seven loaves for the four thousand, and how many basketfuls you gathered?
MAT	16	11	어찌 내 말한 것이 떡에 관함이 아닌 줄을 깨닫지 못하느냐 오직 바리새인과 사두개인들의 누룩을 주의하라 하시니	How is it that ye do not understand that I spake it not to you concerning bread, that ye should beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees?	How do you not understand that I was not telling you about bread? But beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”
MAT	16	12	그제야 제자들이 떡의 누룩이 아니요 바리새인과 사두개인들의 교훈을 삼가라고 말씀하신 줄을 깨달으니라	Then understood they how that he bade them not beware of the leaven of bread, but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees.	Then they understood that He was not telling them to beware of the leaven used in bread, but of the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
MAT	16	13	예수께서 가이사랴 빌립보 지방에 이르러 제자들에게 물어 가라사대 사람들이 인자를 누구라 하느냐	When Jesus came into the coasts of Cesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I the Son of man am?	When Jesus came to the region of Caesarea Philippi, He questioned His disciples: “Who do people say the Son of Man is?”
MAT	16	14	가로되 더러는 침례 요한, 더러는 엘리야, 어떤 이는 예레미야나 선지자 중의 하나라 하나이다	And they said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist: some, Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets.	They replied, “Some say John the Baptist; others say Elijah; and still others, Jeremiah or one of the prophets.”
MAT	16	15	가라사대 너희는 나를 누구라 하느냐	He saith unto them, But whom say ye that I am?	“But what about you?” Jesus asked. “Who do you say I am?”
MAT	16	16	시몬 베드로가 대답하여 가로되 주는 그리스도시요 살아계신 하나님의 아들이시니이다	And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.	Simon Peter answered, “You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.”
MAT	16	17	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 바요나 시몬아 네가 복이 있도다 이를 네게 알게 한 이는 혈육이 아니요 하늘에 계신 내 아버지시니라	And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar–jona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven.	Jesus replied, “Blessed are you, Simon son of Jonah! For this was not revealed to you by flesh and blood, but by My Father in heaven.
MAT	16	18	또 내가 네게 이르노니 너는 베드로라 내가 이 반석 위에 내 교회를 세우리니 음부의 권세가 이기지 못하리라	And I say also unto thee, That thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.	And I tell you that you are Peter, and on this rock I will build My church, and the gates of Hades will not prevail against it.
MAT	16	19	내가 천국 열쇠를 네게 주리니 네가 땅에서 무엇이든지 매면 하늘에서도 매일 것이요 네가 땅에서 무엇이든지 풀면 하늘에서도 풀리리라 하시고	And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.	I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Whatever you bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.”
MAT	16	20	이에 제자들을 경계하사 자기가 그리스도인 것을 아무에게도 이르지 말라 하시니라	Then charged he his disciples that they should tell no man that he was Jesus the Christ.	Then He admonished the disciples not to tell anyone that He was the Christ.
MAT	16	21	이 때로부터 예수 그리스도께서 자기가 예루살렘에 올라가 장로들과 대제사장들과 서기관들에게 많은 고난을 받고 죽임을 당하고 제 삼 일에 살아나야 할 것을 제자들에게 비로소 가르치시니	From that time forth began Jesus to shew unto his disciples, how that he must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third day.	From that time on Jesus began to show His disciples that He must go to Jerusalem and suffer many things at the hands of the elders, chief priests, and scribes, and that He must be killed and on the third day be raised to life.
MAT	16	22	베드로가 예수를 붙들고 간하여 가로되 주여 그리 마옵소서 이 일이 결코 주에게 미치지 아니하리이다	Then Peter took him, and began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee, Lord: this shall not be unto thee.	Peter took Him aside and began to rebuke Him. “Far be it from You, Lord!” he said. “This shall never happen to You!”
MAT	16	23	예수께서 돌이키시며 베드로에게 이르시되 사단아 내 뒤로 물러가라 너는 나를 넘어지게 하는 자로다 네가 하나님의 일을 생각지 아니하고 도리어 사람의 일을 생각하는도다 하시고	But he turned, and said unto Peter, Get thee behind me, Satan: thou art an offence unto me: for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men.	But Jesus turned and said to Peter, “Get behind Me, Satan! You are a stumbling block to Me. For you do not have in mind the things of God, but the things of men.”
MAT	16	24	이에 예수께서 제자들에게 이르시되 아무든지 나를 따라 오려거든 자기를 부인하고 자기 십자가를 지고 나를 좇을 것이니라	Then said Jesus unto his disciples, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.	Then Jesus told His disciples, “If anyone wants to come after Me, he must deny himself and take up his cross and follow Me.
MAT	16	25	누구든지 제 목숨을 구원코자 하면 잃을 것이요 누구든지 나를 위하여 제 목숨을 잃으면 찾으리라	For whosoever will save his life shall lose it: and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it.	For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for My sake will find it.
MAT	16	26	사람이 만일 온 천하를 얻고도 제 목숨을 잃으면 무엇이 유익하리요 사람이 무엇을 주고 제 목숨을 바꾸겠느냐	For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?	What will it profit a man if he gains the whole world, yet forfeits his soul? Or what can a man give in exchange for his soul?
MAT	16	27	인자가 아버지의 영광으로 그 천사들과 함께 오리니 그 때에 각 사람의 행한 대로 갚으리라	For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his angels; and then he shall reward every man according to his works.	For the Son of Man will come in His Father’s glory with His angels, and then He will repay each one according to what he has done.
MAT	16	28	진실로 너희에게 이르노니 여기 섰는 사람 중에 죽기 전에 인자가 그 왕권을 가지고 오는 것을 볼 자들도 있느니라	Verily I say unto you, There be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom.	Truly I tell you, some who are standing here will not taste death before they see the Son of Man coming in His kingdom.”
MAT	17	1	엿새 후에 예수께서 베드로와 야고보와 그 형제 요한을 데리시고 따로 높은 산에 올라 가셨더니	And after six days Jesus taketh Peter, James, and John his brother, and bringeth them up into an high mountain apart,	After six days Jesus took with Him Peter, James, and John the brother of James, and led them up a high mountain by themselves.
MAT	17	2	저희 앞에서 변형되사 그 얼굴이 해 같이 빛나며 옷이 빛과 같이 희어졌더라	And was transfigured before them: and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light.	There He was transfigured before them. His face shone like the sun, and His clothes became as white as the light.
MAT	17	3	때에 모세와 엘리야가 예수로 더불어 말씀하는 것이 저희에게 보이거늘	And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him.	Suddenly Moses and Elijah appeared before them, talking with Jesus.
MAT	17	4	베드로가 예수께 여짜와 가로되 주여 우리가 여기 있는 것이 좋사오니 주께서 만일 원하시면 내가 여기서 초막 셋을 짓되 하나는 주를 위하여, 하나는 모세를 위하여, 하나는 엘리야를 위하여 하리이다	Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here: if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias.	Peter said to Jesus, “Lord, it is good for us to be here. If You wish, I will put up three shelters—one for You, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.”
MAT	17	5	말할 때에 홀연히 빛난 구름이 저희를 덮으며 구름 속에서 소리가 나서 가로되 이는 내 사랑하는 아들이요 내 기뻐하는 자니 너희는 저의 말을 들으라 하는지라	While he yet spake, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them: and behold a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him.	While Peter was still speaking, a bright cloud enveloped them, and a voice from the cloud said, “This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Listen to Him!”
MAT	17	6	제자들이 듣고 엎드리어 심히 두려워하니	And when the disciples heard it, they fell on their face, and were sore afraid.	When the disciples heard this, they fell facedown in terror.
MAT	17	7	예수께서 나아가 저희에게 손을 대시며 가라사대 일어나라 두려워 말라 하신대	And Jesus came and touched them, and said, Arise, and be not afraid.	Then Jesus came over and touched them. “Get up,” He said. “Do not be afraid.”
MAT	17	8	제자들이 눈을 들고 보매 오직 예수 외에는 아무도 보이지 아니하더라	And when they had lifted up their eyes, they saw no man, save Jesus only.	And when they looked up, they saw no one except Jesus.
MAT	17	9	저희가 산에서 내려올 때에 예수께서 명하여 가라사대 인자가 죽은 자 가운데서 살아나기 전에는 본 것을 아무에게도 이르지 말라 하시니	And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them, saying, Tell the vision to no man, until the Son of man be risen again from the dead.	As they were coming down the mountain, Jesus commanded them, “Do not tell anyone about this vision until the Son of Man has been raised from the dead.”
MAT	17	10	제자들이 묻자와 가로되 그러면 어찌하여 서기관들이 엘리야가 먼저 와야 하리라 하나이까	And his disciples asked him, saying, Why then say the scribes that Elias must first come?	The disciples asked Him, “Why then do the scribes say that Elijah must come first?”
MAT	17	11	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 엘리야가 과연 먼저 와서 모든 일을 회복하리라	And Jesus answered and said unto them, Elias truly shall first come, and restore all things.	Jesus replied, “Elijah does indeed come, and he will restore all things.
MAT	17	12	내가 너희에게 말하노니 엘리야가 이미 왔으되 사람들이 알지 못하고 임의로 대우하였도다 인자도 이와 같이 그들에게 고난을 받으리라 하시니	But I say unto you, That Elias is come already, and they knew him not, but have done unto him whatsoever they listed. Likewise shall also the Son of man suffer of them.	But I tell you that Elijah has already come, and they did not recognize him, but have done to him whatever they wished. In the same way, the Son of Man will suffer at their hands.”
MAT	17	13	그제야 제자들이 예수의 말씀하신 것이 침례 요한인 줄을 깨달으니라	Then the disciples understood that he spake unto them of John the Baptist.	Then the disciples understood that He was speaking to them about John the Baptist.
MAT	17	14	저희가 무리에게 이르매 한 사람이 예수께 와서 꿇어 엎드리어 가로되	And when they were come to the multitude, there came to him a certain man, kneeling down to him, and saying,	When they came to the crowd, a man came up to Jesus and knelt before Him.
MAT	17	15	주여 내 아들을 불쌍히 여기소서 저가 간질로 심히 고생하여 자주 불에도 넘어지며 물에도 넘어지는지라	Lord, have mercy on my son: for he is lunatick, and sore vexed: for ofttimes he falleth into the fire, and oft into the water.	“Lord, have mercy on my son,” he said. “He has seizures and is suffering terribly. He often falls into the fire or into the water.
MAT	17	16	내가 주의 제자들에게 데리고 왔으나 능히 고치지 못하더이다	And I brought him to thy disciples, and they could not cure him.	I brought him to Your disciples, but they could not heal him.”
MAT	17	17	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 믿음이 없고 패역한 세대여 내가 얼마나 너희와 함께 있으며 얼마나 너희를 참으리요 그를 이리로 데려오라 하시다	Then Jesus answered and said, O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you? bring him hither to me.	“O unbelieving and perverse generation!” Jesus replied. “How long must I remain with you? How long must I put up with you? Bring the boy here to Me.”
MAT	17	18	이에 예수께서 꾸짖으시니 귀신이 나가고 아이가 그 때부터 나으니라	And Jesus rebuked the devil; and he departed out of him: and the child was cured from that very hour.	Then Jesus rebuked the demon, and it came out of the boy, and he was healed from that moment.
MAT	17	19	이 때에 제자들이 종용히 예수께 나아와 가로되 우리는 어찌하여 쫓아내지 못하였나이까	Then came the disciples to Jesus apart, and said, Why could not we cast him out?	Afterward the disciples came to Jesus privately and asked, “Why couldn’t we drive it out?”
MAT	17	20	가라사대 너희 믿음이 적은 연고니라 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 너희가 만일 믿음이 한 겨자씨만큼만 있으면 이 산을 명하여 여기서 저기로 옮기라 하여도 옮길 것이요 또 너희가 못할 것이 없으리라	And Jesus said unto them, Because of your unbelief: for verily I say unto you, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible unto you.	“Because you have so little faith,” He answered. “For truly I tell you, if you have faith the size of a mustard seed, you can say to this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’ and it will move. Nothing will be impossible for you.”
MAT	17	21	(없음)	Howbeit this kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting.	
MAT	17	22	갈릴리에 모일 때에 예수께서 제자들에게 이르시되 인자가 장차 사람들의 손에 넘기워	And while they abode in Galilee, Jesus said unto them, The Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of men:	When they gathered together in Galilee, Jesus told them, “The Son of Man is about to be delivered into the hands of men.
MAT	17	23	죽임을 당하고 제 삼 일에 살아나리라 하시니 제자들이 심히 근심하더라	And they shall kill him, and the third day he shall be raised again. And they were exceeding sorry.	They will kill Him, and on the third day He will be raised to life.” And the disciples were deeply grieved.
MAT	17	24	가버나움에 이르니 반 세겔 받는 자들이 베드로에게 나아와 가로되 너의 선생이 반 세겔을 내지 아니하느냐	And when they were come to Capernaum, they that received tribute money came to Peter, and said, Doth not your master pay tribute?	After they had arrived in Capernaum, the collectors of the two-drachma tax came to Peter and asked, “Does your Teacher pay the two drachmas?”
MAT	17	25	가로되 내신다 하고 집에 들어가니 예수께서 먼저 가라사대 시몬아 네 생각은 어떠하뇨 세상 임금들이 뉘게 관세와 정세를 받느냐 자기 아들에게냐 타인에게냐	He saith, Yes. And when he was come into the house, Jesus prevented him, saying, What thinkest thou, Simon? of whom do the kings of the earth take custom or tribute? of their own children, or of strangers?	“Yes,” he answered. When Peter entered the house, Jesus preempted him. “What do you think, Simon?” He asked. “From whom do the kings of the earth collect customs and taxes: from their own sons, or from others?”
MAT	17	26	베드로가 가로되 타인에게니이다 예수께서 가라사대 그러하면 아들들은 세를 면하리라	Peter saith unto him, Of strangers. Jesus saith unto him, Then are the children free.	“From others,” Peter answered. “Then the sons are exempt,” Jesus declared.
MAT	17	27	그러나 우리가 저희로 오해케 하지 않기 위하여 네가 바다에 가서 낚시를 던져 먼저 오르는 고기를 가져 입을 열면 돈 한 세겔을 얻을 것이니 가져다가 나와 너를 위하여 주라 하시니라	Notwithstanding, lest we should offend them, go thou to the sea, and cast an hook, and take up the fish that first cometh up; and when thou hast opened his mouth, thou shalt find a piece of money: that take, and give unto them for me and thee.	“But so that we may not offend them, go to the sea, cast a hook, and take the first fish you catch. When you open its mouth, you will find a four-drachma coin. Take it and give it to them for My tax and yours.”
MAT	18	1	그 때에 제자들이 예수께 나아와 가로되 천국에서는 누가 크니이까	At the same time came the disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?	At that time the disciples came to Jesus and asked, “Who then is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?”
MAT	18	2	예수께서 한 어린 아이를 불러 저희 가운데 세우시고	And Jesus called a little child unto him, and set him in the midst of them,	Jesus invited a little child to stand among them.
MAT	18	3	가라사대 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 너희가 돌이켜 어린 아이들과 같이 되지 아니하면 결단코 천국에 들어가지 못하리라	And said, Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.	“Truly I tell you,” He said, “unless you change and become like little children, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven.
MAT	18	4	그러므로 누구든지 이 어린 아이와 같이 자기를 낮추는 그이가 천국에서 큰 자니라	Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven.	Therefore, whoever humbles himself like this little child is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven.
MAT	18	5	또 누구든지 내 이름으로 이런 어린 아이 하나를 영접하면 곧 나를 영접함이니	And whoso shall receive one such little child in my name receiveth me.	And whoever welcomes a little child like this in My name welcomes Me.
MAT	18	6	누구든지 나를 믿는 이 소자 중 하나를 실족케 하면 차라리 연자 맷돌을 그 목에 달리우고 깊은 바다에 빠뜨리우는 것이 나으리라	But whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea.	But if anyone causes one of these little ones who believe in Me to stumble, it would be better for him to have a large millstone hung around his neck and to be drowned in the depths of the sea.
MAT	18	7	실족케 하는 일들이 있음을 인하여 세상에 화가 있도다 실족케 하는 일이 없을 수는 없으나 실족케 하는 그 사람에게는 화가 있도다	Woe unto the world because of offences! for it must needs be that offences come; but woe to that man by whom the offence cometh!	Woe to the world for the causes of sin. These stumbling blocks must come, but woe to the man through whom they come!
MAT	18	8	만일 네 손이나 네 발이 너를 범죄케 하거든 찍어 내버리라 불구자나 절뚝발이로 영생에 들어가는 것이 두 손과 두 발을 가지고 영원한 불에 던지우는 것보다 나으니라	Wherefore if thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut them off, and cast them from thee: it is better for thee to enter into life halt or maimed, rather than having two hands or two feet to be cast into everlasting fire.	If your hand or your foot causes you to sin, cut it off and throw it away. It is better for you to enter life crippled or lame than to have two hands and two feet and be thrown into the eternal fire.
MAT	18	9	만일 네 눈이 너를 범죄케 하거든 빼어 내버리라 한 눈으로 영생에 들어가는 것이 두 눈을 가지고 지옥불에 던지우는 것보다 나으니라	And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: it is better for thee to enter into life with one eye, rather than having two eyes to be cast into hell fire.	And if your eye causes you to sin, gouge it out and throw it away. It is better for you to enter life with one eye than to have two eyes and be thrown into the fire of hell.
MAT	18	10	삼가 이 소자 중에 하나도 업신 여기지 말라 너희에게 말하노니 저희 천사들이 하늘에서 하늘에 계신 내 아버지의 얼굴을 항상 뵈옵느니라	Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you, That in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven.	See that you do not look down on any of these little ones. For I tell you that their angels in heaven always see the face of My Father in heaven.
MAT	18	11		For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost.	
MAT	18	12	너희 생각에는 어떻겠느뇨 만일 어떤 사람이 양 일백 마리가 있는데 그 중에 하나가 길을 잃었으면 그 아흔아홉 마리를 산에 두고 가서 길 잃은 양을 찾지 않겠느냐	How think ye? if a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them be gone astray, doth he not leave the ninety and nine, and goeth into the mountains, and seeketh that which is gone astray?	What do you think? If a man has a hundred sheep and one of them goes astray, will he not leave the ninety-nine on the hills and go out to search for the one that is lost?
MAT	18	13	진실로 너희에게 이르노니 만일 찾으면 길을 잃지 아니한 아흔아홉 마리보다 이것을 더 기뻐하리라	And if so be that he find it, verily I say unto you, he rejoiceth more of that sheep, than of the ninety and nine which went not astray.	And if he finds it, truly I tell you, he rejoices more over that one sheep than over the ninety-nine that did not go astray.
MAT	18	14	이와 같이 이 소자 중에 하나라도 잃어지는 것은 하늘에 계신 너희 아버지의 뜻이 아니니라	Even so it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, that one of these little ones should perish.	In the same way, your Father in heaven is not willing that any of these little ones should perish.
MAT	18	15	네 형제가 죄를 범하거든 가서 너와 그 사람과만 상대하여 권고하라 만일 들으면 네가 네 형제를 얻은 것이요	Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother.	If your brother sins against you, go and confront him privately. If he listens to you, you have won your brother over.
MAT	18	16	만일 듣지 않거든 한두 사람을 데리고 가서 두세 증인의 입으로 말마다 증참케 하라	But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.	But if he will not listen, take one or two others along, so that ‘every matter may be established by the testimony of two or three witnesses.’
MAT	18	17	만일 그들의 말도 듣지 않거든 교회에 말하고 교회의 말도 듣지 않거든 이방인과 세리와 같이 여기라	And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church: but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican.	If he refuses to listen to them, tell it to the church. And if he refuses to listen even to the church, regard him as you would a pagan or a tax collector.
MAT	18	18	진실로 너희에게 이르노니 무엇이든지 너희가 땅에서 매면 하늘에서도 매일 것이요 무엇이든지 땅에서 풀면 하늘에서도 풀리리라	Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.	Truly I tell you, whatever you bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.
MAT	18	19	진실로 다시 너희에게 이르노니 너희 중에 두 사람이 땅에서 합심하여 무엇이든지 구하면 하늘에 계신 내 아버지께서 저희를 위하여 이루게 하시리라	Again I say unto you, That if two of you shall agree on earth as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in heaven.	Again, I tell you truly that if two of you on the earth agree about anything you ask for, it will be done for you by My Father in heaven.
MAT	18	20	두세 사람이 내 이름으로 모인 곳에는 나도 그들 중에 있느니라	For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.	For where two or three gather together in My name, there am I with them.”
MAT	18	21	그 때에 베드로가 나아와 가로되 주여 형제가 내게 죄를 범하면 몇 번이나 용서하여 주리이까 일곱 번까지 하오리이까	Then came Peter to him, and said, Lord, how oft shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? till seven times?	Then Peter came to Jesus and asked, “Lord, how many times shall I forgive my brother who sins against me? Up to seven times?”
MAT	18	22	예수께서 가라사대 네게 이르노니 일곱 번뿐 아니라 일흔 번씩 일곱 번이라도 할지니라	Jesus saith unto him, I say not unto thee, Until seven times: but, Until seventy times seven.	Jesus answered, “I tell you, not just seven times, but seventy-seven times!
MAT	18	23	이러므로 천국은 그 종들과 회계하려 하던 어떤 임금과 같으니	Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a certain king, which would take account of his servants.	Because of this, the kingdom of heaven is like a king who wanted to settle accounts with his servants.
MAT	18	24	회계할 때에 일만 달란트 빚진 자 하나를 데려오매	And when he had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him, which owed him ten thousand talents.	As he began the settlements, a debtor was brought to him owing ten thousand talents.
MAT	18	25	갚을 것이 없는지라 주인이 명하여 그 몸과 처와 자식들과 모든 소유를 다 팔아 갚게 하라 한대	But forasmuch as he had not to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife, and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made.	Since the man was unable to pay, the master ordered that he be sold to pay his debt, along with his wife and children and everything he owned.
MAT	18	26	그 종이 엎드리어 절하며 가로되 내게 참으소서 다 갚으리이다 하거늘	The servant therefore fell down, and worshipped him, saying, Lord, have patience with me, and I will pay thee all.	Then the servant fell on his knees before him. ‘Have patience with me,’ he begged, ‘and I will pay back everything.’
MAT	18	27	그 종의 주인이 불쌍히 여겨 놓아 보내며 그 빚을 탕감하여 주었더니	Then the lord of that servant was moved with compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him the debt.	His master had compassion on him, forgave his debt, and released him.
MAT	18	28	그 종이 나가서 제게 백 데나리온 빚진 동관 하나를 만나 붙들어 목을 잡고 가로되 빚을 갚으라 하매	But the same servant went out, and found one of his fellowservants, which owed him an hundred pence: and he laid hands on him, and took him by the throat, saying, Pay me that thou owest.	But when that servant went out, he found one of his fellow servants who owed him a hundred denarii. He grabbed him and began to choke him, saying, ‘Pay back what you owe me!’
MAT	18	29	그 동관이 엎드리어 간구하여 가로되 나를 참아 주소서 갚으리이다 하되	And his fellowservant fell down at his feet, and besought him, saying, Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all.	So his fellow servant fell down and begged him, ‘Have patience with me, and I will pay you back.’
MAT	18	30	허락하지 아니하고 이에 가서 저가 빚을 갚도록 옥에 가두거늘	And he would not: but went and cast him into prison, till he should pay the debt.	But he refused. Instead, he went and had the man thrown into prison until he could pay his debt.
MAT	18	31	그 동관들이 그것을 보고 심히 민망하여 주인에게 가서 그 일을 다 고하니	So when his fellowservants saw what was done, they were very sorry, and came and told unto their lord all that was done.	When his fellow servants saw what had happened, they were greatly distressed, and they went and recounted all of this to their master.
MAT	18	32	이에 주인이 저를 불러다가 말하되 악한 종아 네가 빌기에 내가 네 빚을 전부 탕감하여 주었거늘	Then his lord, after that he had called him, said unto him, O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou desiredst me:	Then the master summoned him and declared, ‘You wicked servant! I forgave all your debt because you begged me.
MAT	18	33	내가 너를 불쌍히 여김과 같이 너도 네 동관을 불쌍히 여김이 마땅치 아니하냐 하고	Shouldest not thou also have had compassion on thy fellowservant, even as I had pity on thee?	Shouldn’t you have had mercy on your fellow servant, just as I had on you?’
MAT	18	34	주인이 노하여 그 빚을 다 갚도록 저를 옥졸들에게 붙이니라	And his lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due unto him.	In anger his master turned him over to the jailers to be tortured, until he should repay all that he owed.
MAT	18	35	너희가 각각 중심으로 형제를 용서하지 아니하면 내 천부께서도 너희에게 이와 같이 하시리라	So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses.	That is how My heavenly Father will treat each of you unless you forgive your brother from your heart.”
MAT	19	1	예수께서 이 말씀을 마치시고 갈릴리에서 떠나 요단 강 건너 유대 지경에 이르시니	And it came to pass, that when Jesus had finished these sayings, he departed from Galilee, and came into the coasts of Judea beyond Jordan;	When Jesus had finished saying these things, He left Galilee and went into the region of Judea beyond the Jordan.
MAT	19	2	큰 무리가 좇거늘 예수께서 거기서 저희 병을 고치시더라	And great multitudes followed him; and he healed them there.	Large crowds followed Him, and He healed them there.
MAT	19	3	바리새인들이 예수께 나아와 그를 시험하여 가로되 사람이 아무 연고를 물론하고 그 아내를 내어버리는 것이 옳으니이까	The Pharisees also came unto him, tempting him, and saying unto him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause?	Then some Pharisees came and tested Him by asking, “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any reason?”
MAT	19	4	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 사람을 지으신 이가 본래 저희를 남자와 여자로 만드시고	And he answered and said unto them, Have ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning made them male and female,	Jesus answered, “Have you not read that from the beginning the Creator ‘made them male and female,’
MAT	19	5	말씀하시기를 이러므로 사람이 그 부모를 떠나서 아내에게 합하여 그 둘이 한 몸이 될지니라 하신 것을 읽지 못하였느냐	And said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh?	and said, ‘For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh’?
MAT	19	6	이러한즉 이제 둘이 아니요 한 몸이니 그러므로 하나님이 짝지어 주신 것을 사람이 나누지 못할지니라 하시니	Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder.	So they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore what God has joined together, let man not separate.”
MAT	19	7	여짜오되 그러하면 어찌하여 모세는 이혼 증서를 주어서 내어버리라 명하였나이까	They say unto him, Why did Moses then command to give a writing of divorcement, and to put her away?	“Why then,” they asked, “did Moses order a man to give his wife a certificate of divorce and send her away?”
MAT	19	8	예수께서 가라사대 모세가 너희 마음의 완악함을 인하여 아내 내어버림을 허락하였거니와 본래는 그렇지 아니하니라	He saith unto them, Moses because of the hardness of your hearts suffered you to put away your wives: but from the beginning it was not so.	Jesus replied, “Moses permitted you to divorce your wives because of your hardness of heart; but it was not this way from the beginning.
MAT	19	9	내가 너희에게 말하노니 누구든지 음행한 연고 외에 아내를 내어버리고 다른 데 장가드는 자는 간음함이니라	And I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for fornication, and shall marry another, committeth adultery: and whoso marrieth her which is put away doth commit adultery.	Now I tell you that whoever divorces his wife, except for sexual immorality, and marries another woman, commits adultery.”
MAT	19	10	제자들이 가로되 만일 사람이 아내에게 이같이 할진대 장가 들지 않는 것이 좋삽나이다	His disciples say unto him, If the case of the man be so with his wife, it is not good to marry.	His disciples said to Him, “If this is the case between a man and his wife, it is better not to marry.”
MAT	19	11	예수께서 가라사대 사람마다 이 말을 받지 못하고 오직 타고난 자라야 할지니라	But he said unto them, All men cannot receive this saying, save they to whom it is given.	“Not everyone can accept this word,” He replied, “but only those to whom it has been given.
MAT	19	12	어미의 태로부터 된 고자도 있고 사람이 만든 고자도 있고 천국을 위하여 스스로 된 고자도 있도다 이 말을 받을 만한 자는 받을지어다	For there are some eunuchs, which were so born from their mother’s womb: and there are some eunuchs, which were made eunuchs of men: and there be eunuchs, which have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven’s sake. He that is able to receive it, let him receive it.	For there are eunuchs who were born that way; others were made that way by men; and still others live like eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. The one who can accept this should accept it.”
MAT	19	13	때에 사람들이 예수의 안수하고 기도하심을 바라고 어린 아이들을 데리고 오매 제자들이 꾸짖거늘	Then were there brought unto him little children, that he should put his hands on them, and pray: and the disciples rebuked them.	Then the little children were brought to Jesus for Him to place His hands on them and pray for them. And the disciples rebuked those who brought them.
MAT	19	14	예수께서 가라사대 어린 아이들을 용납하고 내게 오는 것을 금하지 말라 천국이 이런 자의 것이니라 하시고	But Jesus said, Suffer little children, and forbid them not, to come unto me: for of such is the kingdom of heaven.	But Jesus said, “Let the little children come to Me, and do not hinder them! For the kingdom of heaven belongs to such as these.”
MAT	19	15	저희 위에 안수하시고 거기서 떠나시니라	And he laid his hands on them, and departed thence.	And after He had placed His hands on them, He went on from there.
MAT	19	16	어떤 사람이 주께 와서 가로되 선생님이여 내가 무슨 선한 일을 하여야 영생을 얻으리이까	And, behold, one came and said unto him, Good Master, what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life?	Just then a man came up to Jesus and inquired, “Teacher, what good thing must I do to obtain eternal life?”
MAT	19	17	예수께서 가라사대 어찌하여 선한 일을 내게 묻느냐 선한 이는 오직 한 분이시니라 네가 생명에 들어가려면 계명들을 지키라	And he said unto him, Why callest thou me good? there is none good but one, that is, God: but if thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments.	“Why do you ask Me about what is good?” Jesus replied. “There is only One who is good. If you want to enter life, keep the commandments.”
MAT	19	18	가로되 어느 계명이오니이까 예수께서 가라사대 살인하지말라, 간음하지말라, 도적질하지 말라, 거짓 증거하지말라,	He saith unto him, Which? Jesus said, Thou shalt do no murder, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness,	“Which ones?” the man asked. Jesus answered, “‘Do not murder, do not commit adultery, do not steal, do not bear false witness,
MAT	19	19	네 부모를 공경하라, 네 이웃을 네 몸과 같이 사랑하라 하신 것이니라	Honour thy father and thy mother: and, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.	honor your father and mother, and love your neighbor as yourself.’”
MAT	19	20	그 청년이 가로되 이 모든 것을 내가 지키었사오니 아직도 무엇이 부족하니이까	The young man saith unto him, All these things have I kept from my youth up: what lack I yet?	“All these I have kept,” said the young man. “What do I still lack?”
MAT	19	21	예수께서 가라사대 네가 온전하고자 할진대 가서 네 소유를 팔아 가난한 자들을 주라 그리하면 하늘에서 보화가 네게 있으리라 그리고 와서 나를 좇으라 하시니	Jesus said unto him, If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come and follow me.	Jesus told him, “If you want to be perfect, go, sell your possessions and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven. Then come, follow Me.”
MAT	19	22	그 청년이 재물이 많으므로 이 말씀을 듣고 근심하며 가니라	But when the young man heard that saying, he went away sorrowful: for he had great possessions.	When the young man heard this, he went away in sorrow, because he had great wealth.
MAT	19	23	예수께서 제자들에게 이르시되 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 부자는 천국에 들어가기가 어려우니라	Then said Jesus unto his disciples, Verily I say unto you, That a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven.	Then Jesus said to His disciples, “Truly I tell you, it is hard for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven.
MAT	19	24	다시 너희에게 말하노니 약대가 바늘귀로 들어가는 것이 부자가 하나님의 나라에 들어가는 것보다 쉬우니라 하신대	And again I say unto you, It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.	Again I tell you, it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God.”
MAT	19	25	제자들이 듣고 심히 놀라 가로되 그런즉 누가 구원을 얻을 수 있으리이까	When his disciples heard it, they were exceedingly amazed, saying, Who then can be saved?	When the disciples heard this, they were greatly astonished and asked, “Who then can be saved?”
MAT	19	26	예수께서 저희를 보시며 가라사대 사람으로는 할 수 없으되 하나님으로서는 다 할 수 있느니라	But Jesus beheld them, and said unto them, With men this is impossible; but with God all things are possible.	Jesus looked at them and said, “With man this is impossible, but with God all things are possible.”
MAT	19	27	이에 베드로가 대답하여 가로되 보소서 우리가 모든 것을 버리고 주를 좇았사오니 그런즉 우리가 무엇을 얻으리이까	Then answered Peter and said unto him, Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee; what shall we have therefore?	“Look,” Peter replied, “we have left everything to follow You. What then will there be for us?”
MAT	19	28	예수께서 가라사대 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 세상이 새롭게 되어 인자가 자기 영광의 보좌에 앉을 때에 나를 좇는 너희도 열 두 보좌에 앉아 이스라엘 열두 지파를 심판하리라	And Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, That ye which have followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.	Jesus said to them, “Truly I tell you, in the renewal of all things, when the Son of Man sits on His glorious throne, you who have followed Me will also sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
MAT	19	29	또 내 이름을 위하여 집이나 형제나 자매나 부모나 자식이나 전토를 버린 자마다 여러 배를 받고 또 영생을 상속하리라	And every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name’s sake, shall receive an hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting life.	And everyone who has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or wife or children or fields for the sake of My name will receive a hundredfold and will inherit eternal life.
MAT	19	30	그러나 먼저 된 자로서 나중 되고 나중 된 자로서 먼저 될 자가 많으니라	But many that are first shall be last; and the last shall be first.	But many who are first will be last, and the last will be first.
MAT	20	1	천국은 마치 품꾼을 얻어 포도원에 들여 보내려고 이른 아침에 나간 집 주인과 같으니	For the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an householder, which went out early in the morning to hire labourers into his vineyard.	“For the kingdom of heaven is like a landowner who went out early in the morning to hire workers for his vineyard.
MAT	20	2	저가 하루 한 데나리온씩 품꾼들과 약속하여 포도원에 들여 보내고	And when he had agreed with the labourers for a penny a day, he sent them into his vineyard.	He agreed to pay them a denarius for the day and sent them into his vineyard.
MAT	20	3	또 제삼시에 나가 보니 장터에 놀고 섰는 사람들이 또 있는지라	And he went out about the third hour, and saw others standing idle in the marketplace,	About the third hour he went out and saw others standing in the marketplace doing nothing.
MAT	20	4	저희에게 이르되 너희도 포도원에 들어가라 내가 너희에게 상당하게 주리라 하니 저희가 가고	And said unto them; Go ye also into the vineyard, and whatsoever is right I will give you. And they went their way.	‘You also go into my vineyard,’ he said, ‘and I will pay you whatever is right.’
MAT	20	5	제 육 시와 제 구 시에 또 나가 그와 같이 하고	Again he went out about the sixth and ninth hour, and did likewise.	So they went. He went out again about the sixth hour and the ninth hour and did the same thing.
MAT	20	6	제 십일 시에도 나가 보니 섰는 사람들이 또 있는지라	And about the eleventh hour he went out, and found others standing idle, and saith unto them, Why stand ye here all the day idle?	About the eleventh hour he went out and found still others standing around. ‘Why have you been standing here all day long doing nothing?’ he asked.
MAT	20	7	가로되 너희는 어찌하여 종일토록 놀고 여기 섰느뇨 가로되 우리를 품꾼으로 쓰는 이가 없음이니이다 가로되 너희도 포도원에 들어가라 하니라	They say unto him, Because no man hath hired us. He saith unto them, Go ye also into the vineyard; and whatsoever is right, that shall ye receive.	‘Because no one has hired us,’ they answered. So he told them, ‘You also go into my vineyard.’
MAT	20	8	저물매 포도원 주인이 청지기에게 이르되 품꾼들을 불러 나중 온 자로부터 시작하여 먼저 온 자까지 삯을 주라 하니	So when even was come, the lord of the vineyard saith unto his steward, Call the labourers, and give them their hire, beginning from the last unto the first.	When evening came, the owner of the vineyard said to his foreman, ‘Call the workers and pay them their wages, starting with the last ones hired and moving on to the first.’
MAT	20	9	제 십일 시에 온 자들이 와서 한 데나리온씩을 받거늘	And when they came that were hired about the eleventh hour, they received every man a penny.	The workers who were hired about the eleventh hour came and each received a denarius.
MAT	20	10	먼저 온 자들이 와서 더 받을 줄 알았더니 저희도 한 데나리온씩 받은지라	But when the first came, they supposed that they should have received more; and they likewise received every man a penny.	So when the original workers came, they assumed they would receive more. But each of them also received a denarius.
MAT	20	11	받은 후 집 주인을 원망하여 가로되	And when they had received it, they murmured against the goodman of the house,	On receiving their pay, they began to grumble against the landowner.
MAT	20	12	나중 온 이 사람들은 한 시간만 일하였거늘 저희를 종일 수고와 더위를 견딘 우리와 같게 하였나이다	Saying, These last have wrought but one hour, and thou hast made them equal unto us, which have borne the burden and heat of the day.	‘These men who were hired last worked only one hour,’ they said, ‘and you have made them equal to us who have borne the burden and the scorching heat of the day.’
MAT	20	13	주인이 그 중의 한 사람에게 대답하여 가로되 친구여 내가 네게 잘못한 것이 없노라 네가 나와 한 데나리온의 약속을 하지 아니하였느냐	But he answered one of them, and said, Friend, I do thee no wrong: didst not thou agree with me for a penny?	But he answered one of them, ‘Friend, I am not being unfair to you. Did you not agree with me on one denarius?
MAT	20	14	네 것이나 가지고 가라 나중 온 이 사람에게 너와 같이 주는 것이 내 뜻이니라	Take that thine is, and go thy way: I will give unto this last, even as unto thee.	Take your pay and go. I want to give this last man the same as I gave you.
MAT	20	15	내 것을 가지고 내 뜻대로 할 것이 아니냐 내가 선하므로 네가 악하게 보느냐	Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? Is thine eye evil, because I am good?	Do I not have the right to do as I please with what is mine? Or are you envious because I am generous?’
MAT	20	16	이와 같이 나중 된 자로서 먼저 되고 먼저 된 자로서 나중 되리라	So the last shall be first, and the first last: for many be called, but few chosen.	So the last will be first, and the first will be last.”
MAT	20	17	예수께서 예루살렘으로 올라 가려 하실 때에 열 두 제자를 따로 데리시고 길에서 이르시되	And Jesus going up to Jerusalem took the twelve disciples apart in the way, and said unto them,	As Jesus was going up to Jerusalem, He took the twelve disciples aside and said,
MAT	20	18	보라 우리가 예루살렘으로 올라 가노니 인자가 대제사장들과 서기관들에게 넘기우매 저희가 죽이기로 결안하고	Behold, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of man shall be betrayed unto the chief priests and unto the scribes, and they shall condemn him to death,	“Look, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be delivered over to the chief priests and scribes. They will condemn Him to death
MAT	20	19	이방인들에게 넘겨 주어 그를 능욕하며 채찍질하며 십자가에 못박게 하리니 제 삼 일에 살아나리라	And shall deliver him to the Gentiles to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify him: and the third day he shall rise again.	and will deliver Him over to the Gentiles to be mocked and flogged and crucified. And on the third day He will be raised to life.”
MAT	20	20	그 때에 세베대의 아들의 어미가 그 아들들을 데리고 예수께 와서 절하며 무엇을 구하니	Then came to him the mother of Zebedee’s children with her sons, worshipping him, and desiring a certain thing of him.	Then the mother of Zebedee’s sons came to Jesus with her sons and knelt down to make a request of Him.
MAT	20	21	예수께서 가라사대 무엇을 원하느뇨 가로되 이 나의 두 아들을 주의 나라에서 하나는 주의 우편에 하나는 주의 좌편에 앉게 명하소서	And he said unto her, What wilt thou? She saith unto him, Grant that these my two sons may sit, the one on thy right hand, and the other on the left, in thy kingdom.	“What do you want?” He inquired. She answered, “Declare that in Your kingdom one of these two sons of mine may sit at Your right hand, and the other at Your left.”
MAT	20	22	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 너희 구하는 것을 너희가 알지 못하는도다 나의 마시려는 잔을 너희가 마실 수 있느냐 저희가 말하되 할 수 있나이다	But Jesus answered and said, Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with? They say unto him, We are able.	“You do not know what you are asking,” Jesus replied. “Can you drink the cup I am going to drink?” “We can,” the brothers answered.
MAT	20	23	가라사대 너희가 과연 내 잔을 마시려니와 내 좌우편에 앉는 것은 나의 줄 것이 아니라 내 아버지께서 누구를 위하여 예비하셨든지 그들이 얻을 것이니라	And he saith unto them, Ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with: but to sit on my right hand, and on my left, is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared of my Father.	“You will indeed drink My cup,” Jesus said. “But to sit at My right or left is not Mine to grant. These seats belong to those for whom My Father has prepared them.”
MAT	20	24	열 제자가 듣고 그 두 형제에 대하여 분히 여기거늘	And when the ten heard it, they were moved with indignation against the two brethren.	When the ten heard about this, they were indignant with the two brothers.
MAT	20	25	예수께서 제자들을 불러다가 가라사대 이방인의 집권자들이 저희를 임의로 주관하고 그 대인들이 저희에게 권세를 부리는 줄을 너희가 알거니와	But Jesus called them unto him, and said, Ye know that the princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exercise authority upon them.	But Jesus called them aside and said, “You know that the rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their superiors exercise authority over them.
MAT	20	26	너희 중에는 그렇지 아니하니 너희 중에 누구든지 크고자 하는 자는 너희를 섬기는 자가 되고	But it shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister;	It shall not be this way among you. Instead, whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant,
MAT	20	27	너희 중에 누구든지 으뜸이 되고자 하는 자는 너희 종이 되어야 하리라	And whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant:	and whoever wants to be first among you must be your slave—
MAT	20	28	인자가 온 것은 섬김을 받으려 함이 아니라 도리어 섬기려 하고 자기 목숨을 많은 사람의 대속물로 주려 함이니라	Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.	just as the Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give His life as a ransom for many.”
MAT	20	29	저희가 여리고에서 떠나갈 때에 큰 무리가 예수를 좇더라	And as they departed from Jericho, a great multitude followed him.	As they were leaving Jericho, a large crowd followed Him.
MAT	20	30	소경 둘이 길 가에 앉았다가 예수께서 지나가신다 함을 듣고 소리질러 가로되 주여 우리를 불쌍히 여기소서 다윗의 자손이여 하니	And, behold, two blind men sitting by the way side, when they heard that Jesus passed by, cried out, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou Son of David.	And there were two blind men sitting beside the road. When they heard that Jesus was passing by, they cried out, “Lord, Son of David, have mercy on us!”
MAT	20	31	무리가 꾸짖어 잠잠하라 하되 더욱 소리질러 가로되 주여 우리를 불쌍히 여기소서 다윗의 자손이여 하는지라	And the multitude rebuked them, because they should hold their peace: but they cried the more, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou Son of David.	The crowd admonished them to be silent, but they cried out all the louder, “Lord, Son of David, have mercy on us!”
MAT	20	32	예수께서 머물러 서서 저희를 불러	And Jesus stood still, and called them, and said, What will ye that I shall do unto you?	Jesus stopped and called them. “What do you want Me to do for you?” He asked.
MAT	20	33	가라사대 너희에게 무엇을 하여주기를 원하느냐 가로되 주여 우리 눈 뜨기를 원하나이다	They say unto him, Lord, that our eyes may be opened.	“Lord,” they answered, “let our eyes be opened.”
MAT	20	34	예수께서 민망히 여기사 저희 눈을 만지시니 곧 보게 되어 저희가 예수를 좇으니라	So Jesus had compassion on them, and touched their eyes: and immediately their eyes received sight, and they followed him.	Moved with compassion, Jesus touched their eyes, and at once they received their sight and followed Him.
MAT	21	1	저희가 예루살렘에 가까이 와서 감람산 벳바게에 이르렀을 때에 예수께서 두 제자를 보내시며	And when they drew nigh unto Jerusalem, and were come to Bethphage, unto the mount of Olives, then sent Jesus two disciples,	As they approached Jerusalem and came to Bethphage on the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent out two disciples,
MAT	21	2	이르시되 너희 맞은편 마을로 가라 곧 매인 나귀와 나귀 새끼가 함께 있는 것을 보리니 풀어 내게로 끌고 오너라	Saying unto them, Go into the village over against you, and straightway ye shall find an ass tied, and a colt with her: loose them, and bring them unto me.	saying to them, “Go into the village ahead of you, and at once you will find a donkey tied there, with her colt beside her. Untie them and bring them to Me.
MAT	21	3	만일 누가 무슨 말을 하거든 주가 쓰시겠다 하라 그리하면 즉시 보내리라 하시니	And if any man say ought unto you, ye shall say, The Lord hath need of them; and straightway he will send them.	If anyone questions you, tell him that the Lord needs them, and he will send them right away.”
MAT	21	4	이는 선지자로 하신 말씀을 이루려 하심이라 일렀으되	All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying,	This took place to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet:
MAT	21	5	시온 딸에게 이르기를 네 왕이 네게 임하나니 그는 겸손하여 나귀 곧 멍에 메는 짐승의 새끼를 탔도다 하라 하였느니라	Tell ye the daughter of Sion, Behold, thy King cometh unto thee, meek, and sitting upon an ass, and a colt the foal of an ass.	“Say to the Daughter of Zion, ‘See, your King comes to you, gentle and riding on a donkey, on a colt, the foal of a donkey.’”
MAT	21	6	제자들이 가서 예수의 명하신대로 하여	And the disciples went, and did as Jesus commanded them,	So the disciples went and did as Jesus had directed them.
MAT	21	7	나귀와 나귀 새끼를 끌고 와서 자기들의 겉옷을 그 위에 얹으매 예수께서 그 위에 타시니	And brought the ass, and the colt, and put on them their clothes, and they set him thereon.	They brought the donkey and the colt and laid their cloaks on them, and Jesus sat on them.
MAT	21	8	무리의 대부분은 그 겉옷을 길에 펴며 다른 이는 나무가지를 베어 길에 펴고	And a very great multitude spread their garments in the way; others cut down branches from the trees, and strawed them in the way.	A massive crowd spread their cloaks on the road, while others cut branches from the trees and spread them on the road.
MAT	21	9	앞에서 가고 뒤에서 따르는 무리가 소리질러 가로되 호산나 다윗의 자손이여 찬송하리로다 주의 이름으로 오시는 이여 가장 높은 곳에서 호산나 하더라	And the multitudes that went before, and that followed, cried, saying, Hosanna to the Son of David: Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest.	The crowds that went ahead of Him and those that followed were shouting: “Hosanna to the Son of David!” “Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord!” “Hosanna in the highest!”
MAT	21	10	예수께서 예루살렘에 들어가시니 온 성이 소동하여 가로되 이는 누구뇨 하거늘	And when he was come into Jerusalem, all the city was moved, saying, Who is this?	When Jesus had entered Jerusalem, the whole city was stirred and asked, “Who is this?”
MAT	21	11	무리가 가로되 갈릴리 나사렛에서 나온 선지자 예수라 하니라	And the multitude said, This is Jesus the prophet of Nazareth of Galilee.	The crowds replied, “This is Jesus, the prophet from Nazareth in Galilee.”
MAT	21	12	예수께서 성전에 들어가사 성전 안에서 매매하는 모든 자를 내어 쫓으시며 돈 바꾸는 자들의 상과 비둘기 파는 자들의 의자를 둘러 엎으시고	And Jesus went into the temple of God, and cast out all them that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and the seats of them that sold doves,	Then Jesus entered the temple courts and drove out all who were buying and selling there. He overturned the tables of the money changers and the seats of those selling doves.
MAT	21	13	저희에게 이르시되 기록된 바 내 집은 기도하는 집이라 일컬음을 받으리라 하였거늘 너희는 강도의 굴혈을 만드는도다 하시니라	And said unto them, It is written, My house shall be called the house of prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves.	And He declared to them, “It is written: ‘My house will be called a house of prayer.’ But you are making it ‘a den of robbers.’”
MAT	21	14	소경과 저는 자들이 성전에서 예수께 나아오매 고쳐 주시니	And the blind and the lame came to him in the temple; and he healed them.	The blind and the lame came to Him at the temple, and He healed them.
MAT	21	15	대제사장들과 서기관들이 예수의 하시는 이상한 일과 또 성전에서 소리질러 호산나 다윗의 자손이여 하는 아이들을 보고 분하여	And when the chief priests and scribes saw the wonderful things that he did, and the children crying in the temple, and saying, Hosanna to the Son of David; they were sore displeased,	But the chief priests and scribes were indignant when they saw the wonders He performed and the children shouting in the temple courts, “Hosanna to the Son of David!”
MAT	21	16	예수께 말하되 저희의 하는 말을 듣느뇨 예수께서 가라사대 그렇다 어린 아기와 젖먹이들의 입에서 나오는 찬미를 온전케 하셨나이다 함을 너희가 읽어 본 일이 없느냐 하시고	And said unto him, Hearest thou what these say? And Jesus saith unto them, Yea; have ye never read, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise?	“Do You hear what these children are saying?” they asked. “Yes,” Jesus answered. “Have you never read: ‘From the mouths of children and infants You have ordained praise’?”
MAT	21	17	그들을 떠나 성 밖으로 베다니에 가서 거기서 유하시니라	And he left them, and went out of the city into Bethany; and he lodged there.	Then He left them and went out of the city to Bethany, where He spent the night.
MAT	21	18	이른 아침에 성으로 들어오실 때에 시장하신지라	Now in the morning as he returned into the city, he hungered.	In the morning, as Jesus was returning to the city, He was hungry.
MAT	21	19	길 가에서 한 무화과나무를 보시고 그리로 가사 잎사귀 밖에 아무 것도 얻지 못하시고 나무에게 이르시되 이제부터 영원토록 네게 열매가 맺지 못하리라 하시니 무화과나무가 곧 마른지라	And when he saw a fig tree in the way, he came to it, and found nothing thereon, but leaves only, and said unto it, Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever. And presently the fig tree withered away.	Seeing a fig tree by the road, He went up to it but found nothing on it except leaves. “May you never bear fruit again!” He said. And immediately the tree withered.
MAT	21	20	제자들이 보고 이상히 여겨 가로되 무화과나무가 어찌하여 곧 말랐나이까	And when the disciples saw it, they marvelled, saying, How soon is the fig tree withered away!	When the disciples saw this, they marveled and asked, “How did the fig tree wither so quickly?”
MAT	21	21	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 만일 너희가 믿음이 있고 의심치 아니하면 이 무화과나무에게 된 이런 일만 할뿐 아니라 이 산더러 들려 바다에 던지우라 하여도 될 것이요	Jesus answered and said unto them, Verily I say unto you, If ye have faith, and doubt not, ye shall not only do this which is done to the fig tree, but also if ye shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; it shall be done.	“Truly I tell you,” Jesus replied, “if you have faith and do not doubt, not only will you do what was done to the fig tree, but even if you say to this mountain, ‘Be lifted up and thrown into the sea,’ it will happen.
MAT	21	22	너희가 기도할 때에 무엇이든지 믿고 구하는 것은 다 받으리라 하시니라	And all things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive.	If you believe, you will receive whatever you ask for in prayer.”
MAT	21	23	예수께서 성전에 들어가 가르치실새 대제사장들과 백성의 장로들이 나아와 가로되 네가 무슨 권세로 이런 일을 하느뇨 또 누가 이 권세를 주었느뇨	And when he was come into the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the people came unto him as he was teaching, and said, By what authority doest thou these things? and who gave thee this authority?	When Jesus returned to the temple courts and began to teach, the chief priests and elders of the people came up to Him. “By what authority are You doing these things?” they asked. “And who gave You this authority?”
MAT	21	24	예수께서 대답하시되 나도 한 말을 너희에게 물으리니 너희가 대답하면 나도 무슨 권세로 이런 일을 하는지 이르리라	And Jesus answered and said unto them, I also will ask you one thing, which if ye tell me, I in like wise will tell you by what authority I do these things.	“I will also ask you one question,” Jesus replied, “and if you answer Me, I will tell you by what authority I am doing these things.
MAT	21	25	요한의 침례가 어디로서 왔느냐 하늘로서냐 사람에게로서냐 저희가 서로 의논하여 가로되 만일 하늘로서라 하면 어찌하여 저를 믿지 아니하였느냐 할 것이요	The baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven, or of men? And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say, From heaven; he will say unto us, Why did ye not then believe him?	What was the source of John’s baptism? Was it from heaven or from men?” They deliberated among themselves and said, “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ He will ask, ‘Why then did you not believe him?’
MAT	21	26	만일 사람에게로서라 하면 모든 사람이 요한을 선지자로 여기니 백성이 무섭다 하여	But if we shall say, Of men; we fear the people; for all hold John as a prophet.	But if we say, ‘From men,’ we are afraid of the people, for they all regard John as a prophet.”
MAT	21	27	예수께 대답하여 가로되 우리가 알지 못하노라 하니 예수께서 가라사대 나도 무슨 권세로 이런 일을 하는지 너희에게 이르지 아니하리라	And they answered Jesus, and said, We cannot tell. And he said unto them, Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things.	So they answered, “We do not know.” And Jesus replied, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I am doing these things.
MAT	21	28	그러나 너희 생각에는 어떠하뇨 한 사람이 두 아들이 있는데 맏아들에게 가서 이르되 얘 오늘 포도원에 가서 일하라 하니	But what think ye? A certain man had two sons; and he came to the first, and said, Son, go work to day in my vineyard.	But what do you think? There was a man who had two sons. He went to the first one and said, ‘Son, go and work today in the vineyard.’
MAT	21	29	대답하여 가로되 아버지여 가겠소이다 하더니 가지 아니하고	He answered and said, I will not: but afterward he repented, and went.	‘I will not,’ he replied. But later he changed his mind and went.
MAT	21	30	둘째 아들에게 가서 또 이같이 말하니 대답하여 가로되 싫소이다 하더니 그 후에 뉘우치고 갔으니	And he came to the second, and said likewise. And he answered and said, I go, sir: and went not.	Then the man went to the second son and told him the same thing. ‘I will, sir,’ he said. But he did not go.
MAT	21	31	그 둘 중에 누가 아비의 뜻대로 하였느뇨 가로되 둘째 아들이니이다 예수께서 저희에게 이르시되 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 세리들과 창기들이 너희보다 먼저 하나님의 나라에 들어가리라	Whether of them twain did the will of his father? They say unto him, The first. Jesus saith unto them, Verily I say unto you, That the publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of God before you.	Which of the two did the will of his father?” “The first,” they answered. Jesus said to them, “Truly I tell you, the tax collectors and prostitutes are entering the kingdom of God before you.
MAT	21	32	요한이 의의 도로 너희에게 왔거늘 너희는 저를 믿지 아니하였으되 세리와 창기는 믿었으며 너희는 이것을 보고도 종시 뉘우쳐 믿지 아니하였도다	For John came unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye believed him not: but the publicans and the harlots believed him: and ye, when ye had seen it, repented not afterward, that ye might believe him.	For John came to you in a righteous way and you did not believe him, but the tax collectors and prostitutes did. And even after you saw this, you did not repent and believe him.
MAT	21	33	다시 한 비유를 들으라 한 집 주인이 포도원을 만들고 산울로 두르고 거기 즙 짜는 구유를 파고 망대를 짓고 농부들에게 세로 주고 타국에 갔더니	Hear another parable: There was a certain householder, which planted a vineyard, and hedged it round about, and digged a winepress in it, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country:	Listen to another parable: There was a landowner who planted a vineyard. He put a wall around it, dug a winepress in it, and built a tower. Then he rented it out to some tenants and went away on a journey.
MAT	21	34	실과 때가 가까우매 그 실과를 받으려고 자기 종들을 농부들에게 보내니	And when the time of the fruit drew near, he sent his servants to the husbandmen, that they might receive the fruits of it.	When the harvest time drew near, he sent his servants to the tenants to collect his share of the fruit.
MAT	21	35	농부들이 종들을 잡아 하나는 심히 때리고 하나는 죽이고 하나는 돌로 쳤거늘	And the husbandmen took his servants, and beat one, and killed another, and stoned another.	But the tenants seized his servants. They beat one, killed another, and stoned a third.
MAT	21	36	다시 다른 종들을 처음보다 많이 보내니 저희에게도 그렇게 하였는지라	Again, he sent other servants more than the first: and they did unto them likewise.	Again, he sent other servants, more than the first group. But the tenants did the same to them.
MAT	21	37	후에 자기 아들을 보내며 가로되 저희가 내 아들은 공경하리라 하였더니	But last of all he sent unto them his son, saying, They will reverence my son.	Finally, he sent his son to them. ‘They will respect my son,’ he said.
MAT	21	38	농부들이 그 아들을 보고 서로 말하되 이는 상속자니 자 죽이고 그의 유업을 차지하자 하고	But when the husbandmen saw the son, they said among themselves, This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance.	But when the tenants saw the son, they said to one another, ‘This is the heir. Come, let us kill him and take his inheritance.’
MAT	21	39	이에 잡아 포도원 밖에 내어쫓아 죽였느니라	And they caught him, and cast him out of the vineyard, and slew him.	So they seized him and threw him out of the vineyard and killed him.
MAT	21	40	그러면 포도원 주인이 올 때에 이 농부들을 어떻게 하겠느뇨	When the lord therefore of the vineyard cometh, what will he do unto those husbandmen?	Therefore, when the owner of the vineyard returns, what will he do to those tenants?”
MAT	21	41	저희가 말하되 이 악한 자들을 진멸하고 포도원은 제 때에 실과를 바칠만한 다른 농부들에게 세로 줄지니이다	They say unto him, He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out his vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their seasons.	“He will bring those wretches to a wretched end,” they replied, “and will rent out the vineyard to other tenants who will give him his share of the fruit at harvest time.”
MAT	21	42	예수께서 가라사대 너희가 성경에 건축자들의 버린 돌이 모퉁이의 머릿돌이 되었나니 이것은 주로 말미암아 된 것이요 우리 눈에 기이하도다 함을 읽어 본 일이 없느냐	Jesus saith unto them, Did ye never read in the scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner: this is the Lord’s doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes?	Jesus said to them, “Have you never read in the Scriptures: ‘The stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone. This is from the Lord, and it is marvelous in our eyes’?
MAT	21	43	그러므로 내가 너희에게 이르노니 하나님의 나라를 너희는 빼앗기고 그 나라의 열매 맺는 백성이 받으리라	Therefore say I unto you, The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.	Therefore I tell you that the kingdom of God will be taken away from you and given to a people who will produce its fruit.
MAT	21	44	이 돌 위에 떨어지는 자는 깨어지겠고 이 돌이 사람 위에 떨어지면 저를 가루로 만들어 흩으리라 하시니	And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.	He who falls on this stone will be broken to pieces, but he on whom it falls will be crushed.”
MAT	21	45	대제사장들과 바리새인들이 예수의 비유를 듣고 자기들을 가리켜 말씀하심인 줄 알고	And when the chief priests and Pharisees had heard his parables, they perceived that he spake of them.	When the chief priests and Pharisees heard His parables, they knew that Jesus was speaking about them.
MAT	21	46	잡고자 하나 무리를 무서워하니 이는 저희가 예수를 선지자로 앎이었더라	But when they sought to lay hands on him, they feared the multitude, because they took him for a prophet.	Although they wanted to arrest Him, they were afraid of the crowds, because the people regarded Him as a prophet.
MAT	22	1	예수께서 다시 비유로 대답하여 가라사대	And Jesus answered and spake unto them again by parables, and said,	Once again, Jesus spoke to them in parables:
MAT	22	2	천국은 마치 자기 아들을 위하여 혼인 잔치를 베푼 어떤 임금과 같으니	The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, which made a marriage for his son,	“The kingdom of heaven is like a king who prepared a wedding banquet for his son.
MAT	22	3	그 종들을 보내어 그 청한 사람들을 혼인 잔치에 오라 하였더니 오기를 싫어하거늘	And sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to the wedding: and they would not come.	He sent his servants to call those he had invited to the banquet, but they refused to come.
MAT	22	4	다시 다른 종들을 보내며 가로되 청한 사람들에게 이르기를 내가 오찬을 준비하되 나의 소와 살진 짐승을 잡고 모든 것을 갖추었으니 혼인 잔치에 오소서 하라 하였더니	Again, he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them which are bidden, Behold, I have prepared my dinner: my oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all things are ready: come unto the marriage.	Again, he sent other servants and said, ‘Tell those who have been invited that I have prepared my dinner. My oxen and fattened cattle have been killed, and everything is ready. Come to the wedding banquet.’
MAT	22	5	저희가 돌아보지도 않고 하나는 자기 밭으로, 하나는 자기 상업차로 가고	But they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his farm, another to his merchandise:	But they paid no attention and went away, one to his field, another to his business.
MAT	22	6	그 남은 자들은 종들을 잡아 능욕하고 죽이니	And the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully, and slew them.	The rest seized his servants, mistreated them, and killed them.
MAT	22	7	임금이 노하여 군대를 보내어 그 살인한 자들을 진멸하고 그 동네를 불사르고	But when the king heard thereof, he was wroth: and he sent forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned up their city.	The king was enraged, and he sent his troops to destroy those murderers and burn their city.
MAT	22	8	이에 종들에게 이르되 혼인 잔치는 예비되었으나 청한 사람들은 합당치 아니하니	Then saith he to his servants, The wedding is ready, but they which were bidden were not worthy.	Then he said to his servants, ‘The wedding banquet is ready, but those I invited were not worthy.
MAT	22	9	사거리 길에 가서 사람을 만나는 대로 혼인 잔치에 청하여 오너라 한대	Go ye therefore into the highways, and as many as ye shall find, bid to the marriage.	Go therefore to the crossroads and invite to the banquet as many as you can find.’
MAT	22	10	종들이 길에 나가 악한 자나 선한 자나 만나는 대로 모두 데려오니 혼인 자리에 손이 가득한지라	So those servants went out into the highways, and gathered together all as many as they found, both bad and good: and the wedding was furnished with guests.	So the servants went out into the streets and gathered everyone they could find, both evil and good, and the wedding hall was filled with guests.
MAT	22	11	임금이 손을 보러 들어올새 거기서 예복을 입지 않은 한 사람을 보고	And when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man which had not on a wedding garment:	But when the king came in to see the guests, he spotted a man who was not dressed in wedding clothes.
MAT	22	12	가로되 친구여 어찌하여 예복을 입지 않고 여기 들어왔느냐 하니 저가 유구무언이어늘	And he saith unto him, Friend, how camest thou in hither not having a wedding garment? And he was speechless.	‘Friend,’ he asked, ‘how did you get in here without wedding clothes?’ But the man was speechless.
MAT	22	13	임금이 사환들에게 말하되 그 수족을 결박하여 바깥 어두움에 내어 던지라 거기서 슬피 울며 이를 갊이 있으리라 하니라	Then said the king to the servants, Bind him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast him into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.	Then the king told the servants, ‘Tie him hand and foot, and throw him into the outer darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’
MAT	22	14	청함을 받은 자는 많되 택함을 입은 자는 적으니라	For many are called, but few are chosen.	For many are called, but few are chosen.”
MAT	22	15	이에 바리새인들이 가서 어떻게 하여 예수로 말의 올무에 걸리게 할까 상론하고	Then went the Pharisees, and took counsel how they might entangle him in his talk.	Then the Pharisees went out and conspired to trap Jesus in His words.
MAT	22	16	자기 제자들을 헤롯 당원들과 함께 예수께 보내어 말하되 선생님이여 우리가 아노니 당신은 참되시고 참으로써 하나님의 도를 가르치시며 아무라도 꺼리는 일이 없으시니 이는 사람을 외모로 보지 아니하심이니이다	And they sent out unto him their disciples with the Herodians, saying, Master, we know that thou art true, and teachest the way of God in truth, neither carest thou for any man: for thou regardest not the person of men.	They sent their disciples to Him along with the Herodians. “Teacher,” they said, “we know that You are honest and that You teach the way of God in accordance with the truth. You seek favor from no one, because You pay no attention to external appearance.
MAT	22	17	그러면 당신의 생각에는 어떠한지 우리에게 이르소서 가이사에게 세를 바치는 것이 가하니이까 불가하니이까 한대	Tell us therefore, What thinkest thou? Is it lawful to give tribute unto Cesar, or not?	So tell us what You think: Is it lawful to pay taxes to Caesar or not?”
MAT	22	18	예수께서 저희의 악함을 아시고 가라사대 외식하는 자들아 어찌하여 나를 시험하느냐	But Jesus perceived their wickedness, and said, Why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites?	But Jesus knew their evil intent and said, “You hypocrites, why are you testing Me?
MAT	22	19	셋돈을 내게 보이라 하시니 데나리온 하나를 가져왔거늘	Shew me the tribute money. And they brought unto him a penny.	Show Me the coin used for the tax.” And they brought Him a denarius.
MAT	22	20	예수께서 말씀하시되 이 형상과 이 글이 뉘 것이냐	And he saith unto them, Whose is this image and superscription?	“Whose image is this,” He asked, “and whose inscription?”
MAT	22	21	가로되 가이사의 것이니이다 이에 가라사대 그런즉 가이사의 것은 가이사에게 하나님의 것은 하나님께 바치라 하시니	They say unto him, Cesar’s. Then saith he unto them, Render therefore unto Cesar the things which are Cesar’s; and unto God the things that are God’s.	“Caesar’s,” they answered. So Jesus told them, “Give to Caesar what is Caesar’s, and to God what is God’s.”
MAT	22	22	저희가 이 말씀을 듣고 기이히 여겨 예수를 떠나가니라	When they had heard these words, they marvelled, and left him, and went their way.	And when they heard this, they were amazed. So they left Him and went away.
MAT	22	23	부활이 없다 하는 사두개인들이 그 날에 예수께 와서 물어 가로되	The same day came to him the Sadducees, which say that there is no resurrection, and asked him,	That same day the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came to Jesus and questioned Him.
MAT	22	24	선생님이여 모세가 일렀으되 사람이 만일 자식이 없이 죽으면 그 동생이 그 아내에게 장가들어 형을 위하여 후사를 세울지니라 하였나이다	Saying, Master, Moses said, If a man die, having no children, his brother shall marry his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother.	“Teacher,” they said, “Moses declared that if a man dies without having children, his brother is to marry the widow and raise up offspring for him.
MAT	22	25	우리 중에 칠 형제가 있었는데 맏이 장가 들었다가 죽어 후사가 없으므로 그의 아내를 그 동생에게 끼쳐두고	Now there were with us seven brethren: and the first, when he had married a wife, deceased, and, having no issue, left his wife unto his brother:	Now there were seven brothers among us. The first one married and died without having children. So he left his wife to his brother.
MAT	22	26	그 둘째와 셋째로 일곱째까지 그렇게 하다가	Likewise the second also, and the third, unto the seventh.	The same thing happened to the second and third brothers, down to the seventh.
MAT	22	27	최후에 그 여자도 죽었나이다	And last of all the woman died also.	And last of all, the woman died.
MAT	22	28	그런즉 저희가 다 그를 취하였으니 부활 때에 일곱 중에 뉘 아내가 되리이까	Therefore in the resurrection whose wife shall she be of the seven? for they all had her.	In the resurrection, then, whose wife will she be of the seven? For all of them were married to her.”
MAT	22	29	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 너희가 성경도 하나님의 능력도 알지 못하는 고로 오해하였도다	Jesus answered and said unto them, Ye do err, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God.	Jesus answered, “You are mistaken because you do not know the Scriptures or the power of God.
MAT	22	30	부활 때에는 장가도 아니가고 시집도 아니가고 하늘에 있는 천사들과 같으니라	For in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven.	In the resurrection, people will neither marry nor be given in marriage. Instead, they will be like the angels in heaven.
MAT	22	31	죽은 자의 부활을 의논할진대 하나님이 너희에게 말씀하신 바	But as touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken unto you by God, saying,	But concerning the resurrection of the dead, have you not read what God said to you:
MAT	22	32	나는 아브라함의 하나님이요 이삭의 하나님이요 야곱의 하나님이로라 하신 것을 읽어 보지 못하였느냐 하나님은 죽은 자의 하나님이 아니요 산 자의 하나님이시니라 하시니	I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the living.	‘I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob’? He is not the God of the dead, but of the living.”
MAT	22	33	무리가 듣고 그의 가르치심에 놀라더라	And when the multitude heard this, they were astonished at his doctrine.	When the crowds heard this, they were astonished at His teaching.
MAT	22	34	예수께서 사두개인들로 대답할 수 없게 하셨다 함을 바리새인들이 듣고 모였는데	But when the Pharisees had heard that he had put the Sadducees to silence, they were gathered together.	And when the Pharisees heard that Jesus had silenced the Sadducees, they themselves gathered together.
MAT	22	35	그 중에 한 율법사가 예수를 시험하여 묻되	Then one of them, which was a lawyer, asked him a question, tempting him, and saying,	One of them, an expert in the law, tested Him with a question:
MAT	22	36	선생님이여 율법 중에 어느 계명이 크니이까	Master, which is the great commandment in the law?	“Teacher, which commandment is the greatest in the Law?”
MAT	22	37	예수께서 가라사대 네 마음을 다하고 목숨을 다하고 뜻을 다하여 주 너의 하나님을 사랑하라 하셨으니	Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.	Jesus declared, “‘Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind.’
MAT	22	38	이것이 크고 첫째 되는 계명이요	This is the first and great commandment.	This is the first and greatest commandment.
MAT	22	39	둘째는 그와 같으니 네 이웃을 네 몸과 같이 사랑하라 하셨으니	And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.	And the second is like it: ‘Love your neighbor as yourself.’
MAT	22	40	이 두 계명이 온 율법과 선지자의 강령이니라	On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.	All the Law and the Prophets hang on these two commandments.”
MAT	22	41	바리새인들이 모였을 때에 예수께서 그들에게 물으시되	While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them,	While the Pharisees were assembled, Jesus questioned them:
MAT	22	42	너희는 그리스도에 대하여 어떻게 생각하느냐 뉘 자손이냐 대답하되 다윗의 자손이니이다	Saying, What think ye of Christ? whose son is he? They say unto him, The Son of David.	“What do you think about the Christ? Whose son is He?” “David’s,” they answered.
MAT	22	43	가라사대 그러면 다윗이 성령에 감동하여 어찌 그리스도를 주라 칭하여 말하되	He saith unto them, How then doth David in spirit call him Lord, saying,	Jesus said to them, “How then does David in the Spirit call Him ‘Lord’? For he says:
MAT	22	44	주께서 내 주께 이르시되 내가 네 원수를 네 발 아래 둘 때까지 내 우편에 앉았으라 하셨도다 하였느냐	The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool?	‘The Lord said to my Lord, “Sit at My right hand until I put Your enemies under Your feet.”’
MAT	22	45	다윗이 그리스도를 주라 칭하였은즉 어찌 그의 자손이 되겠느냐 하시니	If David then call him Lord, how is he his son?	So if David calls Him ‘Lord,’ how can He be David’s son?”
MAT	22	46	한 말도 능히 대답하는 자가 없고 그 날부터 감히 그에게 묻는 자도 없더라	And no man was able to answer him a word, neither durst any man from that day forth ask him any more questions.	No one was able to answer a word, and from that day on no one dared to question Him any further.
MAT	23	1	이에 예수께서 무리와 제자들에게 말씀하여 가라사대	Then spake Jesus to the multitude, and to his disciples,	Then Jesus spoke to the crowds and to His disciples:
MAT	23	2	서기관들과 바리새인들이 모세의 자리에 앉았으니	Saying, The scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses’ seat:	“The scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses’ seat.
MAT	23	3	그러므로 무엇이든지 저희의 말하는 바는 행하고 지키되 저희의 하는 행위는 본받지 말라 저희는 말만 하고 행치 아니하며	All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do not ye after their works: for they say, and do not.	So practice and observe everything they tell you. But do not do what they do, for they do not practice what they preach.
MAT	23	4	또 무거운 짐을 묶어 사람의 어깨에 지우되 자기는 이것을 한 손가락으로도 움직이려 하지 아니하며	For they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men’s shoulders; but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers.	They tie up heavy, burdensome loads and lay them on men’s shoulders, but they themselves are not willing to lift a finger to move them.
MAT	23	5	저희 모든 행위를 사람에게 보이고자 하여 하나니 곧 그 차는 경문을 넓게 하며 옷술을 크게 하고	But all their works they do for to be seen of men: they make broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments,	All their deeds are done for men to see. They broaden their phylacteries and lengthen their tassels.
MAT	23	6	잔치의 상석과 회당의 상좌와	And love the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief seats in the synagogues,	They love the places of honor at banquets, the chief seats in the synagogues,
MAT	23	7	시장에서 문안 받는 것과 사람에게 랍비라 칭함을 받는 것을 좋아하느니라	And greetings in the markets, and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi.	the greetings in the marketplaces, and the title of ‘Rabbi’ by which they are addressed.
MAT	23	8	그러나 너희는 랍비라 칭함을 받지 말라 너희 선생은 하나이요 너희는 다 형제니라	But be not ye called Rabbi: for one is your Master, even Christ; and all ye are brethren.	But you are not to be called ‘Rabbi,’ for you have one Teacher, and you are all brothers.
MAT	23	9	땅에 있는 자를 아비라 하지 말라 너희 아버지는 하나이시니 곧 하늘에 계신 자시니라	And call no man your father upon the earth: for one is your Father, which is in heaven.	And do not call anyone on earth your father, for you have one Father, who is in heaven.
MAT	23	10	또한 지도자라 칭함을 받지 말라 너희 지도자는 하나이니 곧 그리스도니라	Neither be ye called masters: for one is your Master, even Christ.	Nor are you to be called instructors, for you have one Instructor, the Christ.
MAT	23	11	너희 중에 큰 자는 너희를 섬기는 자가 되어야 하리라	But he that is greatest among you shall be your servant.	The greatest among you shall be your servant.
MAT	23	12	누구든지 자기를 높이는 자는 낮아지고 누구든지 자기를 낮추는 자는 높아지리라	And whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased; and he that shall humble himself shall be exalted.	For whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.
MAT	23	13	화 있을진저 외식하는 서기관들과 바리새인들이여 너희는 천국 문을 사람들 앞에서 닫고 너희도 들어가지 않고 들어가려 하는 자도 들어가지 못하게 하는도다	But woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men: for ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in.	Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You shut the kingdom of heaven in men’s faces. You yourselves do not enter, nor will you let in those who wish to enter.
MAT	23	14	(없음)	Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye devour widows’ houses, and for a pretence make long prayer: therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation.	
MAT	23	15	화 있을진저 외식하는 서기관들과 바리새인들이여 너희는 교인 하나를 얻기 위하여 바다와 육지를 두루 다니다가 생기면 너희보다 배나 더 지옥 자식이 되게 하는도다	Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of hell than yourselves.	Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You traverse land and sea to win a single convert, and when he becomes one, you make him twice as much a son of hell as you are.
MAT	23	16	화 있을진저 소경된 인도자여 너희가 말하되 누구든지 성전으로 맹세하면 아무 일 없거니와 성전의 금으로 맹세하면 지킬지라 하는도다	Woe unto you, ye blind guides, which say, Whosoever shall swear by the temple, it is nothing; but whosoever shall swear by the gold of the temple, he is a debtor!	Woe to you, blind guides! You say, ‘If anyone swears by the temple, it means nothing; but if anyone swears by the gold of the temple, he is bound by his oath.’
MAT	23	17	우맹이요 소경들이여 어느 것이 크뇨 그 금이냐 금을 거룩하게 하는 성전이냐	Ye fools and blind: for whether is greater, the gold, or the temple that sanctifieth the gold?	You blind fools! Which is greater: the gold, or the temple that makes it sacred?
MAT	23	18	너희가 또 이르되 누구든지 제단으로 맹세하면 아무 일 없거니와 그 위에 있는 예물로 맹세하면 지킬지라 하는도다	And, Whosoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whosoever sweareth by the gift that is upon it, he is guilty.	And you say, ‘If anyone swears by the altar, it means nothing; but if anyone swears by the gift on it, he is bound by his oath.’
MAT	23	19	소경들이여 어느 것이 크뇨 그 예물이냐 예물을 거룩하게 하는 제단이냐	Ye fools and blind: for whether is greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifieth the gift?	You blind men! Which is greater: the gift, or the altar that makes it sacred?
MAT	23	20	그러므로 제단으로 맹세하는 자는 제단과 그 위에 있는 모든 것으로 맹세함이요	Whoso therefore shall swear by the altar, sweareth by it, and by all things thereon.	So then, he who swears by the altar swears by it and by everything on it.
MAT	23	21	또 성전으로 맹세하는 자는 성전과 그 안에 계신 이로 맹세함이요	And whoso shall swear by the temple, sweareth by it, and by him that dwelleth therein.	And he who swears by the temple swears by it and by the One who dwells in it.
MAT	23	22	또 하늘로 맹세하는 자는 하나님의 보좌와 그 위에 앉으신 이로 맹세함이니라	And he that shall swear by heaven, sweareth by the throne of God, and by him that sitteth thereon.	And he who swears by heaven swears by God’s throne and by the One who sits on it.
MAT	23	23	화 있을진저 외식하는 서기관들과 바리새인들이여 너희가 박하와 회향과 근채의 십일조를 드리되 율법의 더 중한 바 의와 인과 신은 버렸도다 그러나 이것도 행하고 저것도 버리지 말아야 할지니라	Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.	Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You pay tithes of mint, dill, and cumin. But you have disregarded the weightier matters of the law: justice, mercy, and faithfulness. You should have practiced the latter, without neglecting the former.
MAT	23	24	소경된 인도자여 하루살이는 걸러내고 약대는 삼키는도다	Ye blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel.	You blind guides! You strain out a gnat but swallow a camel.
MAT	23	25	화 있을진저 외식하는 서기관들과 바리새인들이여 잔과 대접의 겉은 깨끗이 하되 그 안에는 탐욕과 방탕으로 가득하게 하는도다	Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye make clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and excess.	Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You clean the outside of the cup and dish, but inside they are full of greed and self-indulgence.
MAT	23	26	소경된 바리새인아 너는 먼저 안을 깨끗이 하라 그리하면 겉도 깨끗하리라	Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first that which is within the cup and platter, that the outside of them may be clean also.	Blind Pharisee! First clean the inside of the cup and dish, so that the outside may become clean as well.
MAT	23	27	화 있을진저 외식하는 서기관들과 바리새인들이여 회칠한 무덤 같으니 겉으로는 아름답게 보이나 그 안에는 죽은 사람의 뼈와 모든 더러운 것이 가득하도다	Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are like unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men’s bones, and of all uncleanness.	Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You are like whitewashed tombs, which look beautiful on the outside, but on the inside are full of dead men’s bones and every kind of impurity.
MAT	23	28	이와 같이 너희도 겉으로는 사람에게 옳게 보이되 안으로는 외식과 불법이 가득하도다	Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.	In the same way, on the outside you appear to be righteous, but on the inside you are full of hypocrisy and wickedness.
MAT	23	29	화 있을진저 외식하는 서기관들과 바리새인들이여 너희는 선지자들의 무덤을 쌓고 의인들의 비석을 꾸미며 가로되	Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye build the tombs of the prophets, and garnish the sepulchres of the righteous,	Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You build tombs for the prophets and decorate the monuments of the righteous.
MAT	23	30	만일 우리가 조상 때에 있었더면 우리는 저희가 선지자의 피를 흘리는데 참예하지 아니하였으리라 하니	And say, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.	And you say, ‘If we had lived in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partners with them in shedding the blood of the prophets.’
MAT	23	31	그러면 너희가 선지자를 죽인 자의 자손됨을 스스로 증거함이로다	Wherefore ye be witnesses unto yourselves, that ye are the children of them which killed the prophets.	So you testify against yourselves that you are the sons of those who murdered the prophets.
MAT	23	32	너희가 너희 조상의 양을 채우라	Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers.	Fill up, then, the measure of the sin of your fathers.
MAT	23	33	뱀들아 독사의 새끼들아 너희가 어떻게 지옥의 판결을 피하겠느냐	Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell?	You snakes! You brood of vipers! How will you escape the sentence of hell?
MAT	23	34	그러므로 내가 너희에게 선지자들과 지혜있는 자들과 서기관들을 보내매 너희가 그 중에서 더러는 죽이고 십자가에 못 박고 그 중에 더러는 너희 회당에서 채찍질하고 이 동네에서 저 동네로 구박하리라	Wherefore, behold, I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes: and some of them ye shall kill and crucify; and some of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and persecute them from city to city:	Because of this, I am sending you prophets and wise men and teachers. Some of them you will kill and crucify, and others you will flog in your synagogues and persecute in town after town.
MAT	23	35	그러므로 의인 아벨의 피로부터 성전과 제단 사이에서 너희가 죽인 바라갸의 아들 사가랴의 피까지 땅 위에서 흘린 의로운 피가 다 너희에게 돌아가리라	That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar.	And so upon you will come all the righteous blood shed on earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zechariah son of Berechiah, whom you murdered between the temple and the altar.
MAT	23	36	내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 이것이 다 이 세대에게 돌아가리라	Verily I say unto you, All these things shall come upon this generation.	Truly I tell you, all these things will come upon this generation.
MAT	23	37	예루살렘아 예루살렘아 선지자들을 죽이고 네게 파송된 자들을 돌로 치는 자여 암탉이 그 새끼를 날개 아래 모음 같이 내가 네 자녀를 모으려 한 일이 몇 번이냐 그러나 너희가 원치 아니 하였도다	O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!	O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, who kills the prophets and stones those sent to her, how often I have longed to gather your children together, as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, but you were unwilling!
MAT	23	38	보라 너희 집이 황폐하여 버린 바 되리라	Behold, your house is left unto you desolate.	Look, your house is left to you desolate.
MAT	23	39	내가 너희에게 이르노니 이제부터 너희는 찬송하리로다 주의 이름으로 오시는 이여 할 때까지 나를 보지 못하리라 하시니라	For I say unto you, Ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord.	For I tell you that you will not see Me again until you say, ‘Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord.’”
MAT	24	1	예수께서 성전에서 나와서 가실 때에 제자들이 성전 건물들을 가리켜 보이려고 나아오니	And Jesus went out, and departed from the temple: and his disciples came to him for to shew him the buildings of the temple.	As Jesus left the temple and was walking away, His disciples came up to Him to point out its buildings.
MAT	24	2	대답하여 가라사대 너희가 이 모든 것을 보지 못하느냐 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 돌 하나도 돌 위에 남지 않고 다 무너뜨리우리라	And Jesus said unto them, See ye not all these things? verily I say unto you, There shall not be left here one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down.	“Do you see all these things?” He replied. “Truly I tell you, not one stone here will be left on another; every one will be thrown down.”
MAT	24	3	예수께서 감람 산 위에 앉으셨을 때에 제자들이 종용히 와서 가로되 우리에게 이르소서 어느 때에 이런 일이 있겠사오며 또 주의 임하심과 세상 끝에는 무슨 징조가 있사오리이까	And as he sat upon the mount of Olives, the disciples came unto him privately, saying, Tell us, when shall these things be? and what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world?	While Jesus was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples came to Him privately. “Tell us,” they said, “when will these things happen, and what will be the sign of Your coming and of the end of the age?”
MAT	24	4	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 너희가 사람의 미혹을 받지 않도록 주의하라	And Jesus answered and said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive you.	Jesus answered, “See to it that no one deceives you.
MAT	24	5	많은 사람이 내 이름으로 와서 이르되 나는 그리스도라 하여 많은 사람을 미혹케 하리라	For many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ; and shall deceive many.	For many will come in My name, claiming, ‘I am the Christ,’ and will deceive many.
MAT	24	6	난리와 난리 소문을 듣겠으나 너희는 삼가 두려워 말라 이런 일이 있어야 하되 끝은 아직 아니니라	And ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars: see that ye be not troubled: for all these things must come to pass, but the end is not yet.	You will hear of wars and rumors of wars, but see to it that you are not alarmed. These things must happen, but the end is still to come.
MAT	24	7	민족이 민족을, 나라가 나라를 대적하여 일어나겠고 처처에 기근과 지진이 있으리니	For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom: and there shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes, in divers places.	Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. There will be famines and earthquakes in various places.
MAT	24	8	이 모든 것이 재난의 시작이니라	All these are the beginning of sorrows.	All these are the beginning of birth pains.
MAT	24	9	그 때에 사람들이 너희를 환난에 넘겨 주겠으며 너희를 죽이리니 너희가 내 이름을 위하여 모든 민족에게 미움을 받으리라	Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you: and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake.	Then they will deliver you over to be persecuted and killed, and you will be hated by all nations because of My name.
MAT	24	10	그 때에 많은 사람이 시험에 빠져 서로 잡아 주고 서로 미워하겠으며	And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate one another.	At that time many will fall away and will betray and hate one another,
MAT	24	11	거짓 선지자가 많이 일어나 많은 사람을 미혹하게 하겠으며	And many false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many.	and many false prophets will arise and mislead many.
MAT	24	12	불법이 성하므로 많은 사람의 사랑이 식어지리라	And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold.	Because of the multiplication of wickedness, the love of most will grow cold.
MAT	24	13	그러나 끝까지 견디는 자는 구원을 얻으리라	But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.	But the one who perseveres to the end will be saved.
MAT	24	14	이 천국 복음이 모든 민족에게 증거되기 위하여 온 세상에 전파되리니 그제야 끝이 오리라	And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come.	And this gospel of the kingdom will be preached in all the world as a testimony to all nations, and then the end will come.
MAT	24	15	그러므로 너희가 선지자 다니엘의 말한 바 멸망의 가증한 것이 거룩한 곳에 선 것을 보거든 (읽는 자는 깨달을진저)	When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, stand in the holy place, (whoso readeth, let him understand:)	So when you see standing in the holy place ‘the abomination of desolation,’ described by the prophet Daniel (let the reader understand),
MAT	24	16	그 때에 유대에 있는 자들은 산으로 도망할지어다	Then let them which be in Judea flee into the mountains:	then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains.
MAT	24	17	지붕 위에 있는 자는 집 안에 있는 물건을 가질러 내려 가지 말며	Let him which is on the housetop not come down to take any thing out of his house:	Let no one on the housetop come down to retrieve anything from his house.
MAT	24	18	밭에 있는 자는 겉옷을 가질러 뒤로 돌이키지 말지어다	Neither let him which is in the field return back to take his clothes.	And let no one in the field return for his cloak.
MAT	24	19	그 날에는 아이 밴 자들과 젖 먹이는 자들에게 화가 있으리로다	And woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck in those days!	How miserable those days will be for pregnant and nursing mothers!
MAT	24	20	너희의 도망하는 일이 겨울에나 안식일에 되지 않도록 기도하라	But pray ye that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the sabbath day:	Pray that your flight will not occur in the winter or on the Sabbath.
MAT	24	21	이는 그 때에 큰 환난이 있겠음이라 창세로부터 지금까지 이런 환난이 없었고 후에도 없으리라	For then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be.	For at that time there will be great tribulation, unmatched from the beginning of the world until now, and never to be seen again.
MAT	24	22	그 날들을 감하지 아니할 것이면 모든 육체가 구원을 얻지 못할 것이나 그러나 택하신 자들을 위하여 그 날들을 감하시리라	And except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved: but for the elect’s sake those days shall be shortened.	If those days had not been cut short, nobody would be saved. But for the sake of the elect, those days will be cut short.
MAT	24	23	그 때에 사람이 너희에게 말하되 보라 그리스도가 여기 있다 혹 저기 있다 하여도 믿지 말라	Then if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there; believe it not.	At that time, if anyone says to you, ‘Look, here is the Christ!’ or ‘There He is!’ do not believe it.
MAT	24	24	거짓 그리스도들과 거짓 선지자들이 일어나 큰 표적과 기사를 보이어 할 수만 있으면 택하신 자들도 미혹하게 하리라	For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall shew great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect.	For false Christs and false prophets will appear and perform great signs and wonders that would deceive even the elect, if that were possible.
MAT	24	25	보라 내가 너희에게 미리 말하였노라	Behold, I have told you before.	See, I have told you in advance.
MAT	24	26	그러면 사람들이 너희에게 말하되 보라 그리스도가 광야에 있다 하여도 나가지 말고 보라 골방에 있다 하여도 믿지 말라	Wherefore if they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the desert; go not forth: behold, he is in the secret chambers; believe it not.	So if they tell you, ‘There He is in the wilderness,’ do not go out; or, ‘Here He is in the inner rooms,’ do not believe it.
MAT	24	27	번개가 동편에서 나서 서편까지 번쩍임 같이 인자의 임함도 그러하리라	For as the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.	For just as the lightning comes from the east and flashes as far as the west, so will be the coming of the Son of Man.
MAT	24	28	주검이 있는 곳에는 독수리들이 모일지니라	For wheresoever the carcase is, there will the eagles be gathered together.	Wherever there is a carcass, there the vultures will gather.
MAT	24	29	그 날 환난 후에 즉시 해가 어두워지며 달이 빛을 내지 아니하며 별들이 하늘에서 떨어지며 하늘의 권능들이 흔들리리라	Immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the sun be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken:	Immediately after the tribulation of those days: ‘The sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light; the stars will fall from the sky, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken.’
MAT	24	30	그 때에 인자의 징조가 하늘에서 보이겠고 그 때에 땅의 모든 족속들이 통곡하며 그들이 인자가 구름을 타고 능력과 큰 영광으로 오는 것을 보리라	And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven: and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.	At that time the sign of the Son of Man will appear in heaven, and all the tribes of the earth will mourn. They will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory.
MAT	24	31	저가 큰 나팔 소리와 함께 천사들을 보내리니 저희가 그 택하신 자들을 하늘 이 끝에서 저 끝까지 사방에서 모으리라	And he shall send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.	And He will send out His angels with a loud trumpet call, and they will gather His elect from the four winds, from one end of the heavens to the other.
MAT	24	32	무화과나무의 비유를 배우라 그 가지가 연하여지고 잎사귀를 내면 여름이 가까운 줄을 아나니	Now learn a parable of the fig tree; When his branch is yet tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh:	Now learn this lesson from the fig tree: As soon as its branches become tender and sprout leaves, you know that summer is near.
MAT	24	33	이와 같이 너희도 이 모든 일을 보거든 인자가 가까이 곧 문 앞에 이른 줄 알라	So likewise ye, when ye shall see all these things, know that it is near, even at the doors.	So also, when you see all these things, you will know that He is near, right at the door.
MAT	24	34	내가 진실로 너희에게 말하노니 이 세대가 지나가기 전에 이 일이 다 이루리라	Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not pass, till all these things be fulfilled.	Truly I tell you, this generation will not pass away until all these things have happened.
MAT	24	35	천지는 없어지겠으나 내 말은 없어지지 아니하리라	Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.	Heaven and earth will pass away, but My words will never pass away.
MAT	24	36	그러나 그 날과 그 때는 아무도 모르나니 하늘의 천사들도, 아들도 모르고 오직 아버지만 아시느니라	But of that day and hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels of heaven, but my Father only.	No one knows about that day or hour, not even the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father.
MAT	24	37	노아의 때와 같이 인자의 임함도 그러하리라	But as the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.	As it was in the days of Noah, so will it be at the coming of the Son of Man.
MAT	24	38	홍수 전에 노아가 방주에 들어가던 날까지 사람들이 먹고 마시고 장가 들고 시집 가고 있으면서	For as in the days that were before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark,	For in the days before the flood, people were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, up to the day Noah entered the ark.
MAT	24	39	홍수가 나서 저희를 다 멸하기까지 깨닫지 못하였으니 인자의 임함도 이와 같으리라	And knew not until the flood came, and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.	And they were oblivious, until the flood came and swept them all away. So will it be at the coming of the Son of Man.
MAT	24	40	그 때에 두 사람이 밭에 있으매 하나는 데려감을 당하고 하나는 버려둠을 당할 것이요	Then shall two be in the field; the one shall be taken, and the other left.	Two men will be in the field: one will be taken and the other left.
MAT	24	41	두 여자가 매를 갈고 있으매 하나는 데려감을 당하고 하나는 버려둠을 당할 것이니라	Two women shall be grinding at the mill; the one shall be taken, and the other left.	Two women will be grinding at the mill: one will be taken and the other left.
MAT	24	42	그러므로 깨어 있으라 어느 날에 너희 주가 임할는지	Watch therefore: for ye know not what hour your Lord doth come.	Therefore keep watch, because you do not know the day on which your Lord will come.
MAT	24	43	너희가 알지 못함이니라 너희도 아는 바니 만일 집 주인이 도적이 어느 경점에 올 줄을 알았더면 깨어 있어 그 집을 뚫지 못하게 하였으리라	But know this, that if the goodman of the house had known in what watch the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house to be broken up.	But understand this: If the homeowner had known in which watch of the night the thief was coming, he would have kept watch and would not have let his house be broken into.
MAT	24	44	이러므로 너희도 예비하고 있으라 생각지 않은 때에 인자가 오리라	Therefore be ye also ready: for in such an hour as ye think not the Son of man cometh.	For this reason, you also must be ready, because the Son of Man will come at an hour you do not expect.
MAT	24	45	충성되고 지혜 있는 종이 되어 주인에게 그 집 사람들을 맡아 때를 따라 양식을 나눠 줄 자가 누구뇨	Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath made ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season?	Who then is the faithful and wise servant, whom the master has put in charge of his household, to give the others their food at the proper time?
MAT	24	46	주인이 올 때에 그 종의 이렇게 하는 것을 보면 그 종이 복이 있으리로다	Blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing.	Blessed is that servant whose master finds him doing so when he returns.
MAT	24	47	내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 주인이 그 모든 소유를 저에게 맡기리라	Verily I say unto you, That he shall make him ruler over all his goods.	Truly I tell you, he will put him in charge of all his possessions.
MAT	24	48	만일 그 악한 종이 마음에 생각하기를 주인이 더디 오리라 하여	But and if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming;	But suppose that servant is wicked and says in his heart, ‘My master will be away a long time.’
MAT	24	49	동무들을 때리며 술 친구들로 더불어 먹고 마시게 되면	And shall begin to smite his fellowservants, and to eat and drink with the drunken;	And he begins to beat his fellow servants and to eat and drink with drunkards.
MAT	24	50	생각지 않은 날 알지 못하는 시간에 그 종의 주인이 이르러	The lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of,	The master of that servant will come on a day he does not expect and at an hour he does not anticipate.
MAT	24	51	엄히 때리고 외식하는 자의 받는 율에 처하리니 거기서 슬피 울며 이를 갊이 있으리라	And shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.	Then he will cut him to pieces and assign him a place with the hypocrites, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
MAT	25	1	그 때에 천국은 마치 등을 들고 신랑을 맞으러 나간 열 처녀와 같다 하리니	Then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins, which took their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom.	“At that time the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom.
MAT	25	2	그 중에 다섯은 미련하고 다섯은 슬기 있는지라	And five of them were wise, and five were foolish.	Five of them were foolish, and five were wise.
MAT	25	3	미련한 자들은 등을 가지되 기름을 가지지 아니하고	They that were foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with them:	The foolish ones took their lamps but did not take along any extra oil.
MAT	25	4	슬기 있는 자들은 그릇에 기름을 담아 등과 함께 가져갔더니	But the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps.	But the wise ones took oil in flasks along with their lamps.
MAT	25	5	신랑이 더디 오므로 다 졸며 잘새	While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept.	When the bridegroom was delayed, they all became drowsy and fell asleep.
MAT	25	6	밤 중에 소리가 나되 보라 신랑이로다 맞으러 나오라 하매	And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold, the bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him.	At midnight the cry rang out: ‘Here is the bridegroom! Come out to meet him!’
MAT	25	7	이에 그 처녀들이 다 일어나 등을 준비할 새	Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps.	Then all the virgins woke up and trimmed their lamps.
MAT	25	8	미련한 자들이 슬기 있는 자들에게 이르되 우리 등불이 꺼져가니 너희 기름을 좀 나눠 달라 하거늘	And the foolish said unto the wise, Give us of your oil; for our lamps are gone out.	The foolish ones said to the wise, ‘Give us some of your oil; our lamps are going out.’
MAT	25	9	슬기 있는 자들이 대답하여 가로되 우리와 너희의 쓰기에 다 부족할까 하노니 차라리 파는 자들에게 가서 너희 쓸 것을 사라 하니	But the wise answered, saying, Not so; lest there be not enough for us and you: but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for yourselves.	‘No,’ said the wise ones, ‘or there may not be enough for both us and you. Instead, go to those who sell oil and buy some for yourselves.’
MAT	25	10	저희가 사러 간 동안에 신랑이 오므로 예비하였던 자들은 함께 혼인 잔치에 들어가고 문은 닫힌지라	And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and they that were ready went in with him to the marriage: and the door was shut.	But while they were on their way to buy it, the bridegroom arrived. Those who were ready went in with him to the wedding banquet, and the door was shut.
MAT	25	11	그 후에 남은 처녀들이 와서 가로되 주여 주여 우리에게 열어 주소서	Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us.	Later the other virgins arrived and said, ‘Lord, lord, open the door for us!’
MAT	25	12	대답하여 가로되 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 내가 너희를 알지 못하노라 하였느니라	But he answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not.	But he replied, ‘Truly I tell you, I do not know you.’
MAT	25	13	그런즉 깨어 있으라 너희는 그 날과 그 시를 알지 못하느니라	Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man cometh.	Therefore keep watch, because you do not know the day or the hour.
MAT	25	14	또 어떤 사람이 타국에 갈제 그 종들을 불러 자기 소유를 맡김과 같으니	For the kingdom of heaven is as a man travelling into a far country, who called his own servants, and delivered unto them his goods.	For it is just like a man going on a journey, who called his servants and entrusted them with his possessions.
MAT	25	15	각각 그 재능대로 하나에게는 금 다섯 달란트를, 하나에게는 두 달란트를, 하나에게는 한 달란트를 주고 떠났더니	And unto one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another one; to every man according to his several ability; and straightway took his journey.	To one he gave five talents, to another two talents, and to another one talent—each according to his own ability. And he went on his journey.
MAT	25	16	다섯 달란트 받은 자는 바로 가서 그것으로 장사하여 또 다섯 달란트를 남기고	Then he that had received the five talents went and traded with the same, and made them other five talents.	The servant who had received the five talents went at once and put them to work and gained five more.
MAT	25	17	두 달란트를 받은 자도 그같이 하여 또 두 달란트를 남겼으되	And likewise he that had received two, he also gained other two.	Likewise, the one with the two talents gained two more.
MAT	25	18	한 달란트 받은 자는 가서 땅을 파고 그 주인의 돈을 감추어 두었더니	But he that had received one went and digged in the earth, and hid his lord’s money.	But the servant who had received the one talent went off, dug a hole in the ground, and hid his master’s money.
MAT	25	19	오랜 후에 그 종들의 주인이 돌아와 저희와 회계할새	After a long time the lord of those servants cometh, and reckoneth with them.	After a long time the master of those servants returned to settle accounts with them.
MAT	25	20	다섯 달란트 받았던 자는 다섯 달란트를 더 가지고 와서 가로되 주여 내게 다섯 달란트를 주셨는데 보소서 내가 또 다섯 달란트를 남겼나이다	And so he that had received five talents came and brought other five talents, saying, Lord, thou deliveredst unto me five talents: behold, I have gained beside them five talents more.	The servant who had received the five talents came and presented five more. ‘Master,’ he said, ‘you entrusted me with five talents. See, I have gained five more.’
MAT	25	21	그 주인이 이르되 잘 하였도다 착하고 충성된 종아 네가 작은 일에 충성하였으매 내가 많은 것으로 네게 맡기리니 네 주인의 즐거움에 참예할지어다 하고	His lord said unto him, Well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord.	His master replied, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant! You have been faithful with a few things; I will put you in charge of many things. Enter into the joy of your master!’
MAT	25	22	두 달란트 받았던 자도 와서 가로되 주여 내게 두 달란트를 주셨는데 보소서 내가 또 두 달란트를 남겼나이다	He also that had received two talents came and said, Lord, thou deliveredst unto me two talents: behold, I have gained two other talents beside them.	The servant who had received the two talents also came and said, ‘Master, you entrusted me with two talents. See, I have gained two more.’
MAT	25	23	그 주인이 이르되 잘 하였도다 착하고 충성된 종아 네가 작은 일에 충성하였으매 내가 많은 것으로 네게 맡기리니 네 주인의 즐거움에 참예할지어다 하고	His lord said unto him, Well done, good and faithful servant; thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord.	His master replied, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant! You have been faithful with a few things; I will put you in charge of many things. Enter into the joy of your master!’
MAT	25	24	한 달란트 받았던 자도 와서 가로되 주여 당신은 굳은 사람이라 심지 않은 데서 거두고 헤치지 않은 데서 모으는 줄을 내가 알았으므로	Then he which had received the one talent came and said, Lord, I knew thee that thou art an hard man, reaping where thou hast not sown, and gathering where thou hast not strawed:	Finally, the servant who had received the one talent came and said, ‘Master, I knew that you are a hard man, reaping where you have not sown and gathering where you have not scattered seed.
MAT	25	25	두려워하여 나가서 당신의 달란트를 땅에 감추어 두었나이다 보소서 당신의 것을 받으셨나이다	And I was afraid, and went and hid thy talent in the earth: lo, there thou hast that is thine.	So I was afraid and went out and hid your talent in the ground. See, you have what belongs to you.’
MAT	25	26	그 주인이 대답하여 가로되 악하고 게으른 종아 나는 심지 않은 데서 거두고 헤치지 않은 데서 모으는 줄로 네가 알았느냐	His lord answered and said unto him, Thou wicked and slothful servant, thou knewest that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I have not strawed:	‘You wicked, lazy servant!’ replied his master. ‘You knew that I reap where I have not sown and gather where I have not scattered seed.
MAT	25	27	그러면 네가 마땅히 내 돈을 취리하는 자들에게나 두었다가 나로 돌아와서 내 본전과 변리를 받게 할 것이니라 하고	Thou oughtest therefore to have put my money to the exchangers, and then at my coming I should have received mine own with usury.	Then you should have deposited my money with the bankers, and on my return I would have received it back with interest.
MAT	25	28	그에게서 그 한 달란트를 빼앗아 열 달란트를 가진 자에게 주어라	Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him which hath ten talents.	Therefore take the talent from him and give it to the one who has ten talents.
MAT	25	29	무릇 있는 자는 받아 풍족하게 되고 없는 자는 그 있는 것까지 빼앗기리라	For unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath.	For everyone who has will be given more, and he will have an abundance. But the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.
MAT	25	30	이 무익한 종을 바깥 어두운 데로 내어 쫓으라 거기서 슬피 울며 이를 갊이 있으리라 하니라	And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.	And throw that worthless servant into the outer darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’
MAT	25	31	인자가 자기 영광으로 모든 천사와 함께 올 때에 자기 영광의 보좌에 앉으리니	When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory:	When the Son of Man comes in His glory, and all the angels with Him, He will sit on His glorious throne.
MAT	25	32	모든 민족을 그 앞에 모으고 각각 분별하기를 목자가 양과 염소를 분별하는 것 같이 하여	And before him shall be gathered all nations: and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats:	All the nations will be gathered before Him, and He will separate the people one from another, as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
MAT	25	33	양은 그 오른편에 염소는 왼편에 두리라	And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.	He will place the sheep on His right and the goats on His left.
MAT	25	34	그 때에 임금이 그 오른편에 있는 자들에게 이르시되 내 아버지께 복받을 자들이여 나아와 창세로부터 너희를 위하여 예비된 나라를 상속하라	Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world:	Then the King will say to those on His right, ‘Come, you who are blessed by My Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
MAT	25	35	내가 주릴 때에 너희가 먹을 것을 주었고 목마를 때에 마시게 하였고 나그네 되었을 때에 영접하였고	For I was an hungred, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in:	For I was hungry and you gave Me something to eat, I was thirsty and you gave Me something to drink, I was a stranger and you took Me in,
MAT	25	36	벗었을 때에 옷을 입혔고 병들었을 때에 돌아 보았고 옥에 갇혔을 때에 와서 보았느니라	Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me.	I was naked and you clothed Me, I was sick and you looked after Me, I was in prison and you visited Me.’
MAT	25	37	이에 의인들이 대답하여 가로되 주여 우리가 어느 때에 주의 주리신 것을 보고 공궤하였으며 목마르신 것을 보고 마시게 하였나이까	Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink?	Then the righteous will answer Him, ‘Lord, when did we see You hungry and feed You, or thirsty and give You something to drink?
MAT	25	38	어느 때에 나그네 되신 것을 보고 영접하였으며 벗으신 것을 보고 옷 입혔나이까	When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee?	When did we see You a stranger and take You in, or naked and clothe You?
MAT	25	39	어느 때에 병드신 것이나 옥에 갇히신 것을 보고 가서 뵈었나이까 하리니	Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?	When did we see You sick or in prison and visit You?’
MAT	25	40	임금이 대답하여 가라사대 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 너희가 여기 내 형제 중에 지극히 작은 자 하나에게 한 것이 곧 내게 한 것이니라 하시고	And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.	And the King will reply, ‘Truly I tell you, whatever you did for one of the least of these brothers of Mine, you did for Me.’
MAT	25	41	또 왼편에 있는 자들에게 이르시되 저주를 받은 자들아 나를 떠나 마귀와 그 사자들을 위하여 예비된 영영한 불에 들어가라	Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels:	Then He will say to those on His left, ‘Depart from Me, you who are cursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels.
MAT	25	42	내가 주릴 때에 너희가 먹을 것을 주지 아니하였고 목마를 때에 마시게 하지 아니하였고	For I was an hungred, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink:	For I was hungry and you gave Me nothing to eat, I was thirsty and you gave Me nothing to drink,
MAT	25	43	나그네 되었을 때에 영접하지 아니하였고 벗었을 때에 옷 입히지 아니하였고 병들었을 때와 옥에 갇혔을 때에 돌아보지 아니하였느니라 하시니	I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not: sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not.	I was a stranger and you did not take Me in, I was naked and you did not clothe Me, I was sick and in prison and you did not visit Me.’
MAT	25	44	저희도 대답하여 가로되 주여 우리가 어느 때에 주의 주리신 것이나 목마르신 것이나 나그네 되신 것이나 벗으신 것이나 병드신 것이나 옥에 갇히신 것을 보고 공양치 아니하더이까	Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee?	And they too will reply, ‘Lord, when did we see You hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison, and did not minister to You?’
MAT	25	45	이에 임금이 대답하여 가라사대 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 이 지극히 작은 자 하나에게 하지 아니한 것이 곧 내게 하지 아니한 것이니라 하시리니	Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.	Then the King will answer, ‘Truly I tell you, whatever you did not do for one of the least of these, you did not do for Me.’
MAT	25	46	저희는 영벌에 의인들은 영생에 들어가리라 하시니라	And these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous into life eternal.	And they will go away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life.”
MAT	26	1	예수께서 이 말씀을 다 마치시고 제자들에게 이르시되	And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these sayings, he said unto his disciples,	When Jesus had finished saying all these things, He told His disciples,
MAT	26	2	너희의 아는 바와 같이 이틀을 지나면 유월절이라 인자가 십자가에 못 박히기 위하여 팔리우리라 하시더라	Ye know that after two days is the feast of the passover, and the Son of man is betrayed to be crucified.	“You know that the Passover is two days away, and the Son of Man will be handed over to be crucified.”
MAT	26	3	그 때에 대제사장들과 백성의 장로들이 가야바라 하는 대제사장의 아문에 모여	Then assembled together the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders of the people, unto the palace of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas,	At that time the chief priests and elders of the people assembled in the courtyard of the high priest, whose name was Caiaphas,
MAT	26	4	예수를 궤계로 잡아 죽이려고 의논하되	And consulted that they might take Jesus by subtilty, and kill him.	and they conspired to arrest Jesus covertly and kill Him.
MAT	26	5	말하기를 민요가 날까 하노니 명절에는 말자 하더라	But they said, Not on the feast day, lest there be an uproar among the people.	“But not during the feast,” they said, “or there may be a riot among the people.”
MAT	26	6	예수께서 베다니 문둥이 시몬의 집에 계실 때에	Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper,	While Jesus was in Bethany in the home of Simon the Leper,
MAT	26	7	한 여자가 매우 귀한 향유 한 옥합을 가지고 나아와서 식사하시는 예수의 머리에 부으니	There came unto him a woman having an alabaster box of very precious ointment, and poured it on his head, as he sat at meat.	a woman came to Him with an alabaster jar of expensive perfume, which she poured on His head as He reclined at the table.
MAT	26	8	제자들이 보고 분하여 가로되 무슨 의사로 이것을 허비하느뇨	But when his disciples saw it, they had indignation, saying, To what purpose is this waste?	When the disciples saw this, they were indignant and asked, “Why this waste?
MAT	26	9	이것을 많은 값에 팔아 가난한 자들에게 줄 수 있었겠도다 하거늘	For this ointment might have been sold for much, and given to the poor.	This perfume could have been sold at a high price, and the money given to the poor.”
MAT	26	10	예수께서 아시고 저희에게 이르시되 너희가 어찌하여 이 여자를 괴롭게 하느냐 저가 내게 좋은 일을 하였느니라	When Jesus understood it, he said unto them, Why trouble ye the woman? for she hath wrought a good work upon me.	Aware of this, Jesus asked, “Why are you bothering this woman? She has done a beautiful deed to Me.
MAT	26	11	가난한 자들은 항상 너희와 함께 있거니와 나는 항상 함께 있지 아니하리라	For ye have the poor always with you; but me ye have not always.	The poor you will always have with you, but you will not always have Me.
MAT	26	12	이 여자가 내 몸에 이 향유를 부은 것은 내 장사를 위하여 함이니라	For in that she hath poured this ointment on my body, she did it for my burial.	By pouring this perfume on Me, she has prepared My body for burial.
MAT	26	13	내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 온 천하에 어디서든지 이 복음이 전파되는 곳에는 이 여자의 행한 일도 말하여 저를 기념하리라 하시니라	Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached in the whole world, there shall also this, that this woman hath done, be told for a memorial of her.	Truly I tell you, wherever this gospel is preached in all the world, what she has done will also be told in memory of her.”
MAT	26	14	그 때에 열둘 중에 하나인 가룟 유다라 하는 자가 대제사장들에게 가서 말하되	Then one of the twelve, called Judas Iscariot, went unto the chief priests,	Then one of the Twelve, the one called Judas Iscariot, went to the chief priests
MAT	26	15	내가 예수를 너희에게 넘겨 주리니 얼마나 주려느냐 하니 그들이 은 삼십을 달아 주거늘	And said unto them, What will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you? And they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver.	and asked, “What are you willing to give me if I hand Him over to you?” And they set out for him thirty pieces of silver.
MAT	26	16	저가 그 때부터 예수를 넘겨 줄 기회를 찾더라	And from that time he sought opportunity to betray him.	So from then on Judas looked for an opportunity to betray Jesus.
MAT	26	17	무교절의 첫 날에 제자들이 예수께 나아와서 가로되 유월절 잡수실 것을 우리가 어디서 예비하기를 원하시나이까	Now the first day of the feast of unleavened bread the disciples came to Jesus, saying unto him, Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the passover?	On the first day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread, the disciples came to Jesus and asked, “Where do You want us to prepare for You to eat the Passover?”
MAT	26	18	가라사대 성 안 아무에게 가서 이르되 선생님 말씀이 내 때가 가까웠으니 내 제자들과 함께 유월절을 네 집에서 지키겠다 하시더라 하라 하신대	And he said, Go into the city to such a man, and say unto him, The Master saith, My time is at hand; I will keep the passover at thy house with my disciples.	He answered, “Go into the city to a certain man and tell him that the Teacher says, ‘My time is near. I will keep the Passover with My disciples at your house.’”
MAT	26	19	제자들이 예수의 시키신대로 하여 유월절을 예비하였더라	And the disciples did as Jesus had appointed them; and they made ready the passover.	So the disciples did as Jesus had directed them and prepared the Passover.
MAT	26	20	저물 때에 예수께서 열두 제자와 함께 앉으셨더니	Now when the even was come, he sat down with the twelve.	When evening came, Jesus was reclining with the twelve disciples.
MAT	26	21	저희가 먹을 때에 이르시되 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 너희 중에 한 사람이 나를 팔리라 하시니	And as they did eat, he said, Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me.	And while they were eating, He said to them, “Truly I tell you, one of you will betray Me.”
MAT	26	22	저희가 심히 근심하여 각각 여짜오되 주여 내니이까	And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto him, Lord, is it I?	They were deeply grieved and began to ask Him one after another, “Surely not I, Lord?”
MAT	26	23	대답하여 가라사대 나와 함께 그릇에 손을 넣는 그가 나를 팔리라	And he answered and said, He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish, the same shall betray me.	Jesus answered, “The one who has dipped his hand into the bowl with Me will betray Me.
MAT	26	24	인자는 자기에게 대하여 기록된 대로 가거니와 인자를 파는 그 사람에게는 화가 있으리로다 그 사람은 차라리 나지 아니하였더면 제게 좋을 뻔하였느니라	The Son of man goeth as it is written of him: but woe unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! it had been good for that man if he had not been born.	The Son of Man will go just as it is written about Him, but woe to that man by whom He is betrayed. It would be better for him if he had not been born.”
MAT	26	25	예수를 파는 유다가 대답하여 가로되 랍비여 내니이까 대답하시되 네가 말하였도다 하시니라	Then Judas, which betrayed him, answered and said, Master, is it I? He said unto him, Thou hast said.	Then Judas, who would betray Him, said, “Surely not I, Rabbi?” Jesus answered, “You have said it yourself.”
MAT	26	26	저희가 먹을 때에 예수께서 떡을 가지사 축복하시고 떼어 제자들을 주시며 가라사대 받아 먹으라 이것이 내 몸이니라 하시고	And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body.	While they were eating, Jesus took bread, spoke a blessing and broke it, and gave it to the disciples, saying, “Take and eat; this is My body.”
MAT	26	27	또 잔을 가지사 사례하시고 저희에게 주시며 가라사대 너희가 다 이것을 마시라	And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it;	Then He took the cup, gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, “Drink from it, all of you.
MAT	26	28	이것은 죄 사함을 얻게 하려고 많은 사람을 위하여 흘리는 바 나의 피 곧 언약의 피니라	For this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins.	This is My blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins.
MAT	26	29	그러나 너희에게 이르노니 내가 포도나무에서 난 것을 이제부터 내 아버지의 나라에서 새 것으로 너희와 함께 마시는 날까지 마시지 아니하리라 하시니라	But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father’s kingdom.	I tell you, I will not drink of this fruit of the vine from now on until that day when I drink it anew with you in My Father’s kingdom.”
MAT	26	30	이에 저희가 찬미하고 감람산으로 나아가니라	And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives.	And when they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
MAT	26	31	때에 예수께서 제자들에게 이르시되 오늘 밤에 너희가 다 나를 버리리라 기록된 바 내가 목자를 치리니 양의 떼가 흩어지리라 하였느니라	Then saith Jesus unto them, All ye shall be offended because of me this night: for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad.	Then Jesus said to them, “This very night you will all fall away on account of Me. For it is written: ‘I will strike the Shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.’
MAT	26	32	그러나 내가 살아난 후에 너희보다 먼저 갈릴리로 가리라	But after I am risen again, I will go before you into Galilee.	But after I have risen, I will go ahead of you into Galilee.”
MAT	26	33	베드로가 대답하여 가로되 다 주를 버릴지라도 나는 언제든지 버리지 않겠나이다	Peter answered and said unto him, Though all men shall be offended because of thee, yet will I never be offended.	Peter said to Him, “Even if all fall away on account of You, I never will.”
MAT	26	34	예수께서 가라사대 내가 진실로 네게 이르노니 오늘 밤 닭 울기 전에 네가 세 번 나를 부인하리라	Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, That this night, before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice.	“Truly I tell you,” Jesus declared, “this very night, before the rooster crows, you will deny Me three times.”
MAT	26	35	베드로가 가로되 내가 주와 함께 죽을지언정 주를 부인하지 않겠나이다 하고 모든 제자도 이와 같이 말하니라	Peter said unto him, Though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee. Likewise also said all the disciples.	Peter replied, “Even if I have to die with You, I will never deny You.” And all the other disciples said the same thing.
MAT	26	36	이에 예수께서 제자들과 함께 겟세마네라 하는 곳에 이르러 제자들에게 이르시되 내가 저기 가서 기도할 동안에 너희는 여기 앉아 있으라 하시고	Then cometh Jesus with them unto a place called Gethsemane, and saith unto the disciples, Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder.	At that time Jesus went with His disciples to a place called Gethsemane, and He told them, “Sit here while I go over there and pray.”
MAT	26	37	베드로와 세베대의 두 아들을 데리고 가실새 고민하고 슬퍼하사	And he took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful and very heavy.	He took with Him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee and began to be sorrowful and deeply distressed.
MAT	26	38	이에 말씀하시되 내 마음이 심히 고민하여 죽게 되었으니 너희는 여기 머물러 나와 함께 깨어 있으라 하시고	Then saith he unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death: tarry ye here, and watch with me.	Then He said to them, “My soul is consumed with sorrow to the point of death. Stay here and keep watch with Me.”
MAT	26	39	조금 나아가사 얼굴을 땅에 대시고 엎드려 기도하여 가라사대 내 아버지여 만일 할만하시거든 이 잔을 내게서 지나가게 하옵소서 그러나 나의 원대로 마옵시고 아버지의 원대로 하옵소서 하시고	And he went a little further, and fell on his face, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt.	Going a little farther, He fell facedown and prayed, “My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass from Me. Yet not as I will, but as You will.”
MAT	26	40	제자들에게 오사 그 자는 것을 보시고 베드로에게 말씀하시되 너희가 나와 함께 한 시 동안도 이렇게 깨어 있을 수 없더냐	And he cometh unto the disciples, and findeth them asleep, and saith unto Peter, What, could ye not watch with me one hour?	Then Jesus returned to the disciples and found them sleeping. “Were you not able to keep watch with Me for one hour?” He asked Peter.
MAT	26	41	시험에 들지 않게 깨어 있어 기도하라 마음에는 원이로되 육신이 약하도다 하시고	Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.	“Watch and pray so that you will not enter into temptation. For the spirit is willing, but the body is weak.”
MAT	26	42	다시 두 번째 나아가 기도하여 가라사대 내 아버지여 만일 내가 마시지 않고는 이 잔이 내게서 지나갈 수 없거든 아버지의 원대로 되기를 원하나이다 하시고	He went away again the second time, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if this cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy will be done.	A second time He went away and prayed, “My Father, if this cup cannot pass unless I drink it, may Your will be done.”
MAT	26	43	다시 오사 보신즉 저희가 자니 이는 저희 눈이 피곤함일러라	And he came and found them asleep again: for their eyes were heavy.	And again Jesus returned and found them sleeping—for their eyes were heavy.
MAT	26	44	또 저희를 두시고 나아가 세 번째 동일한 말씀으로 기도하신 후	And he left them, and went away again, and prayed the third time, saying the same words.	So He left them and went away once more and prayed a third time, saying the same thing.
MAT	26	45	이에 제자들에게 오사 이르시되 이제는 자고 쉬라 보라 때가 가까웠으니 인자가 죄인의 손에 팔리우느니라	Then cometh he to his disciples, and saith unto them, Sleep on now, and take your rest: behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.	Then He returned to the disciples and said, “Are you still sleeping and resting? Look, the hour is near, and the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
MAT	26	46	일어나라 함께 가자 보라 나를 파는 자가 가까이 왔느니라	Rise, let us be going: behold, he is at hand that doth betray me.	Rise, let us go! See, My betrayer is approaching!”
MAT	26	47	말씀하실 때에 열둘 중에 하나인 유다가 왔는데 대제사장들과 백성의 장로들에게서 파송된 큰 무리가 검과 몽치를 가지고 그와 함께 하였더라	And while he yet spake, lo, Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief priests and elders of the people.	While Jesus was still speaking, Judas, one of the Twelve, arrived, accompanied by a large crowd armed with swords and clubs, sent from the chief priests and elders of the people.
MAT	26	48	예수를 파는 자가 그들에게 군호를 짜 가로되 내가 입맞추는 자가 그이니 그를 잡으라 하였는지라	Now he that betrayed him gave them a sign, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he: hold him fast.	Now the betrayer had arranged a signal with them: “The One I kiss is the man; arrest Him.”
MAT	26	49	곧 예수께 나아와 랍비여 안녕하시옵니까 하고 입을 맞추니	And forthwith he came to Jesus, and said, Hail, master; and kissed him.	Going directly to Jesus, he said, “Greetings, Rabbi!” and kissed Him.
MAT	26	50	예수께서 가라사대 친구여 네가 무엇을 하려고 왔는지 행하라 하신대 이에 저희가 나아와 예수께 손을 대어 잡는지라	And Jesus said unto him, Friend, wherefore art thou come? Then came they, and laid hands on Jesus, and took him.	“Friend,” Jesus replied, “do what you came for.” Then the men stepped forward, seized Jesus, and arrested Him.
MAT	26	51	예수와 함께 있던 자 중에 하나가 손을 펴 검을 빼어 대제사장의 종을 쳐 그 귀를 떨어뜨리니	And, behold, one of them which were with Jesus stretched out his hand, and drew his sword, and struck a servant of the high priest’s, and smote off his ear.	At this, one of Jesus’ companions drew his sword and struck the servant of the high priest, cutting off his ear.
MAT	26	52	이에 예수께서 이르시되 네 검을 도로 집에 꽂으라 검을 가지는 자는 다 검으로 망하느니라	Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy sword into his place: for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword.	“Put your sword back in its place,” Jesus said to him. “For all who draw the sword will die by the sword.
MAT	26	53	너는 내가 내 아버지께 구하여 지금 열두 영 더 되는 천사를 보내시게 할 수 없는 줄로 아느냐	Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels?	Are you not aware that I can call on My Father, and He will at once put at My disposal more than twelve legions of angels?
MAT	26	54	내가 만일 그렇게 하면 이런 일이 있으리라 한 성경이 어떻게 이루어지리요 하시더라	But how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?	But how then would the Scriptures be fulfilled that say it must happen this way?”
MAT	26	55	그 때에 예수께서 무리에게 말씀하시되 너희가 강도를 잡는 것 같이 검과 몽치를 가지고 나를 잡으러 나왔느냐 내가 날마다 성전에 앉아 가르쳤으되 너희가 나를 잡지 아니하였도다	In that same hour said Jesus to the multitudes, Are ye come out as against a thief with swords and staves for to take me? I sat daily with you teaching in the temple, and ye laid no hold on me.	At that time Jesus said to the crowd, “Have you come out with swords and clubs to arrest Me as you would an outlaw? Every day I sat teaching in the temple courts, and you did not arrest Me.
MAT	26	56	그러나 이렇게 된 것은 다 선지자들의 글을 이루려 함이니라 하시더라 이에 제자들이 다 예수를 버리고 도망하니라	But all this was done, that the scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled. Then all the disciples forsook him, and fled.	But this has all happened so that the writings of the prophets would be fulfilled.” Then all the disciples deserted Him and fled.
MAT	26	57	예수를 잡은 자들이 끌고 대제사장 가야바에게로 가니 거기 서기관과 장로들이 모여 있더라	And they that had laid hold on Jesus led him away to Caiaphas the high priest, where the scribes and the elders were assembled.	Those who had arrested Jesus led Him away to the house of Caiaphas the high priest, where the scribes and elders had gathered.
MAT	26	58	베드로가 멀찍이 예수를 좇아 대제사장의 집 뜰에까지 가서 그 결국을 보려고 안에 들어가 하속들과 함께 앉았더라	But Peter followed him afar off unto the high priest’s palace, and went in, and sat with the servants, to see the end.	But Peter followed Him at a distance, right up to the courtyard of the high priest. And he went in and sat down with the guards to see the outcome.
MAT	26	59	대제사장들과 온 공회가 예수를 죽이려고 그를 칠 거짓 증거를 찾으매	Now the chief priests, and elders, and all the council, sought false witness against Jesus, to put him to death;	Now the chief priests and the whole Sanhedrin were seeking false testimony against Jesus in order to put Him to death.
MAT	26	60	거짓 증인이 많이 왔으나 얻지 못하더니 후에 두 사람이 와서	But found none: yea, though many false witnesses came, yet found they none. At the last came two false witnesses,	But they did not find any, though many false witnesses came forward. Finally two came forward
MAT	26	61	가로되 이 사람의 말이 내가 하나님의 성전을 헐고 사흘에 지을 수 있다 하더라 하니	And said, This fellow said, I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to build it in three days.	and declared, “This man said, ‘I am able to destroy the temple of God and rebuild it in three days.’”
MAT	26	62	대제사장이 일어서서 예수께 묻되 아무 대답도 없느냐 이 사람들의 너를 치는 증거가 어떠하뇨 하되	And the high priest arose, and said unto him, Answerest thou nothing? what is it which these witness against thee?	So the high priest stood up and asked Him, “Have You no answer? What are these men testifying against You?”
MAT	26	63	예수께서 잠잠하시거늘 대제사장이 가로되 내가 너로 살아 계신 하나님께 맹세하게 하노니 네가 하나님의 아들 그리스도인지 우리에게 말하라	But Jesus held his peace. And the high priest answered and said unto him, I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ, the Son of God.	But Jesus remained silent. Then the high priest said to Him, “I charge You under oath by the living God: Tell us if You are the Christ, the Son of God.”
MAT	26	64	예수께서 가라사대 네가 말하였느니라 그러나 내가 너희에게 이르노니 이 후에 인자가 권능의 우편에 앉은 것과 하늘 구름을 타고 오는 것을 너희가 보리라 하시니	Jesus saith unto him, Thou hast said: nevertheless I say unto you, Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.	“You have said it yourself,” Jesus answered. “But I say to all of you, from now on you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of Power and coming on the clouds of heaven.”
MAT	26	65	이에 대제사장이 자기 옷을 찢으며 가로되 저가 참람한 말을 하였으니 어찌 더 증인을 요구하리요 보라 너희가 지금 이 참람한 말을 들었도다	Then the high priest rent his clothes, saying, He hath spoken blasphemy; what further need have we of witnesses? behold, now ye have heard his blasphemy.	At this, the high priest tore his clothes and declared, “He has blasphemed! Why do we need any more witnesses? Look, now you have heard the blasphemy.
MAT	26	66	생각이 어떠하뇨 대답하여 가로되 저는 사형에 해당하니라 하고	What think ye? They answered and said, He is guilty of death.	What do you think?” “He deserves to die,” they answered.
MAT	26	67	이에 예수의 얼굴에 침 뱉으며 주먹으로 치고 혹은 손바닥으로 때리며	Then did they spit in his face, and buffeted him; and others smote him with the palms of their hands,	Then they spit in His face and struck Him. Others slapped Him
MAT	26	68	가로되 그리스도야 우리에게 선지자 노릇을 하라 너를 친 자가 누구냐 하더라	Saying, Prophesy unto us, thou Christ, Who is he that smote thee?	and said, “Prophesy to us, Christ! Who hit You?”
MAT	26	69	베드로가 바깥 뜰에 앉았더니 한 비자가 나아와 가로되 너도 갈릴리 사람 예수와 함께 있었도다 하거늘	Now Peter sat without in the palace: and a damsel came unto him, saying, Thou also wast with Jesus of Galilee.	Meanwhile, Peter was sitting out in the courtyard, and a servant girl came up to him. “You also were with Jesus the Galilean,” she said.
MAT	26	70	베드로가 모든 사람 앞에서 부인하여 가로되 나는 네 말하는 것이 무엇인지 알지 못하겠노라 하며	But he denied before them all, saying, I know not what thou sayest.	But he denied it before them all: “I do not know what you are talking about.”
MAT	26	71	앞문까지 나아가니 다른 비자가 저를 보고 거기 있는 사람들에게 말하되 이 사람은 나사렛 예수와 함께 있었도다 하매	And when he was gone out into the porch, another maid saw him, and said unto them that were there, This fellow was also with Jesus of Nazareth.	When Peter had gone out to the gateway, another servant girl saw him and said to the people there, “This man was with Jesus of Nazareth.”
MAT	26	72	베드로가 맹세하고 또 부인하여 가로되 내가 그 사람을 알지 못하노라 하더라	And again he denied with an oath, I do not know the man.	And again he denied it with an oath: “I do not know the man!”
MAT	26	73	조금 후에 곁에 섰던 사람들이 나아와 베드로에게 이르되 너도 진실로 그 당이라 네 말소리가 너를 표명한다 하거늘	And after a while came unto him they that stood by, and said to Peter, Surely thou also art one of them; for thy speech bewrayeth thee.	After a little while, those standing nearby came up to Peter. “Surely you are one of them,” they said, “for your accent gives you away.”
MAT	26	74	저가 저주하며 맹세하여 가로되 내가 그 사람을 알지 못하노라 하니 닭이 곧 울더라	Then began he to curse and to swear, saying, I know not the man. And immediately the cock crew.	At that he began to curse and swear to them, “I do not know the man!” And immediately a rooster crowed.
MAT	26	75	이에 베드로가 예수의 말씀에 닭 울기 전에 네가 세 번 나를 부인하리라 하심이 생각나서 밖에 나가서 심히 통곡하니라	And Peter remembered the word of Jesus, which said unto him, Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. And he went out, and wept bitterly.	Then Peter remembered the word that Jesus had spoken: “Before the rooster crows, you will deny Me three times.” And he went outside and wept bitterly.
MAT	27	1	새벽에 모든 대제사장과 백성의 장로들이 예수를 죽이려고 함께 의논하고	When the morning was come, all the chief priests and elders of the people took counsel against Jesus to put him to death:	When morning came, all the chief priests and elders of the people conspired against Jesus to put Him to death.
MAT	27	2	결박하여 끌고 가서 총독 빌라도에게 넘겨 주니라	And when they had bound him, they led him away, and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the governor.	They bound Him, led Him away, and handed Him over to Pilate the governor.
MAT	27	3	때에 예수를 판 유다가 그의 정죄됨을 보고 스스로 뉘우쳐 그 은 삼십을 대제사장들과 장로들에게 도로 갖다 주며	Then Judas, which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders,	When Judas, who had betrayed Him, saw that Jesus was condemned, he was filled with remorse and returned the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders.
MAT	27	4	가로되 내가 무죄한 피를 팔고 죄를 범하였도다 하니 저희가 가로되 그것이 우리에게 무슨 상관이 있느냐 네가 당하라 하거늘	Saying, I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent blood. And they said, What is that to us? see thou to that.	“I have sinned by betraying innocent blood,” he said. “What is that to us?” they replied. “You bear the responsibility.”
MAT	27	5	유다가 은을 성소에 던져 넣고 물러가서 스스로 목매어 죽은지라	And he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and departed, and went and hanged himself.	So Judas threw the silver into the temple and left. Then he went away and hanged himself.
MAT	27	6	대제사장들이 그 은을 거두며 가로되 이것은 피 값이라 성전고에 넣어둠이 옳지 않다 하고	And the chief priests took the silver pieces, and said, It is not lawful for to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of blood.	The chief priests picked up the pieces of silver and said, “It is unlawful to put this into the treasury, since it is blood money.”
MAT	27	7	의논한 후 이것으로 토기장이의 밭을 사서 나그네의 묘지를 삼았으니	And they took counsel, and bought with them the potter’s field, to bury strangers in.	After conferring together, they used the money to buy the potter’s field as a burial place for foreigners.
MAT	27	8	그러므로 오늘날까지 그 밭을 피밭이라 일컫느니라	Wherefore that field was called, The field of blood, unto this day.	That is why it has been called the Field of Blood to this day.
MAT	27	9	이에 선지자 예레미야로 하신 말씀이 이루었나니 일렀으되 저희가 그 정가된 자 곧 이스라엘 자손 중에서 정가한 자의 가격 곧 은 삼십을 가지고	Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying, And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was valued, whom they of the children of Israel did value;	Then what was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled: “They took the thirty pieces of silver, the price set on Him by the people of Israel,
MAT	27	10	토기장이의 밭 값으로 주었으니 이는 주께서 내게 명하신 바와 같으니라 하였더라	And gave them for the potter’s field, as the Lord appointed me.	and they gave them for the potter’s field, as the Lord had commanded me.”
MAT	27	11	예수께서 총독 앞에 섰으매 총독이 물어 가로되 네가 유대인의 왕이냐 예수께서 대답하시되 네 말이 옳도다 하시고	And Jesus stood before the governor: and the governor asked him, saying, Art thou the King of the Jews? And Jesus said unto him, Thou sayest.	Meanwhile Jesus stood before the governor, who questioned Him: “Are You the King of the Jews?” “You have said so,” Jesus replied.
MAT	27	12	대제사장들과 장로들에게 고소를 당하되 아무 대답도 아니하시는지라	And when he was accused of the chief priests and elders, he answered nothing.	And when He was accused by the chief priests and elders, He gave no answer.
MAT	27	13	이에 빌라도가 이르되 저희가 너를 쳐서 얼마나 많은 것으로 증거하는지 듣지 못하느냐 하되	Then said Pilate unto him, Hearest thou not how many things they witness against thee?	Then Pilate asked Him, “Do You not hear how many charges they are bringing against You?”
MAT	27	14	한 마디도 대답지 아니하시니 총독이 심히 기이히 여기더라	And he answered him to never a word; insomuch that the governor marvelled greatly.	But Jesus gave no answer, not even to a single charge, much to the governor’s amazement.
MAT	27	15	명절을 당하면 총독이 무리의 소원대로 죄수 하나를 놓아 주는 전례가 있더니	Now at that feast the governor was wont to release unto the people a prisoner, whom they would.	Now it was the governor’s custom at the feast to release to the crowd a prisoner of their choosing.
MAT	27	16	그 때에 바라바라하는 유명한 죄수가 있는데	And they had then a notable prisoner, called Barabbas.	At that time they were holding a notorious prisoner named Barabbas.
MAT	27	17	저희가 모였을 때에 빌라도가 물어 가로되 너희는 내가 누구를 너희에게 놓아 주기를 원하느냐 바라바냐 그리스도라 하는 예수냐 하니	Therefore when they were gathered together, Pilate said unto them, Whom will ye that I release unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus which is called Christ?	So when the crowd had assembled, Pilate asked them, “Which one do you want me to release to you: Barabbas, or Jesus who is called Christ?”
MAT	27	18	이는 저가 그들의 시기로 예수를 넘겨준 줄 앎이러라	For he knew that for envy they had delivered him.	For he knew it was out of envy that they had handed Jesus over to him.
MAT	27	19	총독이 재판 자리에 앉았을 때에 그 아내가 사람을 보내어 가로되 저 옳은 사람에게 아무 상관도 하지 마옵소서 오늘 꿈에 내가 그사람을 인하여 애를 많이 썼나이다 하더라	When he was set down on the judgment seat, his wife sent unto him, saying, Have thou nothing to do with that just man: for I have suffered many things this day in a dream because of him.	While Pilate was sitting on the judgment seat, his wife sent him this message: “Have nothing to do with that innocent man, for I have suffered terribly in a dream today because of Him.”
MAT	27	20	대제사장들과 장로들이 무리를 권하여 바라바를 달라 하게 하고 예수를 멸하자 하게 하였더니	But the chief priests and elders persuaded the multitude that they should ask Barabbas, and destroy Jesus.	But the chief priests and elders persuaded the crowds to ask for Barabbas and to have Jesus put to death.
MAT	27	21	총독이 대답하여 가로되 둘 중에 누구를 너희에게 놓아 주기를 원하느냐 가로되 바라바로소이다	The governor answered and said unto them, Whether of the twain will ye that I release unto you? They said, Barabbas.	“Which of the two do you want me to release to you?” asked the governor. “Barabbas,” they replied.
MAT	27	22	빌라도가 가로되 그러면 그리스도라하는 예수를 내가 어떻게 하랴 저희가 다 가로되 십자가에 못 박혀야 하겠나이다	Pilate saith unto them, What shall I do then with Jesus which is called Christ? They all say unto him, Let him be crucified.	“What then should I do with Jesus who is called Christ?” Pilate asked. They all answered, “Crucify Him!”
MAT	27	23	빌라도가 가로되 어찜이뇨 무슨 악한 일을 하였느냐 저희가 더욱 소리질러 가로되 십자가에 못 박혀야 하겠나이다 하는지라	And the governor said, Why, what evil hath he done? But they cried out the more, saying, Let him be crucified.	“Why?” asked Pilate. “What evil has He done?” But they shouted all the louder, “Crucify Him!”
MAT	27	24	빌라도가 아무 효험도 없이 도리어 민란이 나려는 것을 보고 물을 가져다가 무리 앞에서 손을 씻으며 가로되 이 사람의 피에 대하여 나는 무죄하니 너희가 당하라	When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but that rather a tumult was made, he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person: see ye to it.	When Pilate saw that he was accomplishing nothing, but that instead a riot was breaking out, he took water and washed his hands before the crowd. “I am innocent of this man’s blood,” he said. “You bear the responsibility.”
MAT	27	25	백성이 다 대답하여 가로되 그 피를 우리와 우리 자손에게 돌릴지어다 하거늘	Then answered all the people, and said, His blood be on us, and on our children.	All the people answered, “His blood be on us and on our children!”
MAT	27	26	이에 바라바는 저희에게 놓아주고 예수는 채찍질하고 십자가에 못 박히게 넘겨 주니라	Then released he Barabbas unto them: and when he had scourged Jesus, he delivered him to be crucified.	So Pilate released Barabbas to them. But he had Jesus flogged, and handed Him over to be crucified.
MAT	27	27	이에 총독의 군병들이 예수를 데리고 관정 안으로 들어가서 온 군대를 그에게로 모으고	Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the common hall, and gathered unto him the whole band of soldiers.	Then the governor’s soldiers took Jesus into the Praetorium and gathered the whole company around Him.
MAT	27	28	그의 옷을 벗기고 홍포를 입히며	And they stripped him, and put on him a scarlet robe.	They stripped Him and put a scarlet robe on Him.
MAT	27	29	가시 면류관을 엮어 그 머리에 씌우고 갈대를 그 오른손에 들리고 그 앞에서 무릎을 꿇고 희롱하여 가로되 유대인의 왕이여 평안할지어다 하며	And when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put it upon his head, and a reed in his right hand: and they bowed the knee before him, and mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews!	And they twisted together a crown of thorns and set it on His head. They put a staff in His right hand and knelt down before Him to mock Him, saying, “Hail, King of the Jews!”
MAT	27	30	그에게 침 뱉고 갈대를 빼앗아 그의 머리를 치더라	And they spit upon him, and took the reed, and smote him on the head.	Then they spit on Him and took the staff and struck Him on the head repeatedly.
MAT	27	31	희롱을 다한 후 홍포를 벗기고 도로 그의 옷을 입혀 십자가에 못 박으려고 끌고 나가니라	And after that they had mocked him, they took the robe off from him, and put his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify him.	After they had mocked Him, they removed the robe and put His own clothes back on Him. Then they led Him away to crucify Him.
MAT	27	32	나가다가 시몬이란 구레네 사람을 만나매 그를 억지로 같이 가게 하여 예수의 십자가를 지웠더라	And as they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name: him they compelled to bear his cross.	Along the way they found a man from Cyrene, named Simon, and they forced him to carry the cross of Jesus.
MAT	27	33	골고다 즉 해골의 곳이라는 곳에 이르러	And when they were come unto a place called Golgotha, that is to say, a place of a skull,	And when they came to a place called Golgotha, which means The Place of the Skull,
MAT	27	34	쓸개 탄 포도주를 예수께 주어 마시게 하려 하였더니 예수께서 맛보시고 마시고자 아니하시더라	They gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gall: and when he had tasted thereof, he would not drink.	they offered Him wine to drink, mixed with gall; but after tasting it, He refused to drink it.
MAT	27	35	저희가 예수를 십자가에 못 박은 후에 그 옷을 제비 뽑아 나누고	And they crucified him, and parted his garments, casting lots: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, They parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots.	When they had crucified Him, they divided up His garments by casting lots.
MAT	27	36	거기 앉아 지키더라	And sitting down they watched him there;	And sitting down, they kept watch over Him there.
MAT	27	37	그 머리 위에 이는 유대인의 왕 예수라 쓴 죄패를 붙였더라	And set up over his head his accusation written, THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS.	Above His head they posted the written charge against Him: THIS IS JESUS, THE KING OF THE JEWS.
MAT	27	38	이 때에 예수와 함께 강도 둘이 십자가에 못 박히니 하나는 우편에 하나는 좌편에 있더라	Then were there two thieves crucified with him, one on the right hand, and another on the left.	Two robbers were crucified with Him, one on His right hand and the other on His left.
MAT	27	39	지나가는 자들은 자기 머리를 흔들며 예수를 모욕하여	And they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads,	And those who passed by heaped abuse on Him, shaking their heads
MAT	27	40	가로되 성전을 헐고 사흘에 짓는 자여 네가 만일 하나님의 아들이어든 자기를 구원하고 십자가에서 내려오라 하며	And saying, Thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three days, save thyself. If thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross.	and saying, “You who are going to destroy the temple and rebuild it in three days, save Yourself! If You are the Son of God, come down from the cross!”
MAT	27	41	그와 같이 대제사장들과 서기관들과 장로들과 함께 희롱하여 가로되	Likewise also the chief priests mocking him, with the scribes and elders, said,	In the same way, the chief priests, scribes, and elders mocked Him, saying,
MAT	27	42	저가 남은 구원하였으되 자기는 구원할 수 없도다 저가 이스라엘의 왕이로다 지금 십자가에서 내려올지어다 그러면 우리가 믿겠노라	He saved others; himself he cannot save. If he be the King of Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe him.	“He saved others, but He cannot save Himself. He is the King of Israel! Let Him come down now from the cross, and we will believe in Him.
MAT	27	43	저가 하나님을 신뢰하니 하나님이 저를 기뻐하시면 이제 구원하실지라 제 말이 나는 하나님의 아들이라 하였도다 하며	He trusted in God; let him deliver him now, if he will have him: for he said, I am the Son of God.	He trusts in God. Let God deliver Him now if He wants Him. For He said, ‘I am the Son of God.’”
MAT	27	44	함께 십자가에 못 박힌 강도들도 이와 같이 욕하더라	The thieves also, which were crucified with him, cast the same in his teeth.	In the same way, even the robbers who were crucified with Him berated Him.
MAT	27	45	제 육 시로부터 온 땅에 어두움이 임하여 제 구 시까지 계속하더니	Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land unto the ninth hour.	From the sixth hour until the ninth hour darkness came over all the land.
MAT	27	46	제 구 시 즈음에 예수께서 크게 소리질러 가라사대 엘리 엘리 라마 사박다니 하시니 이는 곧 나의 하나님, 나의 하나님, 어찌하여 나를 버리셨나이까 하는 뜻이라	And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani? that is to say, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?	About the ninth hour Jesus cried out in a loud voice, “Eli, Eli, lema sabachthani?” which means, “My God, My God, why have You forsaken Me?”
MAT	27	47	거기 섰던 자 중 어떤 이들이 듣고 가로되 이 사람이 엘리야를 부른다 하고	Some of them that stood there, when they heard that, said, This man calleth for Elias.	When some of those standing there heard this, they said, “He is calling Elijah.”
MAT	27	48	그 중에 한 사람이 곧 달려가서 해융을 가지고 신 포도주를 머금게 하여 갈대에 꿰어 마시우거늘	And straightway one of them ran, and took a spunge, and filled it with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink.	One of them quickly ran and brought a sponge. He filled it with sour wine, put it on a reed, and held it up for Jesus to drink.
MAT	27	49	그 남은 사람들이 가로되 가만 두어라 엘리야가 와서 저를 구원하나 보자 하더라	The rest said, Let be, let us see whether Elias will come to save him.	But the others said, “Leave Him alone. Let us see if Elijah comes to save Him.”
MAT	27	50	예수께서 다시 크게 소리 지르시고 영혼이 떠나시다	Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost.	When Jesus had cried out again in a loud voice, He yielded up His spirit.
MAT	27	51	이에 성소 휘장이 위로부터 아래까지 찢어져 둘이 되고 땅이 진동하며 바위가 터지고	And, behold, the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom; and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent;	At that moment the veil of the temple was torn in two from top to bottom. The earth quaked and the rocks were split.
MAT	27	52	무덤들이 열리며 자던 성도의 몸이 많이 일어나되	And the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose,	The tombs broke open, and the bodies of many saints who had fallen asleep were raised.
MAT	27	53	예수의 부활 후에 저희가 무덤에서 나와서 거룩한 성에 들어가 많은 사람에게 보이니라	And came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many.	After Jesus’ resurrection, when they had come out of the tombs, they entered the holy city and appeared to many people.
MAT	27	54	백부장과 및 함께 예수를 지키던 자들이 지진과 그 되는 일들을 보고 심히 두려워하여 가로되 이는 진실로 하나님의 아들이었도다 하더라	Now when the centurion, and they that were with him, watching Jesus, saw the earthquake, and those things that were done, they feared greatly, saying, Truly this was the Son of God.	When the centurion and those with him who were guarding Jesus saw the earthquake and all that had happened, they were terrified and said, “Truly this was the Son of God.”
MAT	27	55	예수를 섬기며 갈릴리에서부터 좇아 온 많은 여자가 거기 있어 멀리서 바라보고 있으니	And many women were there beholding afar off, which followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering unto him:	And many women were there, watching from a distance. They had followed Jesus from Galilee to minister to Him.
MAT	27	56	그 중에 막달라 마리아와 또 야고보와 요셉의 어머니 마리아와 또 세베대의 아들들의 어머니도 있더라	Among which was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of Zebedee’s children.	Among them were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James and Joseph, and the mother of Zebedee’s sons.
MAT	27	57	저물었을 때에 아리마대 부자 요셉이라 하는 사람이 왔으니 그도 예수의 제자라	When the even was come, there came a rich man of Arimathea, named Joseph, who also himself was Jesus’ disciple:	When it was evening, there came a rich man from Arimathea named Joseph, who himself was a disciple of Jesus.
MAT	27	58	빌라도에게 가서 예수의 시체를 달라 하니 이에 빌라도가 내어 주라 분부하거늘	He went to Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded the body to be delivered.	He went to Pilate to ask for the body of Jesus, and Pilate ordered that it be given to him.
MAT	27	59	요셉이 시체를 가져다가 정한 세마포로 싸서	And when Joseph had taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean linen cloth,	So Joseph took the body, wrapped it in a clean linen cloth,
MAT	27	60	바위 속에 판 자기 새 무덤에 넣어두고 큰 돌을 굴려 무덤 문에 놓고 가니	And laid it in his own new tomb, which he had hewn out in the rock: and he rolled a great stone to the door of the sepulchre, and departed.	and placed it in his own new tomb that he had cut into the rock. Then he rolled a great stone across the entrance to the tomb and went away.
MAT	27	61	거기 막달라 마리아와 다른 마리아가 무덤을 향하여 앉았더라	And there was Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, sitting over against the sepulchre.	Mary Magdalene and the other Mary were sitting there opposite the tomb.
MAT	27	62	그 이튿날은 예비일 다음날이라 대제사장들과 바리새인들이 함께 빌라도에게 모여 가로되	Now the next day, that followed the day of the preparation, the chief priests and Pharisees came together unto Pilate,	The next day, the one after Preparation Day, the chief priests and Pharisees assembled before Pilate.
MAT	27	63	주여 저 유혹하던 자가 살았을 때에 말하되 내가 사흘 후에 다시 살아나리라 한 것을 우리가 기억하노니	Saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive, After three days I will rise again.	“Sir,” they said, “we remember that while He was alive that deceiver said, ‘After three days I will rise again.’
MAT	27	64	그러므로 분부하여 그 무덤을 사흘까지 굳게 지키게 하소서 그의 제자들이 와서 시체를 도적질하여 가고 백성에게 말하되 그가 죽은 자 가운데서 살아났다 하면 후의 유혹이 전보다 더 될까 하나이다 하니	Command therefore that the sepulchre be made sure until the third day, lest his disciples come by night, and steal him away, and say unto the people, He is risen from the dead: so the last error shall be worse than the first.	So give the order that the tomb be secured until the third day. Otherwise, His disciples may come and steal Him away and tell the people He has risen from the dead. And this last deception would be worse than the first.”
MAT	27	65	빌라도가 가로되 너희에게 파수꾼이 있으니 가서 힘대로 굳게 하라 하거늘	Pilate said unto them, Ye have a watch: go your way, make it as sure as ye can.	“You have a guard,” Pilate said. “Go, make the tomb as secure as you know how.”
MAT	27	66	저희가 파수꾼과 함께 가서 돌을 인봉하고 무덤을 굳게 하니라	So they went, and made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone, and setting a watch.	So they went and secured the tomb by sealing the stone and posting the guard.
MAT	28	1	안식일이 다하여 가고 안식 후 첫날이 되려는 미명에 막달라 마리아와 다른 마리아가 무덤을 보려고 왔더니	In the end of the sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first day of the week, came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to see the sepulchre.	After the Sabbath, at dawn on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary went to see the tomb.
MAT	28	2	큰 지진이 나며 주의 천사가 하늘로서 내려와 돌을 굴려 내고 그 위에 앉았는데	And, behold, there was a great earthquake: for the angel of the Lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it.	Suddenly there was a great earthquake, for an angel of the Lord descended from heaven, rolled away the stone, and sat on it.
MAT	28	3	그 형상이 번개 같고 그 옷은 눈 같이 희거늘	His countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow:	His appearance was like lightning, and his clothes were white as snow.
MAT	28	4	수직하던 자들이 저를 무서워하여 떨며 죽은 사람과 같이 되었더라	And for fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as dead men.	The guards trembled in fear of him and became like dead men.
MAT	28	5	천사가 여자들에게 일러 가로되 너희는 무서워 말라 십자가에 못 박히신 예수를 너희가 찾는 줄을 내가 아노라	And the angel answered and said unto the women, Fear not ye: for I know that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified.	But the angel said to the women, “Do not be afraid, for I know that you are looking for Jesus, who was crucified.
MAT	28	6	그가 여기 계시지 않고 그의 말씀하시던 대로 살아나셨느니라 와서 그의 누우셨던 곳을 보라	He is not here: for he is risen, as he said. Come, see the place where the Lord lay.	He is not here; He has risen, just as He said! Come, see the place where He lay.
MAT	28	7	또 빨리 가서 그의 제자들에게 이르되 그가 죽은 자 가운데서 살아나셨고 너희보다 먼저 갈릴리로 가시나니 거기서 너희가 뵈오리라 하라 보라 내가 너희에게 일렀느니라 하거늘	And go quickly, and tell his disciples that he is risen from the dead; and, behold, he goeth before you into Galilee; there shall ye see him: lo, I have told you.	Then go quickly and tell His disciples, ‘He has risen from the dead and is going ahead of you into Galilee. There you will see Him.’ See, I have told you.”
MAT	28	8	그 여자들이 무서움과 큰 기쁨으로 무덤을 빨리 떠나 제자들에게 알게 하려고 달음질할새	And they departed quickly from the sepulchre with fear and great joy; and did run to bring his disciples word.	So they hurried away from the tomb in fear and great joy, and ran to tell His disciples.
MAT	28	9	예수께서 저희를 만나 가라사대 평안하뇨 하시거늘 여자들이 나아가 그 발을 붙잡고 경배하니	And as they went to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus met them, saying, All hail. And they came and held him by the feet, and worshipped him.	Suddenly Jesus met them and said, “Greetings!” They came to Him, grasped His feet, and worshiped Him.
MAT	28	10	이에 예수께서 가라사대 무서워 말라 가서 내 형제들에게 갈릴리로 가라 하라 거기서 나를 보리라 하시니라	Then said Jesus unto them, Be not afraid: go tell my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see me.	“Do not be afraid,” said Jesus. “Go and tell My brothers to go to Galilee. There they will see Me.”
MAT	28	11	여자들이 갈 제 파수꾼 중 몇이 성에 들어가 모든 된 일을 대제사장들에게 고하니	Now when they were going, behold, some of the watch came into the city, and shewed unto the chief priests all the things that were done.	While the women were on their way, some of the guards went into the city and reported to the chief priests all that had happened.
MAT	28	12	그들이 장로들과 함께 모여 의논하고 군병들에게 돈을 많이 주며	And when they were assembled with the elders, and had taken counsel, they gave large money unto the soldiers,	And after the chief priests had met with the elders and formed a plan, they gave the soldiers a large sum of money
MAT	28	13	가로되 너희는 말하기를 그의 제자들이 밤에 와서 우리가 잘 때에 그를 도적질하여 갔다 하라	Saying, Say ye, His disciples came by night, and stole him away while we slept.	and instructed them: “You are to say, ‘His disciples came by night and stole Him away while we were asleep.’
MAT	28	14	만일 이 말이 총독에게 들리면 우리가 권하여 너희로 근심되지 않게 하리라 하니	And if this come to the governor’s ears, we will persuade him, and secure you.	If this report reaches the governor, we will satisfy him and keep you out of trouble.”
MAT	28	15	군병들이 돈을 받고 가르친 대로 하였으니 이 말이 오늘날까지 유대인 가운데 두루 퍼지니라	So they took the money, and did as they were taught: and this saying is commonly reported among the Jews until this day.	So the guards took the money and did as they were instructed. And this account has been circulated among the Jews to this very day.
MAT	28	16	열 한 제자가 갈릴리에 가서 예수의 명하시던 산에 이르러	Then the eleven disciples went away into Galilee, into a mountain where Jesus had appointed them.	Meanwhile, the eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mountain Jesus had designated.
MAT	28	17	예수를 뵈옵고 경배하나 오히려 의심하는 자도 있더라	And when they saw him, they worshipped him: but some doubted.	When they saw Him, they worshiped Him, but some doubted.
MAT	28	18	예수께서 나아와 일러 가라사대 하늘과 땅의 모든 권세를 내게 주셨으니	And Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth.	Then Jesus came to them and said, “All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to Me.
MAT	28	19	그러므로 너희는 가서 모든 족속으로 제자를 삼아 아버지와 아들과 성령의 이름으로 침례를 주고	Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost:	Therefore go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit,
MAT	28	20	내가 너희에게 분부한 모든 것을 가르쳐 지키게 하라 볼지어다 내가 세상 끝날까지 너희와 항상 함께 있으리라 하시니라	Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world. Amen.	and teaching them to obey all that I have commanded you. And surely I am with you always, even to the end of the age.”
MRK	1	1	하나님의 아들 예수 그리스도 복음의 시작이라	The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God;	This is the beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God.
MRK	1	2	선지자 이사야의 글에 보라 내가 내 사자를 네 앞에 보내노니 저가 네 길을 예비하리라	As it is written in the prophets, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.	As it is written in Isaiah the prophet: “Behold, I will send My messenger ahead of You, who will prepare Your way.”
MRK	1	3	광야에 외치는 자의 소리가 있어 가로되 너희는 주의 길을 예비하라 그의 첩경을 평탄케 하라 기록된 것과 같이	The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.	“A voice of one calling in the wilderness, ‘Prepare the way for the Lord, make straight paths for Him.’”
MRK	1	4	침례 요한이 이르러 광야에서 죄 사함을 받게 하는 회개의 침례를 전파하니	John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins.	John the Baptist appeared in the wilderness, preaching a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins.
MRK	1	5	온 유대 지방과 예루살렘 사람이 다 나아가 자기 죄를 자복하고 요단 강에서 그에게 침례를 받더라	And there went out unto him all the land of Judea, and they of Jerusalem, and were all baptized of him in the river of Jordan, confessing their sins.	People went out to him from all of Jerusalem and the countryside of Judea. Confessing their sins, they were baptized by him in the Jordan River.
MRK	1	6	요한은 약대털을 입고 허리에 가죽띠를 띠고 메뚜기와 석청을 먹더라	And John was clothed with camel’s hair, and with a girdle of a skin about his loins; and he did eat locusts and wild honey;	John was clothed in camel’s hair, with a leather belt around his waist. His food was locusts and wild honey.
MRK	1	7	그가 전파하여 가로되 나보다 능력 많으신 이가 내 뒤에 오시나니 나는 그의 신들메를 풀기도 감당치 못하겠노라	And preached, saying, There cometh one mightier than I after me, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose.	And he began to proclaim: “After me will come One more powerful than I, the straps of whose sandals I am not worthy to stoop down and untie.
MRK	1	8	나는 너희에게 물로 침례를 주었거니와 그는 성령으로 너희에게 침례를 주시리라	I indeed have baptized you with water: but he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost.	I baptize you with water, but He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit.”
MRK	1	9	그 때에 예수께서 갈릴리 나사렛으로부터 와서 요단 강에서 요한에게 침례를 받으시고	And it came to pass in those days, that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized of John in Jordan.	In those days Jesus came from Nazareth in Galilee and was baptized by John in the Jordan.
MRK	1	10	곧 물에서 올라 오실새 하늘이 갈라짐과 성령이 비둘기 같이 자기에게 내려오심을 보시더니	And straightway coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens opened, and the Spirit like a dove descending upon him:	As soon as Jesus came up out of the water, He saw the heavens breaking open and the Spirit descending on Him like a dove.
MRK	1	11	하늘로서 소리가 나기를 너는 내 사랑하는 아들이라 내가 너를 기뻐하노라 하시니라	And there came a voice from heaven, saying, Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.	And a voice came from heaven: “You are My beloved Son; in You I am well pleased.”
MRK	1	12	성령이 곧 예수를 광야로 몰아내신지라	And immediately the Spirit driveth him into the wilderness.	At once the Spirit drove Jesus into the wilderness,
MRK	1	13	광야에서 사십 일을 계셔서 사단에게 시험을 받으시며 들짐승과 함께 계시니 천사들이 수종들더라	And he was there in the wilderness forty days, tempted of Satan; and was with the wild beasts; and the angels ministered unto him.	and He was there for forty days, being tempted by Satan. He was with the wild animals, and the angels ministered to Him.
MRK	1	14	요한이 잡힌 후 예수께서 갈릴리에 오셔서 하나님의 복음을 전파하여	Now after that John was put in prison, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God,	After the arrest of John, Jesus went into Galilee and proclaimed the gospel of God.
MRK	1	15	가라사대 때가 찼고 하나님 나라가 가까웠으니 회개하고 복음을 믿으라 하시더라	And saying, The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye, and believe the gospel.	“The time is fulfilled,” He said, “and the kingdom of God is near. Repent and believe in the gospel!”
MRK	1	16	갈릴리 해변으로 지나가시다가 시몬과 그 형제 안드레가 바다에 그물 던지는 것을 보시니 저희는 어부라	Now as he walked by the sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew his brother casting a net into the sea: for they were fishers.	As Jesus was walking beside the Sea of Galilee, He saw Simon and his brother Andrew. They were casting a net into the sea, for they were fishermen.
MRK	1	17	예수께서 가라사대 나를 따라 오너라 내가 너희로 사람을 낚는 어부가 되게 하리라 하시니	And Jesus said unto them, Come ye after me, and I will make you to become fishers of men.	“Come, follow Me,” Jesus said, “and I will make you fishers of men.”
MRK	1	18	곧 그물을 버려두고 좇으니라	And straightway they forsook their nets, and followed him.	And at once they left their nets and followed Him.
MRK	1	19	조금 더 가시다가 세베대의 아들 야고보와 그 형제 요한을 보시니 저희도 배에 있어 그물을 깁는데	And when he had gone a little further thence, he saw James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, who also were in the ship mending their nets.	Going on a little farther, He saw James son of Zebedee and his brother John. They were in a boat, mending their nets.
MRK	1	20	곧 부르시니 그 아비 세베대를 삯꾼들과 함께 배에 버려두고 예수를 따라가니라	And straightway he called them: and they left their father Zebedee in the ship with the hired servants, and went after him.	Immediately Jesus called them, and they left their father Zebedee in the boat with the hired men and followed Him.
MRK	1	21	저희가 가버나움에 들어가니라 예수께서 곧 안식일에 회당에 들어가 가르치시매	And they went into Capernaum; and straightway on the sabbath day he entered into the synagogue, and taught.	Then Jesus and His companions went to Capernaum, and right away Jesus entered the synagogue on the Sabbath and began to teach.
MRK	1	22	뭇사람이 그의 교훈에 놀라니 이는 그 가르치시는 것이 권세 있는 자와 같고 서기관들과 같지 아니함일러라	And they were astonished at his doctrine: for he taught them as one that had authority, and not as the scribes.	The people were astonished at His teaching, because He taught as one who had authority, and not as the scribes.
MRK	1	23	마침 저희 회당에 더러운 귀신 들린 사람이 있어 소리질러 가로되	And there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit; and he cried out,	Suddenly a man with an unclean spirit cried out in the synagogue:
MRK	1	24	나사렛 예수여 우리가 당신과 무슨 상관이 있나이까 우리를 멸하러 왔나이까 나는 당신이 누구인 줄 아노니 하나님의 거룩한 자니이다	Saying, Let us alone; what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art, the Holy One of God.	“What do You want with us, Jesus of Nazareth? Have You come to destroy us? I know who You are—the Holy One of God!”
MRK	1	25	예수께서 꾸짖어 가라사대 잠잠하고 그 사람에게서 나오라 하시니	And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him.	But Jesus rebuked the spirit. “Be silent!” He said. “Come out of him!”
MRK	1	26	더러운 귀신이 그 사람으로 경련을 일으키게 하고 큰소리를 지르며 나오는지라	And when the unclean spirit had torn him, and cried with a loud voice, he came out of him.	At this, the unclean spirit threw the man into convulsions and came out with a loud shriek.
MRK	1	27	다 놀라 서로 물어 가로되 이는 어찜이뇨 권세 있는 새 교훈이로다 더러운 귀신들을 명한즉 순종하는도다 하더라	And they were all amazed, insomuch that they questioned among themselves, saying, What thing is this? what new doctrine is this? for with authority commandeth he even the unclean spirits, and they do obey him.	All the people were amazed and began to ask one another, “What is this? A new teaching with authority! He commands even the unclean spirits, and they obey Him!”
MRK	1	28	예수의 소문이 곧 온 갈릴리 사방에 퍼지더라	And immediately his fame spread abroad throughout all the region round about Galilee.	And the news about Jesus spread quickly through the whole region of Galilee.
MRK	1	29	회당에서 나와 곧 야고보와 요한과 함께 시몬과 안드레의 집에 들어가시니	And forthwith, when they were come out of the synagogue, they entered into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John.	As soon as Jesus and His companions had left the synagogue, they went with James and John to the home of Simon and Andrew.
MRK	1	30	시몬의 장모가 열병으로 누웠는지라 사람들이 곧 그의 일로 예수께 여짜온대	But Simon’s wife’s mother lay sick of a fever, and anon they tell him of her.	Simon’s mother-in-law was sick in bed with a fever, and they promptly told Jesus about her.
MRK	1	31	나아가사 그 손을 잡아 일으키시니 열병이 떠나고 여자가 저희에게 수종드니라	And he came and took her by the hand, and lifted her up; and immediately the fever left her, and she ministered unto them.	So He went to her, took her by the hand, and helped her up. The fever left her, and she began to serve them.
MRK	1	32	저물어 해 질 때에 모든 병자와 귀신 들린 자를 예수께 데려오니	And at even, when the sun did set, they brought unto him all that were diseased, and them that were possessed with devils.	That evening, after sunset, people brought to Jesus all who were sick and demon-possessed,
MRK	1	33	온 동네가 문 앞에 모였더라	And all the city was gathered together at the door.	and the whole town gathered at the door.
MRK	1	34	예수께서 각색 병든 많은 사람을 고치시며 많은 귀신을 내어 쫓으시되 귀신이 자기를 알므로 그 말하는 것을 허락지 아니하시니라	And he healed many that were sick of divers diseases, and cast out many devils; and suffered not the devils to speak, because they knew him.	And He healed many who were ill with various diseases and drove out many demons. But He would not allow the demons to speak, because they knew who He was.
MRK	1	35	새벽 오히려 미명에 예수께서 일어나 나가 한적한 곳으로 가사 거기서 기도하시더니	And in the morning, rising up a great while before day, he went out, and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed.	Early in the morning, while it was still dark, Jesus got up and slipped out to a solitary place to pray.
MRK	1	36	시몬과 및 그와 함께 있는 자들이 예수의 뒤를 따라가	And Simon and they that were with him followed after him.	Simon and his companions went to look for Him,
MRK	1	37	만나서 가로되 모든 사람이 주를 찾나이다	And when they had found him, they said unto him, All men seek for thee.	and when they found Him, they said, “Everyone is looking for You!”
MRK	1	38	이르시되 우리가 다른 가까운 마을들로 가자 거기서도 전도하리니 내가 이를 위하여 왔노라 하시고	And he said unto them, Let us go into the next towns, that I may preach there also: for therefore came I forth.	But Jesus answered, “Let us go on to the neighboring towns so I can preach there as well, for that is why I have come.”
MRK	1	39	이에 온 갈릴리에 다니시며 저희 여러 회당에서 전도하시고 또 귀신들을 내어 쫓으시더라	And he preached in their synagogues throughout all Galilee, and cast out devils.	So He went throughout Galilee, preaching in their synagogues and driving out demons.
MRK	1	40	한 문둥병자가 예수께 와서 꿇어 엎드리어 간구하여 가로되 원하시면 저를 깨끗케 하실 수 있나이다	And there came a leper to him, beseeching him, and kneeling down to him, and saying unto him, If thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.	Then a leper came to Jesus, begging on his knees: “If You are willing, You can make me clean.”
MRK	1	41	예수께서 민망히 여기사 손을 내밀어 저에게 대시며 가라사대 내가 원하노니 께끗함을 받으라 하신대	And Jesus, moved with compassion, put forth his hand, and touched him, and saith unto him, I will; be thou clean.	Moved with compassion, Jesus reached out His hand and touched the man. “I am willing,” He said. “Be clean!”
MRK	1	42	곧 문둥병이 그 사람에게서 떠나가고 깨끗하여진지라	And as soon as he had spoken, immediately the leprosy departed from him, and he was cleansed.	And immediately the leprosy left him, and the man was cleansed.
MRK	1	43	엄히 경계하사 곧 보내시며	And he straitly charged him, and forthwith sent him away;	Jesus promptly sent him away with a stern warning:
MRK	1	44	가라사대 삼가 아무에게 아무 말도 하지 말고 가서 네 몸을 제사장에게 보이고 네 깨끗케 됨을 인하여 모세의 명한 것을 드려 저희에게 증거하라 하셨더니	And saith unto him, See thou say nothing to any man: but go thy way, shew thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing those things which Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them.	“See that you don’t tell anyone. But go, show yourself to the priest and present the offering Moses prescribed for your cleansing, as a testimony to them.”
MRK	1	45	그러나 그 사람이 나가서 이 일을 많이 전파하여 널리 퍼지게 하니 그러므로 예수께서 다시는 드러나게 동네에 들어가지 못하시고 오직 바깥 한적한 곳에 계셨으나 사방에서 그에게로 나아오더라	But he went out, and began to publish it much, and to blaze abroad the matter, insomuch that Jesus could no more openly enter into the city, but was without in desert places: and they came to him from every quarter.	But the man went out and openly began to proclaim and spread the news. Consequently, Jesus could no longer enter a town in plain view, but He stayed out in solitary places. Yet people came to Him from every quarter.
MRK	2	1	수 일 후에 예수께서 다시 가버나움에 들어가시니 집에 계신 소문이 들린지라	And again he entered into Capernaum after some days; and it was noised that he was in the house.	A few days later Jesus went back to Capernaum. And when the people heard that He was home,
MRK	2	2	많은 사람이 모여서 문 앞에라도 용신할 수 없게 되었는데 예수께서 저희에게 도를 말씀하시더니	And straightway many were gathered together, insomuch that there was no room to receive them, no, not so much as about the door: and he preached the word unto them.	they gathered in such large numbers that there was no more room, not even outside the door, as Jesus spoke the word to them.
MRK	2	3	사람들이 한 중풍병자를 네 사람에게 메워 가지고 예수께로 올새	And they come unto him, bringing one sick of the palsy, which was borne of four.	Then a paralytic was brought to Him, carried by four men.
MRK	2	4	무리를 인하여 예수께 데려갈 수 없으므로 그 계신 곳의 지붕을 뜯어 구멍을 내고 중풍병자의 누운 상을 달아내리니	And when they could not come nigh unto him for the press, they uncovered the roof where he was: and when they had broken it up, they let down the bed wherein the sick of the palsy lay.	Since they were unable to get to Jesus through the crowd, they uncovered the roof above Him, made an opening, and lowered the paralytic on his mat.
MRK	2	5	예수께서 저희의 믿음을 보시고 중풍환자에게 이르시되 소자야 네 죄 사함을 받았느니라 하시니	When Jesus saw their faith, he said unto the sick of the palsy, Son, thy sins be forgiven thee.	When Jesus saw their faith, He said to the paralytic, “Son, your sins are forgiven.”
MRK	2	6	어떤 서기관들이 거기 앉아서 마음에 의논하기를	But there were certain of the scribes sitting there, and reasoning in their hearts,	But some of the scribes were sitting there and thinking in their hearts,
MRK	2	7	이 사람이 어찌 이렇게 말하는가 참람하도다 오직 하나님 한 분 외에는 누가 능히 죄를 사하겠느냐	Why doth this man thus speak blasphemies? who can forgive sins but God only?	“Why does this man speak like this? He is blaspheming! Who can forgive sins but God alone?”
MRK	2	8	저희가 속으로 이렇게 의논하는 줄을 예수께서 곧 중심에 아시고 이르시되 어찌하여 이것을 마음에 의논하느냐	And immediately when Jesus perceived in his spirit that they so reasoned within themselves, he said unto them, Why reason ye these things in your hearts?	At once Jesus knew in His spirit that they were thinking this way within themselves. “Why are you thinking these things in your hearts?” He asked.
MRK	2	9	중풍병자에게 네 죄 사함을 받았느니라 하는 말과 일어나 네 상을 가지고 걸어가라 하는 말이 어느 것이 쉽겠느냐	Whether is it easier to say to the sick of the palsy, Thy sins be forgiven thee; or to say, Arise, and take up thy bed, and walk?	“Which is easier: to say to a paralytic, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Get up, pick up your mat, and walk’?
MRK	2	10	그러나 인자가 땅에서 죄를 사하는 권세가 있는 줄을 너희로 알게 하려 하노라 하시고 중풍병자에게 말씀하시되	But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, (he saith to the sick of the palsy,)	But so that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins...” He said to the paralytic,
MRK	2	11	내가 네게 이르노니 일어나 네 상을 가지고 집으로 가라 하시니	I say unto thee, Arise, and take up thy bed, and go thy way into thine house.	“I tell you, get up, pick up your mat, and go home.”
MRK	2	12	그가 일어나 곧 상을 가지고 모든 사람 앞에서 나가거늘 저희가 다 놀라 영광을 하나님께 돌리며 가로되 우리가 이런 일을 도무지 보지 못하였다 하더라	And immediately he arose, took up the bed, and went forth before them all; insomuch that they were all amazed, and glorified God, saying, We never saw it on this fashion.	And immediately the man got up, picked up his mat, and walked out in front of them all. As a result, they were all astounded and glorified God, saying, “We have never seen anything like this!”
MRK	2	13	예수께서 다시 바닷가에 나가시매 무리가 다 나아왔거늘 예수께서 저희를 가르치시니라	And he went forth again by the sea side; and all the multitude resorted unto him, and he taught them.	Once again Jesus went out beside the sea. All the people came to Him, and He taught them there.
MRK	2	14	또 지나가시다가 알패오의 아들 레위가 세관에 앉아 있는 것을 보시고 저에게 이르시되 나를 좇으라 하시니 일어나 좇으니라	And as he passed by, he saw Levi the son of Alpheus sitting at the receipt of custom, and said unto him, Follow me. And he arose and followed him.	As He was walking along, He saw Levi son of Alphaeus sitting at the tax booth. “Follow Me,” He told him, and Levi got up and followed Him.
MRK	2	15	그의 집에 앉아 잡수실 때에 많은 세리와 죄인들이 예수와 그 제자들과 함께 앉았으니 이는 저희가 많이 있어서 예수를 좇음이러라	And it came to pass, that, as Jesus sat at meat in his house, many publicans and sinners sat also together with Jesus and his disciples: for there were many, and they followed him.	While Jesus was dining at Levi’s house, many tax collectors and sinners were eating with Him and His disciples—for there were many who followed Him.
MRK	2	16	바리새인의 서기관들이 예수께서 죄인과 세리들과 함께 잡수시는 것을 보고 그 제자들에게 이르되 어찌하여 세리와 죄인들과 함께 먹는가	And when the scribes and Pharisees saw him eat with publicans and sinners, they said unto his disciples, How is it that he eateth and drinketh with publicans and sinners?	When the scribes who were Pharisees saw Jesus eating with these people, they asked His disciples, “Why does He eat with tax collectors and sinners?”
MRK	2	17	예수께서 들으시고 저희에게 이르시되 건강한 자에게는 의원이 쓸 데 없고 병든 자에게라야 쓸 데 있느니라 내가 의인을 부르러 온 것이 아니요 죄인을 부르러 왔노라 하시니라	When Jesus heard it, he saith unto them, They that are whole have no need of the physician, but they that are sick: I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.	On hearing this, Jesus told them, “It is not the healthy who need a doctor, but the sick. I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners.”
MRK	2	18	요한의 제자들과 바리새인들이 금식하고 있는지라 혹이 예수께 와서 말하되 요한의 제자들과 바리새인의 제자들은 금식하는데 어찌하여 당신의 제자들은 금식하지 아니하나니까	And the disciples of John and of the Pharisees used to fast: and they come and say unto him, Why do the disciples of John and of the Pharisees fast, but thy disciples fast not?	Now John’s disciples and the Pharisees were often fasting. So people came to Jesus and asked, “Why don’t Your disciples fast like John’s disciples and those of the Pharisees?”
MRK	2	19	예수께서 저희에게 이르시되 혼인집 손님들이 신랑과 함께 있을 때에 금식할 수 있느냐 신랑과 함께 있을 동안에는 금식할 수 없나니	And Jesus said unto them, Can the children of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them? as long as they have the bridegroom with them, they cannot fast.	Jesus replied, “How can the guests of the bridegroom fast while He is with them? As long as He is with them, they cannot fast.
MRK	2	20	그러나 신랑을 빼앗길 날이 이르리니 그 날에는 금식할 것이니라	But the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then shall they fast in those days.	But the time will come when the bridegroom will be taken from them; then they will fast.
MRK	2	21	생베 조각을 낡은 옷에 붙이는 자가 없나니 만일 그렇게 하면 기운 새것이 낡은 그것을 당기어 해어짐이 더하게 되느니라	No man also seweth a piece of new cloth on an old garment: else the new piece that filled it up taketh away from the old, and the rent is made worse.	No one sews a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old garment. If he does, the new piece will pull away from the old, and a worse tear will result.
MRK	2	22	새 포도주를 낡은 가죽부대에 넣는 자가 없나니 만일 그렇게 하면 새 포도주가 부대를 터뜨려 포도주와 부대를 버리게 되리라 오직 새 포도주는 새 부대에 넣느니라 하시니라	And no man putteth new wine into old bottles: else the new wine doth burst the bottles, and the wine is spilled, and the bottles will be marred: but new wine must be put into new bottles.	And no one pours new wine into old wineskins. If he does, the wine will burst the skins, and both the wine and the wineskins will be ruined. Instead, new wine is poured into new wineskins.”
MRK	2	23	안식일에 예수께서 밀밭 사이로 지나가실새 그 제자들이 길을 열며 이삭을 자르니	And it came to pass, that he went through the corn fields on the sabbath day; and his disciples began, as they went, to pluck the ears of corn.	One Sabbath Jesus was passing through the grainfields, and His disciples began to pick the heads of grain as they walked along.
MRK	2	24	바리새인들이 예수께 말하되 보시오 저희가 어찌하여 안식일에 하지 못할 일을 하나이까	And the Pharisees said unto him, Behold, why do they on the sabbath day that which is not lawful?	So the Pharisees said to Him, “Look, why are they doing what is unlawful on the Sabbath?”
MRK	2	25	예수께서 가라사대 다윗이 자기와 및 함께 한 자들이 핍절되어 시장할 때에 한 일을 읽지 못하였느냐	And he said unto them, Have ye never read what David did, when he had need, and was an hungred, he, and they that were with him?	Jesus replied, “Have you never read what David did when he and his companions were hungry and in need?
MRK	2	26	그가 아비아달 대제사장 때에 하나님의 전에 들어가서 제사장 외에는 먹지 못하는 진설병을 먹고 함께 한 자들에게도 주지 아니하였느냐	How he went into the house of God in the days of Abiathar the high priest, and did eat the shewbread, which is not lawful to eat but for the priests, and gave also to them which were with him?	During the high priesthood of Abiathar, he entered the house of God and ate the consecrated bread, which was lawful only for the priests. And he gave some to his companions as well.”
MRK	2	27	또 가라사대 안식일은 사람을 위하여 있는 것이요 사람이 안식일을 위하여 있는 것이 아니니	And he said unto them, The sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath:	Then Jesus declared, “The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath.
MRK	2	28	이러므로 인자는 안식일에도 주인이니라	Therefore the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath.	Therefore, the Son of Man is Lord even of the Sabbath.”
MRK	3	1	예수께서 다시 회당에 들어가시니 한편 손 마른 사람이 거기 있는지라	And he entered again into the synagogue; and there was a man there which had a withered hand.	Once again Jesus entered the synagogue, and a man with a withered hand was there.
MRK	3	2	사람들이 예수를 송사하려 하여 안식일에 그 사람을 고치시는가 엿보거늘	And they watched him, whether he would heal him on the sabbath day; that they might accuse him.	In order to accuse Jesus, they were watching to see if He would heal on the Sabbath.
MRK	3	3	예수께서 손 마른 사람에게 이르시되 한 가운데 일어서라 하시고	And he saith unto the man which had the withered hand, Stand forth.	Then Jesus said to the man with the withered hand, “Stand up among us.”
MRK	3	4	저희에게 이르시되 안식일에 선을 행하는 것과 악을 행하는 것, 생명을 구하는 것과 죽이는 것, 어느 것이 옳으냐 하시니 저희가 잠잠하거늘	And he saith unto them, Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath days, or to do evil? to save life, or to kill? But they held their peace.	And He asked them, “Which is lawful on the Sabbath: to do good or to do evil, to save life or to destroy it?” But they were silent.
MRK	3	5	저희 마음의 완악함을 근심하사 노하심으로 저희를 둘러 보시고 그 사람에게 이르시되 네 손을 내밀라 하시니 그가 내밀매 그 손이 회복되었더라	And when he had looked round about on them with anger, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts, he saith unto the man, Stretch forth thine hand. And he stretched it out: and his hand was restored whole as the other.	Jesus looked around at them with anger and sorrow at their hardness of heart. Then He said to the man, “Stretch out your hand.” So he stretched it out, and it was restored.
MRK	3	6	바리새인들이 나가서 곧 헤롯당과 함께 어떻게 하여 예수를 죽일꼬 의논하니라	And the Pharisees went forth, and straightway took counsel with the Herodians against him, how they might destroy him.	At this, the Pharisees went out and began plotting with the Herodians how they might kill Jesus.
MRK	3	7	예수께서 제자들과 함께 바다로 물러가시니 갈릴리에서 큰 무리가 좇으며	But Jesus withdrew himself with his disciples to the sea: and a great multitude from Galilee followed him, and from Judea,	So Jesus withdrew with His disciples to the sea, accompanied by a large crowd from Galilee, Judea,
MRK	3	8	유대와 예루살렘과 이두매와 요단 강 건너편과 또 두로와 시돈 근처에서 허다한 무리가 그의 하신 큰 일을 듣고 나아오는지라	And from Jerusalem, and from Idumea, and from beyond Jordan; and they about Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude, when they had heard what great things he did, came unto him.	Jerusalem, Idumea, the region beyond the Jordan, and the vicinity of Tyre and Sidon. The large crowd came to Him when they heard what great things He was doing.
MRK	3	9	예수께서 무리의 에워싸 미는 것을 면키 위하여 작은 배를 등대하도록 제자들에게 명하셨으니	And he spake to his disciples, that a small ship should wait on him because of the multitude, lest they should throng him.	Jesus asked His disciples to have a boat ready for Him so that the crowd would not crush Him.
MRK	3	10	이는 많은 사람을 고치셨으므로 병에 고생하는 자들이 예수를 만지고자 하여 핍근히 함이더라	For he had healed many; insomuch that they pressed upon him for to touch him, as many as had plagues.	For He had healed so many that all who had diseases were pressing forward to touch Him.
MRK	3	11	더러운 귀신들도 어느 때든지 예수를 보면 그 앞에 엎드려 부르짖어 가로되 당신은 하나님의 아들이니이다 하니	And unclean spirits, when they saw him, fell down before him, and cried, saying, Thou art the Son of God.	And when the unclean spirits saw Him, they fell down before Him and cried out, “You are the Son of God!”
MRK	3	12	예수께서 자기를 나타내지 말라고 많이 경계하시니라	And he straitly charged them that they should not make him known.	But He warned them sternly not to make Him known.
MRK	3	13	또 산에 오르사 자기의 원하는 자들을 부르시니 나아온지라	And he goeth up into a mountain, and calleth unto him whom he would: and they came unto him.	Then Jesus went up on the mountain and called for those He wanted, and they came to Him.
MRK	3	14	이에 열둘을 세우셨으니 이는 자기와 함께 있게 하시고 또 보내사 전도도 하며	And he ordained twelve, that they should be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach,	He appointed twelve of them, whom He designated as apostles, to accompany Him, to be sent out to preach,
MRK	3	15	귀신을 내어쫓는 권세도 있게 하려 하심이러라	And to have power to heal sicknesses, and to cast out devils:	and to have authority to drive out demons.
MRK	3	16	이 열둘을 세우셨으니 시몬에게는 베드로란 이름을 더하셨고	And Simon he surnamed Peter;	These are the twelve He appointed: Simon (whom He named Peter),
MRK	3	17	또 세베대의 아들 야고보와 야고보의 형제 요한이니 이 둘에게는 보아너게 곧 우뢰의 아들이란 이름을 더하셨으며	And James the son of Zebedee, and John the brother of James; and he surnamed them Boanerges, which is, The sons of thunder:	James son of Zebedee and his brother John (whom He named Boanerges, meaning “Sons of Thunder”),
MRK	3	18	또 안드레와 빌립과 바돌로매와 마태와 도마와 알패오의 아들 야고보와 및 다대오와 가나안인 시몬이며	And Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, and Thomas, and James the son of Alpheus, and Thaddeus, and Simon the Canaanite,	Andrew, Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Thomas, James son of Alphaeus, Thaddaeus, Simon the Zealot,
MRK	3	19	또 가룟 유다니 이는 예수를 판 자러라	And Judas Iscariot, which also betrayed him: and they went into an house.	and Judas Iscariot, who betrayed Jesus.
MRK	3	20	집에 들어가시니 무리가 다시 모이므로 식사할 겨를도 없는지라	And the multitude cometh together again, so that they could not so much as eat bread.	Then Jesus went home, and once again a crowd gathered, so that He and His disciples could not even eat.
MRK	3	21	예수의 친속들이 듣고 붙들러 나오니 이는 그가 미쳤다 함일러라	And when his friends heard of it, they went out to lay hold on him: for they said, He is beside himself.	When His family heard about this, they went out to take custody of Him, saying, “He is out of His mind.”
MRK	3	22	예루살렘에서 내려온 서기관들은 저가 바알세불을 지폈다 하며 또 귀신의 왕을 힘입어 귀신을 쫓아낸다 하니	And the scribes which came down from Jerusalem said, He hath Beelzebub, and by the prince of the devils casteth he out devils.	And the scribes who had come down from Jerusalem were saying, “He is possessed by Beelzebul,” and, “By the prince of the demons He drives out demons.”
MRK	3	23	예수께서 저희를 불러다가 비유로 말씀하시되 사단이 어찌 사단을 쫓아낼 수 있느냐	And he called them unto him, and said unto them in parables, How can Satan cast out Satan?	So Jesus called them together and began to speak to them in parables: “How can Satan drive out Satan?
MRK	3	24	또 만일 나라가 스스로 분쟁하면 그 나라가 설 수 없고	And if a kingdom be divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand.	If a kingdom is divided against itself, it cannot stand.
MRK	3	25	만일 집이 스스로 분쟁하면 그 집이 설 수 없고	And if a house be divided against itself, that house cannot stand.	If a house is divided against itself, it cannot stand.
MRK	3	26	만일 사단이 자기를 거스려 일어나 분쟁하면 설 수 없고 이에 망하느니라	And if Satan rise up against himself, and be divided, he cannot stand, but hath an end.	And if Satan is divided and rises against himself, he cannot stand; his end has come.
MRK	3	27	사람이 먼저 강한 자를 결박지 않고는 그 강한 자의 집에 들어가 세간을 늑탈치 못하리니 결박한 후에야 그 집을 늑탈하리라	No man can enter into a strong man’s house, and spoil his goods, except he will first bind the strong man; and then he will spoil his house.	Indeed, no one can enter a strong man’s house to steal his possessions unless he first ties up the strong man. Then he can plunder his house.
MRK	3	28	내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 사람의 모든 죄와 무릇 훼방하는 훼방은 사하심을 얻되	Verily I say unto you, All sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, and blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme:	Truly I tell you, the sons of men will be forgiven all sins and blasphemies, as many as they utter.
MRK	3	29	누구든지 성령을 훼방하는 자는 사하심을 영원히 얻지 못하고 영원한 죄에 처하느니라 하시니	But he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost hath never forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation:	But whoever blasphemes against the Holy Spirit will never be forgiven; he is guilty of eternal sin.”
MRK	3	30	이는 저희가 말하기를 더러운 귀신이 들렸다 함이러라	Because they said, He hath an unclean spirit.	Jesus made this statement because they were saying, “He has an unclean spirit.”
MRK	3	31	때에 예수의 모친과 동생들이 와서 밖에 서서 사람을 보내어 예수를 부르니	There came then his brethren and his mother, and, standing without, sent unto him, calling him.	Then Jesus’ mother and brothers came and stood outside. They sent someone in to summon Him,
MRK	3	32	무리가 예수를 둘러 앉았다가 여짜오되 보소서 당신의 모친과 동생들과 누이들이 밖에서 찾나이다	And the multitude sat about him, and they said unto him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren without seek for thee.	and a crowd was sitting around Him. “Look,” He was told, “Your mother and brothers are outside, asking for You.”
MRK	3	33	대답하시되 누가 내 모친이며 동생들이냐 하시고	And he answered them, saying, Who is my mother, or my brethren?	But Jesus replied, “Who are My mother and My brothers?”
MRK	3	34	둘러 앉은 자들을 둘러 보시며 가라사대 내 모친과 내 동생들을 보라	And he looked round about on them which sat about him, and said, Behold my mother and my brethren!	Looking at those seated in a circle around Him, He said, “Here are My mother and My brothers!
MRK	3	35	누구든지 하나님의 뜻대로 하는 자는 내 형제요 자매요 모친이니라	For whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is my brother, and my sister, and mother.	For whoever does the will of God is My brother and sister and mother.”
MRK	4	1	예수께서 다시 바닷가에서 가르치시니 큰 무리가 모여 들거늘 예수께서 배에 올라 바다에 떠 앉으시고 온 무리는 바다 곁 육지에 있더라	And he began again to teach by the sea side: and there was gathered unto him a great multitude, so that he entered into a ship, and sat in the sea; and the whole multitude was by the sea on the land.	Once again Jesus began to teach beside the sea, and such a large crowd gathered around Him that He got into a boat and sat in it, while all the people crowded along the shore.
MRK	4	2	이에 예수께서 여러 가지를 비유로 가르치시니 그 가르치시는 중에 저희에게 이르시되	And he taught them many things by parables, and said unto them in his doctrine,	And He taught them many things in parables, and in His teaching He said,
MRK	4	3	들으라 씨를 뿌리는 자가 뿌리러 나가서	Hearken; Behold, there went out a sower to sow:	“Listen! A farmer went out to sow his seed.
MRK	4	4	뿌릴새 더러는 길 가에 떨어지매 새들이 와서 먹어 버렸고	And it came to pass, as he sowed, some fell by the way side, and the fowls of the air came and devoured it up.	And as he was sowing, some seed fell along the path, and the birds came and devoured it.
MRK	4	5	더러는 흙이 얇은 돌밭에 떨어지매 흙이 깊지 아니하므로 곧 싹이 나오나	And some fell on stony ground, where it had not much earth; and immediately it sprang up, because it had no depth of earth:	Some fell on rocky ground, where it did not have much soil. It sprang up quickly because the soil was shallow.
MRK	4	6	해가 돋은 후에 타져서 뿌리가 없으므로 말랐고	But when the sun was up, it was scorched; and because it had no root, it withered away.	But when the sun rose, the seedlings were scorched, and they withered because they had no root.
MRK	4	7	더러는 가시떨기에 떨어지매 가시가 자라 기운을 막으므로 결실치 못하였고	And some fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up, and choked it, and it yielded no fruit.	Other seed fell among thorns, which grew up and choked the seedlings, and they yielded no crop.
MRK	4	8	더러는 좋은 땅에 떨어지매 자라 무성하여 결실하였으니 삼십 배와 육십 배와 백 배가 되었느니라 하시고	And other fell on good ground, and did yield fruit that sprang up and increased; and brought forth, some thirty, and some sixty, and some an hundred.	Still other seed fell on good soil, where it sprouted, grew up, and produced a crop—one bearing thirtyfold, another sixtyfold, and another a hundredfold.”
MRK	4	9	또 이르시되 들을 귀 있는 자는 들으라 하시니라	And he said unto them, He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.	Then Jesus said, “He who has ears to hear, let him hear.”
MRK	4	10	예수께서 홀로 계실 때에 함께한 사람들이 열두 제자로 더불어 그 비유들를 묻자오니	And when he was alone, they that were about him with the twelve asked of him the parable.	As soon as Jesus was alone with the Twelve and those around Him, they asked Him about the parable.
MRK	4	11	이르시되 하나님 나라의 비밀을 너희에게는 주었으나 외인에게는 모든 것을 비유로 하나니	And he said unto them, Unto you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God: but unto them that are without, all these things are done in parables:	He replied, “The mystery of the kingdom of God has been given to you, but to those on the outside everything is expressed in parables,
MRK	4	12	이는 저희로 보기는 보아도 알지 못하며 듣기는 들어도 깨닫지 못하게 하여 돌이켜 죄 사함을 얻지 못하게 하려 함이니라 하시고	That seeing they may see, and not perceive; and hearing they may hear, and not understand; lest at any time they should be converted, and their sins should be forgiven them.	so that, ‘they may be ever seeing but never perceiving, and ever hearing but never understanding; otherwise they might turn and be forgiven.’”
MRK	4	13	또 가라사대 너희가 이 비유를 알지 못할진대 어떻게 모든 비유를 알겠느뇨	And he said unto them, Know ye not this parable? and how then will ye know all parables?	Then Jesus said to them, “Do you not understand this parable? Then how will you understand any of the parables?
MRK	4	14	뿌리는 자는 말씀을 뿌리는 것이라	The sower soweth the word.	The farmer sows the word.
MRK	4	15	말씀이 길 가에 뿌리웠다는 것은 이들이니 곧 말씀을 들었을 때에 사단이 즉시 와서 저희에게 뿌리운 말씀을 빼앗는 것이요	And these are they by the way side, where the word is sown; but when they have heard, Satan cometh immediately, and taketh away the word that was sown in their hearts.	Some are like the seeds along the path, where the word is sown. As soon as they hear it, Satan comes and takes away the word that was sown in them.
MRK	4	16	또 이와 같이 돌밭에 뿌리웠다는 것은 이들이니 곧 말씀을 들을 때에 즉시 기쁨으로 받으나	And these are they likewise which are sown on stony ground; who, when they have heard the word, immediately receive it with gladness;	Some are like the seeds sown on rocky ground. They hear the word and at once receive it with joy.
MRK	4	17	그 속에 뿌리가 없어 잠간 견디다가 말씀을 인하여 환난이나 핍박이 일어나는 때에는 곧 넘어지는 자요	And have no root in themselves, and so endure but for a time: afterward, when affliction or persecution ariseth for the word’s sake, immediately they are offended.	But they themselves have no root, and they remain for only a season. When trouble or persecution comes because of the word, they quickly fall away.
MRK	4	18	또 어떤 이는 가시떨기에 뿌리우는 자니 이들은 말씀을 듣되	And these are they which are sown among thorns; such as hear the word,	Others are like the seeds sown among the thorns. They hear the word,
MRK	4	19	세상의 염려와 재리의 유혹과 기타 욕심이 들어와 말씀을 막아 결실치 못하게 되는 자요	And the cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things entering in, choke the word, and it becometh unfruitful.	but the worries of this life, the deceitfulness of wealth, and the desire for other things come in and choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful.
MRK	4	20	좋은 땅에 뿌리웠다는 것은 곧 말씀을 듣고 받아 삼십 배와 육십 배와 백 배의 결실을 하는 자니라	And these are they which are sown on good ground; such as hear the word, and receive it, and bring forth fruit, some thirtyfold, some sixty, and some an hundred.	Still others are like the seeds sown on good soil. They hear the word, receive it, and produce a crop—thirtyfold, sixtyfold, or a hundredfold.”
MRK	4	21	또 저희에게 이르시되 사람이 등불을 가져오는 것은 말 아래나 평상 아래나 두려 함이냐 등경 위에 두려 함이 아니냐	And he said unto them, Is a candle brought to be put under a bushel, or under a bed? and not to be set on a candlestick?	Jesus also said to them, “Does anyone bring in a lamp to put it under a basket or under a bed? Doesn’t he set it on a stand?
MRK	4	22	드러내려 하지 않고는 숨긴 것이 없고 나타내려 하지 않고는 감추인 것이 없느니라	For there is nothing hid, which shall not be manifested; neither was any thing kept secret, but that it should come abroad.	For there is nothing hidden that will not be disclosed, and nothing concealed that will not be brought to light.
MRK	4	23	들을 귀 있는 자는 들으라	If any man have ears to hear, let him hear.	If anyone has ears to hear, let him hear.”
MRK	4	24	또 가라사대 너희가 무엇을 듣는가 스스로 삼가라 너희의 헤아리는 그 헤아림으로 너희가 헤아림을 받을 것이요 또 더 받으리니	And he said unto them, Take heed what ye hear: with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you: and unto you that hear shall more be given.	He went on to say, “Pay attention to what you hear. With the measure you use, it will be measured to you, and even more will be added to you.
MRK	4	25	있는 자는 받을 것이요 없는 자는 그 있는 것까지 빼앗기리라	For he that hath, to him shall be given: and he that hath not, from him shall be taken even that which he hath.	For whoever has will be given more. But whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.”
MRK	4	26	또 가라사대 하나님의 나라는 사람이 씨를 땅에 뿌림과 같으니	And he said, So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed into the ground;	Jesus also said, “The kingdom of God is like a man who scatters seed on the ground.
MRK	4	27	저가 밤낮 자고 깨고 하는 중에 씨가 나서 자라되 그 어떻게 된 것을 알지 못하느니라	And should sleep, and rise night and day, and the seed should spring and grow up, he knoweth not how.	Night and day he sleeps and wakes, and the seed sprouts and grows, though he knows not how.
MRK	4	28	땅이 스스로 열매를 맺되 처음에는 싹이요 다음에는 이삭이요 그 다음에는 이삭에 충실한 곡식이라	For the earth bringeth forth fruit of herself; first the blade, then the ear, after that the full corn in the ear.	All by itself the earth produces a crop—first the stalk, then the head, then grain that ripens within.
MRK	4	29	열매가 익으면 곧 낫을 대나니 이는 추수 때가 이르렀음이니라	But when the fruit is brought forth, immediately he putteth in the sickle, because the harvest is come.	And as soon as the grain is ripe, he swings the sickle, because the harvest has come.”
MRK	4	30	또 가라사대 우리가 하나님의 나라를 어떻게 비하며 또 무슨 비유로 나타낼꼬	And he said, Whereunto shall we liken the kingdom of God? or with what comparison shall we compare it?	Then He asked, “To what can we compare the kingdom of God? With what parable shall we present it?
MRK	4	31	겨자씨 한 알과 같으니 땅에 심길 때에는 땅 위의 모든 씨보다 작은 것이로되	It is like a grain of mustard seed, which, when it is sown in the earth, is less than all the seeds that be in the earth:	It is like a mustard seed, which is the smallest of all seeds sown upon the earth.
MRK	4	32	심긴 후에는 자라서 모든 나물보다 커지며 큰 가지를 내니 공중의 새들이 그 그늘에 깃들일 만큼 되느니라	But when it is sown, it groweth up, and becometh greater than all herbs, and shooteth out great branches; so that the fowls of the air may lodge under the shadow of it.	But after it is planted, it grows to be the largest of all garden plants and puts forth great branches, so that the birds of the air nest in its shade.”
MRK	4	33	예수께서 이러한 많은 비유로 저희가 알아 들을 수 있는 대로 말씀을 가르치시되	And with many such parables spake he the word unto them, as they were able to hear it.	With many such parables Jesus spoke the word to them, to the extent that they could understand.
MRK	4	34	비유가 아니면 말씀하지 아니하시고 다만 혼자 계실 때에 그 제자들에게 모든 것을 해석하시더라	But without a parable spake he not unto them: and when they were alone, he expounded all things to his disciples.	He did not tell them anything without using a parable. But privately He explained everything to His own disciples.
MRK	4	35	그 날 저물 때에 제자들에게 이르시되 우리가 저편으로 건너가자 하시니	And the same day, when the even was come, he saith unto them, Let us pass over unto the other side.	When that evening came, He said to His disciples, “Let us cross to the other side.”
MRK	4	36	저희가 무리를 떠나 예수를 배에 계신 그대로 모시고 가매 다른 배들도 함께 하더니	And when they had sent away the multitude, they took him even as he was in the ship. And there were also with him other little ships.	After they had dismissed the crowd, they took Jesus with them, since He was already in the boat. And there were other boats with Him.
MRK	4	37	큰 광풍이 일어나며 물결이 부딪혀 배에 들어와 배에 가득하게 되었더라	And there arose a great storm of wind, and the waves beat into the ship, so that it was now full.	Soon a violent windstorm came up, and the waves were breaking over the boat, so that it was being swamped.
MRK	4	38	예수께서는 고물에서 베개를 베시고 주무시더니 제자들이 깨우며 가로되 선생님이여 우리의 죽게 된 것을 돌아보지 아니하시나이까 하니	And he was in the hinder part of the ship, asleep on a pillow: and they awake him, and say unto him, Master, carest thou not that we perish?	But Jesus was in the stern, sleeping on the cushion. So they woke Him and said, “Teacher, don’t You care that we are perishing?”
MRK	4	39	예수께서 깨어 바람을 꾸짖으시며 바다더러 이르시되 잠잠하라 고요하라 하시니 바람이 그치고 아주 잔잔하여지더라	And he arose, and rebuked the wind, and said unto the sea, Peace, be still. And the wind ceased, and there was a great calm.	Then Jesus got up and rebuked the wind and the sea. “Silence!” He commanded. “Be still!” And the wind died down, and it was perfectly calm.
MRK	4	40	이에 제자들에게 이르시되 어찌하여 이렇게 무서워하느냐 너희가 어찌 믿음이 없느냐 하시니	And he said unto them, Why are ye so fearful? how is it that ye have no faith?	“Why are you so afraid?” He asked. “Do you still have no faith?”
MRK	4	41	저희가 심히 두려워하여 서로 말하되 저가 뉘기에 바람과 바다라도 순종하는고 하였더라	And they feared exceedingly, and said one to another, What manner of man is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?	Overwhelmed with fear, they asked one another, “Who is this, that even the wind and the sea obey Him?”
MRK	5	1	예수께서 바다 건너편 거라사인의 지방에 이르러	And they came over unto the other side of the sea, into the country of the Gadarenes.	On the other side of the sea, they arrived in the region of the Gerasenes.
MRK	5	2	배에서 나오시매 곧 더러운 귀신 들린 사람이 무덤 사이에서 나와 예수를 만나다	And when he was come out of the ship, immediately there met him out of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit,	As soon as Jesus got out of the boat, He was met by a man with an unclean spirit, who was coming from the tombs.
MRK	5	3	그 사람은 무덤 사이에 거처하는데 이제는 아무나 쇠사슬로도 맬 수 없게 되었으니	Who had his dwelling among the tombs; and no man could bind him, no, not with chains:	This man had been living in the tombs and could no longer be restrained, even with chains.
MRK	5	4	이는 여러 번 고랑과 쇠사슬에 매였어도 쇠사슬을 끊고 고랑을 깨뜨렸음이러라 그리하여 아무도 저를 제어할 힘이 없는지라	Because that he had been often bound with fetters and chains, and the chains had been plucked asunder by him, and the fetters broken in pieces: neither could any man tame him.	Though he was often bound with chains and shackles, he had broken the chains and shattered the shackles. Now there was no one with the strength to subdue him.
MRK	5	5	밤낮 무덤 사이에서나 산에서나 늘 소리지르며 돌로 제 몸을 상하고 있었더라	And always, night and day, he was in the mountains, and in the tombs, crying, and cutting himself with stones.	Night and day in the tombs and in the mountains he kept crying out and cutting himself with stones.
MRK	5	6	그가 멀리서 예수를 보고 달려와 절하며	But when he saw Jesus afar off, he ran and worshipped him,	When the man saw Jesus from a distance, he ran and fell on his knees before Him.
MRK	5	7	큰 소리로 부르짖어 가로되 지극히 높으신 하나님의 아들 예수여 나와 당신과 무슨 상관이 있나이까 원컨대 하나님 앞에 맹세하고 나를 괴롭게 마옵소서 하니	And cried with a loud voice, and said, What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the most high God? I adjure thee by God, that thou torment me not.	And he shouted in a loud voice, “What do You want with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I beg You before God not to torture me!”
MRK	5	8	이는 예수께서 이미 저에게 이르시기를 더러운 귀신아 그 사람에게서 나오라 하셨음이라	For he said unto him, Come out of the man, thou unclean spirit.	For Jesus had already declared, “Come out of this man, you unclean spirit!”
MRK	5	9	이에 물으시되 네 이름이 무엇이냐 가로되 내 이름은 군대니 우리가 많음이니이다 하고	And he asked him, What is thy name? And he answered, saying, My name is Legion: for we are many.	“What is your name?” Jesus asked. “My name is Legion,” he replied, “for we are many.”
MRK	5	10	자기를 이 지방에서 내어 보내지 마시기를 간절히 구하더니	And he besought him much that he would not send them away out of the country.	And he begged Jesus repeatedly not to send them out of that region.
MRK	5	11	마침 거기 돼지의 큰 떼가 산 곁에서 먹고 있는지라	Now there was there nigh unto the mountains a great herd of swine feeding.	There on the nearby hillside a large herd of pigs was feeding.
MRK	5	12	이에 간구하여 가로되 우리를 돼지에게로 보내어 들어가게 하소서 하니	And all the devils besought him, saying, Send us into the swine, that we may enter into them.	So the demons begged Jesus, “Send us to the pigs, so that we may enter them.”
MRK	5	13	허락하신대 더러운 귀신들이 나와서 돼지에게로 들어가니 거의 이천 마리 되는 떼가 바다를 향하여 비탈로 내리달아 바다에서 몰사하거늘	And forthwith Jesus gave them leave. And the unclean spirits went out, and entered into the swine: and the herd ran violently down a steep place into the sea, (they were about two thousand;) and were choked in the sea.	He gave them permission, and the unclean spirits came out and went into the pigs, and the herd of about two thousand rushed down the steep bank into the sea and drowned in the water.
MRK	5	14	치던 자들이 도망하여 읍내와 촌에 고하니 사람들이 그 어떻게 된 것을 보러 와서	And they that fed the swine fled, and told it in the city, and in the country. And they went out to see what it was that was done.	Those tending the pigs ran off and reported this in the town and countryside, and the people went out to see what had happened.
MRK	5	15	예수께 이르러 그 귀신 들렸던 자 곧 군대 지폈던 자가 옷을 입고 정신이 온전하여 앉은 것을 보고 두려워하더라	And they come to Jesus, and see him that was possessed with the devil, and had the legion, sitting, and clothed, and in his right mind: and they were afraid.	When they came to Jesus, they saw the man who had been possessed by the legion of demons sitting there, clothed and in his right mind; and they were afraid.
MRK	5	16	이에 귀신 들렸던 자의 당한 것과 돼지의 일을 본 자들이 저희에게 고하매	And they that saw it told them how it befell to him that was possessed with the devil, and also concerning the swine.	Those who had seen it described what had happened to the demon-possessed man and also to the pigs.
MRK	5	17	저희가 예수께 그 지경에서 떠나시기를 간구하더라	And they began to pray him to depart out of their coasts.	And the people began to beg Jesus to leave their region.
MRK	5	18	예수께서 배에 오르실 때에 귀신 들렸던 사람이 함께 있기를 간구하였으나	And when he was come into the ship, he that had been possessed with the devil prayed him that he might be with him.	As He was getting into the boat, the man who had been possessed by the demons begged to go with Him.
MRK	5	19	허락지 아니하시고 저에게 이르시되 집으로 돌아가 주께서 네게 어떻게 큰 일을 행하사 너를 불쌍히 여기신 것을 네 친속에게 고하라 하신대	Howbeit Jesus suffered him not, but saith unto him, Go home to thy friends, and tell them how great things the Lord hath done for thee, and hath had compassion on thee.	But Jesus would not allow him. “Go home to your own people,” He said, “and tell them how much the Lord has done for you, and what mercy He has shown you.”
MRK	5	20	그가 가서 예수께서 자기에게 어떻게 큰 일 행하신 것을 데가볼리에 전파하니 모든 사람이 기이히 여기더라	And he departed, and began to publish in Decapolis how great things Jesus had done for him: and all men did marvel.	So the man went away and began to proclaim throughout the Decapolis how much Jesus had done for him. And everyone was amazed.
MRK	5	21	예수께서 배를 타시고 다시 저편으로 건너가시매 큰 무리가 그에게로 모이거늘 이에 바닷가에 계시더니	And when Jesus was passed over again by ship unto the other side, much people gathered unto him: and he was nigh unto the sea.	When Jesus had again crossed by boat to the other side, a large crowd gathered around Him beside the sea.
MRK	5	22	회당장 중 하나인 야이로라 하는 이가 와서 예수를 보고 발 아래 엎드리어	And, behold, there cometh one of the rulers of the synagogue, Jairus by name; and when he saw him, he fell at his feet,	A synagogue leader named Jairus arrived, and seeing Jesus, he fell at His feet
MRK	5	23	많이 간구하여 가로되 내 어린 딸이 죽게 되었사오니 오셔서 그 위에 손을 얹으사 그로 구원을 얻어 살게 하소서 하거늘	And besought him greatly, saying, My little daughter lieth at the point of death: I pray thee, come and lay thy hands on her, that she may be healed; and she shall live.	and pleaded with Him urgently, “My little daughter is near death. Please come and place Your hands on her, so that she will be healed and live.”
MRK	5	24	이에 그와 함께 가실새 큰 무리가 따라가며 에워싸 밀더라	And Jesus went with him; and much people followed him, and thronged him.	So Jesus went with him, and a large crowd followed and pressed around Him.
MRK	5	25	열두 해를 혈루증으로 앓는 한 여자가 있어	And a certain woman, which had an issue of blood twelve years,	And a woman was there who had suffered from bleeding for twelve years.
MRK	5	26	많은 의원에게 많은 괴로움을 받았고 있던 것도 다 허비하였으되 아무 효험이 없고 도리어 더 중하여졌던 차에	And had suffered many things of many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse,	She had borne much agony under the care of many physicians and had spent all she had, but to no avail. Instead, her condition had only grown worse.
MRK	5	27	예수의 소문을 듣고 무리 가운데 섞여 뒤로 와서 그의 옷에 손을 대니	When she had heard of Jesus, came in the press behind, and touched his garment.	When the woman heard about Jesus, she came up through the crowd behind Him and touched His cloak.
MRK	5	28	이는 내가 그의 옷에만 손을 대어도 구원을 얻으리라 함일러라	For she said, If I may touch but his clothes, I shall be whole.	For she kept saying, “If only I touch His garments, I will be healed.”
MRK	5	29	이에 그의 혈루 근원이 곧 마르매 병이 나은 줄을 몸에 깨달으니라	And straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up; and she felt in her body that she was healed of that plague.	Immediately her bleeding stopped, and she sensed in her body that she was healed of her affliction.
MRK	5	30	예수께서 그 능력이 자기에게서 나간 줄을 곧 스스로 아시고 무리 가운데서 돌이켜 말씀하시되 누가 내 옷에 손을 대었느냐 하시니	And Jesus, immediately knowing in himself that virtue had gone out of him, turned him about in the press, and said, Who touched my clothes?	At once Jesus was aware that power had gone out from Him. Turning to the crowd, He asked, “Who touched My garments?”
MRK	5	31	제자들이 여짜오되 무리가 에워싸 미는 것을 보시며 누가 내게 손을 대었느냐 물으시나이까 하되	And his disciples said unto him, Thou seest the multitude thronging thee, and sayest thou, Who touched me?	His disciples answered, “You can see the crowd pressing in on You, and yet You ask, ‘Who touched Me?’”
MRK	5	32	예수께서 이 일 행한 여자를 보려고 둘러 보시니	And he looked round about to see her that had done this thing.	But He kept looking around to see who had done this.
MRK	5	33	여자가 제게 이루어진 일을 알고 두려워하여 떨며 와서 그 앞에 엎드려 모든 사실을 여짜온대	But the woman fearing and trembling, knowing what was done in her, came and fell down before him, and told him all the truth.	Then the woman, knowing what had happened to her, came and fell down before Him trembling in fear, and she told Him the whole truth.
MRK	5	34	예수께서 가라사대 딸아 네 믿음이 너를 구원하였으니 평안히 가라 네 병에서 놓여 건강할지어다	And he said unto her, Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace, and be whole of thy plague.	“Daughter,” said Jesus, “your faith has healed you. Go in peace and be free of your affliction.”
MRK	5	35	아직 말씀하실 때에 회당장의 집에서 사람들이 와서 가로되 당신의 딸이 죽었나이다 어찌하여 선생을 더 괴롭게 하나이까	While he yet spake, there came from the ruler of the synagogue’s house certain which said, Thy daughter is dead: why troublest thou the Master any further?	While He was still speaking, messengers from the house of Jairus arrived and said, “Your daughter is dead; why bother the Teacher anymore?”
MRK	5	36	예수께서 그 하는 말을 곁에서 들으시고 회당장에게 이르시되 두려워 말고 믿기만 하라 하시고	As soon as Jesus heard the word that was spoken, he saith unto the ruler of the synagogue, Be not afraid, only believe.	But Jesus overheard their conversation and said to Jairus, “Do not be afraid; just believe.”
MRK	5	37	베드로와 야고보와 야고보의 형제 요한 외에 아무도 따라옴을 허치 아니하시고	And he suffered no man to follow him, save Peter, and James, and John the brother of James.	And He did not allow anyone to accompany Him except Peter, James, and John the brother of James.
MRK	5	38	회당장의 집에 함께 가사 훤화함과 사람들의 울며 심히 통곡함을 보시고	And he cometh to the house of the ruler of the synagogue, and seeth the tumult, and them that wept and wailed greatly.	When they arrived at the house of the synagogue leader, Jesus saw the commotion and the people weeping and wailing loudly.
MRK	5	39	들어가서 저희에게 이르시되 너희가 어찌하여 훤화하며 우느냐 이 아이가 죽은 것이 아니라 잔다 하시니	And when he was come in, he saith unto them, Why make ye this ado, and weep? the damsel is not dead, but sleepeth.	He went inside and asked, “Why all this commotion and weeping? The child is not dead, but asleep.”
MRK	5	40	저희가 비웃더라 예수께서 저희를 다 내어보내신 후에 아이의 부모와 또 자기와 함께 한 자들을 데리시고 아이 있는 곳에 들어가사	And they laughed him to scorn. But when he had put them all out, he taketh the father and the mother of the damsel, and them that were with him, and entereth in where the damsel was lying.	And they laughed at Him. After He had put them all outside, He took the child’s father and mother and His own companions, and went in to see the child.
MRK	5	41	그 아이의 손을 잡고 가라사대 달리다굼 하시니 번역하면 곧 소녀야 내가 네게 말하노니 일어나라 하심이라	And he took the damsel by the hand, and said unto her, Talitha cumi; which is, being interpreted, Damsel, I say unto thee, arise.	Taking her by the hand, Jesus said, “Talitha koum!” which means, “Little girl, I say to you, get up!”
MRK	5	42	소녀가 곧 일어나서 걸으니 나이 열두 살이라 사람들이 곧 크게 놀라고 놀라거늘	And straightway the damsel arose, and walked; for she was of the age of twelve years. And they were astonished with a great astonishment.	Immediately the girl got up and began to walk around. She was twelve years old, and at once they were utterly astounded.
MRK	5	43	예수께서 이 일을 아무도 알지 못하게 하라고 저희를 많이 경계하시고 이에 소녀에게 먹을 것을 주라 하시니라	And he charged them straitly that no man should know it; and commanded that something should be given her to eat.	Then Jesus gave strict orders that no one should know about this, and He told them to give her something to eat.
MRK	6	1	예수께서 거기를 떠나사 고향으로 가시니 제자들도 좇으니라	And he went out from thence, and came into his own country; and his disciples follow him.	Jesus went on from there and came to His hometown, accompanied by His disciples.
MRK	6	2	안식일이 되어 회당에서 가르치시니 많은 사람이 듣고 놀라 가로되 이 사람이 어디서 이런 것을 얻었느뇨 이 사람의 받은 지혜와 그 손으로 이루어지는 이런 권능이 어찌됨이뇨	And when the sabbath day was come, he began to teach in the synagogue: and many hearing him were astonished, saying, From whence hath this man these things? and what wisdom is this which is given unto him, that even such mighty works are wrought by his hands?	When the Sabbath came, He began to teach in the synagogue, and many who heard Him were astonished. “Where did this man get these ideas?” they asked. “What is this wisdom He has been given? And how can He perform such miracles?
MRK	6	3	이 사람이 마리아의 아들 목수가 아니냐 야고보와 요셉과 유다와 시몬의 형제가 아니냐 그 누이들이 우리와 함께 여기 있지 아니하냐 하고 예수를 배척한지라	Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary, the brother of James, and Joses, and of Juda, and Simon? and are not his sisters here with us? And they were offended at him.	Isn’t this the carpenter, the son of Mary and the brother of James, Joses, Judas, and Simon? Aren’t His sisters here with us as well?” And they took offense at Him.
MRK	6	4	예수께서 저희에게 이르시되 선지자가 자기 고향과 자기 친척과 자기 집 외에서는 존경을 받지 않음이 없느니라 하시며	But Jesus said unto them, A prophet is not without honour, but in his own country, and among his own kin, and in his own house.	Then Jesus said to them, “Only in his hometown, among his relatives, and in his own household is a prophet without honor.”
MRK	6	5	거기서는 아무 권능도 행하실 수 없어 다만 소수의 병인에게 안수하여 고치실 뿐이었고	And he could there do no mighty work, save that he laid his hands upon a few sick folk, and healed them.	So He could not perform any miracles there, except to lay His hands on a few of the sick and heal them.
MRK	6	6	저희의 믿지 않음을 이상히 여기셨더라 이에 모든 촌에 두루 다니시며 가르치시더라	And he marvelled because of their unbelief. And he went round about the villages, teaching.	And He was amazed at their unbelief. And He went around from village to village, teaching the people.
MRK	6	7	열두 제자를 부르사 둘씩 둘씩 보내시며 더러운 귀신을 제어하는 권세를 주시고	And he called unto him the twelve, and began to send them forth by two and two; and gave them power over unclean spirits;	Then Jesus called the Twelve to Him and began to send them out two by two, giving them authority over unclean spirits.
MRK	6	8	명하시되 여행을 위하여 지팡이 외에는 양식이나 주머니나 전대의 돈이나 아무 것도 가지지 말며	And commanded them that they should take nothing for their journey, save a staff only; no scrip, no bread, no money in their purse:	He instructed them to take nothing but a staff for the journey—no bread, no bag, no money in their belts—
MRK	6	9	신만 신고 두 벌 옷도 입지 말라 하시고	But be shod with sandals; and not put on two coats.	and to wear sandals, but not a second tunic.
MRK	6	10	또 가라사대 어디서든지 뉘 집에 들어가거든 그 곳을 떠나기까지 거기 유하라	And he said unto them, In what place soever ye enter into an house, there abide till ye depart from that place.	And He told them, “When you enter a house, stay there until you leave that area.
MRK	6	11	어느 곳에서든지 너희를 영접지 아니하고 너희 말을 듣지도 아니하거든 거기서 나갈 때에 발 아래 먼지를 떨어버려 저희에게 증거를 삼으라 하시니	And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you, when ye depart thence, shake off the dust under your feet for a testimony against them. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city.	If anyone will not welcome you or listen to you, shake the dust off your feet when you leave that place, as a testimony against them.”
MRK	6	12	제자들이 나가서 회개하라 전파하고	And they went out, and preached that men should repent.	So they set out and preached that the people should repent.
MRK	6	13	많은 귀신을 쫓아내며 많은 병인에게 기름을 발라 고치더라	And they cast out many devils, and anointed with oil many that were sick, and healed them.	They also drove out many demons and healed many of the sick, anointing them with oil.
MRK	6	14	이에 예수의 이름이 드러난지라 헤롯 왕이 듣고 가로되 이는 침례 요한이 죽은 자 가운데서 살아났도다 그러므로 이런 능력이 그 속에서 운동하느니라 하고	And king Herod heard of him; (for his name was spread abroad:) and he said, That John the Baptist was risen from the dead, and therefore mighty works do shew forth themselves in him.	Now King Herod heard about this, for Jesus’ name had become well known, and people were saying, “John the Baptist has risen from the dead! That is why miraculous powers are at work in him.”
MRK	6	15	어떤 이는 이가 엘리야라 하고 또 어떤이는 이가 선지자니 옛 선지자 중의 하나와 같다 하되	Others said, That it is Elias. And others said, That it is a prophet, or as one of the prophets.	Others were saying, “He is Elijah,” and still others, “He is a prophet, like one of the prophets of old.”
MRK	6	16	헤롯은 듣고 가로되 내가 목 베인 요한 그가 살아났다 하더라	But when Herod heard thereof, he said, It is John, whom I beheaded: he is risen from the dead.	But when Herod heard this, he said, “John, whom I beheaded, has risen from the dead!”
MRK	6	17	전에 헤롯이 자기가 동생 빌립의 아내 헤로디아에게 장가 든고로 이 여자를 위하여 사람을 보내어 요한을 잡아 옥에 가두었으니	For Herod himself had sent forth and laid hold upon John, and bound him in prison for Herodias’ sake, his brother Philip’s wife: for he had married her.	For Herod himself had ordered that John be arrested and bound and imprisoned, on account of his brother Philip’s wife Herodias, whom Herod had married.
MRK	6	18	이는 요한이 헤롯에게 말하되 동생의 아내를 취한 것이 옳지 않다 하였음이라	For John had said unto Herod, It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother’s wife.	For John had been telling Herod, “It is not lawful for you to have your brother’s wife!”
MRK	6	19	헤로디아가 요한을 원수로 여겨 죽이고자 하였으되 하지 못한 것은	Therefore Herodias had a quarrel against him, and would have killed him; but she could not:	So Herodias held a grudge against John and wanted to kill him. But she had been unable,
MRK	6	20	헤롯이 요한을 의롭고 거룩한 사람으로 알고 두려워하여 보호하며 또 그의 말을 들을 때에 크게 번민을 느끼면서도 달게 들음이러라	For Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just man and an holy, and observed him; and when he heard him, he did many things, and heard him gladly.	because Herod feared John and protected him, knowing that he was a righteous and holy man. When he heard John’s words, he was greatly perplexed; yet he listened to him gladly.
MRK	6	21	마침 기회 좋은 날이 왔으니 곧 헤롯이 자기 생일에 대신들과 천부장들과 갈릴리의 귀인들로 더불어 잔치할새	And when a convenient day was come, that Herod on his birthday made a supper to his lords, high captains, and chief estates of Galilee;	On Herod’s birthday, her opportunity arose. Herod held a banquet for his nobles and military commanders and the leading men of Galilee.
MRK	6	22	헤로디아의 딸이 친히 들어와 춤을 추어 헤롯과 및 함께 앉은 자들을 기쁘게 한지라 왕이 그 여아에게 이르되 무엇이든지 너 원하는 것을 내게 구하라 내가 주리라 하고	And when the daughter of the said Herodias came in, and danced, and pleased Herod and them that sat with him, the king said unto the damsel, Ask of me whatsoever thou wilt, and I will give it thee.	When the daughter of Herodias came and danced, she pleased Herod and his guests, and the king said to the girl, “Ask me for whatever you wish, and I will give it to you.”
MRK	6	23	또 맹세하되 무엇이든지 네가 내게 구하면 내 나라의 절반까지라도 주리라 하거늘	And he sware unto her, Whatsoever thou shalt ask of me, I will give it thee, unto the half of my kingdom.	And he swore to her, “Whatever you ask of me, I will give you, up to half my kingdom!”
MRK	6	24	저가 나가서 그 어미에게 말하되 내가 무엇을 구하리이까 그 어미가 가로되 침례 요한의 머리를 구하라 하니	And she went forth, and said unto her mother, What shall I ask? And she said, The head of John the Baptist.	Then she went out and asked her mother, “What should I request?” And her mother answered, “The head of John the Baptist.”
MRK	6	25	저가 곧 왕에게 급히 들어가 구하여 가로되 침례 요한의 머리를 소반에 담아 곧 내게 주기를 원하옵나이다 한대	And she came in straightway with haste unto the king, and asked, saying, I will that thou give me by and by in a charger the head of John the Baptist.	At once the girl hurried back to the king with her request: “I want you to give me the head of John the Baptist on a platter immediately.”
MRK	6	26	왕이 심히 근심하나 자기의 맹세한 것과 그 앉은 자들을 인하여 저를 거절할 수 없는지라	And the king was exceeding sorry; yet for his oath’s sake, and for their sakes which sat with him, he would not reject her.	The king was consumed with sorrow, but because of his oaths and his guests, he did not want to refuse her.
MRK	6	27	왕이 곧 시위병 하나를 보내어 요한의 머리를 가져오라 명하니 그 사람이 나가 옥에서 요한을 목 베어	And immediately the king sent an executioner, and commanded his head to be brought: and he went and beheaded him in the prison,	So without delay, the king commanded that John’s head be brought in. He sent an executioner, who went and beheaded him in the prison.
MRK	6	28	그 머리를 소반에 담아다가 여아에게 주니 여아가 이것을 그 어미에게 주니라	And brought his head in a charger, and gave it to the damsel: and the damsel gave it to her mother.	The man brought John’s head on a platter and presented it to the girl, who gave it to her mother.
MRK	6	29	요한의 제자들이 듣고 와서 시체를 가져다가 장사하니라	And when his disciples heard of it, they came and took up his corpse, and laid it in a tomb.	When John’s disciples heard about this, they came and took his body and placed it in a tomb.
MRK	6	30	사도들이 예수께 모여 자기들의 행한 것과 가르친 것을 낱낱이 고하니	And the apostles gathered themselves together unto Jesus, and told him all things, both what they had done, and what they had taught.	Meanwhile, the apostles gathered around Jesus and brought Him news of all they had done and taught.
MRK	6	31	이르시되 너희는 따로 한적한 곳에 와서 잠간 쉬어라 하시니 이는 오고 가는 사람이 많아 음식 먹을 겨를도 없음이라	And he said unto them, Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and rest a while: for there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much as to eat.	And He said to them, “Come with Me privately to a solitary place, and let us rest for a while.” For many people were coming and going, and they did not even have time to eat.
MRK	6	32	이에 배를 타고 따로 한적한 곳에 갈새	And they departed into a desert place by ship privately.	So they went away in a boat by themselves to a solitary place.
MRK	6	33	그 가는 것을 보고 많은 사람이 저희인 줄 안지라 모든 고을로부터 도보로 그 곳에 달려와 저희보다 먼저 갔더라	And the people saw them departing, and many knew him, and ran afoot thither out of all cities, and outwent them, and came together unto him.	But many people saw them leaving and recognized them. They ran together on foot from all the towns and arrived before them.
MRK	6	34	예수께서 나오사 큰 무리를 보시고 그 목자 없는 양 같음을 인하여 불쌍히 여기사 이에 여러 가지로 가르치시더라	And Jesus, when he came out, saw much people, and was moved with compassion toward them, because they were as sheep not having a shepherd: and he began to teach them many things.	When Jesus stepped ashore and saw a large crowd, He had compassion on them, because they were like sheep without a shepherd. And He began to teach them many things.
MRK	6	35	때가 저물어가매 제자들이 예수께 나아와 여짜오되 이 곳은 빈 들이요 때도 저물어가니	And when the day was now far spent, his disciples came unto him, and said, This is a desert place, and now the time is far passed:	By now the hour was already late. So the disciples came to Jesus and said, “This is a desolate place, and the hour is already late.
MRK	6	36	무리를 보내어 두루 촌과 마을로 가서 무엇을 사 먹게 하옵소서	Send them away, that they may go into the country round about, and into the villages, and buy themselves bread: for they have nothing to eat.	Dismiss the crowd so they can go to the surrounding countryside and villages and buy themselves something to eat.”
MRK	6	37	대답하여 가라사대 너희가 먹을 것을 주라 하시니 여짜오되 우리가 가서 이백 데나리온의 떡을 사다 먹이리이까	He answered and said unto them, Give ye them to eat. And they say unto him, Shall we go and buy two hundred pennyworth of bread, and give them to eat?	But Jesus told them, “You give them something to eat.” They asked Him, “Should we go out and spend two hundred denarii to give all of them bread to eat?”
MRK	6	38	이르시되 너희에게 떡 몇 개나 있느냐 가서 보라 하시니 알아보고 가로되 떡 다섯 개와 물고기 두 마리가 있더이다 하거늘	He saith unto them, How many loaves have ye? go and see. And when they knew, they say, Five, and two fishes.	“Go and see how many loaves you have,” He told them. And after checking, they said, “Five—and two fish.”
MRK	6	39	제자들을 명하사 그 모든 사람으로 떼를 지어 푸른 잔디 위에 앉게 하시니	And he commanded them to make all sit down by companies upon the green grass.	Then Jesus directed them to have the people sit in groups on the green grass.
MRK	6	40	떼로 혹 백 씩 혹 오십 씩 앉은지라	And they sat down in ranks, by hundreds, and by fifties.	So they sat down in groups of hundreds and fifties.
MRK	6	41	예수께서 떡 다섯 개와 물고기 두 마리를 가지사 하늘을 우러러 축사하시고 떡을 떼어 제자들에게 주어 사람들 앞에 놓게 하시고 또 물고기 두 마리도 모든 사람에게 나누어 주시매	And when he had taken the five loaves and the two fishes, he looked up to heaven, and blessed, and brake the loaves, and gave them to his disciples to set before them; and the two fishes divided he among them all.	Taking the five loaves and the two fish and looking up to heaven, Jesus spoke a blessing and broke the loaves. Then He gave them to His disciples to set before the people. And He divided the two fish among them all.
MRK	6	42	다 배불리 먹고	And they did all eat, and were filled.	They all ate and were satisfied,
MRK	6	43	남은 떡 조각과 물고기를 열두 바구니에 차게 거두었으며	And they took up twelve baskets full of the fragments, and of the fishes.	and the disciples picked up twelve basketfuls of broken pieces of bread and fish.
MRK	6	44	떡을 먹은 남자가 오천 명이었더라	And they that did eat of the loaves were about five thousand men.	And there were five thousand men who had eaten the loaves.
MRK	6	45	예수께서 즉시 제자들을 재촉하사 자기가 무리를 보내는 동안에 배타고 앞서 건너편 벳새다로 가게 하시고	And straightway he constrained his disciples to get into the ship, and to go to the other side before unto Bethsaida, while he sent away the people.	Immediately Jesus made His disciples get into the boat and go on ahead of Him to Bethsaida, while He dismissed the crowd.
MRK	6	46	무리를 작별하신 후에 기도하러 산으로 가시다	And when he had sent them away, he departed into a mountain to pray.	After bidding them farewell, He went up on the mountain to pray.
MRK	6	47	저물매 배는 바다 가운데 있고 예수는 홀로 뭍에 계시다가	And when even was come, the ship was in the midst of the sea, and he alone on the land.	When evening came, the boat was in the middle of the sea, and Jesus was alone on land.
MRK	6	48	바람이 거스리므로 제자들의 괴로이 노 젓는 것을 보시고 밤 사경 즈음에 바다 위로 걸어서 저희에게 오사 지나가려고 하시매	And he saw them toiling in rowing; for the wind was contrary unto them: and about the fourth watch of the night he cometh unto them, walking upon the sea, and would have passed by them.	He could see that the disciples were straining to row, because the wind was against them. About the fourth watch of the night, Jesus went out to them, walking on the sea. He intended to pass by them,
MRK	6	49	제자들이 그의 바다 위로 걸어 오심을 보고 유령인가 하여 소리지르니	But when they saw him walking upon the sea, they supposed it had been a spirit, and cried out:	but when they saw Him walking on the sea, they cried out, thinking He was a ghost—
MRK	6	50	저희가 다 예수를 보고 놀람이라 이에 예수께서 곧 더불어 말씀하여 가라사대 안심하라 내니 두려워 말라 하시고	For they all saw him, and were troubled. And immediately he talked with them, and saith unto them, Be of good cheer: it is I; be not afraid.	for they all saw Him and were terrified. But Jesus spoke up at once: “Take courage! It is I. Do not be afraid.”
MRK	6	51	배에 올라 저희에게 가시니 바람이 그치는지라 제자들이 마음에 심히 놀라니	And he went up unto them into the ship; and the wind ceased: and they were sore amazed in themselves beyond measure, and wondered.	Then He climbed into the boat with them, and the wind died down. And the disciples were utterly astounded,
MRK	6	52	이는 저희가 그 떡 떼시던 일을 깨닫지 못하고 도리어 그 마음이 둔하여졌음이러라	For they considered not the miracle of the loaves: for their heart was hardened.	for they had not understood about the loaves, but their hearts had been hardened.
MRK	6	53	건너가 게네사렛 땅에 이르러 대고	And when they had passed over, they came into the land of Gennesaret, and drew to the shore.	When they had crossed over, they landed at Gennesaret and moored the boat.
MRK	6	54	배에서 내리니 사람들이 곧 예수신 줄을 알고	And when they were come out of the ship, straightway they knew him,	As soon as they got out of the boat, the people recognized Jesus
MRK	6	55	그 온 지방으로 달려 돌아다니며 예수께서 어디 계시단 말을 듣는 대로 병든 자를 침상채로 메고 나아오니	And ran through that whole region round about, and began to carry about in beds those that were sick, where they heard he was.	and ran through that whole region, carrying the sick on mats to wherever they heard He was.
MRK	6	56	아무데나 예수께서 들어가시는 마을이나 도시나 촌에서 병자를 시장에 두고 예수의 옷 가에라도 손을 대게 하시기를 간구하니 손을 대는 자는 다 성함을 얻으니라	And whithersoever he entered, into villages, or cities, or country, they laid the sick in the streets, and besought him that they might touch if it were but the border of his garment: and as many as touched him were made whole.	And wherever He went—villages and towns and countrysides—they laid the sick in the marketplaces and begged Him just to let them touch the fringe of His cloak. And all who touched Him were healed.
MRK	7	1	바리새인들과 또 서기관 중 몇이 예루살렘에서 와서 예수께 모였다가	Then came together unto him the Pharisees, and certain of the scribes, which came from Jerusalem.	Then the Pharisees and some of the scribes who had come from Jerusalem gathered around Jesus,
MRK	7	2	그의 제자 중 몇 사람의 부정한 손 곧 씻지 아니한 손으로 떡 먹는 것을 보았더라	And when they saw some of his disciples eat bread with defiled, that is to say, with unwashen, hands, they found fault.	and they saw some of His disciples eating with hands that were defiled—that is, unwashed.
MRK	7	3	(바리새인들과 모든 유대인들이 장로들의 유전을 지키어 손을 부지런히 씻지 않으면 먹지 아니하며	For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they wash their hands oft, eat not, holding the tradition of the elders.	Now in holding to the tradition of the elders, the Pharisees and all the Jews do not eat until they wash their hands ceremonially.
MRK	7	4	또 시장에서 돌아와서는 물을 뿌리지 않으면 먹지 아니하며 그 외에도 여러가지를 지키어 오는 것이 있으니 잔과 주발과 놋그릇을 씻음이러라)	And when they come from the market, except they wash, they eat not. And many other things there be, which they have received to hold, as the washing of cups, and pots, brasen vessels, and of tables.	And on returning from the market, they do not eat unless they wash. And there are many other traditions for them to observe, including the washing of cups, pitchers, kettles, and couches for dining.
MRK	7	5	이에 바리새인들과 서기관들이 예수께 묻되 어찌하여 당신의 제자들은 장로들의 유전을 준행치 아니하고 부정한 손으로 떡을 먹나이까	Then the Pharisees and scribes asked him, Why walk not thy disciples according to the tradition of the elders, but eat bread with unwashen hands?	So the Pharisees and scribes questioned Jesus: “Why do Your disciples not walk according to the tradition of the elders? Instead, they eat with defiled hands.”
MRK	7	6	가라사대 이사야가 너희 외식하는 자에 대하여 잘 예언하였도다 기록하였으되 이 백성이 입술로는 나를 존경하되 마음은 내게서 멀도다	He answered and said unto them, Well hath Esaias prophesied of you hypocrites, as it is written, This people honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.	Jesus answered them, “Isaiah prophesied correctly about you hypocrites, as it is written: ‘These people honor Me with their lips, but their hearts are far from Me.
MRK	7	7	사람의 계명으로 교훈을 삼아 가르치니 나를 헛되이 경배하는도다 하였느니라	Howbeit in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.	They worship Me in vain; they teach as doctrine the precepts of men.’
MRK	7	8	너희가 하나님의 계명은 버리고 사람의 유전을 지키느니라	For laying aside the commandment of God, ye hold the tradition of men, as the washing of pots and cups: and many other such like things ye do.	You have disregarded the commandment of God to keep the tradition of men.”
MRK	7	9	또 가라사대 너희가 너희 유전을 지키려고 하나님의 계명을 잘 저버리는도다	And he said unto them, Full well ye reject the commandment of God, that ye may keep your own tradition.	He went on to say, “You neatly set aside the command of God to maintain your own tradition.
MRK	7	10	모세는 네 부모를 공경하라 하고 또 아비나 어미를 훼방하는 자는 반드시 죽으리라 하였거늘	For Moses said, Honour thy father and thy mother; and, Whoso curseth father or mother, let him die the death:	For Moses said, ‘Honor your father and your mother’ and ‘Anyone who curses his father or mother must be put to death.’
MRK	7	11	너희는 가로되 사람이 아비에게나 어미에게나 말하기를 내가 드려 유익하게 할 것이 고르반 곧 하나님께 드림이 되었다고 하기만 하면 그만이라 하고	But ye say, If a man shall say to his father or mother, It is Corban, that is to say, a gift, by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me; he shall be free.	But you say that if a man says to his father or mother, ‘Whatever you would have received from me is Corban’ (that is, a gift devoted to God),
MRK	7	12	제 아비나 어미에게 다시 아무 것이라도 하여 드리기를 허하지 아니하여	And ye suffer him no more to do ought for his father or his mother;	he is no longer permitted to do anything for his father or mother.
MRK	7	13	너희의 전한 유전으로 하나님의 말씀을 폐하며 또 이같은 일을 많이 행하느니라 하시고	Making the word of God of none effect through your tradition, which ye have delivered: and many such like things do ye.	Thus you nullify the word of God by the tradition you have handed down. And you do so in many such matters.”
MRK	7	14	무리를 다시 불러 이르시되 너희는 다 내 말을 듣고 깨달으라	And when he had called all the people unto him, he said unto them, Hearken unto me every one of you, and understand:	Once again Jesus called the crowd to Him and said, “All of you, listen to Me and understand:
MRK	7	15	무엇이든지 밖에서 사람에게로 들어가는 것은 능히 사람을 더럽게 하지 못하되	There is nothing from without a man, that entering into him can defile him: but the things which come out of him, those are they that defile the man.	Nothing that enters a man from the outside can defile him; but the things that come out of a man, these are what defile him.”
MRK	7	16	사람 안에서 나오는 것이 사람을 더럽게 하는 것이니라 하시고	If any man have ears to hear, let him hear.	
MRK	7	17	무리를 떠나 집으로 들어가시니 제자들이 그 비유를 묻자온대	And when he was entered into the house from the people, his disciples asked him concerning the parable.	After Jesus had left the crowd and gone into the house, His disciples inquired about the parable.
MRK	7	18	예수께서 이르시되 너희도 이렇게 깨달음이 없느냐 무엇이든지 밖에서 들어가는 것이 능히 사람을 더럽게 하지 못함을 알지 못하느냐	And he saith unto them, Are ye so without understanding also? Do ye not perceive, that whatsoever thing from without entereth into the man, it cannot defile him;	“Are you still so dull?” He asked. “Do you not understand? Nothing that enters a man from the outside can defile him,
MRK	7	19	이는 마음에 들어가지 아니하고 배에 들어가 뒤로 나감이니라 하심으로 모든 식물을 깨끗하다 하셨느니라	Because it entereth not into his heart, but into the belly, and goeth out into the draught, purging all meats?	because it does not enter his heart, but it goes into the stomach and then is eliminated.” (Thus all foods are clean.)
MRK	7	20	또 가라사대 사람에게서 나오는 그것이 사람을 더럽게 하느니라	And he said, That which cometh out of the man, that defileth the man.	He continued: “What comes out of a man, that is what defiles him.
MRK	7	21	속에서 곧 사람의 마음에서 나오는 것은 악한 생각 곧 음란과 도적질과 살인과	For from within, out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders,	For from within the hearts of men come evil thoughts, sexual immorality, theft, murder, adultery,
MRK	7	22	간음과 탐욕과 악독과 속임과 음탕과 흘기는 눈과 훼방과 교만과 광패니	Thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness:	greed, wickedness, deceit, debauchery, envy, slander, arrogance, and foolishness.
MRK	7	23	이 모든 악한 것이 다 속에서 나와서 사람을 더럽게 하느니라	All these evil things come from within, and defile the man.	All these evils come from within, and these are what defile a man.”
MRK	7	24	예수께서 일어나사 거기를 떠나 두로 지경으로 가서 한 집에 들어가 아무도 모르게 하시려하나 숨길 수 없더라	And from thence he arose, and went into the borders of Tyre and Sidon, and entered into an house, and would have no man know it: but he could not be hid.	Jesus left that place and went to the region of Tyre. Not wanting anyone to know He was there, He entered a house, but was unable to escape their notice.
MRK	7	25	이에 더러운 귀신 들린 어린 딸을 둔 한 여자가 예수의 소문을 듣고 곧 와서 그 발 아래 엎드리니	For a certain woman, whose young daughter had an unclean spirit, heard of him, and came and fell at his feet:	Instead, a woman whose little daughter had an unclean spirit soon heard about Jesus, and she came and fell at His feet.
MRK	7	26	그 여자는 헬라인이요 수로보니게 족속이라 자기 딸에게서 귀신 쫓아 주시기를 간구하거늘	The woman was a Greek, a Syrophenician by nation; and she besought him that he would cast forth the devil out of her daughter.	Now she was a Greek woman of Syrophoenician origin, and she kept asking Jesus to drive the demon out of her daughter.
MRK	7	27	예수께서 이르시되 자녀로 먼저 배불리 먹게 할지니 자녀의 떡을 취하여 개들에게 던짐이 마땅치 아니하니라	But Jesus said unto her, Let the children first be filled: for it is not meet to take the children’s bread, and to cast it unto the dogs.	“First let the children have their fill,” He said. “For it is not right to take the children’s bread and toss it to the dogs.”
MRK	7	28	여자가 대답하여 가로되 주여 옳소이다마는 상 아래 개들도 아이들의 먹던 부스러기를 먹나이다	And she answered and said unto him, Yes, Lord: yet the dogs under the table eat of the children’s crumbs.	“Yes, Lord,” she replied, “even the dogs under the table eat the children’s crumbs.”
MRK	7	29	예수께서 가라사대 이 말을 하였으니 돌아가라 귀신이 네 딸에게서 나갔느니라 하시매	And he said unto her, For this saying go thy way; the devil is gone out of thy daughter.	Then Jesus told her, “Because of this answer, you may go. The demon has left your daughter.”
MRK	7	30	여자가 집에 돌아가 본즉 아이가 침상에 누웠고 귀신이 나갔더라	And when she was come to her house, she found the devil gone out, and her daughter laid upon the bed.	And she went home and found her child lying on the bed, and the demon was gone.
MRK	7	31	예수께서 다시 두로 지경에서 나와 시돈을 지나고 데가볼리 지경을 통과하여 갈릴리 호수에 이르시매	And again, departing from the coasts of Tyre and Sidon, he came unto the sea of Galilee, through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis.	Then Jesus left the region of Tyre and went through Sidon to the Sea of Galilee and into the region of the Decapolis.
MRK	7	32	사람들이 귀먹고 어눌한 자를 데리고 예수께 나아와 안수하여 주시기를 간구하거늘	And they bring unto him one that was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech; and they beseech him to put his hand upon him.	Some people brought to Him a man who was deaf and hardly able to speak, and they begged Jesus to place His hand on him.
MRK	7	33	예수께서 그 사람을 따로 데리고 무리를 떠나사 손가락을 그의 양 귀에 넣고 침뱉아 그의 혀에 손을 대시며	And he took him aside from the multitude, and put his fingers into his ears, and he spit, and touched his tongue;	So Jesus took him aside privately, away from the crowd, and put His fingers into the man’s ears. Then He spit and touched the man’s tongue.
MRK	7	34	하늘을 우러러 탄식하시며 그에게 이르시되 에바다 하시니 이는 열리라는 뜻이라	And looking up to heaven, he sighed, and saith unto him, Ephphatha, that is, Be opened.	And looking up to heaven, He sighed deeply and said to him, “Ephphatha!” (which means, “Be opened!”).
MRK	7	35	그의 귀가 열리고 혀의 맺힌 것이 곧 풀려 말이 분명하더라	And straightway his ears were opened, and the string of his tongue was loosed, and he spake plain.	Immediately the man’s ears were opened and his tongue was released, and he began to speak plainly.
MRK	7	36	예수께서 저희에게 경계하사 아무에게라도 이르지 말라 하시되 경계하실수록 저희가 더욱 널리 전파하니	And he charged them that they should tell no man: but the more he charged them, so much the more a great deal they published it;	Jesus ordered them not to tell anyone. But the more He ordered them, the more widely they proclaimed it.
MRK	7	37	사람들이 심히 놀라 가로되 그가 다 잘 하였도다 귀머거리도 듣게 하고 벙어리도 말하게 한다 하니라	And were beyond measure astonished, saying, He hath done all things well: he maketh both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak.	The people were utterly astonished and said, “He has done all things well! He makes even the deaf hear and the mute speak!”
MRK	8	1	그 즈음에 또 큰 무리가 있어 먹을 것이 없는지라 예수께서 제자들을 불러 이르시되	In those days the multitude being very great, and having nothing to eat, Jesus called his disciples unto him, and saith unto them,	In those days the crowd once again became very large, and they had nothing to eat. Jesus called the disciples to Him and said,
MRK	8	2	내가 무리를 불쌍히 여기노라 저희가 나와 함께 있은지 이미 사흘이매 먹을 것이 없도다	I have compassion on the multitude, because they have now been with me three days, and have nothing to eat:	“I have compassion for this crowd, because they have already been with Me three days and have nothing to eat.
MRK	8	3	만일 내가 저희를 굶겨 집으로 보내면 길에서 기진하리라 그 중에는 멀리서 온 사람도 있느니라	And if I send them away fasting to their own houses, they will faint by the way: for divers of them came from far.	If I send them home hungry, they will faint along the way. For some of them have come a great distance.”
MRK	8	4	제자들이 대답하되 이 광야에서 어디서 떡을 얻어 이 사람들로 배부르게 할 수 있으리이까	And his disciples answered him, From whence can a man satisfy these men with bread here in the wilderness?	His disciples replied, “Where in this desolate place could anyone find enough bread to feed all these people?”
MRK	8	5	예수께서 물으시되 너희에게 떡 몇 개나 있느냐 가로되 일곱이로소이다 하거늘	And he asked them, How many loaves have ye? And they said, Seven.	“How many loaves do you have?” Jesus asked. “Seven,” they replied.
MRK	8	6	예수께서 무리를 명하사 땅에 앉게 하시고 떡 일곱 개를 가지사 축사하시고 떼어 제자들에게 주어 그 앞에 놓게 하시니 제자들이 무리 앞에 놓더라	And he commanded the people to sit down on the ground: and he took the seven loaves, and gave thanks, and brake, and gave to his disciples to set before them; and they did set them before the people.	And He instructed the crowd to sit down on the ground. Then He took the seven loaves, gave thanks and broke them, and gave them to His disciples to set before the people. And they distributed them to the crowd.
MRK	8	7	또 작은 생선 두어 마리가 있는지라 이에 축복하시고 명하사 이것도 그 앞에 놓게 하시니	And they had a few small fishes: and he blessed, and commanded to set them also before them.	They also had a few small fish, and Jesus blessed them and ordered that these be set before them as well.
MRK	8	8	배불리 먹고 남은 조각 일곱 광주리를 거두었으며	So they did eat, and were filled: and they took up of the broken meat that was left seven baskets.	The people ate and were satisfied, and the disciples picked up seven basketfuls of broken pieces that were left over.
MRK	8	9	사람은 약 사천 명이었더라 예수께서 저희를 흩어 보내시고	And they that had eaten were about four thousand: and he sent them away.	And about four thousand men were present. As soon as Jesus had dismissed the crowd,
MRK	8	10	곧 제자들과 함께 배에 오르사 달마누다 지방으로 가시니라	And straightway he entered into a ship with his disciples, and came into the parts of Dalmanutha.	He got into the boat with His disciples and went to the district of Dalmanutha.
MRK	8	11	바리새인들이 나와서 예수께 힐난하며 그를 시험하여 하늘로서 오는 표적을 구하거늘	And the Pharisees came forth, and began to question with him, seeking of him a sign from heaven, tempting him.	Then the Pharisees came and began to argue with Jesus, testing Him by demanding from Him a sign from heaven.
MRK	8	12	예수께서 마음 속에 깊이 탄식하시며 가라사대 어찌하여 이 세대가 표적을 구하느냐 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 이 세대에게 표적을 주시지 아니하리라 하시고	And he sighed deeply in his spirit, and saith, Why doth this generation seek after a sign? verily I say unto you, There shall no sign be given unto this generation.	Jesus sighed deeply in His spirit and said, “Why does this generation demand a sign? Truly I tell you, no sign will be given to this generation.”
MRK	8	13	저희를 떠나 다시 배에 올라 건너편으로 가시니라	And he left them, and entering into the ship again departed to the other side.	And He left them, got back into the boat, and crossed to the other side.
MRK	8	14	제자들이 떡 가져오기를 잊었으매 배에 떡 한 개 밖에 저희에게 없더라	Now the disciples had forgotten to take bread, neither had they in the ship with them more than one loaf.	Now the disciples had forgotten to take bread, except for one loaf they had with them in the boat.
MRK	8	15	예수께서 경계하여 가라사대 삼가 바리새인들의 누룩과 헤롯의 누룩을 주의하라 하신대	And he charged them, saying, Take heed, beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the leaven of Herod.	“Watch out!” He cautioned them. “Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of Herod.”
MRK	8	16	제자들이 서로 의논하기를 이는 우리에게 떡이 없음이로다 하거늘	And they reasoned among themselves, saying, It is because we have no bread.	So they began to discuss with one another the fact that they had no bread.
MRK	8	17	예수께서 아시고 이르시되 너희가 어찌 떡이 없음으로 의논하느냐 아직도 알지 못하며 깨닫지 못하느냐 너희 마음이 둔하냐	And when Jesus knew it, he saith unto them, Why reason ye, because ye have no bread? perceive ye not yet, neither understand? have ye your heart yet hardened?	Aware of their conversation, Jesus asked them, “Why are you debating about having no bread? Do you still not see or understand? Do you have such hard hearts?
MRK	8	18	너희가 눈이 있어도 보지 못하며 귀가 있어도 듣지 못하느냐 또 기억지 못하느냐	Having eyes, see ye not? and having ears, hear ye not? and do ye not remember?	‘Having eyes, do you not see? And having ears, do you not hear?’ And do you not remember?
MRK	8	19	내가 떡 다섯 개를 오천 명에게 떼어 줄 때에 조각 몇 바구니를 거두었더냐 가로되 열둘이니이다	When I brake the five loaves among five thousand, how many baskets full of fragments took ye up? They say unto him, Twelve.	When I broke the five loaves for the five thousand, how many basketfuls of broken pieces did you collect?” “Twelve,” they answered.
MRK	8	20	또 일곱 개를 사천 명에게 떼어줄 때에 조각 몇 광주리를 거두었더냐 가로되 일곱이니이다	And when the seven among four thousand, how many baskets full of fragments took ye up? And they said, Seven.	“And when I broke the seven loaves for the four thousand, how many basketfuls of broken pieces did you collect?” “Seven,” they said.
MRK	8	21	가라사대 아직도 깨닫지 못하느냐 하시니라	And he said unto them, How is it that ye do not understand?	Then He asked them, “Do you still not understand?”
MRK	8	22	벳새다에 이르매 사람들이 소경 하나를 데리고 예수께 나아와 손 대시기를 구하거늘	And he cometh to Bethsaida; and they bring a blind man unto him, and besought him to touch him.	When they arrived at Bethsaida, some people brought a blind man and begged Jesus to touch him.
MRK	8	23	예수께서 소경의 손을 붙드시고 마을 밖으로 데리고 나가사 눈에 침을 뱉으시며 그에게 안수하시고 무엇이 보이느냐 물으시니	And he took the blind man by the hand, and led him out of the town; and when he had spit on his eyes, and put his hands upon him, he asked him if he saw ought.	So He took the blind man by the hand and led him out of the village. Then He spit on the man’s eyes and placed His hands on him. “Can you see anything?” He asked.
MRK	8	24	우러러보며 가로되 사람들이 보이나이다 나무 같은 것들의 걸어가는 것을 보나이다 하거늘	And he looked up, and said, I see men as trees, walking.	The man looked up and said, “I can see the people, but they look like trees walking around.”
MRK	8	25	이에 그 눈에 다시 안수하시매 저가 주목하여 보더니 나아서 만물을 밝히 보는지라	After that he put his hands again upon his eyes, and made him look up: and he was restored, and saw every man clearly.	Once again Jesus placed His hands on the man’s eyes, and when he opened them his sight was restored, and he could see everything clearly.
MRK	8	26	예수께서 그 사람을 집으로 보내시며 가라사대 마을에도 들어가지 말라 하시니라	And he sent him away to his house, saying, Neither go into the town, nor tell it to any in the town.	Jesus sent him home and said, “Do not go back into the village.”
MRK	8	27	예수와 제자들이 가이사랴 빌립보 여러 마을로 나가실새 노중에서 제자들에게 물어 가라사대 사람들이 나를 누구라고 하느냐	And Jesus went out, and his disciples, into the towns of Cesarea Philippi: and by the way he asked his disciples, saying unto them, Whom do men say that I am?	Then Jesus and His disciples went on to the villages around Caesarea Philippi. On the way, He questioned His disciples: “Who do people say I am?”
MRK	8	28	여짜와 가로되 침례 요한이라 하고 더러는 엘리야, 더러는 선지자 중의 하나라 하나이다	And they answered, John the Baptist: but some say, Elias; and others, One of the prophets.	They replied, “Some say John the Baptist; others say Elijah; and still others, one of the prophets.”
MRK	8	29	또 물으시되 너희는 나를 누구라 하느냐 베드로가 대답하여 가로되 주는 그리스도시니이다 하매	And he saith unto them, But whom say ye that I am? And Peter answereth and saith unto him, Thou art the Christ.	“But what about you?” Jesus asked. “Who do you say I am?” Peter answered, “You are the Christ.”
MRK	8	30	이에 자기의 일을 아무에게도 말하지 말라 경계하시고	And he charged them that they should tell no man of him.	And Jesus warned them not to tell anyone about Him.
MRK	8	31	인자가 많은 고난을 받고 장로들과 대제사장들과 서기관들에게 버린바 되어 죽임을 당하고 사흘만에 살아나야 할 것을 비로소 저희에게 가르치시되	And he began to teach them, that the Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected of the elders, and of the chief priests, and scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise again.	Then He began to teach them that the Son of Man must suffer many things and be rejected by the elders, chief priests, and scribes, and that He must be killed and after three days rise again.
MRK	8	32	드러내놓고 이 말씀을 하시니 베드로가 예수를 붙들고 간하매	And he spake that saying openly. And Peter took him, and began to rebuke him.	He spoke this message quite frankly, and Peter took Him aside and began to rebuke Him.
MRK	8	33	예수께서 돌이키사 제자들을 보시며 베드로를 꾸짖어 가라사대 사단아 내 뒤로 물러가라 네가 하나님의 일을 생각지 아니하고 도리어 사람의 일을 생각하는도다 하시고	But when he had turned about and looked on his disciples, he rebuked Peter, saying, Get thee behind me, Satan: for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but the things that be of men.	But Jesus, turning and looking at His disciples, rebuked Peter and said, “Get behind Me, Satan! For you do not have in mind the things of God, but the things of men.”
MRK	8	34	무리와 제자들을 불러 이르시되 아무든지 나를 따라 오려거든 자기를 부인하고 자기 십자가를 지고 나를 좇을 것이니라	And when he had called the people unto him with his disciples also, he said unto them, Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.	Then Jesus called the crowd to Him along with His disciples, and He told them, “If anyone wants to come after Me, he must deny himself and take up his cross and follow Me.
MRK	8	35	누구든지 제 목숨을 구원코자 하면 잃을 것이요 누구든지 나와 복음을 위하여 제 목숨을 잃으면 구원하리라	For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the gospel’s, the same shall save it.	For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for My sake and for the gospel will save it.
MRK	8	36	사람이 만일 온 천하를 얻고도 제 목숨을 잃으면 무엇이 유익하리요	For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?	What does it profit a man to gain the whole world, yet forfeit his soul?
MRK	8	37	사람이 무엇을 주고 제 목숨을 바꾸겠느냐	Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?	Or what can a man give in exchange for his soul?
MRK	8	38	누구든지 이 음란하고 죄 많은 세대에서 나와 내 말을 부끄러워하면 인자도 아버지의 영광으로 거룩한 천사들과 함께 올 때에 그 사람을 부끄러워하리라	Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father with the holy angels.	If anyone is ashamed of Me and My words in this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of Man will also be ashamed of him when He comes in His Father’s glory with the holy angels.”
MRK	9	1	또 저희에게 이르시되 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 여기 섰는 사람 중에 죽기 전에 하나님의 나라가 권능으로 임하는 것을 볼 자들도 있느니라 하시니라	And he said unto them, Verily I say unto you, That there be some of them that stand here, which shall not taste of death, till they have seen the kingdom of God come with power.	Then Jesus said to them, “Truly I tell you, there are some standing here who will not taste death before they see the kingdom of God arrive with power.”
MRK	9	2	엿새 후에 예수께서 베드로와 야고보와 요한을 데리시고 따로 높은 산에 올라가셨더니 저희 앞에서 변형되사	And after six days Jesus taketh with him Peter, and James, and John, and leadeth them up into an high mountain apart by themselves: and he was transfigured before them.	After six days Jesus took with Him Peter, James, and John, and led them up a high mountain by themselves. There He was transfigured before them.
MRK	9	3	그 옷이 광채가 나며 세상에서 빨래하는 자가 그렇게 희게 할 수 없을 만큼 심히 희어졌더라	And his raiment became shining, exceeding white as snow; so as no fuller on earth can white them.	His clothes became radiantly white, brighter than any launderer on earth could bleach them.
MRK	9	4	이에 엘리야가 모세와 함께 저희에게 나타나 예수로 더불어 말씀하거늘	And there appeared unto them Elias with Moses: and they were talking with Jesus.	And Elijah and Moses appeared before them, talking with Jesus.
MRK	9	5	베드로가 예수께 고하되 랍비여 우리가 여기 있는 것이 좋사오니 우리가 초막 셋을 짓되 하나는 주를 위하여, 하나는 모세를 위하여, 하나는 엘리야를 위하여 하사이다 하니	And Peter answered and said to Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here: and let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias.	Peter said to Jesus, “Rabbi, it is good for us to be here. Let us put up three shelters—one for You, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.”
MRK	9	6	이는 저희가 심히 무서워하므로 저가 무슨 말을 할는지 알지 못함이더라	For he wist not what to say; for they were sore afraid.	For they were all so terrified that Peter did not know what else to say.
MRK	9	7	마침 구름이 와서 저희를 덮으며 구름 속에서 소리가 나되 이는 내 사랑하는 아들이니 너희는 저의 말을 들으라 하는지라	And there was a cloud that overshadowed them: and a voice came out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son: hear him.	Then a cloud appeared and enveloped them, and a voice came from the cloud: “This is My beloved Son. Listen to Him!”
MRK	9	8	문득 둘러 보니 아무도 보이지 아니하고 오직 예수와 자기들뿐이었더라	And suddenly, when they had looked round about, they saw no man any more, save Jesus only with themselves.	Suddenly, when they looked around, they saw no one with them except Jesus.
MRK	9	9	저희가 산에서 내려올 때에 예수께서 경계하시되 인자가 죽은 자 가운데서 살아날 때까지는 본 것을 아무에게도 이르지 말라 하시니	And as they came down from the mountain, he charged them that they should tell no man what things they had seen, till the Son of man were risen from the dead.	As they were coming down the mountain, Jesus admonished them not to tell anyone what they had seen until the Son of Man had risen from the dead.
MRK	9	10	저희가 이 말씀을 마음에 두며 서로 문의하되 죽은 자 가운데서 살아나는 것이 무엇일까 하고	And they kept that saying with themselves, questioning one with another what the rising from the dead should mean.	So they kept this matter to themselves, discussing what it meant to rise from the dead.
MRK	9	11	이에 예수께 묻자와 가로되 어찌하여 서기관들이 엘리야가 먼저 와야 하리라 하나이까	And they asked him, saying, Why say the scribes that Elias must first come?	And they asked Jesus, “Why do the scribes say that Elijah must come first?”
MRK	9	12	가라사대 엘리야가 과연 먼저 와서 모든 것을 회복하거니와 어찌 인자에 대하여 기록하기를 많은 고난을 받고 멸시를 당하리라 하였느냐	And he answered and told them, Elias verily cometh first, and restoreth all things; and how it is written of the Son of man, that he must suffer many things, and be set at nought.	He replied, “Elijah does indeed come first, and he restores all things. Why then is it written that the Son of Man must suffer many things and be rejected?
MRK	9	13	그러나 내가 너희에게 이르노니 엘리야가 왔으되 기록된 바와 같이 사람들이 임의로 대우하였느니라 하시니라	But I say unto you, That Elias is indeed come, and they have done unto him whatsoever they listed, as it is written of him.	But I tell you that Elijah has indeed come, and they have done to him whatever they wished, just as it is written about him.”
MRK	9	14	저희가 이에 제자들에게 와서 보니 큰 무리가 둘렀고 서기관들이 더불어 변론하더니	And when he came to his disciples, he saw a great multitude about them, and the scribes questioning with them.	When they returned to the other disciples, they saw a large crowd around them, and scribes arguing with them.
MRK	9	15	온 무리가 곧 예수를 보고 심히 놀라며 달려와 문안하거늘	And straightway all the people, when they beheld him, were greatly amazed, and running to him saluted him.	As soon as all the people saw Jesus, they were filled with awe and ran to greet Him.
MRK	9	16	예수께서 물으시되 너희가 무엇을 저희와 변론하느냐	And he asked the scribes, What question ye with them?	“What are you disputing with them?” He asked.
MRK	9	17	무리 중에 하나가 대답하되 선생님 벙어리 귀신 들린 내 아들을 선생님께 데려왔나이다	And one of the multitude answered and said, Master, I have brought unto thee my son, which hath a dumb spirit;	Someone in the crowd replied, “Teacher, I brought You my son, who has a spirit that makes him mute.
MRK	9	18	귀신이 어디서든지 저를 잡으면 거꾸러져 거품을 흘리며 이를 갈며 그리고 파리하여 가는지라 내가 선생의 제자들에게 내어쫓아 달라 하였으나 저희가 능히 하지 못하더이다	And wheresoever he taketh him, he teareth him: and he foameth, and gnasheth with his teeth, and pineth away: and I spake to thy disciples that they should cast him out; and they could not.	Whenever it seizes him, it throws him to the ground. He foams at the mouth, gnashes his teeth, and becomes rigid. I asked Your disciples to drive it out, but they were unable.”
MRK	9	19	대답하여 가라사대 믿음이 없는 세대여 내가 얼마나 너희와 함께 있으며 얼마나 너희를 참으리요 그를 내게로 데려오라 하시매	He answereth him, and saith, O faithless generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you? bring him unto me.	“O unbelieving generation!” Jesus replied. “How long must I remain with you? How long must I put up with you? Bring the boy to Me.”
MRK	9	20	이에 데리고 오니 귀신이 예수를 보고 곧 그 아이로 심히 경련을 일으키게 하는지라 저가 땅에 엎드러져 굴며 거품을 흘리더라	And they brought him unto him: and when he saw him, straightway the spirit tare him; and he fell on the ground, and wallowed foaming.	So they brought him, and seeing Jesus, the spirit immediately threw the boy into a convulsion. He fell to the ground and rolled around, foaming at the mouth.
MRK	9	21	예수께서 그 아비에게 물으시되 언제부터 이렇게 되었느냐 하시니 가로되 어릴 때부터니이다	And he asked his father, How long is it ago since this came unto him? And he said, Of a child.	Jesus asked the boy’s father, “How long has this been with him?” “From childhood,” he said.
MRK	9	22	귀신이 저를 죽이려고 불과 물에 자주 던졌나이다 그러나 무엇을 하실 수 있거든 우리를 불쌍히 여기사 도와 주옵소서	And ofttimes it hath cast him into the fire, and into the waters, to destroy him: but if thou canst do any thing, have compassion on us, and help us.	“It often throws him into the fire or into the water, trying to kill him. But if You can do anything, have compassion on us and help us.”
MRK	9	23	예수께서 이르시되 할 수 있거든이 무슨 말이냐 믿는 자에게는 능치 못할 일이 없느니라 하시니	Jesus said unto him, If thou canst believe, all things are possible to him that believeth.	“If You can?” echoed Jesus. “All things are possible to him who believes!”
MRK	9	24	곧 그 아이의 아비가 소리를 질러 가로되 내가 믿나이다 나의 믿음 없는 것을 도와주소서 하더라	And straightway the father of the child cried out, and said with tears, Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief.	Immediately the boy’s father cried out, “I do believe; help my unbelief!”
MRK	9	25	예수께서 무리의 달려 모이는 것을 보시고 그 더러운 귀신을 꾸짖어 가라사대 벙어리 되고 귀먹은 귀신아 내가 네게 명하노니 그 아이에게서 나오고 다시 들어가지 말라 하시매	When Jesus saw that the people came running together, he rebuked the foul spirit, saying unto him, Thou dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee, come out of him, and enter no more into him.	When Jesus saw that a crowd had come running, He rebuked the unclean spirit. “You deaf and mute spirit,” He said, “I command you to come out and never enter him again.”
MRK	9	26	귀신이 소리지르며 아이로 심히 경련을 일으키게 하고 나가니 그 아이가 죽은 것 같이 되어 많은 사람이 말하기를 죽었다 하나	And the spirit cried, and rent him sore, and came out of him: and he was as one dead; insomuch that many said, He is dead.	After shrieking and convulsing him violently, the spirit came out. The boy became like a corpse, so that many said, “He is dead.”
MRK	9	27	예수께서 그 손을 잡아 일으키시니 이에 일어서니라	But Jesus took him by the hand, and lifted him up; and he arose.	But Jesus took him by the hand and helped him to his feet, and he stood up.
MRK	9	28	집에 들어가시매 제자들이 종용히 묻자오되 우리는 어찌하여 능히 그 귀신을 쫓아내지 못하였나이까	And when he was come into the house, his disciples asked him privately, Why could not we cast him out?	After Jesus had gone into the house, His disciples asked Him privately, “Why couldn’t we drive it out?”
MRK	9	29	이르시되 기도 외에 다른 것으로는 이런 유가 나갈 수 없느니라 하시니라	And he said unto them, This kind can come forth by nothing, but by prayer and fasting.	Jesus answered, “This kind cannot come out, except by prayer.”
MRK	9	30	그곳을 떠나 갈릴리 가운데로 지날새 예수께서 아무에게도 알리고자 아니하시니	And they departed thence, and passed through Galilee; and he would not that any man should know it.	Going on from there, they passed through Galilee. But Jesus did not want anyone to know,
MRK	9	31	이는 제자들을 가르치시며 또 인자가 사람들의 손에 넘기워 죽임을 당하고 죽은 지 삼 일만에 살아나리라는 것을 말씀하시는 연고더라	For he taught his disciples, and said unto them, The Son of man is delivered into the hands of men, and they shall kill him; and after that he is killed, he shall rise the third day.	because He was teaching His disciples. He told them, “The Son of Man will be delivered into the hands of men. They will kill Him, and after three days He will rise.”
MRK	9	32	그러나 제자들은 이 말씀을 깨닫지 못하고 묻기도 무서워하더라	But they understood not that saying, and were afraid to ask him.	But they did not understand this statement, and they were afraid to ask Him about it.
MRK	9	33	가버나움에 이르러 집에 계실새 제자들에게 물으시되 너희가 노중에서 서로 토론한 것이 무엇이냐 하시되	And he came to Capernaum: and being in the house he asked them, What was it that ye disputed among yourselves by the way?	Then they came to Capernaum. While Jesus was in the house, He asked them, “What were you discussing on the way?”
MRK	9	34	저희가 잠잠하니 이는 노중에서 서로 누가 크냐 하고 쟁론하였음이라	But they held their peace: for by the way they had disputed among themselves, who should be the greatest.	But they were silent, for on the way they had been arguing about which of them was the greatest.
MRK	9	35	예수께서 앉으사 열두 제자를 불러서 이르시되 아무든지 첫째가 되고자 하면 뭇사람의 끝이 되며 뭇사람을 섬기는 자가 되어야 하리라 하시고	And he sat down, and called the twelve, and saith unto them, If any man desire to be first, the same shall be last of all, and servant of all.	Sitting down, Jesus called the Twelve and said, “If anyone wants to be first, he must be the last of all and the servant of all.”
MRK	9	36	어린 아이 하나를 데려다가 그들 가운데 세우시고 안으시며 제자들에게 이르시되	And he took a child, and set him in the midst of them: and when he had taken him in his arms, he said unto them,	Then He had a little child stand among them. Taking the child in His arms, He said to them,
MRK	9	37	누구든지 내 이름으로 이런 어린 아이 하나를 영접하면 곧 나를 영접함이요 누구든지 나를 영접하면 나를 영접함이 아니요 나를 보내신 이를 영접함이니라	Whosoever shall receive one of such children in my name, receiveth me: and whosoever shall receive me, receiveth not me, but him that sent me.	“Whoever welcomes one of these little children in My name welcomes Me, and whoever welcomes Me welcomes not only Me, but the One who sent Me.”
MRK	9	38	요한이 예수께 여짜오되 선생님 우리를 따르지 않는 어떤 자가 주의 이름으로 귀신을 내어 쫓는 것을 우리가 보고 우리를 따르지 아니하므로 금하였나이다	And John answered him, saying, Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy name, and he followeth not us: and we forbad him, because he followeth not us.	John said to Him, “Teacher, we saw someone else driving out demons in Your name, and we tried to stop him, because he does not accompany us.”
MRK	9	39	예수께서 가라사대 금하지 말라 내 이름을 의탁하여 능한 일을 행하고 즉시로 나를 비방할 자가 없느니라	But Jesus said, Forbid him not: for there is no man which shall do a miracle in my name, that can lightly speak evil of me.	“Do not stop him,” Jesus replied. “For no one who performs a miracle in My name can turn around and speak evil of Me.
MRK	9	40	우리를 반대하지 않는 자는 우리를 위하는 자니라	For he that is not against us is on our part.	For whoever is not against us is for us.
MRK	9	41	누구든지 너희를 그리스도에게 속한 자라 하여 물 한 그릇을 주면 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 저가 결단코 상을 잃지 않으리라	For whosoever shall give you a cup of water to drink in my name, because ye belong to Christ, verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward.	Indeed, if anyone gives you even a cup of water because you bear the name of Christ, truly I tell you, he will never lose his reward.
MRK	9	42	또 누구든지 나를 믿는 이 소자 중 하나를 실족케 하면 차라리 연자 맷돌을 그 목에 달리우고 바다에 던지움이 나으리라	And whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me, it is better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were cast into the sea.	But if anyone causes one of these little ones who believe in Me to stumble, it would be better for him to have a large millstone hung around his neck and to be thrown into the sea.
MRK	9	43	만일 네 손이 너를 범죄케 하거든 찍어 버리라 불구자로 영생에 들어가는 것이 두 손을 가지고 지옥 꺼지지 않는 불에 들어가는 것보다 나으니라	And if thy hand offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter into life maimed, than having two hands to go into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched:	If your hand causes you to sin, cut it off. It is better for you to enter life crippled than to have two hands and go into hell, into the unquenchable fire.
MRK	9	44		Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched.	
MRK	9	45	만일 네 발이 너를 범죄케 하거든 찍어 버리라 절뚝발이로 영생에 들어가는 것이 두 발을 가지고 지옥에 던지우는 것보다 나으니라	And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter halt into life, than having two feet to be cast into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched:	If your foot causes you to sin, cut it off. It is better for you to enter life lame than to have two feet and be thrown into hell.
MRK	9	46		Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched.	
MRK	9	47	만일 네 눈이 너를 범죄케 하거든 빼어버리라 한 눈으로 하나님의 나라에 들어가는 것이 두 눈을 가지고 지옥에 던지우는 것보다 나으니라	And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out: it is better for thee to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast into hell fire:	And if your eye causes you to sin, pluck it out. It is better for you to enter the kingdom of God with one eye than to have two eyes and be thrown into hell,
MRK	9	48	거기는 구더기도 죽지 않고 불도 꺼지지 아니하느니라	Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched.	where ‘their worm never dies, and the fire is never quenched.’
MRK	9	49	사람마다 불로서 소금 치듯함을 받으리라	For every one shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice shall be salted with salt.	For everyone will be salted with fire.
MRK	9	50	소금은 좋은 것이로되 만일 소금이 그 맛을 잃으면 무엇으로 이를 짜게 하리요 너희 속에 소금을 두고 서로 화목하라 하시니라	Salt is good: but if the salt have lost his saltness, wherewith will ye season it? Have salt in yourselves, and have peace one with another.	Salt is good, but if the salt loses its saltiness, with what will you season it? Have salt among yourselves, and be at peace with one another.”
MRK	10	1	예수께서 거기서 떠나 유대 지경과 요단강 건너편으로 가시니 무리가 다시 모여들거늘 예수께서 다시 전례대로 가르치시더니	And he arose from thence, and cometh into the coasts of Judea by the farther side of Jordan: and the people resort unto him again; and, as he was wont, he taught them again.	Then Jesus left that place and went into the region of Judea, beyond the Jordan. Again the crowds came to Him and He taught them, as was His custom.
MRK	10	2	바리새인들이 예수께 나아와 그를 시험하여 묻되 사람이 아내를 내어버리는 것이 옳으니이까	And the Pharisees came to him, and asked him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife? tempting him.	Some Pharisees came to test Him. “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife?” they inquired.
MRK	10	3	대답하여 가라사대 모세가 어떻게 너희에게 명하였느냐	And he answered and said unto them, What did Moses command you?	“What did Moses command you?” He replied.
MRK	10	4	가로되 모세는 이혼증서를 써주어 내어버리기를 허락하였나이다	And they said, Moses suffered to write a bill of divorcement, and to put her away.	They answered, “Moses permitted a man to write his wife a certificate of divorce and send her away.”
MRK	10	5	예수께서 저희에게 이르시되 너희 마음의 완악함을 인하여 이 명령을 기록하였거니와	And Jesus answered and said unto them, For the hardness of your heart he wrote you this precept.	But Jesus told them, “Moses wrote this commandment for you because of your hardness of heart.
MRK	10	6	창조시로부터 저희를 남자와 여자로 만드셨으니	But from the beginning of the creation God made them male and female.	However, from the beginning of creation, ‘God made them male and female.’
MRK	10	7	이러므로 사람이 그 부모를 떠나서	For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and cleave to his wife;	‘For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife,
MRK	10	8	그 둘이 한 몸이 될지니라 이러한즉 이제 둘이 아니요 한 몸이니	And they twain shall be one flesh: so then they are no more twain, but one flesh.	and the two will become one flesh.’ So they are no longer two, but one flesh.
MRK	10	9	그러므로 하나님이 짝지어 주신 것을 사람이 나누지 못할지니라 하시더라	What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder.	Therefore what God has joined together, let man not separate.”
MRK	10	10	집에서 제자들이 다시 이 일을 묻자온대	And in the house his disciples asked him again of the same matter.	When they were back inside the house, the disciples asked Jesus about this matter.
MRK	10	11	이르시되 누구든지 그 아내를 내어버리고 다른데 장가드는 자는 본처에게 간음을 행함이요	And he saith unto them, Whosoever shall put away his wife, and marry another, committeth adultery against her.	So He told them, “Whoever divorces his wife and marries another woman commits adultery against her.
MRK	10	12	또 아내가 남편을 버리고 다른데로 시집 가면 간음을 행함이니라	And if a woman shall put away her husband, and be married to another, she committeth adultery.	And if a woman divorces her husband and marries another man, she commits adultery.”
MRK	10	13	사람들이 예수의 만져주심을 바라고 어린 아이들을 데리고 오매 제자들이 꾸짖거늘	And they brought young children to him, that he should touch them: and his disciples rebuked those that brought them.	Now people were bringing the little children to Jesus for Him to place His hands on them, and the disciples rebuked those who brought them.
MRK	10	14	예수께서 보시고 분히 여겨 이르시되 어린 아이들의 내게 오는 것을 용납하고 금하지 말라 하나님의 나라가 이런 자의 것이니라	But when Jesus saw it, he was much displeased, and said unto them, Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of God.	But when Jesus saw this, He was indignant and told them, “Let the little children come to Me, and do not hinder them! For the kingdom of God belongs to such as these.
MRK	10	15	내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 누구든지 하나님의 나라를 어린 아이와 같이 받들지 않는 자는 결단코 들어가지 못하리라 하시고	Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein.	Truly I tell you, anyone who does not receive the kingdom of God like a little child will never enter it.”
MRK	10	16	그 어린 아이들을 안고 저희 위에 안수하시고 축복하시니라	And he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon them, and blessed them.	And He took the children in His arms, placed His hands on them, and blessed them.
MRK	10	17	예수께서 길에 나가실새 한 사람이 달려와서 꿇어 앉아 묻자오되 선한 선생님이여 내가 무엇을 하여야 영생을 얻으리이까	And when he was gone forth into the way, there came one running, and kneeled to him, and asked him, Good Master, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?	As Jesus started on His way, a man ran up and knelt before Him. “Good Teacher,” he asked, “what must I do to inherit eternal life?”
MRK	10	18	예수께서 이르시되 네가 어찌하여 나를 선하다 일컫느냐 하나님 한 분 외에는 선한 이가 없느니라	And Jesus said unto him, Why callest thou me good? there is none good but one, that is, God.	“Why do you call Me good?” Jesus replied. “No one is good except God alone.
MRK	10	19	네가 계명을 아나니 살인하지 말라, 간음하지 말라, 도적질하지 말라, 거짓 증거하지 말라, 속여 취하지 말라, 네 부모를 공경하라 하였느니라	Thou knowest the commandments, Do not commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness, Defraud not, Honour thy father and mother.	You know the commandments: ‘Do not murder, do not commit adultery, do not steal, do not bear false witness, do not cheat others, honor your father and mother.’”
MRK	10	20	여짜오되 선생님이여 이것은 내가 어려서부터 다 지키었나이다	And he answered and said unto him, Master, all these have I observed from my youth.	“Teacher,” he replied, “all these I have kept from my youth.”
MRK	10	21	예수께서 그를 보시고 사랑하사 가라사대 네게 오히려 한 가지 부족한 것이 있으니 가서 네 있는 것을 다 팔아 가난한 자들을 주라 그리하면 하늘에서 보화가 네게 있으리라 그리고 와서 나를 좇으라 하시니	Then Jesus beholding him loved him, and said unto him, One thing thou lackest: go thy way, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, take up the cross, and follow me.	Jesus looked at him, loved him, and said to him, “There is one thing you lack: Go, sell everything you own and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven. Then come, follow Me.”
MRK	10	22	그 사람은 재물이 많은고로 이 말씀을 인하여 슬픈 기색을 띠고 근심하며 가니라	And he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved: for he had great possessions.	But the man was saddened by these words and went away in sorrow, because he had great wealth.
MRK	10	23	예수께서 둘러 보시고 제자들에게 이르시되 재물이 있는 자는 하나님의 나라에 들어가기가 심히 어렵도다 하시니	And Jesus looked round about, and saith unto his disciples, How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God!	Then Jesus looked around and said to His disciples, “How hard it is for the rich to enter the kingdom of God!”
MRK	10	24	제자들이 그 말씀에 놀라는지라 예수께서 다시 대답하여 가라사대 얘들아 하나님의 나라에 들어가기가 어떻게 어려운지	And the disciples were astonished at his words. But Jesus answereth again, and saith unto them, Children, how hard is it for them that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of God!	And the disciples were amazed at His words. But Jesus said to them again, “Children, how hard it is to enter the kingdom of God!
MRK	10	25	약대가 바늘귀로 나가는 것이 부자가 하나님의 나라에 들어가는 것보다 쉬우니라 하신대	It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.	It is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God.”
MRK	10	26	제자들이 심히 놀라 서로 말하되 그런즉 누가 구원을 얻을 수 있는가 하니	And they were astonished out of measure, saying among themselves, Who then can be saved?	They were even more astonished and said to one another, “Who then can be saved?”
MRK	10	27	예수께서 저희를 보시며 가라사대 사람으로는 할 수 없으되 하나님으로는 그렇지 아니하니 하나님으로서는 다 하실 수 있느니라	And Jesus looking upon them saith, With men it is impossible, but not with God: for with God all things are possible.	Jesus looked at them and said, “With man this is impossible, but not with God. For all things are possible with God.”
MRK	10	28	베드로가 여짜와 가로되 보소서 우리가 모든 것을 버리고 주를 좇았나이다	Then Peter began to say unto him, Lo, we have left all, and have followed thee.	Peter began to say to Him, “Look, we have left everything and followed You.”
MRK	10	29	예수께서 가라사대 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 나와 및 복음을 위하여 집이나 형제나 자매나 어미나 아비나 자식이나 전토를 버린 자는	And Jesus answered and said, Verily I say unto you, There is no man that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake, and the gospel’s,	“Truly I tell you,” Jesus replied, “no one who has left home or brothers or sisters or mother or father or children or fields for My sake and for the gospel
MRK	10	30	금세에 있어 집과 형제와 자매와 모친과 자식과 전토를 백 배나 받되 핍박을 겸하여 받고 내세에 영생을 받지 못할 자가 없느니라	But he shall receive an hundredfold now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions; and in the world to come eternal life.	will fail to receive a hundredfold in the present age—houses and brothers and sisters and mothers and children and fields, along with persecutions—and in the age to come, eternal life.
MRK	10	31	그러나 먼저 된 자로서 나중 되고 나중 된 자로서 먼저 될 자가 많으니라	But many that are first shall be last; and the last first.	But many who are first will be last, and the last will be first.”
MRK	10	32	예루살렘으로 올라가는 길에 예수께서 제자들 앞에 서서 가시는데 저희가 놀라고 좇는 자들은 두려워하더라 이에 다시 열두 제자를 데리시고 자기의 당할 일을 일러 가라사대	And they were in the way going up to Jerusalem; and Jesus went before them: and they were amazed; and as they followed, they were afraid. And he took again the twelve, and began to tell them what things should happen unto him,	As they were going up the road to Jerusalem, Jesus was walking ahead of them. The disciples were amazed, but those who followed were afraid. Again Jesus took the Twelve aside and began to tell them what was going to happen to Him:
MRK	10	33	보라 우리가 예루살렘에 올라가노니 인자가 대제사장들과 서기관들에게 넘기우매 저희가 죽이기로 결안하고 이방인들에게 넘겨주겠고	Saying, Behold, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of man shall be delivered unto the chief priests, and unto the scribes; and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him to the Gentiles:	“Look, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be delivered over to the chief priests and scribes. They will condemn Him to death and will deliver Him over to the Gentiles,
MRK	10	34	그들은 능욕하며 침 뱉으며 채찍질하고 죽일 것이니 저는 삼 일 만에 살아나리라 하시니라	And they shall mock him, and shall scourge him, and shall spit upon him, and shall kill him: and the third day he shall rise again.	who will mock Him and spit on Him and flog Him and kill Him. And after three days He will rise again.”
MRK	10	35	세베대의 아들 야고보와 요한이 주께 나아와 여짜오되 선생님이여 무엇이든지 우리의 구하는 바를 우리에게 하여주시기를 원하옵나이다	And James and John, the sons of Zebedee, come unto him, saying, Master, we would that thou shouldest do for us whatsoever we shall desire.	Then James and John, the sons of Zebedee, came to Jesus and declared, “Teacher, we want You to do for us whatever we ask.”
MRK	10	36	이르시되 너희에게 무엇을 하여주기를 원하느냐	And he said unto them, What would ye that I should do for you?	“What do you want Me to do for you?” He inquired.
MRK	10	37	여짜오되 주의 영광 중에서 우리를 하나는 주의 우편에, 하나는 좌편에 앉게 하여 주옵소서	They said unto him, Grant unto us that we may sit, one on thy right hand, and the other on thy left hand, in thy glory.	They answered, “Grant that one of us may sit at Your right hand and the other at Your left in Your glory.”
MRK	10	38	예수께서 가라사대 너희 구하는 것을 너희가 알지 못하는도다 너희가 나의 마시는 잔을 마시며 나의 받는 침례를 받을 수 있느냐	But Jesus said unto them, Ye know not what ye ask: can ye drink of the cup that I drink of? and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?	“You do not know what you are asking,” Jesus replied. “Can you drink the cup I will drink, or be baptized with the baptism I will undergo?”
MRK	10	39	저희가 말하되 할 수 있나이다 예수께서 이르시되 너희가 나의 마시는 잔을 마시며 나의 받는 침례를 받으려니와	And they said unto him, We can. And Jesus said unto them, Ye shall indeed drink of the cup that I drink of; and with the baptism that I am baptized withal shall ye be baptized:	“We can,” the brothers answered. “You will drink the cup that I drink,” Jesus said, “and you will be baptized with the baptism that I undergo.
MRK	10	40	내 좌우편에 앉는 것은 나의 줄 것이 아니라 누구를 위하여 예비되었든지 그들이 얻을 것이니라	But to sit on my right hand and on my left hand is not mine to give; but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared.	But to sit at My right or left is not Mine to grant. These seats belong to those for whom they have been prepared.”
MRK	10	41	열 제자가 듣고 야고보와 요한에 대하여 분히 여기거늘	And when the ten heard it, they began to be much displeased with James and John.	When the ten heard about this, they became indignant with James and John.
MRK	10	42	예수께서 불러다가 이르시되 이방인의 소위 집권자들이 저희를 임의로 주관하고 그 대인들이 저희에게 권세를 부리는 줄을 너희가 알거니와	But Jesus called them to him, and saith unto them, Ye know that they which are accounted to rule over the Gentiles exercise lordship over them; and their great ones exercise authority upon them.	So Jesus called them together and said, “You know that those regarded as rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their superiors exercise authority over them.
MRK	10	43	너희 중에는 그렇지 아니하니 너희 중에 누구든지 크고자 하는 자는 너희를 섬기는 자가 되고	But so shall it not be among you: but whosoever will be great among you, shall be your minister:	But it shall not be this way among you. Instead, whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant,
MRK	10	44	너희 중에 누구든지 으뜸이 되고자 하는 자는 모든 사람의 종이 되어야 하리라	And whosoever of you will be the chiefest, shall be servant of all.	and whoever wants to be first must be the slave of all.
MRK	10	45	인자의 온 것은 섬김을 받으려 함이 아니라 도리어 섬기려 하고 자기 목숨을 많은 사람의 대속물로 주려 함이니라	For even the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.	For even the Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give His life as a ransom for many.”
MRK	10	46	저희가 여리고에 이르렀더니 예수께서 제자들과 허다한 무리와 함께 여리고에 나가실 때에 디매오의 아들인 소경 거지 바디매오가 길 가에 앉았다가	And they came to Jericho: and as he went out of Jericho with his disciples and a great number of people, blind Bartimeus, the son of Timeus, sat by the highway side begging.	Next, they came to Jericho. And as Jesus and His disciples were leaving Jericho with a large crowd, a blind beggar named Bartimaeus, the son of Timaeus, was sitting beside the road.
MRK	10	47	나사렛 예수시란 말을 듣고 소리질러 가로되 다윗의 자손 예수여 나를 불쌍히 여기소서 하거늘	And when he heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry out, and say, Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy on me.	When he heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry out, “Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me!”
MRK	10	48	많은 사람이 꾸짖어 잠잠하라 하되 그가 더욱 소리질러 가로되 다윗의 자손이여 나를 불쌍히 여기소서 하는지라	And many charged him that he should hold his peace: but he cried the more a great deal, Thou Son of David, have mercy on me.	Many people admonished him to be silent, but he cried out all the louder, “Son of David, have mercy on me!”
MRK	10	49	예수께서 머물러 서서 저를 부르라 하시니 저희가 그 소경을 부르며 이르되 안심하고 일어나라 너를 부르신다 하매	And Jesus stood still, and commanded him to be called. And they call the blind man, saying unto him, Be of good comfort, rise; he calleth thee.	Jesus stopped and said, “Call him.” So they called the blind man. “Take courage!” they said. “Get up! He is calling for you.”
MRK	10	50	소경이 겉옷을 내어버리고 뛰어 일어나 예수께 나아오거늘	And he, casting away his garment, rose, and came to Jesus.	Throwing off his cloak, Bartimaeus jumped up and came to Jesus.
MRK	10	51	예수께서 일러 가라사대 네게 무엇을 하여주기를 원하느냐 소경이 가로되 선생님이여 보기를 원하나이다	And Jesus answered and said unto him, What wilt thou that I should do unto thee? The blind man said unto him, Lord, that I might receive my sight.	“What do you want Me to do for you?” Jesus asked. “Rabboni,” said the blind man, “let me see again.”
MRK	10	52	예수께서 이르시되 가라 네 믿음이 너를 구원하였느니라 하시니 저가 곧 보게 되어 예수를 길에서 좇으니라	And Jesus said unto him, Go thy way; thy faith hath made thee whole. And immediately he received his sight, and followed Jesus in the way.	“Go,” said Jesus, “your faith has healed you.” And immediately he received his sight and followed Jesus along the road.
MRK	11	1	저희가 예루살렘에 가까이 와서 감람 산 벳바게와 베다니에 이르렀을 때에 예수께서 제자 중 둘을 보내시며	And when they came nigh to Jerusalem, unto Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount of Olives, he sendeth forth two of his disciples,	As they approached Jerusalem and came to Bethphage and Bethany at the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent out two of His disciples
MRK	11	2	이르시되 너희 맞은편 마을로 가라 그리로 들어가면 곧 아직 아무 사람도 타 보지 않은 나귀 새끼의 매여 있는 것을 보리니 풀어 끌고 오너라	And saith unto them, Go your way into the village over against you: and as soon as ye be entered into it, ye shall find a colt tied, whereon never man sat; loose him, and bring him.	and said to them, “Go into the village ahead of you, and as soon as you enter it, you will find a colt tied there, on which no one has ever sat. Untie it and bring it here.
MRK	11	3	만일 누가 너희에게 왜 이리 하느냐 묻거든 주가 쓰시겠다 하라 그리하면 즉시 이리로 보내리라 하시니	And if any man say unto you, Why do ye this? say ye that the Lord hath need of him; and straightway he will send him hither.	If anyone asks, ‘Why are you doing this?’ tell him, ‘The Lord needs it and will return it shortly.’”
MRK	11	4	제자들이 가서 본즉 나귀 새끼가 문 앞 거리에 매여 있는지라 그것을 푸니	And they went their way, and found the colt tied by the door without in a place where two ways met; and they loose him.	So they went and found the colt outside in the street, tied at a doorway. They untied it,
MRK	11	5	거기 섰는 사람 중 어떤 이들이 가로되 나귀 새끼를 풀어 무엇하려느냐 하매	And certain of them that stood there said unto them, What do ye, loosing the colt?	and some who were standing there asked, “Why are you untying the colt?”
MRK	11	6	제자들이 예수의 이르신 대로 말한대 이에 허락하는지라	And they said unto them even as Jesus had commanded: and they let them go.	The disciples answered as Jesus had instructed them, and the people gave them permission.
MRK	11	7	나귀 새끼를 예수께로 끌고 와서 자기들의 겉옷을 그 위에 걸쳐두매 예수께서 타시니	And they brought the colt to Jesus, and cast their garments on him; and he sat upon him.	Then they led the colt to Jesus and threw their cloaks over it, and He sat on it.
MRK	11	8	많은 사람은 자기 겉옷과 다른 이들은 밭에서 벤 나무가지를 길에 펴며	And many spread their garments in the way: and others cut down branches off the trees, and strawed them in the way.	Many in the crowd spread their cloaks on the road, while others spread branches they had cut from the fields.
MRK	11	9	앞에서 가고 뒤에서 따르는 자들이 소리지르되 호산나 찬송하리로다 주의 이름으로 오시는 이여	And they that went before, and they that followed, cried, saying, Hosanna; Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord:	The ones who went ahead and those who followed were shouting: “Hosanna!” “Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord!”
MRK	11	10	찬송하리로다 오는 우리 조상 다윗의 나라여 가장 높은 곳에서 호산나 하더라	Blessed be the kingdom of our father David, that cometh in the name of the Lord: Hosanna in the highest.	“Blessed is the coming kingdom of our father David!” “Hosanna in the highest!”
MRK	11	11	예수께서 예루살렘에 이르러 성전에 들어가사 모든 것을 둘러보시고 때가 이미 저물매 열두 제자를 데리시고 베다니에 나가시다	And Jesus entered into Jerusalem, and into the temple: and when he had looked round about upon all things, and now the eventide was come, he went out unto Bethany with the twelve.	Then Jesus entered Jerusalem and went into the temple courts. He looked around at everything, but since it was already late, He went out to Bethany with the Twelve.
MRK	11	12	이튿날 저희가 베다니에서 나왔을 때에 예수께서 시장하신지라	And on the morrow, when they were come from Bethany, he was hungry:	The next day, when they had left Bethany, Jesus was hungry.
MRK	11	13	멀리서 잎사귀 있는 한 무화과나무를 보시고 혹 그 나무에 무엇이 있을까 하여 가셨더니 가서 보신즉 잎사귀 외에 아무 것도 없더라 이는 무화과의 때가 아님이라	And seeing a fig tree afar off having leaves, he came, if haply he might find any thing thereon: and when he came to it, he found nothing but leaves; for the time of figs was not yet.	Seeing in the distance a fig tree in leaf, He went to see if there was any fruit on it. But when He reached it, He found nothing on it except leaves, since it was not the season for figs.
MRK	11	14	예수께서 나무에게 일러 가라사대 이제부터 영원토록 사람이 네게서 열매를 따먹지 못하리라 하시니 제자들이 이를 듣더라	And Jesus answered and said unto it, No man eat fruit of thee hereafter for ever. And his disciples heard it.	Then He said to the tree, “May no one ever eat of your fruit again.” And His disciples heard this statement.
MRK	11	15	저희가 예루살렘에 들어가니라 예수께서 성전에 들어가사 성전 안에서 매매하는 자들을 내어쫓으시며 돈 바꾸는 자들의 상과 비둘기 파는 자들의 의자를 둘러 엎으시며	And they come to Jerusalem: and Jesus went into the temple, and began to cast out them that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and the seats of them that sold doves;	When they arrived in Jerusalem, Jesus entered the temple courts and began to drive out those who were buying and selling there. He overturned the tables of the money changers and the seats of those selling doves.
MRK	11	16	아무나 기구를 가지고 성전 안으로 지나다님을 허치 아니하시고	And would not suffer that any man should carry any vessel through the temple.	And He would not allow anyone to carry merchandise through the temple courts.
MRK	11	17	이에 가르쳐 이르시되 기록된 바 내 집은 만민의 기도하는 집이라 칭함을 받으리라고 하지 아니하였느냐 너희는 강도의 굴혈을 만들었도다 하시매	And he taught, saying unto them, Is it not written, My house shall be called of all nations the house of prayer? but ye have made it a den of thieves.	Then Jesus began to teach them, and He declared, “Is it not written: ‘My house will be called a house of prayer for all the nations’? But you have made it ‘a den of robbers.’”
MRK	11	18	대제사장들과 서기관들이 듣고 예수를 어떻게 멸할까 하고 꾀하니 이는 무리가 다 그의 교훈을 기이히 여기므로 그를 두려워함일러라	And the scribes and chief priests heard it, and sought how they might destroy him: for they feared him, because all the people was astonished at his doctrine.	When the chief priests and scribes heard this, they looked for a way to kill Him. For they were afraid of Him, because the whole crowd was astonished at His teaching.
MRK	11	19	매양 저물매 저희가 성 밖으로 나가더라	And when even was come, he went out of the city.	And when evening came, Jesus and His disciples went out of the city.
MRK	11	20	저희가 아침에 지나갈 때에 무화과나무가 뿌리로부터 마른 것을 보고	And in the morning, as they passed by, they saw the fig tree dried up from the roots.	As they were walking back in the morning, they saw the fig tree withered from its roots.
MRK	11	21	베드로가 생각이 나서 여짜오되 랍비여 보소서 저주하신 무화과나무가 말랐나이다	And Peter calling to remembrance saith unto him, Master, behold, the fig tree which thou cursedst is withered away.	Peter remembered it and said, “Look, Rabbi! The fig tree You cursed has withered.”
MRK	11	22	예수께서 대답하여 저희에게 이르시되 하나님을 믿으라	And Jesus answering saith unto them, Have faith in God.	“Have faith in God,” Jesus said to them.
MRK	11	23	내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 누구든지 이 산더러 들리어 바다에 던지우라 하며 그 말하는 것이 이룰 줄 믿고 마음에 의심치 아니하면 그대로 되리라	For verily I say unto you, That whosoever shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that those things which he saith shall come to pass; he shall have whatsoever he saith.	“Truly I tell you that if anyone says to this mountain, ‘Be lifted up and thrown into the sea,’ and has no doubt in his heart but believes that it will happen, it will be done for him.
MRK	11	24	그러므로 내가 너희에게 말하노니 무엇이든지 기도하고 구하는 것은 받은 줄로 믿으라 그리하면 너희에게 그대로 되리라	Therefore I say unto you, What things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them.	Therefore I tell you, whatever you ask for in prayer, believe that you have received it, and it will be yours.
MRK	11	25	서서 기도할 때에 아무에게나 혐의가 있거든 용서하라 그리하여야 하늘에 계신 너희 아버지도 너희 허물을 사하여 주시리라 하셨더라	And when ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have ought against any: that your Father also which is in heaven may forgive you your trespasses.	And when you stand to pray, if you hold anything against another, forgive it, so that your Father in heaven will forgive your trespasses as well.”
MRK	11	26		But if ye do not forgive, neither will your Father which is in heaven forgive your trespasses.	
MRK	11	27	저희가 다시 예루살렘에 들어가니라 예수께서 성전에서 걸어다니실 때에 대제사장들과 서기관들과 장로들이 나아와	And they come again to Jerusalem: and as he was walking in the temple, there come to him the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders,	After their return to Jerusalem, Jesus was walking in the temple courts, and the chief priests, scribes, and elders came up to Him.
MRK	11	28	가로되 무슨 권세로 이런 일을 하느뇨 누가 이런 일 할 이 권세를 주었느뇨	And say unto him, By what authority doest thou these things? and who gave thee this authority to do these things?	“By what authority are You doing these things?” they asked. “And who gave You the authority to do them?”
MRK	11	29	예수께서 가라사대 나도 한 말을 너희에게 물으리니 대답하라 그리하면 나도 무슨 권세로 이런 일을 하는지 이르리라	And Jesus answered and said unto them, I will also ask of you one question, and answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I do these things.	“I will ask you one question,” Jesus replied, “and if you answer Me, I will tell you by what authority I am doing these things.
MRK	11	30	요한의 침례가 하늘로서냐 사람에게로서냐 내게 대답하라	The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or of men? answer me.	John’s baptism—was it from heaven or from men? Answer Me!”
MRK	11	31	저희가 서로 의논하여 가로되 만일 하늘로서라 하면 어찌하여 저를 믿지 아니하였느냐 할 것이니	And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say, From heaven; he will say, Why then did ye not believe him?	They deliberated among themselves what they should answer: “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ He will ask, ‘Why then did you not believe him?’
MRK	11	32	그러면 사람에게로서라 할까 하였으나 모든 사람이 요한을 참 선지자로 여기므로 저희가 백성을 무서워하는지라	But if we shall say, Of men; they feared the people: for all men counted John, that he was a prophet indeed.	But if we say, ‘From men’...” they were afraid of the people, for they all held that John truly was a prophet.
MRK	11	33	이에 예수께 대답하여 가로되 우리가 알지 못하노라 하니 예수께서 가라사대 나도 무슨 권세로 이런 일을 하는지 너희에게 이르지 아니하리라 하시니라	And they answered and said unto Jesus, We cannot tell. And Jesus answering saith unto them, Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.	So they answered, “We do not know.” And Jesus replied, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I am doing these things.”
MRK	12	1	예수께서 비유로 저희에게 말씀하시되 한 사람이 포도원을 만들고 산울로 두르고 즙 짜는 구유 자리를 파고 망대를 짓고 농부들에게 세로 주고 타국에 갔더니	And he began to speak unto them by parables. A certain man planted a vineyard, and set an hedge about it, and digged a place for the winefat, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country.	Then Jesus began to speak to them in parables: “A man planted a vineyard. He put a wall around it, dug a wine vat, and built a watchtower. Then he rented it out to some tenants and went away on a journey.
MRK	12	2	때가 이르매 농부들에게 포도원 소출 얼마를 받으려고 한 종을 보내니	And at the season he sent to the husbandmen a servant, that he might receive from the husbandmen of the fruit of the vineyard.	At harvest time, he sent a servant to the tenants to collect his share of the fruit of the vineyard.
MRK	12	3	저희가 종을 잡아 심히 때리고 거저 보내었거늘	And they caught him, and beat him, and sent him away empty.	But they seized the servant, beat him, and sent him away empty-handed.
MRK	12	4	다시 다른 종을 보내니 그의 머리에 상처를 내고 능욕하였거늘	And again he sent unto them another servant; and at him they cast stones, and wounded him in the head, and sent him away shamefully handled.	Then he sent them another servant, and they struck him over the head and treated him shamefully.
MRK	12	5	또 다른 종을 보내니 저희가 그를 죽이고 또 그 외 많은 종들도 혹은 때리고 혹은 죽인지라	And again he sent another; and him they killed, and many others; beating some, and killing some.	He sent still another, and this one they killed. He sent many others; some they beat and others they killed.
MRK	12	6	오히려 한 사람이 있으니 곧 그의 사랑하는 아들이라 최후로 이를 보내며 가로되 내 아들은 공경하리라 하였더니	Having yet therefore one son, his wellbeloved, he sent him also last unto them, saying, They will reverence my son.	Finally, having one beloved son, he sent him to them. ‘They will respect my son,’ he said.
MRK	12	7	저 농부들이 서로 말하되 이는 상속자니 자 죽이자 그러면 그 유업이 우리 것이 되리라 하고	But those husbandmen said among themselves, This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and the inheritance shall be ours.	But the tenants said to one another, ‘This is the heir. Come, let us kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.’
MRK	12	8	이에 잡아 죽여 포도원 밖에 내어 던졌느니라	And they took him, and killed him, and cast him out of the vineyard.	So they seized the son, killed him, and threw him out of the vineyard.
MRK	12	9	포도원 주인이 어떻게 하겠느뇨 와서 그 농부들을 진멸하고 포도원을 다른 사람들에게 주리라	What shall therefore the lord of the vineyard do? he will come and destroy the husbandmen, and will give the vineyard unto others.	What then will the owner of the vineyard do? He will come and kill those tenants, and will give the vineyard to others.
MRK	12	10	너희가 성경에 건축자들의 버린 돌이 모퉁이의 머릿돌이 되었나니	And have ye not read this scripture; The stone which the builders rejected is become the head of the corner:	Have you never read this Scripture: ‘The stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone.
MRK	12	11	이것은 주로 말미암아 된 것이요 우리 눈에 기이하도다 함을 읽어 보지도 못하였느냐 하시더라	This was the Lord’s doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes?	This is from the Lord, and it is marvelous in our eyes’?”
MRK	12	12	저희가 예수의 이 비유는 자기들을 가리켜 말씀하심인 줄 알고 잡고자 하되 무리를 두려워하여 예수를 버려두고 가니라	And they sought to lay hold on him, but feared the people: for they knew that he had spoken the parable against them: and they left him, and went their way.	At this, the leaders sought to arrest Jesus, for they knew that He had spoken this parable against them. But fearing the crowd, they left Him and went away.
MRK	12	13	저희가 예수의 말씀을 책잡으려 하여 바리새인과 헤롯당 중에서 사람을 보내매	And they send unto him certain of the Pharisees and of the Herodians, to catch him in his words.	Later, they sent some of the Pharisees and Herodians to catch Jesus in His words.
MRK	12	14	와서 가로되 선생님이여 우리가 아노니 당신은 참되시고 아무라도 꺼리는 일이 없으시니 이는 사람을 외모로 보지 않고 오직 참으로써 하나님의 도를 가르치심이니이다 가이사에게 세를 바치는 것이 가하니이까 불가하니이까	And when they were come, they say unto him, Master, we know that thou art true, and carest for no man: for thou regardest not the person of men, but teachest the way of God in truth: Is it lawful to give tribute to Cesar, or not?	“Teacher,” they said, “we know that You are honest and seek favor from no one. Indeed, You are impartial and teach the way of God in accordance with the truth. Is it lawful to pay taxes to Caesar or not? Should we pay them or not?”
MRK	12	15	우리가 바치리이까 말리이까 한대 예수께서 그 외식함을 아시고 이르시되 어찌하여 나를 시험하느냐 데나리온 하나를 가져다가 내게 보이라 하시니	Shall we give, or shall we not give? But he, knowing their hypocrisy, said unto them, Why tempt ye me? bring me a penny, that I may see it.	But Jesus saw through their hypocrisy and said, “Why are you testing Me? Bring Me a denarius to inspect.”
MRK	12	16	가져왔거늘 예수께서 가라사대 이 화상과 이 글이 뉘 것이냐 가로되 가이사의 것이니이다	And they brought it. And he saith unto them, Whose is this image and superscription? And they said unto him, Cesar’s.	So they brought it, and He asked them, “Whose image is this? And whose inscription?” “Caesar’s,” they answered.
MRK	12	17	이에 예수께서 가라사대 가이사의 것은 가이사에게, 하나님의 것은 하나님께 바치라 하시니 저희가 예수께 대하여 심히 기이히 여기더라	And Jesus answering said unto them, Render to Cesar the things that are Cesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s. And they marvelled at him.	Then Jesus told them, “Give to Caesar what is Caesar’s, and to God what is God’s.” And they marveled at Him.
MRK	12	18	부활이 없다 하는 사두개인들이 예수께 와서 물어 가로되	Then come unto him the Sadducees, which say there is no resurrection; and they asked him, saying,	Then the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came to Jesus and questioned Him:
MRK	12	19	선생님이여 모세가 우리에게 써 주기를 사람의 형이 자식이 없이 아내를 두고 죽거든 그 동생이 그 아내를 취하여 형을 위하여 후사를 세울지니라 하였나이다	Master, Moses wrote unto us, If a man’s brother die, and leave his wife behind him, and leave no children, that his brother should take his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother.	“Teacher, Moses wrote for us that if a man’s brother dies and leaves a wife but no children, the man is to marry his brother’s widow and raise up offspring for him.
MRK	12	20	칠 형제가 있었는데 맏이 아내를 취하였다가 후사가 없이 죽고	Now there were seven brethren: and the first took a wife, and dying left no seed.	Now there were seven brothers. The first one married and died, leaving no children.
MRK	12	21	둘째도 그 여자를 취하였다가 후사가 없이 죽고 셋째도 그렇게 하여	And the second took her, and died, neither left he any seed: and the third likewise.	Then the second one married the widow, but he also died and left no children. And the third did likewise.
MRK	12	22	일곱이 다 후사가 없었고 최후에 여자도 죽었나이다	And the seven had her, and left no seed: last of all the woman died also.	In this way, none of the seven left any children. And last of all, the woman died.
MRK	12	23	일곱 사람이 다 그를 아내로 취하였으니 부활을 당하여 저희가 살아날 때에 그 중에 뉘 아내가 되리이까	In the resurrection therefore, when they shall rise, whose wife shall she be of them? for the seven had her to wife.	In the resurrection, then, whose wife will she be? For all seven were married to her.”
MRK	12	24	예수께서 가라사대 너희가 성경도 하나님의 능력도 알지 못하므로 오해함이 아니냐	And Jesus answering said unto them, Do ye not therefore err, because ye know not the scriptures, neither the power of God?	Jesus said to them, “Aren’t you mistaken, because you do not know the Scriptures or the power of God?
MRK	12	25	사람이 죽은 자 가운데서 살아날 때에는 장가도 아니가고 시집도 아니가고 하늘에 있는 천사들과 같으니라	For when they shall rise from the dead, they neither marry, nor are given in marriage; but are as the angels which are in heaven.	When the dead rise, they will neither marry nor be given in marriage. Instead, they will be like the angels in heaven.
MRK	12	26	죽은 자의 살아난다는 것을 의논할진대 너희가 모세의 책 중 가시나무떨기에 관한 글에 하나님께서 모세에게 이르시되 나는 아브라함의 하나님이요 이삭의 하나님이요 야곱의 하나님이로라 하신 말씀을 읽어보지 못하였느냐	And as touching the dead, that they rise: have ye not read in the book of Moses, how in the bush God spake unto him, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?	But concerning the dead rising, have you not read about the burning bush in the Book of Moses, how God told him, ‘I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob’?
MRK	12	27	하나님은 죽은 자의 하나님이 아니요 산 자의 하나님이시라 너희가 크게 오해하였도다 하시니라	He is not the God of the dead, but the God of the living: ye therefore do greatly err.	He is not the God of the dead, but of the living. You are badly mistaken!”
MRK	12	28	서기관 중 한 사람이 저희의 변론하는 것을 듣고 예수께서 대답 잘하신 줄을 알고 나아와 묻되 모든 계명 중에 첫째가 무엇이니이까	And one of the scribes came, and having heard them reasoning together, and perceiving that he had answered them well, asked him, Which is the first commandment of all?	Now one of the scribes had come up and heard their debate. Noticing how well Jesus had answered them, he asked Him, “Which commandment is the most important of all?”
MRK	12	29	예수께서 대답하시되 첫째는 이것이니 이스라엘아 들으라 주 곧 우리 하나님은 유일한 주시라	And Jesus answered him, The first of all the commandments is, Hear, O Israel; The Lord our God is one Lord:	Jesus replied, “This is the most important: ‘Hear O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is One.
MRK	12	30	네 마음을 다하고 목숨을 다하고 뜻을 다하고 힘을 다하여 주 너의 하나님을 사랑하라 하신 것이요	And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength: this is the first commandment.	Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind and with all your strength.’
MRK	12	31	둘째는 이것이니 네 이웃을 네 몸과 같이 사랑하라 하신 것이라 이에서 더 큰 계명이 없느니라	And the second is like, namely this, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. There is none other commandment greater than these.	The second is this: ‘Love your neighbor as yourself.’ No other commandment is greater than these.”
MRK	12	32	서기관이 가로되 선생님이여 옳소이다 하나님은 한 분이시요 그 외에 다른 이가 없다 하신 말씀이 참이니이다	And the scribe said unto him, Well, Master, thou hast said the truth: for there is one God; and there is none other but he:	“Right, Teacher,” the scribe replied. “You have stated correctly that God is One and there is no other but Him,
MRK	12	33	또 마음을 다하고 지혜를 다하고 힘을 다하여 하나님을 사랑하는 것과 또 이웃을 제 몸과 같이 사랑하는 것이 전체로 드리는 모든 번제물과 기타 제물보다 나으니이다	And to love him with all the heart, and with all the understanding, and with all the soul, and with all the strength, and to love his neighbour as himself, is more than all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices.	and to love Him with all your heart and with all your understanding and with all your strength, and to love your neighbor as yourself, which is more important than all burnt offerings and sacrifices.”
MRK	12	34	예수께서 그 지혜 있게 대답함을 보시고 이르시되 네가 하나님의 나라에 멀지 않도다 하시니 그 후에 감히 묻는 자가 없더라	And when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, he said unto him, Thou art not far from the kingdom of God. And no man after that durst ask him any question.	When Jesus saw that the man had answered wisely, He said, “You are not far from the kingdom of God.” And no one dared to question Him any further.
MRK	12	35	예수께서 성전에서 가르치실새 대답하여 가라사대 어찌하여 서기관들이 그리스도를 다윗의 자손이라 하느뇨	And Jesus answered and said, while he taught in the temple, How say the scribes that Christ is the Son of David?	While Jesus was teaching in the temple courts, He asked, “How can the scribes say that the Christ is the Son of David?
MRK	12	36	다윗이 성령에 감동하여 친히 말하되 주께서 내 주께 이르시되 내가 네 원수를 발 아래 둘 때까지 내 우편에 앉았으라 하셨도다 하였느니라	For David himself said by the Holy Ghost, The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool.	Speaking by the Holy Spirit, David himself declared: ‘The Lord said to my Lord, “Sit at My right hand until I put Your enemies under Your feet.”’
MRK	12	37	다윗이 그리스도를 주라 하였은즉 어찌 그의 자손이 되겠느냐 하시더라 백성이 즐겁게 듣더라	David therefore himself calleth him Lord; and whence is he then his son? And the common people heard him gladly.	David himself calls Him ‘Lord.’ So how can He be David’s son?” And the large crowd listened to Him with delight.
MRK	12	38	예수께서 가르치실 때에 가라사대 긴 옷을 입고 다니는 것과 시장에서 문안 받는 것과	And he said unto them in his doctrine, Beware of the scribes, which love to go in long clothing, and love salutations in the marketplaces,	In His teaching Jesus also said, “Watch out for the scribes. They like to walk around in long robes, to receive greetings in the marketplaces,
MRK	12	39	회당의 상좌와 잔치의 상석을 원하는 서기관들을 삼가라	And the chief seats in the synagogues, and the uppermost rooms at feasts:	and to have the chief seats in the synagogues and the places of honor at banquets.
MRK	12	40	저희는 과부의 가산을 삼키며 외식으로 길게 기도하는 자니 그 받는 판결이 더욱 중하리라 하시니라	Which devour widows’ houses, and for a pretence make long prayers: these shall receive greater damnation.	They defraud widows of their houses, and for a show make lengthy prayers. These men will receive greater condemnation.”
MRK	12	41	예수께서 연보 궤를 대하여 앉으사 무리의 연보 궤에 돈 넣는 것을 보실새 여러 부자는 많이 넣는데	And Jesus sat over against the treasury, and beheld how the people cast money into the treasury: and many that were rich cast in much.	As Jesus was sitting opposite the treasury, He watched the crowd putting money into it. And many rich people put in large amounts.
MRK	12	42	한 가난한 과부는 와서 두 렙돈 곧 한 고드란트를 넣는지라	And there came a certain poor widow, and she threw in two mites, which make a farthing.	Then one poor widow came and put in two small copper coins, which amounted to a small fraction of a denarius.
MRK	12	43	예수께서 제자들을 불러다가 이르시되 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 이 가난한 과부는 연보 궤에 넣는 모든 사람보다 많이 넣었도다	And he called unto him his disciples, and saith unto them, Verily I say unto you, That this poor widow hath cast more in, than all they which have cast into the treasury:	Jesus called His disciples to Him and said, “Truly I tell you, this poor widow has put more than all the others into the treasury.
MRK	12	44	저희는 다 그 풍족한 중에서 넣었거니와 이 과부는 그 구차한 중에서 자기 모든 소유 곧 생활비 전부를 넣었느니라 하셨더라	For all they did cast in of their abundance; but she of her want did cast in all that she had, even all her living.	For they all contributed out of their surplus, but she out of her poverty has put in all she had to live on.”
MRK	13	1	예수께서 성전에서 나가실 때에 제자 중 하나가 가로되 선생님이여 보소서 이 돌들이 어떠하며 이 건물들이 어떠하니이까	And as he went out of the temple, one of his disciples saith unto him, Master, see what manner of stones and what buildings are here!	As Jesus was leaving the temple, one of His disciples said to Him, “Teacher, look at the magnificent stones and buildings!”
MRK	13	2	예수께서 이르시되 네가 이 큰 건물들을 보느냐 돌 하나도 돌 위에 남지 않고 다 무너뜨려지리라 하시니라	And Jesus answering said unto him, Seest thou these great buildings? there shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down.	“Do you see all these great buildings?” Jesus replied. “Not one stone here will be left on another; every one will be thrown down.”
MRK	13	3	예수께서 감람 산에서 성전을 마주 대하여 앉으셨을 때에 베드로와 야고보와 요한과 안드레가 종용히 묻자오되	And as he sat upon the mount of Olives over against the temple, Peter and James and John and Andrew asked him privately,	While Jesus was sitting on the Mount of Olives opposite the temple, Peter, James, John, and Andrew asked Him privately,
MRK	13	4	우리에게 이르소서 어느 때에 이런 일이 있겠사오며 이 모든 일이 이루려 할 때에 무슨 징조가 있사오리이까	Tell us, when shall these things be? and what shall be the sign when all these things shall be fulfilled?	“Tell us, when will these things happen? And what will be the sign that they are about to be fulfilled?”
MRK	13	5	예수께서 이르시되 너희가 사람의 미혹을 받지 않도록 주의하라	And Jesus answering them began to say, Take heed lest any man deceive you:	Jesus began by telling them, “See to it that no one deceives you.
MRK	13	6	많은 사람이 내 이름으로 와서 이르되 내가 그로라 하여 많은 사람을 미혹케 하리라	For many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ; and shall deceive many.	Many will come in My name, claiming, ‘I am He,’ and will deceive many.
MRK	13	7	난리와 난리 소문을 들을 때에 두려워 말라 이런 일이 있어야 하되 끝은 아직 아니니라	And when ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars, be ye not troubled: for such things must needs be; but the end shall not be yet.	When you hear of wars and rumors of wars, do not be alarmed. These things must happen, but the end is still to come.
MRK	13	8	민족이 민족을, 나라가 나라를 대적하여 일어나겠고 처처에 지진이 있으며 기근이 있으리니 이는 재난의 시작이니라	For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom: and there shall be earthquakes in divers places, and there shall be famines and troubles: these are the beginnings of sorrows.	Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. There will be earthquakes in various places, as well as famines. These are the beginning of birth pains.
MRK	13	9	너희는 스스로 조심하라 사람들이 너희를 공회에 넘겨주겠고 너희를 회당에서 매질하겠으며 나를 인하여 너희가 관장들과 임금들 앞에 서리니 이는 저희에게 증거되려함이라	But take heed to yourselves: for they shall deliver you up to councils; and in the synagogues ye shall be beaten: and ye shall be brought before rulers and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them.	So be on your guard. You will be delivered over to the councils and beaten in the synagogues. On My account you will stand before governors and kings as witnesses to them.
MRK	13	10	또 복음이 먼저 만국에 전파되어야 할 것이니라	And the gospel must first be published among all nations.	And the gospel must first be proclaimed to all the nations.
MRK	13	11	사람들이 너희를 끌어다가 넘겨줄 때에 무슨 말을 할까 미리 염려치 말고 무엇이든지 그 시에 너희에게 주시는 그 말을 하라 말하는 이는 너희가 아니요 성령이시니라	But when they shall lead you, and deliver you up, take no thought beforehand what ye shall speak, neither do ye premeditate: but whatsoever shall be given you in that hour, that speak ye: for it is not ye that speak, but the Holy Ghost.	But when they arrest you and hand you over, do not worry beforehand what to say. Instead, speak whatever you are given at that time, for it will not be you speaking, but the Holy Spirit.
MRK	13	12	형제가 형제를, 아비가 자식을 죽는데 내어주며 자식들이 부모를 대적하여 죽게 하리라	Now the brother shall betray the brother to death, and the father the son; and children shall rise up against their parents, and shall cause them to be put to death.	Brother will betray brother to death, and a father his child. Children will rise against their parents and have them put to death.
MRK	13	13	또 너희가 내 이름을 인하여 모든 사람에게 미움을 받을 것이나 나중까지 견디는 자는 구원을 얻으리라	And ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake: but he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.	You will be hated by everyone because of My name, but the one who perseveres to the end will be saved.
MRK	13	14	멸망의 가증한 것이 서지 못할 곳에 선 것을 보거든 (읽는 자는 깨달을진저) 그 때에 유대에 있는 자들은 산으로 도망할지어다	But when ye shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing where it ought not, (let him that readeth understand,) then let them that be in Judea flee to the mountains:	So when you see the abomination of desolation standing where it should not be (let the reader understand), then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains.
MRK	13	15	지붕 위에 있는 자는 내려가지도 말고 집에 있는 무엇을 가지러 들어가지도 말며	And let him that is on the housetop not go down into the house, neither enter therein, to take any thing out of his house:	Let no one on the housetop go back inside to retrieve anything from his house.
MRK	13	16	밭에 있는 자는 겉옷을 가지러 뒤로 돌이키지 말지어다	And let him that is in the field not turn back again for to take up his garment.	And let no one in the field return for his cloak.
MRK	13	17	그 날에는 아이 밴 자들과 젖먹이는 자들에게 화가 있으리로다	But woe to them that are with child, and to them that give suck in those days!	How miserable those days will be for pregnant and nursing mothers!
MRK	13	18	이 일이 겨울에 나지 않도록 기도하라	And pray ye that your flight be not in the winter.	Pray that this will not occur in the winter.
MRK	13	19	이는 그 날들은 환난의 날이 되겠음이라 하나님의 창조하신 창조부터 지금까지 이런 환난이 없었고 후에도 없으리라	For in those days shall be affliction, such as was not from the beginning of the creation which God created unto this time, neither shall be.	For those will be days of tribulation unmatched from the beginning of God’s creation until now, and never to be seen again.
MRK	13	20	만일 주께서 그 날들을 감하지 아니하셨더면 모든 육체가 구원을 얻지 못할 것이어늘 자기의 택하신 백성을 위하여 그 날들을 감하셨느니라	And except that the Lord had shortened those days, no flesh should be saved: but for the elect’s sake, whom he hath chosen, he hath shortened the days.	If the Lord had not cut short those days, nobody would be saved. But for the sake of the elect, whom He has chosen, He has cut them short.
MRK	13	21	그 때에 사람이 너희에게 말하되 보라 그리스도가 여기 있다 보라 저기 있다 하여도 믿지 말라	And then if any man shall say to you, Lo, here is Christ; or, lo, he is there; believe him not:	At that time if anyone says to you, ‘Look, here is the Christ!’ or ‘There He is!’ do not believe it.
MRK	13	22	거짓 그리스도들과 거짓 선지자들이 일어나서 이적과 기사를 행하여 할 수만 있으면 택하신 백성을 미혹케 하려 하리라	For false Christs and false prophets shall rise, and shall shew signs and wonders, to seduce, if it were possible, even the elect.	For false Christs and false prophets will appear and perform signs and wonders that would deceive even the elect, if that were possible.
MRK	13	23	너희는 삼가라 내가 모든 일을 너희에게 미리 말하였노라	But take ye heed: behold, I have foretold you all things.	So be on your guard; I have told you everything in advance.
MRK	13	24	그 때에 그 환난 후 해가 어두워지며 달이 빛을 내지 아니하며	But in those days, after that tribulation, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light,	But in those days, after that tribulation: ‘The sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light;
MRK	13	25	별들이 하늘에서 떨어지며 하늘에 있는 권능들이 흔들리리라	And the stars of heaven shall fall, and the powers that are in heaven shall be shaken.	the stars will fall from the sky, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken.’
MRK	13	26	그 때에 인자가 구름을 타고 큰 권능과 영광으로 오는 것을 사람들이 보리라	And then shall they see the Son of man coming in the clouds with great power and glory.	At that time they will see the Son of Man coming in the clouds with great power and glory.
MRK	13	27	또 그 때에 저가 천사들을 보내어 자기 택하신 자들을 땅 끝으로부터 하늘 끝까지 사방에서 모으리라	And then shall he send his angels, and shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from the uttermost part of the earth to the uttermost part of heaven.	And He will send out the angels to gather His elect from the four winds, from the ends of the earth to the ends of heaven.
MRK	13	28	무화과나무의 비유를 배우라 그 가지가 연하여지고 잎사귀를 내면 여름이 가까운 줄을 아나니	Now learn a parable of the fig tree; When her branch is yet tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is near:	Now learn this lesson from the fig tree: As soon as its branches become tender and sprout leaves, you know that summer is near.
MRK	13	29	이와 같이 너희가 이런 일이 나는 것을 보거든 인자가 가까이 곧 문 앞에 이른 줄을 알라	So ye in like manner, when ye shall see these things come to pass, know that it is nigh, even at the doors.	So also, when you see these things happening, know that He is near, right at the door.
MRK	13	30	내가 진실로 너희에게 말하노니 이 세대가 지나가기 전에 이 일이 다 이루리라	Verily I say unto you, that this generation shall not pass, till all these things be done.	Truly I tell you, this generation will not pass away until all these things have happened.
MRK	13	31	천지는 없어지겠으나 내 말은 없어지지 아니하리라	Heaven and earth shall pass away: but my words shall not pass away.	Heaven and earth will pass away, but My words will never pass away.
MRK	13	32	그러나 그 날과 그 때는 아무도 모르나니 하늘에 있는 천사들도, 아들도 모르고 아버지만 아시느니라	But of that day and that hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father.	No one knows about that day or hour, not even the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father.
MRK	13	33	주의하라 깨어 있으라 그 때가 언제인지 알지 못함이니라	Take ye heed, watch and pray: for ye know not when the time is.	Be on your guard and stay alert! For you do not know when the appointed time will come.
MRK	13	34	가령 사람이 집을 떠나 타국으로 갈 때에 그 종들에게 권한을 주어 각각 사무를 맡기며 문지기에게 깨어 있으라 명함과 같으니	For the Son of man is as a man taking a far journey, who left his house, and gave authority to his servants, and to every man his work, and commanded the porter to watch.	It is like a man going on a journey who left his house, put each servant in charge of his own task, and instructed the doorkeeper to keep watch.
MRK	13	35	그러므로 깨어 있으라 집 주인이 언제 올는지 혹 저물 때엘는지, 밤중엘는지, 닭 울 때엘는지, 새벽엘는지 너희가 알지 못함이라	Watch ye therefore: for ye know not when the master of the house cometh, at even, or at midnight, or at the cockcrowing, or in the morning:	Therefore keep watch, because you do not know when the master of the house will return—whether in the evening, at midnight, when the rooster crows, or in the morning.
MRK	13	36	그가 홀연히 와서 너희의 자는 것을 보지 않도록 하라	Lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping.	Otherwise, he may arrive without notice and find you sleeping.
MRK	13	37	깨어 있으라 내가 너희에게 하는 이 말이 모든 사람에게 하는 말이니라 하시니라	And what I say unto you I say unto all, Watch.	And what I say to you, I say to everyone: Keep watch!”
MRK	14	1	이틀이 지나면 유월절과 무교절이라 대제사장들과 서기관들이 예수를 궤계로 잡아 죽일 방책을 구하며	After two days was the feast of the passover, and of unleavened bread: and the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might take him by craft, and put him to death.	Now the Passover and the Feast of Unleavened Bread were two days away, and the chief priests and scribes were looking for a covert way to arrest Jesus and kill Him.
MRK	14	2	가로되 민요가 날까 하노니 명절에는 말자 하더라	But they said, Not on the feast day, lest there be an uproar of the people.	“But not during the feast,” they said, “or there may be a riot among the people.”
MRK	14	3	예수께서 베다니 문둥이 시몬의 집에서 식사하실 때에 한 여자가 매우 값진 향유 곧 순전한 나드 한 옥합을 가지고 와서 그 옥합을 깨뜨리고 예수의 머리에 부으니	And being in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, as he sat at meat, there came a woman having an alabaster box of ointment of spikenard very precious; and she brake the box, and poured it on his head.	While Jesus was in Bethany reclining at the table in the home of Simon the Leper, a woman came with an alabaster jar of expensive perfume, made of pure nard. She broke open the jar and poured it on Jesus’ head.
MRK	14	4	어떤 사람들이 분내어 서로 말하되 무슨 의사로 이 향유를 허비하였는가	And there were some that had indignation within themselves, and said, Why was this waste of the ointment made?	Some of those present, however, expressed their indignation to one another: “Why this waste of perfume?
MRK	14	5	이 향유를 삼백 데나리온 이상에 팔아 가난한 자들에게 줄 수 있었겠도다 하며 그 여자를 책망하는지라	For it might have been sold for more than three hundred pence, and have been given to the poor. And they murmured against her.	It could have been sold for over three hundred denarii and the money given to the poor.” And they scolded her.
MRK	14	6	예수께서 가라사대 가만 두어라 너희가 어찌하여 저를 괴롭게 하느냐 저가 내게 좋은 일을 하였느니라	And Jesus said, Let her alone; why trouble ye her? she hath wrought a good work on me.	But Jesus said, “Leave her alone; why are you bothering her? She has done a beautiful deed to Me.
MRK	14	7	가난한 자들은 항상 너희와 함께 있으니 아무 때라도 원하는 대로 도울 수 있거니와 나는 너희와 항상 함께 있지 아니하리라	For ye have the poor with you always, and whensoever ye will ye may do them good: but me ye have not always.	The poor you will always have with you, and you can help them whenever you want. But you will not always have Me.
MRK	14	8	저가 힘을 다하여 내 몸에 향유를 부어 내 장사를 미리 준비하였느니라	She hath done what she could: she is come aforehand to anoint my body to the burying.	She has done what she could to anoint My body in advance of My burial.
MRK	14	9	내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 온 천하에 어디서든지 복음이 전파되는 곳에는 이 여자의 행한 일도 말하여 저를 기념하리라 하시니라	Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world, this also that she hath done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her.	And truly I tell you, wherever the gospel is preached in all the world, what she has done will also be told in memory of her.”
MRK	14	10	열둘 중에 하나인 가룟 유다가 예수를 넘겨 주려고 대제사장들에게 가매	And Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went unto the chief priests, to betray him unto them.	Then Judas Iscariot, one of the Twelve, went to the chief priests to betray Jesus to them.
MRK	14	11	저희가 듣고 기뻐하여 돈을 주기로 약속하니 유다가 예수를 어떻게 넘겨 줄 기회를 찾더라	And when they heard it, they were glad, and promised to give him money. And he sought how he might conveniently betray him.	They were delighted to hear this, and they promised to give him money. So Judas began to look for an opportunity to betray Jesus.
MRK	14	12	무교절의 첫날 곧 유월절 양 잡는 날에 제자들이 예수께 여짜오되 우리가 어디로 가서 선생님으로 유월절을 잡수시게 예비하기를 원하시나이까 하매	And the first day of unleavened bread, when they killed the passover, his disciples said unto him, Where wilt thou that we go and prepare that thou mayest eat the passover?	On the first day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread, when the Passover lamb was to be sacrificed, Jesus’ disciples asked Him, “Where do You want us to prepare for You to eat the Passover?”
MRK	14	13	예수께서 제자 중에 둘을 보내시며 가라사대 성내로 들어가라 그리하면 물 한 동이를 가지고 가는 사람을 만나리니 그를 따라가서	And he sendeth forth two of his disciples, and saith unto them, Go ye into the city, and there shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water: follow him.	So He sent two of His disciples and told them, “Go into the city, and a man carrying a jug of water will meet you. Follow him,
MRK	14	14	어디든지 그의 들어가는 그 집주인에게 이르되 선생님의 말씀이 내가 내 제자들과 함께 유월절을 먹을 나의 객실이 어디 있느뇨 하시더라 하라	And wheresoever he shall go in, say ye to the goodman of the house, The Master saith, Where is the guestchamber, where I shall eat the passover with my disciples?	and whichever house he enters, say to the owner, ‘The Teacher asks: Where is My guest room, where I may eat the Passover with My disciples?’
MRK	14	15	그리하면 자리를 베풀고 예비된 큰 다락방을 보이리니 거기서 우리를 위하여 예비하라 하신대	And he will shew you a large upper room furnished and prepared: there make ready for us.	And he will show you a large upper room, furnished and ready. Make preparations for us there.”
MRK	14	16	제자들이 나가 성내로 들어가서 예수의 하시던 말씀대로 만나 유월절을 예비하니라	And his disciples went forth, and came into the city, and found as he had said unto them: and they made ready the passover.	So the disciples left and went into the city, where they found everything as Jesus had described. And they prepared the Passover.
MRK	14	17	저물매 그 열둘을 데리시고 와서	And in the evening he cometh with the twelve.	When evening came, Jesus arrived with the Twelve.
MRK	14	18	다 앉아 먹을 때에 예수께서 가라사대 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 너희 중에 한 사람 곧 나와 함께 먹는 자가 나를 팔리라 하신대	And as they sat and did eat, Jesus said, Verily I say unto you, One of you which eateth with me shall betray me.	And while they were reclining and eating, Jesus said, “Truly I tell you, one of you who is eating with Me will betray Me.”
MRK	14	19	저희가 근심하여 하나씩 하나씩 여짜오되 내니이까	And they began to be sorrowful, and to say unto him one by one, Is it I? and another said, Is it I?	They began to be grieved and to ask Him one after another, “Surely not I?”
MRK	14	20	이르시되 열둘 중 하나 곧 나와 함께 그릇에 손을 넣는 자니라	And he answered and said unto them, It is one of the twelve, that dippeth with me in the dish.	He answered, “It is one of the Twelve—the one who is dipping his hand into the bowl with Me.
MRK	14	21	인자는 자기에게 대하여 기록된 대로 가거니와 인자를 파는 그 사람에게는 화가 있으리로다 그 사람은 차라리 나지 아니하였더면 제게 좋을 뻔하였느니라 하시니라	The Son of man indeed goeth, as it is written of him: but woe to that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! good were it for that man if he had never been born.	The Son of Man will go just as it is written about Him, but woe to that man by whom He is betrayed! It would be better for him if he had not been born.”
MRK	14	22	저희가 먹을 때에 예수께서 떡을 가지사 축복하시고 떼어 제자들에게 주시며 가라사대 받으라 이것이 내 몸이니라 하시고	And as they did eat, Jesus took bread, and blessed, and brake it, and gave to them, and said, Take, eat: this is my body.	While they were eating, Jesus took bread, spoke a blessing and broke it, and gave it to the disciples, saying, “Take it; this is My body.”
MRK	14	23	또 잔을 가지사 사례하시고 저희에게 주시니 다 이를 마시매	And he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them: and they all drank of it.	Then He took the cup, gave thanks, and gave it to them, and they all drank from it.
MRK	14	24	가라사대 이것은 많은 사람을 위하여 흘리는 바 나의 피 곧 언약의 피니라	And he said unto them, This is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many.	He said to them, “This is My blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many.
MRK	14	25	진실로 너희에게 이르노니 내가 포도나무에서 난 것을 하나님 나라에서 새 것으로 마시는 날까지 다시 마시지 아니하리라 하시니라	Verily I say unto you, I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine, until that day that I drink it new in the kingdom of God.	Truly I tell you, I will no longer drink of the fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it anew in the kingdom of God.”
MRK	14	26	이에 저희가 찬미하고 감람 산으로 나가니라	And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives.	And when they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
MRK	14	27	예수께서 제자들에게 이르시되 너희가 다 나를 버리리라 이는 기록된 바 내가 목자를 치리니 양들이 흩어지리라 하였느니라	And Jesus saith unto them, All ye shall be offended because of me this night: for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered.	Then Jesus said to them, “You will all fall away, for it is written: ‘I will strike the Shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered.’
MRK	14	28	그러나 내가 살아난 후에 너희보다 먼저 갈릴리로 가리라	But after that I am risen, I will go before you into Galilee.	But after I have risen, I will go ahead of you into Galilee.”
MRK	14	29	베드로가 여짜오되 다 버릴지라도 나는 그렇지 않겠나이다	But Peter said unto him, Although all shall be offended, yet will not I.	Peter declared, “Even if all fall away, I never will.”
MRK	14	30	예수께서 가라사대 내가 진실로 네게 이르노니 오늘 이 밤 닭이 두 번 울기 전에 네가 세 번 나를 부인하리라	And Jesus saith unto him, Verily I say unto thee, That this day, even in this night, before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice.	“Truly I tell you,” Jesus replied, “this very night, before the rooster crows twice, you will deny Me three times.”
MRK	14	31	베드로가 힘있게 말하되 내가 주와 함께 죽을지언정 주를 부인하지 않겠나이다 하고 모든 제자도 이와 같이 말하니라	But he spake the more vehemently, If I should die with thee, I will not deny thee in any wise. Likewise also said they all.	But Peter kept insisting, “Even if I have to die with You, I will never deny You.” And all the others said the same thing.
MRK	14	32	저희가 겟세마네라 하는 곳에 이르매 예수께서 제자들에게 이르시되 나의 기도할 동안에 너희는 여기 앉았으라 하시고	And they came to a place which was named Gethsemane: and he saith to his disciples, Sit ye here, while I shall pray.	Then they came to a place called Gethsemane, and Jesus told His disciples, “Sit here while I pray.”
MRK	14	33	베드로와 야고보와 요한을 데리고 가실새 심히 놀라시며 슬퍼하사	And he taketh with him Peter and James and John, and began to be sore amazed, and to be very heavy;	He took with Him Peter, James, and John, and began to be deeply troubled and distressed.
MRK	14	34	말씀하시되 내 마음이 심히 고민하여 죽게 되었으니 너희는 여기 머물러 깨어 있으라 하시고	And saith unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death: tarry ye here, and watch.	Then He said to them, “My soul is consumed with sorrow to the point of death. Stay here and keep watch.”
MRK	14	35	조금 나아가사 땅에 엎드리어 될 수 있는 대로 이 때가 자기에게서 지나가기를 구하여	And he went forward a little, and fell on the ground, and prayed that, if it were possible, the hour might pass from him.	Going a little farther, He fell to the ground and prayed that, if it were possible, the hour would pass from Him.
MRK	14	36	가라사대 아바 아버지여 아버지께는 모든 것이 가능하오니 이 잔을 내게서 옮기시옵소서 그러나 나의 원대로 마옵시고 아버지의 원대로 하옵소서 하시고	And he said, Abba, Father, all things are possible unto thee; take away this cup from me: nevertheless not what I will, but what thou wilt.	“Abba, Father,” He said, “all things are possible for You. Take this cup from Me. Yet not what I will, but what You will.”
MRK	14	37	돌아오사 제자들의 자는 것을 보시고 베드로에게 말씀하시되 시몬아 자느냐 네가 한 시 동안도 깨어 있을 수 없더냐	And he cometh, and findeth them sleeping, and saith unto Peter, Simon, sleepest thou? couldest not thou watch one hour?	Then Jesus returned and found them sleeping. “Simon, are you asleep?” He asked. “Were you not able to keep watch for one hour?
MRK	14	38	시험에 들지 않게 깨어 있어 기도하라 마음에는 원이로되 육신이 약하도다 하시고	Watch ye and pray, lest ye enter into temptation. The spirit truly is ready, but the flesh is weak.	Watch and pray so that you will not enter into temptation. For the spirit is willing, but the body is weak.”
MRK	14	39	다시 나아가 동일한 말씀으로 기도하시고	And again he went away, and prayed, and spake the same words.	Again He went away and prayed, saying the same thing.
MRK	14	40	다시 오사 보신즉 저희가 자니 이는 저희 눈이 심히 피곤함이라 저희가 예수께 무엇으로 대답할 줄을 알지 못하더라	And when he returned, he found them asleep again, (for their eyes were heavy,) neither wist they what to answer him.	And again Jesus returned and found them sleeping—for their eyes were heavy. And they did not know what to answer Him.
MRK	14	41	세 번째 오사 저희에게 이르시되 이제는 자고 쉬라 그만이다 때가 왔도다 보라 인자가 죄인의 손에 팔리우느니라	And he cometh the third time, and saith unto them, Sleep on now, and take your rest: it is enough, the hour is come; behold, the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.	When Jesus returned the third time, He said, “Are you still sleeping and resting? That is enough! The hour has come. Look, the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
MRK	14	42	일어나라 함께 가자 보라 나를 파는 자가 가까이 왔느니라	Rise up, let us go; lo, he that betrayeth me is at hand.	Rise, let us go. See, My betrayer is approaching!”
MRK	14	43	말씀하실 때에 곧 열둘 중의 하나인 유다가 왔는데 대제사장들과 서기관들과 장로들에게 파송된 무리가 검과 몽치를 가지고 그와 함께 하였더라	And immediately, while he yet spake, cometh Judas, one of the twelve, and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief priests and the scribes and the elders.	While Jesus was still speaking, Judas, one of the Twelve, arrived, accompanied by a crowd armed with swords and clubs, sent from the chief priests, scribes, and elders.
MRK	14	44	예수를 파는 자가 이미 그들과 군호를 짜 가로되 내가 입맞추는 자가 그이니 그를 잡아 단단히 끌어가라 하였는지라	And he that betrayed him had given them a token, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he; take him, and lead him away safely.	Now the betrayer had arranged a signal with them: “The One I kiss is the man; arrest Him and lead Him away securely.”
MRK	14	45	이에 와서 곧 예수께 나아와 랍비여 하고 입을 맞추니	And as soon as he was come, he goeth straightway to him, and saith, Master, master; and kissed him.	Going directly to Jesus, he said, “Rabbi!” and kissed Him.
MRK	14	46	저희가 예수께 손을 대어 잡거늘	And they laid their hands on him, and took him.	Then the men seized Jesus and arrested Him.
MRK	14	47	곁에 섰는 자 중에 한 사람이 검을 빼어 대제사장의 종을 쳐 그 귀를 떨어뜨리니라	And one of them that stood by drew a sword, and smote a servant of the high priest, and cut off his ear.	And one of the bystanders drew his sword and struck the servant of the high priest, cutting off his ear.
MRK	14	48	예수께서 무리에게 말씀하여 가라사대 너희가 강도를 잡는 것 같이 검과 몽치를 가지고 나를 잡으러 나왔느냐	And Jesus answered and said unto them, Are ye come out, as against a thief, with swords and with staves to take me?	Jesus asked the crowd, “Have you come out with swords and clubs to arrest Me as you would an outlaw?
MRK	14	49	내가 날마다 너희와 함께 성전에 있어서 가르쳤으되 너희가 나를 잡지 아니하였도다 그러나 이는 성경을 이루려 함이니라 하시더라	I was daily with you in the temple teaching, and ye took me not: but the scriptures must be fulfilled.	Every day I was with you, teaching in the temple courts, and you did not arrest Me. But this has happened that the Scriptures would be fulfilled.”
MRK	14	50	제자들이 다 예수를 버리고 도망하니라	And they all forsook him, and fled.	Then everyone deserted Him and fled.
MRK	14	51	한 청년이 벗은 몸에 베 홑이불을 두르고 예수를 따라오다가 무리에게 잡히매	And there followed him a certain young man, having a linen cloth cast about his naked body; and the young men laid hold on him:	One young man who had been following Jesus was wearing a linen cloth around his body. They caught hold of him,
MRK	14	52	베 홑이불을 버리고 벗은 몸으로 도망하니라	And he left the linen cloth, and fled from them naked.	but he pulled free of the linen cloth and ran away naked.
MRK	14	53	저희가 예수를 끌고 대제사장에게로 가니 대제사장들과 장로들과 서기관들이 다 모이더라	And they led Jesus away to the high priest: and with him were assembled all the chief priests and the elders and the scribes.	They led Jesus away to the high priest, and all the chief priests, elders, and scribes assembled.
MRK	14	54	베드로가 예수를 멀찍이 좇아 대제사장의 집 뜰안까지 들어가서 하속들과 함께 앉아 불을 쬐더라	And Peter followed him afar off, even into the palace of the high priest: and he sat with the servants, and warmed himself at the fire.	Peter followed Him at a distance, right into the courtyard of the high priest. And he sat with the officers and warmed himself by the fire.
MRK	14	55	대제사장들과 온 공회가 예수를 죽이려고 그를 칠 증거를 찾되 얻지 못하니	And the chief priests and all the council sought for witness against Jesus to put him to death; and found none.	Now the chief priests and the whole Sanhedrin were seeking testimony against Jesus to put Him to death, but they did not find any.
MRK	14	56	이는 예수를 쳐서 거짓 증거하는 자가 많으나 그 증거가 서로 합하지 못함이라	For many bare false witness against him, but their witness agreed not together.	For many bore false witness against Jesus, but their testimony was inconsistent.
MRK	14	57	어떤 사람들이 일어나 예수를 쳐서 거짓 증거하여 가로되	And there arose certain, and bare false witness against him, saying,	Then some men stood up and testified falsely against Him:
MRK	14	58	우리가 그의 말을 들으니 손으로 지은 이 성전을 내가 헐고 손으로 짓지 아니한 다른 성전을 사흘에 지으리라 하더라 하되	We heard him say, I will destroy this temple that is made with hands, and within three days I will build another made without hands.	“We heard Him say, ‘I will destroy this man-made temple, and in three days I will build another that is made without hands.’”
MRK	14	59	오히려 그 증거도 서로 합하지 않더라	But neither so did their witness agree together.	But even their testimony was inconsistent.
MRK	14	60	대제사장이 가운데 일어서서 예수에게 물어 가로되 너는 아무 대답도 없느냐 이 사람들의 너를 치는 증거가 어떠하냐 하되	And the high priest stood up in the midst, and asked Jesus, saying, Answerest thou nothing? what is it which these witness against thee?	So the high priest stood up before them and questioned Jesus, “Have You no answer? What are these men testifying against You?”
MRK	14	61	잠잠하고 아무 대답도 아니하시거늘 대제사장이 다시 물어 가로되 네가 찬송 받을 자의 아들 그리스도냐	But he held his peace, and answered nothing. Again the high priest asked him, and said unto him, Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?	But Jesus remained silent and made no reply. Again the high priest questioned Him, “Are You the Christ, the Son of the Blessed One?”
MRK	14	62	예수께서 이르시되 내가 그니라 인자가 권능자의 우편에 앉은 것과 하늘 구름을 타고 오는 것을 너희가 보리라 하시니	And Jesus said, I am: and ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.	“I am,” said Jesus, “and you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of Power and coming with the clouds of heaven.”
MRK	14	63	대제사장이 자기 옷을 찢으며 가로되 우리가 어찌 더 증인을 요구하리요	Then the high priest rent his clothes, and saith, What need we any further witnesses?	At this, the high priest tore his clothes and declared, “Why do we need any more witnesses?
MRK	14	64	그 참람한 말을 너희가 들었도다 너희는 어떻게 생각하느뇨 하니 저희가 다 예수를 사형에 해당한 자로 정죄하고	Ye have heard the blasphemy: what think ye? And they all condemned him to be guilty of death.	You have heard the blasphemy. What is your verdict?” And they all condemned Him as deserving of death.
MRK	14	65	혹은 그에게 침을 뱉으며 그의 얼굴을 가리우고 주먹으로 치며 가로되 선지자 노릇을 하라 하고 하속들은 손바닥으로 치더라	And some began to spit on him, and to cover his face, and to buffet him, and to say unto him, Prophesy: and the servants did strike him with the palms of their hands.	Then some of them began to spit on Him. They blindfolded Him, struck Him with their fists, and said to Him, “Prophesy!” And the officers received Him with slaps in His face.
MRK	14	66	베드로는 아래 뜰에 있더니 대제사장의 비자 하나가 와서	And as Peter was beneath in the palace, there cometh one of the maids of the high priest:	While Peter was in the courtyard below, one of the servant girls of the high priest came down
MRK	14	67	베드로의 불 쬠을 보고 주목하여 가로되 너도 나사렛 예수와 함께 있었도다 하거늘	And when she saw Peter warming himself, she looked upon him, and said, And thou also wast with Jesus of Nazareth.	and saw him warming himself there. She looked at Peter and said, “You also were with Jesus the Nazarene.”
MRK	14	68	베드로가 부인하여 가로되 나는 네 말하는 것이 무엇인지 알지도 못하고 깨닫지도 못하겠노라 하며 앞뜰로 나갈새	But he denied, saying, I know not, neither understand I what thou sayest. And he went out into the porch; and the cock crew.	But he denied it. “I do not know or even understand what you are talking about,” he said. Then he went out to the gateway, and the rooster crowed.
MRK	14	69	비자가 그를 보고 곁에 서 있는 자들에게 다시 이르되 이 사람은 그 당이라 하되	And a maid saw him again, and began to say to them that stood by, This is one of them.	There the servant girl saw him and again said to those standing nearby, “This man is one of them.”
MRK	14	70	또 부인하더라 조금 후에 곁에 서 있는 사람들이 다시 베드로에게 말하되 너는 갈릴리 사람이니 참으로 그 당이니라	And he denied it again. And a little after, they that stood by said again to Peter, Surely thou art one of them: for thou art a Galilean, and thy speech agreeth thereto.	But he denied it again. After a little while, those standing nearby said once more to Peter, “Surely you are one of them, for you too are a Galilean.”
MRK	14	71	베드로가 저주하며 맹세하되 나는 너희의 말하는 이 사람을 알지 못하노라 하니	But he began to curse and to swear, saying, I know not this man of whom ye speak.	But he began to curse and swear, “I do not know this man of whom you speak!”
MRK	14	72	닭이 곧 두 번째 울더라 이에 베드로가 예수께서 자기에게 하신 말씀 곧 닭이 두 번 울기 전에 네가 세 번 나를 부인하리라 하심이 기억되어 생각하고 울었더라	And the second time the cock crew. And Peter called to mind the word that Jesus said unto him, Before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice. And when he thought thereon, he wept.	And immediately the rooster crowed a second time. Then Peter remembered the word that Jesus had spoken to him: “Before the rooster crows twice, you will deny Me three times.” And he broke down and wept.
MRK	15	1	새벽에 대제사장들이 즉시 장로들과 서기관들 곧 온 공회로 더불어 의논하고 예수를 결박하여 끌고 가서 빌라도에게 넘겨주니	And straightway in the morning the chief priests held a consultation with the elders and scribes and the whole council, and bound Jesus, and carried him away, and delivered him to Pilate.	Early in the morning, the chief priests, elders, scribes, and the whole Sanhedrin devised a plan. They bound Jesus, led Him away, and handed Him over to Pilate.
MRK	15	2	빌라도가 묻되 네가 유대인의 왕이냐 예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 네 말이 옳도다 하시매	And Pilate asked him, Art thou the King of the Jews? And he answering said unto him, Thou sayest it.	So Pilate questioned Him, “Are You the King of the Jews?” “You have said so,” Jesus replied.
MRK	15	3	대제사장들이 여러 가지로 고소하는지라	And the chief priests accused him of many things: but he answered nothing.	And the chief priests began to accuse Him of many things.
MRK	15	4	빌라도가 또 물어 가로되 아무 대답도 없느냐 저희가 얼마나 많은 것으로 너를 고소하는가 보라 하되	And Pilate asked him again, saying, Answerest thou nothing? behold how many things they witness against thee.	Then Pilate questioned Him again, “Have You no answer? Look how many charges they are bringing against You!”
MRK	15	5	예수께서 다시 아무 말씀도 대답지 아니하시니 빌라도가 기이히 여기더라	But Jesus yet answered nothing; so that Pilate marvelled.	But to Pilate’s amazement, Jesus made no further reply.
MRK	15	6	명절을 당하면 백성의 구하는 대로 죄수 하나를 놓아 주는 전례가 있더니	Now at that feast he released unto them one prisoner, whomsoever they desired.	Now it was Pilate’s custom at the feast to release to the people a prisoner of their choosing.
MRK	15	7	민란을 꾸미고 이 민란에 살인하고 포박된 자 중에 바라바라 하는 자가 있는지라	And there was one named Barabbas, which lay bound with them that had made insurrection with him, who had committed murder in the insurrection.	And a man named Barabbas was imprisoned with the rebels who had committed murder during the insurrection.
MRK	15	8	무리가 나아가서 전례대로 하여주기를 구한대	And the multitude crying aloud began to desire him to do as he had ever done unto them.	So the crowd went up and began asking Pilate to keep his custom.
MRK	15	9	빌라도가 대답하여 가로되 너희는 내가 유대인의 왕을 너희에게 놓아주기를 원하느냐 하니	But Pilate answered them, saying, Will ye that I release unto you the King of the Jews?	“Do you want me to release to you the King of the Jews?” Pilate asked.
MRK	15	10	이는 저가 대제사장들이 시기로 예수를 넘겨준 줄 앎이러라	For he knew that the chief priests had delivered him for envy.	For he knew it was out of envy that the chief priests had handed Jesus over.
MRK	15	11	그러나 대제사장들이 무리를 충동하여 도리어 바라바를 놓아 달라 하게 하니	But the chief priests moved the people, that he should rather release Barabbas unto them.	But the chief priests stirred up the crowd to have him release Barabbas to them instead.
MRK	15	12	빌라도가 또 대답하여 가로되 그러면 너희가 유대인의 왕이라 하는 이는 내가 어떻게 하랴	And Pilate answered and said again unto them, What will ye then that I shall do unto him whom ye call the King of the Jews?	So Pilate asked them again, “What then do you want me to do with the One you call the King of the Jews?”
MRK	15	13	저희가 다시 소리지르되 저를 십자가에 못 박게 하소서	And they cried out again, Crucify him.	And they shouted back, “Crucify Him!”
MRK	15	14	빌라도가 가로되 어찜이뇨 무슨 악한 일을 하였느냐 하니 더욱 소리지르되 십자가에 못 박게 하소서 하는지라	Then Pilate said unto them, Why, what evil hath he done? And they cried out the more exceedingly, Crucify him.	“Why?” asked Pilate. “What evil has He done?” But they shouted all the louder, “Crucify Him!”
MRK	15	15	빌라도가 무리에게 만족을 주고자 하여 바라바는 놓아 주고 예수는 채찍질하고 십자가에 못 박히게 넘겨주니라	And so Pilate, willing to content the people, released Barabbas unto them, and delivered Jesus, when he had scourged him, to be crucified.	And wishing to satisfy the crowd, Pilate released Barabbas to them. But he had Jesus flogged, and handed Him over to be crucified.
MRK	15	16	군병들이 예수를 끌고 브라이도리온이라는 뜰 안으로 들어가서 온 군대를 모으고	And the soldiers led him away into the hall, called Pretorium; and they call together the whole band.	Then the soldiers led Jesus away into the palace (that is, the Praetorium) and called the whole company together.
MRK	15	17	예수에게 자색 옷을 입히고 가시 면류관을 엮어 씌우고	And they clothed him with purple, and platted a crown of thorns, and put it about his head,	They dressed Him in a purple robe, twisted together a crown of thorns, and set it on His head.
MRK	15	18	예하여 가로되 유대인의 왕이여 평안할지어다 하고	And began to salute him, Hail, King of the Jews!	And they began to salute Him: “Hail, King of the Jews!”
MRK	15	19	갈대로 그의 머리를 치며 침을 뱉으며 꿇어 절하더라	And they smote him on the head with a reed, and did spit upon him, and bowing their knees worshipped him.	They kept striking His head with a staff and spitting on Him. And they knelt down and bowed before Him.
MRK	15	20	희롱을 다한 후 자색 옷을 벗기고 도로 그의 옷을 입히고 십자가에 못 박으려고 끌고 나가니라	And when they had mocked him, they took off the purple from him, and put his own clothes on him, and led him out to crucify him.	After they had mocked Him, they removed the purple robe and put His own clothes back on Him. Then they led Him out to crucify Him.
MRK	15	21	마침 알렉산더와 루포의 아비인 구레네 사람 시몬이 시골로서 와서 지나가는데 저희가 그를 억지로 같이 가게 하여 예수의 십자가를 지우고	And they compel one Simon a Cyrenian, who passed by, coming out of the country, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to bear his cross.	Now Simon of Cyrene, the father of Alexander and Rufus, was passing by on his way in from the country, and the soldiers forced him to carry the cross of Jesus.
MRK	15	22	예수를 끌고 골고다라 하는 곳(번역하면 해골의 곳)에 이르러	And they bring him unto the place Golgotha, which is, being interpreted, The place of a skull.	They brought Jesus to a place called Golgotha, which means The Place of the Skull.
MRK	15	23	몰약을 탄 포도주를 주었으나 예수께서 받지 아니하시니라	And they gave him to drink wine mingled with myrrh: but he received it not.	There they offered Him wine mixed with myrrh, but He did not take it.
MRK	15	24	십자가에 못 박고 그 옷을 나눌새 누가 어느 것을 얻을까 하여 제비를 뽑더라	And when they had crucified him, they parted his garments, casting lots upon them, what every man should take.	And they crucified Him. They also divided His garments by casting lots to decide what each of them would take.
MRK	15	25	때가 제삼시가 되어 십자가에 못 박으니라	And it was the third hour, and they crucified him.	It was the third hour when they crucified Him.
MRK	15	26	그 위에 있는 죄패에 유대인의 왕이라 썼고	And the superscription of his accusation was written over, THE KING OF THE JEWS.	And the charge inscribed against Him read: THE KING OF THE JEWS.
MRK	15	27	강도 둘을 예수와 함께 십자가에 못 박으니 하나는 그의 우편에, 하나는 좌편에 있더라	And with him they crucify two thieves; the one on his right hand, and the other on his left.	Along with Jesus, they crucified two robbers, one on His right and one on His left.
MRK	15	28		And the scripture was fulfilled, which saith, And he was numbered with the transgressors.	
MRK	15	29	지나가는 자들은 자기 머리를 흔들며 예수를 모욕하여 가로되 아하 성전을 헐고 사흘에 짓는 자여	And they that passed by railed on him, wagging their heads, and saying, Ah, thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three days,	And those who passed by heaped abuse on Him, shaking their heads and saying, “Aha! You who are going to destroy the temple and rebuild it in three days,
MRK	15	30	네가 너를 구원하여 십자가에서 내려오라 하고	Save thyself, and come down from the cross.	come down from the cross and save Yourself!”
MRK	15	31	그와 같이 대제사장들도 서기관들과 함께 희롱하며 서로 말하되 저가 남은 구원하였으되 자기는 구원할 수 없도다	Likewise also the chief priests mocking said among themselves with the scribes, He saved others; himself he cannot save.	In the same way, the chief priests and scribes mocked Him among themselves, saying, “He saved others, but He cannot save Himself!
MRK	15	32	이스라엘의 왕 그리스도가 지금 십자가에서 내려와 우리로 보고 믿게 할지어다 하며 함께 십자가에 못박힌 자들도 예수를 욕하더라	Let Christ the King of Israel descend now from the cross, that we may see and believe. And they that were crucified with him reviled him.	Let the Christ, the King of Israel, come down now from the cross, so that we may see and believe!” And even those who were crucified with Him berated Him.
MRK	15	33	제육시가 되매 온 땅에 어두움이 임하여 제구시까지 계속하더니	And when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour.	From the sixth hour until the ninth hour darkness came over all the land.
MRK	15	34	제구시에 예수께서 크게 소리지르시되 엘리 엘리 라마 사박다니 하시니 이를 번역하면 나의 하나님, 나의 하나님, 어찌하여 나를 버리셨나이까 하는 뜻이라	And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani? which is, being interpreted, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?	At the ninth hour, Jesus cried out in a loud voice, “Eloi, Eloi, lema sabachthani?” which means, “My God, My God, why have You forsaken Me?”
MRK	15	35	곁에 섰던 자 중 어떤 이들이 듣고 가로되 보라 엘리야를 부른다 하고	And some of them that stood by, when they heard it, said, Behold, he calleth Elias.	When some of those standing nearby heard this, they said, “Behold, He is calling Elijah.”
MRK	15	36	한 사람이 달려가서 해융에 신포도주를 머금게 하여 갈대에 꿰어 마시우고 가로되 가만 두어라 엘리야가 와서 저를 내려 주나 보자 하더라	And one ran and filled a spunge full of vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink, saying, Let alone; let us see whether Elias will come to take him down.	And someone ran and filled a sponge with sour wine. He put it on a reed and held it up for Jesus to drink, saying, “Leave Him alone. Let us see if Elijah comes to take Him down.”
MRK	15	37	예수께서 큰 소리를 지르시고 운명하시다	And Jesus cried with a loud voice, and gave up the ghost.	But Jesus let out a loud cry and breathed His last.
MRK	15	38	이에 성소 휘장이 위로부터 아래까지 찢어져 둘이 되니라	And the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom.	And the veil of the temple was torn in two from top to bottom.
MRK	15	39	예수를 향하여 섰던 백부장이 그렇게 운명하심을 보고 가로되 이 사람은 진실로 하나님의 아들이었도다 하더라	And when the centurion, which stood over against him, saw that he so cried out, and gave up the ghost, he said, Truly this man was the Son of God.	When the centurion standing there in front of Jesus saw how He had breathed His last, he said, “Truly this man was the Son of God!”
MRK	15	40	멀리서 바라보는 여자들도 있는데 그 중에 막달라 마리아와 또 작은 야고보와 요세의 어머니 마리아와 또 살로메가 있었으니	There were also women looking on afar off: among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the less and of Joses, and Salome;	And there were also women watching from a distance. Among them were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James the younger and of Joses, and Salome.
MRK	15	41	이들은 예수께서 갈릴리에 계실 때에 좇아 섬기던 자요 또 이 외에도 예수와 함께 예루살렘에 올라온 여자가 많이 있었더라	(Who also, when he was in Galilee, followed him, and ministered unto him;) and many other women which came up with him unto Jerusalem.	These women had followed Jesus and ministered to Him while He was in Galilee, and there were many other women who had come up to Jerusalem with Him.
MRK	15	42	이 날은 예비일 곧 안식일 전날이므로 저물었을 때에	And now when the even was come, because it was the preparation, that is, the day before the sabbath,	Now it was already evening. Since it was Preparation Day (that is, the day before the Sabbath),
MRK	15	43	아리마대 사람 요셉이 와서 당돌히 빌라도에게 들어가 예수의 시체를 달라 하니 이 사람은 존귀한 공회원이요 하나님의 나라를 기다리는 자라	Joseph of Arimathea, an honourable counsellor, which also waited for the kingdom of God, came, and went in boldly unto Pilate, and craved the body of Jesus.	Joseph of Arimathea, a prominent Council member who himself was waiting for the kingdom of God, boldly went to Pilate to ask for the body of Jesus.
MRK	15	44	빌라도는 예수께서 벌써 죽었을까 하고 이상히 여겨 백부장을 불러 죽은지 오래냐 묻고	And Pilate marvelled if he were already dead: and calling unto him the centurion, he asked him whether he had been any while dead.	Pilate was surprised to hear that Jesus was already dead, so he summoned the centurion to ask if this was so.
MRK	15	45	백부장에게 알아 본 후에 요셉에게 시체를 내어주는지라	And when he knew it of the centurion, he gave the body to Joseph.	When Pilate had confirmed it with the centurion, he granted the body to Joseph.
MRK	15	46	요셉이 세마포를 사고 예수를 내려다가 이것으로 싸서 바위 속에 판 무덤에 넣어 두고 돌을 굴려 무덤 문에 놓으매	And he bought fine linen, and took him down, and wrapped him in the linen, and laid him in a sepulchre which was hewn out of a rock, and rolled a stone unto the door of the sepulchre.	So Joseph bought a linen cloth, took down the body of Jesus, wrapped it in the cloth, and placed it in a tomb that had been cut out of the rock. Then he rolled a stone against the entrance to the tomb.
MRK	15	47	때에 막달라 마리아와 요세의 어머니 마리아가 예수 둔 곳을 보더라	And Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses beheld where he was laid.	Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joseph saw where His body was placed.
MRK	16	1	안식일이 지나매 막달라 마리아와 야고보의 어머니 마리아와 또 살로메가 가서 예수께 바르기 위하여 향품을 사다 두었다가	And when the sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, and Salome, had bought sweet spices, that they might come and anoint him.	When the Sabbath was over, Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James, and Salome bought spices so they could go and anoint the body of Jesus.
MRK	16	2	안식 후 첫날 매우 일찍이 해 돋은 때에 그 무덤으로 가며	And very early in the morning the first day of the week, they came unto the sepulchre at the rising of the sun.	Very early on the first day of the week, just after sunrise, they went to the tomb.
MRK	16	3	서로 말하되 누가 우리를 위하여 무덤 문에서 돌을 굴려 주리요 하더니	And they said among themselves, Who shall roll us away the stone from the door of the sepulchre?	They were asking one another, “Who will roll away the stone from the entrance of the tomb?”
MRK	16	4	눈을 들어 본즉 돌이 벌써 굴려졌으니 그 돌이 심히 크더라	And when they looked, they saw that the stone was rolled away: for it was very great.	But when they looked up, they saw that the stone had been rolled away, even though it was extremely large.
MRK	16	5	무덤에 들어가서 흰 옷을 입은 한 청년이 우편에 앉은 것을 보고 놀라매	And entering into the sepulchre, they saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a long white garment; and they were affrighted.	When they entered the tomb, they saw a young man dressed in a white robe sitting on the right side, and they were alarmed.
MRK	16	6	청년이 이르되 놀라지 말라 너희가 십자가에 못 박히신 나사렛 예수를 찾는구나 그가 살아나셨고 여기 계시지 아니하니라 보라 그를 두었던 곳이니라	And he saith unto them, Be not affrighted: Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified: he is risen; he is not here: behold the place where they laid him.	But he said to them, “Do not be alarmed. You are looking for Jesus the Nazarene, who was crucified. He has risen! He is not here! See the place where they put Him.
MRK	16	7	가서 그의 제자들과 베드로에게 이르기를 예수께서 너희보다 먼저 갈릴리로 가시나니 전에 너희에게 말씀하신 대로 너희가 거기서 뵈오리라 하라 하는지라	But go your way, tell his disciples and Peter that he goeth before you into Galilee: there shall ye see him, as he said unto you.	But go, tell His disciples and Peter, ‘He is going ahead of you into Galilee. There you will see Him, just as He told you.’”
MRK	16	8	여자들이 심히 놀라 떨며 나와 무덤에서 도망하고 무서워하여 아무에게 아무 말도 하지 못하더라	And they went out quickly, and fled from the sepulchre; for they trembled and were amazed: neither said they any thing to any man; for they were afraid.	So the women left the tomb and ran away, trembling and bewildered. And in their fear they did not say a word to anyone.
MRK	16	9	[예수께서 안식 후 첫날 이른 아침에 살아나신 후 전에 일곱 귀신을 쫓아내어 주신 막달라 마리아에게 먼저 보이시니	Now when Jesus was risen early the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven devils.	Early on the first day of the week, after Jesus had risen, He appeared first to Mary Magdalene, from whom He had driven out seven demons.
MRK	16	10	마리아가 가서 예수와 함께 하던 사람들의 슬퍼하며 울고 있는 중에 이 일을 고하매	And she went and told them that had been with him, as they mourned and wept.	She went and told those who had been with Him, who were mourning and weeping.
MRK	16	11	그들은 예수의 살으셨다는 것과 마리아에게 보이셨다는 것을 듣고도 믿지 아니하니라	And they, when they had heard that he was alive, and had been seen of her, believed not.	And when they heard that Jesus was alive and she had seen Him, they did not believe it.
MRK	16	12	그 후에 저희 중 두 사람이 걸어서 시골로 갈 때에 예수께서 다른 모양으로 저희에게 나타나시니	After that he appeared in another form unto two of them, as they walked, and went into the country.	After this, Jesus appeared in a different form to two of them as they walked along in the country.
MRK	16	13	두 사람이 가서 남은 제자들에게 고하였으되 역시 믿지 아니하니라	And they went and told it unto the residue: neither believed they them.	And they went back and reported it to the rest, but they did not believe them either.
MRK	16	14	그 후에 열한 제자가 음식 먹을 때에 예수께서 저희에게 나타나사 저희의 믿음 없는 것과 마음이 완악한 것을 꾸짖으시니 이는 자기의 살아난 것을 본 자들의 말을 믿지 아니함일러라	Afterward he appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat, and upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they believed not them which had seen him after he was risen.	Later, as they were eating, Jesus appeared to the Eleven and rebuked them for their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they did not believe those who had seen Him after He had risen.
MRK	16	15	또 가라사대 너희는 온 천하에 다니며 만민에게 복음을 전파하라	And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature.	And He said to them, “Go into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature.
MRK	16	16	믿고 침례를 받는 사람은 구원을 얻을 것이요 믿지 않는 사람은 정죄를 받으리라	He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned.	Whoever believes and is baptized will be saved, but whoever does not believe will be condemned.
MRK	16	17	믿는 자들에게는 이런 표적이 따르리니 곧 저희가 내 이름으로 귀신을 쫓아내며 새 방언을 말하며	And these signs shall follow them that believe; In my name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues;	And these signs will accompany those who believe: In My name they will drive out demons; they will speak in new tongues;
MRK	16	18	뱀을 집으며 무슨 독을 마실지라도 해를 받지 아니하며 병든 사람에게 손을 얹은즉 나으리라 하시더라	They shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover.	they will pick up snakes with their hands, and if they drink any deadly poison, it will not harm them; they will lay their hands on the sick, and they will be made well.”
MRK	16	19	주 예수께서 말씀을 마치신 후에 하늘로 올리우사 하나님 우편에 앉으시니라	So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God.	After the Lord Jesus had spoken to them, He was taken up into heaven and sat down at the right hand of God.
MRK	16	20	제자들이 나가 두루 전파할새 주께서 함께 역사하사 그 따르는 표적으로 말씀을 확실히 증거하시니라]	And they went forth, and preached every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with signs following. Amen.	And they went out and preached everywhere, and the Lord worked through them, confirming His word by the signs that accompanied it.
LUK	1	1	우리 중에 이루어진 사실에 대하여	Forasmuch as many have taken in hand to set forth in order a declaration of those things which are most surely believed among us,	Many have undertaken to compose an account of the things that have been fulfilled among us,
LUK	1	2	처음부터 말씀의 목격자 되고 일꾼 된 자들의 전하여 준 그대로 내력을 저술하려고 붓을 든 사람이 많은지라	Even as they delivered them unto us, which from the beginning were eyewitnesses, and ministers of the word;	just as they were handed down to us by the initial eyewitnesses and servants of the word.
LUK	1	3	그 모든 일을 근원부터 자세히 미루어 살핀 나도 데오빌로 각하에게 차례대로 써 보내는 것이 좋은 줄 알았노니	It seemed good to me also, having had perfect understanding of all things from the very first, to write unto thee in order, most excellent Theophilus,	Therefore, having carefully investigated everything from the beginning, it seemed good also to me to write an orderly account for you, most excellent Theophilus,
LUK	1	4	이는 각하로 그 배운 바의 확실함을 알게 하려 함이로다	That thou mightest know the certainty of those things, wherein thou hast been instructed.	so that you may know the certainty of the things you have been taught.
LUK	1	5	유대 왕 헤롯 때에 아비야 반열에 제사장 하나가 있으니 이름은 사가랴요 그 아내는 아론의 자손이니 이름은 엘리사벳이라	There was in the days of Herod, the king of Judea, a certain priest named Zacharias, of the course of Abia: and his wife was of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elisabeth.	In the time of Herod king of Judea there was a priest named Zechariah, who belonged to the priestly division of Abijah, and whose wife Elizabeth was a daughter of Aaron.
LUK	1	6	이 두 사람이 하나님 앞에 의인이니 주의 모든 계명과 규례대로 흠이 없이 행하더라	And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless.	Both of them were righteous in the sight of God, walking blamelessly in all the commandments and decrees of the Lord.
LUK	1	7	엘리사벳이 수태를 못하므로 저희가 무자하고 두 사람의 나이 많더라	And they had no child, because that Elisabeth was barren, and they both were now well stricken in years.	But they had no children, because Elizabeth was barren, and they were both well along in years.
LUK	1	8	마침 사가랴가 그 반열의 차례대로 제사장의 직무를 하나님 앞에 행할새	And it came to pass, that while he executed the priest’s office before God in the order of his course,	One day while Zechariah’s division was on duty and he was serving as priest before God,
LUK	1	9	제사장의 전례를 따라 제비를 뽑아 주의 성소에 들어가 분향하고	According to the custom of the priest’s office, his lot was to burn incense when he went into the temple of the Lord.	he was chosen by lot, according to the custom of the priesthood, to enter the temple of the Lord and burn incense.
LUK	1	10	모든 백성은 그 분향하는 시간에 밖에서 기도하더니	And the whole multitude of the people were praying without at the time of incense.	And at the hour of the incense offering, the whole congregation was praying outside.
LUK	1	11	주의 사자가 저에게 나타나 향단 우편에 선지라	And there appeared unto him an angel of the Lord standing on the right side of the altar of incense.	Just then an angel of the Lord appeared to Zechariah, standing at the right side of the altar of incense.
LUK	1	12	사가랴가 보고 놀라며 무서워하니	And when Zacharias saw him, he was troubled, and fear fell upon him.	When Zechariah saw him, he was startled and gripped with fear.
LUK	1	13	천사가 일러 가로되 사가랴여 무서워 말라 너의 간구함이 들린지라 네 아내 엘리사벳이 네게 아들을 낳아 주리니 그 이름을 요한이라 하라	But the angel said unto him, Fear not, Zacharias: for thy prayer is heard; and thy wife Elisabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name John.	But the angel said to him, “Do not be afraid, Zechariah, because your prayer has been heard. Your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son, and you are to give him the name John.
LUK	1	14	너도 기뻐하고 즐거워할 것이요 많은 사람도 그의 남을 기뻐하리니	And thou shalt have joy and gladness; and many shall rejoice at his birth.	He will be a joy and delight to you, and many will rejoice at his birth,
LUK	1	15	이는 저가 주 앞에 큰 자가 되며 포도주나 소주를 마시지 아니하며 모태로부터 성령의 충만함을 입어	For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and shall drink neither wine nor strong drink; and he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his mother’s womb.	for he will be great in the sight of the Lord. He shall never take wine or strong drink, and he will be filled with the Holy Spirit even from his mother’s womb.
LUK	1	16	이스라엘 자손을 주 곧 저희 하나님께로 많이 돌아오게 하겠음이니라	And many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God.	Many of the sons of Israel he will turn back to the Lord their God.
LUK	1	17	저가 또 엘리야의 심령과 능력으로 주 앞에 앞서 가서 아비의 마음을 자식에게, 거스리는 자를 의인의 슬기에 돌아오게 하고 주를 위하여 세운 백성을 예비하리라	And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.	And he will go on before the Lord in the spirit and power of Elijah, to turn the hearts of the fathers to their children and the disobedient to the wisdom of the righteous—to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.”
LUK	1	18	사가랴가 천사에게 이르되 내가 이것을 어떻게 알리요 내가 늙고 아내도 나이 많으니이다	And Zacharias said unto the angel, Whereby shall I know this? for I am an old man, and my wife well stricken in years.	“How can I be sure of this?” Zechariah asked the angel. “I am an old man, and my wife is well along in years.”
LUK	1	19	천사가 대답하여 가로되 나는 하나님 앞에 섰는 가브리엘이라 이 좋은 소식을 전하여 네게 말하라고 보내심을 입었노라	And the angel answering said unto him, I am Gabriel, that stand in the presence of God; and am sent to speak unto thee, and to shew thee these glad tidings.	“I am Gabriel,” replied the angel. “I stand in the presence of God, and I have been sent to speak to you and to bring you this good news.
LUK	1	20	보라 이 일의 되는 날까지 네가 벙어리가 되어 능히 말을 못하리니 이는 내 말을 네가 믿지 아니함이어니와 때가 이르면 내 말이 이루리라 하더라	And, behold, thou shalt be dumb, and not able to speak, until the day that these things shall be performed, because thou believest not my words, which shall be fulfilled in their season.	And now you will be silent and unable to speak until the day this comes to pass, because you did not believe my words, which will be fulfilled at their proper time.”
LUK	1	21	백성들이 사가랴를 기다리며 그의 성소 안에서 지체함을 기이히 여기더니	And the people waited for Zacharias, and marvelled that he tarried so long in the temple.	Meanwhile, the people were waiting for Zechariah and wondering why he took so long in the temple.
LUK	1	22	그가 나와서 저희에게 말을 못하니 백성들이 그 성소 안에서 이상을 본 줄 알았더라 그가 형용으로 뜻을 표시하며 그냥 벙어리대로 있더니	And when he came out, he could not speak unto them: and they perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple: for he beckoned unto them, and remained speechless.	When he came out and was unable to speak to them, they realized he had seen a vision in the temple. He kept making signs to them but remained speechless.
LUK	1	23	그 직무의 날이 다 되매 집으로 돌아가니라	And it came to pass, that, as soon as the days of his ministration were accomplished, he departed to his own house.	And when the days of his service were complete, he returned home.
LUK	1	24	이 후에 그 아내 엘리사벳이 수태하고 다섯 달 동안 숨어 있으며 가로되	And after those days his wife Elisabeth conceived, and hid herself five months, saying,	After these days, his wife Elizabeth became pregnant and for five months remained in seclusion. She declared,
LUK	1	25	주께서 나를 돌아보시는 날에 인간에 내 부끄러움을 없게 하시려고 이렇게 행하심이라 하더라	Thus hath the Lord dealt with me in the days wherein he looked on me, to take away my reproach among men.	“The Lord has done this for me. In these days He has shown me favor and taken away my disgrace among the people.”
LUK	1	26	여섯째 달에 천사 가브리엘이 하나님의 보내심을 받들어 갈릴리 나사렛이란 동네에 가서	And in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city of Galilee, named Nazareth,	In the sixth month, God sent the angel Gabriel to a town in Galilee called Nazareth,
LUK	1	27	다윗의 자손 요셉이라 하는 사람과 정혼한 처녀에게 이르니 그 처녀의 이름은 마리아라	To a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David; and the virgin’s name was Mary.	to a virgin pledged in marriage to a man named Joseph, who was of the house of David. And the virgin’s name was Mary.
LUK	1	28	그에게 들어가 가로되 은혜를 받은 자여 평안할지어다 주께서 너와 함께 하시도다 하니	And the angel came in unto her, and said, Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women.	The angel appeared to her and said, “Greetings, you who are highly favored! The Lord is with you.”
LUK	1	29	처녀가 그 말을 듣고 놀라 이런 인사가 어찌함인고 생각하매	And when she saw him, she was troubled at his saying, and cast in her mind what manner of salutation this should be.	Mary was greatly troubled at his words and wondered what kind of greeting this might be.
LUK	1	30	천사가 일러 가로되 마리아여 무서워 말라 네가 하나님께 은혜를 얻었느니라	And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found favour with God.	So the angel told her, “Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God.
LUK	1	31	보라 네가 수태하여 아들을 낳으리니 그 이름을 예수라 하라	And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shalt call his name JESUS.	Behold, you will conceive and give birth to a son, and you are to give Him the name Jesus.
LUK	1	32	저가 큰 자가 되고 지극히 높은신 이의 아들이라 일컬을 것이요 주 하나님께서 그 조상 다윗의 위를 저에게 주시리니	He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest: and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David:	He will be great and will be called the Son of the Most High. The Lord God will give Him the throne of His father David,
LUK	1	33	영원히 야곱의 집에 왕노릇하실 것이며 그 나라가 무궁하리라	And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end.	and He will reign over the house of Jacob forever. His kingdom will never end!”
LUK	1	34	마리아가 천사에게 말하되 나는 사내를 알지 못하니 어찌 이 일이 있으리이까	Then said Mary unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?	“How can this be,” Mary asked the angel, “since I am a virgin?”
LUK	1	35	천사가 대답하여 가로되 성령이 네게 임하시고 지극히 높으신 이의 능력이 너를 덮으시리니 이러므로 나실 바 거룩한 자는 하나님의 아들이라 일컬으리라	And the angel answered and said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God.	The angel replied, “The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you. So the Holy One to be born will be called the Son of God.
LUK	1	36	보라 네 친족 엘리사벳도 늙어서 아들을 배었느니라 본래 수태하지 못한다 하던 이가 이미 여섯 달이 되었나니	And, behold, thy cousin Elisabeth, she hath also conceived a son in her old age: and this is the sixth month with her, who was called barren.	Look, even Elizabeth your relative has conceived a son in her old age, and she who was called barren is in her sixth month.
LUK	1	37	대저 하나님의 모든 말씀은 능치 못하심이 없느니라	For with God nothing shall be impossible.	For no word from God will ever fail.”
LUK	1	38	마리아가 가로되 주의 계집종이오니 말씀대로 내게 이루어지이다 하매 천사가 떠나가니라	And Mary said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word. And the angel departed from her.	“I am the Lord’s servant,” Mary answered. “May it happen to me according to your word.” Then the angel left her.
LUK	1	39	이 때에 마리아가 일어나 빨리 산중에 가서 유대 한 동네에 이르러	And Mary arose in those days, and went into the hill country with haste, into a city of Juda;	In those days Mary got ready and hurried to a town in the hill country of Judah,
LUK	1	40	사가랴의 집에 들어가 엘리사벳에게 문안하니	And entered into the house of Zacharias, and saluted Elisabeth.	where she entered the home of Zechariah and greeted Elizabeth.
LUK	1	41	엘리사벳이 마리아의 문안함을 들으매 아이가 복중에서 뛰노는지라 엘리사벳이 성령의 충만함을 입어	And it came to pass, that, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost:	When Elizabeth heard Mary’s greeting, the baby leaped in her womb, and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit.
LUK	1	42	큰 소리로 불러 가로되 여자 중에 네가 복이 있으며 네 태중의 아이도 복이 있도다	And she spake out with a loud voice, and said, Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb.	In a loud voice she exclaimed, “Blessed are you among women, and blessed is the fruit of your womb!
LUK	1	43	내 주의 모친이 내게 나아오니 이 어찌 된 일인고	And whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me?	And why am I so honored, that the mother of my Lord should come to me?
LUK	1	44	보라 네 문안하는 소리가 내 귀에 들릴 때에 아이가 내 복중에서 기쁨으로 뛰놀았도다	For, lo, as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my womb for joy.	For as soon as the sound of your greeting reached my ears, the baby in my womb leaped for joy.
LUK	1	45	믿은 여자에게 복이 있도다 주께서 그에게 하신 말씀이 반드시 이루리라	And blessed is she that believed: for there shall be a performance of those things which were told her from the Lord.	Blessed is she who has believed that the Lord’s word to her will be fulfilled.”
LUK	1	46	마리아가 가로되 내 영혼이 주를 찬양하며	And Mary said, My soul doth magnify the Lord,	Then Mary said: “My soul magnifies the Lord,
LUK	1	47	내 마음이 하나님 내 구주를 기뻐하였음은	And my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour.	and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior!
LUK	1	48	그 계집종의 비천함을 돌아 보셨음이라 보라 이제 후로는 만세에 나를 복이 있다 일컬으리로다	For he hath regarded the low estate of his handmaiden: for, behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.	For He has looked with favor on the humble state of His servant. From now on all generations will call me blessed.
LUK	1	49	능하신 이가 큰 일을 내게 행하셨으니 그 이름이 거룩하시며	For he that is mighty hath done to me great things; and holy is his name.	For the Mighty One has done great things for me. Holy is His name.
LUK	1	50	긍휼하심이 두려워하는 자에게 대대로 이르는도다	And his mercy is on them that fear him from generation to generation.	His mercy extends to those who fear Him, from generation to generation.
LUK	1	51	그의 팔로 힘을 보이사 마음의 생각이 교만한 자들을 흩으셨고	He hath shewed strength with his arm; he hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts.	He has performed mighty deeds with His arm; He has scattered those who are proud in the thoughts of their hearts.
LUK	1	52	권세 있는 자를 그 위에서 내리치셨으며 비천한 자를 높이셨고	He hath put down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low degree.	He has brought down rulers from their thrones, but has exalted the humble.
LUK	1	53	주리는 자를 좋은 것으로 배불리셨으며 부자를 공수로 보내셨도다	He hath filled the hungry with good things; and the rich he hath sent empty away.	He has filled the hungry with good things, but has sent the rich away empty.
LUK	1	54	그 종 이스라엘을 도우사 궁휼히 여기시고 기억하시되	He hath holpen his servant Israel, in remembrance of his mercy;	He has helped His servant Israel, remembering to be merciful,
LUK	1	55	우리 조상에게 말씀하신 것과 같이 아브라함과 및 그 자손에게 영원히 하시리로다 하니라	As he spake to our fathers, to Abraham, and to his seed for ever.	as He promised to our fathers, to Abraham and his descendants forever.”
LUK	1	56	마리아가 석 달쯤 함께 있다가 집으로 돌아가니라	And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned to her own house.	Mary stayed with Elizabeth for about three months and then returned home.
LUK	1	57	엘리사벳이 해산할 기한이 차서 아들을 낳으니	Now Elisabeth’s full time came that she should be delivered; and she brought forth a son.	When the time came for Elizabeth to have her child, she gave birth to a son.
LUK	1	58	이웃과 친족이 주께서 저를 크게 긍휼히 여기심을 듣고 함께 즐거워하더라	And her neighbours and her cousins heard how the Lord had shewed great mercy upon her; and they rejoiced with her.	Her neighbors and relatives heard that the Lord had shown her great mercy, and they rejoiced with her.
LUK	1	59	팔 일이 되매 아이를 할례하러 와서 그 부친의 이름을 따라 사가랴라 하고자 하더니	And it came to pass, that on the eighth day they came to circumcise the child; and they called him Zacharias, after the name of his father.	On the eighth day, when they came to circumcise the child, they were going to name him after his father Zechariah.
LUK	1	60	그 모친이 대답하여 가로되 아니라 요한이라 할 것이라 하매	And his mother answered and said, Not so; but he shall be called John.	But his mother replied, “No! He shall be called John.”
LUK	1	61	저희가 가로되 네 친족 중에 이 이름으로 이름한 이가 없다 하고	And they said unto her, There is none of thy kindred that is called by this name.	They said to her, “There is no one among your relatives who bears this name.”
LUK	1	62	그 부친께 형용하여 무엇으로 이름하려 하는가 물으니	And they made signs to his father, how he would have him called.	So they made signs to his father to find out what he wanted to name the child.
LUK	1	63	저가 서판을 달라 하여 그 이름은 요한이라 쓰매 다 기이히 여기더라	And he asked for a writing table, and wrote, saying, His name is John. And they marvelled all.	Zechariah asked for a tablet and wrote, “His name is John.” And they were all amazed.
LUK	1	64	이에 그 입이 곧 열리고 혀가 풀리며 말을 하여 하나님을 찬송하니	And his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue loosed, and he spake, and praised God.	Immediately Zechariah’s mouth was opened and his tongue was released, and he began to speak, praising God.
LUK	1	65	그 근처에 사는 자가 다 두려워하고 이 모든 말이 온 유대 산중에 두루 퍼지매	And fear came on all that dwelt round about them: and all these sayings were noised abroad throughout all the hill country of Judea.	All their neighbors were filled with awe, and people throughout the hill country of Judea were talking about these events.
LUK	1	66	듣는 사람이 다 이 말을 마음에 두며 가로되 이 아이가 장차 어찌 될꼬 하니 이는 주의 손이 저와 함께 하심이러라	And all they that heard them laid them up in their hearts, saying, What manner of child shall this be! And the hand of the Lord was with him.	And all who heard this wondered in their hearts and asked, “What then will this child become?” For the Lord’s hand was with him.
LUK	1	67	그 부친 사가랴가 성령의 충만함을 입어 예언하여 가로되	And his father Zacharias was filled with the Holy Ghost, and prophesied, saying,	Then his father Zechariah was filled with the Holy Spirit and prophesied:
LUK	1	68	찬송하리로다 주 이스라엘의 하나님이여 그 백성을 돌아보사 속량하시며	Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; for he hath visited and redeemed his people,	“Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, because He has visited and redeemed His people.
LUK	1	69	우리를 위하여 구원의 뿔을 그 종 다윗의 집에 일으키셨으니	And hath raised up an horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David;	He has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of His servant David,
LUK	1	70	이것은 주께서 예로부터 거룩한 선지자의 입으로 말씀하신 바와 같이	As he spake by the mouth of his holy prophets, which have been since the world began:	as He spoke through His holy prophets, those of ages past,
LUK	1	71	우리 원수에게서와 우리를 미워하는 모든 자의 손에서 구원하시는 구원이라	That we should be saved from our enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us;	salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all who hate us,
LUK	1	72	우리 조상을 긍휼히 여기시며 그 거룩한 언약을 기억하셨으니	To perform the mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy covenant;	to show mercy to our fathers and to remember His holy covenant,
LUK	1	73	곧 우리 조상 아브라함에게 맹세하신 맹세라	The oath which he sware to our father Abraham,	the oath He swore to our father Abraham, to grant us
LUK	1	74	우리로 원수의 손에서 건지심을 입고	That he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the hand of our enemies might serve him without fear,	deliverance from hostile hands, that we may serve Him without fear,
LUK	1	75	종신토록 주의 앞에서 성결과 의로 두려움이 없이 섬기게 하리라 하셨도다	In holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our life.	in holiness and righteousness before Him all the days of our lives.
LUK	1	76	이 아이여 네가 지극히 높으신 이의 선지자라 일컬음을 받고 주 앞에 앞서 가서 그 길을 예비하여	And thou, child, shalt be called the prophet of the Highest: for thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways;	And you, child, will be called a prophet of the Most High; for you will go on before the Lord to prepare the way for Him,
LUK	1	77	주의 백성에게 그 죄 사함으로 말미암는 구원을 알게 하리니	To give knowledge of salvation unto his people by the remission of their sins,	to give to His people the knowledge of salvation through the forgiveness of their sins,
LUK	1	78	이는 우리 하나님의 긍휼을 인함이라 이로써 돋는 해가 위로부터 우리에게 임하여	Through the tender mercy of our God; whereby the dayspring from on high hath visited us,	because of the tender mercy of our God, by which the Dawn will visit us from on high,
LUK	1	79	어두움과 죽음의 그늘에 앉은 자에게 비취고 우리 발을 평강의 길로 인도하시리로다 하니라	To give light to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of peace.	to shine on those who live in darkness and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the path of peace.”
LUK	1	80	아이가 자라며 심령이 강하여지며 이스라엘에게 나타나는 날까지 빈 들에 있으니라	And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the deserts till the day of his shewing unto Israel.	And the child grew and became strong in spirit; and he lived in the wilderness until the time of his public appearance to Israel.
LUK	2	1	이 때에 가이사 아구스도가 영을 내려 천하로 다 호적하라 하였으니	And it came to pass in those days, that there went out a decree from Cesar Augustus, that all the world should be taxed.	Now in those days a decree went out from Caesar Augustus that a census should be taken of the whole empire.
LUK	2	2	이 호적은 구레뇨가 수리아 총독 되었을 때에 첫번 한 것이라	(And this taxing was first made when Cyrenius was governor of Syria.)	This was the first census to take place while Quirinius was governor of Syria.
LUK	2	3	모든 사람이 호적하러 각각 고향으로 돌아가매	And all went to be taxed, every one into his own city.	And everyone went to his own town to register.
LUK	2	4	요셉도 다윗의 집 족속인고로 갈릴리 나사렛 동네에서 유대를 향하여 베들레헴이라 하는 다윗의 동네로	And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judea, unto the city of David, which is called Bethlehem; (because he was of the house and lineage of David:)	So Joseph also went up from Nazareth in Galilee to Judea, to the city of David called Bethlehem, since he was from the house and line of David.
LUK	2	5	그 정혼한 마리아아 함께 호적하러 올라가니 마리아가 이미 잉태되었더라	To be taxed with Mary his espoused wife, being great with child.	He went there to register with Mary, who was pledged to him in marriage and was expecting a child.
LUK	2	6	거기 있을 그 때에 해산할 날이 차서	And so it was, that, while they were there, the days were accomplished that she should be delivered.	While they were there, the time came for her Child to be born.
LUK	2	7	맏아들을 낳아 강보로 싸서 구유에 뉘었으니 이는 사관에 있을 곳이 없음이러라	And she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger; because there was no room for them in the inn.	And she gave birth to her firstborn, a Son. She wrapped Him in swaddling cloths and laid Him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the inn.
LUK	2	8	그 지경에 목자들이 밖에서 밤에 자기 양떼를 지키더니	And there were in the same country shepherds abiding in the field, keeping watch over their flock by night.	And there were shepherds residing in the fields nearby, keeping watch over their flocks by night.
LUK	2	9	주의 사자가 곁에 서고 주의 영광이 저희를 두루 비취매 크게 무서워하는지라	And, lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them: and they were sore afraid.	Just then an angel of the Lord stood before them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they were terrified.
LUK	2	10	천사가 이르되 무서워 말라 보라 내가 온 백성에게 미칠 큰 기쁨의 좋은 소식을 너희에게 전하노라	And the angel said unto them, Fear not: for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people.	But the angel said to them, “Do not be afraid! For behold, I bring you good news of great joy that will be for all the people:
LUK	2	11	오늘날 다윗의 동네에 너희를 위하여 구주가 나셨으니 곧 그리스도 주시니라	For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord.	Today in the city of David a Savior has been born to you. He is Christ the Lord!
LUK	2	12	너희가 가서 강보에 싸여 구유에 누인 아기를 보리니 이것이 너희에게 표적이니라 하더니	And this shall be a sign unto you; Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger.	And this will be a sign to you: You will find a baby wrapped in swaddling cloths and lying in a manger.”
LUK	2	13	홀연히 허다한 천군이 그 천사와 함께 있어 하나님을 찬송하여 가로되	And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying,	And suddenly there appeared with the angel a great multitude of the heavenly host, praising God and saying:
LUK	2	14	지극히 높은 곳에서는 하나님께 영광이요 땅에서는 기뻐하심을 입은 사람들 중에 평화로다 하니라	Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.	“Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace to men on whom His favor rests!”
LUK	2	15	천사들이 떠나 하늘로 올라가니 목자가 서로 말하되 이제 베들레헴까지 가서 주께서 우리에게 알리신 바 이 이루어진 일을 보자 하고	And it came to pass, as the angels were gone away from them into heaven, the shepherds said one to another, Let us now go even unto Bethlehem, and see this thing which is come to pass, which the Lord hath made known unto us.	When the angels had left them and gone into heaven, the shepherds said to one another, “Let us go to Bethlehem and see this thing that has happened, which the Lord has made known to us.”
LUK	2	16	빨리 가서 마리아와 요셉과 구유에 누인 아기를 찾아서	And they came with haste, and found Mary, and Joseph, and the babe lying in a manger.	So they hurried off and found Mary and Joseph and the Baby, who was lying in the manger.
LUK	2	17	보고 천사가 자기들에게 이 아기에 대하여 말한 것을 고하니	And when they had seen it, they made known abroad the saying which was told them concerning this child.	After they had seen the Child, they spread the message they had received about Him.
LUK	2	18	듣는 자가 다 목자의 말하는 일을 기이히 여기되	And all they that heard it wondered at those things which were told them by the shepherds.	And all who heard it were amazed at what the shepherds said to them.
LUK	2	19	마리아는 이 모든 말을 마음에 지키어 생각하니라	But Mary kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart.	But Mary treasured up all these things and pondered them in her heart.
LUK	2	20	목자가 자기들에게 이르던 바와 같이 듣고 본 그 모든 것을 인하여 하나님께 영광을 돌리고 찬송하며 돌아가니라	And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things that they had heard and seen, as it was told unto them.	The shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all they had heard and seen, which was just as the angel had told them.
LUK	2	21	할례할 팔 일이 되매 그 이름을 예수라 하니 곧 수태하기 전에 천사의 일컬은 바러라	And when eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of the child, his name was called JESUS, which was so named of the angel before he was conceived in the womb.	When the eight days until His circumcision had passed, He was named Jesus, the name the angel had given Him before He had been conceived.
LUK	2	22	모세의 법대로 결례의 날이 차매 아기를 데리고 예루살렘에 올라가니	And when the days of her purification according to the law of Moses were accomplished, they brought him to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord;	And when the time of purification according to the Law of Moses was complete, His parents brought Him to Jerusalem to present Him to the Lord
LUK	2	23	이는 주의 율법에 쓴 바 첫 태에 처음 난 남자마다 주의 거룩한 자라 하리라 한 대로 아기를 주께 드리고	(As it is written in the law of the Lord, Every male that openeth the womb shall be called holy to the Lord;)	(as it is written in the Law of the Lord: “Every firstborn male shall be consecrated to the Lord”),
LUK	2	24	또 주의 율법에 말씀하신 대로 비둘기 한 쌍이나 혹 어린 반구 둘로 제사하려 함이더라	And to offer a sacrifice according to that which is said in the law of the Lord, A pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons.	and to offer the sacrifice specified in the Law of the Lord: “A pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons.”
LUK	2	25	예루살렘에 시므온이라 하는 사람이 있으니 이 사람이 의롭고 경건하여 이스라엘의 위로를 기다리는 자라 성령이 그 위에 계시더라	And, behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon; and the same man was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel: and the Holy Ghost was upon him.	Now there was a man in Jerusalem named Simeon, who was righteous and devout. He was waiting for the consolation of Israel, and the Holy Spirit was upon him.
LUK	2	26	저가 주의 그리스도를 보기 전에 죽지 아니하리라 하는 성령의 지시를 받았더니	And it was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost, that he should not see death, before he had seen the Lord’s Christ.	The Holy Spirit had revealed to him that he would not see death before he had seen the Lord’s Christ.
LUK	2	27	성령의 감동으로 성전에 들어가매 마침 부모가 율법의 전례대로 행하고자 하여 그 아기 예수를 데리고 오는지라	And he came by the Spirit into the temple: and when the parents brought in the child Jesus, to do for him after the custom of the law,	Led by the Spirit, he went into the temple courts. And when the parents brought in the child Jesus to do for Him what was customary under the Law,
LUK	2	28	시므온이 아기를 안고 하나님을 찬송하여 가로되	Then took he him up in his arms, and blessed God, and said,	Simeon took Him in his arms and blessed God, saying:
LUK	2	29	주재여 이제는 말씀하신 대로 종을 평안히 놓아 주시는도다	Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word:	“Sovereign Lord, as You have promised, You now dismiss Your servant in peace.
LUK	2	30	내 눈이 주의 구원을 보았사오니	For mine eyes have seen thy salvation,	For my eyes have seen Your salvation,
LUK	2	31	이는 만민 앞에 예비하신 것이요	Which thou hast prepared before the face of all people;	which You have prepared in the sight of all people,
LUK	2	32	이방을 비추는 빛이요 주의 백성 이스라엘의 영광이니이다 하니	A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel.	a light for revelation to the Gentiles, and for glory to Your people Israel.”
LUK	2	33	그 부모가 그 아기에 대한 말들을 기이히 여기더라	And Joseph and his mother marvelled at those things which were spoken of him.	The Child’s father and mother were amazed at what was spoken about Him.
LUK	2	34	시므온이 저희에게 축복하고 그 모친 마리아에게 일러 가로되 보라 이 아이는 이스라엘 중 많은 사람의 패하고 흥함을 위하여 비방을 받는 표적되기 위하여 세움을 입었고	And Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mary his mother, Behold, this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel; and for a sign which shall be spoken against;	Then Simeon blessed them and said to His mother Mary: “Behold, this Child is appointed to cause the rise and fall of many in Israel, and to be a sign that will be spoken against,
LUK	2	35	또 칼이 네 마음을 찌르듯 하리라 이는 여러 사람의 마음의 생각을 드러내려 함이니라 하더라	(Yea, a sword shall pierce through thy own soul also,) that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.	so that the thoughts of many hearts will be revealed— and a sword will pierce your soul as well.”
LUK	2	36	또 아셀 지파 바누엘의 딸 안나라 하는 선지자가 있어 나이 매우 늙었더라 그가 출가한 후 일곱 해 동안 남편과 함께 살다가	And there was one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Aser: she was of a great age, and had lived with an husband seven years from her virginity;	There was also a prophetess named Anna, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher, who was well along in years. She had been married for seven years,
LUK	2	37	과부 된 지 팔십사 년이라 이 사람이 성전을 떠나지 아니하고 주야에 금식하며 기도함으로 섬기더니	And she was a widow of about fourscore and four years, which departed not from the temple, but served God with fastings and prayers night and day.	and then was a widow to the age of eighty-four. She never left the temple, but worshiped night and day, fasting and praying.
LUK	2	38	마침 이 때에 나아와서 하나님께 감사하고 예루살렘의 구속됨을 바라는 모든 사람에게 이 아기에 대하여 말하니라	And she coming in that instant gave thanks likewise unto the Lord, and spake of him to all them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem.	Coming forward at that moment, she gave thanks to God and spoke about the Child to all who were waiting for the redemption of Jerusalem.
LUK	2	39	주의 율법을 좇아 모든 일을 필하고 갈릴리로 돌아가 본 동네 나사렛에 이르니라	And when they had performed all things according to the law of the Lord, they returned into Galilee, to their own city Nazareth.	When Jesus’ parents had done everything required by the Law of the Lord, they returned to Galilee, to their own town of Nazareth.
LUK	2	40	아기가 자라며 강하여지고 지혜가 충족하며 하나님의 은혜가 그 위에 있더라	And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom: and the grace of God was upon him.	And the Child grew and became strong. He was filled with wisdom, and the grace of God was upon Him.
LUK	2	41	그 부모가 해마다 유월절을 당하면 예루살렘으로 가더니	Now his parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the passover.	Every year His parents went to Jerusalem for the Feast of the Passover.
LUK	2	42	예수께서 열두 살 될 때에 저희가 이 절기의 전례를 좇아 올라갔다가	And when he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem after the custom of the feast.	And when He was twelve years old, they went up according to the custom of the Feast.
LUK	2	43	그 날들을 마치고 돌아갈 때에 아이 예수는 예루살렘에 머무셨더라 그 부모는 이를 알지 못하고	And when they had fulfilled the days, as they returned, the child Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem; and Joseph and his mother knew not of it.	When those days were over and they were returning home, the boy Jesus remained behind in Jerusalem, but His parents were unaware He had stayed.
LUK	2	44	동행 중에 있는 줄로 생각하고 하룻길을 간 후 친족과 아는 자 중에서 찾되	But they, supposing him to have been in the company, went a day’s journey; and they sought him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance.	Assuming He was in their company, they traveled on for a day before they began to look for Him among their relatives and friends.
LUK	2	45	만나지 못하매 찾으면서 예루살렘에 돌아갔더니	And when they found him not, they turned back again to Jerusalem, seeking him.	When they could not find Him, they returned to Jerusalem to search for Him.
LUK	2	46	사흘 후에 성전에서 만난즉 그가 선생들 중에 앉으사 저희에게 듣기도 하시며 묻기도 하시니	And it came to pass, that after three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors, both hearing them, and asking them questions.	Finally, after three days they found Him in the temple courts, sitting among the teachers, listening to them and asking them questions.
LUK	2	47	듣는 자가 다 그 지혜와 대답을 기이히 여기더라	And all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers.	And all who heard Him were astounded at His understanding and His answers.
LUK	2	48	그 부모가 보고 놀라며 그 모친은 가로되 아이야 어찌하여 우리에게 이렇게 하였느냐 보라 네 아버지와 내가 근심하여 너를 찾았노라	And when they saw him, they were amazed: and his mother said unto him, Son, why hast thou thus dealt with us? behold, thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing.	When His parents saw Him, they were astonished. “Child, why have You done this to us?” His mother asked. “Your father and I have been anxiously searching for You.”
LUK	2	49	예수께서 가라사대 어찌하여 나를 찾으셨나이까 내가 내 아버지 집에 있어야 될 줄을 알지 못하셨나이까 하시니	And he said unto them, How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my Father’s business?	“Why were you looking for Me?” He asked. “Did you not know that I had to be in My Father’s house?”
LUK	2	50	양친이 그 하신 말씀을 깨닫지 못하더라	And they understood not the saying which he spake unto them.	But they did not understand the statement He was making to them.
LUK	2	51	예수께서 한가지로 내려가사 나사렛에 이르러 순종하여 받드시더라 그 모친은 이 모든 말을 마음에 두니라	And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject unto them: but his mother kept all these sayings in her heart.	Then He went down to Nazareth with them and was obedient to them. But His mother treasured up all these things in her heart.
LUK	2	52	예수는 그 지혜와 그 키가 자라가며 하나님과 사람에게 더 사랑스러워 가시더라	And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man.	And Jesus grew in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and man.
LUK	3	1	디베료 가이사가 위에 있은지 열다섯 해 곧 본디오 빌라도가 유대의 총독으로, 헤롯이 갈릴리의 분봉왕으로, 그 동생 빌립이 이두래와 드라고닛 지방의 분봉왕으로, 루사니아가 아빌레네의 분봉왕으로,	Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Cesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip tetrarch of Iturea and of the region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias the tetrarch of Abilene,	In the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, while Pontius Pilate was governor of Judea, Herod tetrarch of Galilee, his brother Philip tetrarch of Ituraea and Trachonitis, and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene,
LUK	3	2	안나스와 가야바가 대제사장으로 있을 때에 하나님의 말씀이 빈 들에서 사가랴의 아들 요한에게 임한지라	Annas and Caiaphas being the high priests, the word of God came unto John the son of Zacharias in the wilderness.	during the high priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas, the word of God came to John son of Zechariah in the wilderness.
LUK	3	3	요한이 요단 강 부근 각처에 와서 죄 사함을 얻게 하는 회개의 침례를 전파하니	And he came into all the country about Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins;	He went into all the region around the Jordan, preaching a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins,
LUK	3	4	선지자 이사야의 책에 쓴 바 광야에 외치는 자의 소리가 있어 가로되 너희는 주의 길을 예비하라 그의 첩경을 평탄케 하라	As it is written in the book of the words of Esaias the prophet, saying, The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.	as it is written in the book of the words of Isaiah the prophet: “A voice of one calling in the wilderness, ‘Prepare the way for the Lord, make straight paths for Him.
LUK	3	5	모든 골짜기가 메워지고 모든 산과 작은 산이 낮아지고 굽은 것이 곧아지고 험한 길이 평탄하여질 것이요	Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought low; and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough ways shall be made smooth;	Every valley shall be filled in, and every mountain and hill made low. The crooked ways shall be made straight, and the rough ways smooth.
LUK	3	6	모든 육체가 하나님의 구원하심을 보리라 함과 같으니라	And all flesh shall see the salvation of God.	And all humanity will see God’s salvation.’”
LUK	3	7	요한이 침례 받으러 나오는 무리에게 이르되 독사의 자식들아 누가 너희를 가르쳐 장차 올 진노를 피하라 하더냐	Then said he to the multitude that came forth to be baptized of him, O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come?	Then John said to the crowds coming out to be baptized by him, “You brood of vipers, who warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
LUK	3	8	그러므로 회개에 합당한 열매를 맺고 속으로 아브라함이 우리 조상이라 말하지 말라 내가 너희에게 이르노니 하나님이 능히 이 돌들로도 아브라함의 자손이 되게 하시리라	Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance, and begin not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father: for I say unto you, That God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham.	Produce fruit, then, in keeping with repentance. And do not begin to say to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father.’ For I tell you that out of these stones God can raise up children for Abraham.
LUK	3	9	이미 도끼가 나무 뿌리에 놓였으니 좋은 열매 맺지 아니하는 나무마다 찍혀 불에 던지우리라	And now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees: every tree therefore which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire.	The axe lies ready at the root of the trees, and every tree that does not produce good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire.”
LUK	3	10	무리가 물어 가로되 그러하면 우리가 무엇을 하리이까	And the people asked him, saying, What shall we do then?	The crowds asked him, “What then should we do?”
LUK	3	11	대답하여 가로되 옷 두 벌 있는 자는 옷 없는 자에게 나눠 줄 것이요 먹을 것이 있는 자도 그렇게 할 것이니라 하고	He answereth and saith unto them, He that hath two coats, let him impart to him that hath none; and he that hath meat, let him do likewise.	John replied, “Whoever has two tunics should share with him who has none, and whoever has food should do the same.”
LUK	3	12	세리들도 침례를 받고자 하여 와서 가로되 선생이여 우리는 무엇을 하리이까 하매	Then came also publicans to be baptized, and said unto him, Master, what shall we do?	Even tax collectors came to be baptized. “Teacher,” they asked, “what should we do?”
LUK	3	13	가로되 정한 세 외에는 늑징치 말라 하고	And he said unto them, Exact no more than that which is appointed you.	“Collect no more than you are authorized,” he answered.
LUK	3	14	군병들도 물어 가로되 우리는 무엇을 하리이까 하매 가로되 사람에게 강포하지 말며 무소하지 말고 받는 요를 족한 줄로 알라 하니라	And the soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And what shall we do? And he said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely; and be content with your wages.	Then some soldiers asked him, “And what should we do?” “Do not take money by force or false accusation,” he said. “Be content with your wages.”
LUK	3	15	백성들이 바라고 기다리므로 모든 사람들이 요한을 혹 그리스도신가 심중에 의논하니	And as the people were in expectation, and all men mused in their hearts of John, whether he were the Christ, or not;	The people were waiting expectantly and were all wondering in their hearts if John could be the Christ.
LUK	3	16	요한이 모든 사람에게 대답하여 가로되 나는 물로 너희에게 침례를 주거니와 나보다 능력이 많으신 이가 오시나니 나는 그 신들메를 풀기도 감당치 못하겠노라 그는 성령과 불로 너희에게 침례를 주실 것이요	John answered, saying unto them all, I indeed baptize you with water; but one mightier than I cometh, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire:	John answered all of them: “I baptize you with water, but One more powerful than I will come, the straps of whose sandals I am not worthy to untie. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with fire.
LUK	3	17	손에 키를 들고 자기의 타작 마당을 정하게 하사 알곡은 모아 곡간에 들이고 쭉정이는 꺼지지 않는 불에 태우시리라	Whose fan is in his hand, and he will throughly purge his floor, and will gather the wheat into his garner; but the chaff he will burn with fire unquenchable.	His winnowing fork is in His hand to clear His threshing floor and to gather the wheat into His barn; but He will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.”
LUK	3	18	또 기타 여러가지로 권하여 백성에게 좋은 소식을 전하였으나	And many other things in his exhortation preached he unto the people.	With these and many other exhortations, John proclaimed the good news to the people.
LUK	3	19	분봉왕 헤롯은 그 동생의 아내 헤로디아의 일과 또 그의 행한 모든 악한 일을 인하여 요한에게 책망을 받고	But Herod the tetrarch, being reproved by him for Herodias his brother Philip’s wife, and for all the evils which Herod had done,	But when he rebuked Herod the tetrarch regarding his brother’s wife Herodias and all the evils he had done,
LUK	3	20	이 위에 한 가지 악을 더하여 요한을 옥에 가두니라	Added yet this above all, that he shut up John in prison.	Herod added this to them all: He locked John up in prison.
LUK	3	21	백성이 다 침례를 받을새 예수도 침례를 받으시고 기도하실 때에 하늘이 열리며	Now when all the people were baptized, it came to pass, that Jesus also being baptized, and praying, the heaven was opened,	When all the people were being baptized, Jesus was baptized too. And as He was praying, heaven was opened,
LUK	3	22	성령이 형체로 비둘기 같이 그의 위에 강림하시더니 하늘로서 소리가 나기를 너는 내 사랑하는 아들이라 내가 너를 기뻐하노라 하시니라	And the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon him, and a voice came from heaven, which said, Thou art my beloved Son; in thee I am well pleased.	and the Holy Spirit descended on Him in a bodily form like a dove. And a voice came from heaven: “You are My beloved Son; in You I am well pleased.”
LUK	3	23	예수께서 가르치심을 시작할 때에 삼심 세쯤 되시니라 사람들의 아는 대로는 요셉의 아들이니 요셉의 이상은 헬리요	And Jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age, being (as was supposed) the son of Joseph, which was the son of Heli,	Jesus Himself was about thirty years old when He began His ministry. He was regarded as the son of Joseph, the son of Heli,
LUK	3	24	그 이상은 맛닷이요 그 이상은 레위요 그 이상은 멜기요 그 이상은 얀나요 그 이상은 요셉이요	Which was the son of Matthat, which was the son of Levi, which was the son of Melchi, which was the son of Janna, which was the son of Joseph,	the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melchi, the son of Jannai, the son of Joseph,
LUK	3	25	그 이상은 맛다디아요 그 이상은 아모스요 그 이상은 나훔이요 그 이상은 에슬리요 그 이상은 낙개요	Which was the son of Mattathias, which was the son of Amos, which was the son of Naum, which was the son of Esli, which was the son of Nagge,	the son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son of Nahum, the son of Esli, the son of Naggai,
LUK	3	26	그 이상은 마앗이요 그 이상은 맛다디아요 그 이상은 서머인이요 그 이상은 요섹이요 그 이상은 요다요	Which was the son of Maath, which was the son of Mattathias, which was the son of Semei, which was the son of Joseph, which was the son of Juda,	the son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the son of Semein, the son of Josech, the son of Joda,
LUK	3	27	그 이상은 요아난이요 그 이상은 레사요 그 이상은 스룹바벨이요 그 이상은 스알디엘이요 그 이상은 네리요	Which was the son of Joanna, which was the son of Rhesa, which was the son of Zorobabel, which was the son of Salathiel, which was the son of Neri,	the son of Joanan, the son of Rhesa, the son of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, the son of Neri,
LUK	3	28	그 이상은 멜기요 그 이상은 앗디요 그 이상은 고삼이요 그 이상은 엘마담이요 그 이상은 에르요	Which was the son of Melchi, which was the son of Addi, which was the son of Cosam, which was the son of Elmodam, which was the son of Er,	the son of Melchi, the son of Addi, the son of Cosam, the son of Elmadam, the son of Er,
LUK	3	29	그 이상은 예수요 그 이상은 엘리에서요 그 이상은 요림이요 그 이상은 맛닷이요 그 이상은 레위요	Which was the son of Jose, which was the son of Eliezer, which was the son of Jorim, which was the son of Matthat, which was the son of Levi,	the son of Joshua, the son of Eliezer, the son of Jorim, the son of Matthat, the son of Levi,
LUK	3	30	그 이상은 시므온이요 그 이상은 유다요 그 이상은 요셉이요 그 이상은 요남이요 그 이상은 엘리아김이요	Which was the son of Simeon, which was the son of Juda, which was the son of Joseph, which was the son of Jonan, which was the son of Eliakim,	the son of Simeon, the son of Judah, the son of Joseph, the son of Jonam, the son of Eliakim,
LUK	3	31	그 이상은 멜레아요 그 이상은 멘나요 그 이상은 맛다다요 그 이상은 나단이요 그 이상은 다윗이요	Which was the son of Melea, which was the son of Menan, which was the son of Mattatha, which was the son of Nathan, which was the son of David,	the son of Melea, the son of Menna, the son of Mattatha, the son of Nathan, the son of David,
LUK	3	32	그 이상은 이새요 그 이상은 오벳이요 그 이상은 보아스요 그 이상은 살몬이요 그 이상은 나손이요	Which was the son of Jesse, which was the son of Obed, which was the son of Booz, which was the son of Salmon, which was the son of Naasson,	the son of Jesse, the son of Obed, the son of Boaz, the son of Sala, the son of Nahshon,
LUK	3	33	그 이상은 아미나답이요 그 이상은 아니요 그 이상은 헤스론이요 그 이상은 베레스요 그 이상은 유다요	Which was the son of Aminadab, which was the son of Aram, which was the son of Esrom, which was the son of Phares, which was the son of Juda,	the son of Amminadab, the son of Admin, the son of Arni, the son of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son of Judah,
LUK	3	34	그 이상은 야곱이요 그 이상은 이삭이요 그 이상은 아브라함이요 그 이상은 데라요 그 이상은 나홀이요	Which was the son of Jacob, which was the son of Isaac, which was the son of Abraham, which was the son of Thara, which was the son of Nachor,	the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, the son of Terah, the son of Nahor,
LUK	3	35	그 이상은 스룩이요 그 이상은 르우요 그 이상은 벨렉이요 그 이상은 헤버요 그 이상은 살라요	Which was the son of Saruch, which was the son of Ragau, which was the son of Phalec, which was the son of Heber, which was the son of Sala,	the son of Serug, the son of Reu, the son of Peleg, the son of Eber, the son of Shelah,
LUK	3	36	그 이상은 가이난이요 그 이상은 아박삿이요 그 이상은 셈이요 그 이상은 노아요 그 이상은 레멕이요	Which was the son of Cainan, which was the son of Arphaxad, which was the son of Sem, which was the son of Noe, which was the son of Lamech,	the son of Cainan, the son of Arphaxad, the son of Shem, the son of Noah, the son of Lamech,
LUK	3	37	그 이상은 므두셀라요 그 이상은 에녹이요 그 이상은 야렛이요 그 이상은 마할랄렐이요 그 이상은 가이난이요	Which was the son of Mathusala, which was the son of Enoch, which was the son of Jared, which was the son of Maleleel, which was the son of Cainan,	the son of Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Mahalalel, the son of Cainan,
LUK	3	38	그 이상은 에노스요 그 이상은 셋이요 그 이상은 아담이요 그 이상은 하나님이시니라	Which was the son of Enos, which was the son of Seth, which was the son of Adam, which was the son of God.	the son of Enosh, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God.
LUK	4	1	예수께서 성령의 충만함을 입어 요단 강에서 돌아오사 광야에서 사십 일 동안 성령에게 이끌리시며	And Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost returned from Jordan, and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness,	Then Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness,
LUK	4	2	마귀에게 시험을 받으시더라 이 모든 날에 아무 것도 잡수시지 아니하시니 날 수가 다하매 주리신지라	Being forty days tempted of the devil. And in those days he did eat nothing: and when they were ended, he afterward hungered.	where for forty days He was tempted by the devil. He ate nothing during those days, and when they had ended, He was hungry.
LUK	4	3	마귀가 가로되 네가 만일 하나님의 아들이어든 이 돌들에게 명하여 떡덩이가 되게 하라	And the devil said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, command this stone that it be made bread.	The devil said to Him, “If You are the Son of God, tell this stone to become bread.”
LUK	4	4	예수께서 대답하시되 기록하기를 사람이 떡으로만 살 것이 아니라 하였느니라	And Jesus answered him, saying, It is written, That man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word of God.	But Jesus answered, “It is written: ‘Man shall not live on bread alone.’”
LUK	4	5	마귀가 또 예수를 이끌고 올라가서 순식간에 천하 만국을 보이며	And the devil, taking him up into an high mountain, shewed unto him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.	Then the devil led Him up to a high place and showed Him in an instant all the kingdoms of the world.
LUK	4	6	가로되 이 모든 권세와 그 영광을 내가 네게 주리라 이것은 내게 넘겨 준 것이므로 나의 원하는 자에게 주노라	And the devil said unto him, All this power will I give thee, and the glory of them: for that is delivered unto me; and to whomsoever I will I give it.	“I will give You authority over all these kingdoms and all their glory,” he said. “For it has been relinquished to me, and I can give it to anyone I wish.
LUK	4	7	그러므로 네가 만일 내게 절하면 다 네 것이 되리라	If thou therefore wilt worship me, all shall be thine.	So if You worship me, it will all be Yours.”
LUK	4	8	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 기록하기를 주 너의 하나님께 경배하고 다만 그를 섬기라 하였느니라	And Jesus answered and said unto him, Get thee behind me, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.	But Jesus answered, “It is written: ‘Worship the Lord your God and serve Him only.’”
LUK	4	9	또 이끌고 예루살렘으로 가서 성전 꼭대기에 세우고 가로되 네가 만일 하나님의 아들이어든 여기서 뛰어 내리라	And he brought him to Jerusalem, and set him on a pinnacle of the temple, and said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down from hence:	Then the devil led Him to Jerusalem and set Him on the pinnacle of the temple. “If You are the Son of God,” he said, “throw Yourself down from here.
LUK	4	10	기록하였으되 하나님이 너를 위하여 그 사자들을 명하사 너를 지키게 하시리라 하였고	For it is written, He shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee:	For it is written: ‘He will command His angels concerning You to guard You carefully;
LUK	4	11	또한 저희가 손으로 너를 받들어 네 발이 돌에 부딪히지 않게 하시리라 하였느니라	And in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone.	and they will lift You up in their hands, so that You will not strike Your foot against a stone.’”
LUK	4	12	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 말씀하기를 주 너의 하나님을 시험치 말라 하였느니라	And Jesus answering said unto him, It is said, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.	But Jesus answered, “It also says, ‘Do not put the Lord your God to the test.’”
LUK	4	13	마귀가 모든 시험을 다 한 후에 얼마 동안 떠나니라	And when the devil had ended all the temptation, he departed from him for a season.	When the devil had finished every temptation, he left Him until an opportune time.
LUK	4	14	예수께서 성령의 권능으로 갈릴리에 돌아가시니 그 소문이 사방에 퍼졌고	And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee: and there went out a fame of him through all the region round about.	Jesus returned to Galilee in the power of the Spirit, and the news about Him spread throughout the surrounding region.
LUK	4	15	친히 그 여러 회당에서 가르치시매 뭇 사람에게 칭송을 받으시더라	And he taught in their synagogues, being glorified of all.	He taught in their synagogues and was glorified by everyone.
LUK	4	16	예수께서 그 자라나신 곳 나사렛에 이르사 안식일에 자기 규례대로 회당에 들어가사 성경을 읽으려고 서시매	And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up: and, as his custom was, he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood up for to read.	Then Jesus came to Nazareth, where He had been brought up. As was His custom, He entered the synagogue on the Sabbath. And when He stood up to read,
LUK	4	17	선지자 이사야의 글을 드리거늘 책을 펴서 이렇게 기록한 데를 찾으시니 곧	And there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet Esaias. And when he had opened the book, he found the place where it was written,	the scroll of the prophet Isaiah was handed to Him. Unrolling it, He found the place where it was written:
LUK	4	18	주의 성령이 내게 임하셨으니 이는 가난한 자에게 복음을 전하게 하시려고 내게 기름을 부으시고 나를 보내사 포로된 자에게 자유를, 눈먼 자에게 다시 보게 함을 전파하며 눌린 자를 자유케 하고	The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised,	“The Spirit of the Lord is on Me, because He has anointed Me to preach good news to the poor. He has sent Me to proclaim liberty to the captives and recovery of sight to the blind, to release the oppressed,
LUK	4	19	주의 은혜의 해를 전파하게 하려 하심이라 하였더라	To preach the acceptable year of the Lord.	to proclaim the year of the Lord’s favor.”
LUK	4	20	책을 덮어 그 맡은 자에게 주시고 앉으시니 회당에 있는 자들이 다 주목하여 보더라	And he closed the book, and he gave it again to the minister, and sat down. And the eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were fastened on him.	Then He rolled up the scroll, returned it to the attendant, and sat down. The eyes of everyone in the synagogue were fixed on Him,
LUK	4	21	이에 예수께서 저희에게 말씀하시되 이 글이 오늘날 너희 귀에 응하였느니라 하시니	And he began to say unto them, This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears.	and He began by saying, “Today this Scripture is fulfilled in your hearing.”
LUK	4	22	저희가 다 그를 증거하고 그 입으로 나오는 바 은혜로운 말을 기이히 여겨 가로되 이 사람이 요셉의 아들이 아니냐	And all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth. And they said, Is not this Joseph’s son?	All spoke well of Him and marveled at the gracious words that came from His lips. “Isn’t this the son of Joseph?” they asked.
LUK	4	23	예수께서 저희에게 이르시되 너희가 반드시 의원아 너를 고치라 하는 속담을 인증하여 내게 말하기를 우리의 들은 바 가버나움에서 행한 일을 네 고향 여기서도 행하라 하리라	And he said unto them, Ye will surely say unto me this proverb, Physician, heal thyself: whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in thy country.	Jesus said to them, “Surely you will quote this proverb to Me: ‘Physician, heal yourself! Do here in Your hometown what we have heard that You did in Capernaum.’”
LUK	4	24	또 가라사대 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 선지자가 고향에서 환영을 받는 자가 없느니라	And he said, Verily I say unto you, No prophet is accepted in his own country.	Then He added, “Truly I tell you, no prophet is accepted in his hometown.
LUK	4	25	내가 참으로 너희에게 이르노니 엘리야 시대에 하늘이 세 해 여섯 달을 닫히어 온 땅에 큰 흉년이 들었을 때에 이스라엘에 많은 과부가 있었으되	But I tell you of a truth, many widows were in Israel in the days of Elias, when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, when great famine was throughout all the land;	But I tell you truthfully that there were many widows in Israel in the time of Elijah, when the sky was shut for three and a half years and great famine swept over all the land.
LUK	4	26	엘리야가 그 중 한 사람에게도 보내심을 받지 않고 오직 시돈 땅에 있는 사렙다의 한 과부에게 뿐이었으며	But unto none of them was Elias sent, save unto Sarepta, a city of Sidon, unto a woman that was a widow.	Yet Elijah was not sent to any of them, but to the widow of Zarephath in Sidon.
LUK	4	27	또 선지자 엘리사 때에 이스라엘에 많은 문둥이가 있었으되 그 중에 한 사람도 깨끗함을 얻지 못하고 오직 수리아 사람 나아만뿐이니라	And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Eliseus the prophet; and none of them was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian.	And there were many lepers in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet. Yet not one of them was cleansed—only Naaman the Syrian.”
LUK	4	28	회당에 있는 자들이 이것을 듣고 다 분이 가득하여	And all they in the synagogue, when they heard these things, were filled with wrath,	On hearing this, all the people in the synagogue were enraged.
LUK	4	29	일어나 동네 밖으로 쫓아내어 그 동네가 건설된 산 낭떠러지까지 끌고 가서 밀쳐 내리치고자 하되	And rose up, and thrust him out of the city, and led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was built, that they might cast him down headlong.	They got up, drove Him out of the town, and led Him to the brow of the hill on which the town was built, in order to throw Him over the cliff.
LUK	4	30	예수께서 저희 가운데로 지나서 가시니라	But he passing through the midst of them went his way,	But Jesus passed through the crowd and went on His way.
LUK	4	31	갈릴리 가버나움 동네에 내려오사 안식일에 가르치시매	And came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and taught them on the sabbath days.	Then He went down to Capernaum, a town in Galilee, and on the Sabbath He began to teach the people.
LUK	4	32	저희가 그 가르치심에 놀라니 이는 그 말씀이 권세가 있음이러라	And they were astonished at his doctrine: for his word was with power.	They were astonished at His teaching, because His message had authority.
LUK	4	33	회당에 더러운 귀신 들린 사람이 있어 크게 소리질러 가로되	And in the synagogue there was a man, which had a spirit of an unclean devil, and cried out with a loud voice,	In the synagogue there was a man possessed by the spirit of an unclean demon. He cried out in a loud voice,
LUK	4	34	아 나사렛 예수여 우리가 당신과 무슨 상관이 있나이까 우리를 멸하러 왔나이까 나는 당신이 누구인 줄 아노니 하나님의 거룩한 자니이다	Saying, Let us alone; what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art; the Holy One of God.	“Ha! What do You want with us, Jesus of Nazareth? Have You come to destroy us? I know who You are—the Holy One of God!”
LUK	4	35	예수께서 꾸짖어 가라사대 잠잠하고 그 사람에게서 나오라 하시니 귀신이 그 사람을 무리 중에 넘어뜨리고 나오되 그 사람은 상하지 아니한지라	And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him. And when the devil had thrown him in the midst, he came out of him, and hurt him not.	But Jesus rebuked the demon. “Be silent!” He said. “Come out of him!” At this, the demon threw the man down before them all and came out without harming him.
LUK	4	36	다 놀라 서로 말하여 가로되 이 어떠한 말씀인고 권세와 능력으로 더러운 귀신을 명하매 나가는도다 하더라	And they were all amazed, and spake among themselves, saying, What a word is this! for with authority and power he commandeth the unclean spirits, and they come out.	All the people were overcome with amazement and asked one another, “What is this message? With authority and power He commands the unclean spirits, and they come out!”
LUK	4	37	이에 예수의 소문이 그 근처 사방에 퍼지니라	And the fame of him went out into every place of the country round about.	And the news about Jesus spread throughout the surrounding region.
LUK	4	38	예수께서 일어나 회당에서 나가사 시몬의 집에 들어가시니 시몬의 장모가 중한 열병에 붙들린지라 사람이 저를 위하여 예수께 구하니	And he arose out of the synagogue, and entered into Simon’s house. And Simon’s wife’s mother was taken with a great fever; and they besought him for her.	After Jesus had left the synagogue, He went to the home of Simon, whose mother-in-law was suffering from a high fever. So they appealed to Jesus on her behalf,
LUK	4	39	예수께서 가까이 서서 열병을 꾸짖으신대 병이 떠나고 여자가 곧 일어나 저희에게 수종드니라	And he stood over her, and rebuked the fever; and it left her: and immediately she arose and ministered unto them.	and He stood over her and rebuked the fever, and it left her. And she got up at once and began to serve them.
LUK	4	40	해 질 적에 각색 병으로 앓는 자 있는 사람들이 다 병인을 데리고 나아오매 예수께서 일일이 그 위에 손을 얹으사 고치시니	Now when the sun was setting, all they that had any sick with divers diseases brought them unto him; and he laid his hands on every one of them, and healed them.	At sunset, all who were ill with various diseases were brought to Jesus, and laying His hands on each one, He healed them.
LUK	4	41	여러 사람에게서 귀신들이 나가며 소리질러 가로되 당신은 하나님의 아들이니이다 예수께서 꾸짖으사 저희의 말함을 허락지 아니하시니 이는 자기를 그리스도인 줄 앎이러라	And devils also came out of many, crying out, and saying, Thou art Christ the Son of God. And he rebuking them suffered them not to speak: for they knew that he was Christ.	Demons also came out of many people, shouting, “You are the Son of God!” But He rebuked the demons and would not allow them to speak, because they knew He was the Christ.
LUK	4	42	날이 밝으매 예수께서 나오사 한적한 곳에 가시니 무리가 찾다가 만나서 자기들에게 떠나시지 못하게 만류하려 하매	And when it was day, he departed and went into a desert place: and the people sought him, and came unto him, and stayed him, that he should not depart from them.	At daybreak, Jesus went out to a solitary place, and the crowds were looking for Him. They came to Him and tried to keep Him from leaving.
LUK	4	43	예수께서 이르시되 내가 다른 동네에서도 하나님의 나라 복음을 전하여야 하리니 나는 이 일로 보내심을 입었노라 하시고	And he said unto them, I must preach the kingdom of God to other cities also: for therefore am I sent.	But Jesus told them, “I must preach the good news of the kingdom of God to the other towns as well, because that is why I was sent.”
LUK	4	44	갈릴리 여러 회당에서 전도하시더라	And he preached in the synagogues of Galilee.	And He continued to preach in the synagogues of Judea.
LUK	5	1	무리가 옹위하여 하나님의 말씀을 들을새 예수는 게네사렛 호숫가에 서서	And it came to pass, that, as the people pressed upon him to hear the word of God, he stood by the lake of Gennesaret,	On one occasion, while Jesus was standing by the Lake of Gennesaret with the crowd pressing in on Him to hear the word of God,
LUK	5	2	호숫가에 두 배가 있는 것을 보시니 어부들은 배에서 나와서 그물을 씻는지라	And saw two ships standing by the lake: but the fishermen were gone out of them, and were washing their nets.	He saw two boats at the edge of the lake. The fishermen had left them and were washing their nets.
LUK	5	3	예수께서 한 배에 오르시니 그 배는 시몬의 배라 육지에서 조금 떼기를 청하시고 앉으사 배에서 무리를 가르치시더니	And he entered into one of the ships, which was Simon’s, and prayed him that he would thrust out a little from the land. And he sat down, and taught the people out of the ship.	Jesus got into the boat belonging to Simon and asked him to put out a little from shore. And sitting down, He taught the people from the boat.
LUK	5	4	말씀을 마치시고 시몬에게 이르시되 깊은 데로 가서 그물을 내려 고기를 잡으라	Now when he had left speaking, he said unto Simon, Launch out into the deep, and let down your nets for a draught.	When Jesus had finished speaking, He said to Simon, “Put out into deep water and let down your nets for a catch.”
LUK	5	5	시몬이 대답하여 가로되 선생이여 우리들이 밤이 맞도록 수고를 하였으되 얻은 것이 없지마는 말씀에 의지하여 내가 그물을 내리리이다 하고	And Simon answering said unto him, Master, we have toiled all the night, and have taken nothing: nevertheless at thy word I will let down the net.	“Master,” Simon replied, “we have worked hard all night without catching anything. But because You say so, I will let down the nets.”
LUK	5	6	그리한즉 고기를 에운 것이 심히 많아 그물이 찢어지는지라	And when they had this done, they inclosed a great multitude of fishes: and their net brake.	When they had done so, they caught such a large number of fish that their nets began to tear.
LUK	5	7	이에 다른 배에 있는 동무를 손짓하여 와서 도와 달라 하니 저희가 와서 두 배에 채우매 잠기게 되었더라	And they beckoned unto their partners, which were in the other ship, that they should come and help them. And they came, and filled both the ships, so that they began to sink.	So they signaled to their partners in the other boat to come and help them, and they came and filled both boats so full that they began to sink.
LUK	5	8	시몬 베드로가 이를 보고 예수의 무릎 아래 엎드려 가로되 주여 나를 떠나소서 나는 죄인이로소이다 하니	When Simon Peter saw it, he fell down at Jesus’ knees, saying, Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord.	When Simon Peter saw this, he fell at Jesus’ knees. “Go away from me, Lord,” he said, “for I am a sinful man.”
LUK	5	9	이는 자기와 및 함께 있는 모든 사람이 고기 잡힌 것을 인하여 놀라고	For he was astonished, and all that were with him, at the draught of the fishes which they had taken:	For he and his companions were astonished at the catch of fish they had taken,
LUK	5	10	세베대의 아들로서 시몬의 동업자인 야고보와 요한도 놀랐음이라 예수께서 시몬에게 일러 가라사대 무서워 말라 이제 후로는 네가 사람을 취하리라 하시니	And so was also James, and John, the sons of Zebedee, which were partners with Simon. And Jesus said unto Simon, Fear not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men.	and so were his partners James and John, the sons of Zebedee. “Do not be afraid,” Jesus said to Simon. “From now on you will catch men.”
LUK	5	11	저희가 배들을 육지에 대고 모든 것을 버려두고 예수를 좇으니라	And when they had brought their ships to land, they forsook all, and followed him.	And when they had brought their boats ashore, they left everything and followed Him.
LUK	5	12	예수께서 한 동네에 계실 때에 온 몸에 문둥병 들린 사람이 있어 예수를 보고 엎드려 구하여 가로되 주여 원하시면 나를 깨끗케 하실 수 있나이다 하니	And it came to pass, when he was in a certain city, behold a man full of leprosy: who seeing Jesus fell on his face, and besought him, saying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.	While Jesus was in one of the towns, a man came along who was covered with leprosy. When he saw Jesus, he fell facedown and begged Him, “Lord, if You are willing, You can make me clean.”
LUK	5	13	예수께서 손을 내밀어 저에게 대시며 가라사대 내가 원하노니 깨끗함을 받으라 하신대 문둥병이 곧 떠나니라	And he put forth his hand, and touched him, saying, I will: be thou clean. And immediately the leprosy departed from him.	Jesus reached out His hand and touched the man. “I am willing,” He said. “Be clean!” And immediately the leprosy left him.
LUK	5	14	예수께서 저를 경계하시되 아무에게도 이르지 말고 가서 제사장에게 네 몸을 보이고 또 네 깨끗케 됨을 인하여 모세의 명한 대로 예물을 드려 저희에게 증거하라 하셨더니	And he charged him to tell no man: but go, and shew thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing, according as Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them.	“Do not tell anyone,” Jesus instructed him. “But go, show yourself to the priest and present the offering Moses prescribed for your cleansing, as a testimony to them.”
LUK	5	15	예수의 소문이 더욱 퍼지매 허다한 무리가 말씀도 듣고 자기 병도 나음을 얻고자 하여 모여 오되	But so much the more went there a fame abroad of him: and great multitudes came together to hear, and to be healed by him of their infirmities.	But the news about Jesus spread all the more, and great crowds came to hear Him and to be healed of their sicknesses.
LUK	5	16	예수는 물러가사 한적한 곳에서 기도하시니라	And he withdrew himself into the wilderness, and prayed.	Yet He frequently withdrew to the wilderness to pray.
LUK	5	17	하루는 가르치실 때에 갈릴리 각 촌과 유대와 예루살렘에서 나온 바리새인과 교법사들이 앉았는데 병을 고치는 주의 능력이 예수와 함께 하더라	And it came to pass on a certain day, as he was teaching, that there were Pharisees and doctors of the law sitting by, which were come out of every town of Galilee, and Judea, and Jerusalem: and the power of the Lord was present to heal them.	One day Jesus was teaching, and the Pharisees and teachers of the law were sitting there. People had come from Jerusalem and from every village of Galilee and Judea, and the power of the Lord was present for Him to heal the sick.
LUK	5	18	한 중풍병자를 사람들이 침상에 메고 와서 예수 앞에 들여 놓고자 하였으나	And, behold, men brought in a bed a man which was taken with a palsy: and they sought means to bring him in, and to lay him before him.	Just then some men came carrying a paralyzed man on a mat. They tried to bring him inside to set him before Jesus,
LUK	5	19	무리 때문에 메고 들어갈 길을 얻지 못한지라 지붕에 올라가 기와를 벗기고 병자를 침상채 무리 가운데로 예수 앞에 달아 내리니	And when they could not find by what way they might bring him in because of the multitude, they went upon the housetop, and let him down through the tiling with his couch into the midst before Jesus.	but they could not find a way through the crowd. So they went up on the roof and lowered him on his mat through the tiles into the middle of the crowd, right in front of Jesus.
LUK	5	20	예수께서 저희 믿음을 보시고 이르시되 이 사람아 네 죄 사함을 받았느니라 하시니	And when he saw their faith, he said unto him, Man, thy sins are forgiven thee.	When Jesus saw their faith, He said, “Friend, your sins are forgiven.”
LUK	5	21	서기관과 바리새인들이 의논하여 가로되 이 참람한 말을 하는 자가 누구뇨 오직 하나님 외에 누가 능히 죄를 사하겠느냐	And the scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying, Who is this which speaketh blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God alone?	But the scribes and Pharisees began thinking to themselves, “Who is this man who speaks blasphemy? Who can forgive sins but God alone?”
LUK	5	22	예수께서 그 의논을 아시고 대답하여 가라사대 너희 마음에 무슨 의논을 하느냐	But when Jesus perceived their thoughts, he answering said unto them, What reason ye in your hearts?	Knowing what they were thinking, Jesus replied, “Why are you thinking these things in your hearts?
LUK	5	23	네 죄 사함을 받았느니라 하는 말과 일어나 걸어가라 하는 말이 어느 것이 쉽겠느냐	Whether is easier, to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee; or to say, Rise up and walk?	Which is easier: to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Get up and walk?’
LUK	5	24	그러나 인자가 땅에서 죄를 사하는 권세가 있는 줄을 너희로 알게 하리라 하시고 중풍병자에게 말씀하시되 내가 네게 이르노니 일어나 네 침상을 가지고 집으로 가라 하시매	But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power upon earth to forgive sins, (he said unto the sick of the palsy,) I say unto thee, Arise, and take up thy couch, and go into thine house.	But so that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on the earth to forgive sins...” He said to the paralytic, “I tell you, get up, pick up your mat, and go home.”
LUK	5	25	그 사람이 저희 앞에서 곧 일어나 누웠던 것을 가지고 하나님께 영광을 돌리며 자기 집으로 돌아가니	And immediately he rose up before them, and took up that whereon he lay, and departed to his own house, glorifying God.	And immediately the man stood up before them, took what he had been lying on, and went home glorifying God.
LUK	5	26	모든 사람이 놀라 하나님께 영광을 돌리며 심히 두려워하여 가로되 오늘날 우리가 기이한 일을 보았다 하니라	And they were all amazed, and they glorified God, and were filled with fear, saying, We have seen strange things to day.	Everyone was taken with amazement and glorified God. They were filled with awe and said, “We have seen remarkable things today.”
LUK	5	27	그 후에 나가사 레위라 하는 세리가 세관에 앉은 것을 보시고 나를 좇으라 하시니	And after these things he went forth, and saw a publican, named Levi, sitting at the receipt of custom: and he said unto him, Follow me.	After this, Jesus went out and saw a tax collector named Levi sitting at the tax booth. “Follow Me,” He told him,
LUK	5	28	저가 모든 것을 버리고 일어나 좇으니라	And he left all, rose up, and followed him.	and Levi got up, left everything, and followed Him.
LUK	5	29	레위가 예수를 위하여 자기 집에서 큰 잔치를 하니 세리와 다른 사람이 많이 함께 앉았는지라	And Levi made him a great feast in his own house: and there was a great company of publicans and of others that sat down with them.	Then Levi hosted a great banquet for Jesus at his house. A large crowd of tax collectors was there, along with others who were eating with them.
LUK	5	30	바리새인과 저희 서기관들이 그 제자들을 비방하여 가로되 너희가 어찌하여 세리와 죄인과 함께 먹고 마시느냐	But their scribes and Pharisees murmured against his disciples, saying, Why do ye eat and drink with publicans and sinners?	But the Pharisees and their scribes complained to Jesus’ disciples, “Why do you eat and drink with tax collectors and sinners?”
LUK	5	31	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 건강한 자에게는 의원이 쓸 데 없고 병든 자에게라야 쓸 데 있나니	And Jesus answering said unto them, They that are whole need not a physician; but they that are sick.	Jesus answered, “It is not the healthy who need a doctor, but the sick.
LUK	5	32	내가 의인을 부르러 온 것이 아니요 죄인을 불러 회개시키러 왔노라	I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.	I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners, to repentance.”
LUK	5	33	저희가 예수께 말하되 요한의 제자는 자주 금식하며 기도하고 바리새인의 제자들도 또한 그리하되 당신의 제자들은 먹고 마시나이다	And they said unto him, Why do the disciples of John fast often, and make prayers, and likewise the disciples of the Pharisees; but thine eat and drink?	Then they said to Him, “John’s disciples and those of the Pharisees frequently fast and pray, but Yours keep on eating and drinking.”
LUK	5	34	예수께서 저희에게 이르시되 혼인집 손님들이 신랑과 함께 있을 때에 너희가 그 손님으로 금식하게 할 수 있느뇨	And he said unto them, Can ye make the children of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them?	Jesus replied, “Can you make the guests of the bridegroom fast while He is with them?
LUK	5	35	그러나 그 날에 이르러 저희가 신랑을 빼앗기리니 그 날에는 금식할 것이니라	But the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then shall they fast in those days.	But the time will come when the bridegroom will be taken from them; then they will fast.”
LUK	5	36	또 비유하여 이르시되 새 옷에서 한 조각을 찢어 낡은 옷에 붙이는 자가 없나니 만일 그렇게 하면 새 옷을 찢을 뿐이요 또 새 옷에서 찢은 조각이 낡은 것에 합하지 아니하리라	And he spake also a parable unto them; No man putteth a piece of a new garment upon an old; if otherwise, then both the new maketh a rent, and the piece that was taken out of the new agreeth not with the old.	He also told them a parable: “No one tears a piece of cloth from a new garment and sews it on an old one. If he does, he will tear the new garment as well, and the patch from the new will not match the old.
LUK	5	37	새 포도주를 낡은 가죽 부대에 넣는 자가 없나니 만일 그렇게 하면 새 포도주가 부대를 터뜨려 포도주가 쏟아지고 부대도 버리게 되리라	And no man putteth new wine into old bottles; else the new wine will burst the bottles, and be spilled, and the bottles shall perish.	And no one pours new wine into old wineskins. If he does, the new wine will burst the skins, the wine will spill, and the wineskins will be ruined.
LUK	5	38	새 포도주는 새 부대에 넣어야 할 것이니라	But new wine must be put into new bottles; and both are preserved.	Instead, new wine is poured into new wineskins.
LUK	5	39	묵은 포도주를 마시고 새 것을 원하는 자가 없나니 이는 묵은 것이 좋다 함이니라	No man also having drunk old wine straightway desireth new: for he saith, The old is better.	And no one after drinking old wine wants new, for he says, ‘The old is better.’”
LUK	6	1	안식일에 예수께서 밀밭 사이로 지나가실새 제자들이 이삭을 잘라 손으로 비비어 먹으니	And it came to pass on the second sabbath after the first, that he went through the corn fields; and his disciples plucked the ears of corn, and did eat, rubbing them in their hands.	One Sabbath Jesus was passing through the grainfields, and His disciples began to pick the heads of grain, rub them in their hands, and eat them.
LUK	6	2	어떤 바리새인들이 말하되 어찌하여 안식일에 하지 못할 일을 하느뇨	And certain of the Pharisees said unto them, Why do ye that which is not lawful to do on the sabbath days?	But some of the Pharisees asked, “Why are you doing what is unlawful on the Sabbath?”
LUK	6	3	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 다윗이 자기와 및 함께한 자들이 시장할 때에 한 일을 읽지 못하였느냐	And Jesus answering them said, Have ye not read so much as this, what David did, when himself was an hungred, and they which were with him;	Jesus replied, “Have you not read what David did when he and his companions were hungry?
LUK	6	4	그가 하나님의 전에 들어가서 다만 제사장 외에는 먹지 못하는 진설병을 집어 먹고 함께한 자들에게도 주지 아니하였느냐	How he went into the house of God, and did take and eat the shewbread, and gave also to them that were with him; which it is not lawful to eat but for the priests alone?	He entered the house of God, took the consecrated bread and gave it to his companions, and ate what is lawful only for the priests to eat.”
LUK	6	5	또 가라사대 인자는 안식일의 주인이니라 하시더라	And he said unto them, That the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath.	Then Jesus declared, “The Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath.”
LUK	6	6	또 다른 안식일에 예수께서 회당에 들어가사 가르치실새 거기 오른손 마른 사람이 있는지라	And it came to pass also on another sabbath, that he entered into the synagogue and taught: and there was a man whose right hand was withered.	On another Sabbath Jesus entered the synagogue and was teaching, and a man was there whose right hand was withered.
LUK	6	7	서기관과 바리새인들이 예수를 송사할 빙거를 찾으려 하여 안식일에 병 고치시는가 엿보니	And the scribes and Pharisees watched him, whether he would heal on the sabbath day; that they might find an accusation against him.	Looking for a reason to accuse Jesus, the scribes and Pharisees were watching Him closely to see if He would heal on the Sabbath.
LUK	6	8	예수께서 저희 생각을 아시고 손마른 사람에게 이르시되 일어나 한가운데 서라 하시니 저가 일어나 서거늘	But he knew their thoughts, and said to the man which had the withered hand, Rise up, and stand forth in the midst. And he arose and stood forth.	But Jesus knew their thoughts and said to the man with the withered hand, “Get up and stand among us.” So he got up and stood there.
LUK	6	9	예수께서 저희에게 이르시되 내가 너희에게 묻노니 안식일에 선을 행하는 것과 악을 행하는 것, 생명을 구하는 것과 멸하는 것, 어느 것이 옳으냐 하시며	Then said Jesus unto them, I will ask you one thing; Is it lawful on the sabbath days to do good, or to do evil? to save life, or to destroy it?	Then Jesus said to them, “I ask you, which is lawful on the Sabbath: to do good or to do evil, to save life or to destroy it?”
LUK	6	10	무리를 둘러 보시고 그 사람에게 이르시되 네 손을 내밀라 하시니 저가 그리하매 그 손이 회복된지라	And looking round about upon them all, he said unto the man, Stretch forth thy hand. And he did so: and his hand was restored whole as the other.	And after looking around at all of them, He said to the man, “Stretch out your hand.” He did so, and it was restored.
LUK	6	11	저희는 분기가 가득하여 예수를 어떻게 처치할 것을 서로 의논하니라	And they were filled with madness; and communed one with another what they might do to Jesus.	But the scribes and Pharisees were filled with rage and began to discuss with one another what they might do to Jesus.
LUK	6	12	이 때에 예수께서 기도하시러 산으로 가사 밤이 맞도록 하나님께 기도하시고	And it came to pass in those days, that he went out into a mountain to pray, and continued all night in prayer to God.	In those days Jesus went out to the mountain to pray, and He spent the night in prayer to God.
LUK	6	13	밝으매 그 제자들을 부르사 그 중에서 열둘을 택하여 사도라 칭하셨으니	And when it was day, he called unto him his disciples: and of them he chose twelve, whom also he named apostles;	When daylight came, He called His disciples to Him and chose twelve of them, whom He also designated as apostles:
LUK	6	14	곧 베드로라고도 이름 주신 시몬과 및 그 형제 안드레와 및 야고보와 요한과 빌립과 바돌로매와	Simon, (whom he also named Peter,) and Andrew his brother, James and John, Philip and Bartholomew,	Simon, whom He named Peter, and his brother Andrew; James and John; Philip and Bartholomew;
LUK	6	15	마태와 도마와 및 알패오의 아들 야고보와 및 셀롯이라 하는 시몬과	Matthew and Thomas, James the son of Alpheus, and Simon called Zelotes,	Matthew and Thomas; James son of Alphaeus and Simon called the Zealot;
LUK	6	16	및 야고보의 아들 유다와 및 예수를 파는 자 될 가룟 유다라	And Judas the brother of James, and Judas Iscariot, which also was the traitor.	Judas son of James, and Judas Iscariot, who became a traitor.
LUK	6	17	예수께서 저희와 함께 내려오사 평지에 서시니 그 제자의 허다한 무리와 또 예수의 말씀도 듣고 병 고침을 얻으려고 유대 사방과 예루살렘과 및 두로와 시돈의 해안으로부터 온 많은 백성도 있더라	And he came down with them, and stood in the plain, and the company of his disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all Judea and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, which came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases;	Then Jesus came down with them and stood on a level place. A large crowd of His disciples was there, along with a great number of people from all over Judea, Jerusalem, and the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon.
LUK	6	18	더러운 귀신에게 고난 받는 자들도 고침을 얻은지라	And they that were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed.	They had come to hear Him and to be healed of their diseases, and those troubled by unclean spirits were healed.
LUK	6	19	온 무리가 예수를 만지려고 힘쓰니 이는 능력이 예수께로 나서 모든 사람을 낫게 함이러라	And the whole multitude sought to touch him: for there went virtue out of him, and healed them all.	The entire crowd was trying to touch Him, because power was coming from Him and healing them all.
LUK	6	20	예수께서 눈을 들어 제자들을 보시고 가라사대 가난한 자는 복이 있나니 하나님의 나라가 너희 것임이요	And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and said, Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God.	Looking up at His disciples, Jesus said: “Blessed are you who are poor, for yours is the kingdom of God.
LUK	6	21	이제 주린 자는 복이 있나니 너희가 배부름을 얻을 것임이요 이제 우는 자는 복이 있나니 너희가 웃을 것임이요	Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh.	Blessed are you who hunger now, for you will be filled. Blessed are you who weep now, for you will laugh.
LUK	6	22	인자를 인하여 사람들이 너희를 미워하며 멀리하고 욕하고 너희 이름을 악하다 하여 버릴 때에는 너희에게 복이 있도다	Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s sake.	Blessed are you when people hate you, and when they exclude you and insult you and reject your name as evil because of the Son of Man.
LUK	6	23	그 날에 기뻐하고 뛰놀라 하늘에서 너희 상이 큼이라 저희 조상들이 선지자들에게 이와 같이 하였느니라	Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven: for in the like manner did their fathers unto the prophets.	Rejoice in that day and leap for joy, because great is your reward in heaven. For their fathers treated the prophets in the same way.
LUK	6	24	그러나 화 있을진저 너희 부요한 자여 너희는 너희의 위로를 이미 받았도다	But woe unto you that are rich! for ye have received your consolation.	But woe to you who are rich, for you have already received your comfort.
LUK	6	25	화 있을진저 너희 이제 배부른 자여 너희는 주리리로다 화 있을진저 너희 이제 웃는 자여 너희가 애통하며 울리로다	Woe unto you that are full! for ye shall hunger. Woe unto you that laugh now! for ye shall mourn and weep.	Woe to you who are well fed now, for you will hunger. Woe to you who laugh now, for you will mourn and weep.
LUK	6	26	모든 사람이 너희를 칭찬하면 화가 있도다 저희 조상들이 거짓 선지자들에게 이와 같이 하였느니라	Woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you! for so did their fathers to the false prophets.	Woe to you when all men speak well of you, for their fathers treated the false prophets in the same way.
LUK	6	27	그러나 너희 듣는 자에게 내가 이르노니 너희 원수를 사랑하며 너희를 미워하는 자를 선대하며	But I say unto you which hear, Love your enemies, do good to them which hate you,	But to those of you who will listen, I say: Love your enemies, do good to those who hate you,
LUK	6	28	너희를 저주하는 자를 위하여 축복하며 너희를 모욕하는 자를 위하여 기도하라	Bless them that curse you, and pray for them which despitefully use you.	bless those who curse you, pray for those who mistreat you.
LUK	6	29	네 이 뺨을 치는 자에게 저 뺨도 돌려 대며 네 겉옷을 빼앗는 자에게 속옷도 금하지 말라	And unto him that smiteth thee on the one cheek offer also the other; and him that taketh away thy cloke forbid not to take thy coat also.	If someone strikes you on one cheek, turn to him the other also. And if someone takes your cloak, do not withhold your tunic as well.
LUK	6	30	무릇 네게 구하는 자에게 주며 네 것을 가져가는 자에게 다시 달라 하지 말며	Give to every man that asketh of thee; and of him that taketh away thy goods ask them not again.	Give to everyone who asks you, and if anyone takes what is yours, do not demand it back.
LUK	6	31	남에게 대접을 받고자 하는 대로 너희도 남을 대접하라	And as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise.	Do to others as you would have them do to you.
LUK	6	32	너희가 만일 너희를 사랑하는 자를 사랑하면 칭찬 받을 것이 무엇이뇨 죄인들도 사랑하는 자를 사랑하느니라	For if ye love them which love you, what thank have ye? for sinners also love those that love them.	If you love those who love you, what credit is that to you? Even sinners love those who love them.
LUK	6	33	너희가 만일 선대하는 자를 선대하면 칭찬 받을 것이 무엇이뇨 죄인들도 이렇게 하느니라	And if ye do good to them which do good to you, what thank have ye? for sinners also do even the same.	If you do good to those who do good to you, what credit is that to you? Even sinners do the same.
LUK	6	34	너희가 받기를 바라고 사람들에게 빌리면 칭찬 받을 것이 무엇이뇨 죄인들도 의수히 받고자 하여 죄인에게 빌리느니라	And if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive, what thank have ye? for sinners also lend to sinners, to receive as much again.	And if you lend to those from whom you expect repayment, what credit is that to you? Even sinners lend to sinners, expecting to be repaid in full.
LUK	6	35	오직 너희는 원수를 사랑하고 선대하며 아무 것도 바라지 말고 빌리라 그리하면 너희 상이 클 것이요 또 지극히 높으신 이의 아들이 되리니 그는 은혜를 모르는 자와 악한 자에게도 인자로우시니라	But love ye your enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again; and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children of the Highest: for he is kind unto the unthankful and to the evil.	But love your enemies, do good to them, and lend to them, expecting nothing in return. Then your reward will be great, and you will be sons of the Most High; for He is kind to the ungrateful and wicked.
LUK	6	36	너희 아버지의 자비하심 같이 너희도 자비하라	Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful.	Be merciful, just as your Father is merciful.
LUK	6	37	비판치 말라 그리하면 너희가 비판을 받지 않을 것이요 정죄하지 말라 그리하면 너희가 정죄를 받지 않을 것이요 용서하라 그리하면 너희가 용서를 받을 것이요	Judge not, and ye shall not be judged: condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned: forgive, and ye shall be forgiven:	Do not judge, and you will not be judged. Do not condemn, and you will not be condemned. Forgive, and you will be forgiven.
LUK	6	38	주라 그리하면 너희에게 줄 것이니 곧 후히 되어 누르고 흔들어 넘치도록 하여 너희에게 안겨 주리라 너희의 헤아리는 그 헤아림으로 너희도 헤아림을 도로 받을 것이니라	Give, and it shall be given unto you; good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom. For with the same measure that ye mete withal it shall be measured to you again.	Give, and it will be given to you. A good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over will be poured into your lap. For with the measure you use, it will be measured back to you.”
LUK	6	39	또 비유로 말씀하시되 소경이 소경을 인도할 수 있느냐 둘이 다 구덩이에 빠지지 아니하겠느냐	And he spake a parable unto them, Can the blind lead the blind? shall they not both fall into the ditch?	Jesus also told them a parable: “Can a blind man lead a blind man? Will they not both fall into a pit?
LUK	6	40	제자가 그 선생보다 높지 못하나 무릇 온전케 된 자는 그 선생과 같으리라	The disciple is not above his master: but every one that is perfect shall be as his master.	A disciple is not above his teacher, but everyone who is fully trained will be like his teacher.
LUK	6	41	어찌하여 형제의 눈 속에 있는 티는 보고 네 눈 속에 있는 들보는 깨닫지 못하느냐	And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother’s eye, but perceivest not the beam that is in thine own eye?	Why do you look at the speck in your brother’s eye, but fail to notice the beam in your own eye?
LUK	6	42	너는 네 눈 속에 있는 들보를 보지 못하면서 어찌하여 형제에게 말하기를 형제여 나로 네 눈 속에 있는 티를 빼게 하라 할 수 있느냐 외식하는 자여 먼저 네 눈 속에서 들보를 빼어라 그 후에야 네가 밝히 보고 형제의 눈 속에 있는 티를 빼리라	Either how canst thou say to thy brother, Brother, let me pull out the mote that is in thine eye, when thou thyself beholdest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of thine own eye, and then shalt thou see clearly to pull out the mote that is in thy brother’s eye.	How can you say, ‘Brother, let me take the speck out of your eye,’ while you yourself fail to see the beam in your own eye? You hypocrite! First take the beam out of your own eye, and then you will see clearly to remove the speck from your brother’s eye.
LUK	6	43	못된 열매 맺는 좋은 나무가 없고 또 좋은 열매 맺는 못된 나무가 없느니라	For a good tree bringeth not forth corrupt fruit; neither doth a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.	No good tree bears bad fruit, nor does a bad tree bear good fruit.
LUK	6	44	나무는 각각 그 열매로 아나니 가시나무에서 무화과를, 또는 찔레에서 포도를 따지 못하느니라	For every tree is known by his own fruit. For of thorns men do not gather figs, nor of a bramble bush gather they grapes.	For each tree is known by its own fruit. Indeed, figs are not gathered from thornbushes, nor grapes from brambles.
LUK	6	45	선한 사람은 마음의 쌓은 선에서 선을 내고 악한 자는 그 쌓은 악에서 악을 내나니 이는 마음에 가득한 것을 입으로 말함이니라	A good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is good; and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is evil: for of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaketh.	The good man brings good things out of the good treasure of his heart, and the evil man brings evil things out of the evil treasure of his heart. For out of the overflow of the heart, the mouth speaks.
LUK	6	46	너희는 나를 불러 주여 주여 하면서도 어찌하여 나의 말하는 것을 행치 아니하느냐	And why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?	Why do you call Me ‘Lord, Lord,’ but not do what I say?
LUK	6	47	내게 나아와 내 말을 듣고 행하는 자마다 누구와 같은 것을 너희에게 보이리라	Whosoever cometh to me, and heareth my sayings, and doeth them, I will shew you to whom he is like:	I will show you what he is like who comes to Me and hears My words and acts on them:
LUK	6	48	집을 짓되 깊이 파고 주초를 반석 위에 놓은 사람과 같으니 큰 물이 나서 탁류가 그 집에 부딪히되 잘 지은 연고로 능히 요동케 못하였거니와	He is like a man which built an house, and digged deep, and laid the foundation on a rock: and when the flood arose, the stream beat vehemently upon that house, and could not shake it: for it was founded upon a rock.	He is like a man building a house, who dug down deep and laid his foundation on the rock. When the flood came, the torrent crashed against that house but could not shake it, because it was well built.
LUK	6	49	듣고 행치 아니하는 자는 주초 없이 흙 위에 집 지은 사람과 같으니 탁류가 부딪히매 집이 곧 무너져 파괴됨이 심하니라 하시니라	But he that heareth, and doeth not, is like a man that without a foundation built an house upon the earth; against which the stream did beat vehemently, and immediately it fell; and the ruin of that house was great.	But the one who hears My words and does not act on them is like a man who built his house on ground without a foundation. The torrent crashed against that house, and immediately it fell—and great was its destruction!”
LUK	7	1	예수께서 모든 말씀을 백성에게 들려 주시기를 마치신 후에 가버나움으로 들어가시니라	Now when he had ended all his sayings in the audience of the people, he entered into Capernaum.	When Jesus had concluded His discourse in the hearing of the people, He went to Capernaum.
LUK	7	2	어떤 백부장의 사랑하는 종이 병들어 죽게 되었더니	And a certain centurion’s servant, who was dear unto him, was sick, and ready to die.	There a highly valued servant of a centurion was sick and about to die.
LUK	7	3	예수의 소문을 듣고 유대인의 장로 몇을 보내어 오셔서 그 종을 구원하시기를 청한지라	And when he heard of Jesus, he sent unto him the elders of the Jews, beseeching him that he would come and heal his servant.	When the centurion heard about Jesus, he sent some Jewish elders to ask Him to come and heal his servant.
LUK	7	4	이에 저희가 예수께 나아와 간절히 구하여 가로되 이 일을 하시는 것이 이 사람에게는 합당하니이다	And when they came to Jesus, they besought him instantly, saying, That he was worthy for whom he should do this:	They came to Jesus and pleaded with Him earnestly, “This man is worthy to have You grant this,
LUK	7	5	저가 우리 민족을 사랑하고 또한 우리를 위하여 회당을 지었나이다 하니	For he loveth our nation, and he hath built us a synagogue.	for he loves our nation and has built our synagogue.”
LUK	7	6	예수께서 함께 가실새 이에 그 집이 멀지 아니하여 이 벗들을 보내어 가로되 주여 수고하시지 마옵소서 내 집에 들어오심을 나는 감당치 못하겠나이다	Then Jesus went with them. And when he was now not far from the house, the centurion sent friends to him, saying unto him, Lord, trouble not thyself: for I am not worthy that thou shouldest enter under my roof:	So Jesus went with them. But when He was not far from the house, the centurion sent friends with the message: “Lord, do not trouble Yourself, for I am not worthy to have You come under my roof.
LUK	7	7	그러므로 내가 주께 나아가기도 감당치 못할 줄을 알았나이다 말씀만 하사 내 하인을 낫게 하소서	Wherefore neither thought I myself worthy to come unto thee: but say in a word, and my servant shall be healed.	That is why I did not consider myself worthy to come to You. But just say the word, and my servant will be healed.
LUK	7	8	저도 남의 수하에 든 사람이요 제 아래에도 군병이 있으니 이더러 가라 하면 가고 저더러 오라 하면 오고 제 종더러 이것을 하라 하면 하나이다	For I also am a man set under authority, having under me soldiers, and I say unto one, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it.	For I myself am a man under authority, with soldiers under me. I tell one to go, and he goes; and another to come, and he comes. I tell my servant to do something, and he does it.”
LUK	7	9	예수께서 들으시고 저를 기이히 여겨 돌이키사 좇는 무리에게 이르시되 내가 너희에게 이르노니 이스라엘 중에서도 이만한 믿음은 만나지 못하였노라 하시더라	When Jesus heard these things, he marvelled at him, and turned him about, and said unto the people that followed him, I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel.	When Jesus heard this, He marveled at the centurion. Turning to the crowd following Him, He said, “I tell you, not even in Israel have I found such great faith.”
LUK	7	10	보내었던 사람들이 집으로 돌아가 보매 종이 이미 강건하여졌더라	And they that were sent, returning to the house, found the servant whole that had been sick.	And when the messengers returned to the house, they found the servant in good health.
LUK	7	11	그 후에 예수께서 나인이란 성으로 가실새 제자와 허다한 무리가 동행하더니	And it came to pass the day after, that he went into a city called Nain; and many of his disciples went with him, and much people.	Soon afterward, Jesus went to a town called Nain. His disciples went with Him, accompanied by a large crowd.
LUK	7	12	성문에 가까이 오실 때에 사람들이 한 죽은 자를 메고 나오니 이는 그 어미의 독자요 어미는 과부라 그 성의 많은 사람도 그와 함께 나오거늘	Now when he came nigh to the gate of the city, behold, there was a dead man carried out, the only son of his mother, and she was a widow: and much people of the city was with her.	As He approached the town gate, He saw a dead man being carried out, the only son of his mother, and she was a widow. And a large crowd from the town was with her.
LUK	7	13	주께서 과부를 보시고 불쌍히 여기사 울지 말라 하시고	And when the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said unto her, Weep not.	When the Lord saw her, He had compassion on her and said, “Do not weep.”
LUK	7	14	가까이 오사 그 관에 손을 대시니 멘 자들이 서는지라 예수께서 가라사대 청년아 내가 네게 말하노니 일어나라 하시매	And he came and touched the bier: and they that bare him stood still. And he said, Young man, I say unto thee, Arise.	Then He went up and touched the coffin, and those carrying it stood still. “Young man,” He said, “I tell you, get up!”
LUK	7	15	죽었던 자가 일어앉고 말도 하거늘 예수께서 그를 어미에게 주신대	And he that was dead sat up, and began to speak. And he delivered him to his mother.	And the dead man sat up and began to speak! Then Jesus gave him back to his mother.
LUK	7	16	모든 사람이 두려워하며 하나님께 영광을 돌려 가로되 큰 선지자가 우리 가운데 일어나셨다 하고 또 하나님께서 자기 백성을 돌아 보셨다 하더라	And there came a fear on all: and they glorified God, saying, That a great prophet is risen up among us; and, That God hath visited his people.	A sense of awe swept over all of them, and they glorified God. “A great prophet has appeared among us!” they said. “God has visited His people!”
LUK	7	17	예수께 대한 이 소문이 온 유대와 사방에 두루 퍼지니라	And this rumour of him went forth throughout all Judea, and throughout all the region round about.	And the news about Jesus spread throughout Judea and all the surrounding region.
LUK	7	18	요한의 제자들이 이 모든 일을 그에게 고하니	And the disciples of John shewed him of all these things.	Then John’s disciples informed him about all these things.
LUK	7	19	요한이 그 제자 중 둘을 불러 주께 보내어 가로되 오실 그이가 당신이오니이까 우리가 다른 이를 기다리오리이까 하라 하매	And John calling unto him two of his disciples sent them to Jesus, saying, Art thou he that should come? or look we for another?	So John called two of his disciples and sent them to ask the Lord, “Are You the One who was to come, or should we look for someone else?”
LUK	7	20	저희가 예수께 나아가 가로되 침례 요한이 우리를 보내어 당신께 말하기를 오실 그이가 당신이오니이까 우리가 다른 이를 기다리오리이까 하더이다 하니	When the men were come unto him, they said, John Baptist hath sent us unto thee, saying, Art thou he that should come? or look we for another?	When the men came to Jesus, they said, “John the Baptist sent us to ask, ‘Are You the One who was to come, or should we look for someone else?’”
LUK	7	21	마침 그 시에 예수께서 질병과 고통과 및 악귀 들린 자를 많이 고치시며 또 많은 소경을 보게 하신지라	And in that same hour he cured many of their infirmities and plagues, and of evil spirits; and unto many that were blind he gave sight.	At that very hour Jesus healed many people of their diseases, afflictions, and evil spirits, and He gave sight to many who were blind.
LUK	7	22	대답하여 가라사대 너희가 가서 보고 들은 것을 요한에게 고하되 소경이 보며 앉은뱅이가 걸으며 문둥이가 깨끗함을 받으며 귀머거리가 들으며 죽은 자가 살아나며 가난한 자에게 복음이 전파된다 하라	Then Jesus answering said unto them, Go your way, and tell John what things ye have seen and heard; how that the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, to the poor the gospel is preached.	So He replied, “Go back and report to John what you have seen and heard: The blind receive sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the good news is preached to the poor.
LUK	7	23	누구든지 나를 인하여 실족치 아니하는 자는 복이 있도다 하시니라	And blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me.	Blessed is the one who does not fall away on account of Me.”
LUK	7	24	요한의 보낸 자가 떠난 후에 예수께서 무리에게 요한에 대하여 말씀하시되 너희가 무엇을 보려고 광야에 나갔더냐 바람에 흔들리는 갈대냐	And when the messengers of John were departed, he began to speak unto the people concerning John, What went ye out into the wilderness for to see? A reed shaken with the wind?	After John’s messengers had left, Jesus began to speak to the crowds about John: “What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed swaying in the wind?
LUK	7	25	그러면 너희가 무엇을 보려고 나갔더냐 부드러운 옷 입은 사람이냐 보라 화려한 옷 입고 사치하게 지내는 자는 왕궁에 있느니라	But what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? Behold, they which are gorgeously apparelled, and live delicately, are in kings’ courts.	Otherwise, what did you go out to see? A man dressed in fine clothes? Look, those who wear elegant clothing and live in luxury are found in palaces.
LUK	7	26	그러면 너희가 무엇을 보려고 나갔더냐 선지자냐 옳다 내가 너희에게 이르노니 선지자보다도 나은 자니라	But what went ye out for to see? A prophet? Yea, I say unto you, and much more than a prophet.	What then did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet.
LUK	7	27	기록된 바 보라 내가 내 사자를 네 앞에 보내노니 그가 네 앞에서 네 길을 예비하리라 한 것이 이 사람에 대한 말씀이라	This is he, of whom it is written, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.	This is the one about whom it is written: ‘Behold, I will send My messenger ahead of You, who will prepare Your way before You.’
LUK	7	28	내가 너희에게 말하노니 여자가 낳은 자 중에 요한보다 큰 이가 없도다 그러나 하나님의 나라에서는 극히 작은 자라도 저보다 크니라 하시니	For I say unto you, Among those that are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptist: but he that is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he.	I tell you, among those born of women there is no one greater than John, yet even the least in the kingdom of God is greater than he.”
LUK	7	29	모든 백성과 세리들은 이미 요한의 침례를 받은지라 이 말씀을 듣고 하나님을 의롭다 하되	And all the people that heard him, and the publicans, justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John.	All the people who heard this, even the tax collectors, acknowledged God’s justice. For they had received the baptism of John.
LUK	7	30	오직 바리새인과 율법사들은 그 침례를 받지 아니한지라 스스로 하나님의 뜻을 저버리니라	But the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of him.	But the Pharisees and experts in the law rejected God’s purpose for themselves, because they had not been baptized by John.
LUK	7	31	또 가라사대 이 세대의 사람을 무엇으로 비유할꼬 무엇과 같은고	And the Lord said, Whereunto then shall I liken the men of this generation? and to what are they like?	“To what, then, can I compare the men of this generation? What are they like?
LUK	7	32	비유컨대 아이들이 장터에 앉아 서로 불러 가로되 우리가 너희를 향하여 피리를 불어도 너희가 춤추지 않고 우리가 애곡을 하여도 너희가 울지 아니하였다 함과 같도다	They are like unto children sitting in the marketplace, and calling one to another, and saying, We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned to you, and ye have not wept.	They are like children sitting in the marketplace and calling out to one another: ‘We played the flute for you, and you did not dance; we sang a dirge, and you did not weep.’
LUK	7	33	침례 요한이 와서 떡도 먹지 아니하며 포도주도 마시지 아니하매 너희 말이 귀신이 들렸다 하더니	For John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine; and ye say, He hath a devil.	For John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and you say, ‘He has a demon!’
LUK	7	34	인자는 와서 먹고 마시매 너희 말이 보라 먹기를 탐하고 포도주를 즐기는 사람이요 세리와 죄인의 친구로다 하니	The Son of man is come eating and drinking; and ye say, Behold a gluttonous man, and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners!	The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and you say, ‘Look at this glutton and drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’
LUK	7	35	지혜는 자기의 모든 자녀로 인하여 옳다 함을 얻느니라	But wisdom is justified of all her children.	But wisdom is vindicated by all her children.”
LUK	7	36	한 바리새인이 예수께 자기와 함께 잡수기를 청하니 이에 바리새인의 집에 들어가 앉으셨을 때에	And one of the Pharisees desired him that he would eat with him. And he went into the Pharisee’s house, and sat down to meat.	Then one of the Pharisees invited Jesus to eat with him, and He entered the Pharisee’s house and reclined at the table.
LUK	7	37	그 동네에 죄인인 한 여자가 있어 예수께서 바리새인의 집에 앉으셨음을 알고 향유 담은 옥합을 가지고 와서	And, behold, a woman in the city, which was a sinner, when she knew that Jesus sat at meat in the Pharisee’s house, brought an alabaster box of ointment,	When a sinful woman from that town learned that Jesus was dining there, she brought an alabaster jar of perfume.
LUK	7	38	예수의 뒤로 그 발 곁에 서서 울며 눈물로 그 발을 적시고 자기 머리털로 씻고 그 발에 입맞추고 향유를 부으니	And stood at his feet behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment.	As she stood behind Him at His feet weeping, she began to wet His feet with her tears and wipe them with her hair. Then she kissed His feet and anointed them with the perfume.
LUK	7	39	예수를 청한 바리새인이 이것을 보고 마음에 이르되 이 사람이 만일 선지자더면 자기를 만지는 이 여자가 누구며 어떠한 자 곧 죄인인 줄을 알았으리라 하거늘	Now when the Pharisee which had bidden him saw it, he spake within himself, saying, This man, if he were a prophet, would have known who and what manner of woman this is that toucheth him: for she is a sinner.	When the Pharisee who had invited Jesus saw this, he said to himself, “If this man were a prophet, He would know who this is and what kind of woman is touching Him—for she is a sinner!”
LUK	7	40	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 시몬아 내가 네게 이를 말이 있다 하시니 저가 가로되 선생님 말씀하소서	And Jesus answering said unto him, Simon, I have somewhat to say unto thee. And he saith, Master, say on.	But Jesus answered him, “Simon, I have something to tell you.” “Tell me, Teacher,” he said.
LUK	7	41	가라사대 빚 주는 사람에게 빚진 자가 둘이 있어 하나는 오백 데나리온을 졌고 하나는 오십 데나리온을 졌는데	There was a certain creditor which had two debtors: the one owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty.	“Two men were debtors to a certain moneylender. One owed him five hundred denarii, and the other fifty.
LUK	7	42	갚을 것이 없으므로 둘 다 탕감하여 주었으니 둘 중에 누가 저를 더 사랑하겠느냐	And when they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both. Tell me therefore, which of them will love him most?	When they were unable to repay him, he forgave both of them. Which one, then, will love him more?”
LUK	7	43	시몬이 대답하여 가로되 제 생각에는 많이 탕감함을 받은 자니이다 가라사대 네 판단이 옳다 하시고	Simon answered and said, I suppose that he, to whom he forgave most. And he said unto him, Thou hast rightly judged.	“I suppose the one who was forgiven more,” Simon replied. “You have judged correctly,” Jesus said.
LUK	7	44	여자를 돌아보시며 시몬에게 이르시되 이 여자를 보느냐 내가 네 집에 들어오매 너는 내게 발 씻을 물도 주지 아니하였으되 이 여자는 눈물로 내 발을 적시고 그 머리털로 씻었으며	And he turned to the woman, and said unto Simon, Seest thou this woman? I entered into thine house, thou gavest me no water for my feet: but she hath washed my feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head.	And turning toward the woman, He said to Simon, “Do you see this woman? When I entered your house, you did not give Me water for My feet, but she wet My feet with her tears and wiped them with her hair.
LUK	7	45	너는 내게 입맞추지 아니하였으되 저는 내가 들어올 때로부터 내 발에 입맞추기를 그치지 아니하였으며	Thou gavest me no kiss: but this woman since the time I came in hath not ceased to kiss my feet.	You did not greet Me with a kiss, but she has not stopped kissing My feet since I arrived.
LUK	7	46	너는 내 머리에 감람유도 붓지 아니하였으되 저는 향유를 내 발에 부었느니라	My head with oil thou didst not anoint: but this woman hath anointed my feet with ointment.	You did not anoint My head with oil, but she has anointed My feet with perfume.
LUK	7	47	이러므로 내가 네게 말하노니 저의 많은 죄가 사하여졌도다 이는 저의 사랑함이 많음이라 사함을 받은 일이 적은 자는 적게 사랑하느니라	Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved much: but to whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little.	Therefore I tell you, because her many sins have been forgiven, she has loved much. But he who has been forgiven little loves little.”
LUK	7	48	이에 여자에게 이르시되 네 죄사함을 얻었느니라 하시니	And he said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven.	Then Jesus said to her, “Your sins are forgiven.”
LUK	7	49	함께 앉은 자들이 속으로 말하되 이가 누구이기에 죄도 사하는가 하더라	And they that sat at meat with him began to say within themselves, Who is this that forgiveth sins also?	But those at the table began to say to themselves, “Who is this who even forgives sins?”
LUK	7	50	예수께서 여자에게 이르시되 네 믿음이 너를 구원하였으니 평안히 가라 하시니라	And he said to the woman, Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace.	And Jesus told the woman, “Your faith has saved you; go in peace.”
LUK	8	1	이 후에 예수께서 각 성과 촌에 두루 다니시며 하나님의 나라를 반포하시며 그 복음을 전하실새 열두 제자가 함께 하였고	And it came to pass afterward, that he went throughout every city and village, preaching and shewing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God: and the twelve were with him,	Soon afterward, Jesus traveled from one town and village to another, preaching and proclaiming the good news of the kingdom of God. The Twelve were with Him,
LUK	8	2	또한 악귀를 쫓아내심과 병 고침을 받은 어떤 여자들 곧 일곱 귀신이 나간 자 막달라인이라 하는 마리아와	And certain women, which had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities, Mary called Magdalene, out of whom went seven devils,	as well as some women who had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities: Mary called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone out,
LUK	8	3	또 헤롯의 청지기 구사의 아내 요안나와 또 수산나와 다른 여러 여자가 함께 하여 자기들의 소유로 저희를 섬기더라	And Joanna the wife of Chuza Herod’s steward, and Susanna, and many others, which ministered unto him of their substance.	Joanna the wife of Herod’s household manager Chuza, Susanna, and many others. These women were ministering to them out of their own means.
LUK	8	4	각 동네 사람들이 예수께로 나아와 큰 무리를 이루니 예수께서 비유로 말씀하시되	And when much people were gathered together, and were come to him out of every city, he spake by a parable:	While a large crowd was gathering and people were coming to Jesus from town after town, He told them this parable:
LUK	8	5	씨를 뿌리는 자가 그 씨를 뿌리러 나가서 뿌릴새 더러는 길 가에 떨어지매 밟히며 공중의 새들이 먹어버렸고	A sower went out to sow his seed: and as he sowed, some fell by the way side; and it was trodden down, and the fowls of the air devoured it.	“A farmer went out to sow his seed. And as he was sowing, some seed fell along the path, where it was trampled, and the birds of the air devoured it.
LUK	8	6	더러는 바위 위에 떨어지매 났다가 습기가 없으므로 말랐고	And some fell upon a rock; and as soon as it was sprung up, it withered away, because it lacked moisture.	Some fell on rocky ground, and when it came up, the seedlings withered because they had no moisture.
LUK	8	7	더러는 가시 떨기 속에 떨어지매 가시가 함께 자라서 기운을 막았고	And some fell among thorns; and the thorns sprang up with it, and choked it.	Other seed fell among thorns, which grew up with it and choked the seedlings.
LUK	8	8	더러는 좋은 땅에 떨어지매 나서 백 배의 결실을 하였느니라 이 말씀을 하시고 외치시되 들을 귀 있는 자는 들을지어다	And other fell on good ground, and sprang up, and bare fruit an hundredfold. And when he had said these things, he cried, He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.	Still other seed fell on good soil, where it sprang up and produced a crop—a hundredfold.” As Jesus said this, He called out, “He who has ears to hear, let him hear.”
LUK	8	9	제자들이 이 비유의 뜻을 물으니	And his disciples asked him, saying, What might this parable be?	Then His disciples asked Him what this parable meant.
LUK	8	10	가라사대 하나님 나라의 비밀을 아는 것이 너희에게는 허락되었으나 다른 사람에게는 비유로 하나니 이는 저희로 보아도 보지 못하고 들어도 깨닫지 못하게 하려 함이니라	And he said, Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God: but to others in parables; that seeing they might not see, and hearing they might not understand.	He replied, “The knowledge of the mysteries of the kingdom of God has been given to you, but to others I speak in parables, so that, ‘though seeing, they may not see; though hearing, they may not understand.’
LUK	8	11	이 비유는 이러하니라 씨는 하나님의 말씀이요	Now the parable is this: The seed is the word of God.	Now this is the meaning of the parable: The seed is the word of God.
LUK	8	12	길 가에 있다는 것은 말씀을 들은 자니 이에 마귀가 와서 그들로 믿어 구원을 얻지 못하게 하려고 말씀을 그 마음에서 빼앗는 것이요	Those by the way side are they that hear; then cometh the devil, and taketh away the word out of their hearts, lest they should believe and be saved.	The seeds along the path are those who hear, but the devil comes and takes away the word from their hearts, so that they may not believe and be saved.
LUK	8	13	바위 위에 있다는 것은 말씀을 들을 때에 기쁨으로 받으나 뿌리가 없어 잠간 믿다가 시험을 받을 때에 배반하는 자요	They on the rock are they, which, when they hear, receive the word with joy; and these have no root, which for a while believe, and in time of temptation fall away.	The seeds on rocky ground are those who hear the word and receive it with joy, but they have no root. They believe for a season, but in the time of testing, they fall away.
LUK	8	14	가시떨기에 떨어졌다는 것은 말씀을 들은 자니 지내는 중 이생의 염려와 재리와 일락에 기운이 막혀 온전히 결실치 못하는 자요	And that which fell among thorns are they, which, when they have heard, go forth, and are choked with cares and riches and pleasures of this life, and bring no fruit to perfection.	The seeds that fell among the thorns are those who hear, but as they go on their way, they are choked by the worries, riches, and pleasures of this life, and their fruit does not mature.
LUK	8	15	좋은 땅에 있다는 것은 착하고 좋은 마음으로 말씀을 듣고 지키어 인내로 결실하는 자니라	But that on the good ground are they, which in an honest and good heart, having heard the word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience.	But the seeds on good soil are those with a noble and good heart, who hear the word, cling to it, and by persevering produce a crop.
LUK	8	16	누구든지 등불을 켜서 그릇으로 덮거나 평상 아래 두지 아니하고 등경 위에 두나니 이는 들어가는 자들로 그 빛을 보게 하려 함이라	No man, when he hath lighted a candle, covereth it with a vessel, or putteth it under a bed; but setteth it on a candlestick, that they which enter in may see the light.	No one lights a lamp and covers it with a jar or puts it under a bed. Instead, he sets it on a stand, so those who enter can see the light.
LUK	8	17	숨은 것이 장차 드러나지 아니할 것이 없고 감추인 것이 장차 알려지고 나타나지 않을 것이 없느니라	For nothing is secret, that shall not be made manifest; neither any thing hid, that shall not be known and come abroad.	For there is nothing hidden that will not be disclosed, and nothing concealed that will not be made known and brought to light.
LUK	8	18	그러므로 너희가 어떻게 듣는가 스스로 삼가라 누구든지 있는 자는 받겠고 없는 자는 그 있는 줄로 아는 것까지 빼앗기리라 하시니라	Take heed therefore how ye hear: for whosoever hath, to him shall be given; and whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken even that which he seemeth to have.	Pay attention, therefore, to how you listen. Whoever has will be given more, but whoever does not have, even what he thinks he has will be taken away from him.”
LUK	8	19	예수의 모친과 그 동생들이 왔으나 무리를 인하여 가까이 하지 못하니	Then came to him his mother and his brethren, and could not come at him for the press.	Then Jesus’ mother and brothers came to see Him, but they were unable to reach Him because of the crowd.
LUK	8	20	혹이 고하되 당신의 모친과 동생들이 당신을 보려고 밖에 섰나이다	And it was told him by certain which said, Thy mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring to see thee.	He was told, “Your mother and brothers are standing outside, wanting to see You.”
LUK	8	21	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 내 모친과 내 동생들은 곧 하나님의 말씀을 듣고 행하는 이 사람들이라 하시니라	And he answered and said unto them, My mother and my brethren are these which hear the word of God, and do it.	But He replied, “My mother and brothers are those who hear the word of God and carry it out.”
LUK	8	22	하루는 제자들과 함께 배에 오르사 저희에게 이르시되 호수 저편으로 건너가자 하시매 이에 떠나	Now it came to pass on a certain day, that he went into a ship with his disciples: and he said unto them, Let us go over unto the other side of the lake. And they launched forth.	One day Jesus said to His disciples, “Let us cross to the other side of the lake.” So He got into a boat with them and set out.
LUK	8	23	행선할 때에 예수께서 잠이 드셨더니 마침 광풍이 호수로 내리치매 배에 물이 가득하게 되어 위태한지라	But as they sailed he fell asleep: and there came down a storm of wind on the lake; and they were filled with water, and were in jeopardy.	As they sailed, He fell asleep, and a windstorm came down on the lake, so that the boat was being swamped, and they were in great danger.
LUK	8	24	제자들이 나아와 깨워 가로되 주여 주여 우리가 죽겠나이다 한대 예수께서 잠을 깨사 바람과 물결을 꾸짖으시니 이에 그쳐 잔잔하여지더라	And they came to him, and awoke him, saying, Master, master, we perish. Then he arose, and rebuked the wind and the raging of the water: and they ceased, and there was a calm.	The disciples went and woke Him, saying, “Master, Master, we are perishing!” Then Jesus got up and rebuked the wind and the raging waters, and they subsided, and all was calm.
LUK	8	25	제자들에게 이르시되 너희 믿음이 어디 있느냐 하시니 저희가 두려워하고 기이히 여겨 서로 말하되 저가 뉘기에 바람과 물을 명하매 순종하는고 하더라	And he said unto them, Where is your faith? And they being afraid wondered, saying one to another, What manner of man is this! for he commandeth even the winds and water, and they obey him.	“Where is your faith?” He asked. Frightened and amazed, they asked one another, “Who is this? He commands even the winds and the water, and they obey Him!”
LUK	8	26	갈릴리 맞은편 거라사인의 땅에 이르러	And they arrived at the country of the Gadarenes, which is over against Galilee.	Then they sailed to the region of the Gerasenes, across the lake from Galilee.
LUK	8	27	육지에 내리시매 그 도시 사람으로서 귀신들린 자 하나가 예수를 만나니 이 사람은 오래 옷을 입지 아니하며 집에 거하지도 아니하고 무덤 사이에 거하는 자라	And when he went forth to land, there met him out of the city a certain man, which had devils long time, and ware no clothes, neither abode in any house, but in the tombs.	When Jesus stepped ashore, He was met by a demon-possessed man from the town. For a long time this man had not worn clothing or lived in a house, but he stayed in the tombs.
LUK	8	28	예수를 보고 부르짖으며 그 앞에 엎드리어 큰 소리로 불러 가로되 지극히 높으신 하나님의 아들 예수여 나와 당신과 무슨 상관이 있나이까 당신께 구하노니 나를 괴롭게 마옵소서 하니	When he saw Jesus, he cried out, and fell down before him, and with a loud voice said, What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God most high? I beseech thee, torment me not.	When the man saw Jesus, he cried out and fell down before Him, shouting in a loud voice, “What do You want with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I beg You not to torture me!”
LUK	8	29	이는 예수께서 이미 더러운 귀신을 명하사 이 사람에게서 나오라 하셨음이라 (귀신이 가끔 이 사람을 붙잡으므로 저가 쇠사슬과 고랑에 매이어 지키웠으되 그 맨 것을 끊고 귀신에게 몰려 광야로 나갔더라)	(For he had commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man. For oftentimes it had caught him: and he was kept bound with chains and in fetters; and he brake the bands, and was driven of the devil into the wilderness.)	For Jesus had commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man. Many times it had seized him, and though he was bound with chains and shackles, he had broken the chains and been driven by the demon into solitary places.
LUK	8	30	예수께서 네 이름이 무엇이냐 물으신즉 가로되 군대라 하니 이는 많은 귀신이 들렸음이라	And Jesus asked him, saying, What is thy name? And he said, Legion: because many devils were entered into him.	“What is your name?” Jesus asked. “Legion,” he replied, because many demons had gone into him.
LUK	8	31	무저갱으로 들어가라 하지 마시기를 간구하더니	And they besought him that he would not command them to go out into the deep.	And the demons kept begging Jesus not to order them to go into the Abyss.
LUK	8	32	마침 거기 많은 돼지 떼가 산에서 먹고 있는지라 귀신들이 그 돼지에게로 들어가게 허하심을 간구하니 이에 허하신대	And there was there an herd of many swine feeding on the mountain: and they besought him that he would suffer them to enter into them. And he suffered them.	There on the hillside a large herd of pigs was feeding. So the demons begged Jesus to let them enter the pigs, and He gave them permission.
LUK	8	33	귀신들이 그 사람에게서 나와 돼지에게로 들어가니 그 떼가 비탈로 내리달아 호수에 들어가 몰사하거늘	Then went the devils out of the man, and entered into the swine: and the herd ran violently down a steep place into the lake, and were choked.	Then the demons came out of the man and went into the pigs, and the herd rushed down the steep bank into the lake and was drowned.
LUK	8	34	치던 자들이 그 된 것을 보고 도망하여 성내와 촌에 고하니	When they that fed them saw what was done, they fled, and went and told it in the city and in the country.	When those tending the pigs saw what had happened, they ran off and reported this in the town and countryside.
LUK	8	35	사람들이 그 된 것을 보러 나와서 예수께 이르러 귀신 나간 사람이 옷을 입고 정신이 온전하여 예수의 발 아래 앉은 것을 보고 두려워하거늘	Then they went out to see what was done; and came to Jesus, and found the man, out of whom the devils were departed, sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed, and in his right mind: and they were afraid.	So the people went out to see what had happened. They came to Jesus and found the man whom the demons had left, sitting at Jesus’ feet, clothed and in his right mind; and they were afraid.
LUK	8	36	귀신 들렸던 자의 어떻게 구원 받은 것을 본 자들이 저희에게 이르매	They also which saw it told them by what means he that was possessed of the devils was healed.	Meanwhile, those who had seen it reported how the demon-possessed man had been healed.
LUK	8	37	거라사인의 땅 근방 모든 백성이 크게 두려워하여 떠나가시기를 구하더라 예수께서 배에 올라 돌아가실새	Then the whole multitude of the country of the Gadarenes round about besought him to depart from them; for they were taken with great fear: and he went up into the ship, and returned back again.	Then all the people of the region of the Gerasenes asked Jesus to depart from them, because great fear had taken hold of them. So He got into the boat and started back.
LUK	8	38	귀신 나간 사람이 함께 있기를 구하였으나 예수께서 저를 보내시며 가라사대	Now the man out of whom the devils were departed besought him that he might be with him: but Jesus sent him away, saying,	The man whom the demons had left begged to go with Jesus. But He sent him away, saying,
LUK	8	39	집으로 돌아가 하나님이 네게 어떻게 큰 일 행하신 것을 일일이 고하라 하시니 저가 가서 예수께서 자기에게 어떻게 큰 일 하신 것을 온 성내에 전파하니라	Return to thine own house, and shew how great things God hath done unto thee. And he went his way, and published throughout the whole city how great things Jesus had done unto him.	“Return home and describe how much God has done for you.” So the man went away and proclaimed all over the town how much Jesus had done for him.
LUK	8	40	예수께서 돌아오시매 무리가 환영하니 이는 다 기다렸음이러라	And it came to pass, that, when Jesus was returned, the people gladly received him: for they were all waiting for him.	When Jesus returned, the crowd welcomed Him, for they had all been waiting for Him.
LUK	8	41	이에 회당장인 야이로라 하는 사람이 와서 예수의 발 아래 엎드려 자기 집에 오시기를 간구하니	And, behold, there came a man named Jairus, and he was a ruler of the synagogue: and he fell down at Jesus’ feet, and besought him that he would come into his house:	Just then a synagogue leader named Jairus came and fell at Jesus’ feet. He begged Him to come to his house,
LUK	8	42	이는 자기에게 열두 살 먹은 외딸이 있어 죽어감이러라 예수께서 가실 때에 무리가 옹위하더라	For he had one only daughter, about twelve years of age, and she lay a dying. But as he went the people thronged him.	because his only daughter, who was about twelve, was dying. As Jesus went with him, the crowds pressed around Him,
LUK	8	43	이에 열두 해를 혈루증으로 앓는 중에 아무에게도 고침을 받지 못하던 여자가	And a woman having an issue of blood twelve years, which had spent all her living upon physicians, neither could be healed of any,	including a woman who had suffered from bleeding for twelve years. She had spent all her money on physicians, but no one was able to heal her.
LUK	8	44	예수의 뒤로 와서 그 옷 가에 손을 대니 혈루증이 즉시 그쳤더라	Came behind him, and touched the border of his garment: and immediately her issue of blood stanched.	She came up behind Jesus and touched the fringe of His cloak, and immediately her bleeding stopped.
LUK	8	45	예수께서 가라사대 내게 손을 댄 자가 누구냐 하시니 다 아니라 할 때에 베드로가 가로되 주여 무리가 옹위하여 미나이다	And Jesus said, Who touched me? When all denied, Peter and they that were with him said, Master, the multitude throng thee and press thee, and sayest thou, Who touched me?	“Who touched Me?” Jesus asked. But they all denied it. “Master,” said Peter, “the people are crowding and pressing against You.”
LUK	8	46	예수께서 가라사대 내게 손을 댄 자가 있도다 이는 내게서 능력이 나간 줄 앎이로다 하신대	And Jesus said, Somebody hath touched me: for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me.	But Jesus declared, “Someone touched Me, for I know that power has gone out from Me.”
LUK	8	47	여자가 스스로 숨기지 못할 줄을 알고 떨며 나아와 엎드리어 그 손 댄 연고와 곧 나은 것을 모든 사람 앞에서 고하니	And when the woman saw that she was not hid, she came trembling, and falling down before him, she declared unto him before all the people for what cause she had touched him, and how she was healed immediately.	Then the woman, seeing that she could not escape notice, came trembling and fell down before Him. In the presence of all the people, she explained why she had touched Him and how she had immediately been healed.
LUK	8	48	예수께서 이르시되 딸아 네 믿음이 너를 구원하였으니 평안히 가라 하시더라	And he said unto her, Daughter, be of good comfort: thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace.	“Daughter,” said Jesus, “your faith has healed you. Go in peace.”
LUK	8	49	아직 말씀하실 때에 회당장의 집에서 사람이 와서 말하되 당신의 딸이 죽었나이다 선생을 더 괴롭게 마소서 하거늘	While he yet spake, there cometh one from the ruler of the synagogue’s house, saying to him, Thy daughter is dead; trouble not the Master.	While He was still speaking, someone arrived from the house of the synagogue leader. “Your daughter is dead,” he told Jairus. “Do not bother the Teacher anymore.”
LUK	8	50	예수께서 들으시고 가라사대 두려워 말고 믿기만 하라 그리하면 딸이 구원을 얻으리라 하시고	But when Jesus heard it, he answered him, saying, Fear not: believe only, and she shall be made whole.	But Jesus overheard them and said to Jairus, “Do not be afraid; just believe, and she will be healed.”
LUK	8	51	집에 이르러 베드로와 요한과 야고보와 및 아이의 부모 외에는 함께 들어가기를 허하지 아니하시니라	And when he came into the house, he suffered no man to go in, save Peter, and James, and John, and the father and the mother of the maiden.	When He entered the house, He did not allow anyone to go in with Him except Peter, John, James, and the child’s father and mother.
LUK	8	52	모든 사람이 아이를 위하여 울며 통곡하매 예수께서 이르시되 울지 말라 죽은 것이 아니라 잔다 하시니	And all wept, and bewailed her: but he said, Weep not; she is not dead, but sleepeth.	Meanwhile, everyone was weeping and mourning for her. But Jesus said, “Stop weeping; she is not dead but asleep.”
LUK	8	53	저희가 그 죽은 것을 아는 고로 비웃더라	And they laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was dead.	And they laughed at Him, knowing that she was dead.
LUK	8	54	예수께서 아이의 손을 잡고 불러 가라사대 아이야 일어나라 하시니	And he put them all out, and took her by the hand, and called, saying, Maid, arise.	But Jesus took her by the hand and called out, “Child, get up!”
LUK	8	55	그 영이 돌아와 아이가 곧 일어나거늘 예수께서 먹을 것을 주라 명하신대	And her spirit came again, and she arose straightway: and he commanded to give her meat.	Her spirit returned, and at once she got up. And He directed that she be given something to eat.
LUK	8	56	그 부모가 놀라는지라 예수께서 경계하사 이 일을 아무에게도 말하지 말라 하시니라	And her parents were astonished: but he charged them that they should tell no man what was done.	Her parents were astounded, but Jesus ordered them not to tell anyone what had happened.
LUK	9	1	예수께서 열두 제자를 불러 모으사 모든 귀신을 제어하며 병을 고치는 능력과 권세를 주시고	Then he called his twelve disciples together, and gave them power and authority over all devils, and to cure diseases.	Then Jesus called the Twelve together and gave them power and authority over all demons, and power to cure diseases.
LUK	9	2	하나님의 나라를 전파하며 앓는 자를 고치게 하려고 내어 보내시며	And he sent them to preach the kingdom of God, and to heal the sick.	And He sent them out to proclaim the kingdom of God and to heal the sick.
LUK	9	3	이르시되 여행을 위하여 아무 것도 가지지 말라 지팡이나 주머니나 양식이나 돈이나 두 벌 옷을 가지지 말며	And he said unto them, Take nothing for your journey, neither staves, nor scrip, neither bread, neither money; neither have two coats apiece.	“Take nothing for the journey,” He told them, “no staff, no bag, no bread, no money, no second tunic.
LUK	9	4	어느 집에 들어가든지 거기서 유하다가 거기서 떠나라	And whatsoever house ye enter into, there abide, and thence depart.	Whatever house you enter, stay there until you leave that area.
LUK	9	5	누구든지 너희를 영접지 아니하거든 그 성에서 떠날 때에 너희 발에서 먼지를 떨어버려 저희에게 증거를 삼으라 하시니	And whosoever will not receive you, when ye go out of that city, shake off the very dust from your feet for a testimony against them.	If anyone does not welcome you, shake the dust off your feet when you leave that town, as a testimony against them.”
LUK	9	6	제자들이 나가 각 촌에 두루 행하여 처처에 복음을 전하며 병을 고치더라	And they departed, and went through the towns, preaching the gospel, and healing every where.	So they set out and went from village to village, preaching the gospel and healing people everywhere.
LUK	9	7	분봉 왕 헤롯이 이 모든 일을 듣고 심히 당황하여 하니 이는 혹은 요한이 죽은 자 가운데서 살아났다고도 하며	Now Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was done by him: and he was perplexed, because that it was said of some, that John was risen from the dead;	When Herod the tetrarch heard about all that was happening, he was perplexed. For some were saying that John had risen from the dead,
LUK	9	8	혹은 엘리야가 나타났다고도 하며 혹은 옛 선지자 하나가 다시 살아났다고도 함이라	And of some, that Elias had appeared; and of others, that one of the old prophets was risen again.	others that Elijah had appeared, and still others that a prophet of old had arisen.
LUK	9	9	헤롯이 가로되 요한은 내가 목을 베었거늘 이제 이런 일이 들리니 이 사람이 누군고 하며 저를 보고자 하더라	And Herod said, John have I beheaded: but who is this, of whom I hear such things? And he desired to see him.	“I beheaded John,” Herod said, “but who is this man I hear such things about?” And he kept trying to see Jesus.
LUK	9	10	사도들이 돌아와 자기들의 모든 행한 것을 예수께 고한대 데리시고 따로 벳새다라는 고을로 떠나 가셨으나	And the apostles, when they were returned, told him all that they had done. And he took them, and went aside privately into a desert place belonging to the city called Bethsaida.	Then the apostles returned and reported to Jesus all that they had done. Taking them away privately, He withdrew to a town called Bethsaida.
LUK	9	11	무리가 알고 따라왔거늘 예수께서 저희를 영접하사 하나님 나라의 일을 이야기하시며 병 고칠 자들은 고치시더라	And the people, when they knew it, followed him: and he received them, and spake unto them of the kingdom of God, and healed them that had need of healing.	But the crowds found out and followed Him. He welcomed them and spoke to them about the kingdom of God, and He healed those who needed healing.
LUK	9	12	날이 저물어 가매 열두 사도가 나아와 여짜오되 무리를 보내어 두루 마을과 촌으로 가서 유하며 먹을 것을 얻게 하소서 우리 있는 여기가 빈 들이니이다	And when the day began to wear away, then came the twelve, and said unto him, Send the multitude away, that they may go into the towns and country round about, and lodge, and get victuals: for we are here in a desert place.	As the day neared its end, the Twelve came to Jesus and said, “Dismiss the crowd so they can go to the surrounding villages and countryside for lodging and provisions. For we are in a desolate place here.”
LUK	9	13	예수께서 이르시되 너희가 먹을 것을 주어라 하시니 여짜오되 우리에게 떡 다섯 개와 물고기 두 마리 밖에 없으니 이 모든 사람을 위하여 먹을 것을 사지 아니하고는 할 수 없삽나이다 하였으니	But he said unto them, Give ye them to eat. And they said, We have no more but five loaves and two fishes; except we should go and buy meat for all this people.	But Jesus told them, “You give them something to eat.” “We have only five loaves of bread and two fish,” they answered, “unless we go and buy food for all these people.”
LUK	9	14	이는 남자가 한 오천 명 됨이러라 제자들에게 이르시되 떼를 지어 한 오십 명씩 앉히라 하시니	For they were about five thousand men. And he said to his disciples, Make them sit down by fifties in a company.	(There were about five thousand men.) He told His disciples, “Have them sit down in groups of about fifty each.”
LUK	9	15	제자들이 이렇게 하여 다 앉힌 후	And they did so, and made them all sit down.	They did so, and everyone was seated.
LUK	9	16	예수께서 떡 다섯 개와 물고기 두 마리를 가지사 하늘을 우러러 축사하시고 떼어 제자들에게 주어 무리 앞에 놓게 하시니	Then he took the five loaves and the two fishes, and looking up to heaven, he blessed them, and brake, and gave to the disciples to set before the multitude.	Taking the five loaves and the two fish and looking up to heaven, Jesus spoke a blessing and broke them. Then He gave them to the disciples to set before the people.
LUK	9	17	먹고 다 배불렀더라 그 남은 조각 열두 바구니를 거두니라	And they did eat, and were all filled: and there was taken up of fragments that remained to them twelve baskets.	They all ate and were satisfied, and the disciples picked up twelve basketfuls of broken pieces that were left over.
LUK	9	18	예수께서 따로 기도하실 때에 제자들이 주와 함께 있더니 물어 가라사대 무리가 나를 누구라고 하느냐	And it came to pass, as he was alone praying, his disciples were with him: and he asked them, saying, Whom say the people that I am?	One day as Jesus was praying in private and the disciples were with Him, He questioned them: “Who do the crowds say I am?”
LUK	9	19	대답하여 가로되 침례 요한이라 하고 더러는 엘리야라, 더러는 옛 선지자 중의 하나가 살아났다 하나이다	They answering said, John the Baptist; but some say, Elias; and others say, that one of the old prophets is risen again.	They replied, “Some say John the Baptist; others say Elijah; and still others, that a prophet of old has arisen.”
LUK	9	20	예수께서 이르시되 너희는 나를 누구라 하느냐 베드로가 대답하여 가로되 하나님의 그리스도시니이다 하니	He said unto them, But whom say ye that I am? Peter answering said, The Christ of God.	“But what about you?” Jesus asked. “Who do you say I am?” Peter answered, “The Christ of God.”
LUK	9	21	경계하사 이 말을 아무에게도 이르지 말라 명하시고	And he straitly charged them, and commanded them to tell no man that thing;	Jesus strictly warned them not to tell this to anyone.
LUK	9	22	가라사대 인자가 많은 고난을 받고 장로들과 대제사장들과 서기관들에게 버린 바 되어 죽임을 당하고 제삼일에 살아나야 하리라 하시고	Saying, The Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be slain, and be raised the third day.	“The Son of Man must suffer many things,” He said. “He must be rejected by the elders, chief priests, and scribes, and He must be killed and on the third day be raised to life.”
LUK	9	23	또 무리에게 이르시되 아무든지 나를 따라 오려거든 자기를 부인하고 날마다 제 십자가를 지고 나를 좇을 것이니라	And he said to them all, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me.	Then Jesus said to all of them, “If anyone wants to come after Me, he must deny himself and take up his cross daily and follow Me.
LUK	9	24	누구든지 제 목숨을 구원코자 하면 잃을 것이요 누구든지 나를 위하여 제 목숨을 잃으면 구원하리라	For whosoever will save his life shall lose it: but whosoever will lose his life for my sake, the same shall save it.	For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for My sake will save it.
LUK	9	25	사람이 만일 온 천하를 얻고도 자기를 잃든지 빼앗기든지 하면 무엇이 유익하리요	For what is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole world, and lose himself, or be cast away?	What does it profit a man to gain the whole world, yet lose or forfeit his very self?
LUK	9	26	누구든지 나와 내 말을 부끄러워하면 인자도 자기와 아버지와 거룩한 천사들의 영광으로 올 때에 그 사람을 부끄러워하리라	For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he shall come in his own glory, and in his Father’s, and of the holy angels.	If anyone is ashamed of Me and My words, the Son of Man will be ashamed of him when He comes in His glory and in the glory of the Father and of the holy angels.
LUK	9	27	내가 참으로 너희에게 이르노니 여기 섰는 사람 중에 죽기 전에 하나님의 나라를 볼 자들도 있느니라	But I tell you of a truth, there be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the kingdom of God.	But I tell you truthfully, some who are standing here will not taste death before they see the kingdom of God.”
LUK	9	28	이 말씀을 하신 후 팔 일쯤 되어 예수께서 베드로와 요한과 야고보를 데리시고 기도하시러 산에 올라가사	And it came to pass about an eight days after these sayings, he took Peter and John and James, and went up into a mountain to pray.	About eight days after Jesus had said these things, He took with Him Peter, John, and James, and went up on a mountain to pray.
LUK	9	29	기도하실 때에 용모가 변화되고 그 옷이 희어져 광채가 나더라	And as he prayed, the fashion of his countenance was altered, and his raiment was white and glistering.	And as He was praying, the appearance of His face changed, and His clothes became radiantly white.
LUK	9	30	문득 두 사람이 예수와 함께 말하니 이는 모세와 엘리야라	And, behold, there talked with him two men, which were Moses and Elias:	Suddenly two men, Moses and Elijah, began talking with Jesus.
LUK	9	31	영광 중에 나타나서 장차 예수께서 예루살렘에서 별세하실 것을 말씀할새	Who appeared in glory, and spake of his decease which he should accomplish at Jerusalem.	They appeared in glory and spoke about His departure, which He was about to accomplish at Jerusalem.
LUK	9	32	베드로와 및 함께 있는 자들이 곤하여 졸다가 아주 깨어 예수의 영광과 및 함께 선 두 사람을 보더니	But Peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep: and when they were awake, they saw his glory, and the two men that stood with him.	Meanwhile Peter and his companions were overcome by sleep, but when they awoke, they saw Jesus’ glory and the two men standing with Him.
LUK	9	33	두 사람이 떠날 때에 베드로가 예수께 여짜오되 주여 우리가 여기 있는 것이 좋사오니 우리가 초막 셋을 짓되 하나는 주를 위하여, 하나는 모세를 위하여, 하나는 엘리야를 위하여 하사이다 하되 자기의 하는 말을 자기도 알지 못하더라	And it came to pass, as they departed from him, Peter said unto Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here: and let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias: not knowing what he said.	As Moses and Elijah were leaving, Peter said to Jesus, “Master, it is good for us to be here. Let us put up three shelters—one for You, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.” (He did not know what he was saying.)
LUK	9	34	이 말 할 즈음에 구름이 와서 저희를 덮는지라 구름 속으로 들어갈 때에 저희가 무서워하더니	While he thus spake, there came a cloud, and overshadowed them: and they feared as they entered into the cloud.	While Peter was speaking, a cloud appeared and enveloped them, and they were afraid as they entered the cloud.
LUK	9	35	구름 속에서 소리가 나서 가로되 이는 나의 아들 곧 택함을 받은 자니 너희는 저의 말을 들으라 하고	And there came a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son: hear him.	And a voice came from the cloud, saying, “This is My Son, whom I have chosen. Listen to Him!”
LUK	9	36	소리가 그치매 오직 예수만 보이시더라 제자들이 잠잠하여 그 본 것을 무엇이든지 그 때에는 아무에게도 이르지 아니하니라	And when the voice was past, Jesus was found alone. And they kept it close, and told no man in those days any of those things which they had seen.	After the voice had spoken, only Jesus was present with them. The disciples kept this to themselves, and in those days they did not tell anyone what they had seen.
LUK	9	37	이튿날 산에서 내려 오시니 큰 무리가 맞을새	And it came to pass, that on the next day, when they were come down from the hill, much people met him.	The next day, when they came down from the mountain, Jesus was met by a large crowd.
LUK	9	38	무리 중에 한 사람이 소리질러 가로되 선생님 청컨대 내 아들을 돌아 보아 주옵소서 이는 내 외아들이니이다	And, behold, a man of the company cried out, saying, Master, I beseech thee, look upon my son: for he is mine only child.	Suddenly a man in the crowd cried out, “Teacher, I beg You to look at my son, for he is my only child.
LUK	9	39	귀신이 저를 잡아 졸지에 부르짖게 하고 경련을 일으켜 거품을 흘리게 하며 심히 상하게 하고야 겨우 떠나가나이다	And, lo, a spirit taketh him, and he suddenly crieth out; and it teareth him that he foameth again, and bruising him hardly departeth from him.	A spirit keeps seizing him, and he screams abruptly. It throws him into convulsions so that he foams at the mouth. It keeps mauling him and rarely departs from him.
LUK	9	40	당신의 제자들에게 내어 쫓아 주기를 구하였으나 저희가 능히 못하더이다	And I besought thy disciples to cast him out; and they could not.	I begged Your disciples to drive it out, but they were unable.”
LUK	9	41	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 믿음이 없고 패역한 세대여 내가 얼마나 너희와 함께 있으며 너희를 참으리요 네 아들을 이리로 데리고 오라 하시니	And Jesus answering said, O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you, and suffer you? Bring thy son hither.	“O unbelieving and perverse generation!” Jesus replied. “How long must I remain with you and put up with you? Bring your son here.”
LUK	9	42	올 때에 귀신이 거꾸러뜨리고 심한 경련을 일으키게 하는지라 예수께서 더러운 귀신을 꾸짖으시고 아이를 낫게 하사 그 아비에게 도로 주시니	And as he was yet a coming, the devil threw him down, and tare him. And Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed the child, and delivered him again to his father.	Even while the boy was approaching, the demon slammed him to the ground in a convulsion. But Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, healed the boy, and gave him back to his father.
LUK	9	43	사람들이 다 하나님의 위엄을 놀라니라 저희가 다 그 행하시는 모든 일을 기이히 여길새 예수께서 제자들에게 이르시되	And they were all amazed at the mighty power of God. But while they wondered every one at all things which Jesus did, he said unto his disciples,	And they were all astonished at the greatness of God. While everyone was marveling at all that Jesus was doing, He said to His disciples,
LUK	9	44	이 말을 너희 귀에 담아두라 인자가 장차 사람들의 손에 넘기우리라 하시되	Let these sayings sink down into your ears: for the Son of man shall be delivered into the hands of men.	“Let these words sink into your ears: The Son of Man is about to be delivered into the hands of men.”
LUK	9	45	저희가 이 말씀을 알지 못하였나니 이는 저희로 깨닫지 못하게 숨김이 되었음이라 또 저희는 이 말씀을 묻기도 두려워하더라	But they understood not this saying, and it was hid from them, that they perceived it not: and they feared to ask him of that saying.	But they did not understand this statement. It was veiled from them so that they could not comprehend it, and they were afraid to ask Him about it.
LUK	9	46	제자 중에서 누가 크냐 하는 변론이 일어나니	Then there arose a reasoning among them, which of them should be greatest.	Then an argument started among the disciples as to which of them would be the greatest.
LUK	9	47	예수께서 그 마음에 변론하는 것을 아시고 어린 아이 하나를 데려다가 자기 곁에 세우시고	And Jesus, perceiving the thought of their heart, took a child, and set him by him,	But Jesus, knowing the thoughts of their hearts, had a little child stand beside Him.
LUK	9	48	저희에게 이르시되 누구든지 내 이름으로 이 어린 아이를 영접하면 곧 나를 영접함이요 또 누구든지 나를 영접하면 곧 나 보내신 이를 영접함이라 너희 모든 사람 중에 가장 작은 그이가 큰 자니라	And said unto them, Whosoever shall receive this child in my name receiveth me: and whosoever shall receive me receiveth him that sent me: for he that is least among you all, the same shall be great.	And He said to them, “Whoever welcomes this little child in My name welcomes Me, and whoever welcomes Me welcomes the One who sent Me. For whoever is the least among all of you, he is the greatest.”
LUK	9	49	요한이 여짜오되 주여 어떤 사람이 주의 이름으로 귀신을 내어 쫓는 것을 우리가 보고 우리와 함께 따르지 아니하므로 금하였나이다	And John answered and said, Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy name; and we forbad him, because he followeth not with us.	“Master,” said John, “we saw someone driving out demons in Your name, and we tried to stop him, because he does not accompany us.”
LUK	9	50	예수께서 가라사대 금하지 말라 너희를 반대하지 않는 자는 너희를 위하는 자니라 하시니라	And Jesus said unto him, Forbid him not: for he that is not against us is for us.	“Do not stop him,” Jesus replied, “for whoever is not against you is for you.”
LUK	9	51	예수께서 승천하실 기약이 차가매 예루살렘을 향하여 올라가기로 굳게 결심하시고	And it came to pass, when the time was come that he should be received up, he stedfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem,	As the day of His ascension approached, Jesus resolutely set out for Jerusalem.
LUK	9	52	사자들을 앞서 보내시매 저희가 가서 예수를 위하여 예비하려고 사마리아인의 한 촌에 들어갔더니	And sent messengers before his face: and they went, and entered into a village of the Samaritans, to make ready for him.	He sent messengers on ahead, who went into a village of the Samaritans to make arrangements for Him.
LUK	9	53	예수께서 예루살렘을 향하여 가시는 고로 저희가 받아 들이지 아니하는지라	And they did not receive him, because his face was as though he would go to Jerusalem.	But the people there refused to welcome Him, because He was heading for Jerusalem.
LUK	9	54	제자 야고보와 요한이 이를 보고 가로되 주여 우리가 불을 명하여 하늘로 좇아 내려 저희를 멸하라 하기를 원하시나이까	And when his disciples James and John saw this, they said, Lord, wilt thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume them, even as Elias did?	When the disciples James and John saw this, they asked, “Lord, do You want us to call down fire from heaven to consume them?”
LUK	9	55	예수께서 돌아보시며 꾸짖으시고	But he turned, and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of.	But Jesus turned and rebuked them.
LUK	9	56	함께 다른 촌으로 가시니라	For the Son of man is not come to destroy men’s lives, but to save them. And they went to another village.	And He and His disciples went on to another village.
LUK	9	57	길 가실 때에 혹이 여짜오되 어디로 가시든지 저는 좇으리이다	And it came to pass, that, as they went in the way, a certain man said unto him, Lord, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest.	As they were walking along the road, someone said to Jesus, “I will follow You wherever You go.”
LUK	9	58	예수께서 가라사대 여우도 굴이 있고 공중의 새도 집이 있으되 인자는 머리 둘 곳이 없도다 하시고	And Jesus said unto him, Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head.	Jesus replied, “Foxes have dens and birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man has no place to lay His head.”
LUK	9	59	또 다른 사람에게 나를 좇으라 하시니 그가 가로되 나로 먼저 가서 내 부친을 장사하게 허락하옵소서	And he said unto another, Follow me. But he said, Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father.	Then He said to another man, “Follow Me.” The man replied, “Lord, first let me go and bury my father.”
LUK	9	60	가라사대 죽은 자들로 자기의 죽은 자들을 장사하게 하고 너는 가서 하나님의 나라를 전파하라 하시고	Jesus said unto him, Let the dead bury their dead: but go thou and preach the kingdom of God.	But Jesus told him, “Let the dead bury their own dead. You, however, go and proclaim the kingdom of God.”
LUK	9	61	또 다른 사람이 가로되 주여 내가 주를 좇겠나이다마는 나로 먼저 내 가족을 작별케 허락하소서	And another also said, Lord, I will follow thee; but let me first go bid them farewell, which are at home at my house.	Still another said, “I will follow You, Lord; but first let me bid farewell to my family.”
LUK	9	62	예수께서 이르시되 손에 쟁기를 잡고 뒤를 돌아보는 자는 하나님의 나라에 합당치 아니하니라 하시니라	And Jesus said unto him, No man, having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God.	Then Jesus declared, “No one who puts his hand to the plow and then looks back is fit for the kingdom of God.”
LUK	10	1	이 후에 주께서 달리 칠십 인을 세우사 친히 가시려는 각동 각처로 둘씩 앞서 보내시며	After these things the Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent them two and two before his face into every city and place, whither he himself would come.	After this, the Lord appointed seventy-two others and sent them two by two ahead of Him to every town and place He was about to visit.
LUK	10	2	이르시되 추수할 것은 많되 일꾼이 적으니 그러므로 추수하는 주인에게 청하여 추수할 일꾼들을 보내어 주소서 하라	Therefore said he unto them, The harvest truly is great, but the labourers are few: pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth labourers into his harvest.	And He told them, “The harvest is plentiful, but the workers are few. Ask the Lord of the harvest, therefore, to send out workers into His harvest.
LUK	10	3	갈지어다 내가 너희를 보냄이 어린 양을 이리 가운데로 보냄과 같도다	Go your ways: behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves.	Go! I am sending you out like lambs among wolves.
LUK	10	4	전대나 주머니나 신을 가지지 말며 길에서 아무에게도 문안하지 말며	Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes: and salute no man by the way.	Carry no purse or bag or sandals. Do not greet anyone along the road.
LUK	10	5	어느 집에 들어가든지 먼저 말하되 이 집이 평안할지어다 하라	And into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house.	Whatever house you enter, begin by saying, ‘Peace to this house.’
LUK	10	6	막일 평안을 받을 사람이 거기 있으면 너희 빈 평안이 그에게 머물 것이요 그렇지 않으면 너희에게로 돌아오리라	And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it: if not, it shall turn to you again.	If a man of peace is there, your peace will rest on him; if not, it will return to you.
LUK	10	7	그 집에 유하며 주는 것을 먹고 마시라 일꾼이 그 삯을 얻는 것이 마땅하니라 이 집에서 저 집으로 옮기지 말라	And in the same house remain, eating and drinking such things as they give: for the labourer is worthy of his hire. Go not from house to house.	Stay at the same house, eating and drinking whatever you are offered. For the worker is worthy of his wages. Do not move around from house to house.
LUK	10	8	어느 동네에 들어가든지 너희를 영접하거든 너희 앞에 차려 놓는 것을 먹고	And into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat such things as are set before you:	If you enter a town and they welcome you, eat whatever is set before you.
LUK	10	9	거기 있는 병자들을 고치고 또 말하기를 하나님의 나라가 너희에게 가까이 왔다 하라	And heal the sick that are therein, and say unto them, The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you.	Heal the sick who are there and tell them, ‘The kingdom of God is near you.’
LUK	10	10	어느 동네에 들어가든지 너희를 영접지 아니하거든 그 거리로 나와서 말하되	But into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go your ways out into the streets of the same, and say,	But if you enter a town and they do not welcome you, go into the streets and declare,
LUK	10	11	너희 동네에서 우리 발에 묻은 먼지도 너희에게 떨어 버리노라 그러나 하나님의 나라가 가까이 온 줄을 알라 하라	Even the very dust of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off against you: notwithstanding be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you.	‘Even the dust of your town that clings to our feet, we wipe off as a testimony against you. Yet be sure of this: The kingdom of God is near.’
LUK	10	12	내가 너희에게 말하노니 저 날에 소돔이 그 동네보다 견디기 쉬우리라	But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable in that day for Sodom, than for that city.	I tell you, it will be more bearable on that day for Sodom than for that town.
LUK	10	13	화 있을진저 고라신아, 화 있을진저 벳새다야, 너희에게서 행한 모든 권능을 두로와 시돈에서 행하였더면 저희가 벌써 베옷을 입고 재에 앉아 회개하였으리라	Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon, which have been done in you, they had a great while ago repented, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.	Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the miracles that were performed in you had been performed in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
LUK	10	14	심판 때에 두로와 시돈이 너희보다 견디기 쉬우리라	But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment, than for you.	But it will be more bearable for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment than for you.
LUK	10	15	가버나움아 네가 하늘에까지 높아지겠느냐 음부에까지 낮아지리라	And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted to heaven, shalt be thrust down to hell.	And you, Capernaum, will you be lifted up to heaven? No, you will be brought down to Hades!
LUK	10	16	너희 말을 듣는 자는 곧 내 말을 듣는 것이요 너희를 저버리는 자는 곧 나를 저버리는 것이요 나를 저버리는 자는 나 보내신 이를 저버리는 것이라 하시니라	He that heareth you heareth me; and he that despiseth you despiseth me; and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me.	Whoever listens to you listens to Me; whoever rejects you rejects Me; and whoever rejects Me rejects the One who sent Me.”
LUK	10	17	칠십 인이 기뻐 돌아와 가로되 주여 주의 이름으로 귀신들도 우리에게 항복하더이다	And the seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through thy name.	The seventy-two returned with joy and said, “Lord, even the demons submit to us in Your name.”
LUK	10	18	예수께서 이르시되 사단이 하늘로서 번개 같이 떨어지는 것을 내가 보았노라	And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven.	So He told them, “I saw Satan fall like lightning from heaven.
LUK	10	19	내가 너희에게 뱀과 전갈을 밟으며 원수의 모든 능력을 제어할 권세를 주었으니 너희를 해할 자가 결단코 없으리라	Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy: and nothing shall by any means hurt you.	Behold, I have given you authority to tread on snakes and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy. Nothing will harm you.
LUK	10	20	그러나 귀신들이 너희에게 항복하는 것으로 기뻐하지 말고 너희 이름이 하늘에 기록된 것으로 기뻐하라 하시니라	Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven.	Nevertheless, do not rejoice that the spirits submit to you, but rejoice that your names are written in heaven.”
LUK	10	21	이 때에 예수께서 성령으로 기뻐하사 가라사대 천지의 주재이신 아버지여 이것을 지혜롭고 슬기 있는 자들에게는 숨기시고 어린 아이들에게는 나타내심을 감사하나이다 옳소이다 이렇게 된 것이 아버지의 뜻이니이다	In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes: even so, Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight.	At that time Jesus rejoiced in the Holy Spirit and declared, “I praise You, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because You have hidden these things from the wise and learned, and revealed them to little children. Yes, Father, for this was well-pleasing in Your sight.
LUK	10	22	내 아버지께서 모든 것을 내게 주셨으니 아버지 외에는 아들이 누군지 아는 자가 없고 아들과 또 아들의 소원대로 계시를 받는 자 외에는 아버지가 누군지 아는 자가 없나이다 하시고	All things are delivered to me of my Father: and no man knoweth who the Son is, but the Father; and who the Father is, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him.	All things have been entrusted to Me by My Father. No one knows who the Son is except the Father, and no one knows who the Father is except the Son and those to whom the Son chooses to reveal Him.”
LUK	10	23	제자들을 돌아보시며 종용히 이르시되 너희의 보는 것을 보는 눈은 복이 있도다	And he turned him unto his disciples, and said privately, Blessed are the eyes which see the things that ye see:	Then Jesus turned to the disciples and said privately, “Blessed are the eyes that see what you see.
LUK	10	24	내가 너희에게 말하노니 많은 선지자와 임금이 너희 보는 바를 보고자 하였으되 보지 못하였으며 너희 듣는 바를 듣고자 하였으되 듣지 못하였느니라	For I tell you, that many prophets and kings have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them.	For I tell you that many prophets and kings desired to see what you see but did not see it, and to hear what you hear but did not hear it.”
LUK	10	25	어떤 율법사가 일어나 예수를 시험하여 가로되 선생님 내가 무엇을 하여야 영생을 얻으리이까	And, behold, a certain lawyer stood up, and tempted him, saying, Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?	One day an expert in the law stood up to test Him. “Teacher,” he asked, “what must I do to inherit eternal life?”
LUK	10	26	예수께서 이르시되 율법에 무엇이라 기록되었으며 네가 어떻게 읽느냐	He said unto him, What is written in the law? how readest thou?	“What is written in the Law?” Jesus replied. “How do you read it?”
LUK	10	27	대답하여 가로되 네 마음을 다하며 목숨을 다하며 힘을 다하며 뜻을 다하여 주 너의 하나님을 사랑하고 또한 네 이웃을 네 몸과 같이 사랑하라 하였나이다	And he answering said, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbour as thyself.	He answered, “‘Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength and with all your mind’ and ‘Love your neighbor as yourself.’”
LUK	10	28	예수께서 이르시되 네 대답이 옳도다 이를 행하라 그러면 살리라 하시니	And he said unto him, Thou hast answered right: this do, and thou shalt live.	“You have answered correctly,” Jesus said. “Do this and you will live.”
LUK	10	29	이 사람이 자기를 옳게 보이려고 예수께 여짜오되 그러면 내 이웃이 누구오니이까	But he, willing to justify himself, said unto Jesus, And who is my neighbour?	But wanting to justify himself, he asked Jesus, “And who is my neighbor?”
LUK	10	30	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 어떤 사람이 예루살렘에서 여리고로 내려가다가 강도를 만나매 강도들이 그 옷을 벗기고 때려 거반 죽은 것을 버리고 갔더라	And Jesus answering said, A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves, which stripped him of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, leaving him half dead.	Jesus took up this question and said, “A man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho when he fell into the hands of robbers. They stripped him, beat him, and went away, leaving him half dead.
LUK	10	31	마침 한 제사장이 그 길로 내려가다가 그를 보고 피하여 지나가고	And by chance there came down a certain priest that way: and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side.	Now by chance a priest was going down the same road, but when he saw him, he passed by on the other side.
LUK	10	32	또 이와 같이 한 레위인도 그곳에 이르러 그를 보고 피하여 지나가되	And likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and looked on him, and passed by on the other side.	So too, when a Levite came to that spot and saw him, he passed by on the other side.
LUK	10	33	어떤 사마리아인은 여행하는 중 거기 이르러 그를 보고 불쌍히 여겨	But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was: and when he saw him, he had compassion on him,	But when a Samaritan on a journey came upon him, he looked at him and had compassion.
LUK	10	34	가까이 가서 기름과 포도주를 그 상처에 붓고 싸매고 자기 짐승에 태워 주막으로 데리고 가서 돌보아 주고	And went to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him to an inn, and took care of him.	He went to him and bandaged his wounds, pouring on oil and wine. Then he put him on his own animal, brought him to an inn, and took care of him.
LUK	10	35	이튿날에 데나리온 둘을 내어 주막 주인에게 주며 가로되 이 사람을 돌보아 주라 부비가 더 들면 내가 돌아올 때에 갚으리라 하였으니	And on the morrow when he departed, he took out two pence, and gave them to the host, and said unto him, Take care of him; and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee.	The next day he took out two denarii and gave them to the innkeeper. ‘Take care of him,’ he said, ‘and on my return I will repay you for any additional expense.’
LUK	10	36	네 의견에는 이 세 사람 중에 누가 강도 만난 자의 이웃이 되겠느냐	Which now of these three, thinkest thou, was neighbour unto him that fell among the thieves?	Which of these three do you think was a neighbor to the man who fell into the hands of robbers?”
LUK	10	37	가로되 자비를 베푼 자니이다 예수께서 이르시되 가서 너도 이와 같이 하라 하시니라	And he said, He that shewed mercy on him. Then said Jesus unto him, Go, and do thou likewise.	“The one who showed him mercy,” replied the expert in the law. Then Jesus told him, “Go and do likewise.”
LUK	10	38	저희가 길 갈 때에 예수께서 한 촌에 들어가시매 마르다라 이름하는 한 여자가 자기 집으로 영접하더라	Now it came to pass, as they went, that he entered into a certain village: and a certain woman named Martha received him into her house.	As they traveled along, Jesus entered a village where a woman named Martha welcomed Him into her home.
LUK	10	39	그에게 마리아라 하는 동생이 있어 주의 발 아래 앉아 그의 말씀을 듣더니	And she had a sister called Mary, which also sat at Jesus’ feet, and heard his word.	She had a sister named Mary, who sat at the Lord’s feet listening to His message.
LUK	10	40	마르다는 준비하는 일이 많아 마음이 분주한지라 예수께 나아가 가로되 주여 내 동생이 나 혼자 일하게 두는 것을 생각지 아니하시나이까 저를 명하사 나를 도와주라 하소서	But Martha was cumbered about much serving, and came to him, and said, Lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone? bid her therefore that she help me.	But Martha was distracted by all the preparations to be made. She came to Jesus and said, “Lord, do You not care that my sister has left me to serve alone? Tell her to help me!”
LUK	10	41	주께서 대답하여 가라사대 마르다야 마르다야 네가 많은 일로 염려하고 근심하나	And Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things:	“Martha, Martha,” the Lord replied, “you are worried and upset about many things.
LUK	10	42	그러나 몇 가지만 하든지 혹 한 가지만이라도 족하니라 마리아는 이 좋은 편을 택하였으니 빼앗기지 아니하리라 하시니라	But one thing is needful: and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from her.	But only one thing is necessary. Mary has chosen the good portion, and it will not be taken away from her.”
LUK	11	1	예수께서 한 곳에서 기도하시고 마치시매 제자 중 하나가 여짜오되 주여 요한이 자기 제자들에게 기도를 가르친 것과 같이 우리에게도 가르쳐 주옵소서	And it came to pass, that, as he was praying in a certain place, when he ceased, one of his disciples said unto him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John also taught his disciples.	One day in a place where Jesus had just finished praying, one of His disciples requested, “Lord, teach us to pray, just as John taught his disciples.”
LUK	11	2	예수께서 이르시되 너희는 기도할 때에 이렇게 하라 아버지여 이름이 거룩히 여김을 받으시오며 나라이 임하옵시며	And he said unto them, When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done, as in heaven, so in earth.	So Jesus told them, “When you pray, say: ‘Father, hallowed be Your name. Your kingdom come.
LUK	11	3	우리에게 날마다 일용할 양식을 주옵시고	Give us day by day our daily bread.	Give us each day our daily bread.
LUK	11	4	우리가 우리에게 죄 지은 모든 사람을 용서하오니 우리 죄도 사하여 주옵시고 우리를 시험에 들게 하지 마옵소서 하라	And forgive us our sins; for we also forgive every one that is indebted to us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil.	And forgive us our sins, for we also forgive everyone who sins against us. And lead us not into temptation.’”
LUK	11	5	또 이르시되 너희 중에 누가 벗이 있는데 밤중에 그에게 가서 말하기를 벗이여 떡 세 덩이를 내게 빌리라	And he said unto them, Which of you shall have a friend, and shall go unto him at midnight, and say unto him, Friend, lend me three loaves;	Then Jesus said to them, “Suppose one of you goes to his friend at midnight and says, ‘Friend, lend me three loaves of bread,
LUK	11	6	내 벗이 여행 중에 내게 왔으나 내가 먹일 것이 없노라 하면	For a friend of mine in his journey is come to me, and I have nothing to set before him?	because a friend of mine has come to me on a journey, and I have nothing to set before him.’
LUK	11	7	저가 안에서 대답하여 이르되 나를 괴롭게 하지 말라 문이 이미 닫혔고 아이들이 함께 나와 침소에 누웠으니 일어나 네게 줄 수가 없노라 하겠느냐	And he from within shall answer and say, Trouble me not: the door is now shut, and my children are with me in bed; I cannot rise and give thee.	And suppose the one inside answers, ‘Do not bother me. My door is already shut, and my children and I are in bed. I cannot get up to give you anything.’
LUK	11	8	내가 너희에게 말하노니 비록 벗됨을 인하여서는 일어나 주지 아니할지라도 그 강청함을 인하여 일어나 그 소용대로 주리라	I say unto you, Though he will not rise and give him, because he is his friend, yet because of his importunity he will rise and give him as many as he needeth.	I tell you, even though he will not get up to provide for him because of his friendship, yet because of the man’s persistence, he will get up and give him as much as he needs.
LUK	11	9	내가 또 너희에게 이르노니 구하라 그러면 너희에게 주실 것이요 찾으라 그러면 찾을 것이요 문을 두드리라 그러면 너희에게 열릴 것이니	And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.	So I tell you: Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and the door will be opened to you.
LUK	11	10	구하는 이마다 받을 것이요 찾는 이가 찾을 것이요 두드리는 이에게 열릴 것이니라	For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened.	For everyone who asks receives; he who seeks finds; and to him who knocks, the door will be opened.
LUK	11	11	너희 중에 아비 된 자 누가 아들이 생선을 달라 하면 생선 대신에 뱀을 주며	If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, will he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish give him a serpent?	What father among you, if his son asks for a fish, will give him a snake instead?
LUK	11	12	알을 달라 하면 전갈을 주겠느냐	Or if he shall ask an egg, will he offer him a scorpion?	Or if he asks for an egg, will give him a scorpion?
LUK	11	13	너희가 악할지라도 좋은 것을 자식에게 줄 줄 알거든 하물며 너희 천부께서 구하는 자에게 성령을 주시지 않겠느냐 하시니라	If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children: how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?	So if you who are evil know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father in heaven give the Holy Spirit to those who ask Him!”
LUK	11	14	예수께서 한 벙어리 귀신을 쫓아내시니 귀신이 나가매 벙어리가 말하는지라 무리들이 기이히 여겼으나	And he was casting out a devil, and it was dumb. And it came to pass, when the devil was gone out, the dumb spake; and the people wondered.	One day Jesus was driving out a demon that was mute. And when the demon was gone, the man who had been mute spoke. The crowds were amazed,
LUK	11	15	그 중에 더러는 말하기를 저가 귀신의 왕 바알세불을 힘입어 귀신을 쫓아낸다 하고	But some of them said, He casteth out devils through Beelzebub the chief of the devils.	but some of them said, “It is by Beelzebul, the prince of the demons, that He drives out demons.”
LUK	11	16	또 더러는 예수를 시험하여 하늘로서 오는 표적을 구하니	And others, tempting him, sought of him a sign from heaven.	And others tested Him by demanding a sign from heaven.
LUK	11	17	예수께서 저희 생각을 아시고 이르시되 스스로 분쟁하는 나라마다 황폐하여지며 스스로 분쟁하는 집은 무너지느니라	But he, knowing their thoughts, said unto them, Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation; and a house divided against a house falleth.	Knowing their thoughts, Jesus said to them, “Every kingdom divided against itself will be laid waste, and a house divided against a house will fall.
LUK	11	18	너희 말이 내가 바알세불을 힘입어 귀신을 쫓아낸다 하니 만일 사단이 스스로 분쟁하면 저의 나라가 어떻게 서겠느냐	If Satan also be divided against himself, how shall his kingdom stand? because ye say that I cast out devils through Beelzebub.	If Satan is divided against himself, how can his kingdom stand? After all, you say that I drive out demons by Beelzebul.
LUK	11	19	내가 바알세불을 힘입어 귀신을 쫓아내면 너희 아들들은 누구를 힘입어 쫓아내느냐 그러므로 저희가 너희 재판장이 되리라	And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your sons cast them out? therefore shall they be your judges.	And if I drive out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your sons drive them out? So then, they will be your judges.
LUK	11	20	그러나 내가 만일 하나님의 손을 힘입어 귀신을 쫓아내는 것이면 하나님의 나라가 이미 너희에게 임하였느니라	But if I with the finger of God cast out devils, no doubt the kingdom of God is come upon you.	But if I drive out demons by the finger of God, then the kingdom of God has come upon you.
LUK	11	21	강한 자가 무장을 하고 자기 집을 지킬 때에는 그 소유가 안전하되	When a strong man armed keepeth his palace, his goods are in peace:	When a strong man, fully armed, guards his house, his possessions are secure.
LUK	11	22	더 강한 자가 와서 저를 이길 때에는 저의 믿던 무장을 빼앗고 저의 재물을 나누느니라	But when a stronger than he shall come upon him, and overcome him, he taketh from him all his armour wherein he trusted, and divideth his spoils.	But when someone stronger attacks and overpowers him, he takes away the armor in which the man trusted, and then he divides up his plunder.
LUK	11	23	나와 함께 아니하는 자는 나를 반대하는 자요 나와 함께 모으지 아니하는 자는 헤치는 자니라	He that is not with me is against me: and he that gathereth not with me scattereth.	He who is not with Me is against Me, and he who does not gather with Me scatters.
LUK	11	24	더러운 귀신이 사람에게서 나갔을 때에 물 없는 곳으로 다니며 쉬기를 구하되 얻지 못하고 이에 가로되 내가 나온 내 집으로 돌아가리라 하고	When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through dry places, seeking rest; and finding none, he saith, I will return unto my house whence I came out.	When an unclean spirit comes out of a man, it passes through arid places seeking rest and does not find it. Then it says, ‘I will return to the house I left.’
LUK	11	25	와 보니 그 집이 소제되고 수리 되었거늘	And when he cometh, he findeth it swept and garnished.	On its return, it finds the house swept clean and put in order.
LUK	11	26	이에 가서 저보다 더 악한 귀신 일곱을 데리고 들어가서 거하니 그 사람의 나중 형편이 전보다 더 심하게 되느니라	Then goeth he, and taketh to him seven other spirits more wicked than himself; and they enter in, and dwell there: and the last state of that man is worse than the first.	Then it goes and brings seven other spirits more wicked than itself, and they go in and dwell there. And the final plight of that man is worse than the first.”
LUK	11	27	이 말씀을 하실 때에 무리 중에서 한 여자가 음성을 높여 가로되 당신을 밴 태와 당신을 먹인 젖이 복이 있도소이다 하니	And it came to pass, as he spake these things, a certain woman of the company lifted up her voice, and said unto him, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou hast sucked.	As Jesus was saying these things, a woman in the crowd raised her voice and said, “Blessed is the womb that bore You, and blessed are the breasts that nursed You!”
LUK	11	28	예수께서 가라사대 오히려 하나님의 말씀을 듣고 지키는 자가 복이 있느니라 하시니라	But he said, Yea rather, blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it.	But He replied, “Blessed rather are those who hear the word of God and obey it.”
LUK	11	29	무리가 모였을 때에 예수께서 말씀하시되 이 세대는 악한 세대라 표적을 구하되 요나의 표적 밖에는 보일 표적이 없나니	And when the people were gathered thick together, he began to say, This is an evil generation: they seek a sign; and there shall no sign be given it, but the sign of Jonas the prophet.	As the crowds were increasing, Jesus said, “This is a wicked generation. It demands a sign, but none will be given it except the sign of Jonah.
LUK	11	30	요나가 니느웨 사람들에게 표적이 됨과 같이 인자도 이 세대에 그러하리라	For as Jonas was a sign unto the Ninevites, so shall also the Son of man be to this generation.	For as Jonah was a sign to the Ninevites, so the Son of Man will be a sign to this generation.
LUK	11	31	심판 때에 남방 여왕이 일어나 이 세대 사람을 정죄하리니 이는 그가 솔로몬의 지혜로운 말을 들으려고 땅 끝에서 왔음이어니와 솔로몬보다 더 큰 이가 여기 있으며	The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with the men of this generation, and condemn them: for she came from the utmost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and, behold, a greater than Solomon is here.	The Queen of the South will rise at the judgment with the men of this generation and condemn them; for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and now One greater than Solomon is here.
LUK	11	32	심판 때에 니느웨 사람들이 일어나 이 세대 사람을 정죄하리니 이는 그들이 요나의 전도를 듣고 회개하였음이어니와 요나보다 더 큰 이가 여기 있느니라	The men of Nineve shall rise up in the judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: for they repented at the preaching of Jonas; and, behold, a greater than Jonas is here.	The men of Nineveh will stand at the judgment with this generation and condemn it; for they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and now One greater than Jonah is here.
LUK	11	33	누구든지 등불을 켜서 움 속에나 말 아래 두지 아니하고 등경 위에 두나니 이는 들어가는 자로 그 빛을 보게 하려 함이니라	No man, when he hath lighted a candle, putteth it in a secret place, neither under a bushel, but on a candlestick, that they which come in may see the light.	No one lights a lamp and puts it in a cellar or under a basket. Instead, he sets it on a stand, so those who enter can see the light.
LUK	11	34	네 몸의 등불은 눈이라 네 눈이 성하면 온 몸이 밝을 것이요 만일 나쁘면 네 몸도 어두우리라	The light of the body is the eye: therefore when thine eye is single, thy whole body also is full of light; but when thine eye is evil, thy body also is full of darkness.	Your eye is the lamp of your body. When your eyes are good, your whole body also is full of light. But when they are bad, your body is full of darkness.
LUK	11	35	그러므로 네 속에 있는 빛이 어둡지 아니한가 보라	Take heed therefore that the light which is in thee be not darkness.	Be careful, then, that the light within you is not darkness.
LUK	11	36	네 온 몸이 밝아 조금도 어두운 데가 없으면 등불의 광선이 너를 비출 때와 같이 온전히 밝으리라 하시니라	If thy whole body therefore be full of light, having no part dark, the whole shall be full of light, as when the bright shining of a candle doth give thee light.	So if your whole body is full of light, with no part of it in darkness, you will be radiant, as though a lamp were shining on you.”
LUK	11	37	예수께서 말씀하실 때에 한 바리새인이 자기와 함께 점심 잡수시기를 청하므로 들어가 앉으셨더니	And as he spake, a certain Pharisee besought him to dine with him: and he went in, and sat down to meat.	As Jesus was speaking, a Pharisee invited Him to dine with him; so He went in and reclined at the table.
LUK	11	38	잡수시기 전에 손 씻지 아니하심을 이 바리새인이 보고 이상히 여기는지라	And when the Pharisee saw it, he marvelled that he had not first washed before dinner.	But the Pharisee was surprised to see that Jesus did not first wash before the meal.
LUK	11	39	주께서 이르시되 너희 바리새인은 지금 잔과 대접의 겉은 깨끗이 하나 너희 속인즉 탐욕과 악독이 가득하도다	And the Lord said unto him, Now do ye Pharisees make clean the outside of the cup and the platter; but your inward part is full of ravening and wickedness.	“Now then,” said the Lord, “you Pharisees clean the outside of the cup and dish, but inside you are full of greed and wickedness.
LUK	11	40	어리석은 자들아 밖을 만드신 이가 속도 만들지 아니하셨느냐	Ye fools, did not he that made that which is without make that which is within also?	You fools! Did not the One who made the outside make the inside as well?
LUK	11	41	오직 그 안에 있는 것으로 구제하라 그리하면 모든 것이 너희에게 깨끗하리라	But rather give alms of such things as ye have; and, behold, all things are clean unto you.	But give as alms the things that are within you, and you will see that everything is clean for you.
LUK	11	42	화 있을진저 너희 바리새인이여 너희가 박하와 운향과 모든 채소의 십일조를 드리되 공의와 하나님께 대한 사랑은 버리는도다 그러나 이것도 행하고 저것도 버리지 아니하여야 할지니라	But woe unto you, Pharisees! for ye tithe mint and rue and all manner of herbs, and pass over judgment and the love of God: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.	Woe to you Pharisees! You pay tithes of mint, rue, and every herb, but you disregard justice and the love of God. You should have practiced the latter without neglecting the former.
LUK	11	43	화 있을진저 너희 바리새인이여 너희가 회당의 높은 자리와 시장에서 문안 받는 것을 기뻐하는도다	Woe unto you, Pharisees! for ye love the uppermost seats in the synagogues, and greetings in the markets.	Woe to you Pharisees! You love the chief seats in the synagogues and the greetings in the marketplaces.
LUK	11	44	화 있을진저 너희여 너희는 평토장한 무덤 같아서 그 위를 밟는 사람이 알지 못하느니라	Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are as graves which appear not, and the men that walk over them are not aware of them.	Woe to you! For you are like unmarked graves, which men walk over without even noticing.”
LUK	11	45	한 율법사가 예수께 대답하여 가로되 선생님 이렇게 말씀하시니 우리까지 모욕하심이니이다	Then answered one of the lawyers, and said unto him, Master, thus saying thou reproachest us also.	One of the experts in the law told Him, “Teacher, when You say these things, You insult us as well.”
LUK	11	46	가라사대 화 있을진저 또 너희 율법사여 지기 어려운 짐을 사람에게 지우고 너희는 한 손가락도 이 짐에 대지 않는도다	And he said, Woe unto you also, ye lawyers! for ye lade men with burdens grievous to be borne, and ye yourselves touch not the burdens with one of your fingers.	“Woe to you as well, experts in the law!” He replied. “You weigh men down with heavy burdens, but you yourselves will not lift a finger to lighten their load.
LUK	11	47	화 있을진저 너희는 선지자들의 무덤을 쌓는도다 저희를 죽인 자도 너희 조상들이로다	Woe unto you! for ye build the sepulchres of the prophets, and your fathers killed them.	Woe to you! You build tombs for the prophets, but it was your fathers who killed them.
LUK	11	48	이와 같이 저희는 죽이고 너희는 쌓으니 너희가 너희 조상의 행한 일에 증인이 되어 옳게 여기는도다	Truly ye bear witness that ye allow the deeds of your fathers: for they indeed killed them, and ye build their sepulchres.	So you are witnesses consenting to the deeds of your fathers: They killed the prophets, and you build their tombs.
LUK	11	49	이러므로 하나님의 지혜가 일렀으되 내가 선지자와 사도들을 저희에게 보내리니 그 중에 더러는 죽이며 또 핍박하리라 하였으니	Therefore also said the wisdom of God, I will send them prophets and apostles, and some of them they shall slay and persecute:	Because of this, the wisdom of God said, ‘I will send them prophets and apostles; some of them they will kill and others they will persecute.’
LUK	11	50	창세 이후로 흘린 모든 선지자의 피를 이 세대가 담당하되	That the blood of all the prophets, which was shed from the foundation of the world, may be required of this generation;	As a result, this generation will be charged with the blood of all the prophets that has been shed since the foundation of the world,
LUK	11	51	곧 아벨의 피로부터 제단과 성전 사이에서 죽임을 당한 사가랴의 피까지 하리라 내가 너희에게 이르노니 과연 이 세대가 담당하리라	From the blood of Abel unto the blood of Zacharias, which perished between the altar and the temple: verily I say unto you, It shall be required of this generation.	from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zechariah, who was killed between the altar and the sanctuary. Yes, I tell you, all of it will be charged to this generation.
LUK	11	52	화 있을진저 너희 율법사여 너희가 지식의 열쇠를 가져 가고 너희도 들어가지 않고 또 들어가고자 하는 자도 막았느니라 하시니라	Woe unto you, lawyers! for ye have taken away the key of knowledge: ye entered not in yourselves, and them that were entering in ye hindered.	Woe to you experts in the law! For you have taken away the key to knowledge. You yourselves have not entered, and you have hindered those who were entering.”
LUK	11	53	거기서 나오실 때에 서기관과 바리새인들이 맹렬히 달라붙어 여러가지 일로 힐문하고	And as he said these things unto them, the scribes and the Pharisees began to urge him vehemently, and to provoke him to speak of many things:	As Jesus went on from there, the scribes and Pharisees began to oppose Him bitterly and to ply Him with questions about many things,
LUK	11	54	그 입에서 나오는 것을 잡고자 하여 목을 지키더라	Laying wait for him, and seeking to catch something out of his mouth, that they might accuse him.	waiting to catch Him in something He might say.
LUK	12	1	그 동안에 무리 수만 명이 모여 서로 밟힐 만큼 되었더니 예수께서 먼저 제자들에게 말씀하여 가라사대 바리새인들의 누룩 곧 외식을 주의하라	In the mean time, when there were gathered together an innumerable multitude of people, insomuch that they trode one upon another, he began to say unto his disciples first of all, Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.	In the meantime, a crowd of many thousands had gathered, so that they were trampling one another. Jesus began to speak first to His disciples: “Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
LUK	12	2	감추인 것이 드러나지 않을 것이 없고 숨은 것이 알려지지 않을 것이 없나니	For there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; neither hid, that shall not be known.	There is nothing concealed that will not be disclosed, and nothing hidden that will not be made known.
LUK	12	3	이러므로 너희가 어두운 데서 말한 모든 것이 광명한 데서 들리고 너희가 골방에서 귀에 대고 말한 것이 집 위에서 전파되리라	Therefore whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness shall be heard in the light; and that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets shall be proclaimed upon the housetops.	What you have spoken in the dark will be heard in the daylight, and what you have whispered in the inner rooms will be proclaimed from the housetops.
LUK	12	4	내가 내 친구 너희에게 말하노니 몸을 죽이고 그 후에는 능히 더 못하는 자들을 두려워하지 말라	And I say unto you my friends, Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do.	I tell you, My friends, do not be afraid of those who kill the body and after that can do no more.
LUK	12	5	마땅히 두려워할 자를 내가 너희에게 보이리니 곧 죽인 후에 또한 지옥에 던져 넣는 권세 있는 그를 두려워하라 내가 참으로 너희에게 이르노니 그를 두려워하라	But I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear: Fear him, which after he hath killed hath power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto you, Fear him.	But I will show you whom you should fear: Fear the One who, after you have been killed, has authority to throw you into hell. Yes, I tell you, fear Him!
LUK	12	6	참새 다섯이 앗사리온 둘에 팔리는 것이 아니냐 그러나 하나님 앞에는 그 하나라도 잊어버리시는 바 되지 아니하는도다	Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of them is forgotten before God?	Are not five sparrows sold for two pennies? Yet not one of them is forgotten by God.
LUK	12	7	너희에게는 오히려 머리털까지도 다 세신 바 되었나니 두려워하지 말라 너희는 많은 참새보다 귀하니라	But even the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not therefore: ye are of more value than many sparrows.	And even the very hairs of your head are all numbered. So do not be afraid; you are worth more than many sparrows.
LUK	12	8	내가 또한 너희에게 말하노니 누구든지 사람 앞에서 나를 시인하면 인자도 하나님의 사자들 앞에서 저를 시인할 것이요	Also I say unto you, Whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall the Son of man also confess before the angels of God:	I tell you, everyone who confesses Me before men, the Son of Man will also confess him before the angels of God.
LUK	12	9	사람 앞에서 나를 부인하는 자는 하나님의 사자들 앞에서 부인함을 받으리라	But he that denieth me before men shall be denied before the angels of God.	But whoever denies Me before men will be denied before the angels of God.
LUK	12	10	누구든지 말로 인자를 거역하면 사하심을 받으려니와 성령을 거역하는 자는 사하심을 받지 못하리라	And whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but unto him that blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost it shall not be forgiven.	And everyone who speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but whoever blasphemes against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven.
LUK	12	11	사람이 너희를 회당과 정사 잡은 이와 권세 있는 이 앞에 끌고 가거든 어떻게 무엇으로 대답하며 무엇으로 말할 것을 염려치 말라	And when they bring you unto the synagogues, and unto magistrates, and powers, take ye no thought how or what thing ye shall answer, or what ye shall say:	When you are brought before synagogues, rulers, and authorities, do not worry about how to defend yourselves or what to say.
LUK	12	12	마땅히 할 말을 성령이 곧 그 때에 너희에게 가르치시리라 하시니라	For the Holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour what ye ought to say.	For at that time the Holy Spirit will teach you what you should say.”
LUK	12	13	무리 중에 한 사람이 이르되 선생님 내 형을 명하여 유업을 나와 나누게 하소서 하니	And one of the company said unto him, Master, speak to my brother, that he divide the inheritance with me.	Someone in the crowd said to Him, “Teacher, tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me.”
LUK	12	14	이르시되 이 사람아 누가 나를 너희의 재판장이나 물건 나누는 자로 세웠느냐 하시고	And he said unto him, Man, who made me a judge or a divider over you?	But Jesus replied, “Man, who appointed Me judge or executor between you?”
LUK	12	15	저희에게 이르시되 삼가 모든 탐심을 물리치라 사람의 생명이 그 소유의 넉넉한 데 있지 아니하니라 하시고	And he said unto them, Take heed, and beware of covetousness: for a man’s life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth.	And He said to them, “Watch out! Guard yourselves against every form of greed, for one’s life does not consist in the abundance of his possessions.”
LUK	12	16	또 비유로 저희에게 일러 가라사대 한 부자가 그 밭에 소출이 풍성하매	And he spake a parable unto them, saying, The ground of a certain rich man brought forth plentifully:	Then He told them a parable: “The ground of a certain rich man produced an abundance.
LUK	12	17	심중에 생각하여 가로되 내가 곡식 쌓아 둘 곳이 없으니 어찌할꼬 하고	And he thought within himself, saying, What shall I do, because I have no room where to bestow my fruits?	So he thought to himself, ‘What shall I do, since I have nowhere to store my crops?’
LUK	12	18	또 가로되 내가 이렇게 하리라 내 곡간을 헐고 더 크게 짓고 내 모든 곡식과 물건을 거기 쌓아 두리라	And he said, This will I do: I will pull down my barns, and build greater; and there will I bestow all my fruits and my goods.	Then he said, ‘This is what I will do: I will tear down my barns and will build bigger ones, and there I will store up all my grain and my goods.
LUK	12	19	또 내가 내 영혼에게 이르되 영혼아 여러 해 쓸 물건을 많이 쌓아 두었으니 평안히 쉬고 먹고 마시고 즐거워하자 하리라 하되	And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry.	Then I will say to myself, “You have plenty of good things laid up for many years. Take it easy. Eat, drink, and be merry!”’
LUK	12	20	하나님은 이르시되 어리석은 자여 오늘 밤에 네 영혼을 도로 찾으리니 그러면 네 예비한 것이 뉘 것이 되겠느냐 하셨으니	But God said unto him, Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee: then whose shall those things be, which thou hast provided?	But God said to him, ‘You fool! This very night your life will be required of you. Then who will own what you have accumulated?’
LUK	12	21	자기를 위하여 재물을 쌓아 두고 하나님께 대하여 부요치 못한 자가 이와 같으니라	So is he that layeth up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God.	This is how it will be for anyone who stores up treasure for himself but is not rich toward God.”
LUK	12	22	또 제자들에게 이르시되 그러므로 내가 너희에게 이르노니 너희 목숨을 위하여 무엇을 먹을까 몸을 위하여 무엇을 입을까 염려하지 말라	And he said unto his disciples, Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat; neither for the body, what ye shall put on.	Then Jesus said to His disciples, “Therefore I tell you, do not worry about your life, what you will eat, or about your body, what you will wear.
LUK	12	23	목숨이 음식보다 중하고 몸이 의복보다 중하니라	The life is more than meat, and the body is more than raiment.	For life is more than food, and the body more than clothes.
LUK	12	24	까마귀를 생각하라 심지도 아니하고 거두지도 아니하며 골방도 없고 창고도 없으되 하나님이 기르시나니 너희는 새보다 얼마나 더 귀하냐	Consider the ravens: for they neither sow nor reap; which neither have storehouse nor barn; and God feedeth them: how much more are ye better than the fowls?	Consider the ravens: They do not sow or reap, they have no storehouse or barn; yet God feeds them. How much more valuable you are than the birds!
LUK	12	25	또 너희 중에 누가 염려함으로 그 키를 한 자나 더할 수 있느냐	And which of you with taking thought can add to his stature one cubit?	Who of you by worrying can add a single hour to his life?
LUK	12	26	그런즉 지극히 작은 것이라도 능치 못하거든 어찌 그 다른 것을 염려하느냐	If ye then be not able to do that thing which is least, why take ye thought for the rest?	So if you cannot do such a small thing, why do you worry about the rest?
LUK	12	27	백합화를 생각하여 보아라 실도 만들지 않고 짜지도 아니하느니라 그러나 내가 너희에게 말하노니 솔로몬의 모든 영광으로도 입은 것이 이 꽃 하나만 같지 못하였느니라	Consider the lilies how they grow: they toil not, they spin not; and yet I say unto you, that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.	Consider how the lilies grow: They do not labor or spin. Yet I tell you, not even Solomon in all his glory was adorned like one of these.
LUK	12	28	오늘 있다가 내일 아궁이에 던지우는 들풀도 하나님이 이렇게 입히시거든 하물며 너희일까보냐 믿음이 적은 자들아	If then God so clothe the grass, which is to day in the field, and to morrow is cast into the oven; how much more will he clothe you, O ye of little faith?	If that is how God clothes the grass of the field, which is here today and tomorrow is thrown into the furnace, how much more will He clothe you, O you of little faith!
LUK	12	29	너희는 무엇을 먹을까 무엇을 마실까 하여 구하지 말며 근심하지도 말라	And seek not ye what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, neither be ye of doubtful mind.	And do not be concerned about what you will eat or drink. Do not worry about it.
LUK	12	30	이 모든 것은 세상 백성들이 구하는 것이라 너희 아버지께서 이런 것이 너희에게 있어야 될 줄을 아시느니라	For all these things do the nations of the world seek after: and your Father knoweth that ye have need of these things.	For the Gentiles of the world strive after all these things, and your Father knows that you need them.
LUK	12	31	오직 너희는 그의 나라를 구하라 그리하면 이런 것을 너희에게 더하시리라	But rather seek ye the kingdom of God; and all these things shall be added unto you.	But seek His kingdom, and these things will be added unto you.
LUK	12	32	적은 무리여 무서워 말라 너희 아버지께서 그 나라를 너희에게 주시기를 기뻐하시느니라	Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom.	Do not be afraid, little flock, for your Father is pleased to give you the kingdom.
LUK	12	33	너희 소유를 팔아 구제하여 낡아지지 아니하는 주머니를 만들라 곧 하늘에 둔 바 다함이 없는 보물이니 거기는 도적도 가까이 하는 일이 없고 좀도 먹는 일이 없느니라	Sell that ye have, and give alms; provide yourselves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that faileth not, where no thief approacheth, neither moth corrupteth.	Sell your possessions and give to the poor. Provide yourselves with purses that will not wear out, an inexhaustible treasure in heaven, where no thief approaches and no moth destroys.
LUK	12	34	너희 보물 있는 곳에는 너희 마음도 있으리라	For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.	For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
LUK	12	35	허리에 띠를 띠고 등불을 켜고 서 있으라	Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning;	Be dressed for service and keep your lamps burning.
LUK	12	36	너희는 마치 그 주인이 혼인 집에서 돌아와 문을 두드리면 곧 열어주려고 기다리는 사람과 같이 되라	And ye yourselves like unto men that wait for their lord, when he will return from the wedding; that when he cometh and knocketh, they may open unto him immediately.	Then you will be like servants waiting for their master to return from the wedding banquet, so that when he comes and knocks, they can open the door for him at once.
LUK	12	37	주인이 와서 깨어 있는 것을 보면 그 종들은 복이 있으리로다 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 주인이 띠를 띠고 그 종들을 자리에 앉히고 나아와 수종하리라	Blessed are those servants, whom the lord when he cometh shall find watching: verily I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them.	Blessed are those servants whom the master finds on watch when he returns. Truly I tell you, he will dress himself to serve and will have them recline at the table, and he himself will come and wait on them.
LUK	12	38	주인이 혹 이경에나 혹 삼경에 이르러서도 종들의 이같이 하는 것을 보면 그 종들은 복이 있으리로다	And if he shall come in the second watch, or come in the third watch, and find them so, blessed are those servants.	Even if he comes in the second or third watch of the night and finds them alert, those servants will be blessed.
LUK	12	39	너희도 아는 바니 집 주인이 만일 도적이 어느 때에 이를 줄 알았더면 그 집을 뚫지 못하게 하였으리라	And this know, that if the goodman of the house had known what hour the thief would come, he would have watched, and not have suffered his house to be broken through.	But understand this: If the homeowner had known at what hour the thief was coming, he would not have let his house be broken into.
LUK	12	40	이러므로 너희도 예비하고 있으라 생각지 않은 때에 인자가 오리라 하시니라	Be ye therefore ready also: for the Son of man cometh at an hour when ye think not.	You also must be ready, because the Son of Man will come at an hour you do not expect.”
LUK	12	41	베드로가 여짜오되 주께서 이 비유를 우리에게 하심이니이까 모든 사람에게 하심이니이까	Then Peter said unto him, Lord, speakest thou this parable unto us, or even to all?	“Lord,” said Peter, “are You addressing this parable to us, or to everyone else as well?”
LUK	12	42	주께서 가라사대 지혜있고 진실한 청지기가 되어 주인에게 그 집 종들을 맡아 때를 따라 양식을 나누어 줄 자가 누구냐	And the Lord said, Who then is that faithful and wise steward, whom his lord shall make ruler over his household, to give them their portion of meat in due season?	And the Lord answered, “Who then is the faithful and wise manager, whom the master puts in charge of his servants to give them their portion at the proper time?
LUK	12	43	주인이 이를 때에 그 종의 이렇게 하는 것을 보면 그 종이 복이 있으리로다	Blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing.	Blessed is that servant whose master finds him doing so when he returns.
LUK	12	44	내가 참으로 너희에게 이르노니 주인이 그 모든 소유를 저에게 맡기리라	Of a truth I say unto you, that he will make him ruler over all that he hath.	Truly I tell you, he will put him in charge of all his possessions.
LUK	12	45	만일 그 종이 마음에 생각하기를 주인이 더디 오리라 하여 노비를 때리며 먹고 마시고 취하게 되면	But and if that servant say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming; and shall begin to beat the menservants and maidens, and to eat and drink, and to be drunken;	But suppose that servant says in his heart, ‘My master will be a long time in coming,’ and he begins to beat the menservants and maidservants, and to eat and drink and get drunk.
LUK	12	46	생각지 않은 날 알지 못하는 시간에 이 종의 주인이 이르러 엄히 때리고 신실치 아니한 자의 받는 율에 처하리니	The lord of that servant will come in a day when he looketh not for him, and at an hour when he is not aware, and will cut him in sunder, and will appoint him his portion with the unbelievers.	The master of that servant will come on a day he does not expect and at an hour he does not anticipate. Then he will cut him to pieces and assign him a place with the unbelievers.
LUK	12	47	주인의 뜻을 알고도 예비치 아니하고 그 뜻대로 행치 아니한 종은 많이 맞을 것이요	And that servant, which knew his lord’s will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes.	That servant who knows his master’s will but does not get ready or follow his instructions will be beaten with many blows.
LUK	12	48	알지 못하고 맞을 일을 행한 종은 적게 맞으리라 무릇 많이 받은 자에게는 많이 찾을 것이요 많이 맡은 자에게는 많이 달라 할 것이니라	But he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes. For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required: and to whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the more.	But the one who unknowingly does things worthy of punishment will be beaten with few blows. From everyone who has been given much, much will be required; and from him who has been entrusted with much, even more will be demanded.
LUK	12	49	내가 불을 땅에 던지러 왔노니 이 불이 이미 붙었으면 내가 무엇을 원하리요	I am come to send fire on the earth; and what will I, if it be already kindled?	I have come to ignite a fire on the earth, and how I wish it were already kindled!
LUK	12	50	나는 받을 침례가 있으니 그 이루기까지 나의 답답함이 어떠하겠느냐	But I have a baptism to be baptized with; and how am I straitened till it be accomplished!	But I have a baptism to undergo, and how distressed I am until it is accomplished!
LUK	12	51	내가 세상에 화평을 주려고 온 줄로 아느냐 내가 너희에게 이르노니 아니라 도리어 분쟁케 하려 함이로라	Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell you, Nay; but rather division:	Do you think that I have come to bring peace to the earth? No, I tell you, but division.
LUK	12	52	이 후부터 한 집에 다섯 사람이 있어 분쟁하되 셋이 둘과, 둘이 셋과 하리니	For from henceforth there shall be five in one house divided, three against two, and two against three.	From now on, five in one household will be divided, three against two and two against three.
LUK	12	53	아비가 아들과, 아들이 아비와, 어미가 딸과, 딸이 어미와, 시어미가 며느리와, 며느리가 시어미와 분쟁하리라 하시니라	The father shall be divided against the son, and the son against the father; the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother; the mother in law against her daughter in law, and the daughter in law against her mother in law.	They will be divided, father against son and son against father, mother against daughter and daughter against mother, mother-in-law against daughter-in-law and daughter-in-law against mother-in-law.”
LUK	12	54	또 무리에게 이르시되 너희가 구름이 서에서 일어남을 보면 곧 말하기를 소나기가 오리라 하나니 과연 그러하고	And he said also to the people, When ye see a cloud rise out of the west, straightway ye say, There cometh a shower; and so it is.	Then Jesus said to the crowds, “As soon as you see a cloud rising in the west, you say, ‘A shower is coming,’ and that is what happens.
LUK	12	55	남풍이 붊을 보면 말하기를 심히 더우리라 하나니 과연 그러하니라	And when ye see the south wind blow, ye say, There will be heat; and it cometh to pass.	And when the south wind blows, you say, ‘It will be hot,’ and it is.
LUK	12	56	외식하는 자여 너희가 천지의 기상은 분변할 줄을 알면서 어찌 이 시대는 분변치 못하느냐	Ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky and of the earth; but how is it that ye do not discern this time?	You hypocrites! You know how to interpret the appearance of the earth and sky. Why don’t you know how to interpret the present time?
LUK	12	57	또 어찌하여 옳은 것을 스스로 판단치 아니하느냐	Yea, and why even of yourselves judge ye not what is right?	And why don’t you judge for yourselves what is right?
LUK	12	58	네가 너를 고소할 자와 함께 법관에게 갈 때에 길에서 화해하기를 힘쓰라 저가 너를 재판장에게 끌어 가고 재판장이 너를 관속에게 넘겨 주어 관속이 옥에 가둘까 염려하라	When thou goest with thine adversary to the magistrate, as thou art in the way, give diligence that thou mayest be delivered from him; lest he hale thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and the officer cast thee into prison.	Make every effort to reconcile with your adversary while you are on your way to the magistrate. Otherwise, he may drag you off to the judge, and the judge may hand you over to the officer, and the officer may throw you into prison.
LUK	12	59	네게 이르노니 호리라도 남김이 없이 갚지 아니하여서는 결단코 저기서 나오지 못하리라 하시니라	I tell thee, thou shalt not depart thence, till thou hast paid the very last mite.	I tell you, you will not get out until you have paid the very last penny.”
LUK	13	1	그 때 마침 두어 사람이 와서 빌라도가 어떤 갈릴리 사람들의 피를 저희의 제물에 섞은 일로 예수께 고하니	There were present at that season some that told him of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices.	At that time some of those present told Jesus about the Galileans whose blood Pilate had mixed with their sacrifices.
LUK	13	2	대답하여 가라사대 너희는 이 갈릴리 사람들이 이같이 해 받음으로써 모든 갈릴리 사람보다 죄가 더 있는 줄 아느냐	And Jesus answering said unto them, Suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans, because they suffered such things?	To this He replied, “Do you think that these Galileans were worse sinners than all the other Galileans, because they suffered this fate?
LUK	13	3	너희에게 이르노니 아니라 너희도 만일 회개치 아니하면 다 이와 같이 망하리라	I tell you, Nay: but, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.	No, I tell you. But unless you repent, you too will all perish.
LUK	13	4	또 실로암에서 망대가 무너져 치어 죽은 열여덟 사람이 예루살렘에 거한 모든 사람보다 죄가 더 있는 줄 아느냐	Or those eighteen, upon whom the tower in Siloam fell, and slew them, think ye that they were sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem?	Or those eighteen who were killed when the tower of Siloam collapsed on them: Do you think that they were more sinful than all the others living in Jerusalem?
LUK	13	5	너희에게 이르노니 아니라 너희도 만일 회개치 아니하면 다 이와 같이 망하리라	I tell you, Nay: but, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.	No, I tell you. But unless you repent, you too will all perish.”
LUK	13	6	이에 비유로 말씀하시되 한 사람이 포도원에 무화과나무를 심은 것이 있더니 와서 그 열매를 구하였으나 얻지 못한지라	He spake also this parable; A certain man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard; and he came and sought fruit thereon, and found none.	Then Jesus told this parable: “A man had a fig tree that was planted in his vineyard. He went to look for fruit on it, but did not find any.
LUK	13	7	과원지기에게 이르되 내가 삼 년을 와서 이 무화과나무에 실과를 구하되 얻지 못하니 찍어 버리라 어찌 땅만 버리느냐	Then said he unto the dresser of his vineyard, Behold, these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none: cut it down; why cumbereth it the ground?	So he said to the keeper of the vineyard, ‘Look, for the past three years I have come to search for fruit on this fig tree and haven’t found any. Therefore cut it down! Why should it use up the soil?’
LUK	13	8	대답하여 가로되 주인이여 금년에도 그대로 두소서 내가 두루 파고 거름을 주리니	And he answering said unto him, Lord, let it alone this year also, till I shall dig about it, and dung it:	‘Sir,’ the man replied, ‘leave it alone again this year, until I dig around it and fertilize it.
LUK	13	9	이 후에 만일 실과가 열면 이어니와 그렇지 않으면 찍어 버리소서 하였다 하시니라	And if it bear fruit, well: and if not, then after that thou shalt cut it down.	If it bears fruit next year, fine. But if not, you can cut it down.’”
LUK	13	10	안식일에 한 회당에서 가르치실 때에	And he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the sabbath.	One Sabbath Jesus was teaching in one of the synagogues,
LUK	13	11	십팔 년 동안을 귀신들려 앓으며 꼬부라져 조금도 펴지 못하는 한 여자가 있더라	And, behold, there was a woman which had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, and was bowed together, and could in no wise lift up herself.	and a woman there had been disabled by a spirit for eighteen years. She was hunched over and could not stand up straight.
LUK	13	12	예수께서 보시고 불러 이르시되 여자여 네가 네 병에서 놓였다 하시고	And when Jesus saw her, he called her to him, and said unto her, Woman, thou art loosed from thine infirmity.	When Jesus saw her, He called her over and said, “Woman, you are set free from your disability.”
LUK	13	13	안수하시매 여자가 곧 펴고 하나님께 영광을 돌리는지라	And he laid his hands on her: and immediately she was made straight, and glorified God.	Then He placed His hands on her, and immediately she straightened up and began to glorify God.
LUK	13	14	회당장이 예수께서 안식일에 병 고치시는 것을 분내어 무리에게 이르되 일할 날이 엿새가 있으니 그 동안에 와서 고침을 받을 것이요 안식일에는 말 것이니라 하거늘	And the ruler of the synagogue answered with indignation, because that Jesus had healed on the sabbath day, and said unto the people, There are six days in which men ought to work: in them therefore come and be healed, and not on the sabbath day.	But the synagogue leader was indignant that Jesus had healed on the Sabbath. “There are six days for work,” he told the crowd. “So come and be healed on those days and not on the Sabbath.”
LUK	13	15	주께서 대답하여 가라사대 외식하는 자들아 너희가 각각 안식일에 자기의 소나 나귀나 마구에서 풀어내어 이끌고 가서 물을 먹이지 아니하느냐	The Lord then answered him, and said, Thou hypocrite, doth not each one of you on the sabbath loose his ox or his ass from the stall, and lead him away to watering?	“You hypocrites!” the Lord replied. “Does not each of you on the Sabbath untie his ox or donkey from the stall and lead it to water?
LUK	13	16	그러면 십팔 년 동안 사단에게 매인 바 된 이 아브라함의 딸을 안식일에 이 매임에서 푸는 것이 합당치 아니하냐	And ought not this woman, being a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan hath bound, lo, these eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the sabbath day?	Then should not this daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has kept bound for eighteen long years, be released from her bondage on the Sabbath day?”
LUK	13	17	예수께서 이 말씀을 하시매 모든 반대하는 자들은 부끄러워하고 온 무리는 그 하시는 모든 영광스러운 일을 기뻐하니라	And when he had said these things, all his adversaries were ashamed: and all the people rejoiced for all the glorious things that were done by him.	When Jesus said this, all His adversaries were humiliated. And the whole crowd rejoiced at all the glorious things He was doing.
LUK	13	18	그러므로 가라사대 하나님의 나라가 무엇과 같을꼬 내가 무엇으로 비할꼬	Then said he, Unto what is the kingdom of God like? and whereunto shall I resemble it?	Then Jesus asked, “What is the kingdom of God like? To what can I compare it?
LUK	13	19	마치 사람이 자기 채전에 갖다 심은 겨자씨 한 알 같으니 자라 나무가 되어 공중의 새들이 그 가지에 깃들였느니라	It is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and cast into his garden; and it grew, and waxed a great tree; and the fowls of the air lodged in the branches of it.	It is like a mustard seed that a man tossed into his garden. It grew and became a tree, and the birds of the air nested in its branches.”
LUK	13	20	또 가라사대 내가 하나님의 나라를 무엇으로 비할꼬	And again he said, Whereunto shall I liken the kingdom of God?	Again He asked, “To what can I compare the kingdom of God?
LUK	13	21	마치 여자가 가루 서 말 속에 갖다 넣어 전부 부풀게 한 누룩과 같으니라 하셨더라	It is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.	It is like leaven that a woman took and mixed into three measures of flour, until all of it was leavened.”
LUK	13	22	예수께서 각 성 각 촌으로 다니사 가르치시며 예루살렘으로 여행하시더니	And he went through the cities and villages, teaching, and journeying toward Jerusalem.	Then Jesus traveled throughout the towns and villages, teaching as He made His way toward Jerusalem.
LUK	13	23	혹이 여짜오되 주여 구원을 얻는 자가 적으니이까 저희에게 이르시되	Then said one unto him, Lord, are there few that be saved? And he said unto them,	“Lord,” someone asked Him, “will only a few people be saved?” Jesus answered,
LUK	13	24	좁은 문으로 들어가기를 힘쓰라 내가 너희에게 이르노니 들어가기를 구하여도 못하는 자가 많으리라	Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.	“Make every effort to enter through the narrow door. For many, I tell you, will try to enter and will not be able.
LUK	13	25	집 주인이 일어나 문을 한 번 닫은 후에 너희가 밖에 서서 문을 두드리며 주여 열어 주소서 하면 저가 대답하여 가로되 나는 너희가 어디로서 온 자인지 알지 못하노라 하리니	When once the master of the house is risen up, and hath shut to the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us; and he shall answer and say unto you, I know you not whence ye are:	After the master of the house gets up and shuts the door, you will stand outside knocking and saying, ‘Lord, open the door for us.’ But he will reply, ‘I do not know where you are from.’
LUK	13	26	그 때에 너희가 말하되 우리는 주 앞에서 먹고 마셨으며 주는 또한 우리 길거리에서 가르치셨나이다 하나	Then shall ye begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our streets.	Then you will say, ‘We ate and drank with you, and you taught in our streets.’
LUK	13	27	저가 너희에게 일러 가로되 나는 너희가 어디로서 왔는지 알지 못하노라 행악하는 모든 자들아 나를 떠나가라 하리라	But he shall say, I tell you, I know you not whence ye are; depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity.	And he will answer, ‘I tell you, I do not know where you are from. Depart from me, all you evildoers.’
LUK	13	28	너희가 아브라함과 이삭과 야곱과 모든 선지자는 하나님 나라에 있고 오직 너희는 밖에 쫓겨난 것을 볼 때에 거기서 슬피 울며 이를 갊이 있으리라	There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of God, and you yourselves thrust out.	There will be weeping and gnashing of teeth when you see Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, but you yourselves are thrown out.
LUK	13	29	사람들이 동서남북으로부터 와서 하나님의 나라 잔치에 참여하리니	And they shall come from the east, and from the west, and from the north, and from the south, and shall sit down in the kingdom of God.	People will come from east and west and north and south, and will recline at the table in the kingdom of God.
LUK	13	30	보라 나중 된 자로서 먼저 될 자도 있고 먼저 된 자로서 나중 될 자도 있느니라 하시더라	And, behold, there are last which shall be first, and there are first which shall be last.	And indeed, some who are last will be first, and some who are first will be last.”
LUK	13	31	곧 그 때에 어떤 바리새인들이 나아와서 이르되 나가서 여기를 떠나소서 헤롯이 당신을 죽이고자 하나이다	The same day there came certain of the Pharisees, saying unto him, Get thee out, and depart hence: for Herod will kill thee.	At that very hour, some Pharisees came to Jesus and told Him, “Leave this place and get away, because Herod wants to kill You.”
LUK	13	32	가라사대 가서 저 여우에게 이르되 오늘과 내일 내가 귀신을 쫓아내며 병을 낫게 하다가 제삼일에는 완전하여지리라 하라	And he said unto them, Go ye, and tell that fox, Behold, I cast out devils, and I do cures to day and to morrow, and the third day I shall be perfected.	But Jesus replied, “Go tell that fox, ‘Look, I will keep driving out demons and healing people today and tomorrow, and on the third day I will reach My goal.’
LUK	13	33	그러나 오늘과 내일과 모레는 내가 갈 길을 가야 하리니 선지자가 예루살렘 밖에서는 죽는 법이 없느니라	Nevertheless I must walk to day, and to morrow, and the day following: for it cannot be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem.	Nevertheless, I must keep going today and tomorrow and the next day, for it is not admissible for a prophet to perish outside of Jerusalem.
LUK	13	34	예루살렘아 예루살렘아 선지자들을 죽이고 네게 파송된 자들을 돌로 치는 자여 암탉이 제 새끼를 날개 아래 모음 같이 내가 너희의 자녀를 모으려 한 일이 몇 번이냐 그러나 너희가 원치 아니하였도다	O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy children together, as a hen doth gather her brood under her wings, and ye would not!	O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, who kills the prophets and stones those sent to her, how often I have longed to gather your children together as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, but you were unwilling!
LUK	13	35	보라 너희 집이 황폐하여 버린바 되니라 내가 너희에게 이르노니 너희가 주의 이름으로 오시는 이를 찬송하리로다 할 때까지는 나를 보지 못하리라 하시니라	Behold, your house is left unto you desolate: and verily I say unto you, Ye shall not see me, until the time come when ye shall say, Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord.	Look, your house is left to you desolate. And I tell you that you will not see Me again until you say, ‘Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord.’”
LUK	14	1	안식일에 예수께서 바리새인의 한 두령의 집에 떡 잡수시러 들어가시니 저희가 엿보고 있더라	And it came to pass, as he went into the house of one of the chief Pharisees to eat bread on the sabbath day, that they watched him.	One Sabbath, Jesus went to eat in the home of a leading Pharisee, and those in attendance were watching Him closely.
LUK	14	2	주의 앞에 고창병 든 한 사람이 있는지라	And, behold, there was a certain man before him which had the dropsy.	Right there before Him was a man with dropsy.
LUK	14	3	예수께서 대답하여 율법사들과 바리새인들에게 일러 가라사대 안식일에 병 고쳐 주는 것이 합당하냐 아니하냐	And Jesus answering spake unto the lawyers and Pharisees, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath day?	So Jesus asked the experts in the law and the Pharisees, “Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath or not?”
LUK	14	4	저희가 잠잠하거늘 예수께서 그 사람을 데려다가 고쳐 보내시고	And they held their peace. And he took him, and healed him, and let him go;	But they remained silent. Then Jesus took hold of the man, healed him, and sent him on his way.
LUK	14	5	또 저희에게 이르시되 너희 중에 누가 그 아들이나 소나 우물에 빠졌으면 안식일에라도 곧 끌어내지 않겠느냐 하시니	And answered them, saying, Which of you shall have an ass or an ox fallen into a pit, and will not straightway pull him out on the sabbath day?	And He asked them, “Which of you whose son or ox falls into a pit on the Sabbath day will not immediately pull him out?”
LUK	14	6	저희가 이에 대하여 대답지 못하니라	And they could not answer him again to these things.	And they were unable to answer these questions.
LUK	14	7	청함을 받은 사람들의 상좌 택함을 보시고 저희에게 비유로 말씀하여 가라사대	And he put forth a parable to those which were bidden, when he marked how they chose out the chief rooms; saying unto them,	When Jesus noticed how the guests chose the places of honor, He told them a parable:
LUK	14	8	네가 누구에게나 혼인 잔치에 청함을 받았을 때에 상좌에 앉지 말라 그렇지 않으면 너보다 더 높은 사람이 청함을 받은 경우에	When thou art bidden of any man to a wedding, sit not down in the highest room; lest a more honourable man than thou be bidden of him;	“When you are invited to a wedding banquet, do not sit in the place of honor, in case someone more distinguished than you has been invited.
LUK	14	9	너와 저를 청한 자가 와서 너더러 이 사람에게 자리를 내어 주라 하리니 그 때에 네가 부끄러워 말석으로 가게 되리라	And he that bade thee and him come and say to thee, Give this man place; and thou begin with shame to take the lowest room.	Then the host who invited both of you will come and tell you, ‘Give this man your seat.’ And in humiliation, you will have to take the last place.
LUK	14	10	청함을 받았을 때에 차라리 가서 말석에 앉으라 그러면 너를 청한 자가 와서 너더러 벗이여 올라 앉으라 하리니 그 때에야 함께 앉은 모든 사람 앞에 영광이 있으리라	But when thou art bidden, go and sit down in the lowest room; that when he that bade thee cometh, he may say unto thee, Friend, go up higher: then shalt thou have worship in the presence of them that sit at meat with thee.	But when you are invited, go and sit in the last place, so that your host will come and tell you, ‘Friend, move up to a better place.’ Then you will be honored in front of everyone at the table with you.
LUK	14	11	무릇 자기를 높이는 자는 낮아지고 자기를 낮추는 자는 높아지리라	For whosoever exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.	For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, and the one who humbles himself will be exalted.”
LUK	14	12	또 자기를 청한 자에게 이르시되 네가 점심이나 저녁이나 베풀거든 벗이나 형제나 친척이나 부한 이웃을 청하지 말라 두렵건대 그 사람들이 너를 도로 청하여 네게 갚음이 될까 하라	Then said he also to him that bade him, When thou makest a dinner or a supper, call not thy friends, nor thy brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbours; lest they also bid thee again, and a recompence be made thee.	Then Jesus said to the man who had invited Him, “When you host a dinner or a banquet, do not invite your friends or brothers or relatives or rich neighbors. Otherwise, they may invite you in return, and you will be repaid.
LUK	14	13	잔치를 배설하거든 차라리 가난한 자들과 병신들과 저는 자들과 소경들을 청하라	But when thou makest a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind:	But when you host a banquet, invite the poor, the crippled, the lame, and the blind,
LUK	14	14	그리하면 저희가 갚을 것이 없는고로 네게 복이 되리니 이는 의인들의 부활 시에 네가 갚음을 받겠음이니라 하시더라	And thou shalt be blessed; for they cannot recompense thee: for thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection of the just.	and you will be blessed. Since they cannot repay you, you will be repaid at the resurrection of the righteous.”
LUK	14	15	함께 먹는 사람 중에 하나가 이 말을 듣고 이르되 무릇 하나님의 나라에서 떡을 먹는 자는 복되도다 하니	And when one of them that sat at meat with him heard these things, he said unto him, Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of God.	When one of those reclining with Him heard this, he said to Jesus, “Blessed is everyone who will eat at the feast in the kingdom of God.”
LUK	14	16	이르시되 어떤 사람이 큰 잔치를 배설하고 많은 사람을 청하였더니	Then said he unto him, A certain man made a great supper, and bade many:	But Jesus replied, “A certain man prepared a great banquet and invited many guests.
LUK	14	17	잔치할 시간에 그 청하였던 자들에게 종을 보내어 가로되 오소서 모든 것이 준비되었나이다 하매	And sent his servant at supper time to say to them that were bidden, Come; for all things are now ready.	When it was time for the banquet, he sent his servant to tell those who had been invited, ‘Come, for everything is now ready.’
LUK	14	18	다 일치하게 사양하여 하나는 가로되 나는 밭을 샀으매 불가불 나가 보아야 하겠으니 청컨대 나를 용서하도록 하라 하고	And they all with one consent began to make excuse. The first said unto him, I have bought a piece of ground, and I must needs go and see it: I pray thee have me excused.	But one after another they all began to make excuses. The first one said, ‘I have bought a field, and I need to go see it. Please excuse me.’
LUK	14	19	또 하나는 가로되 나는 소 다섯 겨리를 샀으매 시험하러 가니 청컨대 나를 용서하도록 하라 하고	And another said, I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I go to prove them: I pray thee have me excused.	Another said, ‘I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I am going to try them out. Please excuse me.’
LUK	14	20	또 하나는 가로되 나는 장가 들었으니 그러므로 가지 못하겠노라 하는지라	And another said, I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come.	Still another said, ‘I have married a wife, so I cannot come.’
LUK	14	21	종이 돌아와 주인에게 그대로 고하니 이에 집주인이 노하여 그 종에게 이르되 빨리 시내의 거리와 골목으로 나가서 가난한 자들과 병신들과 소경들과 저는 자들을 데려오라 하니라	So that servant came, and shewed his lord these things. Then the master of the house being angry said to his servant, Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind.	The servant returned and reported all this to his master. Then the owner of the house became angry and said to his servant, ‘Go out quickly into the streets and alleys of the city, and bring in the poor, the crippled, the blind, and the lame.’
LUK	14	22	종이 가로되 주인이여 명하신 대로 하였으되 오히려 자리가 있나이다	And the servant said, Lord, it is done as thou hast commanded, and yet there is room.	‘Sir,’ the servant replied, ‘what you ordered has been done, and there is still room.’
LUK	14	23	주인이 종에게 이르되 길과 산울 가로 나가서 사람을 강권하여 데려다가 내 집을 채우라	And the lord said unto the servant, Go out into the highways and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled.	So the master told his servant, ‘Go out to the highways and hedges and compel them to come in, so that my house will be full.
LUK	14	24	내가 너희에게 말하노니 전에 청하였던 그 사람은 하나도 내 잔치를 맛보지 못하리라 하였다 하시니라	For I say unto you, That none of those men which were bidden shall taste of my supper.	For I tell you, not one of those men who were invited will taste my banquet.’”
LUK	14	25	허다한 무리가 함께 갈새 예수께서 돌이키사 이르시되	And there went great multitudes with him: and he turned, and said unto them,	Large crowds were now traveling with Jesus, and He turned and said to them,
LUK	14	26	무릇 내게 오는 자가 자기 부모와 처자와 형제와 자매와 및 자기 목숨까지 미워하지 아니하면 능히 나의 제자가 되지 못하고	If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.	“If anyone comes to Me and does not hate his father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters—yes, even his own life—he cannot be My disciple.
LUK	14	27	누구든지 자기 십자가를 지고 나를 좇지 않는 자도 능히 나의 제자가 되지 못하리라	And whosoever doth not bear his cross, and come after me, cannot be my disciple.	And whoever does not carry his cross and follow Me cannot be My disciple.
LUK	14	28	너희 중에 누가 망대를 세우고자 할진대 자기의 가진 것이 준공하기까지에 족할는지 먼저 앉아 그 비용을 예산하지 아니하겠느냐	For which of you, intending to build a tower, sitteth not down first, and counteth the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it?	Which of you, wishing to build a tower, does not first sit down and count the cost to see if he has the resources to complete it?
LUK	14	29	그렇게 아니하여 그 기초만 쌓고 능히 이루지 못하면 보는 자가 다 비웃어	Lest haply, after he hath laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that behold it begin to mock him,	Otherwise, if he lays the foundation and is unable to finish the work, everyone who sees it will ridicule him,
LUK	14	30	가로되 이 사람이 역사를 시작하고 능히 이루지 못하였다 하리라	Saying, This man began to build, and was not able to finish.	saying, ‘This man could not finish what he started to build.’
LUK	14	31	또 어느 임금이 다른 임금과 싸우러 갈 때에 먼저 앉아 일만으로서 저 이만을 가지고 오는 자를 대적할 수 있을까 헤아리지 아니하겠느냐	Or what king, going to make war against another king, sitteth not down first, and consulteth whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him that cometh against him with twenty thousand?	Or what king on his way to war with another king will not first sit down and consider whether he can engage with ten thousand men the one coming against him with twenty thousand?
LUK	14	32	만일 못할 터이면 저가 아직 멀리 있을 동안에 사신을 보내어 화친을 청할지니라	Or else, while the other is yet a great way off, he sendeth an ambassage, and desireth conditions of peace.	And if he is unable, he will send a delegation while the other king is still far off, to ask for terms of peace.
LUK	14	33	이와 같이 너희 중에 누구든지 자기의 모든 소유를 버리지 아니하면 능히 내 제자가 되지 못하리라	So likewise, whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, he cannot be my disciple.	In the same way, any one of you who does not give up everything he has cannot be My disciple.
LUK	14	34	소금이 좋은 것이나 소금도 만일 그 맛을 잃었으면 무엇으로 짜게 하리요	Salt is good: but if the salt have lost his savour, wherewith shall it be seasoned?	Salt is good, but if the salt loses its savor, with what will it be seasoned?
LUK	14	35	땅에도, 거름에도 쓸 데 없어 내어 버리느니라 들을 귀가 있는 자는 들을지어다 하시니라	It is neither fit for the land, nor yet for the dunghill; but men cast it out. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.	It is fit neither for the soil nor for the manure pile, and it is thrown out. He who has ears to hear, let him hear.”
LUK	15	1	모든 세리와 죄인들이 말씀을 들으러 가까이 나아오니	Then drew near unto him all the publicans and sinners for to hear him.	Now all the tax collectors and sinners were gathering around to listen to Jesus.
LUK	15	2	바리새인과 서기관들이 원망하여 가로되 이 사람이 죄인을 영접하고 음식을 같이 먹는다 하더라	And the Pharisees and scribes murmured, saying, This man receiveth sinners, and eateth with them.	So the Pharisees and scribes began to grumble: “This man welcomes sinners and eats with them.”
LUK	15	3	예수께서 저희에게 이 비유로 이르시되	And he spake this parable unto them, saying,	Then Jesus told them this parable:
LUK	15	4	너희 중에 어느 사람이 양 일백 마리가 있는데 그 중에 하나를 잃으면 아흔아홉 마리를 들에 두고 그 잃은 것을 찾도록 찾아 다니지 아니하느냐	What man of you, having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, doth not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost, until he find it?	“What man among you, if he has a hundred sheep and loses one of them, does not leave the ninety-nine in the pasture and go after the one that is lost, until he finds it?
LUK	15	5	또 찾은즉 즐거워 어깨에 메고	And when he hath found it, he layeth it on his shoulders, rejoicing.	And when he finds it, he joyfully puts it on his shoulders,
LUK	15	6	집에 와서 그 벗과 이웃을 불러 모으고 말하되 나와 함께 즐기자 나의 잃은 양을 찾았노라 하리라	And when he cometh home, he calleth together his friends and neighbours, saying unto them, Rejoice with me; for I have found my sheep which was lost.	comes home, and calls together his friends and neighbors to tell them, ‘Rejoice with me, for I have found my lost sheep!’
LUK	15	7	내가 너희에게 이르노니 이와 같이 죄인 하나가 회개하면 하늘에서는 회개할 것 없는 의인 아흔아홉을 인하여 기뻐하는 것보다 더하리라	I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just persons, which need no repentance.	In the same way, I tell you that there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents than over ninety-nine righteous ones who do not need to repent.
LUK	15	8	어느 여자가 열 드라크마가 있는데 하나를 잃으면 등불을 켜고 집을 쓸며 찾도록 부지런히 찾지 아니하겠느냐	Either what woman having ten pieces of silver, if she lose one piece, doth not light a candle, and sweep the house, and seek diligently till she find it?	Or what woman who has ten silver coins and loses one of them does not light a lamp, sweep her house, and search carefully until she finds it?
LUK	15	9	또 찾은즉 벗과 이웃을 불러 모으고 말하되 나와 함께 즐기자 잃은 드라크마를 찾았노라 하리라	And when she hath found it, she calleth her friends and her neighbours together, saying, Rejoice with me; for I have found the piece which I had lost.	And when she finds it, she calls together her friends and neighbors to say, ‘Rejoice with me, for I have found my lost coin.’
LUK	15	10	내가 너희에게 이르노니 이와 같이 죄인 하나가 회개하면 하나님의 사자들 앞에 기쁨이 되느니라	Likewise, I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth.	In the same way, I tell you, there is joy in the presence of God’s angels over one sinner who repents.”
LUK	15	11	또 가라사대 어떤 사람이 두 아들이 있는데	And he said, A certain man had two sons:	Then Jesus said, “There was a man who had two sons.
LUK	15	12	그 둘째가 아비에게 말하되 아버지여 재산 중에서 내게 돌아올 분깃을 내게 주소서 하는지라 아비가 그 살림을 각각 나눠 주었더니	And the younger of them said to his father, Father, give me the portion of goods that falleth to me. And he divided unto them his living.	The younger son said to him, ‘Father, give me my share of the estate.’ So he divided his property between them.
LUK	15	13	그 후 며칠이 못되어 둘째 아들이 재산을 다 모아 가지고 먼 나라에 가 거기서 허랑방탕하여 그 재산을 허비하더니	And not many days after the younger son gathered all together, and took his journey into a far country, and there wasted his substance with riotous living.	After a few days, the younger son got everything together and journeyed to a distant country, where he squandered his wealth in wild living.
LUK	15	14	다 없이한 후 그 나라에 크게 훙년이 들어 저가 비로소 궁핍한지라	And when he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine in that land; and he began to be in want.	After he had spent all he had, a severe famine swept through that country, and he began to be in need.
LUK	15	15	가서 그 나라 백성 중 하나에게 붙여 사니 그가 저를 들로 보내어 돼지를 치게 하였는데	And he went and joined himself to a citizen of that country; and he sent him into his fields to feed swine.	So he went and hired himself out to a citizen of that country, who sent him into his fields to feed the pigs.
LUK	15	16	저가 돼지 먹는 쥐엄 열매로 배을 채우고자 하되 주는 자가 없는지라	And he would fain have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did eat: and no man gave unto him.	He longed to fill his belly with the pods the pigs were eating, but no one would give him a thing.
LUK	15	17	이에 스스로 돌이켜 가로되 내 아버지에게는 양식이 풍족한 품꾼이 얼마나 많은고 나는 여기서 주려 죽는구나	And when he came to himself, he said, How many hired servants of my father’s have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger!	Finally he came to his senses and said, ‘How many of my father’s hired servants have plenty of food? But here I am, starving to death!
LUK	15	18	내가 일어나 아버지께 가서 이르기를 아버지여 내가 하늘과 아버지께 죄를 얻었사오니	I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee,	I will get up and go back to my father and say to him, “Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you.
LUK	15	19	지금부터는 아버지의 아들이라 일컬음을 감당치 못하겠나이다 나를 품꾼의 하나로 보소서 하리라 하고	And am no more worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy hired servants.	I am no longer worthy to be called your son. Make me like one of your hired servants.”’
LUK	15	20	이에 일어나서 아버지께 돌아 가니라 아직도 상거가 먼데 아버지가 저를 보고 측은히 여겨 달려가 목을 안고 입을 맞추니	And he arose, and came to his father. But when he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him.	So he got up and went to his father. But while he was still in the distance, his father saw him and was filled with compassion. He ran to his son, embraced him, and kissed him.
LUK	15	21	아들이 가로되 아버지여 내가 하늘과 아버지께 죄를 얻었사오니 지금부터는 아버지의 아들이라 일컬음을 감당치 못하겠나이다 하나	And the son said unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son.	The son declared, ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you. I am no longer worthy to be called your son.’
LUK	15	22	아버지는 종들에게 이르되 제일 좋은 옷을 내어다가 입히고 손에 가락지를 끼우고 발에 신을 신기라	But the father said to his servants, Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet:	But the father said to his servants, ‘Quick! Bring the best robe and put it on him. Put a ring on his finger and sandals on his feet.
LUK	15	23	그리고 살진 송아지를 끌어다가 잡으라 우리가 먹고 즐기자	And bring hither the fatted calf, and kill it; and let us eat, and be merry:	Bring the fattened calf and kill it. Let us feast and celebrate.
LUK	15	24	이 내 아들은 죽었다가 다시 살아났으며 내가 잃었다가 다시 얻었노라 하니 저희가 즐거워하더라	For this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found. And they began to be merry.	For this son of mine was dead and is alive again! He was lost and is found!’ So they began to celebrate.
LUK	15	25	맏아들은 밭에 있다가 돌아와 집에 가까웠을 때에 풍류와 춤추는 소리를 듣고	Now his elder son was in the field: and as he came and drew nigh to the house, he heard musick and dancing.	Meanwhile the older son was in the field, and as he approached the house, he heard music and dancing.
LUK	15	26	한 종을 불러 이 무슨 일인가 물은대	And he called one of the servants, and asked what these things meant.	So he called one of the servants and asked what was going on.
LUK	15	27	대답하되 당신의 동생이 돌아왔으매 당신의 아버지가 그의 건강한 몸을 다시 맞아 들이게 됨을 인하여 살진 송아지를 잡았나이다 하니	And he said unto him, Thy brother is come; and thy father hath killed the fatted calf, because he hath received him safe and sound.	‘Your brother has returned,’ he said, ‘and your father has killed the fattened calf, because he has him back safe and sound.’
LUK	15	28	저가 노하여 들어가기를 즐겨 아니하거늘 아버지가 나와서 권한대	And he was angry, and would not go in: therefore came his father out, and intreated him.	The older son became angry and refused to go in. So his father came out and pleaded with him.
LUK	15	29	아버지께 대답하여 가로되 내가 여러 해 아버지를 섬겨 명을 어김이 없거늘 내게는 염소 새끼라도 주어 나와 내 벗으로 즐기게 하신 일이 없더니	And he answering said to his father, Lo, these many years do I serve thee, neither transgressed I at any time thy commandment: and yet thou never gavest me a kid, that I might make merry with my friends:	But he answered his father, ‘Look, all these years I have served you and never disobeyed a commandment of yours. Yet you never gave me even a young goat so I could celebrate with my friends.
LUK	15	30	아버지의 살림을 창기와 함께 먹어버린 이 아들이 돌아오매 이를 위하여 살진 송아지를 잡으셨나이다	But as soon as this thy son was come, which hath devoured thy living with harlots, thou hast killed for him the fatted calf.	But when this son of yours returns from squandering your wealth with prostitutes, you kill the fattened calf for him!’
LUK	15	31	아버지가 이르되 얘 너는 항상 나와 함께 있으니 내 것이 다 네 것이로되	And he said unto him, Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine.	‘Son, you are always with me,’ the father said, ‘and all that is mine is yours.
LUK	15	32	이 네 동생은 죽었다가 살았으며 내가 잃었다가 얻었기로 우리가 즐거워하고 기뻐하는 것이 마땅하다 하니라	It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad: for this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is found.	But it was fitting to celebrate and be glad, because this brother of yours was dead and is alive again; he was lost and is found.’”
LUK	16	1	또한 제자들에게 이르시되 어떤 부자에게 청지기가 있는데 그가 주인의 소유를 허비한다는 말이 그 주인에게 들린지라	And he said also unto his disciples, There was a certain rich man, which had a steward; and the same was accused unto him that he had wasted his goods.	Jesus also said to His disciples, “There was a rich man whose manager was accused of wasting his possessions.
LUK	16	2	주인이 저를 불러 가로되 내가 네게 대하여 들은 이 말이 어찜이뇨 네 보던 일을 셈하라 청지기 사무를 계속하지 못하리라 하니	And he called him, and said unto him, How is it that I hear this of thee? give an account of thy stewardship; for thou mayest be no longer steward.	So he called him in to ask, ‘What is this I hear about you? Turn in an account of your management, for you cannot be manager any longer.’
LUK	16	3	청지기가 속으로 이르되 주인이 내 직분을 빼앗으니 내가 무엇을 할꼬 땅을 파자니 힘이 없고 빌어 먹자니 부끄럽구나	Then the steward said within himself, What shall I do? for my lord taketh away from me the stewardship: I cannot dig; to beg I am ashamed.	The manager said to himself, ‘What shall I do, now that my master is taking away my position? I am too weak to dig and too ashamed to beg.
LUK	16	4	내가 할 일을 알았도다 이렇게 하면 직분을 빼앗긴 후에 저희가 나를 자기 집으로 영접하리라 하고	I am resolved what to do, that, when I am put out of the stewardship, they may receive me into their houses.	I know what I will do, so that after my removal from management, people will welcome me into their homes.’
LUK	16	5	주인에게 빚진 자를 낱낱이 불러다가 먼저 온 자에게 이르되 네가 내 주인에게 얼마나 졌느뇨	So he called every one of his lord’s debtors unto him, and said unto the first, How much owest thou unto my lord?	And he called in each one of his master’s debtors. ‘How much do you owe my master?’ he asked the first.
LUK	16	6	말하되 기름 백 말이니이다 가로되 여기 네 증서를 가지고 빨리 앉아 오십이라 쓰라 하고	And he said, An hundred measures of oil. And he said unto him, Take thy bill, and sit down quickly, and write fifty.	‘A hundred measures of olive oil,’ he answered. ‘Take your bill,’ said the manager. ‘Sit down quickly, and write fifty.’
LUK	16	7	또 다른 이에게 이르되 너는 얼마나 졌느뇨 가로되 밀 백 석이니이다 이르되 여기 네 증서를 가지고 팔십이라 쓰라 하였는지라	Then said he to another, And how much owest thou? And he said, An hundred measures of wheat. And he said unto him, Take thy bill, and write fourscore.	Then he asked another, ‘And how much do you owe?’ ‘A hundred measures of wheat,’ he replied. ‘Take your bill and write eighty,’ he told him.
LUK	16	8	주인이 옳지 않은 청지기가 일을 지혜 있게 하였으므로 칭찬하였으니 이 세대의 아들들이 자기 시대에 있어서는 빛의 아들들보다 더 지혜로움이니라	And the lord commended the unjust steward, because he had done wisely: for the children of this world are in their generation wiser than the children of light.	The master commended the dishonest manager because he had acted shrewdly. For the sons of this age are more shrewd in dealing with their own kind than are the sons of light.
LUK	16	9	내가 너희에게 말하노니 불의의 재물로 친구를 사귀라 그리하면 없어질 때에 저희가 영원한 처소로 너희를 영접하리라	And I say unto you, Make to yourselves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness; that, when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations.	I tell you, use worldly wealth to make friends for yourselves, so that when it is gone, they will welcome you into eternal dwellings.
LUK	16	10	지극히 작은 것에 충성된 자는 큰 것에도 충성되고 지극히 작은 것에 불의한 자는 큰 것에도 불의하니라	He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful also in much: and he that is unjust in the least is unjust also in much.	Whoever is faithful with very little will also be faithful with much, and whoever is dishonest with very little will also be dishonest with much.
LUK	16	11	너희가 만일 불의한 재물에 충성치 아니하면 누가 참된 것으로 너희에게 맡기겠느냐	If therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will commit to your trust the true riches?	So if you have not been faithful with worldly wealth, who will entrust you with true riches?
LUK	16	12	너희가 만일 남의 것에 충성치 아니하면 누가 너희의 것을 너희에게 주겠느냐	And if ye have not been faithful in that which is another man’s, who shall give you that which is your own?	And if you have not been faithful with the belongings of another, who will give you belongings of your own?
LUK	16	13	집 하인이 두 주인을 섬길 수 없나니 혹 이를 미워하고 저를 사랑하거나 혹 이를 중히 여기고 저를 경히 여길 것임이니라 너희가 하나님과 재물을 겸하여 섬길 수 없느니라	No servant can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.	No servant can serve two masters. Either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will be devoted to the one and despise the other. You cannot serve both God and money.”
LUK	16	14	바리새인들은 돈을 좋아하는 자라 이 모든 것을 듣고 비웃거늘	And the Pharisees also, who were covetous, heard all these things: and they derided him.	The Pharisees, who were lovers of money, heard all of this and were scoffing at Jesus.
LUK	16	15	예수께서 이르시되 너희는 사람 앞에서 스스로 옳다 하는 자이나 너희 마음을 하나님께서 아시나니 사람 중에 높임을 받는 그것은 하나님 앞에 미움을 받는 것이니라	And he said unto them, Ye are they which justify yourselves before men; but God knoweth your hearts: for that which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight of God.	So He said to them, “You are the ones who justify yourselves before men, but God knows your hearts. For what is prized among men is detestable before God.
LUK	16	16	율법과 선지자는 요한의 때까지요 그 후부터는 하나님 나라의 복음이 전파되어 사람마다 그리로 침입하느니라	The law and the prophets were until John: since that time the kingdom of God is preached, and every man presseth into it.	The Law and the Prophets were proclaimed until John. Since that time, the gospel of the kingdom of God is being preached, and everyone is forcing his way into it.
LUK	16	17	그러나 율법의 한 획이 떨어짐보다 천지의 없어짐이 쉬우리라	And it is easier for heaven and earth to pass, than one tittle of the law to fail.	But it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away than for a single stroke of a pen to drop out of the Law.
LUK	16	18	무릇 그 아내를 버리고 다른 데 장가드는 자도 간음함이요 무릇 버리운 이에게 장가드는 자도 간음함이니라	Whosoever putteth away his wife, and marrieth another, committeth adultery: and whosoever marrieth her that is put away from her husband committeth adultery.	Anyone who divorces his wife and marries another woman commits adultery, and he who marries a divorced woman commits adultery.
LUK	16	19	한 부자가 있어 자색 옷과 고운 베옷을 입고 날마다 호화로이 연락하는데	There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day:	Now there was a rich man dressed in purple and fine linen, who lived each day in joyous splendor.
LUK	16	20	나사로라 이름한 한 거지가 헌데를 앓으며 그 부자의 대문에 누워	And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his gate, full of sores,	And a beggar named Lazarus lay at his gate, covered with sores
LUK	16	21	부자의 상에서 떨어지는 것으로 배불리려 하매 심지어 개들이 와서 그 헌데를 핥더라	And desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from the rich man’s table: moreover the dogs came and licked his sores.	and longing to be fed with the crumbs that fell from the rich man’s table. Even the dogs came and licked his sores.
LUK	16	22	이에 그 거지가 죽어 천사들에게 받들려 아브라함의 품에 들어가고 부자도 죽어 장사되매	And it came to pass, that the beggar died, and was carried by the angels into Abraham’s bosom: the rich man also died, and was buried;	One day the beggar died and was carried by the angels to Abraham’s side. And the rich man also died and was buried.
LUK	16	23	저가 음부에서 고통 중에 눈을 들어 멀리 아브라함과 그의 품에 있는 나사로를 보고	And in hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments, and seeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom.	In Hades, where he was in torment, he looked up and saw Abraham from afar, with Lazarus by his side.
LUK	16	24	불러 가로되 아버지 아브라함이여 나를 긍휼히 여기사 나사로를 보내어 그 손가락 끝에 물을 찍어 내 혀를 서늘하게 하소서 내가 이 불꽃 가운데서 고민하나이다	And he cried and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue; for I am tormented in this flame.	So he cried out, ‘Father Abraham, have mercy on me and send Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue. For I am in agony in this fire.’
LUK	16	25	아브라함이 가로되 얘 너는 살았을 때에 네 좋은 것을 받았고 나사로는 고난을 받았으니 이것을 기억하라 이제 저는 여기서 위로를 받고 너는 고민을 받느니라	But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.	But Abraham answered, ‘Child, remember that during your lifetime you received your good things, while Lazarus received bad things. But now he is comforted here, while you are in agony.
LUK	16	26	이뿐 아니라 너희와 우리 사이에 큰 구렁이 끼어 있어 여기서 너희에게 건너가고자 하되 할 수 없고 거기서 우리에게 건너올 수도 없게 하였느니라	And beside all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed: so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot; neither can they pass to us, that would come from thence.	And besides all this, a great chasm has been fixed between us and you, so that even those who wish cannot cross from here to you, nor can anyone cross from there to us.’
LUK	16	27	가로되 그러면 구하노니 아버지여 나사로를 내 아버지의 집에 보내소서	Then he said, I pray thee therefore, father, that thou wouldest send him to my father’s house:	‘Then I beg you, father,’ he said, ‘send Lazarus to my father’s house,
LUK	16	28	내 형제 다섯이 있으니 저희에게 증거하게 하여 저희로 이 고통 받는 곳에 오지 않게 하소서	For I have five brethren; that he may testify unto them, lest they also come into this place of torment.	for I have five brothers. Let him warn them, so that they will not also end up in this place of torment.’
LUK	16	29	아브라함이 가로되 저희에게 모세와 선지자들이 있으니 그들에게 들을지니라	Abraham saith unto him, They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear them.	But Abraham replied, ‘They have Moses and the prophets; let your brothers listen to them.’
LUK	16	30	가로되 그렇지 아니하니이다 아버지 아브라함이여 만일 죽은 자에게서 저희에게 가는 자가 있으면 회개하리이다	And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the dead, they will repent.	‘No, father Abraham,’ he said, ‘but if someone is sent to them from the dead, they will repent.’
LUK	16	31	가로되 모세와 선지자들에게 듣지 아니하면 비록 죽은 자 가운데서 살아나는 자가 있을지라도 권함을 받지 아니하리라 하였다 하시니라	And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.	Then Abraham said to him, ‘If they do not listen to Moses and the prophets, they will not be persuaded even if someone rises from the dead.’”
LUK	17	1	예수께서 제자들에게 이르시되 실족케 하는 것이 없을 수는 없으나 있게 하는 자에게는 화로다	Then said he unto the disciples, It is impossible but that offences will come: but woe unto him, through whom they come!	Jesus said to His disciples, “It is inevitable that stumbling blocks will come, but woe to the one through whom they come!
LUK	17	2	저가 이 작은 자 중에 하나를 실족케 할진대 차라리 연자맷돌을 그 목에 매이우고 바다에 던지우는 것이 나으리라	It were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the sea, than that he should offend one of these little ones.	It would be better for him to have a millstone hung around his neck and to be thrown into the sea than to cause one of these little ones to stumble.
LUK	17	3	너희는 스스로 조심하라 만일 네 형제가 죄를 범하거든 경계하고 회개하거든 용서하라	Take heed to yourselves: If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him.	Watch yourselves. If your brother sins, rebuke him; and if he repents, forgive him.
LUK	17	4	만일 하루 일곱 번이라도 네게 죄를 얻고 일곱 번 네게 돌아와 내가 회개하노라 하거든 너는 용서하라 하시더라	And if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I repent; thou shalt forgive him.	Even if he sins against you seven times in a day, and seven times returns to say, ‘I repent,’ you must forgive him.”
LUK	17	5	사도들이 주께 여짜오되 우리에게 믿음을 더하소서 하니	And the apostles said unto the Lord, Increase our faith.	The apostles said to the Lord, “Increase our faith!”
LUK	17	6	주께서 가라사대 너희에게 겨자씨 한 알만한 믿음이 있었더면 이 뽕나무더러 뿌리가 뽑혀 바다에 심기우라 하였을 것이요 그것이 너희에게 순종하였으리라	And the Lord said, If ye had faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye might say unto this sycamine tree, Be thou plucked up by the root, and be thou planted in the sea; and it should obey you.	And the Lord answered, “If you have faith the size of a mustard seed, you can say to this mulberry tree, ‘Be uprooted and planted in the sea,’ and it will obey you.
LUK	17	7	너희 중에 뉘게 밭을 갈거나 양을 치거나 하는 종이 있어 밭에서 돌아오면 저더러 곧 와 앉아서 먹으라 할 자가 있느냐	But which of you, having a servant plowing or feeding cattle, will say unto him by and by, when he is come from the field, Go and sit down to meat?	Which of you whose servant comes in from plowing or shepherding in the field will say to him, ‘Come at once and sit down to eat’?
LUK	17	8	도리어 저더러 내 먹을 것을 예비하고 띠를 띠고 나의 먹고 마시는 동안에 수종들고 너는 그 후에 먹고 마시라 하지 않겠느냐	And will not rather say unto him, Make ready wherewith I may sup, and gird thyself, and serve me, till I have eaten and drunken; and afterward thou shalt eat and drink?	Instead, won’t he tell him, ‘Prepare my meal and dress yourself to serve me while I eat and drink; and afterward you may eat and drink’?
LUK	17	9	명한 대로 하였다고 종에게 사례하겠느냐	Doth he thank that servant because he did the things that were commanded him? I trow not.	Does he thank the servant because he did what he was told?
LUK	17	10	이와 같이 너희도 명령받은 것을 행한 후에 이르기를 우리는 무익한 종이라 우리의 하여야 할 일을 한 것뿐이라 할지니라	So likewise ye, when ye shall have done all those things which are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants: we have done that which was our duty to do.	So you also, when you have done everything commanded of you, should say, ‘We are unworthy servants; we have only done our duty.’”
LUK	17	11	예수께서 예루살렘으로 가실 때에 사마리아와 갈릴리 사이로 지나가시다가	And it came to pass, as he went to Jerusalem, that he passed through the midst of Samaria and Galilee.	While Jesus was on His way to Jerusalem, He was passing between Samaria and Galilee.
LUK	17	12	한 촌에 들어가시니 문둥병자 열 명이 예수를 만나 멀리 서서	And as he entered into a certain village, there met him ten men that were lepers, which stood afar off:	As He entered one of the villages, He was met by ten lepers. They stood at a distance
LUK	17	13	소리를 높여 가로되 예수 선생님이여 우리를 궁휼히 여기소서 하거늘	And they lifted up their voices, and said, Jesus, Master, have mercy on us.	and raised their voices, shouting, “Jesus, Master, have mercy on us!”
LUK	17	14	보시고 가라사대 가서 제사장들에게 너희 몸을 보이라 하셨더니 저희가 가다가 깨끗함을 받은지라	And when he saw them, he said unto them, Go shew yourselves unto the priests. And it came to pass, that, as they went, they were cleansed.	When Jesus saw them, He said, “Go, show yourselves to the priests.” And as they were on their way, they were cleansed.
LUK	17	15	그 중에 하나가 자기의 나은 것을 보고 큰 소리로 하나님께 영광을 돌리며 돌아와	And one of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back, and with a loud voice glorified God,	When one of them saw that he was healed, he came back, praising God in a loud voice.
LUK	17	16	예수의 발 아래 엎드리어 사례하니 저는 사마리아인이라	And fell down on his face at his feet, giving him thanks: and he was a Samaritan.	He fell facedown at Jesus’ feet in thanksgiving to Him—and he was a Samaritan.
LUK	17	17	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 열 사람이 다 깨끗함을 받지 아니하였느냐 그 아홉은 어디 있느냐	And Jesus answering said, Were there not ten cleansed? but where are the nine?	“Were not all ten cleansed?” Jesus asked. “Where then are the other nine?
LUK	17	18	이 이방인 외에는 하나님께 영광을 돌리러 돌아온 자가 없느냐 하시고	There are not found that returned to give glory to God, save this stranger.	Was no one found except this foreigner to return and give glory to God?”
LUK	17	19	그에게 이르시되 일어나 가라 네 믿음이 너를 구원하였느니라 하시더라	And he said unto him, Arise, go thy way: thy faith hath made thee whole.	Then Jesus said to him, “Rise and go; your faith has made you well!”
LUK	17	20	바리새인들이 하나님의 나라가 어느 때에 임하나이까 묻거늘 예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 하나님의 나라는 볼 수 있게 임하는 것이 아니요	And when he was demanded of the Pharisees, when the kingdom of God should come, he answered them and said, The kingdom of God cometh not with observation:	When asked by the Pharisees when the kingdom of God would come, Jesus replied, “The kingdom of God will not come with observable signs.
LUK	17	21	또 여기 있다 저기 있다고도 못하리니 하나님의 나라는 너희 안에 있느니라	Neither shall they say, Lo here! or, lo there! for, behold, the kingdom of God is within you.	Nor will people say, ‘Look, here it is,’ or ‘There it is.’ For you see, the kingdom of God is in your midst.”
LUK	17	22	또 제자들에게 이르시되 때가 이르리니 너희가 인자의 날 하루를 보고자 하되 보지 못하리라	And he said unto the disciples, The days will come, when ye shall desire to see one of the days of the Son of man, and ye shall not see it.	Then He said to the disciples, “The time is coming when you will long to see one of the days of the Son of Man, but you will not see it.
LUK	17	23	사람이 너희에게 말하되 보라 저기 있다 보라 여기 있다 하리라 그러나 너희는 가지도 말고 좇지도 말라	And they shall say to you, See here; or, see there: go not after them, nor follow them.	People will tell you, ‘Look, there He is!’ or ‘Look, here He is!’ Do not go out or chase after them.
LUK	17	24	번개가 하늘 아래 이 편에서 번뜻하여 하늘 아래 저 편까지 비췸 같이 인자도 자기 날에 그러하리라	For as the lightning, that lighteneth out of the one part under heaven, shineth unto the other part under heaven; so shall also the Son of man be in his day.	For just as the lightning flashes and lights up the sky from one end to the other, so will be the Son of Man in His day.
LUK	17	25	그러나 그가 먼저 많은 고난을 받으며 이 세대에게 버린 바 되어야 할지니라	But first must he suffer many things, and be rejected of this generation.	But first He must suffer many things and be rejected by this generation.
LUK	17	26	노아의 때에 된 것과 같이 인자의 때에도 그러하리라	And as it was in the days of Noe, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man.	Just as it was in the days of Noah, so also will it be in the days of the Son of Man:
LUK	17	27	노아가 방주에 들어가던 날까지 사람들이 먹고 마시고 장가 들고 시집 가더니 홍수가 나서 저희를 다 멸하였으며	They did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were given in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark, and the flood came, and destroyed them all.	People were eating and drinking, marrying and being given in marriage, up to the day Noah entered the ark. Then the flood came and destroyed them all.
LUK	17	28	또 롯의 때와 같으리니 사람들이 먹고 마시고 사고 팔고 심고 집을 짓더니	Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded;	It was the same in the days of Lot: People were eating and drinking, buying and selling, planting and building.
LUK	17	29	롯이 소돔에서 나가던 날에 하늘로서 불과 유황이 비오듯하여 저희를 멸하였느니라	But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all.	But on the day Lot left Sodom, fire and sulfur rained down from heaven and destroyed them all.
LUK	17	30	인자의 나타나는 날에도 이러하리라	Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed.	It will be just like that on the day the Son of Man is revealed.
LUK	17	31	그 날에 만일 사람이 지붕 위에 있고 그 세간이 집 안에 있으면 그것을 가지러 내려 오지 말 것이요 밭에 있는 자도 이와 같이 뒤로 돌이키지 말 것이니라	In that day, he which shall be upon the housetop, and his stuff in the house, let him not come down to take it away: and he that is in the field, let him likewise not return back.	On that day, let no one on the housetop come down to retrieve his possessions. Likewise, let no one in the field return for anything he has left behind.
LUK	17	32	롯의 처를 생각하라	Remember Lot’s wife.	Remember Lot’s wife!
LUK	17	33	무릇 자기 목숨을 보존하고자 하는 자는 잃을 것이요 잃는 자는 살리리라	Whosoever shall seek to save his life shall lose it; and whosoever shall lose his life shall preserve it.	Whoever tries to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life will preserve it.
LUK	17	34	내가 너희에게 이르노니 그 밤에 두 남자가 한 자리에 누워 있으매 하나는 데려감을 당하고 하나는 버려둠을 당할 것이요	I tell you, in that night there shall be two men in one bed; the one shall be taken, and the other shall be left.	I tell you, on that night two people will be in one bed: one will be taken and the other left.
LUK	17	35	두 여자가 함께 매를 갈고 있으매 하나는 데려감을 당하고 하나는 버려둠을 당할 것이니라	Two women shall be grinding together; the one shall be taken, and the other left.	Two women will be grinding grain together: one will be taken and the other left.”
LUK	17	36		Two men shall be in the field; the one shall be taken, and the other left.	
LUK	17	37	저희가 대답하여 가로되 주여 어디오니이까 가라사대 주검 있는 곳에는 독수리가 모이느니라 하시니라	And they answered and said unto him, Where, Lord? And he said unto them, Wheresoever the body is, thither will the eagles be gathered together.	“Where, Lord?” they asked. Jesus answered, “Wherever there is a carcass, there the vultures will gather.”
LUK	18	1	항상 기도하고 낙망치 말아야 될 것을 저희에게 비유로 하여	And he spake a parable unto them to this end, that men ought always to pray, and not to faint;	Then Jesus told them a parable about their need to pray at all times and not lose heart:
LUK	18	2	가라사대 어떤 도시에 하나님을 두려워 아니하고 사람을 무시하는 한 재판관이 있는데	Saying, There was in a city a judge, which feared not God, neither regarded man:	“In a certain town there was a judge who neither feared God nor respected men.
LUK	18	3	그 도시에 한 과부가 있어 자주 그에게 가서 내 원수에 대한 나의 원한을 풀어 주소서 하되	And there was a widow in that city; and she came unto him, saying, Avenge me of mine adversary.	And there was a widow in that town who kept appealing to him, ‘Give me justice against my adversary.’
LUK	18	4	그가 얼마 동안 듣지 아니하다가 후에 속으로 생각하되 내가 하나님을 두려워 아니하고 사람을 무시하나	And he would not for a while: but afterward he said within himself, Though I fear not God, nor regard man;	For a while he refused, but later he said to himself, ‘Though I neither fear God nor respect men,
LUK	18	5	이 과부가 나를 번거롭게 하니 내가 그 원한을 풀어 주리라 그렇지 않으면 늘 와서 나를 괴롭게 하리라 하였느니라	Yet because this widow troubleth me, I will avenge her, lest by her continual coming she weary me.	yet because this widow keeps pestering me, I will give her justice. Then she will stop wearing me out with her perpetual requests.’”
LUK	18	6	주께서 또 가라사대 불의한 재판관의 말한 것을 들으라	And the Lord said, Hear what the unjust judge saith.	And the Lord said, “Listen to the words of the unjust judge.
LUK	18	7	하물며 하나님께서 그 밤낮 부르짖는 택하신 자들의 원한을 풀어 주지 아니하시겠느냐 저희에게 오래 참으시겠느냐	And shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them?	Will not God bring about justice for His elect who cry out to Him day and night? Will He continue to defer their help?
LUK	18	8	내가 너희에게 이르노니 속히 그 원한을 풀어 주시리라 그러나 인자가 올 때에 세상에서 믿음을 보겠느냐 하시니라	I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless when the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?	I tell you, He will promptly carry out justice on their behalf. Nevertheless, when the Son of Man comes, will He find faith on earth?”
LUK	18	9	또 자기를 의롭다고 믿고 다른 사람을 멸시하는 자들에게 이 비유로 말씀하시되	And he spake this parable unto certain which trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and despised others:	To some who trusted in their own righteousness and viewed others with contempt, He also told this parable:
LUK	18	10	두 사람이 기도하러 성전에 올라가니 하나는 바리새인이요 하나는 세리라	Two men went up into the temple to pray; the one a Pharisee, and the other a publican.	“Two men went up to the temple to pray. One was a Pharisee and the other a tax collector.
LUK	18	11	바리새인은 서서 따로 기도하여 가로되 하나님이여 나는 다른 사람들 곧 토색, 불의, 간음을 하는 자들과 같지 아니하고 이 세리와도 같지 아니함을 감사하나이다	The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican.	The Pharisee stood by himself and prayed, ‘God, I thank You that I am not like the other men—swindlers, evildoers, adulterers—or even like this tax collector.
LUK	18	12	나는 이레에 두 번씩 금식하고 또 소득의 십일조를 드리나이다 하고	I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I possess.	I fast twice a week and pay tithes of all that I acquire.’
LUK	18	13	세리는 멀리 서서 감히 눈을 들어 하늘을 우러러 보지도 못하고 다만 가슴을 치며 가로되 하나님이여 불쌍히 여기옵소서 나는 죄인이로소이다 하였느니라	And the publican, standing afar off, would not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner.	But the tax collector stood at a distance, unwilling even to lift up his eyes to heaven. Instead, he beat his breast and said, ‘God, have mercy on me, a sinner!’
LUK	18	14	내가 너희에게 이르노니 이 사람이 저보다 의롭다 하심을 받고 집에 내려 갔느니라 무릇 자기를 높이는 자는 낮아지고 자기를 낮추는 자는 높아지리라 하시니라	I tell you, this man went down to his house justified rather than the other: for every one that exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.	I tell you, this man, rather than the Pharisee, went home justified. For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, but the one who humbles himself will be exalted.”
LUK	18	15	사람들이 예수의 만져주심을 바라고 자기 어린 아기를 데리고 오매 제자들이 보고 꾸짖거늘	And they brought unto him also infants, that he would touch them: but when his disciples saw it, they rebuked them.	Now people were even bringing their babies to Jesus for Him to place His hands on them. And when the disciples saw this, they rebuked those who brought them.
LUK	18	16	예수께서 그 어린 아이들을 불러 가까이 하시고 이르시되 어린 아이들이 내게 오는 것을 용납하고 금하지 말라 하나님의 나라가 이런 자의 것이니라	But Jesus called them unto him, and said, Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of God.	But Jesus called the children to Him and said, “Let the little children come to Me, and do not hinder them! For the kingdom of God belongs to such as these.
LUK	18	17	내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 누구든지 하나님의 나라를 어린 아이와 같이 받들지 않는 자는 결단코 들어가지 못하리라 하시니라	Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child shall in no wise enter therein.	Truly I tell you, anyone who does not receive the kingdom of God like a little child will never enter it.”
LUK	18	18	어떤 관원이 물어 가로되 선한 선생님이여 내가 무엇을 하여야 영생을 얻으리이까	And a certain ruler asked him, saying, Good Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?	Then a certain ruler asked Him, “Good Teacher, what must I do to inherit eternal life?”
LUK	18	19	예수께서 이르시되 네가 어찌하여 나를 선하다 일컫느냐 하나님 한 분 외에는 선한 이가 없느니라	And Jesus said unto him, Why callest thou me good? none is good, save one, that is, God.	“Why do you call Me good?” Jesus replied. “No one is good except God alone.
LUK	18	20	네가 계명을 아나니 간음하지 말라, 살인하지 말라, 도적질하지 말라, 거짓 증거하지 말라, 네 부모를 공경하라 하였느니라	Thou knowest the commandments, Do not commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness, Honour thy father and thy mother.	You know the commandments: ‘Do not commit adultery, do not murder, do not steal, do not bear false witness, honor your father and mother.’”
LUK	18	21	여짜오되 이것은 내가 어려서부터 다 지키었나이다	And he said, All these have I kept from my youth up.	“All these I have kept from my youth,” he said.
LUK	18	22	예수께서 이 말을 들으시고 이르시되 네가 오히려 한 가지 부족한 것이 있으니 네게 있는 것을 다 팔아 가난한 자들을 나눠 주라 그리하면 하늘에서 보화가 네게 있으리라 그리고 와서 나를 좇으라 하시니	Now when Jesus heard these things, he said unto him, Yet lackest thou one thing: sell all that thou hast, and distribute unto the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, follow me.	On hearing this, Jesus told him, “You still lack one thing: Sell everything you own and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven. Then come, follow Me.”
LUK	18	23	그 사람이 큰 부자인고로 이 말씀을 듣고 심히 근심하더라	And when he heard this, he was very sorrowful: for he was very rich.	But when the ruler heard this, he became very sad, because he was extremely wealthy.
LUK	18	24	예수께서 저를 보시고 가라사대 재산이 있는 자는 하나님의 나라에 들어가기가 어떻게 어려운지	And when Jesus saw that he was very sorrowful, he said, How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God!	Seeing the man’s sadness, Jesus said, “How hard it is for the rich to enter the kingdom of God!
LUK	18	25	약대가 바늘귀로 들어가는 것이 부자가 하나님의 나라에 들어가는 것보다 쉬우니라 하신대	For it is easier for a camel to go through a needle’s eye, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.	Indeed, it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God.”
LUK	18	26	듣는 자들이 가로되 그런즉 누가 구원을 얻을 수 있나이까	And they that heard it said, Who then can be saved?	Those who heard this asked, “Who then can be saved?”
LUK	18	27	가라사대 무릇 사람의 할 수 없는 것을 하나님은 하실 수 있느니라	And he said, The things which are impossible with men are possible with God.	But Jesus said, “What is impossible with man is possible with God.”
LUK	18	28	베드로가 여짜오되 보옵소서 우리가 우리의 것을 다 버리고 주를 좇았나이다	Then Peter said, Lo, we have left all, and followed thee.	“Look,” said Peter, “we have left all we had to follow You.”
LUK	18	29	이르시되 내가 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 하나님의 나라를 위하여 집이나 아내나 형제나 부모나 자녀를 버린 자는	And he said unto them, Verily I say unto you, There is no man that hath left house, or parents, or brethren, or wife, or children, for the kingdom of God’s sake,	“Truly I tell you,” Jesus replied, “no one who has left home or wife or brothers or parents or children for the sake of the kingdom of God
LUK	18	30	금세에 있어 여러 배를 받고 내세에 영생을 받지 못할 자가 없느니라 하시니라	Who shall not receive manifold more in this present time, and in the world to come life everlasting.	will fail to receive many times more in this age—and in the age to come, eternal life.”
LUK	18	31	예수께서 열두 제자를 데리시고 이르시되 보라 우리가 예루살렘으로 올라가노니 선지자들로 기록된 모든 것이 인자에게 응하리라	Then he took unto him the twelve, and said unto them, Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and all things that are written by the prophets concerning the Son of man shall be accomplished.	Then Jesus took the Twelve aside and said to them, “Look, we are going up to Jerusalem, and everything the prophets have written about the Son of Man will be fulfilled.
LUK	18	32	인자가 이방인들에게 넘기워 희롱을 받고 능욕을 받고 침 뱉음을 받겠으며	For he shall be delivered unto the Gentiles, and shall be mocked, and spitefully entreated, and spitted on:	He will be delivered over to the Gentiles and will be mocked and insulted and spit upon.
LUK	18	33	저희는 채찍질하고 죽일 것이니 저는 삼 일만에 살아나리라 하시되	And they shall scourge him, and put him to death: and the third day he shall rise again.	They will flog Him and kill Him, and on the third day He will rise again.”
LUK	18	34	제자들이 이것을 하나도 깨닫지 못하였으니 그 말씀이 감취었으므로 저희가 그 이르신 바를 알지 못하였더라	And they understood none of these things: and this saying was hid from them, neither knew they the things which were spoken.	But the disciples did not understand any of these things. The meaning was hidden from them, and they did not comprehend what He was saying.
LUK	18	35	여리고에 가까이 오실 때에 한 소경이 길 가에 앉아 구걸하다가	And it came to pass, that as he was come nigh unto Jericho, a certain blind man sat by the way side begging:	As Jesus drew near to Jericho, a blind man was sitting beside the road, begging.
LUK	18	36	무리의 지남을 듣고 이 무슨 일이냐고 물은대	And hearing the multitude pass by, he asked what it meant.	When he heard the crowd going by, he asked what was happening.
LUK	18	37	저희가 나사렛 예수께서 지나신다 하니	And they told him, that Jesus of Nazareth passeth by.	“Jesus of Nazareth is passing by,” they told him.
LUK	18	38	소경이 외쳐 가로되 다윗의 자손 예수여 나를 불쌍히 여기소서 하거늘	And he cried, saying, Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy on me.	So he called out, “Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me!”
LUK	18	39	앞서 가는 자들이 저를 꾸짖어 잠잠하라 하되 저가 더욱 심히 소리 질러 다윗의 자손이여 나를 불쌍히 여기소서 하는지라	And they which went before rebuked him, that he should hold his peace: but he cried so much the more, Thou Son of David, have mercy on me.	Those who led the way admonished him to be silent, but he cried out all the louder, “Son of David, have mercy on me!”
LUK	18	40	예수께서 머물러 서서 명하여 데려오라 하셨더니 저가 가까이 오매 물어 가라사대	And Jesus stood, and commanded him to be brought unto him: and when he was come near, he asked him,	Jesus stopped and directed that the man be brought to Him. When he had been brought near, Jesus asked him,
LUK	18	41	네게 무엇을 하여 주기를 원하느냐 가로되 주여 보기를 원하나이다	Saying, What wilt thou that I shall do unto thee? And he said, Lord, that I may receive my sight.	“What do you want Me to do for you?” “Lord,” he said, “let me see again.”
LUK	18	42	예수께서 저에게 이르시되 보아라 네 믿음이 너를 구원하였느니라 하시매	And Jesus said unto him, Receive thy sight: thy faith hath saved thee.	“Receive your sight!” Jesus replied. “Your faith has healed you.”
LUK	18	43	곧 보게 되어 하나님께 영광을 돌리며 예수를 좇으니 백성이 다 이를 보고 하나님을 찬양하니라	And immediately he received his sight, and followed him, glorifying God: and all the people, when they saw it, gave praise unto God.	Immediately he received his sight and followed Jesus, glorifying God. And all the people who saw this gave praise to God.
LUK	19	1	예수께서 여리고로 들어 지나가시더라	And Jesus entered and passed through Jericho.	Then Jesus entered Jericho and was passing through.
LUK	19	2	삭개오라 이름하는 자가 있으니 세리장이요 또한 부자라	And, behold, there was a man named Zaccheus, which was the chief among the publicans, and he was rich.	And there was a man named Zacchaeus, a chief tax collector, who was very wealthy.
LUK	19	3	저가 예수께서 어떠한 사람인가 하여 보고자 하되 키가 작고 사람이 많아 할 수 없어	And he sought to see Jesus who he was; and could not for the press, because he was little of stature.	He was trying to see who Jesus was, but could not see over the crowd because he was small in stature.
LUK	19	4	앞으로 달려가 보기 위하여 뽕나무에 올라가니 이는 예수께서 그리로 지나가시게 됨이러라	And he ran before, and climbed up into a sycomore tree to see him: for he was to pass that way.	So he ran on ahead and climbed a sycamore tree to see Him, since Jesus was about to pass that way.
LUK	19	5	예수께서 그 곳에 이르사 우러러 보시고 이르시되 삭개오야 속히 내려오라 내가 오늘 네 집에 유하여야 하겠다 하시니	And when Jesus came to the place, he looked up, and saw him, and said unto him, Zaccheus, make haste, and come down; for to day I must abide at thy house.	When Jesus came to that place, He looked up and said, “Zacchaeus, hurry down, for I must stay at your house today.”
LUK	19	6	급히 내려와 즐거워하며 영접하거늘	And he made haste, and came down, and received him joyfully.	So Zacchaeus hurried down and welcomed Him joyfully.
LUK	19	7	뭇사람이 보고 수군거려 가로되 저가 죄인의 집에 유하러 들어갔도다 하더라	And when they saw it, they all murmured, saying, That he was gone to be guest with a man that is a sinner.	And all who saw this began to grumble, saying, “He has gone to be the guest of a sinful man!”
LUK	19	8	삭개오가 서서 주께 여짜오되 주여 보시옵소서 내 소유의 절반을 가난한 자들에게 주겠사오며 만일 뉘 것을 토색한 일이 있으면 사 배나 갚겠나이다	And Zaccheus stood, and said unto the Lord; Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor; and if I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, I restore him fourfold.	But Zacchaeus stood up and said to the Lord, “Look, Lord, half of my possessions I give to the poor, and if I have cheated anyone, I will repay it fourfold.”
LUK	19	9	예수께서 이르시되 오늘 구원이 이 집에 이르렀으니 이 사람도 아브라함의 자손임이로다	And Jesus said unto him, This day is salvation come to this house, forsomuch as he also is a son of Abraham.	Jesus said to him, “Today salvation has come to this house, because this man too is a son of Abraham.
LUK	19	10	인자의 온 것은 잃어버린 자를 찾아 구원하려 함이니라	For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost.	For the Son of Man came to seek and to save the lost.”
LUK	19	11	저희가 이 말씀을 듣고 있을 때에 비유를 더하여 말씀하시니 이는 자기가 예루살렘에 가까이 오셨고 저희는 하나님의 나라가 당장에 나타날 줄로 생각함이러라	And as they heard these things, he added and spake a parable, because he was nigh to Jerusalem, and because they thought that the kingdom of God should immediately appear.	While the people were listening to this, Jesus proceeded to tell them a parable, because He was near Jerusalem and they thought the kingdom of God would appear imminently.
LUK	19	12	가라사대 어떤 귀인이 왕위를 받아 가지고 오려고 먼 나라로 갈 때에	He said therefore, A certain nobleman went into a far country to receive for himself a kingdom, and to return.	So He said, “A man of noble birth went to a distant country to lay claim to his kingship and then return.
LUK	19	13	그 종 열을 불러 은 열 므나를 주며 이르되 내가 돌아오기까지 장사하라 하니라	And he called his ten servants, and delivered them ten pounds, and said unto them, Occupy till I come.	Beforehand, he called ten of his servants and gave them ten minas. ‘Conduct business with this until I return,’ he said.
LUK	19	14	그런데 그 백성이 저를 미워하여 사자를 뒤로 보내어 가로되 우리는 이 사람이 우리의 왕 됨을 원치 아니하노이다 하였더라	But his citizens hated him, and sent a message after him, saying, We will not have this man to reign over us.	But his subjects hated him and sent a delegation after him to say, ‘We do not want this man to rule over us.’
LUK	19	15	귀인이 왕위를 받아 가지고 돌아와서 은 준 종들의 각각 어떻게 장사한 것을 알고자 하여 저희를 부르니	And it came to pass, that when he was returned, having received the kingdom, then he commanded these servants to be called unto him, to whom he had given the money, that he might know how much every man had gained by trading.	When he returned from procuring his kingship, he summoned the servants to whom he had given the money, to find out what each one had earned.
LUK	19	16	그 첫째가 나아와 가로되 주여 주의 한 므나로 열 므나를 남겼나이다	Then came the first, saying, Lord, thy pound hath gained ten pounds.	The first servant came forward and said, ‘Master, your mina has produced ten more minas.’
LUK	19	17	주인이 이르되 잘 하였다 착한 종이여 네가 지극히 작은 것에 충성하였으니 열 고을 권세를 차지하라 하고	And he said unto him, Well, thou good servant: because thou hast been faithful in a very little, have thou authority over ten cities.	His master replied, ‘Well done, good servant! Because you have been faithful in a very small matter, you shall have authority over ten cities.’
LUK	19	18	그 둘째가 와서 가로되 주여 주의 한 므나로 다섯 므나를 만들었나이다	And the second came, saying, Lord, thy pound hath gained five pounds.	The second servant came and said, ‘Master, your mina has made five minas.’
LUK	19	19	주인이 그에게도 이르되 너도 다섯 고을을 차지하라 하고	And he said likewise to him, Be thou also over five cities.	And to this one he said, ‘You shall have authority over five cities.’
LUK	19	20	또 한 사람이 와서 가로되 주여 보소서 주의 한 므나가 여기 있나이다 내가 수건으로 싸 두었었나이다	And another came, saying, Lord, behold, here is thy pound, which I have kept laid up in a napkin:	Then another servant came and said, ‘Master, here is your mina, which I have laid away in a piece of cloth.
LUK	19	21	이는 당신이 엄한 사람인 것을 내가 무서워함이라 당신은 두지 않은 것을 취하고 심지 않은 것을 거두나이다	For I feared thee, because thou art an austere man: thou takest up that thou layedst not down, and reapest that thou didst not sow.	For I was afraid of you, because you are a harsh man. You withdraw what you did not deposit and reap what you did not sow.’
LUK	19	22	주인이 이르되 악한 종아 내가 네 말로 너를 판단하노니 너는 내가 두지 않은 것을 취하고 심지 않은 것을 거두는 엄한 사람인 줄을 알았느냐	And he saith unto him, Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee, thou wicked servant. Thou knewest that I was an austere man, taking up that I laid not down, and reaping that I did not sow:	His master replied, ‘You wicked servant, I will judge you by your own words. So you knew that I am a harsh man, withdrawing what I did not deposit and reaping what I did not sow?
LUK	19	23	그러면 어찌하여 내 은을 은행에 두지 아니하였느냐 그리하였으면 내가 와서 그 변리까지 찾았으리라 하고	Wherefore then gavest not thou my money into the bank, that at my coming I might have required mine own with usury?	Why then did you not deposit my money in the bank, and upon my return I could have collected it with interest?’
LUK	19	24	곁에 섰는 자들에게 이르되 그 한 므나를 빼앗아 열 므나 있는 자에게 주라 하니	And he said unto them that stood by, Take from him the pound, and give it to him that hath ten pounds.	Then he told those standing by, ‘Take the mina from him and give it to the one who has ten minas.’
LUK	19	25	저희가 가로되 주여 저에게 이미 열 므나가 있나이다	(And they said unto him, Lord, he hath ten pounds.)	‘Master,’ they said, ‘he already has ten!’
LUK	19	26	주인이 가로되 내가 너희에게 말하노니 무릇 있는 자는 받겠고 없는 자는 그 있는 것도 빼앗기리라	For I say unto you, That unto every one which hath shall be given; and from him that hath not, even that he hath shall be taken away from him.	He replied, ‘I tell you that everyone who has will be given more; but the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.
LUK	19	27	그리고 나의 왕 됨을 원치 아니하던 저 원수들을 이리로 끌어다가 내 앞에서 죽이라 하였느니라	But those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me.	And these enemies of mine who were unwilling for me to rule over them, bring them here and slay them in front of me.’”
LUK	19	28	예수께서 이 말씀을 하시고 예루살렘을 향하여 앞서서 가시더라	And when he had thus spoken, he went before, ascending up to Jerusalem.	After Jesus had said this, He went on ahead, going up to Jerusalem.
LUK	19	29	감람원이라는 산의 벳바게와 베다니에 가까이 왔을 때에 제자 중 둘을 보내시며	And it came to pass, when he was come nigh to Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount called the mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples,	As He approached Bethphage and Bethany at the Mount of Olives, He sent out two of His disciples,
LUK	19	30	이르시되 너희 맞은편 마을로 가라 그리로 들어가면 아직 아무 사람도 타 보지 않은 나귀 새끼의 매여 있는 것을 보리니 풀어 끌고 오너라	Saying, Go ye into the village over against you; in the which at your entering ye shall find a colt tied, whereon yet never man sat: loose him, and bring him hither.	saying, “Go into the village ahead of you, and as you enter it, you will find a colt tied there, on which no one has ever sat. Untie it and bring it here.
LUK	19	31	만일 누가 너희에게 어찌하여 푸느냐 묻거든 이렇게 말하되 주가 쓰시겠다 하라 하시매	And if any man ask you, Why do ye loose him? thus shall ye say unto him, Because the Lord hath need of him.	If anyone asks, ‘Why are you untying it?’ tell him, ‘The Lord needs it.’”
LUK	19	32	보내심을 받은 자들이 가서 그 말씀하신 대로 만난지라	And they that were sent went their way, and found even as he had said unto them.	So those who were sent went out and found it just as Jesus had told them.
LUK	19	33	나귀 새끼를 풀 때에 그 임자들이 이르되 어찌하여 나귀 새끼를 푸느냐	And as they were loosing the colt, the owners thereof said unto them, Why loose ye the colt?	As they were untying the colt, its owners asked, “Why are you untying the colt?”
LUK	19	34	대답하되 주께서 쓰시겠다 하고	And they said, The Lord hath need of him.	“The Lord needs it,” they answered.
LUK	19	35	그것을 예수께로 끌고 와서 자기들의 겉옷을 나귀 새끼 위에 걸쳐 놓고 예수를 태우니	And they brought him to Jesus: and they cast their garments upon the colt, and they set Jesus thereon.	Then they led the colt to Jesus, threw their cloaks over it, and put Jesus on it.
LUK	19	36	가실 때에 저희가 자기의 겉옷을 길에 펴더라	And as he went, they spread their clothes in the way.	As He rode along, the people spread their cloaks on the road.
LUK	19	37	이미 감람 산에서 내려가는 편까지 가까이 오시매 제자의 온 무리가 자기의 본 바 모든 능한 일을 인하여 기뻐하며 큰 소리로 하나님을 찬양하여	And when he was come nigh, even now at the descent of the mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice for all the mighty works that they had seen;	And as He approached the descent from the Mount of Olives, the whole multitude of disciples began to praise God joyfully in a loud voice for all the miracles they had seen:
LUK	19	38	가로되 찬송하리로다 주의 이름으로 오시는 왕이여 하늘에는 평화요 가장 높은 곳에는 영광이로다 하니	Saying, Blessed be the King that cometh in the name of the Lord: peace in heaven, and glory in the highest.	“Blessed is the King who comes in the name of the Lord!” “Peace in heaven and glory in the highest!”
LUK	19	39	무리 중 어떤 바리새인들이 말하되 선생이여 당신의 제자들을 책망하소서 하거늘	And some of the Pharisees from among the multitude said unto him, Master, rebuke thy disciples.	But some of the Pharisees in the crowd said to Him, “Teacher, rebuke Your disciples!”
LUK	19	40	대답하여 가라사대 내가 너희에게 말하노니 만일 이 사람들이 잠잠하면 돌들이 소리지르리라 하시니라	And he answered and said unto them, I tell you that, if these should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry out.	“I tell you,” He answered, “if they remain silent, the very stones will cry out.”
LUK	19	41	가까이 오사 성을 보시고 우시며	And when he was come near, he beheld the city, and wept over it,	As Jesus approached Jerusalem and saw the city, He wept over it
LUK	19	42	가라사대 너도 오늘날 평화에 관한 일을 알았더면 좋을 뻔하였거니와 지금 네 눈에 숨기웠도다	Saying, If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes.	and said, “If only you had known on this day what would bring you peace! But now it is hidden from your eyes.
LUK	19	43	날이 이를지라 네 원수들이 토성을 쌓고 너를 둘러 사면으로 가두고	For the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side,	For the days will come upon you when your enemies will barricade you and surround you and hem you in on every side.
LUK	19	44	또 너와 및 그 가운데 있는 네 자식들을 땅에 메어치며 돌 하나도 돌 위에 남기지 아니하리니 이는 권고 받는 날을 네가 알지 못함을 인함이니라 하시니라	And shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children within thee; and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another; because thou knewest not the time of thy visitation.	They will level you to the ground—you and the children within your walls. They will not leave one stone on another, because you did not recognize the time of your visitation from God.”
LUK	19	45	성전에 들어가사 장사하는 자들을 내어 쫓으시며	And he went into the temple, and began to cast out them that sold therein, and them that bought;	Then Jesus entered the temple courts and began to drive out those who were selling there.
LUK	19	46	저희에게 이르시되 기록된 바 내 집은 기도하는 집이 되리라 하였거늘 너희는 강도의 굴혈을 만들었도다 하시니라	Saying unto them, It is written, My house is the house of prayer: but ye have made it a den of thieves.	He declared to them, “It is written: ‘My house will be a house of prayer.’ But you have made it ‘a den of robbers.’”
LUK	19	47	예수께서 날마다 성전에서 가르치시니 대제사장들과 서기관들과 백성의 두목들이 그를 죽이려고 꾀하되	And he taught daily in the temple. But the chief priests and the scribes and the chief of the people sought to destroy him,	Jesus was teaching at the temple every day, but the chief priests, scribes, and leaders of the people were intent on killing Him.
LUK	19	48	백성이 다 그에게 귀를 기울여 들으므로 어찌할 방침을 찾지 못하였더라	And could not find what they might do: for all the people were very attentive to hear him.	Yet they could not find a way to do so, because all the people hung on His words.
LUK	20	1	하루는 예수께서 성전에서 백성을 가르치시며 복음을 전하실새 대제사장들과 서기관들이 장로들과 함께 가까이 와서	And it came to pass, that on one of those days, as he taught the people in the temple, and preached the gospel, the chief priests and the scribes came upon him with the elders,	One day as Jesus was teaching the people in the temple courts and proclaiming the gospel, the chief priests and scribes, together with the elders, came up to Him.
LUK	20	2	말하여 가로되 당신이 무슨 권세로 이런 일을 하는지 이 권세를 준 이가 누구인지 우리에게 말하라	And spake unto him, saying, Tell us, by what authority doest thou these things? or who is he that gave thee this authority?	“Tell us,” they said, “by what authority are You doing these things, and who gave You this authority?”
LUK	20	3	대답하여 가라사대 나도 한 말을 너희에게 물으리니 내게 말하라	And he answered and said unto them, I will also ask you one thing; and answer me:	“I will also ask you a question,” Jesus replied. “Tell Me:
LUK	20	4	요한의 침례가 하늘로서냐 사람에게로서냐	The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or of men?	John’s baptism—was it from heaven, or from men?”
LUK	20	5	저희가 서로 의논하여 가로되 만일 하늘로서라 하면 어찌하여 저를 믿지 아니하였느냐 할 것이요	And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say, From heaven; he will say, Why then believed ye him not?	They deliberated among themselves and said, “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ He will ask, ‘Why did you not believe him?’
LUK	20	6	만일 사람에게로서라 하면 백성이 요한을 선지자로 인정하니 저희가 다 우리를 돌로 칠 것이라 하고	But and if we say, Of men; all the people will stone us: for they be persuaded that John was a prophet.	But if we say, ‘From men,’ all the people will stone us, for they are convinced that John was a prophet.”
LUK	20	7	대답하되 어디로서인지 알지 못하노라 하니	And they answered, that they could not tell whence it was.	So they answered that they did not know where it was from.
LUK	20	8	예수께서 이르시되 나도 무슨 권세로 이런 일을 하는지 너희에게 이르지 아니하리라 하시니라	And Jesus said unto them, Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things.	And Jesus replied, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I am doing these things.”
LUK	20	9	이 비유로 백성에게 말씀하시되 한 사람이 포도원을 만들어 농부들에게 세로 주고 타국에 가서 오래 있다가	Then began he to speak to the people this parable; A certain man planted a vineyard, and let it forth to husbandmen, and went into a far country for a long time.	Then He proceeded to tell the people this parable: “A man planted a vineyard, rented it out to some tenants, and went away for a long time.
LUK	20	10	때가 이르매 포도원 소출 얼마를 바치게 하려고 한 종을 농부들에게 보내니 농부들이 종을 심히 때리고 거저 보내었거늘	And at the season he sent a servant to the husbandmen, that they should give him of the fruit of the vineyard: but the husbandmen beat him, and sent him away empty.	At harvest time, he sent a servant to the tenants to collect his share of the fruit of the vineyard. But the tenants beat the servant and sent him away empty-handed.
LUK	20	11	다시 다른 종을 보내니 그도 심히 때리고 능욕하고 거저 보내었거늘	And again he sent another servant: and they beat him also, and entreated him shamefully, and sent him away empty.	So he sent another servant, but they beat him and treated him shamefully, sending him away empty-handed.
LUK	20	12	다시 세번째 종을 보내니 이도 상하게 하고 내어 쫓은지라	And again he sent a third: and they wounded him also, and cast him out.	Then he sent a third, but they wounded him and threw him out.
LUK	20	13	포도원 주인이 가로되 어찌할꼬 내 사랑하는 아들을 보내리니 저희가 혹 그는 공경하리라 하였더니	Then said the lord of the vineyard, What shall I do? I will send my beloved son: it may be they will reverence him when they see him.	‘What shall I do?’ asked the owner of the vineyard. ‘I will send my beloved son. Perhaps they will respect him.’
LUK	20	14	농부들이 그를 보고 서로 의논하여 가로되 이는 상속자니 죽이고 그 유업을 우리의 것으로 만들자 하고	But when the husbandmen saw him, they reasoned among themselves, saying, This is the heir: come, let us kill him, that the inheritance may be ours.	But when the tenants saw the son, they discussed it among themselves and said, ‘This is the heir. Let us kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.’
LUK	20	15	포도원 밖에 내어 쫓아 죽였느니라 그런즉 포도원 주인이 이 사람들을 어떻게 하겠느뇨	So they cast him out of the vineyard, and killed him. What therefore shall the lord of the vineyard do unto them?	So they threw him out of the vineyard and killed him. What then will the owner of the vineyard do to them?
LUK	20	16	와서 그 농부들을 진멸하고 포도원을 다른 사람들에게 주리라 하시니 사람들이 듣고 가로되 그렇게 되지 말아지이다 하거늘	He shall come and destroy these husbandmen, and shall give the vineyard to others. And when they heard it, they said, God forbid.	He will come and kill those tenants, and will give the vineyard to others.” And when the people heard this, they said, “May such a thing never happen!”
LUK	20	17	저희를 보시며 가라사대 그러면 기록된 바 건축자들의 버린 돌이 모퉁이의 머릿돌이 되었느니라 함이 어찜이뇨	And he beheld them, and said, What is this then that is written, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner?	But Jesus looked directly at them and said, “Then what is the meaning of that which is written: ‘The stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone’?
LUK	20	18	무릇 이 돌 위에 떨어지는 자는 깨어지겠고 이 돌이 사람 위에 떨어지면 저를 가루로 만들어 흩으리라 하시니라	Whosoever shall fall upon that stone shall be broken; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.	Everyone who falls on this stone will be broken to pieces, but he on whom it falls will be crushed.”
LUK	20	19	서기관들과 대제사장들이 예수의 이 비유는 자기들을 가리켜 말씀하심인 줄 알고 즉시 잡고자 하되 백성을 두려워하더라	And the chief priests and the scribes the same hour sought to lay hands on him; and they feared the people: for they perceived that he had spoken this parable against them.	When the scribes and chief priests realized that Jesus had spoken this parable against them, they sought to arrest Him that very hour. But they were afraid of the people.
LUK	20	20	이에 저희가 엿보다가 예수를 총독의 치리와 권세 아래 붙이려 하여 정탐들을 보내어 그들로 스스로 의인인 체하며 예수의 말을 책잡게 하니	And they watched him, and sent forth spies, which should feign themselves just men, that they might take hold of his words, that so they might deliver him unto the power and authority of the governor.	So they watched Him closely and sent spies who pretended to be sincere. They were hoping to catch Him in His words in order to hand Him over to the rule and authority of the governor.
LUK	20	21	그들이 물어 가로되 선생님이여 우리가 아노니 당신은 바로 말씀하시고 가르치시며 사람을 외모로 취치 아니하시고 오직 참으로써 하나님의 도를 가르치시나이다	And they asked him, saying, Master, we know that thou sayest and teachest rightly, neither acceptest thou the person of any, but teachest the way of God truly:	“Teacher,” they inquired, “we know that You speak and teach correctly. You show no partiality, but teach the way of God in accordance with the truth.
LUK	20	22	우리가 가이사에게 세를 바치는 것이 가하니이까 불가하니이까 하니	Is it lawful for us to give tribute unto Cesar, or no?	Is it lawful for us to pay taxes to Caesar or not?”
LUK	20	23	예수께서 그 간계를 아시고 가라사대	But he perceived their craftiness, and said unto them, Why tempt ye me?	But Jesus saw through their duplicity and said to them,
LUK	20	24	데나리온 하나를 내게 보이라 뉘 화상과 글이 여기 있느냐 대답하되 가이사의 것이니이다	Shew me a penny. Whose image and superscription hath it? They answered and said, Cesar’s.	“Show Me a denarius. Whose image and inscription are on it?” “Caesar’s,” they answered.
LUK	20	25	가라사대 그런즉 가이사의 것은 가이사에게 하나님의 것은 하나님께 바치라 하시니	And he said unto them, Render therefore unto Cesar the things which be Cesar’s, and unto God the things which be God’s.	So Jesus told them, “Give to Caesar what is Caesar’s, and to God what is God’s.”
LUK	20	26	저희가 백성 앞에서 그의 말을 능히 책잡지 못하고 그의 대답을 기이히 여겨 잠잠하니라	And they could not take hold of his words before the people: and they marvelled at his answer, and held their peace.	And they were unable to trap Him in His words before the people; and amazed at His answer, they fell silent.
LUK	20	27	부활이 없다 주장하는 사두개인 중 어떤 이들이 와서	Then came to him certain of the Sadducees, which deny that there is any resurrection; and they asked him,	Then some of the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came to question Him.
LUK	20	28	물어 가로되 선생님이여 모세가 우리에게 써 주기를 사람의 형이 만일 아내를 두고 자식이 없이 죽거든 그 동생이 그 아내를 취하여 형을 위하여 후사를 세울지니라 하였나이다	Saying, Master, Moses wrote unto us, If any man’s brother die, having a wife, and he die without children, that his brother should take his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother.	“Teacher,” they said, “Moses wrote for us that if a man’s brother dies and leaves a wife but no children, the man is to marry his brother’s widow and raise up offspring for him.
LUK	20	29	그런데 칠 형제가 있었는데 맏이 아내를 취하였다가 자식이 없이 죽고	There were therefore seven brethren: and the first took a wife, and died without children.	Now there were seven brothers. The first one married a wife, but died childless.
LUK	20	30	그 둘째와 셋째가 저를 취하고	And the second took her to wife, and he died childless.	Then the second
LUK	20	31	일곱이 다 그와 같이 자식이 없이 죽고	And the third took her; and in like manner the seven also: and they left no children, and died.	and the third married the widow, and in the same way all seven died, leaving no children.
LUK	20	32	그 후에 여자도 죽었나이다	Last of all the woman died also.	And last of all, the woman died.
LUK	20	33	일곱이 다 저를 아내로 취하였으니 부활 때에 그 중에 뉘 아내가 되리이까	Therefore in the resurrection whose wife of them is she? for seven had her to wife.	So then, in the resurrection, whose wife will she be? For all seven were married to her.”
LUK	20	34	예수께서 이르시되 이 세상의 자녀들은 장가도 가고 시집도 가되	And Jesus answering said unto them, The children of this world marry, and are given in marriage:	Jesus answered, “The sons of this age marry and are given in marriage.
LUK	20	35	저 세상과 및 죽은 자 가운데서 부활함을 얻기에 합당히 여김을 입은 자들은 장가가고 시집가는 일이 없으며	But they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage:	But those who are considered worthy to share in the age to come and in the resurrection from the dead will neither marry nor be given in marriage.
LUK	20	36	저희는 다시 죽을 수도 없나니 이는 천사와 동등이요 부활의 자녀로서 하나님의 자녀임이니라	Neither can they die any more: for they are equal unto the angels; and are the children of God, being the children of the resurrection.	In fact, they can no longer die, because they are like the angels. And since they are sons of the resurrection, they are sons of God.
LUK	20	37	죽은 자의 살아난다는 것은 모세도 가시나무 떨기에 관한 글에 보였으되 주를 아브라함의 하나님이요 이삭의 하나님이요 야곱의 하나님이시라 칭하였나니	Now that the dead are raised, even Moses shewed at the bush, when he calleth the Lord the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.	Even Moses demonstrates that the dead are raised, in the passage about the burning bush. For he calls the Lord ‘the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.’
LUK	20	38	하나님은 죽은 자의 하나님이 아니요 산 자의 하나님이시라 하나님에게는 모든 사람이 살았느니라 하시니	For he is not a God of the dead, but of the living: for all live unto him.	He is not the God of the dead, but of the living, for to Him all are alive.”
LUK	20	39	서기관 중 어떤 이들이 말하되 선생이여 말씀이 옳으니이다 하니	Then certain of the scribes answering said, Master, thou hast well said.	Some of the scribes answered, “Teacher, You have spoken well!”
LUK	20	40	저희는 아무 것도 감히 더 물을 수 없음이더라	And after that they durst not ask him any question at all.	And they did not dare to question Him any further.
LUK	20	41	예수께서 저희에게 이르시되 사람들이 어찌하여 그리스도를 다윗의 자손이라 하느냐	And he said unto them, How say they that Christ is David’s son?	Then Jesus declared, “How can it be said that the Christ is the Son of David?
LUK	20	42	시편에 다윗이 친히 말하였으되 주께서 내 주께 이르시되	And David himself saith in the book of Psalms, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand,	For David himself says in the book of Psalms: ‘The Lord said to my Lord, “Sit at My right hand
LUK	20	43	내가 네 원수를 네 발의 발등상으로 둘 때까지 내 우편에 앉았으라 하셨도다 하였느니라	Till I make thine enemies thy footstool.	until I make Your enemies a footstool for Your feet.”’
LUK	20	44	그런즉 다윗이 그리스도를 주라 칭하였으니 어찌 그의 자손이 되겠느뇨 하시니라	David therefore calleth him Lord, how is he then his son?	Thus David calls Him ‘Lord.’ So how can He be David’s son?”
LUK	20	45	모든 백성이 들을 때에 예수께서 그 제자들에게 이르시되	Then in the audience of all the people he said unto his disciples,	In the hearing of all the people, Jesus said to His disciples,
LUK	20	46	긴 옷을 입고 다니는 것을 원하며 시장에서 문안 받는 것과 회당의 상좌와 잔치의 상석을 좋아하는 서기관들을 삼가라	Beware of the scribes, which desire to walk in long robes, and love greetings in the markets, and the highest seats in the synagogues, and the chief rooms at feasts;	“Beware of the scribes. They like to walk around in long robes, and they love the greetings in the marketplaces, the chief seats in the synagogues, and the places of honor at banquets.
LUK	20	47	저희는 과부의 가산을 삼키며 외식으로 길게 기도하니 그 받는 판결이 더욱 중하리라 하시니라	Which devour widows’ houses, and for a shew make long prayers: the same shall receive greater damnation.	They defraud widows of their houses, and for a show make lengthy prayers. These men will receive greater condemnation.”
LUK	21	1	예수께서 눈을 들어 부자들이 연보궤에 헌금 넣는 것을 보시고	And he looked up, and saw the rich men casting their gifts into the treasury.	Then Jesus looked up and saw the rich putting their gifts into the treasury,
LUK	21	2	또 어떤 가난한 과부의 두 렙돈 넣는 것을 보시고	And he saw also a certain poor widow casting in thither two mites.	and He saw a poor widow put in two small copper coins.
LUK	21	3	가라사대 내가 참으로 너희에게 말하노니 이 가난한 과부가 모든 사람보다 많이 넣었도다	And he said, Of a truth I say unto you, that this poor widow hath cast in more than they all:	“Truly I tell you,” He said, “this poor widow has put in more than all the others.
LUK	21	4	저들은 그 풍족한 중에서 헌금을 넣었거니와 이 과부는 그 구차한 중에서 자기의 있는 바 생활비 전부를 넣었느니라 하시니라	For all these have of their abundance cast in unto the offerings of God: but she of her penury hath cast in all the living that she had.	For they all contributed out of their surplus, but she out of her poverty has put in all she had to live on.”
LUK	21	5	어떤 사람들이 성전을 가리켜 그 미석과 헌물로 꾸민 것을 말하매 예수께서 가라사대	And as some spake of the temple, how it was adorned with goodly stones and gifts, he said,	As some of the disciples were remarking how the temple was adorned with beautiful stones and consecrated gifts, Jesus said,
LUK	21	6	너희 보는 이것들이 날이 이르면 돌 하나도 돌 위에 남지 않고 다 무너뜨리우리라	As for these things which ye behold, the days will come, in the which there shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down.	“As for what you see here, the time will come when not one stone will be left on another; every one will be thrown down.”
LUK	21	7	저희가 물어 가로되 선생님이여 그러면 어느 때에 이런 일이 있겠사오며 이런 일이 이루려 할 때에 무슨 징조가 있사오리이까	And they asked him, saying, Master, but when shall these things be? and what sign will there be when these things shall come to pass?	“Teacher,” they asked, “when will these things happen? And what will be the sign that they are about to take place?”
LUK	21	8	가라사대 미혹을 받지 않도록 주의하라 많은 사람이 내 이름으로 와서 이르되 내가 그로라 하며 때가 가까웠다 하겠으나 저희를 좇지 말라	And he said, Take heed that ye be not deceived: for many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ; and the time draweth near: go ye not therefore after them.	Jesus answered, “See to it that you are not deceived. For many will come in My name, claiming, ‘I am He,’ and, ‘The time is near.’ Do not follow them.
LUK	21	9	난리와 소란의 소문을 들을 때에 두려워 말라 이 일이 먼저 있어야 하되 끝은 곧 되지 아니하니라	But when ye shall hear of wars and commotions, be not terrified: for these things must first come to pass; but the end is not by and by.	When you hear of wars and rebellions, do not be alarmed. These things must happen first, but the end is not imminent.”
LUK	21	10	또 이르시되 민족이 민족을, 나라가 나라를 대적하여 일어나겠고	Then said he unto them, Nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom:	Then He told them, “Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.
LUK	21	11	처처에 큰 지진과 기근과 온역이 있겠고 또 무서운 일과 하늘로서 큰 징조들이 있으리라	And great earthquakes shall be in divers places, and famines, and pestilences; and fearful sights and great signs shall there be from heaven.	There will be great earthquakes, famines, and pestilences in various places, along with fearful sights and great signs from heaven.
LUK	21	12	이 모든 일 전에 내 이름을 인하여 너희에게 손을 대어 핍박하며 회당과 옥에 넘겨주며 임금들과 관장들 앞에 끌어 가려니와	But before all these, they shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for my name’s sake.	But before all this, they will seize you and persecute you. On account of My name they will deliver you to the synagogues and prisons, and they will bring you before kings and governors.
LUK	21	13	이 일이 도리어 너희에게 증거가 되리라	And it shall turn to you for a testimony.	This will be your opportunity to serve as witnesses.
LUK	21	14	그러므로 너희는 변명할 것을 미리 연구치 않기로 결심하라	Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall answer:	So make up your mind not to worry beforehand how to defend yourselves.
LUK	21	15	내가 너희의 모든 대적이 능히 대항하거나 변박할 수 없는 구재와 지혜를 너희에게 주리라	For I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor resist.	For I will give you speech and wisdom that none of your adversaries will be able to resist or contradict.
LUK	21	16	심지어 부모와 형제와 친척과 벗이 너희를 넘겨주어 너희 중에 몇을 죽이게 하겠고	And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolks, and friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to death.	You will be betrayed even by parents and brothers and relatives and friends, and some of you will be put to death.
LUK	21	17	또 너희가 내 이름을 인하여 모든 사람에게 미움을 받을 것이나	And ye shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake.	And you will be hated by everyone because of My name.
LUK	21	18	너희 머리털 하나도 상치 아니하리라	But there shall not an hair of your head perish.	Yet not even a hair of your head will perish.
LUK	21	19	너희의 인내로 너희 영혼을 얻으리라	In your patience possess ye your souls.	By your patient endurance you will gain your souls.
LUK	21	20	너희가 예루살렘이 군대들에게 에워싸이는 것을 보거든 그 멸망이 가까운 줄을 알라	And when ye shall see Jerusalem compassed with armies, then know that the desolation thereof is nigh.	But when you see Jerusalem surrounded by armies, you will know that her desolation is near.
LUK	21	21	그 때에 유대에 있는 자들은 산으로 도망할지며 성내에 있는 자들은 나갈지며 촌에 있는 자들은 그리로 들어가지 말지어다	Then let them which are in Judea flee to the mountains; and let them which are in the midst of it depart out; and let not them that are in the countries enter thereinto.	Then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains, let those in the city get out, and let those in the country stay out of the city.
LUK	21	22	이 날들은 기록된 모든 것을 이루는 형벌의 날이니라	For these be the days of vengeance, that all things which are written may be fulfilled.	For these are the days of vengeance, to fulfill all that is written.
LUK	21	23	그 날에는 아이 밴 자들과 젖먹이는 자들에게 화가 있으리니 이는 땅에 큰 환난과 이 백성에게 진노가 있겠음이로다	But woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck, in those days! for there shall be great distress in the land, and wrath upon this people.	How miserable those days will be for pregnant and nursing mothers! For there will be great distress upon the land and wrath against this people.
LUK	21	24	저희가 칼날에 죽임을 당하며 모든 이방에 사로잡혀 가겠고 예루살렘은 이방인의 때가 차기까지 이방인들에게 밟히리라	And they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive into all nations: and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.	They will fall by the edge of the sword and be led captive into all the nations. And Jerusalem will be trodden down by the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled.
LUK	21	25	일월 성신에는 징조가 있겠고 땅에서는 민족들이 바다와 파도의 우는 소리를 인하여 혼란한 중에 곤고하리라	And there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars; and upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity; the sea and the waves roaring;	There will be signs in the sun and moon and stars, and on the earth dismay among the nations, bewildered by the roaring of the sea and the surging of the waves.
LUK	21	26	사람들이 세상에 임할 일을 생각하고 무서워하므로 기절하리니 이는 하늘의 권능들이 흔들리겠음이라	Men’s hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth: for the powers of heaven shall be shaken.	Men will faint from fear and anxiety over what is coming upon the earth, for the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
LUK	21	27	그 때에 사람들이 인자가 구름을 타고 능력과 큰 영광으로 오는 것을 보리라	And then shall they see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.	At that time they will see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.
LUK	21	28	이런 일이 되기를 시작하거든 일어나 머리를 들라 너희 구속이 가까웠느니라 하시더라	And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your heads; for your redemption draweth nigh.	When these things begin to happen, stand up and lift up your heads, because your redemption is drawing near.”
LUK	21	29	이에 비유로 이르시되 무화과나무와 모든 나무를 보라	And he spake to them a parable; Behold the fig tree, and all the trees;	Then Jesus told them a parable: “Look at the fig tree and all the trees.
LUK	21	30	싹이 나면 너희가 보고 여름이 가까운 줄을 자연히 아나니	When they now shoot forth, ye see and know of your own selves that summer is now nigh at hand.	When they sprout leaves, you can see for yourselves and know that summer is near.
LUK	21	31	이와 같이 너희가 이런 일이 나는 것을 보거든 하나님의 나라가 가까운 줄을 알라	So likewise ye, when ye see these things come to pass, know ye that the kingdom of God is nigh at hand.	So also, when you see these things happening, know that the kingdom of God is near.
LUK	21	32	내가 진실로 너희에게 말하노니 이 세대가 지나가기 전에 모든 일이 다 이루리라	Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not pass away, till all be fulfilled.	Truly I tell you, this generation will not pass away until all these things have happened.
LUK	21	33	천지는 없어지겠으나 내 말은 없어지지 아니하리라	Heaven and earth shall pass away: but my words shall not pass away.	Heaven and earth will pass away, but My words will never pass away.
LUK	21	34	너희는 스스로 조심하라 그렇지 않으면 방탕함과 술취함과 생활의 염려로 마음이 둔하여지고 뜻밖에 그 날이 덫과 같이 너희에게 임하리라	And take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares.	But watch yourselves, or your hearts will be weighed down by dissipation, drunkenness, and the worries of life—and that day will spring upon you suddenly like a snare.
LUK	21	35	이 날은 온 지구상에 거하는 모든 사람에게 임하리라	For as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole earth.	For it will come upon all who dwell on the face of all the earth.
LUK	21	36	이러므로 너희는 장차 올 이 모든 일을 능히 피하고 인자 앞에 서도록 항상 기도하며 깨어 있으라 하시니라	Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man.	So keep watch at all times, and pray that you may have the strength to escape all that is about to happen and to stand before the Son of Man.”
LUK	21	37	예수께서 낮이면 성전에서 가르치시고 밤이면 나가 감람원이라 하는 산에서 쉬시니	And in the day time he was teaching in the temple; and at night he went out, and abode in the mount that is called the mount of Olives.	Every day Jesus taught at the temple, but every evening He went out to spend the night on the Mount of Olives.
LUK	21	38	모든 백성이 그 말씀을 들으려고 이른 아침에 성전에 나아가더라	And all the people came early in the morning to him in the temple, for to hear him.	And early in the morning all the people would come to hear Him at the temple.
LUK	22	1	유월절이라 하는 무교절이 가까우매	Now the feast of unleavened bread drew nigh, which is called the Passover.	Now the Feast of Unleavened Bread, called the Passover, was approaching,
LUK	22	2	대제사장들과 서기관들이 예수를 무슨 방책으로 죽일꼬 연구하니 이는 저희가 백성을 두려워함이더라	And the chief priests and scribes sought how they might kill him; for they feared the people.	and the chief priests and scribes were looking for a way to put Jesus to death; for they feared the people.
LUK	22	3	열둘 중에 하나인 가룟인이라 부르는 유다에게 사단이 들어가니	Then entered Satan into Judas surnamed Iscariot, being of the number of the twelve.	Then Satan entered Judas Iscariot, who was one of the Twelve.
LUK	22	4	이에 유다가 대제사장들과 군관들에게 가서 예수를 넘겨 줄 방책을 의논하매	And he went his way, and communed with the chief priests and captains, how he might betray him unto them.	And Judas went to discuss with the chief priests and temple officers how he might betray Jesus to them.
LUK	22	5	저희가 기뻐하여 돈을 주기로 언약하는지라	And they were glad, and covenanted to give him money.	They were delighted and agreed to give him money.
LUK	22	6	유다가 허락하고 예수를 무리가 없을 때에 넘겨 줄 기회를 찾더라	And he promised, and sought opportunity to betray him unto them in the absence of the multitude.	Judas consented, and began to look for an opportunity to betray Jesus to them in the absence of a crowd.
LUK	22	7	유월절 양을 잡을 무교절일이 이른지라	Then came the day of unleavened bread, when the passover must be killed.	Then came the day of Unleavened Bread on which the Passover lamb was to be sacrificed.
LUK	22	8	예수께서 베드로와 요한을 보내시며 가라사대 가서 우리를 위하여 유월절을 예비하여 우리로 먹게 하라	And he sent Peter and John, saying, Go and prepare us the passover, that we may eat.	Jesus sent Peter and John, saying, “Go and prepare for us to eat the Passover.”
LUK	22	9	여짜오되 어디서 예비하기를 원하시나이까	And they said unto him, Where wilt thou that we prepare?	“Where do You want us to prepare it?” they asked.
LUK	22	10	이르시되 보라 너희가 성내로 들어가면 물 한 동이를 가지고 가는 사람을 만나리니 그의 들어가는 집으로 따라 들어가서	And he said unto them, Behold, when ye are entered into the city, there shall a man meet you, bearing a pitcher of water; follow him into the house where he entereth in.	He answered, “When you enter the city, a man carrying a jug of water will meet you. Follow him to the house he enters,
LUK	22	11	그 집 주인에게 이르되 선생님이 네게 하는 말씀이 내가 내 제자들과 함께 유월절을 먹을 객실이 어디 있느뇨 하시더라 하라	And ye shall say unto the goodman of the house, The Master saith unto thee, Where is the guestchamber, where I shall eat the passover with my disciples?	and say to the owner of that house, ‘The Teacher asks: Where is the guest room, where I may eat the Passover with My disciples?’
LUK	22	12	그리하면 저가 자리를 베푼 큰 다락방을 보이리니 거기서 예비하라 하신대	And he shall shew you a large upper room furnished: there make ready.	And he will show you a large upper room, already furnished. Make preparations there.”
LUK	22	13	저희가 나가 그 하시던 말씀대로 만나 유월절을 예비하니라	And they went, and found as he had said unto them: and they made ready the passover.	So they went and found it just as Jesus had told them. And they prepared the Passover.
LUK	22	14	때가 이르매 예수께서 사도들과 함께 앉으사	And when the hour was come, he sat down, and the twelve apostles with him.	When the hour had come, Jesus reclined at the table with His apostles.
LUK	22	15	이르시되 내가 고난을 받기 전에 너희와 함께 이 유월절 먹기를 원하고 원하였노라	And he said unto them, With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer:	And He said to them, “I have eagerly desired to eat this Passover with you before My suffering.
LUK	22	16	내가 너희에게 이르노니 이 유월절이 하나님의 나라에서 이루기까지 다시 먹지 아니하리라 하시고	For I say unto you, I will not any more eat thereof, until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God.	For I tell you that I will not eat it again until it is fulfilled in the kingdom of God.”
LUK	22	17	이에 잔을 받으사 사례하시고 가라사대 이것을 갖다가 너희끼리 나누라	And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and said, Take this, and divide it among yourselves:	After taking the cup, He gave thanks and said, “Take this and divide it among yourselves.
LUK	22	18	내가 너희에게 이르노니 내가 이제부터 하나님의 나라가 임할 때까지 포도나무에서 난 것을 다시 마시지 아니하리라 하시고	For I say unto you, I will not drink of the fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of God shall come.	For I tell you that I will not drink of the fruit of the vine from now on until the kingdom of God comes.”
LUK	22	19	또 떡을 가져 사례하시고 떼어 저희에게 주시며 가라사대 이것은 너희를 위하여 주는 내 몸이라 너희가 이를 행하여 나를 기념하라 하시고	And he took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them, saying, This is my body which is given for you: this do in remembrance of me.	And He took the bread, gave thanks and broke it, and gave it to them, saying, “This is My body, given for you; do this in remembrance of Me.”
LUK	22	20	저녁 먹은 후에 잔도 이와 같이 하여 가라사대 이 잔은 내 피로 세우는 새 언약이니 곧 너희를 위하여 붓는 것이라	Likewise also the cup after supper, saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood, which is shed for you.	In the same way, after supper He took the cup, saying, “This cup is the new covenant in My blood, which is poured out for you.
LUK	22	21	그러나 보라 나를 파는 자의 손이 나와 함께 상 위에 있도다	But, behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the table.	Look! The hand of My betrayer is with Mine on the table.
LUK	22	22	인자는 이미 작정된 대로 가거니와 그를 파는 그 사람에게는 화가 있으리로다 하시니	And truly the Son of man goeth, as it was determined: but woe unto that man by whom he is betrayed!	Indeed, the Son of Man will go as it has been determined, but woe to that man who betrays Him.”
LUK	22	23	저희가 서로 묻되 우리 중에서 이 일을 행할 자가 누구일까 하더라	And they began to enquire among themselves, which of them it was that should do this thing.	Then they began to question among themselves which of them was going to do this.
LUK	22	24	또 저희 사이에 그 중 누가 크냐 하는 다툼이 난지라	And there was also a strife among them, which of them should be accounted the greatest.	A dispute also arose among the disciples as to which of them would be considered the greatest.
LUK	22	25	예수께서 이르시되 이방인의 임금들은 저희를 주관하며 그 집권자들은 은인이라 칭함을 받으나	And he said unto them, The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them; and they that exercise authority upon them are called benefactors.	So Jesus declared, “The kings of the Gentiles lord it over them, and those in authority over them call themselves benefactors.
LUK	22	26	너희는 그렇지 않을지니 너희 중에 큰 자는 젊은 자와 같고 두목은 섬기는 자와 같을지니라	But ye shall not be so: but he that is greatest among you, let him be as the younger; and he that is chief, as he that doth serve.	But you shall not be like them. Instead, the greatest among you should be like the youngest, and the one who leads like the one who serves.
LUK	22	27	앉아서 먹는 자가 크냐 섬기는 자가 크냐 앉아 먹는 자가 아니냐 그러나 나는 섬기는 자로 너희 중에 있노라	For whether is greater, he that sitteth at meat, or he that serveth? is not he that sitteth at meat? but I am among you as he that serveth.	For who is greater, the one who reclines at the table or the one who serves? Is it not the one who reclines? But I am among you as one who serves.
LUK	22	28	너희는 나의 모든 시험 중에 항상 나와 함께 한 자들인즉	Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations.	You are the ones who have stood by Me in My trials.
LUK	22	29	내 아버지께서 나라를 내게 맡기신 것 같이 나도 너희에게 맡겨	And I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father hath appointed unto me;	And I bestow on you a kingdom, just as My Father has bestowed one on Me,
LUK	22	30	너희로 내 나라에 있어 내 상에서 먹고 마시며 또는 보좌에 앉아 이스라엘 열두 지파를 다스리게 하려 하노라	That ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.	so that you may eat and drink at My table in My kingdom, and sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
LUK	22	31	시몬아, 시몬아, 보라 사단이 밀 까부르듯 하려고 너희를 청구하였으나	And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan hath desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat:	Simon, Simon, Satan has asked to sift each of you like wheat.
LUK	22	32	그러나 내가 너를 위하여 네 믿음이 떨어지지 않기를 기도하였노니 너는 돌이킨 후에 네 형제를 굳게 하라	But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: and when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.	But I have prayed for you, Simon, that your faith will not fail. And when you have turned back, strengthen your brothers.”
LUK	22	33	저가 말하되 주여 내가 주와 함께 옥에도, 죽는 데도 가기를 준비하였나이다	And he said unto him, Lord, I am ready to go with thee, both into prison, and to death.	“Lord,” said Peter, “I am ready to go with You even to prison and to death.”
LUK	22	34	가라사대 베드로야 내가 네게 말하노니 오늘 닭 울기 전에 네가 세 번 나를 모른다고 부인하리라 하시니라	And he said, I tell thee, Peter, the cock shall not crow this day, before that thou shalt thrice deny that thou knowest me.	But Jesus replied, “I tell you, Peter, the rooster will not crow today until you have denied three times that you know Me.”
LUK	22	35	저희에게 이르시되 내가 너희를 전대와 주머니와 신도 없이 보내었을 때에 부족한 것이 있더냐 가로되 없었나이다	And he said unto them, When I sent you without purse, and scrip, and shoes, lacked ye any thing? And they said, Nothing.	Then Jesus asked them, “When I sent you out without purse or bag or sandals, did you lack anything?” “Nothing,” they answered.
LUK	22	36	이르시되 이제는 전대 있는 자는 가질 것이요 주머니도 그리하고 검 없는 자는 겉옷을 팔아 살지어다	Then said he unto them, But now, he that hath a purse, let him take it, and likewise his scrip: and he that hath no sword, let him sell his garment, and buy one.	“Now, however,” He told them, “the one with a purse should take it, and likewise a bag; and the one without a sword should sell his cloak and buy one.
LUK	22	37	내가 너희에게 말하노니 기록된 바 저는 불법자의 동류로 여김을 받았다 한 말이 내게 이루어져야 하리니 내게 관한 일이 이루어 감이니라	For I say unto you, that this that is written must yet be accomplished in me, And he was reckoned among the transgressors: for the things concerning me have an end.	For I tell you that this Scripture must be fulfilled in Me: ‘And He was numbered with the transgressors.’ For what is written about Me is reaching its fulfillment.”
LUK	22	38	저희가 여짜오되 주여 보소서 여기 검 둘이 있나이다 대답하시되 족하다 하시니라	And they said, Lord, behold, here are two swords. And he said unto them, It is enough.	So they said, “Look, Lord, here are two swords.” “That is enough,” He answered.
LUK	22	39	예수께서 나가사 습관을 좇아 감람 산에 가시매 제자들도 좇았더니	And he came out, and went, as he was wont, to the mount of Olives; and his disciples also followed him.	Jesus went out as usual to the Mount of Olives, and the disciples followed Him.
LUK	22	40	그곳에 이르러 저희에게 이르시되 시험에 들지 않기를 기도하라 하시고	And when he was at the place, he said unto them, Pray that ye enter not into temptation.	When He came to the place, He told them, “Pray that you will not enter into temptation.”
LUK	22	41	저희를 떠나 돌 던질 만큼 가서 무릎을 꿇고 기도하여	And he was withdrawn from them about a stone’s cast, and kneeled down, and prayed,	And He withdrew about a stone’s throw beyond them, where He knelt down and prayed,
LUK	22	42	가라사대 아버지여 만일 아버지의 뜻이어든 이 잔을 내게서 옮기시옵소서 그러나 내 원대로 마옵시고 아버지의 원대로 되기를 원하나이다 하시니	Saying, Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done.	“Father, if You are willing, take this cup from Me. Yet not My will, but Yours be done.”
LUK	22	43	사자가 하늘로부터 예수께 나타나 힘을 돕더라	And there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him.	Then an angel from heaven appeared to Him and strengthened Him.
LUK	22	44	예수께서 힘쓰고 애써 더욱 간절히 기도하시니 땀이 땅에 떨어지는 핏방울 같이 되더라	And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly: and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground.	And in His anguish, He prayed more earnestly, and His sweat became like drops of blood falling to the ground.
LUK	22	45	기도 후에 일어나 제자들에게 가서 슬픔을 인하여 잠든 것을 보시고	And when he rose up from prayer, and was come to his disciples, he found them sleeping for sorrow,	When Jesus rose from prayer and returned to the disciples, He found them asleep, exhausted from sorrow.
LUK	22	46	이르시되 어찌하여 자느냐 시험에 들지 않게 일어나 기도하라 하시니라	And said unto them, Why sleep ye? rise and pray, lest ye enter into temptation.	“Why are you sleeping?” He asked. “Get up and pray so that you will not enter into temptation.”
LUK	22	47	말씀하실 때에 한 무리가 오는데 열둘 중에 하나인 유다라 하는 자가 그들의 앞에 서서 와서	And while he yet spake, behold a multitude, and he that was called Judas, one of the twelve, went before them, and drew near unto Jesus to kiss him.	While He was still speaking, a crowd arrived, led by the man called Judas, one of the Twelve. He approached Jesus to kiss Him.
LUK	22	48	예수께 입을 맞추려고 가까이 하는지라 예수께서 이르시되 유다야 네가 입맞춤으로 인자를 파느냐 하시니	But Jesus said unto him, Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss?	But Jesus asked him, “Judas, are you betraying the Son of Man with a kiss?”
LUK	22	49	좌우가 그 될 일을 보고 여짜오되 주여 우리가 검으로 치리이까 하고	When they which were about him saw what would follow, they said unto him, Lord, shall we smite with the sword?	Those around Jesus saw what was about to happen and said, “Lord, should we strike with our swords?”
LUK	22	50	그 중에 한 사람이 대제사장의 종을 쳐 그 오른편 귀를 떨어뜨린지라	And one of them smote the servant of the high priest, and cut off his right ear.	And one of them struck the servant of the high priest, cutting off his right ear.
LUK	22	51	예수께서 일러 가라사대 이것까지 참으라 하시고 그 귀를 만져 낫게 하시더라	And Jesus answered and said, Suffer ye thus far. And he touched his ear, and healed him.	But Jesus answered, “No more of this!” And He touched the man’s ear and healed him.
LUK	22	52	예수께서 그 잡으러 온 대제사장들과 성전의 군관들과 장로들에게 이르시되 너희가 강도를 잡는 것 같이 검과 몽치를 가지고 나왔느냐	Then Jesus said unto the chief priests, and captains of the temple, and the elders, which were come to him, Be ye come out, as against a thief, with swords and staves?	Then Jesus said to the chief priests, temple officers, and elders who had come for Him, “Have you come out with swords and clubs as you would against an outlaw?
LUK	22	53	내가 날마다 너희와 함께 성전에 있을 때에 내게 손을 대지 아니하였도다 그러나 이제는 너희 때요 어두움의 권세로다 하시더라	When I was daily with you in the temple, ye stretched forth no hands against me: but this is your hour, and the power of darkness.	Every day I was with you in the temple courts, and you did not lay a hand on Me. But this hour belongs to you and to the power of darkness.”
LUK	22	54	예수를 잡아 끌고 대제사장의 집으로 들어갈새 베드로가 멀찍이 따라가니라	Then took they him, and led him, and brought him into the high priest’s house. And Peter followed afar off.	Then they seized Jesus, led Him away, and took Him into the house of the high priest. And Peter followed at a distance.
LUK	22	55	사람들이 뜰 가운데 불을 피우고 함께 앉았는지라 베드로도 그 가운데 앉았더니	And when they had kindled a fire in the midst of the hall, and were set down together, Peter sat down among them.	When those present had kindled a fire in the middle of the courtyard and sat down together, Peter sat down among them.
LUK	22	56	한 비자가 베드로의 불빛을 향하여 앉은 것을 보고 주목하여 가로되 이 사람도 그와 함께 있었느니라 하니	But a certain maid beheld him as he sat by the fire, and earnestly looked upon him, and said, This man was also with him.	A servant girl saw him seated in the firelight and looked intently at him. “This man also was with Him,” she said.
LUK	22	57	베드로가 부인하여 가로되 이 여자여 내가 저를 알지 못하노라 하더라	And he denied him, saying, Woman, I know him not.	But Peter denied it. “Woman, I do not know Him,” he said.
LUK	22	58	조금 후에 다른 사람이 보고 가로되 너도 그 당이라 하거늘 베드로가 가로되 이 사람아 나는 아니로라 하더라	And after a little while another saw him, and said, Thou art also of them. And Peter said, Man, I am not.	A short time later, someone else saw him and said, “You also are one of them.” But Peter said, “Man, I am not.”
LUK	22	59	한 시쯤 있다가 또 한 사람이 장담하여 가로되 이는 갈릴리 사람이니 참으로 그와 함께 있었느니라	And about the space of one hour after another confidently affirmed, saying, Of a truth this fellow also was with him: for he is a Galilean.	About an hour later, another man insisted, “Certainly this man was with Him, for he too is a Galilean.”
LUK	22	60	베드로가 가로되 이 사람아 나는 너 하는 말을 알지 못하노라고 방금 말할 때에 닭이 곧 울더라	And Peter said, Man, I know not what thou sayest. And immediately, while he yet spake, the cock crew.	“Man, I do not know what you are talking about,” Peter replied. While he was still speaking, the rooster crowed.
LUK	22	61	주께서 돌이켜 베드로를 보시니 베드로가 주의 말씀 곧 오늘 닭 울기 전에 네가 세 번 나를 부인하리라 하심이 생각나서	And the Lord turned, and looked upon Peter. And Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how he had said unto him, Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice.	And the Lord turned and looked at Peter. Then Peter remembered the word that the Lord had spoken to him: “Before the rooster crows today, you will deny Me three times.”
LUK	22	62	밖에 나가서 심히 통곡하니라	And Peter went out, and wept bitterly.	And he went outside and wept bitterly.
LUK	22	63	지키는 사람들이 예수를 희롱하고 때리며	And the men that held Jesus mocked him, and smote him.	The men who were holding Jesus began to mock Him and beat Him.
LUK	22	64	그의 눈을 가리우고 물어 가로되 선지자 노릇 하라 너를 친 자가 누구냐 하고	And when they had blindfolded him, they struck him on the face, and asked him, saying, Prophesy, who is it that smote thee?	They blindfolded Him and kept demanding, “Prophesy! Who hit You?”
LUK	22	65	이 외에도 많은 말로 욕하더라	And many other things blasphemously spake they against him.	And they said many other blasphemous things against Him.
LUK	22	66	날이 새매 백성의 장로들 곧 대제사장들과 서기관들이 모이어 예수를 그 공회로 끌어들여	And as soon as it was day, the elders of the people and the chief priests and the scribes came together, and led him into their council, saying,	At daybreak the council of the elders of the people, both the chief priests and scribes, met together. They led Jesus into their Sanhedrin and said,
LUK	22	67	가로되 네가 그리스도여든 우리에게 말하라 대답하시되 내가 말할지라도 너희가 믿지 아니할 것이요	Art thou the Christ? tell us. And he said unto them, If I tell you, ye will not believe:	“If You are the Christ, tell us.” Jesus answered, “If I tell you, you will not believe.
LUK	22	68	내가 물어도 너희가 대답지 아니할 것이니라	And if I also ask you, ye will not answer me, nor let me go.	And if I ask you a question, you will not answer.
LUK	22	69	그러나 이제 후로는 인자가 하나님의 권능의 우편에 앉아 있으리라 하시니	Hereafter shall the Son of man sit on the right hand of the power of God.	But from now on the Son of Man will be seated at the right hand of the power of God.”
LUK	22	70	다 가로되 그러면 네가 하나님의 아들이냐 대답하시되 너희 말과 같이 내가 그니라	Then said they all, Art thou then the Son of God? And he said unto them, Ye say that I am.	So they all asked, “Are You then the Son of God?” He replied, “You say that I am.”
LUK	22	71	저희가 가로되 어찌 더 증거를 요구하리요 우리가 친히 그 입에서 들었노라 하더라	And they said, What need we any further witness? for we ourselves have heard of his own mouth.	“Why do we need any more testimony?” they declared. “We have heard it for ourselves from His own lips.”
LUK	23	1	무리가 다 일어나 예수를 빌라도에게 끌고 가서	And the whole multitude of them arose, and led him unto Pilate.	Then the whole council rose and led Jesus away to Pilate.
LUK	23	2	고소하여 가로되 우리가 이 사람을 보매 우리 백성을 미혹하고 가이사에게 세 바치는 것을 금하며 자칭 왕 그리스도라 하더이다 하니	And they began to accuse him, saying, We found this fellow perverting the nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Cesar, saying that he himself is Christ a King.	And they began to accuse Him, saying, “We found this man subverting our nation, forbidding payment of taxes to Caesar, and proclaiming Himself to be Christ, a King.”
LUK	23	3	빌라도가 예수께 물어 가로되 네가 유대인의 왕이냐 대답하여 가라사대 네 말이 옳도다	And Pilate asked him, saying, Art thou the King of the Jews? And he answered him and said, Thou sayest it.	So Pilate asked Him, “Are You the King of the Jews?” “You have said so,” Jesus replied.
LUK	23	4	빌라도가 대제사장들과 무리에게 이르되 내가 보니 이 사람에게 죄가 없도다 하니	Then said Pilate to the chief priests and to the people, I find no fault in this man.	Then Pilate said to the chief priests and the crowds, “I find no basis for a charge against this man.”
LUK	23	5	무리가 더욱 굳세게 말하되 저가 온 유대에서 가르치고 갈릴리에서부터 시작하여 여기까지 와서 백성을 소동케 하나이다	And they were the more fierce, saying, He stirreth up the people, teaching throughout all Jewry, beginning from Galilee to this place.	But they kept insisting, “He stirs up the people all over Judea with His teaching. He began in Galilee and has come all the way here.”
LUK	23	6	빌라도가 듣고 묻되 저가 갈릴리 사람이냐 하여	When Pilate heard of Galilee, he asked whether the man were a Galilean.	When Pilate heard this, he asked if the man was a Galilean.
LUK	23	7	헤롯의 관할에 속한 줄을 알고 헤롯에게 보내니 때에 헤롯이 예루살렘에 있더라	And as soon as he knew that he belonged unto Herod’s jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who himself also was at Jerusalem at that time.	And learning that Jesus was under Herod’s jurisdiction, he sent Him to Herod, who himself was in Jerusalem at that time.
LUK	23	8	헤롯이 예수를 보고 심히 기뻐하니 이는 그의 소문을 들었으므로 보고자 한 지 오래였고 또한 무엇이나 이적 행하심을 볼까 바랐던 연고러라	And when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceeding glad: for he was desirous to see him of a long season, because he had heard many things of him; and he hoped to have seen some miracle done by him.	When Herod saw Jesus, he was greatly pleased. He had wanted to see Him for a long time, because he had heard about Him and was hoping to see Him perform a miracle.
LUK	23	9	여러 말로 물으나 아무 말도 대답지 아니하시니	Then he questioned with him in many words; but he answered him nothing.	Herod questioned Jesus at great length, but He gave no answer.
LUK	23	10	대제사장들과 서기관들이 서서 힘써 고소하더라	And the chief priests and scribes stood and vehemently accused him.	Meanwhile, the chief priests and scribes stood there, vehemently accusing Him.
LUK	23	11	헤롯이 그 군병들과 함께 예수를 업신여기며 희롱하고 빛난 옷을 입혀 빌라도에게 도로 보내니	And Herod with his men of war set him at nought, and mocked him, and arrayed him in a gorgeous robe, and sent him again to Pilate.	And even Herod and his soldiers ridiculed and mocked Him. Dressing Him in a fine robe, they sent Him back to Pilate.
LUK	23	12	헤롯과 빌라도가 전에는 원수이었으나 당일에 서로 친구가 되니라	And the same day Pilate and Herod were made friends together: for before they were at enmity between themselves.	That day Herod and Pilate became friends; before this time they had been enemies.
LUK	23	13	빌라도가 대제사장들과 관원들과 백성을 불러 모으고	And Pilate, when he had called together the chief priests and the rulers and the people,	Then Pilate called together the chief priests, the rulers, and the people,
LUK	23	14	이르되 너희가 이 사람을 백성을 미혹하는 자라 하여 내게 끌어왔도다 보라 내가 너희 앞에서 사실하였으되 너희의 고소하는 일에 대하여 이 사람에게 죄를 찾지 못하였고	Said unto them, Ye have brought this man unto me, as one that perverteth the people: and, behold, I, having examined him before you, have found no fault in this man touching those things whereof ye accuse him:	and said to them, “You brought me this man as one who was inciting the people to rebellion. I have examined Him here in your presence and found Him not guilty of your charges against Him.
LUK	23	15	헤롯이 또한 그렇게 하여 저를 우리에게 도로 보내었도다 보라 저의 행한 것은 죽일 일이 없느니라	No, nor yet Herod: for I sent you to him; and, lo, nothing worthy of death is done unto him.	Neither has Herod, for he sent Him back to us. As you can see, He has done nothing deserving of death.
LUK	23	16	그러므로 때려서 놓겠노라	I will therefore chastise him, and release him.	Therefore I will punish Him and release Him.”
LUK	23	17		(For of necessity he must release one unto them at the feast.)	
LUK	23	18	무리가 일제히 소리질러 가로되 이 사람을 없이하고 바라바를 우리에게 놓아 주소서 하니	And they cried out all at once, saying, Away with this man, and release unto us Barabbas:	But they all cried out in unison: “Away with this man! Release Barabbas to us!”
LUK	23	19	이 바라바는 성중에서 일어난 민란과 살인을 인하여 옥에 갇힌 자러라	(Who for a certain sedition made in the city, and for murder, was cast into prison.)	(Barabbas had been imprisoned for an insurrection in the city, and for murder.)
LUK	23	20	빌라도는 예수를 놓고자 하여 다시 저희에게 말하되	Pilate therefore, willing to release Jesus, spake again to them.	Wanting to release Jesus, Pilate addressed them again,
LUK	23	21	저희는 소리질러 가로되 저를 십자가에 못 박게 하소서 십자가에 못 박게 하소서 하는지라	But they cried, saying, Crucify him, crucify him.	but they kept shouting, “Crucify Him! Crucify Him!”
LUK	23	22	빌라도가 세 번째 말하되 이 사람이 무슨 악한 일을 하였느냐 나는 그 죽일 죄를 찾지 못하였나니 때려서 놓으리라 한대	And he said unto them the third time, Why, what evil hath he done? I have found no cause of death in him: I will therefore chastise him, and let him go.	A third time he said to them, “What evil has this man done? I have found in Him no offense worthy of death. So after I punish Him, I will release Him.”
LUK	23	23	저희가 큰 소리로 재촉하여 십자가에 못 박기를 구하니 저희의 소리가 이긴지라	And they were instant with loud voices, requiring that he might be crucified. And the voices of them and of the chief priests prevailed.	But they were insistent, demanding with loud voices for Jesus to be crucified. And their clamor prevailed.
LUK	23	24	이에 빌라도가 저희의 구하는 대로 하기를 언도하고	And Pilate gave sentence that it should be as they required.	So Pilate sentenced that their demand be met.
LUK	23	25	저희의 구하는 자 곧 민란과 살인을 인하여 옥에 갇힌 자를 놓고 예수를 넘겨주어 저희 뜻대로 하게 하니라	And he released unto them him that for sedition and murder was cast into prison, whom they had desired; but he delivered Jesus to their will.	As they had requested, he released the one imprisoned for insurrection and murder, and handed Jesus over to their will.
LUK	23	26	저희가 예수를 끌고 갈 때에 시몬이라는 구레네 사람이 시골로서 오는 것을 잡아 그에게 십자가를 지워 예수를 좇게 하더라	And as they led him away, they laid hold upon one Simon, a Cyrenian, coming out of the country, and on him they laid the cross, that he might bear it after Jesus.	As the soldiers led Him away, they seized Simon of Cyrene on his way in from the country, and put the cross on him to carry behind Jesus.
LUK	23	27	또 백성과 및 그를 위하여 가슴을 치며 슬피 우는 여자의 큰 무리가 따라 오는지라	And there followed him a great company of people, and of women, which also bewailed and lamented him.	A great number of people followed Him, including women who kept mourning and wailing for Him.
LUK	23	28	예수께서 돌이켜 그들을 향하여 가라사대 예루살렘의 딸들아 나를 위하여 울지 말고 너희와 너희 자녀를 위하여 울라	But Jesus turning unto them said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for yourselves, and for your children.	But Jesus turned to them and said, “Daughters of Jerusalem, do not weep for Me, but weep for yourselves and for your children.
LUK	23	29	보라 날이 이르면 사람이 말하기를 수태 못하는 이와 해산하지 못한 배와 먹이지 못한 젖이 복이 있다 하리라	For, behold, the days are coming, in the which they shall say, Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never bare, and the paps which never gave suck.	Look, the days are coming when people will say, ‘Blessed are the barren women, the wombs that never bore, and breasts that never nursed!’
LUK	23	30	그 때에 사람이 산들을 대하여 우리 위에 무너지라 하며 작은 산들을 대하여 우리를 덮으라 하리라	Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us; and to the hills, Cover us.	At that time ‘they will say to the mountains, “Fall on us!” and to the hills, “Cover us!”’
LUK	23	31	푸른 나무에도 이같이 하거든 마른 나무에는 어떻게 되리요 하시니라	For if they do these things in a green tree, what shall be done in the dry?	For if men do these things while the tree is green, what will happen when it is dry?”
LUK	23	32	또 다른 두 행악자도 사형을 받게 되어 예수와 함께 끌려 가니라	And there were also two other, malefactors, led with him to be put to death.	Two others, who were criminals, were also led away to be executed with Jesus.
LUK	23	33	해골이라 하는 곳에 이르러 거기서 예수를 십자가에 못 박고 두 행악자도 그렇게 하니 하나는 우편에, 하나는 좌편에 있더라	And when they were come to the place, which is called Calvary, there they crucified him, and the malefactors, one on the right hand, and the other on the left.	When they came to the place called The Skull, they crucified Him there, along with the criminals, one on His right and the other on His left.
LUK	23	34	이에 예수께서 가라사대 아버지여 저희를 사하여 주옵소서 자기의 하는 것을 알지 못함이니이다 하시더라 저희가 그의 옷을 나눠 제비 뽑을새	Then said Jesus, Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do. And they parted his raiment, and cast lots.	Then Jesus said, “Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing.” And they divided up His garments by casting lots.
LUK	23	35	백성은 서서 구경하며 관원들도 비웃어 가로되 저가 남을 구원하였으니 만일 하나님의 택하신 자 그리스도여든 자기도 구원할지어다 하고	And the people stood beholding. And the rulers also with them derided him, saying, He saved others; let him save himself, if he be Christ, the chosen of God.	The people stood watching, and the rulers sneered at Him, saying, “He saved others; let Him save Himself if He is the Christ of God, the Chosen One.”
LUK	23	36	군병들도 희롱하면서 나아와 신포도주를 주며	And the soldiers also mocked him, coming to him, and offering him vinegar,	The soldiers also mocked Him and came up to offer Him sour wine.
LUK	23	37	가로되 네가 만일 유대인의 왕이어든 네가 너를 구원하라 하더라	And saying, If thou be the king of the Jews, save thyself.	“If You are the King of the Jews,” they said, “save Yourself!”
LUK	23	38	그의 위에 이는 유대인의 왕이라 쓴 패가 있더라	And a superscription also was written over him in letters of Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew, THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.	Above Him was posted an inscription: THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.
LUK	23	39	달린 행악자 중 하나는 비방하여 가로되 네가 그리스도가 아니냐 너와 우리를 구원하라 하되	And one of the malefactors which were hanged railed on him, saying, If thou be Christ, save thyself and us.	One of the criminals who hung there heaped abuse on Him. “Are You not the Christ?” he said. “Save Yourself and us!”
LUK	23	40	하나는 그 사람을 꾸짖어 가로되 네가 동일한 정죄를 받고서도 하나님을 두려워 아니하느냐	But the other answering rebuked him, saying, Dost not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation?	But the other one rebuked him, saying, “Do you not even fear God, since you are under the same judgment?
LUK	23	41	우리는 우리의 행한 일에 상당한 보응을 받는 것이니 이에 당연하거니와 이 사람의 행한 것은 옳지 않은 것이 없느니라 하고	And we indeed justly; for we receive the due reward of our deeds: but this man hath done nothing amiss.	We are punished justly, for we are receiving what our actions deserve. But this man has done nothing wrong.”
LUK	23	42	가로되 예수여 당신의 나라에 임하실 때에 나를 생각하소서 하니	And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou comest into thy kingdom.	Then he said, “Jesus, remember me when You come into Your kingdom!”
LUK	23	43	예수께서 이르시되 내가 진실로 네게 이르노니 오늘 네가 나와 함께 낙원에 있으리라 하시니라	And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, To day shalt thou be with me in paradise.	And Jesus said to him, “Truly I tell you, today you will be with Me in Paradise.”
LUK	23	44	때가 제육시쯤 되어 해가 빛을 잃고 온 땅에 어두움이 임하여 제구시까지 계속하며	And it was about the sixth hour, and there was a darkness over all the earth until the ninth hour.	It was now about the sixth hour, and darkness came over all the land until the ninth hour.
LUK	23	45	성소의 휘장이 한가운데가 찢어지더라	And the sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple was rent in the midst.	The sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple was torn down the middle.
LUK	23	46	예수께서 큰 소리로 불러 가라사대 아버지여 내 영혼을 아버지 손에 부탁하나이다 하고 이 말씀을 하신 후 운명하시다	And when Jesus had cried with a loud voice, he said, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit: and having said thus, he gave up the ghost.	Then Jesus called out in a loud voice, “Father, into Your hands I commit My Spirit.” And when He had said this, He breathed His last.
LUK	23	47	백부장이 그 된 일을 보고 하나님께 영광을 돌려 가로되 이 사람은 정녕 의인이었도다 하고	Now when the centurion saw what was done, he glorified God, saying, Certainly this was a righteous man.	When the centurion saw what had happened, he gave glory to God, saying, “Surely this was a righteous man.”
LUK	23	48	이를 구경하러 모인 무리도 그 된 일을 보고 다 가슴을 두드리며 돌아가고	And all the people that came together to that sight, beholding the things which were done, smote their breasts, and returned.	And when all the people who had gathered for this spectacle saw what had happened, they returned home beating their breasts.
LUK	23	49	예수의 아는 자들과 및 갈릴리로부터 따라온 여자들도 다 멀리 서서 이 일을 보니라	And all his acquaintance, and the women that followed him from Galilee, stood afar off, beholding these things.	But all those who knew Jesus, including the women who had followed Him from Galilee, stood at a distance watching these things.
LUK	23	50	공회 의원으로 선하고 의로운 요셉이라 하는 사람이 있으니	And, behold, there was a man named Joseph, a counsellor; and he was a good man, and a just:	Now there was a Council member named Joseph, a good and righteous man,
LUK	23	51	(저희의 결의와 행사에 가타 하지 아니한 자라) 그는 유대인의 동네 아리마대 사람이요 하나님의 나라를 기다리는 자러니	(The same had not consented to the counsel and deed of them;) he was of Arimathea, a city of the Jews: who also himself waited for the kingdom of God.	who had not consented to their decision or action. He was from the Judean town of Arimathea, and was waiting for the kingdom of God.
LUK	23	52	빌라도에게 가서 예수의 시체를 달라 하여	This man went unto Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus.	He went to Pilate to ask for the body of Jesus.
LUK	23	53	이를 내려 세마포로 싸고 아직 사람을 장사한 일이 없는 바위에 판 무덤에 넣어 두니	And he took it down, and wrapped it in linen, and laid it in a sepulchre that was hewn in stone, wherein never man before was laid.	Then he took it down, wrapped it in a linen cloth, and placed it in a tomb cut into the rock, where no one had yet been laid.
LUK	23	54	이 날은 예비일이요 안식일이 거의 되었더라	And that day was the preparation, and the sabbath drew on.	It was Preparation Day, and the Sabbath was beginning.
LUK	23	55	갈릴리에서 예수와 함께 온 여자들이 뒤를 좇아 그 무덤과 그의 시체를 어떻게 둔 것을 보고	And the women also, which came with him from Galilee, followed after, and beheld the sepulchre, and how his body was laid.	The women who had come with Jesus from Galilee followed, and they saw the tomb and how His body was placed.
LUK	23	56	돌아가 향품과 향유를 예비하더라 계명을 좇아 안식일에 쉬더라	And they returned, and prepared spices and ointments; and rested the sabbath day according to the commandment.	Then they returned to prepare spices and perfumes. And they rested on the Sabbath, according to the commandment.
LUK	24	1	안식 후 첫날 새벽에 이 여자들이 그 예비한 향품을 가지고 무덤에 가서	Now upon the first day of the week, very early in the morning, they came unto the sepulchre, bringing the spices which they had prepared, and certain others with them.	On the first day of the week, very early in the morning, the women came to the tomb, bringing the spices they had prepared.
LUK	24	2	돌이 무덤에서 굴려 옮기운 것을 보고	And they found the stone rolled away from the sepulchre.	They found the stone rolled away from the tomb,
LUK	24	3	들어가니 주 예수의 시체가 뵈지 아니하더라	And they entered in, and found not the body of the Lord Jesus.	but when they entered, they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus.
LUK	24	4	이를 인하여 근심할 때에 문득 찬란한 옷을 입은 두 사람이 곁에 섰는지라	And it came to pass, as they were much perplexed thereabout, behold, two men stood by them in shining garments:	While they were puzzling over this, suddenly two men in radiant apparel stood beside them.
LUK	24	5	여자들이 두려워 얼굴을 땅에 대니 두 사람이 이르되 어찌하여 산 자를 죽은 자 가운데서 찾느냐	And as they were afraid, and bowed down their faces to the earth, they said unto them, Why seek ye the living among the dead?	As the women bowed their faces to the ground in terror, the two men asked them, “Why do you look for the living among the dead?
LUK	24	6	여기 계시지 않고 살아나셨느니라 갈릴리에 계실 때에 너희에게 어떻게 말씀하신 것을 기억하라	He is not here, but is risen: remember how he spake unto you when he was yet in Galilee,	He is not here; He has risen! Remember how He told you while He was still in Galilee:
LUK	24	7	이르시기를 인자가 죄인의 손에 넘기워 십자가에 못 박히고 제삼일에 다시 살아나야 하리라 하셨느니라 한대	Saying, The Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again.	‘The Son of Man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and on the third day rise again.’”
LUK	24	8	저희가 예수의 말씀을 기억하고	And they remembered his words,	Then they remembered His words.
LUK	24	9	무덤에서 돌아가 이 모든 것을 열한 사도와 모든 다른 이에게 고하니	And returned from the sepulchre, and told all these things unto the eleven, and to all the rest.	And when they returned from the tomb, they reported all these things to the Eleven and to all the others.
LUK	24	10	(이 여자들은 막달라 마리아와 요안나와 야고보의 모친 마리아라 또 저희와 함께한 다른 여자들도 이것을 사도들에게 고하니라)	It was Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary the mother of James, and other women that were with them, which told these things unto the apostles.	It was Mary Magdalene, Joanna, Mary the mother of James, and the other women with them who told this to the apostles.
LUK	24	11	사도들은 저희 말이 허탄한듯이 뵈어 믿지 아니하나	And their words seemed to them as idle tales, and they believed them not.	But their words seemed like nonsense to them, and they did not believe the women.
LUK	24	12	베드로는 일어나 무덤에 달려가서 구푸려 들여다 보니 세마포만 보이는지라 그 된 일을 기이히 여기며 집으로 돌아가니라	Then arose Peter, and ran unto the sepulchre; and stooping down, he beheld the linen clothes laid by themselves, and departed, wondering in himself at that which was come to pass.	Peter, however, got up and ran to the tomb. And after bending down and seeing only the linen cloths, he went away, wondering to himself what had happened.
LUK	24	13	그 날에 저희 중 둘이 예루살렘에서 이십오 리 되는 엠마오라 하는 촌으로 가면서	And, behold, two of them went that same day to a village called Emmaus, which was from Jerusalem about threescore furlongs.	That same day two of them were going to a village called Emmaus, about seven miles from Jerusalem.
LUK	24	14	이 모든 된 일을 서로 이야기하더라	And they talked together of all these things which had happened.	They were talking with each other about everything that had happened.
LUK	24	15	저희가 서로 이야기하며 문의할 때에 예수께서 가까이 이르러 저희와 동행하시나	And it came to pass, that, while they communed together and reasoned, Jesus himself drew near, and went with them.	And as they talked and deliberated, Jesus Himself came up and walked along with them.
LUK	24	16	저희의 눈이 가리워져서 그인 줄 알아보지 못하거늘	But their eyes were holden that they should not know him.	But their eyes were kept from recognizing Him.
LUK	24	17	예수께서 이르시되 너희가 길 가면서 서로 주고 받고 하는 이야기가 무엇이냐 하시니 두 사람이 슬픈 빛을 띠고 머물러 서더라	And he said unto them, What manner of communications are these that ye have one to another, as ye walk, and are sad?	He asked them, “What are you discussing so intently as you walk along?” They stood still, with sadness on their faces.
LUK	24	18	그 한 사람인 글로바라 하는 자가 대답하여 가로되 당신이 예루살렘에 우거하면서 근일 거기서 된 일을 홀로 알지 못하느뇨	And the one of them, whose name was Cleopas, answering said unto him, Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and hast not known the things which are come to pass there in these days?	One of them, named Cleopas, asked Him, “Are You the only visitor to Jerusalem who does not know the things that have happened there in recent days?”
LUK	24	19	가라사대 무슨 일이뇨 가로되 나사렛 예수의 일이니 그는 하나님과 모든 백성 앞에서 말과 일에 능하신 선지자여늘	And he said unto them, What things? And they said unto him, Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, which was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people:	“What things?” He asked. “The events involving Jesus of Nazareth,” they answered. “This man was a prophet, powerful in speech and action before God and all the people.
LUK	24	20	우리 대제사장들과 관원들이 사형 판결에 넘겨 주어 십자가에 못 박았느니라	And how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him to be condemned to death, and have crucified him.	Our chief priests and rulers delivered Him up to the sentence of death, and they crucified Him.
LUK	24	21	우리는 이 사람이 이스라엘을 구속할 자라고 바랐노라 이뿐 아니라 이 일이 된 지가 사흘째요	But we trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel: and beside all this, to day is the third day since these things were done.	But we were hoping He was the One who would redeem Israel. And besides all this, it is the third day since these things took place.
LUK	24	22	또한 우리 중에 어떤 여자들이 우리로 놀라게 하였으니 이는 저희가 새벽에 무덤에 갔다가	Yea, and certain women also of our company made us astonished, which were early at the sepulchre;	Furthermore, some of our women astounded us. They were at the tomb early this morning,
LUK	24	23	그의 시체는 보지 못하고 와서 그가 살으셨다 하는 천사들의 나타남을 보았다 함이라	And when they found not his body, they came, saying, that they had also seen a vision of angels, which said that he was alive.	but they did not find His body. They came and told us they had seen a vision of angels, who said that Jesus was alive.
LUK	24	24	또 우리와 함께한 자 중에 두어 사람이 무덤에 가 과연 여자들의 말한 바와 같음을 보았으나 예수는 보지 못하였느니라 하거늘	And certain of them which were with us went to the sepulchre, and found it even so as the women had said: but him they saw not.	Then some of our companions went to the tomb and found it just as the women had described. But Him they did not see.”
LUK	24	25	가라사대 미련하고 선지자들의 말한 모든 것을 마음에 더디 믿는 자들이여	Then he said unto them, O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken:	Then Jesus said to them, “O foolish ones, how slow are your hearts to believe all that the prophets have spoken!
LUK	24	26	그리스도가 이런 고난을 받고 자기의 영광에 들어가야 할 것이 아니냐 하시고	Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?	Was it not necessary for the Christ to suffer these things and then to enter His glory?”
LUK	24	27	이에 모세와 및 모든 선지자의 글로 시작하여 모든 성경에 쓴 바 자기에 관한 것을 자세히 설명하시니라	And beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself.	And beginning with Moses and all the Prophets, He explained to them what was written in all the Scriptures about Himself.
LUK	24	28	저희의 가는 촌에 가까이 가매 예수는 더 가려 하는 것 같이 하시니	And they drew nigh unto the village, whither they went: and he made as though he would have gone further.	As they approached the village where they were headed, He seemed to be going farther.
LUK	24	29	저희가 강권하여 가로되 우리와 함께 유하사이다 때가 저물어 가고 날이 이미 기울었나이다 하니 이에 저희와 함께 유하러 들어가시니라	But they constrained him, saying, Abide with us: for it is toward evening, and the day is far spent. And he went in to tarry with them.	But they pleaded with Him, “Stay with us, for it is nearly evening and the day is almost over.” So He went in to stay with them.
LUK	24	30	저희와 함께 음식 잡수실 때에 떡을 가지사 축사하시고 떼어 저희에게 주시매	And it came to pass, as he sat at meat with them, he took bread, and blessed it, and brake, and gave to them.	While He was reclining at the table with them, He took bread, spoke a blessing and broke it, and gave it to them.
LUK	24	31	저희 눈이 밝아져 그인 줄 알아보더니 예수는 저희에게 보이지 아니하시는지라	And their eyes were opened, and they knew him; and he vanished out of their sight.	Then their eyes were opened and they recognized Jesus—and He disappeared from their sight.
LUK	24	32	저희가 서로 말하되 길에서 우리에게 말씀하시고 우리에게 성경을 풀어 주실 때에 우리 속에서 마음이 뜨겁지 아니하더냐 하고	And they said one to another, Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures?	They asked each other, “Were not our hearts burning within us as He spoke with us on the road and opened the Scriptures to us?”
LUK	24	33	곧 그 시로 일어나 예루살렘에 돌아가 보니 열한 사도와 및 그와 함께 한 자들이 모여 있어	And they rose up the same hour, and returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together, and them that were with them,	And they got up that very hour and returned to Jerusalem. There they found the Eleven and those with them, gathered together
LUK	24	34	말하기를 주께서 과연 살아나시고 시몬에게 나타나셨다 하는지라	Saying, The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon.	and saying, “The Lord has indeed risen and has appeared to Simon!”
LUK	24	35	두 사람도 길에서 된 일과 예수께서 떡을 떼심으로 자기들에게 알려지신 것을 말하더라	And they told what things were done in the way, and how he was known of them in breaking of bread.	Then the two told what had happened on the road, and how they had recognized Jesus in the breaking of the bread.
LUK	24	36	이 말을 할 때에 예수께서 친히 그 가운데 서서 가라사대 너희에게 평강이 있을지어다 하시니	And as they thus spake, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you.	While they were describing these events, Jesus Himself stood among them and said, “Peace be with you.”
LUK	24	37	저희가 놀라고 무서워하여 그 보는 것을 영으로 생각하는지라	But they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they had seen a spirit.	But they were startled and frightened, thinking they had seen a spirit.
LUK	24	38	예수께서 가라사대 어찌하여 두려워하며 어찌하여 마음에 의심이 일어나느냐	And he said unto them, Why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts?	“Why are you troubled,” Jesus asked, “and why do doubts arise in your hearts?
LUK	24	39	내 손과 발을 보고 나인 줄 알라 또 나를 만져보라 영은 살과 뼈가 없으되 너희 보는 바와 같이 나는 있느니라	Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.	Look at My hands and My feet. It is I Myself. Touch Me and see—for a spirit does not have flesh and bones, as you see I have.”
LUK	24	40	이 말씀을 하시고 손과 발을 보이시나	And when he had thus spoken, he shewed them his hands and his feet.	And when He had said this, He showed them His hands and feet.
LUK	24	41	저희가 너무 기쁘므로 오히려 믿지 못하고 기이히 여길 때에 이르시되 여기 무슨 먹을 것이 있느냐 하시니	And while they yet believed not for joy, and wondered, he said unto them, Have ye here any meat?	While they were still in disbelief because of their joy and amazement, He asked them, “Do you have anything here to eat?”
LUK	24	42	이에 구운 생선 한 토막을 드리매	And they gave him a piece of a broiled fish, and of an honeycomb.	So they gave Him a piece of broiled fish,
LUK	24	43	받으사 그 앞에서 잡수시더라	And he took it, and did eat before them.	and He took it and ate it in front of them.
LUK	24	44	또 이르시되 내가 너희와 함께 있을 때에 너희에게 말한 바 곧 모세의 율법과 선지자의 글과 시편에 나를 가리켜 기록된 모든 것이 이루어져야 하리라 한 말이 이것이라 하시고	And he said unto them, These are the words which I spake unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms, concerning me.	Jesus said to them, “These are the words I spoke to you while I was still with you: Everything must be fulfilled that is written about Me in the Law of Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms.”
LUK	24	45	이에 저희 마음을 열어 성경을 깨닫게 하시고	Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the scriptures,	Then He opened their minds to understand the Scriptures.
LUK	24	46	또 이르시되 이같이 그리스도가 고난을 받고 제삼일에 죽은 자 가운데서 살아날 것과	And said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day:	And He told them, “This is what is written: The Christ will suffer and rise from the dead on the third day,
LUK	24	47	또 그의 이름으로 죄 사함을 얻게 하는 회개가 예루살렘으로부터 시작하여 모든 족속에게 전파될 것이 기록되었으니	And that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.	and in His name repentance and forgiveness of sins will be proclaimed to all nations, beginning in Jerusalem.
LUK	24	48	너희는 이 모든 일의 증인이라	And ye are witnesses of these things.	You are witnesses of these things.
LUK	24	49	볼지어다 내가 내 아버지의 약속하신 것을 너희에게 보내리니 너희는 위로부터 능력을 입히울 때까지 이 성에 유하라 하시니라	And, behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you: but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on high.	And behold, I am sending the promise of My Father upon you. But remain in the city until you have been clothed with power from on high.”
LUK	24	50	예수께서 저희를 데리고 베다니 앞까지 나가사 손을 들어 저희에게 축복하시더니	And he led them out as far as to Bethany, and he lifted up his hands, and blessed them.	When Jesus had led them out as far as Bethany, He lifted up His hands and blessed them.
LUK	24	51	축복하실 때에 저희를 떠나 [하늘로 올리우]시니	And it came to pass, while he blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up into heaven.	While He was blessing them, He left them and was carried up into heaven.
LUK	24	52	저희가 [그에게 경배하고] 큰 기쁨으로 예루살렘에 돌아가	And they worshipped him, and returned to Jerusalem with great joy:	And they worshiped Him and returned to Jerusalem with great joy,
LUK	24	53	늘 성전에 있어 하나님을 찬송하니라	And were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God. Amen.	praising God continually in the temple.
JHN	1	1	태초에 말씀이 계시니라 이 말씀이 하나님과 함께 계셨으니 이 말씀은 곧 하나님이시니라	In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.	In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
JHN	1	2	그가 태초에 하나님과 함께 계셨고	The same was in the beginning with God.	He was with God in the beginning.
JHN	1	3	만물이 그로 말미암아 지은 바 되었으니 지은 것이 하나도 그가 없이는 된 것이 없느니라	All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made.	Through Him all things were made, and without Him nothing was made that has been made.
JHN	1	4	그 안에 생명이 있었으니 이 생명은 사람들의 빛이라	In him was life; and the life was the light of men.	In Him was life, and that life was the light of men.
JHN	1	5	빛이 어두움에 비취되 어두움이 깨닫지 못하더라	And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not.	The Light shines in the darkness, and the darkness has not overcome it.
JHN	1	6	하나님께로서 보내심을 받은 사람이 났으니 이름은 요한이라	There was a man sent from God, whose name was John.	There came a man who was sent from God. His name was John.
JHN	1	7	저가 증거하러 왔으니 곧 빛에 대하여 증거하고 모든 사람으로 자기를 인하여 믿게하려 함이라	The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light, that all men through him might believe.	He came as a witness to testify about the Light, so that through him everyone might believe.
JHN	1	8	그는 이 빛이 아니요 이 빛에 대하여 증거하러 온 자라	He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light.	He himself was not the Light, but he came to testify about the Light.
JHN	1	9	참 빛 곧 세상에 와서 각 사람에게 비취는 빛이 있었나니	That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world.	The true Light who gives light to every man was coming into the world.
JHN	1	10	그가 세상에 계셨으며 세상은 그로 말미암아 지은 바 되었으되 세상이 그를 알지 못하였고	He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not.	He was in the world, and though the world was made through Him, the world did not recognize Him.
JHN	1	11	자기 땅에 오매 자기 백성이 영접지 아니하였으나	He came unto his own, and his own received him not.	He came to His own, and His own did not receive Him.
JHN	1	12	영접하는 자 곧 그 이름을 믿는 자들에게는 하나님의 자녀가 되는 권세를 주셨으니	But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name:	But to all who did receive Him, to those who believed in His name, He gave the right to become children of God—
JHN	1	13	이는 혈통으로나 육정으로나 사람의 뜻으로 나지 아니하고 오직 하나님께로서 난 자들이니라	Which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.	children born not of blood, nor of the desire or will of man, but born of God.
JHN	1	14	말씀이 육신이 되어 우리 가운데 거하시매 우리가 그 영광을 보니 아버지의 독생자의 영광이요 은혜와 진리가 충만하더라	And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father,) full of grace and truth.	The Word became flesh and made His dwelling among us. We have seen His glory, the glory of the one and only Son from the Father, full of grace and truth.
JHN	1	15	요한이 그에 대하여 증거하여 외쳐 가로되 내가 전에 말하기를 내 뒤에 오시는 이가 나보다 앞선 것은 나보다 먼저 계심이니라 한 것이 이 사람을 가리킴이라 하니라	John bare witness of him, and cried, saying, This was he of whom I spake, He that cometh after me is preferred before me: for he was before me.	John testified concerning Him. He cried out, saying, “This is He of whom I said, ‘He who comes after me has surpassed me because He was before me.’”
JHN	1	16	우리가 다 그의 충만한 데서 받으니 은혜 위에 은혜러라	And of his fulness have all we received, and grace for grace.	From His fullness we have all received grace upon grace.
JHN	1	17	율법은 모세로 말미암아 주신 것이요 은혜와 진리는 예수 그리스도로 말미암아 온 것이라	For the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.	For the law was given through Moses; grace and truth came through Jesus Christ.
JHN	1	18	본래 하나님을 본 사람이 없으되 아버지 품 속에 있는 독생하신 하나님이 나타내셨느니라	No man hath seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him.	No one has ever seen God, but the one and only Son, who is Himself God and is at the Father’s side, has made Him known.
JHN	1	19	유대인들이 예루살렘에서 제사장들과 레위인들을 요한에게 보내어 네가 누구냐 물을 때에 요한의 증거가 이러하니라	And this is the record of John, when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, Who art thou?	And this was John’s testimony when the Jews of Jerusalem sent priests and Levites to ask him, “Who are you?”
JHN	1	20	요한이 드러내어 말하고 숨기지 아니하니 드러내어 하는 말이 나는 그리스도가 아니라 한대	And he confessed, and denied not; but confessed, I am not the Christ.	He did not refuse to confess, but openly declared, “I am not the Christ.”
JHN	1	21	또 묻되 그러면 무엇 네가 엘리야냐 가로되 나는 아니라 또 묻되 네가 그 선지자냐 대답하되 아니라	And they asked him, What then? Art thou Elias? And he saith, I am not. Art thou that prophet? And he answered, No.	“Then who are you?” they inquired. “Are you Elijah?” He said, “I am not.” “Are you the Prophet?” He answered, “No.”
JHN	1	22	또 말하되 누구냐 우리를 보낸 이들에게 대답하게 하라 너는 네게 대하여 무엇이라 하느냐	Then said they unto him, Who art thou? that we may give an answer to them that sent us. What sayest thou of thyself?	So they said to him, “Who are you? We need an answer for those who sent us. What do you say about yourself?”
JHN	1	23	가로되 나는 선지자 이사야의 말과 같이 주의 길을 곧게 하라고 광야에서 외치는 자의 소리로라 하니라	He said, I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord, as said the prophet Esaias.	John replied in the words of Isaiah the prophet: “I am a voice of one calling in the wilderness, ‘Make straight the way for the Lord.’”
JHN	1	24	저희는 바리새인들에게서 보낸자라	And they which were sent were of the Pharisees.	Then the Pharisees who had been sent
JHN	1	25	또 물어 가로되 네가 만일 그리스도도 아니요 엘리야도 아니요 그 선지자도 아닐진대 어찌하여 침례를 주느냐	And they asked him, and said unto him, Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not that Christ, nor Elias, neither that prophet?	asked him, “Why then do you baptize, if you are not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the Prophet?”
JHN	1	26	요한이 대답하되 나는 물로 침례를 주거니와 너희 가운데 너희가 알지 못하는 한 사람이 섰으니	John answered them, saying, I baptize with water: but there standeth one among you, whom ye know not;	“I baptize with water,” John replied, “but among you stands One you do not know.
JHN	1	27	곧 내 뒤에 오시는 그이라 나는 그의 신들메 풀기도 감당치 못하겠노라 하더라	He it is, who coming after me is preferred before me, whose shoe’s latchet I am not worthy to unloose.	He is the One who comes after me, the straps of whose sandals I am not worthy to untie.”
JHN	1	28	이 일은 요한의 침례 주던 곳 요단 강 건너편 베다니에서 된 일이니라	These things were done in Bethabara beyond Jordan, where John was baptizing.	All this happened at Bethany beyond the Jordan, where John was baptizing.
JHN	1	29	이튿날 요한이 예수께서 자기에게 나아오심을 보고 가로되 보라 세상 죄를 지고 가는 하나님의 어린 양이로다	The next day John seeth Jesus coming unto him, and saith, Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world.	The next day John saw Jesus coming toward him and said, “Look, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world!
JHN	1	30	내가 전에 말하기를 내 뒤에 오는 사람이 있는데 나보다 앞선 것은 그가 나보다 먼저 계심이라 한 것이 이 사람을 가리킴이라	This is he of whom I said, After me cometh a man which is preferred before me: for he was before me.	This is He of whom I said, ‘A man who comes after me has surpassed me because He was before me.’
JHN	1	31	나도 그를 알지 못하였으나 내가 와서 물로 침례를 주는 것은 그를 이스라엘에게 나타내려 함이라 하니라	And I knew him not: but that he should be made manifest to Israel, therefore am I come baptizing with water.	I myself did not know Him, but the reason I came baptizing with water was that He might be revealed to Israel.”
JHN	1	32	요한이 또 증거하여 가로되 내가 보매 성령이 비둘기 같이 하늘로서 내려와서 그의 위에 머물렀더라	And John bare record, saying, I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him.	Then John testified, “I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove and resting on Him.
JHN	1	33	나도 그를 알지 못하였으나 나를 보내어 물로 침례를 주라 하신 그이가 나에게 말씀하시되 성령이 내려서 누구 위에든지 머무는 것을 보거든 그가 곧 성령으로 침례를 주는 이인줄 알라 하셨기에	And I knew him not: but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost.	I myself did not know Him, but the One who sent me to baptize with water told me, ‘The man on whom you see the Spirit descend and rest is He who will baptize with the Holy Spirit.’
JHN	1	34	내가 보고 그가 하나님의 아들이심을 증거하였노라 하니라	And I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God.	I have seen and testified that this is the Son of God.”
JHN	1	35	또 이튿날 요한이 자기 제자 중 두 사람과 함께 섰다가	Again the next day after John stood, and two of his disciples;	The next day John was there again with two of his disciples.
JHN	1	36	예수의 다니심을 보고 말하되 보라 하나님의 어린 양이로다	And looking upon Jesus as he walked, he saith, Behold the Lamb of God!	When he saw Jesus walking by, he said, “Look, the Lamb of God!”
JHN	1	37	두 제자가 그의 말을 듣고 예수를 좇거늘	And the two disciples heard him speak, and they followed Jesus.	And when the two disciples heard him say this, they followed Jesus.
JHN	1	38	예수께서 돌이켜 그 좇는 것을 보시고 물어 가라사대 무엇을 구하느냐 가로되 랍비여 어디 계시오니이까 하니 (랍비는 번역하면 선생이라)	Then Jesus turned, and saw them following, and saith unto them, What seek ye? They said unto him, Rabbi, (which is to say, being interpreted, Master,) where dwellest thou?	Jesus turned and saw them following. “What do you want?” He asked. They said to Him, “Rabbi” (which means Teacher), “where are You staying?”
JHN	1	39	예수께서 가라사대 와 보라 그러므로 저희가 가서 계신 데를 보고 그날 함께 거하니 때가 제십시쯤 되었더라	He saith unto them, Come and see. They came and saw where he dwelt, and abode with him that day: for it was about the tenth hour.	“Come and see,” He replied. So they went and saw where He was staying, and spent that day with Him. It was about the tenth hour.
JHN	1	40	요한의 말을 듣고 예수를 좇는 두 사람 중에 하나는 시몬 베드로의 형제 안드레라	One of the two which heard John speak, and followed him, was Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother.	Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother, was one of the two who heard John’s testimony and followed Jesus.
JHN	1	41	그가 먼저 자기의 형제 시몬을 찾아 말하되 우리가 메시야를 만났다 하고 (메시야는 번역하면 그리스도라)	He first findeth his own brother Simon, and saith unto him, We have found the Messias, which is, being interpreted, the Christ.	He first found his brother Simon and told him, “We have found the Messiah” (which is translated as Christ).
JHN	1	42	데리고 예수께로 오니 예수께서 보시고 가라사대 네가 요한의 아들 시몬이니 장차 게바라 하리라 하시니라 (게바는 번역하면 베드로라)	And he brought him to Jesus. And when Jesus beheld him, he said, Thou art Simon the son of Jona: thou shalt be called Cephas, which is by interpretation, A stone.	Andrew brought him to Jesus, who looked at him and said, “You are Simon son of John. You will be called Cephas” (which is translated as Peter).
JHN	1	43	이튿날 예수께서 갈릴리로 나가려 하시다가 빌립을 만나 이르시되 나를 좇으라 하시니	The day following Jesus would go forth into Galilee, and findeth Philip, and saith unto him, Follow me.	The next day Jesus decided to set out for Galilee. Finding Philip, He told him, “Follow Me.”
JHN	1	44	빌립은 안드레와 베드로와 한 동네 벳새다 사람이라	Now Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter.	Now Philip was from Bethsaida, the same town as Andrew and Peter.
JHN	1	45	빌립이 나다나엘을 찾아 이르되 모세가 율법에 기록하였고 여러 선지자가 기록한 그이를 우리가 만났으니 요셉의 아들 나사렛 예수니라	Philip findeth Nathanael, and saith unto him, We have found him, of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets, did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.	Philip found Nathanael and told him, “We have found the One Moses wrote about in the Law, the One the prophets foretold—Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.”
JHN	1	46	나다나엘이 가로되 나사렛에서 무슨 선한 것이 날 수 있느냐 빌립이 가로되 와 보라 하니라	And Nathanael said unto him, Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? Philip saith unto him, Come and see.	“Can anything good come from Nazareth?” Nathanael asked. “Come and see,” said Philip.
JHN	1	47	예수께서 나다나엘이 자기에게 오는 것을 보시고 그를 가리켜 가라사대 보라 이는 참 이스라엘 사람이라 그 속에 간사한 것이 없도다	Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and saith of him, Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile!	When Jesus saw Nathanael approaching, He said of him, “Here is a true Israelite, in whom there is no deceit.”
JHN	1	48	나다나엘이 가로되 어떻게 나를 아시나이까 예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 빌립이 너를 부르기 전에 네가 무화과나무 아래 있을 때에 보았노라	Nathanael saith unto him, Whence knowest thou me? Jesus answered and said unto him, Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee.	“How do You know me?” Nathanael asked. Jesus replied, “Before Philip called you, I saw you under the fig tree.”
JHN	1	49	나다나엘이 대답하되 랍비여 당신은 하나님의 아들이시요 당신은 이스라엘의 임금이로소이다	Nathanael answered and saith unto him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God; thou art the King of Israel.	“Rabbi,” Nathanael answered, “You are the Son of God! You are the King of Israel!”
JHN	1	50	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 내가 너를 무화과나무 아래서 보았다 하므로 믿느냐 이보다 더 큰 일을 보리라	Jesus answered and said unto him, Because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, believest thou? thou shalt see greater things than these.	Jesus said to him, “Do you believe just because I told you I saw you under the fig tree? You will see greater things than these.”
JHN	1	51	또 가라사대 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 하늘이 열리고 하나님의 사자들이 인자 위에 오르락 내리락 하는 것을 보리라 하시니라	And he saith unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Hereafter ye shall see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man.	Then He declared, “Truly, truly, I tell you, you will all see heaven open and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of Man.”
JHN	2	1	사흘 되던 날에 갈릴리 가나에 혼인이 있어 예수의 어머니도 거기 계시고	And the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee; and the mother of Jesus was there:	On the third day a wedding took place at Cana in Galilee. Jesus’ mother was there,
JHN	2	2	예수와 그 제자들도 혼인에 청함을 받았더니	And both Jesus was called, and his disciples, to the marriage.	and Jesus and His disciples had also been invited to the wedding.
JHN	2	3	포도주가 모자란지라 예수의 어머니가 예수에게 이르되 저희에게 포도주가 없다 하니	And when they wanted wine, the mother of Jesus saith unto him, They have no wine.	When the wine ran out, Jesus’ mother said to Him, “They have no more wine.”
JHN	2	4	예수께서 가라사대 여자여 나와 무슨 상관이 있나이까 내 때가 아직 이르지 못하였나이다	Jesus saith unto her, Woman, what have I to do with thee? mine hour is not yet come.	“Woman, why does this concern us?” Jesus replied. “My hour has not yet come.”
JHN	2	5	그 어머니가 하인들에게 이르되 너희에게 무슨 말씀을 하시든지 그대로 하라 하니라	His mother saith unto the servants, Whatsoever he saith unto you, do it.	His mother said to the servants, “Do whatever He tells you.”
JHN	2	6	거기 유대인의 결례를 따라 두세 통 드는 돌항아리 여섯이 놓였는지라	And there were set there six waterpots of stone, after the manner of the purifying of the Jews, containing two or three firkins apiece.	Now six stone water jars had been set there for the Jewish rites of purification. Each could hold from twenty to thirty gallons.
JHN	2	7	예수께서 저희에게 이르시되 항아리에 물을 채우라 하신즉 아구까지 채우니	Jesus saith unto them, Fill the waterpots with water. And they filled them up to the brim.	Jesus told the servants, “Fill the jars with water.” So they filled them to the brim.
JHN	2	8	이제는 떠서 연회장에게 갖다 주라 하시매 갖다 주었더니	And he saith unto them, Draw out now, and bear unto the governor of the feast. And they bare it.	“Now draw some out,” He said, “and take it to the master of the banquet.” They did so,
JHN	2	9	연회장은 물로 된 포도주를 맛보고 어디서 났는지 알지 못하되 물 떠온 하인들은 알더라 연회장이 신랑을 불러	When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wine, and knew not whence it was: (but the servants which drew the water knew;) the governor of the feast called the bridegroom,	and the master of the banquet tasted the water that had been turned into wine. He did not know where it was from, but the servants who had drawn the water knew. Then he called the bridegroom aside
JHN	2	10	말하되 사람마다 먼저 좋은 포도주를 내고 취한 후에 낮은 것을 내거늘 그대는 지금까지 좋은 포도주를 두었도다 하니라	And saith unto him, Every man at the beginning doth set forth good wine; and when men have well drunk, then that which is worse: but thou hast kept the good wine until now.	and said, “Everyone serves the fine wine first, and then the cheap wine after the guests are drunk. But you have saved the fine wine until now!”
JHN	2	11	예수께서 이 처음 표적을 갈릴리 가나에서 행하여 그 영광을 나타내시매 제자들이 그를 믿으니라	This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested forth his glory; and his disciples believed on him.	Jesus performed this, the first of His signs, at Cana in Galilee. He thus revealed His glory, and His disciples believed in Him.
JHN	2	12	그 후에 예수께서 그 어머니와 형제들과 제자들과 함께 가버나움으로 내려가 거기 여러 날 계시지 아니하시니라	After this he went down to Capernaum, he, and his mother, and his brethren, and his disciples: and they continued there not many days.	After this, He went down to Capernaum with His mother and brothers and His disciples, and they stayed there a few days.
JHN	2	13	유대인의 유월절이 가까운지라 예수께서 예루살렘으로 올라가셨더니	And the Jews’ passover was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem,	When the Jewish Passover was near, Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
JHN	2	14	성전 안에서 소와 양과 비둘기 파는 사람들과 돈 바꾸는 사람들의 앉은 것을 보시고	And found in the temple those that sold oxen and sheep and doves, and the changers of money sitting:	In the temple courts He found men selling cattle, sheep, and doves, and money changers seated at their tables.
JHN	2	15	노끈으로 채찍을 만드사 양이나 소를 다 성전에서 내어 쫓으시고 돈 바꾸는 사람들의 돈을 쏟으시며 상을 엎으시고	And when he had made a scourge of small cords, he drove them all out of the temple, and the sheep, and the oxen; and poured out the changers’ money, and overthrew the tables;	So He made a whip out of cords and drove all from the temple courts, both sheep and cattle. He poured out the coins of the money changers and overturned their tables.
JHN	2	16	비둘기 파는 사람들에게 이르시되 이것을 여기서 가져가라 내 아버지의 집으로 장사하는 집을 만들지 말라 하시니	And said unto them that sold doves, Take these things hence; make not my Father’s house an house of merchandise.	To those selling doves He said, “Get these out of here! How dare you turn My Father’s house into a marketplace!”
JHN	2	17	제자들이 성경 말씀에 주의 전을 사모하는 열심이 나를 삼키리라 한 것을 기억하더라	And his disciples remembered that it was written, The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up.	His disciples remembered that it is written: “Zeal for Your house will consume Me.”
JHN	2	18	이에 유대인들이 대답하여 예수께 말하기를 네가 이런 일을 행하니 무슨 표적을 우리에게 보이겠느뇨	Then answered the Jews and said unto him, What sign shewest thou unto us, seeing that thou doest these things?	On account of this, the Jews demanded, “What sign can You show us to prove Your authority to do these things?”
JHN	2	19	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 너희가 이 성전을 헐라 내가 사흘 동안에 일으키리라	Jesus answered and said unto them, Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.	Jesus answered, “Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up again.”
JHN	2	20	유대인들이 가로되 이 성전은 사십육 년 동안에 지었거늘 네가 삼 일 동안에 일으키겠느뇨 하더라	Then said the Jews, Forty and six years was this temple in building, and wilt thou rear it up in three days?	“This temple took forty-six years to build,” the Jews replied, “and You are going to raise it up in three days?”
JHN	2	21	그러나 예수는 성전된 자기 육체를 가리켜 말씀하신 것이라	But he spake of the temple of his body.	But Jesus was speaking about the temple of His body.
JHN	2	22	죽은 자 가운데서 살아나신 후에야 제자들이 이 말씀하신 것을 기억하고 성경과 및 예수의 하신 말씀을 믿었더라	When therefore he was risen from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this unto them; and they believed the scripture, and the word which Jesus had said.	After He was raised from the dead, His disciples remembered that He had said this. Then they believed the Scripture and the word that Jesus had spoken.
JHN	2	23	유월절에 예수께서 예루살렘에 계시니 많은 사람이 그 행하시는 표적을 보고 그 이름을 믿었으나	Now when he was in Jerusalem at the passover, in the feast day, many believed in his name, when they saw the miracles which he did.	While He was in Jerusalem at the Passover Feast, many people saw the signs He was doing and believed in His name.
JHN	2	24	예수는 그 몸을 저희에게 의탁지 아니하셨으니 이는 친히 모든 사람을 아심이요	But Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he knew all men,	But Jesus did not entrust Himself to them, for He knew them all.
JHN	2	25	또 친히 사람의 속에 있는 것을 아시므로 사람에 대하여 아무의 증거도 받으실 필요가 없음이니라	And needed not that any should testify of man: for he knew what was in man.	He did not need any testimony about man, for He knew what was in a man.
JHN	3	1	바리새인 중에 니고데모라 하는 사람이 있으니 유대인의 관원이라	There was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews:	Now there was a man of the Pharisees named Nicodemus, a leader of the Jews.
JHN	3	2	그가 밤에 예수께 와서 가로되 랍비여 우리가 당신은 하나님께로서 오신 선생인 줄 아나이다 하나님이 함께 하시지 아니하시면 당신의 행하시는 이 표적을 아무라도 할 수 없음이니이다	The same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him, Rabbi, we know that thou art a teacher come from God: for no man can do these miracles that thou doest, except God be with him.	He came to Jesus at night and said, “Rabbi, we know that You are a teacher who has come from God. For no one could perform the signs You are doing if God were not with him.”
JHN	3	3	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 진실로 진실로 네게 이르노니 사람이 거듭나지 아니하면 하나님 나라를 볼 수 없느니라	Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.	Jesus replied, “Truly, truly, I tell you, no one can see the kingdom of God unless he is born again.”
JHN	3	4	니고데모가 가로되 사람이 늙으면 어떻게 날 수 있삽나이까 두번째 모태에 들어갔다가 날 수 있삽나이까	Nicodemus saith unto him, How can a man be born when he is old? can he enter the second time into his mother’s womb, and be born?	“How can a man be born when he is old?” Nicodemus asked. “Can he enter his mother’s womb a second time to be born?”
JHN	3	5	예수께서 대답하시되 진실로 진실로 네게 이르노니 사람이 물과 성령으로 나지 아니하면 하나님 나라에 들어갈 수 없느니라	Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.	Jesus answered, “Truly, truly, I tell you, no one can enter the kingdom of God unless he is born of water and the Spirit.
JHN	3	6	육으로 난 것은 육이요 성령으로 난 것은 영이니	That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit.	Flesh is born of flesh, but spirit is born of the Spirit.
JHN	3	7	내가 네게 거듭나야 하겠다 하는 말을 기이히 여기지 말라	Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again.	Do not be amazed that I said, ‘You must be born again.’
JHN	3	8	바람이 임의로 불매 네가 그 소리를 들어도 어디서 오며 어디로 가는지 알지 못하나니 성령으로 난 사람은 다 이러하니라	The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so is every one that is born of the Spirit.	The wind blows where it wishes. You hear its sound, but you do not know where it comes from or where it is going. So it is with everyone born of the Spirit.”
JHN	3	9	니고데모가 대답하여 가로되 어찌 이러한 일이 있을 수 있나이까	Nicodemus answered and said unto him, How can these things be?	“How can this be?” Nicodemus asked.
JHN	3	10	예수께서 가라사대 너는 이스라엘의 선생으로서 이러한 일을 알지 못하느냐	Jesus answered and said unto him, Art thou a master of Israel, and knowest not these things?	“You are Israel’s teacher,” said Jesus, “and you do not understand these things?
JHN	3	11	진실로 진실로 네게 이르노니 우리 아는 것을 말하고 본 것을 증거하노라 그러나 너희가 우리 증거를 받지 아니하는도다	Verily, verily, I say unto thee, We speak that we do know, and testify that we have seen; and ye receive not our witness.	Truly, truly, I tell you, we speak of what we know, and we testify to what we have seen, and yet you people do not accept our testimony.
JHN	3	12	내가 땅의 일을 말하여도 너희가 믿지 아니하거든 하물며 하늘 일을 말하면 어떻게 믿겠느냐	If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall ye believe, if I tell you of heavenly things?	If I have told you about earthly things and you do not believe, how will you believe if I tell you about heavenly things?
JHN	3	13	하늘에서 내려온 자 곧 인자 외에는 하늘에 올라간 자가 없느니라	And no man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven.	No one has ascended into heaven except the One who descended from heaven—the Son of Man.
JHN	3	14	모세가 광야에서 뱀을 든 것 같이 인자도 들려야 하리니	And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up:	Just as Moses lifted up the snake in the wilderness, so the Son of Man must be lifted up,
JHN	3	15	이는 저를 믿는 자마다 영생을 얻게 하려 하심이니라	That whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life.	that everyone who believes in Him may have eternal life.
JHN	3	16	하나님이 세상을 이처럼 사랑하사 독생자를 주셨으니 이는 저를 믿는 자마다 멸망치 않고 영생을 얻게 하려 하심이니라	For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.	For God so loved the world that He gave His one and only Son, that everyone who believes in Him shall not perish but have eternal life.
JHN	3	17	하나님이 그 아들을 세상에 보내신 것은 세상을 심판하려 하심이 아니요 저로 말미암아 세상이 구원을 받게 하려 하심이라	For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved.	For God did not send His Son into the world to condemn the world, but to save the world through Him.
JHN	3	18	저를 믿는 자는 심판을 받지 아니하는 것이요 믿지 아니하는 자는 하나님의 독생자의 이름을 믿지 아니하므로 벌써 심판을 받은 것이니라	He that believeth on him is not condemned: but he that believeth not is condemned already, because he hath not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God.	Whoever believes in Him is not condemned, but whoever does not believe has already been condemned, because he has not believed in the name of God’s one and only Son.
JHN	3	19	그 정죄는 이것이니 곧 빛이 세상에 왔으되 사람들이 자기 행위가 악하므로 빛보다 어두움을 더 사랑한 것이니라	And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil.	And this is the verdict: The Light has come into the world, but men loved the darkness rather than the Light because their deeds were evil.
JHN	3	20	악을 행하는 자마다 빛을 미워하여 빛으로 오지 아니하나니 이는 그 행위가 드러날까 함이요	For every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved.	Everyone who does evil hates the Light, and does not come into the Light for fear that his deeds will be exposed.
JHN	3	21	진리를 쫓는 자는 빛으로 오나니 이는 그 행위가 하나님 안에서 행한 것임을 나타내려 함이라 하시니라	But he that doeth truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God.	But whoever practices the truth comes into the Light, so that it may be seen clearly that what he has done has been accomplished in God.”
JHN	3	22	이 후에 예수께서 제자들과 유대 땅으로 가서 거기 함께 유하시며 침례를 주시더라	After these things came Jesus and his disciples into the land of Judea; and there he tarried with them, and baptized.	After this, Jesus and His disciples went into the Judean countryside, where He spent some time with them and baptized.
JHN	3	23	요한도 살렘 가까운 애논에서 침례를 주니 거기 물들이 많음이라 사람들이 와서 침례를 받더라	And John also was baptizing in Ænon near to Salim, because there was much water there: and they came, and were baptized.	Now John was also baptizing at Aenon near Salim, because the water was plentiful there, and people kept coming to be baptized.
JHN	3	24	요한이 아직 옥에 갇히지 아니하였더라	For John was not yet cast into prison.	(For John had not yet been thrown into prison.)
JHN	3	25	이에 요한의 제자 중에서 한 유대인으로 더불어 결례에 대하여 변론이 되었더니	Then there arose a question between some of John’s disciples and the Jews about purifying.	Then a dispute arose between John’s disciples and a certain Jew over the issue of ceremonial washing.
JHN	3	26	저희가 요한에게 와서 가로되 랍비여 선생님과 함께 요단 강 저편에 있던 자 곧 선생님이 증거하시던 자가 침례를 주매 사람이 다 그에게로 가더이다	And they came unto John, and said unto him, Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond Jordan, to whom thou barest witness, behold, the same baptizeth, and all men come to him.	So John’s disciples came to him and said, “Look, Rabbi, the One who was with you beyond the Jordan, the One you testified about—He is baptizing, and everyone is going to Him.”
JHN	3	27	요한이 대답하여 가로되 만일 하늘에서 주신바 아니면 사람이 아무 것도 받을 수 없느니라	John answered and said, A man can receive nothing, except it be given him from heaven.	John replied, “A man can receive only what is given him from heaven.
JHN	3	28	나의 말한 바 나는 그리스도가 아니요 그의 앞에 보내심을 받은 자라고 한 것을 증거할 자는 너희니라	Ye yourselves bear me witness, that I said, I am not the Christ, but that I am sent before him.	You yourselves can testify that I said, ‘I am not the Christ, but am sent ahead of Him.’
JHN	3	29	신부를 취하는 자는 신랑이나 서서 신랑의 음성을 듣는 친구가 크게 기뻐하나니 나는 이러한 기쁨이 충만하였노라	He that hath the bride is the bridegroom: but the friend of the bridegroom, which standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom’s voice: this my joy therefore is fulfilled.	The bride belongs to the bridegroom. The friend of the bridegroom stands and listens for him, and is overjoyed to hear the bridegroom’s voice. That joy is mine, and it is now complete.
JHN	3	30	그는 흥하여야 하겠고 나는 쇠하여야 하리라 하니라	He must increase, but I must decrease.	He must increase; I must decrease.
JHN	3	31	위로부터 오시는 이는 만물 위에 계시고 땅에서 난 이는 땅에 속하여 땅에 속한 것을 말하느니라 하늘로서 오시는 이는 만물 위에 계시나니	He that cometh from above is above all: he that is of the earth is earthly, and speaketh of the earth: he that cometh from heaven is above all.	The One who comes from above is above all. The one who is from the earth belongs to the earth and speaks as one from the earth. The One who comes from heaven is above all.
JHN	3	32	그가 그 보고 들은 것을 증거하되 그의 증거를 받는 이가 없도다	And what he hath seen and heard, that he testifieth; and no man receiveth his testimony.	He testifies to what He has seen and heard, yet no one accepts His testimony.
JHN	3	33	그의 증거를 받는 이는 하나님을 참되시다 하여 인쳤느니라	He that hath received his testimony hath set to his seal that God is true.	Whoever accepts His testimony has certified that God is truthful.
JHN	3	34	하나님의 보내신 이는 하나님의 말씀을 하나니 이는 하나님이 성령을 한량 없이 주심이니라	For he whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God: for God giveth not the Spirit by measure unto him.	For the One whom God has sent speaks the words of God, for God gives the Spirit without limit.
JHN	3	35	아버지께서 아들을 사랑하사 만물을 다 그 손에 주셨으니	The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand.	The Father loves the Son and has placed all things in His hands.
JHN	3	36	아들을 믿는 자는 영생이 있고 아들을 순종치 아니하는 자는 영생을 보지 못하고 도리어 하나님의 진노가 그 위에 머물러 있느니라	He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him.	Whoever believes in the Son has eternal life. Whoever rejects the Son will not see life. Instead, the wrath of God remains on him.”
JHN	4	1	예수의 제자를 삼고 침례를 주는 것이 요한보다 많다 하는 말을 바리새인들이 들은 줄을 주께서 아신지라	When therefore the Lord knew how the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and baptized more disciples than John,	When Jesus realized that the Pharisees were aware He was gaining and baptizing more disciples than John
JHN	4	2	(예수께서 친히 침례를 주신 것이 아니요 제자들이 준 것이라)	(Though Jesus himself baptized not, but his disciples,)	(although it was not Jesus who baptized, but His disciples),
JHN	4	3	유대를 떠나사 다시 갈릴리로 가실새	He left Judea, and departed again into Galilee.	He left Judea and returned to Galilee.
JHN	4	4	사마리아로 통행하여야 하겠는지라	And he must needs go through Samaria.	Now He had to pass through Samaria.
JHN	4	5	사마리아에 있는 수가라 하는 동네에 이르시니 야곱이 그 아들 요셉에게 준 땅이 가깝고	Then cometh he to a city of Samaria, which is called Sychar, near to the parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son Joseph.	So He came to a town of Samaria called Sychar, near the plot of ground that Jacob had given to his son Joseph.
JHN	4	6	거기 또 야곱의 우물이 있더라 예수께서 행로에 곤하여 우물 곁에 그대로 앉으시니 때가 제육시쯤 되었더라	Now Jacob’s well was there. Jesus therefore, being wearied with his journey, sat thus on the well: and it was about the sixth hour.	Since Jacob’s well was there, Jesus, weary from His journey, sat down by the well. It was about the sixth hour.
JHN	4	7	사마리아 여자 하나가 물을 길러 왔으매 예수께서 물을 좀 달라 하시니	There cometh a woman of Samaria to draw water: Jesus saith unto her, Give me to drink.	When a Samaritan woman came to draw water, Jesus said to her, “Give Me a drink.”
JHN	4	8	이는 제자들이 먹을 것을 사러 동네에 들어갔음이러라	(For his disciples were gone away unto the city to buy meat.)	(His disciples had gone into the town to buy food.)
JHN	4	9	사마리아 여자가 가로되 당신은 유대인으로서 어찌하여 사마리아 여자 나에게 물을 달라 하나이까 하니 이는 유대인이 사마리아인과 상종치 아니함이러라	Then saith the woman of Samaria unto him, How is it that thou, being a Jew, askest drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria? for the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans.	“You are a Jew,” said the woman. “How can You ask for a drink from me, a Samaritan woman?” (For Jews do not associate with Samaritans.)
JHN	4	10	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 네가 만일 하나님의 선물과 또 네게 물좀 달라 하는 이가 누구인 줄 알았더면 네가 그에게 구하였을 것이요 그가 생수를 네게 주었으리라	Jesus answered and said unto her, If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water.	Jesus answered, “If you knew the gift of God and who is asking you for a drink, you would have asked Him, and He would have given you living water.”
JHN	4	11	여자가 가로되 주여 물 길을 그릇도 없고 이 우물은 깊은데 어디서 이 생수를 얻겠삽나이까	The woman saith unto him, Sir, thou hast nothing to draw with, and the well is deep: from whence then hast thou that living water?	“Sir,” the woman replied, “You have nothing to draw with and the well is deep. Where then will You get this living water?
JHN	4	12	우리 조상 야곱이 이 우물을 우리에게 주었고 또 여기서 자기와 자기 아들들과 짐승이 다 먹었으니 당신이 야곱보다 더 크니이까	Art thou greater than our father Jacob, which gave us the well, and drank thereof himself, and his children, and his cattle?	Are You greater than our father Jacob, who gave us this well and drank from it himself, as did his sons and his livestock?”
JHN	4	13	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 이 물을 먹는 자마다 다시 목마르려니와	Jesus answered and said unto her, Whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst again:	Jesus said to her, “Everyone who drinks this water will be thirsty again.
JHN	4	14	내가 주는 물을 먹는 자는 영원히 목마르지 아니하리니 나의 주는 물은 그 속에서 영생하도록 솟아나는 샘물이 되리라	But whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life.	But whoever drinks the water I give him will never thirst. Indeed, the water I give him will become in him a fount of water springing up to eternal life.”
JHN	4	15	여자가 가로되 주여 이런 물을 내게 주사 목마르지도 않고 또 여기 물 길러 오지도 않게 하옵소서	The woman saith unto him, Sir, give me this water, that I thirst not, neither come hither to draw.	The woman said to Him, “Sir, give me this water so that I will not get thirsty and have to keep coming here to draw water.”
JHN	4	16	가라사대 가서 네 남편을 불러오라	Jesus saith unto her, Go, call thy husband, and come hither.	Jesus told her, “Go, call your husband and come back.”
JHN	4	17	여자가 대답하여 가로되 나는 남편이 없나이다 예수께서 가라사대 네가 남편이 없다 하는 말이 옳도다	The woman answered and said, I have no husband. Jesus said unto her, Thou hast well said, I have no husband:	“I have no husband,” the woman replied. Jesus said to her, “You are correct to say that you have no husband.
JHN	4	18	네가 남편 다섯이 있었으나 지금 있는 자는 네 남편이 아니니 네 말이 참되도다	For thou hast had five husbands; and he whom thou now hast is not thy husband: in that saidst thou truly.	In fact, you have had five husbands, and the man you now have is not your husband. You have spoken truthfully.”
JHN	4	19	여자가 가로되 주여 내가 보니 선지자로소이다	The woman saith unto him, Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet.	“Sir,” the woman said, “I see that You are a prophet.
JHN	4	20	우리 조상들은 이 산에서 예배하였는데 당신들의 말은 예배할 곳이 예루살렘에 있다 하더이다	Our fathers worshipped in this mountain; and ye say, that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship.	Our fathers worshiped on this mountain, but you Jews say that the place where one must worship is in Jerusalem.”
JHN	4	21	예수께서 가라사대 여자여 내 말을 믿으라 이 산에서도 말고 예루살렘에서도 말고 너희가 아버지께 예배할 때가 이르리라	Jesus saith unto her, Woman, believe me, the hour cometh, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father.	“Believe Me, woman,” Jesus replied, “a time is coming when you will worship the Father neither on this mountain nor in Jerusalem.
JHN	4	22	너희는 알지 못하는 것을 예배하고 우리는 아는 것을 예배하노니 이는 구원이 유대인에게서 남이니라	Ye worship ye know not what: we know what we worship: for salvation is of the Jews.	You worship what you do not know; we worship what we do know, for salvation is from the Jews.
JHN	4	23	아버지께 참으로 예배하는 자들은 신령과 진정으로 예배할 때가 오나니 곧 이 때라 아버지께서는 이렇게 자기에게 예배하는 자들을 찾으시느니라	But the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth: for the Father seeketh such to worship him.	But a time is coming and has now come when the true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and in truth, for the Father is seeking such as these to worship Him.
JHN	4	24	하나님은 영이시니 예배하는 자가 신령과 진정으로 예배할지니라	God is a Spirit: and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth.	God is Spirit, and His worshipers must worship Him in spirit and in truth.”
JHN	4	25	여자가 가로되 메시야 곧 그리스도라 하는 이가 오실 줄을 내가 아노니 그가 오시면 모든 것을 우리에게 고하시리이다	The woman saith unto him, I know that Messias cometh, which is called Christ: when he is come, he will tell us all things.	The woman said, “I know that Messiah” (called Christ) “is coming. When He comes, He will explain everything to us.”
JHN	4	26	예수께서 이르시되 네게 말하는 내가 그로라 하시니라	Jesus saith unto her, I that speak unto thee am he.	Jesus answered, “I who speak to you am He.”
JHN	4	27	이 때에 제자들이 돌아와서 예수께서 여자와 말씀하시는 것을 이상히 여겼으나 무엇을 구하시나이까 어찌하여 저와 말씀하시나이까 묻는 이가 없더라	And upon this came his disciples, and marvelled that he talked with the woman: yet no man said, What seekest thou? or, Why talkest thou with her?	Just then His disciples returned and were surprised that He was speaking with a woman. But no one asked Him, “What do You want from her?” or “Why are You talking with her?”
JHN	4	28	여자가 물동이를 버려두고 동네에 들어가서 사람들에게 이르되	The woman then left her waterpot, and went her way into the city, and saith to the men,	Then the woman left her water jar, went back into the town, and said to the people,
JHN	4	29	나의 행한 모든 일을 내게 말한 사람을 와 보라 이는 그리스도가 아니냐 하니	Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did: is not this the Christ?	“Come, see a man who told me everything I ever did. Could this be the Christ?”
JHN	4	30	저희가 동네에서 나와 예수께로 오더라	Then they went out of the city, and came unto him.	So they left the town and made their way toward Jesus.
JHN	4	31	그 사이에 제자들이 청하여 가로되 랍비여 잡수소서	In the mean while his disciples prayed him, saying, Master, eat.	Meanwhile the disciples urged Him, “Rabbi, eat something.”
JHN	4	32	가라사대 내게는 너희가 알지 못하는 먹을 양식이 있느니라	But he said unto them, I have meat to eat that ye know not of.	But He told them, “I have food to eat that you know nothing about.”
JHN	4	33	제자들이 서로 말하되 누가 잡수실 것을 갖다 드렸는가 한대	Therefore said the disciples one to another, Hath any man brought him ought to eat?	So the disciples asked one another, “Could someone have brought Him food?”
JHN	4	34	예수께서 이르시되 나의 양식은 나를 보내신 이의 뜻을 행하며 그의 일을 온전히 이루는 이것이니라	Jesus saith unto them, My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work.	Jesus explained, “My food is to do the will of Him who sent Me and to finish His work.
JHN	4	35	너희가 넉 달이 지나야 추수할 때가 이르겠다 하지 아니하느냐 내가 너희에게 이르노니 눈을 들어 밭을 보라 희어져 추수하게 되었도다	Say not ye, There are yet four months, and then cometh harvest? behold, I say unto you, Lift up your eyes, and look on the fields; for they are white already to harvest.	Do you not say, ‘There are still four months until the harvest’? I tell you, lift up your eyes and look at the fields, for they are ripe for harvest.
JHN	4	36	거두는 자가 이미 삯도 받고 영생에 이르는 열매를 모으나니 이는 뿌리는 자와 거두는 자가 함께 즐거워하게 하려 함이니라	And he that reapeth receiveth wages, and gathereth fruit unto life eternal: that both he that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice together.	Already the reaper draws his wages and gathers a crop for eternal life, so that the sower and the reaper may rejoice together.
JHN	4	37	그런즉 한 사람이 심고 다른 사람이 거둔다 하는 말이 옳도다	And herein is that saying true, One soweth, and another reapeth.	For in this case the saying ‘One sows and another reaps’ is true.
JHN	4	38	내가 너희로 노력지 아니한 것을 거두러 보내었노니 다른 사람들은 노력하였고 너희는 그들의 노력한 것에 참예하였느니라	I sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labour: other men laboured, and ye are entered into their labours.	I sent you to reap what you have not worked for; others have done the hard work, and now you have taken up their labor.”
JHN	4	39	여자의 말이 그가 나의 행한 모든 것을 내게 말하였다 증거하므로 그 동리 중에 많은 사마리아인이 예수를 믿는지라	And many of the Samaritans of that city believed on him for the saying of the woman, which testified, He told me all that ever I did.	Many of the Samaritans from that town believed in Jesus because of the woman’s testimony, “He told me everything I ever did.”
JHN	4	40	사마리아인들이 예수께 와서 자기들과 함께 유하기를 청하니 거기서 이틀을 유하시매	So when the Samaritans were come unto him, they besought him that he would tarry with them: and he abode there two days.	So when the Samaritans came to Him, they asked Him to stay with them, and He stayed two days.
JHN	4	41	예수의 말씀을 인하여 믿는 자가 더욱 많아	And many more believed because of his own word;	And many more believed because of His message.
JHN	4	42	그 여자에게 말하되 이제 우리가 믿는 것은 네 말을 인함이 아니니 이는 우리가 친히 듣고 그가 참으로 세상의 구주신 줄 앎이니라 하였더라	And said unto the woman, Now we believe, not because of thy saying: for we have heard him ourselves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Saviour of the world.	They said to the woman, “We now believe not only because of your words; we have heard for ourselves, and we know that this man truly is the Savior of the world.”
JHN	4	43	이틀이 지나매 예수께서 거기를 떠나 갈릴리로 가시며	Now after two days he departed thence, and went into Galilee.	After two days, Jesus left for Galilee.
JHN	4	44	친히 증거하시기를 선지자가 고향에서는 높임을 받지 못한다 하시고	For Jesus himself testified, that a prophet hath no honour in his own country.	Now He Himself had testified that a prophet has no honor in his own hometown.
JHN	4	45	갈릴리에 이르시매 갈릴리인들이 그를 영접하니 이는 자기들도 명절에 갔다가 예수께서 명절 중 예루살렘에서 하신 모든 일을 보았음이더라	Then when he was come into Galilee, the Galileans received him, having seen all the things that he did at Jerusalem at the feast: for they also went unto the feast.	Yet when He arrived, the Galileans welcomed Him. They had seen all the great things He had done in Jerusalem at the feast, for they had gone there as well.
JHN	4	46	예수께서 다시 갈릴리 가나에 이르시니 전에 물로 포도주를 만드신 곳이라 왕의 신하가 있어 그 아들이 가버나움에서 병들었더니	So Jesus came again into Cana of Galilee, where he made the water wine. And there was a certain nobleman, whose son was sick at Capernaum.	So once again He came to Cana in Galilee, where He had turned the water into wine. And there was a royal official whose son lay sick at Capernaum.
JHN	4	47	그가 예수께서 유대로부터 갈릴리에 오심을 듣고 가서 청하되 내려오셔서 내 아들의 병을 고쳐 주소서 하니 저가 거의 죽게 되었음이라	When he heard that Jesus was come out of Judea into Galilee, he went unto him, and besought him that he would come down, and heal his son: for he was at the point of death.	When he heard that Jesus had come from Judea to Galilee, he went and begged Him to come down and heal his son, who was about to die.
JHN	4	48	예수께서 가라사대 너희는 표적과 기사를 보지 못하면 도무지 믿지 아니하리라	Then said Jesus unto him, Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not believe.	Jesus said to him, “Unless you people see signs and wonders, you will never believe.”
JHN	4	49	신하가 가로되 주여 내 아이가 죽기 전에 내려오소서	The nobleman saith unto him, Sir, come down ere my child die.	“Sir,” the official said, “come down before my child dies.”
JHN	4	50	예수께서 가라사대 가라 네 아들이 살았다 하신대 그 사람이 예수의 하신 말씀을 믿고 가더니	Jesus saith unto him, Go thy way; thy son liveth. And the man believed the word that Jesus had spoken unto him, and he went his way.	“Go,” said Jesus. “Your son will live.” The man took Jesus at His word and departed.
JHN	4	51	내려가는 길에서 그 종들이 오다가 만나서 아이가 살았다 하거늘	And as he was now going down, his servants met him, and told him, saying, Thy son liveth.	And while he was still on the way, his servants met him with the news that his boy was alive.
JHN	4	52	그 낫기 시작한 때를 물은즉 어제 제칠시에 열기가 떨어졌나이다 하는지라	Then enquired he of them the hour when he began to amend. And they said unto him, Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him.	So he inquired as to the hour when his son had recovered, and they told him, “The fever left him yesterday at the seventh hour.”
JHN	4	53	아비가 예수께서 네 아들이 살았다 말씀하신 그 때인 줄 알고 자기와 그 온 집안이 다 믿으니라	So the father knew that it was at the same hour, in the which Jesus said unto him, Thy son liveth: and himself believed, and his whole house.	Then the father realized that this was the very hour in which Jesus had told him, “Your son will live.” And he and all his household believed.
JHN	4	54	이것은 예수께서 유대에서 갈릴리로 오신 후 행하신 두번째 표적이니라	This is again the second miracle that Jesus did, when he was come out of Judea into Galilee.	This was now the second sign that Jesus performed after coming from Judea into Galilee.
JHN	5	1	그 후에 유대인의 명절이 있어 예수께서 예루살렘에 올라가시니라	After this there was a feast of the Jews; and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.	Some time later there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
JHN	5	2	예루살렘에 있는 양문 곁에 히브리 말로 베데스다라 하는 못이 있는데 거기 행각 다섯이 있고	Now there is at Jerusalem by the sheep market a pool, which is called in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda, having five porches.	Now there is in Jerusalem near the Sheep Gate a pool with five covered colonnades, which in Hebrew is called Bethesda.
JHN	5	3	그 안에 많은 병자, 소경, 절뚝발이, 혈기 마른 자들이 누워 [물의 동함을 기다리니	In these lay a great multitude of impotent folk, of blind, halt, withered, waiting for the moving of the water.	On these walkways lay a great number of the sick, the blind, the lame, and the paralyzed.
JHN	5	4	이는 천사가 가끔 못에 내려와 물을 동하게 하는데 동한 후에 먼저 들어가는 자는 어떤 병에 걸렸든지 낫게 됨이러라]	For an angel went down at a certain season into the pool, and troubled the water: whosoever then first after the troubling of the water stepped in was made whole of whatsoever disease he had.	
JHN	5	5	거기 삼십팔 년 된 병자가 있더라	And a certain man was there, which had an infirmity thirty and eight years.	One man there had been an invalid for thirty-eight years.
JHN	5	6	예수께서 그 누운 것을 보시고 병이 벌써 오랜 줄 아시고 이르시되 네가 낫고자 하느냐	When Jesus saw him lie, and knew that he had been now a long time in that case, he saith unto him, Wilt thou be made whole?	When Jesus saw him lying there and realized that he had spent a long time in this condition, He asked him, “Do you want to get well?”
JHN	5	7	병자가 대답하되 주여 물이 동할 때에 나를 못에 넣어 줄 사람이 없어 내가 가는 동안에 다른 사람이 먼저 내려가나이다	The impotent man answered him, Sir, I have no man, when the water is troubled, to put me into the pool: but while I am coming, another steppeth down before me.	“Sir,” the invalid replied, “I have no one to help me into the pool when the water is stirred. While I am on my way, someone else goes in before me.”
JHN	5	8	예수께서 가라사대 일어나 네 자리를 들고 걸어가라 하시니	Jesus saith unto him, Rise, take up thy bed, and walk.	Then Jesus told him, “Get up, pick up your mat, and walk.”
JHN	5	9	그 사람이 곧 나아서 자리를 들고 걸어가니라 이 날은 안식일이니	And immediately the man was made whole, and took up his bed, and walked: and on the same day was the sabbath.	Immediately the man was made well, and he picked up his mat and began to walk. Now this happened on the Sabbath day,
JHN	5	10	유대인들이 병 나은 사람에게 이르되 안식일인데 네가 자리를 들고 가는 것이 옳지 아니하니라	The Jews therefore said unto him that was cured, It is the sabbath day: it is not lawful for thee to carry thy bed.	so the Jews said to the man who had been healed, “This is the Sabbath! It is unlawful for you to carry your mat.”
JHN	5	11	대답하되 나를 낫게 한 그가 자리를 들고 걸어가라 하더라 한대	He answered them, He that made me whole, the same said unto me, Take up thy bed, and walk.	But he answered, “The man who made me well told me, ‘Pick up your mat and walk.’”
JHN	5	12	저희가 묻되 너더러 자리를 들고 걸어가라 한 사람이 누구냐 하되	Then asked they him, What man is that which said unto thee, Take up thy bed, and walk?	“Who is this man who told you to pick it up and walk?” they asked.
JHN	5	13	고침을 받은 사람이 그가 누구신지 알지 못하니 이는 거기 사람이 많으므로 예수께서 이미 피하셨음이라	And he that was healed wist not who it was: for Jesus had conveyed himself away, a multitude being in that place.	But the man who was healed did not know who it was, for Jesus had slipped away while the crowd was there.
JHN	5	14	그 후에 예수께서 성전에서 그 사람을 만나 이르시되 보라 네가 나았으니 더 심한 것이 생기지 않게 다시는 죄를 범치 말라 하시니	Afterward Jesus findeth him in the temple, and said unto him, Behold, thou art made whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.	Afterward, Jesus found the man at the temple and said to him, “See, you have been made well. Stop sinning, or something worse may happen to you.”
JHN	5	15	그 사람이 유대인들에게 가서 자기를 고친 이는 예수라 하니라	The man departed, and told the Jews that it was Jesus, which had made him whole.	And the man went away and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had made him well.
JHN	5	16	그러므로 안식일에 이러한 일을 행하신다 하여 유대인들이 예수를 핍박하게 된지라	And therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus, and sought to slay him, because he had done these things on the sabbath day.	Now because Jesus was doing these things on the Sabbath, the Jews began to persecute Him.
JHN	5	17	예수께서 저희에게 이르시되 내 아버지께서 이제까지 일하시니 나도 일한다 하시매	But Jesus answered them, My Father worketh hitherto, and I work.	But Jesus answered them, “To this very day My Father is at His work, and I too am working.”
JHN	5	18	유대인들이 이를 인하여 더욱 예수를 죽이고자 하니 이는 안식일만 범할 뿐 아니라 하나님을 자기의 친아버지라 하여 자기를 하나님과 동등으로 삼으심이러라	Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, because he not only had broken the sabbath, but said also that God was his Father, making himself equal with God.	Because of this, the Jews tried all the harder to kill Him. Not only was He breaking the Sabbath, but He was even calling God His own Father, making Himself equal with God.
JHN	5	19	그러므로 예수께서 저희에게 이르시되 내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 아들이 아버지의 하시는 일을 보지 않고는 아무 것도 스스로 할 수 없나니 아버지께서 행하시는 그것을 아들도 그와 같이 행하느니라	Then answered Jesus and said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father do: for what things soever he doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise.	So Jesus replied, “Truly, truly, I tell you, the Son can do nothing by Himself, unless He sees the Father doing it. For whatever the Father does, the Son also does.
JHN	5	20	아버지께서 아들을 사랑하사 자기의 행하시는 것을 다 아들에게 보이시고 또 그보다 더 큰 일을 보이사 너희로 기이히 여기게 하시리라	For the Father loveth the Son, and sheweth him all things that himself doeth: and he will shew him greater works than these, that ye may marvel.	The Father loves the Son and shows Him all He does. And to your amazement, He will show Him even greater works than these.
JHN	5	21	아버지께서 죽은 자들을 일으켜 살리심 같이 아들도 자기의 원하는 자들을 살리느니라	For as the Father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth them; even so the Son quickeneth whom he will.	For just as the Father raises the dead and gives them life, so also the Son gives life to whom He wishes.
JHN	5	22	아버지께서 아무도 심판하지 아니하시고 심판을 다 아들에게 맡기셨으니	For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son:	Furthermore, the Father judges no one, but has assigned all judgment to the Son,
JHN	5	23	이는 모든 사람으로 아버지를 공경하는 것 같이 아들을 공경하게 하려 하심이라 아들을 공경치 아니하는 자는 그를 보내신 아버지를 공경치 아니하느니라	That all men should honour the Son, even as they honour the Father. He that honoureth not the Son honoureth not the Father which hath sent him.	so that all may honor the Son just as they honor the Father. Whoever does not honor the Son does not honor the Father who sent Him.
JHN	5	24	내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 내 말을 듣고 또 나 보내신 이를 믿는 자는 영생을 얻었고 심판에 이르지 아니하나니 사망에서 생명으로 옮겼느니라	Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death unto life.	Truly, truly, I tell you, whoever hears My word and believes Him who sent Me has eternal life and will not come under judgment. Indeed, he has crossed over from death to life.
JHN	5	25	진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 죽은 자들이 하나님의 아들의 음성을 들을 때가 오나니 곧 이 때라 듣는 자는 살아나리라	Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live.	Truly, truly, I tell you, the hour is coming and has now come when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God, and those who hear will live.
JHN	5	26	아버지께서 자기 속에 생명이 있음 같이 아들에게도 생명을 주어 그 속에 있게 하셨고	For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself;	For as the Father has life in Himself, so also He has granted the Son to have life in Himself.
JHN	5	27	또 인자됨을 인하여 심판하는 권세를 주셨느니라	And hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man.	And He has given Him authority to execute judgment, because He is the Son of Man.
JHN	5	28	이를 기이히 여기지 말라 무덤 속에 있는 자가 다 그의 음성을 들을 때가 오나니	Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice,	Do not be amazed at this, for the hour is coming when all who are in their graves will hear His voice
JHN	5	29	선한 일을 행한 자는 생명의 부활로, 악한 일을 행한 자는 심판의 부활로 나오리라	And shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation.	and come out—those who have done good to the resurrection of life, and those who have done evil to the resurrection of judgment.
JHN	5	30	내가 아무 것도 스스로 할 수 없노라 듣는 대로 심판하노니 나는 나의 원대로 하려 하지 않고 나를 보내신 이의 원대로 하려는고로 내 심판은 의로우니라	I can of mine own self do nothing: as I hear, I judge: and my judgment is just; because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me.	I can do nothing by Myself; I judge only as I hear. And My judgment is just, because I do not seek My own will, but the will of Him who sent Me.
JHN	5	31	내가 만일 나를 위하여 증거하면 내 증거는 참되지 아니하되	If I bear witness of myself, my witness is not true.	If I testify about Myself, My testimony is not valid.
JHN	5	32	나를 위하여 증거하시는 이가 따로 있으니 나를 위하여 증거하시는 그 증거가 참인 줄 아노라	There is another that beareth witness of me; and I know that the witness which he witnesseth of me is true.	There is another who testifies about Me, and I know that His testimony about Me is valid.
JHN	5	33	너희가 요한에게 사람을 보내매 요한이 진리에 대하여 증거하였느니라	Ye sent unto John, and he bare witness unto the truth.	You have sent to John, and he has testified to the truth.
JHN	5	34	그러나 나는 사람에게서 증거를 취하지 아니하노라 다만 이 말을 하는 것은 너희로 구원을 얻게 하려 함이니라	But I receive not testimony from man: but these things I say, that ye might be saved.	Even though I do not accept human testimony, I say these things so that you may be saved.
JHN	5	35	요한은 켜서 비취는 등불이라 너희가 일시 그 빛에 즐거이 있기를 원하였거니와	He was a burning and a shining light: and ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his light.	John was a lamp that burned and gave light, and you were willing for a season to bask in his light.
JHN	5	36	내게는 요한의 증거보다 더 큰 증거가 있으니 아버지께서 내게 주사 이루게 하시는 역사 곧 나의 하는 그 역사가 아버지께서 나를 보내신 것을 나를 위하여 증거하는 것이요	But I have greater witness than that of John: for the works which the Father hath given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me, that the Father hath sent me.	But I have testimony more substantial than that of John. For the works that the Father has given Me to accomplish—the very works I am doing—testify about Me that the Father has sent Me.
JHN	5	37	또한 나를 보내신 아버지께서 친히 나를 위하여 증거하셨느니라 너희는 아무 때에도 그 음성을 듣지 못하였고 그 형용을 보지 못하였으며	And the Father himself, which hath sent me, hath borne witness of me. Ye have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape.	And the Father who sent Me has Himself testified about Me. You have never heard His voice nor seen His form,
JHN	5	38	그 말씀이 너희 속에 거하지 아니하니 이는 그의 보내신 자를 믿지 아니함이니라	And ye have not his word abiding in you: for whom he hath sent, him ye believe not.	nor does His word abide in you, because you do not believe the One He sent.
JHN	5	39	너희가 성경에서 영생을 얻는 줄 생각하고 성경을 상고하거니와 이 성경이 곧 내게 대하여 증거하는 것이로다	Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me.	You pore over the Scriptures because you presume that by them you possess eternal life. These are the very words that testify about Me,
JHN	5	40	그러나 너희가 영생을 얻기 위하여 내게 오기를 원하지 아니하는도다	And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life.	yet you refuse to come to Me to have life.
JHN	5	41	나는 사람에게 영광을 취하지 아니하노라	I receive not honour from men.	I do not accept glory from men,
JHN	5	42	다만 하나님을 사랑하는 것이 너희 속에 없음을 알았노라	But I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you.	but I know you, that you do not have the love of God within you.
JHN	5	43	나는 내 아버지의 이름으로 왔으매 너희가 영접지 아니하나 만일 다른 사람이 자기 이름으로 오면 영접하리라	I am come in my Father’s name, and ye receive me not: if another shall come in his own name, him ye will receive.	I have come in My Father’s name, and you have not received Me; but if someone else comes in his own name, you will receive him.
JHN	5	44	너희가 서로 영광을 취하고 유일하신 하나님께로부터 오는 영광은 구하지 아니하니 어찌 나를 믿을 수 있느냐	How can ye believe, which receive honour one of another, and seek not the honour that cometh from God only?	How can you believe if you accept glory from one another, yet do not seek the glory that comes from the only God?
JHN	5	45	내가 너희를 아버지께 고소할까 생각지 말라 너희를 고소하는 이가 있으니 곧 너희의 바라는 자 모세니라	Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father: there is one that accuseth you, even Moses, in whom ye trust.	Do not think that I will accuse you before the Father. Your accuser is Moses, in whom you have put your hope.
JHN	5	46	모세를 믿었더면 또 나를 믿었으리니 이는 그가 내게 대하여 기록하였음이라	For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me: for he wrote of me.	If you had believed Moses, you would believe Me, because he wrote about Me.
JHN	5	47	그러나 그의 글도 믿지 아니하거든 어찌 내 말을 믿겠느냐 하시니라	But if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words?	But since you do not believe what he wrote, how will you believe what I say?”
JHN	6	1	그 후에 예수께서 갈릴리 바다 곧 디베랴 바다 건너편으로 가시매	After these things Jesus went over the sea of Galilee, which is the sea of Tiberias.	After this, Jesus crossed to the other side of the Sea of Galilee (that is, the Sea of Tiberias).
JHN	6	2	큰 무리가 따르니 이는 병인들에게 행하시는 표적을 봄이러라	And a great multitude followed him, because they saw his miracles which he did on them that were diseased.	A large crowd followed Him because they saw the signs He was performing on the sick.
JHN	6	3	예수께서 산에 오르사 제자들과 함께 거기 앉으시니	And Jesus went up into a mountain, and there he sat with his disciples.	Then Jesus went up on the mountain and sat down with His disciples.
JHN	6	4	마침 유대인의 명절인 유월절이 가까운지라	And the passover, a feast of the Jews, was nigh.	Now the Jewish Feast of the Passover was near.
JHN	6	5	예수께서 눈을 들어 큰 무리가 자기에게로 오는 것을 보시고 빌립에게 이르시되 우리가 어디서 떡을 사서 이 사람들로 먹게 하겠느냐 하시니	When Jesus then lifted up his eyes, and saw a great company come unto him, he saith unto Philip, Whence shall we buy bread, that these may eat?	When Jesus looked up and saw a large crowd coming toward Him, He said to Philip, “Where can we buy bread for these people to eat?”
JHN	6	6	이렇게 말씀하심은 친히 어떻게 하실 것을 아시고 빌립을 시험코자 하심이라	And this he said to prove him: for he himself knew what he would do.	But He was asking this to test him, for He knew what He was about to do.
JHN	6	7	빌립이 대답하되 각 사람으로 조금씩 받게 할지라도 이백 데나리온의 떡이 부족하리이다	Philip answered him, Two hundred pennyworth of bread is not sufficient for them, that every one of them may take a little.	Philip answered, “Two hundred denarii would not buy enough bread for each of them to have a small piece.”
JHN	6	8	제자 중 하나 곧 시몬 베드로의 형제 안드레가 예수께 여짜오되	One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother, saith unto him,	One of His disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother, said to Him,
JHN	6	9	여기 한 아이가 있어 보리떡 다섯 개와 물고기 두 마리를 가졌나이다 그러나 그것이 이 많은 사람에게 얼마나 되겠삽나이까	There is a lad here, which hath five barley loaves, and two small fishes: but what are they among so many?	“Here is a boy with five barley loaves and two small fish. But what difference will these make among so many?”
JHN	6	10	예수께서 가라사대 이 사람들로 앉게 하라 하신대 그곳에 잔디가 많은지라 사람들이 앉으니 수효가 오천 쯤 되더라	And Jesus said, Make the men sit down. Now there was much grass in the place. So the men sat down, in number about five thousand.	“Have the people sit down,” Jesus said. Now there was plenty of grass in that place, so the men sat down, about five thousand of them.
JHN	6	11	예수께서 떡을 가져 축사하신 후에 앉은 자들에게 나눠 주시고 고기도 그렇게 저희의 원대로 주시다	And Jesus took the loaves; and when he had given thanks, he distributed to the disciples, and the disciples to them that were set down; and likewise of the fishes as much as they would.	Then Jesus took the loaves and the fish, gave thanks, and distributed to those who were seated as much as they wanted.
JHN	6	12	저희가 배부른 후에 예수께서 제자들에게 이르시되 남은 조각을 거두고 버리는 것이 없게 하라 하시므로	When they were filled, he said unto his disciples, Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost.	And when everyone was full, He said to His disciples, “Gather the pieces that are left over, so that nothing will be wasted.”
JHN	6	13	이에 거두니 보리떡 다섯 개로 먹고 남은 조각이 열두 바구니에 찼더라	Therefore they gathered them together, and filled twelve baskets with the fragments of the five barley loaves, which remained over and above unto them that had eaten.	So they collected them and filled twelve baskets with the pieces of the five barley loaves left over by those who had eaten.
JHN	6	14	그 사람들이 예수의 행하신 이 표적을 보고 말하되 이는 참으로 세상에 오실 그 선지자라 하더라	Then those men, when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did, said, This is of a truth that prophet that should come into the world.	When the people saw the sign that Jesus had performed, they began to say, “Truly this is the Prophet who is to come into the world.”
JHN	6	15	그러므로 예수께서 저희가 와서 자기를 억지로 잡아 임금 삼으려는 줄을 아시고 다시 혼자 산으로 떠나 가시니라	When Jesus therefore perceived that they would come and take him by force, to make him a king, he departed again into a mountain himself alone.	Then Jesus, realizing that they were about to come and make Him king by force, withdrew again to a mountain by Himself.
JHN	6	16	저물매 제자들이 바다에 내려가서	And when even was now come, his disciples went down unto the sea,	When evening came, His disciples went down to the sea,
JHN	6	17	배를 타고 바다를 건너 가버나움으로 가는데 이미 어두웠고 예수는 아직 저희에게 오시지 아니하셨더니	And entered into a ship, and went over the sea toward Capernaum. And it was now dark, and Jesus was not come to them.	got into a boat, and started across the sea to Capernaum. It was already dark, and Jesus had not yet gone out to them.
JHN	6	18	큰 바람이 불어 파도가 일어나더라	And the sea arose by reason of a great wind that blew.	A strong wind was blowing, and the sea grew agitated.
JHN	6	19	제자들이 노를 저어 십여 리쯤 가다가 예수께서 바다 위로 걸어 배에 가까이 오심을 보고 두려워하거늘	So when they had rowed about five and twenty or thirty furlongs, they see Jesus walking on the sea, and drawing nigh unto the ship: and they were afraid.	When they had rowed about three or four miles, they saw Jesus approaching the boat, walking on the sea—and they were terrified.
JHN	6	20	가라사대 내니 두려워 말라 하신대	But he saith unto them, It is I; be not afraid.	But Jesus spoke up: “It is I; do not be afraid.”
JHN	6	21	이에 기뻐서 배로 영접하니 배는 곧 저희의 가려던 땅에 이르렀더라	Then they willingly received him into the ship: and immediately the ship was at the land whither they went.	Then they were willing to take Him into the boat, and at once the boat reached the shore where they were heading.
JHN	6	22	이튿날 바다 건너편에 섰는 무리가 배 한 척 밖에 다른 배가 거기 없는 것과 또 어제 예수께서 제자들과 함께 그 배에 오르지 아니하시고 제자들만 가는 것을 보았더니	The day following, when the people which stood on the other side of the sea saw that there was none other boat there, save that one whereinto his disciples were entered, and that Jesus went not with his disciples into the boat, but that his disciples were gone away alone;	The next day, the crowd that had remained on the other side of the sea realized that only one boat had been there, and that Jesus had not boarded it with His disciples, but they had gone away alone.
JHN	6	23	(그러나 디베랴에서 배들이 주의 축사하신 후 여럿이 떡 먹던 그곳에 가까이 왔더라)	(Howbeit there came other boats from Tiberias nigh unto the place where they did eat bread, after that the Lord had given thanks:)	However, some boats from Tiberias landed near the place where the people had eaten the bread after the Lord had given thanks.
JHN	6	24	무리가 거기 예수도 없으시고 제자들도 없음을 보고 곧 배들을 타고 예수를 찾으러 가버나움으로 가서	When the people therefore saw that Jesus was not there, neither his disciples, they also took shipping, and came to Capernaum, seeking for Jesus.	So when the crowd saw that neither Jesus nor His disciples were there, they got into the boats and went to Capernaum to look for Him.
JHN	6	25	바다 건너편에서 만나 랍비여 어느 때에 여기 오셨나이까 하니	And when they had found him on the other side of the sea, they said unto him, Rabbi, when camest thou hither?	When they found Him on the other side of the sea, they asked Him, “Rabbi, when did You get here?”
JHN	6	26	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 너희가 나를 찾는 것은 표적을 본 까닭이 아니요 떡을 먹고 배부른 까닭이로다	Jesus answered them and said, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Ye seek me, not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves, and were filled.	Jesus replied, “Truly, truly, I tell you, it is not because you saw these signs that you are looking for Me, but because you ate the loaves and had your fill.
JHN	6	27	썩는 양식을 위하여 일하지 말고 영생하도록 있는 양식을 위하여 하라 이 양식은 인자가 너희에게 주리니 인자는 아버지 하나님의 인치신 자니라	Labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth unto everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you: for him hath God the Father sealed.	Do not work for food that perishes, but for food that endures to eternal life, which the Son of Man will give you. For on Him God the Father has placed His seal of approval.”
JHN	6	28	저희가 묻되 우리가 어떻게 하여야 하나님의 일을 하오리이까	Then said they unto him, What shall we do, that we might work the works of God?	Then they inquired, “What must we do to perform the works of God?”
JHN	6	29	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 하나님의 보내신 자를 믿는 것이 하나님의 일이니라 하시니	Jesus answered and said unto them, This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he hath sent.	Jesus replied, “The work of God is this: to believe in the One He has sent.”
JHN	6	30	저희가 묻되 그러면 우리로 보고 당신을 믿게 행하시는 표적이 무엇이니이까 하시는 일이 무엇이니이까	They said therefore unto him, What sign shewest thou then, that we may see, and believe thee? what dost thou work?	So they asked Him, “What sign then will You perform, so that we may see it and believe You? What will You do?
JHN	6	31	기록된 바 하늘에서 저희에게 떡을 주어 먹게 하였다 함과 같이 우리 조상들은 광야에서 만나를 먹었나이다	Our fathers did eat manna in the desert; as it is written, He gave them bread from heaven to eat.	Our fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, as it is written: ‘He gave them bread from heaven to eat.’”
JHN	6	32	예수께서 이르시되 내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 하늘에서 내린 떡은 모세가 준 것이 아니라 오직 내 아버지가 하늘에서 내린 참 떡을 너희에게 주시나니	Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Moses gave you not that bread from heaven; but my Father giveth you the true bread from heaven.	Jesus said to them, “Truly, truly, I tell you, it was not Moses who gave you the bread from heaven, but it is My Father who gives you the true bread from heaven.
JHN	6	33	하나님의 떡은 하늘에서 내려 세상에게 생명을 주는 것이니라	For the bread of God is he which cometh down from heaven, and giveth life unto the world.	For the bread of God is He who comes down from heaven and gives life to the world.”
JHN	6	34	저희가 가로되 주여 이 떡을 항상 우리에게 주소서	Then said they unto him, Lord, evermore give us this bread.	“Sir,” they said, “give us this bread at all times.”
JHN	6	35	예수께서 가라사대 내가 곧 생명의 떡이니 내게 오는 자는 결코 주리지 아니할 터이요 나를 믿는 자는 영원히 목마르지 아니하리라	And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life: he that cometh to me shall never hunger; and he that believeth on me shall never thirst.	Jesus answered, “I am the bread of life. Whoever comes to Me will never hunger, and whoever believes in Me will never thirst.
JHN	6	36	그러나 내가 너희더러 이르기를 너희는 나를 보고도 믿지 아니하는도다 하였느니라	But I said unto you, That ye also have seen me, and believe not.	But as I stated, you have seen Me and still you do not believe.
JHN	6	37	아버지께서 내게 주시는 자는 다 내게로 올 것이요 내게 오는 자는 내가 결코 내어 쫓지 아니하리라	All that the Father giveth me shall come to me; and him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out.	Everyone the Father gives Me will come to Me, and the one who comes to Me I will never drive away.
JHN	6	38	내가 하늘로서 내려온 것은 내 뜻을 행하려 함이 아니요	For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me.	For I have come down from heaven, not to do My own will, but to do the will of Him who sent Me.
JHN	6	39	나를 보내신 이의 뜻을 행하려 함이니라 나를 보내신 이의 뜻은 내게 주신 자 중에 내가 하나도 잃어버리지 아니하고 마지막날에 다시 살리는 이것이니라	And this is the Father’s will which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day.	And this is the will of Him who sent Me, that I shall lose none of those He has given Me, but raise them up at the last day.
JHN	6	40	내 아버지의 뜻은 아들을 보고 믿는 자마다 영생을 얻는 이것이니 마지막 날에 내가 이를 다시 살리리라 하시니라	And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life: and I will raise him up at the last day.	For it is My Father’s will that everyone who looks to the Son and believes in Him shall have eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day.”
JHN	6	41	자기가 하늘로서 내려온 떡이라 하시므로 유대인들이 예수께 대하여 수군거려	The Jews then murmured at him, because he said, I am the bread which came down from heaven.	At this, the Jews began to grumble about Jesus because He had said, “I am the bread that came down from heaven.”
JHN	6	42	가로되 이는 요셉의 아들 예수가 아니냐 그 부모를 우리가 아는데 제가 지금 어찌하여 하늘로서 내려왔다 하느냐	And they said, Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? how is it then that he saith, I came down from heaven?	They were asking, “Is this not Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How then can He say, ‘I have come down from heaven?’”
JHN	6	43	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 너희는 서로 수군거리지 말라	Jesus therefore answered and said unto them, Murmur not among yourselves.	“Stop grumbling among yourselves,” Jesus replied.
JHN	6	44	나를 보내신 아버지께서 이끌지 아니하면 아무라도 내게 올 수 없으니 오는 그를 내가 마지막 날에 다시 살리리라	No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him: and I will raise him up at the last day.	“No one can come to Me unless the Father who sent Me draws him, and I will raise him up at the last day.
JHN	6	45	선지자의 글에 저희가 다 하나님의 가르치심을 받으리라 기록되었은즉 아버지께 듣고 배운 사람마다 내게로 오느니라	It is written in the prophets, And they shall be all taught of God. Every man therefore that hath heard, and hath learned of the Father, cometh unto me.	It is written in the Prophets: ‘And they will all be taught by God.’ Everyone who has heard the Father and learned from Him comes to Me—
JHN	6	46	이는 아버지를 본 자가 다 있는 것이 아니라 오직 하나님에게서 온 자만 아버지를 보았느니라	Not that any man hath seen the Father, save he which is of God, he hath seen the Father.	not that anyone has seen the Father except the One who is from God; only He has seen the Father.
JHN	6	47	진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 믿는 자는 영생을 가졌나니	Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me hath everlasting life.	Truly, truly, I tell you, he who believes has eternal life.
JHN	6	48	내가 곧 생명의 떡이로라	I am that bread of life.	I am the bread of life.
JHN	6	49	너희 조상들은 광야에서 만나를 먹었어도 죽었거니와	Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead.	Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, yet they died.
JHN	6	50	이는 하늘로서 내려오는 떡이니 사람으로 하여금 먹고 죽지 아니하게 하는 것이니라	This is the bread which cometh down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not die.	This is the bread that comes down from heaven, so that anyone may eat of it and not die.
JHN	6	51	나는 하늘로서 내려온 산 떡이니 사람이 이 떡을 먹으면 영생하리라 나의 줄 떡은 곧 세상의 생명을 위한 내 살이로라 하시니라	I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.	I am the living bread that came down from heaven. If anyone eats of this bread, he will live forever. And this bread, which I will give for the life of the world, is My flesh.”
JHN	6	52	이러므로 유대인들이 서로 다투어 가로되 이 사람이 어찌 능히 제 살을 우리에게 주어 먹게 하겠느냐	The Jews therefore strove among themselves, saying, How can this man give us his flesh to eat?	At this, the Jews began to argue among themselves, “How can this man give us His flesh to eat?”
JHN	6	53	예수께서 이르시되 내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 인자의 살을 먹지 아니하고 인자의 피를 마시지 아니하면 너희 속에 생명이 없느니라	Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you.	So Jesus said to them, “Truly, truly, I tell you, unless you eat the flesh and drink the blood of the Son of Man, you have no life in you.
JHN	6	54	내 살을 먹고 내 피를 마시는 자는 영생을 가졌고 마지막 날에 내가 그를 다시 살리리니	Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day.	Whoever eats My flesh and drinks My blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day.
JHN	6	55	내 살은 참된 양식이요 내 피는 참된 음료로다	For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.	For My flesh is real food, and My blood is real drink.
JHN	6	56	내 살을 먹고 내 피를 마시는 자는 내 안에 거하고 나도 그 안에 거하나니	He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him.	Whoever eats My flesh and drinks My blood remains in Me, and I in him.
JHN	6	57	살아 계신 아버지께서 나를 보내시매 내가 아버지로 인하여 사는 것 같이 나를 먹는 그 사람도 나로 인하여 살리라	As the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father: so he that eateth me, even he shall live by me.	Just as the living Father sent Me and I live because of the Father, so also the one who feeds on Me will live because of Me.
JHN	6	58	이것은 하늘로서 내려온 떡이니 조상들이 먹고도 죽은 그것과 같지 아니하여 이 떡을 먹는 자는 영원히 살리라	This is that bread which came down from heaven: not as your fathers did eat manna, and are dead: he that eateth of this bread shall live for ever.	This is the bread that came down from heaven. Unlike your fathers, who ate the manna and died, the one who eats this bread will live forever.”
JHN	6	59	이 말씀은 예수께서 가버나움 회당에서 가르치실 때에 하셨느니라	These things said he in the synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum.	Jesus said this while teaching in the synagogue in Capernaum.
JHN	6	60	제자 중 여럿이 듣고 말하되 이 말씀은 어렵도다 누가 들을 수 있느냐 한대	Many therefore of his disciples, when they had heard this, said, This is an hard saying; who can hear it?	On hearing it, many of His disciples said, “This is a difficult teaching. Who can accept it?”
JHN	6	61	예수께서 스스로 제자들이 이 말씀에 대하여 수근거리는 줄 아시고 가라사대 이 말이 너희에게 걸림이 되느냐	When Jesus knew in himself that his disciples murmured at it, he said unto them, Doth this offend you?	Aware that His disciples were grumbling about this teaching, Jesus asked them, “Does this offend you?
JHN	6	62	그러면 너희가 인자의 이전 있던 곳으로 올라가는 것을 볼 것 같으면 어찌 하려느냐	What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before?	Then what will happen if you see the Son of Man ascend to where He was before?
JHN	6	63	살리는 것은 영이니 육은 무익하니라 내가 너희에게 이른 말이 영이요 생명이라	It is the spirit that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing: the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life.	The Spirit gives life; the flesh profits nothing. The words I have spoken to you are spirit and they are life.
JHN	6	64	그러나 너희 중에 믿지 아니하는 자들이 있느니라 하시니 이는 예수께서 믿지 아니하는 자들이 누구며 자기를 팔 자가 누군지 처음부터 아심이러라	But there are some of you that believe not. For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were that believed not, and who should betray him.	However, there are some of you who do not believe.” (For Jesus had known from the beginning which of them did not believe and who would betray Him.)
JHN	6	65	또 가라사대 이러하므로 전에 너희에게 말하기를 내 아버지께서 오게 하여 주지 아니하시면 누구든지 내게 올 수 없다 하였노라 하시니라	And he said, Therefore said I unto you, that no man can come unto me, except it were given unto him of my Father.	Then Jesus said, “This is why I told you that no one can come to Me unless the Father has granted it to him.”
JHN	6	66	이러므로 제자 중에 많이 물러가고 다시 그와 함께 다니지 아니하더라	From that time many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him.	From that time on many of His disciples turned back and no longer walked with Him.
JHN	6	67	예수께서 열두 제자에게 이르시되 너희도 가려느냐	Then said Jesus unto the twelve, Will ye also go away?	So Jesus asked the Twelve, “Do you want to leave too?”
JHN	6	68	시몬 베드로가 대답하여 주여 영생의 말씀이 계시매 우리가 뉘게로 가오리이까	Then Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the words of eternal life.	Simon Peter replied, “Lord, to whom would we go? You have the words of eternal life.
JHN	6	69	우리가 주는 하나님의 거룩한신 자신 줄 믿고 알았삽나이다	And we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God.	We believe and know that You are the Holy One of God.”
JHN	6	70	예수께서 대답하시되 내가 너희 열둘을 택하지 아니하였느냐 그러나 너희 중에 한 사람은 마귀니라 하시니	Jesus answered them, Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil?	Jesus answered them, “Have I not chosen you, the Twelve? Yet one of you is a devil!”
JHN	6	71	이 말씀은 가룟 시몬의 아들 유다를 가리키심이라 저는 열둘 중의 하나로 예수를 팔 자러라	He spake of Judas Iscariot the son of Simon: for he it was that should betray him, being one of the twelve.	He was speaking about Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot. For although Judas was one of the Twelve, he was later to betray Jesus.
JHN	7	1	이 후에 예수께서 갈릴리에서 다니시고 유대에서 다니려 아니하심은 유대인들이 죽이려 함이러라	After these things Jesus walked in Galilee: for he would not walk in Jewry, because the Jews sought to kill him.	After this, Jesus traveled throughout Galilee. He did not want to travel in Judea, because the Jews there were trying to kill Him.
JHN	7	2	유대인의 명절인 초막절이 가까운지라	Now the Jews’ feast of tabernacles was at hand.	However, the Jewish Feast of Tabernacles was near.
JHN	7	3	그 형제들이 예수께 이르되 당신의 행하는 일을 제자들도 보게 여기를 떠나 유대로 가소서	His brethren therefore said unto him, Depart hence, and go into Judea, that thy disciples also may see the works that thou doest.	So Jesus’ brothers said to Him, “Leave here and go to Judea, so that Your disciples there may see the works You are doing.
JHN	7	4	스스로 나타나기를 구하면서 묻혀서 일하는 사람이 없나니 이 일을 행하려 하거든 자신을 세상에 나타내소서 하니	For there is no man that doeth any thing in secret, and he himself seeketh to be known openly. If thou do these things, shew thyself to the world.	For no one who wants to be known publicly acts in secret. Since You are doing these things, show Yourself to the world.”
JHN	7	5	이는 그 형제들이라도 예수를 믿지 아니함이러라	For neither did his brethren believe in him.	For even His own brothers did not believe in Him.
JHN	7	6	예수께서 가라사대 내 때는 아직 이르지 아니하였거니와 너희 때는 늘 준비되어 있느니라	Then Jesus said unto them, My time is not yet come: but your time is alway ready.	Therefore Jesus told them, “Although your time is always at hand, My time has not yet come.
JHN	7	7	세상이 너희를 미워하지 못하되 나를 미워하나니 이는 내가 세상의 행사를 악하다 증거함이라	The world cannot hate you; but me it hateth, because I testify of it, that the works thereof are evil.	The world cannot hate you, but it hates Me, because I testify that its works are evil.
JHN	7	8	너희는 명절에 올라가라 나는 내 때가 아직 차지 못하였으니 이 명절에 아직 올라가지 아니하노라	Go ye up unto this feast: I go not up yet unto this feast; for my time is not yet full come.	Go up to the feast on your own. I am not going up to this feast, because My time has not yet come.”
JHN	7	9	이 말씀을 하시고 갈릴리에 머물러 계시니라	When he had said these words unto them, he abode still in Galilee.	Having said this, Jesus remained in Galilee.
JHN	7	10	그 형제들이 명절에 올라간 후 자기도 올라가시되 나타내지 않고 비밀히 하시니라	But when his brethren were gone up, then went he also up unto the feast, not openly, but as it were in secret.	But after His brothers had gone up to the feast, He also went—not publicly, but in secret.
JHN	7	11	명절 중에 유대인들이 예수를 찾으면서 그가 어디 있느냐 하고	Then the Jews sought him at the feast, and said, Where is he?	So the Jews were looking for Him at the feast and asking, “Where is He?”
JHN	7	12	예수께 대하여 무리 중에서 수군거림이 많아 혹은 좋은 사람이라 하며 혹은 아니라 무리를 미혹하게 한다 하나	And there was much murmuring among the people concerning him: for some said, He is a good man: others said, Nay; but he deceiveth the people.	Many in the crowds were whispering about Him. Some said, “He is a good man.” But others replied, “No, He deceives the people.”
JHN	7	13	그러나 유대인들을 두려워하므로 드러나게 그를 말하는 자가 없더라	Howbeit no man spake openly of him for fear of the Jews.	Yet no one would speak publicly about Him for fear of the Jews.
JHN	7	14	이미 명절의 중간이 되어 예수께서 성전에 올라가사 가르치시니	Now about the midst of the feast Jesus went up into the temple, and taught.	About halfway through the feast, Jesus went up to the temple courts and began to teach.
JHN	7	15	유대인들이 기이히 여겨 가로되 이 사람은 배우지 아니하였거늘 어떻게 글을 아느냐 하니	And the Jews marvelled, saying, How knoweth this man letters, having never learned?	The Jews were amazed and asked, “How did this man attain such learning without having studied?”
JHN	7	16	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 내 교훈은 내 것이 아니요 나를 보내신 이의 것이니라	Jesus answered them, and said, My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me.	“My teaching is not My own,” Jesus replied. “It comes from Him who sent Me.
JHN	7	17	사람이 하나님의 뜻을 행하려 하면 이 교훈이 하나님께로서 왔는지 내가 스스로 말함인지 알리라	If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself.	If anyone desires to do His will, he will know whether My teaching is from God or whether I speak on My own.
JHN	7	18	스스로 말하는 자는 자기 영광만 구하되 보내신 이의 영광을 구하는 자는 참되니 그 속에 불의가 없느니라	He that speaketh of himself seeketh his own glory: but he that seeketh his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him.	He who speaks on his own authority seeks his own glory, but He who seeks the glory of the One who sent Him is a man of truth; in Him there is no falsehood.
JHN	7	19	모세가 너희에게 율법을 주지 아니하였느냐 너희 중에 율법을 지키는 자가 없도다 너희가 어찌하여 나를 죽이려 하느냐	Did not Moses give you the law, and yet none of you keepeth the law? Why go ye about to kill me?	Has not Moses given you the law? Yet not one of you keeps it. Why are you trying to kill Me?”
JHN	7	20	무리가 대답하되 당신은 귀신이 들렸도다 누가 당신을 죽이려 하나이까	The people answered and said, Thou hast a devil: who goeth about to kill thee?	“You have a demon,” the crowd replied. “Who is trying to kill You?”
JHN	7	21	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 내가 한 가지 일을 행하매 너희가 다 이를 인하여 괴이히 여기는도다	Jesus answered and said unto them, I have done one work, and ye all marvel.	Jesus answered them, “I did one miracle, and you are all amazed.
JHN	7	22	모세가 너희에게 할례를 주었으니 (그러나 할례는 모세에게서 난 것이 아니요 조상들에게서 난 것이라) 그러므로 너희가 안식일에도 사람에게 할례를 주느니라	Moses therefore gave unto you circumcision; (not because it is of Moses, but of the fathers;) and ye on the sabbath day circumcise a man.	But because Moses gave you circumcision, you circumcise a boy on the Sabbath (not that it is from Moses, but from the patriarchs.)
JHN	7	23	모세의 율법을 폐하지 아니하려고 사람이 안식일에도 할례를 받는 일이 있거든 내가 안식일에 사람의 전신을 건전케 한 것으로 너희가 나를 노여워하느냐	If a man on the sabbath day receive circumcision, that the law of Moses should not be broken; are ye angry at me, because I have made a man every whit whole on the sabbath day?	If a boy can be circumcised on the Sabbath so that the law of Moses will not be broken, why are you angry with Me for making the whole man well on the Sabbath?
JHN	7	24	외모로 판단하지 말고 공의의 판단으로 판단하라 하시니라	Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment.	Stop judging by outward appearances, and start judging justly.”
JHN	7	25	예루살렘 사람 중에서 혹이 말하되 이는 저희가 죽이고자 하는 그 사람이 아니냐	Then said some of them of Jerusalem, Is not this he, whom they seek to kill?	Then some of the people of Jerusalem began to say, “Isn’t this the man they are trying to kill?
JHN	7	26	보라 드러나게 말하되 저희가 아무 말도 아니하는도다 당국자들은 이 사람을 참으로 그리스도인 줄 알았는가	But, lo, he speaketh boldly, and they say nothing unto him. Do the rulers know indeed that this is the very Christ?	Yet here He is, speaking publicly, and they are not saying anything to Him. Have the rulers truly recognized that this is the Christ?
JHN	7	27	그러나 우리는 이 사람이 어디서 왔는지 아노라 그리스도께서 오실 때에는 어디서 오시는지 아는 자가 없으리라 하는지라	Howbeit we know this man whence he is: but when Christ cometh, no man knoweth whence he is.	But we know where this man is from. When the Christ comes, no one will know where He is from.”
JHN	7	28	예수께서 성전에서 가르치시며 외쳐 가라사대 너희가 나를 알고 내가 어디서 온 것도 알거니와 내가 스스로 온 것이 아니로라 나를 보내신 이는 참이시니 너희는 그를 알지 못하나	Then cried Jesus in the temple as he taught, saying, Ye both know me, and ye know whence I am: and I am not come of myself, but he that sent me is true, whom ye know not.	Then Jesus, still teaching in the temple courts, cried out, “You know Me, and you know where I am from. I have not come of My own accord, but He who sent Me is true. You do not know Him,
JHN	7	29	나는 아노니 이는 내가 그에게서 났고 그가 나를 보내셨음이니라 하신대	But I know him: for I am from him, and he hath sent me.	but I know Him, because I am from Him and He sent Me.”
JHN	7	30	저희가 예수를 잡고자 하나 손을 대는 자가 없으니 이는 그의 때가 아직 이르지 아니하였음이러라	Then they sought to take him: but no man laid hands on him, because his hour was not yet come.	So they tried to seize Him, but no one laid a hand on Him, because His hour had not yet come.
JHN	7	31	무리 중에 많은 사람이 예수를 믿고 말하되 그리스도께서 오실지라도 그 행하실 표적이 이 사람의 행한 것보다 더 많으랴 하니	And many of the people believed on him, and said, When Christ cometh, will he do more miracles than these which this man hath done?	Many in the crowd, however, believed in Him and said, “When the Christ comes, will He perform more signs than this man?”
JHN	7	32	예수께 대하여 무리의 수군거리는 것이 바리새인들에게 들린지라 대제사장들과 바리새인들이 그를 잡으려고 하속들을 보내니	The Pharisees heard that the people murmured such things concerning him; and the Pharisees and the chief priests sent officers to take him.	When the Pharisees heard the crowd whispering these things about Jesus, they and the chief priests sent officers to arrest Him.
JHN	7	33	예수께서 이르시되 내가 너희와 함께 조금 더 있다가 나를 보내신 이에게로 돌아가겠노라	Then said Jesus unto them, Yet a little while am I with you, and then I go unto him that sent me.	So Jesus said, “I am with you only a little while longer, and then I am going to the One who sent Me.
JHN	7	34	너희가 나를 찾아도 만나지 못할 터이요 나 있는 곳에 오지도 못하리라 하신대	Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me: and where I am, thither ye cannot come.	You will look for Me, but you will not find Me; and where I am, you cannot come.”
JHN	7	35	이에 유대인들이 서로 묻되 이 사람이 어디로 가기에 우리가 저를 만나지 못하리요 헬라인 중에 흩어져 사는 자들에게로 가서 헬라인을 가르칠 터인가	Then said the Jews among themselves, Whither will he go, that we shall not find him? will he go unto the dispersed among the Gentiles, and teach the Gentiles?	At this, the Jews said to one another, “Where does He intend to go that we will not find Him? Will He go where the Jews are dispersed among the Greeks, and teach the Greeks?
JHN	7	36	나를 찾아도 만나지 못할 터이요 나 있는 곳에 오지도 못하리라 한 이 말이 무슨 말이냐 하니라	What manner of saying is this that he said, Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me: and where I am, thither ye cannot come?	What does He mean by saying, ‘You will look for Me, but you will not find Me,’ and, ‘Where I am, you cannot come’?”
JHN	7	37	명절 끝날 곧 큰 날에 예수께서 서서 외쳐 가라사대 누구든지 목마르거든 내게로 와서 마시라	In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink.	On the last and greatest day of the feast, Jesus stood up and called out in a loud voice, “If anyone is thirsty, let him come to Me and drink.
JHN	7	38	나를 믿는 자는 성경에 이름과 같이 그 배에서 생수의 강이 흘러나리라 하시니	He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water.	Whoever believes in Me, as the Scripture has said: ‘Streams of living water will flow from within him.’”
JHN	7	39	이는 그를 믿는 자의 받을 성령을 가리켜 말씀하신 것이라 (예수께서 아직 영광을 받지 못하신고로 성령이 아직 저희에게 계시지 아니하시더라)	(But this spake he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive: for the Holy Ghost was not yet given; because that Jesus was not yet glorified.)	He was speaking about the Spirit, whom those who believed in Him were later to receive. For the Spirit had not yet been given, because Jesus had not yet been glorified.
JHN	7	40	이 말씀을 들은 무리 중에서 혹은 이가 참으로 그 선지자라 하며	Many of the people therefore, when they heard this saying, said, Of a truth this is the Prophet.	On hearing these words, some of the people said, “This is truly the Prophet.”
JHN	7	41	혹은 그리스도라 하며 어떤 이들은 그리스도가 어찌 갈릴리에서 나오겠느냐	Others said, This is the Christ. But some said, Shall Christ come out of Galilee?	Others declared, “This is the Christ.” But still others asked, “How can the Christ come from Galilee?
JHN	7	42	성경에 이르기를 그리스도는 다윗의 씨로 또 다윗의 살던 촌 베들레헴에서 나오리라 하지 아니하였느냐 하며	Hath not the scripture said, That Christ cometh of the seed of David, and out of the town of Bethlehem, where David was?	Doesn’t the Scripture say that the Christ will come from the line of David and from Bethlehem, the village where David lived?”
JHN	7	43	예수를 인하여 무리 중에서 쟁론이 되니	So there was a division among the people because of him.	So there was division in the crowd because of Jesus.
JHN	7	44	그 중에는 그를 잡고자 하는 자들도 있으나 손을 대는 자가 없었더라	And some of them would have taken him; but no man laid hands on him.	Some of them wanted to seize Him, but no one laid a hand on Him.
JHN	7	45	하속들이 대제사장들과 바리새인들에게로 오니 저희가 묻되 어찌하여 잡아오지 아니하였느냐	Then came the officers to the chief priests and Pharisees; and they said unto them, Why have ye not brought him?	Then the officers returned to the chief priests and Pharisees, who asked them, “Why didn’t you bring Him in?”
JHN	7	46	하속들이 대답하되 그 사람의 말하는 것처럼 말한 사람은 이 때까지 없었나이다 하니	The officers answered, Never man spake like this man.	“Never has anyone spoken like this man!” the officers answered.
JHN	7	47	바리새인들이 대답하되 너희도 미혹되었느냐	Then answered them the Pharisees, Are ye also deceived?	“Have you also been deceived?” replied the Pharisees.
JHN	7	48	당국자들이나 바리새인 중에 그를 믿는 이가 있느냐	Have any of the rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him?	“Have any of the rulers or Pharisees believed in Him?
JHN	7	49	율법을 알지 못하는 이 무리는 저주를 받은 자로다	But this people who knoweth not the law are cursed.	But this crowd that does not know the law, they are under a curse.”
JHN	7	50	그 중에 한 사람 곧 전에 예수께 왔던 니고데모가 저희에게 말하되	Nicodemus saith unto them, (he that came to Jesus by night, being one of them,)	Nicodemus, who had gone to Jesus earlier and who himself was one of them, asked,
JHN	7	51	우리 율법은 사람의 말을 듣고 그 행한 것을 알기 전에 판결하느냐	Doth our law judge any man, before it hear him, and know what he doeth?	“Does our law convict a man without first hearing from him to determine what he has done?”
JHN	7	52	저희가 대답하여 가로되 너도 갈릴리에서 왔느냐 상고하여 보라 갈릴리에서는 선지자가 나지 못하느니라 하였더라	They answered and said unto him, Art thou also of Galilee? Search, and look: for out of Galilee ariseth no prophet.	“Aren’t you also from Galilee?” they replied. “Look into it, and you will see that no prophet comes out of Galilee.”
JHN	7	53	[다 각각 집으로 돌아가고	And every man went unto his own house.	Then each went to his own home.
JHN	8	1	예수는 감람 산으로 가시다	Jesus went unto the mount of Olives.	But Jesus went to the Mount of Olives.
JHN	8	2	아침에 다시 성전으로 들어오시니 백성이 다 나오는지라 앉으사 저희를 가르치시더니	And early in the morning he came again into the temple, and all the people came unto him; and he sat down, and taught them.	Early in the morning He went back into the temple courts. All the people came to Him, and He sat down to teach them.
JHN	8	3	서기관들과 바리새인들이 간음 중에 잡힌 여자를 끌고 와서 가운데 세우고	And the scribes and Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in adultery; and when they had set her in the midst,	The scribes and Pharisees, however, brought to Him a woman caught in adultery. They made her stand before them
JHN	8	4	예수께 말하되 선생이여 이 여자가 간음하다가 현장에서 잡혔나이다	They say unto him, Master, this woman was taken in adultery, in the very act.	and said, “Teacher, this woman was caught in the act of adultery.
JHN	8	5	모세는 율법에 이러한 여자를 돌로 치라 명하였거니와 선생은 어떻게 말하겠나이까	Now Moses in the law commanded us, that such should be stoned: but what sayest thou?	In the Law Moses commanded us to stone such a woman. So what do You say?”
JHN	8	6	저희가 이렇게 말함은 고소할 조건을 얻고자 하여 예수를 시험함이러라 예수께서 몸을 굽히사 손가락으로 땅에 쓰시니	This they said, tempting him, that they might have to accuse him. But Jesus stooped down, and with his finger wrote on the ground, as though he heard them not.	They said this to test Him, in order to have a basis for accusing Him. But Jesus bent down and began to write on the ground with His finger.
JHN	8	7	저희가 묻기를 마지 아니하는지라 이에 일어나 가라사대 너희 중에 죄 없는 자가 먼저 돌로 치라 하시고	So when they continued asking him, he lifted up himself, and said unto them, He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her.	When they continued to question Him, He straightened up and said to them, “Let him who is without sin among you be the first to cast a stone at her.”
JHN	8	8	다시 몸을 굽히사 손가락으로 땅에 쓰시니	And again he stooped down, and wrote on the ground.	And again He bent down and wrote on the ground.
JHN	8	9	저희가 이 말씀을 듣고 양심의 가책을 받아 어른으로 시작하여 젊은이까지 하나씩 하나씩 나가고 오직 예수와 그 가운데 섰는 여자만 남았더라	And they which heard it, being convicted by their own conscience, went out one by one, beginning at the eldest, even unto the last: and Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in the midst.	When they heard this, they began to go away one by one, beginning with the older ones, until only Jesus was left, with the woman standing there.
JHN	8	10	예수께서 일어나사 여자 외에 아무도 없는 것을 보시고 이르시되 여자여 너를 고소하던 그들이 어디 있느냐 너를 정죄한 자가 없느냐	When Jesus had lifted up himself, and saw none but the woman, he said unto her, Woman, where are those thine accusers? hath no man condemned thee?	Then Jesus straightened up and asked her, “Woman, where are your accusers? Has no one condemned you?”
JHN	8	11	대답하되 주여 없나이다 예수께서 가라사대 나도 너를 정죄하지 아니하노니 가서 다시는 죄를 범치 말라 하시니라]	She said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more.	“No one, Lord,” she answered. “Then neither do I condemn you,” Jesus declared. “Now go and sin no more.”
JHN	8	12	예수께서 또 일러 가라사대 나는 세상의 빛이니 나를 따르는 자는 어두움에 다니지 아니하고 생명의 빛을 얻으리라	Then spake Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life.	Once again, Jesus spoke to the people and said, “I am the light of the world. Whoever follows Me will never walk in the darkness, but will have the light of life.”
JHN	8	13	바리새인들이 가로되 네가 너를 위하여 증거하니 네 증거는 참되지 아니하도다	The Pharisees therefore said unto him, Thou bearest record of thyself; thy record is not true.	So the Pharisees said to Him, “You are testifying about Yourself; Your testimony is not valid.”
JHN	8	14	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 내가 나를 위하여 증거하여도 내 증거가 참되니 나는 내가 어디서 오며 어디로 가는 것을 앎이어니와 너희는 내가 어디서 오며 어디로 가는 것을 알지 못하느니라	Jesus answered and said unto them, Though I bear record of myself, yet my record is true: for I know whence I came, and whither I go; but ye cannot tell whence I come, and whither I go.	Jesus replied, “Even if I testify about Myself, My testimony is valid, because I know where I came from and where I am going. But you do not know where I came from or where I am going.
JHN	8	15	너희는 육체를 따라 판단하나 나는 아무도 판단치 아니하노라	Ye judge after the flesh; I judge no man.	You judge according to the flesh; I judge no one.
JHN	8	16	만일 내가 판단하여도 내 판단이 참되니 이는 내가 혼자 있는 것이 아니요 나를 보내신 이가 나와 함께 계심이라	And yet if I judge, my judgment is true: for I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me.	But even if I do judge, My judgment is true, because I am not alone; I am with the Father who sent Me.
JHN	8	17	너희 율법에도 두 사람의 증거가 참되다 기록하였으니	It is also written in your law, that the testimony of two men is true.	Even in your own Law it is written that the testimony of two men is valid.
JHN	8	18	내가 나를 위하여 증거하는 자가 되고 나를 보내신 아버지도 나를 위하여 증거하시느니라	I am one that bear witness of myself, and the Father that sent me beareth witness of me.	I am One who testifies about Myself, and the Father, who sent Me, also testifies about Me.”
JHN	8	19	이에 저희가 묻되 네 아버지가 어디 있느냐 예수께서 대답하시되 너희는 나를 알지 못하고 내 아버지도 알지 못하는도다 나를 알았더면 내 아버지도 알았으리라	Then said they unto him, Where is thy Father? Jesus answered, Ye neither know me, nor my Father: if ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also.	“Where is Your Father?” they asked Him. “You do not know Me or My Father,” Jesus answered. “If you knew Me, you would know My Father as well.”
JHN	8	20	이 말씀은 성전에서 가르치실 때에 연보궤 앞에서 하셨으나 잡는 사람이 없으니 이는 그의 때가 아직 이르지 아니하였음이러라	These words spake Jesus in the treasury, as he taught in the temple: and no man laid hands on him; for his hour was not yet come.	He spoke these words while teaching in the temple courts, near the treasury. Yet no one seized Him, because His hour had not yet come.
JHN	8	21	다시 이르시되 내가 가리니 너희가 나를 찾다가 너희 죄 가운데서 죽겠고 나의 가는 곳에는 너희가 오지 못하리라	Then said Jesus again unto them, I go my way, and ye shall seek me, and shall die in your sins: whither I go, ye cannot come.	Again He said to them, “I am going away, and you will look for Me, but you will die in your sin. Where I am going, you cannot come.”
JHN	8	22	유대인들이 가로되 저가 나의 가는 곳에는 너희가 오지 못하리라 하니 저가 자결하려는가	Then said the Jews, Will he kill himself? because he saith, Whither I go, ye cannot come.	So the Jews began to ask, “Will He kill Himself, since He says, ‘Where I am going, you cannot come’?”
JHN	8	23	예수께서 가라사대 너희는 아래서 났고 나는 위에서 났으며 너희는 이 세상에 속하였고 나는 이 세상에 속하지 아니하였느니라	And he said unto them, Ye are from beneath; I am from above: ye are of this world; I am not of this world.	Then He told them, “You are from below; I am from above. You are of this world; I am not of this world.
JHN	8	24	이러므로 내가 너희에게 말하기를 너희가 너희 죄 가운데서 죽으리라 하였노라 너희가 만일 내가 그인 줄 믿지 아니하면 너희 죄 가운데서 죽으리라	I said therefore unto you, that ye shall die in your sins: for if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins.	That is why I told you that you would die in your sins. For unless you believe that I am He, you will die in your sins.”
JHN	8	25	저희가 말하되 네가 누구냐 예수께서 가라사대 나는 처음부터 너희에게 말하여 온 자니라	Then said they unto him, Who art thou? And Jesus saith unto them, Even the same that I said unto you from the beginning.	“Who are You?” they asked. “Just what I have been telling you from the beginning,” Jesus replied.
JHN	8	26	내가 너희를 대하여 말하고 판단할 것이 많으나 나를 보내신 이가 참되시매 내가 그에게 들은 그것을 세상에게 말하노라 하시되	I have many things to say and to judge of you: but he that sent me is true; and I speak to the world those things which I have heard of him.	“I have much to say about you and much to judge. But the One who sent Me is truthful, and what I have heard from Him, I tell the world.”
JHN	8	27	저희는 아버지를 가리켜 말씀하신 줄을 깨닫지 못하더라	They understood not that he spake to them of the Father.	They did not understand that He was telling them about the Father.
JHN	8	28	이에 예수께서 가라사대 너희는 인자를 든 후에 내가 그인 줄을 알고 또 내가 스스로 아무 것도 하지 아니하고 오직 아버지께서 가르치신 대로 이런 것을 말하는 줄도 알리라	Then said Jesus unto them, When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then shall ye know that I am he, and that I do nothing of myself; but as my Father hath taught me, I speak these things.	So Jesus said, “When you have lifted up the Son of Man, then you will know that I am He, and that I do nothing on My own, but speak exactly what the Father has taught Me.
JHN	8	29	나를 보내신 이가 나와 함께 하시도다 내가 항상 그의 기뻐하시는 일을 행하므로 나를 혼자 두지 아니하셨느니라	And he that sent me is with me: the Father hath not left me alone; for I do always those things that please him.	He who sent Me is with Me. He has not left Me alone, because I always do what pleases Him.”
JHN	8	30	이 말씀을 하시매 많은 사람이 믿더라	As he spake these words, many believed on him.	As Jesus spoke these things, many believed in Him.
JHN	8	31	그러므로 예수께서 자기를 믿은 유대인들에게 이르시되 너희가 내 말에 거하면 참 내 제자가 되고	Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him, If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed;	So He said to the Jews who had believed Him, “If you continue in My word, you are truly My disciples.
JHN	8	32	진리를 알지니 진리가 너희를 자유케 하리라	And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.	Then you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.”
JHN	8	33	저희가 대답하되 우리가 아브라함의 자손이라 남의 종이 된 적이 없거늘 어찌하여 우리가 자유케 되리라 하느냐	They answered him, We be Abraham’s seed, and were never in bondage to any man: how sayest thou, Ye shall be made free?	“We are Abraham’s descendants,” they answered. “We have never been slaves to anyone. How can You say we will be set free?”
JHN	8	34	예수께서 대답하시되 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 죄를 범하는 자마다 죄의 종이라	Jesus answered them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whosoever committeth sin is the servant of sin.	Jesus replied, “Truly, truly, I tell you, everyone who sins is a slave to sin.
JHN	8	35	종은 영원히 집에 거하지 못하되 아들은 영원히 거하나니	And the servant abideth not in the house for ever: but the Son abideth ever.	A slave is not a permanent member of the family, but a son belongs to it forever.
JHN	8	36	그러므로 아들이 너희를 자유케 하면 너희가 참으로 자유하리라	If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.	So if the Son sets you free, you will be free indeed.
JHN	8	37	나도 너희가 아브라함의 자손인 줄 아노라 그러나 내 말이 너희 속에 있을 곳이 없으므로 나를 죽이려 하는도다	I know that ye are Abraham’s seed; but ye seek to kill me, because my word hath no place in you.	I know you are Abraham’s descendants, but you are trying to kill Me because My word has no place within you.
JHN	8	38	나는 내 아버지에게서 본 것을 말하고 너희는 너희 아비에게서 들은 것을 행하느니라	I speak that which I have seen with my Father: and ye do that which ye have seen with your father.	I speak of what I have seen in the presence of the Father, and you do what you have heard from your father.”
JHN	8	39	대답하여 가로되 우리 아버지는 아브라함이라 하니 예수께서 가라사대 너희가 아브라함의 자손이면 아브라함의 행사를 할 것이어늘	They answered and said unto him, Abraham is our father. Jesus saith unto them, If ye were Abraham’s children, ye would do the works of Abraham.	“Abraham is our father,” they replied. “If you were children of Abraham,” said Jesus, “you would do the works of Abraham.
JHN	8	40	지금 하나님께 들은 진리를 너희에게 말한 사람인 나를 죽이려 하는도다 아브라함은 이렇게 하지 아니하였느니라	But now ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth, which I have heard of God: this did not Abraham.	But now you are trying to kill Me, a man who has told you the truth that I heard from God. Abraham never did such a thing.
JHN	8	41	너희는 너희 아비의 행사를 하는도다 대답하되 우리가 음란한 데서 나지 아니하였고 아버지는 한 분뿐이시니 곧 하나님이시로다	Ye do the deeds of your father. Then said they to him, We be not born of fornication; we have one Father, even God.	You are doing the works of your father.” “We are not illegitimate children,” they declared. “Our only Father is God Himself.”
JHN	8	42	예수께서 가라사대 하나님이 너희 아버지였으면 너희가 나를 사랑하였으리니 이는 내가 하나님께로 나서 왔음이라 나는 스스로 온 것이 아니요 아버지께서 나를 보내신 것이니라	Jesus said unto them, If God were your Father, ye would love me: for I proceeded forth and came from God; neither came I of myself, but he sent me.	Jesus said to them, “If God were your Father, you would love Me, for I have come here from God. I have not come on My own, but He sent Me.
JHN	8	43	어찌하여 내 말을 깨닫지 못하느냐 이는 내 말을 들을 줄 알지 못함이로다	Why do ye not understand my speech? even because ye cannot hear my word.	Why do you not understand what I am saying? It is because you are unable to accept My message.
JHN	8	44	너희는 너희 아비 마귀에게서 났으니 너희 아비의 욕심을 너희도 행하고자 하느니라 저는 처음부터 살인한 자요 진리가 그 속에 없으므로 진리에 서지 못하고 거짓을 말할 때마다 제 것으로 말하나니 이는 저가 거짓말장이요 거짓의 아비가 되었음이니라	Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it.	You belong to your father, the devil, and you want to carry out his desires. He was a murderer from the beginning, refusing to uphold the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he lies, he speaks his native language, because he is a liar and the father of lies.
JHN	8	45	내가 진리를 말하므로 너희가 나를 믿지 아니하는도다	And because I tell you the truth, ye believe me not.	But because I speak the truth, you do not believe Me!
JHN	8	46	너희 중에 누가 나를 죄로 책잡겠느냐 내가 진리를 말하매 어찌하여 나를 믿지 아니하느냐	Which of you convinceth me of sin? And if I say the truth, why do ye not believe me?	Which of you can prove Me guilty of sin? If I speak the truth, why do you not believe Me?
JHN	8	47	하나님께 속한 자는 하나님의 말씀을 듣나니 너희가 듣지 아니함은 하나님께 속하지 아니하였음이로다	He that is of God heareth God’s words: ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God.	Whoever belongs to God hears the words of God. The reason you do not hear is that you do not belong to God.”
JHN	8	48	유대인들이 대답하여 가로되 우리가 너를 사마리아 사람이라 또는 귀신이 들렸다 하는 말이 옳지 아니하냐	Then answered the Jews, and said unto him, Say we not well that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a devil?	The Jews answered Him, “Are we not right to say that You are a Samaritan and You have a demon?”
JHN	8	49	예수께서 대답하시되 나는 귀신 들린 것이 아니라 오직 내 아버지를 공경함이어늘 너희가 나를 무시하는도다	Jesus answered, I have not a devil; but I honour my Father, and ye do dishonour me.	“I do not have a demon,” Jesus replied, “but I honor My Father, and you dishonor Me.
JHN	8	50	나는 내 영광을 구치 아니하나 구하고 판단하시는 이가 계시니라	And I seek not mine own glory: there is one that seeketh and judgeth.	I do not seek My own glory. There is One who seeks it, and He is the Judge.
JHN	8	51	진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 사람이 내 말을 지키면 죽음을 영원히 보지 아니하리라	Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a man keep my saying, he shall never see death.	Truly, truly, I tell you, if anyone keeps My word, he will never see death.”
JHN	8	52	유대인들이 가로되 지금 네가 귀신들린 줄을 아노라 아브라함과 선지자들도 죽었거늘 네 말은 사람이 내 말을 지키면 죽음을 영원히 맛보지 아니하리라 하니	Then said the Jews unto him, Now we know that thou hast a devil. Abraham is dead, and the prophets; and thou sayest, If a man keep my saying, he shall never taste of death.	“Now we know that You have a demon!” declared the Jews. “Abraham died, and so did the prophets, yet You say that anyone who keeps Your word will never taste death.
JHN	8	53	너는 이미 죽은 우리 조상 아브라함보다 크냐 또 선지자들도 죽었거늘 너는 너를 누구라 하느냐	Art thou greater than our father Abraham, which is dead? and the prophets are dead: whom makest thou thyself?	Are You greater than our father Abraham? He died, as did the prophets. Who do You claim to be?”
JHN	8	54	예수께서 대답하시되 내가 내게 영광을 돌리면 내 영광이 아무 것도 아니어니와 내게 영광을 돌리시는 이는 내 아버지시니 곧 너희가 너희 하나님이라 칭하는 그이시라	Jesus answered, If I honour myself, my honour is nothing: it is my Father that honoureth me; of whom ye say, that he is your God:	Jesus answered, “If I glorify Myself, My glory means nothing. The One who glorifies Me is My Father, of whom you say ‘He is our God.’
JHN	8	55	너희는 그를 알지 못하되 나는 아노니 만일 내가 알지 못한다 하면 나도 너희 같이 거짓말장이가 되리라 나는 그를 알고 또 그의 말씀을 지키노라	Yet ye have not known him; but I know him: and if I should say, I know him not, I shall be a liar like unto you: but I know him, and keep his saying.	You do not know Him, but I know Him. If I said I did not know Him, I would be a liar like you. But I do know Him, and I keep His word.
JHN	8	56	너희 조상 아브라함은 나의 때 볼 것을 즐거워하다가 보고 기뻐하였느니라	Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad.	Your father Abraham rejoiced that he would see My day. He saw it and was glad.”
JHN	8	57	유대인들이 가로되 네가 아직 오십도 못되었는데 아브라함을 보았느냐	Then said the Jews unto him, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast thou seen Abraham?	Then the Jews said to Him, “You are not yet fifty years old, and You have seen Abraham?”
JHN	8	58	예수께서 가라사대 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 아브라함이 나기 전부터 내가 있느니라 하시니	Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am.	“Truly, truly, I tell you,” Jesus declared, “before Abraham was born, I am!”
JHN	8	59	저희가 돌을 들어 치려 하거늘 예수께서 숨어 성전에서 나가시니라	Then took they up stones to cast at him: but Jesus hid himself, and went out of the temple, going through the midst of them, and so passed by.	At this, they picked up stones to throw at Him. But Jesus was hidden and went out of the temple area.
JHN	9	1	예수께서 길 가실 때에 날 때부터 소경 된 사람을 보신지라	And as Jesus passed by, he saw a man which was blind from his birth.	Now as Jesus was passing by, He saw a man blind from birth,
JHN	9	2	제자들이 물어 가로되 랍비여 이 사람이 소경으로 난 것이 뉘 죄로 인함이오니이까 자기오니이까 그 부모오니이까	And his disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind?	and His disciples asked Him, “Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he was born blind?”
JHN	9	3	예수께서 대답하시되 이 사람이나 그 부모가 죄를 범한 것이 아니라 그에게서 하나님의 하시는 일을 나타내고자 하심이니라	Jesus answered, Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the works of God should be made manifest in him.	Jesus answered, “Neither this man nor his parents sinned, but this happened so that the works of God would be displayed in him.
JHN	9	4	때가 아직 낮이매 나를 보내신 이의 일을 우리가 하여야 하리라 밤이 오리니 그 때는 아무도 일할 수 없느니라	I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day: the night cometh, when no man can work.	While it is daytime, we must do the works of Him who sent Me. Night is coming, when no one can work.
JHN	9	5	내가 세상에 있는 동안에는 세상의 빛이로라	As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.	While I am in the world, I am the light of the world.”
JHN	9	6	이 말씀을 하시고 땅에 침을 뱉아 진흙을 이겨 그의 눈에 바르시고	When he had thus spoken, he spat on the ground, and made clay of the spittle, and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay,	When Jesus had said this, He spit on the ground, made some mud, and applied it to the man’s eyes.
JHN	9	7	이르시되 실로암 못에 가서 씻으라 하시니 (실로암은 번역하면 보냄을 받았다는 뜻이라) 이에 가서 씻고 밝은 눈으로 왔더라	And said unto him, Go, wash in the pool of Siloam, (which is by interpretation, Sent.) He went his way therefore, and washed, and came seeing.	Then He told him, “Go, wash in the Pool of Siloam” (which means “Sent”). So the man went and washed, and came back seeing.
JHN	9	8	이웃 사람들과 및 전에 저가 걸인인 것을 보았던 사람들이 가로되 이는 앉아서 구걸하던 자가 아니냐	The neighbours therefore, and they which before had seen him that he was blind, said, Is not this he that sat and begged?	At this, his neighbors and those who had formerly seen him begging began to ask, “Isn’t this the man who used to sit and beg?”
JHN	9	9	혹은 그 사람이라 하며 혹은 아니라 그와 비슷하다 하거늘 제 말은 내가 그로라 하니	Some said, This is he: others said, He is like him: but he said, I am he.	Some claimed that he was, but others said, “No, he just looks like him.” But the man kept saying, “I am the one.”
JHN	9	10	저희가 묻되 그러면 네 눈이 어떻게 떠졌느냐	Therefore said they unto him, How were thine eyes opened?	“How then were your eyes opened?” they asked.
JHN	9	11	대답하되 예수라 하는 그 사람이 진흙을 이겨 내 눈에 바르고 나더러 실로암에 가서 씻으라 하기에 가서 씻었더니 보게 되었노라	He answered and said, A man that is called Jesus made clay, and anointed mine eyes, and said unto me, Go to the pool of Siloam, and wash: and I went and washed, and I received sight.	He answered, “The man they call Jesus made some mud and anointed my eyes, and He told me to go to Siloam and wash. So I went and washed and received my sight.”
JHN	9	12	저희가 가로되 그가 어디 있느냐 가로되 알지 못하노라 하니라	Then said they unto him, Where is he? He said, I know not.	“Where is He?” they asked. “I do not know,” he answered.
JHN	9	13	저희가 전에 소경 되었던 사람을 데리고 바리새인들에게 갔더라	They brought to the Pharisees him that aforetime was blind.	They brought to the Pharisees the man who had been blind.
JHN	9	14	예수께서 진흙을 이겨 눈을 뜨게 하신 날은 안식일이라	And it was the sabbath day when Jesus made the clay, and opened his eyes.	Now the day on which Jesus had made the mud and opened his eyes was a Sabbath.
JHN	9	15	그러므로 바리새인들도 그 어떻게 보게 된 것을 물으니 가로되 그 사람이 진흙을 내 눈에 바르매 내가 씻고 보나이다 하니	Then again the Pharisees also asked him how he had received his sight. He said unto them, He put clay upon mine eyes, and I washed, and do see.	So the Pharisees also asked him how he had received his sight. The man answered, “He put mud on my eyes, and I washed, and now I can see.”
JHN	9	16	바리새인 중에 혹은 말하되 이 사람이 안식일을 지키지 아니하니 하나님께로서 온 자가 아니라 하며 혹은 말하되 죄인으로서 어떻게 이러한 표적을 행하겠느냐 하여 피차 쟁론이 되었더니	Therefore said some of the Pharisees, This man is not of God, because he keepeth not the sabbath day. Others said, How can a man that is a sinner do such miracles? And there was a division among them.	Because of this, some of the Pharisees said, “This man is not from God, for He does not keep the Sabbath.” But others said, “How can a sinful man perform such signs?” And there was division among them.
JHN	9	17	이에 소경 되었던 자에게 다시 묻되 그 사람이 네 눈을 뜨게 하였으니 너는 그를 어떠한 사람이라 하느냐 대답하되 선지자니이다 한대	They say unto the blind man again, What sayest thou of him, that he hath opened thine eyes? He said, He is a prophet.	So once again they asked the man who had been blind, “What do you say about Him, since it was your eyes He opened?” “He is a prophet,” the man replied.
JHN	9	18	유대인들이 저가 소경으로 있다가 보게 된 것을 믿지 아니하고 그 부모를 불러 묻되	But the Jews did not believe concerning him, that he had been blind, and received his sight, until they called the parents of him that had received his sight.	The Jews still did not believe that the man had been blind and had received his sight until they summoned his parents
JHN	9	19	이는 너희 말에 소경으로 났다 하는 너희 아들이냐 그러면 지금은 어떻게 되어 보느냐	And they asked them, saying, Is this your son, who ye say was born blind? how then doth he now see?	and asked, “Is this your son, the one you say was born blind? So how is it that he can now see?”
JHN	9	20	그 부모가 대답하여 가로되 이가 우리 아들인 것과 소경으로 난 것을 아나이다	His parents answered them and said, We know that this is our son, and that he was born blind:	His parents answered, “We know he is our son, and we know he was born blind.
JHN	9	21	그러나 지금 어떻게 되어 보는지 또는 누가 그 눈을 뜨게 하였는지 우리는 알지 못하나이다 저에게 물어 보시오 저가 장성하였으니 자기 일을 말하리이다	But by what means he now seeth, we know not; or who hath opened his eyes, we know not: he is of age; ask him: he shall speak for himself.	But how he can now see or who opened his eyes, we do not know. Ask him. He is old enough to speak for himself.”
JHN	9	22	그 부모가 이렇게 말한 것은 이미 유대인들이 누구든지 예수를 그리스도로 시인하는 자는 출교하기로 결의하였으므로 저희를 무서워함이러라	These words spake his parents, because they feared the Jews: for the Jews had agreed already, that if any man did confess that he was Christ, he should be put out of the synagogue.	His parents said this because they were afraid of the Jews. For the Jews had already determined that anyone who confessed Jesus as the Christ would be put out of the synagogue.
JHN	9	23	이러므로 그 부모가 말하기를 저가 장성하였으니 저에게 물어 보시오 하였더라	Therefore said his parents, He is of age; ask him.	That was why his parents said, “He is old enough. Ask him.”
JHN	9	24	이에 저희가 소경 되었던 사람을 두번째 불러 이르되 너는 영광을 하나님께 돌리라 우리는 저 사람이 죄인인 줄 아노라	Then again called they the man that was blind, and said unto him, Give God the praise: we know that this man is a sinner.	So a second time they called for the man who had been blind and said, “Give glory to God! We know that this man is a sinner.”
JHN	9	25	대답하되 그가 죄인인지 내가 알지 못하나 한 가지 아는 것은 내가 소경으로 있다가 지금 보는 그것이니이다	He answered and said, Whether he be a sinner or no, I know not: one thing I know, that, whereas I was blind, now I see.	He answered, “Whether He is a sinner I do not know. There is one thing I do know: I was blind, but now I see!”
JHN	9	26	저희가 가로되 그 사람이 네게 무엇을 하였느냐 어떻게 네 눈을 뜨게 하였느냐	Then said they to him again, What did he to thee? how opened he thine eyes?	“What did He do to you?” they asked. “How did He open your eyes?”
JHN	9	27	대답하되 내가 이미 일렀어도 듣지 아니하고 어찌하여 다시 듣고자 하나이까 당신들도 그 제자가 되려 하나이까	He answered them, I have told you already, and ye did not hear: wherefore would ye hear it again? will ye also be his disciples?	He replied, “I already told you, and you did not listen. Why do you want to hear it again? Do you also want to become His disciples?”
JHN	9	28	저희가 욕하여 가로되 너는 그의 제자나 우리는 모세의 제자라	Then they reviled him, and said, Thou art his disciple; but we are Moses’ disciples.	Then they heaped insults on him and said, “You are His disciple; we are disciples of Moses.
JHN	9	29	하나님이 모세에게는 말씀하신 줄을 우리가 알거니와 이 사람은 어디서 왔는지 알지 못하노라	We know that God spake unto Moses: as for this fellow, we know not from whence he is.	We know that God spoke to Moses, but we do not know where this man is from.”
JHN	9	30	그 사람이 대답하여 가로되 이상하다 이 사람이 내 눈을 뜨게 하였으되 당신들이 그가 어디서 왔는지 알지 못하는도다	The man answered and said unto them, Why herein is a marvellous thing, that ye know not from whence he is, and yet he hath opened mine eyes.	“That is remarkable indeed!” the man said. “You do not know where He is from, and yet He opened my eyes.
JHN	9	31	하나님이 죄인을 듣지 아니하시고 경건하여 그의 뜻대로 행하는 자는 들으시는 줄을 우리가 아나이다	Now we know that God heareth not sinners: but if any man be a worshipper of God, and doeth his will, him he heareth.	We know that God does not listen to sinners, but He does listen to the one who worships Him and does His will.
JHN	9	32	창세 이후로 소경으로 난 자의 눈을 뜨게 하였다 함을 듣지 못하였으니	Since the world began was it not heard that any man opened the eyes of one that was born blind.	Never before has anyone heard of opening the eyes of a man born blind.
JHN	9	33	이 사람이 하나님께로부터 오지 아니하였으면 아무 일도 할 수 없으리이다	If this man were not of God, he could do nothing.	If this man were not from God, He could do no such thing.”
JHN	9	34	저희가 대답하여 가로되 네가 온전히 죄 가운데서 나서 우리를 가르치느냐 하고 이에 쫓아내어 보내니라	They answered and said unto him, Thou wast altogether born in sins, and dost thou teach us? And they cast him out.	They replied, “You were born in utter sin, and you are instructing us?” And they threw him out.
JHN	9	35	예수께서 저희가 그 사람을 쫓아냈다 하는 말을 들으셨더니 그를 만나사 가라사대 네가 인자를 믿느냐	Jesus heard that they had cast him out; and when he had found him, he said unto him, Dost thou believe on the Son of God?	When Jesus heard that they had thrown him out, He found the man and said, “Do you believe in the Son of Man?”
JHN	9	36	대답하여 가로되 주여 그가 누구시오니이까 내가 믿고자 하나이다	He answered and said, Who is he, Lord, that I might believe on him?	“Who is He, Sir?” he replied. “Tell me so that I may believe in Him.”
JHN	9	37	예수께서 가라사대 네가 그를 보았거니와 지금 너와 말하는 자가 그이니라	And Jesus said unto him, Thou hast both seen him, and it is he that talketh with thee.	“You have already seen Him,” Jesus answered. “He is the One speaking with you.”
JHN	9	38	가로되 주여 내가 믿나이다 하고 절하는지라	And he said, Lord, I believe. And he worshipped him.	“Lord, I believe,” he said. And he worshiped Jesus.
JHN	9	39	예수께서 가라사대 내가 심판하러 이 세상에 왔으니 보지 못하는 자들은 보게 하고 보는 자들은 소경 되게 하려 함이라 하시니	And Jesus said, For judgment I am come into this world, that they which see not might see; and that they which see might be made blind.	Then Jesus declared, “For judgment I have come into this world, so that the blind may see and those who see may become blind.”
JHN	9	40	바리새인 중에 예수와 함께 있던 자들이 이 말씀을 듣고 가로되 우리도 소경인가	And some of the Pharisees which were with him heard these words, and said unto him, Are we blind also?	Some of the Pharisees who were with Him heard this, and they asked Him, “Are we blind too?”
JHN	9	41	예수께서 가라사대 너희가 소경 되었더면 죄가 없으려니와 본다고 하니 너희 죄가 그저 있느니라	Jesus said unto them, If ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now ye say, We see; therefore your sin remaineth.	“If you were blind,” Jesus replied, “you would not be guilty of sin. But since you claim you can see, your guilt remains.”
JHN	10	1	내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 양의 우리에 문으로 들어가지 아니하고 다른 데로 넘어가는 자는 절도며 강도요	Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber.	“Truly, truly, I tell you, whoever does not enter the sheepfold by the gate, but climbs in some other way, is a thief and a robber.
JHN	10	2	문으로 들어가는 이가 양의 목자라	But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep.	But the one who enters by the gate is the shepherd of the sheep.
JHN	10	3	문지기는 그를 위하여 문을 열고 양은 그의 음성을 듣나니 그가 자기 양의 이름을 각각 불러 인도하여 내느니라	To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out.	The gatekeeper opens the gate for him, and the sheep listen for his voice. He calls his own sheep by name and leads them out.
JHN	10	4	자기 양을 다 내어 놓은 후에 앞서 가면 양들이 그의 음성을 아는 고로 따라 오되	And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice.	When he has brought out all his own, he goes on ahead of them, and his sheep follow him because they know his voice.
JHN	10	5	타인의 음성은 알지 못하는 고로 타인을 따르지 아니하고 도리어 도망하느니라	And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not the voice of strangers.	But they will never follow a stranger; in fact, they will flee from him because they do not recognize his voice.”
JHN	10	6	예수께서 이 비유로 저희에게 말씀하셨으나 저희는 그 하신 말씀이 무엇인지 알지 못하니라	This parable spake Jesus unto them: but they understood not what things they were which he spake unto them.	Jesus spoke to them using this illustration, but they did not understand what He was telling them.
JHN	10	7	그러므로 예수께서 다시 이르시되 내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 말하노니 나는 양의 문이라	Then said Jesus unto them again, Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep.	So He said to them again, “Truly, truly, I tell you, I am the gate for the sheep.
JHN	10	8	나보다 먼저 온 자는 다 절도요 강도니 양들이 듣지 아니하였느니라	All that ever came before me are thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them.	All who came before Me were thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not listen to them.
JHN	10	9	내가 문이니 누구든지 나로 말미암아 들어가면 구원을 얻고 또는 들어가며 나오며 꼴을 얻으리라	I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture.	I am the gate. If anyone enters through Me, he will be saved. He will come in and go out and find pasture.
JHN	10	10	도적이 오는 것은 도적질하고 죽이고 멸망시키려는 것뿐이요 내가 온 것은 양으로 생명을 얻게 하고 더 풍성히 얻게 하려는 것이라	The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly.	The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy. I have come that they may have life, and have it in all its fullness.
JHN	10	11	나는 선한 목자라 선한 목자는 양들을 위하여 목숨을 버리거니와	I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep.	I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down His life for the sheep.
JHN	10	12	삯꾼은 목자도 아니요 양도 제 양이 아니라 이리가 오는 것을 보면 양을 버리고 달아나나니 이리가 양을 늑탈하고 또 헤치느니라	But he that is an hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth: and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep.	The hired hand is not the shepherd, and the sheep are not his own. When he sees the wolf coming, he abandons the sheep and runs away. Then the wolf pounces on them and scatters the flock.
JHN	10	13	달아나는 것은 저가 삯꾼인 까닭에 양을 돌아보지 아니함이나	The hireling fleeth, because he is an hireling, and careth not for the sheep.	The man runs away because he is a hired servant and is unconcerned for the sheep.
JHN	10	14	나는 선한 목자라 내가 내 양을 알고 양도 나를 아는 것이	I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine.	I am the good shepherd. I know My sheep and My sheep know Me,
JHN	10	15	아버지께서 나를 아시고 내가 아버지를 아는 것 같으니 나는 양을 위하여 목숨을 버리노라	As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep.	just as the Father knows Me and I know the Father. And I lay down My life for the sheep.
JHN	10	16	또 이 우리에 들지 아니한 다른 양들이 내게 있어 내가 인도하여야 할 터이니 저희도 내 음성을 듣고 한 무리가 되어 한 목자에게 있으리라	And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.	I have other sheep that are not of this fold. I must bring them in as well, and they will listen to My voice. Then there will be one flock and one shepherd.
JHN	10	17	아버지께서 나를 사랑하시는 것은 내가 다시 목숨을 얻기 위하여 목숨을 버림이라	Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again.	The reason the Father loves Me is that I lay down My life in order to take it up again.
JHN	10	18	이를 내게서 빼앗는 자가 있는 것이 아니라 내가 스스로 버리노라 나는 버릴 권세도 있고 다시 얻을 권세도 있으니 이 계명은 내 아버지에게서 받았노라 하시니라	No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father.	No one takes it from Me, but I lay it down of My own accord. I have authority to lay it down and authority to take it up again. This charge I have received from My Father.”
JHN	10	19	이 말씀을 인하여 유대인 중에 다시 분쟁이 일어나니	There was a division therefore again among the Jews for these sayings.	Again there was division among the Jews because of Jesus’ message.
JHN	10	20	그 중에 많은 사람이 말하되 저가 귀신 들려 미쳤거늘 어찌하여 그 말을 듣느냐 하며	And many of them said, He hath a devil, and is mad; why hear ye him?	Many of them said, “He is demon-possessed and insane. Why would you listen to Him?”
JHN	10	21	혹은 말하되 이 말은 귀신 들린 자의 말이 아니라 귀신이 소경의 눈을 뜨게 할 수 있느냐 하더라	Others said, These are not the words of him that hath a devil. Can a devil open the eyes of the blind?	But others replied, “These are not the words of a man possessed by a demon. Can a demon open the eyes of the blind?”
JHN	10	22	예루살렘에 수전절이 이르니 때는 겨울이라	And it was at Jerusalem the feast of the dedication, and it was winter.	At that time the Feast of Dedication took place in Jerusalem. It was winter,
JHN	10	23	예수께서 성전 안 솔로몬 행각에서 다니시니	And Jesus walked in the temple in Solomon’s porch.	and Jesus was walking in the temple courts in Solomon’s Colonnade.
JHN	10	24	유대인들이 에워싸고 가로되 당신이 언제까지나 우리 마음을 의혹케 하려나이까 그리스도여든 밝히 말하시오 하니	Then came the Jews round about him, and said unto him, How long dost thou make us to doubt? If thou be the Christ, tell us plainly.	So the Jews gathered around Him and demanded, “How long will You keep us in suspense? If You are the Christ, tell us plainly.”
JHN	10	25	예수께서 대답하시되 내가 너희에게 말하였으되 믿지 아니하는도다 내가 내 아버지의 이름으로 행하는 일들이 나를 증거하는 것이어늘	Jesus answered them, I told you, and ye believed not: the works that I do in my Father’s name, they bear witness of me.	“I already told you,” Jesus replied, “but you did not believe. The works I do in My Father’s name testify on My behalf.
JHN	10	26	너희가 내 양이 아니므로 믿지 아니하는도다	But ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep, as I said unto you.	But because you are not My sheep, you refuse to believe.
JHN	10	27	내 양은 내 음성을 들으며 나는 저희를 알며 저희는 나를 따르느니라	My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me:	My sheep listen to My voice; I know them, and they follow Me.
JHN	10	28	내가 저희에게 영생을 주노니 영원히 멸망치 아니할 터이요 또 저희를 내 손에서 빼앗을 자가 없느니라	And I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand.	I give them eternal life, and they will never perish. No one can snatch them out of My hand.
JHN	10	29	저희를 주신 내 아버지는 만유보다 크시매 아무도 아버지 손에서 빼앗을 수 없느니라	My Father, which gave them me, is greater than all; and no man is able to pluck them out of my Father’s hand.	My Father who has given them to Me is greater than all. No one can snatch them out of My Father’s hand.
JHN	10	30	나와 아버지는 하나이니라 하신대	I and my Father are one.	I and the Father are one.”
JHN	10	31	유대인들이 다시 돌을 들어 치려 하거늘	Then the Jews took up stones again to stone him.	At this, the Jews again picked up stones to stone Him.
JHN	10	32	예수께서 대답하시되 내가 아버지께로 말미암아 여러 가지 선한 일을 너희에게 보였거늘 그 중에 어떤 일로 나를 돌로 치려 하느냐	Jesus answered them, Many good works have I shewed you from my Father; for which of those works do ye stone me?	But Jesus responded, “I have shown you many good works from the Father. For which of these do you stone Me?”
JHN	10	33	유대인들이 대답하되 선한 일을 인하여 우리가 너를 돌로 치려는 것이 아니라 참람함을 인함이니 네가 사람이 되어 자칭 하나님이라 함이로라	The Jews answered him, saying, For a good work we stone thee not; but for blasphemy; and because that thou, being a man, makest thyself God.	“We are not stoning You for any good work,” said the Jews, “but for blasphemy, because You, who are a man, declare Yourself to be God.”
JHN	10	34	예수께서 가라사대 너희 율법에 기록한 바 내가 너희를 신이라 하였노라 하지 아니하였느냐	Jesus answered them, Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are gods?	Jesus replied, “Is it not written in your Law: ‘I have said you are gods’?
JHN	10	35	성경은 폐하지 못하나니 하나님의 말씀을 받은 사람들을 신이라 하셨거든	If he called them gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the scripture cannot be broken;	If he called them gods to whom the word of God came—and the Scripture cannot be broken—
JHN	10	36	하물며 아버지께서 거룩하게 하사 세상에 보내신 자가 나는 하나님 아들이라 하는 것으로 너희가 어찌 참람하다 하느냐	Say ye of him, whom the Father hath sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest; because I said, I am the Son of God?	then what about the One whom the Father sanctified and sent into the world? How then can you accuse Me of blasphemy for stating that I am the Son of God?
JHN	10	37	만일 내가 내 아버지의 일을 행치 아니하거든 나를 믿지 말려니와	If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not.	If I am not doing the works of My Father, then do not believe Me.
JHN	10	38	내가 행하거든 나를 믿지 아니할지라도 그 일은 믿으라 그러면 너희가 아버지께서 내 안에 계시고 내가 아버지 안에 있음을 깨달아 알리라 하신대	But if I do, though ye believe not me, believe the works: that ye may know, and believe, that the Father is in me, and I in him.	But if I am doing them, even though you do not believe Me, believe the works themselves, so that you may know and understand that the Father is in Me, and I am in the Father.”
JHN	10	39	저희가 다시 예수를 잡고자 하였으나 그 손에서 벗어나 나가시니라	Therefore they sought again to take him: but he escaped out of their hand,	At this, they tried again to seize Him, but He escaped their grasp.
JHN	10	40	다시 요단 강 저편 요한이 처음으로 침례 주던 곳에 가사 거기 거하시니	And went away again beyond Jordan into the place where John at first baptized; and there he abode.	Then Jesus went back across the Jordan to the place where John had first been baptizing, and He stayed there.
JHN	10	41	많은 사람이 왔다가 말하되 요한은 아무 표적도 행치 아니하였으나 요한이 이 사람을 가리켜 말한 것은 참이라 하더라	And many resorted unto him, and said, John did no miracle: but all things that John spake of this man were true.	Many came to Him and said, “Although John never performed a sign, everything he said about this man was true.”
JHN	10	42	그리하여 거기서 많은 사람이 예수를 믿으니라	And many believed on him there.	And many in that place believed in Jesus.
JHN	11	1	어떤 병든 자가 있으니 이는 마리아와 그 형제 마르다의 촌 베다니에 사는 나사로라	Now a certain man was sick, named Lazarus, of Bethany, the town of Mary and her sister Martha.	At this time a man named Lazarus was sick. He lived in Bethany, the village of Mary and her sister Martha.
JHN	11	2	이 마리아는 향유를 주께 붓고 머리털로 주의 발을 씻기던 자요 병든 나사로는 그의 오라비러라	(It was that Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment, and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick.)	(Mary, whose brother Lazarus was sick, was to anoint the Lord with perfume and wipe His feet with her hair.)
JHN	11	3	이에 그 누이들이 예수께 사람을 보내어 가로되 주여 보시옵소서 사랑하시는 자가 병들었나이다 하니	Therefore his sisters sent unto him, saying, Lord, behold, he whom thou lovest is sick.	So the sisters sent word to Jesus, “Lord, the one You love is sick.”
JHN	11	4	예수께서 들으시고 가라사대 이 병은 죽을 병이 아니라 하나님의 영광을 위함이요 하나님의 아들로 이를 인하여 영광을 얻게 하려 함이라 하시더라	When Jesus heard that, he said, This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God might be glorified thereby.	When Jesus heard this, He said, “This sickness will not end in death. No, it is for the glory of God, so that the Son of God may be glorified through it.”
JHN	11	5	예수께서 본래 마르다와 그 동생과 나사로를 사랑하시더니	Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus.	Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus.
JHN	11	6	나사로가 병들었다 함을 들으시고 그 계시던 곳에 이틀을 더 유하시고	When he had heard therefore that he was sick, he abode two days still in the same place where he was.	So on hearing that Lazarus was sick, He stayed where He was for two days,
JHN	11	7	그 후에 제자들에게 이르시되 유대로 다시 가자 하시니	Then after that saith he to his disciples, Let us go into Judea again.	and then He said to the disciples, “Let us go back to Judea.”
JHN	11	8	제자들이 말하되 랍비여 방금도 유대인들이 돌로 치려 하였는데 또 그리로 가시려 하나이까	His disciples say unto him, Master, the Jews of late sought to stone thee; and goest thou thither again?	“Rabbi,” they replied, “the Jews just tried to stone You, and You are going back there?”
JHN	11	9	예수께서 대답하시되 낮이 열두 시가 아니냐 사람이 낮에 다니면 이 세상의 빛을 보므로 실족하지 아니하고	Jesus answered, Are there not twelve hours in the day? If any man walk in the day, he stumbleth not, because he seeth the light of this world.	Jesus answered, “Are there not twelve hours of daylight? If anyone walks in the daytime, he will not stumble, because he sees by the light of this world.
JHN	11	10	밤에 다니면 빛이 그 사람 안에 없는 고로 실족하느니라	But if a man walk in the night, he stumbleth, because there is no light in him.	But if anyone walks at night, he will stumble, because he has no light.”
JHN	11	11	이 말씀을 하신 후에 또 가라사대 우리 친구 나사로가 잠들었도다 그러나 내가 깨우러 가노라	These things said he: and after that he saith unto them, Our friend Lazarus sleepeth; but I go, that I may awake him out of sleep.	After He had said this, He told them, “Our friend Lazarus has fallen asleep, but I am going there to wake him up.”
JHN	11	12	제자들이 가로되 주여 잠들었으면 낫겠나이다 하더라	Then said his disciples, Lord, if he sleep, he shall do well.	His disciples replied, “Lord, if he is sleeping, he will get better.”
JHN	11	13	예수는 그의 죽음을 가리켜 말씀하신 것이나 저희는 잠들어 쉬는 것을 가리켜 말씀하심인 줄 생각하는지라	Howbeit Jesus spake of his death: but they thought that he had spoken of taking of rest in sleep.	They thought that Jesus was talking about actual sleep, but He was speaking about the death of Lazarus.
JHN	11	14	이에 예수께서 밝히 이르시되 나사로가 죽었느니라	Then said Jesus unto them plainly, Lazarus is dead.	So Jesus told them plainly, “Lazarus is dead,
JHN	11	15	내가 거기 있지 아니한 것을 너희를 위하여 기뻐하노니 이는 너희로 믿게 하려 함이라 그러나 그에게로 가자 하신대	And I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, to the intent ye may believe; nevertheless let us go unto him.	and for your sake I am glad I was not there, so that you may believe. But let us go to him.”
JHN	11	16	디두모라 하는 도마가 다른 제자들에게 말하되 우리도 주와 함께 죽으러 가자 하니라	Then said Thomas, which is called Didymus, unto his fellowdisciples, Let us also go, that we may die with him.	Then Thomas called Didymus said to his fellow disciples, “Let us also go, so that we may die with Him.”
JHN	11	17	예수께서 와서 보시니 나사로가 무덤에 있은 지 이미 나흘이라	Then when Jesus came, he found that he had lain in the grave four days already.	When Jesus arrived, He found that Lazarus had already spent four days in the tomb.
JHN	11	18	베다니는 예루살렘에서 가깝기가 한 오 리쯤 되매	Now Bethany was nigh unto Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off:	Now Bethany was near Jerusalem, a little less than two miles away,
JHN	11	19	많은 유대인이 마르다와 마리아에게 그 오라비의 일로 위문하러 왔더니	And many of the Jews came to Martha and Mary, to comfort them concerning their brother.	and many of the Jews had come to Martha and Mary to console them in the loss of their brother.
JHN	11	20	마르다는 예수 오신다는 말을 듣고 나가 맞되 마리아는 집에 앉았더라	Then Martha, as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming, went and met him: but Mary sat still in the house.	So when Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she went out to meet Him; but Mary stayed at home.
JHN	11	21	마르다가 예수께 여짜오되 주께서 여기 계셨더면 내 오라비가 죽지 아니하였겠나이다	Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died.	Martha said to Jesus, “Lord, if You had been here, my brother would not have died.
JHN	11	22	그러나 나는 이제라도 주께서 무엇이든지 하나님께 구하시는 것을 하나님이 주실 줄을 아나이다	But I know, that even now, whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God will give it thee.	But even now I know that God will give You whatever You ask of Him.”
JHN	11	23	예수께서 가라사대 네 오라비가 다시 살리라	Jesus saith unto her, Thy brother shall rise again.	“Your brother will rise again,” Jesus told her.
JHN	11	24	마르다가 가로되 마지막 날 부활에는 다시 살 줄을 내가 아나이다	Martha saith unto him, I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day.	Martha replied, “I know that he will rise again in the resurrection at the last day.”
JHN	11	25	예수께서 가라사대 나는 부활이요 생명이니 나를 믿는 자는 죽어도 살겠고	Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live:	Jesus said to her, “I am the resurrection and the life. Whoever believes in Me will live, even though he dies.
JHN	11	26	무릇 살아서 나를 믿는 자는 영원히 죽지 아니하리니 이것을 네가 믿느냐	And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die. Believest thou this?	And everyone who lives and believes in Me will never die. Do you believe this?”
JHN	11	27	가로되 주여 그러하외다 주는 그리스도시요 세상에 오시는 하나님의 아들이신 줄 내가 믿나이다	She saith unto him, Yea, Lord: I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the world.	“Yes, Lord,” she answered, “I believe that You are the Christ, the Son of God, who was to come into the world.”
JHN	11	28	이 말을 하고 돌아가서 가만히 그 형제 마리아를 불러 말하되 선생님이 오셔서 너를 부르신다 하니	And when she had so said, she went her way, and called Mary her sister secretly, saying, The Master is come, and calleth for thee.	After Martha had said this, she went back and called her sister Mary aside to tell her, “The Teacher is here and is asking for you.”
JHN	11	29	마리아가 이 말을 듣고 급히 일어나 예수께 나아가매	As soon as she heard that, she arose quickly, and came unto him.	And when Mary heard this, she got up quickly and went to Him.
JHN	11	30	예수는 아직 마을로 들어오지 아니하시고 마르다의 맞던 곳에 그저 계시더라	Now Jesus was not yet come into the town, but was in that place where Martha met him.	Now Jesus had not yet entered the village, but was still at the place where Martha had met Him.
JHN	11	31	마리아와 함께 집에 있어 위로하던 유대인들은 그의 급히 일어나 나가는 것을 보고 곡하러 무덤에 가는 줄로 생각하고 따라가더니	The Jews then which were with her in the house, and comforted her, when they saw Mary, that she rose up hastily and went out, followed her, saying, She goeth unto the grave to weep there.	When the Jews who were in the house consoling Mary saw how quickly she got up and went out, they followed her, supposing she was going to the tomb to mourn there.
JHN	11	32	마리아가 예수 계신 곳에 와서 보이고 그 발 앞에 엎드리어 가로되 주께서 여기 계셨더면 내 오라비가 죽지 아니하였겠나이다 하더라	Then when Mary was come where Jesus was, and saw him, she fell down at his feet, saying unto him, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died.	When Mary came to Jesus and saw Him, she fell at His feet and said, “Lord, if You had been here, my brother would not have died.”
JHN	11	33	예수께서 그의 우는 것과 또 함께 온 유대인들의 우는 것을 보시고 심령에 통분히 여기시고 민망히 여기사	When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping which came with her, he groaned in the spirit, and was troubled,	When Jesus saw her weeping, and the Jews who had come with her also weeping, He was deeply moved in spirit and troubled.
JHN	11	34	가라사대 그를 어디 두었느냐 가로되 주여 와서 보옵소서 하니	And said, Where have ye laid him? They said unto him, Lord, come and see.	“Where have you put him?” He asked. “Come and see, Lord,” they answered.
JHN	11	35	예수께서 눈물을 흘리시더라	Jesus wept.	Jesus wept.
JHN	11	36	이에 유대인들이 말하되 보라 그를 어떻게 사랑하였는가 하며	Then said the Jews, Behold how he loved him!	Then the Jews said, “See how He loved him!”
JHN	11	37	그 중 어떤 이는 말하되 소경의 눈을 뜨게 한 이 사람이 그 사람은 죽지 않게 할 수 없었더냐 하더라	And some of them said, Could not this man, which opened the eyes of the blind, have caused that even this man should not have died?	But some of them asked, “Could not this man who opened the eyes of the blind also have kept Lazarus from dying?”
JHN	11	38	이에 예수께서 다시 속으로 통분히 여기시며 무덤에 가시니 무덤이 굴이라 돌로 막았거늘	Jesus therefore again groaning in himself cometh to the grave. It was a cave, and a stone lay upon it.	Jesus, once again deeply moved, came to the tomb. It was a cave with a stone laid across the entrance.
JHN	11	39	예수께서 가라사대 돌을 옮겨 놓으라 하시니 그 죽은 자의 누이 마르다가 가로되 주여 죽은 지가 나흘이 되었으매 벌써 냄새가 나나이다	Jesus said, Take ye away the stone. Martha, the sister of him that was dead, saith unto him, Lord, by this time he stinketh: for he hath been dead four days.	“Take away the stone,” Jesus said. “Lord, by now he stinks,” said Martha, the sister of the dead man. “It has already been four days.”
JHN	11	40	예수께서 가라사대 내 말이 네가 믿으면 하나님의 영광을 보리라 하지 아니하였느냐 하신대	Jesus saith unto her, Said I not unto thee, that, if thou wouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God?	Jesus replied, “Did I not tell you that if you believed, you would see the glory of God?”
JHN	11	41	돌을 옮겨 놓으니 예수께서 눈을 들어 우러러 보시고 가라사대 아버지여 내 말을 들으신 것을 감사하나이다	Then they took away the stone from the place where the dead was laid. And Jesus lifted up his eyes, and said, Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me.	So they took away the stone. Then Jesus lifted His eyes upward and said, “Father, I thank You that You have heard Me.
JHN	11	42	항상 내 말을 들으시는 줄을 내가 알았나이다 그러나 이 말씀 하옵는 것은 둘러선 무리를 위함이니 곧 아버지께서 나를 보내신 것을 저희로 믿게 하려 함이니이다	And I knew that thou hearest me always: but because of the people which stand by I said it, that they may believe that thou hast sent me.	I knew that You always hear Me, but I say this for the benefit of the people standing here, so they may believe that You sent Me.”
JHN	11	43	이 말씀을 하시고 큰 소리로 나사로야 나오라 부르시니	And when he thus had spoken, he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth.	After Jesus had said this, He called out in a loud voice, “Lazarus, come out!”
JHN	11	44	죽은 자가 수족을 베로 동인 채로 나오는데 그 얼굴은 수건에 싸였더라 예수께서 가라사대 풀어 놓아 다니게 하라 하시니라	And he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with graveclothes: and his face was bound about with a napkin. Jesus saith unto them, Loose him, and let him go.	The man who had been dead came out with his hands and feet bound in strips of linen, and his face wrapped in a cloth. “Unwrap him and let him go,” Jesus told them.
JHN	11	45	마리아에게 와서 예수의 하신 일을 본 많은 유대인이 저를 믿었으나	Then many of the Jews which came to Mary, and had seen the things which Jesus did, believed on him.	Therefore many of the Jews who had come to Mary, and had seen what Jesus did, believed in Him.
JHN	11	46	그 중에 어떤 자는 바리새인들에게 가서 예수의 하신 일을 고하니라	But some of them went their ways to the Pharisees, and told them what things Jesus had done.	But some of them went to the Pharisees and told them what Jesus had done.
JHN	11	47	이에 대제사장들과 바리새인들이 공회를 모으고 가로되 이 사람이 많은 표적을 행하니 우리가 어떻게 하겠느냐	Then gathered the chief priests and the Pharisees a council, and said, What do we? for this man doeth many miracles.	Then the chief priests and Pharisees convened the Sanhedrin and said, “What are we to do? This man is performing many signs.
JHN	11	48	만일 저를 이대로 두면 모든 사람이 저를 믿을 것이요 그리고 로마인들이 와서 우리 땅과 민족을 빼앗아 가리라 하니	If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him: and the Romans shall come and take away both our place and nation.	If we let Him go on like this, everyone will believe in Him, and then the Romans will come and take away both our place and our nation.”
JHN	11	49	그 중에 한 사람 그 해 대제사장인 가야바가 저희에게 말하되 너희가 아무 것도 알지 못하는도다	And one of them, named Caiaphas, being the high priest that same year, said unto them, Ye know nothing at all,	But one of them, named Caiaphas, who was high priest that year, said to them, “You know nothing at all!
JHN	11	50	한 사람이 백성을 위하여 죽어서 온 민족이 망하지 않게 되는 것이 너희에게 유익한 줄을 생각지 아니하는도다 하였으니	Nor consider that it is expedient for us, that one man should die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not.	You do not realize that it is better for you that one man die for the people than that the whole nation perish.”
JHN	11	51	이 말은 스스로 함이 아니요 그 해에 대제사장이므로 예수께서 그 민족을 위하시고	And this spake he not of himself: but being high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus should die for that nation;	Caiaphas did not say this on his own. Instead, as high priest that year, he was prophesying that Jesus would die for the nation,
JHN	11	52	또 그 민족만 위할 뿐 아니라 흩어진 하나님의 자녀를 모아 하나가 되게 하기 위하여 죽으실 것을 미리 말함이러라	And not for that nation only, but that also he should gather together in one the children of God that were scattered abroad.	and not only for the nation, but also for the scattered children of God, to gather them together into one.
JHN	11	53	이 날부터는 저희가 예수를 죽이려고 모의하니라	Then from that day forth they took counsel together for to put him to death.	So from that day on they plotted to kill Him.
JHN	11	54	그러므로 예수께서 다시 유대인 가운데 드러나게 다니지 아니하시고 여기를 떠나 빈 들 가까운 곳인 에브라임이라는 동리에 가서 제자들과 함께 거기 유하시니라	Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews; but went thence unto a country near to the wilderness, into a city called Ephraim, and there continued with his disciples.	As a result, Jesus no longer went about publicly among the Jews, but He withdrew to a town called Ephraim in an area near the wilderness. And He stayed there with the disciples.
JHN	11	55	유대인의 유월절이 가까우매 많은 사람이 자기를 성결케 하기 위하여 유월절 전에 시골서 예루살렘으로 올라갔더니	And the Jews’ passover was nigh at hand: and many went out of the country up to Jerusalem before the passover, to purify themselves.	Now the Jewish Passover was near, and many people went up from the country to Jerusalem to purify themselves before the Passover.
JHN	11	56	저희가 예수를 찾으며 성전에 서서 서로 말하되 너희 생각에는 어떠하뇨 저가 명절에 오지 아니하겠느냐 하니	Then sought they for Jesus, and spake among themselves, as they stood in the temple, What think ye, that he will not come to the feast?	They kept looking for Jesus and asking one another as they stood in the temple courts, “What do you think? Will He come to the feast at all?”
JHN	11	57	이는 대제사장들과 바리새인들이 누구든지 예수 있는 곳을 알거든 고하여 잡게 하라 명령하였음이러라	Now both the chief priests and the Pharisees had given a commandment, that, if any man knew where he were, he should shew it, that they might take him.	But the chief priests and Pharisees had given orders that anyone who knew where He was must report it, so that they could arrest Him.
JHN	12	1	유월절 엿새 전에 예수께서 베다니에 이르시니 이곳은 예수께서 죽은 자 가운데서 살리신 나사로의 있는 곳이라	Then Jesus six days before the passover came to Bethany, where Lazarus was which had been dead, whom he raised from the dead.	Six days before the Passover, Jesus came to Bethany, the hometown of Lazarus, whom He had raised from the dead.
JHN	12	2	거기서 예수를 위하여 잔치할새 마르다는 일을 보고 나사로는 예수와 함께 앉은 자 중에 있더라	There they made him a supper; and Martha served: but Lazarus was one of them that sat at the table with him.	So they hosted a dinner for Jesus there. Martha served, and Lazarus was among those reclining at the table with Him.
JHN	12	3	마리아는 지극히 비싼 향유 곧 순전한 나드 한 근을 가져다가 예수의 발에 붓고 자기 머리털로 그의 발을 씻으니 향유 냄새가 집에 가득하더라	Then took Mary a pound of ointment of spikenard, very costly, and anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair: and the house was filled with the odour of the ointment.	Then Mary took about a pint of expensive perfume, made of pure nard, and she anointed Jesus’ feet and wiped them with her hair. And the house was filled with the fragrance of the perfume.
JHN	12	4	제자 중 하나로서 예수를 잡아 줄 가룟 유다가 말하되	Then saith one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, Simon’s son, which should betray him,	But one of His disciples, Judas Iscariot, who was going to betray Him, asked,
JHN	12	5	이 향유를 어찌하여 삼백 데나리온에 팔아 가난한 자들에게 주지 아니하였느냐 하니	Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given to the poor?	“Why wasn’t this perfume sold for three hundred denarii and the money given to the poor?”
JHN	12	6	이렇게 말함은 가난한 자들을 생각함이 아니요 저는 도적이라 돈 궤를 맡고 거기 넣는 것을 훔쳐감이러라	This he said, not that he cared for the poor; but because he was a thief, and had the bag, and bare what was put therein.	Judas did not say this because he cared about the poor, but because he was a thief. As keeper of the money bag, he used to take from what was put into it.
JHN	12	7	예수께서 가라사대 저를 가만두어 나의 장사할 날을 위하여 이를 두게 하라	Then said Jesus, Let her alone: against the day of my burying hath she kept this.	“Leave her alone,” Jesus replied. “She has kept this perfume in preparation for the day of My burial.
JHN	12	8	가난한 자들은 항상 너희와 함께 있거니와 나는 항상 있지 아니하리라 하시니라	For the poor always ye have with you; but me ye have not always.	The poor you will always have with you, but you will not always have Me.”
JHN	12	9	유대인의 큰 무리가 예수께서 여기 계신 줄을 알고 오니 이는 예수만 위함이 아니요 죽은 자 가운데서 살리신 나사로도 보려함이러라	Much people of the Jews therefore knew that he was there: and they came not for Jesus’ sake only, but that they might see Lazarus also, whom he had raised from the dead.	Meanwhile a large crowd of Jews learned that Jesus was there. And they came not only because of Him, but also to see Lazarus, whom He had raised from the dead.
JHN	12	10	대제사장들이 나사로까지 죽이려고 모의하니	But the chief priests consulted that they might put Lazarus also to death;	So the chief priests made plans to kill Lazarus as well,
JHN	12	11	나사로 까닭에 많은 유대인이 가서 예수를 믿음이러라	Because that by reason of him many of the Jews went away, and believed on Jesus.	for on account of him many of the Jews were deserting them and believing in Jesus.
JHN	12	12	그 이튿날에는 명절에 온 큰 무리가 예수께서 예루살렘으로 오신다 함을 듣고	On the next day much people that were come to the feast, when they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,	The next day the great crowd that had come to the feast heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem.
JHN	12	13	종려나무 가지를 가지고 맞으러 나가 외치되 호산나 찬송하리로다 주의 이름으로 오시는 이 곧 이스라엘의 왕이시여 하더라	Took branches of palm trees, and went forth to meet him, and cried, Hosanna: Blessed is the King of Israel that cometh in the name of the Lord.	They took palm branches and went out to meet Him, shouting: “Hosanna!” “Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord!” “Blessed is the King of Israel!”
JHN	12	14	예수는 한 어린 나귀를 만나서 타시니	And Jesus, when he had found a young ass, sat thereon; as it is written,	Finding a young donkey, Jesus sat on it, as it is written:
JHN	12	15	이는 기록된 바 시온 딸아 두려워 말라 보라 너의 왕이 나귀 새끼를 타고 오신다 함과 같더라	Fear not, daughter of Sion: behold, thy King cometh, sitting on an ass’s colt.	“Do not be afraid, O Daughter of Zion. See, your King is coming, seated on the colt of a donkey.”
JHN	12	16	제자들은 처음에 이 일을 깨닫지 못하였다가 예수께서 영광을 얻으신 후에야 이것이 예수께 대하여 기록된 것임과 사람들이 예수께 이같이 한 것인 줄 생각났더라	These things understood not his disciples at the first: but when Jesus was glorified, then remembered they that these things were written of him, and that they had done these things unto him.	At first His disciples did not understand these things, but after Jesus was glorified they remembered what had been done to Him, and they realized that these very things had also been written about Him.
JHN	12	17	나사로를 무덤에서 불러내어 죽은 자 가운데서 살리실 때에 함께 있던 무리가 증거한지라	The people therefore that was with him when he called Lazarus out of his grave, and raised him from the dead, bare record.	Meanwhile, many people continued to testify that they had been with Jesus when He called Lazarus from the tomb and raised him from the dead.
JHN	12	18	이에 무리가 예수를 맞음은 이 표적 행하심을 들었음이러라	For this cause the people also met him, for that they heard that he had done this miracle.	That is also why the crowd went out to meet Him, because they heard that He had performed this sign.
JHN	12	19	바리새인들이 서로 말하되 볼지어다 너희 하는 일이 쓸 데 없다 보라 온 세상이 저를 좇는도다 하니라	The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing? behold, the world is gone after him.	Then the Pharisees said to one another, “You can see that this is doing you no good. Look how the whole world has gone after Him!”
JHN	12	20	명절에 예배하러 올라온 사람 중에 헬라인 몇이 있는데	And there were certain Greeks among them that came up to worship at the feast:	Now there were some Greeks among those who went up to worship at the feast.
JHN	12	21	저희가 갈릴리 벳새다 사람 빌립에게 가서 청하여 가로되 선생이여 우리가 예수를 뵈옵고자 하나이다 하니	The same came therefore to Philip, which was of Bethsaida of Galilee, and desired him, saying, Sir, we would see Jesus.	They came to Philip, who was from Bethsaida in Galilee, and requested of him, “Sir, we want to see Jesus.”
JHN	12	22	빌립이 안드레에게 가서 말하고 안드레와 빌립이 예수께 가서 여짜온대	Philip cometh and telleth Andrew: and again Andrew and Philip tell Jesus.	Philip relayed this appeal to Andrew, and both of them went and told Jesus.
JHN	12	23	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 인자의 영광을 얻을 때가 왔도다	And Jesus answered them, saying, The hour is come, that the Son of man should be glorified.	But Jesus replied, “The hour has come for the Son of Man to be glorified.
JHN	12	24	내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 한 알의 밀이 땅에 떨어져 죽지 아니하면 한 알 그대로 있고 죽으면 많은 열매를 맺느니라	Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone: but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit.	Truly, truly, I tell you, unless a kernel of wheat falls to the ground and dies, it remains only a seed; but if it dies, it bears much fruit.
JHN	12	25	자기 생명을 사랑하는 자는 잃어버릴 것이요 이 세상에서 자기 생명을 미워하는 자는 영생하도록 보존하리라	He that loveth his life shall lose it; and he that hateth his life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal.	Whoever loves his life will lose it, but whoever hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life.
JHN	12	26	사람이 나를 섬기려면 나를 따르라 나 있는 곳에 나를 섬기는 자도 거기 있으리니 사람이 나를 섬기면 내 아버지께서 저를 귀히 여기시리라	If any man serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there shall also my servant be: if any man serve me, him will my Father honour.	If anyone serves Me, he must follow Me; and where I am, My servant will be as well. If anyone serves Me, the Father will honor him.
JHN	12	27	지금 내 마음이 민망하니 무슨 말을 하리요 아버지여 나를 구원하여 이 때를 면하게 하여 주옵소서 그러나 내가 이를 위하여 이 때에 왔나이다	Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour.	Now My soul is troubled, and what shall I say? ‘Father, save Me from this hour’? No, it is for this purpose that I have come to this hour.
JHN	12	28	아버지여 아버지의 이름을 영광스럽게 하옵소서 하시니 이에 하늘에서 소리가 나서 가로되 내가 이미 영광스럽게 하였고 또 다시 영광스럽게 하리라 하신대	Father, glorify thy name. Then came there a voice from heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again.	Father, glorify Your name!” Then a voice came from heaven: “I have glorified it, and I will glorify it again.”
JHN	12	29	곁에 서서 들은 무리는 우뢰가 울었다고도 하며 또 어떤이들은 천사가 저에게 말하였다고도 하니	The people therefore, that stood by, and heard it, said that it thundered: others said, An angel spake to him.	The crowd standing there heard it and said that it had thundered. Others said that an angel had spoken to Him.
JHN	12	30	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 이 소리가 난 것은 나를 위한 것이 아니요 너희를 위한 것이니라	Jesus answered and said, This voice came not because of me, but for your sakes.	In response, Jesus said, “This voice was not for My benefit, but yours.
JHN	12	31	이제 이 세상의 심판이 이르렀으니 이 세상 임금이 쫓겨나리라	Now is the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of this world be cast out.	Now judgment is upon this world; now the prince of this world will be cast out.
JHN	12	32	내가 땅에서 들리면 모든 사람을 내게로 이끌겠노라 하시니	And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me.	And I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw everyone to Myself.”
JHN	12	33	이렇게 말씀하심은 자기가 어떠한 죽음으로 죽을 것을 보이심이러라	This he said, signifying what death he should die.	He said this to indicate the kind of death He was going to die.
JHN	12	34	이에 무리가 대답하되 우리는 율법에서 그리스도가 영원히 계신다 함을 들었거늘 너는 어찌하여 인자가 들려야 하리라 하느냐 이 인자는 누구냐	The people answered him, We have heard out of the law that Christ abideth for ever: and how sayest thou, The Son of man must be lifted up? who is this Son of man?	The crowd replied, “We have heard from the Law that the Christ will remain forever. So how can You say that the Son of Man must be lifted up? Who is this Son of Man?”
JHN	12	35	예수께서 가라사대 아직 잠시 동안 빛이 너희 중에 있으니 빛이 있을 동안에 다녀 어두움에 붙잡히지 않게 하라 어두움에 다니는 자는 그 가는 바를 알지 못하느니라	Then Jesus said unto them, Yet a little while is the light with you. Walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you: for he that walketh in darkness knoweth not whither he goeth.	Then Jesus told them, “For a little while longer, the Light will be among you. Walk while you have the Light, so that darkness will not overtake you. The one who walks in the darkness does not know where he is going.
JHN	12	36	너희에게 아직 빛이 있을 동안에 빛을 믿으라 그리하면 빛의 아들이 되리라 예수께서 이 말씀을 하시고 저희를 떠나가서 숨으시니라	While ye have light, believe in the light, that ye may be the children of light. These things spake Jesus, and departed, and did hide himself from them.	While you have the Light, believe in the Light, so that you may become sons of light.” After Jesus had spoken these things, He went away and was hidden from them.
JHN	12	37	이렇게 많은 표적을 저희 앞에서 행하셨으나 저를 믿지 아니하니	But though he had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him:	Although Jesus had performed so many signs in their presence, they still did not believe in Him.
JHN	12	38	이는 선지자 이사야의 말씀을 이루려 하심이라 가로되 주여 우리에게 들은 바를 누가 믿었으며 주의 팔이 뉘게 나타났나이까 하였더라	That the saying of Esaias the prophet might be fulfilled, which he spake, Lord, who hath believed our report? and to whom hath the arm of the Lord been revealed?	This was to fulfill the word of Isaiah the prophet: “Lord, who has believed our message? And to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?”
JHN	12	39	저희가 능히 믿지 못한 것은 이 까닭이니 곧 이사야가 다시 일렀으되	Therefore they could not believe, because that Esaias said again,	For this reason they were unable to believe. For again, Isaiah says:
JHN	12	40	저희 눈을 멀게 하시고 저희 마음을 완고하게 하셨으니 이는 저희로 하여금 눈으로 보고 마음으로 깨닫고 돌이켜 내게 고침을 받지 못하게 하려함이니라 하였음이더라	He hath blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart; that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them.	“He has blinded their eyes and hardened their hearts, so that they cannot see with their eyes, and understand with their hearts, and turn, and I would heal them.”
JHN	12	41	이사야가 이렇게 말한 것은 주의 영광을 보고 주를 가리켜 말한 것이라	These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory, and spake of him.	Isaiah said these things because he saw Jesus’ glory and spoke about Him.
JHN	12	42	그러나 관원 중에도 저를 믿는 자가 많되 바리새인들을 인하여 드러나게 말하지 못하니 이는 출회를 당할까 두려워함이라	Nevertheless among the chief rulers also many believed on him; but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the synagogue:	Nevertheless, many of the leaders believed in Him; but because of the Pharisees they did not confess Him, for fear that they would be put out of the synagogue.
JHN	12	43	저희는 사람의 영광을 하나님의 영광보다 더 사랑하였더라	For they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God.	For they loved praise from men more than praise from God.
JHN	12	44	예수께서 외쳐 가라사대 나를 믿는 자는 나를 믿는 것이 아니요 나를 보내신 이를 믿는 것이며	Jesus cried and said, He that believeth on me, believeth not on me, but on him that sent me.	Then Jesus cried out, “Whoever believes in Me does not believe in Me alone, but in the One who sent Me.
JHN	12	45	나를 보는 자는 나를 보내신 이를 보는 것이니라	And he that seeth me seeth him that sent me.	And whoever sees Me sees the One who sent Me.
JHN	12	46	나는 빛으로 세상에 왔나니 무릇 나를 믿는 자로 어두움에 거하지 않게 하려 함이로라	I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believeth on me should not abide in darkness.	I have come into the world as a light, so that no one who believes in Me should remain in darkness.
JHN	12	47	사람이 내 말을 듣고 지키지 아니할지라도 내가 저를 심판하지 아니하노라 내가 온 것은 세상을 심판하려 함이 아니요 세상을 구원하려 함이로라	And if any man hear my words, and believe not, I judge him not: for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.	As for anyone who hears My words and does not keep them, I do not judge him. For I have not come to judge the world, but to save the world.
JHN	12	48	나를 저버리고 내 말을 받지 아니하는 자를 심판할 이가 있으니 곧 나의 한 그 말이 마지막 날에 저를 심판하리라	He that rejecteth me, and receiveth not my words, hath one that judgeth him: the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day.	There is a judge for the one who rejects Me and does not receive My words: The word that I have spoken will judge him on the last day.
JHN	12	49	내가 내 자의로 말한 것이 아니요 나를 보내신 아버지께서 나의 말할 것과 이를 것을 친히 명령하여 주셨으니	For I have not spoken of myself; but the Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak.	I have not spoken on My own, but the Father who sent Me has commanded Me what to say and how to say it.
JHN	12	50	나는 그의 명령이 영생인 줄 아노라 그러므로 나의 이르는 것은 내 아버지께서 내게 말씀하신 그대로 이르노라 하시니라	And I know that his commandment is life everlasting: whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so I speak.	And I know that His command leads to eternal life. So I speak exactly what the Father has told Me to say.”
JHN	13	1	유월절 전에 예수께서 자기가 세상을 떠나 아버지께로 돌아가실 때가 이른 줄 아시고 세상에 있는 자기 사람들을 사랑하시되 끝까지 사랑하시니라	Now before the feast of the passover, when Jesus knew that his hour was come that he should depart out of this world unto the Father, having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end.	It was now just before the Passover Feast, and Jesus knew that His hour had come to leave this world and return to the Father. Having loved His own who were in the world, He loved them to the very end.
JHN	13	2	마귀가 벌써 시몬의 아들 가룟 유다의 마음에 예수를 팔려는 생각을 넣었더니	And supper being ended, the devil having now put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon’s son, to betray him;	The evening meal was underway, and the devil had already put into the heart of Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot, to betray Jesus.
JHN	13	3	저녁 먹는 중 예수는 아버지께서 모든 것을 자기 손에 맡기신 것과 또 자기가 하나님께로부터 오셨다가 하나님께로 돌아가실 것을 아시고	Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands, and that he was come from God, and went to God;	Jesus knew that the Father had delivered all things into His hands, and that He had come from God and was returning to God.
JHN	13	4	저녁 잡수시던 자리에서 일어나 겉옷을 벗고 수건을 가져다가 허리에 두르시고	He riseth from supper, and laid aside his garments; and took a towel, and girded himself.	So He got up from the supper, laid aside His outer garments, and wrapped a towel around His waist.
JHN	13	5	이에 대야에 물을 담아 제자들의 발을 씻기시고 그 두르신 수건으로 씻기기를 시작하여	After that he poureth water into a bason, and began to wash the disciples’ feet, and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was girded.	After that, He poured water into a basin and began to wash the disciples’ feet and dry them with the towel that was around Him.
JHN	13	6	시몬 베드로에게 이르시니 가로되 주여 주께서 내 발을 씻기시나이까	Then cometh he to Simon Peter: and Peter saith unto him, Lord, dost thou wash my feet?	He came to Simon Peter, who asked Him, “Lord, are You going to wash my feet?”
JHN	13	7	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 나의 하는 것을 네가 이제는 알지 못하나 이 후에는 알리라	Jesus answered and said unto him, What I do thou knowest not now; but thou shalt know hereafter.	Jesus replied, “You do not realize now what I am doing, but later you will understand.”
JHN	13	8	베드로가 가로되 내 발을 절대로 씻기지 못하시리이다 예수께서 대답하시되 내가 너를 씻기지 아니하면 네가 나와 상관이 없느니라	Peter saith unto him, Thou shalt never wash my feet. Jesus answered him, If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me.	“Never shall You wash my feet!” Peter told Him. Jesus answered, “Unless I wash you, you have no part with Me.”
JHN	13	9	시몬 베드로가 가로되 주여 내 발뿐 아니라 손과 머리도 씻겨 주옵소서	Simon Peter saith unto him, Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head.	“Then, Lord,” Simon Peter replied, “not only my feet, but my hands and my head as well!”
JHN	13	10	예수께서 가라사대 이미 목욕한 자는 발밖에 씻을 필요가 없느니라 온 몸이 깨끗하니라 너희가 깨끗하나 다는 아니니라 하시니	Jesus saith to him, He that is washed needeth not save to wash his feet, but is clean every whit: and ye are clean, but not all.	Jesus told him, “Whoever has already bathed needs only to wash his feet, and he will be completely clean. And you are clean, though not all of you.”
JHN	13	11	이는 자기를 팔 자가 누구인지 아심이라 그러므로 다는 깨끗지 아니하다 하시니라	For he knew who should betray him; therefore said he, Ye are not all clean.	For He knew who would betray Him. That is why He said, “Not all of you are clean.”
JHN	13	12	저희 발을 씻기신 후에 옷을 입으시고 다시 앉아 저희에게 이르시되 내가 너희에게 행한 것을 너희가 아느냐	So after he had washed their feet, and had taken his garments, and was set down again, he said unto them, Know ye what I have done to you?	When Jesus had washed their feet and put on His outer garments, He reclined with them again and asked, “Do you know what I have done for you?
JHN	13	13	너희가 나를 선생이라 또는 주라 하니 너희 말이 옳도다 내가 그러하다	Ye call me Master and Lord: and ye say well; for so I am.	You call Me Teacher and Lord, and rightly so, because I am.
JHN	13	14	내가 주와 또는 선생이 되어 너희 발을 씻겼으니 너희도 서로 발을 씻기는 것이 옳으니라	If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet; ye also ought to wash one another’s feet.	So if I, your Lord and Teacher, have washed your feet, you also should wash one another’s feet.
JHN	13	15	내가 너희에게 행한 것 같이 너희도 행하게 하려 하여 본을 보였노라	For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you.	I have set you an example so that you should do as I have done for you.
JHN	13	16	내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 종이 상전보다 크지 못하고 보냄을 받은 자가 보낸 자보다 크지 못하니	Verily, verily, I say unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord; neither he that is sent greater than he that sent him.	Truly, truly, I tell you, no servant is greater than his master, nor is a messenger greater than the one who sent him.
JHN	13	17	너희가 이것을 알고 행하면 복이 있으리라	If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.	If you know these things, you will be blessed if you do them.
JHN	13	18	내가 너희를 다 가리켜 말하는 것이 아니라 내가 나의 택한 자들이 누구인지 앎이라 그러나 내 떡을 먹는 자가 내게 발꿈치를 들었다 한 성경을 응하게 하려는 것이니라	I speak not of you all: I know whom I have chosen: but that the scripture may be fulfilled, He that eateth bread with me hath lifted up his heel against me.	I am not speaking about all of you; I know whom I have chosen. But this is to fulfill the Scripture: ‘The one who shares My bread has lifted up his heel against Me.’
JHN	13	19	지금부터 일이 이루기 전에 미리 너희에게 이름은 일이 이룰 때에 내가 그인 줄 너희로 믿게 하려 함이로라	Now I tell you before it come, that, when it is come to pass, ye may believe that I am he.	I am telling you now before it happens, so that when it comes to pass, you will believe that I am He.
JHN	13	20	내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 나의 보낸 자를 영접하는 자는 나를 영접하는 것이요 나를 영접하는 자는 나를 보내신 이를 영접하는 것이니라	Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that receiveth whomsoever I send receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me.	Truly, truly, I tell you, whoever receives the one I send receives Me, and whoever receives Me receives the One who sent Me.”
JHN	13	21	예수께서 이 말씀을 하시고 심령에 민망하여 증거하여 가라사대 내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 너희 중 하나가 나를 팔리라 하시니	When Jesus had thus said, he was troubled in spirit, and testified, and said, Verily, verily, I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me.	After Jesus had said this, He became troubled in spirit and testified, “Truly, truly, I tell you, one of you will betray Me.”
JHN	13	22	제자들이 서로 보며 뉘게 대하여 말씀하시는지 의심하더라	Then the disciples looked one on another, doubting of whom he spake.	The disciples looked at one another, perplexed as to which of them He meant.
JHN	13	23	예수의 제자 중 하나 곧 그의 사랑하시는 자가 예수의 품에 의지하여 누웠는지라	Now there was leaning on Jesus’ bosom one of his disciples, whom Jesus loved.	One of His disciples, the one whom Jesus loved, was reclining at His side.
JHN	13	24	시몬 베드로가 머릿짓을 하여 말하되 말씀하신 자가 누구인지 말하라 한대	Simon Peter therefore beckoned to him, that he should ask who it should be of whom he spake.	So Simon Peter motioned to him to ask Jesus which one He was talking about.
JHN	13	25	그가 예수의 가슴에 그대로 의지하여 말하되 주여 누구오니이까	He then lying on Jesus’ breast saith unto him, Lord, who is it?	Leaning back against Jesus, he asked, “Lord, who is it?”
JHN	13	26	예수께서 대답하시되 내가 한 조각을 찍어다가 주는 자가 그니라 하시고 곧 한 조각을 찍으셔다가 가룟 시몬의 아들 유다를 주시니	Jesus answered, He it is, to whom I shall give a sop, when I have dipped it. And when he had dipped the sop, he gave it to Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon.	Jesus answered, “It is the one to whom I give this morsel after I have dipped it.” Then He dipped the morsel and gave it to Judas son of Simon Iscariot.
JHN	13	27	조각을 받은 후 곧 사단이 그 속에 들어간지라 이에 예수께서 유다에게 이르시되 네 하는 일을 속히 하라 하시니	And after the sop Satan entered into him. Then said Jesus unto him, That thou doest, do quickly.	And when Judas had taken the morsel, Satan entered into him. Then Jesus said to Judas, “What you are about to do, do quickly.”
JHN	13	28	이 말씀을 무슨 뜻으로 하셨는지 그 앉은 자 중에 아는 이가 없고	Now no man at the table knew for what intent he spake this unto him.	But no one at the table knew why Jesus had said this to him.
JHN	13	29	어떤 이들은 유다가 돈 궤를 맡았으므로 명절에 우리의 쓸 물건을 사라 하시는지 혹 가난한 자들에게 무엇을 주라 하시는 줄로 생각하더라	For some of them thought, because Judas had the bag, that Jesus had said unto him, Buy those things that we have need of against the feast; or, that he should give something to the poor.	Since Judas kept the money bag, some thought that Jesus was telling him to buy what was needed for the feast, or to give something to the poor.
JHN	13	30	유다가 그 조각을 받고 곧 나가니 밤이러라	He then having received the sop went immediately out: and it was night.	As soon as he had received the morsel, Judas went out into the night.
JHN	13	31	저가 나간 후에 예수께서 가라사대 지금 인자가 영광을 얻었고 하나님도 인자를 인하여 영광을 얻으셨도다	Therefore, when he was gone out, Jesus said, Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him.	When Judas had gone out, Jesus said, “Now the Son of Man is glorified, and God is glorified in Him.
JHN	13	32	만일 하나님이 저로 인하여 영광을 얻으셨으면 하나님도 자기로 인하여 저에게 영광을 주시리니 곧 주시리라	If God be glorified in him, God shall also glorify him in himself, and shall straightway glorify him.	If God is glorified in Him, God will also glorify the Son in Himself—and will glorify Him at once.
JHN	13	33	소자들아 내가 아직 잠시 너희와 함께 있겠노라 너희가 나를 찾을 터이나 그러나 일찍 내가 유대인들에게 너희는 나의 가는 곳에 올 수 없다고 말한 것과 같이 지금 너희에게도 이르노라	Little children, yet a little while I am with you. Ye shall seek me: and as I said unto the Jews, Whither I go, ye cannot come; so now I say to you.	Little children, I am with you only a little while longer. You will look for Me, and as I said to the Jews, so now I say to you: ‘Where I am going, you cannot come.’
JHN	13	34	새 계명을 너희에게 주노니 서로 사랑하라 내가 너희를 사랑한 것 같이 너희도 서로 사랑하라	A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another.	A new commandment I give you: Love one another. As I have loved you, so you also must love one another.
JHN	13	35	너희가 서로 사랑하면 이로써 모든 사람이 너희가 내 제자인 줄 알리라	By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another.	By this everyone will know that you are My disciples, if you love one another.”
JHN	13	36	시몬 베드로가 가로되 주여 어디로 가시나이까 예수께서 대답하시되 나의 가는 곳에 네가 지금은 따라올 수 없으나 후에는 따라 오리라	Simon Peter said unto him, Lord, whither goest thou? Jesus answered him, Whither I go, thou canst not follow me now; but thou shalt follow me afterwards.	“Lord, where are You going?” Simon Peter asked. Jesus answered, “Where I am going, you cannot follow Me now, but you will follow later.”
JHN	13	37	베드로가 가로되 주여 내가 지금은 어찌하여 따를 수 없나이까 주를 위하여 내 목숨을 버리겠나이다	Peter said unto him, Lord, why cannot I follow thee now? I will lay down my life for thy sake.	“Lord,” said Peter, “why can’t I follow You now? I will lay down my life for You.”
JHN	13	38	예수께서 대답하시되 네가 나를 위하여 네 목숨을 버리겠느냐 내가 진실로 진실로 네게 이르노니 닭 울기 전에 네가 세 번 나를 부인하리라	Jesus answered him, Wilt thou lay down thy life for my sake? Verily, verily, I say unto thee, The cock shall not crow, till thou hast denied me thrice.	“Will you lay down your life for Me?” Jesus replied. “Truly, truly, I tell you, before the rooster crows, you will deny Me three times.
JHN	14	1	너희는 마음에 근심하지 말라 하나님을 믿으니 또 나를 믿으라	Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me.	“Do not let your hearts be troubled. You believe in God; believe in Me as well.
JHN	14	2	내 아버지 집에 거할 곳이 많도다 그렇지 않으면 너희에게 일렀으리라 내가 너희를 위하여 처소를 예비하러 가노니	In my Father’s house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you.	In My Father’s house are many rooms. If it were not so, would I have told you that I am going there to prepare a place for you?
JHN	14	3	가서 너희를 위하여 처소를 예비하면 내가 다시 와서 너희를 내게로 영접하여 나 있는 곳에 너희도 있게 하리라	And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye may be also.	And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come back and welcome you into My presence, so that you also may be where I am.
JHN	14	4	내가 가는 곳에 그 길을 너희가 알리라	And whither I go ye know, and the way ye know.	You know the way to the place where I am going.”
JHN	14	5	도마가 가로되 주여 어디로 가시는지 우리가 알지 못하거늘 그 길을 어찌 알겠삽나이까	Thomas saith unto him, Lord, we know not whither thou goest; and how can we know the way?	“Lord,” said Thomas, “we do not know where You are going, so how can we know the way?”
JHN	14	6	예수께서 가라사대 내가 곧 길이요 진리요 생명이니 나로 말미암지 않고는 아버지께로 올 자가 없느니라	Jesus saith unto him, I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me.	Jesus answered, “I am the way and the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father except through Me.
JHN	14	7	너희가 나를 알았더면 내 아버지도 알았으리로다 이제부터는 너희가 그를 알았고 또 보았느니라	If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also: and from henceforth ye know him, and have seen him.	If you had known Me, you would know My Father as well. From now on you do know Him and have seen Him.”
JHN	14	8	빌립이 가로되 주여 아버지를 우리에게 보여 주옵소서 그리하면 족하겠나이다	Philip saith unto him, Lord, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us.	Philip said to Him, “Lord, show us the Father, and that will be enough for us.”
JHN	14	9	예수께서 가라사대 빌립아 내가 이렇게 오래 너희와 함께 있으되 네가 나를 알지 못하느냐 나를 본 자는 아버지를 보았거늘 어찌하여 아버지를 보이라 하느냐	Jesus saith unto him, Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the Father; and how sayest thou then, Shew us the Father?	Jesus replied, “Philip, I have been with you all this time, and still you do not know Me? Anyone who has seen Me has seen the Father. How can you say, ‘Show us the Father’?
JHN	14	10	나는 아버지 안에 있고 아버지는 내 안에 계신 것을 네가 믿지 아니하느냐 내가 너희에게 이르는 말이 스스로 하는 것이 아니라 아버지께서 내 안에 계셔 그의 일을 하시는 것이라	Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? the words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself: but the Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works.	Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in Me? The words I say to you, I do not speak on My own. Instead, it is the Father dwelling in Me, performing His works.
JHN	14	11	내가 아버지 안에 있고 아버지께서 내 안에 계심을 믿으라 그렇지 못하겠거든 행하는 그 일을 인하여 나를 믿으라	Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me: or else believe me for the very works’ sake.	Believe Me that I am in the Father and the Father is in Me—or at least believe on account of the works themselves.
JHN	14	12	내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 나를 믿는 자는 나의 하는 일을 저도 할 것이요 또한 이보다 큰 것도 하리니 이는 내가 아버지께로 감이니라	Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also; and greater works than these shall he do; because I go unto my Father.	Truly, truly, I tell you, whoever believes in Me will also do the works that I am doing. He will do even greater things than these, because I am going to the Father.
JHN	14	13	너희가 내 이름으로 무엇을 구하든지 내가 시행하리니 이는 아버지로 하여금 아들을 인하여 영광을 얻으시게 하려 함이라	And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son.	And I will do whatever you ask in My name, so that the Father may be glorified in the Son.
JHN	14	14	내 이름으로 무엇이든지 내게 구하면 내가 시행하리라	If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it.	If you ask Me for anything in My name, I will do it.
JHN	14	15	너희가 나를 사랑하면 나의 계명을 지키리라	If ye love me, keep my commandments.	If you love Me, you will keep My commandments.
JHN	14	16	내가 아버지께 구하겠으니 그가 또 다른 보혜사를 너희에게 주사 영원토록 너희와 함께 있게 하시리니	And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever;	And I will ask the Father, and He will give you another Advocate to be with you forever—
JHN	14	17	저는 진리의 영이라 세상은 능히 저를 받지 못하나니 이는 저를 보지도 못하고 알지도 못함이라 그러나 너희는 저를 아나니 저는 너희와 함께 거하심이요 또 너희 속에 계시겠음이라	Even the Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him: but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you.	the Spirit of truth. The world cannot receive Him, because it neither sees Him nor knows Him. But you do know Him, for He abides with you and will be in you.
JHN	14	18	내가 너희를 고아와 같이 버려두지 아니하고 너희에게로 오리라	I will not leave you comfortless: I will come to you.	I will not leave you as orphans; I will come to you.
JHN	14	19	조금 있으면 세상은 다시 나를 보지 못할 터이로되 너희는 나를 보리니 이는 내가 살았고 너희도 살겠음이라	Yet a little while, and the world seeth me no more; but ye see me: because I live, ye shall live also.	In a little while the world will see Me no more, but you will see Me. Because I live, you also will live.
JHN	14	20	그 날에는 내가 아버지 안에, 너희가 내 안에, 내가 너희 안에 있는 것을 너희가 알리라	At that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you.	On that day you will know that I am in My Father, and you are in Me, and I am in you.
JHN	14	21	나의 계명을 가지고 지키는 자라야 나를 사랑하는 자니 나를 사랑하는 자는 내 아버지께 사랑을 받을 것이요 나도 그를 사랑하여 그에게 나를 나타내리라	He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him.	Whoever has My commandments and keeps them is the one who loves Me. The one who loves Me will be loved by My Father, and I will love him and reveal Myself to him.”
JHN	14	22	가룟인 아닌 유다가 가로되 주여 어찌하여 자기를 우리에게는 나타내시고 세상에게는 아니하려 하시나이까	Judas saith unto him, not Iscariot, Lord, how is it that thou wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world?	Judas (not Iscariot) asked Him, “Lord, why are You going to reveal Yourself to us and not to the world?”
JHN	14	23	예수께서 대답하여 가라사대 사람이 나를 사랑하면 내 말을 지키리니 내 아버지께서 저를 사랑하실 것이요 우리가 저에게 와서 거처를 저와 함께 하리라	Jesus answered and said unto him, If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him.	Jesus replied, “If anyone loves Me, he will keep My word. My Father will love him, and We will come to him and make Our home with him.
JHN	14	24	나를 사랑하지 아니하는 자는 내 말을 지키지 아니하나니 너희의 듣는 말은 내 말이 아니요 나를 보내신 아버지의 말씀이니라	He that loveth me not keepeth not my sayings: and the word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father’s which sent me.	Whoever does not love Me does not keep My words. The word that you hear is not My own, but it is from the Father who sent Me.
JHN	14	25	내가 아직 너희와 함께 있어서 이 말을 너희에게 하였거니와	These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you.	All this I have spoken to you while I am still with you.
JHN	14	26	보혜사 곧 아버지께서 내 이름으로 보내실 성령 그가 너희에게 모든 것을 가르치시고 내가 너희에게 말한 모든 것을 생각나게 하시리라	But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.	But the Advocate, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in My name, will teach you all things and will remind you of everything I have told you.
JHN	14	27	평안을 너희에게 끼치노니 곧 나의 평안을 너희에게 주노라 내가 너희에게 주는 것은 세상이 주는 것 같지 아니하니라 너희는 마음에 근심도 말고 두려워하지도 말라	Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.	Peace I leave with you; My peace I give to you. I do not give to you as the world gives. Do not let your hearts be troubled; do not be afraid.
JHN	14	28	내가 갔다가 너희에게로 온다 하는 말을 너희가 들었나니 나를 사랑하였더면 나의 아버지께로 감을 기뻐하였으리라 아버지는 나보다 크심이니라	Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and come again unto you. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father: for my Father is greater than I.	You heard Me say, ‘I am going away, and I am coming back to you.’ If you loved Me, you would rejoice that I am going to the Father, because the Father is greater than I.
JHN	14	29	이제 일이 이루기 전에 너희에게 말한 것은 일이 이룰 때에 너희로 믿게 하려 함이라	And now I have told you before it come to pass, that, when it is come to pass, ye might believe.	And now I have told you before it happens, so that when it does happen, you will believe.
JHN	14	30	이 후에는 내가 너희와 말을 많이 하지 아니하리니 이 세상 임금이 오겠음이라 그러나 저는 내게 관계할 것이 없으니	Hereafter I will not talk much with you: for the prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing in me.	I will not speak with you much longer, for the prince of this world is coming, and he has no claim on Me.
JHN	14	31	오직 내가 아버지를 사랑하는 것과 아버지의 명하신 대로 행하는 것을 세상으로 알게 하려 함이로라 일어나라 여기를 떠나자 하시니라	But that the world may know that I love the Father; and as the Father gave me commandment, even so I do. Arise, let us go hence.	But I do exactly what the Father has commanded Me, so that the world may know that I love the Father. Get up! Let us go on from here.
JHN	15	1	내가 참 포도나무요 내 아버지는 그 농부라	I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman.	“I am the true vine, and My Father is the keeper of the vineyard.
JHN	15	2	무릇 내게 있어 과실을 맺지 아니하는 가지는 아버지께서 이를 제해 버리시고 무릇 과실을 맺는 가지는 더 과실을 맺게 하려 하여 이를 깨끗케 하시느니라	Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away: and every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit.	He cuts off every branch in Me that bears no fruit, and every branch that does bear fruit, He prunes to make it even more fruitful.
JHN	15	3	너희는 내가 일러 준 말로 이미 깨끗하였으니	Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you.	You are already clean because of the word I have spoken to you.
JHN	15	4	내 안에 거하라 나도 너희 안에 거하리라 가지가 포도나무에 붙어 있지 아니하면 절로 과실을 맺을 수 없음 같이 너희도 내 안에 있지 아니하면 그러하리라	Abide in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me.	Remain in Me, and I will remain in you. Just as no branch can bear fruit by itself unless it remains in the vine, neither can you bear fruit unless you remain in Me.
JHN	15	5	나는 포도나무요 너희는 가지니 저가 내 안에, 내가 저 안에 있으면 이 사람은 과실을 많이 맺나니 나를 떠나서는 너희가 아무 것도 할 수 없음이라	I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing.	I am the vine and you are the branches. The one who remains in Me, and I in him, will bear much fruit. For apart from Me you can do nothing.
JHN	15	6	사람이 내 안에 거하지 아니하면 가지처럼 밖에 버리워 말라지나니 사람들이 이것을 모아다가 불에 던져 사르느니라	If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered; and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned.	If anyone does not remain in Me, he is like a branch that is thrown away and withers. Such branches are gathered up, thrown into the fire, and burned.
JHN	15	7	너희가 내 안에 거하고 내 말이 너희 안에 거하면 무엇이든지 원하는 대로 구하라 그리하면 이루리라	If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you.	If you remain in Me and My words remain in you, ask whatever you wish, and it will be done for you.
JHN	15	8	너희가 과실을 많이 맺으면 내 아버지께서 영광을 받으실 것이요 너희가 내 제자가 되리라	Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit; so shall ye be my disciples.	This is to My Father’s glory, that you bear much fruit, proving yourselves to be My disciples.
JHN	15	9	아버지께서 나를 사랑하신 것 같이 나도 너희를 사랑하였으니 나의 사랑 안에 거하라	As the Father hath loved me, so have I loved you: continue ye in my love.	As the Father has loved Me, so have I loved you. Remain in My love.
JHN	15	10	내가 아버지의 계명을 지켜 그의 사랑 안에 거하는 것 같이 너희도 내 계명을 지키면 내 사랑 안에 거하리라	If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I have kept my Father’s commandments, and abide in his love.	If you keep My commandments, you will remain in My love, just as I have kept My Father’s commandments and remain in His love.
JHN	15	11	내가 이것을 너희에게 이름은 내 기쁨이 너희 안에 있어 너희 기쁨을 충만하게 하려 함이니라	These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full.	I have told you these things so that My joy may be in you and your joy may be complete.
JHN	15	12	내 계명은 곧 내가 너희를 사랑한 것 같이 너희도 서로 사랑하라 하는 이것이니라	This is my commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you.	This is My commandment, that you love one another as I have loved you.
JHN	15	13	사람이 친구를 위하여 자기 목숨을 버리면 이에서 더 큰 사랑이 없나니	Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends.	Greater love has no one than this, that he lay down his life for his friends.
JHN	15	14	너희가 나의 명하는 대로 행하면 곧 나의 친구라	Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you.	You are My friends if you do what I command you.
JHN	15	15	이제부터는 너희를 종이라 하지 아니하리니 종은 주인의 하는 것을 알지 못함이라 너희를 친구라 하였노니 내가 내 아버지께 들은 것을 다 너희에게 알게 하였음이니라	Henceforth I call you not servants; for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth: but I have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father I have made known unto you.	No longer do I call you servants, for a servant does not understand what his master is doing. But I have called you friends, because everything I have learned from My Father I have made known to you.
JHN	15	16	너희가 나를 택한 것이 아니요 내가 너희를 택하여 세웠나니 이는 너희로 가서 과실을 맺게 하고 또 너희 과실이 항상 있게 하여 내 이름으로 아버지께 무엇을 구하든지 다 받게 하려 함이니라	Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain: that whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name, he may give it you.	You did not choose Me, but I chose you. And I appointed you to go and bear fruit—fruit that will remain—so that whatever you ask the Father in My name, He will give you.
JHN	15	17	내가 이것을 너희에게 명함은 너희로 서로 사랑하게 하려 함이로라	These things I command you, that ye love one another.	This is My command to you: Love one another.
JHN	15	18	세상이 너희를 미워하면 너희보다 먼저 나를 미워한 줄을 알라	If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you.	If the world hates you, understand that it hated Me first.
JHN	15	19	너희가 세상에 속하였으면 세상이 자기의 것을 사랑할 터이나 너희는 세상에 속한 자가 아니요 도리어 세상에서 나의 택함을 입은 자인 고로 세상이 너희를 미워하느니라	If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you.	If you were of the world, it would love you as its own. Instead, the world hates you, because you are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world.
JHN	15	20	내가 너희더러 종이 주인보다 더 크지 못하다 한 말을 기억하라 사람들이 나를 핍박하였은즉 너희도 핍박할 터이요 내 말을 지켰은즉 너희 말도 지킬 터이라	Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept my saying, they will keep yours also.	Remember the word that I spoke to you: ‘No servant is greater than his master.’ If they persecuted Me, they will persecute you as well; if they kept My word, they will keep yours as well.
JHN	15	21	그러나 사람들이 내 이름을 인하여 이 모든 일을 너희에게 하리니 이는 나 보내신 이를 알지 못함이니라	But all these things will they do unto you for my name’s sake, because they know not him that sent me.	But they will treat you like this because of My name, since they do not know the One who sent Me.
JHN	15	22	내가 와서 저희에게 말하지 아니하였더면 죄가 없었으려니와 지금은 그 죄를 핑계할 수 없느니라	If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin: but now they have no cloke for their sin.	If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not be guilty of sin. Now, however, they have no excuse for their sin.
JHN	15	23	나를 미워하는 자는 또 내 아버지를 미워하느니라	He that hateth me hateth my Father also.	Whoever hates Me hates My Father as well.
JHN	15	24	내가 아무도 못한 일을 저희 중에서 하지 아니하였더면 저희가 죄 없었으려니와 지금은 저희가 나와 및 내 아버지를 보았고 또 미워하였도다	If I had not done among them the works which none other man did, they had not had sin: but now have they both seen and hated both me and my Father.	If I had not done among them the works that no one else did, they would not be guilty of sin; but now they have seen and hated both Me and My Father.
JHN	15	25	그러나 이는 저희 율법에 기록된 바 저희가 연고 없이 나를 미워하였다 한 말을 응하게 하려 함이니라	But this cometh to pass, that the word might be fulfilled that is written in their law, They hated me without a cause.	But this is to fulfill what is written in their Law: ‘They hated Me without reason.’
JHN	15	26	내가 아버지께로서 너희에게 보낼 보혜사 곧 아버지께로서 나오시는 진리의 성령이 오실 때에 그가 나를 증거하실 것이요	But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the Father, he shall testify of me:	When the Advocate comes, whom I will send to you from the Father—the Spirit of truth who proceeds from the Father—He will testify about Me.
JHN	15	27	너희도 처음부터 나와 함께 있었으므로 증거하느니라	And ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been with me from the beginning.	And you also must testify, because you have been with Me from the beginning.
JHN	16	1	내가 이것을 너희에게 이름은 너희로 실족지 않게 하려 함이니	These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be offended.	“I have told you these things so that you will not fall away.
JHN	16	2	사람들이 너희를 출회할 뿐 아니라 때가 이르면 무릇 너희를 죽이는 자가 생각하기를 이것이 하나님을 섬기는 예라 하리라	They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God service.	They will put you out of the synagogues. In fact, a time is coming when anyone who kills you will think he is offering a service to God.
JHN	16	3	저희가 이런 일을 할 것은 아버지와 나를 알지 못함이라	And these things will they do unto you, because they have not known the Father, nor me.	They will do these things because they have not known the Father or Me.
JHN	16	4	오직 너희에게 이 말을 이른 것은 너희로 그 때를 당하면 내가 너희에게 이 말 한 것을 기억나게 하려 함이요 처음부터 이 말을 하지 아니한 것은 내가 너희와 함께 있었음이니라	But these things have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye may remember that I told you of them. And these things I said not unto you at the beginning, because I was with you.	But I have told you these things so that when their hour comes, you will remember that I told you about them. I did not tell you these things from the beginning, because I was with you.
JHN	16	5	지금 내가 나를 보내신 이에게로 가는데 너희 중에서 나더러 어디로 가느냐 묻는 자가 없고	But now I go my way to him that sent me; and none of you asketh me, Whither goest thou?	Now, however, I am going to Him who sent Me; yet none of you asks Me, ‘Where are You going?’
JHN	16	6	도리어 내가 이 말을 하므로 너희 마음에 근심이 가득하였도다	But because I have said these things unto you, sorrow hath filled your heart.	Instead, your hearts are filled with sorrow because I have told you these things.
JHN	16	7	그러하나 내가 너희에게 실상을 말하노니 내가 떠나가는 것이 너희에게 유익이라 내가 떠나가지 아니하면 보혜사가 너희에게로 오시지 아니할 것이요 가면 내가 그를 너희에게로 보내리니	Nevertheless I tell you the truth; It is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you.	But I tell you the truth, it is for your benefit that I am going away. Unless I go away, the Advocate will not come to you; but if I go, I will send Him to you.
JHN	16	8	그가 와서 죄에 대하여, 의에 대하여, 심판에 대하여 세상을 책망하시리라	And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment:	And when He comes, He will convict the world in regard to sin and righteousness and judgment:
JHN	16	9	죄에 대하여라 함은 저희가 나를 믿지 아니함이요	Of sin, because they believe not on me;	in regard to sin, because they do not believe in Me;
JHN	16	10	의에 대하여라 함은 내가 아버지께로 가니 너희가 다시 나를 보지 못함이요	Of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more;	in regard to righteousness, because I am going to the Father and you will no longer see Me;
JHN	16	11	심판에 대하여라 함은 이 세상 임금이 심판을 받았음이니라	Of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged.	and in regard to judgment, because the prince of this world has been condemned.
JHN	16	12	내가 아직도 너희에게 이를 것이 많으나 지금은 너희가 감당치 못하리라	I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now.	I still have much to tell you, but you cannot yet bear to hear it.
JHN	16	13	그러하나 진리의 성령이 오시면 그가 너희를 모든 진리 가운데로 인도하시리니 그가 자의로 말하지 않고 오직 듣는 것을 말하시며 장래 일을 너희에게 알리시리라	Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak: and he will shew you things to come.	However, when the Spirit of truth comes, He will guide you into all truth. For He will not speak on His own, but He will speak what He hears, and He will declare to you what is to come.
JHN	16	14	그가 내 영광을 나타내리니 내 것을 가지고 너희에게 알리겠음이니라	He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you.	He will glorify Me by taking from what is Mine and disclosing it to you.
JHN	16	15	무릇 아버지께 있는 것은 다 내 것이라 그러므로 내가 말하기를 그가 내 것을 가지고 너희에게 알리리라 하였노라	All things that the Father hath are mine: therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall shew it unto you.	Everything that belongs to the Father is Mine. That is why I said that the Spirit will take from what is Mine and disclose it to you.
JHN	16	16	조금 있으면 너희가 나를 보지 못하겠고 또 조금 있으면 나를 보리라 하신대	A little while, and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while, and ye shall see me, because I go to the Father.	In a little while you will see Me no more, and then after a little while you will see Me.”
JHN	16	17	제자 중에서 서로 말하되 우리에게 말씀하신 바 조금 있으면 나를 보지 못하겠고 또 조금 있으면 나를 보리라 하시며 또 내가 아버지께로 감이라 하신 것이 무슨 말씀이뇨 하고	Then said some of his disciples among themselves, What is this that he saith unto us, A little while, and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while, and ye shall see me: and, Because I go to the Father?	Then some of His disciples asked one another, “Why is He telling us, ‘In a little while you will not see Me, and then after a little while you will see Me’ and ‘Because I am going to the Father’?”
JHN	16	18	또 말하되 조금 있으면이라 한 말씀이 무슨 말씀이뇨 무엇을 말씀하시는지 알지 못하노라 하거늘	They said therefore, What is this that he saith, A little while? we cannot tell what he saith.	They kept asking, “Why is He saying, ‘a little while’? We do not understand what He is saying.”
JHN	16	19	예수께서 그 묻고자 함을 아시고 가라사대 내 말이 조금 있으면 나를 보지 못하겠고 또 조금 있으면 나를 보리라 하므로 서로 문의하느냐	Now Jesus knew that they were desirous to ask him, and said unto them, Do ye enquire among yourselves of that I said, A little while, and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while, and ye shall see me?	Aware that they wanted to question Him, Jesus said to them, “Are you asking one another why I said, ‘In a little while you will not see Me, and then after a little while you will see Me’?
JHN	16	20	내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 너희는 곡하고 애통하겠으나 세상은 기뻐하리라 너희는 근심하겠으나 너희 근심이 도리어 기쁨이 되리라	Verily, verily, I say unto you, That ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice: and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy.	Truly, truly, I tell you, you will weep and wail while the world rejoices. You will grieve, but your grief will turn to joy.
JHN	16	21	여자가 해산하게 되면 그 때가 이르렀으므로 근심하나 아이를 낳으면 세상에 사람 난 기쁨을 인하여 그 고통을 다시 기억지 아니하느니라	A woman when she is in travail hath sorrow, because her hour is come: but as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembereth no more the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world.	A woman has pain in childbirth because her time has come; but when she brings forth her child, she forgets her anguish because of her joy that a child has been born into the world.
JHN	16	22	지금은 너희가 근심하나 내가 다시 너희를 보리니 너희 마음이 기쁠 것이요 너희 기쁨을 빼앗을 자가 없느니라	And ye now therefore have sorrow: but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man taketh from you.	So also you have sorrow now, but I will see you again and your hearts will rejoice, and no one will take away your joy.
JHN	16	23	그 날에는 너희가 아무 것도 내게 묻지 아니하리라 내가 진실로 진실로 너희에게 이르노니 너희가 무엇이든지 아버지께 구하는 것을 내 이름으로 주시리라	And in that day ye shall ask me nothing. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you.	In that day you will no longer ask Me anything. Truly, truly, I tell you, whatever you ask the Father in My name, He will give you.
JHN	16	24	지금까지는 너희가 내 이름으로 아무 것도 구하지 아니하였으나 구하라 그리하면 받으리니 너희 기쁨이 충만하리라	Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name: ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full.	Until now you have not asked for anything in My name. Ask and you will receive, so that your joy may be complete.
JHN	16	25	이것을 비사로 너희에게 일렀거니와 때가 이르면 다시 비사로 너희에게 이르지 않고 아버지에 대한 것을 밝히 이르리라	These things have I spoken unto you in proverbs: but the time cometh, when I shall no more speak unto you in proverbs, but I shall shew you plainly of the Father.	I have spoken these things to you in figures of speech. An hour is coming when I will no longer speak to you this way, but will tell you plainly about the Father.
JHN	16	26	그 날에 너희가 내 이름으로 구할 것이요 내가 너희를 위하여 아버지께 구하겠다 하는 말이 아니니	At that day ye shall ask in my name: and I say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you:	In that day you will ask in My name. I am not saying that I will ask the Father on your behalf.
JHN	16	27	이는 너희가 나를 사랑하고 또 나를 하나님께로서 온 줄 믿은 고로 아버지께서 친히 너희를 사랑하심이니라	For the Father himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God.	For the Father Himself loves you, because you have loved Me and have believed that I came from God.
JHN	16	28	내가 아버지께로 나와서 세상에 왔고 다시 세상을 떠나 아버지께로 가노라 하시니	I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world: again, I leave the world, and go to the Father.	I came from the Father and entered the world. In turn, I will leave the world and go to the Father.”
JHN	16	29	제자들이 말하되 지금은 밝히 말씀하시고 아무 비사도 하지 아니하시니	His disciples said unto him, Lo, now speakest thou plainly, and speakest no proverb.	His disciples said, “See, now You are speaking plainly and without figures of speech.
JHN	16	30	우리가 지금에야 주께서 모든 것을 아시고 또 사람의 물음을 기다리시지 않는 줄 아나이다 이로써 하나님께로서 나오심을 우리가 믿삽나이다	Now are we sure that thou knowest all things, and needest not that any man should ask thee: by this we believe that thou camest forth from God.	Now we understand that You know all things and that You have no need for anyone to question You. Because of this, we believe that You came from God.”
JHN	16	31	예수께서 대답하시되 이제는 너희가 믿느냐	Jesus answered them, Do ye now believe?	“Do you finally believe?” Jesus replied.
JHN	16	32	보라 너희가 다 각각 제 곳으로 흩어지고 나를 혼자 둘 때가 오나니 벌써 왔도다 그러나 내가 혼자 있는 것이 아니라 아버지께서 나와 함께 계시느니라	Behold, the hour cometh, yea, is now come, that ye shall be scattered, every man to his own, and shall leave me alone: and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.	“Look, an hour is coming and has already come when you will be scattered, each to his own home, and you will leave Me all alone. Yet I am not alone, because the Father is with Me.
JHN	16	33	이것을 너희에게 이름은 너희로 내 안에서 평안을 누리게 하려 함이라 세상에서는 너희가 환난을 당하나 담대하라 내가 세상을 이기었노라 하시니라	These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world.	I have told you these things so that in Me you may have peace. In the world you will have tribulation. But take courage; I have overcome the world!”
JHN	17	1	예수께서 이 말씀을 하시고 눈을 들어 하늘을 우러러 가라사대 아버지여 때가 이르렀사오니 아들을 영화롭게 하사 아들로 아버지를 영화롭게 하게 하옵소서	These words spake Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee:	When Jesus had spoken these things, He lifted up His eyes to heaven and said, “Father, the hour has come. Glorify Your Son, that Your Son may glorify You.
JHN	17	2	아버지께서 아들에게 주신 모든 자에게 영생을 주게 하시려고 만민을 다스리는 권세를 아들에게 주셨음이로소이다	As thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him.	For You granted Him authority over all people, so that He may give eternal life to all those You have given Him.
JHN	17	3	영생은 곧 유일하신 참 하나님과 그의 보내신 자 예수 그리스도를 아는 것이니이다	And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.	Now this is eternal life, that they may know You, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom You have sent.
JHN	17	4	아버지께서 내게 하라고 주신 일을 내가 이루어 아버지를 이 세상에서 영화롭게 하였사오니	I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do.	I have glorified You on earth by accomplishing the work You gave Me to do.
JHN	17	5	아버지여 창세 전에 내가 아버지와 함께 가졌던 영화로써 지금도 아버지와 함께 나를 영화롭게 하옵소서	And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was.	And now, Father, glorify Me in Your presence with the glory I had with You before the world existed.
JHN	17	6	세상 중에서 내게 주신 사람들에게 내가 아버지의 이름을 나타내었나이다 저희는 아버지의 것이었는데 내게 주셨으며 저희는 아버지의 말씀을 지키었나이다	I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me out of the world: thine they were, and thou gavest them me; and they have kept thy word.	I have revealed Your name to those You have given Me out of the world. They were Yours; You gave them to Me, and they have kept Your word.
JHN	17	7	지금 저희는 아버지께서 내게 주신 것이 다 아버지께로서 온 것인 줄 알았나이다	Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou hast given me are of thee.	Now they know that everything You have given Me comes from You.
JHN	17	8	나는 아버지께서 내게 주신 말씀들을 저희에게 주었사오며 저희는 이것을 받고 내가 아버지께로부터 나온 줄을 참으로 아오며 아버지께서 나를 보내신 줄도 믿었사옵나이다	For I have given unto them the words which thou gavest me; and they have received them, and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed that thou didst send me.	For I have given them the words You gave Me, and they have received them. They knew with certainty that I came from You, and they believed that You sent Me.
JHN	17	9	내가 저희를 위하여 비옵나니 내가 비옵는 것은 세상을 위함이 아니요 내게 주신 자들을 위함이니이다 저희는 아버지의 것이로소이다	I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast given me; for they are thine.	I ask on their behalf. I do not ask on behalf of the world, but on behalf of those You have given Me; for they are Yours.
JHN	17	10	내 것은 다 아버지의 것이요 아버지의 것은 내 것이온데 내가 저희로 말미암아 영광을 받았나이다	And all mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I am glorified in them.	All I have is Yours, and all You have is Mine; and in them I have been glorified.
JHN	17	11	나는 세상에 더 있지 아니하오나 저희는 세상에 있사옵고 나는 아버지께로 가옵나니 거룩하신 아버지여 내게 주신 아버지의 이름으로 저희를 보전하사 우리와 같이 저희도 하나가 되게 하옵소서	And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come to thee. Holy Father, keep through thine own name those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one, as we are.	I will no longer be in the world, but they are in the world, and I am coming to You. Holy Father, protect them by Your name, the name You gave Me, so that they may be one as We are one.
JHN	17	12	내가 저희와 함께 있을 때에 내게 주신 아버지의 이름으로 저희를 보전하와 지키었나이다 그 중에 하나도 멸망치 않고 오직 멸망의 자식뿐이오니 이는 성경을 응하게 함이니이다	While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name: those that thou gavest me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition; that the scripture might be fulfilled.	While I was with them, I protected and preserved them by Your name, the name You gave Me. Not one of them has been lost, except the son of destruction, so that the Scripture would be fulfilled.
JHN	17	13	지금 내가 아버지께로 가오니 내가 세상에서 이 말을 하옵는 것은 저희로 내 기쁨을 저희 안에 충만히 가지게 하려 함이니이다	And now come I to thee; and these things I speak in the world, that they might have my joy fulfilled in themselves.	But now I am coming to You; and I am saying these things while I am in the world, so that they may have My joy fulfilled within them.
JHN	17	14	내가 아버지의 말씀을 저희에게 주었사오매 세상이 저희를 미워하였사오니 이는 내가 세상에 속하지 아니함 같이 저희도 세상에 속하지 아니함을 인함이니이다	I have given them thy word; and the world hath hated them, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.	I have given them Your word and the world has hated them; for they are not of the world, just as I am not of the world.
JHN	17	15	내가 비옵는 것은 저희를 세상에서 데려가시기를 위함이 아니요 오직 악에 빠지지 않게 보전하시기를 위함이니이다	I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil.	I am not asking that You take them out of the world, but that You keep them from the evil one.
JHN	17	16	내가 세상에 속하지 아니함 같이 저희도 세상에 속하지 아니하였삽나이다	They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.	They are not of the world, just as I am not of the world.
JHN	17	17	저희를 진리로 거룩하게 하옵소서 아버지의 말씀은 진리니이다	Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth.	Sanctify them by the truth; Your word is truth.
JHN	17	18	아버지께서 나를 세상에 보내신 것 같이 나도 저희를 세상에 보내었고	As thou hast sent me into the world, even so have I also sent them into the world.	As You sent Me into the world, I have also sent them into the world.
JHN	17	19	또 저희를 위하여 내가 나를 거룩하게 하오니 이는 저희도 진리로 거룩함을 얻게 하려 함이니이다	And for their sakes I sanctify myself, that they also might be sanctified through the truth.	For them I sanctify Myself, so that they too may be sanctified by the truth.
JHN	17	20	내가 비옵는 것은 이 사람들만 위함이 아니요 또 저희 말을 인하여 나를 믿는 사람들도 위함이니	Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word;	I am not asking on behalf of them alone, but also on behalf of those who will believe in Me through their message,
JHN	17	21	아버지께서 내 안에, 내가 아버지 안에 있는 것 같이 저희도 다 하나가 되어 우리 안에 있게 하사 세상으로 아버지께서 나를 보내신 것을 믿게 하옵소서	That they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me.	that all of them may be one, as You, Father, are in Me, and I am in You. May they also be in Us, so that the world may believe that You sent Me.
JHN	17	22	내게 주신 영광을 내가 저희에게 주었사오니 이는 우리가 하나가 된 것 같이 저희도 하나가 되게 하려 함이니이다	And the glory which thou gavest me I have given them; that they may be one, even as we are one:	I have given them the glory You gave Me, so that they may be one as We are one—
JHN	17	23	곧 내가 저희 안에, 아버지께서 내 안에 계셔 저희로 온전함을 이루어 하나가 되게 하려 함은 아버지께서 나를 보내신 것과 또 나를 사랑하심 같이 저희도 사랑하신 것을 세상으로 알게 하려 함이로소이다	I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one; and that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and hast loved them, as thou hast loved me.	I in them and You in Me—that they may be perfectly united, so that the world may know that You sent Me and have loved them just as You have loved Me.
JHN	17	24	아버지여 내게 주신 자도 나 있는 곳에 나와 함께 있어 아버지께서 창세 전부터 나를 사랑하시므로 내게 주신 나의 영광을 저희로 보게 하시기를 원하옵나이다	Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am; that they may behold my glory, which thou hast given me: for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world.	Father, I want those You have given Me to be with Me where I am, that they may see the glory You gave Me because You loved Me before the foundation of the world.
JHN	17	25	의로우신 아버지여 세상이 아버지를 알지 못하여도 나는 아버지를 알았삽고 저희도 아버지께서 나를 보내신 줄 알았삽나이다	O righteous Father, the world hath not known thee: but I have known thee, and these have known that thou hast sent me.	Righteous Father, although the world has not known You, I know You, and they know that You sent Me.
JHN	17	26	내가 아버지의 이름을 저희에게 알게 하였고 또 알게 하리니 이는 나를 사랑하신 사랑이 저희 안에 있고 나도 저희 안에 있게 하려 함이니이다	And I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it: that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them.	And I have made Your name known to them and will continue to make it known, so that the love You have for Me may be in them, and I in them.”
JHN	18	1	예수께서 이 말씀을 하시고 제자들과 함께 기드론 시내 저편으로 나가시니 거기 동산이 있는데 제자들과 함께 들어가시다	When Jesus had spoken these words, he went forth with his disciples over the brook Cedron, where was a garden, into the which he entered, and his disciples.	After Jesus had spoken these words, He went out with His disciples across the Kidron Valley, where they entered a garden.
JHN	18	2	거기는 예수께서 제자들과 가끔 모이시는 곳이므로 예수를 파는 유다도 그곳을 알더라	And Judas also, which betrayed him, knew the place: for Jesus ofttimes resorted thither with his disciples.	Now Judas His betrayer also knew the place, because Jesus had often met there with His disciples.
JHN	18	3	유다가 군대와 및 대제사장들과 바리새인들에게서 얻은 하속들을 데리고 등과 홰와 병기를 가지고 그리로 오는지라	Judas then, having received a band of men and officers from the chief priests and Pharisees, cometh thither with lanterns and torches and weapons.	So Judas brought a band of soldiers and officers from the chief priests and Pharisees. They arrived at the garden carrying lanterns, torches, and weapons.
JHN	18	4	예수께서 그 당할 일을 다 아시고 나아가 가라사대 너희가 누구를 찾느냐	Jesus therefore, knowing all things that should come upon him, went forth, and said unto them, Whom seek ye?	Jesus, knowing all that was coming upon Him, stepped forward and asked them, “Whom are you seeking?”
JHN	18	5	대답하되 나사렛 예수라 하거늘 가라사대 내로라 하시니라 그를 파는 유다도 저희와 함께 섰더라	They answered him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus saith unto them, I am he. And Judas also, which betrayed him, stood with them.	“Jesus of Nazareth,” they answered. Jesus said, “I am He.” And Judas His betrayer was standing there with them.
JHN	18	6	예수께서 저희에게 내로라 하실 때에 저희가 물러가서 땅에 엎드러지는지라	As soon then as he had said unto them, I am he, they went backward, and fell to the ground.	When Jesus said, “I am He,” they drew back and fell to the ground.
JHN	18	7	이에 다시 누구를 찾느냐고 물으신대 저희가 말하되 나사렛 예수라 하거늘	Then asked he them again, Whom seek ye? And they said, Jesus of Nazareth.	So He asked them again, “Whom are you seeking?” “Jesus of Nazareth,” they answered.
JHN	18	8	예수께서 대답하시되 너희에게 내로라 하였으니 나를 찾거든 이 사람들의 가는 것을 용납하라 하시니	Jesus answered, I have told you that I am he: if therefore ye seek me, let these go their way:	“I told you that I am He,” Jesus replied. “So if you are looking for Me, let these men go.”
JHN	18	9	이는 아버지께서 내게 주신 자 중에서 하나도 잃지 아니하였삽나이다 하신 말씀을 응하게 하려 함이러라	That the saying might be fulfilled, which he spake, Of them which thou gavest me have I lost none.	This was to fulfill the word He had spoken: “I have not lost one of those You have given Me.”
JHN	18	10	이에 시몬 베드로가 검을 가졌는데 이것을 빼어 대제사장의 종을 쳐서 오른편 귀를 베어버리니 그 종의 이름은 말고라	Then Simon Peter having a sword drew it, and smote the high priest’s servant, and cut off his right ear. The servant’s name was Malchus.	Then Simon Peter drew his sword and struck the servant of the high priest, cutting off his right ear. The servant’s name was Malchus.
JHN	18	11	예수께서 베드로더러 이르시되 검을 집에 꽃으라 아버지깨서 주신 잔을 내가 마시지 아니하겠느냐 하시니라	Then said Jesus unto Peter, Put up thy sword into the sheath: the cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?	“Put your sword back in its sheath!” Jesus said to Peter. “Shall I not drink the cup the Father has given Me?”
JHN	18	12	이에 군대와 천부장과 유대인의 하속들이 예수를 잡아 결박하여	Then the band and the captain and officers of the Jews took Jesus, and bound him,	Then the band of soldiers, with its commander and the officers of the Jews, arrested Jesus and bound Him.
JHN	18	13	먼저 안나스에게로 끌고 가니 안나스는 그 해의 대제사장인 가야바의 장인이라	And led him away to Annas first; for he was father in law to Caiaphas, which was the high priest that same year.	They brought Him first to Annas, who was the father-in-law of Caiaphas, the high priest that year.
JHN	18	14	가야바는 유대인들에게 한 사람이 백성을 위하여 죽는 것이 유익하다 권고하던 자러라	Now Caiaphas was he, which gave counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that one man should die for the people.	Caiaphas was the one who had advised the Jews that it would be better if one man died for the people.
JHN	18	15	시몬 베드로와 또 다른 제자 하나가 예수를 따르니 이 제자는 대제사장과 아는 사람이라 예수와 함께 대제사장의 집 뜰에 들어가고	And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did another disciple: that disciple was known unto the high priest, and went in with Jesus into the palace of the high priest.	Now Simon Peter and another disciple were following Jesus. Since that disciple was known to the high priest, he also went with Jesus into the courtyard of the high priest.
JHN	18	16	베드로는 문 밖에 섰는지라 대제사장과 아는 그 다른 제자가 나가서 문지키는 여자에게 말하여 베드로를 데리고 들어왔더니	But Peter stood at the door without. Then went out that other disciple, which was known unto the high priest, and spake unto her that kept the door, and brought in Peter.	But Peter stood outside at the door. Then the disciple who was known to the high priest went out and spoke to the doorkeeper, and brought Peter in.
JHN	18	17	문 지키는 여종이 베드로에게 말하되 너도 이 사람의 제자 중 하나가 아니냐 하니 그가 말하되 나는 아니라 하고	Then saith the damsel that kept the door unto Peter, Art not thou also one of this man’s disciples? He saith, I am not.	At this, the servant girl watching the door said to Peter, “Aren’t you also one of this man’s disciples?” “I am not,” he answered.
JHN	18	18	그 때가 추운고로 종과 하속들이 숯불을 피우고 서서 쬐니 베드로도 함께 서서 쬐더라	And the servants and officers stood there, who had made a fire of coals; for it was cold: and they warmed themselves: and Peter stood with them, and warmed himself.	Because it was cold, the servants and officers were standing around a charcoal fire they had made to keep warm. And Peter was also standing with them, warming himself.
JHN	18	19	대제사장이 예수에게 그의 제자들과 그의 교훈에 대하여 물으니	The high priest then asked Jesus of his disciples, and of his doctrine.	Meanwhile, the high priest questioned Jesus about His disciples and His teaching.
JHN	18	20	예수께서 대답하시되 내가 드러내어 놓고 세상에 말하였노라 모든 유대인들의 모이는 회당과 성전에서 항상 가르쳤고 은밀히는 아무 것도 말하지 아니하였거늘	Jesus answered him, I spake openly to the world; I ever taught in the synagogue, and in the temple, whither the Jews always resort; and in secret have I said nothing.	“I have spoken openly to the world,” Jesus answered. “I always taught in the synagogues and at the temple, where all the Jews come together. I said nothing in secret.
JHN	18	21	어찌하여 내게 묻느냐 내가 무슨 말을 하였는지 들은 자들에게 물어보라 저희가 나의 하던 말을 아느니라	Why askest thou me? ask them which heard me, what I have said unto them: behold, they know what I said.	Why are you asking Me? Ask those who heard My message. Surely they know what I said.”
JHN	18	22	이 말씀을 하시매 곁에 섰는 하속 하나가 손으로 예수를 쳐 가로되 네가 대제사장에게 이같이 대답하느냐 하니	And when he had thus spoken, one of the officers which stood by struck Jesus with the palm of his hand, saying, Answerest thou the high priest so?	When Jesus had said this, one of the officers standing nearby slapped Him in the face and said, “Is this how You answer the high priest?”
JHN	18	23	예수께서 대답하시되 내가 말을 잘못하였으면 그 잘못한 것을 증거하라 잘하였으면 네가 어찌하여 나를 치느냐 하시더라	Jesus answered him, If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: but if well, why smitest thou me?	Jesus replied, “If I said something wrong, testify as to what was wrong. But if I spoke correctly, why did you strike Me?”
JHN	18	24	안나스가 예수를 결박한 그대로 대제사장 가야바에게 보내니라	Now Annas had sent him bound unto Caiaphas the high priest.	Then Annas sent Him, still bound, to Caiaphas the high priest.
JHN	18	25	시몬 베드로가 서서 불을 쬐더니 사람들이 묻되 너도 그 제자 중 하나가 아니냐 베드로가 부인하여 가로되 나는 아니라 하니	And Simon Peter stood and warmed himself. They said therefore unto him, Art not thou also one of his disciples? He denied it, and said, I am not.	Simon Peter was still standing and warming himself. So they asked him, “Aren’t you also one of His disciples?” He denied it and said, “I am not.”
JHN	18	26	대제사장의 종 하나는 베드로에게 귀를 베어 버리운 사람의 일가라 가로되 네가 그 사람과 함께 동산에 있던 것을 내가 보지 아니하였느냐	One of the servants of the high priest, being his kinsman whose ear Peter cut off, saith, Did not I see thee in the garden with him?	One of the high priest’s servants, a relative of the man whose ear Peter had cut off, asked, “Didn’t I see you with Him in the garden?”
JHN	18	27	이에 베드로가 또 부인하니 곧 닭이 울더라	Peter then denied again: and immediately the cock crew.	Peter denied it once more, and immediately a rooster crowed.
JHN	18	28	저희가 예수를 가야바에게서 관정으로 끌고 가니 새벽이라 저희는 더럽힘을 받지 아니하고 유월절 잔치를 먹고자 하여 관정에 들어가지 아니하더라	Then led they Jesus from Caiaphas unto the hall of judgment: and it was early; and they themselves went not into the judgment hall, lest they should be defiled; but that they might eat the passover.	Then they led Jesus away from Caiaphas into the Praetorium. By now it was early morning, and the Jews did not enter the Praetorium, to avoid being defiled and unable to eat the Passover.
JHN	18	29	그러므로 빌라도가 밖으로 저희에게 나가서 말하되 너희가 무슨 일로 이 사람을 고소하느냐	Pilate then went out unto them, and said, What accusation bring ye against this man?	So Pilate went out to them and asked, “What accusation are you bringing against this man?”
JHN	18	30	대답하여 가로되 이 사람이 행악자가 아니었더면 우리가 당신에게 넘기지 아니하였겠나이다	They answered and said unto him, If he were not a malefactor, we would not have delivered him up unto thee.	“If He were not a criminal,” they replied, “we would not have handed Him over to you.”
JHN	18	31	빌라도가 가로되 너희가 저를 데려다가 너희 법대로 재판하라 유대인들이 가로되 우리에게는 사람을 죽이는 권이 없나이다 하니	Then said Pilate unto them, Take ye him, and judge him according to your law. The Jews therefore said unto him, It is not lawful for us to put any man to death:	“You take Him and judge Him by your own law,” Pilate told them. “We are not permitted to execute anyone,” the Jews replied.
JHN	18	32	이는 예수께서 자기가 어떠한 죽음으로 죽을 것을 가리켜 하신 말씀을 응하게 하려 함이러라	That the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spake, signifying what death he should die.	This was to fulfill the word that Jesus had spoken to indicate the kind of death He was going to die.
JHN	18	33	이에 빌라도가 다시 관정에 들어가 예수를 불러 가로되 네가 유대인의 왕이냐	Then Pilate entered into the judgment hall again, and called Jesus, and said unto him, Art thou the King of the Jews?	Pilate went back into the Praetorium, summoned Jesus, and asked Him, “Are You the King of the Jews?”
JHN	18	34	예수께서 대답하시되 이는 네가 스스로 하는 말이뇨 다른 사람들이 나를 대하여 네게 한 말이뇨	Jesus answered him, Sayest thou this thing of thyself, or did others tell it thee of me?	“Are you saying this on your own,” Jesus asked, “or did others tell you about Me?”
JHN	18	35	빌라도가 대답하되 내가 유대인이냐 네 나라 사람과 대제사장들이 너를 내게 넘겼으니 네가 무엇을 하였느냐	Pilate answered, Am I a Jew? Thine own nation and the chief priests have delivered thee unto me: what hast thou done?	“Am I a Jew?” Pilate replied. “Your own people and chief priests handed You over to me. What have You done?”
JHN	18	36	예수께서 대답하시되 내 나라는 이 세상에 속한 것이 아니라 만일 내 나라가 이 세상에 속한 것이었더면 내 종들이 싸워 나로 유대인들에게 넘기우지 않게 하였으리라 이제 내 나라는 여기에 속한 것이 아니니라	Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews: but now is my kingdom not from hence.	Jesus answered, “My kingdom is not of this world; if it were, My servants would fight to prevent My arrest by the Jews. But now My kingdom is not of this realm.”
JHN	18	37	빌라도가 가로되 그러면 네가 왕이 아니냐 예수께서 대답하시되 네 말과 같이 내가 왕이니라 내가 이를 위하여 났으며 이를 위하여 세상에 왔나니 곧 진리에 대하여 증거하려 함이로다 무릇 진리에 속한 자는 내 소리를 듣느니라 하신대	Pilate therefore said unto him, Art thou a king then? Jesus answered, Thou sayest that I am a king. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.	“Then You are a king!” Pilate said. “You say that I am a king,” Jesus answered. “For this reason I was born and have come into the world, to testify to the truth. Everyone who belongs to the truth listens to My voice.”
JHN	18	38	빌라도가 가로되 진리가 무엇이냐 하더라 이 말을 하고 다시 유대인들에게 나가서 이르되 나는 그에게서 아무 죄도 찾지 못하노라	Pilate saith unto him, What is truth? And when he had said this, he went out again unto the Jews, and saith unto them, I find in him no fault at all.	“What is truth?” Pilate asked. And having said this, he went out again to the Jews and told them, “I find no basis for a charge against Him.
JHN	18	39	유월절이면 내가 너희에게 한 사람을 놓아 주는 전례가 있으니 그러면 너희는 내가 유대인의 왕을 너희에게 놓아주기를 원하느냐 하니	But ye have a custom, that I should release unto you one at the passover: will ye therefore that I release unto you the King of the Jews?	But it is your custom that I release to you one prisoner at the Passover. So then, do you want me to release to you the King of the Jews?”
JHN	18	40	저희가 또 소리질러 가로되 이 사람이 아니라 바라바라 하니 바라바는 강도러라	Then cried they all again, saying, Not this man, but Barabbas. Now Barabbas was a robber.	“Not this man,” they shouted, “but Barabbas!” (Now Barabbas was an insurrectionist.)
JHN	19	1	이에 빌라도가 예수를 데려다가 채찍질하더라	Then Pilate therefore took Jesus, and scourged him.	Then Pilate took Jesus and had Him flogged.
JHN	19	2	군병들이 가시로 면류관을 엮어 그의 머리에 씌우고 자색 옷을 입히고	And the soldiers platted a crown of thorns, and put it on his head, and they put on him a purple robe,	The soldiers twisted together a crown of thorns, set it on His head, and dressed Him in a purple robe.
JHN	19	3	앞에 와서 가로되 유대인의 왕이여 평안할지어다 하며 손바닥으로 때리더라	And said, Hail, King of the Jews! and they smote him with their hands.	And they went up to Him again and again, saying, “Hail, King of the Jews!” and slapping Him in the face.
JHN	19	4	빌라도가 다시 밖에 나가 말하되 보라 이 사람을 데리고 너희에게 나오나니 이는 내가 그에게서 아무 죄도 찾지 못한 것을 너희로 알게 하려 함이로다 하더라	Pilate therefore went forth again, and saith unto them, Behold, I bring him forth to you, that ye may know that I find no fault in him.	Once again Pilate came out and said to the Jews, “Look, I am bringing Him out to you to let you know that I find no basis for a charge against Him.”
JHN	19	5	이에 예수께서 가시 면류관을 쓰고 자색 옷을 입고 나오시니 빌라도가 저희에게 말하되 보라 이 사람이로다 하매	Then came Jesus forth, wearing the crown of thorns, and the purple robe. And Pilate saith unto them, Behold the man!	When Jesus came out wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe, Pilate said to them, “Here is the man!”
JHN	19	6	대제사장들과 하속들이 예수를 보고 소리질러 가로되 십자가에 못 박게 하소서 십자가에 못 박게 하소서 하는지라 빌라도가 가로되 너희가 친히 데려다가 십자가에 못 박으라 나는 그에게서 죄를 찾지 못하노라	When the chief priests therefore and officers saw him, they cried out, saying, Crucify him, crucify him. Pilate saith unto them, Take ye him, and crucify him: for I find no fault in him.	As soon as the chief priests and officers saw Him, they shouted, “Crucify Him! Crucify Him!” “You take Him and crucify Him,” Pilate replied, “for I find no basis for a charge against Him.”
JHN	19	7	유대인들이 대답하되 우리에게 법이 있으니 그 법대로 하면 저가 당연히 죽을 것은 저가 자기를 하나님 아들이라 함이니이다	The Jews answered him, We have a law, and by our law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God.	“We have a law,” answered the Jews, “and according to that law He must die, because He declared Himself to be the Son of God.”
JHN	19	8	빌라도가 이 말을 듣고 더욱 두려워하여	When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he was the more afraid;	When Pilate heard this statement, he was even more afraid,
JHN	19	9	다시 관정에 들어가서 예수께 말하되 너는 어디로서냐 하되 예수께서 대답하여 주지 아니하시는지라	And went again into the judgment hall, and saith unto Jesus, Whence art thou? But Jesus gave him no answer.	and he went back into the Praetorium. “Where are You from?” he asked. But Jesus gave no answer.
JHN	19	10	빌라도가 가로되 내게 말하지 아니하느냐 내가 너를 놓을 권세도 있고 십자가에 못 박을 권세도 있는 줄 알지 못하느냐	Then saith Pilate unto him, Speakest thou not unto me? knowest thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to release thee?	So Pilate said to Him, “Do You refuse to speak to me? Do You not know that I have authority to release You and authority to crucify You?”
JHN	19	11	예수께서 대답하시되 위에서 주지 아니하셨더면 나를 해할 권세가 없었으리니 그러므로 나를 네게 넘겨준 자의 죄는 더 크니라 하시니	Jesus answered, Thou couldest have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above: therefore he that delivered me unto thee hath the greater sin.	Jesus answered, “You would have no authority over Me if it were not given to you from above. Therefore the one who handed Me over to you is guilty of greater sin.”
JHN	19	12	이러하므로 빌라도가 예수를 놓으려고 힘썼으나 유대인들이 소리질러 가로되 이 사람을 놓으면 가이사의 충신이 아니니이다 무릇 자기를 왕이라 하는 자는 가이사를 반역하는 것이니이다	And from thenceforth Pilate sought to release him: but the Jews cried out, saying, If thou let this man go, thou art not Cesar’s friend: whosoever maketh himself a king speaketh against Cesar.	From then on, Pilate tried to release Him, but the Jews kept shouting, “If you release this man, you are no friend of Caesar. Anyone who declares himself a king is defying Caesar.”
JHN	19	13	빌라도가 이 말을 듣고 예수를 끌고 나와서 박석(히브리 말로 가바다)이란 곳에서 재판석에 앉았더라	When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down in the judgment seat in a place that is called the Pavement, but in the Hebrew, Gabbatha.	When Pilate heard these words, he brought Jesus out and sat on the judgment seat at a place called the Stone Pavement, which in Hebrew is Gabbatha.
JHN	19	14	이 날은 유월절의 예비일이요 때는 제육시라 빌라도가 유대인들에게 이르되 보라 너희 왕이로다	And it was the preparation of the passover, and about the sixth hour: and he saith unto the Jews, Behold your King!	It was the day of Preparation for the Passover, about the sixth hour. And Pilate said to the Jews, “Here is your King!”
JHN	19	15	저희가 소리지르되 없이 하소서 없이 하소서 저를 십자가에 못 박게 하소서 빌라도가 가로되 내가 너희 왕을 십자가에 못 박으랴 대제사장들이 대답하되 가이사 외에는 우리에게 왕이 없나이다 하니	But they cried out, Away with him, away with him, crucify him. Pilate saith unto them, Shall I crucify your King? The chief priests answered, We have no king but Cesar.	At this, they shouted, “Away with Him! Away with Him! Crucify Him!” “Shall I crucify your King?” Pilate asked. “We have no king but Caesar,” replied the chief priests.
JHN	19	16	이에 예수를 십자가에 못 박히게 저희에게 넘겨주니라	Then delivered he him therefore unto them to be crucified. And they took Jesus, and led him away.	Then Pilate handed Jesus over to be crucified, and the soldiers took Him away.
JHN	19	17	저희가 예수를 맡으매 예수께서 자기의 십자가를 지시고 해골(히브리 말로 골고다)이라 하는 곳에 나오시니	And he bearing his cross went forth into a place called the place of a skull, which is called in the Hebrew Golgotha:	Carrying His own cross, He went out to The Place of the Skull, which in Hebrew is called Golgotha.
JHN	19	18	저희가 거기서 예수를 십자가에 못 박을새 다른 두 사람도 그와 함께 좌우편에 못 박으니 예수는 가운데 있더라	Where they crucified him, and two other with him, on either side one, and Jesus in the midst.	There they crucified Him, and with Him two others, one on each side, with Jesus in the middle.
JHN	19	19	빌라도가 패를 써서 십자가 위에 붙이니 나사렛 예수 유대인의 왕이라 기록되었더라	And Pilate wrote a title, and put it on the cross. And the writing was, JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS.	Pilate also had a notice posted on the cross. It read: JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS.
JHN	19	20	예수의 못 박히신 곳이 성에서 가까운 고로 많은 유대인이 이 패를 읽는데 히브리와 로마와 헬라 말로 기록되었더라	This title then read many of the Jews: for the place where Jesus was crucified was nigh to the city: and it was written in Hebrew, and Greek, and Latin.	Many of the Jews read this sign, because the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city, and it was written in Hebrew, Latin, and Greek.
JHN	19	21	유대인의 대제사장들이 빌라도에게 이르되 유대인의 왕이라 말고 자칭 유대인의 왕이라 쓰라 하니	Then said the chief priests of the Jews to Pilate, Write not, The King of the Jews; but that he said, I am King of the Jews.	So the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate, “Do not write, ‘The King of the Jews,’ but only that He said, ‘I am the King of the Jews.’”
JHN	19	22	빌라도가 대답하되 나의 쓸 것을 썼다 하니라	Pilate answered, What I have written I have written.	Pilate answered, “What I have written, I have written.”
JHN	19	23	군병들이 예수를 십자가에 못 박고 그의 옷을 취하여 네 깃에 나눠 각각 한 깃씩 얻고 속옷도 취하니 이 속옷은 호지 아니하고 위에서부터 통으로 짠 것이라	Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments, and made four parts, to every soldier a part; and also his coat: now the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout.	When the soldiers had crucified Jesus, they divided His garments into four parts, one for each soldier, with the tunic remaining. It was seamless, woven in one piece from top to bottom.
JHN	19	24	군병들이 서로 말하되 이것을 찢지 말고 누가 얻나 제비 뽑자 하니 이는 성경에 저희가 내 옷을 나누고 내 옷을 제비 뽑나이다 한 것을 응하게 하려 함이러라 군병들은 이런 일을 하고	They said therefore among themselves, Let us not rend it, but cast lots for it, whose it shall be: that the scripture might be fulfilled, which saith, They parted my raiment among them, and for my vesture they did cast lots. These things therefore the soldiers did.	So they said to one another, “Let us not tear it. Instead, let us cast lots to see who will get it.” This was to fulfill the Scripture: “They divided My garments among them, and cast lots for My clothing.” So that is what the soldiers did.
JHN	19	25	예수의 십자가 곁에는 그 모친과 이모와 글로바의 아내 마리아와 막달라 마리아가 섰는지라	Now there stood by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his mother’s sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene.	Near the cross of Jesus stood His mother and her sister, as well as Mary the wife of Clopas and Mary Magdalene.
JHN	19	26	예수께서 그 모친과 사랑하시는 제자가 곁에 섰는 것을 보시고 그 모친께 말씀하시되 여자여 보소서 아들이니이다 하시고	When Jesus therefore saw his mother, and the disciple standing by, whom he loved, he saith unto his mother, Woman, behold thy son!	When Jesus saw His mother and the disciple whom He loved standing nearby, He said to His mother, “Woman, here is your son.”
JHN	19	27	또 그 제자에게 이르시되 보라 네 어머니라 하신대 그 때부터 그 제자가 자기 집에 모시니라	Then saith he to the disciple, Behold thy mother! And from that hour that disciple took her unto his own home.	Then He said to the disciple, “Here is your mother.” So from that hour, this disciple took her into his home.
JHN	19	28	이 후에 예수께서 모든 일이 이미 이룬 줄 아시고 성경으로 응하게 하려 하사 가라사대 내가 목마르다 하시니	After this, Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished, that the scripture might be fulfilled, saith, I thirst.	After this, knowing that everything had now been accomplished, and to fulfill the Scripture, Jesus said, “I am thirsty.”
JHN	19	29	거기 신 포도주가 가득히 담긴 그릇이 있는지라 사람들이 신 포도주를 머금은 해융을 우슬초에 매어 예수의 입에 대니	Now there was set a vessel full of vinegar: and they filled a spunge with vinegar, and put it upon hyssop, and put it to his mouth.	A jar of sour wine was sitting there. So they soaked a sponge in the wine, put it on a stalk of hyssop, and lifted it to His mouth.
JHN	19	30	예수께서 신 포도주를 받으신 후 가라사대 다 이루었다 하시고 머리를 숙이시고 영혼이 돌아가시니라	When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, It is finished: and he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost.	When Jesus had received the sour wine, He said, “It is finished.” And bowing His head, He yielded up His spirit.
JHN	19	31	이 날은 예비일이라 유대인들은 그 안식일이 큰 날이므로 그 안식일에 시체들을 십자가에 두지 아니하려 하여 빌라도에게 그들의 다리를 꺾어 시체를 치워 달라 하니	The Jews therefore, because it was the preparation, that the bodies should not remain upon the cross on the sabbath day, (for that sabbath day was an high day,) besought Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken away.	It was the day of Preparation, and the next day was a High Sabbath. In order that the bodies would not remain on the cross during the Sabbath, the Jews asked Pilate to have the legs broken and the bodies removed.
JHN	19	32	군병들이 가서 예수와 함께 못 박힌 첫째 사람과 또 다른 사람의 다리를 꺾고	Then came the soldiers, and brake the legs of the first, and of the other which was crucified with him.	So the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first man who had been crucified with Jesus, and those of the other.
JHN	19	33	예수께 이르러는 이미 죽은 것을 보고 다리를 꺾지 아니하고	But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead already, they brake not his legs:	But when they came to Jesus and saw that He was already dead, they did not break His legs.
JHN	19	34	그 중 한 군병이 창으로 옆구리를 찌르니 곧 피와 물이 나오더라	But one of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith came there out blood and water.	Instead, one of the soldiers pierced His side with a spear, and immediately blood and water flowed out.
JHN	19	35	이를 본 자가 증거하였으니 그 증거가 참이라 저가 자기의 말하는 것이 참인 줄 알고 너희로 믿게 하려 함이니라	And he that saw it bare record, and his record is true: and he knoweth that he saith true, that ye might believe.	The one who saw it has testified to this, and his testimony is true. He knows that he is telling the truth, so that you also may believe.
JHN	19	36	이 일이 이룬 것은 그 뼈가 하나도 꺾이우지 아니하리라 한 성경을 응하게 하려 함이라	For these things were done, that the scripture should be fulfilled, A bone of him shall not be broken.	Now these things happened so that the Scripture would be fulfilled: “Not one of His bones will be broken.”
JHN	19	37	또 다른 성경에 저희가 그 찌른 자를 보리라 하였느니라	And again another scripture saith, They shall look on him whom they pierced.	And, as another Scripture says: “They will look on the One they have pierced.”
JHN	19	38	아리마대 사람 요셉이 예수의 제자나 유대인을 두려워하여 은휘하더니 이 일 후에 빌라도더러 예수의 시체를 가져가기를 구하매 빌라도가 허락하는지라 이에 가서 예수의 시체를 가져가니라	And after this Joseph of Arimathea, being a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, besought Pilate that he might take away the body of Jesus: and Pilate gave him leave. He came therefore, and took the body of Jesus.	Afterward, Joseph of Arimathea, who was a disciple of Jesus (but secretly for fear of the Jews), asked Pilate to let him remove the body of Jesus. Pilate gave him permission, so he came and removed His body.
JHN	19	39	일찍 예수께 밤에 나아왔던 니고데모도 몰약과 침향 섞은 것을 백 근쯤 가지고 온지라	And there came also Nicodemus, which at the first came to Jesus by night, and brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pound weight.	Nicodemus, who had previously come to Jesus at night, also brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about seventy-five pounds.
JHN	19	40	이에 예수의 시체를 가져다가 유대인의 장례 법대로 그 향품과 함께 세마포로 쌌더라	Then took they the body of Jesus, and wound it in linen clothes with the spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury.	So they took the body of Jesus and wrapped it in linen cloths with the spices, according to the Jewish burial custom.
JHN	19	41	예수의 십자가에 못 박히신 곳에 동산이 있고 동산 안에 아직 사람을 장사한 일이 없는 새 무덤이 있는지라	Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden; and in the garden a new sepulchre, wherein was never man yet laid.	Now there was a garden in the place where Jesus was crucified, and in the garden a new tomb in which no one had yet been laid.
JHN	19	42	이 날은 유대인의 예비일이요 또 무덤이 가까운 고로 예수를 거기 두니라	There laid they Jesus therefore because of the Jews’ preparation day; for the sepulchre was nigh at hand.	And because it was the Jewish day of Preparation and the tomb was nearby, they placed Jesus there.
JHN	20	1	안식 후 첫날 이른 아침 아직 어두울 때에 막달라 마리아가 무덤에 와서 돌이 무덤에서 옮겨간 것을 보고	The first day of the week cometh Mary Magdalene early, when it was yet dark, unto the sepulchre, and seeth the stone taken away from the sepulchre.	Early on the first day of the week, while it was still dark, Mary Magdalene went to the tomb and saw that the stone had been removed from the entrance.
JHN	20	2	시몬 베드로와 예수의 사랑하시던 그 다른 제자에게 달려가서 말하되 사람이 주를 무덤에서 가져다가 어디 두었는지 우리가 알지 못하겠다 하니	Then she runneth, and cometh to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple, whom Jesus loved, and saith unto them, They have taken away the Lord out of the sepulchre, and we know not where they have laid him.	So she came running to Simon Peter and the other disciple, the one whom Jesus loved. “They have taken the Lord out of the tomb,” she said, “and we do not know where they have put Him!”
JHN	20	3	베드로와 그 다른 제자가 나가서 무덤으로 갈새	Peter therefore went forth, and that other disciple, and came to the sepulchre.	Then Peter and the other disciple set out for the tomb.
JHN	20	4	둘이 같이 달음질하더니 그 다른 제자가 베드로보다 더 빨리 달아나서 먼저 무덤에 이르러	So they ran both together: and the other disciple did outrun Peter, and came first to the sepulchre.	The two were running together, but the other disciple outran Peter and reached the tomb first.
JHN	20	5	구푸려 세마포 놓인 것을 보았으나 들어가지는 아니하였더니	And he stooping down, and looking in, saw the linen clothes lying; yet went he not in.	He bent down and looked in at the linen cloths lying there, but he did not go in.
JHN	20	6	시몬 베드로도 따라 와서 무덤에 들어가 보니 세마포가 놓였고	Then cometh Simon Peter following him, and went into the sepulchre, and seeth the linen clothes lie,	Simon Peter arrived just after him. He entered the tomb and saw the linen cloths lying there.
JHN	20	7	또 머리를 쌌던 수건은 세마포와 함께 놓이지 않고 딴 곳에 개켜 있더라	And the napkin, that was about his head, not lying with the linen clothes, but wrapped together in a place by itself.	The cloth that had been around Jesus’ head was rolled up, lying separate from the linen cloths.
JHN	20	8	그 때에야 무덤에 먼저 왔던 그 다른 제자도 들어가 보고 믿더라	Then went in also that other disciple, which came first to the sepulchre, and he saw, and believed.	Then the other disciple, who had reached the tomb first, also went in. And he saw and believed.
JHN	20	9	(저희는 성경에 그가 죽은 자 가운데서 다시 살아나야 하리라 하신 말씀을 아직 알지 못하더라)	For as yet they knew not the scripture, that he must rise again from the dead.	For they still did not understand from the Scripture that Jesus had to rise from the dead.
JHN	20	10	이에 두 제자가 자기 집으로 돌아가니라	Then the disciples went away again unto their own home.	Then the disciples returned to their homes.
JHN	20	11	마리아는 무덤 밖에 서서 울고 있더니 울면서 구푸려 무덤 속을 들여다보니	But Mary stood without at the sepulchre weeping: and as she wept, she stooped down, and looked into the sepulchre,	But Mary stood outside the tomb weeping. And as she wept, she bent down to look into the tomb,
JHN	20	12	흰 옷 입은 두 천사가 예수의 시체 뉘었던 곳에 하나는 머리 편에, 하나는 발 편에 앉았더라	And seeth two angels in white sitting, the one at the head, and the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain.	and she saw two angels in white sitting where the body of Jesus had lain, one at the head and the other at the feet.
JHN	20	13	천사들이 가로되 여자여 어찌하여 우느냐 가로되 사람이 내 주를 가져다가 어디 두었는지 내가 알지 못함이니이다	And they say unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? She saith unto them, Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him.	“Woman, why are you weeping?” they asked. “Because they have taken my Lord away,” she said, “and I do not know where they have put Him.”
JHN	20	14	이 말을 하고 뒤로 돌이켜 예수의 서신 것을 보나 예수신 줄 알지 못하더라	And when she had thus said, she turned herself back, and saw Jesus standing, and knew not that it was Jesus.	When she had said this, she turned around and saw Jesus standing there; but she did not recognize that it was Jesus.
JHN	20	15	예수께서 가라사대 여자여 어찌하여 울며 누구를 찾느냐 하시니 마리아는 그가 동산지기인 줄로 알고 가로되 주여 당신이 옮겨 갔거든 어디 두었는지 내게 이르소서 그리하면 내가 가져가리이다	Jesus saith unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? whom seekest thou? She, supposing him to be the gardener, saith unto him, Sir, if thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away.	“Woman, why are you weeping?” Jesus asked. “Whom are you seeking?” Thinking He was the gardener, she said, “Sir, if you have carried Him off, tell me where you have put Him, and I will get Him.”
JHN	20	16	예수께서 마리아야 하시거늘 마리아가 돌이켜 히브리 말로 랍오니여 하니 (이는 선생님이라)	Jesus saith unto her, Mary. She turned herself, and saith unto him, Rabboni; which is to say, Master.	Jesus said to her, “Mary.” She turned and said to Him in Hebrew, “Rabboni!” (which means “Teacher”).
JHN	20	17	예수께서 이르시되 나를 만지지 말라 내가 아직 아버지께로 올라가지 못하였노라 너는 내 형제들에게 가서 이르되 내가 내 아버지 곧 너희 아버지, 내 하나님 곧 너희 하나님께로 올라간다 하라 하신대	Jesus saith unto her, Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God.	“Do not cling to Me,” Jesus said, “for I have not yet ascended to the Father. But go and tell My brothers, ‘I am ascending to My Father and your Father, to My God and your God.’”
JHN	20	18	막달라 마리아가 가서 제자들에게 내가 주를 보았다 하고 또 주께서 자기에게 이렇게 말씀하셨다 이르니라	Mary Magdalene came and told the disciples that she had seen the Lord, and that he had spoken these things unto her.	Mary Magdalene went and announced to the disciples, “I have seen the Lord!” And she told them what He had said to her.
JHN	20	19	이 날 곧 안식 후 첫날 저녁 때에 제자들이 유대인들을 두려워하여 모인 곳에 문들을 닫았더니 예수께서 오사 가운데 서서 가라사대 너희에게 평강이 있을지어다	Then the same day at evening, being the first day of the week, when the doors were shut where the disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you.	It was the first day of the week, and that very evening, while the disciples were together with the doors locked for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood among them. “Peace be with you!” He said to them.
JHN	20	20	이 말씀을 하시고 손과 옆구리를 보이시니 제자들이 주를 보고 기뻐하더라	And when he had so said, he shewed unto them his hands and his side. Then were the disciples glad, when they saw the Lord.	After He had said this, He showed them His hands and His side. The disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord.
JHN	20	21	예수께서 또 가라사대 너희에게 평강이 있을지어다 아버지께서 나를 보내신 것 같이 나도 너희를 보내노라	Then said Jesus to them again, Peace be unto you: as my Father hath sent me, even so send I you.	Again Jesus said to them, “Peace be with you. As the Father has sent Me, so also I am sending you.”
JHN	20	22	이 말씀을 하시고 저희를 향하사 숨을 내쉬며 가라사대 성령을 받으라	And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and saith unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost:	When He had said this, He breathed on them and said, “Receive the Holy Spirit.
JHN	20	23	너희가 뉘 죄든지 사하면 사하여질 것이요 뉘 죄든지 그대로 두면 그대로 있으리라 하시니라	Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained.	If you forgive anyone his sins, they are forgiven; if you withhold forgiveness from anyone, it is withheld.”
JHN	20	24	열두 제자 중에 하나인 디두모라 하는 도마는 예수 오셨을 때에 함께 있지 아니한지라	But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came.	Now Thomas called Didymus, one of the Twelve, was not with the disciples when Jesus came.
JHN	20	25	다른 제자들이 그에게 이르되 우리가 주를 보았노라 하니 도마가 가로되 내가 그 손의 못자국을 보며 내 손가락을 그 못자국에 넣으며 내 손을 그 옆구리에 넣어 보지 않고는 믿지 아니하겠노라 하니라	The other disciples therefore said unto him, We have seen the Lord. But he said unto them, Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe.	So the other disciples told him, “We have seen the Lord!” But he replied, “Unless I see the nail marks in His hands, and put my finger where the nails have been, and put my hand into His side, I will never believe.”
JHN	20	26	여드레를 지나서 제자들이 다시 집 안에 있을 때에 도마도 함께 있고 문들이 닫혔는데 예수께서 오사 가운데 서서 가라사대 너희에게 평강이 있을지어다 하시고	And after eight days again his disciples were within, and Thomas with them: then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said, Peace be unto you.	Eight days later, His disciples were once again inside with the doors locked, and Thomas was with them. Jesus came and stood among them and said, “Peace be with you.”
JHN	20	27	도마에게 이르시되 네 손가락을 이리 내밀어 내 손을 보고 네 손을 내밀어 내 옆구리에 넣어보라 그리하고 믿음 없는 자가 되지 말고 믿는 자가 되라	Then saith he to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side: and be not faithless, but believing.	Then Jesus said to Thomas, “Put your finger here and look at My hands. Reach out your hand and put it into My side. Stop doubting and believe.”
JHN	20	28	도마가 대답하여 가로되 나의 주시며 나의 하나님이시니이다	And Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord and my God.	Thomas replied, “My Lord and my God!”
JHN	20	29	예수께서 가라사대 너는 나를 본 고로 믿느냐 보지 못하고 믿는 자들은 복되도다 하시니라	Jesus saith unto him, Thomas, because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed.	Jesus said to him, “Because you have seen Me, you have believed; blessed are those who have not seen and yet have believed.”
JHN	20	30	예수께서 제자들 앞에서 이 책에 기록되지 아니한 다른 표적도 많이 행하셨으나	And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his disciples, which are not written in this book:	Jesus performed many other signs in the presence of His disciples, which are not written in this book.
JHN	20	31	오직 이것을 기록함은 너희로 예수께서 하나님의 아들 그리스도이심을 믿게 하려 함이요 또 너희로 믿고 그 이름을 힘입어 생명을 얻게 하려 함이니라	But these are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his name.	But these are written so that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that by believing you may have life in His name.
JHN	21	1	그 후에 예수께서 디베랴 바다에서 또 제자들에게 자기를 나타내셨으니 나타내신 일이 이러하니라	After these things Jesus shewed himself again to the disciples at the sea of Tiberias; and on this wise shewed he himself.	Later, by the Sea of Tiberias, Jesus again revealed Himself to the disciples. He made Himself known in this way:
JHN	21	2	시몬 베드로와 디두모라 하는 도마와 갈릴리 가나 사람 나다나엘과 세베대의 아들들과 또 다른 제자 둘이 함께 있더니	There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas called Didymus, and Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two other of his disciples.	Simon Peter, Thomas called Didymus, Nathanael from Cana in Galilee, the sons of Zebedee, and two other disciples were together.
JHN	21	3	시몬 베드로가 나는 물고기 잡으러 가노라 하매 저희가 우리도 함께 가겠다 하고 나가서 배에 올랐으나 이 밤에 아무 것도 잡지 못하였더니	Simon Peter saith unto them, I go a fishing. They say unto him, We also go with thee. They went forth, and entered into a ship immediately; and that night they caught nothing.	Simon Peter told them, “I am going fishing.” “We will go with you,” they said. So they went out and got into the boat, but caught nothing that night.
JHN	21	4	날이 새어갈 때에 예수께서 바닷가에 서셨으나 제자들이 예수신 줄 알지 못하는지라	But when the morning was now come, Jesus stood on the shore: but the disciples knew not that it was Jesus.	Early in the morning, Jesus stood on the shore, but the disciples did not recognize that it was Jesus.
JHN	21	5	예수께서 이르시되 얘들아 너희에게 고기가 있느냐 대답하되 없나이다	Then Jesus saith unto them, Children, have ye any meat? They answered him, No.	So He called out to them, “Children, do you have any fish?” “No,” they answered.
JHN	21	6	가라사대 그물을 배 오른편에 던지라 그리하면 얻으리라 하신대 이에 던졌더니 고기가 많아 그물을 들 수 없더라	And he said unto them, Cast the net on the right side of the ship, and ye shall find. They cast therefore, and now they were not able to draw it for the multitude of fishes.	He told them, “Cast the net on the right side of the boat, and you will find some.” So they cast it there, and they were unable to haul it in because of the great number of fish.
JHN	21	7	예수의 사랑하시는 그 제자가 베드로에게 이르되 주시라 하니 시몬 베드로가 벗고 있다가 주라 하는 말을 듣고 겉옷을 두른 후에 바다로 뛰어 내리더라	Therefore that disciple whom Jesus loved saith unto Peter, It is the Lord. Now when Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he girt his fisher’s coat unto him, (for he was naked,) and did cast himself into the sea.	Then the disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter, “It is the Lord!” As soon as Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he put on his outer garment (for he had removed it) and jumped into the sea.
JHN	21	8	다른 제자들은 육지에서 상거가 불과 한 오십 간쯤 되므로 작은 배를 타고 고기 든 그물을 끌고 와서	And the other disciples came in a little ship; (for they were not far from land, but as it were two hundred cubits,) dragging the net with fishes.	The other disciples came ashore in the boat. They dragged in the net full of fish, for they were not far from land, only about a hundred yards.
JHN	21	9	육지에 올라 보니 숯불이 있는데 그 위에 생선이 놓였고 떡도 있더라	As soon then as they were come to land, they saw a fire of coals there, and fish laid thereon, and bread.	When they landed, they saw a charcoal fire there with fish on it, and some bread.
JHN	21	10	예수께서 가라사대 지금 잡은 생선을 좀 가져오라 하신대	Jesus saith unto them, Bring of the fish which ye have now caught.	Jesus told them, “Bring some of the fish you have just caught.”
JHN	21	11	시몬 베드로가 올라가서 그물을 육지에 끌어 올리니 가득히 찬 큰 고기가 일백쉰세 마리라 이같이 많으나 그물이 찢어지지 아니하였더라	Simon Peter went up, and drew the net to land full of great fishes, an hundred and fifty and three: and for all there were so many, yet was not the net broken.	So Simon Peter went aboard and dragged the net ashore. It was full of large fish, 153, but even with so many, the net was not torn.
JHN	21	12	예수께서 가라사대 와서 조반을 먹으라 하시니 제자들이 주신 줄 아는 고로 당신이 누구냐 감히 묻는 자가 없더라	Jesus saith unto them, Come and dine. And none of the disciples durst ask him, Who art thou? knowing that it was the Lord.	“Come, have breakfast,” Jesus said to them. None of the disciples dared to ask Him, “Who are You?” They knew it was the Lord.
JHN	21	13	예수께서 가셔서 떡을 가져다가 저희에게 주시고 생선도 그와 같이 하시니라	Jesus then cometh, and taketh bread, and giveth them, and fish likewise.	Jesus came and took the bread and gave it to them, and He did the same with the fish.
JHN	21	14	이것은 예수께서 죽은 자 가운데서 살아나신 후에 세번째로 제자들에게 나타나신 것이라	This is now the third time that Jesus shewed himself to his disciples, after that he was risen from the dead.	This was now the third time that Jesus appeared to the disciples after He was raised from the dead.
JHN	21	15	저희가 조반 먹은 후에 예수께서 시몬 베드로에게 이르시되 요한의 아들 시몬아 네가 이 사람들보다 나를 더 사랑하느냐 하시니 가로되 주여 그러하외다 내가 주를 사랑하는 줄 주께서 아시나이다 가라사대 내 어린 양을 먹이라 하시고	So when they had dined, Jesus saith to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my lambs.	When they had finished eating, Jesus asked Simon Peter, “Simon son of John, do you love Me more than these?” “Yes, Lord,” he answered, “You know I love You.” Jesus replied, “Feed My lambs.”
JHN	21	16	또 두번째 가라사대 요한의 아들 시몬아 네가 나를 사랑하느냐 하시니 가로되 주여 그러하외다 내가 주를 사랑하는 줄 주께서 아시나이다 가라사대 내 양을 치라 하시고	He saith to him again the second time, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my sheep.	Jesus asked a second time, “Simon son of John, do you love Me?” “Yes, Lord,” he answered, “You know I love You.” Jesus told him, “Shepherd My sheep.”
JHN	21	17	세번째 가라사대 요한의 아들 시몬아 네가 나를 사랑하느냐 하시니 주께서 세번째 네가 나를 사랑하느냐 하시므로 베드로가 근심하여 가로되 주여 모든 것을 아시오매 내가 주를 사랑하는 줄을 주께서 아시나이다 예수께서 가라사대 내 양을 먹이라	He saith unto him the third time, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me? Peter was grieved because he said unto him the third time, Lovest thou me? And he said unto him, Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I love thee. Jesus saith unto him, Feed my sheep.	Jesus asked a third time, “Simon son of John, do you love Me?” Peter was deeply hurt that Jesus had asked him a third time, “Do you love Me?” “Lord, You know all things,” he replied. “You know I love You.” Jesus said to him, “Feed My sheep.
JHN	21	18	내가 진실로 진실로 네게 이르노니 젊어서는 네가 스스로 띠 띠고 원하는 곳으로 다녔거니와 늙어서는 네 팔을 벌리리니 남이 네게 띠 띠우고 원치 아니하는 곳으로 데려가리라	Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not.	Truly, truly, I tell you, when you were young, you dressed yourself and walked where you wanted; but when you are old, you will stretch out your hands, and someone else will dress you and lead you where you do not want to go.”
JHN	21	19	이 말씀을 하심은 베드로가 어떠한 죽음으로 하나님께 영광을 돌릴 것을 가리키심이러라 이 말씀을 하시고 베드로에게 이르시되 나를 따르라 하시니	This spake he, signifying by what death he should glorify God. And when he had spoken this, he saith unto him, Follow me.	Jesus said this to indicate the kind of death by which Peter would glorify God. And after He had said this, He told him, “Follow Me.”
JHN	21	20	베드로가 돌이켜 예수의 사랑하시는 그 제자가 따르는 것을 보니 그는 만찬석에서 예수의 품에 의지하여 주여 주를 파는 자가 누구오니이까 묻던 자러라	Then Peter, turning about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved following; which also leaned on his breast at supper, and said, Lord, which is he that betrayeth thee?	Peter turned and saw the disciple whom Jesus loved following them. He was the one who had leaned back against Jesus at the supper to ask, “Lord, who is going to betray You?”
JHN	21	21	이에 베드로가 그를 보고 예수께 여짜오되 주여 이 사람은 어떻게 되겠삽나이까	Peter seeing him saith to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do?	When Peter saw him, he asked, “Lord, what about him?”
JHN	21	22	예수께서 가라사대 내가 올 때까지 그를 머물게 하고자 할지라도 네게 무슨 상관이냐 너는 나를 따르라 하시더라	Jesus saith unto him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me.	Jesus answered, “If I want him to remain until I return, what is that to you? You follow Me!”
JHN	21	23	이 말씀이 형제들에게 나가서 그 제자는 죽지 아니하겠다 하였으나 예수의 말씀은 그가 죽지 않겠다 하신 것이 아니라 내가 올 때까지 그를 머물게 하고자 할지라도 네게 무슨 상관이냐 하신 것이러라	Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall not die; but, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?	Because of this, the rumor spread among the brothers that this disciple would not die. However, Jesus did not say that he would not die, but only, “If I want him to remain until I return, what is that to you?”
JHN	21	24	이 일을 증거하고 이 일을 기록한 제자가 이 사람이라 우리는 그의 증거가 참인 줄 아노라	This is the disciple which testifieth of these things, and wrote these things: and we know that his testimony is true.	This is the disciple who testifies to these things and who has written them down. And we know that his testimony is true.
JHN	21	25	예수의 행하신 일이 이 외에도 많으니 만일 낱낱이 기록된다면 이 세상이라도 이 기록된 책을 두기에 부족할 줄 아노라	And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written. Amen.	There are many more things that Jesus did. If all of them were written down, I suppose that not even the world itself would have space for the books that would be written.
ACT	1	1	데오빌로여 내가 먼저 쓴 글에는 무릇 예수의 행하시며 가르치시기를 시작하심부터	The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both to do and teach,	In my first book, O Theophilus, I wrote about all that Jesus began to do and to teach,
ACT	1	2	그의 택하신 사도들에게 성령으로 명하시고 승천하신 날까지의 일을 기록하였노라	Until the day in which he was taken up, after that he through the Holy Ghost had given commandments unto the apostles whom he had chosen:	until the day He was taken up to heaven, after giving instructions through the Holy Spirit to the apostles He had chosen.
ACT	1	3	해 받으신 후에 또한 저희에게 확실한 많은 증거로 친히 사심을 나타내사 사십 일 동안 저희에게 보이시며 하나님 나라의 일을 말씀하시니라	To whom also he shewed himself alive after his passion by many infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God:	After His suffering, He presented Himself to them with many convincing proofs that He was alive. He appeared to them over a span of forty days and spoke about the kingdom of God.
ACT	1	4	사도와 같이 모이사 저희에게 분부하여 가라사대 예루살렘을 떠나지 말고 내게 들은 바 아버지의 약속하신 것을 기다리라	And, being assembled together with them, commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which, saith he, ye have heard of me.	And while they were gathered together, He commanded them: “Do not leave Jerusalem, but wait for the gift the Father promised, which you have heard Me discuss.
ACT	1	5	요한은 물로 침례를 베풀었으나 너희는 몇 날이 못되어 성령으로 침례를 받으리라 하셨느니라	For John truly baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence.	For John baptized with water, but in a few days you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit.”
ACT	1	6	저희가 모였을 때에 예수께 묻자와 가로되 주께서 이스라엘 나라를 회복하심이 이 때니이까 하니	When they therefore were come together, they asked of him, saying, Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?	So when they came together, they asked Him, “Lord, will You at this time restore the kingdom to Israel?”
ACT	1	7	가라사대 때와 기한은 아버지께서 자기의 권한에 두셨으니 너희의 알 바 아니요	And he said unto them, It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father hath put in his own power.	Jesus replied, “It is not for you to know times or seasons that the Father has fixed by His own authority.
ACT	1	8	오직 성령이 너희에게 임하시면 너희가 권능을 받고 예루살렘과 온 유대와 사마리아 땅 끝까지 이르러 내 증인이 되리라 하시니라	But ye shall receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth.	But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes upon you, and you will be My witnesses in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.”
ACT	1	9	이 말씀을 마치시고 저희 보는 데서 올리워 가시니 구름이 저를 가리워 보이지 않게 하더라	And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken up; and a cloud received him out of their sight.	After He had said this, they watched as He was taken up, and a cloud hid Him from their sight.
ACT	1	10	올라가실 때에 제자들이 자세히 하늘을 쳐다보고 있는 데 흰 옷 입은 두 사람이 저희 곁에 서서	And while they looked stedfastly toward heaven as he went up, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel;	They were looking intently into the sky as He was going, when suddenly two men dressed in white stood beside them.
ACT	1	11	가로되 갈릴리 사람들아 어찌하여 서서 하늘을 쳐다보느냐 너희 가운데서 하늘로 올리우신 이 예수는 하늘로 가심을 본 그대로 오시리라 하였느니라	Which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.	“Men of Galilee,” they said, “why do you stand here looking into the sky? This same Jesus, who has been taken from you into heaven, will come back in the same way you have seen Him go into heaven.”
ACT	1	12	제자들이 감람원이라 하는 산으로부터 예루살렘에 돌아오니 이 산은 예루살렘에서 가까워 안식일에 가기 알맞은 길이라	Then returned they unto Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet, which is from Jerusalem a sabbath day’s journey.	Then they returned to Jerusalem from the Mount of Olives, which is near the city, a Sabbath day’s journey away.
ACT	1	13	들어가 저희 유하는 다락에 올라가니 베드로, 요한, 야고보, 안드레와 빌립, 도마와 바돌로매, 마태와 및 알패오의 아들 야고보, 셀롯인 시몬, 야고보의 아들 유다가 다 거기 있어	And when they were come in, they went up into an upper room, where abode both Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew, Philip, and Thomas, Bartholomew, and Matthew, James the son of Alpheus, and Simon Zelotes, and Judas the brother of James.	When they arrived, they went to the upper room where they were staying: Peter and John, James and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James son of Alphaeus, Simon the Zealot, and Judas son of James.
ACT	1	14	여자들과 예수의 모친 마리아와 예수의 아우들로 더불어 마음을 같이하여 전혀 기도에 힘쓰니라	These all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication, with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren.	With one accord they all continued in prayer, along with the women and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with His brothers.
ACT	1	15	모인 무리의 수가 한 일백이십 명이나 되더라 그 때에 베드로가 그 형제 가운데 일어서서 가로되	And in those days Peter stood up in the midst of the disciples, and said, (the number of names together were about an hundred and twenty,)	In those days Peter stood up among the brothers (a gathering of about a hundred and twenty) and said,
ACT	1	16	형제들아 성령이 다윗의 입을 의탁하사 예수 잡는 자들을 지로한 유다를 가리켜 미리 말씀하신 성경이 응하였으니 마땅하도다	Men and brethren, this scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the Holy Ghost by the mouth of David spake before concerning Judas, which was guide to them that took Jesus.	“Brothers, the Scripture had to be fulfilled which the Holy Spirit foretold through the mouth of David concerning Judas, who became a guide for those who arrested Jesus.
ACT	1	17	이 사람이 본래 우리 수 가운데 참예하여 이 직무의 한 부분을 맡았던 자라	For he was numbered with us, and had obtained part of this ministry.	He was one of our number and shared in this ministry.”
ACT	1	18	(이 사람이 불의의 삯으로 밭을 사고 후에 몸이 곤두박질하여 배가 터져 창자가 다 흘러 나온지라	Now this man purchased a field with the reward of iniquity; and falling headlong, he burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out.	(Now with the reward for his wickedness Judas bought a field; there he fell headlong and burst open in the middle, and all his intestines spilled out.
ACT	1	19	이 일이 예루살렘에 사는 모든 사람에게 알게 되어 본 방언에 그 밭을 이르되 아겔다마라 하니 이는 피밭이라는 뜻이라)	And it was known unto all the dwellers at Jerusalem; insomuch as that field is called in their proper tongue, Aceldama, that is to say, The field of blood.	This became known to all who lived in Jerusalem, so they called that field in their own language Akeldama, that is, Field of Blood.)
ACT	1	20	시편에 기록하였으되 그의 거처로 황폐하게 하시며 거기 거하는 자가 없게 하소서 하였고 또 일렀으되 그 직분을 타인이 취하게 하소서 하였도다	For it is written in the book of Psalms, Let his habitation be desolate, and let no man dwell therein: and his bishoprick let another take.	“For it is written in the book of Psalms: ‘May his place be deserted; let there be no one to dwell in it,’ and, ‘May another take his position.’
ACT	1	21	이러하므로 요한의 침례로부터 우리 가운데서 올리워 가신 날까지 주 예수께서 우리 가운데 출입하실 때에	Wherefore of these men which have companied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,	Therefore it is necessary to choose one of the men who have accompanied us the whole time the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,
ACT	1	22	항상 우리와 함께 다니던 사람 중에 하나를 세워 우리로 더불어 예수의 부활하심을 증거할 사람이 되게 하여야 하리라 하거늘	Beginning from the baptism of John, unto that same day that he was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a witness with us of his resurrection.	beginning from John’s baptism until the day Jesus was taken up from us. For one of these must become a witness with us of His resurrection.”
ACT	1	23	저희가 두 사람을 천하니 하나는 바사바라고도 하고 별명은 유스도라고 하는 요셉이요 하나는 맛디아라	And they appointed two, Joseph called Barsabas, who was surnamed Justus, and Matthias.	So they proposed two men: Joseph called Barsabbas (also known as Justus) and Matthias.
ACT	1	24	저희가 기도하여 가로되 뭇사람의 마음을 아시는 주여 이 두 사람 중에 누가 주의 택하신 바 되어	And they prayed, and said, Thou, Lord, which knowest the hearts of all men, shew whether of these two thou hast chosen,	And they prayed, “Lord, You know everyone’s heart. Show us which of these two You have chosen
ACT	1	25	봉사와 및 사도의 직무를 대신할 자를 보이시옵소서 유다는 이를 버리옵고 제 곳으로 갔나이다 하고	That he may take part of this ministry and apostleship, from which Judas by transgression fell, that he might go to his own place.	to take up this ministry and apostleship, which Judas abandoned to go to his rightful place.”
ACT	1	26	제비 뽑아 맛디아를 얻으니 저가 열한 사도의 수에 가입하니라	And they gave forth their lots; and the lot fell upon Matthias; and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.	Then they cast lots, and the lot fell to Matthias; so he was added to the eleven apostles.
ACT	2	1	오순절날이 이미 이르매 저희가 다같이 한 곳에 모였더니	And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in one place.	When the day of Pentecost came, they were all together in one place.
ACT	2	2	홀연히 하늘로부터 급하고 강한 바람 같은 소리가 있어 저희 앉은 온 집에 가득하며	And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting.	Suddenly a sound like a mighty rushing wind came from heaven and filled the whole house where they were sitting.
ACT	2	3	불의 혀 같이 갈라지는 것이 저희에게 보여 각 사람 위에 임하여 있더니	And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them.	They saw tongues like flames of fire that separated and came to rest on each of them.
ACT	2	4	저희가 다 성령의 충만함을 받고 성령이 말하게 하심을 따라 다른 방언으로 말하기를 시작하니라	And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance.	And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak in other tongues as the Spirit enabled them.
ACT	2	5	그 때에 경건한 유대인이 천하 각국으로부터 와서 예루살렘에 우거하더니	And there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of every nation under heaven.	Now there were dwelling in Jerusalem God-fearing Jews from every nation under heaven.
ACT	2	6	이 소리가 나매 큰 무리가 모여 각각 자기의 방언으로 제자들의 말하는 것을 듣고 소동하여	Now when this was noised abroad, the multitude came together, and were confounded, because that every man heard them speak in his own language.	And when this sound rang out, a crowd came together in bewilderment, because each one heard them speaking his own language.
ACT	2	7	다 놀라 기이히 여겨 이르되 보라 이 말하는 사람이 다 갈릴리 사람이 아니냐	And they were all amazed and marvelled, saying one to another, Behold, are not all these which speak Galileans?	Astounded and amazed, they asked, “Are not all these men who are speaking Galileans?
ACT	2	8	우리가 우리 각 사람의 난 곳 방언으로 듣게 되는 것이 어찜이뇨	And how hear we every man in our own tongue, wherein we were born?	How is it then that each of us hears them in his own native language?
ACT	2	9	우리는 바대인과 메대인과 엘람인과 또 메소보다미아, 유대와 가바도기아, 본도와 아시아,	Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, and in Judea, and Cappadocia, in Pontus, and Asia,	Parthians, Medes, and Elamites; residents of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia,
ACT	2	10	브루기아와 밤빌리아, 애굽과 및 구레네에 가까운 리비야 여러 지방에 사는 사람들과 로마로부터 온 나그네 곧 유대인과 유대교에 들어온 사람들과	Phrygia, and Pamphylia, in Egypt, and in the parts of Libya about Cyrene, and strangers of Rome, Jews and proselytes,	Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the parts of Libya near Cyrene; visitors from Rome,
ACT	2	11	그레데인과 아라비아인들이라 우리가 다 우리의 각 방언으로 하나님의 큰 일을 말함을 듣는도다 하고	Cretes and Arabians, we do hear them speak in our tongues the wonderful works of God.	both Jews and converts to Judaism; Cretans and Arabs—we hear them declaring the wonders of God in our own tongues!”
ACT	2	12	다 놀라며 의혹하여 서로 가로되 이 어찐 일이냐 하며	And they were all amazed, and were in doubt, saying one to another, What meaneth this?	Astounded and perplexed, they asked one another, “What does this mean?”
ACT	2	13	또 어떤 이들은 조롱하여 가로되 저희가 새 술이 취하였다 하더라	Others mocking said, These men are full of new wine.	But others mocked them and said, “They are drunk on new wine!”
ACT	2	14	베드로가 열한 사도와 같이 서서 소리를 높여 가로되 유대인들과 예루살렘에 사는 모든 사람들아 이 일을 너희로 알게 할 것이니 내 말에 귀를 기울이라	But Peter, standing up with the eleven, lifted up his voice, and said unto them, Ye men of Judea, and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto you, and hearken to my words:	Then Peter stood up with the Eleven, lifted up his voice, and addressed the crowd: “Men of Judea and all who dwell in Jerusalem, let this be known to you, and listen carefully to my words.
ACT	2	15	때가 제삼시니 너희 생각과 같이 이 사람들이 취한 것이 아니라	For these are not drunken, as ye suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the day.	These men are not drunk, as you suppose. It is only the third hour of the day!
ACT	2	16	이는 곧 선지자 요엘로 말씀하신 것이니 일렀으되	But this is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel;	No, this is what was spoken by the prophet Joel:
ACT	2	17	하나님이 가라사대 말세에 내가 내 영으로 모든 육체에게 부어 주리니 너희의 자녀들은 예언할 것이요 너희의 젊은이들은 환상을 보고 너희의 늙은이들은 꿈을 꾸리라	And it shall come to pass in the last days, saith God, I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh: and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams:	‘In the last days, God says, I will pour out My Spirit on all people. Your sons and daughters will prophesy, your young men will see visions, your old men will dream dreams.
ACT	2	18	그 때에 내가 내 영으로 내 남종과 여종들에게 부어 주리니 저희가 예언할 것이요	And on my servants and on my handmaidens I will pour out in those days of my Spirit; and they shall prophesy:	Even on My menservants and maidservants I will pour out My Spirit in those days, and they will prophesy.
ACT	2	19	또 내가 위로 하늘에서는 기사와 아래로 땅에서는 징조를 베풀리니 곧 피와 불과 연기로다	And I will shew wonders in heaven above, and signs in the earth beneath; blood, and fire, and vapour of smoke:	I will show wonders in the heavens above and signs on the earth below, blood and fire and billows of smoke.
ACT	2	20	주의 크고 영화로운 날이 이르기 전에 해가 변하여 어두워지고 달이 변하여 피가 되리라	The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before that great and notable day of the Lord come:	The sun will be turned to darkness, and the moon to blood, before the coming of the great and glorious Day of the Lord.
ACT	2	21	누구든지 주의 이름을 부르는 자는 구원을 얻으리라 하였느니라	And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved.	And everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.’
ACT	2	22	이스라엘 사람들아 이 말을 들으라 너희도 아는 바에 하나님께서 나사렛 예수로 큰 권능과 기사와 표적을 너희 가운데서 베푸사 너희 앞에서 그를 증거하셨느니라	Ye men of Israel, hear these words; Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you by miracles and wonders and signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye yourselves also know:	Men of Israel, listen to this message: Jesus of Nazareth was a man certified by God to you by miracles, wonders, and signs, which God did among you through Him, as you yourselves know.
ACT	2	23	그가 하나님의 정하신 뜻과 미리 아신 대로 내어준 바 되었거늘 너희가 법 없는 자들의 손을 빌어 못 박아 죽였으나	Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain:	He was delivered up by God’s set plan and foreknowledge, and you, by the hands of the lawless, put Him to death by nailing Him to the cross.
ACT	2	24	하나님께서 사망의 고통을 풀어 살리셨으니 이는 그가 사망에게 매여 있을 수 없었음이라	Whom God hath raised up, having loosed the pains of death: because it was not possible that he should be holden of it.	But God raised Him from the dead, releasing Him from the agony of death, because it was impossible for Him to be held in its clutches.
ACT	2	25	다윗이 저를 가리켜 가로되 내가 항상 내 앞에 계신 주를 뵈었음이여 나로 요동치 않게 하기 위하여 그가 내 우편에 계시도다	For David speaketh concerning him, I foresaw the Lord always before my face, for he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved:	David says about Him: ‘I saw the Lord always before me; because He is at my right hand, I will not be shaken.
ACT	2	26	이러므로 내 마음이 기뻐하였고 내 입술도 즐거워하였으며 육체는 희망에 거하리니	Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad; moreover also my flesh shall rest in hope:	Therefore my heart is glad and my tongue rejoices; my body also will dwell in hope,
ACT	2	27	이는 내 영혼을 음부에 버리지 아니하시며 주의 거룩한 자로 썩음을 당치 않게 하실 것임이로다	Because thou wilt not leave my soul in hell, neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.	because You will not abandon my soul to Hades, nor will You let Your Holy One see decay.
ACT	2	28	주께서 생명의 길로 내게 보이셨으니 주의 앞에서 나로 기쁨이 충만하게 하시리로다 하였으니	Thou hast made known to me the ways of life; thou shalt make me full of joy with thy countenance.	You have made known to me the paths of life; You will fill me with joy in Your presence.’
ACT	2	29	형제들아 내가 조상 다윗에 대하여 담대히 말할 수 있노니 다윗이 죽어 장사되어 그 묘가 오늘까지 우리 중에 있도다	Men and brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the patriarch David, that he is both dead and buried, and his sepulchre is with us unto this day.	Brothers, I can tell you with confidence that the patriarch David died and was buried, and his tomb is with us to this day.
ACT	2	30	그는 선지자라 하나님이 이미 맹세하사 그 자손 중에서 한 사람을 그 위에 앉게 하리라 하심을 알고	Therefore being a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne;	But he was a prophet and knew that God had promised him on oath that He would place one of his descendants on his throne.
ACT	2	31	미리 보는 고로 그리스도의 부활하심을 말하되 저가 음부에 버림이 되지 않고 육신이 썩음을 당하지 아니하시리라 하더니	He seeing this before spake of the resurrection of Christ, that his soul was not left in hell, neither his flesh did see corruption.	Foreseeing this, David spoke about the resurrection of the Christ, that He was not abandoned to Hades, nor did His body see decay.
ACT	2	32	이 예수를 하나님이 살리신지라 우리가 다 이 일에 증인이로다	This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof we all are witnesses.	God has raised this Jesus to life, to which we are all witnesses.
ACT	2	33	하나님이 오른손으로 예수를 높이시매 그가 약속하신 성령을 아버지께 받아서 너희 보고 듣는 이것을 부어 주셨느니라	Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he hath shed forth this, which ye now see and hear.	Exalted, then, to the right hand of God, He has received from the Father the promised Holy Spirit and has poured out what you now see and hear.
ACT	2	34	다윗은 하늘에 올라가지 못하였으나 친히 말하여 가로되 주께서 내 주에게 말씀하시기를	For David is not ascended into the heavens: but he saith himself, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand,	For David did not ascend into heaven, but he himself says: ‘The Lord said to my Lord, “Sit at My right hand
ACT	2	35	내가 네 원수로 네 발등상 되게 하기까지 너는 내 우편에 앉았으라 하셨도다 하였으니	Until I make thy foes thy footstool.	until I make Your enemies a footstool for Your feet.”’
ACT	2	36	그런즉 이스라엘 온 집이 정녕 알지니 너희가 십자가에 못 박은 이 예수를 하나님이 주와 그리스도가 되게 하셨느니라 하니라	Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ.	Therefore let all Israel know with certainty that God has made this Jesus, whom you crucified, both Lord and Christ!”
ACT	2	37	저희가 이 말을 듣고 마음에 찔려 베드로와 다른 사도들에게 물어 가로되 형제들아 우리가 어찌할꼬 하거늘	Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter and to the rest of the apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do?	When the people heard this, they were cut to the heart and asked Peter and the other apostles, “Brothers, what shall we do?”
ACT	2	38	베드로가 가로되 너희가 회개하여 각각 예수 그리스도의 이름으로 침례를 받고 죄 사함을 얻으라 그리하면 성령을 선물로 받으리니	Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.	Peter replied, “Repent and be baptized, every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.
ACT	2	39	이 약속은 너희와 너희 자녀와 모든 먼 데 사람 곧 주 우리 하나님이 얼마든지 부르시는 자들에게 하신 것이라 하고	For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.	This promise belongs to you and your children and to all who are far off—to all whom the Lord our God will call to Himself.”
ACT	2	40	또 여러 말로 확증하며 권하여 가로되 너희가 이 패역한 세대에서 구원을 받으라 하니	And with many other words did he testify and exhort, saying, Save yourselves from this untoward generation.	With many other words he testified, and he urged them, “Be saved from this corrupt generation.”
ACT	2	41	그 말을 받는 사람들은 침례를 받으매 이 날에 제자의 수가 삼천이나 더하더라	Then they that gladly received his word were baptized: and the same day there were added unto them about three thousand souls.	Those who embraced his message were baptized, and about three thousand were added to the believers that day.
ACT	2	42	저희가 사도의 가르침을 받아 서로 교제하며 떡을 떼며 기도하기를 전혀 힘쓰니라	And they continued stedfastly in the apostles’ doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers.	They devoted themselves to the apostles’ teaching and to the fellowship, to the breaking of bread and to prayer.
ACT	2	43	사람마다 두려워하는데 사도들로 인하여 기사와 표적이 많이 나타나니	And fear came upon every soul: and many wonders and signs were done by the apostles.	A sense of awe came over everyone, and the apostles performed many wonders and signs.
ACT	2	44	믿는 사람이 다 함께 있어 모든 물건을 서로 통용하고	And all that believed were together, and had all things common;	All the believers were together and had everything in common.
ACT	2	45	또 재산과 소유를 팔아 각 사람의 필요를 따라 나눠 주고	And sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as every man had need.	Selling their possessions and goods, they shared with anyone who was in need.
ACT	2	46	날마다 마음을 같이하여 성전에 모이기를 힘쓰고 집에서 떡을 떼며 기쁨과 순전한 마음으로 음식을 먹고	And they, continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart,	With one accord they continued to meet daily in the temple courts and to break bread from house to house, sharing their meals with gladness and sincerity of heart,
ACT	2	47	하나님을 찬미하며 또 온 백성에게 칭송을 받으니 주께서 구원 받는 사람을 날마다 더하게 하시니라	Praising God, and having favour with all the people. And the Lord added to the church daily such as should be saved.	praising God and enjoying the favor of all the people. And the Lord added to their number daily those who were being saved.
ACT	3	1	제구시 기도 시간에 베드로와 요한이 성전에 올라갈새	Now Peter and John went up together into the temple at the hour of prayer, being the ninth hour.	One afternoon Peter and John were going up to the temple at the hour of prayer, the ninth hour.
ACT	3	2	나면서 앉은뱅이 된 자를 사람들이 메고 오니 이는 성전에 들어가는 사람들에게 구걸하기 위하여 날마다 미문이라는 성전 문에 두는 자라	And a certain man lame from his mother’s womb was carried, whom they laid daily at the gate of the temple which is called Beautiful, to ask alms of them that entered into the temple;	And a man who was lame from birth was being carried to the temple gate called Beautiful, where he was put every day to beg from those entering the temple courts.
ACT	3	3	그가 베드로와 요한이 성전에 들어가려 함을 보고 구걸하거늘	Who seeing Peter and John about to go into the temple asked an alms.	When he saw Peter and John about to enter, he asked them for money.
ACT	3	4	베드로가 요한으로 더불어 주목하여 가로되 우리를 보라 하니	And Peter, fastening his eyes upon him with John, said, Look on us.	Peter looked directly at him, as did John. “Look at us!” said Peter.
ACT	3	5	그가 저희에게 무엇을 얻을까 하여 바라보거늘	And he gave heed unto them, expecting to receive something of them.	So the man gave them his attention, expecting to receive something from them.
ACT	3	6	베드로가 가로되 은과 금은 내게 없거니와 내게 있는 것으로 네게 주노니 곧 나사렛 예수 그리스도의 이름으로 걸으라 하고	Then Peter said, Silver and gold have I none; but such as I have give I thee: In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth rise up and walk.	But Peter said, “Silver or gold I do not have, but what I have I give you: In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, get up and walk!”
ACT	3	7	오른손을 잡아 일으키니 발과 발목이 곧 힘을 얻고	And he took him by the right hand, and lifted him up: and immediately his feet and ankle bones received strength.	Taking him by the right hand, Peter helped him up, and at once the man’s feet and ankles were made strong.
ACT	3	8	뛰어 서서 걸으며 그들과 함께 성전으로 들어가면서 걷기도 하고 뛰기도 하며 하나님을 찬미하니	And he leaping up stood, and walked, and entered with them into the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising God.	He sprang to his feet and began to walk. Then he went with them into the temple courts, walking and leaping and praising God.
ACT	3	9	모든 백성이 그 걷는 것과 및 하나님을 찬미함을 보고	And all the people saw him walking and praising God:	When all the people saw him walking and praising God,
ACT	3	10	그 본래 성전 미문에 앉아 구걸하던 사람인 줄 알고 그의 당한 일을 인하여 심히 기이히 여기며 놀라니라	And they knew that it was he which sat for alms at the Beautiful gate of the temple: and they were filled with wonder and amazement at that which had happened unto him.	they recognized him as the man who used to sit begging at the Beautiful Gate of the temple, and they were filled with wonder and amazement at what had happened to him.
ACT	3	11	나은 사람이 베드로와 요한을 붙잡으니 모든 백성이 크게 놀라며 달려 나아가 솔로몬의 행각이라 칭하는 행각에 모이거늘	And as the lame man which was healed held Peter and John, all the people ran together unto them in the porch that is called Solomon’s, greatly wondering.	While the man clung to Peter and John, all the people were astonished and ran to them in the walkway called Solomon’s Colonnade.
ACT	3	12	베드로가 이것을 보고 백성에게 말하되 이스라엘 사람들아 이 일을 왜 기이히 여기느냐 우리 개인의 권능과 경건으로 이 사람을 걷게 한 것처럼 왜 우리를 주목하느냐	And when Peter saw it, he answered unto the people, Ye men of Israel, why marvel ye at this? or why look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our own power or holiness we had made this man to walk?	And when Peter saw this, he addressed the people: “Men of Israel, why are you surprised by this? Why do you stare at us as if by our own power or godliness we had made this man walk?
ACT	3	13	아브라함과 이삭과 야곱의 하나님 곧 우리 조상의 하나님이 그 종 예수를 영화롭게 하셨느니라 너희가 저를 넘겨 주고 빌라도가 놓아 주기로 결안한 것을 너희가 그 앞에서 부인하였으니	The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our fathers, hath glorified his Son Jesus; whom ye delivered up, and denied him in the presence of Pilate, when he was determined to let him go.	The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God of our fathers, has glorified His servant Jesus. You handed Him over and rejected Him before Pilate, even though he had decided to release Him.
ACT	3	14	너희가 거룩하고 의로운 자를 부인하고 도리어 살인한 사람을 놓아주기를 구하여	But ye denied the Holy One and the Just, and desired a murderer to be granted unto you;	You rejected the Holy and Righteous One and asked that a murderer be released to you.
ACT	3	15	생명의 주를 죽였도다 그러나 하나님이 죽은 자 가운데서 살리셨으니 우리가 이 일에 증인이로라	And killed the Prince of life, whom God hath raised from the dead; whereof we are witnesses.	You killed the Author of life, but God raised Him from the dead, and we are witnesses of the fact.
ACT	3	16	그 이름을 믿으므로 그 이름이 너희 보고 아는 이 사람을 성하게 하였나니 예수로 말미암아 난 믿음이 너희 모든 사람 앞에서 이같이 완전히 낫게 하였느니라	And his name through faith in his name hath made this man strong, whom ye see and know: yea, the faith which is by him hath given him this perfect soundness in the presence of you all.	By faith in the name of Jesus, this man whom you see and know has been made strong. It is Jesus’ name and the faith that comes through Him that has given him this complete healing in your presence.
ACT	3	17	형제들아 너희가 알지 못하여서 그리하였으며 너희 관원들도 그리한 줄 아노라	And now, brethren, I wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did also your rulers.	And now, brothers, I know that you acted in ignorance, as did your leaders.
ACT	3	18	그러나 하나님이 모든 선지자의 입을 의탁하사 자기의 그리스도의 해 받으실 일을 미리 알게 하신 것을 이와 같이 이루셨느니라	But those things, which God before had shewed by the mouth of all his prophets, that Christ should suffer, he hath so fulfilled.	But in this way God has fulfilled what He foretold through all the prophets, saying that His Christ would suffer.
ACT	3	19	그러므로 너희가 회개하고 돌이켜 너희 죄 없이 함을 받으라 이같이 하면 유쾌하게 되는 날이 주 앞으로부터 이를 것이요	Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord;	Repent, then, and turn back, so that your sins may be wiped away,
ACT	3	20	또 주께서 너희를 위하여 예정하신 그리스도 곧 예수를 보내시리니	And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you:	that times of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord, and that He may send Jesus, the Christ, who has been appointed for you.
ACT	3	21	하나님이 영원 전부터 거룩한 선지자의 입을 의탁하여 말씀하신 바 만유를 회복하실 때까지는 하늘이 마땅히 그를 받아 두리라	Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began.	Heaven must take Him in until the time comes for the restoration of all things, which God announced long ago through His holy prophets.
ACT	3	22	모세가 말하되 주 하나님이 너희를 위하여 너희 형제 가운데서 나 같은 선지자 하나를 세울 것이니 너희가 무엇이든지 그 모든 말씀을 들을 것이라	For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you.	For Moses said, ‘The Lord your God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among your brothers. You must listen to Him in everything He tells you.
ACT	3	23	누구든지 그 선지자의 말을 듣지 아니하는 자는 백성 중에서 멸망 받으리라 하였고	And it shall come to pass, that every soul, which will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people.	Everyone who does not listen to Him will be completely cut off from among his people.’
ACT	3	24	또한 사무엘 때부터 옴으로 말한 모든 선지자도 이 때를 가리켜 말하였느니라	Yea, and all the prophets from Samuel and those that follow after, as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of these days.	Indeed, all the prophets from Samuel on, as many as have spoken, have proclaimed these days.
ACT	3	25	너희는 선지자들의 자손이요 또 하나님이 너희 조상으로 더불어 세우신 언약의 자손이라 아브라함에게 이르시기를 땅 위의 모든 족속이 너의 씨를 인하여 복을 받으리라 하셨으니	Ye are the children of the prophets, and of the covenant which God made with our fathers, saying unto Abraham, And in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed.	And you are sons of the prophets and of the covenant God made with your fathers when He said to Abraham, ‘Through your offspring all the families of the earth will be blessed.’
ACT	3	26	하나님이 그 종을 세워 복 주시려고 너희에게 먼저 보내사 너희로 하여금 돌이켜 각각 그 악함을 버리게 하셨느니라	Unto you first God, having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities.	When God raised up His Servant, He sent Him first to you to bless you by turning each of you from your wicked ways.”
ACT	4	1	사도들이 백성에게 말할 때에 제사장들과 성전 맡은 자와 사두개인들이 이르러	And as they spake unto the people, the priests, and the captain of the temple, and the Sadducees, came upon them,	While Peter and John were speaking to the people, the priests and the captain of the temple guard and the Sadducees came up to them,
ACT	4	2	백성을 가르침과 예수를 들어 죽은 자 가운데서 부활하는 도 전함을 싫어하여	Being grieved that they taught the people, and preached through Jesus the resurrection from the dead.	greatly disturbed that they were teaching the people and proclaiming in Jesus the resurrection of the dead.
ACT	4	3	저희를 잡으매 날이 이미 저문 고로 이튿날까지 가두었으나	And they laid hands on them, and put them in hold unto the next day: for it was now eventide.	They seized Peter and John, and because it was evening, they put them in custody until the next day.
ACT	4	4	말씀을 들은 사람 중에 믿는 자가 많으니 남자의 수가 약 오천이나 되었더라	Howbeit many of them which heard the word believed; and the number of the men was about five thousand.	But many who heard the message believed, and the number of men grew to about five thousand.
ACT	4	5	이튿날에 관원과 장로와 서기관들이 예루살렘에 모였는데	And it came to pass on the morrow, that their rulers, and elders, and scribes,	The next day the rulers, elders, and scribes assembled in Jerusalem,
ACT	4	6	대제사장 안나스와 가야바와 요한과 알렉산더와 및 대제사장의 문중이 다 참예하여	And Annas the high priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and as many as were of the kindred of the high priest, were gathered together at Jerusalem.	along with Annas the high priest, Caiaphas, John, Alexander, and many others from the high priest’s family.
ACT	4	7	사도들을 가운데 세우고 묻되 너희가 무슨 권세와 뉘 이름으로 이 일을 행하였느냐	And when they had set them in the midst, they asked, By what power, or by what name, have ye done this?	They had Peter and John brought in and began to question them: “By what power or what name did you do this?”
ACT	4	8	이에 베드로가 성령이 충만하여 가로되 백성의 관원과 장로들아	Then Peter, filled with the Holy Ghost, said unto them, Ye rulers of the people, and elders of Israel,	Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, said to them, “Rulers and elders of the people!
ACT	4	9	만일 병인에게 행한 착한 일에 대하여 이 사람이 어떻게 구원을 얻었느냐고 오늘 우리에게 질문하면	If we this day be examined of the good deed done to the impotent man, by what means he is made whole;	If we are being examined today about a kind service to a man who was lame, to determine how he was healed,
ACT	4	10	너희와 모든 이스라엘 백성들은 알라 너희가 십자가에 못 박고 하나님이 죽은 자 가운데서 살리신 나사렛 예수 그리스도의 이름으로 이 사람이 건강하게 되어 너희 앞에 섰느니라	Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by him doth this man stand here before you whole.	then let this be known to all of you and to all the people of Israel: It is by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you crucified but whom God raised from the dead, that this man stands before you healed.
ACT	4	11	이 예수는 너희 건축자들의 버린 돌로서 집 모퉁이의 머릿돌이 되었느니라	This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is become the head of the corner.	This Jesus is ‘the stone you builders rejected, which has become the cornerstone.’
ACT	4	12	다른 이로서는 구원을 얻을 수 없나니 천하 인간에 구원을 얻을 만한 다른 이름을 우리에게 주신 일이 없음이니라 하였더라	Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.	Salvation exists in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven given to men by which we must be saved.”
ACT	4	13	저희가 베드로와 요한이 기탄 없이 말함을 보고 그 본래 학문 없는 범인으로 알았다가 이상히 여기며 또 그 전에 예수와 함께 있던 줄도 알고	Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they marvelled; and they took knowledge of them, that they had been with Jesus.	When they saw the boldness of Peter and John and realized that they were unschooled, ordinary men, they marveled and took note that these men had been with Jesus.
ACT	4	14	또 병 나은 사람이 그들과 함께 섰는 것을 보고 힐난할 말이 없는지라	And beholding the man which was healed standing with them, they could say nothing against it.	And seeing the man who had been healed standing there with them, they had nothing to say in response.
ACT	4	15	명하여 공회에서 나가라 하고 서로 의논하여 가로되	But when they had commanded them to go aside out of the council, they conferred among themselves,	So they ordered them to leave the Sanhedrin and then conferred together.
ACT	4	16	이 사람들을 어떻게 할꼬 저희로 인하여 유명한 표적 나타난 것이 예루살렘에 사는 모든 사람에게 알려졌으니 우리도 부인할 수 없는지라	Saying, What shall we do to these men? for that indeed a notable miracle hath been done by them is manifest to all them that dwell in Jerusalem; and we cannot deny it.	“What shall we do with these men?” they asked. “It is clear to everyone living in Jerusalem that a remarkable miracle has occurred through them, and we cannot deny it.
ACT	4	17	이것이 민간에 더 퍼지지 못하게 저희를 위협하여 이 후에는 이 이름으로 아무 사람에게도 말하지 말게 하자 하고	But that it spread no further among the people, let us straitly threaten them, that they speak henceforth to no man in this name.	But to keep this message from spreading any further among the people, we must warn them not to speak to anyone in this name.”
ACT	4	18	그들을 불러 경계하여 도무지 예수의 이름으로 말하지도 말고 가르치지도 말라 하니	And they called them, and commanded them not to speak at all nor teach in the name of Jesus.	Then they called them in again and commanded them not to speak or teach at all in the name of Jesus.
ACT	4	19	베드로와 요한이 대답하여 가로되 하나님 앞에서 너희 말 듣는 것이 하나님 말씀 듣는 것보다 옳은가 판단하라	But Peter and John answered and said unto them, Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye.	But Peter and John replied, “Judge for yourselves whether it is right in God’s sight to listen to you rather than God.
ACT	4	20	우리는 보고 들은 것을 말하지 아니할 수 없다 하니	For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard.	For we cannot stop speaking about what we have seen and heard.”
ACT	4	21	관원들이 백성을 인하여 저희를 어떻게 벌할 도리를 찾지 못하고 다시 위협하여 놓아 주었으니 이는 모든 사람이 그 된 일을 보고 하나님께 영광을 돌림이러라	So when they had further threatened them, they let them go, finding nothing how they might punish them, because of the people: for all men glorified God for that which was done.	After further threats they let them go. They could not find a way to punish them, because all the people were glorifying God for what had happened.
ACT	4	22	이 표적으로 병 나은 사람은 사십여 세나 되었더라	For the man was above forty years old, on whom this miracle of healing was shewed.	For the man who was miraculously healed was over forty years old.
ACT	4	23	사도들이 놓이매 그 동류에게 가서 제사장들과 장로들의 말을 다 고하니	And being let go, they went to their own company, and reported all that the chief priests and elders had said unto them.	On their release, Peter and John returned to their own people and reported everything that the chief priests and elders had said to them.
ACT	4	24	저희가 듣고 일심으로 하나님께 소리를 높여 가로되 대주재여 천지와 바다와 그 가운데 만유를 지은 이시요	And when they heard that, they lifted up their voice to God with one accord, and said, Lord, thou art God, which hast made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and all that in them is:	When the believers heard this, they lifted up their voices to God with one accord. “Sovereign Lord,” they said, “You made the heaven and the earth and the sea and everything in them.
ACT	4	25	또 주의 종 우리 조상 다윗의 입을 의탁하사 성령으로 말씀하시기를 어찌하여 열방이 분노하며 족속들이 허사를 경영하였는고	Who by the mouth of thy servant David hast said, Why did the heathen rage, and the people imagine vain things?	You spoke by the Holy Spirit through the mouth of Your servant, our father David: ‘Why do the nations rage and the peoples plot in vain?
ACT	4	26	세상의 군왕들이 나서며 관원들이 함께 모여 주와 그 그리스도를 대적하도다 하신 이로소이다	The kings of the earth stood up, and the rulers were gathered together against the Lord, and against his Christ.	The kings of the earth take their stand and the rulers gather together against the Lord and against His Anointed One.’
ACT	4	27	과연 헤롯과 본디오 빌라도는 이방인과 이스라엘 백성과 합동하여 하나님의 기름부으신 거룩한 종 예수를 거스려	For of a truth against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou hast anointed, both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel, were gathered together,	In fact, this is the very city where Herod and Pontius Pilate conspired with the Gentiles and the people of Israel against Your holy servant Jesus, whom You anointed.
ACT	4	28	하나님의 권능과 뜻대로 이루려고 예정하신 그것을 행하려고 이 성에 모였나이다	For to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done.	They carried out what Your hand and will had decided beforehand would happen.
ACT	4	29	주여 이제도 저희의 위협함을 하감하옵시고 또 종들로 하여금 담대히 하나님의 말씀을 전하게 하여 주옵시며	And now, Lord, behold their threatenings: and grant unto thy servants, that with all boldness they may speak thy word,	And now, Lord, consider their threats, and enable Your servants to speak Your word with complete boldness,
ACT	4	30	손을 내밀어 병을 낫게 하옵시고 표적과 기사가 거룩한 종 예수의 이름으로 이루어지게 하옵소서 하더라	By stretching forth thine hand to heal; and that signs and wonders may be done by the name of thy holy child Jesus.	as You stretch out Your hand to heal and perform signs and wonders through the name of Your holy servant Jesus.”
ACT	4	31	빌기를 다하매 모인 곳이 진동하더니 무리가 다 성령이 충만하여 담대히 하나님의 말씀을 전하니라	And when they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were assembled together; and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and they spake the word of God with boldness.	After they had prayed, their meeting place was shaken, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and spoke the word of God boldly.
ACT	4	32	믿는 무리가 한 마음과 한 뜻이 되어 모든 물건을 서로 통용하고 제 재물을 조금이라도 제 것이라 하는 이가 하나도 없더라	And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul: neither said any of them that ought of the things which he possessed was his own; but they had all things common.	The multitude of believers was one in heart and soul. No one claimed that any of his possessions was his own, but they shared everything they owned.
ACT	4	33	사도들이 큰 권능으로 주 예수의 부활을 증거하니 무리가 큰 은혜를 얻어	And with great power gave the apostles witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus: and great grace was upon them all.	With great power the apostles continued to give their testimony about the resurrection of the Lord Jesus. And abundant grace was upon them all.
ACT	4	34	그 중에 핍절한 사람이 없으니 이는 밭과 집 있는 자는 팔아 그 판 것의 값을 가져다가	Neither was there any among them that lacked: for as many as were possessors of lands or houses sold them, and brought the prices of the things that were sold,	There were no needy ones among them, because those who owned lands or houses would sell their property, bring the proceeds from the sales,
ACT	4	35	사도들의 발 앞에 두매 저희가 각 사람의 필요를 따라 나눠 줌이러라	And laid them down at the apostles’ feet: and distribution was made unto every man according as he had need.	and lay them at the apostles’ feet for distribution to anyone as he had need.
ACT	4	36	구브로에서 난 레위족인이 있으니 이름은 요셉이라 사도들이 일컬어 바나바(번역하면 권위자)라 하니	And Joses, who by the apostles was surnamed Barnabas, (which is, being interpreted, The son of consolation,) a Levite, and of the country of Cyprus,	Joseph, a Levite from Cyprus, whom the apostles called Barnabas (meaning Son of Encouragement),
ACT	4	37	그가 밭이 있으매 팔아 값을 가지고 사도들의 발 앞에 두니라	Having land, sold it, and brought the money, and laid it at the apostles’ feet.	sold a field he owned, brought the money, and laid it at the apostles’ feet.
ACT	5	1	아나니아라 하는 사람이 그 아내 삽비라로 더불어 소유를 팔아	But a certain man named Ananias, with Sapphira his wife, sold a possession,	Now a man named Ananias, together with his wife Sapphira, also sold a piece of property.
ACT	5	2	그 값에서 얼마를 감추매 그 아내도 알더라 얼마를 가져다가 사도들의 발 앞에 두니	And kept back part of the price, his wife also being privy to it, and brought a certain part, and laid it at the apostles’ feet.	With his wife’s full knowledge, he kept back some of the proceeds for himself, but brought a portion and laid it at the apostles’ feet.
ACT	5	3	베드로가 가로되 아나니아야 어찌하여 사단이 네 마음에 가득하여 네가 성령을 속이고 땅 값 얼마를 감추었느냐	But Peter said, Ananias, why hath Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the land?	Then Peter said, “Ananias, how is it that Satan has filled your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit and withhold some of the proceeds from the land?
ACT	5	4	땅이 그대로 있을 때에는 네 땅이 아니며 판 후에도 네 임의로 할 수가 없더냐 어찌하여 이 일을 네 마음에 두었느냐 사람에게 거짓말한 것이 아니요 하나님께로다	Whiles it remained, was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it not in thine own power? why hast thou conceived this thing in thine heart? thou hast not lied unto men, but unto God.	Did it not belong to you before it was sold? And after it was sold, was it not at your disposal? How could you conceive such a deed in your heart? You have not lied to men, but to God!”
ACT	5	5	아나니아가 이 말을 듣고 엎드러져 혼이 떠나니 이 일을 듣는 사람이 다 크게 두려워하더라	And Ananias hearing these words fell down, and gave up the ghost: and great fear came on all them that heard these things.	On hearing these words, Ananias fell down and died. And great fear came over all who heard what had happened.
ACT	5	6	젊은 사람들이 일어나 시신을 싸서 메고 나가 장사하니라	And the young men arose, wound him up, and carried him out, and buried him.	Then the young men stepped forward, wrapped up his body, and carried him out and buried him.
ACT	5	7	세 시간쯤 지나 그 아내가 그 생긴 일을 알지 못하고 들어오니	And it was about the space of three hours after, when his wife, not knowing what was done, came in.	About three hours later his wife also came in, unaware of what had happened.
ACT	5	8	베드로가 가로되 그 땅 판 값이 이것뿐이냐 내게 말하라 하니 가로되 예 이뿐이로라	And Peter answered unto her, Tell me whether ye sold the land for so much? And she said, Yea, for so much.	“Tell me,” said Peter, “is this the price you and your husband got for the land?” “Yes,” she answered, “that is the price.”
ACT	5	9	베드로가 가로되 너희가 어찌 함께 꾀하여 주의 영을 시험하려 하느냐 보라 네 남편을 장사하고 오는 사람들의 발이 문 앞에 이르렀으니 또 너를 메어 내가리라 한대	Then Peter said unto her, How is it that ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? behold, the feet of them which have buried thy husband are at the door, and shall carry thee out.	“How could you agree to test the Spirit of the Lord?” Peter replied. “Look, the feet of the men who buried your husband are at the door, and they will carry you out also.”
ACT	5	10	곧 베드로의 발 앞에 엎드러져 혼이 떠나는지라 젊은 사람들이 들어와 죽은 것을 보고 메어다가 그 남편 곁에 장사하니	Then fell she down straightway at his feet, and yielded up the ghost: and the young men came in, and found her dead, and, carrying her forth, buried her by her husband.	At that instant she fell down at his feet and died. Then the young men came in and, finding her dead, carried her out and buried her beside her husband.
ACT	5	11	온 교회와 이 일을 듣는 사람들이 다 크게 두려워하니라	And great fear came upon all the church, and upon as many as heard these things.	And great fear came over the whole church and all who heard about these events.
ACT	5	12	사도들의 손으로 민간에 표적과 기사가 많이 되매 믿는 사람이 다 마음을 같이하여 솔로몬 행각에 모이고	And by the hands of the apostles were many signs and wonders wrought among the people; (and they were all with one accord in Solomon’s porch.	The apostles performed many signs and wonders among the people, and with one accord the believers gathered together in Solomon’s Colonnade.
ACT	5	13	그 나머지는 감히 그들과 상종하는 사람이 없으나 백성이 칭송하더라	And of the rest durst no man join himself to them: but the people magnified them.	Although the people regarded them highly, no one else dared to join them.
ACT	5	14	믿고 주께로 나오는 자가 더 많으니 남녀의 큰 무리더라	And believers were the more added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women.)	Yet more and more believers were brought to the Lord—large numbers of both men and women.
ACT	5	15	심지어 병든 사람을 메고 거리에 나가 침대와 요 위에 뉘우고 베드로가 지날 때에 혹 그 그림자라도 뉘게 덮일까 바라고	Insomuch that they brought forth the sick into the streets, and laid them on beds and couches, that at the least the shadow of Peter passing by might overshadow some of them.	As a result, people brought the sick into the streets and laid them on cots and mats, so that at least Peter’s shadow might fall on some of them as he passed by.
ACT	5	16	예루살렘 근읍 허다한 사람들도 모여 병든 사람과 더러운 귀신에게 괴로움 받는 사람을 데리고 와서 다 나음을 얻으니라	There came also a multitude out of the cities round about unto Jerusalem, bringing sick folks, and them which were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed every one.	Crowds also gathered from the towns around Jerusalem, bringing the sick and those tormented by unclean spirits, and all of them were healed.
ACT	5	17	대제사장과 그와 함께 있는 사람 즉 사두개인의 당파가 다 마음에 시기가 가득하여 일어나서	Then the high priest rose up, and all they that were with him, (which is the sect of the Sadducees,) and were filled with indignation,	Then the high priest and all his associates, who belonged to the party of the Sadducees, were filled with jealousy. They went out
ACT	5	18	사도들을 잡아다가 옥에 가두었더니	And laid their hands on the apostles, and put them in the common prison.	and arrested the apostles and put them in the public jail.
ACT	5	19	주의 사자가 밤에 옥문을 열고 끌어내어 가로되	But the angel of the Lord by night opened the prison doors, and brought them forth, and said,	But during the night an angel of the Lord opened the doors of the jail and brought them out, saying,
ACT	5	20	가서 성전에 서서 이 생명의 말씀을 다 백성에게 말하라 하매	Go, stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life.	“Go, stand in the temple courts and tell the people the full message of this new life.”
ACT	5	21	저희가 듣고 새벽에 성전에 들어가서 가르치더니 대제사장과 그와 함께 있는 사람들이 와서 공회와 이스라엘 족속의 원로들을 다 모으고 사람을 옥에 보내어 사도들을 잡아오라 하니	And when they heard that, they entered into the temple early in the morning, and taught. But the high priest came, and they that were with him, and called the council together, and all the senate of the children of Israel, and sent to the prison to have them brought.	At daybreak the apostles entered the temple courts as they had been told and began to teach the people. When the high priest and his associates arrived, they convened the Sanhedrin—the full assembly of the elders of Israel—and sent to the jail for the apostles.
ACT	5	22	관속들이 가서 옥에서 사도들을 보지 못하고 돌아와 말하여	But when the officers came, and found them not in the prison, they returned, and told,	But on arriving at the jail, the officers did not find them there. So they returned with the report:
ACT	5	23	가로되 우리가 보니 옥은 든든하게 잠기고 지킨 사람들이 문에 섰으되 문을 열고 본즉 그 안에는 한 사람도 없더이다 하니	Saying, The prison truly found we shut with all safety, and the keepers standing without before the doors: but when we had opened, we found no man within.	“We found the jail securely locked, with the guards posted at the doors; but when we opened them, we found no one inside.”
ACT	5	24	성전 맡은 자와 제사장들이 이 말을 듣고 의혹하여 이 일이 어찌 될까 하더니	Now when the high priest and the captain of the temple and the chief priests heard these things, they doubted of them whereunto this would grow.	When the captain of the temple guard and the chief priests heard this account, they were perplexed as to what was happening.
ACT	5	25	사람이 와서 고하되 보소서 옥에 가두었던 사람들이 성전에 서서 백성을 가르치더이다 하니	Then came one and told them, saying, Behold, the men whom ye put in prison are standing in the temple, and teaching the people.	Then someone came in and announced, “Look, the men you put in jail are standing in the temple courts teaching the people!”
ACT	5	26	성전 맡은 자가 관속들과 같이 서서 저희를 잡아왔으나 강제로 못함은 백성들이 돌로 칠까 두려워 함이러라	Then went the captain with the officers, and brought them without violence: for they feared the people, lest they should have been stoned.	At that point, the captain went with the officers and brought the apostles—but not by force, for fear the people would stone them.
ACT	5	27	저희를 끌어다가 공회 앞에 세우니 대제사장이 물어	And when they had brought them, they set them before the council: and the high priest asked them,	They brought them in and made them stand before the Sanhedrin, where the high priest interrogated them.
ACT	5	28	가로되 우리가 이 이름으로 사람을 가르치지 말라고 엄금하였으되 너희가 너희 교를 예루살렘에 가득하게 하니 이 사람의 피를 우리에게로 돌리고자 함이로다	Saying, Did not we straitly command you that ye should not teach in this name? and, behold, ye have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine, and intend to bring this man’s blood upon us.	“We gave you strict orders not to teach in this name,” he said. “Yet you have filled Jerusalem with your teaching and are determined to make us responsible for this man’s blood.”
ACT	5	29	베드로와 사도들이 대답하여 가로되 사람보다 하나님을 순종하는 것이 마땅하니라	Then Peter and the other apostles answered and said, We ought to obey God rather than men.	But Peter and the other apostles replied, “We must obey God rather than men.
ACT	5	30	너희가 나무에 달아 죽인 예수를 우리 조상의 하나님이 살리시고	The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a tree.	The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom you had killed by hanging Him on a tree.
ACT	5	31	이스라엘로 회개케 하사 죄사함을 얻게 하시려고 그를 오른손으로 높이사 임금과 구주를 삼으셨느니라	Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins.	God exalted Him to His right hand as Prince and Savior, in order to grant repentance and forgiveness of sins to Israel.
ACT	5	32	우리는 이 일에 증인이요 하나님이 자기를 순종하는 사람들에게 주신 성령도 그러하니라 하더라	And we are his witnesses of these things; and so is also the Holy Ghost, whom God hath given to them that obey him.	We are witnesses of these things, and so is the Holy Spirit, whom God has given to those who obey Him.”
ACT	5	33	저희가 듣고 크게 노하여 사도들을 없이하고자 할새	When they heard that, they were cut to the heart, and took counsel to slay them.	When the Council members heard this, they were enraged, and they resolved to put the apostles to death.
ACT	5	34	바리새인 가말리엘은 교법사로 모든 백성에게 존경을 받는 자라 공회 중에 일어나 명하사 사도들을 잠간 밖에 나가게 하고	Then stood there up one in the council, a Pharisee, named Gamaliel, a doctor of the law, had in reputation among all the people, and commanded to put the apostles forth a little space;	But a Pharisee named Gamaliel, a teacher of the law who was honored by all the people, stood up in the Sanhedrin and ordered that the men be put outside for a short time.
ACT	5	35	말하되 이스라엘 사람들아 너희가 이 사람들에게 대하여 어떻게 하려는 것을 조심하라	And said unto them, Ye men of Israel, take heed to yourselves what ye intend to do as touching these men.	“Men of Israel,” he said, “consider carefully what you are about to do to these men.
ACT	5	36	이전에 드다가 일어나 스스로 자랑하매 사람이 약 사백이나 따르더니 그가 죽임을 당하매 좇던 사람이 다 흩어져 없어졌고	For before these days rose up Theudas, boasting himself to be somebody; to whom a number of men, about four hundred, joined themselves: who was slain; and all, as many as obeyed him, were scattered, and brought to nought.	Some time ago Theudas rose up, claiming to be somebody, and about four hundred men joined him. He was killed, all his followers were dispersed, and it all came to nothing.
ACT	5	37	그 후 호적할 때에 갈릴리 유다가 일어나 백성을 꾀어 좇게 하다가 그도 망한즉 좇던 사람이 다 흩어졌느니라	After this man rose up Judas of Galilee in the days of the taxing, and drew away much people after him: he also perished; and all, even as many as obeyed him, were dispersed.	After him, Judas the Galilean appeared in the days of the census and drew away people after him. He too perished, and all his followers were scattered.
ACT	5	38	이제 내가 너희에게 말하노니 이 사람들을 상관 말고 버려두라 이 사상과 소행이 사람에게로서 났으면 무너질 것이요	And now I say unto you, Refrain from these men, and let them alone: for if this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to nought:	So in the present case I advise you: Leave these men alone. Let them go! For if their purpose or endeavor is of human origin, it will fail.
ACT	5	39	만일 하나님께로서 났으면 너희가 저희를 무너뜨릴 수 없겠고 도리어 하나님을 대적하는 자가 될까 하노라 하니	But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it; lest haply ye be found even to fight against God.	But if it is from God, you will not be able to stop them. You may even find yourselves fighting against God.”
ACT	5	40	저희가 옳게 여겨 사도들을 불러들여 채찍질하며 예수의 이름으로 말하는 것을 금하고 놓으니	And to him they agreed: and when they had called the apostles, and beaten them, they commanded that they should not speak in the name of Jesus, and let them go.	At this, they yielded to Gamaliel. They called the apostles in and had them flogged. Then they ordered them not to speak in the name of Jesus, and released them.
ACT	5	41	사도들은 그 이름을 위하여 능욕 받는 일에 합당한 자로 여기심을 기뻐하면서 공회 앞을 떠나니라	And they departed from the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his name.	The apostles left the Sanhedrin, rejoicing that they had been counted worthy of suffering disgrace for the Name.
ACT	5	42	저희가 날마다 성전에 있든지 집에 있든지 예수는 그리스도라 가르치기와 전도하기를 쉬지 아니하니라	And daily in the temple, and in every house, they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ.	Every day, in the temple courts and from house to house, they did not stop teaching and proclaiming the good news that Jesus is the Christ.
ACT	6	1	그 때에 제자가 더 많아졌는데 헬라파 유대인들이 자기의 과부들이 그 매일 구제에 빠지므로 히브리파 사람을 원망한대	And in those days, when the number of the disciples was multiplied, there arose a murmuring of the Grecians against the Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the daily ministration.	In those days when the disciples were increasing in number, the Grecian Jews among them began to grumble against the Hebraic Jews because their widows were being overlooked in the daily distribution of food.
ACT	6	2	열두 사도가 모든 제자를 불러 이르되 우리가 하나님의 말씀을 제쳐놓고 공궤를 일삼는 것이 마땅치 아니하니	Then the twelve called the multitude of the disciples unto them, and said, It is not reason that we should leave the word of God, and serve tables.	So the Twelve summoned all the disciples and said, “It is unacceptable for us to neglect the word of God in order to wait on tables.
ACT	6	3	형제들아 너희 가운데서 성령과 지혜가 충만하여 칭찬 듣는 사람 일곱을 택하라 우리가 이 일을 저희에게 맡기고	Wherefore, brethren, look ye out among you seven men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business.	Therefore, brothers, select from among you seven men confirmed to be full of the Spirit and wisdom. We will appoint this responsibility to them
ACT	6	4	우리는 기도하는 것과 말씀 전하는 것을 전무하리라 하니	But we will give ourselves continually to prayer, and to the ministry of the word.	and will devote ourselves to prayer and to the ministry of the word.”
ACT	6	5	온 무리가 이 말을 기뻐하여 믿음과 성령이 충만한 사람 스데반과 또 빌립과 브로고로와 니가노르와 디몬과 바메나와 유대교에 입교한 안디옥 사람 니골라를 택하여	And the saying pleased the whole multitude: and they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas a proselyte of Antioch:	This proposal pleased the whole group. They chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, as well as Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolas from Antioch, a convert to Judaism.
ACT	6	6	사도들 앞에 세우니 사도들이 기도하고 그들에게 안수하니라	Whom they set before the apostles: and when they had prayed, they laid their hands on them.	They presented these seven to the apostles, who prayed and laid their hands on them.
ACT	6	7	하나님의 말씀이 점점 왕성하여 예루살렘에 있는 제자의 수가 더 심히 많아지고 허다한 제사장의 무리도 이 도에 복종하니라	And the word of God increased; and the number of the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly; and a great company of the priests were obedient to the faith.	So the word of God continued to spread. The number of disciples in Jerusalem grew rapidly, and a great number of priests became obedient to the faith.
ACT	6	8	스데반이 은혜와 권능이 충만하여 큰 기사와 표적을 민간에 행하니	And Stephen, full of faith and power, did great wonders and miracles among the people.	Now Stephen, who was full of grace and power, was performing great wonders and signs among the people.
ACT	6	9	리버디노 구레네인, 알렉산드리아인, 길리기아와 아시아에서 온 사람들의 회당이라는 각 회당에서 어떤 자들이 일어나 스데반으로 더불어 변론할새	Then there arose certain of the synagogue, which is called the synagogue of the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, and of them of Cilicia and of Asia, disputing with Stephen.	But resistance arose from what was called the Synagogue of the Freedmen, including Cyrenians, Alexandrians, and men from the provinces of Cilicia and Asia. They began to argue with Stephen,
ACT	6	10	스데반이 지혜와 성령으로 말함을 저희가 능히 당치 못하여	And they were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spake.	but they could not stand up to his wisdom or the Spirit by whom he spoke.
ACT	6	11	사람들을 가르쳐 말시키되 이 사람이 모세와 및 하나님을 모독하는 말하는 것을 우리가 들었노라 하게 하고	Then they suborned men, which said, We have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses, and against God.	Then they prompted some men to say, “We heard Stephen speak words of blasphemy against Moses and against God.”
ACT	6	12	백성과 장로와 서기관들을 충동시켜 와서 잡아 가지고 공회에 이르러	And they stirred up the people, and the elders, and the scribes, and came upon him, and caught him, and brought him to the council,	So they stirred up the people, elders, and scribes and confronted Stephen. They seized him and brought him before the Sanhedrin,
ACT	6	13	거짓 증인들을 세우니 가로되 이 사람이 이 거룩한 곳과 율법을 거스려 말하기를 마지 아니하는도다	And set up false witnesses, which said, This man ceaseth not to speak blasphemous words against this holy place, and the law:	where they presented false witnesses who said, “This man never stops speaking against this holy place and against the law.
ACT	6	14	그의 말에 이 나사렛 예수가 이곳을 헐고 또 모세가 우리에게 전하여 준 규례를 고치겠다 함을 우리가 들었노라 하거늘	For we have heard him say, that this Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this place, and shall change the customs which Moses delivered us.	For we have heard him say that Jesus of Nazareth will destroy this place and change the customs that Moses handed down to us.”
ACT	6	15	공회 중에 앉은 사람들이 다 스데반을 주목하여 보니 그 얼굴이 천사의 얼굴과 같더라	And all that sat in the council, looking stedfastly on him, saw his face as it had been the face of an angel.	All who were sitting in the Sanhedrin looked intently at Stephen, and they saw that his face was like the face of an angel.
ACT	7	1	대제사장이 가로되 이것이 사실이냐	Then said the high priest, Are these things so?	Then the high priest asked Stephen, “Are these charges true?”
ACT	7	2	스데반이 가로되 여러분 부형들이여 들으소서 우리 조상 아브라함이 하란에 있기 전 메소보다미아에 있을 때에 영광의 하나님이 그에게 보여	And he said, Men, brethren, and fathers, hearken; The God of glory appeared unto our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran,	And Stephen declared: “Brothers and fathers, listen to me! The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham while he was still in Mesopotamia, before he lived in Haran,
ACT	7	3	가라사대 네 고향과 친척을 떠나 내가 네게 보일 땅으로 가라 하시니	And said unto him, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and come into the land which I shall shew thee.	and told him, ‘Leave your country and your kindred and go to the land I will show you.’
ACT	7	4	아브라함이 갈대아 사람의 땅을 떠나 하란에 거하다가 그 아비가 죽으매 하나님이 그를 거기서 너희 시방 거하는 이 땅으로 옮기셨느니라	Then came he out of the land of the Chaldeans, and dwelt in Charran: and from thence, when his father was dead, he removed him into this land, wherein ye now dwell.	So Abraham left the land of the Chaldeans and settled in Haran. After his father died, God brought him out of that place and into this land where you are now living.
ACT	7	5	그러나 여기서 발 붙일 만큼도 유업을 주지 아니하시고 다만 이 땅을 아직 자식도 없는 저와 저의 씨에게 소유로 주신다고 약속하셨으며	And he gave him none inheritance in it, no, not so much as to set his foot on: yet he promised that he would give it to him for a possession, and to his seed after him, when as yet he had no child.	He gave him no inheritance here, not even a foot of ground. But God promised to give possession of the land to Abraham and his descendants, even though he did not yet have a child.
ACT	7	6	하나님이 또 이같이 말씀하시되 그 씨가 다른 땅에 나그네 되리니 그 땅 사람이 종을 삼아 사백 년 동안을 괴롭게 하리라 하시고	And God spake on this wise, That his seed should sojourn in a strange land; and that they should bring them into bondage, and entreat them evil four hundred years.	God told him that his descendants would be foreigners in a strange land, and that they would be enslaved and mistreated four hundred years.
ACT	7	7	또 가라사대 종 삼는 나라를 내가 심판하리니 그 후에 저희가 나와서 이곳에서 나를 섬기리라 하시고	And the nation to whom they shall be in bondage will I judge, said God: and after that shall they come forth, and serve me in this place.	‘But I will punish the nation that enslaves them,’ God said, ‘and afterward they will come forth and worship Me in this place.’
ACT	7	8	할례의 언약을 아브라함에게 주셨더니 그가 이삭을 낳아 여드레만에 할례를 행하고 이삭이 야곱을, 야곱이 우리 열두 조상을 낳으니	And he gave him the covenant of circumcision: and so Abraham begat Isaac, and circumcised him the eighth day; and Isaac begat Jacob; and Jacob begat the twelve patriarchs.	Then God gave Abraham the covenant of circumcision, and Abraham became the father of Isaac and circumcised him on the eighth day. And Isaac became the father of Jacob, and Jacob of the twelve patriarchs.
ACT	7	9	여러 조상이 요셉을 시기하여 애굽에 팔았더니 하나님이 저와 함께 계셔	And the patriarchs, moved with envy, sold Joseph into Egypt: but God was with him,	Because the patriarchs were jealous of Joseph, they sold him as a slave into Egypt. But God was with him
ACT	7	10	그 모든 환난에서 건져내사 애굽 왕 바로 앞에서 은총과 지혜를 주시매 바로가 저를 애굽과 자기 온 집의 치리자로 세웠느니라	And delivered him out of all his afflictions, and gave him favour and wisdom in the sight of Pharaoh king of Egypt; and he made him governor over Egypt and all his house.	and rescued him from all his troubles. He granted Joseph favor and wisdom in the sight of Pharaoh king of Egypt, who appointed him ruler over Egypt and all his household.
ACT	7	11	그 때에 애굽과 가나안 온 땅에 흉년 들어 큰 환난이 있을새 우리 조상들이 양식이 없는지라	Now there came a dearth over all the land of Egypt and Chanaan, and great affliction: and our fathers found no sustenance.	Then famine and great suffering swept across Egypt and Canaan, and our fathers could not find food.
ACT	7	12	야곱이 애굽에 곡식 있다는 말을 듣고 먼저 우리 조상들을 보내고	But when Jacob heard that there was corn in Egypt, he sent out our fathers first.	When Jacob heard that there was grain in Egypt, he sent our fathers on their first visit.
ACT	7	13	또 재차 보내매 요셉이 자기 형제들에게 알게 되고 또 요셉의 친족이 바로에게 드러나게 되니라	And at the second time Joseph was made known to his brethren; and Joseph’s kindred was made known unto Pharaoh.	On their second visit, Joseph revealed his identity to his brothers, and his family became known to Pharaoh.
ACT	7	14	요셉이 보내어 그 부친 야곱과 온 친족 일흔다섯 사람을 청하였더니	Then sent Joseph, and called his father Jacob to him, and all his kindred, threescore and fifteen souls.	Then Joseph sent for his father Jacob and all his relatives, seventy-five in all.
ACT	7	15	야곱이 애굽으로 내려가 자기와 우리 조상들이 거기서 죽고	So Jacob went down into Egypt, and died, he, and our fathers,	So Jacob went down to Egypt, where he and our fathers died.
ACT	7	16	세겜으로 옮기워 아브라함이 세겜 하몰의 자손에게서 은으로 값주고 산 무덤에 장사되니라	And were carried over into Sychem, and laid in the sepulchre that Abraham bought for a sum of money of the sons of Emmor the father of Sychem.	Their bones were carried back to Shechem and placed in the tomb that Abraham had bought from the sons of Hamor at Shechem for a price he paid in silver.
ACT	7	17	하나님이 아브라함에게 약속하신 때가 가까우매 이스라엘 백성이 애굽에서 번성하여 많아졌더니	But when the time of the promise drew nigh, which God had sworn to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in Egypt,	As the time drew near for God to fulfill His promise to Abraham, our people in Egypt increased greatly in number.
ACT	7	18	요셉을 알지 못하는 새 임금이 애굽 왕위에 오르매	Till another king arose, which knew not Joseph.	Then another king, who knew nothing of Joseph, arose over Egypt.
ACT	7	19	그가 우리 족속에게 궤계를 써서 조상들을 괴롭게 하여 그 어린 아이들을 내어버려 살지 못하게 하려 할새	The same dealt subtilly with our kindred, and evil entreated our fathers, so that they cast out their young children, to the end they might not live.	He exploited our people and oppressed our fathers, forcing them to abandon their infants so they would die.
ACT	7	20	그 때에 모세가 났는데 하나님 보시기에 아름다운지라 그 부친의 집에서 석 달을 길리우더니	In which time Moses was born, and was exceeding fair, and nourished up in his father’s house three months:	At that time Moses was born, and he was beautiful in the sight of God. For three months he was nurtured in his father’s house.
ACT	7	21	버리운 후에 바로의 딸이 가져다가 자기 아들로 기르매	And when he was cast out, Pharaoh’s daughter took him up, and nourished him for her own son.	When he was set outside, Pharaoh’s daughter took him and brought him up as her own son.
ACT	7	22	모세가 애굽 사람의 학술을 다 배워 그 말과 행사가 능하더라	And Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was mighty in words and in deeds.	So Moses was educated in all the wisdom of the Egyptians and was powerful in speech and action.
ACT	7	23	나이 사십이 되매 그 형제 이스라엘 자손을 돌아볼 생각이 나더니	And when he was full forty years old, it came into his heart to visit his brethren the children of Israel.	When Moses was forty years old, he decided to visit his brothers, the children of Israel.
ACT	7	24	한 사람의 원통한 일 당함을 보고 보호하여 압제 받는 자를 위하여 원수를 갚아 애굽 사람을 쳐 죽이니라	And seeing one of them suffer wrong, he defended him, and avenged him that was oppressed, and smote the Egyptian:	And when he saw one of them being mistreated, Moses went to his defense and avenged him by striking down the Egyptian who was oppressing him.
ACT	7	25	저는 그 형제들이 하나님께서 자기의 손을 빌어 구원하여 주시는 것을 깨달으리라고 생각하였으나 저희가 깨닫지 못하였더라	For he supposed his brethren would have understood how that God by his hand would deliver them: but they understood not.	He assumed his brothers would understand that God was using him to deliver them, but they did not.
ACT	7	26	이튿날 이스라엘 사람이 싸울 때에 모세가 와서 화목시키려 하여 가로되 너희는 형제라 어찌 서로 해하느냐 하니	And the next day he shewed himself unto them as they strove, and would have set them at one again, saying, Sirs, ye are brethren; why do ye wrong one to another?	The next day he came upon two Israelites who were fighting, and he tried to reconcile them, saying, ‘Men, you are brothers. Why are you mistreating each other?’
ACT	7	27	그 동무를 해하는 사람이 모세를 밀뜨려 가로되 누가 너를 관원과 재판장으로 우리 위에 세웠느냐	But he that did his neighbour wrong thrust him away, saying, Who made thee a ruler and a judge over us?	But the man who was abusing his neighbor pushed Moses aside and said, ‘Who made you ruler and judge over us?
ACT	7	28	네가 어제 애굽 사람을 죽임과 같이 또 나를 죽이려느냐 하니	Wilt thou kill me, as thou diddest the Egyptian yesterday?	Do you want to kill me as you killed the Egyptian yesterday?’
ACT	7	29	모세가 이 말을 인하여 도주하여 미디안 땅에서 나그네 되어 거기서 아들 둘을 낳으니라	Then fled Moses at this saying, and was a stranger in the land of Madian, where he begat two sons.	At this remark, Moses fled to the land of Midian, where he lived as a foreigner and had two sons.
ACT	7	30	사십 년이 차매 천사가 시내 산 광야 가시나무 떨기 불꽃 가운데서 그에게 보이거늘	And when forty years were expired, there appeared to him in the wilderness of mount Sina an angel of the Lord in a flame of fire in a bush.	After forty years had passed, an angel appeared to Moses in the flames of a burning bush in the desert near Mount Sinai.
ACT	7	31	모세가 이 광경을 보고 기이히 여겨 알아보려고 가까이 가니 주의 소리 있어	When Moses saw it, he wondered at the sight: and as he drew near to behold it, the voice of the Lord came unto him,	When Moses saw it, he marveled at the sight. As he approached to look more closely, the voice of the Lord came to him:
ACT	7	32	나는 네 조상의 하나님 즉 아브라함과 이삭과 야곱의 하나님이로라 하신대 모세가 무서워 감히 알아보지 못하더라	Saying, I am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Then Moses trembled, and durst not behold.	‘I am the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.’ Moses trembled with fear and did not dare to look.
ACT	7	33	주께서 가라사대 네 발에 신을 벗으라 너 섰는 곳은 거룩한 땅이니라	Then said the Lord to him, Put off thy shoes from thy feet: for the place where thou standest is holy ground.	Then the Lord said to him, ‘Take off your sandals, for the place where you are standing is holy ground.
ACT	7	34	내 백성이 애굽에서 괴로움 받음을 내가 정녕히 보고 그 탄식하는 소리를 듣고 저희를 구원하려고 내려왔노니 시방 내가 너를 애굽으로 보내리라 하시니라	I have seen, I have seen the affliction of my people which is in Egypt, and I have heard their groaning, and am come down to deliver them. And now come, I will send thee into Egypt.	I have indeed seen the oppression of My people in Egypt. I have heard their groaning and have come down to deliver them. Now come, I will send you back to Egypt.’
ACT	7	35	저희 말이 누가 너를 관원과 재판장으로 세웠느냐 하며 거절하던 그 모세를 하나님은 가시나무 떨기 가운데서 보이던 천사의 손을 의탁하여 관원과 속량하는 자로 보내셨으니	This Moses whom they refused, saying, Who made thee a ruler and a judge? the same did God send to be a ruler and a deliverer by the hand of the angel which appeared to him in the bush.	This Moses, whom they had rejected with the words, ‘Who made you ruler and judge?’ is the one whom God sent to be their ruler and redeemer through the angel who appeared to him in the bush.
ACT	7	36	이 사람이 백성을 인도하여 나오게 하고 애굽과 홍해와 광야에서 사십 년간 기사와 표적을 행하였느니라	He brought them out, after that he had shewed wonders and signs in the land of Egypt, and in the Red sea, and in the wilderness forty years.	He led them out and performed wonders and signs in the land of Egypt, at the Red Sea, and for forty years in the wilderness.
ACT	7	37	이스라엘 자손을 대하여 하나님이 너희 형제 가운데서 나와 같은 선지자를 세우리라 하던 자가 곧 이 모세라	This is that Moses, which said unto the children of Israel, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear.	This is the same Moses who told the Israelites, ‘God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among your brothers.’
ACT	7	38	시내 산에서 말하던 그 천사와 및 우리 조상들과 함께 광야 교회에 있었고 또 생명의 도를 받아 우리에게 주던 자가 이 사람이라	This is he, that was in the church in the wilderness with the angel which spake to him in the mount Sina, and with our fathers: who received the lively oracles to give unto us:	He was in the assembly in the wilderness with the angel who spoke to him on Mount Sinai, and with our fathers. And he received living words to pass on to us.
ACT	7	39	우리 조상들이 모세에게 복종치 아니하고자 하여 거절하며 그 마음이 도리어 애굽으로 행하여	To whom our fathers would not obey, but thrust him from them, and in their hearts turned back again into Egypt,	But our fathers refused to obey him. Instead, they rejected him and in their hearts turned back to Egypt.
ACT	7	40	아론더러 이르되 우리를 인도할 신들을 우리를 위하여 만들라 애굽 땅에서 우리를 인도하던 이 모세는 어떻게 되었는지 알지 못하노라 하고	Saying unto Aaron, Make us gods to go before us: for as for this Moses, which brought us out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him.	They said to Aaron, ‘Make us gods who will go before us! As for this Moses who led us out of the land of Egypt, we do not know what has happened to him.’
ACT	7	41	그 때에 저희가 송아지를 만들어 그 우상 앞에 제사하며 자기 손으로 만든 것을 기뻐하더니	And they made a calf in those days, and offered sacrifice unto the idol, and rejoiced in the works of their own hands.	At that time they made a calf and offered a sacrifice to the idol, rejoicing in the works of their hands.
ACT	7	42	하나님이 돌이키사 저희를 그 하늘의 군대 섬기는 일에 버려 두셨으니 이는 선지자의 책에 기록된 바 이스라엘의 집이여 사십 년을 광야에서 너희가 희생과 제물을 내게 드린 일이 있었느냐	Then God turned, and gave them up to worship the host of heaven; as it is written in the book of the prophets, O ye house of Israel, have ye offered to me slain beasts and sacrifices by the space of forty years in the wilderness?	But God turned away from them and gave them over to the worship of the host of heaven, as it is written in the book of the prophets: ‘Did you bring Me sacrifices and offerings forty years in the wilderness, O house of Israel?
ACT	7	43	몰록의 장막과 신 레판의 별을 받들었음이여 이것은 너희가 절하고자 하여 만든 형상이로다 내가 너희를 바벨론 밖에 옮기리라 함과 같으니라	Yea, ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of your god Remphan, figures which ye made to worship them: and I will carry you away beyond Babylon.	You have taken along the tabernacle of Molech and the star of your god Rephan, the idols you made to worship. Therefore I will send you into exile beyond Babylon.’
ACT	7	44	광야에서 우리 조상들에게 증거의 장막이 있었으니 이것은 모세에게 말씀하신 이가 명하사 저가 본 그 식대로 만들게 하신 것이라	Our fathers had the tabernacle of witness in the wilderness, as he had appointed, speaking unto Moses, that he should make it according to the fashion that he had seen.	Our fathers had the tabernacle of the Testimony with them in the wilderness. It was constructed exactly as God had directed Moses, according to the pattern he had seen.
ACT	7	45	우리 조상들이 그것을 받아 하나님이 저희 앞에서 쫓아내신 이방인의 땅을 점령할 때에 여호수아와 함께 가지고 들어가사 다윗 때까지 이르니라	Which also our fathers that came after brought in with Jesus into the possession of the Gentiles, whom God drave out before the face of our fathers, unto the days of David;	And our fathers who received it brought it in with Joshua when they dispossessed the nations God drove out before them. It remained until the time of David,
ACT	7	46	다윗이 하나님 앞에서 은혜를 받아 야곱의 집을 위하여 하나님의 처소를 준비케 하여 달라 하더니	Who found favour before God, and desired to find a tabernacle for the God of Jacob.	who found favor in the sight of God and asked to provide a dwelling place for the God of Jacob.
ACT	7	47	솔로몬이 그를 위하여 집을 지었느니라	But Solomon built him an house.	But it was Solomon who built the house for Him.
ACT	7	48	그러나 지극히 높으신 이는 손으로 지은 곳에 계시지 아니하시나니 선지자의 말한 바	Howbeit the most High dwelleth not in temples made with hands; as saith the prophet,	However, the Most High does not dwell in houses made by human hands. As the prophet says:
ACT	7	49	주께서 가라사대 하늘은 나의 보좌요 땅은 나의 발등상이니 너희가 나를 위하여 무슨 집을 짓겠으며 나의 안식할 처소가 어디뇨	Heaven is my throne, and earth is my footstool: what house will ye build me? saith the Lord: or what is the place of my rest?	‘Heaven is My throne and the earth is My footstool. What kind of house will you build for Me, says the Lord, or where will My place of repose be?
ACT	7	50	이 모든 것이 다 내 손으로 지은 것이 아니냐 함과 같으니라	Hath not my hand made all these things?	Has not My hand made all these things?’
ACT	7	51	목이 곧고 마음과 귀에 할례를 받지 못한 사람들아 너희가 항상 성령을 거스려 너희 조상과 같이 너희도 하는도다	Ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye.	You stiff-necked people with uncircumcised hearts and ears! You always resist the Holy Spirit, just as your fathers did.
ACT	7	52	너희 조상들은 선지자 중에 누구를 핍박지 아니하였느냐 의인이 오시리라 예고한 자들을 저희가 죽였고 이제 너희는 그 의인을 잡아준 자요 살인한 자가 되나니	Which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted? and they have slain them which shewed before of the coming of the Just One; of whom ye have been now the betrayers and murderers:	Which of the prophets did your fathers fail to persecute? They even killed those who foretold the coming of the Righteous One. And now you are His betrayers and murderers—
ACT	7	53	너희가 천사의 전한 율법을 받고도 지키지 아니하였도다 하니라	Who have received the law by the disposition of angels, and have not kept it.	you who received the law ordained by angels, yet have not kept it.”
ACT	7	54	저희가 이 말을 듣고 마음에 찔려 저를 향하여 이를 갈거늘	When they heard these things, they were cut to the heart, and they gnashed on him with their teeth.	On hearing this, the members of the Sanhedrin were enraged, and they gnashed their teeth at him.
ACT	7	55	스데반이 성령이 충만하여 하늘을 우러러 주목하여 하나님의 영광과 및 예수께서 하나님 우편에 서신 것을 보고	But he, being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up stedfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God,	But Stephen, full of the Holy Spirit, looked intently into heaven and saw the glory of God and Jesus standing at the right hand of God.
ACT	7	56	말하되 보라 하늘이 열리고 인자가 하나님 우편에 서신 것을 보노라 한대	And said, Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God.	“Look,” he said, “I see heaven open and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God.”
ACT	7	57	저희가 큰 소리를 지르며 귀를 막고 일심으로 그에게 달려들어	Then they cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and ran upon him with one accord,	At this they covered their ears, cried out in a loud voice, and rushed together at him.
ACT	7	58	성 밖에 내치고 돌로 칠새 증인들이 옷을 벗어 사울이라 하는 청년의 발 앞에 두니라	And cast him out of the city, and stoned him: and the witnesses laid down their clothes at a young man’s feet, whose name was Saul.	They dragged him out of the city and began to stone him. Meanwhile the witnesses laid their garments at the feet of a young man named Saul.
ACT	7	59	저희가 돌로 스데반을 치니 스데반이 부르짖어 가로되 주 예수여 내 영혼을 받으시옵소서 하고	And they stoned Stephen, calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.	While they were stoning him, Stephen appealed, “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.”
ACT	7	60	무릎을 꿇고 크게 불러 가로되 주여 이 죄를 저들에게 돌리지 마옵소서 이 말을 하고 자니라	And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. And when he had said this, he fell asleep.	Falling on his knees, he cried out in a loud voice, “Lord, do not hold this sin against them.” And when he had said this, he fell asleep.
ACT	8	1	사울이 그의 죽임 당함을 마땅히 여기더라 그 날에 예루살렘에 있는 교회에 큰 핍박이 나서 사도 외에는 다 유대와 사마리아 모든 땅으로 흩어지니라	And Saul was consenting unto his death. And at that time there was a great persecution against the church which was at Jerusalem; and they were all scattered abroad throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria, except the apostles.	And Saul was there, giving approval to Stephen’s death. On that day a great persecution broke out against the church in Jerusalem, and all except the apostles were scattered throughout Judea and Samaria.
ACT	8	2	경건한 사람들이 스데반을 장사하고 위하여 크게 울더라	And devout men carried Stephen to his burial, and made great lamentation over him.	God-fearing men buried Stephen and mourned deeply over him.
ACT	8	3	사울이 교회를 잔멸할새 각 집에 들어가 남녀를 끌어다가 옥에 넘기니라	As for Saul, he made havock of the church, entering into every house, and haling men and women committed them to prison.	But Saul began to destroy the church. Going from house to house, he dragged off men and women and put them in prison.
ACT	8	4	그 흩어진 사람들이 두루 다니며 복음의 말씀을 전할새	Therefore they that were scattered abroad went every where preaching the word.	Those who had been scattered preached the word wherever they went.
ACT	8	5	빌립이 사마리아 성에 내려가 그리스도를 백성에게 전파하니	Then Philip went down to the city of Samaria, and preached Christ unto them.	Philip went down to a city in Samaria and proclaimed the Christ to them.
ACT	8	6	무리가 빌립의 말도 듣고 행하는 표적도 보고 일심으로 그의 말하는 것을 좇더라	And the people with one accord gave heed unto those things which Philip spake, hearing and seeing the miracles which he did.	The crowds gave their undivided attention to Philip’s message and to the signs they saw him perform.
ACT	8	7	많은 사람에게 붙었던 더러운 귀신들이 크게 소리를 지르며 나가고 또 많은 중풍병자와 앉은뱅이가 나으니	For unclean spirits, crying with loud voice, came out of many that were possessed with them: and many taken with palsies, and that were lame, were healed.	With loud shrieks, unclean spirits came out of many who were possessed, and many of the paralyzed and lame were healed.
ACT	8	8	그 성에 큰 기쁨이 있더라	And there was great joy in that city.	So there was great joy in that city.
ACT	8	9	그 성에 시몬이라 하는 사람이 전부터 있어 마술을 행하여 사마리아 백성을 놀라게 하며 자칭 큰 자라 하니	But there was a certain man, called Simon, which beforetime in the same city used sorcery, and bewitched the people of Samaria, giving out that himself was some great one:	Prior to that time, a man named Simon had practiced sorcery in the city and astounded the people of Samaria. He claimed to be someone great,
ACT	8	10	낮은 사람부터 높은 사람까지 다 청종하여 가로되 이 사람은 크다 일컫는 하나님의 능력이라 하더라	To whom they all gave heed, from the least to the greatest, saying, This man is the great power of God.	and all the people, from the least to the greatest, heeded his words and said, “This man is the divine power called the Great Power.”
ACT	8	11	오랫동안 그 마술에 놀랐으므로 저희가 청종하더니	And to him they had regard, because that of long time he had bewitched them with sorceries.	They paid close attention to him because he had astounded them for a long time with his sorcery.
ACT	8	12	빌립이 하나님 나라와 및 예수 그리스도의 이름에 관하여 전도함을 저희가 믿고 남녀가 다 침례를 받으니	But when they believed Philip preaching the things concerning the kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women.	But when they believed Philip as he preached the gospel of the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women.
ACT	8	13	시몬도 믿고 침례를 받은 후에 전심으로 빌립을 따라다니며 그 나타나는 표적과 큰 능력을 보고 놀라니라	Then Simon himself believed also: and when he was baptized, he continued with Philip, and wondered, beholding the miracles and signs which were done.	Even Simon himself believed and was baptized. He followed Philip closely and was astounded by the great signs and miracles he observed.
ACT	8	14	예루살렘에 있는 사도들이 사마리아도 하나님의 말씀을 받았다 함을 듣고 베드로와 요한을 보내매	Now when the apostles which were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John:	When the apostles in Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent Peter and John to them.
ACT	8	15	그들이 내려가서 저희를 위하여 성령 받기를 기도하니	Who, when they were come down, prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost:	On their arrival, they prayed for them to receive the Holy Spirit.
ACT	8	16	이는 아직 한 사람에게도 성령 내리신 일이 없고 오직 주 예수의 이름으로 침례만 받을 뿐이러라	(For as yet he was fallen upon none of them: only they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.)	For the Holy Spirit had not yet fallen upon any of them; they had simply been baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus.
ACT	8	17	이에 두 사도가 저희에게 안수하매 성령을 받는지라	Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost.	Then Peter and John laid their hands on them, and they received the Holy Spirit.
ACT	8	18	시몬이 사도들의 안수함으로 성령 받는 것을 보고 돈을 드려	And when Simon saw that through laying on of the apostles’ hands the Holy Ghost was given, he offered them money,	When Simon saw that the Spirit was given through the laying on of the apostles’ hands, he offered them money.
ACT	8	19	가로되 이 권능을 내게도 주어 누구든지 내가 안수하는 사람은 성령을 받게 하여 주소서 하니	Saying, Give me also this power, that on whomsoever I lay hands, he may receive the Holy Ghost.	“Give me this power as well,” he said, “so that everyone on whom I lay my hands may receive the Holy Spirit.”
ACT	8	20	베드로가 가로되 네가 하나님의 선물을 돈 주고 살 줄로 생각하였으니 네 은과 네가 함께 망할지어다	But Peter said unto him, Thy money perish with thee, because thou hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money.	But Peter replied, “May your silver perish with you, because you thought you could buy the gift of God with money!
ACT	8	21	하나님 앞에서 네 마음이 바르지 못하니 이 도에는 네가 관계도 없고 분깃 될 것도 없느니라	Thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter: for thy heart is not right in the sight of God.	You have no part or share in our ministry, because your heart is not right before God.
ACT	8	22	그러므로 너의 이 악함을 회개하고 주께 기도하라 혹 마음에 품은 것을 사하여 주시리라	Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee.	Repent, therefore, of your wickedness, and pray to the Lord. Perhaps He will forgive you for the intent of your heart.
ACT	8	23	내가 보니 너는 악독이 가득하며 불의에 매인 바 되었도다	For I perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity.	For I see that you are poisoned by bitterness and captive to iniquity.”
ACT	8	24	시몬이 대답하여 가로되 나를 위하여 주께 기도하여 말한 것이 하나도 내게 임하지 말게 하소서 하니라	Then answered Simon, and said, Pray ye to the Lord for me, that none of these things which ye have spoken come upon me.	Then Simon answered, “Pray to the Lord for me, so that nothing you have said may happen to me.”
ACT	8	25	두 사도가 주의 말씀을 증거하여 말한 후 예루살렘으로 돌아갈새 사마리아인의 여러 촌에서 복음을 전하니라	And they, when they had testified and preached the word of the Lord, returned to Jerusalem, and preached the gospel in many villages of the Samaritans.	And after Peter and John had testified and spoken the word of the Lord, they returned to Jerusalem, preaching the gospel in many of the Samaritan villages.
ACT	8	26	주의 사자가 빌립더러 일러 가로되 일어나서 남으로 향하여 예루살렘에서 가사로 내려가는 길까지 가라 하니 그 길은 광야라	And the angel of the Lord spake unto Philip, saying, Arise, and go toward the south unto the way that goeth down from Jerusalem unto Gaza, which is desert.	Now an angel of the Lord said to Philip, “Get up and go south to the desert road that goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza.”
ACT	8	27	일어나 가서 보니 에디오피아 사람 곧 에디오피아 여왕 간다게의 모든 국고를 맡은 큰 권세가 있는 내시가 예배하러 예루살렘에 왔다가	And he arose and went: and, behold, a man of Ethiopia, an eunuch of great authority under Candace queen of the Ethiopians, who had the charge of all her treasure, and had come to Jerusalem for to worship,	So he started out, and on his way he met an Ethiopian eunuch, a court official in charge of the entire treasury of Candace, queen of the Ethiopians. He had gone to Jerusalem to worship,
ACT	8	28	돌아가는데 병거를 타고 선지자 아사야의 글을 읽더라	Was returning, and sitting in his chariot read Esaias the prophet.	and on his return was sitting in his chariot reading Isaiah the prophet.
ACT	8	29	성령이 빌립더러 이르시되 이 병거로 가까이 나아가라 하시거늘	Then the Spirit said unto Philip, Go near, and join thyself to this chariot.	The Spirit said to Philip, “Go over to that chariot and stay by it.”
ACT	8	30	빌립이 달려가서 선지자 이사야의 글 읽는 것을 듣고 말하되 읽는 것을 깨닫느뇨	And Philip ran thither to him, and heard him read the prophet Esaias, and said, Understandest thou what thou readest?	So Philip ran up and heard the man reading Isaiah the prophet. “Do you understand what you are reading?” Philip asked.
ACT	8	31	대답하되 지도하는 사람이 없으니 어찌 깨달을 수 있느뇨 하고 빌립을 청하여 병거에 올라 같이 앉으라 하니라	And he said, How can I, except some man should guide me? And he desired Philip that he would come up and sit with him.	“How can I,” he said, “unless someone guides me?” And he invited Philip to come up and sit with him.
ACT	8	32	읽는 성경 귀절은 이것이니 일렀으되 저가 사지로 가는 양과 같이 끌리었고 털 깎는 자 앞에 있는 어린 양의 잠잠함과 같이 그 입을 열지 아니하였도다	The place of the scripture which he read was this, He was led as a sheep to the slaughter; and like a lamb dumb before his shearer, so opened he not his mouth:	The eunuch was reading this passage of Scripture: “He was led like a sheep to the slaughter, and as a lamb before the shearer is silent, so He did not open His mouth.
ACT	8	33	낮을 때에 공변된 판단을 받지 못하였으니 누가 가히 그 세대를 말하리요 그 생명이 땅에서 빼앗김이로다 하였거늘	In his humiliation his judgment was taken away: and who shall declare his generation? for his life is taken from the earth.	In His humiliation He was deprived of justice. Who can recount His descendants? For His life was removed from the earth.”
ACT	8	34	내시가 빌립더러 말하되 청컨대 묻노니 선지자가 이 말 한 것이 누구를 가리킴이뇨 자기를 가리킴이뇨 타인을 가리킴이뇨	And the eunuch answered Philip, and said, I pray thee, of whom speaketh the prophet this? of himself, or of some other man?	“Tell me,” said the eunuch, “who is the prophet talking about, himself or someone else?”
ACT	8	35	빌립이 입을 열어 이 글에서 시작하여 예수를 가르쳐 복음을 전하니	Then Philip opened his mouth, and began at the same scripture, and preached unto him Jesus.	Then Philip began with this very Scripture and told him the good news about Jesus.
ACT	8	36	길 가다가 물 있는 곳에 이르러 내시가 말하되 보라 물이 있으니 내가 침례를 받음에 무슨 거리낌이 있느뇨	And as they went on their way, they came unto a certain water: and the eunuch said, See, here is water; what doth hinder me to be baptized?	As they traveled along the road and came to some water, the eunuch said, “Look, here is water! What is there to prevent me from being baptized?”
ACT	8	37		And Philip said, If thou believest with all thine heart, thou mayest. And he answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.	
ACT	8	38	이에 명하여 병거를 머물고 빌립과 내시가 둘 다 물에 내려가 빌립이 침례를 주고	And he commanded the chariot to stand still: and they went down both into the water, both Philip and the eunuch; and he baptized him.	And he gave orders to stop the chariot. Then both Philip and the eunuch went down into the water, and Philip baptized him.
ACT	8	39	둘이 물에서 올라갈새 주의 영이 빌립을 이끌어 간지라 내시는 흔연히 길을 가므로 그를 다시 보지 못하니라	And when they were come up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, that the eunuch saw him no more: and he went on his way rejoicing.	When they came up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord carried Philip away, and the eunuch saw him no more, but went on his way rejoicing.
ACT	8	40	빌립은 아소도에 나타나 여러 성을 지나 다니며 복음을 전하고 가이사랴에 이르니라	But Philip was found at Azotus: and passing through he preached in all the cities, till he came to Cesarea.	But Philip appeared at Azotus and traveled through that region, preaching the gospel in all the towns until he came to Caesarea.
ACT	9	1	사울이 주의 제자들을 대하여 여전히 위협과 살기가 등등하여 대제사장에게 가서	And Saul, yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, went unto the high priest,	Meanwhile, Saul was still breathing out murderous threats against the disciples of the Lord. He approached the high priest
ACT	9	2	다메섹 여러 회당에 갈 공문을 청하니 이는 만일 그 도를 좇는 사람을 만나면 무론 남녀하고 결박하여 예루살렘으로 잡아오려 함이라	And desired of him letters to Damascus to the synagogues, that if he found any of this way, whether they were men or women, he might bring them bound unto Jerusalem.	and requested letters to the synagogues in Damascus, so that if he found any men or women belonging to the Way, he could bring them as prisoners to Jerusalem.
ACT	9	3	사울이 행하여 다메섹에 가까이 가더니 홀연히 하늘로서 빛이 저를 둘러 비추는지라	And as he journeyed, he came near Damascus: and suddenly there shined round about him a light from heaven:	As Saul drew near to Damascus on his journey, suddenly a light from heaven flashed around him.
ACT	9	4	땅에 엎드러져 들으매 소리 있어 가라사대 사울아 사울아 네가 어찌하여 나를 핍박하느냐 하시거늘	And he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?	He fell to the ground and heard a voice say to him, “Saul, Saul, why do you persecute Me?”
ACT	9	5	대답하되 주여 뉘시오니이까 가라사대 나는 네가 핍박하는 예수라	And he said, Who art thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest: it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.	“Who are You, Lord?” Saul asked. “I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting,” He replied.
ACT	9	6	네가 일어나 성으로 들어가라 행할 것을 네게 이를 자가 있느니라 하시니	And he trembling and astonished said, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? And the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do.	“Now get up and go into the city, and you will be told what you must do.”
ACT	9	7	같이 가던 사람들은 소리만 듣고 아무도 보지 못하여 말을 못하고 섰더라	And the men which journeyed with him stood speechless, hearing a voice, but seeing no man.	The men traveling with Saul stood there speechless. They heard the voice but did not see anyone.
ACT	9	8	사울이 땅에서 일어나 눈은 떴으나 아무 것도 보지 못하고 사람의 손에 끌려 다메섹으로 들어가서	And Saul arose from the earth; and when his eyes were opened, he saw no man: but they led him by the hand, and brought him into Damascus.	Saul got up from the ground, but when he opened his eyes he could not see a thing. So they led him by the hand into Damascus.
ACT	9	9	사흘 동안을 보지 못하고 식음을 전폐하니라	And he was three days without sight, and neither did eat nor drink.	For three days he was without sight, and he did not eat or drink anything.
ACT	9	10	그 때에 다메섹에 아나니아라 하는 제자가 있더니 주께서 환상 중에 불러 가라사대 아나니아야 하시거늘 대답하되 주여 내가 여기 있나이다 하니	And there was a certain disciple at Damascus, named Ananias; and to him said the Lord in a vision, Ananias. And he said, Behold, I am here, Lord.	In Damascus there was a disciple named Ananias. The Lord spoke to him in a vision, “Ananias!” “Here I am, Lord,” he answered.
ACT	9	11	주께서 가라사대 일어나 직가라 하는 거리로 가서 유다 집에서 다소 사람 사울이라 하는 자를 찾으라 저가 기도하는 중이다	And the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the street which is called Straight, and enquire in the house of Judas for one called Saul, of Tarsus: for, behold, he prayeth,	“Get up!” the Lord told him. “Go to the house of Judas on Straight Street and ask for a man from Tarsus named Saul, for he is praying.
ACT	9	12	저가 아나니아라 하는 사람이 들어와서 자기에게 안수하여 다시 보게 하는 것을 보았느니라 하시거늘	And hath seen in a vision a man named Ananias coming in, and putting his hand on him, that he might receive his sight.	In a vision he has seen a man named Ananias come and place his hands on him to restore his sight.”
ACT	9	13	아나니아가 대답하되 주여 이 사람에 대하여 내가 여러 사람에게 듣사온즉 그가 예루살렘에서 주의 성도에게 적지 않은 해를 끼쳤다 하더니	Then Ananias answered, Lord, I have heard by many of this man, how much evil he hath done to thy saints at Jerusalem:	But Ananias answered, “Lord, many people have told me about this man and all the harm he has done to Your saints in Jerusalem.
ACT	9	14	여기서도 주의 이름을 부르는 모든 자를 결박할 권세를 대제사장들에게 받았나이다 하거늘	And here he hath authority from the chief priests to bind all that call on thy name.	And now he is here with authority from the chief priests to arrest all who call on Your name.”
ACT	9	15	주께서 가라사대 가라 이 사람은 내 이름을 이방인과 임금들과 이스라엘 자손들 앞에 전하기 위하여 택한 나의 그릇이라	But the Lord said unto him, Go thy way: for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel:	“Go!” said the Lord. “This man is My chosen instrument to carry My name before the Gentiles and their kings, and before the people of Israel.
ACT	9	16	그가 내 이름을 위하여 해를 얼마나 받아야 할 것을 내가 그에게 보이리라 하시니	For I will shew him how great things he must suffer for my name’s sake.	I will show him how much he must suffer for My name.”
ACT	9	17	아나니아가 떠나 그 집에 들어가서 그에게 안수하여 가로되 형제 사울아 주 곧 네가 오는 길에서 나타나시던 예수께서 나를 보내어 너로 다시 보게 하시고 성령으로 충만하게 하신다 하니	And Ananias went his way, and entered into the house; and putting his hands on him said, Brother Saul, the Lord, even Jesus, that appeared unto thee in the way as thou camest, hath sent me, that thou mightest receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost.	So Ananias went to the house, and when he arrived, he placed his hands on Saul. “Brother Saul,” he said, “the Lord Jesus, who appeared to you on the road as you were coming here, has sent me so that you may see again and be filled with the Holy Spirit.”
ACT	9	18	즉시 사울의 눈에서 비늘 같은 것이 벗어져 다시 보게 된지라 일어나 침례를 받고	And immediately there fell from his eyes as it had been scales: and he received sight forthwith, and arose, and was baptized.	At that instant, something like scales fell from Saul’s eyes, and his sight was restored. He got up and was baptized,
ACT	9	19	음식을 먹으매 강건하여지니라 사울이 다메섹에 있는 제자들과 함께 며칠 있을새	And when he had received meat, he was strengthened. Then was Saul certain days with the disciples which were at Damascus.	and after taking some food, he regained his strength. And he spent several days with the disciples in Damascus.
ACT	9	20	즉시로 각 회당에서 예수의 하나님의 아들이심을 전파하니	And straightway he preached Christ in the synagogues, that he is the Son of God.	Saul promptly began to proclaim Jesus in the synagogues, declaring, “He is the Son of God.”
ACT	9	21	듣는 사람이 다 놀라 말하되 이 사람이 예루살렘에서 이 이름 부르는 사람을 잔해하던 자가 아니냐 여기 온 것도 저희를 결박하여 대제사장들에게 끌어가고자 함이 아니냐 하더라	But all that heard him were amazed, and said; Is not this he that destroyed them which called on this name in Jerusalem, and came hither for that intent, that he might bring them bound unto the chief priests?	All who heard him were astounded and asked, “Isn’t this the man who wreaked havoc in Jerusalem on those who call on this name? And hasn’t he come here to take them as prisoners to the chief priests?”
ACT	9	22	사울은 힘을 더 얻어 예수를 그리스도라 증명하여 다메섹에 사는 유대인들을 굴복시키니라	But Saul increased the more in strength, and confounded the Jews which dwelt at Damascus, proving that this is very Christ.	But Saul was empowered all the more, and he confounded the Jews living in Damascus by proving that Jesus is the Christ.
ACT	9	23	여러 날이 지나매 유대인들이 사울 죽이기를 공모하더니	And after that many days were fulfilled, the Jews took counsel to kill him:	After many days had passed, the Jews conspired to kill him,
ACT	9	24	그 계교가 사울에게 알려지니라 저희가 그를 죽이려고 밤낮으로 성문까지 지키거늘	But their laying await was known of Saul. And they watched the gates day and night to kill him.	but Saul learned of their plot. Day and night they watched the city gates in order to kill him.
ACT	9	25	그의 제자들이 밤에 광주리에 사울을 담아 성에서 달아 내리니라	Then the disciples took him by night, and let him down by the wall in a basket.	One night, however, his disciples took him and lowered him in a basket through a window in the wall.
ACT	9	26	사울이 예루살렘에 가서 제자들을 사귀고자 하나 다 두려워하여 그의 제자 됨을 믿지 아니하니	And when Saul was come to Jerusalem, he assayed to join himself to the disciples: but they were all afraid of him, and believed not that he was a disciple.	When Saul arrived in Jerusalem, he tried to join the disciples, but they were all afraid of him, not believing that he was a disciple.
ACT	9	27	바나바가 데리고 사도들에게 가서 그가 길에서 어떻게 주를 본 것과 주께서 그에게 말씀하신 일과 다메섹에서 그가 어떻게 예수의 이름으로 담대히 말하던 것을 말하니라	But Barnabas took him, and brought him to the apostles, and declared unto them how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him, and how he had preached boldly at Damascus in the name of Jesus.	Then Barnabas brought him to the apostles and described how Saul had seen the Lord, who spoke to him on the road to Damascus, and how Saul had spoken boldly in that city in the name of Jesus.
ACT	9	28	사울이 제자들과 함께 있어 예루살렘에 출입하며	And he was with them coming in and going out at Jerusalem.	So Saul stayed with them, moving about freely in Jerusalem and speaking boldly in the name of the Lord.
ACT	9	29	또 주 예수의 이름으로 담대히 말하고 헬라파 유대인들과 함께 말하며 변론하니 그 사람들이 죽이려고 힘쓰거늘	And he spake boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus, and disputed against the Grecians: but they went about to slay him.	He talked and debated with the Grecian Jews, but they tried to kill him.
ACT	9	30	형제들이 알고 가이사랴로 데리고 내려가서 다소로 보내니라	Which when the brethren knew, they brought him down to Cesarea, and sent him forth to Tarsus.	When the brothers learned of this, they took him down to Caesarea and sent him off to Tarsus.
ACT	9	31	그리하여 온 유대와 갈릴리와 사마리아 교회가 평안하여 든든히 서 가고 주를 경외함과 성령의 위로로 진행하여 수가 더 많아지니라	Then had the churches rest throughout all Judea and Galilee and Samaria, and were edified; and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, were multiplied.	Then the church throughout Judea, Galilee, and Samaria experienced a time of peace. It grew in strength and numbers, living in the fear of the Lord and the encouragement of the Holy Spirit.
ACT	9	32	때에 베드로가 사방으로 두루 행하다가 룻다에 사는 성도들에게도 내려갔더니	And it came to pass, as Peter passed throughout all quarters, he came down also to the saints which dwelt at Lydda.	As Peter traveled throughout the area, he went to visit the saints in Lydda.
ACT	9	33	거기서 애니아라 하는 사람을 만나매 그가 중풍병으로 상 위에 누운지 팔 년이라	And there he found a certain man named Eneas, which had kept his bed eight years, and was sick of the palsy.	There he found a man named Aeneas, who had been paralyzed and bedridden for eight years.
ACT	9	34	베드로가 가로되 애니아야 예수 그리스도께서 너를 낫게 하시니 일어나 네 자리를 정돈하라 한대 곧 일어나니	And Peter said unto him, Eneas, Jesus Christ maketh thee whole: arise, and make thy bed. And he arose immediately.	“Aeneas,” Peter said to him, “Jesus Christ heals you! Get up and put away your mat.” Immediately Aeneas got up,
ACT	9	35	룻다와 사론에 사는 사람들이 다 그를 보고 주께로 돌아가니라	And all that dwelt at Lydda and Saron saw him, and turned to the Lord.	and all who lived in Lydda and Sharon saw him and turned to the Lord.
ACT	9	36	욥바에 다비다라 하는 여제자가 있으니 그 이름을 번역하면 도르가라 선행과 구제하는 일이 심히 많더니	Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple named Tabitha, which by interpretation is called Dorcas: this woman was full of good works and almsdeeds which she did.	In Joppa there was a disciple named Tabitha (which is translated as Dorcas), who was always occupied with works of kindness and charity.
ACT	9	37	그 때에 병들어 죽으매 시체를 씻어 다락에 뉘우니라	And it came to pass in those days, that she was sick, and died: whom when they had washed, they laid her in an upper chamber.	At that time, however, she became sick and died, and her body was washed and placed in an upper room.
ACT	9	38	룻다가 욥바에 가까운지라 제자들이 베드로가 거기 있음을 듣고 두 사람을 보내어 지체 말고 오라고 간청하니	And forasmuch as Lydda was nigh to Joppa, and the disciples had heard that Peter was there, they sent unto him two men, desiring him that he would not delay to come to them.	Since Lydda was near Joppa, the disciples heard that Peter was there and sent two men to urge him, “Come to us without delay.”
ACT	9	39	베드로가 일어나 저희와 함께 가서 이르매 저희가 데리고 다락에 올라가니 모든 과부가 베드로의 곁에 서서 울며 도르가가 저희와 함께 있을 때에 지은 속옷과 겉옷을 다 내어 보이거늘	Then Peter arose and went with them. When he was come, they brought him into the upper chamber: and all the widows stood by him weeping, and shewing the coats and garments which Dorcas made, while she was with them.	So Peter got up and went with them. On his arrival, they took him to the upper room. All the widows stood around him, weeping and showing him the tunics and other clothing that Dorcas had made while she was still with them.
ACT	9	40	베드로가 사람을 다 내어 보내고 무릎을 꿇고 기도하고 돌이켜 시체를 향하여 가로되 다비다야 일어나라 하니 그가 눈을 떠 베드로를 보고 일어나 앉는지라	But Peter put them all forth, and kneeled down, and prayed; and turning him to the body said, Tabitha, arise. And she opened her eyes: and when she saw Peter, she sat up.	Then Peter sent them all out of the room. He knelt down and prayed, and turning toward her body, he said, “Tabitha, get up!” She opened her eyes, and seeing Peter, she sat up.
ACT	9	41	베드로가 손을 내밀어 일으키고 성도들과 과부들을 불러들여 그의 산 것을 보이니	And he gave her his hand, and lifted her up, and when he had called the saints and widows, presented her alive.	Peter took her by the hand and helped her up. Then he called the saints and widows and presented her to them alive.
ACT	9	42	온 욥바 사람이 알고 많이 주를 믿더라	And it was known throughout all Joppa; and many believed in the Lord.	This became known all over Joppa, and many people believed in the Lord.
ACT	9	43	베드로가 욥바에 여러 날 있어 시몬이라 하는 피장의 집에서 유하니라	And it came to pass, that he tarried many days in Joppa with one Simon a tanner.	And Peter stayed for several days in Joppa with a tanner named Simon.
ACT	10	1	가이사랴에 고넬료라 하는 사람이 있으니 이달리야대라 하는 군대의 백부장이라	There was a certain man in Cesarea called Cornelius, a centurion of the band called the Italian band,	At Caesarea there was a man named Cornelius, a centurion in what was called the Italian Regiment.
ACT	10	2	그가 경건하여 온 집으로 더불어 하나님을 경외하며 백성을 많이 구제하고 하나님께 항상 기도하더니	A devout man, and one that feared God with all his house, which gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God alway.	He and all his household were devout and God-fearing. He gave generously to the people and prayed to God regularly.
ACT	10	3	하루는 제 구 시쯤 되어 환상 중에 밝히 보매 하나님의 사자가 들어와 가로되 고넬료야 하니	He saw in a vision evidently about the ninth hour of the day an angel of God coming in to him, and saying unto him, Cornelius.	One day at about the ninth hour, he had a clear vision of an angel of God who came to him and said, “Cornelius!”
ACT	10	4	고넬료가 주목하여 보고 두려워 가로되 주여 무슨 일이니이까 천사가 가로되 네 기도와 구제가 하나님 앞에 상달하여 기억하신 바가 되었으니	And when he looked on him, he was afraid, and said, What is it, Lord? And he said unto him, Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God.	Cornelius stared at him in fear and asked, “What is it, Lord?” The angel answered, “Your prayers and gifts to the poor have ascended as a memorial offering before God.
ACT	10	5	네가 지금 사람들을 욥바에 보내어 베드로라 하는 시몬을 청하라	And now send men to Joppa, and call for one Simon, whose surname is Peter:	Now send men to Joppa to call for a man named Simon who is called Peter.
ACT	10	6	저는 피장 시몬의 집에 우거하니 그 집은 해변에 있느니라 하더라	He lodgeth with one Simon a tanner, whose house is by the sea side: he shall tell thee what thou oughtest to do.	He is staying with Simon the tanner, whose house is by the sea.”
ACT	10	7	마침 말하던 천사가 떠나매 고넬료가 집안 하인 둘과 종졸 가운데 경건한 사람 하나를 불러	And when the angel which spake unto Cornelius was departed, he called two of his household servants, and a devout soldier of them that waited on him continually;	When the angel who spoke to him had gone, Cornelius called two of his servants and a devout soldier from among his attendants.
ACT	10	8	이 일을 다 고하고 욥바로 보내니라	And when he had declared all these things unto them, he sent them to Joppa.	He explained what had happened and sent them to Joppa.
ACT	10	9	이튿날 저희가 행하여 성에 가까이 갔을 그 때에 베드로가 기도하려고 지붕에 올라가니 시간은 제 육 시더라	On the morrow, as they went on their journey, and drew nigh unto the city, Peter went up upon the housetop to pray about the sixth hour:	The next day at about the sixth hour, as the men were approaching the city on their journey, Peter went up on the roof to pray.
ACT	10	10	시장하여 먹고자 하매 사람이 준비할 때에 비몽사몽간에	And he became very hungry, and would have eaten: but while they made ready, he fell into a trance,	He became hungry and wanted something to eat, but while the meal was being prepared, he fell into a trance.
ACT	10	11	하늘이 열리며 한 그릇이 내려 오는 것을 보니 큰 보자기 같고 네 귀를 매어 땅에 드리웠더라	And saw heaven opened, and a certain vessel descending unto him, as it had been a great sheet knit at the four corners, and let down to the earth:	He saw heaven open and something like a large sheet being let down to earth by its four corners.
ACT	10	12	그 안에는 땅에 있는 각색 네 발 가진 짐승과 기는 것과 공중에 나는 것들이 있는데	Wherein were all manner of fourfooted beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air.	It contained all kinds of four-footed animals and reptiles of the earth, as well as birds of the air.
ACT	10	13	또 소리가 있으되 베드로야 일어나 잡아 먹으라 하거늘	And there came a voice to him, Rise, Peter; kill, and eat.	Then a voice said to him: “Get up, Peter, kill and eat!”
ACT	10	14	베드로가 가로되 주여 그럴 수 없나이다 속되고 깨끗지 아니한 물건을 내가 언제든지 먹지 아니하였삽나이다 한대	But Peter said, Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten any thing that is common or unclean.	“No, Lord!” Peter answered. “I have never eaten anything impure or unclean.”
ACT	10	15	또 두번째 소리 있으되 하나님께서 깨끗케 하신 것을 네가 속되다 하지 말라 하더라	And the voice spake unto him again the second time, What God hath cleansed, that call not thou common.	The voice spoke to him a second time: “Do not call anything impure that God has made clean.”
ACT	10	16	이런 일이 세 번 있은 후 그 그릇이 곧 하늘로 올리워 가니라	This was done thrice: and the vessel was received up again into heaven.	This happened three times, and all at once the sheet was taken back up into heaven.
ACT	10	17	베드로가 본 바 환상이 무슨 뜻인지 속으로 의심하더니 마침 고넬료의 보낸 사람들이 시몬의 집을 찾아 문 밖에 서서	Now while Peter doubted in himself what this vision which he had seen should mean, behold, the men which were sent from Cornelius had made enquiry for Simon’s house, and stood before the gate,	While Peter was puzzling over the meaning of the vision, the men sent by Cornelius found Simon’s house and approached the gate.
ACT	10	18	불러 묻되 베드로라 하는 시몬이 여기 우거하느냐 하거늘	And called, and asked whether Simon, which was surnamed Peter, were lodged there.	They called out to ask if Simon called Peter was staying there.
ACT	10	19	베드로가 그 환상에 대하여 생각할 때에 성령께서 저더러 말씀하시되 두 사람이 너를 찾으니	While Peter thought on the vision, the Spirit said unto him, Behold, three men seek thee.	As Peter continued to reflect on the vision, the Spirit said to him, “Behold, three men are looking for you.
ACT	10	20	일어나 내려가 의심치 말고 함께 가라 내가 저희를 보내었느니라 하시니	Arise therefore, and get thee down, and go with them, doubting nothing: for I have sent them.	So get up! Go downstairs and accompany them without hesitation, because I have sent them.”
ACT	10	21	베드로가 내려가 그 사람들을 보고 가로되 내가 곧 너희의 찾는 사람이니 너희가 무슨 일로 왔느냐	Then Peter went down to the men which were sent unto him from Cornelius; and said, Behold, I am he whom ye seek: what is the cause wherefore ye are come?	So Peter went down to the men and said, “Here am I, the one you are looking for. Why have you come?”
ACT	10	22	저희가 대답하되 백부장 고넬료는 의인이요 하나님을 경외하는 자라 유대 온 족속이 칭찬하더니 저가 거룩한 천사의 지시를 받아 너를 그 집으로 청하여 말을 들으려 하느니라 한대	And they said, Cornelius the centurion, a just man, and one that feareth God, and of good report among all the nation of the Jews, was warned from God by an holy angel to send for thee into his house, and to hear words of thee.	“Cornelius the centurion has sent us,” they said. “He is a righteous and God-fearing man with a good reputation among the whole Jewish nation. A holy angel instructed him to request your presence in his home so he could hear a message from you.”
ACT	10	23	베드로가 불러 들여 유숙하게 하니라 이튿날 일어나 저희와 함께 갈새 욥바 두어 형제도 함께 가니라	Then called he them in, and lodged them. And on the morrow Peter went away with them, and certain brethren from Joppa accompanied him.	So Peter invited them in as his guests. And the next day he got ready and went with them, accompanied by some of the brothers from Joppa.
ACT	10	24	이튿날 가이사랴에 들어가니 고넬료가 일가와 가까운 친구들을 모아 기다리더니	And the morrow after they entered into Cesarea. And Cornelius waited for them, and had called together his kinsmen and near friends.	The following day he arrived in Caesarea, where Cornelius was expecting them and had called together his relatives and close friends.
ACT	10	25	마침 베드로가 들어올 때에 고넬료가 맞아 발 앞에 엎드리어 절하니	And as Peter was coming in, Cornelius met him, and fell down at his feet, and worshipped him.	As Peter was about to enter, Cornelius met him and fell at his feet to worship him.
ACT	10	26	베드로가 일으켜 가로되 일어서라 나도 사람이라 하고	But Peter took him up, saying, Stand up; I myself also am a man.	But Peter helped him up. “Stand up,” he said, “I am only a man myself.”
ACT	10	27	더불어 말하며 들어가 여러 사람의 모인 것을 보고	And as he talked with him, he went in, and found many that were come together.	As Peter talked with him, he went inside and found many people gathered together.
ACT	10	28	이르되 유대인으로서 이방인을 교제하는 것과 가까이 하는 것이 위법인 줄은 너희도 알거니와 하나님께서 내게 지시하사 아무도 속되다 하거나 깨끗지 않다 하지 말라 하시기로	And he said unto them, Ye know how that it is an unlawful thing for a man that is a Jew to keep company, or come unto one of another nation; but God hath shewed me that I should not call any man common or unclean.	He said to them, “You know how unlawful it is for a Jew to associate with a foreigner or visit him. But God has shown me that I should not call any man impure or unclean.
ACT	10	29	부름을 사양치 아니하고 왔노라 묻노니 무슨 일로 나를 불렀느뇨	Therefore came I unto you without gainsaying, as soon as I was sent for: I ask therefore for what intent ye have sent for me?	So when I was invited, I came without objection. I ask, then, why have you sent for me?”
ACT	10	30	고넬료가 가로되 나흘 전 이맘 때까지 내 집에서 제 구 시 기도를 하는데 홀연히 한 사람이 빛난 옷을 입고 내 앞에 서서	And Cornelius said, Four days ago I was fasting until this hour; and at the ninth hour I prayed in my house, and, behold, a man stood before me in bright clothing,	Cornelius answered: “Four days ago I was in my house praying at this, the ninth hour. Suddenly a man in radiant clothing stood before me
ACT	10	31	말하되 고넬료야 하나님이 네 기도를 들으시고 네 구제를 기억하셨으니	And said, Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and thine alms are had in remembrance in the sight of God.	and said, ‘Cornelius, your prayer has been heard, and your gifts to the poor have been remembered before God.
ACT	10	32	사람을 욥바에 보내어 베드로라 하는 시몬을 청하라 저가 바닷가 피장 시몬의 집에 우거하느니라 하시기로	Send therefore to Joppa, and call hither Simon, whose surname is Peter; he is lodged in the house of one Simon a tanner by the sea side: who, when he cometh, shall speak unto thee.	Therefore send to Joppa for Simon, who is called Peter. He is a guest in the home of Simon the tanner, by the sea.’
ACT	10	33	내가 곧 당신에게 사람을 보내었더니 오셨으니 잘하였나이다 이제 우리는 주께서 당신에게 명하신 모든 것을 듣고자 하여 다 하나님 앞에 있나이다	Immediately therefore I sent to thee; and thou hast well done that thou art come. Now therefore are we all here present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God.	So I sent for you immediately, and you were kind enough to come. Now then, we are all here in the presence of God to listen to everything the Lord has instructed you to tell us.”
ACT	10	34	베드로가 입을 열어 가로되 내가 참으로 하나님은 사람의 외모를 취하지 아니하시고	Then Peter opened his mouth, and said, Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons:	Then Peter began to speak: “I now truly understand that God does not show favoritism,
ACT	10	35	각 나라 중 하나님을 경외하며 의를 행하는 사람은 하나님이 받으시는 줄 깨달았도다	But in every nation he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted with him.	but welcomes those from every nation who fear Him and do what is right.
ACT	10	36	만유의 주 되신 예수 그리스도로 말미암아 화평의 복음을 전하사 이스라엘 자손들에게 보내신 말씀	The word which God sent unto the children of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ: (he is Lord of all:)	He has sent this message to the people of Israel, proclaiming the gospel of peace through Jesus Christ, who is Lord of all.
ACT	10	37	곧 요한이 그 침례를 반포한 후에 갈릴리에서 시작되어 온 유대에 두루 전파된 그것을 너희도 알거니와	That word, I say, ye know, which was published throughout all Judea, and began from Galilee, after the baptism which John preached;	You yourselves know what has happened throughout Judea, beginning in Galilee with the baptism that John proclaimed:
ACT	10	38	하나님이 나사렛 예수에게 성령과 능력을 기름붓듯 하셨으매 저가 두루 다니시며 착한 일을 행하시고 마귀에게 눌린 모든 자를 고치셨으니 이는 하나님이 함께 하셨음이라	How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power: who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil; for God was with him.	how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Spirit and with power, and how Jesus went around doing good and healing all who were oppressed by the devil, because God was with Him.
ACT	10	39	우리는 유대인의 땅과 예루살렘에서 그의 행하신 모든 일에 증인이라 그를 저희가 나무에 달아 죽였으나	And we are witnesses of all things which he did both in the land of the Jews, and in Jerusalem; whom they slew and hanged on a tree:	We are witnesses of all that He did, both in the land of the Jews and in Jerusalem. And although they put Him to death by hanging Him on a tree,
ACT	10	40	하나님이 사흘만에 다시 살리사 나타내시되	Him God raised up the third day, and shewed him openly;	God raised Him up on the third day and caused Him to be seen—
ACT	10	41	모든 백성에게 하신 것이 아니요 오직 미리 택하신 증인 곧 죽은 자 가운데서 일어나신 후 모시고 음식을 먹은 우리에게 하신 것이라	Not to all the people, but unto witnesses chosen before of God, even to us, who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead.	not by all the people, but by the witnesses God had chosen beforehand, by us who ate and drank with Him after He rose from the dead.
ACT	10	42	우리를 명하사 백성에게 전도하되 하나님이 산 자와 죽은 자의 재판장으로 정하신 자가 곧 이 사람인 것을 증거하게 하셨고	And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that it is he which was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead.	And He commanded us to preach to the people and to testify that He is the One appointed by God to judge the living and the dead.
ACT	10	43	저에 대하여 모든 선지자도 증거하되 저를 믿는 사람들이 다 그 이름을 힘입어 죄 사함을 받는다 하였느니라	To him give all the prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins.	All the prophets testify about Him that everyone who believes in Him receives forgiveness of sins through His name.”
ACT	10	44	베드로가 이 말 할 때에 성령이 말씀 듣는 모든 사람에게 내려 오시니	While Peter yet spake these words, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word.	While Peter was still speaking these words, the Holy Spirit fell upon all who heard his message.
ACT	10	45	베드로와 함께 온 할례 받은 신자들이 이방인들에게도 성령 부어주심을 인하여 놀라니	And they of the circumcision which believed were astonished, as many as came with Peter, because that on the Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the Holy Ghost.	All the circumcised believers who had accompanied Peter were astounded that the gift of the Holy Spirit had been poured out even on the Gentiles.
ACT	10	46	이는 방언을 말하며 하나님 높임을 들음이러라	For they heard them speak with tongues, and magnify God. Then answered Peter,	For they heard them speaking in tongues and exalting God. Then Peter said,
ACT	10	47	이에 베드로가 가로되 이 사람들이 우리와 같이 성령을 받았으니 누가 능히 물로 침례 줌을 금하리요 하고	Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we?	“Can anyone withhold the water to baptize these people? They have received the Holy Spirit just as we have!”
ACT	10	48	명하여 예수 그리스도의 이름으로 침례를 주라 하니라 저희가 베드로에게 수일 더 유하기를 청하니라	And he commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord. Then prayed they him to tarry certain days.	So he ordered that they be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. Then they asked him to stay for a few days.
ACT	11	1	유대에 있는 사도들과 형제들이 이방인들도 하나님 말씀을 받았다 함을 들었더니	And the apostles and brethren that were in Judea heard that the Gentiles had also received the word of God.	The apostles and brothers throughout Judea soon heard that the Gentiles also had received the word of God.
ACT	11	2	베드로가 예루살렘에 올라갔을 때에 할례자들이 힐난하여	And when Peter was come up to Jerusalem, they that were of the circumcision contended with him,	So when Peter went up to Jerusalem, the circumcised believers took issue with him
ACT	11	3	가로되 네가 무할례자의 집에 들어가 함께 먹었다 하니	Saying, Thou wentest in to men uncircumcised, and didst eat with them.	and said, “You visited uncircumcised men and ate with them.”
ACT	11	4	베드로가 저희에게 이 일을 차례로 설명하여	But Peter rehearsed the matter from the beginning, and expounded it by order unto them, saying,	But Peter began and explained to them the whole sequence of events:
ACT	11	5	가로되 내가 욥바 성에서 기도할 때에 비몽사몽간에 환상을 보니 큰 보자기 같은 그릇을 네 귀를 매어 하늘로부터 내리워 내 앞에까지 드리우거늘	I was in the city of Joppa praying: and in a trance I saw a vision, A certain vessel descend, as it had been a great sheet, let down from heaven by four corners; and it came even to me:	“I was in the city of Joppa praying, and in a trance I saw a vision of something like a large sheet being let down from heaven by its four corners, and it came right down to me.
ACT	11	6	이것을 주목하여 보니 땅에 네 발 가진 것과 들짐승과 기는 것과 공중에 나는 것들이 보이더라	Upon the which when I had fastened mine eyes, I considered, and saw fourfooted beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air.	I looked at it closely and saw four-footed animals of the earth, wild beasts, reptiles, and birds of the air.
ACT	11	7	또 들으니 소리 있어 내게 이르되 베드로야 일어나 잡아 먹으라 하거늘	And I heard a voice saying unto me, Arise, Peter; slay and eat.	Then I heard a voice saying to me, ‘Get up, Peter, kill and eat.’
ACT	11	8	내가 가로되 주여 그럴 수 없나이다 속되거나 깨끗지 아니한 물건은 언제든지 내 입에 들어간 일이 없나이다 하니	But I said, Not so, Lord: for nothing common or unclean hath at any time entered into my mouth.	‘No, Lord,’ I said, ‘for nothing impure or unclean has ever entered my mouth.’
ACT	11	9	또 하늘로부터 두번째 소리 있어 내게 대답하되 하나님이 깨끗하게 하신 것을 네가 속되다 말라 하더라	But the voice answered me again from heaven, What God hath cleansed, that call not thou common.	But the voice spoke from heaven a second time, ‘Do not call anything impure that God has made clean.’
ACT	11	10	이런 일이 세 번 있은 후에 모든 것이 다시 하늘로 끌려 올라가더라	And this was done three times: and all were drawn up again into heaven.	This happened three times, and everything was drawn back up into heaven.
ACT	11	11	마침 세 사람이 내 우거한 집 앞에 섰으니 가이사랴에서 내게로 보낸 사람이라	And, behold, immediately there were three men already come unto the house where I was, sent from Cesarea unto me.	Just then three men sent to me from Caesarea stopped at the house where I was staying.
ACT	11	12	성령이 내게 명하사 아무 의심 말고 함께 가라 하시매 이 여섯 형제도 나와 함께 가서 그 사람의 집에 들어가니	And the spirit bade me go with them, nothing doubting. Moreover these six brethren accompanied me, and we entered into the man’s house:	The Spirit told me to accompany them without hesitation. These six brothers also went with me, and we entered the man’s home.
ACT	11	13	그가 우리에게 말하기를 천사가 내 집에 서서 말하되 네가 사람을 욥바에 보내어 베드로라 하는 시몬을 청하라	And he shewed us how he had seen an angel in his house, which stood and said unto him, Send men to Joppa, and call for Simon, whose surname is Peter;	He told us how he had seen an angel standing in his house and saying, ‘Send to Joppa for Simon who is called Peter.
ACT	11	14	그가 너와 네 온 집의 구원 얻을 말씀을 네게 이르리라 함을 보았다 하거늘	Who shall tell thee words, whereby thou and all thy house shall be saved.	He will convey to you a message by which you and all your household will be saved.’
ACT	11	15	내가 말을 시작할 때에 성령이 저희에게 임하시기를 처음 우리에게 하신 것과 같이 하는지라	And as I began to speak, the Holy Ghost fell on them, as on us at the beginning.	As I began to speak, the Holy Spirit fell upon them, just as He had fallen upon us at the beginning.
ACT	11	16	내가 주의 말씀에 요한은 물로 침례를 주었으나 너희는 성령으로 침례 받으리라 하신 것이 생각났노라	Then remembered I the word of the Lord, how that he said, John indeed baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost.	Then I remembered the word of the Lord, as He used to say, ‘John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit.’
ACT	11	17	그런즉 하나님이 우리가 주 예수 그리스도를 믿을 때에 주신 것과 같은 선물을 저희에게도 주셨으니 내가 누구관대 하나님을 능히 막겠느냐 하더라	Forasmuch then as God gave them the like gift as he did unto us, who believed on the Lord Jesus Christ; what was I, that I could withstand God?	So if God gave them the same gift He gave us who believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I to hinder the work of God?”
ACT	11	18	저희가 이 말을 듣고 잠잠하여 하나님께 영광을 돌려 가로되 그러면 하나님께서 이방인에게도 생명 얻는 회개를 주셨도다 하니라	When they heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life.	When they heard this, their objections were put to rest, and they glorified God, saying, “So then, God has granted even the Gentiles repentance unto life.”
ACT	11	19	때에 스데반의 일로 일어난 환난을 인하여 흩어진 자들이 베니게와 구브로와 안디옥까지 이르러 도를 유대인에게만 전하는데	Now they which were scattered abroad upon the persecution that arose about Stephen travelled as far as Phenice, and Cyprus, and Antioch, preaching the word to none but unto the Jews only.	Meanwhile those scattered by the persecution that began with Stephen traveled as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch, speaking the message only to Jews.
ACT	11	20	그 중에 구브로와 구레네 몇 사람이 안디옥에 이르러 헬라인에게도 말하여 주 예수를 전파하니	And some of them were men of Cyprus and Cyrene, which, when they were come to Antioch, spake unto the Grecians, preaching the Lord Jesus.	But some of them, men from Cyprus and Cyrene, went to Antioch and began speaking to the Greeks as well, proclaiming the good news about the Lord Jesus.
ACT	11	21	주의 손이 그들과 함께 하시매 수다한 사람이 믿고 주께 돌아오더라	And the hand of the Lord was with them: and a great number believed, and turned unto the Lord.	The hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number of people believed and turned to the Lord.
ACT	11	22	예루살렘 교회가 이 사람들의 소문을 듣고 바나바를 안디옥까지 보내니	Then tidings of these things came unto the ears of the church which was in Jerusalem: and they sent forth Barnabas, that he should go as far as Antioch.	When news of this reached the ears of the church in Jerusalem, they sent Barnabas to Antioch.
ACT	11	23	저가 이르러 하나님의 은혜를 보고 기뻐하여 모든 사람에게 굳은 마음으로 주께 붙어 있으라 권하니	Who, when he came, and had seen the grace of God, was glad, and exhorted them all, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord.	When he arrived and saw the grace of God, he rejoiced and encouraged them all to abide in the Lord with all their hearts.
ACT	11	24	바나바는 착한 사람이요 성령과 믿음이 충만한 자라 이에 큰 무리가 주께 더하더라	For he was a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost and of faith: and much people was added unto the Lord.	Barnabas was a good man, full of the Holy Spirit and faith, and a great number of people were brought to the Lord.
ACT	11	25	바나바가 사울을 찾으러 다소에 가서	Then departed Barnabas to Tarsus, for to seek Saul:	Then Barnabas went to Tarsus to look for Saul,
ACT	11	26	만나매 안디옥에 데리고 와서 둘이 교회에 일 년간 모여 있어 큰 무리를 가르쳤고 제자들이 안디옥에서 비로소 그리스도인이라 일컫음을 받게 되었더라	And when he had found him, he brought him unto Antioch. And it came to pass, that a whole year they assembled themselves with the church, and taught much people. And the disciples were called Christians first in Antioch.	and when he found him, he brought him back to Antioch. So for a full year they met together with the church and taught large numbers of people. The disciples were first called Christians at Antioch.
ACT	11	27	그 때에 선지자들이 예루살렘에서 안디옥에 이르니	And in these days came prophets from Jerusalem unto Antioch.	In those days some prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch.
ACT	11	28	그 중에 아가보라 하는 한 사람이 일어나 성령으로 말하되 천하가 크게 흉년 들리라 하더니 글라우디오 때에 그렇게 되니라	And there stood up one of them named Agabus, and signified by the spirit that there should be great dearth throughout all the world: which came to pass in the days of Claudius Cesar.	One of them named Agabus stood up and predicted through the Spirit that a great famine would sweep across the whole world. (This happened under Claudius.)
ACT	11	29	제자들이 각각 그 힘대로 유대에 사는 형제들에게 부조를 보내기로 작정하고	Then the disciples, every man according to his ability, determined to send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in Judea:	So the disciples, each according to his ability, decided to send relief to the brothers living in Judea.
ACT	11	30	이를 실행하여 바나바와 사울의 손으로 장로들에게 보내니라	Which also they did, and sent it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.	This they did, sending their gifts to the elders with Barnabas and Saul.
ACT	12	1	그 때에 헤롯 왕이 손을 들어 교회 중 몇 사람을 해하려 하여	Now about that time Herod the king stretched forth his hands to vex certain of the church.	About that time, King Herod reached out to harm some who belonged to the church.
ACT	12	2	요한의 형제 야고보를 칼로 죽이니	And he killed James the brother of John with the sword.	He had James, the brother of John, put to death with the sword.
ACT	12	3	유대인들이 이 일을 기뻐하는 것을 보고 베드로도 잡으려 할새 때는 무교절일이라	And because he saw it pleased the Jews, he proceeded further to take Peter also. (Then were the days of unleavened bread.)	And seeing that this pleased the Jews, Herod proceeded to seize Peter during the Feast of Unleavened Bread.
ACT	12	4	잡으매 옥에 가두어 군사 넷씩인 네 패에게 맡겨 지키고 유월절 후에 백성 앞에 끌어 내고자 하더라	And when he had apprehended him, he put him in prison, and delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers to keep him; intending after Easter to bring him forth to the people.	He arrested him and put him in prison, handing him over to be guarded by four squads of four soldiers each. Herod intended to bring him out to the people after the Passover.
ACT	12	5	이에 베드로는 옥에 갇혔고 교회는 그를 위하여 간절히 하나님께 빌더라	Peter therefore was kept in prison: but prayer was made without ceasing of the church unto God for him.	So Peter was kept in prison, but the church was fervently praying to God for him.
ACT	12	6	헤롯이 잡아 내려고 하는 그 전날 밤에 베드로가 두 군사 틈에서 두 쇠사슬에 매여 누워 자는데 파수꾼들이 문 밖에서 옥을 지키더니	And when Herod would have brought him forth, the same night Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains: and the keepers before the door kept the prison.	On the night before Herod was to bring him to trial, Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains, with sentries standing guard at the entrance to the prison.
ACT	12	7	홀연히 주의 사자가 곁에 서매 옥중에 광채가 조요하며 또 베드로의 옆구리를 쳐 깨워 가로되 급히 일어나라 하니 쇠사슬이 그 손에서 벗어지더라	And, behold, the angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in the prison: and he smote Peter on the side, and raised him up, saying, Arise up quickly. And his chains fell off from his hands.	Suddenly an angel of the Lord appeared and a light shone in the cell. He tapped Peter on the side and woke him up, saying, “Get up quickly.” And the chains fell off his wrists.
ACT	12	8	천사가 가로되 띠를 띠고 신을 들메라 하거늘 베드로가 그대로 하니 천사가 또 가로되 겉옷을 입고 따라 오라 한대	And the angel said unto him, Gird thyself, and bind on thy sandals. And so he did. And he saith unto him, Cast thy garment about thee, and follow me.	“Get dressed and put on your sandals,” said the angel. Peter did so, and the angel told him, “Wrap your cloak around you and follow me.”
ACT	12	9	베드로가 나와서 따라갈새 천사의 하는 것이 참인 줄 알지 못하고 환상을 보는가 하니라	And he went out, and followed him; and wist not that it was true which was done by the angel; but thought he saw a vision.	So Peter followed him out, but he was unaware that what the angel was doing was real. He thought he was only seeing a vision.
ACT	12	10	이에 첫째와 둘째 파수를 지나 성으로 통한 쇠문에 이르니 문이 절로 열리는지라 나와 한 거리를 지나매 천사가 곧 떠나더라	When they were past the first and the second ward, they came unto the iron gate that leadeth unto the city; which opened to them of his own accord: and they went out, and passed on through one street; and forthwith the angel departed from him.	They passed the first and second guards and came to the iron gate leading to the city, which opened for them by itself. When they had gone outside and walked the length of one block, the angel suddenly left him.
ACT	12	11	이에 베드로가 정신이 나서 가로되 내가 이제야 참으로 주께서 그의 천사를 보내어 나를 헤롯의 손과 유대 백성의 모든 기대에서 벗어나게 하신 줄 알겠노라 하여	And when Peter was come to himself, he said, Now I know of a surety, that the Lord hath sent his angel, and hath delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from all the expectation of the people of the Jews.	Then Peter came to himself and said, “Now I know for sure that the Lord has sent His angel and rescued me from Herod’s grasp and from everything the Jewish people were anticipating.”
ACT	12	12	깨닫고 마가라 하는 요한의 어머니 마리아의 집에 가니 여러 사람이 모여 기도하더라	And when he had considered the thing, he came to the house of Mary the mother of John, whose surname was Mark; where many were gathered together praying.	And when he had realized this, he went to the house of Mary the mother of John, also called Mark, where many people had gathered together and were praying.
ACT	12	13	베드로가 대문을 두드린대 로데라 하는 계집아이가 영접하러 나왔다가	And as Peter knocked at the door of the gate, a damsel came to hearken, named Rhoda.	He knocked at the outer gate, and a servant girl named Rhoda came to answer it.
ACT	12	14	베드로의 음성인 줄 알고 기뻐하여 문을 미처 열지 못하고 달려 들어가 말하되 베드로가 대문 밖에 섰더라 하니	And when she knew Peter’s voice, she opened not the gate for gladness, but ran in, and told how Peter stood before the gate.	When she recognized Peter’s voice, she was so overjoyed that she forgot to open the gate, but ran inside and announced, “Peter is standing at the gate!”
ACT	12	15	저희가 말하되 네가 미쳤다 하나 계집아이는 힘써 말하되 참말이라 하니 저희가 말하되 그러면 그의 천사라 하더라	And they said unto her, Thou art mad. But she constantly affirmed that it was even so. Then said they, It is his angel.	“You are out of your mind,” they told her. But when she kept insisting it was so, they said, “It must be his angel.”
ACT	12	16	베드로가 문 두드리기를 그치지 아니하니 저희가 문을 열어 베드로를 보고 놀라는지라	But Peter continued knocking: and when they had opened the door, and saw him, they were astonished.	But Peter kept on knocking, and when they opened the door and saw him, they were astounded.
ACT	12	17	베드로가 저희에게 손짓하여 종용하게 하고 주께서 자기를 이끌어 옥에서 나오게 하던 일을 말하고 또 야고보와 형제들에게 이 말을 전하라 하고 떠나 다른 곳으로 가니라	But he, beckoning unto them with the hand to hold their peace, declared unto them how the Lord had brought him out of the prison. And he said, Go shew these things unto James, and to the brethren. And he departed, and went into another place.	Peter motioned with his hand for silence, and he described how the Lord had brought him out of the prison. “Send word to James and to the brothers,” he said, and he left for another place.
ACT	12	18	날이 새매 군사들은 베드로가 어떻게 되었는지 알지 못하여 적지 않게 소동하니	Now as soon as it was day, there was no small stir among the soldiers, what was become of Peter.	At daybreak there was no small commotion among the soldiers as to what had become of Peter.
ACT	12	19	헤롯이 그를 찾아도 보지 못하매 파수꾼들을 심문하고 죽이라 명하니라 헤롯이 유대를 떠나 가이사랴로 내려가서 거하니라	And when Herod had sought for him, and found him not, he examined the keepers, and commanded that they should be put to death. And he went down from Judea to Cesarea, and there abode.	After Herod had searched for him unsuccessfully, he examined the guards and ordered that they be executed. Then he went down from Judea to Caesarea and spent some time there.
ACT	12	20	헤롯이 두로와 시돈 사람들을 대단히 노여워하나 저희 지방이 왕국에서 나는 양식을 쓰는고로 일심으로 그에게 나아와 왕의 침소 맡은 신하 블라스도를 친하여 화목하기를 청한지라	And Herod was highly displeased with them of Tyre and Sidon: but they came with one accord to him, and, having made Blastus the king’s chamberlain their friend, desired peace; because their country was nourished by the king’s country.	Now Herod was in a furious dispute with the people of Tyre and Sidon, and they convened before him. Having secured the support of Blastus, the king’s chamberlain, they asked for peace, because their region depended on the king’s country for food.
ACT	12	21	헤롯이 날을 택하여 왕복을 입고 위에 앉아 백성을 효유한대	And upon a set day Herod, arrayed in royal apparel, sat upon his throne, and made an oration unto them.	On the appointed day, Herod donned his royal robes, sat on his throne, and addressed the people.
ACT	12	22	백성들이 크게 부르되 이것은 신의 소리요 사람의 소리는 아니라 하거늘	And the people gave a shout, saying, It is the voice of a god, and not of a man.	And they began to shout, “This is the voice of a god, not a man!”
ACT	12	23	헤롯이 영광을 하나님께로 돌리지 아니하는고로 주의 사자가 곧 치니 충이 먹어 죽으니라	And immediately the angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not God the glory: and he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost.	Immediately, because Herod did not give glory to God, an angel of the Lord struck him down, and he was eaten by worms and died.
ACT	12	24	하나님의 말씀은 흥왕하여 더하더라	But the word of God grew and multiplied.	But the word of God continued to spread and multiply.
ACT	12	25	바나바와 사울이 부조의 일을 마치고 마가라 하는 요한을 데리고 예루살렘에서 돌아오니라	And Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerusalem, when they had fulfilled their ministry, and took with them John, whose surname was Mark.	When Barnabas and Saul had fulfilled their mission to Jerusalem, they returned, bringing with them John, also called Mark.
ACT	13	1	안디옥 교회에 선지자들과 교사들이 있으니 곧 바나바와 니게르라하는 시므온과 구레네 사람 루기오와 분봉 왕 헤롯의 젖동생 마나엔과 및 사울이라	Now there were in the church that was at Antioch certain prophets and teachers; as Barnabas, and Simeon that was called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen, which had been brought up with Herod the tetrarch, and Saul.	Now in the church at Antioch there were prophets and teachers: Barnabas, Simeon called Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen (who had been brought up with Herod the tetrarch), and Saul.
ACT	13	2	주를 섬겨 금식할 때에 성령이 가라사대 내가 불러 시키는 일을 위하여 바나바와 사울을 따로 세우라 하시니	As they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them.	While they were worshiping the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, “Set apart for Me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them.”
ACT	13	3	이에 금식하며 기도하고 두 사람에게 안수하여 보내니라	And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away.	And after they had fasted and prayed, they laid their hands on them and sent them off.
ACT	13	4	두 사람이 성령의 보내심을 받아 실루기아에 내려가 거기서 배 타고 구브로에 가서	So they, being sent forth by the Holy Ghost, departed unto Seleucia; and from thence they sailed to Cyprus.	So Barnabas and Saul, sent forth by the Holy Spirit, went down to Seleucia and sailed from there to Cyprus.
ACT	13	5	살라미에 이르러 하나님의 말씀을 유대인의 여러 회당에서 전할새 요한을 수종자로 두었더라	And when they were at Salamis, they preached the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews: and they had also John to their minister.	When they arrived at Salamis, they proclaimed the word of God in the Jewish synagogues. And John was with them as their helper.
ACT	13	6	온 섬 가운데로 지나서 바보에 이르러 바예수라 하는 유대인 거짓 선지자 박수를 만나니	And when they had gone through the isle unto Paphos, they found a certain sorcerer, a false prophet, a Jew, whose name was Bar–jesus:	They traveled through the whole island as far as Paphos, where they found a Jewish sorcerer and false prophet named Bar-Jesus,
ACT	13	7	그가 총독 서기오 바울과 함께 있으니 서기오 바울은 지혜 있는 사람이라 바나바와 사울을 불러 하나님 말씀을 듣고자 하더라	Which was with the deputy of the country, Sergius Paulus, a prudent man; who called for Barnabas and Saul, and desired to hear the word of God.	an attendant of the proconsul, Sergius Paulus. The proconsul, a man of intelligence, summoned Barnabas and Saul because he wanted to hear the word of God.
ACT	13	8	이 박수 엘루마는 (이 이름을 번역하면 박수라) 저희를 대적하여 총독으로 믿지 못하게 힘쓰니	But Elymas the sorcerer (for so is his name by interpretation) withstood them, seeking to turn away the deputy from the faith.	But Elymas the sorcerer (for that is what his name means) opposed them and tried to turn the proconsul from the faith.
ACT	13	9	바울이라고 하는 사울이 성령이 충만하여 그를 주목하고	Then Saul, (who also is called Paul,) filled with the Holy Ghost, set his eyes on him,	Then Saul, who was also called Paul, filled with the Holy Spirit, looked directly at Elymas
ACT	13	10	가로되 모든 궤계와 악행이 가득한 자요 마귀의 자식이요 모든 의의 원수여 주의 바른 길을 굽게 하기를 그치지 아니하겠느냐	And said, O full of all subtilty and all mischief, thou child of the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, wilt thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord?	and said, “O child of the devil and enemy of all righteousness, you are full of all kinds of deceit and trickery! Will you never stop perverting the straight ways of the Lord?
ACT	13	11	보라 이제 주의 손이 네 위에 있으니 네가 소경이 되어 얼마 동안 해를 보지 못하리라 하니 즉시 안개와 어두움이 그를 덮어 인도할 사람을 두루 구하는지라	And now, behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thee, and thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun for a season. And immediately there fell on him a mist and a darkness; and he went about seeking some to lead him by the hand.	Now look, the hand of the Lord is against you, and for a time you will be blind and unable to see the light of the sun.” Immediately mist and darkness came over him, and he groped about, seeking someone to lead him by the hand.
ACT	13	12	이에 총독이 그렇게 된 것을 보고 믿으며 주의 가르치심을 기이히 여기니라	Then the deputy, when he saw what was done, believed, being astonished at the doctrine of the Lord.	When the proconsul saw what had happened, he believed, for he was astonished at the teaching about the Lord.
ACT	13	13	바울과 및 동행하는 사람들이 바보에서 배 타고 밤빌리아에 있는 버가에 이르니 요한은 저희에게서 떠나 예루살렘으로 돌아가고	Now when Paul and his company loosed from Paphos, they came to Perga in Pamphylia: and John departing from them returned to Jerusalem.	After setting sail from Paphos, Paul and his companions came to Perga in Pamphylia, where John left them to return to Jerusalem.
ACT	13	14	저희는 버가로부터 지나 비시디아 안디옥에 이르러 안식일에 회당에 들어가 앉으니라	But when they departed from Perga, they came to Antioch in Pisidia, and went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and sat down.	And from Perga, they traveled inland to Pisidian Antioch, where they entered the synagogue on the Sabbath and sat down.
ACT	13	15	율법과 선지자의 글을 읽은 후에 회당장들이 사람을 보내어 물어 가로되 형제들아 만일 백성을 권할 말이 있거든 말하라 하니	And after the reading of the law and the prophets the rulers of the synagogue sent unto them, saying, Ye men and brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the people, say on.	After the reading from the Law and the Prophets, the synagogue leaders sent word to them: “Brothers, if you have a word of encouragement for the people, please speak.”
ACT	13	16	바울이 일어나 손짓하며 말하되 이스라엘 사람들과 및 하나님을 경외하는 사람들아 들으라	Then Paul stood up, and beckoning with his hand said, Men of Israel, and ye that fear God, give audience.	Paul stood up, motioned with his hand, and began to speak: “Men of Israel and you Gentiles who fear God, listen to me!
ACT	13	17	이 이스라엘 백성의 하나님이 우리 조상들을 택하시고 애굽 땅에서 나그네 된 그 백성을 높여 큰 권능으로 인도하여 내사	The God of this people of Israel chose our fathers, and exalted the people when they dwelt as strangers in the land of Egypt, and with an high arm brought he them out of it.	The God of the people of Israel chose our fathers. He made them into a great people during their stay in Egypt, and with an uplifted arm He led them out of that land.
ACT	13	18	광야에서 약 사십 년간 저희 소행을 참으시고	And about the time of forty years suffered he their manners in the wilderness.	He endured their conduct for about forty years in the wilderness.
ACT	13	19	가나안 땅 일곱 족속을 멸하사 그 땅을 기업으로 주시고 (약 사백오십 년간)	And when he had destroyed seven nations in the land of Chanaan, he divided their land to them by lot.	And having vanquished seven nations in Canaan, He gave their land to His people as an inheritance.
ACT	13	20	그 후에 선지자 사무엘 때까지 사사를 주셨더니	And after that he gave unto them judges about the space of four hundred and fifty years, until Samuel the prophet.	All this took about 450 years. After this, God gave them judges until the time of Samuel the prophet.
ACT	13	21	그 후에 저희가 왕을 구하거늘 하나님이 베냐민 지파 사람 기스의 아들 사울을 사십 년간 주셨다가	And afterward they desired a king: and God gave unto them Saul the son of Cis, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, by the space of forty years.	Then the people asked for a king, and God gave them forty years under Saul son of Kish, from the tribe of Benjamin.
ACT	13	22	폐하시고 다윗을 왕으로 세우시고 증거하여 가라사대 내가 이새의 아들 다윗을 만나니 내 마음에 합한 사람이라 내 뜻을 다 이루게 하리라 하시더니	And when he had removed him, he raised up unto them David to be their king; to whom also he gave testimony, and said, I have found David the son of Jesse, a man after mine own heart, which shall fulfil all my will.	After removing Saul, He raised up David as their king and testified about him: ‘I have found David son of Jesse a man after My own heart; he will carry out My will in its entirety.’
ACT	13	23	하나님이 약속하신 대로 이 사람의 씨에서 이스라엘을 위하여 구주를 세우셨으니 곧 예수라	Of this man’s seed hath God according to his promise raised unto Israel a Saviour, Jesus:	From the descendants of this man, God has brought to Israel the Savior Jesus, as He promised.
ACT	13	24	그 오시는 앞에 요한이 먼저 회개의 침례를 이스라엘 모든 백성에게 전파하니라	When John had first preached before his coming the baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel.	Before the arrival of Jesus, John preached a baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel.
ACT	13	25	요한이 그 달려 갈 길을 마칠 때에 말하되 너희가 나를 누구로 생각하느냐 나는 그리스도가 아니라 내 뒤에 오시는 이가 있으니 나는 그 발의 신 풀기도 감당치 못하리라 하였으니	And as John fulfilled his course, he said, Whom think ye that I am? I am not he. But, behold, there cometh one after me, whose shoes of his feet I am not worthy to loose.	As John was completing his course, he said, ‘Who do you suppose I am? I am not that One. But He is coming after me whose sandals I am not worthy to untie.’
ACT	13	26	형제들, 아브라함의 후예와 너희 중 하나님을 경외하는 사람들아 이 구원의 말씀을 우리에게 보내셨거늘	Men and brethren, children of the stock of Abraham, and whosoever among you feareth God, to you is the word of this salvation sent.	Brothers, children of Abraham, and you Gentiles who fear God, it is to us that this message of salvation has been sent.
ACT	13	27	예루살렘에 사는 자들과 저희 관원들이 예수와 및 안식일마다 외우는 바 선지자들의 말을 알지 못하므로 예수를 정죄하여 선지자들의 말을 응하게 하였도다	For they that dwell at Jerusalem, and their rulers, because they knew him not, nor yet the voices of the prophets which are read every sabbath day, they have fulfilled them in condemning him.	The people of Jerusalem and their rulers did not recognize Jesus, yet in condemning Him they fulfilled the words of the prophets that are read every Sabbath.
ACT	13	28	죽일 죄를 하나도 찾지 못하였으나 빌라도에게 죽여 달라 하였으니	And though they found no cause of death in him, yet desired they Pilate that he should be slain.	And though they found no ground for a death sentence, they asked Pilate to have Him executed.
ACT	13	29	성경에 저를 가리켜 기록한 말씀을 다 응하게 한 것이라 후에 나무에서 내려다가 무덤에 두었으나	And when they had fulfilled all that was written of him, they took him down from the tree, and laid him in a sepulchre.	When they had carried out all that was written about Him, they took Him down from the tree and laid Him in a tomb.
ACT	13	30	하나님이 죽은 자 가운데서 저를 살리신지라	But God raised him from the dead:	But God raised Him from the dead,
ACT	13	31	갈릴리로부터 예루살렘에 함께 올라간 사람들에게 여러 날 보이셨으니 저희가 이제 백성 앞에 그의 증인이라	And he was seen many days of them which came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are his witnesses unto the people.	and for many days He was seen by those who had accompanied Him from Galilee to Jerusalem. They are now His witnesses to our people.
ACT	13	32	우리도 조상들에게 주신 약속을 너희에게 전파하노니	And we declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was made unto the fathers,	And now we proclaim to you the good news: What God promised our fathers
ACT	13	33	곧 하나님이 예수를 일으키사 우리 자녀들에게 이 약속을 이루게 하셨다 함이라 시편 둘째 편에 기록한 바와 같이 너는 내 아들이라 오늘 너를 낳았다 하셨고	God hath fulfilled the same unto us their children, in that he hath raised up Jesus again; as it is also written in the second psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.	He has fulfilled for us, their children, by raising up Jesus. As it is written in the second Psalm: ‘You are My Son; today I have become Your Father.’
ACT	13	34	또 하나님께서 죽은 자 가운데서 저를 일으키사 다시 썩음을 당하지 않게 하실 것을 가르쳐 가라사대 내가 다윗의 거룩하고 미쁜 은사를 너희에게 주리라 하셨으니	And as concerning that he raised him up from the dead, now no more to return to corruption, he said on this wise, I will give you the sure mercies of David.	In fact, God raised Him from the dead, never to see decay. As He has said: ‘I will give you the holy and sure blessings promised to David.’
ACT	13	35	그러므로 또 다른 편에 일렀으되 주의 거룩한 자로 썩음을 당하지 않게 하시리라 하셨느니라	Wherefore he saith also in another psalm, Thou shalt not suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.	So also, He says in another Psalm: ‘You will not let Your Holy One see decay.’
ACT	13	36	다윗은 당시에 하나님의 뜻을 좇아 섬기다가 잠들어 그 조상들과 함께 묻혀 썩음을 당하였으되	For David, after he had served his own generation by the will of God, fell on sleep, and was laid unto his fathers, and saw corruption:	For when David had served God’s purpose in his own generation, he fell asleep. His body was buried with his fathers and saw decay.
ACT	13	37	하나님의 살리신 이는 썩음을 당하지 아니하였나니	But he, whom God raised again, saw no corruption.	But the One whom God raised from the dead did not see decay.
ACT	13	38	그러므로 형제들아 너희가 알 것은 이 사람을 힘입어 죄 사함을 너희에게 전하는 이것이며	Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins:	Therefore let it be known to you, brothers, that through Jesus the forgiveness of sins is proclaimed to you.
ACT	13	39	또 모세의 율법으로 너희가 의롭다 하심을 얻지 못하던 모든 일에도 이 사람을 힘입어 믿는 자마다 의롭다 하심을 얻는 이것이라	And by him all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses.	Through Him everyone who believes is justified from everything you could not be justified from by the law of Moses.
ACT	13	40	그런즉 너희는 선지자들로 말씀하신 것이 너희에게 미칠까 삼가라	Beware therefore, lest that come upon you, which is spoken of in the prophets;	Watch out, then, that what was spoken by the prophets does not happen to you:
ACT	13	41	일렀으되 보라 멸시하는 사람들아 너희는 놀라고 망하라 내가 너희 때를 당하여 한 일을 행할 것이니 사람이 너희에게 이를지라도 도무지 믿지 못할 일이라 하였느니라 하니라	Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish: for I work a work in your days, a work which ye shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it unto you.	‘Look, you scoffers, wonder and perish! For I am doing a work in your days that you would never believe, even if someone told you.’”
ACT	13	42	저희가 나갈새 사람들이 청하되 다음 안식일에도 이 말씀을 하라 하더라	And when the Jews were gone out of the synagogue, the Gentiles besought that these words might be preached to them the next sabbath.	As Paul and Barnabas were leaving the synagogue, the people urged them to continue this message on the next Sabbath.
ACT	13	43	폐회한 후에 유대인과 유대교에 입교한 경건한 사람들이 많이 바울과 바나바를 좇으니 두 사도가 더불어 말하고 항상 하나님의 은혜 가운데 있으라 권하니라	Now when the congregation was broken up, many of the Jews and religious proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas: who, speaking to them, persuaded them to continue in the grace of God.	After the synagogue was dismissed, many of the Jews and devout converts to Judaism followed Paul and Barnabas, who spoke to them and urged them to continue in the grace of God.
ACT	13	44	그 다음 안식일에는 온 성이 거의 다 하나님 말씀을 듣고자 하여 모이니	And the next sabbath day came almost the whole city together to hear the word of God.	On the following Sabbath, nearly the whole city gathered to hear the word of the Lord.
ACT	13	45	유대인들이 그 무리를 보고 시기가 가득하여 바울의 말한 것을 변박하고 비방하거늘	But when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled with envy, and spake against those things which were spoken by Paul, contradicting and blaspheming.	But when the Jews saw the crowds, they were filled with jealousy, and they blasphemously contradicted what Paul was saying.
ACT	13	46	바울과 바나바가 담대히 말하여 가로되 하나님의 말씀을 마땅히 먼저 너희에게 전할 것이로되 너희가 버리고 영생 얻음에 합당치 않은 자로 자처하기로 우리가 이방인에게로 향하노라	Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said, It was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken to you: but seeing ye put it from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles.	Then Paul and Barnabas answered them boldly: “It was necessary to speak the word of God to you first. But since you reject it and do not consider yourselves worthy of eternal life, we now turn to the Gentiles.
ACT	13	47	주께서 이같이 우리를 명하시되 내가 너를 이방의 빛을 삼아 너로 땅 끝까지 구원하게 하리라 하셨느니라 하니	For so hath the Lord commanded us, saying, I have set thee to be a light of the Gentiles, that thou shouldest be for salvation unto the ends of the earth.	For this is what the Lord has commanded us: ‘I have made you a light for the Gentiles, to bring salvation to the ends of the earth.’”
ACT	13	48	이방인들이 듣고 기뻐하여 하나님의 말씀을 찬송하며 영생을 주시기로 작정된 자는 다 믿더라	And when the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord: and as many as were ordained to eternal life believed.	When the Gentiles heard this, they rejoiced and glorified the word of the Lord, and all who were appointed for eternal life believed.
ACT	13	49	주의 말씀이 그 지방에 두루 퍼지니라	And the word of the Lord was published throughout all the region.	And the word of the Lord spread throughout that region.
ACT	13	50	이에 유대인들이 경건한 귀부인들과 그 성내 유력자들을 선동하여 바울과 바나바를 핍박케 하여 그 지경에서 쫓아내니	But the Jews stirred up the devout and honourable women, and the chief men of the city, and raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their coasts.	The Jews, however, incited the religious women of prominence and the leading men of the city. They stirred up persecution against Paul and Barnabas and drove them out of their district.
ACT	13	51	두 사람이 저희를 향하여 발에 티끌을 떨어버리고 이고니온으로 가거늘	But they shook off the dust of their feet against them, and came unto Iconium.	So they shook the dust off their feet in protest against them and went to Iconium.
ACT	13	52	제자들은 기쁨과 성령이 충만하니라	And the disciples were filled with joy, and with the Holy Ghost.	And the disciples were filled with joy and with the Holy Spirit.
ACT	14	1	이에 이고니온에서 두 사도가 함께 유대인의 회당에 들어가 말하니 유대와 헬라의 허다한 무리가 믿더라	And it came to pass in Iconium, that they went both together into the synagogue of the Jews, and so spake, that a great multitude both of the Jews and also of the Greeks believed.	At Iconium, Paul and Barnabas went as usual into the Jewish synagogue, where they spoke so well that a great number of Jews and Greeks believed.
ACT	14	2	그러나 순종치 아니하는 유대인들이 이방인들의 마음을 선동하여 형제들에게 악감을 품게 하거늘	But the unbelieving Jews stirred up the Gentiles, and made their minds evil affected against the brethren.	But the unbelieving Jews stirred up the Gentiles and poisoned their minds against the brothers.
ACT	14	3	두 사도가 오래 있어 주를 힘입어 담대히 말하니 주께서 저희 손으로 표적과 기사를 행하게 하여 주사 자기 은혜의 말씀을 증거하시니	Long time therefore abode they speaking boldly in the Lord, which gave testimony unto the word of his grace, and granted signs and wonders to be done by their hands.	So Paul and Barnabas spent considerable time there, speaking boldly for the Lord, who affirmed the message of His grace by enabling them to perform signs and wonders.
ACT	14	4	그 성내 무리가 나뉘어 유대인을 좇는 자도 있고 두 사도를 좇는 자도 있는지라	But the multitude of the city was divided: and part held with the Jews, and part with the apostles.	The people of the city were divided. Some sided with the Jews, and others with the apostles.
ACT	14	5	이방인과 유대인과 그 관원들이 두 사도를 능욕하며 돌로 치려고 달려드니	And when there was an assault made both of the Gentiles, and also of the Jews with their rulers, to use them despitefully, and to stone them,	But when the Gentiles and Jews, together with their rulers, set out to mistreat and stone them,
ACT	14	6	저희가 알고 도망하여 루가오니아의 두 성 루스드라와 더베와 및 그 근방으로 가서	They were ware of it, and fled unto Lystra and Derbe, cities of Lycaonia, and unto the region that lieth round about:	they found out about it and fled to the Lycaonian cities of Lystra and Derbe and to the surrounding region,
ACT	14	7	거기서 복음을 전하니라	And there they preached the gospel.	where they continued to preach the gospel.
ACT	14	8	루스드라에 발을 쓰지 못하는 한 사람이 있어 앉았는데 나면서 앉은뱅이 되어 걸어본 적이 없는 자라	And there sat a certain man at Lystra, impotent in his feet, being a cripple from his mother’s womb, who never had walked:	In Lystra there sat a man crippled in his feet, who was lame from birth and had never walked.
ACT	14	9	바울의 말하는 것을 듣거늘 바울이 주목하여 구원 받을 만한 믿음이 그에게 있는 것을 보고	The same heard Paul speak: who stedfastly beholding him, and perceiving that he had faith to be healed,	This man was listening to the words of Paul, who looked intently at him and saw that he had faith to be healed.
ACT	14	10	큰 소리로 가로되 네 발로 바로 일어서라 하니 그 사람이 뛰어 걷는지라	Said with a loud voice, Stand upright on thy feet. And he leaped and walked.	In a loud voice Paul called out, “Stand up on your feet!” And the man jumped up and began to walk.
ACT	14	11	무리가 바울의 행한 일을 보고 루가오니아 방언으로 소리질러 가로되 신들이 사람의 형상으로 우리 가운데 내려오셨다 하여	And when the people saw what Paul had done, they lifted up their voices, saying in the speech of Lycaonia, The gods are come down to us in the likeness of men.	When the crowds saw what Paul had done, they lifted up their voices in the Lycaonian language: “The gods have come down to us in human form!”
ACT	14	12	바나바는 쓰스라 하고 바울은 그 중에 말하는 자이므로 허메라 하더라	And they called Barnabas, Jupiter; and Paul, Mercurius, because he was the chief speaker.	Barnabas they called Zeus, and Paul they called Hermes, because he was the chief speaker.
ACT	14	13	성 밖 쓰스 신당의 제사장이 소와 화관들을 가지고 대문 앞에 와서 무리와 함께 제사하고자 하니	Then the priest of Jupiter, which was before their city, brought oxen and garlands unto the gates, and would have done sacrifice with the people.	The priest of Zeus, whose temple was just outside the city, brought bulls and wreaths to the city gates, hoping to offer a sacrifice along with the crowds.
ACT	14	14	두 사도 바나바와 바울이 듣고 옷을 찢고 무리 가운데 뛰어 들어가서 소리질러	Which when the apostles, Barnabas and Paul, heard of, they rent their clothes, and ran in among the people, crying out,	But when the apostles Barnabas and Paul found out about this, they tore their clothes and rushed into the crowd, shouting,
ACT	14	15	가로되 여러분이여 어찌하여 이러한 일을 하느냐 우리도 너희와 같은 성정을 가진 사람이라 너희에게 복음을 전하는 것은 이 헛된 일을 버리고 천지와 바다와 그 가운데 만유를 지으시고 살아계신 하나님께로 돌아오라 함이라	And saying, Sirs, why do ye these things? We also are men of like passions with you, and preach unto you that ye should turn from these vanities unto the living God, which made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and all things that are therein:	“Men, why are you doing this? We too are only men, human like you. We are bringing you good news that you should turn from these worthless things to the living God, who made heaven and earth and sea and everything in them.
ACT	14	16	하나님이 지나간 세대에는 모든 족속으로 자기의 길들을 다니게 묵인하셨으나	Who in times past suffered all nations to walk in their own ways.	In past generations, He let all nations go their own way.
ACT	14	17	그러나 자기를 증거하지 아니하신 것이 아니니 곧 너희에게 하늘로서 비를 내리시며 결실기를 주시는 선한 일을 하사 음식과 기쁨으로 너희 마음에 만족케 하셨느니라 하고	Nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness.	Yet He has not left Himself without testimony to His goodness: He gives you rain from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling your hearts with food and gladness.”
ACT	14	18	이렇게 말하여 겨우 무리를 말려 자기들에게 제사를 못하게 하니라	And with these sayings scarce restrained they the people, that they had not done sacrifice unto them.	Even with these words, Paul and Barnabas could hardly stop the crowds from sacrificing to them.
ACT	14	19	유대인들이 안디옥과 이고니온에서 와서 무리를 초인하여 돌로 바울을 쳐서 죽은 줄로 알고 성 밖에 끌어 내치니라	And there came thither certain Jews from Antioch and Iconium, who persuaded the people, and, having stoned Paul, drew him out of the city, supposing he had been dead.	Then some Jews arrived from Antioch and Iconium and won over the crowds. They stoned Paul and dragged him outside the city, presuming he was dead.
ACT	14	20	제자들이 둘러 섰을 때에 바울이 일어나 성에 들어갔다가 이튿날 바나바와 함께 더베로 가서	Howbeit, as the disciples stood round about him, he rose up, and came into the city: and the next day he departed with Barnabas to Derbe.	But after the disciples had gathered around him, he got up and went back into the city. And the next day he left with Barnabas for Derbe.
ACT	14	21	복음을 그 성에서 전하여 많은 사람을 제자로 삼고 루스드라와 이고니온과 안디옥으로 돌아가서	And when they had preached the gospel to that city, and had taught many, they returned again to Lystra, and to Iconium, and Antioch,	They preached the gospel to that city and made many disciples. Then they returned to Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch,
ACT	14	22	제자들의 마음을 굳게 하여 이 믿음에 거하라 권하고 또 우리가 하나님 나라에 들어가려면 많은 환난을 겪어야 할 것이라 하고	Confirming the souls of the disciples, and exhorting them to continue in the faith, and that we must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God.	strengthening the souls of the disciples and encouraging them to continue in the faith. “We must endure many hardships to enter the kingdom of God,” they said.
ACT	14	23	각 교회에서 장로들을 택하여 금식 기도하며 저희를 그 믿은 바 주께 부탁하고	And when they had ordained them elders in every church, and had prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord, on whom they believed.	Paul and Barnabas appointed elders for them in each church, praying and fasting as they entrusted them to the Lord, in whom they had believed.
ACT	14	24	비시디아 가운데로 지나가서 밤빌리아에 이르러	And after they had passed throughout Pisidia, they came to Pamphylia.	After passing through Pisidia, they came to Pamphylia.
ACT	14	25	도를 버가에서 전하고 앗달리아로 내려가서	And when they had preached the word in Perga, they went down into Attalia:	And when they had spoken the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia.
ACT	14	26	거기서 배 타고 안디옥에 이르니 이곳은 두 사도의 이룬 그 일을 위하여 전에 하나님의 은혜에 부탁하던 곳이라	And thence sailed to Antioch, from whence they had been recommended to the grace of God for the work which they fulfilled.	From Attalia they sailed to Antioch, where they had been commended to the grace of God for the work they had just completed.
ACT	14	27	이르러 교회를 모아 하나님이 함께 행하신 모든 일과 이방인들에게 믿음의 문을 여신 것을 고하고	And when they were come, and had gathered the church together, they rehearsed all that God had done with them, and how he had opened the door of faith unto the Gentiles.	When they arrived, they gathered the church together and reported all that God had done through them, and how He had opened the door of faith to the Gentiles.
ACT	14	28	제자들과 함께 오래 있으니라	And there they abode long time with the disciples.	And they spent a long time there with the disciples.
ACT	15	1	어떤 사람들이 유대로부터 내려와서 형제들을 가르치되 너희가 모세의 법대로 할례를 받지 아니하면 능히 구원을 얻지 못하리라 하니	And certain men which came down from Judea taught the brethren, and said, Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved.	Then some men came down from Judea and were teaching the brothers, “Unless you are circumcised according to the custom of Moses, you cannot be saved.”
ACT	15	2	바울과 바나바와 저희 사이에 적지 아니한 다툼과 변론이 일어난지라 형제들이 이 문제에 대하여 바울과 바나바와 및 그 중에 몇 사람을 예루살렘에 있는 사도와 장로들에게 보내기로 작정하니	When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension and disputation with them, they determined that Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them, should go up to Jerusalem unto the apostles and elders about this question.	And after engaging these men in sharp debate, Paul and Barnabas were appointed, along with some other believers, to go up to Jerusalem to see the apostles and elders about this question.
ACT	15	3	저희가 교회의 전송을 받고 베니게와 사마리아로 다녀가며 이방인들의 주께 돌아온 일을 말하여 형제들을 다 크게 기쁘게 하더라	And being brought on their way by the church, they passed through Phenice and Samaria, declaring the conversion of the Gentiles: and they caused great joy unto all the brethren.	Sent on their way by the church, they passed through Phoenicia and Samaria, recounting the conversion of the Gentiles and bringing great joy to all the brothers.
ACT	15	4	예루살렘에 이르러 교회와 사도와 장로들에게 영접을 받고 하나님이 자기들과 함께 계셔 행하신 모든 일을 말하매	And when they were come to Jerusalem, they were received of the church, and of the apostles and elders, and they declared all things that God had done with them.	On their arrival in Jerusalem, they were welcomed by the church and apostles and elders, to whom they reported all that God had done through them.
ACT	15	5	바리새파 중에 믿는 어떤 사람들이 일어나 말하되 이방인에게 할례주고 모세의 율법을 지키라 명하는 것이 마땅하다 하니라	But there rose up certain of the sect of the Pharisees which believed, saying, That it was needful to circumcise them, and to command them to keep the law of Moses.	But some believers from the party of the Pharisees stood up and declared, “The Gentiles must be circumcised and required to obey the law of Moses.”
ACT	15	6	사도와 장로들이 이 일을 의논하러 모여	And the apostles and elders came together for to consider of this matter.	So the apostles and elders met to look into this matter.
ACT	15	7	많은 변론이 있은 후에 베드로가 일어나 말하되 형제들아 너희도 알거니와 하나님이 이방인들로 내 입에서 복음의 말씀을 들어 믿게 하시려고 오래 전부터 너희 가운데서 나를 택하시고	And when there had been much disputing, Peter rose up, and said unto them, Men and brethren, ye know how that a good while ago God made choice among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word of the gospel, and believe.	After much discussion, Peter got up and said to them, “Brothers, you know that in the early days God made a choice among you that the Gentiles would hear from my lips the message of the gospel and believe.
ACT	15	8	또 마음을 아시는 하나님이 우리에게와 같이 저희에게도 성령을 주어 증거하시고	And God, which knoweth the hearts, bare them witness, giving them the Holy Ghost, even as he did unto us;	And God, who knows the heart, showed His approval by giving the Holy Spirit to them, just as He did to us.
ACT	15	9	믿음으로 저희 마음을 깨끗이 하사 저희나 우리나 분간치 아니하셨느니라	And put no difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith.	He made no distinction between us and them, for He cleansed their hearts by faith.
ACT	15	10	그런데 지금 너희가 어찌하여 하나님을 시험하여 우리 조상과 우리도 능히 메지 못하던 멍에를 제자들의 목에 두려느냐	Now therefore why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear?	Now then, why do you test God by placing on the necks of the disciples a yoke that neither we nor our fathers have been able to bear?
ACT	15	11	우리가 저희와 동일하게 주 예수의 은혜로 구원 받는 줄을 믿노라 하니라	But we believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved, even as they.	On the contrary, we believe it is through the grace of the Lord Jesus that we are saved, just as they are.”
ACT	15	12	온 무리가 가만히 있어 바나바와 바울이 하나님이 자기들로 말미암아 이방인 중에서 행하신 표적과 기사 고하는 것을 듣더니	Then all the multitude kept silence, and gave audience to Barnabas and Paul, declaring what miracles and wonders God had wrought among the Gentiles by them.	The whole assembly fell silent as they listened to Barnabas and Paul describing the signs and wonders God had done among the Gentiles through them.
ACT	15	13	말을 마치매 야고보가 대답하여 가로되 형제들아 내 말을 들으라	And after they had held their peace, James answered, saying, Men and brethren, hearken unto me:	When they had finished speaking, James declared, “Brothers, listen to me!
ACT	15	14	하나님이 처음으로 이방인 중에서 자기 이름을 위할 백성을 취하시려고 저희를 권고하신 것을 시므온이 고하였으니	Simeon hath declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for his name.	Simon has told us how God first visited the Gentiles to take from them a people to be His own.
ACT	15	15	선지자들의 말씀이 이와 합하도다 기록된 바	And to this agree the words of the prophets; as it is written,	The words of the prophets agree with this, as it is written:
ACT	15	16	이 후에 내가 돌아와서 다윗의 무너진 장막을 다시 지으며 또 그 퇴락한 것을 다시 지어 일으키리니	After this I will return, and will build again the tabernacle of David, which is fallen down; and I will build again the ruins thereof, and I will set it up:	‘After this I will return and rebuild the fallen tent of David. Its ruins I will rebuild, and I will restore it,
ACT	15	17	이는 그 남은 사람들과 내 이름으로 일컬음을 받는 모든 이방인들로 주를 찾게 하려 함이라 하셨으니	That the residue of men might seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles, upon whom my name is called, saith the Lord, who doeth all these things.	so that the remnant of men may seek the Lord, and all the Gentiles who are called by My name, says the Lord who does these things
ACT	15	18	즉 예로부터 이것을 알게 하시는 주의 말씀이라 함과 같으니라	Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world.	that have been known for ages.’
ACT	15	19	그러므로 내 의견에는 이방인 중에서 하나님께로 돌아오는 자들을 괴롭게 말고	Wherefore my sentence is, that we trouble not them, which from among the Gentiles are turned to God:	It is my judgment, therefore, that we should not cause trouble for the Gentiles who are turning to God.
ACT	15	20	다만 우상의 더러운 것과 음행과 목매어 죽인 것과 피를 멀리하라고 편지하는 것이 가하니	But that we write unto them, that they abstain from pollutions of idols, and from fornication, and from things strangled, and from blood.	Instead, we should write and tell them to abstain from food polluted by idols, from sexual immorality, from the meat of strangled animals, and from blood.
ACT	15	21	이는 예로부터 각 성에서 모세를 전하는 자가 있어 안식일마다 회당에서 그 글을 읽음이니라 하더라	For Moses of old time hath in every city them that preach him, being read in the synagogues every sabbath day.	For Moses has been proclaimed in every city from ancient times and is read in the synagogues on every Sabbath.”
ACT	15	22	이에 사도와 장로와 온 교회가 그 중에서 사람을 택하여 바울과 바나바와 함께 안디옥으로 보내기를 가결하니 곧 형제 중에 인도자인 바사바라 하는 유다와 실라더라	Then pleased it the apostles and elders, with the whole church, to send chosen men of their own company to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas; namely, Judas surnamed Barsabas, and Silas, chief men among the brethren:	Then the apostles and elders, with the whole church, decided to select men from among them to send to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas. They chose Judas called Barsabbas and Silas, two leaders among the brothers,
ACT	15	23	그 편에 편지를 부쳐 이르되 사도와 장로된 형제들은 안디옥과 수리아와 길리기아에 있는 이방인 형제들에게 문안하노라	And they wrote letters by them after this manner; The apostles and elders and brethren send greeting unto the brethren which are of the Gentiles in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia:	and sent them with this letter: The apostles and the elders, your brothers, To the brothers among the Gentiles in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia: Greetings.
ACT	15	24	들은즉 우리 가운데서 어떤 사람들이 우리의 시킨 것도 없이 나가서 말로 너희를 괴롭게 하고 마음을 혹하게 한다 하기로	Forasmuch as we have heard, that certain which went out from us have troubled you with words, subverting your souls, saying, Ye must be circumcised, and keep the law: to whom we gave no such commandment:	It has come to our attention that some went out from us without our authorization and unsettled you, troubling your minds by what they said.
ACT	15	25	사람을 택하여 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 이름을 위하여 생명을 아끼지 아니하는 자인 우리의 사랑하는 바나바와 바울과 함께 너희에게 보내기를 일치 가결하였노라	It seemed good unto us, being assembled with one accord, to send chosen men unto you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul,	So we all agreed to choose men to send to you along with our beloved Barnabas and Paul,
ACT	15	26		Men that have hazarded their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.	men who have risked their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
ACT	15	27	그리하여 유다와 실라를 보내니 저희도 이 일을 말로 전하리라	We have sent therefore Judas and Silas, who shall also tell you the same things by mouth.	Therefore we are sending Judas and Silas to tell you in person the same things we are writing.
ACT	15	28	성령과 우리는 이 요긴한 것들 외에 아무 짐도 너희에게 지우지 아니하는 것이 가한 줄 알았노니	For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary things;	It seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us not to burden you with anything beyond these essential requirements:
ACT	15	29	우상의 제물과 피와 목매어 죽인 것과 음행을 멀리 할지니라 이에 스스로 삼가면 잘되리라 평안함을 원하노라 하였더라	That ye abstain from meats offered to idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and from fornication: from which if ye keep yourselves, ye shall do well. Fare ye well.	You must abstain from food sacrificed to idols, from blood, from the meat of strangled animals, and from sexual immorality. You will do well to avoid these things. Farewell.
ACT	15	30	저희가 작별하고 안디옥에 내려가 무리를 모은 후에 편지를 전하니	So when they were dismissed, they came to Antioch: and when they had gathered the multitude together, they delivered the epistle:	So the men were sent off and went down to Antioch, where they assembled the congregation and delivered the letter.
ACT	15	31	읽고 그 위로한 말을 기뻐하더라	Which when they had read, they rejoiced for the consolation.	When the people read it, they rejoiced at its encouraging message.
ACT	15	32	유다와 실라도 선지자라 여러 말로 형제를 권면하여 굳게 하고	And Judas and Silas, being prophets also themselves, exhorted the brethren with many words, and confirmed them.	Judas and Silas, who themselves were prophets, said much to encourage and strengthen the brothers.
ACT	15	33	얼마 있다가 평안히 가라는 전송을 형제들에게 받고 자기를 보내던 사람들에게로 돌아가되	And after they had tarried there a space, they were let go in peace from the brethren unto the apostles.	After spending some time there, they were sent off by the brothers in peace to return to those who had sent them.
ACT	15	34		Notwithstanding it pleased Silas to abide there still.	
ACT	15	35	바울과 바나바는 안디옥에서 유하여 다수한 다른 사람들과 함께 주의 말씀을 가르치며 전파하니라	Paul also and Barnabas continued in Antioch, teaching and preaching the word of the Lord, with many others also.	But Paul and Barnabas remained at Antioch, along with many others, teaching and preaching the word of the Lord.
ACT	15	36	수일 후에 바울이 바나바더러 말하되 우리가 주의 말씀을 전한 각 성으로 다시 가서 형제들이 어떠한가 방문하자 하니	And some days after Paul said unto Barnabas, Let us go again and visit our brethren in every city where we have preached the word of the Lord, and see how they do.	Some time later Paul said to Barnabas, “Let us go back and visit the brothers in every town where we proclaimed the word of the Lord, to see how they are doing.”
ACT	15	37	바나바는 마가라 하는 요한도 데리고 가고자 하나	And Barnabas determined to take with them John, whose surname was Mark.	Barnabas wanted to take John, also called Mark.
ACT	15	38	바울은 밤빌리아에서 자기들을 떠나 한가지로 일하러 가지 아니한 자를 데리고 가는 것이 옳지 않다 하여	But Paul thought not good to take him with them, who departed from them from Pamphylia, and went not with them to the work.	But Paul thought it best not to take him, because he had deserted them in Pamphylia and had not accompanied them in the work.
ACT	15	39	서로 심히 다투어 피차 갈라서니 바나바는 마가를 데리고 배 타고 구브로로 가고	And the contention was so sharp between them, that they departed asunder one from the other: and so Barnabas took Mark, and sailed unto Cyprus;	Their disagreement was so sharp that they parted company. Barnabas took Mark and sailed for Cyprus,
ACT	15	40	바울은 실라를 택한 후에 형제들에게 주의 은혜에 부탁함을 받고 떠나	And Paul chose Silas, and departed, being recommended by the brethren unto the grace of God.	but Paul chose Silas and left, commended by the brothers to the grace of the Lord.
ACT	15	41	수리아와 길리기아로 다녀가며 교회들을 굳게 하니라	And he went through Syria and Cilicia, confirming the churches.	And he traveled through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening the churches.
ACT	16	1	바울이 더베와 루스드라에도 이르매 거기 디모데라 하는 제자가 있으니 그 모친은 믿는 유대 여자요 부친은 헬라인이라	Then came he to Derbe and Lystra: and, behold, a certain disciple was there, named Timotheus, the son of a certain woman, which was a Jewess, and believed; but his father was a Greek:	Paul came to Derbe and then to Lystra, where he found a disciple named Timothy, the son of a believing Jewish woman and a Greek father.
ACT	16	2	디모데는 루스드라와 이고니온에 있는 형제들에게 칭찬 받는 자니	Which was well reported of by the brethren that were at Lystra and Iconium.	The brothers in Lystra and Iconium spoke well of him.
ACT	16	3	바울이 그를 데리고 떠나고자 할 새 그 지경에 있는 유대인을 인하여 그를 데려다가 할례를 행하니 이는 그 사람들이 그의 부친은 헬라인인 줄 다 앎이러라	Him would Paul have to go forth with him; and took and circumcised him because of the Jews which were in those quarters: for they knew all that his father was a Greek.	Paul wanted Timothy to accompany him, so he took him and circumcised him on account of the Jews in that area, for they all knew that his father was a Greek.
ACT	16	4	여러 성으로 다녀갈 때에 예루살렘에 있는 사도와 장로들의 작정한 규례를 저희에게 주어 지키게 하니	And as they went through the cities, they delivered them the decrees for to keep, that were ordained of the apostles and elders which were at Jerusalem.	As they went from town to town, they delivered the decisions handed down by the apostles and elders in Jerusalem for the people to obey.
ACT	16	5	이에 여러 교회가 믿음이 더 굳어지고 수가 날마다 더하니라	And so were the churches established in the faith, and increased in number daily.	So the churches were strengthened in the faith and grew daily in numbers.
ACT	16	6	성령이 아시아에서 말씀을 전하지 못하게 하시거늘 브루기아와 갈라디아 땅으로 다녀가	Now when they had gone throughout Phrygia and the region of Galatia, and were forbidden of the Holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia,	After the Holy Spirit had prevented them from speaking the word in the province of Asia, they traveled through the region of Phrygia and Galatia.
ACT	16	7	무시아 앞에 이르러 비두니아로 가고자 애쓰되 예수의 영이 허락지 아니하시는지라	After they were come to Mysia, they assayed to go into Bithynia: but the Spirit suffered them not.	And when they came to the border of Mysia, they tried to enter Bithynia, but the Spirit of Jesus would not permit them.
ACT	16	8	무시아를 지나 드로아로 내려 갔는데	And they passing by Mysia came down to Troas.	So they passed by Mysia and went down to Troas.
ACT	16	9	밤에 환상이 바울에게 보이니 마게도냐 사람 하나가 서서 그에게 청하여 가로되 마게도냐로 건너와서 우리를 도우라 하거늘	And a vision appeared to Paul in the night; There stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, Come over into Macedonia, and help us.	During the night, Paul had a vision of a man of Macedonia standing and pleading with him, “Come over to Macedonia and help us.”
ACT	16	10	바울이 이 환상을 본 후에 우리가 곧 마게도냐로 떠나기를 힘쓰니 이는 하나님이 저 사람들에게 복음을 전하라고 우리를 부르신 줄로 인정함이러라	And after he had seen the vision, immediately we endeavoured to go into Macedonia, assuredly gathering that the Lord had called us for to preach the gospel unto them.	As soon as Paul had seen the vision, we got ready to leave for Macedonia, concluding that God had called us to preach the gospel to them.
ACT	16	11	드로아에서 배로 떠나 사모드라게로 직행하여 이튿날 네압볼리로 가고	Therefore loosing from Troas, we came with a straight course to Samothracia, and the next day to Neapolis;	We sailed from Troas straight to Samothrace, and the following day on to Neapolis.
ACT	16	12	거기서 빌립보에 이르니 이는 마게도냐 지경 첫 성이요 또 로마의 식민지라 이 성에서 수일을 유하다가	And from thence to Philippi, which is the chief city of that part of Macedonia, and a colony: and we were in that city abiding certain days.	From there we went to the Roman colony of Philippi, the leading city of that district of Macedonia. And we stayed there several days.
ACT	16	13	안식일에 우리가 기도처가 있는가 하여 문 밖 강가에 나가 거기 앉아서 모인 여자들에게 말하더니	And on the sabbath we went out of the city by a river side, where prayer was wont to be made; and we sat down, and spake unto the women which resorted thither.	On the Sabbath we went outside the city gate along the river, where it was customary to find a place of prayer. After sitting down, we spoke to the women who had gathered there.
ACT	16	14	두아디라 성의 자주 장사로서 하나님을 공경하는 루디아라 하는 한 여자가 들었는데 주께서 그 마음을 열어 바울의 말을 청종하게 하신지라	And a certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira, which worshipped God, heard us: whose heart the Lord opened, that she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul.	Among those listening was a woman named Lydia, a dealer in purple cloth from the city of Thyatira, who was a worshiper of God. The Lord opened her heart to respond to Paul’s message.
ACT	16	15	저와 그 집이 다 침례를 받고 우리에게 청하여 가로되 만일 나를 주 믿는 자로 알거든 내 집에 들어와 유하라 하고 강권하여 있게 하니라	And when she was baptized, and her household, she besought us, saying, If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and abide there. And she constrained us.	And when she and her household had been baptized, she urged us, “If you consider me a believer in the Lord, come and stay at my house.” And she persuaded us.
ACT	16	16	우리가 기도하는 곳에 가다가 점하는 귀신 들린 여종 하나를 만나니 점으로 그 주인들을 크게 이하게 하는 자라	And it came to pass, as we went to prayer, a certain damsel possessed with a spirit of divination met us, which brought her masters much gain by soothsaying:	One day as we were going to the place of prayer, we were met by a slave girl with a spirit of divination, who earned a large income for her masters by fortune-telling.
ACT	16	17	바울과 우리를 좇아와서 소리질러 가로되 이 사람들은 지극히 높은 하나님의 종으로 구원의 길을 너희에게 전하는 자라 하며	The same followed Paul and us, and cried, saying, These men are the servants of the most high God, which shew unto us the way of salvation.	This girl followed Paul and the rest of us, shouting, “These men are servants of the Most High God, who are proclaiming to you the way of salvation!”
ACT	16	18	이같이 여러 날을 하는지라 바울이 심히 괴로워하여 돌이켜 그 귀신에게 이르되 예수 그리스도의 이름으로 내가 네게 명하노니 그에게서 나오라 하니 귀신이 즉시 나오니라	And this did she many days. But Paul, being grieved, turned and said to the spirit, I command thee in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her. And he came out the same hour.	She continued this for many days. Eventually Paul grew so aggravated that he turned and said to the spirit, “In the name of Jesus Christ I command you to come out of her!” And the spirit left her at that very moment.
ACT	16	19	종의 주인들은 자기 이익의 소망이 끊어진 것을 보고 바울과 실라를 잡아가지고 저자로 관원들에게 끌어 갔다가	And when her masters saw that the hope of their gains was gone, they caught Paul and Silas, and drew them into the marketplace unto the rulers,	When the girl’s owners saw that their hope of making money was gone, they seized Paul and Silas and dragged them before the authorities in the marketplace.
ACT	16	20	상관들 앞에 데리고 가서 말하되 이 사람들이 유대인인데 우리 성을 심히 요란케 하여	And brought them to the magistrates, saying, These men, being Jews, do exceedingly trouble our city,	They brought them to the magistrates and said, “These men are Jews and are throwing our city into turmoil
ACT	16	21	로마 사람인 우리가 받지도 못하고 행치도 못할 풍속을 전한다 하거늘	And teach customs, which are not lawful for us to receive, neither to observe, being Romans.	by promoting customs that are unlawful for us Romans to adopt or practice.”
ACT	16	22	무리가 일제히 일어나 송사하니 상관들이 옷을 찢어 벗기고 매로 치라 하여	And the multitude rose up together against them: and the magistrates rent off their clothes, and commanded to beat them.	The crowd joined in the attack against Paul and Silas, and the magistrates ordered that they be stripped and beaten with rods.
ACT	16	23	많이 친 후에 옥에 가두고 간수에게 분부하여 든든히 지키라 하니	And when they had laid many stripes upon them, they cast them into prison, charging the jailor to keep them safely:	And after striking them with many blows, they threw them into prison and ordered the jailer to guard them securely.
ACT	16	24	그가 이러한 영을 받아 저희를 깊은 옥에 가두고 그 발을 착고에 든든히 채웠더니	Who, having received such a charge, thrust them into the inner prison, and made their feet fast in the stocks.	On receiving this order, he placed them in the inner cell and fastened their feet in the stocks.
ACT	16	25	밤중쯤 되어 바울과 실라가 기도하고 하나님을 찬미하매 죄수들이 듣더라	And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and sang praises unto God: and the prisoners heard them.	About midnight Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God, and the other prisoners were listening to them.
ACT	16	26	이에 홀연히 큰 지진이 나서 옥터가 움직이고 문이 곧 다 열리며 모든 사람의 매인 것이 다 벗어진지라	And suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison were shaken: and immediately all the doors were opened, and every one’s bands were loosed.	Suddenly a strong earthquake shook the foundations of the prison. At once all the doors flew open and everyone’s chains came loose.
ACT	16	27	간수가 자다가 깨어 옥문들이 열린 것을 보고 죄수들이 도망한 줄 생각하고 검을 빼어 자결하려 하거늘	And the keeper of the prison awaking out of his sleep, and seeing the prison doors open, he drew out his sword, and would have killed himself, supposing that the prisoners had been fled.	When the jailer woke up and saw the prison doors open, he drew his sword and was about to kill himself, presuming that the prisoners had escaped.
ACT	16	28	바울이 크게 소리질러 가로되 네 몸을 상하지 말라 우리가 다 여기 있노라 하니	But Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, Do thyself no harm: for we are all here.	But Paul called out in a loud voice, “Do not harm yourself! We are all here!”
ACT	16	29	간수가 등불을 달라고 하며 뛰어 들어가 무서워 떨며 바울과 실라 앞에 부복하고	Then he called for a light, and sprang in, and came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas,	Calling for lights, the jailer rushed in and fell trembling before Paul and Silas.
ACT	16	30	저희를 데리고 나가 가로되 선생들아 내가 어떻게 하여야 구원을 얻으리이까 하거늘	And brought them out, and said, Sirs, what must I do to be saved?	Then he brought them out and asked, “Sirs, what must I do to be saved?”
ACT	16	31	가로되 주 예수를 믿으라 그리하면 너와 네 집이 구원을 얻으리라 하고	And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house.	They replied, “Believe in the Lord Jesus and you will be saved, you and your household.”
ACT	16	32	주의 말씀을 그 사람과 그 집에 있는 모든 사람에게 전하더라	And they spake unto him the word of the Lord, and to all that were in his house.	Then Paul and Silas spoke the word of the Lord to him and to everyone in his house.
ACT	16	33	밤 그 시에 간수가 저희를 데려다가 그 맞은 자리를 씻기고 자기와 그 권속이 다 침례를 받은 후	And he took them the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes; and was baptized, he and all his, straightway.	At that hour of the night, the jailer took them and washed their wounds. And without delay, he and all his household were baptized.
ACT	16	34	저희를 데리고 자기 집에 올라가서 음식을 차려 주고 저와 온 집이 하나님을 믿었으므로 크게 기뻐하니라	And when he had brought them into his house, he set meat before them, and rejoiced, believing in God with all his house.	Then he brought them into his home and set a meal before them. So he and all his household rejoiced that they had come to believe in God.
ACT	16	35	날이 새매 상관들이 아전을 보내어 이 사람들을 놓으라 하니	And when it was day, the magistrates sent the serjeants, saying, Let those men go.	When daylight came, the magistrates sent their officers with the order: “Release those men.”
ACT	16	36	간수가 이 말대로 바울에게 고하되 상관들이 사람을 보내어 너희를 놓으라 하였으니 이제는 나가서 평안히 가라 하거늘	And the keeper of the prison told this saying to Paul, The magistrates have sent to let you go: now therefore depart, and go in peace.	The jailer informed Paul: “The magistrates have sent orders to release you. Now you may go on your way in peace.”
ACT	16	37	바울이 이르되 로마 사람인 우리를 죄도 정치 아니하고 공중 앞에서 때리고 옥에 가두었다가 이제는 가만히 우리를 내어 보내고자 하느냐 아니라 저희가 친히 와서 우리를 데리고 나가야 하리라 한대	But Paul said unto them, They have beaten us openly uncondemned, being Romans, and have cast us into prison; and now do they thrust us out privily? nay verily; but let them come themselves and fetch us out.	But Paul said to the officers, “They beat us publicly without a trial and threw us into prison, even though we are Roman citizens. And now do they want to send us away secretly? Absolutely not! Let them come themselves and escort us out!”
ACT	16	38	아전들이 이 말로 상관들에게 고하니 저희가 로마 사람이라 하는 말을 듣고 두려워하여	And the serjeants told these words unto the magistrates: and they feared, when they heard that they were Romans.	So the officers relayed this message to the magistrates, who were alarmed to hear that Paul and Silas were Roman citizens.
ACT	16	39	와서 권하여 데리고 나가 성에서 떠나기를 청하니	And they came and besought them, and brought them out, and desired them to depart out of the city.	They came to appease them and led them out, requesting that they leave the city.
ACT	16	40	두 사람이 옥에서 나가 루디아의 집에 들어가서 형제들을 만나 보고 위로하고 가니라	And they went out of the prison, and entered into the house of Lydia: and when they had seen the brethren, they comforted them, and departed.	After Paul and Silas came out of the prison, they went to Lydia’s house to see the brothers and encourage them. Then they left the city.
ACT	17	1	저희가 암비볼리와 아볼로니아로 다녀가 데살로니가에 이르니 거기 유대인의 회당이 있는지라	Now when they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where was a synagogue of the Jews:	When they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where there was a Jewish synagogue.
ACT	17	2	바울이 자기의 규례대로 저희에게로 들어가서 세 안식일에 성경을 가지고 강론하며	And Paul, as his manner was, went in unto them, and three sabbath days reasoned with them out of the scriptures,	As was his custom, Paul went into the synagogue, and on three Sabbaths he reasoned with them from the Scriptures,
ACT	17	3	뜻을 풀어 그리스도가 해를 받고 죽은 자 가운데서 다시 살아야 할 것을 증명하고 이르되 내가 너희에게 전하는 이 예수가 곧 그리스도라 하니	Opening and alleging, that Christ must needs have suffered, and risen again from the dead; and that this Jesus, whom I preach unto you, is Christ.	explaining and proving that the Christ had to suffer and rise from the dead. “This Jesus I am proclaiming to you is the Christ,” he declared.
ACT	17	4	그 중에 어떤 사람 곧 경건한 헬라인의 큰 무리와 적지 않은 귀부인도 권함을 받고 바울과 실라를 좇으나	And some of them believed, and consorted with Paul and Silas; and of the devout Greeks a great multitude, and of the chief women not a few.	Some of the Jews were persuaded and joined Paul and Silas, along with a large number of God-fearing Greeks and quite a few leading women.
ACT	17	5	그러나 유대인들은 시기하여 저자의 어떤 괴악한 사람들을 데리고 떼를 지어 성을 소동케 하여 야손의 집에 달려들어 저희를 백성에게 끌어내려고 찾았으나	But the Jews which believed not, moved with envy, took unto them certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the city on an uproar, and assaulted the house of Jason, and sought to bring them out to the people.	The Jews, however, became jealous. So they brought in some troublemakers from the marketplace, formed a mob, and sent the city into an uproar. They raided Jason’s house in search of Paul and Silas, hoping to bring them out to the people.
ACT	17	6	발견치 못하매 야손과 및 형제를 끌고 읍장들 앞에 가서 소리질러 가로되 천하를 어지럽게 하던 이 사람들이 여기도 이르매	And when they found them not, they drew Jason and certain brethren unto the rulers of the city, crying, These that have turned the world upside down are come hither also;	But when they could not find them, they dragged Jason and some other brothers before the city officials, shouting, “These men who have turned the world upside down have now come here,
ACT	17	7	야손이 들였도다 이 사람들이 다 가이사의 명을 거역하여 말하되 다른 임금 곧 예수라 하는 이가 있다 하더이다 하니	Whom Jason hath received: and these all do contrary to the decrees of Cesar, saying that there is another king, one Jesus.	and Jason has welcomed them into his home. They are all defying Caesar’s decrees, saying that there is another king, named Jesus!”
ACT	17	8	무리와 읍장들이 이 말을 듣고 소동하여	And they troubled the people and the rulers of the city, when they heard these things.	On hearing this, the crowd and city officials were greatly disturbed.
ACT	17	9	야손과 그 나머지 사람들에게 보를 받고 놓으니라	And when they had taken security of Jason, and of the other, they let them go.	And they collected bond from Jason and the others, and then released them.
ACT	17	10	밤에 형제들이 곧 바울과 실라를 베뢰아로 보내니 저희가 이르러 유대인의 회당에 들어가니라	And the brethren immediately sent away Paul and Silas by night unto Berea: who coming thither went into the synagogue of the Jews.	As soon as night had fallen, the brothers sent Paul and Silas away to Berea. On arriving there, they went into the Jewish synagogue.
ACT	17	11	베뢰아 사람은 데살로니가에 있는 사람보다 더 신사적이어서 간절한 마음으로 말씀을 받고 이것이 그러한가 하여 날마다 성경을 상고하므로	These were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the scriptures daily, whether those things were so.	Now the Bereans were more noble-minded than the Thessalonians, for they received the message with great eagerness and examined the Scriptures every day to see if these teachings were true.
ACT	17	12	그 중에 믿는 사람이 많고 또 헬라의 귀부인과 남자가 적지 아니하나	Therefore many of them believed; also of honourable women which were Greeks, and of men, not a few.	As a result, many of them believed, along with quite a few prominent Greek women and men.
ACT	17	13	데살로니가에 있는 유대인들이 바울이 하나님 말씀을 베뢰아에서도 전하는 줄을 알고 거기도 가서 무리를 움직여 소동케 하거늘	But when the Jews of Thessalonica had knowledge that the word of God was preached of Paul at Berea, they came thither also, and stirred up the people.	But when the Jews from Thessalonica learned that Paul was also proclaiming the word of God in Berea, they went there themselves to incite and agitate the crowds.
ACT	17	14	형제들이 곧 바울을 내어 보내어 바다까지 가게 하되 실라와 디모데는 아직 거기 유하더라	And then immediately the brethren sent away Paul to go as it were to the sea: but Silas and Timotheus abode there still.	The brothers immediately sent Paul to the coast, but Silas and Timothy remained in Berea.
ACT	17	15	바울을 인도하는 사람들이 데리고 아덴까지 이르러 바울에게서 실라와 디모데를 자기에게로 속히 오게 하라는 명을 받고 떠나니라	And they that conducted Paul brought him unto Athens: and receiving a commandment unto Silas and Timotheus for to come to him with all speed, they departed.	Those who escorted Paul brought him to Athens and then returned with instructions for Silas and Timothy to join him as soon as possible.
ACT	17	16	바울이 아덴에서 저희를 기다리다가 온 성에 우상이 가득한 것을 보고 마음에 분하여	Now while Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit was stirred in him, when he saw the city wholly given to idolatry.	While Paul was waiting for them in Athens, he was deeply disturbed in his spirit to see that the city was full of idols.
ACT	17	17	회당에서는 유대인과 경건한 사람들과 또 저자에서는 날마다 만나는 사람들과 변론하니	Therefore disputed he in the synagogue with the Jews, and with the devout persons, and in the market daily with them that met with him.	So he reasoned in the synagogue with the Jews and God-fearing Gentiles, and in the marketplace with those he met each day.
ACT	17	18	어떤 에비구레오와 스도이고 철학자들도 바울과 쟁론할새 혹은 이르되 이 말장이가 무슨 말을 하고자 하느뇨 하고 혹은 이르되 이방신들을 전하는 사람인가보다 하니 이는 바울이 예수와 또 몸의 부활 전함을 인함이러라	Then certain philosophers of the Epicureans, and of the Stoicks, encountered him. And some said, What will this babbler say? other some, He seemeth to be a setter forth of strange gods: because he preached unto them Jesus, and the resurrection.	Some Epicurean and Stoic philosophers also began to debate with him. Some of them asked, “What is this babbler trying to say?” Others said, “He seems to be advocating foreign gods.” They said this because Paul was proclaiming the good news of Jesus and the resurrection.
ACT	17	19	붙들어 가지고 아레오바고로 가며 말하기를 우리가 너의 말하는 이 새 교가 무엇인지 알 수 있겠느냐	And they took him, and brought him unto Areopagus, saying, May we know what this new doctrine, whereof thou speakest, is?	So they took Paul and brought him to the Areopagus, where they asked him, “May we know what this new teaching is that you are presenting?
ACT	17	20	네가 무슨 이상한 것을 우리 귀에 들려주니 그 무슨 뜻인지 알고자 하노라 하니	For thou bringest certain strange things to our ears: we would know therefore what these things mean.	For you are bringing some strange notions to our ears, and we want to know what they mean.”
ACT	17	21	모든 아덴 사람과 거기서 나그네 된 외국인들이 가장 새로 되는 것을 말하고 듣는 이외에 달리는 시간을 쓰지 않음이더라	(For all the Athenians and strangers which were there spent their time in nothing else, but either to tell, or to hear some new thing.)	Now all the Athenians and foreigners who lived there spent their time doing nothing more than hearing and articulating new ideas.
ACT	17	22	바울이 아레오바고 가운데 서서 말하되 아덴 사람들아 너희를 보니 범사에 종교성이 많도다	Then Paul stood in the midst of Mars’ hill, and said, Ye men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious.	Then Paul stood up in the meeting of the Areopagus and said, “Men of Athens, I see that in every way you are very religious.
ACT	17	23	내가 두루 다니며 너희의 위하는 것들을 보다가 알지 못하는 신에게라고 새긴 단도 보았으니 그런즉 너희가 알지 못하고 위하는 그것을 내가 너희에게 알게 하리라	For as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I found an altar with this inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you.	For as I walked around and examined your objects of worship, I even found an altar with this inscription: TO AN UNKNOWN GOD. Therefore what you worship as something unknown, I now proclaim to you.
ACT	17	24	우주와 그 가운데 있는 만유를 지으신 신께서는 천지의 주재시니 손으로 지은 전에 계시지 아니하시고	God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands;	The God who made the world and everything in it is the Lord of heaven and earth and does not live in temples made by human hands.
ACT	17	25	또 무엇이 부족한 것처럼 사람의 손으로 섬김을 받으시는 것이 아니니 이는 만민에게 생명과 호흡과 만물을 친히 주시는 자이심이라	Neither is worshipped with men’s hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he giveth to all life, and breath, and all things;	Nor is He served by human hands, as if He needed anything, because He Himself gives everyone life and breath and everything else.
ACT	17	26	인류의 모든 족속을 한 혈통으로 만드사 온 땅에 거하게 하시고 저희의 연대를 정하시며 거주의 경계를 한하셨으니	And hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation;	From one man He made every nation of men, that they should inhabit the whole earth; and He determined their appointed times and the boundaries of their lands.
ACT	17	27	이는 사람으로 하나님을 혹 더듬어 찾아 발견케 하려 하심이로되 그는 우리 각 사람에게서 멀리 떠나 계시지 아니하도다	That they should seek the Lord, if haply they might feel after him, and find him, though he be not far from every one of us:	God intended that they would seek Him and perhaps reach out for Him and find Him, though He is not far from each one of us.
ACT	17	28	우리가 그를 힘입어 살며 기동하며 있느니라 너희 시인 중에도 어떤 사람들의 말과 같이 우리가 그의 소생이라 하니	For in him we live, and move, and have our being; as certain also of your own poets have said, For we are also his offspring.	‘For in Him we live and move and have our being.’ As some of your own poets have said, ‘We are His offspring.’
ACT	17	29	이와 같이 신의 소생이 되었은즉 신을 금이나 은이나 돌에다 사람의 기술과 고안으로 새긴 것들과 같이 여길 것이 아니니라	Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art and man’s device.	Therefore, being offspring of God, we should not think that the Divine Being is like gold or silver or stone, an image formed by man’s skill and imagination.
ACT	17	30	알지 못하던 시대에는 하나님이 허물치 아니하셨거니와 이제는 어디든지 사람을 다 명하사 회개하라 하셨으니	And the times of this ignorance God winked at; but now commandeth all men every where to repent:	Although God overlooked the ignorance of earlier times, He now commands all people everywhere to repent.
ACT	17	31	이는 정하신 사람으로 하여금 천하를 공의로 심판할 날을 작정하시고 이에 저를 죽은 자 가운데서 다시 살리신 것으로 모든 사람에게 믿을 만한 증거를 주셨음이니라 하니라	Because he hath appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained; whereof he hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead.	For He has set a day when He will judge the world with justice by the Man He has appointed. He has given proof of this to everyone by raising Him from the dead.”
ACT	17	32	저희가 죽은 자의 부활을 듣고 혹은 기롱도 하고 혹은 이 일에 대하여 네 말을 다시 듣겠다 하니	And when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked: and others said, We will hear thee again of this matter.	When they heard about the resurrection of the dead, some began to mock him, but others said, “We want to hear you again on this topic.”
ACT	17	33	이에 바울이 저희 가운데서 떠나매	So Paul departed from among them.	At that, Paul left the Areopagus.
ACT	17	34	몇 사람이 그를 친하여 믿으니 그 중 아레오바고 관원 디오누시오와 다마리라 하는 여자와 또 다른 사람들도 있었더라	Howbeit certain men clave unto him, and believed: among the which was Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.	But some joined him and believed, including Dionysius the Areopagite, a woman named Damaris, and others who were with them.
ACT	18	1	이 후에 바울이 아덴을 떠나 고린도에 이르러	After these things Paul departed from Athens, and came to Corinth;	After this, Paul left Athens and went to Corinth.
ACT	18	2	아굴라라 하는 본도에서 난 유대인 하나를 만나니 글라우디오가 모든 유대인을 명하여 로마에서 떠나라 한 고로 그가 그 아내 브리스길라와 함께 이달리야로부터 새로 온지라 바울이 그들에게 가매	And found a certain Jew named Aquila, born in Pontus, lately come from Italy, with his wife Priscilla; (because that Claudius had commanded all Jews to depart from Rome:) and came unto them.	There he found a Jew named Aquila, a native of Pontus, who had recently come from Italy with his wife Priscilla because Claudius had ordered all the Jews to leave Rome. Paul went to visit them,
ACT	18	3	업이 같으므로 함께 거하여 일을 하니 그 업은 장막을 만드는 것이더라	And because he was of the same craft, he abode with them, and wrought: for by their occupation they were tentmakers.	and he stayed and worked with them because they were tentmakers by trade, just as he was.
ACT	18	4	안식일마다 바울이 회당에서 강론하고 유대인과 헬라인을 권면하니라	And he reasoned in the synagogue every sabbath, and persuaded the Jews and the Greeks.	Every Sabbath he reasoned in the synagogue, trying to persuade Jews and Greeks alike.
ACT	18	5	실라와 디모데가 마게도냐로서 내려오매 바울이 하나님의 말씀에 붙잡혀 유대인들에게 예수는 그리스도라 밝히 증거하니	And when Silas and Timotheus were come from Macedonia, Paul was pressed in the spirit, and testified to the Jews that Jesus was Christ.	And when Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia, Paul devoted himself fully to the word, testifying to the Jews that Jesus is the Christ.
ACT	18	6	저희가 대적하여 훼방하거늘 바울이 옷을 떨어 가로되 너희 피가 너희 머리로 돌아갈 것이요 나는 깨끗하니라 이 후에는 이방인에게로 가리라 하고	And when they opposed themselves, and blasphemed, he shook his raiment, and said unto them, Your blood be upon your own heads; I am clean: from henceforth I will go unto the Gentiles.	But when they opposed and insulted him, he shook out his garments and told them, “Your blood be on your own heads! I am innocent of it. From now on I will go to the Gentiles.”
ACT	18	7	거기서 옮겨 하나님을 공경하는 디도 유스도라 하는 사람의 집에 들어가니 그 집이 회당 옆이라	And he departed thence, and entered into a certain man’s house, named Justus, one that worshipped God, whose house joined hard to the synagogue.	So Paul left the synagogue and went next door to the house of Titus Justus, a worshiper of God.
ACT	18	8	또 회당장 그리스보가 온 집으로 더불어 주를 믿으며 수다한 고린도 사람도 듣고 믿어 침례를 받더라	And Crispus, the chief ruler of the synagogue, believed on the Lord with all his house; and many of the Corinthians hearing believed, and were baptized.	Crispus, the synagogue leader, and his whole household believed in the Lord. And many of the Corinthians who heard the message believed and were baptized.
ACT	18	9	밤에 주께서 환상 가운데 바울에게 말씀하시되 두려워하지 말며 잠잠하지 말고 말하라	Then spake the Lord to Paul in the night by a vision, Be not afraid, but speak, and hold not thy peace:	One night the Lord spoke to Paul in a vision: “Do not be afraid; keep on speaking; do not be silent.
ACT	18	10	내가 너와 함께 있으매 아무 사람도 너를 대적하여 해롭게 할 자가 없을 것이니 이는 이 성중에 내 백성이 많음이라 하시더라	For I am with thee, and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee: for I have much people in this city.	For I am with you and no one will lay a hand on you, because I have many people in this city.”
ACT	18	11	일 년 육 개월을 유하며 그들 가운데서 하나님의 말씀을 가르치니라	And he continued there a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them.	So Paul stayed for a year and a half, teaching the word of God among the Corinthians.
ACT	18	12	갈리오가 아가야 총독 되었을 때에 유대인이 일제히 일어나 바울을 대적하여 재판 자리로 데리고 와서	And when Gallio was the deputy of Achaia, the Jews made insurrection with one accord against Paul, and brought him to the judgment seat,	While Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews coordinated an attack on Paul and brought him before the judgment seat.
ACT	18	13	말하되 이 사람이 율법을 어기어 하나님을 공경하라고 사람들을 권한다 하거늘	Saying, This fellow persuadeth men to worship God contrary to the law.	“This man is persuading the people to worship God in ways contrary to the law,” they said.
ACT	18	14	바울이 입을 열고자 할 때에 갈리오가 유대인들에게 이르되 너희 유대인들아 만일 무슨 부정한 일이나 괴악한 행동이었으면 내가 너희 말을 들어주는 것이 가하거니와	And when Paul was now about to open his mouth, Gallio said unto the Jews, If it were a matter of wrong or wicked lewdness, O ye Jews, reason would that I should bear with you:	But just as Paul was about to speak, Gallio told the Jews, “If this matter involved a wrongdoing or vicious crime, O Jews, it would be reasonable for me to hear your complaint.
ACT	18	15	만일 문제가 언어와 명칭과 너희 법에 관한 것이면 너희가 스스로 처리하라 나는 이러한 일에 재판장 되기를 원치 아니하노라 하고	But if it be a question of words and names, and of your law, look ye to it; for I will be no judge of such matters.	But since it is a dispute about words and names and your own law, settle it yourselves. I refuse to be a judge of such things.”
ACT	18	16	저희를 재판 자리에서 쫓아내니	And he drave them from the judgment seat.	And he drove them away from the judgment seat.
ACT	18	17	모든 사람이 회당장 소스데네를 잡아 재판 자리 앞에서 때리되 갈리오가 이 일을 상관치 아니하니라	Then all the Greeks took Sosthenes, the chief ruler of the synagogue, and beat him before the judgment seat. And Gallio cared for none of those things.	At this, the crowd seized Sosthenes the synagogue leader and beat him in front of the judgment seat. But none of this was of concern to Gallio.
ACT	18	18	바울은 더 여러 날 유하다가 형제들을 작별하고 배 타고 수리아로 떠나갈새 브리스길라와 아굴라도 함께 하더라 바울이 일찍 서원이 있으므로 겐그레아에서 머리를 깎았더라	And Paul after this tarried there yet a good while, and then took his leave of the brethren, and sailed thence into Syria, and with him Priscilla and Aquila; having shorn his head in Cenchrea: for he had a vow.	Paul remained in Corinth for quite some time before saying goodbye to the brothers. He had his head shaved in Cenchrea to keep a vow he had made, and then he sailed for Syria, accompanied by Priscilla and Aquila.
ACT	18	19	에베소에 와서 저희를 거기 머물러 두고 자기는 회당에 들어가서 유대인들과 변론하니	And he came to Ephesus, and left them there: but he himself entered into the synagogue, and reasoned with the Jews.	When they reached Ephesus, Paul parted ways with Priscilla and Aquila. He himself went into the synagogue there and reasoned with the Jews.
ACT	18	20	여러 사람이 더 오래 있기를 청하되 허락지 아니하고	When they desired him to tarry longer time with them, he consented not;	When they asked him to stay for a while longer, he declined.
ACT	18	21	작별하여 가로되 만일 하나님의 뜻이면 너희에게 돌아오리라 하고 배를 타고 에베소를 떠나	But bade them farewell, saying, I must by all means keep this feast that cometh in Jerusalem: but I will return again unto you, if God will. And he sailed from Ephesus.	But as he left, he said, “I will come back to you if God is willing.” And he set sail from Ephesus.
ACT	18	22	가이사랴에서 상륙하여 올라가 교회의 안부를 물은 후에 안디옥으로 내려가서	And when he had landed at Cesarea, and gone up, and saluted the church, he went down to Antioch.	When Paul had landed at Caesarea, he went up and greeted the church at Jerusalem. Then he went down to Antioch.
ACT	18	23	얼마 있다가 떠나 갈라디아와 브루기아 땅을 차례로 다니며 모든 제자를 굳게 하니라	And after he had spent some time there, he departed, and went over all the country of Galatia and Phrygia in order, strengthening all the disciples.	After Paul had spent some time in Antioch, he traveled from place to place throughout the region of Galatia and Phrygia, strengthening all the disciples.
ACT	18	24	알렉산드리아에서 난 아볼로라 하는 유대인이 에베소에 이르니 이 사람은 학문이 많고 성경에 능한 자라	And a certain Jew named Apollos, born at Alexandria, an eloquent man, and mighty in the scriptures, came to Ephesus.	Meanwhile a Jew named Apollos, a native of Alexandria, came to Ephesus. He was an eloquent man, well versed in the Scriptures.
ACT	18	25	그가 일찍 주의 도를 배워 열심으로 예수에 관한 것을 자세히 말하며 가르치나 요한의 침례만 알 따름이라	This man was instructed in the way of the Lord; and being fervent in the spirit, he spake and taught diligently the things of the Lord, knowing only the baptism of John.	He had been instructed in the way of the Lord and was fervent in spirit. He spoke and taught accurately about Jesus, though he knew only the baptism of John.
ACT	18	26	그가 회당에서 담대히 말하기를 시작하거늘 브리스길라와 아굴라가 듣고 데려다가 하나님의 도를 더 자세히 풀어 이르더라	And he began to speak boldly in the synagogue: whom when Aquila and Priscilla had heard, they took him unto them, and expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly.	And he began to speak boldly in the synagogue. When Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took him in and explained to him the way of God more accurately.
ACT	18	27	아볼로가 아가야로 건너가고자 하니 형제들이 저를 장려하며 제자들에게 편지하여 영접하라 하였더니 저가 가매 은혜로 말미암아 믿은 자들에게 많은 유익을 주니	And when he was disposed to pass into Achaia, the brethren wrote, exhorting the disciples to receive him: who, when he was come, helped them much which had believed through grace:	When Apollos resolved to cross over to Achaia, the brothers encouraged him and wrote to the disciples there to welcome him. On his arrival, he was a great help to those who by grace had believed.
ACT	18	28	이는 성경으로써 예수는 그리스도라고 증거하여 공중 앞에서 유력하게 유대인의 말을 이김일러라	For he mightily convinced the Jews, and that publickly, shewing by the scriptures that Jesus was Christ.	For he powerfully refuted the Jews in public debate, proving from the Scriptures that Jesus is the Christ.
ACT	19	1	아볼로가 고린도에 있을 때에 바울이 윗 지방으로 다녀 에베소에 와서 어떤 제자들을 만나	And it came to pass, that, while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul having passed through the upper coasts came to Ephesus: and finding certain disciples,	While Apollos was at Corinth, Paul passed through the interior and came to Ephesus. There he found some disciples
ACT	19	2	가로되 너희가 믿을 때에 성령을 받았느냐 가로되 아니라 우리는 성령이 있음도 듣지 못하였노라	He said unto them, Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed? And they said unto him, We have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost.	and asked them, “Did you receive the Holy Spirit when you became believers?” “No,” they answered, “we have not even heard that there is a Holy Spirit.”
ACT	19	3	바울이 가로되 그러면 너희가 무슨 침례를 받았느냐 대답하되 요한의 침례로라	And he said unto them, Unto what then were ye baptized? And they said, Unto John’s baptism.	“Into what, then, were you baptized?” Paul asked. “The baptism of John,” they replied.
ACT	19	4	바울이 가로되 요한이 회개의 침례를 베풀며 백성에게 말하되 내 뒤에 오시는 이를 믿으라 하였으니 이는 곧 예수라 하거늘	Then said Paul, John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe on him which should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus.	Paul explained: “John’s baptism was a baptism of repentance. He told the people to believe in the One coming after him, that is, in Jesus.”
ACT	19	5	저희가 듣고 주 예수의 이름으로 침례를 받으니	When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.	On hearing this, they were baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus.
ACT	19	6	바울이 그들에게 안수하매 성령이 그들에게 임하시므로 방언도 하고 예언도 하니	And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them; and they spake with tongues, and prophesied.	And when Paul laid his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came upon them, and they spoke in tongues and prophesied.
ACT	19	7	모두 열두 사람쯤 되니라	And all the men were about twelve.	There were about twelve men in all.
ACT	19	8	바울이 회당에 들어가 석 달 동안을 담대히 하나님 나라에 대하여 강론하며 권면하되	And he went into the synagogue, and spake boldly for the space of three months, disputing and persuading the things concerning the kingdom of God.	Then Paul went into the synagogue and spoke boldly there for three months, arguing persuasively about the kingdom of God.
ACT	19	9	어떤 사람들은 마음이 굳어 순종치 않고 무리 앞에서 이 도를 비방하거늘 바울이 그들을 떠나 제자들을 따로 세우고 두란노 서원에서 날마다 강론하여	But when divers were hardened, and believed not, but spake evil of that way before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the disciples, disputing daily in the school of one Tyrannus.	But when some of them stubbornly refused to believe and publicly maligned the Way, Paul took his disciples and left the synagogue to conduct daily discussions in the lecture hall of Tyrannus.
ACT	19	10	이같이 두 해 동안을 하매 아시아에 사는 자는 유대인이나 헬라인이나 다 주의 말씀을 듣더라	And this continued by the space of two years; so that all they which dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks.	This continued for two years, so that everyone who lived in the province of Asia, Jews and Greeks alike, heard the word of the Lord.
ACT	19	11	하나님이 바울의 손으로 희한한 능을 행하게 하시니	And God wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul:	God did extraordinary miracles through the hands of Paul,
ACT	19	12	심지어 사람들이 바울의 몸에서 손수건이나 앞치마를 가져다가 병든 사람에게 얹으면 그 병이 떠나고 악귀도 나가더라	So that from his body were brought unto the sick handkerchiefs or aprons, and the diseases departed from them, and the evil spirits went out of them.	so that even handkerchiefs and aprons that had touched him were taken to the sick, and the diseases and evil spirits left them.
ACT	19	13	이에 돌아다니며 마술하는 어떤 유대인들이 시험적으로 악귀 들린 자들에게 대하여 주 예수의 이름을 불러 말하되 내가 바울의 전파하는 예수를 빙자하여 너희를 명하노라 하더라	Then certain of the vagabond Jews, exorcists, took upon them to call over them which had evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preacheth.	Now there were some itinerant Jewish exorcists who tried to invoke the name of the Lord Jesus over those with evil spirits. They would say, “I bind you by Jesus, whom Paul proclaims.”
ACT	19	14	유대의 한 제사장 스게와의 일곱 아들도 이 일을 행하더니	And there were seven sons of one Sceva, a Jew, and chief of the priests, which did so.	Seven sons of Sceva, a Jewish chief priest, were doing this.
ACT	19	15	악귀가 대답하여 가로되 예수도 내가 알고 바울도 내가 알거니와 너희는 누구냐 하며	And the evil spirit answered and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know; but who are ye?	Eventually, one of the evil spirits answered them, “Jesus I know, and I know about Paul, but who are you?”
ACT	19	16	악귀 들린 사람이 그 두 사람에게 뛰어올라 억제하여 이기니 저희가 상하여 벗은 몸으로 그 집에서 도망하는지라	And the man in whom the evil spirit was leaped on them, and overcame them, and prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded.	Then the man with the evil spirit jumped on them and overpowered them all. The attack was so violent that they ran out of the house naked and wounded.
ACT	19	17	에베소에 거하는 유대인과 헬라인들이 다 이 일을 알고 두려워하며 주 예수의 이름을 높이고	And this was known to all the Jews and Greeks also dwelling at Ephesus; and fear fell on them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified.	This became known to all the Jews and Greeks living in Ephesus, and fear came over all of them. So the name of the Lord Jesus was held in high honor.
ACT	19	18	믿은 사람들이 많이 와서 자복하여 행한 일을 고하며	And many that believed came, and confessed, and shewed their deeds.	Many who had believed now came forward, confessing and disclosing their deeds.
ACT	19	19	또 마술을 행하던 많은 사람이 그 책을 모아 가지고 와서 모든 사람 앞에서 불사르니 그 책 값을 계산한즉 은 오만이나 되더라	Many of them also which used curious arts brought their books together, and burned them before all men: and they counted the price of them, and found it fifty thousand pieces of silver.	And a number of those who had practiced magic arts brought their books and burned them in front of everyone. When the value of the books was calculated, the total came to fifty thousand drachmas.
ACT	19	20	이와 같이 주의 말씀이 힘이 있어 흥왕하여 세력을 얻으니라	So mightily grew the word of God and prevailed.	So the word of the Lord powerfully continued to spread and prevail.
ACT	19	21	이 일이 다 된 후 바울이 마게도냐와 아가야로 다녀서 예루살렘에 가기를 경영하여 가로되 내가 거기 갔다가 후에 로마도 보아야 하리라 하고	After these things were ended, Paul purposed in the spirit, when he had passed through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem, saying, After I have been there, I must also see Rome.	After these things had happened, Paul resolved in the Spirit to go to Jerusalem after he had passed through Macedonia and Achaia. “After I have been there,” he said, “I must see Rome as well.”
ACT	19	22	자기를 돕는 사람 중에서 디모데와 에라스도 두 사람을 마게도냐로 보내고 자기는 아시아에 얼마간 더 있으니라	So he sent into Macedonia two of them that ministered unto him, Timotheus and Erastus; but he himself stayed in Asia for a season.	He sent two of his helpers, Timothy and Erastus, to Macedonia, while he stayed for a time in the province of Asia.
ACT	19	23	그 때쯤 되어 이 도로 인하여 적지 않은 소동이 있었으니	And the same time there arose no small stir about that way.	About that time there arose a great disturbance about the Way.
ACT	19	24	즉 데메드리오라 하는 어떤 은장색이 아데미의 은감실을 만들어 직공들로 적지 않은 벌이를 하게 하더니	For a certain man named Demetrius, a silversmith, which made silver shrines for Diana, brought no small gain unto the craftsmen;	It began with a silversmith named Demetrius who made silver shrines of Artemis, bringing much business to the craftsmen.
ACT	19	25	그가 그 직공들과 이러한 영업하는 자들을 모아 이르되 여러분도 알거니와 우리의 유족한 생활이 이 업에 있는데	Whom he called together with the workmen of like occupation, and said, Sirs, ye know that by this craft we have our wealth.	Demetrius assembled the craftsmen, along with the workmen in related trades. “Men,” he said, “you know that this business is our source of prosperity.
ACT	19	26	이 바울이 에베소뿐 아니라 거의 아시아 전부를 통하여 허다한 사람을 권유하여 말하되 사람의 손으로 만든 것들은 신이 아니라 하니 이는 그대들도 보고 들은 것이라	Moreover ye see and hear, that not alone at Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul hath persuaded and turned away much people, saying that they be no gods, which are made with hands:	And you can see and hear that not only in Ephesus, but in nearly the whole province of Asia, Paul has persuaded a great number of people to turn away. He says that man-made gods are no gods at all.
ACT	19	27	우리의 이 영업만 천하여질 위험이 있을 뿐 아니라 큰 여신 아데미의 전각도 경홀히 여김이 되고 온 아시아와 천하가 위하는 그의 위엄도 떨어질까 하노라 하더라	So that not only this our craft is in danger to be set at nought; but also that the temple of the great goddess Diana should be despised, and her magnificence should be destroyed, whom all Asia and the world worshippeth.	There is danger not only that our business will fall into disrepute, but also that the temple of the great goddess Artemis will be discredited and her majesty deposed—she who is worshiped by all the province of Asia and the whole world.”
ACT	19	28	저희가 이 말을 듣고 분이 가득하여 외쳐 가로되 크다 에베소 사람의 아데미여 하니	And when they heard these sayings, they were full of wrath, and cried out, saying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.	When the men heard this, they were enraged and began shouting, “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!”
ACT	19	29	온 성이 요란하여 바울과 같이 다니는 마게도냐 사람 가이오와 아리스다고를 잡아가지고 일제히 연극장으로 달려들어 가는지라	And the whole city was filled with confusion: and having caught Gaius and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia, Paul’s companions in travel, they rushed with one accord into the theatre.	Soon the whole city was in disarray. They rushed together into the theatre, dragging with them Gaius and Aristarchus, Paul’s traveling companions from Macedonia.
ACT	19	30	바울이 백성 가운데로 들어가고자 하나 제자들이 말리고	And when Paul would have entered in unto the people, the disciples suffered him not.	Paul wanted to go before the assembly, but the disciples would not allow him.
ACT	19	31	또 아시아 관원 중에 바울의 친구 된 어떤 이들이 그에게 통지하여 연극장에 들어가지 말라 권하더라	And certain of the chief of Asia, which were his friends, sent unto him, desiring him that he would not adventure himself into the theatre.	Even some of Paul’s friends who were officials of the province of Asia sent word to him, begging him not to venture into the theatre.
ACT	19	32	사람들이 외쳐 혹은 이 말을, 혹은 저 말을 하니 모인 무리가 분란하여 태반이나 어찌하여 모였는지 알지 못하더라	Some therefore cried one thing, and some another: for the assembly was confused; and the more part knew not wherefore they were come together.	Meanwhile the assembly was in turmoil. Some were shouting one thing and some another, and most of them did not even know why they were there.
ACT	19	33	유대인들이 무리 가운데서 알렉산더를 권하여 앞으로 밀어내니 알렉산더가 손짓하며 백성에게 발명하려 하나	And they drew Alexander out of the multitude, the Jews putting him forward. And Alexander beckoned with the hand, and would have made his defence unto the people.	The Jews in the crowd pushed Alexander forward to explain himself, and he motioned for silence so he could make his defense to the people.
ACT	19	34	저희는 그가 유대인인 줄 알고 다 한 소리로 외쳐 가로되 크다 에베소 사람의 아데미여 하기를 두 시 동안이나 하더니	But when they knew that he was a Jew, all with one voice about the space of two hours cried out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.	But when they realized that he was a Jew, they all shouted in unison for about two hours: “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!”
ACT	19	35	서기장이 무리를 안돈시키고 이르되 에베소 사람들아 에베소 성이 큰 아데미와 및 쓰스에게서 내려온 우상의 전각지기가 된 줄을 누가 알지 못하겠느냐	And when the townclerk had appeased the people, he said, Ye men of Ephesus, what man is there that knoweth not how that the city of the Ephesians is a worshipper of the great goddess Diana, and of the image which fell down from Jupiter?	Finally the city clerk quieted the crowd and declared, “Men of Ephesus, doesn’t everyone know that the city of Ephesus is guardian of the temple of the great Artemis and of her image, which fell from heaven?
ACT	19	36	이 일이 그렇지 않다 할 수 없으니 너희가 가만히 있어서 무엇이든지 경솔히 아니하여야 하리라	Seeing then that these things cannot be spoken against, ye ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rashly.	Since these things are undeniable, you ought to be calm and not do anything rash.
ACT	19	37	전각의 물건을 도적질하지도 아니하였고 우리 여신을 훼방하지도 아니한 이 사람들을 너희가 잡아왔으니	For ye have brought hither these men, which are neither robbers of churches, nor yet blasphemers of your goddess.	For you have brought these men here, though they have neither robbed our temple nor blasphemed our goddess.
ACT	19	38	만일 데메드리오와 및 그와 함께 있는 직공들이 누구에게 송사할 것이 있거든 재판 날도 있고 총독들도 있으니 피차 고소할 것이요	Wherefore if Demetrius, and the craftsmen which are with him, have a matter against any man, the law is open, and there are deputies: let them implead one another.	So if Demetrius and his fellow craftsmen have a complaint against anyone, the courts are open and proconsuls are available. Let them bring charges against one another there.
ACT	19	39	만일 그 외에 무엇을 원하거든 정식으로 민회에서 결단할지라	But if ye enquire any thing concerning other matters, it shall be determined in a lawful assembly.	But if you are seeking anything beyond this, it must be settled in a legal assembly.
ACT	19	40	오늘 아무 까닭도 없는 이 일에 우리가 소요의 사건으로 책망 받을 위험이 있고 우리가 이 불법 집회에 관하여 보고할 재료가 없다 하고	For we are in danger to be called in question for this day’s uproar, there being no cause whereby we may give an account of this concourse.	For we are in jeopardy of being charged with rioting for today’s events, and we have no justification to account for this commotion.”
ACT	19	41	이에 그 모임을 흩어지게 하니라	And when he had thus spoken, he dismissed the assembly.	After he had said this, he dismissed the assembly.
ACT	20	1	소요가 그치매 바울이 제자들을 불러 권한 후에 작별하고 떠나 마게도냐로 가니라	And after the uproar was ceased, Paul called unto him the disciples, and embraced them, and departed for to go into Macedonia.	When the uproar had ended, Paul sent for the disciples. And after encouraging them, he said goodbye to them and left for Macedonia.
ACT	20	2	그 지경으로 다녀가며 여러 말로 제자들에게 권하고 헬라에 이르러	And when he had gone over those parts, and had given them much exhortation, he came into Greece,	After traveling through that area and speaking many words of encouragement, he arrived in Greece,
ACT	20	3	거기 석 달을 있다가 배 타고 수리아로 가고자 할 그 때에 유대인들이 자기를 해하려고 공모하므로 마게도냐로 다녀 돌아가기를 작정하니	And there abode three months. And when the Jews laid wait for him, as he was about to sail into Syria, he purposed to return through Macedonia.	where he stayed three months. And when the Jews formed a plot against him as he was about to sail for Syria, he decided to go back through Macedonia.
ACT	20	4	아시아까지 함께 가는 자는 베뢰아 사람 부로의 아들 소바더와 데살로니가 사람 아리스다고와 세군도와 더베 사람 가이오와 및 디모데와 아시아 사람 두기오와 드로비모라	And there accompanied him into Asia Sopater of Berea; and of the Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus; and Gaius of Derbe, and Timotheus; and of Asia, Tychicus and Trophimus.	Paul was accompanied by Sopater son of Pyrrhus from Berea, Aristarchus and Secundus from Thessalonica, Gaius from Derbe, Timothy, and Tychicus and Trophimus from the province of Asia.
ACT	20	5	그들은 먼저 가서 드로아에서 우리를 기다리더라	These going before tarried for us at Troas.	These men went on ahead and waited for us in Troas.
ACT	20	6	우리는 무교절 후에 빌립보에서 배로 떠나 닷새 만에 드로아에 있는 그들에게 가서 이레를 머무니라	And we sailed away from Philippi after the days of unleavened bread, and came unto them to Troas in five days; where we abode seven days.	And after the Feast of Unleavened Bread, we sailed from Philippi, and five days later we rejoined them in Troas, where we stayed seven days.
ACT	20	7	안식 후 첫날에 우리가 떡을 떼려 하여 모였더니 바울이 이튿날 떠나고자 하여 저희에게 강론할 새 말을 밤중까지 계속하매	And upon the first day of the week, when the disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to depart on the morrow; and continued his speech until midnight.	On the first day of the week we came together to break bread. Since Paul was ready to leave the next day, he talked to them and kept on speaking until midnight.
ACT	20	8	우리의 모인 윗다락에 등불을 많이 켰는데	And there were many lights in the upper chamber, where they were gathered together.	Now there were many lamps in the upper room where we were gathered.
ACT	20	9	유두고라 하는 청년이 창에 걸터 앉았다가 깊이 졸더니 바울이 강론하기를 더 오래 하매 졸음을 이기지 못하여 삼층 누에서 떨어지거늘 일으켜 보니 죽었는지라	And there sat in a window a certain young man named Eutychus, being fallen into a deep sleep: and as Paul was long preaching, he sunk down with sleep, and fell down from the third loft, and was taken up dead.	And a certain young man named Eutychus, seated in the window, was sinking into a deep sleep as Paul talked on and on. When he was sound asleep, he fell from the third story and was picked up dead.
ACT	20	10	바울이 내려가서 그 위에 엎드려 그 몸을 안고 말하되 떠들지 말라 생명이 저에게 있다 하고	And Paul went down, and fell on him, and embracing him said, Trouble not yourselves; for his life is in him.	But Paul went down, threw himself on the young man, and embraced him. “Do not be alarmed!” he said. “He is still alive!”
ACT	20	11	올라가 떡을 떼어 먹고 오랫동안 곧 날이 새기까지 이야기하고 떠나니라	When he therefore was come up again, and had broken bread, and eaten, and talked a long while, even till break of day, so he departed.	Then Paul went back upstairs, broke bread, and ate. And after speaking until daybreak, he departed.
ACT	20	12	사람들이 살아난 아이를 데리고 와서 위로를 적지 않게 받았더라	And they brought the young man alive, and were not a little comforted.	And the people were greatly relieved to take the boy home alive.
ACT	20	13	우리는 앞서 배를 타고 앗소에서 바울을 태우려고 그리로 행선하니 이는 자기가 도보로 가고자 하여 이렇게 정하여 준 것이라	And we went before to ship, and sailed unto Assos, there intending to take in Paul: for so had he appointed, minding himself to go afoot.	We went on ahead to the ship and sailed to Assos, where we were to take Paul aboard. He had arranged this because he was going there on foot.
ACT	20	14	바울이 앗소에서 우리를 만나니 우리가 배에 올리고 미둘레네에 가서	And when he met with us at Assos, we took him in, and came to Mitylene.	And when he met us at Assos, we took him aboard and went on to Mitylene.
ACT	20	15	거기서 떠나 이튿날 기오 앞에 오고 그 이튿날 사모에 들리고 또 그 다음날 밀레도에 이르니라	And we sailed thence, and came the next day over against Chios; and the next day we arrived at Samos, and tarried at Trogyllium; and the next day we came to Miletus.	Sailing on from there, we arrived the next day opposite Chios. The day after that we arrived at Samos, and on the following day we came to Miletus.
ACT	20	16	바울이 아시아에서 지체치 않기 위하여 에베소를 지나 행선하기로 작정하였으니 이는 될 수 있는 대로 오순절 안에 예루살렘에 이르려고 급히 감이러라	For Paul had determined to sail by Ephesus, because he would not spend the time in Asia: for he hasted, if it were possible for him, to be at Jerusalem the day of Pentecost.	Paul had decided to sail past Ephesus to avoid spending time in the province of Asia, because he was in a hurry to reach Jerusalem, if possible, by the day of Pentecost.
ACT	20	17	바울이 밀레도에서 사람을 에베소로 보내어 교회 장로들을 청하니	And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called the elders of the church.	From Miletus, Paul sent to Ephesus for the elders of the church.
ACT	20	18	오매 저희에게 말하되 아시아에 들어온 첫날부터 지금까지 내가 항상 너희 가운데서 어떻게 행한 것을 너희도 아는 바니	And when they were come to him, he said unto them, Ye know, from the first day that I came into Asia, after what manner I have been with you at all seasons,	When they came to him, he said, “You know how I lived the whole time I was with you, from the first day I arrived in the province of Asia.
ACT	20	19	곧 모든 겸손과 눈물이며 유대인의 간계를 인하여 당한 시험을 참고 주를 섬긴 것과	Serving the Lord with all humility of mind, and with many tears, and temptations, which befell me by the lying in wait of the Jews:	I served the Lord with great humility and with tears, especially in the trials that came upon me through the plots of the Jews.
ACT	20	20	유익한 것은 무엇이든지 공중 앞에서나 각 집에서나 꺼림이 없이 너희에게 전하여 가르치고	And how I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have shewed you, and have taught you publickly, and from house to house,	I did not shrink back from declaring anything that was helpful to you as I taught you publicly and from house to house,
ACT	20	21	유대인과 헬라인들에게 하나님께 대한 회개와 우리 주 예수 그리스도께 대한 믿음을 증거한 것이라	Testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.	testifying to Jews and Greeks alike about repentance to God and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.
ACT	20	22	보라 이제 나는 심령에 매임을 받아 예루살렘으로 가는데 저기서 무슨 일을 만날는지 알지 못하노라	And now, behold, I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall me there:	And now, compelled by the Spirit, I am going to Jerusalem, not knowing what will happen to me there.
ACT	20	23	오직 성령이 각 성에서 내게 증거하여 결박과 환난이 나를 기다린다 하시나	Save that the Holy Ghost witnesseth in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions abide me.	I only know that in town after town the Holy Spirit warns me that chains and afflictions await me.
ACT	20	24	나의 달려갈 길과 주 예수께 받은 사명 곧 하나님의 은혜의 복음 증거하는 일을 마치려 함에는 나의 생명을 조금도 귀한 것으로 여기지 아니하노라	But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto myself, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God.	But I consider my life of no value to me, if only I may finish my course and complete the ministry I have received from the Lord Jesus—the ministry of testifying to the good news of God’s grace.
ACT	20	25	보라 내가 너희 중에 왕래하며 하나님 나라를 전파하였으나 지금은 너희가 다 내 얼굴을 다시 보지 못할 줄 아노라	And now, behold, I know that ye all, among whom I have gone preaching the kingdom of God, shall see my face no more.	Now I know that none of you among whom I have preached the kingdom will see my face again.
ACT	20	26	그러므로 오늘 너희에게 증거하노니 모든 사람의 피에 대하여 내가 깨끗하니	Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men.	Therefore I testify to you this day that I am innocent of the blood of all men.
ACT	20	27	이는 내가 꺼리지 않고 하나님의 뜻을 다 너희에게 전하였음이라	For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God.	For I did not shrink back from declaring to you the whole will of God.
ACT	20	28	너희는 자기를 위하여 또는 온 양떼를 위하여 삼가라 성령이 저들 가운데 너희로 감독자를 삼고 하나님이 자기 피로 사신 교회를 치게 하셨느니라	Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the flock, over the which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to feed the church of God, which he hath purchased with his own blood.	Keep watch over yourselves and the entire flock of which the Holy Spirit has made you overseers. Be shepherds of the church of God, which He purchased with His own blood.
ACT	20	29	내가 떠난 후에 흉악한 이리가 너희에게 들어와서 그 양떼를 아끼지 아니하며	For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock.	I know that after my departure, savage wolves will come in among you and will not spare the flock.
ACT	20	30	또한 너희 중에서도 제자들을 끌어 자기를 좇게 하려고 어그러진 말을 하는 사람들이 일어날 줄을 내가 아노니	Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them.	Even from your own number, men will rise up and distort the truth to draw away disciples after them.
ACT	20	31	그러므로 너희가 일깨어 내가 삼 년이나 밤낮 쉬지 않고 눈물로 각 사람을 훈계하던 것을 기억하라	Therefore watch, and remember, that by the space of three years I ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears.	Therefore be alert and remember that for three years I never stopped warning each of you night and day with tears.
ACT	20	32	지금 내가 너희를 주와 및 그 은혜의 말씀께 부탁하노니 그 말씀이 너희를 능히 든든히 세우사 거룩케 하심을 입은 모든 자 가운데 기업이 있게 하시리라	And now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified.	And now I commit you to God and to the word of His grace, which can build you up and give you an inheritance among all who are sanctified.
ACT	20	33	내가 아무의 은이나 금이나 의복을 탐하지 아니하였고	I have coveted no man’s silver, or gold, or apparel.	I have not coveted anyone’s silver or gold or clothing.
ACT	20	34	너희 아는 바에 이 손으로 나와 내 동행들의 쓰는 것을 당하여	Yea, ye yourselves know, that these hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were with me.	You yourselves know that these hands of mine have ministered to my own needs and those of my companions.
ACT	20	35	범사에 너희에게 모본을 보였노니 곧 이같이 수고하여 약한 사람들을 돕고 또 주 예수의 친히 말씀하신 바 주는 것이 받는 것보다 복이 있다 하심을 기억하여야 할지니라	I have shewed you all things, how that so labouring ye ought to support the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more blessed to give than to receive.	In everything, I showed you that by this kind of hard work we must help the weak, remembering the words of the Lord Jesus Himself: ‘It is more blessed to give than to receive.’”
ACT	20	36	이 말을 한 후 무릎을 꿇고 저희 모든 사람과 함께 기도하니	And when he had thus spoken, he kneeled down, and prayed with them all.	When Paul had said this, he knelt down with all of them and prayed.
ACT	20	37	다 크게 울며 바울의 목을 안고 입을 맞추고	And they all wept sore, and fell on Paul’s neck, and kissed him,	They all wept openly as they embraced Paul and kissed him.
ACT	20	38	다시 그 얼굴을 보지 못하리라 한 말을 인하여 더욱 근심하고 배에까지 그를 전송하니라	Sorrowing most of all for the words which he spake, that they should see his face no more. And they accompanied him unto the ship.	They were especially grieved by his statement that they would never see his face again. Then they accompanied him to the ship.
ACT	21	1	우리가 저희를 작별하고 행선하여 바로 고스로 가서 이튿날 로도에 이르러 거기서부터 바다라로 가서	And it came to pass, that after we were gotten from them, and had launched, we came with a straight course unto Coos, and the day following unto Rhodes, and from thence unto Patara:	After we had torn ourselves away from them, we sailed directly to Cos, and the next day on to Rhodes, and from there to Patara.
ACT	21	2	베니게로 건너가는 배를 만나서 타고 가다가	And finding a ship sailing over unto Phenicia, we went aboard, and set forth.	Finding a ship crossing over to Phoenicia, we boarded it and set sail.
ACT	21	3	구브로를 바라보고 이를 왼편에 두고 수리아로 행선하여 두로에서 상륙하니 거기서 배가 짐을 풀려 함이러라	Now when we had discovered Cyprus, we left it on the left hand, and sailed into Syria, and landed at Tyre: for there the ship was to unlade her burden.	After sighting Cyprus and passing south of it, we sailed on to Syria and landed at Tyre, where the ship was to unload its cargo.
ACT	21	4	제자들을 찾아 거기서 이레를 머물더니 그 제자들이 성령의 감동으로 바울더러 예루살렘에 들어가지 말라 하더라	And finding disciples, we tarried there seven days: who said to Paul through the Spirit, that he should not go up to Jerusalem.	We sought out the disciples in Tyre and stayed with them seven days. Through the Spirit they kept telling Paul not to go up to Jerusalem.
ACT	21	5	이 여러 날을 지난 후 우리가 떠나갈새 저희가 다 그 처자와 함께 성문 밖까지 전송하거늘 우리가 바닷가에서 무릎을 꿇어 기도하고	And when we had accomplished those days, we departed and went our way; and they all brought us on our way, with wives and children, till we were out of the city: and we kneeled down on the shore, and prayed.	But when our time there had ended, we set out on our journey. All the disciples, with their wives and children, accompanied us out of the city and knelt down on the beach to pray with us.
ACT	21	6	서로 작별한 후 우리는 배에 오르고 저희는 집으로 돌아가니라	And when we had taken our leave one of another, we took ship; and they returned home again.	And after we had said our farewells, we went aboard the ship, and they returned home.
ACT	21	7	두로로부터 수로를 다 행하여 돌레마이에 이르러 형제들에게 안부를 묻고 그들과 함께 하루를 있다가	And when we had finished our course from Tyre, we came to Ptolemais, and saluted the brethren, and abode with them one day.	When we had finished our voyage from Tyre, we landed at Ptolemais, where we greeted the brothers and stayed with them for a day.
ACT	21	8	이튿날 떠나 가이사랴에 이르러 일곱 집사 중 하나인 전도자 빌립의 집에 들어가서 유하니라	And the next day we that were of Paul’s company departed, and came unto Cesarea: and we entered into the house of Philip the evangelist, which was one of the seven; and abode with him.	Leaving the next day, we went on to Caesarea and stayed at the home of Philip the evangelist, who was one of the Seven.
ACT	21	9	그에게 딸 넷이 있으니 처녀로 예언하는 자라	And the same man had four daughters, virgins, which did prophesy.	He had four unmarried daughters who prophesied.
ACT	21	10	여러 날 있더니 한 선지자 아가보라 하는 이가 유대로부터 내려와	And as we tarried there many days, there came down from Judea a certain prophet, named Agabus.	After we had been there several days, a prophet named Agabus came down from Judea.
ACT	21	11	우리에게 와서 바울의 띠를 가져다가 자기 수족을 잡아매고 말하기를 성령이 말씀하시되 예루살렘에서 유대인들이 이같이 이 띠 임자를 결박하여 이방인의 손에 넘겨주리라 하거늘	And when he was come unto us, he took Paul’s girdle, and bound his own hands and feet, and said, Thus saith the Holy Ghost, So shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that owneth this girdle, and shall deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles.	Coming over to us, he took Paul’s belt, bound his own feet and hands, and said, “The Holy Spirit says: ‘In this way the Jews of Jerusalem will bind the owner of this belt and hand him over to the Gentiles.’”
ACT	21	12	우리가 그 말을 듣고 그 곳 사람들로 더불어 바울에게 예루살렘으로 올라가지 말라 권하니	And when we heard these things, both we, and they of that place, besought him not to go up to Jerusalem.	When we heard this, we and the people there pleaded with Paul not to go up to Jerusalem.
ACT	21	13	바울이 대답하되 너희가 어찌하여 울어 내 마음을 상하게 하느냐 나는 주 예수의 이름을 위하여 결박 받을 뿐 아니라 예루살렘에서 죽을 것도 각오하였노라 하니	Then Paul answered, What mean ye to weep and to break mine heart? for I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.	Then Paul answered, “Why are you weeping and breaking my heart? I am ready not only to be bound, but also to die in Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.”
ACT	21	14	저가 권함을 받지 아니하므로 우리가 주의 뜻대로 이루어지이다 하고 그쳤노라	And when he would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, The will of the Lord be done.	When he would not be dissuaded, we fell silent and said, “The Lord’s will be done.”
ACT	21	15	이 여러 날 후에 행장을 준비하여 예루살렘으로 올라갈새	And after those days we took up our carriages, and went up to Jerusalem.	After these days, we packed up and went on to Jerusalem.
ACT	21	16	가이사랴의 몇 제자가 함께 가며 한 오랜 제자 구브로 사람 나손을 데리고 가니 이는 우리가 그의 집에 유하려 함이라	There went with us also certain of the disciples of Cesarea, and brought with them one Mnason of Cyprus, an old disciple, with whom we should lodge.	Some of the disciples from Caesarea accompanied us, and they took us to stay at the home of Mnason the Cypriot, an early disciple.
ACT	21	17	예루살렘에 이르니 형제들이 우리를 기꺼이 영접하거늘	And when we were come to Jerusalem, the brethren received us gladly.	When we arrived in Jerusalem, the brothers welcomed us joyfully.
ACT	21	18	그 이튿날 바울이 우리와 함께 야고보에게로 들어가니 장로들도 다 있더라	And the day following Paul went in with us unto James; and all the elders were present.	The next day Paul went in with us to see James, and all the elders were present.
ACT	21	19	바울이 문안하고 하나님이 자기의 봉사로 말미암아 이방 가운데서 하신 일을 낱낱이 고하니	And when he had saluted them, he declared particularly what things God had wrought among the Gentiles by his ministry.	Paul greeted them and recounted one by one the things that God had done among the Gentiles through his ministry.
ACT	21	20	저희가 듣고 하나님께 영광을 돌리고 바울더러 이르되 형제여 그대도 보는 바에 유대인 중에 믿는 자 수만 명이 있으니 다 율법에 열심 있는 자라	And when they heard it, they glorified the Lord, and said unto him, Thou seest, brother, how many thousands of Jews there are which believe; and they are all zealous of the law:	When they heard this, they glorified God. Then they said to Paul, “You see, brother, how many thousands of Jews have believed, and all of them are zealous for the law.
ACT	21	21	네가 이방에 있는 모든 유대인을 가르치되 모세를 배반하고 아들들에게 할례를 하지 말고 또 규모를 지키지 말라 한다 함을 저희가 들었도다	And they are informed of thee, that thou teachest all the Jews which are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, saying that they ought not to circumcise their children, neither to walk after the customs.	But they are under the impression that you teach all the Jews who live among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, telling them not to circumcise their children or observe our customs.
ACT	21	22	그러면 어찌할꼬 저희가 필연 그대의 온 것을 들으리니	What is it therefore? the multitude must needs come together: for they will hear that thou art come.	What then should we do? They will certainly hear that you have come.
ACT	21	23	우리의 말하는 이대로 하라 서원한 네 사람이 우리에게 있으니	Do therefore this that we say to thee: We have four men which have a vow on them;	Therefore do what we advise you. There are four men with us who have taken a vow.
ACT	21	24	저희를 데리고 함께 결례를 행하고 저희를 위하여 비용을 내어 머리를 깎게 하라 그러면 모든 사람이 그대에게 대하여 들은 것이 헛된 것이고 그대로 율법을 지켜 행하는 줄로 알 것이라	Them take, and purify thyself with them, and be at charges with them, that they may shave their heads: and all may know that those things, whereof they were informed concerning thee, are nothing; but that thou thyself also walkest orderly, and keepest the law.	Take these men, purify yourself along with them, and pay their expenses so they can have their heads shaved. Then everyone will know that there is no truth to these rumors about you, but that you also live in obedience to the law.
ACT	21	25	주를 믿는 이방인에게는 우리가 우상의 제물과 피와 목매어 죽인 것과 음행을 피할 것을 결의하고 편지하였느니라 하니	As touching the Gentiles which believe, we have written and concluded that they observe no such thing, save only that they keep themselves from things offered to idols, and from blood, and from strangled, and from fornication.	As for the Gentile believers, we have written to them our decision that they must abstain from food sacrificed to idols, from blood, from the meat of strangled animals, and from sexual immorality.”
ACT	21	26	바울이 이 사람들을 데리고 이튿날 저희와 함께 결례를 행하고 성전에 들어가서 각 사람을 위하여 제사 드릴 때까지의 결례의 만기 된 것을 고하니라	Then Paul took the men, and the next day purifying himself with them entered into the temple, to signify the accomplishment of the days of purification, until that an offering should be offered for every one of them.	So the next day Paul took the men and purified himself along with them. Then he entered the temple to give notice of the date when their purification would be complete and the offering would be made for each of them.
ACT	21	27	그 이레가 거의 차매 아시아로부터 온 유대인들이 성전에서 바울을 보고 모든 무리를 충동하여 그를 붙들고	And when the seven days were almost ended, the Jews which were of Asia, when they saw him in the temple, stirred up all the people, and laid hands on him,	When the seven days were almost over, some Jews from the province of Asia saw Paul at the temple. They stirred up the whole crowd and seized him,
ACT	21	28	외치되 이스라엘 사람들아 도우라 이 사람은 각처에서 우리 백성과 율법과 이곳을 훼방하여 모든 사람을 가르치는 그 자인데 또 헬라인을 데리고 성전에 들어가서 이 거룩한 곳을 더럽게 하였다 하니	Crying out, Men of Israel, help: This is the man, that teacheth all men every where against the people, and the law, and this place: and further brought Greeks also into the temple, and hath polluted this holy place.	crying out, “Men of Israel, help us! This is the man who teaches everywhere against our people and against our law and against this place. Furthermore, he has brought Greeks into the temple and defiled this holy place.”
ACT	21	29	이는 저희가 전에 에베소 사람 드로비모가 바울과 함께 성내에 있음을 보고 바울이 저를 성전에 데리고 들어간 줄로 생각함일러라	(For they had seen before with him in the city Trophimus an Ephesian, whom they supposed that Paul had brought into the temple.)	For they had previously seen Trophimus the Ephesian with him in the city, and they assumed that Paul had brought him into the temple.
ACT	21	30	온 성이 소동하여 백성이 달려와 모여 바울을 잡아 성전 밖으로 끌고 나가니 문들이 곧 닫히더라	And all the city was moved, and the people ran together: and they took Paul, and drew him out of the temple: and forthwith the doors were shut.	The whole city was stirred up, and the people rushed together. They seized Paul and dragged him out of the temple, and at once the gates were shut.
ACT	21	31	저희가 그를 죽이려 할 때에 온 예루살렘의 요란하다는 소문이 군대의 천부장에게 들리매	And as they went about to kill him, tidings came unto the chief captain of the band, that all Jerusalem was in an uproar.	While they were trying to kill him, the commander of the Roman regiment received a report that all Jerusalem was in turmoil.
ACT	21	32	저가 급히 군사들과 백부장들을 거느리고 달려 내려가니 저희가 천부장과 군사들을 보고 바울 치기를 그치는지라	Who immediately took soldiers and centurions, and ran down unto them: and when they saw the chief captain and the soldiers, they left beating of Paul.	Immediately he took some soldiers and centurions and ran down to the crowd. When the people saw the commander and the soldiers, they stopped beating Paul.
ACT	21	33	이에 천부장이 가까이 가서 바울을 잡아 두 쇠사슬로 결박하라 명하고 누구며 무슨 일을 하였느냐 물으니	Then the chief captain came near, and took him, and commanded him to be bound with two chains; and demanded who he was, and what he had done.	The commander came up and arrested Paul, ordering that he be bound with two chains. Then he asked who he was and what he had done.
ACT	21	34	무리 가운데서 어떤 이는 이 말로, 어떤 이는 저 말로 부르짖거늘 천부장이 소동을 인하여 그 실상을 알 수 없어 그를 영문 안으로 데려가라 명하니라	And some cried one thing, some another, among the multitude: and when he could not know the certainty for the tumult, he commanded him to be carried into the castle.	Some in the crowd were shouting one thing, and some another. And since the commander could not get at the truth because of the uproar, he ordered that Paul be brought into the barracks.
ACT	21	35	바울이 층대에 이를 때에 무리의 포행을 인하여 군사들에게 들려가니	And when he came upon the stairs, so it was, that he was borne of the soldiers for the violence of the people.	When Paul reached the steps, he had to be carried by the soldiers because of the violence of the mob.
ACT	21	36	이는 백성의 무리가 그를 없이 하자고 외치며 따라 감이러라	For the multitude of the people followed after, crying, Away with him.	For the crowd that followed him kept shouting, “Away with him!”
ACT	21	37	바울을 데리고 영문으로 들어가려 할 그 때에 바울이 천부장더러 이르되 내가 당신에게 말할수 있느뇨 가로되 네가 헬라말을 아느냐	And as Paul was to be led into the castle, he said unto the chief captain, May I speak unto thee? Who said, Canst thou speak Greek?	As they were about to take Paul into the barracks, he asked the commander, “May I say something to you?” “Do you speak Greek?” he replied.
ACT	21	38	그러면 네가 이전에 난을 일으켜 사천의 자객을 거느리고 광야로 가던 애굽인이 아니냐	Art not thou that Egyptian, which before these days madest an uproar, and leddest out into the wilderness four thousand men that were murderers?	“Aren’t you the Egyptian who incited a rebellion some time ago and led four thousand members of the ‘Assassins’ into the wilderness?”
ACT	21	39	바울이 가로되 나는 유대인이라 소읍이 아닌 길리기아 다소 성의 시민이니 청컨대 백성에게 말하기를 허락하라 하니	But Paul said, I am a man which am a Jew of Tarsus, a city in Cilicia, a citizen of no mean city: and, I beseech thee, suffer me to speak unto the people.	But Paul answered, “I am a Jew from Tarsus in Cilicia, a citizen of no ordinary city. Now I beg you to allow me to speak to the people.”
ACT	21	40	천부장이 허락하거늘 바울이 층대 위에 서서 백성에게 손짓하여 크게 종용히 한 후에 히브리 방언으로 말하여 가로되	And when he had given him licence, Paul stood on the stairs, and beckoned with the hand unto the people. And when there was made a great silence, he spake unto them in the Hebrew tongue, saying,	Having received permission, Paul stood on the steps and motioned to the crowd. A great hush came over the crowd, and he addressed them in Hebrew:
ACT	22	1	부형들아 내가 지금 너희 앞에서 변명하는 말을 들으라 하더라	Men, brethren, and fathers, hear ye my defence which I make now unto you.	“Brothers and fathers, listen now to my defense before you.”
ACT	22	2	저희가 그 히브리 방언으로 말함을 듣고 더욱 종용한지라 이어 가로되	(And when they heard that he spake in the Hebrew tongue to them, they kept the more silence: and he saith,)	When they heard him speak to them in Hebrew, they became even more silent. Then Paul declared,
ACT	22	3	나는 유대인으로 길리기아 다소에서 났고 이 성에서 자라 가말리엘의 문하에서 우리 조상들의 율법의 엄한 교훈을 받았고 오늘 너희 모든 사람처럼 하나님께 대하여 열심하는 자라	I am verily a man which am a Jew, born in Tarsus, a city in Cilicia, yet brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel, and taught according to the perfect manner of the law of the fathers, and was zealous toward God, as ye all are this day.	“I am a Jew, born in Tarsus of Cilicia, but raised in this city. I was educated at the feet of Gamaliel in strict conformity to the law of our fathers. I am just as zealous for God as any of you here today.
ACT	22	4	내가 이 도를 핍박하여 사람을 죽이기까지 하고 남녀를 결박하여 옥에 넘겼노니	And I persecuted this way unto the death, binding and delivering into prisons both men and women.	I persecuted this Way even to the death, detaining both men and women and throwing them into prison,
ACT	22	5	이에 대제사장과 모든 장로들이 내 증인이라 또 내가 저희에게서 다메섹 형제들에게 가는 공문을 받아 가지고 거기 있는 자들도 결박하여 예루살렘으로 끌어다가 형벌 받게 하려고 가더니	As also the high priest doth bear me witness, and all the estate of the elders: from whom also I received letters unto the brethren, and went to Damascus, to bring them which were there bound unto Jerusalem, for to be punished.	as the high priest and the whole Council can testify about me. I even obtained letters from them to their brothers in Damascus, and I was on my way to apprehend these people and bring them to Jerusalem to be punished.
ACT	22	6	가는데 다메섹에 가까웠을 때에 오정쯤 되어 홀연히 하늘로서 큰 빛이 나를 둘러 비취매	And it came to pass, that, as I made my journey, and was come nigh unto Damascus about noon, suddenly there shone from heaven a great light round about me.	About noon as I was approaching Damascus, suddenly a bright light from heaven flashed around me.
ACT	22	7	내가 땅에 엎드러져 들으니 소리 있어 가로되 사울아 사울아 네가 왜 나를 핍박하느냐 하시거늘	And I fell unto the ground, and heard a voice saying unto me, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?	I fell to the ground and heard a voice say to me, ‘Saul, Saul, why do you persecute Me?’
ACT	22	8	내가 대답하되 주여 뉘시니이까 하니 가라사대 나는 네가 핍박하는 나사렛 예수라 하시더라	And I answered, Who art thou, Lord? And he said unto me, I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou persecutest.	‘Who are You, Lord?’ I asked. ‘I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom you are persecuting,’ He replied.
ACT	22	9	나와 함께 있는 사람들이 빛은 보면서도 나더러 말하시는 이의 소리는 듣지 못하더라	And they that were with me saw indeed the light, and were afraid; but they heard not the voice of him that spake to me.	My companions saw the light, but they could not understand the voice of the One speaking to me.
ACT	22	10	내가 가로되 주여 무엇을 하리이까 주께서 가라사대 일어나 다메섹으로 들어가라 정한 바 너희 모든 행할 것을 거기서 누가 이르리라 하시거늘	And I said, What shall I do, Lord? And the Lord said unto me, Arise, and go into Damascus; and there it shall be told thee of all things which are appointed for thee to do.	Then I asked, ‘What should I do, Lord?’ ‘Get up and go into Damascus,’ He told me. ‘There you will be told all that you have been appointed to do.’
ACT	22	11	나는 그 빛의 광채를 인하여 볼 수 없게 되었으므로 나와 함께 있는 사람들의 손에 끌려 다메섹에 들어갔노라	And when I could not see for the glory of that light, being led by the hand of them that were with me, I came into Damascus.	Because the brilliance of the light had blinded me, my companions led me by the hand into Damascus.
ACT	22	12	율법에 의하면 경건한 사람으로 거기 사는 모든 유대인들에게 칭찬을 듣는 아나니아라 하는 이가	And one Ananias, a devout man according to the law, having a good report of all the Jews which dwelt there,	There a man named Ananias, a devout observer of the law who was highly regarded by all the Jews living there,
ACT	22	13	내게 와 곁에 서서 말하되 형제 사울아 다시 보라 하거늘 즉시 그를 쳐다보았노라	Came unto me, and stood, and said unto me, Brother Saul, receive thy sight. And the same hour I looked up upon him.	came and stood beside me. ‘Brother Saul,’ he said, ‘receive your sight.’ And at that moment I could see him.
ACT	22	14	그가 또 가로되 우리 조상들의 하나님이 너를 택하여 너로 하여금 자기 뜻을 알게 하시며 저 의인을 보게 하시고 그 입에서 나오는 음성을 듣게 하셨으니	And he said, The God of our fathers hath chosen thee, that thou shouldest know his will, and see that Just One, and shouldest hear the voice of his mouth.	Then he said, ‘The God of our fathers has appointed you to know His will, and to see the Righteous One, and to hear His voice.
ACT	22	15	네가 그를 위하여 모든 사람 앞에서 너의 보고 들은 것에 증인이 되리라	For thou shalt be his witness unto all men of what thou hast seen and heard.	You will be His witness to everyone of what you have seen and heard.
ACT	22	16	이제는 왜 주저하느뇨 일어나 주의 이름을 불러 침례를 받고 너의 죄를 씻으라 하더라	And now why tarriest thou? arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord.	And now what are you waiting for? Get up, be baptized, and wash your sins away, calling on His name.’
ACT	22	17	후에 내가 예루살렘으로 돌아와서 성전에서 기도할 때에 비몽사몽간에	And it came to pass, that, when I was come again to Jerusalem, even while I prayed in the temple, I was in a trance;	Later, when I had returned to Jerusalem and was praying at the temple, I fell into a trance
ACT	22	18	보매 주께서 내게 말씀하시되 속히 예루살렘에서 나가라 저희는 네가 내게 대하여 증거하는 말을 듣지 아니하리라 하시거늘	And saw him saying unto me, Make haste, and get thee quickly out of Jerusalem: for they will not receive thy testimony concerning me.	and saw the Lord saying to me, ‘Hurry! Leave Jerusalem quickly, because the people here will not accept your testimony about Me.’
ACT	22	19	내가 말하기를 주여 내가 주 믿는 사람들을 가두고 또 각 회당에서 때리고	And I said, Lord, they know that I imprisoned and beat in every synagogue them that believed on thee:	‘Lord,’ I answered, ‘they know very well that in one synagogue after another I imprisoned and beat those who believed in You.
ACT	22	20	또 주의 증인 스데반의 피를 흘릴 적에 내가 곁에 서서 찬성하고 그 죽이는 사람들의 옷을 지킨 줄 저희도 아나이다	And when the blood of thy martyr Stephen was shed, I also was standing by, and consenting unto his death, and kept the raiment of them that slew him.	And when the blood of Your witness Stephen was shed, I stood there giving my approval and watching over the garments of those who killed him.’
ACT	22	21	나더러 또 이르시되 떠나가라 내가 너를 멀리 이방인에게로 보내리라 하셨느니라	And he said unto me, Depart: for I will send thee far hence unto the Gentiles.	Then He said to me, ‘Go! I will send you far away to the Gentiles.’”
ACT	22	22	이 말 하는 것까지 저희가 듣다가 소리질러 가로되 이러한 놈은 세상에서 없이 하자 살려둘 자가 아니라 하여	And they gave him audience unto this word, and then lifted up their voices, and said, Away with such a fellow from the earth: for it is not fit that he should live.	The crowd listened to Paul until he made this statement. Then they lifted up their voices and shouted, “Rid the earth of him! He is not fit to live!”
ACT	22	23	떠들며 옷을 벗어 던지고 티끌을 공중에 날리니	And as they cried out, and cast off their clothes, and threw dust into the air,	As they were shouting and throwing off their cloaks and tossing dust into the air,
ACT	22	24	천부장이 바울을 영문 안으로 데려가라 명하고 저희가 무슨 일로 그를 대하여 떠드나 알고자 하여 채찍질하며 신문하라 한대	The chief captain commanded him to be brought into the castle, and bade that he should be examined by scourging; that he might know wherefore they cried so against him.	the commander ordered that Paul be brought into the barracks. He directed that Paul be flogged and interrogated to determine the reason for this outcry against him.
ACT	22	25	가죽줄로 바울을 매니 바울이 곁에 섰는 백부장더러 이르되 너희가 로마 사람 된 자를 죄도 정치 아니하고 채찍질할 수 있느냐 하니	And as they bound him with thongs, Paul said unto the centurion that stood by, Is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is a Roman, and uncondemned?	But as they stretched him out to strap him down, Paul said to the centurion standing there, “Is it lawful for you to flog a Roman citizen without a trial?”
ACT	22	26	백부장이 듣고 가서 천부장에게 전하여 가로되 어찌하려 하느뇨 이는 로마 사람이라 하니	When the centurion heard that, he went and told the chief captain, saying, Take heed what thou doest: for this man is a Roman.	On hearing this, the centurion went and reported it to the commander. “What are you going to do?” he said. “This man is a Roman citizen.”
ACT	22	27	천부장이 와서 바울에게 말하되 네가 로마 사람이냐 내게 말하라 가로되 그러하다	Then the chief captain came, and said unto him, Tell me, art thou a Roman? He said, Yea.	The commander went to Paul and asked, “Tell me, are you a Roman citizen?” “Yes,” he answered.
ACT	22	28	천부장이 대답하되 나는 돈을 많이 들여 이 시민권을 얻었노라 바울이 가로되 나는 나면서부터로라 하니	And the chief captain answered, With a great sum obtained I this freedom. And Paul said, But I was free born.	“I paid a high price for my citizenship,” said the commander. “But I was born a citizen,” Paul replied.
ACT	22	29	신문하려던 사람들이 곧 그에게서 물러가고 천부장도 그가 로마 사람인 줄 알고 또는 그 결박한 것을 인하여 두려워하니라	Then straightway they departed from him which should have examined him: and the chief captain also was afraid, after he knew that he was a Roman, and because he had bound him.	Then those who were about to interrogate Paul stepped back, and the commander himself was alarmed when he realized that he had put a Roman citizen in chains.
ACT	22	30	이튿날 천부장이 무슨 일로 유대인들이 그를 송사하는지 실상을 알고자 하여 그 결박을 풀고 명하여 제사장들과 온 공회를 모으고 바울을 데리고 내려가서 저희 앞에 세우니라	On the morrow, because he would have known the certainty wherefore he was accused of the Jews, he loosed him from his bands, and commanded the chief priests and all their council to appear, and brought Paul down, and set him before them.	The next day the commander, wanting to learn the real reason Paul was accused by the Jews, released him and ordered the chief priests and the whole Sanhedrin to assemble. Then he brought Paul down and had him stand before them.
ACT	23	1	바울이 공회를 주목하여 가로되 여러분 형제들아 오늘날까지 내가 범사에 양심을 따라 하나님을 섬겼노라 하거늘	And Paul, earnestly beholding the council, said, Men and brethren, I have lived in all good conscience before God until this day.	Paul looked directly at the Sanhedrin and said, “Brothers, I have conducted myself before God in all good conscience to this day.”
ACT	23	2	대제사장 아나니아가 바울 곁에 섰는 사람들에게 그 입을 치라 명하니	And the high priest Ananias commanded them that stood by him to smite him on the mouth.	At this, the high priest Ananias ordered those standing near Paul to strike him on the mouth.
ACT	23	3	바울이 가로되 회칠한 담이여 하나님이 너를 치시리로다 네가 나를 율법대로 판단한다고 앉아서 율법을 어기고 나를 치라 하느냐 하니	Then said Paul unto him, God shall smite thee, thou whited wall: for sittest thou to judge me after the law, and commandest me to be smitten contrary to the law?	Then Paul said to him, “God will strike you, you whitewashed wall! You sit here to judge me according to the law, yet you yourself violate the law by commanding that I be struck.”
ACT	23	4	곁에 선 사람들이 말하되 하나님의 대제사장을 네가 욕하느냐	And they that stood by said, Revilest thou God’s high priest?	But those standing nearby said, “How dare you insult the high priest of God!”
ACT	23	5	바울이 가로되 형제들아 나는 그가 대제사장인 줄 알지 못하였노라 기록하였으되 너희 백성의 관원을 비방치 말라 하였느니라 하더라	Then said Paul, I wist not, brethren, that he was the high priest: for it is written, Thou shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy people.	“Brothers,” Paul replied, “I was not aware that he was the high priest, for it is written: ‘Do not speak evil about the ruler of your people.’”
ACT	23	6	바울이 그 한 부분은 사두개인이요 한 부분은 바리새인인 줄 알고 공회에서 외쳐 가로되 여러분 형제들아 나는 바리새인이요 또 바리새인의 아들이라 죽은 자의 소망 곧 부활을 인하여 내가 심문을 받노라	But when Paul perceived that the one part were Sadducees, and the other Pharisees, he cried out in the council, Men and brethren, I am a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee: of the hope and resurrection of the dead I am called in question.	Then Paul, knowing that some of them were Sadducees and others Pharisees, called out in the Sanhedrin, “Brothers, I am a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee. It is because of my hope in the resurrection of the dead that I am on trial.”
ACT	23	7	그 말을 한즉 바리새인과 사두개인 사이에 다툼이 생겨 무리가 나누이니	And when he had so said, there arose a dissension between the Pharisees and the Sadducees: and the multitude was divided.	As soon as he had said this, a dispute broke out between the Pharisees and Sadducees, and the assembly was divided.
ACT	23	8	이는 사두개인은 부활도 없고 천사도 없고 영도 없다 하고 바리새인은 다 있다 함이라	For the Sadducees say that there is no resurrection, neither angel, nor spirit: but the Pharisees confess both.	For the Sadducees say that there is neither a resurrection, nor angels, nor spirits, but the Pharisees acknowledge them all.
ACT	23	9	크게 훤화가 일어날새 바리새인 편에서 몇 서기관이 일어나 다투어 가로되 우리가 이 사람을 보매 악한 것이 없도다 혹 영이나 혹 천사가 저더러 말하였으면 어찌 하겠느뇨 하여	And there arose a great cry: and the scribes that were of the Pharisees’ part arose, and strove, saying, We find no evil in this man: but if a spirit or an angel hath spoken to him, let us not fight against God.	A great clamor arose, and some scribes from the party of the Pharisees got up and contended sharply, “We find nothing wrong with this man. What if a spirit or an angel has spoken to him?”
ACT	23	10	큰 분쟁이 생기니 천부장이 바울이 저희에게 찢겨질까 하여 군사를 명하여 내려가 무리 가운데서 빼앗아 가지고 영문으로 들어가라 하니라	And when there arose a great dissension, the chief captain, fearing lest Paul should have been pulled in pieces of them, commanded the soldiers to go down, and to take him by force from among them, and to bring him into the castle.	The dispute grew so violent that the commander was afraid they would tear Paul to pieces. He ordered the soldiers to go down and remove him by force and bring him into the barracks.
ACT	23	11	그 날 밤에 주께서 바울 곁에 서서 이르시되 담대하라 네가 예루살렘에서 나의 일을 증거한 것 같이 로마에서도 증거하여야 하리라 하시니라	And the night following the Lord stood by him, and said, Be of good cheer, Paul: for as thou hast testified of me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at Rome.	The following night the Lord stood near Paul and said, “Take courage! As you have testified about Me in Jerusalem, so also you must testify in Rome.”
ACT	23	12	날이 새매 유대인들이 당을 지어 맹세하되 바울을 죽이기 전에는 먹지도 아니하고 마시지도 아니하겠다 하고	And when it was day, certain of the Jews banded together, and bound themselves under a curse, saying that they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul.	When daylight came, the Jews formed a conspiracy and bound themselves with an oath not to eat or drink until they had killed Paul.
ACT	23	13	이같이 동맹한 자가 사십여 명이더라	And they were more than forty which had made this conspiracy.	More than forty of them were involved in this plot.
ACT	23	14	대제사장들과 장로들에게 가서 말하되 우리가 바울을 죽이기 전에는 아무 것도 먹지 않기로 굳게 맹세하였으니	And they came to the chief priests and elders, and said, We have bound ourselves under a great curse, that we will eat nothing until we have slain Paul.	They went to the chief priests and elders and said, “We have bound ourselves with a solemn oath not to eat anything until we have killed Paul.
ACT	23	15	이제 너희는 그의 사실을 더 자세히 알아볼 양으로 공회와 함께 천부장에게 청하여 바울을 너희에게로 데리고 내려오게 하라 우리는 그가 가까이 오기 전에 죽이기로 준비하였노라 하더니	Now therefore ye with the council signify to the chief captain that he bring him down unto you to morrow, as though ye would enquire something more perfectly concerning him: and we, or ever he come near, are ready to kill him.	Now then, you and the Sanhedrin petition the commander to bring him down to you on the pretext of examining his case more carefully. We are ready to kill him on the way.”
ACT	23	16	바울의 생질이 그들이 매복하여 있다 함을 듣고 와서 영문에 들어가 바울에게 고한지라	And when Paul’s sister’s son heard of their lying in wait, he went and entered into the castle, and told Paul.	But when the son of Paul’s sister heard about the plot, he went into the barracks and told Paul.
ACT	23	17	바울이 한 백부장을 청하여 가로되 이 청년을 천부장에게로 인도하라 그에게 무슨 할 말이 있다 하니	Then Paul called one of the centurions unto him, and said, Bring this young man unto the chief captain: for he hath a certain thing to tell him.	Then Paul called one of the centurions and said, “Take this young man to the commander; he has something to tell him.”
ACT	23	18	천부장에게로 데리고 가서 가로되 죄수 바울이 나를 불러 이 청년이 당신께 할 말이 있다 하여 데리고 가기를 청하더이다 하매	So he took him, and brought him to the chief captain, and said, Paul the prisoner called me unto him, and prayed me to bring this young man unto thee, who hath something to say unto thee.	So the centurion took him to the commander and said, “Paul the prisoner sent and asked me to bring this young man to you. He has something to tell you.”
ACT	23	19	천부장이 그 손을 잡고 물러가서 종용히 묻되 내게 할 말이 무엇이냐	Then the chief captain took him by the hand, and went with him aside privately, and asked him, What is that thou hast to tell me?	The commander took the young man by the hand, drew him aside, and asked, “What do you need to tell me?”
ACT	23	20	대답하되 유대인들이 공모하기를 저희들이 바울에 대하여 더 자세한 것을 묻기 위함이라 하고 내일 그를 데리고 공회로 내려오기를 당신께 청하자 하였으니	And he said, The Jews have agreed to desire thee that thou wouldest bring down Paul to morrow into the council, as though they would enquire somewhat of him more perfectly.	He answered, “The Jews have agreed to ask you to bring Paul to the Sanhedrin tomorrow on the pretext of acquiring more information about him.
ACT	23	21	당신은 저희 청함을 좇지 마옵소서 저희 중에서 바울을 죽이기 전에는 먹지도 않고 마시지도 않기로 맹세한 자 사십여 명이 그를 죽이려고 숨어서 지금 다 준비하고 당신의 허락만 기다리나이다 하매	But do not thou yield unto them: for there lie in wait for him of them more than forty men, which have bound themselves with an oath, that they will neither eat nor drink till they have killed him: and now are they ready, looking for a promise from thee.	Do not let them persuade you, because more than forty men are waiting to ambush him. They have bound themselves with an oath not to eat or drink until they have killed him; they are ready now, awaiting your consent.”
ACT	23	22	이에 천부장이 청년을 보내며 경계하되 이 일을 내게 고하였다고 아무에게도 이르지 말라 하고	So the chief captain then let the young man depart, and charged him, See thou tell no man that thou hast shewed these things to me.	So the commander dismissed the young man and instructed him, “Do not tell anyone that you have reported this to me.”
ACT	23	23	백부장 둘을 불러 이르되 밤 제 삼 시에 가이사랴까지 갈 보병 이백 명과 마병 칠십 명과 창군 이백 명을 준비하라 하고	And he called unto him two centurions, saying, Make ready two hundred soldiers to go to Cesarea, and horsemen threescore and ten, and spearmen two hundred, at the third hour of the night;	Then he called two of his centurions and said, “Prepare two hundred soldiers, seventy horsemen, and two hundred spearmen to go to Caesarea in the third hour of the night.
ACT	23	24	또 바울을 태워 총독 벨릭스에게로 무사히 보내기 위하여 짐승을 준비하라 명하며	And provide them beasts, that they may set Paul on, and bring him safe unto Felix the governor.	Provide mounts for Paul to take him safely to Governor Felix.”
ACT	23	25	또 이 아래와 같이 편지하니 일렀으되	And he wrote a letter after this manner:	And he wrote the following letter:
ACT	23	26	글라우디오 루시아는 총독 벨릭스 각하에게 문안하노이다	Claudius Lysias unto the most excellent governor Felix sendeth greeting.	Claudius Lysias, To His Excellency, Governor Felix: Greetings.
ACT	23	27	이 사람이 유대인들에게 잡혀 죽게 된 것을 내가 로마 사람인 줄 들어 알고 군사를 거느리고 가서 구원하여다가	This man was taken of the Jews, and should have been killed of them: then came I with an army, and rescued him, having understood that he was a Roman.	This man was seized by the Jews, and they were about to kill him when I came with my troops to rescue him. For I had learned that he is a Roman citizen,
ACT	23	28	유대인들이 무슨 일로 그를 송사하는지 알고자 하여 저희 공회로 데리고 내려갔더니	And when I would have known the cause wherefore they accused him, I brought him forth into their council:	and since I wanted to understand their charges against him, I brought him down to their Sanhedrin.
ACT	23	29	송사하는 것이 저희 율법 문제에 관한 것뿐이요 한 가지도 죽이거나 결박할 사건이 없음을 발견하였나이다	Whom I perceived to be accused of questions of their law, but to have nothing laid to his charge worthy of death or of bonds.	I found that the accusation involved questions about their own law, but there was no charge worthy of death or imprisonment.
ACT	23	30	그러나 이 사람을 해하려는 간계가 있다고 누가 내게 알게 하기로 곧 당신께로 보내며 또 송사하는 사람들도 당신 앞에서 그를 대하여 말하라 하였나이다 하였더라	And when it was told me how that the Jews laid wait for the man, I sent straightway to thee, and gave commandment to his accusers also to say before thee what they had against him. Farewell.	When I was informed that there was a plot against the man, I sent him to you at once. I also instructed his accusers to present their case against him before you.
ACT	23	31	보병이 명을 받은 대로 밤에 바울을 데리고 안디바드리에 이르러	Then the soldiers, as it was commanded them, took Paul, and brought him by night to Antipatris.	So the soldiers followed their orders and brought Paul by night to Antipatris.
ACT	23	32	이튿날 마병으로 바울을 호송하게 하고 영문으로 돌아가니라	On the morrow they left the horsemen to go with him, and returned to the castle:	The next day they returned to the barracks and let the horsemen go on with him.
ACT	23	33	저희가 가이사랴에 들어가서 편지를 총독에게 드리고 바울을 그 앞에 세우니	Who, when they came to Cesarea, and delivered the epistle to the governor, presented Paul also before him.	When the horsemen arrived in Caesarea, they delivered the letter to the governor and presented Paul to him.
ACT	23	34	총독이 읽고 바울더러 어느 영지 사람이냐 물어 길리기아 사람인 줄 알고	And when the governor had read the letter, he asked of what province he was. And when he understood that he was of Cilicia;	The governor read the letter and asked what province Paul was from. Learning that he was from Cilicia,
ACT	23	35	가로되 너를 송사하는 사람들이 오거든 네 말을 들으리라 하고 헤롯 궁에 그를 지키라 명하니라	I will hear thee, said he, when thine accusers are also come. And he commanded him to be kept in Herod’s judgment hall.	he said, “I will hear your case when your accusers arrive.” Then he ordered that Paul be kept under guard in Herod’s Praetorium.
ACT	24	1	닷새 후에 대제사장 아나니아가 어떤 장로들과 한 변사 더둘로와 함께 내려와서 총독 앞에서 바울을 고소하니라	And after five days Ananias the high priest descended with the elders, and with a certain orator named Tertullus, who informed the governor against Paul.	Five days later the high priest Ananias came down with some elders and a lawyer named Tertullus, who presented to the governor their case against Paul.
ACT	24	2	바울을 부르매 더둘로가 송사하여 가로되	And when he was called forth, Tertullus began to accuse him, saying, Seeing that by thee we enjoy great quietness, and that very worthy deeds are done unto this nation by thy providence,	When Paul had been called in, Tertullus opened the prosecution: “Because of you, we have enjoyed a lasting peace, and your foresight has brought improvements to this nation.
ACT	24	3	벨릭스 각하여 우리가 당신을 힘입어 태평을 누리고 또 이 민족이 당신의 선견을 인하여 여러 가지로 개량된 것을 우리가 어느 모양으로나 어느 곳에서나 감사무지하옵나이다	We accept it always, and in all places, most noble Felix, with all thankfulness.	In every way and everywhere, most excellent Felix, we acknowledge this with all gratitude.
ACT	24	4	당신을 더 괴롭게 아니하려 하여 우리가 대강 여짜옵나니 관용하여 들으시기를 원하나이다	Notwithstanding, that I be not further tedious unto thee, I pray thee that thou wouldest hear us of thy clemency a few words.	But in order not to burden you any further, I beg your indulgence to hear us briefly.
ACT	24	5	우리가 보니 이 사람은 염병이라 천하에 퍼진 유대인을 다 소요케 하는 자요 나사렛 이단의 괴수라	For we have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition among all the Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes:	We have found this man to be a pestilence, stirring up dissension among the Jews all over the world. He is a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes,
ACT	24	6	저가 또 성전을 더럽게 하려 하므로 우리가 잡았사오니	Who also hath gone about to profane the temple: whom we took, and would have judged according to our law.	and he even tried to desecrate the temple; so we seized him.
ACT	24	7	당신이 친히 그를 심문하시면	But the chief captain Lysias came upon us, and with great violence took him away out of our hands,	
ACT	24	8	우리의 송사하는 이 모든 일을 아실 수 있나이다 하니	Commanding his accusers to come unto thee: by examining of whom thyself mayest take knowledge of all these things, whereof we accuse him.	By examining him yourself, you will be able to learn the truth about all our charges against him.”
ACT	24	9	유대인들도 이에 참가하여 이 말이 옳다 주장하니라	And the Jews also assented, saying that these things were so.	The Jews concurred, asserting that these charges were true.
ACT	24	10	총독이 바울에게 머리로 표시하여 말하라 하니 그가 대답하되 당신이 여러 해 전부터 이 민족의 재판장 된 것을 내가 알고 내 사건에 대하여 기쁘게 변명하나이다	Then Paul, after that the governor had beckoned unto him to speak, answered, Forasmuch as I know that thou hast been of many years a judge unto this nation, I do the more cheerfully answer for myself:	When the governor motioned for Paul to speak, he began his response: “Knowing that you have been a judge over this nation for many years, I gladly make my defense.
ACT	24	11	당신이 아실 수 있는 바와 같이 내가 예루살렘에 예배하러 올라간 지 열이틀밖에 못되었고	Because that thou mayest understand, that there are yet but twelve days since I went up to Jerusalem for to worship.	You can verify for yourself that no more than twelve days ago I went up to Jerusalem to worship.
ACT	24	12	저희는 내가 성전에서 아무와 변론하는 것이나 회당과 또는 성중에서 무리를 소동케 하는 것을 보지 못하였으니	And they neither found me in the temple disputing with any man, neither raising up the people, neither in the synagogues, nor in the city:	Yet my accusers did not find me debating with anyone in the temple or riling up a crowd in the synagogues or in the city.
ACT	24	13	이제 나를 송사하는 모든 일에 대하여 저희가 능히 당신 앞에 내세울 것이 없나이다	Neither can they prove the things whereof they now accuse me.	Nor can they prove to you any of their charges against me.
ACT	24	14	그러나 이것을 당신께 고백하리이다 나는 저희가 이단이라 하는 도를 좇아 조상의 하나님을 섬기고 율법과 및 선지자들의 글에 기록된 것을 다 믿으며	But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers, believing all things which are written in the law and in the prophets:	I do confess to you, however, that I worship the God of our fathers according to the Way, which they call a sect. I believe everything that is laid down by the Law and written in the Prophets,
ACT	24	15	저희의 기다리는 바 하나님께 향한 소망을 나도 가졌으니 곧 의인과 악인의 부활이 있으리라 함이라	And have hope toward God, which they themselves also allow, that there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust.	and I have the same hope in God that they themselves cherish, that there will be a resurrection of both the righteous and the wicked.
ACT	24	16	이것을 인하여 나도 하나님과 사람을 대하여 항상 양심에 거리낌이 없기를 힘쓰노라	And herein do I exercise myself, to have always a conscience void of offence toward God, and toward men.	In this hope, I strive always to maintain a clear conscience before God and man.
ACT	24	17	여러 해 만에 내가 내 민족을 구제할 것과 제물을 가지고 와서	Now after many years I came to bring alms to my nation, and offerings.	After several years, then, I returned to Jerusalem to bring alms to my people and to present offerings.
ACT	24	18	드리는 중에 내가 결례를 행하였고 모임도 없고 소동도 없이 성전에 있는 것을 저희가 보았나이다 그러나 아시아로부터 온 어떤 유대인들이 있었으니	Whereupon certain Jews from Asia found me purified in the temple, neither with multitude, nor with tumult.	At the time they found me in the temple, I was ceremonially clean and was not inciting a crowd or an uproar. But there are some Jews from the province of Asia
ACT	24	19	저희가 만일 나를 반대할 사건이 있으면 마땅히 당신 앞에 와서 송사하였을 것이요	Who ought to have been here before thee, and object, if they had ought against me.	who ought to appear before you and bring charges, if they have anything against me.
ACT	24	20	그렇지 않으면 이 사람들이 내가 공회 앞에 섰을 때에 무슨 옳지 않은 것을 보았는가 말하라 하소서	Or else let these same here say, if they have found any evil doing in me, while I stood before the council,	Otherwise, let these men state for themselves any crime they found in me when I stood before the Sanhedrin,
ACT	24	21	오직 내가 저희 가운데 서서 외치기를 내가 죽은 자의 부활에 대하여 오늘 너희 앞에 심문을 받는다고 한 이 한 소리가 있을 따름이니이다 하니	Except it be for this one voice, that I cried standing among them, Touching the resurrection of the dead I am called in question by you this day.	unless it was this one thing I called out as I stood in their presence: ‘It is concerning the resurrection of the dead that I am on trial before you today.’”
ACT	24	22	벨릭스가 이 도에 관한 것을 더 자세히 아는고로 연기하여 가로되 천부장 루시아가 내려오거든 너희 일을 처결하리라 하고	And when Felix heard these things, having more perfect knowledge of that way, he deferred them, and said, When Lysias the chief captain shall come down, I will know the uttermost of your matter.	Then Felix, who was well informed about the Way, adjourned the hearing and said, “When Lysias the commander comes, I will decide your case.”
ACT	24	23	백부장을 명하여 바울을 지키되 자유를 주며 친구 중 아무나 수종하는 것을 금치 말라 하니라	And he commanded a centurion to keep Paul, and to let him have liberty, and that he should forbid none of his acquaintance to minister or come unto him.	He ordered the centurion to keep Paul under guard, but to allow him some freedom and permit his friends to minister to his needs.
ACT	24	24	수일 후에 벨릭스가 그 아내 유대 여자 드루실라와 함께 와서 바울을 불러 그리스도 예수 믿는 도를 듣거늘	And after certain days, when Felix came with his wife Drusilla, which was a Jewess, he sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the faith in Christ.	After several days, Felix returned with his wife Drusilla, who was a Jewess. He sent for Paul and listened to him speak about faith in Christ Jesus.
ACT	24	25	바울이 의와 절제와 장차 오는 심판을 강론하니 벨릭스가 두려워하여 대답하되 시방은 가라 내가 틈이 있으면 너를 부르리라 하고	And as he reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, Felix trembled, and answered, Go thy way for this time; when I have a convenient season, I will call for thee.	As Paul expounded on righteousness, self-control, and the coming judgment, Felix became frightened and said, “You may go for now. When I find the time, I will call for you.”
ACT	24	26	동시에 또 바울에게서 돈을 받을까 바라는 고로 더 자주 불러 같이 이야기하더라	He hoped also that money should have been given him of Paul, that he might loose him: wherefore he sent for him the oftener, and communed with him.	At the same time, he was hoping that Paul would offer him a bribe. So he sent for Paul frequently and talked with him.
ACT	24	27	이태를 지내서 보르기오 베스도가 벨릭스의 소임을 대신하니 벨릭스가 유대인의 마음을 얻고자 하여 바울을 구류하여 두니라	But after two years Porcius Festus came into Felix’ room: and Felix, willing to shew the Jews a pleasure, left Paul bound.	After two years had passed, Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus. And wishing to do the Jews a favor, Felix left Paul in prison.
ACT	25	1	베스도가 도임한 지 삼 일 후에 가이사랴에서 예루살렘으로 올라가니	Now when Festus was come into the province, after three days he ascended from Cesarea to Jerusalem.	Three days after his arrival in the province, Festus went up from Caesarea to Jerusalem,
ACT	25	2	대제사장들과 유대인 중 높은 사람들이 바울을 고소할새	Then the high priest and the chief of the Jews informed him against Paul, and besought him,	where the chief priests and Jewish leaders presented their case against Paul. They urged Festus
ACT	25	3	베스도의 호의로 바울을 예루살렘으로 옮겨 보내기를 청하니 이는 길에 매복하였다가 그를 죽이고자 함이러라	And desired favour against him, that he would send for him to Jerusalem, laying wait in the way to kill him.	to grant them a concession against Paul by summoning him to Jerusalem, because they were preparing an ambush to kill him along the way.
ACT	25	4	베스도가 대답하여 바울이 가이사랴에 구류된 것과 자기도 미구에 떠나갈 것을 말하고	But Festus answered, that Paul should be kept at Cesarea, and that he himself would depart shortly thither.	But Festus replied, “Paul is being held in Caesarea, and I myself am going there soon.
ACT	25	5	또 가로되 너희 중 유력한 자들은 나와 함께 내려가서 그 사람에게 만일 옳지 아니한 일이 있거든 송사하라 하니라	Let them therefore, said he, which among you are able, go down with me, and accuse this man, if there be any wickedness in him.	So if this man has done anything wrong, let some of your leaders come down with me and accuse him there.”
ACT	25	6	베스도가 그들 가운데서 팔 일 혹 십 일을 지낸 후 가이사랴로 내려가서 이튿날 재판 자리에 앉고 바울을 데려오라 명하니	And when he had tarried among them more than ten days, he went down unto Cesarea; and the next day sitting on the judgment seat commanded Paul to be brought.	After spending no more than eight or ten days with them, Festus went down to Caesarea. The next day he sat on the judgment seat and ordered that Paul be brought in.
ACT	25	7	그가 나오매 예루살렘에서 내려온 유대인들이 둘러 서서 여러 가지 중대한 사건으로 송사하되 능히 증명하지 못한지라	And when he was come, the Jews which came down from Jerusalem stood round about, and laid many and grievous complaints against Paul, which they could not prove.	When Paul arrived, the Jews who had come down from Jerusalem stood around him, bringing many serious charges that they could not prove.
ACT	25	8	바울이 변명하여 가로되 유대인의 율법이나 성전이나 가이사에게나 내가 도무지 죄를 범하지 아니하였노라 하니	While he answered for himself, Neither against the law of the Jews, neither against the temple, nor yet against Cesar, have I offended any thing at all.	Then Paul made his defense: “I have committed no offense against the law of the Jews or against the temple or against Caesar.”
ACT	25	9	베스도가 유대인의 마음을 얻고자 하여 바울더러 묻되 네가 예루살렘에 올라가서 이 사건에 대하여 내 앞에서 심문을 받으려느냐	But Festus, willing to do the Jews a pleasure, answered Paul, and said, Wilt thou go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these things before me?	But Festus, wishing to do the Jews a favor, said to Paul, “Are you willing to go up to Jerusalem to stand trial before me on these charges?”
ACT	25	10	바울이 가로되 내가 가이사의 재판 자리 앞에 섰으니 마땅히 거기서 심문을 받을 것이라 당신도 잘 아시는 바에 내가 유대인들에게 불의를 행한 일이 없나이다	Then said Paul, I stand at Cesar’s judgment seat, where I ought to be judged: to the Jews have I done no wrong, as thou very well knowest.	Paul replied, “I am standing before the judgment seat of Caesar, where I ought to be tried. I have done nothing wrong to the Jews, as you yourself know very well.
ACT	25	11	만일 내가 불의를 행하여 무슨 사죄를 범하였으면 죽기를 사양치 아니할 것이나 만일 이 사람들의 나를 송사하는 것이 다 사실이 아니면 누구든지 나를 그들에게 내어줄 수 없삽나이다 내가 가이사께 호소하노라 한대	For if I be an offender, or have committed any thing worthy of death, I refuse not to die: but if there be none of these things whereof these accuse me, no man may deliver me unto them. I appeal unto Cesar.	If, however, I am guilty of anything worthy of death, I do not refuse to die. But if there is no truth to their accusations against me, no one has the right to hand me over to them. I appeal to Caesar!”
ACT	25	12	베스도가 배석자들과 상의하고 가로되 네가 가이사에게 호소하였으니 가이사에게 갈 것이라 하니라	Then Festus, when he had conferred with the council, answered, Hast thou appealed unto Cesar? unto Cesar shalt thou go.	Then Festus conferred with his council and replied, “You have appealed to Caesar. To Caesar you will go!”
ACT	25	13	수일 후에 아그립바 왕과 버니게가 베스도에게 문안하러 가이사랴에 와서	And after certain days king Agrippa and Bernice came unto Cesarea to salute Festus.	After several days had passed, King Agrippa and Bernice came down to Caesarea to pay their respects to Festus.
ACT	25	14	여러 날을 있더니 베스도가 바울의 일로 왕에게 고하여 가로되 벨릭스가 한 사람을 구류하여 두었는데	And when they had been there many days, Festus declared Paul’s cause unto the king, saying, There is a certain man left in bonds by Felix:	Since they were staying several days, Festus laid out Paul’s case before the king: “There is a certain man whom Felix left in prison.
ACT	25	15	내가 예루살렘에 있을 때에 유대인의 대제사장들과 장로들이 그를 고소하여 정죄하기를 청하기에	About whom, when I was at Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews informed me, desiring to have judgment against him.	While I was in Jerusalem, the chief priests and elders of the Jews presented their case and requested a judgment against him.
ACT	25	16	내가 대답하되 무릇 피고가 원고들 앞에서 고소 사건에 대하여 변명할 기회가 있기 전에 내어주는 것이 로마 사람의 법이 아니라 하였노라	To whom I answered, It is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to die, before that he which is accused have the accusers face to face, and have licence to answer for himself concerning the crime laid against him.	I told them that it is not the Roman custom to hand a man over before he has had an opportunity to face his accusers and defend himself against their charges.
ACT	25	17	그러므로 저희가 나와 함께 여기 오매 내가 지체하지 아니하고 이튿날 재판 자리에 앉아 명하여 그 사람을 데려왔으나	Therefore, when they were come hither, without any delay on the morrow I sat on the judgment seat, and commanded the man to be brought forth.	So when they came here with me, I did not delay. The next day I sat on the judgment seat and ordered that the man be brought in.
ACT	25	18	원고들이 서서 나의 짐작하던 것 같은 악행의 사건은 하나도 제출치 아니하고	Against whom when the accusers stood up, they brought none accusation of such things as I supposed:	But when his accusers rose to speak, they did not charge him with any of the crimes I had expected.
ACT	25	19	오직 자기들의 종교와 또는 예수라 하는 이의 죽은 것을 살았다고 바울이 주장하는 그 일에 관한 문제로 송사하는 것뿐이라	But had certain questions against him of their own superstition, and of one Jesus, which was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive.	They only had some contentions with him regarding their own religion and a certain Jesus who had died, but whom Paul affirmed to be alive.
ACT	25	20	내가 이 일을 어떻게 사실할는지 의심이 있어서 바울에게 묻되 예루살렘에 올라가서 이 일에 심문을 받으려느냐 한즉	And because I doubted of such manner of questions, I asked him whether he would go to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these matters.	Since I was at a loss as to how to investigate these matters, I asked if he was willing to go to Jerusalem and be tried there on these charges.
ACT	25	21	바울은 황제의 판결을 받도록 자기를 지켜주기를 호소하므로 내가 그를 가이사에게 보내기까지 지켜두라 명하였노라 하니	But when Paul had appealed to be reserved unto the hearing of Augustus, I commanded him to be kept till I might send him to Cesar.	But when Paul appealed to be held over for the decision of the Emperor, I ordered that he be held until I could send him to Caesar.”
ACT	25	22	아그립바가 베스도더러 이르되 나도 이 사람의 말을 듣고자 하노라 베스도가 가로되 내일 들으시리이다 하더라	Then Agrippa said unto Festus, I would also hear the man myself. To morrow, said he, thou shalt hear him.	Then Agrippa said to Festus, “I would like to hear this man myself.” “Tomorrow you will hear him,” Festus declared.
ACT	25	23	이튿날 아그립바와 버니게가 크게 위의를 베풀고 와서 천부장들과 성중의 높은 사람들과 함께 신문소에 들어오고 베스도의 명으로 바울을 데려오니	And on the morrow, when Agrippa was come, and Bernice, with great pomp, and was entered into the place of hearing, with the chief captains, and principal men of the city, at Festus’ commandment Paul was brought forth.	The next day Agrippa and Bernice came with great pomp and entered the auditorium, along with the commanders and leading men of the city. And Festus ordered that Paul be brought in.
ACT	25	24	베스도가 말하되 아그립바 왕과 여기 같이 있는 여러분이여 당신들의 보는 이 사람은 유대의 모든 무리가 크게 외치되 살려두지 못할 사람이라고 하여 예루살렘에서와 여기서도 내게 청원하였으나	And Festus said, King Agrippa, and all men which are here present with us, ye see this man, about whom all the multitude of the Jews have dealt with me, both at Jerusalem, and also here, crying that he ought not to live any longer.	Then Festus said, “King Agrippa and all who are present with us, you see this man. The whole Jewish community has petitioned me about him, both here and in Jerusalem, crying out that he ought not to live any longer.
ACT	25	25	나는 살피건대 죽일 죄를 범한 일이 없더이다 그러나 저가 황제에게 호소한 고로 보내기를 작정하였나이다	But when I found that he had committed nothing worthy of death, and that he himself hath appealed to Augustus, I have determined to send him.	But I found he had done nothing worthy of death, and since he has now appealed to the Emperor, I decided to send him.
ACT	25	26	그에게 대하여 황제께 확실한 사실을 아뢸 것이 없으므로 심문한 후 상소할 재료가 있을까 하여 당신들 앞 특히 아그립바 왕 당신 앞에 그를 내어 세웠나이다	Of whom I have no certain thing to write unto my lord. Wherefore I have brought him forth before you, and specially before thee, O king Agrippa, that, after examination had, I might have somewhat to write.	I have nothing definite to write to our sovereign one about him. Therefore I have brought him before all of you, and especially before you, King Agrippa, so that after this inquiry I may have something to write.
ACT	25	27	그 죄목을 베풀지 아니하고 죄수를 보내는 것이 무리한 일인 줄 아나이다 하였더라	For it seemeth to me unreasonable to send a prisoner, and not withal to signify the crimes laid against him.	For it seems unreasonable to me to send on a prisoner without specifying the charges against him.”
ACT	26	1	아그립바가 바울더러 이르되 너를 위하여 말하기를 네게 허락하노라 하니 이에 바울이 손을 들어 변명하되	Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Thou art permitted to speak for thyself. Then Paul stretched forth the hand, and answered for himself:	Agrippa said to Paul, “You have permission to speak for yourself.” Then Paul stretched out his hand and began his defense:
ACT	26	2	아그립바 왕이여 유대인이 모든 송사하는 일을 오늘 당신 앞에서 변명하게 된 것을 다행히 여기옵나이다	I think myself happy, king Agrippa, because I shall answer for myself this day before thee touching all the things whereof I am accused of the Jews:	“King Agrippa, I consider myself fortunate to stand before you today to defend myself against all the accusations of the Jews,
ACT	26	3	특히 당신이 유대인의 모든 풍속과 및 문제를 아심이니이다 그러므로 내 말을 너그러이 들으시기를 바라옵나이다	Especially because I know thee to be expert in all customs and questions which are among the Jews: wherefore I beseech thee to hear me patiently.	especially since you are acquainted with all the Jewish customs and controversies. I beg you, therefore, to listen to me patiently.
ACT	26	4	내가 처음부터 내 민족 중에와 예루살렘에서 젊었을 때 생활한 상태를 유대인이 다 아는 바라	My manner of life from my youth, which was at the first among mine own nation at Jerusalem, know all the Jews;	Surely all the Jews know how I have lived from the earliest days of my youth, among my own people and in Jerusalem.
ACT	26	5	일찍부터 나를 알았으니 저희가 증거하려 하면 내가 우리 종교의 가장 엄한 파를 좇아 바리새인의 생활을 하였다고 할 것이라	Which knew me from the beginning, if they would testify, that after the most straitest sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee.	They have known me for a long time and can testify, if they are willing, that I lived as a Pharisee, adhering to the strictest sect of our religion.
ACT	26	6	이제도 여기 서서 심문 받는 것은 하나님이 우리 조상에게 약속하신 것을 바라는 까닭이니	And now I stand and am judged for the hope of the promise made of God unto our fathers:	And now I stand on trial because of my hope in the promise that God made to our fathers,
ACT	26	7	이 약속은 우리 열두 지파가 밤낮으로 간절히 하나님을 받들어 섬김으로 얻기를 바라는 바인데 아그립바 왕이여 이 소망을 인하여 내가 유대인들에게 송사를 받는 것이니이다	Unto which promise our twelve tribes, instantly serving God day and night, hope to come. For which hope’s sake, king Agrippa, I am accused of the Jews.	the promise our twelve tribes are hoping to realize as they earnestly serve God day and night. It is because of this hope, O king, that I am accused by the Jews.
ACT	26	8	당신들은 하나님이 죽은 사람 다시 살리심을 어찌하여 못 믿을 것으로 여기나이까	Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the dead?	Why would any of you consider it incredible that God raises the dead?
ACT	26	9	나도 나사렛 예수의 이름을 대적하여 범사를 행하여야 될 줄 스스로 생각하고	I verily thought with myself, that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth.	So then, I too was convinced that I ought to do all I could to oppose the name of Jesus of Nazareth.
ACT	26	10	예루살렘에서 이런 일을 행하여 대제사장들에게서 권세를 얻어 가지고 많은 성도를 옥에 가두며 또 죽일 때에 내가 가편 투표를 하였고	Which thing I also did in Jerusalem: and many of the saints did I shut up in prison, having received authority from the chief priests; and when they were put to death, I gave my voice against them.	And that is what I did in Jerusalem. With authority from the chief priests I put many of the saints in prison, and when they were condemned to death, I cast my vote against them.
ACT	26	11	또 모든 회당에서 여러 번 형벌하여 강제로 모독하는 말을 하게 하고 저희를 대하여 심히 격분하여 외국 성까지도 가서 핍박하였고	And I punished them oft in every synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme; and being exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them even unto strange cities.	I frequently had them punished in the synagogues, and I tried to make them blaspheme. In my raging fury against them, I even went to foreign cities to persecute them.
ACT	26	12	그 일로 대제사장들의 권세와 위임을 받고 다메섹으로 갔나이다	Whereupon as I went to Damascus with authority and commission from the chief priests,	In this pursuit I was on my way to Damascus with the authority and commission of the chief priests.
ACT	26	13	왕이여 때가 정오나 되어 길에서 보니 하늘로서 해보다 더 밝은 빛이 나와 내 동행들을 둘러 비추는지라	At midday, O king, I saw in the way a light from heaven, above the brightness of the sun, shining round about me and them which journeyed with me.	About noon, O king, as I was on the road, I saw a light from heaven, brighter than the sun, shining around me and my companions.
ACT	26	14	우리가 다 땅에 엎드러지매 내가 소리를 들으니 히브리 방언으로 이르되 사울아 사울아 네가 어찌하여 나를 핍박하느냐 가시채를 뒷발질하기가 네게 고생이니라	And when we were all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice speaking unto me, and saying in the Hebrew tongue, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.	We all fell to the ground, and I heard a voice say to me in Hebrew, ‘Saul, Saul, why do you persecute Me? It is hard for you to kick against the goads.’
ACT	26	15	내가 대답하되 주여 뉘시니이까 주께서 가라사대 나는 네가 핍박하는 예수라	And I said, Who art thou, Lord? And he said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest.	‘Who are You, Lord?’ I asked. ‘I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting,’ the Lord replied.
ACT	26	16	일어나 네 발로 서라 내가 네게 나타난 것은 곧 네가 나를 본 일과 장차 내가 네게 나타날 일에 너로 사환과 증인을 삼으려 함이니	But rise, and stand upon thy feet: for I have appeared unto thee for this purpose, to make thee a minister and a witness both of these things which thou hast seen, and of those things in the which I will appear unto thee;	‘But get up and stand on your feet. For I have appeared to you to appoint you as a servant and as a witness of what you have seen from Me and what I will show you.
ACT	26	17	이스라엘과 이방인들에게서 내가 너를 구원하여 저희에게 보내어	Delivering thee from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I send thee,	I will rescue you from your own people and from the Gentiles. I am sending you to them
ACT	26	18	그 눈을 뜨게 하여 어두움에서 빛으로, 사단의 권세에서 하나님께로 돌아가게 하고 죄사함과 나를 믿어 거룩케 된 무리 가운데서 기업을 얻게 하리라 하더이다	To open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in me.	to open their eyes, so that they may turn from darkness to light and from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins and an inheritance among those sanctified by faith in Me.’
ACT	26	19	아그립바 왕이여 그러므로 하늘에서 보이신 것을 내가 거스리지 아니하고	Whereupon, O king Agrippa, I was not disobedient unto the heavenly vision:	So then, King Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision.
ACT	26	20	먼저 다메섹에와 또 예루살렘에 있는 사람과 유대 온 땅과 이방인에게까지 회개하고 하나님께로 돌아가서 회개에 합당한 일을 행하라 선전하므로	But shewed first unto them of Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and throughout all the coasts of Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, and do works meet for repentance.	First to those in Damascus and Jerusalem, then to everyone in the region of Judea, and then to the Gentiles, I declared that they should repent and turn to God, performing deeds worthy of their repentance.
ACT	26	21	유대인들이 성전에서 나를 잡아 죽이고자 하였으나	For these causes the Jews caught me in the temple, and went about to kill me.	For this reason the Jews seized me in the temple courts and tried to kill me.
ACT	26	22	하나님의 도우심을 받아 내가 오늘까지 서서 높고 낮은 사람 앞에서 증거하는 것은 선지자들과 모세가 반드시 되리라고 말한 것밖에 없으니	Having therefore obtained help of God, I continue unto this day, witnessing both to small and great, saying none other things than those which the prophets and Moses did say should come:	But I have had God’s help to this day, and I stand here to testify to small and great alike. I am saying nothing beyond what the prophets and Moses said would happen:
ACT	26	23	곧 그리스도가 고난을 받으실 것과 죽은 자 가운데서 먼저 다시 살아나사 이스라엘과 이방인들에게 빛을 선전하시리라 함이니이다 하니라	That Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that should rise from the dead, and should shew light unto the people, and to the Gentiles.	that the Christ would suffer, and as the first to rise from the dead, would proclaim light to our people and to the Gentiles.”
ACT	26	24	바울이 이같이 변명하매 베스도가 크게 소리하여 가로되 바울아 네가 미쳤도다 네 많은 학문이 너를 미치게 한다 하니	And as he thus spake for himself, Festus said with a loud voice, Paul, thou art beside thyself; much learning doth make thee mad.	At this stage of Paul’s defense, Festus exclaimed in a loud voice, “You are insane, Paul! Your great learning is driving you to madness!”
ACT	26	25	바울이 가로되 베스도 각하여 내가 미친 것이 아니요 참되고 정신차린 말을 하나이다	But he said, I am not mad, most noble Festus; but speak forth the words of truth and soberness.	But Paul answered, “I am not insane, most excellent Festus; I am speaking words of truth and sobriety.
ACT	26	26	왕께서는 이 일을 아시기로 내가 왕께 담대히 말하노니 이 일에 하나라도 아시지 못함이 없는 줄 믿나이다 이 일은 한편 구석에서 행한 것이 아니로소이다	For the king knoweth of these things, before whom also I speak freely: for I am persuaded that none of these things are hidden from him; for this thing was not done in a corner.	For the king knows about these matters, and I can speak freely to him. I am confident that none of this has escaped his notice, because it was not done in a corner.
ACT	26	27	아그립바 왕이여 선지자를 믿으시나이까 믿으시는 줄 아나이다	King Agrippa, believest thou the prophets? I know that thou believest.	King Agrippa, do you believe the prophets? I know you do.”
ACT	26	28	아그립바가 바울더러 이르되 네가 적은 말로 나를 권하여 그리스도인이 되게 하려 하는도다	Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian.	Then Agrippa said to Paul, “Can you persuade me in such a short time to become a Christian?”
ACT	26	29	바울이 가로되 말이 적으나 많으나 당신뿐 아니라 오늘 내 말을 듣는 모든 사람도 다 이렇게 결박한 것 외에는 나와 같이 되기를 하나님께 원하노이다 하니라	And Paul said, I would to God, that not only thou, but also all that hear me this day, were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except these bonds.	“Short time or long,” Paul replied, “I wish to God that not only you but all who hear me this day may become what I am, except for these chains.”
ACT	26	30	왕과 총독과 버니게와 그 함께 앉은 사람들이 다 일어나서	And when he had thus spoken, the king rose up, and the governor, and Bernice, and they that sat with them:	Then the king and the governor rose, along with Bernice and those seated with them.
ACT	26	31	물러가 서로 말하되 이 사람은 사형이나 결박을 당할 만한 행사가 없다 하더라	And when they were gone aside, they talked between themselves, saying, This man doeth nothing worthy of death or of bonds.	On their way out, they said to one another, “This man has done nothing worthy of death or imprisonment.”
ACT	26	32	이에 아그립바가 베스도더러 일러 가로되 이 사람이 만일 가이사에게 호소하지 아니하였더면 놓을 수 있을 뻔하였다 하니라	Then said Agrippa unto Festus, This man might have been set at liberty, if he had not appealed unto Cesar.	And Agrippa said to Festus, “This man could have been released if he had not appealed to Caesar.”
ACT	27	1	우리의 배 타고 이달리야로 갈 일이 작정되매 바울과 다른 죄수 몇 사람을 아구사도대의 백부장 율리오란 사람에게 맡기니	And when it was determined that we should sail into Italy, they delivered Paul and certain other prisoners unto one named Julius, a centurion of Augustus’ band.	When it was decided that we would sail for Italy, Paul and some other prisoners were handed over to a centurion named Julius, who belonged to the Imperial Regiment.
ACT	27	2	아시아 해변 각처로 가려 하는 아드라뭇데노 배에 우리가 올라 행선할새 마게도냐의 데살로니가 사람 아리스다고도 함께 하니라	And entering into a ship of Adramyttium, we launched, meaning to sail by the coasts of Asia; one Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us.	We boarded an Adramyttian ship about to sail for ports along the coast of Asia, and we put out to sea. Aristarchus, a Macedonian from Thessalonica, was with us.
ACT	27	3	이튿날 시돈에 대니 율리오가 바울을 친절히 하여 친구들에게 가서 대접받음을 허락하더니	And the next day we touched at Sidon. And Julius courteously entreated Paul, and gave him liberty to go unto his friends to refresh himself.	The next day we landed at Sidon, and Julius treated Paul with consideration, allowing him to visit his friends and receive their care.
ACT	27	4	또 거기서 우리가 떠나가다가 바람의 거스림을 피하여 구브로 해안을 의지하고 행선하여	And when we had launched from thence, we sailed under Cyprus, because the winds were contrary.	After putting out from there, we sailed to the lee of Cyprus because the winds were against us.
ACT	27	5	길리기아와 밤빌리아 바다를 건너 루기아의 무라 성에 이르러	And when we had sailed over the sea of Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myra, a city of Lycia.	And when we had sailed across the open sea off the coast of Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myra in Lycia.
ACT	27	6	거기서 백부장이 이달리야로 가려 하는 알렉산드리아 배를 만나 우리를 오르게 하니	And there the centurion found a ship of Alexandria sailing into Italy; and he put us therein.	There the centurion found an Alexandrian ship sailing for Italy and put us on board.
ACT	27	7	배가 더디 가 여러 날만에 간신히 니도 맞은 편에 이르러 풍세가 더 허락지 아니하므로 살모네 앞을 지나 그레데 해안을 의지하고 행선하여	And when we had sailed slowly many days, and scarce were come over against Cnidus, the wind not suffering us, we sailed under Crete, over against Salmone;	After sailing slowly for many days, we arrived off Cnidus. When the wind impeded us, we sailed to the lee of Crete, opposite Salmone.
ACT	27	8	간신히 그 연안을 지나 미항이라는 곳에 이르니 라새아 성에서 가깝더라	And, hardly passing it, came unto a place which is called The fair havens; nigh whereunto was the city of Lasea.	After we had moved along the coast with difficulty, we came to a place called Fair Havens, near the town of Lasea.
ACT	27	9	여러 날이 걸려 금식하는 절기가 이미 지났으므로 행선하기가 위태한지라 바울이 저희를 권하여	Now when much time was spent, and when sailing was now dangerous, because the fast was now already past, Paul admonished them,	By now much time had passed, and the voyage had already become dangerous because it was after the Fast. So Paul advised them,
ACT	27	10	말하되 여러분이여 내가 보니 이번 행선이 하물과 배만 아니라 우리 생명에도 타격과 많은 손해가 있으리라 하되	And said unto them, Sirs, I perceive that this voyage will be with hurt and much damage, not only of the lading and ship, but also of our lives.	“Men, I can see that our voyage will be filled with disaster and great loss, not only to ship and cargo, but to our own lives as well.”
ACT	27	11	백부장이 선장과 선주의 말을 바울의 말보다 더 믿더라	Nevertheless the centurion believed the master and the owner of the ship, more than those things which were spoken by Paul.	But contrary to Paul’s advice, the centurion was persuaded by the pilot and by the owner of the ship.
ACT	27	12	그 항구가 과동하기에 불편하므로 거기서 떠나 아무쪼록 뵈닉스에 가서 과동하자 하는 자가 더 많으니 뵈닉스는 그레데 항구라 한 편은 동북을, 한 편은 동남을 향하였더라	And because the haven was not commodious to winter in, the more part advised to depart thence also, if by any means they might attain to Phenice, and there to winter; which is an haven of Crete, and lieth toward the south west and north west.	Since the harbor was unsuitable to winter in, the majority decided to sail on, if somehow they could reach Phoenix to winter there. Phoenix was a harbor in Crete facing both southwest and northwest.
ACT	27	13	남풍이 순하게 불매 저희가 득의한 줄 알고 닻을 감아 그레데 해변을 가까이 하고 행선하더니	And when the south wind blew softly, supposing that they had obtained their purpose, loosing thence, they sailed close by Crete.	When a gentle south wind began to blow, they thought they had their opportunity. So they weighed anchor and sailed along, hugging the coast of Crete.
ACT	27	14	얼마 못되어 섬 가운데로서 유라굴로라는 광풍이 대작하니	But not long after there arose against it a tempestuous wind, called Euroclydon.	But it was not long before a cyclone called the Northeaster swept down across the island.
ACT	27	15	배가 밀려 바람을 맞추어 갈 수 없어 가는 대로 두고 쫓겨가다가	And when the ship was caught, and could not bear up into the wind, we let her drive.	Unable to head into the wind, the ship was caught up. So we gave way and let ourselves be driven along.
ACT	27	16	가우다라는 작은 섬 아래로 지나 간신히 거루를 잡아	And running under a certain island which is called Clauda, we had much work to come by the boat:	Passing to the lee of a small island called Cauda, we barely managed to secure the lifeboat.
ACT	27	17	끌어 올리고 줄을 가지고 선체를 둘러 감고 스르디스에 걸릴까 두려워 연장을 내리고 그냥 쫓겨가더니	Which when they had taken up, they used helps, undergirding the ship; and, fearing lest they should fall into the quicksands, strake sail, and so were driven.	After hoisting it up, the crew used ropes to undergird the ship. And fearing that they would run aground on the sandbars of Syrtis, they lowered the sea anchor and were driven along.
ACT	27	18	우리가 풍랑으로 심히 애쓰다가 이튿날 사공들이 짐을 바다에 풀어 버리고	And we being exceedingly tossed with a tempest, the next day they lightened the ship;	We were tossed so violently that the next day the men began to jettison the cargo.
ACT	27	19	사흘째 되는 날에 배의 기구를 저희 손으로 내어 버리니라	And the third day we cast out with our own hands the tackling of the ship.	On the third day, they threw the ship’s tackle overboard with their own hands.
ACT	27	20	여러 날 동안 해와 별이 보이지 아니하고 큰 풍랑이 그대로 있으매 구원의 여망이 다 없어졌더라	And when neither sun nor stars in many days appeared, and no small tempest lay on us, all hope that we should be saved was then taken away.	When neither sun nor stars appeared for many days and the great storm continued to batter us, we abandoned all hope of being saved.
ACT	27	21	여러 사람이 오래 먹지 못하였으매 바울이 가운데 서서 말하되 여러분이여 내 말을 듣고 그레데에서 떠나지 아니하여 이 타격과 손상을 면하였더면 좋을 뻔하였느니라	But after long abstinence Paul stood forth in the midst of them, and said, Sirs, ye should have hearkened unto me, and not have loosed from Crete, and to have gained this harm and loss.	After the men had gone a long time without food, Paul stood up among them and said, “Men, you should have followed my advice not to sail from Crete. Then you would have averted this disaster and loss.
ACT	27	22	내가 너희를 권하노니 이제는 안심하라 너희 중 생명에는 아무 손상이 없겠고 오직 배뿐이리라	And now I exhort you to be of good cheer: for there shall be no loss of any man’s life among you, but of the ship.	But now I urge you to keep up your courage, because you will not experience any loss of life, but only of the ship.
ACT	27	23	나의 속한 바 곧 나의 섬기는 하나님의 사자가 어제 밤에 내 곁에 서서 말하되	For there stood by me this night the angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve,	For just last night an angel of God, whose I am and whom I serve, stood beside me
ACT	27	24	바울아 두려워 말라 네가 가이사 앞에 서야 하겠고 또 하나님께서 너와 함께 행선하는 자를 다 네게 주셨다 하였으니	Saying, Fear not, Paul; thou must be brought before Cesar: and, lo, God hath given thee all them that sail with thee.	and said, ‘Do not be afraid, Paul; you must stand before Caesar. And look, God has granted you the lives of all who sail with you.’
ACT	27	25	그러므로 여러분이여 안심하라 나는 내게 말씀하신 그대로 되리라고 하나님을 믿노라	Wherefore, sirs, be of good cheer: for I believe God, that it shall be even as it was told me.	So take courage, men, for I believe God that it will happen just as He told me.
ACT	27	26	그러나 우리가 한 섬에 걸리리라 하더라	Howbeit we must be cast upon a certain island.	However, we must run aground on some island.”
ACT	27	27	열나흘째 되는 날 밤에 우리가 아드리아 바다에 이리저리 쫓겨 가더니 밤중쯤 되어 사공들이 어느 육지에 가까워지는 줄을 짐작하고	But when the fourteenth night was come, as we were driven up and down in Adria, about midnight the shipmen deemed that they drew near to some country;	On the fourteenth night we were still being driven across the Adriatic Sea. About midnight the sailors sensed they were approaching land.
ACT	27	28	물을 재어보니 이십 길이 되고 조금 가다가 다시 재니 열다섯 길이라	And sounded, and found it twenty fathoms: and when they had gone a little further, they sounded again, and found it fifteen fathoms.	They took soundings and found that the water was twenty fathoms deep. Going a little farther, they took another set of soundings that read fifteen fathoms.
ACT	27	29	암초에 걸릴까 하여 고물로 닻 넷을 주고 날이 새기를 고대하더니	Then fearing lest we should have fallen upon rocks, they cast four anchors out of the stern, and wished for the day.	Fearing that we would run aground on the rocks, they dropped four anchors from the stern and prayed for daybreak.
ACT	27	30	사공들이 도망하고자 하여 이물에서 닻을 주려는 체하고 거루를 바다에 내려놓거늘	And as the shipmen were about to flee out of the ship, when they had let down the boat into the sea, under colour as though they would have cast anchors out of the foreship,	Meanwhile, the sailors attempted to escape from the ship. Pretending to lower anchors from the bow, they let the lifeboat down into the sea.
ACT	27	31	바울이 백부장과 군사들에게 이르되 이 사람들이 배에 있지 아니하면 너희가 구원을 얻지 못하리라 하니	Paul said to the centurion and to the soldiers, Except these abide in the ship, ye cannot be saved.	But Paul said to the centurion and the soldiers, “Unless these men remain with the ship, you cannot be saved.”
ACT	27	32	이에 군사들이 거룻 줄을 끊어 떼어 버리니라	Then the soldiers cut off the ropes of the boat, and let her fall off.	So the soldiers cut the ropes to the lifeboat and set it adrift.
ACT	27	33	날이 새어 가매 바울이 여러 사람을 음식 먹으라 권하여 가로되 너희가 기다리고 기다리며 먹지 못하고 주린 지가 오늘까지 열나흘인즉	And while the day was coming on, Paul besought them all to take meat, saying, This day is the fourteenth day that ye have tarried and continued fasting, having taken nothing.	Right up to daybreak, Paul kept urging them all to eat: “Today is your fourteenth day in constant suspense, without taking any food.
ACT	27	34	음식 먹으라 권하노니 이것이 너희 구원을 위하는 것이요 너희 중 머리터럭 하나라도 잃을 자가 없느니라 하고	Wherefore I pray you to take some meat: for this is for your health: for there shall not an hair fall from the head of any of you.	So for your own preservation, I urge you to eat something, because not a single hair of your head will be lost.”
ACT	27	35	떡을 가져다가 모든 사람 앞에서 하나님께 축사하고 떼어 먹기를 시작하매	And when he had thus spoken, he took bread, and gave thanks to God in presence of them all: and when he had broken it, he began to eat.	After he had said this, Paul took bread and gave thanks to God in front of them all. Then he broke it and began to eat.
ACT	27	36	저희도 다 안심하고 받아 먹으니	Then were they all of good cheer, and they also took some meat.	They were all encouraged and took some food themselves.
ACT	27	37	배에 있는 우리의 수는 전부 이백칠십육 인이러라	And we were in all in the ship two hundred threescore and sixteen souls.	In all, there were 276 of us on board.
ACT	27	38	배부르게 먹고 밀을 바다에 버려 배를 가볍게 하였더니	And when they had eaten enough, they lightened the ship, and cast out the wheat into the sea.	After the men had eaten their fill, they lightened the ship by throwing the grain into the sea.
ACT	27	39	날이 새매 어느 땅인지 알지 못하나 경사 진 해안으로 된 항만이 눈에 띄거늘 배를 거기에 들여다 댈 수 있는가 의논한 후	And when it was day, they knew not the land: but they discovered a certain creek with a shore, into the which they were minded, if it were possible, to thrust in the ship.	When daylight came, they did not recognize the land, but they sighted a bay with a sandy beach, where they decided to run the ship aground if they could.
ACT	27	40	닻을 끊어 바다에 버리는 동시에 킷줄을 늦추고 돛을 달고 바람을 맞추어 해안을 향하여 들어가다가	And when they had taken up the anchors, they committed themselves unto the sea, and loosed the rudder bands, and hoised up the mainsail to the wind, and made toward shore.	Cutting away the anchors, they left them in the sea as they loosened the ropes that held the rudders. Then they hoisted the foresail to the wind and made for the beach.
ACT	27	41	두 물이 합하여 흐르는 곳을 당하여 배를 걸매 이물은 부딪혀 움직일 수 없이 붙고 고물은 큰 물결에 깨어져가니	And falling into a place where two seas met, they ran the ship aground; and the forepart stuck fast, and remained unmoveable, but the hinder part was broken with the violence of the waves.	But the vessel struck a sandbar and ran aground. The bow stuck fast and would not move, and the stern was being broken up by the pounding of the waves.
ACT	27	42	군사들은 죄수가 헤엄쳐서 도망할까 하여 저희를 죽이는 것이 좋다 하였으나	And the soldiers’ counsel was to kill the prisoners, lest any of them should swim out, and escape.	The soldiers planned to kill the prisoners so none of them could swim to freedom.
ACT	27	43	백부장이 바울을 구원하려 하여 저희의 뜻을 막고 헤엄칠 줄 아는 사람들을 명하여 물에 뛰어 내려 먼저 육지에 나가게 하고	But the centurion, willing to save Paul, kept them from their purpose; and commanded that they which could swim should cast themselves first into the sea, and get to land:	But the centurion, wanting to spare Paul’s life, thwarted their plan. He commanded those who could swim to jump overboard first and get to land.
ACT	27	44	그 남은 사람들은 널조각 혹은 배 물건에 의지하여 나가게 하니 마침내 사람들이 다 상륙하여 구원을 얻으니라	And the rest, some on boards, and some on broken pieces of the ship. And so it came to pass, that they escaped all safe to land.	The rest were to follow on planks and various parts of the ship. In this way everyone was brought safely to land.
ACT	28	1	우리가 구원을 얻은 후에 안즉 그 섬은 멜리데라 하더라	And when they were escaped, then they knew that the island was called Melita.	Once we were safely ashore, we learned that the island was called Malta.
ACT	28	2	토인들이 우리에게 특별한 동정을 하여 비가 오고 날이 차매 불을 피워 우리를 다 영접하더라	And the barbarous people shewed us no little kindness: for they kindled a fire, and received us every one, because of the present rain, and because of the cold.	The islanders showed us extraordinary kindness. They kindled a fire and welcomed all of us because it was raining and cold.
ACT	28	3	바울이 한 뭇 나무를 거두어 불에 넣으니 뜨거움을 인하여 독사가 나와 그 손을 물고 있는지라	And when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks, and laid them on the fire, there came a viper out of the heat, and fastened on his hand.	Paul gathered a bundle of sticks, and as he laid them on the fire, a viper, driven out by the heat, fastened itself to his hand.
ACT	28	4	토인들이 이 짐승이 그 손에 달림을 보고 서로 말하되 진실로 이 사람은 살인한 자로다 바다에서는 구원을 얻었으나 공의가 살지 못하게 하심이로다 하더니	And when the barbarians saw the venomous beast hang on his hand, they said among themselves, No doubt this man is a murderer, whom, though he hath escaped the sea, yet vengeance suffereth not to live.	When the islanders saw the creature hanging from his hand, they said to one another, “Surely this man is a murderer. Although he was saved from the sea, Justice has not allowed him to live.”
ACT	28	5	바울이 그 짐승을 불에 떨어버리매 조금도 상함이 없더라	And he shook off the beast into the fire, and felt no harm.	But Paul shook the creature off into the fire and suffered no ill effects.
ACT	28	6	그가 붓든지 혹 갑자기 엎드러져 죽을 줄로 저희가 기다렸더니 오래 기다려도 그에게 아무 이상이 없음을 보고 돌려 생각하여 말하되 신이라 하더라	Howbeit they looked when he should have swollen, or fallen down dead suddenly: but after they had looked a great while, and saw no harm come to him, they changed their minds, and said that he was a god.	The islanders were expecting him to swell up or suddenly drop dead. But after waiting a long time and seeing nothing unusual happen to him, they changed their minds and said he was a god.
ACT	28	7	이 섬에 제일 높은 사람 보블리오라 하는 이가 그 근처에 토지가 있는지라 그가 우리를 영접하여 사흘이나 친절히 유숙하게 하더니	In the same quarters were possessions of the chief man of the island, whose name was Publius; who received us, and lodged us three days courteously.	Nearby stood an estate belonging to Publius, the chief official of the island. He welcomed us and entertained us hospitably for three days.
ACT	28	8	보블리오의 부친이 열병과 이질에 걸려 누웠거늘 바울이 들어가서 기도하고 그에게 안수하여 낫게 하매	And it came to pass, that the father of Publius lay sick of a fever and of a bloody flux: to whom Paul entered in, and prayed, and laid his hands on him, and healed him.	The father of Publius was sick in bed, suffering from fever and dysentery. Paul went in to see him, and after praying and placing his hands on him, he healed the man.
ACT	28	9	이러므로 섬 가운데 다른 병든 사람들이 와서 고침을 받고	So when this was done, others also, which had diseases in the island, came, and were healed:	After this had happened, the rest of the sick on the island came and were cured as well.
ACT	28	10	후한 예로 우리를 대접하고 떠날 때에 우리 쓸 것을 배에 올리더라	Who also honoured us with many honours; and when we departed, they laded us with such things as were necessary.	The islanders honored us in many ways and supplied our needs when we were ready to sail.
ACT	28	11	석 달 후에 그 섬에서 과동한 알렉산드리아 배를 우리가 타고 떠나니 그 배 기호는 디오스구로라	And after three months we departed in a ship of Alexandria, which had wintered in the isle, whose sign was Castor and Pollux.	After three months we set sail in an Alexandrian ship that had wintered in the island. It had the Twin Brothers as a figurehead.
ACT	28	12	수라구사에 대고 사흘을 있다가	And landing at Syracuse, we tarried there three days.	Putting in at Syracuse, we stayed there three days.
ACT	28	13	거기서 둘러가서 레기온에 이르러 하루를 지난 후 남풍이 일어나므로 이튿날 보디올에 이르러	And from thence we fetched a compass, and came to Rhegium: and after one day the south wind blew, and we came the next day to Puteoli:	From there we weighed anchor and came to Rhegium. After one day, a south wind came up, and on the second day we arrived at Puteoli.
ACT	28	14	거기서 형제를 만나 저희의 청함을 받아 이레를 함께 유하다가 로마로 가니라	Where we found brethren, and were desired to tarry with them seven days: and so we went toward Rome.	There we found some brothers who invited us to spend the week with them. And so we came to Rome.
ACT	28	15	거기 형제들이 우리 소식을 듣고 압비오 저자와 삼관까지 맞으러 오니 바울이 저희를 보고 하나님께 사례하고 담대한 마음을 얻으니라	And from thence, when the brethren heard of us, they came to meet us as far as Appii forum, and The three taverns: whom when Paul saw, he thanked God, and took courage.	The brothers there had heard about us and traveled as far as the Forum of Appius and the Three Taverns to meet us. When Paul saw them, he was encouraged and gave thanks to God.
ACT	28	16	우리가 로마에 들어가니 바울은 자기를 지키는 한 군사와 함께 따로 있게 허락하더라	And when we came to Rome, the centurion delivered the prisoners to the captain of the guard: but Paul was suffered to dwell by himself with a soldier that kept him.	When we arrived in Rome, Paul was permitted to stay by himself, with a soldier to guard him.
ACT	28	17	사흘 후에 바울이 유대인 중 높은 사람들을 청하여 모인 후에 이르되 여러분 형제들아 내가 이스라엘 백성이나 우리 조상의 규모를 배척한 일이 없는데 예루살렘에서 로마인의 손에 죄수로 내어준 바 되었으니	And it came to pass, that after three days Paul called the chief of the Jews together: and when they were come together, he said unto them, Men and brethren, though I have committed nothing against the people, or customs of our fathers, yet was I delivered prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans.	After three days, he called together the leaders of the Jews. When they had gathered, he said to them, “Brothers, although I have done nothing against our people or the customs of our fathers, I was taken prisoner in Jerusalem and handed over to the Romans.
ACT	28	18	로마인은 나를 심문하여 죽일 죄목이 없으므로 놓으려 하였으나	Who, when they had examined me, would have let me go, because there was no cause of death in me.	They examined me and wanted to release me, because there was no basis for a death sentence against me.
ACT	28	19	유대인들이 반대하기로 내가 마지 못하여 가이사에게 호소함이요 내 민족을 송사하려는 것이 아니로라	But when the Jews spake against it, I was constrained to appeal unto Cesar; not that I had ought to accuse my nation of.	But when the Jews objected, I was compelled to appeal to Caesar, even though I have no charge to bring against my nation.
ACT	28	20	이러하므로 너희를 보고 함께 이야기하려고 청하였노니 이스라엘의 소망을 인하여 내가 이 쇠사슬에 매인 바 되었노라	For this cause therefore have I called for you, to see you, and to speak with you: because that for the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain.	So for this reason I have called to see you and speak with you. It is because of the hope of Israel that I am bound with this chain.”
ACT	28	21	저희가 가로되 우리가 유대에서 네게 대한 편지도 받은 일이 없고 또 형제 중 누가 와서 네게 대하여 좋지 못한 것을 고하든지 이야기한 일도 없느니라	And they said unto him, We neither received letters out of Judea concerning thee, neither any of the brethren that came shewed or spake any harm of thee.	The leaders replied, “We have not received any letters about you from Judea, nor have any of the brothers from there reported or even mentioned anything bad about you.
ACT	28	22	이에 우리가 너의 사상이 어떠한가 듣고자 하노니 이 파에 대하여는 어디서든지 반대를 받는 줄 우리가 앎이라 하더라	But we desire to hear of thee what thou thinkest: for as concerning this sect, we know that every where it is spoken against.	But we consider your views worth hearing, because we know that people everywhere are speaking against this sect.”
ACT	28	23	저희가 일자를 정하고 그의 우거하는 집에 많이 오니 바울이 아침부터 저녁까지 강론하여 하나님 나라를 증거하고 모세의 율법과 선지자의 말을 가지고 예수의 일로 권하더라	And when they had appointed him a day, there came many to him into his lodging; to whom he expounded and testified the kingdom of God, persuading them concerning Jesus, both out of the law of Moses, and out of the prophets, from morning till evening.	So they set a day to meet with Paul, and many people came to the place he was staying. He expounded to them from morning to evening, testifying about the kingdom of God and persuading them about Jesus from the Law of Moses and the Prophets.
ACT	28	24	그 말을 믿는 사람도 있고 믿지 아니하는 사람도 있어	And some believed the things which were spoken, and some believed not.	Some of them were convinced by what he said, but others refused to believe.
ACT	28	25	서로 맞지 아니하여 흩어질 때에 바울이 한 말로 일러 가로되 성령이 선지자 이사야로 너희 조상들에게 말씀하신 것이 옳도다	And when they agreed not among themselves, they departed, after that Paul had spoken one word, Well spake the Holy Ghost by Esaias the prophet unto our fathers,	They disagreed among themselves and began to leave after Paul had made this final statement: “The Holy Spirit was right when He spoke to your fathers through Isaiah the prophet:
ACT	28	26	일렀으되 이 백성에게 가서 말하기를 너희가 듣기는 들어도 도무지 깨닫지 못하며 보기는 보아도 도무지 알지 못하는도다	Saying, Go unto this people, and say, Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and not perceive:	‘Go to this people and say, “You will be ever hearing but never understanding; you will be ever seeing but never perceiving.”
ACT	28	27	이 백성들의 마음이 완악하여져서 그 귀로는 둔하게 듣고 그 눈을 감았으니 이는 눈으로 보고 귀로 듣고 마음으로 깨달아 돌아와 나의 고침을 받을까 함이라 하였으니	For the heart of this people is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes have they closed; lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them.	For this people’s heart has grown callous; they hardly hear with their ears, and they have closed their eyes. Otherwise they might see with their eyes, hear with their ears, understand with their hearts, and turn, and I would heal them.’
ACT	28	28	그런즉 하나님의 이 구원을 이방인에게로 보내신 줄 알라 저희는 또한 들으리라 하더라	Be it known therefore unto you, that the salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles, and that they will hear it.	Be advised, therefore, that God’s salvation has been sent to the Gentiles, and they will listen!”
ACT	28	29		And when he had said these words, the Jews departed, and had great reasoning among themselves.	
ACT	28	30	바울이 온 이태를 자기 셋집에 유하며 자기에게 오는 사람을 다 영접하고	And Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, and received all that came in unto him,	Paul stayed there two full years in his own rented house, welcoming all who came to visit him.
ACT	28	31	담대히 하나님 나라를 전파하며 주 예수 그리스도께 관한 것을 가르치되 금하는 사람이 없었더라	Preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence, no man forbidding him.	Boldly and freely he proclaimed the kingdom of God and taught about the Lord Jesus Christ.
ROM	1	1	예수 그리스도의 종 바울은 사도로 부르심을 받아 하나님의 복음을 위하여 택정함을 입었으니	Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an apostle, separated unto the gospel of God,	Paul, a servant of Christ Jesus, called to be an apostle, and set apart for the gospel of God—
ROM	1	2	이 복음은 하나님이 선지자들로 말미암아 그의 아들에 관하여 성경에 미리 약속하신 것이라	(Which he had promised afore by his prophets in the holy scriptures,)	the gospel He promised beforehand through His prophets in the Holy Scriptures,
ROM	1	3	이 아들로 말하면 육신으로는 다윗의 혈통에서 나셨고	Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh;	regarding His Son, who was a descendant of David according to the flesh,
ROM	1	4	성결의 영으로는 죽은 가운데서 부활하여 능력으로 하나님의 아들로 인정되셨으니 곧 우리 주 예수 그리스도시니라	And declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead:	and who through the Spirit of holiness was declared with power to be the Son of God by His resurrection from the dead: Jesus Christ our Lord.
ROM	1	5	그로 말미암아 우리가 은혜와 사도의 직분을 받아 그 이름을 위하여 모든 이방인 중에서 믿어 순종케 하나니	By whom we have received grace and apostleship, for obedience to the faith among all nations, for his name:	Through Him and on behalf of His name, we received grace and apostleship to call all those among the Gentiles to the obedience that comes from faith.
ROM	1	6	너희도 그들 중에 있어 예수 그리스도의 것으로 부르심을 입은 자니라	Among whom are ye also the called of Jesus Christ:	And you also are among those who are called to belong to Jesus Christ.
ROM	1	7	로마에 있어 하나님의 사랑하심을 입고 성도로 부르심을 입은 모든 자에게 하나님 우리 아버지와 주 예수 그리스도로 좇아 은혜와 평강이 있기를 원한노라	To all that be in Rome, beloved of God, called to be saints: Grace to you and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.	To all in Rome who are loved by God and called to be saints: Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
ROM	1	8	첫째는 내가 예수 그리스도로 말미암아 너희 모든 사람을 인하여 내 하나님께 감사함은 너희 믿음이 온 세상에 전파됨이로다	First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your faith is spoken of throughout the whole world.	First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for all of you, because your faith is being proclaimed all over the world.
ROM	1	9	내가 그의 아들의 복음 안에서 내 심령으로 섬기는 하나님이 나의 증인이 되시거니와 항상 내 기도에 쉬지 않고 너희를 말하며	For God is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit in the gospel of his Son, that without ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers;	God, whom I serve with my spirit in preaching the gospel of His Son, is my witness how constantly I remember you
ROM	1	10	어떠하든지 이제 하나님의 뜻 안에서 너희에게로 나아갈 좋은 길 얻기를 구하노라	Making request, if by any means now at length I might have a prosperous journey by the will of God to come unto you.	in my prayers at all times, asking that now at last by God’s will I may succeed in coming to you.
ROM	1	11	내가 너희 보기를 심히 원하는 것은 무슨 신령한 은사를 너희에게 나눠 주어 너희를 견고케 하려 함이니	For I long to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift, to the end ye may be established;	For I long to see you so that I may impart to you some spiritual gift to strengthen you,
ROM	1	12	이는 곧 내가 너희 가운데서 너희와 나의 믿음을 인하여 피차 안위함을 얻으려 함이라	That is, that I may be comforted together with you by the mutual faith both of you and me.	that is, that you and I may be mutually encouraged by each other’s faith.
ROM	1	13	형제들아 내가 여러 번 너희에게 가고자 한 것을 너희가 모르기를 원치 아니하노니 이는 너희 중에서도 다른 이방인 중에서와 같이 열매를 맺게 하려 함이로되 지금까지 길이 막혔도다	Now I would not have you ignorant, brethren, that oftentimes I purposed to come unto you, (but was let hitherto,) that I might have some fruit among you also, even as among other Gentiles.	I do not want you to be unaware, brothers, how often I planned to come to you (but have been prevented from visiting until now), in order that I might have a harvest among you, just as I have had among the other Gentiles.
ROM	1	14	헬라인이나 야만이나 지혜 있는 자나 어리석은 자에게 다 내가 빚진 자라	I am debtor both to the Greeks, and to the Barbarians; both to the wise, and to the unwise.	I am obligated both to Greeks and non-Greeks, both to the wise and the foolish.
ROM	1	15	그러므로 나는 할 수 있는 대로 로마에 있는 너희에게도 복음 전하기를 원하노라	So, as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the gospel to you that are at Rome also.	That is why I am so eager to preach the gospel also to you who are in Rome.
ROM	1	16	내가 복음을 부끄러워하지 아니하노니 이 복음은 모든 믿는 자에게 구원을 주시는 하나님의 능력이 됨이라 첫째는 유대인에게요 또한 헬라인에게로다	For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.	I am not ashamed of the gospel, because it is the power of God for salvation to everyone who believes, first to the Jew, then to the Greek.
ROM	1	17	복음에는 하나님의 의가 나타나서 믿음으로 믿음에 이르게 하나니 기록된 바 오직 의인은 믿음으로 말미암아 살리라 함과 같으니라	For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith: as it is written, The just shall live by faith.	For the gospel reveals the righteousness of God that comes by faith from start to finish, just as it is written: “The righteous will live by faith.”
ROM	1	18	하나님의 진노가 불의로 진리를 막는 사람들의 모든 경건치 않음과 불의에 대하여 하늘로 좇아 나타나나니	For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness;	The wrath of God is being revealed from heaven against all the godlessness and wickedness of men who suppress the truth by their wickedness.
ROM	1	19	이는 하나님을 알 만한 것이 저희 속에 보임이라 하나님께서 이를 저희에게 보이셨느니라	Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them; for God hath shewed it unto them.	For what may be known about God is plain to them, because God has made it plain to them.
ROM	1	20	창세로부터 그의 보이지 아니하는 것들 곧 그의 영원하신 능력과 신성이 그 만드신 만물에 분명히 보여 알게 되나니 그러므로 저희가 핑계치 못할지니라	For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead; so that they are without excuse:	For since the creation of the world God’s invisible qualities, His eternal power and divine nature, have been clearly seen, being understood from His workmanship, so that men are without excuse.
ROM	1	21	하나님을 알되 하나님으로 영화롭게도 아니하며 감사치도 아니하고 오히려 그 생각이 허망하여지며 미련한 마음이 어두워졌나니	Because that, when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful; but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened.	For although they knew God, they neither glorified Him as God nor gave thanks to Him, but they became futile in their thinking and darkened in their foolish hearts.
ROM	1	22	스스로 지혜 있다 하나 우준하게 되어	Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools,	Although they claimed to be wise, they became fools,
ROM	1	23	썩어지지 아니하는 하나님의 영광을 썩어질 사람과 금수와 버러지 형상의 우상으로 바꾸었느니라	And changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things.	and exchanged the glory of the immortal God for images of mortal man and birds and animals and reptiles.
ROM	1	24	그러므로 하나님께서 저희를 마음의 정욕대로 더러움에 내어 버려두사 저희 몸을 서로 욕되게 하셨으니	Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonour their own bodies between themselves:	Therefore God gave them over in the desires of their hearts to impurity for the dishonoring of their bodies with one another.
ROM	1	25	이는 저희가 하나님의 진리를 거짓 것으로 바꾸어 피조물을 조물주보다 더 경배하고 섬김이라 주는 곧 영원히 찬송할 이시로다 아멘	Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever. Amen.	They exchanged the truth of God for a lie, and worshiped and served the creature rather than the Creator, who is forever worthy of praise! Amen.
ROM	1	26	이를 인하여 하나님께서 저희를 부끄러운 욕심에 내어 버려 두셨으니 곧 저희 여인들도 순리대로 쓸 것을 바꾸어 역리로 쓰며	For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections: for even their women did change the natural use into that which is against nature:	For this reason God gave them over to dishonorable passions. Even their women exchanged natural relations for unnatural ones.
ROM	1	27	이와 같이 남자들도 순리대로 여인 쓰기를 버리고 서로 향하여 음욕이 불 일듯 하매 남자가 남자로 더불어 부끄러운 일을 행하여 저희의 그릇됨에 상당한 보응을 그 자신에 받았느니라	And likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the woman, burned in their lust one toward another; men with men working that which is unseemly, and receiving in themselves that recompence of their error which was meet.	Likewise, the men abandoned natural relations with women and burned with lust for one another. Men committed indecent acts with other men, and received in themselves the due penalty for their error.
ROM	1	28	또한 저희가 마음에 하나님 두기를 싫어하매 하나님께서 저희를 그 상실한 마음대로 내어 버려 두사 합당치 못한 일을 하게 하셨으니	And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient;	Furthermore, since they did not see fit to acknowledge God, He gave them up to a depraved mind, to do what ought not to be done.
ROM	1	29	곧 모든 불의, 추악, 탐욕, 악의가 가득한 자요 시기, 살인, 분쟁, 사기, 악독이 가득한 자요 수군수군 하는 자요	Being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity; whisperers,	They have become filled with every kind of wickedness, evil, greed, and depravity. They are full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, and malice. They are gossips,
ROM	1	30	비방하는 자요 하나님의 미워하시는 자요 능욕하는 자요 교만한 자요 자랑하는 자요 악을 도모하는 자요 부모를 거역하는 자요	Backbiters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents,	slanderers, God-haters, insolent, arrogant, and boastful. They invent new forms of evil; they disobey their parents.
ROM	1	31	우매한 자요 배약하는 자요 무정한 자요 무자비한 자라	Without understanding, covenantbreakers, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful:	They are senseless, faithless, heartless, merciless.
ROM	1	32	저희가 이같은 일을 행하는 자는 사형에 해당하다고 하나님의 정하심을 알고도 자기들만 행할 뿐 아니라 또한 그 일을 행하는 자를 옳다 하느니라	Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them.	Although they know God’s righteous decree that those who do such things are worthy of death, they not only continue to do these things, but also approve of those who practice them.
ROM	2	1	그러므로 남을 판단하는 사람아 무론 누구든지 네가 핑계치 못할 것은 남을 판단하는 것으로 네가 너를 정죄함이니 판단하는 네가 같은 일을 행함이니라	Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judgest: for wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself; for thou that judgest doest the same things.	You, therefore, have no excuse, you who pass judgment on another. For on whatever grounds you judge the other, you are condemning yourself, because you who pass judgment do the same things.
ROM	2	2	이런 일을 행하는 자에게 하나님의 판단이 진리대로 되는 줄 우리가 아노라	But we are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth against them which commit such things.	And we know that God’s judgment against those who do such things is based on truth.
ROM	2	3	이런 일을 행하는 자를 판단하고도 같은 일을 행하는 사람아 네가 하나님의 판단을 피할 줄로 생각하느냐	And thinkest thou this, O man, that judgest them which do such things, and doest the same, that thou shalt escape the judgment of God?	So when you, O man, pass judgment on others, yet do the same things, do you think you will escape God’s judgment?
ROM	2	4	혹 네가 하나님의 인자하심이 너를 인도하여 회개케 하심을 알지 못하여 그의 인자하심과 용납하심과 길이 참으심의 풍성함을 멸시하느뇨	Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance and longsuffering; not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance?	Or do you disregard the riches of His kindness, tolerance, and patience, not realizing that God’s kindness leads you to repentance?
ROM	2	5	다만 네 고집과 회개치 아니한 마음을 따라 진노의 날 곧 하나님의 의로우신 판단이 나타나는 그 날에 임할 진노를 네게 쌓는도다	But after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God;	But because of your hard and unrepentant heart, you are storing up wrath against yourself for the day of wrath, when God’s righteous judgment will be revealed.
ROM	2	6	하나님께서 각 사람에게 그 행한 대로 보응하시되	Who will render to every man according to his deeds:	God “will repay each one according to his deeds.”
ROM	2	7	참고 선을 행하여 영광과 존귀와 썩지 아니함을 구하는 자에게는 영생으로 하시고	To them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and honour and immortality, eternal life:	To those who by perseverance in doing good seek glory, honor, and immortality, He will give eternal life.
ROM	2	8	오직 당을 지어 진리를 좇지 아니하고 불의를 좇는 자에게는 노와 분으로 하시리라	But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath,	But for those who are self-seeking and who reject the truth and follow wickedness, there will be wrath and anger.
ROM	2	9	악을 행하는 각 사람의 영에게 환난과 곤고가 있으리니 첫째는 유대인에게요 또한 헬라인에게며	Tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of man that doeth evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile;	There will be trouble and distress for every human being who does evil, first for the Jew, then for the Greek;
ROM	2	10	선을 행하는 각 사람에게는 영광과 존귀와 평강이 있으리니 첫째는 유대인에게요 또한 헬라인에게라	But glory, honour, and peace, to every man that worketh good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile:	but glory, honor, and peace for everyone who does good, first for the Jew, then for the Greek.
ROM	2	11	이는 하나님께서 외모로 사람을 취하지 아니하심이니라	For there is no respect of persons with God.	For God does not show favoritism.
ROM	2	12	무릇 율법 없이 범죄한 자는 또한 율법 없이 망하고 무릇 율법이 있고 범죄한 자는 율법으로 말미암아 심판을 받으리라	For as many as have sinned without law shall also perish without law: and as many as have sinned in the law shall be judged by the law;	All who sin apart from the law will also perish apart from the law, and all who sin under the law will be judged by the law.
ROM	2	13	하나님 앞에서는 율법을 듣는 자가 의인이 아니요 오직 율법을 행하는 자라야 의롭다 하심을 얻으리니	(For not the hearers of the law are just before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified.	For it is not the hearers of the law who are righteous before God, but it is the doers of the law who will be declared righteous.
ROM	2	14	(율법 없는 이방인이 본성으로 율법의 일을 행할 때는 이 사람은 율법이 없어도 자기가 자기에게 율법이 되나니	For when the Gentiles, which have not the law, do by nature the things contained in the law, these, having not the law, are a law unto themselves:	Indeed, when Gentiles, who do not have the law, do by nature what the law requires, they are a law to themselves, even though they do not have the law.
ROM	2	15	이런 이들은 그 양심이 증거가 되어 그 생각들이 서로 혹은 송사하며 혹은 변명하여 그 마음에 새긴 율법의 행위를 나타내느니라)	Which shew the work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing or else excusing one another;)	So they show that the work of the law is written on their hearts, their consciences also bearing witness, and their thoughts either accusing or defending them
ROM	2	16	곧 내 복음에 이른 바와 같이 하나님이 예수 그리스도로 말미암아 사람들의 은밀한 것을 심판하시는 그 날이라	In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my gospel.	on the day when God will judge men’s secrets through Christ Jesus, as proclaimed by my gospel.
ROM	2	17	유대인이라 칭하는 네가 율법을 의지하며 하나님을 자랑하며	Behold, thou art called a Jew, and restest in the law, and makest thy boast of God,	Now you, if you call yourself a Jew; if you rely on the law and boast in God;
ROM	2	18	율법의 교훈을 받아 하나님의 뜻을 알고 지극히 선한 것을 좋게 여기며	And knowest his will, and approvest the things that are more excellent, being instructed out of the law;	if you know His will and approve of what is superior because you are instructed by the law;
ROM	2	19	네가 율법에 있는 지식과 진리의 규모를 가진 자로서 소경의 길을 인도하는 자요 어두움에 있는 자의 빛이요	And art confident that thou thyself art a guide of the blind, a light of them which are in darkness,	if you are convinced that you are a guide for the blind, a light for those in darkness,
ROM	2	20	어리석은 자의 훈도요 어린 아이의 선생이라고 스스로 믿으니	An instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes, which hast the form of knowledge and of the truth in the law.	an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of infants, because you have in the law the embodiment of knowledge and truth—
ROM	2	21	그러면 다른 사람을 가르치는 네가 네 자신을 가르치지 아니하느냐 도적질 말라 반포하는 네가 도적질하느냐	Thou therefore which teachest another, teachest thou not thyself? thou that preachest a man should not steal, dost thou steal?	you, then, who teach others, do you not teach yourself? You who preach against stealing, do you steal?
ROM	2	22	간음하지 말라 말하는 네가 간음하느냐 우상을 가증히 여기는 네가 신사 물건을 도적질하느냐	Thou that sayest a man should not commit adultery, dost thou commit adultery? thou that abhorrest idols, dost thou commit sacrilege?	You who forbid adultery, do you commit adultery? You who abhor idols, do you rob temples?
ROM	2	23	율법을 자랑하는 네가 율법을 범함으로 하나님을 욕되게 하느냐	Thou that makest thy boast of the law, through breaking the law dishonourest thou God?	You who boast in the law, do you dishonor God by breaking the law?
ROM	2	24	기록된 바와 같이 하나님의 이름이 너희로 인하여 이방인 중에서 모독을 받는도다	For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you, as it is written.	As it is written: “God’s name is blasphemed among the Gentiles because of you.”
ROM	2	25	네가 율법을 행한즉 할례가 유익하나 만일 율법을 범한즉 네 할례가 무할례가 되었느니라	For circumcision verily profiteth, if thou keep the law: but if thou be a breaker of the law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision.	Circumcision has value if you observe the law, but if you break the law, your circumcision has become uncircumcision.
ROM	2	26	그런즉 무할례자가 율법의 제도를 지키면 그 무할례를 할례와 같이 여길 것이 아니냐	Therefore if the uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the law, shall not his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision?	If a man who is not circumcised keeps the requirements of the law, will not his uncircumcision be regarded as circumcision?
ROM	2	27	또한 본래 무할례자가 율법을 온전히 지키면 의문과 할례를 가지고 율법을 범하는 너를 판단치 아니하겠느냐	And shall not uncircumcision which is by nature, if it fulfil the law, judge thee, who by the letter and circumcision dost transgress the law?	The one who is physically uncircumcised yet keeps the law will condemn you who, even though you have the written code and circumcision, are a lawbreaker.
ROM	2	28	대저 표면적 유대인이 유대인이 아니요 표면적 육신의 할례가 할례가 아니라	For he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly; neither is that circumcision, which is outward in the flesh:	A man is not a Jew because he is one outwardly, nor is circumcision only outward and physical.
ROM	2	29	오직 이면적 유대인이 유대인이며 할례는 마음에 할지니 신령에 있고 의문에 있지 아니한 것이라 그 칭찬이 사람에게서가 아니요 다만 하나님에게서니라	But he is a Jew, which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter; whose praise is not of men, but of God.	No, a man is a Jew because he is one inwardly, and circumcision is a matter of the heart, by the Spirit, not by the written code. Such a man’s praise does not come from men, but from God.
ROM	3	1	그런즉 유대인의 나음이 무엇이며 할례의 유익이 무엇이뇨	What advantage then hath the Jew? or what profit is there of circumcision?	What, then, is the advantage of being a Jew? Or what is the value of circumcision?
ROM	3	2	범사에 많으니 첫째는 저희가 하나님의 말씀을 맡았음이니라	Much every way: chiefly, because that unto them were committed the oracles of God.	Much in every way. First of all, they have been entrusted with the very words of God.
ROM	3	3	어떤 자들이 믿지 아니하였으면 어찌하리요 그 믿지 아니함이 하나님의 미쁘심을 폐하겠느뇨	For what if some did not believe? shall their unbelief make the faith of God without effect?	What if some did not have faith? Will their lack of faith nullify God’s faithfulness?
ROM	3	4	그럴 수 없느니라 사람은 다 거짓되되 오직 하나님은 참되시다 할지어다 기록된 바 주께서 주의 말씀에 의롭다 함을 얻으시고 판단 받으실 때에 이기려 하심이라 함과 같으니라	God forbid: yea, let God be true, but every man a liar; as it is written, That thou mightest be justified in thy sayings, and mightest overcome when thou art judged.	Certainly not! Let God be true and every man a liar. As it is written: “So that You may be proved right when You speak and victorious when You judge.”
ROM	3	5	그러나 우리 불의가 하나님의 의를 드러나게 하면 무슨 말 하리요 내가 사람의 말하는 대로 말하노니 진노를 내리시는 하나님이 불의하시냐	But if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God, what shall we say? Is God unrighteous who taketh vengeance? (I speak as a man)	But if our unrighteousness highlights the righteousness of God, what shall we say? That God is unjust to inflict His wrath on us? I am speaking in human terms.
ROM	3	6	결코 그렇지 아니하니라 만일 그러하면 하나님께서 어찌 세상을 심판하시리요	God forbid: for then how shall God judge the world?	Certainly not! In that case, how could God judge the world?
ROM	3	7	그러나 나의 거짓말로 하나님의 참되심이 더 풍성하여 그의 영광이 되었으면 어찌 나도 죄인처럼 심판을 받으리요	For if the truth of God hath more abounded through my lie unto his glory; why yet am I also judged as a sinner?	However, if my falsehood accentuates God’s truthfulness, to the increase of His glory, why am I still condemned as a sinner?
ROM	3	8	또는 그러면 선을 이루기 위하여 악을 행하자 하지 않겠느냐 (어떤 이들이 이렇게 비방하여 우리가 이런 말을 한다고 하니) 저희가 정죄 받는 것이 옳으니라	And not rather, (as we be slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say,) Let us do evil, that good may come? whose damnation is just.	Why not say, as some slanderously claim that we say, “Let us do evil that good may result”? Their condemnation is deserved!
ROM	3	9	그러면 어떠하뇨 우리는 나으뇨 결코 아니라 유대인이나 헬라인이나 다 죄 아래 있다고 우리가 이미 선언하였느니라	What then? are we better than they? No, in no wise: for we have before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin;	What then? Are we any better? Not at all. For we have already made the charge that Jews and Greeks alike are all under sin.
ROM	3	10	기록한 바 의인은 없나니 하나도 없으며	As it is written, There is none righteous, no, not one:	As it is written: “There is no one righteous, not even one.
ROM	3	11	깨닫는 자도 없고 하나님을 찾는 자도 없고	There is none that understandeth, there is none that seeketh after God.	There is no one who understands, no one who seeks God.
ROM	3	12	다 치우쳐 한가지로 무익하게 되고 선을 행하는 자는 없나니 하나도 없도다	They are all gone out of the way, they are together become unprofitable; there is none that doeth good, no, not one.	All have turned away, they have together become worthless; there is no one who does good, not even one.”
ROM	3	13	저희 목구멍은 열린 무덤이요 그 혀로는 속임을 베풀며 그 입술에는 독사의 독이 있고	Their throat is an open sepulchre; with their tongues they have used deceit; the poison of asps is under their lips:	“Their throats are open graves; their tongues practice deceit.” “The venom of vipers is on their lips.”
ROM	3	14	그 입에는 저주와 악독이 가득하고	Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness:	“Their mouths are full of cursing and bitterness.”
ROM	3	15	그 발은 피 흘리는데 빠른지라	Their feet are swift to shed blood:	“Their feet are swift to shed blood;
ROM	3	16	파멸과 고생이 그 길에 있어	Destruction and misery are in their ways:	ruin and misery lie in their wake,
ROM	3	17	평강의 길을 알지 못하였고	And the way of peace have they not known:	and the way of peace they have not known.”
ROM	3	18	저희 눈 앞에 하나님을 두려워함이 없느니라 함과 같으니라	There is no fear of God before their eyes.	“There is no fear of God before their eyes.”
ROM	3	19	우리가 알거니와 무릇 율법이 말하는 바는 율법 아래 있는 자들에게 말하는 것이니 이는 모든 입을 막고 온 세상으로 하나님의 심판 아래 있게 하려 함이니라	Now we know that what things soever the law saith, it saith to them who are under the law: that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God.	Now we know that whatever the law says, it says to those who are under the law, so that every mouth may be silenced and the whole world held accountable to God.
ROM	3	20	그러므로 율법의 행위로 그의 앞에 의롭다 하심을 얻을 육체가 없나니 율법으로는 죄를 깨달음이니라	Therefore by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified in his sight: for by the law is the knowledge of sin.	Therefore no one will be justified in His sight by works of the law. For the law merely brings awareness of sin.
ROM	3	21	이제는 율법 외에 하나님의 한 의가 나타났으니 율법과 선지자들에게 증거를 받은 것이라	But now the righteousness of God without the law is manifested, being witnessed by the law and the prophets;	But now, apart from the law, the righteousness of God has been revealed, as attested by the Law and the Prophets.
ROM	3	22	곧 예수 그리스도를 믿음으로 말미암아 모든 믿는 자에게 미치는 하나님의 의니 차별이 없느니라	Even the righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all them that believe: for there is no difference:	And this righteousness from God comes through faith in Jesus Christ to all who believe. There is no distinction,
ROM	3	23	모든 사람이 죄를 범하였으매 하나님의 영광에 이르지 못하더니	For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God;	for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God,
ROM	3	24	그리스도 예수 안에 있는 구속으로 말미암아 하나님의 은혜로 값없이 의롭다 하심을 얻은 자 되었느니라	Being justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus:	and are justified freely by His grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus.
ROM	3	25	이 예수를 하나님이 그의 피로 인하여 믿음으로 말미암는 화목제물로 세우셨으니 이는 하나님께서 길이 참으시는 중에 전에 지은 죄를 간과하심으로 자기의 의로우심을 나타내려 하심이니	Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God;	God presented Him as the atoning sacrifice through faith in His blood, in order to demonstrate His righteousness, because in His forbearance He had passed over the sins committed beforehand.
ROM	3	26	곧 이 때에 자기의 의로우심을 나타내사 자기도 의로우시며 또한 예수 믿는 자를 의롭다 하려 하심이니라	To declare, I say, at this time his righteousness: that he might be just, and the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus.	He did this to demonstrate His righteousness at the present time, so as to be just and to justify the one who has faith in Jesus.
ROM	3	27	그런즉 자랑할 데가 어디뇨 있을 수가 없느니라 무슨 법으로냐 행위로냐 아니라 오직 믿음의 법으로니라	Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what law? of works? Nay: but by the law of faith.	Where, then, is boasting? It is excluded. On what principle? On that of works? No, but on that of faith.
ROM	3	28	그러므로 사람이 의롭다 하심을 얻는 것은 율법의 행위에 있지 않고 믿음으로 되는 줄 우리가 인정하노라	Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law.	For we maintain that a man is justified by faith apart from works of the law.
ROM	3	29	하나님은 홀로 유대인의 하나님뿐이시뇨 또 이방인의 하나님은 아니시뇨 진실로 이방인의 하나님도 되시느니라	Is he the God of the Jews only? is he not also of the Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also:	Is God the God of Jews only? Is He not the God of Gentiles too? Yes, of Gentiles too,
ROM	3	30	할례자도 믿음으로 말미암아 또는 무할례자도 믿음으로 말미암아 의롭다 하실 하나님은 한 분이시니라	Seeing it is one God, which shall justify the circumcision by faith, and uncircumcision through faith.	since there is only one God, who will justify the circumcised by faith and the uncircumcised through that same faith.
ROM	3	31	그런즉 우리가 믿음으로 말미암아 율법을 폐하느뇨 그럴 수 없느니라 도리어 율법을 굳게 세우느니라	Do we then make void the law through faith? God forbid: yea, we establish the law.	Do we, then, nullify the law by this faith? Certainly not! Instead, we uphold the law.
ROM	4	1	그런즉 육신으로 우리 조상된 아브라함이 무엇을 얻었다 하리요	What shall we say then that Abraham our father, as pertaining to the flesh, hath found?	What then shall we say that Abraham, our forefather, has discovered?
ROM	4	2	만일 아브라함이 행위로써 의롭다 하심을 얻었으면 자랑할 것이 있으려니와 하나님 앞에서는 없느니라	For if Abraham were justified by works, he hath whereof to glory; but not before God.	If Abraham was indeed justified by works, he had something to boast about, but not before God.
ROM	4	3	성경이 무엇을 말하느뇨 아브라함이 하나님을 믿으매 이것이 저에게 의로 여기신 바 되었느니라	For what saith the scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness.	For what does the Scripture say? “Abraham believed God, and it was credited to him as righteousness.”
ROM	4	4	일하는 자에게는 그 삯을 은혜로 여기지 아니하고 빚으로 여기거니와	Now to him that worketh is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt.	Now the wages of the worker are not credited as a gift, but as an obligation.
ROM	4	5	일을 아니할지라도 경건치 아니한 자를 의롭다 하시는 이를 믿는 자에게는 그의 믿음을 의로 여기시나니	But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.	However, to the one who does not work, but believes in Him who justifies the wicked, his faith is credited as righteousness.
ROM	4	6	일한 것이 없이 하나님께 의로 여기심을 받는 사람의 행복에 대하여 다윗의 말한 바	Even as David also describeth the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputeth righteousness without works,	And David speaks likewise of the blessedness of the man to whom God credits righteousness apart from works:
ROM	4	7	그 불법을 사하심을 받고 그 죄를 가리우심을 받는 자는 복이 있고	Saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.	“Blessed are they whose lawless acts are forgiven, whose sins are covered.
ROM	4	8	주께서 그 죄를 인정치 아니하실 사람은 복이 있도다 함과 같으니라	Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin.	Blessed is the man whose sin the Lord will never count against him.”
ROM	4	9	그런즉 이 행복이 할례자에게뇨 혹 무할례자에게도뇨 대저 우리가 말하기를 아브라함에게는 그 믿음을 의로 여기셨다 하노라	Cometh this blessedness then upon the circumcision only, or upon the uncircumcision also? for we say that faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness.	Is this blessing only on the circumcised, or also on the uncircumcised? We have been saying that Abraham’s faith was credited to him as righteousness.
ROM	4	10	그런즉 이를 어떻게 여기셨느뇨 할례시냐 무할례시냐 할례시가 아니라 무할례시니라	How was it then reckoned? when he was in circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision.	In what context was it credited? Was it after his circumcision, or before? It was not after, but before.
ROM	4	11	저가 할례의 표를 받은 것은 무할례시에 믿음으로 된 의를 인친 것이니 이는 무할례자로서 믿는 모든 자의 조상이 되어 저희로 의로 여기심을 얻게 하려 하심이라	And he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had yet being uncircumcised: that he might be the father of all them that believe, though they be not circumcised; that righteousness might be imputed unto them also:	And he received the sign of circumcision as a seal of the righteousness that he had by faith while he was still uncircumcised. So then, he is the father of all who believe but are not circumcised, in order that righteousness might be credited to them.
ROM	4	12	또한 할례자의 조상이 되었나니 곧 할례 받을 자에게뿐 아니라 우리 조상 아브라함의 무할례시에 가졌던 믿음의 자취를 좇는 자들에게도니라	And the father of circumcision to them who are not of the circumcision only, but who also walk in the steps of that faith of our father Abraham, which he had being yet uncircumcised.	And he is also the father of the circumcised who not only are circumcised, but who also walk in the footsteps of the faith that our father Abraham had before he was circumcised.
ROM	4	13	아브라함이나 그 후손에게 세상의 후사가 되리라고 하신 언약은 율법으로 말미암은 것이 아니요 오직 믿음의 의로 말미암은 것이니라	For the promise, that he should be the heir of the world, was not to Abraham, or to his seed, through the law, but through the righteousness of faith.	For the promise to Abraham and his offspring that he would be heir of the world was not given through the law, but through the righteousness that comes by faith.
ROM	4	14	만일 율법에 속한 자들이 후사이면 믿음은 헛것이 되고 약속은 폐하여졌느니라	For if they which are of the law be heirs, faith is made void, and the promise made of none effect:	For if those who live by the law are heirs, faith is useless and the promise is worthless,
ROM	4	15	율법은 진노를 이루게 하나니 율법이 없는 곳에는 범함도 없느니라	Because the law worketh wrath: for where no law is, there is no transgression.	because the law brings wrath. And where there is no law, there is no transgression.
ROM	4	16	그러므로 후사가 되는 이것이 은혜에 속하기 위하여 믿음으로 되나니 이는 그 약속을 그 모든 후손에게 굳게 하려 하심이라 율법에 속한 자에게뿐 아니라 아브라함의 믿음에 속한 자에게도니 아브라함은 하나님 앞에서 우리 모든 사람의 조상이라	Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace; to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed; not to that only which is of the law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham; who is the father of us all,	Therefore, the promise comes by faith, so that it may rest on grace and may be guaranteed to all Abraham’s offspring—not only to those who are of the law, but also to those who are of the faith of Abraham. He is the father of us all.
ROM	4	17	기록된 바 내가 너를 많은 민족의 조상으로 세웠다 하심과 같으니 그의 믿은 바 하나님은 죽은 자를 살리시며 없는 것을 있는 것 같이 부르시는 이시니라	(As it is written, I have made thee a father of many nations,) before him whom he believed, even God, who quickeneth the dead, and calleth those things which be not as though they were.	As it is written: “I have made you a father of many nations.” He is our father in the presence of God, in whom he believed, the God who gives life to the dead and calls into being what does not yet exist.
ROM	4	18	아브라함이 바랄 수 없는 중에 바라고 믿었으니 이는 네 후손이 이같으리라 하신 말씀대로 많은 민족의 조상이 되게 하려 하심을 인함이라	Who against hope believed in hope, that he might become the father of many nations; according to that which was spoken, So shall thy seed be.	Against all hope, Abraham in hope believed and so became the father of many nations, just as he had been told, “So shall your offspring be.”
ROM	4	19	그가 백 세나 되어 자기 몸의 죽은 것 같음과 사라의 태의 죽은 것 같음을 알고도 믿음이 약하여지지 아니하고	And being not weak in faith, he considered not his own body now dead, when he was about an hundred years old, neither yet the deadness of Sara’s womb:	Without weakening in his faith, he acknowledged the decrepitness of his body (since he was about a hundred years old) and the lifelessness of Sarah’s womb.
ROM	4	20	믿음이 없어 하나님의 약속을 의심치 않고 믿음에 견고하여져서 하나님께 영광을 돌리며	He staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief; but was strong in faith, giving glory to God;	Yet he did not waver through disbelief in the promise of God, but was strengthened in his faith and gave glory to God,
ROM	4	21	약속하신 그것을 또한 능히 이루실 줄을 확신하였으니	And being fully persuaded that, what he had promised, he was able also to perform.	being fully persuaded that God was able to do what He had promised.
ROM	4	22	그러므로 이것을 저에게 의로 여기셨느니라	And therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness.	This is why “it was credited to him as righteousness.”
ROM	4	23	저에게 의로 여기셨다 기록된 것은 아브라함만 위한 것이 아니요	Now it was not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him;	Now the words “it was credited to him” were written not only for Abraham,
ROM	4	24	의로 여기심을 받을 우리도 위함이니 곧 예수 우리 주를 죽은 자 가운데서 살리신 이를 믿는 자니라	But for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead;	but also for us, to whom righteousness will be credited—for us who believe in Him who raised Jesus our Lord from the dead.
ROM	4	25	예수는 우리 범죄함을 위하여 내어줌이 되고 또한 우리를 의롭다 하심을 위하여 살아나셨느니라	Who was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our justification.	He was delivered over to death for our trespasses and was raised to life for our justification.
ROM	5	1	그러므로 우리가 믿음으로 의롭다 하심을 얻었은즉 우리 주 예수 그리스도로 말미암아 하나님으로 더불어 화평을 누리자	Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ:	Therefore, since we have been justified through faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
ROM	5	2	또한 그로 말미암아 우리가 믿음으로 서있는 이 은혜에 들어감을 얻었으며 하나님의 영광을 바라고 즐거워하느니라	By whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God.	through whom we have gained access by faith into this grace in which we stand. And we rejoice in the hope of the glory of God.
ROM	5	3	다만 이뿐 아니라 우리가 환난 중에도 즐거워하나니 이는 환난은 인내를,	And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also: knowing that tribulation worketh patience;	Not only that, but we also rejoice in our sufferings, because we know that suffering produces perseverance;
ROM	5	4	인내는 연단을, 연단은 소망을 이루는 줄 앎이로다	And patience, experience; and experience, hope:	perseverance, character; and character, hope.
ROM	5	5	소망이 부끄럽게 아니함은 우리에게 주신 성령으로 말미암아 하나님의 사랑이 우리 마음에 부은 바 됨이니	And hope maketh not ashamed; because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us.	And hope does not disappoint us, because God has poured out His love into our hearts through the Holy Spirit, whom He has given us.
ROM	5	6	우리가 아직 연약할 때에 기약대로 그리스도께서 경건치 않은 자를 위하여 죽으셨도다	For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly.	For at just the right time, while we were still powerless, Christ died for the ungodly.
ROM	5	7	의인을 위하여 죽는 자가 쉽지 않고 선인을 위하여 용감히 죽는 자가 혹 있거니와	For scarcely for a righteous man will one die: yet peradventure for a good man some would even dare to die.	Very rarely will anyone die for a righteous man, though for a good man someone might possibly dare to die.
ROM	5	8	우리가 아직 죄인 되었을 때에 그리스도께서 우리를 위하여 죽으심으로 하나님께서 우리에게 대한 자기의 사랑을 확증하셨느니라	But God commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.	But God proves His love for us in this: While we were still sinners, Christ died for us.
ROM	5	9	그러면 이제 우리가 그 피를 인하여 의롭다 하심을 얻었은즉 더욱 그로 말미암아 진노하심에서 구원을 얻을 것이니	Much more then, being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him.	Therefore, since we have now been justified by His blood, how much more shall we be saved from wrath through Him!
ROM	5	10	곧 우리가 원수 되었을 때에 그 아들의 죽으심으로 말미암아 하나님으로 더불어 화목되었은즉 화목된 자로서는 더욱 그의 살으심을 인하여 구원을 얻을 것이니라	For if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life.	For if, when we were enemies of God, we were reconciled to Him through the death of His Son, how much more, having been reconciled, shall we be saved through His life!
ROM	5	11	이뿐 아니라 이제 우리로 화목을 얻게 하신 우리 주 예수 그리스도로 말미암아 하나님 안에서 또한 즐거워하느니라	And not only so, but we also joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement.	Not only that, but we also rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received reconciliation.
ROM	5	12	이러므로 한 사람으로 말미암아 죄가 세상에 들어오고 죄로 말미암아 사망이 왔나니 이와 같이 모든 사람이 죄를 지었으므로 사망이 모든 사람에게 이르렀느니라	Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned:	Therefore, just as sin entered the world through one man, and death through sin, so also death was passed on to all men, because all sinned.
ROM	5	13	죄가 율법 있기 전에도 세상에 있었으나 율법이 없을 때에는 죄를 죄로 여기지 아니하느니라	(For until the law sin was in the world: but sin is not imputed when there is no law.	For sin was in the world before the law was given; but sin is not taken into account when there is no law.
ROM	5	14	그러나 아담으로부터 모세까지 아담의 범죄와 같은 죄를 짓지 아니한 자들 위에도 사망이 왕 노릇 하였나니 아담은 오실 자의 표상이라	Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adam’s transgression, who is the figure of him that was to come.	Nevertheless, death reigned from Adam until Moses, even over those who did not sin in the way that Adam transgressed. He is a pattern of the One to come.
ROM	5	15	그러나 이 은사는 그 범죄와 같지 아니하니 곧 한 사람의 범죄를 인하여 많은 사람이 죽었은즉 더욱 하나님의 은혜와 또는 한 사람 예수 그리스도의 은혜로 말미암은 선물이 많은 사람에게 넘쳤으리라	But not as the offence, so also is the free gift. For if through the offence of one many be dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man, Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto many.	But the gift is not like the trespass. For if the many died by the trespass of the one man, how much more did God’s grace and the gift that came by the grace of the one man, Jesus Christ, abound to the many!
ROM	5	16	또 이 선물은 범죄한 한 사람으로 말미암은 것과 같지 아니하니 심판은 한 사람을 인하여 정죄에 이르렀으나 은사는 많은 범죄를 인하여 의롭다 하심에 이름이니라	And not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift: for the judgment was by one to condemnation, but the free gift is of many offences unto justification.	Again, the gift is not like the result of the one man’s sin: The judgment that followed one sin brought condemnation, but the gift that followed many trespasses brought justification.
ROM	5	17	한 사람의 범죄를 인하여 사망이 그 한 사람으로 말미암아 왕 노릇 하였은즉 더욱 은혜와 의의 선물을 넘치게 받는 자들이 한 분 예수 그리스도로 말미암아 생명 안에서 왕 노릇 하리로다	For if by one man’s offence death reigned by one; much more they which receive abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ.)	For if, by the trespass of the one man, death reigned through that one man, how much more will those who receive an abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one man, Jesus Christ!
ROM	5	18	그런즉 한 범죄로 많은 사람이 정죄에 이른 것 같이 의의 한 행동으로 말미암아 많은 사람이 의롭다 하심을 받아 생명에 이르렀느니라	Therefore as by the offence of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life.	So then, just as one trespass brought condemnation for all men, so also one act of righteousness brought justification and life for all men.
ROM	5	19	한 사람의 순종치 아니함으로 많은 사람이 죄인 된 것 같이 한 사람의 순종하심으로 많은 사람이 의인이 되리라	For as by one man’s disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.	For just as through the disobedience of the one man the many were made sinners, so also through the obedience of the one man the many will be made righteous.
ROM	5	20	율법이 가입한 것은 범죄를 더하게 하려 함이라 그러나 죄가 더한 곳에 은혜가 넘쳤나니	Moreover the law entered, that the offence might abound. But where sin abounded, grace did much more abound:	The law came in so that the trespass would increase; but where sin increased, grace increased all the more,
ROM	5	21	이는 죄가 사망 안에서 왕 노릇 한 것 같이 은혜도 또한 의로 말미암아 왕 노릇 하여 우리 주 예수 그리스도로 말미암아 영생에 이르게 하려 함이니라	That as sin hath reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord.	so that, just as sin reigned in death, so also grace might reign through righteousness to bring eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
ROM	6	1	그런즉 우리가 무슨 말 하리요 은혜를 더하게 하려고 죄에 거하겠느뇨	What shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound?	What then shall we say? Shall we continue in sin so that grace may increase?
ROM	6	2	그럴 수 없느니라 죄에 대하여 죽은 우리가 어찌 그 가운데 더 살리요	God forbid. How shall we, that are dead to sin, live any longer therein?	Certainly not! How can we who died to sin live in it any longer?
ROM	6	3	무릇 그리스도 예수와 합하여 침례를 받은 우리는 그의 죽으심과 합하여 침례 받은 줄을 알지 못하느뇨	Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death?	Or aren’t you aware that all of us who were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into His death?
ROM	6	4	그러므로 우리가 그의 죽으심과 합하여 침례를 받음으로 그와 함께 장사되었나니 이는 아버지의 영광으로 말미암아 그리스도를 죽은 자 가운데서 살리심과 같이 우리로 또한 새 생명 가운데서 행하게 하려 함이니라	Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life.	We were therefore buried with Him through baptism into death, in order that, just as Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father, we too may walk in newness of life.
ROM	6	5	만일 우리가 그의 죽으심을 본받아 연합한 자가 되었으면 또한 그의 부활을 본받아 연합한 자가 되리라	For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection:	For if we have been united with Him like this in His death, we will certainly also be united with Him in His resurrection.
ROM	6	6	우리가 알거니와 우리 옛 사람이 예수와 함께 십자가에 못 박힌 것은 죄의 몸이 멸하여 다시는 우리가 죄에게 종노릇하지 아니하려 함이니	Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin.	We know that our old self was crucified with Him so that the body of sin might be rendered powerless, that we should no longer be slaves to sin.
ROM	6	7	이는 죽은 자가 죄에서 벗어나 의롭다 하심을 얻었음이니라	For he that is dead is freed from sin.	For anyone who has died has been freed from sin.
ROM	6	8	만일 우리가 그리스도와 함께 죽었으면 또한 그와 함께 살 줄을 믿노니	Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him:	Now if we died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with Him.
ROM	6	9	이는 그리스도께서 죽은 자 가운데서 사셨으매 다시 죽지 아니하시고 사망이 다시 그를 주장하지 못할 줄을 앎이로라	Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead dieth no more; death hath no more dominion over him.	For we know that since Christ was raised from the dead, He cannot die again; death no longer has dominion over Him.
ROM	6	10	그의 죽으심은 죄에 대하여 단번에 죽으심이요 그의 살으심은 하나님께 대하여 살으심이니	For in that he died, he died unto sin once: but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God.	The death He died, He died to sin once for all; but the life He lives, He lives to God.
ROM	6	11	이와 같이 너희도 너희 자신을 죄에 대하여는 죽은 자요 그리스도 예수 안에서 하나님을 대하여는 산 자로 여길지어다	Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord.	So you too must count yourselves dead to sin, but alive to God in Christ Jesus.
ROM	6	12	그러므로 너희는 죄로 너희 죽을 몸에 왕 노릇 하지 못하게 하여 몸의 사욕을 순종치 말고	Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof.	Therefore do not let sin reign in your mortal body so that you obey its desires.
ROM	6	13	또한 너희 지체를 불의의 병기로 죄에게 드리지 말고 오직 너희 자신을 죽은 자 가운데서 다시 산 자 같이 하나님께 드리며 너의 지체를 의의 병기로 하나님께 드리라	Neither yield ye your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin: but yield yourselves unto God, as those that are alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness unto God.	Do not present the parts of your body to sin as instruments of wickedness, but present yourselves to God as those who have been brought from death to life; and present the parts of your body to Him as instruments of righteousness.
ROM	6	14	죄가 너희를 주관치 못하리니 이는 너희가 법 아래 있지 아니하고 은혜 아래 있음이니라	For sin shall not have dominion over you: for ye are not under the law, but under grace.	For sin shall not be your master, because you are not under law, but under grace.
ROM	6	15	그런즉 어찌하리요 우리가 법 아래 있지 아니하고 은혜 아래 있으니 죄를 지으리요 그럴 수 없느니라	What then? shall we sin, because we are not under the law, but under grace? God forbid.	What then? Shall we sin because we are not under law, but under grace? Certainly not!
ROM	6	16	너희 자신을 종으로 드려 누구에게 순종하든지 그 순종함을 받는 자의 종이 되는 줄을 너희가 알지 못하느냐 혹은 죄의 종으로 사망에 이르고 순종의 종으로 의에 이르느니라	Know ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness?	Do you not know that when you offer yourselves as obedient slaves, you are slaves to the one you obey, whether you are slaves to sin leading to death, or to obedience leading to righteousness?
ROM	6	17	하나님께 감사하리로다 너희가 본래 죄의 종이더니 너희에게 전하여 준 바 교훈의 본을 마음으로 순종하여	But God be thanked, that ye were the servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered you.	But thanks be to God that, though you once were slaves to sin, you wholeheartedly obeyed the form of teaching to which you were committed.
ROM	6	18	죄에게서 해방되어 의에게 종이 되었느니라	Being then made free from sin, ye became the servants of righteousness.	You have been set free from sin and have become slaves to righteousness.
ROM	6	19	너희 육신이 연약하므로 내가 사람의 예대로 말하노니 전에 너희가 너희 지체를 부정과 불법에 드려 불법에 이른 것 같이 이제는 너희 지체를 의에게 종으로 드려 거룩함에 이르라	I speak after the manner of men because of the infirmity of your flesh: for as ye have yielded your members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity unto iniquity; even so now yield your members servants to righteousness unto holiness.	I am speaking in human terms because of the weakness of your flesh. Just as you used to offer the parts of your body in slavery to impurity and to escalating wickedness, so now offer them in slavery to righteousness leading to holiness.
ROM	6	20	너희가 죄의 종이 되었을 때에는 의에 대하여 자유하였느니라	For when ye were the servants of sin, ye were free from righteousness.	For when you were slaves to sin, you were free of obligation to righteousness.
ROM	6	21	너희가 그 때에 무슨 열매를 얻었느뇨 이제는 너희가 그 일을 부끄러워하나니 이는 그 마지막이 사망임이니라	What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end of those things is death.	What fruit did you reap at that time from the things of which you are now ashamed? The outcome of those things is death.
ROM	6	22	그러나 이제는 너희가 죄에게서 해방되고 하나님께 종이 되어 거룩함에 이르는 열매를 얻었으니 이 마지막은 영생이라	But now being made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life.	But now that you have been set free from sin and have become slaves to God, the fruit you reap leads to holiness, and the outcome is eternal life.
ROM	6	23	죄의 삯은 사망이요 하나님의 은사는 그리스도 예수 우리 주 안에 있는 영생이니라	For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.	For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.
ROM	7	1	형제들아 내가 법 아는 자들에게 말하노니 너희는 율법이 사람의 살 동안만 그를 주관하는 줄 알지 못하느냐	Know ye not, brethren, (for I speak to them that know the law,) how that the law hath dominion over a man as long as he liveth?	Do you not know, brothers (for I am speaking to those who know the law), that the law has authority over a man only as long as he lives?
ROM	7	2	남편 있는 여인이 그 남편 생전에는 법으로 그에게 매인 바 되나 만일 그 남편이 죽으면 남편의 법에서 벗어났느니라	For the woman which hath an husband is bound by the law to her husband so long as he liveth; but if the husband be dead, she is loosed from the law of her husband.	For instance, a married woman is bound by law to her husband as long as he lives. But if her husband dies, she is released from the law of marriage.
ROM	7	3	그러므로 만일 그 남편 생전에 다른 남자에게 가면 음부라 이르되 남편이 죽으면 그 법에서 자유케 되나니 다른 남자에게 갈지라도 음부가 되지 아니하느니라	So then if, while her husband liveth, she be married to another man, she shall be called an adulteress: but if her husband be dead, she is free from that law; so that she is no adulteress, though she be married to another man.	So then, if she is joined to another man while her husband is still alive, she is called an adulteress; but if her husband dies, she is free from that law and is not an adulteress, even if she marries another man.
ROM	7	4	그러므로 내 형제들아 너희도 그리스도의 몸으로 말미암아 율법에 대하여 죽임을 당하였으니 이는 다른 이 곧 죽은 자 가운데서 살아나신 이에게 가서 우리로 하나님을 위하여 열매를 맺히게 하려 함이니라	Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become dead to the law by the body of Christ; that ye should be married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God.	Therefore, my brothers, you also died to the law through the body of Christ, that you might belong to another, to Him who was raised from the dead, in order that we might bear fruit to God.
ROM	7	5	우리가 육신에 있을 때에는 율법으로 말미암는 죄의 정욕이 우리 지체 중에 역사하여 우리로 사망을 위하여 열매를 맺게 하였더니	For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sins, which were by the law, did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death.	For when we lived according to the flesh, the sinful passions aroused by the law were at work in our bodies, bearing fruit for death.
ROM	7	6	이제는 우리가 얽매였던 것에 대하여 죽었으므로 율법에서 벗어났으니 이러므로 우리가 영의 새로운 것으로 섬길 것이요 의문의 묵은 것으로 아니할지니라	But now we are delivered from the law, that being dead wherein we were held; that we should serve in newness of spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter.	But now, having died to what bound us, we have been released from the law, so that we serve in the new way of the Spirit, and not in the old way of the written code.
ROM	7	7	그런즉 우리가 무슨 말 하리요 율법이 죄냐 그럴 수 없느니라 율법으로 말미암지 않고는 내가 죄를 알지 못하였으니 곧 율법이 탐내지 말라 하지 아니하였더면 내가 탐심을 알지 못하였으리라	What shall we say then? Is the law sin? God forbid. Nay, I had not known sin, but by the law: for I had not known lust, except the law had said, Thou shalt not covet.	What then shall we say? Is the law sin? Certainly not! Indeed, I would not have been mindful of sin if not for the law. For I would not have been aware of coveting if the law had not said, “Do not covet.”
ROM	7	8	그러나 죄가 기회를 타서 계명으로 말미암아 내 속에서 각양 탐심을 이루었나니 이는 법이 없으면 죄가 죽은 것임이니라	But sin, taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all manner of concupiscence. For without the law sin was dead.	But sin, seizing its opportunity through the commandment, produced in me every kind of covetous desire. For apart from the law, sin is dead.
ROM	7	9	전에 법을 깨닫지 못할 때에는 내가 살았더니 계명이 이르매 죄는 살아나고 나는 죽었도다	For I was alive without the law once: but when the commandment came, sin revived, and I died.	Once I was alive apart from the law; but when the commandment came, sin sprang to life and I died.
ROM	7	10	생명에 이르게 할 그 계명이 내게 대하여 도리어 사망에 이르게 하는 것이 되었도다	And the commandment, which was ordained to life, I found to be unto death.	So I discovered that the very commandment that was meant to bring life actually brought death.
ROM	7	11	죄가 기회를 타서 계명으로 말미암아 나를 속이고 그것으로 나를 죽였는지라	For sin, taking occasion by the commandment, deceived me, and by it slew me.	For sin, seizing its opportunity through the commandment, deceived me and through the commandment put me to death.
ROM	7	12	이로 보건대 율법도 거룩하며 계명도 거룩하며 의로우며 선하도다	Wherefore the law is holy, and the commandment holy, and just, and good.	So then, the law is holy, and the commandment is holy, righteous, and good.
ROM	7	13	그런즉 선한 것이 내게 사망이 되었느뇨 그럴 수 없느니라 오직 죄가 죄로 드러나기 위하여 선한 그것으로 말미암아 나를 죽게 만들었으니 이는 계명으로 말미암아 죄로 심히 죄되게 하려 함이니라	Was then that which is good made death unto me? God forbid. But sin, that it might appear sin, working death in me by that which is good; that sin by the commandment might become exceeding sinful.	Did that which is good, then, become death to me? Certainly not! But in order that sin might be exposed as sin, it produced death in me through what was good, so that through the commandment sin might become utterly sinful.
ROM	7	14	우리가 율법은 신령한 줄 알거니와 나는 육신에 속하여 죄 아래 팔렸도다	For we know that the law is spiritual: but I am carnal, sold under sin.	We know that the law is spiritual; but I am unspiritual, sold as a slave to sin.
ROM	7	15	나의 행하는 것을 내가 알지 못하노니 곧 원하는 이것은 행하지 아니하고 도리어 미워하는 그것을 함이라	For that which I do I allow not: for what I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that do I.	I do not understand what I do. For what I want to do, I do not do. But what I hate, I do.
ROM	7	16	만일 내가 원치 아니하는 그것을 하면 내가 이로 율법의 선한 것을 시인하노니	If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the law that it is good.	And if I do what I do not want to do, I admit that the law is good.
ROM	7	17	이제는 이것을 행하는 자가 내가 아니요 내 속에 거하는 죄니라	Now then it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me.	In that case, it is no longer I who do it, but it is sin living in me that does it.
ROM	7	18	내 속 곧 내 육신에 선한 것이 거하지 아니하는 줄을 아노니 원함은 내게 있으나 선을 행하는 것은 없노라	For I know that in me (that is, in my flesh,) dwelleth no good thing: for to will is present with me; but how to perform that which is good I find not.	I know that nothing good lives in me, that is, in my flesh; for I have the desire to do what is good, but I cannot carry it out.
ROM	7	19	내가 원하는 바 선은 하지 아니하고 도리어 원치 아니하는 바 악은 행하는도다	For the good that I would I do not: but the evil which I would not, that I do.	For I do not do the good I want to do. Instead, I keep on doing the evil I do not want to do.
ROM	7	20	만일 내가 원치 아니하는 그것을 하면 이를 행하는 자가 내가 아니요 내 속에 거하는 죄니라	Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me.	And if I do what I do not want, it is no longer I who do it, but it is sin living in me that does it.
ROM	7	21	그러므로 내가 한 법을 깨달았노니 곧 선을 행하기 원하는 나에게 악이 함께 있는 것이로다	I find then a law, that, when I would do good, evil is present with me.	So this is the principle I have discovered: When I want to do good, evil is right there with me.
ROM	7	22	내 속 사람으로는 하나님의 법을 즐거워하되	For I delight in the law of God after the inward man:	For in my inner being I delight in God’s law.
ROM	7	23	내 지체 속에서 한 다른 법이 내 마음의 법과 싸워 내 지체 속에 있는 죄의 법 아래로 나를 사로잡아 오는 것을 보는도다	But I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my members.	But I see another law at work in my body, warring against the law of my mind and holding me captive to the law of sin that dwells within me.
ROM	7	24	오호라 나는 곤고한 사람이로다 이 사망의 몸에서 누가 나를 건져내랴	O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?	What a wretched man I am! Who will rescue me from this body of death?
ROM	7	25	우리 주 예수 그리스도로 말미암아 하나님께 감사하리로다 그런즉 내 자신이 마음으로는 하나님의 법을, 육신으로는 죄의 법을 섬기노라	I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then with the mind I myself serve the law of God; but with the flesh the law of sin.	Thanks be to God, through Jesus Christ our Lord! So then, with my mind I serve the law of God, but with my flesh I serve the law of sin.
ROM	8	1	그러므로 이제 그리스도 예수 안에 있는 자에게는 결코 정죄함이 없나니	There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.	Therefore, there is now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus.
ROM	8	2	이는 그리스도 예수 안에 있는 생명의 성령의 법이 죄와 사망의 법에서 너를 해방하였음이라	For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free from the law of sin and death.	For in Christ Jesus the law of the Spirit of life set you free from the law of sin and death.
ROM	8	3	율법이 육신으로 말미암아 연약하여 할 수 없는 그것을 하나님은 하시나니 곧 죄를 인하여 자기 아들을 죄 있는 육신의 모양으로 보내어 육신에 죄를 정하사	For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh:	For what the law was powerless to do in that it was weakened by the flesh, God did by sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful man, as an offering for sin. He thus condemned sin in the flesh,
ROM	8	4	육신을 좇지 않고 그 영을 좇아 행하는 우리에게 율법의 요구를 이루어지게 하려 하심이니라	That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.	so that the righteous standard of the law might be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to the flesh but according to the Spirit.
ROM	8	5	육신을 좇는 자는 육신의 일을, 영을 좇는 자는 영의 일을 생각하나니	For they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh; but they that are after the Spirit the things of the Spirit.	Those who live according to the flesh set their minds on the things of the flesh; but those who live according to the Spirit set their minds on the things of the Spirit.
ROM	8	6	육신의 생각은 사망이요 영의 생각은 생명과 평안이니라	For to be carnally minded is death; but to be spiritually minded is life and peace.	The mind of the flesh is death, but the mind of the Spirit is life and peace,
ROM	8	7	육신의 생각은 하나님과 원수가 되나니 이는 하나님의 법에 굴복치 아니할 뿐 아니라 할 수도 없음이라	Because the carnal mind is enmity against God: for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be.	because the mind of the flesh is hostile to God: It does not submit to God’s law, nor can it do so.
ROM	8	8	육신에 있는 자들은 하나님을 기쁘시게 할 수 없느니라	So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God.	Those controlled by the flesh cannot please God.
ROM	8	9	만일 너희 속에 하나님의 영이 거하시면 너희가 육신에 있지 아니하고 영에 있나니 누구든지 그리스도의 영이 없으면 그리스도의 사람이 아니라	But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.	You, however, are controlled not by the flesh, but by the Spirit, if the Spirit of God lives in you. And if anyone does not have the Spirit of Christ, he does not belong to Christ.
ROM	8	10	또 그리스도께서 너희 안에 계시면 몸은 죄로 인하여 죽은 것이나 영은 의를 인하여 산 것이니라	And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin; but the Spirit is life because of righteousness.	But if Christ is in you, your body is dead because of sin, yet your spirit is alive because of righteousness.
ROM	8	11	예수를 죽은 자 가운데서 살리신 이의 영이 너희 안에 거하시면 그리스도 예수를 죽은 자 가운게서 살리신 이가 너희 안에 거하시는 그의 영으로 말미암아 너희 죽을 몸도 살리시리라	But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in you.	And if the Spirit of Him who raised Jesus from the dead is living in you, He who raised Christ Jesus from the dead will also give life to your mortal bodies through His Spirit, who lives in you.
ROM	8	12	그러므로 형제들아 우리가 빚진 자로되 육신에게 져서 육신대로 살 것이 아니니라	Therefore, brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh.	Therefore, brothers, we have an obligation, but it is not to the flesh, to live according to it.
ROM	8	13	너희가 육신대로 살면 반드시 죽을 것이로되 영으로써 몸의 행실을 죽이면 살리니	For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.	For if you live according to the flesh, you will die; but if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, you will live.
ROM	8	14	무릇 하나님의 영으로 인도함을 받는 그들은 곧 하나님의 아들이라	For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God.	For all who are led by the Spirit of God are sons of God.
ROM	8	15	너희는 다시 무서워하는 종의 영을 받지 아니하였고 양자의 영을 받았으므로 아바 아버지라 부르짖느니라	For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.	For you did not receive a spirit of slavery that returns you to fear, but you received the Spirit of sonship, by whom we cry, “Abba! Father!”
ROM	8	16	성령이 친히 우리 영으로 더불어 우리가 하나님의 자녀인 것을 증거하시나니	The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God:	The Spirit Himself testifies with our spirit that we are God’s children.
ROM	8	17	자녀이면 또한 후사 곧 하나님의 후사요 그리스도와 함께 한 후사니 우리가 그와 함께 영광을 받기 위하여 고난도 함께 받아야 될 것이니라	And if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together.	And if we are children, then we are heirs: heirs of God and co-heirs with Christ—if indeed we suffer with Him, so that we may also be glorified with Him.
ROM	8	18	생각건대 현재의 고난은 장차 우리에게 나타날 영광과 족히 비교할 수 없도다	For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us.	I consider that our present sufferings are not comparable to the glory that will be revealed in us.
ROM	8	19	피조물의 고대하는 바는 하나님의 아들들의 나타나는 것이니	For the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of God.	The creation waits in eager expectation for the revelation of the sons of God.
ROM	8	20	피조물이 허무한 데 굴복하는 것은 자기 뜻이 아니요 오직 굴복케 하시는 이로 말미암음이라	For the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who hath subjected the same in hope,	For the creation was subjected to futility, not by its own will, but because of the One who subjected it, in hope
ROM	8	21	그 바라는 것은 피조물도 썩어짐의 종노릇한 데서 해방되어 하나님의 자녀들의 영광의 자유에 이르는 것이니라	Because the creature itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God.	that the creation itself will be set free from its bondage to decay and brought into the glorious freedom of the children of God.
ROM	8	22	피조물이 다 이제까지 함께 탄식하며 함께 고통하는 것을 우리가 아나니	For we know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now.	We know that the whole creation has been groaning together in the pains of childbirth until the present time.
ROM	8	23	이뿐 아니라 또한 우리 곧 성령의 처음 익은 열매를 받은 우리까지도 속으로 탄식하여 양자 될 것 곧 우리 몸의 구속을 기다리느니라	And not only they, but ourselves also, which have the firstfruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body.	Not only that, but we ourselves, who have the firstfruits of the Spirit, groan inwardly as we wait eagerly for our adoption as sons, the redemption of our bodies.
ROM	8	24	우리가 소망으로 구원을 얻었으매 보이는 소망이 소망이 아니니 보는 것을 누가 바라리요	For we are saved by hope: but hope that is seen is not hope: for what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for?	For in this hope we were saved; but hope that is seen is no hope at all. Who hopes for what he can already see?
ROM	8	25	만일 우리가 보지 못하는 것을 바라면 참음으로 기다릴지니라	But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it.	But if we hope for what we do not yet see, we wait for it patiently.
ROM	8	26	이와 같이 성령도 우리 연약함을 도우시나니 우리가 마땅히 빌 바를 알지 못하나 오직 성령이 말할 수 없는 탄식으로 우리를 위하여 친히 간구하시느니라	Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered.	In the same way, the Spirit helps us in our weakness. For we do not know how we ought to pray, but the Spirit Himself intercedes for us with groans too deep for words.
ROM	8	27	마음을 감찰하시는 이가 성령의 생각을 아시나니 이는 성령이 하나님의 뜻대로 성도를 위하여 간구하심이니라	And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the saints according to the will of God.	And He who searches our hearts knows the mind of the Spirit, because the Spirit intercedes for the saints according to the will of God.
ROM	8	28	우리가 알거니와 하나님을 사랑하는 자 곧 그 뜻대로 부르심을 입은 자들에게는 모든 것이 합력하여 선을 이루느니라	And we know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose.	And we know that God works all things together for the good of those who love Him, who are called according to His purpose.
ROM	8	29	하나님이 미리 아신 자들로 또한 그 아들의 형상을 본받게 하기 위하여 미리 정하셨으니 이는 그로 많은 형제 중에서 맏아들이 되게 하려 하심이니라	For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren.	For those God foreknew, He also predestined to be conformed to the image of His Son, so that He would be the firstborn among many brothers.
ROM	8	30	또 미리 정하신 그들을 또한 부르시고 부르신 그들을 또한 의롭다 하시고 의롭다 하신 그들을 또한 영화롭게 하셨느니라	Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified.	And those He predestined, He also called; those He called, He also justified; those He justified, He also glorified.
ROM	8	31	그런즉 이 일에 대하여 우리가 무슨 말 하리요 만일 하나님이 우리를 위하시면 누가 우리를 대적하리요	What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who can be against us?	What then shall we say in response to these things? If God is for us, who can be against us?
ROM	8	32	자기 아들을 아끼지 아니하시고 우리 모든 사람을 위하여 내어 주신 이가 어찌 그 아들과 함께 모든 것을 우리에게 은사로 주지 아니하시겠느뇨	He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?	He who did not spare His own Son but gave Him up for us all, how will He not also, along with Him, freely give us all things?
ROM	8	33	누가 능히 하나님의 택하신 자들을 송사하리요 의롭다 하신 이는 하나님이시니	Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God’s elect? It is God that justifieth.	Who will bring any charge against God’s elect? It is God who justifies.
ROM	8	34	누가 정죄하리요 죽으실 뿐 아니라 다시 살아나신 이는 그리스도 예수시니 그는 하나님 우편에 계신 자요 우리를 위하여 간구하시는 자시니라	Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us.	Who is there to condemn us? For Christ Jesus, who died, and more than that was raised to life, is at the right hand of God—and He is interceding for us.
ROM	8	35	누가 우리를 그리스도의 사랑에서 끊으리요 환난이나 곤고나 핍박이나 기근이나 적신이나 위협이나 칼이랴	Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?	Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall trouble or distress or persecution or famine or nakedness or danger or sword?
ROM	8	36	기록된 바 우리가 종일 주를 위하여 죽임을 당케 되며 도살할 양 같이 여김을 받았나이다 함과 같으니라	As it is written, For thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.	As it is written: “For Your sake we face death all day long; we are considered as sheep to be slaughtered.”
ROM	8	37	그러나 이 모든 일에 우리를 사랑하시는 이로 말미암아 우리가 넉넉히 이기느니라	Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that loved us.	No, in all these things we are more than conquerors through Him who loved us.
ROM	8	38	내가 확신하노니 사망이나 생명이나 천사들이나 권세자들이나 현재 일이나 장래 일이나 능력이나	For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,	For I am convinced that neither death nor life, neither angels nor principalities, neither the present nor the future, nor any powers,
ROM	8	39	높음이나 깊음이나 다른 아무 피조물이라도 우리를 우리 주 그리스도 예수 안에 있는 하나님의 사랑에서 끊을 수 없으리라	Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.	neither height nor depth, nor anything else in all creation, will be able to separate us from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
ROM	9	1	내가 그리스도 안에서 참말을 하고 거짓말을 아니하노라 내게 큰 근심이 있는 것과 마음에 그치지 않는 고통이 있는 것을 내 양심이 성령 안에서 나로 더불어 증거하노니	I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost,	I speak the truth in Christ; I am not lying, as confirmed by my conscience in the Holy Spirit.
ROM	9	2		That I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart.	I have deep sorrow and unceasing anguish in my heart.
ROM	9	3	나의 형제 곧 골육의 친척을 위하여 내 자신이 저주를 받아 그리스도에게서 끊어질지라도 원하는 바로라	For I could wish that myself were accursed from Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh:	For I could wish that I myself were cursed and cut off from Christ for the sake of my brothers, my own flesh and blood,
ROM	9	4	저희는 이스라엘 사람이라 저희에게는 양자 됨과 영광과 언약들과 율법을 세우신 것과 예배와 약속들이 있고	Who are Israelites; to whom pertaineth the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the law, and the service of God, and the promises;	the people of Israel. Theirs is the adoption as sons; theirs the divine glory and the covenants; theirs the giving of the law, the temple worship, and the promises.
ROM	9	5	조상들도 저희 것이요 육신으로 하면 그리스도가 저희에게서 나셨으니 저는 만물 위에 계셔 세세에 찬양을 받으실 하나님이시니라 아멘	Whose are the fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen.	Theirs are the patriarchs, and from them proceeds the human descent of Christ, who is God over all, forever worthy of praise! Amen.
ROM	9	6	또한 하나님의 말씀이 폐하여진 것 같지 않도다 이스라엘에게서 난 그들이 다 이스라엘이 아니요	Not as though the word of God hath taken none effect. For they are not all Israel, which are of Israel:	It is not as though God’s word has failed. For not all who are descended from Israel are Israel.
ROM	9	7	또한 아브라함의 씨가 다 그 자녀가 아니라 오직 이삭으로부터 난 자라야 네 씨라 칭하리라 하셨으니	Neither, because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children: but, In Isaac shall thy seed be called.	Nor because they are Abraham’s descendants are they all his children. On the contrary, “Through Isaac your offspring will be reckoned.”
ROM	9	8	곧 육신의 자녀가 하나님의 자녀가 아니라 오직 약속의 자녀가 씨로 여기심을 받느니라	That is, They which are the children of the flesh, these are not the children of God: but the children of the promise are counted for the seed.	So it is not the children of the flesh who are God’s children, but it is the children of the promise who are regarded as offspring.
ROM	9	9	약속의 말씀은 이것이라 명년 이 때에 내가 이르리니 사라에게 아들이 있으리라 하시니라	For this is the word of promise, At this time will I come, and Sara shall have a son.	For this is what the promise stated: “At the appointed time I will return, and Sarah will have a son.”
ROM	9	10	이뿐 아니라 또한 리브가가 우리 조상 이삭 한 사람으로 말미암아 잉태하였는데	And not only this; but when Rebecca also had conceived by one, even by our father Isaac;	Not only that, but Rebecca’s children were conceived by one man, our father Isaac.
ROM	9	11	그 자식들이 아직 나지도 아니하고 무슨 선이나 악을 행하지 아니한 때에 택하심을 따라 되는 하나님의 뜻이 행위로 말미암지 않고 오직 부르시는 이에게로 말미암아 서게 하려 하사	(For the children being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of works, but of him that calleth;)	Yet before the twins were born or had done anything good or bad, in order that God’s plan of election might stand,
ROM	9	12	리브가에게 이르시되 큰 자가 어린 자를 섬기리라 하셨나니	It was said unto her, The elder shall serve the younger.	not by works but by Him who calls, she was told, “The older will serve the younger.”
ROM	9	13	기록된 바 내가 야곱은 사랑하고 에서는 미워하였다 하심과 같으니라	As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.	So it is written: “Jacob I loved, but Esau I hated.”
ROM	9	14	그런즉 우리가 무슨 말 하리요 하나님께 불의가 있느뇨 그럴 수 없느니라	What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid.	What then shall we say? Is God unjust? Certainly not!
ROM	9	15	모세에게 이르시되 내가 긍휼히 여길 자를 긍휼히 여기고 불쌍히 여길 자를 불쌍히 여기리라 하셨으니	For he saith to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion.	For He says to Moses: “I will have mercy on whom I have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion.”
ROM	9	16	그런즉 원하는 자로 말미암음도 아니요 달음박질하는 자로 말미암음도 아니요 오직 긍휼히 여기시는 하나님으로 말미암음이니라	So then it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that sheweth mercy.	So then, it does not depend on man’s desire or effort, but on God’s mercy.
ROM	9	17	성경이 바로에게 이르시되 내가 이 일을 위하여 너를 세웠으니 곧 너로 말미암아 내 능력을 보이고 내 이름이 온 땅에 전파되게 하려 함이로라 하셨으니	For the scripture saith unto Pharaoh, Even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might shew my power in thee, and that my name might be declared throughout all the earth.	For the Scripture says to Pharaoh: “I raised you up for this very purpose, that I might display My power in you, and that My name might be proclaimed in all the earth.”
ROM	9	18	그런즉 하나님께서 하고자 하시는 자를 긍휼히 여기시고 하고자 하시는 자를 강퍅케 하시느니라	Therefore hath he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardeneth.	Therefore God has mercy on whom He wants to have mercy, and He hardens whom He wants to harden.
ROM	9	19	혹 네가 내게 말하기를 그러면 하나님이 어찌하여 허물하시느뇨 누가 그 뜻을 대적하느뇨 하리니	Thou wilt say then unto me, Why doth he yet find fault? For who hath resisted his will?	One of you will say to me, “Then why does God still find fault? For who can resist His will?”
ROM	9	20	이 사람아 네가 뉘기에 감히 하나님을 힐문하느뇨 지음을 받은 물건이 지은 자에게 어찌 나를 이같이 만들었느냐 말하겠느뇨	Nay but, O man, who art thou that repliest against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why hast thou made me thus?	But who are you, O man, to talk back to God? Shall what is formed say to Him who formed it, “Why did You make me like this?”
ROM	9	21	토기장이가 진흙 한 덩이로 하나는 귀히 쓸 그릇을, 하나는 천히 쓸 그릇을 만드는 권이 없느냐	Hath not the potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honour, and another unto dishonour?	Does not the potter have the right to make from the same lump of clay one vessel for special occasions and another for common use?
ROM	9	22	만일 하나님이 그 진노를 보이시고 그 능력을 알게 하고자 하사 멸하기로 준비된 진노의 그릇을 오래 참으심으로 관용하시고	What if God, willing to shew his wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much longsuffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction:	What if God, intending to show His wrath and make His power known, bore with great patience the vessels of His wrath, prepared for destruction?
ROM	9	23	또한 영광 받기로 예비하신 바 긍휼의 그릇에 대하여 그 영광의 부요함을 알게 하고자 하셨을지라도 무슨 말 하리요	And that he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had afore prepared unto glory,	What if He did this to make the riches of His glory known to the vessels of His mercy, whom He prepared in advance for glory—
ROM	9	24	이 그릇은 우리니 곧 유대인 중에서뿐 아니라 이방인 중에서도 부르신 자니라	Even us, whom he hath called, not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles?	including us, whom He has called not only from the Jews, but also from the Gentiles?
ROM	9	25	호세아 글에도 이르기를 내가 내 백성 아닌 자를 내 백성이라, 사랑치 아니한 자를 사랑한 자라 부르리라	As he saith also in Osee, I will call them my people, which were not my people; and her beloved, which was not beloved.	As He says in Hosea: “I will call them ‘My People’ who are not My people, and I will call her ‘My Beloved’ who is not My beloved,”
ROM	9	26	너희는 내 백성이 아니라 한 그곳에서 저희가 살아계신 하나님의 아들이라 부름을 얻으리라 함과 같으니라	And it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said unto them, Ye are not my people; there shall they be called the children of the living God.	and, “It will happen that in the very place where it was said to them, ‘You are not My people,’ they will be called ‘sons of the living God.’”
ROM	9	27	또 이사야가 이스라엘에 관하여 외치되 이스라엘 뭇 자손의 수가 비록 바다의 모래 같을지라도 남은 자만 구원을 얻으리니	Esaias also crieth concerning Israel, Though the number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, a remnant shall be saved:	Isaiah cries out concerning Israel: “Though the number of the Israelites is like the sand of the sea, only the remnant will be saved.
ROM	9	28	주께서 땅 위에서 그 말씀을 이루사 필하시고 끝내시리라 하셨느니라	For he will finish the work, and cut it short in righteousness: because a short work will the Lord make upon the earth.	For the Lord will carry out His sentence on the earth thoroughly and decisively.”
ROM	9	29	또한 이사야가 미리 말한 바 만일 만군의 주께서 우리에게 씨를 남겨 두시지 아니하셨더면 우리가 소돔과 같이 되고 고모라와 같았으리로다 함과 같으니라	And as Esaias said before, Except the Lord of Sabaoth had left us a seed, we had been as Sodoma, and been made like unto Gomorrha.	It is just as Isaiah foretold: “Unless the Lord of Hosts had left us descendants, we would have become like Sodom, we would have resembled Gomorrah.”
ROM	9	30	그런즉 우리가 무슨 말 하리요 의를 좇지 아니한 이방인들이 의를 얻었으니 곧 믿음에서 난 의요	What shall we say then? That the Gentiles, which followed not after righteousness, have attained to righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith.	What then will we say? That the Gentiles, who did not pursue righteousness, have obtained it, a righteousness that is by faith;
ROM	9	31	의의 법을 좇아간 이스라엘은 법에 이르지 못하였으니	But Israel, which followed after the law of righteousness, hath not attained to the law of righteousness.	but Israel, who pursued a law of righteousness, has not attained it.
ROM	9	32	어찌 그러하뇨 이는 저희가 믿음에 의지하지 않고 행위에 의지함이라 부딪힐 돌에 부딪혔느니라	Wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law. For they stumbled at that stumblingstone;	Why not? Because their pursuit was not by faith, but as if it were by works. They stumbled over the stumbling stone,
ROM	9	33	기록된 바 보라 내가 부딪히는 돌과 거치는 반석을 시온에 두노니 저를 믿는 자는 부끄러움을 당치 아니하리라 함과 같으니라	As it is written, Behold, I lay in Sion a stumblingstone and rock of offence: and whosoever believeth on him shall not be ashamed.	as it is written: “See, I lay in Zion a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense; and the one who believes in Him will never be put to shame.”
ROM	10	1	형제들아 내 마음에 원하는 바와 하나님께 구하는 바는 이스라엘을 위함이니 곧 저희로 구원을 얻게 함이라	Brethren, my heart’s desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved.	Brothers, my heart’s desire and prayer to God for the Israelites is for their salvation.
ROM	10	2	내가 증거하노니 저희가 하나님께 열심이 있으나 지식을 좇은 것이 아니라	For I bear them record that they have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge.	For I testify about them that they are zealous for God, but not on the basis of knowledge.
ROM	10	3	하나님의 의를 모르고 자기 의를 세우려고 힘써 하나님의 의를 복종치 아니하였느니라	For they being ignorant of God’s righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God.	Because they were ignorant of God’s righteousness and sought to establish their own, they did not submit to God’s righteousness.
ROM	10	4	그리스도는 모든 믿는 자에게 의를 이루기 위하여 율법의 마침이 되시니라	For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believeth.	For Christ is the end of the law, to bring righteousness to everyone who believes.
ROM	10	5	모세가 기록하되 율법으로 말미암는 의를 행하는 사람은 그 의로 살리라 하였거니와	For Moses describeth the righteousness which is of the law, That the man which doeth those things shall live by them.	For concerning the righteousness that is by the law, Moses writes: “The man who does these things will live by them.”
ROM	10	6	믿음으로 말미암는 의는 이같이 말하되 네 마음에 누가 하늘에 올라가겠느냐 하지 말라 하니 올라가겠느냐 함은 그리스도를 모셔 내리려는 것이요	But the righteousness which is of faith speaketh on this wise, Say not in thine heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? (that is, to bring Christ down from above:)	But the righteousness that is by faith says: “Do not say in your heart, ‘Who will ascend into heaven?’ (that is, to bring Christ down)
ROM	10	7	혹 누가 음부에 내려가겠느냐 하지 말라 하니 내려가겠느냐 함은 그리스도를 죽은 자 가운데서 모셔 올리려는 것이라	Or, Who shall descend into the deep? (that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead.)	or, ‘Who will descend into the Abyss?’ (that is, to bring Christ up from the dead).”
ROM	10	8	그러면 무엇을 말하느뇨 말씀이 네게 가까워 네 입에 있으며 네 마음에 있다 하였으니 곧 우리가 전파하는 믿음의 말씀이라	But what saith it? The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart: that is, the word of faith, which we preach;	But what does it say? “The word is near you; it is in your mouth and in your heart,” that is, the word of faith we are proclaiming:
ROM	10	9	네가 만일 네 입으로 예수를 주로 시인하며 또 하나님께서 그를 죽은 자 가운데서 살리신 것을 네 마음에 믿으면 구원을 얻으리니	That if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved.	that if you confess with your mouth, “Jesus is Lord,” and believe in your heart that God raised Him from the dead, you will be saved.
ROM	10	10	사람이 마음으로 믿어 의에 이르고 입으로 시인하여 구원에 이르느니라	For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.	For with your heart you believe and are justified, and with your mouth you confess and are saved.
ROM	10	11	성경에 이르되 누구든지 저를 믿는 자는 부끄러움을 당하지 아니하리라 하니	For the scripture saith, Whosoever believeth on him shall not be ashamed.	It is just as the Scripture says: “Anyone who believes in Him will never be put to shame.”
ROM	10	12	유대인이나 헬라인이나 차별이 없음이라 한 주께서 모든 사람의 주가 되사 저를 부르는 모든 사람에게 부요하시도다	For there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek: for the same Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him.	For there is no difference between Jew and Greek: The same Lord is Lord of all, and gives richly to all who call on Him,
ROM	10	13	누구든지 주의 이름을 부르는 자는 구원을 얻으리라	For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.	for, “Everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.”
ROM	10	14	그런즉 저희가 믿지 아니하는 이를 어찌 부르리요 듣지도 못한 이를 어찌 믿으리요 전파하는 자가 없이 어찌 들으리요	How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher?	How then can they call on the One in whom they have not believed? And how can they believe in the One of whom they have not heard? And how can they hear without someone to preach?
ROM	10	15	보내심을 받지 아니하였으면 어찌 전파하리요 기록된 바 아름답도다 좋은 소식을 전하는 자들의 발이여 함과 같으니라	And how shall they preach, except they be sent? as it is written, How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things!	And how can they preach unless they are sent? As it is written: “How beautiful are the feet of those who bring good news!”
ROM	10	16	그러나 저희가 다 복음을 순종치 아니하였도다 이사야가 가로되 주여 우리의 전하는 바를 누가 믿었나이까 하였으니	But they have not all obeyed the gospel. For Esaias saith, Lord, who hath believed our report?	But not all of them welcomed the good news. For Isaiah says, “Lord, who has believed our message?”
ROM	10	17	그러므로 믿음은 들음에서 나며 들음은 그리스도의 말씀으로 말미암았느니라	So then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.	Consequently, faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of Christ.
ROM	10	18	그러나 내가 말하노니 저희가 듣지 아니하였느뇨 그렇지 아니하다 그 소리가 온 땅에 퍼졌고 그 말씀이 땅 끝까지 이르렀도다 하였느니라	But I say, Have they not heard? Yes verily, their sound went into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.	But I ask, did they not hear? Indeed they did: “Their voice has gone out into all the earth, their words to the ends of the world.”
ROM	10	19	그러나 내가 말하노니 이스라엘이 알지 못하였느뇨 먼저 모세가 이르되 내가 백성 아닌 자로써 너희를 시기나게 하며 미련한 백성으로써 너희를 노엽게 하리라 하였고	But I say, Did not Israel know? First Moses saith, I will provoke you to jealousy by them that are no people, and by a foolish nation I will anger you.	I ask instead, did Israel not understand? First, Moses says: “I will make you jealous by those who are not a nation; I will make you angry by a nation without understanding.”
ROM	10	20	또한 이사야가 매우 담대하여 이르되 내가 구하지 아니하는 자들에게 찾은 바 되고 내게 문의하지 아니하는 자들에게 나타났노라 하였고	But Esaias is very bold, and saith, I was found of them that sought me not; I was made manifest unto them that asked not after me.	And Isaiah boldly says: “I was found by those who did not seek Me; I revealed Myself to those who did not ask for Me.”
ROM	10	21	이스라엘을 대하여 가라사대 순종치 아니하고 거스려 말하는 백성에게 내가 종일 내 손을 벌렸노라 하셨느니라	But to Israel he saith, All day long I have stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient and gainsaying people.	But as for Israel he says: “All day long I have held out My hands to a disobedient and obstinate people.”
ROM	11	1	그러므로 내가 말하노니 하나님이 자기 백성을 버리셨느뇨 그럴 수 없느니라 나도 이스라엘인이요 아브라함의 씨에서 난 자요 베냐민 지파라	I say then, Hath God cast away his people? God forbid. For I also am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.	I ask then, did God reject His people? Certainly not! I am an Israelite myself, a descendant of Abraham, from the tribe of Benjamin.
ROM	11	2	하나님이 그 미리 아신 자기 백성을 버리지 아니하셨나니 너희가 성경이 엘리야를 가리켜 말한 것을 알지 못하느냐 저가 이스라엘을 하나님께 송사하되	God hath not cast away his people which he foreknew. Wot ye not what the scripture saith of Elias? how he maketh intercession to God against Israel, saying,	God did not reject His people, whom He foreknew. Do you not know what the Scripture says about Elijah, how he appealed to God against Israel:
ROM	11	3	주여 저희가 주의 선지자들을 죽였으며 주의 제단들을 헐어버렸고 나만 남았는데 내 목숨도 찾나이다 하니	Lord, they have killed thy prophets, and digged down thine altars; and I am left alone, and they seek my life.	“Lord, they have killed Your prophets and torn down Your altars. I am the only one left, and they are seeking my life as well”?
ROM	11	4	저에게 하신 대답이 무엇이뇨 내가 나를 위하여 바알에게 무릎을 꿇지 아니한 사람 칠천을 남겨 두었다 하셨으니	But what saith the answer of God unto him? I have reserved to myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to the image of Baal.	And what was the divine reply to him? “I have reserved for Myself seven thousand men who have not bowed the knee to Baal.”
ROM	11	5	그런즉 이와 같이 이제도 은혜로 택하심을 따라 남은 자가 있느니라	Even so then at this present time also there is a remnant according to the election of grace.	In the same way, at the present time there is a remnant chosen by grace.
ROM	11	6	만일 은혜로 된 것이면 행위로 말미암지 않음이니 그렇지 않으면 은혜가 은혜 되지 못하느니라	And if by grace, then is it no more of works: otherwise grace is no more grace. But if it be of works, then is it no more grace: otherwise work is no more work.	And if it is by grace, then it is no longer by works. Otherwise, grace would no longer be grace.
ROM	11	7	그런즉 어떠하뇨 이스라엘이 구하는 그것을 얻지 못하고 오직 택하심을 입은 자가 얻었고 그 남은 자들은 완악하여졌느니라	What then? Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh for; but the election hath obtained it, and the rest were blinded	What then? What Israel was seeking, it failed to obtain, but the elect did. The others were hardened,
ROM	11	8	기록된 바 하나님이 오늘날까지 저희에게 혼미한 심령과 보지 못할 눈과 듣지 못할 귀를 주셨다 함과 같으니라	(According as it is written, God hath given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear;) unto this day.	as it is written: “God gave them a spirit of stupor, eyes that could not see, and ears that could not hear, to this very day.”
ROM	11	9	또 다윗이 가로되 저희 밥상이 올무와 덫과 거치는 것과 보응이 되게 하옵시고	And David saith, Let their table be made a snare, and a trap, and a stumblingblock, and a recompence unto them:	And David says: “May their table become a snare and a trap, a stumbling block and a retribution to them.
ROM	11	10	저희 눈은 흐려 보지 못하고 저희 등은 항상 굽게 하옵소서 하였느니라	Let their eyes be darkened, that they may not see, and bow down their back alway.	May their eyes be darkened so they cannot see, and their backs be bent forever.”
ROM	11	11	그러므로 내가 말하노니 저희가 넘어지기까지 실족하였느뇨 그럴 수 없느니라 저희의 넘어짐으로 구원이 이방인에게 이르러 이스라엘로 시기나게 함이니라	I say then, Have they stumbled that they should fall? God forbid: but rather through their fall salvation is come unto the Gentiles, for to provoke them to jealousy.	I ask then, did they stumble so as to fall beyond recovery? Certainly not! However, because of their trespass, salvation has come to the Gentiles to make Israel jealous.
ROM	11	12	저희의 넘어짐이 세상의 부요함이 되며 저희의 실패가 이방인의 부요함이 되거든 하물며 저희의 충만함이리요	Now if the fall of them be the riches of the world, and the diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles; how much more their fulness?	But if their trespass means riches for the world, and their failure means riches for the Gentiles, how much greater riches will their fullness bring!
ROM	11	13	내가 이방인인 너희에게 말하노라 내가 이방인의 사도인 만큼 내 직분을 영광스럽게 여기노니	For I speak to you Gentiles, inasmuch as I am the apostle of the Gentiles, I magnify mine office:	I am speaking to you Gentiles. Inasmuch as I am the apostle to the Gentiles, I magnify my ministry
ROM	11	14	이는 곧 내 골육을 아무쪼록 시기케 하여 저희 중에서 얼마를 구원하려 함이라	If by any means I may provoke to emulation them which are my flesh, and might save some of them.	in the hope that I may provoke my own people to jealousy and save some of them.
ROM	11	15	저희를 버리는 것이 세상의 화목이 되거든 그 받아들이는 것이 죽은 자 가운데서 사는 것이 아니면 무엇이리요	For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world, what shall the receiving of them be, but life from the dead?	For if their rejection is the reconciliation of the world, what will their acceptance be but life from the dead?
ROM	11	16	제사하는 처음 익은 곡식 가루가 거룩한즉 떡덩이도 그러하고 뿌리가 거룩한즉 가지도 그러하니라	For if the firstfruit be holy, the lump is also holy: and if the root be holy, so are the branches.	If the first part of the dough is holy, so is the whole batch; if the root is holy, so are the branches.
ROM	11	17	또한 가지 얼마가 꺾여졌는데 돌감람나무인 네가 그들 중에 접붙임이 되어 참감람나무 뿌리의 진액을 함께 받는 자 되었은즉	And if some of the branches be broken off, and thou, being a wild olive tree, wert graffed in among them, and with them partakest of the root and fatness of the olive tree;	Now if some branches have been broken off, and you, a wild olive shoot, have been grafted in among the others to share in the nourishment of the olive root,
ROM	11	18	그 가지들을 향하여 자긍하지 말라 자긍할지라도 네가 뿌리를 보전하는 것이 아니요 뿌리가 너를 보전하는 것이니라	Boast not against the branches. But if thou boast, thou bearest not the root, but the root thee.	do not boast over those branches. If you do, remember this: You do not support the root, but the root supports you.
ROM	11	19	그러면 네 말이 가지들이 꺾이운 것은 나로 접붙임을 받게 하려함이라 하리니	Thou wilt say then, The branches were broken off, that I might be graffed in.	You will say then, “Branches were broken off so that I could be grafted in.”
ROM	11	20	옳도다 저희는 믿지 아니하므로 꺾이우고 너는 믿으므로 섰느니라 높은 마음을 품지 말고 도리어 두려워하라	Well; because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou standest by faith. Be not highminded, but fear:	That is correct: They were broken off because of unbelief, but you stand by faith. Do not be arrogant, but be afraid.
ROM	11	21	하나님이 원 가지들도 아끼지 아니하셨은즉 너도 아끼지 아니하시리라	For if God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee.	For if God did not spare the natural branches, He will certainly not spare you either.
ROM	11	22	그러므로 하나님의 인자와 엄위를 보라 넘어지는 자들에게는 엄위가 있으니 너희가 만일 하나님의 인자에 거하면 그 인자가 너희에게 있으리라 그렇지 않으면 너도 찍히는 바 되리라	Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God: on them which fell, severity; but toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in his goodness: otherwise thou also shalt be cut off.	Take notice, therefore, of the kindness and severity of God: severity to those who fell, but kindness to you, if you continue in His kindness. Otherwise you also will be cut off.
ROM	11	23	저희도 믿지 아니하는 데 거하지 아니하면 접붙임을 얻으리니 이는 저희를 접붙이실 능력이 하나님께 있음이라	And they also, if they abide not still in unbelief, shall be graffed in: for God is able to graff them in again.	And if they do not persist in unbelief, they will be grafted in, for God is able to graft them in again.
ROM	11	24	네가 원 돌감람나무에서 찍힘을 받고 본성을 거스려 좋은 감람나무에 접붙임을 얻었은즉 원 가지인 이 사람들이야 얼마나 더 자기 감람나무에 접붙이심을 얻으랴	For if thou wert cut out of the olive tree which is wild by nature, and wert graffed contrary to nature into a good olive tree: how much more shall these, which be the natural branches, be graffed into their own olive tree?	For if you were cut from a wild olive tree, and contrary to nature were grafted into one that is cultivated, how much more readily will these, the natural branches, be grafted into their own olive tree!
ROM	11	25	형제들아 너희가 스스로 지혜있다 함을 면키 위하여 이 비밀을 너희가 모르기를 내가 원치 아니하노니 이 비밀은 이방인의 충만한 수가 들어오기까지 이스라엘의 더러는 완악하게 된 것이라	For I would not, brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this mystery, lest ye should be wise in your own conceits; that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in.	I do not want you to be ignorant of this mystery, brothers, so that you will not be conceited: A hardening in part has come to Israel, until the full number of the Gentiles has come in.
ROM	11	26	그리하여 온 이스라엘이 구원을 얻으리라 기록된 바 구원자가 시온에서 오사 야곱에게서 경건치 않은 것을 돌이키시겠고	And so all Israel shall be saved: as it is written, There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob:	And so all Israel will be saved, as it is written: “The Deliverer will come from Zion; He will remove godlessness from Jacob.
ROM	11	27	내가 저희 죄를 없이 할 때에 저희에게 이루어질 내 언약이 이것이라 함과 같으니라	For this is my covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sins.	And this is My covenant with them when I take away their sins.”
ROM	11	28	복음으로 하면 저희가 너희를 인하여 원수 된 자요 택하심으로 하면 조상들을 인하여 사랑을 입은 자라	As concerning the gospel, they are enemies for your sakes: but as touching the election, they are beloved for the fathers’ sakes.	Regarding the gospel, they are enemies on your account; but regarding election, they are loved on account of the patriarchs.
ROM	11	29	하나님의 은사와 부르심에는 후회하심이 없느니라	For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance.	For God’s gifts and His call are irrevocable.
ROM	11	30	너희가 전에 하나님께 순종치 아니하더니 이스라엘의 순종치 아니함으로 이제 긍휼을 입었는지라	For as ye in times past have not believed God, yet have now obtained mercy through their unbelief:	Just as you who formerly disobeyed God have now received mercy through their disobedience,
ROM	11	31	이와 같이 이 사람들이 순종치 아니하니 이는 너희에게 베푸시는 긍휼로 이제 저희도 긍휼을 얻게 하려 하심이니라	Even so have these also now not believed, that through your mercy they also may obtain mercy.	so they too have now disobeyed, in order that they too may now receive mercy through the mercy shown to you.
ROM	11	32	하나님이 모든 사람을 순종치 아니하는 가운데 가두어 두심은 모든 사람에게 긍휼을 베풀려 하심이로다	For God hath concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all.	For God has consigned everyone to disobedience so that He may have mercy on everyone.
ROM	11	33	깊도다 하나님의 지혜와 지식의 부요함이여 그의 판단은 측량치 못할 것이며 그의 길은 찾지 못할 것이로다	O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!	O, the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are His judgments, and untraceable His ways!
ROM	11	34	누가 주의 마음을 알았느뇨 누가 그의 모사가 되었느뇨	For who hath known the mind of the Lord? or who hath been his counsellor?	“Who has known the mind of the Lord? Or who has been His counselor?”
ROM	11	35	누가 주께 먼저 드려서 갚으심을 받겠느뇨	Or who hath first given to him, and it shall be recompensed unto him again?	“Who has first given to God, that God should repay him?”
ROM	11	36	이는 만물이 주에게서 나오고 주로 말미암고 주에게로 돌아감이라 영광이 그에게 세세에 있으리로다 아멘	For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things: to whom be glory for ever. Amen.	For from Him and through Him and to Him are all things. To Him be the glory forever! Amen.
ROM	12	1	그러므로 형제들아 내가 하나님의 모든 자비하심으로 너희를 권하노니 너희 몸을 하나님이 기뻐하시는 거룩한 산 제사로 드리라 이는 너희의 드릴 영적 예배니라	I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service.	Therefore I urge you, brothers, on account of God’s mercy, to offer your bodies as living sacrifices, holy and pleasing to God, which is your spiritual service of worship.
ROM	12	2	너희는 이 세대를 본받지 말고 오직 마음을 새롭게 함으로 변화를 받아 하나님의 선하시고 기뻐하시고 온전하신 뜻이 무엇인지 분별하도록 하라	And be not conformed to this world: but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect, will of God.	Do not be conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind. Then you will be able to test and approve what is the good, pleasing, and perfect will of God.
ROM	12	3	내게 주신 은혜로 말미암아 너희 중 각 사람에게 말하노니 마땅히 생각할 그 이상의 생각을 품지 말고 오직 하나님께서 각 사람에게 나눠주신 믿음의 분량대로 지혜롭게 생각하라	For I say, through the grace given unto me, to every man that is among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think; but to think soberly, according as God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith.	For by the grace given me I say to every one of you: Do not think of yourself more highly than you ought, but think of yourself with sober judgment, according to the measure of faith God has given you.
ROM	12	4	우리가 한 몸에 많은 지체를 가졌으나 모든 지체가 같은 직분을 가진 것이 아니니	For as we have many members in one body, and all members have not the same office:	Just as each of us has one body with many members, and not all members have the same function,
ROM	12	5	이와 같이 우리 많은 사람이 그리스도 안에서 한 몸이 되어 서로 지체가 되었느니라	So we, being many, are one body in Christ, and every one members one of another.	so in Christ we who are many are one body, and each member belongs to one another.
ROM	12	6	우리에게 주신 은혜대로 받은 은사가 각각 다르니 혹 예언이면 믿음의 분수대로,	Having then gifts differing according to the grace that is given to us, whether prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of faith;	We have different gifts according to the grace given us. If one’s gift is prophecy, let him use it in proportion to his faith;
ROM	12	7	혹 섬기는 일이면 섬기는 일로, 혹 가르치는 자면 가르치는 일로,	Or ministry, let us wait on our ministering: or he that teacheth, on teaching;	if it is serving, let him serve; if it is teaching, let him teach;
ROM	12	8	혹 권위하는 자면 권위하는 일로, 구제하는 자는 성실함으로, 다스리는 자는 부지런함으로, 긍휼을 베푸는 자는 즐거음으로 할 것이니라	Or he that exhorteth, on exhortation: he that giveth, let him do it with simplicity; he that ruleth, with diligence; he that sheweth mercy, with cheerfulness.	if it is encouraging, let him encourage; if it is giving, let him give generously; if it is leading, let him lead with diligence; if it is showing mercy, let him do it cheerfully.
ROM	12	9	사랑엔 거짓이 없나니 악을 미워하고 선에 속하라	Let love be without dissimulation. Abhor that which is evil; cleave to that which is good.	Love must be sincere. Detest what is evil; cling to what is good.
ROM	12	10	형제를 사랑하여 서로 우애하고 존경하기를 서로 먼저 하며	Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love; in honour preferring one another;	Be devoted to one another in brotherly love. Outdo yourselves in honoring one another.
ROM	12	11	부지런하여 게으르지 말고 열심을 품고 주를 섬기라	Not slothful in business; fervent in spirit; serving the Lord;	Do not let your zeal subside; keep your spiritual fervor, serving the Lord.
ROM	12	12	소망 중에 즐거워하며 환난 중에 참으며 기도에 항상 힘쓰며	Rejoicing in hope; patient in tribulation; continuing instant in prayer;	Be joyful in hope, patient in affliction, persistent in prayer.
ROM	12	13	성도들의 쓸 것을 공급하며 손 대접하기를 힘쓰라	Distributing to the necessity of saints; given to hospitality.	Share with the saints who are in need. Practice hospitality.
ROM	12	14	너희를 핍박하는 자를 축복하라 축복하고 저주하지 말라	Bless them which persecute you: bless, and curse not.	Bless those who persecute you. Bless and do not curse.
ROM	12	15	즐거워하는 자들로 함께 즐거워하고 우는 자들로 함께 울라	Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep.	Rejoice with those who rejoice; weep with those who weep.
ROM	12	16	서로 마음을 같이 하며 높은 데 마음을 두지 말고 도리어 낮은 데 처하며 스스로 지혜 있는 체 말라	Be of the same mind one toward another. Mind not high things, but condescend to men of low estate. Be not wise in your own conceits.	Live in harmony with one another. Do not be proud, but enjoy the company of the lowly. Do not be conceited.
ROM	12	17	아무에게도 악으로 악을 갚지 말고 모든 사람 앞에서 선한 일을 도모하라	Recompense to no man evil for evil. Provide things honest in the sight of all men.	Do not repay anyone evil for evil. Carefully consider what is right in the eyes of everybody.
ROM	12	18	할 수 있거든 너희로서는 모든 사람으로 더불어 평화하라	If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably with all men.	If it is possible on your part, live at peace with everyone.
ROM	12	19	내 사랑하는 자들아 너희가 친히 원수를 갚지 말고 진노하심에 맡기라 기록되었으되 원수 갚는 것이 내게 있으니 내가 갚으리라고 주께서 말씀하시니라	Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather give place unto wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord.	Do not avenge yourselves, beloved, but leave room for God’s wrath. For it is written: “Vengeance is Mine; I will repay, says the Lord.”
ROM	12	20	네 원수가 주리거든 먹이고 목마르거든 마시우라 그리함으로 네가 숯불을 그 머리에 쌓아 놓으리라	Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink: for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire on his head.	On the contrary, “If your enemy is hungry, feed him; if he is thirsty, give him a drink. For in so doing, you will heap burning coals on his head.”
ROM	12	21	악에게 지지 말고 선으로 악을 이기라	Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.	Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good.
ROM	13	1	각 사람은 위에 있는 권세들에게 굴복하라 권세는 하나님께로 나지 않음이 없나니 모든 권세는 다 하나님의 정하신 바라	Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For there is no power but of God: the powers that be are ordained of God.	Everyone must submit himself to the governing authorities, for there is no authority except that which is from God. The authorities that exist have been appointed by God.
ROM	13	2	그러므로 권세를 거스리는 자는 하나님의 명을 거스림이니 거스리는 자들은 심판을 자취하리라	Whosoever therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God: and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation.	Consequently, whoever resists authority is opposing what God has set in place, and those who do so will bring judgment on themselves.
ROM	13	3	관원들은 선한 일에 대하여 두려움이 되지 않고 악한 일에 대하여 되나니 네가 권세를 두려워하지 아니하려느냐 선을 행하라 그리하면 그에게 칭찬을 받으리라	For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Wilt thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou shalt have praise of the same:	For rulers are not a terror to good conduct, but to bad. Do you want to be unafraid of the one in authority? Then do what is right, and you will have his approval.
ROM	13	4	그는 하나님의 사자가 되어 네게 선을 이루는 자니라 그러나 네가 악을 행하거든 두려워하라 그가 공연히 칼을 가지지 아니하였으니 곧 하나님의 사자가 되어 악을 행하는 자에게 진노하심을 위하여 보응하는 자니라	For he is the minister of God to thee for good. But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he beareth not the sword in vain: for he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that doeth evil.	For he is God’s servant for your good. But if you do wrong, be afraid, for he does not carry the sword in vain. He is God’s servant, an agent of retribution to the wrongdoer.
ROM	13	5	그러므로 굴복하지 아니할 수 없으니 노를 인하여만 할 것이 아니요 또한 양심을 인하여 할 것이라	Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake.	Therefore it is necessary to submit to authority, not only to avoid punishment, but also as a matter of conscience.
ROM	13	6	너희가 공세를 바치는 것도 이를 인함이라 저희가 하나님의 일꾼이 되어 바로 이 일에 항상 힘쓰느니라	For for this cause pay ye tribute also: for they are God’s ministers, attending continually upon this very thing.	This is also why you pay taxes. For the authorities are God’s servants, who devote themselves to their work.
ROM	13	7	모든 자에게 줄 것을 주되 공세를 받을 자에게 공세를 바치고 국세 받을 자에게 국세를 바치고 두려워할 자를 두려워하며 존경할 자를 존경하라	Render therefore to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute is due; custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear; honour to whom honour.	Pay everyone what you owe him: taxes to whom taxes are due, revenue to whom revenue is due, respect to whom respect is due, honor to whom honor is due.
ROM	13	8	피차 사랑의 빚 외에는 아무에게든지 아무 빚도 지지 말라 남을 사랑하는 자는 율법을 다 이루었느니라	Owe no man any thing, but to love one another: for he that loveth another hath fulfilled the law.	Be indebted to no one, except to one another in love. For he who loves his neighbor has fulfilled the law.
ROM	13	9	간음하지 말라, 살인하지 말라, 도적질하지 말라, 탐내지 말라 한 것과 그 외에 다른 계명이 있을지라도 네 이웃을 네 자신과 같이 사랑하라 하신 그 말씀 가운데 다 들었느니라	For this, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness, Thou shalt not covet; and if there be any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.	The commandments “Do not commit adultery,” “Do not murder,” “Do not steal,” “Do not covet,” and any other commandments, are summed up in this one decree: “Love your neighbor as yourself.”
ROM	13	10	사랑은 이웃에게 악을 행치 아니하나니 그러므로 사랑은 율법의 완성이니라	Love worketh no ill to his neighbour: therefore love is the fulfilling of the law.	Love does no wrong to its neighbor. Therefore love is the fulfillment of the law.
ROM	13	11	또한 너희가 이 시기를 알거니와 자다가 깰 때가 벌써 되었으니 이는 이제 우리의 구원이 처음 믿을 때보다 가까웠음이니라	And that, knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of sleep: for now is our salvation nearer than when we believed.	And do this, understanding the occasion. The hour has come for you to wake up from your slumber, for our salvation is nearer now than when we first believed.
ROM	13	12	밤이 깊고 낮이 가까웠으니 그러므로 우리가 어두움의 일을 벗고 빛의 갑옷을 입자	The night is far spent, the day is at hand: let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armour of light.	The night is nearly over; the day has drawn near. So let us lay aside the deeds of darkness and put on the armor of light.
ROM	13	13	낮에와 같이 단정히 행하고 방탕과 술 취하지 말며 음란과 호색하지 말며 쟁투와 시기하지 말고	Let us walk honestly, as in the day; not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying.	Let us behave decently, as in the daytime, not in carousing and drunkenness, not in sexual immorality and debauchery, not in dissension and jealousy.
ROM	13	14	오직 주 예수 그리스도로 옷 입고 정욕을 위하여 육신의 일을 도모하지 말라	But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof.	Instead, clothe yourselves with the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the desires of the flesh.
ROM	14	1	믿음이 연약한 자를 너희가 받되 그의 의심하는 바를 비판하지 말라	Him that is weak in the faith receive ye, but not to doubtful disputations.	Accept him whose faith is weak, without passing judgment on his opinions.
ROM	14	2	어떤 사람은 모든 것을 먹을 만한 믿음이 있고 연약한 자는 채소를 먹느니라	For one believeth that he may eat all things: another, who is weak, eateth herbs.	For one person has faith to eat all things, while another, who is weak, eats only vegetables.
ROM	14	3	먹는 자는 먹지 않는 자를 업신여기지 말고 먹지 못하는 자는 먹는 자를 판단하지 말라 이는 하나님이 저를 받으셨음이니라	Let not him that eateth despise him that eateth not; and let not him which eateth not judge him that eateth: for God hath received him.	The one who eats everything must not belittle the one who does not, and the one who does not eat everything must not judge the one who does, for God has accepted him.
ROM	14	4	남의 하인을 판단하는 너는 누구뇨 그 섰는 것이나 넘어지는 것이 제 주인에게 있으매 저가 세움을 받으리니 이는 저를 세우시는 권능이 주께 있음이니라	Who art thou that judgest another man’s servant? to his own master he standeth or falleth. Yea, he shall be holden up: for God is able to make him stand.	Who are you to judge someone else’s servant? To his own master he stands or falls. And he will stand, for the Lord is able to make him stand.
ROM	14	5	혹은 이 날을 저 날보다 낫게 여기고 혹은 모든 날을 같게 여기나니 각각 자기 마음에 확정할지니라	One man esteemeth one day above another: another esteemeth every day alike. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind.	One person regards a certain day above the others, while someone else considers every day alike. Each one should be fully convinced in his own mind.
ROM	14	6	날을 중히 여기는 자도 주를 위하여 중히 여기고 먹는 자도 주를 위하여 먹으니 이는 하나님께 감사함이요 먹지 않는 자도 주를 위하여 먹지 아니하며 하나님께 감사하느니라	He that regardeth the day, regardeth it unto the Lord; and he that regardeth not the day, to the Lord he doth not regard it. He that eateth, eateth to the Lord, for he giveth God thanks; and he that eateth not, to the Lord he eateth not, and giveth God thanks.	He who observes a special day does so to the Lord; he who eats does so to the Lord, for he gives thanks to God; and he who abstains does so to the Lord and gives thanks to God.
ROM	14	7	우리 중에 누구든지 자기를 위하여 사는 자가 없고 자기를 위하여 죽는 자도 없도다	For none of us liveth to himself, and no man dieth to himself.	For none of us lives to himself alone, and none of us dies to himself alone.
ROM	14	8	우리가 살아도 주를 위하여 살고 죽어도 주를 위하여 죽나니 그러므로 사나 죽으나 우리가 주의 것이로라	For whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto the Lord: whether we live therefore, or die, we are the Lord’s.	If we live, we live to the Lord, and if we die, we die to the Lord. So whether we live or die, we belong to the Lord.
ROM	14	9	이를 위하여 그리스도께서 죽었다가 다시 살으셨으니 곧 죽은 자와 산 자의 주가 되려 하심이니라	For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living.	For this reason Christ died and returned to life, that He might be the Lord of both the dead and the living.
ROM	14	10	네가 어찌하여 네 형제를 판단하느뇨 어찌하여 네 형제를 업신여기느뇨 우리가 다 하나님의 심판대 앞에 서리라	But why dost thou judge thy brother? or why dost thou set at nought thy brother? for we shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ.	Why, then, do you judge your brother? Or why do you belittle your brother? For we will all stand before God’s judgment seat.
ROM	14	11	기록되었으되 주께서 가라사대 내가 살았노니 모든 무릎이 내게 꿇을 것이요 모든 혀가 하나님께 자백하리라 하였느니라	For it is written, As I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God.	It is written: “As surely as I live, says the Lord, every knee will bow before Me; every tongue will confess to God.”
ROM	14	12	이러므로 우리 각인이 자기 일을 하나님께 직고하리라	So then every one of us shall give account of himself to God.	So then, each of us will give an account of himself to God.
ROM	14	13	그런즉 우리가 다시는 서로 판단하지 말고 도리어 부딪힐 것이나 거칠 것으로 형제 앞에 두지 아니할 것을 주의하라	Let us not therefore judge one another any more: but judge this rather, that no man put a stumblingblock or an occasion to fall in his brother’s way.	Therefore let us stop judging one another. Instead, make up your mind not to put any stumbling block or obstacle in your brother’s way.
ROM	14	14	내가 주 예수 안에서 알고 확신하는 것은 무엇이든지 스스로 속된 것이 없으되 다만 속되게 여기는 그 사람에게는 속되니라	I know, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of itself: but to him that esteemeth any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean.	I am convinced and fully persuaded in the Lord Jesus that nothing is unclean in itself. But if anyone regards something as unclean, then for him it is unclean.
ROM	14	15	만일 식물을 인하여 네 형제가 근심하게 되면 이는 네가 사랑으로 행치 아니함이라 그리스도께서 대신하여 죽으신 형제를 네 식물로 망케 하지 말라	But if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walkest thou not charitably. Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died.	If your brother is distressed by what you eat, you are no longer acting in love. Do not by your eating destroy your brother, for whom Christ died.
ROM	14	16	그러므로 너희의 선한 것이 비방을 받지 않게 하라	Let not then your good be evil spoken of:	Do not allow what you consider good, then, to be spoken of as evil.
ROM	14	17	하나님의 나라는 먹는 것과 마시는 것이 아니요 오직 성령 안에서 의와 평강과 희락이라	For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.	For the kingdom of God is not a matter of eating and drinking, but of righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit.
ROM	14	18	이로써 그리스도를 섬기는 자는 하나님께 기뻐하심을 받으며 사람에게도 칭찬을 받느니라	For he that in these things serveth Christ is acceptable to God, and approved of men.	For whoever serves Christ in this way is pleasing to God and approved by men.
ROM	14	19	이러므로 우리가 화평의 일과 서로 덕을 세우는 일을 힘쓰나니	Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace, and things wherewith one may edify another.	So then, let us pursue what leads to peace and to mutual edification.
ROM	14	20	식물을 인하여 하나님의 사업을 무너지게 말라 만물이 다 정하되 거리낌으로 먹는 사람에게는 악하니라	For meat destroy not the work of God. All things indeed are pure; but it is evil for that man who eateth with offence.	Do not destroy the work of God for the sake of food. All food is clean, but it is wrong for a man to let his eating be a stumbling block.
ROM	14	21	고기도 먹지 아니하고 포도주도 마시지 아니하고 무엇이든지 네 형제로 거리끼게 하는 일을 아니함이 아름다우니라	It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak.	It is better not to eat meat or drink wine or to do anything to cause your brother to stumble.
ROM	14	22	네게 있는 믿음을 하나님 앞에서 스스로 가지고 있으라 자기의 옳다 하는 바로 자기를 책하지 아니하는 자는 복이 있도다	Hast thou faith? have it to thyself before God. Happy is he that condemneth not himself in that thing which he alloweth.	Keep your belief about such matters between yourself and God. Blessed is the one who does not condemn himself by what he approves.
ROM	14	23	의심하고 먹는 자는 정죄되었나니 이는 믿음으로 좇아 하지 아니한 연고라 믿음으로 좇아 하지 아니하는 모든 것이 죄니라	And he that doubteth is damned if he eat, because he eateth not of faith: for whatsoever is not of faith is sin.	But the one who has doubts is condemned if he eats, because his eating is not from faith; and everything that is not from faith is sin.
ROM	15	1	우리 강한 자가 마땅히 연약한 자의 약점을 담당하고 자기를 기쁘게 하지 아니할 것이라	We then that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves.	We who are strong ought to bear with the shortcomings of the weak and not to please ourselves.
ROM	15	2	우리 각 사람이 이웃을 기쁘게 하되 선을 이루고 덕을 세우도록 할지니라	Let every one of us please his neighbour for his good to edification.	Each of us should please his neighbor for his good, to build him up.
ROM	15	3	그리스도께서 자기를 기쁘게 하지 아니하셨나니 기록된 바 주를 비방하는 자들의 비방이 내게 미쳤나이다 함과 같으니라	For even Christ pleased not himself; but, as it is written, The reproaches of them that reproached thee fell on me.	For even Christ did not please Himself, but as it is written: “The insults of those who insult You have fallen on Me.”
ROM	15	4	무엇이든지 전에 기록한 바는 우리의 교훈을 위하여 기록된 것이니 우리로 하여금 인내로 또는 성경의 안위로 소망을 가지게 함이니라	For whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope.	For everything that was written in the past was written for our instruction, so that through endurance and the encouragement of the Scriptures, we might have hope.
ROM	15	5	이제 인내와 안위의 하나님이 너희로 그리스도 예수를 본받아 서로 뜻이 같게 하여 주사	Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be likeminded one toward another according to Christ Jesus:	Now may the God who gives endurance and encouragement grant you harmony with one another in Christ Jesus,
ROM	15	6	한 마음과 한 입으로 하나님 곧 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 아버지께 영광을 돌리게 하려 하노라	That ye may with one mind and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.	so that with one mind and one voice you may glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
ROM	15	7	이러므로 그리스도께서 우리를 받아 하나님께 영광을 돌리심과 같이 너희도 서로 받으라	Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us to the glory of God.	Accept one another, then, just as Christ accepted you, in order to bring glory to God.
ROM	15	8	내가 말하노니 그리스도께서 하나님의 진실하심을 위하여 할례의 수종자가 되셨으니 이는 조상들에게 주신 약속들을 견고케 하시고	Now I say that Jesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the promises made unto the fathers:	For I tell you that Christ has become a servant of the circumcised on behalf of God’s truth, to confirm the promises made to the patriarchs,
ROM	15	9	이방인으로 그 긍휼하심을 인하여 하나님께 영광을 돌리게 하려 하심이라 기록된 바 이러므로 내가 열방 중에서 주께 감사하고 주의 이름을 찬송하리로다 함과 같으니라	And that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy; as it is written, For this cause I will confess to thee among the Gentiles, and sing unto thy name.	so that the Gentiles may glorify God for His mercy. As it is written: “Therefore I will praise You among the Gentiles; I will sing hymns to Your name.”
ROM	15	10	또 가로되 열방들아 주의 백성과 함께 즐거워하라 하였으며	And again he saith, Rejoice, ye Gentiles, with his people.	Again, it says: “Rejoice, O Gentiles, with His people.”
ROM	15	11	또 모든 열방들아 주를 찬양하며 모든 백성들아 저를 찬송하라 하였으며	And again, Praise the Lord, all ye Gentiles; and laud him, all ye people.	And again: “Praise the Lord, all you Gentiles, and extol Him, all you peoples.”
ROM	15	12	또 이사야가 가로되 이새의 뿌리 곧 열방을 다스리기 위하여 일어나시는 이가 있으리니 열방이 그에게 소망을 두리라 하였느니라	And again, Esaias saith, There shall be a root of Jesse, and he that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles; in him shall the Gentiles trust.	And once more, Isaiah says: “The Root of Jesse will appear, One who will arise to rule over the Gentiles; in Him the Gentiles will put their hope.”
ROM	15	13	소망의 하나님이 모든 기쁨과 평강을 믿음 안에서 너희에게 충만케 하사 성령의 능력으로 소망이 넘치게 하시기를 원하노라	Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost.	Now may the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace as you believe in Him, so that you may overflow with hope by the power of the Holy Spirit.
ROM	15	14	내 형제들아 너희가 스스로 선함이 가득하고 모든 지식이 차서 능히 서로 권하는 자임을 나도 확신하노라	And I myself also am persuaded of you, my brethren, that ye also are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish one another.	I myself am convinced, my brothers, that you yourselves are full of goodness, brimming with knowledge, and able to instruct one another.
ROM	15	15	그러나 내가 너희로 다시 생각나게 하려고 하나님께서 내게 주신 은혜로 인하여 더욱 담대히 대강 너희에게 썼노니	Nevertheless, brethren, I have written the more boldly unto you in some sort, as putting you in mind, because of the grace that is given to me of God,	However, I have written you a bold reminder on some points, because of the grace God has given me
ROM	15	16	이 은혜는 곧 나로 이방인을 위하여 그리스도 예수의 일꾼이 되어 하나님의 복음의 제사장 직무를 하게 하사 이방인을 제물로 드리는 그것이 성령 안에서 거룩하게 되어 받으심직하게 하려 하심이라	That I should be the minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, ministering the gospel of God, that the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost.	to be a minister of Christ Jesus to the Gentiles in the priestly service of the gospel of God, so that the Gentiles might become an offering acceptable to God, sanctified by the Holy Spirit.
ROM	15	17	그러므로 내가 그리스도 예수 안에서 하나님의 일에 대하여 자랑하는 것이 있거니와	I have therefore whereof I may glory through Jesus Christ in those things which pertain to God.	Therefore I exult in Christ Jesus in my service to God.
ROM	15	18	그리스도께서 이방인들을 순종케 하기 위하여 나로 말미암아 말과 일이며 표적과 기사의 능력이며 성령의 능력으로 역사하신 것 외에는 내가 감히 말하지 아니하노라	For I will not dare to speak of any of those things which Christ hath not wrought by me, to make the Gentiles obedient, by word and deed,	I will not presume to speak of anything except what Christ has accomplished through me in leading the Gentiles to obedience by word and deed,
ROM	15	19	이 일로 인하여 내가 예루살렘으로부터 두루 행하여 일루리곤까지 그리스도의 복음을 편만하게 전하였노라	Through mighty signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit of God; so that from Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum, I have fully preached the gospel of Christ.	by the power of signs and wonders, and by the power of the Spirit of God. So from Jerusalem all the way around to Illyricum, I have fully proclaimed the gospel of Christ.
ROM	15	20	또 내가 그리스도의 이름을 부르는 곳에는 복음을 전하지 않기로 힘썼노니 이는 남의 터 위에 건축하지 아니하려 함이라	Yea, so have I strived to preach the gospel, not where Christ was named, lest I should build upon another man’s foundation:	In this way I have aspired to preach the gospel where Christ was not known, so that I would not be building on someone else’s foundation.
ROM	15	21	기록된 바 주의 소식을 받지 못한 자들이 볼 것이요 듣지 못한 자들이 깨달으리라 함과 같으니라	But as it is written, To whom he was not spoken of, they shall see: and they that have not heard shall understand.	Rather, as it is written: “Those who were not told about Him will see, and those who have not heard will understand.”
ROM	15	22	그러므로 또한 내가 너희에게 가려 하던 것이 여러 번 막혔더니	For which cause also I have been much hindered from coming to you.	That is why I have often been hindered from coming to you.
ROM	15	23	이제는 이 지방에 일할 곳이 없고 여러 해 전부터 언제든지 서바나로 갈 때에 너희에게 가려는 원이 있었으니	But now having no more place in these parts, and having a great desire these many years to come unto you;	But now that there are no further opportunities for me in these regions, and since I have longed for many years to visit you,
ROM	15	24	이는 지나가는 길에 너희를 보고 먼저 너희와 교제하여 약간 만족을 받은 후에 너희의 그리로 보내줌을 바람이라	Whensoever I take my journey into Spain, I will come to you: for I trust to see you in my journey, and to be brought on my way thitherward by you, if first I be somewhat filled with your company.	I hope to see you on my way to Spain. And after I have enjoyed your company for a while, you can equip me for my journey.
ROM	15	25	그러나 이제는 내가 성도를 섬기는 일로 예루살렘에 가노니	But now I go unto Jerusalem to minister unto the saints.	Now, however, I am on my way to Jerusalem to serve the saints there.
ROM	15	26	이는 마게도냐와 아가야 사람들이 예루살렘 성도 중 가난한 자들을 위하여 기쁘게 얼마를 동정하였음이라	For it hath pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor saints which are at Jerusalem.	For Macedonia and Achaia were pleased to make a contribution for the poor among the saints in Jerusalem.
ROM	15	27	저희가 기뻐서 하였거니와 또한 저희는 그들에게 빚진 자니 만일 이방인들이 그들의 신령한 것을 나눠 가졌으면 육신의 것으로 그들을 섬기는 것이 마땅하니라	It hath pleased them verily; and their debtors they are. For if the Gentiles have been made partakers of their spiritual things, their duty is also to minister unto them in carnal things.	They were pleased to do it, and indeed they owe it to them. For if the Gentiles have shared in their spiritual blessings, they are obligated to minister to them with material blessings.
ROM	15	28	그러므로 내가 이 일을 마치고 이 열매를 저희에게 확증한 후에 너희에게를 지나 서바나로 가리라	When therefore I have performed this, and have sealed to them this fruit, I will come by you into Spain.	So after I have completed this service and have safely delivered this bounty to them, I will set off to Spain by way of you.
ROM	15	29	내가 너희에게 나갈 때에 그리스도의 충만한 축복을 가지고 갈 줄을 아노라	And I am sure that, when I come unto you, I shall come in the fulness of the blessing of the gospel of Christ.	I know that when I come to you, I will come in the fullness of the blessing of Christ.
ROM	15	30	형제들아 내가 우리 주 예수 그리스도로 말미암고 성령의 사랑으로 말미암아 너희를 권하노니 너희 기도에 나와 힘을 같이하여 나를 위하여 하나님께 빌어	Now I beseech you, brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ’s sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that ye strive together with me in your prayers to God for me;	Now I urge you, brothers, by our Lord Jesus Christ and by the love of the Spirit, to join me in my struggle by praying to God for me.
ROM	15	31	나로 유대에 순종치 아니하는 자들에게서 구원을 받게 하고 또 예루살렘에 대한 나의 섬기는 일을 성도들이 받음직하게 하고	That I may be delivered from them that do not believe in Judea; and that my service which I have for Jerusalem may be accepted of the saints;	Pray that I may be delivered from the unbelievers in Judea, and that my service in Jerusalem may be acceptable to the saints there,
ROM	15	32	나로 하나님의 뜻을 좇아 기쁨으로 너희에게 나아가 너희와 함께 편히 쉬게 하라	That I may come unto you with joy by the will of God, and may with you be refreshed.	so that by God’s will I may come to you with joy and together with you be refreshed.
ROM	15	33	평강의 하나님께서 너희 모든 사람과 함께 계실지어다 아멘	Now the God of peace be with you all. Amen.	The God of peace be with all of you. Amen.
ROM	16	1	내가 겐그레아 교회의 일꾼으로 있는 우리 자매 뵈뵈를 너희에게 천거하노니	I commend unto you Phebe our sister, which is a servant of the church which is at Cenchrea:	I commend to you our sister Phoebe, a servant of the church in Cenchrea.
ROM	16	2	너희가 주 안에서 성도들의 합당한 예절로 그를 영접하고 무엇이든지 그에게 소용되는 바를 도와줄지니 이는 그가 여러 사람과 나의 보호자가 되었음이니라	That ye receive her in the Lord, as becometh saints, and that ye assist her in whatsoever business she hath need of you: for she hath been a succourer of many, and of myself also.	Welcome her in the Lord in a manner worthy of the saints, and assist her with anything she may need from you. For she has been a great help to many people, including me.
ROM	16	3	너희가 그리스도 예수 안에서 나의 동역자들인 브리스가와 아굴라에게 문안하라	Greet Priscilla and Aquila my helpers in Christ Jesus:	Greet Prisca and Aquila, my fellow workers in Christ Jesus,
ROM	16	4	저희는 내 목숨을 위하여 자기의 목이라도 내어 놓았나니 나뿐 아니라 이방인의 모든 교회도 저희에게 감사하느니라	Who have for my life laid down their own necks: unto whom not only I give thanks, but also all the churches of the Gentiles.	who have risked their lives for me. Not only I but all the churches of the Gentiles are grateful to them.
ROM	16	5	또 저의 교회에게도 문안하라 나희 사랑하는 에배네도에게 문안하라 저는 아시아에서 그리스도께 처음 익은 열매니라	Likewise greet the church that is in their house. Salute my wellbeloved Epenetus, who is the firstfruits of Achaia unto Christ.	Greet also the church that meets at their house. Greet my beloved Epenetus, who was the first convert to Christ in the province of Asia.
ROM	16	6	너희를 위하여 많이 수고한 마리아에게 문안하라	Greet Mary, who bestowed much labour on us.	Greet Mary, who has worked very hard for you.
ROM	16	7	내 친척이요 나와 함께 갇혔던 안드로니고와 유니아에게 문안하라 저희는 사도에게 유명히 여김을 받고 또한 나보다 먼저 그리스도 안에 있는 자라	Salute Andronicus and Junia, my kinsmen, and my fellowprisoners, who are of note among the apostles, who also were in Christ before me.	Greet Andronicus and Junia, my fellow countrymen and fellow prisoners. They are outstanding among the apostles, and they were in Christ before I was.
ROM	16	8	또 주 안에서 내 사랑하는 암블리아에게 문안하라	Greet Amplias my beloved in the Lord.	Greet Ampliatus, my beloved in the Lord.
ROM	16	9	그리스도 안에서 우리의 동역자인 우르바노와 나의 사랑하는 스다구에게 문안하라	Salute Urbane, our helper in Christ, and Stachys my beloved.	Greet Urbanus, our fellow worker in Christ, and my beloved Stachys.
ROM	16	10	그리스도 안에서 인정함을 받은 아벨레에게 문안하라 아리스도불로의 권속에게 문안하라	Salute Apelles approved in Christ. Salute them which are of Aristobulus’ household.	Greet Apelles, who is approved in Christ. Greet those who belong to the household of Aristobulus.
ROM	16	11	내 친척 헤로디온에게 문안하라 나깃수의 권속 중 주 안에 있는 자들에게 문안하라	Salute Herodion my kinsman. Greet them that be of the household of Narcissus, which are in the Lord.	Greet Herodion, my fellow countryman. Greet those from the household of Narcissus who are in the Lord.
ROM	16	12	주 안에서 수고한 드루배나와 드루보사에게 문안하라 주 안에서 많이 수고하고 사랑하는 버시에게 문안하라	Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa, who labour in the Lord. Salute the beloved Persis, which laboured much in the Lord.	Greet Tryphena and Tryphosa, women who have worked hard in the Lord. Greet my beloved Persis, who has worked very hard in the Lord.
ROM	16	13	주 안에서 택하심을 입은 루포와 그 어머니에게 문안하라 그 어머니는 곧 내 어머니니라	Salute Rufus chosen in the Lord, and his mother and mine.	Greet Rufus, chosen in the Lord, and his mother, who has been a mother to me as well.
ROM	16	14	아순그리도와 블레곤과 허메와 바드로바와 허마와 저희와 함께 있는 형제들에게 문안하라	Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Hermes, and the brethren which are with them.	Greet Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and the brothers with them.
ROM	16	15	빌롤로고와 율리아와 또 네레오와 그 자매와 올름바와 저희와 함께 있는 모든 성도에게 문안하라	Salute Philologus, and Julia, Nereus, and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints which are with them.	Greet Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas and all the saints with them.
ROM	16	16	너희가 거룩하게 입맞춤으로 서로 문안하라 그리스도의 모든 교회가 다 너희에게 문안하느니라	Salute one another with an holy kiss. The churches of Christ salute you.	Greet one another with a holy kiss. All the churches of Christ send you greetings.
ROM	16	17	형제들아 내가 너희를 권하노니 너희 교훈을 거스려 분쟁을 일으키고 거치게 하는 자들을 살피고 저희에게서 떠나라	Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offences contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned; and avoid them.	Now I urge you, brothers, to watch out for those who create divisions and obstacles that are contrary to the teaching you have learned. Turn away from them.
ROM	16	18	이같은 자들은 우리 주 그리스도를 섬기지 아니하고 다만 자기의 배만 섬기나니 공교하고 아첨하는 말로 순진한 자들의 마음을 미혹하느니라	For they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.	For such people are not serving our Lord Christ, but their own appetites. By smooth talk and flattery they deceive the hearts of the naive.
ROM	16	19	너희 순종함이 모든 사람에게 들리는지라 그러므로 내가 너희를 인하여 기뻐하노니 너희가 선한 데 지혜롭고 악한 데 미련하기를 원하노라	For your obedience is come abroad unto all men. I am glad therefore on your behalf: but yet I would have you wise unto that which is good, and simple concerning evil.	Everyone has heard about your obedience, so I rejoice over you. But I want you to be wise about what is good and innocent about what is evil.
ROM	16	20	평강의 하나님께서 속히 사단을 너희 발 아래서 상하게 하시리라 우리 주 예수의 은혜가 너희에게 있을지어다	And the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.	The God of peace will soon crush Satan under your feet. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
ROM	16	21	나의 동역자 디모데와 나의 친척 누기오와 야손과 소시바더가 너희에게 문안하느니라	Timotheus my workfellow, and Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipater, my kinsmen, salute you.	Timothy, my fellow worker, sends you greetings, as do Lucius, Jason, and Sosipater, my fellow countrymen.
ROM	16	22	이 편지를 대서하는 나 더디오도 주 안에서 너희에게 문안하노라	I Tertius, who wrote this epistle, salute you in the Lord.	I, Tertius, who wrote down this letter, greet you in the Lord.
ROM	16	23	나와 온 교회 식주인 가이오도 너희에게 문안하고 이 성의 재무 에라스도와 형제 구아도도 너희에게 문안하느니라	Gaius mine host, and of the whole church, saluteth you. Erastus the chamberlain of the city saluteth you, and Quartus a brother.	Gaius, who has hosted me and all the church, sends you greetings. Erastus, the city treasurer, sends you greetings, as does our brother Quartus.
ROM	16	24		The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.	
ROM	16	25	나의 복음과 예수 그리스도를 전파함은 영세 전부터 감취었다가	Now to him that is of power to stablish you according to my gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret since the world began,	Now to Him who is able to strengthen you by my gospel and by the proclamation of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery concealed for ages past
ROM	16	26	이제는 나타내신 바 되었으며 영원하신 하나님의 명을 좇아 선지자들의 글로 말미암아 모든 민족으로 믿어 순종케 하시려고 알게하신 바 그 비밀의 계시를 좇아 된 것이니 이 복음으로 너희를 능히 견고케 하실	But now is made manifest, and by the scriptures of the prophets, according to the commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all nations for the obedience of faith:	but now revealed and made known through the writings of the prophets by the command of the eternal God, in order to lead all nations to the obedience that comes from faith—
ROM	16	27	지혜로우신 하나님께 예수 그리스도로 말미암아 영광이 세세무궁토록 있을지어다 아멘	To God only wise, be glory through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen. Written to the Romans from Corinthus, and sent by Phebe servant of the church at Cenchrea.	to the only wise God be glory forever through Jesus Christ! Amen.
1CO	1	1	하나님의 뜻을 따라 그리스도 예수의 사도로 부르심을 입은 바울과 및 형제 소스데네는	Paul, called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God, and Sosthenes our brother,	Paul, called to be an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and our brother Sosthenes,
1CO	1	2	고린도에 있는 하나님의 교회 곧 그리스도 예수 안에서 거룩하여지고 성도라 부르심을 입은 자들과 또 각처에서 우리의 주 곧 저희와 우리의 주 되신 예수 그리스도의 이름을 부르는 모든 자들에게	Unto the church of God which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints, with all that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours:	To the church of God in Corinth, to those sanctified in Christ Jesus and called to be holy, together with all those everywhere who call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, their Lord and ours:
1CO	1	3	하나님 우리 아버지와 주 예수 그리스도로 좇아 은혜와 평강이 있기를 원하노라	Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.	Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
1CO	1	4	그리스도 예수 안에서 너희에게 주신 하나님의 은혜를 인하여 내가 너희를 위하여 항상 하나님께 감사하노니	I thank my God always on your behalf, for the grace of God which is given you by Jesus Christ;	I always thank my God for you because of the grace He has given you in Christ Jesus.
1CO	1	5	이는 너희가 그의 안에서 모든 일 곧 모든 구변과 모든 지식에 풍족하므로	That in every thing ye are enriched by him, in all utterance, and in all knowledge;	For in Him you have been enriched in every way, in all speech and all knowledge,
1CO	1	6	그리스도의 증거가 너희 중에 견고케 되어	Even as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you:	because our testimony about Christ was confirmed in you.
1CO	1	7	너희가 모든 은사에 부족함이 없이 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 나타나심을 기다림이라	So that ye come behind in no gift; waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ:	Therefore you do not lack any spiritual gift as you eagerly await the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ.
1CO	1	8	주께서 너희를 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 날에 책망할 것이 없는 자로 끝까지 견고케 하시리라	Who shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.	He will sustain you to the end, so that you will be blameless on the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
1CO	1	9	너희를 불러 그의 아들 예수 그리스도 우리 주로 더불어 교제케 하시는 하나님은 미쁘시도다	God is faithful, by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.	God, who has called you into fellowship with His Son Jesus Christ our Lord, is faithful.
1CO	1	10	형제들아 내가 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 이름으로 너희를 권하노니 다 같은 말을 하고 너희 가운데 분쟁이 없이 같은 마음과 같은 뜻으로 온전히 합하라	Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment.	I appeal to you, brothers, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that all of you agree together, so that there may be no divisions among you and that you may be united in mind and conviction.
1CO	1	11	내 형제들아 글로에의 집 편으로서 너희에게 대한 말이 내게 들리니 곧 너희 가운데 분쟁이 있다는 것이라	For it hath been declared unto me of you, my brethren, by them which are of the house of Chloe, that there are contentions among you.	My brothers, some from Chloe’s household have informed me that there are quarrels among you.
1CO	1	12	이는 다름아니라 너희가 각각 이르되 나는 바울에게, 나는 아볼로에게, 나는 게바에게, 나는 그리스도에게 속한 자라 하는 것이니	Now this I say, that every one of you saith, I am of Paul; and I of Apollos; and I of Cephas; and I of Christ.	What I mean is this: Individuals among you are saying, “I follow Paul,” “I follow Apollos,” “I follow Cephas,” or “I follow Christ.”
1CO	1	13	그리스도께서 어찌 나뉘었느뇨 바울이 너희를 위하여 십자가에 못 박혔으며 바울의 이름으로 너희가 침례를 받았느뇨	Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized in the name of Paul?	Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you? Were you baptized into the name of Paul?
1CO	1	14	그리스보와 가이오 외에는 너희 중 아무에게도 내가 침례를 주지 아니한 것을 감사하노니	I thank God that I baptized none of you, but Crispus and Gaius;	I thank God that I did not baptize any of you except Crispus and Gaius,
1CO	1	15	이는 아무도 나의 이름으로 침례를 받았다 말하지 못하게 하려함이라	Lest any should say that I had baptized in mine own name.	so no one can say that you were baptized into my name.
1CO	1	16	내가 또한 스데바나 집 사람에게 침례를 주었고 그 외에는 다른 아무에게 침례를 주었는지 알지 못하노라	And I baptized also the household of Stephanas: besides, I know not whether I baptized any other.	Yes, I also baptized the household of Stephanas; beyond that I do not remember if I baptized anyone else.
1CO	1	17	그리스도께서 나를 보내심은 침례를 주게 하려 하심이 아니요 오직 복음을 전케 하려 하심이니 말의 지혜로 하지 아니함은 그리스도의 십자가가 헛되지 않게 하려 함이라	For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the gospel: not with wisdom of words, lest the cross of Christ should be made of none effect.	For Christ did not send me to baptize, but to preach the gospel, not with words of wisdom, lest the cross of Christ be emptied of its power.
1CO	1	18	십자가의 도가 멸망하는 자들에게는 미련한 것이요 구원을 얻는 우리에게는 하나님의 능력이라	For the preaching of the cross is to them that perish foolishness; but unto us which are saved it is the power of God.	For the message of the cross is foolishness to those who are perishing, but to us who are being saved it is the power of God.
1CO	1	19	기록된 바 내가 지혜 있는 자들의 지혜를 멸하고 총명한 자들의 총명을 폐하리라 하였으니	For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent.	For it is written: “I will destroy the wisdom of the wise; the intelligence of the intelligent I will frustrate.”
1CO	1	20	지혜 있는 자가 어디 있느뇨 선비가 어디 있느뇨 이 세대에 변사가 어디 있느뇨 하나님께서 이 세상의 지혜를 미련케 하신 것이 아니뇨	Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of this world? hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?	Where is the wise man? Where is the scribe? Where is the philosopher of this age? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of the world?
1CO	1	21	하나님의 지혜에 있어서는 이 세상이 자기 지혜로 하나님을 알지 못하는 고로 하나님께서 전도의 미련한 것으로 믿는 자들을 구원하시기를 기뻐하셨도다	For after that in the wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe.	For since in the wisdom of God the world through its wisdom did not know Him, God was pleased through the foolishness of what was preached to save those who believe.
1CO	1	22	유대인은 표적을 구하고 헬라인은 지혜를 찾으나	For the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom:	Jews demand signs and Greeks search for wisdom,
1CO	1	23	우리는 십자가에 못 박힌 그리스도를 전하니 유대인에게는 거리끼는 것이요 이방인에게는 미련한 것이로되	But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumblingblock, and unto the Greeks foolishness;	but we preach Christ crucified, a stumbling block to Jews and foolishness to Gentiles,
1CO	1	24	오직 부르심을 입은 자들에게는 유대인이나 헬라인이나 그리스도는 하나님의 능력이요 하나님의 지혜니라	But unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God.	but to those who are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God.
1CO	1	25	하나님의 미련한 것이 사람보다 지혜 있고 하나님의 약한 것이 사람보다 강하니라	Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men; and the weakness of God is stronger than men.	For the foolishness of God is wiser than man’s wisdom, and the weakness of God is stronger than man’s strength.
1CO	1	26	형제들아 너희를 부르심을 보라 육체를 따라 지혜 있는 자가 많지 아니하며 능한 자가 많지 아니하며 문벌 좋은 자가 많지 아니하도다	For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called:	Brothers, consider the time of your calling: Not many of you were wise by human standards; not many were powerful; not many were of noble birth.
1CO	1	27	그러나 하나님께서 세상의 미련한 것들을 택하사 지혜 있는 자들을 부끄럽게 하려 하시고 세상의 약한 것들을 택하사 강한 것들을 부끄럽게 하려 하시며	But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty;	But God chose the foolish things of the world to shame the wise; God chose the weak things of the world to shame the strong.
1CO	1	28	하나님께서 세상의 천한 것들과 멸시 받는 것들과 없는 것들을 택하사 있는 것들을 폐하려 하시나니	And base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to nought things that are:	He chose the lowly and despised things of the world, and the things that are not, to nullify the things that are,
1CO	1	29	이는 아무 육체라도 하나님 앞에서 자랑하지 못하게 하려 하심이라	That no flesh should glory in his presence.	so that no one may boast in His presence.
1CO	1	30	너희는 하나님께로부터 나서 그리스도 예수 안에 있고 예수는 하나님께로서 나와서 우리에게 지혜와 의로움과 거룩함과 구속함이 되셨으니	But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption:	It is because of Him that you are in Christ Jesus, who has become for us wisdom from God: our righteousness, holiness, and redemption.
1CO	1	31	기록된 바 자랑하는 자는 주 안에서 자랑하라 함과 같게 하려 함이니라	That, according as it is written, He that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord.	Therefore, as it is written: “Let him who boasts boast in the Lord.”
1CO	2	1	형제들아 내가 너희에게 나아가 하나님의 증거를 전할 때에 말과 지혜의 아름다운 것으로 아니하였나니	And I, brethren, when I came to you, came not with excellency of speech or of wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony of God.	When I came to you, brothers, I did not come with eloquence or wisdom as I proclaimed to you the testimony about God.
1CO	2	2	내가 너희 중에서 예수 그리스도와 그의 십자가에 못 박히신 것 외에는 아무 것도 알지 아니하기로 작정하였음이라	For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified.	For I resolved to know nothing while I was with you except Jesus Christ and Him crucified.
1CO	2	3	내가 너희 가운데 거할 때에 약하며 두려워하며 심히 떨었노라	And I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling.	I came to you in weakness and fear, and with much trembling.
1CO	2	4	내 말과 내 전도함이 지혜의 권하는 말로 하지 아니하고 다만 성령의 나타남과 능력으로 하여	And my speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of man’s wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power:	My message and my preaching were not with persuasive words of wisdom, but with a demonstration of the Spirit’s power,
1CO	2	5	너희 믿음이 사람의 지혜에 있지 아니하고 다만 하나님의 능력에 있게 하려 하였노라	That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.	so that your faith would not rest on men’s wisdom, but on God’s power.
1CO	2	6	그러나 우리가 온전한 자들 중에서 지혜를 말하노니 이는 이 세상의 지혜가 아니요 또 이 세상의 없어질 관원의 지혜도 아니요	Howbeit we speak wisdom among them that are perfect: yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the princes of this world, that come to nought:	Among the mature, however, we speak a message of wisdom—but not the wisdom of this age or of the rulers of this age, who are coming to nothing.
1CO	2	7	오직 비밀한 가운데 있는 하나님의 지혜를 말하는 것이니 곧 감취었던 것인데 하나님이 우리의 영광을 위하사 만세 전에 미리 정하신 것이라	But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom, which God ordained before the world unto our glory:	No, we speak of the mysterious and hidden wisdom of God, which He destined for our glory before time began.
1CO	2	8	이 지혜는 이 세대의 관원이 하나도 알지 못하였나니 만일 알았더면 영광의 주를 십자가에 못 박지 아니하였으리라	Which none of the princes of this world knew: for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.	None of the rulers of this age understood it. For if they had, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.
1CO	2	9	기록된 바 하나님이 자기를 사랑하는 자들을 위하여 예비하신 모든 것은 눈으로 보지 못하고 귀로도 듣지 못하고 사람의 마음으로도 생각지 못하였다 함과 같으니라	But as it is written, Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him.	Rather, as it is written: “No eye has seen, no ear has heard, no heart has imagined, what God has prepared for those who love Him.”
1CO	2	10	오직 하나님이 성령으로 이것을 우리에게 보이셨으니 성령은 모든 것 곧 하나님의 깊은 것이라도 통달하시느니라	But God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God.	But God has revealed it to us by the Spirit. The Spirit searches all things, even the deep things of God.
1CO	2	11	사람의 사정을 사람의 속에 있는 영 외에는 누가 알리요 이와 같이 하나님의 사정도 하나님의 영 외에는 아무도 알지 못하느니라	For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God.	For who among men knows the thoughts of man except his own spirit within him? So too, no one knows the thoughts of God except the Spirit of God.
1CO	2	12	우리가 세상의 영을 받지 아니하고 오직 하나님께로 온 영을 받았으니 이는 우리로 하여금 하나님께서 우리에게 은혜로 주신 것들을 알게 하려 하심이라	Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God; that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God.	We have not received the spirit of the world, but the Spirit who is from God, that we may understand what God has freely given us.
1CO	2	13	우리가 이것을 말하거니와 사람의 지혜의 가르친 말로 아니하고 오직 성령의 가르치신 것으로 하니 신령한 일은 신령한 것으로 분별하느니라	Which things also we speak, not in the words which man’s wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual things with spiritual.	And this is what we speak, not in words taught us by human wisdom, but in words taught by the Spirit, expressing spiritual truths in spiritual words.
1CO	2	14	육에 속한 사람은 하나님의 성령의 일을 받지 아니하나니 저희에게는 미련하게 보임이요 또 깨닫지도 못하나니 이런 일은 영적으로라야 분변함이니라	But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.	The natural man does not accept the things that come from the Spirit of God. For they are foolishness to him, and he cannot understand them, because they are spiritually discerned.
1CO	2	15	신령한 자는 모든 것을 판단하나 자기는 아무에게도 판단을 받지 아니하느니라	But he that is spiritual judgeth all things, yet he himself is judged of no man.	The spiritual man judges all things, but he himself is not subject to anyone’s judgment.
1CO	2	16	누가 주의 마음을 알아서 주를 가르치겠느냐 그러나 우리가 그리스도의 마음을 가졌느니라	For who hath known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct him? But we have the mind of Christ.	“For who has known the mind of the Lord, so as to instruct Him?” But we have the mind of Christ.
1CO	3	1	형제들아 내가 신령한 자들을 대함과 같이 너희에게 말할 수 없어서 육신에 속한 자 곧 그리스도 안에서 어린 아이들을 대함과 같이 하노라	And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ.	Brothers, I could not address you as spiritual, but as worldly—as infants in Christ.
1CO	3	2	내가 너희를 젖으로 먹이고 밥으로 아니하였노니 이는 너희가 감당치 못하였음이거니와 지금도 못하리라	I have fed you with milk, and not with meat: for hitherto ye were not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able.	I gave you milk, not solid food, for you were not yet ready for solid food. In fact, you are still not ready,
1CO	3	3	너희가 아직도 육신에 속한 자로다 너희 가운데 시기와 분쟁이 있으니 어찌 육신에 속하여 사람을 따라 행함이 아니리요	For ye are yet carnal: for whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men?	for you are still worldly. For since there is jealousy and dissension among you, are you not worldly? Are you not walking in the way of man?
1CO	3	4	어떤 이는 말하되 나는 바울에게라 하고 다른 이는 나는 아볼로에게라 하니 너희가 사람이 아니리요	For while one saith, I am of Paul; and another, I am of Apollos; are ye not carnal?	For when one of you says, “I follow Paul,” and another, “I follow Apollos,” are you not mere men?
1CO	3	5	그런즉 아볼로는 무엇이며 바울은 무엇이뇨 저희는 주께서 각각 주신 대로 너희로 하여금 믿게 한 사역자들이니라	Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every man?	What then is Apollos? And what is Paul? They are servants through whom you believed, as the Lord has assigned to each his role.
1CO	3	6	나는 심었고 아볼로는 물을 주었으되 오직 하나님은 자라나게 하셨나니	I have planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase.	I planted the seed and Apollos watered it, but God made it grow.
1CO	3	7	그런즉 심는 이나 물 주는 이는 아무 것도 아니로되 오직 자라나게 하시는 하나님뿐이니라	So then neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that watereth; but God that giveth the increase.	So neither he who plants nor he who waters is anything, but only God, who makes things grow.
1CO	3	8	심는 이와 물 주는 이가 일반이나 각각 자기의 일하는 대로 자기의 상을 받으리라	Now he that planteth and he that watereth are one: and every man shall receive his own reward according to his own labour.	He who plants and he who waters are one in purpose, and each will be rewarded according to his own labor.
1CO	3	9	우리는 하나님의 동역자들이요 너희는 하나님의 밭이요 하나님의 집이니라	For we are labourers together with God: ye are God’s husbandry, ye are God’s building.	For we are God’s fellow workers; you are God’s field, God’s building.
1CO	3	10	내게 주신 하나님의 은혜를 따라 내가 지혜로운 건축자와 같이 터를 닦아 두매 다른 이가 그 위에 세우나 그러나 각각 어떻게 그 위에 세우기를 조심할지니라	According to the grace of God which is given unto me, as a wise masterbuilder, I have laid the foundation, and another buildeth thereon. But let every man take heed how he buildeth thereupon.	By the grace God has given me, I laid a foundation as an expert builder, and someone else is building on it. But each one must be careful how he builds.
1CO	3	11	이 닦아 둔 것 외에 능히 다른 터를 닦아 둘 자가 없으니 이 터는 곧 예수 그리스도라	For other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ.	For no one can lay a foundation other than the one already laid, which is Jesus Christ.
1CO	3	12	만일 누구든지 금이나 은이나 보석이나 나무나 풀이나 짚으로 이 터 위에 세우면	Now if any man build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble;	If anyone builds on this foundation using gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, or straw,
1CO	3	13	각각 공력이 나타날 터인데 그 날이 공력을 밝히리니 이는 불로 나타내고 그 불이 각 사람의 공력이 어떠한 것을 시험할 것임이니라	Every man’s work shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try every man’s work of what sort it is.	his workmanship will be evident, because the Day will bring it to light. It will be revealed with fire, and the fire will prove the quality of each man’s work.
1CO	3	14	만일 누구든지 그 위에 세운 공력이 그대로 있으면 상을 받고	If any man’s work abide which he hath built thereupon, he shall receive a reward.	If what he has built survives, he will receive a reward.
1CO	3	15	누구든지 공력이 불타면 해를 받으리니 그러나 자기는 구원을 얻되 불 가운데서 얻은 것 같으리라	If any man’s work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss: but he himself shall be saved; yet so as by fire.	If it is burned up, he will suffer loss. He himself will be saved, but only as if through the flames.
1CO	3	16	너희가 하나님의 성전인 것과 하나님의 성령이 너희 안에 거하시는 것을 알지 못하느뇨	Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?	Do you not know that you yourselves are God’s temple, and that God’s Spirit dwells in you?
1CO	3	17	누구든지 하나님의 성전을 더럽히면 하나님이 그 사람을 멸하시리라 하나님의 성전은 거룩하니 너희도 그러하니라	If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are.	If anyone destroys God’s temple, God will destroy him; for God’s temple is holy, and you are that temple.
1CO	3	18	아무도 자기를 속이지 말라 너희 중에 누구든지 이 세상에서 지혜 있는 줄로 생각하거든 미련한 자가 되어라 그리하여야 지혜로운 자가 되리라	Let no man deceive himself. If any man among you seemeth to be wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise.	Let no one deceive himself. If any of you thinks he is wise in this age, he should become a fool, so that he may become wise.
1CO	3	19	이 세상 지혜는 하나님께 미련한 것이니 기록된 바 지혜 있는 자들로 하여금 자기 궤휼에 빠지게 하시는 이라 하였고	For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. For it is written, He taketh the wise in their own craftiness.	For the wisdom of this world is foolishness in God’s sight. As it is written: “He catches the wise in their craftiness.”
1CO	3	20	또 주께서 지혜 있는 자들의 생각을 헛것으로 아신다 하셨느니라	And again, The Lord knoweth the thoughts of the wise, that they are vain.	And again, “The Lord knows that the thoughts of the wise are futile.”
1CO	3	21	그런즉 누구든지 사람을 자랑하지 말라 만물이 다 너희 것임이라	Therefore let no man glory in men. For all things are yours;	Therefore, stop boasting in men. All things are yours,
1CO	3	22	바울이나 아볼로나 게바나 세계나 생명이나 사망이나 지금 것이나 장래 것이나 다 너희의 것이요	Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come; all are yours;	whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas or the world or life or death or the present or the future. All of them belong to you,
1CO	3	23	너희는 그리스도의 것이요 그리스도는 하나님의 것이니라	And ye are Christ’s; and Christ is God’s.	and you belong to Christ, and Christ belongs to God.
1CO	4	1	사람이 마땅히 우리를 그리스도의 일꾼이요 하나님의 비밀을 맡은 자로 여길지어다	Let a man so account of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God.	So then, men ought to regard us as servants of Christ and stewards of the mysteries of God.
1CO	4	2	그리고 맡은 자들에게 구할 것은 충성이니라	Moreover it is required in stewards, that a man be found faithful.	Now it is required of stewards that they be found faithful.
1CO	4	3	너희에게나 다른 사람에게나 판단 받는 것이 내게는 매우 작은 일이라 나도 나를 판단치 아니하노니	But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you, or of man’s judgment: yea, I judge not mine own self.	I care very little, however, if I am judged by you or by any human court. In fact, I do not even judge myself.
1CO	4	4	내가 자책할 아무 것도 깨닫지 못하나 그러나 이를 인하여 의롭다 함을 얻지 못하노라 다만 나를 판단하실 이는 주시니라	For I know nothing by myself; yet am I not hereby justified: but he that judgeth me is the Lord.	My conscience is clear, but that does not vindicate me. It is the Lord who judges me.
1CO	4	5	그러므로 때가 이르기 전 곧 주께서 오시기까지 아무 것도 판단치 말라 그가 어두움에 감추인 것들을 드러내고 마음의 뜻을 나타내시리니 그 때에 각 사람에게 하나님께로부터 칭찬이 있으리라	Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts: and then shall every man have praise of God.	Therefore judge nothing before the appointed time; wait until the Lord comes. He will bring to light what is hidden in darkness and will expose the motives of men’s hearts. At that time each will receive his praise from God.
1CO	4	6	형제들아 내가 너희를 위하여 이 일에 나와 아볼로를 가지고 본을 보였으니 이는 너희로 하여금 기록한 말씀 밖에 넘어가지 말라 한 것을 우리에게서 배워 서로 대적하여 교만한 마음을 먹지 말게 하려 함이라	And these things, brethren, I have in a figure transferred to myself and to Apollos for your sakes; that ye might learn in us not to think of men above that which is written, that no one of you be puffed up for one against another.	Brothers, I have applied these things to myself and Apollos for your benefit, so that you may learn from us not to go beyond what is written. Then you will not take pride in one man over another.
1CO	4	7	누가 너를 구별하였느뇨 네게 있는 것 중에 받지 아니한 것이 무엇이뇨 네가 받았은즉 어찌하여 받지 아니한 것 같이 자랑하느뇨	For who maketh thee to differ from another? and what hast thou that thou didst not receive? now if thou didst receive it, why dost thou glory, as if thou hadst not received it?	For who makes you so superior? What do you have that you did not receive? And if you did receive it, why do you boast as though you did not?
1CO	4	8	너희가 이미 배부르며 이미 부요하며 우리 없이 왕 노릇 하였도다 우리가 너희와 함께 왕 노릇 하기 위하여 참으로 너희의 왕 노릇 하기를 원하노라	Now ye are full, now ye are rich, ye have reigned as kings without us: and I would to God ye did reign, that we also might reign with you.	Already you have all you want. Already you have become rich. Without us, you have become kings. How I wish you really were kings, so that we might be kings with you!
1CO	4	9	내가 생각건대 하나님이 사도인 우리를 죽이기로 작정한 자 같이 미말에 두셨으매 우리는 세계 곧 천사와 사람에게 구경거리가 되었노라	For I think that God hath set forth us the apostles last, as it were appointed to death: for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men.	For it seems to me that God has displayed us apostles at the end of the procession, like prisoners appointed for death. We have become a spectacle to the whole world, to angels as well as to men.
1CO	4	10	우리는 그리스도의 연고로 미련하되 너희는 그리스도 안에서 지혜롭고 우리는 약하되 너희는 강하고 너희는 존귀하되 우리는 비천하여	We are fools for Christ’s sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are honourable, but we are despised.	We are fools for Christ, but you are wise in Christ. We are weak, but you are strong. You are honored, but we are dishonored.
1CO	4	11	바로 이 시간까지 우리가 주리고 목마르며 헐벗고 매맞으며 정처가 없고	Even unto this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwellingplace;	To this very hour we are hungry and thirsty, we are poorly clothed, we are brutally treated, we are homeless.
1CO	4	12	또 수고하여 친히 손으로 일을 하며 후욕을 당한즉 축복하고 핍박을 당한즉 참고	And labour, working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it:	We work hard with our own hands. When we are vilified, we bless; when we are persecuted, we endure it;
1CO	4	13	비방을 당한즉 권면하니 우리가 지금까지 세상의 더러운 것과 만물의 찌끼 같이 되었도다	Being defamed, we intreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things unto this day.	when we are slandered, we answer gently. Up to this moment we have become the scum of the earth, the refuse of the world.
1CO	4	14	내가 너희를 부끄럽게 하려고 이것을 쓰는 것이 아니라 오직 너희를 내 사랑하는 자녀 같이 권하려 하는 것이라	I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons I warn you.	I am not writing this to shame you, but to warn you as my beloved children.
1CO	4	15	그리스도 안에서 일만 스승이 있으되 아비는 많지 아니하니 그리스도 예수 안에서 복음으로써 내가 너희를 낳았음이라	For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the gospel.	Even if you have ten thousand guardians in Christ, you do not have many fathers; for in Christ Jesus I became your father through the gospel.
1CO	4	16	그러므로 내가 너희에게 권하노니 너희는 나를 본받는 자 되라	Wherefore I beseech you, be ye followers of me.	Therefore I urge you to imitate me.
1CO	4	17	이를 인하여 내가 주 안에서 내 사랑하고 신실한 아들 디모데를 너희에게 보내었노니 저가 너희로 하여금 그리스도 예수 안에서 나의 행사 곧 내가 각처 교회에서 가르치는 것을 생각나게 하리라	For this cause have I sent unto you Timotheus, who is my beloved son, and faithful in the Lord, who shall bring you into remembrance of my ways which be in Christ, as I teach every where in every church.	That is why I have sent you Timothy, my beloved and faithful child in the Lord. He will remind you of my way of life in Christ Jesus, which is exactly what I teach everywhere in every church.
1CO	4	18	어떤 이들은 내가 너희에게 나아가지 아니할 것 같이 스스로 교만하여졌으나	Now some are puffed up, as though I would not come to you.	Some of you have become arrogant, as if I were not coming to you.
1CO	4	19	그러나 주께서 허락하시면 내가 너희에게 속히 나아가서 교만한 자의 말을 알아 볼 것이 아니라 오직 그 능력을 알아 보겠노니	But I will come to you shortly, if the Lord will, and will know, not the speech of them which are puffed up, but the power.	But I will come to you shortly, if the Lord is willing, and then I will find out not only what these arrogant people are saying, but what power they have.
1CO	4	20	하나님의 나라는 말에 있지 아니하고 오직 능력에 있음이라	For the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power.	For the kingdom of God is not a matter of talk but of power.
1CO	4	21	너희가 무엇을 원하느냐 내가 매를 가지고 너희에게 나아가랴 사랑과 온유한 마음으로 나아가랴	What will ye? shall I come unto you with a rod, or in love, and in the spirit of meekness?	Which do you prefer? Shall I come to you with a rod, or in love and with a gentle spirit?
1CO	5	1	너희 중에 심지어 음행이 있다 함을 들으니 이런 음행은 이방인 중에라도 없는 것이라 누가 그 아비의 아내를 취하였다 하는도다	It is reported commonly that there is fornication among you, and such fornication as is not so much as named among the Gentiles, that one should have his father’s wife.	It is actually reported that there is sexual immorality among you, and of a kind that is intolerable even among pagans: A man has his father’s wife.
1CO	5	2	그리하고도 너희가 오히려 교만하여져서 어찌하여 통한히 여기지 아니하고 그 일 행한 자를 너희 중에서 물리치지 아니하였느냐	And ye are puffed up, and have not rather mourned, that he that hath done this deed might be taken away from among you.	And you are proud! Shouldn’t you rather have been stricken with grief and have removed from your fellowship the man who did this?
1CO	5	3	내가 실로 몸으로는 떠나 있으나 영으로는 함께 있어서 거기 있는 것 같이 이 일 행한 자를 이미 판단하였노라	For I verily, as absent in body, but present in spirit, have judged already, as though I were present, concerning him that hath so done this deed,	Although I am absent from you in body, I am present with you in spirit, and I have already pronounced judgment on the one who did this, just as if I were present.
1CO	5	4	주 예수의 이름으로 너희가 내 영과 함께 모여서 우리 주 예수의 능력으로	In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ,	When you are assembled in the name of our Lord Jesus and I am with you in spirit, along with the power of the Lord Jesus,
1CO	5	5	이런 자를 사단에게 내어주었으니 이는 육신은 멸하고 영은 주 예수의 날에 구원 얻게 하려 함이라	To deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.	hand this man over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, so that his spirit may be saved on the Day of the Lord.
1CO	5	6	너희의 자랑하는 것이 옳지 아니하도다 적은 누룩이 온 덩어리에 퍼지는 것을 알지 못하느냐	Your glorying is not good. Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump?	Your boasting is not good. Do you not know that a little leaven works through the whole batch of dough?
1CO	5	7	너희는 누룩 없는 자인데 새 덩어리가 되기 위하여 묵은 누룩을 내어 버리라 우리의 유월절 양 곧 그리스도께서 희생이 되셨느니라	Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened. For even Christ our passover is sacrificed for us:	Get rid of the old leaven, that you may be a new unleavened batch, as you really are. For Christ, our Passover lamb, has been sacrificed.
1CO	5	8	이러므로 우리가 명절을 지키되 묵은 누룩도 말고 괴악하고 악독한 누룩도 말고 오직 순전함과 진실함의 누룩 없는 떡으로 하자	Therefore let us keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness; but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.	Therefore let us keep the feast, not with the old bread, leavened with malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and of truth.
1CO	5	9	내가 너희에게 쓴 것에 음행하는 자들을 사귀지 말라 하였거니와	I wrote unto you in an epistle not to company with fornicators:	I wrote you in my letter not to associate with sexually immoral people.
1CO	5	10	이 말은 이 세상의 음행하는 자들이나 탐하는 자들과 토색하는 자들이나 우상 숭배하는 자들을 도무지 사귀지 말라 하는 것이 아니니 만일 그리하려면 세상 밖으로 나가야 할 것이라	Yet not altogether with the fornicators of this world, or with the covetous, or extortioners, or with idolaters; for then must ye needs go out of the world.	I was not including the sexually immoral of this world, or the greedy and swindlers, or idolaters. In that case you would have to leave this world.
1CO	5	11	이제 내가 너희에게 쓴 것은 만일 어떤 형제라 일컫는 자가 음행하거나 탐람하거나 우상 숭배를 하거나 후욕하거나 술 취하거나 토색하거든 사귀지도 말고 그런 자와는 함께 먹지도 말라 함이라	But now I have written unto you not to keep company, if any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner; with such an one no not to eat.	But now I am writing you not to associate with anyone who claims to be a brother but is sexually immoral or greedy, an idolater or a verbal abuser, a drunkard or a swindler. With such a man do not even eat.
1CO	5	12	외인들을 판단하는데 내게 무슨 상관이 있으리요마는 교중 사람들이야 너희가 판단치 아니하랴	For what have I to do to judge them also that are without? do not ye judge them that are within?	What business of mine is it to judge those outside the church? Are you not to judge those inside?
1CO	5	13	외인들은 하나님이 판단하시려니와 이 악한 사람은 너희 중에서 내어 쫓으라	But them that are without God judgeth. Therefore put away from among yourselves that wicked person.	God will judge those outside. “Expel the wicked man from among you.”
1CO	6	1	너희 중에 누가 다른 이로 더불어 일이 있는데 구태여 불의한 자들 앞에서 송사하고 성도 앞에서 하지 아니하느냐	Dare any of you, having a matter against another, go to law before the unjust, and not before the saints?	If any of you has a grievance against another, how dare he go to law before the unrighteous instead of before the saints!
1CO	6	2	성도가 세상을 판단할 것을 너희가 알지 못하느냐 세상도 너희에게 판단을 받겠거든 지극히 작은 일 판단하기를 감당치 못하겠느냐	Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world? and if the world shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters?	Do you not know that the saints will judge the world? And if you are to judge the world, are you not competent to judge trivial cases?
1CO	6	3	우리가 천사를 판단할 것을 너희가 알지 못하느냐 그러하거든 하물며 세상 일이랴	Know ye not that we shall judge angels? how much more things that pertain to this life?	Do you not know that we will judge angels? How much more the things of this life!
1CO	6	4	그런즉 너희가 세상 사건이 있을 때에 교회에서 경히 여김을 받는 자들을 세우느냐	If then ye have judgments of things pertaining to this life, set them to judge who are least esteemed in the church.	So if you need to settle everyday matters, do you appoint as judges those of no standing in the church?
1CO	6	5	내가 너희를 부끄럽게 하려 하여 이 말을 하노니 너희 가운데 그 형제간 일을 판단할 만한 지혜있는 자가 이같이 하나도 없느냐	I speak to your shame. Is it so, that there is not a wise man among you? no, not one that shall be able to judge between his brethren?	I say this to your shame. Is there really no one among you wise enough to arbitrate between his brothers?
1CO	6	6	형제가 형제로 더불어 송사할 뿐더러 믿지 아니하는 자들 앞에서 하느냐	But brother goeth to law with brother, and that before the unbelievers.	Instead, one brother goes to law against another, and this in front of unbelievers!
1CO	6	7	너희가 피차 송사함으로 너희 가운데 이미 완연한 허물이 있나니 차라리 불의를 당하는 것이 낫지 아니하며 차라리 속는 것이 낫지 아니하냐	Now therefore there is utterly a fault among you, because ye go to law one with another. Why do ye not rather take wrong? why do ye not rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded?	The very fact that you have lawsuits among you means that you are thoroughly defeated already. Why not rather be wronged? Why not rather be cheated?
1CO	6	8	너희는 불의를 행하고 속이는구나 저는 너희 형제로다	Nay, ye do wrong, and defraud, and that your brethren.	Instead, you yourselves cheat and do wrong, even against your own brothers!
1CO	6	9	불의한 자가 하나님의 나라를 유업으로 받지 못할 줄을 알지 못하느냐 미혹을 받지 말라 음란하는 자나 우상 숭배하는 자나 간음하는 자나 탐색하는 자나 남색하는 자나	Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind,	Do you not know that the wicked will not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived: Neither the sexually immoral, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor men who submit to or perform homosexual acts,
1CO	6	10	도적이나 탐람하는 자나 술취하는 자나 후욕하는 자나 토색하는 자들은 하나님의 나라를 유업으로 받지 못하리라	Nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God.	nor thieves, nor the greedy, nor drunkards, nor verbal abusers, nor swindlers, will inherit the kingdom of God.
1CO	6	11	너희 중에 이와 같은 자들이 있더니 주 예수 그리스도의 이름과 우리 하나님의 성령 안에서 씻음과 거룩함과 의롭다 하심을 얻었느니라	And such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.	And that is what some of you were. But you were washed, you were sanctified, you were justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and by the Spirit of our God.
1CO	6	12	모든 것이 내게 가하나 다 유익한 것이 아니요 모든 것이 내게 가하나 내가 아무에게든지 제재를 받지 아니하리라	All things are lawful unto me, but all things are not expedient: all things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the power of any.	“Everything is permissible for me,” but not everything is beneficial. “Everything is permissible for me,” but I will not be mastered by anything.
1CO	6	13	식물은 배를 위하고 배는 식물을 위하나 하나님이 이것 저것 다 폐하시리라 몸은 음란을 위하지 않고 오직 주를 위하며 주는 몸을 위하시느니라	Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats: but God shall destroy both it and them. Now the body is not for fornication, but for the Lord; and the Lord for the body.	“Food for the stomach and the stomach for food,” but God will destroy them both. The body is not intended for sexual immorality, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body.
1CO	6	14	하나님이 주를 다시 살리셨고 또한 그의 권능으로 우리를 다시 살리시리라	And God hath both raised up the Lord, and will also raise up us by his own power.	By His power God raised the Lord from the dead, and He will raise us also.
1CO	6	15	너희 몸이 그리스도의 지체인 줄을 알지 못하느냐 내가 그리스도의 지체를 가지고 창기의 지체를 만들겠느냐 결코 그럴 수 없느니라	Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ? shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid.	Do you not know that your bodies are members of Christ? Shall I then take the members of Christ and unite them with a prostitute? Never!
1CO	6	16	창기와 합하는 자는 저와 한 몸인 줄을 알지 못하느냐 일렀으되 둘이 한 육체가 된다 하셨나니	What? know ye not that he which is joined to an harlot is one body? for two, saith he, shall be one flesh.	Or don’t you know that he who unites himself with a prostitute is one with her in body? For it is said, “The two will become one flesh.”
1CO	6	17	주와 합하는 자는 한 영이니라	But he that is joined unto the Lord is one spirit.	But he who unites himself with the Lord is one with Him in spirit.
1CO	6	18	음행을 피하라 사람이 범하는 죄마다 몸 밖에 있거니와 음행하는 자는 자기 몸에게 죄를 범하느니라	Flee fornication. Every sin that a man doeth is without the body; but he that committeth fornication sinneth against his own body.	Flee from sexual immorality. Every other sin a man can commit is outside his body, but he who sins sexually sins against his own body.
1CO	6	19	너희 몸은 너희가 하나님께로부터 받은 바 너희 가운데 계신 성령의 전인 줄을 알지 못하느냐 너희는 너희의 것이 아니라	What? know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own?	Do you not know that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit who is in you, whom you have received from God? You are not your own;
1CO	6	20	값으로 산 것이 되었으니 그런즉 너희 몸으로 하나님께 영광을 돌리라	For ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are God’s.	you were bought at a price. Therefore glorify God with your body.
1CO	7	1	너희의 쓴 말에 대하여는 남자가 여자를 가까이 아니함이 좋으나	Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me: It is good for a man not to touch a woman.	Now for the matters you wrote about: It is good to abstain from sexual relations.
1CO	7	2	음행의 연고로 남자마다 자기 아내를 두고 여자마다 자기 남편을 두라	Nevertheless, to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife, and let every woman have her own husband.	But because there is so much sexual immorality, each man should have his own wife, and each woman her own husband.
1CO	7	3	남편은 그 아내에게 대한 의무를 다하고 아내도 그 남편에게 그렇게 할지라	Let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence: and likewise also the wife unto the husband.	The husband should fulfill his marital duty to his wife, and likewise the wife to her husband.
1CO	7	4	아내가 자기 몸을 주장하지 못하고 오직 그 남편이 하며 남편도 이와 같이 자기 몸을 주장하지 못하고 오직 그 아내가 하나니	The wife hath not power of her own body, but the husband: and likewise also the husband hath not power of his own body, but the wife.	The wife does not have authority over her own body, but the husband. Likewise the husband does not have authority over his own body, but the wife.
1CO	7	5	서로 분방하지 말라 다만 기도할 틈을 얻기 위하여 합의상 얼마 동안은 하되 다시 합하라 이는 너희의 절제 못함을 인하여 사단으로 너희를 시험하지 못하게 하려 함이라	Defraud ye not one the other, except it be with consent for a time, that ye may give yourselves to fasting and prayer; and come together again, that Satan tempt you not for your incontinency.	Do not deprive each other, except by mutual consent and for a time, so you may devote yourselves to prayer. Then come together again, so that Satan will not tempt you through your lack of self-control.
1CO	7	6	그러나 내가 이 말을 함은 권도요 명령은 아니라	But I speak this by permission, and not of commandment.	I say this as a concession, not as a command.
1CO	7	7	나는 모든 사람이 나와 같기를 원하노라 그러나 각각 하나님께 받은 자기의 은사가 있으니 하나는 이러하고 하나는 저러하니라	For I would that all men were even as I myself. But every man hath his proper gift of God, one after this manner, and another after that.	I wish that all men were as I am. But each man has his own gift from God; one has this gift, another has that.
1CO	7	8	내가 혼인하지 아니한 자들과 및 과부들에게 이르노니 나와 같이 그냥 지내는 것이 좋으니라	I say therefore to the unmarried and widows, It is good for them if they abide even as I.	Now to the unmarried and widows I say this: It is good for them to remain unmarried, as I am.
1CO	7	9	만일 절제할 수 없거든 혼인하라 정욕이 불 같이 타는 것보다 혼인하는 것이 나으니라	But if they cannot contain, let them marry: for it is better to marry than to burn.	But if they cannot control themselves, let them marry. For it is better to marry than to burn with passion.
1CO	7	10	혼인한 자들에게 내가 명하노니 (명하는 자는 내가 아니요 주시라) 여자는 남편에게서 갈리지 말고	And unto the married I command, yet not I, but the Lord, Let not the wife depart from her husband:	To the married I give this command (not I, but the Lord): A wife must not separate from her husband.
1CO	7	11	(만일 갈릴지라도 그냥 지내든지 다시 그 남편과 화합하든지 하라) 남편도 아내를 버리지 말라	But and if she depart, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband: and let not the husband put away his wife.	But if she does, she must remain unmarried or else be reconciled to her husband. And a husband must not divorce his wife.
1CO	7	12	그 남은 사람들에게 내가 말하노니 (이는 주의 명령이 아니라) 만일 어떤 형제에게 믿지 아니하는 아내가 있어 남편과 함께 살기를 좋아하거든 저를 버리지 말며	But to the rest speak I, not the Lord: If any brother hath a wife that believeth not, and she be pleased to dwell with him, let him not put her away.	To the rest I say this (I, not the Lord): If a brother has an unbelieving wife and she is willing to live with him, he must not divorce her.
1CO	7	13	어떤 여자에게 믿지 아니하는 남편이 있어 아내와 함께 살기를 좋아하거든 그 남편을 버리지 말라	And the woman which hath an husband that believeth not, and if he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave him.	And if a woman has an unbelieving husband and he is willing to live with her, she must not divorce him.
1CO	7	14	믿지 아니하는 남편이 아내로 인하여 거룩하게 되고 믿지 아니하는 아내가 남편으로 인하여 거룩하게 되나니 그렇지 아니하면 너희 자녀도 깨끗지 못하니라 그러나 이제 거룩하니라	For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband: else were your children unclean; but now are they holy.	For the unbelieving husband is sanctified through his believing wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified through her believing husband. Otherwise your children would be unclean, but now they are holy.
1CO	7	15	혹 믿지 아니하는 자가 갈리거든 갈리게 하라 형제나 자매나 이런 일에 구속 받을 것이 없느니라 그러나 하나님은 화평 중에서 너희를 부르셨느니라	But if the unbelieving depart, let him depart. A brother or a sister is not under bondage in such cases: but God hath called us to peace.	But if the unbeliever leaves, let him go. The believing brother or sister is not bound in such cases. God has called you to live in peace.
1CO	7	16	아내 된 자여 네가 남편을 구원할는지 어찌 알 수 있으며 남편된 자여 네가 네 아내를 구원할는지 어찌 알 수 있으리요	For what knowest thou, O wife, whether thou shalt save thy husband? or how knowest thou, O man, whether thou shalt save thy wife?	How do you know, wife, whether you will save your husband? Or how do you know, husband, whether you will save your wife?
1CO	7	17	오직 주께서 각 사람에게 나눠주신 대로 하나님이 각 사람을 부르신 그대로 행하라 내가 모든 교회에서 이와 같이 명하노라	But as God hath distributed to every man, as the Lord hath called every one, so let him walk. And so ordain I in all churches.	Regardless, each one should lead the life that the Lord has assigned to him and to which God has called him. This is what I prescribe in all the churches.
1CO	7	18	할례자로 부르심을 받은 자가 있느냐 무할례자가 되지 말며 무할례자로 부르심을 받은 자가 있느냐 할례를 받지 말라	Is any man called being circumcised? let him not become uncircumcised. Is any called in uncircumcision? let him not be circumcised.	Was a man already circumcised when he was called? He should not become uncircumcised. Was a man still uncircumcised when called? He should not be circumcised.
1CO	7	19	할례 받는 것도 아무 것도 아니요 할례 받지 아니하는 것도 아무 것도 아니로되 오직 하나님의 계명을 지킬 따름이니라	Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the commandments of God.	Circumcision is nothing and uncircumcision is nothing. Keeping God’s commandments is what counts.
1CO	7	20	각 사람이 부르심을 받은 그 부르심 그대로 지내라	Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called.	Each one should remain in the situation he was in when he was called.
1CO	7	21	네가 종으로 있을 때에 부르심을 받았느냐 염려하지 말라 그러나 자유할 수 있거든 차라리 사용하라	Art thou called being a servant? care not for it: but if thou mayest be made free, use it rather.	Were you a slave when you were called? Do not let it concern you—but if you can gain your freedom, take the opportunity.
1CO	7	22	주 안에서 부르심을 받은 자는 종이라도 주께 속한 자유자요 또 이와 같이 자유자로 있을 때에 부르심을 받은 자는 그리스도의 종이니라	For he that is called in the Lord, being a servant, is the Lord’s freeman: likewise also he that is called, being free, is Christ’s servant.	For he who was a slave when he was called by the Lord is the Lord’s freedman. Conversely, he who was a free man when he was called is Christ’s slave.
1CO	7	23	너희는 값으로 사신 것이니 사람들의 종이 되지 말라	Ye are bought with a price; be not ye the servants of men.	You were bought at a price; do not become slaves of men.
1CO	7	24	형제들아 각각 부르심을 받은 그대로 하나님과 함께 거하라	Brethren, let every man, wherein he is called, therein abide with God.	Brothers, each one should remain in the situation he was in when God called him.
1CO	7	25	처녀에 대하여는 내가 주께 받은 계명이 없으되 주의 자비하심을 받아서 충성된 자가 되어 의견을 고하노니	Now concerning virgins I have no commandment of the Lord: yet I give my judgment, as one that hath obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful.	Now about virgins, I have no command from the Lord, but I give a judgment as one who by the Lord’s mercy is trustworthy.
1CO	7	26	내 생각에는 이것이 좋으니 곧 임박한 환난을 인하여 사람이 그냥 지내는 것이 좋으니라	I suppose therefore that this is good for the present distress, I say, that it is good for a man so to be.	Because of the present crisis, I think it is good for a man to remain as he is.
1CO	7	27	네가 아내에게 매였느냐 놓이기를 구하지 말며 아내에게서 놓였느냐 아내를 구하지 말라	Art thou bound unto a wife? seek not to be loosed. Art thou loosed from a wife? seek not a wife.	Are you committed to a wife? Do not seek to be released. Are you free of commitment? Do not look for a wife.
1CO	7	28	그러나 장가 가도 죄 짓는 것이 아니요 처녀가 시집 가도 죄 짓는 것이 아니로되 이런 이들은 육신에 고난이 있으리니 나는 너희를 아끼노라	But and if thou marry, thou hast not sinned; and if a virgin marry, she hath not sinned. Nevertheless such shall have trouble in the flesh: but I spare you.	But if you do marry, you have not sinned. And if a virgin marries, she has not sinned. But those who marry will face troubles in this life, and I want to spare you this.
1CO	7	29	형제들아 내가 이 말을 하노니 때가 단축하여진 고로 이후부터 아내 있는 자들은 없는 자 같이 하며	But this I say, brethren, the time is short: it remaineth, that both they that have wives be as though they had none;	What I am saying, brothers, is that the time is short. From now on those who have wives should live as if they had none;
1CO	7	30	우는 자들은 울지 않는 자 같이 하며 기쁜 자들은 기쁘지 않은 자 같이 하며 매매하는 자들은 없는 자 같이 하며	And they that weep, as though they wept not; and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though they possessed not;	those who weep, as if they did not; those who are joyful, as if they were not; those who make a purchase, as if they had nothing;
1CO	7	31	세상 물건을 쓰는 자들은 다 쓰지 못하는 자 같이 하라 이 세상의 형적은 지나감이니라	And they that use this world, as not abusing it: for the fashion of this world passeth away.	and those who use the things of this world, as if not dependent on them. For this world in its present form is passing away.
1CO	7	32	너희가 염려 없기를 원하노라 장가 가지 않은 자는 주의 일을 염려하여 어찌하여야 주를 기쁘시게 할꼬 하되	But I would have you without carefulness. He that is unmarried careth for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord:	I want you to be free from concern. The unmarried man is concerned about the work of the Lord, how he can please the Lord.
1CO	7	33	장가 간 자는 세상 일을 염려하여 어찌하여야 아내를 기쁘게 할꼬 하여 마음이 나누이며	But he that is married careth for the things that are of the world, how he may please his wife.	But the married man is concerned about the affairs of this world, how he can please his wife,
1CO	7	34	시집 가지 않은 자와 처녀는 주의 일을 염려하여 몸과 영을 다 거룩하게 하려 하되 시집 간 자는 세상 일을 염려하여 어찌하여야 남편을 기쁘게 할꼬 하느니라	There is difference also between a wife and a virgin. The unmarried woman careth for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and in spirit: but she that is married careth for the things of the world, how she may please her husband.	and his interests are divided. The unmarried woman or virgin is concerned about the work of the Lord, how she can be holy in both body and spirit. But the married woman is concerned about the affairs of this world, how she can please her husband.
1CO	7	35	내가 이것을 말함은 너희의 유익을 위함이요 너희에게 올무를 놓으려 함이 아니니 오직 너희로 하여금 이치에 합하게 하여 분요함이 없이 주를 섬기게 하려 함이라	And this I speak for your own profit; not that I may cast a snare upon you, but for that which is comely, and that ye may attend upon the Lord without distraction.	I am saying this for your own good, not to restrict you, but in order to promote proper decorum and undivided devotion to the Lord.
1CO	7	36	누가 자기의 처녀 딸에 대한 일이 이치에 합당치 못한 줄로 생각할 때에 혼기도 지나고 그같이 할 필요가 있거든 마음대로 하라 이것은 죄 짓는 것이 아니니 혼인하게 하라	But if any man think that he behaveth himself uncomely toward his virgin, if she pass the flower of her age, and need so require, let him do what he will, he sinneth not: let them marry.	However, if someone thinks he is acting inappropriately toward his betrothed, and if she is beyond her youth and they ought to marry, let him do as he wishes; he is not sinning; they should get married.
1CO	7	37	그러나 그 마음을 굳게 하고 또 부득이한 일도 없고 자기 뜻대로 할 권리가 있어서 그 처녀 딸을 머물러 두기로 마음에 작정하여도 잘 하는 것이니라	Nevertheless he that standeth stedfast in his heart, having no necessity, but hath power over his own will, and hath so decreed in his heart that he will keep his virgin, doeth well.	But the man who is firmly established in his heart and under no constraint, with control over his will and resolve in his heart not to marry the virgin, he will do well.
1CO	7	38	그러므로 처녀 딸을 시집 보내는 자도 잘 하거니와 시집 보내지 아니하는 자가 더 잘 하는 것이니라	So then he that giveth her in marriage doeth well; but he that giveth her not in marriage doeth better.	So then, he who marries the virgin does well, but he who does not marry her does even better.
1CO	7	39	아내가 그 남편이 살 동안에 매여 있다가 남편이 죽으면 자유하여 자기 뜻대로 시집 갈 것이나 주 안에서만 할 것이니라	The wife is bound by the law as long as her husband liveth; but if her husband be dead, she is at liberty to be married to whom she will; only in the Lord.	A wife is bound to her husband as long as he lives. But if her husband dies, she is free to marry anyone she wishes, as long as he belongs to the Lord.
1CO	7	40	그러나 내 뜻에는 그냥 지내는 것이 더욱 복이 있으리로다 나도 또한 하나님의 영을 받은 줄로 생각하노라	But she is happier if she so abide, after my judgment: and I think also that I have the Spirit of God.	In my judgment, however, she is happier if she remains as she is. And I think that I too have the Spirit of God.
1CO	8	1	우상의 제물에 대하여는 우리가 다 지식이 있는 줄을 아나 지식은 교만하게 하며 사랑은 덕을 세우나니	Now as touching things offered unto idols, we know that we all have knowledge. Knowledge puffeth up, but charity edifieth.	Now about food sacrificed to idols: We know that we all have knowledge. Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up.
1CO	8	2	만일 누구든지 무엇을 아는 줄로 생각하면 아직도 마땅히 알 것을 알지 못하는 것이요	And if any man think that he knoweth any thing, he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know.	The one who thinks he knows something does not yet know as he ought to know.
1CO	8	3	또 누구든지 하나님을 사랑하면 이 사람은 하나님의 아시는 바 되었느니라	But if any man love God, the same is known of him.	But the one who loves God is known by God.
1CO	8	4	그러므로 우상의 제물 먹는 일에 대하여는 우리가 우상은 세상에 아무 것도 아니며 또한 하나님은 한 분밖에 없는 줄 아노라	As concerning therefore the eating of those things that are offered in sacrifice unto idols, we know that an idol is nothing in the world, and that there is none other God but one.	So about eating food sacrificed to idols: We know that an idol is nothing at all in the world, and that there is no God but one.
1CO	8	5	비록 하늘에나 땅에나 신이라 칭하는 자가 있어 많은 신과 많은 주가 있으나	For though there be that are called gods, whether in heaven or in earth, (as there be gods many, and lords many,)	For even if there are so-called gods, whether in heaven or on earth (as there are many so-called gods and lords),
1CO	8	6	그러나 우리에게는 한 하나님 곧 아버지가 계시니 만물이 그에게서 났고 우리도 그를 위하여 또한 한 주 예수 그리스도께서 계시니 만물이 그로 말미암고 우리도 그로 말미암았느니라	But to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.	yet for us there is but one God, the Father, from whom all things came and for whom we exist. And there is but one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom all things came and through whom we exist.
1CO	8	7	그러나 이 지식은 사람마다 가지지 못하여 어떤 이들은 지금까지 우상에 대한 습관이 있어 우상의 제물로 알고 먹는 고로 그들의 양심이 악하여지고 더러워지느니라	Howbeit there is not in every man that knowledge: for some with conscience of the idol unto this hour eat it as a thing offered unto an idol; and their conscience being weak is defiled.	But not everyone has this knowledge. Some people are still so accustomed to idols that they eat such food as if it were sacrificed to an idol. And since their conscience is weak, it is defiled.
1CO	8	8	식물은 우리를 하나님 앞에 세우지 못하나니 우리가 먹지 아니하여도 부족함이 없고 먹어도 풍족함이 없으리라	But meat commendeth us not to God: for neither, if we eat, are we the better; neither, if we eat not, are we the worse.	But food does not bring us closer to God: We are no worse if we do not eat, and no better if we do.
1CO	8	9	그런즉 너희 자유함이 약한 자들에게 거치는 것이 되지 않도록 조심하라	But take heed lest by any means this liberty of yours become a stumblingblock to them that are weak.	Be careful, however, that your freedom does not become a stumbling block to the weak.
1CO	8	10	지식 있는 네가 우상의 집에 앉아 먹는 것을 누구든지 보면 그 약한 자들의 양심이 담력을 얻어 어찌 우상의 제물을 먹게 되지 않겠느냐	For if any man see thee which hast knowledge sit at meat in the idol’s temple, shall not the conscience of him which is weak be emboldened to eat those things which are offered to idols;	For if someone with a weak conscience sees you who are well informed eating in an idol’s temple, will he not be encouraged to eat food sacrificed to idols?
1CO	8	11	그러면 네 지식으로 그 약한 자가 멸망하나니 그는 그리스도께서 위하여 죽으신 형제라	And through thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish, for whom Christ died?	So this weak brother, for whom Christ died, is destroyed by your knowledge.
1CO	8	12	이같이 너희가 형제에게 죄를 지어 그 약한 양심을 상하게 하는 것이 곧 그리스도에게 지를 짓는 것이니라	But when ye sin so against the brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ.	By sinning against your brothers in this way and wounding their weak conscience, you sin against Christ.
1CO	8	13	그러므로 만일 식물이 내 형제로 실족케 하면 나는 영원히 고기를 먹지 아니하여 내 형제를 실족치 않게 하리라	Wherefore, if meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world standeth, lest I make my brother to offend.	Therefore, if what I eat causes my brother to stumble, I will never eat meat again, so that I will not cause him to stumble.
1CO	9	1	내가 자유자가 아니냐 사도가 아니냐 예수 우리 주를 보지 못하였느냐 주 안에서 행한 나의 일이 너희가 아니냐	Am I not an apostle? am I not free? have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? are not ye my work in the Lord?	Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Have I not seen Jesus our Lord? Are you yourselves not my workmanship in the Lord?
1CO	9	2	다른 사람들에게는 내가 사도가 아닐지라도 너희에게는 사도니 나의 사도 됨을 주 안에서 인친 것이 너희라	If I be not an apostle unto others, yet doubtless I am to you: for the seal of mine apostleship are ye in the Lord.	Even if I am not an apostle to others, surely I am to you. For you are the seal of my apostleship in the Lord.
1CO	9	3	나를 힐문하는 자들에게 발명할 것이 이것이니	Mine answer to them that do examine me is this,	This is my defense to those who scrutinize me:
1CO	9	4	우리가 먹고 마시는 권이 없겠느냐	Have we not power to eat and to drink?	Have we no right to food and to drink?
1CO	9	5	우리가 다른 사도들과 주의 형제들과 게바와 같이 자매 된 아내를 데리고 다닐 권이 없겠느냐	Have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife, as well as other apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas?	Have we no right to take along a believing wife, as do the other apostles and the Lord’s brothers and Cephas?
1CO	9	6	어찌 나와 바나바만 일하지 아니할 권이 없겠느냐	Or I only and Barnabas, have not we power to forbear working?	Or are Barnabas and I the only apostles who must work for a living?
1CO	9	7	누가 자비량하고 병정을 다니겠느냐 누가 포도를 심고 그 실과를 먹지 않겠느냐 누가 양떼를 기르고 그 양떼의 젖을 먹지 않겠느냐	Who goeth a warfare any time at his own charges? who planteth a vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit thereof? or who feedeth a flock, and eateth not of the milk of the flock?	Who serves as a soldier at his own expense? Who plants a vineyard and does not eat of its fruit? Who tends a flock and does not drink of its milk?
1CO	9	8	내가 사람의 예대로 이것을 말하느냐 율법도 이것을 말하지 아니하느냐	Say I these things as a man? or saith not the law the same also?	Do I say this from a human perspective? Doesn’t the Law say the same thing?
1CO	9	9	모세 율법에 곡식을 밟아 떠는 소에게 망을 씌우지 말라 기록하였으니 하나님께서 어찌 소들을 위하여 염려하심이냐	For it is written in the law of Moses, Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn. Doth God take care for oxen?	For it is written in the Law of Moses: “Do not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain.” Is it about oxen that God is concerned?
1CO	9	10	전혀 우리를 위하여 말씀하심이 아니냐 과연 우리를 위하여 기록된 것이니 밭 가는 자는 소망을 가지고 갈며 곡식 떠는 자는 함께 얻을 소망을 가지고 떠는 것이라	Or saith he it altogether for our sakes? For our sakes, no doubt, this is written: that he that ploweth should plow in hope; and that he that thresheth in hope should be partaker of his hope.	Isn’t He actually speaking on our behalf? Indeed, this was written for us, because when the plowman plows and the thresher threshes, they should also expect to share in the harvest.
1CO	9	11	우리가 너희에게 신령한 것을 뿌렸은즉 너희 육신의 것을 거두기로 과하다 하겠느냐	If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things?	If we have sown spiritual seed among you, is it too much for us to reap a material harvest from you?
1CO	9	12	다른 이들도 너희에게 이런 권을 가졌거든 하물며 우리일까보냐 그러나 우리가 이 권을 쓰지 아니하고 범사에 참는 것은 그리스도의 복음에 아무 장애가 없게 하려 함이로다	If others be partakers of this power over you, are not we rather? Nevertheless we have not used this power; but suffer all things, lest we should hinder the gospel of Christ.	If others have this right to your support, shouldn’t we have it all the more? But we did not exercise this right. Instead, we put up with anything rather than hinder the gospel of Christ.
1CO	9	13	성전의 일을 하는 이들은 성전에서 나는 것을 먹으며 제단을 모시는 이들은 제단과 함께 나누는 것을 너희가 알지 못하느냐	Do ye not know that they which minister about holy things live of the things of the temple? and they which wait at the altar are partakers with the altar?	Do you not know that those who work in the temple eat of its food, and those who serve at the altar partake of its offerings?
1CO	9	14	이와 같이 주께서도 복음 전하는 자들이 복음으로 말미암아 살리라 명하셨느니라	Even so hath the Lord ordained that they which preach the gospel should live of the gospel.	In the same way, the Lord has prescribed that those who preach the gospel should receive their living from the gospel.
1CO	9	15	그러나 내가 이것을 하나도 쓰지 아니하였고 또 이 말을 쓰는 것은 내게 이같이 하여 달라는 것이 아니라 내가 차라리 죽을지언정 누구든지 내 자랑하는 것을 헛된 데로 돌리지 못하게 하리라	But I have used none of these things: neither have I written these things, that it should be so done unto me: for it were better for me to die, than that any man should make my glorying void.	But I have not used any of these rights. And I am not writing this to suggest that something be done for me. Indeed, I would rather die than let anyone nullify my boast.
1CO	9	16	내가 복음을 전할지라도 자랑할 것이 없음은 내가 부득불 할 일임이라 만일 복음을 전하지 아니하면 내게 화가 있을 것임이로라	For though I preach the gospel, I have nothing to glory of: for necessity is laid upon me; yea, woe is unto me, if I preach not the gospel!	Yet when I preach the gospel, I have no reason to boast, because I am obligated to preach. Woe to me if I do not preach the gospel!
1CO	9	17	내가 내 임의로 이것을 행하면 상을 얻으려니와 임의로 아니한다 할지라도 나는 직분을 맡았노라	For if I do this thing willingly, I have a reward: but if against my will, a dispensation of the gospel is committed unto me.	If my preaching is voluntary, I have a reward. But if it is not voluntary, I am still entrusted with a responsibility.
1CO	9	18	그런즉 내 상이 무엇이냐 내가 복음을 전할 때에 값없이 전하고 복음으로 인하여 내게 있는 권을 다 쓰지 아니하는 이것이로라	What is my reward then? Verily that, when I preach the gospel, I may make the gospel of Christ without charge, that I abuse not my power in the gospel.	What then is my reward? That in preaching the gospel I may offer it free of charge, and so not use up my rights in preaching it.
1CO	9	19	내가 모든 사람에게 자유하였으나 스스로 모든 사람에게 종이 된 것은 더 많은 사람을 얻고자 함이라	For though I be free from all men, yet have I made myself servant unto all, that I might gain the more.	Though I am free of obligation to anyone, I make myself a slave to everyone, to win as many as possible.
1CO	9	20	유대인들에게는 내가 유대인과 같이 된 것은 유대인들을 얻고자 함이요 율법 아래 있는 자들에게는 내가 율법 아래 있지 아니하나 율법 아래 있는 자 같이 된 것은 율법 아래 있는 자들을 얻고자 함이요	And unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to them that are under the law, as under the law, that I might gain them that are under the law;	To the Jews I became like a Jew, to win the Jews. To those under the law I became like one under the law (though I myself am not under the law), to win those under the law.
1CO	9	21	율법 없는 자에게는 내가 하나님께는 율법 없는 자가 아니요 도리어 그리스도의 율법 아래 있는 자나 율법 없는 자와 같이 된 것은 율법 없는 자들을 얻고자 함이라	To them that are without law, as without law, (being not without law to God, but under the law to Christ,) that I might gain them that are without law.	To those without the law I became like one without the law (though I am not outside the law of God but am under the law of Christ), to win those without the law.
1CO	9	22	약한 자들에게는 내가 약한 자와 같이 된 것은 약한 자들을 얻고자 함이요 여러 사람에게 내가 여러 모양이 된 것은 아무쪼록 몇몇 사람들을 구원코자 함이니	To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save some.	To the weak I became weak, to win the weak. I have become all things to all people so that by all possible means I might save some.
1CO	9	23	내가 복음을 위하여 모든 것을 행함은 복음에 참예하고자 함이라	And this I do for the gospel’s sake, that I might be partaker thereof with you.	I do all this for the sake of the gospel, so that I may share in its blessings.
1CO	9	24	운동장에서 달음질하는 자들이 다 달아날지라도 오직 상 얻는 자는 하나인 줄을 너희가 알지 못하느냐 너희도 얻도록 이와 같이 달음질하라	Know ye not that they which run in a race run all, but one receiveth the prize? So run, that ye may obtain.	Do you not know that in a race all the runners run, but only one receives the prize? Run in such a way as to take the prize.
1CO	9	25	이기기를 다투는 자마다 모든 일에 절제하나니 저희는 썩을 면류관을 얻고자 하되 우리는 썩지 아니할 것을 얻고자 하노라	And every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things. Now they do it to obtain a corruptible crown; but we an incorruptible.	Everyone who competes in the games trains with strict discipline. They do it for a crown that is perishable, but we do it for a crown that is imperishable.
1CO	9	26	그러므로 내가 달음질하기를 향방 없는 것 같이 아니하고 싸우기를 허공을 치는 것 같이 아니하여	I therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so fight I, not as one that beateth the air:	Therefore I do not run aimlessly; I do not fight like I am beating the air.
1CO	9	27	내가 내 몸을 쳐 복종하게 함은 내가 남에게 전파한 후에 자기가 도리어 버림이 될까 두려워함이로라	But I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection: lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I myself should be a castaway.	No, I discipline my body and make it my slave, so that after I have preached to others, I myself will not be disqualified.
1CO	10	1	형제들아 너희가 알지 못하기를 내가 원치 아니하노니 우리 조상들이 다 구름 아래 있고 바다 가운데로 지나며	Moreover, brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea;	I do not want you to be unaware, brothers, that our forefathers were all under the cloud, and that they all passed through the sea.
1CO	10	2	모세에게 속하여 다 구름과 바다에서 침례를 받고	And were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea;	They were all baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea.
1CO	10	3	다 같은 신령한 식물을 먹으며	And did all eat the same spiritual meat;	They all ate the same spiritual food
1CO	10	4	다 같은 신령한 음료를 마셨으니 이는 저희를 따르는 신령한 반석으로부터 마셨으매 그 반석은 곧 그리스도시라	And did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ.	and drank the same spiritual drink; for they drank from the spiritual rock that accompanied them, and that rock was Christ.
1CO	10	5	그러나 저희의 다수를 하나님이 기뻐하지 아니하신 고로 저희가 광야에서 멸망을 받았느니라	But with many of them God was not well pleased: for they were overthrown in the wilderness.	Nevertheless, God was not pleased with most of them, for they were struck down in the wilderness.
1CO	10	6	그런 일은 우리의 거울이 되어 우리로 하여금 저희가 악을 즐겨한 것 같이 즐겨하는 자가 되지 않게 하려 함이니	Now these things were our examples, to the intent we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted.	These things took place as examples to keep us from craving evil things as they did.
1CO	10	7	저희 중에 어떤 이들과 같이 너희는 우상 숭배하는 자가 되지 말라 기록된 바 백성이 앉아서 먹고 마시며 일어나서 뛰논다 함과 같으니라	Neither be ye idolaters, as were some of them; as it is written, The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.	Do not be idolaters, as some of them were. As it is written: “The people sat down to eat and to drink, and got up to indulge in revelry.”
1CO	10	8	저희 중에 어떤 이들이 간음하다가 하루에 이만 삼천 명이 죽었나니 우리는 저희와 같이 간음하지 말자	Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them committed, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand.	We should not commit sexual immorality, as some of them did, and in one day twenty-three thousand of them died.
1CO	10	9	저희 중에 어떤 이들이 주를 시험하다가 뱀에게 멸망하였나니 우리는 저희와 같이 시험하지 말자	Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed of serpents.	We should not test Christ, as some of them did, and were killed by snakes.
1CO	10	10	저희 중에 어떤 이들이 원망하다가 멸망시키는 자에게 멸망하였나니 너희는 저희와 같이 원망하지 말라	Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer.	And do not complain, as some of them did, and were killed by the destroying angel.
1CO	10	11	저희에게 당한 이런 일이 거울이 되고 또한 말세를 만난 우리의 경계로 기록하였느니라	Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples: and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.	Now these things happened to them as examples and were written down as warnings for us, on whom the fulfillment of the ages has come.
1CO	10	12	그런즉 선 줄로 생각하는 자는 넘어질까 조심하라	Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall.	So the one who thinks he is standing firm should be careful not to fall.
1CO	10	13	사람이 감당할 시험 밖에는 너희에게 당한 것이 없나니 오직 하나님은 미쁘사 너희가 감당치 못할 시험 당함을 허락지 아니하시고 시험 당할 즈음에 또한 피할 길을 내사 너희로 능히 감당하게 하시느니라	There hath no temptation taken you but such as is common to man: but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it.	No temptation has seized you except what is common to man. And God is faithful; He will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear. But when you are tempted, He will also provide an escape, so that you can stand up under it.
1CO	10	14	그런즉 내 사랑하는 자들아 우상 숭배하는 일을 피하라	Wherefore, my dearly beloved, flee from idolatry.	Therefore, my beloved, flee from idolatry.
1CO	10	15	나는 지혜있는 자들에게 말함과 같이 하노니 너희는 내 이르는 말을 스스로 판단하라	I speak as to wise men; judge ye what I say.	I speak to reasonable people; judge for yourselves what I say.
1CO	10	16	우리가 축복하는 바 축복의 잔은 그리스도의 피에 참예함이 아니며 우리가 떼는 떡은 그리스도의 몸에 참예함이 아니냐	The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?	Is not the cup of blessing that we bless a participation in the blood of Christ? And is not the bread that we break a participation in the body of Christ?
1CO	10	17	떡이 하나요 많은 우리가 한 몸이니 이는 우리가 다 한 떡에 참예함이라	For we being many are one bread, and one body: for we are all partakers of that one bread.	Because there is one loaf, we who are many are one body; for we all partake of the one loaf.
1CO	10	18	육신을 따라 난 이스라엘을 보라 제물을 먹는 자들이 제단에 참예하는 자들이 아니냐	Behold Israel after the flesh: are not they which eat of the sacrifices partakers of the altar?	Consider the people of Israel: Are not those who eat the sacrifices fellow partakers in the altar?
1CO	10	19	그런즉 내가 무엇을 말하느뇨 우상의 제물은 무엇이며 우상은 무엇이라 하느뇨	What say I then? that the idol is any thing, or that which is offered in sacrifice to idols is any thing?	Am I suggesting, then, that food sacrificed to an idol is anything, or that an idol is anything?
1CO	10	20	대저 이방인의 제사하는 것은 귀신에게 하는 것이요 하나님께 제사하는 것이 아니니 나는 너희가 귀신과 교제하는 자 되기를 원치 아니하노라	But I say, that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God: and I would not that ye should have fellowship with devils.	No, but the sacrifices of pagans are offered to demons, not to God. And I do not want you to be participants with demons.
1CO	10	21	너희가 주의 잔과 귀신의 잔을 겸하여 마시지 못하고 주의 상과 귀신의 상에 겸하여 참예치 못하리라	Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils: ye cannot be partakers of the Lord’s table, and of the table of devils.	You cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of demons too; you cannot partake in the table of the Lord and the table of demons too.
1CO	10	22	그러면 우리가 주를 노여워하시게 하겠느냐 우리가 주보다 강한 자냐	Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he?	Are we trying to provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger than He?
1CO	10	23	모든 것이 가하나 모든 것이 유익한 것이 아니요 모든 것이 가하나 모든 것이 덕을 세우는 것이 아니니	All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient: all things are lawful for me, but all things edify not.	“Everything is permissible,” but not everything is beneficial. “Everything is permissible,” but not everything is edifying.
1CO	10	24	누구든지 자기의 유익을 구치 말고 남의 유익을 구하라	Let no man seek his own, but every man another’s wealth.	No one should seek his own good, but the good of others.
1CO	10	25	무릇 시장에서 파는 것은 양심을 위하여 묻지 말고 먹으라	Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, that eat, asking no question for conscience sake:	Eat anything sold in the meat market without raising questions of conscience,
1CO	10	26	이는 땅과 거기 충만한 것이 주의 것임이니라	For the earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof.	for, “The earth is the Lord’s, and the fullness thereof.”
1CO	10	27	불신자 중 누가 너희를 청하매 너희가 가고자 하거든 너희 앞에 무엇이든지 차려 놓은 것은 양심을 위하여 묻지 말고 먹으라	If any of them that believe not bid you to a feast, and ye be disposed to go; whatsoever is set before you, eat, asking no question for conscience sake.	If an unbeliever invites you to a meal and you want to go, eat anything set before you without raising questions of conscience.
1CO	10	28	누가 너희에게 이것이 제물이라 말하거든 알게 한 자와 및 양심을 위하여 먹지 말라	But if any man say unto you, This is offered in sacrifice unto idols, eat not for his sake that shewed it, and for conscience sake: for the earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof:	But if someone tells you, “This food was offered to idols,” then do not eat it, for the sake of the one who told you and for the sake of conscience—
1CO	10	29	내가 말한 양심은 너희의 것이 아니요 남의 것이니 어찌하여 내 자유가 남의 양심으로 말미암아 판단을 받으리요	Conscience, I say, not thine own, but of the other: for why is my liberty judged of another man’s conscience?	the other one’s conscience, I mean, not your own. For why should my freedom be determined by someone else’s conscience?
1CO	10	30	만일 내가 감사함으로 참예하면 어찌하여 내가 감사하다 하는 것에 대하여 비방을 받으리요	For if I by grace be a partaker, why am I evil spoken of for that for which I give thanks?	If I partake in the meal with thankfulness, why am I denounced because of that for which I give thanks?
1CO	10	31	그런즉 너희가 먹든지 마시든지 무엇을 하든지 다 하나님의 영광을 위하여 하라	Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.	So whether you eat or drink or whatever you do, do it all to the glory of God.
1CO	10	32	유대인에게나 헬라인에게나 하나님의 교회에나 거치는 자가 되지 말고	Give none offence, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the church of God:	Do not become a stumbling block, whether to Jews or Greeks or the church of God—
1CO	10	33	나와 같이 모든 일에 모든 사람을 기쁘게 하여 나의 유익을 구치 아니하고 많은 사람의 유익을 구하여 저희로 구원을 얻게 하라	Even as I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved.	as I also try to please everyone in all I do. For I am not seeking my own good, but the good of many, that they may be saved.
1CO	11	1	내가 그리스도를 본받는 자 된 것 같이 너희는 나를 본받는 자 되라	Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ.	You are to imitate me, just as I imitate Christ.
1CO	11	2	너희가 모든 일에 나를 기억하고 또 내가 너희에게 전하여 준 대로 그 유전을 너희가 지키므로 너희를 칭찬하노라	Now I praise you, brethren, that ye remember me in all things, and keep the ordinances, as I delivered them to you.	Now I commend you for remembering me in everything and for maintaining the traditions, just as I passed them on to you.
1CO	11	3	그러나 나는 너희가 알기를 원하노니 각 남자의 머리는 그리스도요 여자의 머리는 남자요 그리스도의 머리는 하나님이시라	But I would have you know, that the head of every man is Christ; and the head of the woman is the man; and the head of Christ is God.	But I want you to understand that the head of every man is Christ, and the head of the woman is man, and the head of Christ is God.
1CO	11	4	무릇 남자로서 머리에 무엇을 쓰고 기도나 예언을 하는 자는 그 머리를 욕되게 하는 것이요	Every man praying or prophesying, having his head covered, dishonoureth his head.	Every man who prays or prophesies with his head covered dishonors his head.
1CO	11	5	무릇 여자로서 머리에 쓴 것을 벗고 기도나 예언을 하는 자는 그 머리를 욕되게 하는 것이니 이는 머리 민 것과 다름이 없음이니라	But every woman that prayeth or prophesieth with her head uncovered dishonoureth her head: for that is even all one as if she were shaven.	And every woman who prays or prophesies with her head uncovered dishonors her head, for it is just as if her head were shaved.
1CO	11	6	만일 여자가 머리에 쓰지 않거든 깎을 것이요 만일 깎거나 미는 것이 여자에게 부끄러움이 되거든 쓸지니라	For if the woman be not covered, let her also be shorn: but if it be a shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven, let her be covered.	If a woman does not cover her head, she should have her hair cut off. And if it is shameful for a woman to have her hair cut or shaved off, she should cover her head.
1CO	11	7	남자는 하나님의 형상과 영광이니 그 머리에 마땅히 쓰지 않거니와 여자는 남자의 영광이니라	For a man indeed ought not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the image and glory of God: but the woman is the glory of the man.	A man ought not to cover his head, since he is the image and glory of God; but the woman is the glory of man.
1CO	11	8	남자가 여자에게서 난 것이 아니요 여자가 남자에게서 났으며	For the man is not of the woman; but the woman of the man.	For man did not come from woman, but woman from man.
1CO	11	9	또 남자가 여자를 위하여 지음을 받지 아니하고 여자가 남자를 위하여 지음을 받은 것이니	Neither was the man created for the woman; but the woman for the man.	Neither was man created for woman, but woman for man.
1CO	11	10	이러므로 여자는 천사들을 인하여 권세 아래 있는 표를 그 머리 위에 둘지니라	For this cause ought the woman to have power on her head because of the angels.	For this reason a woman ought to have a sign of authority on her head, because of the angels.
1CO	11	11	그러나 주 안에는 남자 없이 여자만 있지 않고 여자 없이 남자만 있지 아니하니라	Nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord.	In the Lord, however, woman is not independent of man, nor is man independent of woman.
1CO	11	12	여자가 남자에게서 난 것 같이 남자도 여자로 말미암아 났으나 모든 것이 하나님에게서 났느니라	For as the woman is of the man, even so is the man also by the woman; but all things of God.	For just as woman came from man, so also man is born of woman. But everything comes from God.
1CO	11	13	너희는 스스로 판단하라 여자가 쓰지 않고 하나님께 기도하는 것이 마땅하냐	Judge in yourselves: is it comely that a woman pray unto God uncovered?	Judge for yourselves: Is it proper for a woman to pray to God with her head uncovered?
1CO	11	14	만일 남자가 긴 머리가 있으면 자기에게 욕되는 것을 본성이 너희에게 가르치지 아니하느냐	Doth not even nature itself teach you, that, if a man have long hair, it is a shame unto him?	Doesn’t nature itself teach you that if a man has long hair, it is a disgrace to him,
1CO	11	15	만일 여자가 긴 머리가 있으면 자기에게 영광이 되나니 긴 머리는 쓰는 것을 대신하여 주신 연고니라	But if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her: for her hair is given her for a covering.	but that if a woman has long hair, it is her glory? For long hair is given to her as a covering.
1CO	11	16	변론하려는 태도를 가진 자가 있을지라도 우리에게나 하나님의 모든 교회에는 이런 규례가 없느니라	But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the churches of God.	If anyone is inclined to dispute this, we have no other practice, nor do the churches of God.
1CO	11	17	내가 명하는 이 일에 너희를 칭찬하지 아니하나니 이는 저희의 모임이 유익이 못되고 도리어 해로움이라	Now in this that I declare unto you I praise you not, that ye come together not for the better, but for the worse.	In the following instructions I have no praise to offer, because your gatherings do more harm than good.
1CO	11	18	첫째는 너희가 교회에 모일 때에 너희 중에 분쟁이 있다 함을 듣고 대강 믿노니	For first of all, when ye come together in the church, I hear that there be divisions among you; and I partly believe it.	First of all, I hear that when you come together as a church, there are divisions among you, and in part I believe it.
1CO	11	19	너희 중에 편당이 있어야 너희 중에 옳다 인정함을 받은 자들이 나타나게 되리라	For there must be also heresies among you, that they which are approved may be made manifest among you.	And indeed, there must be differences among you to show which of you are approved.
1CO	11	20	그런즉 너희가 함께 모여서 주의 만찬을 먹을 수 없으니	When ye come together therefore into one place, this is not to eat the Lord’s supper.	Now then, when you come together, it is not the Lord’s Supper you eat.
1CO	11	21	이는 먹을 때에 각각 자기의 만찬을 먼저 갖다 먹으므로 어떤 이는 시장하고 어떤 이는 취함이라	For in eating every one taketh before other his own supper: and one is hungry, and another is drunken.	For as you eat, each of you goes ahead without sharing his meal. While one remains hungry, another gets drunk.
1CO	11	22	너희가 먹고 마실 집이 없느냐 너희가 하나님의 교회를 업신여기고 빈궁한 자들을 부끄럽게 하느냐 내가 너희에게 무슨 말을 하랴 너희를 칭찬하랴 이것으로 칭찬하지 않노라	What? have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? or despise ye the church of God, and shame them that have not? What shall I say to you? shall I praise you in this? I praise you not.	Don’t you have your own homes in which to eat and drink? Or do you despise the church of God and humiliate those who have nothing? What can I say to you? Shall I praise you for this? No, I will not!
1CO	11	23	내가 너희에게 전한 것은 주께 받은 것이니 곧 주 예수께서 잡히시던 밤에 떡을 가지사	For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, That the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed took bread:	For I received from the Lord what I also passed on to you: The Lord Jesus, on the night He was betrayed, took bread,
1CO	11	24	축사하시고 떼어 가라사대 이것은 너희를 위하는 내 몸이니 이것을 행하여 나를 기념하라 하시고	And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat: this is my body, which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me.	and when He had given thanks, He broke it and said, “This is My body, which is for you; do this in remembrance of Me.”
1CO	11	25	식후에 또한 이와 같이 잔을 가지시고 가라사대 이 잔은 내 피로 세운 새 언약이니 이것을 행하여 마실 때마다 나를 기념하라 하셨으니	After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood: this do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me.	In the same way, after supper He took the cup, saying, “This cup is the new covenant in My blood; do this, as often as you drink it, in remembrance of Me.”
1CO	11	26	너희가 이 떡을 먹으며 이 잔을 마실 때마다 주의 죽으심을 오실 때까지 전하는 것이니라	For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do shew the Lord’s death till he come.	For as often as you eat this bread and drink this cup, you proclaim the Lord’s death until He comes.
1CO	11	27	그러므로 누구든지 주의 떡이나 잔을 합당치 않게 먹고 마시는 자는 주의 몸과 피를 범하는 죄가 있느니라	Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord, unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.	Therefore, whoever eats the bread or drinks the cup of the Lord in an unworthy manner will be guilty of sinning against the body and blood of the Lord.
1CO	11	28	사람이 자기를 살피고 그 후에야 이 떡을 먹고 이 잔을 마실지니	But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup.	Each one must examine himself before he eats of the bread and drinks of the cup.
1CO	11	29	주의 몸을 분변치 못하고 먹고 마시는 자는 자기의 죄를 먹고 마시는 것이니라	For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord’s body.	For anyone who eats and drinks without recognizing the body eats and drinks judgment on himself.
1CO	11	30	이러므로 너희 중에 약한 자와 병든 자가 많고 잠자는 자도 적지 아니하니	For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep.	That is why many among you are weak and sick, and a number of you have fallen asleep.
1CO	11	31	우리가 우리를 살폈으면 판단을 받지 아니하려니와	For if we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged.	Now if we judged ourselves properly, we would not come under judgment.
1CO	11	32	우리가 판단을 받는 것은 주께 징계를 받는 것이니 이는 우리로 세상과 함께 죄 정함을 받지 않게 하려 하심이라	But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world.	But when we are judged by the Lord, we are being disciplined so that we will not be condemned with the world.
1CO	11	33	그런즉 내 형제들아 먹으러 모일 때에 서로 기다리라	Wherefore, my brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for another.	So, my brothers, when you come together to eat, wait for one another.
1CO	11	34	만일 누구든지 시장하거든 집에서 먹을지니 이는 너희의 판단 받는 모임이 되지 않게 하려 함이라 그 남은 것은 내가 언제든지 갈 때에 귀정하리라	And if any man hunger, let him eat at home; that ye come not together unto condemnation. And the rest will I set in order when I come.	If anyone is hungry, he should eat at home, so that when you come together it will not result in judgment. And when I come, I will give instructions about the remaining matters.
1CO	12	1	형제들아 신령한 것에 대하여는 내가 너희의 알지 못하기를 원치 아니하노니	Now concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, I would not have you ignorant.	Now about spiritual gifts, brothers, I do not want you to be uninformed.
1CO	12	2	너희도 알거니와 너희가 이방인으로 있을 때에 말 못하는 우상에게로 끄는 그대로 끌려 갔느니라	Ye know that ye were Gentiles, carried away unto these dumb idols, even as ye were led.	You know that when you were pagans, you were influenced and led astray to mute idols.
1CO	12	3	그러므로 내가 너희에게 알게 하노니 하나님의 영으로 말하는 자는 누구든지 예수를 저주할 자라 하지 않고 또 성령으로 아니하고는 누구든지 예수를 주시라 할 수 없느니라	Wherefore I give you to understand, that no man speaking by the Spirit of God calleth Jesus accursed: and that no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost.	Therefore I inform you that no one who is speaking by the Spirit of God says, “Jesus be cursed,” and no one can say, “Jesus is Lord,” except by the Holy Spirit.
1CO	12	4	은사는 여러 가지나 성령은 같고	Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit.	There are different gifts, but the same Spirit.
1CO	12	5	직임은 여러 가지나 주는 같으며	And there are differences of administrations, but the same Lord.	There are different ministries, but the same Lord.
1CO	12	6	또 역사는 여러 가지나 모든 것을 모든 사람 가운데서 역사하시는 하나님은 같으니	And there are diversities of operations, but it is the same God which worketh all in all.	There are different ways of working, but the same God works all things in all people.
1CO	12	7	각 사람에게 성령의 나타남을 주심은 유익하게 하려 하심이라	But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal.	Now to each one the manifestation of the Spirit is given for the common good.
1CO	12	8	어떤 이에게는 성령으로 말미암아 지혜의 말씀을, 어떤 이에게는 같은 성령을 따라 지식의 말씀을,	For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit;	To one there is given through the Spirit the message of wisdom, to another the message of knowledge by the same Spirit,
1CO	12	9	다른 이에게는 같은 성령으로 믿음을, 어떤 이에게는 한 성령으로 병 고치는 은사를,	To another faith by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing by the same Spirit;	to another faith by the same Spirit, to another gifts of healing by that one Spirit,
1CO	12	10	어떤 이에게는 능력 행함을, 어떤 이에게는 예언함을, 어떤 이에게는 영들 분별함을, 다른 이에게는 각종 방언 말함을, 어떤 이에게는 방언들 통역함을 주시나니	To another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to another discerning of spirits; to another divers kinds of tongues; to another the interpretation of tongues:	to another the working of miracles, to another prophecy, to another distinguishing between spirits, to another speaking in various tongues, and to still another the interpretation of tongues.
1CO	12	11	이 모든 일은 같은 한 성령이 행하사 그 뜻대로 각 사람에게 나눠 주시느니라	But all these worketh that one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will.	All these are the work of one and the same Spirit, who apportions them to each one as He determines.
1CO	12	12	몸은 하나인데 많은 지체가 있고 몸의 지체가 많으나 한 몸임과 같이 그리스도도 그러하니라	For as the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members of that one body, being many, are one body: so also is Christ.	The body is a unit, though it is composed of many parts. And although its parts are many, they all form one body. So it is with Christ.
1CO	12	13	우리가 유대인이나 헬라인이나 종이나 자유자나 다 한 성령으로 침례를 받아 한 몸이 되었고 또 다 한 성령을 마시게 하셨느니라	For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free; and have been all made to drink into one Spirit.	For in one Spirit we were all baptized into one body, whether Jews or Greeks, slave or free, and we were all given one Spirit to drink.
1CO	12	14	몸은 한 지체뿐 아니요 여럿이니	For the body is not one member, but many.	For the body does not consist of one part, but of many.
1CO	12	15	만일 발이 이르되 나는 손이 아니니 몸에 붙지 아니하였다 할지라도 이로 인하여 몸에 붙지 아니한 것이 아니요	If the foot shall say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body?	If the foot should say, “Because I am not a hand, I do not belong to the body,” that would not make it any less a part of the body.
1CO	12	16	또 귀가 이르되 나는 눈이 아니니 몸에 붙지 아니하였다 할지라도 이로 인하여 몸에 붙지 아니한 것이 아니니	And if the ear shall say, Because I am not the eye, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body?	And if the ear should say, “Because I am not an eye, I do not belong to the body,” that would not make it any less a part of the body.
1CO	12	17	만일 온 몸이 눈이면 듣는 곳은 어디며 온 몸이 듣는 곳이면 냄새 맡는 곳은 어디뇨	If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? If the whole were hearing, where were the smelling?	If the whole body were an eye, where would the sense of hearing be? If the whole body were an ear, where would the sense of smell be?
1CO	12	18	그러나 이제 하나님이 그 원하시는 대로 지체를 각각 몸에 두셨으니	But now hath God set the members every one of them in the body, as it hath pleased him.	But in fact, God has arranged the members of the body, every one of them, according to His design.
1CO	12	19	만일 다 한 지체뿐이면 몸은 어디뇨	And if they were all one member, where were the body?	If they were all one part, where would the body be?
1CO	12	20	이제 지체는 많으나 몸은 하나라	But now are they many members, yet but one body.	As it is, there are many parts, but one body.
1CO	12	21	눈이 손더러 내가 너를 쓸 데 없다 하거나 또한 머리가 발더러 내가 너를 쓸 데 없다 하거나 하지 못하리라	And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee: nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you.	The eye cannot say to the hand, “I do not need you.” Nor can the head say to the feet, “I do not need you.”
1CO	12	22	이뿐 아니라 몸의 더 약하게 보이는 지체가 도리어 요긴하고	Nay, much more those members of the body, which seem to be more feeble, are necessary:	On the contrary, the parts of the body that seem to be weaker are indispensable,
1CO	12	23	우리가 몸의 덜 귀히 여기는 그것들을 더욱 귀한 것들로 입혀 주며 우리의 아름답지 못한 지체는 더욱 아름다운 것을 얻고	And those members of the body, which we think to be less honourable, upon these we bestow more abundant honour; and our uncomely parts have more abundant comeliness.	and the parts we consider less honorable, we treat with greater honor. And our unpresentable parts are treated with special modesty,
1CO	12	24	우리의 아름다운 지체는 요구할 것이 없으니 오직 하나님이 몸을 고르게 하여 부족한 지체에게 존귀를 더하사	For our comely parts have no need: but God hath tempered the body together, having given more abundant honour to that part which lacked:	whereas our presentable parts have no such need. But God has composed the body and has given greater honor to the parts that lacked it,
1CO	12	25	몸 가운데서 분쟁이 없고 오직 여러 지체가 서로 같이하여 돌아보게 하셨으니	That there should be no schism in the body; but that the members should have the same care one for another.	so that there should be no division in the body, but that its members should have mutual concern for one another.
1CO	12	26	만일 한 지체가 고통을 받으면 모든 지체도 함께 고통을 받고 한 지체가 영광을 얻으면 모든 지체도 함께 즐거워하나니	And whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member be honoured, all the members rejoice with it.	If one part suffers, every part suffers with it; if one part is honored, every part rejoices with it.
1CO	12	27	너희는 그리스도의 몸이요 지체의 각 부분이라	Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular.	Now you are the body of Christ, and each of you is a member of it.
1CO	12	28	하나님이 교회 중에 몇을 세우셨으니 첫째는 사도요 둘째는 선지자요 셋째는 교사요 그 다음은 능력이요 그 다음은 병 고치는 은사와 서로 돕는 것과 다스리는 것과 각종 방언을 하는 것이라	And God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues.	And in the church God has appointed first of all apostles, second prophets, third teachers, then workers of miracles, and those with gifts of healing, helping, administration, and various tongues.
1CO	12	29	다 사도겠느냐 다 선지자겠느냐 다 교사겠느냐 다 능력을 행하는 자겠느냐	Are all apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all workers of miracles?	Are all apostles? Are all prophets? Are all teachers? Do all work miracles?
1CO	12	30	다 병 고치는 은사를 가진 자겠느냐 다 방언을 말하는 자겠느냐 다 통역하는 자겠느냐	Have all the gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret?	Do all have gifts of healing? Do all speak in tongues? Do all interpret?
1CO	12	31	너희는 더욱 큰 은사를 사모하라 내가 또한 제일 좋은 길을 너희에게 보이리라	But covet earnestly the best gifts: and yet shew I unto you a more excellent way.	But eagerly desire the greater gifts. And now I will show you the most excellent way.
1CO	13	1	내가 사람의 방언과 천사의 말을 할지라도 사랑이 없으면 소리나는 구리와 울리는 꽹과리가 되고	Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.	If I speak in the tongues of men and of angels, but have not love, I am only a ringing gong or a clanging cymbal.
1CO	13	2	내가 예언하는 능이 있어 모든 비밀과 모든 지식을 알고 또 산을 옮길 만한 모든 믿음이 있을지라도 사랑이 없으면 내가 아무 것도 아니요	And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing.	If I have the gift of prophecy and can fathom all mysteries and all knowledge, and if I have absolute faith so as to move mountains, but have not love, I am nothing.
1CO	13	3	내가 내게 있는 모든 것으로 구제하고 또 내 몸을 불사르게 내어 줄지라도 사랑이 없으면 내게 아무 유익이 없느니라	And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing.	If I give all I possess to the poor and exult in the surrender of my body, but have not love, I gain nothing.
1CO	13	4	사랑은 오래 참고 사랑은 온유하며 투기하는 자가 되지 아니하며 사랑은 자랑하지 아니하며 교만하지 아니하며	Charity suffereth long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up,	Love is patient, love is kind. It does not envy, it does not boast, it is not proud.
1CO	13	5	무례히 행치 아니하며 자기의 유익을 구치 아니하며 성내지 아니하며 악한 것을 생각지 아니하며	Doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil;	It is not rude, it is not self-seeking, it is not easily angered, it keeps no account of wrongs.
1CO	13	6	불의를 기뻐하지 아니하며 진리와 함께 기뻐하고	Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth;	Love takes no pleasure in evil, but rejoices in the truth.
1CO	13	7	모든 것을 참으며 모든 것을 믿으며 모든 것을 바라며 모든 것을 견디느니라	Beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things.	It bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things.
1CO	13	8	사랑은 언제까지든지 떨어지지 아니하나 예언도 폐하고 방언도 그치고 지식도 폐하리라	Charity never faileth: but whether there be prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away.	Love never fails. But where there are prophecies, they will cease; where there are tongues, they will be restrained; where there is knowledge, it will be dismissed.
1CO	13	9	우리가 부분적으로 알고 부분적으로 예언하니	For we know in part, and we prophesy in part.	For we know in part and we prophesy in part,
1CO	13	10	온전한 것이 올 때에는 부분적으로 하던 것이 폐하리라	But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away.	but when the perfect comes, the partial passes away.
1CO	13	11	내가 어렸을 때에는 말하는 것이 어린 아이와 같고 깨닫는 것이 어린 아이와 같고 생각하는 것이 어린 아이와 같다가 장성한 사람이 되어서는 어린 아이의 일을 버렸노라	When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things.	When I was a child, I talked like a child, I thought like a child, I reasoned like a child. When I became a man, I set aside childish ways.
1CO	13	12	우리가 이제는 거울로 보는 것 같이 희미하나 그 때에는 얼굴과 얼굴을 대하여 볼 것이요 이제는 내가 부분적으로 아나 그 때에는 주께서 나를 아신 것 같이 내가 온전히 알리라	For now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known.	Now we see but a dim reflection as in a mirror; then we shall see face to face. Now I know in part; then I shall know fully, even as I am fully known.
1CO	13	13	그런즉 믿음, 소망, 사랑, 이 세가지는 항상 있을 것인데 그 중에 제일은 사랑이라	And now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest of these is charity.	And now these three remain: faith, hope, and love; but the greatest of these is love.
1CO	14	1	사랑을 따라 구하라 신령한 것을 사모하되 특별히 예언을 하려고 하라	Follow after charity, and desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophesy.	Earnestly pursue love and eagerly desire spiritual gifts, especially the gift of prophecy.
1CO	14	2	방언을 말하는 자는 사람에게 하지 아니하고 하나님께 하나니 이는 알아 듣는 자가 없고 그 영으로 비밀을 말함이니라	For he that speaketh in an unknown tongue speaketh not unto men, but unto God: for no man understandeth him; howbeit in the spirit he speaketh mysteries.	For he who speaks in a tongue does not speak to men, but to God. Indeed, no one understands him; he utters mysteries in the Spirit.
1CO	14	3	그러나 예언하는 자는 사람에게 말하여 덕을 세우며 권면하며 안위하는 것이요	But he that prophesieth speaketh unto men to edification, and exhortation, and comfort.	But he who prophesies speaks to men for their edification, encouragement, and comfort.
1CO	14	4	방언을 말하는 자는 자기의 덕을 세우고 예언하는 자는 교회의 덕을 세우나니	He that speaketh in an unknown tongue edifieth himself; but he that prophesieth edifieth the church.	The one who speaks in a tongue edifies himself, but the one who prophesies edifies the church.
1CO	14	5	나는 너희가 다 방언 말하기를 원하나 특별히 예언하기를 원하노라 방언을 말하는 자가 만일 교회의 덕을 세우기 위하여 통역하지 아니하면 예언하는 자만 못하니라	I would that ye all spake with tongues, but rather that ye prophesied: for greater is he that prophesieth than he that speaketh with tongues, except he interpret, that the church may receive edifying.	I wish that all of you could speak in tongues, but I would rather have you prophesy. He who prophesies is greater than one who speaks in tongues, unless he interprets so that the church may be edified.
1CO	14	6	그런즉 형제들아 내가 너희에게 나아가서 방언을 말하고 계시나 지식이나 예언이나 가르치는 것이나 말하지 아니하면 너희에게 무엇이 유익하리요	Now, brethren, if I come unto you speaking with tongues, what shall I profit you, except I shall speak to you either by revelation, or by knowledge, or by prophesying, or by doctrine?	Now, brothers, if I come to you speaking in tongues, how will I benefit you, unless I bring you some revelation or knowledge or prophecy or teaching?
1CO	14	7	혹 저나 거문고와 같이 생명 없는 것이 소리를 낼 때에 그 음의 분별을 내지 아니하면 저 부는 것인지 거문고 타는 것인지 어찌 알게 되리요	And even things without life giving sound, whether pipe or harp, except they give a distinction in the sounds, how shall it be known what is piped or harped?	Even in the case of lifeless instruments, such as the flute or harp, how will anyone recognize the tune they are playing unless the notes are distinct?
1CO	14	8	만일 나팔이 분명치 못한 소리를 내면 누가 전쟁을 예비하리요	For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the battle?	Again, if the trumpet sounds a muffled call, who will prepare for battle?
1CO	14	9	이와 같이 너희도 혀로서 알아 듣기 쉬운 말을 하지 아니하면 그 말하는 것을 어찌 알리요 이는 허공에다 말하는 것이라	So likewise ye, except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it be known what is spoken? for ye shall speak into the air.	So it is with you. Unless you speak intelligible words with your tongue, how will anyone know what you are saying? You will just be speaking into the air.
1CO	14	10	세상에 소리의 종류가 이같이 많되 뜻 없는 소리는 없나니	There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices in the world, and none of them is without signification.	Assuredly, there are many different languages in the world, yet none of them is without meaning.
1CO	14	11	그러므로 내가 그 소리의 뜻을 알지 못하면 내가 말하는 자에게 야만이 되고 말하는 자도 내게 야만이 되리니	Therefore if I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be unto him that speaketh a barbarian, and he that speaketh shall be a barbarian unto me.	If, then, I do not know the meaning of someone’s language, I am a foreigner to the speaker, and he is a foreigner to me.
1CO	14	12	그러면 너희도 신령한 것을 사모하는 자인즉 교회의 덕 세우기를 위하여 풍성하기를 구하라	Even so ye, forasmuch as ye are zealous of spiritual gifts, seek that ye may excel to the edifying of the church.	It is the same with you. Since you are eager to have spiritual gifts, strive to excel in gifts that build up the church.
1CO	14	13	그러므로 방언을 말하는 자는 통역하기를 기도할지니	Wherefore let him that speaketh in an unknown tongue pray that he may interpret.	Therefore, the one who speaks in a tongue should pray that he may interpret.
1CO	14	14	내가 만일 방언으로 기도하면 나의 영이 기도하거니와 나의 마음은 열매를 맺히지 못하리라	For if I pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit prayeth, but my understanding is unfruitful.	For if I pray in a tongue, my spirit prays, but my mind is unfruitful.
1CO	14	15	그러면 어떻게 할꼬 내가 영으로 기도하고 또 마음으로 기도하며 내가 영으로 찬미하고 또 마음으로 찬미하리라	What is it then? I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also: I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also.	What then shall I do? I will pray with my spirit, but I will also pray with my mind. I will sing with my spirit, but I will also sing with my mind.
1CO	14	16	그렇지 아니하면 네가 영으로 축복할 때에 무식한 처지에 있는 자가 네가 무슨 말을 하는지 알지 못하고 네 감사에 어찌 아멘 하리요	Else when thou shalt bless with the spirit, how shall he that occupieth the room of the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he understandeth not what thou sayest?	Otherwise, if you speak a blessing in spirit, how can someone who is uninstructed say “Amen” to your thanksgiving, since he does not know what you are saying?
1CO	14	17	너는 감사를 잘하였으나 그러나 다른 사람은 덕 세움을 받지 못하리라	For thou verily givest thanks well, but the other is not edified.	You may be giving thanks well enough, but the other one is not edified.
1CO	14	18	내가 너희 모든 사람보다 방언을 더 말하므로 하나님께 감사하노라	I thank my God, I speak with tongues more than ye all:	I thank God that I speak in tongues more than all of you.
1CO	14	19	그러나 교회에서 네가 남을 가르치기 위하여 깨달은 마음으로 다섯 마디 말을 하는 것이 일만 마디 방언으로 말하는 것보다 나으니라	Yet in the church I had rather speak five words with my understanding, that by my voice I might teach others also, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue.	But in the church, I would rather speak five coherent words to instruct others than ten thousand words in a tongue.
1CO	14	20	형제들아 지혜에는 아이가 되지 말고 악에는 어린 아이가 되라 지혜에 장성한 사람이 되라	Brethren, be not children in understanding: howbeit in malice be ye children, but in understanding be men.	Brothers, stop thinking like children. In regard to evil be infants, but in your thinking be mature.
1CO	14	21	율법에 기록된 바 주께서 가라사대 내가 다른 방언하는 자와 다른 입술로 이 백성에게 말할지라도 저희가 오히려 듣지 아니하리라 하였으니	In the law it is written, With men of other tongues and other lips will I speak unto this people; and yet for all that will they not hear me, saith the Lord.	It is written in the Law: “By strange tongues and foreign lips I will speak to this people, but even then they will not listen to Me, says the Lord.”
1CO	14	22	그러므로 방언은 믿는 자들을 위하지 않고 믿지 아니하는 자들을 위하는 표적이나 예언은 믿지 아니하는 자들을 위하지 않고 믿는 자들을 위함이니	Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe, but to them that believe not: but prophesying serveth not for them that believe not, but for them which believe.	Tongues, then, are a sign, not for believers, but for unbelievers. Prophecy, however, is for believers, not for unbelievers.
1CO	14	23	그러므로 온 교회가 함께 모여 다 방언으로 말하면 무식한 자들이나 믿지 아니하는 자들이 들어와서 너희를 미쳤다 하지 아니하겠느냐	If therefore the whole church be come together into one place, and all speak with tongues, and there come in those that are unlearned, or unbelievers, will they not say that ye are mad?	So if the whole church comes together and everyone speaks in tongues, and some who are uninstructed or some unbelievers come in, will they not say that you are out of your minds?
1CO	14	24	그러나 다 예언을 하면 믿지 아니하는 자들이나 무식한 자들이 들어와서 모든 사람에게 책망을 들으며 모든 사람에게 판단을 받고	But if all prophesy, and there come in one that believeth not, or one unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all:	But if an unbeliever or uninstructed person comes in while everyone is prophesying, he will be convicted and called to account by all,
1CO	14	25	그 마음의 숨은 일이 드러나게 되므로 엎드리어 하나님께 경배하며 하나님이 참으로 너희 가운데 계시다 전파하리라	And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest; and so falling down on his face he will worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth.	and the secrets of his heart will be made known. So he will fall facedown and worship God, proclaiming, “God is truly among you!”
1CO	14	26	그런즉 형제들아 어찌할꼬 너희가 모일 때에 각각 찬송시도 있으며 가르치는 말씀도 있으며 계시도 있으며 방언도 있으며 통역함도 있나니 모든 것을 덕을 세우기 위하여 하라	How is it then, brethren? when ye come together, every one of you hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a tongue, hath a revelation, hath an interpretation. Let all things be done unto edifying.	What then shall we say, brothers? When you come together, everyone has a psalm or a teaching, a revelation, a tongue, or an interpretation. All of these must be done to build up the church.
1CO	14	27	만일 누가 방언으로 말하거든 두 사람이나 다 불과 세 사람이 차서를 따라 하고 한 사람이 통역할 것이요	If any man speak in an unknown tongue, let it be by two, or at the most by three, and that by course; and let one interpret.	If anyone speaks in a tongue, two, or at most three, should speak in turn, and someone must interpret.
1CO	14	28	만일 통역하는 자가 없거든 교회에서는 잠잠하고 자기와 및 하나님께 말할 것이요	But if there be no interpreter, let him keep silence in the church; and let him speak to himself, and to God.	But if there is no interpreter, he should remain silent in the church and speak only to himself and God.
1CO	14	29	예언하는 자는 둘이나 셋이나 말하고 다른 이들은 분변할 것이요	Let the prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge.	Two or three prophets should speak, and the others should weigh carefully what is said.
1CO	14	30	만일 곁에 앉은 다른 이에게 계시가 있거든 먼저 하던 자는 잠잠할지니라	If any thing be revealed to another that sitteth by, let the first hold his peace.	And if a revelation comes to someone who is seated, the first speaker should stop.
1CO	14	31	너희는 다 모든 사람으로 배우게 하고 모든 사람으로 권면을 받게 하기 위하여 하나씩 하나씩 예언할 수 있느니라	For ye may all prophesy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted.	For you can all prophesy in turn so that everyone may be instructed and encouraged.
1CO	14	32	예언하는 자들의 영이 예언하는 자들에게 제재를 받나니	And the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets.	The spirits of prophets are subject to prophets.
1CO	14	33	하나님은 어지러움의 하나님이 아니시요 오직 화평의 하나님이시니라	For God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all churches of the saints.	For God is not a God of disorder, but of peace—as in all the churches of the saints.
1CO	14	34	모든 성도의 교회에서 함과 같이 여자는 교회에서 잠잠하라 저희의 말하는 것을 허락함이 없나니 율법에 이른 것 같이 오직 복종할 것이요	Let your women keep silence in the churches: for it is not permitted unto them to speak; but they are commanded to be under obedience, as also saith the law.	Women are to be silent in the churches. They are not permitted to speak, but must be in submission, as the law says.
1CO	14	35	만일 무엇을 배우려거든 집에서 자기 남편에게 물을지니 여자가 교회에서 말하는 것은 부끄러운 것임이라	And if they will learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at home: for it is a shame for women to speak in the church.	If they wish to inquire about something, they are to ask their own husbands at home; for it is dishonorable for a woman to speak in the church.
1CO	14	36	하나님의 말씀이 너희에게로부터 난 것이냐 또는 너희에게만 임한 것이냐	What? came the word of God out from you? or came it unto you only?	Did the word of God originate with you? Or are you the only ones it has reached?
1CO	14	37	만일 누구든지 자기를 선지자나 혹 신령한 자로 생각하거든 내가 너희에게 편지한 것이 주의 명령인 줄 알라	If any man think himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things that I write unto you are the commandments of the Lord.	If anyone considers himself a prophet or spiritual person, let him acknowledge that what I am writing you is the Lord’s command.
1CO	14	38	만일 누구든지 알지 못하면 그는 알지 못한 자니라	But if any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant.	But if anyone ignores this, he himself will be ignored.
1CO	14	39	그런즉 내 형제들아 예언하기를 사모하며 방언 말하기를 금하지 말라	Wherefore, brethren, covet to prophesy, and forbid not to speak with tongues.	So, my brothers, be eager to prophesy, and do not forbid speaking in tongues.
1CO	14	40	모든 것을 적당하게 하고 질서대로 하라	Let all things be done decently and in order.	But everything must be done in a proper and orderly manner.
1CO	15	1	형제들아 내가 너희에게 전한 복음을 너희로 알게 하노니 이는 너희가 받은 것이요 또 그 가운데 선 것이라	Moreover, brethren, I declare unto you the gospel which I preached unto you, which also ye have received, and wherein ye stand;	Now, brothers, I want to remind you of the gospel I preached to you, which you received, and in which you stand firm.
1CO	15	2	너희가 만일 나의 전한 그 말을 굳게 지키고 헛되이 믿지 아니하였으면 이로 말미암아 구원을 얻으리라	By which also ye are saved, if ye keep in memory what I preached unto you, unless ye have believed in vain.	By this gospel you are saved, if you hold firmly to the word I preached to you. Otherwise, you have believed in vain.
1CO	15	3	내가 받은 것을 먼저 너희에게 전하였노니 이는 성경대로 그리스도께서 우리 죄를 위하여 죽으시고	For I delivered unto you first of all that which I also received, how that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures;	For what I received I passed on to you as of first importance: that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures,
1CO	15	4	장사 지낸 바 되었다가 성경대로 사흘 만에 다시 살아나사	And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the scriptures:	that He was buried, that He was raised on the third day according to the Scriptures,
1CO	15	5	게바에게 보이시고 후에 열두 제자에게와	And that he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve:	and that He appeared to Cephas and then to the Twelve.
1CO	15	6	그 후에 오백여 형제에게 일시에 보이셨나니 그 중에 지금까지 태반이나 살아 있고 어떤 이는 잠들었으며	After that, he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once; of whom the greater part remain unto this present, but some are fallen asleep.	After that, He appeared to more than five hundred brothers at once, most of whom are still living, though some have fallen asleep.
1CO	15	7	그 후에 야고보에게 보이셨으며 그 후에 모든 사도에게와	After that, he was seen of James; then of all the apostles.	Then He appeared to James, then to all the apostles.
1CO	15	8	맨 나중에 만삭되지 못하여 난 자 같은 내게도 보이셨느니라	And last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time.	And last of all He appeared to me also, as to one of untimely birth.
1CO	15	9	나는 사도 중에 지극히 작은 자라 내가 하나님의 교회를 핍박하였으므로 사도라 칭함을 받기에 감당치 못할 자로라	For I am the least of the apostles, that am not meet to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God.	For I am the least of the apostles and am unworthy to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God.
1CO	15	10	그러나 나의 나 된 것은 하나님의 은혜로 된 것이니 내게 주신 그의 은혜가 헛되지 아니하여 내가 모든 사도보다 더 많이 수고하였으나 내가 아니요 오직 나와 함께 하신 하나님의 은혜로라	But by the grace of God I am what I am: and his grace which was bestowed upon me was not in vain; but I laboured more abundantly than they all: yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me.	But by the grace of God I am what I am, and His grace to me was not in vain. No, I worked harder than all of them—yet not I, but the grace of God that was with me.
1CO	15	11	그러므로 내나 저희나 이같이 전파하매 너희도 이같이 믿었느니라	Therefore whether it were I or they, so we preach, and so ye believed.	Whether, then, it was I or they, this is what we preach, and this is what you believed.
1CO	15	12	그리스도께서 죽은 자 가운데서 다시 살아나셨다 전파되었거늘 너희 중에서 어떤 이들은 어찌하여 죽은 자 가운데서 부활이 없다 하느냐	Now if Christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead?	But if it is preached that Christ has been raised from the dead, how can some of you say that there is no resurrection of the dead?
1CO	15	13	만일 죽은 자의 부활이 없으면 그리스도도 다시 살지 못하셨으리라	But if there be no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen:	If there is no resurrection of the dead, then not even Christ has been raised.
1CO	15	14	그리스도께서 만일 다시 살지 못하셨으면 우리의 전파하는 것도 헛것이요 또 너희 믿음도 헛것이며	And if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain.	And if Christ has not been raised, our preaching is worthless, and so is your faith.
1CO	15	15	또 우리가 하나님의 거짓 증인으로 발견되리니 우리가 하나님이 그리스도를 다시 살리셨다고 증거하였음이라 만일 죽은 자가 다시 사는 것이 없으면 하나님이 그리스도를 다시 살리시지 아니하셨으리라	Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God; because we have testified of God that he raised up Christ: whom he raised not up, if so be that the dead rise not.	In that case, we are also exposed as false witnesses about God. For we have testified about God that He raised Christ from the dead, but He did not raise Him if in fact the dead are not raised.
1CO	15	16	만일 죽은 자가 다시 사는 것이 없으면 그리스도도 다시 사신 것이 없었을 터이요	For if the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised:	For if the dead are not raised, then not even Christ has been raised.
1CO	15	17	그리스도께서 다시 사신 것이 없으면 너희의 믿음도 헛되고 너희가 여전히 죄 가운데 있을 것이요	And if Christ be not raised, your faith is vain; ye are yet in your sins.	And if Christ has not been raised, your faith is futile; you are still in your sins.
1CO	15	18	또한 그리스도 안에서 잠자는 자도 망하였으리니	Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished.	Then those also who have fallen asleep in Christ have perished.
1CO	15	19	만일 그리스도 안에서 우리의 바라는 것이 다만 이생뿐이면 모든 사람 가운데 우리가 더욱 불쌍한 자리라	If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable.	If our hope in Christ is for this life alone, we are to be pitied more than all men.
1CO	15	20	그러나 이제 그리스도께서 죽은 자 가운데서 다시 살아 잠자는 자들의 첫 열매가 되셨도다	But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept.	But Christ has indeed been raised from the dead, the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep.
1CO	15	21	사망이 사람으로 말미암았으니 죽은 자의 부활도 사람으로 말미암는도다	For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead.	For since death came through a man, the resurrection of the dead comes also through a man.
1CO	15	22	아담 안에서 모든 사람이 죽은 것 같이 그리스도 안에서 모든 사람이 삶을 얻으리라	For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.	For as in Adam all die, so in Christ all will be made alive.
1CO	15	23	그러나 각각 자기 차례대로 되리니 먼저는 첫 열매인 그리스도요 다음에는 그리스도 강림하실 때에 그에게 붙은 자요	But every man in his own order: Christ the firstfruits; afterward they that are Christ’s at his coming.	But each in his own turn: Christ the firstfruits; then at His coming, those who belong to Him.
1CO	15	24	그 후에는 나중이니 저가 모든 정사와 모든 권세와 능력을 멸하시고 나라를 아버지 하나님께 바칠 때라	Then cometh the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father; when he shall have put down all rule and all authority and power.	Then the end will come, when He hands over the kingdom to God the Father after He has destroyed all dominion, authority, and power.
1CO	15	25	저가 모든 원수를 그 발 아래 둘 때까지 불가불 왕 노릇 하시리니	For he must reign, till he hath put all enemies under his feet.	For He must reign until He has put all His enemies under His feet.
1CO	15	26	맨 나중에 멸망 받을 원수는 사망이니라	The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death.	The last enemy to be destroyed is death.
1CO	15	27	만물을 저의 발 아래 두셨다 하셨으니 만물을 아래 둔다 말씀하실 때에 만물을 저의 아래 두신 이가 그 중에 들지 아니한 것이 분명하도다	For he hath put all things under his feet. But when he saith all things are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted, which did put all things under him.	For “God has put everything under His feet.” Now when it says that everything has been put under Him, this clearly does not include the One who put everything under Him.
1CO	15	28	만물을 저에게 복종하게 하신 때에는 아들 자신도 그 때에 만물을 자기에게 복종케 하신 이에게 복종케 되리니 이는 하나님이 만유의 주로서 만유 안에 계시려 하심이라	And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all.	And when all things have been subjected to Him, then the Son Himself will be made subject to Him who put all things under Him, so that God may be all in all.
1CO	15	29	만일 죽은 자들이 도무지 다시 살지 못하면 죽은 자들을 위하여 침례 받는 자들이 무엇을 하겠느냐 어찌하여 저희를 위하여 침례를 받느뇨	Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?	If these things are not so, what will those do who are baptized for the dead? If the dead are not raised at all, why are people baptized for them?
1CO	15	30	또 어찌하여 우리가 때마다 위험을 무릅쓰리요	And why stand we in jeopardy every hour?	And why do we endanger ourselves every hour?
1CO	15	31	형제들아 내가 그리스도 예수 우리 주 안에서 가진 바 너희에게 대한 나의 자랑을 두고 단언하노니 나는 날마다 죽노라	I protest by your rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily.	I face death every day, brothers, as surely as I boast about you in Christ Jesus our Lord.
1CO	15	32	내가 범인처럼 에베소에서 맹수로 더불어 싸웠으면 내게 무슨 유익이 있느뇨 죽은 자가 다시 살지 못할 것이면 내일 죽을 터이니 먹고 마시자 하리라	If after the manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, what advantageth it me, if the dead rise not? let us eat and drink; for to morrow we die.	If I fought wild beasts in Ephesus for human motives, what did I gain? If the dead are not raised, “Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die.”
1CO	15	33	속지 말라 악한 동무들은 선한 행실을 더럽히나니	Be not deceived: evil communications corrupt good manners.	Do not be deceived: “Bad company corrupts good character.”
1CO	15	34	깨어 의를 행하고 죄를 짓지 말라 하나님을 알지 못하는 자가 있기로 내가 너희를 부끄럽게 하기 위하여 말하노라	Awake to righteousness, and sin not; for some have not the knowledge of God: I speak this to your shame.	Sober up as you ought, and stop sinning; for some of you are ignorant of God. I say this to your shame.
1CO	15	35	누가 묻기를 죽은 자들이 어떻게 다시 살며 어떠한 몸으로 오느냐 하리니	But some man will say, How are the dead raised up? and with what body do they come?	But someone will ask, “How are the dead raised? With what kind of body will they come?”
1CO	15	36	어리석은 자여 너의 뿌리는 씨가 죽지 않으면 살아나지 못하겠고	Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die:	You fool! What you sow does not come to life unless it dies.
1CO	15	37	또 너의 뿌리는 것은 장래 형체를 뿌리는 것이 아니요 다만 밀이나 다른 것의 알갱이뿐이로되	And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain:	And what you sow is not the body that will be, but just a seed, perhaps of wheat or something else.
1CO	15	38	하나님이 그 뜻대로 저에게 형체를 주시되 각 종자에게 그 형체를 주시느니라	But God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him, and to every seed his own body.	But God gives it a body as He has designed, and to each kind of seed He gives its own body.
1CO	15	39	육체는 다 같은 육체가 아니니 하나는 사람의 육체요 하나는 짐승의 육체요 하나는 새의 육체요 하나는 물고기의 육체라	All flesh is not the same flesh: but there is one kind of flesh of men, another flesh of beasts, another of fishes, and another of birds.	Not all flesh is the same: Men have one kind of flesh, animals have another, birds another, and fish another.
1CO	15	40	하늘에 속한 형체도 있고 땅에 속한 형체도 있으나 하늘에 속한 자의 영광이 따로 있고 땅에 속한 자의 영광이 따로 있으니	There are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial: but the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another.	There are also heavenly bodies and earthly bodies. But the splendor of the heavenly bodies is of one degree, and the splendor of the earthly bodies is of another.
1CO	15	41	해의 영광도 다르며 달의 영광도 다르며 별의 영광도 다른데 별과 별의 영광이 다르도다	There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars: for one star differeth from another star in glory.	The sun has one degree of splendor, the moon another, and the stars another; and star differs from star in splendor.
1CO	15	42	죽은 자의 부활도 이와 같으니 썩을 것으로 심고 썩지 아니할 것으로 다시 살며	So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorruption:	So will it be with the resurrection of the dead: What is sown is perishable; it is raised imperishable.
1CO	15	43	욕된 것으로 심고 영광스러운 것으로 다시 살며 약한 것으로 심고 강한 것으로 다시 살며	It is sown in dishonour; it is raised in glory: it is sown in weakness; it is raised in power:	It is sown in dishonor; it is raised in glory. It is sown in weakness; it is raised in power.
1CO	15	44	육의 몸으로 심고 신령한 몸으로 다시 사나니 육의 몸이 있은즉 또 신령한 몸이 있느니라	It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body. There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body.	It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body. If there is a natural body, there is also a spiritual body.
1CO	15	45	기록된 바 첫 사람 아담은 산 영이 되었다 함과 같이 마지막 아담은 살려주는 영이 되었나니	And so it is written, The first man Adam was made a living soul; the last Adam was made a quickening spirit.	So it is written: “The first man Adam became a living being;” the last Adam a life-giving spirit.
1CO	15	46	그러나 먼저는 신령한 자가 아니요 육 있는 자요 그 다음에 신령한 자니라	Howbeit that was not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural; and afterward that which is spiritual.	The spiritual, however, was not first, but the natural, and then the spiritual.
1CO	15	47	첫 사람은 땅에서 났으니 흙에 속한 자이거니와 둘째 사람은 하늘에서 나셨느니라	The first man is of the earth, earthy: the second man is the Lord from heaven.	The first man was of the dust of the earth, the second man from heaven.
1CO	15	48	무릇 흙에 속한 자는 저 흙에 속한 자들과 같고 무릇 하늘에 속한 자는 저 하늘에 속한 자들과 같으니	As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy: and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly.	As was the earthly man, so also are those who are of the earth; and as is the heavenly man, so also are those who are of heaven.
1CO	15	49	우리가 흙에 속한 자의 형상을 입은 것 같이 또한 하늘에 속한 자의 형상을 입으리라	And as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly.	And just as we have borne the likeness of the earthly man, so also shall we bear the likeness of the heavenly man.
1CO	15	50	형제들아 내가 이것을 말하노니 혈과 육은 하나님 나라를 유업으로 받을 수 없고 또한 썩은 것은 썩지 아니한 것을 유업으로 받지 못하느니라	Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God; neither doth corruption inherit incorruption.	Now I declare to you, brothers, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, nor does the perishable inherit the imperishable.
1CO	15	51	보라 내가 너희에게 비밀을 말하노니 우리가 다 잠잘 것이 아니요 마지막 나팔에 순식간에 홀연히 다 변화하리니	Behold, I shew you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed,	Listen, I tell you a mystery: We will not all sleep, but we will all be changed—
1CO	15	52	나팔 소리가 나매 죽은 자들이 썩지 아니할 것으로 다시 살고 우리도 변화하리라	In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed.	in an instant, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet. For the trumpet will sound, the dead will be raised imperishable, and we will be changed.
1CO	15	53	이 썩을 것이 불가불 썩지 아니할 것을 입겠고 이 죽을 것이 죽지 아니함을 입으리로다	For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality.	For the perishable must be clothed with the imperishable, and the mortal with immortality.
1CO	15	54	이 썩을 것이 썩지 아니함을 입고 이 죽을 것이 죽지 아니함을 입을 때에는 사망이 이김의 삼킨 바 되리라고 기록된 말씀이 응하리라	So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory.	When the perishable has been clothed with the imperishable and the mortal with immortality, then the saying that is written will come to pass: “Death has been swallowed up in victory.”
1CO	15	55	사망아 너의 이기는 것이 어디 있느냐 사망아 너의 쏘는 것이 어디 있느냐	O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?	“Where, O Death, is your victory? Where, O Death, is your sting?”
1CO	15	56	사망의 쏘는 것은 죄요 죄의 권능은 율법이라	The sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the law.	The sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law.
1CO	15	57	우리 주 예수 그리스도로 말미암아 우리에게 이김을 주시는 하나님께 감사하노니	But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.	But thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ!
1CO	15	58	그러므로 내 사랑하는 형제들아 견고하며 흔들리지 말며 항상 주의 일에 더욱 힘쓰는 자들이 되라 이는 너희 수고가 주 안에서 헛되지 않은 줄을 앎이니라	Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labour is not in vain in the Lord.	Therefore, my beloved brothers, be steadfast and immovable. Always excel in the work of the Lord, because you know that your labor in the Lord is not in vain.
1CO	16	1	성도를 위하는 연보에 대하여는 내가 갈라디아 교회들에게 명한 것 같이 너희도 그렇게 하라	Now concerning the collection for the saints, as I have given order to the churches of Galatia, even so do ye.	Now about the collection for the saints, you are to do as I directed the churches of Galatia:
1CO	16	2	매주일 첫날에 너희 각 사람이 이를 얻은 대로 저축하여 두어서 내가 갈 때에 연보를 하지 않게 하라	Upon the first day of the week let every one of you lay by him in store, as God hath prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I come.	On the first day of every week, each of you should set aside a portion of his income, saving it up, so that when I come no collections will be needed.
1CO	16	3	내가 이를 때에 너희의 인정한 사람에게 편지를 주어 너희의 은혜를 예루살렘으로 가지고 가게 하리니	And when I come, whomsoever ye shall approve by your letters, them will I send to bring your liberality unto Jerusalem.	Then, on my arrival, I will send letters with those you recommend to carry your gift to Jerusalem.
1CO	16	4	만일 나도 가는 것이 합당하면 저희가 나와 함께 가리라	And if it be meet that I go also, they shall go with me.	And if it is advisable for me to go also, they can travel with me.
1CO	16	5	내가 마게도냐를 지날 터이니 마게도냐를 지난 후에 너희에게 나아가서	Now I will come unto you, when I shall pass through Macedonia: for I do pass through Macedonia.	After I go through Macedonia, however, I will come to you; for I will be going through Macedonia.
1CO	16	6	혹 너희와 함께 머물며 과동할 듯도 하니 이는 너희가 나를 나의 갈 곳으로 보내어 주게 하려 함이라	And it may be that I will abide, yea, and winter with you, that ye may bring me on my journey whithersoever I go.	Perhaps I will stay with you awhile, or even spend the winter, so that you can help me on my journey, wherever I go.
1CO	16	7	이제는 지나는 길에 너희 보기를 원치 하니하노니 이는 주께서 만일 허락하시면 얼마 동안 너희와 함께 유하기를 바람이라	For I will not see you now by the way; but I trust to tarry a while with you, if the Lord permit.	For I do not want to see you now only in passing; I hope to spend some time with you, if the Lord permits.
1CO	16	8	내가 오순절까지 에베소에 유하려 함은	But I will tarry at Ephesus until Pentecost.	But I will stay in Ephesus until Pentecost,
1CO	16	9	내게 광대하고 공효를 이루는 문이 열리고 대적하는 자가 많음이니라	For a great door and effectual is opened unto me, and there are many adversaries.	because a great door for effective work has opened to me, even though many oppose me.
1CO	16	10	디모데가 이르거든 너희는 조심하여 저로 두려움이 없이 너희 가운데 있게 하라 이는 저도 나와 같이 주의 일을 힘쓰는 자임이니라	Now if Timotheus come, see that he may be with you without fear: for he worketh the work of the Lord, as I also do.	If Timothy comes, see to it that he has nothing to fear while he is with you, for he is doing the work of the Lord, just as I am.
1CO	16	11	그러므로 누구든지 저를 멸시하지 말고 평안히 보내어 내게로 오게 하라 나는 저가 형제들과 함께 오기를 기다리노라	Let no man therefore despise him: but conduct him forth in peace, that he may come unto me: for I look for him with the brethren.	No one, then, should treat him with contempt. Send him on his way in peace so that he can return to me, for I am expecting him along with the brothers.
1CO	16	12	형제 아볼로에 대하여는 저더러 형제들과 함께 너희에게 가라고 내가 많이 권하되 지금은 갈 뜻이 일절 없으나 기회가 있으면 가리라	As touching our brother Apollos, I greatly desired him to come unto you with the brethren: but his will was not at all to come at this time; but he will come when he shall have convenient time.	Now about our brother Apollos: I strongly urged him to go to you with the brothers. He was not at all inclined to go now, but he will go when he has the opportunity.
1CO	16	13	깨어 믿음에 굳게 서서 남자답게 강건하여라	Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong.	Be on the alert. Stand firm in the faith. Be men of courage. Be strong.
1CO	16	14	너희 모든 일을 사랑으로 행하라	Let all your things be done with charity.	Do everything in love.
1CO	16	15	형제들아 스데바나의 집은 곧 아가야의 첫 열매요 또 성도 섬기기로 작정한 줄을 너희가 아는지라 내가 너희를 권하노니	I beseech you, brethren, (ye know the house of Stephanas, that it is the firstfruits of Achaia, and that they have addicted themselves to the ministry of the saints,)	You know that Stephanas and his household were the first converts in Achaia, and they have devoted themselves to the service of the saints. Now I urge you, brothers,
1CO	16	16	이 같은 자들과 또 함께 일하며 수고하는 모든 자에게 복종하라	That ye submit yourselves unto such, and to every one that helpeth with us, and laboureth.	to submit to such as these, and to every fellow worker and laborer.
1CO	16	17	내가 스데바나와 브드나도와 아가이고의 온 것을 기뻐하노니 저희가 너희의 부족한 것을 보충하였음이니라	I am glad of the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus: for that which was lacking on your part they have supplied.	I am glad that Stephanas, Fortunatus, and Achaicus have arrived, because they have supplied what was lacking from you.
1CO	16	18	저희가 나와 너희 마음을 시원케 하였으니 그러므로 너희는 이런 자들을 알아 주라	For they have refreshed my spirit and yours: therefore acknowledge ye them that are such.	For they refreshed my spirit and yours as well. Show your appreciation, therefore, to such men.
1CO	16	19	아시아의 교회들이 너희에게 문안하고 아굴라와 브리스가와 및 그 집에 있는 교회가 주 안에서 너희에게 간절히 문안하고	The churches of Asia salute you. Aquila and Priscilla salute you much in the Lord, with the church that is in their house.	The churches in the province of Asia send you greetings. Aquila and Prisca greet you warmly in the Lord, and so does the church that meets at their house.
1CO	16	20	모든 형제도 너희에게 문안하니 너희는 거룩하게 입맞춤으로 서로 문안하라	All the brethren greet you. Greet ye one another with an holy kiss.	All the brothers here send you greetings. Greet one another with a holy kiss.
1CO	16	21	나 바울은 친필로 너희에게 문안하노니	The salutation of me Paul with mine own hand.	This greeting is in my own hand—Paul.
1CO	16	22	만일 누구든지 주를 사랑하지 아니하거든 저주를 받을지어다 주께서 임하시느니라	If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maran-atha.	If anyone does not love the Lord, let him be under a curse. Come, O Lord!
1CO	16	23	주 예수 그리스도의 은혜가 너희와 함께 하고	The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.	The grace of the Lord Jesus be with you.
1CO	16	24	나의 사랑이 그리스도 예수의 안에서 너희 무리와 함께 할지어다	My love be with you all in Christ Jesus. Amen. The first epistle to the Corinthians was written from Philippi by Stephanas, and Fortunatus, and Achaicus, and Timotheus.	My love be with all of you in Christ Jesus. Amen.
2CO	1	1	하나님의 뜻으로 말미암아 그리스도 예수의 사도 된 바울과 및 형제 디모데는 고린도에 있는 하나님의 교회와 또 온 아가야에 있는 모든 성도에게	Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and Timothy our brother, unto the church of God which is at Corinth, with all the saints which are in all Achaia:	Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy our brother, To the church of God in Corinth, together with all the saints throughout Achaia:
2CO	1	2	하나님 우리 아버지와 주 예수 그리스도로 좇아 은혜와 평강이 있기를 원하노라	Grace be to you and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.	Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
2CO	1	3	찬송하리로다 그는 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 하나님이시요 자비의 아버지시요 모든 위로의 하나님이시며	Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort;	Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of compassion and the God of all comfort,
2CO	1	4	우리의 모든 환난 중에서 우리를 위로하사 우리로 하여금 하나님께 받는 위로로써 모든 환난 중에 있는 자들을 능히 위로하게 하시는 이시로다	Who comforteth us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God.	who comforts us in all our troubles, so that we can comfort those in any trouble with the comfort we ourselves have received from God.
2CO	1	5	그리스도의 고난이 우리에게 넘친 것 같이 우리의 위로도 그리스도로 말미암아 넘치는도다	For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also aboundeth by Christ.	For just as the sufferings of Christ overflow to us, so also through Christ our comfort overflows.
2CO	1	6	우리가 환난 받는 것도 너희의 위로와 구원을 위함이요 혹 위로 받는 것도 너희의 위로를 위함이니 이 위로가 너희 속에 역사하여 우리가 받는 것 같은 고난을 너희도 견디게 하느니라	And whether we be afflicted, it is for your consolation and salvation, which is effectual in the enduring of the same sufferings which we also suffer: or whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation and salvation.	If we are afflicted, it is for your comfort and salvation; if we are comforted, it is for your comfort, which accomplishes in you patient endurance of the same sufferings we experience.
2CO	1	7	너희를 위한 우리의 소망이 견고함은 너희가 고난에 참예하는 자가 된 것 같이 위로에도 그러할 줄을 앎이라	And our hope of you is stedfast, knowing, that as ye are partakers of the sufferings, so shall ye be also of the consolation.	And our hope for you is sure, because we know that just as you share in our sufferings, so also you will share in our comfort.
2CO	1	8	형제들아 우리가 아시아에서 당한 환난을 너희가 알지 못하기를 원치 아니하노니 힘에 지나도록 심한 고생을 받아 살 소망까지 끊어지고	For we would not, brethren, have you ignorant of our trouble which came to us in Asia, that we were pressed out of measure, above strength, insomuch that we despaired even of life:	We do not want you to be unaware, brothers, of the hardships we encountered in the province of Asia. We were under a burden far beyond our ability to endure, so that we despaired even of life.
2CO	1	9	우리 마음에 사형 선고를 받은 줄 알았으니 이는 우리로 자기를 의뢰하지 말고 오직 죽은 자를 다시 살리시는 하나님만 의뢰하게 하심이라	But we had the sentence of death in ourselves, that we should not trust in ourselves, but in God which raiseth the dead:	Indeed, we felt we were under the sentence of death, in order that we would not trust in ourselves, but in God, who raises the dead.
2CO	1	10	그가 이같이 큰 사망에서 우리를 건지셨고 또 건지시리라 또한 이후에라도 건지시기를 그를 의지하여 바라노라	Who delivered us from so great a death, and doth deliver: in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us;	He has delivered us from such a deadly peril, and He will deliver us. In Him we have placed our hope that He will yet again deliver us,
2CO	1	11	너희도 우리를 위하여 간구함으로 도우라 이는 우리가 많은 사람의 기도로 얻은 은사를 인하여 많은 사람도 우리를 위하여 감사하게 하려 함이라	Ye also helping together by prayer for us, that for the gift bestowed upon us by the means of many persons thanks may be given by many on our behalf.	as you help us by your prayers. Then many will give thanks on our behalf for the favor shown us in answer to their prayers.
2CO	1	12	우리가 세상에서 특별히 너희에게 대하여 하나님의 거룩함과 진실함으로써 하되 육체의 지혜로 하지 아니하고 하나님의 은혜로 행함은 우리 양심의 증거하는 바니 이것이 우리의 자랑이라	For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to you-ward.	And this is our boast: Our conscience testifies that we have conducted ourselves in the world, and especially in relation to you, in the holiness and sincerity that are from God—not in worldly wisdom, but in the grace of God.
2CO	1	13	오직 너희가 읽고 아는 것 외에 우리가 다른 것을 쓰지 아니하노니 너희가 끝까지 알기를 내가 바라는 것은	For we write none other things unto you, than what ye read or acknowledge; and I trust ye shall acknowledge even to the end;	For we do not write you anything that is beyond your ability to read and understand. And I hope that you will understand us completely,
2CO	1	14	너희가 대강 우리를 아는 것 같이 우리 주 예수의 날에 너희가 우리의 자랑이 되고 우리가 너희의 자랑이 되는 것이라	As also ye have acknowledged us in part, that we are your rejoicing, even as ye also are ours in the day of the Lord Jesus.	as you have already understood us in part, so that you may boast of us just as we will boast of you in the day of our Lord Jesus.
2CO	1	15	내가 이 확신을 가지고 너희로 두 번 은혜를 얻게 하기 위하여 먼저 너희에게 이르렀다가	And in this confidence I was minded to come unto you before, that ye might have a second benefit;	Confident of this, I planned to visit you first, so that you might receive a double blessing.
2CO	1	16	너희를 지나 마게도냐에 갔다가 다시 마게도냐에서 너희에게 가서 너희가 보내줌으로 유대로 가기를 경영하였으니	And to pass by you into Macedonia, and to come again out of Macedonia unto you, and of you to be brought on my way toward Judea.	I wanted to visit you on my way to Macedonia, and to return to you from Macedonia, and then to have you help me on my way to Judea.
2CO	1	17	이렇게 경영할 때에 어찌 경홀히 하였으리요 혹 경영하기를 육체를 좇아 경영하여 예 예 하고 아니 아니라 하는 일이 내게 있었겠느냐	When I therefore was thus minded, did I use lightness? or the things that I purpose, do I purpose according to the flesh, that with me there should be yea yea, and nay nay?	When I planned this, did I do it carelessly? Or do I make my plans by human standards, so as to say “Yes, yes” when I really mean “No, no”?
2CO	1	18	하나님은 미쁘시니라 우리가 너희에게 한 말은 예 하고 아니라 함이 없노라	But as God is true, our word toward you was not yea and nay.	But as surely as God is faithful, our message to you is not “Yes” and “No.”
2CO	1	19	우리 곧 나와 실루아노와 디모데로 말미암아 너희 가운데 전파된 하나님의 아들 예수 그리스도는 예 하고 아니라 함이 되지 아니하였으니 저에게는 예만 되었느니라	For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by us, even by me and Silvanus and Timotheus, was not yea and nay, but in him was yea.	For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was proclaimed among you by me and Silvanus and Timothy, was not “Yes” and “No,” but in Him it has always been “Yes.”
2CO	1	20	하나님의 약속은 얼마든지 그리스도 안에서 예가 되니 그런즉 그로 말미암아 우리가 아멘 하여 하나님께 영광을 돌리게 되느니라	For all the promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God by us.	For all the promises of God are “Yes” in Christ. And so through Him, our “Amen” is spoken to the glory of God.
2CO	1	21	우리를 너희와 함께 그리스도 안에서 견고케 하시고 우리에게 기름을 부으신 이는 하나님이시니	Now he which stablisheth us with you in Christ, and hath anointed us, is God;	Now it is God who establishes both us and you in Christ. He anointed us,
2CO	1	22	저가 또한 우리에게 인치시고 보증으로 성령을 우리 마음에 주셨느니라	Who hath also sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts.	placed His seal on us, and put His Spirit in our hearts as a pledge of what is to come.
2CO	1	23	내가 내 영혼을 두고 하나님을 불러 증거하시게 하노니 다시 고린도에 가지 아니한 것은 너희를 아끼려 함이라	Moreover I call God for a record upon my soul, that to spare you I came not as yet unto Corinth.	I call God as my witness that it was in order to spare you that I did not return to Corinth.
2CO	1	24	우리가 너희 믿음을 주관하려는 것이 아니요 오직 너희 기쁨을 돕는 자가 되려 함이니 이는 너희가 믿음에 섰음이라	Not for that we have dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy: for by faith ye stand.	Not that we lord it over your faith, but we are fellow workers with you for your joy, because it is by faith that you stand firm.
2CO	2	1	내가 다시 근심으로 너희에게 나아가지 않기로 스스로 결단하였노니	But I determined this with myself, that I would not come again to you in heaviness.	So I made up my mind not to make another painful visit to you.
2CO	2	2	내가 너희를 근심하게 하면 나의 근심하게 한 자밖에 나를 기쁘게 하는 자가 누구냐	For if I make you sorry, who is he then that maketh me glad, but the same which is made sorry by me?	For if I grieve you, who is left to cheer me but those whom I have grieved?
2CO	2	3	내가 이같이 쓴 것은 내가 갈 때에 마땅히 나를 기쁘게 할 자로부터 도리어 근심을 얻을까 염려함이요 또 너희 무리를 대하여 나의 기쁨이 너희 무리의 기쁨인 줄 확신함이로라	And I wrote this same unto you, lest, when I came, I should have sorrow from them of whom I ought to rejoice; having confidence in you all, that my joy is the joy of you all.	I wrote as I did so that on my arrival I would not be saddened by those who ought to make me rejoice. I had confidence in all of you, that you would share my joy.
2CO	2	4	내가 큰 환난과 애통한 마음이 있어 많은 눈물로 너희에게 썼노니 이는 너희로 근심하게 하려 한 것이 아니요 오직 내가 너희를 향하여 넘치는 사랑이 있음을 너희로 알게 하려 함이라	For out of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote unto you with many tears; not that ye should be grieved, but that ye might know the love which I have more abundantly unto you.	For through many tears I wrote you out of great distress and anguish of heart, not to grieve you but to let you know how much I love you.
2CO	2	5	근심하게 한 자가 있었을지라도 나를 근심하게 한 것이 아니요 어느 정도 너희 무리를 근심하게 한 것이니 어느 정도라 함은 내가 너무 심하게 하지 아니하려 함이라	But if any have caused grief, he hath not grieved me, but in part: that I may not overcharge you all.	Now if anyone has caused grief, he has not grieved me but all of you—to some degree, not to overstate it.
2CO	2	6	이러한 사람이 많은 사람에게서 벌 받은 것이 족하도다	Sufficient to such a man is this punishment, which was inflicted of many.	The punishment imposed on him by the majority is sufficient for him.
2CO	2	7	그런즉 너희는 차라리 저를 용서하고 위로할 것이니 저가 너무 많은 근심에 잠길까 두려워하노라	So that contrariwise ye ought rather to forgive him, and comfort him, lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow.	So instead, you ought to forgive and comfort him, so that he will not be overwhelmed by excessive sorrow.
2CO	2	8	그러므로 너희를 권하노니 사랑을 저희에게 나타내라	Wherefore I beseech you that ye would confirm your love toward him.	Therefore I urge you to reaffirm your love for him.
2CO	2	9	너희가 범사에 순종하는지 그 증거를 알고자 하여 내가 이것을 너희에게 썼노라	For to this end also did I write, that I might know the proof of you, whether ye be obedient in all things.	My purpose in writing you was to see if you would stand the test and be obedient in everything.
2CO	2	10	너희가 무슨 일이든지 뉘게 용서하면 나도 그리하고 내가 만일 용서한 일이 있으면 용서한 그것은 너희를 위하여 그리스도 앞에서 한 것이니	To whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive also: for if I forgave any thing, to whom I forgave it, for your sakes forgave I it in the person of Christ;	If you forgive anyone, I also forgive him. And if I have forgiven anything, I have forgiven it in the presence of Christ for your sake,
2CO	2	11	이는 우리로 사단에게 속지 않게 하려 함이라 우리가 그 궤계를 알지 못하는 바가 아니로라	Lest Satan should get an advantage of us: for we are not ignorant of his devices.	in order that Satan should not outwit us. For we are not unaware of his schemes.
2CO	2	12	내가 그리스도의 복음을 위하여 드로아에 이르매 주 안에서 문이 내게 열렸으되	Furthermore, when I came to Troas to preach Christ’s gospel, and a door was opened unto me of the Lord,	Now when I went to Troas to preach the gospel of Christ and a door stood open for me in the Lord,
2CO	2	13	내가 내 형제 디도를 만나지 못하므로 내 심령이 편치 못하여 저희를 작별하고 마게도냐로 갔노라	I had no rest in my spirit, because I found not Titus my brother: but taking my leave of them, I went from thence into Macedonia.	I had no peace in my spirit, because I did not find my brother Titus there. So I said goodbye to them and went on to Macedonia.
2CO	2	14	항상 우리를 그리스도 안에서 이기게 하시고 우리로 말미암아 각처에서 그리스도를 아는 냄새를 나타내시는 하나님께 감사하노라	Now thanks be unto God, which always causeth us to triumph in Christ, and maketh manifest the savour of his knowledge by us in every place.	But thanks be to God, who always leads us triumphantly as captives in Christ and through us spreads everywhere the fragrance of the knowledge of Him.
2CO	2	15	우리는 구원 얻는 자들에게나 망하는 자들에게나 하나님 앞에서 그리스도의 향기니	For we are unto God a sweet savour of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish:	For we are to God the sweet aroma of Christ among those who are being saved and those who are perishing.
2CO	2	16	이 사람에게는 사망으로 좇아 사망에 이르는 냄새요 저 사람에게는 생명으로 좇아 생명에 이르는 냄새라 누가 이것을 감당하리요	To the one we are the savour of death unto death; and to the other the savour of life unto life. And who is sufficient for these things?	To the one, we are an odor of death and demise; to the other, a fragrance that brings life. And who is qualified for such a task?
2CO	2	17	우리는 수다한 사람과 같이 하나님의 말씀을 혼잡하게 하지 아니하고 곧 순전함으로 하나님께 받은 것 같이 하나님 앞에서와 그리스도 안에서 말하노라	For we are not as many, which corrupt the word of God: but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ.	For we are not like so many others, who peddle the word of God for profit. On the contrary, in Christ we speak before God with sincerity, as men sent from God.
2CO	3	1	우리가 다시 자천하기를 시작하겠느냐 우리가 어찌 어떤 사람처럼 천거서를 너희에게 부치거나 혹 너희에게 맡거나 할 필요가 있느냐	Do we begin again to commend ourselves? or need we, as some others, epistles of commendation to you, or letters of commendation from you?	Are we beginning to commend ourselves again? Or do we need, like some people, letters of recommendation to you or from you?
2CO	3	2	너희가 우리의 편지라 우리 마음에 썼고 뭇 사람이 알고 읽는 바라	Ye are our epistle written in our hearts, known and read of all men:	You yourselves are our letter, inscribed on our hearts, known and read by everyone.
2CO	3	3	너희는 우리로 말미암아 나타난 그리스도의 편지니 이는 먹으로 쓴 것이 아니요 오직 살아 계신 하나님의 영으로 한 것이며 또 돌비에 쓴 것이 아니요 오직 육의 심비에 한 것이라	Forasmuch as ye are manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ ministered by us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart.	It is clear that you are a letter from Christ, the result of our ministry, written not with ink but with the Spirit of the living God, not on tablets of stone but on tablets of human hearts.
2CO	3	4	우리가 그리스도로 말미암아 하나님을 향하여 이같은 확신이 있으니	And such trust have we through Christ to God-ward:	Such confidence before God is ours through Christ.
2CO	3	5	우리가 무슨 일이든지 우리에게서 난 것 같이 생각하여 스스로 만족할 것이 아니니 우리의 만족은 오직 하나님께로서 났느니라	Not that we are sufficient of ourselves to think any thing as of ourselves; but our sufficiency is of God;	Not that we are competent in ourselves to claim that anything comes from us, but our competence comes from God.
2CO	3	6	저가 또 우리로 새 언약의 일꾼 되기에 만족케 하셨으니 의문으로 하지 아니하고 오직 영으로 함이니 의문은 죽이는 것이요 영은 살리는 것임이니라	Who also hath made us able ministers of the new testament; not of the letter, but of the spirit: for the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life.	And He has qualified us as ministers of a new covenant, not of the letter but of the Spirit; for the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life.
2CO	3	7	돌에 써서 새긴 죽게 하는 의문의 직분도 영광이 있어 이스라엘 자손들이 모세의 얼굴의 없어질 영광을 인하여 그 얼굴을 주목하지 못하였거든	But if the ministration of death, written and engraven in stones, was glorious, so that the children of Israel could not stedfastly behold the face of Moses for the glory of his countenance; which glory was to be done away:	Now if the ministry of death, which was engraved in letters on stone, came with such glory that the Israelites could not gaze at the face of Moses because of its fleeting glory,
2CO	3	8	하물며 영의 직분이 더욱 영광이 있지 아니하겠느냐	How shall not the ministration of the spirit be rather glorious?	will not the ministry of the Spirit be even more glorious?
2CO	3	9	정죄의 직분도 영광이 있은즉 의의 직분은 영광이 더욱 넘치리라	For if the ministration of condemnation be glory, much more doth the ministration of righteousness exceed in glory.	For if the ministry of condemnation was glorious, how much more glorious is the ministry of righteousness!
2CO	3	10	영광되었던 것이 더 큰 영광을 인하여 이에 영광될 것이 없으나	For even that which was made glorious had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that excelleth.	Indeed, what was once glorious has no glory now in comparison to the glory that surpasses it.
2CO	3	11	없어질 것도 영광으로 말미암았은즉 길이 있을 것은 더욱 영광 가운데 있느니라	For if that which is done away was glorious, much more that which remaineth is glorious.	For if what was fading away came with glory, how much greater is the glory of that which endures!
2CO	3	12	우리가 이같은 소망이 있으므로 담대히 말하노니	Seeing then that we have such hope, we use great plainness of speech:	Therefore, since we have such a hope, we are very bold.
2CO	3	13	우리는 모세가 이스라엘 자손들로 장차 없어질 것의 결국을 주목치 못하게 하려고 수건을 그 얼굴에 쓴 것 같이 아니하노라	And not as Moses, which put a vail over his face, that the children of Israel could not stedfastly look to the end of that which is abolished:	We are not like Moses, who would put a veil over his face to keep the Israelites from gazing at the end of what was fading away.
2CO	3	14	그러나 저희 마음이 완고하여 오늘까지라도 구약을 읽을 때에 그 수건이 오히려 벗어지지 아니하고 있으니 그 수건은 그리스도 안에서 없어질 것이라	But their minds were blinded: for until this day remaineth the same vail untaken away in the reading of the old testament; which vail is done away in Christ.	But their minds were closed. For to this day the same veil remains at the reading of the old covenant. It has not been lifted, because only in Christ can it be removed.
2CO	3	15	오늘까지 모세의 글을 읽을 때에 수건이 오히려 그 마음을 덮었도다	But even unto this day, when Moses is read, the vail is upon their heart.	And even to this day when Moses is read, a veil covers their hearts.
2CO	3	16	그러나 언제든지 주께로 돌아가면 그 수건이 벗어지리라	Nevertheless when it shall turn to the Lord, the vail shall be taken away.	But whenever anyone turns to the Lord, the veil is taken away.
2CO	3	17	주는 영이시니 주의 영이 계신 곳에는 자유함이 있느니라	Now the Lord is that Spirit: and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.	Now the Lord is the Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is freedom.
2CO	3	18	우리가 다 수건을 벗은 얼굴로 거울을 보는 것 같이 주의 영광을 보매 저와 같은 형상으로 화하여 영광으로 영광에 이르니 곧 주의 영으로 말미암음이니라	But we all, with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord.	And we, who with unveiled faces all reflect the glory of the Lord, are being transformed into His image with intensifying glory, which comes from the Lord, who is the Spirit.
2CO	4	1	이러하므로 우리가 이 직분을 받아 긍휼하심을 입은 대로 낙심하지 아니하고	Therefore seeing we have this ministry, as we have received mercy, we faint not;	Therefore, since God in His mercy has given us this ministry, we do not lose heart.
2CO	4	2	이에 숨은 부끄러움의 일을 버리고 궤휼 가운데 행하지 아니하며 하나님의 말씀을 혼잡케 아니하고 오직 진리를 나타냄으로 하나님 앞에서 각 사람의 양심에 대하여 스스로 천거하노라	But have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully; but by manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every man’s conscience in the sight of God.	Instead, we have renounced secret and shameful ways. We do not practice deceit, nor do we distort the word of God. On the contrary, by open proclamation of the truth, we commend ourselves to every man’s conscience in the sight of God.
2CO	4	3	만일 우리 복음이 가리웠으면 망하는 자들에게 가리운 것이라	But if our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost:	And even if our gospel is veiled, it is veiled to those who are perishing.
2CO	4	4	그 중에 이 세상 신이 믿지 아니하는 자들의 마음을 혼미케 하여 그리스도의 영광의 복음의 광채가 비취지 못하게 함이니 그리스도는 하나님의 형상이니라	In whom the god of this world hath blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them.	The god of this age has blinded the minds of unbelievers so they cannot see the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ, who is the image of God.
2CO	4	5	우리가 우리를 전파하는 것이 아니라 오직 그리스도 예수의 주 되신 것과 또 예수를 위하여 우리가 너희의 종 된 것을 전파함이라	For we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and ourselves your servants for Jesus’ sake.	For we do not proclaim ourselves, but Jesus Christ as Lord, and ourselves as your servants for Jesus’ sake.
2CO	4	6	어두운 데서 빛이 비취리라 하시던 그 하나님께서 예수 그리스도의 얼굴에 있는 하나님의 영광을 아는 빛을 우리 마음에 비취셨느니라	For God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.	For God, who said, “Let light shine out of darkness,” made His light shine in our hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.
2CO	4	7	우리가 이 보배를 질그릇에 가졌으니 이는 능력의 심히 큰 것이 하나님께 있고 우리에게 있지 아니함을 알게 하려 함이라	But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us.	Now we have this treasure in jars of clay to show that this surpassingly great power is from God and not from us.
2CO	4	8	우리가 사방으로 우겨쌈을 당하여도 싸이지 아니하며 답답한 일을 당하여도 낙심하지 아니하며	We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair;	We are hard pressed on all sides, but not crushed; perplexed, but not in despair;
2CO	4	9	핍박을 받아도 버린 바 되지 아니하며 거꾸러뜨림을 당하여도 망하지 아니하고	Persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed;	persecuted, but not forsaken; struck down, but not destroyed.
2CO	4	10	우리가 항상 예수 죽인 것을 몸에 짊어짐은 예수의 생명도 우리 몸에 나타나게 하려 함이라	Always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body.	We always carry around in our body the death of Jesus, so that the life of Jesus may also be revealed in our body.
2CO	4	11	우리 산 자가 항상 예수를 위하여 죽음에 넘기움은 예수의 생명이 또한 우리 죽을 육체에 나타나게 하려 함이니라	For we which live are alway delivered unto death for Jesus’ sake, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh.	For we who are alive are always consigned to death for Jesus’ sake, so that the life of Jesus may also be revealed in our mortal body.
2CO	4	12	그런즉 사망은 우리 안에서 역사하고 생명은 너희 안에서 하느니라	So then death worketh in us, but life in you.	So then, death is at work in us, but life is at work in you.
2CO	4	13	기록한 바 내가 믿는 고로 말하였다 한 것 같이 우리가 같은 믿음의 마음을 가졌으니 우리도 믿는 고로 또한 말하노라	We having the same spirit of faith, according as it is written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken; we also believe, and therefore speak;	And in keeping with what is written: “I believed, therefore I have spoken,” we who have the same spirit of faith also believe and therefore speak,
2CO	4	14	주 예수를 다시 살리신 이가 예수와 함께 우리도 다시 살리사 너희와 함께 그 앞에 서게 하실 줄을 아노니	Knowing that he which raised up the Lord Jesus shall raise up us also by Jesus, and shall present us with you.	knowing that the One who raised the Lord Jesus will also raise us with Jesus and present us with you in His presence.
2CO	4	15	모든 것을 너희를 위하여 하는 것은 은혜가 많은 사람의 감사함으로 말미암아 더하여 넘쳐서 하나님께 영광을 돌리게 하려 함이라	For all things are for your sakes, that the abundant grace might through the thanksgiving of many redound to the glory of God.	All this is for your benefit, so that the grace that is extending to more and more people may overflow in thanksgiving, to the glory of God.
2CO	4	16	그러므로 우리가 낙심하지 아니하노니 겉 사람은 후패하나 우리의 속은 날로 새롭도다	For which cause we faint not; but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day.	Therefore we do not lose heart. Though our outer self is wasting away, yet our inner self is being renewed day by day.
2CO	4	17	우리의 잠시 받는 환난의 경한 것이 지극히 크고 영원한 영광의 중한 것을 우리에게 이루게 함이니	For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory;	For our light and momentary affliction is producing for us an eternal weight of glory that is far beyond comparison.
2CO	4	18	우리의 돌아보는 것은 보이는 것이 아니요 보이지 않는 것이니 보이는 것은 잠간이요 보이지 않는 것은 영원함이니라	While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal.	So we fix our eyes not on what is seen, but on what is unseen. For what is seen is temporary, but what is unseen is eternal.
2CO	5	1	만일 땅에 있는 우리의 장막집이 무너지면 하나님께서 지으신 집 곧 손으로 지은 것이 아니요 하늘에 있는 영원한 집이 우리에게 있는 줄 아나니	For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.	Now we know that if the earthly tent we live in is dismantled, we have a building from God, an eternal house in heaven, not built by human hands.
2CO	5	2	과연 우리가 여기 있어 탄식하며 하늘로부터 오는 우리 처소로 덧입기를 간절히 사모하노니	For in this we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven:	For in this tent we groan, longing to be clothed with our heavenly dwelling,
2CO	5	3	이렇게 입음은 벗은 자들로 발견되지 않으려 함이라	If so be that being clothed we shall not be found naked.	because when we are clothed, we will not be found naked.
2CO	5	4	이 장막에 있는 우리가 짐 진 것 같이 탄식하는 것은 벗고자 함이 아니요 오직 덧입고자 함이니 죽을 것이 생명에게 삼킨 바 되게 하려 함이라	For we that are in this tabernacle do groan, being burdened: not for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life.	So while we are in this tent, we groan under our burdens, because we do not wish to be unclothed but clothed, so that our mortality may be swallowed up by life.
2CO	5	5	곧 이것을 우리에게 이루게 하시고 보증으로 성령을 우리에게 주신 이는 하나님이시니라	Now he that hath wrought us for the selfsame thing is God, who also hath given unto us the earnest of the Spirit.	And God has prepared us for this very purpose and has given us the Spirit as a pledge of what is to come.
2CO	5	6	그러므로 우리가 항상 담대하여 몸에 거할 때에는 주와 따로 거하는 줄을 아노니	Therefore we are always confident, knowing that, whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord:	Therefore we are always confident, although we know that while we are at home in the body, we are away from the Lord.
2CO	5	7	이는 우리가 믿음으로 행하고 보는 것으로 하지 아니함이로라	(For we walk by faith, not by sight:)	For we walk by faith, not by sight.
2CO	5	8	우리가 담대하여 원하는 바는 차라리 몸을 떠나 주와 함께 거하는 그것이니라	We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord.	We are confident, then, and would prefer to be away from the body and at home with the Lord.
2CO	5	9	그런즉 우리는 거하든지 떠나든지 주를 기쁘시게 하는 자가 되기를 힘쓰노라	Wherefore we labour, that, whether present or absent, we may be accepted of him.	So we aspire to please Him, whether we are here in this body or away from it.
2CO	5	10	이는 우리가 다 반드시 그리스도의 심판대 앞에 드러나 각각 선악간에 그 몸으로 행한 것을 따라 받으려 함이라	For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ; that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad.	For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that each one may receive his due for the things done in the body, whether good or bad.
2CO	5	11	우리가 주의 두려우심을 알므로 사람을 권하노니 우리가 하나님 앞에 알리워졌고 또 너희의 양심에도 알리워졌기를 바라노라	Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men; but we are made manifest unto God; and I trust also are made manifest in your consciences.	Therefore, since we know what it means to fear the Lord, we try to persuade men. What we are is clear to God, and I hope it is clear to your conscience as well.
2CO	5	12	우리가 다시 너희에게 자천하는 것이 아니요 오직 우리를 인하여 자랑할 기회를 너희에게 주어 마음으로 하지 않고 외모로 자랑하는 자들을 대하게 하려 하는 것이라	For we commend not ourselves again unto you, but give you occasion to glory on our behalf, that ye may have somewhat to answer them which glory in appearance, and not in heart.	We are not commending ourselves to you again. Instead, we are giving you an occasion to be proud of us, so that you can answer those who take pride in appearances rather than in the heart.
2CO	5	13	우리가 만일 미쳤어도 하나님을 위한 것이요 만일 정신이 온전하여도 너희를 위한 것이니	For whether we be beside ourselves, it is to God: or whether we be sober, it is for your cause.	If we are out of our mind, it is for God; if we are of sound mind, it is for you.
2CO	5	14	그리스도의 사랑이 우리를 강권하시는도다 우리가 생각건대 한 사람이 모든 사람을 대신하여 죽었은즉 모든 사람이 죽은 것이라	For the love of Christ constraineth us; because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead:	For Christ’s love compels us, because we are convinced that One died for all, therefore all died.
2CO	5	15	저가 모든 사람을 대신하여 죽으심은 산 자들로 하여금 다시는 저희 자신을 위하여 살지 않고 오직 저희를 대신하여 죽었다가 다시 사신 자를 위하여 살게 하려 함이니라	And that he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again.	And He died for all, that those who live should no longer live for themselves, but for Him who died for them and was raised again.
2CO	5	16	그러므로 우리가 이제부터는 아무 사람도 육체대로 알지 아니하노라 비록 우리가 그리스도도 육체대로 알았으나 이제부터는 이같이 알지 아니하노라	Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh: yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more.	So from now on we regard no one according to the flesh. Although we once regarded Christ in this way, we do so no longer.
2CO	5	17	그런즉 누구든지 그리스도 안에 있으면 새로운 피조물이라 이전 것은 지나갔으니 보라 새 것이 되었도다	Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are passed away; behold, all things are become new.	Therefore if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation. The old has passed away. Behold, the new has come!
2CO	5	18	모든 것이 하나님께로 났나니 저가 그리스도로 말미암아 우리를 자기와 화목하게 하시고 또 우리에게 화목하게 하는 직책을 주셨으니	And all things are of God, who hath reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and hath given to us the ministry of reconciliation;	All this is from God, who reconciled us to Himself through Christ and gave us the ministry of reconciliation:
2CO	5	19	이는 하나님께서 그리스도 안에 계시사 세상을 자기와 화목하게 하시며 저희의 죄를 저희에게 돌리지 아니하시고 화목하게 하는 말씀을 우리에게 부탁하셨느니라	To wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them; and hath committed unto us the word of reconciliation.	that God was reconciling the world to Himself in Christ, not counting men’s trespasses against them. And He has committed to us the message of reconciliation.
2CO	5	20	이러므로 우리가 그리스도를 대신하여 사신이 되어 하나님이 우리로 너희를 권면하시는 것 같이 그리스도를 대신하여 간구하노니 너희는 하나님과 화목하라	Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ’s stead, be ye reconciled to God.	Therefore we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God were making His appeal through us. We implore you on behalf of Christ: Be reconciled to God.
2CO	5	21	하나님이 죄를 알지도 못하신 자로 우리를 대신하여 죄를 삼으신 것은 우리로 하여금 저의 안에서 하나님의 의가 되게 하려 하심이니라	For he hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.	God made Him who knew no sin to be sin on our behalf, so that in Him we might become the righteousness of God.
2CO	6	1	우리가 하나님과 함께 일하는 자로서 너희를 권하노니 하나님의 은혜를 헛되이 받지 말라	We then, as workers together with him, beseech you also that ye receive not the grace of God in vain.	As God’s fellow workers, then, we urge you not to receive God’s grace in vain.
2CO	6	2	가라사대 내가 은혜 베풀 때에 너를 듣고 구원의 날에 너를 도왔다 하셨으니 보라 지금은 은혜 받을 만한 때요 보라 지금은 구원의 날이로다	(For he saith, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation have I succoured thee: behold, now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation.)	For He says: “In the time of favor I heard you, and in the day of salvation I helped you.” Behold, now is the time of favor; now is the day of salvation!
2CO	6	3	우리가 이 직책이 훼방을 받지 않게 하려고 무엇에든지 아무에게도 거리끼지 않게 하고	Giving no offence in any thing, that the ministry be not blamed:	We put no obstacle in anyone’s way, so that no one can discredit our ministry.
2CO	6	4	오직 모든 일에 하나님의 일꾼으로 자천하여 많이 견디는 것과 환난과 궁핍과 곤란과	But in all things approving ourselves as the ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses,	Rather, as servants of God we commend ourselves in every way: in great endurance; in troubles, hardships, and calamities;
2CO	6	5	매맞음과 갇힘과 요란한 것과 수고로움과 자지 못함과 먹지 못함과	In stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labours, in watchings, in fastings;	in beatings, imprisonments, and riots; in labor, sleepless nights, and hunger;
2CO	6	6	깨끗함과 지식과 오래 참음과 자비함과 성령의 감화와 거짓이 없는 사랑과	By pureness, by knowledge, by longsuffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned,	in purity, knowledge, patience, and kindness; in the Holy Spirit and in sincere love;
2CO	6	7	진리의 말씀과 하나님의 능력 안에 있어 의의 병기로 좌우하고	By the word of truth, by the power of God, by the armour of righteousness on the right hand and on the left,	in truthful speech and in the power of God; with the weapons of righteousness in the right hand and in the left;
2CO	6	8	영광과 욕됨으로 말미암으며 악한 이름과 아름다운 이름으로 말미암으며 속이는 자 같으나 참되고	By honour and dishonour, by evil report and good report: as deceivers, and yet true;	through glory and dishonor, slander and praise; viewed as imposters, yet genuine;
2CO	6	9	무명한 자 같으나 유명한 자요 죽는 자 같으나 보라 우리가 살고 징계를 받는 자 같으나 죽임을 당하지 아니하고	As unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and, behold, we live; as chastened, and not killed;	as unknown, yet well-known; dying, and yet we live on; punished, yet not killed;
2CO	6	10	근심하는 자 같으나 항상 기뻐하고 가난한 자 같으나 많은 사람을 부요하게 하고 아무 것도 없는 자 같으나 모든 것을 가진 자로다	As sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things.	sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; poor, yet making many rich; having nothing, and yet possessing everything.
2CO	6	11	고린도인들이여 너희를 향하여 우리의 입이 열리고 우리의 마음이 넓었으니	O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is enlarged.	We have spoken freely to you, Corinthians. Our hearts are open wide.
2CO	6	12	너희가 우리 안에서 좁아진 것이 아니라 오직 너희 심정에서 좁아진 것이니라	Ye are not straitened in us, but ye are straitened in your own bowels.	It is not our affection, but yours, that is restrained.
2CO	6	13	내가 자녀에게 말하듯 하노니 보답하는 양으로 너희도 마음을 넓히라	Now for a recompence in the same, (I speak as unto my children,) be ye also enlarged.	As a fair exchange, I ask you as my children: Open wide your hearts also.
2CO	6	14	너희는 믿지 않는 자와 멍에를 같이 하지 말라 의와 불법이 어찌 함께 하며 빛과 어두움이 어찌 사귀며	Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers: for what fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion hath light with darkness?	Do not be unequally yoked with unbelievers. For what partnership can righteousness have with wickedness? Or what fellowship does light have with darkness?
2CO	6	15	그리스도와 벨리알이 어찌 조화되며 믿는 자와 믿지 않는 자가 어찌 상관하며	And what concord hath Christ with Belial? or what part hath he that believeth with an infidel?	What harmony is there between Christ and Belial? Or what does a believer have in common with an unbeliever?
2CO	6	16	하나님의 성전과 우상이 어찌 일치가 되리요 우리는 살아계신 하나님의 성전이라 이와 같이 하나님께서 가라사대 내가 저희 가운데 거하며 두루 행하여 나는 저희 하나님이 되고 저희는 나의 백성이 되리라 하셨느니라	And what agreement hath the temple of God with idols? for ye are the temple of the living God; as God hath said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people.	What agreement can exist between the temple of God and idols? For we are the temple of the living God. As God has said: “I will dwell with them and walk among them, and I will be their God, and they will be My people.”
2CO	6	17	그러므로 주께서 말씀하시기를 너희는 저희 중에서 나와서 따로 있고 부정한 것을 만지지 말라 내가 너희를 영접하여	Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you,	“Therefore come out from among them and be separate, says the Lord. Touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you.”
2CO	6	18	너희에게 아버지가 되고 너희는 내게 자녀가 되리라 전능하신 주의 말씀이니라 하셨느니라	And will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty.	And: “I will be a Father to you, and you will be My sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty.”
2CO	7	1	그런즉 사랑하는 자들아 이 약속을 가진 우리가 하나님을 두려워하는 가운데서 거룩함을 온전히 이루어 육과 영의 온갖 더러운 것에서 자신을 깨끗케 하자	Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.	Therefore, beloved, since we have these promises, let us cleanse ourselves from everything that defiles body and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
2CO	7	2	마음으로 우리를 영접하라 우리가 아무에게도 불의를 하지 않고 아무에게도 해롭게 하지 않고 아무에게도 속여 빼앗은 일이 없노라	Receive us; we have wronged no man, we have corrupted no man, we have defrauded no man.	Make room for us in your hearts. We have wronged no one, we have corrupted no one, we have exploited no one.
2CO	7	3	내가 정죄하려고 이 말을 하는 것이 아니라 이전에 말하였거니와 너희로 우리 마음에 있어 함께 죽고 함께 살게 하고자 함이라	I speak not this to condemn you: for I have said before, that ye are in our hearts to die and live with you.	I do not say this to condemn you. I have said before that you so occupy our hearts that we live and die together with you.
2CO	7	4	내가 너희를 향하여 하는 말이 담대한 것도 많고 너희를 위하여 자랑하는 것도 많으니 내가 우리의 모든 환난 가운데서도 위로가 가득하고 기쁨이 넘치는도다	Great is my boldness of speech toward you, great is my glorying of you: I am filled with comfort, I am exceeding joyful in all our tribulation.	Great is my confidence in you; great is my pride in you; I am filled with encouragement; in all our troubles my joy overflows.
2CO	7	5	우리가 마게도냐에 이르렀을때에도 우리 육체가 편치 못하고 사방으로 환난을 당하여 밖으로는 다툼이요 안으로는 두려움이라	For, when we were come into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest, but we were troubled on every side; without were fightings, within were fears.	For when we arrived in Macedonia, our bodies had no rest, but we were pressed from every direction—conflicts on the outside, fears within.
2CO	7	6	그러나 비천한 자들을 위로하시는 하나님이 디도의 옴으로 우리를 위로하셨으니	Nevertheless God, that comforteth those that are cast down, comforted us by the coming of Titus;	But God, who comforts the downcast, comforted us by the arrival of Titus,
2CO	7	7	저의 온 것뿐 아니요 오직 저가 너희에게 받은 그 위로로 위로하고 너희의 사모함과 애통함과 나를 위하여 열심 있는 것을 우리에게 고함으로 나로 더욱 기쁘게 하였느니라	And not by his coming only, but by the consolation wherewith he was comforted in you, when he told us your earnest desire, your mourning, your fervent mind toward me; so that I rejoiced the more.	and not only by his arrival, but also by the comfort he had received from you. He told us about your longing, your mourning, and your zeal for me, so that I rejoiced all the more.
2CO	7	8	그러므로 내가 편지로 너희를 근심하게 한 것을 후회하였으나 지금은 후회하지 아니함은 그 편지가 너희로 잠시만 근심하게 한 줄을 앎이라	For though I made you sorry with a letter, I do not repent, though I did repent: for I perceive that the same epistle hath made you sorry, though it were but for a season.	Even if I caused you sorrow by my letter, I do not regret it. Although I did regret it, I now see that my letter caused you sorrow, but only for a short time.
2CO	7	9	내가 지금 기뻐함은 너희로 근심하게 한 까닭이 아니요 도리어 너희가 근심함으로 회개함에 이른 까닭이라 너희가 하나님의 뜻대로 근심하게 된 것은 우리에게서 아무 해도 받지 않게 하려 함이라	Now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to repentance: for ye were made sorry after a godly manner, that ye might receive damage by us in nothing.	And now I rejoice, not because you were made sorrowful, but because your sorrow led you to repentance. For you felt the sorrow that God had intended, and so were not harmed in any way by us.
2CO	7	10	하나님의 뜻대로 하는 근심은 후회할 것이 없는 구원에 이르게 하는 회개를 이루는 것이요 세상 근심은 사망을 이루는 것이니라	For godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be repented of: but the sorrow of the world worketh death.	Godly sorrow brings repentance that leads to salvation without regret, but worldly sorrow brings death.
2CO	7	11	보라 하나님의 뜻대로 하게 한 이 근심이 너희로 얼마나 간절하게 하며 얼마나 변명하게 하며 얼마나 분하게 하며 얼마나 두렵게 하며 얼마나 사모하게 하며 얼마나 열심있게 하며 얼마나 벌하게 하였는가 너희가 저 일에 대하여 일절 너희 자신의 깨끗함을 나타내었느니라	For behold this selfsame thing, that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of yourselves, yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what vehement desire, yea, what zeal, yea, what revenge! In all things ye have approved yourselves to be clear in this matter.	Consider what this godly sorrow has produced in you: what earnestness, what eagerness to clear yourselves, what indignation, what alarm, what longing, what zeal, what vindication! In every way you have proved yourselves to be innocent in this matter.
2CO	7	12	그런즉 내가 너희에게 쓴 것은 그 불의 행한 자를 위한 것도 아니요 그 불의 당한 자를 위한 것도 아니요 오직 우리를 위한 너희의 간절함이 하나님 앞에서 너희에게 나타나게 하려 함이로라	Wherefore, though I wrote unto you, I did it not for his cause that had done the wrong, nor for his cause that suffered wrong, but that our care for you in the sight of God might appear unto you.	So even though I wrote to you, it was not on account of the one who did wrong or the one who was harmed, but rather that your earnestness on our behalf would be made clear to you in the sight of God.
2CO	7	13	이로 인하여 우리가 위로를 받았고 우리의 받은 위로 위에 디도의 기쁨으로 우리가 더욱 많이 기뻐함은 그의 마음이 너희 무리를 인하여 안심함을 얻었음이니라	Therefore we were comforted in your comfort: yea, and exceedingly the more joyed we for the joy of Titus, because his spirit was refreshed by you all.	On account of this, we are encouraged. In addition to our own encouragement, we were even more delighted by the joy of Titus. For his spirit has been refreshed by all of you.
2CO	7	14	내가 그에게 너희를 위하여 자랑한 것이 있더라도 부끄럽지 아니하니 우리가 너희에게 이른 말이 다 참된 것 같이 디도 앞에서 우리의 자랑한 것도 참되게 되었도다	For if I have boasted any thing to him of you, I am not ashamed; but as we spake all things to you in truth, even so our boasting, which I made before Titus, is found a truth.	Indeed, I was not embarrassed by anything I had boasted to him about you. But just as everything we said to you was true, so our boasting to Titus has proved to be true as well.
2CO	7	15	저가 너희 모든 사람들이 두려워하고 떪으로 자기를 영접하여 순종한 것을 생각하고 너희를 향하여 그의 심정이 더욱 깊었으니	And his inward affection is more abundant toward you, whilst he remembereth the obedience of you all, how with fear and trembling ye received him.	And his affection for you is even greater when he remembers that you were all obedient as you welcomed him with fear and trembling.
2CO	7	16	내가 너희를 인하여 범사에 담대한 고로 기뻐하노라	I rejoice therefore that I have confidence in you in all things.	I rejoice that I can have complete confidence in you.
2CO	8	1	형제들아 하나님께서 마게도냐 교회들에게 주신 은혜를 우리가 너희에게 알게 하노니	Moreover, brethren, we do you to wit of the grace of God bestowed on the churches of Macedonia;	Now, brothers, we want you to know about the grace that God has given the churches of Macedonia.
2CO	8	2	환난의 많은 시련 가운데서 저희 넘치는 기쁨과 극한 가난이 저희로 풍성한 연보를 넘치도록 하게 하였느니라	How that in a great trial of affliction the abundance of their joy and their deep poverty abounded unto the riches of their liberality.	In the terrible ordeal they suffered, their abundant joy and deep poverty overflowed into rich generosity.
2CO	8	3	내가 증거하노니 저희가 힘대로 할 뿐 아니라 힘에 지나도록 자원하여	For to their power, I bear record, yea, and beyond their power they were willing of themselves;	For I testify that they gave according to their ability and even beyond it. Of their own accord,
2CO	8	4	이 은혜와 성도 섬기는 일에 참여함에 대하여 우리에게 간절히 구하니	Praying us with much intreaty that we would receive the gift, and take upon us the fellowship of the ministering to the saints.	they earnestly pleaded with us for the privilege of sharing in this service to the saints.
2CO	8	5	우리의 바라던 것뿐 아니라 저희가 먼저 자신을 주께 드리고 또 하나님 뜻을 좇아 우리에게 주었도다	And this they did, not as we hoped, but first gave their own selves to the Lord, and unto us by the will of God.	And not only did they do as we expected, but they gave themselves first to the Lord and then to us, because it was the will of God.
2CO	8	6	이러므로 우리가 디도를 권하여 너희 가운데서 시작하였은즉 이 은혜를 그대로 성취케 하라 하였노라	Insomuch that we desired Titus, that as he had begun, so he would also finish in you the same grace also.	So we urged Titus to help complete your act of grace, just as he had started it.
2CO	8	7	오직 너희는 믿음과 말과 지식과 모든 간절함과 우리를 사랑하는 이 모든 일에 풍성한 것 같이 이 은혜에도 풍성하게 할지니라	Therefore, as ye abound in every thing, in faith, and utterance, and knowledge, and in all diligence, and in your love to us, see that ye abound in this grace also.	But just as you excel in everything—in faith, in speech, in knowledge, in complete earnestness, and in the love we inspired in you—see that you also excel in this grace of giving.
2CO	8	8	내가 명령으로 하는 말이 아니요 오직 다른 이들의 간절함을 가지고 너희의 사랑의 진실함을 증명코자 함이로라	I speak not by commandment, but by occasion of the forwardness of others, and to prove the sincerity of your love.	I am not making a demand, but I am testing the sincerity of your love in comparison to the earnestness of others.
2CO	8	9	우리 주 예수 그리스도의 은혜를 너희가 알거니와 부요하신 자로서 너희를 위하여 가난하게 되심은 그의 가난함을 인하여 너희로 부요케 하려 하심이니라	For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that, though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich.	For you know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though He was rich, yet for your sakes He became poor, so that you through His poverty might become rich.
2CO	8	10	이 일에 내가 뜻만 보이노니 이것은 너희에게 유익함이라 너희가 일 년 전에 행하기를 먼저 시작할 뿐 아니라 원하기도 하였은즉	And herein I give my advice: for this is expedient for you, who have begun before, not only to do, but also to be forward a year ago.	And this is my opinion about what is helpful for you in this matter: Last year you were the first not only to give, but even to have such a desire.
2CO	8	11	이제는 행하기를 성취할지니 마음에 원하던 것과 같이 성취하되 있는 대로 하라	Now therefore perform the doing of it; that as there was a readiness to will, so there may be a performance also out of that which ye have.	Now finish the work, so that you may complete it just as eagerly as you began, according to your means.
2CO	8	12	할 마음만 있으면 있는 대로 받으실 터이요 없는 것을 받지 아니하시리라	For if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man hath, and not according to that he hath not.	For if the eagerness is there, the gift is acceptable according to what one has, not according to what he does not have.
2CO	8	13	이는 다른 사람들은 평안하게 하고 너희는 곤고하게 하려는 것이 아니요 평균케 하려 함이니	For I mean not that other men be eased, and ye burdened:	It is not our intention that others may be relieved while you are burdened, but that there may be equality.
2CO	8	14	이제 너희의 유여한 것으로 저희 부족한 것을 보충함은 후에 저희 유여한 것으로 너희 부족한 것을 보충하여 평균하게 하려 함이라	But by an equality, that now at this time your abundance may be a supply for their want, that their abundance also may be a supply for your want: that there may be equality:	At the present time, your surplus will meet their need, so that in turn their surplus will meet your need. Then there will be equality.
2CO	8	15	기록한 것 같이 많이 거둔 자도 남지 아니하였고 적게 거둔 자도 모자라지 아니하였느니라	As it is written, He that had gathered much had nothing over; and he that had gathered little had no lack.	As it is written: “He who gathered much had no excess, and he who gathered little had no shortfall.”
2CO	8	16	너희를 위하여 같은 간절함을 디도의 마음에도 주시는 하나님께 감사하노니	But thanks be to God, which put the same earnest care into the heart of Titus for you.	But thanks be to God, who put into the heart of Titus the same devotion I have for you.
2CO	8	17	저가 권함을 받고 더욱 간절함으로 자원하여 너희에게 나아갔고	For indeed he accepted the exhortation; but being more forward, of his own accord he went unto you.	For not only did he welcome our appeal, but he is eagerly coming to you of his own volition.
2CO	8	18	또 저와 함께 한 형제를 보내었으니 이 사람은 복음으로서 모든 교회에서 칭찬을 받는 자요	And we have sent with him the brother, whose praise is in the gospel throughout all the churches;	Along with Titus we are sending the brother who is praised by all the churches for his work in the gospel.
2CO	8	19	이뿐 아니라 저는 동일한 주의 영광과 우리의 원을 나타내기 위하여 여러 교회의 택함을 입어 우리의 맡은 은혜의 일로 우리와 동행하는 자라	And not that only, but who was also chosen of the churches to travel with us with this grace, which is administered by us to the glory of the same Lord, and declaration of your ready mind:	More than that, this brother was chosen by the churches to accompany us with the offering—the gracious gift we administer to honor the Lord Himself and to show our eagerness to help.
2CO	8	20	이것을 조심함은 우리가 맡은 이 거액의 연보로 인하여 아무도 우리를 훼방하지 못하게 하려 함이니	Avoiding this, that no man should blame us in this abundance which is administered by us:	We hope to avoid any criticism of the way we administer this generous gift.
2CO	8	21	이는 우리가 주 앞에서만 아니라 사람 앞에서도 선한 일에 조심하려 함이라	Providing for honest things, not only in the sight of the Lord, but also in the sight of men.	For we are taking great care to do what is right, not only in the eyes of the Lord, but also in the eyes of men.
2CO	8	22	또 저희와 함께 우리의 한 형제를 보내었노니 우리가 여러 가지 일에 그 간절한 것을 여러 번 시험하였거니와 이제 저가 너희를 크게 믿은 고로 더욱 간절하니라	And we have sent with them our brother, whom we have oftentimes proved diligent in many things, but now much more diligent, upon the great confidence which I have in you.	And we are sending along with them our brother whose earnestness has been proven many times and in many ways, and now even more so by his great confidence in you.
2CO	8	23	디도로 말하면 나의 동무요 너희를 위한 나의 동역자요 우리 형제들로 말하면 여러 교회의 사자들이요 그리스도의 영광이니라	Whether any do enquire of Titus, he is my partner and fellowhelper concerning you: or our brethren be enquired of, they are the messengers of the churches, and the glory of Christ.	As for Titus, he is my partner and fellow worker among you. As for our brothers, they are messengers of the churches, to the glory of Christ.
2CO	8	24	그러므로 너희는 여러 교회 앞에서 너희의 사랑과 너희를 대한 우리 자랑의 증거를 저희에게 보이라	Wherefore shew ye to them, and before the churches, the proof of your love, and of our boasting on your behalf.	In full view of the churches, then, show these men the proof of your love and the reason for our boasting about you.
2CO	9	1	성도를 섬기는 일에 대하여 내가 너희에게 쓸 필요가 없나니	For as touching the ministering to the saints, it is superfluous for me to write to you:	Now about the service to the saints, there is no need for me to write to you.
2CO	9	2	이는 내가 너희의 원함을 앎이라 내가 너희를 위하여 마게도냐인들에게 아가야에서는 일 년 전부터 예비하였다 자랑하였는데 과연 너희 열심이 퍽 많은 사람들을 격동시켰느니라	For I know the forwardness of your mind, for which I boast of you to them of Macedonia, that Achaia was ready a year ago; and your zeal hath provoked very many.	For I know your eagerness to help, and I have been boasting to the Macedonians that since last year you in Achaia were prepared to give. And your zeal has stirred most of them to do likewise.
2CO	9	3	그런데 이 형제들을 보낸 것은 이 일에 너희를 위한 우리의 자랑이 헛되지 않고 내 말한 것 같이 준비하게 하려 함이라	Yet have I sent the brethren, lest our boasting of you should be in vain in this behalf; that, as I said, ye may be ready:	But I am sending the brothers in order that our boasting about you in this matter should not prove empty, but that you will be prepared, just as I said.
2CO	9	4	혹 마게도냐인들이 나와 함께 가서 너희의 준비치 아니한 것을 보면 너희는 고사하고 우리가 이 믿던 것에 부끄러움을 당할까 두려워하노라	Lest haply if they of Macedonia come with me, and find you unprepared, we (that we say not, ye) should be ashamed in this same confident boasting.	Otherwise, if any Macedonians come with me and find you unprepared, we—to say nothing of you—would be ashamed of having been so confident.
2CO	9	5	이러므로 내가 이 형제들로 먼저 너희에게 가서 너희의 전에 약속한 연보를 미리 준비케 하도록 권면하는 것이 필요한 줄 생각하였노니 이렇게 준비하여야 참 연보답고 억지가 아니니라	Therefore I thought it necessary to exhort the brethren, that they would go before unto you, and make up beforehand your bounty, whereof ye had notice before, that the same might be ready, as a matter of bounty, and not as of covetousness.	So I thought it necessary to urge the brothers to visit you beforehand and make arrangements for the bountiful gift you had promised. This way, your gift will be prepared generously and not begrudgingly.
2CO	9	6	이것이 곧 적게 심는 자는 적게 거두고 많이 심는 자는 많이 거둔다 하는 말이로다	But this I say, He which soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly; and he which soweth bountifully shall reap also bountifully.	Remember this: Whoever sows sparingly will also reap sparingly, and whoever sows generously will also reap generously.
2CO	9	7	각각 그 마음에 정한 대로 할 것이요 인색함으로나 억지로 하지 말지니 하나님은 즐겨 내는 자를 사랑하시느니라	Every man according as he purposeth in his heart, so let him give; not grudgingly, or of necessity: for God loveth a cheerful giver.	Each one should give what he has decided in his heart to give, not out of regret or compulsion. For God loves a cheerful giver.
2CO	9	8	하나님이 능히 모든 은혜를 너희에게 넘치게 하시나니 이는 너희로 모든 일에 항상 모든 것이 넉넉하여 모든 착한 일을 넘치게 하게 하려 하심이라	And God is able to make all grace abound toward you; that ye, always having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good work:	And God is able to make all grace abound to you, so that in all things, at all times, having all that you need, you will abound in every good work.
2CO	9	9	기록한 바 저가 흩어 가난한 자들에게 주었으니 그의 의가 영원토록 있느니라 함과 같으니라	(As it is written, He hath dispersed abroad; he hath given to the poor: his righteousness remaineth for ever.	As it is written: “He has scattered abroad His gifts to the poor; His righteousness endures forever.”
2CO	9	10	심는 자에게 씨와 먹을 양식을 주시는 이가 너희 심을 것을 주사 풍성하게 하시고 너희 의의 열매를 더하게 하시리니	Now he that ministereth seed to the sower both minister bread for your food, and multiply your seed sown, and increase the fruits of your righteousness;)	Now He who supplies seed to the sower and bread for food will supply and multiply your store of seed and will increase the harvest of your righteousness.
2CO	9	11	너희가 모든 일에 부요하여 너그럽게 연보를 함은 저희로 우리로 말미암아 하나님께 감사하게 하는 것이라	Being enriched in every thing to all bountifulness, which causeth through us thanksgiving to God.	You will be enriched in every way to be generous on every occasion, so that through us your giving will produce thanksgiving to God.
2CO	9	12	이 봉사의 직무가 성도들의 부족한 것만 보충할 뿐 아니라 사람들의 하나님께 드리는 많은 감사를 인하여 넘쳤느니라	For the administration of this service not only supplieth the want of the saints, but is abundant also by many thanksgivings unto God;	For this ministry of service is not only supplying the needs of the saints, but is also overflowing in many expressions of thanksgiving to God.
2CO	9	13	이 직무로 증거를 삼아 너희의 그리스도의 복음을 진실히 믿고 복종하는 것과 저희와 모든 사람을 섬기는 너희의 후한 연보를 인하여 하나님께 영광을 돌리고	Whiles by the experiment of this ministration they glorify God for your professed subjection unto the gospel of Christ, and for your liberal distribution unto them, and unto all men;	Because of the proof this ministry provides, the saints will glorify God for your obedient confession of the gospel of Christ, and for the generosity of your contribution to them and to all the others.
2CO	9	14	또 저희가 너희를 위하여 간구하며 하나님의 너희에게 주신 지극한 은혜를 인하여 너희를 사모하느니라	And by their prayer for you, which long after you for the exceeding grace of God in you.	And their prayers for you will express their affection for you, because of the surpassing grace God has given you.
2CO	9	15	말할 수 없는 그의 은사를 인하여 하나님께 감사하노라	Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable gift.	Thanks be to God for His indescribable gift!
2CO	10	1	너희를 대하여 대면하면 겸비하고 떠나 있으면 담대한 나 바울은 이제 그리스도의 온유와 관용으로 친히 너희를 권하고	Now I Paul myself beseech you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ, who in presence am base among you, but being absent am bold toward you:	Now by the mildness and gentleness of Christ, I appeal to you—I, Paul, who am humble when face to face with you, but bold when away.
2CO	10	2	또한 우리를 육체대로 행하는 자로 여기는 자들을 대하여 내가 담대히 대하려는 것 같이 너희와 함께 있을 때에 나로 하여금 이 담대한 태도로 대하지 않게 하기를 구하노라	But I beseech you, that I may not be bold when I am present with that confidence, wherewith I think to be bold against some, which think of us as if we walked according to the flesh.	I beg you that when I come I may not need to be as bold as I expect toward those who presume that we live according to the flesh.
2CO	10	3	우리가 육체에 있어 행하나 육체대로 싸우지 아니하노니	For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh:	For though we live in the flesh, we do not wage war according to the flesh.
2CO	10	4	우리의 싸우는 병기는 육체에 속한 것이 아니요 오직 하나님 앞에서 견고한 진을 파하는 강력이라	(For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds;)	The weapons of our warfare are not the weapons of the world. Instead, they have divine power to demolish strongholds.
2CO	10	5	모든 이론을 파하며 하나님 아는 것을 대적하여 높아진 것을 다 파하고 모든 생각을 사로잡아 그리스도에게 복종케 하니	Casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ;	We tear down arguments and every presumption set up against the knowledge of God; and we take captive every thought to make it obedient to Christ.
2CO	10	6	너희의 복종이 온전히 될 때에 모든 복종치 않는 것을 벌하려고 예비하는 중에 있노라	And having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled.	And we will be ready to punish every act of disobedience, as soon as your obedience is complete.
2CO	10	7	너희는 외모만 보는도다 만일 사람이 자기가 그리스도에게 속한 줄을 믿을진대 자기가 그리스도에게 속한 것 같이 우리도 그러한 줄을 자기 속으로 다시 생각할 것이라	Do ye look on things after the outward appearance? If any man trust to himself that he is Christ’s, let him of himself think this again, that, as he is Christ’s, even so are we Christ’s.	You are looking at outward appearances. If anyone is confident that he belongs to Christ, he should remind himself that we belong to Christ just as much as he does.
2CO	10	8	주께서 주신 권세는 너희를 파하려고 하신 것이 아니요 세우려고 하신 것이니 내가 이에 대하여 지나치게 자랑하여도 부끄럽지 아니하리라	For though I should boast somewhat more of our authority, which the Lord hath given us for edification, and not for your destruction, I should not be ashamed:	For even if I boast somewhat excessively about the authority the Lord gave us for building you up rather than tearing you down, I will not be ashamed.
2CO	10	9	이는 내가 편지들로 너희를 놀라게 하려는 것 같이 생각지 않게 함이니	That I may not seem as if I would terrify you by letters.	I do not want to seem to be trying to frighten you by my letters.
2CO	10	10	저희 말이 그 편지들은 중하고 힘이 있으나 그 몸으로 대할 때는 약하고 말이 시원치 않다 하니	For his letters, say they, are weighty and powerful; but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech contemptible.	For some say, “His letters are weighty and forceful, but his physical presence is unimpressive, and his speaking is of no account.”
2CO	10	11	이런 사람은 우리가 떠나 있을 때에 편지들로 말하는 자가 어떠한 자이면 함께 있을 때에 행하는 자도 그와 같은 자인 줄 알라	Let such an one think this, that, such as we are in word by letters when we are absent, such will we be also in deed when we are present.	Such people should consider that what we are in our letters when absent, we will be in our actions when present.
2CO	10	12	우리가 어떤 자기를 칭찬하는 자로 더불어 감히 짝하며 비교할 수 없노라 그러나 저희가 자기로서 자기를 헤아리고 자기로서 자기를 비교하니 지혜가 없도다	For we dare not make ourselves of the number, or compare ourselves with some that commend themselves: but they measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves among themselves, are not wise.	We do not dare to classify or compare ourselves with some who commend themselves. When they measure themselves by themselves and compare themselves with themselves, they show their ignorance.
2CO	10	13	그러나 우리는 분량밖의 자랑을 하지 않고 오직 하나님이 우리에게 분량으로 나눠 주신 그 분량의 한계를 따라 하노니 곧 너희에게까지 이른 것이라	But we will not boast of things without our measure, but according to the measure of the rule which God hath distributed to us, a measure to reach even unto you.	We, however, will not boast beyond our limits, but only within the field of influence that God has assigned to us—a field that reaches even to you.
2CO	10	14	우리가 너희에게 미치지 못할 자로서 스스로 지나쳐 나아간 것이 아니요 그리스도의 복음으로 너희에게까지 이른 것이라	For we stretch not ourselves beyond our measure, as though we reached not unto you: for we are come as far as to you also in preaching the gospel of Christ:	We are not overstepping our bounds, as if we had not come to you. Indeed, we were the first to reach you with the gospel of Christ.
2CO	10	15	우리는 남의 수고를 가지고 분량밖의 자랑하는 것이 아니라 오직 너희 믿음이 더 할수록 우리의 한계를 따라 너희 가운데서 더욱 위대하여지기를 바라노라	Not boasting of things without our measure, that is, of other men’s labours; but having hope, when your faith is increased, that we shall be enlarged by you according to our rule abundantly,	Neither do we boast beyond our limits in the labors of others. But we hope that as your faith increases, our area of influence among you will greatly increase as well,
2CO	10	16	이는 남의 한계 안에 예비한 것으로 자랑하지 아니하고 너희 지경을 넘어 복음을 전하려 함이라	To preach the gospel in the regions beyond you, and not to boast in another man’s line of things made ready to our hand.	so that we can preach the gospel in the regions beyond you. Then we will not be boasting in the work already done in another man’s territory.
2CO	10	17	자랑하는 자는 주 안에서 자랑할지니라	But he that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord.	Rather, “Let him who boasts boast in the Lord.”
2CO	10	18	옳다 인정함을 받는 자는 자기를 칭찬하는 자가 아니요 오직 주께서 칭찬하시는 자니라	For not he that commendeth himself is approved, but whom the Lord commendeth.	For it is not the one who commends himself who is approved, but the one whom the Lord commends.
2CO	11	1	원컨대 너희는 나의 좀 어리석은 것을 용납하라 청컨대 나를 용납하라	Would to God ye could bear with me a little in my folly: and indeed bear with me.	I hope you will bear with a little of my foolishness, but you are already doing that.
2CO	11	2	내가 하나님의 열심으로 너희를 위하여 열심 내노니 내가 너희를 정결한 처녀로 한 남편인 그리스도께 드리려고 중매함이로다	For I am jealous over you with godly jealousy: for I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ.	I am jealous for you with a godly jealousy. For I promised you to one husband, to present you as a pure virgin to Christ.
2CO	11	3	뱀이 그 간계로 이와를 미혹케 한 것 같이 너희 마음이 그리스도를 향하는 진실함과 깨끗함에서 떠나 부패할까 두려워하노라	But I fear, lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.	I am afraid, however, that just as Eve was deceived by the serpent’s cunning, your minds may be led astray from your simple and pure devotion to Christ.
2CO	11	4	만일 누가 가서 우리의 전파하지 아니한 다른 예수를 전파하거나 혹 너희의 받지 아니한 다른 영을 받게 하거나 혹 너희의 받지 아니한 다른 복음을 받게할 때에는 너희가 잘 용납하는구나	For if he that cometh preacheth another Jesus, whom we have not preached, or if ye receive another spirit, which ye have not received, or another gospel, which ye have not accepted, ye might well bear with him.	For if someone comes and proclaims a Jesus other than the One we proclaimed, or if you receive a different spirit than the One you received, or a different gospel than the one you accepted, you put up with it way too easily.
2CO	11	5	내가 지극히 큰 사도들보다 부족한 것이 조금도 없는 줄 생각하노라	For I suppose I was not a whit behind the very chiefest apostles.	I consider myself in no way inferior to those “super-apostles.”
2CO	11	6	내가 비록 말에는 졸하나 지식에는 그렇지 아니하니 이것을 우리가 모든 사람 가운데서 모든 일로 너희에게 나타내었노라	But though I be rude in speech, yet not in knowledge; but we have been throughly made manifest among you in all things.	Although I am not a polished speaker, I am certainly not lacking in knowledge. We have made this clear to you in every way possible.
2CO	11	7	내가 너희를 높이려고 나를 낮추어 하나님의 복음을 값없이 너희에게 전함으로 죄를 지었느냐	Have I committed an offence in abasing myself that ye might be exalted, because I have preached to you the gospel of God freely?	Was it a sin for me to humble myself in order to exalt you, because I preached the gospel of God to you free of charge?
2CO	11	8	내가 너희를 섬기기 위하여 다른 여러 교회에서 요를 받은 것이 탈취한 것이라	I robbed other churches, taking wages of them, to do you service.	I robbed other churches by accepting their support in order to serve you.
2CO	11	9	또 내가 너희에게 있어 용도가 부족하되 아무에게도 누를 끼치지 아니함은 마게도냐에서 온 형제들이 나의 부족한 것을 보충하였음이라 내가 모든 일에 너희에게 폐를 끼치지 않기 위하여 스스로 조심하였거니와 또 조심하리라	And when I was present with you, and wanted, I was chargeable to no man: for that which was lacking to me the brethren which came from Macedonia supplied: and in all things I have kept myself from being burdensome unto you, and so will I keep myself.	And when I was with you and in need, I was not a burden to anyone; for the brothers who came from Macedonia supplied my needs. I have refrained from being a burden to you in any way, and I will continue to do so.
2CO	11	10	그리스도의 진리가 내 속에 있으니 아가야 지방에서 나의 이 자랑이 막히지 아니하리라	As the truth of Christ is in me, no man shall stop me of this boasting in the regions of Achaia.	As surely as the truth of Christ is in me, this boasting of mine will not be silenced in the regions of Achaia.
2CO	11	11	어떠한 연고뇨 내가 너희를 사랑하지 아니함이냐 하나님이 아시느니라	Wherefore? because I love you not? God knoweth.	Why? Because I do not love you? God knows I do!
2CO	11	12	내가 하는 것을 또 하리니 기회를 찾는 자들의 그 기회를 끊어 저희로 하여금 그 자랑하는 일에 대하여 우리와 같이 되게 하려 함이로라	But what I do, that I will do, that I may cut off occasion from them which desire occasion; that wherein they glory, they may be found even as we.	But I will keep on doing what I am doing, in order to undercut those who want an opportunity to be regarded as our equals in the things of which they boast.
2CO	11	13	저런 사람들은 거짓 사도요 궤휼의 역군이니 자기를 그리스도의 사도로 가장하는 자들이니라	For such are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the apostles of Christ.	For such men are false apostles, deceitful workers, masquerading as apostles of Christ.
2CO	11	14	이것이 이상한 일이 아니라 사단도 자기를 광명의 천사로 가장하나니	And no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light.	And no wonder, for Satan himself masquerades as an angel of light.
2CO	11	15	그러므로 사단의 일꾼들도 자기를 의의 일꾼으로 가장하는 것이 또한 큰 일이 아니라 저희의 결국은 그 행위대로 되리라	Therefore it is no great thing if his ministers also be transformed as the ministers of righteousness; whose end shall be according to their works.	It is not surprising, then, if his servants masquerade as servants of righteousness. Their end will correspond to their actions.
2CO	11	16	내가 다시 말하노니 누구든지 나를 어리석은 자로 여기지 말라 만일 그러하더라도 나로 조금 자랑하게 어리석은 자로 받으라	I say again, Let no man think me a fool; if otherwise, yet as a fool receive me, that I may boast myself a little.	I repeat: Let no one take me for a fool. But if you do, then receive me as a fool, so that I too may boast a little.
2CO	11	17	내가 말하는 것은 주를 따라 하는 말이 아니요 오직 어리석은 자와 같이 기탄 없이 자랑하노라	That which I speak, I speak it not after the Lord, but as it were foolishly, in this confidence of boasting.	In this confident boasting of mine, I am not speaking as the Lord would, but as a fool.
2CO	11	18	여러 사람이 육체를 따라 자랑하니 나도 자랑하겠노라	Seeing that many glory after the flesh, I will glory also.	Since many are boasting according to the flesh, I too will boast.
2CO	11	19	너희는 지혜로운 자로서 어리석은 자들을 기쁘게 용납하는구나	For ye suffer fools gladly, seeing ye yourselves are wise.	For you gladly tolerate fools, since you are so wise.
2CO	11	20	누가 너희로 종을 삼거나 잡아 먹거나 사로잡거나 자고하다 하거나 뺨을 칠지라도 너희가 용납하는도다	For ye suffer, if a man bring you into bondage, if a man devour you, if a man take of you, if a man exalt himself, if a man smite you on the face.	In fact, you even put up with anyone who enslaves you or exploits you or takes advantage of you or exalts himself or strikes you in the face.
2CO	11	21	우리가 약한 것 같이 내가 욕되게 말하노라 그러나 누가 무슨 일에 담대하면 어리석은 말이나마 나도 담대하리라	I speak as concerning reproach, as though we had been weak. Howbeit whereinsoever any is bold, (I speak foolishly,) I am bold also.	To my shame I concede that we were too weak for that! Speaking as a fool, however, I can match what anyone else dares to boast about.
2CO	11	22	저희가 히브리인이냐 나도 그러하며 저희가 이스라엘인이냐 나도 그러하며 저희가 아브라함의 씨냐 나도 그러하며	Are they Hebrews? so am I. Are they Israelites? so am I. Are they the seed of Abraham? so am I.	Are they Hebrews? So am I. Are they Israelites? So am I. Are they descendants of Abraham? So am I.
2CO	11	23	저희가 그리스도의 일꾼이냐 정신 없는 말을 하거니와 나도 더욱 그러하도다 내가 수고를 넘치도록 하고 옥에 갇히기도 더 많이 하고 매도 수없이 맞고 여러 번 죽을 뻔하였으니	Are they ministers of Christ? (I speak as a fool) I am more; in labours more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths oft.	Are they servants of Christ? I am speaking like I am out of my mind, but I am so much more: in harder labor, in more imprisonments, in worse beatings, in frequent danger of death.
2CO	11	24	유대인들에게 사십에 하나 감한 매를 다섯 번 맞았으며	Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one.	Five times I received from the Jews the forty lashes minus one.
2CO	11	25	세 번 태장으로 맞고 한 번 돌로 맞고 세 번 파선하는데 일 주야를 깊음에서 지냈으며	Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have been in the deep;	Three times I was beaten with rods, once I was stoned, three times I was shipwrecked. I spent a night and a day in the open sea.
2CO	11	26	여러 번 여행에 강의 위험과 강도의 위험과 동족의 위험과 이방인의 위험과 시내의 위험과 광야의 위험과 바다의 위험과 거짓 형제 중의 위험을 당하고	In journeyings often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren;	In my frequent journeys, I have been in danger from rivers and from bandits, in danger from my countrymen and from the Gentiles, in danger in the city and in the country, in danger on the sea and among false brothers,
2CO	11	27	또 수고하며 애쓰고 여러 번 자지 못하고 주리며 목마르고 여러 번 굶고 춥고 헐벗었노라	In weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness.	in labor and toil and often without sleep, in hunger and thirst and often without food, in cold and exposure.
2CO	11	28	이 외의 일은 고사하고 오히려 날마다 내 속에 눌리는 일이 있으니 곧 모든 교회를 위하여 염려하는 것이라	Beside those things that are without, that which cometh upon me daily, the care of all the churches.	Apart from these external trials, I face daily the pressure of my concern for all the churches.
2CO	11	29	누가 약하면 내가 약하지 아니하며 누가 실족하게 되면 내가 애타하지 않더냐	Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not?	Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is led into sin, and I do not burn with grief?
2CO	11	30	내가 부득불 자랑할진대 나의 약한 것을 자랑하리라	If I must needs glory, I will glory of the things which concern mine infirmities.	If I must boast, I will boast of the things that show my weakness.
2CO	11	31	주 예수의 아버지 영원히 찬송할 하나님이 나의 거짓말 아니하는 줄을 아시느니라	The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is blessed for evermore, knoweth that I lie not.	The God and Father of the Lord Jesus, who is forever worthy of praise, knows that I am not lying.
2CO	11	32	다메섹에서 아레다 왕의 방백이 나를 잡으려고 다메섹 성을 지킬새	In Damascus the governor under Aretas the king kept the city of the Damascenes with a garrison, desirous to apprehend me:	In Damascus, the governor under King Aretas secured the city of the Damascenes in order to arrest me.
2CO	11	33	내가 광주리를 타고 들창문으로 성벽을 내려가 그 손에서 벗어났노라	And through a window in a basket was I let down by the wall, and escaped his hands.	But I was lowered in a basket through a window in the wall and escaped his grasp.
2CO	12	1	무익하나마 내가 부득불 자랑하노니 주의 환상과 계시를 말하리라	It is not expedient for me doubtless to glory. I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord.	I must go on boasting. Although there is nothing to gain, I will go on to visions and revelations from the Lord.
2CO	12	2	내가 그리스도 안에 있는 한 사람을 아노니 십사 년 전에 그가 셋째 하늘에 이끌려 간 자라 (그가 몸 안에 있었는지 몸 밖에 있었는지 나는 모르거니와 하나님은 아시느니라)	I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, (whether in the body, I cannot tell; or whether out of the body, I cannot tell: God knoweth;) such an one caught up to the third heaven.	I know a man in Christ who fourteen years ago was caught up to the third heaven. Whether it was in the body or out of it I do not know, but God knows.
2CO	12	3	내가 이런 사람을 아노니 (그가 몸 안에 있었는지 몸 밖에 있었는지 나는 모르거니와 하나님은 아시느니라)	And I knew such a man, (whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell: God knoweth;)	And I know that this man—whether in the body or out of it I do not know, but God knows—
2CO	12	4	그가 낙원으로 이끌려 가서 말할 수 없는 말을 들었으니 사람이 가히 이르지 못할 말이로다	How that he was caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter.	was caught up to Paradise. The things he heard were too sacred for words, things that man is not permitted to tell.
2CO	12	5	내가 이런 사람을 위하여 자랑하겠으나 나를 위하여는 약한 것들 외에 자랑치 아니하리라	Of such an one will I glory: yet of myself I will not glory, but in mine infirmities.	I will boast about such a man, but I will not boast about myself, except in my weaknesses.
2CO	12	6	내가 만일 자랑하고자 하여도 어리석은 자가 되지 아니할 것은 내가 참말을 함이라 그러나 누가 나를 보는 바와 내게 듣는 바에 지나치게 생각할까 두려워하여 그만 두노라	For though I would desire to glory, I shall not be a fool; for I will say the truth: but now I forbear, lest any man should think of me above that which he seeth me to be, or that he heareth of me.	Even if I wanted to boast, I would not be a fool, because I would be speaking the truth. But I refrain, so no one will credit me with more than he sees in me or hears from me,
2CO	12	7	여러 계시를 받은 것이 지극히 크므로 너무 자고하지 않게 하시려고 내 육체에 가시 곧 사단의 사자를 주셨으니 이는 나를 쳐서 너무 자고하지 않게 하려 하심이니라	And lest I should be exalted above measure through the abundance of the revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure.	or because of these surpassingly great revelations. So to keep me from becoming conceited, I was given a thorn in my flesh, a messenger of Satan, to torment me.
2CO	12	8	이것이 내게서 떠나기 위하여 내가 세 번 주께 간구하였더니	For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me.	Three times I pleaded with the Lord to take it away from me.
2CO	12	9	내게 이르시기를 내 은혜가 네게 족하도다 이는 내 능력이 약한 데서 온전하여짐이라 하신지라 이러므로 도리어 크게 기뻐함으로 나의 여러 약한 것들에 대하여 자랑하리니 이는 그리스도의 능력으로 내게 머물게 하려 함이라	And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakness. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me.	But He said to me, “My grace is sufficient for you, for My power is perfected in weakness.” Therefore I will boast all the more gladly in my weaknesses, so that the power of Christ may rest on me.
2CO	12	10	그러므로 내가 그리스도를 위하여 약한 것들과 능욕과 궁핍과 핍박과 곤란을 기뻐하노니 이는 내가 약할 그 때에 곧 강함이니라	Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ’s sake: for when I am weak, then am I strong.	That is why, for the sake of Christ, I delight in weaknesses, in insults, in hardships, in persecutions, in difficulties. For when I am weak, then I am strong.
2CO	12	11	내가 어리석은 자가 되었으나 너희에게 억지로 시킨 것이니 내가 너희에게 칭찬을 받아야 마땅하도다 내가 아무 것도 아니나 지극히 큰 사도들보다 조금도 부족하지 아니하니라	I am become a fool in glorying; ye have compelled me: for I ought to have been commended of you: for in nothing am I behind the very chiefest apostles, though I be nothing.	I have become a fool, but you drove me to it. In fact, you should have commended me, since I am in no way inferior to those “super-apostles,” even though I am nothing.
2CO	12	12	사도의 표 된 것은 내가 너희 가운데서 모든 참음과 표적과 기사와 능력을 행한 것이라	Truly the signs of an apostle were wrought among you in all patience, in signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds.	The true marks of an apostle—signs, wonders, and miracles—were performed among you with great perseverance.
2CO	12	13	내 자신이 너희에게 폐를 끼치지 아니한 일 밖에 다른 교회보다 부족하게 한 것이 무엇이 있느냐 너희는 나의 이 공평치 못한 것을 용서하라	For what is it wherein ye were inferior to other churches, except it be that I myself was not burdensome to you? forgive me this wrong.	In what way were you inferior to the other churches, except that I was not a burden to you? Forgive me this wrong!
2CO	12	14	보라 이제 세 번째 너희에게 가기를 예비하였으나 너희에게 폐를 끼치지 아니하리라 나의 구하는 것은 너희 재물이 아니요 오직 너희니라 어린 아이가 부모를 위하여 재물을 저축하는 것이 아니요 이에 부모가 어린 아이를 위하여 하느니라	Behold, the third time I am ready to come to you; and I will not be burdensome to you: for I seek not yours, but you: for the children ought not to lay up for the parents, but the parents for the children.	See, I am ready to come to you a third time, and I will not be a burden, because I am not seeking your possessions, but you. For children should not have to save up for their parents, but parents for their children.
2CO	12	15	내가 너희 영혼을 위하여 크게 기뻐함으로 재물을 허비하고 또 내 자신까지 허비하리니 너희를 더욱 사랑할수록 나는 덜 사랑을 받겠느냐	And I will very gladly spend and be spent for you; though the more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved.	And for the sake of your souls, I will most gladly spend my money and myself. If I love you more, will you love me less?
2CO	12	16	하여간 어떤 이의 말이 내가 너희에게 짐을 지우지는 아니하였을지라도 공교한 자가 되어 궤계로 너희를 취하였다 하니	But be it so, I did not burden you: nevertheless, being crafty, I caught you with guile.	Be that as it may, I was not a burden to you; but crafty as I am, I caught you by trickery.
2CO	12	17	내가 너희에게 보낸 자 중에 누구로 너희의 이를 취하더냐	Did I make a gain of you by any of them whom I sent unto you?	Did I exploit you by anyone I sent you?
2CO	12	18	내가 디도를 권하고 함께 한 형제를 보내었으니 디도가 너희의 이를 취하더냐 우리가 동일한 성령으로 행하지 아니하더냐 동일한 보조로 하지 아니하더냐	I desired Titus, and with him I sent a brother. Did Titus make a gain of you? walked we not in the same spirit? walked we not in the same steps?	I urged Titus to visit you, and I sent our brother with him. Did Titus exploit you in any way? Did we not walk in the same Spirit and follow in the same footsteps?
2CO	12	19	이 때까지 우리가 우리를 너희에게 변명하는 줄로 생각하는구나 우리가 그리스도 안에서 하나님 앞에 말하노라 사랑하는 자들아 이 모든 것은 너희의 덕을 세우기 위함이니라	Again, think ye that we excuse ourselves unto you? we speak before God in Christ: but we do all things, dearly beloved, for your edifying.	Have you been thinking all along that we were making a defense to you? We speak before God in Christ, and all of this, beloved, is to build you up.
2CO	12	20	내가 갈 때에 너희를 나의 원하는 것과 같이 보지 못하고 또 내가 너희에게 너희의 원치 않는 것과 같이 보일까 두려워하며 또 다툼과 시기와 분냄과 당 짓는 것과 중상함과 수군수군하는 것과 거만함과 어지러운 것이 있을까 두려워하고	For I fear, lest, when I come, I shall not find you such as I would, and that I shall be found unto you such as ye would not: lest there be debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults:	For I am afraid that when I come, I may not find you as I wish, and you may not find me as you wish. I fear that there may be quarreling, jealousy, rage, rivalry, slander, gossip, arrogance, and disorder.
2CO	12	21	또 내가 다시 갈 때에 내 하나님이 나를 너희 앞에서 낮추실까 두려워하고 또 내가 전에 죄를 지은 여러 사람의 그 행한 바 더러움과 음란함과 호색함을 회개치 아니함을 인하여 근심할까 두려워하노라	And lest, when I come again, my God will humble me among you, and that I shall bewail many which have sinned already, and have not repented of the uncleanness and fornication and lasciviousness which they have committed.	I am afraid that when I come again, my God will humble me before you, and I will be grieved over many who have sinned earlier and have not repented of their acts of impurity, sexual immorality, and debauchery.
2CO	13	1	내가 이제 세번째 너희에게 갈 터이니 두세 증인의 입으로 말마다 확정하리라	This is the third time I am coming to you. In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established.	This is the third time I am coming to you. “Every matter must be established by the testimony of two or three witnesses.”
2CO	13	2	내가 이미 말하였거니와 지금 떠나 있으나 두번째 대면하였을 때와 같이 전에 죄 지은 자들과 그 남은 모든 사람에게 미리 말하노니 내가 다시 가면 용서하지 아니하리라	I told you before, and foretell you, as if I were present, the second time; and being absent now I write to them which heretofore have sinned, and to all other, that, if I come again, I will not spare:	I already warned you the second time I was with you. So now in my absence I warn those who sinned earlier and everyone else: If I return, I will not spare anyone,
2CO	13	3	이는 그리스도께서 내 안에서 말씀하시는 증거를 너희가 구함이니 저가 너희를 향하여 약하지 않고 도리어 너희 안에서 강하시니라	Since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me, which to you-ward is not weak, but is mighty in you.	since you are demanding proof that Christ is speaking through me. He is not weak in dealing with you, but is powerful among you.
2CO	13	4	그리스도께서 약하심으로 십자가에 못 박히셨으나 오직 하나님의 능력으로 살으셨으니 우리도 저의 안에서 약하나 너희를 향하여 하나님의 능력으로 저와 함께 살리라	For though he was crucified through weakness, yet he liveth by the power of God. For we also are weak in him, but we shall live with him by the power of God toward you.	For He was indeed crucified in weakness, yet He lives by God’s power. And though we are weak in Him, yet by God’s power we will live with Him to serve you.
2CO	13	5	너희가 믿음에 있는가 너희 자신을 시험하고 너희 자신을 확증하라 예수 그리스도께서 너희 안에 계신 줄을 너희가 스스로 알지 못하느냐 그렇지 않으면 너희가 버리운 자니라	Examine yourselves, whether ye be in the faith; prove your own selves. Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates?	Examine yourselves to see whether you are in the faith; test yourselves. Can’t you see for yourselves that Jesus Christ is in you—unless you actually fail the test?
2CO	13	6	우리가 버리운 자 되지 아니한 것을 너희가 알기를 내가 바라고	But I trust that ye shall know that we are not reprobates.	And I hope you will realize that we have not failed the test.
2CO	13	7	우리가 하나님께서 너희로 악을 조금도 행하지 않게 하시기를 구하노니 이는 우리가 옳은 자임을 나타내고자 함이 아니라 오직 우리는 버리운 자 같을지라도 너희로 선을 행하게 하고자 함이라	Now I pray to God that ye do no evil; not that we should appear approved, but that ye should do that which is honest, though we be as reprobates.	Now we pray to God that you will not do anything wrong—not that we will appear to have stood the test, but that you will do what is right, even if we appear to have failed.
2CO	13	8	우리는 진리를 거스려 아무 것도 할 수 없고 오직 진리를 위할 뿐이니	For we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth.	For we cannot do anything against the truth, but only for the truth.
2CO	13	9	우리가 약할 때에 너희의 강한 것을 기뻐하고 또 이것을 위하여 구하니 곧 너희의 온전하게 되는 것이라	For we are glad, when we are weak, and ye are strong: and this also we wish, even your perfection.	In fact, we rejoice when we are weak but you are strong, and our prayer is for your perfection.
2CO	13	10	이를 인하여 내가 떠나 있을 때에 이렇게 쓰는 것은 대면할 때에 주께서 너희를 파하려 하지 않고 세우려 하여 내게 주신 그 권세를 따라 엄하지 않게 하려 함이니라	Therefore I write these things being absent, lest being present I should use sharpness, according to the power which the Lord hath given me to edification, and not to destruction.	This is why I write these things while absent, so that when I am present I will not need to be severe in my use of the authority that the Lord gave me for building you up, not for tearing you down.
2CO	13	11	마지막으로 말하노니 형제들아 기뻐하라 온전케 되며 위로를 받으며 마음을 같이 하며 평안할지어다 또 사랑과 평강의 하나님이 너희와 함께 계시리라 거룩하게 입맞춤으로 서로 문안하라	Finally, brethren, farewell. Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you.	Finally, brothers, rejoice! Aim for perfect harmony, encourage one another, be of one mind, live in peace. And the God of love and peace will be with you.
2CO	13	12	모든 성도가 너희에게 문안하느니라	Greet one another with an holy kiss.	Greet one another with a holy kiss.
2CO	13	13	주 예수 그리스도의 은혜와 하나님의 사랑과 성령의 교통하심이 너희 무리와 함께 있을지어다	All the saints salute you.	All the saints send you greetings.
2CO	13	14		The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all. Amen. The second epistle to the Corinthians was written from Philippi, a city of Macedonia, by Titus and Lucas.	The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with all of you.
GAL	1	1	사람들에게서 난 것도 아니요 사람으로 말미암은 것도 아니요 오직 예수 그리스도와 및 죽은 자 가운데서 그리스도를 살리신 하나님 아버지로 말미암아 사도 된 바울은	Paul, an apostle, (not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised him from the dead;)	Paul, an apostle—sent not from men nor by man, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father, who raised Him from the dead—
GAL	1	2	함께 있는 모든 형제로 더불어 갈라디아 여러 교회들에게	And all the brethren which are with me, unto the churches of Galatia:	and all the brothers with me, To the churches of Galatia:
GAL	1	3	우리 하나님 아버지와 주 예수 그리스도로 좇아 은혜와 평강이 있기를 원하노라	Grace be to you and peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ,	Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ,
GAL	1	4	그리스도께서 하나님 곧 우리 아버지의 뜻을 따라 이 악한 세대에서 우리를 건지시려고 우리 죄를 위하여 자기 몸을 드리셨으니	Who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil world, according to the will of God and our Father:	who gave Himself for our sins to rescue us from the present evil age, according to the will of our God and Father,
GAL	1	5	영광이 저에게 세세토록 있을지어다 아멘	To whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.	to whom be glory forever and ever. Amen.
GAL	1	6	그리스도의 은혜로 너희를 부르신 이를 이같이 속히 떠나 다른 복음 좇는 것을 내가 이상히 여기노라	I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ unto another gospel:	I am amazed how quickly you are deserting the One who called you by the grace of Christ and are turning to a different gospel—
GAL	1	7	다른 복음은 없나니 다만 어떤 사람들이 너희를 요란케 하여 그리스도의 복음을 변하려 함이라	Which is not another; but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospel of Christ.	which is not even a gospel. Evidently some people are troubling you and trying to distort the gospel of Christ.
GAL	1	8	그러나 우리나 혹 하늘로부터 온 천사라도 우리가 너희에게 전한 복음 외에 다른 복음을 전하면 저주를 받을지어다	But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.	But even if we or an angel from heaven should preach a gospel contrary to the one we preached to you, let him be under a curse!
GAL	1	9	우리가 전에 말하였거니와 내가 지금 다시 말하노니 만일 누구든지 너희의 받은 것 외에 다른 복음을 전하면 저주를 받을지어다	As we said before, so say I now again, If any man preach any other gospel unto you than that ye have received, let him be accursed.	As we have said before, so now I say again: If anyone is preaching to you a gospel contrary to the one you received, let him be under a curse!
GAL	1	10	이제 내가 사람들에게 기쁨을 구하랴 내가 지금까지 사람의 기쁨을 구하는 것이었더면 그리스도의 종이 아니니라	For do I now persuade men, or God? or do I seek to please men? for if I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ.	Am I now seeking the approval of men, or of God? Or am I striving to please men? If I were still trying to please men, I would not be a servant of Christ.
GAL	1	11	형제들아 사람들에게 좋게 하랴 하나님께 좋게 하랴 내가 너희에게 알게 하노니 내가 전한 복음이 사람의 뜻을 따라 된 것이 아니라	But I certify you, brethren, that the gospel which was preached of me is not after man.	For I certify to you, brothers, that the gospel I preached was not devised by man.
GAL	1	12	이는 내가 사람에게서 받은 것도 아니요 배운 것도 아니요 오직 예수 그리스도의 계시로 말미암은 것이라	For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ.	I did not receive it from any man, nor was I taught it; rather, I received it by revelation from Jesus Christ.
GAL	1	13	내가 이전에 유대교에 있을 때에 행한 일을 너희가 들었거니와 하나님의 교회를 심히 핍박하여 잔해하고	For ye have heard of my conversation in time past in the Jews’ religion, how that beyond measure I persecuted the church of God, and wasted it:	For you have heard of my former way of life in Judaism, how severely I persecuted the church of God and tried to destroy it.
GAL	1	14	내가 내 동족 중 여러 연갑자보다 유대교를 지나치게 믿어 내 조상의 유전에 대하여 더욱 열심이 있었으나	And profited in the Jews’ religion above many my equals in mine own nation, being more exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my fathers.	I was advancing in Judaism beyond many of my contemporaries and was extremely zealous for the traditions of my fathers.
GAL	1	15	그러나 내 어머니의 태로부터 나를 택정하시고 은혜로 나를 부르신 이가	But when it pleased God, who separated me from my mother’s womb, and called me by his grace,	But when God, who set me apart from my mother’s womb and called me by His grace, was pleased
GAL	1	16	그 아들을 이방에 전하기 위하여 그를 내 속에 나타내시기를 기뻐하실 때에 내가 곧 혈육과 의논하지 아니하고	To reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the heathen; immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood:	to reveal His Son in me so that I might preach Him among the Gentiles, I did not rush to consult with flesh and blood,
GAL	1	17	또 나보다 먼저 사도 된 자들을 만나려고 예루살렘으로 가지 아니하고 오직 아라비아로 갔다가 다시 다메섹으로 돌아갔노라	Neither went I up to Jerusalem to them which were apostles before me; but I went into Arabia, and returned again unto Damascus.	nor did I go up to Jerusalem to the apostles who came before me, but I went into Arabia and later returned to Damascus.
GAL	1	18	그 후 삼 년 만에 내가 게바를 심방하려고 예루살렘에 올라가서 저와 함께 십오 일을 유할새	Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode with him fifteen days.	Only after three years did I go up to Jerusalem to confer with Cephas, and I stayed with him fifteen days.
GAL	1	19	주의 형제 야고보 외에 다른 사도들을 보지 못하였노라	But other of the apostles saw I none, save James the Lord’s brother.	But I saw none of the other apostles except James, the Lord’s brother.
GAL	1	20	보라 내가 너희에게 쓰는 것은 하나님 앞에서 거짓말이 아니로라	Now the things which I write unto you, behold, before God, I lie not.	I assure you before God that what I am writing to you is no lie.
GAL	1	21	그 후에 내가 수리아와 길리기아 지방에 이르렀으나	Afterwards I came into the regions of Syria and Cilicia;	Later I went to the regions of Syria and Cilicia.
GAL	1	22	유대에 그리스도 안에 있는 교회들이 나를 얼굴로 알지 못하고	And was unknown by face unto the churches of Judea which were in Christ:	I was personally unknown, however, to the churches of Judea that are in Christ.
GAL	1	23	다만 우리를 핍박하던 자가 전에 잔해하던 그 믿음을 지금 전한다 함을 듣고	But they had heard only, That he which persecuted us in times past now preacheth the faith which once he destroyed.	They only heard the account: “The man who formerly persecuted us is now preaching the faith he once tried to destroy.”
GAL	1	24	나로 말미암아 영광을 하나님께 돌리니라	And they glorified God in me.	And they glorified God because of me.
GAL	2	1	십사 년 후에 내가 바나바와 함께 디도를 데리고 다시 예루살렘에 올라갔노니	Then fourteen years after I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, and took Titus with me also.	Fourteen years later I went up again to Jerusalem, accompanied by Barnabas. I took Titus along also.
GAL	2	2	계시를 인하여 올라가 내가 이방 가운데서 전파하는 복음을 저희에게 제출하되 유명한 자들에게 사사로이 한 것은 내가 달음질하는 것이나 달음질한 것이 헛되지 않게 하려 함이라	And I went up by revelation, and communicated unto them that gospel which I preach among the Gentiles, but privately to them which were of reputation, lest by any means I should run, or had run, in vain.	I went in response to a revelation and set before them the gospel that I preach among the Gentiles. But I spoke privately to those recognized as leaders, for fear that I was running or had already run in vain.
GAL	2	3	그러나 나와 함께 있는 헬라인 디도라도 억지로 할례를 받게 아니하였으니	But neither Titus, who was with me, being a Greek, was compelled to be circumcised:	Yet not even Titus, who was with me, was compelled to be circumcised, even though he was a Greek.
GAL	2	4	이는 가만히 들어온 거짓 형제 까닭이라 저희가 가만히 들어온 것은 그리스도 예수 안에서 우리의 가진 자유를 엿보고 우리를 종으로 삼고자 함이로되	And that because of false brethren unawares brought in, who came in privily to spy out our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage:	This issue arose because some false brothers had come in under false pretenses to spy on our freedom in Christ Jesus, in order to enslave us.
GAL	2	5	우리가 일시라도 복종치 아니하였으니 이는 복음의 진리로 너희 가운데 항상 있게 하려 함이라	To whom we gave place by subjection, no, not for an hour; that the truth of the gospel might continue with you.	We did not give in to them for a moment, so that the truth of the gospel would remain with you.
GAL	2	6	유명하다는 이들 중에 (본래 어떤 이들이든지 내게 상관이 없으며 하나님은 사람의 외모를 취하지 아니하시나니) 저 유명한 이들은 내게 더하여 준 것이 없고	But of these who seemed to be somewhat, (whatsoever they were, it maketh no matter to me: God accepteth no man’s person:) for they who seemed to be somewhat in conference added nothing to me:	But as for the highly esteemed—whatever they were makes no difference to me; God does not show favoritism—those leaders added nothing to me.
GAL	2	7	도리어 내가 무할례자에게 복음 전함을 맡기를 베드로가 할례자에게 맡음과 같이 한 것을 보고	But contrariwise, when they saw that the gospel of the uncircumcision was committed unto me, as the gospel of the circumcision was unto Peter;	On the contrary, they saw that I had been entrusted to preach the gospel to the uncircumcised, just as Peter had been to the circumcised.
GAL	2	8	베드로에게 역사하사 그를 할례자의 사도로 삼으신 이가 또한 내게 역사하사 나를 이방인에게 사도로 삼으셨느니라	(For he that wrought effectually in Peter to the apostleship of the circumcision, the same was mighty in me toward the Gentiles:)	For the One who was at work in Peter’s apostleship to the circumcised was also at work in my apostleship to the Gentiles.
GAL	2	9	또 내게 주신 은혜를 알므로 기둥 같이 여기는 야고보와 게바와 요한도 나와 바나바에게 교제의 악수를 하였으니 이는 우리는 이방인에게로, 저희는 할례자에게로 가게 하려 함이라	And when James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be pillars, perceived the grace that was given unto me, they gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship; that we should go unto the heathen, and they unto the circumcision.	And recognizing the grace that I had been given, James, Cephas, and John—those reputed to be pillars—gave me and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship, so that we should go to the Gentiles, and they to the circumcised.
GAL	2	10	다만 우리에게 가난한 자들 생각하는 것을 부탁하였으니 이것을 나도 본래 힘써 행하노라	Only they would that we should remember the poor; the same which I also was forward to do.	They only asked us to remember the poor, the very thing I was eager to do.
GAL	2	11	게바가 안디옥에 이르렀을 때에 책망할 일이 있기로 내가 저를 면책하였노라	But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed.	When Cephas came to Antioch, however, I opposed him to his face, because he stood to be condemned.
GAL	2	12	야고보에게서 온 어떤 이들이 이르기 전에 게바가 이방인과 함께 먹다가 저희가 오매 그가 할례자들을 두려워하여 떠나 물러가매	For before that certain came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles: but when they were come, he withdrew and separated himself, fearing them which were of the circumcision.	For before certain men came from James, he used to eat with the Gentiles. But when they arrived, he began to draw back and separate himself, for fear of those in the circumcision group.
GAL	2	13	남은 유대인들도 저와 같이 외식하므로 바나바도 저희의 외식에 유혹되었느니라	And the other Jews dissembled likewise with him; insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation.	The other Jews joined him in his hypocrisy, so that by their hypocrisy even Barnabas was led astray.
GAL	2	14	그러므로 나는 저희가 복음의 진리를 따라 바로 행하지 아니함을 보고 모든 자 앞에서 게바에게 이르되 네가 유대인으로서 이방을 좇고 유대인답게 살지 아니하면서 어찌하여 억지로 이방인을 유대인답게 살게 하려느냐 하였노라	But when I saw that they walked not uprightly according to the truth of the gospel, I said unto Peter before them all, If thou, being a Jew, livest after the manner of Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews?	When I saw that they were not walking in line with the truth of the gospel, I said to Cephas in front of them all, “If you, who are a Jew, live like a Gentile and not like a Jew, how can you compel the Gentiles to live like Jews?”
GAL	2	15	우리는 본래 유대인이요 이방 죄인이 아니로되	We who are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles,	We who are Jews by birth and not Gentile “sinners”
GAL	2	16	사람이 의롭게 되는 것은 율법의 행위에서 난 것이 아니요 오직 예수 그리스도를 믿음으로 말미암는 줄 아는 고로 우리도 그리스도 예수를 믿나니 이는 우리가 율법의 행위에서 아니고 그리스도를 믿음으로써 의롭다 함을 얻으려 함이라 율법의 행위로서는 의롭다 함을 얻을 육체가 없느니라	Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law: for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified.	know that a man is not justified by works of the law, but by faith in Jesus Christ. So we, too, have believed in Christ Jesus, that we may be justified by faith in Christ and not by works of the law, because by works of the law no one will be justified.
GAL	2	17	만일 우리가 그리스도 안에서 의롭게 되려 하다가 죄인으로 나타나면 그리스도께서 죄를 짓게 하는 자냐 결코 그럴 수 없느니라	But if, while we seek to be justified by Christ, we ourselves also are found sinners, is therefore Christ the minister of sin? God forbid.	But if, while we seek to be justified in Christ, we ourselves are found to be sinners, does that make Christ a minister of sin? Certainly not!
GAL	2	18	만일 내가 헐었던 것을 다시 세우면 내가 나를 범법한 자로 만드는 것이라	For if I build again the things which I destroyed, I make myself a transgressor.	If I rebuild what I have already torn down, I prove myself to be a lawbreaker.
GAL	2	19	내가 율법으로 말미암아 율법을 향하여 죽었나니 이는 하나님을 향하여 살려 함이니라	For I through the law am dead to the law, that I might live unto God.	For through the law I died to the law so that I might live to God.
GAL	2	20	내가 그리스도와 함께 십자가에 못 박혔나니 그런즉 이제는 내가 산 것이 아니요 오직 내 안에 그리스도께서 사신 것이라 이제 내가 육체 가운데 사는 것은 나를 사랑하사 나를 위하여 자기 몸을 버리신 하나님의 아들을 믿는 믿음 안에서 사는 것이라	I am crucified with Christ: nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.	I have been crucified with Christ, and I no longer live, but Christ lives in me. The life I live in the body, I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave Himself up for me.
GAL	2	21	내가 하나님의 은혜를 폐하지 아니하노니 만일 의롭게 되는 것이 율법으로 말미암으면 그리스도께서 헛되이 죽으셨느니라	I do not frustrate the grace of God: for if righteousness come by the law, then Christ is dead in vain.	I do not set aside the grace of God. For if righteousness comes through the law, Christ died for nothing.
GAL	3	1	어리석도다 갈라디아 사람들아 예수 그리스도께서 십자가에 못 박히신 것이 너희 눈 앞에 밝히 보이거늘 누가 너희를 꾀더냐	O foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath been evidently set forth, crucified among you?	O foolish Galatians! Who has bewitched you? Before your very eyes Jesus Christ was clearly portrayed as crucified.
GAL	3	2	내가 너희에게 다만 이것을 알려 하노니 너희가 성령을 받은 것은 율법의 행위로냐 듣고 믿음으로냐	This only would I learn of you, Received ye the Spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith?	I would like to learn just one thing from you: Did you receive the Spirit by works of the law, or by hearing with faith?
GAL	3	3	너희가 이같이 어리석으냐 성령으로 시작하였다가 이제는 육체로 마치겠느냐	Are ye so foolish? having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect by the flesh?	Are you so foolish? After starting in the Spirit, are you now finishing in the flesh?
GAL	3	4	너희가 이같이 많은 괴로움을 헛되이 받았느냐 과연 헛되냐	Have ye suffered so many things in vain? if it be yet in vain.	Have you suffered so much for nothing, if it really was for nothing?
GAL	3	5	너희에게 성령을 주시고 너희 가운데서 능력을 행하시는 이의 일이 율법의 행위에서냐 듣고 믿음에서냐	He therefore that ministereth to you the Spirit, and worketh miracles among you, doeth he it by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith?	Does God lavish His Spirit on you and work miracles among you because you practice the law, or because you hear and believe?
GAL	3	6	아브라함이 하나님을 믿으매 이것을 그에게 의로 정하셨다 함과 같으니라	Even as Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness.	So also, “Abraham believed God, and it was credited to him as righteousness.”
GAL	3	7	그런즉 믿음으로 말미암은 자들은 아브라함의 아들인 줄 알지어다	Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham.	Understand, then, that those who have faith are sons of Abraham.
GAL	3	8	또 하나님이 이방을 믿음으로 말미암아 의로 정하실 것을 성경이 미리 알고 먼저 아브라함에게 복음을 전하되 모든 이방이 너를 인하여 복을 받으리라 하였으니	And the scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed.	The Scripture foresaw that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, and foretold the gospel to Abraham: “All nations will be blessed through you.”
GAL	3	9	그러므로 믿음으로 말미암은 자는 믿음이 있는 아브라함과 함께 복을 받느니라	So then they which be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham.	So those who have faith are blessed along with Abraham, the man of faith.
GAL	3	10	무릇 율법 행위에 속한 자들은 저주 아래 있나니 기록된 바 누구든지 율법 책에 기록된 대로 온갖 일을 항상 행하지 아니하는 자는 저주 아래 있는 자라 하였음이라	For as many as are of the works of the law are under the curse: for it is written, Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things which are written in the book of the law to do them.	All who rely on works of the law are under a curse. For it is written: “Cursed is everyone who does not continue to do everything written in the Book of the Law.”
GAL	3	11	또 하나님 앞에서 아무나 율법으로 말미암아 의롭게 되지 못할 것이 분명하니 이는 의인이 믿음으로 살리라 하였음이니라	But that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God, it is evident: for, The just shall live by faith.	Now it is clear that no one is justified before God by the law, because, “The righteous will live by faith.”
GAL	3	12	율법은 믿음에서 난 것이 아니라 이를 행하는 자는 그 가운데서 살리라 하였느니라	And the law is not of faith: but, The man that doeth them shall live in them.	The law, however, is not based on faith; on the contrary, “The man who does these things will live by them.”
GAL	3	13	그리스도께서 우리를 위하여 저주를 받은 바 되사 율법의 저주에서 우리를 속량하셨으니 기록된 바 나무에 달린 자마다 저주 아래 있는 자라 하였음이라	Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree:	Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us. For it is written: “Cursed is everyone who is hung on a tree.”
GAL	3	14	이는 그리스도 예수 안에서 아브라함의 복이 이방인에게 미치게 하고 또 우리로 하여금 믿음으로 말미암아 성령의 약속을 받게 하려 함이니라	That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ; that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith.	He redeemed us in order that the blessing promised to Abraham would come to the Gentiles in Christ Jesus, so that by faith we might receive the promise of the Spirit.
GAL	3	15	형제들아 사람의 예대로 말하노니 사람의 언약이라도 정한 후에는 아무나 폐하거나 더하거나 하지 못하느니라	Brethren, I speak after the manner of men; Though it be but a man’s covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man disannulleth, or addeth thereto.	Brothers, let me put this in human terms. Even a human covenant, once it is ratified, cannot be canceled or amended.
GAL	3	16	이 약속들은 아브라함과 그 자손에게 말씀하신 것인데 여럿을 가리켜 그 자손들이라 하지 아니하시고 오직 하나를 가리켜 네 자손이라 하셨으니 곧 그리스도라	Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He saith not, And to seeds, as of many; but as of one, And to thy seed, which is Christ.	The promises were spoken to Abraham and to his seed. The Scripture does not say, “and to seeds,” meaning many, but “and to your seed,” meaning One, who is Christ.
GAL	3	17	내가 이것을 말하노니 하나님의 미리 정하신 언약을 사백삼십 년 후에 생긴 율법이 없이 하지 못하여 그 약속을 헛되게 하지 못하리라	And this I say, that the covenant, that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the law, which was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot disannul, that it should make the promise of none effect.	What I mean is this: The law that came 430 years later does not revoke the covenant previously established by God, so as to nullify the promise.
GAL	3	18	만일 그 유업이 율법에서 난 것이면 약속에서 난 것이 아니리라 그러나 하나님이 약속으로 말미암아 아브라함에게 은혜로 주신 것이라	For if the inheritance be of the law, it is no more of promise: but God gave it to Abraham by promise.	For if the inheritance depends on the law, then it no longer depends on a promise; but God freely granted it to Abraham through a promise.
GAL	3	19	그런즉 율법은 무엇이냐 범법함을 인하여 더한 것이라 천사들로 말미암아 중보의 손을 빌어 베푸신 것인데 약속하신 자손이 오시기까지 있을 것이라	Wherefore then serveth the law? It was added because of transgressions, till the seed should come to whom the promise was made; and it was ordained by angels in the hand of a mediator.	Why then was the law given? It was added because of transgressions, until the arrival of the seed to whom the promise referred. It was administered through angels by a mediator.
GAL	3	20	중보는 한 편만 위한 자가 아니니 오직 하나님은 하나이시니라	Now a mediator is not a mediator of one, but God is one.	A mediator is unnecessary, however, for only one party; but God is one.
GAL	3	21	그러면 율법이 하나님의 약속들을 거스리느냐 결코 그럴 수 없느니라 만일 능히 살게 하는 율법을 주셨더면 의가 반드시 율법으로 말미암았으리라	Is the law then against the promises of God? God forbid: for if there had been a law given which could have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the law.	Is the law, then, opposed to the promises of God? Certainly not! For if a law had been given that could impart life, then righteousness would certainly have come from the law.
GAL	3	22	그러나 성경이 모든 것을 죄 아래 가두었으니 이는 예수 그리스도를 믿음으로 말미암은 약속을 믿는 자들에게 주려 함이니라	But the scripture hath concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe.	But the Scripture pronounces all things confined by sin, so that by faith in Jesus Christ the promise might be given to those who believe.
GAL	3	23	믿음이 오기 전에 우리가 율법 아래 매인 바 되고 계시될 믿음의 때까지 갇혔느니라	But before faith came, we were kept under the law, shut up unto the faith which should afterwards be revealed.	Before this faith came, we were held in custody under the law, locked up until faith should be revealed.
GAL	3	24	이같이 율법이 우리를 그리스도에게로 인도하는 몽학선생이 되어 우리로 하여금 믿음으로 말미암아 의롭다 함을 얻게 하려 함이니라	Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith.	So the law became our guardian to lead us to Christ, that we might be justified by faith.
GAL	3	25	믿음이 온 후로는 우리가 몽학선생 아래 있지 아니하도다	But after that faith is come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster.	Now that faith has come, we are no longer under a guardian.
GAL	3	26	너희가 다 믿음으로 말미암아 그리스도 예수 안에서 하나님의 아들이 되었으니	For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus.	You are all sons of God through faith in Christ Jesus.
GAL	3	27	누구든지 그리스도와 합하여 침례를 받은 자는 그리스도로 옷 입었느니라	For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ.	For all of you who were baptized into Christ have clothed yourselves with Christ.
GAL	3	28	너희는 유대인이나 헬라인이나 종이나 자주자나 남자나 여자 없이 다 그리스도 예수 안에서 하나이니라	There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.	There is neither Jew nor Greek, slave nor free, male nor female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus.
GAL	3	29	너희가 그리스도께 속한 자면 곧 아브라함의 자손이요 약속대로 유업을 이을 자니라	And if ye be Christ’s, then are ye Abraham’s seed, and heirs according to the promise.	And if you belong to Christ, then you are Abraham’s seed and heirs according to the promise.
GAL	4	1	내가 또 말하노니 유업을 이을 자가 모든 것의 주인이나 어렸을 동안에는 종과 다름이 없어서	Now I say, That the heir, as long as he is a child, differeth nothing from a servant, though he be lord of all;	What I am saying is that as long as the heir is a child, he is no different from a slave, although he is the owner of everything.
GAL	4	2	그 아버지의 정한 때까지 후견인과 청지기 아래 있나니	But is under tutors and governors until the time appointed of the father.	He is subject to guardians and trustees until the date set by his father.
GAL	4	3	이와 같이 우리도 어렸을 때에 이 세상 초등 학문 아래 있어서 종 노릇 하였더니	Even so we, when we were children, were in bondage under the elements of the world:	So also, when we were children, we were enslaved under the basic principles of the world.
GAL	4	4	때가 차매 하나님이 그 아들을 보내사 여자에게서 나게 하시고 율법 아래 나게 하신 것은	But when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law,	But when the time had fully come, God sent His Son, born of a woman, born under the law,
GAL	4	5	율법 아래 있는 자들을 속량하시고 우리로 아들의 명분을 얻게 하려 하심이라	To redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons.	to redeem those under the law, that we might receive our adoption as sons.
GAL	4	6	너희가 아들인 고로 하나님이 그 아들의 영을 우리 마음 가운데 보내사 아바 아버지라 부르게 하셨느니라	And because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.	And because you are sons, God sent the Spirit of His Son into our hearts, crying out, “Abba, Father!”
GAL	4	7	그러므로 네가 이 후로는 종이 아니요 아들이니 아들이면 하나님으로 말미암아 유업을 이을 자니라	Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son; and if a son, then an heir of God through Christ.	So you are no longer a slave, but a son; and since you are a son, you are also an heir through God.
GAL	4	8	그러나 너희가 그 때에는 하나님을 알지 못하여 본질상 하나님이 아닌 자들에게 종 노릇 하였더니	Howbeit then, when ye knew not God, ye did service unto them which by nature are no gods.	Formerly, when you did not know God, you were slaves to those who by nature are not gods.
GAL	4	9	이제는 너희가 하나님을 알 뿐더러 하나님의 아신 바 되었거늘 어찌하여 다시 약하고 천한 초등 학문으로 돌아가서 다시 저희에게 종 노릇 하려 하느냐	But now, after that ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye again to the weak and beggarly elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage?	But now that you know God, or rather are known by God, how is it that you are turning back to those weak and worthless principles? Do you wish to be enslaved by them all over again?
GAL	4	10	너희가 날과 달과 절기와 해를 삼가 지키니	Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years.	You are observing special days and months and seasons and years!
GAL	4	11	내가 너희를 위하여 수고한 것이 헛될까 두려워하노라	I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labour in vain.	I fear for you, that my efforts for you may have been in vain.
GAL	4	12	형제들아 내가 너희와 같이 되었은즉 너희도 나와 같이 되기를 구하노라 너희가 내게 해롭게 하지 아니하였느니라	Brethren, I beseech you, be as I am; for I am as ye are: ye have not injured me at all.	I beg you, brothers, become like me, for I became like you. You have done me no wrong.
GAL	4	13	내가 처음에 육체의 약함을 인하여 너희에게 복음을 전한 것을 너희가 아는 바라	Ye know how through infirmity of the flesh I preached the gospel unto you at the first.	You know that it was because of an illness that I first preached the gospel to you.
GAL	4	14	너희를 시험하는 것이 내 육체에 있으되 이것을 너희가 업신여기지도 아니하며 버리지도 아니하고 오직 나를 하나님의 천사와 같이 또는 그리스도 예수와 같이 영접하였도다	And my temptation which was in my flesh ye despised not, nor rejected; but received me as an angel of God, even as Christ Jesus.	And although my illness was a trial to you, you did not despise or reject me. Instead, you welcomed me as if I were an angel of God, as if I were Christ Jesus Himself.
GAL	4	15	너희의 복이 지금 어디 있느냐 내가 너희에게 증거하노니 너희가 할 수만 있었더면 너희의 눈이라도 빼어 나를 주었으리라	Where is then the blessedness ye spake of? for I bear you record, that, if it had been possible, ye would have plucked out your own eyes, and have given them to me.	What then has become of your blessing? For I can testify that, if it were possible, you would have torn out your eyes and given them to me.
GAL	4	16	그런즉 내가 너희에게 참된 말을 하므로 원수가 되었느냐	Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth?	Have I now become your enemy by telling you the truth?
GAL	4	17	저희가 너희를 대하여 열심내는 것이 좋은 뜻이 아니요 오직 너희를 이간 붙여 너희로 저희를 대하여 열심내게 하려 함이라	They zealously affect you, but not well; yea, they would exclude you, that ye might affect them.	Those people are zealous for you, but not in a good way. Instead, they want to isolate you from us, so that you may be zealous for them.
GAL	4	18	좋은 일에 대하여 열심으로 사모함을 받음은 내가 너희를 대하였을 때뿐 아니라 언제든지 좋으니라	But it is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing, and not only when I am present with you.	Nevertheless, it is good to be zealous if it serves a noble purpose—at any time, and not only when I am with you.
GAL	4	19	나의 자녀들아 너희 속에 그리스도의 형상이 이루기까지 다시 너희를 위하여 해산하는 수고를 하노니	My little children, of whom I travail in birth again until Christ be formed in you,	My children, for whom I am again in the pains of childbirth until Christ is formed in you,
GAL	4	20	내가 이제라도 너희와 함께 있어 내 음성을 변하려 함은 너희를 대하여 의심이 있음이라	I desire to be present with you now, and to change my voice; for I stand in doubt of you.	how I wish I could be with you now and change my tone, because I am perplexed about you.
GAL	4	21	내게 말하라 율법 아래 있고자 하는 자들아 율법을 듣지 못하였느냐	Tell me, ye that desire to be under the law, do ye not hear the law?	Tell me, you who want to be under the law, do you not understand what the law says?
GAL	4	22	기록된 바 아브라함이 두 아들이 있으니 하나는 계집종에게서 하나는 자유하는 여자에게서 났다 하였으나	For it is written, that Abraham had two sons, the one by a bondmaid, the other by a freewoman.	For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by the slave woman and the other by the free woman.
GAL	4	23	계집종에게서는 육체를 따라 났고 자유하는 여자에게서는 약속으로 말미암았느니라	But he who was of the bondwoman was born after the flesh; but he of the freewoman was by promise.	His son by the slave woman was born according to the flesh, but his son by the free woman was born through the promise.
GAL	4	24	이것은 비유니 이 여자들은 두 언약이라 하나는 시내 산으로부터 종을 낳은 자니 곧 하가라	Which things are an allegory: for these are the two covenants; the one from the mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage, which is Agar.	These things serve as illustrations, for the women represent two covenants. One covenant is from Mount Sinai and bears children into slavery: This is Hagar.
GAL	4	25	이 하가는 아라비아에 있는 시내 산으로 지금 있는 예루살렘과 같은 데니 저가 그 자녀들로 더불어 종 노릇 하고	For this Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and answereth to Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage with her children.	Now Hagar stands for Mount Sinai in Arabia and corresponds to the present-day Jerusalem, because she is in slavery with her children.
GAL	4	26	오직 위에 있는 예루살렘은 자유자니 곧 우리 어머니라	But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us all.	But the Jerusalem above is free, and she is our mother.
GAL	4	27	기록된 바 잉태치 못한 자여 즐거워하라 구로치 못한 자여 소리 질러 외치라 이는 홀로 사는 자의 자녀가 남편 있는 자의 자녀보다 많음이라 하였으니	For it is written, Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not; break forth and cry, thou that travailest not: for the desolate hath many more children than she which hath an husband.	For it is written: “Rejoice, O barren woman, who bears no children; break forth and cry aloud, you who have never travailed; because more are the children of the desolate woman than of her who has a husband.”
GAL	4	28	형제들아 너희는 이삭과 같이 약속의 자녀라	Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise.	Now you, brothers, like Isaac, are children of promise.
GAL	4	29	그러나 그 때에 육체를 따라 난 자가 성령을 따라 난 자를 핍박한 것 같이 이제도 그러하도다	But as then he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now.	At that time, however, the son born by the flesh persecuted the son born by the Spirit. It is the same now.
GAL	4	30	그러나 성경이 무엇을 말하느뇨 계집종과 그 아들을 내어 쫓으라 계집종의 아들이 자유하는 여자의 아들로 더불어 유업을 얻지 못하리라 하였느니라	Nevertheless what saith the scripture? Cast out the bondwoman and her son: for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the freewoman.	But what does the Scripture say? “Expel the slave woman and her son, for the slave woman’s son will never share in the inheritance with the free woman’s son.”
GAL	4	31	그런즉 형제들아 우리는 계집종의 자녀가 아니요 자유하는 여자의 자녀니라	So then, brethren, we are not children of the bondwoman, but of the free.	Therefore, brothers, we are not children of the slave woman, but of the free woman.
GAL	5	1	그리스도께서 우리로 자유케 하려고 자유를 주셨으니 그러므로 굳세게 서서 다시는 종의 멍에를 메지 말라	Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.	It is for freedom that Christ has set us free. Stand firm, then, and do not be encumbered once more by a yoke of slavery.
GAL	5	2	보라 나 바울은 너희에게 말하노니 너희가 만일 할례를 받으면 그리스도께서 너희에게 아무 유익이 없으리라	Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing.	Take notice: I, Paul, tell you that if you let yourselves be circumcised, Christ will be of no value to you at all.
GAL	5	3	내가 할례를 받는 각 사람에게 다시 증거하노니 그는 율법 전체를 행할 의무를 가진 자라	For I testify again to every man that is circumcised, that he is a debtor to do the whole law.	Again I testify to every man who gets himself circumcised that he is obligated to obey the whole law.
GAL	5	4	율법 안에서 의롭다 함을 얻으려 하는 너희는 그리스도에게서 끊어지고 은혜에서 떨어진 자로다	Christ is become of no effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the law; ye are fallen from grace.	You who are trying to be justified by the law have been severed from Christ; you have fallen away from grace.
GAL	5	5	우리가 성령으로 믿음을 좇아 의의 소망을 기다리노니	For we through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by faith.	But by faith we eagerly await through the Spirit the hope of righteousness.
GAL	5	6	그리스도 예수 안에서는 할례나 무할례가 효력이 없되 사랑으로써 역사하는 믿음뿐이니라	For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision; but faith which worketh by love.	For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision has any value. All that matters is faith, expressed through love.
GAL	5	7	너희가 달음질을 잘 하더니 누가 너희를 막아 진리를 순종치 않게 하더냐	Ye did run well; who did hinder you that ye should not obey the truth?	You were running so well. Who has obstructed you from obeying the truth?
GAL	5	8	그 권면이 너희를 부르신 이에게서 난 것이 아니라	This persuasion cometh not of him that calleth you.	Such persuasion does not come from the One who calls you.
GAL	5	9	적은 누룩이 온 덩이에 퍼지느니라	A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.	A little leaven works through the whole batch of dough.
GAL	5	10	나는 너희가 아무 다른 마음도 품지 아니할 줄을 주 안에서 확신하노라 그러나 너희를 요동케 하는 자는 누구든지 심판을 받으리라	I have confidence in you through the Lord, that ye will be none otherwise minded: but he that troubleth you shall bear his judgment, whosoever he be.	I am confident in the Lord that you will take no other view. The one who is troubling you will bear the judgment, whoever he may be.
GAL	5	11	형제들아 내가 지금까지 할례를 전하면 어찌하여 지금까지 핍박을 받으리요 그리하였으면 십자가의 거치는 것이 그쳤으리니	And I, brethren, if I yet preach circumcision, why do I yet suffer persecution? then is the offence of the cross ceased.	Now, brothers, if I am still preaching circumcision, why am I still being persecuted? In that case the offense of the cross has been abolished.
GAL	5	12	너희를 어지럽게 하는 자들이 스스로 베어버리기를 원하노라	I would they were even cut off which trouble you.	As for those who are agitating you, I wish they would proceed to emasculate themselves!
GAL	5	13	형제들아 너희가 자유를 위하여 부르심을 입었으나 그러나 그 자유로 육체의 기회를 삼지 말고 오직 사랑으로 서로 종 노릇 하라	For, brethren, ye have been called unto liberty; only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another.	For you, brothers, were called to freedom; but do not use your freedom as an opportunity for the flesh. Rather, serve one another in love.
GAL	5	14	온 율법은 네 이웃 사랑하기를 네 몸 같이 하라 하신 한 말씀에 이루었나니	For all the law is fulfilled in one word, even in this; Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.	The entire law is fulfilled in a single decree: “Love your neighbor as yourself.”
GAL	5	15	만일 서로 물고 먹으면 피차 멸망할까 조심하라	But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of another.	But if you keep on biting and devouring one another, watch out, or you will be consumed by one another.
GAL	5	16	내가 이르노니 너희는 성령을 좇아 행하라 그리하면 육체의 욕심을 이루지 아니하리라	This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh.	So I say, walk by the Spirit, and you will not gratify the desires of the flesh.
GAL	5	17	육체의 소욕은 성령을 거스리고 성령의 소욕은 육체를 거스리나니 이 둘이 서로 대적함으로 너희의 원하는 것을 하지 못하게 하려 함이니라	For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other: so that ye cannot do the things that ye would.	For the flesh craves what is contrary to the Spirit, and the Spirit what is contrary to the flesh. They are opposed to each other, so that you do not do what you want.
GAL	5	18	너희가 만일 성령의 인도하시는 바가 되면 율법 아래 있지 아니하리라	But if ye be led of the Spirit, ye are not under the law.	But if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under the law.
GAL	5	19	육체의 일은 현저하니 곧 음행과 더러운 것과 호색과	Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these; Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness,	The acts of the flesh are obvious: sexual immorality, impurity, and debauchery;
GAL	5	20	우상 숭배와 술수와 원수를 맺는 것과 분쟁과 시기와 분냄과 당 짓는 것과 분리함과 이단과	Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies,	idolatry and sorcery; hatred, discord, jealousy, and rage; rivalries, divisions, factions,
GAL	5	21	투기와 술 취함과 방탕함과 또 그와 같은 것들이라 전에 너희에게 경계한 것 같이 경계하노니 이런 일을 하는 자들은 하나님의 나라를 유업으로 받지 못할 것이요	Envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like: of the which I tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God.	and envy; drunkenness, orgies, and the like. I warn you, as I did before, that those who practice such things will not inherit the kingdom of God.
GAL	5	22	오직 성령의 열매는 사랑과 희락과 화평과 오래 참음과 자비와 양선과 충성과	But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,	But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness,
GAL	5	23	온유와 절제니 이같은 것을 금지할 법이 없느니라	Meekness, temperance: against such there is no law.	gentleness, and self-control. Against such things there is no law.
GAL	5	24	그리스도 예수의 사람들은 육체와 함께 그 정과 욕심을 십자가에 못 박았느니라	And they that are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts.	Those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires.
GAL	5	25	만일 우리가 성령으로 살면 또한 성령으로 행할지니	If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit.	Since we live by the Spirit, let us walk in step with the Spirit.
GAL	5	26	헛된 영광을 구하여 서로 격동하고 서로 투기하지 말지니라	Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one another, envying one another.	Let us not become conceited, provoking and envying one another.
GAL	6	1	형제들아 사람이 만일 무슨 범죄한 일이 드러나거든 신령한 너희는 온유한 심령으로 그러한 자를 바로 잡고 네 자신을 돌아보아 너도 시험을 받을까 두려워하라	Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted.	Brothers, if someone is caught in a trespass, you who are spiritual should restore him with a spirit of gentleness. But watch yourself, or you also may be tempted.
GAL	6	2	너희가 짐을 서로 지라 그리하여 그리스도의 법을 성취하라	Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ.	Carry one another’s burdens, and in this way you will fulfill the law of Christ.
GAL	6	3	만일 누가 아무 것도 되지 못하고 된 줄로 생각하면 스스로 속임이니라	For if a man think himself to be something, when he is nothing, he deceiveth himself.	If anyone thinks he is something when he is nothing, he deceives himself.
GAL	6	4	각각 자기의 일을 살피라 그리하면 자랑할 것이 자기에게만 있고 남에게는 있지 아니하리니	But let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another.	Each one should test his own work. Then he will have reason to boast in himself alone, and not in someone else.
GAL	6	5	각각 자기의 짐을 질 것임이니라	For every man shall bear his own burden.	For each one should carry his own load.
GAL	6	6	가르침을 받는 자는 말씀을 가르치는 자와 모든 좋은 것을 함께 하라	Let him that is taught in the word communicate unto him that teacheth in all good things.	Nevertheless, the one who receives instruction in the word must share in all good things with his instructor.
GAL	6	7	스스로 속이지 말라 하나님은 만홀히 여김을 받지 아니하시나니 사람이 무엇으로 심든지 그대로 거두리라	Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.	Do not be deceived: God is not to be mocked. Whatever a man sows, he will reap in return.
GAL	6	8	자기의 육체를 위하여 심는 자는 육체로부터 썩어진 것을 거두고 성령을 위하여 심는 자는 성령으로부터 영생을 거두리라	For he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.	The one who sows to please his flesh, from the flesh will reap destruction; but the one who sows to please the Spirit, from the Spirit will reap eternal life.
GAL	6	9	우리가 선을 행하되 낙심하지 말지니 피곤하지 아니하면 때가 이르매 거두리라	And let us not be weary in well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.	Let us not grow weary in well-doing, for in due time we will reap a harvest if we do not give up.
GAL	6	10	그러므로 우리는 기회 있는 대로 모든 이에게 착한 일을 하되 더욱 믿음의 가정들에게 할지니라	As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially unto them who are of the household of faith.	Therefore, as we have opportunity, let us do good to everyone, and especially to the family of faith.
GAL	6	11	내 손으로 너희에게 이렇게 큰 글자로 쓴 것을 보라	Ye see how large a letter I have written unto you with mine own hand.	See what large letters I am using to write to you with my own hand!
GAL	6	12	무릇 육체의 모양을 내려 하는 자들이 억지로 너희로 할례 받게 함은 저희가 그리스도의 십자가를 인하여 핍박을 면하려 함뿐이라	As many as desire to make a fair shew in the flesh, they constrain you to be circumcised; only lest they should suffer persecution for the cross of Christ.	Those who want to make a good impression outwardly are trying to compel you to be circumcised. They only do this to avoid persecution for the cross of Christ.
GAL	6	13	할례 받은 저희라도 스스로 율법은 지키지 아니하고 너희로 할례 받게 하려 하는 것은 너희의 육체로 자랑하려 함이니라	For neither they themselves who are circumcised keep the law; but desire to have you circumcised, that they may glory in your flesh.	For the circumcised do not even keep the law themselves, yet they want you to be circumcised that they may boast in your flesh.
GAL	6	14	그러나 내게는 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 십자가 외에 결코 자랑할 것이 없으니 그리스도로 말미암아 세상이 나를 대하여 십자가에 못 박히고 내가 또한 세상을 대하여 그러하니라	But God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.	But as for me, may I never boast, except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which the world has been crucified to me, and I to the world.
GAL	6	15	할례나 무할례가 아무 것도 아니로되 오직 새로 지으심을 받은 자뿐이니라	For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature.	For neither circumcision nor uncircumcision means anything. What counts is a new creation.
GAL	6	16	무릇 이 규례를 행하는 자에게와 하나님의 이스라엘에게 평강과 긍휼이 있을지어다	And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.	Peace and mercy to all who walk by this rule, even to the Israel of God.
GAL	6	17	이 후로는 누구든지 나를 괴롭게 말라 내가 내 몸에 예수의 흔적을 가졌노라	From henceforth let no man trouble me: for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus.	From now on let no one cause me trouble, for I bear on my body the marks of Jesus.
GAL	6	18	형제들아 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 은혜가 너희 심령에 있을지어다 아멘	Brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen. Unto the Galatians written from Rome.	The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brothers. Amen.
EPH	1	1	하나님의 뜻으로 말미암아 그리스도 예수의 사도 된 바울은 에베소에 있는 성도들과 그리스도 예수 안에 신실한 자들에게 편지하노니	Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, to the saints which are at Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus:	Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, To the saints in Ephesus, the faithful in Christ Jesus:
EPH	1	2	하나님 우리 아버지와 주 예수 그리스도로 좇아 은혜와 평강이 너희에게 있을지어다	Grace be to you, and peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.	Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
EPH	1	3	찬송하리로다 하나님 곧 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 아버지께서 그리스도 안에서 하늘에 속한 모든 신령한 복으로 우리에게 복 주시되	Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ:	Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in Christ with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly realms.
EPH	1	4	곧 창세 전에 그리스도 안에서 우리를 택하사 우리로 사랑 안에서 그 앞에 거룩하고 흠이 없게 하시려고	According as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love:	For He chose us in Him before the foundation of the world to be holy and blameless in His presence. In love
EPH	1	5	그 기쁘신 뜻대로 우리를 예정하사 예수 그리스도로 말미암아 자기의 아들들이 되게 하셨으니	Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will,	He predestined us for adoption as His sons through Jesus Christ, according to the good pleasure of His will,
EPH	1	6	이는 그의 사랑하시는 자 안에서 우리에게 거저 주시는 바 그의 은혜의 영광을 찬미하게 하려는 것이라	To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the beloved.	to the praise of His glorious grace, which He has freely given us in the Beloved One.
EPH	1	7	우리가 그리스도 안에서 그의 은혜의 풍성함을 따라 그의 피로 말미암아 구속 곧 죄 사함을 받았으니	In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace;	In Him we have redemption through His blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses, according to the riches of His grace
EPH	1	8	이는 그가 모든 지혜와 총명으로 우리에게 넘치게 하사	Wherein he hath abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence;	that He lavished on us with all wisdom and understanding.
EPH	1	9	그 뜻의 비밀을 우리에게 알리셨으니 곧 그 기쁘심을 따라 그리스도 안에서 때가 찬 경륜을 위하여 예정하신 것이니	Having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he hath purposed in himself:	And He has made known to us the mystery of His will according to His good pleasure, which He purposed in Christ
EPH	1	10	하늘에 있는 것이나 땅에 있는 것이 다 그리스도 안에서 통일되게 하려 하심이라	That in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him:	as a plan for the fullness of time, to bring all things in heaven and on earth together in Christ.
EPH	1	11	모든 일을 그 마음의 원대로 역사하시는 자의 뜻을 따라 우리가 예정을 입어 그 안에서 기업이 되었으니	In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestinated according to the purpose of him who worketh all things after the counsel of his own will:	In Him we were also chosen as God’s own, having been predestined according to the plan of Him who works out everything by the counsel of His will,
EPH	1	12	이는 그리스도 안에서 전부터 바라던 우리로 그의 영광의 찬송이 되게 하려 하심이라	That we should be to the praise of his glory, who first trusted in Christ.	in order that we, who were the first to hope in Christ, would be for the praise of His glory.
EPH	1	13	그 안에서 너희도 진리의 말씀 곧 너희의 구원의 복음을 듣고 그 안에서 또한 믿어 약속의 성령으로 인치심을 받았으니	In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation: in whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise,	And in Him, having heard and believed the word of truth—the gospel of your salvation—you were sealed with the promised Holy Spirit,
EPH	1	14	이는 우리의 기업에 보증이 되사 그 얻으신 것을 구속하시고 그의 영광을 찬미하게 하려 하심이라	Which is the earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory.	who is the pledge of our inheritance until the redemption of those who are God’s possession, to the praise of His glory.
EPH	1	15	이를 인하여 주 예수 안에서 너희 믿음과 모든 성도를 향한 사랑을 나도 듣고	Wherefore I also, after I heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and love unto all the saints,	For this reason, ever since I heard about your faith in the Lord Jesus and your love for all the saints,
EPH	1	16	너희를 인하여 감사하기를 마지 아니하고 내가 기도할 때에 너희를 말하노라	Cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers;	I have not stopped giving thanks for you, remembering you in my prayers,
EPH	1	17	우리 주 예수 그리스도의 하나님, 영광의 아버지께서 지혜와 계시의 정신을 너희에게 주사 하나님을 알게 하시고	That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him:	that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the glorious Father, may give you a spirit of wisdom and revelation in your knowledge of Him.
EPH	1	18	너희 마음 눈을 밝히사 그의 부르심의 소망이 무엇이며 성도 안에서 그 기업의 영광의 풍성이 무엇이며	The eyes of your understanding being enlightened; that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints,	I ask that the eyes of your heart may be enlightened, so that you may know the hope of His calling, the riches of His glorious inheritance in the saints,
EPH	1	19	그의 힘의 강력으로 역사하심을 따라 믿는 우리에게 베푸신 능력의 지극히 크심이 어떤 것을 너희로 알게 하시기를 구하노라	And what is the exceeding greatness of his power to us-ward who believe, according to the working of his mighty power,	and the surpassing greatness of His power to us who believe. These are in accordance with the working of His mighty strength,
EPH	1	20	그 능력이 그리스도 안에서 역사하사 죽은 자들 가운데서 다시 살리시고 하늘에서 자기의 오른 편에 앉히사	Which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places,	which He exerted in Christ when He raised Him from the dead and seated Him at His right hand in the heavenly realms,
EPH	1	21	모든 정사와 권세와 능력과 주관하는 자와 이 세상뿐 아니라 오는 세상에 일컫는 모든 이름 위에 뛰어나게 하시고	Far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come:	far above all rule and authority, power and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in the present age but also in the one to come.
EPH	1	22	또 만물을 그 발 아래 복종하게 하시고 그를 만물 위에 교회의 머리로 주셨느니라	And hath put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all things to the church,	And God put everything under His feet and made Him head over everything for the church,
EPH	1	23	교회는 그의 몸이니 만물 안에서 만물을 충만케 하시는 자의 충만이니라	Which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all.	which is His body, the fullness of Him who fills all in all.
EPH	2	1	너희의 허물과 죄로 죽었던 너희를 살리셨도다	And you hath he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins;	And you were dead in your trespasses and sins,
EPH	2	2	그 때에 너희가 그 가운데서 행하여 이 세상 풍속을 좇고 공중의 권세 잡은 자를 따랐으니 곧 지금 불순종의 아들들 가운데서 역사하는 영이라	Wherein in time past ye walked according to the course of this world, according to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience:	in which you used to walk when you conformed to the ways of this world and of the ruler of the power of the air, the spirit who is now at work in the sons of disobedience.
EPH	2	3	전에는 우리도 다 그 가운데서 우리 육체의 욕심을 따라 지내며 육체와 마음의 원하는 것을 하여 다른 이들과 같이 본질상 진노의 자녀이었더니	Among whom also we all had our conversation in times past in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind; and were by nature the children of wrath, even as others.	All of us also lived among them at one time, fulfilling the cravings of our flesh and indulging its desires and thoughts. Like the rest, we were by nature children of wrath.
EPH	2	4	긍휼에 풍성하신 하나님이 우리를 사랑하신 그 큰 사랑을 인하여	But God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us,	But because of His great love for us, God, who is rich in mercy,
EPH	2	5	허물로 죽은 우리를 그리스도 예수 안에서 살리셨고 (너희가 은혜로 구원을 얻은 것이라)	Even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ, (by grace ye are saved;)	made us alive with Christ even when we were dead in our trespasses. It is by grace you have been saved!
EPH	2	6	또 함께 일으키사 그리스도 예수 안에서 함께 하늘에 앉히시니	And hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus:	And God raised us up with Christ and seated us with Him in the heavenly realms in Christ Jesus,
EPH	2	7	이는 그리스도 예수 안에서 우리에게 자비하심으로써 그 은혜의 지극히 풍성함을 오는 여러 세대에 나타내려 하심이니라	That in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus.	in order that in the coming ages He might display the surpassing riches of His grace, demonstrated by His kindness to us in Christ Jesus.
EPH	2	8	너희가 그 은혜를 인하여 믿음으로 말미암아 구원을 얻었나니 이것이 너희에게서 난 것이 아니요 하나님의 선물이라	For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God:	For it is by grace you have been saved through faith, and this not from yourselves; it is the gift of God,
EPH	2	9	행위에서 난 것이 아니니 이는 누구든지 자랑치 못하게 함이니라	Not of works, lest any man should boast.	not by works, so that no one can boast.
EPH	2	10	우리는 그의 만드신 바라 그리스도 예수 안에서 선한 일을 위하여 지으심을 받은 자니 이 일은 하나님이 전에 예비하사 우리로 그 가운데서 행하게 하려 하심이니라	For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them.	For we are God’s workmanship, created in Christ Jesus to do good works, which God prepared in advance as our way of life.
EPH	2	11	그러므로 생각하라 너희는 그 때에 육체로 이방인이요 손으로 육체에 행한 할례당이라 칭하는 자들에게 무할례당이라 칭함을 받는 자들이라	Wherefore remember, that ye being in time past Gentiles in the flesh, who are called Uncircumcision by that which is called the Circumcision in the flesh made by hands;	Therefore remember that formerly you who are Gentiles in the flesh and called uncircumcised by the so-called circumcision (that done in the body by human hands)—
EPH	2	12	그 때에 너희는 그리스도 밖에 있었고 이스라엘 나라 밖의 사람이라 약속의 언약들에 대하여 외인이요 세상에서 소망이 없고 하나님도 없는 자이더니	That at that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world:	remember that at that time you were separate from Christ, alienated from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the covenants of the promise, without hope and without God in the world.
EPH	2	13	이제는 전에 멀리 있던 너희가 그리스도 예수 안에서 그리스도의 피로 가까워졌느니라	But now in Christ Jesus ye who sometimes were far off are made nigh by the blood of Christ.	But now in Christ Jesus you who once were far away have been brought near through the blood of Christ.
EPH	2	14	그는 우리의 화평이신지라 둘로 하나를 만드사 중간에 막힌 담을 허시고	For he is our peace, who hath made both one, and hath broken down the middle wall of partition between us;	For He Himself is our peace, who has made the two one and has torn down the dividing wall of hostility
EPH	2	15	원수 된 것 곧 의문에 속한 계명의 율법을 자기 육체로 폐하셨으니 이는 이 둘로 자기의 안에서 한 새 사람을 지어 화평하게 하시고	Having abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the law of commandments contained in ordinances; for to make in himself of twain one new man, so making peace;	by abolishing in His flesh the law of commandments and decrees. He did this to create in Himself one new man out of the two, thus making peace
EPH	2	16	또 십자가로 이 둘을 한 몸으로 하나님과 화목하게 하려 하심이라 원수 된 것을 십자가로 소멸하시고	And that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross, having slain the enmity thereby:	and reconciling both of them to God in one body through the cross, by which He extinguished their hostility.
EPH	2	17	또 오셔서 먼 데 있는 너희에게 평안을 전하고 가까운 데 있는 자들에게 평안을 전하셨으니	And came and preached peace to you which were afar off, and to them that were nigh.	He came and preached peace to you who were far away and peace to those who were near.
EPH	2	18	이는 저로 말미암아 우리 둘이 한 성령 안에서 아버지께 나아감을 얻게 하려 하심이라	For through him we both have access by one Spirit unto the Father.	For through Him we both have access to the Father by one Spirit.
EPH	2	19	그러므로 이제부터 너희가 외인도 아니요 손도 아니요 오직 성도들과 동일한 시민이요 하나님의 권속이라	Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellowcitizens with the saints, and of the household of God;	Therefore you are no longer strangers and foreigners, but fellow citizens with the saints and members of God’s household,
EPH	2	20	너희는 사도들과 선지자들의 터 위에 세우심을 입은 자라 그리스도 예수께서 친히 모퉁이 돌이 되셨느니라	And are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone;	built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, with Christ Jesus Himself as the cornerstone.
EPH	2	21	그의 안에서 건물마다 서로 연결하여 주 안에서 성전이 되어 가고	In whom all the building fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord:	In Him the whole building is fitted together and grows into a holy temple in the Lord.
EPH	2	22	너희도 성령 안에서 하나님의 거하실 처소가 되기 위하여 예수 안에서 함께 지어져 가느니라	In whom ye also are builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit.	And in Him you too are being built together into a dwelling place for God in His Spirit.
EPH	3	1	이러므로 그리스도 예수의 일로 너희 이방을 위하여 갇힌 자 된 나 바울은...	For this cause I Paul, the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles,	For this reason I, Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus for the sake of you Gentiles...
EPH	3	2	너희를 위하여 내게 주신 하나님의 그 은혜의 경륜을 너희가 들었을 터이라	If ye have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God which is given me to you-ward:	Surely you have heard about the stewardship of God’s grace that was given to me for you,
EPH	3	3	곧 계시로 내게 비밀을 알게 하신 것은 내가 이미 대강 기록함과 같으니	How that by revelation he made known unto me the mystery; (as I wrote afore in few words,	that is, the mystery made known to me by revelation, as I have already written briefly.
EPH	3	4	이것을 읽으면 그리스도의 비밀을 내가 깨달은 것을 너희가 알 수 있으리라	Whereby, when ye read, ye may understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ)	In reading this, then, you will be able to understand my insight into the mystery of Christ,
EPH	3	5	이제 그의 거룩한 사도들과 선지자들에게 성령으로 나타내신 것 같이 다른 세대에서는 사람의 아들들에게 알게 하지 아니하셨으니	Which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, as it is now revealed unto his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit;	which was not made known to men in other generations as it has now been revealed by the Spirit to God’s holy apostles and prophets.
EPH	3	6	이는 이방인들이 복음으로 말미암아 그리스도 예수 안에서 함께 후사가 되고 함께 지체가 되고 함께 약속에 참예하는 자가 됨이라	That the Gentiles should be fellowheirs, and of the same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by the gospel:	This mystery is that through the gospel the Gentiles are fellow heirs, fellow members of the body, and fellow partakers of the promise in Christ Jesus.
EPH	3	7	이 복음을 위하여 그의 능력이 역사하시는 대로 내게 주신 하나님의 은혜의 선물을 따라 내가 일꾼이 되었노라	Whereof I was made a minister, according to the gift of the grace of God given unto me by the effectual working of his power.	I became a servant of this gospel by the gift of God’s grace, given me through the working of His power.
EPH	3	8	모든 성도 중에 지극히 작은 자보다 더 작은 나에게 이 은혜를 주신 것은 측량할 수 없는 그리스도의 풍성을 이방인에게 전하게 하시고	Unto me, who am less than the least of all saints, is this grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ;	Though I am less than the least of all the saints, this grace was given me: to preach to the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ,
EPH	3	9	영원부터 만물을 창조하신 하나님 속에 감취었던 비밀의 경륜이 어떠한 것을 드러내게 하려 하심이라	And to make all men see what is the fellowship of the mystery, which from the beginning of the world hath been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus Christ:	and to illuminate for everyone the stewardship of this mystery, which for ages past was kept hidden in God, who created all things.
EPH	3	10	이는 이제 교회로 말미암아 하늘에서 정사와 권세들에게 하나님의 각종 지혜를 알게 하려 하심이니	To the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places might be known by the church the manifold wisdom of God,	His purpose was that now, through the church, the manifold wisdom of God should be made known to the rulers and authorities in the heavenly realms,
EPH	3	11	곧 영원부터 우리 주 그리스도 예수 안에서 예정하신 뜻대로 하신 것이라	According to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord:	according to the eternal purpose that He accomplished in Christ Jesus our Lord.
EPH	3	12	우리가 그 안에서 그를 믿음으로 말미암아 담대함과 하나님께 당당히 나아감을 얻느니라	In whom we have boldness and access with confidence by the faith of him.	In Him and through faith in Him we may enter God’s presence with boldness and confidence.
EPH	3	13	그러므로 너희에게 구하노니 너희를 위한 나의 여러 환난에 대하여 낙심치 말라 이는 너희의 영광이니라	Wherefore I desire that ye faint not at my tribulations for you, which is your glory.	So I ask you not to be discouraged because of my sufferings for you, which are your glory.
EPH	3	14	이러하므로 내가 하늘과 땅에 있는 각 족속에게	For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,	... for this reason I bow my knees before the Father,
EPH	3	15	이름을 주신 아버지 앞에 무릎을 꿇고 비노니	Of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named,	from whom every family in heaven and on earth derives its name.
EPH	3	16	그 영광의 풍성을 따라 그의 성령으로 말미암아 너희 속 사람을 능력으로 강건하게 하옵시며	That he would grant you, according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man;	I ask that out of the riches of His glory He may strengthen you with power through His Spirit in your inner being,
EPH	3	17	믿음으로 말미암아 그리스도께서 너희 마음에 계시게 하옵시고 너희가 사랑 가운데서 뿌리가 박히고 터가 굳어져서	That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that ye, being rooted and grounded in love,	so that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith. Then you, being rooted and grounded in love,
EPH	3	18	능히 모든 성도와 함께 지식에 넘치는 그리스도의 사랑을 알아	May be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height;	will have power, together with all the saints, to comprehend the length and width and height and depth
EPH	3	19	그 넓이와 길이와 높이와 깊이가 어떠함을 깨달아 하나님의 모든 충만하신 것으로 너희에게 충만하게 하시기를 구하노라	And to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fulness of God.	of the love of Christ, and to know this love that surpasses knowledge, that you may be filled with all the fullness of God.
EPH	3	20	우리 가운데서 역사하시는 능력대로 우리의 온갖 구하는 것이나 생각하는 것에 더 넘치도록 능히 하실 이에게	Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power that worketh in us,	Now to Him who is able to do immeasurably more than all we ask or imagine, according to His power that is at work within us,
EPH	3	21	교회 안에서와 그리스도 예수 안에서 영광이 대대로 영원 무궁하기를 원하노라 아멘	Unto him be glory in the church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages, world without end. Amen.	to Him be the glory in the church and in Christ Jesus throughout all generations, forever and ever. Amen.
EPH	4	1	그러므로 주 안에서 갇힌 내가 너희를 권하노니 너희가 부르심을 입은 부름에 합당하게 행하여	I therefore, the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called,	As a prisoner in the Lord, then, I urge you to walk in a manner worthy of the calling you have received:
EPH	4	2	모든 겸손과 온유로 하고 오래 참음으로 사랑 가운데서 서로 용납하고	With all lowliness and meekness, with longsuffering, forbearing one another in love;	with all humility and gentleness, with patience, bearing with one another in love,
EPH	4	3	평안의 매는 줄로 성령의 하나 되게 하신 것을 힘써 지키라	Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.	and with diligence to preserve the unity of the Spirit through the bond of peace.
EPH	4	4	몸이 하나이요 성령이 하나이니 이와 같이 너희가 부르심의 한 소망 안에서 부르심을 입었느니라	There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling;	There is one body and one Spirit, just as you were called to one hope when you were called;
EPH	4	5	주도 하나이요 믿음도 하나이요 침례도 하나이요	One Lord, one faith, one baptism,	one Lord, one faith, one baptism;
EPH	4	6	하나님도 하나이시니 곧 만유의 아버지시라 만유 위에 계시고 만유를 통일하시고 만유 가운데 계시도다	One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.	one God and Father of all, who is over all and through all and in all.
EPH	4	7	우리 각 사람에게 그리스도의 선물의 분량대로 은혜를 주셨나니	But unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ.	Now to each one of us grace has been given according to the measure of the gift of Christ.
EPH	4	8	그러므로 이르기를 그가 위로 올라가실 때에 사로잡힌 자를 사로잡고 사람들에게 선물을 주셨다 하였도다	Wherefore he saith, When he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men.	This is why it says: “When He ascended on high, He led captives away, and gave gifts to men.”
EPH	4	9	올라가셨다 하였은즉 땅 아랫 곳으로 내리셨던 것이 아니면 무엇이냐	(Now that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the earth?	What does “He ascended” mean, except that He also descended to the lower parts of the earth?
EPH	4	10	내리셨던 그가 곧 모든 하늘 위에 오르신 자니 이는 만물을 충만케 하려 하심이니라	He that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all heavens, that he might fill all things.)	He who descended is the very One who ascended above all the heavens, in order to fill all things.
EPH	4	11	그가 혹은 사도로, 혹은 선지자로, 혹은 복음 전하는 자로, 혹은 목사와 교사로 주셨으니	And he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers;	And it was He who gave some to be apostles, some to be prophets, some to be evangelists, and some to be pastors and teachers,
EPH	4	12	이는 성도를 온전케 하며 봉사의 일을 하게 하며 그리스도의 몸을 세우려 하심이라	For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ:	to equip the saints for works of ministry and to build up the body of Christ,
EPH	4	13	우리가 다 하나님의 아들을 믿는 것과 아는 일에 하나가 되어 온전한 사람을 이루어 그리스도의 장성한 분량이 충만한 데까지 이르리니	Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ:	until we all reach unity in the faith and in the knowledge of the Son of God, as we mature to the full measure of the stature of Christ.
EPH	4	14	이는 우리가 이제부터 어린 아이가 되지 아니하여 사람의 궤술과 간사한 유혹에 빠져 모든 교훈의 풍조에 밀려 요동치 않게 하려 함이라	That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive;	Then we will no longer be infants, tossed about by the waves and carried around by every wind of teaching and by the clever cunning of men in their deceitful scheming.
EPH	4	15	오직 사랑 안에서 참된 것을 하여 범사에 그에게까지 자랄지라 그는 머리니 곧 그리스도라	But speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ:	Instead, speaking the truth in love, we will in all things grow up into Christ Himself, who is the head.
EPH	4	16	그에게서 온 몸이 각 마디를 통하여 도움을 입음으로 연락하고 상합하여 각 지체의 분량대로 역사하여 그 몸을 자라게 하며 사랑 안에서 스스로 세우느니라	From whom the whole body fitly joined together and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, maketh increase of the body unto the edifying of itself in love.	From Him the whole body, fitted and held together by every supporting ligament, grows and builds itself up in love through the work of each individual part.
EPH	4	17	그러므로 내가 이것을 말하며 주 안에서 증거하노니 이제부터는 이방인이 그 마음의 허망한 것으로 행함 같이 너희는 행하지 말라	This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind,	So I tell you this, and insist on it in the Lord, that you must no longer walk as the Gentiles do, in the futility of their thinking.
EPH	4	18	저희 총명이 어두워지고 저희 가운데 있는 무지함과 저희 마음이 굳어짐으로 말미암아 하나님의 생명에서 떠나 있도다	Having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart:	They are darkened in their understanding and alienated from the life of God because of the ignorance that is in them due to the hardness of their hearts.
EPH	4	19	저희가 감각 없는 자 되어 자신을 방탕에 방임하여 모든 더러운 것을 욕심으로 행하되	Who being past feeling have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness.	Having lost all sense of shame, they have given themselves over to sensuality for the practice of every kind of impurity, with a craving for more.
EPH	4	20	오직 너희는 그리스도를 이같이 배우지 아니하였느니라	But ye have not so learned Christ;	But this is not the way you came to know Christ.
EPH	4	21	진리가 예수 안에 있는 것 같이 너희가 과연 그에게서 듣고 또한 그 안에서 가르침을 받았을진대	If so be that ye have heard him, and have been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus:	Surely you heard of Him and were taught in Him—in keeping with the truth that is in Jesus—
EPH	4	22	너희는 유혹의 욕심을 따라 썩어져 가는 구습을 좇는 옛 사람을 벗어버리고	That ye put off concerning the former conversation the old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts;	to put off your former way of life, your old self, which is being corrupted by its deceitful desires;
EPH	4	23	오직 심령으로 새롭게 되어	And be renewed in the spirit of your mind;	to be renewed in the spirit of your minds;
EPH	4	24	하나님을 따라 의와 진리의 거룩함으로 지으심을 받은 새 사람을 입으라	And that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.	and to put on the new self, created to be like God in true righteousness and holiness.
EPH	4	25	그런즉 거짓을 버리고 각각 그 이웃으로 더불어 참된 것을 말하라 이는 우리가 서로 지체가 됨이니라	Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with his neighbour: for we are members one of another.	Therefore each of you must put off falsehood and speak truthfully to his neighbor, for we are all members of one another.
EPH	4	26	분을 내어도 죄를 짓지 말며 해가 지도록 분을 품지 말고	Be ye angry, and sin not: let not the sun go down upon your wrath:	“Be angry, yet do not sin.” Do not let the sun set upon your anger,
EPH	4	27	마귀로 틈을 타지 못하게 하라	Neither give place to the devil.	and do not give the devil a foothold.
EPH	4	28	도적질하는 자는 다시 도적질 하지 말고 돌이켜 빈궁한 자에게 구제할 것이 있기 위하여 제 손으로 수고하여 선한 일을 하라	Let him that stole steal no more: but rather let him labour, working with his hands the thing which is good, that he may have to give to him that needeth.	He who has been stealing must steal no longer, but must work, doing good with his own hands, that he may have something to share with the one in need.
EPH	4	29	무릇 더러운 말은 너희 입 밖에도 내지 말고 오직 덕을 세우는 데 소용되는 대로 선한 말을 하여 듣는 자들에게 은혜를 끼치게 하라	Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers.	Let no unwholesome talk come out of your mouths, but only what is helpful for building up the one in need and bringing grace to those who listen.
EPH	4	30	하나님의 성령을 근심하게 하지 말라 그 안에서 너희가 구속의 날까지 인치심을 받았느니라	And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption.	And do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, in whom you were sealed for the day of redemption.
EPH	4	31	너희는 모든 악독과 노함과 분냄과 떠드는 것과 훼방하는 것을 모든 악의와 함께 버리고	Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with all malice:	Get rid of all bitterness, rage and anger, outcry and slander, along with every form of malice.
EPH	4	32	서로 인자하게 하며 불쌍히 여기며 서로 용서하기를 하나님이 그리스도 안에서 너희를 용서하심과 같이 하라	And be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ’s sake hath forgiven you.	Be kind and tenderhearted to one another, forgiving each other just as in Christ God forgave you.
EPH	5	1	그러므로 사랑을 입은 자녀 같이 너희는 하나님을 본받는 자가 되고	Be ye therefore followers of God, as dear children;	Be imitators of God, therefore, as beloved children,
EPH	5	2	그리스도께서 너희를 사랑하신 것 같이 너희도 사랑 가운데서 행하라 그는 우리를 위하여 자신을 버리사 향기로운 제물과 생축으로 하나님께 드리셨느니라	And walk in love, as Christ also hath loved us, and hath given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweetsmelling savour.	and walk in love, just as Christ loved us and gave Himself up for us as a fragrant sacrificial offering to God.
EPH	5	3	음행과 온갖 더러운 것과 탐욕은 너희 중에서 그 이름이라도 부르지 말라 이는 성도의 마땅한 바니라	But fornication, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be once named among you, as becometh saints;	But among you, as is proper among the saints, there must not be even a hint of sexual immorality, or of any kind of impurity, or of greed.
EPH	5	4	누추함과 어리석은 말이나 희롱의 말이 마땅치 아니하니 돌이켜 감사하는 말을 하라	Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient: but rather giving of thanks.	Nor should there be obscenity, foolish talk, or crude joking, which are out of character, but rather thanksgiving.
EPH	5	5	너희도 이것을 정녕히 알거니와 음행하는 자나 더러운 자나 탐하는 자 곧 우상 숭배자는 다 그리스도와 하나님 나라에서 기업을 얻지 못하리니	For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater, hath any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.	For of this you can be sure: No immoral, impure, or greedy person (that is, an idolater), has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.
EPH	5	6	누구든지 헛된 말로 너희를 속이지 못하게 하라 이를 인하여 하나님의 진노가 불순종의 아들들에게 임하나니	Let no man deceive you with vain words: for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience.	Let no one deceive you with empty words, for because of such things the wrath of God is coming on the sons of disobedience.
EPH	5	7	그러므로 저희와 함께 참예하는 자 되지 말라	Be not ye therefore partakers with them.	Therefore do not be partakers with them.
EPH	5	8	너희가 전에는 어두움이더니 이제는 주 안에서 빛이라 빛의 자녀들처럼 행하라	For ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord: walk as children of light:	For you were once darkness, but now you are light in the Lord. Walk as children of light,
EPH	5	9	빛의 열매는 모든 착함과 의로움과 진실함에 있느니라	(For the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness and righteousness and truth;)	for the fruit of the light consists in all goodness, righteousness, and truth.
EPH	5	10	주께 기쁘시게 할 것이 무엇인가 시험하여 보라	Proving what is acceptable unto the Lord.	Test and prove what pleases the Lord.
EPH	5	11	너희는 열매 없는 어두움의 일에 참예하지 말고 도리어 책망하라	And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them.	Have no fellowship with the fruitless deeds of darkness, but rather expose them.
EPH	5	12	저희의 은밀히 행하는 것들은 말하기도 부끄러움이라	For it is a shame even to speak of those things which are done of them in secret.	For it is shameful even to mention what the disobedient do in secret.
EPH	5	13	그러나 책망을 받는 모든 것이 빛으로 나타나나니 나타나지는 것마다 빛이니라	But all things that are reproved are made manifest by the light: for whatsoever doth make manifest is light.	But everything exposed by the light becomes visible, for everything that is illuminated becomes a light itself.
EPH	5	14	그러므로 이르시기를 잠자는 자여 깨어서 죽은 자들 가운데서 일어나라 그리스도께서 네게 비취시리라 하셨느니라	Wherefore he saith, Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light.	So it is said: “Wake up, O sleeper, rise up from the dead, and Christ will shine on you.”
EPH	5	15	그런즉 너희가 어떻게 행할 것을 자세히 주의하여 지혜 없는 자 같이 말고 오직 지혜 있는 자 같이 하여	See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise,	Pay careful attention, then, to how you walk, not as unwise but as wise,
EPH	5	16	세월을 아끼라 때가 악하니라	Redeeming the time, because the days are evil.	redeeming the time, because the days are evil.
EPH	5	17	그러므로 어리석은 자가 되지 말고 오직 주의 뜻이 무엇인가 이해하라	Wherefore be ye not unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is.	Therefore do not be foolish, but understand what the Lord’s will is.
EPH	5	18	술 취하지 말라 이는 방탕한 것이니 오직 성령의 충만을 받으라	And be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess; but be filled with the Spirit;	Do not get drunk on wine, which leads to reckless indiscretion. Instead, be filled with the Spirit.
EPH	5	19	시와 찬미와 신령한 노래들로 서로 화답하며 너희의 마음으로 주께 노래하며 찬송하며	Speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord;	Speak to one another with psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs. Sing and make music in your hearts to the Lord,
EPH	5	20	범사에 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 이름으로 항상 아버지 하나님께 감사하며	Giving thanks always for all things unto God and the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ;	always giving thanks to God the Father for everything in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
EPH	5	21	그리스도를 경외함으로 피차 복종하라	Submitting yourselves one to another in the fear of God.	Submit to one another out of reverence for Christ.
EPH	5	22	아내들이여 자기 남편에게 복종하기를 주께 하듯 하라	Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord.	Wives, submit to your husbands as to the Lord.
EPH	5	23	이는 남편이 아내의 머리 됨이 그리스도께서 교회의 머리 됨과 같음이니 그가 친히 몸의 구주시니라	For the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the church: and he is the saviour of the body.	For the husband is the head of the wife as Christ is the head of the church, His body, of which He is the Savior.
EPH	5	24	그러나 교회가 그리스도에게 하듯 아내들도 범사에 그 남편에게 복종할지니라	Therefore as the church is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be to their own husbands in every thing.	Now as the church submits to Christ, so also wives should submit to their husbands in everything.
EPH	5	25	남편들아 아내 사랑하기를 그리스도께서 교회를 사랑하시고 위하여 자신을 주심 같이 하라	Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it;	Husbands, love your wives, just as Christ loved the church and gave Himself up for her
EPH	5	26	이는 곧 물로 씻어 말씀으로 깨끗하게 하사 거룩하게 하시고	That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word,	to sanctify her, cleansing her by the washing with water through the word,
EPH	5	27	자기 앞에 영광스러운 교회로 세우사 티나 주름잡힌 것이나 이런 것들이 없이 거룩하고 흠이 없게 하려 하심이니라	That he might present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish.	and to present her to Himself as a glorious church, without stain or wrinkle or any such blemish, but holy and blameless.
EPH	5	28	이와 같이 남편들도 자기 아내 사랑하기를 제 몸 같이 할지니 자기 아내를 사랑하는 자는 자기를 사랑하는 것이라	So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies. He that loveth his wife loveth himself.	In the same way, husbands ought to love their wives as their own bodies. He who loves his wife loves himself.
EPH	5	29	누구든지 언제든지 제 육체를 미워하지 않고 오직 양육하여 보호하기를 그리스도께서 교회를 보양함과 같이 하나니	For no man ever yet hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as the Lord the church:	Indeed, no one ever hated his own body, but he nourishes and cherishes it, just as Christ does the church.
EPH	5	30	우리는 그 몸의 지체임이니라	For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones.	For we are members of His body.
EPH	5	31	이러므로 사람이 부모를 떠나 그 아내와 합하여 그 둘이 한 육체가 될지니	For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall be joined unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh.	“For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh.”
EPH	5	32	이 비밀이 크도다 내가 그리스도와 교회에 대하여 말하노라	This is a great mystery: but I speak concerning Christ and the church.	This mystery is profound, but I am speaking about Christ and the church.
EPH	5	33	그러나 너희도 각각 자기의 아내 사랑하기를 자기 같이 하고 아내도 그 남편을 경외하라	Nevertheless let every one of you in particular so love his wife even as himself; and the wife see that she reverence her husband.	Nevertheless, each one of you also must love his wife as he loves himself, and the wife must respect her husband.
EPH	6	1	자녀들아 너희 부모를 주 안에서 순종하라 이것이 옳으니라	Children, obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right.	Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right.
EPH	6	2	네 아버지와 어머니를 공경하라 이것이 약속 있는 첫 계명이니	Honour thy father and mother; (which is the first commandment with promise;)	“Honor your father and mother” (which is the first commandment with a promise),
EPH	6	3	이는 네가 잘 되고 땅에서 장수하리라	That it may be well with thee, and thou mayest live long on the earth.	“that it may go well with you and that you may have a long life on the earth.”
EPH	6	4	또 아비들아 너희 자녀를 노엽게 하지 말고 오직 주의 교양과 훈계로 양육하라	And, ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath: but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.	Fathers, do not provoke your children to wrath; instead, bring them up in the discipline and instruction of the Lord.
EPH	6	5	종들아 두려워하고 떨며 성실한 마음으로 육체의 상전에게 순종하기를 그리스도께 하듯 하여	Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ;	Slaves, obey your earthly masters with respect and fear and sincerity of heart, just as you would obey Christ.
EPH	6	6	눈가림만 하여 사람을 기쁘게 하는 자처럼 하지 말고 그리스도의 종들처럼 마음으로 하나님의 뜻을 행하여	Not with eyeservice, as menpleasers; but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart;	And do this not only to please them while they are watching, but as servants of Christ, doing the will of God from your heart.
EPH	6	7	단 마음으로 섬기기를 주께 하듯 하고 사람들에게 하듯 하지 말라	With good will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to men:	Serve with good will, as to the Lord and not to men,
EPH	6	8	이는 각 사람이 무슨 선을 행하든지 종이나 자유하는 자나 주에게 그대로 받을 줄을 앎이니라	Knowing that whatsoever good thing any man doeth, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free.	because you know that the Lord will reward each one for whatever good he does, whether he is slave or free.
EPH	6	9	상전들아 너희도 저희에게 이와 같이 하고 공갈을 그치라 이는 저희와 너희의 상전이 하늘에 계시고 그에게는 외모로 사람을 취하는 일이 없는 줄 너희가 앎이니라	And, ye masters, do the same things unto them, forbearing threatening: knowing that your Master also is in heaven; neither is there respect of persons with him.	And masters, do the same for your slaves. Give up your use of threats, because you know that He who is both their Master and yours is in heaven, and there is no favoritism with Him.
EPH	6	10	종말로 너희가 주 안에서와 그 힘의 능력으로 강건하여지고	Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might.	Finally, be strong in the Lord and in His mighty power.
EPH	6	11	마귀의 궤계를 능히 대적하기 위하여 하나님의 전신 갑주를 입으라	Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil.	Put on the full armor of God, so that you can make your stand against the devil’s schemes.
EPH	6	12	우리의 씨름은 혈과 육에 대한 것이 아니요 정사와 권세와 이 어두움의 세상 주관자들과 하늘에 있는 악의 영들에게 대함이라	For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.	For our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the powers of this world’s darkness, and against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly realms.
EPH	6	13	그러므로 하나님의 전신 갑주를 취하라 이는 악한 날에 너희가 능히 대적하고 모든 일을 행한 후에 서기 위함이라	Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand.	Therefore take up the full armor of God, so that when the day of evil comes, you will be able to stand your ground, and having done everything, to stand.
EPH	6	14	그런즉 서서 진리로 너희 허리띠를 띠고 의의 흉배를 붙이고	Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness;	Stand firm then, with the belt of truth buckled around your waist, with the breastplate of righteousness arrayed,
EPH	6	15	평안의 복음의 예비한 것으로 신을 신고	And your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace;	and with your feet fitted with the readiness of the gospel of peace.
EPH	6	16	모든 것 위에 믿음의 방패를 가지고 이로써 능히 악한 자의 모든 화전을 소멸하고	Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked.	In addition to all this, take up the shield of faith, with which you can extinguish all the flaming arrows of the evil one.
EPH	6	17	구원의 투구와 성령의 검 곧 하나님의 말씀을 가지라	And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God:	And take the helmet of salvation and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.
EPH	6	18	모든 기도와 간구로 하되 무시로 성령 안에서 기도하고 이를 위하여 깨어 구하기를 항상 힘쓰며 여러 성도를 위하여 구하고	Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all saints;	Pray in the Spirit at all times, with every kind of prayer and petition. To this end, stay alert with all perseverance in your prayers for all the saints.
EPH	6	19	또 나를 위하여 구할 것은 내게 말씀을 주사 나로 입을 벌려 복음의 비밀을 담대히 알리게 하옵소서 할 것이니	And for me, that utterance may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the gospel,	Pray also for me, that whenever I open my mouth, words may be given me so that I will boldly make known the mystery of the gospel,
EPH	6	20	이 일을 위하여 내가 쇠사슬에 매인 사신이 된 것은 나로 이 일에 당연히 할 말을 담대히 하게 하려 하심이니라	For which I am an ambassador in bonds: that therein I may speak boldly, as I ought to speak.	for which I am an ambassador in chains. Pray that I may proclaim it fearlessly, as I should.
EPH	6	21	나의 사정 곧 내가 무엇을 하는지 너희에게도 알게 하려 하노니 사랑을 받은 형제요 주 안에서 진실한 일꾼인 두기고가 모든 일을 너희에게 알게 하리라	But that ye also may know my affairs, and how I do, Tychicus, a beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord, shall make known to you all things:	Tychicus, the beloved brother and faithful servant in the Lord, will tell you everything, so that you also may know about me and what I am doing.
EPH	6	22	우리 사정을 알게 하고 또 너희 마음을 위로하게 하기 위하여 내가 특별히 저를 너희에게 보내었노라	Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that ye might know our affairs, and that he might comfort your hearts.	I have sent him to you for this very purpose, that you may know about us, and that he may encourage your hearts.
EPH	6	23	아버지 하나님과 주 예수 그리스도에게로부터 평안과 믿음을 겸한 사랑이 형제들에게 있을지어다	Peace be to the brethren, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.	Peace to the brothers and love with faith from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
EPH	6	24	우리 주 예수 그리스도를 변함 없이 사랑하는 모든 자에게 은혜가 있을지어다	Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. Amen. Written from Rome unto the Ephesians by Tychicus.	Grace to all who love our Lord Jesus Christ with an undying love.
PHP	1	1	그리스도 예수의 종 바울과 디모데는 그리스도 예수 안에서 빌립보에 사는 모든 성도와 또는 감독들과 집사들에게 편지하노니	Paul and Timotheus, the servants of Jesus Christ, to all the saints in Christ Jesus which are at Philippi, with the bishops and deacons:	Paul and Timothy, servants of Christ Jesus, To all the saints in Christ Jesus at Philippi, together with the overseers and deacons:
PHP	1	2	하나님 우리 아버지와 주 예수 그리스도에게로서 은혜와 평강이 너희에게 있을지어다	Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.	Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
PHP	1	3	내가 너희를 생각할 때마다 나의 하나님께 감사하며	I thank my God upon every remembrance of you,	I thank my God every time I remember you.
PHP	1	4	간구할 때마다 너희 무리를 위하여 기쁨으로 항상 간구함은	Always in every prayer of mine for you all making request with joy,	In every prayer for all of you, I always pray with joy,
PHP	1	5	첫날부터 이제까지 복음에서 너희가 교제함을 인함이라	For your fellowship in the gospel from the first day until now;	because of your partnership in the gospel from the first day until now,
PHP	1	6	너희 속에 착한 일을 시작하신 이가 그리스도 예수의 날까지 이루실 줄을 우리가 확신하노라	Being confident of this very thing, that he which hath begun a good work in you will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ:	being confident of this, that He who began a good work in you will carry it on to completion until the day of Christ Jesus.
PHP	1	7	내가 너희 무리를 위하여 이와 같이 생각하는 것이 마땅하니 이는 너희가 내 마음에 있음이며 나의 매임과 복음을 변명함과 확정함에 너희가 다 나와 함께 은혜에 참예한 자가 됨이라	Even as it is meet for me to think this of you all, because I have you in my heart; inasmuch as both in my bonds, and in the defence and confirmation of the gospel, ye all are partakers of my grace.	It is right for me to feel this way about all of you, since I have you in my heart. For in my chains and in my defense and confirmation of the gospel, you are all partners in grace with me.
PHP	1	8	내가 예수 그리스도의 심장으로 너희 무리를 어떻게 사모하는지 하나님이 내 증인이시니라	For God is my record, how greatly I long after you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ.	God is my witness how I long for all of you with the affection of Christ Jesus.
PHP	1	9	내가 기도하노라 너희 사랑을 지식과 모든 총명으로 점점 더 풍성하게 하사	And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and in all judgment;	And this is my prayer: that your love may abound more and more in knowledge and depth of insight,
PHP	1	10	너희로 지극히 선한 것을 분별하며 또 진실하여 허물 없이 그리스도의 날까지 이르고	That ye may approve things that are excellent; that ye may be sincere and without offence till the day of Christ;	so that you may be able to test and prove what is best and may be pure and blameless for the day of Christ,
PHP	1	11	예수 그리스도로 말미암아 의의 열매가 가득하여 하나님의 영광과 찬송이 되게 하시기를 구하노라	Being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God.	filled with the fruit of righteousness that comes through Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God.
PHP	1	12	형제들아 나의 당한 일이 도리어 복음의 진보가 된 줄을 너희가 알기를 원하노라	But I would ye should understand, brethren, that the things which happened unto me have fallen out rather unto the furtherance of the gospel;	Now I want you to know, brothers, that my circumstances have actually served to advance the gospel.
PHP	1	13	이러므로 나의 매임이 그리스도 안에서 온 시위대 안과 기타 모든 사람에게 나타났으니	So that my bonds in Christ are manifest in all the palace, and in all other places;	As a result, it has become clear throughout the whole palace guard and to everyone else that I am in chains for Christ.
PHP	1	14	형제 중 다수가 나의 매임을 인하여 주 안에서 신뢰하므로 겁 없이 하나님의 말씀을 더욱 담대히 말하게 되었느니라	And many of the brethren in the Lord, waxing confident by my bonds, are much more bold to speak the word without fear.	And most of the brothers, confident in the Lord by my chains, now dare more greatly to speak the word without fear.
PHP	1	15	어떤 이들은 투기와 분쟁으로, 어떤 이들은 착한 뜻으로 그리스도를 전파하나니	Some indeed preach Christ even of envy and strife; and some also of good will:	It is true that some preach Christ out of envy and rivalry, but others out of goodwill.
PHP	1	16	이들은 내가 복음을 변명하기 위하여 세우심을 받은 줄 알고 사랑으로 하나	The one preach Christ of contention, not sincerely, supposing to add affliction to my bonds:	The latter do so in love, knowing that I am appointed for the defense of the gospel.
PHP	1	17	저들은 나의 매임에 괴로움을 더하게 할 줄로 생각하여 순전치 못하게 다툼으로 그리스도를 전파하느니라	But the other of love, knowing that I am set for the defence of the gospel.	The former, however, preach Christ out of selfish ambition, not sincerely, supposing that they can add to the distress of my chains.
PHP	1	18	그러면 무엇이뇨 외모로 하나 참으로 하나 무슨 방도로 하든지 전파되는 것은 그리스도니 이로써 내가 기뻐하고 또한 기뻐하리라	What then? notwithstanding, every way, whether in pretence, or in truth, Christ is preached; and I therein do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.	What then is the issue? Just this: that in every way, whether by false motives or true, Christ is preached. And in this I rejoice. Yes, and I will continue to rejoice,
PHP	1	19	이것이 너희 간구와 예수 그리스도의 성령의 도우심으로 내 구원에 이르게 할 줄 아는 고로	For I know that this shall turn to my salvation through your prayer, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ,	because I know that through your prayers and the provision of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, my distress will turn out for my deliverance.
PHP	1	20	나의 간절한 기대와 소망을 따라 아무 일에든지 부끄럽지 아니하고 오직 전과 같이 이제도 온전히 담대하여 살든지 죽든지 내 몸에서 그리스도가 존귀히 되게 하려 하나니	According to my earnest expectation and my hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed, but that with all boldness, as always, so now also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life, or by death.	I eagerly expect and hope that I will in no way be ashamed, but will have complete boldness so that now as always Christ will be exalted in my body, whether by life or by death.
PHP	1	21	이는 내게 사는 것이 그리스도니 죽는 것도 유익함이니라	For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.	For to me, to live is Christ, and to die is gain.
PHP	1	22	그러나 만일 육신으로 사는 이것이 내 일의 열매일진대 무엇을 가릴는지 나는 알지 못하노라	But if I live in the flesh, this is the fruit of my labour: yet what I shall choose I wot not.	But if I go on living in the body, this will mean fruitful labor for me. So what shall I choose? I do not know.
PHP	1	23	내가 그 두 사이에 끼였으니 떠나서 그리스도와 함께 있을 욕망을 가진 이것이 더욱 좋으나	For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better:	I am torn between the two. I desire to depart and be with Christ, which is far better indeed.
PHP	1	24	그러나 내가 육신에 거하는 것이 너희를 위하여 더 유익하리라	Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you.	But it is more necessary for you that I remain in the body.
PHP	1	25	내가 살 것과 너희 믿음의 진보와 기쁨을 위하여 너희 무리와 함께 거할 이것을 확실히 아노니	And having this confidence, I know that I shall abide and continue with you all for your furtherance and joy of faith;	Convinced of this, I know that I will remain and will continue with all of you for your progress and joy in the faith,
PHP	1	26	내가 다시 너희와 같이 있음으로 그리스도 예수 안에서 너희 자랑이 나를 인하여 풍성하게 하려 함이라	That your rejoicing may be more abundant in Jesus Christ for me by my coming to you again.	so that through my coming to you again your exultation in Christ Jesus will resound on account of me.
PHP	1	27	오직 너희는 그리스도 복음에 합당하게 생활하라 이는 내가 너희를 가 보나 떠나 있으나 너희가 일심으로 서서 한 뜻으로 복음의 신앙을 위하여 협력하는 것과	Only let your conversation be as it becometh the gospel of Christ: that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear of your affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind striving together for the faith of the gospel;	Nevertheless, conduct yourselves in a manner worthy of the gospel of Christ. Then, whether I come and see you or only hear about you in my absence, I will know that you stand firm in one spirit, contending side by side for the faith of the gospel,
PHP	1	28	아무 일에든지 대적하는 자를 인하여 두려워하지 아니하는 이 일을 듣고자 함이라 이것이 저희에게는 멸망의 빙거요 너희에게는 구원의 빙거니 이는 하나님께로부터 난 것이니라	And in nothing terrified by your adversaries: which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God.	without being frightened in any way by those who oppose you. This is a clear sign of their destruction but of your salvation, and it is from God.
PHP	1	29	그리스도를 위하여 너희에게 은혜를 주신 것은 다만 그를 믿을 뿐 아니라 또한 그를 위하여 고난도 받게 하심이라	For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake;	For it has been granted to you on behalf of Christ not only to believe in Him, but also to suffer for Him,
PHP	1	30	너희에게도 같은 싸움이 있으니 너희가 내 안에서 본 바요 이제도 내 안에서 듣는 바니라	Having the same conflict which ye saw in me, and now hear to be in me.	since you are encountering the same struggle you saw I had, and now hear that I still have.
PHP	2	1	그러므로 그리스도 안에 무슨 권면이나 사랑에 무슨 위로나 성령의 무슨 교제나 긍휼이나 자비가 있거든	If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies,	Therefore if you have any encouragement in Christ, if any comfort from His love, if any fellowship with the Spirit, if any affection and compassion,
PHP	2	2	마음을 같이 하여 같은 사랑을 가지고 뜻을 합하며 한 마음을 품어	Fulfil ye my joy, that ye be likeminded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind.	then make my joy complete by being like-minded, having the same love, being united in spirit and purpose.
PHP	2	3	아무 일에든지 다툼이나 허영으로 하지 말고 오직 겸손한 마음으로 각각 자기보다 남을 낫게 여기고	Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory; but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than themselves.	Do nothing out of selfish ambition or empty pride, but in humility consider others more important than yourselves.
PHP	2	4	각각 자기 일을 돌아볼 뿐더러 또한 각각 다른 사람들의 일을 돌아보아 나의 기쁨을 충만케 하라	Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others.	Each of you should look not only to your own interests, but also to the interests of others.
PHP	2	5	너희 안에 이 마음을 품으라 곧 그리스도 예수의 마음이니	Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus:	Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus:
PHP	2	6	그는 근본 하나님의 본체시나 하나님과 동등됨을 취할 것으로 여기지 아니하시고	Who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God:	Who, existing in the form of God, did not consider equality with God something to be grasped,
PHP	2	7	오히려 자기를 비어 종의 형체를 가져 사람들과 같이 되었고	But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men:	but emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in human likeness.
PHP	2	8	사람의 모양으로 나타나셨으매 자기를 낮추시고 죽기까지 복종하셨으니 곧 십자가에 죽으심이라	And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.	And being found in appearance as a man, He humbled Himself and became obedient to death— even death on a cross.
PHP	2	9	이러므로 하나님이 그를 지극히 높여 모든 이름 위에 뛰어난 이름을 주사	Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name:	Therefore God exalted Him to the highest place and gave Him the name above all names,
PHP	2	10	하늘에 있는 자들과 땅에 있는 자들과 땅 아래 있는 자들로 모든 무릎을 예수의 이름에 꿇게 하시고	That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth;	that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven and on earth and under the earth,
PHP	2	11	모든 입으로 예수 그리스도를 주라 시인하여 하나님 아버지께 영광을 돌리게 하셨느니라	And that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.	and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.
PHP	2	12	그러므로 나의 사랑하는 자들아 너희가 나 있을 때뿐 아니라 더욱 지금 나 없을 때에도 항상 복종하여 두렵고 떨림으로 너희 구원을 이루라	Wherefore, my beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.	Therefore, my beloved, just as you have always obeyed, not only in my presence, but now even more in my absence, continue to work out your salvation with fear and trembling.
PHP	2	13	너희 안에서 행하시는 이는 하나님이시니 자기의 기쁘신 뜻을 위하여 너희로 소원을 두고 행하게 하시나니	For it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure.	For it is God who works in you to will and to act on behalf of His good purpose.
PHP	2	14	모든 일을 원망과 시비가 없이 하라	Do all things without murmurings and disputings:	Do everything without complaining or arguing,
PHP	2	15	이는 너희가 흠이 없고 순전하여 어그러지고 거스리는 세대 가운데서 하나님의 흠 없는 자녀로 세상에서 그들 가운데 빛들로 나타내며	That ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world;	so that you may be blameless and pure, children of God without fault in a crooked and perverse generation, in which you shine as lights in the world
PHP	2	16	생명의 말씀을 밝혀 나의 달음질도 헛되지 아니하고 수고도 헛되지 아니함으로 그리스도의 날에 나로 자랑할 것이 있게 하려 함이라	Holding forth the word of life; that I may rejoice in the day of Christ, that I have not run in vain, neither laboured in vain.	as you hold forth the word of life, in order that I may boast on the day of Christ that I did not run or labor in vain.
PHP	2	17	만일 너희 믿음의 제물과 봉사 위에 내가 나를 관제로 드릴지라도 나는 기뻐하고 너희 무리와 함께 기뻐하리니	Yea, and if I be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I joy, and rejoice with you all.	But even if I am being poured out like a drink offering on the sacrifice and service of your faith, I am glad and rejoice with all of you.
PHP	2	18	이와 같이 너희도 기뻐하고 나와 함께 기뻐하라	For the same cause also do ye joy, and rejoice with me.	So you too should be glad and rejoice with me.
PHP	2	19	내가 디모데를 속히 너희에게 보내기를 주 안에서 바람은 너희 사정을 앎으로 안위를 받으려 함이니	But I trust in the Lord Jesus to send Timotheus shortly unto you, that I also may be of good comfort, when I know your state.	Now I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you soon, that I also may be cheered when I learn how you are doing.
PHP	2	20	이는 뜻을 같이 하여 너희 사정을 진실히 생각할 자가 이밖에 내게 없음이라	For I have no man likeminded, who will naturally care for your state.	I have nobody else like him who will genuinely care for your needs.
PHP	2	21	저희가 다 자기 일을 구하고 그리스도 예수의 일을 구하지 아니하되	For all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ’s.	For all the others look after their own interests, not those of Jesus Christ.
PHP	2	22	디모데의 연단을 너희가 아나니 자식이 아비에게 함 같이 나와 함께 복음을 위하여 수고하였느니라	But ye know the proof of him, that, as a son with the father, he hath served with me in the gospel.	But you know Timothy’s proven worth, that as a child with his father he has served with me to advance the gospel.
PHP	2	23	그러므로 내가 내 일이 어떻게 될 것을 보아서 곧 이 사람을 보내기를 바라고	Him therefore I hope to send presently, so soon as I shall see how it will go with me.	So I hope to send him as soon as I see what happens with me.
PHP	2	24	나도 속히 가기를 주 안에서 확신하노라	But I trust in the Lord that I also myself shall come shortly.	And I trust in the Lord that I myself will come soon.
PHP	2	25	그러나 에바브로디도를 너희에게 보내는 것이 필요한 줄로 생각하노니 그는 나의 형제요 함께 수고하고 함께 군사 된 자요 너희 사자로 나의 쓸 것을 돕는 자라	Yet I supposed it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus, my brother, and companion in labour, and fellowsoldier, but your messenger, and he that ministered to my wants.	But I thought it necessary to send back to you Epaphroditus, my brother, fellow worker, and fellow soldier, who is also your messenger and minister to my needs.
PHP	2	26	그가 너희 무리를 간절히 사모하고 자기 병든 것을 너희가 들은 줄을 알고 심히 근심한지라	For he longed after you all, and was full of heaviness, because that ye had heard that he had been sick.	For he has been longing for all of you and is distressed because you heard he was ill.
PHP	2	27	저가 병들어 죽게 되었으나 하나님이 저를 긍휼히 여기셨고 저뿐 아니라 또 나를 긍휼히 여기사 내 근심 위에 근심을 면하게 하셨느니라	For indeed he was sick nigh unto death: but God had mercy on him; and not on him only, but on me also, lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow.	He was sick indeed, nearly unto death. But God had mercy on him, and not only on him but also on me, to spare me sorrow upon sorrow.
PHP	2	28	그러므로 내가 더욱 급히 저를 보낸 것은 너희로 저를 다시 보고 기뻐하게 하며 내 근심도 덜려 함이니	I sent him therefore the more carefully, that, when ye see him again, ye may rejoice, and that I may be the less sorrowful.	Therefore I am all the more eager to send him, so that when you see him again you may rejoice, and I may be less anxious.
PHP	2	29	이러므로 너희가 주 안에서 모든 기쁨으로 저를 영접하고 또 이와 같은 자들을 존귀히 여기라	Receive him therefore in the Lord with all gladness; and hold such in reputation:	Welcome him in the Lord with great joy, and honor men like him,
PHP	2	30	저가 그리스도의 일을 위하여 죽기에 이르러도 자기 목숨을 돌아보지 아니한 것은 나를 섬기는 너희의 일에 부족함을 채우려 함이니라	Because for the work of Christ he was nigh unto death, not regarding his life, to supply your lack of service toward me.	because he nearly died for the work of Christ, risking his life to make up for your deficit of service to me.
PHP	3	1	종말로 나의 형제들아 주 안에서 기뻐하라 너희에게 같은 말을 쓰는 것이 내게는 수고로움이 없고 너희에게는 안전하니라	Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same things to you, to me indeed is not grievous, but for you it is safe.	Finally, my brothers, rejoice in the Lord. It is no trouble for me to write the same things to you again, and it is a safeguard for you.
PHP	3	2	개들을 삼가고 행악하는 자들을 삼가고 손할례당을 삼가라	Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision.	Watch out for those dogs, those workers of evil, those mutilators of the flesh!
PHP	3	3	하나님의 성령으로 봉사하며 그리스도 예수로 자랑하고 육체를 신뢰하지 아니하는 우리가 곧 할례당이라	For we are the circumcision, which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.	For it is we who are the circumcision, we who worship by the Spirit of God, who glory in Christ Jesus, and who put no confidence in the flesh—
PHP	3	4	그러나 나도 육체를 신뢰할 만하니 만일 누구든지 다른 이가 육체를 신뢰할 것이 있는 줄로 생각하면 나는 더욱 그러하리니	Though I might also have confidence in the flesh. If any other man thinketh that he hath whereof he might trust in the flesh, I more:	though I myself could have such confidence. If anyone else thinks he has grounds for confidence in the flesh, I have more:
PHP	3	5	내가 팔일 만에 할례를 받고 이스라엘의 족속이요 베냐민의 지파요 히브리인 중의 히브리인이요 율법으로는 바리새인이요	Circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews; as touching the law, a Pharisee;	circumcised on the eighth day, of the people of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin; a Hebrew of Hebrews; as to the law, a Pharisee;
PHP	3	6	열심으로는 교회를 핍박하고 율법의 의로는 흠이 없는 자로라	Concerning zeal, persecuting the church; touching the righteousness which is in the law, blameless.	as to zeal, persecuting the church; as to righteousness in the law, faultless.
PHP	3	7	그러나 무엇이든지 내게 유익하던 것을 내가 그리스도를 위하여 다 해로 여길 뿐더러	But what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ.	But whatever was gain to me I count as loss for the sake of Christ.
PHP	3	8	또한 모든 것을 해로 여김은 내 주 그리스도 예수를 아는 지식이 가장 고상함을 인함이라 내가 그를 위하여 모든 것을 잃어버리고 배설물로 여김은 그리스도를 얻고	Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ,	More than that, I count all things as loss compared to the surpassing excellence of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have lost all things. I consider them rubbish, that I may gain Christ
PHP	3	9	그 안에서 발견되려 함이니 내가 가진 의는 율법에서 난 것이 아니요 오직 그리스도를 믿음으로 말미암은 것이니 곧 믿음으로 하나님께로서 난 의라	And be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith:	and be found in Him, not having my own righteousness from the law, but that which is through faith in Christ, the righteousness from God on the basis of faith.
PHP	3	10	내가 그리스도와 그 부활의 권능과 그 고난에 참예함을 알려 하여 그의 죽으심을 본받아	That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death;	I want to know Christ and the power of His resurrection and the fellowship of His sufferings, being conformed to Him in His death,
PHP	3	11	어찌하든지 죽은 자 가운데서 부활에 이르려 하노니	If by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead.	and so, somehow, to attain to the resurrection from the dead.
PHP	3	12	내가 이미 얻었다 함도 아니요 온전히 이루었다 함도 아니라 오직 내가 그리스도 예수께 잡힌 바 된 그것을 잡으려고 좇아가노라	Not as though I had already attained, either were already perfect: but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus.	Not that I have already obtained all this, or have already been made perfect, but I press on to take hold of that for which Christ Jesus took hold of me.
PHP	3	13	형제들아 나는 아직 내가 잡은 줄로 여기지 아니하고 오직 한 일 즉 뒤에 있는 것은 잊어버리고 앞에 있는 것을 잡으려고	Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended: but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before,	Brothers, I do not consider myself yet to have taken hold of it. But one thing I do: Forgetting what is behind and straining toward what is ahead,
PHP	3	14	푯대를 향하여 그리스도 예수 안에서 하나님이 위에서 부르신 부름의 상을 위하여 좇아가노라	I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.	I press on toward the goal to win the prize of God’s heavenly calling in Christ Jesus.
PHP	3	15	그러므로 누구든지 우리 온전히 이룬 자들은 이렇게 생각할지니 만일 무슨 일에 너희가 달리 생각하면 하나님이 이것도 너희에게 나타내시리라	Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded: and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you.	All of us who are mature should embrace this point of view. And if you think differently about some issue, God will reveal this to you as well.
PHP	3	16	오직 우리가 어디까지 이르렀든지 그대로 행할 것이라	Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing.	Nevertheless, we must live up to what we have already attained.
PHP	3	17	형제들아 너희는 함께 나를 본받으라 또 우리로 본을 삼은 것 같이 그대로 행하는 자들을 보이라	Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark them which walk so as ye have us for an ensample.	Join one another in following my example, brothers, and carefully observe those who walk according to the pattern we set for you.
PHP	3	18	내가 여러 번 너희에게 말하였거니와 이제도 눈물을 흘리며 말하노니 여러 사람들이 그리스도 십자가의 원수로 행하느니라	(For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ:	For as I have often told you before, and now say again even with tears: Many live as enemies of the cross of Christ.
PHP	3	19	저희의 마침은 멸망이요 저희의 신은 배요 그 영광은 저희의 부끄러움에 있고 땅의 일을 생각하는 자라	Whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things.)	Their end is destruction, their god is their belly, and their glory is in their shame. Their minds are set on earthly things.
PHP	3	20	오직 우리의 시민권은 하늘에 있는지라 거기로서 구원하는 자 곧 주 예수 그리스도를 기다리노니	For our conversation is in heaven; from whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ:	But our citizenship is in heaven, and we eagerly await a Savior from there, the Lord Jesus Christ,
PHP	3	21	그가 만물을 자기에게 복종케 하실 수 있는 자의 역사로 우리의 낮은 몸을 자기 영광의 몸의 형체와 같이 변케 하시리라	Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself.	who, by the power that enables Him to subject all things to Himself, will transform our lowly bodies to be like His glorious body.
PHP	4	1	그러므로 나의 사랑하고 사모하는 형제들, 나의 기쁨이요 면류관인 사랑하는 자들아 이와 같이 주 안에 서라	Therefore, my brethren dearly beloved and longed for, my joy and crown, so stand fast in the Lord, my dearly beloved.	Therefore, my brothers, whom I love and long for, my joy and crown, that is how you must stand firm in the Lord, my beloved.
PHP	4	2	내가 유오디아를 권하고 순두게를 권하노니 주 안에서 같은 마음을 품으라	I beseech Euodias, and beseech Syntyche, that they be of the same mind in the Lord.	I urge Euodia and Syntyche to agree with each other in the Lord.
PHP	4	3	또 참으로 나와 멍에를 같이 한 자, 네게 구하노니 복음에 나와 함께 힘쓰던 저 부녀들을 돕고 또한 글레멘드와 그 위에 나의 동역자들을 도우라 그 이름들이 생명책에 있느니라	And I intreat thee also, true yokefellow, help those women which laboured with me in the gospel, with Clement also, and with other my fellowlabourers, whose names are in the book of life.	Yes, and I ask you, my true yokefellow, to help these women who have labored with me for the gospel, along with Clement and the rest of my fellow workers, whose names are in the Book of Life.
PHP	4	4	주 안에서 항상 기뻐하라 내가 다시 말하노니 기뻐하라	Rejoice in the Lord alway: and again I say, Rejoice.	Rejoice in the Lord always. I will say it again: Rejoice!
PHP	4	5	너희 관용을 모든 사람에게 알게 하라 주께서 가까우시니라	Let your moderation be known unto all men. The Lord is at hand.	Let your gentleness be apparent to all. The Lord is near.
PHP	4	6	아무 것도 염려하지 말고 오직 모든 일에 기도와 간구로, 너희 구할 것을 감사함으로 하나님께 아뢰라	Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God.	Be anxious for nothing, but in everything, by prayer and petition, with thanksgiving, present your requests to God.
PHP	4	7	그리하면 모든 지각에 뛰어난 하나님의 평강이 그리스도 예수 안에서 너희 마음과 생각을 지키시리라	And the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus.	And the peace of God, which surpasses all understanding, will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus.
PHP	4	8	종말로 형제들아 무엇에든지 참되며 무엇에든지 경건하며 무엇에든지 옳으며 무엇에든지 정결하며 무엇에든지 사랑할 만하며 무엇에든지 칭찬할 만하며 무슨 덕이 있든지 무슨 기림이 있든지 이것들을 생각하라	Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things.	Finally, brothers, whatever is true, whatever is honorable, whatever is right, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is admirable—if anything is excellent or praiseworthy—think on these things.
PHP	4	9	너희는 내게 배우고 받고 듣고 본 바를 행하라 그리하면 평강의 하나님이 너희와 함께 계시리라	Those things, which ye have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, do: and the God of peace shall be with you.	Whatever you have learned or received or heard from me, or seen in me, put it into practice. And the God of peace will be with you.
PHP	4	10	내가 주 안에서 크게 기뻐함은 너희가 나를 생각하던 것이 이제 다시 싹이 남이니 너희가 또한 이를 위하여 생각은 하였으나 기회가 없었느니라	But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly, that now at the last your care of me hath flourished again; wherein ye were also careful, but ye lacked opportunity.	Now I rejoice greatly in the Lord that at last you have revived your concern for me. You were indeed concerned, but you had no opportunity to show it.
PHP	4	11	내가 궁핍하므로 말하는 것이 아니라 어떠한 형편에든지 내가 자족하기를 배웠노니	Not that I speak in respect of want: for I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content.	I am not saying this out of need, for I have learned to be content regardless of my circumstances.
PHP	4	12	내가 비천에 처할 줄도 알고 풍부에 처할 줄도 알아 모든 일에 배부르며 배고픔과 풍부와 궁핍에도 일체의 비결을 배웠노라	I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound: every where and in all things I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need.	I know how to live humbly, and I know how to abound. I am accustomed to any and every situation—to being filled and being hungry, to having plenty and having need.
PHP	4	13	내게 능력 주시는 자 안에서 내가 모든 것을 할 수 있느니라	I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me.	I can do all things through Christ who gives me strength.
PHP	4	14	그러나 너희가 내 괴로움에 함께 참예하였으니 잘하였도다	Notwithstanding ye have well done, that ye did communicate with my affliction.	Nevertheless, you have done well to share in my affliction.
PHP	4	15	빌립보 사람들아 너희도 알거니와 복음의 시초에 내가 마게도냐를 떠날 때에 주고 받는 내 일에 참예한 교회가 너희 외에 아무도 없었느니라	Now ye Philippians know also, that in the beginning of the gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, no church communicated with me as concerning giving and receiving, but ye only.	And as you Philippians know, in the early days of the gospel, when I left Macedonia, no church but you partnered with me in the matter of giving and receiving.
PHP	4	16	데살로니가에 있을 때에도 너희가 한 번 두 번 나의 쓸 것을 보내었도다	For even in Thessalonica ye sent once and again unto my necessity.	For even while I was in Thessalonica, you provided for my needs again and again.
PHP	4	17	내가 선물을 구함이 아니요 오직 너희에게 유익하도록 과실이 번성하기를 구함이라	Not because I desire a gift: but I desire fruit that may abound to your account.	Not that I am seeking a gift, but I am looking for the fruit that may be credited to your account.
PHP	4	18	내게는 모든 것이 있고 또 풍부한지라 에바브로디도 편에 너희의 준 것을 받으므로 내가 풍족하니 이는 받으실 만한 향기로운 제물이요 하나님을 기쁘시게 한 것이라	But I have all, and abound: I am full, having received of Epaphroditus the things which were sent from you, an odour of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, wellpleasing to God.	I have all I need and more, now that I have received your gifts from Epaphroditus. They are a fragrant offering, an acceptable sacrifice, well-pleasing to God.
PHP	4	19	나의 하나님이 그리스도 예수 안에서 영광 가운게 그 풍성한 대로 너희 모든 쓸 것을 채우시리라	But my God shall supply all your need according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus.	And my God will supply all your needs according to His glorious riches in Christ Jesus.
PHP	4	20	하나님 곧 우리 아버지께 세세 무궁토록 영광을 돌릴지어다 아멘	Now unto God and our Father be glory for ever and ever. Amen.	To our God and Father be glory forever and ever. Amen.
PHP	4	21	그리스도 예수 안에 있는 성도에게 각각 문안하라 나와 함께 있는 형제들이 너희에게 문안하고	Salute every saint in Christ Jesus. The brethren which are with me greet you.	Greet all the saints in Christ Jesus. The brothers who are with me send you greetings.
PHP	4	22	모든 성도들이 너희에게 문안하되 특별히 가이사 집 사람 중 몇이니라	All the saints salute you, chiefly they that are of Cesar’s household.	All the saints send you greetings, especially those from the household of Caesar.
PHP	4	23	주 예수 그리스도의 은혜가 너희 심령에 있을지어다	The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen. It was written to the Philippians from Rome by Epaphroditus.	The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.
COL	1	1	하나님의 뜻으로 말미암아 그리스도 예수의 사도 된 바울과 형제 디모데는	Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and Timotheus our brother,	Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy our brother,
COL	1	2	골로새에 있는 성도들 곧 그리스도 안에서 신실한 형제들에게 편지하노니 우리 아버지 하나님으로부터 은혜와 평강이 너희에게 있을지어다	To the saints and faithful brethren in Christ which are at Colosse: Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.	To the saints and faithful brothers in Christ at Colossae: Grace and peace to you from God our Father.
COL	1	3	우리가 너희를 위하여 기도할 때마다 하나님 곧 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 아버지께 감사하노라	We give thanks to God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, praying always for you,	We always thank God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, when we pray for you,
COL	1	4	이는 그리스도 예수 안에 너희의 믿음과 모든 성도에 대한 사랑을 들음이요	Since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love which ye have to all the saints,	because we have heard about your faith in Christ Jesus and your love for all the saints—
COL	1	5	너희를 위하여 하늘에 쌓아 둔 소망을 인함이니 곧 너희가 전에 복음 진리의 말씀을 들은 것이라	For the hope which is laid up for you in heaven, whereof ye heard before in the word of the truth of the gospel;	the faith and love proceeding from the hope stored up for you in heaven, of which you have already heard in the word of truth, the gospel
COL	1	6	이 복음이 이미 너희에게 이르매 너희가 듣고 참으로 하나님의 은혜를 깨달은 날부터 너희 중에서와 같이 또한 온 천하에서도 열매를 맺어 자라는도다	Which is come unto you, as it is in all the world; and bringeth forth fruit, as it doth also in you, since the day ye heard of it, and knew the grace of God in truth:	that has come to you. All over the world this gospel is bearing fruit and growing, just as it has been doing among you since the day you heard it and truly understood the grace of God.
COL	1	7	이와 같이 우리와 함께 종 된 사랑하는 에바브라에게 너희가 배웠나니 그는 너희를 위하여 그리스도의 신실한 일꾼이요	As ye also learned of Epaphras our dear fellowservant, who is for you a faithful minister of Christ;	You learned it from Epaphras, our beloved fellow servant, who is a faithful minister of Christ on our behalf,
COL	1	8	성령 안에서 너희 사랑을 우리에게 고한 자니라	Who also declared unto us your love in the Spirit.	and who also informed us of your love in the Spirit.
COL	1	9	이로써 우리도 듣던 날부터 너희를 위하여 기도하기를 그치지 아니하고 구하노니 너희로 하여금 모든 신령한 지혜와 총명에 하나님의 뜻을 아는 것으로 채우게 하시고	For this cause we also, since the day we heard it, do not cease to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding;	For this reason, since the day we heard about you, we have not stopped praying for you and asking God to fill you with the knowledge of His will in all spiritual wisdom and understanding,
COL	1	10	주께 합당히 행하여 범사에 기쁘시게 하고 모든 선한 일에 열매를 맺게 하시며 하나님을 아는 것에 자라게 하시고	That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God;	so that you may walk in a manner worthy of the Lord and may please Him in every way: bearing fruit in every good work, growing in the knowledge of God,
COL	1	11	그 영광의 힘을 좇아 모든 능력으로 능하게 하시며 기쁨으로 모든 견딤과 오래 참음에 이르게 하시고	Strengthened with all might, according to his glorious power, unto all patience and longsuffering with joyfulness;	being strengthened with all power according to His glorious might so that you may have full endurance and patience, and joyfully
COL	1	12	우리로 하여금 빛 가운데서 성도의 기업의 부분을 얻기에 합당하게 하신 아버지께 감사하게 하시기를 원하노라	Giving thanks unto the Father, which hath made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light:	giving thanks to the Father, who has qualified you to share in the inheritance of the saints in the light.
COL	1	13	그가 우리를 흑암의 권세에서 건져내사 그의 사랑의 아들의 나라로 옮기셨으니	Who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son:	He has rescued us from the dominion of darkness and brought us into the kingdom of His beloved Son,
COL	1	14	그 아들 안에서 우리가 구속 곧 죄 사함을 얻었도다	In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins:	in whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins.
COL	1	15	그는 보이지 아니하시는 하나님의 형상이요 모든 창조물보다 먼저 나신 자니	Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature:	The Son is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn over all creation.
COL	1	16	만물이 그에게 창조되되 하늘과 땅에서 보이는 것들과 보이지 않는 것들과 혹은 보좌들이나 주관들이나 정사들이나 권세들이나 만물이 다 그로 말미암고 그를 위하여 창조되었고	For by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him:	For in Him all things were created, things in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or rulers or authorities. All things were created through Him and for Him.
COL	1	17	또한 그가 만물보다 먼저 계시고 만물이 그 안에 함께 섰느니라	And he is before all things, and by him all things consist.	He is before all things, and in Him all things hold together.
COL	1	18	그는 몸인 교회의 머리라 그가 근본이요 죽은 자들 가운데서 먼저 나신 자니 이는 친히 만물의 으뜸이 되려 하심이요	And he is the head of the body, the church: who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all things he might have the preeminence.	And He is the head of the body, the church; He is the beginning and firstborn from among the dead, so that in all things He may have preeminence.
COL	1	19	아버지께서는 모든 충만으로 예수 안에 거하게 하시고	For it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell;	For God was pleased to have all His fullness dwell in Him,
COL	1	20	그의 십자가의 피로 화평을 이루사 만물 곧 땅에 있는 것들이나 하늘에 있는 것들을 그로 말미암아 자기와 화목케 되기를 기뻐하심이라	And, having made peace through the blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all things unto himself; by him, I say, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven.	and through Him to reconcile to Himself all things, whether things on earth or things in heaven, by making peace through the blood of His cross.
COL	1	21	전에 악한 행실로 멀리 떠나 마음으로 원수가 되었던 너희를	And you, that were sometime alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now hath he reconciled	Once you were alienated from God and were hostile in your minds, engaging in evil deeds.
COL	1	22	이제는 그의 육체의 죽음으로 말미암아 화목케 하사 너희를 거룩하고 흠 없고 책망할 것이 없는 자로 그 앞에 세우고자 하셨으니	In the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and unblameable and unreproveable in his sight:	But now He has reconciled you by Christ’s physical body through death to present you holy, unblemished, and blameless in His presence—
COL	1	23	만일 너희가 믿음에 거하고 터 위에 굳게 서서 너희 들은 바 복음의 소망에서 흔들리지 아니하면 그리하리라 이 복음은 천하 만민에게 전파된 바요 나 바울은 이 복음의 일꾼이 되었노라	If ye continue in the faith grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the hope of the gospel, which ye have heard, and which was preached to every creature which is under heaven; whereof I Paul am made a minister;	if indeed you continue in your faith, established and firm, not moved from the hope of the gospel you heard, which has been proclaimed to every creature under heaven, and of which I, Paul, have become a servant.
COL	1	24	내가 이제 너희를 위하여 받는 괴로움을 기뻐하고 그리스도의 남은 고난을 그의 몸된 교회를 위하여 내 육체에 채우노라	Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body’s sake, which is the church:	Now I rejoice in my sufferings for you, and I fill up in my flesh what is lacking in regard to Christ’s afflictions for the sake of His body, which is the church.
COL	1	25	내가 교회 일꾼 된 것은 하나님이 너희를 위하여 내게 주신 경륜을 따라 하나님의 말씀을 이루려 함이니라	Whereof I am made a minister, according to the dispensation of God which is given to me for you, to fulfil the word of God;	I became its servant by the commission God gave me to fully proclaim to you the word of God,
COL	1	26	이 비밀은 만세와 만대로부터 옴으로 감취었던 것인데 이제는 그의 성도들에게 나타났고	Even the mystery which hath been hid from ages and from generations, but now is made manifest to his saints:	the mystery that was hidden for ages and generations but is now revealed to His saints.
COL	1	27	하나님이 그들로 하여금 이 비밀의 영광이 이방인 가운데 어떻게 풍성한 것을 알게 하려 하심이라 이 비밀은 너희 안에 계신 그리스도시니 곧 영광의 소망이니라	To whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles; which is Christ in you, the hope of glory:	To them God has chosen to make known among the Gentiles the glorious riches of this mystery, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory.
COL	1	28	우리가 그를 전파하여 각 사람을 권하고 모든 지혜로 각 사람을 가르침은 각 사람을 그리스도 안에서 완전한 자로 세우려 함이니	Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom; that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus:	We proclaim Him, admonishing and teaching everyone with all wisdom, so that we may present everyone perfect in Christ.
COL	1	29	이를 위하여 나도 내 속에서 능력으로 역사하시는 이의 역사를 따라 힘을 다하여 수고하노라	Whereunto I also labour, striving according to his working, which worketh in me mightily.	To this end I also labor, striving with all His energy working powerfully within me.
COL	2	1	내가 너희와 라오디게아에 있는 자들과 무릇 내 육신의 얼굴을 보지 못한 자들을 위하여 어떻게 힘쓰는 것을 너희가 알기를 원하노니	For I would that ye knew what great conflict I have for you, and for them at Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face in the flesh;	For I want you to know how much I am struggling for you and for those at Laodicea, and for all who have not met me face to face,
COL	2	2	이는 저희로 마음에 위안을 받고 사랑 안에서 연합하여 원만한 이해의 모든 부요에 이르러 하나님의 비밀인 그리스도를 깨닫게 하려 함이라	That their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgement of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ;	that they may be encouraged in heart, knit together in love, and filled with the full riches of complete understanding, so that they may know the mystery of God, namely Christ,
COL	2	3	그 안에는 지혜와 지식의 모든 보화가 감취어 있느니라	In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.	in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
COL	2	4	내가 이것을 말함은 아무도 공교한 말로 너희를 속이지 못하게 하려 함이니	And this I say, lest any man should beguile you with enticing words.	I say this so that no one will deceive you by smooth rhetoric.
COL	2	5	이는 내가 육신으로는 떠나 있으나 심령으로는 너희와 함께 있어 너희의 규모와 그리스도를 믿는 너희 믿음의 굳은 것을 기쁘게 봄이라	For though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit, joying and beholding your order, and the stedfastness of your faith in Christ.	For although I am absent from you in body, I am present with you in spirit, and I delight to see your orderly condition and firm faith in Christ.
COL	2	6	그러므로 너희가 그리스도 예수를 주로 받았으니 그 안에서 행하되	As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him:	Therefore, just as you have received Christ Jesus as Lord, continue to walk in Him,
COL	2	7	그 안에 뿌리를 박으며 세움을 입어 교훈을 받은 대로 믿음에 굳게 서서 감사함을 넘치게 하라	Rooted and built up in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving.	rooted and built up in Him, established in the faith as you were taught, and overflowing with thankfulness.
COL	2	8	누가 철학과 헛된 속임수로 너희를 노략할까 주의하라 이것이 사람의 유전과 세상의 초등학문을 좇음이요 그리스도를 좇음이 아니니라	Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ.	See to it that no one takes you captive through philosophy and empty deception, which are based on human tradition and the spiritual forces of the world rather than on Christ.
COL	2	9	그 안에는 신성의 모든 충만이 육체로 거하시고	For in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily.	For in Christ all the fullness of the Deity dwells in bodily form.
COL	2	10	너희도 그 안에서 충만하여졌으니 그는 모든 정사와 권세의 머리시라	And ye are complete in him, which is the head of all principality and power:	And you have been made complete in Christ, who is the head over every ruler and authority.
COL	2	11	또 그 안에서 너희가 손으로 하지 아니한 할례를 받았으니 곧 육적 몸을 벗는 것이요 그리스도의 할례니라	In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ:	In Him you were also circumcised, in the putting off of your sinful nature, with the circumcision performed by Christ and not by human hands.
COL	2	12	너희가 침례로 그리스도와 함께 장사한 바 되고 또 죽은 자들 가운데서 그를 일으키신 하나님의 역사를 믿음으로 말미암아 그 안에서 함께 일으키심을 받았느니라	Buried with him in baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, who hath raised him from the dead.	And having been buried with Him in baptism, you were raised with Him through your faith in the power of God, who raised Him from the dead.
COL	2	13	또 너희의 범죄와 육체의 무할례로 죽었던 너희를 하나님이 그와 함께 살리시고 우리에게 모든 죄를 사하시고	And you, being dead in your sins and the uncircumcision of your flesh, hath he quickened together with him, having forgiven you all trespasses;	When you were dead in your trespasses and in the uncircumcision of your sinful nature, God made you alive with Christ. He forgave us all our trespasses,
COL	2	14	우리를 거스리고 우리를 대적하는 의문에 쓴 증서를 도말하시고 제하여 버리사 십자가에 못 박으시고	Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross;	having canceled the debt ascribed to us in the decrees that stood against us. He took it away, nailing it to the cross!
COL	2	15	정사와 권세를 벗어버려 밝히 드러내시고 십자가로 승리하셨느니라	And having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a shew of them openly, triumphing over them in it.	And having disarmed the powers and authorities, He made a public spectacle of them, triumphing over them by the cross.
COL	2	16	그러므로 먹고 마시는 것과 절기나 월삭이나 안식일을 인하여 누구든지 너희를 폄론하지 못하게 하라	Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of an holyday, or of the new moon, or of the sabbath days:	Therefore let no one judge you by what you eat or drink, or with regard to a feast, a New Moon, or a Sabbath.
COL	2	17	이것들은 장래 일의 그림자이나 몸은 그리스도의 것이니라	Which are a shadow of things to come; but the body is of Christ.	These are a shadow of the things to come, but the body that casts it belongs to Christ.
COL	2	18	누구든지 일부러 겸손함과 천사 숭배함을 인하여 너희 상을 빼앗지 못하게 하라 저가 그 본 것을 의지하여 그 육체의 마음을 좇아 헛되이 과장하고	Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility and worshipping of angels, intruding into those things which he hath not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind,	Do not let anyone who delights in false humility and the worship of angels disqualify you with speculation about what he has seen. Such a person is puffed up without basis by his unspiritual mind.
COL	2	19	머리를 붙들지 아니하는지라 온 몸이 머리로 말미암아 마디와 힘줄로 공급함을 얻고 연합하여 하나님이 자라게 하심으로 자라느니라	And not holding the Head, from which all the body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered, and knit together, increaseth with the increase of God.	He has lost connection to the head, from whom the whole body, supported and knit together by its joints and ligaments, grows as God causes it to grow.
COL	2	20	너희가 세상의 초등 학문에서 그리스도와 함께 죽었거든 어찌하여 세상에 사는 것과 같이 의문에 순종하느냐	Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why, as though living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances,	If you have died with Christ to the spiritual forces of the world, why, as though you still belonged to the world, do you submit to its regulations:
COL	2	21	곧 붙잡지도 말고 맛보지도 말고 만지지도 말라 하는 것이니	(Touch not; taste not; handle not;	“Do not handle, do not taste, do not touch!”?
COL	2	22	(이 모든 것은 쓰는 대로 부패에 돌아가리라) 사람의 명과 가르침을 좇느냐	Which all are to perish with the using;) after the commandments and doctrines of men?	These will all perish with use, because they are based on human commands and teachings.
COL	2	23	이런 것들은 자의적 숭배와 겸손과 몸을 괴롭게 하는 데 지혜 있는 모양이나 오직 육체 좇는 것을 금하는 데는 유익이 조금도 없느니라	Which things have indeed a shew of wisdom in will worship, and humility, and neglecting of the body; not in any honour to the satisfying of the flesh.	Such restrictions indeed have an appearance of wisdom, with their self-prescribed worship, their false humility, and their harsh treatment of the body; but they are of no value against the indulgence of the flesh.
COL	3	1	그러므로 너희가 그리스도와 함께 다시 살리심을 받았으면 위엣 것을 찾으라 거기는 그리스도께서 하나님 우편에 앉아 계시느니라	If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God.	Therefore, since you have been raised with Christ, strive for the things above, where Christ is seated at the right hand of God.
COL	3	2	위엣 것을 생각하고 땅엣 것을 생각지 말라	Set your affection on things above, not on things on the earth.	Set your minds on things above, not on earthly things.
COL	3	3	이는 너희가 죽었고 너희 생명이 그리스도와 함께 하나님 안에 감취었음이니라	For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.	For you died, and your life is now hidden with Christ in God.
COL	3	4	우리 생명이신 그리스도께서 나타나실 그 때에 너희도 그와 함께 영광 중에 나타나리라	When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory.	When Christ, who is your life, appears, then you also will appear with Him in glory.
COL	3	5	그러므로 땅에 있는 지체를 죽이라 곧 음란과 부정과 사욕과 악한 정욕과 탐심이니 탐심은 우상 숭배니라	Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth; fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which is idolatry:	Put to death, therefore, the components of your earthly nature: sexual immorality, impurity, lust, evil desires, and greed, which is idolatry.
COL	3	6	이것들을 인하여 하나님의 진노가 임하느니라	For which things’ sake the wrath of God cometh on the children of disobedience:	Because of these, the wrath of God is coming on the sons of disobedience.
COL	3	7	너희도 전에 그 가운데 살 때에는 그 가운데서 행하였으나	In the which ye also walked some time, when ye lived in them.	When you lived among them, you also used to walk in these ways.
COL	3	8	이제는 너희가 이 모든 것을 벗어버리라 곧 분과 악의와 훼방과 너희 입의 부끄러운 말이라	But now ye also put off all these; anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, filthy communication out of your mouth.	But now you must put aside all such things as these: anger, rage, malice, slander, and filthy language from your lips.
COL	3	9	너희가 서로 거짓말을 말라 옛 사람과 그 행위를 벗어버리고	Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old man with his deeds;	Do not lie to one another, since you have taken off the old self with its practices,
COL	3	10	새 사람을 입었으니 이는 자기를 창조하신 자의 형상을 좇아 지식에까지 새롭게 하심을 받는 자니라	And have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him:	and have put on the new self, which is being renewed in knowledge in the image of its Creator.
COL	3	11	거기는 헬라인과 유대인이나 할례당과 무할례당이나 야인이나 스구디아인이나 종이나 자유인이 분별이 있을 수 없나니 오직 그리스도는 만유시요 만유 안에 계시니라	Where there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free: but Christ is all, and in all.	Here there is no Greek or Jew, circumcised or uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave, or free, but Christ is all and is in all.
COL	3	12	그러므로 너희는 하나님의 택하신 거룩하고 사랑하신 자처럼 긍휼과 자비와 겸손과 온유와 오래 참음을 옷입고	Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, longsuffering;	Therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, clothe yourselves with hearts of compassion, kindness, humility, gentleness, and patience.
COL	3	13	누가 뉘게 혐의가 있거든 서로 용납하여 피차 용서하되 주께서 너희를 용서하신 것과 같이 너희도 그리하고	Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any: even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.	Bear with one another and forgive any complaint you may have against someone else. Forgive as the Lord forgave you.
COL	3	14	이 모든 것 위에 사랑을 더하라 이는 온전하게 매는 띠니라	And above all these things put on charity, which is the bond of perfectness.	And over all these virtues put on love, which is the bond of perfect unity.
COL	3	15	그리스도의 평강이 너희 마음을 주장하게 하라 평강을 위하여 너희가 한 몸으로 부르심을 받았나니 또한 너희는 감사하는 자가 되라	And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye are called in one body; and be ye thankful.	Let the peace of Christ rule in your hearts, for to this you were called as members of one body. And be thankful.
COL	3	16	그리스도의 말씀이 너희 속에 풍성히 거하여 모든 지혜로 피차 가르치며 권면하고 시와 찬미와 신령한 노래를 부르며 마음에 감사함으로 하나님을 찬양하고	Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom; teaching and admonishing one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord.	Let the word of Christ richly dwell within you as you teach and admonish one another with all wisdom, and as you sing psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs with gratitude in your hearts to God.
COL	3	17	또 무엇을 하든지 말에나 일에나 다 주 예수의 이름으로 하고 그를 힘입어 하나님 아버지께 감사하라	And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him.	And whatever you do, in word or deed, do it all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through Him.
COL	3	18	아내들아 남편에게 복종하라 이는 주 안에서 마땅하니라	Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as it is fit in the Lord.	Wives, submit to your husbands, as is fitting in the Lord.
COL	3	19	남편들아 아내를 사랑하며 괴롭게 하지 말라	Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter against them.	Husbands, love your wives and do not be harsh with them.
COL	3	20	자녀들아 모든 일에 부모에게 순종하라 이는 주 안에서 기쁘게 하는 것이니라	Children, obey your parents in all things: for this is well pleasing unto the Lord.	Children, obey your parents in everything, for this is pleasing to the Lord.
COL	3	21	아비들아 너희 자녀를 격노케 말지니 낙심할까 함이라	Fathers, provoke not your children to anger, lest they be discouraged.	Fathers, do not provoke your children, so they will not become discouraged.
COL	3	22	종들아 모든 일에 육신의 상전들에게 순종하되 사람을 기쁘게 하는 자와 같이 눈가림만 하지 말고 오직 주를 두려워하여 성실한 마음으로 하라	Servants, obey in all things your masters according to the flesh; not with eyeservice, as menpleasers; but in singleness of heart, fearing God:	Slaves, obey your earthly masters in everything, not only to please them while they are watching, but with sincerity of heart and fear of the Lord.
COL	3	23	무슨 일을 하든지 마음을 다하여 주께 하듯 하고 사람에게 하듯 하지 말라	And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men;	Whatever you do, work at it with your whole being, for the Lord and not for men,
COL	3	24	이는 유업의 상을 주께 받을 줄 앎이니 너희는 주 그리스도를 섬기느니라	Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance: for ye serve the Lord Christ.	because you know that you will receive an inheritance from the Lord as your reward. It is the Lord Christ you are serving.
COL	3	25	불의를 행하는 자는 불의의 보응을 받으리니 주는 외모로 사람을 취하심이 없느니라	But he that doeth wrong shall receive for the wrong which he hath done: and there is no respect of persons.	Whoever does wrong will be repaid for his wrong, and there is no favoritism.
COL	4	1	상전들아 의와 공평을 종들에게 베풀지니 너희에게도 하늘에 상전이 계심을 알지어다	Masters, give unto your servants that which is just and equal; knowing that ye also have a Master in heaven.	Masters, supply your slaves with what is right and fair, since you know that you also have a Master in heaven.
COL	4	2	기도를 항상 힘쓰고 기도에 감사함으로 깨어 있으라	Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving;	Devote yourselves to prayer, being watchful and thankful,
COL	4	3	또한 우리를 위하여 기도하되 하나님이 전도할 문을 우리에게 열어주사 그리스도의 비밀을 말하게 하시기를 구하라 내가 이것을 인하여 매임을 당하였노라	Withal praying also for us, that God would open unto us a door of utterance, to speak the mystery of Christ, for which I am also in bonds:	as you pray also for us, that God may open to us a door for the word, so that we may proclaim the mystery of Christ, for which I am in chains.
COL	4	4	그리하면 내가 마땅히 할 말로써 이 비밀을 나타내리라	That I may make it manifest, as I ought to speak.	Pray that I may declare it clearly, as I should.
COL	4	5	외인을 향하여서는 지혜로 행하여 세월을 아끼라	Walk in wisdom toward them that are without, redeeming the time.	Act wisely toward outsiders, redeeming the time.
COL	4	6	너희 말을 항상 은혜 가운데서 소금으로 고루게 함 같이 하라 그리하면 각 사람에게 마땅히 대답할 것을 알리라	Let your speech be alway with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may know how ye ought to answer every man.	Let your speech always be gracious, seasoned with salt, so that you may know how to answer everyone.
COL	4	7	두기고가 내 사정을 다 너희에게 알게 하리니 그는 사랑을 받는 형제요 신실한 일꾼이요 주 안에서 함께 된 종이라	All my state shall Tychicus declare unto you, who is a beloved brother, and a faithful minister and fellowservant in the Lord:	Tychicus will tell you all the news about me. He is a beloved brother, a faithful minister, and a fellow servant in the Lord.
COL	4	8	내가 저를 특별히 너희에게 보낸 것은 너희로 우리 사정을 알게 하고 너희 마음을 위로하게 하려 함이라	Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he might know your estate, and comfort your hearts;	I have sent him to you for this very purpose, that you may know about us, and that he may encourage your hearts.
COL	4	9	신실하고 사랑을 받는 형제 오네시모를 함께 보내노니 그는 너희에게서 온 사람이라 저희가 여기 일을 다 너희에게 알게 하리라	With Onesimus, a faithful and beloved brother, who is one of you. They shall make known unto you all things which are done here.	With him I am sending Onesimus, our faithful and beloved brother, who is one of you. They will tell you about everything here.
COL	4	10	나와 함께 갇힌 아리스다고와 바나바의 생질 마가와 (이 마가에 대하여 너희가 명을 받았으매 그가 이르거든 영접하라)	Aristarchus my fellowprisoner saluteth you, and Marcus, sister’s son to Barnabas, (touching whom ye received commandments: if he come unto you, receive him;)	My fellow prisoner Aristarchus sends you greetings, as does Mark the cousin of Barnabas. You have already received instructions about him: If he comes to you, welcome him.
COL	4	11	유스도라 하는 예수도 너희에게 문안하니 저희는 할례당이라 이들만 하나님 나라를 위하여 함께 역사하는 자들이니 이런 사람들이 나의 위로가 되었느니라	And Jesus, which is called Justus, who are of the circumcision. These only are my fellowworkers unto the kingdom of God, which have been a comfort unto me.	Jesus, who is called Justus, also sends greetings. These are the only Jews among my fellow workers for the kingdom of God, and they have been a comfort to me.
COL	4	12	그리스도 예수의 종인 너희에게서 온 에바브라가 너희에게 문안하니 저가 항상 너희를 위하여 애써 기도하여 너희로 하나님의 모든 뜻 가운데서 완전하고 확신 있게 서기를 구하나니	Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Christ, saluteth you, always labouring fervently for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God.	Epaphras, who is one of you and a servant of Christ Jesus, sends you greetings. He is always wrestling in prayer for you, so that you may stand mature and fully assured in the full will of God.
COL	4	13	그가 너희와 라오디게아에 있는 자들과 히에라볼리에 있는 자들을 위하여 많이 수고하는 것을 내가 증거하노라	For I bear him record, that he hath a great zeal for you, and them that are in Laodicea, and them in Hierapolis.	For I testify about him that he goes to great pains for you and for those at Laodicea and Hierapolis.
COL	4	14	사랑을 받는 의원 누가와 또 데마가 너희에게 문안하느니라	Luke, the beloved physician, and Demas, greet you.	Luke, the beloved physician, and Demas send you greetings.
COL	4	15	라오디게아에 있는 형제들과 눔바와 그 여자의 집에 있는 교회에 문안하고	Salute the brethren which are in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the church which is in his house.	Greet the brothers in Laodicea, as well as Nympha and the church that meets at her house.
COL	4	16	이 편지를 너희에게서 읽은 후에 라오디게아인의 교회에서도 읽게 하고 또 라오디게아로서 오는 편지를 너희도 읽으라	And when this epistle is read among you, cause that it be read also in the church of the Laodiceans; and that ye likewise read the epistle from Laodicea.	After this letter has been read among you, make sure that it is also read in the church of the Laodiceans, and that you in turn read the letter from Laodicea.
COL	4	17	아킵보에게 이르기를 주 안에서 받은 직분을 삼가 이루라고 하라	And say to Archippus, Take heed to the ministry which thou hast received in the Lord, that thou fulfil it.	Tell Archippus: “See to it that you complete the ministry you have received in the Lord.”
COL	4	18	나 바울은 친필로 문안하노니 나의 매인 것을 생각하라 은혜가 너희에게 있을지어다	The salutation by the hand of me Paul. Remember my bonds. Grace be with you. Amen. Written from Rome to the Colossians by Tychicus and Onesimus.	This greeting is in my own hand—Paul. Remember my chains. Grace be with you.
1TH	1	1	바울과 실루아노와 디모데는 하나님 아버지와 주 예수 그리스도 안에 있는 데살로니가인의 교회에 편지하노니 은혜와 평강이 너희에게 있을지어다	Paul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus, unto the church of the Thessalonians which is in God the Father and in the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.	Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy, To the church of the Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace and peace to you.
1TH	1	2	우리가 너희 무리를 인하여 항상 하나님께 감사하고 기도할 때에 너희를 말함은	We give thanks to God always for you all, making mention of you in our prayers;	We always thank God for all of you, remembering you in our prayers
1TH	1	3	너희의 믿음의 역사와 사랑의 수고와 우리 주 예수 그리스도에 대한 소망의 인내를 우리 하나님 아버지 앞에서 쉬지 않고 기억함이니	Remembering without ceasing your work of faith, and labour of love, and patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God and our Father;	and continually recalling before our God and Father your work of faith, your labor of love, and your enduring hope in our Lord Jesus Christ.
1TH	1	4	하나님의 사랑하심을 받은 형제들아 너희를 택하심을 아노라	Knowing, brethren beloved, your election of God.	Brothers who are beloved by God, we know that He has chosen you,
1TH	1	5	이는 우리 복음이 말로만 너희에게 이른 것이 아니라 오직 능력과 성령과 큰 확신으로 된 것이니 우리가 너희 가운데서 너희를 위하여 어떠한 사람이 된 것은 너희 아는 바와 같으니라	For our gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance; as ye know what manner of men we were among you for your sake.	because our gospel came to you not only in word, but also in power, in the Holy Spirit, and with great conviction—just as you know we lived among you for your sake.
1TH	1	6	또 너희는 많은 환난 가운데서 성령의 기쁨으로 도를 받아 우리와 주를 본받은 자가 되었으니	And ye became followers of us, and of the Lord, having received the word in much affliction, with joy of the Holy Ghost:	And you became imitators of us and of the Lord when you welcomed the message with the joy of the Holy Spirit, in spite of your great suffering.
1TH	1	7	그러므로 너희가 마게도냐와 아가야 모든 믿는 자의 본이 되었는지라	So that ye were ensamples to all that believe in Macedonia and Achaia.	As a result, you have become an example to all the believers in Macedonia and Achaia.
1TH	1	8	주의 말씀이 너희에게로부터 마게도냐와 아가야에만 들릴 뿐 아니라 하나님을 향하는 너희 믿음의 소문이 각처에 퍼지므로 우리는 아무 말도 할 것이 없노라	For from you sounded out the word of the Lord not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in every place your faith to God-ward is spread abroad; so that we need not to speak any thing.	For not only did the message of the Lord ring out from you to Macedonia and Achaia, but your faith in God has gone out to every place, so that we have no need to say anything more.
1TH	1	9	저희가 우리에 대하여 스스로 고하기를 우리가 어떻게 너희 가운데 들어간 것과 너희가 어떻게 우상을 버리고 하나님께로 돌아와서 사시고 참되신 하나님을 섬기며	For they themselves shew of us what manner of entering in we had unto you, and how ye turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God;	For they themselves report what kind of welcome you gave us, and how you turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God
1TH	1	10	또 죽은 자들 가운데서 다시 살리신 그의 아들이 하늘로부터 강림하심을 기다린다고 말하니 이는 장래 노하심에서 우리를 건지시는 예수시니라	And to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, even Jesus, which delivered us from the wrath to come.	and to await His Son from heaven, whom He raised from the dead—Jesus our deliverer from the coming wrath.
1TH	2	1	형제들아 우리가 너희 가운데 들어감이 헛되지 않은 줄을 너희가 친히 아나니	For yourselves, brethren, know our entrance in unto you, that it was not in vain:	You yourselves know, brothers, that our visit to you was not in vain.
1TH	2	2	너희 아는 바와 같이 우리가 먼저 빌립보에서 고난과 능욕을 당하였으나 우리 하나님을 힘입어 많은 싸움 중에 하나님의 복음을 너희에게 말하였노라	But even after that we had suffered before, and were shamefully entreated, as ye know, at Philippi, we were bold in our God to speak unto you the gospel of God with much contention.	As you are aware, we had already endured suffering and shameful treatment in Philippi. But in the face of strong opposition, we were bold in our God to speak to you the gospel of God.
1TH	2	3	우리의 권면은 간사에서나 부정에서 난 것도 아니요 궤계에 있는 것도 아니라	For our exhortation was not of deceit, nor of uncleanness, nor in guile:	For our appeal does not arise from deceit or ulterior motives or trickery.
1TH	2	4	오직 하나님의 옳게 여기심을 입어 복음 전할 부탁을 받았으니 우리가 이와 같이 말함은 사람을 기쁘게 하려 함이 아니요 오직 우리 마음을 감찰하시는 하나님을 기쁘시게 하려 함이라	But as we were allowed of God to be put in trust with the gospel, even so we speak; not as pleasing men, but God, which trieth our hearts.	Instead, we speak as those approved by God to be entrusted with the gospel, not in order to please men but God, who examines our hearts.
1TH	2	5	너희도 알거니와 우리가 아무 때에도 아첨의 말이나 탐심의 탈을 쓰지 아니한 것을 하나님이 증거하시느니라	For neither at any time used we flattering words, as ye know, nor a cloke of covetousness; God is witness:	As you know, we never used words of flattery or any pretext for greed. God is our witness!
1TH	2	6	우리가 그리스도의 사도로 능히 존중할 터이나 그러나 너희에게든지 다른 이에게든지 사람에게는 영광을 구치 아니하고	Nor of men sought we glory, neither of you, nor yet of others, when we might have been burdensome, as the apostles of Christ.	Nor did we seek praise from you or from anyone else, although as apostles of Christ we had authority to demand it.
1TH	2	7	오직 우리가 너희 가운데서 유순한 자 되어 유모가 자기 자녀를 기름과 같이 하였으니	But we were gentle among you, even as a nurse cherisheth her children:	On the contrary, we were gentle among you, like a nursing mother caring for her children.
1TH	2	8	우리가 이같이 너희를 사모하여 하나님의 복음으로만 아니라 우리 목숨까지 너희에게 주기를 즐겨함은 너희가 우리의 사랑하는 자 됨이니라	So being affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted unto you, not the gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto us.	We cared so deeply that we were delighted to share with you not only the gospel of God, but our own lives as well. That is how beloved you have become to us.
1TH	2	9	형제들아 우리의 수고와 애쓴 것을 너희가 기억하리니 너희 아무에게도 누를 끼치지 아니하려고 밤과 낮으로 일하면서 너희에게 하나님의 복음을 전파하였노라	For ye remember, brethren, our labour and travail: for labouring night and day, because we would not be chargeable unto any of you, we preached unto you the gospel of God.	Surely you recall, brothers, our labor and toil. We worked night and day so that we would not be a burden to anyone while we proclaimed to you the gospel of God.
1TH	2	10	우리가 너희 믿는 자들을 향하여 어떻게 거룩하고 옳고 흠 없이 행한 것에 대하여 너희가 증인이요 하나님도 그러하시도다	Ye are witnesses, and God also, how holily and justly and unblameably we behaved ourselves among you that believe:	You are witnesses, and so is God, of how holy, righteous, and blameless our conduct was among you who believed.
1TH	2	11	너희도 아는 바와 같이 우리가 너희 각 사람에게 아비가 자기 자녀에게 하듯 권면하고 위로하고 경계하노니	As ye know how we exhorted and comforted and charged every one of you, as a father doth his children,	For you know that we treated each of you as a father treats his own children—
1TH	2	12	이는 너희를 부르사 자기 나라와 영광에 이르게 하시는 하나님께 합당히 행하게 하려 함이니라	That ye would walk worthy of God, who hath called you unto his kingdom and glory.	encouraging you, comforting you, and urging you to walk in a manner worthy of God, who calls you into His own kingdom and glory.
1TH	2	13	이러므로 우리가 하나님께 쉬지 않고 감사함은 너희가 우리에게 들은 바 하나님의 말씀을 받을 때에 사람의 말로 아니하고 하나님의 말씀으로 받음이니 진실로 그러하다 이 말씀이 또한 너희 믿는 자 속에서 역사하느니라	For this cause also thank we God without ceasing, because, when ye received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word of men, but as it is in truth, the word of God, which effectually worketh also in you that believe.	And we continually thank God because, when you received the word of God that you heard from us, you accepted it not as the word of men, but as the true word of God—the word which is now at work in you who believe.
1TH	2	14	형제들아 너희가 그리스도 예수 안에서 유대에 있는 하나님의 교회들을 본받은 자 되었으니 저희가 유대인들에게 고난을 받음과 같이 너희도 너희 나라 사람들에게 동일한 것을 받았느니라	For ye, brethren, became followers of the churches of God which in Judea are in Christ Jesus: for ye also have suffered like things of your own countrymen, even as they have of the Jews:	For you, brothers, became imitators of the churches of God in Judea that are in Christ Jesus. You suffered from your own countrymen the very things they suffered from the Jews,
1TH	2	15	유대인은 주 예수와 선지자들을 죽이고 우리를 쫓아내고 하나님을 기쁘시게 아니하고 모든 사람에게 대적이 되어	Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own prophets, and have persecuted us; and they please not God, and are contrary to all men:	who killed both the Lord Jesus and their own prophets, and drove us out as well. They are displeasing to God and hostile to all men,
1TH	2	16	우리가 이방인에게 말하여 구원 얻게 함을 저희가 금하여 자기 죄를 항상 채우매 노하심이 끝까지 저희에게 임하였느니라	Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up their sins alway: for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost.	hindering us from telling the Gentiles how they may be saved. As a result, they continue to heap up their sins to full capacity; the utmost wrath has come upon them.
1TH	2	17	형제들아 우리가 잠시 너희를 떠난 것은 얼굴이요 마음은 아니니 너희 얼굴 보기를 열정으로 더욱 힘썼노라	But we, brethren, being taken from you for a short time in presence, not in heart, endeavoured the more abundantly to see your face with great desire.	Brothers, although we were torn away from you for a short time (in person, not in heart), our desire to see you face to face was even more intense.
1TH	2	18	그러므로 나 바울은 한 번 두 번 너희에게 가고자 하였으나 사단이 우리를 막았도다	Wherefore we would have come unto you, even I Paul, once and again; but Satan hindered us.	For we wanted to come to you—indeed I, Paul, tried again and again—but Satan obstructed us.
1TH	2	19	우리의 소망이나 기쁨이나 자랑의 면류관이 무엇이냐 그의 강림하실 때 우리 주 예수 앞에 너희가 아니냐	For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming?	After all, who is our hope, our joy, our crown of boasting, if it is not you yourselves in the presence of our Lord Jesus at His coming?
1TH	2	20	너희는 우리의 영광이요 기쁨이니라	For ye are our glory and joy.	You are indeed our glory and our joy.
1TH	3	1	이러므로 우리가 참다 못하여 우리만 아덴에 머물기를 좋게 여겨	Wherefore when we could no longer forbear, we thought it good to be left at Athens alone;	So when we could bear it no longer, we were willing to be left on our own in Athens.
1TH	3	2	우리 형제 곧 그리스도 복음의 하나님의 일꾼인 디모데를 보내노니 이는 너희를 굳게 하고 너희 믿음에 대하여 위로함으로	And sent Timotheus, our brother, and minister of God, and our fellowlabourer in the gospel of Christ, to establish you, and to comfort you concerning your faith:	We sent Timothy, our brother and fellow worker for God in the gospel of Christ, to strengthen and encourage you in your faith,
1TH	3	3	누구든지 이 여러 환난 중에 요동치 않게 하려 함이라 우리로 이것을 당하게 세우신 줄을 너희가 친히 알리라	That no man should be moved by these afflictions: for yourselves know that we are appointed thereunto.	so that none of you would be shaken by these trials. For you know that we are destined for this.
1TH	3	4	우리가 너희와 함께 있을 때에 장차 받을 환난을 너희에게 미리 말하였더니 과연 그렇게 된 것을 너희가 아느니라	For verily, when we were with you, we told you before that we should suffer tribulation; even as it came to pass, and ye know.	Indeed, when we were with you, we kept warning you that we would suffer persecution; and as you know, it has come to pass.
1TH	3	5	이러므로 나도 참다 못하여 너희 믿음을 알기 위하여 보내었노니 이는 혹 시험하는 자가 너희를 시험하여 우리 수고를 헛되게 할까 함일러니	For this cause, when I could no longer forbear, I sent to know your faith, lest by some means the tempter have tempted you, and our labour be in vain.	For this reason, when I could bear it no longer, I sent to find out about your faith, for fear that the tempter had somehow tempted you and caused our labor to be in vain.
1TH	3	6	지금은 디모데가 너희에게로부터 와서 너희 믿음과 사랑의 기쁜 소식을 우리에게 전하고 또 너희가 항상 우리를 잘 생각하여 우리가 너희를 간절히 보고자 함과 같이 너희도 우리를 간절히 보고자 한다 하니	But now when Timotheus came from you unto us, and brought us good tidings of your faith and charity, and that ye have good remembrance of us always, desiring greatly to see us, as we also to see you:	But just now, Timothy has returned from his visit with the good news about your faith, your love, and the fond memories you have preserved, longing to see us just as we long to see you.
1TH	3	7	이러므로 형제들아 우리가 모든 궁핍과 환난 가운데서 너희 믿음으로 말미암아 너희에게 위로를 받았노라	Therefore, brethren, we were comforted over you in all our affliction and distress by your faith:	For this reason, brothers, in all our distress and persecution, we have been reassured about you, because of your faith.
1TH	3	8	그러므로 너희가 주 안에 굳게 선즉 우리가 이제는 살리라	For now we live, if ye stand fast in the Lord.	For now we can go on living, as long as you are standing firm in the Lord.
1TH	3	9	우리가 우리 하나님 앞에서 너희를 인하여 모든 기쁨으로 기뻐하니 너희를 위하여 능히 어떠한 감사함으로 하나님께 보답할꼬	For what thanks can we render to God again for you, for all the joy wherewith we joy for your sakes before our God;	How can we adequately thank God for you in return for our great joy over you in His presence?
1TH	3	10	주야로 심히 간구함은 너희 얼굴을 보고 너희 믿음의 부족함을 온전케 하려 함이라	Night and day praying exceedingly that we might see your face, and might perfect that which is lacking in your faith?	Night and day we pray most earnestly that we may see you face to face and supply what is lacking from your faith.
1TH	3	11	하나님 우리 아버지와 우리 주 예수는 우리 길을 너희에게로 직행하게 하옵시며	Now God himself and our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, direct our way unto you.	Now may our God and Father Himself, and our Lord Jesus, direct our way to you.
1TH	3	12	또 주께서 우리가 너희를 사랑함과 같이 너희도 피차간과 모든 사람에 대한 사랑이 더욱 많아 넘치게 하사	And the Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward another, and toward all men, even as we do toward you:	And may the Lord cause you to increase and overflow with love for one another and for everyone else, just as our love for you overflows,
1TH	3	13	너희 마음을 굳게 하시고 우리 주 예수께서 그의 모든 성도와 함께 강림하실 때에 하나님 우리 아버지 앞에서 거룩함에 흠이 없게 하시기를 원하노라	To the end he may stablish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints.	so that He may establish your hearts in blamelessness and holiness before our God and Father at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all His saints. Amen.
1TH	4	1	종말로 형제들아 우리가 주 예수 안에서 너희에게 구하고 권면하노니 너희가 마땅히 어떻게 행하며 하나님께 기쁘시게 할 것을 우리에게 받았으니 곧 너희 행하는 바라 더욱 많이 힘쓰라	Furthermore then we beseech you, brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk and to please God, so ye would abound more and more.	Finally, brothers, we ask and encourage you in the Lord Jesus to live in a way that is pleasing to God, just as you have received from us. This is how you already live, so you should do so all the more.
1TH	4	2	우리가 주 예수로 말미암아 너희에게 무슨 명령으로 준 것을 너희가 아느니라	For ye know what commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus.	For you know the instructions we gave you by the authority of the Lord Jesus.
1TH	4	3	하나님의 뜻은 이것이니 너희의 거룩함이라 곧 음란을 버리고	For this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye should abstain from fornication:	For it is God’s will that you should be holy: You must abstain from sexual immorality;
1TH	4	4	각각 거룩함과 존귀함으로 자기의 아내 취할 줄을 알고	That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honour;	each of you must know how to control his own body in holiness and honor,
1TH	4	5	하나님을 모르는 이방인과 같이 색욕을 좇지 말고	Not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the Gentiles which know not God:	not in lustful passion like the Gentiles who do not know God;
1TH	4	6	이 일에 분수를 넘어서 형제를 해하지 말라 이는 우리가 너희에게 미리 말하고 증거한 것과 같이 이 모든 일에 주께서 신원하여 주심이니라	That no man go beyond and defraud his brother in any matter: because that the Lord is the avenger of all such, as we also have forewarned you and testified.	and no one should ever violate or exploit his brother in this regard, because the Lord will avenge all such acts, as we have already told you and solemnly warned you.
1TH	4	7	하나님이 우리를 부르심은 부정케 하심이 아니요 거룩케 하심이니	For God hath not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness.	For God has not called us to impurity, but to holiness.
1TH	4	8	그러므로 저버리는 자는 사람을 저버림이 아니요 너희에게 그의 성령을 주신 하나님을 저버림이니라	He therefore that despiseth, despiseth not man, but God, who hath also given unto us his holy Spirit.	Anyone, then, who rejects this command does not reject man but God, the very One who gives you His Holy Spirit.
1TH	4	9	형제 사랑에 관하여는 너희에게 쓸 것이 없음은 너희가 친히 하나님의 가르치심을 받아 서로 사랑함이라	But as touching brotherly love ye need not that I write unto you: for ye yourselves are taught of God to love one another.	Now about brotherly love, you do not need anyone to write to you, because you yourselves have been taught by God to love one another.
1TH	4	10	너희가 온 마게도냐 모든 형제를 대하여 과연 이것을 행하도다 형제들아 권하노니 더 많이 하고	And indeed ye do it toward all the brethren which are in all Macedonia: but we beseech you, brethren, that ye increase more and more;	And you are indeed showing this love to all the brothers throughout Macedonia. But we urge you, brothers, to excel more and more
1TH	4	11	또 너희에게 명한 것 같이 종용하여 자기 일을 하고 너희 손으로 일하기를 힘쓰라	And that ye study to be quiet, and to do your own business, and to work with your own hands, as we commanded you;	and to aspire to live quietly, to attend to your own matters, and to work with your own hands, as we instructed you.
1TH	4	12	이는 외인을 대하여 단정히 행하고 또한 아무 궁핍함이 없게 하려 함이라	That ye may walk honestly toward them that are without, and that ye may have lack of nothing.	Then you will behave properly toward outsiders, without being dependent on anyone.
1TH	4	13	형제들아 자는 자들에 관하여는 너희가 알지 못함을 우리가 원치 아니하노니 이는 소망 없는 다른 이와 같이 슬퍼하지 않게 하려 함이라	But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope.	Brothers, we do not want you to be uninformed about those who sleep in death, so that you will not grieve like the rest, who are without hope.
1TH	4	14	우리가 예수의 죽었다가 다시 사심을 믿을진대 이와 같이 예수 안에서 자는 자들도 하나님이 저와 함께 데리고 오시리라	For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.	For since we believe that Jesus died and rose again, we also believe that God will bring with Jesus those who have fallen asleep in Him.
1TH	4	15	우리가 주의 말씀으로 너희에게 이것을 말하노니 주 강림하실 때까지 우리 살아 남아 있는 자도 자는 자보다 결단코 앞서지 못하리라	For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them which are asleep.	By the word of the Lord, we declare to you that we who are alive and remain until the coming of the Lord will by no means precede those who have fallen asleep.
1TH	4	16	주께서 호령과 천사장의 소리와 하나님의 나팔로 친히 하늘로 좇아 강림하시리니 그리스도 안에서 죽은 자들이 먼저 일어나고	For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first:	For the Lord Himself will descend from heaven with a loud command, with the voice of an archangel, and with the trumpet of God, and the dead in Christ will be the first to rise.
1TH	4	17	그 후에 우리 살아 남은 자도 저희와 함께 구름 속으로 끌어올려 공중에서 주를 영접하게 하시리니 그리하여 우리가 항상 주와 함께 있으리라	Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.	After that, we who are alive and remain will be caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air. And so we will always be with the Lord.
1TH	4	18	그러므로 이 여러 말로 서로 위로하라	Wherefore comfort one another with these words.	Therefore encourage one another with these words.
1TH	5	1	형제들아 때와 시기에 관하여는 너희에게 쓸 것이 없음은	But of the times and the seasons, brethren, ye have no need that I write unto you.	Now about the times and seasons, brothers, we do not need to write to you.
1TH	5	2	주의 날이 밤에 도적 같이 이를 줄을 너희 자신이 자세히 앎이라	For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night.	For you are fully aware that the Day of the Lord will come like a thief in the night.
1TH	5	3	저희가 평안하다, 안전하다 할 그 때에 잉태된 여자에게 해산 고통이 이름과 같이 멸망이 홀연히 저희에게 이르리니 결단코 피하지 못하리라	For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape.	While people are saying, “Peace and security,” destruction will come upon them suddenly, like labor pains on a pregnant woman, and they will not escape.
1TH	5	4	형제들아 너희는 어두움에 있지 아니하매 그 날이 도적 같이 너희에게 임하지 못하리니	But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should overtake you as a thief.	But you, brothers, are not in the darkness so that this day should overtake you like a thief.
1TH	5	5	너희는 다 빛의 아들이요 낮의 아들이라 우리가 밤이나 어두움에 속하지 아니하나니	Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day: we are not of the night, nor of darkness.	For you are all sons of the light and sons of the day; we do not belong to the night or to the darkness.
1TH	5	6	그러므로 우리는 다른 이들과 같이 자지 말고 오직 깨어 근신할지라	Therefore let us not sleep, as do others; but let us watch and be sober.	So then, let us not sleep as the others do, but let us remain awake and sober.
1TH	5	7	자는 자들은 밤에 자고 취하는 자들은 밤에 취하되	For they that sleep sleep in the night; and they that be drunken are drunken in the night.	For those who sleep, sleep at night; and those who get drunk, get drunk at night.
1TH	5	8	우리는 낮에 속하였으니 근신하여 믿음과 사랑의 흉배를 붙이고 구원의 소망의 투구를 쓰자	But let us, who are of the day, be sober, putting on the breastplate of faith and love; and for an helmet, the hope of salvation.	But since we belong to the day, let us be sober, putting on the breastplate of faith and love, and the helmet of our hope of salvation.
1TH	5	9	하나님이 우리를 세우심은 노하심에 이르게 하심이 아니요 오직 우리 주 예수 그리스도로 말미암아 구원을 얻게 하신 것이라	For God hath not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ,	For God has not appointed us to suffer wrath, but to obtain salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ.
1TH	5	10	예수께서 우리를 위하여 죽으사 우리로 하여금 깨든지 자든지 자기와 함께 살게 하려 하셨느니라	Who died for us, that, whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him.	He died for us so that, whether we are awake or asleep, we may live together with Him.
1TH	5	11	그러므로 피차 권면하고 피차 덕을 세우기를 너희가 하는 것 같이 하라	Wherefore comfort yourselves together, and edify one another, even as also ye do.	Therefore encourage and build one another up, just as you are already doing.
1TH	5	12	형제들아 우리가 너희에게 구하노니 너희 가운데서 수고하고 주 안에서 너희를 다스리며 권하는 자들을 너희가 알고	And we beseech you, brethren, to know them which labour among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you;	But we ask you, brothers, to acknowledge those who work diligently among you, who preside over you in the Lord and give you instruction.
1TH	5	13	저의 역사로 말미암아 사랑 안에서 가장 귀히 여기며 너희끼리 화목하라	And to esteem them very highly in love for their work’s sake. And be at peace among yourselves.	In love, hold them in highest regard because of their work. Live in peace with one another.
1TH	5	14	또 형제들아 너희를 권면하노니 규모 없는 자들을 권계하며 마음이 약한 자들을 안위하고 힘이 없는 자들을 붙들어 주며 모든 사람을 대하여 오래 참으라	Now we exhort you, brethren, warn them that are unruly, comfort the feebleminded, support the weak, be patient toward all men.	And we urge you, brothers, to admonish the unruly, encourage the fainthearted, help the weak, and be patient with everyone.
1TH	5	15	삼가 누가 누구에게든지 악으로 악을 갚지 말게 하고 오직 피차 대하든지 모든 사람을 대하든지 항상 선을 좇으라	See that none render evil for evil unto any man; but ever follow that which is good, both among yourselves, and to all men.	Make sure that no one repays evil for evil. Always pursue what is good for one another and for all people.
1TH	5	16	항상 기뻐하라	Rejoice evermore.	Rejoice at all times.
1TH	5	17	쉬지 말고 기도하라	Pray without ceasing.	Pray without ceasing.
1TH	5	18	범사에 감사하라 이는 그리스도 예수 안에서 너희를 향하신 하나님의 뜻이니라	In every thing give thanks: for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you.	Give thanks in every circumstance, for this is God’s will for you in Christ Jesus.
1TH	5	19	성령을 소멸치 말며	Quench not the Spirit.	Do not extinguish the Spirit.
1TH	5	20	예언을 멸시치 말고	Despise not prophesyings.	Do not treat prophecies with contempt,
1TH	5	21	범사에 헤아려 좋은 것을 취하고	Prove all things; hold fast that which is good.	but test all things. Hold fast to what is good.
1TH	5	22	악은 모든 모양이라도 버리라	Abstain from all appearance of evil.	Abstain from every form of evil.
1TH	5	23	평강의 하나님이 친히 너희로 온전히 거룩하게 하시고 또 너희 온 영과 혼과 몸이 우리 주 예수 그리스도 강림하실 때에 흠 없게 보전되기를 원하노라	And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray God your whole spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.	Now may the God of peace Himself sanctify you completely, and may your entire spirit, soul, and body be kept blameless at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
1TH	5	24	너희를 부르시는 이는 미쁘시니 그가 또한 이루시리라	Faithful is he that calleth you, who also will do it.	The One who calls you is faithful, and He will do it.
1TH	5	25	형제들아 우리를 위하여 기도하라	Brethren, pray for us.	Brothers, pray for us as well.
1TH	5	26	거룩하게 입맞춤으로 모든 형제에게 문안하라	Greet all the brethren with an holy kiss.	Greet all the brothers with a holy kiss.
1TH	5	27	내가 주를 힘입어 너희를 명하노니 모든 형제에게 이 편지를 읽어 들리라	I charge you by the Lord that this epistle be read unto all the holy brethren.	I charge you before the Lord to have this letter read to all the brothers.
1TH	5	28	우리 주 예수 그리스도의 은혜가 너희에게 있을지어다	The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen. The first epistle unto the Thessalonians was written from Athens.	The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
2TH	1	1	바울과 실루아노와 디모데는 하나님 우리 아버지와 주 예수 그리스도 안에 있는 데살로니가인의 교회에 편지하노니	Paul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus, unto the church of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:	Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy, To the church of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:
2TH	1	2	하나님 아버지와 주 예수 그리스도로부터 은혜와 평강이 너희에게 있을지어다	Grace unto you, and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.	Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
2TH	1	3	형제들아 우리가 너희를 위하여 항상 하나님께 감사할지니 이것이 당연함은 너희 믿음이 더욱 자라고 너희가 다 각기 서로 사랑함이 풍성함이며	We are bound to thank God always for you, brethren, as it is meet, because that your faith groweth exceedingly, and the charity of every one of you all toward each other aboundeth;	We are obligated to thank God for you all the time, brothers, as is fitting, because your faith is growing more and more, and your love for one another is increasing.
2TH	1	4	그리고 너희의 참는 모든 핍박과 환난 중에서 너희 인내와 믿음을 인하여 하나님의 여러 교회에서 우리가 친히 자랑함이라	So that we ourselves glory in you in the churches of God for your patience and faith in all your persecutions and tribulations that ye endure:	That is why we boast among God’s churches about your perseverance and faith in the face of all the persecution and affliction you are enduring.
2TH	1	5	이는 하나님의 공의로운 심판의 표요 너희로 하여금 하나님의 나라에 합당한 자로 여기심을 얻게 하려 함이니 그 나라를 위하여 너희가 또한 고난을 받으리니	Which is a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, that ye may be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer:	All this is clear evidence of God’s righteous judgment. And so you will be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which you are suffering.
2TH	1	6	너희로 환난 받게 하는 자들에게는 환난으로 갚으시고	Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you;	After all, it is only right for God to repay with affliction those who afflict you,
2TH	1	7	환난 받는 너희에게는 우리와 함께 안식으로 갚으시는 것이 하나님의 공의시니 주 예수께서 저의 능력의 천사들과 함께 하늘로부터 불꽃 중에 나타나실 때에	And to you who are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels,	and to grant relief to you who are oppressed and to us as well. This will take place when the Lord Jesus is revealed from heaven with His mighty angels
2TH	1	8	하나님을 모르는 자들과 우리 주 예수의 복음을 복종치 않는 자들에게 형벌을 주시리니	In flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ:	in blazing fire, inflicting vengeance on those who do not know God and do not obey the gospel of our Lord Jesus.
2TH	1	9	이런 자들이 주의 얼굴과 그의 힘의 영광을 떠나 영원한 멸망의 형벌을 받으리로다	Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power;	They will suffer the penalty of eternal destruction, separated from the presence of the Lord and the glory of His might,
2TH	1	10	그 날에 강림하사 그의 성도들에게서 영광을 얻으시고 모든 믿는 자에게서 기이히 여김을 얻으시리라 (우리의 증거가 너희에게 믿어졌음이라)	When he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe (because our testimony among you was believed) in that day.	on the day He comes to be glorified in His saints and regarded with wonder by all who have believed, including you who have believed our testimony.
2TH	1	11	이러므로 우리도 항상 너희를 위하여 기도함은 우리 하나님이 너희를 그 부르심에 합당한 자로 여기시고 모든 선을 기뻐함과 믿음의 역사를 능력으로 이루게 하시고	Wherefore also we pray always for you, that our God would count you worthy of this calling, and fulfil all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with power:	To this end, we always pray for you, that our God will count you worthy of His calling, and that He will powerfully fulfill your every good desire and work of faith,
2TH	1	12	우리 하나님과 주 예수 그리스도의 은혜대로 우리 주 예수의 이름이 너희 가운데서 영광을 얻으시고 너희도 그 안에서 영광을 얻게 하려 함이니라	That the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye in him, according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ.	so that the name of our Lord Jesus will be glorified in you, and you in Him, according to the grace of our God and of the Lord Jesus Christ.
2TH	2	1	형제들아 우리가 너희에게 구하는 것은 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 강림하심과 우리가 그 앞에 모임에 관하여	Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him,	Now concerning the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our being gathered together to Him, we ask you, brothers,
2TH	2	2	혹 영으로나 혹 말로나 혹 우리에게서 받았다 하는 편지로나 주의 날이 이르렀다고 쉬 동심하거나 두려워하거나 하지 아니할 그것이라	That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand.	not to be easily disconcerted or alarmed by any spirit or message or letter seeming to be from us, alleging that the Day of the Lord has already come.
2TH	2	3	누가 아무렇게 하여도 너희가 미혹하지 말라 먼저 배도하는 일이 있고 저 불법의 사람 곧 멸망의 아들이 나타나기 전에는 이르지 아니하리니	Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition;	Let no one deceive you in any way, for it will not come until the rebellion occurs and the man of lawlessness—the son of destruction—is revealed.
2TH	2	4	저는 대적하는 자라 범사에 일컫는 하나님이나 숭배함을 받는 자 위에 뛰어나 자존하여 하나님 성전에 앉아 자기를 보여 하나님이라 하느니라	Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God.	He will oppose and exalt himself above every so-called god or object of worship. So he will seat himself in the temple of God, proclaiming himself to be God.
2TH	2	5	내가 너희와 함께 있을 때에 이 일을 너희에게 말한 것을 기억하지 못하느냐	Remember ye not, that, when I was yet with you, I told you these things?	Do you not remember that I told you these things while I was still with you?
2TH	2	6	저로 하여금 저의 때에 나타나게 하려 하여 막는 것을 지금도 너희가 아나니	And now ye know what withholdeth that he might be revealed in his time.	And you know what is now restraining him, so that he may be revealed at the proper time.
2TH	2	7	불법의 비밀이 이미 활동하였으나 지금 막는 자가 있어 그 중에서 옮길 때까지 하리라	For the mystery of iniquity doth already work: only he who now letteth will let, until he be taken out of the way.	For the mystery of lawlessness is already at work, but the one who now restrains it will continue until he is taken out of the way.
2TH	2	8	그 때에 불법한 자가 나타나리니 주 예수께서 그 입의 기운으로 저를 죽이시고 강림하여 나타나심으로 폐하시리라	And then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming:	And then the lawless one will be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus will slay with the breath of His mouth and annihilate by the majesty of His arrival.
2TH	2	9	악한 자의 임함은 사단의 역사를 따라 모든 능력과 표적과 거짓 기적과	Even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders,	The coming of the lawless one will be accompanied by the working of Satan, with every kind of power, sign, and false wonder,
2TH	2	10	불의의 모든 속임으로 멸망하는 자들에게 임하리니 이는 저희가 진리의 사랑을 받지 아니하여 구원함을 얻지 못함이니라	And with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish; because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved.	and with every wicked deception directed against those who are perishing, because they refused the love of the truth that would have saved them.
2TH	2	11	이러므로 하나님이 유혹을 저의 가운데 역사하게 하사 거짓 것을 믿게 하심은	And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie:	For this reason God will send them a powerful delusion so that they believe the lie,
2TH	2	12	진리를 믿지 않고 불의를 좋아하는 모든 자로 심판을 받게 하려 하심이니라	That they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.	in order that judgment may come upon all who have disbelieved the truth and delighted in wickedness.
2TH	2	13	주의 사랑하시는 형제들아 우리가 항상 너희를 위하여 마땅히 하나님께 감사할 것은 하나님이 처음부터 너희를 택하사 성령의 거룩하게 하심과 진리를 믿음으로 구원을 얻게 하심이니	But we are bound to give thanks alway to God for you, brethren beloved of the Lord, because God hath from the beginning chosen you to salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth:	But we should always thank God for you, brothers who are loved by the Lord, because God has chosen you from the beginning to be saved by the sanctification of the Spirit and by faith in the truth.
2TH	2	14	이를 위하여 우리 복음으로 너희를 부르사 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 영광을 얻게 하려 하심이니라	Whereunto he called you by our gospel, to the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.	To this He called you through our gospel, so that you may share in the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
2TH	2	15	이러므로 형제들아 굳게 서서 말로나 우리 편지로 가르침을 받은 유전을 지키라	Therefore, brethren, stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye have been taught, whether by word, or our epistle.	Therefore, brothers, stand firm and cling to the traditions we taught you, whether by speech or by letter.
2TH	2	16	우리 주 예수 그리스도와 우리를 사랑하시고 영원한 위로와 좋은 소망을 은혜로 주신 하나님 우리 아버지께	Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God, even our Father, which hath loved us, and hath given us everlasting consolation and good hope through grace,	Now may our Lord Jesus Christ Himself and God our Father, who by grace has loved us and given us eternal comfort and good hope,
2TH	2	17	너희 마음을 위로하시고 모든 선한 일과 말에 굳게 하시기를 원하노라	Comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work.	encourage your hearts and strengthen you in every good word and deed.
2TH	3	1	종말로 형제들아 너희는 우리를 위하여 기도하기를 주의 말씀이 너희 가운데서와 같이 달음질하여 영광스럽게 되고	Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have free course, and be glorified, even as it is with you:	Finally, brothers, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may spread quickly and be held in honor, just as it was with you.
2TH	3	2	또한 우리를 무리하고 악한 사람들에게서 건지옵소서 하라 믿음은 모든 사람의 것이 아님이라	And that we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men: for all men have not faith.	And pray that we may be delivered from wicked and evil men; for not everyone holds to the faith.
2TH	3	3	주는 미쁘사 너희를 굳게 하시고 악한 자에게서 지키시리라	But the Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you from evil.	But the Lord is faithful, and He will strengthen you and guard you from the evil one.
2TH	3	4	너희에게 대하여는 우리의 명한 것을 너희가 행하고 또 행할 줄을 우리가 주 안에서 확신하노니	And we have confidence in the Lord touching you, that ye both do and will do the things which we command you.	And we have confidence in the Lord that you are doing and will continue to do what we command.
2TH	3	5	주께서 너희 마음을 인도하여 하나님의 사랑과 그리스도의 인내에 들어가게 하시기를 원하노라	And the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the patient waiting for Christ.	May the Lord direct your hearts into God’s love and Christ’s perseverance.
2TH	3	6	형제들아 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 이름으로 너희를 명하노니 규모 없이 행하고 우리에게 받은 유전대로 행하지 아니하는 모든 형제에게서 떠나라	Now we command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw yourselves from every brother that walketh disorderly, and not after the tradition which he received of us.	Now we command you, brothers, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to keep away from any brother who leads an undisciplined life that is not in keeping with the tradition you received from us.
2TH	3	7	어떻게 우리를 본받아야 할 것을 너희가 스스로 아나니 우리가 너희 가운데서 규모 없이 행하지 아니하며	For yourselves know how ye ought to follow us: for we behaved not ourselves disorderly among you;	For you yourselves know how you ought to imitate us, because we were not undisciplined among you,
2TH	3	8	누구에게서든지 양식을 값없이 먹지 않고 오직 수고하고 애써 주야로 일함은 너희 아무에게도 누를 끼치지 아니하려 함이니	Neither did we eat any man’s bread for nought; but wrought with labour and travail night and day, that we might not be chargeable to any of you:	nor did we eat anyone’s food without paying for it. Instead, in labor and toil, we worked night and day so that we would not be a burden to any of you.
2TH	3	9	우리에게 권리가 없는 것이 아니요 오직 스스로 너희에게 본을 주어 우리를 본받게 하려 함이니라	Not because we have not power, but to make ourselves an ensample unto you to follow us.	Not that we lack this right, but we wanted to offer ourselves as an example for you to imitate.
2TH	3	10	우리가 너희와 함께 있을 때에도 너희에게 명하기를 누구든지 일하기 싫어하거든 먹지도 말게 하라 하였더니	For even when we were with you, this we commanded you, that if any would not work, neither should he eat.	For even while we were with you, we gave you this command: “If anyone is unwilling to work, he shall not eat.”
2TH	3	11	우리가 들은즉 너희 가운데 규모 없이 행하여 도무지 일하지 아니하고 일만 만드는 자들이 있다 하니	For we hear that there are some which walk among you disorderly, working not at all, but are busybodies.	Yet we hear that some of you are leading undisciplined lives and accomplishing nothing but being busybodies.
2TH	3	12	이런 자들에게 우리가 명하고 주 예수 그리스도 안에서 권하기를 종용히 일하여 자기 양식을 먹으라 하노라	Now them that are such we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work, and eat their own bread.	We command and urge such people by our Lord Jesus Christ to begin working quietly to earn their own living.
2TH	3	13	형제들아 너희는 선을 행하다가 낙심치 말라	But ye, brethren, be not weary in well doing.	But as for you, brothers, do not grow weary in well-doing.
2TH	3	14	누가 이 편지에 한 우리 말을 순종치 아니하거든 그 사람을 지목하여 사귀지 말고 저로 하여금 부끄럽게 하라	And if any man obey not our word by this epistle, note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed.	Take note of anyone who does not obey the instructions we have given in this letter. Do not associate with him, so that he may be ashamed.
2TH	3	15	그러나 원수와 같이 생각지 말고 형제 같이 권하라	Yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.	Yet do not regard him as an enemy, but warn him as a brother.
2TH	3	16	평강의 주께서 친히 때마다 일마다 너희에게 평강을 주시기를 원하노라 주는 너희 모든 사람과 함께 하실지어다	Now the Lord of peace himself give you peace always by all means. The Lord be with you all.	Now may the Lord of peace Himself give you peace at all times and in every way. The Lord be with all of you.
2TH	3	17	나 바울은 친필로 문안하노니 이는 편지마다 표적이기로 이렇게 쓰노라	The salutation of Paul with mine own hand, which is the token in every epistle: so I write.	This greeting is in my own hand—Paul. This is my mark in every letter; it is the way I write.
2TH	3	18	우리 주 예수 그리스도의 은혜가 너희 무리에게 있을지어다	The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen. The second epistle to the Thessalonians was written from Athens.	The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with all of you.
1TI	1	1	우리 구주 하나님과 우리 소망이신 그리스도 예수의 명령을 따라 그리스도 예수의 사도 된 바울은	Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the commandment of God our Saviour, and Lord Jesus Christ, which is our hope;	Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the command of God our Savior and of Christ Jesus our hope,
1TI	1	2	믿음 안에서 참 아들 된 디모데에게 편지하노니 하나님 아버지와 그리스도 예수 우리 주께로부터 은혜와 긍휼과 평강이 네게 있을지어다	Unto Timothy, my own son in the faith: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God our Father and Jesus Christ our Lord.	To Timothy, my true child in the faith: Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
1TI	1	3	내가 마게도냐로 갈 때에 너를 권하여 에베소에 머물라 한 것은 어떤 사람들을 명하여 다른 교훈을 가르치지 말며	As I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into Macedonia, that thou mightest charge some that they teach no other doctrine,	As I urged you on my departure to Macedonia, you should stay on at Ephesus to instruct certain men not to teach false doctrines
1TI	1	4	신화와 끝없는 족보에 착념치 말게 하려 함이라 이런 것은 믿음 안에 있는 하나님의 경륜을 이룸보다 도리어 변론을 내는 것이라	Neither give heed to fables and endless genealogies, which minister questions, rather than godly edifying which is in faith: so do.	or devote themselves to myths and endless genealogies, which promote speculation rather than the stewardship of God’s work, which is by faith.
1TI	1	5	경계의 목적은 청결한 마음과 선한 양심과 거짓이 없는 믿음으로 나는 사랑이거늘	Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned:	The goal of our instruction is the love that comes from a pure heart, a clear conscience, and a sincere faith.
1TI	1	6	사람들이 이에서 벗어나 헛된 말에 빠져	From which some having swerved have turned aside unto vain jangling;	Some have strayed from these ways and turned aside to empty talk.
1TI	1	7	율법의 선생이 되려 하나 자기의 말하는 것이나 자기의 확증하는 것도 깨닫지 못하는도다	Desiring to be teachers of the law; understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm.	They want to be teachers of the law, but they do not understand what they are saying or that which they so confidently assert.
1TI	1	8	그러나 사람이 율법을 법있게 쓰면 율법은 선한 것인 줄 우리는 아노라	But we know that the law is good, if a man use it lawfully;	Now we know that the law is good, if one uses it legitimately.
1TI	1	9	알 것은 이것이니 법은 옳은 사람을 위하여 세운 것이 아니요 오직 불법한 자와 복종치 아니하는 자며 경건치 아니한 자와 죄인이며 거룩하지 아니한 자와 망령된 자며 아비를 치는 자와 어미를 치는 자며 살인하는 자며	Knowing this, that the law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, for manslayers,	We realize that law is not enacted for the righteous, but for the lawless and rebellious, for the ungodly and sinful, for the unholy and profane, for killers of father or mother, for murderers,
1TI	1	10	음행하는 자며 남색하는 자며 사람을 탈취하는 자며 거짓말하는 자며 거짓 맹세하는 자와 기타 바른 교훈을 거스리는 자를 위함이니	For whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind, for menstealers, for liars, for perjured persons, and if there be any other thing that is contrary to sound doctrine;	for the sexually immoral, for homosexuals, for slave traders and liars and perjurers, and for anyone else who is averse to sound teaching
1TI	1	11	이 교훈은 내게 맡기신 바 복되신 하나님의 영광의 복음을 좇음이니라	According to the glorious gospel of the blessed God, which was committed to my trust.	that agrees with the glorious gospel of the blessed God, with which I have been entrusted.
1TI	1	12	나를 능하게 하신 그리스도 예수 우리 주께 내가 감사함은 나를 충성되이 여겨 내게 직분을 맡기심이니	And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who hath enabled me, for that he counted me faithful, putting me into the ministry;	I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who has strengthened me, that He considered me faithful and appointed me to service.
1TI	1	13	내가 전에는 훼방자요 핍박자요 포행자이었으나 도리어 긍휼을 입은 것은 내가 믿지 아니할 때에 알지 못하고 행하였음이라	Who was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious: but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief.	I was formerly a blasphemer, a persecutor, and a violent man; yet because I had acted in ignorance and unbelief, I was shown mercy.
1TI	1	14	우리 주의 은혜가 그리스도 예수 안에 있는 믿음과 사랑과 함께 넘치도록 풍성하였도다	And the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.	And the grace of our Lord overflowed to me, along with the faith and love that are in Christ Jesus.
1TI	1	15	미쁘다 모든 사람이 받을 만한 이 말이여 그리스도 예수께서 죄인을 구원하시려고 세상에 임하셨다 하였도다 죄인 중에 내가 괴수니라	This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief.	This is a trustworthy saying, worthy of full acceptance: Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am the worst.
1TI	1	16	그러나 내가 긍휼을 입은 까닭은 예수 그리스도께서 내게 먼저 일절 오래 참으심을 보이사 후에 주를 믿어 영생 얻는 자들에게 본이 되게 하려 하심이니라	Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might shew forth all longsuffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting.	But for this very reason I was shown mercy, so that in me, the worst of sinners, Christ Jesus might display His perfect patience as an example to those who would believe in Him for eternal life.
1TI	1	17	만세의 왕 곧 썩지 아니하고 보이지 아니하고 홀로 하나이신 하나님께 존귀와 영광이 세세토록 있을지이다 아멘	Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen.	Now to the King eternal, immortal, and invisible, the only God, be honor and glory forever and ever. Amen.
1TI	1	18	아들 디모데야 내가 네게 이 경계로써 명하노니 전에 너를 지도한 예언을 따라 그것으로 선한 싸움을 싸우며	This charge I commit unto thee, son Timothy, according to the prophecies which went before on thee, that thou by them mightest war a good warfare;	Timothy, my child, I entrust you with this command in keeping with the previous prophecies about you, so that by them you may fight the good fight,
1TI	1	19	믿음과 착한 양심을 가지라 어떤 이들이 이 양심을 버렸고 그 믿음에 관하여는 파선하였느니라	Holding faith, and a good conscience; which some having put away concerning faith have made shipwreck:	holding on to faith and a good conscience, which some have rejected and thereby shipwrecked their faith.
1TI	1	20	그 가운데 후메내오와 알렉산더가 있으니 내가 사단에게 내어준 것은 저희로 징계를 받아 훼방하지 말게 하려 함이니라	Of whom is Hymeneus and Alexander; whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme.	Among them are Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I have handed over to Satan to be taught not to blaspheme.
1TI	2	1	그러므로 내가 첫째로 권하노니 모든 사람을 위하여 간구와 기도와 도고와 감사를 하되	I exhort therefore, that, first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men;	First of all, then, I urge that petitions, prayers, intercessions, and thanksgiving be offered for everyone—
1TI	2	2	임금들과 높은 지위에 있는 모든 사람을 위하여 하라 이는 우리가 모든 경건과 단정한 중에 고요하고 평안한 생활을 하려 함이니라	For kings, and for all that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.	for kings and all those in authority—so that we may lead tranquil and quiet lives in all godliness and dignity.
1TI	2	3	이것이 우리 구주 하나님 앞에 선하고 받을실 만한 것이니	For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour;	This is good and pleasing in the sight of God our Savior,
1TI	2	4	하나님은 모든 사람이 구원을 받으며 진리를 아는 데 이르기를 원하시느니라	Who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth.	who wants everyone to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth.
1TI	2	5	하나님은 한 분이시요 또 하나님과 사람 사이에 중보도 한 분이시니 곧 사람이신 그리스도 예수라	For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus;	For there is one God, and there is one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus,
1TI	2	6	그가 모든 사람을 위하여 자기를 속전으로 주셨으니 기약이 이르면 증거할 것이라	Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time.	who gave Himself as a ransom for all—the testimony that was given at just the right time.
1TI	2	7	이를 위하여 내가 전파하는 자와 사도로 세움을 입은 것은 참말이요 거짓말이 아니니 믿음과 진리 안에서 내가 이방인의 스승이 되었노라	Whereunto I am ordained a preacher, and an apostle, (I speak the truth in Christ, and lie not;) a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity.	For this reason I was appointed as a preacher, an apostle, and a faithful and true teacher of the Gentiles. I am telling the truth; I am not lying about anything.
1TI	2	8	그러므로 각처에서 남자들이 분노와 다툼이 없이 거룩한 손을 들어 기도하기를 원하노라	I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting.	Therefore I want the men everywhere to pray, lifting up holy hands, without anger or dissension.
1TI	2	9	또 이와 같이 여자들도 아담한 옷을 입으며 염치와 정절로 자기를 단장하고 땋은 머리와 금이나 진주나 값진 옷으로 하지 말고	In like manner also, that women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety; not with broided hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array;	Likewise, I want the women to adorn themselves with respectable apparel, with modesty, and with self-control, not with braided hair or gold or pearls or expensive clothes,
1TI	2	10	오직 선행으로 하기를 원하라 이것이 하나님을 공경한다 하는 자들에게 마땅한 것이니라	But (which becometh women professing godliness) with good works.	but with good deeds, as is proper for women who profess to worship God.
1TI	2	11	여자는 일절 순종함으로 종용히 배우라	Let the woman learn in silence with all subjection.	A woman must learn in quietness and full submissiveness.
1TI	2	12	여자의 가르치는 것과 남자를 주관하는 것을 허락지 아니하노니 오직 종용할지니라	But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence.	I do not permit a woman to teach or to exercise authority over a man; she is to remain quiet.
1TI	2	13	이는 아담이 먼저 지음을 받고 이와가 그 후며	For Adam was first formed, then Eve.	For Adam was formed first, and then Eve.
1TI	2	14	아담이 꾀임을 보지 아니하고 여자가 꾀임을 보아 죄에 빠졌음이니라	And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the transgression.	And it was not Adam who was deceived, but the woman who was deceived and fell into transgression.
1TI	2	15	그러나 여자들이 만일 정절로써 믿음과 사랑과 거룩함에 거하면 그 해산함으로 구원을 얻으리라	Notwithstanding she shall be saved in childbearing, if they continue in faith and charity and holiness with sobriety.	Women, however, will be saved through childbearing, if they continue in faith, love, and holiness, with self-control.
1TI	3	1	미쁘다 이 말이여 사람이 감독의 직분을 얻으려 하면 선한 일을 사모한다 함이로다	This is a true saying, If a man desire the office of a bishop, he desireth a good work.	This is a trustworthy saying: If anyone aspires to be an overseer, he desires a noble task.
1TI	3	2	그러므로 감독은 책망할 것이 없으며 한 아내의 남편이 되며 절제하며 근신하며 아담하며 나그네를 대접하며 가르치기를 잘하며	A bishop then must be blameless, the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behaviour, given to hospitality, apt to teach;	An overseer, then, must be above reproach, the husband of but one wife, temperate, self-controlled, respectable, hospitable, able to teach,
1TI	3	3	술을 즐기지 아니하며 구타하지 아니하며 오직 관용하며 다투지 아니하며 돈을 사랑치 아니하며	Not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre; but patient, not a brawler, not covetous;	not dependent on wine, not violent but gentle, peaceable, and free of the love of money.
1TI	3	4	자기 집을 잘 다스려 자녀들로 모든 단정함으로 복종케 하는 자라야 할지며	One that ruleth well his own house, having his children in subjection with all gravity;	An overseer must manage his own household well and keep his children under control, with complete dignity.
1TI	3	5	(사람이 자기 집을 다스릴 줄 알지 못하면 어찌 하나님의 교회를 돌아보리요)	(For if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the church of God?)	For if someone does not know how to manage his own household, how can he care for the church of God?
1TI	3	6	새로 입교한 자도 말지니 교만하여져서 마귀를 정죄하는 그 정죄에 빠질까 함이요	Not a novice, lest being lifted up with pride he fall into the condemnation of the devil.	He must not be a recent convert, or he may become conceited and fall under the same condemnation as the devil.
1TI	3	7	또한 외인에게서도 선한 증거를 얻은 자라야 할지니 비방과 마귀의 올무에 빠질까 염려하라	Moreover he must have a good report of them which are without; lest he fall into reproach and the snare of the devil.	Furthermore, he must have a good reputation with outsiders, so that he will not fall into disgrace and into the snare of the devil.
1TI	3	8	이와 같이 집사들도 단정하고 일구이언을 하지 아니하고 술에 인박이지 아니하고 더러운 이를 탐하지 아니하고	Likewise must the deacons be grave, not doubletongued, not given to much wine, not greedy of filthy lucre;	Deacons likewise must be dignified, not double-tongued or given to much wine or greedy for money.
1TI	3	9	깨끗한 양심에 믿음의 비밀을 가진 자라야 할지니	Holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience.	They must hold to the mystery of the faith with a clear conscience.
1TI	3	10	이에 이 사람들을 먼저 시험하여 보고 그 후에 책망할 것이 없으면 집사의 직분을 하게 할 것이요	And let these also first be proved; then let them use the office of a deacon, being found blameless.	Additionally, they must first be tested. Then, if they are above reproach, let them serve as deacons.
1TI	3	11	여자들도 이와 같이 단정하고 참소하지 말며 절제하며 모든 일에 충성된 자라야 할지니라	Even so must their wives be grave, not slanderers, sober, faithful in all things.	In the same way, the women must be dignified, not slanderers, but temperate and faithful in all things.
1TI	3	12	집사들은 한 아내의 남편이 되어 자녀와 자기 집을 잘 다스리는 자일지니	Let the deacons be the husbands of one wife, ruling their children and their own houses well.	A deacon must be the husband of but one wife, a good manager of his children and of his own household.
1TI	3	13	집사의 직분을 잘한 자들은 아름다운 지위와 그리스도 예수 안에 있는 믿음에 큰 담력을 얻느니라	For they that have used the office of a deacon well purchase to themselves a good degree, and great boldness in the faith which is in Christ Jesus.	For those who have served well as deacons acquire for themselves a high standing and great confidence in the faith that is in Christ Jesus.
1TI	3	14	내가 속히 네게 가기를 바라나 이것을 네게 쓰는 것은	These things write I unto thee, hoping to come unto thee shortly:	Although I hope to come to you soon, I am writing you these things
1TI	3	15	만일 내가 지체하면 너로 하나님의 집에서 어떻게 행하여야 할 것을 알게 하려 함이니 이 집은 살아계신 하나님의 교회요 진리의 기둥과 터이니라	But if I tarry long, that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God, which is the church of the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth.	in case I am delayed, so that you will know how each one must conduct himself in God’s household, which is the church of the living God, the pillar and foundation of the truth.
1TI	3	16	크도다 경건의 비밀이여 그렇지 않다 하는 이 없도다 그는 육신으로 나타난 바 되시고 영으로 의롭다 하심을 입으시고 천사들에게 보이시고 만국에서 전파되시고 세상에서 믿은 바 되시고 영광 가운데서 올리우셨음이니라	And without controversy great is the mystery of godliness: God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory.	By common confession, the mystery of godliness is great: He appeared in the flesh, was vindicated by the Spirit, was seen by angels, was proclaimed among the nations, was believed in throughout the world, was taken up in glory.
1TI	4	1	그러나 성령이 밝히 말씀하시기를 후일에 어떤 사람들이 믿음에서 떠나 미혹케 하는 영과 귀신의 가르침을 좇으리라 하셨으니	Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils;	Now the Spirit expressly states that in later times some will abandon the faith to follow deceitful spirits and the teachings of demons,
1TI	4	2	자기 양심이 화인 맞아서 외식함으로 거짓말하는 자들이라	Speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their conscience seared with a hot iron;	influenced by the hypocrisy of liars, whose consciences are seared with a hot iron.
1TI	4	3	혼인을 금하고 식물을 폐하라 할 터이나 식물은 하나님이 지으신 바니 믿는 자들과 진리를 아는 자들이 감사함으로 받을 것이니라	Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God hath created to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe and know the truth.	They will prohibit marriage and require abstinence from certain foods that God has created to be received with thanksgiving by those who believe and know the truth.
1TI	4	4	하나님의 지으신 모든 것이 선하매 감사함으로 받으면 버릴 것이 없나니	For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving:	For every creation of God is good, and nothing that is received with thanksgiving should be rejected,
1TI	4	5	하나님의 말씀과 기도로 거룩하여짐이니라	For it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer.	because it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer.
1TI	4	6	네가 이것으로 형제를 깨우치면 그리스도 예수의 선한 일꾼이 되어 믿음의 말씀과 네가 좇는 선한 교훈으로 양육을 받으리라	If thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things, thou shalt be a good minister of Jesus Christ, nourished up in the words of faith and of good doctrine, whereunto thou hast attained.	By pointing out these things to the brothers, you will be a good servant of Christ Jesus, nourished by the words of faith and sound instruction that you have followed.
1TI	4	7	망령되고 허탄한 신화를 버리고 오직 경건에 이르기를 연습하라	But refuse profane and old wives’ fables, and exercise thyself rather unto godliness.	But reject irreverent, silly myths. Instead, train yourself for godliness.
1TI	4	8	육체의 연습은 약간의 유익이 있으나 경건은 범사에 유익하니 금생과 내생에 약속이 있느니라	For bodily exercise profiteth little: but godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.	For physical exercise is of limited value, but godliness is valuable in every way, holding promise for the present life and for the one to come.
1TI	4	9	미쁘다 이 말이여 모든 사람들이 받을 만하도다	This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptation.	This is a trustworthy saying, worthy of full acceptance.
1TI	4	10	이를 위하여 우리가 수고하고 진력하는 것은 우리 소망을 살아계신 하나님께 둠이니 곧 모든 사람 특히 믿는 자들의 구주시라	For therefore we both labour and suffer reproach, because we trust in the living God, who is the Saviour of all men, specially of those that believe.	To this end we labor and strive, because we have set our hope on the living God, who is the Savior of everyone, and especially of those who believe.
1TI	4	11	네가 이것들을 명하고 가르치라	These things command and teach.	Command and teach these things.
1TI	4	12	누구든지 네 연소함을 업신여기지 못하게 하고 오직 말과 행실과 사랑과 믿음과 정절에 대하여 믿는 자에게 본이 되어	Let no man despise thy youth; but be thou an example of the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity.	Let no one despise your youth, but set an example for the believers in speech, in conduct, in love, in faith, in purity.
1TI	4	13	내가 이를 때까지 읽는 것과 권하는 것과 가르치는 것에 착념하라	Till I come, give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine.	Until I come, devote yourself to the public reading of Scripture, to exhortation, and to teaching.
1TI	4	14	네 속에 있는 은사 곧 장로의 회에서 안수 받을 때에 예언으로 말미암아 받은 것을 조심 없이 말며	Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery.	Do not neglect the gift that is in you, which was given you through the prophecy spoken over you at the laying on of the hands of the elders.
1TI	4	15	이 모든 일에 전심전력하여 너의 진보를 모든 사람에게 나타나게 하라	Meditate upon these things; give thyself wholly to them; that thy profiting may appear to all.	Be diligent in these matters and absorbed in them, so that your progress will be evident to all.
1TI	4	16	네가 네 자신과 가르침을 삼가 이 일을 계속하라 이것을 행함으로 네 자신과 네게 듣는 자를 구원하리라	Take heed unto thyself, and unto the doctrine; continue in them: for in doing this thou shalt both save thyself, and them that hear thee.	Pay close attention to your life and to your teaching. Persevere in these things, for by so doing you will save both yourself and those who hear you.
1TI	5	1	늙은이를 꾸짖지 말고 권하되 아비에게 하듯 하며 젊은이를 형제에게 하듯 하고	Rebuke not an elder, but intreat him as a father; and the younger men as brethren;	Do not rebuke an older man, but appeal to him as to a father. Treat younger men as brothers,
1TI	5	2	늙은 여자를 어미에게 하듯 하며 젊은 여자를 일절 깨끗함으로 자매에게 하듯 하라	The elder women as mothers; the younger as sisters, with all purity.	older women as mothers, and younger women as sisters, with absolute purity.
1TI	5	3	참 과부인 과부를 경대하라	Honour widows that are widows indeed.	Honor the widows who are truly widows.
1TI	5	4	만일 어떤 과부에게 자녀나 손자들이 있거든 저희로 먼저 자기 집에서 효를 행하여 부모에게 보답하기를 배우게 하라 이것이 하나님 앞에 받으실 만한 것이니라	But if any widow have children or nephews, let them learn first to shew piety at home, and to requite their parents: for that is good and acceptable before God.	But if a widow has children or grandchildren, they must first learn to show godliness to their own family and repay their parents, for this is pleasing in the sight of God.
1TI	5	5	참 과부로서 외로운 자는 하나님께 소망을 두어 주야로 항상 간구와 기도를 하거니와	Now she that is a widow indeed, and desolate, trusteth in God, and continueth in supplications and prayers night and day.	The widow who is truly in need and left all alone puts her hope in God and continues night and day in her petitions and prayers.
1TI	5	6	일락을 좋아하는 이는 살았으나 죽었느니라	But she that liveth in pleasure is dead while she liveth.	But she who lives for pleasure is dead even while she is still alive.
1TI	5	7	네가 또한 이것을 명하여 그들로 책망 받을 것이 없게 하라	And these things give in charge, that they may be blameless.	Give these instructions to the believers, so that they will be above reproach.
1TI	5	8	누구든지 자기 친족 특히 자기 가족을 돌아보지 아니하면 믿음을 배반한 자요 불신자보다 더 악한 자니라	But if any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel.	If anyone does not provide for his own, and especially his own household, he has denied the faith and is worse than an unbeliever.
1TI	5	9	과부로 명부에 올릴 자는 나이 육십이 덜 되지 아니하고 한 남편의 아내이었던 자로서	Let not a widow be taken into the number under threescore years old, having been the wife of one man,	A widow should be enrolled if she is at least sixty years old, the wife of one man,
1TI	5	10	선한 행실의 증거가 있어 혹은 자녀를 양육하며 혹은 나그네를 대접하며 혹은 성도들의 발을 씻기며 혹은 환난 당한 자들을 구제하며 혹은 모든 선한 일을 좇은 자라야 할 것이요	Well reported of for good works; if she have brought up children, if she have lodged strangers, if she have washed the saints’ feet, if she have relieved the afflicted, if she have diligently followed every good work.	and well known for good deeds such as bringing up children, entertaining strangers, washing the feet of the saints, imparting relief to the afflicted, and devoting herself to every good work.
1TI	5	11	젊은 과부는 거절하라 이는 정욕으로 그리스도를 배반할 때에 시집가고자 함이니	But the younger widows refuse: for when they have begun to wax wanton against Christ, they will marry;	But refuse to enroll younger widows. For when their passions draw them away from Christ, they will want to marry,
1TI	5	12	처음 믿음을 저버렸으므로 심판을 받느니라	Having damnation, because they have cast off their first faith.	and thus will incur judgment because they are setting aside their first faith.
1TI	5	13	또 저희가 게으름을 익혀 집집에 돌아다니고 게으를 뿐 아니라 망령된 폄론을 하며 일을 만들며 마땅히 아니할 말을 하나니	And withal they learn to be idle, wandering about from house to house; and not only idle, but tattlers also and busybodies, speaking things which they ought not.	At the same time they will also learn to be idle, going from house to house and being not only idle, but also gossips and busybodies, discussing things they should not mention.
1TI	5	14	그러므로 젊은이는 시집가서 아이를 낳고 집을 다스리고 대적에게 훼방할 기회를 조금도 주지 말기를 원하노라	I will therefore that the younger women marry, bear children, guide the house, give none occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully.	So I advise the younger widows to marry, have children, and manage their households, denying the adversary occasion for slander.
1TI	5	15	이미 사단에게 돌아간 자들도 있도다	For some are already turned aside after Satan.	For some have already turned aside to follow Satan.
1TI	5	16	만일 믿는 여자에게 과부 친척이 있거든 자기가 도와주고 교회로 짐지지 말게 하라 이는 참 과부를 도와주게 하려 함이니라	If any man or woman that believeth have widows, let them relieve them, and let not the church be charged; that it may relieve them that are widows indeed.	If any believing woman has dependent widows, she must assist them and not allow the church to be burdened, so that it can help the widows who are truly in need.
1TI	5	17	잘 다스리는 장로들을 배나 존경할 자로 알되 말씀과 가르침에 수고하는 이들을 더할 것이니라	Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honour, especially they who labour in the word and doctrine.	Elders who lead effectively are worthy of double honor, especially those who work hard at preaching and teaching.
1TI	5	18	성경에 일렀으되 곡식을 밟아 떠는 소의 입에 망을 씌우지 말라 하였고 또 일꾼이 그 삯을 받는 것이 마땅하다 하였느니라	For the scripture saith, Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn. And, The labourer is worthy of his reward.	For the Scripture says, “Do not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain,” and, “The worker is worthy of his wages.”
1TI	5	19	장로에 대한 송사는 두세 증인이 없으면 받지 말 것이요	Against an elder receive not an accusation, but before two or three witnesses.	Do not entertain an accusation against an elder, except on the testimony of two or three witnesses.
1TI	5	20	범죄한 자들을 모든 사람 앞에 꾸짖어 나머지 사람으로 두려워 하게 하라	Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear.	But those who persist in sin should be rebuked in front of everyone, so that the others will stand in fear of sin.
1TI	5	21	하나님과 그리스도 예수와 택하심을 받은 천사들 앞에서 내가 엄히 명하노니 너는 편견이 없이 이것들을 지켜 아무 일도 편벽되이 하지 말며	I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect angels, that thou observe these things without preferring one before another, doing nothing by partiality.	I solemnly charge you before God and Christ Jesus and the elect angels to maintain these principles without bias, and to do nothing out of partiality.
1TI	5	22	아무에게나 경솔히 안수하지 말고 다른 사람의 죄에 간섭지 말고 네 자신을 지켜 정결케 하라	Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men’s sins: keep thyself pure.	Do not be too quick in the laying on of hands and thereby share in the sins of others. Keep yourself pure.
1TI	5	23	이제부터는 물만 마시지 말고 네 비위와 자주 나는 병을 인하여 포도주를 조금씩 쓰라	Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomach’s sake and thine often infirmities.	Stop drinking only water and use a little wine instead, because of your stomach and your frequent ailments.
1TI	5	24	어떤 사람들의 죄는 밝히 드러나 먼저 심판에 나아가고 어떤 사람들의 죄는 그 뒤를 좇나니	Some men’s sins are open beforehand, going before to judgment; and some men they follow after.	The sins of some men are obvious, going ahead of them to judgment; but the sins of others do not surface until later.
1TI	5	25	이와 같이 선행도 밝히 드러나고 그렇지 아니한 것도 숨길 수 없느니라	Likewise also the good works of some are manifest beforehand; and they that are otherwise cannot be hid.	In the same way, good deeds are obvious, and even the ones that are inconspicuous cannot remain hidden.
1TI	6	1	무릇 멍에 아래 있는 종들은 자기 상전들을 범사에 마땅히 공경할 자로 알지니 이는 하나님의 이름과 교훈으로 훼방을 받지 않게 하려 함이라	Let as many servants as are under the yoke count their own masters worthy of all honour, that the name of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed.	All who are under the yoke of slavery should regard their masters as fully worthy of honor, so that God’s name and our teaching will not be discredited.
1TI	6	2	믿는 상전이 있는 자들은 그 상전을 형제라고 경히 여기지 말고 더 잘 섬기게 하라 이는 유익을 받는 자들이 믿는 자요 사랑을 받는 자임이니라 너는 이것들을 가르치고 권하라	And they that have believing masters, let them not despise them, because they are brethren; but rather do them service, because they are faithful and beloved, partakers of the benefit. These things teach and exhort.	Those who have believing masters should not show disrespect because they are brothers, but should serve them all the more, since those receiving their good service are beloved believers. Teach and encourage these principles.
1TI	6	3	누구든지 다른 교훈을 하며 바른 말 곧 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 말씀과 경건에 관한 교훈에 착념치 아니하면	If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness;	If anyone teaches another doctrine and disagrees with the sound words of our Lord Jesus Christ and with godly teaching,
1TI	6	4	저는 교만하여 아무 것도 알지 못하고 변론과 언쟁을 좋아하는 자니 이로써 투기와 분쟁과 훼방과 악한 생각이 나며	He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof cometh envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings,	he is conceited and understands nothing. Instead, he has an unhealthy interest in controversies and semantics, out of which come envy, strife, abusive talk, evil suspicions,
1TI	6	5	마음이 부패하여지고 진리를 잃어버려 경건을 이익의 재료로 생각하는 자들의 다툼이 일어나느니라	Perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is godliness: from such withdraw thyself.	and constant friction between men of depraved mind who are devoid of the truth. These men regard godliness as a means of gain.
1TI	6	6	그러나 지족하는 마음이 있으면 경건이 큰 이익이 되느니라	But godliness with contentment is great gain.	Of course, godliness with contentment is great gain.
1TI	6	7	우리가 세상에 아무 것도 가지고 온 것이 없으매 또한 아무 것도 가지고 가지 못하리니	For we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out.	For we brought nothing into the world, so we cannot carry anything out of it.
1TI	6	8	우리가 먹을 것과 입을 것이 있은즉 족한 줄로 알 것이니라	And having food and raiment let us be therewith content.	But if we have food and clothing, we will be content with these.
1TI	6	9	부하려 하는 자들은 시험과 올무와 여러 가지 어리석고 해로운 정욕에 떨어지나니 곧 사람으로 침륜과 멸망에 빠지게 하는 것이라	But they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition.	Those who want to be rich, however, fall into temptation and become ensnared by many foolish and harmful desires that plunge them into ruin and destruction.
1TI	6	10	돈을 사랑함이 일만 악의 뿌리가 되나니 이것을 사모하는 자들이 미혹을 받아 믿음에서 떠나 많은 근심으로써 자기를 찔렀도다	For the love of money is the root of all evil: which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.	For the love of money is the root of all kinds of evil. By craving it, some have wandered away from the faith and pierced themselves with many sorrows.
1TI	6	11	오직 너 하나님의 사람아 이것들을 피하고 의와 경건과 믿음과 사랑과 인내와 온유를 좇으며	But thou, O man of God, flee these things; and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness.	But you, O man of God, flee from these things and pursue righteousness, godliness, faith, love, perseverance, and gentleness.
1TI	6	12	믿음의 선한 싸움을 싸우라 영생을 취하라 이를 위하여 네가 부르심을 입었고 많은 증인 앞에서 선한 증거를 증거하였도다	Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life, whereunto thou art also called, and hast professed a good profession before many witnesses.	Fight the good fight of the faith. Take hold of the eternal life to which you were called when you made the good confession before many witnesses.
1TI	6	13	만물을 살게 하신 하나님 앞과 본디오 빌라도를 향하여 선한 증거로 증거하신 그리스도 예수 앞에서 내가 너를 명하노니	I give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickeneth all things, and before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession;	I charge you in the presence of God, who gives life to all things, and of Christ Jesus, who made the good confession in His testimony before Pontius Pilate:
1TI	6	14	우리 주 예수 그리스도 나타나실 때까지 점도 없고 책망 받을 것도 없이 이 명령을 지키라	That thou keep this commandment without spot, unrebukeable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ:	Keep this commandment without stain or reproach until the appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ,
1TI	6	15	기약이 이르면 하나님이 그의 나타나심을 보이시리니 하나님은 복되시고 홀로 한 분이신 능하신 자이며 만왕의 왕이시며 만주의 주시요	Which in his times he shall shew, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords;	which the blessed and only Sovereign One—the King of kings and Lord of lords—will bring about in His own time.
1TI	6	16	오직 그에게만 죽지 아니함이 있고 가까이 가지 못할 빛에 거하시고 아무 사람도 보지 못하였고 또 볼 수 없는 자시니 그에게 존귀와 영원한 능력을 돌릴지어다 아멘	Who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; whom no man hath seen, nor can see: to whom be honour and power everlasting. Amen.	He alone is immortal and dwells in unapproachable light. No one has ever seen Him, nor can anyone see Him. To Him be honor and eternal dominion! Amen.
1TI	6	17	네가 이 세대에 부한 자들을 명하여 마음을 높이지 말고 정함이 없는 재물에 소망을 두지 말고 오직 우리에게 모든 것을 후히 주사 누리게 하시는 하나님께 두며	Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not highminded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who giveth us richly all things to enjoy;	Instruct those who are rich in the present age not to be conceited and not to put their hope in the uncertainty of wealth, but in God, who richly provides all things for us to enjoy.
1TI	6	18	선한 일을 행하고 선한 사업에 부하고 나눠주기를 좋아하며 동정하는 자가 되게 하라	That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate;	Instruct them to do good, to be rich in good works, and to be generous and ready to share,
1TI	6	19	이것이 장래에 자기를 위하여 좋은 터를 쌓아 참된 생명을 취하는 것이니라	Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life.	treasuring up for themselves a firm foundation for the future, so that they may take hold of that which is truly life.
1TI	6	20	디모데야 네게 부탁한 것을 지키고 거짓되이 일컫는 지식의 망령되고 허한 말과 변론을 피하라	O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane and vain babblings, and oppositions of science falsely so called:	O Timothy, guard what has been entrusted to you. Avoid irreverent, empty chatter and the opposing arguments of so-called “knowledge,”
1TI	6	21	이것을 좇는 사람들이 있어 믿음에서 벗어났느니라 은혜가 너희와 함께 있을지어다	Which some professing have erred concerning the faith. Grace be with thee. Amen. The first to Timothy was written from Laodicea, which is the chiefest city of Phrygia Pacatiana.	which some have professed and thus swerved away from the faith. Grace be with you all.
2TI	1	1	하나님의 뜻으로 말미암아 그리스도 예수 안에 있는 생명의 약속대로 그리스도 예수의 사도 된 바울은	Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, according to the promise of life which is in Christ Jesus,	Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, according to the promise of life in Christ Jesus,
2TI	1	2	사랑하는 아들 디모데에게 편지하노니 하나님 아버지와 그리스도 예수 우리 주께로부터 은혜와 긍휼과 평강이 네게 있을지어다	To Timothy, my dearly beloved son: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.	To Timothy, my beloved child: Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
2TI	1	3	나의 밤낮 간구하는 가운데 쉬지 않고 너를 생각하여 청결한 양심으로 조상적부터 섬겨 오는 하나님께 감사하고	I thank God, whom I serve from my forefathers with pure conscience, that without ceasing I have remembrance of thee in my prayers night and day;	I thank God, whom I serve with a clear conscience as did my forefathers, as I constantly remember you night and day in my prayers.
2TI	1	4	네 눈물을 생각하여 너 보기를 원함은 내 기쁨이 가득하게 하려 함이니	Greatly desiring to see thee, being mindful of thy tears, that I may be filled with joy;	Recalling your tears, I long to see you so that I may be filled with joy.
2TI	1	5	이는 네 속에 거짓이 없는 믿음을 생각함이라 이 믿음은 먼저 네 외조모 로이스와 네 어머니 유니게 속에 있더니 네 속에도 있는 줄을 확신하노라	When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice; and I am persuaded that in thee also.	I am reminded of your sincere faith, which first dwelt in your grandmother Lois and your mother Eunice, and I am convinced is in you as well.
2TI	1	6	그러므로 내가 나의 안수함으로 네 속에 있는 하나님의 은사를 다시 불일듯 하게 하기 위하여 너로 생각하게 하노니	Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God, which is in thee by the putting on of my hands.	For this reason I remind you to fan into flame the gift of God, which is in you through the laying on of my hands.
2TI	1	7	하나님이 우리에게 주신 것은 두려워하는 마음이 아니요 오직 능력과 사랑과 근신하는 마음이니	For God hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind.	For God has not given us a spirit of fear, but of power, love, and self-control.
2TI	1	8	그러므로 네가 우리 주의 증거와 또는 주를 위하여 갇힌 자 된 나를 부끄러워 말고 오직 하나님의 능력을 좇아 복음과 함께 고난을 받으라	Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner: but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the gospel according to the power of God;	So do not be ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, or of me, His prisoner. Instead, join me in suffering for the gospel by the power of God.
2TI	1	9	하나님이 우리를 구원하사 거룩하신 부르심으로 부르심은 우리의 행위대로 하심이 아니요 오직 자기 뜻과 영원한 때 전부터 그리스도 예수 안에서 우리에게 주신 은혜대로 하심이라	Who hath saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began,	He has saved us and called us to a holy calling, not because of our works, but by His own purpose and by the grace He granted us in Christ Jesus before time began.
2TI	1	10	이제는 우리 구주 그리스도 예수의 나타나심으로 말미암아 나타났으니 저는 사망을 폐하시고 복음으로써 생명과 썩지 아니할 것을 드러내신지라	But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ, who hath abolished death, and hath brought life and immortality to light through the gospel:	And now He has revealed this grace through the appearing of our Savior, Christ Jesus, who has abolished death and illuminated the way to life and immortality through the gospel,
2TI	1	11	내가 이 복음을 위하여 반포자와 사도와 교사로 세우심을 입었노라	Whereunto I am appointed a preacher, and an apostle, and a teacher of the Gentiles.	to which I was appointed as a preacher, an apostle, and a teacher.
2TI	1	12	이를 인하여 내가 또 이 고난을 받되 부끄러워하지 아니함은 나의 의뢰한 자를 내가 알고 또한 나의 의탁한 것을 그 날까지 저가 능히 지키실 줄을 확신함이라	For the which cause I also suffer these things: nevertheless I am not ashamed: for I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day.	For this reason, even though I suffer as I do, I am not ashamed; for I know whom I have believed, and I am convinced that He is able to guard what I have entrusted to Him for that day.
2TI	1	13	너는 그리스도 예수 안에 있는 믿음과 사랑으로써 내게 들은 바 바른 말을 본받아 지키고	Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou hast heard of me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.	Hold on to the pattern of sound teaching you have heard from me, with the faith and love that are in Christ Jesus.
2TI	1	14	우리 안에 거하시는 성령으로 말미암아 네게 부탁한 아름다운 것을 지키라	That good thing which was committed unto thee keep by the Holy Ghost which dwelleth in us.	Guard the treasure entrusted to you, with the help of the Holy Spirit who dwells in us.
2TI	1	15	아시아에 있는 모든 사람이 나를 버린 이 일을 네가 아나니 그 중에 부겔로와 허모게네가 있느니라	This thou knowest, that all they which are in Asia be turned away from me; of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes.	You know that everyone in the Province of Asia has deserted me, including Phygelus and Hermogenes.
2TI	1	16	원컨대 주께서 오네시보로의 집에 긍휼을 베푸시옵소서 저가 나를 자주 유쾌케 하고 나의 사슬에 매인 것을 부끄러워 아니하여	The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus; for he oft refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain:	May the Lord grant mercy to the household of Onesiphorus, because he has often refreshed me and was unashamed of my chains.
2TI	1	17	로마에 있을 때에 나를 부지런히 찾아 만났느니라	But, when he was in Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and found me.	Indeed, when he arrived in Rome, he searched diligently until he found me.
2TI	1	18	(원컨대 주께서 저로 하여금 그 날에 주의 긍휼을 얻게 하여 주옵소서) 또 저가 에베소에서 얼마큼 나를 섬긴 것을 네가 잘 아느니라	The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day: and in how many things he ministered unto me at Ephesus, thou knowest very well.	May the Lord grant Onesiphorus His mercy on that day. You know very well how much he ministered to me in Ephesus.
2TI	2	1	내 아들아 그러므로 네가 그리스도 예수 안에 있는 은혜 속에서 강하고	Thou therefore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.	You therefore, my child, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.
2TI	2	2	또 네가 많은 증인 앞에서 내게 들은 바를 충성된 사람들에게 부탁하라 저희가 또 다른 사람들을 가르칠 수 있으리라	And the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also.	And the things that you have heard me say among many witnesses, entrust these to faithful men who will be qualified to teach others as well.
2TI	2	3	네가 그리스도 예수의 좋은 군사로 나와 함께 고난을 받을지니	Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ.	Join me in suffering, like a good soldier of Christ Jesus.
2TI	2	4	군사로 다니는 자는 자기 생활에 얽매이는 자가 하나도 없나니 이는 군사로 모집한 자를 기쁘게 하려 함이라	No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier.	A soldier refrains from entangling himself in civilian affairs, in order to please the one who enlisted him.
2TI	2	5	경기하는 자가 법대로 경기하지 아니하면 면류관을 얻지 못할 것이며	And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully.	Likewise, a competitor does not receive the crown unless he competes according to the rules.
2TI	2	6	수고하는 농부가 곡식을 먼저 받는 것이 마땅하니라	The husbandman that laboureth must be first partaker of the fruits.	The hardworking farmer should be the first to partake of the crops.
2TI	2	7	내 말하는 것을 생각하라 주께서 범사에 네게 총명을 주시리라	Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all things.	Consider what I am saying, for the Lord will give you insight into all things.
2TI	2	8	나의 복음과 같이 다윗의 씨로 죽은 자 가운데서 다시 살으신 예수 그리스도를 기억하라	Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the dead according to my gospel:	Remember Jesus Christ, raised from the dead, descended from David, as proclaimed by my gospel,
2TI	2	9	복음을 인하여 내가 죄인과 같이 매이는 데까지 고난을 받았으나 하나님의 말씀은 매이지 아니하니라	Wherein I suffer trouble, as an evil doer, even unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound.	for which I suffer to the extent of being chained like a criminal. But the word of God cannot be chained!
2TI	2	10	그러므로 내가 택하신 자를 위하여 모든 것을 참음은 저희로도 그리스도 예수 안에 있는 구원을 영원한 영광과 함께 얻게 하려 함이로라	Therefore I endure all things for the elect’s sakes, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.	For this reason I endure all things for the sake of the elect, so that they too may obtain the salvation that is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory.
2TI	2	11	미쁘다 이 말이여, 우리가 주와 함께 죽었으면 또한 함께 살 것이요	It is a faithful saying: For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him:	This is a trustworthy saying: If we died with Him, we will also live with Him;
2TI	2	12	참으면 또한 함께 왕 노릇 할 것이요 우리가 주를 부인하면 주도 우리를 부인하실 것이라	If we suffer, we shall also reign with him: if we deny him, he also will deny us:	if we endure, we will also reign with Him; if we deny Him, He will also deny us;
2TI	2	13	우리는 미쁨이 없을지라도 주는 일향 미쁘시니 자기를 부인하실 수 없으시리라	If we believe not, yet he abideth faithful: he cannot deny himself.	if we are faithless, He remains faithful, for He cannot deny Himself.
2TI	2	14	너는 저희로 이 일을 기억하게 하여 말다툼을 하지 말라고 하나님 앞에서 엄히 명하라 이는 유익이 하나도 없고 도리어 듣는 자들을 망하게 함이니라	Of these things put them in remembrance, charging them before the Lord that they strive not about words to no profit, but to the subverting of the hearers.	Remind the believers of these things, charging them before God to avoid quarreling over words, which succeeds only in leading the listeners to ruin.
2TI	2	15	네가 진리의 말씀을 옳게 분변하여 부끄러울 것이 없는 일꾼으로 인정된 자로 자신을 하나님 앞에 드리기를 힘쓰라	Study to shew thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.	Make every effort to present yourself approved to God, an unashamed workman who accurately handles the word of truth.
2TI	2	16	망령되고 헛된 말을 버리라 저희는 경건치 아니함에 점점 나아가나니	But shun profane and vain babblings: for they will increase unto more ungodliness.	But avoid irreverent, empty chatter, which will only lead to more ungodliness,
2TI	2	17	저희 말은 독한 창질의 썩어져 감과 같은데 그 중에 후메내오와 빌레도가 있느니라	And their word will eat as doth a canker: of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus;	and the talk of such men will spread like gangrene. Among them are Hymenaeus and Philetus,
2TI	2	18	진리에 관하여는 저희가 그릇되었도다 부활이 이미 지나갔다 하므로 어떤 사람들의 믿음을 무너뜨리느니라	Who concerning the truth have erred, saying that the resurrection is past already; and overthrow the faith of some.	who have deviated from the truth. They say that the resurrection has already occurred, and they undermine the faith of some.
2TI	2	19	그러나 하나님의 견고한 터는 섰으니 인침이 있어 일렀으되 주께서 자기 백성을 아신다 하며 또 주의 이름을 부르는 자마다 불의에서 떠날지어다 하였느니라	Nevertheless the foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his. And, Let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity.	Nevertheless, God’s firm foundation stands, bearing this seal: “The Lord knows those who are His,” and, “Everyone who calls on the name of the Lord must turn away from iniquity.”
2TI	2	20	큰 집에는 금과 은의 그릇이 있을 뿐 아니요 나무와 질그릇도 있어 귀히 쓰는 것도 있고 천히 쓰는 것도 있나니	But in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth; and some to honour, and some to dishonour.	A large house contains not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood and clay. Some indeed are for honorable use, but others are for common use.
2TI	2	21	그러므로 누구든지 이런 것에서 자기를 깨끗하게 하면 귀히 쓰는 그릇이 되어 거룩하고 주인의 쓰심에 합당하며 모든 선한 일에 예비함이 되리라	If a man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honour, sanctified, and meet for the master’s use, and prepared unto every good work.	So if anyone cleanses himself of what is unfit, he will be a vessel for honor: sanctified, useful to the Master, and prepared for every good work.
2TI	2	22	또한 네가 청년의 정욕을 피하고 주를 깨끗한 마음으로 부르는 자들과 함께 믿음과 사랑과 화평을 좇으라	Flee also youthful lusts: but follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart.	Flee from youthful passions and pursue righteousness, faith, love, and peace, together with those who call on the Lord out of a pure heart.
2TI	2	23	어리석고 무식한 변론을 버리라 이에서 다툼이 나는 줄 앎이라	But foolish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they do gender strifes.	But reject foolish and ignorant speculation, for you know that it breeds quarreling.
2TI	2	24	마땅히 주의 종은 다투지 아니하고 모든 사람을 대하여 온유하라 가르치기를 잘하며 참으며	And the servant of the Lord must not strive; but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient,	And a servant of the Lord must not be quarrelsome, but must be kind to everyone, able to teach, and forbearing.
2TI	2	25	거역하는 자를 온유함으로 징계할지니 혹 하나님이 저희에게 회개함을 주사 진리를 알게 하실까 하며	In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves; if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth;	He must gently reprove those who oppose him, in the hope that God may grant them repentance leading to a knowledge of the truth.
2TI	2	26	저희로 깨어 마귀의 올무에서 벗어나 하나님께 사로잡힌 바 되어 그 뜻을 좇게 하실까 함이라	And that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him at his will.	Then they will come to their senses and escape the snare of the devil, who has taken them captive to his will.
2TI	3	1	네가 이것을 알라 말세에 고통하는 때가 이르리니	This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come.	But understand this: In the last days terrible times will come.
2TI	3	2	사람들은 자기를 사랑하며 돈을 사랑하며 자긍하며 교만하며 훼방하며 부모를 거역하며 감사치 아니하며 거룩하지 아니하며	For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy,	For men will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, boastful, arrogant, abusive, disobedient to their parents, ungrateful, unholy,
2TI	3	3	무정하며 원통함을 풀지 아니하며 참소하며 절제하지 못하며 사나우며 선한 것을 좋아 아니하며	Without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good,	unloving, unforgiving, slanderous, without self-control, brutal, without love of good,
2TI	3	4	배반하여 팔며 조급하며 자고하며 쾌락을 사랑하기를 하나님 사랑하는 것보다 더하며	Traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God;	traitorous, reckless, conceited, lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God,
2TI	3	5	경건의 모양은 있으나 경건의 능력은 부인하는 자니 이같은 자들에게서 네가 돌아서라	Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away.	having a form of godliness but denying its power. Turn away from such as these!
2TI	3	6	저희 중에 남의 집에 가만히 들어가 어리석은 여자를 유인하는 자들이 있으니 그 여자는 죄를 중히 지고 여러 가지 욕심에 끌린 바 되어	For of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led away with divers lusts,	They are the kind who worm their way into households and captivate vulnerable women who are weighed down with sins and led astray by various passions,
2TI	3	7	항상 배우나 마침내 진리의 지식에 이를 수 없느니라	Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth.	who are always learning but never able to come to a knowledge of the truth.
2TI	3	8	얀네와 얌브레가 모세를 대적한 것 같이 저희도 진리를 대적하니 이 사람들은 그 마음이 부패한 자요 믿음에 관하여는 버리운 자들이라	Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith.	Just as Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses, so also these men oppose the truth. They are depraved in mind and disqualified from the faith.
2TI	3	9	그러나 저희가 더 나가지 못할 것은 저 두 사람의 된 것과 같이 저희 어리석음이 드러날 것임이니라	But they shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be manifest unto all men, as theirs also was.	But they will not advance much further. For just like Jannes and Jambres, their folly will be plain to everyone.
2TI	3	10	나의 교훈과 행실과 의향과 믿음과 오래 참음과 사랑과 인내와	But thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, longsuffering, charity, patience,	You, however, have observed my teaching, my conduct, my purpose, my faith, my patience, my love, my perseverance,
2TI	3	11	핍박과 고난과 또한 안디옥과 이고니온과 루스드라에서 당한 일과 어떠한 핍박 받은 것을 네가 과연 보고 알았거니와 주께서 이 모든 것 가운데서 나를 건지셨느니라	Persecutions, afflictions, which came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; what persecutions I endured: but out of them all the Lord delivered me.	my persecutions, and the sufferings that came upon me in Antioch, Iconium, and Lystra. What persecutions I endured! Yet the Lord rescued me from all of them.
2TI	3	12	무릇 그리스도 예수 안에서 경건하게 살고자 하는 자는 핍박을 받으리라	Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.	Indeed, all who desire to live godly lives in Christ Jesus will be persecuted,
2TI	3	13	악한 사람들과 속이는 자들은 더욱 악하여져서 속이기도 하고 속기도 하나니	But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived.	while evil men and imposters go from bad to worse, deceiving and being deceived.
2TI	3	14	그러나 너는 배우고 확신한 일에 거하라 네가 뉘게서 배운 것을 알며	But continue thou in the things which thou hast learned and hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned them;	But as for you, continue in the things you have learned and firmly believed, since you know from whom you have learned them.
2TI	3	15	또 네가 어려서부터 성경을 알았나니 성경은 능히 너로 하여금 그리스도 예수 안에 있는 믿음으로 말미암아 구원에 이르는 지혜가 있게 하느니라	And that from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus.	From infancy you have known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus.
2TI	3	16	모든 성경은 하나님의 감동으로 된 것으로 교훈과 책망과 바르게 함과 의로 교육하기에 유익하니	All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness:	All Scripture is God-breathed and is useful for instruction, for conviction, for correction, and for training in righteousness,
2TI	3	17	이는 하나님의 사람으로 온전케 하며 모든 선한 일을 행하기에 온전케 하려 함이니라	That the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works.	so that the man of God may be complete, fully equipped for every good work.
2TI	4	1	하나님 앞과 산 자와 죽은 자를 심판하실 그리스도 예수 앞에서 그의 나타나실 것과 그의 나라를 두고 엄히 명하노니	I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom;	I charge you in the presence of God and of Christ Jesus, who will judge the living and the dead, and in view of His appearing and His kingdom:
2TI	4	2	너는 말씀을 전파하라 때를 얻든지 못 얻든지 항상 힘쓰라 범사에 오래 참음과 가르침으로 경책하며 경계하며 권하라	Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine.	Preach the word; be prepared in season and out of season; reprove, rebuke, and encourage with every form of patient instruction.
2TI	4	3	때가 이르리니 사람이 바른 교훈을 받지 아니하며 귀가 가려워서 자기의 사욕을 좇을 스승을 많이 두고	For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears;	For the time will come when men will not tolerate sound doctrine, but with itching ears they will gather around themselves teachers to suit their own desires.
2TI	4	4	또 그 귀를 진리에서 돌이켜 허탄한 이야기를 좇으리라	And they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables.	So they will turn their ears away from the truth and turn aside to myths.
2TI	4	5	그러나 너는 모든 일에 근신하여 고난을 받으며 전도인의 일을 하며 네 직무를 다하라	But watch thou in all things, endure afflictions, do the work of an evangelist, make full proof of thy ministry.	But you, be sober in all things, endure hardship, do the work of an evangelist, fulfill your ministry.
2TI	4	6	관제와 같이 벌써 내가 부음이 되고 나의 떠날 기약이 가까웠도다	For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand.	For I am already being poured out like a drink offering, and the time of my departure is at hand.
2TI	4	7	내가 선한 싸움을 싸우고 나의 달려갈 길을 마치고 믿음을 지켰으니	I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith:	I have fought the good fight, I have finished the race, I have kept the faith.
2TI	4	8	이제 후로는 나를 위하여 의의 면류관이 예비되었으므로 주 곧 의로우신 재판장이 그 날에 내게 주실 것이니 내게만 아니라 주의 나타나심을 사모하는 모든 자에게니라	Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.	From now on there is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will award to me on that day—and not only to me, but to all who crave His appearing.
2TI	4	9	너는 어서 속히 내게로 오라	Do thy diligence to come shortly unto me:	Make every effort to come to me quickly,
2TI	4	10	데마는 이 세상을 사랑하여 나를 버리고 데살로니가로 갔고 그레스게는 갈라디아로, 디도는 달마디아로 갔고	For Demas hath forsaken me, having loved this present world, and is departed unto Thessalonica; Crescens to Galatia, Titus unto Dalmatia.	because Demas, in his love of this world, has deserted me and gone to Thessalonica. Crescens has gone to Galatia, and Titus to Dalmatia.
2TI	4	11	누가만 나와 함께 있느니라 네가 올 때에 마가를 데리고 오라 저가 나의 일에 유익하니라	Only Luke is with me. Take Mark, and bring him with thee: for he is profitable to me for the ministry.	Only Luke is with me. Get Mark and bring him with you, because he is useful to me in the ministry.
2TI	4	12	두기고는 에베소로 보내었노라	And Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus.	Tychicus, however, I have sent to Ephesus.
2TI	4	13	네가 올 때에 내가 드로아 가보의 집에 둔 겉옷을 가지고 오고 또 책은 특별히 가죽 종이에 쓴 것을 가져오라	The cloke that I left at Troas with Carpus, when thou comest, bring with thee, and the books, but especially the parchments.	When you come, bring the cloak that I left with Carpus at Troas, and my scrolls, especially the parchments.
2TI	4	14	구리 장색 알렉산더가 내게 해를 많이 보였으매 주께서 그 행한 대로 저에게 갚으시리니	Alexander the coppersmith did me much evil: the Lord reward him according to his works:	Alexander the coppersmith did great harm to me. The Lord will repay him according to his deeds.
2TI	4	15	너도 저를 주의하라 저가 우리 말을 심히 대적하였느니라	Of whom be thou ware also; for he hath greatly withstood our words.	You too should beware of him, for he has vigorously opposed our message.
2TI	4	16	내가 처음 변명할 때에 나와 함께 한 자가 하나도 없고 다 나를 버렸으나 저희에게 허물을 돌리지 않기를 원하노라	At my first answer no man stood with me, but all men forsook me: I pray God that it may not be laid to their charge.	At my first defense, no one stood with me, but everyone deserted me. May it not be charged against them.
2TI	4	17	주께서 내 곁에 서서 나를 강건케 하심은 나로 말미암아 전도의 말씀이 온전히 전파되어 이방인으로 듣게 하려 하심이니 내가 사자의 입에서 건지웠느니라	Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me; that by me the preaching might be fully known, and that all the Gentiles might hear: and I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion.	But the Lord stood by me and strengthened me, so that through me the message would be fully proclaimed, and all the Gentiles would hear it. So I was delivered from the mouth of the lion.
2TI	4	18	주께서 나를 모든 악한 일에서 건져내시고 또 그의 천국에 들어가도록 구원하시리니 그에게 영광이 세세무궁토록 있을지어다 아멘	And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom: to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.	And the Lord will rescue me from every evil action and bring me safely into His heavenly kingdom. To Him be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
2TI	4	19	브리스가와 아굴라와 및 오네시보로의 집에 문안하라	Salute Prisca and Aquila, and the household of Onesiphorus.	Greet Prisca and Aquila, as well as the household of Onesiphorus.
2TI	4	20	에라스도는 고린도에 머물렀고 드로비모는 병듦으로 밀레도에 두었노니	Erastus abode at Corinth: but Trophimus have I left at Miletum sick.	Erastus has remained at Corinth, and Trophimus I left sick in Miletus.
2TI	4	21	겨울 전에 너는 어서 오라 으불로와 부데와 리노와 글라우디아와 모든 형제가 다 네게 문안하느니라	Do thy diligence to come before winter. Eubulus greeteth thee, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren.	Make every effort to come to me before winter. Eubulus sends you greetings, as do Pudens, Linus, Claudia, and all the brothers.
2TI	4	22	나는 주께서 네 심령에 함께 계시기를 바라노니 은혜가 너희와 함께 있을지어다	The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit. Grace be with you. Amen. The second epistle unto Timotheus, ordained the first bishop of the church of the Ephesians, was written from Rome, when Paul was brought before Nero the second time.	The Lord be with your spirit. Grace be with you all.
TIT	1	1	하나님의 종이요 예수 그리스도의 사도인 바울 곧 나의 사도 된 것은 하나님의 택하신 자들의 믿음과 경건함에 속한 진리의 지식과	Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the faith of God’s elect, and the acknowledging of the truth which is after godliness;	Paul, a servant of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ for the faith of God’s elect and their knowledge of the truth that leads to godliness,
TIT	1	2	영생의 소망을 인함이라 이 영생은 거짓이 없으신 하나님이 영원한 때 전부터 약속하신 것인데	In hope of eternal life, which God, that cannot lie, promised before the world began;	in the hope of eternal life, which God, who cannot lie, promised before time began.
TIT	1	3	자기 때에 자기의 말씀을 전도로 나타내셨으니 이 전도는 우리 구주 하나님의 명대로 내게 맡기신 것이라	But hath in due times manifested his word through preaching, which is committed unto me according to the commandment of God our Saviour;	In His own time He has made His word evident in the proclamation entrusted to me by the command of God our Savior.
TIT	1	4	같은 믿음을 따라 된 나의 참 아들 디도에게 편지하노니 하나님 아버지와 그리스도 예수 우리 구주로 좇아 은혜와 평강이 네게 있을지어다	To Titus, mine own son after the common faith: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ our Saviour.	To Titus, my true child in our common faith: Grace and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Savior.
TIT	1	5	내가 너를 그레데에 떨어뜨려 둔 이유는 부족한 일을 바로잡고 나의 명한 대로 각 성에 장로들을 세우게 하려 함이니	For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou shouldest set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain elders in every city, as I had appointed thee:	The reason I left you in Crete was that you would set in order what was unfinished and appoint elders in every town, as I directed you.
TIT	1	6	책망할 것이 없고 한 아내의 남편이며 방탕하다 하는 비방이나 불순종하는 일이 없는 믿는 자녀를 둔 자라야 할지라	If any be blameless, the husband of one wife, having faithful children not accused of riot or unruly.	An elder must be blameless, the husband of but one wife, having children who are believers and who are not open to accusation of indiscretion or insubordination.
TIT	1	7	감독은 하나님의 청지기로서 책망할 것이 없고 제 고집대로 하지 아니하며 급히 분내지 아니하며 술을 즐기지 아니하며 구타하지 아니하며 더러운 이를 탐하지 아니하며	For a bishop must be blameless, as the steward of God; not selfwilled, not soon angry, not given to wine, no striker, not given to filthy lucre;	As God’s steward, an overseer must be above reproach—not self-absorbed, not quick-tempered, not given to drunkenness, not violent, not greedy for money.
TIT	1	8	오직 나그네를 대접하며 선을 좋아하며 근신하며 의로우며 거룩하며 절제하며	But a lover of hospitality, a lover of good men, sober, just, holy, temperate;	Instead, he must be hospitable, a lover of good, self-controlled, upright, holy, and disciplined.
TIT	1	9	미쁜 말씀의 가르침을 그대로 지켜야 하리니 이는 능히 바른 교훈으로 권면하고 거스려 말하는 자들을 책망하게 하려 함이라	Holding fast the faithful word as he hath been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers.	He must hold firmly to the faithful word as it was taught, so that he can encourage others by sound teaching and refute those who contradict it.
TIT	1	10	복종치 아니하고 헛된 말을 하며 속이는 자가 많은 중 특별히 할례당 가운데 심하니	For there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, specially they of the circumcision:	For many are rebellious and full of empty talk and deception, especially those of the circumcision,
TIT	1	11	저희의 입을 막을 것이라 이런 자들이 더러운 이를 취하려고 마땅치 아니한 것을 가르쳐 집들을 온통 엎드러치는도다	Whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucre’s sake.	who must be silenced. For the sake of dishonorable gain, they undermine entire households and teach things they should not.
TIT	1	12	그레데인 중에 어떤 선지자가 말하되 그레데인들은 항상 거짓말장이며 악한 짐승이며 배만 위하는 게으름장이라 하니	One of themselves, even a prophet of their own, said, The Cretians are alway liars, evil beasts, slow bellies.	As one of their own prophets has said, “Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, lazy gluttons.”
TIT	1	13	이 증거가 참되도다 그러므로 네가 저희를 엄히 꾸짖으라 이는 저희로 하여금 믿음을 온전케 하고	This witness is true. Wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith;	This testimony is true. Therefore rebuke them sternly, so that they will be sound in the faith
TIT	1	14	유대인의 허탄한 이야기와 진리를 배반하는 사람들의 명령을 좇지 않게 하려 함이라	Not giving heed to Jewish fables, and commandments of men, that turn from the truth.	and will pay no attention to Jewish myths or to the commands of men who have rejected the truth.
TIT	1	15	깨끗한 자들에게는 모든 것이 깨끗하나 더럽고 믿지 아니하는 자들에게는 아무 것도 깨끗한 것이 없고 오직 저희 마음과 양심이 더러운지라	Unto the pure all things are pure: but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure; but even their mind and conscience is defiled.	To the pure, all things are pure; but to the defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure. Indeed, both their minds and their consciences are defiled.
TIT	1	16	저희가 하나님을 시인하나 행위로는 부인하니 가증한 자요 복종치 아니하는 자요 모든 선한 일을 버리는 자니라	They profess that they know God; but in works they deny him, being abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate.	They profess to know God, but by their actions they deny Him. They are detestable, disobedient, and unfit for any good deed.
TIT	2	1	오직 너는 바른 교훈에 합한 것을 말하여	But speak thou the things which become sound doctrine:	But as for you, speak the things that are consistent with sound doctrine.
TIT	2	2	늙은 남자로는 절제하며 경건하며 근신하며 믿음과 사랑과 인내함에 온전케 하고	That the aged men be sober, grave, temperate, sound in faith, in charity, in patience.	Older men are to be temperate, dignified, self-controlled, and sound in faith, love, and perseverance.
TIT	2	3	늙은 여자로는 이와 같이 행실이 거룩하며 참소치 말며 많은 술의 종이 되지 말며 선한 것을 가르치는 자들이 되고	The aged women likewise, that they be in behaviour as becometh holiness, not false accusers, not given to much wine, teachers of good things;	Older women, likewise, are to be reverent in their behavior, not slanderers or addicted to much wine, but teachers of good.
TIT	2	4	저들로 젊은 여자들을 교훈하되 그 남편과 자녀를 사랑하며	That they may teach the young women to be sober, to love their husbands, to love their children,	In this way they can train the young women to love their husbands and children,
TIT	2	5	근신하며 순전하며 집안 일을 하며 선하며 자기 남편에게 복종하게 하라 이는 하나님의 말씀이 훼방을 받지 않게 하려 함이니라	To be discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good, obedient to their own husbands, that the word of God be not blasphemed.	to be self-controlled, pure, managers of their households, kind, and submissive to their own husbands, so that the word of God will not be discredited.
TIT	2	6	너는 이와 같이 젊은 남자들을 권면하여 근신하게 하되	Young men likewise exhort to be sober minded.	In the same way, urge the younger men to be self-controlled.
TIT	2	7	범사에 네 자신으로 선한 일의 본을 보여 교훈의 부패치 아니함과 경건함과	In all things shewing thyself a pattern of good works: in doctrine shewing uncorruptness, gravity, sincerity,	In everything, show yourself to be an example by doing good works. In your teaching show integrity, dignity,
TIT	2	8	책망할 것이 없는 바른 말을 하게 하라 이는 대적하는 자로 하여금 부끄러워 우리를 악하다 할 것이 없게 하려 함이라	Sound speech, that cannot be condemned; that he that is of the contrary part may be ashamed, having no evil thing to say of you.	and wholesome speech that is above reproach, so that anyone who opposes us will be ashamed, having nothing bad to say about us.
TIT	2	9	종들로는 자기 상전들에게 범사에 순종하여 기쁘게 하고 거스려 말하지 말며	Exhort servants to be obedient unto their own masters, and to please them well in all things; not answering again;	Slaves are to submit to their own masters in everything, to be well-pleasing, not argumentative,
TIT	2	10	떼어 먹지 말고 오직 선한 충성을 다하게 하라 이는 범사에 우리 구주 하나님의 교훈을 빛나게 하려 함이라	Not purloining, but shewing all good fidelity; that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things.	not stealing from them, but showing all good faith, so that in every respect they will adorn the teaching about God our Savior.
TIT	2	11	모든 사람에게 구원을 주시는 하나님의 은혜가 나타나	For the grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men,	For the grace of God has appeared, bringing salvation to everyone.
TIT	2	12	우리를 양육하시되 경건치 않은 것과 이 세상 정욕을 다 버리고 근신함과 의로움과 경건함으로 이 세상에 살고	Teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world;	It instructs us to renounce ungodliness and worldly passions, and to live sensible, upright, and godly lives in the present age,
TIT	2	13	복스러운 소망과 우리의 크신 하나님 구주 예수 그리스도의 영광이 나타나심을 기다리게 하셨으니	Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ;	as we await the blessed hope and glorious appearance of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ.
TIT	2	14	그가 우리를 대신하여 자신을 주심은 모든 불법에서 우리를 구속하시고 우리를 깨끗하게 하사 선한 일에 열심하는 친 백성이 되게 하려 하심이니라	Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.	He gave Himself for us to redeem us from all lawlessness and to purify for Himself a people for His own possession, zealous for good deeds.
TIT	2	15	너는 이것을 말하고 권면하며 모든 권위로 책망하여 누구에게든지 업신여김을 받지 말라	These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority. Let no man despise thee.	Speak these things as you encourage and rebuke with all authority. Let no one despise you.
TIT	3	1	너는 저희로 하여금 정사와 권세잡은 자들에게 복종하며 순종하며 모든 선한 일 행하기를 예비하게 하며	Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey magistrates, to be ready to every good work,	Remind the believers to submit to rulers and authorities, to be obedient and ready for every good work,
TIT	3	2	아무도 훼방하지 말며 다투지 말며 관용하며 범사에 온유함을 모든 사람에게 나타낼 것을 기억하게 하라	To speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, shewing all meekness unto all men.	to malign no one, and to be peaceable and gentle, showing full consideration to everyone.
TIT	3	3	우리도 전에는 어리석은 자요 순종치 아니한 자요 속은 자요 각색 정욕과 행락에 종 노릇 한 자요 악독과 투기로 지낸 자요 가증스러운 자요 피차 미워한 자이었으나	For we ourselves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another.	For at one time we too were foolish, disobedient, misled, and enslaved to all sorts of desires and pleasures—living in malice and envy, being hated and hating one another.
TIT	3	4	우리 구주 하나님의 자비와 사람 사랑하심을 나타내실 때에	But after that the kindness and love of God our Saviour toward man appeared,	But when the kindness of God our Savior and His love for mankind appeared,
TIT	3	5	우리를 구원하시되 우리의 행한 바 의로운 행위로 말미암지 아니하고 오직 그의 긍휼하심을 좇아 중생의 씻음과 성령의 새롭게 하심으로 하셨나니	Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost;	He saved us, not by the righteous deeds we had done, but according to His mercy, through the washing of new birth and renewal by the Holy Spirit.
TIT	3	6	성령을 우리 구주 예수 그리스도로 말미암아 우리에게 풍성히 부어 주사	Which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Saviour;	This is the Spirit He poured out on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior,
TIT	3	7	우리로 저의 은혜를 힘입어 의롭다 하심을 얻어 영생의 소망을 따라 후사가 되게 하려 하심이라	That being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life.	so that, having been justified by His grace, we would become heirs with the hope of eternal life.
TIT	3	8	이 말이 미쁘도다 원컨대 네가 이 여러 것에 대하여 굳세게 말하라 이는 하나님을 믿는 자들로 하여금 조심하여 선한 일을 힘쓰게 하려 함이라 이것은 아름다우며 사람들에게 유익하니라	This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God might be careful to maintain good works. These things are good and profitable unto men.	This saying is trustworthy. And I want you to emphasize these things, so that those who have believed God will take care to devote themselves to good deeds. These things are excellent and profitable for the people.
TIT	3	9	그러나 어리석은 변론과 족보 이야기와 분쟁과 율법에 대한 다툼을 피하라 이것은 무익한 것이요 헛된 것이니라	But avoid foolish questions, and genealogies, and contentions, and strivings about the law; for they are unprofitable and vain.	But avoid foolish controversies, genealogies, arguments, and quarrels about the law, because these things are pointless and worthless.
TIT	3	10	이단에 속한 사람을 한두 번 훈계한 후에 멀리 하라	A man that is an heretick after the first and second admonition reject;	Reject a divisive man after a first and second admonition,
TIT	3	11	이러한 사람은 네가 아는 바와 같이 부패하여서 스스로 정죄한 자로서 죄를 짓느니라	Knowing that he that is such is subverted, and sinneth, being condemned of himself.	knowing that such a man is corrupt and sinful; he is self-condemned.
TIT	3	12	내가 아데마나 두기고를 네게 보내리니 그 때에 네가 급히 니고볼리로 내게 오라 내가 거기서 과동하기로 작정하였노라	When I shall send Artemas unto thee, or Tychicus, be diligent to come unto me to Nicopolis: for I have determined there to winter.	As soon as I send Artemas or Tychicus to you, make every effort to come to me at Nicopolis, because I have decided to winter there.
TIT	3	13	교법사 세나와 및 아볼로를 급히 먼저 보내어 저희로 궁핍함이 없게 하고	Bring Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their journey diligently, that nothing be wanting unto them.	Do your best to equip Zenas the lawyer and Apollos, so that they will have everything they need.
TIT	3	14	또 우리 사람들도 열매 없는 자가 되지 않게 하기 위하여 필요한 것을 예비하는 좋은 일에 힘쓰기를 배우게 하라	And let ours also learn to maintain good works for necessary uses, that they be not unfruitful.	And our people must also learn to devote themselves to good works in order to meet the pressing needs of others, so that they will not be unfruitful.
TIT	3	15	나와 함께 있는 자가 다 네게 문안하니 믿음 안에서 우리를 사랑하는 자들에게 너도 문안하라 은혜가 너희 무리에게 있을지어다	All that are with me salute thee. Greet them that love us in the faith. Grace be with you all. Amen. It was written to Titus, ordained the first bishop of the church of the Cretians, from Nicopolis of Macedonia.	All who are with me send you greetings. Greet those who love us in the faith. Grace be with all of you.
PHM	1	1	그리스도 예수를 위하여 갇힌 자 된 바울과 및 형제 디모데는 우리의 사랑을 받는 자요 동역자인 빌레몬과	Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ, and Timothy our brother, unto Philemon our dearly beloved, and fellowlabourer,	Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timothy our brother, To Philemon our beloved fellow worker,
PHM	1	2	및 자매 압비아와 및 우리와 함께 군사된 아킵보와 네 집에 있는 교회에게 편지하노니	And to our beloved Apphia, and Archippus our fellowsoldier, and to the church in thy house:	to Apphia our sister, to Archippus our fellow soldier, and to the church that meets at your house:
PHM	1	3	하나님 우리 아버지와 주 예수 그리스도로 좇아 은혜와 평강이 너희에게 있을지어다	Grace to you, and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.	Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
PHM	1	4	내가 항상 내 하나님께 감사하고 기도할 때에 너를 말함은	I thank my God, making mention of thee always in my prayers,	I always thank my God, remembering you in my prayers,
PHM	1	5	주 예수와 및 모든 성도에 대한 네 사랑과 믿음이 있음을 들음이니	Hearing of thy love and faith, which thou hast toward the Lord Jesus, and toward all saints;	because I hear about your faith in the Lord Jesus and your love for all the saints.
PHM	1	6	이로써 네 믿음의 교제가 우리 가운데 있는 선을 알게 하고 그리스도께 미치도록 역사하느니라	That the communication of thy faith may become effectual by the acknowledging of every good thing which is in you in Christ Jesus.	I pray that your partnership in the faith may become effective as you fully acknowledge every good thing that is ours in Christ.
PHM	1	7	형제여 성도들의 마음이 너로 말미암아 평안함을 얻었으니 내가 너의 사랑으로 많은 기쁨과 위로를 얻었노라	For we have great joy and consolation in thy love, because the bowels of the saints are refreshed by thee, brother.	I take great joy and encouragement in your love, because you, brother, have refreshed the hearts of the saints.
PHM	1	8	이러므로 내가 그리스도 안에서 많은 담력을 가지고 네게 마땅한 일로 명할 수 있으나	Wherefore, though I might be much bold in Christ to enjoin thee that which is convenient,	So although in Christ I am bold enough to order you to do what is proper,
PHM	1	9	사랑을 인하여 도리어 간구하노니 나이 많은 나 바울은 지금 또 예수 그리스도를 위하여 갇힌 자 되어	Yet for love’s sake I rather beseech thee, being such an one as Paul the aged, and now also a prisoner of Jesus Christ.	I prefer to appeal on the basis of love. For I, Paul, am now aged, and a prisoner of Christ Jesus as well.
PHM	1	10	갇힌 중에서 낳은 아들 오네시모를 위하여 네게 간구하노라	I beseech thee for my son Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my bonds:	I appeal to you for my child Onesimus, whose father I became while I was in chains.
PHM	1	11	저가 전에는 네게 무익하였으나 이제는 나와 네게 유익하므로	Which in time past was to thee unprofitable, but now profitable to thee and to me:	Formerly he was useless to you, but now he has become useful both to you and to me.
PHM	1	12	네게 저를 돌려 보내노니 저는 내 심복이라	Whom I have sent again: thou therefore receive him, that is, mine own bowels:	I am sending back to you him who is my very heart.
PHM	1	13	저를 내게 머물러 두어 내 복음을 위하여 갇힌 중에서 네 대신 나를 섬기게 하고자 하나	Whom I would have retained with me, that in thy stead he might have ministered unto me in the bonds of the gospel:	I would have liked to keep him with me, so that on your behalf he could minister to me in my chains for the gospel.
PHM	1	14	다만 네 승낙이 없이는 내가 아무 것도 하기를 원치 아니하노니 이는 너의 선한 일이 억지 같이 되지 아니하고 자의로 되게 하려 함이로라	But without thy mind would I do nothing; that thy benefit should not be as it were of necessity, but willingly.	But I did not want to do anything without your consent, so that your goodness will not be out of compulsion, but by your own free will.
PHM	1	15	저가 잠시 떠나게 된 것은 이를 인하여 저를 영원히 두게 함이니	For perhaps he therefore departed for a season, that thou shouldest receive him for ever;	For perhaps this is why he was separated from you for a while, so that you might have him back for good—
PHM	1	16	이 후로는 종과 같이 아니하고 종에서 뛰어나 곧 사랑받는 형제로 둘 자라 내게 특별히 그러하거든 하물며 육신과 주 안에서 상관 된 네게랴	Not now as a servant, but above a servant, a brother beloved, specially to me, but how much more unto thee, both in the flesh, and in the Lord?	no longer as a slave, but better than a slave, as a beloved brother. He is especially beloved to me, but even more so to you, both in person and in the Lord.
PHM	1	17	그러므로 네가 나를 동무로 알진대 저를 영접하기를 내게 하듯 하고	If thou count me therefore a partner, receive him as myself.	So if you consider me a partner, receive him as you would receive me.
PHM	1	18	저가 만일 네게 불의를 하였거나 네게 진 것이 있거든 이것을 내게로 회계하라	If he hath wronged thee, or oweth thee ought, put that on mine account;	But if he has wronged you in any way or owes you anything, charge it to my account.
PHM	1	19	나 바울이 친필로 쓰노니 내가 갚으려니와 너는 이 외에 네 자신으로 내게 빚진 것을 내가 말하지 아니하노라	I Paul have written it with mine own hand, I will repay it: albeit I do not say to thee how thou owest unto me even thine own self besides.	I, Paul, write this with my own hand. I will repay it—not to mention that you owe me your very self.
PHM	1	20	오 형제여 나로 주 안에서 너를 인하여 기쁨을 얻게 하고 내 마음이 그리스도 안에서 평안하게 하라	Yea, brother, let me have joy of thee in the Lord: refresh my bowels in the Lord.	Yes, brother, let me have some benefit from you in the Lord. Refresh my heart in Christ.
PHM	1	21	나는 네가 순종함을 확신하므로 네게 썼노니 네가 나의 말보다 더 행할 줄을 아노라	Having confidence in thy obedience I wrote unto thee, knowing that thou wilt also do more than I say.	Confident of your obedience, I write to you, knowing that you will do even more than I ask.
PHM	1	22	오직 너는 나를 위하여 처소를 예비하라 너희 기도로 내가 너희에게 나아가게 하여 주시기를 바라노라	But withal prepare me also a lodging: for I trust that through your prayers I shall be given unto you.	In the meantime, prepare a guest room for me, because I hope that through your prayers I will be restored to you.
PHM	1	23	그리스도 예수 안에서 나와 함께 갇힌 자 에바브라와	There salute thee Epaphras, my fellowprisoner in Christ Jesus;	Epaphras, my fellow prisoner in Christ Jesus, sends you greetings,
PHM	1	24	또한 나의 동역자 마가, 아리스다고, 데마, 누가가 문안하느니라	Marcus, Aristarchus, Demas, Lucas, my fellowlabourers.	as do Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, and Luke, my fellow workers.
PHM	1	25	우리 주 예수 그리스도의 은혜가 너희 심령과 함께 할지어다	The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen. Written from Rome to Philemon, by Onesimus a servant.	The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.
HEB	1	1	옛적에 선지자들로 여러 부분과 여러 모양으로 우리 조상들에게 말씀하신 하나님이	God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets,	On many past occasions and in many different ways, God spoke to our fathers through the prophets.
HEB	1	2	이 모든 날 마지막에 아들로 우리에게 말씀하셨으니 이 아들을 만유의 후사로 세우시고 또 저로 말미암아 모든 세계를 지으셨느니라	Hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds;	But in these last days He has spoken to us by His Son, whom He appointed heir of all things, and through whom He made the universe.
HEB	1	3	이는 하나님의 영광의 광채시요 그 본체의 형상이시라 그의 능력의 말씀으로 만물을 붙드시며 죄를 정결케 하는 일을 하시고 높은 곳에 계신 위엄의 우편에 앉으셨느니라	Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high;	The Son is the radiance of God’s glory and the exact representation of His nature, upholding all things by His powerful word. After He had provided purification for sins, He sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high.
HEB	1	4	저가 천사보다 얼마큼 뛰어남은 저희보다 더욱 아름다운 이름을 기업으로 얻으심이니	Being made so much better than the angels, as he hath by inheritance obtained a more excellent name than they.	So He became as far superior to the angels as the name He has inherited is excellent beyond theirs.
HEB	1	5	하나님께서 어느 때에 천사 중 누구에게 네가 내 아들이라 오늘날 내가 너를 낳았다 하셨으며 또 다시 나는 그에게 아버지가 되고 그는 내게 아들이 되리라 하셨느뇨	For unto which of the angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? And again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son?	For to which of the angels did God ever say: “You are My Son; today I have become Your Father”? Or again: “I will be His Father, and He will be My Son”?
HEB	1	6	또 맏아들을 이끌어 세상에 다시 들어오게 하실 때에 하나님의 모든 천사가 저에게 경배할지어다 말씀하시며	And again, when he bringeth in the firstbegotten into the world, he saith, And let all the angels of God worship him.	And again, when God brings His firstborn into the world, He says: “Let all God’s angels worship Him.”
HEB	1	7	또 천사들에 관하여는 그는 그의 천사들을 바람으로, 그의 사역자들을 불꽃으로 삼으시느니라 하셨으되	And of the angels he saith, Who maketh his angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire.	Now about the angels He says: “He makes His angels winds, His servants flames of fire.”
HEB	1	8	아들에 관하여는 하나님이여 주의 보좌가 영영하며 주의 나라의 홀은 공평한 홀이니이다	But unto the Son he saith, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever: a sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of thy kingdom.	But about the Son He says: “Your throne, O God, endures forever and ever, and justice is the scepter of Your kingdom.
HEB	1	9	네가 의를 사랑하고 불법을 미워하였으니 그러므로 하나님 곧 너의 하나님이 즐거움의 기름을 네게 부어 네 동류들보다 승하게 하셨도다 하였고	Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated iniquity; therefore God, even thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.	You have loved righteousness and hated wickedness; therefore God, Your God, has anointed You above Your companions with the oil of joy.”
HEB	1	10	또 주여 태초에 주께서 땅의 기초를 두셨으며 하늘도 주의 손으로 지으신 바라	And, Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the foundation of the earth; and the heavens are the works of thine hands:	And: “In the beginning, O Lord, You laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the work of Your hands.
HEB	1	11	그것들은 멸망할 것이나 오직 주는 영존할 것이요 그것들은 다 옷과 같이 낡아지리니	They shall perish; but thou remainest; and they all shall wax old as doth a garment;	They will perish, but You remain; they will all wear out like a garment.
HEB	1	12	의복처럼 갈아 입을 것이요 그것들이 옷과 같이 변할 것이나 주는 여전하여 연대가 다함이 없으리라 하였으나	And as a vesture shalt thou fold them up, and they shall be changed: but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail.	You will roll them up like a robe; like a garment they will be changed; but You remain the same, and Your years will never end.”
HEB	1	13	어느 때에 천사 중 누구에게 내가 네 원수로 네 발등상 되게 하기까지 너는 내 우편에 앉았으라 하셨느뇨	But to which of the angels said he at any time, Sit on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool?	Yet to which of the angels did God ever say: “Sit at My right hand until I make Your enemies a footstool for Your feet”?
HEB	1	14	모든 천사들은 부리는 영으로서 구원 얻을 후사들을 위하여 섬기라고 보내심이 아니뇨	Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation?	Are not the angels ministering spirits sent to serve those who will inherit salvation?
HEB	2	1	그러므로 모든 들은 것을 우리가 더욱 간절히 삼갈지니 혹 흘러 떠내려 갈까 염려하노라	Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any time we should let them slip.	We must pay closer attention, therefore, to what we have heard, so that we do not drift away.
HEB	2	2	천사들로 하신 말씀이 견고하게 되어 모든 범죄함과 순종치 아니함이 공변된 보응을 받았거든	For if the word spoken by angels was stedfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompence of reward;	For if the message spoken by angels was binding, and every transgression and disobedience received its just punishment,
HEB	2	3	우리가 이같이 큰 구원을 등한히 여기면 어찌 피하리요 이 구원은 처음에 주로 말씀하신 바요 들은 자들이 우리에게 확증한 바니	How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation; which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him;	how shall we escape if we neglect such a great salvation? This salvation was first announced by the Lord, was confirmed to us by those who heard Him,
HEB	2	4	하나님도 표적들과 기사들과 여러가지 능력과 및 자기 뜻을 따라 성령의 나눠 주신 것으로써 저희와 함께 증거하셨느니라	God also bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will?	and was affirmed by God through signs, wonders, various miracles, and gifts of the Holy Spirit distributed according to His will.
HEB	2	5	하나님이 우리의 말한 바 장차 오는 세상을 천사들에게는 복종케 하심이 아니라	For unto the angels hath he not put in subjection the world to come, whereof we speak.	For it is not to angels that He has subjected the world to come, about which we are speaking.
HEB	2	6	오직 누가 어디 증거하여 가로되 사람이 무엇이관대 주께서 저를 생각하시며 인자가 무엇이관대 주께서 저를 권고하시나이까	But one in a certain place testified, saying, What is man, that thou art mindful of him? or the son of man, that thou visitest him?	But somewhere it is testified in these words: “What is man that You are mindful of him, or the son of man that You care for him?
HEB	2	7	저를 잠간 동안 천사보다 못하게 하시며 영광과 존귀로 관 씌우시며	Thou madest him a little lower than the angels; thou crownedst him with glory and honour, and didst set him over the works of thy hands:	You made him a little lower than the angels; You crowned him with glory and honor
HEB	2	8	만물을 그 발 아래 복종케 하셨느니라 하였으니 만물로 저에게 복종케 하셨은즉 복종치 않은 것이 하나도 없으나 지금 우리가 만물이 아직 저에게 복종한 것을 보지 못하고	Thou hast put all things in subjection under his feet. For in that he put all in subjection under him, he left nothing that is not put under him. But now we see not yet all things put under him.	and placed everything under his feet.” When God subjected all things to him, He left nothing outside of his control. Yet at present we do not see everything subject to him.
HEB	2	9	오직 우리가 천사들보다 잠간 동안 못하게 하심을 입은 자 곧 죽음의 고난 받으심을 인하여 영광과 존귀로 관 쓰신 예수를 보니 이를 행하심은 하나님의 은혜로 말미암아 모든 사람을 위하여 죽음을 맛보려 하심이라	But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour; that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man.	But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels, now crowned with glory and honor because He suffered death, so that by the grace of God He might taste death for everyone.
HEB	2	10	만물이 인하고 만물이 말미암은 자에게는 많은 아들을 이끌어 영광에 들어가게 하시는 일에 저희 구원의 주를 고난으로 말미암아 온전케 하심이 합당하도다	For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings.	In bringing many sons to glory, it was fitting for God, for whom and through whom all things exist, to make the author of their salvation perfect through suffering.
HEB	2	11	거룩하게 하시는 자와 거룩하게 함을 입은 자들이 다 하나에서 난지라 그러므로 형제라 부르시기를 부끄러워 아니하시고	For both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren,	For both the One who sanctifies and those who are sanctified are of the same family. So Jesus is not ashamed to call them brothers.
HEB	2	12	이르시되 내가 주의 이름을 내 형제들에게 선포하고 내가 주를 교회 중에서 찬송하리라 하셨으며	Saying, I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee.	He says: “I will proclaim Your name to My brothers; I will sing Your praises in the assembly.”
HEB	2	13	또 다시 내가 그를 의지하리라 하시고 또 다시 볼지어다 나와 및 하나님께서 내게 주신 자녀라 하셨으니	And again, I will put my trust in him. And again, Behold I and the children which God hath given me.	And again: “I will put My trust in Him.” And once again: “Here am I, and the children God has given Me.”
HEB	2	14	자녀들은 혈육에 함께 속하였으매 그도 또한 한 모양으로 혈육에 함께 속하심은 사망으로 말미암아 사망의 세력을 잡은 자 곧 마귀를 없이 하시며	Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same; that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil;	Now since the children have flesh and blood, He too shared in their humanity, so that by His death He might destroy him who holds the power of death, that is, the devil,
HEB	2	15	또 죽기를 무서워하므로 일생에 매여 종 노릇 하는 모든 자들을 놓아주려 하심이니	And deliver them who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage.	and free those who all their lives were held in slavery by their fear of death.
HEB	2	16	이는 실로 천사들을 붙들어 주려 하심이 아니요 오직 아브라함의 자손을 붙들어 주려 하심이라	For verily he took not on him the nature of angels; but he took on him the seed of Abraham.	For surely it is not the angels He helps, but the descendants of Abraham.
HEB	2	17	그러므로 저가 범사에 형제들과 같이 되심이 마땅하도다 이는 하나님의 일에 자비하고 충성된 대제사장이 되어 백성의 죄를 구속하려 하심이라	Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people.	For this reason He had to be made like His brothers in every way, so that He might become a merciful and faithful high priest in service to God, in order to make atonement for the sins of the people.
HEB	2	18	자기가 시험을 받아 고난을 당하셨은즉 시험 받는 자들을 능히 도우시느니라	For in that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is able to succour them that are tempted.	Because He Himself suffered when He was tempted, He is able to help those who are being tempted.
HEB	3	1	그러므로 함께 하늘의 부르심을 입은 거룩한 형제들아 우리의 믿는 도리의 사도시며 대제사장이신 예수를 깊이 생각하라	Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus;	Therefore, holy brothers, who share in the heavenly calling, set your focus on Jesus, the apostle and high priest whom we confess.
HEB	3	2	저가 자기를 세우신 이에게 충성하시기를 모세가 하나님의 온 집에서 한 것과 같으니	Who was faithful to him that appointed him, as also Moses was faithful in all his house.	He was faithful to the One who appointed Him, just as Moses was faithful in all God’s house.
HEB	3	3	저는 모세보다 더욱 영광을 받을 만한 것이 마치 집 지은 자가 그 집보다 더욱 존귀함 같으니라	For this man was counted worthy of more glory than Moses, inasmuch as he who hath builded the house hath more honour than the house.	For Jesus has been counted worthy of greater glory than Moses, just as the builder of a house has greater honor than the house itself.
HEB	3	4	집마다 지은 이가 있으니 만물을 지으신 이는 하나님이시라	For every house is builded by some man; but he that built all things is God.	And every house is built by someone, but God is the builder of everything.
HEB	3	5	또한 모세는 장래의 말할 것을 증거하기 위하여 하나님의 온 집에서 사환으로 충성하였고	And Moses verily was faithful in all his house, as a servant, for a testimony of those things which were to be spoken after;	Now Moses was faithful as a servant in all God’s house, testifying to what would be spoken later.
HEB	3	6	그리스도는 그의 집 맡은 아들로 충성하였으니 우리가 소망의 담대함과 자랑을 끝까지 견고히 잡으면 그의 집이라	But Christ as a son over his own house; whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end.	But Christ is faithful as the Son over God’s house. And we are His house, if we hold firmly to our confidence and the hope of which we boast.
HEB	3	7	그러므로 성령이 이르신 바와 같이 오늘날 너희가 그의 음성을 듣거든	Wherefore (as the Holy Ghost saith, To day if ye will hear his voice,	Therefore, as the Holy Spirit says: “Today, if you hear His voice,
HEB	3	8	노하심을 격동하여 광야에서 시험하던 때와 같이 너희 마음을 강퍅케 하지 말라	Harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of temptation in the wilderness:	do not harden your hearts, as you did in the rebellion, in the day of testing in the wilderness,
HEB	3	9	거기서 너희 열조가 나를 시험하여 증험하고 사십 년 동안에 나의 행사를 보았느니라	When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works forty years.	where your fathers tested and tried Me, and for forty years saw My works.
HEB	3	10	그러므로 내가 이 세대를 노하여 가로되 저희가 항상 마음이 미혹되어 내 길을 알지 못하는도다 하였고	Wherefore I was grieved with that generation, and said, They do alway err in their heart; and they have not known my ways.	Therefore I was angry with that generation, and I said, ‘Their hearts are always going astray, and they have not known My ways.’
HEB	3	11	내가 노하여 맹세한 바와 같이 저희는 내 안식에 들어오지 못하리라 하셨다 하였으니	So I sware in my wrath, They shall not enter into my rest.)	So I swore on oath in My anger, ‘They shall never enter My rest.’”
HEB	3	12	형제들아 너희가 삼가 혹 너희 중에 누가 믿지 아니하는 악심을 품고 살아 계신 하나님에게서 떨어질까 염려할 것이요	Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God.	See to it, brothers, that none of you has a wicked heart of unbelief that turns away from the living God.
HEB	3	13	오직 오늘이라 일컫는 동안에 매일 피차 권면하여 너희 중에 누구든지 죄의 유혹으로 강퍅케 됨을 면하라	But exhort one another daily, while it is called To day; lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.	But exhort one another daily, as long as it is called today, so that none of you may be hardened by sin’s deceitfulness.
HEB	3	14	우리가 시작할 때에 확실한 것을 끝까지 견고히 잡으면 그리스도와 함께 참예한 자가 되리라	For we are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our confidence stedfast unto the end;	We have come to share in Christ if we hold firmly to the end the assurance we had at first.
HEB	3	15	성경에 일렀으되 오늘날 너희가 그의 음성을 듣거든 노하심을 격동할 때와 같이 너희 마음을 강퍅케 하지 말라 하였으니	While it is said, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation.	As it has been said: “Today, if you hear His voice, do not harden your hearts, as you did in the rebellion.”
HEB	3	16	듣고 격노케 하던 자가 누구뇨 모세를 좇아 애굽에서 나온 모든 이가 아니냐	For some, when they had heard, did provoke: howbeit not all that came out of Egypt by Moses.	For who were the ones who heard and rebelled? Were they not all those Moses led out of Egypt?
HEB	3	17	또 하나님이 사십 년 동안에 누구에게 노하셨느뇨 범죄하여 그 시체가 광야에 엎드러진 자에게가 아니냐	But with whom was he grieved forty years? was it not with them that had sinned, whose carcases fell in the wilderness?	And with whom was God angry for forty years? Was it not with those who sinned, whose bodies fell in the wilderness?
HEB	3	18	또 하나님이 누구에게 맹세하사 그의 안식에 들어오지 못하리라 하셨느뇨 곧 순종치 아니하던 자에게가 아니냐	And to whom sware he that they should not enter into his rest, but to them that believed not?	And to whom did He swear that they would never enter His rest? Was it not to those who disobeyed?
HEB	3	19	이로 보건대 저희가 믿지 아니하므로 능히 들어가지 못한 것이라	So we see that they could not enter in because of unbelief.	So we see that it was because of their unbelief that they were unable to enter.
HEB	4	1	그러므로 우리는 두려워할지니 그의 안식에 들어갈 약속이 남아 있을지라도 너희 중에 혹 미치지 못할 자가 있을까 함이라	Let us therefore fear, lest, a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it.	Therefore, while the promise of entering His rest still stands, let us be careful that none of you be deemed to have fallen short of it.
HEB	4	2	저희와 같이 우리도 복음 전함을 받은 자이나 그러나 그 들은 바 말씀이 저희에게 유익되지 못한 것은 듣는 자가 믿음을 화합지 아니함이라	For unto us was the gospel preached, as well as unto them: but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it.	For we also received the good news just as they did; but the message they heard was of no value to them, since they did not share the faith of those who comprehended it.
HEB	4	3	이미 믿는 우리들은 저 안식에 들어가는도다 그 말씀하신 바와 같으니 내가 노하여 맹세한 바와 같이 저희가 내 안식에 들어오지 못하리라 하셨다 하였으나 세상을 창조할 때부터 그 일이 이루었느니라	For we which have believed do enter into rest, as he said, As I have sworn in my wrath, if they shall enter into my rest: although the works were finished from the foundation of the world.	Now we who have believed enter that rest. As for the others, it is just as God has said: “So I swore on oath in My anger, ‘They shall never enter My rest.’” And yet His works have been finished since the foundation of the world.
HEB	4	4	제칠일에 관하여는 어디 이렇게 일렀으되 하나님은 제칠일에 그의 모든 일을 쉬셨다 하였으며	For he spake in a certain place of the seventh day on this wise, And God did rest the seventh day from all his works.	For somewhere He has spoken about the seventh day in this manner: “And on the seventh day God rested from all His works.”
HEB	4	5	또 다시 거기 저희가 내 안식에 들어오지 못하리라 하였으니	And in this place again, If they shall enter into my rest.	And again, as He says in the passage above: “They shall never enter My rest.”
HEB	4	6	그러면 거기 들어갈 자들이 남아 있거니와 복음 전함을 먼저 받은 자들은 순종치 아니함을 인하여 들어가지 못하였으므로	Seeing therefore it remaineth that some must enter therein, and they to whom it was first preached entered not in because of unbelief:	Since, then, it remains for some to enter His rest, and since those who formerly heard the good news did not enter because of their disobedience,
HEB	4	7	오랜 후에 다윗의 글에 다시 어느 날을 정하여 오늘날이라고 미리 이같이 일렀으되 오늘날 너희가 그의 음성을 듣거든 너희 마음을 강퍅케 말라 하였나니	Again, he limiteth a certain day, saying in David, To day, after so long a time; as it is said, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.	God again designated a certain day as “Today,” when a long time later He spoke through David as was just stated: “Today, if you hear His voice, do not harden your hearts.”
HEB	4	8	만일 여호수아가 저희에게 안식을 주었더면 그 후에 다른 날을 말씀하지 아니하셨으리라	For if Jesus had given them rest, then would he not afterward have spoken of another day.	For if Joshua had given them rest, God would not have spoken later about another day.
HEB	4	9	그런즉 안식할 때가 하나님의 백성에게 남아 있도다	There remaineth therefore a rest to the people of God.	There remains, then, a Sabbath rest for the people of God.
HEB	4	10	이미 그의 안식에 들어간 자는 하나님이 자기 일을 쉬심과 같이 자기 일을 쉬느니라	For he that is entered into his rest, he also hath ceased from his own works, as God did from his.	For whoever enters God’s rest also rests from his own work, just as God did from His.
HEB	4	11	그러므로 우리가 저 안식에 들어가기를 힘쓸지니 이는 누구든지 저 순종치 아니하는 본에 빠지지 않게 하려 함이라	Let us labour therefore to enter into that rest, lest any man fall after the same example of unbelief.	Let us, therefore, make every effort to enter that rest, so that no one will fall by following the same pattern of disobedience.
HEB	4	12	하나님의 말씀은 살았고 운동력이 있어 죄우에 날선 어떤 검보다도 예리하여 혼과 영과 및 관절과 골수를 찔러 쪼개기까지 하며 또 마음의 생각과 뜻을 감찰하나니	For the word of God is quick, and powerful, and sharper than any twoedged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.	For the word of God is living and active. Sharper than any double-edged sword, it pierces even to dividing soul and spirit, joints and marrow. It judges the thoughts and intentions of the heart.
HEB	4	13	지으신 것이 하나라도 그 앞에 나타나지 않음이 없고 오직 만물이 우리를 상관하시는 자의 눈 앞에 벌거벗은 것 같이 드러나느니라	Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight: but all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do.	Nothing in all creation is hidden from God’s sight; everything is uncovered and exposed before the eyes of Him to whom we must give account.
HEB	4	14	그러므로 우리에게 큰 대제사장이 있으니 승천하신 자 곧 하나님 아들 예수시라 우리가 믿는 도리를 굳게 잡을지어다	Seeing then that we have a great high priest, that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession.	Therefore, since we have a great high priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold firmly to what we profess.
HEB	4	15	우리에게 있는 대제사장은 우리 연약함을 체휼하지 아니하는 자가 아니요 모든 일에 우리와 한결 같이 시험을 받은 자로되 죄는 없으시니라	For we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin.	For we do not have a high priest who is unable to sympathize with our weaknesses, but we have one who was tempted in every way that we are, yet was without sin.
HEB	4	16	그러므로 우리가 긍휼하심을 받고 때를 따라 돕는 은혜를 얻기 위하여 은혜의 보좌 앞에 담대히 나아갈 것이니라	Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.	Let us then approach the throne of grace with confidence, so that we may receive mercy and find grace to help us in our time of need.
HEB	5	1	대제사장마다 사람 가운데서 취한 자이므로 하나님께 속한 일에 사람을 위하여 예물과 속죄하는 제사를 드리게 하나니	For every high priest taken from among men is ordained for men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins:	Every high priest is appointed from among men to represent them in matters relating to God, to offer gifts and sacrifices for sins.
HEB	5	2	저가 무식하고 미혹한 자를 능히 용납할 수 있는 것은 자기도 연약에 싸여 있음이니라	Who can have compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way; for that he himself also is compassed with infirmity.	He is able to deal gently with those who are ignorant and misguided, since he himself is beset by weakness.
HEB	5	3	이러므로 백성을 위하여 속죄제를 드림과 같이 또한 자기를 위하여 드리는 것이 마땅하니라	And by reason hereof he ought, as for the people, so also for himself, to offer for sins.	That is why he is obligated to offer sacrifices for his own sins, as well as for the sins of the people.
HEB	5	4	이 존귀는 아무나 스스로 취하지 못하고 오직 아론과 같이 하나님의 부르심을 입은 자라야 할 것이니라	And no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.	No one takes this honor upon himself; he must be called by God, just as Aaron was.
HEB	5	5	또한 이와 같이 그리스도께서 대제사장 되심도 스스로 영광을 취하심이 아니요 오직 말씀하신 이가 저더러 이르시되 너는 내 아들이니 오늘날 내가 너를 낳았다 하셨고	So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an high priest; but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee.	So also Christ did not take upon Himself the glory of becoming a high priest, but He was called by the One who said to Him: “You are My Son; today I have become Your Father.”
HEB	5	6	또한 이와 같이 다른 데 말씀하시되 네가 영원히 멜기세덱의 반차를 좇는 제사장이라 하셨으니	As he saith also in another place, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec.	And in another passage God says: “You are a priest forever in the order of Melchizedek.”
HEB	5	7	그는 육체에 계실 때에 자기를 죽음에서 능히 구원하실 이에게 심한 통곡과 눈물로 간구와 소원을 올렸고 그의 경외하심을 인하여 들으심을 얻었느니라	Who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared;	During the days of Jesus’ earthly life, He offered up prayers and petitions with loud cries and tears to the One who could save Him from death, and He was heard because of His reverence.
HEB	5	8	그가 아들이시라도 받으신 고난으로 순종함을 배워서	Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered;	Although He was a Son, He learned obedience from what He suffered.
HEB	5	9	온전하게 되었은즉 자기를 순종하는 모든 자에게 영원한 구원의 근원이 되시고	And being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him;	And having been made perfect, He became the source of eternal salvation to all who obey Him
HEB	5	10	하나님께 멜기세덱의 반차를 좇은 대제사장이라 칭하심을 받았느니라	Called of God an high priest after the order of Melchisedec.	and was designated by God as high priest in the order of Melchizedek.
HEB	5	11	멜기세덱에 관하여는 우리가 할 말이 많으나 너희의 듣는 것이 둔하므로 해석하기 어려우니라	Of whom we have many things to say, and hard to be uttered, seeing ye are dull of hearing.	We have much to say about this, but it is hard to explain, because you are dull of hearing.
HEB	5	12	때가 오래므로 너희가 마땅히 선생이 될 터인데 너희가 다시 하나님의 말씀의 초보가 무엇인지 누구에게 가르침을 받아야 할 것이니 젖이나 먹고 단단한 식물을 못 먹을 자가 되었도다	For when for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one teach you again which be the first principles of the oracles of God; and are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat.	Although by this time you ought to be teachers, you need someone to reteach you the basic principles of God’s word. You need milk, not solid food!
HEB	5	13	대저 젖을 먹는 자마다 어린 아이니 의의 말씀을 경험하지 못한 자요	For every one that useth milk is unskilful in the word of righteousness: for he is a babe.	For everyone who lives on milk is still an infant, inexperienced in the message of righteousness.
HEB	5	14	단단한 식물은 장성한 자의 것이니 저희는 지각을 사용하므로 연단을 받아 선악을 분변하는 자들이니라	But strong meat belongeth to them that are of full age, even those who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil.	But solid food is for the mature, who by constant use have trained their senses to distinguish good from evil.
HEB	6	1	그러므로 우리가 그리스도 도의 초보를 버리고 죽은 행실을 회개함과 하나님께 대한 신앙과	Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection; not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God,	Therefore let us leave the elementary teachings about Christ and go on to maturity, not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith in God,
HEB	6	2	침례들과 안수와 죽은 자의 부활과 영원한 심판에 관한 교훈의 터를 다시 닦지 말고 완전한 데 나아갈지니라	Of the doctrine of baptisms, and of laying on of hands, and of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment.	instruction about baptisms, the laying on of hands, the resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgment.
HEB	6	3	하나님께서 허락하시면 우리가 이것을 하리라	And this will we do, if God permit.	And this we will do, if God permits.
HEB	6	4	한번 비췸을 얻고 하늘의 은사를 맛보고 성령에 참예한 바 되고	For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost,	It is impossible for those who have once been enlightened, who have tasted the heavenly gift, who have shared in the Holy Spirit,
HEB	6	5	하나님의 선한 말씀과 내세의 능력을 맛보고	And have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come,	who have tasted the goodness of the word of God and the powers of the coming age—
HEB	6	6	타락한 자들은 다시 새롭게 하여 회개케 할 수 없나니 이는 자기가 하나님의 아들을 다시 십자가에 못 박아 현저히 욕을 보임이라	If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame.	and then have fallen away—to be restored to repentance, because they themselves are crucifying the Son of God all over again and subjecting Him to open shame.
HEB	6	7	땅이 그 위에 자주 내리는 비를 흡수하여 밭 가는 자들의 쓰기에 합당한 채소를 내면 하나님께 복을 받고	For the earth which drinketh in the rain that cometh oft upon it, and bringeth forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receiveth blessing from God:	For land that drinks in the rain often falling on it and that produces a crop useful to those for whom it is tended receives the blessing of God.
HEB	6	8	만일 가시와 엉겅퀴를 내면 버림을 당하고 저주함에 가까워 그 마지막은 불사름이 되리라	But that which beareth thorns and briers is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing; whose end is to be burned.	But land that produces thorns and thistles is worthless, and its curse is imminent. In the end it will be burned.
HEB	6	9	사랑하는 자들아 우리가 이같이 말하나 너희에게는 이보다 나은 것과 구원에 가까운 것을 확신하노라	But, beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany salvation, though we thus speak.	Even though we speak like this, beloved, we are convinced of better things in your case—things that accompany salvation.
HEB	6	10	하나님이 불의치 아니하사 너희 행위와 그의 이름을 위하여 나타낸 사랑으로 이미 성도를 섬긴 것과 이제도 섬기는 것을 잊어버리지 아니하시느니라	For God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labour of love, which ye have shewed toward his name, in that ye have ministered to the saints, and do minister.	For God is not unjust. He will not forget your work and the love you have shown for His name as you have ministered to the saints and continue to do so.
HEB	6	11	우리가 간절히 원하는 것은 너희 각 사람이 동일한 부지런을 나타내어 끝까지 소망의 풍성함에 이르러	And we desire that every one of you do shew the same diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the end:	We want each of you to show this same diligence to the very end, in order to make your hope sure.
HEB	6	12	게으르지 아니하고 믿음과 오래 참음으로 말미암아 약속들을 기업으로 받는 자들을 본받는 자 되게 하려는 것이니라	That ye be not slothful, but followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the promises.	Then you will not be sluggish, but will imitate those who through faith and patience inherit what has been promised.
HEB	6	13	하나님이 아브라함에게 약속하실 때에 가리켜 맹세할 자가 자기보다 더 큰 이가 없으므로 자기를 가리켜 맹세하여	For when God made promise to Abraham, because he could swear by no greater, he sware by himself,	When God made His promise to Abraham, since He had no one greater to swear by, He swore by Himself,
HEB	6	14	가라사대 내가 반드시 너를 복주고 복주며 너를 번성케 하고 번성케 하리라 하셨더니	Saying, Surely blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee.	saying, “I will surely bless you and multiply your descendants.”
HEB	6	15	저가 이같이 오래 참아 약속을 받았느니라	And so, after he had patiently endured, he obtained the promise.	And so Abraham, after waiting patiently, obtained the promise.
HEB	6	16	사람들은 자기보다 더 큰 자를 가리켜 맹세하나니 맹세는 저희 모든 다투는 일에 최후 확정이니라	For men verily swear by the greater: and an oath for confirmation is to them an end of all strife.	Men swear by someone greater than themselves, and their oath serves as a confirmation to end all argument.
HEB	6	17	하나님은 약속을 기업으로 받는 자들에게 그 뜻이 변치 아니함을 충분히 나타내시려고 그 일에 맹세로 보증하셨나니	Wherein God, willing more abundantly to shew unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath:	So when God wanted to make the unchanging nature of His purpose very clear to the heirs of the promise, He guaranteed it with an oath.
HEB	6	18	이는 하나님이 거짓말을 하실 수 없는 이 두 가지 변치 못할 사실을 인하여 앞에 있는 소망을 얻으려고 피하여 가는 우리로 큰 안위를 받게 하려 하심이라	That by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us:	Thus by two unchangeable things in which it is impossible for God to lie, we who have fled to take hold of the hope set before us may be strongly encouraged.
HEB	6	19	우리가 이 소망이 있는 것은 영혼의 닻 같아서 튼튼하고 견고하여 휘장 안에 들어가나니	Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfast, and which entereth into that within the veil;	We have this hope as an anchor for the soul, firm and secure. It enters the inner sanctuary behind the curtain,
HEB	6	20	그리로 앞서 가신 예수께서 멜기세덱의 반차를 좇아 영원히 대제사장이 되어 우리를 위하여 들어가셨느니라	Whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, made an high priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec.	where Jesus our forerunner has entered on our behalf. He has become a high priest forever in the order of Melchizedek.
HEB	7	1	이 멜기세덱은 살렘 왕이요 지극히 높으신 하나님의 제사장이라 여러 임금을 쳐서 죽이고 돌아오는 아브라함을 만나 복을 빈 자라	For this Melchisedec, king of Salem, priest of the most high God, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, and blessed him;	This Melchizedek was king of Salem and priest of God Most High. He met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings and blessed him,
HEB	7	2	아브라함이 일체 십분의 일을 그에게 나눠 주니라 그 이름을 번역한즉 첫째 의의 왕이요 또 살렘 왕이니 곧 평강의 왕이요	To whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all; first being by interpretation King of righteousness, and after that also King of Salem, which is, King of peace;	and Abraham apportioned to him a tenth of everything. First, his name means “king of righteousness.” Then also, “king of Salem” means “king of peace.”
HEB	7	3	아비도 없고 어미도 없고 족보도 없고 시작한 날도 없고 생명의 끝도 없어 하나님 아들과 방불하여 항상 제사장으로 있느니라	Without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life; but made like unto the Son of God; abideth a priest continually.	Without father or mother or genealogy, without beginning of days or end of life, like the Son of God, he remains a priest for all time.
HEB	7	4	이 사람의 어떻게 높은 것을 생각하라 조상 아브라함이 노략물 중 좋은 것으로 십분의 일을 저에게 주었느니라	Now consider how great this man was, unto whom even the patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of the spoils.	Consider how great Melchizedek was: Even the patriarch Abraham gave him a tenth of the plunder.
HEB	7	5	레위의 아들들 가운데 제사장의 직분을 받는 자들이 율법을 좇아 아브라함의 허리에서 난 자라도 자기 형제인 백성에게서 십분의 일을 취하라는 명령을 가졌으나	And verily they that are of the sons of Levi, who receive the office of the priesthood, have a commandment to take tithes of the people according to the law, that is, of their brethren, though they come out of the loins of Abraham:	Now the law commands the sons of Levi who become priests to collect a tenth from the people—that is, from their brothers—though they too are descended from Abraham.
HEB	7	6	레위 족보에 들지 아니한 멜기세덱은 아브라함에게서 십분의 일을 취하고 그 얻은 자를 위하여 복을 빌었나니	But he whose descent is not counted from them received tithes of Abraham, and blessed him that had the promises.	But Melchizedek, who did not trace his descent from Levi, collected a tenth from Abraham and blessed him who had the promises.
HEB	7	7	폐일언하고 낮은 자가 높은 자에게 복 빎을 받느니라	And without all contradiction the less is blessed of the better.	And indisputably, the lesser is blessed by the greater.
HEB	7	8	또 여기는 죽을 자들이 십분의 일을 받으나 저기는 산다고 증거를 얻은 자가 받았느니라	And here men that die receive tithes; but there he receiveth them, of whom it is witnessed that he liveth.	In the case of the Levites, mortal men collect the tenth; but in the case of Melchizedek, it is affirmed that he lives on.
HEB	7	9	또한 십분의 일을 받는 레위도 아브라함으로 말미암아 십분의 일을 바쳤다 할 수 있나니	And as I may so say, Levi also, who receiveth tithes, payed tithes in Abraham.	And so to speak, Levi, who collects the tenth, paid the tenth through Abraham.
HEB	7	10	이는 멜기세덱이 아브라함을 만날 때에 레위는 아직 자기 조상의 허리에 있었음이니라	For he was yet in the loins of his father, when Melchisedec met him.	For when Melchizedek met Abraham, Levi was still in the loin of his ancestor.
HEB	7	11	레위 계통의 제사 직분으로 말미암아 온전함을 얻을 수 있었으면 (백성이 그 아래서 율법을 받았으니) 어찌하여 아론의 반차를 좇지 않고 멜기세덱의 반차를 좇는 별다른 한 제사장을 세울 필요가 있느뇨	If therefore perfection were by the Levitical priesthood, (for under it the people received the law,) what further need was there that another priest should rise after the order of Melchisedec, and not be called after the order of Aaron?	Now if perfection could have been attained through the Levitical priesthood (for on this basis the people received the law), why was there still need for another priest to appear—one in the order of Melchizedek and not in the order of Aaron?
HEB	7	12	제사 직분이 변역한즉 율법도 반드시 변역하리니	For the priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the law.	For when the priesthood is changed, the law must be changed as well.
HEB	7	13	이것은 한 사람도 제단 일을 받들지 않는 지파에 속한 자를 가리켜 말한 것이라	For he of whom these things are spoken pertaineth to another tribe, of which no man gave attendance at the altar.	He of whom these things are said belonged to a different tribe, from which no one has ever served at the altar.
HEB	7	14	우리 주께서 유다로 좇아 나신 것이 분명하도다 이 지파에는 모세가 제사장들에 관하여 말한 것이 하나도 없고	For it is evident that our Lord sprang out of Juda; of which tribe Moses spake nothing concerning priesthood.	For it is clear that our Lord descended from Judah, a tribe as to which Moses said nothing about priests.
HEB	7	15	멜기세덱과 같은 별다른 한 제사장이 일어난 것을 보니 더욱 분명하도다	And it is yet far more evident: for that after the similitude of Melchisedec there ariseth another priest,	And this point is even more clear if another priest like Melchizedek appears,
HEB	7	16	그는 육체에 상관된 계명의 법을 좇지 아니하고 오직 무궁한 생명의 능력을 좇아 된 것이니	Who is made, not after the law of a carnal commandment, but after the power of an endless life.	one who has become a priest not by a law of succession, but by the power of an indestructible life.
HEB	7	17	증거하기를 네가 영원히 멜기세덱의 반차를 좇는 제사장이라 하였도다	For he testifieth, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec.	For it is testified: “You are a priest forever in the order of Melchizedek.”
HEB	7	18	전엣 계명이 연약하며 무익하므로 폐하고	For there is verily a disannulling of the commandment going before for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof.	So the former commandment is set aside because it was weak and useless
HEB	7	19	(율법은 아무 것도 온전케 못할지라) 이에 더 좋은 소망이 생기니 이것으로 우리가 하나님께 가까이 가느니라	For the law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did; by the which we draw nigh unto God.	(for the law made nothing perfect), and a better hope is introduced, by which we draw near to God.
HEB	7	20	또 예수께서 제사장 된 것은 맹세 없이 된 것이 아니니	And inasmuch as not without an oath he was made priest:	And none of this happened without an oath. For others became priests without an oath,
HEB	7	21	(저희는 맹세 없이 제사장이 되었으되 오직 예수는 자기에게 말씀하신 자로 말미암아 맹세로 되신 것이라 주께서 맹세하시고 뉘우치지 아니하시리니 네가 영원히 제사장이라 하셨도다)	(For those priests were made without an oath; but this with an oath by him that said unto him, The Lord sware and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec:)	but Jesus became a priest with an oath by the One who said to Him: “The Lord has sworn and will not change His mind: ‘You are a priest forever.’”
HEB	7	22	이와 같이 예수는 더 좋은 언약의 보증이 되셨느니라	By so much was Jesus made a surety of a better testament.	Because of this oath, Jesus has become the guarantee of a better covenant.
HEB	7	23	저희 제사장 된 자의 수효가 많은 것은 죽음을 인하여 항상 있지 못함이로되	And they truly were many priests, because they were not suffered to continue by reason of death:	Now there have been many other priests, since death prevented them from continuing in office.
HEB	7	24	예수는 영원히 계시므로 그 제사 직분도 갈리지 아니하나니	But this man, because he continueth ever, hath an unchangeable priesthood.	But because Jesus lives forever, He has a permanent priesthood.
HEB	7	25	그러므로 자기를 힘입어 하나님께 나아가는 자들을 온전히 구원하실 수 있으니 이는 그가 항상 살아서 저희를 위하여 간구하심이니라	Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them.	Therefore He is able to save completely those who draw near to God through Him, since He always lives to intercede for them.
HEB	7	26	이러한 대제사장은 우리에게 합당하니 거룩하고 악이 없고 더러움이 없고 죄인에게서 떠나 계시고 하늘보다 높이 되신 자라	For such an high priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens;	Such a high priest truly befits us—One who is holy, innocent, undefiled, set apart from sinners, and exalted above the heavens.
HEB	7	27	저가 저 대제사장들이 먼저 자기 죄를 위하고 다음에 백성의 죄를 위하여 날마다 제사 드리는 것과 같이 할 필요가 없으니 이는 저가 단번에 자기를 드려 이루셨음이니라	Who needeth not daily, as those high priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people’s: for this he did once, when he offered up himself.	Unlike the other high priests, He does not need to offer daily sacrifices, first for His own sins and then for the sins of the people; He sacrificed for sin once for all when He offered up Himself.
HEB	7	28	율법은 약점을 가진 사람들을 제사장으로 세웠거니와 율법 후에 하신 맹세의 말씀은 영원히 온전케 되신 아들을 세우셨느니라	For the law maketh men high priests which have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the Son, who is consecrated for evermore.	For the law appoints as high priests men who are weak; but the oath, which came after the law, appointed the Son, who has been made perfect forever.
HEB	8	1	이제 하는 말의 중요한 것은 이러한 대제사장이 우리에게 있는 것이라 그가 하늘에서 위엄의 보좌 우편에 앉으셨으니	Now of the things which we have spoken this is the sum: We have such an high priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens;	The point of what we are saying is this: We do have such a high priest, who sat down at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in heaven,
HEB	8	2	성소와 참 장막에 부리는 자라 이 장막은 주께서 베푸신 것이요 사람이 한 것이 아니니라	A minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man.	and who ministers in the sanctuary and true tabernacle set up by the Lord, not by man.
HEB	8	3	대제사장마다 예물과 제사 드림을 위하여 세운 자니 이러므로 저도 무슨 드릴 것이 있어야 할지니라	For every high priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices: wherefore it is of necessity that this man have somewhat also to offer.	And since every high priest is appointed to offer both gifts and sacrifices, it was necessary for this One also to have something to offer.
HEB	8	4	예수께서 만일 땅에 계셨더면 제사장이 되지 아니하셨을 것이니 이는 율법을 좇아 예물을 드리는 제사장이 있음이라	For if he were on earth, he should not be a priest, seeing that there are priests that offer gifts according to the law:	Now if He were on earth, He would not be a priest, since there are already priests who offer gifts according to the law.
HEB	8	5	저희가 섬기는 것은 하늘에 있는 것의 모형과 그림자라 모세가 장막을 지으려 할 때에 지시하심을 얻음과 같으니 가라사대 삼가 모든 것을 산에서 네게 보이던 본을 좇아 지으라 하셨느니라	Who serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, as Moses was admonished of God when he was about to make the tabernacle: for, See, saith he, that thou make all things according to the pattern shewed to thee in the mount.	The place where they serve is a copy and shadow of what is in heaven. This is why Moses was warned when he was about to build the tabernacle: “See to it that you make everything according to the pattern shown you on the mountain.”
HEB	8	6	그러나 이제 그가 더 아름다운 직분을 얻으셨으니 이는 더 좋은 약속으로 세우신 더 좋은 언약의 중보시라	But now hath he obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also he is the mediator of a better covenant, which was established upon better promises.	Now, however, Jesus has received a much more excellent ministry, just as the covenant He mediates is better and is founded on better promises.
HEB	8	7	저 첫 언약이 무흠하였더면 둘째 것을 요구할 일이 없었으려니와	For if that first covenant had been faultless, then should no place have been sought for the second.	For if that first covenant had been without fault, no place would have been sought for a second.
HEB	8	8	저희를 허물하여 일렀으되 주께서 가라사대 볼지어다 날이 이르리니 내가 이스라엘 집과 유다 집으로 새 언약을 세우리라	For finding fault with them, he saith, Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, when I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah:	But God found fault with the people and said: “Behold, the days are coming, declares the Lord, when I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah.
HEB	8	9	또 주께서 가라사대 내가 저희 열조들의 손을 잡고 애굽 땅에서 인도하여 내던 날에 저희와 세운 언약과 같지 아니하도다 저희는 내 언약 안에 머물러 있지 아니하므로 내가 저희를 돌아보지 아니하였노라	Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt; because they continued not in my covenant, and I regarded them not, saith the Lord.	It will not be like the covenant I made with their fathers when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt, because they did not abide by My covenant, and I disregarded them, declares the Lord.
HEB	8	10	또 주께서 가라사대 그 날 후에 내가 이스라엘 집으로 세울 언약이 이것이니 내 법을 저희 생각에 두고 저희 마음에 이것을 기록하리라 나는 저희에게 하나님이 되고 저희는 내게 백성이 되리라	For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, saith the Lord; I will put my laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts: and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people:	For this is the covenant I will make with the house of Israel after those days, declares the Lord. I will put My laws in their minds and inscribe them on their hearts. And I will be their God, and they will be My people.
HEB	8	11	또 각각 자기 나라 사람과 각각 자기 형제를 가르쳐 이르기를 주를 알라 하지 아니할 것은 저희가 작은 자로부터 큰 자까지 다 나를 앎이니라	And they shall not teach every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for all shall know me, from the least to the greatest.	No longer will each one teach his neighbor or his brother, saying, ‘Know the Lord,’ because they will all know Me, from the least of them to the greatest.
HEB	8	12	내가 저희 불의를 긍휼히 여기고 저희 죄를 다시 기억하지 아니하리라 하셨느니라	For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more.	For I will forgive their iniquities and will remember their sins no more.”
HEB	8	13	새 언약이라 말씀하셨으매 첫 것은 낡아지게 하신 것이니 낡아지고 쇠하는 것은 없어져 가는 것이니라	In that he saith, A new covenant, he hath made the first old. Now that which decayeth and waxeth old is ready to vanish away.	By speaking of a new covenant, He has made the first one obsolete; and what is obsolete and aging will soon disappear.
HEB	9	1	첫 언약에도 섬기는 예법과 세상에 속한 성소가 있더라	Then verily the first covenant had also ordinances of divine service, and a worldly sanctuary.	Now the first covenant had regulations for worship and also an earthly sanctuary.
HEB	9	2	예비한 첫 장막이 있고 그 안에 등대와 상과 진설병이 있으니 이는 성소라 일컫고	For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein was the candlestick, and the table, and the shewbread; which is called the sanctuary.	A tabernacle was prepared. In its first room were the lampstand, the table, and the consecrated bread. This was called the Holy Place.
HEB	9	3	또 둘째 휘장 뒤에 있는 장막을 지성소라 일컫나니	And after the second veil, the tabernacle which is called the Holiest of all;	Behind the second curtain was a room called the Most Holy Place,
HEB	9	4	금향로와 사면을 금으로 싼 언약궤가 있고 그 안에 만나를 담은 금항아리와 아론의 싹 난 지팡이와 언약의 비석들이 있고	Which had the golden censer, and the ark of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that had manna, and Aaron’s rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant;	containing the golden altar of incense and the gold-covered ark of the covenant. Inside the ark were the gold jar of manna, Aaron’s staff that had budded, and the stone tablets of the covenant.
HEB	9	5	그 위에 속죄소를 덮는 영광의 그룹들이 있으니 이것들에 관하여는 이제 낱낱이 말할 수 없노라	And over it the cherubims of glory shadowing the mercyseat; of which we cannot now speak particularly.	Above the ark were the cherubim of glory, overshadowing the mercy seat. But we cannot discuss these things in detail now.
HEB	9	6	이 모든 것을 이같이 예비하였으니 제사장들이 항상 첫 장막에 들어가 섬기는 예를 행하고	Now when these things were thus ordained, the priests went always into the first tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God.	When everything had been prepared in this way, the priests entered regularly into the first room to perform their sacred duties.
HEB	9	7	오직 둘째 장막은 대제사장이 홀로 일 년 일 차씩 들어가되 피 없이는 아니하나니 이 피는 자기와 백성의 허물을 위하여 드리는 것이라	But into the second went the high priest alone once every year, not without blood, which he offered for himself, and for the errors of the people:	But only the high priest entered the second room, and then only once a year, and never without blood, which he offered for himself and for the sins the people had committed in ignorance.
HEB	9	8	성령이 이로써 보이신 것은 첫 장막이 서 있을 동안에 성소에 들어가는 길이 아직 나타나지 아니한 것이라	The Holy Ghost this signifying, that the way into the holiest of all was not yet made manifest, while as the first tabernacle was yet standing:	By this arrangement the Holy Spirit was showing that the way into the Most Holy Place had not yet been disclosed as long as the first tabernacle was still standing.
HEB	9	9	이 장막은 현재까지의 비유니 이에 의지하여 드리는 예물과 제사가 섬기는 자로 그 양심상으로 온전케 할 수 없나니	Which was a figure for the time then present, in which were offered both gifts and sacrifices, that could not make him that did the service perfect, as pertaining to the conscience;	It is an illustration for the present time, because the gifts and sacrifices being offered were unable to cleanse the conscience of the worshiper.
HEB	9	10	이런 것은 먹고 마시는 것과 여러 가지 씻는 것과 함께 육체의 예법만 되어 개혁할 때까지 맡겨 둔 것이니라	Which stood only in meats and drinks, and divers washings, and carnal ordinances, imposed on them until the time of reformation.	They consist only in food and drink and special washings—external regulations imposed until the time of reform.
HEB	9	11	그리스도께서 장래 좋은 일의 대제사장으로 오사 손으로 짓지 아니한, 곧 이 창조에 속하지 아니한 더 크고 온전한 장막으로 말미암아	But Christ being come an high priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this building;	But when Christ came as high priest of the good things that have come, He went through the greater and more perfect tabernacle that is not made by hands and is not a part of this creation.
HEB	9	12	염소와 송아지의 피로 아니하고 오직 자기 피로 영원한 속죄를 이루사 단번에 성소에 들어가셨느니라	Neither by the blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us.	He did not enter by the blood of goats and calves, but He entered the Most Holy Place once for all by His own blood, thus securing eternal redemption.
HEB	9	13	염소와 황소의 피와 및 암송아지의 재로 부정한 자에게 뿌려 그 육체를 정결케 하여 거룩케 하거든	For if the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh:	For if the blood of goats and bulls and the ashes of a heifer sprinkled on those who are ceremonially unclean sanctify them so that their bodies are clean,
HEB	9	14	하물며 영원하신 성령으로 말미암아 흠 없는 자기를 하나님께 드린 그리스도의 피가 어찌 너희 양심으로 죽은 행실에서 깨끗하게 하고 살아계신 하나님을 섬기게 못하겠느뇨	How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living God?	how much more will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered Himself unblemished to God, purify our consciences from works of death, so that we may serve the living God!
HEB	9	15	이를 인하여 그는 새 언약의 중보니 이는 첫 언약 때에 범한 죄를 속하려고 죽으사 부르심을 입은 자로 하여금 영원한 기업의 약속을 얻게 하려 하심이니라	And for this cause he is the mediator of the new testament, that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first testament, they which are called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance.	Therefore Christ is the mediator of a new covenant, so that those who are called may receive the promised eternal inheritance, now that He has died to redeem them from the transgressions committed under the first covenant.
HEB	9	16	유언은 유언한 자가 죽어야 되나니	For where a testament is, there must also of necessity be the death of the testator.	In the case of a will, it is necessary to establish the death of the one who made it,
HEB	9	17	유언은 그 사람이 죽은 후에야 견고한즉 유언한 자가 살았을 때에는 언제든지 효력이 없느니라	For a testament is of force after men are dead: otherwise it is of no strength at all while the testator liveth.	because a will does not take effect until the one who made it has died; it cannot be executed while he is still alive.
HEB	9	18	이러므로 첫 언약도 피 없이 세운 것이 아니니	Whereupon neither the first testament was dedicated without blood.	That is why even the first covenant was not put into effect without blood.
HEB	9	19	모세가 율법대로 모든 계명을 온 백성에게 말한 후에 송아지와 염소의 피와 및 물과 붉은 양털과 우슬초를 취하여 그 책과 온 백성에게 뿌려	For when Moses had spoken every precept to all the people according to the law, he took the blood of calves and of goats, with water, and scarlet wool, and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book, and all the people,	For when Moses had proclaimed every commandment of the law to all the people, he took the blood of calves and goats, along with water, scarlet wool, and hyssop, and sprinkled the scroll and all the people,
HEB	9	20	이르되 이는 하나님이 너희에게 명하신 언약의 피라 하고	Saying, This is the blood of the testament which God hath enjoined unto you.	saying, “This is the blood of the covenant, which God has commanded you to keep.”
HEB	9	21	또한 이와 같이 피로써 장막과 섬기는 일에 쓰는 모든 그릇에 뿌렸느니라	Moreover he sprinkled with blood both the tabernacle, and all the vessels of the ministry.	In the same way, he sprinkled with blood the tabernacle and all the vessels used in worship.
HEB	9	22	율법을 좇아 거의 모든 물건이 피로써 정결케 되나니 피흘림이 없은즉 사함이 없느니라	And almost all things are by the law purged with blood; and without shedding of blood is no remission.	According to the law, in fact, nearly everything must be purified with blood, and without the shedding of blood there is no forgiveness.
HEB	9	23	그러므로 하늘에 있는 것들의 모형은 이런 것들로써 정결케 할 필요가 있었으나 하늘에 있는 그것들은 이런 것들보다 더 좋은 제물로 할지니라	It was therefore necessary that the patterns of things in the heavens should be purified with these; but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these.	So it was necessary for the copies of the heavenly things to be purified with these sacrifices, but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these.
HEB	9	24	그리스도께서는 참 것의 그림자인 손으로 만든 성소에 들어가지 아니하시고 오직 참 하늘에 들어가사 이제 우리를 위하여 하나님 앞에 나타나시고	For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true; but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us:	For Christ did not enter a man-made copy of the true sanctuary, but He entered heaven itself, now to appear on our behalf in the presence of God.
HEB	9	25	대제사장이 해마다 다른 것의 피로써 성소에 들어가는 것 같이 자주 자기를 드리려고 아니하실지니	Nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the high priest entereth into the holy place every year with blood of others;	Nor did He enter heaven to offer Himself again and again, as the high priest enters the Most Holy Place every year with blood that is not his own.
HEB	9	26	그리하면 그가 세상을 창조할 때부터 자주 고난을 받았어야 할 것이로되 이제 자기를 단번에 제사로 드려 죄를 없게 하시려고 세상 끝에 나타나셨느니라	For then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the world: but now once in the end of the world hath he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.	Otherwise, Christ would have had to suffer repeatedly since the foundation of the world. But now He has appeared once for all at the end of the ages to do away with sin by the sacrifice of Himself.
HEB	9	27	한번 죽는 것은 사람에게 정하신 것이요 그 후에는 심판이 있으리니	And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment:	Just as man is appointed to die once, and after that to face judgment,
HEB	9	28	이와 같이 그리스도도 많은 사람의 죄를 담당하시려고 단번에 드리신 바 되셨고 구원에 이르게 하기 위하여 죄와 상관 없이 자기를 바라는 자들에게 두 번째 나타나시리라	So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many; and unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation.	so also Christ was offered once to bear the sins of many; and He will appear a second time, not to bear sin, but to bring salvation to those who eagerly await Him.
HEB	10	1	율법은 장차 오는 좋은 일의 그림자요 참 형상이 아니므로 해마다 늘 드리는 바 같은 제사로는 나아오는 자들을 언제든지 온전케 할 수 없느니라	For the law having a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of the things, can never with those sacrifices which they offered year by year continually make the comers thereunto perfect.	For the law is only a shadow of the good things to come, not the realities themselves. It can never, by the same sacrifices offered year after year, make perfect those who draw near to worship.
HEB	10	2	그렇지 아니하면 섬기는 자들이 단번에 정결케 되어 다시 죄를 깨닫는 일이 없으리니 어찌 드리는 일을 그치지 아니하였으리요	For then would they not have ceased to be offered? because that the worshippers once purged should have had no more conscience of sins.	If it could, would not the offerings have ceased? For the worshipers would have been cleansed once for all, and would no longer have felt the guilt of their sins.
HEB	10	3	그러나 이 제사들은 해마다 죄를 생각하게 하는 것이 있나니	But in those sacrifices there is a remembrance again made of sins every year.	Instead, those sacrifices are an annual reminder of sins,
HEB	10	4	이는 황소와 염소의 피가 능히 죄를 없이 하지 못함이라	For it is not possible that the blood of bulls and of goats should take away sins.	because it is impossible for the blood of bulls and goats to take away sins.
HEB	10	5	그러므로 세상에 임하실 때에 가라사대 하나님이 제사와 예물을 원치 아니하시고 오직 나를 위하여 한 몸을 예비하셨도다	Wherefore when he cometh into the world, he saith, Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest not, but a body hast thou prepared me:	Therefore, when Christ came into the world, He said: “Sacrifice and offering You did not desire, but a body You prepared for Me.
HEB	10	6	전체로 번제함과 속죄제는 기뻐하지 아니하시나니	In burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin thou hast had no pleasure.	In burnt offerings and sin offerings You took no delight.
HEB	10	7	이에 내가 말하기를 하나님이여 보시옵소서 두루마리 책에 나를 가리켜 기록한 것과 같이 하나님의 뜻을 행하러 왔나이다 하시니라	Then said I, Lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is written of me,) to do thy will, O God.	Then I said, ‘Here I am, it is written about Me in the scroll: I have come to do Your will, O God.’”
HEB	10	8	위에 말씀하시기를 제사와 예물과 전체로 번제함과 속죄제는 원치도 아니하고 기뻐하지도 아니하신다 하셨고 (이는 다 율법을 따라 드리는 것이라)	Above when he said, Sacrifice and offering and burnt offerings and offering for sin thou wouldest not, neither hadst pleasure therein; which are offered by the law;	In the passage above He says, “Sacrifices and offerings, burnt offerings and sin offerings You did not desire, nor did You delight in them” (although they are offered according to the law).
HEB	10	9	그 후에 말씀하시기를 보시옵소서 내가 하나님의 뜻을 행하러 왔나이다 하셨으니 그 첫 것을 폐하심은 둘째 것을 세우려 하심이니라	Then said he, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God. He taketh away the first, that he may establish the second.	Then He adds, “Here I am, I have come to do Your will.” He takes away the first to establish the second.
HEB	10	10	이 뜻을 좇아 예수 그리스도의 몸을 단번에 드리심으로 말미암아 우리가 거룩함을 얻었노라	By the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.	And by that will, we have been sanctified through the sacrifice of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.
HEB	10	11	제사장마다 매일 서서 섬기며 자주 같은 제사를 드리되 이 제사는 언제든지 죄를 없게 하지 못하거니와	And every priest standeth daily ministering and offering oftentimes the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins:	Day after day every priest stands to minister and to offer again and again the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins.
HEB	10	12	오직 그리스도는 죄를 위하여 한 영원한 제사를 드리시고 하나님 우편에 앉으사	But this man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God;	But when this Priest had offered for all time one sacrifice for sins, He sat down at the right hand of God.
HEB	10	13	그 후에 자기 원수들로 자기 발등상이 되게 하실 때까지 기다리시나니	From henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his footstool.	Since that time, He waits for His enemies to be made a footstool for His feet,
HEB	10	14	저가 한 제물로 거룩하게 된 자들을 영원히 온전케 하셨느니라	For by one offering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified.	because by a single offering He has made perfect for all time those who are being sanctified.
HEB	10	15	또한 성령이 우리에게 증거하시되	Whereof the Holy Ghost also is a witness to us: for after that he had said before,	The Holy Spirit also testifies to us about this. First He says:
HEB	10	16	주께서 가라사대 그 날 후로는 저희와 세울 언약이 이것이라 하시고 내 법을 저희 마음에 두고 저희 생각에 기록하리라 하신 후에	This is the covenant that I will make with them after those days, saith the Lord, I will put my laws into their hearts, and in their minds will I write them;	“This is the covenant I will make with them after those days, declares the Lord. I will put My laws in their hearts and inscribe them on their minds.”
HEB	10	17	또 저희 죄와 저희 불법을 내가 다시 기억지 아니하리라 하셨으니	And their sins and iniquities will I remember no more.	Then He adds: “Their sins and lawless acts I will remember no more.”
HEB	10	18	이것을 사하셨은즉 다시 죄를 위하여 제사 드릴 것이 없느니라	Now where remission of these is, there is no more offering for sin.	And where these have been forgiven, an offering for sin is no longer needed.
HEB	10	19	그러므로 형제들아 우리가 예수의 피를 힘입어 성소에 들어갈 담력을 얻었나니	Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus,	Therefore, brothers, since we have confidence to enter the Most Holy Place by the blood of Jesus,
HEB	10	20	그 길은 우리를 위하여 휘장 가운데로 열어 놓으신 새롭고 산 길이요 휘장은 곧 저의 육체니라	By a new and living way, which he hath consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say, his flesh;	by the new and living way opened for us through the curtain of His body,
HEB	10	21	또 하나님의 집 다스리는 큰 제사장이 계시매	And having an high priest over the house of God;	and since we have a great priest over the house of God,
HEB	10	22	우리가 마음에 뿌림을 받아 양심의 악을 깨닫고 몸을 맑은 물로 씻었으니 참 마음과 온전한 믿음으로 하나님께 나아가자	Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water.	let us draw near with a sincere heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled to cleanse us from a guilty conscience and our bodies washed with pure water.
HEB	10	23	또 약속하신 이는 미쁘시니 우리가 믿는 도리의 소망을 움직이지 않고 굳게 잡아	Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering; (for he is faithful that promised;)	Let us hold resolutely to the hope we profess, for He who promised is faithful.
HEB	10	24	서로 돌아보아 사랑과 선행을 격려하며	And let us consider one another to provoke unto love and to good works:	And let us consider how to spur one another on to love and good deeds.
HEB	10	25	모이기를 폐하는 어떤 사람들의 습관과 같이 하지 말고 오직 권하여 그 날이 가까움을 볼수록 더욱 그리하자	Not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as the manner of some is; but exhorting one another: and so much the more, as ye see the day approaching.	Let us not neglect meeting together, as some have made a habit, but let us encourage one another, and all the more as you see the Day approaching.
HEB	10	26	우리가 진리를 아는 지식을 받은 후 짐짓 죄를 범한즉 다시 속죄하는 제사가 없고	For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins,	If we deliberately go on sinning after we have received the knowledge of the truth, no further sacrifice for sins remains,
HEB	10	27	오직 무서운 마음으로 심판을 기다리는 것과 대적하는 자를 소멸할 맹렬한 불만 있으리라	But a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries.	but only a fearful expectation of judgment and of raging fire that will consume all adversaries.
HEB	10	28	모세의 법을 폐한 자도 두세 증인을 인하여 불쌍히 여김을 받지 못하고 죽었거든	He that despised Moses’ law died without mercy under two or three witnesses:	Anyone who rejected the law of Moses died without mercy on the testimony of two or three witnesses.
HEB	10	29	하물며 하나님 아들을 밟고 자기를 거룩하게 한 언약의 피를 부정한 것으로 여기고 은혜의 성령을 욕되게 하는 자의 당연히 받을 형벌이 얼마나 더 중하겠느냐 너희는 생각하라	Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the Spirit of grace?	How much more severely do you think one deserves to be punished who has trampled on the Son of God, profaned the blood of the covenant that sanctified him, and insulted the Spirit of grace?
HEB	10	30	원수 갚는 것이 내게 있으니 내가 갚으리라 하시고 또 다시 주께서 그의 백성을 심판하리라 말씀하신 것을 우리가 아노니	For we know him that hath said, Vengeance belongeth unto me, I will recompense, saith the Lord. And again, The Lord shall judge his people.	For we know Him who said, “Vengeance is Mine; I will repay,” and again, “The Lord will judge His people.”
HEB	10	31	살아 계신 하나님의 손에 빠져 들어가는 것이 무서울진저	It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.	It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
HEB	10	32	전날에 너희가 빛을 받은 후에 고난의 큰 싸움에 참은 것을 생각하라	But call to remembrance the former days, in which, after ye were illuminated, ye endured a great fight of afflictions;	Remember the early days that you were in the light. In those days, you endured a great conflict in the face of suffering.
HEB	10	33	혹 비방과 환난으로써 사람에게 구경거리가 되고 혹 이런 형편에 있는 자들로 사귀는 자 되었으니	Partly, whilst ye were made a gazingstock both by reproaches and afflictions; and partly, whilst ye became companions of them that were so used.	Sometimes you were publicly exposed to ridicule and persecution; at other times you were partners with those who were so treated.
HEB	10	34	너희가 갇힌 자를 동정하고 너희 산업을 빼앗기는 것도 기쁘게 당한 것은 더 낫고 영구한 산업이 있는 줄 앎이라	For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in yourselves that ye have in heaven a better and an enduring substance.	You sympathized with those in prison and joyfully accepted the confiscation of your property, knowing that you yourselves had a better and permanent possession.
HEB	10	35	그러므로 너희 담대함을 버리지 말라 이것이 큰 상을 얻느니라	Cast not away therefore your confidence, which hath great recompence of reward.	So do not throw away your confidence; it holds a great reward.
HEB	10	36	너희에게 인내가 필요함은 너희가 하나님의 뜻을 행한 후에 약속을 받기 위함이라	For ye have need of patience, that, after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise.	You need to persevere, so that after you have done the will of God, you will receive what He has promised.
HEB	10	37	잠시 잠간 후면 오실 이가 오시리니 지체하지 아니하시리라	For yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry.	For, “In just a little while, He who is coming will come and will not delay.
HEB	10	38	오직 나의 의인은 믿음으로 말미암아 살리라 또한 뒤로 물러가면 내 마음이 저를 기뻐하지 아니하리라 하셨느니라	Now the just shall live by faith: but if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him.	But My righteous one will live by faith; and if he shrinks back, I will take no pleasure in him.”
HEB	10	39	우리는 뒤로 물러가 침륜에 빠질 자가 아니요 오직 영혼을 구원함에 이르는 믿음을 가진 자니라	But we are not of them who draw back unto perdition; but of them that believe to the saving of the soul.	But we are not of those who shrink back and are destroyed, but of those who have faith and preserve their souls.
HEB	11	1	믿음은 바라는 것들의 실상이요 보지 못하는 것들의 증거니	Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.	Now faith is the assurance of what we hope for and the certainty of what we do not see.
HEB	11	2	선진들이 이로써 증거를 얻었으니라	For by it the elders obtained a good report.	This is why the ancients were commended.
HEB	11	3	믿음으로 모든 세계가 하나님의 말씀으로 지어진 줄을 우리가 아나니 보이는 것은 나타난 것으로 말미암아 된 것이 아니니라	Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear.	By faith we understand that the universe was formed at God’s command, so that what is seen was not made out of what was visible.
HEB	11	4	믿음으로 아벨은 가인보다 더 나은 제사를 하나님께 드림으로 의로운 자라 하시는 증거를 얻었으니 하나님이 그 예물에 대하여 증거하심이라 저가 죽었으나 그 믿음으로써 오히려 말하느니라	By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts: and by it he being dead yet speaketh.	By faith Abel offered God a better sacrifice than Cain did. By faith he was commended as righteous when God gave approval to his gifts. And by faith he still speaks, even though he is dead.
HEB	11	5	믿음으로 에녹은 죽음을 보지 않고 옮기웠으니 하나님이 저를 옮기심으로 다시 보이지 아니하니라 저는 옮기우기 전에 하나님을 기쁘시게 하는 자라 하는 증거를 받았느니라	By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death; and was not found, because God had translated him: for before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God.	By faith Enoch was taken up so that he did not see death: “He could not be found, because God had taken him away.” For before he was taken, he was commended as one who pleased God.
HEB	11	6	믿음이 없이는 기쁘시게 못하나니 하나님께 나아가는 자는 반드시 그가 계신 것과 또한 그가 자기를 찾는 자들에게 상 주시는 이심을 믿어야 할지니라	But without faith it is impossible to please him: for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.	And without faith it is impossible to please God, because anyone who approaches Him must believe that He exists and that He rewards those who earnestly seek Him.
HEB	11	7	믿음으로 노아는 아직 보지 못하는 일에 경고하심을 받아 경외함으로 방주를 예비하여 그 집을 구원하였으니 이로 말미암아 세상을 정죄하고 믿음을 좇는 의의 후사가 되었느니라	By faith Noah, being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house; by the which he condemned the world, and became heir of the righteousness which is by faith.	By faith Noah, when warned about things not yet seen, in godly fear built an ark to save his family. By faith he condemned the world and became heir of the righteousness that comes by faith.
HEB	11	8	믿음으로 아브라함은 부르심을 받았을 때에 순종하여 장래 기업으로 받을 땅에 나갈새 갈 바를 알지 못하고 나갔으며	By faith Abraham, when he was called to go out into a place which he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed; and he went out, not knowing whither he went.	By faith Abraham, when called to go to a place he would later receive as his inheritance, obeyed and went, without knowing where he was going.
HEB	11	9	믿음으로 저가 외방에 있는 것 같이 약속하신 땅에 우거하여 동일한 약속을 유업으로 함께 받은 이삭과 야곱으로 더불어 장막에 거하였으니	By faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange country, dwelling in tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise:	By faith he dwelt in the promised land as a stranger in a foreign country. He lived in tents, as did Isaac and Jacob, who were heirs with him of the same promise.
HEB	11	10	이는 하나님의 경영하시고 지으실 터가 있는 성을 바랐음이니라	For he looked for a city which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God.	For he was looking forward to the city with foundations, whose architect and builder is God.
HEB	11	11	믿음으로 사라 자신도 나이 늙어 단산하였으나 잉태하는 힘을 얻었으니 이는 약속하신 이를 미쁘신 줄 앎이라	Through faith also Sara herself received strength to conceive seed, and was delivered of a child when she was past age, because she judged him faithful who had promised.	By faith Sarah, even though she was barren and beyond the proper age, was enabled to conceive a child, because she considered Him faithful who had promised.
HEB	11	12	이러므로 죽은 자와 방불한 한 사람으로 말미암아 하늘에 허다한 별과 또 해변의 무수한 모래와 같이 많이 생육하였느니라	Therefore sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead, so many as the stars of the sky in multitude, and as the sand which is by the sea shore innumerable.	And so from one man, and he as good as dead, came descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky and as countless as the sand on the seashore.
HEB	11	13	이 사람들은 다 믿음을 따라 죽었으며 약속을 받지 못하였으되 그것들을 멀리서 보고 환영하며 또 땅에서는 외국인과 나그네로라 증거하였으니	These all died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth.	All these people died in faith, without having received the things they were promised. However, they saw them and welcomed them from afar. And they acknowledged that they were strangers and exiles on the earth.
HEB	11	14	이같이 말하는 자들은 본향 찾는 것을 나타냄이라	For they that say such things declare plainly that they seek a country.	Now those who say such things show that they are seeking a country of their own.
HEB	11	15	저희가 나온 바 본향을 생각하였더면 돌아갈 기회가 있었으려니와	And truly, if they had been mindful of that country from whence they came out, they might have had opportunity to have returned.	If they had been thinking of the country they had left, they would have had opportunity to return.
HEB	11	16	저희가 이제는 더 나은 본향을 사모하니 곧 하늘에 있는 것이라 그러므로 하나님이 저희 하나님이라 일컬음 받으심을 부끄러워 아니하시고 저희를 위하여 한 성을 예비하셨느니라	But now they desire a better country, that is, an heavenly: wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God: for he hath prepared for them a city.	Instead, they were longing for a better country, a heavenly one. Therefore God is not ashamed to be called their God, for He has prepared a city for them.
HEB	11	17	아브라함은 시험을 받을 때에 믿음으로 이삭을 드렸으니 저는 약속을 받은 자로되 그 독생자를 드렸느니라	By faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac: and he that had received the promises offered up his only begotten son,	By faith Abraham, when he was tested, offered up Isaac on the altar. He who had received the promises was ready to offer his one and only son,
HEB	11	18	저에게 이미 말씀하시기를 네 자손이라 칭할 자는 이삭으로 말미암으리라 하셨으니	Of whom it was said, That in Isaac shall thy seed be called:	even though God had said to him, “Through Isaac your offspring will be reckoned.”
HEB	11	19	저가 하나님이 능히 죽은 자 가운데서 다시 살리실 줄로 생각한지라 비유컨대 죽은 자 가운데서 도로 받은 것이니라	Accounting that God was able to raise him up, even from the dead; from whence also he received him in a figure.	Abraham reasoned that God could raise the dead, and in a sense, he did receive Isaac back from death.
HEB	11	20	믿음으로 이삭은 장차 오는 일에 대하여 야곱과 에서에게 축복하였으며	By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come.	By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning the future.
HEB	11	21	믿음으로 야곱은 죽을 때에 요셉의 각 아들에게 축복하고 그 지팡이 머리에 의지하여 경배하였으며	By faith Jacob, when he was a dying, blessed both the sons of Joseph; and worshipped, leaning upon the top of his staff.	By faith Jacob, when he was dying, blessed each of Joseph’s sons and worshiped as he leaned on the top of his staff.
HEB	11	22	믿음으로 요셉은 임종시에 이스라엘 자손들의 떠날 것을 말하고 또 자기 해골을 위하여 명하였으며	By faith Joseph, when he died, made mention of the departing of the children of Israel; and gave commandment concerning his bones.	By faith Joseph, when his end was near, spoke about the exodus of the Israelites and gave instructions about his bones.
HEB	11	23	믿음으로 모세가 났을 때에 그 부모가 아름다운 아이임을 보고 석 달 동안 숨겨 임금의 명령을 무서워 아니하였으며	By faith Moses, when he was born, was hid three months of his parents, because they saw he was a proper child; and they were not afraid of the king’s commandment.	By faith Moses’ parents hid him for three months after his birth, because they saw that he was a beautiful child, and they were unafraid of the king’s edict.
HEB	11	24	믿음으로 모세는 장성하여 바로의 공주의 아들이라 칭함을 거절하고	By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh’s daughter;	By faith Moses, when he was grown, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh’s daughter.
HEB	11	25	도리어 하나님의 백성과 함께 고난 받기를 잠시 죄악의 낙을 누리는 것보다 더 좋아하고	Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season;	He chose to suffer oppression with God’s people rather than to experience the fleeting enjoyment of sin.
HEB	11	26	그리스도를 위하여 받는 능욕을 애굽의 모든 보화보다 더 큰 재물로 여겼으니 이는 상 주심을 바라봄이라	Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompence of the reward.	He valued disgrace for Christ above the treasures of Egypt, for he was looking ahead to his reward.
HEB	11	27	믿음으로 애굽을 떠나 임금의 노함을 무서워 아니하고 곧 보이지 아니하는 자를 보는 것 같이 하여 참았으며	By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king: for he endured, as seeing him who is invisible.	By faith Moses left Egypt, not fearing the king’s anger; he persevered because he saw Him who is invisible.
HEB	11	28	믿음으로 유월절과 피 뿌리는 예를 정하였으니 이는 장자를 멸하는 자로 저희를 건드리지 않게 하려 한 것이며	Through faith he kept the passover, and the sprinkling of blood, lest he that destroyed the firstborn should touch them.	By faith he kept the Passover and the sprinkling of blood, so that the destroyer of the firstborn would not touch Israel’s own firstborn.
HEB	11	29	믿음으로 저희가 홍해를 육지 같이 건넜으나 애굽 사람들은 이것을 시험하다가 빠져 죽었으며	By faith they passed through the Red sea as by dry land: which the Egyptians assaying to do were drowned.	By faith the people passed through the Red Sea as on dry land; but when the Egyptians tried to follow, they were drowned.
HEB	11	30	믿음으로 칠 일 동안 여리고를 두루 다니매 성이 무너졌으며	By faith the walls of Jericho fell down, after they were compassed about seven days.	By faith the walls of Jericho fell, after the people had marched around them for seven days.
HEB	11	31	믿음으로 기생 라합은 정탐꾼을 평안히 영접하였으므로 순종치 아니한 자와 함께 멸망치 아니하였도다	By faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not, when she had received the spies with peace.	By faith the prostitute Rahab, because she welcomed the spies in peace, did not perish with those who were disobedient.
HEB	11	32	내가 무슨 말을 더 하리요 기드온, 바락, 삼손, 입다와 다윗과 사무엘과 및 선지자들의 일을 말하려면 내게 시간이 부족하리로다	And what shall I more say? for the time would fail me to tell of Gedeon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of Jephthae; of David also, and Samuel, and of the prophets:	And what more shall I say? Time will not allow me to tell of Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephthah, David, Samuel, and the prophets,
HEB	11	33	저희가 믿음으로 나라들을 이기기도 하며 의를 행하기도 하며 약속을 받기도 하며 사자들의 입을 막기도 하며	Who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions,	who through faith conquered kingdoms, administered justice, and gained what was promised; who shut the mouths of lions,
HEB	11	34	불의 세력을 멸하기도 하며 칼날을 피하기도 하며 연약한 가운데서 강하게 되기도 하며 전쟁에 용맹되어 이방 사람들의 진을 물리치기도 하며	Quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens.	quenched the raging fire, and escaped the edge of the sword; who gained strength from weakness, became mighty in battle, and put foreign armies to flight.
HEB	11	35	여자들은 자기의 죽은 자를 부활로 받기도 하며 또 어떤 이들은 더 좋은 부활을 얻고자 하여 악형을 받되 구차히 면하지 아니하였으며	Women received their dead raised to life again: and others were tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they might obtain a better resurrection:	Women received back their dead, raised to life again. Others were tortured and refused their release, so that they might gain a better resurrection.
HEB	11	36	또 어떤 이들은 희롱과 채찍질뿐 아니라 결박과 옥에 갇히는 시험도 받았으며	And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment:	Still others endured mocking and flogging, and even chains and imprisonment.
HEB	11	37	돌로 치는 것과 톱으로 켜는 것과 시험과 칼에 죽는 것을 당하고 양과 염소의 가죽을 입고 유리하여 궁핍과 환난과 학대를 받았으니	They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword: they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented;	They were stoned, they were sawed in two, they were put to death by the sword. They went around in sheepskins and goatskins, destitute, oppressed, and mistreated.
HEB	11	38	(이런 사람은 세상이 감당치 못하도다) 저희가 광야와 산중과 암혈과 토굴에 유리하였느니라	(Of whom the world was not worthy:) they wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth.	The world was not worthy of them. They wandered in deserts and mountains, and hid in caves and holes in the ground.
HEB	11	39	이 사람들이 다 믿음으로 말미암아 증거를 받았으나 약속을 받지 못하였으니	And these all, having obtained a good report through faith, received not the promise:	These were all commended for their faith, yet they did not receive what was promised.
HEB	11	40	이는 하나님이 우리를 위하여 더 좋은 것을 예비하셨은즉 우리가 아니면 저희로 온전함을 이루지 못하게 하려 하심이니라	God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect.	God had planned something better for us, so that together with us they would be made perfect.
HEB	12	1	이러므로 우리에게 구름 같이 둘러싼 허다한 증인들이 있으니 모든 무거운 것과 얽매이기 쉬운 죄를 벗어 버리고 인내로써 우리 앞에 당한 경주를 경주하며	Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us,	Therefore, since we are surrounded by such a great cloud of witnesses, let us throw off every encumbrance and the sin that so easily entangles, and let us run with endurance the race set out for us.
HEB	12	2	믿음의 주요 또 온전케 하시는 이인 예수를 바라보자 저는 그 앞에 있는 즐거움을 위하여 십자가를 참으사 부끄러움을 개의치 아니하시더니 하나님 보좌 우편에 앉으셨느니라	Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith; who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God.	Let us fix our eyes on Jesus, the author and perfecter of our faith, who for the joy set before Him endured the cross, scorning its shame, and sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.
HEB	12	3	너희가 피곤하여 낙심치 않기 위하여 죄인들의 이같이 자기에게 거역한 일을 참으신 자를 생각하라	For consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds.	Consider Him who endured such hostility from sinners, so that you will not grow weary and lose heart.
HEB	12	4	너희가 죄와 싸우되 아직 피흘리기까지는 대항치 아니하고	Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin.	In your struggle against sin, you have not yet resisted to the point of shedding your blood.
HEB	12	5	또 아들들에게 권하는 것 같이 너희에게 권면하신 말씀을 잊었도다 일렀으되 내 아들아 주의 징계하심을 경히 여기지 말며 그에게 꾸지람을 받을 때에 낙심하지 말라	And ye have forgotten the exhortation which speaketh unto you as unto children, My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him:	And you have forgotten the exhortation that addresses you as sons: “My son, do not take lightly the discipline of the Lord, and do not lose heart when He rebukes you.
HEB	12	6	주께서 그 사랑하시는 자를 징계하시고 그의 받으시는 이들마다 채찍질하심이니라 하였으니	For whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth.	For the Lord disciplines the one He loves, and He chastises every son He receives.”
HEB	12	7	너희가 참음은 징계를 받기 위함이라 하나님이 아들과 같이 너희를 대우하시나니 어찌 아비가 징계하지 않는 아들이 있으리요	If ye endure chastening, God dealeth with you as with sons; for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not?	Endure suffering as discipline; God is treating you as sons. For what son is not disciplined by his father?
HEB	12	8	징계는 다 받는 것이거늘 너희에게 없으면 사생자요 참 아들이 아니니라	But if ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons.	If you do not experience discipline like everyone else, then you are illegitimate children and not true sons.
HEB	12	9	또 우리 육체의 아버지가 우리를 징계하여도 공경하였거늘 하물며 모든 영의 아버지께 더욱 복종하여 살려 하지 않겠느냐	Furthermore we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, and live?	Furthermore, we have all had earthly fathers who disciplined us, and we respected them. Should we not much more submit to the Father of our spirits and live?
HEB	12	10	저희는 잠시 자기의 뜻대로 우리를 징계하였거니와 오직 하나님은 우리의 유익을 위하여 그의 거룩하심에 참예케 하시느니라	For they verily for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure; but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness.	Our fathers disciplined us for a short time as they thought best, but God disciplines us for our good, so that we may share in His holiness.
HEB	12	11	무릇 징계가 당시에는 즐거워 보이지 않고 슬퍼 보이나 후에 그로 말미암아 연달한 자에게는 의의 평강한 열매를 맺나니	Now no chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby.	No discipline seems enjoyable at the time, but painful. Later on, however, it yields a harvest of righteousness and peace to those who have been trained by it.
HEB	12	12	그러므로 피곤한 손과 연약한 무릎을 일으켜 세우고	Wherefore lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees;	Therefore strengthen your limp hands and weak knees.
HEB	12	13	너희 발을 위하여 곧은 길을 만들어 저는 다리로 하여금 어그러지지 않고 고침을 받게 하라	And make straight paths for your feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the way; but let it rather be healed.	Make straight paths for your feet, so that the lame may not be disabled, but rather healed.
HEB	12	14	모든 사람으로 더불어 화평함과 거룩함을 좆으라 이것이 없이는 아무도 주를 보지 못하리라	Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord:	Pursue peace with everyone, as well as holiness, without which no one will see the Lord.
HEB	12	15	너희는 돌아보아 하나님 은혜에 이르지 못하는 자가 있는가 두려워하고 또 쓴 뿌리가 나서 괴롭게 하고 많은 사람이 이로 말미암아 더러움을 입을까 두려워하고	Looking diligently lest any man fail of the grace of God; lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled;	See to it that no one falls short of the grace of God, and that no root of bitterness springs up to cause trouble and defile many.
HEB	12	16	음행하는 자와 혹 한 그릇 식물을 위하여 장자의 명분을 판 에서와 같이 망령된 자가 있을까 두려워하라	Lest there be any fornicator, or profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright.	See to it that no one is sexually immoral, or is godless like Esau, who for a single meal sold his birthright.
HEB	12	17	너희의 아는 바와 같이 저가 그 후에 축복을 기업으로 받으려고 눈물을 흘리며 구하되 버린 바가 되어 회개할 기회를 얻지 못하였느니라	For ye know how that afterward, when he would have inherited the blessing, he was rejected: for he found no place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears.	For you know that afterward, when he wanted to inherit the blessing, he was rejected. He could find no ground for repentance, though he sought the blessing with tears.
HEB	12	18	너희의 이른 곳은 만질 만한 불 붙는 산과 흑운과 흑암과 폭풍과	For ye are not come unto the mount that might be touched, and that burned with fire, nor unto blackness, and darkness, and tempest,	For you have not come to a mountain that can be touched and that is burning with fire; to darkness, gloom, and storm;
HEB	12	19	나팔소리와 말하는 소리가 아니라 그 소리를 듣는 자들은 더 말씀하지 아니하시기를 구하였으니	And the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words; which voice they that heard intreated that the word should not be spoken to them any more:	to a trumpet blast or to a voice that made its hearers beg that no further word be spoken.
HEB	12	20	이는 짐승이라도 산에 이르거든 돌로 침을 당하리라 하신 명을 저희가 견디지 못함이라	(For they could not endure that which was commanded, And if so much as a beast touch the mountain, it shall be stoned, or thrust through with a dart:	For they could not bear what was commanded: “If even an animal touches the mountain, it must be stoned.”
HEB	12	21	그 보이는 바가 이렇듯이 무섭기로 모세도 이르되 내가 심히 두렵고 떨린다 하였으나	And so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake:)	The sight was so terrifying that even Moses said, “I am trembling with fear.”
HEB	12	22	그러나 너희가 이른 곳은 시온 산과 살아계신 하나님의 도성인 하늘의 예루살렘과 천만 천사와	But ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels,	Instead, you have come to Mount Zion, to the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem. You have come to myriads of angels
HEB	12	23	하늘에 기록한 장자들의 총회와 교회와 만민의 심판자이신 하나님과 및 온전케 된 의인의 영들과	To the general assembly and church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect,	in joyful assembly, to the congregation of the firstborn, enrolled in heaven. You have come to God the Judge of all, to the spirits of the righteous made perfect,
HEB	12	24	새 언약의 중보이신 예수와 및 아벨의 피보다 더 낫게 말하는 뿌린 피니라	And to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better things than that of Abel.	to Jesus the mediator of a new covenant, and to the sprinkled blood that speaks a better word than the blood of Abel.
HEB	12	25	너희는 삼가 말하신 자를 거역하지 말라 땅에서 경고하신 자를 거역한 저희가 피하지 못하였거든 하물며 하늘로 좇아 경고하신 자를 배반하는 우리일까 보냐	See that ye refuse not him that speaketh. For if they escaped not who refused him that spake on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him that speaketh from heaven:	See to it that you do not refuse Him who speaks. For if the people did not escape when they refused Him who warned them on earth, how much less will we escape if we reject Him who warns us from heaven?
HEB	12	26	그 때에는 그 소리가 땅을 진동하였거니와 이제는 약속하여 가라사대 내가 또 한 번 땅만 아니라 하늘도 진동하리라 하셨느니라	Whose voice then shook the earth: but now he hath promised, saying, Yet once more I shake not the earth only, but also heaven.	At that time His voice shook the earth, but now He has promised, “Once more I will shake not only the earth, but heaven as well.”
HEB	12	27	이 또 한 번이라 하심은 진동치 아니하는 것을 영존케 하기 위하여 진동할 것들 곧 만든 것들의 변동될 것을 나타내심이니라	And this word, Yet once more, signifieth the removing of those things that are shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which cannot be shaken may remain.	The words “Once more” signify the removal of what can be shaken—that is, created things—so that the unshakable may remain.
HEB	12	28	그러므로 우리가 진동치 못할 나라를 받았은즉 은혜를 받자 이로 말미암아 경건함과 두려움으로 하나님을 기쁘시게 섬길지니	Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear:	Therefore, since we are receiving an unshakable kingdom, let us be filled with gratitude, and so worship God acceptably with reverence and awe.
HEB	12	29	우리 하나님은 소멸하는 불이심이니라	For our God is a consuming fire.	“For our God is a consuming fire.”
HEB	13	1	형제 사랑하기를 계속하고	Let brotherly love continue.	Continue in brotherly love.
HEB	13	2	손님 대접하기를 잊지 말라 이로써 부지중에 천사들을 대접한 이들이 있었느니라	Be not forgetful to entertain strangers: for thereby some have entertained angels unawares.	Do not neglect to show hospitality to strangers, for by so doing some people have entertained angels without knowing it.
HEB	13	3	자기도 함께 갇힌 것 같이 갇힌 자를 생각하고 자기도 몸을 가졌은즉 학대 받는 자를 생각하라	Remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them; and them which suffer adversity, as being yourselves also in the body.	Remember those in prison as if you were bound with them, and those who are mistreated as if you were suffering with them.
HEB	13	4	모든 사람은 혼인을 귀히 여기고 침소를 더럽히지 않게 하라 음행하는 자들과 간음하는 자들을 하나님이 심판하시리라	Marriage is honourable in all, and the bed undefiled: but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge.	Marriage should be honored by all and the marriage bed kept undefiled, for God will judge the sexually immoral and adulterers.
HEB	13	5	돈을 사랑치 말고 있는 바를 족한 줄로 알라 그가 친히 말씀하시기를 내가 과연 너희를 버리지 아니하고 과연 너희를 떠나지 아니하리라 하셨느니라	Let your conversation be without covetousness; and be content with such things as ye have: for he hath said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.	Keep your lives free from the love of money and be content with what you have, for God has said: “Never will I leave you, never will I forsake you.”
HEB	13	6	그러므로 우리가 담대히 가로되 주는 나를 돕는 자시니 내가 무서워 아니하겠노라 사람이 내게 어찌하리요 하노라	So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me.	So we say with confidence: “The Lord is my helper; I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?”
HEB	13	7	하나님의 말씀을 너희에게 이르고 너희를 인도하던 자들을 생각하며 저희 행실의 종말을 주의하여 보고 저희 믿음을 본받으라	Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you the word of God: whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation.	Remember your leaders who spoke the word of God to you. Consider the outcome of their way of life and imitate their faith.
HEB	13	8	예수 그리스도는 어제나 오늘이나 영원토록 동일하시니라	Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever.	Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today and forever.
HEB	13	9	여러 가지 다른 교훈에 끌리지 말라 마음은 은혜로써 굳게 함이 아름답고 식물로써 할 것이 아니니 식물로 말미암아 행한 자는 유익을 얻지 못하였느니라	Be not carried about with divers and strange doctrines. For it is a good thing that the heart be established with grace; not with meats, which have not profited them that have been occupied therein.	Do not be carried away by all kinds of strange teachings, for it is good for the heart to be strengthened by grace and not by foods of no value to those devoted to them.
HEB	13	10	우리에게 제단이 있는데 그 위에 있는 제물은 장막에서 섬기는 자들이 이 제단에서 먹을 권이 없나니	We have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve the tabernacle.	We have an altar from which those who serve at the tabernacle have no right to eat.
HEB	13	11	이는 죄를 위한 짐승의 피는 대제사장이 가지고 성소에 들어가고 그 육체는 영문 밖에서 불사름이니라	For the bodies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high priest for sin, are burned without the camp.	Although the high priest brings the blood of animals into the Holy Place as a sacrifice for sin, the bodies are burned outside the camp.
HEB	13	12	그러므로 예수도 자기 피로써 백성을 거룩케 하려고 성문 밖에서 고난을 받으셨느니라	Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate.	And so Jesus also suffered outside the city gate, to sanctify the people by His own blood.
HEB	13	13	그런즉 우리는 그 능욕을 지고 영문 밖으로 그에게 나아가자	Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach.	Therefore let us go to Him outside the camp, bearing the disgrace He bore.
HEB	13	14	우리가 여기는 영구한 도성이 없고 오직 장차 올 것을 찾나니	For here have we no continuing city, but we seek one to come.	For here we do not have a permanent city, but we are looking for the city that is to come.
HEB	13	15	이러므로 우리가 예수로 말미암아 항상 찬미의 제사를 하나님께 드리자 이는 그 이름을 증거하는 입술의 열매니라	By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips giving thanks to his name.	Through Jesus, therefore, let us continually offer to God a sacrifice of praise, the fruit of lips that confess His name.
HEB	13	16	오직 선을 행함과 서로 나눠주기를 잊지 말라 이같은 제사는 하나님이 기뻐하시느니라	But to do good and to communicate forget not: for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.	And do not neglect to do good and to share with others, for with such sacrifices God is pleased.
HEB	13	17	너희를 인도하는 자들에게 순종하고 복종하라 저희는 너희 영혼을 위하여 경성하기를 자기가 회계할 자인 것 같이 하느니라 저희로 하여금 즐거움으로 이것을 하게 하고 근심으로 하게 말라 그렇지 않으면 너희에게 유익이 없느니라	Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves: for they watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you.	Obey your leaders and submit to them, for they watch over your souls as those who must give an account. To this end, allow them to lead with joy and not with grief, for that would be of no advantage to you.
HEB	13	18	우리를 위하여 기도하라 우리가 모든 일에 선하게 행하려 하므로 우리에게 선한 양심이 있는 줄을 확신하노니	Pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly.	Pray for us; we are convinced that we have a clear conscience and desire to live honorably in every way.
HEB	13	19	내가 더 속히 너희에게 돌아가기를 위하여 너희 기도함을 더욱 원하노라	But I beseech you the rather to do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner.	And I especially urge you to pray that I may be restored to you soon.
HEB	13	20	양의 큰 목자이신 우리 주 예수를 영원한 언약의 피로 죽은 자 가운데서 이끌어 내신 평강의 하나님이	Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant,	Now may the God of peace, who through the blood of the eternal covenant brought back from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep,
HEB	13	21	모든 선한 일에 너희를 온전케 하사 자기 뜻을 행하게 하시고 그 앞에 즐거운 것을 예수 그리스도로 말미암아 우리 속에 이루시기를 원하노라 영광이 그에게 세세무궁토록 있을지어다 아멘	Make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which is wellpleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.	equip you with every good thing to do His will. And may He accomplish in us what is pleasing in His sight through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory forever and ever. Amen.
HEB	13	22	형제들아 내가 너희를 권하노니 권면의 말을 용납하라 내가 간단히 너희에게 썼느니라	And I beseech you, brethren, suffer the word of exhortation: for I have written a letter unto you in few words.	I urge you, brothers, to bear with my word of exhortation, for I have only written to you briefly.
HEB	13	23	우리 형제 디모데가 놓인 것을 너희가 알라 그가 속히 오면 내가 저와 함께 가서 너희를 보리라	Know ye that our brother Timothy is set at liberty; with whom, if he come shortly, I will see you.	Be aware that our brother Timothy has been released. If he arrives soon, I will come with him to see you.
HEB	13	24	너희를 인도하는 자와 및 모든 성도에게 문안하라 이달리야에서 온 자들도 너희에게 문안하느니라	Salute all them that have the rule over you, and all the saints. They of Italy salute you.	Greet all your leaders and all the saints. Those from Italy send you greetings.
HEB	13	25	은혜가 너희 모든 사람에게 있을지어다	Grace be with you all. Amen. Written to the Hebrews from Italy by Timothy.	Grace be with all of you.
JAS	1	1	하나님과 주 예수 그리스도의 종 야고보는 흩어져 있는 열두 지파에게 문안하노라	James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes which are scattered abroad, greeting.	James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, To the twelve tribes of the Dispersion: Greetings.
JAS	1	2	내 형제들아 너희가 여러 가지 시험을 만나거든 온전히 기쁘게 여기라	My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers temptations;	Consider it pure joy, my brothers, when you encounter trials of many kinds,
JAS	1	3	이는 너희 믿음의 시련이 인내를 만들어 내는 줄 너희가 앎이라	Knowing this, that the trying of your faith worketh patience.	because you know that the testing of your faith develops perseverance.
JAS	1	4	인내를 온전히 이루라 이는 너희로 온전하고 구비하여 조금도 부족함이 없게 하려 함이라	But let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing.	Allow perseverance to finish its work, so that you may be mature and complete, not lacking anything.
JAS	1	5	너희 중에 누구든지 지혜가 부족하거든 모든 사람에게 후히 주시고 꾸짖지 아니하시는 하나님께 구하라 그리하면 주시리라	If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.	Now if any of you lacks wisdom, he should ask God, who gives generously to all without finding fault, and it will be given to him.
JAS	1	6	오직 믿음으로 구하고 조금도 의심하지 말라 의심하는 자는 마치 바람에 밀려 요동하는 바다 물결 같으니	But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed.	But he must ask in faith, without doubting, because he who doubts is like a wave of the sea, blown and tossed by the wind.
JAS	1	7	이런 사람은 무엇이든지 주께 얻기를 생각하지 말라	For let not that man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord.	That man should not expect to receive anything from the Lord.
JAS	1	8	두 마음을 품어 모든 일에 정함이 없는 자로다	A double minded man is unstable in all his ways.	He is a double-minded man, unstable in all his ways.
JAS	1	9	낮은 형제는 자기의 높음을 자랑하고	Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted:	The brother in humble circumstances should exult in his high position.
JAS	1	10	부한 형제는 자기의 낮아짐을 자랑할지니 이는 풀의 꽃과 같이 지나감이라	But the rich, in that he is made low: because as the flower of the grass he shall pass away.	But the one who is rich should exult in his low position, because he will pass away like a flower of the field.
JAS	1	11	해가 돋고 뜨거운 바람이 불어 풀을 말리우면 꽃이 떨어져 그 모양의 아름다움이 없어지나니 부한 자도 그 행하는 일에 이와 같이 쇠잔하리라	For the sun is no sooner risen with a burning heat, but it withereth the grass, and the flower thereof falleth, and the grace of the fashion of it perisheth: so also shall the rich man fade away in his ways.	For the sun rises with scorching heat and withers the plant; its flower falls and its beauty is lost. So too, the rich man will fade away in the midst of his pursuits.
JAS	1	12	시험을 참는 자는 복이 있도다 이것이 옳다 인정하심을 받은 후에 주께서 자기를 사랑하는 자들에게 약속하신 생명의 면류관을 얻을 것임이니라	Blessed is the man that endureth temptation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that love him.	Blessed is the man who perseveres under trial, because when he has stood the test, he will receive the crown of life that God has promised to those who love Him.
JAS	1	13	사람이 시험을 받을 때에 내가 하나님께 시험을 받는다 하지 말지니 하나님은 악에게 시험을 받지도 아니하시고 친히 아무도 시험하지 아니하시느니라	Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempteth he any man:	When tempted, no one should say, “God is tempting me.” For God cannot be tempted by evil, nor does He tempt anyone.
JAS	1	14	오직 각 사람이 시험을 받는 것은 자기 욕심에 끌려 미혹됨이니	But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed.	But each one is tempted when by his own evil desires he is lured away and enticed.
JAS	1	15	욕심이 잉태한즉 죄를 낳고 죄가 장성한즉 사망을 낳느니라	Then when lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin: and sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death.	Then after desire has conceived, it gives birth to sin; and sin, when it is full-grown, gives birth to death.
JAS	1	16	내 사랑하는 형제들아 속지 말라	Do not err, my beloved brethren.	Do not be deceived, my beloved brothers.
JAS	1	17	각양 좋은 은사와 온전한 선물이 다 위로부터 빛들의 아버지께로서 내려오나니 그는 변함도 없으시고 회전하는 그림자도 없으시니라	Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning.	Every good and perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of the heavenly lights, with whom there is no change or shifting shadow.
JAS	1	18	그가 그 조물 중에 우리로 한 첫 열매가 되게 하시려고 자기의 뜻을 좇아 진리의 말씀으로 우리를 낳으셨느니라	Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we should be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures.	He chose to give us birth through the word of truth, that we would be a kind of firstfruits of His creation.
JAS	1	19	내 사랑하는 형제들아 너희가 알거니와 사람마다 듣기는 속히 하고 말하기는 더디 하며 성내기도 더디하라	Wherefore, my beloved brethren, let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath:	My beloved brothers, understand this: Everyone should be quick to listen, slow to speak, and slow to anger,
JAS	1	20	사람의 성내는 것이 하나님의 의를 이루지 못함이니라	For the wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God.	for man’s anger does not bring about the righteousness that God desires.
JAS	1	21	그러므로 모든 더러운 것과 넘치는 악을 내어 버리고 능히 너희 영혼을 구원할 바 마음에 심긴 도를 온유함으로 받으라	Wherefore lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able to save your souls.	Therefore, get rid of all moral filth and every expression of evil, and humbly accept the word planted in you, which can save your souls.
JAS	1	22	너희는 도를 행하는 자가 되고 듣기만 하여 자신을 속이는 자가 되지 말라	But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.	Be doers of the word, and not hearers only. Otherwise, you are deceiving yourselves.
JAS	1	23	누구든지 도를 행하지 아니하면 그는 거울로 자기의 얼굴을 보는 사람과 같으니	For if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass:	For anyone who hears the word but does not carry it out is like a man who looks at his face in a mirror,
JAS	1	24	제 자신을 보고 가서 그 모양이 어떠한 것을 곧 잊어버리거니와	For he beholdeth himself, and goeth his way, and straightway forgetteth what manner of man he was.	and after observing himself goes away and immediately forgets what he looks like.
JAS	1	25	자유하게 하는 온전한 율법을 들여다 보고 있는 자는 듣고 잊어버리는 자가 아니요 실행하는 자니 이 사람이 그 행하는 일에 복을 받으리라	But whoso looketh into the perfect law of liberty, and continueth therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his deed.	But the one who looks intently into the perfect law of freedom, and continues to do so—not being a forgetful hearer, but an effective doer—he will be blessed in what he does.
JAS	1	26	누구든지 스스로 경건하다 생각하며 자기 혀를 재갈 먹이지 아니하고 자기 마음을 속이면 이 사람의 경건은 헛것이라	If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, this man’s religion is vain.	If anyone considers himself religious and yet does not bridle his tongue, he deceives his heart and his religion is worthless.
JAS	1	27	하나님 아버지 앞에서 정결하고 더러움이 없는 경건은 곧 고아와 과부를 그 환난 중에 돌아보고 또 자기를 지켜 세속에 물들지 아니하는 이것이니라	Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world.	Pure and undefiled religion before our God and Father is this: to care for orphans and widows in their distress, and to keep oneself from being polluted by the world.
JAS	2	1	내 형제들아 영광의 주 곧 우리 주 예수 그리스도를 믿는 믿음을 너희가 받았으니 사람을 외모로 취하지 말라	My brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, with respect of persons.	My brothers, as you hold out your faith in our glorious Lord Jesus Christ, do not show favoritism.
JAS	2	2	만일 너희 회당에 금 가락지를 끼고 아름다운 옷을 입은 사람이 들어오고 또 더러운 옷을 입은 가난한 사람이 들어올 때에	For if there come unto your assembly a man with a gold ring, in goodly apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment;	Suppose a man comes into your meeting wearing a gold ring and fine clothes, and a poor man in shabby clothes also comes in.
JAS	2	3	너희가 아름다운 옷을 입은 자를 돌아보아 가로되 여기 좋은 자리에 앉으소서 하고 또 가난한 자에게 이르되 너는 거기 섰든지 내 발등상 아래 앉으라 하면	And ye have respect to him that weareth the gay clothing, and say unto him, Sit thou here in a good place; and say to the poor, Stand thou there, or sit here under my footstool:	If you lavish attention on the man in fine clothes and say, “Here is a seat of honor,” but say to the poor man, “You must stand” or “Sit at my feet,”
JAS	2	4	너희끼리 서로 구별하며 악한 생각으로 판단하는 자가 되는 것이 아니냐	Are ye not then partial in yourselves, and are become judges of evil thoughts?	have you not discriminated among yourselves and become judges with evil thoughts?
JAS	2	5	내 사랑하는 형제들아 들을지어다 하나님이 세상에 대하여는 가난한 자를 택하사 믿음에 부요하게 하시고 또 자기를 사랑하는 자들에게 약속하신 나라를 유업으로 받게 아니하셨느냐	Hearken, my beloved brethren, Hath not God chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised to them that love him?	Listen, my beloved brothers: Has not God chosen the poor of this world to be rich in faith and to inherit the kingdom He promised those who love Him?
JAS	2	6	너희는 도리어 가난한 자를 괄시하였도다 부자는 너희를 압제하며 법정으로 끌고 가지 아니하느냐	But ye have despised the poor. Do not rich men oppress you, and draw you before the judgment seats?	But you have dishonored the poor. Is it not the rich who oppress you and drag you into court?
JAS	2	7	저희는 너희에게 대하여 일컫는 바 그 아름다운 이름을 훼방하지 아니하느냐	Do not they blaspheme that worthy name by the which ye are called?	Are they not the ones who blaspheme the noble name by which you have been called?
JAS	2	8	너희가 만일 경에 기록한 대로 네 이웃 사랑하기를 네 몸과 같이 하라 하신 최고한 법을 지키면 잘하는 것이거니와	If ye fulfil the royal law according to the scripture, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself, ye do well:	If you really fulfill the royal law stated in Scripture, “Love your neighbor as yourself,” you are doing well.
JAS	2	9	만일 너희가 외모로 사람을 취하면 죄를 짓는 것이니 율법이 너희를 범죄자로 정하리라	But if ye have respect to persons, ye commit sin, and are convinced of the law as transgressors.	But if you show favoritism, you sin and are convicted by the law as transgressors.
JAS	2	10	누구든지 온 율법을 지키다가 그 하나에 거치면 모두 범한 자가 되나니	For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all.	Whoever keeps the whole law but stumbles at just one point is guilty of breaking all of it.
JAS	2	11	간음하지 말라 하신 이가 또한 살인하지 말라 하셨은즉 네가 비록 간음하지 아니하여도 살인하면 율법을 범한 자가 되느니라	For he that said, Do not commit adultery, said also, Do not kill. Now if thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a transgressor of the law.	For He who said, “Do not commit adultery,” also said, “Do not murder.” If you do not commit adultery, but do commit murder, you have become a lawbreaker.
JAS	2	12	너희는 자유의 율법대로 심판 받을 자처럼 말도 하고 행하기도 하라	So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the law of liberty.	Speak and act as those who are going to be judged by the law that gives freedom.
JAS	2	13	긍휼을 행하지 아니하는 자에게는 긍휼 없는 심판이 있으리라 긍휼은 심판을 이기고 자랑하느니라	For he shall have judgment without mercy, that hath shewed no mercy; and mercy rejoiceth against judgment.	For judgment without mercy will be shown to anyone who has not been merciful. Mercy triumphs over judgment.
JAS	2	14	내 형제들아 만일 사람이 믿음이 있노라 하고 행함이 없으면 무슨 이익이 있으리요 그 믿음이 능히 자기를 구원하겠느냐	What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have not works? can faith save him?	What good is it, my brothers, if someone claims to have faith, but has no deeds? Can such faith save him?
JAS	2	15	만일 형제나 자매가 헐벗고 일용할 양식이 없는데	If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food,	Suppose a brother or sister is without clothes and daily food.
JAS	2	16	너희 중에 누구든지 그에게 이르되 평안히 가라, 더웁게 하라, 배 부르게 하라 하며 그 몸에 쓸 것을 주지 아니하면 무슨 이익이 있으리요	And one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the body; what doth it profit?	If one of you tells him, “Go in peace; stay warm and well fed,” but does not provide for his physical needs, what good is that?
JAS	2	17	이와 같이 행함이 없는 믿음은 그 자체가 죽은 것이라	Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being alone.	So too, faith by itself, if it does not result in action, is dead.
JAS	2	18	혹이 가로되 너는 믿음이 있고 나는 행함이 있으니 행함이 없는 네 믿음을 내게 보이라 나는 행함으로 내 믿음을 네게 보이리라	Yea, a man may say, Thou hast faith, and I have works: shew me thy faith without thy works, and I will shew thee my faith by my works.	But someone will say, “You have faith and I have deeds.” Show me your faith without deeds, and I will show you my faith by my deeds.
JAS	2	19	네가 하나님은 한 분이신 줄을 믿느냐 잘하는도다 귀신들도 믿고 떠느니라	Thou believest that there is one God; thou doest well: the devils also believe, and tremble.	You believe that God is one. Good for you! Even the demons believe that—and shudder.
JAS	2	20	아아 허탄한 사람아 행함이 없는 믿음이 헛것인 줄 알고자 하느냐	But wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead?	O foolish man, do you want evidence that faith without deeds is worthless?
JAS	2	21	우리 조상 아브라함이 그 아들 이삭을 제단에 드릴 때에 행함으로 의롭다 하심을 받은 것이 아니냐	Was not Abraham our father justified by works, when he had offered Isaac his son upon the altar?	Was not our father Abraham justified by what he did when he offered his son Isaac on the altar?
JAS	2	22	네가 보거니와 믿음이 그의 행함과 함께 일하고 행함으로 믿음이 온전케 되었느니라	Seest thou how faith wrought with his works, and by works was faith made perfect?	You see that his faith was working with his actions, and his faith was perfected by what he did.
JAS	2	23	이에 경에 이른 바 이브라함이 하나님을 믿으니 이것을 의로 여기셨다는 말씀이 응하였고 그는 하나님의 벗이라 칭함을 받았나니	And the scripture was fulfilled which saith, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness: and he was called the Friend of God.	And the Scripture was fulfilled that says, “Abraham believed God, and it was credited to him as righteousness,” and he was called a friend of God.
JAS	2	24	이로 보건대 사람이 행함으로 의롭다 하심을 받고 믿음으로만 아니니라	Ye see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only.	As you can see, a man is justified by his deeds and not by faith alone.
JAS	2	25	또 이와 같이 기생 라합이 사자를 접대하여 다른 길로 나가게 할 때에 행함으로 의롭다 하심을 받은 것이 아니냐	Likewise also was not Rahab the harlot justified by works, when she had received the messengers, and had sent them out another way?	In the same way, was not even Rahab the prostitute justified by her actions when she welcomed the spies and sent them off on another route?
JAS	2	26	영혼 없는 몸이 죽은 것 같이 행함이 없는 믿음은 죽은 것이니라	For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also.	As the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without deeds is dead.
JAS	3	1	내 형제들아 너희는 선생 된 우리가 더 큰 심판을 받을 줄을 알고 선생이 되지 말라	My brethren, be not many masters, knowing that we shall receive the greater condemnation.	Not many of you should become teachers, my brothers, because you know that we who teach will be judged more strictly.
JAS	3	2	우리가 다 실수가 많으니 만일 말에 실수가 없는 자면 곧 온전한 사람이라 능히 온 몸에 굴레 씌우리라	For in many things we offend all. If any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, and able also to bridle the whole body.	We all stumble in many ways. If anyone is never at fault in what he says, he is a perfect man, able to control his whole body.
JAS	3	3	우리가 말을 순종케 하려고 그 입에 재갈 먹여 온 몸을 어거하며	Behold, we put bits in the horses’ mouths, that they may obey us; and we turn about their whole body.	When we put bits into the mouths of horses to make them obey us, we can guide the whole animal.
JAS	3	4	또 배를 보라 그렇게 크고 광풍에 밀려가는 것들을 지극히 작은 키로 사공의 뜻대로 운전하나니	Behold also the ships, which though they be so great, and are driven of fierce winds, yet are they turned about with a very small helm, whithersoever the governor listeth.	Consider ships as well. Although they are so large and are driven by strong winds, they are steered by a very small rudder wherever the pilot is inclined.
JAS	3	5	이와 같이 혀도 작은 지체로되 큰 것을 자랑하도다 보라 어떻게 작은 불이 어떻게 많은 나무를 태우는가	Even so the tongue is a little member, and boasteth great things. Behold, how great a matter a little fire kindleth!	In the same way, the tongue is a small part of the body, but it boasts of great things. Consider how small a spark sets a great forest ablaze.
JAS	3	6	혀는 곧 불이요 불의의 세계라 혀는 우리 지체 중에서 온 몸을 더럽히고 생의 바퀴를 불사르나니 그 사르는 것이 지옥 불에서 나느니라	And the tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity: so is the tongue among our members, that it defileth the whole body, and setteth on fire the course of nature; and it is set on fire of hell.	The tongue also is a fire, a world of wickedness among the parts of the body. It pollutes the whole person, sets the course of his life on fire, and is itself set on fire by hell.
JAS	3	7	여러 종류의 짐승과 새며 벌레와 해물은 다 길들므로 사람에게 길들었거니와	For every kind of beasts, and of birds, and of serpents, and of things in the sea, is tamed, and hath been tamed of mankind:	All kinds of animals, birds, reptiles, and creatures of the sea are being tamed and have been tamed by man,
JAS	3	8	혀는 능히 길들일 사람이 없나니 쉬지 아니하는 악이요 죽이는 독이 가득한 것이라	But the tongue can no man tame; it is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison.	but no man can tame the tongue. It is a restless evil, full of deadly poison.
JAS	3	9	이것으로 우리가 주 아버지를 찬송하고 또 이것으로 하나님의 형상대로 지음을 받은 사람을 저주하나니	Therewith bless we God, even the Father; and therewith curse we men, which are made after the similitude of God.	With the tongue we bless our Lord and Father, and with it we curse men, who have been made in God’s likeness.
JAS	3	10	한 입으로 찬송과 저주가 나는도다 내 형제들아 이것이 마땅치 아니하니라	Out of the same mouth proceedeth blessing and cursing. My brethren, these things ought not so to be.	Out of the same mouth come blessing and cursing. My brothers, this should not be!
JAS	3	11	샘이 한 구멍으로 어찌 단 물과 쓴 물을 내겠느뇨	Doth a fountain send forth at the same place sweet water and bitter?	Can both fresh water and salt water flow from the same spring?
JAS	3	12	내 형제들아 어찌 무화과나무가 감람 열매를, 포도나무가 무화과를 맺겠느뇨 이와 같이 짠 물이 단 물을 내지 못하느니라	Can the fig tree, my brethren, bear olive berries? either a vine, figs? so can no fountain both yield salt water and fresh.	My brothers, can a fig tree grow olives, or a grapevine bear figs? Neither can a salt spring produce fresh water.
JAS	3	13	너희 중에 지혜와 총명이 있는 자가 누구뇨 그는 선행으로 말미암아 지혜의 온유함으로 그 행함을 보일지니라	Who is a wise man and endued with knowledge among you? let him shew out of a good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom.	Who is wise and understanding among you? Let him show it by his good conduct, by deeds done in the humility that comes from wisdom.
JAS	3	14	그러나 너희 마음 속에 독한 시기와 다툼이 있으면 자랑하지 말라 진리를 거스려 거짓하지 말라	But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the truth.	But if you harbor bitter jealousy and selfish ambition in your hearts, do not boast in it or deny the truth.
JAS	3	15	이러한 지혜는 위로부터 내려온 것이 아니요 세상적이요 정욕적이요 마귀적이니	This wisdom descendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish.	Such wisdom does not come from above, but is earthly, unspiritual, demonic.
JAS	3	16	시기와 다툼이 있는 곳에는 요란과 모든 악한 일이 있음이니라	For where envying and strife is, there is confusion and every evil work.	For where jealousy and selfish ambition exist, there will be disorder and every evil practice.
JAS	3	17	오직 위로부터 난 지혜는 첫째 성결하고 다음에 화평하고 관용하고 양순하며 궁휼과 선한 열매가 가득하고 편벽과 거짓이 없나니	But the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be intreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy.	But the wisdom from above is first of all pure, then peace-loving, gentle, accommodating, full of mercy and good fruit, impartial, and sincere.
JAS	3	18	화평케 하는 자들은 화평으로 심어 의의 열매를 거두느니라	And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that make peace.	Peacemakers who sow in peace reap the fruit of righteousness.
JAS	4	1	너희 중에 싸움이 어디로, 다툼이 어디로 좇아 나느뇨 너희 지체 중에서 싸우는 정욕으로 좇아 난 것이 아니냐	From whence come wars and fightings among you? come they not hence, even of your lusts that war in your members?	What causes conflicts and quarrels among you? Don’t they come from the passions at war within you?
JAS	4	2	너희가 욕심을 내어도 얻지 못하고 살인하고 시기하여도 능히 취하지 못하나니 너희가 다투고 싸우는도다 너희가 얻지 못함은 구하지 아니함이요	Ye lust, and have not: ye kill, and desire to have, and cannot obtain: ye fight and war, yet ye have not, because ye ask not.	You crave what you do not have; you kill and covet, but are unable to obtain it. You quarrel and fight. You do not have, because you do not ask.
JAS	4	3	구하여도 받지 못함은 정욕으로 쓰려고 잘못 구함이니라	Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts.	And when you do ask, you do not receive, because you ask with wrong motives, that you may squander it on your pleasures.
JAS	4	4	간음하는 여자들이여 세상에 벗된 것이 하나님의 원수임을 알지 못하느뇨 그런즉 누구든지 세상과 벗이 되고자 하는 자는 스스로 하나님과 원수 되게 하는 것이니라	Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God.	You adulteresses! Do you not know that friendship with the world is hostility toward God? Therefore, whoever chooses to be a friend of the world renders himself an enemy of God.
JAS	4	5	너희가 하나님이 우리 속에 거하게 하신 성령이 시기하기까지 사모한다 하신 말씀을 헛된 줄로 생각하느뇨	Do ye think that the scripture saith in vain, The spirit that dwelleth in us lusteth to envy?	Or do you think the Scripture says without reason that the Spirit He caused to dwell in us yearns with envy?
JAS	4	6	그러나 더욱 큰 은혜를 주시나니 그러므로 일렀으되 하나님이 교만한 자를 물리치시고 겸손한 자에게 은혜를 주신다 하였느니라	But he giveth more grace. Wherefore he saith, God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the humble.	But He gives us more grace. This is why it says: “God opposes the proud, but gives grace to the humble.”
JAS	4	7	그런즉 너희는 하나님께 순복할지어다 마귀를 대적하라 그리하면 너희를 피하리라	Submit yourselves therefore to God. Resist the devil, and he will flee from you.	Submit yourselves, then, to God. Resist the devil, and he will flee from you.
JAS	4	8	하나님을 가까이 하라 그리하면 너희를 가까이 하시리라 죄인들아 손을 깨끗이 하라 두 마음을 품은 자들아 마음을 성결케 하라	Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you. Cleanse your hands, ye sinners; and purify your hearts, ye double minded.	Draw near to God, and He will draw near to you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners, and purify your hearts, you double-minded.
JAS	4	9	슬퍼하며 애통하며 울지어다 너희 웃음을 애통으로, 너희 즐거움을 근심으로 바꿀지어다	Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep: let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to heaviness.	Grieve, mourn, and weep. Turn your laughter to mourning, and your joy to gloom.
JAS	4	10	주 앞에서 낮추라 그리하면 주께서 너희를 높이시리라	Humble yourselves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up.	Humble yourselves before the Lord, and He will exalt you.
JAS	4	11	형제들아 피차에 비방하지 말라 형제를 비방하는 자나 형제를 판단하는 자는 곧 율법을 비방하고 율법을 판단하는 것이라 네가 만일 율법을 판단하면 율법의 준행자가 아니요 재판자로다	Speak not evil one of another, brethren. He that speaketh evil of his brother, and judgeth his brother, speaketh evil of the law, and judgeth the law: but if thou judge the law, thou art not a doer of the law, but a judge.	Brothers, do not slander one another. Anyone who speaks against his brother or judges him speaks against the law and judges it. And if you judge the law, you are not a practitioner of the law, but a judge of it.
JAS	4	12	입법자와 재판자는 오직 하나이시니 능히 구원하기도 하시며 멸하기도 하시느니라 너는 누구관대 이웃을 판단하느냐	There is one lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy: who art thou that judgest another?	There is only one Lawgiver and Judge, the One who is able to save and destroy. But who are you to judge your neighbor?
JAS	4	13	들으라 너희 중에 말하기를 오늘이나 내일이나 우리가 아무 도시에 가서 거기서 일 년을 유하며 장사하여 이를 보리라 하는 자들아	Go to now, ye that say, To day or to morrow we will go into such a city, and continue there a year, and buy and sell, and get gain:	Come now, you who say, “Today or tomorrow we will go to this or that city, spend a year there, carry on business, and make a profit.”
JAS	4	14	내일 일을 너희가 알지 못하는도다 너희 생명이 무엇이뇨 너희는 잠간 보이다가 없어지는 안개니라	Whereas ye know not what shall be on the morrow. For what is your life? It is even a vapour, that appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away.	You do not even know what will happen tomorrow! What is your life? You are a mist that appears for a little while and then vanishes.
JAS	4	15	너희가 도리어 말하기를 주의 뜻이면 우리가 살기도 하고 이것 저것을 하리라 할 것이거늘	For that ye ought to say, If the Lord will, we shall live, and do this, or that.	Instead, you ought to say, “If the Lord is willing, we will live and do this or that.”
JAS	4	16	이제 너희가 허탄한 자랑을 자랑하니 이러한 자랑은 다 악한 것이라	But now ye rejoice in your boastings: all such rejoicing is evil.	As it is, you boast in your proud intentions. All such boasting is evil.
JAS	4	17	이러므로 사람이 선을 행할 줄 알고도 행치 아니하면 죄니라	Therefore to him that knoweth to do good, and doeth it not, to him it is sin.	Anyone, then, who knows the right thing to do, yet fails to do it, is guilty of sin.
JAS	5	1	들으라 부한 자들아 너희에게 임할 고생을 인하여 울고 통곡하라	Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you.	Come now, you who are rich, weep and wail over the misery to come upon you.
JAS	5	2	너희 재물은 썩었고 너희 옷은 좀 먹었으며	Your riches are corrupted, and your garments are motheaten.	Your riches have rotted and moths have eaten your clothes.
JAS	5	3	너희 금과 은은 녹이 슬었으니 이 녹이 너희에게 증거가 되며 불 같이 너희 살을 먹으리라 너희가 말세에 재물을 쌓았도다	Your gold and silver is cankered; and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire. Ye have heaped treasure together for the last days.	Your gold and silver are corroded. Their corrosion will testify against you and consume your flesh like fire. You have hoarded treasure in the last days.
JAS	5	4	보라 너희 밭에 추수한 품꾼에게 주지 아니한 삯이 소리지르며 추수한 자의 우는 소리가 만군의 주의 귀에 들렸느니라	Behold, the hire of the labourers who have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, crieth: and the cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord of sabaoth.	Look, the wages you withheld from the workmen who mowed your fields are crying out against you. The cries of the harvesters have reached the ears of the Lord of Hosts.
JAS	5	5	너희가 땅에서 사치하고 연락하여 도살의 날에 너희 마음을 살찌게 하였도다	Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton; ye have nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter.	You have lived on earth in luxury and self-indulgence. You have fattened your hearts in the day of slaughter.
JAS	5	6	너희가 옳은 자를 정죄하였도다 또 죽였도다 그는 너희에게 대항하지 아니하였느니라	Ye have condemned and killed the just; and he doth not resist you.	You have condemned and murdered the righteous, who did not resist you.
JAS	5	7	그러므로 형제들아 주의 강림하시기까지 길이 참으라 보라 농부가 땅에서 나는 귀한 열매를 바라고 길이 참아 이른 비와 늦은 비를 기다리나니	Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord. Behold, the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the earth, and hath long patience for it, until he receive the early and latter rain.	Be patient, then, brothers, until the Lord’s coming. See how the farmer awaits the precious fruit of the soil—how patient he is for the fall and spring rains.
JAS	5	8	너희도 길이 참고 마음을 굳게 하라 주의 강림이 가까우니라	Be ye also patient; stablish your hearts: for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh.	You, too, be patient and strengthen your hearts, because the Lord’s coming is near.
JAS	5	9	형제들아 서로 원망하지 말라 그리하여야 심판을 면하리라 보라 심판자가 문 밖에 서 계시니라	Grudge not one against another, brethren, lest ye be condemned: behold, the judge standeth before the door.	Do not complain about one another, brothers, so that you will not be judged. Look, the Judge is standing at the door!
JAS	5	10	형제들아 주의 이름으로 말한 선지자들로 고난과 오래 참음의 본을 삼으라	Take, my brethren, the prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example of suffering affliction, and of patience.	Brothers, as an example of patience in affliction, take the prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord.
JAS	5	11	보라 인내하는 자를 우리가 복되다 하나니 너희가 욥의 인내를 들었고 주께서 주신 결말을 보았거니와 주는 가장 자비하시고 긍휼히 여기는 자시니라	Behold, we count them happy which endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord; that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy.	See how blessed we consider those who have persevered. You have heard of Job’s perseverance and have seen the outcome from the Lord. The Lord is full of compassion and mercy.
JAS	5	12	내 형제들아 무엇보다도 맹세하지 말지니 하늘로나 땅으로나 아무 다른 것으로도 맹세하지 말고 오직 너희의 그렇다 하는 것은 그렇다 하고 아니라 하는 것은 아니라 하여 죄 정함을 면하라	But above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any other oath: but let your yea be yea; and your nay, nay; lest ye fall into condemnation.	Above all, my brothers, do not swear, not by heaven or earth or by any other oath. Simply let your “Yes” be yes, and your “No,” no, so that you will not fall under judgment.
JAS	5	13	너희 중에 고난 당하는 자가 있느냐 저는 기도할 것이요 즐거워하는 자가 있느냐 저는 찬송할지니라	Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. Is any merry? let him sing psalms.	Is any one of you suffering? He should pray. Is anyone cheerful? He should sing praises.
JAS	5	14	너희 중에 병든 자가 있느냐 저는 교회의 장로들을 청할 것이요 그들은 주의 이름으로 기름을 바르며 위하여 기도할지니라	Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord:	Is any one of you sick? He should call the elders of the church to pray over him and anoint him with oil in the name of the Lord.
JAS	5	15	믿음의 기도는 병든 자를 구원하리니 주께서 저를 일으키시리라 혹시 죄를 범하였을지라도 사하심을 얻으리라	And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him.	And the prayer offered in faith will restore the one who is sick. The Lord will raise him up. If he has sinned, he will be forgiven.
JAS	5	16	이러므로 너희 죄를 서로 고하며 병 낫기를 위하여 서로 기도하라 의인의 간구는 역사하는 힘이 많으니라	Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much.	Therefore confess your sins to each other and pray for each other so that you may be healed. The prayer of a righteous man has great power to prevail.
JAS	5	17	엘리야는 우리와 성정이 같은 사람이로되 저가 비 오지 않기를 간절히 기도한즉 삼 년 육 개월 동안 땅에 비가 아니오고	Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain: and it rained not on the earth by the space of three years and six months.	Elijah was a man just like us. He prayed earnestly that it would not rain, and it did not rain on the land for three and a half years.
JAS	5	18	디시 기도한즉 하늘이 비를 주고 땅이 열매를 내었느니라	And he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit.	Again he prayed, and the heavens gave rain, and the earth yielded its crops.
JAS	5	19	내 형제들아 너희 중에 미혹하여 진리를 떠난 자를 누가 돌아서게 하면	Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth, and one convert him;	My brothers, if one of you should wander from the truth and someone should bring him back,
JAS	5	20	너희가 알 것은 죄인을 미혹한 길에서 돌아서게 하는 자가 그 영혼을 사망에서 구원하며 허다한 죄를 덮을 것이니라	Let him know, that he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.	consider this: Whoever turns a sinner from the error of his way will save his soul from death and cover over a multitude of sins.
1PE	1	1	예수 그리스도의 사도 베드로는 본도, 갈라디아, 갑바도기아, 아시아와 비두니아 에 흩어진 나그네	Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the strangers scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia,	Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, To the elect who are exiles of the Dispersion throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, chosen
1PE	1	2	곧 하나님 아버지의 미리 아심을 따라 성령의 거룩하게 하심으로 순종함과 예수 그리스도의 피 뿌림을 얻기 위하여 택하심을 입은 자들에게 편지하노니 은혜와 평강이 너희에게 더욱 많을지어다	Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ: Grace unto you, and peace, be multiplied.	according to the foreknowledge of God the Father and sanctified by the Spirit for obedience to Jesus Christ and sprinkling by His blood: Grace and peace be yours in abundance.
1PE	1	3	찬송하리로다 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 아버지 하나님이 그 많으신 긍휼대로 예수 그리스도의 죽은 자 가운데서 부활하심으로 말미암아 우리를 거듭나게 하사 산 소망이 있게 하시며	Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy hath begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,	Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! By His great mercy He has given us new birth into a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
1PE	1	4	썩지 않고 더럽지 않고 쇠하지 아니하는 기업을 잇게 하시나니 곧 너희를 위하여 하늘에 간직하신 것이라	To an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you,	and into an inheritance that is imperishable, undefiled, and unfading, reserved in heaven for you,
1PE	1	5	너희가 말세에 나타내기로 예비하신 구원을 얻기 위하여 믿음으로 말미암아 하나님의 능력으로 보호하심을 입었나니	Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last time.	who through faith are shielded by God’s power for the salvation that is ready to be revealed in the last time.
1PE	1	6	그러므로 너희가 이제 여러 가지 시험을 인하여 잠간 근심하게 되지 않을 수 없었으나 오히려 크게 기뻐하도다	Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season, if need be, ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations:	In this you greatly rejoice, though now for a little while you may have had to suffer grief in various trials
1PE	1	7	너희 믿음의 시련이 불로 연단하여도 없어질 금보다 더 귀하여 예수 그리스도의 나타나실 때에 칭찬과 영광과 존귀를 얻게 하려 함이라	That the trial of your faith, being much more precious than of gold that perisheth, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise and honour and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ:	so that the proven character of your faith—more precious than gold, which perishes even though refined by fire—may result in praise, glory, and honor at the revelation of Jesus Christ.
1PE	1	8	예수를 너희가 보지 못하였으나 사랑하는도다 이제도 보지 못하나 믿고 말할 수 없는 영광스러운 즐거움으로 기뻐하니	Whom having not seen, ye love; in whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory:	Though you have not seen Him, you love Him; and though you do not see Him now, you believe in Him and rejoice with an inexpressible and glorious joy,
1PE	1	9	믿음의 결국 곧 영혼의 구원을 받음이라	Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls.	now that you are receiving the goal of your faith, the salvation of your souls.
1PE	1	10	이 구원에 대하여는 너희에게 임할 은혜를 예언하던 선지자들이 연구하고 부지런히 살펴서	Of which salvation the prophets have enquired and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you:	Concerning this salvation, the prophets who foretold the grace to come to you searched and investigated carefully,
1PE	1	11	자기 속에 계신 그리스도의 영이 그 받으실 고난과 후에 얻으실 영광을 미리 증거하여 어느 시, 어떠한 때를 지시하시는지 상고하니라	Searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow.	trying to determine the time and setting to which the Spirit of Christ in them was pointing when He predicted the sufferings of Christ and the glories to follow.
1PE	1	12	이 섬긴 바가 자기를 위한 것이 아니요 너희를 위한 것임이 계시로 알게 되었으니 이것은 하늘로부터 보내신 성령을 힘입어 복음을 전하는 자들로 이제 너희에게 고한 것이요 천사들도 살펴 보기를 원하는 것이니라	Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister the things, which are now reported unto you by them that have preached the gospel unto you with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven; which things the angels desire to look into.	It was revealed to them that they were not serving themselves, but you, when they foretold the things now announced by those who preached the gospel to you by the Holy Spirit sent from heaven. Even angels long to look into these things.
1PE	1	13	그러므로 너희 마음의 허리를 동이고 근신하여 예수 그리스도의 나타나실 때에 너희에게 가져올 은혜를 온전히 바랄지어다	Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ;	Therefore prepare your minds for action. Be sober-minded. Set your hope fully on the grace to be given you at the revelation of Jesus Christ.
1PE	1	14	너희가 순종하는 자식처럼 이전 알지 못할 때에 좇던 너희 사욕을 본 삼지 말고	As obedient children, not fashioning yourselves according to the former lusts in your ignorance:	As obedient children, do not conform to the passions of your former ignorance.
1PE	1	15	오직 너희를 부르신 거룩한 자처럼 너희도 모든 행실에 거룩한 자가 되라	But as he which hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation;	But just as He who called you is holy, so be holy in all you do,
1PE	1	16	기록하였으되 내가 거룩하니 너희도 거룩할지어다 하셨느니라	Because it is written, Be ye holy; for I am holy.	for it is written: “Be holy, because I am holy.”
1PE	1	17	외모로 보시지 않고 각 사람의 행위대로 판단하시는 자를 너희가 아버지라 부른즉 너희의 나그네로 있을 때를 두려움으로 지내라	And if ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons judgeth according to every man’s work, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear:	Since you call on a Father who judges each one’s work impartially, conduct yourselves in reverent fear during your stay as foreigners.
1PE	1	18	너희가 알거니와 너희 조상의 유전한 망령된 행실에서 구속된 것은 은이나 금 같이 없어질 것으로 한 것이 아니요	Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers;	For you know that it was not with perishable things such as silver or gold that you were redeemed from the empty way of life you inherited from your forefathers,
1PE	1	19	오직 흠 없고 점 없는 어린 양 같은 그리스도의 보배로운 피로 한 것이니라	But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot:	but with the precious blood of Christ, a lamb without blemish or spot.
1PE	1	20	그는 창세 전부터 미리 알리신 바 된 자나 이 말세에 너희를 위하여 나타내신 바 되었으니	Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for you,	He was known before the foundation of the world, but was revealed in the last times for your sake.
1PE	1	21	너희는 저를 죽은 자 가운데서 살리시고 영광을 주신 하나님을 그리스도로 말미암아 믿는 자니 너희 믿음과 소망이 하나님께 있게 하셨느니라	Who by him do believe in God, that raised him up from the dead, and gave him glory; that your faith and hope might be in God.	Through Him you believe in God, who raised Him from the dead and glorified Him; and so your faith and hope are in God.
1PE	1	22	너희가 진리를 순종함으로 너희 영혼을 깨끗하게 하여 거짓이 없이 형제를 사랑하기에 이르렀으니 마음으로 뜨겁게 피차 사랑하라	Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren, see that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently:	Since you have purified your souls by obedience to the truth so that you have a genuine love for your brothers, love one another deeply, from a pure heart.
1PE	1	23	너희가 거듭난 것이 썩어질 씨로 된 것이 아니요 썩지 아니할 씨로 된 것이니 하나님의 살아 있고 항상 있는 말씀으로 되었느니라	Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which liveth and abideth for ever.	For you have been born again, not of perishable seed, but of imperishable, through the living and enduring word of God.
1PE	1	24	그러므로 모든 육체는 풀과 같고 그 모든 영광이 풀의 꽃과 같으니 풀은 마르고 꽃은 떨어지되	For all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of grass. The grass withereth, and the flower thereof falleth away:	For, “All flesh is like grass, and all its glory like the flowers of the field; the grass withers and the flowers fall,
1PE	1	25	오직 주의 말씀은 세세토록 있도다 하였으니 너희에게 전한 복음이 곧 이 말씀이니라	But the word of the Lord endureth for ever. And this is the word which by the gospel is preached unto you.	but the word of the Lord stands forever.” And this is the word that was proclaimed to you.
1PE	2	1	그러므로 모든 악독과 모든 궤휼과 외식과 시기와 모든 비방하는 말을 버리고	Wherefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and all evil speakings,	Rid yourselves, therefore, of all malice, deceit, hypocrisy, envy, and slander.
1PE	2	2	갓난 아이들 같이 순전하고 신령한 젖을 사모하라 이는 이로 말미암아 너희로 구원에 이르도록 자라게 하려 함이라	As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby:	Like newborn babies, crave pure spiritual milk, so that by it you may grow up in your salvation,
1PE	2	3	너희가 주의 인자하심을 맛보았으면 그리하라	If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious.	now that you have tasted that the Lord is good.
1PE	2	4	사람에게는 버린 바가 되었으나 하나님께는 택하심을 입은 보배로운 산 돌이신 예수에게 나아와	To whom coming, as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious,	As you come to Him, the living stone, rejected by men but chosen and precious in God’s sight,
1PE	2	5	너희도 산 돌 같이 신령한 집으로 세워지고 예수 그리스도로 말미암아 하나님이 기쁘게 받으실 신령한 제사를 드릴 거룩한 제사장이 될지니라	Ye also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.	you also, like living stones, are being built into a spiritual house to be a holy priesthood, offering spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.
1PE	2	6	경에 기록하였으되 보라 내가 택한 보배롭고 요긴한 모퉁이 돌을 시온에 두노니 저를 믿는 자는 부끄러움을 당치 아니하리라 하였으니	Wherefore also it is contained in the scripture, Behold, I lay in Sion a chief corner stone, elect, precious: and he that believeth on him shall not be confounded.	For it stands in Scripture: “See, I lay in Zion a stone, a chosen and precious cornerstone; and the one who believes in Him will never be put to shame.”
1PE	2	7	그러므로 믿는 너희에게는 보배이나 믿지 아니하는 자에게는 건축자들의 버린 그 돌이 모퉁이의 머릿돌이 되고	Unto you therefore which believe he is precious: but unto them which be disobedient, the stone which the builders disallowed, the same is made the head of the corner,	To you who believe, then, this stone is precious. But to those who do not believe, “The stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone,”
1PE	2	8	또한 부딪히는 돌과 거치는 반석이 되었다 하니라 저희가 말씀을 순종치 아니하므로 넘어지나니 이는 저희를 이렇게 정하신 것이라	And a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offence, even to them which stumble at the word, being disobedient: whereunto also they were appointed.	and, “A stone of stumbling and a rock of offense.” They stumble because they disobey the word—and to this they were appointed.
1PE	2	9	오직 너희는 택하신 족속이요 왕같은 제사장들이요 거룩한 나라요 그의 소유된 백성이니 이는 너희를 어두운 데서 불러내어 그의 기이한 빛에 들어가게 하신 자의 아름다운 덕을 선전하게 하려 하심이라	But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light:	But you are a chosen people, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for God’s own possession, to proclaim the virtues of Him who called you out of darkness into His marvelous light.
1PE	2	10	너희가 전에는 백성이 아니더니 이제는 하나님의 백성이요 전에는 긍휼을 얻지 못하였더니 이제는 긍휼을 얻은 자니라	Which in time past were not a people, but are now the people of God: which had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy.	Once you were not a people, but now you are the people of God; once you had not received mercy, but now you have received mercy.
1PE	2	11	사랑하는 자들아 나그네와 행인 같은 너희를 권하노니 영혼을 거스려 싸우는 육체의 정욕을 제어하라	Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul;	Beloved, I urge you, as foreigners and exiles, to abstain from the desires of the flesh, which war against your soul.
1PE	2	12	너희가 이방인 중에서 행실을 선하게 가져 너희를 악행한다고 비방하는 자들로 하여금 너희 선한 일을 보고 권고하시는 날에 하나님께 영광을 돌리게 하려 함이라	Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles: that, whereas they speak against you as evildoers, they may by your good works, which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation.	Conduct yourselves with such honor among the Gentiles that, though they slander you as evildoers, they may see your good deeds and glorify God on the day He visits us.
1PE	2	13	인간에 세운 모든 제도를 주를 위하여 순복하되 혹은 위에 있는 왕이나	Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord’s sake: whether it be to the king, as supreme;	Submit yourselves for the Lord’s sake to every human institution, whether to the king as the supreme authority,
1PE	2	14	혹은 악행하는 자를 징벌하고 선행하는 자를 포장하기 위하여 그의 보낸 방백에게 하라	Or unto governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well.	or to governors as those sent by him to punish those who do wrong and to praise those who do right.
1PE	2	15	곧 선행으로 어리석은 사람들의 무식한 말을 막으시는 것이라	For so is the will of God, that with well doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men:	For it is God’s will that by doing good you should silence the ignorance of foolish men.
1PE	2	16	자유하나 그 자유로 악을 가리우는데 쓰지 말고 오직 하나님의 종과 같이 하라	As free, and not using your liberty for a cloke of maliciousness, but as the servants of God.	Live in freedom, but do not use your freedom as a cover-up for evil; live as servants of God.
1PE	2	17	뭇 사람을 공경하며 형제를 사랑하며 하나님을 두려워하며 왕을 공경하라	Honour all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Honour the king.	Treat everyone with high regard: Love the brotherhood of believers, fear God, honor the king.
1PE	2	18	사환들아 범사에 두려워함으로 주인들에게 순복하되 선하고 관용하는 자들에게만 아니라 또한 까다로운 자들에게도 그리하라	Servants, be subject to your masters with all fear; not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward.	Servants, submit yourselves to your masters with all respect, not only to those who are good and gentle, but even to those who are unreasonable.
1PE	2	19	애매히 고난을 받아도 하나님을 생각함으로 슬픔을 참으면 이는 아름다우나	For this is thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully.	For if anyone endures the pain of unjust suffering because he is conscious of God, this is to be commended.
1PE	2	20	죄가 있어 매를 맞고 참으면 무슨 칭찬이 있으리요 오직 선을 행함으로 고난을 받고 참으면 이는 하나님 앞에 아름다우니라	For what glory is it, if, when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if, when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God.	How is it to your credit if you are beaten for doing wrong and you endure it? But if you suffer for doing good and you endure it, this is commendable before God.
1PE	2	21	이를 위하여 너희가 부르심을 입었으니 그리스도도 너희를 위하여 고난을 받으사 너희에게 본을 끼쳐 그 자취를 따라오게 하려 하셨느니라	For even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps:	For to this you were called, because Christ also suffered for you, leaving you an example, that you should follow in His footsteps:
1PE	2	22	저는 죄를 범치 아니하시고 그 입에 궤사도 없으시며	Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth:	“He committed no sin, and no deceit was found in His mouth.”
1PE	2	23	욕을 받으시되 대신 욕하지 아니하시고 고난을 받으시되 위협하지 아니하시고 오직 공의로 심판하시는 자에게 부탁하시며	Who, when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not; but committed himself to him that judgeth righteously:	When they heaped abuse on Him, He did not retaliate; when He suffered, He made no threats, but entrusted Himself to Him who judges justly.
1PE	2	24	친히 나무에 달려 그 몸으로 우리 죄를 담당하셨으니 이는 우리로 죄에 대하여 죽고 의에 대하여 살게 하려 하심이라 저가 채찍에 맞음으로 너희는 나음을 얻었나니	Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness: by whose stripes ye were healed.	He Himself bore our sins in His body on the tree, so that we might die to sin and live to righteousness. “By His stripes you are healed.”
1PE	2	25	너희가 전에는 양과 같이 길을 잃었더니 이제는 너희 영혼의 목자와 감독 되신 이에게 돌아왔느니라	For ye were as sheep going astray; but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls.	For “you were like sheep going astray,” but now you have returned to the Shepherd and Overseer of your souls.
1PE	3	1	아내 된 자들아 이와 같이 자기 남편에게 순복하라 이는 혹 도를 순종치 않는 자라도 말로 말미암지 않고 그 아내의 행위로 말미암아 구원을 얻게 하려 함이니	Likewise, ye wives, be in subjection to your own husbands; that, if any obey not the word, they also may without the word be won by the conversation of the wives;	Wives, in the same way, submit yourselves to your husbands, so that even if they refuse to believe the word, they will be won over without words by the behavior of their wives
1PE	3	2	너희의 두려워하며 정결한 행위를 봄이라	While they behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear.	when they see your pure and reverent demeanor.
1PE	3	3	너희 단장은 머리를 꾸미고 금을 차고 아름다운 옷을 입는 외모로 하지 말고	Whose adorning let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel;	Your beauty should not come from outward adornment, such as braided hair or gold jewelry or fine clothes,
1PE	3	4	오직 마음에 숨은 사람을 온유하고 안정한 심령의 썩지 아니할 것으로 하라 이는 하나님 앞에 값진 것이니라	But let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price.	but from the inner disposition of your heart, the unfading beauty of a gentle and quiet spirit, which is precious in God’s sight.
1PE	3	5	전에 하나님께 소망을 두었던 거룩한 부녀들도 이와 같이 자기 남편에게 순복함으로 자기를 단장하였나니	For after this manner in the old time the holy women also, who trusted in God, adorned themselves, being in subjection unto their own husbands:	For this is how the holy women of the past adorned themselves. They put their hope in God and were submissive to their husbands,
1PE	3	6	사라가 아브라함을 주라 칭하여 복종한 것 같이 너희가 선을 행하고 아무 두려운 일에도 놀라지 아니함으로 그의 딸이 되었느니라	Even as Sara obeyed Abraham, calling him lord: whose daughters ye are, as long as ye do well, and are not afraid with any amazement.	just as Sarah obeyed Abraham and called him lord. And you are her children if you do what is right and refuse to give way to fear.
1PE	3	7	남편된 자들아 이와 같이 지식을 따라 너희 아내와 동거하고 저는 더 연약한 그릇이요 또 생명의 은혜를 유업으로 함께 받을 자로 알아 귀히 여기라 이는 너희 기도가 막히지 아니하게 하려 함이라	Likewise, ye husbands, dwell with them according to knowledge, giving honour unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel, and as being heirs together of the grace of life; that your prayers be not hindered.	Husbands, in the same way, treat your wives with consideration as a delicate vessel, and with honor as fellow heirs of the gracious gift of life, so that your prayers will not be hindered.
1PE	3	8	마지막으로 말하노니 너희가 다 마음을 같이 하여 체휼하며 형제를 사랑하며 불쌍히 여기며 겸손하며	Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another, love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous:	Finally, all of you, be like-minded and sympathetic, love as brothers, be tenderhearted and humble.
1PE	3	9	악을 악으로, 욕을 욕으로 갚지 말고 도리어 복을 빌라 이를 위하여 너희가 부르심을 입었으니 이는 복을 유업으로 받게 하려 하심이라	Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing: but contrariwise blessing; knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a blessing.	Do not repay evil with evil or insult with insult, but with blessing, because to this you were called so that you may inherit a blessing.
1PE	3	10	그러므로 생명을 사랑하고 좋은 날 보기를 원하는 자는 혀를 금하여 악한 말을 그치며 그 입술로 궤휼을 말하지 말고	For he that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile:	For, “Whoever would love life and see good days must keep his tongue from evil and his lips from deceitful speech.
1PE	3	11	악에서 떠나 선을 행하고 화평을 구하여 이를 좇으라	Let him eschew evil, and do good; let him seek peace, and ensue it.	He must turn from evil and do good; he must seek peace and pursue it.
1PE	3	12	주의 눈은 의인을 향하시고 그의 귀는 저의 간구에 기울이시되 주의 낯은 악행하는 자들을 향하시느니라 하였느니라	For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open unto their prayers: but the face of the Lord is against them that do evil.	For the eyes of the Lord are on the righteous, and His ears are inclined to their prayer. But the face of the Lord is against those who do evil.”
1PE	3	13	또 너희가 열심으로 선을 행하면 누가 너희를 해하리요	And who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good?	Who can harm you if you are zealous for what is good?
1PE	3	14	그러나 의를 위하여 고난을 받으면 복 있는 자니 저희의 두려워함을 두려워 말며 소동치 말고	But and if ye suffer for righteousness’ sake, happy are ye: and be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled;	But even if you should suffer for what is right, you are blessed. “Do not fear what they fear; do not be shaken.”
1PE	3	15	너희 마음에 그리스도를 주로 삼아 거룩하게 하고 너희 속에 있는 소망에 관한 이유를 묻는 자에게는 대답할 것을 항상 예비하되 온유와 두려움으로 하고	But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts: and be ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you with meekness and fear:	But in your hearts sanctify Christ as Lord. Always be prepared to give a defense to everyone who asks you the reason for the hope that is in you. But respond with gentleness and respect,
1PE	3	16	선한 양심을 가지라 이는 그리스도 안에 있는 너희의 선행을 욕하는 자들로 그 비방하는 일에 부끄러움을 당하게 하려 함이라	Having a good conscience; that, whereas they speak evil of you, as of evildoers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ.	keeping a clear conscience, so that those who slander you may be put to shame by your good behavior in Christ.
1PE	3	17	선을 행함으로 고난 받는 것이 하나님의 뜻일진대 악을 행함으로 고난 받는 것보다 나으니라	For it is better, if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for well doing, than for evil doing.	For it is better, if it is God’s will, to suffer for doing good than for doing evil.
1PE	3	18	그리스도께서도 한 번 죄를 위하여 죽으사 의인으로서 불의한 자를 대신하셨으니 이는 우리를 하나님 앞으로 인도하려 하심이라 육체로는 죽임을 당하시고 영으로는 살리심을 받으셨으니	For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit:	For Christ also suffered for sins once for all, the righteous for the unrighteous, to bring you to God. He was put to death in the body but made alive in the Spirit,
1PE	3	19	저가 또한 영으로 옥에 있는 영들에게 전파하시니라	By which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison;	in whom He also went and preached to the spirits in prison
1PE	3	20	그들은 전에 노아의 날 방주 예비할 동안 하나님이 오래 참고 기다리실 때에 순종치 아니하던 자들이라 방주에서 물로 말미암아 구원을 얻은 자가 몇 명뿐이니 겨우 여덟 명이라	Which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water.	who disobeyed long ago when God waited patiently in the days of Noah while the ark was being built. In the ark a few people, only eight souls, were saved through water.
1PE	3	21	물은 예수 그리스도의 부활하심으로 말미암아 이제 너희를 구원하는 표니 곧 침례라 육체의 더러운 것을 제하여 버림이 아니요 오직 선한 양심이 하나님을 향하여 찾아가는 것이라	The like figure whereunto even baptism doth also now save us (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God,) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ:	And this water symbolizes the baptism that now saves you also—not the removal of dirt from the body, but the pledge of a clear conscience toward God—through the resurrection of Jesus Christ,
1PE	3	22	저는 하늘에 오르사 하나님 우편에 계시니 천사들과 권세들과 능력들이 저에게 순복하느니라	Who is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God; angels and authorities and powers being made subject unto him.	who has gone into heaven and is at the right hand of God, with angels, authorities, and powers subject to Him.
1PE	4	1	그리스도께서 이미 육체에 고난을 받으셨으니 너희도 같은 마음으로 갑옷을 삼으라 이는 육체의 고난을 받은 자가 죄를 그쳤음이니	Forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered for us in the flesh, arm yourselves likewise with the same mind: for he that hath suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sin;	Therefore, since Christ suffered in His body, arm yourselves with the same resolve, because anyone who has suffered in his body is done with sin.
1PE	4	2	그 후로는 다시 사람의 정욕을 좇지 않고 오직 하나님의 뜻을 좇아 육체의 남은 때를 살게 하려 함이라	That he no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh to the lusts of men, but to the will of God.	Consequently, he does not live out his remaining time on earth for human passions, but for the will of God.
1PE	4	3	너희가 음란과 정욕과 술취함과 방탕과 연락과 무법한 우상 숭배를 하여 이방인의 뜻을 좇아 행한 것이 지나간 때가 족하도다	For the time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banquetings, and abominable idolatries:	For you have spent enough time in the past carrying out the same desires as the Gentiles: living in debauchery, lust, drunkenness, orgies, carousing, and detestable idolatry.
1PE	4	4	이러므로 너희가 저희와 함께 그런 극한 방탕에 달음질하지 아니하는 것을 저희가 이상히 여겨 비방하나	Wherein they think it strange that ye run not with them to the same excess of riot, speaking evil of you:	Because of this, they consider it strange of you not to plunge with them into the same flood of reckless indiscretion, and they heap abuse on you.
1PE	4	5	저희가 산 자와 죽은 자 심판하기를 예비하신 자에게 직고하리라	Who shall give account to him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead.	But they will have to give an account to Him who is ready to judge the living and the dead.
1PE	4	6	이를 위하여 죽은 자들에게도 복음이 전파되었으니 이는 육체로는 사람처럼 심판을 받으나 영으로는 하나님처럼 살게 하려 함이니라	For for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit.	That is why the gospel was preached even to those who are now dead, so that they might be judged as men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit.
1PE	4	7	만물의 마지막이 가까웠으니 그러므로 너희는 정신을 차리고 근신하여 기도하라	But the end of all things is at hand: be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer.	The end of all things is near. Therefore be clear-minded and sober, so that you can pray.
1PE	4	8	무엇보다도 열심으로 서로 사랑할지니 사랑은 허다한 죄를 덮느니라	And above all things have fervent charity among yourselves: for charity shall cover the multitude of sins.	Above all, love one another deeply, because love covers over a multitude of sins.
1PE	4	9	서로 대접하기를 원망 없이 하고	Use hospitality one to another without grudging.	Show hospitality to one another without complaining.
1PE	4	10	각각 은사를 받은 대로 하나님의 각양 은혜를 맡은 선한 청지기 같이 서로 봉사하라	As every man hath received the gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God.	As good stewards of the manifold grace of God, each of you should use whatever gift he has received to serve one another.
1PE	4	11	만일 누가 말하려면 하나님의 말씀을 하는 것 같이 하고 누가 봉사하려면 하나님의 공급하시는 힘으로 하는 것 같이 하라 이는 범사에 예수 그리스도로 말미암아 하나님이 영광을 받으시게 하려 함이니 그에게 영광과 권능이 세세에 무궁토록 있느니라 아멘	If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God; if any man minister, let him do it as of the ability which God giveth: that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.	If anyone speaks, he should speak as one conveying the words of God. If anyone serves, he should serve with the strength God provides, so that in all things God may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory and the power forever and ever. Amen.
1PE	4	12	사랑하는 자들아 너희를 시련하려고 오는 불시험을 이상한 일 당하는 것 같이 이상히 여기지 말고	Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you:	Beloved, do not be surprised at the fiery trial that has come upon you, as though something strange were happening to you.
1PE	4	13	오직 너희가 그리스도의 고난에 참예하는 것으로 즐거워하라 이는 그의 영광을 나타내실 때에 너희로 즐거워하고 기뻐하게 하려 함이라	But rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ’s sufferings; that, when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy.	But rejoice that you share in the sufferings of Christ, so that you may be overjoyed at the revelation of His glory.
1PE	4	14	너희가 그리스도의 이름으로 욕을 받으면 복 있는 자로다 영광의 영 곧 하나님의 영이 너희 위에 계심이라	If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you: on their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified.	If you are insulted for the name of Christ, you are blessed, because the Spirit of glory and of God rests on you.
1PE	4	15	너희 중에 누구든지 살인이나 도적질이나 악행이나 남의 일을 간섭하는 자로 고난을 받지 말려니와	But let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evildoer, or as a busybody in other men’s matters.	Indeed, none of you should suffer as a murderer or thief or wrongdoer, or even as a meddler.
1PE	4	16	만일 그리스도인으로 고난을 받은즉 부끄러워 말고 도리어 그 이름으로 하나님께 영광을 돌리라	Yet if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed; but let him glorify God on this behalf.	But if you suffer as a Christian, do not be ashamed, but glorify God that you bear that name.
1PE	4	17	하나님 집에서 심판을 시작할 때가 되었나니 만일 우리에게 먼저 하면 하나님의 복음을 순종치 아니하는 자들의 그 마지막이 어떠하며	For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God: and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of God?	For it is time for judgment to begin with the family of God; and if it begins with us, what will the outcome be for those who disobey the gospel of God?
1PE	4	18	또 의인이 겨우 구원을 얻으면 경건치 아니한 자와 죄인이 어디 서리요	And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?	And, “If it is hard for the righteous to be saved, what will become of the ungodly and the sinner?”
1PE	4	19	그러므로 하나님의 뜻대로 고난을 받는 자들은 또한 선을 행하는 가운데 그 영혼을 미쁘신 조물주께 부탁할지어다	Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God commit the keeping of their souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator.	So then, those who suffer according to God’s will should entrust their souls to their faithful Creator and continue to do good.
1PE	5	1	너희 중 장로들에게 권하노니 나는 함께 장로 된 자요 그리스도의 고난의 증인이요 나타날 영광에 참예할 자로라	The elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that shall be revealed:	As a fellow elder, a witness of Christ’s sufferings, and a partaker of the glory to be revealed, I appeal to the elders among you:
1PE	5	2	너희 중에 있는 하나님의 양 무리를 치되 부득이함으로 하지 말고 오직 하나님의 뜻을 좇아 자원함으로 하며 더러운 이를 위하여 하지 말고 오직 즐거운 뜻으로 하며	Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind;	Be shepherds of God’s flock that is among you, watching over them not out of compulsion, but because it is God’s will; not out of greed, but out of eagerness;
1PE	5	3	맡기운 자들에게 주장하는 자세를 하지 말고 오직 양 무리의 본이 되라	Neither as being lords over God’s heritage, but being ensamples to the flock.	not lording it over those entrusted to you, but being examples to the flock.
1PE	5	4	그리하면 목자장이 나타나실 때에 시들지 아니하는 영광의 면류관을 얻으리라	And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth not away.	And when the Chief Shepherd appears, you will receive the crown of glory that will never fade away.
1PE	5	5	젊은 자들아 이와 같이 장로들에게 순복하고 다 서로 겸손으로 허리를 동이라 하나님이 교만한 자를 대적하시되 겸손한 자들에게는 은혜를 주시느니라	Likewise, ye younger, submit yourselves unto the elder. Yea, all of you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility: for God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble.	Young men, in the same way, submit yourselves to your elders. And all of you, clothe yourselves with humility toward one another, because, “God opposes the proud, but gives grace to the humble.”
1PE	5	6	그러므로 하나님의 능하신 손 아래서 겸손하라 때가 되면 너희를 높이시리라	Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time:	Humble yourselves, therefore, under God’s mighty hand, so that in due time He may exalt you.
1PE	5	7	너희 염려를 다 주께 맡겨 버리라 이는 저가 너희를 권고하심이니라	Casting all your care upon him; for he careth for you.	Cast all your anxiety on Him, because He cares for you.
1PE	5	8	근신하라 깨어라 너희 대적 마귀가 우는 사자 같이 두루 다니며 삼킬 자를 찾나니	Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour:	Be sober-minded and alert. Your adversary the devil prowls around like a roaring lion, seeking someone to devour.
1PE	5	9	너희는 믿음을 굳게 하여 저를 대적하라 이는 세상에 있는 너희 형제들도 동일한 고난을 당하는 줄을 앎이니라	Whom resist stedfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world.	Resist him, standing firm in your faith and in the knowledge that your brothers throughout the world are undergoing the same kinds of suffering.
1PE	5	10	모든 은혜의 하나님 곧 그리스도 안에서 너희를 부르사 자기의 영원한 영광에 들어가게 하신 이가 잠간 고난을 받은 너희를 친히 온전케 하시며 굳게 하시며 강하게 하시며 터를 견고케 하시리라	But the God of all grace, who hath called us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you.	And after you have suffered for a little while, the God of all grace, who has called you to His eternal glory in Christ, will Himself restore you, secure you, strengthen you, and establish you.
1PE	5	11	권력이 세세무궁토록 그에게 있을지어다 아멘	To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.	To Him be the power forever and ever. Amen.
1PE	5	12	내가 신실한 형제로 아는 실루아노로 말미암아 너희에게 간단히 써서 권하고 이것이 하나님의 참된 은혜임을 증거하노니 너희는 이 은혜에 굳게 서라	By Silvanus, a faithful brother unto you, as I suppose, I have written briefly, exhorting, and testifying that this is the true grace of God wherein ye stand.	Through Silvanus, whom I regard as a faithful brother, I have written to you briefly, encouraging you and testifying that this is the true grace of God. Stand firm in it.
1PE	5	13	함께 택하심을 받은 바벨론에 있는 교회가 너희에게 문안하고 내 아들 마가도 그리하느니라	The church that is at Babylon, elected together with you, saluteth you; and so doth Marcus my son.	The church in Babylon, chosen together with you, sends you greetings, as does my son Mark.
1PE	5	14	너희는 사랑의 입맞춤으로 피차 문안하라 그리스도 안에 있는 너희 모든 이에게 평강이 있을지어다	Greet ye one another with a kiss of charity. Peace be with you all that are in Christ Jesus. Amen.	Greet one another with a kiss of love. Peace to all of you who are in Christ.
2PE	1	1	예수 그리스도의 종과 사도인 시몬 베드로는 우리 하나님과 구주 예수 그리스도의 의를 힘입어 동일하게 보배로운 믿음을 우리와 같이 받은 자들에게 편지하노니	Simon Peter, a servant and an apostle of Jesus Christ, to them that have obtained like precious faith with us through the righteousness of God and our Saviour Jesus Christ:	Simon Peter, a servant and apostle of Jesus Christ, To those who through the righteousness of our God and Savior Jesus Christ have received a faith as precious as ours:
2PE	1	2	하나님과 우리 주 예수를 앎으로 은혜와 평강이 너희에게 더욱 많을지어다	Grace and peace be multiplied unto you through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord,	Grace and peace be multiplied to you through the knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord.
2PE	1	3	그의 신기한 능력으로 생명과 경건에 속한 모든 것을 우리에게 주셨으니 이는 자기의 영광과 덕으로써 우리를 부르신 자를 앎으로 말미암음이라	According as his divine power hath given unto us all things that pertain unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of him that hath called us to glory and virtue:	His divine power has given us everything we need for life and godliness through the knowledge of Him who called us by His own glory and excellence.
2PE	1	4	이로써 그 보배롭고 지극히 큰 약속을 우리에게 주사 이 약속으로 말미암아 너희로 정욕을 인하여 세상에서 썩어질 것을 피하여 신의 성품에 참예하는 자가 되게 하려 하셨으니	Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises: that by these ye might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust.	Through these He has given us His precious and magnificent promises, so that through them you may become partakers of the divine nature, now that you have escaped the corruption in the world caused by evil desires.
2PE	1	5	이러므로 너희가 더욱 힘써 너희 믿음에 덕을, 덕에 지식을,	And beside this, giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge;	For this very reason, make every effort to add to your faith virtue; and to virtue, knowledge;
2PE	1	6	지식에 절제를, 절제에 인내를, 인내에 경건을,	And to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience godliness;	and to knowledge, self-control; and to self-control, perseverance; and to perseverance, godliness;
2PE	1	7	경건에 형제 우애를, 형제 우애에 사랑을 공급하라	And to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity.	and to godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness, love.
2PE	1	8	이런 것이 너희에게 있어 흡족한즉 너희로 우리 주 예수 그리스도를 알기에 게으르지 않고 열매 없는 자가 되지 않게 하려니와	For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.	For if you possess these qualities and continue to grow in them, they will keep you from being ineffective and unproductive in your knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
2PE	1	9	이런 것이 없는 자는 소경이라 원시치 못하고 그의 옛 죄를 깨끗케 하심을 잊었느니라	But he that lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and hath forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.	But whoever lacks these traits is nearsighted to the point of blindness, having forgotten that he has been cleansed from his past sins.
2PE	1	10	그러므로 형제들아 더욱 힘써 너희 부르심과 택하심을 굳게 하라 너희가 이것을 행한즉 언제든지 실족지 아니하리라	Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure: for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall:	Therefore, brothers, strive to make your calling and election sure. For if you practice these things you will never stumble,
2PE	1	11	이같이 하면 우리 주 곧 구주 예수 그리스도의 영원한 나라에 들어감을 넉넉히 너희에게 주시리라	For so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.	and you will receive a lavish reception into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
2PE	1	12	이러므로 너희가 이것을 알고 이미 있는 진리에 섰으나 내가 항상 너희로 생각하게 하려 하노라	Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things, though ye know them, and be established in the present truth.	Therefore I will always remind you of these things, even though you know them and are established in the truth you now have.
2PE	1	13	내가 이 장막에 있을 동안에 너희를 일깨워 생각하게 함이 옳은 줄로 여기노니	Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you in remembrance;	I think it is right to refresh your memory as long as I live in the tent of my body,
2PE	1	14	이는 우리 주 예수 그리스도께서 내게 지시하신 것 같이 나도 이 장막을 벗어날 것이 임박한 줄을 앎이라	Knowing that shortly I must put off this my tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath shewed me.	because I know that this tent will soon be laid aside, as our Lord Jesus Christ has made clear to me.
2PE	1	15	내가 힘써 너희로 하여금 나의 떠난 후에라도 필요할 때는 이런 것을 생각나게 하려 하노라	Moreover I will endeavour that ye may be able after my decease to have these things always in remembrance.	And I will make every effort to ensure that after my departure, you will be able to recall these things at all times.
2PE	1	16	우리 주 예수 그리스도의 능력과 강림하심을 너희에게 알게 한 것이 공교히 만든 이야기를 좇은 것이 아니요 우리는 그의 크신 위엄을 친히 본 자라	For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty.	For we did not follow cleverly devised fables when we made known to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but we were eyewitnesses of His majesty.
2PE	1	17	지극히 큰 영광 중에서 이러한 소리가 그에게 나기를 이는 내 사랑하는 아들이요 내 기뻐하는 자라 하실 때에 저가 하나님 아버지께 존귀와 영광을 받으셨느니라	For he received from God the Father honour and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.	For He received honor and glory from God the Father when the voice came to Him from the Majestic Glory, saying, “This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.”
2PE	1	18	이 소리는 우리가 저와 함께 거룩한 산에 있을 때에 하늘로서 나옴을 들은 것이라	And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with him in the holy mount.	And we ourselves heard this voice from heaven when we were with Him on the holy mountain.
2PE	1	19	또 우리에게 더 확실한 예언이 있어 어두운 데 비취는 등불과 같으니 날이 새어 샛별이 너희 마음에 떠오르기까지 너희가 이것을 주의하는 것이 가하니라	We have also a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts:	We also have the word of the prophets as confirmed beyond doubt. And you will do well to pay attention to it, as to a lamp shining in a dark place, until the day dawns and the morning star rises in your hearts.
2PE	1	20	먼저 알 것은 경의 모든 예언은 사사로이 풀 것이 아니니	Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation.	Above all, you must understand that no prophecy of Scripture comes from one’s own interpretation.
2PE	1	21	예언은 언제든지 사람의 뜻으로 낸 것이 아니요 오직 성령의 감동하심을 입은 사람들이 하나님께 받아 말한 것임이니라	For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.	For no such prophecy was ever brought forth by the will of man, but men spoke from God as they were carried along by the Holy Spirit.
2PE	2	1	그러나 민간에 또한 거짓 선지자들이 일어났었나니 이와 같이 너희 중에도 거짓 선생들이 있으리라 저희는 멸망케 할 이단을 가만히 끌어들여 자기들을 사신 주를 부인하고 임박한 멸망을 스스로 취하는 자들이라	But there were false prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction.	Now there were also false prophets among the people, just as there will be false teachers among you. They will secretly introduce destructive heresies, even denying the Master who bought them—bringing swift destruction on themselves.
2PE	2	2	여럿이 저희 호색하는 것을 좇으리니 이로 인하여 진리의 도가 훼방을 받을 것이요	And many shall follow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of.	Many will follow in their depravity, and because of them the way of truth will be defamed.
2PE	2	3	저희가 탐심을 인하여 지은 말을 가지고 너희로 이를 삼으니 저희 심판은 옛적부터 지체하지 아니하며 저희 멸망은 자지 아니하느니라	And through covetousness shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you: whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not, and their damnation slumbereth not.	In their greed, these false teachers will exploit you with deceptive words. The longstanding verdict against them remains in force, and their destruction does not sleep.
2PE	2	4	하나님이 범죄한 천사들을 용서치 아니하시고 지옥에 던져 어두운 구덩이에 두어 심판 때까지 지키게 하셨으며	For if God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment;	For if God did not spare the angels when they sinned, but cast them deep into hell, placing them in chains of darkness to be held for judgment;
2PE	2	5	옛 세상을 용서치 아니하시고 오직 의를 전파하는 노아와 그 일곱 식구를 보존하시고 경건치 아니한 자들의 세상에 홍수를 내리셨으며	And spared not the old world, but saved Noah the eighth person, a preacher of righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly;	if He did not spare the ancient world when He brought the flood on its ungodly people, but preserved Noah, a preacher of righteousness, among the eight;
2PE	2	6	소돔과 고모라 성을 멸망하기로 정하여 재가 되게 하사 후세에 경건치 아니할 자들에게 본을 삼으셨으며	And turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes condemned them with an overthrow, making them an ensample unto those that after should live ungodly;	if He condemned the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah to destruction, reducing them to ashes as an example of what is coming on the ungodly;
2PE	2	7	무법한 자의 음란한 행실을 인하여 고통하는 의로운 롯을 건지셨으니	And delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked:	and if He rescued Lot, a righteous man distressed by the depraved conduct of the lawless
2PE	2	8	(이 의인이 저희 중에 거하여 날마다 저 불법한 행실을 보고 들음으로 그 의로운 심령을 상하니라)	(For that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds;)	(for that righteous man, living among them day after day, was tormented in his righteous soul by the lawless deeds he saw and heard)—
2PE	2	9	주께서 경건한 자는 시험에서 건지시고 불의한 자는 형벌 아래 두어 심판 날까지 지키시며	The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished:	if all this is so, then the Lord knows how to rescue the godly from trials and to hold the unrighteous for punishment on the day of judgment.
2PE	2	10	육체를 따라 더러운 정욕 가운데서 행하며 주관하는 이를 멸시하는 자들에게 특별히 형벌하실 줄을 아시느니라 이들은 담대하고 고집하여 떨지 않고 영광 있는 자를 훼방하거니와	But chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and despise government. Presumptuous are they, selfwilled, they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities.	Such punishment is specially reserved for those who indulge the corrupt desires of the flesh and despise authority. Bold and self-willed, they are unafraid to slander glorious beings.
2PE	2	11	더 큰 힘과 능력을 가진 천사들이라도 주 앞에서 저희를 거스려 훼방하는 송사를 하지 아니하느니라	Whereas angels, which are greater in power and might, bring not railing accusation against them before the Lord.	Yet not even angels, though greater in strength and power, dare to bring such slanderous charges against them before the Lord.
2PE	2	12	그러나 이 사람들은 본래 잡혀 죽기 위하여 난 이성 없는 짐승 같아서 그 알지 못한 것을 훼방하고 저희 멸망 가운데서 멸망을 당하며	But these, as natural brute beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of the things that they understand not; and shall utterly perish in their own corruption;	These men are like irrational animals, creatures of instinct, born to be captured and destroyed. They blaspheme in matters they do not understand, and like such creatures, they too will be destroyed.
2PE	2	13	불의의 값으로 불의를 당하며 낮에 연락을 기쁘게 여기는 자들이니 점과 흠이라 너희와 함께 연회할 때에 저희 간사한 가운데 연락하며	And shall receive the reward of unrighteousness, as they that count it pleasure to riot in the day time. Spots they are and blemishes, sporting themselves with their own deceivings while they feast with you;	The harm they will suffer is the wages of their wickedness. They consider it a pleasure to carouse in broad daylight. They are blots and blemishes, reveling in their deception as they feast with you.
2PE	2	14	음심이 가득한 눈을 가지고 범죄하기를 쉬지 아니하고 굳세지 못한 영혼들을 유혹하며 탐욕에 연단된 마음을 가진 자들이니 저주의 자식이라	Having eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin; beguiling unstable souls: an heart they have exercised with covetous practices; cursed children:	Their eyes are full of adultery; their desire for sin is never satisfied; they seduce the unstable. They are accursed children with hearts trained in greed.
2PE	2	15	저희가 바른 길을 떠나 미혹하여 브올의 아들 발람의 길을 좇는도다 그는 불의의 삯을 사랑하다가	Which have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray, following the way of Balaam the son of Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness;	They have left the straight way and wandered off to follow the way of Balaam son of Beor, who loved the wages of wickedness.
2PE	2	16	자기의 불법을 인하여 책망을 받되 말 못하는 나귀가 사람의 소리로 말하여 이 선지자의 미친 것을 금지하였느니라	But was rebuked for his iniquity: the dumb ass speaking with man’s voice forbad the madness of the prophet.	But he was rebuked for his transgression by a donkey, otherwise without speech, that spoke with a man’s voice and restrained the prophet’s madness.
2PE	2	17	이 사람들은 물 없는 샘이요 광풍에 밀려 가는 안개니 저희를 위하여 캄캄한 어두움이 예비되어 있나니	These are wells without water, clouds that are carried with a tempest; to whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever.	These men are springs without water and mists driven by a storm. Blackest darkness is reserved for them.
2PE	2	18	저희가 허탄한 자랑의 말을 토하여 미혹한 데 행하는 사람들에게서 겨우 피한 자들을 음란으로써 육체의 정욕 중에서 유혹하여	For when they speak great swelling words of vanity, they allure through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that were clean escaped from them who live in error.	With lofty but empty words, they appeal to the sensual passions of the flesh and entice those who are just escaping from others who live in error.
2PE	2	19	저희에게 자유를 준다 하여도 자기는 멸망의 종들이니 누구든지 진 자는 이긴 자의 종이 됨이니라	While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption: for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage.	They promise them freedom, while they themselves are slaves to depravity. For a man is a slave to whatever has mastered him.
2PE	2	20	만일 저희가 우리 주 되신 구주 예수 그리스도를 앎으로 세상의 더러움을 피한 후에 다시 그 중에 얽매이고 지면 그 나중 형편이 처음보다 더 심하리니	For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the beginning.	If indeed they have escaped the corruption of the world through the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, only to be entangled and overcome by it again, their final condition is worse than it was at first.
2PE	2	21	의의 도를 안 후에 받은 거룩한 명령을 저버리는 것보다 알지 못하는 것이 도리어 저희에게 나으니라	For it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them.	It would have been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness than to have known it and then to turn away from the holy commandment passed on to them.
2PE	2	22	참 속담에 이르기를 개가 그 토하였던 것에 돌아가고 돼지가 씻었다가 더러운 구덩이에 도로 누웠다 하는 말이 저희에게 응하였도다	But it is happened unto them according to the true proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit again; and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire.	Of them the proverbs are true: “A dog returns to its vomit,” and, “A sow that is washed goes back to her wallowing in the mud.”
2PE	3	1	사랑하는 자들아 내가 이제 이 둘째 편지를 너희에게 쓰노니 이 둘로 너희 진실한 마음을 일깨워 생각하게 하여	This second epistle, beloved, I now write unto you; in both which I stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance:	Beloved, this is now my second letter to you. Both of them are reminders to stir you to wholesome thinking
2PE	3	2	곧 거룩한 선지자의 예언한 말씀과 주 되신 구주께서 너희의 사도들로 말미암아 명하신 것을 기억하게 하려 하노라	That ye may be mindful of the words which were spoken before by the holy prophets, and of the commandment of us the apostles of the Lord and Saviour:	by recalling what was foretold by the holy prophets and commanded by our Lord and Savior through your apostles.
2PE	3	3	먼저 이것을 알지니 말세에 기롱하는 자들이 와서 자기의 정욕을 좇아 행하며 기롱하여	Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts,	Most importantly, you must understand that in the last days scoffers will come, scoffing and following their own evil desires.
2PE	3	4	가로되 주의 강림하신다는 약속이 어디 있느뇨 조상들이 잔 후로부터 만물이 처음 창조할 때와 같이 그냥 있다 하니	And saying, Where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation.	“Where is the promise of His coming?” they will ask. “Ever since our fathers fell asleep, everything continues as it has from the beginning of creation.”
2PE	3	5	이는 하늘이 옛적부터 있는 것과 땅이 물에서 나와 물로 성립한 것도 하나님의 말씀으로 된 것을 저희가 잊으려 함이로다	For this they willingly are ignorant of, that by the word of God the heavens were of old, and the earth standing out of the water and in the water:	But they deliberately overlook the fact that long ago by God’s word the heavens existed and the earth was formed out of water and by water,
2PE	3	6	이로 말미암아 그 때 세상은 물의 넘침으로 멸망하였으되	Whereby the world that then was, being overflowed with water, perished:	through which the world of that time perished in the flood.
2PE	3	7	이제 하늘과 땅은 그 동일한 말씀으로 불사르기 위하여 간수하신 바 되어 경건치 아니한 사람들의 심판과 멸망의 날까지 보존하여 두신 것이니라	But the heavens and the earth, which are now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men.	And by that same word, the present heavens and earth are reserved for fire, being kept for the day of judgment and destruction of ungodly men.
2PE	3	8	사랑하는 자들아 주께는 하루가 천 년 같고 천 년이 하루 같은 이 한 가지를 잊지 말라	But, beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.	Beloved, do not let this one thing escape your notice: With the Lord a day is like a thousand years, and a thousand years are like a day.
2PE	3	9	주의 약속은 어떤 이의 더디다고 생각하는 것 같이 더딘 것이 아니라 오직 너희를 대하여 오래 참으사 아무도 멸망치 않고 다 회개하기에 이르기를 원하시느니라	The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count slackness; but is longsuffering to us-ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance.	The Lord is not slow in keeping His promise as some understand slowness, but is patient with you, not wanting anyone to perish but everyone to come to repentance.
2PE	3	10	그러나 주의 날이 도적 같이 오리니 그 날에는 하늘이 큰 소리로 떠나가고 체질이 뜨거운 불에 풀어지고 땅과 그 중에 있는 모든 일이 드러나리로다	But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burned up.	But the Day of the Lord will come like a thief. The heavens will disappear with a roar, the elements will be destroyed by fire, and the earth and its works will be laid bare.
2PE	3	11	이 모든 것이 이렇게 풀어지리니 너희가 어떠한 사람이 되어야 마땅하뇨 거룩한 행실과 경건함으로	Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness,	Since everything will be destroyed in this way, what kind of people ought you to be? You ought to conduct yourselves in holiness and godliness
2PE	3	12	하나님의 날이 임하기를 바라보고 간절히 사모하라 그 날에 하늘이 불에 타서 풀어지고 체질이 뜨거운 불에 녹아지려니와	Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat?	as you anticipate and hasten the coming of the day of God, when the heavens will be destroyed by fire and the elements will melt in the heat.
2PE	3	13	우리는 그의 약속대로 의의 거하는 바 새 하늘과 새 땅을 바라보도다	Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness.	But in keeping with God’s promise, we are looking forward to a new heaven and a new earth, where righteousness dwells.
2PE	3	14	그러므로 사랑하는 자들아 너희가 이것을 바라보나니 주 앞에서 점도 없고 흠도 없이 평강 가운데서 나타나기를 힘쓰라	Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless.	Therefore, beloved, as you anticipate these things, make every effort to be found at peace—spotless and blameless in His sight.
2PE	3	15	또 우리 주의 오래 참으심이 구원이 될 줄로 여기라 우리 사랑하는 형제 바울도 그 받은 지혜대로 너희에게 이같이 썼고	And account that the longsuffering of our Lord is salvation; even as our beloved brother Paul also according to the wisdom given unto him hath written unto you;	Consider also that our Lord’s patience brings salvation, just as our beloved brother Paul also wrote you with the wisdom God gave him.
2PE	3	16	또 그 모든 편지에도 이런 일에 관하여 말하였으되 그 중에 알기 어려운 것이 더러 있으니 무식한 자들과 굳세지 못한 자들이 다른 성경과 같이 그것도 억지로 풀다가 스스로 멸망에 이르느니라	As also in all his epistles, speaking in them of these things; in which are some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other scriptures, unto their own destruction.	He writes this way in all his letters, speaking in them about such matters. Some parts of his letters are hard to understand, which ignorant and unstable people distort, as they do the rest of the Scriptures, to their own destruction.
2PE	3	17	그러므로 사랑하는 자들아 너희가 이것을 미리 알았은즉 무법한 자들의 미혹에 이끌려 너희 굳센 데서 떨어질까 삼가라	Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye also, being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness.	Therefore, beloved, since you already know these things, be on your guard so that you will not be carried away by the error of the lawless and fall from your secure standing.
2PE	3	18	오직 우리 주 곧 구주 예수 그리스도의 은혜와 저를 아는 지식에서 자라가라 영광이 이제와 영원한 날까지 저에게 있을지어다	But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. To him be glory both now and for ever. Amen.	But grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To Him be the glory both now and to the day of eternity. Amen.
1JN	1	1	태초부터 있는 생명의 말씀에 관하여는 우리가 들은 바요 눈으로 본 바요 주목하고 우리 손으로 만진 바라	That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, of the Word of life;	That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our own eyes, which we have gazed upon and touched with our own hands—this is the Word of life.
1JN	1	2	이 생명이 나타내신 바 된지라 이 영원한 생명을 우리가 보았고 증거하여 너희에게 전하노니 이는 아버지와 함께 계시다가 우리에게 나타내신 바 된 자니라	(For the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and shew unto you that eternal life, which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us;)	And this is the life that was revealed; we have seen it and testified to it, and we proclaim to you the eternal life that was with the Father and was revealed to us.
1JN	1	3	우리가 보고 들은 바를 너희에게도 전함은 너희로 우리와 사귐이 있게 하려 함이니 우리의 사귐은 아버지와 그 아들 예수 그리스도와 함께 함이라	That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us: and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.	We proclaim to you what we have seen and heard, so that you also may have fellowship with us. And this fellowship of ours is with the Father and with His Son, Jesus Christ.
1JN	1	4	우리가 이것을 씀은 우리의 기쁨이 충만케 하려 함이로라	And these things write we unto you, that your joy may be full.	We write these things so that our joy may be complete.
1JN	1	5	우리가 저에게서 듣고 너희에게 전하는 소식이 이것이니 곧 하나님은 빛이시라 그에게는 어두움이 조금도 없으시니라	This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all.	And this is the message we have heard from Him and announce to you: God is light, and in Him there is no darkness at all.
1JN	1	6	만일 우리가 하나님과 사귐이 있다 하고 어두운 가운데 행하면 거짓말을 하고 진리를 행치 아니함이거니와	If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth:	If we say we have fellowship with Him yet walk in the darkness, we lie and do not practice the truth.
1JN	1	7	저가 빛 가운데 계신 것 같이 우리도 빛 가운데 행하면 우리가 서로 사귐이 있고 그 아들 예수의 피가 우리를 모든 죄에서 깨끗하게 하실 것이요	But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin.	But if we walk in the light as He is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus His Son cleanses us from all sin.
1JN	1	8	만일 우리가 죄 없다 하면 스스로 속이고 또 진리가 우리 속에 있지 아니할 것이요	If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.	If we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.
1JN	1	9	만일 우리가 우리 죄를 자백하면 저는 미쁘시고 의로우사 우리 죄를 사하시며 모든 불의에서 우리를 깨끗케 하실 것이요	If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.	If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
1JN	1	10	만일 우리가 범죄하지 아니하였다 하면 하나님을 거짓말하는 자로 만드는 것이니 또한 그의 말씀이 우리 속에 있지 아니하니라	If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.	If we say we have not sinned, we make Him out to be a liar, and His word is not in us.
1JN	2	1	나의 자녀들아 내가 이것을 너희에게 씀은 너희로 죄를 범치 않게 하려 함이라 만일 누가 죄를 범하면 아버지 앞에서 우리에게 대언자가 있으니 곧 의로우신 예수 그리스도시라	My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not. And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous:	My little children, I am writing these things to you so that you will not sin. But if anyone does sin, we have an advocate before the Father—Jesus Christ, the Righteous One.
1JN	2	2	저는 우리 죄를 위한 화목 제물이니 우리만 위할 뿐 아니요 온 세상의 죄를 위하심이라	And he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world.	He Himself is the atoning sacrifice for our sins, and not only for ours but also for the sins of the whole world.
1JN	2	3	우리가 그의 계명을 지키면 이로써 우리가 저를 아는 줄로 알 것이요	And hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his commandments.	By this we can be sure that we have come to know Him: if we keep His commandments.
1JN	2	4	저를 아노라 하고 그의 계명을 지키지 아니하는 자는 거짓말하는 자요 진리가 그 속에 있지 아니하되	He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him.	If anyone says, “I know Him,” but does not keep His commandments, he is a liar, and the truth is not in him.
1JN	2	5	누구든지 그의 말씀을 지키는 자는 하나님의 사랑이 참으로 그 속에서 온전케 되었나니 이로써 우리가 저 안에 있는 줄을 아노라	But whoso keepeth his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected: hereby know we that we are in him.	But if anyone keeps His word, the love of God has been truly perfected in him. By this we know that we are in Him:
1JN	2	6	저 안에 거한다 하는 자는 그의 행하시는 대로 자기도 행할지니라	He that saith he abideth in him ought himself also so to walk, even as he walked.	Whoever claims to abide in Him must walk as Jesus walked.
1JN	2	7	사랑하는 자들아 내가 새 계명을 너희에게 쓰는 것이 아니라 너희가 처음부터 가진 옛 계명이니 이 옛 계명은 너희의 들은 바 말씀이거니와	Brethren, I write no new commandment unto you, but an old commandment which ye had from the beginning. The old commandment is the word which ye have heard from the beginning.	Beloved, I am not writing to you a new commandment, but an old one, which you have had from the beginning. This commandment is the message you have heard.
1JN	2	8	다시 내가 너희에게 새 계명을 쓰노니 저에게와 너희에게도 참된 것이라 이는 어두움이 지나가고 참 빛이 벌써 비췸이니라	Again, a new commandment I write unto you, which thing is true in him and in you: because the darkness is past, and the true light now shineth.	Then again, I am also writing to you a new commandment, which is true in Him and also in you. For the darkness is fading and the true light is already shining.
1JN	2	9	빛 가운데 있다 하며 그 형제를 미워하는 자는 지금까지 어두운 가운데 있는 자요	He that saith he is in the light, and hateth his brother, is in darkness even until now.	If anyone claims to be in the light but hates his brother, he is still in the darkness.
1JN	2	10	그의 형제를 사랑하는 자는 빛 가운데 거하여 자기 속에 거리낌이 없으나	He that loveth his brother abideth in the light, and there is none occasion of stumbling in him.	Whoever loves his brother remains in the light, and there is no cause of stumbling in him.
1JN	2	11	그의 형제를 미워하는 자는 어두운 가운데 있고 또 어두운 가운데 행하며 갈 곳을 알지 못하나니 이는 어두움이 그의 눈을 멀게 하였음이니라	But he that hateth his brother is in darkness, and walketh in darkness, and knoweth not whither he goeth, because that darkness hath blinded his eyes.	But whoever hates his brother is in the darkness and walks in the darkness. He does not know where he is going, because the darkness has blinded his eyes.
1JN	2	12	자녀들아 내가 너희에게 쓰는 것은 너희 죄가 그의 이름으로 말미암아 사함을 얻음이요	I write unto you, little children, because your sins are forgiven you for his name’s sake.	I am writing to you, little children, because your sins have been forgiven through His name.
1JN	2	13	아비들아 내가 너희에게 쓰는 것은 너희가 태초부터 계신 이를 앎이요 청년들아 내가 너희에게 쓰는 것은 너희가 악한 자를 이기었음이니라	I write unto you, fathers, because ye have known him that is from the beginning. I write unto you, young men, because ye have overcome the wicked one. I write unto you, little children, because ye have known the Father.	I am writing to you, fathers, because you know Him who is from the beginning. I am writing to you, young men, because you have overcome the evil one. I have written to you, children, because you know the Father.
1JN	2	14	아이들아 내가 너희에게 쓴 것은 너희가 아버지를 알았음이요 아비들아 내가 너희에게 쓴 것은 너희가 태초부터 계신 이를 알았음이요 청년들아 내가 너희에게 쓴 것은 너희가 강하고 하나님의 말씀이 너희 속에 거하시고 너희가 흉악한 자를 이기었음이라	I have written unto you, fathers, because ye have known him that is from the beginning. I have written unto you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abideth in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one.	I have written to you, fathers, because you know Him who is from the beginning. I have written to you, young men, because you are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and you have overcome the evil one.
1JN	2	15	이 세상이나 세상에 있는 것들을 사랑치 말라 누구든지 세상을 사랑하면 아버지의 사랑이 그 속에 있지 아니하니	Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.	Do not love the world or anything in the world. If anyone loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him.
1JN	2	16	이는 세상에 있는 모든 것이 육신의 정욕과 안목의 정욕과 이생의 자랑이니 다 아버지께로 좇아 온 것이 아니요 세상으로 좇아 온 것이라	For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world.	For all that is in the world—the desires of the flesh, the desires of the eyes, and the pride of life—is not from the Father but from the world.
1JN	2	17	이 세상도 그 정욕도 지나가되 오직 하나님의 뜻을 행하는 이는 영원히 거하느니라	And the world passeth away, and the lust thereof: but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever.	The world is passing away, along with its desires; but whoever does the will of God remains forever.
1JN	2	18	아이들아 이것이 마지막 때라 적그리스도가 이르겠다 함을 너희가 들은 것과 같이 지금도 많은 적그리스도가 일어났으니 이러므로 우리가 마지막 때인 줄 아노라	Little children, it is the last time: and as ye have heard that antichrist shall come, even now are there many antichrists; whereby we know that it is the last time.	Children, it is the last hour; and just as you have heard that the antichrist is coming, so now many antichrists have appeared. This is how we know it is the last hour.
1JN	2	19	저희가 우리에게서 나갔으나 우리에게 속하지 아니하였나니 만일 우리에게 속하였더면 우리와 함께 거하였으려니와 저희가 나간 것은 다 우리에게 속하지 아니함을 나타내려 함이니라	They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us: but they went out, that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us.	They went out from us, but they did not belong to us. For if they had belonged to us, they would have remained with us. But their departure made it clear that none of them belonged to us.
1JN	2	20	너희는 거룩하신 자에게서 기름 부음을 받고 모든 것을 아느니라	But ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things.	You, however, have an anointing from the Holy One, and all of you know the truth.
1JN	2	21	내가 너희에게 쓴 것은 너희가 진리를 알지 못함을 인함이 아니라 너희가 앎을 인함이요 또 모든 거짓은 진리에서 나지 않음을 인함이니라	I have not written unto you because ye know not the truth, but because ye know it, and that no lie is of the truth.	I have not written to you because you lack knowledge of the truth, but because you have it, and because no lie comes from the truth.
1JN	2	22	거짓말하는 자가 누구뇨 예수께서 그리스도이심을 부인하는 자가 아니뇨 아버지와 아들을 부인하는 그가 적그리스도니	Who is a liar but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ? He is antichrist, that denieth the Father and the Son.	Who is the liar, if it is not the one who denies that Jesus is the Christ? This is the antichrist, who denies the Father and the Son.
1JN	2	23	아들을 부인하는 자에게는 또한 아버지가 없으되 아들을 시인하는 자에게는 아버지도 있느니라	Whosoever denieth the Son, the same hath not the Father: [but] he that acknowledgeth the Son hath the Father also.	Whoever denies the Son does not have the Father, but whoever confesses the Son has the Father as well.
1JN	2	24	너희는 처음부터 들은 것을 너희 안에 거하게 하라 처음부터 들은 것이 너희 안에 거하면 너희가 아들의 안과 아버지의 안에 거하리라	Let that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard from the beginning. If that which ye have heard from the beginning shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father.	As for you, let what you have heard from the beginning remain in you. If it does, you will also remain in the Son and in the Father.
1JN	2	25	그가 우리에게 약속하신 약속이 이것이니 곧 영원한 생명이니라	And this is the promise that he hath promised us, even eternal life.	And this is the promise that He Himself made to us: eternal life.
1JN	2	26	너희를 미혹케 하는 자들에 관하여 내가 이것을 너희에게 썼노라	These things have I written unto you concerning them that seduce you.	I have written these things to you about those who are trying to deceive you.
1JN	2	27	너희는 주께 받은 바 기름 부음이 너희 안에 거하나니 아무도 너희를 가르칠 필요가 없고 오직 그의 기름 부음이 모든 것을 너희에게 가르치며 또 참되고 거짓이 없으니 너희를 가르치신 그대로 주 안에 거하라	But the anointing which ye have received of him abideth in you, and ye need not that any man teach you: but as the same anointing teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him.	And as for you, the anointing you received from Him remains in you, and you do not need anyone to teach you. But just as His true and genuine anointing teaches you about all things, so remain in Him as you have been taught.
1JN	2	28	자녀들아 이제 그 안에 거하라 이는 주께서 나타내신 바 되면 그의 강림하실 때에 우리로 담대함을 얻어 그 앞에서 부끄럽지 않게 하려 함이라	And now, little children, abide in him; that, when he shall appear, we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming.	And now, little children, remain in Christ, so that when He appears, we may be confident and unashamed before Him at His coming.
1JN	2	29	너희가 그의 의로우신 줄을 알면 의를 행하는 자마다 그에게서 난 줄을 알리라	If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one that doeth righteousness is born of him.	If you know that He is righteous, you also know that everyone who practices righteousness has been born of Him.
1JN	3	1	보라 아버지께서 어떠한 사랑을 우리에게 주사 하나님의 자녀라 일컬음을 얻게 하셨는고 우리가 그러하도다 그러므로 세상이 우리를 알지 못함은 그를 알지 못함이니라	Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God: therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew him not.	Behold what manner of love the Father has given to us, that we should be called children of God. And that is what we are! The reason the world does not know us is that it did not know Him.
1JN	3	2	사랑하는 자들아 우리가 지금은 하나님의 자녀라 장래에 어떻게 될 것은 아직 나타나지 아니하였으나 그가 나타내심이 되면 우리가 그와 같을 줄을 아는 것은 그의 계신 그대로 볼 것을 인함이니	Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is.	Beloved, we are now children of God, and what we will be has not yet been revealed. We know that when Christ appears, we will be like Him, for we will see Him as He is.
1JN	3	3	주를 향하여 이 소망을 가진 자마다 그의 깨끗하심과 같이 자기를 깨끗하게 하느니라	And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure.	And everyone who has this hope in Him purifies himself, just as Christ is pure.
1JN	3	4	죄를 짓는 자마다 불법을 행하나니 죄는 불법이라	Whosoever committeth sin transgresseth also the law: for sin is the transgression of the law.	Everyone who practices sin practices lawlessness as well. Indeed, sin is lawlessness.
1JN	3	5	그가 우리 죄를 없이 하려고 나타내신 바 된 것을 너희가 아나니 그에게는 죄가 없느니라	And ye know that he was manifested to take away our sins; and in him is no sin.	But you know that Christ appeared to take away sins, and in Him there is no sin.
1JN	3	6	그 안에 거하는 자마다 범죄하지 아니하나니 범죄하는 자마다 그를 보지도 못하였고 그를 알지도 못하였느니라	Whosoever abideth in him sinneth not: whosoever sinneth hath not seen him, neither known him.	No one who remains in Him keeps on sinning. No one who continues to sin has seen Him or known Him.
1JN	3	7	자녀들아 아무도 너희를 미혹하지 못하게 하라 의를 행하는 자는 그의 의로우심과 같이 의롭고	Little children, let no man deceive you: he that doeth righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous.	Little children, let no one deceive you: The one who practices righteousness is righteous, just as Christ is righteous.
1JN	3	8	죄를 짓는 자는 마귀에게 속하나니 마귀는 처음부터 범죄함이니라 하나님의 아들이 나타나신 것은 마귀의 일을 멸하려 하심이니라	He that committeth sin is of the devil; for the devil sinneth from the beginning. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil.	The one who practices sin is of the devil, because the devil has been sinning from the very start. This is why the Son of God was revealed, to destroy the works of the devil.
1JN	3	9	하나님께로서 난 자마다 죄를 짓지 아니하나니 이는 하나님의 씨가 그의 속에 거함이요 저도 범죄치 못하는 것은 하나님께로서 났음이라	Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin; for his seed remaineth in him: and he cannot sin, because he is born of God.	Anyone born of God refuses to practice sin, because God’s seed abides in him; he cannot go on sinning, because he has been born of God.
1JN	3	10	이러므로 하나님의 자녀들과 마귀의 자녀들이 나타나나니 무릇 의를 행치 아니하는 자나 또는 그 형제를 사랑치 아니하는 자는 하나님께 속하지 아니하니라	In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil: whosoever doeth not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loveth not his brother.	By this the children of God are distinguished from the children of the devil: Anyone who does not practice righteousness is not of God, nor is anyone who does not love his brother.
1JN	3	11	우리가 서로 사랑할지니 이는 너희가 처음부터 들은 소식이라	For this is the message that ye heard from the beginning, that we should love one another.	This is the message you have heard from the beginning: We should love one another.
1JN	3	12	가인 같이 하지 말라 저는 악한 자에게 속하여 그 아우를 죽였으니 어찐 연고로 죽였느뇨 자기의 행위는 악하고 그 아우의 행위는 의로움이니라	Not as Cain, who was of that wicked one, and slew his brother. And wherefore slew he him? Because his own works were evil, and his brother’s righteous.	Do not be like Cain, who belonged to the evil one and murdered his brother. And why did Cain slay him? Because his own deeds were evil, while those of his brother were righteous.
1JN	3	13	형제들아 세상이 너희를 미워하거든 이상히 여기지 말라	Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you.	So do not be surprised, brothers, if the world hates you.
1JN	3	14	우리가 형제를 사랑함으로 사망에서 옮겨 생명으로 들어간 줄을 알거니와 사랑치 아니하는 자는 사망에 거하느니라	We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren. He that loveth not his brother abideth in death.	We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love our brothers. The one who does not love remains in death.
1JN	3	15	그 형제를 미워하는 자마다 살인하는 자니 살인하는 자마다 영생이 그 속에 거하지 아니하는 것을 너희가 아는 바라	Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer: and ye know that no murderer hath eternal life abiding in him.	Everyone who hates his brother is a murderer, and you know that eternal life does not reside in a murderer.
1JN	3	16	그가 우리를 위하여 목숨을 버리셨으니 우리가 이로써 사랑을 알고 우리도 형제들을 위하여 목숨을 버리는 것이 마땅하니라	Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us: and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.	By this we know what love is: Jesus laid down His life for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for our brothers.
1JN	3	17	누가 이 세상 재물을 가지고 형제의 궁핍함을 보고도 도와 줄 마음을 막으면 하나님의 사랑이 어찌 그 속에 거할까 보냐	But whoso hath this world’s good, and seeth his brother have need, and shutteth up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him?	If anyone with earthly possessions sees his brother in need, but withholds his compassion from him, how can the love of God abide in him?
1JN	3	18	자녀들아 우리가 말과 혀로만 사랑하지 말고 오직 행함과 진실함으로 하자	My little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue; but in deed and in truth.	Little children, let us love not in word and speech, but in action and truth.
1JN	3	19	이로써 우리가 진리에 속한 줄을 알고 또 우리 마음을 주 앞에서 굳세게 하리로다	And hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him.	And by this we will know that we belong to the truth, and will assure our hearts in His presence:
1JN	3	20	우리 마음이 혹 우리를 책망할 일이 있거든 하물며 우리 마음보다 크시고 모든 것을 아시는 하나님일까 보냐	For if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and knoweth all things.	Even if our hearts condemn us, God is greater than our hearts, and He knows all things.
1JN	3	21	사랑하는 자들아 만일 우리 마음이 우리를 책망할 것이 없으면 하나님 앞에서 담대함을 얻고	Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God.	Beloved, if our hearts do not condemn us, we have confidence before God,
1JN	3	22	무엇이든지 구하는 바를 그에게 받나니 이는 우리가 그의 계명들을 지키고 그 앞에서 기뻐하시는 것을 행함이라	And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight.	and we will receive from Him whatever we ask, because we keep His commandments and do what is pleasing in His sight.
1JN	3	23	그의 계명은 이것이니 곧 그 아들 예수 그리스도의 이름을 믿고 그가 우리에게 주신 계명대로 서로 사랑할 것이니라	And this is his commandment, That we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave us commandment.	And this is His commandment: that we should believe in the name of His Son, Jesus Christ, and we should love one another just as He commanded us.
1JN	3	24	그의 계명들을 지키는 자는 주 안에 거하고 주는 저 안에 거하시나니 우리에게 주신 성령으로 말미암아 그가 우리 안에 거하시는 줄을 우리가 아느니라	And he that keepeth his commandments dwelleth in him, and he in him. And hereby we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath given us.	Whoever keeps His commandments remains in God, and God in him. And by this we know that He remains in us: by the Spirit He has given us.
1JN	4	1	사랑하는 자들아 영을 다 믿지 말고 오직 영들이 하나님께 속하였나 시험하라 많은 거짓 선지자가 세상에 나왔음이니라	Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God: because many false prophets are gone out into the world.	Beloved, do not believe every spirit, but test the spirits to see whether they are from God. For many false prophets have gone out into the world.
1JN	4	2	하나님의 영은 이것으로 알지니 곧 예수 그리스도께서 육체로 오신 것을 시인하는 영마다 하나님께 속한 것이요	Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God:	By this you will know the Spirit of God: Every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is from God,
1JN	4	3	예수를 시인하지 아니하는 영마다 하나님께 속한 것이 아니니 이것이 곧 적그리스도의 영이니라 오리라 한 말을 너희가 들었거니와 이제 벌써 세상에 있느니라	And every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God: and this is that spirit of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come; and even now already is it in the world.	and every spirit that does not confess Jesus is not from God. This is the spirit of the antichrist, which you have heard is coming and which is already in the world at this time.
1JN	4	4	자녀들아 너희는 하나님께 속하였고 또 저희를 이기었나니 이는 너희 안에 계신 이가 세상에 있는 이보다 크심이라	Ye are of God, little children, and have overcome them: because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world.	You, little children, are from God and have overcome them, because greater is He who is in you than he who is in the world.
1JN	4	5	저희는 세상에 속한 고로 세상에 속한 말을 하매 세상이 저희 말을 듣느니라	They are of the world: therefore speak they of the world, and the world heareth them.	They are of the world. That is why they speak from the world’s perspective, and the world listens to them.
1JN	4	6	우리는 하나님께 속하였으니 하나님을 아는 자는 우리의 말을 듣고 하나님께 속하지 아니한 자는 우리의 말을 듣지 아니하나니 진리의 영과 미혹의 영을 이로써 아느니라	We are of God: he that knoweth God heareth us; he that is not of God heareth not us. Hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error.	We are from God. Whoever knows God listens to us; whoever is not from God does not listen to us. That is how we know the Spirit of truth and the spirit of deception.
1JN	4	7	사랑하는 자들아 우리가 서로 사랑하자 사랑은 하나님께 속한 것이니 사랑하는 자마다 하나님께로 나서 하나님을 알고	Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God; and every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God.	Beloved, let us love one another, because love comes from God. Everyone who loves has been born of God and knows God.
1JN	4	8	사랑하지 아니하는 자는 하나님을 알지 못하나니 이는 하나님은 사랑이심이라	He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love.	Whoever does not love does not know God, because God is love.
1JN	4	9	하나님의 사랑이 우리에게 이렇게 나타난 바 되었으니 하나님이 자기의 독생자를 세상에 보내심은 저로 말미암아 우리를 살리려 하심이니라	In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him.	This is how God’s love was revealed among us: God sent His one and only Son into the world, so that we might live through Him.
1JN	4	10	사랑은 여기 있으니 우리가 하나님을 사랑한 것이 아니요 오직 하나님이 우리를 사랑하사 우리 죄를 위하여 화목제로 그 아들을 보내셨음이니라	Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins.	And love consists in this: not that we loved God, but that He loved us and sent His Son as the atoning sacrifice for our sins.
1JN	4	11	사랑하는 자들아 하나님이 이같이 우리를 사랑하셨은즉 우리도 서로 사랑하는 것이 마땅하도다	Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another.	Beloved, if God so loved us, we also ought to love one another.
1JN	4	12	어느 때나 하나님을 본 사람이 없으되 만일 우리가 서로 사랑하면 하나님이 우리 안에 거하시고 그의 사랑이 우리 안에 온전히 이루느니라	No man hath seen God at any time. If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us.	No one has ever seen God; but if we love one another, God remains in us, and His love is perfected in us.
1JN	4	13	그의 성령을 우리에게 주시므로 우리가 그 안에 거하고 그가 우리 안에 거하시는 줄을 아느니라	Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit.	By this we know that we remain in Him, and He in us: He has given us of His Spirit.
1JN	4	14	아버지가 아들을 세상의 구주로 보내신 것을 우리가 보았고 또 증거하노니	And we have seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world.	And we have seen and testify that the Father has sent His Son to be the Savior of the world.
1JN	4	15	누구든지 예수를 하나님의 아들이라 시인하면 하나님이 저 안에 거하시고 저도 하나님 안에 거하느니라	Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in God.	If anyone confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, God abides in him, and he in God.
1JN	4	16	하나님이 우리를 사랑하시는 사랑을 우리가 알고 믿었노니 하나님은 사랑이시라 사랑 안에 거하는 자는 하나님 안에 거하고 하나님도 그 안에 거하시느니라	And we have known and believed the love that God hath to us. God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him.	And we have come to know and believe the love that God has for us. God is love; whoever abides in love abides in God, and God in him.
1JN	4	17	이로써 사랑이 우리에게 온전히 이룬 것은 우리로 심판 날에 담대함을 가지게 하려 함이니 주의 어떠하심과 같이 우리도 세상에서 그러하니라	Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment: because as he is, so are we in this world.	In this way, love has been perfected among us, so that we may have confidence on the day of judgment; for in this world we are just like Him.
1JN	4	18	사랑 안에 두려움이 없고 온전한 사랑이 두려움을 내어 쫓나니 두려움에는 형벌이 있음이라 두려워하는 자는 사랑 안에서 온전히 이루지 못하였느니라	There is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear: because fear hath torment. He that feareth is not made perfect in love.	There is no fear in love, but perfect love drives out fear, because fear involves punishment. The one who fears has not been perfected in love.
1JN	4	19	우리가 사랑함은 그가 먼저 우리를 사랑하셨음이라	We love him, because he first loved us.	We love because He first loved us.
1JN	4	20	누구든지 하나님을 사랑하노라 하고 그 형제를 미워하면 이는 거짓말하는 자니 보는 바 그 형제를 사랑치 아니하는 자가 보지 못하는 바 하나님을 사랑할 수 없느니라	If a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen?	If anyone says, “I love God,” but hates his brother, he is a liar. For anyone who does not love his brother, whom he has seen, cannot love God, whom he has not seen.
1JN	4	21	우리가 이 계명을 주께 받았나니 하나님을 사랑하는 자는 또한 그 형제를 사랑할지니라	And this commandment have we from him, That he who loveth God love his brother also.	And we have this commandment from Him: Whoever loves God must love his brother as well.
1JN	5	1	예수께서 그리스도이심을 믿는 자마다 하나님께로서 난 자니 또한 내신 이를 사랑하는 자마다 그에게 난 자를 사랑하느니라	Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God: and every one that loveth him that begat loveth him also that is begotten of him.	Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ has been born of God, and everyone who loves the Father also loves those born of Him.
1JN	5	2	우리가 하나님을 사랑하고 그의 계명들을 지킬 때에 이로써 우리가 하나님의 자녀 사랑하는 줄을 아느니라	By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God, and keep his commandments.	By this we know that we love the children of God: when we love God and keep His commandments.
1JN	5	3	하나님을 사랑하는 것은 이것이니 우리가 그의 계명들을 지키는 것이라 그의 계명들은 무거운 것이 아니로다	For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments: and his commandments are not grievous.	For this is the love of God, that we keep His commandments. And His commandments are not burdensome,
1JN	5	4	대저 하나님께로서 난 자마다 세상을 이기느니라 세상을 이긴 이김은 이것이니 우리의 믿음이니라	For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world: and this is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith.	because everyone born of God overcomes the world. And this is the victory that has overcome the world: our faith.
1JN	5	5	예수께서 하나님의 아들이심을 믿는 자가 아니면 세상을 이기는 자가 누구뇨	Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?	Who then overcomes the world? Only he who believes that Jesus is the Son of God.
1JN	5	6	이는 물과 피로 임하신 자니 곧 예수 그리스도시라 물로만 아니요 물과 피로 임하셨고	This is he that came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ; not by water only, but by water and blood. And it is the Spirit that beareth witness, because the Spirit is truth.	This is the One who came by water and blood, Jesus Christ—not by water alone, but by water and blood. And it is the Spirit who testifies to this, because the Spirit is the truth.
1JN	5	7	증거하는 이는 성령이시니 성령은 진리니라	For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these three are one.	For there are three that testify:
1JN	5	8	증거하는 이가 셋이니 성령과 물과 피라 또한 이 셋이 합하여 하나이니라	And there are three that bear witness in earth, the spirit, and the water, and the blood: and these three agree in one.	the Spirit, the water, and the blood—and these three are in agreement.
1JN	5	9	만일 우리가 사람들의 증거를 받을진대 하나님의 증거는 더욱 크도다 하나님의 증거는 이것이니 그 아들에 관하여 증거하신 것이니라	If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater: for this is the witness of God which he hath testified of his Son.	Even if we accept human testimony, the testimony of God is greater. For this is the testimony that God has given about His Son.
1JN	5	10	하나님의 아들을 믿는 자는 자기 안에 증거가 있고 하나님을 믿지 아니하는 자는 하나님을 거짓말하는 자로 만드나니 이는 하나님께서 그 아들에 관하여 증거하신 증거를 믿지 아니하였음이라	He that believeth on the Son of God hath the witness in himself: he that believeth not God hath made him a liar; because he believeth not the record that God gave of his Son.	Whoever believes in the Son of God has this testimony within him; whoever does not believe God has made Him out to be a liar, because he has not believed in the testimony that God has given about His Son.
1JN	5	11	또 증거는 이것이니 하나님이 우리에게 영생을 주신 것과 이 생명이 그의 아들 안에 있는 그것이니라	And this is the record, that God hath given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.	And this is that testimony: God has given us eternal life, and this life is in His Son.
1JN	5	12	아들이 있는 자에게는 생명이 있고 하나님의 아들이 없는 자에게는 생명이 없느니라	He that hath the Son hath life; and he that hath not the Son of God hath not life.	Whoever has the Son has life; whoever does not have the Son of God does not have life.
1JN	5	13	내가 하나님의 아들의 이름을 믿는 너희에게 이것을 쓴 것은 너희로 하여금 너희에게 영생이 있음을 알게 하려 함이라	These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of the Son of God; that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe on the name of the Son of God.	I have written these things to you who believe in the name of the Son of God, so that you may know that you have eternal life.
1JN	5	14	그를 향하여 우리의 가진 바 담대한 것이 이것이니 그의 뜻대로 무엇을 구하면 들으심이라	And this is the confidence that we have in him, that, if we ask any thing according to his will, he heareth us:	And this is the confidence that we have before Him: If we ask anything according to His will, He hears us.
1JN	5	15	우리가 무엇이든지 구하는 바를 들으시는 줄을 안즉 우리가 그에게 구한 그것을 얻은 줄을 또한 아느니라	And if we know that he hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions that we desired of him.	And if we know that He hears us in whatever we ask, we know that we already possess what we have asked of Him.
1JN	5	16	누구든지 형제가 사망에 이르지 아니한 죄 범하는 것을 보거든 구하라 그러면 사망에 이르지 아니하는 범죄자들을 위하여 저에게 생명을 주시리라 사망에 이르는 죄가 있으니 이에 대하여 나는 구하라 하지 않노라	If any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto death: I do not say that he shall pray for it.	If anyone sees his brother committing a sin not leading to death, he should ask God, who will give life to those who commit this kind of sin. There is a sin that leads to death; I am not saying he should ask regarding that sin.
1JN	5	17	모든 불의가 죄로되 사망에 이르지 아니하는 죄도 있도다	All unrighteousness is sin: and there is a sin not unto death.	All unrighteousness is sin, yet there is sin that does not lead to death.
1JN	5	18	하나님께로서 난 자마다 범죄치 아니하는 줄을 우리가 아노라 하나님께로서 나신 자가 저를 지키시매 악한 자가 저를 만지지도 못하느니라	We know that whosoever is born of God sinneth not; but he that is begotten of God keepeth himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not.	We know that anyone born of God does not keep on sinning; the One who was born of God protects him, and the evil one cannot touch him.
1JN	5	19	또 아는 것은 우리는 하나님께 속하고 온 세상은 악한 자 안에 처한 것이며	And we know that we are of God, and the whole world lieth in wickedness.	We know that we are of God, and that the whole world is under the power of the evil one.
1JN	5	20	또 아는 것은 하나님의 아들이 이르러 우리에게 지각을 주사 우리로 참된 자를 알게 하신 것과 또한 우리가 참된 자 곧 그의 아들 예수 그리스도 안에 있는 것이니 그는 참 하나님이시요 영생이시라	And we know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us an understanding, that we may know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and eternal life.	And we know that the Son of God has come and has given us understanding, so that we may know Him who is true; and we are in Him who is true—in His Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life.
1JN	5	21	자녀들아 너희 자신을 지켜 우상에서 멀리 하라	Little children, keep yourselves from idols. Amen.	Little children, keep yourselves from idols.
2JN	1	1	장로는 택하심을 입은 부녀와 그의 자녀에게 편지하노니 내가 참으로 사랑하는 자요 나뿐 아니라 진리를 아는 모든 자도 그리하는 것은	The elder unto the elect lady and her children, whom I love in the truth; and not I only, but also all they that have known the truth;	The elder, To the chosen lady and her children, whom I love in the truth—and not I alone, but also all who know the truth—
2JN	1	2	우리 안에 거하여 영원히 우리와 함께 할 진리를 인함이로다	For the truth’s sake, which dwelleth in us, and shall be with us for ever.	because of the truth that abides in us and will be with us forever:
2JN	1	3	은혜와 긍휼과 평강이 하나님 아버지와 아버지의 아들 예수 그리스도께로부터 진리와 사랑 가운데서 우리와 함께 있으리라	Grace be with you, mercy, and peace, from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in truth and love.	Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and from Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, will be with us in truth and love.
2JN	1	4	너의 자녀 중에 우리가 아버지께 받은 계명대로 진리에 행하는 자를 내가 보니 심히 기쁘도다	I rejoiced greatly that I found of thy children walking in truth, as we have received a commandment from the Father.	I was overjoyed to find some of your children walking in the truth, just as the Father has commanded us.
2JN	1	5	부녀여, 내가 이제 네게 구하노니 서로 사랑하자 이는 새 계명 같이 네게 쓰는 것이 아니요 오직 처음부터 우리가 가진 것이라	And now I beseech thee, lady, not as though I wrote a new commandment unto thee, but that which we had from the beginning, that we love one another.	And now I urge you, dear lady—not as a new commandment to you, but one we have had from the beginning—that we love one another.
2JN	1	6	또 사랑은 이것이니 우리가 그 계명을 좇아 행하는 것이요 계명은 이것이니 너희가 처음부터 들은 바와 같이 그 가운데서 행하라 하심이라	And this is love, that we walk after his commandments. This is the commandment, That, as ye have heard from the beginning, ye should walk in it.	And this is love, that we walk according to His commandments. This is the very commandment you have heard from the beginning, that you must walk in love.
2JN	1	7	미혹하는 자가 많이 세상에 나왔나니 이는 예수 그리스도께서 육체로 임하심을 부인하는 자라 이것이 미혹하는 자요 적그리스도니	For many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a deceiver and an antichrist.	For many deceivers have gone out into the world, refusing to confess the coming of Jesus Christ in the flesh. Any such person is the deceiver and the antichrist.
2JN	1	8	너희는 너희를 삼가 우리의 일한 것을 잃지 말고 오직 온전한 상을 얻으라	Look to yourselves, that we lose not those things which we have wrought, but that we receive a full reward.	Watch yourselves, so that you do not lose what we have worked for, but that you may be fully rewarded.
2JN	1	9	지내쳐 그리스도 교훈 안에 거하지 아니하는 자마다 하나님을 모시지 못하되 교훈 안에 거하는 이 사람이 아버지와 아들을 모시느니라	Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God. He that abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he hath both the Father and the Son.	Anyone who runs ahead without remaining in the teaching of Christ does not have God. Whoever remains in His teaching has both the Father and the Son.
2JN	1	10	누구든지 이 교훈을 가지지 않고 너희에게 나아가거든 그를 집에 들이지도 말고 인사도 말라	If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed:	If anyone comes to you but does not bring this teaching, do not receive him into your home or even greet him.
2JN	1	11	그에게 인사하는 자는 그 악한 일에 참예하는 자임이니라	For he that biddeth him God speed is partaker of his evil deeds.	Whoever greets such a person shares in his evil deeds.
2JN	1	12	내가 너희에게 쓸 것이 많으나 종이와 먹으로 쓰기를 원치 아니하고 오히려 너희에게 가서 면대하여 말하려 하니 이는 너희 기쁨을 충만케 하려 함이라	Having many things to write unto you, I would not write with paper and ink: but I trust to come unto you, and speak face to face, that our joy may be full.	I have many things to write to you, but I would prefer not to do so with paper and ink. Instead, I hope to come and speak with you face to face, so that our joy may be complete.
2JN	1	13	택하심을 입은 네 자매의 자녀가 네게 문안하느니라	The children of thy elect sister greet thee. Amen.	The children of your elect sister send you greetings.
3JN	1	1	장로는 사랑하는 가이오 곧 나의 참으로 사랑하는 자에게 편지하노라	The elder unto the wellbeloved Gaius, whom I love in the truth.	The elder, To the beloved Gaius, whom I love in the truth:
3JN	1	2	사랑하는 자여 네 영혼이 잘됨 같이 네가 범사에 잘되고 강건하기를 내가 간구하노라	Beloved, I wish above all things that thou mayest prosper and be in health, even as thy soul prospereth.	Beloved, I pray that in every way you may prosper and enjoy good health, as your soul also prospers.
3JN	1	3	형제들이 와서 네게 있는 진리를 증거하되 네가 진리 안에서 행한다 하니 내가 심히 기뻐하노라	For I rejoiced greatly, when the brethren came and testified of the truth that is in thee, even as thou walkest in the truth.	For I was overjoyed when the brothers came and testified about your devotion to the truth, in which you continue to walk.
3JN	1	4	내가 내 자녀들이 진리 안에서 행한다 함을 듣는 것보다 더 즐거움이 없도다	I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in truth.	I have no greater joy than to hear that my children are walking in the truth.
3JN	1	5	사랑하는 자여 네가 무엇이든지 형제 곧 나그네 된 자들에게 행하는 것이 신실한 일이니	Beloved, thou doest faithfully whatsoever thou doest to the brethren, and to strangers;	Beloved, you are faithful in what you are doing for the brothers, and especially since they are strangers to you.
3JN	1	6	저희가 교회 앞에서 너의 사랑을 증거하였느니라 네가 하나님께 합당하게 저희를 전송하면 가하리로다	Which have borne witness of thy charity before the church: whom if thou bring forward on their journey after a godly sort, thou shalt do well:	They have testified to the church about your love. You will do well to send them on their way in a manner worthy of God.
3JN	1	7	이는 저희가 주의 이름을 위하여 나가서 이방인에게 아무 것도 받지 아니함이라	Because that for his name’s sake they went forth, taking nothing of the Gentiles.	For they went out on behalf of the Name, accepting nothing from the Gentiles.
3JN	1	8	이러므로 우리가 이같은 자들을 영접하는 것이 마땅하니 이는 우리로 진리를 위하여 함께 수고하는 자가 되게 하려 함이니라	We therefore ought to receive such, that we might be fellowhelpers to the truth.	Therefore we ought to support such men, so that we may be fellow workers for the truth.
3JN	1	9	내가 두어 자를 교회에게 썼으나 저희 중에 으뜸되기를 좋아하는 디오드레베가 우리를 접대하지 아니하니	I wrote unto the church: but Diotrephes, who loveth to have the preeminence among them, receiveth us not.	I have written to the church about this, but Diotrephes, who loves to be first, will not accept our instruction.
3JN	1	10	이러므로 내가 가면 그 행한 일을 잊지 아니하리라 저가 악한 말로 우리를 망령되이 폄론하고도 유위부족하여 형제들을 접대치도 아니하고 접대하고자 하는 자를 금하여 교회에서 내어 쫓는도다	Wherefore, if I come, I will remember his deeds which he doeth, prating against us with malicious words: and not content therewith, neither doth he himself receive the brethren, and forbiddeth them that would, and casteth them out of the church.	So if I come, I will call attention to his malicious slander against us. And unsatisfied with that, he refuses to welcome the brothers and forbids those who want to do so, even putting them out of the church.
3JN	1	11	사랑하는 자여 악한 것을 본받지 말고 선한 것을 본받으라 선을 행하는 자는 하나님께 속하고 악을 행하는 자는 하나님을 뵈옵지 못하였느니라	Beloved, follow not that which is evil, but that which is good. He that doeth good is of God: but he that doeth evil hath not seen God.	Beloved, do not imitate what is evil, but what is good. The one who does good is of God; the one who does evil has not seen God.
3JN	1	12	데메드리오는 뭇사람에게도, 진리에게도 증거를 받았으매 우리도 증거하노니 너는 우리의 증거가 참된 줄을 아느니라	Demetrius hath good report of all men, and of the truth itself: yea, and we also bear record; and ye know that our record is true.	Demetrius has received a good testimony from everyone, and from the truth itself. We also testify for him, and you know that our testimony is true.
3JN	1	13	내가 네게 쓸 것이 많으나 먹과 붓으로 쓰기를 원치 아니하고	I had many things to write, but I will not with ink and pen write unto thee:	I have many things to write to you, but I would prefer not to do so with pen and ink.
3JN	1	14	속히 보기를 바라노니 또한 우리가 면대하여 말하리라	But I trust I shall shortly see thee, and we shall speak face to face. Peace be to thee. Our friends salute thee. Greet the friends by name.	Instead, I hope to see you soon and speak with you face to face. Peace to you. The friends here send you greetings. Greet each of our friends there by name.
3JN	1	15	평강이 네게 있을지어다 여러 친구가 네게 문안하느니라 너는 각 친구 명하에 문안하라		
JUD	1	1	예수 그리스도의 종이요 야고보의 형제인 유다는 부르심을 입은 자 곧 하나님 아버지 안에서 사랑을 얻고 예수 그리스도를 위하여 지키심을 입은 자들에게 편지하노라	Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to them that are sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and called:	Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ and a brother of James, To those who are called, loved by God the Father, and kept in Jesus Christ:
JUD	1	2	긍휼과 평강과 사랑이 너희에게 더욱 많을지어다	Mercy unto you, and peace, and love, be multiplied.	Mercy, peace, and love be multiplied to you.
JUD	1	3	사랑하는 자들아 내가 우리의 일반으로 얻은 구원을 들어 너희에게 편지하려는 뜻이 간절하던 차에 성도에게 단번에 주신 믿음의 도를 위하여 힘써 싸우라는 편지로 너희를 권하여야 할 필요를 느꼈노니	Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you that ye should earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered unto the saints.	Beloved, although I made every effort to write to you about the salvation we share, I felt it necessary to write and urge you to contend earnestly for the faith entrusted once for all to the saints.
JUD	1	4	이는 가만히 들어온 사람 몇이 있음이라 저희는 옛적부터 이 판결을 받기로 미리 기록된 자니 경건치 아니하여 우리 하나님의 은혜를 도리어 색욕거리로 바꾸고 홀로 하나이신 주재 곧 우리 주 예수 그리스도를 부인하는 자니라	For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.	For certain men have crept in among you unnoticed—ungodly ones who were designated long ago for condemnation. They turn the grace of our God into a license for immorality, and they deny our only Master and Lord, Jesus Christ.
JUD	1	5	너희가 본래 범사를 알았으나 내가 너희로 다시 생각나게 하고자 하노라 주께서 백성을 애굽에서 구원하여 내시고 후에 믿지 아니하는 자들을 멸하셨으며	I will therefore put you in remembrance, though ye once knew this, how that the Lord, having saved the people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed them that believed not.	Although you are fully aware of this, I want to remind you that after Jesus had delivered His people out of the land of Egypt, He destroyed those who did not believe.
JUD	1	6	또 자기 지위를 지키지 아니하고 자기 처소를 떠난 천사들을 큰 날의 심판까지 영원한 결박으로 흑암에 가두셨으며	And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day.	And the angels who did not stay within their own domain but abandoned their proper dwelling—these He has kept in eternal chains under darkness, bound for judgment on that great day.
JUD	1	7	소돔과 고모라와 그 이웃 도시들도 저희와 같은 모양으로 간음을 행하며 다른 색을 따라 가다가 영원한 불의 형벌을 받음으로 거울이 되었느니라	Even as Sodom and Gomorrha, and the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.	In like manner, Sodom and Gomorrah and the cities around them, who indulged in sexual immorality and pursued strange flesh, are on display as an example of those who sustain the punishment of eternal fire.
JUD	1	8	그러한데 꿈꾸는 이 사람들도 그와 같이 육체를 더럽히며 권위를 업신여기며 영광을 훼방하는도다	Likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities.	Yet in the same way these dreamers defile their bodies, reject authority, and slander glorious beings.
JUD	1	9	천사장 미가엘이 모세의 시체에 대하여 마귀와 다투어 변론할 때에 감히 훼방하는 판결을 쓰지 못하고 다만 말하되 주께서 너를 꾸짖으시기를 원하노라 하였거늘	Yet Michael the archangel, when contending with the devil he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee.	But even the archangel Michael, when he disputed with the devil over the body of Moses, did not presume to bring a slanderous charge against him, but said, “The Lord rebuke you!”
JUD	1	10	이 사람들은 무엇이든지 그 알지 못하는 것을 훼방하는도다 또 저희는 이성 없는 짐승 같이 본능으로 아는 그것으로 멸망하느니라	But these speak evil of those things which they know not: but what they know naturally, as brute beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves.	These men, however, slander what they do not understand, and like irrational animals, they will be destroyed by the things they do instinctively.
JUD	1	11	화 있을진저 이 사람들이여, 가인의 길에 행하였으며 삯을 위하여 발람의 어그러진 길로 몰려갔으며 고라의 패역을 좇아 멸망을 받았도다	Woe unto them! for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Core.	Woe to them! They have traveled the path of Cain; they have rushed headlong into the error of Balaam; they have perished in Korah’s rebellion.
JUD	1	12	저희는 기탄 없이 너희와 함께 먹으니 너희 애찬의 암초요 자기 몸만 기르는 목자요 바람에 불려가는 물 없는 구름이요 죽고 또 죽어 뿌리까지 뽑힌 열매 없는 가을 나무요	These are spots in your feasts of charity, when they feast with you, feeding themselves without fear: clouds they are without water, carried about of winds; trees whose fruit withereth, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots;	These men are hidden reefs in your love feasts, shamelessly feasting with you but shepherding only themselves. They are clouds without water, carried along by the wind; fruitless trees in autumn, twice dead after being uprooted.
JUD	1	13	자기의 수치의 거품을 뿜는 바다의 거친 물결이요 영원히 예비된 캄캄한 흑암에 돌아갈 유리하는 별들이라	Raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame; wandering stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.	They are wild waves of the sea, foaming up their own shame; wandering stars, for whom blackest darkness has been reserved forever.
JUD	1	14	아담의 칠세 손 에녹이 사람들에게 대하여도 예언하여 이르되 보라 주께서 그 수만의 거룩한 자와 함께 임하셨나니	And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints,	Enoch, the seventh from Adam, also prophesied about them: “Behold, the Lord is coming with myriads of His holy ones
JUD	1	15	이는 뭇사람을 심판하사 모든 경건치 않은 자의 경건치 않게 행한 모든 경건치 않은 일과 또 경건치 않은 죄인의 주께 거스려 한 모든 강퍅한 말을 인하여 저희를 정죄하려 하심이라 하였느니라	To execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.	to execute judgment on everyone, and to convict all the ungodly of every ungodly act of wickedness and every harsh word spoken against Him by ungodly sinners.”
JUD	1	16	이 사람들은 원망하는 자며 불만을 토하는 자며 그 정욕대로 행하는 자라 그 입으로 자랑하는 말을 내며 이를 위하여 아첨하느니라	These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts; and their mouth speaketh great swelling words, having men’s persons in admiration because of advantage.	These men are discontented grumblers, following after their own lusts; their mouths spew arrogance; they flatter others for their own advantage.
JUD	1	17	사랑하는 자들아 너희는 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 사도들의 미리 한 말을 기억하라	But, beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before of the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ;	But you, beloved, remember what was foretold by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ
JUD	1	18	그들이 너희에게 말하기를 마지막 때에 자기의 경건치 않은 정욕대로 행하며 기롱하는 자들이 있으리라 하였나니	How that they told you there should be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts.	when they said to you, “In the last times there will be scoffers who will follow after their own ungodly desires.”
JUD	1	19	이 사람들은 당을 짓는 자며 육에 속한 자며 성령은 없는 자니라	These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit.	These are the ones who cause divisions, who are worldly and devoid of the Spirit.
JUD	1	20	사랑하는 자들아 너희는 너희의 지극히 거룩한 믿음 위에 자기를 건축하며 성령으로 기도하며	But ye, beloved, building up yourselves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost,	But you, beloved, by building yourselves up in your most holy faith and praying in the Holy Spirit,
JUD	1	21	하나님의 사랑 안에서 자기를 지키며 영생에 이르도록 우리 주 예수 그리스도의 긍휼을 기다리라	Keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.	keep yourselves in the love of God as you await the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to bring you eternal life.
JUD	1	22	어떤 의심하는 자들을 긍휼히 여기라	And of some have compassion, making a difference:	And indeed, have mercy on those who doubt;
JUD	1	23	또 어떤 자를 불에서 끌어내어 구원하라 또 어떤 자를 그 육체로 더럽힌 옷이라도 싫어하여 두려움으로 긍휼히 여기라	And others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire; hating even the garment spotted by the flesh.	save others by snatching them from the fire; and to still others show mercy tempered with fear, hating even the clothing stained by the flesh.
JUD	1	24	능히 너희를 보호하사 거침이 없게 하시고 너희로 그 영광 앞에 흠이 없이 즐거움으로 서게 하실 자	Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy,	Now to Him who is able to keep you from stumbling and to present you unblemished in His glorious presence, with great joy—
JUD	1	25	곧 우리 구주 홀로 하나이신 하나님께 우리 주 예수 그리스도로 말미암아 영광과 위엄과 권력과 권세가 만고 전부터 이제와 세세에 있을지어다 아멘	To the only wise God our Saviour, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen.	to the only God our Savior be glory, majesty, dominion, and authority through Jesus Christ our Lord before all time, and now, and for all eternity. Amen.
REV	1	1	예수 그리스도의 계시라 이는 하나님이 그에게 주사 반드시 속히 될 일을 그 종들에게 보이시려고 그 천사를 그 종 요한에게 보내어 지시하신 것이라	The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to shew unto his servants things which must shortly come to pass; and he sent and signified it by his angel unto his servant John:	This is the revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave Him to show His servants what must soon come to pass. He made it known by sending His angel to His servant John,
REV	1	2	요한은 하나님의 말씀과 예수 그리스도의 증거 곧 자기의 본 것을 다 증거하였느니라	Who bare record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus Christ, and of all things that he saw.	who testifies to everything he saw. This is the word of God and the testimony of Jesus Christ.
REV	1	3	이 예언의 말씀을 읽는 자와 듣는 자들과 그 가운데 기록한 것을 지키는 자들이 복이 있나니 때가 가까움이라	Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of this prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein: for the time is at hand.	Blessed is the one who reads aloud the words of this prophecy, and blessed are those who hear and obey what is written in it, because the time is near.
REV	1	4	요한은 아시아에 있는 일곱 교회에 편지하노니 이제도 계시고 전에도 계시고 장차 오실 이와 그 보좌 앞에 일곱 영과	John to the seven churches which are in Asia: Grace be unto you, and peace, from him which is, and which was, and which is to come; and from the seven Spirits which are before his throne;	John, To the seven churches in the province of Asia: Grace and peace to you from Him who is and was and is to come, and from the seven Spirits before His throne,
REV	1	5	또 충성된 증인으로 죽은 자들 가운데서 먼저 나시고 땅의 임금들의 머리가 되신 예수 그리스도로 말미암아 은혜와 평강이 너희에게 있기를 원하노라 우리를 사랑하사 그의 피로 우리 죄에서 우리를 해방하시고	And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, and the first begotten of the dead, and the prince of the kings of the earth. Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood,	and from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the firstborn from the dead, and the ruler of the kings of the earth. To Him who loves us and has released us from our sins by His blood,
REV	1	6	그 아버지 하나님을 위하여 우리를 나라와 제사장으로 삼으신 그에게 영광과 능력이 세세토록 있기를 원하노라 아멘	And hath made us kings and priests unto God and his Father; to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.	who has made us to be a kingdom, priests to His God and Father—to Him be the glory and power forever and ever! Amen.
REV	1	7	볼지어다 구름을 타고 오시리라 각인의 눈이 그를 보겠고 그를 찌른 자들도 볼 터이요 땅에 있는 모든 족속이 그를 인하여 애곡하리니 그러하리라 아멘	Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him: and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him. Even so, Amen.	Behold, He is coming with the clouds, and every eye will see Him—even those who pierced Him. And all the tribes of the earth will mourn because of Him. So shall it be! Amen.
REV	1	8	주 하나님이 가라사대 나는 알파와 오메가라 이제도 있고 전에도 있었고 장차 올 자요 전능한 자라 하시더라	I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, saith the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty.	“I am the Alpha and the Omega,” says the Lord God, who is and was and is to come—the Almighty.
REV	1	9	나 요한은 너희 형제요 예수의 환난과 나라와 참음에 동참하는 자라 하나님의 말씀과 예수의 증거를 인하여 밧모라 하는 섬에 있었더니	I John, who also am your brother, and companion in tribulation, and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, was in the isle that is called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ.	I, John, your brother and partner in the tribulation and kingdom and perseverance that are in Jesus, was on the island of Patmos because of the word of God and my testimony about Jesus.
REV	1	10	주의 날에 내가 성령에 감동하여 내 뒤에서 나는 나팔 소리 같은 큰 음성을 들으니	I was in the Spirit on the Lord’s day, and heard behind me a great voice, as of a trumpet,	On the Lord’s day I was in the Spirit, and I heard behind me a loud voice like a trumpet,
REV	1	11	가로되 너 보는 것을 책에 써서 에베소, 서머나, 버가모, 두아디라, 사데, 빌라멜비아, 라오디게아 일곱 교회에 보내라 하시기로	Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last: and, What thou seest, write in a book, and send it unto the seven churches which are in Asia; unto Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, and unto Pergamos, and unto Thyatira, and unto Sardis, and unto Philadelphia, and unto Laodicea.	saying, “Write on a scroll what you see and send it to the seven churches: to Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamum, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea.”
REV	1	12	몸을 돌이켜 나더러 말한 음성을 알아 보려고 하여 돌이킬 때에 일곱 금 촛대를 보았는데	And I turned to see the voice that spake with me. And being turned, I saw seven golden candlesticks;	Then I turned to see the voice that was speaking with me. And having turned, I saw seven golden lampstands,
REV	1	13	촛대 사이에 인자 같은 이가 발에 끌리는 옷을 입고 가슴에 금띠를 띠고	And in the midst of the seven candlesticks one like unto the Son of man, clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle.	and among the lampstands was One like the Son of Man, dressed in a long robe, with a golden sash around His chest.
REV	1	14	그 머리와 털의 희기가 흰 양털 같고 눈 같으며 그의 눈은 불꽃 같고	His head and his hairs were white like wool, as white as snow; and his eyes were as a flame of fire;	The hair of His head was white like wool, as white as snow, and His eyes were like a blazing fire.
REV	1	15	그의 발은 풀무에 단련한 빛난 주석 같고 그의 음성은 많은 물소리와 같으며	And his feet like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a furnace; and his voice as the sound of many waters.	His feet were like polished bronze refined in a furnace, and His voice was like the roar of many waters.
REV	1	16	그 오른손에 일곱 별이 있고 그 입에서 좌우에 날선 검이 나오고 그 얼굴은 해가 힘있게 비취는 것 같더라	And he had in his right hand seven stars: and out of his mouth went a sharp twoedged sword: and his countenance was as the sun shineth in his strength.	He held in His right hand seven stars, and a sharp double-edged sword came from His mouth. His face was like the sun shining at its brightest.
REV	1	17	내가 볼 때에 그 발 앞에 엎드러져 죽은 자 같이 되매 그가 오른손을 내게 얹고 가라사대 두려워 말라 나는 처음이요 나중이니	And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead. And he laid his right hand upon me, saying unto me, Fear not; I am the first and the last:	When I saw Him, I fell at His feet like a dead man. But He placed His right hand on me and said, “Do not be afraid. I am the First and the Last,
REV	1	18	곧 산 자라 내가 전에 죽었었노라 볼지어다 이제 세세토록 살아 있어 사망과 음부의 열쇠를 가졌노니	I am he that liveth, and was dead; and, behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of hell and of death.	the Living One. I was dead, and behold, now I am alive forever and ever! And I hold the keys of Death and of Hades.
REV	1	19	그러므로 네 본 것과 이제 있는 일과 장차 될 일을 기록하라	Write the things which thou hast seen, and the things which are, and the things which shall be hereafter;	Therefore write down the things you have seen, and the things that are, and the things that will happen after this.
REV	1	20	네 본 것은 내 오른손에 일곱 별의 비밀과 일곱 금 촛대라 일곱 별은 일곱 교회의 사자요 일곱 촛대는 일곱 교회니라	The mystery of the seven stars which thou sawest in my right hand, and the seven golden candlesticks. The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches: and the seven candlesticks which thou sawest are the seven churches.	This is the mystery of the seven stars you saw in My right hand and of the seven golden lampstands: The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches, and the seven lampstands are the seven churches.
REV	2	1	에베소 교회의 사자에게 편지하기를 오른손에 일곱 별을 붙잡고 일곱 금 촛대 사이에 다니시는 이가 가라사대	Unto the angel of the church of Ephesus write; These things saith he that holdeth the seven stars in his right hand, who walketh in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks;	“To the angel of the church in Ephesus write: These are the words of Him who holds the seven stars in His right hand and walks among the seven golden lampstands.
REV	2	2	내가 네 행위와 수고와 네 인내를 알고 또 악한 자들을 용납지 아니한 것과 자칭 사도라 하되 아닌 자들을 시험하여 그 거짓된 것을 네가 드러낸 것과	I know thy works, and thy labour, and thy patience, and how thou canst not bear them which are evil: and thou hast tried them which say they are apostles, and are not, and hast found them liars:	I know your deeds, your labor, and your perseverance. I know that you cannot tolerate those who are evil, and you have tested and exposed as liars those who falsely claim to be apostles.
REV	2	3	또 네가 참고 내 이름을 위하여 견디고 게으르지 아니한 것을 아노라	And hast borne, and hast patience, and for my name’s sake hast laboured, and hast not fainted.	Without growing weary, you have persevered and endured many things for the sake of My name.
REV	2	4	그러나 너를 책망할 것이 있나니 너의 처음 사랑을 버렸느니라	Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou hast left thy first love.	But I have this against you: You have abandoned your first love.
REV	2	5	그러므로 어디서 떨어진 것을 생각하고 회개하여 처음 행위를 가지라 만일 그리하지 아니하고 회개치 아니하면 내가 네게 임하여 네 촛대를 그 자리에서 옮기리라	Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.	Therefore, keep in mind how far you have fallen. Repent and perform the deeds you did at first. But if you do not repent, I will come to you and remove your lampstand from its place.
REV	2	6	오직 네게 이것이 있으니 네가 니골라 당의 행위를 미워하는도다 나도 이것을 미워하노라	But this thou hast, that thou hatest the deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.	But you have this to your credit: You hate the works of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.
REV	2	7	귀 있는 자는 성령이 교회들에게 하시는 말씀을 들을지어다 이기는 그에게는 내가 하나님의 낙원에 있는 생명나무의 과실을 주어 먹게 하리라	He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches; To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God.	He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches. To the one who overcomes, I will grant the right to eat from the tree of life in the Paradise of God.
REV	2	8	서머나 교회의 사자에게 편지하기를 처음이요 나중이요 죽었다가 살아나신 이가 가라사대	And unto the angel of the church in Smyrna write; These things saith the first and the last, which was dead, and is alive;	To the angel of the church in Smyrna write: These are the words of the First and the Last, who died and returned to life.
REV	2	9	내가 네 환난과 궁핍을 아노니 실상은 네가 부요한 자니라 자칭 유대인이라 하는 자들의 훼방도 아노니 실상은 유대인이 아니요 사단의 회라	I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty, (but thou art rich) and I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not, but are the synagogue of Satan.	I know your affliction and your poverty—though you are rich! And I am aware of the slander of those who falsely claim to be Jews, but are in fact a synagogue of Satan.
REV	2	10	네가 장차 받을 고난을 두려워 말라 볼지어다 마귀가 장차 너희 가운데서 몇 사람을 옥에 던져 시험을 받게 하리니 너희가 십 일 동안 환난을 받으리라 네가 죽도록 충성하라 그리하면 내가 생명의 면류관을 네게 주리라	Fear none of those things which thou shalt suffer: behold, the devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried; and ye shall have tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life.	Do not fear what you are about to suffer. Look, the devil is about to throw some of you into prison to test you, and you will suffer tribulation for ten days. Be faithful even unto death, and I will give you the crown of life.
REV	2	11	귀 있는 자는 성령이 교회들에게 하시는 말씀을 들을지어다 이기는 자는 둘째 사망의 해를 받지 아니하리라	He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches; He that overcometh shall not be hurt of the second death.	He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches. The one who overcomes will not be harmed by the second death.
REV	2	12	버가모 교회의 사자에게 편지하기를 죄우에 날선 검을 가진 이가 가라사대	And to the angel of the church in Pergamos write; These things saith he which hath the sharp sword with two edges;	To the angel of the church in Pergamum write: These are the words of the One who holds the sharp, double-edged sword.
REV	2	13	네가 어디 사는 것을 내가 아노니 거기는 사단의 위가 있는 데라 네가 내 이름을 굳게 잡아서 내 충성된 증인 안디바가 너희 가운데 곧 사단의 거하는 곳에서 죽임을 당할 때에도 나를 믿는 믿음을 저버리지 아니하였도다	I know thy works, and where thou dwellest, even where Satan’s seat is: and thou holdest fast my name, and hast not denied my faith, even in those days wherein Antipas was my faithful martyr, who was slain among you, where Satan dwelleth.	I know where you live, where the throne of Satan sits. Yet you have held fast to My name and have not denied your faith in Me, even in the day when My faithful witness Antipas was killed among you, where Satan dwells.
REV	2	14	그러나 네게 두어 가지 책망할 것이 있나니 거기 네게 발람의 교훈을 지키는 자들이 있도다 발람이 발락을 가르쳐 이스라엘 앞에 올무를 놓아 우상의 제물을 먹게 하였고 또 행음하게 하였느니라	But I have a few things against thee, because thou hast there them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a stumblingblock before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed unto idols, and to commit fornication.	But I have a few things against you, because some of you hold to the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to place a stumbling block before the Israelites so they would eat food sacrificed to idols and commit sexual immorality.
REV	2	15	이와 같이 네게도 니골라 당의 교훈을 지키는 자들이 있도다	So hast thou also them that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate.	In the same way, some of you also hold to the teaching of the Nicolaitans.
REV	2	16	그러므로 회개하라 그리하지 아니하면 내가 네게 속히 임하여 내 입의 검으로 그들과 싸우리라	Repent; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight against them with the sword of my mouth.	Therefore repent! Otherwise I will come to you shortly and wage war against them with the sword of My mouth.
REV	2	17	귀 있는 자는 성령이 교회들에게 하시는 말씀을 들을지어다 이기는 그에게는 내가 감추었던 만나를 주고 또 흰 돌을 줄 터인데 그 돌 위에 새 이름을 기록한 것이 있나니 받는 자 밖에는 그 이름을 알 사람이 없느니라	He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches; To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it.	He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches. To the one who overcomes, I will give the hidden manna. I will also give him a white stone inscribed with a new name, known only to the one who receives it.
REV	2	18	두아디라 교회의 사자에게 편지하기를 그 눈이 불꽃 같고 그 발이 빛난 주석과 같은 하나님의 아들이 가라사대	And unto the angel of the church in Thyatira write; These things saith the Son of God, who hath his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet are like fine brass;	To the angel of the church in Thyatira write: These are the words of the Son of God, whose eyes are like a blazing fire and whose feet are like polished bronze.
REV	2	19	내가 네게 사업과 사랑과 믿음과 섬김과 인내를 아노니 네 나중 행위가 처음 것보다 많도다	I know thy works, and charity, and service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy works; and the last to be more than the first.	I know your deeds—your love, your faith, your service, your perseverance—and your latter deeds are greater than your first.
REV	2	20	그러나 네게 책망할 일이 있노라 자칭 선지자라 하는 여자 이세벨을 네가 용납함이니 그가 내 종들을 가르쳐 꾀어 행음하게 하고 우상의 제물을 먹게 하는도다	Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, because thou sufferest that woman Jezebel, which calleth herself a prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto idols.	But I have this against you: You tolerate that woman Jezebel, who calls herself a prophetess. By her teaching she misleads My servants to be sexually immoral and to eat food sacrificed to idols.
REV	2	21	또 내가 그에게 회개할 기회를 주었으되 그 음행을 회개하고자 아니하는도다	And I gave her space to repent of her fornication; and she repented not.	Even though I have given her time to repent of her immorality, she is unwilling.
REV	2	22	볼지어다 내가 그를 침상에 던질 터이요 또 그로 더불어 간음하는 자들도 만일 그의 행위를 회개치 아니하면 큰 환난 가운데 던지고	Behold, I will cast her into a bed, and them that commit adultery with her into great tribulation, except they repent of their deeds.	Behold, I will cast her onto a bed of sickness, and those who commit adultery with her will suffer great tribulation unless they repent of her deeds.
REV	2	23	또 내가 사망으로 그의 자녀를 죽이리니 모든 교회가 나는 사람의 뜻과 마음을 살피는 자인 줄 알지라 내가 너희 각 사람의 행위대로 갚아주리라	And I will kill her children with death; and all the churches shall know that I am he which searcheth the reins and hearts: and I will give unto every one of you according to your works.	Then I will strike her children dead, and all the churches will know that I am the One who searches minds and hearts, and I will repay each of you according to your deeds.
REV	2	24	두아디라에 남아 있어 이 교훈을 받지 아니하고 소위 사단의 깊은 것을 알지 못하는 너희에게 말하노니 다른 짐으로 너희에게 지울 것이 없노라	But unto you I say, and unto the rest in Thyatira, as many as have not this doctrine, and which have not known the depths of Satan, as they speak; I will put upon you none other burden.	But I say to the rest of you in Thyatira, who do not hold to her teaching and have not learned the so-called deep things of Satan: I will place no further burden upon you.
REV	2	25	다만 너희에게 있는 것을 내가 올 때까지 굳게 잡으라	But that which ye have already hold fast till I come.	Nevertheless, hold fast to what you have until I come.
REV	2	26	이기는 자와 끝까지 내 일을 지키는 그에게 만국을 다스리는 권세를 주리니	And he that overcometh, and keepeth my works unto the end, to him will I give power over the nations:	And to the one who overcomes and continues in My work until the end, I will give authority over the nations.
REV	2	27	그가 철장을 가지고 저희를 다스려 질그릇 깨뜨리는 것과 같이 하리라 나도 내 아버지께 받은 것이 그러하니라	And he shall rule them with a rod of iron; as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers: even as I received of my Father.	He will rule them with an iron scepter and shatter them like pottery—just as I have received authority from My Father.
REV	2	28	내가 또 그에게 새벽 별을 주리라	And I will give him the morning star.	And I will give him the morning star.
REV	2	29	귀있는 자는 성령이 교회들에게 하시는 말씀을 들을지어다	He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches.	He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.
REV	3	1	사데 교회의 사자에게 편지하기를 하나님의 일곱 영과 일곱 별을 가진 이가 가라사대 내가 네 행위를 아노니 네가 살았다 하는 이름은 가졌으나 죽은 자로다	And unto the angel of the church in Sardis write; These things saith he that hath the seven Spirits of God, and the seven stars; I know thy works, that thou hast a name that thou livest, and art dead.	“To the angel of the church in Sardis write: These are the words of the One who holds the seven Spirits of God and the seven stars. I know your deeds; you have a reputation for being alive, yet you are dead.
REV	3	2	너는 일깨워 그 남은 바 죽게 된 것을 굳게 하라 내 하나님 앞에 네 행위의 온전한 것을 찾지 못하였노니	Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to die: for I have not found thy works perfect before God.	Wake up and strengthen what remains, which was about to die; for I have found your deeds incomplete in the sight of My God.
REV	3	3	그러므로 네가 어떻게 받았으며 어떻게 들었는지 생각하고 지키어 회개하라 만일 일깨지 아니하면 내가 도적 같이 이르리니 어느 시에 네게 임할는지 네가 알지 못하리라	Remember therefore how thou hast received and heard, and hold fast, and repent. If therefore thou shalt not watch, I will come on thee as a thief, and thou shalt not know what hour I will come upon thee.	Remember, then, what you have received and heard. Keep it and repent. If you do not wake up, I will come like a thief, and you will not know the hour when I will come upon you.
REV	3	4	그러나 사데에 그 옷을 더럽히지 아니한 자 몇 명이 네게 있어 흰 옷을 입고 나와 함께 다니리니 그들은 합당한 자인 연고라	Thou hast a few names even in Sardis which have not defiled their garments; and they shall walk with me in white: for they are worthy.	But you do have a few people in Sardis who have not soiled their garments, and because they are worthy, they will walk with Me in white.
REV	3	5	이기는 자는 이와 같이 흰 옷을 입을 것이요 내가 그 이름을 생명책에서 반드시 흐리지 아니하고 그 이름을 내 아버지 앞과 그 천사들 앞에서 시인하리라	He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white raiment; and I will not blot out his name out of the book of life, but I will confess his name before my Father, and before his angels.	Like them, he who overcomes will be dressed in white. And I will never blot out his name from the Book of Life, but I will confess his name before My Father and His angels.
REV	3	6	귀 있는 자는 성령이 교회들에게 하시는 말씀을 들을지어다	He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches.	He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.
REV	3	7	빌라델비아 교회의 사자에게 편지하기를 거룩하고 진실하사 다윗의 열쇠를 가지신 이 곧 열면 닫을 사람이 없고 닫으면 열 사람이 없는 그이가 가라사대	And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write; These things saith he that is holy, he that is true, he that hath the key of David, he that openeth, and no man shutteth; and shutteth, and no man openeth;	To the angel of the church in Philadelphia write: These are the words of the One who is holy and true, who holds the key of David. What He opens no one can shut, and what He shuts no one can open.
REV	3	8	볼지어다 내가 네 앞에 열린 문을 두었으되 능히 닫을 사람이 없으리라 내가 네 행위를 아노니 네가 적은 능력을 가지고도 내 말을 지키며 내 이름을 배반치 아니하였도다	I know thy works: behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it: for thou hast a little strength, and hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name.	I know your deeds. See, I have placed before you an open door, which no one can shut. For you have only a little strength, yet you have kept My word and have not denied My name.
REV	3	9	보라 사단의 회 곧 자칭 유대인이라 하나 그렇지 않고 거짓말하는 자들 중에서 몇을 네게 주어 저희로 와서 네 발 앞에 절하게 하고 내가 너를 사랑하는 줄을 알게 하리라	Behold, I will make them of the synagogue of Satan, which say they are Jews, and are not, but do lie; behold, I will make them to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee.	Look at those who belong to the synagogue of Satan, who claim to be Jews but are liars instead. I will make them come and bow down at your feet, and they will know that I love you.
REV	3	10	네가 나의 인내의 말씀을 지켰은즉 내가 또한 너를 지키어 시험의 때를 면하게 하리니 이는 장차 온 세상에 임하여 땅에 거하는 자들을 시험할 때라	Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth.	Because you have kept My command to persevere, I will also keep you from the hour of testing that is about to come upon the whole world, to test those who dwell on the earth.
REV	3	11	내가 속히 임하리니 네가 가진 것을 굳게 잡아 아무나 네 면류관을 빼앗지 못하게 하라	Behold, I come quickly: hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take thy crown.	I am coming soon. Hold fast to what you have, so that no one will take your crown.
REV	3	12	이기는 자는 내 하나님 성전에 기둥이 되게 하리니 그가 결코 다시 나가지 아니하리라 내가 하나님의 이름과 하나님의 성 곧 하늘에서 내 하나님께로부터 내려오는 새 예루살렘의 이름과 나의 새 이름을 그이 위에 기록하리라	Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem, which cometh down out of heaven from my God: and I will write upon him my new name.	The one who overcomes I will make a pillar in the temple of My God, and he will never again leave it. Upon him I will write the name of My God, and the name of the city of My God (the new Jerusalem that comes down out of heaven from My God), and My new name.
REV	3	13	귀 있는 자는 성령이 교회들에게 하시는 말씀을 들을지어다	He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches.	He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.
REV	3	14	라오디게아 교회의 사자에게 편지하기를 아멘이시요 충성되고 참된 증인이시요 하나님의 창조의 근본이신 이가 가라사대	And unto the angel of the church of the Laodiceans write; These things saith the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation of God;	To the angel of the church in Laodicea write: These are the words of the Amen, the faithful and true Witness, the Originator of God’s creation.
REV	3	15	내가 네 행위를 아노니 네가 차지도 아니하고 더웁지도 아니하도다 네가 차든지 더웁든지 하기를 원하노라	I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou wert cold or hot.	I know your deeds; you are neither cold nor hot. How I wish you were one or the other!
REV	3	16	네가 이같이 미지근하여 더웁지도 아니하고 차지도 아니하니 내 입에서 너를 토하여 내치리라	So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth.	So because you are lukewarm—neither hot nor cold—I am about to vomit you out of My mouth!
REV	3	17	네가 말하기를 나는 부자라 부요하여 부족한 것이 없다 하나 네 곤고한 것과 가련한 것과 가난한 것과 눈 먼 것과 벌거벗은 것을 알지 못하도다	Because thou sayest, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked:	You say, ‘I am rich; I have grown wealthy and need nothing.’ But you do not realize that you are wretched, pitiful, poor, blind, and naked.
REV	3	18	내가 너를 권하노니 내게서 불로 연단한 금을 사서 부요하게 하고 흰 옷을 사서 입어 벌거벗은 수치를 보이지 않게 하고 안약을 사서 눈에 발라 보게 하라	I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou mayest be rich; and white raiment, that thou mayest be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear; and anoint thine eyes with eyesalve, that thou mayest see.	I counsel you to buy from Me gold refined by fire so that you may become rich, white garments so that you may be clothed and your shameful nakedness not exposed, and salve to anoint your eyes so that you may see.
REV	3	19	무릇 내가 사랑하는 자를 책망하여 징계하노니 그러므로 네가 열심을 내라 회개하라	As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore, and repent.	Those I love, I rebuke and discipline. Therefore be earnest and repent.
REV	3	20	볼지어다 내가 문 밖에 서서 두드리노니 누구든지 내 음성을 듣고 문을 열면 내가 그에게로 들어가 그로 더불어 먹고 그는 나로 더불어 먹으리라	Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.	Behold, I stand at the door and knock. If anyone hears My voice and opens the door, I will come in and dine with him, and he with Me.
REV	3	21	이기는 그에게는 내가 내 보좌에 함께 앉게 하여 주기를 내가 이기고 아버지 보좌에 함께 앉은 것과 같이 하리라	To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne.	To the one who overcomes, I will grant the right to sit with Me on My throne, just as I overcame and sat down with My Father on His throne.
REV	3	22	귀 있는 자는 성령이 교회들에게 하시는 말씀을 들을지어다	He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches.	He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.”
REV	4	1	이 일 후에 내가 보니 하늘에 열린 문이 있는데 내가 들은 바 처음에 내게 말하던 나팔 소리 같은 그 음성이 가로되 이리로 올라오라 이 후에 마땅히 될 일을 내가 네게 보이리라 하시더라	After this I looked, and, behold, a door was opened in heaven: and the first voice which I heard was as it were of a trumpet talking with me; which said, Come up hither, and I will shew thee things which must be hereafter.	After this I looked and saw a door standing open in heaven. And the voice I had previously heard speak to me like a trumpet was saying, “Come up here, and I will show you what must happen after these things.”
REV	4	2	내가 곧 성령에 감동하였더니 보라 하늘에 보좌를 베풀었고 그 보좌 위에 앉으신 이가 있는데	And immediately I was in the spirit: and, behold, a throne was set in heaven, and one sat on the throne.	At once I was in the Spirit, and I saw a throne standing in heaven, with someone seated on it.
REV	4	3	앉으신 이의 모양이 벽옥과 홍보석 같고 또 무지개가 있어 보좌에 둘렸는데 그 모양이 녹보석 같더라	And he that sat was to look upon like a jasper and a sardine stone: and there was a rainbow round about the throne, in sight like unto an emerald.	The One seated there looked like jasper and carnelian, and a rainbow that gleamed like an emerald encircled the throne.
REV	4	4	또 보좌에 둘려 이십사 보좌들이 있고 그 보좌들 위에 이십사 장로들이 흰 옷을 입고 머리에 금 면류관을 쓰고 앉았더라	And round about the throne were four and twenty seats: and upon the seats I saw four and twenty elders sitting, clothed in white raiment; and they had on their heads crowns of gold.	Surrounding the throne were twenty-four other thrones, and on these thrones sat twenty-four elders dressed in white, with golden crowns on their heads.
REV	4	5	보좌로부터 번개와 음성과 뇌성이 나고 보좌 앞에 일곱 등불 켠 것이 있으니 이는 하나님의 일곱 영이라	And out of the throne proceeded lightnings and thunderings and voices: and there were seven lamps of fire burning before the throne, which are the seven Spirits of God.	From the throne came flashes of lightning, and rumblings, and peals of thunder. Before the throne burned seven torches of fire. These are the seven Spirits of God.
REV	4	6	보좌 앞에 수정과 같은 유리 바다가 있고 보좌 가운데와 보좌 주위에 네 생물이 있는데 앞 뒤에 눈이 가득하더라	And before the throne there was a sea of glass like unto crystal: and in the midst of the throne, and round about the throne, were four beasts full of eyes before and behind.	And before the throne was something like a sea of glass, as clear as crystal. In the center, around the throne, were four living creatures, covered with eyes in front and back.
REV	4	7	그 첫째 생물은 사자 같고 그 둘째 생물은 송아지 같고 그 셋째 생물은 얼굴이 사람 같고 그 넷째 생물은 날아가는 독수리 같은데	And the first beast was like a lion, and the second beast like a calf, and the third beast had a face as a man, and the fourth beast was like a flying eagle.	The first living creature was like a lion, the second like a calf, the third had a face like a man, and the fourth was like an eagle in flight.
REV	4	8	네 생물이 각각 여섯 날개가 있고 그 안과 주위에 눈이 가득하더라 그들이 밤낮 쉬지 않고 이르기를 거룩하다 거룩하다 거룩하다 주 하나님 곧 전능하신 이여 전에도 계셨고 이제도 계시고 장차 오실 자라 하고	And the four beasts had each of them six wings about him; and they were full of eyes within: and they rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.	And each of the four living creatures had six wings and was covered with eyes all around and within. Day and night they never stop saying: “Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord God Almighty, who was and is and is to come!”
REV	4	9	그 생물들이 영광과 존귀와 감사를 보좌에 앉으사 세세토록 사시는 이에게 돌릴 때에	And when those beasts give glory and honour and thanks to him that sat on the throne, who liveth for ever and ever,	And whenever the living creatures give glory, honor, and thanks to the One seated on the throne who lives forever and ever,
REV	4	10	이십사 장로들이 보좌에 앉으신 이 앞에 엎드려 세세토록 사시는 이에게 경배하고 자기의 면류관을 보좌 앞에 던지며 가로되	The four and twenty elders fall down before him that sat on the throne, and worship him that liveth for ever and ever, and cast their crowns before the throne, saying,	the twenty-four elders fall down before the One seated on the throne, and they worship Him who lives forever and ever. They cast their crowns before the throne, saying:
REV	4	11	우리 주 하나님이여 영광과 존귀와 능력을 받으시는 것이 합당하오니 주께서 만물을 지으신지라 만물이 주의 뜻대로 있었고 또 지으심을 받았나이다 하더라	Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honour and power: for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created.	“Worthy are You, our Lord and God, to receive glory and honor and power, for You created all things; by Your will they exist and came to be.”
REV	5	1	내가 보매 보좌에 앉으신 이의 오른손에 책이 있으니 안팎으로 썼고 일곱 인으로 봉하였더라	And I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne a book written within and on the backside, sealed with seven seals.	Then I saw a scroll in the right hand of the One seated on the throne. It had writing on both sides and was sealed with seven seals.
REV	5	2	또 보매 힘있는 천사가 큰 음성으로 외치기를 누가 책을 펴며 그 인을 떼기에 합당하냐 하니	And I saw a strong angel proclaiming with a loud voice, Who is worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof?	And I saw a mighty angel proclaiming in a loud voice, “Who is worthy to break the seals and open the scroll?”
REV	5	3	하늘 위에나 땅 위에나 땅 아래에 능히 책을 펴거나 보거나 할 이가 없더라	And no man in heaven, nor in earth, neither under the earth, was able to open the book, neither to look thereon.	But no one in heaven or on earth or under the earth was able to open the scroll or look inside it.
REV	5	4	이 책을 펴거나 보거나 하기에 합당한 자가 보이지 않기로 내가 크게 울었더니	And I wept much, because no man was found worthy to open and to read the book, neither to look thereon.	And I began to weep bitterly, because no one was found worthy to open the scroll or look inside it.
REV	5	5	장로 중에 하나가 내게 말하되 울지 말라 유대 지파의 사자 다윗의 뿌리가 이기었으니 이 책과 그 일곱 인을 떼시리라 하더라	And one of the elders saith unto me, Weep not: behold, the Lion of the tribe of Juda, the Root of David, hath prevailed to open the book, and to loose the seven seals thereof.	Then one of the elders said to me, “Do not weep! Behold, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, has triumphed to open the scroll and its seven seals.”
REV	5	6	내가 또 보니 보좌와 네 생물과 장로들 사이에 어린 양이 섰는데 일찍 죽임을 당한 것 같더라 일곱 뿔과 일곱 눈이 있으니 이 눈은 온 땅에 보내심을 입은 하나님의 일곱 영이더라	And I beheld, and, lo, in the midst of the throne and of the four beasts, and in the midst of the elders, stood a Lamb as it had been slain, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God sent forth into all the earth.	Then I saw a Lamb who appeared to have been slain, standing in the center of the throne, encircled by the four living creatures and the elders. The Lamb had seven horns and seven eyes, which represent the seven Spirits of God sent out into all the earth.
REV	5	7	어린 양이 나아와서 보좌에 앉으신 이의 오른손에서 책을 취하시니라	And he came and took the book out of the right hand of him that sat upon the throne.	And He came and took the scroll from the right hand of the One seated on the throne.
REV	5	8	책을 취하시매 네 생물과 이십사 장로들이 어린 양 앞에 엎드려 각각 거문고와 향이 가득한 금대접을 가졌으니 이 향은 성도의 기도들이라	And when he had taken the book, the four beasts and four and twenty elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one of them harps, and golden vials full of odours, which are the prayers of saints.	When He had taken the scroll, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb. Each one had a harp, and they were holding golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the saints.
REV	5	9	새 노래를 노래하여 가로되 책을 가지시고 그 인봉을 떼기에 합당하시도다 일찍 죽임을 당하사 각 족속과 방언과 백성과 나라 가운데서 사람들을 피로 사서 하나님께 드리시고	And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation;	And they sang a new song: “Worthy are You to take the scroll and open its seals, because You were slain, and by Your blood You purchased for God those from every tribe and tongue and people and nation.
REV	5	10	저희로 우리 하나님 앞에서 나라와 제사장을 삼으셨으니 저희가 땅에서 왕 노릇 하리로다 하더라	And hast made us unto our God kings and priests: and we shall reign on the earth.	You have made them to be a kingdom and priests to serve our God, and they will reign upon the earth.”
REV	5	11	내가 또 보고 들으매 보좌와 생물들과 장로들을 둘러 선 많은 천사의 음성이 있으니 그 수가 만만이요 천천이라	And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels round about the throne and the beasts and the elders: and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands;	Then I looked, and I heard the voices of many angels and living creatures and elders encircling the throne, and their number was myriads of myriads and thousands of thousands.
REV	5	12	큰 음성으로 가로되 죽임을 당하신 어린 양이 능력과 부와 지혜와 힘과 존귀와 영광과 찬송을 받으시기에 합당하도다 하더라	Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing.	In a loud voice they were saying: “Worthy is the Lamb, who was slain, to receive power and riches and wisdom and strength and honor and glory and blessing!”
REV	5	13	내가 또 들으니 하늘 위에와 땅 위에와 땅 아래와 바다 위에와 또 그 가운데 모든 만물이 가로되 보좌에 앉으신 이와 어린 양에게 찬송과 존귀와 영광과 능력을 세세토록 돌릴지어다 하니	And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying, Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.	And I heard every creature in heaven and on earth and under the earth and in the sea, and all that is in them, saying: “To Him who sits on the throne and to the Lamb be praise and honor and glory and power forever and ever!”
REV	5	14	네 생물이 가로되 아멘 하고 장로들은 엎드려 경배하더라	And the four beasts said, Amen. And the four and twenty elders fell down and worshipped him that liveth for ever and ever.	And the four living creatures said, “Amen,” and the elders fell down and worshiped.
REV	6	1	내가 보매 어린 양이 일곱 인 중에 하나를 떼시는 그 때에 내가 들으니 네 생물 중에 하나가 우뢰 소리 같이 말하되 오라 하기로	And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seals, and I heard, as it were the noise of thunder, one of the four beasts saying, Come and see.	Then I watched as the Lamb opened one of the seven seals, and I heard one of the four living creatures say in a thunderous voice, “Come!”
REV	6	2	내가 이에 보니 흰 말이 있는데 그 탄 자가 활을 가졌고 면류관을 받고 나가서 이기고 또 이기려고 하더라	And I saw, and behold a white horse: and he that sat on him had a bow; and a crown was given unto him: and he went forth conquering, and to conquer.	So I looked and saw a white horse, and its rider held a bow. And he was given a crown, and he rode out to overcome and conquer.
REV	6	3	둘째 인을 떼실 때에 내가 들으니 둘째 생물이 말하되 오라 하더니	And when he had opened the second seal, I heard the second beast say, Come and see.	And when the Lamb opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature say, “Come!”
REV	6	4	이에 붉은 다른 말이 나오더라 그 탄 자가 허락을 받아 땅에서 화평을 제하여 버리며 서로 죽이게 하고 또 큰 칼을 받았더라	And there went out another horse that was red: and power was given to him that sat thereon to take peace from the earth, and that they should kill one another: and there was given unto him a great sword.	Then another horse went forth. It was bright red, and its rider was granted permission to take away peace from the earth and to make men slay one another. And he was given a great sword.
REV	6	5	셋째 인을 떼실 때에 내가 들으니 셋째 생물이 말하되 오라 하기로 내가 보니 검은 말이 나오는데 그 탄 자가 손에 저울을 가졌더라	And when he had opened the third seal, I heard the third beast say, Come and see. And I beheld, and lo a black horse; and he that sat on him had a pair of balances in his hand.	And when the Lamb opened the third seal, I heard the third living creature say, “Come!” Then I looked and saw a black horse, and its rider held in his hand a pair of scales.
REV	6	6	내가 네 생물 사이로서 나는듯하는 음성을 들으니 가로되 한 데나리온에 밀 한 되요 한 데나리온에 보리 석 되로다 또 감람유와 포도주는 해치 말라 하더라	And I heard a voice in the midst of the four beasts say, A measure of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny; and see thou hurt not the oil and the wine.	And I heard what sounded like a voice from among the four living creatures, saying, “A quart of wheat for a denarius, and three quarts of barley for a denarius, and do not harm the oil and wine.”
REV	6	7	넷째 인을 떼실 때에 내가 넷째 생물의 음성을 들으니 가로되 오라 하기로	And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth beast say, Come and see.	And when the Lamb opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth living creature say, “Come!”
REV	6	8	내가 보매 청황색 말이 나오는데 그 탄 자의 이름은 사망이니 음부가 그 뒤를 따르더라 저희가 땅 사분 일의 권세를 얻어 검과 흉년과 사망과 땅의 짐승으로써 죽이더라	And I looked, and behold a pale horse: and his name that sat on him was Death, and Hell followed with him. And power was given unto them over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with hunger, and with death, and with the beasts of the earth.	Then I looked and saw a pale green horse. Its rider’s name was Death, and Hades followed close behind. And they were given authority over a fourth of the earth, to kill by sword, by famine, by plague, and by the beasts of the earth.
REV	6	9	다섯째 인을 떼실 때에 내가 보니 하나님의 말씀과 저희의 가진 증거를 인하여 죽임을 당한 영혼들이 제단 아래 있어	And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held:	And when the Lamb opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of those who had been slain for the word of God and for the testimony they had upheld.
REV	6	10	큰 소리로 불러 가로되 거룩하고 참되신 대주재여 땅에 거하는 자들을 심판하여 우리 피를 신원하여 주지 아니하시기를 어느 때까지 하시려나이까 하니	And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?	And they cried out in a loud voice, “How long, O Lord, holy and true, until You avenge our blood and judge those who dwell upon the earth?”
REV	6	11	각각 저희에게 흰 두루마기를 주시며 가라사대 아직 잠시 동안 쉬되 저희 동무 종들과 형제들도 자기처럼 죽임을 받아 그 수가 차기까지 하라 하시더라	And white robes were given unto every one of them; and it was said unto them, that they should rest yet for a little season, until their fellowservants also and their brethren, that should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled.	Then each of them was given a white robe and told to rest a little while longer, until the full number of their fellow servants, their brothers, were killed, just as they had been killed.
REV	6	12	내가 보니 여섯째 인을 떼실 때에 큰 지진이 나며 해가 총담 같이 검어지고 온 달이 피 같이 되며	And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and, lo, there was a great earthquake; and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon became as blood;	And when I saw the Lamb open the sixth seal, there was a great earthquake, and the sun became black like sackcloth of goat hair, and the whole moon turned blood red,
REV	6	13	하늘의 별들이 무화과나무가 대풍에 흔들려 선 과실이 떨어지는 것 같이 땅에 떨어지며	And the stars of heaven fell unto the earth, even as a fig tree casteth her untimely figs, when she is shaken of a mighty wind.	and the stars of the sky fell to the earth like unripe figs dropping from a tree shaken by a great wind.
REV	6	14	하늘은 종이 축이 말리는 것 같이 떠나가고 각 산과 섬이 제 자리에서 옮기우매	And the heaven departed as a scroll when it is rolled together; and every mountain and island were moved out of their places.	The sky receded like a scroll being rolled up, and every mountain and island was moved from its place.
REV	6	15	땅의 임금들과 왕족들과 장군들과 부자들과 강한 자들과 각 종과 자주자가 굴과 산 바위 틈에 숨어	And the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and every free man, hid themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains;	Then the kings of the earth, the nobles, the commanders, the rich, the mighty, and every slave and free man hid in the caves and among the rocks of the mountains.
REV	6	16	산과 바위에게 이르되 우리 위에 떨어져 보좌에 앉으신 이의 낯에서와 어린 양의 진노에서 우리를 가리우라	And said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb:	And they said to the mountains and the rocks, “Fall on us and hide us from the face of the One seated on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb.
REV	6	17	그들의 진노의 큰 날이 이르렀으니 누가 능히 서리요 하더라	For the great day of his wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand?	For the great day of Their wrath has come, and who is able to withstand it?”
REV	7	1	이 일 후에 내가 네 천사가 땅 네 모퉁이에 선 것을 보니 땅의 사방의 바람을 붙잡아 바람으로 하여금 땅에나 바다에나 각종 나무에 불지 못하게 하더라	And after these things I saw four angels standing on the four corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that the wind should not blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree.	After this I saw four angels standing at the four corners of the earth, holding back its four winds so that no wind would blow on land or sea or on any tree.
REV	7	2	또 보매 다른 천사가 살아 계신 하나님의 인을 가지고 해 돋는 데로부터 올라와서 땅과 바다를 해롭게 할 권세를 얻은 네 천사를 향하여 큰 소리로 외쳐	And I saw another angel ascending from the east, having the seal of the living God: and he cried with a loud voice to the four angels, to whom it was given to hurt the earth and the sea,	And I saw another angel ascending from the east, with the seal of the living God. And he called out in a loud voice to the four angels who had been given power to harm the land and the sea:
REV	7	3	가로되 우리가 우리 하나님의 종들의 이마에 인치기까지 땅이나 바다나 나무나 해하지 말라 하더라	Saying, Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads.	“Do not harm the land or sea or trees until we have sealed the foreheads of the servants of our God.”
REV	7	4	내가 인 맞은 자의 수를 들으니 이스라엘 자손의 각 지파 중에서 인 맞은 자들이 십사만 사천이니	And I heard the number of them which were sealed: and there were sealed an hundred and forty and four thousand of all the tribes of the children of Israel.	And I heard the number of those who were sealed, 144,000 from all the tribes of Israel:
REV	7	5	유다 지파 중에 인 맞은 자가 일만 이천이요 르우벤 지파 중에 일만 이천이요 갓 지파 중에 일만 이천이요	Of the tribe of Juda were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Reuben were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Gad were sealed twelve thousand.	From the tribe of Judah 12,000 were sealed, from the tribe of Reuben 12,000, from the tribe of Gad 12,000,
REV	7	6	아셀 지파 중에 일만 이천이요 납달리 지파 중에 일만 이천이요 므낫세 지파 중에 일만 이천이요	Of the tribe of Aser were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Nepthalim were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Manasses were sealed twelve thousand.	from the tribe of Asher 12,000, from the tribe of Naphtali 12,000, from the tribe of Manasseh 12,000,
REV	7	7	시므온 지파 중에 일만 이천이요 레위 지파 중에 일만 이천이요 잇사갈 지파 중에 일만 이천이요	Of the tribe of Simeon were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Levi were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Issachar were sealed twelve thousand.	from the tribe of Simeon 12,000, from the tribe of Levi 12,000, from the tribe of Issachar 12,000,
REV	7	8	스블론 지파 중에 일만 이천이요 요셉 지파 중에 일만 이천이요 베냐민 지파 중에 인 맞은 자가 일만 이천이라	Of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Joseph were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Benjamin were sealed twelve thousand.	from the tribe of Zebulun 12,000, from the tribe of Joseph 12,000, and from the tribe of Benjamin 12,000.
REV	7	9	이 일 후에 내가 보니 각 나라와 족속과 백성과 방언에서 아무라도 능히 셀 수 없는 큰 무리가 흰 옷을 입고 손에 종려 가지를 들고 보좌 앞과 어린 양 앞에 서서	After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands;	After this I looked and saw a multitude too large to count, from every nation and tribe and people and tongue, standing before the throne and before the Lamb. They were wearing white robes and holding palm branches in their hands.
REV	7	10	큰 소리로 외쳐 가로되 구원하심이 보좌에 앉으신 우리 하나님과 어린 양에게 있도다 하니	And cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb.	And they cried out in a loud voice: “Salvation to our God, who sits on the throne, and to the Lamb!”
REV	7	11	모든 천사가 보좌와 장로들과 네 생물의 주위에 섰다가 보좌 앞에 엎드려 얼굴을 대고 하나님께 경배하여	And all the angels stood round about the throne, and about the elders and the four beasts, and fell before the throne on their faces, and worshipped God,	And all the angels stood around the throne and around the elders and the four living creatures. And they fell facedown before the throne and worshiped God,
REV	7	12	가로되 아멘 찬송과 영광과 지혜와 감사와 존귀와 능력과 힘이 우리 하나님께 세세토록 있을지로다 아멘 하더라	Saying, Amen: Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and might, be unto our God for ever and ever. Amen.	saying, “Amen! Blessing and glory and wisdom and thanks and honor and power and strength be to our God forever and ever! Amen.”
REV	7	13	장로 중에 하나가 응답하여 내게 이르되 이 흰 옷 입은 자들이 누구며 또 어디서 왔느뇨	And one of the elders answered, saying unto me, What are these which are arrayed in white robes? and whence came they?	Then one of the elders addressed me: “These in white robes,” he asked, “who are they, and where have they come from?”
REV	7	14	내가 가로되 내 주여 당신이 알리이다 하니 그가 나더러 이르되 이는 큰 환난에서 나오는 자들인데 어린 양의 피에 그 옷을 씻어 희게 하였느니라	And I said unto him, Sir, thou knowest. And he said to me, These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.	“Sir,” I answered, “you know.” So he replied, “These are the ones who have come out of the great tribulation; they have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.
REV	7	15	그러므로 그들이 하나님의 보좌 앞에 있고 또 그의 성전에서 밤낮 하나님을 섬기매 보좌에 앉으신 이가 그들 위에 장막을 치시리니	Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple: and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them.	For this reason, they are before the throne of God and serve Him day and night in His temple; and the One seated on the throne will spread His tabernacle over them.
REV	7	16	저희가 다시 주리지도 아니하며 목마르지도 아니하고 해나 아무 뜨거운 기운에 상하지 아니할지니	They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat.	‘Never again will they hunger, and never will they thirst; nor will the sun beat down upon them, nor any scorching heat.’
REV	7	17	이는 보좌 가운데 계신 어린 양이 저희의 목자가 되사 생명수 샘으로 인도하시고 하나님께서 저희 눈에서 모든 눈물을 씻어 주실 것임이러라	For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.	For the Lamb in the center of the throne will be their shepherd. ‘He will lead them to springs of living water,’ and ‘God will wipe away every tear from their eyes.’”
REV	8	1	일곱째 인을 떼실 때에 하늘이 반 시 동안쯤 고요하더니	And when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven about the space of half an hour.	When the Lamb opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven for about half an hour.
REV	8	2	내가 보매 하나님 앞에 시위한 일곱 천사가 있어 일곱 나팔을 받았더라	And I saw the seven angels which stood before God; and to them were given seven trumpets.	And I saw the seven angels who stand before God, and they were given seven trumpets.
REV	8	3	또 다른 천사가 와서 제단 곁에 서서 금 향로를 가지고 많은 향을 받았으니 이는 모든 성도의 기도들과 합하여 보좌 앞 금단에 드리고자 함이라	And another angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer; and there was given unto him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all saints upon the golden altar which was before the throne.	Then another angel, who had a golden censer, came and stood at the altar. He was given much incense to offer, along with the prayers of all the saints, on the golden altar before the throne.
REV	8	4	향연이 성도의 기도와 함께 천사의 손으로부터 하나님 앞으로 올라가는지라	And the smoke of the incense, which came with the prayers of the saints, ascended up before God out of the angel’s hand.	And the smoke of the incense, together with the prayers of the saints, rose up before God from the hand of the angel.
REV	8	5	천사가 향로를 가지고 단 위의 불을 담아다가 땅에 쏟으매 뇌성과 음성과 번개와 지진이 나더라	And the angel took the censer, and filled it with fire of the altar, and cast it into the earth: and there were voices, and thunderings, and lightnings, and an earthquake.	Then the angel took the censer, filled it with fire from the altar, and hurled it to the earth; and there were peals of thunder, and rumblings, and flashes of lightning, and an earthquake.
REV	8	6	일곱 나팔 가진 일곱 천사가 나팔 불기를 예비하더라	And the seven angels which had the seven trumpets prepared themselves to sound.	And the seven angels with the seven trumpets prepared to sound them.
REV	8	7	첫째 천사가 나팔을 부니 피 섞인 우박과 불이 나서 땅에 쏟아지매 땅의 삼분의 일이 타서 사위고 수목의 삼분의 일도 타서 사위고 각종 푸른 풀도 타서 사위더라	The first angel sounded, and there followed hail and fire mingled with blood, and they were cast upon the earth: and the third part of trees was burnt up, and all green grass was burnt up.	Then the first angel sounded his trumpet, and hail and fire mixed with blood were hurled down upon the earth. A third of the earth was burned up, along with a third of the trees and all the green grass.
REV	8	8	둘째 천사가 나팔을 부니 불붙는 큰 산과 같은 것이 바다에 던지우매 바다의 삼분의 일이 피가 되고	And the second angel sounded, and as it were a great mountain burning with fire was cast into the sea: and the third part of the sea became blood;	Then the second angel sounded his trumpet, and something like a great mountain burning with fire was thrown into the sea. A third of the sea turned to blood,
REV	8	9	바다 가운데 생명 가진 피조물들의 삼분의 일이 죽고 배들의 삼분의 일이 깨어지더라	And the third part of the creatures which were in the sea, and had life, died; and the third part of the ships were destroyed.	a third of the living creatures in the sea died, and a third of the ships were destroyed.
REV	8	10	셋째 천사가 나팔을 부니 횃불 같이 타는 큰 별이 하늘에서 떨어져 강들의 삼분의 일과 여러 물샘에 떨어지니	And the third angel sounded, and there fell a great star from heaven, burning as it were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of the rivers, and upon the fountains of waters;	Then the third angel sounded his trumpet, and a great star burning like a torch fell from heaven and landed on a third of the rivers and on the springs of water.
REV	8	11	이 별 이름은 쑥이라 물들의 삼분의 일이 쑥이 되매 그 물들이 쓰게 됨을 인하여 많은 사람이 죽더라	And the name of the star is called Wormwood: and the third part of the waters became wormwood; and many men died of the waters, because they were made bitter.	The name of the star is Wormwood. A third of the waters turned bitter like wormwood oil, and many people died from the bitter waters.
REV	8	12	넷째 천사가 나팔을 부니 해 삼분의 일과 달 삼분의 일과 별들의 삼분의 일이 침을 받아 그 삼분의 일이 어두워지니 낮 삼분의 일은 비췸이 없고 밤도 그러하더라	And the fourth angel sounded, and the third part of the sun was smitten, and the third part of the moon, and the third part of the stars; so as the third part of them was darkened, and the day shone not for a third part of it, and the night likewise.	Then the fourth angel sounded his trumpet, and a third of the sun and moon and stars were struck. A third of the stars were darkened, a third of the day was without light, and a third of the night as well.
REV	8	13	내가 또 보고 들으니 공중에 날아가는 독수리가 큰 소리로 이르되 땅에 거하는 자들에게 화, 화, 화가 있으리로다 이 외에도 세 천사의 불 나팔 소리를 인함이로다 하더라	And I beheld, and heard an angel flying through the midst of heaven, saying with a loud voice, Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabiters of the earth by reason of the other voices of the trumpet of the three angels, which are yet to sound!	And as I observed, I heard an eagle flying overhead, calling in a loud voice, “Woe! Woe! Woe to those who dwell on the earth, because of the trumpet blasts about to be sounded by the remaining three angels!”
REV	9	1	다섯째 천사가 나팔을 불매 내가 보니 하늘에서 땅에 떨어진 별 하나가 있는데 저가 무저갱의 열쇠를 받았더라	And the fifth angel sounded, and I saw a star fall from heaven unto the earth: and to him was given the key of the bottomless pit.	Then the fifth angel sounded his trumpet, and I saw a star that had fallen from heaven to earth, and it was given the key to the pit of the Abyss.
REV	9	2	저가 무저갱을 여니 그 구멍에서 큰 풀무의 연기 같은 연기가 올라오매 해와 공기가 그 구멍의 연기로 인하여 어두워지며	And he opened the bottomless pit; and there arose a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace; and the sun and the air were darkened by reason of the smoke of the pit.	The star opened the pit of the Abyss, and smoke rose out of it like the smoke of a great furnace, and the sun and the air were darkened by the smoke from the pit.
REV	9	3	또 황충이 연기 가운데로부터 땅 위에 나오매 저희가 땅에 있는 전갈의 권세와 같은 권세를 받았더라	And there came out of the smoke locusts upon the earth: and unto them was given power, as the scorpions of the earth have power.	And out of the smoke, locusts descended on the earth, and they were given power like that of the scorpions of the earth.
REV	9	4	저희에게 이르시되 땅의 풀이나 푸른 것이나 각종 수목은 해하지 말고 오직 이마에 하나님의 인 맞지 아니한 사람들만 해하라 하시더라	And it was commanded them that they should not hurt the grass of the earth, neither any green thing, neither any tree; but only those men which have not the seal of God in their foreheads.	They were told not to harm the grass of the earth or any plant or tree, but only those who did not have the seal of God on their foreheads.
REV	9	5	그러나 그들을 죽이지는 못하게 하시고 다섯 달 동안 괴롭게만 하게 하시는데 그 괴롭게 함은 전갈이 사람을 쏠 때에 괴롭게 함과 같더라	And to them it was given that they should not kill them, but that they should be tormented five months: and their torment was as the torment of a scorpion, when he striketh a man.	The locusts were not given power to kill them, but only to torment them for five months, and their torment was like the stinging of a scorpion.
REV	9	6	그 날에는 사람들이 죽기를 구하여도 얻지 못하고 죽고 싶으나 죽음이 저희를 피하리로다	And in those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it; and shall desire to die, and death shall flee from them.	In those days men will seek death and will not find it; they will long to die, but death will escape them.
REV	9	7	황충들의 모양은 전쟁을 위하여 예비한 말들 같고 그 머리에 금 같은 면류관 비슷한 것을 썼으며 그 얼굴은 사람의 얼굴 같고	And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared unto battle; and on their heads were as it were crowns like gold, and their faces were as the faces of men.	And the locusts looked like horses prepared for battle, with something like crowns of gold on their heads, and faces like the faces of men.
REV	9	8	또 여자의 머리털 같은 머리털이 있고 그 이는 사자의 이 같으며	And they had hair as the hair of women, and their teeth were as the teeth of lions.	They had hair like that of women, and teeth like those of lions.
REV	9	9	또 철흉갑 같은 흉갑이 있고 그 날개들의 소리는 병거와 많은 말들이 전장으로 달려 들어가는 소리 같으며	And they had breastplates, as it were breastplates of iron; and the sound of their wings was as the sound of chariots of many horses running to battle.	They also had thoraxes like breastplates of iron, and the sound of their wings was like the roar of many horses and chariots rushing into battle.
REV	9	10	또 전갈과 같은 꼬리와 쏘는 살이 있어 그 꼬리에는 다섯 달 동안 사람들을 해하는 권세가 있더라	And they had tails like unto scorpions, and there were stings in their tails: and their power was to hurt men five months.	They had tails with stingers like scorpions, which had the power to injure people for five months.
REV	9	11	저희에게 임금이 있으니 무저갱의 사자라 히브리 음으로 이름은 아바돈이요 헬라 음으로 이름은 아볼루온이더라	And they had a king over them, which is the angel of the bottomless pit, whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek tongue hath his name Apollyon.	They were ruled by a king, the angel of the Abyss. His name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in Greek it is Apollyon.
REV	9	12	첫째 화는 지나갔으나 보라 아직도 이 후에 화 둘이 이르리로다	One woe is past; and, behold, there come two woes more hereafter.	The first woe has passed. Behold, two woes are still to follow.
REV	9	13	여섯째 천사가 나팔을 불매 내가 들으니 하나님 앞 금단 네 뿔에서 한 음성이 나서	And the sixth angel sounded, and I heard a voice from the four horns of the golden altar which is before God,	Then the sixth angel sounded his trumpet, and I heard a voice from the four horns of the golden altar before God
REV	9	14	나팔 가진 여섯째 천사에게 말하기를 큰 강 유브라데에 결박한 네 천사를 놓아 주라 하매	Saying to the sixth angel which had the trumpet, Loose the four angels which are bound in the great river Euphrates.	saying to the sixth angel with the trumpet, “Release the four angels who are bound at the great river Euphrates.”
REV	9	15	네 천사가 놓였으니 그들은 그 년 월 일 시에 이르러 사람 삼분의 일을 죽이기로 예비한 자들이더라	And the four angels were loosed, which were prepared for an hour, and a day, and a month, and a year, for to slay the third part of men.	So the four angels who had been prepared for this hour and day and month and year were released to kill a third of mankind.
REV	9	16	마병대의 수는 이만 만이니 내가 그들의 수를 들었노라	And the number of the army of the horsemen were two hundred thousand thousand: and I heard the number of them.	And the number of mounted troops was two hundred million; I heard their number.
REV	9	17	이같이 이상한 가운데 그 말들과 그 탄 자들을 보니 불빛과 자주빛과 유황빛 흉갑이 있고 또 말들의 머리는 사자 머리 같고 그 입에서는 불과 연기와 유황이 나오더라	And thus I saw the horses in the vision, and them that sat on them, having breastplates of fire, and of jacinth, and brimstone: and the heads of the horses were as the heads of lions; and out of their mouths issued fire and smoke and brimstone.	Now the horses and riders in my vision looked like this: The riders had breastplates the colors of fire, sapphire, and sulfur. The heads of the horses were like the heads of lions, and out of their mouths proceeded fire, smoke, and sulfur.
REV	9	18	이 세 재앙 곧 저희 입에서 나오는 불과 연기와 유황을 인하여 사람 삼분의 일이 죽임을 당하니라	By these three was the third part of men killed, by the fire, and by the smoke, and by the brimstone, which issued out of their mouths.	A third of mankind was killed by the three plagues of fire, smoke, and sulfur that proceeded from their mouths.
REV	9	19	이 말들의 힘은 그 입과 그 꼬리에 있으니 그 꼬리는 뱀 같고 또 꼬리에 머리가 있어 이것으로 해하더라	For their power is in their mouth, and in their tails: for their tails were like unto serpents, and had heads, and with them they do hurt.	For the power of the horses was in their mouths and in their tails; indeed, their tails were like snakes, having heads with which to inflict harm.
REV	9	20	이 재앙에 죽지 않고 남은 사람들은 그 손으로 행하는 일을 회개치 아니하고 오히려 여러 귀신과 또는 보거나 듣거나 다니거나 하지 못하는 금, 은, 동과 목석의 우상에게 절하고	And the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues yet repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils, and idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood: which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk:	Now the rest of mankind who were not killed by these plagues still did not repent of the works of their hands. They did not stop worshiping demons and idols of gold, silver, bronze, stone, and wood, which cannot see or hear or walk.
REV	9	21	또 그 살인과 복술과 음행과 도적질을 회개치 아니하더라	Neither repented they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornication, nor of their thefts.	Furthermore, they did not repent of their murder, sorcery, sexual immorality, and theft.
REV	10	1	내가 또 보니 힘센 다른 천사가 구름을 입고 하늘에서 내려오는데 그 머리 위에 무지개가 있고 그 얼굴은 해 같고 그 발은 불기둥 같으며	And I saw another mighty angel come down from heaven, clothed with a cloud: and a rainbow was upon his head, and his face was as it were the sun, and his feet as pillars of fire:	Then I saw another mighty angel coming down from heaven, wrapped in a cloud, with a rainbow above his head. His face was like the sun, and his legs were like pillars of fire.
REV	10	2	그 손에 펴 놓인 작은 책을 들고 그 오른발은 바다를 밟고 왼발은 땅을 밟고	And he had in his hand a little book open: and he set his right foot upon the sea, and his left foot on the earth,	He held in his hand a small scroll, which lay open. He placed his right foot on the sea and his left foot on the land.
REV	10	3	사자의 부르짖는 것 같이 큰 소리로 외치니 외칠 때에 일곱 우뢰가 그 소리를 발하더라	And cried with a loud voice, as when a lion roareth: and when he had cried, seven thunders uttered their voices.	Then he cried out in a loud voice like the roar of a lion. And when he cried out, the seven thunders sounded their voices.
REV	10	4	일곱 우뢰가 발할 때에 내가 기록하려고 하다가 곧 들으니 하늘에서 소리 나서 말하기를 일곱 우뢰가 발한 것을 인봉하고 기록하지 말라 하더라	And when the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was about to write: and I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Seal up those things which the seven thunders uttered, and write them not.	When the seven thunders had spoken, I was about to put it in writing. But I heard a voice from heaven saying, “Seal up what the seven thunders have said, and do not write it down.”
REV	10	5	내가 본 바 바다와 땅을 밟고 섰는 천사가 하늘을 향하여 오른손을 들고	And the angel which I saw stand upon the sea and upon the earth lifted up his hand to heaven,	Then the angel I had seen standing on the sea and on the land lifted up his right hand to heaven.
REV	10	6	세세토록 살아계신 자 곧 하늘과 그 가운데 있는 물건이며 땅과 그 가운데 있는 물건이며 바다와 그 가운데 있는 물건을 창조하신 이를 가리켜 맹세하여 가로되 지체하지 아니하리니	And sware by him that liveth for ever and ever, who created heaven, and the things that therein are, and the earth, and the things that therein are, and the sea, and the things which are therein, that there should be time no longer:	And he swore by Him who lives forever and ever, who created heaven and everything in it, the earth and everything in it, and the sea and everything in it: “There will be no more delay!
REV	10	7	일곱째 천사가 소리 내는 날 그 나팔을 불게 될 때에 하나님의 비밀이 그 종 선지자들에게 전하신 복음과 같이 이루리라	But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God should be finished, as he hath declared to his servants the prophets.	But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he is about to sound his trumpet, the mystery of God will be fulfilled, just as He proclaimed to His servants the prophets.”
REV	10	8	하늘에서 나서 내게 들리던 음성이 또 내게 말하여 가로되 네가 가서 바다와 땅을 밟고 섰는 천사의 손에 펴 놓인 책을 가지라 하기로	And the voice which I heard from heaven spake unto me again, and said, Go and take the little book which is open in the hand of the angel which standeth upon the sea and upon the earth.	Then the voice that I had heard from heaven spoke to me again, saying, “Go, take the small scroll that lies open in the hand of the angel standing on the sea and on the land.”
REV	10	9	내가 천사에게 나아가 작은 책을 달라 한즉 천사가 가로되 갖다 먹어버리라 네 배에는 쓰나 네 입에는 꿀 같이 달리라 하거늘	And I went unto the angel, and said unto him, Give me the little book. And he said unto me, Take it, and eat it up; and it shall make thy belly bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth sweet as honey.	And I went to the angel and said, “Give me the small scroll.” “Take it and eat it,” he said. “It will make your stomach bitter, but in your mouth it will be as sweet as honey.”
REV	10	10	내가 천사의 손에서 작은 책을 갖다 먹어버리니 내 입에는 꿀 같이 다나 먹은 후에 내 배에서는 쓰게 되더라	And I took the little book out of the angel’s hand, and ate it up; and it was in my mouth sweet as honey: and as soon as I had eaten it, my belly was bitter.	So I took the small scroll from the angel’s hand and ate it; and it was as sweet as honey in my mouth, but when I had eaten it, my stomach turned bitter.
REV	10	11	저가 내게 말하기를 네가 많은 백성과 나라와 방언과 임금에게 다시 예언하여야 하리라 하더라	And he said unto me, Thou must prophesy again before many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings.	And they told me, “You must prophesy again about many peoples and nations and tongues and kings.”
REV	11	1	또 내게 지팡이 같은 갈대를 주며 말하기를 일어나서 하나님의 성전과 제단과 그 안에서 경배하는 자들을 척량하되	And there was given me a reed like unto a rod: and the angel stood, saying, Rise, and measure the temple of God, and the altar, and them that worship therein.	Then I was given a measuring rod like a staff and was told, “Go and measure the temple of God and the altar, and count the number of worshipers there.
REV	11	2	성전 밖 마당은 척량하지 말고 그냥 두라 이것을 이방인에게 주었은즉 저희가 거룩한 성을 마흔두 달 동안 짓밟으리라	But the court which is without the temple leave out, and measure it not; for it is given unto the Gentiles: and the holy city shall they tread under foot forty and two months.	But exclude the courtyard outside the temple. Do not measure it, because it has been given over to the nations, and they will trample the holy city for 42 months.
REV	11	3	내가 나의 두 증인에게 권세를 주리니 저희가 굵은 베옷을 입고 일천이백육십 일을 예언하리라	And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy a thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth.	And I will empower my two witnesses, and they will prophesy for 1,260 days, clothed in sackcloth.”
REV	11	4	이는 이 땅의 주 앞에 섰는 두 감람나무와 두 촛대니	These are the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks standing before the God of the earth.	These witnesses are the two olive trees and the two lampstands that stand before the Lord of the earth.
REV	11	5	만일 누구든지 저희를 해하고자 한즉 저희 입에서 불이 나서 그 원수를 소멸할지니 누구든지 해하려 하면 반드시 이와 같이 죽임을 당하리라	And if any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies: and if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed.	If anyone wants to harm them, fire proceeds from their mouths and devours their enemies. In this way, anyone who wants to harm them must be killed.
REV	11	6	저희가 권세를 가지고 하늘을 닫아 그 예언을 하는 날 동안 비 오지 못하게 하고 또 권세를 가지고 물을 변하여 피 되게 하고 아무 때든지 원하는 대로 여러 가지 재앙으로 땅을 치리로다	These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their prophecy: and have power over waters to turn them to blood, and to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will.	These witnesses have power to shut the sky so that no rain will fall during the days of their prophecy, and power to turn the waters into blood and to strike the earth with every kind of plague as often as they wish.
REV	11	7	저희가 그 증거를 마칠 때에 무저갱으로부터 올라오는 짐승이 저희로 더불어 전쟁을 일으켜 저희를 이기고 저희를 죽일 터인즉	And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them.	When the two witnesses have finished their testimony, the beast that comes up from the Abyss will wage war with them, and will overpower and kill them.
REV	11	8	저희 시체가 큰 성 길에 있으리니 그 성은 영적으로 하면 소돔이라고도 하고 애굽이라고도 하니 곧 저희 주께서 십자가에 못 박히신 곳이니라	And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified.	Their bodies will lie in the street of the great city—figuratively called Sodom and Egypt—where their Lord was also crucified.
REV	11	9	백성들과 족속과 방언과 나라 중에서 사람들이 그 시체를 사흘 반 동안을 목도하며 무덤에 장사하지 못하게 하리로다	And they of the people and kindreds and tongues and nations shall see their dead bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves.	For three and a half days all peoples and tribes and tongues and nations will view their bodies and will not permit them to be laid in a tomb.
REV	11	10	이 두 선지자가 땅에 거하는 자들을 괴롭게 한 고로 땅에 거하는 자들이 저희의 죽음을 즐거워하고 기뻐하여 서로 예물을 보내리라 하더라	And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to another; because these two prophets tormented them that dwelt on the earth.	And those who dwell on the earth will gloat over them, and will celebrate and send one another gifts, because these two prophets had tormented them.
REV	11	11	삼 일 반 후에 하나님께로부터 생기가 저희 속에 들어가매 저희 발로 일어서니 구경하는 자들이 크게 두려워하더라	And after three days and an half the Spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet; and great fear fell upon them which saw them.	But after the three and a half days, the breath of life from God entered the two witnesses, and they stood on their feet, and great fear fell upon those who saw them.
REV	11	12	하늘로부터 큰 음성이 있어 이리로 올라오라 함을 저희가 듣고 구름을 타고 하늘로 올라가니 저희 원수들도 구경하더라	And they heard a great voice from heaven saying unto them, Come up hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud; and their enemies beheld them.	And the witnesses heard a loud voice from heaven saying, “Come up here.” And they went up to heaven in a cloud as their enemies watched them.
REV	11	13	그 시에 큰 지진이 나서 성 십분의 일이 무너지고 지진에 죽은 사람이 칠천이라 그 남은 자들이 두려워하여 영광을 하늘의 하나님께 돌리더라	And the same hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the city fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand: and the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven.	And in that hour there was a great earthquake, and a tenth of the city collapsed. Seven thousand were killed in the quake, and the rest were terrified and gave glory to the God of heaven.
REV	11	14	둘째 화는 지나갔으나 보라 셋째 화가 속히 이르는도다	The second woe is past; and, behold, the third woe cometh quickly.	The second woe has passed. Behold, the third woe is coming shortly.
REV	11	15	일곱째 천사가 나팔을 불매 하늘에 큰 음성들이 나서 가로되 세상 나라가 우리 주와 그 그리스도의 나라가 되어 그가 세세토록 왕 노릇 하시리로다 하니	And the seventh angel sounded; and there were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever.	Then the seventh angel sounded his trumpet, and loud voices called out in heaven: “The kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our Lord and of His Christ, and He will reign forever and ever.”
REV	11	16	하나님 앞에 자기 보좌에 앉은 이십사 장로들이 엎드려 얼굴을 대고 하나님께 경배하여	And the four and twenty elders, which sat before God on their seats, fell upon their faces, and worshipped God,	And the twenty-four elders who sit on their thrones before God fell on their faces and worshiped God,
REV	11	17	가로되 감사하옵나니 옛적에도 계셨고 시방도 계신 주 하나님 곧 전능하신 이여 친히 큰 권능을 잡으시고 왕 노릇 하시도다	Saying, We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast, and art to come; because thou hast taken to thee thy great power, and hast reigned.	saying: “We give thanks to You, O Lord God Almighty, the One who is and who was, because You have taken Your great power and have begun to reign.
REV	11	18	이방들이 분노하매 주의 진노가 임하여 죽은 자를 심판하시며 종 선지자들과 성도들과 또 무론대소하고 주의 이름을 경외하는 자들에게 상 주시며 또 땅을 망하게 하는 자들을 멸망시키실 때로소이다 하더라	And the nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead, that they should be judged, and that thou shouldest give reward unto thy servants the prophets, and to the saints, and them that fear thy name, small and great; and shouldest destroy them which destroy the earth.	The nations were enraged, and Your wrath has come. The time has come to judge the dead and to reward Your servants the prophets, as well as the saints and those who fear Your name, both small and great— and to destroy those who destroy the earth.”
REV	11	19	이에 하늘에 있는 하나님의 성전이 열리니 성전 안에 하나님의 언약궤가 보이며 또 번개와 음성들과 뇌성과 지진과 큰 우박이 있더라	And the temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in his temple the ark of his testament: and there were lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and an earthquake, and great hail.	Then the temple of God in heaven was opened, and the ark of His covenant appeared in His temple. And there were flashes of lightning, and rumblings, and peals of thunder, and an earthquake, and a great hailstorm.
REV	12	1	하늘에 큰 이적이 보이니 해를 입은 한 여자가 있는데 그 발 아래는 달이 있고 그 머리에는 열두 별의 면류관을 썼더라	And there appeared a great wonder in heaven; a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars:	And a great sign appeared in heaven: a woman clothed in the sun, with the moon under her feet and a crown of twelve stars on her head.
REV	12	2	이 여자가 아이를 배어 해산하게 되매 아파서 애써 부르짖더라	And she being with child cried, travailing in birth, and pained to be delivered.	She was pregnant and crying out in the pain and agony of giving birth.
REV	12	3	하늘에 또 다른 이적이 보이니 보라 한 큰 붉은 용이 있어 머리가 일곱이요 뿔이 열이라 그 여러 머리에 일곱 면류관이 있는데	And there appeared another wonder in heaven; and behold a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads.	Then another sign appeared in heaven: a huge red dragon with seven heads, ten horns, and seven royal crowns on his heads.
REV	12	4	그 꼬리가 하늘 별 삼분의 일을 끌어다가 땅에 던지더라 용이 해산하려는 여자 앞에서 그가 해산하면 그 아이를 삼키고자 하더니	And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast them to the earth: and the dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered, for to devour her child as soon as it was born.	His tail swept a third of the stars from the sky, tossing them to the earth. And the dragon stood before the woman who was about to give birth, ready to devour her child as soon as she gave birth.
REV	12	5	여자가 아들을 낳으니 이는 장차 철장으로 만국을 다스릴 남자라 그 아이를 하나님 앞과 그 보좌 앞으로 올려가더라	And she brought forth a man child, who was to rule all nations with a rod of iron: and her child was caught up unto God, and to his throne.	And she gave birth to a son, a male child, who will rule all the nations with an iron scepter. And her child was caught up to God and to His throne.
REV	12	6	그 여자가 광야로 도망하매 거기서 일천이백육십 일 동안 저를 양육하기 위하여 하나님의 예비하신 곳이 있더라	And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she hath a place prepared of God, that they should feed her there a thousand two hundred and threescore days.	And the woman fled into the wilderness, where God had prepared a place for her to be nourished for 1,260 days.
REV	12	7	하늘에 전쟁이 있으니 미가엘과 그의 사자들이 용으로 더불어 싸울새 용과 그의 사자들도 싸우나	And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels,	Then a war broke out in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon, and the dragon and his angels fought back.
REV	12	8	이기지 못하여 다시 하늘에서 저희의 있을 곳을 얻지 못한지라	And prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven.	But the dragon was not strong enough, and no longer was any place found in heaven for him and his angels.
REV	12	9	큰 용이 내어 쫓기니 옛 뱀 곧 마귀라고도 하고 사단이라고도 하는 온 천하를 꾀는 자라 땅으로 내어 쫓기니 그의 사자들도 저와 함께 내어 쫓기니라	And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him.	And the great dragon was hurled down—that ancient serpent called the devil and Satan, the deceiver of the whole world. He was hurled to the earth, and his angels with him.
REV	12	10	내가 또 들으니 하늘에 큰 음성이 있어 가로되 이제 우리 하나님의 구원과 능력과 나라와 또 그의 그리스도의 권세가 이루었으니 우리 형제들을 참소하던 자 곧 우리 하나님 앞에서 밤낮 참소하던 자가 쫓겨났고	And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night.	And I heard a loud voice in heaven saying: “Now have come the salvation and the power and the kingdom of our God, and the authority of His Christ. For the accuser of our brothers has been thrown down— he who accuses them day and night before our God.
REV	12	11	또 여러 형제가 어린 양의 피와 자기의 증거하는 말을 인하여 저를 이기었으니 그들은 죽기까지 자기 생명을 아끼지 아니하였도다	And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; and they loved not their lives unto the death.	They have conquered him by the blood of the Lamb and by the word of their testimony. And they did not love their lives so as to shy away from death.
REV	12	12	그러므로 하늘과 그 가운데 거하는 자들은 즐거워하라 그러나 땅과 바다는 화 있을진저 이는 마귀가 자기의 때가 얼마 못된 줄을 알므로 크게 분내어 너희에게 내려갔음이라 하더라	Therefore rejoice, ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them. Woe to the inhabiters of the earth and of the sea! for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time.	Therefore rejoice, O heavens, and you who dwell in them! But woe to the earth and the sea; with great fury the devil has come down to you, knowing he has only a short time.”
REV	12	13	용이 자기가 땅으로 내어 쫓긴 것을 보고 남자를 낳은 여자를 핍박하는지라	And when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted the woman which brought forth the man child.	And when the dragon saw that he had been thrown to the earth, he pursued the woman who had given birth to the male child.
REV	12	14	그 여자가 큰 독수리의 두 날개를 받아 광야 자기 곳으로 날아가 거기서 그 뱀의 낯을 피하여 한 때와 두 때와 반 때를 양육 받으매	And to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent.	But the woman was given two wings of a great eagle to fly from the presence of the serpent to her place in the wilderness, where she was nourished for a time, and times, and half a time.
REV	12	15	여자의 뒤에서 뱀이 그 입으로 물을 강 같이 토하여 여자를 물에 떠내려 가게 하려 하되	And the serpent cast out of his mouth water as a flood after the woman, that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood.	Then from the mouth of the serpent spewed water like a river to overtake the woman and sweep her away in the torrent.
REV	12	16	땅이 여자를 도와 그 입을 벌려 용의 입에서 토한 강물을 삼키니	And the earth helped the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up the flood which the dragon cast out of his mouth.	But the earth helped the woman and opened its mouth to swallow up the river that had poured from the dragon’s mouth.
REV	12	17	용이 여자에게 분노하여 돌아가서 그 여자의 남은 자손 곧 하나님의 계명을 지키며 예수의 증거를 가진 자들로 더불어 싸우려고 바다 모래 위에 섰더라	And the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.	And the dragon was enraged at the woman, and went to make war with the rest of her children, who keep the commandments of God and hold to the testimony of Jesus. And the dragon stood on the shore of the sea.
REV	12	18			
REV	13	1	내가 보니 바다에서 한 짐승이 나오는데 뿔이 열이요 머리가 일곱이라 그 뿔에는 열 면류관이 있고 그 머리들에는 참람한 이름들이 있더라	And I stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise up out of the sea, having seven heads and ten horns, and upon his horns ten crowns, and upon his heads the name of blasphemy.	Then I saw a beast with ten horns and seven heads rising out of the sea. There were ten royal crowns on its horns and blasphemous names on its heads.
REV	13	2	내가 본 짐승은 표범과 비슷하고 그 발은 곰의 발 같고 그 입은 사자의 입 같은데 용이 자기의 능력과 보좌와 큰 권세를 그에게 주었더라	And the beast which I saw was like unto a leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion: and the dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and great authority.	The beast I saw was like a leopard, with the feet of a bear and the mouth of a lion. And the dragon gave the beast his power and his throne and great authority.
REV	13	3	그의 머리 하나가 상하여 죽게된 것 같더니 그 죽게 되었던 상처가 나으매 온 땅이 이상히 여겨 짐승을 따르고	And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death; and his deadly wound was healed: and all the world wondered after the beast.	One of the heads of the beast appeared to be mortally wounded. But the mortal wound was healed, and the whole world marveled and followed the beast.
REV	13	4	용이 짐승에게 권세를 주므로 용에게 경배하며 짐승에게 경배하여 가로되 누가 이 짐승과 같으뇨 누가 능히 이로 더불어 싸우리요 하더라	And they worshipped the dragon which gave power unto the beast: and they worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like unto the beast? who is able to make war with him?	They worshiped the dragon who had given authority to the beast, and they worshiped the beast, saying, “Who is like the beast, and who can wage war against it?”
REV	13	5	또 짐승이 큰 말과 참람된 말하는 입을 받고 또 마흔두 달 일할 권세를 받으니라	And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies; and power was given unto him to continue forty and two months.	The beast was given a mouth to speak arrogant and blasphemous words, and authority to act for 42 months.
REV	13	6	짐승이 입을 벌려 하나님을 향하여 훼방하되 그의 이름과 그의 장막 곧 하늘에 거하는 자들을 훼방하더라	And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven.	And the beast opened its mouth to speak blasphemies against God and to slander His name and His tabernacle—those who dwell in heaven.
REV	13	7	또 권세를 받아 성도들과 싸워 이기게 되고 각 족속과 백성과 방언과 나라를 다스리는 권세를 받으니	And it was given unto him to make war with the saints, and to overcome them: and power was given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations.	Then the beast was permitted to wage war against the saints and to conquer them, and it was given authority over every tribe and people and tongue and nation.
REV	13	8	죽임을 당한 어린 양의 생명책에 창세 이후로 녹명되지 못하고 이 땅에 사는 자들은 다 짐승에게 경배하리라	And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world.	And all who dwell on the earth will worship the beast—all whose names have not been written from the foundation of the world in the Book of Life belonging to the Lamb who was slain.
REV	13	9	누구든지 귀가 있거든 들을지어다	If any man have an ear, let him hear.	He who has an ear, let him hear:
REV	13	10	사로잡는 자는 사로잡힐 것이요 칼에 죽이는 자는 자기도 마땅히 칼에 죽으리니 성도들의 인내와 믿음이 여기 있느니라	He that leadeth into captivity shall go into captivity: he that killeth with the sword must be killed with the sword. Here is the patience and the faith of the saints.	“If anyone is destined for captivity, into captivity he will go; if anyone is to die by the sword, by the sword he must be killed.” Here is a call for the perseverance and faith of the saints.
REV	13	11	내가 보매 또 다른 짐승이 땅에서 올라오니 새끼 양 같이 두 뿔이 있고 용처럼 말하더라	And I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth; and he had two horns like a lamb, and he spake as a dragon.	Then I saw another beast rising out of the earth. This beast had two horns like a lamb, but spoke like a dragon.
REV	13	12	저가 먼저 나온 짐승의 모든 권세를 그 앞에서 행하고 땅과 땅에 거하는 자들로 처음 짐승에게 경배하게 하니 곧 죽게 되었던 상처가 나은 자니라	And he exerciseth all the power of the first beast before him, and causeth the earth and them which dwell therein to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed.	And this beast exercised all the authority of the first beast and caused the earth and those who dwell in it to worship the first beast, whose mortal wound had been healed.
REV	13	13	큰 이적을 행하되 심지어 사람들 앞에서 불이 하늘로부터 땅에 내려오게 하고	And he doeth great wonders, so that he maketh fire come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of men,	And the second beast performed great signs to cause even fire from heaven to come down to earth in the presence of the people.
REV	13	14	짐승 앞에서 받은 바 이적을 행함으로 땅에 거하는 자들을 미혹하며 땅에 거하는 자들에게 이르기를 칼에 상하였다가 살아난 짐승을 위하여 우상을 만들라 하더라	And deceiveth them that dwell on the earth by the means of those miracles which he had power to do in the sight of the beast; saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make an image to the beast, which had the wound by a sword, and did live.	Because of the signs it was given to perform on behalf of the first beast, it deceived those who dwell on the earth, telling them to make an image to the beast that had been wounded by the sword and yet had lived.
REV	13	15	저가 권세를 받아 그 짐승의 우상에게 생기를 주어 그 짐승의 우상으로 말하게 하고 또 짐승의 우상에게 경배하지 아니하는 자는 몇이든지 다 죽이게 하더라	And he had power to give life unto the image of the beast, that the image of the beast should both speak, and cause that as many as would not worship the image of the beast should be killed.	The second beast was permitted to give breath to the image of the first beast, so that the image could speak and cause all who refused to worship it to be killed.
REV	13	16	저가 모든 자 곧 작은 자나 큰 자나 부자나 빈궁한 자나 자유한 자나 종들로 그 오른손에나 이마에 표를 받게 하고	And he causeth all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads:	And the second beast required all people small and great, rich and poor, free and slave, to receive a mark on their right hand or on their forehead,
REV	13	17	누구든지 이 표를 가진 자 외에는 매매를 못하게 하니 이 표는 곧 짐승의 이름이나 그 이름의 수라	And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name.	so that no one could buy or sell unless he had the mark—the name of the beast or the number of its name.
REV	13	18	지혜가 여기 있으니 총명 있는 자는 그 짐승의 수를 세어 보라 그 수는 사람의 수니 육백육십육이니라	Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the number of the beast: for it is the number of a man; and his number is Six hundred threescore and six.	Here is a call for wisdom: Let the one who has insight calculate the number of the beast, for it is the number of a man, and that number is 666.
REV	14	1	또 내가 보니 어린 양이 시온 산에 섰고 그와 함께 십사만 사천이 섰는데 그 이마에 어린 양의 이름과 그 아버지의 이름을 쓴 것이 있도다	And I looked, and, lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty and four thousand, having his Father’s name written in their foreheads.	Then I looked and saw the Lamb standing on Mount Zion, and with Him 144,000 who had His name and His Father’s name written on their foreheads.
REV	14	2	내가 하늘에서 나는 소리를 들으니 많은 물소리도 같고 큰 뇌성도 같은데 내게 들리는 소리는 거문고 타는 자들의 그 거문고 타는 것 같더라	And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of harpers harping with their harps:	And I heard a sound from heaven like the roar of many waters and the loud rumbling of thunder. And the sound I heard was like harpists strumming their harps.
REV	14	3	저희가 보좌와 네 생물과 장로들 앞에서 새 노래를 부르니 땅에서 구속함을 얻은 십사만 사천 인 밖에는 능히 이 노래를 배울 자가 없더라	And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four beasts, and the elders: and no man could learn that song but the hundred and forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from the earth.	And they sang a new song before the throne and before the four living creatures and the elders. And no one could learn the song except the 144,000 who had been redeemed from the earth.
REV	14	4	이 사람들은 여자로 더불어 더럽히지 아니하고 정절이 있는 자라 어린 양이 어디로 인도하든지 따라가는 자며 사람 가운데서 구속을 받아 처음 익은 열매로 하나님과 어린 양에게 속한 자들이니	These are they which were not defiled with women; for they are virgins. These are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth. These were redeemed from among men, being the firstfruits unto God and to the Lamb.	These are the ones who have not been defiled with women, for they are virgins. They follow the Lamb wherever He goes. They have been redeemed from among men as firstfruits to God and to the Lamb.
REV	14	5	그 입에 거짓말이 없고 흠이 없는 자들이더라	And in their mouth was found no guile: for they are without fault before the throne of God.	And no lie was found in their mouths; they are blameless.
REV	14	6	또 보니 다른 천사가 공중에 날아가는데 땅에 거하는 자들 곧 여러 나라와 족속과 방언과 백성에게 전할 영원한 복음을 가졌더라	And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people,	Then I saw another angel flying overhead, with the eternal gospel to proclaim to those who dwell on the earth—to every nation and tribe and tongue and people.
REV	14	7	그가 큰 음성으로 가로되 하나님을 두려워하며 그에게 영광을 돌리라 이는 그의 심판하실 시간이 이르렀음이니 하늘과 땅과 바다와 물들의 근원을 만드신 이를 경배하라 하더라	Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters.	And he said in a loud voice, “Fear God and give Him glory, because the hour of His judgment has come. Worship the One who made the heavens and the earth and the sea and the springs of waters.”
REV	14	8	또 다른 천사 곧 둘째가 그 뒤를 따라 말하되 무너졌도다 무너졌도다 큰 성 바벨론이여 모든 나라를 그 음행으로 인하여 진노의 포도주로 먹이던 자로다 하더라	And there followed another angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great city, because she made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication.	Then a second angel followed, saying, “Fallen, fallen is Babylon the great, who has made all the nations drink the wine of the passion of her immorality.”
REV	14	9	또 다른 천사 곧 셋째가 그 뒤를 따라 큰 음성으로 가로되 만일 누구든지 짐승과 그의 우상에게 경배하고 이마에나 손에 표를 받으면	And the third angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, If any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand,	And a third angel followed them, calling out in a loud voice, “If anyone worships the beast and its image, and receives its mark on his forehead or on his hand,
REV	14	10	그도 하나님의 진노의 포도주를 마시리니 그 진노의 잔에 섞인 것이 없이 부은 포도주라 거룩한 천사들 앞과 어린 양 앞에서 불과 유황으로 고난을 받으리니	The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation; and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb:	he too will drink the wine of God’s anger, poured undiluted into the cup of His wrath. And he will be tormented in fire and sulfur in the presence of the holy angels and of the Lamb.
REV	14	11	그 고난의 연기가 세세토록 올라가리로다 짐승과 그의 우상에게 경배하고 그 이름의 표를 받는 자는 누구든지 밤낮 쉼을 얻지 못하리라 하더라	And the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever: and they have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and his image, and whosoever receiveth the mark of his name.	And the smoke of their torment rises forever and ever. Day and night there is no rest for those who worship the beast and its image, or for anyone who receives the mark of its name.”
REV	14	12	성도들의 인내가 여기 있나니 저희는 하나님의 계명과 예수 믿음을 지키는 자니라	Here is the patience of the saints: here are they that keep the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.	Here is a call for the perseverance of the saints who keep the commandments of God and the faith of Jesus.
REV	14	13	또 내가 들으니 하늘에서 음성이 나서 가로되 기록하라 자금 이후로 주 안에서 죽는 자들은 복이 있도다 하시매 성령이 가라사대 그러하다 저희 수고를 그치고 쉬리니 이는 저희의 행한 일이 따름이라 하시더라	And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours; and their works do follow them.	And I heard a voice from heaven telling me to write, “Blessed are the dead—those who die in the Lord from this moment on.” “Yes,” says the Spirit, “they will rest from their labors, for their deeds will follow them.”
REV	14	14	또 내가 보니 흰 구름이 있고 구름 위에 사람의 아들과 같은 이가 앉았는데 그 머리에는 금 면류관이 있고 그 손에는 이한 낫을 가졌더라	And I looked, and behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud one sat like unto the Son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a sharp sickle.	And I looked and saw a white cloud, and seated on the cloud was One like the Son of Man, with a golden crown on His head and a sharp sickle in His hand.
REV	14	15	또 다른 천사가 성전으로부터 나와 구름 위에 앉은 이를 향하여 큰 음성으로 외쳐 가로되 네 낫을 휘둘러 거두라 거둘 때가 이르러 땅에 곡식이 다 익었음이로다 하니	And another angel came out of the temple, crying with a loud voice to him that sat on the cloud, Thrust in thy sickle, and reap: for the time is come for thee to reap; for the harvest of the earth is ripe.	Then another angel came out of the temple, crying out in a loud voice to the One seated on the cloud, “Swing Your sickle and reap, because the time has come to harvest; for the crop of the earth is ripe.”
REV	14	16	구름 위에 앉으신 이가 낫을 땅에 휘두르매 곡식이 거두어지니라	And he that sat on the cloud thrust in his sickle on the earth; and the earth was reaped.	So the One seated on the cloud swung His sickle over the earth, and the earth was harvested.
REV	14	17	또 다른 천사가 하늘에 있는 성전에서 나오는데 또한 이한 낫을 가졌더라	And another angel came out of the temple which is in heaven, he also having a sharp sickle.	Then another angel came out of the temple in heaven, and he too had a sharp sickle.
REV	14	18	또 불을 다스리는 다른 천사가 제단으로부터 나와 이한 낫 가진 자를 향하여 큰 음성으로 불러 가로되 네 이한 낫을 휘둘러 땅의 포도송이를 거두라 그 포도가 익었느니라 하더라	And another angel came out from the altar, which had power over fire; and cried with a loud cry to him that had the sharp sickle, saying, Thrust in thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth; for her grapes are fully ripe.	Still another angel, with authority over the fire, came from the altar and called out in a loud voice to the angel with the sharp sickle, “Swing your sharp sickle and gather the clusters of grapes from the vine of the earth, because its grapes are ripe.”
REV	14	19	천사가 낫을 땅에 휘둘러 땅의 포도를 거두어 하나님의 진노의 큰 포도주 틀에 던지매	And the angel thrust in his sickle into the earth, and gathered the vine of the earth, and cast it into the great winepress of the wrath of God.	So the angel swung his sickle over the earth and gathered the grapes of the earth, and he threw them into the great winepress of God’s wrath.
REV	14	20	성 밖에서 그 틀이 밟히니 틀에서 피가 나서 말굴레까지 닿았고 일천육백 스다디온에 퍼졌더라	And the winepress was trodden without the city, and blood came out of the winepress, even unto the horse bridles, by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs.	And the winepress was trodden outside the city, and the blood that flowed from it rose as high as the bridles of the horses for a distance of 1,600 stadia.
REV	15	1	또 하늘에 크고 이상한 다른 이적을 보매 일곱 천사가 일곱 재앙을 가졌으니 곧 마지막 재앙이라 하나님의 진노가 이것으로 마치리로다	And I saw another sign in heaven, great and marvellous, seven angels having the seven last plagues; for in them is filled up the wrath of God.	Then I saw another great and marvelous sign in heaven: seven angels with the seven final plagues, with which the wrath of God is completed.
REV	15	2	또 내가 보니 불이 섞인 유리 바다 같은 것이 있고 짐승과 그의 우상과 그의 이름의 수를 이기고 벗어난 자들이 유리 바닷가에 서서 하나님의 거문고를 가지고	And I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with fire: and them that had gotten the victory over the beast, and over his image, and over his mark, and over the number of his name, stand on the sea of glass, having the harps of God.	And I saw something like a sea of glass mixed with fire, beside which stood those who had conquered the beast and its image and the number of its name. They were holding harps from God,
REV	15	3	하나님의 종 모세의 노래, 어린 양의 노래를 불러 가로되 주 하나님 곧 전능하신 이시여 하시는 일이 크고 기이하시도다 만국의 왕이시여 주의 길이 의롭고 참되시도다	And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and marvellous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints.	and they sang the song of God’s servant Moses and of the Lamb: “Great and wonderful are Your works, O Lord God Almighty! Just and true are Your ways, O King of the nations!
REV	15	4	주여 누가 주의 이름을 두려워하지 아니하며 영화롭게 하지 아니하오리이까 오직 주만 거룩하시니이다 주의 의로우신 일이 나타났으매 만국이 와서 주께 경배하리이다 하더라	Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy: for all nations shall come and worship before thee; for thy judgments are made manifest.	Who will not fear You, O Lord, and glorify Your name? For You alone are holy. All nations will come and worship before You, for Your righteous acts have been revealed.”
REV	15	5	또 이 일 후에 내가 보니 하늘에 증거 장막의 성전이 열리며	And after that I looked, and, behold, the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened:	After this I looked, and the temple—the tabernacle of the Testimony—was opened in heaven.
REV	15	6	일곱 재앙을 가진 일곱 천사가 성전으로부터 나와 맑고 빛난 세마포 옷을 입고 가슴에 금띠를 띠고	And the seven angels came out of the temple, having the seven plagues, clothed in pure and white linen, and having their breasts girded with golden girdles.	And out of the temple came the seven angels with the seven plagues, dressed in clean and bright linen and girded with golden sashes around their chests.
REV	15	7	네 생물 중에 하나가 세세에 계신 하나님의 진노를 가득히 담은 금 대접 일곱을 그 일곱 천사에게 주니	And one of the four beasts gave unto the seven angels seven golden vials full of the wrath of God, who liveth for ever and ever.	Then one of the four living creatures gave the seven angels seven golden bowls full of the wrath of God, who lives forever and ever.
REV	15	8	하나님의 영광과 능력을 인하여 성전에 연기가 차게 되매 일곱 천사의 일곱 재앙이 마치기까지는 성전에 능히 들어갈 자가 없더라	And the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God, and from his power; and no man was able to enter into the temple, till the seven plagues of the seven angels were fulfilled.	And the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God and from His power; and no one could enter the temple until the seven plagues of the seven angels were completed.
REV	16	1	또 내가 들으니 성전에서 큰 음성이 나서 일곱 천사에게 말하되 너희는 가서 하나님의 진노의 일곱 대접을 땅에 쏟으라 하더라	And I heard a great voice out of the temple saying to the seven angels, Go your ways, and pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth.	Then I heard a loud voice from the temple saying to the seven angels, “Go, pour out on the earth the seven bowls of God’s wrath.”
REV	16	2	첫째가 가서 그 대접을 땅에 쏟으며 악하고 독한 헌데가 짐승의 표를 받은 사람들과 그 우상에게 경배하는 자들에게 나더라	And the first went, and poured out his vial upon the earth; and there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had the mark of the beast, and upon them which worshipped his image.	So the first angel went and poured out his bowl on the earth, and loathsome, malignant sores broke out on those who had the mark of the beast and worshiped its image.
REV	16	3	둘째가 그 대접을 바다에 쏟으매 바다가 곧 죽은 자의 피 같이 되니 바다 가운데 모든 생물이 죽더라	And the second angel poured out his vial upon the sea; and it became as the blood of a dead man: and every living soul died in the sea.	And the second angel poured out his bowl into the sea, and it turned to blood like that of the dead, and every living thing in the sea died.
REV	16	4	셋째가 그 대접을 강과 물 근원에 쏟으매 피가 되더라	And the third angel poured out his vial upon the rivers and fountains of waters; and they became blood.	And the third angel poured out his bowl into the rivers and springs of water, and they turned to blood.
REV	16	5	내가 들으니 물을 차지한 천사가 가로되 전에도 계셨고 시방도 계신 거룩하신 이여 이렇게 심판하시니 의로우시도다	And I heard the angel of the waters say, Thou art righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and shalt be, because thou hast judged thus.	And I heard the angel of the waters say: “Righteous are You, O Holy One, who is and was, because You have brought these judgments.
REV	16	6	저희가 성도들과 선지자들의 피를 흘렸으므로 저희로 피를 마시게 하신 것이 합당하니이다 하더라	For they have shed the blood of saints and prophets, and thou hast given them blood to drink; for they are worthy.	For they have spilled the blood of saints and prophets, and You have given them blood to drink, as they deserve.”
REV	16	7	또 내가 들으니 제단이 말하기를 그러하다 주 하나님 곧 전능하신 이시여 심판하시는 것이 참되시고 의로우시도다 하더라	And I heard another out of the altar say, Even so, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments.	And I heard the altar reply: “Yes, Lord God Almighty, true and just are Your judgments.”
REV	16	8	넷째가 그 대접을 해에 쏟으매 해가 권세를 받아 불로 사람들을 태우니	And the fourth angel poured out his vial upon the sun; and power was given unto him to scorch men with fire.	Then the fourth angel poured out his bowl on the sun, and it was given power to scorch the people with fire.
REV	16	9	사람들이 크게 태움에 태워진지라 이 재앙들을 행하는 권세를 가지신 하나님의 이름을 훼방하며 또 회개하여 영광을 주께 돌리지 아니하더라	And men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the name of God, which hath power over these plagues: and they repented not to give him glory.	And the people were scorched by intense heat, and they cursed the name of God, who had authority over these plagues; yet they did not repent and give Him glory.
REV	16	10	또 다섯째가 그 대접을 짐승의 보좌에 쏟으니 그 나라가 곧 어두워지며 사람들이 아파서 자기 혀를 깨물고	And the fifth angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the beast; and his kingdom was full of darkness; and they gnawed their tongues for pain,	And the fifth angel poured out his bowl on the throne of the beast, and its kingdom was plunged into darkness, and men began to gnaw their tongues in anguish
REV	16	11	아픈 것과 종기로 인하여 하늘의 하나님을 훼방하고 저희 행위를 회개치 아니하더라	And blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and their sores, and repented not of their deeds.	and curse the God of heaven for their pains and sores; yet they did not repent of their deeds.
REV	16	12	또 여섯째가 그 대접을 큰 강 유브라데에 쏟으매 강물이 말라서 동방에서 오는 왕들의 길이 예비되더라	And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river Euphrates; and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the kings of the east might be prepared.	And the sixth angel poured out his bowl on the great river Euphrates, and its water was dried up to prepare the way for the kings of the East.
REV	16	13	또 내가 보매 개구리 같은 세 더러운 영이 용의 입과 짐승의 입과 거짓 선지자의 입에서 나오니	And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet.	And I saw three unclean spirits that looked like frogs coming out of the mouths of the dragon, the beast, and the false prophet.
REV	16	14	저희는 귀신의 영이라 이적을 행하여 온 천하 임금들에게 가서 하나님 곧 전능하신 이의 큰 날에 전쟁을 위하여 그들을 모으더라	For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty.	These are demonic spirits that perform signs and go out to all the kings of the earth, to assemble them for battle on the great day of God the Almighty.
REV	16	15	보라 내가 도적 같이 오리니 누구든지 깨어 자기 옷을 지켜 벌거벗고 다니지 아니하며 자기의 부끄러움을 보이지 아니하는 자가 복이 있도다	Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.	“Behold, I am coming like a thief. Blessed is the one who remains awake and clothed, so that he will not go naked and let his shame be exposed.”
REV	16	16	세 영이 히브리 음으로 아마겟돈이라 하는 곳으로 왕들을 모으더라	And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon.	And they assembled the kings in the place that in Hebrew is called Armageddon.
REV	16	17	일곱째가 그 대접을 공기 가운데 쏟으매 큰 음성이 성전에서 보좌로부터 나서 가로되 되었다 하니	And the seventh angel poured out his vial into the air; and there came a great voice out of the temple of heaven, from the throne, saying, It is done.	Then the seventh angel poured out his bowl into the air, and a loud voice came from the throne in the temple, saying, “It is done!”
REV	16	18	번개와 음성들과 뇌성이 있고 또 지진이 있어 어찌 큰지 사람이 땅에 있어 옴으로 이같이 큰 지진이 없었더라	And there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings; and there was a great earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake, and so great.	And there were flashes of lightning, and rumblings, and peals of thunder, and a great earthquake the likes of which had not occurred since men were upon the earth—so mighty was the great quake.
REV	16	19	큰 성이 세 갈래로 갈라지고 만국의 성들도 무너지니 큰 성 바벨론이 하나님 앞에 기억하신 바 되어 그의 맹렬한 진노의 포도주 잔을 받으매	And the great city was divided into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell: and great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath.	The great city was split into three parts, and the cities of the nations collapsed. And God remembered Babylon the great and gave her the cup of the wine of the fury of His wrath.
REV	16	20	각 섬도 없어지고 산악도 간 데 없더라	And every island fled away, and the mountains were not found.	Then every island fled, and no mountain could be found.
REV	16	21	또 중수가 한 달란트나 되는 큰 우박이 하늘로부터 사람들에게 내리매 사람들이 그 박재로 인하여 하나님을 훼방하니 그 재앙이 심히 큼이러라	And there fell upon men a great hail out of heaven, every stone about the weight of a talent: and men blasphemed God because of the plague of the hail; for the plague thereof was exceeding great.	And great hailstones weighing almost a hundred pounds each rained down on them from above. And men cursed God for the plague of hail, because it was so horrendous.
REV	17	1	또 일곱 대접을 가진 일곱 천사 중 하나가 와서 내게 말하여 가로되 이리 오라 많은 물 위에 앉은 큰 음녀의 받을 심판을 네게 보이리라	And there came one of the seven angels which had the seven vials, and talked with me, saying unto me, Come hither; I will shew unto thee the judgment of the great whore that sitteth upon many waters:	Then one of the seven angels with the seven bowls came and said to me, “Come, I will show you the punishment of the great prostitute, who sits on many waters.
REV	17	2	땅의 임금들도 그로 더불어 음행하였고 땅에 거하는 자들도 그 음행의 포도주에 취하였다 하고	With whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication.	The kings of the earth were immoral with her, and those who dwell on the earth were intoxicated with the wine of her immorality.”
REV	17	3	곧 성령으로 나를 데리고 광야로 가니라 내가 보니 여자가 붉은 빛 짐승을 탔는데 그 짐승의 몸에 참람된 이름들이 가득하고 일곱 머리와 열 뿔이 있으며	So he carried me away in the spirit into the wilderness: and I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet coloured beast, full of names of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns.	And the angel carried me away in the Spirit into a wilderness, where I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet beast that was covered with blasphemous names and had seven heads and ten horns.
REV	17	4	그 여자는 자주빛과 붉은빛 옷을 입고 금과 보석과 진주로 꾸미고 손에 금잔을 가졌는데 가증한 물건과 그의 음행의 더러운 것들이 가득하더라	And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet colour, and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand full of abominations and filthiness of her fornication:	The woman was dressed in purple and scarlet, and adorned with gold and precious stones and pearls. She held in her hand a golden cup full of abominations and the impurities of her sexual immorality.
REV	17	5	그 이마에 이름이 기록되었으니 비밀이라, 큰 바벨론이라, 땅의 음녀들과 가증한 것들의 어미라 하였더라	And upon her forehead was a name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH.	And on her forehead a mysterious name was written: BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF PROSTITUTES AND OF THE ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH.
REV	17	6	또 내가 보매 이 여자가 성도들의 피와 예수의 증인들의 피에 취한지라 내가 그 여자를 보고 기이히 여기고 크게 기이히 여기니	And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, I wondered with great admiration.	I could see that the woman was drunk with the blood of the saints and witnesses for Jesus. And I was utterly amazed at the sight of her.
REV	17	7	천사가 가로되 왜 기이히 여기느냐 내가 여자와 그의 탄 바 일곱 머리와 열 뿔 가진 짐승의 비밀을 네게 이르리라	And the angel said unto me, Wherefore didst thou marvel? I will tell thee the mystery of the woman, and of the beast that carrieth her, which hath the seven heads and ten horns.	“Why are you so amazed?” said the angel. “I will tell you the mystery of the woman and of the beast that carries her, which has the seven heads and ten horns.
REV	17	8	네가 본 짐승은 전에 있었다가 시방 없으나 장차 무저갱으로부터 올라와 멸망으로 들어갈 자니 땅에 거하는 자들로서 창세 이후로 생명책에 녹명되지 못한 자들이 이전에 있었다가 시방 없으나 장차 나올 짐승을 보고 기이히 여기리라	The beast that thou sawest was, and is not; and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit, and go into perdition: and they that dwell on the earth shall wonder, whose names were not written in the book of life from the foundation of the world, when they behold the beast that was, and is not, and yet is.	The beast that you saw—it was, and now is no more, but is about to come up out of the Abyss and go to its destruction. And those who dwell on the earth whose names were not written in the Book of Life from the foundation of the world will marvel when they see the beast that was, and is not, and yet will be.
REV	17	9	지혜 있는 뜻이 여기 있으니 그 일곱 머리는 여자가 앉은 일곱 산이요	And here is the mind which hath wisdom. The seven heads are seven mountains, on which the woman sitteth.	This calls for a mind with wisdom. The seven heads are seven mountains on which the woman sits.
REV	17	10	또 일곱 왕이라 다섯은 망하였고 하나는 있고 다른 이는 아직 이르지 아니하였으나 이르면 반드시 잠간 동안 계속하리라	And there are seven kings: five are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come; and when he cometh, he must continue a short space.	There are also seven kings. Five have fallen, one is, and the other has not yet come; but when he does come, he must remain for only a little while.
REV	17	11	전에 있었다가 시방 없어진 짐승은 여덟째 왕이니 일곱 중에 속한 자라 저가 멸망으로 들어가리라	And the beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth, and is of the seven, and goeth into perdition.	The beast that was, and now is not, is an eighth king, who belongs to the other seven and is going into destruction.
REV	17	12	네가 보던 열 뿔은 열 왕이니 아직 나라를 얻지 못하였으나 다만 짐승으로 더불어 임금처럼 권세를 일시 동안 받으리라	And the ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings, which have received no kingdom as yet; but receive power as kings one hour with the beast.	The ten horns you saw are ten kings who have not yet received a kingdom, but will receive one hour of authority as kings, along with the beast.
REV	17	13	저희가 한 뜻을 가지고 자기의 능력과 권세를 짐승에게 주더라	These have one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto the beast.	These kings have one purpose: to yield their power and authority to the beast.
REV	17	14	저희가 어린 양으로 더불어 싸우려니와 어린 양은 만주의 주시요 만왕의 왕이시므로 저희를 이기실 터이요 또 그와 함께 있는 자들 곧 부르심을 입고 빼내심을 얻고 진실한 자들은 이기리로다	These shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them: for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings: and they that are with him are called, and chosen, and faithful.	They will make war against the Lamb, and the Lamb will triumph over them, because He is Lord of lords and King of kings; and He will be accompanied by His called and chosen and faithful ones.”
REV	17	15	또 천사가 내게 말하되 네가 본 바 음녀의 앉은 물은 백성과 무리와 열국과 방언들이니라	And he saith unto me, The waters which thou sawest, where the whore sitteth, are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues.	Then the angel said to me, “The waters you saw, where the prostitute was seated, are peoples and multitudes and nations and tongues.
REV	17	16	네가 본 바 이 열 뿔과 짐승이 음녀를 미워하여 망하게 하고 벌거벗게 하고 그 살을 먹고 불로 아주 사르리라	And the ten horns which thou sawest upon the beast, these shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire.	And the ten horns and the beast that you saw will hate the prostitute. They will leave her desolate and naked, and will eat her flesh and burn her with fire.
REV	17	17	하나님이 자기 뜻대로 할 마음을 저희에게 주사 한 뜻을 이루게 하시고 저희 나라를 그 짐승에게 주게 하시되 하나님 말씀이 응하기까지 하심이니라	For God hath put in their hearts to fulfil his will, and to agree, and give their kingdom unto the beast, until the words of God shall be fulfilled.	For God has put it into their hearts to carry out His purpose by uniting to give their kingdom to the beast, until the words of God are fulfilled.
REV	17	18	또 내가 본 바 여자는 땅의 임금들을 다스리는 큰 성이라 하더라	And the woman which thou sawest is that great city, which reigneth over the kings of the earth.	And the woman you saw is the great city that rules over the kings of the earth.”
REV	18	1	이 일 후에 다른 천사가 하늘에서 내려오는 것을 보니 큰 권세를 가졌는데 그의 영광으로 땅이 환하여지더라	And after these things I saw another angel come down from heaven, having great power; and the earth was lightened with his glory.	After this I saw another angel descending from heaven with great authority, and the earth was illuminated by his glory.
REV	18	2	힘센 음성으로 외쳐 가로되 무너졌도자 무너졌도다 큰 성 바벨론이여 귀신의 처소와 각종 더러운 영의 모이는 곳과 각종 더럽고 가증한 새의 모이는 곳이 되었도다	And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird.	And he cried out in a mighty voice: “Fallen, fallen is Babylon the great! She has become a lair for demons and a haunt for every unclean spirit, every unclean bird, and every detestable beast.
REV	18	3	그 음행의 진노의 포도주를 인하여 만국이 무너졌으며 또 땅의 왕들이 그로 더불어 음행하였으며 땅의 상고들도 그 사치의 세력을 인하여 치부하였도다 하더라	For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies.	All the nations have drunk the wine of the passion of her immorality. The kings of the earth were immoral with her, and the merchants of the earth have grown wealthy from the extravagance of her luxury.”
REV	18	4	또 내가 들으니 하늘로서 다른 음성이 나서 가로되 내 백성아, 거기서 나와 그의 죄에 참예하지 말고 그의 받을 재앙들을 받지 말라	And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.	Then I heard another voice from heaven say: “Come out of her, My people, so that you will not share in her sins or contract any of her plagues.
REV	18	5	그 죄는 하늘에 사무쳤으며 하나님은 그의 불의한 일을 기억하신지라	For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God hath remembered her iniquities.	For her sins are piled up to heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities.
REV	18	6	그가 준 그대로 그에게 주고 그의 행위대로 갑절을 갚아주고 그의 섞은 잔에도 갑절이나 섞어 그에게 주라	Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double according to her works: in the cup which she hath filled fill to her double.	Give back to her as she has done to others; pay her back double for what she has done; mix her a double portion in her own cup.
REV	18	7	그가 어떻게 자기를 영화롭게 하였으며 사치하였든지 그만큼 고난과 애통으로 갚아 주라 그가 마음에 말하기를 나는 여황으로 앉은 자요 과부가 아니라 결단코 애통을 당하지 아니하리라 하니	How much she hath glorified herself, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her: for she saith in her heart, I sit a queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow.	As much as she has glorified herself and lived in luxury, give her the same measure of torment and grief. In her heart she says, ‘I sit as queen; I am not a widow and will never see grief.’
REV	18	8	그러므로 하루 동안에 그 재앙들이 이르리니 곧 사망과 애통과 흉년이라 그가 또한 불에 살라지리니 그를 심판하신 주 하나님은 강하신 자이심이니라	Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine; and she shall be utterly burned with fire: for strong is the Lord God who judgeth her.	Therefore her plagues will come in one day— death and grief and famine— and she will be consumed by fire, for mighty is the Lord God who judges her.”
REV	18	9	그와 함께 음행하고 사치하던 땅의 왕들이 그 불붙는 연기를 보고 위하여 울고 가슴을 치며	And the kings of the earth, who have committed fornication and lived deliciously with her, shall bewail her, and lament for her, when they shall see the smoke of her burning,	Then the kings of the earth who committed sexual immorality and lived in luxury with her will weep and wail at the sight of the smoke rising from the fire that consumes her.
REV	18	10	그 고난을 무서워하여 멀리 서서 가로되 화 있도다 화 있도다 큰 성, 견고한 성 바벨론이여 일시간에 네 심판이 이르렀다 하리로다	Standing afar off for the fear of her torment, saying, Alas, alas, that great city Babylon, that mighty city! for in one hour is thy judgment come.	In fear of her torment, they will stand at a distance and cry out: “Woe, woe to the great city, the mighty city of Babylon! For in a single hour your judgment has come.”
REV	18	11	땅의 상고들이 그를 위하여 울고 애통하는 것은 다시 그 상품을 사는 자가 없음이라	And the merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over her; for no man buyeth their merchandise any more:	And the merchants of the earth will weep and mourn over her, because there is no one left to buy their cargo—
REV	18	12	그 상품은 금과 은과 보석과 진주와 세마포와 자주 옷감과 비단과 붉은 옷감이요 각종 향목과 각종 상아 기명이요 값진 나무와 진유와 철과 옥석으로 만든 각종 기명이요	The merchandise of gold, and silver, and precious stones, and of pearls, and fine linen, and purple, and silk, and scarlet, and all thyine wood, and all manner vessels of ivory, and all manner vessels of most precious wood, and of brass, and iron, and marble,	cargo of gold, silver, precious stones, and pearls; of fine linen, purple, silk, and scarlet; of all kinds of citron wood and every article of ivory, precious wood, bronze, iron, and marble;
REV	18	13	계피와 향료와 향과 향유와 유향과 포도주와 감람유와 고운 밀가루와 밀과 소와 양과 말과 수레와 종들과 사람의 영혼들이라	And cinnamon, and odours, and ointments, and frankincense, and wine, and oil, and fine flour, and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and chariots, and slaves, and souls of men.	of cinnamon, spice, incense, myrrh, and frankincense; of wine, olive oil, fine flour, and wheat; of cattle, sheep, horses, and chariots; of slaves and souls of men.
REV	18	14	바벨론아 네 영혼의 탐하던 과실이 네게서 떠났으며 맛있는 것들과 빛난 것들이 다 없어졌으니 사람들이 결코 이것들을 다시 보지 못하리로다	And the fruits that thy soul lusted after are departed from thee, and all things which were dainty and goodly are departed from thee, and thou shalt find them no more at all.	And they will say: “The fruit of your soul’s desire has departed from you; all your luxury and splendor have vanished, never to be seen again.”
REV	18	15	바벨론을 인하여 치부한 이 상품의 상고들이 그 고난을 무서워하여 멀리 서서 울고 애통하여	The merchants of these things, which were made rich by her, shall stand afar off for the fear of her torment, weeping and wailing,	The merchants who sold these things and grew their wealth from her will stand at a distance, in fear of her torment. They will weep and mourn,
REV	18	16	가로되 화 있도다 화 있도다 큰 성이여 세마포와 자주와 붉은 옷을 입고 금과 보석과 진주로 꾸민 것인데	And saying, Alas, alas, that great city, that was clothed in fine linen, and purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and precious stones, and pearls!	saying: “Woe, woe to the great city, clothed in fine linen and purple and scarlet, adorned with gold and precious stones and pearls!
REV	18	17	그러한 부가 일시간에 망하였도다 각 선장과 각처를 다니는 선객들과 선인들과 바다에서 일하는 자들이 멀리 서서	For in one hour so great riches is come to nought. And every shipmaster, and all the company in ships, and sailors, and as many as trade by sea, stood afar off,	For in a single hour such fabulous wealth has been destroyed!” Every shipmaster, passenger, and sailor, and all who make their living from the sea, will stand at a distance
REV	18	18	그 불붙는 연기를 보고 외쳐 가로되 이 큰 성과 같은 성이 어디 있느뇨 하며	And cried when they saw the smoke of her burning, saying, What city is like unto this great city!	and cry out at the sight of the smoke rising from the fire that consumes her. “What city was ever like this great city?” they will exclaim.
REV	18	19	티끌을 자기 머리에 뿌리고 울고 애통하여 외쳐 가로되 화 있도다 화 있도다 이 큰 성이여 바다에서 배 부리는 모든 자들이 너의 보배로운 상품을 인하여 치부하였더니 일시간에 망하였도다	And they cast dust on their heads, and cried, weeping and wailing, saying, Alas, alas, that great city, wherein were made rich all that had ships in the sea by reason of her costliness! for in one hour is she made desolate.	Then they will throw dust on their heads as they weep and mourn and cry out: “Woe, woe to the great city, where all who had ships on the sea were enriched by her wealth! For in a single hour she has been destroyed.”
REV	18	20	하늘과 성도들과 사도들과 선지자들아 그를 인하여 즐거워하라 하나님이 너희를 신원하시는 심판을 그에게 하셨음이라 하더라	Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets; for God hath avenged you on her.	Rejoice over her, O heaven, O saints and apostles and prophets, because God has pronounced for you His judgment against her.
REV	18	21	이에 한 힘센 천사가 큰 맷돌 같은 돌을 들어 바다에 던져 가로되 큰 성 바벨론이 이같이 몹시 떨어져 결코 다시 보이지 아니하리로다	And a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all.	Then a mighty angel picked up a stone the size of a great millstone and cast it into the sea, saying: “With such violence the great city of Babylon will be cast down, never to be seen again.
REV	18	22	또 거문고 타는 자와 풍류하는 자와 퉁소 부는 자와 나팔 부는 자들의 소리가 결코 다시 네 가운데서 들리지 아니하고 물론 어떠한 세공업자든지 결코 다시 네 가운데서 보이지 아니하고 또 맷돌 소리가 다시 네 가운데서 들리지 아니하고	And the voice of harpers, and musicians, and of pipers, and trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in thee; and no craftsman, of whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more in thee; and the sound of a millstone shall be heard no more at all in thee;	And the sound of harpists and musicians, of flute players and trumpeters, will never ring out in you again. Nor will any craftsmen of any trade be found in you again, nor the sound of a millstone be heard in you again.
REV	18	23	등불 빛이 결코 다시 네 가운데서 비취지 아니하고 신랑과 신부의 음성이 결코 다시 네 가운데서 들리지 아니하리로다 너의 상고들은 땅의 왕족들이라 네 복술을 인하여 만국이 미혹되었도다	And the light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee; and the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more at all in thee: for thy merchants were the great men of the earth; for by thy sorceries were all nations deceived.	The light of a lamp will never shine in you again, and the voices of a bride and bridegroom will never call out in you again. For your merchants were the great ones of the earth, because all the nations were deceived by your sorcery.”
REV	18	24	선지자들과 성도들과 및 땅 위에서 죽임을 당한 모든 자의 피가 이 성중에서 보였느니라 하더라	And in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth.	And there was found in her the blood of prophets and saints, and of all who had been slain on the earth.
REV	19	1	이 일 후에 내가 들으니 하늘에 허다한 무리의 큰 음성 같은 것이 있어 가로되 할렐루야 구원과 영광과 능력이 우리 하나님께 있도다	And after these things I heard a great voice of much people in heaven, saying, Alleluia; Salvation, and glory, and honour, and power, unto the Lord our God:	After this I heard a sound like the roar of a great multitude in heaven, shouting: “Hallelujah! Salvation and glory and power belong to our God!
REV	19	2	그의 심판은 참되고 의로운지라 음행으로 땅을 더럽게 한 큰 음녀를 심판하사 자기 종들의 피를 그의 손에 갚으셨도다 하고	For true and righteous are his judgments: for he hath judged the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and hath avenged the blood of his servants at her hand.	For His judgments are true and just. He has judged the great prostitute who corrupted the earth with her immorality. He has avenged the blood of His servants that was poured out by her hand.”
REV	19	3	두번째 가로되 할렐루야 하더니 그 연기가 세세토록 올라가더라	And again they said, Alleluia. And her smoke rose up for ever and ever.	And a second time they called out: “Hallelujah! Her smoke rises forever and ever.”
REV	19	4	또 이십사 장로와 네 생물이 엎드려 보좌에 앉으신 하나님께 경배하여 가로되 아멘 할렐루야 하니	And the four and twenty elders and the four beasts fell down and worshipped God that sat on the throne, saying, Amen; Alleluia.	And the twenty-four elders and the four living creatures fell down and worshiped God who sits on the throne, saying: “Amen, Hallelujah!”
REV	19	5	보좌에서 음성이 나서 가로되 하나님의 종들 곧 그를 경외하는 너희들아 무론대소하고 다 우리 하나님께 찬송하라	And a voice came out of the throne, saying, Praise our God, all ye his servants, and ye that fear him, both small and great.	Then a voice came from the throne, saying: “Praise our God, all you who serve Him, and those who fear Him, small and great alike!”
REV	19	6	또 내가 들으니 허다한 무리의 음성도 같고 많은 물소리도 같고 큰 뇌성도 같아서 가로되 할렐루야 주 우리 하나님 곧 전능하신 이가 통치하시도다	And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluia: for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth.	And I heard a sound like the roar of a great multitude, like the rushing of many waters, and like a mighty rumbling of thunder, crying out: “Hallelujah! For the Lord our God the Almighty reigns.
REV	19	7	우리가 즐거워하고 크게 기뻐하여 그에게 영광을 돌리세 어린 양의 혼인 기약이 이르렀고 그 아내가 예비하였으니	Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honour to him: for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made herself ready.	Let us rejoice and be glad and give Him the glory. For the marriage of the Lamb has come, and His bride has made herself ready.
REV	19	8	그에게 허락하사 빛나고 깨끗한 세마포를 입게 하셨은즉 이 세마포는 성도들의 옳은 행실이로다 하더라	And to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white: for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints.	She was given clothing of fine linen, bright and pure.” For the fine linen she wears is the righteous acts of the saints.
REV	19	9	천사가 내게 말하기를 기록하라 어린 양의 혼인 잔치에 청함을 입은 자들이 복이 있도다 하고 또 내게 말하되 이것은 하나님의 참되신 말씀이라 하기로	And he saith unto me, Write, Blessed are they which are called unto the marriage supper of the Lamb. And he saith unto me, These are the true sayings of God.	Then the angel told me to write, “Blessed are those who are invited to the marriage supper of the Lamb.” And he said to me, “These are the true words of God.”
REV	19	10	내가 그 발 앞에 엎드려 경배하려 하니 그가 나더러 말하기를 나는 너와 및 예수의 증거를 받은 네 형제들과 같이 된 종이니 삼가 그리하지 말고 오직 하나님께 경배하라 예수의 증거는 대언의 영이라 하더라	And I fell at his feet to worship him. And he said unto me, See thou do it not: I am thy fellowservant, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus: worship God: for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.	So I fell at his feet to worship him. But he told me, “Do not do that! I am a fellow servant with you and your brothers who rely on the testimony of Jesus. Worship God! For the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.”
REV	19	11	또 내가 하늘이 열린 것을 보니 보라 백마와 탄 자가 있으니 그 이름은 충신과 진실이라 그가 공의로 심판하며 싸우더라	And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse; and he that sat upon him was called Faithful and True, and in righteousness he doth judge and make war.	Then I saw heaven standing open, and there before me was a white horse. And its rider is called Faithful and True. With righteousness He judges and wages war.
REV	19	12	그 눈이 불꽃 같고 그 머리에 많은 면류관이 있고 또 이름 쓴 것이 하나가 있으니 자기 밖에 아는 자가 없고	His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crowns; and he had a name written, that no man knew, but he himself.	He has eyes like blazing fire, and many royal crowns on His head. He has a name written on Him that only He Himself knows.
REV	19	13	또 그가 피 뿌린 옷을 입었는데 그 이름은 하나님의 말씀이라 칭하더라	And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood: and his name is called The Word of God.	He is dressed in a robe dipped in blood, and His name is The Word of God.
REV	19	14	하늘에 있는 군대들이 희고 깨끗한 세마포를 입고 백마를 타고 그를 따르더라	And the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean.	The armies of heaven, dressed in fine linen, white and pure, follow Him on white horses.
REV	19	15	그의 입에서 이한 검이 나오니 그것으로 만국을 치겠고 친히 저희를 철장으로 다스리며 또 친히 하나님 곧 전능하신 이의 맹렬한 진노의 포도주 틀을 밟겠고	And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of iron: and he treadeth the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God.	And from His mouth proceeds a sharp sword with which to strike down the nations, and He will rule them with an iron scepter. He treads the winepress of the fury of the wrath of God the Almighty.
REV	19	16	그 옷과 그 다리에 이름 쓴 것이 있으니 만왕의 왕이요 만주의 주라 하였더라	And he hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.	And He has a name written on His robe and on His thigh: KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS.
REV	19	17	또 내가 보니 한 천사가 해에 서서 공중에 나는 모든 새를 향하여 큰 음성으로 외쳐 가로되 와서 하나님의 큰 잔치에 모여	And I saw an angel standing in the sun; and he cried with a loud voice, saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, Come and gather yourselves together unto the supper of the great God;	Then I saw an angel standing in the sun, and he cried out in a loud voice to all the birds flying overhead, “Come, gather together for the great supper of God,
REV	19	18	왕들의 고기와 장군들의 고기와 장사들의 고기와 말들과 그 탄 자들의 고기와 자유한 자들이나 종들이나 무론대소하고 모든 자의 고기를 먹으라 하더라	That ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both small and great.	so that you may eat the flesh of kings and commanders and mighty men, of horses and riders, of everyone slave and free, small and great.”
REV	19	19	또 내가 보매 그 짐승과 땅의 임금들과 그 군대들이 모여 그 말 탄 자와 그의 군대로 더불어 전쟁을 일으키다가	And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies, gathered together to make war against him that sat on the horse, and against his army.	Then I saw the beast and the kings of the earth with their armies assembled to wage war against the One seated on the horse, and against His army.
REV	19	20	짐승이 잡히고 그 앞에서 이적을 행하던 거짓 선지자도 함께 잡혔으니 이는 짐승의 표를 받고 그의 우상에게 경배하던 자들을 이적으로 미혹하던 자라 이 둘이 산 채로 유황불 붙는 못에 던지우고	And the beast was taken, and with him the false prophet that wrought miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had received the mark of the beast, and them that worshipped his image. These both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone.	But the beast was captured along with the false prophet, who on its behalf had performed signs deceiving those who had the mark of the beast and worshiped its image. Both the beast and the false prophet were thrown alive into the fiery lake of burning sulfur.
REV	19	21	그 나머지는 말 탄 자의 입으로 나오는 검에 죽으매 모든 새가 그 고기로 배불리우더라	And the remnant were slain with the sword of him that sat upon the horse, which sword proceeded out of his mouth: and all the fowls were filled with their flesh.	And the rest were killed with the sword that proceeded from the mouth of the One seated on the horse. And all the birds gorged themselves on their flesh.
REV	20	1	또 내가 보매 천사가 무저갱 열쇠와 큰 쇠사슬을 그 손에 가지고 하늘로서 내려와서	And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand.	Then I saw an angel coming down from heaven with the key to the Abyss, holding in his hand a great chain.
REV	20	2	용을 잡으니 곧 옛 뱀이요 마귀요 사단이라 잡아 일천 년 동안 결박하여	And he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan, and bound him a thousand years,	He seized the dragon, that ancient serpent who is the devil and Satan, and bound him for a thousand years.
REV	20	3	무저갱에 던져 잠그고 그 위에 인봉하여 천 년이 차도록 다시는 만국을 미혹하지 못하게 하였다가 그 후에는 반드시 잠간 놓이리라	And cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him, that he should deceive the nations no more, till the thousand years should be fulfilled: and after that he must be loosed a little season.	And he threw him into the Abyss, shut it, and sealed it over him, so that he could not deceive the nations until the thousand years were complete. After that, he must be released for a brief period of time.
REV	20	4	또 내가 보좌들을 보니 거기 앉은 자들이 있어 심판하는 권세를 받았더라 또 내가 보니 예수의 증거와 하나님의 말씀을 인하여 목 베임을 받은 자의 영혼들과 또 짐승과 그의 우상에게 경배하지도 아니하고 이마와 손에 그의 표를 받지도 아니한 자들이 살아서 그리스도로 더불어 천 년 동안 왕 노릇 하니	And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them: and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.	Then I saw the thrones, and those seated on them had been given authority to judge. And I saw the souls of those who had been beheaded for their testimony of Jesus and for the word of God, and those who had not worshiped the beast or its image, and had not received its mark on their foreheads or hands. And they came to life and reigned with Christ for a thousand years.
REV	20	5	(그 나머지 죽은 자들은 그 천 년이 차기까지 살지 못하더라) 이는 첫째 부활이라	But the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were finished. This is the first resurrection.	The rest of the dead did not come back to life until the thousand years were complete. This is the first resurrection.
REV	20	6	이 첫째 부활에 참예하는 자들은 복이 있고 거룩하도다 둘째 사망이 그들을 다스리는 권세가 없고 도리어 그들이 하나님과 그리스도의 제사장이 되어 천 년 동안 그리스도로 더불어 왕 노릇 하리라	Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection: on such the second death hath no power, but they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.	Blessed and holy are those who share in the first resurrection! The second death has no power over them, but they will be priests of God and of Christ, and will reign with Him for a thousand years.
REV	20	7	천 년이 차매 사단이 그 옥에서 놓여	And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison,	When the thousand years are complete, Satan will be released from his prison,
REV	20	8	나와서 땅의 사방 백성 곧 곡과 마곡을 미혹하고 모아 싸움을 붙이리니 그 수가 바다 모래 같으리라	And shall go out to deceive the nations which are in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle: the number of whom is as the sand of the sea.	and will go out to deceive the nations in the four corners of the earth—Gog and Magog—to assemble them for battle. Their number is like the sand of the seashore.
REV	20	9	저희가 지면에 널리 퍼져 성도들의 진과 사랑하시는 성을 두르매 하늘에서 불이 내려와 저희를 소멸하고	And they went up on the breadth of the earth, and compassed the camp of the saints about, and the beloved city: and fire came down from God out of heaven, and devoured them.	And they marched across the broad expanse of the earth and surrounded the camp of the saints and the beloved city. But fire came down from heaven and consumed them.
REV	20	10	또 저희를 미혹하는 마귀가 불과 유황 못에 던지우니 거기는 그 짐승과 거짓 선지자들도 있어 세세토록 밤낮 괴로움을 받으리라	And the devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are, and shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever.	And the devil who had deceived them was thrown into the lake of fire and sulfur, into which the beast and the false prophet had already been thrown. There they will be tormented day and night forever and ever.
REV	20	11	또 내가 크고 흰 보좌와 그 위에 앉으신 자를 보니 땅과 하늘이 그 앞에서 피하여 간 데 없더라	And I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away; and there was found no place for them.	Then I saw a great white throne and the One seated on it. Earth and heaven fled from His presence, and no place was found for them.
REV	20	12	또 내가 보니 죽은 자들이 무론대소하고 그 보좌 앞에 섰는데 책들이 펴 있고 또 다른 책이 펴졌으니 곧 생명책이라 죽은 자들이 자기 행위를 따라 책들에 기록된 대로 심판을 받으니	And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works.	And I saw the dead, great and small, standing before the throne. And there were open books, and one of them was the Book of Life. And the dead were judged according to their deeds, as recorded in the books.
REV	20	13	바다가 그 가운데서 죽은 자들을 내어주고 또 사망과 음부도 그 가운데서 죽은 자들을 내어주매 각 사람이 자기의 행위대로 심판을 받고	And the sea gave up the dead which were in it; and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them: and they were judged every man according to their works.	The sea gave up its dead, and Death and Hades gave up their dead, and each one was judged according to his deeds.
REV	20	14	사망과 음부도 불못에 던지우니 이것은 둘째 사망 곧 불못이라	And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire. This is the second death.	Then Death and Hades were thrown into the lake of fire. This is the second death—the lake of fire.
REV	20	15	누구든지 생명책에 기록되지 못한 자는 불못에 던지우더라	And whosoever was not found written in the book of life was cast into the lake of fire.	And if anyone was found whose name was not written in the Book of Life, he was thrown into the lake of fire.
REV	21	1	또 내가 새 하늘과 새 땅을 보니 처음 하늘과 처음 땅이 없어졌고 바다도 다시 있지 않더라	And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea.	Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and earth had passed away, and the sea was no more.
REV	21	2	또 내가 보매 거룩한 성 새 예루살렘이 하나님께로부터 하늘에서 내려오니 그 예비한 것이 신부가 남편을 위하여 단장한 것 같더라	And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.	I saw the holy city, the new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.
REV	21	3	내가 들으니 보좌에서 큰 음성이 나서 가로되 보라 하나님의 장막이 사람들과 함께 있으매 하나님이 저희와 함께 거하시리니 저희는 하나님의 백성이 되고 하나님은 친히 저희와 함께 계셔서	And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God.	And I heard a loud voice from the throne saying: “Behold, the dwelling place of God is with man, and He will dwell with them. They will be His people, and God Himself will be with them as their God.
REV	21	4	모든 눈물을 그 눈에서 씻기시매 다시 사망이 없고 애통하는 것이나 곡하는 것이나 아픈 것이 다시 있지 아니하리니 처음 것들이 다 지나갔음이러라	And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things are passed away.	‘He will wipe away every tear from their eyes,’ and there will be no more death or mourning or crying or pain, for the former things have passed away.”
REV	21	5	보좌에 앉으신 이가 가라사대 보라 내가 만물을 새롭게 하노라 하시고 또 가라사대 이 말은 신실하고 참되니 기록하라 하시고	And he that sat upon the throne said, Behold, I make all things new. And he said unto me, Write: for these words are true and faithful.	And the One seated on the throne said, “Behold, I make all things new.” Then He said, “Write this down, for these words are faithful and true.”
REV	21	6	또 내게 말씀하시되 이루었도다 나는 알파와 오메가요 처음과 나중이라 내가 생명수 샘물로 목마른 자에게 값없이 주리니	And he said unto me, It is done. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. I will give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of life freely.	And He told me, “It is done! I am the Alpha and the Omega, the Beginning and the End. To the thirsty I will give freely from the spring of the water of life.
REV	21	7	이기는 자는 이것들을 유업으로 얻으리라 나는 저의 하나님이 되고 그는 내 아들이 되리라	He that overcometh shall inherit all things; and I will be his God, and he shall be my son.	The one who overcomes will inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he will be My son.
REV	21	8	그러나 두려워하는 자들과 믿지 아니하는 자들과 흉악한 자들과 살인자들과 행음자들과 술객들과 우상 숭배자들과 모든 거짓말하는 자들은 불과 유황으로 타는 못에 참예하리니 이것이 둘째 사망이라	But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: which is the second death.	But to the cowardly and unbelieving and abominable and murderers and sexually immoral and sorcerers and idolaters and all liars, their place will be in the lake that burns with fire and sulfur. This is the second death.”
REV	21	9	일곱 대접을 가지고 마지막 일곱 재앙을 담은 일곱 천사 중 하나가 나아와서 내게 말하여 가로되 이리 오라 내가 신부 곧 어린 양의 아내를 네게 보이리라 하고	And there came unto me one of the seven angels which had the seven vials full of the seven last plagues, and talked with me, saying, Come hither, I will shew thee the bride, the Lamb’s wife.	Then one of the seven angels with the seven bowls full of the seven final plagues came and said to me, “Come, I will show you the bride, the wife of the Lamb.”
REV	21	10	성령으로 나를 데리고 크고 높은 산으로 올라가 하나님께로부터 하늘에서 내려오는 거룩한 성 예루살렘을 보이니	And he carried me away in the spirit to a great and high mountain, and shewed me that great city, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God,	And he carried me away in the Spirit to a mountain great and high, and showed me the holy city of Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from God,
REV	21	11	하나님의 영광이 있으매 그 성의 빛이 지극히 귀한 보석 같고 벽옥과 수정 같이 맑더라	Having the glory of God: and her light was like unto a stone most precious, even like a jasper stone, clear as crystal;	shining with the glory of God. Its radiance was like a most precious jewel, like a jasper, as clear as crystal.
REV	21	12	크고 높은 성곽이 있고 열두 문이 있는데 문에 열두 천사가 있고 그 문들 위에 이름을 썼으니 이스라엘 자손 열두 지파의 이름들이라	And had a wall great and high, and had twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and names written thereon, which are the names of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel:	The city had a great and high wall with twelve gates inscribed with the names of the twelve tribes of Israel, and twelve angels at the gates.
REV	21	13	동편에 세 문, 북편에 세 문, 남편에 세 문, 서편에 세 문이니	On the east three gates; on the north three gates; on the south three gates; and on the west three gates.	There were three gates on the east, three on the north, three on the south, and three on the west.
REV	21	14	그 성에 성곽은 열두 기초석이 있고 그 위에 어린 양의 십이 사도의 열두 이름이 있더라	And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and in them the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.	The wall of the city had twelve foundations bearing the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.
REV	21	15	내게 말하는 자가 그 성과 그 문들과 성곽을 척량하려고 금 갈대를 가졌더라	And he that talked with me had a golden reed to measure the city, and the gates thereof, and the wall thereof.	The angel who spoke with me had a golden measuring rod to measure the city and its gates and walls.
REV	21	16	그 성은 네모가 반듯하여 장광이 같은지라 그 갈대로 그 성을 척량하니 일만 이천 스다디온이요 장과 광과 고가 같더라	And the city lieth foursquare, and the length is as large as the breadth: and he measured the city with the reed, twelve thousand furlongs. The length and the breadth and the height of it are equal.	The city lies foursquare, with its width the same as its length. And he measured the city with the rod, and all its dimensions were equal—12,000 stadia in length and width and height.
REV	21	17	그 성곽을 척량하매 일백사십사 규빗이니 사람의 척량 곧 천사의 척량이라	And he measured the wall thereof, an hundred and forty and four cubits, according to the measure of a man, that is, of the angel.	And he measured its wall to be 144 cubits, by the human measure the angel was using.
REV	21	18	그 성곽은 벽옥으로 쌓였고 그 성은 정금인데 맑은 유리 같더라	And the building of the wall of it was of jasper: and the city was pure gold, like unto clear glass.	The wall was made of jasper, and the city itself of pure gold, as pure as glass.
REV	21	19	그 성의 성곽의 기초석은 각색 보석으로 꾸몄는데 첫째 기초석은 벽옥이요 둘째는 남보석이요 셋째는 옥수요 넷째는 녹보석이요	And the foundations of the wall of the city were garnished with all manner of precious stones. The first foundation was jasper; the second, sapphire; the third, a chalcedony; the fourth, an emerald;	The foundations of the city walls were adorned with every kind of precious stone: The first foundation was jasper, the second sapphire, the third chalcedony, the fourth emerald,
REV	21	20	다섯째는 홍마노요 여섯째는 홍보석이요 일곱째는 황옥이요 여덟째는 녹옥이요 아홉째는 담황옥이요 열째는 비취옥이요 열한째는 청옥이요 열두째는 자정이라	The fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the seventh, chrysolite; the eighth, beryl; the ninth, a topaz; the tenth, a chrysoprasus; the eleventh, a jacinth; the twelfth, an amethyst.	the fifth sardonyx, the sixth carnelian, the seventh chrysolite, the eighth beryl, the ninth topaz, the tenth chrysoprase, the eleventh jacinth, and the twelfth amethyst.
REV	21	21	그 열두 문은 열두 진주니 문마다 한 진주요 성의 길은 맑은 유리 같은 정금이더라	And the twelve gates were twelve pearls; every several gate was of one pearl: and the street of the city was pure gold, as it were transparent glass.	And the twelve gates were twelve pearls, with each gate consisting of a single pearl. The main street of the city was pure gold, as clear as glass.
REV	21	22	성 안에 성전을 내가 보지 못하였으니 이는 주 하나님 곧 전능하신 이와 및 어린 양이 그 성전이심이라	And I saw no temple therein: for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it.	But I saw no temple in the city, because the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are its temple.
REV	21	23	그 성은 해나 달의 비췸이 쓸 데 없으니 이는 하나님의 영광이 비취고 어린 양이 그 등이 되심이라	And the city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it: for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.	And the city has no need of sun or moon to shine on it, because the glory of God illuminates the city, and the Lamb is its lamp.
REV	21	24	만국이 그 빛 가운데로 다니고 땅의 왕들이 자기 영광을 가지고 그리로 들어오리라	And the nations of them which are saved shall walk in the light of it: and the kings of the earth do bring their glory and honour into it.	By its light the nations will walk, and into it the kings of the earth will bring their glory.
REV	21	25	성문들을 낮에 도무지 닫지 아니하리니 거기는 밤이 없음이라	And the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day: for there shall be no night there.	Its gates will never be shut at the end of the day, because there will be no night there.
REV	21	26	사람들이 만국의 영광과 존귀를 가지고 그리로 들어오겠고	And they shall bring the glory and honour of the nations into it.	And into the city will be brought the glory and honor of the nations.
REV	21	27	무엇이든지 속된 것이나 가증한 일 또는 거짓말하는 자는 결코 그리로 들어오지 못하되 오직 어린 양의 생명책에 기록된 자들뿐이라	And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie: but they which are written in the Lamb’s book of life.	But nothing unclean will ever enter it, nor anyone who practices an abomination or a lie, but only those whose names are written in the Lamb’s Book of Life.
REV	22	1	또 저가 수정 같이 맑은 생명수의 강을 내게 보이니 하나님과 및 어린 양의 보좌로부터 나서	And he shewed me a pure river of water of life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb.	Then the angel showed me a river of the water of life, as clear as crystal, flowing from the throne of God and of the Lamb
REV	22	2	길 가운데로 흐르더라 강 좌우에 생명나무가 있어 열두 가지 실과를 맺히되 달마다 그 실과를 맺히고 그 나무 잎사귀들은 만국을 소성하기 위하여 있더라	In the midst of the street of it, and on either side of the river, was there the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her fruit every month: and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations.	down the middle of the main street of the city. On either side of the river stood a tree of life, bearing twelve kinds of fruit and yielding a fresh crop for each month. And the leaves of the tree are for the healing of the nations.
REV	22	3	다시 저주가 없으며 하나님과 그 어린 양의 보좌가 그 가운데 있으리니 그의 종들이 그를 섬기며	And there shall be no more curse: but the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it; and his servants shall serve him:	No longer will there be any curse. The throne of God and of the Lamb will be within the city, and His servants will worship Him.
REV	22	4	그의 얼굴을 볼 터이요 그의 이름도 저희 이마에 있으리라	And they shall see his face; and his name shall be in their foreheads.	They will see His face, and His name will be on their foreheads.
REV	22	5	다시 밤이 없겠고 등불과 햇빛이 쓸 데 없으니 이는 주 하나님이 저희에게 비취심이라 저희가 세세토록 왕 노릇 하리로다	And there shall be no night there; and they need no candle, neither light of the sun; for the Lord God giveth them light: and they shall reign for ever and ever.	There will be no more night in the city, and they will have no need for the light of a lamp or of the sun. For the Lord God will shine on them, and they will reign forever and ever.
REV	22	6	또 그가 내게 말하기를 이 말은 신실하고 참된지라 주 곧 선지자들의 영의 하나님이 그의 종들에게 결코 속히 될 일을 보이시려고 그의 천사를 보내셨도다	And he said unto me, These sayings are faithful and true: and the Lord God of the holy prophets sent his angel to shew unto his servants the things which must shortly be done.	Then the angel said to me, “These words are faithful and true. The Lord, the God of the spirits of the prophets, has sent His angel to show His servants what must soon take place.”
REV	22	7	보라 내가 속히 오리니 이 책의 예언의 말씀을 지키는 자가 복이 있으리라 하더라	Behold, I come quickly: blessed is he that keepeth the sayings of the prophecy of this book.	“Behold, I am coming soon. Blessed is the one who keeps the words of prophecy in this book.”
REV	22	8	이것들을 보고 들은 자는 나 요한이니 내가 듣고 볼 때에 이 일을 내게 보이던 천사의 발 앞에 경배하려고 엎드렸더니	And I John saw these things, and heard them. And when I had heard and seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel which shewed me these things.	And I am John, who heard and saw these things. And when I had heard and seen them, I fell down to worship at the feet of the angel who had shown me these things.
REV	22	9	저가 내게 말하기를 나는 너와 네 형제 선지자들과 또 이 책의 말을 지키는 자들과 함께 된 종이니 그리하지 말고 오직 하나님께 경배하라 하더라	Then saith he unto me, See thou do it not: for I am thy fellowservant, and of thy brethren the prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this book: worship God.	But he said to me, “Do not do that! I am a fellow servant with you and your brothers the prophets, and with those who keep the words of this book. Worship God!”
REV	22	10	또 내게 말하되 이 책의 예언의 말씀을 인봉하지 말라 때가 가까우니라	And he saith unto me, Seal not the sayings of the prophecy of this book: for the time is at hand.	Then he told me, “Do not seal up the words of prophecy in this book, because the time is near.
REV	22	11	불의를 하는 자는 그대로 불의를 하고 더러운 자는 그대로 더럽고 의로운 자는 그대로 의를 행하고 거룩한 자는 그대로 거룩되게 하라	He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still.	Let the unrighteous continue to be unrighteous, and the vile continue to be vile; let the righteous continue to practice righteousness, and the holy continue to be holy.”
REV	22	12	보라 내가 속히 오리니 내가 줄 상이 내게 있어 각 사람에게 그의 일한 대로 갚아 주리라	And, behold, I come quickly; and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work shall be.	“Behold, I am coming soon, and My reward is with Me, to give to each one according to what he has done.
REV	22	13	나는 알파와 오메가요 처음과 나중이요 시작과 끝이라	I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last.	I am the Alpha and the Omega, the First and the Last, the Beginning and the End.”
REV	22	14	그 두루마기를 빠는 자들은 복이 있으니 이는 저희가 생명나무에 나아가며 문들을 통하여 성에 들어갈 권세를 얻으려 함이로다	Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city.	Blessed are those who wash their robes, so that they may have the right to the tree of life and may enter the city by its gates.
REV	22	15	개들과 술객들과 행음자들과 살인자들과 우상 숭배자들과 및 거짓말을 좋아하며 지어내는 자마다 성 밖에 있으리라	For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie.	But outside are the dogs, the sorcerers, the sexually immoral, the murderers, the idolaters, and everyone who loves and practices falsehood.
REV	22	16	나 예수는 교회들을 위하여 내 사자를 보내어 이것들을 너희에게 증거하게 하였노라 나는 다윗의 뿌리요 자손이니 곧 광명한 새벽별이라 하시더라	I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify unto you these things in the churches. I am the root and the offspring of David, and the bright and morning star.	“I, Jesus, have sent My angel to give you this testimony for the churches. I am the Root and the Offspring of David, the bright Morning Star.”
REV	22	17	성령과 신부가 말씀하시기를 오라 하시는도다 듣는 자도 오라 할 것이요 목마른 자도 올 것이요 또 원하는 자는 값없이 생명수를 받으라 하시더라	And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.	The Spirit and the bride say, “Come!” Let the one who hears say, “Come!” And let the one who is thirsty come, and the one who desires the water of life drink freely.
REV	22	18	내가 이 책의 예언의 말씀을 듣는 각인에게 증거하노니 만일 누구든지 이것들 외에 더하면 하나님이 이 책에 기록된 재앙들을 그에게 더하실 터이요	For I testify unto every man that heareth the words of the prophecy of this book, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book:	I testify to everyone who hears the words of prophecy in this book: If anyone adds to them, God will add to him the plagues described in this book.
REV	22	19	만일 누구든지 이 책의 예언의 말씀에서 제하여 버리면 하나님이 이 책에 기록된 생명나무와 및 거룩한 성에 참예함을 제하여 버리시리라	And if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and from the things which are written in this book.	And if anyone takes away from the words of this book of prophecy, God will take away his share in the tree of life and the holy city, which are described in this book.
REV	22	20	이것들을 증거하신 이가 가라사대 내가 진실로 속히 오리라 하시거늘 아멘 주 예수여 오시옵소서	He which testifieth these things saith, Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so, come, Lord Jesus.	He who testifies to these things says, “Yes, I am coming soon.” Amen. Come, Lord Jesus!
REV	22	21	주 예수의 은혜가 모든 자들에게 있을지어다 아멘	The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.	The grace of the Lord Jesus be with all the saints. Amen.